CORNELL 

UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 


052040 


The  original  of  tiiis  book  is  in 
tine  Cornell  University  Library. 

There  are  no  known  copyright  restrictions  in 
the  United  States  on  the  use  of  the  text. 


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924101104747 


THE 

PULPIT    COMMENTARY, 

EDITED   BY  THE 

VERY   REV.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  D.D., 

DEAN  OF  GLOUCESTER  ; 
AND   BY  THE 

REV.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A. 

WITH 

INTRODUCTIONS 

BY  THE 


VEN.  ARCHDEACON  F.  W.  FARRAR,  D.D.,  F.R.S.— RT.  REV.  H.  COTTERILL,  D.D.,  F.R.S  E. 

VERY  REV.  PRINCIPAL  J.  TULLOCH,  D.D.-REV.  CANON  G.  RAWLINSON,  M.A. 

REV.  A.  PLUMMER,  M.A.,  D.D. 


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
New  York  and  Toeokto. 


THE 


PULPIT    COMMENTARY 


EDITED   BY  THE 


VEIIY  MV.  II.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  D.D., 


DEAN  OF   GLOUCESTER; 
AND   BY  THE 


RliV,   JOSEPH    S.    EXELL,   IH.A, 


PROVERBS, 


By  EEV.   W.   J.   DEANE,  MA., 

RECTOR  OF   ASHEN  ; 
AND 

By  UEV.   S.   T.   TAYLOR-TASWELL,  M.A., 

RECTOR  OF  WITHERLEY. 

ijomilctice  : 
By  rev.  professor  W.   F.  ADENEY,  M.A. 

jgomilics  lij)  lliivions  Qlntliors  : 

REV.    PROF,    E.   JOHNSON,    M.A.  REV.   W.  CLARKSON,   B.A. 


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
New  York  and  Toronto. 


THE    PROVERBS. 


INTRODUCTION. 


§  1.   Name  of  the  Book. 

Tff«  book  wTiicTi  we  are  about  to  consider  takes  its  geTieral  title  from  the 
words  with  which  it  opens  in  the  Hebrew  original,  "  The  Proverbs  of 
Solomon ' — Mishle  Shelomoh.  This  name,  or,  in  an  abbreviated  form,  Mishle, 
has  always  been  carrent  in  the  Jewish  Chnrch.  Later,  in  rabbinical  writings, 
it  was  cited  under  the  appellation  of  Sepher  Ghocmah,  '  Book  of  Wisdom,' 
which  title  also  included  Ecclesiastes.  In  the  Septuagint  it  is  headed 
Jlapoi/iLai  SaXdi/iuJvTos  in  some  manuscripts,  though  in  others,  and  those  the 
eariiest,  the  name  of  Solomon  is  omitted.  St.  Jerome,  in  the  Latin  Yulgate, 
gives  a  longer  title  :  '  Liber  Proverbiorum  quem  Hebraei  Misle  appellant.' 

Among  the  early  Christian  writers,  in  addition  to  the  »ame  given  in  the 
Septuagint,  it  was  called  'S,o<j>ta,  '  Wisdom,'  or  'H  IlavopcTos  So<^ta,  '  All- 
virtuous  Wisdom,'  though  this  last  title  was  also  applied  to  Ecclesiasticus 
and  the  Book  of  Wisdom.  Clemens  Romanus,  in  his  'Epistle  to  the 
Corinthians  '  (i.  67),  heads  a  quotation  from"  ch.  i.  23 — 33  thus :  Ovtws  yap 
Ae-ya  ^  HavaptToi  Soi^ui,  "  Thus  saith  All-virtuous  Wisdom."  That  this  was 
commonly  received  as  the  designation  of  our  book  is  clear  also  from 
Eusebius,  who  writes  ('  Hist.  Eccl.,'  iv.  22),  "  Other  passages  also,  as  if 
from  unwritten  Jewish  tradition,  Hegesippus  cites;  and  not  only  he,  but 
Irensens,  and  the  whole  band  of  ancient  writers,  called  the  'Proverbs  of 
Solomon  '  '  Fanaretos  Sophia.'  "  It  is  true  that  in  the  writings  which  are 
attributed  to  Irenaeus  still  extant,  quotations  from  the  Proverbs  are  cited 
simply  as  Scripture  without  further  definition,  bat  we  have  no  reason  to 
discredit  Eusebius's  testimony  concerning  a  matter  with  which  he  must  have 
been  well  acquainted.  Two  other  titles  are  found,  viz.  'H  2o^^  BiyflXos, '  The 
Wise  Book,'  so  called  by  Dionysius  of  Alexandria ;  and  IlatSayto-ytK^  %o^Ca, 
'  Educational  Wisdom,'  by  Gregory  of  Nazianzum.  Melito  of  Sardis 
(according  to  Eusebius,  'Hist.  Eccl.,'  iv.  26)  states,  in  giving  a  catalogue 

nOVKBBS,  i 


rNTRODtrCTION  IX) 


of  canonical  Soriptnres,  that  the  book  was  known  by  the  name  of  So^to, 
'  Wisdom,'  as  weU  as  that  of  '  Proverbs  of  Solomon.'  This  title,  which, 
better  perhaps  than  that  of  Proverbs,  expresses  the  chief  subject  of  the 
work,  seems  not  to  have  been  invented  by  the  primitive  Christian  writers, 
but  to  have  been  derived  from  still  earlier  times,  and  to  hare  been  handed 
down  by  that  unwritten  Jewish  tradition  of  which  Eusebius  speaks. 

In  considering  the  appropriateness  of  the  usual  name  of  our  book,  we 
must  see  what  is  meant  by  the  Jewish  term  mishJe,  "  proverbs,"  as  we  trans- 
late it.  The  word  maghal  has  a  much  wider  significance  than  our  word 
"  proverb."  It  ia  derived  from  a  root  meaning  "  to  be  Kke,"  and  therefore 
has  primarily  the  meaning  of  comparison,  similitude,  and  is  applied  to 
many  discourses,  sentences,  and  expressions  which  we  should  not  class 
under  the  head  of  proverbs.  Thus  Balaam's  prophecy  is  so  called  (Numb, 
xxii.  7,  eta)  ;  so  too  Job's  didactic  poem  (Job  xxrii.  1) ;  the  taunting  satire 
in  Isa.  xiv.  4,  etc. ;  the  parables  in  Ezek.  xvii.  2  and  xz.  49,  etc. ;  the  song 
in  Numb.  zzi.  27,  etc.  It  is  often  translated  "  parable  "  in  the  Authorized 
Version,  even  in  the  book  itself  (oh.  xxvi.  7),  and  in  the  historical  psalm 
(IxxviiL),  the  second  verse  of  which  St.  Matthew  (xiii.  35)  tells  us  Christ 
fulfilled  when  he  spake  by  parables.  This  would  lead  us  to  expect  to  find 
other  meanings  ru  the  term  and  under  the  husk  of  the  outward  form.  And, 
indeed,  the  Hebrew  wiashal  is  not  confined  to  wise  or  pithy  sayings,  express- 
ing in  pointed  terms  the  experience  of  m.en  and  ages;  such  an  account 
would,  as  we  see,  be  most  inadequate  to  describe  the  various  forms  to  which 
the  term  was  applied.  That  there  are  in  our  book  numerous  apothegms 
and  maxims,  enforcing  moral  truths,  explaining  faqts  in  men's  lives  and  the 
course  of  society,  which  are  proverbs  in  the  strictest  sense  of  the  word,  i» 
obvious ;  but  a  very  large  proportion  of  the  utterances  therein  are  not 
covered  by  that  designation.  If  the  notion  of  comparison  at  first  restricted 
the  term  to  sayings  containing  a  simile,  it  soon  overstepped  the  bounds  of 
such  limitation,  and  comprehended  such  brief  sentences  as  conveyed  a  popular 
truth  under  figures  or  metaphors.  Of  this  sort  is  the  pointed  query,  "  la 
Saul  also  among  the  prophets  ?  "  (1  Sam.  x.  12)  ;  and,  "  The  fathers  have 
eaten  sour  grapes,  and  the  children's  teeth  are  set  on  edge  "  (Ezek.  xviii. 
2);  and,  "Physician,  heal  thyself"  (Luke  iv.  23).  In  many  so^alled 
proverbs  the  contrasted  objects  are  placed  side  by  side,  leaving  the  hearer 
to  draw  his  own  deduction.  In  the  longer  pieces  so-named  a  single  idea  is 
worked  out  at  some  length  in  rhythmical  form.  Further,  under  this  general 
category  are  contained  also  dark  sayings,  riddles,  intricate  questions  (ehidaTi), 
which  have  always  had  great  attraction  for  Oriental  minds.  The  Queen  of 
Sheba,  we  are  told,  cameto  try  Solomon  with  hard  questions  (1  Kings  x.  1)  ; 
as  the  Septuagint  renders  it,  "  with  enigmas."  Probably  such  puzzles  are 
found  in  oh.  xxx.,  and  in  many  of  those  passages  which,  according  as  they 
are  pointed,  are  capable  of  very  different  interpretations.  There  is  one 
other  word  used  in  this  connection'  (oh.  i.  6) — melitsah,  which  is  rendered 
in  the  Authorized  Version  "  interpretation,"  and  in  the  Revised  Version  "  a 


THE   PROVERBS. 


figure ;  "  it  probably  means  a  saying  containing  some  obscure  allnsion,  and 
nsnally  of  a  sarcastic  nature.  There  are  very  few  examples  of  this  form  in 
Diir  book. 

The  Tarions  kinds  of  proverbs  have  been  divided  by  Hanneberg  ('  Revel. 
Bibl.,*  V.  41,  quoted  by  Lesetre)  into  five  classes :  1.  Historical  proverbs, 
wherein  an  event  of  the  past,  or  a  word  used  on  some  momentons  occasion, 
has  passed  into  a  popular  saying,  expressive  of  some  general  sentiment  or 
idea.  The  saying  about  Saul  mentioned  just  above  is  of  this  nature.  Of 
the  historical  proverb  tliere  seems  to  be  no  instance  in  our  book.  2.  Meta- 
phorical proverbs.  These  are  what  we  should  most  appropriately  call 
proverbs.  They  enunciate  some  moral  truth  under  a  figure  drawn  from 
nature  or  life.  Such  are  the.se  :  "  In  vain  is  the  net  spread  in  the  eyes  of 
any  bird  "  (ch.  i.  17)  ;  "  Go  to  the  ant,  thou  sluggard  "  (oh.  vi.  6)  ;  "  Let 
a  bear  robbed  of  her  whelps  meet  a  man,  rather  than  a  fool  in  his  folly  " 
(ch.  xvii.  12)  ;  "  The  contentions  of  a  wife  are  a  continual  dropping  "  (ch. 
xix.  13 ;  xxvii.  15,  16).  3.  Enigmas.  These  are  either  riddles  like  that  of 
Samson  (Judg.  xiv.  14),  or  obscure  questions  which  needed  thought  to  eluci- 
date them,  and  the  kernel  of  which  conveyed  a  moral  truth.  Such  are  the 
words  of  Agur,  "Who  hath  ascended  up  into  heaven,  or  descended  ?  "  etc. 
(ch.  XXX.  4)  ;  "  The  horseleech  hath  two  daughters.  Give,  give  "  (ch.  xxi. 
15).  4.  Parabolic  proverbs.  Herein  are  presented  things  and  truths  in 
allegorical  shape.  Our  blessed  Lord  has  used  this  mode  of  teaching  most 
extensively,  showing  himself  greater  than  Solomon.  The  best  example  of 
this  class  is  the  treatment  of  Wisdom,  e.g.  "Wisdom  hath  builded  her  house, 
she  hath  hewn  out  her  seven  pillars  "  (ch.  ix.  1).  5.  Didactical  proverbs, 
which  give  pr  cise  instruction  on  points  of  morals,  religion,  or  behaviour, 
and  of  which  the  first  nine  chapters  afford  very  perfect  instances,  and  the 
rest  of  the  book  m.ore  concise  and  less  developed  examples. 

§  2.     CONTBNTS. 

The  book  is  inscribed,  "  The  Proverbs  of  Solomon,  son  of  David,  King  of 
'  Israel."  How  this  title  is  to  be  regarded,  and  to  what  portion  or  portions 
of  the  work  it  applies,  we  shall  see  further  on.  Then  (ch.  i.  1^6)  follows 
a  description  of  the  writing  and  a  recommendation  of  its  importance  and 
utility.  Its  object  is  partly  moral  and  partly  intellectual;  it  seeks  to 
instruct  in  the  way  of  wisdom,  to  edify  those  who  have  already  made  pro- 
gress, and  to  discipline  hearers  to  receive  and  assimilate  the  highest  teach- 
ing. The  wisdom  (chocmdh,  and  in  the  plural  of  "  excellence,"  chocmoth) 
here  first  mentioned  is  no  mere  philosophical  attainment,  no  merely  secular 
advancement  in  the  knowledge  of  things ;  it  is  this — it  includes  the  know- 
ledge of  all  that  can  be  known ;  but  it  is  much  more.  It  is  distinctly 
religious,  and  haa  for  its  object  the  directing  man's  life  according  to  his 
highest  interests,  so  that  it  is  equivalent  to  "the  fear  of  the  Lord,"  that 
is,  practical  religion,  and  is  often  interchanged  with  that  expression.     It 


INTEODUCTION  TO 


teacbes  what  God  requires  of  man,  how  God  would  have  man  behave  in  all 
circnmBtances  of  life ;  it  teaches  piety,  duty,  justice.  King  and  peasant,  the 
old  and  the  young,  learned  and  ignorant,  are  hereby  taught  what  is  accept- 
able in  their  several  stations,  ages,  stages  of  intellectual  development.  Later 
on,  Wisdom  is  personified  as  a  great  teacher,  as  dwelling  with  God  from  all 
eternity,  assisting  at  the  creation  of  the  world,  the  original  of  all  authority 
on  earth.  We  gather  from  various  indications  in  our  book  that  wisdom  is 
regarded  in  a  threefold  respect :  first,  as  an  essential  attribute  of  Almighty 
God ;  secondly,  as  revealed  in  creation ;  thirdly,  as  communicated  to  man. 
It  is  the  mind  or  thought  of  God ;  it  is  that  by  which  he  created  the  world ; 
it  is  that  which  regulates  and  informs  the  moral  being  of  man.  The  lan- 
guage used  in  such  passages  as  ch.  viii.  23 — 31  adapts  itself  to  the  idea  of 
a  representation  of  the  Son  of  God,  an  anticipation  of  the  incarnation  of 
Jesus  our  Lord;  and  though  we  cannot  suppose  that  Solomon  had  any 
clear  notion  of  the  Divine  personality  of  Wisdom  (for  which,  indeed,  the 
stem  monotheism  of  the  age  was  not  ripe),  yet  we  may  believe  that  it  was 
not  alien  from  the  mind  of  the  Holy  Spirit  that  the  Christian  Church  should 
see  in  these  Solomonic  utterances  prophecies  and  adumbrations  of  the 
nature  and  operations  of  the  Son  of  God  made  man,  of  him  whom  St.  John 
calls  the  Word.  It  is  of  Wisdom  as  communicated  to  man  that  the  Book  of 
Proverbs  chiefly  treats,  indicating  the  only  way  of  obtaining  and  securing 
possession  of  her,  and  the  incalculable  blessings  that  attend  her  acquisition 
and  usance. 

It  must  further  be  observed,  in  connection  with  this  subject,  that  the 
Hebrew,  in  his  pursuit  of  Wisdom,  was  not  like  the  heathen  philosopher 
groping  blindly  after  God,  seeking  to  discover  the  great  Unknown,  and  to 
form  for  himself  a  deity  which  should  satisfy  his  moral  instincts  and  solve 
the  questions  of  the  creation  and  government  of  the  universe.  The  Hebrew 
started  from  the  point  where  the  heathen  came  to  a  pause.  The  Jew  knew 
God  already— knew  him  by  revelation ;  his  aim  was  to  recognize  him  in  all 
relations — in  nature,  in  life,  in  morality,  in  religion ;  to  see  this  overruling 
Providence  in  all  things  whatsoever;  to  make  this  great  truth  control  private, 
public,  social,  and  political  circumstances  and  conduct.  This  profound  con- 
ception of  Divine  superintendence  dominates  all  the  reflections  of  the  think- 
ing man,  and  makes  him  own  in  every  occurrence,  even  in  every  natural 
phenomenon,  an  expression  of  the  mind  and  will  of  God.  Hence  comes  the 
absolute  trust  in  the  justice  of  the  supreme  Ruler,  in  the  wise  ordering  of 
events,  in  the  certain  distribution  of  rewards  and  punishments,  in  the 
regulated  dispensing  of  prosperity  and  adversity.  In  such  ways  Wisdom 
reveals  itself,  and  the  intelligent  man  recognized  its  presence;  and  idealizing 
and  personifying  it,  learned  to  speak  of  it  in  those  high  terms  which  wa 
read  of  with  awe  in  this  section,  seeing  therein  him  who  is  invisible. 

After  this  introduction  there  follows  the  first  part  of  the  book  (ch.  i.  7— 
ix.  18),  consisting  of  fifteen  admonitory  discourses,  addressed  to  youth 
with  the  view  of  exhibiting  the  excellence  of   wisdom,  encouraging  the 


THE  PROVERBS. 


ardent  pursuit  ttereof,  and  dissuading  from  folly,  i.e.  vice,  which  is  its 
opposite.  This  is  especially  the  hortatory  or  wisdom  section  of  the  book. 
It  is  usually  regarded  as  a  prelude  to  the  collection  of  proverbs  beginning 
at  ch.  X.,  and  is  compared  to  the  proem,  of  Elihu  in  Job  xxxii.  6 — 22, 
before  he  addresses  himself  more  particularly  to  the  matter  in  hand.  An 
analogous  preface  occurs  in  oh.  xxii.  17 — 21  of  our  book,  though  this  is 
short  and  intercalary.  The  section  is  divided  by  Delitzsch  as  above, 
though  the  portions  are  not  very  accurately  defined  by  internal  evidence. 
We  have  adopted  this  arrangeinent  in  the  Commentary  for  convenience' 
sake.  Commonly,  each  fresh  warning  or  instruction  is  prefaced  by  the 
address,  "  My  son  "  {e.g.  oh.  i.  8, 10, 15;  ii.  1,  etc.),  but  this  is  not  universally 
the  case,  and  no  subdivisions  can  be  accurately  formed  by  attention  to  this 
peculiarity.  The  unity  of  the  section  consists  in  the  subject  and  the  mode 
of  treatment,  rather  than  in  a  regular  course  of  instruction  proceeding  on 
definite  lines,  and  leading  to  a  climacteric  conclusion.  The  motto  of  the 
whole  is  the  noble  maxim,  "  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  beginning  of 
knowledge  :  but  the  foolish  despise  wisdom  and  instruction."  Taking  this 
as  the  basis  of  his  lecture,  Solomon  proceeds  with  his  discourse.  He 
warns  against  fellowship  with  those  who  entice  to  robbery  and  murder 
(ch.  i.  8 — 19).  Wisdom  addresses  those  who  despise  her,  showjng  them 
their  folly  in  rejecting  her  offers,  and  the  security  of  those  who  hearken 
to  her  counsels  (ch.  i.  20 — 33).  The  teacher  points  out  the  blessings 
arising  from  the  sincere  and  earnest  pursuit  of  Wisdom — ^it  delivers  from 
the  path  of  evil,  and  leads  to  all  moral  and  religious  knowledge  (ch.  ii.). 
Now  comes  an  exhortation  to  obedience  and  faithfulness,  self-sacrificing 
devotion  to  God,  perfect  resignation  to  his  will  (ch.  iii.  1 — 18).  Wisdom 
is  introduced  as  the  creative  energy  of  Grod,  who  becomes  the  Protector  of 
all  who  hold  fast  to  her  (ch.  iii.  19 — 26).  One  condition  for  the  attain- 
ment of  wisdom  and  happiness  is  the  practice  of  benevolence  and  rectitude 
in  dealing  with  others  (ch.  iii.  27—35).  Having  previously  spoken  in  his 
own  name,  and  having  also  brought  forward  Wisdom  making  her  appeal, 
the  teacher  now  gives  some  recollections  of  his  own  early  home  and  hia 
father's  advice,  especially  on  the  subject  of  discipline  and  obedience 
(ch.  iv.).  He  returns  to  a  matter  before  glanced  at  as  one  of  the  chief 
temptations  to  which  youth  was  exposed,  and  gives  an  emphatic  warning 
against  adultery  and  impurity,  while  he  beaatifully  commends  honourable 
marriage  (ch.  v.).  Then  he  warns  against  suretyship  (ch.  vi.  1—5),  sloth 
(vers.  6—11),  deceit  and  malice  (vers.  12—19),  and  adultery  (vers. 
20—35).  Keeping  to  the  theme  of  his  last  discourse,  the  moralist  again 
denounces  the  detestable  sin  of  adultery,  and  enforces  his  admonition  by 
an  example  which  he  had  himself  vritnessed  (ch.  vii.).  Working  round 
again  to  Wisdom,  as  the  object  of  all  his  discourses,  the  author  introduces 
her  as  inviting  all  to  follow  her,  descanting  on  her  excellence,  her  heavenly 
origin,  her  inestimable  blessings.  This  is  the  most  important  section 
concerning   Wisdom,   which    here   appears   as    coeternal    with   God    and 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


co-operating  with  him  in  creation.  Thus  her  supreme  excellence  is  m 
additional  reason  for  hearkening  to  her  instructions  (ph.  viii.).  Summing 
up  in  brief  the  warnings  which  have  preceded,  Solomon  introduces  Wisdom 
and  Folly,  her  rival,  inviting  severally  to  their  companionship  (ch.  ix.). 

The  next  part  of  our  book  contains  the  first  great  collection  of  Solomonic 
proverbs,  some  four  hundred  in  number ;  or,  as  others  say,  three  hundred 
and  seventy-five  (ch.  x. — xxii.  16).  They  are  introduced  with  the  title, 
"  The  Proverbs  of  Solomon,"  and  fully  correspond  to  their  description, 
being  a  series  of  apothegms,  gnomes,  and  sentences,  containing  ideaa 
moral,  religious,  social,  political,  introduced  apparently  withoat  order,  or 
with  only  some  verbal  connection  or  common  characteristics,  and  certainly 
not  arranged  on  any  systematic  scheme.  Of  the  form  of  these  maxims  we 
shall  speak  later;  we  here  only  mention  some  of  the  subjects  with  which 
they  are  concerned.  This  part  of  the  work  begins  by  drawing  comparisons 
between  the  righteous  and  sinners,  in  their  general  conduct,  and  the 
consequences  that  result  therefrom  (ch.  x.). 

"  Treasures  of  wickedness  profit  nothing : 

But  righteousness  delivereth  from  death  "  (ch.  x.  2). 
"He  that  gathereth  in  summer  is  a  wise  son : 

.  But  lie  that  sleepeth  in  harvest  ia  a  son  that  causeth  shame "  (ch.  x.  S). 
"The  memory  of  the  just  ia  blessed: 

But  the  name  of  the  wicked  shall  rot"  (ch.  x.  7). 

The  same  distinction  is  maintained  in  conduct  to  neighbours— 

"  A  false  balance  ia  abomination  to  the  Lord ; 

But  a  just  weight  is  his  delight "  (ch.  xi.  1). 
"  He  that  withholdeth  corn,  the  people  shall  curse  him : 

But  blessing  shall  be  upon  the  head  of  him  that  selleth  it "  (ch.  xi.  26). 
Then  we  have  maxims  on  social  and  domestic  life— 
"  A  virtuous  woman  is  a  crown  to  her  husband : 

But  she  that  maketh  ashamed  is  as  rottenness  in  his  bones  "  (ch.  xiL  4). 
"  The  righteous  man  regardeth  the  life  of  hia  beast : 

But  the  tender  mercies  of  the  wicked  are  cruel "  (oh.  xii.  10). 
The  diiference  between  the  godly  and  sinners  is  seen  in  the  use  they 
respectively  make  of  temporal  goods — 

"There  is  that  maketh  himself  rich,  yet  hath  nothing: 

There  is  that  maketh  himself  poor,  yet  hath  great  wealth  "  (ch.  xiiL  71 
"  Wealth  gotten  by  vanity  shall  be  diminished : 

But  he  that  gathereth  by  labour  shall  have  increase  "  (oh.  xiii  11). 

The  relations  between  rich  and  poor,  wise  and  fools,  exhibit  the  sama 
role — 

••  He  that  despiseth  his  neighbour  sinneth : 

But  he  that  hath  pity  on  the  poor,  happy  is  he  I "  (ch.  xlv.  21). 
"  The  foolish  make  a  mock  at  guilt : 
But  among  the  upright  there  is  favour  "  (ch.  xlv.  9). 


TEE  PROVERBS.  rii 


The  state  of  the  heart  is  that  to  which  God  looks — 

"  The  Lord  is  far  from  the  wicked : 
But  he  heareth  the  prayer  of  the  righteous"  (oh,  xv.  29). 

Tmst  in  God  is  the  only  security  in  life — 

"Commit  thy  wDrks  nnto  the  Lord, 
And  thy  purposes  shall  he  established  "  (ch.  xvi.  3). 

"  He  that  giveth  heed  unto  the  word  shall  fiod  good : 
And  whoso  trustetb  in  the  Lord,  happy  is  he  I "  (oh.  xvi.  20). 

Gentleness  and  long-suffering  are  recommended — 

"  A  soft  answer  tumeth  away  wrath  : 
But  a  grievous  word  stirreth  up  anger"  (oh.  iv.  1). 

"The  beginning  of  strife  is  as  when  one  letteth  out  water: 
Therefore  leave  off  contention,  before  there  be  quarrelling"  (ch.  ivii.  14). 

Humility  is  strongly  enjoined — 

"  Pride  goeth  before  destruction^ 
And  a  haughty  spirit  before  a  fall "  (ch.  xvi.  18). 

Sloth  and  intemperance  and  other  vices  are  severely  reprobated — 

"  Slothfulness  casteth  into  a  deep  sleep ; 
And  the  idle  soul  shall  suffer  hunger  "  (ch.  lix.  15). 

"Love  not  sleep,  lest  thou  come  to  poverty; 
Open  thine  eyes,  and  thou  shalt  be  satisfied  with  bread  "  (ch.  xx.  IS). 

"  He  that  loveth  pleasure  shall  be  a  poor  man : 
He  that  loveth  wine  and  oil  shall  not  be  rich  "  (ch.  xxi.  17). 

A.  good  reputation  should  be  sought  and  retained — 

"  A  good  name  is  rather  to  be  chosen  than  great  riches, 
And  loving  favour  rather  than  silver  and  gold  "  (ch.  xxii.  1). 

The  section  ends  with  an  apothegm  about  rich  and  poor  which  is  capable 
of  more  than  one  interpretation — 

"  Whosoever  oppresseth  the  poor,  it  is  for  his  gain ; 
Whosoever  giveth  to  the  rich,  it  is  for  his  loss  "  (ch.  xxii.  16). 

j.4ii8  18  a  religious  statement  concerning  the  moral  government  of  God, 
affirming,  on  the  one  hand,  that  oppression  and  extortion  inflicted  on  the 
poor  man  do  in  the  end  redound  to  his  good ;  and,  on  the  other  hand, 
addition  to  the  wealth  of  a  rich  man  only  injures  him,  leads  him  to 
indolence  and  extravagance,  and  sooner  or  later  brings  him  to  want. 

There  is  much  said  in  this  part  about  the  king's  prerogative — 

"  The  king's  favour  is  toward  a  servant  that  dealeth  wisely  : 
But  his  wrath  shall  be  against  him  that  causeth  shame  "  (ch.  xiv.  35). 

"He  that  loveth  pureness  of  heart. 
For  the  grace  of  his  lips  the  king  shall  be  his  friend"  (ch.  xxii.  11). 

It  u  possible  to  take  exception  to  the  worldliness  and  low  motives  of 


[NTRODUCTION  TO 


many  of  the  maxims  in  this  and  other  parts  of  the  book.  The  wisdom 
often  seems  to  be  that  of  this  -world  rather  than  of  heavenly  aspiration. 
And  there  have  not  been  wanting  persona  who  aay  such  pronouncements 
cannot  be  deemed  to  be  inspired,  and  that  the  work  containing  them  was  not 
dictated  or  controlled  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  "We  will  quote  a  few  of  those 
so-called  worldly  maxims.  Obedience  to  the  Law  is  enjoined  in  order  to 
gain  long  life  and  prosperity  (ch.  iii.  1,  2),  riches  and  honour  (ch.  viii. 
18) ;  diligence  is  to  be  desired  with  the  view  of  obtaining  a  sufficiency, 
and  averting  poverty  (ch.  xx.  13)  ;  the  great  motive  for  charity  and  bene- 
volence is  the  temporal  reward  and  the  favour  of  God  which  they  secure 
(ch.  xix.  17 ;  xxi.  13) ;  the  same  reason  holds  good  for  honouring  God 
with  our  substance  (ch.  iii.  9,  10)  ;  humility  is  to  be  practised  because  it 
brings  honour  and  life  (ch.  xxii.  4)  ;  self-control  is  a  useful  attainment 
because  it  preserves  from  many  dangers  (oh.  xvi.  32 ;  xxv.  28)  ;  a  fine 
reputation  is  a  worthy  object  of  quest  (ch.  xxii.  1);  sloth,  drunkenness, 
and  gluttony  are  to  be  avoided  because  they  impoverish  a  man  (oh.  xxi. 
17;  xxiii.  20,  21;  xxiv.  33,  34);  we  should  avoid  companionship  with  the 
evil  because  they  will  lead  us  into  trouble  (ch.  xiii.  20 ;  xxii.  24,  etc.)  ; 
it  is  unwise  to  retaliate  lest  we  bring  injury  on  ourselves  in  the  end 
(ch.  xvii.  13)  ;  we  are  not  to  exult  over  an  enemy's  fall  lest  we  provoke 
Pi-ovidence  to  punish  us  (ch.  xxiv.  17,  etc.),  but  rather  to  assist  an  adver- 
sary in  order  to  secure  a  reward  at  the  hands  of  the  Lord  (ch.  xxv, 
21,  etc.)  ;  wisdom  is  to  be  sought  for  the  temporal  advantages  which  it 
brings  (ch.  xxiv.  3,  etc. ;  xxi.  20). 

Such  are  some  of  the  maxims  which  confront  us  in  this  Scripture ;  and 
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  they  seem  at  first  sight  to  make  virtue  a  matter 
of  calculation ;  and  though  they  are  capable  of  being  spiritualized  and 
forced  into  a  higher  sphere,  yet  in  their  natural  sense  they  do  urge  the 
pursuit  of  right  on  low  grounds,  and  base  their  injunctions  on  selfish 
considerations.  Is  this  what  we  should  expect  to  find  in  a  work  con- 
fessedly appertaining  to  the  sacred  canon?  Is  this  teaching  such  as 
tends  to  make  a  man  wise  unto  salvation,  to  furnish  the  man  of  God 
unto  good  works?  The  whole  question  turns  upon  the  due  employment 
of  secondary  motives  La  the  conduct  of  life.  Is  this  method  properly 
employed  in  education  ?  Does  God  use  it  in  his  dealings  with  us  ?  We 
must  observe  that  '  Proverbs '  is  a  book  written  chiefly  for  the  edification 
of  the  young  and  inexperienced,  the  simple  who  were  still  in  the  early 
age  of  moral  growth,  those  whose  principles  were  as  yet  unsettled  and 
needed  direction  and  steadfastness.  For  such  teaching  of  the  highest 
character  would  be  inappropriate;  they  could  not  at  once  appreciate 
more  elevated  doctrine ;  their  power  of  assimilation  was  at  present  too 
feeble  to  admit  the  strong  meat  of  heavenly  lore;  and  they  were  to  be 
led  gradually  to  a  higher  stage  by  a  slow  and  natural  process  which  would 
make  no  great  demand  on  their  faith,  nor  conscious  interruption  in  their 
'-lily  life.     It  is  thus  that  wo  educate  children.     We  employ  the  motives 


THE  PROVERBS. 


of  sliame  and  emnlation,  reward  and  piinisTimeiit,  pleasnre  and  pain,  as 
incentives  to  goodness  and  activity,  or  as  deterrents  from  evil ;  and  though 
the  actions  and  habits  fostered  loj  these  means  cannot  be  regarded  as 
perfect,  and  have  in  them  an  element  of  weakness,  still  they  are  helps  on 
the  way  to  virtue,  and  facilitate  the  course  of  higher  training.     By  such 
means,  imperfect  as  they  are,  the  moral  principle  is  not  injured,  and  the 
pupil  is  placed  in  a  position  where  he  is  open  to  the  best  influences,  and 
prepared  to  receive  them.     We  have  learned  thus  to  deal  with  children 
from  God's  dealings  with  ourselves.     What  are  gratitude  to  parents,  faith 
in  teachers,  love  of  friends,  loyalty  to  a  sovereign,  but  secondary  motives 
which  control  our  lives,  and  yet  are  not  distinctly  religious  ?     We  build 
on  these  feelings,  we  expect  and  cherish,  them,  because  they  lead  to  worthy 
action,  and   without  them  we  should  be  selfish,  loveless,  animals.     They 
keep  us  in  the  path  of  duty ;  they  take  us  out  of  ourselves,  make  us  regard 
others'  interests,  preserve  us  from  much  that  is  evil.     Men  act  on  such 
motives ;   they  do  not  generally  set  before  themselves  anything  higher ; 
and  he  who  would  teach  them  mnst  take  them  as  they  are,  stand  on  their 
platform,  sympathize  with   their   weakness,  and,  by  putting  himself  in 
their  position,  gain  their  confidence,  and  lead  them  to  trust  his-  guidance 
when  he  tells  them  of  heavenly  things.     On  such  principles  much  of  our 
book  is  framed.     The  moralist   knew  and  recognized  the  fact  that  the 
persons  for  whose  benefit  he  wrote  were  not  wont  to  act  from  the  highest 
motives,  that  in  their  daily  life  they  were  influenced  by  selfish  considera- 
tions— fear   of   loss,   censure  of  neighbours,  public   opinion,   expediency, 
revenge,  custom,  example  ;  and,  instead  of  declaiming  against  these  prin- 
ciples and   in  austere  virtue  censuring  their  defects,  he  makes  the  best 
of  them,  selects  such  as  may  suit  his  purpose,  and,  while  using  them  as 
supports  for  his  warnings,  he  intersperses  so  much  higher  teaching  that 
every  one  must  see  that  morality  has  another  side,  and  that  the  only  real 
and  true  motive  for  virtue  is  the  love  of   God.     Such  teaching  loses  its 
apparently  anomalous  character  when  we  consider  that  it  is  addressed  to 
a  people  who  were  living  under  a  temporal  dispensation,  who  were  told  to 
expect  blessings  and  punishments  in  their  present   life,  and  who  saw  in 
all    that    befell    them    providential    interferences,   tokens   of    the    moral 
government  of  their  Lord  and  King.     It  is  consistent  with  the  educational 
object  of  our  book,  and  with  the  gradual  development  of  doctrine  observed 
in  the  Old  Testament,  wherein  is  seen  that  the  Law  was  a  tutor  to  bring 
men  to  Christ. 

The  first  collection  of  proverbs  is  followed  by  two  appendices  enunciat- 
ing "the  words  of  the  wise" — the  first  contained  in  ch.  xxii.  17 — xxiv.  22; 
the  second,  introduced  by  the  words,  "These  things  also  belong  to  the. 
wise  "  in  ch.  xxiv.  23 — 34  The  former  of  these  commences  with  a  personal 
address  to  the  pupil,  recommending  these  sayings  to  his  serious  attention, 
and  then  proceeds  to  give  various  precepts  concerning  duty  to  the  poor, 
anger,  suretyship,  cupidity,  intemperance,  impurity,  and  to  urge  the  young 


INTBODtJCTION  TO 


to  avoid  evil  men  and  those  who  would  lead  them  astray.     It  ends  with 
the  weighty  saying  of  moral  and  political  importance — 

"My  Bon,  fear  thou  the  Lord  and  the  king : 
And  meddle  not  with  them  that  are  given  to  change"  (oh.  xxiv.  21), 

The  second  little  appendix  consists  also  of  proverbial  sayings,  but  is 
enlivened  by  a  personal  reminiscence  of  the  writer,  who  in  his  walk  passed 
by  the  field  of  the  sluggard,  noted  its  miserable  condition,  and  drew  a 
lesson  therefrom  (ch.  xxiv.  30,  etc.).  This  section  also  contains  the  almost 
evangelical  precept — 

"  Say  not,  I  will  do  so  to  him  as  he  hath  done  to  mo : 
I  will  render  to  the  man  according  to  his  work." 

We  now  arrive  at  the  second  great  collection  of  Solomonic  proverbs, 
"which  the  men  of  Hezekiah  copied  out"  (ch.  xxv. — xxix.).  This  is 
a  series  of  some  hundred  and  twelity  gnomic  sayings  collected  from 
previous  writings,  by  certain  scribes  and  historiographers,  in  the  reign  and 
under  the  superintendence  of  the  good  King  Hezekiah,  and  intended  as  a 
supplement  to  the  former  collection,  to  which  it  bears  a  very  marked 
similarity,  and  many  sentences  of  which  it  repeats  with  no  or  very  slight 
variations.  Hezekiah,  devoted  to  the  moral  and  religions  improvement  of 
his  people,  seems  to  have  commissioned  his  secretaries  to  examine  again  the 
works  of  his  predecessor,  and  to  cull  from  them,  and  from  similar  com- 
pilations, snch  maxims  as  would  further  his  great  purpose.  Hence  we  do 
not  find  in  this  section,  as  in  former  parts,  much  instruction  for  the  young, 
but  sentences  concerning  government,  ideas  on  social  subjects,  on  behaviour, 
on  moral  restraint,  and  kindred  topics  that  have  to  do  with  private  and 
public  life.  There  are  in  it  some  noteworthy  utterances  concerning  the 
office  of  king — 

"  The  heaven  for  height,  and  the  earth  for  depth. 
But  the  heart  of  kings  is  unsearchahle. 
Take  away  dross  from  the  silver. 
And  there  cometh  forth  a  vessel  for  the  finer} 
Take  away  the  wicked  from  hefore  the  king. 
And  his  throne  shall  be  established  in  righteousBeu"  (ch.  xxv.  3,  «tc.). 

"The  king  by  judgment  estahlisheth  the  land: 
But  he  that  exacteth  gifts  overthroweth  it "  (ch.  xxix.  4). 

There  is  also  a  mashal  hymn  in  praise  of  agriculture,  which  looks  like  a 
protest  against  the  growing  luxury  of  the  age,  and  a  call  to  the  simpler, 
purer  Ufe  of  earlier  days — 

"  Be  thou  diligent  to  know  the  state  of  thy  flocki. 
And  look  well  to  thy  herds. 
For  riches  are  not  for  ever : 
And  doth  the  crown  endure  unto  all  generations? 
The  hay  is  carried,  and  the  tender  grass  showeth  itself 


THE  PROVERBS. 


And  the  herbs  of  the  mountains  are  gathered  in. 

The  lambs  are  for  thy  clothing. 

And  the  goats  are  the  price  of  the  field : 

And  there  will  be  goats'  milk  enough  for  thy  food. 

For  the  food  of  thy  househoW, 

And  maintenance  for  thy  maidens  "  (oh.  xxvii.  23,  etc.). 

There  follow  three  appendices  of  various  origin  and  authorship.  The 
first  contains  "  The  words  of  Agar,  the  son  of  Jakeh,  the  oracle,"  addressed 
by  him  to  two  of  his  disciples  (according  to  one  interpretation  of  the 
words,  "The  man  spake  unto  Ithiel,  even  unto  Ithiel  and  Ucal"),  and 
containing  proverbial  and  enigmatical  sayings  (ch.  xxx.).  This  unknown 
author  begins  with  a  confession  of  his  faith,  a  humble  depreciation  of  his  own 
acquirements,  and  an  acknowledgment  of  the  fraitlessness  of  endeavouring 
to  comprehend  the  nature  of  God.  There  is  much  here  and  in  other  parts 
of  the  section  to  remind  us  of  the  musings  of  Job,  who  felt  and  expressed 
the  same  perplexity.  The  poet  then  utters  two  prayers  to  God,  that  he 
may  be  delivered  from  vanity  and  lies,  and  may  be  supplied  with  daily 
food— 

"  Give  me  neither  poverty  nor  riches  ; 
Feed  me  with  the  food  that  is  needful  for  me  "  (ch.  xxx.  8). 

Then  succeeds  a  curious  collection  of  pictures,  grouped  into  three  or 
four  sentences  each,  each  stich  having  a  certain  connection  in  language 
and  idea.  Thus  we  have  four  wicked  generations,  denoting  the  universal 
prevalence  of  the  sins  therein  denounced ;  four  things  insatiable ;  four 
things  inscrutable ;  four  intolerable ;  four  exceeding  wise ;  four  of  stately 
presence.  If  these  utterances  mean  no  more  than  what  at  first  sight  they 
seem  to  imply,  they  merely  express  the  feelings  of  one  who  was  a  keen 
observer  of  man  and  nature,  and  took  a  peculiar  method  of  enforcing  hia 
remarks:  "There  are  three  things,  yea,  four,"  etc.  But  if  under  these 
apparently  simple  statements  of  fact  there  are  hidden  great  spiritual 
verities,  then  we  have  here  examples  of  dark  sayings,  enigmas,  difficulties, 
in  the  solution  of  which  the  opening  of  the  Book  promised  assistance. 
That  such  is  the  case  many  early  commentators,  followed  by  some  modem 
writers,  have  stated  without  hesitation;  and  much  labour  has  been 
expended  in  spiritualizing  the  dicta  of  the  text.  Certainly  in  their  literal 
shape  these  sentences  are  not  of  the  highest  type,  nor  distinctly  religious ; 
and  it  is  but  natural  that,  feeling  this,  expositors  should  endeavour  to  raise 
these  commonplace  and  secular  allusions  to  a  more  exalted  sphere. 

The  second  appendix  (ch.  xxxi.  1 — 9)  is  entitled,  "  The  words  of  King 
Lemuel,  the  oracle  which  his  mother  taught  him."  The  chief  interest  lies 
in  the  question — Who  is  Lemuel?  (see  §  3).  The  section  is  a  brief  lesson 
addressed  to  kings,  chiefly  on  the  subjects  of  impurity  and  drunkenness. 

The  third  appendix,  which  forms  the  conclusion  of  the  book  (ch.  xxxi. 

10 31),  consists  of   the   celebrated   description   of   the  virtuous  woman, 

the  type  of  the  ideal  wife,  mother,  and  mistress.     It  is  what  is  called  an 


lil  INTBODUCTION  TO 


acrostic  mashal,  i.e.  each  verse  commences  with  one  of  the  twenty-two 
letters  of  the  Hebrew  alphabet,  in  the  usual  alphabetical  order.  Taking 
the  manners  and  customs  of  his  age  and  country  as  the  basis  of  his  pictures, 
the  author  delineates  a  woman  of  the  highest  attainments,  strong-minded 
yet  feminine,  active,  practical,  prudent,  economical.  Her  husband  trusts 
her  wholly ;  she  manages  the  household,  keeps  her  servants  to  their  work, 
and  herself  sets  an  example  of  diligence ;  she  always  has  funds  in  hand  to 
make  purchases  at  the  right  moment,  and  to  provide  for  the  needs  of  her 
household.  She  is  as  wise  as  she  is  beautiful,  as  generous  and  charitable  as 
she  is  just;  her  virtue  redounds  to  the  credit  of  husband  and  children,  and 
all  connected  with  her. 

"Her  children  rise  up,  and  call  her  blessed; 
Her  husband  also,  and  he  praiseth  her,  saying, 
Hany  daughters  have  done  virtuously. 
But  thou  excellest  them  all. 
Favour  is  deceitful,  and  beauty  is  vain : 
But  a  woman  that  feareth  the  Lord,  she  shall  be  praised. 
Give  her  of  the  fruit  of  her  hands ; 
And  let  her  works  praise  her  in  the  gates.'' 

After  the  many  passages  which  speak  of  the  degradation  of  woman, 
which  introduce  her  in  the  most  odious  light,  as  the  temptress  of  youth, 
and  the  very  road  to  death ;  in  contrast,  too,  to  numerous  paragraphs  and 
allusions  which  represent  home-life  as  spoiled  by  a  contentions,  jealous, 
and  extravagant  wife,— it  is  soothing  to  come  upon  this  noble  description, 
and  to  close  the  volume  with  this  picture  of  what  a  woman  is  when  she 
is  animated  by  love  of  God  and  duty. 

We  may  add  a  slight  sketch  of  the  theology  and  ethics  which  meet  ub 
in  this  book.  There  is  little  distinctive  Judaism.  In  this  respect  the 
similarity  to  the  Book  of  Job  is  remarkable.  The. name  of  Israel  is  not 
once  mentioned;  there  is  no  allusion  to  the  Passover  or  the  other  great 
festivals ;  there  is  not  a  word  about  idolatry,  not  a  warning  against  the 
worship  of  false  gods;  the  observation  of  the  sabbath  is  not  referred  to 
nor  the  payment  of  tithes.  At  the  same  time,  the  Law  is  often  mentioned^ 
and  the  ceremonies  enjoined  therein  are  tacitly  regarded  as  being  in  full 
use  and  practice  (see  ch.  xxviii.  4,  9 ;  xiv.  9 ;  vii.  14,  etc.).  It  is  doubtless 
a  providential  arrangement  that  so  little  prominence  is  given  to  the 
external  obligations  of  the  Hebrew  religion;  by  this  reticence  the  book 
was  better  adapted  to  become  a  world-wide  teacher;  it  spoke  to  Jew  and 
Gentile  alike;  it  taught  a  morality  with  which  all  good  men  could 
sympathize ;  it  penetrated  wherever  Greek  literature  was  understood  and 
valued.  Of  Its  wide  influence  the  Book  of  Wisdom  and  Ecclesiastics  are 
special  proofs. 

wiJh'^thfT'*"  t*r'f'  °^  ?^'  ^'°^^^^^"  ^^«  ^°  --^Pl-te  accord 
with  the  religion  of  Israel  as  we  know  it  from  other  sources.     The  special 

name  of  God   in  the  form   Jehovah   occurs   everywhere   throughout   thi 


THE  PROVEEBS.  xiil 


buok,  and  is  used  more  often  than  Elohim,  thus  emphasizing  the  great 
truth  o£  which  the  incommunicable  name  was  the  symbol.  Grod  is  incom- 
prehensible (ch.  XXX.  4),  infinitely  wise  (ch.  iii.  19,  etc. ;  viii.),  omniscient, 
omnipresent  (ch.  xv.  3).  He  created  all  things  out  of  nothing  (ch.  viii 
22,  etc.)  ;  he  governs  and  preserves  them  by  his  providence  (oh.  xvi.  4)  ; 
he  teaches  men  by  chastening  and  affliction  (ch.  iii.  11,  12)  ;  his  care 
watches  over  and  rewards  the  good,  -while  he  punishes  the  evil  (ch.  xii.  2)  ; 
the  poor  and  the  lowly  are  special  objects  of  his  love  (ch.  xxii.  4;  xvi.  19; 
xxiii.  11)  ;  allowing  to  man  the  exercise  of  free-will  (ch.  i.  24),  God  helps 
him  by  his  grace  to  make  a  right  choice  (ch.  xvi.  1,  3,  9 ;  xx.  24),  because 
he  loves  him  (ch.  viii.  17,  31),  and  wills  his  happiness  (ch.  viii.  36).  Of 
the  doctrine  concerning  wisdom  in  this  book  we  have  spoken  above.  Of 
Messianic  hopes  no  distinct  trace  is  found.  "Whether  the  future  life  is 
asserted  has  often  been  questioned ;  but  it  is  difficult  to  believe  that  this 
great  truth  is  wholly  neglected  in  this  book,  as  we  know  that  long  before 
Solomon's  time  it  was  generally  admitted,  and  we  should  confidently  expect 
traces  of  its  influence  in  the  treatment  of  man's  destiny. 

"  In  the  way  of  righteousness  is  life ; 
And  in  the  pathway  thereof  there  is  no  death  "  (ch.  xii.  28). 

"  The  wicked  is  thrust  down  in  his  evil-doing : 
But  the  righteous  hath  hope  in  his  death  "  (oh.  xiv.  32). 

These  are  not  dogmatic  assertions  of  future  rewards  and  punishments, 
but  they  are  consistent  with  such  a  belief,  and  may  well  imply  it.  In  the 
same  light  we  may  consider  the  many  passages  which  speak  of  the  recom- 
pense that  awaits  actions  good  or  evil.  The  retribution  promised  is  not 
fully  satisfied  by  anything  that  befalls  a  man  in  this  life  as  the  result  of 
his  conduct;  both  the  reward  and  the  punishment  are  spoken  of  in  terms 
which  seem  to  look  to  something  beyond  the  grave —something  which 
death  did  not  end,  and  which  nothing  here  was  adequate  to  fulfil.  If  it 
is  said  that  impurity  plunges  a  man  into  the  depths  of  hell  (ch.  ii.  18 ; 
vii.  11),  that  sinners  remain  in  the  congregation  of  the  dead  (ch.  xxi.  16), 
and  that  their  expectation  perishes  when  they  die  (ch.  xi.  7),  it  is  also 
announced  that  righteousness  delivereth  from  death  (ch.  xi.  4),  that  there 
is  a  sure  reward  for  the  godly  (oh.  xi.  18),  and  that  the  righteous  hath 
hope  in  his  death  (ch.  xiv.  32). 

The  moral  teaching  of  our  book  may  be  grouped  under  various  heads — 
the  result  of  experience,  the  outcome  of  thought,  controlled  by  the  strongest 
sense  of  religion  and  an  overruling  Providence. 

1.  Duty  to  God.  The  first  of  all  duties,  the  foundation  of  all  morality 
and  religion,  is  the  fear  of  God  (ch.  i.  7).  This  must  be  followed  by  perfect 
trust  in  him  and  distrust  of  self  (ch.  iii.  5,  etc.).  The  externals  of  religious 
worship  are  not  to  be  neglected  (ch.  xiv.  9 ;  xx.  25),  but  God  looks  chiefly 
to  the  heart  (ch.  xvii.  3)  ;  it  is  this  which  makes  men  acceptable  or 
abominable  in  his  sight  (cb.  xi.  20;  xv.  8).     If  we  sin,  we  must  confess 


'INTRODUOTiaN  TO 


our  guilt  (ch.  ixviii.  13),  meekly  submit  to  his  chastisement  (ch.  in.  11, 
etc.). 

2.  Duty  to  ourselves.  The  first  and  cliief  lesson  enforced  is  the  utter 
necessity  of  avoiding  fleshly  lusts  and  evil  companionship  (ch.  i.  10,  etc. ; 
xiii.  20).  Among  deadly  sins  to  be  avoided  special  mention  is  made  of 
pride,  the  enemy  of  wisdom  and  hateful  to  God  (oh.  xvi.  5,  18,  19) ;  avarice 
and  cupidity,  which  lead  to  fraud  and  wrong  (ch.  xxviii.  20),  and  produce 
only  a  transitory  profit  (ch.  xxiii.  4,  5) ;  envy,  which  is  as  rottenness  in 
the  bones  (ch.  xiv.  30)  ;  luxury  and  intemperance,  which,  as  prevalent 
in  the  more  artificial  state  of  society,  induced  by  wealth  and  contact  with 
other  nations,  are  most  strongly  reprobated  and  shown  to  ensure  most  fatal 
consequences  (ch.  ii.  18 ;  xxiii.  1,  etc.,  20,  etc.,  29,  etc.) ;  anger,  which 
leads  to  folly,  causes  and  embitters  quarrels,  makes  a  man  detestable  (ch. 
xiv.  17;  XV.  1;  xx.  3);  idleness,  which  ruins  equally  a  man's  character  and 
property  (ch.  xiii.  4;  vi.  6,  etc.).  Then  much  is  said  about  the  necessity 
of  guarding  the  tongue,  in  the  power  of  which  are  death  and  life  (oh.  xii. 
13,  etc. ;  xviii.  21),  and  avoiding  self-praise  (ch.  xii.  9 ;  xxvii.  2). 

3.  Duty  to  our  neighbours.  We  should  sympathize  with  the  afilicted,  and 
try  to  cheer  them  (ch.  xii.  25 ;  xvi.  24) ;  help  the  poor  in  their  need 
because  they  are  breihren,  children  of  the  All-Father  (ch.  iii.  27,  etc.  • 
xiv.  31).  A  neighbour  should  be  judged  honestly  and  truthfully  (ch.  xvii. 
15 ;  xxiv.  23,  etc.) ;  with  him  we  are  to  live  in  peace  (ch.  iii.  29,  etc. ; 
xvii.  13,  etc.),  never  slandering  him  (ch.  x.  10,  etc. ;  xi.  12,  etc.),  hiding 
his  faults  if  possible  (ch.  x.  12),  encouraging  sincere  friendship  (ch.  xviii. 
24),  and  being  strictly  honest  in  all  transactions  with  him  (ch.  xi.  1  ■ 
XX.  14 ;  xxii.  28). 

4.  Domestic  duties.  Pious  parents  are  a  blessing  to  children  (ch.  xx.  7), 
and  should  teach  them  holy  lessons  from  their  earliest  years  (ch.  i.  8 ;  iv.  1, 
etc.),  training  them  in  the  right  way  (ch.  xxii.  6),  correcting  them  when 
they  do  wrong  (ch.  xxiii.  13,  etc.).  Children  for  their  part  should  attend 
to  the  instruction  of  elders,  and  gladden  their  parents'  hearts  by  prompt 
obedience  and  strict  life  (ch.  x.  1 ;  xxiii.  15,  etc.).  Let  the  mother  of  the 
family  realize  her  high  position,  and  be  the  crown  of  her  husband  (ch. 
xii.  4),  and  build  up  her  house  (ch.  xiv.  1).  If  she  needs  a  model,  let  her 
endeavour  to  emulate  the  strong-minded  virtuous  woman  (oh.  xxxi.  10,  etc.). 
Be  it  far  from  her  to  imitate  the  contentious  wife,  whose  peevish  lU  temper 
is  like  the  continuous  dropping  of  a  leaky  roof,  and  renders  family  life 
insupportable  (ch.  xix.  13  ;  xxv.  24).  Servants  should  be  carefully  selected 
(ch.  xvii.  2)  and  wisely  treated,  that  they  may  not  rise  beyond  their  station 
and  prove  arrogant  and  assuming  (ch.  xix.  10;  xxix.  21). 

5.  Maxims  relating  to  civil  life  and  political  economy.  The  king's  throne 
is  established  by  righteousness,  mercy,  and  truth  (ch.  xvi.  12;  xx.  28); 
his  sentence  is  regarded  as  indefeasible  (ch.  xvi.  10);  he  pursues  the 
godless  with  righteous  punishment  (ch.  xx.  8,  26),  protects  the  weak  (ch 
Kxxi.  7,  etc.),  favours  the  pious  and  obedient  (ch.  xvi.  15 ;  xix.  12).     Ho 


THE  PROVBEBS. 


IB  no  oppressor,  nor  coTetous  (ch.  xxviii.  16)  ;  and  he  gathers  round  him 
faithfal  counsellors  (ch.  xiv.  35),  whose  advice  he  takes  in  all  importanc 
matters  (ch.  xxiv.  6).  By  such  means  he  increases  the  stability  of  his 
throne;  he  enables  his  subjects  to  advance  in  prospei'ity  and  virtue,  and 
finds  his  honour  in  the  multitude  of  his  people  (ch.  xi.  14 ;  xiv.  28).  It  is 
the  duty  of  men  to  render  obedience  to  the  powers  that  be ;  punish  lent 
speedily  overtakes  tlie  rebellious  (ch.  xvi.  14,  etc.;  xix.  12;  xx.  2).  God 
has  ordained  that  there  shall  be  rich  and  poor  in  the  land  (oh.  xxii.  2)  ; 
the  rich  ought  to  help  the  poor  (ch.  iii.  27,  etc. ;  xiv.  21),  and  not  treat  th  ni 
roughly  (ch.  xviii.  23).  All  commercial  transactions  should  be  conducted 
with  the  strictest  honesty ;  the  withholding  of  corn  is  specially  denounced 
(ch.  xi.  26).  It  is  a  foolish  act  to  stand  security  for  another's  debt;  you 
are  sure  to  smart  for  it,  and  then  you  can  blame  only  yourself  (ch.  vi.  I, 
etc. ;  xxii.  26,  etc.). 

Among  miscellaneous  sayings  we  may  note  the  following  :— 

"  Who  can  say,  I  have  made  my  heart  clean, 
I  am  pure  from  my  sin  ?  "  (ch.  xx.  9). 

"  It  is  as  sport  to  a  fool  to  do  wickedness ; 
And  so  is  wisdom  to  a  man  of  understanding  "  (ch.  x.  23). 

"  A  wise  man  is  strong ; 
Tea,  a  man  of  knowledge  increaseth  strength  "  (oh.  xxiv.  6), 

"  The  wicked  flee  when  no  man  parsueth ; 
But  the  righteous  are  bold  as  a  lion  "  (oh.  xxviii.  1). 

"  Hope  deferred  maketh  the  heart  sick : 
But  when  the  desire  cometh,  it  is  a  tree  of  life  "  (ch.  xiii.  12). 

"  The  path  of  the  righteous  is  as  the  shining  light. 
That  shineth  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect  day  "  (ch.  iv.  18). 

"  The  wicked  eameth  deceitful  wages : 
But  he  that  soweth  righteousness  hath  a  sure  reward  "  (ch.  xi.  18). 

"  The  hoary  head  is  a  crown  of  glory ; 
It  shall  be  found  in  the  way  of  righteousness  "  (ch.  ivi.  31). 

§  3.    AUTHOESHIP  AND   DaTB. 

Uncritical  antiquity,  followed  in  modern  times  by  undiscriminating 
conservatism,  had  no  hesitation  in  ascribing  the  whole  Book  of  Proverbs 
to  one  author,  Solomon,  King  of  Israel.  It  is  true  that  three  portions  of 
the  work  are  prefaced  with  his  name  (oh.  i.  1 ;  x.  1 ;  xxv.  1)  ;  but  two 
other  sections  are  attributed  respectively  to  Agur  (ch.  xix.  1)  and  Lemuel 
(ch.  xxxi.  1)  ;  so  that  apparently  the  volume  itself  professes  to  be  composed 
by  three  authors;  and  besides  this,  there  are  two  appendices  containing 
"the  words  of  the  wise"  (ch.  xxii.  17,  etc.;  xxiv.  23,  etc.),  which  must  be 
distinguiflhed  from  those  of  Solomon.  It  was  natural  indeed  for  the  Jews 
to  affix  their  great  king's  name  to  the  whole  collection.     He  is  said  to  have 


xji  INTEODUCTION  TO 


spoken  three  thousand  proverbs  (mashal,  1  Kings  iv.  32),  a  statement  which 
implies  that  they  had  been  collected  into  a  volume,  and  the  present  work 
was  reasonably  supposed  to  form  part  of  this  surprisingly  large  storehouse 
of  wisdom.  But  a  more  careful  examination  of  the  book  necessitates  the 
opinion  of  divided  authorship ;  contents  and  language  point  to  differences 
of  date  and  composition ;  the  repetition  of  the  same  proverb  in  identical 
or  almost  identical  language,  the  recurrence  of  the  same  thought  varied 
only  in  actual  wording,  the  adoption  of  one  member  of  an  old  maxim  with 
the  attachment  of  a  different  hemistich, — ^these  blemishes  could  hardly  have 
been  allowed  to  remain  in  the  work  of  a  single  author.  There  are  also 
variations  in  the  language,  which  in  a  marked  manner  differentiate  the 
several  parts,  so  that  we  are  forced  to  allow  a  composite  character  to  the 
work;  and  the  difficult  task  is  imposed  of  endeavouring  to  find  some 
certainty  on  the  question  of  its  origin. 

In  one  place  alone  does  the  book  itself  afford  direct  help  towards  deter- 
mining the  date  of  any  portion.  The  section  copied  by  Hezekiah's  friends 
from  previous  records  must  have  been  put  together  in  that  monarch's  reign, 
between  two  and  tljree  hundred  years  after  the  time  of  Solomon,  who  was 
regarded  as  the  author  of  those  sayings.  The  persons  engaged  in  the  com- 
pilation may  have  been  those  mentioned  in  2  Kings  xviii.  18 — Shebna  the 
secretary,  and  Joah,  son  of  Asaph,  the  chronicler,  and  very  possibly  the 
Prophet  Isaiah  himself,  as  a  Jewish  tradition  relates.  Wbether  after  so  long 
an  interval  they  simply  reproduced  his  utterances,  unadulterated  and  unaug- 
mented,  might  primd  facie  be  doubted ;  a  careful  examination  of  the  section 
shows  that  this  doubt  is  well  founded.  If  there  are  many  sentences  therein 
which  in  form  and  substance  have  a  flavour  of  high  antiquity,  and  may  well 
have  flowed  from  Solomon's  lips  and  have  been  current  in  his  age,  there 
are  also  many  which  exhibit  the  artificiality  of  a  later  period,  and  presup- 
pose a  condition  of  things  far  removed  from  the  palmy  era  of  the  Hebrew 
monarchy.  Most  critics  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  earliest 
portion  is  that  which  is  called  the  first  great  collection,  contained  in  ch. 
xi. — xxii.  16.  The  style  throughout  is  simple  and  chaste,  the  maxims  are 
mostly  comprised  in  antithetical  distichs,  each  verse  being  complete  in 
itself.  This,  according  to  Ewald,  is  the  oldest  form  of  the  technical  proverb. 
It  is  noticed  that  there  are  many  phrases  and  expressions  which  are  peculiar 
to  this  section,  e.g.  "fountain  of  Hfe,"  "tree  of  life,"  "snares  of  death," 
"hand  in  hand,"  "whisperer,  tale-bearer,"  "shall  not  go  unpunished," 
"but  for  a  moment,"  etc.  But  arguments  derived  from  peculiarities  of 
structure  and  language  are  generally  uncertain,  and  strike  readers  in 
different  ways.  A  surer  criterion  is  found  in  the  contents  of  a  composition, 
in  the  references  which  it  contains,  in  the  circumstances  which  it  mentions 
or  the  environments  which  it  implies.  Now,  if  we  compare  this  first 
collection  with  that  of  Hezekiah's  "  men,"  we  shall  note  some  very  marked 
differences,  which  have  been  observed  by  many  critics.  There  is  evidently 
a  change  in  the  political  situation.     In  the  former  section  the  monarchy  if 


THE  PROVERBS.  xvii 


at  its  best.  It  is  deemed  "an  abomination  to  kings  to  commit  wickedness" 
(ch.  xvi.  12)  ;  their  "  throne  is  established  by  righteousness,"  they  "  delight 
in  righteous  lips,  and  love  him  that  speaketh  right ;  "  there  is  "  life  in  the 
king's  countenance,  and  his  favour  is  like  the  latter  rain  "  (ch.  xvi.  13, 
etc.) ;  mercy  and  truth  are  his  safeguard,  and  uphold  his  throne  (ch.  xx. 
28).  A  changed  picture  is  presented  in  the  Hezekiah  collection.  Here  we 
have  a  people  oppressed  by  a  prince  wanting  in  understanding  (ch.  xxviii. 
19),  mourning  under  the  rule  of  a  wicked  king  (ch.  xxix.  2),  who  is  likened 
to  a  roaring  lion  and  a  ranging  bear  (ch.  xxviii.  15).  There  is  reference  to 
bribery  and  extortion  in  high  places  (ch.  xxix,  4),  change  of  dynasties  (ch. 
xxviii.  2),  unworthy  favourites  (ch.  xxv.  5;  xxix.  12) — all  of  which  circum- 
stances point  to  a  political  situation  other  than  that  in  the  former  part; 
a  period,  in  fact,  when  experience  had  brought  knowledge  of  evil,  and 
rulers  had  been  found  to  be  antagonistic  to  the  interests  of  their  subjects, 
liable  to  the  worst  vices,  open  to  corrupting  influences.  It  is  impossible 
to  suppose  that  many  of  the  maxims,  even  in  the  former  collection,  were 
spoken  by  Solomon.  What  experience  would  make  him  say  that  the  king's 
honour  lay  in  the  multitude  of  his  people,  and  his  destruction  in  their 
paucity  (ch.  xiv.  28)  ?  Or,  again,  that  a  pious  wife  is  the  best  of  blessings 
(ch.  xii.  4;  xviii.  22),  while  a  contentious  one  is  a  torment  (ch.'  xix.  13, 14; 
xxi.  9, 19)  ?  Such  statements  as  these  last  presuppose  a  monogamous  man, 
not  one  notorious  for'polygam'y.  Then,  would  Solomon  have  discoursed  thus 
about  himself,  asserting  that  a  Divine  sentence  is  his  word,  and  that  his 
judgments  are  irrefragable  (ch.  xvi.  10),  that  his  wrath  is  as  messengers  of 
death,  that  his  favour  is  light  and  life  (ch.  xvi.  14, 15),  that  his  anger  is  like 
the  roaring  of  a  lion,  and  he  puts  to  the  torture  those  who  offend  him,  while 
his  only  claim  to  support  at  God's  hands  is  the  mercy  and  truth  which  his 
life  exhibits  (ch.  xx.  2,  26,  28)  ?  However  cast  in  Solomonic  mould,  these 
sentences  cannot  have  had  Solomon  for  their  author ;  so  we  must  conclude 
that,  together  with  his  genuine  sayings,  a  multitude  of  gnomes  were  extant, 
of  various  ages  and  origins,  which  were  attributed  popularly  to  the  great 
king,  as  the  founder  of  that  kind  of  gnomic  poetry,  the  great  master  of 
proverbial  philosophy.  That  both  sections  contain  very  many  sayings 
which  had  him  for  their  author,  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose,  and  there  is 
nothing  to  discredit  this  notion.  From  what  is  said  of  his  remarkable 
wisdom,  and  regarding  the  form  which  philosophy  assumes  in  the  East,  we 
might  expect  such  productions  from  his  mind.  If  he  had  for  his  object 
the  instruction  of  his  people,  the  training  of  them  in  sound  views  of  life 
and  in  the  practice  of  virtue  and  religion,  .he  would  embody  his  views  in 
terse  and  pithy  sentences,  charming  the  imagination  and  easy  to  be  remem- 
bered ;  he  would  thus  apply  Divine  truths  to  the  conduct  and  regulation  of 
daily  life.  This  precedent  was  doubtless  followed  by  other  sages,  and  thus 
in  addition  to  and  in  connection  with  the  proverbial  lore  which  is  accu- 
mulated in  every  nation  by  the  experience  of  ages,  there  grew  up  a  gradually 
increasing  store  of  maxims  and  apothegms,  of  a  higher  order  than  the 

rBOVEBBS.  * 


XTIB  INTRODUCTION  TO 


vulgar  sort,  yrhich  was   enshrined  in  carefally  balanced   sentences,  and 
handed  down  as  a  precious  heirloom  to  succeeding  generations. 

These  considerations,  which  seem  well  grounded,  account  for  the  compo- 
site character  of  the  Book  of  Proverbs.     Many  minds  and  many  ages  have 
been  concerned  in  the  collection  ;  it  has  suffered  from  interpolation,  trans- 
position, addition ;  various  editors  have  arranged  and  rearranged  the  mate- 
rials before  them ;  passages  reflect  the  golden  age  of  Israel's  monarchy ; 
passages  belong  to  such  times  as  those  of  Jeroboam  II.  and  his  successors. 
It  has  become  impossible  to  assign  assured  dates  to  the  several  parts,  and 
the  attempt  has  led  critics  to  ludicrous  conclusions,  some  from  the  same 
data  attributing  to  Solomon  compositions  which  others  affix  to  post-exilian 
times.     Out  of  the  medley  of  varying  opinions  we  gather  the  following 
conclusions.     When  the  men  of  Hezekiah  made  their  collection,  which  is 
headed  with  the  words,  "  These  are  also  proverbs  of  Solomon,"  there  existed 
already  a  body  of  maxims  known  as  Solomon's,  to  which  they  were  minded 
to  make  an  addition  from  sources  open  to  them.     This  previously  existing 
collection  we  may  reasonably  suppose  to  be  that  which  at  present  stands 
immediately  before  theirs,  viz.  ch.  x.  1 — xxii.  16,  and  which  would  thus  be 
the  older  portion.     It  is  expressly  called  "the  proverbs  of  Solomon;  "  and 
there  can  be  no  reasonable  doubt  that  the  traditional  account  which  assigned 
it  to  the  son  of  David  was  in  the  main  correct.     Knowing  the  facts  of 
Solomon's  later  career,  no  collector  would  have  had  the  hardihood  to  attri- 
bute many  of  the  utterances  therein  to  him,  had  they  not  been  universally 
recognized  as  his.     They  are  doubtless  the  effusion  of  earlier  days,  the  col- 
lected outpouring  of  the  happy  time  when  his  heart  was  whole  and  his  faith 
unimpaired ;  but  who  arranged  it,  or  when  it  received  its  present  shape, 
can  only  be  conjectured.     It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  Solomon  sat  down 
and  deliberately  composed  a  book  of  proverbs  such  as  we  now  possess.     It 
is  said  that  he  spahe  three  thousand  proverbs.     He  must  have  had  scribes 
and  secretaries  who  collected  the  wisdom  that  flowed  from  bis  lips  during 
the  various  circumstances  of  his  life  and  in  the  various  stages  of  his  career 
(1  Kings  iv.  3).     This  formed  the  nucleus  round  which  accretions  gathered 
in  the  course  of  time,  the  acumen  of  Hebrew  critics  failing  to  distinguish 
the  genuine  from  the  spurious.     From  the  great  mass  of  proverbial  litera- 
ture thus  formed  Hezekiah's  friends  made  a  new  selection.     What  became 
of  the  rest  of  the  older  collection,  which  is  not  comprised  in  our  present 
volume,  cannot  be  known.     It  was  evidently  preserved  among  the  archives 
of  the  kingdom  which  contained  accounts,  not  only  of  the  monarch's  acts, 
but  also  of  his  wisdom  (I  Kings  xi.  41).    As  we  have  said  above,  the  repeti- 
tions  of  the  same  proverb  in  different  places  indicate  a  change  of  authors  or 
editors,  deriving  their  materials  from  the  same  source,  oral  or  documentary, 
but  writing  independently. 

The  two  appendices  to  this  section  containing  the  "  words  of  the  wise  " 
(ch.  xxii.  17— xxiv.)  exhibit  repetitions  which  again  would  indicate  a 
variety  of  authors,  or  a  lack  of  care  in  selection.     Some  passages  found 


u 


THE  PEOVEEBS.  xii 


other  parts  of  the  book  occur  also  in  these  two  sections.  Thus  ch.  xxiv. 
20  (as  we  shall  notice  directly)  appears  at  ch.  xiii.  9 ;  ch.  xxiv.  23,  "  To 
have  respect  of  persons  is  not  good,"  at  ch.  xxviii.  21  ;  and  ch.  xxiv.  33, 
34  at  ch.  vi.  10,  11.  The  first  of  the  appendices  is  evidently  later  than  the 
first  collection ;  the  structure  of  the  verses  is  less  terse,  the  parallelism  is 
not  so  strongly  marked,  sometimes  entirely  wanting,  and  the  sense  is  often 
not  completed  tinder  three  or  even  five  verses.  A  comparison  of  the  way 
in  which  the  repetitions  above  indicated  are  introduced  would  lead  to  the 
impression  that  the  former  was  the  earlier,  and  that  the  appendix-writer 
derived  certain  sentences  from  that.  Thus  in  ch.  xxii.  14  we  have  the 
statement,  "  The  mouth  of  strange  women  is  a  deep  pit ;  "  but  in  ch.  xxiii. 
27  this  is  introduced  as  a  reason  for  the  advice  in  the  previous  verse,  and 
amplified  thus :  "  For  a  whore  is  a  deep  ditch,  and  a  strange  woman  is 
a  narrow  pit."  So  the  verse,  ch.  xi.  14,  is  enlarged  into  two  in  ch.  xxiv. 
5,  6;  and  the  unvarnished  gnome  (ch.  xiii.  9),  "The  light  of  the  righteous 
rejoiceth,  but  the  lamp  of  the  wicked  shall  be  put  out,"  becomes,  under  the 
manipulation  of  the  transcriber,  a  warning  in  quite  a  different  direction : 
"Fret  not  thyself  because  of  evil-doers,  neither  be  thoo  envious  at  the 
wicked ;  for  there  will  be  no  reward  to  the  evil  man ;  the  lamp  of  the 
wicked  shall  be  put  out  "  (ch.  xxiv.  19,  20).  Who  can  doubt  that  the  sim- 
pler form  of  these  sayings  is  the  original  ?  Hitzig  claims  an  exilian  date 
for  this  section  on  the  strength  of  an  Aramaic  colouring  which  other  critics 
deny,  and  a  supposed  borrowing  of  passages  or  phrases  from  Jeremiah 
which  seems  to  be  wholly  imaginary.  How  could  a  poet,  banished  from  his 
own  country,  make  a  point  of  not  removing  the  ancient  landmark  (ch.  xxii. 
28 ;  xxiii.  10),  or  enjoin  his  hearers  to  serve  their  king  and  avoid  innova- 
tors (ch.  xxiv.  21)  ?  There  is,  indeed,  nothing  to  guide  us  to  any  certainty 
in  the  question,  but  the  style  and  language  reflect  those  of  the  first  portion 
of  our  book,  and  it  may  possibly  have  been  written  about  the  same  period. 
As"  in  ch.  iii.  31,  so  often  in  this  section  (e.g.  ch.  xxii.  22;  xxiv.  15,  etc.), 
there  are  hints  of  oppressive  rulers  and  iniqaitous  governors,  which  would 
lead  us  to  think  of  Manasseh  and  his  like.  It  is  reasonable  to  conclude 
that  this  appendix  was  added  after  Hezekiah's  time  by  an  editor  who  had 
before  him  the  fir^  great  collection.  The  same  holds  good  concerning  the 
second  little  appendix  (oh.  xxiv.  23—34),  which  seems  to  be  of  contempo- 
raneous origin.  Nowack,  by  comparing  the  two  similar  passages  in  ch.  vi. 
10  11  and  xxiv.  33,  34,  concludes  that  the  former  is  original,  and  that  the 
appendix-writer  has  somewhat  altered  the  sentence  in  transferring  it  to  his 
own  repertory. 

We  have  in  some  degree  indicated  what  may  bo  reasonably  determined 
about  the  date  and  authorship  of  the  central  portions  of  our  book.  It 
remains  to  investigate  the  beginning  and  the  closing  sections.  The  intro- 
duction (ch.  i.  1 — 6),  describing  the  character  and  intent  of  the  work, 
applies  virtually  not  only  to  the  collection  immediately  succeeding  (ch.  i. 
7_j,.^^  b^t  to  other  parts  of  the  book,  whether  the  writer  had  these  parta 


INTEODUCTION  TO 


before  him  or  not.  Who  is  the  author  of  this  first  section,  the  proem,  m  it 
has  been  called,  is  a  matter  of  much  dispute.  There  is  some  difiSonlty  in 
attributing  it  to  Solomon  himself.  The  opening  words  do  not  necessarily 
imply  that  Solomon  wrote  all  that  follows.  "  The  Proverbs  of  Solomon  " 
may  be  introduced  as  a,  formal  heading  of  what  may  be  a  gathering  of 
fragments  from  many  quarters,  composed  in  Solomon's  spirit  and  instinct 
with  his  wisdom,  but  not  actually  received  from  his  lips  or  writings.  There 
are  passages  which  seem  to  be  derived  from  Isaiah's  prophecy ;  e.g.  eh.  iL 
15,  "Whose  ways  are  crooked,  and  they  froward  in  their  paths,"  is 
parallel  to  Isa.  lis.  8 ;  ch.  i.  24,  26,  27,  to  Isa.  Izv.  12  and  Ixvi.  4.  But  the 
language  is  not  identical,  and  the  prophet  may  have  been  indebted  to  the 
moralist.  More  to  the  purpose  is  the  fact  that  the  second  part  (ch.  z.  1 — 
xxii.  16)  is  superscribed  "  The  Proverbs  of  Solomon,"  which  would  be 
unnecessary  and  misleading  if  the  first  part  was  also  his  composition.  To 
this 'it  may  be  answered  that  this  title  is  more  especially  appropriate  to  the 
section  as  containing  proverbs  rather  than  hortatory  addresses;  and  it 
introduced  by  a  different  editpr  the  discrepancy  is  easily  accounted  for. 
Others  insist  that  the  religious  ideas  and  the  form  in  which  they  are 
expressed  are  quite  foreign  to  Solomon's  time  and  standpoint.  If  the 
teolinical  form  of  the  mashal,  consisting  of  distichs  displaying  well- 
balanced  and  antithetical  clauses,  be  the  form  which  alone  appertains  to 
Solumon's  age,  then  it  must  be  allowed  that  the  introdnctory  section 
contains  very  few  proper  nuishals,  but  rather  is  composed  of  odes  of 
varying  length,  in  which,  as  it  were  incidentally,  a  few  mashals  are 
inserted.  The  terse  single  proverb  is  remarkably  absent,  and  descriptire 
poems,  lengthy  exhortations,  and  developments  of  a  given  truth,  are  the 
common  characteristics  of  the  piece.  Here  again,  however,  there  is  no 
certainty  that  Solomon  regarded  himself  as  bound  to  keep  to  one  law  in 
the  composition  of  proverbs,  or  that  he  did  not  employ  other  and  more 
elaborate  methods  of  expressing  his  sentiments.  The  presumption  is 
certainly  against  the  two  parts  having  the  same  author,  but  the  idea  is  not 
irrational.  Delitzsch  has  produced  another  argument.  He  dwells  upon 
the  different  idea  of  Wisdom  afforded  by  the  two  sections.  In  the  former, 
Wisdom  appears  as  an  Independent  personality,  dwelling  with  God  before 
all  creation,  and  operating  in  the  prodaction  of  the  visible  world,  and  busy- 
ing itself  with  the  affairs  of  men  ;  in  the  latter,  Wisdom  is  a  moral  quality, 
which  is  grounded  in  the  fear  of  God,  teaches  men  to  recognize  the  truth., 
and  to  regulate  their  lives  according  to  the  rules  of  religion.  Doubtless 
the  view  of  Wisdom  in  the  proem  is  an  advance  on  and  a  development  of 
the  conception  in  the  other  section.  Speculation  had  progressed,  schools 
of  wise  men  had  been  formed,  preceptors  addressed  their  pupils  as  "  son," 
and  Wisdom  was  regarded  as  the  chief  motor  of  moral  and  religious  action. 
The  chohna  is  no  longer  an  idea,  a  code,  or  a  subjective  thoTtght ;  it  has 
an  objective  existence,  carried  back  to  eternity,  fellow-worker  with  God. 
This  consideration  is  decisive  against  the  identity  of  authorship  in  the  two 


THE  PROVERBa  ix) 


parts,  and  disposes  one  to  allow  more  weight  to  the  undecisiye  arguments 
mentioned  above.  The  parssnetical  form  adopted  in  the  introduction,  so 
different  from  the  proverb  proper,  points  to  the  influence  of  the  prophetic 
element,  hardly  arrived  at  public  utterances  and  documentary  testimony  in 
Solomon's  time,  but  afterwards  the  great  power  in  the  state  and  the  common 
support  of  the  religious  life.  Many  passages  breathe  the  spirit  of  Deutero- 
nomy, which  in  the  minds  of  some  critics  would  at  once  be  a  proof  of  very 
late  origin,  but  of  course  have  no  such  look  for  those  who  hold  the  Mosaic 
authorship  of  the  Pentateuch.  Others  are  remarkably  simUar  to  parts  of 
the  Book  of  Job,  and  are  evidently  more  or  less  borrowed  from  that  source ; 
but  as  the  date  of  that  writing  is  still  undecided,  nothing  can  be  deduced 
from  this  fact.  Taking  all  that  has  been  said  into  consideration,  and  care- 
fully weighing  the  opinions  which  have  been  put  forth  on  the  question,  we 
regard  this  section  as  the  composition  of  one  author,  and  that  not  Solomon, 
except  in  so  far  as  it  breathes  his  spirit  and  possibly  embodies  many  of  his 
sayings.  It  is  no  argument  against  this  last  suggestion,  that  Solomon 
would  not  be  found  discoursing  against  unchastity  of  which  his  own  later 
life  was  a  flagrant  example.  There  is  no  reason  why  this  wisest  of  men 
should  not  have  uttered  such  warnings  in  the  earlier  and  purer  part  of  his 
career.  It  was  probably  arranged  in  its  present  shape  by  the  editor  of  the 
first  great  collection  of  Solomonic  proverbs,  and  placed  by  him  as  an  intro- 
duction to  this  work.  The  eloquence  of  the  piece  is  of  the  very  highest 
order,  and  exhibits  the  inspiration  of  a  true  prophet,  but  the  writer  must 
remain  unknown.  It  is  only  natural  to  consider  that  such  magnificent 
passages  as  those  contained  in  ch.  vii.  and  ix.  were  composed  by  a  man  of  no 
mean  attainments,  and  one  can  think  of  no  one  able  to  write  them  but 
Solomon  himself,  especially  inspired  by  God  with  wisdom  beyond  all  men ; 
but  this  impression  does  not  vanquish  opposing  criticism,  and  we  can  only 
concede  that  the  section  is  worthy  of  Solomon,  and  probably  contains  some 
of  his  lore,  garnered  and  lovingly  reproduced  by  a  kindred  spirit. 

The  last  two  chapters  (xx'x.  and  xxxi.)  present  some  difficult  questions, 
which  have  always  exercised  the  ingenuity  of  critics,  and  which  cannot 
even  now  be  determined  with  any  certainty.  Ch.  xxx.  opens  (accord- 
ing to  the  Authorized  Version)  thus:  "The  words  of  Agur  the  son  of 
Jakeh,  even  the  prophecy  :  the  man  spake  unto  Ithiel,  even  unto  Ithiel  and 
Ucal."  Nothing  whatever  is  known  about  any  of  the  persons  here  supposed 
to  be  mentioned.  The  name  Ithiel,  indeed,  occurs  once  in  Nehemiah 
(xi.  ?) ;  but  the  Benjamite  thus  called  can  have  nothing  to  do  with  the 
person  in  our  verse.  It  is  conjectured  that  Agur  was  some  well-known 
sage,  Hebrew  or  foreign,  whose  sayings  were  thought  by  some  late  editor 
to  be  worthy  of  a  place  beside  the  proverbs  of  Solomon.  Jewish  interpre- 
ters have  explained  the  names  symbolically  of  Solomon  himself.  Agur  may 
mean  "  Gatherer,"  "  Convener,"  from  agar,  "  to;  collect,"  and  is  applied  to 
the  wise  king,  either  as  "  master  of  assemblies  "  (Ecoles.  xii.  11),  or  col- 
lector  of  wisdom  and  maxims,  elsewhere  called  koheleth  (Eccles.  i.  1),  though 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


this  interpretation  of  the  latter  word  is  very  qnestionable.  Jakeh  ia 
rendered  "Obedient"  or  "Pious,"  so  "the  Gatherer,  son  of  the  Obedient," 
would  designate  Solomon,  son  of  David.  St.  Jerome  countenances  the 
allegorical  interpretation  by  rendering,  "  Verba  Congregantis  filii  Vomentis." 
But  one  sees  no  reason  why  the  king,  whose  name  has  been  freely  used  in 
the  previous  sections,  should  now  be  introduced  under  an  allegorical  appel- 
lation. Certainly,  much  that  is  contained  in  the  chapter  may  be  regarded 
as  symbolical,  bat  that  is  scarcely  sufficient  reason  for  making  the  teacher 
also  symbolical.  Why,  again,  should  this  section  be  separated  from  the  rest 
of  Solomon's  words,  and  not  incorporated  with  the  great  body  of  his 
collection  ?  What  object  could  there  be  in  introducing  another  batch  of 
the  king's  proverbs  after  the  "  words  of  the  wise  "  ?  If  this  piece  had  been 
in  existence  in  early  times,  Hezekiah  would  surely  not  have  omitted  placing 
it  in  its  proper  position  in  his  own  repertory.  The  contents,  however 
leave  no  doubt  on  the  subject.  Solomon  never  could  have  uttered  what 
foUowB : — 

"  Surely  I  am  more  brutish  than  any  man. 
And  have  not  the  understanding  of  a  man; 
And  I  have  not  learned  wisdom  "  (ch.  xxx.  2,  3). 

Ifor  could  he  be  blindly  groping  in  darkness  after  the  Creator  (ch.  xxx.  4)  ; 
nor  pray  that  he  might  have  neither  poverty  nor  riches  (ch.  xxx.  8).  The 
notion,  therefore,  that  Solomon  himself  is  here  intended  must  be  sur- 
rendered as  wholly  unfounded.  Some  have  attempted  to  find  Agur'a 
nationality  in  the  word  translated  "the  prophecy"  (hamassa).  Massa 
"  burden,"  is  the  word  generally  used  to  denote  a  prophet's  message,  either 
from  its  being  borne  by  him  to  the  appointed  place,  or  expressive  of  its 
grievous  nature  and  awful  importance.  The  term  does  not  seem  altogether 
appropriate  to  the  utterances  that  follow,  and  Hitzig  has  started  a  theory 
which  makes  the  word  denote  the  country  from  which  Agur  came.  The 
old  Venetian  Version  had  given  :  Ao'yoi  'kyovpov  vieus  'Icuceciis  row  Moo-oou, 
"  the  words  of  Agur  son  of  Jakeh  the  Masaite."  Now,  there  was  a  son  of 
Ishmael  named  Massa  (Gen.  xxv.-14;  1  Chron.  i.  30),  who  may  have  given 
his  name  to  a  tribe  and  a  district,  as  did  his  brothers  Duma  and  Tema 
(Isa.  xxi.  11,  14).  It  is  mentioned  in  1  Chron.  iv.  38,  etc.,  that  certain 
Simeonites  in  the  days  of  Hezekiah  made  a  raid  into  the  country  of  Edom, 
and  established  themselves  in  Mount  Seir,  driving  out  the  Amalekitea 
whom  they  found  settled  there.  Starting  fi-om  this  locality  and  moving 
northwards  towards  Damascus,  according  to  Hitzig,  they  set  up  the  king- 
dom of  Massa,  and  hence  issued  this  piece  of  poetry  not  long  after  the  first 
establishment.  This,  in  his  view,  would  account  for  the  peculiarities  of 
dialect  found  in  the  composition.  Others  have  found  a  Massa  in  the  town 
Mismije,  on  the  north  of  the  Hauran  ;  others  place  it  on  the  north  of  the 
Persian  Gulf.  In  fact,  nothing  is  known  with  certainty  about  the  country  • 
its  very  existence  is  problematical.  The  most  likely  supposition  is  that 
Agur  was  an  Edomite,  a  worshipper  of  Jehovah,  and  weU  acquainted  with 


THE  PEOVBBBa  Miil 


Israelitish  literatare,  being  one  of  the  sages  for  whom  Edom  was  celebitited 
(1  Kings  iv.  30),  a  man  whose  sayings  were  deemed  of  sufficient  value  and 
inspiration  to  insert  in  the  sacred  canon,  though  he,  like  Job,  was  not 
one  of  tho  chosen  people.  The  more  probable  rendering  of  the  second 
hemistich  of  ver.  1  of  this  chapter,  which  is  given  in  the  margin  of  the 
Revised  Version,  is  noted  in  the  Exposition, 

As  Agnr  is  considered  a  symbolical  name  of  Solomon,  so  is  Lemuel  in  the 
next  chapter,  which  opens  thus  :  "  The  words  of  King  Lemuel,  the  burden 
which  his  mother  taught  him."  Lemuel  (or  Lemoel,  as  ver.  4)  means 
"  Unto  God,"  equivalent  to  "  Dedicated  to  God ;  "  and  it  is  supposed  to  be 
applied  to  Solomon,  who  from  infancy  was  dedicated  to  God,  and  called  by 
him  Jedidiah,  "Beloved  of  the  Lord"  (2  Sam.  xii.  25).  But  there  is  no 
good  reason  for  supposing  Solomon  to  be  designated  Lemuel.  If  Agnr 
meant  Solomon,  why  is  the  name  now  suddenly  changed  ?  And  how  can 
we  suppose  the  following  address  to  have  been  spoken  by  Bathsheba,  the 
adulteress  and  virtual  murderess  ?  This  is  a  difficulty  not  resolved  by 
regarding  "  the  mother  "  as  a  personification  of  the  Hebrew  Church,  which 
is  an  arbitrary  assumption  invented  to  meet  an  objection,  rather  than 
necessitated  by  an  observation  of  evidence.  Those  who  saw  in  Massa  the 
country  of  Agur's  residence,  would  here  likewise  translate,  "  the  words  of 
Lemuel,  King  of  Massa,"  and  weave  a  pleasing  fiction  whereby  Agur  and 
Lemuel  become  the  sons  of  a  Queen  of  Massa,  who  is  supposed  to  have  been, 
like  the  Queen  of  Sheba,  a  diligent  seeker  of  wisdom.  This  may  be  true, 
but  it  is  a  mere  conjecture,  which  cannot  be  verified.  K  it  is  accepted, 
Lemuel  would  be  an  Ishmaelite,  whose  home  was  in  North  Arabia,  and  who 
belonged  to  the  company  of  the  wise  men  for  whom  Arabia  was  proverbial. 
At  tho  same  time,  it  is  unlikely  that  the  production  of  an  alien,  particularly 
of  a  jealously  regarded  Ishmaelite,  should  be  admitted  to  the  sacred  canon. 
Of  course,  there  is  the  difficulty  concerning  the  origin  of  the  Book  of  Job, 
but  as  that  controversy  is  not  settled,  we  cannot  regard  this  as  an  objection. 
Laying  aside  the  theory  of  Lemuel  being  a  non-Israelite,  we  must  regard 
the  word  as  the  appellation  of  an  ideal  king,  whether  the  poet  looked  back 
to  Salomon  or  Hezekiah,  whom  he  represents  as  taught  by  a  careful  mother 
in  the  way  of  piety  and  justice.  Concerning  the  date  of  these  appendices 
there  is  little  to  guide  us  in  our  determination,  except  that  the  language 
points  to  composition  at  a  later  period  than  the  former  portions  of  the 
book.  We  have  many  dialectical  variations,  Aramaic  and  Arabic  expres. 
sions  which  do  not  occur  in  the  earlier  sections,  and  which  were  not,  as  far 
as  we  know,  current  in  Southern  Israel  before  Hezekiah's  reign,  nor  probably 
for  some  long  time  after.  The  free,  terse  proverb  is  now  wholly  wanting, 
a  strained,  mechanical  composition  taking  its  place;  we  have  enigmas 
instead  of  maxims,  laboured  odelets  instead  of  neat  distichs — productions  in 
quite  different  style  from  those  hitherto  handled,  and  showing  a  decline  of 
creative  power  and  a  tendency  to  make  artificiality  and  mechanical  skill 
take  the  place  of  thought  and  novelty.     The  passages  which  are  similar  to, 


ixir  m¥K0t)tlCT10N  TO 


and  may  have  been  derived  from,  Job  cannot  be"  used  in  proof  of  the  late 
date  of  these  sections,  as  the  era  of  that  work  is  undetermined ;  but  the 
painful  consciousness  of  man's  ignorance  in  the  presence  of  the  great  Creator, 
■which  meets  us,  as  in  Job,  so  in  this  appendix  (eh.  xxx.  2,  etc.),  implies  a 
speculative  activity  very  foreign  to  the  earlier  Hebrew  mind,  and  indicative 
of  contact  with  other  elements,  and  acquaintance  with  philosophical  ques- 
tions far  removed  from  the  times  of  the  primordial  monarchy.  Some, 
accordingly,  have  attributed  the  pieces  to  post-exilian  days  ;  but  there  is  not 
a  shadow  of  proof  for  this,  not  an  expression  or  an  allusion  which  confirms 
such  a  notion ;  and  Delitzsch  is  probably  correct  when  he  dates  their  pro- 
duction at  the  end  of  the  seventh  or  the  beginning  of  the  sixth  century  B.C. 
The  closing  poem,  the  praise  of  the  virtuous  woman,  is  probably  still 
later,  and  certainly  by  a  difEerent  hand.  The  alphabetical  ode  is  not  found 
tfll  the  very  latest  period  of  Hebrew  poetry,  though  it  is  impossible  to  affix 
any  definite  date  for  its  production. 

§  4.  Gbkebal  Charagtsb. 

The  whole  Book  of  the  Proverbs  is  rhythmical  in  construction,  and  it  is 
rightly  so  printed  in  the  Revised  Version  as  to  exhibit  this  characteristic. 
The  great  feature  of  Hebrew  poetry,  as  every  one  knows,  is  parallelism,"  the 
balancing  of  thought  against  thought,  corresponding  in  form  and  often  in 
sound,  so  that  one  line  is  an  echo  of  the  other.  The  second  member  is 
either  equivalent  to  the  first,  or  contrasted  with  it  or  similar  to  it  in  con- 
struction ;  the  whole  may  consist  of  only  two  lines  forming  a  distich,  which 
is  the  normal  type  of  proverb,  or  of  three  or  four  or  more ;  but  all  con- 
tain one  thought  expanded  on  parallel  lines.  The  various  shapes  which  are 
thus  assumed  by  the  sentences  in  our  book  are  thus  noted. 

The  simplest  and  earliest  form  is  the  distich,  a  sentence  consisting  of 
two  lines  Viaianced  one  with  the  other,  like — 

•  A  wise  son  maketh  a  glad  father : 
But  a  foolish  son  is  the  heaviness  of  his  mother  "  (ch.  x.  1). 

The  second  part  of  our  book  (ch.  x.  1 — xxii.  16)  consists  mainly  of  such 
sentences.  Sometimes  the  sense  extends  over  three  lines,  forming  a 
tristich,  when  the  thought  in  the  first  line  is  repeated  in  the  second  before 
the  conclusion  is  reached.     Thus — 

"  Though  thou  shouldest  bray  a  fool  in  a  mortar 
With  a  pestle  among  bruised  corn, 
Yet  will  not  hia  foolishuess  depart  from  him  "  (ch.  xxviL  22). 

Or  the  idea  in  the  second  line  is  developed  by  a  contrast  in  the  third— 

"Whoso  causeth  the  upright  to  go  astray  in  an  evil  way. 
He  shall  fall  himself  into  his  own  pit : 
But  the  perfect  shall  inherit  good  "  (ch.  xxviii.  lOX 


THE  PROVERBS. 


XXV 


Or  the  additional  line  produces  a  proof  in  confirmation — 

"Thine  own  friend,  and  thy  father's  friend,  forsalcenot; 
And  go  not  to  thy  brother's  house  in  the  day  of  thy  calamity : 
Better  is  a  neighbour  that  is  near  than  a  brother  that  is  far  olf  (ch.  xivii.,10X 

Of  tetrastichs  we  find  some  instances,  where  the  last  two  lines  make  the 
application  of  the  others — 

"  Take  away  the  dross  from  the  silver, 

And  there  cometh  forth  a  vessel  for  the  finer  t 

Take  away  the  wicked  from  before  the  king. 

And  his  throne  shall  be  established  in  righteousness  "  (ch.  xxv.  i,  6). 

In  the  maxims  consisting  of  five  lines,  pentastichs,  the  last  two  or  three 
generally  supply  or  develop  the  reason  of  the  preceding — 

"  Weary  not  thyself  to  be  rich : 
Cease  from  thine  own  wisdom. 
Wilt  thou  set  thine  eyes  upon  that  which  Is  not? 
For  riches  certainly  make  themselves  wings. 
Like  an  eagle  that  flieth  toward  heaven  "  (ch.  xxiii.  4,  6). 

Of  a  proverb  in  six  lines,  hexastioh,  we  have  a  few  instances — 

"Deliver  them  that  are  carried  away  unto  death. 
And  those  that  are  ready  to  be  slain  see  that  thou  hold  back. 
If  thou  sayest.  Behold,  we  knew  not  this; 
Doth  not  he  that  weigheth  the  hearts  consider  it  ? 
And  he  that  keepeth  thy  soul,  doth  not  he  know  it  ? 
And  shall  not  he  render  to  every  man  according  to  his  work?"  (ch.  xxiv.  11, 12). 

Of  the  Ji^tastich  there  is  only  one  example,  viz.  ch.  xxiii.  6 — 8. 

The  connected  verses  in  ch.  xxiii.  22 — 25  may  be  regarded  as  an  octastich, 
but  when  thus  extended  the  proverb  becomes  a  mashal  ode,  like  Ps.  xxv., 
xxxiv.,  xxxvii.  Of  this  character  are  the  introductory  parb,  which  consists 
of  fifteen  didactic  poems,  the  hortatory  address  (oh.  xxii.  17 — 21),  the 
warning  against  drunkenness  (ch.  xxiii.  29 — 35),  and  many  other  passages, 
especially  the  praise  of  the  virtuous  woman  (ch.  xxxi.  10,  etc.),  written  in 
ihe  form  of  an  alphabetical  acrostic. 

The  form  of  the  proverb  being  such  as  we  have  described,  it  remains  to 
distinguish  the  different  kinds  of  parallelisms  employed  which  have  led  to 
their  being  arranged  into  various  classes. 

1.  The  simplest  species  is  the  synonymous,  where  the  second  hemistich 
merely  repeats  the  first,  with  some  little  alteration  of  words,  in  order  to 
enforce  the  truth  presented  in  the  former ;  e,g. — 

"The  liberal  soul  shall  be  made  fat; 
And  be  that  watereth  shall  be  watered  also  himself "  (ch.  xi.  25). 

"  He  that  is  slow  to  anger  is  better  than  the  mighty ; 
And  he  that  ruleth  his  spirit  than  he  that  taketh  a  city  "  (ch.  xvi.  32\ 


sxvt 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


2  The  antithetic  presents  in  the  second  member  a  contrast  to  the  first, 
bringing  forward  a  fact  or  an  idea  whicb  ofPers  the  other  side  of  the 
picture— 

••  The  labour  of  the  righteous  tendeth  to  life ! 

The  increase  of  the  wicked  to  sin"  (ch.  x.  16). 
"  The  thoughts  of  the  righteous  are  judgment : 
But  the  counsels  of  the  wicked  are  deceit"  (oh.  xH.  5). 

These  are,  perhaps,  of  more  frequent  occurrence  than  any.  Sometimes 
the  form  is  interrogative — 

"The  spirit  of  a  man  will  sustain  his  infirmity: 
But  a  broken  spirit  who  can  bear?"  (ch.  xviii.  14). 

3.  Synthesis  in  logic  is  an  argument  advancing  regularly  from  principles 
conceded  to  a  conclusion  founded  thereon.  The  term  has  been  loosely 
applied  to  our  subject,  and  synthetical  proverbs  are  such  as  contain  two 
different  truths  embodied  in  the  distich,  and  not  necessarily  dependent  one 
upon  another,  but  connected  by  some  feature  common  to  both. 

«'  The  fear  of  the  wicked,  it  shall  come  upon  him ; 
And  the  desire  of  the  righteous  shall  be  granted  "  (ch.  x.  24). 

The  idea  of  the  future  is  here  the  connecting  link.  In  the  following 
distich  the  misery  which  results  in  both  cases  is  the  point : — 

"  He  that  is  slack  in  his  work 
Is  brother  to  him  that  is  a  destroyer  "  (ch.  xviii.  9). 

4.  This  last  example  introduces  ns  to  -what  Delitzsch  terms  the  integral 
proverb,  where  the  second  line  completes  the  thought  which  is  only  begun 
in  the  first — 

"  The  law  of  the  wise  is  a  fountain  of  life. 
To  depart  from  the  snares  of  death  "  (ch.  xiii.  14). 

"  The  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  in  every  place. 
Keeping  watch  upon  the  evil  and  the  good"  (ch.  xv.  3). 

This  is  called  also  progressive,  a  gradation  being  presented  from  the  less  to 
the  greater,  or  the  greater  to  the  less,  as — 

"  Bt;hold,  the  righteous  shall  be  recompensed  in  the  earth : 
How  much  more  the  wicked  and  the  sinner  1 "  (oh.  xi  31). 

"  Sheol  and  Abaddon  are  before  the  Lord : 
How  much  more  then  the  hearts  of  the  children  of  men  I "  (ch.  xv.  11). 

5.  The  fifth  sort  of  proverb  is  named  the  parabolic,  which  is,  perhaps,  the 
most  striking  and  significant  of  all,  and  capable  of  manifold  expression. 
Herein  a  fact  in  nature  or  in  common  life  is  stated,  and  an  ethical  lesson 
grounded  upon  it.     The  comparison  is  sometimes  intraduced  by  particles— 

"  As  vinegar  to  the  teeth,  and  as  smoke  to  the  eyes, 
go  is  the  sluggard  to  them  that  send  him"  (ch.  x.  26). 


THE  PROVERBS.  htU 


Sometimes  it  is  suggested  by  mere  JTixtaposition: — 

"  A  jewel  of  gold  in  a  swine's  snout, 
A  fair  woman  which  is  without  discretion  "  (ch.  xL  22), 

Or  it  is  introduced  by  "  and,''  the  so-called  vae  adeequatioiiit — 

"  Cold  water  to  a  thirsty  soul. 
And  good  news  from  a  far  country"  (cb.  xit.  25). 

"  For  lack  of  wood  the  fire  goeth  out. 
And  where  there  is  no  whisperer,  contention  ceaseth"  (oh.  xxvi.  20). 

To  the  forms  here  specified  must  be  added  the  numerical  proverb  (middah, 
"measure"),  where  a  certain  number  is  stated  in  the  first  line,  -which  is 
usually  increased  bj  one  in  the  second,  and  thus  a  kind  of  climax  ia  formed 
which  gives  force  and  piquancy  to  the  sentence.  Familiar  examples  occur 
in  Amos  i.,  where  we  find  a  series  of  propositions  commencing  with  the 
words,  "  For  three,  .  .  .  yea,  for  four,"  etc.  There  is  only  one  of  these 
in  our  book  from  ch.  i.  to  xxix.,  and  that  is  the  octasHch,  ch.  vi.  16 — 19, 
beginning — 

"  There  he  six  things  which  the  Lord  hateth. 
Yea,  seven  which  are  an  abomination  unto  him/ 

But  there  are  many  in  ch.  xxx.,  viz.  vers.  15,  18,  21,  29.  These  are  all  in 
the  form  mentioned  above,  the  first-named  number  being  augmented  by 
one.  Two  more  are  of  simpler  form,  being  not  olimacterio,  viz.  vers.  7 — 9, 
24 — 28.     The  latter,  e.g.,  says — 

"There  are  four  things  which  are  little  upon  the  earth. 
But  they  are  exceeding  wise ; " 

and  then  proceeds  to  specify  the  ants,  conies,  locusts,  and  lizards. 

The  last  two  chapters  possess  a  character  of  their  own,  quite  distinct 
from  the  rest  of  the  work  ;  ch.  xxx.  being  for  the  most  part  destitute  of 
parallelism,  Lemuel's  words  forming  a  continuous  instruction  in  which  the 
second  member  of  each  verse  repeats  the  idea  and  almost  the  very  words  of 
the  first,  and  the  eulogium  of  the  virtuous  woman  taking  the  shape  of  an 
acrostic  ode. 

Of  the  principles  which  guided  the  editors  in  their  arrangement  of  the 
material  before  them,  it  is  impossible  to  give  any  satisfactory  account. 
Sometimes  the  proverbs  are  loosely  connected  by  certain  catchwords  which 
occur  in  a  series.  Thus  in  ch.  xii.  5 — 7  the  link  is  found  in  the  recurrence 
of  the  words  "  righteous  "  (tsaddik)  and  "  wicked  "  (rasha)  ;  in  ch.  x.  8,  13, 
20,  21,  we  have  in  the  Hebrew  continually  the  word  leh,  "heart;  "  so  in 
ch.  xii.  8,  11,  20,  23,  25,  and  elsewhere.  Sometimes  the  subject  supplies 
the  connection,  as  in  ch.  xviii.  10,  11,  where  the  fortress' of  faith  and  that 
of  presumption  are  contrasted;  ch.  xxii.  30,  31,  where  the  overruling  of 
God's  providence  is  the  theme.  JBut  generally  the  grouping  ia  arbitrary, 
and  the  attempt,  like  that  of  Zookler,  to  give  a  synoptical  account  of  th« 
contents  is  far  from  satisfactory. 


uvtti  INTfiOCtJCTlON  TO 


Such,  then,  is  the  mashal  collection  in  this  book  regarded  in  its 
mechanical  aspect.  Viewed  as  poetry,  it  offers  the  greatest  contrasts, 
ranging  from  the  bald  and  commonplace  to  the  heights  of  the  sublime.  If 
we  meet  with  vulgar  truisms  in  one  place,  in  another  we  are  sitting  at  the 
feet  of  a  bard  who  discourses  of  heavenly  things  with  pure  and  fervid 
eloquence.  If  in  one  place  we  find  only  maxims  of  secular  tendency,  to  be 
taken  as  the  outcome  of  worldly  experience  in  matters  of  daily  life,  in 
another  we  are  dealing  with  parables  of  things  Divine,  which  need  and  are 
intended  to  receive  spiritual  handling,  and  cannot  be  thoroughly  understood 
under  any  other  treatment.  The  portrait  of  Wisdom  is  an  adumbration  of 
the  eternal  Son  of  God,  who  invites  all  to  share  his  bounty  and  enrich  them- 
selves from  his  boundless  store.  The  "  strange  woman  "  is  not  merely  a 
representation  of  vice ;  she  is  a  type  of  the  great  opponent  of  Christ,  the 
antichrist,  the  false  doctrine,  the  harlotry  of  the  intellect,  which  opposes  the 
truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.  And  the  virtuous  woman  is  not  merely  an  example 
of  the  perfect  woman,  wife,  and  mother ;  but  also  a  figure  of  the  Church  of 
God,  with  all  its  ennobling  influence,  its  vivifying  ordinances,  its  super- 
natural graces. 

The  book  reflects  the  circumstances  of  the  times  in  which  its  various 
parts  were  composed.  There  are  pictures  of  savage  rapine  and  plunder, 
insecurity  of  life  and  property,  and  the  evils  that  attend  days  of 
anarchy  and  confusion.  There  are  pictures  of  peace  and  prosperity,  quiet 
home-life,  agriculture,  grazing,  farming,  with  its  pleasures  and  profit. 
There  are  signs  of  luxury,  bringing  in  its  train  excess,  profligacy,  fraud, 
covetousness.  There  is  the  ideal  king,  upright,  discerning,  pious,  the  enemy 
of  all  that  is  base,  dishonourable,  or  vicious,  the  re  warder  of  the  just  and 
God-fearing.  There  is  the  ruler,  tyrannical,  oppressive,  iniquitous,  hated 
by  his  subjects,  and  caring  nothing  for  their  best  interests.  Here  we  have 
the  judge  whose  verdict  is  as  God's  own  judgment,  pure  and  equitable ; 
there  the  judge  venal,  corrupt,  selling  the  truth,  perverting  the  right,  and 
making  the  tribunal  a  mart  for  the  gain  of  filthy  lucre.  On  these  and  such- 
like circumstances  the  Proverbs  offer  warnings  and  instructions  ;  antidotes 
against  evil  influences ;  encouragements  to  perseverance  in  the  right  way. 
Much  may  have  originally  been  written  by,  Solomon  for  the  benefit  of  his 
son  Rehoboam,  who  in  that  age  was  exposed  to  peculiar  temptations ;  but 
thereby  the  Holy  Spirit  has  produced  a  manual  fitted  for  the  use  of  all  who 
in  active  life  are  open  to  the  seductions  of  their  time  and  country  and 
society.  We  have  spoken  above  of  the  use  of  secondary  motives  in  the 
teaching  of  our  book ;  but  we  must  not  omit  to  observe  that,  under  the  earthly 
and  secular  element,  there  is  present  a  vein  of  heavenly  wealth.  The  con- 
sciousness  of  a  Divine  presence,  of  a  moral  Governor,  of  an  exterior  Law- 
giver, dominates  every  lesson.  The  heart  is  to  be  guarded  whose  secrets  are 
known  only  to  God ;  the  tongue  is  to  be  diligently  watched,  though  human 
law  punishes  not  its  transgressions.  All  actions  are  to  be  referred  to  God's 
will  and  Word,  and  are  only  right  when  conformed  to  these. 


THE  PEoVlSBS. 


tin 


The  absence  of  all  mention  of  polytheism,  which  some  have  used  as  a 
reason  for  assigning  a  post-exilian  date  to  the  book,  may  be  other-wise 
accounted  for.  If  the  Proverbs  reflect  the  earlier  days  of  Solomon's  reign, 
before  his  great  decline  and  apostasy,  the  days  when  the  temple  had  newly 
been  built  and  consecrated,  and  men's  minds  were  filled  with  the  grand 
ceremonies  of  its  opening  services  and  the  marvels  which  attended  its  dedi- 
cation, there  would  be  then  no  tendency  to  idolatry,  the  evil  propensity 
for  unlawful  worship  would  at  any  rate  for  a  time  have  been  checked,  and 
the  moralist  would  have  had  no  reason  for  warning  against  this  particular 
offence. 

§  5.  History  op  the  Text. 

The  Boot  of  Proverbs  has  always  been  enumerated  by  the  Jews  among 
the  twenty-two  books  into  which  they  divided  their  canon.  Thus  it  was 
found  to  be  by  Melito  of  Sardis,  when  he  personally  investigated  the  matter 
during  his  journey  in  the  East,  as  mentioned  by  Eusebius  ('  Hist.  Bccl.,' 
iv.  26).  To  the  same  effect  is  the  testimony  of  Origen,  adduced  also  by 
Eusebius  (ibid.,  vi.  25).  In  the  Christian  Church  the  catalogues  of  Holy 
Scripture  drawn  up  by  oouncils  and  private  persons  never  fail  to  include 
Proverbs  in  the  canon.  The  frequent  quotation  of  the  work  by  the  writers 
of  the  New  Testament  (e.g.  Rom.  xii.  1.6,  17;  2  Cor.  ix.  7,  Septuagint,  etc.) 
placed  it  at  once  beyond  the  pale  of  doubt,  and  lent  indisputable  confirma- 
tion to  its  claims.  The  inspiration  of  the  works  attributed  to  Solomon  was 
indeed  denied  by  Theodore  of  Mopsuestia  at  the  end  of  the  fourth  century, 
but  his  opinions  found  no  support  among  the  orthodox,  and  were  condemned 
by  the  Fifth  (Ecumenical  Council.  Since  that  time  no  doubt  has  ever  been 
thrown  by  Christians  upon  the  claim  of  our  book  to  its  place  in  the  sacred 
volume.  But  the  settlement  of  the  original  text  is  quite  a  different  matter 
from  establishing  the  canonicity  of  the  work  as  a  whole.  To  compare  with 
the  existing  Masoretic  text  we  have  the  Targnm,  the  Syriao,  Greek,  and 
Latin  versions,  all  of  which  present  variations  from  the  original  which  we 

possess. 

The  Targum,  which  usually  takes  the  form  of  a  Chaldee  Paraphrase,  is 
in  the  present  case  a  tolerably  close  version  without  much  comment  or 
additional  matter.  It  is  plainly  dependent  upon  the  Syriac  in  a  great 
degree,  though  it  varies  from  it  occasionally,  the  translator  having  other 
sources  to  appeal  to.  In  many  passages  the  Peshito  and  the  Targum  agree 
in  receding  from  the  Masoretic  readipg,  in  these  often  coinciding  with  the 
Septuagint,  which  version  it  is  most  unlikely  that  the  Tavgumist  himself 
consulted,  the  strictest  of  Hebrews  holding  that  translation  in  abhorrence. 
Noldeke  concludes  that  a  Jew  took  the  Syriac  as  the  foundation  of  a 
Targum,  but  also  consulted  the  Masoretic  text,  correcting  from  it  certain 
prominent  errors,  but  for  the  most  part  leaving  the  rest  unaltered. 

The  Syriao  itself  offers  many  remarkable  deviations  from  our  text,  mot 


«Mt  INTEODUCTION   TO 


only  affording  interpretations  wliicli  denote  different  wording  and  pointing, 
bat  often  introducing  whole  verses  or  clauses  which  have  no  representative 
in  the  Hebrew.  It  is  evident  that  when  this  version  was  made,  the  Hebrew 
text  was  still  unsettled,  and  what  we  now  receive  was  not  nnivei-sally 
recognized.  Very  probably  under  these  variations  are  concealed  genuine 
readings  which  would  otherwise  be  lost.  Many  of  these  are  noticed  in  the 
Erposition.  The  Syriao  translator  has  made  free  use  of  the  Septuagint,  and 
laid  great  weight  on  its  renderings,  often  endorsing  its  mistakes  and 
paraphrastic  explanations. 

The  Latin  Vulgate,  the  work  of  St.  Jerome,  is  also  greatly  indebted  to 
the  LXX.,  though  he  has  not  always  slavishly  followed  it  against  the 
authority  of  the  present  Hebrew  ;  when  he  does  do  so,  it  is  in  cases  where 
the  text  seemed  unintelligible  without  the  help  of  the  Greek,  or  where  the 
pointing  was  not  determined  by  any  traditional  decision.  What  use  he 
made  of  the  old  Itala  cannot  be  determined,  though  it  seems  to  be  assured 
that  many  of  the  additions  found  in  his  version  occur  also  in  the  more 
ancient. 

Of  the  Septuagint  Version,  as  the  most  important  of  all,  there  is  more  to 
be  said.  When  it  was  made  it  is  impossible  to  say,  though  it  must  have 
been  in  existence  before  Ecclesiasticus  was  writtSn,  as  it  seems  clear  that 
Ben-Sira  had  it  before  him  when  he  translated  his  senior's  work.  The  trans- 
lator was  well  acquainted  with  Greek  literature,  and  aimed  rather  at  pro- 
ducing a  respectable  literary  work  than  offering  a  simple  representation  of 
the  original.  He  renders  freely,  paraphrasing  where  he  thought  it  neces- 
sary, and  even,  as  it  seems,  altering  words  or  phrases  to  make  his  meaning 
clearer,  or  his  sentence  more  flowing.  The  version  shows  traces  of  more 
than  one  hand  being  concerned  in  arranging  the  present  text,  as  we  find  some- 
times double  renderings  of  the  same  passage,  and  sometimes  two  incompa- 
tible translations  blended  confusingly  into  one.  Thus,  ch.  i.  27,  after,  "When 
affliction  and  siege  come  upon  you,"  is  added,  "  or  when  destruction  shall 
come  upon  you;"  ch.  ii.  2,  "Thine  ear  shall  listen  to  wisdom,  thon  shalt 
also  apply  thine  heart  to  understanding,  and  thou  shalt  apply  it  to  the 
instruction  of  thy  son;  "  ch.  vi.  25,  "  Let  not  the  desire  of  beauty  overcome 
thee,  neither  be  thou  captiM-ed  with  thine  eyes,  neither  be  thou  caught  with 
her  eyelids;"  ch.  iii.  15,  "She  is  more  valuable  than  precious  stones,  no 
evil  thing  shall  oppose  her;  she  is  well  known  to  all  who  approach  her,  and  no 
precious  thing  is  worthy  of  her."  There  is  also  evidence  of  carelessness  and . 
want  of  precision  here  as  in  other  portions  of  the  Greek  Version.  But  there 
can  be  no  doubt  that  many  of  the  variations  are  owed  to  a  different  original, 
That  the  LXX.  had  not  our  Masoretic  text  before  them  is  proved  by  more 
than  one  consideration.  In  the  first  place,  the  order  of  chapter  and  verse, 
so  to  speak,  was  not  the  same  as  in  our  present  book.  Up  to  ch.  xxiv.  22 
the  two  for  the  most  part  coincide,  though  there  is  some  variation  in  ch.  xv. 
and  xvi.;  and  again  in  ch.  xvii.  and  xx.  single  verses  are  dislocated  and 
inserted  elsewhere.    But  at  ch.  xxiv.  23  a  notable  change  occurs.     Here  is 


THE  PROVERBS.  xxxl 


introdaoed  ch.  xxix.  27;  then  follow  four  disticlis  not  found  in  the  Hebrew; 
then  ch.  xxx.  1 — 14,  succeeded  by  oh.  xxiv.  23 — 34  ;  then  comes  the  rest  of 
ch.  XXX.,  yiz.  from  ver.  15  up  to  eh.  xxxi.  9.  Thus  the  words  of  Agur  are 
divided  into  two  sections ;  and  the  superscriptions  there  and  at  the  begin- 
ning  of  ch.  xxx.  being  removed,  the  proverbs  of  Agur  and  Lemuel  are 
joined  without  reserve  to  those  of  Solomon.  The  praise  of  the  virtuous 
woman  closes  the  book,  as  in  the  Hebrew.  What  led  the  translator  to 
make  these  changes  is  a  difficult  question.  Hitzig  considers  that  the 
writer  confounded  the  columns  of  the  manuscript  before  him,  two  being  on 
each  page,  and  the  proverbs  of  Agur  and  Lemuel  being  ranked  before  ch. 
XXV,,  and  understood  traditionally  as  Solomon's.  That  this  was  the  trans- 
lator's idea  we  see  from  the  inscription  which  he  has  inserted  at  ch.  xxiv. 
23,  "  These  things  I  say  to  you  who  are  wise,"  where  the  speaker  must 
necessarily  be  Solomon.  Instead  of  "The  words  of  Agur"  (ch.  xxx.  1), 
he  writes,  "  Fear  my  words,  my  son,  and  receiving  them  repent ; "  and  in 
oh.  xxxi.  1,  again,  he  finds  no  proper  name  in  Lemuel,  but  renders,  "  My 
words  have  been  spoken  by  God  the  King."  Another  circumstance  which 
shows  that  the  Greek  translator  had  before  him  a  different  text  from  ours 
is  that  he  presents  us  with  many  passages  which  are  not  fonnd  in  the 
Hebrew,  and  omits  many  which  now  have  a  place  therein. 

The  list  of  such  variations  would  be  very  large.  Among  the  additions 
we  may  notice  the  following :  At  the  end  of  ch.  iv.,  which  seems  to  close 
somewhat  abruptly,,  we  have  two  verses,  "  For  the  ways  which  are  on  the 
right  hand  God  knoweth,  but  those  on  the  left  are  crooked ;  and  he  it  is 
who  will  make  thy  tracks  straight,  and  will  guide  thy  goings  in  peace." 
In  ch.  ix.  there  are  two  great  additions :  after  ver.  12,  "  He  that  stays 
himself  upon  lies,  he  shepherdeth  winds,  and  he  will  pursue  birds  as  they 
fly ;  for  he  has  forsaken  the  ways  of  his  own  vineyard,  and  has  caused  the 
axles  of  his  own  field  to  go  astray,  and  he  passeth  through  a  waterless 
desert,  and  a  land  established  in  drought,  and  gathers  with  his  hands  fruit- 
lessness ; "  and  at  ver.  18,  "  But  hasten  thou  away,  delay  not  in  the  place, 
neither  fix  thine  eye  upon  her,  for  then  shalt  thou  go  through  strange  water ; 
but  from  strange  water  abstain  thou,  and  of  a  strange  fountain  drink  not, 
that  thou  mayest  live  long,  and  years  of  life  may  be  added  to  thee." 
Whether  these  and  such-like  sentences  are  genuine  or  not  cannot  be  deter- 
mined. They  look  very  commonly  Hke  explanations  or  amplifications  of 
the  original  which  have  crept  from  the  margin  into  the  text.  Thus  ch.  xi. 
16,  "  A  gracious  woman  raiseth  glory  for  her  husband,  but  a  seat  of  dis- 
honour is  a  woman  hating  righteousness;  the  slothful  come  to  lack  wealth,  but 
the  brave  are  supported  by  wealth."  Here  the  Syriao  gives,  "  The  slothful 
shall  be  poor  even  with  their  riches  ;  but  the  spirited  shall  sustain  wisdom." 
The  words  in  italics  seem  to  be  mere  glosses.  So  ch.  xviii.  22,  "  He  who 
finds  a  good  wife  finds  favours ;  and  receives  gladness  from  God:  He  who 
puttetli  away  a  good  wife  putteth  away  good  things,  and  he  that  keepeth 
«a  adulteress  is  foolish  and  ungodly."     Of  the  '•»ager  'ntercalations  tb« 


ril  INTRODUCTION  TO 


most  celebrated  is  that  concerning  the  bee  (ch.  yi.  8),  which  follows  the 
lesson  on  the  ant :  "  Or  go  to  the  bee,  and  learn  how  diligent  she  is,  and 
how  noble  a  work  she  performeth ;  whose  labours  kings  and  private  persons 
use  for  health,  and  she  is  desired-  by  all  and  of  good  repute ;  and  although 
she  is  weak  in  strength,  yet  because  she  regardeth  wisdom  she  is  highly 
honoured."     There  is  another  long  interpolation  respecting  the  king  and 
his  power  which  succeeds  ch.  xxiv.  22 :  "A  son  that  keepeth  the  word  shall 
be  far  from  destruction.     Receiving  he  receiveth  it.     Let  no  falsehood  be 
spoken  by  the  mouth  of  a  king,  and  let  no  falsehood  proceed  from  his 
tona^ue.     The  king's  tongue  is  a  sword,  and  not  one  of  flesh ;  whosoever 
shall  be  delivered  over  to  it  shall  be  utterly  cr'ushed.     For  if  his  anger  be 
provoked,  he  consumes  men  together  with  their  sinews,  and   devoureth 
men's  bones,  and  burneth  them  as  a  flame,  so  that  they  cannot  be  eaten  by 
the  young  of  eagles."     The  last  clause  seems  to  refer  to  the  opinion  that 
birds  of  prey  will  not  touch  carcases  struck  by  lightning.     After  ch.  xix.  7, 
which  is  given  thus  :  "  Every  one  who  hates  a  poor  brother  shall  also  be  far 
from  friendship,"  we  have,  "  Good  understanding  will  draw  near  to  them 
that  know  it ;  and  a  prudent  man  will  find  it.     He  that  doth  much  evil 
perfects  mischief,  and  he  that  useth  provoking  words  shaU  not  be  saved." 
An  additional  illustration  is  sometimes  added.     Thus,  in  ch.  xxv.  20,  omit- 
ting the  reference  to  leaving  off  a  garment  in  cold  weather,  the  LXX.  give, 
"As  vinegar  is  inexpedient  for  a  sore,  so  suffering  falling  on  the  body 
afflicts  the  heart.     As  moth  in  a  garment  and  worm  in  wood,  so  a  man's 
grief  injures  the  heart."    In  ch.  xxvii.  20  we  have,  "  An  abomination  to  the 
Lord  is  he  who  fixeth  his  eye,  and  the  uninstructed  are  incontinent  in 
tongue."     And  in  the  next  verse,  "  The  heart  of  the  lawless  seeketh  evils, 
but  an  upright  heart  seeketh  knowledge."     The  addition  in  ch.  xxvi.  11 
occurs  in  Ecclus.  iv.  21,  "  There  is  a  shame  that  bringeth  sin,  and  there 
is  a  shame  that  is  glory  and  grace."     The  Grreek  origin  of  the  translation 
appears  plainly  in  some  of  the  interpolations.     Thus  in  ch.  xvii.  4,  "  To  the 
faithful  belongeth  the  whole  world  of  riches,  but  to  the  unfaithful  not  even 
an  obole." 

The  minor  interpolations  are  too  numerous  to  specify.  They  are  for  the 
most  part  noticed  as  they  occur  in  the  Exposition,  in  which  also  the  many 
deviations  from  the  received  Hebrew  text  in  words  and  clauses  are  mentioned. 
The  additions  are  not  of  much  value  morally  or  religiously,  and  cannot 
bear  comparison  with  the  genuine  proverbs.  Whether  they  are  corruptions 
of  the  Hebrew  text,  or  corrections  and  additions  made  by  the  ti-anslators 
themselves,  cannot  be  decided.  It  must  be  noted,  in  conclusion,  that  the 
Greek  Version  omits  many  passages  which  are  now  found  in  our  Hebrew 
Bibles ;  e.g.  ch.  i.  16 ;  viii.  32,  33 ;  xi.  3,  4 ;  xv.  31 ;  xvi.  1,  3 ;  xviii.  23,  24 ; 
xix.  1,  2 ;  XX.  14 — 19  ;  xxi.  5  ;  xxii.  6 ;  xxiii.  23. 

Of  the  versions  of  Aquila,  Symmachus,  and  Theodotion,  fragments  have 
been  transmitted  in  Origen's  great  work,  which  sometimes  afford  light  in 
the  rendering  of  difficult  words.     There  is  also  another  translation  known 


THE  PROVERBS  xxxiii 


•8  Yeneta,  very  literal,  and  made  about  the  ninth  century  of  onr  era.  li 
belongs  to  St.  Mark's  Library  at  Venice,  and  has  been  published,  first  in 
1784,  and  again  of  late  years. 

§  6.  Abranoement  in  Sections. 

The  various  superscriptions  in  the  book  for  the  most  part  divide  it  into 
its  several  parts.  There  is  one  at  the  very  beginning,  "The  Proverbs  of 
Solomon ; "  the  same  words  are  repeated  at  ch.  z.  1 ;  at  ch.  zxii.  17  a  new 
section  is  commenced  with  the  words,  "  Bow  down  thine  ear,  and  hear  the 
words  of  the  wise ;  "  another  at  qh.  xxiv,  23  with  the  remark,  "  These  things 
also  belong  to  the  wise."  Then  at  ch,  xxv.  1  we  have,  "  These  are  also  the 
Proverbs  of  Solomon  which  the  men  of  Hezekiah  copied  out ;  "  at  ch.  xxx.  1, 
*'  the  words  of  Agur ; "  at  ch.  xxxi.  1,  "  the  words  of  Lemuel,"  followed  by 
the  acrostic  ode  of  the  virtuous  woman. 

Thus  the  book  may  conveniently  be  divided  into  nine  parts^ 

Part  L  Title  and  superscription.    Ch,  i,  1 — 6. 

Past  II.  Fifteen  hortatory  discourses,  exhibiting  the  excellence  of  wLsdum  «nd 
encouraging  the  pursuit  thereof.    Ch.  i.  7 — ix,  18. 

1,  First  hortatory  discourse.    Ch.  i.  7 — 19. 

2.  Second        „  „  Ch.  i.  20—33. 
•   3,  Third          „             „  Ch.  11. 

4.  Fourth  „  „  Ch.  ili.  1—18. 

5.  Fifth  „  „  Ch,  ill,  19—26. 

6.  Sixth  „  „  Ch.  iii.  27—35. 

7.  Seventh  „  „  Ch.  iv, 

8.  Eighth  „  „  Ch.  v. 

9.  Ninth  „  „  Ch.  vi.  1—5. 

10.  Tenth         „  „  Ch  vi.  6—11. 

11.  Eleventh     „  „  Ch.  vi.  12—19. 

12.  Twelfth      „  „  Ch.  vi.  20--35. 

13.  Thirteenth  „  „  Ch.  vii. 

14.  Fourteenth  „  „  Ch,  viii. 

15.  Fifteenth     „  „  Ch.  ix. 

Pabt  III.  First  great  collection  of  (375)  Solomonic  proverbs,  mostly  unconnected. 
Ch,  X,  1 — xxii,  16, — divided  into  lour  sections,  viz.  ch.  x.  1 — ^xil.  28;  xiii.  1 — xv.  19; 
XV.  20— xix.  25 ;  xix,  26— xxii.  16. 

Part  IV.  First  appendix  to  first  collection,  containing  "  words  of  the  wise." 
Ch.  xxii.  17— xxiv.  22. 

Part  V.  Second  appendix  to  first  collection,  containing  further  "words  of  the 
wise."    Ch.  xxiv.  23-34. 

Part  VI.  Second  great  collection  of  Solomonic  proverbs  gathered  by  "men  of 
Hezekiah,"    Ch.  xxv. — xxix. 

Pakt  VII.  First  appendix  to  second  collection :  "  words  of  Agur."    Ch.  xxx. 

Part  VIII.  Second  appendix  to  second  collection:  "words  of  Lemuel."  Ch, 
xxxi.  1 — 9.  , 

Part  IX.  Third  appendix  to  second  collection :  acrostic  ode  in  praise  of  the  virtuou.-. 
woman.    Ch.  xxxi.  ICf — 31. 

§  7.  Litebatube. 

The  Fathers  have  for  the  most  part  not  formally  commented  on  this  book.  Origeii 
and  Basil  have  commentaries  hereon: '  Ex  Commentariis  in  Proverbia,'  Orig.,  'Op.,'  iii.; 
'In  Prinoipiura  Prov.,'  Basil.,  ii.    Besides  these  there  u  Bede,  'Exposit.  AUegor. 

PB0VXBB8.  ' 


xxxiT  INTBODUCTION   TO  THE   PROVBEBa 


Among  the  nnmerous  expositions  of  later  date  the  most  useful  are  the  follciriDg: 
Salazar,  1619;  Cornelius  i,  Lapide,  1635,  etc.;  Melancthon,  'Op.,'  ii.;  Bossuet, 
■Notas,'  1673;  Hammond,  'Paraphrase,'  iv.;  Michaelis,  ' Adnotationes,'  1720;  Aben 
Ezra,  1620,  and  edit,  by  Horowitz,  1884;  Schulteus,  1748;  Umbreit,  1826;  Eosenmiiller, 
1829 ;  Lowenstein,  1838 ;  Maurer,  1838 ;  Berthcau,  1847 ;  re-edited  by  Nowack,  1883 ; 
Stuart,  1852;  Bwald, 'Spriiohe  Sal.,'  1837,  1867;  Hitzig,  1858;  Zockler,  in  Lange's 
'Bibelwerk,*  1867;  Vaihinger,  1857;  Delitzsch,  in  Clarke's  'For.  Libr.;'  Reuss, 
I'aris,  1878;  PluBJptre,  in  the  'Speaker's  Commentary;'  Bishop  Wordsworth ;  Nutt,  in 
Bishop EUicott's  Commentary ;  Strack,  in  •  Kurzgef.  Kommentar,'  1889.  The  '  Topical 
Arrangemeni '  uf  Br.  Stock  will  be  found  useful ;  aliio  ike  Introductiuus  of  Eichfiora. 
Ho  Wette.  Bertholdt.  Keil,  and  BlMk. 


THE    PROVERBS. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  I. 

Vera.  1—6.— Part  I.  The  Title  and 
Superscription.  The  superscription  of  the 
Proveiba,  which  extends  from  ver.  1  to  ver- 
6,  furnishes  us  with  an  epitome  in  short  and 
concise  language  of  the  general  scope  and 
bearing  of  the  book,  and  points  out  its 
specific  utility,  both  to  the  inexperienced 
and  to  those  already  wise.  Thus  (1)  in  ver. 
1  it  girea  the  name  of  the  author  to  whom 
the  proverba  are  attributed;  (2)  in  vers.  2 
and  3  it  declares  the  aim,  object,  or  design  of 
the  collection,  which  is  to  lead  to  the  acquire- 
ment of  wisdom  generally ;  and  (3)  in  vers. 
4 — 6  it  proceeds  to  indicate  the  speciiil 
utility  the  collection  will  be  to  two  main 
classes — to  the  simple  and  immature,  on  the 
one  hand,  in  opening  and  enlarging  their 
understanding,  and  so  providing  them  with 
prudent  rules  of  conduct  by  which  they  may 
regulate  the  course  of  life;  and,  on  the 
other,  to  the  wise  and  intelligent,  in  further 
increasing  their  knowledge  or  learning,  and 
thus  rendering  them  competent  to  compre- 
hend, and  also  t«  explain  to  others  less 
favourably  situated  than  themselves,  other 
proverbs,  or  enigmas,  or  sayinga,  of  a  like 
recondite  nature  to  those  now  to  be  brought 
before  them. 

The  title  of  the  book  embodied  in  the  text 
is,  'The  Proverbs  of  Solomon  the  son  of 
David,  King  of  Israel,'  but  the  shorter  de- 
signation by  which  it  was  and  is  known 
among  the  Jews  ia  Mishle  ('Wd),  taken  from 
the  word  with  which  the  book  begina. 
Analogoualy,  in  the  Authorized  Veraion  it 
is  atyled  'The  Proverba,'  and  the  heading 
in  the  LXX.  ia  napoiitlai  ioXo/uirToi,    The 

PBOTEBBS. 


outaide  title  in  the  Vulgate  ii  more  elaU 
rately  given  as,  '  Liber  Proverbiorum,  quen 
Hebrtei  Misle  appellant '  ('  The  Book  of  the 
Proverba,  wliioh  the  Hebrews  call  Miile'). 
In  the  Talmud  it  ia  called  the  'Book  oj 
Wisdom  •  (nnpri  nop,  Sepher  Kkokhiaak);  and 
Origeu  (EusebiuB, '  Hist.  Eccl.,'  vi.  25)  de- 
ais;natea  it  Mi<rAt69,  the  Greek  form  of  the 
Hebrew  M'shaloth  (nShda).  Among  the 
ancient  Greek  Fathera,  e.g.  Clement,  Hege- 
sippus,  IreniBus,  the  book  was  known  by  a 
variety  of  titles,  all  more  or  less  descriptive 
of  its  contents  as  a  repository  of  wisdom. 

Ver.  1. — The  proverbs  of  Solomon.  The 
word  which  is  here  translated  "  proverba  " 
is  the  original  mishle  C^B'p),  the  conatiuct 
case  olmashdl  (^K'p),  which,  again,  is  derived 
from  the  verb  mashal  (half),  signifying  (1) 
"to  make  like,"  "to  assimilate,"  and  (2) 
"  to  have  dominion  "  (Gesenius).  The  radical 
signification  of  mashal  is  "comparison"  or 
"  similitude,"  and  in  this  sense  it  is  applied 
generally  to  the  utterances  of  the  wise.  In 
Numb,  xxiii.  7,  8  it  is  used  of  the  prophetic 
predictions  of  Balaam ;  certain  didactic 
psalms,  e.g.  Ps.  xlix.  5  ami  Ixxviii.  2,  are 
so  designated,  and  in  Job  (xxvii.  1  and 
xxix.  1)  it  describes  the  sententious  dis- 
courses of  wise  men.  While  all  these  come 
under  the  generic  term  of  m'shalim,  though 
few  or  no  comparisons  are  found  in  them, 
we  find  the  term  mashal  sometimes  used  of 
what  are  proverbs  in  the  sense  of  popular 
aayinga.  Compare  "  Therefore  it  became  a 
proverb  (Wp),  Is  Saul  also  among  the  pro- 
phets?" (1  Sam.  X.  12);  and  see  also  other 
instances  in  Ezek.  xvi.  4  and  xviii.  2.  '  In 
thia  sense  it  is  also  found  in  the  eoUeotion 
before  us.  The  predominant  idea  of  the 
term,  however,  ia  that  of  compariaon  oi 
liniilitude,  and  as  such  it  is  better  repn- 
aented  by  the  Greek  raf/a^oKii  (from  ira,  a 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[oh.  1. 1 — 33. 


piWa,  "to  set  or  place  Bide  by  Bide"), 
literally,  a  placing  beside,  or  comparison, 
than  by  Trapoi/ila,  "a  byword,"  or  "a  trite 
wayside  saying,"  though  in  the  Greek  of 
the  synoptic  Gospels  irapoi/iia  is  equivalent 
to  irapa^oKi).  The  English  word  "  proverb  " 
insufficiently  renders  the  wider  scope  of 
meaning  conveyed  in  the  Hebrew  mashdl, 
and  is  not  quite  accurately  rendered  here, 
since  of  proverbs  in  our  ordinary  significa- 
tion of  that  word  there  are  comparatively 
few  in  this  collection.  The  Hebrew  word 
here  means  "  maxims,"  "  aphorisms,"  "  wise 
counsels."  Of  Solomon.  Most  modern  com- 
mentators (Delitzsoh,  Zockler,  Puerst, 
Stuart,  Plumptre,  etc.),  while  attributing, 
ill  a  greater  or  less  degree,  the  authorship 
of  the  book  to  Solomon,  regard  the  insertion 
of  his  name  iu  the  title  as  indicating  rather 
that  he  is  the  dominant  spirit  among  those 
wise  men  of  his  age,  some  of  whose  sayings 
are  here  incorporated  with  his  own.  King 
of  Israel,  as  forming  the  second  hemistich 
of  the  verse,  goes  with  "  Solomon,"  and  not 
"David."  This  is  indicated  in  the  Authorized 
Version  by  the  position  of  the  comma.  The 
Arabic  Version  omits  allusion  to  David,  and 
reads,  "Proverbia,  nempe  documenta  Salo- 
monis  sapientis,  qui  regnavit  super  filios 
Israel."  The  proverbial  or  parabolic  form 
of  teaching  was  a  recognized  mode  of  in- 
struction among  the  Hebrews,  and  in  the 
Christian  Church  is  recommended  by  St. 
Clement  of  Alexandria  ('Strom.,'  lib.  11, 
inity. 

Ver.  2. — To  know  wisdom  and  instruotion. 
In  this  verse  we  have  a  statement  of  the  first 
general  aim  or  object  of  the  Proverbs.  "  To 
know"  (nyi7,  ladaath')  is  somewhat  in- 
definite in  the  Authorized  Version,  and 
might  be  more  accurately  rendered,  "  from 
which  men  may  know  "  (De  Wette,  Noyes) ; 
of.  unde  scias  (Munsterus).  The  h  which  is 
kere  prefixed  to  the  infinitive,  as  in  vers.  2, 
8,  and  6,  gives  the  clause  a  final  character, 
and  thus  points  out  the  object  which  the 
teaching  of  the  Proverbs  has  in  view.  The 
teaching  is  viewed  from  the  standpoint  of 
the  learner,  and  hence  what  is  iudicated 
here  is  not  the  imparting  of  knowledge,  but 
the  reception  oi  apf  rojiriation  thereof  on  the 
part  of  the  I-wmer.  Scbultens  states  that 
the  radical  meaning  of  nyT  (daath)  is  the 
reception  of  knowledge  into  one's  self. 
Wisdom.  It  will  be  necessary  to  go  rather 
fully  into  this  word  here  on  its  first  appear- 
ance in  the  text.  The  Hebrew  is  np?n 
(khokhmah).  Wisdom  is  mentioned  tr'ai, 
because  it  is  the  end  to  which  all  know- 
ledge and  instruction  tend.  The  funda- 
mental conception  of  the  word  is  variously 
represented  as  either  (1)  the  "power  of  judg- 
ing," derived  from  DDg,  "  to  1»  wise,"  from 


the  Arabic, "to  judge"  (Gesenius);  or  (2) 
"the  fixing  of  a  thing  for  cognition,"  derived 
from  the  Arabic  equivalent  of  the  Hebrew 
DDn,  as  before,  which  signifies  "  to  fasten  " 
(Zockler),  or  "  compactness,"  from  the  game 
root  as  before,  "to  be  firm,  or  closed."  It  is 
also  variously  defined  (l)  as  "  insight  into 
that  upright  dealing  which  pleases  God — a 
knowledge  of  the  right  way  which  is  to  be 
followed  before  God,  and  of  the  wrong  one 
which  is  to  be  shunned "  (Zockler) ;  (2)  as 
"  piety  towards  God,"  as  in  Job  xxviii.  28 
(Gesenius);  (3)  as  "  the  knowledge  of  thing! 
in  their  being  and  in  the  reality  of  their 
existence  "  (Delitzsoh).  The  word  is  trans- 
lated in  the  LXX.  by  irocpla,  and  in  the 
Vulgate  by  eapientia.  The  Hebrew  khokh- 
mah and  the  Greek  iTo<pla  so  far  agree  ai 
philosopliical  terms  in  that  the  end  of  each 
is  the  same,  viz.  the  striving  after  objective 
wisdom,  the  moral  fitness  of  things;  but  the 
character  of  the  former  differs  from  that 
of  the  latter  in  being  distinctly  religious. 
The  beginning  and  the  end  of  the  khokh- 
mah, wisdom,  is  God  (cf.  ver.  7).  Wisdom, 
then,  is  not  the  merely  scientific  know- 
ledge, or  moral  philosophy,  but  knowledge 
kut'  i^oxh",  i.e.  religious  knowledge  or 
piety  towards  God;  i.e.  an  appreciation  of 
what  God  requires  of  us  and  what  we  con- 
versely owe  to  God.  "Sapientia  est  de 
divinis"  (Lyra).  Wisdom  will,  of  course, 
carry  with  it  the  notions  of  knowledge  anl 
insight.  Instruction.  As  the  preceding  word 
represents  wisdom  in  its  intellectual  concep- 
tion, and  has  rather  a  theoretical  character, 
so  "  instruotion,"  Hebrew,  iDip  (musar),  re- 
presents it  on  its  practical  side,  and  as  such 
is  its  practical  complement.  The  Hebrew 
musar  signifies  properly  '*  chastisement," 
from  the  root  yasdr  (no;),  "to  correct,"  or 
*'  chastise,"  and  hence  education,  moral 
training;  and  hence  in  the  LXX.  it  is 
rendered  by  watSeTa,  which  means  both  the 
process  of  education  (cf.  Plato,  'Eepub.,' 
376,  E.;  Arist.,  'Pol.,'  8.  3)  and  its  result 
as  learning  (Plato,  '  Prob.,'  327,  D.).  The 
Vulgate  has  disoipUna.  In  relation  to 
wisdom,  it  is  antecedent  to  it ;  i.e.  to  know 
wisdom  truly  we  must  first  become  ac- 
quainted with  instruction,  and  hence  it  ii 
a  preparatory  step  to  the  knowledge  of 
wisdom,  though  here  it  is  stated  rather 
objectively.  The  words,  "wisdom  and  in- 
struction," are  found  in  exactly  the  same 
collocation  in  ch.  iv.  13  and  xxiii.  23.  In 
its  strictly  disciplinary  sense,  "instruction" 
occurs  in  ch.  iii.  11,  with  which  comp.  Heb. 
xii.  5.  Holden  takes  this  word  as  "moral 
discipline"  iu  the  highest  sense.  To  per- 
ceive the  words  of  understanding ;  literally, 
to  discern  the  words  of  discernment;  i.e.  "  to 
comprehend  the  utterances  which  proceed 
from  intelligence,  and  give  expresaion  to 


OH.  1. 1 — 33.] 


THE  PROVERBB. 


it"  (DelitzBoh).     Underttanding ;  Hebrew, 
tinah  (nya),  connected  with  the  hiph.  0*3r)? 

I'havin),  properly  "to  distinguish,"  hence 
"to  discern,"  of  the  same  clause,  signifies 
the  capability  of  discerning  the  true  from 
the  false,  good  from  bad,  etc.  With  this 
agrees  Cornelius  i  Lspide,  who  says,  "Dnde 
prudenter  discernas  inter  bonum  et  malum, 
licitum  et  illlcitura,  utile  et  noxium,  verum 
et  lalsum,"  and  from  which  you  are  enabled 
to  know  what  to  do  in  any  circumstances,  and 
what  not  to  do.  The  LXX.  renders  the 
word  by  <l>p6yri(ris,  the  Vulgate  by  prudentia. 
^povriffis,  in  Plato  and  Aristotle,  is  the  virtue 
concerned  in  the  government  of  men,  manage- 
ment of  affairs,  and  the  like  (see  Plato, 
•Sym.,'  209,  A.;  Arist.,  'Eth.,'  N.  6.  5  and 
8),  and  means  practical  wisdom,  prudence, 
or  moral  wisdom.  Van  Ess,  Allioli,  Holden, 
translate  "  piudence." 

Ver.  3. — To  receive  the  instruction  of 
wisdom.  This  verse  carries  on  the  state- 
ment of  the  design  of  the  Proverbs.  To 
receive;  Hebrew,  nnj5^  (lakalchath),  not  the 
same  word  as  "  to  know "  (npn';),  in  ver.  2, 
though  regarded  as  synonymous  with  it  by 
Delitzsoh.  Its  meaning  is  well  represented 
by  the  LXX.  Sf^aa-Bai,  and  the  Authorized 
Version  "  to  receive."  The  Hebrew,  nn[37, 
is  infinitive,  and  means  properly  "  to  take, 
or  lay  hold  of,"  hence  "  to  receive,"  Greek, 
Se'xo/iai.  No  doubt  it  conveys  the  idea  of 
intellectual  reception  (cf  ch.  ii.  1).  The 
instruction  of  wisdum ;  Hebrew,  73i?n  HDiD 
(musar  has'hel) ;  i.e.  the  discipline  or  moral 
training  which  leads  on  to  reason,  intelli- 
gence, or  wisdom  (as  Hitzig,  PuerstjZockler); 
or  discipline  full  of  insight,  discernment,  or 
thoughtfulness  (as  Umbreit,  Ewald,  De- 
litzsch).  The  phrase  does  not  mean  the 
wisdom  which  iubtruotion  imparts.  The 
word  mumr  occurs  here  in  a  slightly  differ- 
ent sense  from  its  ,use  in  ver.  2 ;  there  it  is 
objective,  here  its  meaning  as  a  medium  for 
the  attainment  of  wisdom  is  more  distinctly 
brought  out.  Wisdom  (has'hel)  is  properly 
"thoughtfulness"  (so  Umbreit,  Ewald, 
Delitzsoh,  Plumptre).  It  is  strictly  the  in- 
finitive absolute  of  b'^  (salcal),  "  to  entwine 
or  involve,"  and  as  a  substantive  it  stands 
for  the  thinking  through  of  a  subject,  so 
"thoughtfulness."  The  LXX.  renders  this 
sentence,  Si^affSal  re  (rrpoi^ks  xir/av,  which 
St.  Jerome  understands  as  "versutias  ser- 
monum  et  solutiones  senigmatum"  ("the 
cunning  or  craftiness  of  words  and  the  ex- 
plication of  enigmas").  Justice,  and  judg- 
ment, and  equity.  These  words  seem  to  be 
the  unfolding  of  the  meaning  contained  in 
the  expression,  "  the  instruction  of  wisdom." 
Holden  regards  the  last  four  words  as 
objective  genitives  dependent  on  "instruc- 


tion," but  wrongly.  Cornelius  k  Lapide 
states  that  "justice  and  judgment  and 
equity"  indicate  the  same  thing  ui  different 
aspects.  "  Justice  stands  for  the  thing 
itself— that  which  is  just;  judgment  in  re- 
spect of  right  reason,  which  says  it  is  just ; 
and  equity  in  respect  of  its  being  agreeable 
to  the  Law  of  God."    Justice ;  Hebrow,  pis 

(tsedele),  from  the  root  pi:s  (tsadah),  "  to  be 
right,  or  straight ; "  in   a  moral   sense  it 
means  "  rectitude,"  "  right,"  as  in  Isa.  xv. 
2  (Gesenius).     Tlie  underlying  idea  is  tliat 
of   straightness.    Heidenheim,    quoted    by 
Delitzsch,  maintains  that  in  tsedek  the  con- 
ception of  the  justum  prevails ;  but  the  latter 
enlarges  its  meaning,  and  holds  that  it  also 
has  the  idea  of  a  mode  of  thought  and  action 
regulated,  not  by  the  letter  of  tlie  Ijaw,  but 
by  love,  as  in  Isa.  xli.  2 ;  xlii.  6.    Plumptre 
thinks  "  righteousness  "  would  be  a  better 
translation  of  the  word,  on  the  ground  that 
the  Hebrew  includes  the  ideas  of  truth  and 
beneficence.    Compare  with  this  the  LXX. 
8ifcaio(rucj7    i.\riSi]s.     Zockler    also    renders 
"  righteousness,"    t.e.   "  that    which    is   in 
accord  with  the  will  and  ordinances  of  God 
as  Supreme  Judge."    In    the    Authorized 
Version,  in  ch.  ii.  9,  where  we  have  the 
same  collocation  of  words,  tsedek.  is  trans- 
lated "  righteousness ; "  cf.  ch.  xii.  17,  "  H  e 
who  utters  truth  shows  forth  righteousness 
(tsedeky   Judgment;  Hebrew,  n^fJ?  (mish'- 
paf),  from  the  root  taBB*  (shapaf),  "  to  adjust, 
judge,"  corresponds  with  the  Hebrew  in 
meaning ;   it  is  the  delivery'  of  a  correct 
judgment  on  human  actions.    Compare  the 
LXX.  Kpi/ia  Kareveiveiv.    Equity ;  i.e.  recti- 
tude in  thought  and  action  (Delitzsch),  or 
integrity  (Zockler).    This  quality  expresses 
upright  demeanour  or  honourable  action  on 
one's  own  part  individually,  while  "judg- 
ment "  has  regard  both  to  our  own  and  the 
actions  of  others.     The  Hebrew,  mesharim 
(on^p),  used  only  in  the  plural,  is  from  the 
root  idi  (yashar),  "  to  be  straight  or  even," 
and  is'equal  to  "  uprightness."    The  plural 
form  is  reproduced  in  the  marginal  reading 
"equities;"  corap.  Ps.  xvii.  2,  "Let  thine 
eyes   behold    the    things    that    are    equal 
(mesharim)."     The  Vulgate  reads  aequitas, 
and  the  Syriac  rectitudo.    The  two  ideas  in 
judgment  and  equity  appear  to  be  expressed 
in  the  LXX.  by  the  phrase,  Kplfia  Ka^ivdiveiv, 
Yer.  4. — To  give  subtilty  to  the  simple. 
In  this  verse  and  the  following  we  are  intro- 
duced to  the  classes  of  persons  to  whom  the 
proverbs  will  be  beneficial.    The  h  with  the 
infinitive,  nn^  (latheth),  shows  that  in  con- 
struction this  proposition  is  co-ordinate  with 
those  in  vers.  2  and  3,  and  not  dependent  as 
represented  by  Vto  S^  (LXX.)  and  u<  detur 
(Vulgate).  Subtilty;  Hebrew,  npTB  (ar'mah), 


THE  PBOVBRBa 


[oh.  1. 1— 3a 


from  the  root  □']]>  (aram),  "to  be  oiafty  or 
wily,"  properly  means  "  nakedness "  or 
"  amoothness ; "  bence  in  a  metaphorical 
sense  it  expresses  "  the  capacity  for  escaping 
from  the  wiles  of  others"  (tJmbreit).  We 
have  this  idea  expressed  as  follows  in  ch. 
ixli.  3,  "The  prudent  man  (on^,  arum) 
foreseeth  the  evil,  and  hideth  himself."  In  the 
Arabic  Version  it  is  rendered  by  calUditas, 
"  shrewdness,"  in  a  good  sense.  The  Hebrew 
ar'mah,  like  the  Latin  ealUditat,  also  means 
"  craftiness,"  as  appears  in  the  use  of  the 
cognate  adjective  arum  in  Gen.  iii.  1,  where 
we  read, "  The  serpent  was  more  subtle,"  etc. 
For  "  subtilty  "  the  LXX.  has  -/ravoiipyia,  a 
Greek  word  which  appears  to  be  employed 
altogether  in  a  bad  sense,  as  "  trickery,"  "  vil- 
lainy," "knavery ; "  but  that  scarcely  appears 
to  be  the  meaning  of  the  Hebrew  here,  since 
the  aim  of  the  Proverbs  is  ethical  and  bene- 
ficial in  the  highest  degree.  The  Vulgate 
aetutia,  the  quality  of  the  astutus,  beside 
tbe  bad  sense  of  craftiness,  also  bears  the 
good  sense  of  shrewdness,  sagacity,  and  so 
better  represents  the  Hebrew.  "Subtilty 
may  turn  to  evil,  but  it  also  takes  its  place 
among  the  highest  moral  gifts  "  (Plumptre). 
The  simple;  Hebrew,  D'^i^^^  (ph'thaim),  plural 
of  'Pi§  (p'ti)  from  the  root  hn^  {pathahh),  '-'to 
be  open,"  properly  means  the  open-hearted, 
i.e.  those  who  are  susceptible  to  external 
impressions  (Zockler),  and  so  easily  misled. 
The  word  occurs  in  ch.  vii.  7;  viii.  5;  ix.  6; 
xiv.  18;  and  xxvii.  12.  The  LXX.  properly 
rendersthe  word  2iKoitoi,"unknowing  of  evil." 
The  same  idea  is  indirectly  expressed  in  the 
Vulgate  parvuli, "  the  very  young;"  and  the 
_  term  is  paraphrased  in  the  Arabic  Version, 
ti8  in  quibut  non  est  malitia  ("those  who 
are  without  malice").  The  Hebrew  here 
means  "simple"  in  the  sense  of  inexperi- 
enced. To  the  yonng  man  knowledge  and 
disoretion.  The  Hebrew  naar  (nyj)  is  here 
used  representatively  for"youth"  (cf.  LXX., 
TTois  veos;  Vulgate,  adolescens)  in  general, 
which  stands  in  need  of  the  qualities  here 
mentioned.  It  advances  in  idea  beyond  "the 
simple."  Knowledge;  Hebrew,  ngT  {daath), 
i.e.  experimental  knowledge  (Delltzsch);  in- 
sight (Gesenius);  knowledge  of  good  and  evil 
(Plumptre).  The  LXX.  has  alae-qins,  which 
olasically  means  perception  by  the  senses 
and  also  by  the  mind.  Discretion ;  Hebrew, 
npjn  (m!  nimmah),  properly  "  though  tfuliiess," 
and  hence  "  circumspection  "  or  "  caution  " 
(Zockler), or  "discernment,"  that  which  sets 
a  man  on  his  guard  and  prevents  him  being 
duped  by  others  (Plumptre).  'Ewom  was 
probably  adopted  by  the  LXX.  in  its  primary 
sense  as  representing  the  act  of  tliinking; 
inteUectus  (Vulgate),  equivalent  to  "a  dis- 
cerning" (see  the  marginal  "  advisement  "). 
Yet,  5. — ^A  wise  man  will  hear,  and  will  in- 


oiease  learning.  The  change  of  construction 
in  the  original  is  reproduced  in  the  Autho- 
rized Version,  bnt  has  been  rendered  vari- 
ously. Thus  Umbreit  and  Elster,  regarding 
the  verb  ya^  (yiah'ma)  as  conditional,  trans- 
late, "  if  the  wise  man  hear ; "  on  the  other 
hand,  Belitzsch  and  Zockler  take  it  as  vc  lun- 
tati  ve, "  let  the  wise  man  hear,"  etc.  The  prin- 
ciple here  ennnciated  is  again  stated  in  ch. 
ix.  9,  "  Give  instruction  to  a  wise  man,  and 
he  will  be  yet  wiser,"  and  finds  expressioL 
under  the  gospel  economy  in  the  words  of 
our  Lord, "  For  whosoever  hatb,  to  him  shall 
be  given,  and  he  shall  have  more  abun- 
dance" (Matt.  xiii.  12;  cf.  xxv.  29;  Mark 
iv.  25  ;  Luke  viii.  18  and  xiv.  26).  Learn- 
ing; Hebrew,  nph  (lekakh),  in  the  sense  ol 
being  transmitted  or  received  (Gesenius, 
Delltzsch,  Dunn).  And  a  man  of  under- 
standing shall  attain  unto  wise  counsels. 
A  man  of  understanding  (LXX.,  d  co^/tmc; 
Vulgate,  inleUigens)  is  a  person  of  intelli- 
gence who  lays  himself  open  to  be  instructed. 
Wise  counsels;  Hebrew,  nH^^nn  (takh'buloth). 
This  word  is  derived  from  ^an  (khevel),  ■ 
ship-rope,  a  denominative  of  hsh  (hhovel), 
and  only  occurs  in  the  plural.  It  signifies 
those  maxims  of  prudence  by  which  a  man 
may  direct  his  course  aright  through  life 
(of.  regimen,  Arabic).  The  imagery  is  taken 
from  the  management  of  a  vessel,  and  is 
reproduced  in  the  LXX.  Kvfitpvricrts,  and 
the  Vulgate  gubematio,  "  Navigationi  vitam 
comparat "  (Mariana).  The  word  is  almost 
exclusively  confined  to  the  Proverbs,  and 
occurs  in  ch.  xi.  14;  xii.  5;  xx.  18;  and 
xxiv.  6,  usually  in  a  good  sense,  though  it 
has  the  meaning  of  "  stratagem  "  in  ch.  xii.  5. 
In  the  only  other  passage  where  it  is  found 
it  is  used  of  God's  power  in  turning  about 
tbe  clouds;  cf.  Job  xxxvii.  12,  "And  it 
[t'.e.  the  bright  cloud]  is  turned  round  aboul 
by  his  counsels  (itjSianna,  b'thakh'bulothau)." 
It  is  the  practical  correlative  of  "learning,' 
in  the  first  part  of  the  verse. 

Ver.  6. — ^To  understand  a  proverb.  Thi 
verse  carries  on  the  idea  which  is  stated  ir 
ver.  5.  The  end  of  the  wise  and  intelligenl 
man's  increase  in  learning  and  prudence  i; 
that  he  may  be  thus  enabled  to  understand 
other  proverbs.  Sohultens,  followed  by 
HolJen,  takes  the  verb  pij^  Q'havin)  as  n 
gerund,  intelUgendo  sententids.  This  render- 
ing does  not  represent  the  end,  but  points 
to  the  proverbs,  etc.,  as  means  by  which  the 
wise  generally  attain  to  learning  and  pru- 
dence. And  the  interpretation;  Hebrew, 
ni-'^p  (m'litsah).  It  is  difficult  to  determine 
the  exact  meaning  of  this  word.  By  Ge- 
senius it  is  rendered  "  jnigma,  riddle ; "  by 
Bertheau  and  Hitzig,  "  discourse  requiring 


on.  1 1— S3.] 


*Ht!  PROVBEBa 


interpretation ; "  by  Delitzscb,  "  symbol ; " 
by  Havernick  and  Keil,  "  brilliaut  and 
pleasing  discourse ; "  and  by  Fuerst,  "  figu- 
rative and  involved  discourse."  By  com- 
paring it  ■with  the  corresponding  words, 
"dark  sayings,"  it  may  be  regarded  as 
designating  that  which  is  obscure  and  in- 
volved in  meaning ;  compare  trxoTeivhs 
Kiyos  (LXX.).  It  only  occurs  here  and  in 
Hab.  ii.  6,  where  it  is  rendered  "  taunting 
proverb."  The  marginal  reading  is  "an 
eloquent  speech,"  equivalent  to  facundia, 
"eloquence."  Vatablus  says  that  the  Hebrews 
understood  it  ag  "  mensuram  et  pondus 
verbi."  The  words  of  the  wise;  i.e.  the 
utterances  of  the  hhalchamim  (p'Oprf),  This 
expression  occurs  again  in  ch.  xxii.  17,  and 
also  in  Eccles.  ix.  19  and  xii.  11,  In  the 
latter  they  are  described  as  "goads  and  as 
nails  fastened  by  the  ministers  of  assem- 
blies" (t'.fl.  "authors  of  compilations,"  as 
Mendelssohn),  because  they  cannot  fail  to 
make  an  impression  on  everybody  good  or 
bad.  The  expression,  as  used  in  ch.  xxii. 
17,  implies  that  other  than  Solomonic  pro- 
verbs are  included  in  this  collection.  And 
their  dark  sayings ;  Hebrew,  opTri)  (v'khi- 
dotham).  The  Hebrew  khidah  (HTn),  as 
tt'lUsah  (nj'^n),  its  parallel  in  the  preceding 
hemistich,  designates  obscure,  involved  utter- 
ances. It  plainly  has  the  sense  of  "  enigma  " 
(Fleischer,  apud  Delitzsoh).  Compare  oi- 
viyiiara  (LXX.),  and  tenigmata  (Vulgate), 
which  latter  is  followed  by  the  Olialdee 
Paraphrase  and  Syriac  (see  also  Ps.  Ixxviii. 
2,  "I  will  open  my  mouth  in  parables,  I 
will  utter  d^rk  myingt  of  old  ").  Gesenius 
derives  it  from  the  root  Tin  (Jchud),  "  to  tie 
knots,"  and  hence  arrives  at  its  meaning  as 
an  involved  or  twisted  sententious  expres- 
sion, an  enigma. 

Ver.  7— ch.  Ix.  18.— Part  IL  Intboduo- 
TOBT  Section.  The  first  main  section  of 
the  book  begins  here  and  ends  at  ch.  ix.  18. 
It  consists  of  a  series  of  fifteen  admonitory 
discourses  addressed  to  youth  by  the  Teacher 
and  Wisdom  personified,  with  the  view  to 
exhibit  the  excellence  of  wisdom,  and  gene- 
rally to  illustrate  the  motto,  "The  ftar  of 
the  Lord  is  the  beginning  of  knowledge," 
or  wisdom.  It  urges  strong  encouragements 
to  virtue,  and  equally  strong  dissuasives 
from  vice,  and  shows  that  the  attainment  of 
wisdom  in  its  true  sense  is  the  aim  of  all 
moral  efibrt. 

"Ver.  7. — The  fear  of  the  lord  is  the  begin- 
ning of  knowledge.  This  proposition  is  by 
some  commentators  regarded  as  the  motto, 
symbol,  or  device  of  the  book  (Delitzscb, 


Umbreit,  Zockler,  Plnmptre).  Others,  follow- 
ing tlie  Masoretio  arrangement  of  the  He- 
brew text,  consider  it  as  forming  part  of  the 
superscription  (Ewald,  Bertheau,  Elster, 
Keil).  As  a  general  proposition  expressing 
the  essence  of  the  philosophy  of  the  Israel- 
ites, and  from  its  relation  to  the  rest  of  the 
contents  of  this  book,  it  seems  rightly  to 
occupy  a  special  and  individual  position. 
Tlie  proposition  occurs  again  in  the  Pro- 
verbs in  ch.  ix.  10,  and  it  is  met  with  in 
similar  or  slightly  modified  forms  in  other 
books  which  belong  to  the  same  group  of 
sacred  writings,  that  is,  those  which  treat 
of  religious  philosophy— ^theKhokhmah;  e.g. 
Job  xxviii.  28 ;  Ps.  cxi.  10 ;  Bccles.  xii.  13 ; 
Ecclus.  i.  16, 25.  With  this  maxim  we  may 
compare  "  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  in- 
struction of  wisdom  "  (ch.  xv.  3.3).  The  fear 
of  the  Lord  (njr.j  riNT,  yir'ath  y'hovaK);  lite- 
rally, the  fear  of  Jehovah.  The  expression 
describes  that  reverential  attitude  or  holy 
fear  which  man,  when  his  heart  is  set 
aright,  observes  towards  God.  The  original 
word,  ns"!^  (yir'ath)  for  "fear,"  is  properly 
the  infinitive  of  tSTJ  (fare),  "to  fear  or 
reverence,"  and  as  a  substantive  means 
"  reverence  or  holy  fear  "  (Gesenius).  Ser- 
vile or  abject  fear  (as  Jerome,  Buda,  Bstius) 
is  not  to  be  understood,  but  filial  fear  (as 
Gejerus,  Merceius,  Cornelius  it  Lapide,  Cart- 
wright),  by  wliich  we"  fear  to  offetid  God — 
that  fear  of  Jehovah  which  is  elsewhere 
described  as  "  to  hate  evil "  (ch.  Viii.  13), 
and  in  which  a  predominating  element  is 
love.  Wardlaw  remarks  that  the  "fear  of 
the  Lord "  is  in  invariable  union  with  love 
and  in  invariable  proportion  to  it.  We 
truly  fear  God  just  in  proportion  as  we  truly 
love  him.  The  fear  of  the  Lord  also  carries 
with  it  the  whole  worship  of  God.  It  is 
observable  that  the  word  Jehovah  (njn.')  is 

used  in  the  Hebrew,  and  not  Elohim  (o'li^M), 
a  peculiarity  which  is  invariably  marked  in 
the  Authorized  Version  by  small  capitals. 
The  beginning;  Hebrew,  n'PNT  (reshith). 
This  word  has  been  understood  in  three 
different  senses :  (1)  As  initium,  the  begin- 
ning; i.e.  the  initial  step  or  starting-point 
at  which  every  one  who  wishes  to  follow 
true  wisdom  must  begin  (Gejerus,  Zockler, 
Plumptre).  (2)  As  caput;  i.e.  tlje  most 
excellent  or  principal  part,  the  noblest  or 
best  wisdom.  This  sense  is  adopted  in  the 
marginal  reading  (comp.  also  ch.  iv.  7) 
(Holden,  Trapp).  (3)  As  the  principium 
(Vulgate);  i.e.  the  origin,  or  basis,  as  in 
Micah  i.  lH,  "  She  is  the  origin,  or  basis 
(reshith]  of  the  sin  of  the  daughter  of  Zion." 
Delitzscb  regards  the  original,  reshith,  as 
embracing  the  two  ideas  of  commencement 
and  origin,  in  the  same  way  as  tlie  Greek 
ifXh-    Wisdom  has  its  origin  in  God,  and 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[oh.  1. 1 — 33. 


whoever  fears  him  receives  it  if  he  prays  in 
faith  (cf.  Jas.  i.  5,  iqq.)  (Vatablus,  Mercerus, 
DelitZBoh).  That  the  first  sense,  viz.  that 
of  beginning,  is  to  be  understood  here  ap- 
pears from  the  parallel  passage  in  oh.  x.  10, 
where  the  corresponding  word  is  n^nri  (IfkU- 
lath),  "  beginning,"  from  the  root  "j^n  (kha- 
laV),  "  to  begin ;  "  of.  also  tlie  LXX.  apx^,  in 
this  sense,  and  the  initium  of  the  Syriao 
and  Arabic  Versions.  AU  previous  know- 
ledge to  "  the  fear  of  the  Lord  "  is  compara- 
tive folly.  He  who  would  advance  in 
knowledge  must  first  be  imbued  with  a 
reverence  or  holy  fear  of  God.  But  fools 
despise  wisdom  and  instruction ;  or,  accord- 
ing to  the  inverted  order  of  the  words  in  the 
original,  wz'sdom  and  imtruttion  JodU  de* 
aptse,  the  association  of  ideas  in  the  three 
words,  "  knowledge,"  "  wisdom,"  and  "  in- 
struction," thus  being  more  continuously  sui- 
talned.  This  arrangement  links  on  the  two 
latter  words  with  "the  fear  of  the  Lord," 
and  so  helps  towards  the  elucidation  of  the 
sense  in  which  "  fools  "  is  to  be  understood 
Fools  i  D'^'is  (evilim),  plural  of  ^'IK.  (emZ), 
from  the  root  ^IN  (aval),  "  to  be  perverse," 
here  properly  designates  the  incorrigible,  as 
in  ch.  xxvii.  22,  and  those  who  are  unwilling 
to  know  God  (Jer.  iv.  22),  and  hence  refuse 
and  despise  wisdom  and  salutary  discipline, 
those  "who  set  at  nought  all  liis  counsel, 
and  will  none  of  his  reproof."  The  word  is 
opposed  to  the  "prudent"  (ch.  xii.  16)  and 
to  the  "  wise  "  (ch.  x.  14).  Delitzsch  under- 
stands it  as  "  thick,  hard,  stupid,"  from  the 
root  aval,  eoalescere,  incrassari.  Schultens 
uses  TraxeTs,  equivalent  to  crassi  pro  stupidis, 
to  represent  the  original.  Dunn  takes  it  in 
the  same  sense  as  "  gross  or  dull  of  under- 
standing." Fuerst,  adopted  by  Wordsworth, 
regards  it  in  the  sense  of  having  no  moral 
stamina,  from  the  root  meaning  "to  be  slack, 
weak,  lax,  or  lazy."  But  none  of  these  ex- 
planations seems,  in  my  opinion,  to  coincide 
sufficiently  vfith  the  evU  and  depraved 
activity  expressed  in  the  verb  "  despise," 
which  follows,  and  vrhich  describes  the 
conduct  of  this  class.  The  LXX.  renders 
the  word  or  action  by  do-sjSeis,  equivalent  to 
impii,  "godless,"  "profane,"  and  the  Vulgate 
by  stulti.  Despite;  113  (bazu)  is  perfect,  but 
is  properly  translated  by  the  present,  because 
the  perfect-  here  represents  a  condition  long 
continued  and  still  existing  (Gesenius,  §  126) ; 
cf.  the  Latin  odi,  memini,  etc.  The  LXX. 
uses  the  future  ^^oueej/^o-ouo-ii/,  i.e.  they  will 
set  at  nought;  the  Vulgate,  the  present 
(despiciunt).  The  radical  meaning  is  most 
probably  contemptuous  trampling  under  the 
feet  (Gesenius).  Wisdom  and  instruction 
(see  vcr.  2).  The  latter  clause  of  this  verse 
is  antithetical  to  the  former,  but  the  anti- 
thesis is  obscurely  expressed.   In  the  Autho- 


rized Version  it  is  marked  by  the  adversatlvs 
conjunction  "  but,"  which,  however,  is  not 
in  the  original.  The  LXX.  has  a  striking 
interpolation  in  this  verse  between  the  first 
and  second  clauses,  which  is  partly  taken 
from  Ps.  cxi.  10  (2^<'e»'«  Se  dyaBii  vaffi  t  iis 
voLovfftv  avT-fiv'  eu(re)3eio  Se  eis  @ehv  &pxh 
ala-6ii<reas,  "And  a  good  understanding  have 
all  they  that  do  it :  and  reverence  towards 
God  is  the  beginning  of  knowledge  ").  Com- 
pare the  Arabic  Version,  which  has  the  same 
interpolation :  Et  intellectua  bonus  omnibus 
fadentibus  earn.  Sana  religio  in  Deum  est 
initium  prudential. 

Vers. 8 — 19. — 1.  First  admonitory  discourse. 
Warning  against  enticemenin  to  robbery  and 
bloodshed. 

Ver.  8. — My  son,  hear  the  instruction  of  thy 
father.  The  transition  in  this  verse  from 
what  may  be  regarded  as  filial  obedience 
towards  God  to  filial  .obedience  towards 
parents  is  sugo;estive  of  the  moral  Law. 
The  same  admonition,  in  a  slightly  altered 
form,  occurs  again  in  oh.  vi.,  "My  son 
keep  thy  father's  commandment,  and  for- 
sake not  the  law  of  thy  mother"  (cf.  also 
ch.  iv.  1).  My  son;  'M  (bW)  from  J2  (ben),  "a 
son."  The  form  of  address  here  adopted  was 
that  in  common  use  by  teachers  towards 
their  pupils,  and  marks  that  superintending, 
loving,  and  fatherly  care  and  interest  which 
the  former  felt  in  aud  towards  the  latter. 
It  occurs  frequent]  y  in  the  introductory  section 
(ch.ii.l;  iii.1,21;  iv.10,20;  v.l;  vi.l;  vii.l), 
and  reappears  again  towards  the  close  (ch. 
xxiii.  15,  19,  26;  xxiv.  13,  21 ;  xxvii.  11)  in 
the  teacher's  address.  The  mother  of  Lemuel 
uses  it  (ch.  xxxi.  2)  in  the  strictly  parental 
sense.  In  other  passages  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment the  teacher,  on  the  other  hand,  is  repre- 
sented as  a  "father"  (Judg.  xvii.  )0;  Isa. 
X.  12 ;  2  Kings  ii.  21).  We  find  the  same 
relation  assumed  in  the  New  Testament, 
both  by  St.  Paul  (1  Cor.  iv.  15 ;  Philem.  10; 
Gal.  iv.  19)  and  by  St.  John  (1  John  ii.  1 ; 
y.  2);  but  under 'the  economy  of  the  gospel 
it  has  a  deeper  significance  than  here,  as 
poiniing  to  the  "new  birth,"  which,  being 
a  later  revelation,  lies  outside  the  scope  of 
the  moral  teaching  of  the  Old  Testament 
dispensation.  The  instruction  (iDVii,  musar); 
as  carrying  with  it  the  sense  of  disciplinary 
education  (cf.  LXX.,  iraiSe^a;  Vulgate,  disci- 
plina;  see  also  ver.  2),  and  of  the  correc- 
tion with  which  it  may  be  enforced  (cf.  sh. 
xiii.24;  xxii.  15;  xxiii.  13,  14),  the  writei 
attributes  appropriately  to  the  father,  while 
the  milder  torah, "  law,"  he  uhes  of  the  mother 
(Delitzsch).  Father.  The  nature  of  the  ex- 
hortation conveyed  in  this  verse  requires 
that  we  should  understand  the  terms  "  father  " 
and  "  mother  "  in  their  natural  sense  as  desig- 
nating the  parents  of  the  persons  addressed, 


OH.  1. 1—33.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


though  a  Bymbolical  ineaniiig  has  been 
attached  to  them  by  the  rabbis  (see  Babbi  Sa- 
lomon, in  Zoo.),  "father"  being  understood  as 
representing  God,  and  "  mother,"  the  people. 
But  the  terms  are  more  than  merely  figura- 
tive expressions  (Stuart).  Those  who  look 
upon  the  Proverbs  as  the  address  of  Solomon 
to  his  son  Behobcam  naturally  take  "father" 
as  standing  for  the  former.  I^aamah,  in 
this  case  must  be  the  mother  (1  Kings  xiv. 
31).  It  is  almost  unnecessary  to  state  that 
pious  parents  are  presupposed,  and  that  Only 
that  instruction  and  law  can  be  meant  which 
is  not  inconsistent  with  the  higher  and  more 
perfect  Law  of  God  (Gejerus,  Wardlaw). 
And  forsake  not  the  law  of  thy  mother. 
Forsake.  The  radical  meaning  of  nlw  (tit- 
tosh)  is  that  of  "  spreading,"  then  of  "  scat- 
teriog"  (Aiken),  and  so  the  word  comes  to 
mean"forsake, reject, or  neglect."  TheLXX. 
reads  mtdia-ji,  from  diro94a,  dbjicere,  "  to  push 
away,  reject."  Cf.  aJyicias  (Arabic).  The 
Vulgate  has  dimittas,  i.e.  "nbandon,"  and 
tiie  Syriao,  oUiviscaris,  i.e.  "forget."  The 
laa;  min  (toraift),. construct  case  of  niw 
(toroA),  from  the  root  ni;  Q/ardh),  "to  teach," 
hence  here  equivalent  to  "  a  law  "  in  the  sense 
of  that  which  teaches — a  precept  (doctrina, 
Jun.  et  Tremell.,  Piscat.,  Castal.,  Versions). 
With  one  exception  (oh.  viii.  10),  it  is  the 
term  which  always  expresses  the  instruction 
given  by  Wisdom  (Delitzsch).  The  law 
(torah)  of  the  mother  is  that  preceptive 
teaching  which  she  imparts  orally  to  her 
son,  but  torah  is  also  used  in  a  technical 
sense  as  lex,  vS/tos  SeV/ios,  that  which  is  laid 
down  and  established,  a  deeretum  or  insti- 
tutum,  and  designates  some  distinct  pro- 
vision or  ordinance,  as  the  law  of  sacrifice 
(Lev.  vi.  7).  In  Josh.  i.  8  we  find  it  em- 
ployed to  signify  the  whole  body  of  the 
Mosaic  Law  (sepherhatorah).  Mother.  Not 
inserted  here  as  a  natural  expansion  of  the 
idea  of  the  figure  required  by  the  laws  of 
poetic  parallelism  (as  Zookler),  since  this 
jreakens  the  force  of  the  passage.  Mothers 
ftre  mentioned  because  of  their  sedulousness 
in  imparting  instruction  (Bayne). 

Ver.  9.— For  they  (shall  be)  an  ornament 
of  grace  unto  thy  head.  The  sentiment  here 
expressed  is  put  forward  as  an  inducement 
to  youth  to  observe  obedience  towards  the 
instruction  of  the  father  and  the  law  of  the 
motlier,  and  the  meaning  is  that,  just  as  in 
popular  opinion  ornaments  and  jewels  are 
supposed  to  set  off  the  personal  form,  so 
obedience  towards  parents  in  the  ways  of 
virtue  embellishes  the  moral  character 
(Bayne,  Cartwright,  Holden).  An  ornament 
of  grace;  Hebrew,  )n  n;)h  (liv'yath  Tthen); 
literally,  a  wreath  or  garland  of  grace.  We 
meet  with  the  same  expression  in  ch.  iv.  9, 
"She  p.e.  wisdom]  shall  give  to  thine  heud 


an  ornament  of  grace."  The  Hebrew  rf'i^ 
(liv'yah)  is  derived  from  the  root  ni.^  (lavaK), 
"to  wind  a  roll"  (Delitzsch)  or  "to  be 
joined  closely  with "  (Gesenius),  and  hence 
signifies  an  ornament  that  is  twisted,  and  so 
a  wreath  or  garland.  Gejerus  and  Schul- 
tens  translate  the  plirase  by  corona  grati- 
osa,  i.e.  "a  crown  full  of  grace,"  and  so 
meaning  conferring  or  producing  grace, 
just  as  file  expression,  "the  chastisement  oi 
our  peace  "  (Isa.  liii.  5),  means  the  chastise- 
ment bringing  or  procuring  our  peace.  So 
agaia  a  "precious  stone,"  in  ch.  xvii.  8, 
margin,  "  a  stone  of  grace,"  is  one  conferring 
gracefulness.  The  marginal  reading,  "an 
adding  "  (additamentiim,  Vatablus),  conveys, 
though  obscurely,  the  same  idea ;  and  this 
sense  is  again  reproduced  in  the  Vulgate, 
ut  addaiur  gratia  capiti  tuo  ("  in  order  that 
grace  may  be  added  to  thy  head").  The 
LXX.  reads,  (rrfifiavos  xapfrwj/.  And  chains 
about  thy  neck.  Chains  ;  properly,  neclclaces; 
D'pjjp (ona/ctm),  plural  of  piS.  (anah),  "a 

collar  or  necklace ; "  the  k\oi6s  xP'""^'"'  °' 
"golden  coUar,"  of  the  LXX.,  and  torques 
(i.e.  twisted  neckchain)  of  the  Vulgate. 
There  is  a  very  apposite  parallel  to  this 
verse  in  ch.  vi.  20,  21  (cf.  ch.  iii.  3 ;  see  also 
Judg.  viii.  26).  The  gold  chain  round  the 
neck  was  a  mark  of  distinction,  and  was 
conferred  on  Joseph  by  Pharaoh  when  in- 
vesting him  with  authority  and  dignity 
(Gen.  xli.  42),  anrl  on  Daniel  by  Belshazzar 
in  the  same  way  (Dan.  v.  29 ;  see  Song  of 
Solomon  iv.  9).  The  mere  adornment  of  the 
person  with  gold  and  pearls,  without  the 
further  adornment  of  the  moral  character  with 
Christian  graces,  is  deprecated  both  by  St. 
Paul  and  St.  Peter  (see  1  Tim.  ii.  9, 10,  and 
1  Pet.  iii.  3,  i).  Neck,  rh^-}i  (gar'g'roth) 
only  occurs  in  the  plural  (Gesenius)."  (See 
ch.  iii.  3, 22 ;  vi.  21.) 

Ver.  10. — My  son,  if  sinners  entice  thee. 
(As  to  the  form  of  address,  see  ver.  8.)  It  is 
here  used  because  the  writer  is  passing  to  a 
warning  against  bad  company,  and  hence 
the  term  is  emphatic,  and  intended  to  call 
especial  attention  to  what  is  said.  It  is 
repeated  again  in  ver.  15,  at  a  further  stage 
in  this  address,  with  the  same  view.  Sinners ; 
D'i«Kin  (hhattaim),  the  plural  of  tten  (khafta), 
from  the  root  («Ein  (khata),  properly  "to  misa 
the  mark,  to  err;"  cf.  Greek,  afiapTava,  "to 
sin  "  (Gesenius),  here  equivalent  to  "  habi- 
tual, abandoned  sinners,"  and  those  espe- 
cially who  make  robbery  and  bloodshed  a 
profession.  Not  simply  peceantes,  i.e.  sinners 
as  a  generic  designation  of  the  human  race, 
for  "  AU  have  sinned  and  come  short  of  the 
glory  of  God  "  (Eom.  iii.  23),  but  peccatores 
(Chaldee,  Syriao,  Pa  gin.,  Tigur.,  Versions  and 
Vulgate),  "  sinners,"  i.e.  those  who  sin  habi- 
tually, knowingly,  wilfully,  and  maliciously 


THE  PBOVEBBS. 


[oh.  1. 1—83 


(Oejerus),  or  those  who  give  themselveB  up 
lo  iuiquity,  and  persuade  others  to  follow 
tlieir  example  (Oartwright).  In  the  New 
Testament  they  are  styled  d/ittpTiiiKol.  They 
are  those  of  whom  David  speaks  in  strik- 
ingly parallel  language  in  Ps.  xxvi.  9, 
"  G  ather  not  my  soul  with  sinners  (Jtlmttaim), 
nor  my  life  with  hloody  men  "  (of.  Ps.  i.  1). 
The  LXX.  has  ivSpes  dffiPeh  (i.e.  ungodly, 
unlioly  men).  Entice  thee;  '^ins;  (y'phat- 
tukha) ;  the  piel  form,  npe  {pitah),  of  the 
kal  nnp  (patah),  "  to  open,"  and  hence  to 
make  accessible  to  persuasion,  akin  to  the 
Greek  TreifleiK,  "to  persuade."  The  noun 
'HQ  ip'thi),  is  "one  easily  enticed  or  per- 
suaded "  (Gesenius).  The  LXX.  reads  iiii 
Tr\avi\aacriv,  "let  them  not  Itad  thee  aatray." 
The  idea  is  expressed  in  the  Vulgate  by 
laataverint ;  i.e.  "  if  sinners  allure  or  deceive 
thee  with  fair  words."  The  Syriac,  Montan., 
Jun.  et  Tiemell.,  Versions  read  pellexerint, 
from  pellicio,  "  to  entice."  Consent  thou  not. 
(«3h-f>N,  al-toveii).  The  Masoietio  text  here 
has  been  emended  by  Kennioott  and  De  Rossi, 
who,  on  tlie  joint  authority  of  fifty-eight 
manuscripts, maintain  that  N3h(<oBett) should 
be  written  snSn  (totoeN).  Others  read  Nnn 
(tacoN),  •'.«.  "thou  shalt  not  go,"  which, 
though  good  sense,  is  incorrect,  -h^  (al)  is 
the  adverb  of  negation,  i.q.  /i)j,  ne.  The 
Hebrew  Niri  (toveik)  is  derived  from  nnNi 
(avaK),  "  to  afjree  to,  to  be  willing"  (Gese- 
nius, Delitzsoh),  the  preformative  N  being 
omitted,  and  is  accurately  rendered  by  the 
LXX.,  /i7)  $ovKnefs,  and  the  Vulgate, 
ne  acquiescas.  The  warning  is  especially 
brief  and  striking.  The  only  answer  to  all 
enticements  of  evil  is  a  decided  negative 
(Plumptre).  Com|  are  St.  Paul's  advice  to 
the  Ephesians  (Epb.  v.  11,  "And  have  no 
fellowship  with  the  unfruitful  works  of 
darkness,  but  rather  reprove  them  "). 

Ver.  11. — If  they  say,  Come  with  us,  let  us 
lay  wait  for  blood.  Tlie  teacher  here  puts 
into  tlie  mouth  of  the  sinners,  for  the  sake 
of  vivid  reprc sentalion,  the  first  iniiuoemiut 
with  which  they  seek  to  allure  youth  from 
the  paths  of  rectitude,  viz.  privacy  and  con- 
cealment (Cartwright,  Wardlaw).  Bi)th  the 
verbs  an^  (arav)  and  ]dk  (tmphan)  mean 
•'  to  lay  in  wait "  (Zockler).  The  radical 
meaning  of  arav,  from  which  njllJ.J  (nee/- 
vah),  "let  us  lay  in  wait"  (Authorized  Ver- 
sion) is  taken,  is  "  to  knot,  to  weave,  to  inter- 
twine." Verbs  of  this  class  are  often  applied 
te  snares  and  craftiness  (cf.  the  Greek  S6\av 
vijiutyfiv,  and  the  Latin  insidias  nectere,  "  to 
■weave  plots,  or  lay  snares").  Generally, 
arav  is  ecjuivalent  to  "to  watch  in  ambush" 
(Gesinius);  cf.  the  Vulgate,  insiA'cmur  aun- 

?«i»t ;  i.e.  "  let  us  lay  wait  for  blood."    The 
<XX.  paraphrases  the  cxpr.  ssion,  Koivdvr)- 


trov  tHiiaros,  i.e.  "  let  us  share  in  blood."  On 
the  other  hand,  ]3X  (tmphan),  from  which 
n}ex3  (nilz'p'nah),  tianslated  in  the  Autho- 
rized Version,  "let  us  lurk  privily,"  is  "to 
hide  or  conceal,"  and  intrans. "  to  hide  one's 
self,"  or  ellipt.,  "  to  hide  nets,  snares  "  (Gese- 
nius, Holden).  This  sense  agiees  With  the 
Vulgate  ahieondamus  tendiculaa;  i.e.  "let 
us  conceal  snares."  L/elitzscli,  howt-ver, 
holds  that  no  Word  is  to  be  understood  with 
this  verb,  and  traces  the  radical  meaning  to 
that  of  restraining  one's  self,  watching,  lurk- 
ing, in  the  sense  of  spdculari,  "to  watch  for," 
intidiari,  "  to  lay  wait  for."  The  two  verbs 
combine  what  may  be  termed  the  apparatus, 
the  arrangement  of  the  plot  and  their  lurk- 
ing in  ambush,  by  which  they  will  await 
their  victims.  For.  blood  (p-^h,  I'dam).  The 
context  (see  vers.  12  and  16),  bearing  as  It 
does  upon  bloodshed  accompanying  robbery, 
:.*equires  that  the  Hebrew  cqh  (I'dam)  should 
be  understood  here,  as  Fleischer  remarks, 
either  elliptically,  for  "  tlie  blood  of  men," 
as  the;  Jewish  interpreters  explain,  or  syne- 
dochically,  for  the  person,  with  especial 
reference  to  his  blood  being  shed,  as  in  Ps. 
xciv.  21.  Vatablus,  Cornelius  &  Lapide,  and 
Gesenius  support  the  latter  view  (cf.  Micah 
vii.  2,  "  Tliey  all  lie  in  wait  for  blood,"  ».«. 
for  bloodshed,  or  murder.  Dj  (dam)  may 
be  also  taken  for  life  in  the  sense  that  "  the 
blood  is  the  life"  (Dent.  xii.  23).  Let  na 
lurk  privily  for  the  innocent  without  cause. 
The  relation  of  the  phrase,  "  without  cause  " 
(Dan,  khinnam),  in  this  sentence  is  a  matter 
of  much  dispute.  It  may  be  taken  either 
with  (I)  tlie  verb  (as  in  the  Authorized  Ver- 
sion, Wordsworth,  Luther,  Van.  Ess,  Noyes, 
Zockler,  Delitzsch,  Hitzig,'  LXX.,  Sjriac, 
Eashi,  Ilalbac),and  then  "lurk  privily  with- 
out cause "  is  equivalent  to  (a)  without 
having  any  reason  for  revenge  and  enmity 
(Zockler),  i.e.  though  tliey  have  not  pro- 
voked us,  nor  done  us  any  injury,  yet  let  us 
hurt  them,  in  the  sense  of  abeqiie  causa 
(Muiisterus,  Paganini  Version,  Piscatoris 
Version,  Meroerus),  dSums  (LXX.),  inique 
(Arabic) ;  (6)  with  impunity,  since  none 
will  avenue  them  in  the  sense  of  Job  ix.  12 
(this  is  the  view  of  Lowestein,  but  it  is 
rejected  by  Delitzsoh);  or  (2)  It  may  be 
taken  with  the  adjective  "innocent,"  in 
which  case  it  means  (a)  him  that  is  inno- 
cent ill  vain ;  i.e.  the  man  whose  innocence 
will  in  vain  protect  (Zockler,  Holden),  who 
gets  nothing  by  it  (Plumptre),  or,  innocent 
in  vain,  since  God  does  not  vindicate  him 
(Cornelius  ^  Lapide).  On  the  analogy  of 
1  Sam.  xix.  5 ;  xxv.  31 ;  Ps.  xxxv.  19 ;  Ixix. 
4 ;  Lam.  iii.  52,  it  seems  preferable  to  adopt 
the  first  connection,  and  to  take  the  adverb 
with  the  verb.  In  the  whole  of  the  passage 
there  is  au  evident  allusion  to  au  evil  preva. 


OH.  1. 1—33.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


lent  in  the  age  of  Solomon,  viz.  the  presence 
of  bands  of  robbers,  or  banditti,  who  dis- 
turbed the  security  and  internal  peace  of 
the  country.  In  the  New  Testament  the 
game  state  of  things  continued,  and  ia 
alluded  to  by  our  Lord  in  the  parable  of 
the  man  who  fell  among  thieves. 

Vtr.  12. — Let  us  swallow  them  up  alive 
as  the  grave.  A  continuation  of  ver.  11, 
expan  ling  the  idea  of  bloodshed  ending  in 
murder,  and  showing  the  determination  of 
the  sinners  to  proceed  to  the  most  violent 
means  to  eft'ect  their  covetous  ends.  Tlie 
enticement  here  put  before  youth  is  the 
courage  and  boldness  of  their  exploits 
(Wardlaw).  The  order  of  the  words  in  the 
original  is,  "  Let  us  swallow  them  up,  as  the 
grave,  living,"  which  sufficiently  indicates 
the  meaning  of  the  passage.  Alive;  D';n 
(Jchayyim),  i.e.  "tlie  living,"  refers  to  the 
pronominal  suffix  in  oyjiaj  (niv'laem),  as  in 
the  Authorized  Version  and  Zockler  (cf.  Pa. 
Iv.  15 ;  cxxiv.  3).  Umbreit  and  Hitzig  are 
grammntically  incorrect  in  connecting  'jimk'd 
(hish'ol)  "  as  the  grave,"  with  "  tlie  living," 
and  translating  "like  the  pit  (swallows) 
that  which  lives."  The  ?  (Jci)  with  a  sub- 
etantive,  as  here  in  kkh'ol,  is  a  preposition, 
and  not  a  conjunction  (see  Gesenius,  '  Lexi- 
con')»  It  denotes  a  kind  of  resemblance, 
but  does  not  introduce  a  co-ordinate  sentence. 
The  allusion  is  undoubtedly  in  the  teacher's 
mind  to  the  fate  of  Korali  and  his  company 
(Numb.  xvi.  30 — 33),  and  as  in  that  Ciise 
"  the  earth  opened  her  mouth,  and  swallowed 
them  up"  in  tlie  flush  of  life,  so  here  the 
robbers  say  that  they  will  as  suddenly  and 
•if.  otively  destroy  their  victims,  rpa  {data); 
from  which  niv'laem,  in  a  figurative  sense, 
means  "  to  destroy  utterly  "  (Gesenius).  The 
change  from  the  singular,  "  the  innocent " 
rpj'?,  I'naki),  to  the  plural  in  "  let  us  swallow 
fhem  up,"  is  noticeable.  Like  the  pit  (Vine's, 
kish'ol);  literally,  like  Sheol,  or  Uades,  the 
great  subterianeau  Ciivity  or  world  of  the 
dead.  The  all-devouring  and  insatiable 
character  of  sheol  is  described  in  ch.  xxvii. 
20,  where  the  Anth  irized  Version  translates 
"  Hell  (sheol)  and  destruction  are  never  full," 
and  again  in  eli.  xxx.  15,  where  it  (sheol. 
Authorized  Version,  "  the  grave  ")  is  classed 
with  the  four  things  that  are  never  satisfied. 
Vulgate,  infernus;  LXX.,  ?5r)j.  And  whole, 
as  those  that  go  down  into  the  pit.  The 
parallelism  of  ideas  requires  that  the  word 
"whole"  (d'P'Dpi,  I'mimim)  shouM  be  under- 
stood of  those  physically  whole  (see  Meroerus, 
Dclitzseh),  and  not  in  a  moral  Sense,  as  the 
upright  (Luther,  Grier,  Holdon,  Plumptre). 
The  word  is  used  in  an  ethical  signification 
in  ch.  ii.  21.  Gesenius  gives  it  the  metiuing 
of  "safe,  secure."     Thoie  that  go  down  into 


the  pit  (ni3  '.'jnv,  yorde  vor);  i.e.  the  dead. 
The  phrase  also  occurs  in  Ps.  xxviii.  1; 
xxx.  4;  Ixxxviii.  i;  oxliii.  7;  Isa.  xxxviii, 
18).  The  p»7(ii3,  vor);  or,  the  sepulchre, 
the  receptacle  of  the  dead,  is  here  synonymous 
with  sheol.  The  LXX.  substitutes  for  the 
latter  part  of  the  verse,  Ka!  ipufiey  outoD  tV 
livinTiv  6K  yris,  "And  let  us  remove  his 
memory  from  the  earth."  The  robbers,  by 
drawing  a  comparison  between  themselves 
and  Hades  and  the  grave,  which  consign 
to  silence  all  who  are  put  therein,  imply 
their  own  security  against  detection.  They 
will  so  utterly  destroy  their  victims  that 
none  wiU  be  left  to  tell  the  tale  (see  Musset, 
in  loc.).  This,  we  know,  is  a  fancied,  and  at 
the  best  only  a  temporary,  security. 

Ver.  13. — We  shall  find  all  preoious  sub- 
stance. This  verse  carries  on  the  proposal 
of  the  sinners  one  step  further,  and  puts 
forward  a  third  enticement,  viz.  that  of  thft 
pinflt  of  crime,  or  the  prospect  of  immediate 
riches,  before  youth  to  joiii  in  crime.  A 
short  cut  to  weallh,  and  to  the  acquirement 
of  that  which  costs  others  long  years  of 
steady  application  and  carefulness,  is  a  strong 
inducement  (Wardlaw).  We  shall  find; 
Nyp:  (nim'tza),  from  N^p  (matza),  properly 
"  to  reach  to,"  and  "  to  find,"  in  the  sense  of 
"  to  come  upon ; "  cf.  Latin  invenio.  Sub- 
stance ([in,  hon) ;  i.e.  substance  in  the  sense 
of  riches.  The  radical  meaning  of  ]in  (hun), 
from  which  it  is  derived,  is  the  same  as  in 
the  Arabic  word,  "  to  be  light,  easy,  to  be 
in  easy  circumstances,  and  so  to  be  rich" 
(Gesenius).  In  its  abstract  sense,  hon,  "sub- 
stance," means  ease,  comfort,  and  concretely 
riches  which  bring  about  that  result  (see 
also  Fleischer,  as  quoted  by  Delitzsch);  cf. 
the  LXX.  KTTiffis,  i.e.  collectively,  possessions, 
property.  The  Pisoatoris  Version,  for  "  pre- 
cious substance,"  reads  (Zw//ia8,  "riches."  Pre- 
cious; nj>  (j/aftar),  properly  "heavy,"  is  found 
with  )in  (hon),  "substance,"  in  ch.  xii.  27 
and  xxiv.  4.  The  collocation  of  the  ideas  of 
lightness  and  heaviness  iu  Ihese  two  words 
is  striking,  but  we  need  not  neces  arily 
suppose  that  any  oxymoron  is  intended,  as 
Sohulteus.  Such  combinations  occur  in  other 
languages,  and  reside  more  in  the  radical 
meanings  of  the  wonls  tl.an  in  the  mind  or 
intention  of  the  writer  or  speaker.  We  shall  ■ 
fill  our  houses  with  spoil ;  i.e.  they  promise 
not  only  finding,  but  full  possession  (Gejerus, 
Muffet).  Spoil;  hh^  (shalal),  from  hh^ 
{shalal),  same  as  (he  Arabic  verb  "to draw," 
and  hence  "to  strip  off'  (Gesenius);  and 
equivalent  to  the  Greek  o-icSAa  (LXX.),  the 
arms  stripped  off  a  slain  enemy,  spoils,  and 
the  Latin  spolia  (Vulgate).  Shalal  is  used 
generally,  as  here,  for  "  prey,"  "booty  "  (Gen. 
xlix.   27;    Exod.  xv.  9).     Our  gains,  lay 


10 


THE  PE0VBRB3. 


[oh.  1. 1—83. 


the  robbers,  will  not  only  be  valuable,  but 
numerous  and  plentiful. 

Ver.  14. — Cast  in  thy  lot  among  us.  The 
fourth  and  last  enticement  put  forward,  viz. 
lumourable  union  and  frank  and  open-hearted 
generosity.  It  has  distinct  reference  to  the 
preceding  verse,  and  shows  how  the  prospect 
of  immediate  wealth  is  to  be  realized  (see 
Delitzsch,  Wardlaw),  Cast  in  thy  lot  cannot 
mean,  as  Mercerus,  "cast  in  your  inheritance 
with  us,  so  that  we  all  may  use  it  ia  common," 
though  "j^li  (goral) doea  mean  "inheritance" 
in  the  sense  of  that  wliioh  comes  to  any  one 
by  lot  (Judg.  i.  3)  (Gesenius),  since  that 
would  be  no  inducement  to  youth  to  join 
the  robbers.  Goral  properly  is  "a  little 
stone  or  pebble,"  KXrjpos,  especially  such  as 
were  used  in  casting  lots,  and  so  equivalent 
to  a  "lot"  here — that  with  which  the  dis- 
tribution was  made,  as  in  Lev.  xvi.  8 ;  Neh. 
X.  34 ;  and  the  cuotom  of  freebooters  dividing 
the  spoil  by  lot  is  here  alluded  to  (Holden) ; 
comp.  Pb.  xxii.  18  in  illustration  of  tlie 
practice  of  casting  lots,  "  They  part  my 
garments  among  tbem,  and  cast  lots  upon 
my  vesture."  The  sense  is,  "you  shall  equally 
with  the  others  cast  lots  for  your  share  of 
the  spoU"  (Zockler,  Delitzsch).  Let  us  all 
have  one  purse.  Puree;  D'3  (Itis),  the 
PaKdvTiov  cf  the  LXX.,  the  marsupium 
of  the  Vulgate,  is  the  receptacle  in  which 
money  is  placed  for  security.  In  ch.  xv.  11 
it  is  used  for  the  bag  in  which  traders  kept 
their  weights,  "the  weights  of  the  bag;" 
and  in  ch.  xxiii.  31  it  is  translated  "cup," 
the  wine-cup.  It  here  signifies  the  common 
stock,  the  aggregate  of  the  gains  of  the 
robbers  contributed  to  a  common  fund.  The 
booty  captured  by  each  or  any  is  to  be 
thrown  into  one  common  stock,  to  form  one 
purse,  to  be  divided  by  lot  among  all  the 
members  of  the  band.  On  this  community 
of  goods  among  robbers,  compare  tlie  Hebrew 
proverb.  In  looulia,  in  poculis,  in  ira.  Com- 
munity of  goods  among  the  wicked  carries 
with  it  community  in  crime,  just  as  the 
community  of  goods  among  the  early 
Christians  implied  community  in  good  works 
and  in  the  religious  sentiments  of  the 
Christian  body  or  Church.  The  Eabbi 
Salomon  Isacides  oifers  another  explanation 
(which  leaves  tlie  choice  open  to  youth  either 
to  share  in  the  spoil  by  lut,  or  to  live  at  the 
expense  of  a  common  fund,  as  he  may  prefer) : 
"  Si  voles,  nobiscum  spolia  partieris,  si  etiam 
magisplacebit,  social!  communique  maisupio 
nobiscum  vives"— "If  thou  wilt,  thou  shalt 
sliare  with  us  the  booty ;  ay,  it  it  like  thee 
more,  thou  shalt  live  with  us  on  a  confederate 
andcommon  purse"  (see  Cornelius  &  Lapide). 

Ver.  15.— My  son,  walk  not  thou  in  the 
way  with  them.  The  admonitory  strain  of 
ver.  10  is  again  resumed,  and  in  vers.  16—19 
the  teacher  states  the  reasons  which  should 


dissuade  youth  from  listening  to  the  tempta 
tions  of  sinners.  My  ion.  The  recurrence 
of  these  words  for  the  third  time  in  this 
address  marks  the  affectionate  interest,  the 
loving  solicitude,  in  which  the  admonition 
is  addressed.  Walk  not  thou.  Immediate 
and  entire  abandonment  is  counselled.  Tlie 
warning  is  practically  a  repetition  of  ver.  10, 
and  is  given  again  in  oh.  iv.  14,  "  Enter  not 
into  the  path  of  the  wicked,  and  go  not  in 
the  way  of  evU  men."  Way;  TQn  (dereh) 
means,  figuratively,  the  way  of  living  and 
acting  (Gesenius).  "  Mores  etconsuetudines" 
(Bayne) ;  cf.  ch.  xii.  15,  "  the  fool's  way ; " 
xxii.  25;  and  Ps.  i.  1.  The  meaning  is 
"associate  not  with  them,  have  no  dealing! 
whatever  with  tbem."  Befrain  thy  foot  from 
their  path ;  i.e.  keep  back  thy  foot,  or  make 
not  one  step  in  compliance,  resist  the  very 
first  solicitations  to  evil.  Compare  the  legal 
maxim,  Initiis  ohsta.  Be/rain;  j)jp  (m'na) 
is  from  J)m  (mano),"  to  keep  back,  restrain;* 
LXX.,  (kkKivov  (cf.  Ps.  cxix.  101,  "I  have 
refrained  my  feet  from  every  evU  way;" 
Jer.  xiv.  10,  "Thus  have  they  loved  to 
wander,  they  have  not  refrained  their  feet "). 
Restraining  the  foot  carries  with  it  indirectly 
the  natural  inclination  or  propensity  of  the 
heart,  even  of  the  good,  towards  evil  (Cart- 
wright).  Foot  ('?.:t,  regd)  is,  of  course, 
used  metaphorically,  and  means  less  the 
member  of  the  body  than  the  idea  suggested 
by  it ;  hence  the  use  of  the  singular  (Gejcrus, 
Delitzsch).  Bayne  remarks  that  the  He- 
brews understood  this  passage  as  meaning 
"neither  in  public  nor  private  life  have  any 
dealings  with  sinners."  Path  (a'W,  nathiv) 
is  a  beaten  path,  a  pathway,  a  byway; 
from  the  unused  root  arij  (jucthav),  "to 
tread,  trample;"  and  hence,  while  "way" 
may  mean  the  great  public  high-road, 
"path"  may  stand  for  the  bypath,  less 
frequented  or  public.  The  same  distinction 
probably  occurs  in  Ps.  xxv.  4,  "Show  me 
thy  ways,  0  Lord;  and  teach  me  thy  paths." 
Ver.  16.— For  their  feet  run  to  evil,  and 
make  haste  to  shed  blood,  This  is  the  first 
dissuasive  urged  to  enfoice  the  warning 
against  evil  companionship,  as  showing  the 
extremes  to  which  entering  npon  the  ways 
of  the  wicked  lead  ultimately.  At  once  the 
youth  who  listens  will  be'  hurried  along 
impetuously  to  the  two  crimes  of  robbery 
and  murder,  which  God  has  expressly  for- 
bidden in  the  eighth  and  sixtli  command- 
ments respectively  of  tlie  moral  code.  Evd 
(J>n,  ra)  is  "  wickedness,"  t!)  KaK6v,  generally, 
but  here  more  specifically  highway  robbery, 
latrocinism  (Cornelius  k  Lapide),  as  appears 
from  vers.  11—13,  where  also  murder,  the 
layinj;;  in  wait  for  blood,  is  proposed.  The 
Rabliis  Salomon  and  Salazar  understand 
the  evil  to  refer  to  the  evil  or  destructioi 


OB.  1 1—33.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


11 


which  sinners  bring  upon  themselves,  and 
the  shedding  of  blood  to  the  fact  that  they 
lay  themselves  open  to  have  their  own  blood 
shed  by  judicial  process  (see  also  Holden). 
The  former  explanation  seems  preferable  to 
this,  as  putting  a  higher  law  than  that  of 
self-preservation  before  youth.  The  tear  of 
judges  who  can  .condemn  to  death  is  nothing 
comparatively  to  the  fear  of  him  "who  is 
able  to  destroy  both  body  and  soul  in  hell." 
This  verse  is  wanting  in  the  Vatican  LXX., 
and  Arabic,  and  hence  Hitzig  has  concluded 
that  it  is  an  interpolation  made  from  Isa. 
lix.  7,  but  upon  insufficient  evidence,  as  it 
is  found  in  the  Alexandrian  LXX.,  Chaldee 
Paraphrase,  Vulgate,  and  Syriac  Versions, 
all  which  follow  the  Hebrew  text.  The 
latter  part  of  the  verse  is  quoted  by  St.  Paul 
in  Horn.  iii.  15. 

Ver.  17. — Surely  in  vain  the  net  is  spread 
in  the  face  of  any  bird.  The  teacher  here 
advances  a  second  reason  in  support  of  his 
warning  in  ver.  15,  under  the  form  of  a 
proverb  in  its  strict  sense.  It  is  based  on 
the  ill-advised  audacity  of  sinners  in  flying 
in  the  face  of  God's  judgments.  In  vain 
(D|n,  khinnani),  see  ver.  11,  may  be  taken 
in  two  senses.  (1)  J.e,  to  no  purpose, 
gratis,frusl.ra  (Vulgate,  Chaldee  Paraphrase, 
Arabic).  The  meaning  of  the  proverb  here 
used  then  is,  "  to  no  purpose  is  the  net  spread 
before  birds,"  i.e.  though  they  see  the  net 
spread  before  them,  they  nevertheless  fly 
into  it  (comp.  ch.  vii.  23,  "As  a  bird 
hasteth  to  the  snare,  and  kuoweth  not  that 
it  is  for  his  life  ").  So  sinnsrs,  when  they 
are  plotting  for  others,  pluuge  into  their  own 
destruction  with  their  eyes  open.  Therefore 
do  not  associate  with  them,  do  not  imitate 
their  crass  folly,  be  warned  by  their  example, 
or  yon  will  share  their  fate.  This  view  is 
supported  by  the  LXX.  reading,  Oi  yap 
aS'iKus  eKTeiverai  SUrva  irTepioToTs,  "  For  not 
unreasonably  is  the  net  spread  before  birds ; " 
i.e.  they  fall  into  the  snare  (see  Luther, 
Patrick,  Umbreit,  Ewald,  Hitzig,  Zockler, 
Plumptre).  (2)  Others,  as  Delitzsch,  Ziegler, 
Beda,  Doderlein,  Bertheau,  VVardlaw,  take 
hhinnam  in  ft  different  sense,  as  indicating 
the  escape  of  the  birds — the  birds  see  the 
snare  and  fly  away,  and  so  in  vain  the  net 
is  spread  in  their  sight.  This  explanation 
is  in  agreement  with  Ovid's  statement,  "Quaj 
nimis  apparent  retia  vitat  avis."  The  moral 
motive  put  before  youth  in  this  case  is  the 
aggravation  of  his  guilt  if  he  listens  to  the 
enticements  of  sinners.  The  teacher  seems 
to  say,  " Im  tati-  the  birds,  flee  from  tempta- 
tion; if  you  listen  to  sinners,  you  will  sin  with 
your  eyes  open."  Is  spread;  njip  (m'zorah), 
expansum,  not  consperium  est,  i.e.  besprinkled 
or  strewn  with  corn  as  a  bait,  as  Eashi. 
Wzorah  is  the  participle  passive  of  pual,  nni 


(zorah),  "  to  be  strewn,"  from  kal  niT  (tarah), 
"to  scatter,  or  disperse"  (Gesenius),  and 
means  expansum,  because  when  a  net  is 
scattered  or  dispersed  it  is  spread  out  (see 
Delitzsch).  Of  any  bird  (yffs  bpa-'rj,  hhal- 
baal  Ithanaph);  literally,  of  every  possessor  of 
a  wing,  or,  as  miirgin,  of  everything  that  hath 
a  wing,  i.e.  of  every  bird.  Compare  the 
same  expression  in  Eccles.  x.  20,  D;B^3n  ^pa 
(fcooZ  hach'naphai/im) ;  i.e.  "  that  which  hath 
wings"  (Authorized  Version). 

Ver.  18. — And  they  lay  wait  for  their  own 
blood,  etc.  1'l)c  ihhd  reason  or  argument 
why  the  teaclic.r's  wiirning  should  be  fol- 
lowed, drawn  from  llio  destruction  which 
overtakes  the  sinners  themselves.  "Lay 
wait," and  "hnU  privily,"  as  in  ver.  11,  from 
which  this  verse  is  evidently  borrowed. 
They  propose,  as  tiiey  say,  to  lay  wait  for 
the  blood  of  othora;  but  it  is  says  the 
teiicher,for  their  owd  blood,  o^-jh  (I'dkamam), 
contra  sanguinem  suttm;  they  lurk  privily, 
as  they  say,  for  Hie  innocent,  but  in  reality 
it  is  for  their  own  lives ;  nnWsih  (I'naph'sho- 
tliani);  contra  aid  mas  suas  (Vulgate);  or, 
as  the  LXX.  puts  it,  Ainol  yctp  ot  ^6vov 
/i^Texoj/res,  dTifravpi^ovorty  eavrois  /ca/cct,  *'  For 
they  who  take  part  in  murder  treasure  up 
evils  for  themselves;"  that  is,  they  are 
bringing  a  heavier  and  surer  destruction 
upon  thcmsolvca  than  they  can  over  inflict 
upon  others  (Wardlaw).  The  LXX.  adds, 
at  the  close  of  the  verse,  'H  Sc  Karaffrpoipii 
avSpuy  Trapai/dfiuv  KaK-f],  **  And  the  overthruw- 
ing  or  destruction  of  transgressors  is  great, 
or  evil."  The  Arabic  Version  has  a  similar 
addition. 

Ver.  19. — So  are  the  ways  of  every  one 
that  is  greedy  of  gain.  The  epiplionema 
or  moral  of  the  preceding  address.  So  are 
the  ways,  or  such  is  the  lot  (as  Delitzsch), 
or  such  are  the  paths  (as  Zockler),  i.e.  so 
deceitful,  so  ruinous,  are  the  ways.  |3  (clien) 
is  here  used  as  a  qualitative  adverb.  Wayi; 
ninnts  {ar'Tchoth),  the  plural  of  rrvk  (orakh), 
a  poet,  word,  equivalent  in  the  first  inslance 
to  "  way,"  i.q.  "titi  (derekh),  and  metaphori- 
cally applied  to  any  one's  ways,  his  manner 
of  life  and  its  result,  and  hence  lot,  as  in 
Job  viii.  12,  and  hence  the  expression  covers 
the  three  preceding  verses.  T]mt  is  greedy 
of  gain  (J>1!|  jsb,  lotsea  hatsa);  literally,  coii- 
eupiscentis  coneupiscentiam  lueri;  i.e.  eagerly 
longing  after  gain ;  he  who  greedily  desires 
riohes  (avari,  Vulgate).  Gain;  hatsa  in 
pause,  from  j)S3  (betsa),  which  takes  its 
meaning  from  the  verb  ps3  (batsa\  "to 
out  in  pieces,  to  break,"  and  hence  means 
properly  that  which  is  cut  or  broken  off 
and  taken  by  any  one  for  himself,  and  so 
unjust  gain — anything  whatever  fraudulently 


t2 


THE  PBOVERBS. 


[oh.  1. 1—33. 


acquii-ed,  as  In  ch.  xxviii.  16,  where  it  is 
translated  "  covetousness "  (Authorized 
Version);  of.  Isa.  xxxiii.  15;  ch.  iv.  27. 
The  idea  of  greed  and  covetousnesa  enters 
largely  into  the  word.  Which  taketh  away 
the  life  of  the  owners  thereof.  The  pronoun 
"  which "  does  not  occur  in  the  original. 
The  nominative  to  "taketh  away"  (njj;, 
yiklcath)  is  "gain;"  the  "unjust  gain" 
(betsd)  takes  away  the  life  of  its  owners,  i.e. 
of  tliose  who  are  under  its  power.  Owners 
thereof  0'^??i  Valayo)  does  not  necessarily 
imply  that  they  are  in  actual  possession  of 
the  unjust  gain,  but  rather  refers  to  the 
influence  which  the  lust  for  gain  exercises 
over  them.  The  expression  in  this  second 
hemistich  does  not  mean  that  the  rapacious 
take  the  life  of  their  comrades  who  possess  the 
gain,  as  Babbi  Salomon;  nor,  as  the  Vulgate, 
"the  ways  of  the  avaricious  man  take  away 
the  lives  of  those  who  possess  them."  For 
the  phrase,  "taketh  away  the  life,"  as  import- 
ing a  violent  taking  away,  cf.  Ps.  xxii.  13; 
1  Kings  xix.  10.  The  sentiment  of  the 
verse  is  well  expressed  in  1  Tim.  vi.  10, 
"  For  the  love  of  money  is  the  roct  of  all 
evil;  which  while  some  coveted  after,  they 
have  erred  from  the  faith,  and  pierced  them- 
Belves  through  with  many  sorrows." 

Vera.  20 — 33. — 2.  Second  admonitory  dis- 
course. Address  of  Wisdom  personified,  ex- 
hibiting the  folly  of  those  who  wilfully  reject, 
and  the  security  of  those  who  hearken  to,  her 
counsels.  The  sacred  writer,  in  this  section, 
as  also  in  h.  viii.,  uses  the  rhetorical  figure 
of  prosopopoeia,  or  impersonation.  Wisdom 
is  represented  as  speaking  and  as  addressing 
the  simple,  scorners,  and  fools.  Tlie  address 
itself  is  one  of  the  noblest  specimens  of 
aacred  eloquence,  expressing  in  rapid  suc- 
cession  the   strongist  phases   of  feeling 

pathetic  bolioitude  with  abundant  promibC, 
indignant  scorn  at  the  rejection  of  her 
appeal,  the  judicial  severity  of  offended 
majesty  upon  offenders,  and  lastly  the 
judicial  complacency  which  deliglits  in 
mercy  towards  the  obedient.  The  imagery 
in  pait  is  taken  from  the  forces  of  nature 
in  their  irresistible  and  overwhelming 
violence  and  destructive  potency. 

Ver.  20.— Wisdom  orieth  without.  Wis- 
dom. The  Hebrew  word  hochmnfl,.)  here 
used  to  designate  Wisdom  seems  i  he  an 
abstract  derivation  from  the  ordinary 
lihochmah.  The  form  is  peculiar  to  the 
I  roverbs  and  Psidms,  in  the  fi)rmer  occnr- 
nug  four  times  (ch.  i.  22;  ix.  1 ;  xiv.  1 ;  xxiv 
7J,  and  m  the  latter  twice  only  (viz.  Ps. 


zlix.  4;  Ixxviii.  15).    As  in  oh.  iz.  1  and 
xxiv.  7,  it  is  a  pUiralii  excelUntise  of  the 
feminine  gender,  a  variety  of  the  pluralis 
extensivus,  as  Bottcher  prefers  to  denomi- 
nate  it.    The  feminine  form  may  be  deter- 
mined by  the  general  law  which  associates 
purity     and     serenity    with     womanhood 
(Plumptre).   The  idea  of  plurality,  however, 
is  not  that  of  extension,  but  of  comprehen- 
sion, I.e.  it  is  not  so  much  all  kinds  of 
wisdom  which  is  presented  to  us,  as  all  the 
varieties  under  which  wisdom  par  excellence 
may  be  regarded    and    is   comprehended. 
The  plural  form  of  the  word  denotes  the 
highest  character  or  excellence  in  which 
wisdom  can  be  conceived;  or,  as  the  mar- 
ginal   reading  expresses   it,  wisdoms,  ».«. 
excellent  wisdom.     Other  instances  of  the 
pluralis  exeeUentiie  are  met  with  in  Holy 
Writ,  e.g.  Mldhim,  God,  i.e.  "  God  of  Gods," 
either  from  the  polytheistic  view,  or  from 
the    monotheistic    view    as    expressive   of 
God's    might    in    manifestation,   passim; 
h'doshim,   "the  Holy  (God),"  ch.  ix.   10; 
XXX. 3 ;  adnnim,  for  adon,  "lord"  (Qesenius, 
'  Gram.,'  §  108.  2  6).    In  the  conception  of 
Wisdom  here  presented   to  us  in  the  text 
we  have  the  germ,  of  an  idea  which,  on  the 
principles  of   expansion,  developed  subse- 
quently in  the  consciousness  of  the  Chris- 
tian Church  into  a  definite  identification  of 
Wisdom   with  the  Second  Person  of  the 
blessed  Trinity.    There  is  a  striking  parallel 
to  this  passage  in  Luke  xi.  49,  where  Christ 
speaks  of  himself  as  rt  3o^ta  rod  &eoS,  "tlie 
Wisdom  of  God,"  that  shall  send  prophets 
and  apostles  into  Ihe  world,  and  thereby 
identifies    himself   with   Wisdom  (cf.  this 
with  vers.  20, 21 ;  ch.  vii.).  Again,  a  striking 
similarity  is  observable  between  the  teaching 
o(  Divine  Wisdom  and  that  of  the  Incarnate 
Word,  as  much    in  their  promises  as  in 
their  throats  and  warnings.    But  it  is  difS- 
cult  to  determine  with  accuracy  to  what 
extent  the  lUessianio  import  of  the  personi- 
fication was  present  to  the  consciousness 
of  the  sacred  writers,  and  whether  Wisdom 
as  here  presented  to  us  is  simply  a  poetic 
and  abstract  personification  or  a  distiuot  hy- 
postatizing  of  the  Word.    Dorner  ('  Pera.  of 
Christ,    lutrod.,  p.  16),  with  reference  tc 
ch.  viii.  22,  etc.,  says  that  though  Wisdom 
18  introauoed    speaking    as  a  personality 
distinct  from  God,  still  the  passage  does 
not  lead  oleariy  to  an  hypostntizing  of  the 
Khoohmah.    Bollinger  ('Heidenthum  und 
Judenthum,'   bk.  x.  pt.  iii.   sec.  2  a,  and 
0.1.  viii.  22,  etc.)  maintiiins  that  Wisdom  ii 
the  personified  idea  of  the  mind  of  God 
111  creation,"  rather  than  the  presence  of  "a 
distinct  hypcstiisis."     Liioke  (see  reference  f 
ui  '-"ddou  '  Hampton  Lects.')  holds  that  in 
Iroveibs    Wisdom   is  merely  a  personificft- 
ton.   It  13  cloiir  that  whatever  is  predicated 


OH.  1. 1—33.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


18 


of  Wisdom  in  ch.  rlii.  mnet  be  also  pre- 
dicated of  her  in  the  passage  before  us,  in 
reference  either  to  the  hypostatic  or  opposite 
view.  On  the  other  hand,  a  large  number 
of  expositors,  dating  from  the  earliest 
periods  of  the  Christian  Church  down  to 
the  present  time,  see  in  Wisdom  a  distinct 
hypostasis,  or  person — the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
A  fuller  investigation  of  this  subject  will 
be  seen  in  our  remarts  on  ch.  viii.  For 
the  present  we  observe  tliat  Wisdom  is 
esientially  Divine.  Her  authority,  her 
utterances,  whether  of  promise,  threat,  scorn, 
or  vengeance,  are  the  authority,  the  utter- 
ances, of  God.  Crieth ;  rather,  crieth  loudly, 
or  aloud.    The  Hebrew  verb  ranan  (jjn)  is 

"  to  vibrate  the  voice,"  and  conveys  the  idea 
of  the  clear  loud  ringing  tones  with  which 
proclamations  were  made;  of.  the  Vulgate 
prsedieare,  and  the  Arabic  clamitate, "  to  cry 
witli  a  loud  voice."  Fleischer  remarks  that 
the  Arabic  rannan,  which  is  allied  to  the 
Hebrew  verb,  is  used  of  a  speaker  who  has 
a  clear  piercing  voice.  In  such  a  way  does 
Wisdom  cry  without  when  making  her 
address.  She  elevates  her  voice  that  all 
may  hear.  The  verb  in  the  original  is 
taionnah,  the  feminine  singular  of  ranan, 
and  predicate  to  "Wisdom,"  according  to 
the  rule  that  verbs  in  the  singular  are 
construed  with  plural  nouns  having  a 
lingular  signification,  especially  the  plmralis 
exoellentiiB  (see  Gesenius, '  Gram.,'  §  146.  2). 
Without,  pia  (bakhuts)  is  here  used  ad- 
verbially, as  in  Gen.  ix.  22,  and  signifies 
"  in  the  open  places,"  t.e.  abroad,  without, 
as  opposed  to  tie  space  withio  the  walls. 
The  writer  here  begins  his  enumeration  of 
the  five  places  wherein  Wisdom  preaolies, 
viz.  (1)  without,  (2)  in  the  streets,  (3)  in 
chief  places  of  concourse,  (4)  in  the  openini^ 
of  the  gates,  (5)  in  the  city,  all  of  which 
are  public,  and  thus  indicate  the  publicity 
of  her  announcements  (with  tliese  comp.  ch. 
viii.  1 ;  ix.  3).  She  uttereth  her  voice ;  or^ 
causeth  her  voice  to  be  heard;  represented  in 
the  Vulgate  by  dat  vocem  suam,  and  in  the 
LXX.  by  irapjniffiav  Syet  (equivalent  to  "  she 
observes  free-spokenness  ").  The  instru- 
mentality which  Wisdom  uses  in  her  public 
preaching  are  the  prophets  and  teachers 
(Ecclus.  xxiv.  33 ;  Zookler,  Vatablus,  Mer- 
cerus).  In  the  streets ;  literally,  in  the  wide 
tpaces;  the  Hebrew,  nuhi  (/khovoth),  being, 
as  in  Gen.  xxvi.  22,  "wide  spaces,"  and 
corresponding  to  the  irKarda  of  the  LXX. ; 
platex,  Vnlgate.  The  same  places  are  indi- 
cated in  Luke  xiv.  21,  where,  in  the  parable 
of  the  marriage  supper,  the  servants  are 
bidden  to  go  out  iuLo  the  streets  (ir^aTetai) 
and  lanes  of  the  jily.  The  word  is  con- 
nected with  the  adjective  rakhav  (an^), 
"broad,"  "wide;"  and  in  S  Chton.  xxxiL 


6  Is  used  to  designate  the  ample  space 
at  the  gates  of  Oriental  cities  (Gesenius), 
though  here  it  seems  to  refer  rather  to 
"squares,"  large  open  spaces,  not  uncom- 
mon in  Oriental  cities — I  saw  one  such  at 
Aden — or  it  may  refer  to  the  broad  crowded 
thoroughfares.  The  Syriac  reading,  in  com- 
piiie,  gives  a  different  sense,  as  compitum, 
equivalent  to  "cross-roads." 

Ver.  21. — She  crieth  in  the  chief  place  of 
concourse.  The  chief  place  is  literally  the 
head  (pAl,  rosh) ;  here  used  figuratively  for 
the  place  where  streets  or  roads  branch  off 
in  different  directions,  as  in  Ezek.  xvi.  25, 
"  the  beginning  of  streets,"  or  "  the  head  of 
the  way;"  comp.  Gen.  ii.  10,  where  it  is 
used  of  the  point  at  which  the  four  streams 
branched  off;  and  the  corresponding  ex- 
pression in  oh.  viii.  2,  "  She  staudeth  in  the 
top  (rosh)  of  high  places."  Of  concourse; 
ni»Dh  QiomiyyotK)  is  the  plural  of  the  adjec- 
tive, 'oin  (homi) ;  literally,  "  those  who  are 
making  a  noise,"  or  "the  tumultuous;"  here, 
as  in  Isa.  xxii.  2  and  1  Kings  i.  41,  used 
substantively  for  "  boisterous,  noisy  places  " 
(compare  the  Vulgate,  in  capite  turbarum). 
The  variation  in  the  LXX.,  "on  high 
walls,"  or  "  on  the  tops  of  the  walls  "  (tV 
6.Kpav  Se  reix^av,  super  summos  muros), 
which  is  adopted  also  in  the  Chaldee, 
Syriac,  and  Arabic  Versions,  arises  from 
reading  niDin  (hhomotli),  "walls,"  for  the 
Masorttic  homiyyoth.  In  the  openings  of 
the  gates.  The  opening  (nna,  pethakh)  is 
the  opening  of  the  gate,  or  the  entrance 
by  the  gate  (-\y_^,  shaar),  i.e.  of  the  city, 
the  introitus  porta  of  the  Chaldee  and 
Syriac  Versions.  The  openings  of  the  gates 
would  be  thronged,  as  courts  of  justice  were 
held  at  the  gates  (Deut.  xvi.  18 ;  2  Sam. 
XV.  2);  business  was  carried  on  there,  as 
the  selling  ami  redemption  of  land  (Gen. 
xxiii.  10 — 16;  Kuth  iv.  1);  markets  were 
also  held  there  (2  Kings  vii.  1—18);  and  the 
same  localities  were  used  for  the  councils 
of  the  state  and  conferences  (Gen.  xxxiv. 
20;  2  Sam.  iii.  27;  2  Chron.  xviii.  9;  Jer. 
xvii.  19 ;  comp.  ch.  xxxi.  33,  "  Her  husband 
is  known  in  the  gates").  In  place  of  thw 
expression,  "  in  the  openings  of  the  gates," 
the  LXX.  reads,  'Eiri  5e  irvXais  Swcurruv 
irapeSpdet, ''  And  at  the  gates  of  the  mighty 
she  sits  " — an  interpolation  which  only  parti- 
ally represents  the  8eni.e  of  the  original,  and 
which  is  adopted  in  the  Arabic.  In  the  next 
clause,  for  "in  the  city"  is  substituted  eV! 
5e  iruKais  ■ir6\€ws,  "at  the  gates  of  the  city." 
The  Vulgate  combines  the  separate  clauses 
of  the  original  in  one — in  foribus  portarum 
urbis,  "in  the  entrances  and  openings  of 
the  gates  of  the  city."  In  the  oity  (tj;3, 
bair) ;  <*.«.  in  the  city  itself  (so  Aben  Ezra 
ap.  Gejerus),  as  opposed  to  the  entrance  bi 


14 


THE  PKOVERBS. 


[oh.  1. 1—33. 


the  gates,  and  so  need  antithetically  (as 
Umbreit,  Bertheau,  Hitzig).  The  publicity 
of  the  teaching  of  Wisdom,  observable  ih  the 
places  she  selects  for  that  puipose,  also 
marked  the  public  ministry  of  our  Lord  and 
his  disciples,  and  finds  an  illustration  in 
his  command,  "  What  ye  hear  in  the  ear, 
that  preach  ye  upon  the  housetops  "  (Matt. 
X.  27) ;  i.e.  give  it  all  the  publicity  possible. 
The  spirit  of  Wisdom,  like  that  of  Chris- 
tianity, is  aggressive  (see  Wardlavf ,  'Lectures 
on  Proverbs  iv.,'  vol.  i.  pp.  40,  41). 

Ver.  22. — How  long,  ye  simple  ones,  will 
ye  love  simplicity  1  etc.  From  this  verse  ,to 
the  end  of  the  chapter  the  sacred  writer  puts 
before  us  the  words  of  Wisdom  herself. 
The  discourse  begins  in  the  same  way  as  in 
Ps.  iv.  2  (Zockler),  and  the  classification  of  the 
persons  addressed — the  simple,  the  soorners, 
•nd  the  sinners — closely  rusembles  that  of 
Ps.  i.  1.  In  the  order  there  is  a  progression 
from  the  least  to  the  most  culpable.  The 
timple  (□;ne,  j/thayim),  as  in  ver.  4,  those 
who  are  indifferent  through  thoughtlessness 
and  inoonsiderateness,  and  are  thereby  open 
to  evil.  The  soorners  (D'l^,  letsim);  or, 
muckers,  the  same  as  the  (px^,  laUori) 
"  scornful  men ''  of  oh.  xxix.  8,  derived  from 
the  root  yh  (luts),  "to  deride,  mock,"  pro- 
bably by  imitating  the  voice  in  derision. 
The  mockers  are  those  who  hold  all  things 
in  derision,  both  human  and  Divine,  who 
oontemn  God's  admonitions,  and  treat  with 
ridicule  both  threatenings  and  promises 
alike.  Pools;  D'^'M  (ch'eilim),  a  different 
word  from  the  evilim  of  ver.  7,  but  eignify- 
ing  much  the  same,  t.e.  the  obdurate,  the 
hardened,  sMidi,  thofie,vwio  walk  after  the 
sight  of  their  eyes  and  the  imagination  of 
their  hearts — a  class  not  ignorant  of  know- 
ledge, but  hating  it  because  of  the  restraint 
it  puts  them  under.  The  word  occurs  in 
oh.  xvii.  10,  in  the  sense  of  the  incorrigible; 
in  ch.  xzvi.  3,  4  as  a  term  of  the  greatest 
contempt.  The  enallage,  or  interchange  of 
tenses  in  the  original — the  verbs  "  love  "  and 
"  hate  "  being  future,  and  "  delight "  being 
perfect — is  not  reproducible  in  English.  The 
perfect  is  used  interchangeably  with  the 
future  where  the  action  or  state  is  repre- 
sented as  first  coming  to  pass  or  in  progress, 
and,  as  Zookler  remarks,  may  be  inchoative, 
and  so  be  rendered  "become  fond  of," 
instead  of  "be  fond  of."  But  it  appears 
to  represent  not  so  much  a  state  or  action 
first  coming  to  pass  as  in  progress  (see 
Geseuius,  'Gram.,'  §  126.  3).  Bottoher 
(§  948.  2)  translates  it  by  conowpiverint,  i.e. 
"  How  long  shall  ye  have  delighted  in  scorn- 
ing ?  "  The  futures  express  "  love "  and 
"hate"  as  habitual  sentiments  (Delitzsoh). 
It  ia  to  be  noted   that  the   language   of 


Wisdom,  in  verfl.  22  and  23,  is  expressiw 
of  the  most  tender  and  earnest  solicitude. 

Ver.  23. — Turn  you  at  my  reproof.  A  call 
is  here  made  to  repentance.  The  meaning 
seems  to  1)6  "  return  to  my  reproof,"  t.e.  place 
yourselves  under  my  reproof  (as  Gejerus, 
Delitzsch),  the  ^  being  represented  by  ad, 
as  in  the  Vulgate:  convertimini  ad  correp- 
tionem  meam.  It  is  susceptible,  however, 
of  a  different  reading,  ix.  "  in  consequence 
of,  or  because  of  (propter),  my  reproof,"  the 
prefix  ^  being  found  in  Kumb.  xvi.  34, 
"  They  fled  at  the  cry,"  t.e.  because  of  the 
cry.  Meproof  (nna'in,  ihoahalchath);  i.«.  re- 
buke, or  correction,  by  words.  The  LXX. 
i\iyXos  conveys  the  argumentative  con- 
viction which  will  be  present  in  the  reproof. 
The  word  occurs  again  in  vers.  23, 25,  and  30 
of  this  chapter,  and  also  in  ch.  iii.  11 ;  t.  12; 
vi.  23 ;  xxvii.  5 ;  xxix.  15.  Behold,  I  will 
pour  out  my  Spirit  unto  yon.  The  promise 
consequent  upon,  and  the  encouragement  to, 
repentance.  The  promise  is  conditioned — if 
those  addressed  will  heed  the  reproof  of 
Wisdom,  then  she  will  pour  forth  her  Spirit 
upon  them,  and  cause  them  to  know  her 
words.  The  \erh  hibhia  Ql'Si),  "to  stream 
forth,  or  gush  out,"  is  here  used  figuratively. 
The  outflow  of  the  Spirit  of  Wisdom  will  be 
like  the  abundant  and  continuous  gushing 
forth  of  water  from  the  spring  or  "fountain. 
The  verb  unites  in  it  the  figures  of  abundant 
fulness  and  refreshing  invigoration  (Umbreit, 
Elster);  comp.  oh.  xv.  2,  28;  Ps.  lix.  7; 
cxix.  171 ;  Eocles.  x.  1.  We  have  here  a 
striking  anticipation  of  the  prophecy  of  Joel 
(ii.  28).  The  Spirit  is  that  of  Wisdom  "  and 
understanding,  the  Spirit  of  counsel  and 
godly  strength,  the  Spirit  of  knowledge  and 
true  godliness"  (see  Confirmation  Office). 
The  explanation  of  Beda,  that  it  signifies 
her  anger,  is  clearly  inadmissible.  I  will 
make  ^own  my  words  onto  you ;  t.e.  as  the 
LXX.,  "I  will  teach  you  my  word"  (SiS({|ai), 
or  as  the  Vulgate  "show"  (ostendam),  "ex- 
pound, or  make  clear."  My  words  (d'vari)', 
i.e,  precepts,  or  doctrine,  or  secrets.  An  inti- 
mate relation  subsists  between  the  "  Spirit" 
of  Wisdom  and  her  "words,"  with  which  it 
is  parallel.  The  former  is  the  illuminating, 
invigorating  principle  which  infuses  life 
and  power  into  the  "words"  of  Wisdom, 
which  she  has  already  given,  and  which 
are  already  in  our  possession.  Wisdom 
stands  in  the  same  relation  to  her  words  as 
the  Divine  Logos  does  to  his  utterances, 
into  which  he  infuses  himself.  "It  is  the 
Spirit  that  quickeneth;  the  flesh  profiteth 
nothing :  the  words  that  I  speak  unto  yon, 
they  are  spirit,  and  they  are  life"  (John 
vi.  63.    See  Delitzsoh,  Wardlaw,  tn  loo.). 

Ver.  24.— Beoanse  I  have  called,  and  yo 
refused.    A  pause  may  be  imagined,  and 


OH.  1. 1 — 33.J 


THE  PE0VBRB3. 


IS 


seemB  to  be  .implied,  between  this  and  the 
preceding  verses  (22  and  23),  when  the  ad- 
dress passes  Into  a  new  phase — from  that  of 
invitation  and  promise  to  that  of  judgment 
and  stern  dennnciation  (vers.  24 — 27).  In 
the  subsection  the  antecedent  clauses  are 
vers.  24,  25,  introduced  by  the  conjunction 
•because"  (]r^, j/ao» ;  quia,  Vulgate), which 

expresses  the  reason  or  cause  for  the  con- 
clusion in  vers.  26  and  27,  introduced  by 
"  I  also,"  to  which  the  "  because  "  answers. 
A  similar  grammatical  construction  and 
judgment  is  to  be  found  in  Isaiah :  "  I  also 
will  choose  their  delusions,  and  will  bring 
their  fears  upon  them;  because  when  I  called, 
none  did  answer ;  when  X  spake,  they  did 
not.hear  "  (Isa.  Ixvi.  4 ;  see  also  Jer.  vii.  13). 
Refused ;  i.e.  refused  to  hearken,  as  signified 
in  the  LXX.  viraKoiiraTe,  I  have  stretched 
out  my  hand.  A  forensic  gesture  to  arrest 
attention.  The  expression  is  equivalent  to 
"  I  have  spread  out  my  hands  "  (Isa.  Ixv. 
2);  cf.  "Then  Paul  stretched  forth  the 
hand  {ixrelyas  tV  x^'P")"  (Acts  xxvi. 
1).  Begarded  (I'a'pn,  mak'shiv).  The  ori- 
ginal idea  of  the  verb  aB'jj  Qcathav),  used 
here,  is  that  of  erecting  or  pricking  up 
the  ear,  like  the  Latin  arrigere,  sc.  aures, 
in  Plant.,  '  Bud.,'  5.  2.  6  ;  and  cf.  "  arreotia- 
que  auribus  adstant"  (Virgil,  'jEneid,'  i. 
153). 

Ver.  25. — Ye  have  get  at  nought ;  ratlier, 
rejected  (Umbreit,  Bwald,  et  alii).  The 
Authorized  Version  rendering  here  is  eciui- 
Tocal,  inasmuch  as  it  is  capable  of  meaning 
"  despised,"  whereas  y ns  (para")  signifies  "  to 
let  loose,"  "to  let  go"  (cf.  the  German 
fahren  lasseri),  and  hence  "  to  overlook,  or 
reject."  Its  force  is  fairly  represented  in  the 
LXX..,  'Axipous  iiroieiTe  €/iiiis  j3ou\as,  "  Ye 
rendered  my  counsel  of  no  effect."  Counsel 
(DSSj  etsah);  i.e.  advice,  in  the  sense  of 
recommendations  for  doing  good,  as  opposed 
to  reproofs  for  the  avoidance  of  evil  (see 
vers.  23  and  30).  Would  none.  The  same 
verb,  n3N  (avah),  occurs  in  vers.  10  and  30, 
hence  used  with  the  negative  (4?  (lo)  in  the 
sense  of  direifleii/  (LXX.),  "  to  refuse  com- 
pliance with,"  aa  in  .Slschylus,  'Agam.,' 
1049. 

Ver.  26.— I  also  will  laugh  at  your 
calamity;  or,  more  accurately,  in  the  time 
of  your  calamity;  as  in  the  Vulgate,  in 
interitu  vestro  ridebo.  The  preposition  pre- 
fixed to  the  substantive  Veyd'chem  (037!}?) 
refers  to  the  time,  or  state,  or  condition 
(Gesenius,  'Gram.,'  154.  3).  In  the  time 
of  their  calamity  wisdom  will  exult  or 
lejoice.  The  LXX.,  Tp  i/ierepa  07rm\€iif 
imye\i(ronai,  however,  favours  the  rendering 
of  the  Authorized  Version.  Calamity  (tn, 
eyd)  is   heavy    overwhelming   misfortune. 


that  which  oppresses  and'crushes  its  victims. 
The  terrific  nature  of  the  punishment  of  the 
wicked  is  marked  by  a  succession  of  terms 
all  of  terrible  import — calamity,  fear,  desola- 
tion, destruction,  distress,  and  anguish  (vers. 
26,  27).  When  these  come  upon  them,  then 
Wisdom  will  laugh  and  have  thenr  in  de- 
rision. The  verbs  "laugh"  (pn'^,  sakhak) 
and  "  mock "  (igji,  laag)  are  the  same  as  in 
Ps.  ii.  4,  where  they  are  rendered  "  to 
mock  "  aud  "  have  in  derision."  When  your 
fear  cometh ;  i.e.  has  actually  arrived.  Fear 
(nns,  palilMd);  here  used  metonymically 
for  that  which  causes  the  fear  or  terror  (id, 
quod  timebatis,  Vulgate).  There  is  a  similar 
use  of  ip6^os  in  1  Pet.  iii.  14. 

Ver.  27. — When  your  fear  cometh  as  deso- 
lation. The  imagery  in  this  verse  is  borrowed 
from  nature — from  the  tempest  and  whirl- 
wind, which,  in  their  impetuous  fury,  involve 
all  in  irretrievable  ruin.  The  two  leading 
ideas  here  in  the  writer's  mind  are  calamity 
and  fear.  These — their  fear,  that  which 
causes  their  fear ;  and  their  destruction,  i.e. 
calamity — ^both  representing  Wisdom's,  and 
so  God's,  judgment,  will  come  on  sinners  as 
a  wasting  tempest  and  sweeping  hurricane. 
The  terror  and  devastation  caused  by  these 
latter  as  they  pass  over  the  face  of  uature 
are  employed  to  depict  the  alarm  and  ruin  of 
sinners.  Desolation;  niNtj;  (sJiaavali)  isa  wast- 
ing, crashing  tempest  (cf.  ch.  iii.  25 ;  Zeph. 
i.  15),  derived  from  nsa'  (shaah),  "  to  make  a 
crash,"  as  of  a  house  falling.  The  Vulgate 
reads,  repentura  calamitaa ;  the  LXX.,  SKpvai 
e6pvPos ;  both  bringing  out  the  idea  of  sud- 
denness, and  the  latter  that  of  the  uproar  of 
the  tempest.  The  Khetib,  or  traditional 
text  of  the  manuscripts  (nw»?),  is  equi- 
valent to  the  Keri,  or  emended  reading 
(n{!iK'3),  and  both  appear  to  have  the  same 
root-meaning.  Destruction  (TN,  eyd);  the 
same  as  "  calamity  "  in  the  preceding  verse. 
Whirlwind ;  nsiD  (suphah),  from  the  root  C)1D 

(supK),  "  to  snatch,  or  carry  away,"  means  a 
whirlwind  carrying  everything  before  it— 
the  Karaijls  of  the  LXX.,  or  hurricane,  as  in 
Arist.,  'Mund.,'  4. 16.  Distress  and  anguish 
(npai  nniB,  tsarah  v'tzukdh).  A  corre- 
sponding alliteration  occurs  in  Isa.  xxx.  6 
and  Zeph.  i.  15.  The  root-signification  of 
the  former  is  that  of  compression,  reproduced 
in  the  LXX.  exists,  and  the  Vulgate  triba- 
latio;  that  of  the  latter  is  narrowness. 
LXX.,  TToMopKia,  "a  beleaguering;"  Vul- 
gate, angustia.  The  LXX.  adds,  at  the 
close  of  this  verse,  fl  Srav  Ipxvrai  vfuv 
iXeBpos  as  explanatory. 

Ver.  28.— The  phase  which  the  address 
now  enters  upon  continues  to  the  thirty -first 
verse.  The  change  in  this  verse  from  the 
second  to  the  third  person  i*  striking.    It 


10 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[oh.  I.  1— 3a 


implies  that  Wisdom  thinks  fools  no  longer 
worthy  of  being  addressed  personally— 
''Quasi  stultos  indignos  censunt  vdterioii 
alloqiiio"  (Gejerns  and  Michaells).  Thede- 
claiation  is  the  eml)odiment  of  the  laughter 
and  scorn  of  ver.  26.  The  three  verbs, "  they 
shall  c&U,"  "they  shall  seek,"  "they  shall 
find,"  occur  in  uncommon  and  emphatic 
forms  in  the  original.  They  are  some 
out  of  the  few  instances  where  the  future 
terminations  are  inserted  fully  before  the 
pronominal  sufSx.  I  will  not  answer.  The 
distress  and  anguish  consequent  upon  their 
calamity  and  fear  lead  them  to  pray,  but 
there  will  be  no  answer  nor  heed  given  to 
their  cry.  They  are,  not  heard,  because 
they  do  not  cry  rightly  nor  in  the  time  of 
grace  (Lapide).  See  uie  striking  parallel 
to  the  tenor  of  this  passage  in  Luke  xiii. 
24 — 28.  They  shall  seek  me  early  ;  i.e.  dili- 
gently. The  verb  inK'  (ihalchar)  is  the  de- 
nominative from  the  substantive  "in»  (efta- 
har),  "the  dawn,  morning,"  and  signifies 
to  go  out  and  seek  something  in  the  ob- 
scurity of  the  morning  twilight  (Delitzsoh, 
Zookler),  and  hence  indicates  diligence 
and  earnestness  in  the  search.  Oesenius 
gives  the  same  derivation,  but  connects  it 
witli  the  dawn  in  the  sense  of  the  light 
breaking  forth,  and  thus,  as  it  were,  seeking 
(see  also  oh.  ii.  27 ;  vii.  15 ;  viii.  17 ;  Hos. 
V.  15). 

Vers.  29  and  30  belong  to  ver.  28,  and 
are  not  the  antecedent  clauses  to  ver.  31, 
as  Zoohler  reiiiaiks.  They  recapitulate  the 
charges  already  made  against  the  sinneis 
in  vers.  22  and  25,  and  now  set  them  forth 
as  the  ground  or  reason  why  Wisdom,  on 
her  part,  turns  a  deaf  ear  to  their  entreaties. 
Wisdom  will  disregard  them  because  they 
have  previously  disregarded  her.  The 
connection  is  denoted  in  (he  LXX.  by  yip, 
for  the  Hebrew  tahJtath  lei,  equivalent  to 
"  because,"  and  in  the  Authorized  Version 
by  the  punctuation.  Did  not  choose  the 
fear  of  the  Lord.  The  verb  "  to  chonse " 
("inj,  bahhar)  combines  in  itself  the  mean- 
ings of  eligere  and  diligere  (Fleischer),  and 
therefore  signifies  here  not  only  choice  of, 
but  also  the  fuller  sense  of  love  for,  the  fear 
of  the  Lord.  They  despised ;  i.e.  rejected  the 
reproof  with  scorn  or  derision,  sneered  or 
turned  up  their  noses  at  it  (/luKTrjpifeii', 
LXX.),  disparaged  it  (deirahere,  Vulgate), 
or,  more  strongly,  as  Gejerus  says,  execrated 
it.  Their  rejection  of  reproof  is  stigmatized 
in  stronger  terms  than  in  ver.  25. 

Ver.  31.— Therefore  they  shall  eat,  etc. 
A  further  enlargement  of  the  declaration  of 
Wisdom,  showing  that  their  calamity  ig  the 
result  of  their  own  ways.  The  futures  are 
resumed  in  the  original  from  ver.  28.  The 
word  "therefore"  doeB  not  occur,  bnt  it  ia 


met  with  in  the  LXX.,  roiyapovy;  in  tha 
Vulgate,  igilur;  and  in  the  Syriao,  idea. 
The  truth  here  expressed  is  accordant  with 
the  tenor  of  the  teaching  of  the  Scripture 
(comp.  oh.  xiv.  14;  ixii.  8;  Job  iv.  8; 
Isa.  iii.  10 ;  Gal.  vi.  7,  8),  and  with  our  daily 
experience  of  God's  moral  government  of 
the  world  (see  Butler,  'Analogy,'  part  i. 
ch.  ii.,  ad  fin.).  This  sentiment  of  retribu- 
tive punishment  also  found  expression  in 
Terence,  "  Tute  hoc  intiisti,  tibi  omne  est 
edendum"  ('Phorm.,'  2.  1.  4).  When  we 
are  punished,  the  blameworthiness  lies  not 
with  God,  but  with  us  sinners  (Wardlaw). 
They  shall  be  filled ;  rather,  satiated,  or  aur- 
feited ;  mturdbuntur  (Vulgate).  Tl le  verb  ya^ 
(ihava)  means  not  only  "  to  fill,"  but  "  to  be 
satiated  or  cloyed"  (cf.  ch,  xiv.  14  ;  xxv.  16; 
Pa.  Ixxxviii.  3;  cxxiii.  4).  Michaelis  re- 
marks on  this  word,  "  Ad  nauseam  imple- 
buntur  et  comedent,  ita  ut  consiliorum 
suorum  veliementer  tandem,  sed  nimis  sero, 
ipsos  poeniteat"  (Michaelis,  'Notaa  Ube- 
riores  in  Prov.'),  "  They  shall  be  filled  and 
eat  ad  nauseam,  so  tliat  at  length,  but  too 
late,  they  shall  vehemently  repent  them  of 
their  own  counsels."  Counsels  (nii'JJin,  moe- 
tsotJi);  i.e.  ungodly  counsels,  or  evil  devices. 
The  word  only  occurs  in  the  plural. 

Ver.  32. — Wisdom  now  brings  her  address 
to  a  close  by  contrasting  the  destruction  and 
ruin  of  the  foolish,  and  the  security  of  those 
who  listen  to  her  voice.  The  turning  away ; 
nniB'a  (m'shuvaK),  from  aw'  (shuv),  "  to  turn 
about,  or  to  return  "  (which  is  used  meta- 
phorically of  conversion),  here  means  defec- 
tion, turning  away ;  and  hence  apostasy 
(aversin,  Vulgate,  Chaldee  Paraphrase,  Sy- 
riac;  perveraitio.  Cast.  Version);  the  "back- 
sliding "  of  Jer.  viii.  5 ;  Hos.  xi.  7.  Aben 
Ezra  understands  it  to  signify  "  ease,"  as 
in  the  marginal  reading ;  but  there  seems  no 
warrant  for  taking  the  word  in  that  sense. 
The  LXX.  renders  the  passage  quite  difier- 
ently,  'Ave'  S>v  yip  T}SlKovy  in)irlovs,  ipovfvBi]- 
aovTai, "  For  because  they  wronged  the  young, 
they  shall  be  slain ; "  so  also  the  Arabic. 
The  turning  away  is  from  the  warnings  and 
invitations  of  Wisdom,  and  implies  rebel- 
liousness against  God.  The  prosperity.  The 
word  in  the  original  (ni^»',  thal'vaV)  is 
here  used  in  a  bad  sense,  and  means  "  care- 
lessness, indolence,"  that  carnal  security 
wliich  is  induced  by  prosperity  and  worldly 
success,  as  in  Jer.  xxii.-21,  "1  spoke  to  thee 
in  thy  prosperity  (security),  but  thou  saidst, 
I  will  not  hear"  (of.  Ezek.  xvi.  49,  where  it 
is  translated  "idleness."  So  Dathe  trans- 
lates, "  Incuria  ignavorum  eos  perdit."  The 
Ohalilee  Paraphrase  and  Syriac  Versions 
read  "  error."  It  occurs  in  a  good  sense  aa 
"  tranquillity,"  "  security,"  in  ch.  xvil  1  and 
Ps.  cixii,  7,    The  derivation  of  the  word  ii 


OH.  1. 1—33.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


17 


from  n^^  (thalcth),  "to  be  tranquil,  to  be 
safe,  secure."  Mariana  remarks  that  it  ia 
more  difficult  to  bear  prosperity  tlian  adver- 
sity, because  we  endure  adversity,  we  are 
corrupted  by  prosperity,  and  prosperity  or 
ease  makes  fools  mad.  The  false  security  of 
the  prosperous  is  illustrated  by  our  Lord  in 
his  parable  of  the  rich  fool  (Luke  xii.  16 — 
21)  The  LXX.  differs  again  from  the 
Hebrew  in  the  second  clause  of  tliis  vtrse, 
Kol  i^eToiriids  ao-E/Seis  dhei;  i.e.  the  carefully 
considered  judgment  of  God  conceruing 
them  shall  deatioy  them.  The  LXX.  is 
followed  by  the  Arabic.  Them;  i.e.  the 
fools  themselves,  and  not  otiier  sinners,  as 
Ben  Ezra  says,  though  the  apparent  security 
of  fools,  tlie  impunity  with  which  they 
seem  to  go  on  in  their  wickedness,  and  the 
success  of  their  plans,  may  lead  others  to 
destruction. 

Ver.  33. — Hearkeneth  unto  me.  Wisdom, 
in  closing  her  address,  draws  a  beautiful 
picture  of  the  real  security  and  peace  of  the 
righteous,  as  contrasted  with  the  false 
security  of  tlie  wicked.  As  on  the  one  side 
rejection  of  her  counsels,  her  warnings,  and 
invitations,  carries  with  it  punishment  and 
irretrievable  ruin ;  so,  on  the  other,  the 
hearkening  to  her  words,  and  loving  obedi- 
ence, are  rewarded  by  her  with  the  choicest 
blessings.  Shall  dwell  safely  ;  that  is,  with 
confidence,  without  danger  (absqiie  terrore, 
Vulgate).     The  phrase,  -joa  ]3f  (shaehan 


betakh),  is  used  in  Deut.  xzxiii.  12— 18o{ 
the  safety  with  which  the  covenant  people 
should  dwell  in  the  land  that  Ood  had  given 
them ;  but  it  is  capable  of  a  further  exten- 
sion of  meaning  beyond  mere  temporal 
security,  viz.  to  the  spiritual  peace  of  the 
righteous.  The  psalmist  also  employs  it  to 
describe  the  confidence  with  which  he  awaits 
the  resurrection,  when  he  says,  "My  flesh  also 
shall  rest  in  hope  [or,  '  dwell  confidently  ']  " 
(Ps.  xvi.  9).  So  here  Wisdom  promises 
that  he  who  hearkens  to  her  shall  dwell 
calmly  and  undisturbed  amidst  the  distrac- 
tions of  the  world.  Thepromise  agrees  with 
the  description  of  Wisdom  elsewhere  that 
"  her  ways  are  ways  of  pleasantness,  and  all 
her  paths  are  peace."  And  shall  be  quiet 
(IJW,  shaanan,  perfect  pile!).  Wisdom 
regards  her  assurance  as  already  accom- 
plished, and  hence  the  perfect  in  the  original 
is  used  for  the  future.  The  hearers  and  doers 
of  her  will  shall  live  in  tranquillity ;  nay, 
they  are  already  doing  so.  It  is  a  thing  not 
oidy  in  prospect,  but  in  posgession.  From 
fear  of  evil ;  i.e.  either  without  any  fear  of 
evil,  fear  being  removed  (timore  sublato, 
Vulgate),  or,  as  the  Authorized  Version 
expresses  it,  connecting  the  phrase  more 
intimately  with  the  verb — "  quiet  from  fear 
of  evil."  It  is  not  only  evil,  nyi  (raah),  In  its 
substantial  form,  as  calamity,  they  are  to  be 
free  from,  but  even  the  fear  of  it.  The  tran- 
quillity will  be  supreme.  , 


H0MILETIC3. 

Yer.  6 Proverbs.     It  is  not  surprising  to  see  that  proverbs,  which  are  found  more 

or  less  in  the  traditional  lore  of  almost  all  nations,  and  flourish  most  abmidantly  in 
the  East,  also  er)ter  into  the  circle  of  the  inspired  Uterature  of  the  Jews.  The  general 
characteristics  of  this  portion  of  the  sacred  Scriptures  are  well  worthy  of  our  study. 

I  The  proverbs  are  all  conoisb  utterances.  In  the  present  age,  when  time  is 
more  precious  than  ever,  it  is  to  be  wished  that  public  teachers  would  correct  their 
prolixity  by  following  the  example  of  these  sa.v  ings,  which  certamly  contam  ■  the  soul 
of  wit "  1.  The  conciseness  of  the  proverbs  renders  them  striking.  It  is  not  enough 
to  state  a  truth;  we  must  make  it  tell.  Men's  ears  are  dull  to  spiritual  ideas.  In 
ofder  to  penetrate,  words  must  have  point,  inoisivenesa,  force.  2.  The  conciseness  also 
greatly  assists  memory.  Proverbs  can  be  handed  from  one  to  another  like  coins.  A 
truth  that  is  worth  uttering  is  worth  remembering.  ^ 

II  Many  of  the  proverbs  are  illustrative  sayings.  They  are  figures.  Ihe 
proverb  runs  into  the  parable ;  indeed,  a  parable  is  but  an  expanded  proverb.  Eithei 
by  way  of  arbitrary  illustration,  or  by  reason  of  real  correspondence  between  the 
material  and  the  spiritual  nature,  a  proverb  will  often  afford  lessons  of  spiritual  truth 
which  are  more  fresh  and  interesting  than  bare  abstract  statements  The  popular 
mind  naturally  turns  to  the  concrete.  What  strikes  the  senses  is  felt  tobe  most 
forcible.  How  well  our  Lord  knew  this  fact  of  human  nature,  and  how  graciously  he 
Undescended  to  accommodate  himself  to  it,  is  seen  in  his  own  rich  PCture-^alle^y 
of  parabolic  teaching.  He  who  can  discern  "  sermons  in  stones  "and  '<  book,  in  the 
runnin"  brooks  "  will  have  his  eyes  opened  to  see  "  good  in  everything. 

IIL  Some  of  the  proverbs  are  suggestive  rather  than  direct  teachings.  Ihey 
are  "dark  sayings  "-possibly  because  the  truth  is  so  profound  that  it  can  only  be 

PBOVEEBS. 


18  THE   PROVERBS.  [oh.  i.  1—SS. 


approached  by  those  who  grope  after  it  in  difficult  research.  But  more  simple  truth 
may  be  wrapped  in  enigmatic  phrases  for  the  express  purpose  of  testing  the  genuineness 
of  the  desire  to  possess  it,  exciting  interest,  exercising  the  powers  of  thought  in  the 
learner,  and  becoming  itself  a  more  intelligible  and  more  valuable  thing  when  it  is 
once  found  (see  Matt.  xiii.  10—17).  Let  no  man  think  that  the  best  treasures  of 
thought  are  scattered  prodigally  on  the  surface  of  life  for  swine  to  trample  underfoot. 
They  lie  deep,  and  must  often  be  sought  with  toil  and  anguish  of  soul.  Tet  to  the 
honest  seeker  after  light,  if  only  he  follow  the  Light  of  the  world,  it  will  surely  dawn, 
though  for  a  season 

"  The  intellectual  power,  through  words  and  things, 
Went  sounding  on,  a  dim  and  perilous  way." 

rV.  The  peoveebs  tebat  of  human  conduct.  1.  Next  to  theology,  the  highest 
knowledge  is  that  of  human  Mfe  and  duty.  The  triumphs  of  physical  discovery  seem 
to  have  thrown  us  into  the  opposite  extreme  from  that  to  which  Socrates  tended. 
Surely  whatever  other  studies  we  may  pursue,  "  the  proper  study  of  mankind  is  man." 
!No  other  topic  is  more  profoundly  interesting,  none  requires  so  much  light,  none  is  so 
replete  with  practical  issues.  2.  The  wisdom  of  the  proverbs  is  practical.  It  deals 
with  conduct — which,  as  Mr.  Matthew  Arnold  says,  "  is  three-fourths  of  life."  What 
we  know  is  of  service  to  us  chiefly  as  it  affects  what  we  do.  3.  This  wisdom  concerns 
itself  with  the  moral  and  religious  guides  to  practice.  We  find  here  no  Machiavellian 
maxims  of  dishonest  expediency,  no  mere  worldly  advice  in  the  school  of  Lord  Chester- 
field, no  Jesuistic  casuistry.  Righteousness  among  men  and  the  fear  of  God  are  the 
leading  principles  set  forth.  The  least  exalted  precepts  are  pure  and  honest.  The 
highest  reach  the  level  of  Christian  ethics.  Though  much  of  the  Book  of  Proverbs  falls 
short  of  the  lofty  requirements  of  the  New  Testament,  many  passages  in  it  read  like 
anticipations  of  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount.  Thus  are  we  taught  that  the  highest 
wisdom  is  one  with  the  purest  morality  and  the  noblest  religion. 

V.  The  pkoveebs  originated  in  wisdom,  and  need  wisdom  foe  their  inteeprb- 
TATION.  They  are  words  of  the  wise.  Inspiration  does  not  dispense  with  intelligence ; 
it  quickens  it.  Wisdom  is  itself  a  gift  of  the  Spirit  of  God  (Jas.  i.  5).  The  most 
simple  truth  is  often  the  product  of  the  most  difficult  thinking  which  has  triumphed  in 
thus  making  plain  what  was  previously  obscure.  Let  us  see,  however,  that  the  clear 
utterance  is  a  word  of  the  wise ;  for  there  is  a  tendency  to  accept  a  saying  because 
of  its  neat  and  apt  form,  without  regard  to  its  truth  or  falseness.  Wisdom  is  therefore 
needed  in  understanding  proverbs  and  in  "  discerning  spirits."  It  is  not  enough  that 
the  giammarian  explains  the  words.  Higher  wisdom  is  necessary  to  see  where  the 
isolated  truth  fits  into  other  truths,  by  what  it  is  qualified,  and  how  it  is  to  be  applied ; 
for  it  is  one  of  the  disadvantages  of  the  proverb  that  its  very  terseness  gives  to  it 
an  unnatural  isolation,  and  excludes  the  addition  of  counterbalancing  truths. 

Ver.  7. — The  relation  of  religion  to  knowledge.  "  The  fear  of  the  Lord  "  being  the 
most  common  Old  Testament  name  for  religion,  we  must  take  it  here  in  its  large  and 
general  sense,  and  understand  that  religion  in  all  its  relations  is  set  forth  as  the  true 
basis  of  knowledge ;  though  it  may  well  be  that  awe  and  reverence  for  the  majesty  and 
mystery  of  God  have  a  special  prominence  in  regard  to  the  pursuit  of  truth. 

I.  Religion  is  an  important  requisite  foe  the  acquisition  of  all  kinds  o» 
KNOWLEDGE.  Religion — not  theology — claims  this  position.  The  progress  of  science 
was  arrested  for  a  thousand  years  by  the  claims  of  theology  to  dominate  all  regions  of 
inquiry.  Theology,  or  human  speculations  about  Divine  things,  is  the  most  difficult, 
and  therefore  in  many  respects  the  most  uncertain,  of  all  the  sciences.  When  the 
schoolmen  made  the  dogmatic  assumptions  of  patristic  theology,  combined  with  elaborate 
deductions  from  Aristotelian  philosophy,  the  touchstone  of  all  truth,  they  set  up  an 
impenetrable  barrier  before  the  investigation  of  nature.  Even  when  theologicsJ  dicta 
are  absolutely  true,  it  is  irrelevant  to  bring  these  to  bear  upon  physical  science. 
Unquestionably  Bacon  did  a  great  service  to  the  cause  of  truth  in  banishing  final  causes 
from  the  science  of  nature.  But  the  relation  of  religion  to  science  is  of  a  totally 
different  nature.  That  relation  consists  in  the  influence  that  religious  experience, 
religious  charac'-.er,  religious  feelings  and  motives,  must  necessarily  have  upon  scientiflo 


OH.  1. 1—33.]  THE  PROVERBS.  19 

research.  Religion  influences  all  life;  intellectual  lif<»  is  no  exception.  1.  Religion 
should  excite  the  thirst  for  truth.  It  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  religion  inclines  to 
indolence  and  ignorance.  It  inspires  all  the  noblest  endeavours.  It  is  on  the  side 
of  light  and  truth.  Rightly  understood,  it  will  impose  the  pursuit  of  science  as  a  duty. 
Without  religion  this  pursuit  is  too  likely  to  be  followed  only  from  more  inclination, 
or  possibly  for  ends  of  self-interest.  2.  Religion  tends  to  induce  the  most  wholesome 
scientific  temper.  There  is  great  ri'semblance  between  the  Christian  graces  and  the  special 
dispositions  requisite  for  the  successful  discovery  of  truth.  The  Sermon  on  the  Mounl 
contains  the  best  possible  precepts  for  the  character  of  the  model  man  of  science. 
Loyalty  to  truth,  unselfishness  in  sacrificing  prejudices  and  crotchets,  justice  to  the 
work  of  rivals,  diligence  in  uninteresting  but  needful  inquiries,  patience  in  waiting  for 
solid  results,  conscientiousness  in  refraining  from  mere  sensationalism,  humility  in 
confessing  the  smallness  of  the  area  really  conquered,  calmness  and  generosity  under 
criticism,  are  among  the  most  essential  requisites  for  the  pursuit  of  science,  and  they  are 
among  the  best  fruits  of  religion.  3.  Religion  tends  to  open  the  eyes  to  truth.  It  raises 
us  from  the  gross  animalism  which  is  intellectual  death.  Elevating  the  whole  man,  it 
enlarges  the  intellect. 

II.  Religion  is  the  necessary  foundation  of  spiritual  knowlbdoe.  This  fact 
agrees  with  the  great  modern  doctrine  of  inductive  philosophy.  Experience  is  the  basis 
of  knowledge.  To  know  God  we  must  have  personal  relations  with  him.  Spiritual 
truths  in  regard  to  human  life  depend  on  the  same  Source.  We  must  do  the  command- 
ment in  order  to  know  the  doctrine.  Indeed,  there  is  a  constant  interaction  between 
knowledge  and  experience — every  enlargement  of  experience  increasing  our  knowledge, 
and  every  increment  of  knowledge  throwing  light  on  our  way  for  future  experience ; 
till,  in  consequence  of  these  two  processes,  we  rise,  as  one  has  said,  by  a  sort  of  "  spiritual 
spiral,"  to  the  coexistent  perfection  of  knowledge  and  of  character.  Our  independence 
upon  an  external  and  superhuman  revelation  for  our  knowledge  of  Divine  things  is  no 
exception  to  this  principle,  as  two  considerations  will  show.  1.  Revelation  was  first 
vouchsafed  through  religious  men.  The  fear  of  God  was  the  beginning  of  knowledge 
in  the  prophets ;  the  love  of  Christ  is  its  basis  in  the  apostles.  Nebuchadnezzar  could 
not  have  written  the  prophecies  of  Isaiah,  nor  could  Judas  have  written  St.  John's 
Gospel.  2.  Bevelation  can  only  be  understood  by  religious  men.  A  bad  man  may  be  a 
good  verbal  commentator,  but  the  essential  truth,  the  spirit  which  quickens  as  dis- 
tinguished from  the  "  letter  that  killeth,"  can  only  be  discerned  by  those  who  are  in 
sympathy  with  it,  because  "  spiritual  things  are  spiritually  discerned." 

Ver.  10. — Temptation.  I.  How  the  temptation  combs.  1.  From  sinners.  (1)  It 
comes  from  without.  The  evil  of  our  own  hearts  inclines  us  to  sin  ;  but  were  we  per- 
fectly innocent  we  could  not  escape  temptation.  The  serpent  was  a  denizen  of  Eden. 
Christ  the  Sinless  One  was  tempted.  The  sights  and  sounds  of  the  wicked  world  pene- 
trate to  the  most  carefully  guarded  soul.  (2)  The  temptation  is  furnished  by  those 
who  have  themselves  succumbed  to  sin.  It  is  sinners  who  tempt.  Sin  is  contagions. 
The  worst  sin  is  that  of  those  who,  hke  Jeroboam,  "  make  Israel  to  sin."  The  bad  man 
has  terrible  power  for  harm.  Example,  social  influence,  friendship,  favour  his  designs. 
2.  By  enticements.  Sin  is  made  to  be  attractive;  and  it  is  most  important  for  all  of 
us  to  know  that  there  are  pleasures  in  sin,  in  order  that  we  may  not  be  surprised  at  the 
discovery  of  them.  The  fruit  is  palatable,  though,  like  apples  of  Sodom,  it  soon  turns 
to  ashes.  If  it  were  not  so,  who  would  run  the  risk  of  tasting  it?  If  stolen  waters 
were  not  sweet,  who  would  choose  to  wear  the  brand  of  a  thief  on  his  conscience? 
Herein  is  the  great  power  of  temptation.  By  slow  degrees  and  soft  inducements  the 
evil  is  wrought.  The  subtle  serpent  succeeds  where  the  roaring  lion  fails.  Delilah 
conquers  the  man  whom  no  Philistine  warrior  could  overthrow. 

"  Devils  soonest  tempt,  resembling  spirits  of  light." 

n  How  THE  temptation  IS  TO.  BE  MET.  "  Conscnt  thou  not."  Let  no  man  deem 
himself  the  helpless  victim  of  temptation.  "  God  is  faithful,  who  will  not  sufi'er  you 
to  be  tempted  above  that  ye  are  able,"  etc.  (1  Cor.  x.  13).  We  have  wills.  We  can  say 
"  Yes  "  and  "  No."  We  are  not  responsible  for  meeting  with  temptation,  smce  even  Christ 
felt  the  cruel  force  of  this  trial,  but  we  are  responsible  for  the  way  we  behave  under  it. 


20  THE  PEOVEBBS.  [ch.  i.  1—3 


"  'Tjs  one  thing  to  be  tempted, 
Another  thing  to  fall." 
Now,  the  resistance  to  temptation  must  be  immediate  and,  thorough.  The_  tempter 
entices  by  gentle  degrees,  but  the  tempted  must  resist  at  once  and  with  decision.  He 
must  not  begin  with  the  "  retort  courteous,"  but  with  "  the  lie  direct."  There  is  some- 
thing brusque  about  the  advice,  "consent  thou  not,"  very  different  in  tone  from  the 
polite  enticing  manner  of  the  tempter.  Yet  this  is  necessary,  for  all  that  is  wanted  by 
the  tempter  is  compliance — no  active  exercise  of  will,  but  a  passive  yielding.  The 
rusistance,  however,  must  be  active.    The  greatest  danger  is  in  dallying  with  temptation. 

"  Lie  in  the  lap  of  sin,  and  not  mean  harm  ? 
It  is  hypocrisy  against  the  devil : 
They  that  mean  virtuously,  and  yet  do  bo. 
The  devil  their  vbtue  tempts,  and  they  tempt  Heaven.* 

The  difficulty  is  to  give  a  decided  negative.  With  some  people  the  hardest  word  to 
say  is  "  No."  Kemember :  1.  There  is  a  Divine  grace  to  which  we  can  appeal  for  aid 
in  temptation,  and  a  Saviour  who  can  succour  (Heb.  ii.  18).  2.  We  can  best  keep 
out  sin,  not  by  bare  expulsion  of  the  spirit  of  evil,  leaving  the  soul  empty,  swept,  and 
garnished,  and  therefore  ready  for  the  advent  of  worse  sins,  but  by  filling  our  thoughts 
and  affections  with  pure  and  worthy  objects,  by  overcoming  evil  with  good. 

Vers.  20—23. — The  gospel  call.  This  cry  of  Wisdom  is  a  sort  of  evangel  of  the  Old 
Testament  religion.  It  is  an  anticipation  of  the  gracious  invitation  subsequently  put 
forth  by  the  Christian  truth.  That,  too,  is  a  cry  of  Wisdom ;  for  is  not  Christ  the 
"Wisdom  of  God"  (1  Cor.  i.  24),  and  "  made  unto  us  Wisdom"  (1  Cor.  i  30)?  We 
of  the  latter  times,  therefore,  may  hear  in  the  preaching  of  Solomon  the  call  of  the 
glorious  gospel  of  the  blessed  God. 

L  The  ohabaoteb  of  the  call.  It  is  a  cry,  a  loud  utterance,  arresting  attention, 
arousing  the  thoughtless.  Elsewhere  we  read  that  wisdom  must  be  sought  for  like  hid 
treasures  (ch.  ii.  4),  and  her  most  precious  gifts  are  always  reserved  for  diligent  inquirers. 
But  before  she  is  found,  she  calls.  Though  the  choicest  blessings  of  Christ  may  be  _ 
pearls  to  be  had  only  after  long  search,  his  call  to  us  is  antecedent  to  our  desire  to 
obtain  them,  God  does  not  wait  for  us  to  return  to  him  before  he  shows  a  willingness 
to  welcome  us.  He  calls  at  once  in  his  revelation  of  truth.  It  is  the  duty  of  Christians 
to  take  up  and  repeat  this  call,  to  be  heralds  of  a  public  truth,  not  jealous  guardians 
of  an  esoteric  doctrine. 

II.  The  scene  op  the  call.  1.  Without.  Before  the  truth  can  be  enjoyed  in  the 
heart  it  must  be  heard  from  without.  It  is  not  reserved  for  the  initiated.  It  is 
declared  in  the  open.  2.  In  the  streets.  The  gospel  meets  men  in  their  busy  lives. 
The  streets  and  lanes  must  be  scoured  to  furnish  guests  for  the  King's  feast.  The  call 
is  too  gracious  to  contain  itself  in  the  conventicle  of  the  elect.  Free  as  the  air,  it  aims 
to  reach  all.  The  faithful  preacher  of  the  gospel  must  seek  men  in  their  haunts, 
not  wait  till  they  come  to  his  snug  retreat.  3.  In  the  chief  place  of  concourse.  The 
gospel  courts  inquiry,  it  declares  itself  in  the  full  light  of  day,  it  challenges  comparison 
with  all  earthly  voices.  Let  us  not  think  that  it  can  only  live  in  conventual  seclusion. 
It  boldly  claims  a  place  in  the  busiest  life  of  the  world.  If  it  cannot  hold  its  own  there, 
It  is  worthless.  If  Christians  had  more  faith  in  it,  they  would  be  less  afraid  to  bring 
this  truth  into  all  possible  relations  with  science,  politics,  business,  recreation.  But 
alas !  our  ears  are  dull,  and  often  when  the  voice  of  Wisdom  is  lifted  up  clear  and 
kindly,  it  is  drowned  in  the  coarse  din  of  worldly  commotion, 

III.  The  persoks  called.  Simple  ones,  scorners,  fools.  Divine  wisdom  is  healing 
wisdom.  It  is  not  so  much  a  reward  to  the  wise  as  instruction  for  the  foolish. 
Earthly  wisdom  comes  most  readily  to  those  who  are  most  advanced.  The  gospel 
of  Christ  seeks  the  ignorant,  the  wayward,  the  fallen. 

IV.  The  way  to  receive  the  call.  "  Turn  you."  It  is  not  enough  to  hear,  ws 
TOUst  answer ;  and  to  answer  is  to  obey,  for  the  call  is  an  invitation ;  and  to  obey  is  to 
turn  and  repent,  for  the  gospel  of  the  holy  Christ  must  be  a  reproof  to  sinners.  This 
gospel  can  be  of  no  avail' to  us  until  we  come  to  ourselves,  turn  our  backs  on  our  old 
ufe,  and  arise  and  go  to  our  Fatl  er. 


OH.  1.1— 330  THE  PEOVEEBS.  21 

V.  The  blbssino  promised — the  outpouring  of  the  Divine  Spirit.  All  Divine  wisdom 
is  an  inspiration.  Christ  the  Wisdom  of  God  can  only  be  received  as  we  are  baptized 
with  the  Holy  Spirit.  Thus  we  receive  light,  love,  purity,  peace,  strength,  and  eternal 
life. 

Vers.  24 — 30. — Left  to  their  doom.  Broad  and  encouraging  as  are  the  promises  of 
Divine  grace,  if  we  forget  the  darker  facts  of  life  we  shall  be  deluded  into  a  false 
security ;  for  nothing  could  be  more  unreasonable  than  to  suppose  that  the  mercy  of 
God  takes  no  account  of  moral  considerations.  Legally  our  sovereign  is  vested  with 
an  unfettered  right  of  pardoning  every  criminal,  but  principles  of  justice  and  public 
order  put  great  restraints  upon  the  exercise  of  such  a  right.  Bald  representations  of 
prayer  as  a  means  for  securing  immediate  deliverance  from  trouble,  and  especially  as  a 
sure  door  of  escape  from  the  consequences  of  sin,  are  as  false  as  they  are  shallow.  It  is 
most  important  that  we  should  know  under  what  circumstances  God  will  reject  the 
prayer  of  his  troubled  children  and  leave  them  to  their  doom. 

I.  Ak  obstinate  bejbction  of  God's  invitations  and  counsels.  No  word  is 
here  said  of  the  great  mass  of  the  heathen  world,  who  have  never  heard  the  full 
declaration  of  God's  will.  Clearly  it  is  implied  that  such  men  do  not  come  under 
the  same  condemnation  as  that  of  the  persons  immediately  referred  to.  For  the  special 
accusation  is  based  on  the  rejection  of  the  overtures  of  grace,  which  must  have  been 
known  to  have  been  refused.  The  guilt  of  this  rejection  may  be  measured  in  two 
directions.  1.  By  the  character  of  the  Divine  voice.  (1)  It  was  an  invitation,  not 
a  mere  declaration  of  truth.  "  I  have  called."  (2)  It  was  a  persuading.  "  I  have 
stretched  out  my  hand."  (3)  It  was  a  warning.  "Counsel"  and  "reproof"  are 
referred  to.  The  sin  was  plainly  demonstrated,  the  danger  clearly  revealed.  To  reject 
such  a  Divine  message  is  no  slight  error.  2.  By  the  character  of  the  rejection  itself. 
(1)  It  was  an  obstinate  refusal.  There  was  no  indecision.  But,  practically,  not  to 
decide  to  obey  the  voice  of  God  is  to  decide  to  rebel  against  him.  (2)  It  was  an 
insulting  indifference.  "  No  man  regarded."  They  refused,  and  went  on  their  own 
ways,  to  their  farms  and  merchandise  and  pleasure,  without  further  thought. 

II.  A   OEY    FOE   deliverance    FROM    TROUBLE   WITHOUT   EEPENTANCB   OF  SIN.      The 

simple  ingratitude  of  sin  would  be  no  barrier  to  the  full  exercise  of  "God's  pardon  in 
Christ  if  it  were  hated  and  repented  of,  for  "  he  is  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost,"  etc. 
But  without  repentance  the  smallest  sin  cannot  be  forgiven.  And  repentance  is  not 
the  mere  feeling  of  distress  at  the  consequence  of  sin— every  sane  and  sentient  being 
would  have  that  feeling ;  nor  is  it  a  mere  regret  that  the  wrong  thing  was  done  now 
its  horrible  fruits  are  ripening.  It  must  be  a  hearty  abhorrence  of  the  wickedness 
itself  and  a  gentiine  desire  to  do  nothing  of  the  kind  in  the  future.  The  dying  sinner 
who  is  appalled  at  his  future  prospects,  and  shrieks  for  deliverance  from  the  powers  of 
hell,  will  not  be  heard,  but  will  be  left  to  his  fate,  and  most  reasonably  so,  if  he  has 
experienced  no  moral  change,  and  feels  no  compunctions  of  conscience,  but  would  do 
all  his  vile  deeds  over  again  if  only  he  could  ensure  himself  against  the  just  penalties  of 
them. 

in.  An  ATTEMPT  TO  ESCAPE  FROM  THE  INEVITABLE.  The  earthly  consequencos  of 
sin  are  many  of  them  fixed  immutably  by  laws  of  nature.  Prayer  will  not  heal  the 
shattered  constitution  of  the  drunkard,  nor  restore  the  squandered  fortune  of  the  spend- 
thrift, nor  recover  the  lost  reputation  of  the  thief.  No  doubt  many  spkitual  conse- 
quences of  sin  are  also  inevitable,  and,  though  God  may  pardon  the  sinner,  he  will  take 
vengeance  on  his  devices.  But  when  there  is  true  penitence  and  trust  in  the  mercy  of 
God,  the  incidence  of  the  calamity  is  shifted,  though  the  calamity  itself  is  not  altered, 
BO  that  it  comes  as  wholesome  chastisement,  and  is  then  not  laughed  at  by  the  Divine 
wisdom,  but  graciously  overruled  for  the  discipline  of  the  penitent. 

Ver.  31. — Punishment  the  natural  fruit  of  sin.  The  punishment  of  sin  is  not  an 
arbitrary  penalty,  but  a  natural  consequence.  It  follows  by  laws  of  nature.  It  needs 
no  executioner.  The  sin  works  out  its  own  doom.  This  thought  may  be  regarded 
from  two  points  of  view.  Prom  the  standpoint  of  nature  it  is  a  proof  that  Divine 
justice  does  not  abrogate,  but  works  through  natural  laws.  From  the  spiritual  side 
it  is  an  evidence  that  God  has  planted  his  moral  laws  in  the  very  constitution  of  the  world. 


22  THE  PEO VERBS.  [oh.  1.1—33. 

I.  Sin  BBAE8  PEUiT.  Nothing  really  perishes.  Deeds  live  on  in  their  consequences. 
Evil  is  not  simply  negative ;  there  is  a  terribly  active  and  even  vital  power  in  it.  Its 
vitality  may  be  of  a  diseased,  destructive  order,  like  that  of  the  cancer  that  grows  and 
spreads  to  the  death  of  the  body  in  which  it  is  imbedded;  but  it  is  none  the  less 
vigorous  and  euduring. 

II.  The  fkuit  of  sin  has  a  natural  affinity  to  the  stock  peom  which  it 
SPRINGS.  The  consequences  of  a  sin  have  an  inherent  resemblance  to  the  sin.  As 
the  Beatitudes  are  specially  related  to  the  graces  they  crown,  so  the  curses  of  evil  have 
close  relations  to  particular  forms  of  evil.  Each  sin  bears  its  own  fruit.  Hatred 
provokes  hatred;  selfishness  leads  to  isolation;  falsehood  engenders  distrust. 

III.  The  feuit  of  sin  is  beyond  oue  conteol.  We  are  free  to  sow  the  seed  or  to 
refrain ;  we  are  not  free  to  arrest  the  growth  of  the  tree.  A  deed  once  dune  is  not  only 
irretrievable,  but  it  passes  out  of  our  power  while  it  lives  on  to  work  out  perpetual 
consequences.     It  may  become  a  Frankenstein,  iiorribly  tynmnizing  over  its  creator. 

IV.  The  feuit  of  sin  must  be  eaten  by  the  binnee.  It  will  come  back  to  him 
when  it  is  ripe.  There  may  be  a  long  interval  between  the  sowing  of  the  seed  and  the 
gathering  of  the  fruit,  but  the  sower  wiU  have  to  devour  the  harvest.  Herein  is  the 
peculiar  horror  of  the  doom  of  sin.  Though  a  man  would  fain  forget  the  past,  it 
returns  in  the  dreadful  resemblance  it  bears  to  its  consequences,  now  fully  developed 
and  revealed  in  true  colours.  Nauseous  and  poisonous,  it  must  not  only  be  witnessed, 
but  eaten.  He  will  have  to  receive  it  in  his  own  life,  in  most  close  and  intimate  union 
with  himself. 

Conclusion.  1.  Let  us  beware  of  the  thoughtless  sowing  which  must  lead  to  f 
fearful  a  harvest.  2.  Let  us  lay  hold  of  the  hope  oi  redemptioa  in  Christ  through 
which  our  sins  may  be  buried  in  the  depths  of  the  sea. 

Ver.  32. — Fatal  prosperity.  It  is  certainly  not  incumbent  on  the  Christian  preacher 
to  maintain  that  prosperity  is  in  itself  an  evil.  This  would  involve  a  strange  paradox, 
since  it  must  be  confessed  that  we  all  desire  prosperity  by  natural  instinct,  and  seek  it 
in  seme  form,  and  when  we  have  met  with  it  are  exhorted  to  be  thankful  for  it;  all  of 
wbich  things  would  need  to  be  deprecated  if  prosperity  were  essentially  evil.  So  far  is 
it  from  beinj;  tlius  represented  in  the  Bible,  that  the  Old  Testament  regards  it  as  the 
reward  of  righteousness,  and  the  New  Testament  as  less  important  indeed  and  more 
full  of  danger,  yet  still  as  something  to  be  enjoyed  gratefully  (see  1  Tim.  iv,  4).  But 
experience  and  revelation  both  warn  us  that  it  brings  peculiar  perils  and  temptations, 
and  that  there  are  some  people  to  whom  it  is  nothing  less  than  fatal. 

I.  Considee  who  aeb  the  persons  to  whom  prospeeity  is  most  fatal.  It  does 
not  affect  all  alike.  One  man  can  stand  calmly  on  a  steep  height  where  another  reels 
with  giddiness.  The  success  which  is  fatal  to  one  may  develop  magnanimous  qualities 
in  another.  It  is  not  all  prosperity,  but  the  prosperity  of  fools,  that  is  destructive. 
The  character  of  the  men  rather  than  the  inherent  evil  of  the  thing  determines  its 
effects.  Note  some  of  the  characters  most  injured  by  prosperity.  1.  77ie  weak,  who 
are  moulded  by  circumstances  instead  of  mastering  them.  If  a  man  is  not  strong 
enough  to  direct  his  course,  but  suffers  himself  to  drift  with  the  currents  of  external 
events,  prosperity  will  lead  him  away  into  extravagance  and  folly.  He  only  is  safe 
under  it  who  is  independent  of  it.  2.  The  short-sighted — men  whose  views  of  life  are 
exceptionally  limited.  These  people  will  be  likely  to  expect  too  much  from  prosperity, 
to  forget  that  riches  take  to  themselves  wings  and  fly  away.  3.  The  empty-minded. 
If  people  have  other  resources  than  external  possessions  they  are  the  more  free  to  make 
good  use  of  those  possessions.  But  if  they  have  nothing  else,  if  they  have  no  "  inner 
city  of  the  mind,"  if  their  life  is  all  on  the  outside,  prosperity  will  become  a  god  and 
the  idolatry  of  it  a  fatal  delusion.  4.  The  vicious.  A  bad  man  will  find  in  prosperity 
only  enlarged  means  for  evil-doing,  and  so  will  increase  his  wickedness  and  bring  the 
greater  doom  upon  his  own  head.  To  the  intemperate,  the  profligate,  the  lovers  of 
corrupt  pleasures,  prosperity  is  nothing  less  than  a  curse. 

II.  Considee  the  way  in  which  prospeeity  becomes  fatal.  1.  It  hides  foUy. 
La  Bruyfere  says,  "  As  riches  and  favour  forsake  a  man,  we  discover  him  to  be  a  fool, 
but  nobody  could  find  it  out  in  his  prosperity; "  and  Hare  remarks  that  "nothing  hides 
V  blemish  so  completely  as  a  cloth  of  gold."    But  if  folly  is  hidden,  it  is  unchecked, 


<».Ll— 33.]  *ffiB  PROVERM 


«nd  grows  worse  and  ripens  fatally.  2.  It  encourages  indolence.  Prosperity  may  afford 
ample  means  for  generous  occupation,  but  weak  and  foolish  people  are  more  likely  to 
he  satisfied  with  idleness  and  self-indulgence  when  they  find  that  all  their  wants  are 
supplied  without  any  effort  on  their  own  part.  Then  the  disuse  of  faculties  leads  to 
the  loss  of  them.  Hence,  as  the  pressure  of  adversity  quickens  our  powers,  the 
relaxation  of  prosperity  tends  to  a  sort  of  atrophy  of  them.  3.  It  affords  opportunity 
for  the  exercise  of  had  qualities.  Many  men  have  tendencies  to  particular  kinds  of  sin 
that  are  checked  for  want  of  opportunity.  Prosperity  will  give  this  with  fatal  results. 
4.  It  induces  satisfaction  with  itself.  Thus  it  quenches  the  thirst  for  deeper  satisfaction. 
Lot,  prosperous  in  Sodom,  ceases  to  he  a  "pilgiim  and  stranger,"  and  forgets  to 
seek  a  "  better  country  "  till  he  is  roused  by  the  shock  that  puts  an  end  to  his  worldly 
successes. 


HOMILOJS  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOKS. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — Design  and  character  of  proverbial  wisdom.  We  may  regard  the 
opening  words  as  a  general  index  of  the  contents,  as  a  designation  of  the  object,  and 
a  statement  of  the  value  and  prcfit  of  the  teaching,  of  the  book. 

I.  Its  design  is  to  impart  pbactioal  sense.  1.  And  first,  this  in  general  includes 
the  information  of  the  understanding  and  of  the  memory  by  wisdom.  This  Hebrew 
word  (chokmM)  denotes,  strictly,  all  that  is  fixed  for  human  knowledge.  We  may 
render  it  "  insight."  In  other  places  in  the  Bible,  the  judge  (1  Kings  iii.  28),  the  artist 
(Exod.  xxviii.  3),  or  the  man  of  skill  and  renown  in  general,  are  thus  said  to  be  men 
of  insight,  craft,  or  cunning,  in  the  original  and  good  sense  of  those  words.  Applied  to 
religion  and  conduct,  it  means  insight  into  the  principles  of  right  conduct,  the  knowledge 
of  how  to  walk  before  God,  choosing  the  right  and  avoiding  the  wrong  path — the  know- 
ledge of  the  way  to  peace  and  blessedness.  2.  The  training  of  the  will.  The  word 
rendered  "  instruction  "  denotes  moral  education  or  training.  Here,  then,  is  the  prac- 
tical side  of  the  matter.  Not  only  sound  intelligence  is  aimed  at,  but  pure  feeling, 
right  affections,  the  will  guided  by  the  polar  star  of  duty.  All  this  is  general,  3.  But 
next,  particulars,  falling  within  this  great  scope,  ,are  pointed  out,  viz.  "  the  attainment 
of  justice  and  right  and  fair  dealing."  The  first  is  all  that  pertains  to  God,  the 
supreme  Judge — his  eternal  order  and  will.  The  second  refers  to  established  custom 
and  usage  among  men — to  law,  in  the  human  sense.  The  third,  an  expressive  word, 
signifying  literally  what  is  straight,  points  to  straightforward,  honourable,  and  noble 
conduct.  4.  But  the  book  has  a  special  object  in  view,  and  a  special  class  :  «'To  hold 
o\A prudence  to  simple  ones,  and  knowledge  and  reflectiveness  to  loys."  Bach  of  these  words 
has  its  peculiar  force.  The  Hebrew  expression  for  the  first  class  is  literally  the  "  open 
ones,"  i.e.  those  who  in  ignorance  and  inexperience  are  open  to  every  impression,  good 
or  bad ;  simple-minded  ones  (not /ooZs,  which  is  another  idea),  who  are  readily  governed 
by  the  opinions  and  examples  of  stronger  minds.  They  need  that  prudence,  or  caution, 
which  the  hints  of  proverbial  sense  may  supply,  to  enable  them  to  glide  out  of  danger 
and  avoid  snares  (for  the  word  rendered  "  subtilty  "  denotes  smoothness,  like  that  of  the 
slippery  snake).  Boys,  or  youths  also,  stand  in  peculiar  need  of  "  thoughtfulness "— a 
habit  of  reflecting  with  attention  and  forethought  upon  life  and  different  modes  of  conduct. 
The  Book  of  Proverbs,  all  must  see,  is  specially  adapted  for  these  classes.  But  not  for 
them  alone.  5.  The  book  is  a  book  for  all.  The  wise  man  may  listen  and  gain  instruc- 
tion ;  for  men  "  grow  old,  learning  something  fresh  each  day."  And  the  intelligent  man 
may  obtain  guidance.  For  although  by  middle  life  the  general  principles  and  maxims 
of  wisdom  may  have  been  stored  up,  still  the  applications  of  them,  the  exceptions  to 
them,  form  avast  field  for  ever-growing  acquisition.  Knowledge  is  practically  mfinite ; 
we  can  think  of  no  bounds  to  it.  New  perplexities  continually  arise,  new  cases  of  con- 
science present  themselves,  old  temptations  revive  in  fresh  combinations;  and  the 
records  of  others'  experience  continually  flash  new  light  from  angles  of  observation 
distinct  from  our  own.  ,^      „^     .,    i^  •  i,   t-        i 

II  The  character  and  value  op  the  book.  (Ver.  6.)  1.  It  is  a  collection  oj 
proverbs.  Condensed  wisdom.  Landmarks  in  the  field  of  experience.  Beacons  ol 
waminff  from  dangerous  shores.     Objects  of  interest  in  life's  travel.     Finger-posts. 


warning  from  dangerous  shores.     Objects 


24  THE  PROVERBS.  [oh.  1. 1—33; 


The  "wit  of  many,  the  wisdom  of  one."  A  portable  property  of  the  intellect.  A 
currency  honoured  in  every  land.  "  Jewels  five  words  long,  that  on  the  outstretch'd 
forefinger  of  all  time  sparkle  for  ever."  They  may  be  compared  to  darts,  to  stings, 
to  goads.  They  arouse  the  memory,  awake  the  conscience:  they  fix  the  floating 
impressions  of  truth  in  forms  not  easily  forgotten.  These  Bible  proverbs  are  in  poetical 
form ;  and  of  them  it  may  well  be  said,  with  George  Herbert,  "  A  verse  finds  him  who 
a  sermon  flies."  2.  The  mode  of  speech  is  often  figurative.  The  word  rendered  "  dark 
saying"  means  a  profound  saying,  enigma,  "thing  hidden"  (Matt.  xiii.  35 ;  Ps.  Ixxviii.  2), 
"  obscure  allegory  "  (Augustine).  An  example  of  this  parabolic  way  of  speaking  is 
found  in  Agur's  discourse  (ch.  xxx.).  The  power  of  it,  like  the  power  of  pictures  and 
of  all  sensuous  symbols  and  poetical  images,  lies  in  the  fact  that  the  form  "  half  reveals 
and  half  conceals  the  soul  within,"  and  thus  excites  the  curiosity,  fixes  the  attention, , 
stimulates  exertion  of  thought  in  the  listener.  The  best  preachers  leave  much  for  the 
hearers  to  fill  up  for  themselves.  Suggestive  teaching  is  the  richest ;  it  makes  the  pupil 
teach  himself.  Such  is  the  metliod  of  our  Lord  i;i  his  parables;  but  not, the  only 
method;  to  be  combined,  as  with  him  and  here,  with  the  direct  mode  of  statement. 
The  application  is :  "  Take  heed  how  ye  hear."  "  To  him  that  hath  it  shall  be  given." 
All  wisdom  is  of  God;  the  teacher  and  the  disciple  are  both  listeners  at  the  living 
oracle  of  eternal  truth.  Knowledge  is  essential  to  religion,  and  growth  belongs  to  both 
(Luke  xvii.  5 ;  Eph.  iv.  15,  16 ;  Col.  i.  11 ;  ii.  19 ;  2  Thess.  i.  3 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  18).— J. 

Ver.  7. — Beliffion  the  true  heginning.  Tliis  is  the  motto  of  the  book.  It  is  often 
found  (ch.  ix.  10;  Siraoh  i.  16,  25,  26;  Ps.  oxi.  10).  The  Arabs  have  adopted  it  at 
the  head  of  their  proverbial  collections. 

I.  The  Old  Testament  desiskation  of  religion.  It  is  the  fear  of  Jehovoih. 
Tliat  is  reverence  for  him  who  is  One,  who  is  eternal,  incomparable  with  any  of 
the  gods  of  the  heathen,  the  Deliverer  of  Israel  in  the  past  and  ever,  the  All-holy, 
just  and  merciful  One.  Such  reverence  includes  practical  obedience,  trust,  gratitude, 
and  love.  With  this  expression  we  may  compare  walking  before  Jehovah  and  the 
service  of  Jehovah,  as  designations  of  the  practical  aspect  of  religion,  as  the  former 
indicates  the  emotional  and  intellectual. 

II.  Such  religion  is  the  true  germ  of  sound  knowledge.  Men  have  divorced 
by  a  logical  abstraction  science,  and  often  sense,  from  religion.  But  ideally,  psychologi- 
cally, historically,  they  are  in  perfect  unity.  Religion  is  "  the  oldest  and  holiest 
tradition  of  our  race"  (Herder).  From  it  as  the  beginning  the  arts  and  sciences 
sprang.  It  is  ever  so.  True  science  has  a  religious  basis.  1.  In  both  the  Infinite  is 
impUed  and  is  sought  through  the  finite.  2.  Both  run  up  into  mystery — science 
into  the  unknowaWe  ground  or  substance  behind  all  phenomena,  religion  before  the 
inscrutable  and  unutterable  God.  3.  The  true  mood  is  alike  in  both,  that  of  profound 
humility,  sincerity,  self-abnegation,  impassioned  love  of  the  truth,  the  mood  of  Bacon, 
of  Newton,  etc. 

III.  The  rejection  of  religion  folly.  The  Hebrew  word  for  "  fool "  is  strong ;  it 
is  cross,  stupid,  insensible.  "  A  stock,  a  stone,  a  worse  than  senseless  thing."  Folly 
is  always  the  reversal  of  some  true  attitude  ot  the  mind  and  temper.  It  is  the  taking 
a  false  measure  of  self  in  some  relation.  It  is  the  conceit  of  a  position  purely  imaginary 
— amusing  in  a  child,  pathetic  in  a  lunatic,  pitiful  in  a  rational  man.  True  wisdom  lies 
in  the  sense  that  we  have  little,  in  the  feeling  of  constant  need  of  light  and  direction; 
extreme  folly,  in  the  notion  that  the  man  "  knows  all  about  it."  Most  pitiable  are 
learned  fools.  Without  religion,  i.e.  the  constant  habit  of  reference  to  the  universal, 
all  knowledge  remains  partial  and  shrunk,  is  tainted  with  egotism;  would  reverse  the 
laws  of  intelligence,  and  make  the  universal  give  way  to  the  particular,  instead  of 
lifting  the  particular  to  the  life  of  the  universal.  Beware  of  the  contemptuous  tone  in 
books,  newspapers,  and  speakers.  Reserve  scorn  for  manifest  evil.  The  way  to  be 
looked  down  upon  is  to  form  the  habit  of  looking  down  on  others.  To  despise  any 
humblest  commonplace  of  sense  and  wisdom  is  to  brand  one's  self  in  the  sight  of 
Heaven,  and  of  the  wise,  afool. — J. 

Vers.  8,  9. — Filial  piety.  The  teacher  speaks  under  the  assumed  form  of  a  father, 
like  St.  Paul  (1  Cor.  iv.  15 ;  Philem.  10),  to  give  the  more  affectionate  zest   to  hii 


CH.1.1— 83.]  THE  PROVERfeS. 


appeal.  And  the  word  "  mother  "  is  hrought  in  by  poetical  parallelism,  enhancing 
the  parental  ima<ie.  We  may  include  the  parent  and  the  teacher  in  one  conception. 
The  duty  owed  to  both  is  analogous.  And  the  teacher  may  be  at  the  same  time  the 
parent. 

I.  Duty  to  parents  and  early  teachers  combs  next  to  duty  to  God.  It 
occupies  that  place  in  the  Decalogue.  Pythagoras  and  Plato,  and  the  wise  of  antiquity, 
generally  taught  tliat  parents  came  next  to  the  gods,  and  were  to  be  honoured  even  as 
the  gods.  The  family  is  the  key-stone  of  society.  Parents  are  the  earliest  reiiresenta- 
tives  to  children  of  the  principle  of  authority,  of  "  other-will,"  and,  in  this  sense,  of 
Gbd. 

II.  The  true  parent  is  the  best  early  teacher.  1.  He  has  the  fresh  mind 
to'  deal  with,  the  opportunity  of  the  first  word,  the  early  and  deepest  impression. 
2.  He  is  the  most  sincere  of  teachers,  or  has  the  least  temptation  to  be  insincere.  His 
one  object  is  the  child's  good.  3.  He  is  the  most  loving.  4.  The  father  and  the 
mother  should  combine  in  this  work — the  father  to  train  the  young  mind  to  principle, 
the  mother  to  inspire  pure  sentiment.  The  masculine  influence  deals  with  the 
general,  with  law  and  relation  in  life,  with  the  logic  or  mathematics  of  conduct;  the 
feminine,  with  the  particular,  with  the  details  of  behaviour,  with  the  concrete  expres- 
sion of  right  thought  and  feeling.     Neither  can  be  dispensed  with. 

III.  Eevekencb  for  parents  and  teachers  imparts  gracb  and  beauty  to  thk 
bearino.  The  adoption  of  their  example  and  instruction  is  compared,  in  Oriental 
illustration,  to  the  wearing  of  a  "  pleasant  cbaplet"  on  the  head  (and  the  necklace  of 
pearls),  as  at  feasts  and  entertainments — a  wreath  of  roses  or  other  flowers.  The 
former  was  a  general  custom  of  antiquity,  both  for  men  and  women.  We  have  no 
exact  parallel  to  it,  and  must  recur  to  the  thought  of  good  or  graceful  dress  in  general. 
What  significance,  as  we  all  know,  is  there  in  dress  to  make  or  mar  the  personal 
appearance!  But  the  spiritual,  not  the  material  "habit"  is  the  best  dress,  and  will 
set  off  the  most  ungainly  form.  It  is  natural  to  wish  to  appear  graceful,  and  one  of 
the  first  manifestations  of  the  artistic  instinct  in  humanity  is  in  this  attention  to  dress. 
Let  the  instinct,  then,  have  a  moral  or  religious  turn,  and  true  beauty  be  found  above 
all  in  the  moral  idea,  in  the  attire  of  the  soul,  "  the  ornament  of  a  meek  and  quiet 
spirit,  which  in  the  sight  of  God  is  of  great  price."  The  complimentary  deferences  to 
one  another  in  polite  society,  the  slight  submissions  in  word  and  deed,  the  trifling  self- 
abnegations  which  give  a  transient  perfume  and  refinement  to  social  hours, — all  these 
do  but  mimic  or  represent  something  of  more  permanent  value,  the  principle  of 
obedience,  the  will  governed  by  law,  the  character  formed  by  the  true,  which  is  also 
the  good  and  the  beautiful. — J. 

Vers.  10 — 19. —  Warnings  against  the  evih  of  the  time.  An  unsettled  time,  one  of 
violence  and  insecurity  of  life,  appears  to  be  indicated,  such  as  has  only  its  occasional 
parallel  in  onr  society.  Yet  the  perverted  impulses  which  lead  to  open  crime  are 
those  which  induce  every  species  of  dishonesty  and  more  subtle  attacks  upon  the  life 
or  property  of  others.  We  may  thus  draw  from  a  particular  description  some  general 
lessons.  But  it  seems  to  give  more  point  and  force  to  the  passage  if  we  view  it  at 
attaching  to  notorious  and  frequent  forms  of  crime. 

I.  The  tempter.  He  is  always  existing  in  every  state  of  society,  and  not  hard  to 
find.  There  are  human  beings  who  have  come  to  adopt  evil  as  a  trade,  and,  not 
content  with  practising  it  themselves,  must  have  help  and  sympathy  in  their  work, 
and  turn  recruiting-sergeants  for  the  devil.  The  beautiful  laws  ot  our  being  assert 
themselves  amidst  all  the  perversion  of  depraved  choice.  Crime,  like  sorrow,  is  lonely, 
and  craves  partnership.  Remorse  would  soothe  itself  by  fixing  the  like  sting  in  the 
bosoms  of  others.  And  the  criminal,  constantly  on  his  defence  against  society, 
learns  to  acquire  an  allurement  of  manner  which  is  not  the  least  of  his  dangerous 
qualities.  The  warning  to  youth  against  "  enticing  sinners  "  of  both  sexes  can  never 
be  obsolete.  Beware  of  persons  of  "peculiarly  fascinating  manners."  What  is  it 
that  fascinates?  Generally  it  will  be  found  to  be  some  species  of  flattery,  overt  or 
concealed,  attacking  the  weak  point  of  the  tempted  ones.  The  warning  may  be  so 
far  generalized  into  "Beware  of  the  flatterer."  Flattery  is  at  the  bottom  of  most 
temptntion. 


THE  PHOVteEBS.  toH.i.  1— 8 


II.  PioTUREB  OF  OBiME.  1.  Its  aspect  of  horror.  They  are  to  be  understood  as 
drawn  by  the  teacher's  hand.  He  is  putting  the  real  meaning  of  the  tempter's 
suggestions  into  vivid  descriptions.  The  tempter  himself  will  take  care  not  to  expose 
the  bloody  and  hideous  aspect  of  his  trade. 

"  Vice  is  a  monster  of  so  hideous  mien, 
Thai  to  be  hated  needs  but  to  be  seen." 

On  such  a  principle  the  teacher  acts.  The  veil  is  torn  aside  from  the  life  of  crime, 
and  its  repulsive  inhumanity  disclosed.  It  is  a  "  lurking  for  blood,"  after  the  image  of 
the  hunter  with  nets  and  nooses,  watching  for  his  prey.  And  this  too  for  "  the  vainly 
innocent,"  i.e.  whose  innocence  will  avail  him  nothing  with  us  (comp.  Ps.  xxxv.  19 ; 
Ixix.  5 ;  Lam.  iii.  52),  or,  in  the  other  interpretation,  for  the  innocent  who  has  given 
us  no  cause  for  hatred  or  revenge.  "Will  swallow  them  up  living  like  the  pit 
[or,  'abyss']."  An  expression  for  sudden  death  as  opposed  to  that  by  lingering 
sickness — the  earth  as  it  were  yawning  from  its  abysses  to  devour  the  fated  lives 
(comp.  Ps.  cxxiv.  3 ;  ch.  xxx.  16).  The  expression  whole,  whether  it  denotes  sound 
in  body  or  in  character  (honest  men),  adds  to  the  force  of  the  description.  2.  But 
there  is  an  attractive  aspect  in  crime.  "Thou  shalt  cast  thy  lot  into  our  midst," 
i.e.  shalt  share  and  share  alike  with  us,  as  we  say,  or  take  an  equal  chance  for  the 
best  of  the  booty,  the  lot  in  such  cases  being  the  custom  of  robbers  and  of  soldiers 
(Ps.  xxii.  19;  Neb.  x.  35).  There  is  freedom,  communism,  good-fellowship,  in  the 
life  of  the  banditti;  no  distinction  of  rank  or  class,  poor  or  rich.  In  certain  times 
the  picture  of  such  a  life  has  proved  of  overwhelming  fascination  for  young  adven- 
turous spirits.  In  solemn  reiterated  warning  the  teacher  raises  his  voice  against  the 
treading  of  their  path  and  way.  This  simple  biblical  figure  may  remind  us  that  every 
mode  of  active  life,  every  profession  or  occupation,  is  like  a  path ;  it  leads  somewhither. 
Unless  we  could  cease  from  activity,  we  must  all  be  advancing  to  some  moral  issue. 
What  will  it  be?  3.  A  summary  description  of  the  criminal.  He  runs  toward 
wickedness,  hastes  to  shed  blood.  The  eagerness,  the  swiftness,  and  perseverance  of 
the  criminal  often  arouse  intellectual  admiration,  and  shame  the  slothfulness  of 
those  who  follow  noble  callings.  But  the  devotion  of  ability  and  energy  of  a  high 
order  to  such  ends  is,  indeed,  one  of  the  most  striking  proofs  we  can  have  of  the 
corruption  of  man's  nature.  This  is  crime  revealed  in  its  hatefulness,  on  the  one 
hand,  by  its  cruel  and  inhuman  conduct  and  effects ;  on  the  other,  in  its  dark  source, 
the  utter  perversion  of  the  criminal's  mind  itself. 

III.  The  recoil  of  evil  on  the  doers.  Here  again  are  powerful  pictures.  Like 
thoughtless  birds,  which  rush  with  open  eyes  into  the  net,  so  do  these  miscreants,  in 
preparing  destruction  for  others,  themselves  run  headlong  upon  their  fate  (comp.  Job 
xviii.  8).  While  they  are  lurking  for  others'  blood  and  laying  snares  for  others'  lives, 
their  own  are  forfeited.  This  self-defeat  of  wickedness  is  a  central  thought  in  biblical 
wisdom  (comp.  oh.  xv.  32 ;  xvi.  27 ;  Bccles.  x.  8 ;  Ps.  vii.  16 ;  Bom.  ii.  5 ;  Gial.  Ti. 
8;  1  Tim.  vi.  9,  10;  Jas.  v.  3 — 5).  Thus  wisdom  and  folly  form  an  antithesis  in 
their  nature,  their  powers,  and  their  result.  1.  Wisdom  is  at  one  with  religion  and 
morality;  folly  casts  off  God  and  right.  2.  Wisdom  pursues  good  ends  by  good 
means;  folly  pursues  evil  by  evil  means.  3.  The  result  of  wisdom  is  life  and 
blessedness,  health  and  peace;  that  of  folly  is  self-undermining,  self-overthrow,  ot 
"  slow  suicide." 

HI.  The  eoot  of  crime.  It  is  like  that  of  all  sin,  in  desire,  in  misdirected  desire, 
the  greed  of  "unlawful  gain,"  to  give  the  fuller  force  of  the  expression.  Note:  1. 
The  prevalence  of  this  passion.  By  far  the  largest  proportion  of  men's  worst  actions 
are  probably  to  be  traced  to  it.  Read  the  reports  of  the  courts  of  law,  listen  to  the 
gossip  of  the  hour  for  illustrations.  2.  Its  intoxicating,  illusory  power.  The  victim 
of  it  deceives  himself,  as  in  other  passions :  it  is  thrift,  it  is  due  regard  to  what  is  of 
substantial  value  to  one's  interests,  etc.  And  how  difficult  to  distinguish  that  desire 
for  more,  which  is  the  spring  of  action  in  commerce  as  in  honourable  ambition,  the 
pursuit  of  knowledge,  etc. !  The  question  must  be  carried  to  the  conscience  and  to 
God.  3.  Its  unsocial  character.  More  than  any  passion,  it  separates  man  from  his 
kind,  and  assimilates  him  to  the  beast  of  prey.  4.  Its  svdcidal  effect.  If  it  does  not 
destroy  the  man's  bcdy,  it  certainly  corrodes  and  eats  away  his  soul.     It  dehumanize! 


«a.  1.1—33.]  THE  PBOVERBS.  27 

him.  There  is  no  object  more  shadowy  in  one  aspect,  more  unreal,  in  another  more 
monstrous,  than  the  miser,  as  depicted  by  Balzac  and  other  great  writers.  Covetousness 
is  self-slaughter. — J. 

Vers.  20 — 33. —  Warning  cry  of  Wisdom.  In  dramatic  style,  Wisdom  is  presentiated , 
pe/sonified,  endued  with  visible  and  audible  attributes.  As  contempt  for  religion  has 
been  animadverted  upon,  so  now  contempt  for  Wisdom  calls  for  rebuke.  The  motto 
(ver.  7)  is  still  in  the  preacher's  mind. 

I.  The  cry  of  Wisbom  is  public  and  cleab.  In  the  street,  "  where  merchants 
most  do  congregate,"  and  in  all  places  of  general  resort,  the  cry  is  heard.  Hers  is  no 
esoteric  doctrine ;  it  is  popularly  exoteric,  it  is  for  all.  She  has  no  concealments.  She 
is  not  ashamed  of  her  message.  She  seeks  the  weal  of  each  and  of  all.  Like  her 
Divine  embodiment,  she  is  the  Friend  of  the  simple  and  the  meek,  yea,  of  the  fools  and 
the  sinners  (Matt.  x.  27 ;  Luke  xiv.  21).  It  is  a  voice  to  be  heard  above  the  mingled 
sounds  of  these  thronged  centres.  The  state  of  the  markets  and  of  the  weather,  passing 
events,  the  gossip  of  the  hour,  news  of  success  and  of  failure,  all  have  a  moral  meaning, 
run  up  into  moral  calculations,  may  be  reduced  to  expressions  of  moral  law. 

II.  Her  tone.  1.  -It  is  commanding  and  superior.  She  appeals  to  different  classes 
of  the  frivolous,  the  free-thinking,  the  scoffers  of  the  time.  The  times  of  Solomon,  as 
pointed  out  by  Delitzsob,  were  times  of  widespread  worldliness  and  religious  indiffer- 
ence. The  lezim,  or  "  scorners,"  must  have  been  a  numerous  class.  They  scoffed  at 
sacred  things,  laid  claim  to  superior  sense  (oh.  xiv.  6),  were  contentious  and  full  of 
debate  (ch.  xxii.  10).  They  avoided  the  chakanim,  or  "  wise  men,"  and  hence  received 
the  name  of  scoffers  or  mocl^ers.  They  were  like  our  modern  free-thinkers,  and  have 
left  their  clear  traces  on  the  biblical  page.  The  "  wise  men  "  were  a  kind  of  practical 
philosophers,  not  a  professional  class,  but  belonging  to  different  callings.  Eeligion  and 
worship  have  never  been  exempt  from  criticism,  have  in  every  age  been  exposed  to 
that  "  ridicule  which  is  the  test  of  truth."  In  these  conflicts  the  tone  of  truth  is  ever 
commanding',  conscious  of  authority,  calm ;  that  of  the  scoffer  irritable  and  wanting  in 
weight.  Wisdom  is  commanding,  because  she  holds  the  conscience.  She  bandies  no 
arguments  with  the  scoffer,  who  will  only  find  in  them  fuel  for  his  contentious  spirit ; 
she  aims  directly  at  the  conscience,  accuses  and  judges  the  peiTcrted  heart.  "  Turn 
at  my  denunciation  "  from  your  evil  ways  1  "  I  will  cause  my  Spirit  to  stream  forth 
upon  you,"  2.  Her  tone  is  hortatory  and  promising.  The  Spirit  of  wisdom  is  com- 
pared to  a  mighty,  forth-bubbling,  never-exhausted  fountain.  So  Christ  cried  in  the 
last  great  day  of  the  feast  in  Jerusalem,  "  If  any  man  thirst,  let  him  come  tmto  me,  and 
drink."  (1)  There  is  a  rich  fulness  in  having  wisdom,  in  contrast  to  which  are  the 
dry  negations  which  are  all  the  scoffer  has  to  offer.  (2)  It  is  a  refreshing  and  a 
strengthening  supply.  It  is  not  pedantry,  the  wisdom  of  words,  nor  abstract  science  of 
logic  and  metaphysics,  but  vital  truth,  the  knowledge  of  facts  and  laws  of  the  inner  and 
outer  world,  which  we  need  for  everyday  consumption,  for  the  life  of  the  mind.  (3) 
Its  impartation  is  conditioned  by  the  will  of  the  recipient.  There  must  be  the  turning 
and  the  seeking,  that  there  may  be  the  finding  and  the  enjoying  of  it ;  the  opening  of 
the  mouth  before  it  can  be  filled.  3.  Her  tone  is  threatening  and  prophetic  of  retribu- 
tion. The  day  of  grace  is  now  conceived  as  past,  the  hour  gone  that  will  not  return. 
She  has  called,  has  stretched  out  the  hand,  in  token  of  pleading  for  attention,  has 
lavished  both  counsel  and  febuke ;  but  has  been  responded  to  by  sullen  refusal,  averted 
looks,  scornful  depreciation,  obstinate  resistance.  This  relation  of  forbearance  and  good 
will  has  been  strained  to  the  last  degree ;  in  the  law  of  things  it  must  be  succeeded  by  a 
reaction.  The  places  will  be  reversed.  The  scoffer  will  be  the  scoffed ;  the  mocker  will 
afford  material  for  mirth.  And  here  the  pictures  accumulate  their  dread  impression  on 
the  imagination ;  the  tempest  and  the  tempest-whirlwind  answer  in  nature  to  the  calamity 
and  the"  horror,  the  anguish  and  constraint,  of  the  faithless  soul.  All  moral  teaching 
carries  in  it  a  twofold  prophetic  element ;  a  prophecy  of  penal  retribution  and  a  pro- 
phecy of  blessed  recompense.  Retribution  is  the  logical  consequence  of  certain  acts ; 
and  it  involves  a  correspondence.  The  relation  which  has  been  wrongly  denied  comes 
in  the  end  to  be  afiirmed;  and  that  which  w:is  affirmed,  to  be  in  the  end  denied.  The 
manner  of  the  sin  foretells  the  mapner  of  the  penalty.  Those  who  turned  from  pleading 
Wisdom  plead  in  the  end  with  her  in  vwn;  seeking  her  now  with  zeal  ("early"),  their 


28  THE  PROVERBS.  ton.  1. 1— 3t 

search  is  vain.  The  attitude  which  the  soul  refused  to  assume  in  its  pride,  it  is  forced 
into  by  its  distress.  The  wheel  comes  full  circle ;  the  sinner  is  smitten  in  the  very 
place  of  his  sin;  and  outraged  conscience  is  avenged.  4.  Above  all,  the  tone  of 
Wisdom  is  reasonable.  These  are  no  arbitrary,  cruel,  capricious  dealings  with  the 
sinner.  They  rest  upon  the  law  of  things  (vers.  29 — 31).  "  Because  they  hated  reason- 
able doctrine,  and  coveted  not  the  fear  of  Jehovah,  fared  not  on  the  way  of  my  counsel, 
and  despised  all  my  rebuke;  ther^ore  they  shall  eat  of  the  fruit  of  their  way,  and  be 
satiated  with  their  counsels!"  It  is  the  law  of  causality  applied  to  moral  things. 
"  The  curse  causeless  shall  not  come ! "  The  most  obvious  example  of  the  law  of  cause 
and  effect  in  nature — the  connection  of  seed  and  crop,  sowing  and  reaping — ^best  illus- 
trates the  process  in  the  human  spirit.  We  cannot  deceive  Grod,  cannot  evade  law; 
whatsoever  we  sow,  we  must  reap,  and  that  according  to  qtiantity,  to  kind  or  quality. 
Again,  the  figure  of  a  surfeit  is  forcible  as  applied  to  this  experience  of  the  consequences 
of  guilt.  We  find  it  also  in  Isa.  iii.  10;  Ps.  Ixxxviii.  4;  cxxiii.  4.  It  brings  out  the 
principle  that  all  spurious  pleasures,  i.e.  those  which  are  rooted  only  in  egotism,  doy, 
and  so  turn  the  man  against  himself.  Self-loathiug,  self-contempt,  is  the  deep  revela- 
tion of  an  inner  judgment.  If  any  one  asks  with  the  anger  of  the  atheistic  poet, "  Who 
made  self-contempt?"  let  him  turn  to  this  passage  for  an  answer.  5.  Wisdom  ii 
declarative  of  moral  laws.  The  turning  away,  the  resistance  and  recalcitrancy  of  the 
simple,  murders  them  (Jer.  viii.  5;  Hos.  xi.  5),  aud  the  security  (idle,  easy,  fleshly 
car^essness,  Jer.  zxii.  21)  destroys  them. 

"  More  the  treacherous  calm  I  dread 
Than  tempests  sailing  overhead." 

(See  South's  powerful  sermon,  with  his  usual  splendid  illustrations,  on  "  Prosperity 
ever  dangerous  to  Virtue,"  vol.  ii.  ser.  vi.)  6.  She  is  prophetic  of  good  to  the  obedient. 
In  bright  contrast  to  the  spurious  peace  of  the  dulled  conscience  is  the  true  peace  of 
the  wise  and  God-fearing,  "  He  who  listens  to  me  shall  dwell  securely,  and  have  rest 
without  terror  of  calamity."  It  is  like  that  of  ordered  nature — "  central  peace  abiding 
at  the  heart  of  endless  agitation."  In  this  profound  union  with  God,  the  parables  of 
life  are  but  superficial  and  transient  as  the  waves  of  ocean,  while  the  depths  are  calm 
as  eternity.  The  method  of  personified  Wisdom  is  that  of  Christ,  with  which  it  may 
be  compared  at  every  point.  (1)  Sin  is  clearly  exposed,  in  its  effects  and  its  cause.  (2) 
Judgment  is  clearly  announced.  (3)  Promises  of  eternal  good  are  no  less  emphatically 
given.  (4)  Refuge  from  evil,  and  the  way  of  salvation  both  temporal  and  eternal,  are 
pointed  out. — J. 

Vers.  1 — 6- — The  ideal  teacher.  Solomon  had  all  possible  advantages  to  qualify  him 
for  the  work  of  a  teacher  of  men.  He  had  (1)  special  endowments  from  the  hand  of 
his  Creator  (1  Kings  iii.);  (2)  a  heritage  of  rich  experience  from  the  life  of  his  father, 
beside  parental  counsels  from  his  lips;  (3)  the  best  instruction  which  the  kingdom 
could  afford,  aud  surely  there  must  have  been  much  wisdom  to  learn  from  so  wise  and 
faithful  a  teacher  as  the  Prophet  Nathan  (2  Sam.  xii.).  Who,  then,  should  be  so  weU 
able  as  he  was  to  give  us  the  ideal  of  a  true  teacher  ?  We  are  reminded  by  these 
verses  that  he  is  the  man  who — 

I.  Is    AFFECTED    BY    THE    PRESENCE    OP    IQNOBANCB    AND    ERROB.      He    UOticeS    the 

"  simple  "  man  and  the  "  young  man  "  (ver.  4) ;  he  has  r^ard  to  the  fact  that  there 
are  those  about  him  who  need  to  he  led  into  the  paths  of  "justice  and  judgment  and 
equity  "  (ver.  3).  His  eye  rests  on  these ;  his  mind  perceives  how  urgently  they  need 
the  "  instruction "  aud  "  understanding "  which  will  save  them  from  the  perils  to 
which  they  are  exposed ;  his  heart  goes  out  to  them  ;  his  sympathies  embrace  them ; 
he  desires  "  to  give  subtilty  to  the  simple,  to  the  young  man  knowledge  and  dis- 
cretion."   He  is,  therefore,  the  man  who — 

II.  Conveys  knowledge.  1.  He  seeks  to  impart  a  knowledge  of  faett ;  to  give 
"  instruction  "  (ver.  2) ;  to  make  known  to  the  simple-minded  and  inexperienced  the 
truth  that  "  all  is  not  gold  that  glitters,"  that  men  are  often  very  differenj;  from  that 
which  they  seem  to  be,  that  under  a  fair  exterior  there  may  lurk  uttermost  corruption, 
that  the  sweetest  morsels  may  he  the  introduction  to  bitterest  consequences,  etc.  2. 
He  seeks  also  to  convey  a  knowledge  oiprindpUs;  to  give  "  understanding;  "  to  mak* 


cm.  1. 1—33.]  THE  PROVEBBS. 


plam  to  the  mind  distinctions  between  that  which  is  true  and  that  which  is  false,  that 
which  is  honourable  and  that  which  is  shameful,  that  which  elevates  and  that  which 
lowers,  that  which  is  permissible  and  that  which  is  desirable.  He  is,  further,  the  man 
who — 

III.  Imparts  wisdom.  He  will  not  be  content  until  he  has  instilled  into  the  mind 
and  introduced  to  the  heart  discretion  (ver.  4)  and  wisdom  itself  (ver.  2).  Wisdom  is 
the  pursuit  of  the  highest  end  by  the  surest  means.  No  teacher  of  men  who  recognizes 
his  true  position  will  ever  be  contented  until  he  has  led  his  disciples  to  walk  in  the 
path  of  wisdom — to  bo  seeking  after  the  noblest  ends  for  which  God  gave  us  our  being, 
and  to  be  seeking  them  by  those  ways  which  are  sure  to  lead  thereto.  1.  Our  highest 
wisdom  is  to  seek  "  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  his  righteousness"  (Matt.  vi.  33).  2rOur 
one  "  Way  "  is  the  Son  of  God  himself  (John  xiv.  6).  The  true  teacher  thus  becomes 
the  man  who — 

IV.  Conducts  to  moral  bxobllbnob.  For  he  who  is  the  child  of  wisdom  will 
also  receive  the  instruction  of  "justice  and  judgment  and  equity."  He  will  be  a  man 
who  will  have  continual  regard  to  the  claims  of  his  fellow-men ;  who  will  shrink  from 
encroaching  on  their  rights;  who  will  endeavour  to  give  to  them  the  consideration,  the 
care,  the  kindness,  which  they  may  rightly  look  for  as  children  of  the  same  Father,  as 
disciples  of  the  same  Saviour,  as  citizens  of  the  same  kingdom,  as  travellers  to  the  same 
home.     The  ideal  teacher  will  also  be  a  man  who^ 

V.  Fobtebs  intellbotual  growth.  (Vers.  5,  6.)  We  ourselves  are  not  truly  and 
satisfactorily  progressing  except  our  mental  capacities  are  being  developed,  and  thus 
truth  and  wisdom  are  being  seen  with  clearer  eye  and  held  with  tighter  grasp.  The 
wise  man  is  therefore  bent  on  training,  exercising,  bracing  the  intellectual  faculties  of 
his  disciple,  so  that  he  "  will  increase  learning,"  will  "  attain  to  wise  counsels,"  will 
think  out  and  see  through  the  proverbs  and  problems,  the  puzzles  and  perplexities, 
which  come  up  for  investigation.  We  know  something  in  order  that  we  may  know 
much.  We  are  wise  that  we  may  become  wiser.  We  climb  the  first  slope  of  the  hill  of 
heavenly  truth  that  we  may  ascend  the  one  which  is  beyond ;  we  master  the  "  deep 
things  of  God"  that  we  may  look  into  those  which  are  deeper  and  darker  still.  Ours 
is  ever  to  be  the  spirit  of  holy  inquiry ;  not  of  querulous  impatience,  but  of  patient, 
untiring  effort  to  understand  all  those  truths  which  are  within  our  reach,  waiting  for 
the  fuller  revelation  of  the  days  which  are  to  come. — 0. 

Ver.  7. — The  foundation-truth.    These  words  invite  our  attention  to— 

I.  That  which  constitutes  the  fear  of  God.  "  The  fear  of  the  Lord"  was  the 
chief  note  of  Hebrew  piety.  It  expressed  itself  in  that  form  (see  Gen.  xlii.  18; 
Exod.  xviii.  21 ;  Lev.  xix.  14 ;  Neh.  v.  15 ;  Ps.  Ixvi.  16 ;  Eccles.  xii.  13,  etc.).  Wh»t 
did  it  signify  ?  Evidently  something  more  and  other  than  mere  dread.  The  piety  of 
the  Jews  was  an  immeasurably  higher  thing  than  the  abject  terror  with  which  the 
heathen  shrank  from  the  capricious  and  malignant  power  of  the  deities  they  worshipped. 
It  included :  1.  Reverence  for  his  Divine  nature.  2.  Sense  of  the  Divine  presence : 
"  The  Lord  tefore  whom  I  stand."  3.  Regard  for  the  Divine  will,  shown  in  the  two 
ways  of  (1)  obedience  to  his  commands,  and  (2)  submission  to  his  appointments. 

II.  The  fact  that  the  feab  of  God  constitutes  the  foundation  on  which  wb 
BUILD.  "  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  beginning  of  knowledge."  The  sense  of  God,  the 
belief  that  he  is,  that  he  reigns,  that  he  is  the  Source  and  Fountain  of  all  life  and  bless- 
ing— this  is  the  foundation  on  which  all  wisdom,  all  success,  all  excellency,  rests.  How 
truly  fundamental  is  this  fear  of  God  is  seen  when  we  consider :  1.  That  it  is  implanted, 
as  one  of  the  earliest  thoughts,  in  the  human  mind.  The  very  little  child  can  enter- 
tain it;  it  enters  his  opening  mind  with  the  first  conceptions  which  are  cherished 
there.  As  soon  as  we  begin  to  think  we  begin  to  fear  God.  That  sentiment,  which 
never  once  affected  the  life  of  the  most  intelligent  of  the  brute  creation  in  any  land  or 
age,  strikes  deep  root  and  bears  fairest  fruit  in  the  spiritual  nature  of  the  "  little  child." 
"  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  beginning  of  knowledge,"  even  in  time.  2.  That  the 
aci;eptance  of  God  is  the  basis  on  which  all  truth  must  rest.  There  are  mysteries  in 
till  ism  which  may  bafile  and  sometimes  perplex  us.  But  in  atheism  we  are  utterly  at 
bea.  Not  to  stait  from  the  acceptance  of  an  originating,  designing,  fashioning,  con- 
tri'lliii",  out-working  Intelligence  is  to  be  "  all  abroad  "  in  the  re^on  of  hum»n  investi- 


80  THE  PROVERBS.  [oh.  1. 1—33. 

gatioD  and  Inquiry.  Accepting  tliat,  the  universe  is  indeed  mysterious,  but  it  is  not 
an  all-shrouding  mist  in  which  we  ourselves  and  everything  around  us  are  hopelessly 
lost.  The  fear  of  the  Lord,  the  reverent  acceptance  of  the  truth  that  God  is,  and  that 
he  reigns,  lies  at  the  foundation,  is  the  beginning,  of  knowledge — of  the  truth  which 
makes  the  world  comprehensible  to  the  understanding,  and  life  valuable  to  the  soul. 
3.  That  the  fear  of  God  is  the  ground  of  all  heavenly  wisdom.  We  cannot  know  our 
own  Divine  Father,  our  own  spiritual  nature  with  all  its  high  and  ennobling  capacities, 
the  excellency  of  moral  and  spiritual  worth,  the  supreme  blessedness  of  self-surrender,  if 
we  do  not -know  God,  if  we  have  not  the  mind  of  Christ  revealed  to  us  and  accepted  by 
us.  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  beginning,  and  is  the  very  substance  of  that  know- 
ledge which  constitutes  the  "  life  eternal  "  (John  xvii.  3). 

III.  The  follt  op  spibitual  indifference.  "  Fools  despise  wisdom  and  instruc- 
tion." The  foolish  man  does  not  care  even  to  begin  to  know ;  he  despises  the  very 
elements  of  instruction  ;  he  will  not  take  the  first  step  in  the  path  of  wisdom.  He 
wanders  off  at  his  own  will,  and  he  goes  in  the  direction  of  the  thick  darkness. 
He  is  turning  from  him  who  is  the  Light  of  life,  and  is  travelling  to  that  dreary  region 
where  it  is  always  night,  away  from  God,  from  wisdom,  from  holiness,  from  love. — 0. 

Vers.  8,  9. — The  duty  and  the  beauty  of  filial  piety.  The  wise  teacher  here  com- 
mends to  us  the  excellency  of  the  filial  spirit.  And  it  is  worthy  of  notice  that  he 
exhorts  the  young  to  be  obedient  to  their  mother  as  well  as  mindful  of  the  counsels  of 
their  father.     We  think  of — 

I.  The  duty  of  filial  piett,  based  upon  and  arising  from  :  1.  The  relation  itself. 
It  is  enough  that  our  parents  are  our  parents,  and  that  we  are  their  offspring.  On  that 
simple  ground  it  behoves  us  to  listen  and  to  obey.  2.  The  fact  that  they  have 
expended  on  us' far  more  than  any  other  beings.  Who  shall  measure  the  thought,  the 
anxiety,  the  solicitude,  the  prayers,  the  labours,  the  sacrifices,  which  they  have  cheer- 
fully devoted  to  us  ?  3.  The  fact  that  it  is  the  will  of  God  that  we  should  render  such 
filial  honour  (Exod.  xx.  12  ;  Lev.  xix.  3  ;  Deut.  v.  16 ;  Eph.  vi.  2). 

n.  The  beadtt  op  filial  piety.  "  They  shall  be  an  ornament  of  grace  unto  thy 
head,  and  chains  about  thy  neck  "  (ver.  9).  Youth,  especially  young  manhood,  is  apt 
to  think  that  there  is  something  unbecoming,  ungraceful  if  not  disgraceful,  in  rendering 
filial  obedience ;  it  is  apt  to  imagine  that  there  is  something  admirable  in  breaking  away, 
in  even  early  years,  from  parental  guidance,  and  establishing  an  independence  of  judg- 
ment and  action.  In  truth,  there  is  nothing  more  oflfensive,  nothing  morally  uglier, 
than  such  premature  assertiveness.  On  the  other  hand,  nothing  is  more  comely, 
nothing  more  attractive,  nothing  more  intrinsically  beautiful,  than  filial  devotedness. 
It  has  all  the  best  elements  of  spiritual  excellency:  (1)  humility,  a  lowly  view  of  our- 
selves ;  (2)  responsiveness  to  strong  and  tender  love ;  (3)  the  recognition  of  real  worth, 
of  the  claims  of  age  and  wisdom ;  (4)  cheerful  acceptance  of  the  ordination  of  nature, 
and  acquiescence  in  the  will  of  God.  Those  who  illustrate  the  duty  of  filial  piety  live 
in  the  admiration  of  the  wise,  and  walk  in  the  sunshine  of  the  smile  of  the  Supreme. 0. 

Vers.  10 — 19.— The  peril  and  the  wisdom  of  youth:  a  sermon  to  the  young.  How 
many  human  lives  are  nothing  better  than  failures !  How  many  souls  are  there  that 
"  make  shipwreck  of  faith  and  a  good  conscience  " !  Over  how  many  of  the  children  of 
men  do  the  wise  and  the  holy  mourn,  as  those  who  might  have  done  well  and  wrought 
good,  but  who  have  turned  aside  to  folly,  guilt,  and  ruin !  As  a  rule,  these  have  gone 
astray  m  their  younger  days.  Temptation  assailed  them  when  they  were  comparatively 
unarmed,  attacked  them  when  least  prepared  to  resist,  and  they  were  overcome.  Our 
text  suggests — 

L  The  peculiab  pebil  of  youth.  Youth  is  endangered  by  three  things  1  The 
invitations  of  the  unholy.  "  Sinners  entice  it."  Companionship  is  dear  to°the  young 
and  IS  very  powerful  over  it.  Its  heart  is  open,  trustful,  responsive.  It  rejoices  with  a 
keen  delight  m  the  confidences  of  friendship.  And  when  one  whose  advances  have 
been  received,  and  who  has  been  welcomed  as  a  congenial  companion,  says,  "Come "it 
is  hard  for  friendsliip  to  refuse;  this  more  especially  when  the  solicitation  comes  n-om 
him  who  has  a  strong  will  or  an  amiable  and  fascinating  disposition.  The  heart  of 
youth  IS  very  powerfully  drawn,  sometimes  to  good,  but  too  often  to  evil,  by  the  charm 


OH.  1. 1—33.]  THE  PROVERBS.  31 

of  early  friendship.  2.  Tlie  subtlety  of  sin  (ver.  17).  Sin  makes  a  very  fair  promise, 
but  its  word  is  false,  its  coin  is  counterfeit.  (1)  It  professes  disinterestedness  (ver.  14), 
but  it  is  utterly  selfish  at  heart.  (2)  It  affects  to  be  able  to  hide  all  traces  and  elude  all 
evil  consequences  of  its  acts  (ver.  12),  but  it  cannot :  the  blood  which  it  sheds  virill  cry 
to  Heaven  fbr  retribution.  (3)  It  offers  gain  and  satisfaction  (vers.  13, 19),  but  it  con- 
stantly fails  to  secure  its  immediate  object,  and  it  never  brings  real  and  lasting  joy  to 
the  soul.  The  fowler  does  not  spread  the  net  in  sight  of  the  bird,  or  he  would  fail. 
Sin  keeps  its  snares  well  out  of  view ;  it  proceeds  with  cruel  cunning ;  it  shows  the 
present  pleasure,  and  hides  the  coming  shame,  and  so  it  secures  its  victims.  3.  The 
appeal  of  powerful  instincts.  The  love  of  daring  exploits  has  led  many  a  young  man 
to  consent  when  sinners  have  said,  "Come,  let  us  attack  the  victim,  that  we  may  seize 
the  prey  "  (vers.  11, 12).  Guilty  violence  shapes  itself  as  manly  daring.  And  the 
instinct  of  acquisition,  the  desire  to  obtain  and  to  possess  (vers.  13,  19),  often  leads 
astray.  Greediness  of  gain  begins  in  a  desire  to  be  rich,  an  ambition  to  have 
abundance. 

IL  The  earnest  solicitude  of  the  wise.  There  is  an  air  of  earnestness,  a  tone  of 
deep  solemnity,  about  these  words  of  the  wise  man.  "  My  son,  if  sinners  entice  thee," 
etc.  (ver.  10);  "My  son,  walk  not  thou  in  the  way,"  etc.  (ver.  15).  Here  is  the 
urgency  of  a  tender  solicitude  ;  here  are  the  pleadings  of  profound  affection.  And 
why  ?  Because  the  wise  man  (the  father,  minister,  teacher)  knows ;  1.  That  sin 
means  ruin  to  others  (ver.  16).  The  path  of  evil  is  marked  with  blood:  it  is  the  track 
which  is  trodden  by  death  itself;  it  is  red  with  the  blood  of  souls.  2.  That  sin  is  the 
supreme  mistake.  It  is  really  laying  wait  for  itself,  to  compass  its  own  miserable  end 
(ver.  18) ;  it  is  robbing  itself  of  all  the  excellency  of  life  in  order  to  secure  its  gains 
(ver.  19).  Men  too  often  "  lose  their  life  for  the  sake  of  the  means  of  living."  They 
expend  on  the  means  all  those  resources  of  their  manhood  which  should  be  devoted  to 
lile  itself.  Sin  is  suicidal ;  the  young  who  are  yielding  themselves  to  a  life  of  ungod- 
liness and  guilt  may  well  be  the  object  of  the  most  fervent  anxiety,  of  the  most 
tender,  tearful  pity  of  the  wise. 

IIL  The  way  of  victoet.  And  there  is  no  other  way  than  that  of  -decisive  refusal 
at  once.  As  soon  as  the  alluring  voice  says,  "  Come,"  let  the  resolute  reply  be  heard, 
"  I  will  not."  Let  the  lips  of  holy  resentment  open  at  once  to  say,  "  Depart  from  me, 
ye  evil-doers ;  I  will  keep  the  commandments  of  my  God  "  (Ps.  cxix.  115).  To  hesitate 
is  to  risk  everything.     Speak  a  strong,  unwavering  refusal  on  the  spot. — 0. 

Vers.  20—23. — The  voice  of  Wisdom.  Wisdom  is  here  personified ;  it  is  the  language 
of  poetic  inspiration.  Later  on,  "  in  the  dispensation  of  the  fulness  of  times,"  Wisdom 
was  manifested  in  human  form,  and  spake  in  the  hearing  of  men.  But  its  voice  has 
never  been  silent  altogether,  from  the  beginning  until  now.     We  are  reminded  of  it— 

I.  That  there  aee  mant  channels  through  which  Wisdom  utters  its  voice. 
The  plural  form  of  the  word  ("wisdoms")  suggests  the  manifoldness  of  the  utterance.  God 
teaches  us  his  truth,  makes  known  his  mind  to  us,  through  (1)  the  objects  and  laws  of 
the  physical  world  around  us;  (2)  the  constitution  of  our  own  frame ;  (3)  the  teachings 
of  our  own  spiritual  nature,  the  judgments  of  our  conscience  and  the  conclusions  of  our 
reason ;  (4)  his  providential  orderings ;  (5)  the  admonitions  of  his  Spmt;  (6)  the  words 
of  Jesus  Christ :  he  is  the  "  Wisdom  of  God  "  (1  Cor.  i.  24). 

II  That  the  voice  or  Wisdom  is  audible  to  all  who  will  listen.  Wisdom 
crieth  without:  she  utters  her  voice  in  the  streets:  she  crieth  in  the  chief  place  of 
concourse,"  etd.  (Vers.  20,  21).  Wisdom,  Divine  truth,  does  not  merely  whisper  its 
doctrine  in  secret  places  where  there  are  few  to  hear;  she  does  not  reserve  her  teaching 
to  the  closed  class-room  to  which  only  some  favoured  ones  find  admittance ;  she  speaks 
"  in  the  open,"  where  the  "ways  meet,"  in  "  the  chief  places  of  concourse.  Upon 
whom  doth  not  God's  light  arise?"  (Job  xxv.  3).  The  fnendly  voices  speak  m  the 
ear  of  childhood ;  they  address  the  mind  of  youth ;  they  have  a  message  for  manhood; 
they  find  their  way  to  the  sanctuary  of  age.  Wisdom  waits  upon  the  pure  and  holy, 
walks  bv  the  side  of  spiritual  indifference  to  win  its  ear,  and  confronts  sin  in  its  most 
Tecret  haunts  Nothing— or  nothing  but  the  most  hardened  iniquity  which  caUs  evil 
good  and  good  evil-d  shut  its  doors  so  fast  that  the  monitory  voice  camiot  enter  tb« 
chamber*  «f  the  soul. 


KS  THE  PROVERBS.  [oh.  1. 1—33. 


in.  That  Wisdom  speaks  with  a  holt  and  loving  energy.  Wisdom  "  crieth/' 
"utters  her  voice  in  the  streets."  There  is  an  energy  and  an  urgency  in  her  tones  and 
m  her  language  (vers.  22, 23).  'i'he  utterance  of  Wisdom  is  none  other  than  the  voice  of 
God.  It  is  our  Father  who  pleads  with  us ;  it  is  our  Saviour  who  calls  to  us ;  it  is  our 
Divine  Friend  who  implores  us.  It  is  no  hard  voice  as  of  a  court  doomster  that 
assaults  us;  it  is  the  pleading,  plaiutive,  pathetic  voice  of  One  who  loves  us  with 
fatherly  affection,  and  yearns  over  us  with  more  than  motherly  solicitude,  that  arrests 
us  in  our  course  and  touches  the  tender  and  sacred  feelings  of  our  heart. 

IV.  That  Wisdom  spares  not  to  tell  tjs  exactly  what  we  abb.  She  doei 
not  mince  her  words ;  she  does  not  cut  away  the  knots  of  the  cord  with  which  we  are 
to  be  stirred  to  newness  of  life.  She  calls  men  simpletons,  scorners,  fouls,  and  upbraids 
them  for  their  stupidity  and  their  folly  (ver.  22).  When  we  listen  to  the  voices  which 
are  from  above  we  must  expect  plain  speaking.  We  miust  not  start  back  with  offence 
if  we  find  ourselves  condemned  in  strong  terms.  "  Thou  art  the  man  I "  follows  the 
narrative  wViich  transfixes  the  cruel  ami  heartless  robber  uf  his  ueighbour's  all.  "Ye 
fools  and  blind  I "  said  the  Wisdom  of  God,  as  he  rebuked  the  hypocrisy  of  his  day.  We 
are  not  to  be  repelled  from,  but  attracted  to,  the  man  who,  speaking  fur  the  only  wise 
God,  puts  sacred  truth  into  the  strongest  and  even  the  sternest  language. 

V.  That  Wisdom  seeks  to  impart  its  own  spirit  to  its  disciples.  "  Behold, 
I  will  pour  out  my  Spirit  unto  you "  (ver.  23).  Its  aim  is  spiritual  and  beneficent. 
God  wounds  only  that  he  may  heal.  He  sends  "poverty  of  spirit"  that  he  may 
thereby  make  rich  for  evermore.  He  humbles  that  he  may  exalt.  His  one  desire  is  to 
make  us  like  himself;  to  put  his  own  Spirit  within  us,  that  we  may  be  "  the  children 
of  our  Father  who  is  in  heaven." — 0. 

Vers.  24 — 33. — I%e  Divine  ultimatum.  There  is  something  which  is  fearful  and 
appalling  in  these  verses.  We  are  ready  to  tremble  as  we  read  them.  We  are  ready 
to  exclaim,  "  How  far  may  human  perversity,  and  Divine  retribution  gol"  With  hushed 
voice,  with  subdued  spirit,  as  those  bifure  whose  eyes  the  lightnings  of  heaven  are 
flishing,  we  consider  the  significance  of  tiie  words.     But  first  we  see — 

I.  That  God  makes  many  appeals  to  the  human  soul.  He  calls, and  we  refuse; 
he  stretches  out  his  hands,  and  no  man  regards  (ver.  24).  He  multiplies  his  counsel 
and  his  reproof  (vers.  25  and  30).  Thus  his  statement  is  sustained  by  his  dealings 
with  us ;  he  gives  us  the  repeated  and  manifold  admonitions  of  our  own  conscience,  of 
the  home,  of  the  sanctuary,  of  friendship,  of  his  Word,  of  his  Spirit,  etc. 

II.  That  human  perversity  goes  as  far  as  the  Divine  patience.  Man 
"  refuses,"  "  regards  not "  (turns  away  his  eyes,  closes  his  ears),  "  gets  at  nought," 
•*  will  not  have,"  "  hates,''  does  not  choose  (deliberately  rejects),  all  the  counsel  of  God. 
Perhaps  the  course  of  human  perversity  may  be  thus  traced  :  first  temporizing,  with 
the  idea  of  submitting  ;  then  postponing,  without  any  such  intention  ;  then  disregard- 
ing, hearing  without  heeding ;  then  positively  disliking  and  getting  away  from;  then 
actually  hating,  cherishing  a  feeling  of  rebellious  aversion,  ending  in  mockery  snd 
sconi.  So  far  may  human  perversity  go.  God's  wonderful  patience  in  seeking  to  win 
is  extended  far,  but  not  further  than  human  opposition  and  resistance.  To  every 
"Come"  from  Heaven  there  is  an  answer,  "  I  will  not,"  in  the  human  spirit, 

III.  That  God  finally  abandons  sin  to  its  doom.  We  must,  of  course,  under- 
stand the  language  of  vers.  26, 27  as  highly  figurative.  No  proverb  is  to  be  pressed  to 
its  fullest  possible  meaning.  The  author  always  assumes  that  it  will  be  applied  with 
intelligence  and  discrimination.  This  is  the  language  of  hyperbole.  No  one  could  for 
a  moment  believe  that  the  eternal  Father  of  our  spirits  would,  literally  and  actually, 
laugh  and  mock  at  our  calamity  and  alarm.  The  significance  of  the  passage  is  that, 
after  a  certain  point  of  perverse  refusal  has  been  past,  God  no  longer  pleads  and  strives 
with  his  wayward  children.  He  interposes  no  further  between  a  man  and  the  conse- 
quences of  his  folly.  He  "leaves  him  alone"  (Hos.  iv.  17).  He  "gives  him  up" 
(Acts  vii.  42;  Eom.  i.  26).  He  permits  sin  to  do  its  own  sad  work  in  the  soul,  and  to 
produce  its  own  natural  results  in  the  life ;  he  removes  his  restraining  hand,  and  sufi'ers 
them  "  to  eat  of  the  fruit-  of  their  own  way,  and  be  filled  with  their  own  devices  " 
(ver.  31).  This  is  the  end  of  impenitence.  We  see  it  only  too  often  illustrated  before 
OAjr  eye*.  Men  act  as  if  they  might  defy  their  Maker,  as  if  they  might  draw  indefinitely 


m.n.  1— 22.]  THE   PROVERBS.  88 


on  the  patience  of  their  Divine  Saviour,  as  if  they  might  reckon  on  the  unlimited 
striving  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  They  are  wrong;  they  make  a  fatal  mistake;  they 
commit  the  one  unpardonable  sin!  They  try  to  go  beyond  the  Divine  ultimatum. 
Grod's  marvellous  patience  reaches  far,  but  it  has  its  bounds.  When  these  are  passed 
his  voice  is  still,  his  hand  is  taken  down,  fiis  interposing  influence  is  withdrawn.  Sin 
must  bear  its  penalty.  But  this  awful  passage  closes  with  a  word  of  hope.  Let  us  turn 
to  a  brighter  aspect,  and  see — 

IV.  That  so  long  as  man  honestly  desires  God's  service,  he  mat  find 
PEACE  and  rest.  (Ver.  33.)  If  at  any  time  it  is  in  our  heart  to  obey  the  voice  of  the 
All-wise,  to  lend  an  attentive  ear  to  the  Divine  counsel,  we  may  reckon  on  his  grace 
and  favour.  Happy  the  heart  that  heeds  the  voice  of  Wisdom  I  Others  may  be  rocked 
and  tossed  on  the  heaving  billows  of  care  sind  anxiety,  of  alarm  and  dread ;  but  he, 
"  dwelling  in  the  secret  place  of  the  Most  High,"  hiding  in  the  Rook  of  his  salvation, 
«hall  "  dwell  safely,  and  be  quiet  from  fear  of  evil."  God  will  hide  him  in  his  pavilion ; 
he  will  "  rest  in  the  Lord." — 0. 

Ver.  32. — "  The  prosperity  of  fools."  "  The  prosperity  of  fools  shall  destroy  them." 
Few  men  fear  prosperity ;  but  if  they  had  enough  wisdom  to  know  their  own  weakness, 
they  would  see  that  there  was  nothing  which  they  had  so  much  reason  to  dread.  We 
approach  the  truth  of  the  text  by  seeing — 

I.  That  it  is  in  cub  human  nature  to  aspire  to  prosperity  and  to  strive 
AFTER  IT.  The  Author  of  our  nature  has  made  us  hunger  for  success  as  the  food  of  the 
soul. 

II.  That  the  prosperity  of  the  wise  is  an  eminently  desirable  thinq. 
For  it  (1)  will  do  thein  no  harm,  and  (2)  will  multiply  their  influence  for  good. 

III.  That  the  prosperity  op  the  foolish  is  a  calamitous  thino.  1.  It  results 
in  ruin  to  other  people — often  their  temporal,  still  more  often  their  spiritual,  ruin.  2. 
It  ends  in  their  own  destruction.  It  leads  down  to  death ;  for  :  (1)  It  fosters  pride,  and 
"  pride  comes  before  a  fall."  (2)  It  ministers  to  passion,  and  passion  conducts  to  the 
grave  in  every  sense.  (3)  It  induces  worldliness,  and  the  man  who  loses  himself  in  the 
cares,  engagements,  and  excitements  of  the  world  is  "  dead  while  he  lives." 

The  conclusion  of  the  matter  is  this :  1.  Let  those  to  whom  God  has  denied 
prosperity  cheerfully  accejit  their  lowliness.  In  their  humble  position  they  are  com- 
paratively safe.  They  live  where  many  arrows  of  destruction  do  not  fly.  2.  Let 
those  who  have  attained  prosperity  ever  recognize  that  the  post  of  honour  and  of  power 
is  the  place  of  danger,  and  that  they  need  peculiar  grace  from  God  that  they  may  not 
fall  3.  Let  those  who  are  being  injured  by  their  prosperity  beware  lest  they  go  down 
fast  to  utter  and  irretrievable  ruin.r--C. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  II. 

Vers.  1 — 22. — 8.  ITiird  admonitory  dis- 
course, pointing  out  the  benefits  whioh  arise 
from  a  sincere,  earnest,  and  persevering  search 
after  Wisdom.  This  discourse  divides  itself 
into  three  parts.  (1)  Vers.  1 — 9:  a  state- 
ment of  the  conditions  whioh,  if  fulfilled, 
result  in  the  highest  knowledge  of  Jehovah 
—the  fear  of  Jehovah  and  the  knowledge  of 
God,  who  is  the  Source  of  wisdom  and  the 
Protection  and  Ensurerof  safety  to  the  right- 
wus.  (2)  Vers.  10—19:  the  negatively  bene- 
jcial  results  of  Wisdom,  in  delivery  from  the 
paths  of  evil,  from  destructive  lusts  and 
passions,  from  the  temptations  of  wicked 


men  and  wicked  women.    (3)  Vers.  20 — 22 ; 

the  epilogue,  or  conclusion,  combining  en- 
couragement on  the  one  hand,  and  warning 
on  the  other. 

Ver.  1. — The  teacher  here  reverts  to  the 
original  form  of  his  address,  as  appears  from 
the  employment  of  the  term,  my  son.  II 
seems  clear  that  it  is  no  longer  Wisdom 
personified  who  ia  the  speaker,  from  the  fact 
that  the  words,  "  wisdom  and  understanding" 
in  ver.  2  are  used  without  the  possessive 
pronoun  "  my,"  whioh  would  have  been  im- 
doubtedly  inserted  if  this  address  had  been 
»  continuation  of  the  discourse  in  the  pre- 
ceding chapter.  Some  of  the  ideas  of  that 
address,  however,  are  restated,  as  the  crying 
and  lilting  up  the  voice  after  Wisdom,  and  th» 


PBOVKRBS.  * 


3i 


THE  PEOVBBBS. 


[oh.  u.  1—22. 


conclusion,  wherein  the  respective  destinies 
of  the  pious  and  wicked  are  portrayed.  The 
particle  "if"  (dn)  is  conditional,  and  serves 
to  introduce  the  aeries  of  clauses  (vers.  1 — 4) 
which  lay  down  the  conditions  upon  which 
the  promises  depend,  and  which  form  the 
protasis  to  the  double  apodosis  in  vers.  5 
and  9.  De  Wette,  Mever,  and  Delitzsoh 
regard  it  as  voluntative,  as  expre.«sing  a  wish 
on  the  part  bf  the  teacher,  and  translate, 
"Oh  that  thou  wouldst!"  and  Dtt,  "if,"  is 
used  in  this  way  in  Ps.  oxxxix.  19;  but  the 
LXX.  {^dy)  and  Vulgate  (si)  make  it  con- 
ditional. It  is  repeated  in  an  emphatic 
form  in  ver.  3.  Receive.  Tlie  verbs  "re- 
ceive "  and  "  hide  "  show  that  the  endeavour 
after  Wisdom  is  to  be  candid  and  sincere. 
"  To  receive "  (np^)  seems  to  be  here  used, 
like  the  LXX.  Sex^a-Cai,  in  the  sense  of  "  to 
receive  graciously,"  "  to  admit  the  words  of 
Wisdom."  It  is  noticeable  that  there  is  a 
gradation  in  emphasis  in  the  various  terms 
here  used  by  the  teacher.  Just  as ''  command- 
ments "  is  stronger  than  ''  words,"  so  "hide" 
is  stronger  tLan  "receive."  The  emphasizing 
is  carried  on  in  the  following  verses  in  the 
same  way,  and  at  length  culminates  in  ver. 
4,  whicli  sums  up  the  ardent  spirit  in  wMch 
the  search  after  Wisdom  is  to  be  prosecuted 
in  presenting  it  to  us  in  its  strongest  form. 
Hide.  The  original  (jss,  tsaphan)  is  here 
nsed  in  a  different  sense  to  that  in  which 
it  occurs  in  ch.  i.  11  and  18.  It  here  refers, 
as  in  oh.  vii.  1 ;  x.  14 ;  and  xiii.  22,  to  the 
storing  or  laying  up,  as  of  treasure,  in  some 
secret  repository,  and  means  "to  lay  up." 
The  Divine  commands  of  tlie  teacher  are  to 
be  hidden  in  safe  custoiiy  in  the  memory, 
in  the  understand  ng,  in  the  conscience,  and 
in  the  heart  (cf.  ch.  iv.  21  ;  vii.  1).  The 
psalmist  expresses  the  same  idea  in  Ps. 
cxix.  11,  "Thy  words  Ijave  I  hid  in  my 
heart,  that  I  might  not  sin  against  thee." 

Ver.  2. — This  verse  is  dependent  on  the 
preceding.  So  that  thou  incline.  The  literal 
translation  is  "  to  incline ; "  but  the  inclina- 
tion of  the  ear  and  the  application  of  tl:e  heart 
follow  as  a  consequence  upon  the  preceding 
ideas  (cf.  the  Vulgate,  ut  audiat  sapientiam 
amis  tva).  The  root-idea  of  the  original 
(aK-'j^,  hasiiav)  is  "  to  sharpen,"  viz.  the  ear 

as  expressed,  and  so  to  give  diligent  atten- 
tion to  the  precepts  of  Wisdom.  In  ch.  i. 
24  it  is  rendered  "  to  regard. '  To  apply 
thine  heart  is  to  turn  the  lieart  with  tlie 
whole  scope  of  its  powers,  in  the  spirit  of 
humility  and  eagerness,  to  understanding. 
As  the  ear  represents  the  outward  veliicle 
of  communication,  so  the  heart  (a^,  lev)  re- 
presents the  inward,  the  intellectual  faculty, 
the  mind,  or  it  may  mean  the  affections  as 
iuggested  by  the  LXX.  KopSia  and  Vulgate 


cor.  Understanding  (nj^^l^i  f'omiah')  is  ben 
interchanged  with  "wisdom,"  which  must 
determine  its  meaning  to  some  extent.  The 
LXX.  intei-preters  take  it  as  aiveais,  "the 
faculty  of  comprehension."  Like  nj'a  {vitah) 
in  ch.  i.  2,  the  word  describes  the  faculty  of 
distinguishing  or  separating ;  but  it  does  not 
appear  to  be  here  used  as  representing  this 
"as  a  faculty  of  the  soul,  but  as  a  Divine 
power  which  communicates  itself  as  the  gift 
of  God  "  (Delitzsch).  A  secoml  and  perhaps 
simpler  sense  may  be  given  to  the  sentence. 
It  may  mean  the  turning  or  applying  of  the 
heart  in  an  affectionate  and  loving  way,  i.e. 
with  full  purpose,  to  the  discrimination  of 
what  is  rig]  it  and  what  wrong.  The  ideai 
of  wisdom  and  understanding  seem  to  some 
extent  to  be  brought  forward  as  personifica- 
tions. They  are  things  outside  of  ourselves, 
to  which  we  have  to  give  attention.  Eiligion 
appeals  not  only  to  the  affections,  but  also 
to  the  intellect,  as  this  satisfies  all  ijie'  yearn- 
ings of  our  nature. 

Ver.  3. — ^Yea,  if  thou  oriest  after  know- 
ledge. The  endeavour  after  Wisdom  is  not 
only  to  be  sincere,  it  is  also  to  be  earnest, 
as  appears  from  the  "  yea,  if,"  and  the  verbs 
"crying"  and  "lifting  up  the  voice,"  both 
of  which  frequently  occur  in  Scripture  as 
indicating  earnestness.  This  earnestness  is 
the  counterpart  of  that  which  Wisdom  herself 
displays  (see  oh.  i.  20,  21).  Knowledge;  i.e. 
insight.  In  the  original  there  is  practically 
little  difference  between  "knowledge"  and 
"understanding"  (nya  and  nmn).  They 
carry  on  the  idea  expressed  in  "  understand- 
ing" in  the  preceding  verse,  and  thus  throw 
the  emphasis  on  the  verbs.  The  LXX.  and 
VulgaiB,  however,  taie  "knowledge"  as 
equivalent  to  <ro<pia,  sapieutia,  "  wisdom." 
The  reading  of  the  Targum,  "  If  thou  callest 
understanding  thy  mother,"  arises  from  read- 
ing DN  for  Qij,  but  is  not  to  be  preferred  to 
the  Masoretio  text,  as  it  destroys  the 
parallelism. 

Ver.  4. — If  thou  seekest,  etc.  The  climax 
in  the  series  of  conditions  is  reached  in  this 
verse;  and  the  imagery  employed  in  both 
clauses  indicates  that  the  search  after  Wis- 
dom is  to  be  persevering,  unrelaxing,  and 
diligent,  like  the  unremitting  toil  and  labour 
with  which  men  carry  on  mining  operations. 
"  To  seek  "  (ppj,  bakash)  in  the  original  is 
properly  "to  seek  diligently"  (piel),  and  is 
kindred  to  "to  search  "  (^p^,  Ihaphas),  which 
again  is  equivalent  to  "to  dig"  (nsn,  Itha 
phar),  the  Vulgate  effodere,  "to  dig  out." 
Compare  the  expression  in  Job  iii.  21,  "  And 
dig  for  it  more  than  for  hid  treasures."  We 
trace  in  these  verbs  the  idea  in  the  mind  of 
the  teacher  in^iicsited  above,  which  find* 
expression  also  in  the  object  of  the  search, 
the  silver,  in  its  crude  state,  and  the  hidden 


OH.  II.  1 — 22.J 


THE  PROVERBS. 


85 


treasures  (D':bnp,  mat'monim),  i.e.  the  trea- 
sures of  gold,  silver,  and  precious  metal 
concealed  in  the  earth.  The  comparison 
here  made  between  the  search  for  Wisdom 
and  the  search  for  the  hidden  treasures  of 
the  earth  was  not  unfamiliar  to  the  Hebrew 
mind,  as  it  is  fcnml  worked  out  with  great 
beauty  of  detail  iu  the  twenty -eighth  chapter 
of  Job.  Again,  the  comparison  of  Wisdom 
with  things  most  precious  in  the  estimation 
of  man  is  natural  and  common,  and  occurs 
in  Pa.  cxix.  72;  Job  xxviii.  15—19.  The 
same  ideas  and  comparisons  here  used  are 
presented  to  us  iu  the  New  Testament 
teaching,  in  our  Lord's  parable  of  the  man 
who  finds  the  hid  treasure  in  the  field,  and, 
iu  the  phraseology  of  St.  Paul,  who  spealcs 
of  "  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  know- 
ledge,'' and  of  "the  unsearchable  riches  of 
Christ."  "  Divine  knowledge  is  an  inex- 
haustible mine  of  precious  ore"  (Wardlaw). 
The  language  of  the  Proverbs  would  receive 
additional  force  from  the  ciicumstanoes  of 
the  reign  of  Solomon,  the  most  splendid  and 
prosperous  era  in  the  annals  of  the  Jewish 
national  history,  iu  the  means  taken  to 
secure  the  treasures  of  other  and  distant 
countries;  the  wealth  and  the  riches  of  that 
reign  (see  2  Chron.  ix.  20 — 22)  would  help 
to  bring  out  the  idea  of  the  superlative  value 
of  Wisdom.  In  no  era  of  the  Jewish  national 
history  was  there  such  abundance  of  riches, 
such  splendid  prosperity,  as  in  the  reign  of 
Solomon,  whose  ships  of  Tarshish  brought 
"gold  and  silver"  (see  2  Chron.  ix.  20—22), 
and  this  state  of  things  would  give  point  to 
the  comparisons  which  the  teacher  uses  in 
our  text. 

Ver.  5. — Then  shalt  thou  understand  the 
fear  of  the  lord.  Thm  ()N),  introducing 
the  first  apodosis,  and  answering  to  the 
conditional  "if"  of  vers.  1,  3,  4.  The 
earnest  endeavour  after  Wisdom  meets  with 
its  reward,  and  those  that  seek  shall  find 
(cf.  Matt.  vii.  7);  and  thus  an  indufement 
is  held  forth  to  listen  to  the  admonition  of 
the  teacher.  Understand  implies  the  power 
of  discernment,  but  Zookler.  gives  it  the 
further  meaning  of  taking  to  one's  self  as 
a  spiritual  possi  ssion,  just  as  "find,"  mean- 
ing primarily  '■  to  arrive  at,"  conveys  the 
idea  of  getting  possession  of  (Mercerus).  The 
fear  of  the  Lord  (nin;  ns.-i.',  yir'ath  y'hovah) ; 
"  the  fear  of  Jehovah,"  as  in  ch.  i.  7.  As 
it  is  the  beginning,  so  it  is  the  highest 
form  of  knowledge  and  the  greatest  good. 
Elsewhere  it  is  represented  as  a  fountain 
of  life  (ch.  XV.  27).,  All  true  wisdom  is 
summed  up  in  "  the  fear  of  the  Lord."  It 
here  means  the  reverence  due  to  him,  and 
80  comprises  the  whole  range  of  the  religious 
affections  and  feelings,  which  respond  to 
various  attributes  of  the  Divine  character  as 
they  are  revealed,  and  which  find  their  ex- 


pression iu  holy  worship.  The  knowledge 
of  God  (D'n^^.  nr-1,  daath  EloUm)  ;  lite- 
rally, the  hnowtedge  of  Elohim.  Not  merely 
cognition,  but  knowledge  in  its  wider  bense. 
The  two  ideas  of  "the  fear  of  the  Lord" 
and  "the  knowledge  of  God"  act  recipro> 
cally  on  each  other.  Just  as  without  rever- 
ence of  God  there  can  be  no  knowlfdge  of  him 
in  its  true  sense,  so  the  knowledge  of  God 
will  increase  and  deepen  the  feeling  of  rever- 
ence. But  it  is  noticeable  that  the  teacher 
here,  as  in  ch.  ix.  10,  where,  how  ever,  it  is 
"  the  knowledge  of  the  holy  "  (a'Einp  nri, 

daafh  k'dosMm),  gives  the  chief  place  to 
reverence,  and  thus  indicates  that  it  is 
the  basis  of  knowledge,  which  is  its  fruit 
and  result.  The  relation  here  suggested 
is  analogous  to  that  which  subsists  be- 
tween faith  and  knowledge,  and  recalls 
the  celebrated  dictum  of  Auselm  :  "Neque 
euim  quaere  intelligere  ut  credam;  Bed 
credo,  ut  iutelligam."  Elohim,  here  in- 
terchanged with  Jehovah,  is  not  of  fre- 
quent occurrence  iu  the  Proverbs,  as  it  is 
only  found  therein  five  times,  while  the 
predominating  word  which  is  used  to  de- 
signate the  Deity  is  Jehovah.  But  it  is  diffi- 
cult to  draw  any  distinction  between  them 
here.  Jehovah  may  refer  more  especially 
to  the  Personality  of  the  Divine  nature, 
while  Elohim  may  refer  to  Christ's  glory 
(Plumptre),  Bishop  Wordsworth  thinks 
that  a  distinction  is  made  between  the 
knowledge  of  Elohim  and  the  knowledge  of 
man  which  is  of  little  worth. 

Ver.  6. — For  the  Lord  giveth  wisdom. 
The  Lord  Jehovah  is  the  only  and  true 
Source  of  wisdom.  The  truth  stated  here 
is  also  met  with  in  Dan.  ii.  21,  "He  giveth 
wisdom  unto  the  wisp,  and  knowledge  to  them 
that  know  understanding."  He  "giveth," 
or  more  properly,  "  wiU  give "  (jw,  yitten, 

future  of  jnj,  nathan),  wisdom ;    but   the 

connection  requires  us  to  understand  that 
the  assurance  applies  only  to  those  who 
seek  after  it  earnestly  and  truly  (cf.  Jas. 
i.  5 — 7).  The  two  coefficients  to  our  ob- 
taining wisdom  are  our  efiforts  and  God's 
assistance.  Solomon  may  be  adduced  as  • 
striking  exemplification  of  this;  he  asked 
for  "  an  understanding  heart,"  and  God 
graciously  granted  his  request  (see  1  Kings 
iii.  9, 12).  Out  of  his  mouth  (vsn,  mippiv); 
ex  ore  ejus ;  God  is  here  spoken  of  anthropo- 
logically. He  is  the  true  Teacher.  The 
meaning  is  that  God  communicates  wisdom 
through  the  medium  of  his  Word  (Delitzscli, 
Pi.).  The  law  proceeds  from  his  mouth 
(Job  xxii.  22).  In  the  Book  of  Wisdom  (vii. 
25),  "Wisdom  is  the  breath  of  the  power 
of  God."  His  word  is  conveyed  to  us  through 
men  divinely  inspired,  and  hence  St.  Peter 
(2  Pet.  i.  21)  says  that  "  holy  men  of  old 


36 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[oh.  n.  1—22. 


gpake  as  they  were  moved  by  the  Holy 
Ghost." 

Ver.  7. — Wisdom  which  is  the  foundation 
of  security  and  safety,  and  heuoe  is  sound 
wisdom,  is  that  which  God  treasures  up  for 
the  righteous.  The  teacher  passes  to  an- 
other phase  of  the  Divine  character.  God 
is  not  only  the  Source  of  wisdom ;  he  is  also 
the  Ensurer  of  safety,  the  Source  of  salvation 
to  tliose  who  act  uprightly.  It  will  be 
noted  that  the  use  of  the  word  is  confined 
to  t)ie  Proverbs  and  Job,  with  the  exception 
of  the  two  passages  in  Isa-ah  and  Mioah. 
Buckler.  Besides  storing  up  the  treasures 
of  sound  wisdom,  which  the  righteous  may 
use  and  bo  obtain  security  in  their  upright- 
ness, God  is  himself  a  BucMer,  or  Sliield 
QiD^  mageri),  to  those  who  walk  in  innocence. 
This  aspect  of  God's  du-ectly  protLCting  power 
is  met  with  in  other  parts  of  Scripture.  In 
Gen.  XV.  1  he  encourages  Abram  with  the 
assurance, "  I  am  thy  Shield."  In  Ps.  xxxiii. 
20 ;  Ixxxiv.  11 ;  Ixxxix.  18 ;  cxliv.  2,  Jehovah 
is  called  a  Shield  to  liis  saints.  He  renders 
them  security  against  the  assaults  of  their 
enemies,  and  especially  against  the  fiery 
darts  of  the  wicked  one.  Again,  in  ch. 
XXX.  5,  it  is  said,  "  God  is  a  Shield  (magen) 
unto  them  that  walk  uprightly."  It  is 
incorrect  to  take  JJO  (magen)  either  as  an 

accusative  after  the  verb  or  in  apposition  with 
"sound  wisdom."  To  them  that  walk  up- 
rightly ;  literally,  to  the  walkers  in  innocence 
(Dh  'iVn"?,  I'khoVlcey  thom).  Dh  (tham)  is 
"  integrity  of  mind,"  "  moral  faultlessness," 
"innocence."  "To  walk  uprightly"  is  to 
maintain  a  course  of  life  regulated  by 
right  principles,  and  directed  to  right 
ends.  He  "walks  uprightly  who  lives 
with  the  fear  of  God  as  his  principle,  the 
Word  of  God  as  his  rule,  and  the  glory  of 
God  as  his  end  "  (Wardlaw).  The  com- 
pleteness  of  the  moral  and  religious  cha- 
racter is  involved  in  the  expression  which 
is  found  also  in  ch.  x.  9  and  Ps.  Ixxxiv.  11. 
The  Vulgate  translates  the  latter  clause  of 
the  verse, proteget gradienies  simpliciter,  "he 
will  protect  those  who  walk  in  simplicity ;  " 
of.  2  Cor.  i.  12  in  illustration  of  the  phrase. 
Ho  layeth  up ;  i.e.  he  treasures  up  (LXX., 
6ria-avpl(eiv),  or  preserves  and  protects  (cus- 
iodire,  Vulgate),  as  a  person  does  "  treasure 
or  jewel,  that  it  may  not  be  stolen  "  (Zooklor). 
The  majority  of  commentators  read  the  Keri 
(jsi;,  "he  will  trt;asure  up,"  future  of  [si) 
in  preference  to  the  Khetib  ()Di'i,.  perfect 
of  same  verb,  with  prefix  1.,  "and  he  trea- 
sured up  "),  and  this  is  the  reading  adopted 
in  the  Authorized  Version.  Tlie  Keri  im- 
plies that  God  does  treasure  up  sound 
wisdom,  while  the  Khetib,  as  Delitzsoh 
•bserves,  has  the  force  of  the  aorist,  and  so  | 


represents  the  treasuring  up  as  an  accom- 
plished fact.  The  same  verb  occurs  in  ch. 
ii.  1,  where  it  is  translated  in  the  Authorized 
Version  by  "hide,"  and  also  in  oh.  vii.  1 
and  X.  14:  by  "lay  up."  The  laying  up,  or 
treasuring,  points  to  the  preciousness  of 
that  which  is  treasured,  "souud  wisdom." 
Sound  wisdom.  A  great  variety  of  opinions 
exists  as  to  the  true  meaning  of  the  word 
in  the  original,  n;B'in  (tvushiyyah),  of  which 
"  sound  wisdom  "  is  an  interp  i  etation.  Zockler 
explains  it  as  "  wisdom,  reflection; "  Delitzsoh, 
as  "advancement  and  promotion;"  Dathe, 
as  "  solid  fortune ; "  Gesenius,  as  "  aid." 
The  proper  meaning  of  the  word  seems  to 
be  "substance,"  from  tlie  root  n»;,  "to-be, 
to  exist,  to  be  firm."  Professor  Lee  remarks 
on  the  word,  "  From  the  places  in  which  it 
occurs,  either  wealth,  thought,  or  some  such 
sense  it  manifestly  requires.  It  occurs  in 
Job  vi.  13,  in  parallelism  with  '  help ; '  in 
ch.  ii.  7,  with  a  '  shield ; '  in  Job  xi.  6,  with 
'wisdom;'  in  Job  xii.  16,  with  ' strength ; ' 
in  ch.  iii.  21,  with  '  discretion ; '  in  ch.  viii. 
14,  with  'counsel'  and  'understanding;' 
in  Isa.  xxviii.  29,  with  '  counsel ; '  and  so  in 
Job  xxvi.  3.  In  Job  xxx.  22  and  Micah  vi.  9, 
'  entirely '  or  the  like  seems  to  suit  the  con- 
text; see  also  ch.  xviii.  1,  and  generally 
'excess,'  or  'abundance,'  taken  either  in  a 
good  or  bad  sense,  and  varied  by  other  con- 
siderations, seems  to  prevail  in  every  case  in 
which  this  word  is  used  "  (see  Professor  Lee, 
on  Job  V.  12).  The  parallelism  of  the  pas- 
sage before  us  seems  to  require  that  it 
should  be  understood  in  the  sense  of  security ; 
and  transftrring  the  idea  to  wisdom  as  the 
means  of  security.  This  idea  is  reproduced 
in  the  LXX.  a-ar-lipia,  the  Vulgate  salus, 
and  the  Targum  incolumitas. 

Ver.  8. — He  keepeth  the  paths  of  judg- 
ment. This  verse  is  explanatory  of  the  latter 
hemistich  of  ver.  7,  and  points  out  more 
fully  in  what  way  God  is  a  Protector  of  his 
saints.  Some  connect  the  Hebrew  infinitive 
•isf?(lin'tsor),  "to  watch  or  keep,"  with"them 
that  walk  uprightly,"  and  translate,  "  tliem 
that  walk  uprightly  by  keeping  the  paths  of 
judgment ; "  but  this  is  to  transfer  the  idea 
of  protection  from  God  to  suo'i  persons.  The 
verb  signifies  specially  "  to  defend,  to  preserve 
from  danger,"  as  in  ch.  .xxiL  12,  "  The  eyes 
of  the  Lord  preserve  knowledge ;  i.e.  defend 
or  protect  it  from  danger."  It  is  God  who 
"keepeth  the  paths  of  judgment,"  as  he 
alone  lias  the  power  to  do  so.  He  watches 
over  all  that  walk  therein,  guides,  superin- 
tends, and  protects  them.  The  paths  of 
judgment;  oi  lather,  justice,  Q^B-p  rtniN  (ar"- 
Moth  mish'pat).  The  abstract  is  here  used 
for  the  concrete,  and  the  phrase  means  "  the 
paths  of  the  just,"  i.e.  the  paths  in  whioh 
the  just  walk,  or  « those  who  wallt  justlj  " 


OH.  n.  1—22.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


87 


(MerceruB).  This  expression  corresponds 
with  "  the  way  of  bis  saintB,"  just  as  "  keep  " 
and  "  preserve"  are  synonymous  verbs,  both 
meaning  "  to  guard,  keep  safe,  or  protect."  He 
preserveth  the  way  of  Ms  saints.  God  does 
this  (1)  by  his  preventing  grace,  as  in  Ps. 
Ixvi.  9,  "  He  Buifereth  not  our  feet  to  slip." 
Of.  Hannah's  song,  "  He  wOl  keep  the  feet 
of  his  saints  "  (1  Sam.  ii.  9) ;  (2)  by  angtlio 
agency,  as  in  Ps.  xoi.  11,  "He  shall  give 
his  angels  charge  over  thee  to  keep  thee  in 
all  thy  ways."  The  saints  are  ever  under 
the  watchful  care  and  mighty  protection  of 
Jehovah.  Sis  aainte  07PD,  Wtasidav) ;  i.e.  the 
pious  towards  God,  the  godly,  those  in  whose 
hearts  tie  principles  of  sanctity  have  been 
implanted,  and  who  cherish  earnest  inward 
love  to  God,  and  "  walk  righteously "  atid 
"  speak  uprightly  "  (Isa.  xxxiii.  15).  It  is  re- 
markable that  the  word  "  saints  "  only  occurs 
oncu  (in  this  passage)  in  the  Proverbs.  During 
the  period  of  the  Maccabssan  Wars,  a  party 
or  sect,  which  aimed  at  ceremonial  purity, 
claimed  for  themselves  the  title  of  Ohandim 
or  Asidssane  ('ActiSoioi),  as  expressive  of  their 
piety  or  devotion.  They  are  those  whom 
Moses  called  "  men  of  holiness,"  Exod.  xxii. 
31  Q!ijp~>^i^),v'an'shev-]wdesliy,  cf.  Ps.  Ixxxix. 
5;  cxiix.  1 ;  ixxxix.  8 ;  Deut.  xxxiii.  3;  Dan. 
vii.  18,  21,  22,  25.  Under  the  Christian 
dispensation,  the  saints  are  those,  who  are 
sanctified  in  Ch  riot  Jesus  (1  Oor.  i.  2 ;  1  John 
Y.  1),  and  who  are  holy  in  all  manner  of 
conversation  (1  Pet.  i.  15 ;  1  Maco.  ii.  42 ; 
vii.  13 ;  2  Maoc.  xiv.  6) ;  see  Bishop  Light- 
foot.  '  Colossians  and  Philemon,'  diss.  ii. 
p.  355. 

Ver.  9, — Then  (in,  az),  repeated  from  ver. 
5,  introduces  the  second  apodosis.  As  the 
former  referred  to  God,  so  this  appears  to 
refer  more  especially  to  man,  and  thus  we 
have  stated  the  whole  benefit,  in  its  twofold 
aspect,  which  Wisdom  confers  on  those  who 
diligently  seek  her.  It  is  not  to  be  affirmed, 
however,  that  righteousness  and  judgment 
and  equity  refer  exclusively  to  man;  they 
must  represent  some  aspects  of  our  relation- 
ship to  God,  both  from  the  meaning  of  the 
words  themsalves,  and  because  the  law  whiuh 
regulates  our  dealings  and  intercourse  with 
man  has  its  seat  in  the  higher  law  of  our 
relation  to  God. ,  Righteousness,  and  judg- 
ment, and  ectuity.  The^e  three  words  occur 
in  the  same  collocation  in  ch.  i.  3,  which 
see.  Yea,  every  good  path.  "Yea"  does 
not  occur  in  the  original.  The  expression 
is  a  summarizing  of  the  three  previous  con- 
ceptions, as  if  the  teacher  implied  that  all 
good  paths  are  embraced  by  and  included 
in  "  righteoudueas,  and  judgment,  and 
equity;"  but  the  term  is  also  comprehensive 
in  the  widest  degree.  The  literal  transla- 
Uon  i»  "every  path  of  good"  (^ta-h^vg-h^. 


eal-ma'gal-tov),  i.e.  every  course  of  action  of 
which  goodness  is  the  characteristic,  or,  aa 
the  Authorized  Version,  "  every  good  path," 
the  sense  in  which  it  was  understood  hy  St. 
Jerome,  omnem  oriitam  bonam.  The  word 
here  used  for  "  path  "  is  h^sa  (ma' gal),  "  the 
way  in  which  the  chariot  roils  "  (Dclitzsch), 
and  metaphorically  a  course  of  action,  as  in 
ch.  ii.  15 ;  iv.  26. 

Vers.  10— 19.— Statement  of  the  advan- 
tages which  result  from  the  possession  of 
Wisdom,  and  specially  as  a  safeguard  against 
evil  men  (vers.  12—15)  and  evil  women  (vers 
16—19). 

Ver.   10. — When    wisdom    entereth   into 
thine  heart.    There  is  practically  little  dif- 
ference as  to  the  sense,  whutlier  we  render 
tlje  Hebrew  '3  by  the  conditional  "  if"  or  by 
the  temporal  "  when  "  as  in  the  Authorized 
Version.     The  conditional  force  is  adopted 
by  the  LXX.  Hv  and  the  Vulgate  si.    In  the 
previous  section  of  this  address,  the  teacher 
has  shown  that  the  search  after  Wisdom  will 
result  in  possession;  now  he  points  out,  when 
Wisdom  is  secured,  certain  advantageous  con- 
sequences  follow.     The  transition   is  easy 
and  natural.    The  form  of  construction  is 
very  similar  to  that  adopted   previously. 
There  is  first  the  hypothesis,  if  we  give 
this  force  to  '3,  though  much  shorter ;  and 
secondly  the  climax,  also  shorter  and  branch- 
ing off  into  the  statement  of  two  special 
cases,    iintereth ;  or,  sjiall  enter  (Nun,  ihavo) 
in  the  sense  of  permanent  residence  in  the 
heart.    Wisdom  is  not  only  to  come  in,  but 
to  rest  there  (of.  ch.  xiv.  33).    The  expression 
is  illustrated  by  John  xiv.  23.     The  imagery 
of  the  verse  is  taken  from  the  reception  and 
entertainment  of  a  guest.    As  we  receive  a 
welcome  guest,  and  find   pleasure  in   his 
company,  so  is  Wisdom  to  be  dear  to  the 
heart  and  soul.    Into  thine  heart  ('^373, 6'K- 
heehd).    The  heurt  (3^)  "  concentrates  in  it- 
self the  personal  life  of  man  in  all  its  rela- 
tions, the  conscious  and  the  unconscious,  the 
voluntary  and  tljo  involuntary,  the  physical 
and  the  spiritual  impulses,  the  emotions  and 
states  "  (Cremer, '  Bib.  Theol.  Lex.,'  sub  voce 
KopSia).    It  is  that  in  which  the  tysj  (ne- 
phesh),"  soul,"  manifests  itself.  Itis  the  centre 
of  the  life  of  will  and  desire,  of  the  emotions, 
and  of  the  moral  life.     Eudloff  ('  Lehre  von 
Menscher,'  p.  59,  sqq.,  apud  Zockler)  remarks  . 
that  everywhere  in  the  Scriptures  the  heart 
appears  to  belong  more  to  the  life  of  desire 
and  feeling  than  to  the  intellectual  activity 
of  the  soul.     But  at  the  same  time,  it  is  to 
be  noted  that  intelligent  conception  is  at- 
tributed to  the  heart  (3^.) ;  ch.  xiv.  10 ;  viii. 
5 ;  xvi.  9.     The  expression  seems  to  be  put 


88 


THE  PBOVEEBS. 


[OH.  n.  1—22. 


here  for  the  moral  side  of  man's  nature ;  and 
In  the  HelleniBtio  sense,  xapSla,  the  proper 
equivalent  of  a^j  "  heart,"  involves  all  that 
stands  for  yavs,  \6yos,  irurefSjjinj,  and  Bvi^js ; 
i.e.  it  Includes,  besides  other  things,  the  in- 
telleotual  faculty.  The  word  "  soul "  (WM, 
nepliesh^  is  here  found  in  combination  with 
"heart."  The  other  passages  where  they 
are  mentioned  together  are  Deut.  vi.  5 ;  Ps. 
xiii.  2;  Jer.  iv.  19;  ch.  xxiv.  12.  The 
soul  is  primarily  the  vital  principle,  but 
according  to  the  usus  loquendi  of  Holy 
Scripture,  it  frequently  denotes  the  entire 
inward  nature  of  man ;  it  is  that  part  which 
is  the  object  of  the  work  of  redemption. 
The  home  of  the  soul  is  the  heart,  as  ap- 
pears from  ch.  xiv.  10,  "  The  heart 
knoweth  his  own  bitterness  [or,  'the  bitter- 
ness of  his  soul,'  Hebrew]."  While  the 
"heart"  (a^J  is  rendered  by  KapSia  and 
tfivX^'  ^^^  °^^J  Giieek  equivalent  to  "  soul " 
(ti'sj)  is  ^fivxii.  The  two  expressions, "  heart," 
and  "  soul,"  in  the  passage  before  us  may  be 
taken  as  designating  both  the  moral  and 
spiritual  sides  of  man's  nature.  Wisdom  is 
to  be  acceptable  and  pleasant  to  man  in  these 
respects.  It  may  be  remarked  that  an  in- 
tellectual colouring  is  given  to  the  word 
"heart"  by  the  LXX.,  who  render  it  by 
Stavoia,  as  also  in  Deut.  vi.  5  and  other 
passages,  evidently  from  the  idea  that  pro- 
minence is  given  to  the  reflective  faculty. 
Classically,  Siavolais  equivalent  to  "  thought," 
•'  faculty  of  thought,"  "  intellect."  Know- 
ledge (Hebrew,  npj) ;  literally,  to  know,  as  in 
cli.  viii.  10  and  xiv.  6;  here  used  synony- 
mously with  "  wisdom."  Knowledge,  not 
merely  as  cognition,  but  perception ;  i.e.  not 
merely  kuowing  a  thing  with  respect  to  its 
existence  and  being,  but  as  to  its  excellence 
and  truth.  Equivalent  to  the  LXX.  aia-Bt)- 
ffis,  "  perception,"  and  the  Vulgate  scientia. 
Is  pleasant  (Hebrew,  D^y,yin'am);  literally, 
thall  be  pleasant ;  i.e.  sweet,  lovely,  beautiful. 
The  same  word  is  used  impersonally  in  Jacob's 
blessing  of  Issachar  (Gen.  xlix.  15,  "  And 
he  saw  the  land  that  it  was  pleasant "),  and 
also  in  ch.  xxiv.  25,  "  To  those  that  punish 
[i.e.  the  judges]  there  shall  be  delight."  And 
this  usage  has  led  Dunn  to  take  "knowledge" 
as  an  accusative  of  reference,  and  to  translate, 
"  There  is  pleasure  to  thy  soul  in  respect  of 
knowledge;"  but  the  Authorized  Version 
may  be  accepted  as  correct.  "Knowledge" 
is  masculine,  as  in  ch.  viii.  10  and  xiv.  6,  and 
agrees  with  the  masculine  verb  "is  pleasant." 
Knowledge  will  be  pleasant  from  the  enjoy- 
ment and  rest  which  it  yields.  The  Arabic 
presents  the  idea  of  this  enjoyment  under  a 
different  aspect :  "  And  prudence  shall  be 
in  thy  ioul  the  most  beautiful  glory." 

Ver.  11. — ^Discretion  shall  preserve  thee. 
Viserelion  (pgirtf,  m'timoth'),  as  in  ch.  i.  4,  is 


the  outward  manifestation  of  wisdom;  it 
tests  what  is  uncertain,  and  avoids  danger 
(Hitzig).  The  word  carries  with  it  the  idea 
of  reflection  or  consideration  (see  oh.  iii.  21 ; 
V.  2  ;  viii.  12).  The  LXX.  reads,  ^ovXii  xaX-li, 
"  good  counsel; "  and  the  Vulgate,  concilium. 
Shall  preserve  thee.  The  idea  of  protection 
and  guarding,  which  is  predicated  of  Jehovah 
in  ver.  8,  is  here  transferred  to  discretion 
and  understanding,  which  to  some  extent 
are  put  forward  as  personifications.  Under- 
standing (njian,  t'vundh),  as  in  ch.  ii.  11; 
the  power  of  distinguishing  and  separating, 
and,  in  the  case  of  conflicting  interests,  to 
decide  on  the  best.  Shall  keep ;  i.e.  keep 
safe,  or  in  the  sense  of  watching  over  or 
guarding.  The  two  verbs  "to  preserve" 
(T5»',  shamar)  and  "  to  keep  "  (iBj,  natsar), 
LXX.  riipeiy,  occur  together  again  in  ch. 
iv.  6. 

Ver.  12. — To  deliver  thee  from  the  way  of 
the  evil  man.  The  first  special  advantage 
resulting  from  the  protecting  guardianship 
of  discretion  and  understanding.  From  the 
way  of  the  evil  man;  properly,  from  an  evil 
way;  Hebrew, j;5"i|ri.jp  (mtdoreA;ra),notneces- 
sarily,  though  by  implication,  connected  with 
man,  as  in  the  Authorized  Version,  yi  {ra\ 
"  evU,"  "  wicked,"  in  an  ethical  sense,  is  an 
adjective,  as  in  Jer.  iii.  16  (yi  a^,  lev  ra),  "  an 
evil  he.nrt;"  cf.  the  LXX.,  &Trh  ddov  /ca/c^s; 
the  Vulgate,  Targum,  and  Arabic,  a  vid 
mala,  and  the  Syriac,  a  viis  pravis.  "Way," 
is  here  used  in  the  sense  of  "conduct,"  and 
the  evil  way  is  a  line  of  conduct  or  action 
which  is  essentially  wicked  or  evil.  The 
teacher  has  already  warned  youth  against 
the  temptations  and  dangers  of  the  way  of 
evU  men  in  oh.  i.  10 — 15 ;  he  now  shows 
that  discretion,  arising  from  wisdom  being 
resideot  in  the  heart,  will  be  a  sufficient  safe 
guard  against  its  allurements.  From  the 
man  that  speaketh  froward  things.  Perverse 
utterances  are  here  brought  in  contradis- 
tinction to  the  evil  way  or  froward  conduct. 
Man  («?>(,  ish)  is  here  used  generically,  as  the 
representative  of  the  whole  cluss  of  base  and 
wicked  men,  since  all  the  following  verbs  are 
in  the  plural.  Froward  things.  The  word 
niagnn  (tah'pucoth),  here  tianslated  "fro- 
ward things,"  is  derived  from  the  root  T]E)ri 
(haphak),  "to  turn,"  "to  pervert,"  and  should 
be  faanslated  "  perversencss."  Perverseness 
is  the  wilful  misrepresentation  of  that 
which  is  good  and  true.  The  utterances  are 
of  a  distorted  and  tortuous  character.  The 
word,  only  found  in  the  plural,  is  abstract  in 
form,  and  is  of  frequent,  tliough  not  of  ex- 
clusive, occurrence  in  the  Pioverbs.  It  ia 
attributed  to  the  Israelites  in  Deut.  xxxii, 
20.  It  is  met  with  again  in  such  expressions 
as  "  the  mouth  of  pervSrscness,"  Authorized 
Version  "  froward  mouth  "  (oh.  viii.  13) ;  "  tha 


CH.  n.  1 — 22,] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


39 


tongue  of  perverseneBS,"  "  froward  tongue," 
Authorized  Version  (ch.  x.  31) ;  "  the  man  of 
perverseness,"  "froward  man,"  Authorized 
Version  (oh.  xvi.  28).  What  is  here  said  of 
wicked  men  is  attributed  to  drunkards  in  ch. 
xxiii.  33,  "Thine  heart  shall  utter  perverse 
things."  The  expression  finds  its  expla- 
nation in  ch.  vi.  13, 14.  The  spirit  which 
indulges  in  this  perverseness  is  stubborn, 
scornful,  self-willi  d,  and  rebellious,  and  it  is 
from  such  a  spirit  that  discretion  is  a  pre- 
servatlre.  In  Job  v.  13  it  is  said  that 
"  the  counsel  of  the  froward  is  carried  head- 
long "  (see  also  2  Sara  xxii.  27 ;  Ps.  xviii. 
26 ;  oi.  4).  The  LXX.  rendering  of  this 
word  is  unSfV  iriffTdi/, "  nothing  trustworthy," 
which  ia  amplified  in  the  Arabic,  quod 
nullam  in  te  continet  veritatem,  "that  which 
contains  in  itself  no  truth." 

Ver.  13. — Who  leave  the  paths  of  upright- 
ness. Between  vers.  13  and  15  the  teacher 
proceeds  to  give  a  more  detailed  description 
of  those  who  speak  perversely.  Who  leave 
(D'ajjjn,  haoz'vim) ;  literally,  forsahing,  but 
the  present  participle  has  the  force  of  the 
preterite,  as  appears  from  the  context.  The 
men  alluded  to  have  already  forsaken  or 
deserted  the  paths  of  uprigh'ness  (see  pre- 
vious note  on  the  word  "  man."  The  paths 
of  wprightneBe  (ne'TiiniN,  ar'hhoth  yosher'); 
the  same  as  the  "right  paths"  of  ch.  iv.  11. 
The  strict  mianing  of  the  Hebrew  word 
translated  "  uprightness  "  is  "straightiieas," 
and  hence  it  stands  opposed  to  "  perverse- 
ness" in  the  previous  verse.  Uprightness 
is  integrity,  rectitude,  honest  dealing.  The 
LXX.  traublators  represent  the  forsaking  of 
the  paths  of  uprightness  as  a  consequence 
resulting  from  walking  in  the  ways  of  dark- 
ness, "  O  ye  who  have  left  the  right  ways 
by  departing  [to5  iropeiJetrBoi,  equivalent  to 
abeundo]  into  the  ways  of  darkness." 
Again,the  ways  of  darkness  ("^B'n  -2yi,  dar'ehey 
kkoshek)  are  opposed  to  the  "  paths  of  up- 
rightness "  which  rejoice  in  the  light.  Dark- 
ness includes  the  two  ideas  of  (1)  ignorance 
and  error  (Isa.-  ix.  2 ;  Eph.  v.  8),  and  (2) 
evil  deeds.  To  walk  in  the  way  s  of  darkness, 
then,  is  to  persist  in  a  course  of  wilful  igno- 
rance, to  reject  deliberately  the  light  of  know- 
ledge, and  tfl  work  wickedness,  by  performing 
"  the  works  of  darkness  (rti  ipya  rod  axi- 
Tovs),"  which  St.  Paul  exhorted  the  Church 
at  Rome  to  cast  away  (Eom.  xiii.  12),  and 
by  having  fellonsh  p  with  " the  unfruitful 
works  of  darku'  eb  (tA  Ipya  ri.  axdp'xa  rov 
(TKoTovs),"  against  wnieh  the  same  apostle 
warned  the  Ephesians  (v.  1 1).  They  are  ways 
of  darkness,  because  they  endeavour  to  hide 
themselves  from  God  (Isa.  xxix.  15)  and 
from  man  (Job  xxiv.  15;  xxxviu.  13,  15). 
In  their  tendency  and  end  they  load  to  the 
blackness  of  darkness  for  ever.  In  Scripture 
darkness  is  associated  with  evd,  juat  a» 


light  is  with  uprightness  (see  John  iii.  19, 
20).  The  same  association  of  ideas  is  dis- 
coverable in  the  dualism  of  the  Persian 
system,  as  formulated  by  Zoroaster — Ormuzd, 
the  good  principle,  presid  s  over  the  king- 
dom of  light,  while  Ahrim.in,  tlie  principle 
of  evil,  is  the  ruler  of  the  kingdom  of  dark- 
ness. 

Ver.  14. — Who  rejoice  to  do  evil.  Another 
element  is  here  brought  forward,  and  the 
description  increases  in  intensity.  The 
wicked  not  only  rejoice  to  do  evil  them- 
iselves,  but  they  exult  when  they  hear  of 
evil  in  others  (of.  Bom.  i.  32).  Such  may 
be  tlie  interpretation,  though  the  latter  part, 
of  the  verse  is  capable  of  a  different  and 
more  general  rendering  as  signifying  exulta- 
tion in  evil  generally,  whether  it  appears 
in  themselves  or  others.  The  expression 
rendered  in  the  Authorized  Version,  in  the 
frowardness  of  the  wicked,  is  in  the  original 
(pi  nia^inna,  Vthdh'-pucoth  id),  in  the  per- 
vereenesi  of  evil,  or  in  evil  perverseness, 
where  the  combination  of  the  two  nouns 
serves  to  give  force  to  the  main  idea,  which 
is  that  of  perverseness.  This  rendering  is 
adopted  in  the  LXX.,  eVl  dia(rTpo(p7J  kuk^,  *'in 
evil  distortion ; "  in  the  Vulj^ate,  in  peseimis 
rebus;  in  the  Targum,  Syriac,  and  Arabic, 
t»  convereatione  mala,  "  in  a  bad  course  of 
conduct;"  and  in  the  Targum,  in  muUtise 
perversione, "  in  the  perversion  of  wickedness." 
It  is  not  perverseness  in  its  simple  and  com- 
mon form  that  these  men  exult  in,  but  in  its 
worst  and  most  vicious  form  (for  a  similar 
construction,  see  ch.  vi.  24 ;  xv.  26 ;  and 
xxviii.  5).  How  widely  different  is  the  con- 
duct of  charity,  which  "rejoiceth  nut  in 
iniquity  "  (1  Cor.  xiii.  6)  I 

Ver.  15. — Whose  ways  are  crooked ;  better, 
perhaps,  who  as  to  their  ways  are  crooked. 
This  is  the  construction  adopted  by  Fleischer, 
Bertheau,  Zocbler,  and  others,  though  it  may 
be  remarked  that  the  substantive  nnx  (ornlsh), 
''way,"  is  common  gender,  and  may  thus 
agree  with  the  adjective  ty'pr  (ikeah),  '■  per- 
verse," which  is  masculine.  The  Targum, 
LXX.,  Vulgate,  Syriac,  and  Arabic,  all 
make  "crooked"  agree  with  "ways,"  so 
that,  grammatically,  the  Authorized  Version 
may  be  regarded  as  not  incorrect.  Crooked 
(P'vm,  ik'shim) ;  i.e.  tortuous,  perverse,  not 
straightforward,((rKoXial,LXX.).  Symmach  us 
translates  the  original  by  crKanPai,  i.e. "  bent." 
Theodotion,  by  a-TpifiXai,  "  twisted,  crookt." 
Sinners,  in  their  perverseness,  are  ever  wind- 
ing about,  turning  in  every  direction,  and 
changing  from  purpose  to  purpose,  as  way- 
ward caprice  or  shifting  inclination,  the 
alternations  of  evil  propensity,  happen  to 
dictate  (Wardlaw).  (For  the  expression, 
"  crooked  ways,"  see  Ps.  oxxv.  5.)  And  they 
froward  in  their  paths ;  i.e.  perverse  in  their 


40 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[oh.  n.  1—22. 


paths.  The  root-idea  of  the  Hebrew  niph. 
participle  D'li^ji  (vun'lozim),  translated  "  and 
they  froward,"'  ie  "  to  bend  aside,"  "  to  turn 
away."  They  are  tmned  aside  to  the  rislit 
hand  and  to  the  left  in  their  walk.  The 
niph.  participle  rh}  (naloz)  only  occurs  four 
times  in  the  Scriptures — here ;  oh,  iii.  32 ; 
xiv.  2 ;  and  Isa.  xxx.  12.  Tliis  is  the  last 
feature  in  their  wickedness. 

Ver.  16. — To  deliver  thee  from  the  strange 
woman.  This  is  the  second  form  of  tempta- 
tion against  which  wisdom  (discretion)  is  a 
preservative,  and  the  great  and  especial 
dangers  arising  from  it  to  youth,  owing  to 
ils  seductive  allurements,  afford  the  reason 
why  the  teacher  is  so  strong  in  his  warnings 
on  this  subject.  Two  terms  are  employed 
to  designate  the  source  of  this  evil — "  the 
strange  woman  "  (npi  nf  N,  iehshah  zara),  and 
"the- stranger"  (n'Tij,  nofeVii/a/j)— and  both 
undoubtedly,  in  the  passage  before  us,  mean 
a  meretricious  person,  one  who  indulges  in 
illicit  intercourse.  The  former  term  is  in- 
variably employed  in  this  sense  in  the  Proverbs 
(ch.  V.  2,  20 ;  vii.  5 ;  xxii.  14  ;  xxiii.  33)  of 
the  adulteress  (Dni,  zarini),  and  Jer.  ii.  25. 
The  participle  T?  (2ar),from  the  verb  IIJ  (zur), 
of  which  nnT  Izara'j)  is  the  feminine  form,  is, 
however,  used  in  a  wider  sense,  as  signifying 

(1)  one  of  another  nation,  or  one  of  anotlier 
family ;  (2)  or  some  one  different  from  one's 
self;  (."5)  or  strange.  Thus :  (1)  in  Isa.  i.  7 
we  have  "  Strangers  devour  it  (your  land) 
in  your  presence;"  but  in  Exod.  xxx.  33 
"  the  stranger "  is  one  not  the  high  priest. 

(2)  Tlie  "stranger"  is  another  (eh.  xi.  15; 
xiv.  10;  XX.  16;  xxvii.  2,  13).  (3)  The 
"  strange  fire  "  (nnj  &H,  esh  zarah)  is  the  un- 
lawful fire  as  opposed  to  the  holy  fire  (Lev. 
X.  1);  the  "strange  god"(ni  hti,el  zar)  is 
the  foreign  god  (Ps.  Ixxxi.  9).  But  the 
idea  of  foreign  origin  implied  in  the  word  is 
more  stron<!;ly  brought  out  in  the  next  term, 
iin?J  {nok'riyali),  on  which  Deli tzsch  remarks 
that  it  scarcely  ever  divests  itself  of  astrange, 
foreign  origin.  This  word  is  used  to  desig- 
nate those  "  strange  women"  whom  Solomon 
loved  in  his  old  age,  and  who  turned  his 
heart  aside  to  worship  false  gods  (1  Kings 
xi.  1 — 8),  "  outlandisli  women,"  as  they  are 
termed  in  Neh.  xiii.  26  ;  it  designates  "  the 
strange  wives  "of  Ezra  x.  and  Neh.  xiii.  27; 
and  is  applied  to  Euth  the  Moabitess  (Ruth 
ii.  10).  Again,  it  has  to  be  further  observed 
that  the  laws  of  the  Mosaic  code  against 
prostitution  were  of  a  most  stringent  nature 
(Lev.  xix.  29  ;  xxi.  9 ;  Deut.  xxiii.  17),  and 
no  doubt  served  to  maintain  a  higher  standard 
of  morality  among  Israelii  i^h  women  than 
that  observed  among  the  Midianites,  Syrians, 
and  other  nations.  Strong  prohibitions 
were  directed  against  the  intermarriage  of 


Israelites  with  the  women  of  the  surrounding 
nations;  but  the  example  set  by  Solomon 
would  serve  to  weaken  the  force  of  these 
prohibitions,  and  wonld  lead  to  a  large  influx 
of  women  of  a  different  nationality.  The 
conclusion  we  arrive  at  is  that  the  class 
mentioned  in  the  text,  tljough  not  Israelitish 
by  bjrih,  were  yet  so  by  adoption,  as  the 
context  clearly  indicates  (ver.  17)  the  fact, 
of  marriage  and  the  acceptance  of  certain 
religious  observances.  Such  women,  after 
a  temporary  restraint,  would  eventually  set 
all  moral  and  religious  obligations  at  de- 
fiance, and  would  become  the  source  of  temp- 
tation to  others.  The  allegorical  interpreta- 
tion given  to  this  passage  by  the  LXX.  is  to 
be  rejected  on  the  ground  that  the  previous 
section  (vers.  12 — 15)  speaks  of  perverse 
men.  Which  flattereth  with  her  words; 
literally,  who  lias  made  smooth  her  words, 
the  hiph.  perfect  being  used  of  p^n  (Jthalak), 

"  to  make  smooth,'  or  "flattering."  The  pre- 
terite shows  what  her  habitual  practice  is, 
and  is  used  of  an  action  still  continuing, 
and  BO  may  be  fitly  rendered  by  the  pre- 
sent, OS  in  the  Authorized  Version :  "  She  has 
acquired  the  art  of  enticing  by  flattering 
words,  and  it  is  her  study  to  employ  them ; " 
cf.  the  Vulgate,  quse  mollit  sermones  suos, 
"  who  softens  her  words ; "  and  the  Syriac, 
quss  suhvertit  verba  sua,  "  who  subverts  her 
words,''  i.e.  "  uses  deceit."  The  expression 
occurs  again  in  ch.  v.  3 ;  vi.  24  ;  vii.  5. 

Ver.  17. — The  guide  of  her  youth  (cji^ 
n'liyj,  alluph  n'lireyah) ;  properly,  the  asso- 
ciate or  companion  of  her  youth.  The  H  ebrew, 
C)i^  (oMuph'),  being  derived  from  the  root  cj^K, 

(alapK),  "  to  accustom  one's  self  to,"  or  "  to 
be  accustomed  to"  or  "  familiar  with"  any 
one.  The  word  is  rendered  as  "friend"  in 
ch.  xvii.9;  xvi.  28;  Micahvii.  5.  The  idea 
of  guidance,  which  is  adopted  in  the 
Authorized  Version,  and  appears  also  in  tlie 
Vulgate  dux,  and  Targum  ducatus,  is  a 
secondary  idea,  and  is  derived  probably  from 
the  relation  in  which  t)ie  husband  stands  to 
his  wife.  Various  interpretations  have  been 
given  to  the  expression.  It  occurs  again  in 
Jer.  iii.  4,  where  Jehovah  applies  it  to  him- 
self, and  says,  through  liis  prophet,  to  the 
religiously  adulterous  Judah,  "  Wilt  thou 
not  from  this  time  cry  unto  me,  My  Father, 
thou  art  the  Guide  of  my  youth  (ny:  P]i''«^ 
alluph  n'urd)?"  It  has  also  been  under- 
stood as  referring  to  the  woman's  parents, 
her  father  and  mother,  who  were  her  natural 
guardians.  But  Ihe  context  seems  to  re- 
quire that  it  should  be  taken  as  designating 
her  husband.  It  will  then  be  the  correlative 
of  "  the  wife  of  thy  youth  "  of  Mai.  ii.  14. 
The  covenant  of  her  God ;  i.e.  the  marriage 
covenant,  called  "  the  covenant  of  her  Qui," 


OH.  II.  1—22.] 


THE   PE0VBRB8, 


41 


because  entered  into  in  his  presence.  The 
forsaking  of  the  guide  of  her  youth  is  essen- 
tially bound  up  with  a  forgetfulness  of  the 
Bolemn  covenant  which  she  had  entered  into 
in  the  presence  of  God.  No  specific  mention 
is  made  in  tlie  Pentateuch  of  any  religious 
ceremony  at  marriage;  yet  we  may  infer, from 
Mai.  ii.  14,  1.'),  where  God  is  spoken  of  as 
"  a  Witness  "  between  the  liusbancl  and  "  the 
wife  of  ids  youth,"  "  the  wife  of  thy  cove- 
nant," thnt  the  marriage  contract  was  solem- 
nized with  sacred  rites.  The  Proverbs  thus 
give  a  high  and  sacred  character  to  mar- 
riage, and  so  carry  on  the  original  idea  of 
the  institution  which,  under  the  gospel  dis- 
pensation, developed  into  the  principle  of 
the  indissolubility  of  the  marriase  tie.  It 
is  no  objection  to  this  view  that  the  mnno- 
gamio  principle  was  infringed,  and  polygamy 
countenanced.  The  reason  of  this  latter 
departure  is  given  in  Deut.  xxii.  28  and 
Exod.  xxii.  16.  The  morality  of  the 
Proverbs  always  represents  monogamy  as 
the  rule ;  it  deprecates  illicit  intercourse,  and 
discountenances  divorce.  It  is  in  entire 
accordance  witli  the  seventh  commandment. 
The  woman  who  commits  adultery  offends, 
not  only  against  her  husband,  but  against 
lier  God. 

Ver.  18.— For  her  house  iuoliueth  unto 
death ;  rather,  she  sinks  down  to  death  together 
with  her  house  (Bottcher,  Delitzsch).  The 
objection  to  the  Authorized  Version  is  tl  at  it 
doesnot  follow  the  constructionof  the  original, 
the  verb  "sinks down"  (pr\f,  shalihah)beu\g 
feminine,  while  "house"  (n;3,  hayith)  is 
invariably  masculine.  Aben  Ezra  translates, 
"  She  sinks  down  to  death,  (which  is  to  be) 
her  house ; "  but  it  seems  better  to  regard 
"her  hoi^se"  as  an  adjunct  of  the  strange 
woman.  Her  hou.-e  includes  all  who  belong 
to  her.  She  and  they  are  involved  in  the 
same  fate.  The  Authorized  Version  is 
evidently  influenced  by  the  Vulgate.  Incli- 
nala  est  enim  ad  mortem  domiis  ejus,  "  For  her 
house  is  inclined  to  death."  The  LXX.  gives 
a  different  rendering,  "Eflero  yiip  irapi,  tZ 
■eaf&Ta:  Thv  oIkov  auTijr,  "For  she  hath 
placed  her  house  beside  death."  So  the 
Arabic.  The  "for"  ('3,  U)  refers  back  to 
ver.  16,  and  indicates  how  great  is  the 
deliverance  effected  by  wisdom.  The  mean- 
ing of  the  passage  is  aptly  illustrated  by 
ch.  vii.  27,  "  Her  house  is  the  way  to  hell, 
going  down  to  the  chambers  of  death."  And 
her  paths  unto  the  dead.  The  dead  (PW^, 
r'phaim)  are  properly  the  quiet,  or  the 
feeble.  They  are  the  shadowy  inhabitants 
or  shades  of  Hades,  tUeinferi oi  ihe  Vulgate, 
and  are  here  put  for  Sheol  itself.  Compare 
the  eldaha  KafivSvraiv  of  Homer,  and  the 
ambrie,  "shades,"  of  Virgil.  The  word 
occurs  again  in  oh.  ii.  18 ;  xxi.  16 ;  and  m 


Ps.  Ixxxviii.  11;   Isa.  xxvi.  14,  19;  Jofc 

xxvi.  5. 

Ver.  19. — None  that  go  unto  her  return 
again.  The  fate  of  the  companions  of  the 
strange  woman  is  described  as  irrevocable. 
All  who  visit  her  shall  not  return  again. 
The  Targum  reads,  "  They  shall  not  return 
in  peace."  Tlie  diiBculty  which  they  who 
give  themselves  up  to  the  indulgence  of 
lust  and  passion  encounter  in  extricating 
themselves  makes  the  statement  of  the 
teacher  an  almost  universal  truth.  Hence 
St.  Chrysobtom  says,  "It  is  as  difficult  to 
bring  back  a  libidinous  person  to  chastity 
as  a  dead  man  to  life."  This  passage  led 
some  of  the  Fatliers  to  declare  that  the  -sin 
of  adultery  was  unpardonable.  Fornication 
was  classed  by  the  scholastic  divines  among 
the  seven  deadly  sins,  and  it  has  this 
character  given  to  it  in  the  Litany :  "  From 
fornication,  and  all  otljer  deadly  sin."  St. 
Paul  says,  "No  whoremonger  nor  unclean 
person  ,  .  .  hath  any  inheritance  in  the 
kingdom  of  Christ  and  of  God  "  (Eph.  v.  5 ; 
cf.  1  Cor.  vi.  9;  Eev.  xxii.  15).  The  sin 
which  they  commit  who  have  dealings  with 
the  strange  woman  is  deadly  and  leads  on 
to  death,  and  from  deatli  there  ia  no  return, 
nor  laying  hold  of  or  regaining  the  paths  of 
life  (see  Job  vii.  9,  10).  Compare  the  words 
with  which  Deiphobe,  the  Cumsean  sibyl, 
addresses  JEneas — 

"Tros  Anchysiaile,  faoUis  descensus  Avenio 
Sed  revocare  gradum  superasque  evadere 

ad  aura.'*. 
Hoc  opus,  hio  labor  est." 

(Virgil, '  ^neid,'  vi.  126—129.) 
"  O  Trojan,  son  of  Anohyses,  easy  is  the  path 
that  leads  to  hell.    But  to  retrace  one's  steps, 
and  escape  to  the  upper  regions,  this  is  a 
work,  this  ia  a  task." 

Vers.  20 — 22. — Conclusion  of  the  discourse 
in  w  hich  are  antithetically  stated  the  respec- 
tive destinies  of  the  good  and  the  bad,  the 
upright  and  the  wicked. 

Ver.  20.— That  (Hebrew,  pQ^,  Pmoan) ;  in 
order  that  (Vulgate,  ut),  carries  us  back 
properly  to  ver.  11.  The  protecting  power 
of  wisdom  is  developed  in  a  positive  direc- 
tion. Negatively,  it  delivers  from  the  evil 
man  and  from  the  strange  woman,  but  it 
does  more—"  it  shaii  keep  thee  in  order  that 
thou  mayest  walk  in  a  good  way,"  etc.  The 
Hebrew  pah  Q'maan)  is  co-ordinate  with  "  to 
deliver  thee,"  but  it  serves  to  bring  the  dis- 
course to  a  conclusion.  Uiubreit  renders  it 
"therefore,"  thus  making  what  follows  aa 
inference  from  the  preceding  discourse.  So 
the  Syriao,  amhula  igilwr,  "  therefore  walk." 
In  the  way  of  good  men  (D'3iD  '^Ti^'  ^'^''^^ 
tovim);  it.  in  the  way  of  the  good,  in  an  ethical 


4S 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[CH.  n.  1—22. 


sense,  i.e.  the  upright,  as  in  Isa.  v.  20,  The 
Vulgate  renders,  in  via  bond,  "in  the  good 
way."  "  The  way  of  good  men  "  is  the  way 
»f  God'a  commandments,  the  way  of  obeJi- 
enoe.  Keep.  The  Hebrew  verb  IDE'  (shamar) 
is  here  used  in  the  sense  of  "to  observe," 
"  to  attend  to,"  but  in  a  different  sense  from 
Psi  xvit  4,  "  I  have  observed  the  ways  of 
the  violent  man,"  i.e.  that  I  might  avoid 
them.  To  keep  the  paths  of  the  righteous 
18  to  carefully  attend  to  the  life  of  obedience 
which  they  follow.  The  LXX.  clobely 
connects  this  verse  with  the  preceding,  and 
renders, "  For  if  th ey  had  walked  in  good  ways, 
they  would  have  found  the  paths  of  righteous- 
ness light." 

Ver.  21. — For  the  upright  shall  dwell  in 
the  land.  Much  the  same  language  is  met 
with  in  Ps.  xxxvii.  29,  "  The  righteous  shall 
Inherit  the  land,  and  dwell  therein  for  ever." 
It  is  the  secure  and  peaceful  dwelling  in  the 
land  which  is  intended  (cf.  ch.  x.  30).  To 
dwell  in  the  land  was  always  put  forwaid  as 
the  reward  of  obedience  to  God's  command- 
ments (see  Exod.  xx.  12;  Lev.  xxv.  18; 
xxvi.  5),  and  the  phrase  conveyed  to  the 
Hebrew  mind  the  idea  of  one  of  the  greatest, 
if  not  the  grt  atest,  of  all  temporal  blessings. 
The  love  of  country  was  a  predominant 
characteristic  of  the  race.  Elster,  quoted  by 
Zookler,  remarks, "  The  Israelite  was  beyond 
the  power  of  natural  feeling,  which  makes 
home  dear  to  every  one,  more  closely  bound 
to  the  ancestral  soil  by  the  whole  form  of  the 
theocracy ;  torn  from  it,  he  was  in  the  inmost 
roots  of  life  strained  and  broken.  Especially 
from  psalms  belonging  to  the  period  of  the 
exile  this  patriotic  I'eeling  is  breathed  out  in 
the  fullest  glow  and  intensity."  The  land 
(yiN,  areis)  was  the  promised  land,  the  land 

of  Canaan.  The  word  is  not  used  hero  in 
the  wider  sense  in  which  it  occurs  in  Matt. 
V.  5,  "  Blessed  are  the  meek :  for  they  shall 
inherit  the  earth."  And  the  perfect  shall 
remain  in  it ;  i.e,  they  shall  not,  as  Eabbi  Levi 
remarks,  be  driven  thence  nor  caused  to 
migrate.  The  perfecl  (D'D'pn,  th'mimim), 
the  holy  (LXX.,  iaioi),  the  spotless  (imma- 
eulati,  Targum),  those  without  a  stain  (qui 
eine  lobe,  Syriao),  the  guileless  (simplices, 
Vulgate).  ShaU  remain;  niiv  (yivvaih'ru), 
niph.  future  of  irv  (yathar),  properly  "to 
be  redundant,"  and  in  the  niph.  form,  "  to 
be  left,"  or  "  to  remain."    LXX.,  6Tro\ei<t>eili- 


aovTai,  "Shall  remain;"  permanehmd,  Vul- 
gate. 

Ver.  22. — But  the  wicked  shall  be  cnt  off 
from  the  earth.     The   punishment  of  the 
wicked  is  contrasted  with  the  ble.'sings  that 
are  promised  to  the  upright.    Shall  he  cut  off; 
mn3'    (yikkarethu),    niph.     future    of   n"D 
(Jcaraih),  "to  cut  off,  or  destroy."    LXX', 
oAouyrai;  Vulgate,  perdentur.    The  expres- 
sion is  used  to  convey  the  idea  of  e.itermi- 
nation,  as  in  Ps.  xxxvii.  9  (cf.  Job  xviii.  17 ; 
Ps.  xxxvii.  28;  civ.  35).    The  verb  is  found 
also  in  Gen.  xvii.  14;  Exod.  xii.  15.     The 
earth;  properly,  the  land.     'J'he  same  word 
(yiN,  arets)  is  used  as  in  ver.  21.    The  trans- 
gressors (DHJia,   hog'dini);  here  employed 
synonymously  with    "the    wicked"  (d'P^.' 
y'shaim),    "  the    impious."      The    primar) 
meaning  of  the  verb  from  which  it  is  derived 
(1J3,  bagad)  is  "  to  cover,"  "  to  deal  treach- 
erously," and  hence  the  word  signifies  those 
who  act  treacherously  or  perfidiously,  the 
faithless.    They  are  those  wl.o  perfidiously 
depart  from  God,  and  break  away  from  the 
covenant   with  Jehovah.     LXX.,   irapdvo/ioi 
(cf.  ch.  xi.  3,  6;  xiii.  2,  25;   xxii.  12;  Ps. 
xxv.   3;  lix.  5;  Isi.  xxxiii.   1).     Shall  be 
rooted  out  One',  yiss'khu).     This  word  is 
taken  by  Davidson  as  the  future  kal  of  noj 
(nasah),    "to    pluck    np,"    and    hence   is 
equivalent  to   "they  shall   pluck   up,"  or, 
passively,  "they  shall  be  plucked  up."     De- 
li(;zsch  remarks  that  it  is  as  at  ch.  xv.  25  and 
Ps.  lii.  7,  active,  "  tliey  shall  pluck  up,"  and 
this  with  the  subject  remaining  indefinite  is 
equivalent  to  the  passive  form,  "  they  shall 
be  pluekbd  up."     Tiiis  indefinite  "  they " 
can  be  used  of  God,  as  also  in  Job  vii.  3 
(Fleischer).    The  expression  has  been  under- 
stood as  referring  to  being  driven  into  exile 
(Gesenius),  aud  this  view  would  be  amply 
justified  by  the  fate  which  overtook  the 
apostate  nation  when  both  the  kingdoms  of 
Isi'ael  and  Judah  suffered    this    fate    (cf. 
LXX.  i^aBiiaovrm,  "  they  sliall   be   driven 
out").      It  also  derives   colour    from    the 
language  of  the  preceding  verse,  but. the 
imagery  appears  to  be  derived  from  the  cut- 
ting down  and  rooting  up  of  trees.     The 
debtruotion  of  the  wicked  and  transgressors 
will  be  complete.     They  shall  be  extermi- 
nated (of.   Targum,  eratUeabuntur ;   Syriac, 
evellentur ;  and  Arabic,  exterminabimtury 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 5. — The  search  for  wisdom.  I.  Divine  wisdom  must  be  sought  befobb 
IT  CAN  BE  FOUND.  It  is  truB  that  Wisdom  cries  aloud  in  the  street  and  invites  the 
Ignorant  and  simple  to  partake  of  her  stores.  But  the  burden  of  her  cry  is  to  bid  us 
seek  her.  It  is  the  voice  of  invitation,  not  that  of  revelation.  The  latter  is  only 
audible  to  those  who  incline  their  ears  purposely  and  thoughtfully.     The  thoughtless 


6H.  n.  1—22.]  THE  PBOVEKBS.  43 

are  satisfied  with  hasty  impressions  of  the  moment;  hut  the  only  religious  convictions 
worth  considering  are  the  outcome  of  thought  and  prayer.  Still,  it  is  to  he  observed 
that  this  wisdom  is  not  reherveil  for  the  keen-sij.'hled,  the  intellectual,  the  philosophical. 
It  is  not  ability,  but  industry,  that  is  required ;  not  exceptional  capacity  to  attain  know- 
ledge, hut  diligence  in  pursuing  it.  Laborious  dulness  can  never  achieve  the  triumphs 
of  the  brilliant  scholar  in  secular  studies.  Industry  alone  will  not  make  a  senior 
wrangler.  But  the  hijjhest  knowledge.  Divine  knowledge,  depends  so  much  more  on 
moral  considerations  which  are  within  the  reach  of  all,  that  it  can  stand  upon  this 
democratic  basis  and  offer  itself  to  all  patient  inquirers. 

II.  The  search  for  Divine  wisdom  must  begin  in  receptive  faith.  This 
wisdom  is  not  innate ;  it  is  not  attained  by  direct  observation ;  it  is  not  the  result  ol 
self-sustained  reasoning.  It  comes  as  revelation,  in  the  voice  of  God.  Thus  the  soul's 
first  duty  is  to  hear.  But  the  right  attitude  towards  the  Divine  revelation  is  not  merely 
a  state  of  receptivity.  It  is  one  of  faith  and  careful  attention,  receiving  the  words  and 
hiding  them.  All  through  the  Bible  this  essential  distinction  between  heavenly  truth 
and  philosophy,  between  the  mere  intellectual  requisites  of  the  one  and  the  faith  and 
obedience  which  lie  at  the  root  of  the  other,  is  apparent.  The  first  steps  towards 
receiving  the  wisdom  of  God  are  childlike  trust  and  that  purity  and  devoutness  which 
bring  the  soul  into  communion  with  God. 

III.  The  search  for  Divine  wisdom  must  be  maintained  with  inceeasinq 
earnestness.  The  verses  before  us  describe  a  progressive  intensity  of  spiritual  eftbrt — 
receiving,  hiding  the  commandment,  inclining  the  ear,  applying  the  heart,  crying 
after,  lifting  up  the  voice,  seeking,  searching  as  fur  hid  treasure.  The  trutli  may  not 
be  found  at  once.  But  the  earnest  soul  will  not  desist  at  the  first  discouragement;  if 
his  heart  is  in  the  pursuit,  he  will  only  press  on  the  more  vigorously.  It  is,  moreover, 
the  characteristic  of  Divine  truth  that  a  little  knowledge  of  it  kindles  the  thirst  for 
deeper  draughts.  Thus  we  are  led  on  to  the  most  energetic  search.  Spirituality  does 
not  discourage  the  eager  energy  with  which  men  seek  worldly  gain ;  on  the  contrary,  it 
)ids  us  transfer  this  to  higher  pursuits,  and  seek  wisdom  as  men  seek  for  silver,  and 
ink  mines  after  hidden  treasures.     Clirist  does  not  say,  "  Be  anxious  for  nothing  ; " 

out,  "  Be  not  anxious  for  the  morrow  " — in  order  that  we  may  transfer  our  anxiety  to 
more  important  concerns,  and  "  seek  first  the  kingdom  of  God  and  his  righteousness." 

IV.  The  search  for  Divine  wisdom  will  be  rewarded  with  success.  Some 
question  this,  and,  after  weary  pursuit,  abandon  the  quest  in  despair,  or  settle  down 
into  indolent  indifference.  Perhaps  they  lack  patience — toiling  in  the  night  and  taking 
nothing,  they  cannot  hold  on  till  the  dawn,  when  the  Master  will  give  them  a  rich 
draught ;  or  they  seek  wrongly,  not  in  spiritual  faith,  but  in  cold  human  reason ;  or 
they  seek  a  mistaken  goal — the  explanation  of  mystery  rather  than  praotica.1  wisdom 
as  the  guide  of  life.  This  wisdom  is  promised  to  those  who  truly  seek,  and  it  is 
attainable. 

Yer.  6. —  Wisdcym  a  gift  of  Ood.  I.  True  wisdom  originates  in  Divine  inspira- 
tion. Prophets  and  apostles — teachers  of  the  highest  trutho — claim  to  be  delivering  a 
message  from  heaven.  The  greater  the  thoughts  declared  to  us  in  Scripture,  the  more 
emphatic  is  the  ascription  of  them  to  a  superhuman  source.  Surely  this  very  fact — this 
conjunction  of  unique  value  in  the  thoughts,  with  the  confident  assertion  that  they  are 
from  God — should  go  far  in  leading  us  to  believe  in  the  inspiration  of  them.  But  it  is 
also  urged  by  the  men  who  bring  these  truths  to  us  that  we  can  only  receive  them  when 
we  are  inspired  by  the  Spirit  of  God";  and  experience  shows  that  they  who  have  most 
spirituality  of  life  are  able  to  drink  most  deeply  of  the  fountains  of  revelation.  Further, 
when  once  we  admit  this  much,  it  follows  that,  if  we  recognize  the  constancy  of  God  in 
ill  his  methods  of  action,  it  is  reasonable  for  us  to  feel  that  all  truth  must  depend  on  a 
Divine  illumination  for  its  manifestation,  and  that  all  wisdom  must  be  the  outcome  of 
»ome  degree  of  inspiration.  Nevertheless,  it  is  not  to  be  inferred  that  inspiration  dis- 
penses with  natural  channels  of  knowledge ;  on  the  contrary,  it  opens  the  eyes  of  men, 
who  must  then  use  their  eyes  to  be  seers  of  spiritual  truth. 

II.  The  inspiration  of  wisdom  depends  on  spiritual  relations  with  God.  M 
inspiration  is  the  source,  the  questions  arise— Who  are  privileged  to  drink  of  this  foun- 
tain? and  how  do  they  gain  access  to  it?    Now,  it  is  much  to  be  assured  that  this  is 


44  THE  PROVERBS.  [oh.  n.  1— 21 

not  reserved  to  any  select  class  of  men.  Prophets  have  a  special  revelation  to  convey 
a  special  message,  and  apostles  have  a  distinctive  endowment  for  the  accomplishment 
of  a  particular  mission ;  but  the  inspiration  of  wisdom  generally  is  not  thus  limited.  On 
the  contrary,  it  comes  freely  to  all  wlio  rightly  avail  themselves  of  it.  What,  then, 
are  the  conditions  for  receiving  it  ?  1.  Prayer.  "If  any  of  you  lack  wisdom,  let  him 
ask  of  G-od,  who  giveth  to  all  libeially,  and  upbraideth  not ;  and  it  shall  be  given  him  " 
(Jas.  i.  5).  Whosoever  seeks  shall  find.  2.  Purity.  "  The  pure  in  heart  shall  sef 
God,"  and  the  highest  wisdom  is  in  the  beatific  vision  of  him  who  dwells  in  tho 
light  of  eternal  truth.  3.  Ohe  Hence.  As  we  submit  our  wills  to  God's  will,  we  open 
the  channel  through  which  his  Spirit  enters  into  us,  and  by  fellowship  illumines. 

III.  True  wisdom,  being  inspibed  by  God,  will  beab  the  stamp  of  Divine 
OHARACTBRi.sTics.  It  will  differ  from  mere  human  speculation;  sometimes  it  will  be 
DO  much  in  conflict  with  that  speculation  as  to  pass  for  foolishness  (see  1  Onr.  i.  18).  It 
will  be  distinctly  opposed  to  the  wisdom  that  is  purely  carnal,  i.e.  to  that  which  takes 
account  only  of  earthly  facts  ami  ignores  spiritual  principles,  the  wisdom  of  expediency, 
the  cleverness  of  men  of  the  world.  Such  wisdom  is  not  only  earthly  ;  its  low  maxims 
and  immoral  devices  proclaim  it  to  be  "sensual,  devilish"  (Jas.  iii.  15).  Divinely 
inspired  wisdom,  on  the  contrary,  is  S|iiritual — ^taking  account  of  the  facts  and  laws  of 
the  higher  order ;  pure — ^not  ministering  to  selfish  greed  and  degraded  pleasure ;  whole- 
some— strengthening  and  elevating  the  soul ;  "  peaceable,  gentle,  easy  to  be  intreated, 
full  of  mercy  and  good  fruits,  without  variance,  without  hypocrisy  "  (Jas.  iii.  17). 

Vers.  10,  11. — The  antidote  to  temptation.  I.  Wb  need  an  antidote  to  tempta- 
tion. It  is  not  enough  to  trust  to  our  own  spiritual  health  to  throw  off  the  poison. 
We  are  already  diseased  with  sin,  and  have  a  predisposition  to  yield  to  temptation  in 
the  corruption  of  our  own  hearts,  ^ut  if  we  were  'mmaculate,  we  should  still  be  liable 
to  fall ;  the  power  of  temptation  is  so  fearful  that  the  purest,  strongest  :oul  would  be  in 
danger  of  succumbing.  The  tempter  can  choose  the  moment  of  his  attack.  When  we 
are  most  off  our  guard,  when  we  are  faint  and  weary,  when  we  are  suffering  from  spiritual 
depression,  the  mine  may  be  suddenly  sprung,  and  we  may  be  lost  before  we  have  fully 
realized  the  situation.  Like  the  dragon  in  Spenser's  '  Faery  Queene,'  which  would  ha''* 
stifled  the  Bed  Cross  Knight  with  the  fiery  fumes  it  belched  forth  unless  he  had  fallen  Into 
the  healin'j;  fountain,  the  tempter  would  destroy  our  spiritual  life  with  an  atmosphere  o/ 
foul  thoughts  after  more  tangible  attacks  have  failed,  were  it  not  that  we  have  a  supi]ly 
of  grace  outside  ourselves,  equal  to  our  need.  Even  Christ,  when  tempted,  did  not 
rest  on  his  own  purity  and  power,  but  appealed  for  support  to  the  sacred  wisdom  of 
Scripture. 

II.  The  antidote  to  temptation  must  be  some  form  of  positive  good.  Fire 
is  quenched  by  water,  not  by  opposing  flames.  Evil  must  be  overcome  with  good.  The 
way  to  keep  sin  out  of  the  heart  is  to  fill  the  heart  with  pure  thoughts  and  affections 
till  there  is  no  room  for  anything  else.  The  citadel  entered  most  easily  by  the  tempter 
is  an  empty  heart. 

III.  True  wisdom  is  the  surest  antidote  to  temptation.  All  knowledge  tends 
in  some  degree  to  preserve  from  evil.  Light  makes  for  goodness.  Both  are  from  God, 
and  therefore  they  must  harmonize.  Secular  knowledge  is  morally  useful.  A  very 
large  proportion  of  the  criminals  in  our  jails  can  neither  read  nor  write.  Ignorant  of  wiser 
courses,  they  are  led  aside  to  the  lowest  pursuits.  Sound  intelligence  and  good  informa- 
tion introduce  men  at  least  to  the  social  conscience.  But  the  schoolmaster  is  not  the 
saviour  of  the  world.  Higher  wisdom  is  needed  "to  be  the  successful  antidote  to  sin — 
that  wisdom  which,  in  the  Book  of  Proverbs,  is  almost  synonymous  with  religion — the 
knowledge  of  God  and  his  laws,  and  the  practical  discernment  of  the  application  of  this 
knowledge  to  conduct.  We  must  know  God's  will  and  the  way  of  the  Christian  life, 
the  beauty  of  holiness  and  how  to  attain  it,  if  we  are  to  have  a  good  safeguard  against 
sin.  Christ,  the  Wisdom  of  God,  dwelling  in  our  hearts,  is  the  great  security  against 
temptation. 

IV.  To  be  effectual  as  an  antidote  to  temptation,  wisdom  must  be  received 
WITH  DELIGHT.  Knowledge  must  be  "pleasant."  We  are  most  influenced  by  tliat 
which  we  love  most.  There  is  a  strength  in  the  Divine  joy.  So  long  as  religious 
truths  are  accepted  in  cold  intellectual  conviction,  or  submitted  to  through  hard  com- 


OH.II.  1— 22.]  THE  PROVERBS.  45 

pulsions  of  dnty,  they  will  have  little  power  over  us.  But  happily  God  has  joined  the 
highest  truth  to  the  purest  gladness.  Wisdom  is  a  pleasure  to  those  who  welcome  it  to 
their  hearts.  The  acquisition  of  all  knowledge  is  pleasurable.  The  knowledge  of  God 
is  joined  with  peculiar  spiritual  delights.  In  rejoicing  in  tliis  and  in  love  to  the  incarna- 
tion of  this  wisdom  in  Christ,  we  have  the  strongest  safeguard  against  temptation. 

Ver.  14. — Bejoicing  to  do  evil.  We  often  insist  upon  the  fact  that  gooilness  is  tha 
secret  of  true  happiness,  and  invite  men  to  rejoice  in  the  service  of  God ;  but  we  are 
here  reminded  of  an  opposite  kind  of  joy  which  some  find  in  the  course  of  wickedness. 

I.  This  is  a  possible  experience.  It  is  so  unnatural  that  one  who  knew  nothing 
of  the  world  might  well  declare  it  to  be  impossible.  But  experience  provts  its  existence, 
and  the  explanation  of  it  is  not  far  to  seek.  1.  Naturally  desirable  ends  lend  a  sense  of 
pleasure  to  the  evil  means  by  which  they  are  sought.  The  miser  loves  his  money  on  its 
own  account  through  previous  associations  with  the  ideas  of  what  it  might  purchase. 
So  the  criminal  may  come  to  delight  in  his  crimes  because  the  profit  he  gets  out  of  them 
has  cast  a  glamour  over  the  ugly  deeds  themselves.  2.  Some  pleasures  are  sinful. 
Then  the  whole  course,  end  as  well  as  means,  is  wicked;  yet,  as  it  concerns  self- 
indulgence,  a  wicked  glee  accompanies  it.  3.  There  is  a  sense  of  freedom  in  sin.  There 
is  more  room  to  range  at  large  over  the  broad  way  than  in  the  narrow  path  of  righteous- 
ness. The  sinner  has  burst  the  shackles  of  law,  and  he  revels  in  the  licence  of  si'lf-will. 
4.  Sin  gives  an  opportunity  for  the  exercise  of  power.  Much  evil  is  done  simply  for  the 
sake  of  effect,  in  order  that  the  doer  of  it  may  find  him»elf  producing  results.  But  it  is 
easier  to  do  harm  than  to  do  good.  Therefore  a  man  turns  to  evil  for  the  larger  realiza- 
tion of  his  power.     So  wicked  children  delight  in  picking  flies  to  pieces. 

II.  This  is  a  sign  of  advanced  wickedness.  1.  At  first  it  is  painful  to  sin.  The 
poor,  weak  soul  gives  way  to  temptation,  but  the  very  act  of  sinning  is  accompanied 
with  a  sense  of  uneasiness  and  humiliation.  2.  A  further  stage  is  reached  when  sin  i$ 
committed  with  indifference.  This  is  indeed  a  state  of  moral  degradation,  for  conscience 
is  now  practically  dead,  and  the  sinner  is  as  willing  to  have  his  pleasure  by  lawless 
means  as  in  an  innocent  manner.  3.  The  lowest  depth  is  reached  when  there  is  a  posi- 
tive pleasure  in  doing  wrong.  Evil  is  then  chosen  on  its  own  account,  and  not  as  the 
disagreeable  or  the  indifferent  means  for  reaching  some  ulterior  end.  When  two  courses 
are  open,  the  bad  one  is  deliberately  selected  as  the  more  pleasant  on  its  own  account. 
A  malignant  joy  lights  up  the  countenance  of  the  abandoned  sinner  at  the  mere  prospect 
of  some  new  villainy.  This  is  Satanic  wickedness.  The  abandoned  sinner  can  now 
exclaim  with  Milton's  Satan — 

"  Evil,  be  thou  my  good  I " 

III.  This  is  a  delusive  jot.  1.  It  is  shallow.  Though  it  may  be  excited  into  a  dia- 
bolical ecstasy,  it  has  no  heart-satisfying  qualities.  Beneath  it  there  is  profound  unrest. 
The  peace  which  accompanies  the  joy  of  holiness,  and  which  is  the  sweetest  ingredient 
in  the  cup  of  the  good  man,  is  quite  wanting  here.  There  are  shooting  pangs,  dark 
misgivings,  and  dread  sinkings  of  heart  in  the  midst  of  this  monstrous  delight.  2.  It 
will  not  endure.  The  pleasures  of  sin  do  but  endure  for  a  season.  The  sweet  morsels 
soon  turn  to  dust  and  ashes.  After  the  wild  orgie  there  follows  deep  depression  or  dread 
despair,  or  at  best  a  sense  of  listless  weariness.  The  appetite  is  soon  exhausted.  New 
ami  more  piquant  forms  of  wickedness  must  be  invented  to  stimulate  the  jaded  palate. 
At  length  the  awful  consequences  must  come,  and  anguish  of  soul  follow  the  delights  of 
sin  when  God's  judgment  takes  effect. 

Ver.  16. — -Crooked  ways.  I.  Chocked  ways  abb  deviations  fkom  the  stkaiqhi 
PATHS  OF  MOBAL  SIMPLICITY.  The  man  of  high  character  is  simple  in  conduct.  Great 
complexity  of  motive  is  generally  a  sign  of  moral  laxity.  The  way  of  right  is  straight 
because  it  makes  for  its  goal  without  any  considerations  of  expediency,  danger,  or 
pleasure.  To  be  turned  aside  from  the  steep  Hill  of  Difficulty,  or  into  By-path  Meadow, 
is  to  forsake  the  right  for  selfish  ease.  When  men  allow  considerations  of  momentary 
advantage  to  guide  their  actions,  they  will  be  perpetually  swayed  from  side  to  side  till 
their  track  is  marked  by  an  irregular  "  zigzag."  "  The  expressinn  of  truth,"  says  Seneo% 
*  ia  simplicity." 


46  THE  PROVERBS.  [oh.  n.  1—22. 

II.  Ckooked  ways  aeb  signs  of  lack  of  pbinciplb.  Principles  are  like  the  rails 
on  which  the  train  runs,  keeping  it  in  a  direct  course  and  facihtating  its  speed.  The 
unprincipled  man  is  off  the  rails,  and  the  result  is  confusion.  Like  a  ship  without 
compass,  rudder,  or  chart,  the  un)irincipled  man  diifts  with  wind  and  tide,  and  so  leaves 
behind  him  a  crooked  track.  The  security  for  straightforward  conduct  is  the  guidance 
of  a  deep-seated  principle  of  righteousness. 

III.  Obooked  ways  result  pkom  short-sighted  aims.  The  lane  which  is  made, 
bit  by  bit,  from  farm  to  farm,  is  likely  to  wind  about ;  but  the  old  Roman  high-road 
that  connects  two  distant  cities  runs  as  directly  as  possible.  The  ploughman  who  looks 
no  further  than  his  horses'  heads  will  make  a  crooked  furrow ;  to  go  straight  he  must 
fix  his  eyes  on  the  end  of  the  field.  He  who  regards  only  present  circumstances  will 
wander  aimlessly.  To  go  right  we  must  look  out  of  self  to  Christ ;  beyond  present 
expediency  to  the  full  purpose  and  end  of  life ;  above  all  earthly  pursuits  to  the  goal  of 
the  life  eternal. 

IV.  Crooked  ways  abb  deceitful  ways.  Bad  men  often  fear  to  go  straisht  towards 
their  evil  aims  lest  they  shall  be  discovered.  They  beat  about  the  bush.  The  assassin 
avoids  the  high-road  and  slinks  along  under  a  hedge,  that  he  may  come  upon  his  victim 
unawares.  The  thief  breaks  into  the  house  by  the  back  door.  Honesty  is  direct ;  dis- 
honesty is  circuitous.  Crooked  ways  tend  to  become  deceitful,  if  they  are  not  so  of  set 
purpose.  A  man  may  wander  in  them  till  he  has  lost  account  of  the  points  of  the  com- 
pass, and  knows  not  whiiher  he  is  going.  The  most  elementary  notions  of  right  and 
wrong  are  then  confused.  This  is  the  common  issue  of  casuistic  and  disingenuous 
conduct ;  it  results  in  self-deception. 

V.  Crooked  ways  lead  to  a  fatal  end.  The  way  to  heaven  is  to  "  turn  to  the 
right,  and  keep  straight  on."  The  road  that  leads  to  destruction  is  broad,  admitting  of 
much  irregularity  of  motion  from  one  side  to  the  other.  It  is  the  straight  and  narrow 
way  that  leads  to  life. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS 

Vers.  1 — 9. — The  conditions  of  religious  knowledge.  The  previous  chapter  having 
shown  us  in  a  variety  of  representations  the  necessity  and  the  worth  of  wisdom,  the 
question  is  now  dealt  with — How  shall  it  be  sought  and  attained  ? 

I.  Conditions  on  man's  bide.  The  enumeration  is  climactic,  proceeding  from  the 
less  strong  to  the  stronger  expressions.  1.  Receptivity.  The  open  mind  and  heart, 
ever  ready  to  "  adopt "  true  sentiments  and  appropriate  them  as  one's  own.  The 
point  is  not  to  ask — Who  says  this?  By  what  channel  does  it  come  to  me  ?  But — 
Is  it  sound  ?  is  it  true  ?  If  so,  it  is  for  me,  and  shall  be  made  my  own.  Truth  is 
common  property.  2.  Attention,  concentration,  assimilation.  "Keeping  her  com- 
mands with  us."  The' thorough  student  finds  it  necessary  to  exercise  his  memory,  and 
to  help  it  by  the  use  of  note-books,  where  he  hives  his  knowledge.  So  must  we  hive 
and  store,  arrange  and  digest,  our  religious  impressions,  which  otherwise  "go  in  at  one 
ear  and  out  at  the  other."  Short  germ-sayings  may  be  thus  kept  in  the  memory ; 
they  will  burst  into  fertility  some  day.  3.  Active  application.  In  figurative  language 
"  bi  nding  the  ear  "  and  "  turning  the  heart "  in  the  desired  direction.  The  mind  must 
not  be  passive  in  religion.  It  is  no  process  of  "cramming,"  but  of  personal, original, 
spiritual  activity  tliroughout.  4.  Passionate  craving  and  prayerfulness.  "Calling 
Sense  to  one's  side,  and  raising  one's  voice  to  Prudence" — to  give  another  rendering  to 
ver.  3.  We  must  invoice  the  spirit  of  Wisdom  for  the  needs  of  daily  conduct;  thus 
placing  ourselves  in  living  relation  with  what  is  our  true  nature.  Fra  Angelico 
prayed  before  his  easel;  Cromwell,  in  his  tent  on  the  eve  of  battle.  So  must  the 
thinker  in  his  study,  the  preacher  in  his  pulpit,  the  merchant  at  his  desk,  if  he  would 
have  the  true  clearness  of  vision  and  the  only  genuine  success.  True  prayer  is  always 
for  the  universal,  not  the  private,  good.  5.  Persevering  and  laborious  exertion. 
Illustrated  by  the  miner's  toil.  The  passage  (Job  xxviii.),  of  extraordinary  picturesque 
power  and  interest,  describing  the  miner's  operations,  may  help  us  to  appreciate  the 
illustration.  The  pursuit  of  what  is  ideal  is  still  more  arduous  tlian  that  of  the 
material,  as  silver  and  gold.     It  is  often  said  that  the  perseverance  of  the  unholy 


CH.  II.  1—22.]  THE   PROViiilBS. 


worker  shames  the  sloth  of  the  spiritual  man.  But  let  us  not  ignore  the  oth'jr  sile. 
The  toil  in  the  spirituiil  rt'gion  is  not  obvious  to  the  eye  like  the  other,  but  is  not  the 
less  really  practised  in  silence  by  thousands  of  faithful  souls.  We  should  reflect  on 
the  immense  travau  of  soul  it  has  cost  to  produce  the  liook  which  stirs  us  like  a  new 
force,  though  it  may  appear  to  flow  with  consummate  ease  from  the  pen.  Such  are 
the  conditions  of  "undei  standing  the  fear  of  Jehovah,"  or,  in  modern  language,  of 
appropriating,  making  religion  our  own;  "receiving  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God," 
in  the  language  of  St.  Paul  (1  Cor.  ii.  14).  It  is  the  highest  human  possession, 
because  permanent,  inalienable,  and  preservative  amidst  life's  ills. 

II.  Conditions  on  the  side  op  God.  If  religion  be  the  union  or  identification 
of  the  soul  with  God,  he  must  be  related  to  us  in  such  a  way  as  maltes  this  possible. 
I.  He  is  wisdom's  Source  and  Giver.  He  not  only  contains  in  himself  that  knowli  dge 
which,  reflected  in  us,  becomes  prudence,  sense,  wisdom,  piety ;  he  is  an  active  Will 
and  a  gell-communicating  Spirit.  The  ancients  haJ  a  glimpse  of  this  when  they  said 
that  the  gods  were  not  of  so  grudging  or  envious  a  nature  as  not  to  reveal  their  good 
to  men.  God  is  self-revealing ;  "  freely  gives  of  his  things  "  to  us,  that  we  may  know, 
and  in  knowing,  possess  them.  2.  His  wisdom  is  saving.  "  Sound  wisdom  "  (ver.  7) 
may  be  better  rendered  soundness,  or  salvation,  or  health,. or  saving  health.  It  seems  to 
come  from  a  root  signifying  the  essential  nr  actual.  Nothing  is  essential  but  health  for 
sensuous  enjoyment;  nothing  but  health,  in  the  larger  sense,  for  spiritUHl  enjoyment. 
Let  US  think  of  God  as  himself  absolute  Health,  and  thus  the  Giver  of  all  health  and 
happiness  to  his  creatures.  3.  He  is  Protector  of  the  faithful.  The  Hebrew  imagina- 
tion, informed  by  constant  scenes  of  war,  delights  to  represent  him  as  the  Buckler  or 
Shield  of  his  servants  (Ps.  xviii.  2;  xxxiii.  20;  Ixxxix.  10).  Those  who  "walk  in 
innocence"  seem  to  bear  a  charmed  life.  They  "  fear  no  evil,"  for  he  is  with  them. 
The  vast  sky  is  their  tent-roof.  They  may  he  slain,  but  cannot  be  hurt.  To  be 
snatched  from  this  world  is  to  be  caught  to  his  arms.  4.  He  is  eternal  Justice.  Being 
this  in  himself,  the  "way  of  his  saints,"  which  is  synonymous  with  human  rectitude, 
cannot  be  indifferent  to  him.  Eight  is  the  highest  idea  we  can  associate  with  God. 
It  is  exempt  from  the  possible  suspicion  of  weakness  or  misdirection  which  may  cleave 
to  the  mere  idea  of  goodness  or  kindness.  It  essentially  includes  might.  Thus  the 
soul  finds  shelter  beneath  this  vast  and  majestic  conception  and  faith  of  its  God. 
These,  then,  aie  the  conditions,  Divine  and  human,  of  religion.  That  we  may  realize  it 
in  ourselves,  "understand  right,  justice,  and  equity" — in  a  word,  "every  good  way" 
of  life  and  thought,  uniting  piety  with  morality — the  conditions  must  be  faithfully 
fulfilled.  Perfect  bodily  health  may  not  he  attainable;  some  of  its  conditions  lie 
without  the  sphere  of  freedom,  and  within  that  of  necessary  law.  Spiritual  health  ii 
attainable,  for  it  lies  within  the  sphere  of  freedom.  Then  God  is  realized;  it  is  the 
ether  of  the  soul,  and  the  region  of  love  and  light  and  blessedness. — J. 

Vers.  10—22. — The  profit  of'  religious  knowledge.  It  is  preservative  amidst  the 
influences  of  evil  example  and  of  sensuous  solicitation. 

I.  The  way  in  which  it  acts  as  a  pebsbbvative.  1.  By  taking  up  a  central 
place  in  the  consciousness.  "  When  wisdom  enters  thy  heart,  and  knowledge  is  dear 
to  thy  soul."  Not  as  a  stranger  or  mere  guest,  but  a  beloved  and  confidential  intimate. 
The  heart  denotes  here,  as  elsewhere,  "  the  centre  and  organic  basis  of  the  collective 
life  of  the  soul,  the  seat  of  sentiment,  the  starting-point  of  personal  self-determination." 
The  soul,  as  used  by  Hebrew  writers,  denotes  the  entire  assemblage  of  the  passive  and 
active  principles  of  the  innei  life.  Delitzsch  terms  the  heart,  as  used  in  the  Bible,  "the 
birthplace  of  thought ; "  and  this  is  true,  because  thought  springs  out  of  the  dim  chaos 
of  feeling  as  the  defined  crystals  from  the  chemical  mixture.  2.  By  counteractive 
force.  If  the  inmost  thing  we  know  and  feel  be  a  sense  of  right  and  a  sense  of  God, 
a  pure  sentiment  and  a  lofty  idea,  this  must  exclude  the  baser  feeimgs,  and  displace 
the  images  of  pleasure  and  objects  of  desire  which  are  unlawf^l  and  undivine.  There 
is  watch  and  ward  in  the  fortress  of  Man-soul  against  the  enemy  and  the  intruder. 
The  "  expulsive  force  of  a  new  affection  "  operates.  It  is  the  occupied  heart  that  alone 
is  temptation-proof.  "  Discretion  shall  watch  over  thee,  prudence  guard  thee."  The 
mind,  directed  to  what  is  without,  and  feeling  for  its  course  among  uncertainties,  thui 
"tppeara  forearmed  against  dangers. 


48  THE   PEOVEBBS.  [oh.  ii.  1—22. 

II.  The  dangers  pbom  which  it  preserves.  Social  dangers.  In  society  lies  onr 
field  of  full  moral  development,  both  in  sympathy  with  the  good  and  in  antipathy  to 
the  evil.  Two  dangers  are  particularized.  1.  The  influence  of  the  had  man.  We  know 
men  by  their  talk  and  by  their  actions — their  habit  in  both;  their  "style,"  their 
"  form,"  in  the  expressive  language  of  the  day.  (1)  His  talk  is  of  "  froward  things/'  or 
"  perversities  " — cunning,  crafty,  malicious  in  spirit  (ver.  12).  Literally  it  is  crooked  talk, 
which  is  a  relative  term — the  direct  opposite  of  the  "  straightness  "  of  ver.  9  being  meant. 
Our  moral  intuitions  appear  in  the  mind  under  the  analogy  of  relations  in  space,  and 
are  thus  designated  probably  in  all  languages.  The  right  line  and  the  curve  or  zigzag 
represent  what  we/ee?  about  good  and  evil  in  conduct.  The  speech  of  evil  insinuation, 
covert  suggestion,  had  tone,  generally  may  be  meant ;  or  perhaps,  rather,  guilty  topics 
of  conversation.  The  East  is  more  leisurely  in  its  habits  than  are  we;  and  the  warning 
has  peculiar  adapfation  to  the  unfilled  hours  of  an  easy  life,  and  which  bad  talk  so  often 
wastes  and  corrupts.  (2)  His  habit  of  life.  He  forsakes  the  "  straight  paths  "  to  walk 
iu  "  dark  ways,"  such  as  those  alluded  to  by  St.  Paul  (Rom.  xiii.  13 ;  Eph.  v.  11 ; 
1  Thess.  V.  5).  In  the  like  sense  that  darkness  is  antipathetic  to  us,  is  moral  evil 
(hence  its  appropriateness  as  an  emblem) ;  we  may  overcome  the  feeling  partially,  but 
only  by  doing  ourselves  a  violence.  It  is  a  step  further  in  self-perversion  to  "  take 
pleasure  in  the  execution  of  evil,  and  to  make  merry  over  wickedness."  Human  nature 
demands  sympatliy ;  the  most  depraved  cannot  do  without  it  or  the  semblance  of  it. 
We  are  always  craving  the  sight  of  that  which  I'eflects  us ;  hence  the  sight  of  evil 
gives  joy  to  the  bad  man,  the  sight  of  good  enrages  him.  For  he  is  a  deformity.  His 
ways  are  crooked,  twisted  all  his  mode  of  mind  and  life;  a  moral  deformity.  The 
conscience,  armed  with  the  healthy  perception  of  the  true,  beautiful,  and  good,  sees  all 
this  in  the  bad  man,  recognizes  him  for  what  he  is,  and  so  is  proof  against  him.  One 
great  lesson  of  Goethe's  'Faust'  is  that  the  tempted  man  does  not  see  the  devil  in 
human  shape,  because  his  moral  temper  has  been  first  unstrung,  and  so  his  vision 
vitiated.  2.  The  solicitations  of  the  had  woman.  The  expressions, "  strange,  foreign  " 
(ver.  16),  appear  to  designate  her  as  the  wife  of  another,  an  adulteress  (comp.  ch.  vi.  26 ; 
but  the  sense  is  disputed).  To  allegorize  the  passage  is  to  weaken  its  force ;  for  the 
actual  dangers  of  youth  are  clearly  indicated.  She  is  depicted  in  the  strongest  light  of 
reality.  This  is  what  she  is  in  the  view  of  the  inspired  conscience.  (1)  Her  infidelity 
to  her  husband  and  her  God  (ver.  17).  For  marriage  is  a  bond,  not  only  between  two 
human  beings,  but  between  each  and  God.  Affiance  is  the  glory  of  womanhood ;  to 
break  her  plighted  troth  is  to  wreck  all  her  true  charm  and  beauty.  "  Companion  of 
her  youth"  is  a  beautiful  designation  of  the  husband  (Jer.  iii.  4;  Ps.  Iv.  14).  (2) 
Her  dangerous  arts.  Oh,  what  can  replace  a  youth  defiled?  or  what  more  dangerous 
influence  can  there  be  than  that  of  her  whose  "  hatred  is  goaded  by  shame  " — hatred 
against  the  virtue  which  confronts  to  reproach  her  ?  Her  smooth  tongue,  flattering  her 
victim  with  simulated  admiration,  and  with  the  "hyppcrisy  of  passion,"  is  more  deadly 
than  the  sword.  (3)  Her  deadly  seductions.  Death,  the  kingdom  of  the  shades,  the 
ghosts  who  lead,  according  to  the  view  of  the  ancient  world,  a  faint  and  bloodless 
existence  below,  is  the  end  of  her  and  the  partakers  of  her  sins.  To  She61,  to 
Hades,  the  bourne  whence  no  traveller  returns,  the  steps  of  all  her  visitors  tend.  Her 
house  seems  ever  to  be  tottering  over  the  dark  abyss.  The  truth  held  in  this  tragic 
picture  is  too  obvious  to  need  further  illustration.  Fatal  to  health  of  body,  to  peace 
of  soul,  to  the  very  life  itself,  is  the  zymotic  disease  of  lust.  To  the  religious  conscience 
thus  the  harlot  appears ;  stripped  of  her  paint  and  finery,  her  hypocrisy  exposed,  the 
poison  of  her  being  detected.  It  is  the  shadow  of  a  life,  and  ends  in  emptiness, 
darkness,  and  ghostly  gibbering. — J. 

Vers.  20—22. — The  principle  of  moral  stability.  This  may  be  regarded  as  tha 
epilogue  or  summary  of  the  whole  chapter.  The  object  of  all  Wisdom's  exhortations 
and  warnings  is  the  direction  of  youth  to  the  good  way,  and  that  they  may  hold  on  the 
path  of  the  just.     For — 

I.  The  righteous  have  a  future  before  them.    A  "dwelling  in  the  land" 

the  home-land;  sound  dear  to  an  Israelitish  ear.  The  fwrn  in  which  the  happy 
future  shall  be  realized  may  be  first  material,  but  only  to  pass  into  the  spiritual.  For 
ages  Iwael  saw  the  promise  under  tha  image  of  material  proaperity  ;  afterwards,  in  tiw 


OH.  II.  1—22.]  THE  PROVERBS.  i9 


purification  and  enlightenment  of  her  conscience  by  the  gospel,  she  looked  for  a  "  better 
country,  that  is,  an  heavenly."  Both  senses  may  be  included.  The  enlightened  spirit 
know8  how  to  idealize  every  material  content,  and  will  leave  much  undefined  in  the 
prospect.  Enough  to  say  of  all  the  seekers  of  God's  kingdom  and  righteousness, 
"  They  have  a  future  before  them."  The  soul  itself  suffices  to  itself  for  the  scene  of 
bliss,  and  converts  the  rich  land  of  Canaan  into  the  type  of  its  inward  joys  and  harvests 
of  good. 

II.  The  wicked  have  no  putube  before  them.  That  is,  in  the  sense  far  excellence. 
Their  doom  is  to  be  rooted  out  and  cast  forth  from  the  land.  What  lies  behind  the 
material  figure,  who  can  say?.  To  conceive  it  transcends  the  bounds  of  human 
thought.  There  is  no  travelling  out  of  the  analogies  of  experience  possible.  We  reach 
at  last  a  negative  conception  in  the  case  both  of  future  bliss  and  future  woe.  The 
Buddhists  aim  as  their  highest  goal  at  the  Nirvana,  which  is  the  negation  of  finite 
existence  with  its  defects  and  evils.  What  must  be  the  Nirvana  of  the  wicked  ?  The 
negation  of  the  Infinite  must  mean  confinement  in  self,  and  this  is  death  indeed.  They 
who  have  persistently  said  "  No  "  to  God  and  the  good  in  their  life  will  be  confronted 
by  an  everlasting  "No!"  And  thus  again  the  wheel  comes  full  circle,  and  they 
reap  as  they  sow  (comp.  Matt.  vii.  24 — 27). — J. 

Vers.  1 — 9. — 2%e  course,  the  goal,  and  the  prize  of  wisdom.  These  are  comprehen- 
sive verses ;  they  include  the  three  main  features  of  the  heavenly  race. 

I.  The  course  of  the  wisdom- seeker.  He  who  searches  for  wisdom  is  a  wise 
runner  in  a  heavenly  race ;  he  is  pursuing  an  end  which  the  Divine  Author  of  his  being 
distinctly  and  emphatically  commends.  1.  His  search  for  life-giving  truth  must  be 
characterized  by  readiness  to  receive.  He  must  be  wholly  different  in  spirit  from  those 
who  are  disinclined  to  learn ;  still  more  must  he  be  far  removed  from  those  who  scorn- 
fully reject;  he  must  be  a  son  who  "will  receive  the  words"  of  wisdom — the  words  of 
the  "  only  wise  God,"  of  him  who  is  "  the  Wisdom  of  God "  (ver.  1).  2.  But  there 
must  be  not  only  readiness;  there  should  be  eagerness  to  receive.  He  must  "  incline  his 
ear  "  (ver.  2).  Not  only  be  prepared  to  listen  when  Wisdom  speaks,  but  make  a  distinct 
and  positive  effort  to  learn  the  truth  which  affects  him  and  which  will  bless  him.  3. 
Beyond  this,  there  must  be  carefulness  to  retain.  The  student  must  not  let  his  mind 
be  a  sieve  through  which  knowledge  passes  and  from  which  it  is  readUy  lost ;  he  must 
make  it  a  reservoir  which  will  retain;  he  is  to  "hide  God's  commandments"  within 
him  (ver.  1),  to  take  them  down  into  the  deep  places  of  the  soul  whence  they  will  not 
escape.  4.  Further,  there  must  be  perseverance  in  the  search.  He  must  "  apply  his 
heart  to  understanding  "  (ver.  2).  Not  by  "  fits  and  starts"  is  the  goal  to  bo  reached, 
but  by  steady,  patient,  continuous  search.  5.  And  there  must  also  be  enthusiasm,  in 
the  endeavour  (vers.  3,  4).  With  the  impassioned  earnestness  with  which  a  man  who 
is  lost  in  the  pathless  wood,  or  is  sinking  under  the  whelming  wave,  "  cries  "  and  "lifts 
up  his  voice,"  should  the  seeker  after  heavenly  wisdom  strive  after  the  goal  which  is 
before  him.  With  the  untiring  energy  and  inexhaustible  ardour  with  which  men  toil 
for  silver  or  dig  for  the  buried  treasure  of  which  they  believe  themselves  to  have  found 
the  secret,  should  the  soul  strive  and  search  after  the  high  end  to  which  God  is 
calling  it. 

II.  The  GOAii  HE  wiiiL  SURELY  REACH.  He  who  thus  seeks  for  heavenly  truth 
will  attain  that  to  which  he  is  aspiring ;  "  for  the  Lord  giveth  wisdom,"  etc.  (ver.  6). 
There  is  no  man  who  desires  to  be  led  into  the  path  of  that  Divine  wisdom  which  con- 
stitutes the  life  and  joy  of  the  soul,  and  who  pursues  that  lofty  and  holy  end  in  the 
spirit  here  commended,  who  will  fail  to  reach  the  goal  toward  which  he  runs.  That 
earnest  and  patient  runner  shall  be  helped  of  God ;  Divine  resources  shall  be  supplied 
to  him;  he  shall  run  without  weariness,  he  shall  walk  without  fainting,  till  the  winning- 
post  is  clasped  (see  Matt.  v.  6 ;  vii.  7,  8).  1.  He  shall  apprehend  the  essential  elements 
of  religion.  "  Thou  shalt  understand  the  fear  of  the  Lord "  (ver.  5).  He  will  be  led 
into  a  spiritual  apprehension  of  that  which  constitutes  the  foundation  and  the  essence 
of  all  true  piety.  He  will  be  able  to  distinguish  between  the  substance  and  the 
shadow,  the  reality  and  the  pretence  of  religion.  2.  He  shall  also — and  this  is  a  still 
greater  thing — attain  to  a  vital  and  redeeming  krwwledye  of  Ood  himself.  "Thou 
shalt  find  the  knowledge  of  Ood  "  (ver.  6).    To  know  him  is  eternal  life  (John  xviL  3). 


60  THE  PBOVEBBS.  [oh.  n.  1—22. 

But  thi8  knowledge  must  be — what  in  the  case  of  the  earnest  disciple  of  heavenly 
wisdom  it  will  become — a  vital  knowledge ;  it  must  be  of  the  whole  spiritual  natuie, 
and  not  only  of  the  intellectual  faculty.  It  must  be  a  knowledge  which  (1)  engages 
Ibe  whole  powers  of  the  spirit;  (2)  which  brings  joy  to  the  ioul;  (3)  which  leads  to 
an  honest  effort  after  God-likeness. 

III.  The  prize  he  will  win.  It  may  be  truly  said  that  the  runner  in  the  race 
finds  a  deeper  satisfaction  in  clasping  the  goal  while  his  competitors  are  all  behind  him 
tl.an  in  wearing  the  chaplet  of  honour  on  his  brows.  And  it  maybe  truly  said  that  the 
must  blessed  guerdon  which  the  heavenly  runner  wins  is  in  that  knowledge  of  Qoi 
wliich  is  his  "  goal  "  rather  than  in  the  after-honours  which  are  his  "prize."  Yet  we 
may  well  cnvet  with  intense  eagerness  the  prize  which  Wisdom  holds  in  her  hand  for 
those  who  are  victorious.  It  includes  much.  1.  Stores  of  deep  spiritual  verities.  "  He 
Liyeth  up  sound  wisdom,''  etc.  (ver.  7) — greater  and  deeper  insight  into  the  most  pro- 
found and  precious  truth.  2.  Discernment  of  all  practical  wisdom.  "  Thou  ghalt 
understand  righteousness,  and  judgment,  and  equity;  yea,  every  good  path"  (ver.  9). 
3.  Divine  guardianship  along  all  the  path  of  life.  *'  He  is  a  Buckler  to  them  that  walk 
uprightly.     He  keepeth  the  paths  of  judgment,"  etc.  (vers.  7,  8). — 0. 

Vers.  10 — 15. — 2%e  course  of  sin  and  the  strength  of  righieousnest.  We  have  here 
portrayed  for  us — 

1.  The  shocking  course  op  sin.  1.  It  begins  in  departure  from  rectitude.  Evil 
men  first  manifest  their  error  by  "  leaving  the  paths  of  uprightness."  They  were  once 
under  the  wholesome  restraints  of  righteousness.  Parental  control,  the  influences  of 
the  sanctuary  and  of  virtnous  society,  held  them  in  check,  but  these  are  thrown  off; 
they  have  become  irksome,  and  they  are  rebelled  against  and  abandoned.  The  old  and 
wise  principles  which  were  received  and  cherished  are  one  by  one  discarded,  and  they 
stand  unshielded,  imguided,  ready  to  wander  in  forbidden  paths.  2.  It  continues  in 
the  practice  of  evil.  Having  thrown  off  old  restraints,  they  "  walk  in  the  ways  of  dark- 
ness "  (ver.  13) ;  they  proceed  to  do,  habitually,  those  things  which  the  unenlightened 
do — those  things  which  shun  the  light  and  love  the  darkness ;  deeds  of  error  and  of 
shame.  3  It  resorts  to  despicable  shifts.  "Whose  ways  are  crooked"  (ver.  15). 
Sin  cannot  walk  straight  on ;  it  would  be  soon  overtaken  by  penalty,  or  fall  over  the 
precipice.  It  is  like  men  pursued  of  justice,  who  have  to  turn  and  double  that  they 
may  elude  those  who  are  behind.  The  course  of  sin  is  twisted  and  tortuous ;  it  resorts 
to  c'jnning  and  craftiness.  All  manliness  is  eaten  out  of  it;  it  has  the  spirit  and 
habit  of  a  slave  (see  Bom.  vi.  16).  4.  It  hardens  into  utter  perversity.  They  "  are 
fro  ward  in  their  paths"  (ver.  15);  they  "speak  froward  things"  (ver.  12),  {.e.  they 
sink  down  into  complete  hardihood  and  spiritual  stubbornness;  their  hearts  are  turned 
aside  from  all  that  is  devout,  pure,  wise,  and  they  have  gone  utterly  after  that  which 
is  profane  and  base.  5.  It  cvdminates  in  a  hateful  and  hurtful  propagandism.  They 
"  rejoice  to  do  evil,  and  delight  in  the  frowardness  of  the  wicked"  (ver.  14).  Sin  can 
go  no  further  in  enormity,  no  deeper  in  abasement,  than  when,  rejoicing  in  iniquity,  it 
seeks  to  lead  others  into  the  same  guilt  and  vileness  with  itself.  What  a  pitiful 
zenldtry  is  this — the  anxiety  and  pertinacity  of  sin  in  winning  from  the  paths  of 
rectitude  the  children  of  innocence  and  truth  1  What  a  saddening  thought  that 
thousands  of  our  fellow-men  are  actively  occupied  in  this  diabolical  pursuit! 

II.  The  peril  of  piety  and  virtue.  Here,  on  earth,  the  purest  virtue  must 
walk  side  by  side  with  the  worst  depravity.  Sin  sits  down  at  the  same  hearth  with 
goodness;  profanity  with  piety.  And  thus  brought  into  close  contact,  it  is  open  to 
one  to  win  or  to  seduce  the  other.  We  rejpice  that  godliness  is  seeking  to  gain  impiety 
for  God,  but  we  mourn  and  tremble  as  we  see  sin  seeking  to  pervert  purity  and  good- 
ness from  "  the  right  ways  of  the  Lord."  We  are  all  open  to  human  influence.  The 
Deart  of  man  is  responsive  to  human  entreaty  and  example.  But  especially  so  is  the 
heart  of  youth :  that  is  tender,  impressionable,  plastic.  Perhaps  never  a  day  passes  but 
the  sun  looks  down,  in  every  land,  on  some  young  heart  detached  from  truth,  led  into 
the  path  of  evil,  stained  with  sin,  through  the  snares  and  wiles  of  guilty  men.  Who 
docs  not  sigh  with  some  feeling  of  solicitude  as  he  sees  the  young  njan  go  forth  from 
the  shelter  of  the  godly  home  into  the  world'  where  the  wicked  wait,  "rejoicing  tft  d» 
evil,"  and  taking  piide  in  the  destruction  they  produce? 


OH.  n.  1—22.]  THE  PE0VERB3.  61 

III.  Tbe  strength  and  seooeitt  of  RiaHTBousNBSS.  When  wisdom  enters  the 
heart  and  knowledge  is  pleasant  to  the  soul,  then  discretion  wiU  preserve,  and  under- 
standing will  keep  us  (vers.  10, 11).  In  other  words,  the  cordial  acceptance  of  the  truth 
(if  God  is  the  one  security  against  sin.  Delighting  to  do  God's  will,  his  Law  being  in  the 
heart  as  well  as  in  the  understanding  (Ps.  xl.  8),  this  will  prove  an  effectual  breakwater 
against  the  tides  of  evil.  He  that  can  say, "  0  Lord,  how  love  I  thy  Law ! "  (Ps.  cxix.) 
will  never  have  to  utter  words  of  bitter  remorse  and  black  despair.  Would  youth 
know  the  certain  path  of  victory,  and  pursue  that  way  which  leads,  not  down  to  shame, 
but  on  and  up  to  heavenly  glory?  1.  Let  it  regard  with  earnest  gaze  him  who  is  the 
Wisdom  of  Ged  in  fullest  revelation  to  the  sons  of  men.  2.  Yield  to  him  its  early, 
unbounded  love.  3.  Then  will  it  find  unfading  joy  in  the  Divine  truth  which  flowed 
from  his  lips,  and  which  shone  in  his  holy  life.  Whoio  believes  in  him  shall  never  be 
confounded . — C. 

Vers.  16 — 19. —  Hie  way  of  sin  ;  a  sermon  to  yovng  men.  Reference  is  made  here  to 
one  particular  sin.  While  the  words  of  the  teacher  are  specially  appropriate  to  it,  they 
will  also  apply  to  all  sin ;  they  show  the  way  it  takes.     Let  us  see  — 

I.  That  sin  is  the  contradiction  of  the  Divine  thought.  It  is  a  "  strange " 
thing  (ver.  16).  The  painted  harlot  is  "the  strange  woman."  And  while  the  prosti- 
tution of  a  human  being,  meant  to  be  a  helpmeet  for  man  in  all  his  highest  and  holiest 
pursuits  to  a  mere  ministress  to  his  unlawful  lusts,  is  the  very  saddest  departure  from 
the  Divine  ideal,  and  amply  justifies  the  use  of  the  word  "  strange  woman,"  we  may 
remember  that  oM  sin  is  a  strange  thing  in  the  universe  of  God.  How  it  ever  entered 
there  is  the  problem  which  can  never  be  solved.  But  meeting  with  it  here,  in  what- 
ever form,  we  say,  "  This  is  the  contrary  of  the  thonght  of  the  Supreme,"  "  This  is  the 
exact  opposite  of  his  design,"  "  This  ia  something  alien,  unnatural,  intrusive:  cannot  we 
cast  it  out?" 

n.  That  sin  must  stoop  to  falsehood  if  it  will  win  its  wat.  It "  flattereth 
with  its  words  "  (ver.  16).  Flattery  is  only  another  name  for  a  sweet  falsehood.  The 
woman  that  ia  a  sinner  uses  flattery  to  accomplish  her  ends.  So  sin  cannot  liva 
without  lying.  That  may  be  said  of  sin  which  was  said  of  a  great  European  usurper, 
that  it  "  has  deliberately  taken  falsehood  into  its  service."  But  the  most  effective  and 
destructive  form  of  it  is  flattery.  Let  the  young  take  earnest  heed  to  their  danger. 
When  the  lips  of  beauty  speak  soft  and  gratifying  things,  let  purity  beware ;  it  is  only 
too  likely  that  temptation  in  its  most  seductive  form  is  nigh,  and  that  character  and 
reputation  are  being  insidiously  assailed. 

III.  That  sin  sinks  to  its  darkest  depths  through  various  violations. 
(Ver.  17.)  It  is  uncertain  whether  by  the  "  guide  of  her  youth"  is  to  be  understood 
her  husband  (see  Mai.  ii.  14, 15),  her  parents,  or  her  God.  The  second  clause  clearly 
refers  to  the  marriage  covenant,  which  is  regarded  as  a  sacred  bond.  Whichever  be  the 
correct  view  of  the  former  clause,  it  is  certain  that  the  sinner  of  the  text  could  only 
descend  to  her  shameless  depth  by  violating  every  promise  she  has  made,  by_  breaking 
through  every  fence  which  once  stood  between  her  and  guilt.  This  is  the  inevitable 
course  of  sin.  It  violates  first  one  vow,  then  another,  until  all  sacred  promises  are 
broken.  (1)  Deliberate  resolutions,  (2)  solemn  assurances,  (3)  formal  vows ; — all  are 
infringed* 

IV.  That  sin  leads  straight  to  the  doorway  of  death.  (Vers.  18,  19.)  It 
leads:  1.  To  physical  death.  Vice  carries  with  it  a  penalty  in  the  body;  it  robs  of  health 
and  strength ;  it  enfeebles ;  it  sows  seeds  of  sickness  and  death.  The  «'  graves  of  lust " 
are  in  every  cemetery  and  churchyard  in  the  land.  2.  To  spiritual  death.  "  None 
that  go  unto  her  return  again  "  as  they  went.  Men  come  away  from  every  unlawful 
indulgence  other  than  they  go — weaker  and  worse  in  soul.  Alas  for  the  morrow  of 
incontinence,  of  whatever  kind  it  be!  The  soul  is  injured;  its  self-respect  is  slain,  its 
force  is  lessened ;  it  is  on  the  incline  which  slopes  to  death,  and  one  step  nearer  to  the 
foot  of  it.  «  Her  house  inclineth  unto  death."  3.  To  eternal  death.  They  who  resort 
to  forbidden  pleasure  are  fast  on  their  way  to  the  final  condemnation;  they  havs 
wandered  long  leagues  from  "  the  paths  of  life."  We  conclude  with  two  admonitions  ; 
(1)  Keep  carefully  away  from  the  beginnings  of  evil.  Shun  not  only  the  "  Strang* 
woman's  "  door,  but  the  evil  glance,  the  doubtful  company,  the  impure  book,  the  mere- 


53 


THE   PROVERBS. 


[oh.  m.  1 — 35. 


tricious  paper.  (2)  The  way  of  escape  is  immediate  and  total  abandonment  of  sin. 
Such  resolution  made  at  once,  seeking  God's  strength  and  grace,  will  permit  the 
wanderer  to  "  return  again," — 0. 

Vers.  20 — 22. — Becom^ense  and  retribution.  It  ought  to  be  enough  for  us  that 
wisdom  is  the  supremely  excellent  thing;  that  the  service  of  God  is  the  one  right 
thing.  We  should  hasten  to  do  that  which  commends  itself  to  our  conscience  as  that 
which  is  obligatory.  But  God  knows  that,  in  our  weakness  and  frailty,  we  have  need 
of  other  inducements  than  a  sense  cf  duty ;  be  has,  therefore,  given  us  others.  He  has 
made  wisdom  and  righteousness  to  be  immeasurably  remunerative ;  he  has  made  folly 
and  sin  to  be  utterly  destructive  to  us.    We  look  at — 

L  The  beward  op  wisdom.  (Vers.  20,  21.)  1.  The  man  who  pursues  wisdom, 
who  seeks  conformity  to  the  will  of  the  Wise  One,  will  have  holy  companionship  for 
the  path  of  life.  He  will  walk  in  the  way  in  which  good  and  righteous  men  walk. 
Instead  of  being  "  the  companion  of  fools,"  he  will  be  "  the  friend  of  the  wise."  Those 
whose  hearts  are  pure,  whose  minds  are  stored  with  heavenly  treasure,  and  whose  lives 
are  admirable,  will  be  about  him,  making  his  whole  path  fragrant  with  the  flowers  ol 
virtue,  rich  with  the  fruits  of  goodness.  2.  He  will  be  upheld  in  personal  integrity. 
Walking  in  the  way  of  the  good,  and  keeping  the  paths  of  the  righteous,  he  himself 
will  be  preserved  in  his  integrity,  and  be  set  before  God's  face  for  ever  (see  Ps.  xU.  12). 
His  feet  will  not  slip ;  he  will  not  wander  into  forbidden  ways ;  he  will  keep  "  the  King's 
highway  of  holiness ; "  his  face  will  be  ever  set  toward  the  heavenly  Jerusalem.  3.  He 
will  dwell  in  the  land  of  plenty  (ver.  21).  To  "  dwell  in  the  land,"  to  "  remain  "  in 
the  land  of  promise,  was  to  abide  in  that  country  where  all  things  in  rich  abundance 
waited  for  the  possession  and  enjoyment  of  the  people  of  God  (Exod.  iii.  8).  Those 
who  are  the  children  of  wisdom  now  dwell  in  a  region  which  is  full  of  blessing.  If 
outward  prosperity  be  not  always  their  portion,  yet  is  there  provided  by  God  (1)  evtry- 
thing  needful  for  temporal  well-being ;  (2)  fulness  of  spiritual  privilege ;  (3)  the  abiding 
presence  and  favour  of  the  eternal  Father,  the  unfailing  Friend,  the  Divine  Comforter. 

n.  Thb  fate  of  folly.  (Ver.  22.)  Those  who  were  the  children  of  folly  in  the 
wilderness-period  were  shut  out  of  the  land  of  promise ;  they  did  not  enter  into  rest. 
The  threat  of  the  Holy  One  to  those  who  had  inherited  the  land  was  deportation  and 
distance  from  their  inheritance — being  "  cut  off"  and  "  rooted  out."  The  evils  which 
foolish  and  stubborn  souls  have  now  to  dread,  as  the  just  penalty  of  their  folly  and 
their  frowardness,  are  (1)  exclusion  from  the  "  kingdom  of  God "  on  earth,  and  (2) 
exile  from  the  kingdom  of  God  in  heaven.  Such  impenitent  and  uaibelieving  ones,  by 
their  own  folly,  cut  themselves  off  from  that  "  eternal  life  "  which  begins  in  a  blessed 
and  holy  union  with  the  Lord  of  glory  here,  and  which  is  consummated  and  per- 
petuated in  the  nearer  fellowship  and  more  perfect  bliss  of  heaven. — G, 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  in. 


Vera.  1 — 18. — 4.  Fourth  admonitory  dit- 
oourtt.  The  third  chapter  introduces  us  to  a 
group  of  admonitions,  and  the  first  of  these 
(ver».  1 — 18)  forms  the  fomth  admonitory  dis- 
course of  the  teacher.  To  all  intents  and 
p  urposes  this  is  a  continuation  of  the  discourse 
in  the  preceding  chapter,  for  inasmuch  as  that 
described  the  benefits,  spiritual  and  moral, 
which  follow  from  the  pursuit  of  Wisdom,  in 
promoting  godliness  and  providing  safety 
from  evil  companions,  so  this  in  like  manner 
depicts  the  gain  flowing  from  Wisdom,  the 


happiness  of  the  man  who  finds  Wisdom,  and 
the  favour  which  he  meets  with  both  with 
God  and  man.  The  discourse  embraces 
exhortations  to  obedience  (vers.  1 — 4),  to 
reliance  on  God  (vers.  5,  6)  against  self- 
sufficiency  and  self-dependence  (vers.  7,  8), 
to  self-sacrificing  devotion  to  God  (vers.  9, 
10),  to  patient  submission  to  God's  afBictive 
dispensations  (vers.  11,  12),  and  concludes 
with  pointing  out  the  happy  gain  of  Wisdom, 
her  incomparable  value,  and  wherein  that 
value  consists  (vers.  13 — 18).  It  is  notice- 
able that  in  each  case  the  exhortation  ii 
accompanied  with  a  corresponding  promi|( 


AH.  ni.  1 — 35.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


B3 


of  reward  (vers,  2,  4,  6,  8,  10),  and  these 
promises  are  brought  forward  with  the  view 
to  encourage  the  observance  of  the  duties 
recommended  or  enjoined.  Jehovah  is  the 
central  point  to  wliioh  all  the  exhortations 
converge.  Obedience,  trust,  self-sacrificing 
devotion,  submission,  are  successively  brought 
forward  by  the  teacher  as  due  to  God,  and 
the  persons  in  whom  they  are  exhibited  are 
truly  happy  in  finding  Wisdom.  The  transi- 
tion in  thought  from  the  former  to  the  latter 
part  of  the  discourse  is  easy  and  natural. 
Obedience  and  trust  are  represented  as 
bringing  favour,  guidance,  and  health — ^in  a 
word,  prosperity.  But  God  is  not  only  to  be 
honoured  in  times  of  prosperity,  but  also  in 
adversity  his  loving  hand  is  to  be  recognized ; 
and  in  this  submission  to  his  will  is  true 
wisdom. 

Ver.  1. — My  son  (b'ni)  serves  to  exter- 
nally connect  this  discourse  with  the  preced- 
ing. Forget  not  my  law.  This  admonition 
bears  a  strong  resemblance  to  that  in  oh.  i. 
8,  though  the  terms  employed  are  somewhat 
different,  tordh  and  mitsfoth  here  occupying 
the  place  respectively  of  musar  and  torah 
in  that  passage.  My  law  (torathi),  is  lite- 
rally, my  teaching,  or  doctrine,  from  the  root 
yarah,  "  to  teach."  The  torah  is  the  whole 
body  of  salutary  doctrine,  and  designates 
"Law"  from  the  standpoint  of  teaching. 
Forgetting  here  is  not  so  much  oblivion 
arising  from  defective  memory,  as  a  wilful 
disregard  and  neglect  of  the  admonitions  of 
the  teacher.  Thine  heart  QibeTchd);  Vul- 
gate, eor;  LXX.,  KapSfo;  and  so  the  sum 
total  of  the  affections.  Keep ;  yitatsor,  from 
notear,  "to  keep,  or  observe  that  which  is 
commanded."  The  word  is  of  frequent 
occurrence  in  the  Proverbs,  and  appears  about 
twenty-five  times.  My  commandments 
(jnits'othay) ;  Vulgate,  prsecepta  mea;  LXX., 
Tck  ^iifiara  iiov;  t.e.  my  precepts.  The  Hebrew 
verb  from  which  it  is  derived  means  "to 
command,  or  prescribe."  The  law  and  com- 
mandments here  alluded  to  are  those  which 
immediately  follow,  from  ver.  3  onwards. 
The  three  main  ideas  combined  in  this  verse 
are  remembrance,  affection,  and  obedience. 
Remembering  the  law  or  teaching  will  de- 
pend, to  a  large  extent,  on  the  interest  felt 
in  that  law;  and  the  admonition  to  "forget 
not"  is  an  admonition  to  give  "earnest 
heed,"  so  that  the  law  or  teaching  may  be 
firmly  fixed  in  the  mind.  In  using  the 
■words,  "let  thy  heart  keep,"  the  teacher 
goes  to  the  root  of  the  matter.  There-  may 
be  an  historical  remembrance  of,  or  an  intel- 
lectual assent  to,  the  commandments,  but 
these  are  insufficient,  for  the  keeping  of  the 


commandmenta  must  be  baaed  on  the  recog- 
nition of  the  fact  that  the  affections  of  the 
heart  are  to  be  employed  in  the  service  of 
God,  the  keeping  of  the  commandmenta  is  to 
be  a  labour  of  love.  Again,  the  expression, 
"  keep  my  com mandments,"  i mplies, of  course, 
external  conformity  to  their  requirements: 
we  are  "  to  observe  to  do  them  "  (Deut.  viii. 
1) ;  but  it  implies,  further,  spiritual  obedience, 
i.e.  an  obedience  with  which  love  is  combined 
(Deut.  XXX.  20),  and  which  arises  from  the 
inward  principles  of  the  heart  being  in 
harmony  with  the  spirit  of  the  command- 
ments (see  Wardlaw). 

Ver.  2.— Length  of  days  (orek  yamim); 
Vulgate,  longitudo  dierum.  The  expression 
is  literally  "  extension  of  days,"  and  signifies 
the  prolongation  of  life,  its  duration  to  the 
appointed  limit — a  meamng  which  is  brought 
out  in  the  LXX.  /^.TiKos  plov,  "length  of 
days,"  the  Greek  word  pios  being  used,  not 
of  existence,  but  of  the  time  and  course  of 
life.  It  occurs  again  in  ver.  16,  and  also  in 
Job  xii.  12  and  Ps.  xxi.  4.  "  Length  of 
days"  is  represented  as  a  blessing  in  the 
Old  Testament,  depending,  however,  as  in  the 
present  instance,  on  the  fulfilment  of  certain 
conditions.  Thus  in  the  fifth  command- 
ment it  is  appended  to  the  honouring  of 
parents  (Exod.  xx.  12),  and  it  was  promised 
to  Solomon,  at  Gibeon,  on  the  condition  that 
he  walked  in  the  way ,|  statutes,  and  com- 
mandments of  God  (1  Kings  iii.  14).  The 
promise  of  prolongaiiou  of  life  is  not  to  be 
pressed  historically  as  applying  to  every 
individual  case,  but  is  to  be  taken  as  indi- 
cating the  tendency  of  keeping  the  Divine 
precepts,  which,  as  a  rule,  ensure  preserva- 
tion of  health,  and  hence  "length  of  days." 
long  life  (vush'noth  khayyim);  literally, 
years  of  life;  Targum  Jonathan,  Vulgate, 
Svriao,  and  Arabic,  anni  vitss;  LXX.,  txTj 
fmTJs.  The  Authorized  Version  scarcely 
serves  to  bring  out  the  sense  of  the  original, 
as  there  is  practically  no  difference  in  mean- 
ing  between  "  length  of  days"  and  "long  life." 
The  idea  conveyed  in  the  expression,  "years 
of  life,"  is  that  of  material  prosperity.  The 
thought  of  an  extended  life  is  carried  on 
from  the  preceding  expression,  but  it  is 
amplified  and  described.  The  years  of  life 
will  be  many,  but  they  will  be  years  of  life 
in  its  truest  sense,  as  one  of  true  happiness 
and  enjoyment,  free  from  distraotin<>:  cares, 
sickness,  and  other  drawbacks.  The  Hebrew 
plural,  khayyim,  "Uves,"  is  equivalent  to  the 
Greek  expression,  $los  Piar6s,  "  a  life  worth 
while  living"  (of.  Plat., '  Apol.,'  38.  A).  To 
the  Israelitish  mind,  the  happiness  of  Me 
consisted  in  "dwelling  in  the  laud"  (Deut 
iv  40-  V.  30,  etc.),  and  "abiding  in  the 
house  of  the  Lord  "  (Ps.  xv.  1 ;  ixiii.  6 ;  xxvii 
8)  (Zockler) .  The  conjecture  that  the  plural, 
khayyim,  signifies  the  present  and  the  futurs 


64 


THE  PB0VEBB8. 


[oh.  m.  1—85. 


life,  is  unfounded.  The  scope  of  the  promise 
before  us  is  confined  to  the  present  stage  of 
existence,  and  it  ia  negatived  also  by  the 
similar  use  of  the  plural  in  ch.  xvi.  5,  "  In 
the  light  of  the  king's  countenance  is  life 
Qchayyim)"  where  hhayyim  cannot  possibly 
refer  to  the  future  life.  Khayyim  stands  for 
life  in  its  fulness.  "  Godliness  "  has  indeed, 
as  St.  Paul  wrote  to  Timothy,  "promise  of 
the  life  that  now  is,  and  of  that  which  is  to 
come"  (1  Tim.  iv.  8).  Teaeo  (thalom).  The 
verb  eltalam,  tiom  which  the  substantive 
thalom  is  derived,  signifies  "to  be  whole, 
sound,  safe,"  and  hence  "peace"  means  in- 
ternal and  external  contentment,  and  tran- 
quillity of  mind  arising  from  the  sense  of 
safety.  In  ver.  17  the  ways  of  Wisdom  are 
designated  people.  While,  on  the  one  hand, 
peace  is  represented  by  the  psalmist  as  the 
possession  of  those  who  love  God's  Law  (Ps. 
cxix.  165),  on  the  other,  it  is  denied  the 
wicked  (Isa.  xlviii.  22 ;  Ivii.  21).  Shall  they 
add  to  thee;  i.e.  shall  the  precepts  and 
commands  bring  (Zockler)  or  heap  upon 
(Muffet)  thee. 

Ver.  3. — Uercy  and  truth  (kheted  vermetK) ; 
properly,  love  and  truth;  Vulgate,  miseri- 
cordia  et  Veritas;  LXX.,  iXetinoaivai  koX 
irhrreis.  With  this  verse  begin  the  com- 
mandments which  are  alluded  to  in  ver.  1. 
The  Hebrew  kheeed  has  to  be  ucderstood  in 
its  widest  sense,  though  the  Vulgate  and  the 
LXX.  confine  it  to  one  aspect  of  its  mean- 
ing, viz.  that  which  refers  to  the  relation  of 
man  to  man,  to  the  pity  evoked  by  the  eight 
of  another's  misfortunes,  ana  .o  almsgiving. 
The  radical  meaning  of  the  v>ord  is  "  ardent 
desire,"  from  the  root  hhasad,  "  to  eagerly  or 
ardently  desire."  Delitzsch  describes  it  as 
"  well-affectedness."  Predicated  of  God,  it 
indicates  God's  love  and  grace  towards  man ; 
predicated  of  man,  it  signifies  man's  love  to- 
wards God,  i.  e.  piety,  or  man's  love  towardshis 
neighbour,  i.e.  humanity.  Where  this  mercy 
or  love  is  exhibited  in  man  it  finds  expression 
in  (1)  mutual  outward  help ;  (2)  forgiveness 
of  offences ;  (3)  sympathy  of  feeling,  which 
leads  to  interchange  of  thought,  and  so  to  the 
development  of  the  spiritual  life  (gee  Elster, 
in  Zoc).  The  word  carries  with  it  the  ideas 
of  kindlint  sa,  hemgnity(Ta,Tgnm,benigmtas), 
and  grace  (Syriac,  gratia).  Truth  {emeth) ; 
properly,  firmness,  or  stability,  and  so  fidelity 
in  whiohone  performs  one's  promise.  Truth 
is  that  absolute  integrity  of  character,  both 
in  word  and  deed,  which  secures'  the  unhesi- 
tating confidence  of  all  (  Wardlaw).  Umbreit 
and  Elster  designate  it  as  inward  truthful- 
ness, the  pectus  rectum,  the  very  essence  of  a 
true  man.  As  Ichesed  excludes  all  selfishness 
and  hate,  bo  emeth  excludes  all  hypocrisy 
and  dissimulation.  These  two  virtues  are  fre- 
quently combined  in  the  Proverbs  (e.g.  oh.  xiv. 
22;  XV  L  16;  xx.  28)  and  Psalms  (e.gi.  Ps. 


XXV.  10;  xl.  11;  Ivii.  4 — 11;  cviii.  5;  cxxxviii 
2),  and,  when  predicated  of  man,  indicate  the 
highest  normal  standard  of  moral  perfetftion 
(Zockler).  The  two  ideas  are  again  brought 
together  in  the  New  Testament  phrase,  &Ai) 
Beietv  in  iydmi, "  to  speak  the  truth  in  love  " 
(Eph.  iv.  15)'.  There  seems  little  ground 
for  the  remark  of  Salasius,  that  "  mercy  " 
refers  to  our  neighbours,  and  "tiuth*  to 
God.  Each  virtue,  in  fact,  has  a  twofold 
reference— one  to  God,  the  other  to  man. 
The  promise  in  ver.  4,  that  the  exercise  of 
these  virtues  procures  favour  with  God  and 
man,  implies  this  twofold  aspect.  Bind  them 
about  thy  neok ;  either  (1)  as  ornaments 
worn  about  the  neck  (Gejerus,  Zockler);  or 
(2)  as  amulets  or  talismans,  which  were  worn 
from  a  superstitious  notion  to  ward  ofl 
danger  (Umbreit  and  Vaihinger) ;  or  (3)  as 
treasures  which  one  wears  atlached  to  the 
neck  by  a  chain  to  guard  against  their  loss 
(Hitzig);  or  (4)  as  a  signet,  which  was 
carried  on  a  string  round  the  neck  (Delitzsch). 
The  true  reference  of  the  passage  seems  to 
lie  between  (1)  and  (.S).  The  latter  adapts 
itself  to  the  parallel  expression,  "  Write 
them  on  the  tablet  of  thine  lieart,"  and  also 
agrees  with  ch.  vi.  21,  "  Tie  them  about  thy 
neck,"  the  idea  being  that  of  their  careful 
preservation  a  gainst  loss.  The  former  mean- 
ing, however,  seems  preferable.  Mercy  and 
truth  »re  to  be  ornaments  of  the  character, 
to  be  bound  round  the  neck,  i.e.  worn  at  all 
times  (comp.  oh.  i.  9,  "  For  they  shall  be  an 
ornament  of  grace  unto  thine  head,  and 
chains  about  thy  neck."  See  also  Gen.  xli. 
42;  Songof  Sol.i.  10;  iv.9;  Ezek.xvi.  11). 
The  imagery  of  the  binding  is  evidently 
taken  from  Exod.xiii.  9  and  Deut.  vi.  8,  and 
is  suggestive  of  the  tephillim,  or  phylac- 
teries. Write  them  upon  the  table  of  thine 
heart ;  i.e.  inscribe  them,  mercy  and  truth, 
deeply  there,  impress  tliem  thoroughly  and 
indelibly  upon  thine  heart,  so  that  they  may 
never  be  forgntlen,  and  may  form  the  main- 
sjiring  of  your  actions.  The  expression  im- 
plies tii.it  the  heart  is  to  be  in  entire  union 
■wiih  their  dictates.  The  table  Qudkh)  was 
the  tablet  expre-sly  prepared  for  writing  by 
being  polished,  corresponding  to  the  irica- 
Ki'Sioj',  the  writing-table  of  Luke  i.  63,  which, 
however,  was  probably  covered  with  wax. 
The  inscription  was  made  with  the  stylus. 
The  same  word  is  used  of  the  tables  of  stone, 
on  which  the  ten  commandment*  were 
written  with  the  finger  of  God,  and  allusion 
is  in  all  probability  here  made  to  that  fact 
(Exod.  xxxi.  18;  xxxiv.  28).  The  expres- 
sion, "the  tables  of  the  heart,"  occurs  in 
oh.  vii.  3;  Jer.  xvii.  1  (of.  2  Cor.  iii.  3); 
and  is  used  by  JEschylus, '  Pro.,'  789,  UXroi 
(ppevZv,  "the  tablets  of  the  heart."  Thii 
clause  is  omitted  in  the  LXX. 
Ver.  4.— So   shalt   thou  find  (iwm'Cia)j 


on.  m.  1 — 35.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


66 


literally,  and  find.  A  peculiar  nee  of  the 
imperative,  the  imperative  kal  (m'tsa)  with 
vau  consecutive  (1)  being  equivalent  to  the 
future,  "  thou  shalt  find,"  as  in  the  Autho- 
rized VerBion.  This  construction,  wliere  two 
imperatives  are  joined,  the  former  coiitainino: 
■n  extiortation  or  admonition,  tlie  second 
a  promise  made  on  thfi  condition  implied  in 
the  first,  and  the  second  imperative  beiug 
used  as  a  future,  occurs  again  in  oh.  iv.  4 ; 
vii.  2, "  Keop  my  commandments,  and  live ; " 
\x.  6,  "  Forsake  the  foolish,  and  live ;  "  xx. 
13,  "Open  thine  eyes,  and  thou  shalt  be 
satisfied  with  bread "  (cf .  Geu.  xlii.  18 ;  Ps. 
Kxxvii.  27;  Job  xxii.  21;  Isa.  xxxvi.  16; 
Hos.  X.  12 ;  Amos  v.  4 — 6 ;  Gesenius,  §  130. 
2).  Delitzsch  calls  this  "an  admonitory 
imperative  ; "  Bottcher, "the  desponsive  im- 
perative." Compare  the  Greek  construction 
in  Menander,  OT5'  8ti  iroi-qaov,  for  iroiiiffets, 
"  Kno w  th  at  this  you  will  do."  Find  (matza) ; 
here  simply  "  to  attain,"  "  obtain,"  not  neces- 
sarily implying  previous  search,  as  in  ch. 
xvil.  20.  TaTour  (khen).  The  same  word 
is  frequently  translated  "  grace,"  and  means 
the  same  thing;  Vulgate,  gratia;  LXX., 
Xnpfc.  For  tlie  expression, "  to  find  favour  " 
[matsa  khen),  see  Gen.  vi.  8  ;  Exod.  xxxiii. 
12 ;  Jer.  xxxi.  2 ;  comp.  Luke  i.  30,  Evpcs 
yip  x^'"  "■"C^  T^  06^. "  For  thou  hast  found 
fevonr  [or,  '  grace  'j  with  God,"  spoken  by 
Gabriel  to  the  Virgin.  Good  understanding 
(selcd  tov) ;  i.e.  good  sagacity,  or  prudence. 
So  Delitzsch,  Bertheau,  Kamph.  A  true 
sagacity,  prudence,  or  penetrating  judgment 
will  be  adjudicated  by  God  and  man  to 
him  who  possesses  the  internal  excellence 
of  love  and  truth.  The  Hebrew  eekel  is 
derived  from  lakal,  "  to  act  wisely  or  pru- 
dently," and  has  this  intellectual  meaning 
in  oh.  xiii.  15 ;  Ps.  cxi.  10  (see  also  1 
Sam.  XXV.  3  and  2  Chron.  xxx.  22).  The 
Targum  Jiinatl.an  reads,  intelleclus  el  he- 
nignitas,'  thus  throwing  the  adjective  into 
»  substantival  form ;  tlie  Syriae,  intellecius 
simply.  Ewald,  Hitzig,  Zockler,  and  othei  s, 
on  the  other  hand,  understand  sekel  as  re- 
ferring to  tlie  judgment  formed  of  any  one, 
the  favourable  opinion  or  view  which  is 
entertained  of  him  by  others,  and  lience 
take  it  as  reputation,  or  estimation.  The 
man  who  has  love  and  truth  will  be  held  in 
high  esteem  by  God  and  man.  Our  objec- 
tion to  this  rendering  is  that  it  does  not 
seem  to  advance  the  meaning  of  the  passage 
beyond  that  of  "  favour."  Another,  mentioned 
by  Delitzsch,  is  that  sekel  is  never  used  in 
any  other  sense  than  that  of  intellectue  in 
the  Mishle.  The  marginal  reading,  "  good 
success,"  ».e.  prosperity,  seems  inadmissible 
here,  as  the  hiph.  ha^kU, "  to  cause  to  prosper," 
as  in  ch.  xvii.  8 ;  Josh.  i.  7 ;  Dent.  xxix.  9, 
does  not  apply  in  this  instance  any  more 
than  in  Ps.  cxL  10,  margin.    In  the  sight 


of  God  and  man  (b'eyney  elnhim  r^adam) ; 
literally, in  tlie  eyes  of  Elohim  and  man;  i.e 
according  to  the  judgment  of  God  and  ma  i 
(Zockler);  Vulgate, corom Deo e<  hominihus. 
A  simpler  form  of  this  phrase  is  found  in 
1  Sam.  ii.  26,  where  Samuel  is  said  to  have 
found  favour  with  the  Lord,  and  also  with 
men.  So  in  Luke  ii.  52  Jesus  found  favour 
"  with  God  and  man  (irapi  @ef  Kal  hvepd- 
ttois) "  (comp.  Gen.  x.  9 ;  Acts  ii.  47 ; 
Rom.  liv.  18).  The  two  conditions  of  favour 
and  sagacity,  or  prudence,  are  not  to  be 
assigned  respectively  to  God  and  man  (as 
Ewald  and  Hitzig),  or  that  finding  favour 
has  reference  more  to  God,  and  being  deemed 
prudent  refers  more  to  man.  "She  sfnte- 
ment  is  universal.  Both  these  conditions 
will  he  adjudged  to  the  man  who  has  mercy 
and  truth  by  God  in  heaven  and  man  on 
earth  at  the  same  time  (see  Delitszch).  The 
LXX.,  "  after  favour,"  instead  of  the  text, 
reads,  "  and  provide  good  things  in  the 
sight  of  the  Lord  and  men,"  quoted  by  St. 
Paul  (2  Cor.  viii.  21). 

Ver.  5.— Trust  in  the  Lord  (b'takh  et- 
y'hovdh);  literally,  trust  tn  JeAoroA.  Entire 
reliance  upon  Jehovah,  implied  in  the' words, 
"  with  all  thine  heart,"  is  here  appropriately 
placed  at  the  head  of  a  series  of  admonitions 
which  especially  have  God  and  man's  re- 
lations with  him  in  view,  inasmuch  as  such 
confidence  or  trust,  with  its  corresponding 
idea  of  the  renunciation  of  reliance  on  self, 
is,  as  Zockler  truly  remarks,  a  "  funda- 
mental principle  of  all  religion."  It  is  the 
first  lesson  to  he  learnt  by  all,  and  no  less 
necessary  for  the  Jew  than  for  the  Christian. 
Without  this  reliance  on  or  confidence  in 
God,  it  is  impossible  to  carry  out  any  of  the 
precepts  of  religion.  Batakh  is,  properly, 
"to  cling  to,"  and  so  passes  to  the  meaning 
of  "to  confide  in,"  "to  set  one's  hope  and 
confidence  upon."  The  preposition  el  with 
Jehovah  indicates  the  direction  which  the 
confidence  is  to  take  (cf.  Ps.  xxxvii.  3,  5). 
Lean  (fiihshaen') ;  Vulgate,  innitaris;  fol- 
lowed by  el,  like  b'takh,  with  which  it  is 
very  similar  in  meaning.  Shaan,  not  used 
in  kal,  in  hiph.  signifies  "  to  lean  upon,  rest 
upon,"  just  as  man  rests  upon  a  spear  for 
support.  Its  metaphorical  use,  to  repose 
conjidenee  in,  is  derived  from  the  practice 
of  kings  who  were  accustomed  to  appear  in 
public  leaning  on  their  friends  and  ministers; 
cf.  2  Kings  V.  18;  vii.  2,  17  (Gesenius). 
The  admonition  does  not  mean  that  we  are 
not  to  use  our  own  understanding  (binah), 
i.e.  form  plans  with  dis'^retion,  and  employ 
legitimate  means  in  the  pursuit  of  our  ends ; 
but  that,  when  we  use  it,  we  are  to  depend 
upon  God  and  his  directing  and  overruling 
providence  (Wardlaw) ;  of.  Jer.  ix.  23,  24, 
"  Let  not  the  wise  man  glory  in  his  wisdom, 
etc.    The  teacher  points  out  not  only  where 


66 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[oh.  in.  1 — 36, 


we  are  to  rely,  but  also  where  we  are  not  to 
rely. 

Ver.  6. — ^In  all  thy  ways.  This  expres- 
sion covers  the  whole  area  of  life's  action — 
all  its  acts  and  undertakings,  its  spiritual 
and  secular  sides,  no  less  than  its  public  and 
private.  It  guards  against  our  acknow- 
ledging God  in  great  crises  and  solemn  acts 
of  svorship  only  (Plumptre).  Acknowledge 
(daehu);  Vulgate,  cogita;  LXX.,  yvJipi^e. 
The  Hebrew  verb  yada  signifies  "  to  know, 
recognize."  To  acknowledge  God  is,  there- 
fore, to  recognize,  in  all  our  dealingii  and 
undertakings,  God's  overruling  providence, 
which  "  shapes  our  ends,  rough-hew  them 
as  we  will."  It  is  not  a  mere  theoretical 
acknowledgment,  but  one  that  engages  the 
whole  energies  of  the  soul  (Delitzsch), 
and  sees  in  God  power,  wisdom,  providence, 
goodness,  and  justice.  Tliis  meaning  is  con- 
veyed by  the  Vulgate  coyitare,  which  is  "  to 
consider"  in  all  parts,  "to  reflect  upon." 
David's  advice  to  his  son  Solomon  is,  "  Kuow 
thon  (ola)  the  God  of  thy  father."  We 
may  well  acknowledge  Jehovah ;  for  he 
"knoweth  the  way  of  the  righteous"  (Ps. 
i.  6).  Acknowledging  God  also  implies  that 
we  first  ascertain  whether  what  we  are 
about  to  take  in  hand  is  in  accordance  with 
hig  precepts,  and  then  look  for  his  direction 
and  illumination  (Wardlaw).  And  he  shall 
direct  thy  paths  (vfhu  y'yashsher  or'khothey- 
kd);  i.e.  he  himself  shall  make  them 
straight,  or  level,  removing  all  obstacles  out 
of  the  way;  or  they  shall,  under  God's 
direction,  prosper  and  come  to  a  successful 
issue ;  they  shall  be  virtuous,  inasmuch  as 
deviation  into  vice  will  be  guarded  against, 
and  happy,  because  they  are  prosperous. 
The  pronoun  v'hu  is  emphatic,  "he  him- 
self; "  Vulgate,  et  ipse.  Yashar,  piel,  is  "to 
make  a  way  straight,"  as  in  oh.  ix.  15  ;  iv. 
21;  xi.  5.  Of.  the  LXX.  opBorofu'iv,  "to 
cut  straight"  (see  on  ch.  xi.  5).  God  here 
binds  liimself  by  a  covenant  (Lapide).  Tliis 
power  is  properly  attributed  to  God,  for  "  it 
is  not  in  man  to  direct  hia  steps "  ( Jer.  x. 

Ver.  7. — Be  not  wise  in  thine  own  eyes. 
This  admonition  carries  on  the  thought  from 
the  preceding  verses  (5,  6),  approaching  it 
from  a  different  direction.  It  is  a  protest 
against  self-sufficiency,  self-conceit,  and  self- 
reliance.  It  says,  in  effect,  "Trust  in  the 
Lord,  do  not  trust  in  yourself."  Wisdom,  as 
Michaelis  remarks,  is  to  trust  in  God;  to 
trust  in  yourself  and  in  your  own  wisdom 
is  unwisdom.  God  denounces  this  spirit: 
"  Woe  onto  them  that  are  wise  in  their  own 
tyes,  and  prudent  in  their  own  sight  1 "  (Isa. 
V.  21),  because  such  a  spirit  leads  to  the 
prohibited  self-dependence,  and  is  inconsis- 
tent with  "the  fear  of  the  Lord."  The 
precept  of  the  text  is  reiterated  by  St.  Paul, 


especially  in  Rom.  xii.  16,  "  Be  not  wise  is 
your  own  conceits"  (cf.  1  Oor.  viii.  8;  Gal. 
vi.  3).  It  commends  humility.  The  diligent 
search  for  Wisdom  is  commanded.  The  great 
hindrance  to  all  true  wisdom  is  the  thought 
that  we  have  already  attained  it  (Flumptre). 
In  thine  own  eyes ;  i.e.  in  thine  own  estima- 
tion ;  arhitrio  tuo  (Trem.  et  Jun.).  Fear  the 
Lord,  and  depart  from  evil.  The  connection 
of  this  with  the  first  part  of  the  verse  becomes 
clear  upon  reflection.  "  The  fear  of  the 
Lord  "  is  true  wisdom  (Job  xxviii.  28  :  ch. 
i.  7).  Pear  the  Lord,  therefore,  because  it 
is  the  best  corrective  of  one's  own  wisdom, 
which  engenders  arrogance,  pride,  presump- 
tion of  mind,  which,  moreover,  is  deceptive 
and  apt  to  lead  to  sin.  The  fear  of  the  Lord 
has  this  other  advantage — that  it  leads  to 
the  departure  from  evil  (ch.  xvi.  6).  It  is 
the  mark  of  the  wise  man  that  he  fears  the 
Lord,  and  departs  from  evil  (cli.  xiv.  16). 
These  precepts  form  the  two  elements  of 
practical  piety  (Dclitzseh),  an  eminent  ex- 
ample of  which  was  Job  (Job  i.  1). 

Ver,  8. — It  shall  be  health  to  thy  navel, 
and  marrow  to  thy  bones.  A  metaphorical 
expression,  denoting  the  complete  spiritual 
health  which  shall  follow  from  fearing  the 
Lord  and  departing  from  evil.  Health, 
(ripl^uth);  properly,  AeaZmj ;  LXX.,  iSurts; 
Vmgate,  eanitas;  so  Syriac  and  Arabic.  The 
Targum  Jonathan  Imamedicina,  "medicine," 
as  the  margin.  The  root  rapha  is  properly 
"  to  sew  together,"  and  the  secondary  mean- 
ing, "  to  heal,"  is  taken  from  the  healing  of  a 
wound  by  sewing  it  up.  Delitzsch,  however, 
thinks  riph'uth  is  not  to  be  taken  as  a  restora- 
tion from  sickness,  but  as  a  raising  up  from 
enfeebled  health,  or  a  confirming  of  the 
strength  which  already  exists.  There  shall 
be  a  continuance  of  health.  Geseniui 
translates  "refreshment."  To  thy  navel 
(JHelwr'rekha);  Vulgate,  umli'Mcoiwo;  so  Tar- 
gum Jonathan.  Slior  is  "  the  navel,"  here 
used  synecdochically  for  the  whole  body, 
just  as  "head"  is  put  for  the  whole  man 
(Judg.  V.  30), "  mouth  "  for  the  whole  person 
speaking  (oh.  viii.  13),  and  "  slow  bellies  " 
for  depraved  gluttons  (Titus  1. 12)  (Gejems, 
Umbreit).  The  idea  is  expressed  in  the 
LXX.,  Syriac,  and  Arabic  by  "to  thy  body" 
(t^  aiifiuTi  <rou;  corpori  tuo).  The  navel  is 
here  regarded  as  the  centre  of  vital  strength. 
For  the  word,  see  Cant.  vii.  2 ;  Ezek.  xvi.  4. 
This  is  the  only  place  in  the  Proverbs  where 
this  word  is  ■found.  Gesenius,  however, 
takes  ehor,fiT  I'ahor'rehha,  as  standing  col- 
lectively for  the  nerves,  in  which,  he  says, 
is  the  seat  of  strength,  and  translates  ac- 
cordingly, "  Health  (i.e.  refreshment)  shall 
it  be  to  thy  nerves."  Marroa  (thik^kuy); 
literally,  watering  or  moistening,  as  in  the 
margin;  Vulgate,  irrigatio.  Moistening  is 
imparted  to  the  bones  by  the  marrow,  and 


OH.  m.  1—35.] 


THE  PE0VEBB8. 


ST 


thus  they  are  strengthened :  "  His  hones  are 
moistened  with  marrow"  (Joh  xxi.  24). 
Where  there  is  an  absence  of  marrow  the 
drying  up  of  the  bones  ensues,  and  hence 
their  strength  is  impaired,  and  a  general 
debility  of  tlie  system  sets  in — they  "  wax 
old"  (Ps.  xxxii.  3).  The  effect  of  a  brolien 
spirit  is  tlius  described :  "  A  broken  spirit 
drieth  up  the  bones"  (oh.  xvii.  22).  The 
physiological  fact  here  brouglit  forward  is 
borne  witness  to  by  Cicero,  '  In  Tusc. : '  "  In 
visceribus  atque  medullis  omne  bouum  con- 
didisse  naturam"  (cf.  Plato).  .The  meaning 
of  the  passage  is  that,  as  health  to  the  navel 
and  marrow  to  tlio  bones  stand  as  representa- 
tives of  physical  strength,  so  the  fear  of  the 
Liord,  etc.,  is  the  spiritual  strength  of  God's 
children. 

Ver.  9. — Honour  the  lord  with  thy  sub- 
stance, etc.  An  exhortation  to  self-sacri- 
fioing  devotion  by  the  appropriation  and  use 
of  wealth  to  the  service  of  Jehovah.  With 
thy  gubstance  (mehonehhd) ;  Vulgate,  de  tuu 
tubstantia ;  LXX.,  &irh  cwv  SiKaiav  nSi^wy. 
Bon,  properly  " liglitness,"  is  "opulence," 
"  wealth,"  as  in  ch.  i.  13.  The  min  in  com- 
position with  hon  is  not  partitive,  as 
Delitzsoh  andBertheau  lake  it,  but  signifies 
"  with  "  or  "  by  means  of,"  as  in  Ps.  xxviii. 
7 ;  Isa.  Iviii.  12  ;  Ezek.  xxviii.  18 ;  Obad.  9. 
The  insertion  of  Sixaios  by  the  LXX.  limits 
the  wealth  to  that  which  is  justly  acquired, 
and  so  guard-i  against  the  erroneous  idea 
that  God  is  honoured  by  tlio  appropriation 
to  his  use  of  unlawful  wealth  or  gain 
(Plumptre).  The  Israelites  "  honoured  Je- 
hovah with  their  substance"  when  they 
contributed  towards  the  erection  of  the 
tabernacle  in  the  wilderness,  and  later  when 
they  assisted  in  the  preparations  for  the 
building  of  the  temple,  and  in  the  payment 
of  tithes.  The  injunction  may  undoubtedly 
refer  to  tithes,  and  is  in  accordance  with  the 
requiryment  of  the  Mosaic  Law  on  that  and 
other  points  as  to  oblations,  free-will  offer- 
ings, etc. ;  but  it  has  a  wider  bearing  and 
contemplates  the  use  of  wealth  for  all  pious 
a. id  charitable  purposes  (see  ch.  xiv.  31). 
The  word  maaser,  "  tithe,"  does  not  occur  in 
tlie  Proverbs.  With  the  firstfruits  (mere- 
thith) ;  Vulgate,  de  primitiu.  So  Targum 
Jonathan,  Syriac,  and  Arabic.  The  law  of 
the  firstfruits  is  found  in  ExihI.  xxii.  29; 
xxiii.  19 ;  xxxiv.  20 ;  Lev.  xxiii.  10 ;  Numb. 
xviii.  12 ;  Deut.  ivlii.  4 ;  xxvi.  1 — 3.  The 
fiistfruits  were  presented  by  every  Israelite 
to  the  priests,  in  token  of  gratituile  and 
humble  thankfulness  to  Jehovah,  and  con- 
sisted of  the  produce  of  the  land  in  its 
natural  state,  or  prepared  for  human  food 
(Maclear, '  Old  Test.  Hist.,'  bk.  iv.  c.  iii.  a). 
The  "firstfruits"  also  carried  with  it  the 
idea  of  the  best.  The  custom  of  offering  the 
firstfruiti  of  the  field  and  other  revenues  as 


a  religious  obligation  was  observed  by  an- 
cient pagan  nations  (see  Dioil.  Sic,  i.  14 ; 
Plut., '  De  Iside,'  p.  377 ;  Pliny, '  Hist.  Nat.,' 
18.  2  (Zookler).  Some  of  the  ancient  com- 
mentators find  in  this  verse  an  argument  for 
the  support  of  the  ministry.  It  is  well 
known  that  the  priests  "  lived  of  the  sacri- 
fice," and  were  "  partakers  of  the  altar,"  and 
as  their  support  by  these  means  tended  to 
the  maintenance  of  Divine'worship,  so  thosa 
who  supported  them  were  in  the  highest 
degree  "  honouring  God."  The  injunctions 
also  show  that  the  honouring  of  God  does 
not  consist  simply  of  lip-service,  of  humility 
aud  conlidence  in  him,  but  also  of  external 
worship,  and  in  corporeal  things.  They  are 
not  peculiar  to  Israel,  but  are  binding  on  all. 
They  oppose  all  selfish  use  of  God's  temporal 
gifts,  and  lead  to  the  thought  that,  in  obey- 
ing them,  we  are  only  giving  back  to  God 
what  are  his  own.  "  The'  silver  and  the 
gold  is  mine,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts  "  (Hag. 
ii.  28). 

"We  give  thee  but  thine  own, 

Whate'er  the  gift  may  be ; 
All  that  we  have  is  thine  alone, 

A  trust,  O  Lord,  from  thee." 

(Day's  '  Psalter.') 

Ver.  10. — So  shall  thy  bams  be  filled  with 
plenty.  The  promise  hold  out  to  encourage 
the  devotion  of  one's  wealth  to  Jehovah's 
service,  while  supplying  a  motive  which  at 
first  sight  appears  selfish  and  questionable, 
is  in  reality  a  trial  of  faith.  Few  persons 
find  it  easy  to  realize  that  giving  away  will 
•increase  their  store  (Wiirdlaw).  The  teacher 
is  warranted  in  bringing  forward  this  pro- 
mise by  the  language  of  Moses  in  Deut. 
xxviii.  1 — 8,  where,  among  other  things,  he 
promises  that  Jehovah  will  command  a 
blessing  upon  the  "storehouses"  and  in- 
dustry of  those  who  honour  God.  The  prin- 
ciple is  otherwise  expressed  in  ch.  xi.  25, 
"  The  liberal  soul  shall  be  made  fat,  and  he 
that  watereth  shall  be  also  watered  himself;" 
and  it  is  exemplified  in  Hag.  i.  3 — 11 ;  ii. 
15,  19;  Mai.  iii.  10—12,  and  in  the  New 
Testament  in  Phil.  iv.  14—19;  2  Cor.  ix. 
6 — 8.  Thy  bams;  asamei/fcAa,  the  only  form 
in  which  asam,  "  a  storehoiise,"  "  barn,"  or 
"granary,"  occurs.  The  Hebrew  aiam  ia 
the  same  as  the  Latin  horreum  (Vulgate) 
and  the  Greek  -raixiuov  (LXX.).  With 
plenty  (tava) ;  V"lg'^te,  taturitas ;  i.e.  ful- 
ness, abundance,  plenty.  The  root  sava  ia 
"  to  become  satisfied,"  and  that  richly  satis- 
fied. This  expression  and  the  following, 
and  thy  presses  shall  burst  out  with  new 
wine,  depict  the  greatest  abundance.  Thy 
presses  (^Icaveykhd).  The  word  here  trans- 
lated "  presses"  is,  strictly  speaking,"  vats" 
or  "  reservoirs,"  into  which  the  must  froa 
the  wine-press  flowed.    The  wine-pfess  oou 


58 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[CH.  m.  1 — 35, 


Bisted  of  two  parts,  the  gath  (equivalent  to 
the  Latin  torcularium,  torcalum,  or  turcular; 
Greek,  K-nv6s,  Matt.  xxi.  33),  into  wViiclj  the 
grapes  were  collected  from  tlie  surrounding 
vim-yard,  and  there  trodden  underfoot  by 
several  persons  (Neh.  xiii.  15;  Isa.  Ixiii.  3; 
Lam.  i.  15),  whose  movements  were  regu- 
lated by  singing  or  shouting  (Isa.  xvi.  10 ; 
Jer.  xlviii.  33),  as  among  the  Greeks  (see 
'Athen.,' v.  p.  199,  a;  Anacreon,  '  Od.,' xvii. 
1.  lii. ;  of.  Theocritus,  vii.  26)  and  Egyptians 
(Wilkinson,  'Man.  and  Oust.,'  vol.  ii.  pp. 
152—157);  and  the  yekev,  used  here,  which 
was  a  trough  of  corresponding  size,  dug  into 
tlie  gi'ound,  or  cut  out  of  a  rook,  at  a  lower 
kvel,  to  receive  the  must.  The  yekev  cor- 
responded with  the  Greek  moKitviov,  men- 
tioned in  Mark  xii.  1,  and  the  Latin  lacux 
(Ovid, '  Fasti,'  v.  888 ;  Pliny, '  Epist.,'  ix.  20  ; 
'Colum.  de  Rust.,' xii.  18);  Cajeterus,  in- 
deeil,  reads,  lacui  torcvlarii.  The  word 
yekev  is,  however,  useil  for  the  wine-press 
itself  in  Job  xxiv.  11  and  2  Kings  vi.  27. 
Shall  burst  out  (yiph'rotsu);  literally,  fliey 
shall  extend  themselves;  i.e.,  shall  overflow. 
Pdrats,  "  to  break,"  is  here  used  metaphori- 
cally in  the  sense  of  "  to  bo  redundant,"  "  to 
ovcriiow  "  (cf  2  Sam.  v.  20).  It  is  employed 
intransitively  of  a  people  Spreading  thom- 
selvea  abroad,  or  increasing,  in  Gen.  xxviii. 
14  ;  Bxod.  i.  12.  New  wine  (tirosh) ;  Vul- 
gate, Arabic,  and  Syriae,  vino;  LXX.,  o1vtj> ; 
properly,  as  in  the  Authorized  Version, 
"new  wine;"  Latin,  mustum  (see  Deut. 
xxxiii.  28;  Isa.  xxxvi.  17;  Iv.  1). 

Ver.  11. — My  son,  despise  not  the  chasten- 
ing of  the  Lord.  The  teacher,  in  vers.  1 1 
»nd  1 2,  passes  to  another  phase  of  life.  The 
thought  of  prosperity  suggests  the  opposite 
one  of  adversity.  Abundant  prosperity  shaH 
flow  from  honouring  Jehovah,  but  he  some- 
times and  not  unfrequently  sends  aflliction, 
and,  indeed,  without  this  life  would  be  in- 
compkte.  The  object  of  the  exhortation  is, 
as  Delitzsch  states,  to  show  that,  as  in 
pi'osperity  God  should  not  be  forgotten,  bo 
one  should  not  suffer  himself  to  lie  estianged, 
by  days  of  adversity.  Submission  is  coun- 
selled on  the  ground  that,  when  Jehovah 
afflicts,  he  does  so  in  the  Bpirit  of  love,  and 
foi-  good.  The  "  chastening  "  and  "  correc- 
tion," though  presenting  God  in  an  attitude 
of  anger,  are  iu  reality  not  the  punishment 
of  an  irate  God.  The  verse  before  us  is 
evidently  copied  from  Job  v.  17,  "Behold, 
hap|iy  is  the  man  whom  God  correcteth, 
therefore  despise  not  thou  the  chastening  of 
the  Almighty;"  and  the  wliole  passage  is 
ciled  again  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews 
(Heb.  xii.  5,  6).  It  has  been  said  that 
ver.  11  expresses  the  problem  of  the  Book 
of  Job,  and  ver.  12  its  solution  (Delitzsch). 
Dtipise  not  (id-timas) ;  Vulgate,  ne  abjioiag; 
LXX.,  nil  oAiyt^pei.    The  verb  maas  is  first 


"  to  reject,"  and  then  "  to  despise  and  con- 
temn." The  Targum  Jonathan  puts  the 
thought  in  a  stronger  form,  ne  exeereris, 
"  do  not  curse."  They  despise  the  chasten- 
ing of  Jehovah  who,  when  they  see  his  hand 
in  it,  do  not  humbly  and  submissively  bow, 
but  resist  and  become  refractory,  or,  as  it  is 
expressed  in  oh.  xix.  3,  when  their  "  lieart 
fretteth  against  the  Lord."  Job,  notwith- 
standing his  bitter  complaints,  was  on  the 
whole,  and  in  his  better  niiiments,  an 
example  of  the  proper  state  of  mind  under 
correction  (see  Job  i.  21 ;  ii.  10).  Jonah,  in 
treating  contemptuously  the  procedure  of 
God,  is  an  exemplification  of  the  contrary 
spirit,  which  is  condemned  implicitly  in  the 
text  (Wardlaw).  Chastening  (musar) ;  i.e 
correction  not  by  reproof  only,  as  in  oh.  vi, 
23  and  viii.  30 ;  but  by  punishment  also,  as  in 
ch.  xiii.  24;  xxii.  15.  The  meaning  hero  is 
expressed  by  the  LXX.  irctiSei'a,  which  is 
"  instruction  by  punishment,"  discipline,  or 
schooling  (cf.  Vulgate,  disciplina).  Neither 
be  weary  (al-takots) ;  i.e.  do  not  loathe, 
abhor,  feel  disgust  nor  vexation  towards. 
The  expression,  "  do  not  loathe,"  is  a  climax 
to  the  other,  "despise  not."  It  represents  a 
more  deeply  seated  aversion  to  Jehovah's 
plans.  Gesenius  takes  the  primary  meaning 
of  kuts  to  be  that  of  vomiting.  The  word 
before  us  certainly  denotes  loathing  or 
nausea,  and  is  used  in  this  sense  by  the 
Israelites  in  their  complaints  against  God 
and  against  Moses  in  Numb.  xxi.  5  (of.  Gen. 
xxvii.  40).  The  writer  of  the  Epistle  to  the 
Hebrews,  in  quoting  the  passage,  adopts 
the  LXX.  reading,  /i?;  okKAov,  "nor  faint;" 
Vulgate,  ne  deficias,  i.e.  "  do  not  give  way 
to  despondency."  Correction.  This  word, 
like  mur.ar  above,  has  a  twofold  meaning  of 
either  punishment  or  chastening,  as  in  Ps. 
Ixxiii.  14 ;  or  reproof,  as  in  ch.  i.  23  ;  xxv. 
30;  V.  12;  xxvii.  5;  xxix.  15,  where  it 
also  occurs.  It  is  here  used  in  the  former 
sense.  To  loathe  the  correction  of  Jehovah 
is  to  allow  it  to  com|iletely  estrange  us  from 
him.  We  faint  under  it  when,  by  dwelling 
on  or  brooding  over,  or  bemoaning  the  trial, 
the  spirit  sinks  to  faintness.  To  faint  at 
correction  ignores  the  belief  in  the  truth 
that  "  all  things  work  together  for  good  tc 
them  that  love  God." 

Ver.  12. — In  this  verse  the  motive  for . 
submissiveness  to  Jehovah's  corrections  is 
brought  forward.  They  are  corrections,  but 
they  are  the  corrections  of  love.  One  of  the 
most  touching  relationships  of  life,  and  that 
with  whicli  we  are  most  familiar,  viz.  that 
of  father  and  son  is  employed  to  reconcile 
us  to  Jehovah's  afflictive  dispensations. 
A  comparison  is  drawn.  God  corrects 
those  whom  ho  loves  after  the  same  manner 
as  a  father  corrects  ("  correcteth  "  has  to  be 
understood  from  the  first  hemistich)  the 


OH.  m.  1—35.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


69 


8on  wlioni  lie  I  voa.  The  idea  of  t'  e  pasage 
ia  evidently  tulseii  fium  Deut.  viii.  5,  " Thou 
■halt  also  consider  in  thine  heart,  that  as  a 
man  chasteneth  his  son,  so  the  Lord  thy  God 
chasteneth  thee."  The  idea  of  the  paternal 
relationship  of  God  to  mankind  is  found 
elsewhere  (Jer.  xxxi.  9;  Mai.  ii.  10),  and 
especially  finds  expresBion  in  the  Lord's 
prayer.  When  the  truth  of  this  passage  is 
learned,  we  shall  be  drawn  to,  rather  than 
repelled  from,  God  by  his  corrections.  The 
gracious  end  of  earthly  trials  is  expressed  in 
Heb.  xii.  6,  2 ;  of.  Kom.  v.  3—5 ;  2  Cor.  iv. 
17  (Wardlaw).  "These  gracious  words 
(Heb.  xii.)  are  written  in  Holy  Scripture  for 
our  comfort  and  instruction ;  that  we  should 
patiently  and  with  thanksgiving  bear  our 
heavenly  Father's  correction,  whensoever  by 
any  manner  of  adversity  it  shall  please  his 
^aciouB  goodness  to  visit  us"  (gee  Visita- 
tion Office).  Even  as  a  father  the  son  in 
whom  he  delighteth  (vuTt'av  eth-ben 
yir'tseK) ;  literally,  even  at  a  father  the  son 
he  delighteth  in.  Various  renderings  have 
been  giTen  to  this  passage.  (1)  Delitzsch, 
De  Wette,  et  ci.,  agree  with  the  Authorized 
Version,  and  take  1  van,  as  explicative,  and 
yir'tieh,  "in  whom  he  delighteth,"  as  a 
relative  sentence.  The  1  is  used  in  this 
explanatory  sense  in  1  Sam.  xxviii.  3  (see 
Gesenius,  §  155.  1  o).  The  relative  cisher, 
"  whom,"  is  omitted  in  the  original,  accord- 
ing to  the  rule  that  the  relative  is  omitted, 
especially  in  poetry,  where  it  would  stand  as 
a  pronoun  in  the  nominative  or  accusative 
case  (comp.  Ps.  vii.  16,  "  And  he  falls  into 
the  pit  (which)  he  made;"  and  oh.  v. 
13).  We  have  the  same  elision  of  the  rela- 
tive in  the  English  colloquial  expression, 
"the  friend  I  met"  (see  Gesenius,  §  123.  3, 
a).  (2)  Hitzig  and  Zockler  translate,  "and 
holds  him  dear  as  a  father  his  son."  This, 
though  grammatically  correct,  does  not  pre- 
serve the  parallelism.  It  serves  only  to 
expand  the  idea  of  love,  whereas  the  pre- 
dominant idea  of  the  verse  is  that  of  cor- 
rection, to  which  love  is  an  accessory  idea 
(see  Delitzsch).  For  similar  parallels,  see 
Deut.  viii.  5  as  before,  and  Ps.  ciii.  13.  In 
the  comparison  which  is  instituted,  yir'tseh, 
"  in  wliom  he  delighteth,"  corresponds  with 
eth  asher  ye'hav  y'hovah,  "whom  the  Lord 
.  loveth,"  and  not  with  yaikiah,  "  correcteth." 

(3)  Kamph  translates,  "  and  (dealeth)  as  a 
fother  (who)  wisheth  well  to  his  son."  'This 
is  substantially  the  same  as  the  Authorized 
Version,  except  that  in  the  relative  sentence 
"  son  "  is  made  accusative  after  yir'tseh,  here 
translated,  "  wisheth  well  to,"  and  the 
omitted  relative  (asJier')  is  placed  in  the 
nominative  instead  of  the  accusative  case. 

(4)  "The  variation  in  the  LXX.,  /uurTiyoi  Se 
miiiTa  vlov  %v  irapaSdxfrai,  "  and  scourgeth 
eveiy  son  whom  he  receiveth,"  cited  litenllj 


in  Heb.  xii.  5,  evidently  arises  from  the 
tianslutord  having  read  aN?^  (yaleev),  "  he 
scourgeth "  for  3^51  (vuk'avj,  "  even  as  a 
father."  It  will  be  seen  that  this  alteration 
could  be  easily  effected  by  a  change  in  the 
Masoretic  pointing.  (5)  The  Vulgate  ren- 
ders, et  quasi  pater  in  Jilio  complaoet  aibi. 
Be  delighteth;  yir'tieh  is  from  ratsah,  "to 
be  delighted  "  with  any  person  or  thing. 

Vera.  13— 18.— The  teacher  here  enters 
upon  the  last  part  of  this  discourse.  In 
doing  so,  ho  reverts  to  his  main  subject, 
which  is  Wisdom,  or  the  fear  of  the  Lord 
(see  ver.  7  and  oh.  i.  7),  and  pronounces  a 
panegyric  upon  her,  comparing  her,  as  in 
Job  xxviii.,  with  treasures  whose  value  she 
exceeds,  and  showing  wherein  that  value 
consists,  viz.  in  the  gifts  which  she  confers 
on  man. 

VfT.  13. — Happy  is  the  man  (aeh'rey 
adam);  literally,  blessings  of  the  man.  The 
plural  of  "  excellence  "  used  here,  as  in  Job 
v.  17,  to  raise  the  sense.  The  man  who  has 
found  Wisdom  is  supremely  blessed.  Beda 
connects  this  blessedness  immediately  with 
God's  chastisements  in  the  preceding  verse. 
So  Delitzsch.  Tliat  findeth  (maiea);  pro- 
perly, hath  found.  "  The  perfect  expresses 
permanent  possession,  just  as  the  imperfect, 
yaphih,  denotes  a  continually  renewed  and 
repeated  attaining"  (ZooMer).  The  Vul- 
gate also  uses  the  perfect,  invenit,  "  hath 
found ; "  LXX.,  »s  eSpe,  "  who  found  "—the 
aorist.  The  man  that  getteth  understanding 
(adam  yaphik  t'mmah')',  literally,  the  man 
that  draweth  out  understanding,  as  in  the 
margin.  Yaphik  is  the  hiph.  future  or 
imperfect  of  puh,  the  primary  meaning  of 
which  is  edueere,  "to  draw  out,"  "to  bring 
forth."  This  verb  is  used  in  two  widely 
different  senses.  In  the  first  place,  it  is 
equivalent  to  "bring  forth"  or  "draw  out" 
in  the  sense  of  imparting,  as  in  Isa.  Iviii.  10, 
"If  thou  draw  out  thy  soul  to  the  hungry," 
i.e.  impart  benefits  to  them ;  and  Ps.  oxlly.  13, 
"  That  our  garners  may  be  full,  affording  all 
manner  of  store,"  i.e.  yielding,  giving  out, 
presenting  for  our  benefit.  Its  second  sense 
is  that  of  attaining,  drawing  out  from 
another  for  one's  own  nse.  In  this  sense  it 
occurs  in  ch.  viii.  35 ;  xii.  2 ;  xviii.  22,  where 
it  is  rendered  "  obtain."  The  latter  sense  is 
the  one  tliat  suits  the  present  passage,  and 
best  agrees  with  the  corresponding  matsa. 
The  man  is  blessed  who  draws  forth,  i.e. 
obtains,  understanding  from  God  for  him- 
self. The  Vnlgatc  renders,  qui  affluit  pru- 
dentid, "  who  overflow*  with  understanding," 
or,  has  understanding  in  abundance ;  LXX., 
ts  eISe,  equivalent  to  "  who  saw." 

Ver.  14. — ^Ihe    merchandise   (,t(Mi,'rahy 


«0 


THE  PE0VEEB8. 


[oh.  m.  1 — S6, 


Vnlgate,  aequititio;  LXX.,  ifnropfie<rtai. 
The  gain  arising  from  trading  in  wisdom  is 
better  than  that  which  arises  from  trading 
in  silver.  Sakh'rah  is  the  gain  or  profit 
arising  from  merchandise,  t.e.  from  trading. 
It  denotes  the  act  itself  of  gaining.  The 
root  sakrah,  like  the  Greek  iixnopeviffBat, 
signifies  "  to  go  about  for  the  sake  of  traffic," 
i.e.  to  trade.  There  may  be  an  allusion 
liere,  as  in  ch.  ii.  4,  to  the  new  commerce 
(Plumptre).  The  gain  thereof  (f utrnttaft) ; 
i.e.  the  gain  existing  in,  and  going  along 
with.  Wisdom  herself;  gain,  therefore,  in  a 
different  sense  from  that  indicated  in  sdlch'- 
rah.  Geseniua  takes  it  as  "  gain  resulting 
from  Wisdom,"  aa  in  ch.  viii.  19  and  Isa. 
xxiii.  3.  The  word  is  used  of  the  produce  of 
the  earth,  the  idea  apparently  embodied  In 
the  Vulgate  fructus.  In  this  case  there  may 
be  a  reference  to  ver.  18,  where  Wisdom  is 
said  to  be  a  "  tree  of  life."  The  LXX.  omits 
the  latter  clause  of  this  verse.  The  sense  is, 
"  The  possession  of  Wisdom  herself  is  better 
than  fine  gold."  Fine  gold  (karuts) ;  Vul- 
gate, aurum  purum;  Syriac,  aurum  puria- 
litnum.  Kharuls  is  the  poetic  word  for  gold, 
BO  called,  either  (1)  &om  its  brilliancy,  and 
then  akin  to  the  Greek  xP""'^^  (Curtius) ; 
or  (2)  from  its  being  dug  up,  from  the  root 
kharata,  "to  cut  into  or  dig  up,"  "to 
sharpen."  it  evidently  means  the  finest 
and  purest  gold,  and  is  here  contrasted  with 
silver  (kesepK).  The  word  is  translated 
"  choice  gold  "  in  ch.  viii.  10 ;  "  gold  "  simply 
In  ch.  xvi  16i;  "  yellow  gold  "  in  Pa.  Ixviii. 
13 ;  and  "  fine  gold  "  in  Zech.  ix.  3.  In  the 
Version  Junii  et  Tremellii  it  appears  as 
effosvm  aurum,  "  gold  dug  up,"  i.e.  gold  in 
its  native,  unalloyed  state.  The  Targum 
Jonathan  understands  it  of  "  molten  gold  " 
(aurum  conflatum). 

Ver.  15. — EabieB(Khetib,  p'mi/tm;  Keri, 
p'ninim).  No  unanimous  opinion  has  been 
arrived  at  as  to  the  real  signification  of  the 
word  here  translated  "rubies."  The  ma- 
jority of  the  rabbins  (among  them  Eashi), 
and  Bochart,  Hartman,  Bohlen,  Lee  on  Job 
xxxviii.  18,  and  Zockler,  render  it  "pearls." 
Its  meaning  seems  to  lie  between  this  and 
"  corals,"  the  rendering  adopted  by  Mi- 
chaelis,  Gesenius,  and  Delitzsch  (following 
Fleischer),  who  says  that  the  Hebrew 
p'ninim  corresponds  with  the  Arabic  word 
whose  root-idea  is  "  shooting  forth,"  and 
means  "  a  branch."  The  peculiar  branching 
form  in  which  coral  is  found  favours  this 
opinion,  which  is  strengthened  by  the  pas- 
sage in  Lam.  iv.  7,  where  we  get  additional 
information  as  to  colour,  "  They  [the  Naza- 
rites]  were  more  mddy  in  body  than  rubies," 
a  description  which  would  apply  to  "  coral," 
but  is  scarcely  applicable  to  "  pearls."  The 
various  versions  suggest  the  further  idea 
that  jp'ninim  was  a  descriptive  word  used 


to  denote  precious  stones  in  general.  The 
LXX.  renders,  "  She  is  more  precious  than 
precious  stones  {KlBiev  voKintfJav)."  So  the 
Targum  Jonathan,  Syriac,  and  Arabic.  The 
Vulgate  Tenders,  "  She  is  more  precious  than 
all  riches  (cunetis  opibue)."  The  word 
p'ninim  only  occurs  here  (Keri)  and  in  ch. 
viii.  11 ;  XX.  15 ;  xxxi.  10;  and  in  Job  and 
Lamentations  as  above.  This  passage,  aa 
well  as  ch.  viii.  11,  which  is  an  almost 
literal  repetition  of  it,  are  imitations  of  Job 
xxviii.  18.  The  identification  of  pfninim 
with  "pearls"  may  have  suggested  our 
Lord's  parable  of  the  pearl  of  great  price 
(IMatt.  xiii.  45,  46).  All  the  things  thon  canst 
desire  (kalrliha^hatseyha) ;  literally,  aU  thy 
detiret.  Here  everything  in  which  you 
have  pleasure,  or  all  your  precious  things; 
LXX.,  itar  rl/iioy;  Vulgate,  omnia,  qua 
desideraniur.  The  comparison,  which  has 
risen  from  the  less  to  the  more  valuable, 
culminates  in  this  comprehensive  expression. 
There  is  nothing,  neither  silver,  gold,  pre- 
cious stones,  nor  anything  precious,  which 
is  an  equivalent  (ihavah)  to  Wisdom  in  value. 
How  it  shows,  when  everything  is  put  before 
us  to  choose  from,  that,  like  Solomon  at 
Gibeon,  we  should  prefer  wisdom  (1  Kings 
iii.  11 — 13)  I  In  the  second  half  of  this 
verse  the  LXX.  substitutes,  "  No  evil  thing 
competes  with  her ;  she  is  well  known  to  all 
that  approach  her." 

Ver.  16. — The  remaining  three  verses 
(16 — 18)  state  in  what  respects  Wisdom  is 
incomparable  in  value.  Length  of  days; 
orek  yamim,  as  in  ver.  2.  Wisdom  is  here 
represented  as  holding  in  her  right  hand 
that  which  is  previously  promised  to  obedi- 
ence. Length  of  days  is  the  blessing  of 
blessings,  the  condition  of  all  prosperity  and 
enjoyment,  and  hence  is  placed  in  the  right 
hand,  the  chief  place,  for  among  the 
Hebrews  and  other  Oriental  nations,  as 
also  among  the  Greeks  the  right  hand  was 
regarded  as  the  position  of  highest!  honour 
(Ps.  ex.  1 ;  1  Kings  ii.  19;  1  Maco.  x.  63 ; 
Matt.  xxii.  24);  cf.  Ps.  xvi.  11,  in  which  the 
psalmist  says  of  Jehovah,  "In  thy  right 
hand  there  are  pleasures  for  evermore." 
The  two  hands,  tha  right  and  the  left, 
signify  the  abundance  of  Wisdom's  gifts. 
Biches  and  honour  stand  here  for  prosperity 
in  general.  The  same  expression  occurs  in 
ch.  viii.  8,  where  riches  are  explained  as 
"durable  riches."  A  spiritual  interpreta- 
tion can,  of  course,  be  given  to  this  passage — 
length  of  days  being  understood  of  eternal 
life ;  riches,  of  heavenly  riches ;  and  honour, 
not  "  the  honour  that  cometh  of  men,"  but 
honour  conferred  by  God  (1  Sam.  T,  44; 
John  xii.  26);  see  Wardlaw,  in  loe.  The 
thonght  of  the  verse  is,  of  course,  that 
Wisdom  not  only  holds  these  blessings  in  hei 
hands,  but  also  confers  them  on  tboae  wb« 


OH,  m.  1 — 35.] 


THE  PROVEBBS. 


61 


■eek  her.  The  LXX.  adds,  '<  Oat  of  her 
mouth  proceedeth  righteousness;  justice 
and  mercy  she  beareth  upon  her  tongue  ; " 
possibly  suggested  by  ch.  viii.  3.  The 
words  of  the  teacher  remind  us  of  the  saying 
of  Menander,  'O  Siadiipay  \oyt<rfi^  irdvr' 
ex^h  "  Kb  't'bo  excels  in  prudence  possesses ' 
all  things." 

Ver.  17. — Ways  of  pleasantness  (dar'key 
noam) ;  Vulgate,  vise  pulchrx ;  LXX.,  oSol 
KaKal.  Wisdom's  ways  are  those  in  which 
substantial  delight  may  be  found.  They 
are  beautiful  and  lovely  to  look  upon,  and 
afford  happiness.  All  her  paths  are  peace 
(y'kal-n'thivo-theyali  ehalom);  literally,  as  in 
the  Authorized  Version.  "  Peace,"  ihalom, 
is  not  genitive  as  "pleasantness."  The 
cliaracter  of  peace  is  stamped  upon  her 
paths,  80  that  in  speaking  of  Wisdom's  paths 
we  speak  of  peace.  She  brings  tranquillity 
and  serenity  and  blessedness.  Her  paths 
are  free  from  strife  and  alarm,  and  they  lead 
to  peace.  (On  the  distinction  between 
"ways"  and  "paths" — the  more  open  and 
the  more  private  walks — see  ch.  ii.  15.) 

Ver.  18. — A  tree  of  life  (ets-khayyim)'; 
Vulgate,  lignum  vitx;  LXX.,  ^i\or  (aris. 
This  expression  obviously  refers  to  "  the  tree 
of  life"  (ets-hakayyim),  which  was  placed  in 
the  midst  of  the  garden  of  Eden,  and  con- 
ferred immortality  on  those  who  ate  of  its 
fruit  (Gen.  ii.  9 ;  iii.  22).  So  Wisdom  be- 
comes equally  life-giving  to  those  who  lay 
hold  on  her,  who  taste  of  her  fruit.  She 
communicates  life  in  its  manifold  fulness 
and  richness  (so  the  plural  "lives"  indi- 
cates) to  those  who  seize  her  firmly.  What 
is  predicated  of  Wisdom  here  is  predicated 
in  other  passages  (ch.  xi.  80 ;  xiii.  12 ; 
XT.  4)  of  the  fruit  of  the  righteous,  the 
fulfilment  of  desire,  and  a  wholesome 
tongue.  Each  of  these,  the  teacher  says,  is 
"  a  tree  of  life."  Elster  denies  that  there  is 
any  reference  to  "  f  fte  tree  of  life,"  and  classes 
the  expression  among  those  other  figurative 
expressions — a  "fountain  of  life,"  in  ch. 
xiii.  4  and  liv.  27,  and  a  "  well  of  life,"  in 
ch.  X.  11 ;  bnt  if  it  be  once  admitted  that 
there  is  inch  a  reference,  and  it  be  remem- 
bered also  that  Wisdom  is  the  saine  as  "  the 
fear  of  the  Lord,"  the  point  insisted  on  in 
the  Proverbs  and  in  Job,  it  seems  difiBcult  to 
deny  that  the  teacher  has  in  view  the  blessed 
immortality  of  which  the  tree  of  life  in 
Paradise  was  the  symbol.  In  this  higher 
sense  the  term  is  used  in  the  Revelation 
(ii.  7 ;  xxii.  2,  14).  Wisdom  restores  to  her 
worshippers  the  life  which  was  lost  in  Adam 
(Cartwright).  It  is  remarkable  that  the 
imagery  here  employed  is  confined  to  these 
two  books.  After  the  historical  record  in 
Genesis,  no  other  sacred  writers  refer  to  the 
tree  of  life.  Old  ecclesiastical  writers  saw  in 
the  exprewion  •  reference  to  Christ's  re- 


deeming work.  "The  tree  of  life  is  the 
cross  of  Christ,"  lignum  vitss  crux  Chriaii 
(quoted  by  Delitzsch).  The  symbol,  Plump- 
tre  remarks,  entered  largely  into  the  re- 
ligious imagery  of  Assyria,  Egypt,  and 
Persia.  To  them  that  lay  hold  upon  (lam- 
mahhazihim,  hiph.  participle) ;  Vulgate,  his, 
qui  apprehenderint ;  LXX.,  rots  anTcx"- 
iUfVois.  The  Hebrew  verb  pin  {khazak),  "to 
tie  fast,"  is  in  hiph.  with  a  (&'), "  to  take  hold 
ofi"  "  to  seize  any  one."  iHappy  is  every  one 
that  retaineth  her.  In  the  original,  the 
participle, "  they  retaining  her  "  (tom'keyah), 
is  plural,  and  the  predicate,  "  happy "  or 
"  blessed  "  (m'ushshar),  is  singular.  The 
liitter  is  used  distributively,  and  the  con- 
struction is  common  (cf.  ch.  xv.  22).  The 
Authorized  Version  aptly  renders  the  origi- 
nal. The  necessity  for  "  retaining"  as  well 
as  *'  laying  hold  "  of  Wisdom  is  pointed  out. 
The  verb  TjDn  (famak)  is  "to  hold  fast 
something  taken."  Such  will  be  blessed 
who  hold  Wisdom  tenaciously  and  per- 
severingly. 

Vers.  19—26. — 5.  Fifth  hortatory  di>- 
course.  Wisdom,  the  creative  power  of  God, 
exhibited  as  the  protection  of  those  who  fear 
God.  The  teacher  in  this  discourse  presents 
Wisdom  under  a  new  aspect.  Wisdom  is  the 
Divine  power  of  God,  by  which  lie  created 
the  world,  and  by  which  he  sustains  the 
work  of  his  hands  and  regulates  the  operu- 
tions  of  nature.  This  eminence  of  Wisdom, 
in  her  intimate  association  with  Jehovah,  is 
made  the  basis  of  a  renewed  exhortation  to 
keep  Wisdom  steadily  in  view.  The  elevated 
thought  that  Wisdom  has  her  source  in 
Jehovah  might  seem  in  itself  an  adequate 
and  sufficient  reason  for  the  exhortation. 
But  another  motive  is  adduced  intimately 
bound  up  with  this  view  of  Wisdom.  Jehovah 
becomes  the  ground  of  confidence  and  the 
protection  in  all  conditions  of  life  of  those 
who  keep  Wisdom. 

Ver.  19.— The  Lord  by  wisdom  hath 
founded  the  earth.  The  emphatic  position 
of  the  word  Jehovah,  "the  Lord,"  at  the 
beginning  of  the  sentence  (cf  P».  xxvii. ; 
xcvii. ;  xcix.),  as  well  as  the  nature  of  the 
discourse,  indicates  a  new  parugraph.  The 
description  of  the  creative  Wisdom  of  Jehovah 
may  have  been  suggested  to  the  mind  of 
the  teacher  by  the  mention  of  the  tree  of 
life,  in  ver.  18  (Zoekler) ;  but  the  connection 
between  this  and  the  preceding  passage  has 
to  be  souglit  for  in  something  deeper.  The 
scope  of  the  teacher  is  to  exhibit,  and  so  to 
recommend.  Wisdom  in  every  respect,  and 
after  showing  her  excellence  in  man,  he  now 


62 


THE  PROVBBBS. 


[oh.  in.  1 — 35, 


brings  her  forward  as  the  mediam  of  creation, 
and  hence  in  her  relation  to  God.  Sy  wisdom 
(b'kokhmah);  \\i\ga.te,  sapientid ;  LXX.,  tij 
aoipia.  It  is  evident  that  Wisdom  is  here 
soincthiug  more  than  an  attribute  of  Jehovah. 
"  By  Wisdom  "  moans  "  by,  or  through,  the 
instrumentality  of  Wisdom."  While  the  cor- 
responding and  parallel  expressions,  "  under- 
standing," "  knowledge,"  militate  against  the 
idea  of  an  hypostatizing  of  Wisdom,  i.e. 
assigning  to  Wisdom  a  concrete  and  objective 
personality,  yet  tlie  language  is  sufficiently 
strong,  when  we  connect  this  passage  with 
ch.  i.  and  viii.,  to  warrant  our  regarding 
Wisdom  as  something  apart  from  yet  inti- 
mately connected  with  Jehovah,  as  an  active 
agency  employed  by  him,  and  hence  this 
description  may  be  looked  upon  as  an  antici- 
pation of  that  which  is  more  fully  developed 
in  ch.  viii.,  where  the  characteristics  which 
are  wanting  here  are  there  worked  out  at 
length.  The  rabbins  evidently  connected 
the  passage  before  us,  as  well  as  ch.  i.  and 
viii.,  with  Gen.  i.  1,  by  rendering  b'reshith, 
"  in  the  beginning,"  by  b'kokhmah,  "  by 
Wisdom."  Our  Lord  identifies  himself  with 
the  Divine  Sophia,  or  Wisdom  (Luke  xi. 
49).  And  the  language  of  St.  John,  •'  All 
things  were  made  by  him,  and  without  him 
was  not  anything  made  tliat  was  made" 
(John  i.  8),  which  assigns  to  tlie  Logos,  or 
Word  of  God,  i.e.  Christ,  the  act  of  creation 
(cf.  John  i  10,  and  especially  the  languiige  of 
St.  Paul,  in  CoL  i.  16),  argues  in  favour  of 
the  view  of  some  commentators  who  under- 
btand  Wisdom  to  refer  to  the  Second  Person 
of  the  Trinity.  The  Logos  was  understood 
by  Alexandrian  Judaism  to  expruss  the 
manifeetation  of  the  unseen  God,  the  Absolute 
Being,  in  the  creation  and  government  of 
the  world ;  and  the  Christian  teachers,  when 
they  adopted  this  term,  assigned  to  it  a 
concrete  meaning  as  indicating  the  Incarnate 
Word  (see  Bishop  Lightfoot,  in  Col.  i.  15). 
For  the  passage,  see  Ps.  xxxiii.  6 ;  civ.  24  ; 
cxxxvi.  5;  and  especially  Jer.  x.  12,  "He 
hath  established  the  world  by  his  wisdom," 
etc. ;  li.  55 ;  Ecclus.  xxiv.  2,  eeq.  Hath 
founded  (yasad);  'Vu\gAte,/>mdavit;  LXX., 
edefj.€\ta(r€.  The  same  verb  is  used  in  Job 
xxxviii.  4;  Ps.  xxiv.  2;  Ixxviii.  69,  of  the 
cieation  of  the  earth  by  God.  While  the 
primary  meaning  of  yasad  is  "  to  give  fixity 
to,"  "  to  lay  fast,"  that  of  honen,  rendered 
"  he  hath  established,"  is  "  to  set  up,"  "  to 
erect,"  and  so  "to  found,"  from  kun,  or 
referring  to  the  Arabic  and  Ethiopic  cognate 
root,  "to  exist,"  "to  give  existence  to." 
The  marginal  reading,  "prepared,"  corre- 
sponds with  the  LXX.  €To(/m<re.  The  Vul- 
gate is  stdbilivit,  "  he  hath  established." 

Ver.  20. — By  Ms  knowledge  the  depths  are 
broketi  up.  This  is  usually  taken  to  refer 
to  that  primary  act  in  creation,  the  separa- 


tion of  the  waters  from  the  eartli,  when  "  tha 
waters  were  gathered  together  unto  their 
ovm  place,"  as  recorded  in  Gen.  i.  9.  So 
Munster,  Ziickler,  Wardlaw.  But  it  seema 
better  to  understand  it  (as  Mercerus,  Lapide, 
Delitzsoh,  and  Authorized  Version)  of  the 
fertilization  of  the  earth  by  rivers,  streams, 
etc.,  which  burst  forth  from  the  interior  of 
the  earth.  In  this  sense  the  correspondence 
is  preserved  with  the  second  hemistich, 
where  the  atmosplieric  influence  is  referred 
to  as  conducing  to  the  same  end.  The 
teacher  passes  from  tlie  creation  to  the 
wonderful  means  which  Jehovah  employs 
through  Wisdom  to  sustain  his  work.  2^ 
depths  (t'homoth);  Vulgate,  abyssi;  LXX., 
SiSuiro-oi,  are  here  '*  the  internal  water  stores 
of  the  earth  "  (Delitzsch),  and  not  the  depths 
of  the  ocean,  as  in  ch.  viii.  24,  27,  28,  and  in 
Gen.  i.  2.  Are  broken  up  (niv'kau) ;  properly, 
were  broken  up,  niph.  perfect  of  baka,  (1)  to 
cleave  asunder,  (2)  to  break  forth,  as  water, 
in  Isa.  XXXV.  6.  The  perfect  describes  a 
past  act,  but  one  that  is  still  continuing  in 
effect.  Cf.  Vulgate  eruperunt,  "they  burst 
forth;"  LXX.,  efi^dyriirav,  aorist  2  passive 
of  ^iiyvuin,  "  to  burst  forth,"  Targum,  rupti 
sunt;  and  Syrlac,  ruptie  sunt.  The  idea  of 
division  or  separation  is  present,  but  it  is  not 
the  predominant  idea.  There  seems  to  be 
no  allusion  here  either  to  the  Deluge  (Beda), 
nor  to  the  cleaving  of  the  waters  of  the  Bed 
Sea(Gejerus),  though  both  of  these  historical 
events  were  undoubtedly  well  known  to  the 
teacher.  And  the  clouds  drop  down  the  dew. 
The  clouds  (sh'khnkim)  are  properly  the 
ether,  the  higher  and  colder  regions  of  the 
atmosphere,  and  then  "the  clouds,"  as  in 
Ps.  Ixxvii.  15,  which  are  formed  by  the  con- 
densation of  vapours  drawn  by  solar  influence 
from  the  surface  of  the  earth — seas,  riverSj 
etc.  The  singular  shakhak  signifies  "  dust, 
and  secondly  "a  cloud,"  evidently  fmm  the 
minute  particles  of  moisture  of  which  a 
cloud  is  composed.  Drop  down  (yir'aphu, 
kal  future  of  raaph,  used  as  a  present  or 
imperfect) ;  LXX.,  i^jvr,ffav, "  let  flow."  The 
clouds  discharge  their  contents  in  showers,  or 
distil  at  evening  in  refreshing  dew.  Modem 
science  agrees  with  the  meteorological  fact 
here  alluded  to,  of  the  reciprocal  action  of 
the  heavens  and  the  earth.  The  moisture 
drawn  from  the  earth  returns  again  "  to 
water  the  earth,  that  it  may  bring  forth  and 
bud,  to  give  seed  to  the  sower,  and  bread  to 
the  eater"  (Isa.  Iv.  10).  Dew;  tal,  here 
used  not  only  of  dew,  but  of  rain  in  gentle 
and  fructifying  showers.  The  Arabic  word 
signifies  "  light  rain ; "  LXX.,  Spoaovs, "  dew." 
•Moses,  in  describing  the  blessing  of  Israel, 
says,  "His  heavens  shall  drop  down  dew" 
in  the  same  sense  (Deut.  xxxviii  28;  of 
Job  xxxvi.  28).  The  fertilization  of  the 
earth  is  ordered  bj  the  Divine  Wisdom. 


OH.  nr.  1—35.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


63 


Ver.  21. — My  son,  let  not  them  depart 
from  thine  eyes.  After  the  description  of 
the  power  of  Wisdom  exhibited  in  creating 
and  sustaining  the  earth,  the  exhortation  to 
keep  Wisdom  steadily  before  the  eyes,  and 
the  promises  of  Uiviiie  piofectlon,  appro- 
priately follow.  Sioce  Wisdom  is  so  power- 
ful, then,  the  teacher  argues,  she  is  worthy 
of  being  retained  and  guarded,  and  able  to 
protect.  Let  them  not  depm  t  (al-yaluzu) ;  i.e. 
"  let  them  not  escape  or  slip  asiiie  from  your 
mind  (cf.  Vulgate,  ne  effluant  hsec  ab  oeulis 
tuts).  They  are  to  he  as  frontluts  between 
your  eyes,  as  a  ring  upon  your  finger. 
Yalueu,  from  lia,  "  to  bend  aside,"  di-flectere, 
a  via  declinare,  which  see  in  ch.  ii.  15, 
ought  probably  to  be  written  yellezu,  on  the 
analogy  of  the  coirespouding  passage  in  ch. 
iv.  21.  The  LXX.  renders  absolutely  fii) 
wapa^pti-Hi,  "do  not  thou  pass  by,"  from 
vapapfiiai,  "  to  flow  by,"  "  to  pass  by,  recede  " 
(of.  Heb.  ii.  1,  "  Therefore  we  ought  to  give 
the  more  earnest  heed  to  these  things,  lest 
at  any  time  we  should  let  them  slip  (/i^  irore 
■rrapappuaij.er)"  quoted  probably  from  the 
LXX..  of  this  passage).  The  Targum  Jona- 
than reads,  ne  vilescat,  "  lot  it,"  i.e.  wisdom, 
"not  become  worthless."  Them,  included 
in  the  verb  yaltizu,  of  which  it  is  subject  in 
the  original,  is  to  be  referred  either  to 
"sound  wisdom  and  discretion"  of  ver.  216 
— so  Gejerus,  Oartwright,  Gei'er,  Umbreit, 
Hitzig,  Zockler,  Plumptre  (a  similar  trajeo- 
tion  occurs  in  Deut.  xxxii.  5,  and  is  used,  as 
here,  to  give  vividness  to  the  description); 
or  to  "wisdom,  undeistanding,  knowledge," 
of  the  preceding  verses — so  Delitzsch  and 
Holden.  The  first  view  in  every  way  seems 
preferable,  and  it  is  no  objection  to  it  that 
"  sound  wisdom  "  (tusli  iyyah)  and  "  discre- 
tion" (jm'yimmah)  are  feminine,  while  tlie 
verb  "  depart "  (yaluzu)  is  masculine  (see 
GeseniuB,  'Gram.,'  §  147).  The  Syriao 
reads,  "  Let  it  not  become  worthless  (ne  vile 
fit)  in  thine  eyes  to  keep  my  doctrine  and 
my  counsels."  Keep  sound  wisdom  and 
discretion.  Keep;  n'zor,  kal  imperative  of 
ndtsdr,  "to  watch,  guard."  For  "sound 
wisdom"  (tushiyyah),  see  ch.  ii.  7.  Here  used 
for  "wisdom"  t^kokhmah),  as  "discretion" 
(m'zimmah)  for  "  understanding  "  (t'vunah), 
to  contrast  the  absolute  wisdom  and  insight 
of  God  with  the  corresponding  attributes  in 
man  (see  Zockler,  in  Zoo.).  They  belong  to 
God,  but  are  conferred  on  those  who  seek 
after  Wisdom,  and  are  then  to  be  guarded  as 
priceless  treasures.  The  Vulgate  reads, 
custodi  legem  et  consilium;  and  the  LXX., 
■riipriffov  Si  hiujir  fiouKriv  Koi  Iwoiav,  "  guard 
my  counsel  and  thought." 

Ver.  22. — So  shall  they  be  life  to  thy  soul, 
and  grace  to  thy  neck.  So  shall  they  be 
(n'yikva);  and  they  shall  be.  The  "soul" 
and  "neck"  stand  for  the  whole  man  in 


his  t\Tofold  nature,  internal  and  external 
Life  is  in  its  liigheat  and  widest  seiipe 
given  to  the  soul  (see  ch.  ii.  16,  18  ;  iv.  22 ; 
viii.  3.5),  and  favour  is  conferred  on  tlir 
man,  i.e.  he  becomes  aooeptalile  to  his  neigh 
hours,  if  he  has  wisdom.  The  latter  ex- 
preosiou  is  very  similar  to  ch.  i.  9,  where 
the  same  promise  is  expre.ssed,  "grai-e" 
(hon.)  being  equivalent  to  "  oruaineat  of 
grace"  (liv'yath  Aon).  Others  uuilerst.r,d 
'■  grace  to  thy  neck  "  (hon  I'giirg'grolheykd ), 
as  gratia  gutturis,  in  the  sense  of  "grnee  of 
the  lips,"  as  in  Ps.  xlv.  3  and  oh.  xxii.  11, 
that  is,  as  thu  grace  of  speaking,  power  of 
eloquent  and  ell'ective  utterance  (<iejerns, 
Bayne,  Lapido).  It  is  better  to  tiU>e  it  na 
referring  to  tlie  adornment  of  the  person. il 
character,  and  so  by  metonymy  of  tne 
favour  and  kindness  which  it  procures. 

Ver.  23. — Then  shall  thou  walk  in  thy 
way  safely.  The  first  of  the  proiaises  of 
protection,  which  follow  from  vers.  23— 
26.  He  who  keeps  "sound  wisdom  and 
discretion "  shall  enjoy  the  greatest  sense 
of  security  in  all  situations  of  life.  Safely 
(lar-'iakh);  either  in  confidence,  as  Vulgate 
fiducialiter,  i.e.  confidently,  because  of  the 
sense  of  security  (cf.  LXX.,  ire7roi9is  4v 
etpiiyp,  and  ver.  26);  or  in  security:  the 
adverb  lavetalth  is  equivalent  to  betakh  in 
ch.  i.  30  and  x.  9.  The  allusion  is  obvious. 
As  he  who  is  accompanied  by  an  escort 
proceeds  on  his  way  in  safety,  so  you  pro- 
tected by  God  will  pass  youi  life  in  security ; 
or,  as  Trapp,  "  Thou  shalt  ever  go  under  a 
double  guard,  'the  peace  of  God'  within 
thee  (Phil.  iv.  7),  and  the  'power  of  God' 
without  thee  (1  Pet.  i.  5). "  And  thy  foot 
shall  not  stumble ;  literally,  and  tlwu  shult 
not  strike  thy  foot.  Stumble  in  the  original 
is  thiggoph,  2  singular  kal  future  of 
nagaph,  "  to  smite,"  "  strike  against  with 
the  foot."  So  in  Ps.  xci.  12.  The  Autho- 
rized Version,  however,  correctly  gives  the 
sense.  The  LXX.,  like  the  Autliorizcd 
Version,  makes  "  foot  "  the  subj.  ot,  'o  5e 
TTovs  (Tov  'ov  /i^)  ir/>o(rK(5i^,  "(That)  thy  lb{)t 
may  not  stumble."  For  a  similar  assuranc. , 
see  ch.  iv.  12.  The  meaning  is:  You  will 
not  stumble,  because  you  will  be  walkiiig 
in  the  way  of  wisdom,  which  is  free  from 
stumbling-blocks  (Lapide).  You  will  not 
fall  into  sin. 

Ver.  24. — When  then  liest  dowh  then 
Shalt  not  be  afraid.  This  is  beautifully 
illustrated  by  what  David  says  in  Ps.  iv.  8, 
"I  will  both  lay  me  down  in  peace  and 
sleep:  for  thou,  Lord, only  makest  me  dwell 
in  safety."  No  fear  is  to  be  apprehended 
where  Jeliovah  is  Protector  (see  Ps.  iii  5,  6 ; 
xlvi.  1—3;  xci.  1—5;  oxxi,  5—8).  When 
(im)  is  Tendered  "if"  by  the  Vulgate, 
LXX.,  Targum  Jonathan.  Thou  liest  down; 
tish'kav,  "  thou  shalt  lis  down,"  kal  future, 


64 


THE   PROVERBS. 


[CH.  m.  1 — 35. 


like  thakavta,  kal  perfect,  "n  the  correspond- 
ing hemistich,  is  from  shakxv,  "  to  lie  down," 
specially  to  lay  one's  self  down  to  sleep,  as 
in  Gen.  xix.  4;  Ps.  iii.  6.  Vulgate,  «» 
dormierit ;  cf.  ch.  vi.  22,  "  when  thou 
sleepest"  ■=1?3b'3,  b'shok'b'ka).  The  LXX. 
rendering,  "if  thou  eittest"  (itiflj;),  arises 
from  reading  2eia  (tethev)  for  noBJ'n  (tish'kav). 
Tea,  thou  shalt  lie  down;  b'sliok'h'ta,  as 
before,  with  )  preiixed,  equivalent  to  the 
future,  as  in  tlie  Autliorized  Version ; 
LXX.,  imSeiSris.  Shall  be  sweet;  arvah, 
from  arav,  "to  be  sweet,"  or  "pleasant," 
perhaps  "  well  mixed,"  as  arev,  equivalent  to 
"  to  mix."  Thy  sleep  shall  be  full  of  pleasing 
impressions,  not  restlrss,  as  in  Deut.  xxviii. 
60  anil  Job  vii.  4,  but  sweet,  because  of  the 
sense  of  safety,  and  from  confidence  in  God, 
as  well  as  from  a  good  conscience  (cf.  Job 
xi.  18,  "  Thiiu  .shalt  take  thy  rest  in  safety," 
from  which  the  idea  is  probably  taken). 

Ver.  25. — Be  not  afraid ;  al-tirah,  is  lite- 
rally "  fear  thou  not,"  the  future  with  al 
preceding  being  used  for  the  imperative  in 
a  flehortative  sense,  as  in  Gen.  xlvi.  3; 
Job  iii.  4,  6,  7  (see  Gesenius,  '  Gram.,'  § 
127.  3,  o);  Vulgate,  ne  paveas.  Others, 
however,  render,  as  the  LXX.,  oi  ^o^riSijaiif, 
"Thou  shalt  not  be  afraid,"  in  the  sense  of 
a  promise.  The  verb  yare,  from  which 
tirdh,  is  here  followed  by  min,  as  in  Ps. 
iii.  7 ;  xxvii.  1,  and  properly  means  "  to  be 
afraid  from  or  before"  some  person  or 
thing.  Sudden;  pithom,  an  adverb  used 
adjectively  (cf.  like  use  of  adverb  khinnam 
in  ch.  xxvi.  2).  Tear  (palihad);  as  in  ch. 
i.  16,  the  object  which  excites  terror  or  fear, 
as  any  great  disaster.  The  desolation  of  the 
wicked  (shdath  r'shaim)  may  be  taken  eitlier 
(1)  as  the  desolation  made  by  the  violence 
of  the  wicked,  the  desolation  or  storm  which 
they  raise  against  the  righteous  (so  the 
LXX.,  Vulgate,  JIariana,  Michaelis,  Hitzig, 
and  others);  or  (2)  the  desolation  which 
oTertakes  the  wicked,  tlie  desolating  ven- 
geance executed  upon  them  (so  Doderlein, 
Lapide,  Stiiavt,  Muensch.,  Dclitzsch,  Ward- 
law).  The  latter  is  probably  the  right 
interpretation,  and  agrees  with  the  threat- 
ening language  of  Wisdom  against  her 
despisers,  in  ch.  i.  27,  where  shSaih  also 
occurs.  In  the  desolation  whicliihall  over- 
whelm the  wicked  he  who  has  made  Wisdom 
his  Kuide  shall  be  undismayed,  for  the  Lord 
is  his  coniidenoe.  The  passage  was  probably 
suggested  by  ch.  v.  21,  "  Neither  shalt  tliou 
be  afraid  of  desolation  when  it  cometh." 
Lee,  in  loc.  cit.,  says  the  places  are  almost 
innumerable  where  this  sentiment  occurs. 
Compare  the  fearlessness  of  the  man  of 
integrity  and  justice,  in  Horace — 

"  Si  fractus  illabatur  orbis, 
Impavidum  ferient  ruinsa." 

(Horace, '  Od.,'  iii.  3.  7,  8.) 


"  Let  Jove's  dread  arm  with  thundeis  rend 

the  spheres, 
Beneath  the  crush  of  worlds  undaunted  he 

appears." 

(Francis's  Tran».) 
Ver.  26.— Thy  oonfldenoe  (t/kiiTleki); 
literally,  as  thy  confidence,  Eesel,  pri- 
marily "  loin  "  or  "  flank,"  as  in  Lev.  iii,  14 ; 
X.  15 ;  Job  XV.  27,  is  apparently  used  here 
in  its  secondary  meaning  of  "confidence," 
"  hope,"  as  in  Job  viii.  1 4 ;  ixxi.  24 ;  Pa. 
Ixxviii.  7.  The  3  (»')  prefixed  is  what  is 
usually  termed  the  ?  essential,  or  ?  pleonas- 
tinum  (equivalent  to  the  Latin  tanquam, 
"  as  "),  and  serves  to  emphasize  the  connec- 
tion between  the  predicate  "thy  cnnfidence" 
and  the  subject  "Jehovah  "  (of.  Exod.  xviii. 
4;  seeEwald,'Lehrb.,'217,/.;  and  Gesenius, 
'  Gram.,'  §  154).  Jehovah  shall  be  in  th« 
highest  sense  yoiir  ground  and  object  of 
confidence.  Dclitzsch  describes  kesel  as 
confidence  in  the  presence  of  evil :  Jehovah 
in  the  presence  of  the  "sudilen  fear,"  and 
of  "  the  desolation  of  the  wicked,"  the  evils 
and  calamities  which  overwhelm  the  wicked, 
shall  be  thy  confidence.  The  sense  of  his 
all-encircling  protection  will  render  ynu 
undismayed.  "The  meaning  given  to  kesel 
as  "  foolhardiness "  (Ps.  xlix.  14)  aud 
"folly"  (Eccles.  vii.  25),  and  the  connec- 
tion of  kesel  with  k'silim  in  ch.  i.  22,  comes 
from  the  root-idea  kasSl,  "  to  be  fleshly,  or 
fat,"  the  signifloalion  of  vvhicli  branches  out 
on  the  one  side  into  strength  and  boldness, 
and  on  the  other  into  languor  and  inert- 
ness, and  so  folly  or  confidence  in  self 
(Schultens,  Z.c).  'The  Talniudic  rendering 
of  the  Rabbi  Salomon  appioximates  to  tnis 
meaning,  "and  the  things  in  which  you 
seemed  to  be  foolish  (desipere  videbaris)  he 
will  be  at  once  present  with  you."  Others, 
as  Ziegler,  Muentinghe,  give  kesd  its 
primary  meaning,  and  translate,  "Jehovah 
shall  be  aa  thy  loins,"  the  loins  being  re- 
garded as  the  emblem  of  strength.  Jehovah 
shall  be  your  strength.  But  kesel  does 
not  appear  to  have  this  local  upplication 
here.  Wherever  it  is  used  in  tliis  sense,  as 
in  Job  and  Leviticus  cited  above,  there  is 
sometliing  in  the  context  to  point  it  out  as 
a  part  of  tlie  body.  Compare,  however,  the 
Vulgate,  in  latere  suo,  "in  thy  side  or  flank." 
The  LXX.  renders,  M  wairuv  dSuv  (rou, 
"over  all  thy  ways."  From  being  taken 
(milldlted) ;  Vulgate,  ne  eapiaris,  "  lest  tliou 
be  taken."  The  meaning  is,  Jehovah  will 
be  your  protection  against  all  the  snares 
and  traps  which  the  impious  lay  for  you. 
Likid,  "a  being  taken,"  is  from  Idliad,  "to 
take  or  catch  animals"  in  a  net  or  in  snares. 
It  only  occurs  here  in  tlie  Proverbs.  Its 
unusual  appearance,  together  with  otbei 
reasons,  not  tenable,  however,  has  led  Hitzig 
to  reject  vers.  22 — 26  as  an  interpolation 


«B.  m.  1— as.] 


THE  PROVBBBS. 


65 


The  LXX.  reads,  TT^ii>,pavorem.  nrAfo-iT, 
in  Plato,  Aristotle,  and  Flntaroh,  U  naed 
BubjectiTBly,  and  means  "any  vehement 
emotion."  The  word  only  ooonn  once  in 
the  New  Testament  in  1  Pet.  iii.  6,  ji^ 
^oPoifieirq  fVuSeiticw  rriiiffiVf  where  it  is 
eTidently  qnoted  from  the  passage  before  ns, 
in  an  objective  sense,  and  designates  some 
external  cause  of  terror  (of.  Authorized 
Version,  "and  be  not  atraid  with  any 
amazement;"  see  also  Book  if  Common 
Prayer :  *  Solemnization  of  Matrimony,'  ad 
fin.). 

Vert.  27—35.-6.  Sixth  admonitory  dig- 
tourte.  In  this  discourse  the  teacher  still 
carries  on  his  object,  which  is  to  demon- 
strate the  condition!  upon  which  true 
wisdom  and  happiness  are  to  be  attained. 
The  discourse  differs  from  the  preceding  in 
consisting  of  detached  proverbs,  and  may 
be  divided  into  two  main  sections — the 
first  (vers.  27 — 30)  enjoining  benevolence, 
that  love  to  one's  neighbour  which  is  the 
fulfilling  of  the  Law ;  the  second  warning 
•gainst  emulating  the  oppressor  and  associ- 
ating with  him,  because  of  the  fate  of  the 
wicked  (vers.  81 — 35).  It  is  observable  that 
all  the  maxims  have  a  negative  form,  aud 
thus  present  a  striking  contrast  to  the  form 
adopted  by  our  Lord  in  the  Sermon  on  the 
Uonnt  (Matt,  v.),  and  to  the  admonitions 
at  the  close  of  St.  Paul's  Epistles!  In  one 
instance  in  particular  (ver.  80),  the  teaching 
does  not  reach  the  high  moral  standard  of 
the  gospel  (see  Delitzsoh  and  Lange). 

Ver.  27. — Withhold  not  good  from  them 
to  whom  it  is  due.  Tiiis  precept  indicates 
the  general  principle  of  beneficence,  and  not 
merely,  as  the  words  at  first  sight  seem  to 
imply,  restitution  (as  Cajet.).  We  are  to 
do  good  to  those  who  are  in  need  or  deserving 
of  it,  whenever  we  have  the  means  and 
opportunity.  From  them  to  whom  it  j«  due 
(nib'dldyo);  literally,  from  its  owner,  from 
hadl,  dominui,  "  lord "  or  owner  of  a  thing. 
Cf.  oh.  xvi.  22,  "Prudence  is  a  fountain  of 
life  to  its  owner  (b'dldyv);"  i.  19;  xvii.  8; 
and  also  Eccles.  viii.  8;  vii.  12; — in  all  of 
which  passages  proprietorship  in  the  thing 
or  quality  mentioned  is  expiesscd.  The 
owners  of  good  are  those  to  whom  good  is 
due  or  belongs  either  by  law  or  by  morality, 
whether  by  desert  or  need.  Tie  latter 
qualification  is  the  one  emphasized  in  tlie 
LXX.,  Mi)  air6<rxv  ?"  TO«r>'  eySeii,  "  Abntaiu 
not  from  doing  good  to  the  needy,"  So  the 
Arabic  pauperi.  The  Turgum  and  Syriac 
put  the  precept  in  more  general  terms, 
"  Cease  not  to  do  good,"  without  indicating 

FBOTEBBS. 


in  partionlar  anyone  who  is  to  be  the  recipient 
of  the  good.  But  the  Jewish  interpreters 
generally  (e.g,  Ben  Ezra)  understand  it  of 
the  poor,  egentibut.  The  Vulgate  puta 
an  entirely  different  interpretation  on  the 
passage :  Noli  prohibere  bene/aeert  eum  qui 
potest;  si  vales,  et  ipse  bene/ae,  "Do  not 
prohibit  him  who  can  from  doing  good ;  if 
you  are  able,  do  good  also  yourself."  It 
thus  implies  that  we  are  to  put  no  impedi- 
ment in  the  way  of  any  one  who  is  willing 
to  do  good  to  others,  and  enjoins  the  duty 
on  onrselves  also.  Good  (^tAp) ;  «.e.  "  good  " 
under  any  form,  any  good  deed  or  act  of 
beneficence.  The  prmciple  brought  forward 
in  this  passage  is  that  what  we  possess  and 
is  seemingly  our  own  is  in  reality  to  be 
regarded  as  belonging  to  others.  We  are 
only  stewards  of  our  wealth.  In  the  power 
of  thine  hand  (I'el  yad'yka);  literally,  in 
the  power  of  thine  hands.  For  the  dual, 
yad'ykA,  the  Keri  substitutes  the  singular, 
ydd'kd,  to  harmonize  it  with  the  similar 
expression,  I'el  yddi,  "in  the  power  of  thy 
hand,"  which  occurs  in  Gen.  xxxi.  27; 
Dent,  xxviii.  32;  Neh.  v.  5;  Micah  u.  1. 
But  there  is  no  grammatical  need  for  the 
emendation.  Botli  the  LXZ.  and  Targum 
employ  the  singular,  "thy  hand."  Poieer 
(el);  here  "strength"  in  the  abstract. 
Usually  it  means  "the  strong,"  and  is  so 
used  as  an  appellation  of  Jehovah,  though, 
as  Gesenius  says,  those  little  understand  the 
phrase  who  would  render  el  here  "by  God." 
The  7  prefixed  to  el  indicates  the  condition. 
Tlie  meaning  of  the  phrase  is,  "  While  it  is 
praotioable,  and  you  have  the  opportunity 
and  means  of  doing  good,  do  it."  Do  not 
defer,  but  do  good  promptly.  The  passage 
receives  a  remarkable  illustration  in  the 
language  of  St.  Paul,  "  Wliile  we  have 
opportunity,  let  us  do  good  unto  all  men" 
(Gal,  vi.  10). 

Ver.  28. — The  precept  of  this  and  that  of 
the  preceding  verse  are  very  closely  related. 
The  former  precept  enjoined  the  general 
principle  of  benevolence  when  we  have  the 
means;  this  carries  on  the  Idea,  and  is 
directed  against  the  postponement  of  giving 
when  we  are  in  a  position  to  give.  In  effect 
it  says,  "Do  not  defer  till  to-moirow  what 
you  can  do  to-day."  This  "putting  off" 
may  arise  from  avarice,  from  indolence,  or 
from  insolence  and  contempt.  These  under- 
lying faults,  which  are  incompatible  witli 
neighbourly  good  will,  are  condemned  by 
implication.  Unto  thy  neighbour ;  I'reSylcd, 
"  to  tliy  friends,"  the  word  being  evidently 
used  distributively.  Belli  is  "  a  companion  " 
or  "  friend  "  (cf.  Vulgate,  amioo  fno ;  Syria(\ 
sodali  tuo),  and  generally  au_v  oilier  person, 
equivalent  to  the  Greek  6  -rKi^niif,  "neigh- 
bour." The  Authorized  Veinion  onrreotly 
renders  "come  again,"  us  ahue  is  not  merely 


66 


THE  PBOVBEBS. 


[oh.  m.  1 — 35. 


"  to  retnm,"  bnt  to  return  again  to  something 
(ao  Delitzsoh);  of.  Vulgate,  revertere;  and 
as  the  words,  "to-morrow  I  will  give  thee," 
■how.  The  LXX.  adds,  "  For  thou  knowest 
not  what  the  morrow  may  hring  forth," 
probably  from  ch.  xvii  1.  If  viewed  in 
respect  of  the  specific  claims  which  servants 
haTe  for  work  done,  the  precept  is  a  re-CL.io 
of  Lev.  xxix.  13  and  Deut.  xxiv.  15.  In 
illustration  of  the  general  scope  of  the 
passage,  Grotius  quotes,  "A  slow-footed 
faTom:  is  a  favour  without  favour."  Seneca 
says  in  the  same  spirit,  "Ingratum  est 
beneficium  quod  diu  inter  manus  dantis 
bcsit,"  "The  benefit  is  thankless  which 
sticks  long  between  the  hands  of  the  giver  " 
(Seneca, '  Bene!,'  i.  2) ;  cf.  also  Bis  dat  qui 
eito  dat. 

Ver.  29. — Devise  not  evil  agunst  thy 
neighbour.  Thiy  precept  is  directed  against 
abuse  of  confidence.  Devise  not  evil  (ai 
tdkhardeh  rdah).  The  meaning  of  this  ex- 
pression lies  between  "  fabricating  evil "  and 
"  ploughing  evil."  The  radical  meaning  of 
khdrdsh,  fjom  which  tdlcharosh,  is  "to  cut 
into,"  "  1  o  inscribe  "  letters  on  a  tablet,  cog- 
nate with  the  Greek  xapiiriretv,  "to  cut  into." 
But  it  is  used  in  the  sense  of  "  to  plough  " 
in  Job  iv.  18,  "They  that  plough  iniquity 
(kliar'ehey  dvin),"  and  Ps.  oxxix.  3,  "The 
ploughers  ploughed  (khar'ehim  hhai'tldm) 
upon  my  back  "  (of.  Hos.  x.  13).  This  also 
appears  from  the  context  to  be  the  meaning 
in  ch.  vi.  14.  With  these  we  may  compare 
such  expressions  as  "to  plough  a  lie"  (jiAt 
aporpla  \jifiSo5,  rendered  in  the  Authorized 
Version,  *  Devise  not  a  lie  ") ;  see  ch.  vii.  12, 
and  "  to  sow  iniquity,"  ch.  xxii.  8 — a  cognate, 
figure.  "  To  plough  evil"  is  to  devise  evU, 
to  prepare  for  it,  just  in  the  same  way  as  a 
ploughman  prepares  the  land  for  sowing. 
In  this  sense  the  verb  is  understood  by  the 
older  commentators  and  by  Ewald  and 
Dehtzsoh.  On  the  other  hand,  the  verb 
may  be  used  in  its  other  signiii cation,  "to 
fabricate,"  and  hence  "to  contrive."  The 
noun  hhdrdsli  is  an  artificer  of  iron,  eto. 
(Exod.  XXXV.  35;  Deut.  xxvii.  15).  "To 
febricate  evil"  is,  of  course,  as  the  Authorized 
Version  "to  devise  evil."  The  LXX.,  /iii 
TeKTj/yp,  from  TeKTalro/iai,  "  to  build," 
inclines  to  this  sense.  The  Vulgate,  ne 
moliarii,  does  not  clear  up  the  point,  though 
moliri,  usually  "to  contrive,"  is  used  by 
Virgil,  '  Georg.,'  i.  494,  "  moliri  terram,"  of 
working  or  tilling  the  ground.  The  verb 
also  occurs  in  ch.  vi.  19;  xii.  20;  xiv.  22. 
Seeing  he  dwelleth  seourely  by  thee;  i.e. 
as  the  Vulgate,  cum  ille  in  te  liahet  fidueiam, 
"when  he  has  confidence  in  thee;"  so  the 
LXX.;  or,  as  the  Targum  and  Syriau, 
"  when  he  dwells  with  thee  in  peace."  To 
dwell  (]/dthar)  is  in  Ps.  i.  1  "  to  sit  with  any 
one,"  f.e.  to  associate  familiarly  with  him 


(cL  Pa.  xzvi  4,'5) ;  bnt  it  also  has  the  mean- 
ing "  to  dwell,"  jtnd  the  participle  ySshet, 
here  used ;  in  Gen.  xix.  23 ;  Judg.  vi  21, 
means  "an  inhabitant,  a  dweller."  Securely 
(Idveiah');  »'.«.  with  fiill  trust  (see  on  ver.  23). 
Devising  evil  against  a  friend  ia  at  any  time 
reprehensible,  but  to  do  so  when  he  confidet 
in  and  is  altogether  unsuspicious  of  you,  ia 
an  act  of  the  greatest  treachery,  and  an 
outrage  on  all  law,  human  and  Divine.  It 
implies  dissimulation.  It  is  the  very  sin  by 
which  "  the  devil  beguUed  Eve  through  his 
subtlety"  (Wardlaw). 

Ver.  30. — The  meaning  of  the  precept  is 
this  verse  ia  clear.  We  are  not  to  strive  or 
quarrel  with  a  man  unless  he  has  first  given 
us  offence.  So  Le  Olero,  "  Nisi  injuria  prior 
lacessiverit."  The  admonition  is  directed 
against  those  who,  from  spite,  jealousy,  or 
other  reasons,  "stir  up  strife  all  the  day 
long"  with  those  who  are  quiet  and  peaceable. 
Strive.  The  Keri  here  reads  tariv  for  the 
Klietib  taruv,  but  without  any  change  of 
meaning.  The  verb  rHv,  from  which  taruv, 
is  "  to  strive  or  contend  with  the  hand  and 
with  blows,"  as  in  Deut.  xxxiii.  7;  or  with 
words,  as  in  Ps.  ciii.  9  (c£  the  Vulgate,  ne 
eontendat;  and  the  LXX.,  nii  (pt\ex^'fi(riiis, 
"  Do  not  exercise  enmity,"  from  the  unusiul 
<pi\fX^p4a.  Biiv  is  here  followed  by  D* 
(im),  as  in  Job  ix.  3 ;  xl.  2 ;  and  Gen.  xxvi 
30.  Its  forensic  sense,  "to  contend  with  i> 
law,"  does  not  strictly  apply  here,  though  the 
precept  may  be  taken  as  discouraging  liti- 
gation (Lapide).  Without  causa  (khinnam); 
LXX.,  /iar-fiv,  equivalent  to  Sapeiy  in  John 
XV.  25;  Vulgate, /rusfro;  further  explained 
in  the  concluding  clause  (see  on  ch.  i.  IT). 
If  he  have  done  thee  no  harm.  The  phrase, 
gfxmal  rddh,  is  to  bring  evil  upon  any  on* 
(Sclmltens).  The  verb  gdmal  signifies  "to 
do,  to  give,  to  show  to  any  one."  Holden 
renders,  "  Snrely  he  will  return  thee  evil," 
in  the  sense  that  unprovoked  attack  ensurea 
retaliation.  Bnt  this  is  to  ignore  the  negative 
force  of  im-ld,  "  if  not."  The  verb  sometimea 
means  "  requiting,"  bnt  not  in  the  passage 
before  us,  nor  in  ch.  xi.  17;  xxxi.  12.  The 
Vulgate  renders  as  the  Authorized  Version, 
Cum  ipge  tibi  nihil  mali  fecerit.  It  ia  to  be 
remarked  that  this  precept  falls  below  the 
moral  standard  of  tiie  New  Testament 
teaching  (see  Matt.  v.  S9 — 41;  Kom.  xii. 
17—21 ;  1  Cor.  vi  6—8),  and  of  the  example 
of  our  Lord,  of  whom  it  was  predicted  that 
"  When  he  was  reviled,  he  reviled  not 
again;  when  he  Buffered,  he  threatened 
not "  (see  Isa.  liii,). 

Ver.  31. — Envy  thou  not  the  oppressor,  and 
ohoose  none  of  his  ways.  The  thought  ol 
strife  in  the  preceding  verse  leads  to  that 
of  oppression,  and  the  precept  is  directed 
against  fellowship  with  those  who  outrage 
the  general  law  of  benevolence  and  justioa 


OH.  Ill,  1 — 35,] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


67 


Envy  not;  i.e.  M  Stuatt,  "Do  not  anxiously 
covet  the  booty  which  men  of  violence 
acquire."  Succesa  and  wealth  may  follow 
from  severity  and  extortion,  but  the  man 
who  acquires  prosperity  by  these  means 
ia  not  to  be  envied  even  by  the  yiotim  of 
hii  oppression  (for  the  verb,  see  ch.  xxiii. 
17 ;  xxiv.  1, 19).  The  oppresior  {teh  kkamds) ; 
literally,  a  man  of  violence  (see  margin). 
The  expression  occurs  in  ch.  xiv.  29;  Ps. 
zviii.  41,  and  in  its  plural  form,  Uh 
khSmdmim,  "  man  of  violences,"  in  2  Sam. 
xxii.  49 ;  Ps.  cxl.  1,  i.  The  man  of  violence 
is  one  who  "grinds  the  faces  of  the  poor," 
and  whose  conduct  is  rapacions,  violent, 
aad  unjust.  And  ehooee  none  of  hit  ways; 
literally,  and  choose  not  aU  hi»  wayt,  i.e.  with 
a  view  to  acquire  the  same  wealth,  greatness, 
and  power.  The  LXX.  renders  this  verse, 
"Do  not  acquire  the  hatred  of  evil  men, 
neither  be  jealous  of  their  ways,"  evidently 
from  having  taken  tiv'khar,  "  choose,"  in  the 
second  hemistich,  for  tith'khar,  "  be  jealous." 
Ver.  32. — This  verse  gives  the  leason  for 
the  previous  warning.  The  oppressor  is 
here  mcluded  under  the  more  general  term, 
"the'froward."  Thefroward;  ndloz,hyp\i. 
participle  from  luz,  "  to  bend  aside,"  and 
henco  a  perverted  or  wicked  man,  one  who 
turns  aside  from  the  way  of  uprightness, 
a  transgressor  of  the  Law  (of.  LXX.,  irapd- 
ro/ios) ;  and  go  the  opposite  of  "  the  right- 
eous," t/'ehdrim,  "  the  upright,"  those  who 
pursue  the  path  of  j^ustness,  or  the  straight- 
forward. Abomination  (tiSevdh);  i.e.  an 
abhoiTence,  something  which,  being  impure 
and  unclean  (of.  LXX.,  oKoflapToi),  is  especi- 
ally abhorrent  to  Jehovah.  In  some  passages 
it  is  connected  with  idolatry,  as  in  1  Kings 
xiv.  24  and  2  Kings  xxiii.  13,  but  is  never 
nsed  in  this  sense  in  the  Proverbs,  where  it 
occurs  about  twenty  times  (see  ch.  xxviii.  9 ; 
xxi  27 ;  xi.  1,  20,  etc.).  The  passage  shows 
that  prosperity  and  worldly  success  are  not 
always  a  true  measure  of  Divine  favour. 
Eis  secret  (eddd);  Vulgate,  sermocinatio. 
Here  tod  probably  means  "familiar  inter- 
course," as  in  Job  xxix.  4  and  Ps.  xxv.  14 1 
and  hence  the  special  favour  with  which 
Jehovah  regards  the  upright,  by  revealing 
to  them  what  he  conceals  firom  others,  or 
his  friendship  (compare  what  our  Lord  says 
in  John  xv.  14,  15).  Dathe  translates, 
"probis  vero  est  familiaris."  Gesenius  says 
lod  properly  means  "  a  couch,"  or  triclinium, 
on  which  people  recline;  but  Delitzsch 
derives  it  from  the  root  sod,  "to  be  firm," 
"compressed,"  and  states  that  it  therefore 
means  properly  "a  being  together,  or  sitting 
together."  The  LXX.  continues  the  "fro- 
ward  man "  (vapdvo/uis)  as  the  subject,  and 
renders,  "Every  transgressor  is  impure 
before  Qoi,  and  does  not  sit  together  with 
(ftii  (TvyfSpiiCfi)  the  just" 


Ver.  33. — The  curse  of  the  lord  if  in  th« 
honse  of  the  wicked.  From  ver.  83  to  the 
end  of  the  discourse  the  contrast  is  con- 
tinued between  the  condition  of  the  wicked' 
and  the  just,  the  scornful  and  the  lowly, 
the  wise  and  the  fools.  In  the  verse  before 
us  a  further  reason  is  given  why  the  pros- 
perity of  the  wicked  is  not  enviable.  The 
curse  of  Jehovah  dwells  in  and  rests  upon 
his  house.  The  curse;  m'erdh,  from  arav, 
"to  curse.''  This  word  only  occurs  five 
times  in  the  Old  Testament — once  in  Deute- 
ronomy, twice  in  Proverbs  (here  and  in  ch. 
xxviii  27),  and  twice  in  Malachi.  The 
nature  of  the  curse  may  be  learned  from 
Dent,  xxviii.  20,  where  it  is  the  infliction 
of  temporal  misfortunes  ending  with  the 
"  cutting  o&"  of  the  wicked  (see  Ps.  xxxvii. 
22).  It  is  a  hovering  evil,  the  somce  of 
constant  misfortune.  LXX.,  Kardpa.  Ct 
"the  cursing"  {dldh)  against  thieves  and 
■wearers  in  Zech.  y.  4.  But  he  blesseth  the 
habitation  of  the  just.  The  contrast  to  the 
former,  as  in  Deut.  xxviii.  2 — 6.  He  blesseth; 
i.e.  both  temporarily  and  spiritually.  Bless- 
ing does  not  exclude  affiiction,  but  "  trials  " 
are  not  "curses"  (Wardlaw).  Both  the 
LXX.  and  the  Vulgate  render,  "But  tha 
habitations  of  the  just  shall  be  blessed," 
the  LXX.  having  read  the  pual  future 
(y'vSrak),  "they  shall  be  blessed,"  for  the 
piol  future  (y'vdrtk),  "he  shall  bless,"  of 
the  text.  The  habitation;  ndveh,  from  ndvdh, 
"  to  sit  down,"  "  to  dwell."  A  poetic  and 
nomad  (Fleischer)  word  usually  understood 
of  a  small  dwelling  is  tugurium,  the  shep- 
herd's hut  or  cottage,  "the  sheepcote"  of 
2  Sam.  vii.  8.  The  LXX.  HvavKis,  and  the 
Vulgate  habitaculum,  favour  the  suggestion 
of  Gejerus,  that  a  contrast  is  here  made 
between  the  large  house  or  palace  (bdyith) 
of  the  wicked  and  the  small  dwelling  of 
the  just.  In  ch.  xxi.  20  and  xxiv.  15  th* 
word  is  rendered  "  dwelling." 

Ver.  34. — Surely  he  scometh  the  soomera; 
literally,  if  with  regard  to  the  scorneri  ha 
scorneth  (im  Idlletsim  hii  yalitt');  i.e.  he  re- 
pays scorn  with  scorn ;  or,  as  Bubbi  Salomon, 
"  He  renders  to  them  so  that  they  fall  in  their 
own  derision  (reddit  ipsis  ut  in  lud  derition* 
corruant)."  He  renders  their  schemes  abor- 
tive. He  resists  them.  The  scornert  (littim') 
are  those  who  treat  with  scoffing  regard  the 
precepts  and  truths  of  God;  the  arrogant, 
proud,  insolent,  here  placed  in  contrast  with 
"tiie  lowly."  Vulgate,  derisoret;  LXX., 
hir(pii<pavoi,  "the  overbearing."  The  ^  for 
n^  (I'fto),  prefixed  to  letsim,  signifies  "with 
regard  to,"  as  in  Job  xxxii.  4  (cf.  Ps.  xvi.  3, 
"  With  regard  to  the  saints  QiWdishim),  in 
th<  m  only  I  delight ").  But  he  giveth  graci 
unto  the  lowly ;  or,  on  tt«  other  hand,  the  h. 
prefixed  to  Idandyim, "  to  the  lowly,"  taving 


G8 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[oh.  iil  1 — ^35 


Ihkt  antithetical  force  here  as  in  Joh  viii.  20. 
The  Unely  (anayy'im);  Vulgate,  maneaeli; 
LXX.,  Tairfij/oi;  properly,  "the  affliuted," 
with  added  notion  of  submission  and  lowly 
demeanour,  and  hence  the  meek,  gentle^ 
the  gentle  towards  unan,  and  the  abased  and 
lowly  before  God.  St.  James  (iv.  6)  quotes 
the  LXX.  of  this  passage,  "  God  rosisteth 
the  proud,  but  givetb  grace  to  the  hnmble." 
With  tlie  exception  of  substituting  Kipios  for 
&f6s  (cf.  1  Pet  V.  5),  our  Lord's  pnrable 
of  the  Pharisee  and  publican  illustrates  the 
teaching  of  this  verse  (Luke  xviii.  9 — H). 

Ver.  35. — The  wise  shall  inherit  glory. 
Ch.  xi.  2  indicates  that  "the  wise"  here  are 
to  be  identified  with  "  the  lowly  "  of  the 
preceding  Terse.  Inherit;  succeed  to  it  as  a 
matter  of  course  by  hereditary  right  as  sons. 
Ileirehip  implies  eonship.  Olory  (Jtdvdd) ;  or, 
honour;  not  merely  earthly  distinction  and 
splendour,  the  glory  of  man,  but  the  "  glory 
of  God."  But  shame  shall  be  the  promotion 
of  fools;  or,  as  margin,  ihame  exalleth  the 
fooh.  The  rendering  of  the  original, 
vuJ^i'ilm  merim  kdldn,  depends  upon  the 
meaning  to  be  given  to  merim,  the  hiph. 
participle  of  Him,  hiph.  "  to  lift  uj),  exalt ; " 
and  whether  the  plural,  k'ellim,  in  a  dis- 


tributive sense,  as  in  ver.  18,  or  JialSn,  is 
the  subject.  Various  interpretations  have 
been  given  of  the  passage.  (1)  The  Vulgate 
renders,  itultorum  exaltatio  ignominia;  Le. 
as  in  the  Authorized  Version, "  shame  exalts 
fools."  They  "  glory  in  their  shame  "  (PhiL 
(ii.  19) ;  or  shame  renders  them  con- 
spicuous as  warning  examples  (Ewald) ;  or, 
as  Dathe  explains  it,  "  Stulti  infamitl  snnt 
faraosi,"  "  Fools  become  famous  by  infamy;" 
or  as  Biibbi  Levi,  "Shame  exalts  them  as 
into  the  air,  and  makes  them  vanish  away." 
(2)  Tlie  LXX.  renders,  Ai  da.tPftt  Sijiairay 
dri/ilav,  i.e.  "  Foola  exalt  shame,  prize  what 
others  desjiise"  (Plumptre).  (3)  Umbreit, 
Bertheau,  Zockler,  render,  "Shame  sweeps 
fools  away,"  i.e.  lifts  them  up  in  order  to 
sweep  away  and  destroy  them  (cf.  Isa.  IviL 
14).  (4)  Tlie  true  rendering  seems  to  be 
given  by  Michaelis,  "  Fodls  carry  anay 
shame  "  as  their  portioa.  So  the  Targum, 
Delitzsch,  Hitzig,  Wordsworth.  Tliey  look 
for  "promotion."  They  attain  such  as  it 
is,  but  tho  end  of  their  attainments  it 
"  shame  and  everlasting  contempt."  As  the 
wise  inherit  glory,  so  fools  get  M  their 
portion  shame  and  ignominy. 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver*.  1 — 4. — Making  the  heart  a  treasury  of  good  principles.  I.  The  TBEAfftJKK. 
Innumerable  impressions  are  constantly  being  made  upon  our  minds,  and  as  constantly 
transferring  themselves  into  memories.  Frivolous  thoughts,  false  notions,  corrupt 
images,  once  harboured,  take  up  their  abode  in  the  soul,  and  ultimately  modify  its 
character  to  the  likeness  of  themselves.  It  is  most  important  for  us  to  guard  our 
memories  from  such  thin^',  and  to  fill  them  with  more  worthy  stores.  Consider, 
therefore,  the  best  subjects  for  contemplation  and  memory.  1.  The  Law  of  Ood.  Divine 
truth  is  the  highest  truth,  the  noblest  theme  of  meditation,  the  supreme  guide  to  con- 
duct. Truth  concerning  our  actions,  the  revealed  wiU  of  God,  is  for  us  the  most 
valuable  Divine  truth.  Other  forms  of  truth  may  please  and  help  us,  but  this  is 
essentially  needful  as  a  lamp  to  our  feet.  We  can  afford  to  lose  sight  of  the  stars  if 
the  harbour  light  shines  clear  on  the  waters  over  which  we  have  to  sail.  This  practical 
Divine  truth — ^not  our"  dreams  and  fancies,  hut  utterances  of  God's  will — ^we  are  called  to 
remember.  Hence  the  importance  of  studying  the  Bible,  which  contains  it.  It  is  well 
for  children  to  store  their  minds  with  passages  of  Scripture.  These  will  afford  strength 
in  temptation,  guidance  in  perplexity,  comfort  in  sorrow.  2.  Mercy  and  truth.  "  The 
letter  killeth."  It  is  superstition  that  merely  treasures  up  the  words  of  Holy  Writ, 
and  repeats  them  parrot-like,  as  though  a  spell  were  to  be  wrought  by  the  very  utter- 
ance of  them.  The  truth  contained  within  these  ancient  words  is  whfit  we  need  to 
recollect.  And  it  is  not  the  exact  verbal  bearing  of  the  Law,  but  the  wide-reaching 
principles  underlying  it,  that  Christians  are  called  upon  to  treasure;  not  rules  of 
sacrifice,  but  principles  of  mercy ;  not  merely  tho  prohibition,  "  Thou  shalt  not  steal," 
but  the  higher  precept, "  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself."  3.  Christ.  Christ 
is  the  Truth ;  he  is  the  incarnation  of  mercy,  our  great  exemplar,  the  visible  manifesta- 
tion of  God's  will,  the  perfect  Ideal  of  our  life.  If  we  are  weary  of  reading  dry  l^al 
rescripts,  *nd  fail  in  contemplating  bare  abstract  truths,  wo  have  a  better  way  of 
treasuring  good  principles,  by  cherishing  the  vision  of  Christ. 

IL  Thb  tbbabubt.  This  is  the  heart.  It  is  not  enough  that  the  Law  has  been 
once  for  all  revealed,  that  we  come  under  it  and  under  the  institutions  of  the  Church, 
that  we  treasure  the  Bible  in  our  library,  that  we  hear  it  r«»d  in  hasty  momenta. 


««.m.  1— 35,]  THE  PROVEEBS.  «9 


Much  Bupentition  prevailg  on  these  points.  People  seem  to  think  that  there  is  a  Tirtue 
in  the  mere  act  of  reading  a  chupter  from  the  Bible,  and  some  seem  to  go  through  the 
task  as  a  sort  of  penance,  imagining  that  they  thus  score  some  points  to  their  credit  Ie 
heaven.  The  Bible  is  valuable  to  us  only  in  so  far  as  it  influences  us.  To  influence 
us  it  must  be  known  and  remembered.  The  Law  graven  on  stone,  locked  in  the  ark, 
and  hidden  behiiid  the  thick  curtains  of  the  sanctuary,  could  do  the  people  of  Israel 
little  good.  It  needed  to  be  written  on  the  fleshy  tables  of  the  heart.  This  involves: 
1.  An  intelligent  understanding  of  Divine  truth,  so  that  it  comes  to  us,  not  as  a  mere 
string  of  words,  but  as  clear  ideas.  2.  A  good  memory  of  it.  3.  A  love  of  it,  so  that  it 
is  treasured  thoughtfully,  and  becomes  part  of  our  very  being,  moulding  our  character, 
colouring  our  thoughts  and  afifections,  and  directing  our  conduct.  It  is  not  difficult  to 
see  that  such  a  treasury  of  such  treasure  will  secure  &vour  with  God  and  ultimately 
also  favour  with  men. 

Vers.  5,  6. — Divine  guidance.  I.  Thb  need  of  Divine  ouidanoi!.  Several  con- 
siderations force  this  upon  us ;  e.g. :  1.  Hie  complexity  of  life.  The  longer  we  live, 
the  more  do  we  feel  the  profound  mystery  that  touches  us  on  every  side.  Innumerable 
avenues  open  out  to  us.  Innumerable  claims  are  made  upon  us.  Conflicting  duties 
perplex  us.  We  feel  as  autumn  leaves  before  the  driving  winds.  We  are  helpless 
to  choose  and  follow  the  right.  2.  Our  ignorance  of  the  future.  Like  Columbus,  we 
set  our  sails  to  cross  unknown  seas.  We  know  not  what  a  day  will  bring  forth,  yet  we 
must  boldly  face  the  next  day,  and  plan  for  many  a  day  in  advance.  Our  whole  life 
must  be  arranged  with  respect  to  the  future.  We  live  in  the  future.  Yet  the  future 
is  hidden  from  us.  How  needful,  then,  to  be  guided  on  to  that  unknown  land  by 
One  who  sees  the  end  from  the  beginning!  3.  The  claims  of  duty.  We  need  a  guide 
if  we  have  only  our  own  interests  to  consider.  Much  more  is  this  the  case  when  we 
are  called  to  serve  God.  We  are  not  free  to  choose  our  own  path,  even  if  we  have 
light  to  do  so.  The  servant  must  learn  the  will  of  his  master  before  he  can  know  what 
he  is  to  do.  Our  prayer  should  be  not  so  much  that  God  should  guide  us  safely,  ai 
that  he  should  show  us  his  way. 

II.  The  condition  of  Divine  ouidancb.  This  is  trust.  The  lower  animals  are 
guided  by  God  through  unconscious  instincts.  But  having  endowed  us  with  a  higher 
nature,  God  has  given  to  us  the  dangerous  privilege  of  a  larger  liberty,  and.the  serious 
responsibility  of  voluntarily  choosing  or  rejecting  his  guidance.  But  then  he  vouch- 
safes this  great  help  on  the  simplest  of  all  conditions.  We  have  not  to  deserve  it,  to 
attain  to  it  by  any  skill  or  labour,  but  simply  to  trust  with  the  most  childlike  faith. 
Consider  what  this  involves.  1.  Self-surrender.  "  Lean  not  to  thine  own  understand- 
ing." We  sometimes  pray  for  God's  guidance  insincerely.  We  want  him  to  guide  us 
into  our  own  way.  But  his  guidance  is  useless  when  we  should  go  the  same  way  with- 
out it.  It  is  only  when  human  wisdom  diverges  from  Divine  wisdom  that  we  are  called 
expressly  to  follow  the  latter ;  we  do  so  unconsciously  under  easier  circumstances.  This 
does  not  mean,  however,  that  we  are  to  stultify  our  intellect ;  we  must  rather  seek 
God's  Spirit  to  enlighten  it— not  lean  to  our  understanding,  but  to  God  for  the 
strengthening  of  that  understanding.  2.  Whole-hearted  faith.  "  Trust  in  God  with 
all  thine  heart."  It  is  useless  to  have  certain  faint  opinions  about  the  wisdom  of  God. 
Every  thought,  affection,  and  desire  must  be  given  over  to  his  direction ;  at  least,  we 
must  honestly  aim  at  doing  this.  The  more  completely  we  trust  the  more  surely  will 
God  guide  us.  3.  Active  faith.  God  guides,  but  we  must  follow  his  directions.  The 
traveller  is  not  carried  up  the  mountain  by  his  guide;  he  follows  of  his  own  will.  It 
is  vain  for  us  to  pray  for  a  Divine  leading  unless  we  consent  to  follow  the  directions 

indicated  to  us.  .,    m,        i  •  n 

III  Thb  method  of  Divine  guidance.  1.  Through  our  oton  conscience.  Uon- 
Bcience  is  our  natural  guide.  It  is  not,  therefore,  the  less  Divin»t  *Jr  God  is  the 
Author  of  our  nature.  Conscience,  clear  and  healthy,  is  the  voice  of  God  m  the  soul. 
But  conscience  is  liable  to  corruption  with  the  rest  of  our  nature.  Hence  the  need  ol 
prayer  for  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  purify,  enlighten,  and  strengthen  it.  2. 
htrough  inspired  teaching.  Qoi  guides  one  man  through  his  message  to  another. 
Prophets  and  apostles  are  messengers  of  Divine  guidance.  We  need  such  direction 
•utside  our  own  consciences,  especially  in  our  present  imperfect  condition,  or  we  may 


70  THE  PBOVBEBS.  [oh.  in.  1—35. 

mistake  the  echoes  of  old  prejudices  and  the  promptings  of  self-interest  for  voices  of 
God.  God's  word  in  the  Bible  is  "a  lamp  to  our  feet."  3.  Through,  the  disposition  oj 
events.  God  guides  us  in  his  overruling  providence,  now  closing  dangerous  ways,  now 
opening  up  new  paths. 

Vers.  9, 10. — Consecrated  property.  I.  Wb  oak  honoub  God  with  oub  peopertt. 
It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  because  religion  is  a  wholly  spiritual  power  it  has  no 
bearing  on  material  things.  Our  religion  is  a  mockery  unless  it  affects  the  way  in 
which  we  spend  our  money,  as  well  as  all  other  concerns  of  life.  Property  can  be  con- 
secrated to  God  by  being  spent  in  conscious  obedience  to  his  will  and  by  being  used  for 
the  promotion  of  his  glory,  as  in  the  maintenance  of  worship,  the  extension  of  missions, 
the  relief  of  the  poor,  the  sick,  the  widow  and  orphan. 

II.  God  has  claims  upon  oub  propebtt.  1.  It  originally  came  from  him.  He 
created  the  materials  and  powers  of  nature.  He  gave  to  us  our  faculties.  We  sow  the 
seed,  but  God  gives  the  increase.  2.  It  is  only  lent  to  us  for  a  season.  Till  recently  it 
was  not  ours ;  soon  we  must  leave  it.  While  we  have  it,  it  is  a  talent  to  be  used  in  our 
great  Master's  service,  and  for  which  we  shall  have  to  give  an  account.  Rich  men  will 
be  called  to  a  Divine  audit,  where  all  their  wealth  will  be  reckoned  and  their  method 
of  spending  it  apprised.  But  so  also  will  the  poor ;  for  we  are  all  answerable  for  the 
use  we  make  of  our  possessions,  whether  they  be  much  or  little.  The  one  talent  must 
be  accounted  for  as  well  as  the  five  talents. 

III.  Our  whole  property  should  be  consecbated  to  God.  It  was  all  given  to 
us  by  God.  We  shall  have  to  give  account  of  the  use  we  make  of  all  of  it — of  the 
substance  or  capital  and  of  the  increase  or  yearly  income.  We  cannot  compound  for 
the  abuse  of  the  larger  part  of  our  goods  by  sacrificing  to  God  a  small  proportion  of 
them.  If  we  give  a  tithe  of  our  possessions  to  God,  we  do  not  thereby  receive  a  dis- 
pensation to  give  the  rest  to  Mammon.  Is  the  mendicant  friar,  then,  the  typical 
Christian  ?  No.  An  enlightened  Christianity  will  teachus  how  to  consecrate  our  posses- 
sions to  God,  while  retaining  the  control  of  them.     We  are  to  be  stewards,  not  beggars. 

IV.  The  best  op  oub  property  should  be  more  directly  offered  to  th« 
SERVICE  of  God.  While  all  we  have  should  be  held  sacred  to  God,  some  shoidd  be 
spent  on  objects  that  plainly  involve  self- sacrifice,  and  that  manifestly  concern  the 
kingdom  of  heaven.  We  must  not  make  the  lofty  thought  of  the  consecration  of  all 
our  property  an  excuse  for  low  selfishness  in  spending  the  whole  on  ourselves.  God 
expects  the  best.  He  should  have  the  firstfruits;  his  claims  should  be  recognized 
before  all  others.  People  often  give  to  religious  objects  what  they  think  they  can  spare 
after  satisfying  all  other  calls.  They  should  give  to  these  first,  and  see  afterwards  what 
is  spared  for  more  selfish  things. 

V.  It  is  well  to  dispose  of  oub  property  on  a  certain  method.  People  who 
give  to  religious  and  philanthropic  objects  on  a  system  of  setting  apart  a  certain  portion 
of  their  income  for  such  purposes,  find  that  they  can  thus  give  most  readily  and  justly. 
It  is  for  each  to  settle  in  his  own  conscience  and  before  God  according  to  what  propor- 
tion he  should  give.  One  may  find  a  tithe  too  much,  considering  his  duty  to  his  family, 
etc.  Another  may  find  it  far  too  little,  considering  his  ease  and  affluence  and  the  needi 
of  the  world. 

VI.  This  consecration  of  property  to  God  brtngs  a  blessino  on  the  ownkb. 
If  it  is  not  always  rewarded  with  temporal  riches,  it  is  repaid  in  better  treasures — 
pleasures  of  sympathy  and  benevolence  and  the  smile  of  God. 

Vers.  11,  12. — Chastening.  I.  God  chastens  his  children  with  buffering.  All 
Buffering  is  not  chastening.  Some  trouble  is  the  pruning  of  branches  that  already  bear 
fruit,  in  order  that  they  may  biiug  forth  more  fruit  (John  xv.  2).  But  when  it  meets 
us  in  our  sins  and  failings,  it  is  to  he  regarded  as  a  Divine  method  of  correction.  It  is 
not  then  the  vengeance  of  a  God  simply  concerned  with  his  own  outraged  anger ;  before 
this  we  should  tremble  with  alarm.  It  is  not  the  chance  product  of  the  unconscioui 
working  of  brute  forces ;  such  a  materialistic  explanation  of  suffering  might  well  indue* 
blank  despair.  The  teaching  of  revelation  is  that  suffering  comes  with°a  purpoie,  and 
that  the  purpose  is  our  own  good;  it  is  a  rod  to  chasten  us  for  our  faults,  that  we  may 
be  led  to  forsake  them,  and  a  pruning-knife  to  fit  us  for  larger  fruitfulness. 


OH.  ml— 35.]  THE  PR0VEIIB3,  W 

n.  The  motive  with  which  God  chastens  his  children  is  fatherly  iovb. 
1.  Qod  must  he  angry  with  us  for  our  sin.  Eis  anger,  however,  is  not  the  fruit  of 
malignant  hatred,  but  the  expression  of  grieved  love.  For  love  can  be  angry,  naj, 
sometimes  must  be,  if  it  is  pure  and  strong.  The  weak  kindliness  which  is  a  stranger 
to  indignation  at  wrong-doing  is  based  on  no  deep  affection.  2.  ff  God  ctmsttnt  in  love, 
it  is  for  our  own  good.  Weak  love  seeks  the  present  pleasure  of  its  objects ;  strong 
love  aims  at  the  highest  welfare,  even  though  this  involve  misunderstandings  and 
temporary  estrangement.  3.  Ood^s  paternal  relation  with  us  is  the  ground  of  hii 
chastening  in  love.  We  do  not  feel  called  upon  to  correct  in  strange  children  the 
faults  for  which  we  chastise  our  own  family.  The  very  love  we  bear  to  our  children 
rouses  indignation  at  conduct  which  we  should  scarfcely  heed  in  others.  True  love  is 
not  blind  to  the  faults  of  those  who  are  loved,  it  is  rather  rendered  keen-sighted  by 
sorrowful  interest.  Hence  we  may  take  the  chastening  as  a  proof  of  the  love  and 
Fatherhood  of  God.  If  we  were  not  children,  God  would  not  thus  put  us  to  pain. 
Instead  of  regarding  trouble  as  a  proof  that  God  has  deserted  us,  we  should  see  in  it 
a  sign  that  God  is  owning  us  and  concerning  himself  with  our  welfare.  The  worst 
curse  a  man  can  receive  is  to  be  deserted  by  God  and  left  unchecked  in  pursuit  of  folly 
and  sin  (Heb.  xii.  8). 

III.   To  BIGHTLT   BEOEIVE    DlVINE  OHASTBNINa  WE   UUST  NXITmiB  DESFIBI   IT  HOB 

OBOw  WBABT  OF  IT.  The  good  it  will  do  to  us  depends  on  the  reception  we  give  it. 
Like  other  graces,  the  grace  of  correction  may  be  received  in  vain,  may  be  abused  to 
our  own  hurt.  We  must  not  be  satisfied,  therefore,  with  the  mere  fact  that  we  are 
being  chastened.  Two  evils  must  be  avoided.  1.  Despising  chastening.  Cynical 
indifference  and  stoical  hardness  will  render  the  chastening  inefficacious.  We  must 
open  our  hearts  to  receive  it.  It  blesses  the  broken  heart.  The  very  sorrow  it  induces 
is  of  the  essence  of  its  healing  grace.  2.  Growing  weary  of  chastening.  This  is  the 
opposite  failing.  We  may  despair,  complain,  show  impatience,  and  rebel.  Then  the. 
chastening  loses  its  utility.  The  right  reception  is  evidently  to  feel  its  grievousness, 
but  to  submit  humbly  and  to  seek  to  learn  its  bitter  but  wholesome  lessons.  The  two 
all-essential  thoughts,  that  suffering  is  for  our  own  good,  and  that  it  is  sent  in  love 
and  is  a  proof  of  God's  fatherly  care  for  our  welfare,  should  help  us  neither  to  be 
indifferent  to  it  nor  to  rel>el  against  it,  but  thus  humbly  to  accept  it. 

Vers.  13 — 20. — "More  precious  than  ruhies."  We  must  bear  in  mind  that  the 
wisdom  here  commended  to  us  is  not  mere  knowledge,  science,  philosophy.  It  has 
two  important  characteristics.  First,  it  is  religious ;  it  is  based  on  the  fear  of  God. 
Second,  it  is  practical;  it  assumes  the  direction  of  human  conduct.  It  is  the  know- 
ledge of  Divine  truth,  and  the  application  of  it  to  life.  Why  is  this  to  be  accounted 
most  precious  ? 

I.  Wisdom  is  talttable  on  accottnt  of  its  owh  inherent  qualities.  (Vers. 
13 — 15.)  Paper  money,  is  worthless  unless  it  can  be  exchanged  for  something  else ; 
but  gold  coins  have  a  value  of  their  own.  If  they  are  not  used  in  the  purchase  of 
other  things,  the  precious  metal  is  valuable,  and  can  be  fashioned  into  objects  of  use 
and  beauty.  Wisdom  is  like  solid  specie.  If  she  brings  nothing  else,  she  is  a  treasure  in 
herself  While  men  are  asking  what  advantages  will  religion  give  them,  they  should 
see  that  she  is  "  the  pearl  of  great  price,"  for  which  all  other  good  things  may  be  sold, 
and  yet  the  profit  remain  heavily  on  the  side  of  him  who  purchases  her.  This  is  an 
inward  treasure,  a  possession  of  the  soul.  It  has  many  advantages  over  material 
treasures.  1.  It  is  exalted  and  elevating.  Its  character  is  pure,  and  it  raises  thoss 
who  possess  it.  There  are  earthly  treasures  that  defile  by  contact  with  them,  and 
others  that  materialize — make  a  man  hard,  worldly,  ignoble.  2.  It  is  satisfying.  A 
man  cannot  live  on  gold,  but  on  bread  alone.  There  are  desires  of  the  soul  that  money 
and  food  do  not  quiet.  Books,  pictures,  music,  all  works  of  art,  all  triumphs  of  civiliza- 
tion, leave  a  void  unfilled.  It  ia  the  mission  of  the  thoughts  of  God  in  the  soul  to  fill 
this  void.  3.  It  is  never  wearying.  Many  things  that  never  satisfy  soon  satiate.  We 
are  not  full,  yet  we  turn  away  with  disgust,  having  had  enough  of  them.  The  sea  is 
beautiful,  but  the  sailor  grows  tired  of  the  endless  monotony  of  waves.  Divine  wisdom 
never  tires  us.  It  is  infinite,  endlessly  varied,  eternally  fresh.  It  is  true  that  we  may 
become  wearied  of  religious  occupations,  religious  books,  etc.    But  then  we  bava  tha 


78  THE  PROVERBS.  [oh.  m.  1— 38. 

imperfections  of  the  human  embodiment  of  wisdom  to  annoy  us.  4  It  is  secure.  No 
thief  can  steal  it.  No  moth  nor  rust  can  consume  it.  The  thief  may  take  a  man'i 
jewels,  but  never  his  inner  treasure.  He  may  be  stripped  of  property,  home,  choicest 
possessioas,  and  left  to  bare  beggary;  yet  if  he  liave  precious  thoughts  of  God  in  his 
heart,  no  thief  can  touch  them.     They  are  a  safe,  an  eternal  possession. 

II.  Wisdom  is  valuable  bbcausb  it  ministers  to  cub  eabthlt  wblfabr.  (Vers. 
16 — 18.)  The  temporal  advantages  of  religion  are  here  described  with  that  prominence 
and  positiveness  which  are  characteristic  of  the  Old  Testament,  and  of  ihe  Book  of 
Proverbs  in  particular.  We  have  learnt  to  see  more  limitations  upon  these  things,  and, 
at  the  same  time,  we  have  had  revealed  to  us  much  larger  spiritual  and  eternal  beati- 
tudes than  those  of  the  Jewish  faith.  But  we  may  make  the  mistake  of  ignoring  th« 
truth  contained  in  the  old  view.  There  are  earthly  advantages  in  religion.  It  has 
promises  for  this  life  as  well  as  for  that  to  come.  1.  Length  of  days.  Many  good 
people  die  young ;  many  bad  men  grow  hoary  in  sin.  If  it  were  not  so,  we  should 
lose  the  discipline  that  comes  by  our  having  to  walk  by  faith.  But  on  the  whole, 
wisdom  tends  to  length  of  days  by  preserving  the  constitution  sound  and  healthy.  A 
wise  way  of  living  falls  in  with  the  laws  of  health.  Reckless  folly  saps  the  energies  of 
life,  induces  disi  ase,  decrepitude,  premature  old  age  and  dea'h.  2.  Ways  of  pleasant- 
ness and  peace.  The  road  is  pleasant  as  well  as  the  end.  Religion  may  bring  a  cross, 
but  she  also  brings  grace  for  bearing  it.  All  her  rewards  are  not  reserved  for  the 
future.  There  is  a  peace  of  God  that  passeth  all  understanding,  which  the  world  can 
neither  give  nor  take  away,  and  which  will  make  the  wilderness  of  the  saddest  life 
blossom  like  the  rose.  3.  A  tree  of  life.  Length  of  days  is  a  poor  blessing  unless  the 
life  preserved  is  worth  living.  What  boon  would  it  be  to  an  exile  in  Siberia,  a  convict 
on  Dartmoor,  a  paralytic  in  an  infirmary?  Long  existence  without  a  source  of  worthy 
life  is  the  curse  of  the  Wandering  Jew,  not  the  blessing  of  eternal  life.  Wisdom — 
i.e.  Divine  truth,  religion — supplies  fruits  for  holy  sustenance  and  leaves  for  the  healing 
of  the  nations.     To  know  God  is  eternal  life  (John  xvii.  3). 

III.  Wisdom  is  valuable  because  it  is  a  link  of  connection  between  man 
AND  God.  (Vers.  19,  20.)  Our  heart  is  restless  till  it  finds  rest  in  God.  All  our 
highest  life,  all  our  deepest  peace,  all  our  truest  thought,  all  our  noblest  effort,  all  our 
purest  joy,  depend  on  our  union  in  and  with  God.  But  wisdom  is  an  essential  Divine 
attribute.  By  it  God  first  created  the  earth  and  the  heavens  (ver,  13).  By  it  he  now 
controls  all  things  (ver.  20).  The  wisdom  of  God  is  reflected  in  nature.  All  our  know- 
ledge is  just  the  reflection  of  this  wisdom;  it  is  thinking  into  the  thoughts  of  God; 
thus  it  is  a  communion  with  him.  Spiritual  knowledge  brings  us  nearest  to  God,  who 
is  Spirit.  Christ  as  the  incarnate  "  Word,"  by  whom  all  things  were  made,  and  tha 
Wisdom  of  God,  is  our  Mediator,  and  unites  us  to  God. 

Vers.  27,  28.— DiZatormess  in  the  payment  of  just  debts.  I.  This  dilatobiness  d 
moballt  culpable,  and  most  injubious  to  sociktt.  Through  thoughtlessness  in 
some  cases,  through  deliberate  meanness  in  others,  many  people  postpone  the  payment 
of  their  just  debts  as  long  as  possible,  though  they  have  the  money  by  them,  and  are 
perhaps  turning  it  to  account  for  their  own  advantage.  Such  needless  delay  of  justice 
should  be  regardeii  as  a  moral  offence.  A  sad  laxity  prevails  in  this  matter.  It  is  said 
that  preachers  direct  their  admonitions  respecting  the  business  habits  of  the  day  too 
much  to  one  side  of  the  case.  The  tradesman  is  accused  of  greed,  dishonesty,  deceit, 
while  little  is  said  of  the  conduct  of  the  customer.  But  here  is  an  instance  where  the 
failing,  nay,  the  sin,  lies  with  the  buyer.  Most  of  us  little  know  how  much  the  trading 
classes  suffer  from  delay  and  difficulty  in  calling  in  the  money  that  is  owing  to  them ; 
how  often  they  pinch  themselves  and  suifer  in  silence  for  fear  of  losing  a  customer  by 
giving  offence  in  too  much  pressing  for  payment,  knowing  that  the  common  selfish- 
ness of  others  will  readily  lead  them  to  court  the  patronage  of  the  offended  client.  This 
delay  is  grossly  unjust  to  more  conscientious  people  who  pay  promptly,  and  yet  are 
made  to  suffer  from  the  high  prices  necessitated  by  the  bad  debts  and  postponed  pay- 
ments of  others.  It  is  also  a  direct  temptation  to  those  shifty  practices  which  all  of  us 
deprecate  when  we  meet  with  them  in  trade.  Peeling  that  he  cannot  recoup  himself 
readily  in  the  regular  way,  the  tradesman  is  tempted  to  try  some  less  straightforward 
method  for  making  his  business,  thus  heavily  handicapped,  to  some  extent  profitable. 


OH.  m.  1—35.]  THE  PBOYBBBa.  W 

A  new  moral  tone  is  requisite  in  this  matter.  People  should  see  that  to  delay  to  ezeouta 
Justice  is  to  commit  injustice.  Time  is  as  valuable  as  coins.  He  who  robs  a  man  of 
time  is  a  thief,  and  should  wear  the  brand  of  a  thief. 

II.  The  bemedy  for  this  dilatoriness  hubt  be  FoxmD  in  a  fuller  RECoom- 
1I0N  of  the  claims  of  huuan  BROTHBaHOOD.  It  Is  not  enough  to  prove  the  abstraot 
justice  of  prompt  payment.  The  selfishness  which  withholds  it  will  find  soms 
casuistic  excuse  for  further  delay.  This  selfishness,  which  is  at  the  root  of  the  evil, 
must  be  overcome.  The  spirit  of  Cain  is  dishonest  as  well  as  murderous.  We  are  too 
ready  to  treat  those  with  whom  we  have  merely  business  dealings  according  to  an 
entirely  difierent  code  from  that  which  controls  our  conduct  with  otir  friends.  Com- 
mercial rules  are  so  much  more  lax  than  social  laws.  The  mere  business  relatioa  is 
too  often  robbed  of  all  human  consideration,  treated  from  a  purely  selfish  standpoint, 
almost  on  a  principle  of  enmity,  as  though  it  belonged  to  a  state  of  war.  Does  a  man 
cease  to  be  our  brother  because  we  buy  and  sell  with  him  ?  When  he  was  a  stranger, 
we  felt  some  tie  of  common  humanity  with  him.  After  we  have  entered  into  relations 
of  mutual  convenience,  is  the  tie  broken,  and  does  he  become  as  a  heathen  and  a 
publican  ?  We  must  remember  that  it  is  our  "  neighbour  "  who  claims  just  payment ; 
and  are  we  not  required  to  love  our  neighbour  as  ourselves?  The  golden  rule  of  Christ, 
that  we  must  do  to  others  as  we  would  that  they  should  do  to  us,  must  be  applied  to 
business,  or  we  have  no  right  to  profess  ourselves  to  be  Christians. 


HOMILIES  BY  VABIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 10. — Precepts  and  promises  of  wisdom.  I.  The  connection  of  vsaitet 
AND  PROMISE.  1.  Precept  needs  confirmation.  We  cannot  but  ask — 'Why  should  we 
pursue  this  or  that  line  of  conduct  in  preference  to  another  ?  Why  should  men  l« 
Qod-fearing,  honest,  chaste  ?  We  are  rational  creatures,  not  "  dumb  driven  cattle,"  to 
be  forced  along  a  given  road.  We  must  have  reasons ;  and  it  is  to  reason  in  us  that 
the  Divine  rea.son  ever  makes  appeal.  2.  The  confirmation  is  found  in  experience.  Tliit 
is  the  source  of  our  knowledge ;  to  it  the  true  teacher  must  constantly  refer  for  tht 
verification  of  his  principles,  the  corroboration  of  his  precepts.  The  tone  assumed  by 
the  teacher  is  indeed  that  of  authority,  but  real  authority  always  rests  upon  experience. 
Experience,  in  short,  is  the  discovery  and  ascertainment  of  law  in  life.  Precepts  are  its 
formulation.  3.  The  experience  of  the  past  enables  the  prediction  of  the  future.  Just 
as  we  know  the  science  of  the  astronomer,  e.g.,  to  be  sound,  because  we  find  that  he  can 
predict  with  accuracy  coming  events,  appearances  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  eclipses,  etc., 
so  do  we  recognize  the  soundness  of  moral  teaching  by  its  power  to  forecast  the  future 
fates  of  men.  Precepts  are  the  deductions  from  the  actual ;  promises  the  forecasts  of 
that  which,  because  it  has  been  constant  in  the  past,  may  be  expected  in  the  future. 
In  science,  in  morality,  in  religion,  we  build  on  the  permanence  of  law ;  in  other  words, 
on  the  constancy  of  the  eternal  God. 

II.  Particular  examples  of  this  connection.  1.  Obedience  ensures  earthly  happi- 
ness. (Vers.  1,  2.)  The  connection  is  first  stated  generally.  "  Extension  of  days,"  or 
long  life,  is  the  one  aspect  of  this  happiness;  inward  peace  of  heart,  denied  to  the  god- 
less, the  other  (Isa.  xlviii.  22 ;  Ivii.  21).  Prolongation  of  days,  life  in  the  good  land, 
dwelling  in  the  house  of  the  Lord,  are  the  peculiar  Old  Testament  blessings  (Deut.  iv. 
40 ;  V.  33  ;  vi.  2 ;  xi.  9  j  xxii.  7 ;  xxx.  16  ;  Ps.  xv.  1 ;  xxiii.  6 ;  xxvii.  4).  (1)  'I'lie 
desire  for  long  life  is  natural,  and  religion  recognizes  it.  (2)  Without  inward  satisfao- 
tion,  long  life  is  no  blessing.  (3)  While  the  Old  Testament  promises  formally  cover 
the  finite  life  only,  they  do  not  exclude  the  infinite.  In  Grod  and  faith  in  him  the 
i  I]  finite  is  germinally  contained.  2.  Love  and  good  faith  ensure  favour  with  Ood,  good 
will  with  men.  "  Mercy,"  or  "  love  ;"  the  word  denotes  the  recognition  of  kinship, 
fellowship  in  men,  and  the  duty  of  kindness  therein  implied.  "Truth,"  in  the  sense 
in  which  we  speak  of  a  true  man ;  sincerity  and  rectitude,  the  striving  to  make  the 
seeming  and  the  being  coriespond  to  one  another ;  the  absence  of  hypocrisy.  Rt.  Paul 
gives  the  ideas,  "dealing  truly  in  love"  (Eph.  iv.  15).  Let  these  virtues  bo  bound 
about  the  neck,  like  precious  objects,  for  tlie  sake  of  security;  let  these  commands  be 
engraven  in  the  only  indelible  way— upon  the  heart.    Let  the  mind  be  fixed  and 


T4  THE  PEOVBBBB.  [oh.  in.  1—86. 

formed,  and  the  result  will  be  favour  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  a  "  good  opinion  "  in  th« 
minds  of  men.    The  two  relations  form  a  correlation.    There  is  no  true  standing  with 
God  which  does  not  reflect  itself  in  the  good  opinion  of  good  men ;  no  worthy  opinion 
of  a  man  which  does  not  furnish  an  index  to  God's  view  of  him.     Both  were  united 
in  the  case  of  the  youthful  Jesus.    3.  Trust  in  Ood  ensures  practical  direction.    (Vers. 
6,  6.)    (1)  This  trust  must  be  whole-hearted.    An  exception  to  it  destroys  it,  as  one 
faulty  link  will  cause  the  chain  to  break,  one  rotten  plank  the  ship  to  leak,  etc.    (2) 
The  fallacy  of  confidence  is  when  we  separate  the  particular  in  our  intelligence  from  the 
universal.   This  is  intellectual  egoism.    There  is  a  dualism  in  consciousness — ^the  private 
Belf-seeking  intelligence,  and  the  Divine  mind  in  us.    (3)  Trust  is  dbandonntent  to  the 
Divine  mind,  to  the  universal  intelligence  which  carries  us  out  of  self.    (4)  Such  trust 
implies  the  "  taking  cognizance  "  of  God  in  all  we  do.    Of  bad,  unjust  men,  like  Eli's 
«ons,  it  is  said  that  they  take  no  cognizance  of  Jehovah  (1  Sam.  ii.  12).    To  ask  of 
every  action  not — Is  this  what  the  generality  of  men  would  do  in  my  position  ?  but— 
Is  it  what  God  would  have  me  to  do?    Not — Is  it  "natural"?  but—la  it  Divine f 
Such  a  habit  ensures  practicpl  direction.    All  our  igarements  and  stumblings  arise  from 
following  the  isolated  intelligence,  which  is  a  true  guide  only  for  immediate  Mnsuous 
relations,  cannot  light  us  for  life's  complex  whole.    Hence  the  way  in  which  selfish  and 
cunning  people  constantly  outwit  themselves,  while  the  man  who  is  set  down  by  them 
as  a  fool  for  neglecting  his  owq  interests  comes  out  safely  in  the  long  run.    4.  Simpt* 
piety  secure)  health.    (Vers.  7,  8.)    (1)  Conceit  is  opposed  to  piety.    This  we  have 
already  seen.    For  what  is  conceit  but  the  lifting  of  the  merely  individual  into  a  false 
generality  ?    In  its  extreme,  the  worship  of  self  is  a  little  god.    (2)  Simple  piety  has 
a  positive  and  a  negative  pole:  positive,  reverence  for  God;  negative,  aversion  from 
evil.    The  pious  man  afiirms  and  denies,  both  with  all  his  might.    His  life  is  emphatic, 
includes  an  everlasting  "  Yes "  and  an  everlasting  "  No "  1    (3)  Simple  piety  is  the 
source  of  health,    (a)  Physical.    It  tends  to  promote  right  physical  habits.    It  cer- 
tainly reacts  against  the  worst  disorders,  viz.  the  nervous,    (b)  Spiritval.    It  is  in 
the  mind  what  the  sound  nervous  organization  is  in  the  body.    The  mind  thus  cen- 
trally right  digests,  enjoys,  assimilates,  the  rich  food  which  nature,  books,  and  men 
afford.    5.  Consecration  of  property  ensures  wealth.    (Vers.  9,  10.)    (1)  Ancient  custom 
commanded  this.  The  consecration  of  the  firstling  of  firstfruits  was  not  confined  to  Israel. 
It  was  an  ancient  custom  of  the  world  generally.    The  part  .represents  the  whole,  fat 
all  is  God's.    There  seems  to  be  no  objection  to  the  private  practice  of  the  custom  by 
Christians  still.    In  any  case,  let  it  be  recognized  that  property,  in  the  legal  sense,  if 
but  an  expression  of  convenience ;  that  really  our  temporary  possessions,  along  with 
ourselves,  are  the  property  of  God.    If  this  be  not  recognized,  we  merely  consume  them, 
or  hoard  them,  do  not  use  them.    (2)  Plenty  falls  to  the  lot  of  the  giver.    The  excep- 
tions to  the  rule  are  apparent,  and  perhaps  language  does  not  suffice  for  their  statement 
and  elucidation.    The  rule  is  comprehensively  true,  and  a  comprehensive  view  is  necessary 
for  its  application.    Eich  and  poor  are  subjective  terms.    There  is  a  rich  poverty  and 
a  miserable  affluence.    The  promise  is  only  truly  fulfilled  in  the  man  who  feelt  he  has 
abundance,  and  enjoys  it. — J. 

Vers.  11, 12. — Patience  in  affliction.  Well  does  this  lesson  contrast  with  the  pre- 
ceding picture  of  prosperity  and  opulence. 

I.  The  ebligious  view  of  suFFEBiNa,  1.  It  is  not  a  dark  doom,  a  cruel  fate,  a 
blind  necessity  of  things.  Such  were  the  ideas  of  the  heathen.  2.  Its  cause  may  t» 
knovm.  This  is  ever  a  great  solace — to  be  persuaded  that  our  troubles  lie  in  the  reason 
of  things,  that  nothing  is  chance  or  caprice.  3.  That  cause  is  in  the  Divine  mind 
and  will.  The  power  of  God  is  manifested  in  our  suffering;  we  are  but  as  the  clay  on 
the  potter's  wheel..  Still  more  the  love  of  God  is  manifested  in  our  sufi'ering.  There 
is  always  some  mitigation  accompanying  it.  "  It  might  have  been  worse  "  may  be  said 
of  every  pain.  It  serves  as  the  foil  to  set  off  some  greater  good.  "  The  ring  may  be 
lost,  but  the  finger  remains,"  as  the  Spanish  proverb  says.  4.  The  ohjeot  or  final  cause 
tif  suffering.  Purification  from  inward  evil ;  correction  of  faults.  The  mind  grows  of 
Itself;  the  schoolmaster  can  do  little  more  than  point  out  and  correct  faults.  So  with 
life's  education  from  the  religious  point  of  view.  And  the  most  fertile  minds  need  most 
tite  discipline  of  auffering.    The  pruning-knife  is  not  applied  to  the  puny  plant;  and 


CH.  m.  1— >>5.]  THE  PROVERBS.  76 


languid  minds  are  the  least  touched  by  afBiotion.  In  these  adjustments,  love  is  still 
revealed.  5.  Suffering  must  he  viewed  under  the  analogy  of  the  parental  and  filial 
relation.  Let  these  words  once  become  clear,  Father,  son,  in  their  application  to  God'i 
relation  to  us,  and  ours  to  him,  and  the  theory  of  suffering  is  mastered  (oomp.  Dent, 
viii.  5 ;  Ps.  oxviii.  18 ;  Lam.  iii.  31 — 33). 

_  IL  The  beligious  temper  under  suffering.  1.  Humility.  No  indignant  ques- 
tioning, scornful  recalcitration,  proud  efforts  of  stoical  fortitude.  These  will  but 
defeat  or  dday  the  end.  The  medicine  benefits  not  if  the  patient  sets  his  mind 
against  it  as  unneeded.  2.  Patient  endurance.  Perseverance  in  a  passive,  receptive, 
attitude  is  far  more  difficult  than  perseverance  in  activity.  We  haste  to  snatch  at 
good.  But  God  is  never  in  haste.  His  processes  are  slow.  Apd  to  receive  their  benefit 
we  must  learn  the  wisdom  of  the  word  "  wait."  While  we  are  thus  waiting,  things 
are  not  at  a  standstill  j  God  is  working,  producing  a  spiritual  shape  out  of  the  passive 
materiaL 

"  Maker,  remake,  complete, 
I  trust  what  thou  ehalt  do  I " 

(B.  Browning's  noble  poem, '  Babbi  Ben  Ezra.*) 

J. 

Vers.  13 — 18. — Wisdom  the  hett  investment.  L  Wisdom  comparable  with  the 
MOST  precious  THINGS.  Silver,  gold,  precious  stones,  everything  eagerly  coveted 
and  warmly  prized  by  the  senses  and  the  fancy,  may  illustrate  the  worth  of  the  pious 
intelligence.  Every  object  in  the  world  of  s.euse  has  its  analogy  in  the  world  of  spirit. 
The  worth  of  the  ruby  is  due  to  the  testhetic  light  in  the  mind  of  the  observer.  But 
wisdom  is  the  light  in  the  mind  itself. 

II.  Wisdom  incomparable  with  all  precious  things.  For  by  ona?og'^  only  can 
wn  put  wisdom  and  precious  miDcrals  side  by  side,  on  the  principle  that  mind  is 
reflected  in  matter.  But  on  the  opposite  principle,  that  mind  is  diverse  from  matter, 
rests  the  incomparahleness  of  wisdom.  Mere  matter  can  breed  nothing ;  spiritual  force 
only  is  generative.  When  we  talk  of  "money  breeding  money,"  we  use  a  figure  of 
speech.     It  is  the  mind  which  is  the  active  power. 

III.  Wisdom  mat  be  viewed  as  the  best  life  investment.  All  the  objects 
which  stimulate  human  activity  to  their  pursuit  are  derivable  from  this  capital.  Life 
in  health  and  ample  and  various  enjoyment,  riches  and  honour,  pleasure  and  inward 
peace ;  blessings  that  neither  money  nor  jewels  can  purchase,  are  the  fruit,  direct  or 
indirect,  of  the  cultivation  of  the  spiritual  field  of  enterprise,  the  whole-hearted  venture 
on  this  Divine  speculation,  so  to  say.  For  religion  is  a  speculation ;  faith  is  a  specu- 
lation in  the  sense  that  everything  cannot  be  made  certain;  some  elements  in  the 
calculation  must  ever  remain  undefined.  (For  further,  see  the  early  part  of  the  chapter ; 
and  on  ver.  17,  South's  '  Sermons,'  vol.  i.  ser.  1.)  The  summary  expression,  "  a  tree  of 
life,"  seems  to  symbolize  aU  that  is  beautiful,  all  that  is  desirable,  all  that  gives  joy 
and  intensity  to  living  (comp.  ch.  xiii.  12 ;  xv.  4). — J. 

Vers.  19,  20. —  Wisdom  the  principle  of  the  creation.  Perhaps  the  mention  of  the 
tree  of  life  has  reminded  the  writer  of  the  early  account  of  the  creation  in  Gen.  i.,  ii. 
He  thus  traces  the  visible  world  and  its  order  to  its  spiritual  root  in  the  mind  of  God. 
He  gives  a  brief  sketch  of  the  construction  of  the  cosmos,  according  to  the  ancient 
mode  of  thought.  Both  heaven  and  earth  are  fixed  and  made  fast ;  and  the  water- 
masses  divided  into  those  above  and  those  below  the  "  firmament ; "  the  consequence 
of  which  is  the  gushing  forth  of  the  clouds  in  rain.  The  modern  scientific  knowledge 
of  the  world  may  be  used  to  impart  a  rich  context  to  these  simple  conceptions  of  the 
early  imagination. 

I.  The  world  is  an  order.  The  Greeks  expressed  this  idea  in  the  beautiful 
word  "cosmos."  It  includes  symmetry,  beauty,  variety,  harmony,  adaptation  erf 
means  to  ends.  To  recognize  these  in  the  visible  world  is  an  intellectual  delight, 
and  a  motive  to  the  purest  reverence. 

II.  This  order  is  reducible  to  a  unity.  Formerly  we  looked  upon  the  world 
as  a  collection  of  independent  forces.    Science  showed  us  the  correlation,  interdepen- 


T«  THE  PROVERBS.  [ch-  m.  1— 3&. 

dence,  interaction  of  these  forces.     Now  she  has  risen  to  the  grand  conception  of  the 
unity  of  all  force;  and  thus  arrives  at  the  same  goal  with  religious  thought. 

III.  That  Unity  of  force  is  God.  It  is  often  forgotten  that  the  generalizations 
of  science  are  but  logical  distinctions — cause,  law,  force,  etc.  What  are  these  without 
Being,  Personality,  as  their  ground?  Empty  names.  Religion  fills  tliese  forms  with 
life,  and  where  the  scientific  man  speaks  of  law,  she  bows  before  the  living  Grod. 

IV.  Science  and  religion  abb  at  one.  When  we  talk  of  their  opposition,  we 
are  using  a  figure  of  speech.  What  they  represent,  these  names,  is  two  different 
directions  of  the  spiritual  activity  of  man.  What  needs  to  be  cured  is  narrowness  and 
partialism  on  the  side  of  both  scientific  and  religious  men.  For  there  is  no  real  cleft 
in  the  nature  of  our  knowledge.  All  genuine  knowledge  is  essentially  a  knowledge  of 
God,  of  the  Infinite  revealed  in  and  through  the  finite.— J. 

Vers.  21 — 26. — Confidence  and  the  sense  of  security  in  the  ways  of  Ood.  In  rich 
variation  the  religious  habit  of  mind  is  presented.  What  has  been  spoken  of  as  worthy 
to  be  hung  about  the  neck  as  precious  is  now  referred  to  as  to  be  kept  continually 
nefore  the  eyes  of  the  mind.  The  designation  of  wisdom  or  its  attributes  is  also 
varied,  viz.  " thoughtfulness  and  circumspection"  (ver.  21).  In  the  next,  former 
modes  of  statement  recur  (comp.  ver.  3,  sqq.^. 

I.  Religion  strengthens  and  steadies  the  perckption.  (Ver.  23.)  Perfect 
unconsciousness  of  danger,  as  in  the  child,  the  somnambulist,  etc.,  is  often  seen  to  be 
a  condition  of  security  in  walking  in  dangerous  places.  And  so  may  the  mind  be 
unconscious  of  danger  through  the  full  enfolding  in  God.  But  better  is  the  safe  Step 
which  is  given  by  the  perfect  knowledge -both  of  danger  and  the  resources  against  it 
This  is  found  in  religion.  We  know  what  is  against  us,  still  more  who  is  for  us,  and 
so  pass  on  with  head  erect  and  footstep  firm. 

II.  Heligion  controls  the  imagination.  (Vers.  24,  25.)  The  indefinable  in 
space  and  time  continually  besets  the  fancy,  and,  especially  in  certain  temperaments, 
fills  it  with  images  of  gloom  and  terror.  The  timid  heart  forebodes  some  sudden 
"  tempest  of  the  wicked,"  some  onrush  of  malice  and  violence  out  of  the  dark.  What 
a  chapter  of  "  imaginary  terrors  "  could  be  filled  from  the  experience  of  many  such  • 
one!  But  faith  fortifies  the  imagination,  preoccupying  it  With  the  thought  of  the 
almighty  Defender  (compare  the  beautiful  Ps.  xci.).— -J. 

Vers.  27,  28. — Promptitude  in  good  actions.  L  Negative  ukkindness.  (Vor.  27.) 
1.  It  consists  in  withholding  good  which  it  is  in  our  power  to  impart.  2,  It  is 
analogous  to  the  refusal  to  pay  a  Just  debt.  Kindness  is  the  "due  "  of  our  fellow-men. 
This  docs  not  imply  the  giving  to  every  beggar  or  borrower.  No  act  is  required  which, 
under  the  show  of  kindness,  involves  no  real  benefit  to  another  or  actually  involves  an 
injustice  to  ourself  or  another.  We  must  carry  these  precepts  to  the  light  of  the 
heart  and  of  the  discriminating  intelligence.  Speaking  generally,  suUenness,  unsociability, 
extreme  taciturnity,  self-absorption,  are  forms  of  the  sin. 

II.  Procrastination  condemned.  (Ver.  28.)  Remember:  1.  That  to  give  promptly 
is  to  give  twice ;  that  the  deferred  gift  loses  its  bloom ;  that  unnecessary  delay  is  a 
fraud  on  the  time  and  temper  of  others;  that  of  everything  we  intend  to  do  we  had 
best  m  ke  the  beginning  at  once,  which,  the  Roman  poet  says,  is  "  half  the  deed."  2. 
Tu  dciL-r  a  duty  till  to-morrow  may  be  to  defer  it  for  ever.  A  lost  opportunity  of  doing 
pood  is  a  sad  sting  In  the  memory.  These  negative  warnings  infer  the  positive  lesson 
cf  promptitude.  (1)  Now  is  the  acceptable  time  for  ourselves  and  our  own  salvation. 
(2)  It  may  also  be  the  acceptable  time  for  others'  salvation.  How  admirable  to  be 
oue  of  those  who,  amidst  whatever  pressure,  can  find  time  to  listen,  to  comfort,  to  help 
their  brethren,  to-day,  at  once ! — J. 

Vers  29 — 31. —  Odious  passions.  Let  them  be  held  up  in  the  clear  exposure  of 
Wisdom,  that  their  very  mention  may  snggest  their  hideoueness. 

I.  Malice  and  its  devices.  (Ver.  29.)  Literally,  "Forge  not  ill  against  thy 
neighbour."  1.  Malice,  like  love,  is  all-inventive.  But  as  the  devices  of  the  latter 
are  the  very  instruments  of  progress  and  good,  so  those  of  the  former  are  pernicious — 
burglar's  tools,  cunning  instruments  of  torture.     2.  Directed  against   unsuspectiog 


CH.  in.  1^35.]  THE  PBOVERBS.  11 

objects,  malice  is  truly  Satanic,  an  inspiration  from  hell.  We  have  to  beware  of  indul- 
gunce  in  curiosity  about  our  neighbours;  it  is  seldom  free  from  some  taint  of  malice  in 
thought,  which  may  pass  over  at  any  moment  into  action.  Something  in  our  neigh- 
bour's life  may  rebuke  us  and  rouse  the  latent  pasision.  How  near  are  the  angel  and 
the  devil  to  one  another  in  the  heart ! 

II.  Unprovoked  ctontentioubnbss.  (Ver.  30.)  In  other  words,  quarrdsomeness. 
The  vicious  habit  and  disposition  to  "pick  quarrels,"  to  invent  occasions  for  fault- 
finding, for  the  exercise  of  pugnacity,  and  so  on.  The  man  of  whom  it  is  said  that  if 
left  alone  in  the  world  he  would  fight  with  his  own  shadow.  Let  him  contend  with  his 
own  vices,  of  which  this  temper  is  a  symptom,  and  expend  his  pugnacity  upon  the 
evils  of  society.  There  are  men  before  whose  presence  all  the  sleeping  germs  of  wrath 
start  up  into  chaotic  life.     (Dould  they  but  see  themselves  as  others  see  them  I 

III.  Enty  of  the  wicked  obeat.  (Ver.  31.)  As  emulation  of  the  virtuous  great 
is  a  noble  passion,  this,  the  reverse  aide  of  it,  is  correspondingly  base.  Imitation,  again, 
is  a  powerful  passion,  the  source  of  "fashion."  The  pare  spirit  knows  nothing  of 
fashion  as  such;  and  immoral  fashion,  born  of  mere  imitation,  it  must  avoid  and 
lieuounce.  1.  Every  passion  has  its  obverse  and  its  reverse,  its  good  and  its  evil  side ; 
malice  may  be  turned  to  benevolence;  idle  quarrelsomeness  to  noble  pugnacity; 
immoral  envy  to  pure  emulation.  2.  Religion  intensifies,  pitrifies,  directs,  the  passions 
to  noble  ends. — J. 

Vers.  32 — 35. — ITte  diseemment  of  Jehovah.  This  is  a  leading  thought  of  the  Old 
Testament.  In  ordinary  life,  in  civilized  times,  the  character  of  individuals  is  concealed 
from  us  by  the  intermixtures  of  society  and  the  complexity  of  its  interests.  Even  in 
village  life  it  is  difficult  to  classify  people ;  but  God  distinguishes  in — 

I.  His  view  of  individual  crabaoteb.  1.  He  abominates  the  perverse,  the 
crooked,  twisted,  deceitful  character.  All  in  the  spirit  must  be  compared  with  that 
ideal  geometrical  rectitude  of  form,  so  to  speak,  which  is  the  truth  of  his  Being.  2. 
With  the  upright  he  "maintains  good  friendship"  (ver.  32),  or  "is  in  secret  alliance" 
(Job  xxix.  4 ;  Ps.  xxv.  14).  To  enjoy  the  friendship  of  discerning  minds,  what  greater 
privilege  can  there  be?  To  live  on  such  terms  with  God  is  the  privilege  of  the  true 
soul. 

II.  His  peovidential  administbation.  "His  curse  dwells  in  the  house  of  the 
wicked."  A  fatality  of  evil  cliogs  to-  him  and  his.  But  Jehovah  blesses  the  tent  of 
the  righteous.  He  scoffs  at  the  scoffer,  but  gives  to  the  lowly  grace  (comp.  Jas.  iv.  6 ; 
1  Pet.  V.  5).  The  wise  under  this  administration  inherit  glory,  while  ignominy  carries 
away  the  fools.  1.  These  are,  in  the  mode  of  their  presentation,  generalized  or  abstract 
truths,  and  as  such  must  be  understood.  The  study  of  apparent  exceptions,  even  the 
admission  of  them,  is  foreign  to  this  phase  of  Oriental  thought.  It  was  the  presence 
of  exceptions,  insoluble  to  ancient  thought,  which  excited  the  doubt  and  grief  of  Job 
and  some  of  the  psalmists.  2.  While  the  truth  must  be  stated,  from  the  exigencies 
of  language,  in  this  sharp  polar  antithesis,  actual  human  character  is  found,  with  all 
its  merits  and  shades,  in  the  intermediate  region.  3.  The  subtle  intermixtures  of  good 
and  evil  in  human  character,  recognized  by  modern  thought,  defy  complete  analysis. 
We  must  suspend  our  judgment  in  particular  cases,  leaving  all  to  him  who  brings  to 
light  the  hidden  things  of  darkness ;  conscious  that  there  must  be  great  "  reversals  of 
human  jjidgment"  upon  the  character  of  man  (see  Mozley's  sermon  on  this  subject). — J. 

Vers.  1 — L-^Cherishing  the  truth.    We  have  here — 

I.  The  essential  thing  implied.  It  is  implied  that  the  Law  of  God  has  been 
heard  and  understood ;  also  that  it  has  been  received  as  Divine,  and  taken  as  the  true 
guide  of  life.  The  teacher  or  preacher  has  sometimes  to  assume  this;  but  too  often 
it  is  an  assumption  unjustified  by  the  facts.    When  it  is  justified,  there  come — 

IL  Two  specially  valuable  vibtues  insisted  ui>on.  Mercy  and  truth  (ver.  3) 
are  to  be  exem])lifio(1.  1.  Mercy,  which  includes  (1)  compassion,  or  the  pity  one  should 
■how  to  the  unfortuuate  and  the  suffering ;  and  (2)  clemency,  or  a  lenient  view  taken 
and  a  generous  spirit  shown  in  presence  of  error  and  wrong-doing,  particularly  ot 
injury  done  to  ourselves.  2.  Truth,  which  includes  (1)  veracity  in  language;  (2) 
■incerity  of  heart ;  (8)  honesty  and  uprightness  of  action. 


78  THE  PROVERBS.  [oh.  m.  1— 3Ri 

m.  A  MATTES  OF  OBEAT  MOMENT  ENFOBCED.  Tbis  is  the  cheiishing  of  the  truth 
by  the  spirit  which  has  received  it  in  the  love  of  it.  "My  son,  forget  not  my  law;  . . . 
let  thine  heart  keep,"  etc.  (ver.  1) ;  "  Bind  them  about  thy  neck ;  write  them  upon  the 
tablet  of  thine  heart "  (ver.  3).  If  these  precepts  are  to  be  duly  carried  out,  and  there 
is  thus  to  be  a  continuance  in  well-doing,  and  even  a  growth  therein,  then  must  there 
be :  1.  The  dwelling  upon  them  by  the  mind ;  that  must  be  a  mental  habit  carefully 
cultivated.  2.  The  placing  ourselves  where  they  will  he  urged  on  our  attention  and 
commended  to  our  affection  (the  sanctuary,  the  Lord's  table,  the  society  of  the  holy, 
etc.).  3.  The  wise  study  of  them  as  illustrated  in  the  lives  of  the  worthiest  of  our 
race.  4.  The  use  of  any  and  every  means  by  which  they  will  be  seen  by  us  to  be  the 
beautiful  and  blessed  things  they  are.  The  children  of  Wisdom  will  not  only  receive 
gladly  the  truth  of  God,  but  they  will  cherish  it  carefully ;  they  will  water  with  diligent 
hand  the  plant  which  has  been  sown  and  which  has  sprung  up  in  the  soul.  "  Let  not 
the  workman  lose  what  he  has  wrought."  If  we  continue  in  the  word  of  Christ,  then 
are  we  his  disciples  indeed  (see  John  viii.  31 ;  xv.  9 ;  Acts  xiii.  43). 

IV.  A  LAKGE  BLESSING  PROMISED.  (Vcrs.  2,  4.)  Under  the  Law,  temporal  bless- 
ings were  more  abundantly  held  in  view ;  then  the  wise  were  promised  long  life,  comfort, 
and  human  estimation,  as  well  as  the  favour  of  God.  Under  the  gospel,  temporal 
prosperity  takes  the  second  place,  spiritual  and  heavenly  well-being  the  first.  But  we 
may  urge  that  conformity  to  the  will  of  God  as  revealed  in  his  Word :  1,  Tends  to 
bodily  health  and  strength  ;  if  that  does  not  secure  it,  assuredly  disobedience  will  not 
2.  Tends  to  secure  a  life  of  tranquillity.  "  Peace,"  as  well  as  "length  of  days,"  it  is 
likely  to  add ;  equanimity  of  mind  and  the  comfort  which  is  the  consequence  of  right 
and  kind  behaviour.  3.  Tends  to  win  the  esteem  and  the  affection  of  our  iLeighbours. 
"  Favour  in  the  sight  of  man."  4.  Ensures  the  love  and  the  blessing  of  .^Jmighty 
God.— C. 

Vers.  5,  6, 7  (first  part). — Self-distrust  and  trust  in  Ood.  If  we  would  realize  God's 
thought  concerning  us,  we  shall — 

I.  Cherish  a  deep  distrust  of  ourselves.  We  are  not  to  "  lean  unto  our  own 
understanding,"  or  to  "  be  wise  in  our  own  eyes  "  (vers.  5,  7).  1.  We  shall  certainly 
have  a  sense  of  our  own  insufSciency  if  we  weigh  our  own  human  weakness ;  if  we 
consider  how  little  we  know  of  (1)  human  nature  generally ;  and  of  (2)  our  own  hearts 
in  particular ;  of  (3)  the  real  character  and  disposition  of  those  connected  with  us ;  of 
(4)  the  whole  circle  of  law  by  which  we  are  surrounded  on  every  side ;  of  (5)  the  events 
which  are  in  the  (even)  near  future ;  of  (6)  the  vdtimate  effect  of  our  decisions  on  our 
circumstances  and  our  character.  2.  So  also  if  we  consider  the  disastrous  results  that 
have  followed  presumption  in  this  matter.  How  often  have  we  seen  men,  confident  of 
their  own  capacity,  staking  everything  on  their  own  judgment,  and  miserably  disap- 
pointed with  the  issue  1  Men  of  this  spirit,  who  carry  self-reliance  (which  is  a  virtue) 
to  an  exaggerated  and  false  assurance  of  their  own  sagacity,  not  only  dig  a  deep  grave 
for  their  own  happiness,  but  usually  involve  others  also  in  their  ruin.  Neither  in  (1) 
the  affairs  of  this  life,  nor  (2)  in  the  larger  issues  of  the  spiritual  realm,  should  we  lean 
all  the  weight  of  our  own  and  of  others'  prosperity  on  our  own  poor  finite  under- 
standing. 

II.  Look  devoutly  upward.  We  are  to  maintain:  1.  A  whole-hearted  trust  in 
God  (ver.  6).  A  profound  assurance  that  (1)  he  is  regarding  us ;  (2)  he  is  divinely 
interested  in  our  welfare ;  (3)  he  will  see  that  we  have  all  we  need,  and  go  in  the  way 
in  which  it  is  best  for  us  to  walk.  2.  A  continual  acknowledgment  (ver.  6).  We  are 
to  acknowledge  God  (1)  by  referring  everything  to  him  in  our  own  heart;  (2)  by 
consulting  and  applying  his  will  as  revealed  in  his  Word;  (3)  by  praying  for  and 
expecting  his  Divine  direction ;  so  shall  we  acknowledge  him  "  in  aU  our  ways."  This 
trust  and  acknowledgment  are  inclusive  and  not  exclusive  of  our  own  individual  endea- 
vour. We  are  to  think  well,  to  consult  wisely,  to  act  diligently,  and  then  to  trust 
whoUy.  Whoso  does  the  last  without  the  first  is  guiltily  and  daringly  presumptuous ; 
whoso  does  the  first  without  the  last  is  guiltily  irreverent  and  unbelieving. 

IIL  Reckon  confidbntlt  on  Divine  direction.  "He  shall  direct  thy  paths" 
(ver.  6).  As  a  very  little  child,  left  alone  in  the  streets  of  a  great  city,  can  but  wander 
aimlessly  about,  and  will  surely  fail  of  reaching  home,  so  we,  lost  in  the  maze  of  thii 


cm.  m.  1—35.]  THE  PROVEBBS.  79 

leething,  Btraggling,  incompreliensible  world — world  of  circumstance  and  world  of 
thought — can  but  make  vain  guesses  as  to  our  true  course,  and  are  certain  to  wander 
far  from  the  home  of  God.  What  the  shrewdest  and  cleverest  of  men  most  urgently 
and  sorely  need  is  the  guiding  hand  of  a  heavenly  Father,  who,  through  all  the 
labyrinths  of  life,  past  all  the  by-paths  of  error  and  evil,  will  conduct  us  to  truth, 
righteousness,  wisdom,  heaven.  If  we  trust  him  wholly,  and  acknowledge  him  freely 
and  fully,  we  may  confidently  expect  that  he  will  (1)  lead  our  feet  along  the  path  of 
gutward  life ;  (2)  guide  our  minds  into  the  sanctuary  of  heavenly  truth ;  (3)  help  our 
souls  up  the  ennobling  heights  of  holiness ;  (4)  direct  our  steps  to  the  gates  of  the  city 
of  God ;  and  (5)  finally  welcome  us  within  its  "  golden  streets." — 0. 

Vers.  7  (second  part),  8. — A  three-linked  chain.     We  have — 

L  Piety.  "  Fear  the  Lord."  It  is  the  faculty  which  distinguishes  the  meanest 
man  from  the  noblest  brute,  which  raises  our  race  immeasurably  above  the  next 
below  it.  Man  can  fear  God.  He  can  (1)  recognize  his  Maker ;  (2)  bow  down  in 
lowly  but  manly  reverence  before  God ;  (3)  render  to  him  the  gratitude  of  a  heart 
mindful  of  his  many  mercies;  (4)  subject  his  will  to  the  will  Divine;  (5)  order  his 
life  according  to  the  written  Word. 

II.  MoRALiTT.  "  Depart  from  evil."  The  outcome  of  piety  is  morality.  1.  The 
morality  which  rests  not  on  the  basis  of  piety  (the  fear  of  the  Lord)  is  on  an  insecure 
foundation.  Change  of  circumstance,  of  friends,  of  fashions,  may  blow  it  down.  2. 
The  morality  which  depends  on  the  "  thou  shalt"  and  "  thou  shalt  not"  of  the  Supreme 
is  safe  against  all  the  winds  that  blow:  J'or  the  dark  hour  of  powerful  temptation 
there  is  no  such  barrier  against  sin  and  ruin  as  the  conviction,  "  How  can  1  do  this 
great  wickedness  and  sin  against  God  ?  "  For  the  bright  hour  of  obligation  there  is  no 
such  animating  incitement  as  "  that  Christ  may  be  magnified  in  me."  The  third  link 
in  this  heaven-forged  chain  is — 

III.  Health.  "  It  shall  be  health  to  thy  navel,  and  marrow  to  thy  bones."  Sick- 
ness of  body  may  be  the  portion  of  the  best  of  men  or  women.  Some  are  bom  to  suffer 
until  they  die  and  pass  to  the  blessed  country  where  the  inhabitant  will  never  say, "  I  am 
sick."  But  the  constant  tendency  of  piety  and  its  invariable  accompaniment  morality 
is  to  give  (1)  health  and  strength  of  bodily  frame;  the  pure  blood,  the  clear  eye,  the 
strong  muscle,  the  steady  nerve,  the  "  green  old  age."  It  regularly  gives  (2)  an  active 
mind;  and  it  necessarily  imparts  (3)  a  soul  that  is  "in  health  "  (3  John  2).  The  man 
who  fears  God  and  departs  from  evU  is  the  man  who  is  fitted  and  is  likely  to  have  the 
largest  show  of  vigorous,  robust,  healthy  life  in  all  its  forms. — 0. 

Vers.  9, 10. — The  Divine  responsiveness.  There  are  two  ways  in  which  God  blesses 
us — unconditionally  and  conditionally.  We  receive  very  much  from  him  in  virtue  of 
his  originating  and  spontaneous  goodness.  We  may,  if  we  will,  receive  much  from  him 
also  as  the  result  of  his  faithful  response  to  our  appeal.  The  text  suggests  to  us  the 
truth,  which  has  manifold  illustrations,  that  if  we  take  toward  him  the  attitude  which 
he  desires  us  to  assume,  he  will  visit  us  with  appropriate  and  corresponding  blessings. 

I.  If  we  love  him,  he  will  love  us.  True,  indeed,  it  is  that  "we  love  him 
because  he  first  loved  us"  (1  John  iv.  19),  his  own  Divine  beneficence  is  the  source  of 
all  hunjan  affection;  but  it  is  also  true  that  "if  a  man  love  me  (Christ),  he  will  keep 
my  words,  and  my  Father  will  love  hiin  "  (John  xiv.  23).  Our  love  of  God,  of  Jesus 
Christ,  will  meet  with  a  large  response  in  the  outpouring  of  Divme  affection  toward  us. 
God  will  love  us  with  the  fiilness  of  parental,  rejoicing  love.  ,     t     j  t 

n  If  we  trust  him,  he  will  trust  us.  Those  who  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  and  thus  become  his  sons  (John  i.  12),  are  the  objects  of  his  Divine  trust 
God  does  not  prescribe  to  his  reconciled  children  the  hours,  places,  forms,  methyls,  and 
means  of  service.  He  leaves  these  to  the  promptings  of  the  filial  spirit,  to  the  decision 
of  the  understanding  which  has  been  consecrated  to  him.  He  makes  known  to  us  his 
will  that  he  should  be  served  and  his  creatures  blessed  and  saved;  then  he  trusts  us 
to  put  out  our  energies  in  all  wise  ways  to  fulfil  his  purpose.  His  treatment  of  us  la 
in  response  to  our  attitude  towards  him.  ■■  ons 

III.  If  wb  honour  him,  he  will  honour  us.    (1  Sam.  u.  30.)  _ 

IV   If  wk  give  of  oub  substance  to  him,  he  will  enrich  us.     1  Jus  is  tin 


80  THE  PBOVBRB&  foH,  m.  1— 35. 

illustration  which  our  text  supplies  (see  Deut.  xxvi,).  The  children  of  Israel  were 
encouraged  to  bring  of  their  firstfruits  and  to  present  them  unto  the  Lord,  and  to 
expect  that,  if  they  gave  thus  to  God,  he  would  give,  in  like  way,  to  them,  enlarging 
and  enriching  them  (Mai.  iii.  10 — 12).  And  not  only  were  they  taught  thus  to  look 
on  gifts  of  piety,  but  also  of  charity ;  these  should  be  repaid  by  the  observing  and 
responsive  Lord  (ch,  xix.  17).  It  may  be  asked  how  far  we  may  go  in  anticipating 
like  rewards  at  the  hand  of  God  now.  And  the  answer  is  :  1.  We  are  not  to  expect 
that  God  will  enrich  us  in  substance  irrespective  of  other  conditions  (2  Thess.  iii.  10). 
This  would  be  a  premium  on  idleness  and  imprudence.  It  will  always  be  "the  band 
of  the  diligent  that  will  make  rich."  2.  But  labour  and  frugality  being  understood, 
the  man  wKo  "  seeks  first  the  kingdom  of  God,"  who  "  acknowledges  him  in  all  his 
ways  "  (ver.  6),  and  who  liberally  gives  to  his  cause  (specially  remembering  his  "  little 
ones" — his  poor),  may  look  for  large  blessings  at  his  hand.  At  least  sufficiency  now 
(Matt.  vi.  33 ;  Phil.  iv.  19),  and  glorious  abundance  soon  and  for  ever  (John  xiv.  13, 
14;  xvi.  9).— C. 

Vers.  11, 12. —  Wrong  views  of  affliction,  and  the  right  one.  Sorrow  is  a  very  large 
ingredient  in  the  cup  of  human  life.  It  begins  so  early  and  lasts  so  long ;  it  lies  so 
near  the  surface  and  it  strikes  so  deep  into  our  nature ;  it  is  so  certain  that  we  shall 
meet  with  it  before  long,  and  so  likely  that  we  may  renew  our  acquaintance  with  it  very 
soon,  that  they  must  be  unwise  indeed  who  do  not  prepare  for  its  coming,  and  they 
must  be  losers  indeed  who  do  not  know  how  to  treat  it  when  it  knocks  at  their  door. 
There  are — 

I.  Many  mistakes  wb  mat  make  about  it.  1.  We  may  treat  it  thoughtlessly ; 
we  may  "  despise  the  chastening  of  the  Lord  "  (ver.  11).  We  may  allow  ourselves  to 
have  "  the  sorrow  of  the  world,"  of  which  Paul  speaks  (2  Cor.  viL  10) ;  i.e.  we  may 
decline  to  consider  what  it  means ;  content  ourselves  with  the  sullen  thought  that  we 
have  something  that  we  must  endure  as  best  we  can,  not  attempting  to  discover  whence 
it  comes  or  what  it  means.  2.  We  may  conclude  that  it  is  only  accidental.  This  is 
another  way  of  "despising  the  chastening  of  the  Lord."  We  may  take  that  view 
which  is  intellectually  the  most  easy  and  spiritually  the  most  barren,  and  refer  oni 
trouble  to  the  "  course  of  events ; "  we  may  recognize  no  guiding  hand,  we  may  decide, 
with  off-handed  readiness,  that  we  are  the  unhappy  victims  of  unkind  circumstances, 
and  go  on  our  way  "  grinding  our  teeth "  with  impatient  spirit.  3.  We  may  be 
crushed  under  the  weight  of  it.  We  may  (to  use  the  words  in  Heb.  xiL  5)  "  faint 
when  we  are  rebuked."  We  may  suffer  a  spiritual  collapse,  may  meet  affliction  with 
an  unmanly  spirit  of  prostration,  and,  instead  of  bending  bravely  beneath  the  yoke  and 
bearing  it,  break  down  utterly  and  miserably.  4.  We  may  repine  under  long  continu- 
ance of  it.  We  may  "be  weary"  of  God's  correction.  Sometimes,  when  afflictii^n  is 
long-continued,  men  feel  that  eitiher  God  has  nothing  to  do  with  them  at  all,  or  thai 
he  is  not  regarding  their  prayer,  or  that  he  is  punishing  them  above  thai  whicii  mty 
are  able  to  bear,_and  they  repine;  they  are  weary  in  their  spirit,  querulous  in  their 
tone,  perhaps  positively  complaining  in  their  speech.    But  there  is — 

II.  Thk  one  bight  way  uf  WHICH  TO  TAKE  IT.  And  that  is  to  accept  it  as  the 
torrecHon  of  fatherly  kindness.  "  For  whom  the  Lord  lo'veth  he  correoteth,"  etc  (ver. 
12).  1.  We  may  be  God's  unreconciled  children,  and  he  is  seeking  to  win  us  to 
himself  2.  Or  we  may  have  returned  to  him,  but  need  fatherly  correction.  He  may 
be  rebuking  us  for  some  departure  from  his  will.  He  may  be  desirous  of  removing  the 
spirit  of  pride  or  of  selfishness,  or  of  worldliness,  and  of  leading  us  along  paths  of 
humility,  self-surrender,  spirituality.  Certainly  he  is  seeking  our  truest  welfare,  our 
highest  good,  our  lasting  joy.  Let  each  affiicted  heart  ask — What  is  the  lesson  the 
Father  wishes  me  to  learn?-— C. 

Vers.  13 — 26. —  Wisdom's  inestimahle  worth.  Here  are  found  many  strong  recommen- 
dations of  heavenly  wisdom,  and  we  might  adopt  the  thirteenth  verse  as  a  refhun  to 
each  one  of  them:  "Happy  is  the  man  tliat  findeth  wisdom,  and  the  man  that  getteth 
understanding." 

I.   POSSBSSORB  OF  IT,   WE   ARE    SHAREMOLDEBS   WITH   GoD   HIMSELF.      (Vors.    19,  20.) 

Only  by  wisdom  could  the  Divine  Founder  of  all  visible  things  make  them  what' they 


OH.  ni.  1—35.]  THE  PROVERBS.  81 

•re.  His  wonder-workings  in  the  heavens  above  and  on  the  earth  beneath,  in  sun  and 
star,  in  grain  and  grass,  in  coal  and  iron,  in  i  ain  and  dew, — all  are  the  product  of  Divinu 
wisdom. 

II.  Possessors  of  it,  wb  have  a  well-bbino  that  enbubes.  "  Length  of  days 
is  in  her  right  hand "  (ver.  16).  "  She  is  a  tree  of  life  to  them  that  lay  hold  upon 
her  "  (ver.  18).  They  who  fear  God  are  more  likely  than  others  to  "  be  satisfied  with 
long  hfe "  (Ps.  xci.  16).  For  the  secret  of  strength  is  with  those  who  are  obedient  to 
law ;  but  though  they  should  die  before  old  age,  yet  (1)  so  long  as  life  lasts  their  well- 
being  will  continue,  and  (2)  when  their  earthly  life  is  takeo,  their  heritage  is  in  the 
everlasting  Ufe  beyond,  where  there  is  "  length  of  days"  indeed. 

III.  It  is  the  source  of  genuine  esteem.  "  In  her  left  hand  .  .  .  honour  "  (ver 
16).  It  may,  indeed,  be  that  the  children  of  wisdom  are  disregarded  or  even  despised. 
But  that  is  the  painful  exception  to  the  rule.  The  rule  is,  everywhere  and  in  every 
age,  that  those  who  consult  God's  will  in  the  guidance  of  their  life  are  honoured  of 
their  brethren,  enjoy  the  esteem  of  the  worthiest  of  their  neighbours,  live  and  die  in 
the  fragrance  of  general  regard. 

IV.  It  18  THE  ONE  security  AGAINST  SIN.  (Ver.  23.)  How  many  are  "the 
stumblers,"  those  who  trip  and  fall  as  they  ascend  or  descend  the  hill  of  life !  And 
how  serious,  sometimes,  are  these  falls!  Character,  reputation,  joy,  the  light  of  other 
hearts,  the  happiness  of  the  home, — all  gone  through  the  one  false  step  I  We  have 
urgent  need  of  some  security.  In  what  shall  this  be  found?  Not  in  hedgings  and 
fencings  which  will  take  away  every  possible  danger,  but  in  the  wisdom  of  the  wise, 
which  will  teach  us  where  to  go  and  how  to  tread  the  path  of  life,  in  the  "  wisdom 
which  is  from  above." 

V.  It  qoaeantebs  the  guardianship  of  God,  and  thus  ensures  confidence 
AND  PEACE.  (Vers.  24 — 26.)  Ihere  are  those  whose  life  is  full  of  slavish  fear;  by  day 
they  dread  the  evils  which  assail  the  wicked,  by  night  the  perils  of  the  darkness. 
But  he  who  keeps  God's  Word  enjoys  the  guardianship  of  his  Almighty  arm.  "  The 
Lord  is  his  confidence ;"  his  days  are  spent  in  quietness  and  calmness,  and  "  his  sleep 
is  sweet "  (Ps.  cxii.  7). 

VI.  It  is  the  PERENNIAL  SPRING  OF  PEACE  AND  JOT.  (Vers.  17,  18.)  Other  sources 
of  gratification  are  to  be  found,  but  some  of  them  do  not  carry  the  sanction  of  con- 
science, some  of  them  are  out  of  the  reach  of  the.  lowly,  others  are  only  open  to  tbe 
learned  or  the  favoured ;  most,  if  not  all  of  them,  are  short-lived,  and  become  of  less 
worth  as  they  are  more  frequently  employed.  'The  wisdom  which  comes  from  God 
and  which  leads  to  Liai,  which  makes  the  human  spirit  the  friend  and  follower  of  the 
Son  of  God,  brings  a  "  peace  which  passes  all  understanding,"  the  "  peace  of  God,"  and 
"joys  which  through  all  time  abide." 

VII.  It  18  THE  REALIZATION  OF  HUMAN  LIFE.  Wisdom  IS  a  "  tree  of  life  "  (ver.  18); 
wisdom  and  discretion  "  shall  be  life  unto  our  soul "  (ver.  22).  Any  existence  which 
is  not  illumined,  ennobled,  sanctified,  beautified  (ver.  22,  "grace  to  thy  neck"),  by 
these,  is  something  less  than  life  in  the  sight  of  God.  Only  with  these  and  by  these 
do  we  attain  to  a  state  of  being  which  the  Wise  One  who  sees  things  as  they  are 
recognizes  as  the  life  of  man. 

Wherefore:  1.  Count  it  worth  while  to  secure  this  heavenly  wisdom  at  all  costs 
whatsoever  (vers.  14,  15).  Its  value  cannot  be  estimated  in  gold  ;  the  price  of  wisdom 
is  above  rubies  (Job  xxviii.  18).  Nothing  is  to  be  compared  with  it.  Part,  if  necessary, 
with  the  largest  fortune  to  obtain  it  (Mark  x.  21 ;  ch.  xxiii.  23).  2.  Take  care  to 
cherish  and  retain  it  (ver.  24).  Let  the  most  precious  pearl  fall,  but  hold  this  with  a 
hand  that  will  not  unclasp.— 0. 

Vers.  27 — 32. — Four  valuable  virtues.  There  are  some  graces  which,  though  not  of 
the  first  importance,  are  yet  far  from  being  unimportant.  Many  men  so  fashion  their 
lives  that  while,  upon  the  whole,  they  are  rightly  reckoned  among  the  wise  and  good, 
they  are  much  less  happy,  less  honoured,  and  less  useful  than  they  might  become  if 
they  heeded  a  few  small  things.  If  we  had  regard  to  some  of  the  minor  moralities 
which  we  are  apt  to  neglect,  there  would  be  less  friction  and  more  beauty  in  our  lives 
than  is  now  seen  of  God  and  felt  of  man.  , 

1.  Punctuality  is  tub  payment  of  that  which  is  dub.    (Vers.  27,  28.)    These 

PROVERBS.  " 


82  THE  PROVERBS.  [oh.  ni.  1—35. 

dues  may  be  (1)  the  wages  of  the  workman ;  (2)  the  debt  contracted  with  the  trades- 
man ;  (3)  the  sum  promised  to  the  relative  or  friend.  This  may  be  denied,  even  when 
it  could  be  easily  rendered,  through  an  "  avaricious  reluctance  "  to  part  with  money  or 
a  culpable  disregard  of  other  men's  necessities  and  claims.  Such  default  is  not  worthy 
of  a  godly,  a  Christian  man. 

II.  Conscientiousness  towards  our  friends.  (Ver.  29.)  Too  many  men  are 
inclined  to  abuse  the  confidence  their  kindred  or  friends  put  in  them,  or  the  generosity 
they  are  prepared  to  show  them.  Such  men  draw  unscrupulously  on  the  trust  or  the 
bounty  of  others.  It  is  a  serious  departure  from  perfect  rectitude,  and  should  be 
disallowed  to  themselves  by  all  who  fear  God  and  would  follow  Christ.  Those  who 
"  dwell  securely  by  us,"  who  have  confided  in  us,  are  those  whom  every  principle  of 
honest  self-respect  demands  that  we  should  treat  with  scrupulous  integrity. 

III.  Peacbableness  of  spirit.  (Ver.  30.)  The  lives  of  many  are  embittered  by 
the  quarrelsomeness  of  their  neighbours.  Offence,  never  intended,  is  taken,  bitter 
words  are  spoken,  a  hostile  attitude  is  assumed,  all  friendly  relations  are  broken  off, 
malicious  insinuations  are  thrown  out ;  in  fact,  "  there  is  war  between  the  house "  of 
this  man  and  that  man,  when  there  is  positively  nothing  on  which  to  found  a  complaint. 
A  very  small  allowance  of  charity  would  cure  this  evil  spirit,  if  only  taken  in  time. 
Charity  would  hide  a  multitude  of  sins  in  the  sense  of  preventing  them  altogether,  if 
men  would  but  attribute  kind  motives  to  their  neighbours,  or  inquire  sufficiently  before 
they  condemn,  or  even  wait  a  while  before  they  strike,  to  see  if  there  is  no  other  and 
better  way  of  arranging  a  dispute.  If  it  be  possible — and  it  very  often  it  possible, 
when  men  imagine  it  is  not — we  should  "live  peaceably  with  all  men"  (Rom, 
xii.  18). 

IV.  Freedom  from  fbettino  entt.  Many  good  men  are,  upon  the  whole,  what 
God  would  have  them  to  be,  and  they  have  from  him  all  that  they  can  reasonably  ask 
at  his  hand ;  their  well-being  is  such  as  to  constitute  the  condition  of  thankfulness  and 
joy.  Yet  the  cup  of  their  life  is  made  bitter  and  unpalatable  because  they  are  envious 
ef  the  successful  oppressor  (ver.  31) ;  they  "  fret  themselves  because  of  evil-doers,"  and 
are  envious  against  the  workers  of  iniquity  (Ps.  xixvii.  1,  8 ;  Ixxiii.  3).  They  think, 
perhaps,  that  if  bad  men  are  as  prosperous  as  they  seem  to  be,  they  (the  good)  ought 
to  be  far  more  successful  than  they  find  themselves  to  be.  Surely  this  is  both  sinful 
and  foolish.  1.  It  is  discontentment  with  God's  arrangement,  and  a  querulous  chal- 
lenging of  his  administration  of  human  affairs.  2.  It  is  forgetfulness  of  the  fact  that 
God's  severest  anger  rests  on  the  oppressor,  and  that  he  is  therefore  the  last  man  to  be 
envied ;  he  is  "  abomination  to  the  Lord  "  (ver.  32).  Would  we  change  places  with 
him  f  3.  It  overlooks  the  fact  that  the  righteous  man  is  enjoying  the  friendship  of 
God — surely  an  advantage  that  immeasurably  outweighs  the  wealth  or  honour  which 
the  oppressor  has  stolen.  "  The  secret  of  the  Lord  "  is  with  him.  He  is  God's  trusted 
servant,  Christ's  intimate  friend  (see  Ps.  xxv.  14 ;  John  xv.  14, 15 ;  xiv.  23). — 0. 

Vers.  33 — 35. — The  height  of  wdl-heing  and  the  depth  of  Hl-being.  The  issues  of 
righteousness  and  unrighteousness  are  here  very  broadly  stated.  These  verses  indicate 
to  us  the  long  and  large  results  of  wisdom  on  the  one  hiand  and  of  folly  on  the  other. 

I.  Those  whom  God  favours  and  that  which  he  apportions  them.  There  are 
three  epithets  by  which  they  are  here  characterized;  they  are  called  "  the  just,"  "  the 
lowly,"  and  "  the  wise."    In  those  whom  God  loves  and  means  to  bless  there  are  found 

(1)  the  spirit  of  humility, — they  are  conscious  of  their  own  demerit  and  nnworthiness; 

(2)  the  spirit  of  wisdom, — they  are  in  the  attitude  of  inquiry  towards  God,  desirous  of 
knowing  his  truth  and  doing  his  will;  and  (3)  the  spirit  of  conscientiousness, — ^ttiey  are 
the  "just,"  wishful  to  do  that  which  is  right  toward  their  fellows,  to  act  honestly, 
fairly,  considerately,  in  the  various  relations  they  sustain.  These  God  loves,  and  on 
them  he  will  bestow  his  Divine  benediction.  1.  He  will  give  them  "  grace  " — his  own 
royal  favour  and  that  which  draws  down  upon  them  the  genial  and  gracious  regard  of 
men.  2.  He  will  bless  them  in  their  home  life.  He  "  blesseth  the  habitation  of  the 
just."  He  wiU  give  them  purity,  love,  honour,  affection,  peace,  joy  in  their  most 
intimate  relations ;  so  that  their  homes  shall  be  blessed.  He  will  be  known  as  the 
"  God  of  the  families  of  Israel."  3.  And  He  will  give  them  exaltation  in  the  end. 
"  The  wise  shall  inherit  glory."     "  Unto  the  upright  there  will  arise  light  in  the  dark- 


OH.  IV.  1—27.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


ness."    Present  gloom  shall  give  place  to  glory,  either  now  on  this  side  the  graven  or 
hereafter  in  "  that  world  of  light." 

11.  Those  with  whom  God  is  Di8Pr.BA8BD  and  his  awfcl  maledictions  on  them. 
These  are  also  thrice  characterized  here ;  they  are  "  the  wicked,"  "  the  scorners," ''  fools." 
These  are  they  who  (1)  in  their  folly  reject  the  counsel  of  God ;  who  (2)  in  their  guilt 
yield  themselves  up  to  sin  in  its  various  forms  ;  who  (3)  in  their  arrogance  scoff  at  all 
sacred  things — the  "scorners;"  this  la  the  last  and  worst  development  of  sin,  the 
treatment  of  things  holy  and  Divine  with  flippant  irreverence.  These  God  regards 
with  Divine  disapproval ;  them  he  strongly  condemns  and  visits  with  fearful  penalty. 
1.  His  wrath  is  on  themselves.  He  "scorneth  the  scorners."  "  He  that  sittetli  in  the 
heavens  laughs"  at  them,  he  "has  them  in  derision"  (Ps.  ii.  4).  His  feeling  toward 
them  and  his  power  over  them  are  such  that  they  have  reason  to  apprehend  overthrow 
and  ruin  at  any  hour  (see  Ps.  Ixxiii.  19,  20).  2.  His  curse  is  on  their  house  (ver.  33). 
They  may  expect  that  in  their  domestic  relations  they  will  have,  as  in  fact  they  do 
have,  saddest  occasions  of  sorrow  and  remorse.  3.  His  hand  is  against  their  hope. 
They  may  be  anticipating  great  things  for  themselves  in  the  future,  their  castles  are 
high  and  strong  in  the  air,  their  hope  is  great;  but  "lol  sudden  destruction,"  the  winrl 
of  heaven  blows,  and  all  is  brought  into  desolation.  God  touches  their  fine  structure 
with  hlB  finger,  and  it  is  in  ruins.    "  Shame  is  the  promotion  of  fools." — 0. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  IV. 


Yen.  1 — 27. — 7.  Seventh  admonitory 
discouree.  We  here  enter  upon  the  second 
group  of  admonitory  discourses,  as  is  indicated 
by  the  opening  address,  "  my  children,"  and 
which  occurs  again  in  ch.  v.  7  and  viL  24. 
This  group  extends  to  the  end  of  ch.  vii. 
Its  prevailing  tone  is  that  of  warning  rather 
than  of  positive  exhortations,  which  have 
been  the  rule  hitherto.  The  general  aim  of 
the  discourse  before  us,  as  of  those  preceding, 
18  to  exalt  Wisdom,  to  exhibit  her  as  a 
subject  worthy  of  all  earnest  endeavour  and 
sacrifice,  but  it  is  noticeable  that  the  teacher 
introduces  a  fresh  feature  into  his  teachmg 
or  mode  of  instruction,  in  order  to  procure 
attention  to,  and  acceptance  ot^  his  precepts 
on  the  part  of  his  hearers.  He  has  already 
spoken  in  Ids  own  name  and  with  his  own 
authority ;  he  has  brought  forward  Wisdom 
personified  as  making  her  appeal;  he  now 
adduces  the  authority  of  his  own  father's 
advice  to  himself.  But  as  the  mode  of 
emphasizing  his  admonitions  varies,  so 
Wisdom  is  many-sided,  and  the  aspect  under 
which  she  is  now  presented  seems  to  be 
especially  that  of  discipline  and  obedieuce. 
The  key-not»  of  the  discourse  seems  to  be 
struck  in  the  word  "instruction,"  i.e. 
discipline,  in  the  original,  musor,  thus 
recalling  the  admonition  in  oh.  i.  8,  "My 
son,  hear  the  instruction  of  thy  father." 


Bohlius,  in  hii  'Ethloa  Sacra,'  disp.  vi. 
p.  65,  tqq.,  assigns  "discipline"  (musar)  to 
this  chapter ;  and  Melancthon  describes  the 
admonitions  of  the  chapter  before  us  as 
"  adhortationes  ad  studium  obedientise " 
Discipline  rising  into  obedience  seems  to  ba 
the  predominant  thought  to  which  all  others 
are  made  subordinate.  The  discourse  ia  an 
enlargement  or  amplification  of  this  aspect 
of  Wisdom.  In  structure  the  discourse 
consists  mainly  of  the  father's  advice  (vers. 
4 — 19),  preceded  and  followed  by  the 
teacher's  own  admonitions  in  vers.  1 — 3  and 
20 — 27.  The  chief  topics  touched  upon  are 
(1)  the  supreme  importance  of  Wisdom  as 
being  "  the  principal  thing  "  to  be  obtained 
before  everything  else  (vers.  7—9) ;  (2)  tlie 
two  ways  that  lie  open  to  the  choice  of 
youth,  distinguished  respectively  as  the  wt  v 
of  light  and  the  way  of  darkness  (vert 
14 — 19);  and  (B)  the  guarding  of  the  heart 
with  all  diligence,  as  being  the  seat  of 
conscience  and  the  fountain  of  life  in  its 
moral  sense  (vers.  23 — 27).  The  first  part 
of  the  discourse  is  characterized  by  exhorta- 
tions accompanied  by  promises ;  the  latter 
part  takes  the  form  of  warning,  and  warning 
of  an  alarming  nature.  The  harmony  which 
exists  between  the  allusions  in  the  discoursd 
and  the  facts  recorded  in  the  historical 
books  of  Samuel  and  Chronicles  serves  to 
indicate  that  we  have  before  us,  in  substance 
at  least,  the  advice  which  David  gave  to 


84 


THE  PKOVEEBa 


[cH.  IV.  1—27, 


Solomon,  and  that  the  discourse  is  Solomonic. 
Compare  especially  ver.  3  witli  1  Chron. 
xxviiL  S  and  zxii.  9,  and  ver.  18  with  the 
last  words  of  David  in  2  Sam.  xxiii.  4. 

Ver.  1. — Hear,  ye  children,  the  instmction 
of  a  father.  This  exhortation  is  identical 
witli  tliat  in  ch.  i.  8,  except  that  the  address, 
"ye  children,"  indicating  a  new  departure, 
Is  now  used  instead. of  "my  son,"  which  has 
been  hitherto  employed  (see  ch.  i.  8 ;  ii.  1 ; 
iii.  1,  21),  and  "of  thy  father"  is  altered  to 
"of  a  father."  The  verb  is  the  same, 
occurring  here,  of  course,  in  the  plural 
number.  The  appeal  is  evidently  intended 
to  rouse  attention.  Attention  is  especially 
necessary  to  secure  a  knowledge  of  Divine 
truth.  Ye  children  (bhdnim).  This  address 
occurs  again  twice  in  the  second  group  of 
admonitory  discourses — ^in  ch.  v.7  and  viL  24, 
and  also  in  the  appeal  of  Wisdom  personified 
in  ch.  viii.  32,  and,  with  these  exceptions, 
nowhere  else  in  the  Proverbs.  It  is  used  by 
David,  and  it  is  possible  that  when  the 
teacher  penned  these  words  he  had  in  mind 
Ps.  xxxiv.  11,  "Come,  ye  cliildren,  hearken 
unto  me;  I  will  teach  you  the  fear  of  tlie 
Lord."  The  similarity  in  the  address  serves 
to  connect  the  teacher  of  wisdom  with 
David,  and  thus  to  identify  him  with 
Solomon,  while  it  also  leads  to  the  conclusion 
that  the  advice  which  follows  in  vers.  4 — 19 
is  in  substance  that  which  David  had  given 
his  son.  On  "instruction,"  see  ch.  i.  8. 
0/  a  father  (dv).  It  is  difficult,  owing 
to  the  want  of  the  pronominal  suffix,  to 
determine  accurately  whether  the  teacher  is 
referring  to  himself  or  to  his  own  father  in 
the  expression.  The  following  verse  (2) 
would  indicate  that  he  is  speaking  of  himself 
in  his  capacity  as  a  teacher  or  instructor  of 
jouth.  But  it  is  quite  possible  that  he 
may  be  referring  to  hia  own  father,  whose 
advice  he  had  received,  and  which  he  is 
now  about  to  lay  before  others  in  vers.  4 — 19, 
Though  attentiou  to  paternal  advice  in 
general,  •'.«.  instruction  given  by  any  father 
to  his  chililreu,  is  not  intended  here,  still 
the  passage  may  be  regarded  as  embodying 
the  principle  that  attentiou  to  parental 
advice  is  incumbent  on  children,  and  a 
disregai-d  of  it  is  the  mark  of  ingratitude 
and  depravity.  Babbi  Levi  understands 
tl  e  phrase  as  referring  to  our  heavenly 
Father.  Attend  (hahehivu,  hiph.  imperative 
of  Ttdshdv).  On  the  force  of  this  verb  as 
iignifying  "earnest,  absorbed  attention," 
see  ch.  i.  24.  To  know  understanding 
(IdddSth  bind);  i.e.  in  order  that  you  may 
know  or  gain  uuderstanding.  The  infinitive 
marks  tlie  deeign  or  object  of  the  attention 
(cf.  the  Vulgato,u(  eciatis).  The  expression 
corresponds  with  Iddddth  kholcmah  in  ch. 
L  2,  »nd  just  aa  thia  signifies  "  to  appropriate 


to  yourself  wisdom,"  so  the  one  before  ni 
has  the  same  force,  and  signifies  the  gaining 
or  appropriation  of  understanding,  i.e.  the 
faculty  of  discernment  or  discrimination. 
Hitzig  renders,  "to  know  with  the  under- 
standing;" i.e.  to  know  intelligently,  but 
this  does  not  seem  to  be  the  meaning  of 
the  phrase. 

Ver.  2. — For  I  give  yon  good  doctrine. 
This,  while  stating  the  reason  for  the 
exhortation  in  the  previous  verse,  signifies 
that  what  the  teacher  has  given  and  is 
giving,  he  has  received  from  his  father.  1 
give;  ndthali,  literally,  "  I  gave,"  is  the  kal 
perfect  of  ndthan,  "  to  give,"  but  the  perfect 
is  here  used  for  the  present,  as  denoting  not 
only  a  past  action,  but  one  that  is  still 
continuing  (Gesenius,  'Heb.  Gram.,'  §  126. 
3).  Good  doctrine  (Wealth  tdv).  The  doctrine 
or  instruction  is  "good,"  not  only  intrin- 
eically,  but  as  to  the  source  from  which  it 
was  derived,  and  in  its  efiects,  Likdkh  is, 
according  to  its  root  Idkdkh,  "something 
which  is  received  or  taken."  From  the 
standpoint  of  the  teacher  it  is  that  instruction 
which  he  had  received  of  his  father.  With 
respect  to  his  hearts  it  is  the  instruction 
which  is  communicated  to  them,  and  which 
they  receive  (see  en  ch.  i.  5).  The  LXX 
renders,  Siipov  ayoBhr ;  similarly  tiie  Vulgate, 
donum  bonum,  "a  good  gift."  Torsake  ye 
not ;  Sl-tSaz6mii,  from  dzdv,  "  to  leave, 
forsake"  (compare  the  corresponding  phrase, 
Sl-tiltSsh,  from  ndtash,  "to  leave,  forsake," 
in  ch.  i.  8).    Law  (tSrSK);  as  in  ch.  i.  8. 

Ver.  3. — ^For  I  was  my  father's  son.  This 
is  more  than  the  mere  statement  of  a  physical 
fact.  It  indicates  that  the  teacher  was  in 
the  highest  degree  an  object  of  endearment 
to  his  father,  just  as  he  states  in  the  second 
hemistich  that  he  held  a  unique  position  in 
the  afiection  of  his  mother.  The  statement 
agrees  with  the  historical  record.  Solomon 
would  be  more  than  ordinarily  dear  to  his 
father,  as  being  a  child  of  promise,  as  "  the 
beloved  of  the  Lord,"  and  as  the  son  whom 
the  Divine  will  had  pointed  as  the  successor 
to  his  throne,  and  the  one  on  whom  was  to 
devolve  the  building  of  the  temple  (see 
2  Sam.  vii.  12, 13;  xii.  24;  1  Chron.  xxii.  9). 
Bertheau  explains,  "I  also  once  stood  in 
the  relation  to  my  (actual)  father  in  which 
you  stand  to  me  your  paternal  instructor," 
thus  giving  prominence  rather  to  the  con- 
secution of  the  passage,  and  preparing  the 
way  for  the  reception  of  the  father's  advice 
which  is  to  follow.  But  this  rather  loses 
sight  of  what  appears  an  important  element 
in  the  instruction,  that  not  only  was  it 
"  good,"  but  that  it  was  dictated  by  affection. 
The  writer  is  fortifying  and  strengthening 
his  instruction  by  the  authority  of  his  fiiither, 
showing  that  what  he  was  laying  before 
others  he  had  had  placed  before  him;  and 


CB.  nr.  1—27.] 


THE  PEOTERBS. 


86 


■8  hi$  fother'*  advice  was  th«  ontoome  of 
affectioD,  so  he  addresses  bis  hearers  in  the 
same  spirit.  Dathe  and  others  connect 
"tender"  (rofc)  with  "son"  (jbin),  and  render, 
"I  WAS  a  son  dear  to  my  father."  So 
tte  LXX.,  which,  however,  understands 
"  tender "  in  the  sense  of  "  tractable," 
"  obedient : "  "  For  I  was  an  obedient  son 
to  my  father " — a  meaning  which  the  word 
rdk  can.  only  bear  as  indicating  the  suscepti- 
bility of  the  young  to  receive  impressions. 
In  general,  rak  means  "tender,"  "soft,"  and 
has  reference  to  the  weakness  and  helpless- 
ness of  the  young;  comp.  Gen.  xxxiii.  13, 
"My  lord  knoweth  that  tVie  cljildren  are 
tender  (raklcim)"  Combined  witli  ydkhid, 
which  follows,  it  signifies,  in  the  pnssage 
before  us,  that  the  teacher  was  an  object  of 
tender  care  or  love.  The  Vulgate  tenellue, 
the  diminutive  of  tener,  as  signifying  "some- 
what tender  or  delicate,"  reproduces  the 
idea  of  the  Hebrew  rak.  In  the  word  the 
teacher  recalls  his  early  life  and  the 
instruction  in  wisdom  which  he  received  in 
it.  Only  beloved;  literally,  only  {ydkhid), 
as  "  beloved  "  does  not  occur  in  the  original. 
The  Vulgate  renders,  unigenitus;  Aquila, 
Synnnachus,.  and  Theodotion,  fiovoyevtjs, 
i.e.  "  only  begotten ; "  but  this  was  not 
literally  the  fact,  as  Bathsheba,  the  mother 
of  Solomon,  had  other  sons  (2  Sam.  v.  14 ; 
1  Chron.  iii.  5).  Both  the  Hebrew  ydkhid, 
"only,"  and  the  Vulgate  unigenitus,  "only 
begotten,"  consequently  signify  what  is 
expressed  by  the  LXX.  ayair^iievos,  i.e. 
"  toloved."  Solomon  was  so  beloved  of  his 
mother  as  if  he  were  an  only  child.  So 
yakhtd  is  used  of  Isaac  in  Gen.  xxiL  2,  12 
in  the  same  way,  since  at  the  time  that 
Isaac  was  so  designated,  Ishmael,  the  other 
son  of  Abraham,  was  still  living.  The 
word  ydkhid  occurs  in  Ps.  xxii.  20,  where 
it  is  rendered  "  darling,"  and  may  possibly 
refer  to  Solomon.  Jennings,  in  Ps.  xxii.  20, 
understands  it,  however,  of  the  life  besides 
which  the  psalmist  has  no  otlier — wnicam 
meam,  as  the  Vulgate,  t.e.  "his  only  life  "  (c£ 
Pa.  XXXV.  17;  and  for  the  word  ydkhid,  see 
Jer.  V.  26 :  Amos  viii.  10 ;  Zecli,  xii.  10). 
In  the  sight  of  my  mother  (liph'ne  immi) ; 
literally,  ad  facie)  matris  mess,  or,  before  my 
mother}  Vulgate,  coram  matre  med,  te.  in 
her  estimation  (cf.  Gen.  xvii.  18).  The 
mention  of  the  mother  is  probably  introduced 
here  for  the  sake  of  poetic  parallelism;  cf. 
cb.  i.  8  (Zockler). 

Ver.  4. — ^From  this  verse  to  ver.  19  in- 
clusive, the  teacher  quotes  the  instruction 
which  he  had  received  of  his  father.  His 
object  in  doing  so  is  to  show  tliat  his  own 
teaching  wa»  in  harmony  with  it,  and  there- 
fore wortlxy  of  attention.  His  precepts, 
kdmonitions,  and  warnings  are  not  his  only, 
but  those  of  hit  father.    Other  examples  of 


David's  instructions  to  Solomon  are  fonnd 
in  1  Kings  ii.  2;    1  Chron.  xiiiv  12,  13; 

xxviii.  9.  And  he  taught ;  i.e.  his  father,  for 
vayyorini  is  ma'iouline.  The  LXX.  renders, 
"  They  said  and  taught  me  (ot  iheyov  koL 
iSiSao-icdv  /ie),"  as  if  the  precepts  which  fol- 
low were  the  combined  teaching  of  David  and 
Bathsheba.  This  variation  is  duo  to  the 
mention  of  both  parents  in  the  preceding 
verse.  Betain;  xjitU'miHc,  kal  future,  used 
imperatively,  of  thdmdk,  "to  take  hold  of," 
and  metaphorically,  as  here,  "  to  hold  fast" 
(see  ch.  iii.  18).  The  LXX.  renders 
ipetScTO),  imperative  of  IpflSa,  "  to  fix  firm." 
Symmachus  has  Karexfru,  "  give  heed  to." 
And  live ;  i.e.  and  thou  shalt  live,  as  the 
kal  imperative,  kh'yeh,  from  khdydk,  "  to 
Uve,"  has  here  the  force  of  the  futnre 
(cf.  Vulgate,  el  vives).  The  meaning  is, 
"  And  tliou  shalt  enjoy  a  long  and  happy 
life."  Temporal  life  alone  seems  to  be  in- 
dieated,  as  in  ver.  10  (of.  ch.  iii.  2).  The 
Syriac  addition,  "And  my  law  as  the  apple 
of  thine  eye,"  is  probably  borrowed  from  ch. 
vii.  2,  where  we  meet  with  the  same  admo- 
nition. 

Ver.  5. — After  the  general  exhortation 
given  above,  the  father's  instruction  becomes 
more  specific,  and  deals  with  the  acquire- 
ment of  wisdom.  This  subject  seems  to  be 
continued  in  ver.  13,  where  the  second  and 
concluding  branch  of  the  instruction  begins, 
whioli  consists  mainly  of  warning,  as  the 
first  part  does  with  exhortation.  We  are 
thiis  furnished  with  an  example  how  to 
teach.  In  our  teaching  it  is  not  sufficient 
simply  to  point  out  what  is  to  be  done,  but 
we  must  show  what  is  to  be  avoided.  Get 
wisdom,  get  understanding.  The  father 
urges  the  acquirement  of  wisdom  in  the 
same  way  and  with  the  sam.e  importunity 
as  the  trader  or  merchant  presses  his  goods 
upon  buyers.  Wisdom  and  understanding 
are  put  forward  as  objects  of  merchandise ; 
for  the  verb  kdndh,  from  which  the  impera- 
tive k'neh,  signifies  not  only  "  to  acquire  for 
one's  self,"  or  "  to  possess,"  but  especially  "  to 
buy."  The  verb  occurs  again  in  the  same 
sense  in  ver.  7,  "  Get  [fc'neft,  ie.  buy]  wis- 
dom;" and  in  ch.  xxiii.  23,  "Buy  (Jt'nth) 
the  truth,  and  sell  it  not ;  also  wisdom,  and 
instruction,  and  understanding"  (cf.  alsoch. 
XV.  22 ;  xvi,  16 ;  xix.  9,  where  we  also  meet 
with  the  same  verb).  The  reiteration  of  the 
word  "get,"  as  Umbreit  remarks,  is  "an 
imitation  of  the  exclamation  of  a  merchant 
who  is  offering  his  wares."  The  importunity 
of  the  father  measures  the  value  he  sets  upon 
wisdom  as  an  inestimable  treasure,  a  peturl  of 
great  price  (see  ch.  iii.  14).  Forget  it  not, 
etc. ;  rather, /orjet  noi,  neither  turn  from- (he 
v)ord$  of  my  mouth, — so  Zockler,  Delitzsch, 
Hodg.,  and  others ;  Vulgate,  ne  oblivitearit, 
neqtte  decline*  a  verbi$  oris  met.    There  ia  n« 


86 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[oh.  iy.  1—27, 


need  to  supply  "  it "  »fter  the  verb  al-tUh'- 
Jiahh,  "  forget  not,"  as  Holden  states,  and  as 
appears  in  the  Authorized  Version,  since 
ihdkakh  is  found  with  min  (]D),  "of"  or 
"  from,"  in  Ps.  lii.  4  (5),  "  I  forgot  to  eat 
{shdliahh'ti  meSkol),"  and  the  same  construc- 
tion niay  obtain  here.  The  two  verbs,  "  for- 
get" and  "decline  from,"  are  not  bo  very 
wide  in  meaning,  since  the  former,  ihakSlch, 
is  to  "leave"  something  from  forgetfulness, 
and  the  latter,  nataft,  rendered  here  "decline 
from,"  is  "  to  turn  away "  from  something. 
The  words  of  my  mouth  represent  as  it  were 
the  means  by  which  wisdom  may  be  pur- 
chased. 

Ver.  7. — Wisdom  is  the  principal  thing  | 
therefore  get  wisdom.  The  older  versions, 
such  as  the  Alexandrian  LXX.  (the  verse  is 
omitted  by  the  Vatican  LXX.),  Targum, 
and  Syriac,  agree  in  rendering  this  verse, 
"  The  beginning  of  wisdom  is  get  wisdom," 
which  is  equivalent  to  saying  that  the  begiu- 
ning  of  wisdom  consists  in  the  acquisition  of 
wisdom,  or,  as  Umbreit  explains,  "  in  the 
resolution  to  get  wisdom."  That  this  ren- 
dering, which  isadopted  by  Luther,  Delitzsch, 
and  Umbreit,  may  be  correct  appears  from 
oh.  i.  7  and  ix.  10,  where  we  have  the  same 
construction,  only  in  inverted  order.  Seneca's 
aphorism  is  conceived  in  much  the  same 
spirit :  "  Magna  pars  boni  est  velle  fieri 
bonum  " — "  A  large  part  of  good  is  the  wish 
to  become  good ; "  i.e.  that  the  beginning  of 
being  good  depends  to  a  large  extent  upon 
the  wish  to  become  so.  The  objections  to 
this  rendering  are  :  (1)  That  it  is  difficult  to 
see  how  the  beginning  of  wisdom  can  be  the 
acquisition  of  it.  (2)  That  elsewhere,  as  in 
ch.  i.  7  and  ix.  10,  the  beginning  of  wisdom 
is  represented  as  the  fear  of  the  Lord.  (3) 
That  it  does. not  fall  in  well  with  the  con- 
text or  with  the  aim  of  the  father's  teaching, 
which  is  to  hold  up  wisdom  as  pre-eminently 
a  blessing,  as  the  most  excellent  and  highest 
thing  attainable.  On  the  other  hand,  Hitzig, 
De  Dieu,  Doderlein,  Zookler,  render  as  in 
the  Authorized  Version,  "Wisdom  is  the 
principal  thing,  therefore  get  wisdom ;  "  t.e. 
wisdom  is  the  highest  good,  and  therefore 
ought  to  be  obtained.  The  word  reshith  is 
found  with  this  signification  in  ch.  xxiv.  20 ; 
1  Sam.  u.  29 ;  Job  xl.  19 ;  Jer.  xlix.  35  ; 
Amos  vi.  1 — 6.  And  with  all  thy  getting 
get  understanding.  This  does  not  mean,  aa 
the  Authorized  Version  seems  to  imply,  that 
while  you  are  acquiring  other  things,  you  are 
to  acquire  wisdom,  but  that  wisdom  is  to  be 
purchased  with  all  you  have  acquired  or 
gotten.  "  Getting"  (kin'yon)  is  the  purchase 
money.  No  price  is  too  high  to  be  paid  for 
her,  no  sacrifice  too  great ;  cf.  the  parables  of 
the  hidden  treasure  and  goodly  pearl  (Matt. 
xiii.  44  ;  Luke  x.  42),  in  both  of  which  the 
man  sold  "all  that  he  had"  to  obtain  the 


prize.  There  is  a  play  upon  the  words  In 
the  original  (kin'ydn'kt  k'nih),  which  Is  pre- 
served in  our  translation. 

Ver.  8, — Exalt  her,  and  she  shall  promote 
thee.  The  father  here  proceeds  to  point  out 
some  of  the  benefits  which  follow  from  the 
pursuit  of  Wisdom.  Exalt  her  (edl's'lgdh) ; 
Vulgate,  arripeillam;  JJS.X.., irepixapdKua'ov 
abrriv ;  'Targum,  dilige  earn ;  Syriac,  blandire 
illi ;  Arabic,  cireumsepi  earn.  The  Hebrew, 
eaVe'leah,  is  the  pilpel  imperative  of  adldl, 
"  to  lift  up,  exalt."  It  is  equivalent  to  the 
kal  form.  The  pilpel  form  rally  occurs  here, 
but  the  kal  participle  is  met  with  in  ch.  iv. 
19,  where  it  has  the  meaning  of  "  to  raise  up 
as  a  causeway"  (see  marginal  reading  in  loc). 
Gesenius  renders,  "  exalt  her,"  ec.  with 
praises.  The  meaning  of  the  verb,  as 
Delitzsch  says,  is  to  be  determined  by  the 
corresponding  "  she  shall  promote  thee " 
{th'rdm'mek),  and  this  verb  rotnem  is  (1) 
to  raise  or  make  high;  (2)  to  exalt  by  be- 
stowing honom-3  upon  one  of  low  estate,  i.e. 
raising  them  in  general  estimation ;  it  is 
so  used  in  1  Sam.  ii.  7  by  Hannah,  in  her 
song  of  thankfulness,  "  He.  (Jehovah)  bring- 
eth  low  and  lifteth  up  (m'r6m^m) ; "  (3)  to 
extol  by  praises,  as  in  Ps.  xxx.  2.  The 
radical  meaning  of  sdlal  seems  to  be  "to 
heap  up,"  as  a  rond  is  prepared  by  embank- 
meiits,  and  by  the  filling  up  of  inequalities 
(cf.  Isa.  Mi.  10).  In  this  sense  the  passage 
before  us  is  explained  by  I^evi  ben  Gersom, 
"Prepare  the  way  of  Wisdom,  and  walk 
assiduously  in  it."  But  the  context,  wherein 
the  idea  of  buying  is  evidently  used,  favours 
Botteher's  interpretation,  "Hold  it  or  her 
high  in  price,  bid  high  for  her  as  a  purchaser 
who  makes  offer  upon  offer,  to  secure  what 
he  wants."  So  Pi,  in  pretio  habe.  The 
LXX.  rendering,  "  Oircnmvallate  her,  en- 
close her  with  a  wall  or  hedge,"  which  is 
reproduced  in  the  Arabic,  cireumsepi  earn, 
"  hedge  her  around,"  seems  out  of  place  with 
the  context.  The  Talmudists  understand  the 
verb  as  signifying  "  to  examine  closely,"  "  to 
scrutinize,  meditate,  or  reflect "  upon  Wisdom 
constantly,  just  as  the  Koman  poet  says, 
"  Nocturna  versate  manu,  versate  diums  " — 
"  We  exalt  Wisdom  when  we  follow  her  pre- 
cepts," i.e.  when  we  esteem  her — the  idea 
which  is  presented  to  us  in  the  Targum  and 
Syriac  cited  above.  The  sentiment  of  the 
verse  agrees  with  what  Jehovah  says  in  the 
message  of  the  man  of  God  to  Eli,  in  1 
Sam.  ii.  30,  "  Them  that  honour  me  I  mil 
honour."  She  shall  bring  thee  to  honour, 
when  thou  dost  embrace  her.  The  LXX. 
reverses  the  order  of  ideas,  "  Honour  her  in 
order  that  she  may  embrace  thee."  Embrace 
her ;  i.e.  in  a  loving  and  affectionate  manner, 
as  a  husband  does  his  wife,  or  a  son  his 
mother.  (For  the  verb  khdvak,  see  oh.  v.  20 ; 
Cant.  ii.  6 ;  viii.  3.)    There  ore  only  thrt* 


ca.  w.  1—27.] 


THE  PE0VEEB3. 


87 


other  instances  where  this  verb  occurs  in  the 
pilel  form,  khlbblk.  Esteem  and  hononr,  the 
confidence  of  others,  elevation  to  ofSces  of 
trust  and  consequence,  are  some  of  the  re- 
wards with  which  Wisdom  repays  those  who 
esteem  and  love  her.  Others  foUow  in  the 
next  verse. 

Ver.  9. — An  ornament  of  grace  (liv'yafh 
then).  (On  this,  see  ch.  i.  9.)  A.  orown 
of  glory  shall  she  deliver  to  thee;  or,  as 
margin,  she  shaU  compass  thee  with  a  crown 
of  glory.  Deliver.  The  verb  miggen,  piel, 
since  the  kal,  mdgan,  is  not  used,  is,  however, 
properly,  "  to  give,  or  deliver,"  as  in  Gen. 
xiv.  20;  Ho3.  xi.  8.  That  this  is  the 
meaning  is  clear  from  the  corresponding 
"she  sh^l  give"  (tlttSn,  but  of.  ndthau, 
"to  give").  It  is  commonly  found  with 
an  accusative  and  dative,  but  here  takes 
two  accusatives.  Both  the  LXX.  and  the 
Vulgate  render,  "With  a  crown  of  glory 
or  delights  shall  she  protect  (xmepairtrlaiii, 
protegef)  thee ;  "  as  if  it  were  connected  with 
mdgen, "  a  shield,"  but  a  crown  is  not  usually 
associated  with  protection  or  defence.  "  A 
crown  of  glory,"  in  the  New  Testament,  is 
always  associated  with  the  everlasting 
honours  of  heaven,  as  in  Heb.  ii.  9 ;  2  Tim. 
iv.  8 ;  1  Pet.  iv.  4;  Eev.  ii.  20.  The  mean- 
ing is  here,  "  Wisdom  shall  confer  on  thee 
true  dignity." 

Ver.  10. — Many  commentators,  e.g.  Jerome, 
Bede,  Bwald,  Bertheau,  and  Hitzig,  suppose 
that  the  father's  instruction  closes  in  the  pre- 
ceding verse,  but  it  seems  more  appropriate 
to  consider  the  father  as  here  passing  to 
another  branch  of  Ijis  instruction,  which  is  to 
point  out  the  way  of  wisdom,  and  so  to  pre- 
pare for  his  warnings  which  follow  from 
ver.  14  to  ver.  19.  Eeceive ;  Icakh,  from  Idkah, 
"  to  receive"  (on  the  force  of  this  verb,  see  ch. 
i.  3).  He  who  shows  a  delight  or  willingness 
in  admitting  the  words  of  Wisdom — for  such 
a  character  the  father  claims  for  his  teaching, 
as  we  see  from  the  next  verse — shall  receive 
a  blessing.  ~  It  is  a  sign  of  grace  when  any 
even  show  themselves  open  to  listen  to  in- 
struction ;  but  it  is  a  greater  sign  when  this 
instruction  is  received  with  readiness  and 
pleasure  (Muifet).  The  years  of  thy  life 
(sh'tidthkhayyim) ;  literally,  years  of  thy  lives. 
The  plural  "  lives  "  expresses  the  idea  of  life 
in  the  abstract.  There  is  no  absolute  state- 
ment of  a  future  life  here,  though  by  the 
Christian  this  idea  may  be  indulged  in  on 
the  ground  of  a  fuller  revelation.  Tlie  pro- 
mise is  one  that  not  only  implies  the  pro- 
longation of  life,  but  also  a  life  of  prosperity 
and  enjoyment.  ShaU  be  many;  literally, 
shall  be  multiplied. 

Ver.  11. — The  perfects,  I  have  taught  and 
I  have  led,  in  the  original  seem  to  have 
here  the  absolute  signification  of  the  past. 
The  &ther  recalls  the  instruction  which  he 


has  given  in  times  past.  So  Delitzsoh.  But 
Gejerus  gives  them  the  combined  force  of 
the  past  and  future,  "  I  have  taught  and  I 
will  more  fully  teach,"  and  so  with  the  other 
verb.  The  Vulgate  renders,  mxmstraho,  "I 
will  show,"  and  ducam,  "  I  will  lead."  In  the 
way  of  wisdom  {bdSrSt  hhSk'mah)  may 
mean  "  in  the  way  that  leads  to,  or  by  which 
you  come  to  Wisdom ;  I  have  taught  yon  the 
manner  in  which  Wisdom  may  be  attained ; " 
or  "  the  way  in  which  Wisdom  walks " 
(Zoekler).  The  ways  of  Wisdom  are  described 
in  ch.  iii.  17  as  "-ways  of  pleasantness." 
The  next  clause  seems  to  indicate  that  the 
latter  explanation  is  to  be  preferred.  The  3 
(6')  indicates  the  subject  in  which  instruct 
tion  has  been  given.  In  right  paths  (b'mS'- 
g'le  ySsMr);  literally,  in  the  paths  of  rectitude; 
i.e.  of  straightnesB,  paths  of  which  the 
characteristic  is  uprightness.  (On  "paths," 
as  eiguifying  a  carriage-way,  see  ch.  ii.-9.) 
Instruction  and  direction  have  formed  the 
two  elements  in  the  father's  teaching.  These 
present  us  with  a  model  of  education.  "To 
teach  duty  without  truth  is  to  teach  practice 
without  motive  ;  to  teach  truth  without  duty 
is  to  teach  motive  without  the  practice  to 
which  it  should  lead  "  (Wardlaw). 

Ver.  ]2. — In  tliis  verse  the  fattier  depicts 
the  benefits  and  advantages  which  shall 
follow  from  "  receiving  his  words  "  (ver.  10)^ 
i.e.  from  attending  to  his  counsels  and  im- 
bibing the  principles  of  wisilom.  The 
whole  course  of  life  shall  be  freed  from 
obstacles  or  impediments,  from  anxiety, 
perplexity,  or  difBculty,  or  from  vacillation. 
When  thou  goest  may  refer  to  the  daily 
walk,  to  the  common  and  ordinary  events  or 
circumstances  incidental  to  life,  just  as  the 
corresponding  when  thou  runuest  may 
refer  to  cases  of  emergency  when  promptness 
and  decisive  action  are  called  for.  In  both 
cases  Wisdom,by  inspiring  unity  of  principle, 
gives  freedom  of  movement ;  in  ordinary  cases 
it  removes  embarrassment  and  perplexity 
arising  from  conflicting  interests  drawing 
now  in  one  direction,  now  in  another,  and  in 
extraordinary  cases  it  supplies  a  rule  of  con- 
duct which  prevents  our  falling  into  mistakes 
and  errors.  Or  the  verse  may  refer  to  the 
prosperity  which  shall  attend  all  the  under- 
takings of  those  who  are  in  Wisdom's  ways, 
whether  they  advance  slowly  or  rush  for- 
ward with  the  impetuosity  of  youth,  whether 
they  act  with  deliberation  or  with  haste. 
Shall  not  he  straitened  (16-yetsdr} ;  i.e.  shall 
not  be  narrowed  or  confined ;  Vulgate,  rum 
arctdbuntur ;  LXX.,  ou  irvyKKeiaiiia^Tat. 
The  future  yetsar  only  occurs  four  times  in 
the  Scriptures— here,  and  Job  xviii.  7;  ix. 
22;  Isa,  xlix.  19.  Itis  usually  derived  from 
the  root  ydtsdr,  whioli,  however,  is  not  found, 
cognate  with  tsUr,  "  to  straiten,"  "  to  be  nar- 
row."    Yetsar,  however,  always  occurs  in  the 


88 


THE  PROVERBS, 


fcH.  IV.  1—27. 


passive  sense,  though  an,  active  sismfication 
13  given  it  by  the  Eabbi  Nathan  ben  Jechiel, 
quoted  by  Delitzsch,  in  loo.,  who  rendeis, 
"  Thou  Shalt  not  need  to  bind  together,  or 
hedge  up  thy  way."  The  roots  ydtsdr  and 
Uur  partajce  more  or  less  of  the  idea,  of  bind- 
ing up,  oppressing,  putting  Into  narrow  and 
confined  circumstences  and  limits.  By  the 
expression  that  "tlie  steps  are  straitened" 
we  may  understand,  therefore,  that  there  is 
a  want  of  freedom  for  their  movements,  and 
consequently  that  they  are  impeded  or 
cramped.  The  Arabic  expressfon,  "  to  eon- 
traet  the  feet,"  signifies  the  diminishing  of 
good  fortune.  Compare  the  sintilar  expres- 
sion in  Job  xviil.  7,  "The  steps  of  his 
strength  shall  be  straitened."  The  psalmist 
presents  the  idea  of  the  verse  under  a  dif- 
ferent form,  "  Thou  hast  enlarged  my  steps 
under  me,  so  that  my  feet  did  not  slip  "  (Ps. 
x,vii.  36).  Thou  shalt  not  stumble ;  Id-Oiik- 
kashel,  hiph.  future.  The  niph.  nikshdl, 
equivalent  to  the  kal  TcdnhSl,  signifies  pro- 
perly "  to  totter,"  "  to  sink  down,"  used  of 
one  about  to  fall.  The  primary  idea,  however, 
usually  disregarded,  of  kashal,  is  "  to  totter 
in  the  ankles,"  equivalent  to  the  Latin  tali- 
pedare.  It  occurs  ag;iin  in  ch.  iv.  16,  and 
is  a  different  verb  &om  "  stumble "  in  ch. 
lii.  23  (which  see). 

Ver.  13. — The  short  but  urgent  admoni- 
nitions  in  this  verse  may  be  explained  by 
the  knowledge  which  the  father  has  of  the 
temptations  to  which  youth  is  exposed  and 
the  liability  of  youth  to  fall  into  them,  as 
well  as  by  the  fact  that  Instruction,  or  Wis- 
dom, is  the  bestower  of  life.  This  latter 
conviction  is  the  reason  why  he  urges  "  tak- 
ing fast  hold"  of  Wisdom.  The  tenacious 
grasp  with  which  the  shipwrecked  sinking 
sailor  lays  hold  on  any  spar  or  plank  float- 
ing near  will  illustrate  the  kind  of  grasp 
with  which  Wisdom  is  to  be  held.  It  is  no 
less  a  virtue  to  keep  and  hold  fast  a  good 
thing  than  to  get  it  at  the  first  beginning 
(Muffet).  Instruction  (mtisaj-),  usually  of  a 
disciplinary  nature  (see  oh.  i,  3),  here  more 
particularly  the  instruction  of  the  father,  but 
in  a  wider  sense  wisdom  generally,  with 
which  it  is  synonymous,  as  appears  from  the 
feminine,  "  let  her  not  go,  keep  her,"  musar 
being  masculine ;  or  the  feminines  may 
refer  back  to  "Wisdom"  in  ver.  11.  So 
Mercerus  and  Buxtorf.  Tor  she  is  thy  life 
(Ici-hi  klidyyilca) ;  i.e:  she  brings  life  to  thee. 
Wisdom  is  represented  as  the  bestower  of 
long  life,  in  ch.  iii.  2,  16,  18.  Just  in  pro- 
portion as  Wisdom  is  retained  and  guarded, 
so  is  life  secured,  and  so  far  as  the  hold 
npon  her  is  lost,  so  are  the  hopes  of  life 
diminished.  Life  depends  upon  the  obser- 
vance of  her  precepts. 

Ver.  14. — ^From  admonition  the  father 
pjsses  to  warning.    The  connection  with 


the  preceding  section  is  obvious.  There 
are  two  ways  diametrically  opposite — tiia 
way  of  wisdom,  and  the  way  of  evil ;  the 
one  the  way  of  life,  the  oiihei  fraught 
with  death,  because  a  way  of  darkness 
and  violenoe,^  As  the  father  has  dealt 
with  the  former,  so  now  he  deals  with  the 
latter.  With  these  warnings  we  may  also 
comp.  ch.  i.  10 — 15  and  ii.  10 — 15,  where 
muoh  the  same  warning  is  given,  and  the 
way  of  the  wicked  is  described  ia  almost  the 
same  terms.  The  warning  of  the  father  takes 
a  threefold  form :  (1)  enter  not ;  (2)  go  not ; 
(3)  avoid.  In  efffeet  he  says  this  is  the  only 
course  to  be  adopted  in  order  to  keep  a  tirm 
hold  of  Wisdom  which  he  has  counselled  in 
the  preceding  verse  (13).  Enter  not;  S-tAS, 
from  hd,  "  to  come  in,"  "  to  enter,"  i.e.  do 
not  even  enter.  Tlie  Yulgats.  renders, 
"  Delight  not  in,"  evidently  from  reading 
tdve,  which  occurs  in  ch.  i  10.  But  our 
reading  is  to  be  preferred,  as  dvdh,  "to 
acquiesce  in,"  from  which  tdv'i,  is  not  used 
with  a,  here  denoting  place,  but  with  '?. 
Go  not  (Sl-t'd»hsher);  i.e,  do  not  walk  m. 
The  two  verbs  "  to  enter  "  (6<5)  and  "  to  go  " 
{Ishsher)  stand  in  the  relation  of  entering 
and'  going  on — ingreasus  and  progfesms-  So 
Gejerus  and  Delitzsch.  The  piel  tshsher,  here 
used,  is  properly  "to  go  straight  on,'*  like 
the  kal  dshar,  of  which  it  is  an  intensive 
(cf.  ch.  ix.  6).  It  is  the  bold,  presumptuous 
walk,  the  stepping  straight  out  of  the  evil, 
which  is  here  indicated^  and  against  this 
the  father  warns  his  son.  The  sense  is,  "  If 
you  have  entered  the  way  of  the  wicked^  do 
not  continue  or  persevere  in  it."  The  other 
meanings  of  the  verb  dghSr,  viz.  "  to  guide 
straight"  (ch.  xxiii.  19),  "to esteem  happy 
and  prosperous"  (ch.  xxxi.  28),  are  not  in 
place  here,  as  they  destroy  the  parallelism  of 
thought,  and  on  the  same  ground  the  l-XX. 
and  Syriao  renderings,  "  envy  not "  and/tijSe 
Cn\^(Tris,  are  to  be  rejected.  The  wicked 
(ishaim),  i.e.  the  godless  (cf.  Ps.  i.  1);  is 
parallel  with  "evil  men"  (rdimy,  i.e.  the 
habitually  wicked. 

Ver.  15. — Avoid  it ;  p'rdehn,  the  kal  im- 
perative of  pdra,  properly, "  to  let  go,"  hence 
"to  reject,  or  abhor."  (On  the  verb,  see  ch. 
i.  25,  where  it  is  rendered,  "  set  at  naught.") 
The  same  verb  also  occurs  in  ch.  viii.  33 ; 
xiii.  18 ;  xv.  32.  It ;  i.e.  the  way.  The  suffix 
of  the  verb  in  the  original  is  feminine, 
"avoid  her;"  dSrSk,  "the  way,"  being  com- 
mon. Turn  from  it  (ji'teh  medldyv).  The 
original  is  a  pregnant  expression  equivalent 
to  "turn  aside  from  it,  so  that  yea  do  not 
come  to  stand  upon  it."  The  word  medldyv, 
equivalent  to  the  Latin  desuper  ea,  has  much 
tlie  same  force  as  the  French  de  iiesiv^  and 
tlie^Italian  di  sopra  (Delitzsch).  The  verb 
sdtdh  is,  as  in  the  Authorized  Version,  "  to 
turn,  or  go  aside."     Pass  away;  Sv&r,  ial 


CH.  IV.  1—27.} 


THE  PE0VERB8. 


imperatiTe  of  dvar,  "  to  pass  over,''  equiva- 
lent to  Latin  transire,  here  means  "  to  pass 
on,  or  along,"  "to  go  beyond,"  like  the  Ger- 
maji  Oer  weiter  gehn.  Ike  counsel  o£  the 
father  is  not  only  "turn  aside  from,"  but 
"put  the  greatest  possible  distance  between 
you  and  it."  The  injunction,  so  absolutely 
stated,  to  have  nothing  to  do  with  sin,  ia 
required,  if  not  indeed  prompted,  by  the 
knowledge  of  the  fact  that  youth,  confident 
in  its  own  power  of  resistance,  frequently 
indulges  in  the  fatal  mistake  of  imagining 
that  it  can  dally  with  sin  with  impunity. 
The  o«ly  course  compatible  with  safety  is 
to  entiiely  avoid  it. 

Ver.  16. — This  verse  exhibits  the  extreme 
depravity  and  debasement  into  which  "  the 
wicked "  (r'ahaim)  and  "  the  evil"  (rdim)  of 
ver.  14  have  fallen.  Their  sins  are  not  sins 
of  frailty,  but  arise  fri/m  premeditatioa  and 
from  their  insatiable  deoire  to  commit  wicked- 
ness. Sin  has  become  to  them  a  kiad  of 
second  nature,  and.  unless  they  indulge  in 
it,  sleep  is  banished  from  their  eyes.  Xhey 
sleep  not ;  lo-yish'nu,  future  of  yashan,  "  to 
fall  asleep ; "  the  future  here  being  used  for 
the  present,  as  ia  frequently  the  case  in  the 
Proverbs,  and  denoting  a  permanent  condi- 
tion or  habit.  Unless  they  cause 'some  to 
fall ;  i.e.  "  unless  they  have  betrayed  others 
into  gin,"  taking  the  verb  in  an  ethical  sense 
(Zockler),  or,  which  is  preferable,  owing  to 
ver.  16a,  unless  they  have  done  them  some 
injury  (Mercerus) ;  Vulgate,  nisi  sttpplan- 
taverint  For  the  Khetib  yik'shMu,  kat, 
which  would  mean  "unless  they  have 
stumbled  or  fallen,"  the  Keri  substitutes 
the  hiph.  ySli'sMhi,  "unless  they  have 
caused  some  to  fall."  The  hiph.  is  found 
without  any  object,  as  here,  in  2  Chron.  xxv. 
8).  (On  the  verb  hhdsal,  from  which  it  is 
derived,  see  eh.  iv.  12.)  With  the  statement 
of  the  verse  we  may  eomp.are  David's  com- 
plaint of  the  persistent  persecution  of  his 
enemies  (Pa.  lix.  15),  "  If  they  be  not 
satisfied,  then  will  they  stay  all  night" 
(margin).  A  similar  construction  to  the 
one  before  us  occurs  in  Virgil :  "  Et  si  non 
aliqua  nocuisses,  mortuus  esses  " — "  And  had 
you  not,  by  some  means  or  other  done  him 
an  injury,  you  would  have  died  "  ('  Eclog.,' 
iii.  15);  cf.  alw)  Juvenal  :  "  Ergo  non  aliter 
potent  dormire;  quibusdam  somnum  rixa 
facit" — "Therefore,  not  otherwise,  would 
he  have  slept ;  contention  to  some  produces 
sleep."  Hitzig  rejects  vers.  16  and  17  against 
all  manuscript  authority. 

Ver.  17; — ^For  (&t,  equivalent  to  the  Greek 
yip)  is  here  explanatory.  It  serves  not  so 
much  to  introduce  another  independent 
statement,  als  one  which  accounts  for  the 
statement  made  in  the  preceding  verse,  that 
the  wicked  sleep  not  unless  they  have  (lone 
miichief,  i.«.  it  atates  the  reason  why  they 


are  so  conditioned.  There  is  no  ooiapaiison 
expressed  in  the  original,  as  the  rendering 
adopted  by  Schnltens  and  otliers.  implies, 
"  For  wickedness  do  they  eat  as  bread;  and 
violence  do  they  drink  as  wine,"  which  is 
evidently  based  on  Job  xv.  16,  "Which 
drinketh  up  iniquity  like  water,"  and  Job 
xxxiv.  7,  "  Who  drinketh  ap  scorning  like 
water."  The  literal  rendering  is,  far  (hey 
eat  the  bread  of  wickedness^  and  the  wine  oj 
violence  do  they  drink.  The  bread  of  wicked- 
ness {IShhSm  rlsha)  is  not  bread  which 
consists  in  wickedness,  but  bread  which  is 
obtained  by  wickedness,  just  as  the  wine  of 
Tiolenoe  (yiyln  khdmasim)  is  not  the  wine 
which  produces  violence,  but  the  wine  that 
is  procured  by  violent  deeds.  Theisr  sup- 
port, what  they  eat  and  drink,  is  obtained 
by  wickedness  and  injustice.  Tliey  live  by 
wrong.  For  such  expressions  as  "  the  bread 
of  wickedness  "  and  "  the  wine  of  violence," 
ef.  Deut.  xvi.  3,  "  the  broad  of  afiliption ; " 
Ps.  cxxvii.  2,  "the  bread  of  sorruws;" 
and  Amos  ii.  8,  "  the  wine  of  the  cou- 
demnedi"  There  is  a  change  of  tease  in  the 
verbs,  the  first  being  perfect,  "they  have 
eaten,"  and  the  second  future,  "  they  shall 
drink,"  which  Delitzsch  explains  as  repre- 
senting the  twofold  act — ^first  eating  the 
bread,  and  then  wasliing  it  down  with  wine. 
Ver.  18. — ^A  contrast  is  drawn  in  this  and 
the  following  verse  between  the  path  of 
the  just  and  the  way  of  the  wicked.  Tlie 
former  is,  by  an  extremely  beautiful  image, 
likened  to  the  light  at  dawn,  which  goes  on 
increasing  in  brightness  and  intensity  as  the 
day  advances,  until  at  length  it  reaches  its 
meridian  splendour  and  glory.  An  exactly 
similar  figure  is  found  in  David's  last  words 
(2  Sam.  xxiii.  4).  The  path  of  the  just ;  i.e, 
their  moral  course.  As  the  shining  light 
(Jt'6r  ndgali) ;  i.e.  as  the  light  of  dawn.  The 
word  nSgdh,  from  ndgah,  "  to  shine,"  is  a 
noun,  and  properly  signifies  "brightness," 
"  shining,"  "  splendour."  It  is  used  also  to 
designate  the  dawn,  the  light  of  the  sun 
when  it  first  mounts  tlie  horizon,  and  sheds 
its  beams  over  the  landscape,  as  in  Isa.  Ix. 
3,  "  Kings  (shall  come)  to  the  brightness 
(ndgdh)  of  thy  rising;"  and  Isa.  Ixii.  1,  "^Unlil 
the  righteousness  thereof  go  forth  as  the 
brightness  (ndgroA)"  (of- 2  Sam.  xxiiL4,.where 
the  same  word  also  occurs).  Michaelis 
and  Schultens  refer  ndgah  to  "the  patli," 
and  render,  "  The  path  of  the  just  is  splendid 
as  the  light."  So  Dathe  and  others ;  and  ia 
this  sense  it  was  understood  by  the  LXX., 
"  The  path  of  the  just  shall  shine  as  the  light 
shines."  The  Vulgate  renders,  quasi  lux 
splendens.  That  sMneth  more  and  more 
(hdUk  vddr) ;  literally,  going  and  shining — a 
common  Hebrew  idiom  denoting  progression 
or  increase.  The  construction  of  the  parti- 
ciple hSUh,  from  hdldk,  "to  go^"  with  the 


90 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[oh.  IV.  1—27. 


psrticiple  of  another  verb,  is  found  in  1  Sam. 
xvii.  41,  "The  Philistme  came  nearer  and 
nearer  (hSUk  v'kdriv) ; "  1  Sam.  iL  26,  "  The 
child  Samuel  grew  on  more  and  more  (h6Uh 
xfhadeV)"  (of.  2 Chron. xvii.  12;  Jonah i.  11). 
Unto  the  perfect  day  (dd-n'ltdn  hayydm); 
Vulgate,  usque  ad  perfectam  diem.  The 
Hebrew,  n'kSn  hdyyom,  corresponds  to  the 
Greek,  fi  aTaSepa  ij.ecrrin$pta,  equivalent  to 
"  the  high  noon,"  wlien  the  sun  seems  to 
ttand  ttill  in  the  heavens.  The  figure,  as 
Fleischer  remarks,  is  probably  derived  from 
the  balance,  the  tongue  of  the  balance  of 
day,  which  before  or  after  is  inclined  either 
to  the  right  or  tlie  left,  being  at  midday 
perfectly  upright,  and  as  it  were  firm.  So 
hurt,  the  unused  kal,  from  which  n'kdn,  the 
niph.  participle,  is  derived,  is  "  to  stand  up- 
right," and  in  hiph.  "  to  be  set,"  "  to  stand 
firm,"  "to  be  established,"  and  hence  the 
expression  might  be  rendered,  "until  the 
steady,  or  established  day,"  which,  however, 
refers  to  the  midday,  or  noon,  and  not  to 
that  point  when  day  succeeds  dawn,  as 
Kosenmiiller  and  Schultens  on  Hos.  vi.  3 
maintain.  The  comparison  is  not  extended 
beyond  the  midday,  because  the  wish  of  the 
father  was  to  indicate  the  full  knowledge 
which  the  just  attain  in  God,  and  which  can 
know  of  no  decline.  A  similar  figure  of 
gi'adual  development  is  found  in  our  Lord's 
parable  of  the  seed  growing  secretly  (Mark 
iv.  28),  and  is  visible  in  Ps.  Ixxxiv.  7,  "  Tliey 
grow  from  strength  to  strength,  every  one  of 
them  in  Zion  appeareth  before  God."  The 
verse  illustrate?  the  gradual  growth  and 
increase  of  the  righteous  in  knowledge,  holi- 
ness, and  joy,  all  of  which  are  inseparably 
connected  in  the  career  of  such. 

Ver.  19. — The  way  of  the  wicked  is  as 
darkness.  In  contrast  with  the  path  of  the 
just  is  the  way  of  the  wicked,  which  is  de- 
scribed as  darkness  itself;  i.e.  so  deeply 
enveloped  in  gloom  that  the  wicked  are 
not  able  even  to  see  the  obstacles  and 
impediments  against  which  they  stumble, 
and  which  are  the  cause  of  their  ruin.  It 
is  a  way  dark  throughout — a  via  tenehrosa 
(Vulgate) — terminating  at  length  in  "the 
blackness  of  darkness."  As  light  is  emble- 
matical of  knowledge,  holiness,  and  joy,  so 
darkness  represents  ignorance,  unholiness, 
and  misery  (see  Isa.  viii.  22). '  Barhness 
(Sphildli);  strictly,  thick  darkness,  midnight 
gloom,  the  entire  absence  of  light.  It  is 
the  word  used  of  the  plague  of  "thick 
darkness "  that  settled  over  all  the  land  of 
^gyptt  even  a  darkness  that  "might  be 
felt,"  when  the  Egyptians  "saw  not  one 
another,  nor  any  arose  from  his  place  for 
three  days "  <Exod.  x.  21—23).  It  occurs 
again  in  ch.  vii.  9,  "in  the  black  and  dark 
night."  In  this  darkness  the  wicked  cannot 
belp  bnt   stumbla     Compare   our   Lord's 


teaching,  "But  if  a  man  walk  in  the  night, 
he  stumbletb,  because  there  is  no  light  in 
him"  (John  xi.  10;  of.  xii.  36).  The  ex- 
pression, they  know  not  at  what  they 
stumble,  carries  with  it  the  idea  that  they 
are  so  ignorant  that  they  neither  know 
wickedness  as  wickednes'?,  nor  do  they 
apprehend  the  destruction  which  it  in- 
volves. "Sins,  however  great  and  detest- 
able they  may  be,  are  looked  upon  as  trivial, 
or  as  not  sins  at  all,  when  men  get  accus- 
tomed to  them"  (St.  Augustine,  'Enchiri- 
dion,' cap.  80).  On  "  stumble  "  (kdshSl),  see 
ver.  12 ;  and  on  the  destruction  of  the  wicked 
implied  in  the  stumbling,  see  ch.  i.  27,  sej., 
ii.  18—22 ;  iii.  35. 

Ver.  20. — The  teacher  here  resumes  his 
admonitions  after  thus  citing  the  example 
of  his  father's  teaching,  and  showing  how  ii 
resembled  the  tenor  of  his  own  precepts, 
which,  upon  such  a  consideration,  were  most 
worthy  of  attention. 

Ver.  21. — Let  them  not  depart  from  thine 
eyes ;  i.e.  keep  them  constantly  in  view  as 
the  guide  of  the  whole  conduct.  These 
words  are  a  repetition  of  ch.  iii.  21,  just  aa 
the  latter  part  of  the  verse  reproduces  the 
thought  of  ch.  ii.  1.  J)epart.  The  hiph. 
ydlltzu  is  here  used  instead  of  the  kal  yalizu 
of  ch.  iii.  21,  but  has  the  same  force.  In 
the  midst  9f  thine  heart ;  i.e.  in  its  inmost 
recesses ;  there  the  words  and  sayings  are  to 
be  guarded  as  a  man  guards  a  treasure  stowed 
away  in  the  inmost  chambers  of  a  house. 
The  expression  implies  cherishinfi  them 
with  an  internal  affection.  The  terms  oi 
the  verse  may  be  illustrated  by  Deut.  vi.  6, 
8,  "And  these  words,  which  I  command 

thee  this  day,  shall  be  in  thine  heart And 

thou  shalt  bind  them  for  a  sign  upon  thine 
hand,  and  they  shall  be  as  frontlets  between 
thine  eyes." 

Ver.  22.— They  are  Ufa;  i.e.  they  bring 
life  Qchayyim;  the  plural,  as  usual).  TJnto 
those  that  find  them;  i.e.  to  those  who  by 
effort  get  possession  of  and  procure  them; 
the  verb  mdtsd,  "to  find,"  embodying  the 
idea  of  activity.  Health;  mdr'pS,  derived 
from  the  root  rdphd,  "to  heal"  (like  ripWuth 
of  ch.  iii.  8,  which  see),  and  hence  rather 
"the  means  of  health"  than  "health," 
"  healing,"  or,  as  margin,  "  medicine,"  "  that 
which  restores  to  health;"  LXX.,  Uais; 
Vulgate,  sanUat.  The  moral  condition  is 
regarded  as  enfeebled  by  sickness,  from 
which  it  may  be  restored  to  health  and 
soundness  by  the  words  of  wisdom.  The 
effect  of  these,  however,  is  not  only  to  re- 
store to  health,  l)ut  to  maintain  in  health. 
Their  tendency  is  to  promote  "a  sound  mind 
in  a  sound  body."  To  their  flesh;  literally, 
to  his  fieth  ;  the  singular,  h'edrd,  being  used 
instead  of  the  plural,  which  we  should  have 
expected,  because  what  is  said  appliei  to 


OH.  IT.  1—27.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


01 


each  one  of  those  who  receive  the  precepts 
of  wisdom.  The  all  implies  the  complete- 
ness of  the  restoration ;  it  is  not  confined  to 
one  part,  but  pervades  the  whole  body. 

Ver.  23. — ^Keep  thy  heart  with  all  dili- 
gence ;  properly,  above  all  things  that  have 
to  he  guarded,  keep  or  guard  thy  heart.  So 
Mercerus,  Gesenius,  Delitzsoh,  Zockler. 
This  seems  to  be  the  right  meaning  of  the 
phrase,  mikkol-mieh'mar,  rendered  in  the 
Authorized  Version  "  with  all  diligence," 
misk'mar,  from  ihdmar,  "to  guard,"  being 
the  object  of  guarding ;  that  which  is  to  be 
guarded.  It  is  as  if  the  toaolier  saiii,  "  Guard 
riches,  property,  health,  body,  everything,  in 
short,  in  which  you  have  a  legitimate  in- 
terest, or  which  is  advantageous ;  but  before 
and  above  everything  else,  keep  a  guard  on 
your  heai-t.  The  rabbins  Jarchi,  Ben  Ezra, 
Eashi,  however,  give  a  different  rendering, 
"  From  everything  which  is  to  be  avoided 
(ab  omni  re  cavenda)  guard  thy  heart ; "  but 
the  objection  to  this  is  that  it  ignores  the 
radical  meaning  of  the  verb  shdrmr,  from 
which  mUh'mar  is  derived,  as  stated  above, 
which  is  not  that  of  avoiding,  but  of  guard- 
ing. A  third  rendering  is, "  Keep  thy  heart 
.with  all  keeping ; "  so  the  Vulgate,  omni 
eustodia  serva  cor  tuum;  and  the  LXX., 
irdtrri  <^u\aKi7  T^jpei  iriiv  KapSlav;  on  which 
the  Authorized  Version  seems  to  be  based. 
Another  rendering,  similar  to  the  first,  ex- 
cept that  it  gives  mish'mar  the  active  signi- 
fication of  guarding  instead  of  the  pnssive 
one  of  being  kept  or  guarded,  is,  "Keep 
thy  heart  more  than  any  other  keeping 
(prm  omni cmtudia)."  Origen,  'Hex, ; '  Field. 
Again,  Aquila  and  Theodotion  render, 
"Keep  thy  heart  by  reason  of  every  com- 
mandment (oTrb  vavrhs  <j>v\dyfLa,TOs),"  tlius 
bringing  into  prominence  the  occasion  and 
the  obligation  of  keeping  the  heart,  which 
is  that  we  are  so  commanded.  Eeart  Qev) ; 
here  the  affections  and  the  moral  conscious- 
ness. Tor  out  of  it  are  the  issues  of  life. 
The  conjunction  "for"  introduces  the 
reason.  The  fact  here  stated  is  that  the 
moral  conduct  of  life,  its  actions  and  pro- 
ceedings, are  determined  by  the  condition 
of  the  heart.  If  the  heart  is  pure,  the  life 
will  be  pure ;  if  the  heart  is  corrupt,  tlie  life 
will  be  corrupt.  Tlie  heart  is  heie  com- 
pared with  a  fountain.  The  same  idea 
which  is  affixed  to  it  in  its  physical  sense 
is  also  assigned  to  it  in  its  ethical  or  moral 
sense.  Physically,  it  is  the  central  (jrgan  of 
the  body ;  morally,  it  is  the  seat  of  the  affec- 
tions and  the  centre  of  the  moral  conscious- 
ness. From  this  moral  centre  flow  foith 
"  the  issues  of  life ;  "  i.e.  the  currents  of  the 
moral  life  take  their  rise  in  and  flow  forth 
from  it,  just  as  from  the  heart,  physically 
considered,  the  blood  is  propelled  and  flows 
forth  into  the  arterial  iyitem,  by  which  it 


is  conveyed  to  the  remotest  extremities  of 
the  body.  And  as  the  bodily  health  de- 
pends on  the  healthy  action  of  the  heart,  in 
the  moral  health  depends  on  and  is  in- 
fluenced by  the  state  in  which  this  spring 
of  all  action  is  preserved.  Issues;  tdts'ddth, 
from  ydtsar, "  to  go  forth,"  are  the  place  from 
which  anything  goes  forth,  and  hence  a 
fountain.  For  "the  issues  of  life,"  the 
LXX.  reads,  e^oSoi  fwijs,  the  Vulgate,  exitus 
vitss.  With  this  passage  compare  our  Lord's 
teaching  (Matt.  xv.  19;  Mark  vii.  21—23; 
Luke  vi.  43 — i5). 

Ver.  24. — The  following  admonitions  of 
this  cliapter  bear  reference  to  the  outward 
conduct  of  life.  They  continue  the  subject 
of  ver.  23  by  showing  how  the  guarding  of 
the  heart  is  to  be  done,  There  is  the  most 
intimate  connection  between  the  heart  as 
the  fuuntain  of  the  moral  life  and  of  the  con- 
duct of  life,  which,  though  ilettimined  by 
the  condition  of  the  heart,  in  its  turn  reacts 
upon  the  heart  as  the  moral  centre,  and 
keeps  it  pure.  Thus  the  subject  is  treated 
from  its  two  sides.  On  vers.  24  and  25 
Hitzig  remarks  that  they  "  warn  against  an 
arbitrary  perverting  of  the  moral  judgment 
into  which  evil  passions  so  easily  betray, 
and  admonish  not  to  give  misdirection  to 
tliought  within  the  department  of  morality." 
A  froward  mouth,  and  perverse  lips ;  lite- 
rally, jjerjierseness  of  mouth  and  waywardness 
of  lips  {ikk'thulh  peh  vulzulh  s'phdlUdylm). 
"  Perversity  of  mouth  "  is  fraudulent,  deceit- 
ful speech;  that  which  twists,  distorts,  per- 
verts, oi-  misrepresents  what  is  true,  and 
hence  falsehood  (oh.  iv.  24;  vi.  12;  xix.  1). 
The  (TKoKiiv  irrSfia  of  the  LXX.,  i.e.  the 
"  tortuous  mouth,"  in  a  metaphorical  sense. 
The  phrase  is  very  similar  in  meaning  with 
the  parallel  **  waywardness  of  lips,"  which 
means  speech  whioli  turns  aside  from  what 
is  true  and  right,  the  noun  Idzuth  boiu'^ 
del  iveil  from  Idzdh,  or  luz,  "  to  bend  aside." 
The  tongue  is  the  unruly  member  (Jas.  iii 
2).  Speech  is  the  index  of  the  mind  (Lapide). 
Vigilance  over  the  heai  t  is  vigilance  over 
the  mouth,  inasmuch  as  "  out  of  the  abun- 
dance of  the  heart  tlie  mouth  speaketli " 
(Matt.  xii.  34).  The  admonition  may  have 
a  twofold  application,  and  may  mean  either 
do  not  indulge  in  this  kind  of  speech  your- 
self, exercise  an  unremitting  jealousy  over 
every  propensity  to  it;  or  have  no  dealings 
with  those  who  are  guilty  of  it,  as  in  Ps. 
ci.  5. 

Ver.  25.— Let  thine  eyes  look  right  on, 
and  let  thine  eyelids  look  straight  before 
thee.  "To  look  right  on"  and  "to  look 
straight  before  one"  is  to  fix  the  eyes 
steadily  and  unswervingly  upon  an  object 
before  them,  not  to  allow  the  gaze  to  deflect 
either  to  the  right  hand  or  to  the  left.  As 
a  noun,  the  word  ndkdkh,  rendered  "  right 


92 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[oh.  IV.  1—27. 


on,"  Bigmfies  what  is  straight  in  front  of 
one ;  adverbially,  it  has  the  same  meaning 
as  that  given  in  the  Antborized  Version. 
The  corresponrling  "  before  "  (nigld)  is  sub.- 
stantively  the  side  of  any  object  which  is 
opposite  one,  and  as  a  preposition  is  equiva- 
lent to  "  before,"  "  in  tile  presence  of,"  like 
the    Latin    coram.    The   versions    (LXX., 
Syriao,  Targum)  take  ndlcakh  in  the  sense 
of  "  right  things : "  "  Let  thine  eyes  look  at 
right  things ; "  contemplate  them,  aim  at 
justice  and  equity.    This  meaning  is  given 
to  the  cognate  adjective  ndlcSalth  in  ch.  viii. 
9 ;  xxiv.  26 ;  Isa.  xxvi.  10  ;  xxx.  10 ;  lix. 
14 ;  but  in  the  Proverbs  the  word  ndltakh 
only  occurs  twice  (here  and  ver.  21),  either 
as    an    adverb,  "right   on,"  "straightfor- 
wardly,"   or   as    a   preposition,    "  before." 
Look  straight.     Gesenius  takes  this   verb 
yaehar  in  hiph.,  "  to  make  straight,"  as  used 
elliptically :  "  Let  thine  eyelids  direct  a  way 
before  thee  ; "  but  the  meaning  is  the  same 
as  "Let  them  look  straight  before  thee." 
The  Syriao,  Gejems,  and  Holden  render, 
"Let  thine  eyelids  direct  thy  way  before 
thee ; "  i.e.  do  nothing  rashly,  but  every- 
thing  with    premerlitation ;   examine    thy 
conduct,  and  see  that  it  is  right.     The  verb 
ydshar  haa  this  meaning,  "to  direct,"  in  ch. 
iii.  6 ;  xi.  5,  but  it  is  here  used  intransitively 
(Mercerus).    Eyelids  (aph'dppimy,  so  called 
from  their  fluttering,  rapid  motion,  here 
used  by  way  of   poetic    parallelism  with 
"  eyes."    What  the  command  inculcates  is 
simplicity  of  aim  or  principle,  singleness  of 
motive.    The  moral  gaze  is  to  be  steadily 
fixed,  because  if  it  wanders  indolently,  lasci- 
viously, aimlessly,  it  imperils  the  purity  of 
tiie  soul.    This  verse  may  be  understood,  as 
Zockler,  as  containing  a  command  levelled 
against  dishonest  practices.     The  man  who 
intends  to  cheat  his  neighbour  looks  this 
way  and  that  how  he  may  deceive  him. 
Such  an  interpretation  may  be  maintained 
on  the  gi'ound    that  the    former  verse  is 
directed   against  falsehood  in  speech;  this 
against  fulseliood  in  action.    But  the  former 
view  is  preferable.    If  you  wish  to  keep  the 
heart,  you  must  be  guided  by  simplicity  of 
aim  ;  look  not  aside  either  to  the  one  hand 
or  to  the  other,  leot  you  may  be  led  astray 
by  the  seductions  and  temptations  wliich 
imperil  the  onward  and  upward  progress  of 


the  soul.  The  passage  remindB  us  of  the 
"  single  eye  "  (Sir\ous),  "  simple,"  i.e.  intent 
on  heaven  and  God,  of  Matt.  vi.  22. 

Ver.  26.— Ponder  the  path  of  tty  feet; 
properly,  maJee  straight  or  level  the  path  of 
thy  feet.  'The  command  carries  on  the  idea 
of  the  previous  verse.  Simplicity  of  aim  in 
the  moral  life  is  to  be  accompanied  by  atten- 
tion to  the  moral  condnct.  The  sense  is, 
remove  every  obstacle  which  may  impede 
or  render  insecure  the  way  of  moral  life, 
and  thus  avoid  every  false  step.  The  mean- 
ing "to  ponder,"  i.e.  "to  weigh,"  seems  to 
be  given  to  the  verb  pdlUs,  piel  of  the  un- 
used pdJas  here  used  only  in  Ps.  Iviii.  3 
and  possibly  in  ch.  v.  21.  Its  ordinary  sig- 
nification is  "  to  make  level,  or  even,"  as  in 
Isa.  xxvi.  7;  xl.  12;  and  ch.  v.  6.  The 
LXX.  keeps  tliis  in  view  in  rendering, 
"  Make  straight  paths  for  tliyfeet"  (cf.  Heb. 
xii.  13).  The  Authorized  Version  would 
mean,  "Weigh  your  conduct  as  in  a  balance ; 
before  acting,  consider  the  consequences  and 
nature  of  tlie  act."  The  second  clause,  and 
let  all  thy  ways  be  established,  is  in  effect 
only  a  repetition  of  the  preceding  thought, 
since  it  signifies,  "  See  that  thy  conduct  is 
correct;  let  all  thy  ways  be  definite  and 
fixed."  The  marginal  reading,  "And-  all 
thy  ways  shall  be  ordered  aright,"  gives  the 
literal  rendering ta the  tense;  yikkonu  being 
the  future  hiph.  of  kun,  "  to  be  established," 
"to  stand  firm."  This  Ttonld  express  the 
result  of  giving  heed  to  one's  conduct. 

Ver.  27. — This  verse,  with  which  the 
teacher  closes  this  discourse,  is  very  closely 
connected  with  ver.  26,  which  it  more  fully 
explains.  The  command  is  the  parallel  of 
ver.  25.  As  in  ver.  25^  the  gaze  is-  to  be 
concentrated.  So  here  the  feet  are  not  to 
deflect  nor  turn  aside  to  byways.  Nothing 
is  to  be  permitted  to  draw  one  off  from  the 
right  way,  neither  adversity,  nor  prosperity, 
nor  anything  which  can  possess  the  power 
of  temptation  (Bayne  and  Wardlaw).  Re- 
move thy  foot  from  evlL  A  fuller  expres- 
sion than  "  depart  from  evil,"  of  ch.  iii.  7. 
Both  the  LXX.  and  the  Vulgate  add,  "  For 
the  Lord  knows  the  ways  which  are  on  tliy 
right  hand ;  but  they  are  perverse-  which 
are  on  thy  left.  He  shall  make  thy  paths 
straight,  and  shall  advance  thy  ways  in 
peace." 


HOMILETICS. 

Vera.  1 — t — A  family  heirloom,  I.  Diyinb  wisdom  ib  thb  brst  of  family 
HETRLOOMs.  Solomon  transmits  to  his  son  the  instruction  which  he  has  received  from 
his  father.  Thus  he  aims  at  making  it  an  old  household  treasure.  He  also  hands 
down  royal  power,  great  possessions,  national  fame.  But  wisdom  is  to  him  an  inherii- 
tance  more  precious  than  all  other  things.  The  rest  may  go  rather  than  that  the 
enttul  shall  be  cut  off  this  most  prized  part  of  the  family  estate     It  would  be  well  il 


OH.IV.  1— 27.]  THE  PE0VERB8. 


fathers  and  sons  had  a  similar  opinion  of  the  best  of  treasures.  One  labours  to  leave 
heavy  legacies  in  his  will ;  another  aims  at  securing  good  posts  for  his  sons ;  a  third  is 
proud  of  the  misuUied  family  honour ;  but  iiiany  forget  that  which  alone  secures  true 
welfare  here  and  eternal  life  hereafter.  It  is  beautiful  to  see  this  heirloom  of  piety 
carefully  guarded  in  the  cottage  of  the  poor;  but  it  is  more  interesting  to  see  those  who 
might  be  drawn  aside  to  lower  pursuits — ^as,  alas  I  Solomon  was  in  his  later  days — 
setting  the  same  treasure  bei'ore  their  family  as  the  most  valuable  of  all  possessions. 

II.  Divine  wisdom  will  not  bemain  as  a  family  hbibloom  without  special 
CASE  IN  EBTAiNiNa  AND  TEAN8MITTING  FT.  The  estate  dcsceuds  from  father  to  son  by 
laws,  of  inheritance  or  by  testamentary  directions.  The  bodily  likeness,  the  mental 
characteristic,  the  genius,  the  defect,  the  disea.se,  often  come  down  through  successive 
generations.  But  religion  is  not  found  in  the  blood ;  no  law  of  inheritance  will  secure 
the  succession  to  Divine  wisdom ;  you  cannot  ensure  that  your  son  will  be  pious  by  any 
clause  in  your  wilL  This  family  heirloom  will  pass  out  of  the  household  unless  it  is 
most  carefully  guarded.  Bad  sons  may  foUow  good  fathers.  The  religion  of  our 
parents  is  no  guarantee  of  our  own  spiritual  state,  nor  does  our  religion  contain  within 
it  the  promise  and  potency  of  our  children's  faith. 

III.  Divine  wisdom  may  be  tbansmittbd  as  a  family  heibloom  thbouoh 
INSTBUOTION  AND  EXAMPLE.  We  Cannot  absolutely  secure  the  inheritance  because 
we  have  to  deal  with  that  most  ungovernable  of  all  elements,  the  free-will  of  souls. 
But  failure  is  often  to  be  attributed  to  defective  instruction.  Home  culture  has  been' 
neglected,  while  public  ministry  has  been  most  assiduous;  or  there  has  been  a  harsh, 
unwise  restraint  which  has  provoked  a  rebound  of  licence.  On  the  whole,  we  may 
hope  that  good,  sound  home  training  wUl  not  be  in  vain.  This  involves  two  elements. 
1.  Instmction.  There  must  be  positive,  definite  teaching.  We  must  not  rely  on  the 
general  influence  of  a  wholesome  Christian  atmosphere,  on  casual  words  and  passing 
advice,  etc.  Wisdom  involves  knowledge;  religion  depends  on  faith;  and  faith  follows 
"  hearing."  It  is  most  important  that  Uie  main  elements  of  the  Christian  truth  should 
be  understood  and  remembered  by  children.  It  is  not  enough  to  tell  them  to  love 
Christ.  They  must  know  him  if  they  are  to  trust  and  follow  him.  2.  Example, 
Without  this  instruction  is  futile.  Our  deeds  then  give  the  lie  to  our  words.  Instruc- 
tion is  the  light  to  show  the  way ;  example,  the  impulse  to  urge  us  to  walk  in  it. 
Succession  in  genius  is  rare.  The  two  Plinys,  the  two  Pitts,  the  two  Mills,  are 
exceptional  instances.  But  by  right  instruction  and  example  we  have  much  more 
reason  to  expect  a  succession  in  piety,  because  genius  must  be  born  in  a  man,  but  the 
wisdom  of  godliness  is  offered  to  all  who  will  seek  it. 

Ver.  9. — A  coronation.  Wisdom  is  here  represented  as  standing  forth  with  garlands 
and  crowns,  rewarding  her  votary.  The  whole  picture  suggested  to  us  by  this  brief 
verse  may  be  taken  as  illustrative  of  the  blessed  experience  of  the  people  of  God. 

I.  The  OBOWwisa  adthobitt.  It  is  ridiculous  to  offer  a  crown  except  with  the 
ri^t  and  power  to  make  the  coronation  effective.  It  was  held  that  no  one  could  be  an 
emperor  in  the  "holy  Roman  empire"  of  the  Middle  Ages  unless  he  had  been  crowned 
by  the  pope,  as  Charles  the  Great  had  been  crowned.  In  our  picture  we  have  a  greater 
than  the  highest  ecclesiastic.  The  Wisdom  of  God,  ideally  personified,  offers  crowns 
and  garlands  with  her  own  hands.  It  is  really  an  act  of  God.  God's  wisdom  is  subse- 
quently revealed  in  Christ  who  bestows  the  best  blessings  on  his  people.  Coronation 
from  such  an  authority  must  be  efiiective. 

IL  The  sijbject  ceownbd.  He  is  the  votary  of  Wisdom,  and  it  is  on  account  of  his 
allegiance  to  his  heavenly  mistress  that  he  receives  his  honour.  Solomon  seems  to  be 
referring  directly  to  himself  (ver.  3).  If  so,  it  is  the  more  remarkable  that  the  most 
magnificent  king  of  Israel  should  set  less  value  on  his  regal  dignity  than  on  his  fidelity 
to  Wisdom.  Even  Solomon  is  here  crowned,  not  because  he  is  David's  son  and  sits  on 
the  throne  of  a  great  nation,  but  because  he  is  a  loyal  servant  of  Wisdom.  The  same 
honour  is  open  to  all  who  follow  the  same  cairse.  Wisdom,  Divine  truth,  the  know- 
ledge of  God,  the  following  of  Christ,— these  things  are  the  true  grounds  for  honour; 
not  birth,  rank,  power,  or  wealth.  ,    ,   .,       .  v        *  au 

IIL  The  aot  of  oobonation.  Wisdom  stands  forth  and  crowns  her  votary.  She 
does  it  spontaneously.    The  pursuit  of  Divine  Wisdom  brings  honour.    Here  we  see 


94  THE  PROVERBS.  [CH.  iv.  1— 27 

that  there  is  more  than  bare  deliverance  from  ruin  for  the  people  of  God.  They  are 
invited  to  receive  honours  from  above.  This  happens  in  a  measure  upon  earth  in  the 
elevation  of  character,  the  loftiness  of  the  whole  course  of  life,  and  perhaps  even  the 
worthy  reputation  of  a  true  Christian.  Yet  we  must  remember  that  the  coronation  is 
not  the  world's  admiration,  but  God's  approval.  This  will  be  perfected  in  heaven 
when  the  saints  who  have  borne  the  cross  on  earth  will  receive  their  crowns — only  to 
cast  them  at  the  feet  of  the  Lord  through  whose  grace  alone  they  have  won  them 
(Rev.  iv.  10). 

IV.  The  natuek  of  the  cbowns.  There  is  a  garland  as  well  as  a  crown.  1.  A 
recognition  ofiiictortf.  A  simple  wreath  has  little  inherent  worth.  But  it  is  a  token  of 
victory.  It  is  nobler  to  wear  a  true  conqueror's  wreath  than  an  idle  monarch's  diadem. 
The  pursuit  of  Divine  Wisdom  leads  to  victory  over  sin  and  the  world.  2.  A  possession 
of  wealth  and  honour.  After  the  victor's  wreath  comes  the  regal  crown.  Observe 
how  it  is  constructed.  (1)  Gold  of  truth.  (2)  Precious  stones  of  heavenly  experience. 
Precious  stones  are  symbolical  of  celestial  structures  (Rev.  xxi.  18 — 21).  The  follower 
of  Wisdom  has  the  heavenly  mind;  he  minds  spiritual  things.  (3)  Pearls  of  purity. 
True  wisdom  leads  to  holiness. 

Ver.  12. — A  free  course.  Religion  is  looked  upon  too  much  in  the  light  of  a 
restraint,  and  the  Christian  is  often  regarded  by  the  world  as  hampered  and  shackled 
by  irksome  bonds.  But  the  very  opposite  is  suggested  by  the  words  of  our  text.  We 
see  the  servant  of  Divine  Wisdom  running  with  freedom  on  his  course,  and  at  the  same 
time  carefully  guarded  from  misadventure. 

I.  The  truth  op  God  gives  liberty.  Christ  promised  that  the  truth  ihould  make 
men  free  (John  viii.  32).  1.  ITie  liberty  of  knowledge.  Ignorance  is  a  bondage,  because 
the  ignorant  man  does  not  know  how  to  shape  his  course.  He  is  like  a  traveller  lost 
in  the  African  bush.  Physical  knowledge  gives  a  certain  liberty  of  action.  Knowledge 
of  nature  helps  the  man  of  science  to  act  where  the  layman  would  be  helpless.  The 
engineer's  knowledge  of  his  machine  enables  him  to  work  it.  When  we  know  the  way 
of  peace  and  safety  we  can  freely  and  fearlessly  run  in  it.  2.  The  liberty  of  obedience. 
The  wisdom  of  the  Proverbs  is  practical;  it  is  intimately  connected  with  the  fear  of 
God.  It  implies  more  than  knowledge  in  its  followers;  it  requires  also  submission  and 
obedience.  Now,  when  we  are  in  rebellion  against  the  Law  and  will  of  God,  wo  are  con- 
tinually arrested  by  his  opposing  action.  But  when  we  delight  to  do  his  wUl,  we  are 
perfectly  free.  There  is  no  liberty  so  great  as  that  which  comes  from  harmony  between 
ovir  wills  and  the  will  of  God.  We  desire  the  very  things  that  God  commands;  it  must 
follow  that  we  are  free  to  seek  them.  Then  of  a  certainty  God  will  give  us  our  heart'i 
desire. 

II.  The  truth  or  God  secuees  safety.  The  follower  of  Divine  Wisdom  will  not 
stumble.  1.  Se  will  not  run  in  the  way  of  danger.  The  narrow  path  is  the  safe  path. 
There  are  gins  and  snares  in  the  broad  road.  Though  the  way  of  life  may  be  rugged, 
it  is  not  like  the  flowery  path  of  sin,  io  the  beauty  of  which  a  deadly  serpent  hides.  2. 
Ood  will  remove  the  greatest  impediments  out  of  his  path.  He  is  in  the  King's  high- 
way. Even  this  road  may  lead  over  steep  places  and*through  difficult  passes.  But 
still,  as  it  is  maintained  by  its  Lord,  it  cannot  be  left  to  fall  into  the  state  of  an 
impassable  road  in  a  neglected  country,  God  is  with  his  people  while  they  are  treaHing 
the  path  of  righteousness,  and  he  will  prepare  their  way  for  them.  3.  There  toill  be 
light  to  see  the  difficulties  of  the  way.  It  is  possible  to  stumble  even  on  the  high-road. 
Christian  men  have  fallen.  We  need  to  be  prepared  to  face  the  difBcultics  which  will 
surely  meet  us  even  while  we  are  pursuing  the  Christian  course.  Now,  God's  truth  is 
a  lamp  to  guide  us  over  such  difficulties  (Ps.  cxix.  105).  With  the  light  of  heavenly 
wisdom  we  safely  pass  them.  4.  There  will  be  help  at  hand.  Christ  is  with  his  people 
on  their  pilgrimage.  Like  Peter  sinking  in  the  waves,  they  may  cry,  "Lord,  save  me: 
I  perish  I "  and  they  will  be  delivered.  "  Hold  thou  me  up,  and  I  shall  be  safe  "  (Ps. 
cxix.  117). 

Ver.  13. — Holding  fast.  1.  Thb  neoessitt  of  holdins  fast.  This  is  to  be  in 
regard  to  instruction  in  Divine  wisdom.  There  are  difficulties  in  keeping  to  the  truth 
of  God.     1.  The  knowledge  of  it  is  an  attainment.    It  is  not  innate ;  it  does  not  come 


CH.1T.  1— 27.]  THE  PROVERBS.  9S 

by  inevitable  experience ;  it  is  not  received  without  conscious  effort.  What  has  been 
■won  may  be  lost.  That  which  is  not  naturally  a  part  of  our  being  may  be  detached 
from  us.  2.  The  truth  is  spiritual.  Therefore  it  belongs  to  a  different  region  from 
that  of  everyday  experience  in  the  world,  and  it  is  in  danger  of  being  thrust  aside  by 
the  rude  demands  of  material  facts.  The  rush  and  roar  of  outward  life  drown  the 
whispers  of  the  "  still,  small  voice."  3.  It  is  morally  exacting,  God's  instruction 
concerns  our  conduct,  and  that  in  a  way  not  always  agreeable  to  ourselves.  It  urges 
us  with  lofty  mandates,  it  seeks  to  regulate  our  lives  by  great  principles.  But  weak- 
ness shrinks  and  self-will  rebels  against  such  a  yoke.  Therefore  unless  we  hold  fast  to 
the  instruction,  we  shall  soon  lose  it.  Mere  negligence  is  enough  to  imperil  the  choice 
possession.    By  simple  indifference  we  may  let  slip  the  truth  of  God  (Heb.  ii.  1). 

II.  How  WE  MAT  HOLD  FAST.  1.  Attention  musthe  directed.  As  we  have  a  certain 
command  of  our  thoughts  in  the  power  of  fixing  attention  on  certain  topics  in  prefer- 
ence to  others,  we  can  turn  our  minds  towards  Divine  truth  by  a  voluntary  movement. 
External  aids  are  here  of  use.  The  reading  of  the  Bible  is  most  helpful,  not  merely  to 
obtain  fresh  truth,  but  to  impress  and  revive  the  truth  we  already  know.  The  ordi- 
nances of  public  worship  are  also  designed  with  this  end  in  view.  The  Christian 
preacher  has  not  merely  to  instruct,  the  ignorant  and  to  lead  those  who  know  some 
truth  to  higher  regions  of  revelation.  A  great  part  of  his  work  consists  in  impressing 
upon  men  what  they  already  know,  and  aiding  them  to  hold  it  fast.  None  of  these 
means  of  directing  attention  are  sufficient  without  the  addition  of  personal  prayer  and 
meditation.  2.  2'ruth  must  he  realized  in  practice.  There  is  no  better  way  of  holding 
fast  to  instruction  than  by  obeying  it.  The  greatest  truths  are  vague  ideas  till  we 
commence  to  put  them  in  practice.  We  hold  best  those  truths  which  we  follow  most 
closely  in  life. 

III.  The  advantage  of  holding  past.  It  is  our  duty  to  hold  the  truth  which 
God  has  revealed  to  us,  and  to  attend  to  the  commandments  which  he  has  sent  us. 
But  it  is  also  for  our  own  soul's  profit.  This  is  a  matter  of  life  and  death.  Divine 
truth  is  not  a  mere  luxury  for  the  leisured  classes.  It  is  a  necessary  of  life.  1.  This 
truth  is  a  guide  from  the  way  of  ruin.  God  speaks  words  of  the  utmost  moment  to 
warn  us  from  continuing  in  the  old  course  of  sin,  and  to  show  us  the  way  of  salvation. 
2.  It  is  an  immediate  source  of  life.  God  gives  his  Spirit  through  his  truth,  and  the 
Spirit  of  God  is  the  quickening  power  of  our  souls.  Thus  God's  truth  is  the  soul's 
food.  To  lose  it  is  to  starve.  To  hold  it  fast  is  to  secure  eternal  life.  The  words  that 
Christ  speaks  to  us  are  spirit  and  life  (John  vi.  63). 

Vers.  14, 15. — Bad  company.  I.  The  duty  of  avoiding  bad  company.  We  are 
bU  more  or  less  unconsciously  affected  by  the  tone  of  the  society  we  frequent.  Even 
the  strongest,  most  independent  spirit  cannot  wholly  fortify  himself  against  this 
influence.  As  water  w^ears  the  hardest  rock,  the  constant  friction  of  social  intercourse 
makes  itself  felt  in  course  of  time  upon  the  most  resolute  character.  We  are  naturally 
gregarious.  Without  knowing  it,  nay,  even  while  protesting  against  it,  we  are  carried 
away  with  the  current  through  which  our  course  lies.  Salmon  swim  up  against  the 
stream ;  but  men  prefer  to  float  with  the  stream.  Hence  the  great  reason  for  choosing 
society  of  good  character.  It  is  most  essential  that  young  men  just  entering  business 
in  a  great  city  should  bear  this  in  mind.  The  class  of  companions  they  choose  will 
very  largely  affect  the  whole  future  course  of  their  lives.  Christians  are  called  to  come 
out  from  the  world ;  but  our  Lord  showed  his  wisdom,  as  much  as  his  kindliness,  in 
instituting  the  Church  as  a  fellowship  of  his  people.  Thus  he  sought  to  use  the 
social  influences  of  mankind  in  favour  of  purity  and  truth  as  a  set-off  against  the 
strong  current  of  a  corrupt  worldly  society.  It  is  always  dangerous  to  be  cut  off  from 
these  good  influences.  Emigrants  and  others  who  go  to  the  colonies  and  to  foreign 
countries  should  be  on  their  guard  against  the  peculiar  dangers  of  their  isolated 
situation.  Many  a  young  man  has  been  ruined  for  life  by  going  friendless  to  a  distant 
country,  and  there  falling  a  prey  to  the  corruptions  of  bad  company. 

IL  DiFFiotJLTiBS  IN  THE  APPLICATION  OF  THIS  DUTY.  The  early  Chaich,  seeing 
idolatrous  rites  associated  with  almost  every  political  and  social  engagement,  withdrew 
very  considerably  from  public  life.  The  logical  outcome  of  her  conduct  was  monasti- 
dsm.    We  have  not  her  peculiar  difficulties  to  contend  with.    Yet  the  mere  thought 


98  THE  PE0VEEB8.  [oh.  iv.  1— 2?. 

of  avoiding  bad  company  might  lead  us  to  a  similar  course  unless  we  weighed  well 
other  considerations  of  duty.  Thus  there  are  Christians  who  eschew  all  connection 
with  national  affairs  because  they  hold  that  politics  are  closely  wrapped  up  with 
worldly  and  wicked  practices.  But  if  the  worst  is  true,  it  is  rather  our  duty  to  seek  to 
mend  matters.  Since  we  must  have  government,  we  should  see  that  this  is  of  the  best 
possible  character.  If  all  the  good  people  forsake  it,  they  hand  the  government  of  the 
nation  over  to  the  wicked,  and  thereby  tacitly  saactioa  bad  government.  So  if  they  put 
a  ban  on  all  amusement,  they  indirectly  degrade  every  kind  of  amusement,  and  increase 
the  temptation  of  the  great  mass  of  people,  who  naturally  seek  some  sort  of  recreation, 
and  will  have  the  bad  if  they  do  not  get  the  good.  We  must  remember  also  that  our 
Lord  was  accused  of  keeping  the  worst  of  company,  and  that  he  did  this  deliberately 
for  the  good  of  those  with  whom  he  had  intercourse.  We  are  not  to  be  Pharisees, 
proud  separatists,  but  brothers  of  all  men,  who  are  our  fellow-sinneTS.  The  important 
point  is  the  motive  with  which  men  enter  bad  company.  If  this  be  to  discharge  some 
duty,  or  to  benefit  those  who  are  visited,  it  is  pure,  and  may  be  expected  to  ward  off 
harm.    If  it  be  done  carelessly  and  for  selfish  pleasure,  there  is  danger  in  it. 

Ver.  18. — "  The  path  of  the  just."  L  A  SHiNiNa  light.  1  It  has  all  the  great 
leading  characteristics  suggested  by  light,  viz.  truth,  purity,  joy,  life.  Perhaps  the 
leading  idea  is  that  of  holy  gladness.  This  is  to  be  enjoyed  here  on  earth  in  those 
pleasant  ways  and  paths  of  peace  through  which  Wisdom  leads  her  votaries.  The 
Christian  may  be  a  martyr,  but  he  need  not  be  a  victim  of  melancholy.  2.  It  is  open 
to  the  day.  They  who  do  evil  love  the  darkness  that  hides  their  deeds.  "The  dark 
places  of  the  earth  are  full  of  the  habitations  of  cruelty."  Goodness  fears  no  exposure. 
Cato  had  no  fear  of  his  neighbours  looking  into  his  garden.  Daniel  could  afford  to  let 
his  habits  be  public.  3.  It  is  bright  with  reflected  Divine  light.  Here  is  the  source  of 
the  brightness  like  that  of  the  dawn  that  reflects  the  suu's  beams.  Christ  shines  on 
the  soul,  and  it  brightens  under  his  love  as  the  dark  hills  and  darker  valleys  take  on 
the  colours  of  life  before  the  rising  sun.  4.  It  is  alioays  giving  out  light  around  it. 
It  is  a  shining  light,  a  glistening  light;  not  mere  colour,  but  radiance.  The  true 
Christian  is  a  light  of  the  world ;  it  is  his  duty  to  let  his  light  shine  to  the  glory  of 
God. 

II.  A  GBOWTNO  LiQHT.  We  must  not  stumble  at  that  word  "just,"  as  though  it 
removed  the  whole  subject  to  lofty  regions  far  beyond  all  possible  attainments  of  onrs. 
The  just  man  in  the  Old  Testament,  like  the  saint  in  the  New  Testament,  is  not  neces- 
sarily a  person  of  fully  ripened  perfection,  but  one  whose  course  and  aim  and  tendency 
are  towards  righteousness.  Such  a  man  will  begin  with  many  imperfections.  His  course, 
however,  will  be  one  of  growing  brightness.  Unless  there  is  growth  there  must  be 
death.  The  stajinant  Christian  is  the  dead  Christian,  soon  to  become  the  corrupt 
Christian.  It  is  for  our  encouragement  that  we  may  expect  growth  if  we  employ  the 
right  means.  There  is  growth  in  personal  piety.  Every  victory  over  sin  is  so  much 
new  light  gained.  There  is  growth  in  grace.  The  richest  stores  of  God's  grace  are  in 
the  future.  There  is  ever  "  more  to  follow,"  and  the  best  wine  is  reserved  for  the  last. 
There  is  growth  in  knowledge.  The  light  of  truth  is  a  growing  light.  What  we  know 
not  now  we  shall  know  hereafter.  "Now  we  see  as  in  a  mirror  darkly,  but  then  face 
to  face."  Tliere  is  growth  in  joy  and  peace.  The  best  fruits  of  Christian  blessedness 
take  time  to  ripen.  The  young  Christian  is  disappointed  at  finding  them  green  and 
acid.  Time  must  mellow  them.  Now,  this  growth  is  giadual  like  the  dawn,  so  that 
the  Christian  is  carried  on  from  stage  to  stage.  But  the  rate  is  not  uniform.  With 
some  there  is  a  long  twilight.  With  others  the  day  hastens  on  with  tropical  speed. 
He  who  has  most  of  Christ  will  find  his  dawn  spread  most  rapidly. 

III.  A  LIGHT  THAT  LEADS  TO  PEEFECT  DAT.      All  that  We  nOW  660  is  but  the  dull, 

chill  twilight.  It  may  be  a  cheerful  dawn,  but  it  is  not  to  be  compared  with  the  rich 
splendour  of  the  noon.  The  Christian  progress  is  not  to  cease  till  it  reaches  perfection. 
It  is  far  from  that  as  yet.  With  some  of  us  but  a  few  grey  streaks  have  as  yet  broken 
out  of  the  old  sad  night.  But  all  Christians  may  have  the  same  glad  hope  of  the  full 
and  perfect  day.  Heaven  will  be  the  coincidence  of  ripLncd  character  with  perfected 
blessedness.  And  this  <lay  has  no  afternoon.  There  are  no  lengthening  shadows  to 
sadden  us  with  threats  of  the  chill  evening  and  the  dread  darkness,  for  "  there  is  no  night 


CH.  IV.  1—27.]  THE  PROVERBS.  97 

there.''  A  greater  than  Joshua  arrests  the  sun  at  the  meridian.  Or  rather  there  will 
be  no  need  of  the  sun,  because  we  shall  be  beyond  this  world  of  successive  changes  in 
.the  life  eternal  of  that  new  Jerusalem,  whjre  it  is  ever  day,  because  "  the  Lord  God  is 
the  Light  thereof." 

Ver.  19,— The  way  of  darkness.  The  way  of  sin  is  in  all  respects  one  of  darkness. 
It  is  dark  in  its  origin,  dark  in  its  course,  and  dark  in  its  end. 

I.  The  way  of  sin  starts  from  a  dark  okiqin.  1.  Ignorance.  Most  criminals 
are  deplorably  ignorant.  Vicious  men  are  generally  men  whnse  .mental  cultivation  has 
been  neglected  by  others  or  by  themselves.  Ignorance  of  Divine  truth  leads  the  way 
to  wickedness.  The  first  preventative  of  evil  is  the  religious  teaching  of  children. 
2.  Inherited  tendencies  to  evil.  These  awful  consequences  of  a  parent's  sin  are  a  dark 
heritage  which  heavily  handicaps  the  child  from  the  first.  3.  Satanic  influences. 
Temptations  are  all  dark  in  their  origin.  Evil  suggestions  come  up  from  the  pit  of 
darkness.  4.  The  lower  nature.  When  a  man  jijives  way  to  sin  he  sacrifices  his 
higher  to  his  lower  self.  He  sinks  from  the  sunlit  mountain  heights  of  purity  to 
gloomy  depths  of  baser  living. 

IL  The  wat  of  sin  pdrbubs  a  dark  course.  It  is  a  road  that  runs  through 
sombre  passes,  like  some  of  those  Welsh  paths  far  in  the  h(  art  of  the  mountains,  on 
which  the  sun  never  shines.  Tliis  is  worse  than  the  Valley  of  the  Shadow  of  Death, 
for  in  the  fearful  path  of  sin  there  is  no  guiding  hand  and  no  protecting  staff.  The 
darkness  of  this  course  is  exhaled  from  the  evil  committed  upon  it.  1.  Ferverted  con- 
science. Sin  distorts  a  man's  thoughts,  blinds  his  eyes  to  the  highest  truth,  raises  a 
mist  about  the  old  landmarks  of  right  and  wrong,  and  plunges  tiie  soul  into  a  stupor 
of  moral  indifference.  From  neglecting  to  follow  the  light  of  God,  the  sinner  comes  at 
last  to  be  incapable  of  beholding  it.  2.  (Spiritual  desertion.  God's  Sjiirit  will  not 
always  strive  with  the  sons  of  men  (Gen.  vi.  3).  There  comes  a  time  when  God  leaves 
the  self-abandoned  soul  to  its  own  devices.  Then,  indeed,  a  darkness  as  of  winter 
midnight  sinks  upon  the  lost  being.  3.  Corrupt  conduct.  Following  the  way  of  evil, 
the  sinner  continues  to  blacken  it  with  the  guilt  of  liis  own  misdeeds.  He  plunges 
into  the  spiritual  darkness  of  wicked  living — the  degradation,  the  loss  of  the  joy  and 
purity  of  heavenly  light  that  sin  always  induces. 

III.  The  way  of  sin  issues  is  a  dark  end.  The  sinner  cannot  see  his  way  upon 
it,  and  therefore  he  is  sure  to  stumble.  Braised  and  confused,  he  may  still  persist  in 
his  sombre  career.  But  he  Las  no  pros[)ect  of  light  beyond.  There  are  no  Beulah 
heights  for  him  at  the  further  end  of  the  gloomy  valley.  His  night  of  sin  will  be 
followed  by  no  dawn  of  blessed  light.  He  presses  on  only  to  deeper  and  yet  deeper 
darkness.  If  he  will  not  return  there  is  nothing  before  him  but  the  darkness  of  death. 
The  one  way  of  escape  is  backwards — to  retrace  his  steps  in  humble  penitence.  Then, 
indeed,  he  may  see  the  welcome  light  of  his  Father's  home,  and  even  earlier  the  Light  oi 
the  world,  the  Saviour  who  has  come  out  into  the  darkness  to  lead  him  back  to  God. 
For  the  sinner  who  persists  in  his  evil  course  there  can  be  no  better  prospect  than 
that  described  by  By  ion  in  his  poem  on  "  Darkness" — 

"  The  world  was  void. 
The  popnlons  and  the  powerful  w  as  a  lump, 
Beasonless,  herbless,  treeless,  mankss,  lifeless— 
A  lump  of  death — a  chaos  of  lianl  clay. 
The  rivers,  lakes,  and  ocean  all  stood  still, 
And  nothing  stirred  within  their  silent  deptlis ; 
Ships  sailorless  lay  rotting  on  the  sea. 
And  their  masts  fell  down  piecemeal :  as  they  dropped 
They  slept  on  the  abyss  without  a  surge — 
The  waves  were  dead ;  the  tides  were  in  their  grave. 
The  moon,  their  mistress,  had  expiied  before ; 
The  winds  were  withered  in  tiie  stagnant  air, 
And  the  clouds  perished  ;  Darkness  had  no  need 
Of  aid  from  them — she  was  the  Universe." 

\er.  23. On  guard.'  I.  What  is  to  be  kept.    The  heart.    In  the  Bible  th« 

PEOVBEBS.  ■ 


98  THE   PE0VEKB3.  [oh.  it.  1  -27 

"  heart "  represent!  what  we  call  the  "  head  "  as  well  aa  the  affections  and  conscience 
to  which  we  confine  the  word  "  heart ; "  i.e.  it  stands  for  the  whole  inner  nature,  the  life 
of  thought,  feeling,  and  will.  This  is  the  "  Town  of  Mansoul,"  and  it  has  the  various 
con.stituents  of  a  town.  1.  Entrjmce  gates.  '  The  soul  is  always  receiving  thoughts  and 
impulses  from  without.  It  is  important  to  see  that  no  adulterated  article,  no  poison, 
no  subject  of  infectious  clisease  comes  in.  Debased,  false,  and  immoral  impressions 
must  be  warded  off.  2.  Ways  of  exit.  The  broad  river  bears  on  her  bosom  argosies 
from  the  busy  city  to  many  a  distant  port.  Let  us  see  that  the  cargo  is  of  good  wares, 
in  good  measure,  honestly  realizing  professions,  containing  no  iujurious  things.  Some 
hearts  export  only  sham  products,  some  deadly  poisons.  Deeds,  words,  even  smiles 
and  glances  carrying  thought  and  influences  out  of  the  soul  must  be  carefully  guarded. 

3.  Internal  thorough/ares.  The  town  is  a  network  of  streets  and  passages.  Busy 
thoughts  run  to  and  fro  in  the  heart.  Let  the  traffic  be  orderly,  the  road  well  preserved, 
lest  pure  thoughts  should  he  smirched  with  the  mire  of  an  unwholesome  mental  habit 

4.  Storehouses.  Memory  has  her  treasuries,  warehouses,  granaries.  Let  us  see  that  they 
are  not  crowded  with  rubbish,  left  in  disorder,  made  fever-nests  by  the  corruption  of 
any  unhealthy  contents.    Nourishing  truths  and  beautiful  ideas  should  stock  them. 

5.  Factories.  In  the  heart  we  weave  fine  webs  of  fancy — see  that  the  pattern  has  the 
beauty  of  holiness ;  there,  too,  we  forge  great  engines  for  future  work: — see  that  they 
are  constructed  on  safe  and  serviceable  principles.  6.  Balls  of  amusement.  Let  them 
be  places  of  recreation,  not  of  dissipation.  7.  Shrines  for  worship.  See  that  no  idol 
takes  the  place  of  the  true  God,  no  hypocrisy  does  service  for  the  incense  of  spiritual 
prayer  and  praise.  8.  Graveyards  of  dead  hopes  and  loves ;  keep  them  beautiful  with 
flowers  of  tender  memory.  Are  there  also  graves  of  dead  sins  ?  Plant  weeping  willows 
of  penitence  over  them., 

II.  Why  it  is  to  be  kept.  1.  For  its  own  sake.  The  heart  is  the  centre  of  the 
life ;  the  soul  is  the  true  being,  the  self.  To  care  for  the  health  of  the  body  while  the 
soul  is  diseased  and  dying  in  sin  is  like  sending  for  the  builder  to  repair  the  house,  but 
leaving  the  sick  inmate  to  perish  without  attention.  "  What  shall  it  profit  a  man  if  he 
gain  the  whole  world  and  lose  his  own  soul " — life,  heart  ?  2.  For  its  fruits.  "  Out 
of  it  are  the  issues  of  life."  In  proportion  as  the  heart  is  vigorous  or  feeble,  healthy  or 
diseased,  all  the  organs  of  the  body  work  well  or  ill.  Take  care  of  the  heart  first, 
cultivate  right  principles,  see  that  the  affections  are  set  on  things  above,  and  then  the 
practice  of  the  details  of  morals  will  follow  almost  as  a  matter  of  course.  It  is  a 
mistake  to  put  casuistry  in  the  forefront  of  moral  teaching.  The  result  of  doing  so  is 
to  weaken  conscience,  to  confuse  the  sense  of  right  and  wrong.  Let  the  condition  of 
the  heart  be  the  first  concern ;  see  that  truth,  justice,  purity,  charity,  are  enshrined 
there.  Let  the  love  of  God  and  the  love  of  man  be  well  cultivated,  and  the  spiritual 
directory  will  be  greatly  simplified.  But  it  is  not  even  enough  to  cultivate  right  prin- 
ciples. Deeper  than  these  is  the  life.  Below  the  particiidar  actions  come  genera' 
principles ;  beneath  these  lie  the  character,  the  life,  the  heart  of  all.  The  fundamental 
requisite  is  not  to  do  this  or  that  deed,  nor  to  cherish  one  or  another  principle,  but  to 
possess  the  life  eternal  in  the  heart,  out  of  which  pure  blood  will  flow  through  main 
arteries  of  principles  to  the  most  remote  and  minute  and  intricate  capillaries  oi 
conduct. 

III.  How  IT  18  TO  BE  KEPT.  1.  Pure.  Let  us  see  that  the  heart  above  all  things 
is  cleansed  from  sin  and  kept  holy.  We  cannot  do  this  for  ourselves.  But  we  can  go 
to  the  fountain  that  is  opened  for  uncleanness,  and  there  wash  and  be  clean.  The  blood 
of  Christ,  which  cleanses  from  all  sin,  not  only  removes  guilt,  but  purges  out  the  corrup- 
tion and  power  of  evil.  By  faith  in  Christ  and  the  indwelling  of  the  Divine  Spirit  that 
is  a  consequence  of  faith,  the  heart  can  be  cleansed  and  preserved  in  purity.  2.  2V««. 
The  Christian  is  to  be  a  servant  of  God.  Let  him  be  loyal — frank,  too,  and  ingenuous 
and  simple.  3.  Tender.  One  has  well  said  that  we  want  "  tough  skins  and  tender 
hearts."  There  is  much  in  the  world  to  harden  them.  Let  us  seek  to  have  them  soft 
to  receive  Divine  influences  and  to  feel  human  compassions.  The  heart  must  he  kept, 
not  as  a  prisoner  under  hard  restraint,  nor  like  the  jewels  at  the  Tower,  in  useless 
seclusion;  but  like  a  garden,  well  weeded,  but  also  sown  with  good  seed  and  bearing 
fruit  and  flowers.  Keep  the  heart  thus  by  watchfulness,  by  self-control  (the  New 
Testament  "  temperance "),  by  prayer,  above  all  by  entrusting  it  to  the  keeping  of 


OH.  lY.  1—27.]  THE  PROVERBS.  M 


Gkid.  _  Peeling  that  "  the  heart  is  deceitful  above  all  things  and  desperately  wicked," 
knowing  how  powerful  are  the  temptations  of  the  world,  we  may  well  despair  of  keeping 
the  heart  pure  and  safe,  God  meets  us  in  our  helplessness,  and  offers  to  keep  it  fi  )r  us 
if  we  will  put  our  trust  and  love  In  him.     "  My  son,  give  me  thy  heart." 

Vers.  25 — 27. — Spiritual  drilling.  The  whole  man  must  he  drilled  into  form  and 
disciplined  into  orderly  action,  just  as  the  whole  armour  of  God  is  necessary  for  the 
protection  of  the  soldier  of  Christ.  It  is  not  enough  for  safety  to  wear  a  helniet 
while  the  breast  is  exposed,  nor  to  bare  the  head  while  the  legs  are  covered ;  and  it  is 
not  enough  for  service  that  part  of  our  nature  is  trained  to  obedience.  We  m  ist  seek 
to  have  all  in  right  order. 

I.  The  hbabt.  This  must  be  guarded  most  sedulously,  and  before  all  else.  We 
cannot  have  our  actions  right  in  the  sight  of  God  while  the  heart  is  perverted.  The 
attempt  to  secure  this  only  ends  in  hypocrisy.  The  first  duty  of  the  soldier  is  loyalty. 
The  first  duty  of  the  Ohiistian  is  fidelity.  Nevertheless,  though  the  fountain  must  be 
pure  if  the  stream  is  to  be  pure,  its  purity  will  not  secure  the  water  against  subsequent 
defilement.  It  is  not  enough  to  think  of  the  state  of  the  heart,  we  must  also  consider 
the  course  of  our  actions.  A  pseudo-spirituality  ends  in  indifference  to  morals,  and  even 
in  positive  immorality.  St.  Paul  did  not  think  his  work  done  when  he  had  laid  the 
foundation  of  the  Christian  character.  He  sought  the  "  edification,"  the  "  building 
up,"  of  it  by  detailed  and  earnest  instruction  in  Christian  morals. 

II.  The  LIP3.  The  first  and  most  ready  expression  of  the  state  of  the  heart  is  in 
our  conversation.  "  Out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart  the  mouth  speaketh."  Now, 
it  is  important  to  remember  that  we  are  responsible  for  our  words.  For  "  every  idle 
word  that  men  shall  speak,  they  shall  give  account  thereof  in  the  day  of  judgment " 
(Matt  xii.  36).  Words  are  deeds.  They  carry  infiuence  and  linger  in  memories  and 
are  transmitted  from  one  to  another  long  after  the  speaker  has  forgotten  them. 

III.  The  byes.  The  eye  is  one  of  the  chief  gateways  of  knowledge.  According  to 
the  objects  on  which  we  fix  it,  the  class  of  our  knowledge  will  be  determined.  It  is 
the  guide  in  our  actions.  Now,  it  is  requisite  that  the  Christian  have:  1.  A  straight 
and  "single"  sight  (see  Matt.  vi.  22),  looking  only  at  the  truth,  with  no  stray  glances  at 
the  innumerable  deceptions  of  low  self-interest.  2.  A  long  sight,  looking  at  the  end  of 
the  race — the  Celestial  City,  neither  allured  by  the  fascinations  of  Vanity  Fair  nor 
distracted  by  the  horrors  of  the  Valley  of  the  Shadow  of  Death.  3.  An  upward  gaze 
fixed  on  God  and  Christ  rather  than  on  worldly  loss  or  gain. 

IV.  The  feet.  All  the  life  leads  on  to  the  outgoings  of  activity.  The  ultimate 
question  is — In  what  way  are  we  going?  Here  the  requisite  is  that  the  feet  should  go 
straight  on.  There  are  many  ways  of  wrong,  only  one  of  right ;  hence  the  breadth  of 
the  former  and  the  narrowness  of  the  latter.  We  must  especially  avoid  the  error  of 
falling  into  extremes.  While  shunning  the  track  to  the  left  let  us  see  that  we  do  not 
go  off  on  that  to  the  right.  The  path  of  duty  is  between  these  extremes.  Yet  the 
way  to  find  it  is  not  by  seeking  for  a  mean  and  so  only  accepting  a  compromise,  but  by 
aiming  at  the  true  and  the  right  and  pressing  straight  on  to  them  ineepective  of  all 
conflicting  influences. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS, 

Vers.  1 13. The  tradition  of  piety.    The  writer,  here  and  in  ch.  ▼,  7  and  vii.  24, 

addresses  his  audience  as  children,  thinking  of  himself  as  a  son,  who  had  been  the 
obJLOt  of  fatherly  counsels  and  warnings  in  his  youth.  He  would  hand  on  the  torch 
of  wisdom,  the  tradition  of  piety,  to  the  next  generation,  .     „     j  j  j 

I.  Piety  bhotjld  bk  a  family  tbadition.  (Vers.  1 — 3.)  Handed  down  from 
father  to  son  and  grandson,  or  from  mother  to  daughter  and  grandchild,  from  Lois  to 
Eunice,  till  it  dwells  in  Timothy  also  (2  Tim.  i.  5).  Tradition  in  every  forn.  is  perhaps, 
the  strongest  governing  power  over  the  minds  of  men  in  every  department  of  Me. 

II  Eably  instkuction  will  be  ketained,  bboalled,  and  bbproduced.  As  the 
twie'is  bent,  so  is  the  tree  inclined;  or,  as  Horace  says  so  beautifully,  " The  cask  will 
long  preserve  the  odour  with  which  when  fresh  it  was  imbued"  ('Ep.,   i.  2.  69). 


100  THE  PROVERBS.  [oh.  iv.  1—27. 

Every  higher  effort  of  the  intellect  rests  on  memory.    Our  later  life  is  for  the  most 
part  the  reproduction  in  other  forms  of  the  deep  impressions  of  childhood. 

III.  The  contents  op  this  thadition  abb  simple,  yet  pbofound.  (Vers.  4 — 9.) 
They  are  summed  up  in  "  the  one  thing  needful."  In  opposition  to  the  cynical  maxim, 
"Get  money,  honestly  if  you  can,  but  by  all  means  get  money,"  or  the  refrain  of 
" Property,  pioperty  "  (Tennyson's  '  Northern  Parmer '),  the  teacher  rings  the  exhorta- 
tion out,  like  an  old  chime,  "  Get  wisdom,  get  understanding." 

IV.  The  style  ok  fobm  op  the  tradition.  1.  It  is  iterative.  It  may  even  seem 
to  modern  ears  monotonous.  But  this  form  is  peculiarly  part  of  the  habit  of  the 
stationary  Bast.  Thought  is  not  so  much  expansive,  travelling  from  a  centre  to  a 
wide  periphery;  it  swings,  like  a  pendulum,  between  two  extremes.  Generally,  for  all, 
the  best  life-wisdom  must  be  these  iterations,  "Line  upon  line,  precept  upon  precept" 
or  stare  siyper  antiquas  vias — a  recurrence  to  well-worn  paths.  2.  It  has  variety  of 
expression  with  unbroken  unity  of  thought.  (1)  In  r  ference  to  the  ohjed  of  pursuit. 
"  Wisdom"  is  the  leading  word;  but  this  is  exchanged  for  "tiainiag"  and  "insight" 
(ver.  1);  "doctrine"  and  "law"  (ver.  2);  "  words"  and  "commandments"  (ver"4); 
the  same  word  often  recurs.  (2)  In  reference  to  the  active  effurt  of  the  mind  itself. 
This  is  presented  as  "hearing"  and  "attending"  (ver.  1);  "nut  forsakiug "  (ver.  2) ; 
"  holding  fast  in  the  heart,"  and  "guarding"  (ver.  4);  "gettint;"  and  "uot  turning 
from"  (ver.  5);  "not  forsaking"  and  "loving"  (ver.  6);  "holding  her  high"  and 
"embracing  her"  (ver.  8);  "receiving  words"  and  "adhering  to  instruction"  (vers. 
10,  13).  (3)  In  reference  to  the  accompanying  promise.  "Thou  shalt  iive"  (ver.  4); 
"She  shall  guard  thee;"  "protect  thee"  (ver.  6);  "exalt  thee;"  "bring  tliee  to 
honour"  (ver.  8);  "give  to  thy  head  a  chaplet  of  delight;"  "hold  ■  ut  to  thee  a 
splendid  crown"  (ver.  9);  "many  years  of  life"  (ver.  10);  "Thy  steps  shall  not 
be  hindered"  (ver.  12);  "Thou  shalt  not  stumble"  (ver.  12);  "She  is  thy  Ufe  " 
(ver.  13). 

V.  The  advantages  op  this  method  op  teaching.  1.  It  is  simple,  intelligible 
to  all.  2.  Of  universal  adaptation.  Easily  remembered  by  the  young,  impossible  to 
forget  in  age.  3.  It  admits  of  infinite  illustration  from  experience,  it  is  a  sketch  or 
outline,  given  to  the  pupil ;  he  fills  it  in  and  colours  it  as  life  progresses.— J. 

Vers.  14 — 19. — The  two  paths.  I.  Lipe  under  the  image  op  a  path.  It  is  a 
leading  biblical  image.  There  is  much  suggestion  in  it.  1.  Life,  like  a  path,  has  a 
starting-poi'it,  a  direction,  and  an  end.  2.  We  have  a  choice  of  paths  before  us.  The 
high-road  may  image  holy  tradition  and  custom,  the  bypaths  the  choice  of  caprice  or 
personal  aberration.  3.  It  is  only  safe  to  follow  beaten  tracks.  What  we  call  "striking 
out  an  original  course"  may  be  conceited  folly.  "Gangin'  our  ain  gait"  is  a  dubious 
expression.  4.  The  selection  of  the  path  must  be  determined  by  whither  we  desire  to 
arrive.  5.  We  are  ever  drawing  near  to  some  end.  It  alone  can  disclose  the  prudence 
or  the  folly  of  our  choice. 

II.  The  path  op  the  wicked.  (Vers.  14—17,  19.)  1.  Religion  passionately  warns 
against  it.  The  language  of  iteration  is  the  very  language  of  urgency  and  passion. 
What  a  force  there  is  in  the  mere  repel itioii  of  the  cry,  "Fire!  firel  fire!"  or  in  the 
warning  of  the  mother  to  the  liltle  one  against  some  dangerous  object,  "  Don't  go  near 
it ;  keep  away  ;  go  further  off! "  Just  so  does  Divine  Wisdom  deal  with  us  children  of 
a  larger  growth.  Again  and  again  she  clamours,  "  EnUr  not;  go  not;  shun  it;  pass 
not  over;  turn  away;  pass  hy!"  (vers.  14,  15).  This  throbbing  earnestness,  this 
emotion  of  the  Bihle,  gives  it  its  bold  on  man  ;  and  should  be  shared  by  every  teacher. 
2.  Religion  describes  it  in  powerful  invective  (veis.  16,  17).  (1)  The  sleepless  malice  of 
the  wicked.  A  common  figure  lor  the  intense  activity  of  the  mind.  As  David  had  a 
sleepless  ambition  to  build  a  temple  for  Jehovah;  as  the  trophies  of  Marathon  siifi'ered 
not  the  glory-loving  Themistochs  to  sleep;  as  care,  or  glowing  study,  or  ea^er  planning, 
breaks  our  nightly  rest;— so  the  evil  have  no  repose  from  their  dark  cupidities  and' 
pen.i(;ious  schemes.  (2)  They  are  nourished  by  evil  (ver.  17).  To  "eat  bread  and 
drink  wine  is  a  Hebrew  metaphor  for  living  (Araus  ii.  8;  vii.  12).  In  a  similar  way 
tlie  "  bread  of  misery  "  and  the  "wine  of  punishment"  are  spoken  of  (Dent.  xvi.  3- 
Ps.  cxxvii.  2 ;  Amos  ii.  8).  'I  hey  live  upon  villainy,  as  we  might  say.  It  is  the.  root 
of  their  being.    It  is  horrible,  but  true,  that  a  man  may,  as  it  were,  draw  life  and  enerc^v 


CH.  IV.  1—27.]  THE  PROVERBS.  101 

out  of  a  perverted  consciouBness,  as  the  drunkard  cannot  lire  without  the  alcohol  whicli 
is  killing  him. 

III.  The  path  of  the  bighteoub.  (Ver.  18.)  There  ia  a  change  of  figure;  for 
the  image  of  the  path,  the  image  of  the  advancing  light  of  morning  is  substituted. 
1.  Lisht  as  an  image  of  moral  goodness.  It  is  universal,  suggests  itself  to  and  strikes 
the  fancy  of  alL  It  associates  with  it  the  images  of  beauty,  of  joy,  of  expansion,  of 
futurity,  of  infinity.  2.  'I  he  growth  of  light  from  dawn  to  noon  as  an  imajre  of  moral 
progress.  This  is  true  of  knowledge  and  of  practice.  The  good  man  tiavels  out  of 
dimmer  perceptions  and  out  of  doubts,  into  clear  convictions  of  reason.  At  first  he 
realizes  little;  his  will  is  weak  and  untrained.  But  keeping  his  eyes  upon  the  ideal  of 
the  good,  true,  and  beautiful,  he  embodies  more  and  more  of  it  in  conduct.  As  the  sun 
rests  not  (to  speak  and  think  in  the  dialect  of  poetry)  till  it  "  stands"  (see  the  Hebrew) 
in  high  noon,  so  the  righteous  is  ever  advancing  towards  the  goal  of  a  life  in  perfect 
unity  with  God.  3.  The  safety  of  the  light  is  an  image  of  the  course  of  the  righteous. 
Translated  into  distinctively  Christian  thought,  this  ia  follovnng  Christ  (John  xi.  9,  10). 
4.  The  image  serves  to  throw  into  contrast  the  course  of  the  wicked.  "  Thick  darkness" 
represents  their  mind  and  way.  It  is  ignorant,  full  of  peril,  yet  they  are  uncon- 
scious of  it.  Instead  of  growth  and  progress,  their  doom  is  sudden  extinction  (comp. 
ch.  i.  27,  sqq. ;  ii.  18,  22 ;  iii.  35).— J. 

Vers.  20 — 22. — Self-preservation.  The  instinct  of  self-preservation  is  the  very  root 
of  all  our  activity.  "  Every  individual  existence  strives  to  remain  what  it  is,"  and 
would  defend  its  integrity  from  all  attack. 

I.  The  instinct  ib  eecoqnized.  As  it  must  be  by  all  genuine  teachers.  It  is  a 
fact,  and  cannot  be  properly  ignored;  a  Divine  fact,  and  ought  not  to  be  oljscured.  It 
Includes  (1)  the  desire  to  live,  the  sense  of  life's  sweetness ;  (2)  the  desire  for  health 
and  happiness. 

II.  The  instinct  ib  dieectbd.  It  needs  direction ;  for  all  instinct  is  in  itself  blind, 
and  men,  in  seeking  health  and  happiness,  ignorantly  and  viciously  purchase  disease  and 
death. 

in.  There  is  no  beobet  op  sblp-pebsbrvation  but  (in  the  most  comprehensive 
sense)  godliness.  This  teaches  the  renunciation  of  the  immediate  for  the  further 
and  lasting  good.  A  paradox  is  here  involved,  a  seeming  contradiction  containing  a 
unity.  To  lose  life  is  to  gain  it ;  to  gain  it,  to  lose  it.  For  in  true  conduct  there  is  ever 
a  denial  of  the  lower  contained  in  the  affirmation  of  the  higher,  and  in  evil  conduct  mce 
versa  (compare  on  this  section,  ch.  iii.  2,  8, 13, 16  ;  iv.  13). — J. 

Vers.  23 — 27. —  Uie  heart  and  its  issues.  I.  Life  centred  in  the  heart.  (Ver.  23.) 
Physically,  we  know  this  is  so.  It  is  a  self-acting  pump,  a  fountain  of  vital  force.  All 
the  physical  activities  are  derived  from  it.  Spiritually,  it  is  so.  The  connection  of 
the  heart  with  emotion  is  recognized  in  all  languages.  It  is  feeling  in  the  widest  sense 
that  makes  us  what  we  are. 

II.  The  heart  must  be,  therefore,  the  peculiar  object  of  odr  solicitude. 
(Ver.  23.)  The  sentiments,  to  put  it  in  another  form,  are  the  important  elements  in  cha- 
racter. These  lie  so  close  to  opinion,  that  we  commonly  say  either  "  I  feel "  or  "  I  think  " 
in  expressing  our  opinions.  To  instil  right  sentiments  about  the  important  points  of 
behaviour,  the  relation  of  the  sexes,  business,  honour,  truth,  loyalty,  is  the  great  work  of 
moral  education,  and  here  lies  its  immense  value  as  distinguished  from  the  gymnastic 
of  the  intellect. 

III.  The  external  organs  must  at  the  same  time  be  disciplined.  (Vers.  24 — 27.) 
Education  must  not  be  one-sided.  The  heart  supplies  the  organs  and  channels  of 
activity ;  but  these  again  react  upon  the  heart.  The  impulses  of  feeling  are  in  them- 
selves formless ;  it  is  the  definite  organs  which  give  to  them  peculiar  shape  and  deter- 
mination. Hence  the  organs  themselves  must  be  trained  to  receive  true  impressions 
and  to  -give  them  back.  1.  The  mouth— the  lips.  They  are  to  be  corrected  of  every 
"crooked,"  false  expression.  What  wonderful  variety  of  expression  is  the  mouth 
capable  of— firmness,  laxity,  tenderness,  scorn,  love,  irony,  hate  I  In  controlling  the 
mouth  we  do  something  to  control  the  heart.  Its  contents  must  be  purified  from  false- 
hood, coarseness,  foolish  jesting,  malicious  gossip,  all  of  which  tell  upon  the  centra] 


102  THE  PEOVBBBS.  [oh.  iv.  1— av. 


consciousness,  and  disturb  and  obscure  it.  2.  The  eyes.  (Ver.  25.)  They  are  to  be 
trained  to  a  direct  and  straightforward  expression.  The  leer  of  lust,  the  oblique 
glance  of  cunning  expressed  on  the  faces  of  others,  or  the  clear  honest  light  beaming 
from  the  eyes  of  the  pure  and  open-hearted,  not  only  mirror  the  heart,  but  remind  how 
the  heart  may  be  reached  by  the  self-discipline  of  the  eye.  3.  The  feet.  (Ver.  26.) 
In  like  manner,  they  are  to  be  trained  to  a  straightforward  walk.  Even  in  moments  of 
relaxation  'tis  well  to  have  an  object  for  a  walk.  The  mind  needs  self-direction  and 
discipline  even  in  its  pleasures;  otherwise  it  becomes  dissolute,  and  waywardly  falls  into 
evil  through  sheer  laxity  in  the  spring  of  will.  (1)  Action  and  reaction,  between  the 
inward  and  the  outward  world,  expression  and  impression,  constitute  a  great  law  of  our 
spiritual  activity.  (2)  Hence  self-discipline  and  moral  education  should  be  founded  on 
the  recognition  of  it.  We  must  work  from  the  centre  to  the  periphery,  and  back  again 
from  every  point  of  the  periphery  to  the  centre  of  life. — J, 

Vers.  1 — 13. — The  solicitude  of  the  wise  father:  a  sermon  to  parents  a/nd  children. 
In  these  verses  we  have  a  peep  into  the  royal  house  at  Jerusalem  while  David  was  on 
the  throne.  And  we  have  such  a  glimpse  as  we  should  expect  to  gain.  We  see  the 
devout  man  extremely  solicitous  that  his  son  should  walk  in  the  ways  of  Divine  and 
heavenly  wisdom.  David,  like  the  rest  of  human  parents,  and  more  than  most  of 
them,  was  under — 

I.  A  8TE0NO  TEMPTATION  TO  MAKE  A  FALSE  ESTIMATE.  So  near  to  US  is  this  present 
passing  world,  so  powerfully  do  its  interests  appeal  to  us,  so  strong  is  the  hold  which  it 
gains  over  our  senses  and  our  imagination,  that  we  are  apt  to  over-estimate  altogether  its 
claims  and  its  worth.  And  this  in  proportion  to  the  height  of  the  dignity,  the  measure 
of  the  power,  the  extent  of  the  fortune,  to  which  we  have  attained.  David,  as  a  man 
subject  to  all  human  passions,"  would  be  particularly  tempfed  to  weigh  the  worldly 
advantages  of  his  favourite  son,  and  estimate  them  very  carefully  and  very  highly. 
He  would  be  in  danger  of  considering — not  exclusively,  but  excessively — what  would  be 
the  extent  of  his  kingly  rule,  what  the  revenue  he  would  be  able  to  collect,  what  the 
influence  he  would  wield  over  neighbouring  powers,  what  the  authority  he  would 
exercise  over  his  own  people,  etc.  And  in  the  thick  throng  of  these  mundane  con- 
siderations there  would  be  no  small  risk  of  other  and  higher  things  being  lost  sight  of. 
So  with  other  if  not  with  all  parents.  There  is  a  constant  danger  of  worldly  anxieties 
about  our  children  absorbing,  or  at  any  rate  obscuring,  the  deeper  and  worthier  solici- 
tudes. But  in  the  case  of  the  devout  monarch  of  Israel  there  was,  as  there  should 
be  with  us  all — 

n.  A  WISE  DiscEBNMENT.  David  was  profoundly  convinced  that  "  wisdom  is  the 
principal  thing  "  (ver.  7),  that  everything  is  of  inferior  val  ue  to  that.  He  saw  clearly  and 
felt  strongly  that  he  must  induce  his  son  Solomon  to  walk  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  or 
even  his  brilliant  prospects  would  come  to  nothing.  For  he  knew :  1.  That  the  fear  of 
trod  was  the  living  principle  most  likely  to  lead  to  temporal  prosperily:  he  had 
proved  that  m  the  elevation  of  his  own  «'  house  "  and  the  rejection  of  that  of  Saul. 
i.  Ihat  no  possible  successes  of  an  earthly  kind  would  compensate  for  the  loss  of 
character :  his  own  hour  of  disastrous  folly  had  shown  him  that  (2  Sam.  xi.  27). 
a.  Ihat  no  circumstantial  misfortunes  could  fatally  injure  a  man  who  was  ri<^ht  at 
heart  with  God  :  his  own  experience  had  illustrated  that  truth  (Ps.  xli.  12).  We  shall 
be  wise  if  we  come  to  the  same  conclusions.  Like  David,  we  sliall  see  that  the  outward 
and  the  visible,  though  they  may  be  far  more  attractive  and  voiceful,  are  yet  of  far 
inferior  account  to  the  mw;ard  and  the  spiritual.  We  shall  care  immeasurably  more 
lTth7:"^il'^^r  *'lL^YJ^fLll.r.^« '"  T\  *\-  P-^P-°-  ™ -tate,  "all  Jori 


TIT   rp        e^'^'ugor  Keeping  possession  ot  lands  and  houses. 

«.  7v,«f  w?  ^'"'^  Z  ^'^''"°  u  ''°!^^5°  '^"'^  ^°"^'<'-     "  ^«'  "sj^rents,  would  walk  wisely, 
J^=.rlo        "W  attain  our  heart's  desire  concerning  the  chilTfren  of  our  love  and  of  our 

t^^^M^f  "f  ^  ^^"7^  ^'^-^^  ^^"^^  "'"»'»««''  ^^'  *^i^  God  has  taught  us  (1) 
with  a  1  affectionateness  of  manner  (ver.  3);  (2)  with  all  earnestness  of  sjlrit  {vlJ. 

rf  i;^.  /  'a  ^  •'  r '  ^"'°^^'  "^  exposition.     There  is  a  strain  of  parental  tendernest 

af  tone  and  energy  of  manner,  as  well  as  great  fulness  of  utterance  here.    The  same 


OH.  IV.  1—27.]  THE  PROVERBS.  103 

thought  is  presented,  is  repeated,  is  pressed  on  the  reason  and  the  conscience.  David 
evidently  yearned,  strove,  persisted  with  patient  and  resolute  zeal,  that  he  might  con- 
vince and  inspire  his  son  with  the  sacred  truths  he  held  so  dear.  He  represented 
heavenly  wisdom,  the  truth  of  God,  as  (1)  the  thing  of  surpassing  intrinsic  excellency 
( vtr.  7) ;  (2)  a  thing  to  he  pursued  in  preference  to  other  fascinations  (vers.  5 — 7) ; 
(3)  a  thing  to  be  cherished  and  held  to  the  heart  (ver.  6);  (4)  a  thing  to  bo  highly 
honoured  before  men  (ver.  8) ;  (5)  a  thing  to  be  retained  at  all  costs  (ver.  13) ;  (6)  a 
friend  that  would  repay  all  attentions — that  would  guard  and  shield  from  evil  (vers. 
6, 12),  that  would  load  to  honour  and  esteem  (vers.  8,  9),  that  would  prolong  life 
(ver.  10),  that  would  lead  in  that  way  which  is  the  path  of  life  itself  (ver.  13). 

1.  To  parents,  the  lesson  of  the  text  is  (1)  discern  the  one  supremely  precious  thing 
to  be  commended  to  the  heart  of  youth ;  and  (2)  commend  it  graciously,  earnestly, 
fully.  2.  To  sons  and  dauyhters,  it  is  (1)  remember  all  the  sacred  solicitude  that  has 
been  expended  on  you;  and  (2)  fulfil  the  desire  of  ynur  parents'  hearts.  "  My  .son, 
kuuw  the  Grud  of  your  father"  (see  ver.  1);  this  is  "good  doctrine  "  (ver.  2) ;  it  is 
"yQurlife"(ver.  13).— C. 

Vers.  14 — 17,  19. —  The  prudence  of  piety.  We  may  say  concerning  piety  or  virtue 
— the  wisdom  which  is  from  God  includes  both — that  the  essence  of  it  is  in  rigla 
feeling,  in  loving  him  who  is  the  Holy  One  and  that  which  is  the  right  and  admirable 
thing,  and  in  hating  that  which  is  evil  and  base  ;  that  the  proof  of  it  is  in  right  acting — 
iu  doing  those  things  and  those  only  which  are  good  and  honourable,  which  God's 
Word  and  our  own  conscience  approve ;  and  that  the  prudence  of  it  is  in  these  two 
tilings  which  are  implied  in  our  text. 

I.  Cherishing  a  wholesome  hoeeor  op  the  consequences  of  sin.  There  is  an 
insensibility  and  an  ignorance  which  passes  for  courage,  and  gets  a  credit  which  is  not 
its  due.  Those  who  do  not  take  the  trouble  to  know  what  the  issues  of  any  line  of 
conduct  are,  and  who  go  fearlessly  forward,  are  not  brave  ;  they  are  only  blind.  We 
ought  to  know  all  we  can  learn  of  the  consequences  of  our  behaviour,  of  the  end  in 
which  the  path  we  are  treading  terminates.  The  prudent  man  will  see  and  shrink  from 
the  consequences  of  evil ;  and  if  he  open  his  eyes  or  consult  those  who  can  tell  him,  he 
will  find  that  they  are  simply  disastrous.  1.  For  sin  is  mischievous  in  its  spirit ;  it 
gloats  over  the  ruin  which  it  works ;  it  finds  a  horrible  delight  in  doing  harm  to 
human  souls  (vers.  16,  17).  2.  And  it  succeeds  in  its  shameful  design.  It  does 
"  mischief;"  it  makes  men  "to  fall."  It  causes  spiritual  decline,  decay,  corruption — 
the  worst  of  all  mischief;  it  leads  purity,  sobriety,  honesty,  truthfulness,  reverence,  love, 
to  fall  down  into  the  ruinous  depths  of  lascivionsness,  intemperance,  dishonesty,  false- 
hood, profanity,  hard-heartedness.  3.  It  leads  down  to  a  darkness  and  a  death  if 
which  it  did  not  dream  (ver.  19).  It  sinks  into  that  awful  soul-blindness  in  which  the 
"eye  is  evil,"  in  which  the  very  "light  is  darkness"  (Matt.  vi.  23),  in  which  the 
moral  judgment,  all  perverted,  leads  astray.  "  The  way  of  the  wicked  is  as  darkness  : 
they  know  not  at  what  they  stumble."  Their  powers  of  moral  distinction  are  gone ;  they 
are  "  altogether  gone  astray."  Piety,  virtue,  may  well  in  godly  prudence  shrink  with 
wholesome  horror  from  this. 

II.  Careeul  avoidance  of  the  way  of  the  wicked,  and  so  of  the  path  nf 
temptation.  1.  True  it  is  that  we  must  be  often  found  in  perilous  places  at  the  call 
of  daily  duty.  2.  True  that  at  the  invitation  of  mercy  we  shall  sometimes  be  found 
there.  3.  But  it  is  also  true  that  the  wise  will  not  needlessly  expose  themselves  to 
the  assaults  of  sin.  They  will  refrain  from  so  doing  both  because  (1)  we  are  not  sure 
of  the  measure  of  our  own  strength ;  there  may  be  some  very  weak  places  in  our 
armour,  ill-fortified  parts  in  onr  character ;  most  men  are  weaker  than  they  know, 
somewhere.  And  also  because  (2)  we  do  not  know  the  full  strength  of  temptation.  Full 
often  sin  proves  to  have  an  unimagined  force,  an  unsuspected  skill.  The  full  strength 
of  the  allurements  and  enticements  of  evil  perhaps  no  man  knows.  The  number  of 
the  slain  that  lie  on  the  spiritual  battle-field  tells  with  a  mournful  eloquence  that 
thousands  of  the  children  of  men  have  over-estimated  their  own  resisting  power,  or  under- 
estimated the  insidiousness,  or  the  fascination,  or  the  force  of  the  foe.  Therefore,  if  duly 
does  not  demand  it,  nor  mercy  plead  for  it,  shun  the  dangerous  path,  "  enter  not  into  the 
way  of  it  .  .  .  avoid  it,  pass  not  by  it,  turn  from  it,  and  pass  away  ''  (vers.  14,  15). 


104  THE  PROVERBS.  [oh.  iv.  1—27. 

Let  it  be  considered  that  this  is  a  Divine  injunction ;  therefore  let  there  be  no 
hesitation  about  obeying.  There  is  nctliing  unmanly  or  ignoble  in  prudence.  It  is 
not  a  virtue  to  be  anywise  ashamed  of.  There  is  ample  scope  for  the  utmost  heroism 
of  spirit  and  of  life  without  exposing  our  young  hearts  to  evils  the  very  nature  of 
which  we  may  not  know,  the  force  of  which  we  cannot  measure,  and  from  the  conse- 
quences of  which  we  might  never  be  able  to  escape. — C. 

Vers.  18,  19. — Darkness  and  light.  We  have  two  perfect  contrasts  in  these  two 
verses — the  path  of  the  just  and  the  way  of  the  wicked ;  the  one  is  very  closely  con- 
nected with  light  and  the  other  with  darkness. 

I.  Sin  and  darkness.  (Ver.  19.)  We  may  say  that ;  1.  Sin  is  darkness.  It  is  (1) 
the  ignorance  of  the  mind ;  it  is  (2)  the  error  of  the  heart — it  is  the  soul's  supreme 
mistake,  misreading,  misunderstanding  every  one  and  everything  from  the  highest  to 
the  lowest.  2.  Sin  spreads  darkness  (1)  over  the  soul  of  the  sinner  himself,  blinding 
his  eyes,  distorting  his  vision,  confusing  his  perceptions  ;  (2)  over  the  souls  of  others, 
leading  them  into  the  darkness  of  folly,  superstition,  wrong-doing.  3.  Sin  leads  to  the 
ruin  which  attends  darkness ;  it  ends  in  making  the  sinner  blind  to  the  true  character 
of  his  own  transgressions :  "  They  know  not  at  what  they  stumble ; "  blind,  also,  to  the 
final  issue  of  his  guilt :  they  know  not  into  what  they  stumble — into  what  a  "  black- 
ness of  darkness." 

II.  Wisdom  and  light.  (Ver.  18.)  By  "  the  just "  in  this  verse  we  understand 
not  particularly  the  man  who  is  equitable  in  his  dealings  with  his  fellows,  but  the  good 
and  wise  man — the  man  who,  in  the  fear  of  God,  seeks  to  act  with  rectitude  in  all  his 
relations.  This  man  is  closely  associated  with  the  light.  1.  Knowle^lge  is  light,  and 
heavenly  wisdom  is  tlie  truest  and  best  knowledge — that  of  Q-od,  and  of  the  human 
soul,  and  of  the  path  of  eteinal  life.  2.  That  which  reveals  is  light,  and  heavenly 
wisdom  is  the  best  and  most  beneficent  revealing  power.  The  wise,  the  "  just "  man 
is  "making  manifest"  (see  Eph.  v.  13)  the  highest,  the  most  far-reaching,  deep- 
descending  truths.  He  does  this  (1)  by  his  direct  endeavour  to  instruct;  (2)  uncon- 
sciously, by  the  influence  of  his  life.  "  The  life  is  the  light  of  men  "  in  our  case  as  in 
his  who  was  "  the  Life  made  mitnifest."  3.  The  light  of  the  just  man  grows  ever 
stronger  and  more  illuminating  :  it  "  shineth  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect  day," 
With  added  opportunities  of  inquiry  and  acquisition,  with  multiplied  privileges,  with 
more  of  Divine  discipline,  with  increase  of  power  resulting  from  the  exercise  of 
spiritual  faculty,  there  is  (1)  growing  light  within,  burning  more  steadily  and  lustrously ; 
and  (2)  advancing  influence  for  good  which  flows  forth  in  wider,  deeper,  and  larger 
streams. — 0. 

Vers.  20 — 27. — The  course  of  wisdom.  In  these  verses  we  may  trace  the  course  of 
wisdom  from  the  beginning  to  its  full  development.    We  have — 

I.  Its  bboinninq  in  the  soul.  (Ver.  20.)  It  commences  in  attention,.  When  a 
man  "  inclines  his  ear  unto  the  sayings  of  Wisdom,"  when  he  eagerly  listens  to  what 
God  !-ays  to  him,  when  he  is  a  disciple  sitting  at  the  feet  of  the  great  Teacher,  he  has 
taken  an  important  step  in  the  heavenward  course.  The  "  grace  of  God"  is  upon  him 
(Acts  xiii.  43). 

II.  Its  establishment  in  the  soul.  (Ver.  21,  latter  clause.)  When  the  counsels 
of  the  Wise  One  are  once  fairly  and  fully  welcomed  to  the  soul,  so  that  they  may 
be  said  to  be  "  in  the  midst  of  thine  heart,"  then  it  may  be  said  that  the  decisive  point 
is  turned.  When  there  is  the  "cherishing  of  a  cordial  attachment;"  when  we  say, 
"How  love  I  thy  Law ! "  when  our  heart  is  given  to  the  ti  uth  of  God  because  given  to 
him,  the  gracious  Lord  of  truth  ; — then  wisdom  is  establisiied  within  our  soul. 

III.  The  need  for  holy  vihilanob  concerning  its  maintenance.  (Ver.  23;  see 
homily  infra.    Ver.  26,  first  clause.) 

IV.  One  of  its  manifestations.  (Ver.  24.)  It  will  show  itself  in  clean  lips;  it  will 
put  far  away  the  froward  and  perverse  mouth.  Its  utterances  will  be  pure,  temperate, 
reverent.  The  child  of  folly  is  detected  by  his  foolish,  vain,  culpable  exp^es^ions.  His 
"speech  bevvrayeth  him."  "By  his  words  he  is  condemned."  The  son  ot  wisdom  i^i 
known  by  his  blamelessness  in  this  particular;  by  his  words  he  is  justified  (Matt.  xii. 
36, 37 ;  Eph.  iv.  29 ;  Jas.  i.  26).  J  \ 


OH.  IT.  1—27.]  THE  PBOVBRBS.  106 

V.  Bbsolutbnesb  in  the  eight  path.  (Ver.  27.)  There  must  be  no  "turning 
again  to  folly  "  (Ps.  Ixxxv.  8) ;  no  turning  to  the  right  or  left  into  either  main  high- 
ways of  vice  and  open  sin,  or  any  byways  of  error  and  ill-doing.  Even  the  pleasant 
path  that  seems  to  skirt  the  King's  highway  so  closely  that  at  any  time  we  may  return 
thereto,  is  a  danger  to  be  avoided.  The  road  that  leads  off  from  that  highway  of  holi- 
ness by  ever  so  small  an  angle  is  a  road  that  finds  its  way  at  last  to  a  "  City  of 
Destruction."  The  best  preservative  from  the  perilpus  wandering  is  here  indicated ; 
it  is — 

VI.  Steadfast  gaze  upon  the  goal.  (Ver.  25.)  Look  right  on  to  the  goal  in 
front :  ha  «o  intent  on  reaching  that,  and  on  attaining  to  the  prize  which  awaits  the 
winner,  that  there  will  be  no  temptation  to  depart  from  the  straight  course.  We  keep 
a  straighter  path  by  fixing  our  eye  on  the  object  toward  which  we  walk  than  by  watch- 
ing the  steps  we  take ;  how  much  more  so  than  by  louking  about  us  on  every  hand  1 
Our  heavenly  wisdom  is  to  be  looking  "  right  on,"  "  straight  before  us,"  unto  Jesus,  the 
Leader  and  Perfecter  of  the  faith  (Heb.  xii.  2), 

VII.  Its  issue.  It  issues  in  life  and  health  (vers.  22,  23).  Long  life  was  promised 
to  the  wise  and  holy  under  the  old  dispensation ;  now  we  look  confidently  forward,  as 
the  issue  of  heavenly  wisdom,  to  (1)  a  blessed  life  below,  of  spiritual  wholeness,  and 
(2)  everlasting  life  beyond,  where  the  inhabitants  are  never  sick  (Isa.  xxxiii.  24). — 0. 

Ver.  23. — Man's  chief  treasure.  "  Keep  thy  heart  above  all  keeping "  (marginal 
reading).  Evidently  there  is  a  precious  treasure  which,  as  the  disciples  of  Wisdom,  we 
are  charged  to  keep.   We  ask — 

I.  What  ake  the  chief  tkbasubbs  wb  have  in  charge  ?-  These  are  threefold. 
1.  That  which  belongs  to  us,  but  which  is  entirely  without  us — our  money,  our 
houses,  our  lands,  our  shares,  our  ships,  our  precious  documents,  our  "  valuables."  2. 
That  which  is  more  closely  related  to  us,  but  is  still  outside  ourselves — our  bodily  frame, 
the  tabenaade  of  car  spirit,  and,  with  this,  our  physical  health  and  strength;  the  clear 
eye,  the  healthy  brain,  the  strong  nerve.  3.  Our  own  very  selves — that  spiritual  nature 
in  virtue  of  which  we  are  said  to  be  "  created  in  the  image  of  God  "  (Gen.  L  27).  These 
aifl  the  treasures  we  may  "  keep." 

n.  Which  is  the  one  of  supreme  value,  and  why  ?  "  Keep  thy  heart  above 
all  keeping;."  That  which  is  nearest  ourselves  must  be  of  more  value  to  us  than  that 
which  is  further  from  us.  To  keep  our  temporal  estate  is  to  preserve  that  which  is 
precious,  but  which  is  not  ourselves.  To  maintain  our  health  is  most  desirable,  but  our 
body  is  only  our  temporary  home  and  organ  ;  it  is  something  we  can  lose  and  yet  our- 
selves be.  But  our  heart,  that  is  our  own  very  self.  God  made  us,  not  to  have,  but  to 
he,  living  souls :  that  in  us,  that  of  us  which  thinks,  loves,  hopes,  worships,  rejoices  in 
the  spiritual  and  the  Divine,  that  is  ov/rself,  and  to  keep  that  must  be  the  supreme 
duty ;  that  is  to  be  kept  beyond  all  keeping.  But  the  wise  man  says  there  is  a  special 
reason  why  we  should  keep  our  heart  beyond  all  keeping ;  he  says,  "  for  out  of  it  are 
the  issues  of  life."  In  other  words,  a  well-guarded  heart  is  the  spring  and  source  of  all 
that  is  best  in  human  life.  1.  The  holy  thoughts  and  pure  feelings  and  kind  purposes 
which  flow  therefrom  are,  in  themselves,  a  large  part  and  the  very  best  part  of  human 
life.  2.  A  well-guarded  heart  will  prove  the  source  of  a  well-regulated  life — of  a 
life  of  honesty,  virtue,  peaceableness,  sobriety;  and  these  will  ensure  prosperity, 
esteem,  joy.  3.  A  well-regulated  heart  will  conduct  to  the  life  immortal  in  the 
heavenly  land :  this  is  the  most  blessed  "  issue  "  of  all.  With  whatsoever  anxiety, 
vigilance,  diligence,  we  gnard  our  temporal  interests,  or  even  our  health  and  our  mortal 
life,  with  far  greater  anxiety,  far  more  eager  vigilance,  far  more  unremitting  diligence, 
should  we  guard  our  heart — its  purity,  its  tenderness,  its  devotion. 

III.  What  abb  our  forces  op  defence  ?  Wherewith  shall  we  keep  these  hearts 
of  ours  ?  What  are  the  forces  at  our  command  ?  They  are  these.  1.  The  power  of 
introspection.  We  can  interrogate  and  examine  our  own  souls,  and  see  how  we  stand, 
what  need  there  is  for  penitence  and  for  renewal.  2.  The  power  of  self-regulation.  We 
can  acquire  healthful  habits,  pass  regulative  rescdutions  which  will  (1)  keep  us  away 
from  temptation,  and  (2)  take  us  where  our  souls  will  be  nourished  and  strengthened 
in  things  Divine.  3.  The  power  of  the  Divine  Spirit.  We  can  ask  and  gain  the  "  might 
[which  come«  froml  his  Spirit  in  the  inner  man." — 0. 


106 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[oh.  v.  1—23. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  V. 
Vers.  1—23.— 8.  Eighth  admonitory  dis- 
course.   Warning  against  aduUeryi  and  comr 
mendation  of  marriage.      The  teacher,  in 
this  diflcoJiTBe,  recurs  to  a  subject  which  he 
lias  glanced  at  before  in  oh.  ii.  15 — 19,  and 
which  he  again  treats  of  in  the  latter  part  of 
the  sixth  and  in  the  whole  of  the  eeveiith 
chapters.    This  constant  recurrence  to  the 
same  subject,  repulsive  on  account  of  its 
assooiations,  shows,  however,  the  importance 
which  it  had  in  the  teacher's  estimation  as 
a  ground  of  warning,  and  that  he  ranked 
it  among  the  foremost  of  the  temptations 
and  sins  which  called  the  young  ofif  from 
the  pursuit  of  Wisdom,  and  so  led  them 
astray  from  "  the  fear  of  the  Lord."    The 
vividness  with  which-  the  ruin,  bodily  and 
moral,  ensuing  with  absolute  certainty  on  a 
life  of  vice,  is  described  is  a  sufBcient  proof 
in  itself  that  the  subject  before  us  is  not 
brought  forward    from  or   for   voluptuous 
motives,  but  for  the  purpose  of  conveying  an 
impressive  warning.     Some  commentators, 
».g.  Delitzsoh,  include  the  first  six  verses 
in  the  previous  discourse ;  but  the  unity  of 
the  subject  requires  a  different  treatment. 
Zockler's  reason  against  this  arrangement, 
on  the  ground  that  the  previous  discourse 
was  addressed  to  "  tender  youth,"  and  thus 
to  youth  in  a  state  of  pupilage,  while  the 
one  before  us  refers  to  more  advanced  age 
—  to  the  married  man^may  be  true,  but  is 
not  the  true  ground  for  incorporating  them 
in  the  present  discourse.     The  unity  of  the 
subject  requires  that  they  should  be  taken 
with  the  central  and  didactic  part  of  the 
discourse,  as  being  in  a  sense  introductory  to 
it.    The  discourse  divides  itself  into  three 
sections.    (1)  The  earnest  appeal  to  atten- 
tion because  of  the  counter-attraction  in  the 
blandishments  of  the  harlot,  which,  how- 
ever, in  the  end,  are  bitter  as  wormwood  and 
sharp  as  a  two-edged  sword  (vers.  1 — 6). 
(2)  The  main  or  didactic  section  (vers.  7 — 
20),  embracing  (a)  warnings  against  adul- 
terous   intercourse     with     "  the     strange 
woman  "  (vera.  7 — 14) ;  (5)  the  antithetical 
admonition  to  use  the  means  of  chaslity  by 
remaining  faithful  to,  and  rejoicing  with. 


the  vdfe  of  one's  yonth  (vea  IS — VS).  And 
(3)  the  epilogue,  which,  in  addition  to  the 
disastrous  temporal  consequences  which 
follow  on  the  violation  of  the  sanctity  of 
marriage,  mentioned  in  vera.  9 — 14,  repre- 
sents the  sin  as  one  which  will  be  examined 
by  the  universal  Judge,  and  which  brings 
with  it  its  own  Nemesis  or  retribution.  All 
sins  of  impurity,  aU  sins  against  temperance, 
soberness,  and  chastity,  are  no  doubt  in- 
volved in  the  warning,  and  the  subject  is 
capable  of  an  allegorical  interpretation — a 
mode  of  treatment  in  some  instances  adopted 
by  the  LXX.  rendering,  as  that  the  "  strange 
woman"  stands  as  the  representative  of 
impenitence  (Miller),  or,  according  to  the 
earlier  view  of  Bede,  as  the  representative 
of  heresy  and  false  doctrine;  but  the  sin 
which  is  inveighed  against,  and  which  is 
made  the  subject  of  these  repeated  warn- 
ings, is  not  fornication  simply,  but  adultery— 
the  violation,  in  its  most  repulsive  form,  of 
the  sacred  obligations  of  marriage.  The 
whole  discourse  is  an  impressive  com- 
mentary on  the  seventh  commandment. 

Ver.  1. — The  admonitory  address  is  very 
similar  to  that  in  cii.  iv.  20,  except  that  here 
the  teacher  says, "  Attend  to  my  wisdom,  bow 
down  thine  ear  to  my  understanding,"  in- 
stead of  "  Attend  to  my  words,  and  incline 
thine  ear  unto  my  saying."  It  is  not  merely 
"wisdom"  and  "understanding"  in  the 
abstract,  but  wisdom  which  he  has  appro- 
priated to  himself,  made  his  own,  and  which 
he  knows  by  experience  to  be  true  wisdom. 
It  may  therefore  have  the  sense  of  experi- 
ence and  observation,  both  of  which  increase 
with  years.  To  "  bow  down  the  ear  "  is  to 
listen  attentively,  and  so  to  fix  the  mind 
intently  on  what  is  being  said.  Compare 
the  similar  expressions  in  Ps.  xxxi.  2  and 
oh.  ii.  2;  iv.  20;  xxxiii.  12.  The  same 
idea  is  expressed  in  Marc  Antony's  address 
to  his  countrymen,  "  Lend  me  your  ears " 
(Shakespeare,  '  Julius  Csesar,'  act  iii.  so.  2). 
Ver.  2. — This  verse  expresses  the  pur- 
poses or  results  of  the  preceding  admonition. 
The  first  is,  that  thou  mayest  regard  discre- 
tion (Hebrew,  ItshmSr  m'zlmmdth)  ;  literally, 
to  guard  reflection ;  i.e.  in  other  words,  that 
thou  mayest  maintain  thouglitfuluess,  ob- 
serve counsel,  set  a  proper  guard  or  control 
over  thy  thouglits,  and  so  restrain  them 
within  proper  and  legitimate  limits,  ol 
form    such  resolutions  which,  being  well 


OH.  Y.  1—23.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


107 


oonaideied  and  prudential,  may  result  in 
pmdent    conduct.     The   word  m'zimmdth, 
bowever,  does  not  travel  beyond  the  sphere 
of  what  is  conceivi  d  in  the  mind,  and  con- 
Bequently  does  not  mean  conduct  (as  Holden 
conceiTes),  except  in  a  secondary  sense,  as 
that  thoughts  and  plans  are  the  necessary 
preliminaries  to  action  and  conduct.  Mnffet, 
tn  loe.,  explains,  "  that  thou  mayesc  not 
conceive  in  mind  any  evil  or  vanity."    The 
vrord  m'iimmoi'h  is  the  plural  of  m'zlmimah, 
which   occurs   in    oh.    i    4.     This    word 
generally  means  any  plan,  project,  device, 
either  in  a  good  or  bad  sense.    In  the  latter 
sense  it  is  applied  to  intrigue  and  deceitful 
conduct,  as  in  ch.  xxiv.  8.    It  ia  here  used 
in  a  good  sense.    Indeed,  Delitzsch  remarks 
that  the  use  of  the  word  in  a  good  sense  is 
peculiar  to  the  introductory  part   of   the 
Proverbs  (ch.  i. — ix.).  The  Vulgate  renders, 
"That  thou  mayest  guard  thy  thoughts  or 
reflection  (yteustodiateogitationei)."  So  the 
LXX.,  *Ii/a  (i>v\alris  ivmiav  h.yaBii',  "  That 
thou  mayest  guard  good  reflection,"   the 
adjective  dya.ei\  being  introduced  to  note  the 
sense  in  which  the  iwoia,  i.e.  act  of  thinking, 
properly,  is  to  be  understood.    The  prefix 
h  ("to")  before   tlidmSr,  "to   guard,"  in 
lisJimSr,  expresses  the  purpose,  as  in  ch.i 
S ;  ii.  2,  et  alia.   The  second  end  in  view  is, 
that  thy  lips  may  keep  knowledge;  literally, 
and  thy  lips  shall  keep  knowledge.    Those 
lips   keep    or   pieserve   knowledge    which 
literally  retain  tLo  instruction  of  Wisdom 
(Zockler),  or  which  allow  nothing  to  pass 
them  which  does  not  proceed  from  the  know- 
ledge ef  God  (Delitzsch),  and  which,  when 
they  speak,  give  utterance  to  sound  wisdom. 
Tlie  meaning  may  be  illustrated  by  Ps.  xvii. 
8,  "  I  am  purposed  that  my  month  shall  not 
transgress."    The  same  expression  occurs  in 
Mai.  ii.  7,  "  For  the  priest's  lips  should  keep 
knowledge,"  i.e.  preserve  and  give  utterance 
to  it.     Where  "the  lips  keep  knowledge," 
there  they  are  protected  against  the  lips  of 
tlie  strange  woman,  i.e.  against  her  allure- 
ments, because  they  will  be  fortified  with 
purity.     Tliy  lips;  s'phdtUykd  is  the  dual 
of  the  feminine  noun  saphah,  "  a  lip."    The 
teacher  designedly  uses  this  word  instead  of 
"thy  heart"  (cf.  ch.  iii.  1),  because  of  the 
contrast  which  he  has  in  mind,  and  which 
he  produces  in  the  next  verse.    The  LXX., 
Vulgate,  and  Arabic  add,  "Attend  not  to 
the  deceitful  woman,"  wliich  Houbigant  and 
Scliieusner  think  is  required  by  the  context. 
The  addition,  however,  is  without  authority 
(Holden). 

Ver.  3.— The  teacher  enters  upon  the 
subject  of  his  warning,  and  under  two 
familiar  figures— common  alike  to  Oriental 
and  Greek  writers— describes  the  nature  of 
the  "strange  woman's"  allurements.  For 
the  Up ■  of  a  strange  woman  drop  as  an 


honeycomb.  The  conjunction  "  for  "  (Hebrew 
kt)  here,  like  the  LXX.  yip,  states  the 
reason  why  the  preceding  exhortation  is 
worthy  of  attention.  Some  commentators 
render  " although,"  " albeit,"  as  coirespond- 
ing  with  the  antithetical  "  but "  in  ver.  4. 
The  lips;  slphthey,  the  construct  case  of 
tdphdh  in  ver.  2.  The  organ  of  speech  is 
here  used  for  the  speech  itself,  like  the 
parallel "  mouth."  A  strange  woman  (zdrdh) ; 
t.e.  the  ballot.  The  word  occurs  before  in 
ch.  ii.  16,  and  again  in  ch.  v.  20;  vii.  5; 
xxii.  11 ;  xxiii.  33.  She  is  extranea,  a 
stranger  with  respect  to  the  youth  whom 
she  would  beguile,  either  as  being  of  foreign 
extraction,  or  as  being  the  wife  of  another 
man,  in  which  capacity  she  ia  so  represented 
in  ch.  vii.  19.  In  this  sense  she  would  be 
an  adulteress.  St.  Jerome,  in  Ezek.  vi., 
takes  her  as  the  representative  of  the  allure- 
ments from  sound  doctrine,  and  of  corrupt 
worsliip  (Wordsworth).  Drop  a»  an  honey- 
comb (nSphMh  tUhdph'ndh);  rather,  distil 
honey.  The  Hebrew  nSphMh  is  properly 
a  "  dropping,"  dietillatio,  and  so  the  honey 
flowing  from  the  honeycombs  (tsuphim). 
Kimohi  explains  it  as  the  honey  flowing 
from  the  cells  before  they  are  broken,  and 
hence  it  is  the  pure  fine  virgin  honey. 
Exactly  the  same  phrase  occurs  in  Cant. 
iv.  11,  "Thy  lips,  O  my  spouse,  drop  as  an 
honeycomb  (nSphlth  tUhdph'ndh)."  The  only 
other  places  where  we  meet  with  the  word 
nSpMlh  are  Ps.  xxiv.  10  (11)  (there  com- 
bined with  tsuphim,  which  helps  to  deter- 
mine its  meanmg)  and  eh.  Xiiv.  13 ;  xxvii. 
7.  The  meaning  is  the  same  as  she  "  flat- 
tereth  with  her  words"  of  ch.  vii.  5,  in 
which  chapter  the  teacher  gives  an  example 
of  the  alluring  words  which  the  strange 
woman  uses  (ch.  vii.  14—20).  As  honey  is 
sweet  and  attractive  to  the  taste,  so  in  a 
higher  degree  are  her  words  pleasant  to  the 
senses.  Her  month  is  smoother  than  oil; 
i.e.  her  words  are  most  plausible  and  persua- 
sive. The  Hebrew  khilc  is  properly  "the 
palate,"  though  it  also  included  the  cor- 
responding lower  part  of  the  mouth  (Gese- 
nius).  It  is  used  as  the  instrument  or  organ 
of  speech  in  ch.  viii.  7,  "For  my  mouth 
(khik)  shall  speak  truth ; "  and  in  Job  xxxi. 
30,  "  I  have  not  suffered  my  mouth  (khik) 
to  sin."  Under  the  same  figure  David 
describes  the  treachery  of  his  friend  in  Ps. 
Iv.  22,  "  His  words  were  softer  than  oil,  yet 
they  were  drawn  swords." 

Ver.  4. — The  contrast  is  drawn  with  great 
vividness  between  the  professions  of  the 
"  strange  woman  "  and  the  disastrous  con- 
sequences which  overtake  those  who  listen 
to  her  enticements.  She  promises  enjoy- 
ment, pleasure,  freedom  from  danger,  but 
her  end  is  bitter  as  wormwood.  "  Her  end," 
not  merely  with  reference  to  herself,  which 


108 


THE   PROVERBS. 


[oh.  t.  1—23, 


may  be  and  is  nndoubtedly  true,  but  the 
last  of  her  as  experienced  by  those  who  have 
'nteroourse  with  her — her  character  as  it 
stands  revealed  at  the  last.  So  it  is  said  of 
wine,  "  At  the  last,"  i.e.  its  final  effects,  if 
indulged  in  to  excess,  "it  biteth  like  a 
serpent,  and  stingeth  like  an  adder"  (oh. 
xxiii.  22).  Bitter  as  wormwood.  The 
Hebrew,  IdSndh,  "  wormwood,"  Gesenius 
derives  from  the  unused  root  loan,  "to 
curse."  It  is  the  equivalent  to  tlie  absin- 
thium of  the  Vulgate.  So  Aquila,  who 
has  cafiiveiov.  The  LXX.  improperly  renders 
XoAij,  "gall."  In  other  places  the  word 
laanah  is  used  as  the  emblem  of  bitterness, 
with  the  superadded  idea  of  its  being 
poisonous,  also  according  to  the  Hebrew 
notion,  shared  in  also  by  the  Greeks,  that 
the  plant  combined  these  two  qualities. 
Thus  in  Deut.  xxix.  18  it  is  associatfd  with 
rosh,  "a  poisonful  herb"  (margin),  and  the 
Targum  terms  it,  agreeably  with  this  notion, 
"deadly  wormwood."  The  same  belief  is 
reproduced  in  Eev.  viii.  11,  ''And  the  name 
of  the  star  is  called  Wormwood :  and  many 
men  died  of  the  waters  because  they  were 
made  bitter"  (cf.  Jer.  ix.  15;  Amos  v.  7: 
vi.  12).  The  apostle,  no  doubt,  has  it  in  mind 
when  he  speaks  of  any  "  root  of  bitterness," 
in  Heb.  xii.  15.  The  herb  is  thus  described 
by  Umbreit :  "It  is  a  plant  toward  two  feet 
high,  belonging  to  the  genus  Artemisia 
(species  Artemisia  ahsinthiwm),  which  pro- 
duces a  very  firm  stalk  with  many  branches, 
grayish  leaves,  and  small,  almost  round, 
pendent  blossoms.  It  Jias  a  bitter  and  saline 
taste,  and  seems  to  have  been  regarded  in 
the  East  as  also  a  poison,  of  which  the  fre- 
quent combination  with  rSsh  gives  an  intima- 
tion." Terence  has  a  strikingly  similar 
passage  to  the  one  before  us — 

"In  melle  sunt  linguae  sitaa  vestrsB  atque 
orationes 
Lacteque ;  corda  felle  sunt  lita  atqne  acerbo 
ace  to," 

"  Your  tongues  are  placed  in  honey  and  your 
speech  is  milk ;  your  hearts  are  besmeared 
with  gall  and  sharp  vinegar"  ('Truoul.,' 
i.  11.  75).  Sharp  as  a  two-edged  sword; 
literally,  as  a  sword  of  edges  {hhSrSv  ptyySth), 
which  may  mean  a  swoid  of  extreme  sharp- 
ness. Her  end  is  as  sharp  as  the  sharpest 
sword.  But  it  seems  better  to  take  the  term 
as  it  is  understood  in  the  Authorized  Ver- 
sion, which  has  the  support  both  of  the 
Vulgate,  gladius  biceps,  and  the  LXX., 
fiaxaipa  SurrSfios,  i.e.  "  a  two-etlgeil  sword." 
Compare  "  a  two-edged  sword "  (khSrev 
ptpMyySth')  of  Ps.  cxlix.  6.  The  meaning 
is,  tlie  last  of  her  is  poignancy  of  remorse, 
anguish  of  heart,  and  death.  In  these  she 
involves  her  victims. 
Ver,  5. — Vers.  5  and  6  continue  the  de- 


scription of  the  harlot.  Her  feet  go  down 
to  death ;  her  steps  take  hold  pn  hell.  She 
leads  her  victims  to  ruin.  She  hastens  to 
death  and  the  gr.ive,  and  so  do  all  those  who 
listen  to  her.  In  all  instances  where  the 
teacher  speaks  of  the  harlot  at  length  he 
gives  the  same  description  of  her  (cf.  oh.  ii. 
18  ;  vii.  27 ;  ix.  18).  An  intensifying  of  the 
language  is  observable  in  the  second  hemi- 
stich. The  descending  progress  to  death 
becomes  the  laying  hold  of  the  grave,  the 
underworld,  as  if  nothing  could  turn  her 
steps  aside.  And  it  is  not  only  death,  as 
the  cessation  of  life,  but  death  as  a  punish- 
ment, that  is  implied,  just  as  the  grave  has 
in  it  the  idea  of  corruption.  (On  "  hell," 
sh'ol,  see  ch.  i.  12.) 

Ver.  6. — Lest  thou  shouldest  ponder  the 
path  of  life,  her  ways  are  movable,  that 
thou  canst  not  know  them.  This  verse  should 
be  rather  rendered,  she  walks  not  in  the  path 
of  life,  her  ways  fluctuate,  she  knows  not.  It 
consists  of  a  series  of  independent  proposi- 
tions or  statements,  all  of  which  are  descrip- 
tive of  the  singularly  fatuous  conduct  of 
"  the  strange  woman."  lu  the  previous 
verse  the  teacher  has  said  that  her  conduct 
leads  to  ruin;  he  here  further  emphasizes 
the  idea  by  putting  forward  the  same  trutli 
from  the  opposite,  or,  as  we  may  say,  from 
the  negative  point  of  view,  and  so  completes 
the  picture.  "The  words,"  as  Plumptre 
remarks,  "  describe  with  terrible  vividness 
the  state  of  heart  and  soul  which  prostitution 
brings  on  its  victims."  Her  course  is  one  of 
persistent,  wilful,  headstrong,  blind  folly  and 
wickedness.  Lest; pin;  here  "not,"  equiva- 
lent to  Ah  (Id).  So  the  LXX.,  Vulgate,  Tar- 
gum, Syriac.  The  use  of  pin  in  this  sense 
is,  however,  unique  (Gesenius).  Delitzsch 
and  Zookler,  following  Luther,  Geier, 
Holden,  etc.,  assign  to  it  an  emphatic 
negative  force,  as,  "  She  is  far  removed  from 
entering,"  or,  "  she  never  treadeth."  Others 
take  pin  as  a  dependent  prohibitive  particle, 
equivalent  to  tlie  Latin  ne  forte,  "  lest,"  as 
in  the  Authorized  Version,  and  employed  to 
connect  the  sentence  which  it  introduces 
either  with  the  preceding  verse  (as  Schul- 
tens)  or  with  the  second  hemistich,  on  whicli 
it  is  made  dependent  (Holden,  Wordsworth, 
Aben  Ezra,  Zoo.,  Micliaplis,  etc.).  Thou 
shouldest  ponder;  t'phalUs,  connected  by 
makkeph  with  pSn,  as  usual  (Lee),  is  either 
second  person  masculine  or  third  person 
feminine.  The  latter  is  required  here,  the 
subject  of  the  sentence  being  "the  strange 
woman,"  as  appears  ckarly  from  the  second 
hemistich,  "  ^er  ways,"  etc.  The  verb  pdtds 
(cf.  ch.  xiv.  26)  here  means  "to  prepare," 
i.e.  to  walk  in,  or  to  travel  over.  Thus 
Gesenius  renders,  "She  (the  adulteress) 
prepareth  not  (for  herself)  the  way  of  life; " 
i.e.  she  does  not  walk  in  the  way  of  life ; 


OH.  V.  1—23.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


109 


of.  the  LXX.  etffdpx^rai,  Vulgate  ambulant 
(so.  gressus  ejus),  and  other  ancient  versions, 
all  of  which  understand  the  verb  in  this 
sense.  The  meaning  of  the  phrase,  pin 
fphallee,  is,  therefore,  "she  walks  not"  in 
the  way  of  life — the  way  that  has  life  for 
its  object,  and  which  in  itself  is  full  of  life 
and  safety.  Far  from  doing  this,  the  teacher 
goes  on  to  say,  her  ways  are  movable; 
literally,  go  to  and  fro,  or  fluctuate;  i.e.  tljey 
wilfully  stagger  hither  and  thither,  like  the 
steps  of  a  drunkard,  or  like  the  uncertain 
steps  of  the  blind,  for  the  verb  nua  is  so 
used  in  the  former  sense  in  Isa.  zxiv.  20 ; 
xxix,  9 ;  Ps.  cvii.  27 ;  and  in  the  latter  in 
Lam.  iv.  14.  Her  steps  are  slippfiry  (LXX., 
<r<paK4pai),  or  wander  (Vulgate,  vagi) ;  they 
are  without  any  definite  aim  ;  she  is  always 
straying  in  the  vagrancy  of  sin  (Words- 
worth) ;  cf.  ch.  vii.  12.  Tftot  tfiou  canst  not 
know  them  (16  thMd);  literally,  she  knows 
nut.  The  elliptical  form  of  this  sentence  in 
the  original  leaves  it  open  to  various  inter- 
pretations. It  seems  to  refer  to  the  way  of 
life ;  she  knows  not  the  way  of  life,  i.e.  she 
does  not  regard  or  perceive  the  way  of  life. 
The  verb  yada  often  has  this  meaning.  The 
meaning  may  be  obtained  by  supplying  mah, 
equivalent  to  quicquam,  "anything,"  as  in 
ch.  ix.  13,  "She  knows  not  anything," 
i.e.  slie  knows  nothing.  The  objection  to 
this  is  that  it  travels  unnecessarily  out  of 
the  sentence  to  find  the  object  which  ought 
rather  to  be  supplied  from  the  context.  The 
object  may  possibly  be  the  staggering  of  her 
feet :  she  staggers  hither  and  thither  with- 
out her  perceiving  it  (Delitzsoh);  or  it  may, 
lastly,  be  indefinite  :  she  knows  not  whither 
her  steps  conduct  her  (Wordsworth  and 
Zockler). 

Vers.  7 — 14. — The  ruinous  consequences 
of  indulgence  in  illicit  pleasures. 

Ver.  7.— The  subject  of  which  the  teacher 
is  treating  demands  the  utmost  attention  of 
youth.  Enough,  it  might  be  supposed,  had 
been  said  to  deter  from  intercourse  with  the 
"  strange  woman."  She  has  been  portrayed 
in  her  real  colours,  plunging  recklessly  into 
ruin  herself,  and  carrying  her  victims  with 
her;  deceitful,  full  of  intrigues,  neither 
walking  in  nor  knowing  the  way  of  life.  But 
the  warning  is  amjjlified  and  made  more 
impressive.  There  is  another  side  of  the 
picture,  the  complete  bodily  and  temporal 
ruin  of  her  victim.  The  argumentvm  ad 
hmninem  is  applied.  There  is  an  appeal  to 
personal  interest  in  the  details  which  follow, 
which  ought  not  to  fail  in  holding  youth 
oaok.  The  form  of  the  address  which  is 
repeated  is  very  similar  to  that  in  ch.  vii.  24. 
The  plural  form,  "O  ye  children"  (of.  ch. 
It.  1  and  vii.  24),  unmediately  passes  into 
the  nngnlar  for  the  reason  mentioned  before. 


that,  though  the  address  is  made  to  all,  yet 
each  individually  is  to  apply  it  to  himself. 

Ver.  8. — Bemove  thy  way  far  from  her. 
In  other  words,  this  is  the  same  as  St.  Paul 
counsels,  "  Flee  fornication  "  (1  Cor.  vi.  14). 
From  her  (medliydh  ;  deswper  ea).  The  term 
conveys  the  impression  that  the  youth  has 
come  within  the  compass  of  her  temptations, 
or  that  in  the  highest  degree  he  is  liable  to 
them.  The  Hebrew  meal,  compounded  of 
min  and  al,  and  meaning  "  from  upon,"  being 
used  of  persons  or  things  which  go  away 
from  the  place  in  or  v/pon  which  they  had 
been.  And  come  not  nigh  the  door  of  her 
hoase;  i.e.  shun  the  very  place  where  she 
dwells.  "Be  so  far  from  coming  into  her 
chamber  as  not  to  come  near  the  door  of  her 
house"  (Patrick).  She  and  her  house  are 
to  be  avoided  as  if  they  were  infected  with 
some  mortal  disease.  The  old  proverb  quoted 
by  Muffet  is  applicable — 

"  He  that  would  no  evil  do 
Must  do  nothing  that  'longeth  [fe.  be- 
longeth]  thereto." 

Ver.  9. — The  reasons  why  the  harlot  is 
to  be  avoided  follow  in  rapid  succession. 
Lest  thou  give  thine  honour  unto  others, 
and  thy  years  unto  the  cruel.  The  word 
rendered  "honour"  (Hebrew,  h6d)  is  not  so 
much  reputation,  as  the  English  implies,  as 
"  the  grace  and  freshness  of  youth."  It  is 
so  used  in  Hos.  xiv.  6;  Dan.  x.  8.  The 
Vulgate  renders  "honour,"  and  the  LXX., 
ft^T),  "  life."  Hdd  is  derived  from  the  Arabic 
word  signifying  "  to  lift  one's  self  up,"  and 
then  "  to  be  eminent,  beautiful."  Thy 
years;  i.e.  the  best  and  most  vigorous,  and 
hence  the  most  useful  and  valuable,  years 
of  life.  XJnto  the  cruel  (Hebrew,  I'ak'zdri) ; 
literally,  to  the  cruel  one ;  but  the  adjective 
Skzdrt  is  only  found  in  the  singular,  and 
may  be  here  used  in  a  collective  sense  as 
designating  the  entourage  of  the  harlot,  her 
associates  who  prey  pitilessly  on  the  youth 
whom  they  bring  within  the  range  of  her 
fascinations.  So  Delitzsoh.  It  seems  to  be 
so  "understood  by  the  LXX.,  which  reads 
dveheiifioffiv,  immitentibus ;  but  not  so  by 
the  Vulgate,  which  adheres  to  the  singular, 
cTudeli.  If  we  adhere  to  the  gender  of  the 
adjective  Skzdrt,  which  is  masculine,  and  to 
its  number,  it  may  designate  the  husband 
of  the  adulteress,  who  will  deal  mercilessly 
towards  the  paramour  of  his  wife.  So  Zock- 
ler. Again,  it  may  refer,  notwithstanding 
the  gender,  to  the  harlot  herself  (so  Vatablui 
and  Holden),  who  is  cruel,  who  has  no  love 
for  the  youth,  and  would  see  him  perish 
without  pity.  The  explanation  of  Stuart 
and  others,  including  Ewald,  that  the  "  cruel 
one  "  is  the  purchaser  of  the  punished  adul- 
terer, is  without  foundation  or  warmnt, 
since  there  is  no  historical  instance  on  record 


110 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[oh.  v.  1— 23b 


where  the  adulterei  waB  reduced  to  slaveiy, 
and  the  punishment  inflicted  by  the  Mosaic 
code  was  not  slavery,  but  death  (Numb.  xx. 
10 ;  Deut.  xxii.  22),  and,  as  it  appears  from 
Ezek.  xvi.  40  and  John  viii.  5,  death  from 
stoning.  The  adjective  akzart,  like  its 
equivalent  ahzdr,  is  derived  from  the  verb 
kdzdr,  "  to  break,"  and  occurs  again  in  eh. 
xi.  17;  xii.  10;  xvli.  11.  The  moral  of  the 
■warning  is  a  wasted  life. 

Ver.  10. — Another  temporal  consequence 
of,  and  deteirent  against,  a  life  of  profligacy, 
lest  strangers  be  filled  with  thy  wealth; 
and  thy  labours  be  in  the  house  of  a  stranger. 
The  margin  reads,  "  thy  strength  "  for  "  thy 
wealth,"  but  the  text  properly  renders  the 
original  kSdkh,  which  means  "substance," 
"  wealth,"  "  riches  " — the  youth's  possessions 
in  money  and  property  (Delitzsch).  The 
primary  meaning  of  the  word  is  "  strength  " 
or  "  might,"  as  appears  from  the  verb  kd- 
khdkh,  "  to  exert  one's  self,"  from  which  it  is 
derived,  but  the  parallel  atsdblykd,  "  thy 
toils,"  rendered  "thy  labours,"  determines 
itg  use  in  the  secondary  .sense  here.  Com- 
pare the  similar  passage  in  Hos.  vii.  9, 
"  Strangers  have  devoured  his  strength 
[kdakh,  i.e. '  his  possessions'],  and  he  knoweth 
it  not "  (see  also  Job  vi.  22).  Kddkh  is  the 
concrete  product  resulting  from  the  abstract 
strength  or  ability  when  brought  into  action. 
Thy  lahours  {dtmhiykd') ;  i.e.  thy  toils,  the 
product  of  laborious  toil,  that  which  you 
have  gotten  by  the  labour  of  your  hand*, 
and  earned  with  the  sweat  of  your  brow. 
Fleischer  compares  the  Italian  i  miri 
eudori,  and  the  French  mee  sueurs.  Ttie 
singular  itegv  signifies  "  heavy  toilsome 
labour,"  and  the  plural  SIsdvim,  "  labours," 
things  done  with  toil,  and  so  the  idea  passes 
to  the  resultant  of  the  labour.  Compare  the 
very  similar  expression  in  Ps.  oxxvii.  2,  li- 
khlm  ndatsdvtm,  equivalent  to  "  bread  obtained 
by  toilsome  labour;"  Authorized  Version, 
"the  bread  of  sorrows."  The  Authorized 
Version  properly  supplies  the  verb  "  be  " 
against  those  (e.g.  Holden  et  alii)  who  join 
on  "  thy  labours  "  to  the  previous  verb  "  be 
filled,"  as  an  accusative,  and  render,  "and 
with  thy  labuurs  in  tlie  house  of  a  stranger." 
So  also  the  l.XX.  and  the  Vulgate, "  and  thy 
labours  come"  (cAflwo-i,  LXX.)  or  "be" 
(sint,  Vulgate)  "  to  the  house  of  strangers  " 
(ei J  oifKous  dKKoTpluy}  or, "  in  a  strange  house  " 
(in  aliena  domo).  In  the  latter  case  the 
Vulgate  is  wrong,  as  ndk'rt  in  the  phrase 
heyth  ndlc'ri  is  always  personal  (Delitzsoli), 
and  should  be  rendered,  as  in  the  Autliorized 
Version,  "  in  the  house  of  a  stranger."  The 
meaning  of  tlie  verse  is  that  a  life  of  im- 
purity transfers  the  profligate's  substance, 
ills  wealth  and  possessions,  to  others,  who 
will  be  satiated  at  his  expense,  and,  being 
strangers,  are  indifferent  to  hia  ruin. 


Ter.  11. — ^The  last  argument  is  the  mental 
anguish  which  ensues  when  health  ia  ruined 
and  wealth  is  squandered.  And  thou 
mourn  at  the  last,  when  thy  flesh  and  thy 
body  are  consumed.  The  Hebrew  tfndhSmid 
is  rather  "  and  thou  groan."  It  is  not  the 
plaintive  wailing  or  the  subdued  grief  of 
heart  whicli  is  signified,  but  the  loud  wail 
of  lamentation,  the  groaning  indicative  of 
intense  mental  suffering  called  forth  by  the 
remembrance  of  past  folly,  and  which  sees 
no  remedy  in  the  future.  The  verb  ndham 
occurs  again  in  eh.  xxviii  IS,  where  it  is 
used  of  the  roaring  of  the  lion,  and  the 
cognate  noun  naham  is  met  with  in  ch.  xix. 
12  and  xx.  2  in  the  same  sense.  By  Ezekiel 
it  is  used  of  the  groaning  of  the  people  of 
Jerusalem  when  they  shall  see  their  sanctu- 
ary profaned,  their  sons  and  their  daughters 
fall  by  the  sword,  and  their  city  destroved 
(;Bzek.  xxiv.  23).  Isaiah  (v.  29,  30)  applies 
it  to  the  roaring  of  the  sea.  The  Vulgate 
reproduces  the  idea  in  gemas,  equivalent  to 
"and  thou  groan."  The  LXX.  rendering, 
KaX  neTane\Tie^(ry,  "  ani  thou  shalt  repent," 
arising  from  the  adoption  of  a  different 
pointing,  nlkhamta,  from  the  niph.  nikham, 
"  to  repent,"  for  ndhamtd,  to  some  extent  ex- 
presses the  sense.  At  the  la»t ;  literally,  at 
thine  end;  i.e.  when  thou  art  ruined,  or,  as 
the  teacher  explains,  when  thy  flesh  and  thy 
body  are  consumed.  The  expression,  "thy 
flesh  and  thy  body,"  here  stands  for  the  whole 
body,  the  body  in  its  totality,  not  the  body 
and  the  soul,  which  would  be  different.  Of 
these  two  words  "  the  flesh  "  (5asor)  rather 
denotes  the  flesh  in  its  strict  sense  as  such 
(of.  Job  xxxi.  31 ;  xxxiii.  21),  while  "  body  " 
(sh'lr)  is  the  flesh  adhering  to  the  bones. 
Gesenlus  regards  them  as  synonymous  terms, 
staling,  however,  that  sh'ir  is  the  more 
poetical  as  to  use.  The  word  hdsdr  is  used 
to  denote  the  whole  body  in  oh.  xiv.  30.  It 
is  clear  that,  by  the  use  of  these  two  terms 
here,  the  teacher  is  following  a  peculiarity 
observable  elsewhere  in  the  Proverbs,  of 
combining  two  terms  to  express,  and  so  to 
give  force  to,  one  idea.  The  expression  de- 
scribes "  the  utter  destruction  of  the  libertine  " 
(Umbreit).  This  destruction,  as  further  in- 
volving the  ruin  of  the  soul,  is  described  in 
ch.  vi.  32,  "Whoso  committeth  adultery  with 
a  woman  lacketh  understanding;  he  that 
doeth  it  destroyeth  his  own  soul  (nephegh)  " 
(cf.  ch.  vii.  22,  23). 

Ver.  12. — Self-reproach  accompanies  the 
unavailable  groaning.  And  say,  How  have 
I  hated  instruction,  and  my  heart  despised 
reproof!  i.e.  how  could  it  ever  come  to 
pass  that  I  have  acted  in  such  a  senscle  a 
and  inexcusable  manner,  that  I  have  hated 
instruction  (musar,  diecipUna,  iratSeia),  the 
warning  voice  which  dissuaded  me  from 
going  with  the  harlot,  and   in  my  heart 


OH.  T.  1—23.] 


THE   PROVERBS. 


Ill 


despised,  t.e.  rejected  inwardly,  whatever  my 
outward  demeanour  may  have  been,  the  re- 
proof which  followed  after  I  had  been  with 
her  1  Despised  (naats),  as  in  ch.  i.  30  ;  comp. 
also  ch.  XV.  5,  "  A  fool  despiseth  his  father's 
instriictinns." 

Ver  13. — And  have  not  obeyed  the  voice 
of  my  teachers,  nor  inclined  mine  ear  to  them 
that  instructed  me.  The  ruined  profligate 
admits  he  was  not  without  teachers  and 
advisers,  but  that  he  gave  no  heed  to  their 
warnings  and  ruproofs.  Eave  not  obeyed  the 
voice  {M-shdmd'ti  b'kdV).  The  same  phrase 
occurs  in  Gen.  xxvii.  13;  Exod.  xviii.  19; 
Deut.  xxvi.  14;  2  Sam.  xii.  18.  The  verb 
shdmd  is  primarily  "  to  hear,"  and  then  "  to 
obey,"  ''to  give  heed  to,"  like  the  Greek 

Ver.  14. — I  was  almost  in  all  evil  in  the 
midst  of  the  congregation  and  assembly; 
i.e.  such  was  my  shamelessness  that  there 
was  scarcely  any  wickedness  which  1  did  not 
commit,  unrestrained  even  by  the  presence 
of  the  congregation  and  assembly.  The  fact 
which  the  ruined  youtli  laments  is  the 
extent  and  audacity  of  liis  sins.  It  is  not 
that  he  accuses  himself  of  hypocrisy  in 
nligion  (Delitzsch),  but  he  adds  another 
element  in  liis  career  of  vice.  He  has  dis- 
regarded the  warnings  and  reproofs  of  his 
teachers  and  friends ;  but  more,  the  presence 
of  the  congi-egation  of  God's  people,  a  silent 
but  not  a  less  impressive  protest,  had  no 
restraining  effect  upon  him.  The  words, 
"the  congregation  and  assembly"  (Hebrew, 
hdhdl  v'eddh),  seem  to  be  used  to  heigliteu 
the  conception,  rather  than  to  express  two 
distinct  and  separate  ideas,  since  we  find 
them  loth  used  interchangeably  to  designate 
the  congregation  of  the  Israelites.  The 
radical  conception  of  fcaAaZ  ("congregation") 
is  the  same  as  that  of  the  LXX.  iKK\^(na 
and  Vulgate  eeclesia,  viz.  the  congregation 
looked  upon  from  the  point  of  its  being 
called  together,  Jsdhal  being  derived  from 
kd/idl,  which  in  hiph.  is  equivalent  to  "to 
call  together,"  while  that  of  eddh  is  the  con- 
gregation looked  at  from  the  point  of  its 
having  assembled  iddh  being  derived  from 
yddd,  in  niph.  equivalent  to  "to  come  to- 
gether." The  Intter  will  therefore  stand  for 
any  assembly  of  people  specially  convened 
or  coming  together  for  some  definite  object, 
like  the  LXX.  (rvvaydyv  and  the  Vulgate 
tynagoga.  The  term  iddh  is,  however,  used 
in  a  technical  sense  as  signifying  the  seventy 
elders,  or  senators,  who  judged  the  people 
(see  Numb.  xxv.  7 ;  xxxv.  12).  Eabbi  Salo- 
mon so  explains  hdeddh  as  "  the  congrega- 
tion," in  Josh.  XX.  6  and  Numb,  xxvii.  21. 
Other  explanations, however, have  been  given 
of  these  words.  Zockler  takes  hdhdl  as  the 
convendd  council  of  ciders  acting  as  judges 
(Uant.  zxziii.  4,  5),  and  idah  as  the  con- 


course (coetus)  of  the  people  executing  the 
condemning  sentence  (Numb.  xv.  15;  cf. 
Ps.  vii.  7),  and  renders,  "  Well  nigh  had  1 
fallen  into  utter  destruction  in  the  midst  of  the 
assembly  and  the  congregation."  Fleischer, 
Vatablus,  and  Bayne  take  much  the  same 
view,  looking  upon  ro  ("evil,"  Authorized 
Version)  as  "punishment,"  i.e.  the  evil 
which  follows  as  a  consequence  of  sin — a 
usage  supported  by  2  Sam.  xvi.  18 ;  Exod. 
v.  19;  1  Chrou.  vii.  23;  Ps.  x.  6— rather 
than  as  evil  per  se,  i.e.  that  which  is  morally 
bad,  as  in  Exod.  xxxii.  22.  Aben  Ezra  con- 
siders that  the  perfect  is  used  for  the  future ; 
"In  a  little  time  I  shall  be  involved  in  all 
evil ;  "  i.e.  punishment,  which  is  looked  for- 
ward to  prospectively.  For  "  almost "  (kl- 
wiai,  equivalent  to  "  within  a  little,"  "  almost," 
"nearly"),  see  Gen.  xxvi.  10;  Ps.  Izxiii.  2; 
oxix.  87. 

Vers.  15—19. — Commendation  oftne  chaste 
intercourse  of  marriage.  In  this  section  the 
teacher  passes  from  admonitory  warnings 
against  unchastity  to  the  commendation  of 
conjugal  fidelity  and  pure  love.  The  alle- 
gorical exposition  of  this  passage,  current  at 
the  period  of  the  Revision  of  the  Authorized 
Version  in  1612,  as  referring  to  liberality,  is 
not  ad  rem.  Such  an  idea  had  no  place 
certainly  in  the  teacher's  mind,  nor  is  it 
appropriate  to  the  context,  the  scope  of 
which  is,  as  we  have  seen,  to  warn  youth 
against  indulgence  in  illicit  pleasures,  by 
pointing  out  the  terrible  consequences  which 
follow,  and  to  indicate,  on  the  other  hand, 
in  what  direction  the  satisfaction  of  natural 
wants  is  to  be  obtained,  that  so,  the  heart 
and  conscience  being  kept  pure,  sin  and 
evil  may  be  avoided, 

Ver.  15. — Drink  waters  ont  of  thine 
own  cistern,  etc. ;  i.e.  in  the  wife  of  your 
own  choice,  or  in  the  legitimate  sphere  of 
marriage,  seek  the  satisfaction  of  your 
natural  impulses.  The  pure,  innocent,  and 
chaste  nature  of  such  pleasures  is  appro- 
priately compared  with  the  pure  and  whole- 
some waters  of  the  cistern  and  the  well- 
spring.  The  "  drinking"  carries  with  it  the 
satisfying  of  a  natural  want.  Agreeably 
with  oriental  and  scriptural  usage,  "the 
wife"  is  compared  with  a  "cistern"  and 
"  well."  Thus  in  the  Song  of  Solomon  the 
"bride"  is  called  "a  spring  shut  up,  a 
fountain  sealed"  (Song  of  Sol.  iv.  12). 
Sarah  is  spoken  of  under  exactly  the  same 
figure  that  is  used  here,  viz.  the  bdr,  or 
"cistern,"  in  Isa.  li.  1.  The  figure  was  not 
confined  to  women,  however,  as  we  find 
Judah  alluded  to  as  "  waters"  in  Ib«.  xlviii.  Ij 


112 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[OH.  V.  1—28. 


and  Jacob  or  Israel  bo  appearing  in  the  pro- 
phecy of  Balaam  (Numb.  xxiv.  7).  The 
people  are  spoken  of  by  David  as  they  that 
are  "of  the  fountain  of  Israel"  (Ps.  Ixviii. 
26).  A  similar  imagery  is  employed  in  the 
New  Testament  of  the  wife.  The  apostles 
St.  Paul  and  St.  Peter  both  speak  of  her  as 
"the  vessel  (t^  triceSos)"  (see  1  Thess.  iv.  4 
and  1  Pet.  iii.  7).  The  forms  of  the  original, 
b'or  and  b'er,  standing  respectively  for  "  cis- 
tern "  and  "  well,"  indicate  a  common  deri- 
vation from  hddr,  "  to  dig."  But  bSr  is  an 
artificially  constructed  reservoir  or  cistern, 
equivalent  to  the  Vulgate  eisterna,  and 
LXX.  &77eio  J,  while  Vir  is  the  natural  spring 
of  water,  equivalent  to  the  Vulgate  putens. 
So  Aben  Ezra,  who  says,  on  Lev.  ii.  36, 
"  BSr  is  that  which  catches  the  rain,  while 
b'er  is  that  from  within  which  the  water 
wells  up."  This  explanation,  however,  does 
not  entirely  cover  the  terms  as  used  here. 
The  "  waters  "  (Hebrew,  mayim)  may  be  the 
pure  water  conveyed  into  the  cistern,  and 
not  simply  the  water  which  is  caught  in  its 
descent  from  heaven.  The  parallel  term, 
"running  waters"  (Hebrew,  rwz'lim),  de- 
scribes the  flowing  limpid  stream  fit,  like  the 
other,  for  drinkingpurposes.  A  similar  use 
of  the  terms  is  made  in  the  Song  of  Sol.  iv. 
15,  "a  well  of  living  waters  (b'er  mayim 
khayyim)  and  streams  (v'noz'Um)  from  Leba- 
non." It  may  be  remarked  thatthe  allusion 
to  the  wife,  under  the  figures  employed,  en- 
hances her  value.  It  indicates  the  high 
estimation  in  which  she  is  to  be  held,  since 
the  "cistern"  or  "well"  was  one  of  the 
most  valuable  possessions  and  adjuncts  of 
an  Eastern  house.  The  teaching  of  the 
passage,  in  its  bearing  on  the  subject  of 
marriage,  coincides  with  that  which  is 
subsequently  put  forward  by  St.  Paul,  in 
1  Cor.  vii.  9. 

Ver.  16. — Let  thy  fountains  be  dispersed 
abroad,  and  rivers  of  waters  in  the  streets. 
The  figurative  language  is  still  continued, 
and  under  the  terms  "  foim tains  "  and  "  rivers 
of  waters,"  are  to  be  understood  children, 
the  legitimate  issue  of  lawful  marriage.  So 
Aben  Ezra  and  the  majority  of  modern 
commentators,  Schultens,I)oderlein,Holdeii, 
Muenscher,  Noyes,  Wardlaw,  etc.  The 
meaning  appears  to  be,  "  Let  thy  marriage 
be  blessed  with  many  children,  who  may  go 
forth  abroad  for  the  public  good."  Other 
interpretations  have  been  adopted.  Thus  : 
(1)  Delitzsch  takes  the  words  "  fountains  " 
and  "  rivers  of  waters"  as  us&l  fiijiiratively 
for  the  procreative  power,  and  renders, 
"Shall  thy  strpams  flow  ubmaU,  and  water- 
brooks  in  thi  streets?"  and  interjirets,  "L(  t 
generative  pi  wrr  act  freely  and  unrestrain- 
edly within  the  marriage  relation."  (2) 
Schultens  and  Dath,},  followed  by  Holden, 
regard  the  verse  as  expressing  a  conclusion 


on  the  preceding,  "  Then  shall  thy  springs 
be  dispersed  abroad,  even  rivers  of  waters 
in  the  streets."  The  objection  to  this  is  that 
it  necessitates  the  insertion  of  the  copulative 
vau  (1 )  before  the  verb,  yaphutzu,  "  be  dis- 
(3)  Zockler  and  Hitzig  read  the 


verse  interrogatively,  "  Shall  thy  streams 
flow  abroad  as  water-brooks  in  the  streets?" 
on  the  analogy  of  ch.  vi.  30  and  Ps.  Ivi.  7. 
(4)  The  reading  of  the  LXX.,  adopted  by 
Origen,  Clemens  Alexandrinus,  places  a 
negative  before  the  verb,  Uij  {nrepeKx^itrBai, 
i.e.  ''Let  not  thy  waters  flow  beyond  thy 
fountain  ; "  i.e.  "  confine  thyself  to  thy  wife." 
Fountains.  The  Hebrew  ma'ydnim,  plural 
of  mdydn,  derived  from  dyln  ("  a  fountain  ") 
with  the  formative  men,  is  rather  a  stream 
or  rill — water  flowing;  on  the  surface  of  the 
ground.  It  is  used,  however,  of  a  fountain 
itself  in  Gen.  vii.  11 ;  viii.  2.  Rivers  of 
waters  (Hebrew,  pal'gey-maylm);  rather, 
watercourses,  or  water-  brooks  (cf.  Job  xxxviii. 
25).  The  pgUg  represents  the  various  streams 
into  which  the  muydn,  "  fountain,"  divides 
itself  at  its  source  or  in  its  course.  We 
find  the  same  expression,  paVgey-may'im, 
used  of  tears  in  Ps.  cxix,  136 ;  Lam.  iii.  48. 
It  occurs  again  in  our  book  in  ch.  xxi.  1, 
"  Tlie  king's  heart  is  in  the  hand  of  the 
Lord  as  tlie  rivers  of  waters  {pal'cjey  mayim)." 
On  "abroad"  (Hebrew,  Tthutz),  and  "in  the 
streets  "  (r'khSvoth'),  see  ch.  i.  20. 

Ver.  17. — Let  them  be  only  thine  own, 
and  not  strangers'  with  thee.  By  confining 
yourself  to  chaste  intercourse  with  your 
lawful  wife,  be  assured  that  your  offspring 
is  your  own.  Promiscuous  and  unlawful 
•intercourse  throws  doubt  upon  the  paternity 
of  children.  Thy  children  may  be  thine, 
they  may  belong  to  another.  The  natural 
pride  which  is  felt  in  a  legitimate  oflfspring 
is  the  motive  put  forward  to  commend  the 
husband  to  confine  himself  exclusively  to 
bis  wife.  Grotius  on  this  verse  remarks, 
"Ibi  sere  ubi  prolem  metas" — "Sow  there 
where  you  may  reap  an  offspring."  Tlwm ; 
i.e.  the  children  referred  to  figuratively  in 
the  preceding  verse,  from  which  the  subject 
of  this  verse  is  supplied.  The  repetition  of 
the  pronoun  which  occurs  in  the  original, 
"  let  them  belong  to  thee,  to  thee,"  is  em- 
phatic, and  exclusive  of  others.  The  latter 
clause  of  the  verse,  "  and  not  strangers'  with 
thee,"  covers  the  whole  ground.  The  idea 
of  their  being  strangers'  is  repulsive,  and  so 
gives  further  point  to  the  exhortation. 

Ver.  18.— Let  thy  fountain  be  blessed: 
and  rejoice  with  the  wife  of  thy  youth. 
The  employment  of  the  ordinary  term 
"  wife  "  in  the  second  hemistich  shows  in 
what  sense  the  figure  which  is  used  has  to 
be  understood.  The  terms  "fountain"  and 
"wife"  denote  the  same  person.  The  wifa 
is  here    called  "thy  fountain"   (Hebrew, 


OH.  T.  1 — ^23.J 


THE  PROVERBS. 


118 


m'hor'ka),  just  aa  she  has  been 'previously 
"  thine  own  cistern"  (b'or)  and  "thine  own 
well"  (6'er)  in  ver.  15.  The  Hebrew 
rndMr,  "  fountain,"  is  derived  from  the  root 
kur,  "  to  dig."  The  figure  seems  to  deter- 
mine that  the  blessing  here  spoken  of  con- 
sists in  the  wife  being  a  fruitful  mother  cf 
children ;  and  hence  tlie  phrase  means, "  Let 
thy  wife  be  blessed,"  t.e.  rendered  happy  in 
being  the  mother  of  thy  children.  This  is 
quite  consistent  with  the  Hebrew  mode  of 
thought  Every  Israelitish  wife  regarded  her- 
self, and  was  regarded  by  others  as  "blessed," 
if  she  bore  children,  and  unhappy  if  the 
reverse  were  the  case.  Blentd;  Hebrew, 
har&k  (Vulgate,  henedictd),  is  the  kal  par- 
ticiple passive  of  larah, "  to  bless."  Instead 
of  tliis,  the  LXX.  reads  ifSio, "  Let  thy  foun- 
tain be  thine  own  " — a  variation  which  in  no 
sense  conveys  the  meaning  of  the  original. 
And  r^oiee  with ;  rather,  rejoice  in,  the  wife 
being  regarded  as  the  sphere  within  which 
the  husband  is  to  find  his  pleasure  and  joy. 
Umbreit  explains, "  Let  thy  wife  be  extolled." 
The  same  construction  of  the  imperative 
e'mSih,  from  tdmahh, "  to  be  glad,  or  joyful," 
with  min,  occurs  in  Judg.  ix.  19 ;  Zeph.  iii. 
14,  etc.  The  Authorized  rendering  is,  how- 
ever, favoured  by  the  Vulgate,  Isetare  cwm, 
and  the  LXX.,  <rwev(ppalyu  fierX-  Compare 
the  exhortation  in  Ecolea.  ix.  9,  "  Live  joy- 
fully with  the  wife  whom  thou  lovest." 
The  wife  of  thy  youth  (Hebrew,  Uhshdh 
n'urSyka)  may  mean  either  (I)  tbe  wife  to 
whom  thou  hast  given  the  fair  bloom  of  thy 
youth  (Umbreit) ;  (2)  the  wife  chosen  in  thy 
youth  (Delitzach);  or  (3)  thy  youthful  wife. 
The  former  seems  tbe  more  probable  mean- 
ing. C!ompare  the  expression,  "companion 
of  thy  youth,"  in  ch.  ii.  17. 

Ver.  19. — Let  her  be  as  the  loving  hind 
and  pleasant  roe.  The  words  in  italics  do 
not  occur  in  the  original.  Tlie  expression, 
"the  loving  hind  and  pleasant  roe,"  is, 
therefore,  to  be  attached  to  the  preceding 
verse,  as  carrying  on  the  sense  and  as  de- 
scriptive of  the  grace  and  fascinating  charms 
of  the  young  wife.  As  combining  these 
attributes,  she  is  to  be  the  object  of  thy  love 
and  devotion,  the  one  in  whom  thine  affections 
are  to  find  the  fulfilment  of  their  desires. 
Love  and  grace  are  her  possessions.  The 
loving  hind  (Hebrew,  dyyiUth  Shdvtmj;  lite- 
rally, the  hind  of  loves,  which  may  be 
understood,  as  in  the  Authorized  Version,  as 
pointing  to  the  fondness  of  this  animal  for 
its  young,  or  as  descriptive  of  its  beauty 
and  the  extreme  gracefulness  of  its  form. 
In  this  sense  the  phrase  may  be  rendered, 
"the  lovely  hind."  The  ayydeth, or  dyydldh, 
feminine  of  dyydl,  "stag,"  or  "  hart,"  was  in 
all  probability  the  gazelle.  Pleasant  roe 
(Hebrew,  ydaldth  khen);  literally,  the  ibex 
of  grace.     The  particular  expression  only 

FJtOVEBBS, 


occurs  here  in  the  Bible.  The  yaSldlh  is  tha 
feminine  of  yddl,  "the  ibex"  or  "moun- 
tain goat"  according  to  Bochart,  or  the 
"  chamois"  according  to  Gesenius.  It  does 
not  appear  that  it  is  so  much  "  the  pleasant- 
ness "  or  amiability  of  this  animal  which  if 
here  alluded  to  as  its  gracefulness  of  form. 
As  terms  of  endearment,  the  words  entered 
largely  into  the  erotic  poetry  of  the  East. 
Thus  in  the  Song  of  Sol.  iv.  5  tbe  bride 
likens  her  beloved  to  "  a  roe  or  young  hart " 
(cf.  also  Song  of  Sol.  iv.  17  and  viii.  14), 
while' numerous  examples  might  be  quoted 
from  the  Arabian  and  Persian  poets.  They 
were  also  employed  sometimes  as  names  for 
women.  Compare  tlie  superscription  of  Ps. 
xxii.,  AyyeUth  hash-ehakar,  "  Upon  the  hind 
of  the  dawn."  Let  her  breasts  satisfy  thee 
at  all  times.  The  love  of  the  wife  is  to 
refresh  and  fully  satisfy  the  husband.  The 
word  dadeyah,  "her  breasts,"  only  occur* 
here  and  in  Ezek.  xxiii.  3,  8,  21,  and  is 
equivalent  to  dodeyah,  "her  love."  The 
marginal  reading,  "  water  thee,"  serves  to 
bring  out  the  literal  meaning  of  the  t/rav- 
vuka,  derived  from  ravah,  in  kal,  "  to  drink 
largely,"  "  to  be  satisfied  with  drink,"  but 
misses  the  emphatic  force  of  the  piel,  "  to  be 
fully  satisfied  or  satiated."  This  is  ex- 
pressed very  forcibly  in  the  Vulgate  render- 
ing,"  Let  her  breasts  inebriate  thee  (inebrient 
fa),"  which  represents  the  strong  influence 
which  the  attructions  of  the  wife  are  to 
maintain.  The  LXX.,  on  the  other  hand, 
avoiding  the  rather  sensual  colouring  of  the 
language,  substitutes,  "  May  she  thine  own 
lead  thee,  and  be  with  thee  always."  And 
be  thou  ravished  always  with  her  love ;  t.e. 
let  it  intoxicate  thee.  The  teacher,  by  a 
bold  figure,  describes  the  entire  fascination 
which  tlie  husband  is  to  allow  the  wife  to 
exercise  over  him.  The  verb  shdgdh  is  "  to 
reel  under  the  influence  of  wine,"  and  is  so 
used  in  the  succeeding  vers.  20  and  23,  and 
ch.  XX.  1  and  Isa.  xxviii.  7.  The  primary 
meaning,  "to  err  from  the  way,"  scarcely 
applies  here,  and  does  not  express  tlie  idea 
of  the  teacher,  which  is  to  desoribe  "  an 
intensity  of  love  connected  with  the  feeling 
of  superabundant  happiness"  (Delitzsch). 
The  Vulgate,  In  amore  ejus  delectare  jugiter, 
"  In  her  love  delight  thyself  continually," 
and  the  LXX.,  "For  in  her  love  thou  shalt 
he  daily  engaged,"  are  mere  paraphrases. 

Vers.  20, 21. — The  adulterer  to  be  retrained 
by  the  fact  of  God'i  omnisdenoe  and  the 
Divine  punishment.  Vers.  20  and  21  should 
apparently  be  taken  together.  The  teaching 
assumes  a  higher  tone,  and  rises  from  the 
lower  law  which  regulates  fidelity  to  the 
wife,  based  upon  personal  attractions,  to 
the  higher  law,  which  brings  the  husband's 

I 


114 


THE  PROVERBa. 


[oh.  T.l— 28, 


conduct  into  relation  with  the  dnty  he  owes 
to  Jehovah.  Not  merely  is  his  conduct  to 
be  regulated  by  love  and  affection  alone,  but 
it  is  to  be  fashioned  by  the  reflection  or 
consciousness  that  the  Supreme  Being  pre- 
sides over  all,  and  takes  cognizance  of 
human  action.  Without  losing  eight  that 
the  marriage  contract  has  its  own  peculiar 
obligations,  the  fact  is  insisted  upon  that 
all  a  man's  ways  are  open  to  the  eyes  oi  the 
Lord. 

Ver.  20. — And  why ;  <.«.  what  inducement 
is  there,  what  reason  can  be  givem,  for  con- 
jugal infidelity,  except  the  lewd  and  immoral 
promptings  of  the  lower  nature,  except  sen- 
Buality  in  its  lowest  form  ?  Bavished.  The 
verb  shdgch  recurs,  but  in  a  lower  sense,  as 
indicating  "  the  foo'ish  delirium  of  the  liber- 
tine hastening  after  the  harlot "  (Zockler). 
With  a  strange  woman  (Hebrew,  b'zarah) ; 
i.e.  with  a  harlot.  On  zdrdh,  see  ch.  ii.  16 
and  vii.  5.  The  V  (3)  localizes  the  sources  of 
the  intoxication.  £mbraoe  (Hebrew,  fkhab- 
bek).  On  this  verb,  see  eh,  iv.  8.  The  bosom 
of  a  stranger  (Hebrew,  kheh  nBk'riyydh). 
A  parallel  expression  having  the  same  force 
as  its  counterpart.  The  more  usual  form  of 
Tcliek  is  hlieyk,  and  means  "  the  bosom  "  of  a 
person.  In  ch.  xvi.  33  it  is  used  of  the  lap, 
and  in  ch.  xvii.  23  and  xxi.  14  for  the 
ioiom  or  folds  of  a  garment. 

'Ver.21. — For  the  ways  of  man  are  before 
the  eyes  of  the  Lord,  The  obvious  meaning 
here  is  that  as  "  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  in 
every  place,  beholding  the  evil  and  the  good  " 
(ch,  XV.  3),  there  is  no  possibility  of  any 
act  of  immorality  escaping  God's  notice. 
The  consciousness  of  this  fact  is  to  be  the 
restraining  motive,  inasmuch  as  he  who  sees 
will  also  punish  every  transgression.  The 
great  truth  acknowledged  here  is  the  omni- 
science of  God,  a  truth  which  is  borne  wit- 
ness to  in  almost  identical  language  in  Job : 
"  For  his  eyes  are  upon  the  ways  of  man, 
and  he  seeth  all  his  goings"  (Job  xxxiv. 
21 ;  cf.  xxiv.  23  and  xxxi.  4).  So  Hanani 
the  seer  says  to  Asa  King  of  Juduh, 
"For  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  run  to  and  fro 
throughout  the  whole  earth  "  (2  Chron.  xvi. 
9) ;  and  Jehovah  says,  in  Jeremiah,  "  For 
mine  eyes  are  upon  all  their  ways,  they  are 
not  hid  from  my  face,  neither  is  their  ini- 
quity hid  from  mine  eyes  "  (Jer.  xvi.  17 ; 
cf.  xxxii.  29);  and  again,  in  Hosea,  "They 
aie  before  my  face"  (Hos.  vii.  2),  and  the 
same  truth  is  re-echoed  in  the  Epistle  to 
the  Hebrews,  in  all  probability  gathered 
from  our  passage,  "  All  things  are  naked  and 
opened  unto  the  eyes  of  him  with  whom  we 
have  to  do  "  (Heb.  iv.  13).  The  ways  of  man  ; 
i-Q.  the  conduct  of  any  individual  man  or 


woman;  Uh, " man," being  used  generically. 
Are  before  the  eyet  of  the  Lord ;  le.  are  an 
object  on  which  Jehovah  fixes  his  gaze 
and  scrutiny.  And  he  pondereth  all  his 
goings.  The  word  "he  pondereth  "  is  in  the 
original  m'ji^Z^s,  the  piel  participle  of  j)biUi^(, 
piel  of  the  unused  kal,  pdlds,  and  appears 
to  be  properly  rendered  in  the  Authorized 
Version.  This  verb,  however,  has  various 
meanings :  (1)  to  make  level,  or  prepare,  as 
in  ch.  iv.  26  and  v.  6 ;  (2)  to  weigh,  or  con- 
sider accurately,  in  which  sense  it  is  used 
here.  So  Gesenius,  Lee,  Buxtorf,  and  David- 
son. Jehovah  not  only  sees,  but  weighs  all 
that  a  man  does,  wheresoever  he  be,  and  will 
apportion  re  wards  and  punishments  according 
to  a  man's  actions  (Patrick).  The  German 
commentators,  Delitzsch  and  Zockler,  how- 
ever, look  npon  the  word  as  indicating  the 
overruling  providence  of  God,  just  as  the 
former  part  of  the  verse  refers  to  his  omni- 
science, and  render,  "he  marketh  out,"  in 
the  sense  that  the  Lord  makes  it  possible 
for  a  man  to  walk  in  the  way  of  uprightness 
and  purity.  There  is  nothing  inherently 
objectionable  in  this  view,  since  experience 
shows  that  the  world  is  regulated  by  the 
Divine  government,  but  it  loses  sight  to  some 
extent  of  the  truth  npon  which  the  teacher 
appears  to  be  insisting,  which  is  that  evil 
actions  are  visited  with  Divine  retribution. 

Vers.  22,  23.— The  fearful  end  of  the  adul- 
terer. From  the  universal  statement  of 
God's  omniscience  and  the  Divine  judgment, 
the  teacher  passes  to  the  fate  of  the  profli- 
gate. His  end  is  inevitable  ruin  and  misery. 
The  deep  moral  lesson  conveyed  is  that  sin 
carries  with  it  its  own  Nemesis.  Adultery 
and  impurity,  like  all  sin  of  which  they  are 
forms,  are  retributive.  The  career  of  the 
adulterer  is  a  career  begun,  continued,  and 
ended  in  folly  (oomp.  ch.  i.  31,  32 ;  ii.  5 ; 
xviii.  7 ;  xxLs.  6 ;  and  Ps.  Ix.  15). 

Ver.  22.— His  own  iniqoities  shall  tak* 
the  wicked  himself;  i.e.  his  manifold  sius 
shall  overtake  and  arrest  him.  The  imagery 
is  borrowed  from  the  snare  of  the  fowler. 
The  emphetio  form  of  the  original,  "His 
sins  shall  overtake  him,  the  impious  man," 
point  conclusively  to  the  adulterer.  It  is 
"his"  sins  that  shall  overtake  him,  not 
those  of  another,  and  they  shall  fall  upon 
his  c  wn  head ;  and  further,  his  character  is 
depicted  in  the  condemning  clause,  "  the 
impious  man ; "  for  such  he  is.  Shall  taJce. 
The  verb  Idkud  is  Uteially  *<to  take  oi 
catch  animals  in  a  snare  or  net,"  properly 
"to  strike  with  a  net."  The  wicked  man 
becomes  entangled  and  canght  in  hii  own 
sins;  he  is  struok  down  and  captured  hj 


OH.  ▼.  1—23.] 


THE  PROVBBBa 


116 


them,  jnat  as  theprey  is  strnok  by  the  snare 
of  the  fowler,  llie  verb  is,  of  course,  used 
metaphorically,  as  in  Job  t.  13.  Tlie  wielted 
(Hebrew,  eik-hdrdsd);  in  the  original  intro- 
duced as  explanatory  of  the  object,  "  him." 
And  he  shaU  be  holden  with  the  cords  of 
his  sins,  The  Authorized  Version  follows 
the  LXX.  and  Vulgate  in  rendering  "his 
sins,"  instead  of  the  original  "his  sin" 
{hhdttdtho).  It  is  not  so  much  every  sin  of 
man  which  shall  hold  him,  though  this  is 
true,  as  the  particular  sin  Seated  of  in  the 
address,  viz.  adultery,  which  shall  do  this. 
The  expression,  "  tiie  cords  of  his  sin " 
(Hebrew,  khavley  khdttdtho),  means  the  cords 
which  his  sin  weaves  around  him.  Nothing 
else  will  be  requisite  to  bind  and  hold  him 
fast  for  punishment  (of. "  cords  of  vanity," 
in  Xsa.  v.  IS). 

Ver.  23. — He  shall  die  without  instmo- 
tion.  The  phrase,  **  without  instruction," 
is  in  the  original  b'eyu  muiar,  literally,  "  in 
there  not  being  instruction."  The  obvious 
meaning  is,  because  he  gave  no  heed  to  in- 
struction. So  Aben  Ezra  and  Gersom.  The 
Authorized  Version  is  at  least  ambiguous, 
and  seems  to  imply  that  the  adulterer  has 
been  without  instruction,  without  any  to 
leprove  or  counsel  him.  But  such  is  not 
the  case.  He  has  been  admonished  of  the 
evil  consequences  of  his  sin,  but  to  these 


warnings  he  has  turned  a  deaf  ear,  and  the 
teacher  says  therefore  he  shall  die.  The 
Vulgate  supports  this  explanation,  quia  non 
habuit  disciplinam  "because  he  did  not 
entertain  or  use  instruction."  In  the  LXX. 
the  idea  is  enlarged,  "  He  shall  die  together 
with  those  who  have  no  instruction  (jitri 
airaiStiraiy)."  The  h'  (3)  in  b'eyn  is  causal, 
and  equivalent  to  propter,  as  in  Gen.  xviiL 
28 ;  Jer.  xvii.  3.  A  similar  statement  is 
found  in  Job  iv.  21,  "  They  die  even  without 
wisdom,"  i.e.  because  they  have  disregarded 
the  lessons  of  wisdom;  and  Job  xxxvi.  12, 
"  They  shall  die  without  knowledge."  And 
in  the  greatness  of  his  folly  he  shall  go 
astray;  better,  as  Delilzseb,  "He  shall 
stagger  to  ruin."  The  verb  shdgdk  is  used 
as  in  vers.  19  and  20,  but  with  a  ileeper  and 
more  dread  significance.  A  climax  is  rearhed 
in  the  manner  in  which  the  end  of  the  adul- 
terer is  portrayed.  His  end  is  without  a 
gleam  of  hope  or  satisfaction.  With  an  un- 
derstanding darkened  and  rendered  callous 
by  unrestrained  indulgence  in  lust,  and  by 
folly  which  has  reached  its  utmost  limits 
and  cannot,  as  it  were,  be  surpassed,  in  that 
it  has  persistently  and  wilfully  set  aside 
and  scorned  wisdom  and  true  happiness, 
the  adulterer,  like  the  drunkard,  who  is 
oblivious  of  the  danger  before  him,  shall 
stagger  to  ruin. 


HOMILETICa 

Ver.  15. — Bbm»  foy.  L  Tbb  home  is  a  Divine  institdtioh  of  the  mtsr 
iMFOBTANOE  FOB  THE  WELFABE  OF  UANKiND.  Here  and  throughout  the  Bible  the 
sanctity  of  the  home  is  insisted  on  as  something  to  be  guarded  inviolably.  It  is 
evident  that  this  beautiful  institution  is  in  harmony  with  our  nature.  _  To  live 
according  to  nature  is  not  to  indulge  ill-regulated  passions,  to  follow  chance  impulses, 
to  subordinate  reason  and  conscience  to  instinct  and  appetite.  It  is  to  live  so  as  to 
secure  the  harmonious  working  of  our  whole  nature  and  of  the  general  body  of  mankind. 
Thus  regarded,  family  life  is  natural;  it  falls  in  best  with  the  requirements  of  the  race, 
it  ministers  best  to  its  advancement.  Polygamy  is  always  degrading.  As  men  rise  in 
the  moral  scale  they  cast  it  off.  The  home  is  the  foundation  of  the  state.  Where 
home  life  is  most  corrupt  social  and  political  institutions  are  in  greatest  danger.  The 
homes  of  England  are  the  surest  guardians  of  her  internal  order  and  peace.  May  no 
corrupt  casuistry  ever  dare  to  lay  its  foul  finger  on  these  holy  shrines  1  The  worst 
fruits  of  atheism  and  of  the  confessional  are  seen  in  specious  pretexts  for  committing 
that  horrible  sacrilege. 

IL  Ik  obdeb  to  pbootot  the  home  God  has  hade  it  to  be  a  fouktain  of 
FDBE  AND  wholesome  jotb.  They  who  break  through  the  restraints  of  home  life  in 
the  feverish  thirst  for  illicit  delights  little  know  what  joys  they  are  losing.  The 
poison-fruits  of  a  pandemonium  let  a  blight  fall  on  the  sweet,  fresh  beauty  of  what 
might  have  been  a  very  garden  of  Eden.  For  the  restraints  which  look  to  libertines 
so  irksome  are  just  the  very  conditions  of  the  most  lasting,  most  satisfying,  most 
wholesome  of  human  joys.  The  strong  love  of  husband  and  wife,  the  parents'  pleasure 
in  their  children,  the  mnumerable  little  interests  of  the  home  circle,  and  all  that 
is  typified  by  the  "fireside,"  are  delights  unknown  to  men  who  profess  to  make  the 
pursuit  of  pleasure  their  aim  in  life. 


116  THE  PEOVEEBS.  [oh.  v.  1—23. 

"The  first  sure  Bymptom  of  a  mind  in  health 
Is  rest  of  heai  t  and  pleasure  felt  at  home," 

in.   To  BE   PB8SEBVED    IN   THEIB    INTEGRITY,   THE    HOME  JOYS   KUST  BB  CAREFULLY 

OUABDED  AND  BEVEBENTLY  OHEBisBGD.  The  BBrpcDt  IS  in  the  garden ;  beware  of  its 
wiles.  Temptations  seek  to  break  up  the  confidence  and  peace  of  the  family  circle. 
Not  only  must  gross  infidelity  be  shunned  as  a  deadly  sin,  but  all  approaches  to  a 
breach  of  domestic  sanctity  must  be  dreaded.  Levity,  as  well  as  immorality,  may  go 
far  to  spoil  the  waters  of  the  purest  fountain  of  delight.  Mere  indifference  may  wreck 
the  home  joys.  These  joys  must  be  cherished.  Courtship  should  not  end  with  the 
wedding-day.  Husbands  and  wives  should  beware  of  neglecting  mutual  respect  and 
consideration  under  the  influence  of  familiarity.  Why  should  a  man  be  more  rude 
to  his  wife  than  to  any  other  woman?  Surely  marriage  is  not  designed  to  destroy 
courtesy.  There  should  be  an  element  of  reverence  in  wedded  love.  Mutual  sympathy 
—each  taking  interest  in  the  occupations  and  cares  of  the  other ;  mutual  confidence — 
the  avoidance  of  secrets  between  husband  and  wife  on  the  mistaken  plea  of  sparing 
pain ;  and  mutual  forbearance,  are  reqiusites  for  the  preservation  of  the  sweetness  of  the 
fountains  of  home  joy. 

Ver.  21. — Under  the  eyes  of  God.  I.  We  abe  always  undeb  the  watchful  byes 
OF  GrOD.  God  is  no  epicurean  Divinity,  retreating  far  above  mundane  affairs  in  celestial 
seclusion.  He  is  not  indifferent  to  what  goes  on  in  this  little  world.  He  is  watchful 
and  observant.  This  fact  may  not  affect  us  much  while  we  think  of  it  in  the  general. 
But  we  should  observe  that  Clod's  watchfulness  is  directed  to  all  particular,  individual 
objects.  He  looks  at  each  of  us,  at  the  smallest  of  our  concerns.  It  is  the  property  of 
an  infinite  mind  thus  to  reach  down  to  the  infinitely  small,  as  well  as  to  rise  to  the 
infinitely  great.  Consider,  then,  that  God  searches  us  through  and  through.  There  is 
no  dark  cranny  of  the  soul  into  which  his  keen  penetrating  light  does  not  fall,  no 
locked  secret  which  does  not  open  up  freely  to  his  magisterial  warrant.  We  may  hide 
the  thought  of  God  from  our  own  minds,  but  we  cannot  hide  ourselves  from  the  sight 
of  God.  Now,  what  God  notices  chiefly  in  us  is  our  conduct— our  "  ways,"  "  goings." 
Mere  profession  counts  for  nothing  with  the  All-seeing.  Opinions,  feelings,  resolutions, 
are  of  secondary  moment.  God  takes  inquisition  chiefly  of  what  we  do,  whither  our 
life  is  tending,  what  are  the  actions  of  the  inner  as  well  as  of  the  outer  man.  But  let 
us  remember  that  God  does  all  this  in  no  mere  prying  curiosity,  in  no  cruel  desire  to 
"find  us  out"  and  convict  us  of  wrong.  He  does  it  of  right,  for  he  is  our  Judge;  he 
does  it  with  holy  ends,  for  he  is  holy ;  he  does  it  in  love,  for  he  is  our  Father. 

II.    The    C0NBCI0U8NES8    OF    THE    DiVINE    OVERSIGHT    SHOULD    POWERFULLY    AFFECT 

ALL  OUB  CONDUCT.  1.  It  should  make  us  triie.  What  is  the  use  of  paltry  devices  for 
the  deception  of  men  when  the  only  question  of  consequence  concerning  the  treatment 
of  our  conduct  is — How  will  God  regard  it?  What  folly  to  wear  a  mask  if  he  sees 
behind  it  1  The  gaze  of  God  should  shame  and  bum  all  lies  out  of  the  soul.  2.  It 
should  make  us  dread  to  do  wrong.  An  Eastern  legend  tells  how  one  stole  a  jewel 
called  "the  eye  of  God,"  but  though  he  fled  far  with  his  treasure  and  hid  in  dark 
caverns,  he  was  tortured  by  the  piercing  light  that  it  threw  out  till,  unable  to  endure 
the  horror  of  it,  he  gave  himself  up  to  justice.  We  all  have  the  eye  of  God  on  our 
ways.  Let  us  beware  that  we  never  go  where  we  should  not  wish  him  to  see  us.  3.  It 
should  lead  to  confession  of  sin.  If  God  knows  all,  is  it  not  best  to  make  a  clean  breast 
of  it,  and  humble  ourselves  before  him?  We  cannot  hide  or  cloke  our  sins  from  God. 
It  is  foolish  to  attempt  to  do  so.  But  let  us  be  thankful  that  we  cannot.  While  we 
try  to  hide  them  they  only  scorch  our  own  bosom.  If  we  confess  them,  "  he  is  faithful 
and  just  to  forgive  us  our  sins."  4.  It  should  induce  confidence  in  Ood.  It  is  some- 
times a  relief  to  know  that  the  worst  is  out.  God  knows  all.  Yet  he  endures  us,  yet 
he  loves  us  still.  He  who  thus  watches  looks  upon  us  as  a  mother  regards  her  child, 
grieving  for  what  is  wrong,  but  tenderly  seeking  to  save  and  protect  us  from  all  harm. 
Why  should  we  fear  the  gaze  of  God?  His  sleepless  eye  is  our  great  security  (see 
2  Chron.  xvi.  9).  5.  It  should  incline  us  to  faithful  service.  We  should  learn  to  be 
ashamed  of  the  eye-service  of  men-pleasers,  and  seek  to  win  the  approval  of  our 
rightful  Lord.  He  is  no  hard  tyrant.  When  we  try  to  please  him,  though  ever  so 
imperfectly,  he  t>  pleased,  and  will  say,  "  Well  done,  good  and  faithful  servant."     May 


OH.  V.  1—23.]  THE  PEOVBRBS.  117 

it  be  our  aim  to  live,  as  Milton  resolved  to  do  when  consideriag  his  life  on  his  twenty- 
third  birthday— 

•As  ever  in  my  great  Taskmaiter's  eye." 

Ver.  22. — Oord»  of  sin.  I.  The  sinner  is  in  bondage.  Such  a  condition  Is  not 
expected  when  a  man  freely  gives  the  reins  to  his  passions,  and  weakly  yields  himself 
to  temptation.  On  the  contrary,  he  supposes  that  he  is  enjoying  a  larger  liberty  than 
they  possess  who  are  constrained  to  walk  in  the  narrow  path  of  righteousness.  Moreover, 
even  when  this  shocking  condition  is  reached,  he  is  slow  to  admit  its  existence.  He 
will  not  confess  his  bondage;  perhaps  he  scarcely  feels  it.  Thus  the  Jews  were 
indignant  in  rejecting  any  such  notion  when  our  Lord  offered  deliverance  from  the 
slavery  of  sin  (John  viii.  33).  But  this  only  proves  the  bondage  to  be  the  greater. 
The  worst  degradation  of  slavery  is  that  it  so  benumbs  the  feelings  and  crushes  the 
manliness  of  its  victims,  that  some  of  them  do  not  notice  the  yoke  that  would  gall  the 
shoulders  of  all  men  who  truly  appreciated  their  condition.  The  reality  of  the  bondage 
is  soon  proved,  however,  whenever  a  slave  tries  to  escape.  Then  the  chains  of  sin  are 
felt  to  be  too  strong  for  the  sinner  to  break.  He  cries,  "  0  wretched  man  that  I  am  I 
who  shall  deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death  ?  "  (Rom.  vii.  24). 

II.  The  ooeds  that  bind  the  sinnbb  abe  spun  out  of  hib  own  sms.    Satan 
"  does  not  need  to  build  any  massive  prison  walls,  or  to  call  upon  Vulcan  to  forge  fetters 

for  his  captives.  He  has  but  to  leave  them  to  themselves,  and  their  own  misdeeds  will 
shut  them  in,  as  the  rank  new  growth  of  a  tropical  forest  encloses  the  rotting  trunks  of 
the  older  trees,  from  the  seed  of  which  it  sprang.  1.  This  results  from  the /orce  of 
habit.  All  conduct  tends  to  become  permanent.  The  way  wears  into  ruts.  Men 
become  entangled  in  their  own  past.  2.  This  is  confirmed  by  wUful  disregard  of 
saving  influences.  If  the  sinner  repented  and  called  for  deliverance,  he  might  be  saved 
from  the  fearful  bondage  of  his  sins.  But  proudly  choosing  to  continue  on  his  own 
course,  he  has  consented  to  the  tightening  of  the  cords  that  bind  him. 

III.  CHBisr  alone  can  liberate  from  the  bondage  of  sin.  Left  to  itself,  the 
slavery  will  be  fatal.  The  sinner  will  never  be  free  to  live  to  any  good  purpose.  He 
will  not  be  able  to  escape  in  the  day  of  doom;  his  own  sins  will  tie  him  to  his  fate. 
In  the  end  they  will  strangle  him.  Inasmuch  as  the  cords  are  spun  out  of  his  own 
conduct,  they  are  part  of  hSnself,  and  he  cannot  untie  their  knots  or  cut  their  strands. 
They  are  stronger  than  the  cords  with  which  Delilah  bound  Samson,  while  the  helpless, 
guilty  sinner  is  weaker  than  the  shorn  Nazarite.  But  it  is  to  men  in  this  forlorn 
condition  that  the  gospel  of  Christ  is  proclaimed,  with  its  glorious  promise  of  liberty^  to 
the  captives  (Isa.  Ixi.  1).  Christ  brings  liberating  truth  (John  viii.  32),  redeeming 
grace,  and  the  saving  power  of  a  mighty  love, — those  attractive  "cords  of  »  man" 
(Hos.  xi.  4)  which  are  even  stronger  than  the  binding  cords  of  sin. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 14. — Meretricious  pleasures  and  their  results.    I.  GinebaIi  AOMONrnoN. 

(Yei-B.  i 3.)  Similar  prefaces  to  warnings  against  unchastity  are  found  in  ch.  vi.  20,  etc. ; 

vii.  1,*  etc.  The  same  forms  of  iteration  for  the  sake  of  urgency  are  observed.  A  fresh 
expression  is,  "  That  thy  lips  may  keep  insight."  That  is,  let  the  lessons  of  wisdom  be 
oft  conned  over ;  to  keep  them  on  the  lips  is  to  "  get  them  by  heart."  "  Consideration  " 
(ver.  2),  circumspection,  forethought,  are  peculiarly  needed  in  facing  a  temptation 
which  wears  a  fascinating  form,  and  which  must  be  viewed  in  renUts,  if  its  pernicious 
quality  is  to  be  understood.  ,    ..   ,ov    ti     v 

II  The  faboination  of  the  harlot.  (Ver.  3 ;  comp.  oh.  ii.  lb.)  Her  lips  are 
honeyed  with  compliments  and  flattery  (comp.  Cant.  iv.  11).  Her  voice  is  smoother  than 
oiL  A  temptation  has  no  power  unless  it  is  directed  to  some  weakness  in  the  subject 
of  it  as  the  spark  goes  out  in  the  absence  of  tinder.  The  harlot's  power  to  seduce  lies 
mainly  in  that  weakest  of  weaknesses,  vanity— at  least,  in  many  cases.  It  is  a  power 
in  general  over  the  senses  and  the  imaginati  pn.  And  it  is  the  part  of  the  teacher  to 
disabuse  these  of  their  illusions.    In  the  word  "  meretricious  "  (from  the  Latm  word  for 


11«  THE  PBOVEEBS.  tcH.T.l— 2«. 

"  hu\oi  "),  applied  to  spurious  art,  we  have  a  witness  in  language  to  the  hollowness  of 
bei  attractions. 

III,  Thk  BEBDiiTB  or  vioioDB  PLEASUBES.  (Vers.  4 — 6.)  They  are  described  in 
images  full  of  expression.  1.  As  bitter  like  wormwood,  which  has  a  bitter,  salt  taste, 
and  is  regarded  in  the  East  in  the  light  of  poison.  Or  "  like  Dead-Sea  fruits,  which 
tempt  the  taste,  and  tnrn  to  ashes  on  the  lips."  2.  As  of  acute  pain,  under  the  image 
of  a  sword,  smooth  on  the  surface,  with  a  keen  double  edge  to  wound.  3.  As  fatal. 
The  harlot  beckons  her  guests  as  it  were  down  the  deathful  way,  to  $he6l,  to  Hades,  the 
kingdom  of  the  dead.  4.  They  have  no  good  result.  Ver.  6,  correctly  rendered,  says, 
"  She  measures  not  the  path  of  life ;  her  tracks  are  roving,  she  knows  not  whither." 
The  picture  of  a  life  which  can  give  no  account  of  itself,  cannot  justify  itself  to  reason, 
and  comes  to  a  brutish  end. 

IV.  The  bemotbb  cWNSEQirENOEg  of  vice.  (Vers.  7 — 13.)  A  gloomy  vista  opens, 
in  prospect  of  which  the  warning  is  urgently  renewed  (vers.  7,  8).  1.  The  exposure  of 
the  detected  adulterer.  (Ver.  9.)  He  exchanges  honour  and  repute  for  public  shame, 
loses  his  life  at  the  hands  of  the  outraged  husband,  or  becomes  his  slave  (comp.  ch. 
vi.  34).  2.  The  loss  of  property.  (Ver.  10.)  The  punishment  of  adultery  under  the 
Law  was  stoning  (Lev.  xx.  10;  Deut.  xxii.  22,  sqq.).  Possibly  this  might  be  commuted 
into  the  forfeiture  of  goods  and  enslavement  to  the  injured  husband.  3.  Remorse. 
(Vers.  11 — 14.)  Last  and  worst  of  all  inflictions,  from  the  Divine  hand,  immediately. 
In  the  last  stage  of  consumption  the  victim  of  lust  groans  forth  his  unavailing  sorrow. 
Bemorse,  the  fearful  counterpart  of  self-respect,  is  the  mind  turning  upon  itself,  internal 
discord  replacing  the  harmony  God  made.  The  sufferer  accuses  himself  of  haired  to 
light,  contempt  of  rebuke,  of  disobedience  to  voices  that  were  authoritative,  of  deafness 
to  warning.  No  external  condemnation  is  ever  passed  on  a  man  which  his  own 
conscience  has  not  previously  ratified.  Bemorse  is  the  last  witness  to  Wisdom  and  her 
claims.  To  complete  the  picture,  the  miserable  man  is  represented  as  reflecting  that 
he  all  but  fell  into  the  doom  of  the  public  condemnation  and  the  public  execution 
(ver.  14).— J. 

Vers.  15 — 21. — Fidelitp  and  bliss  in  marriage.  The  counterpart  of  the  foregoing 
warning  against  vice,  placing  connubial  joys  in  the  brightest  light  of  poetic  fancy. 

I.  Images  of  wifehood.  The  wife  is  described :  1.  As  a  spring,  and  as  a  cistern. 
Property  in  a  spring  or  well  was  highly,  even  sacredly,  esteemed.  Hence  a  peculiar 
force  in  the  comparison.  The  wife  is  the  husband's  peculiar  delight  and  property ;  the 
source  of  pleasures  of  every  kind  and  degree ;  the  fruitful  origin  of  the  family  (comp. 
Isa.  li.  1 ;  Cant.  iv.  12).  2.  As  "  vtife  of  on^i  youth."  (Cf.  Deut.  xxiv.  5 ;  Eccles.  ix.  9.) 
One  to  whom  the  flower  of  youth  and  manhood  has  been  devoted.  The  parallel 
description  is  "companion  of  youth"  (ch.  iL  17).  Her  image,  in  this  case,  is  associated 
with  the  sunniest  scenes  of  experience.  3.  As  a  "  lovely  hind,  or  charming  gazelle." 
A  favourite  Oriental  comparison,  and  embodied  in  the  names  Tabitha  and  Boreas, 
which  denoto  "gazelle."  There  are  numberless  uses  of  the  figure  in  Arabian  and 
Persian  poets.  The  beautiful  liquid  eye,  delicate  head,  graceful  carriage  of  the  creature, 
all  point  the  simile.  Nothing  can  surpass,  as  a  husband's  description  of  a  true  wife^ 
Wordsworth's  exquisite  stanza  beginning — 

"She  was  a  phantom  of  delight. 
When  first  she  gleam'd  upon  my  sight  t 
A  creature  not  too  bright  or  good 
For  hnman  nature's  daily  food ; 
For  transient  sorrows,  simple  wiles. 
Praise,  blame,  love,  kisses,  tears,  and  smiles." 

IL  Ihaoeb  or  thi  husband's  bliss.  1.  It  is  like  taking  draughts  from  •  fresh 
and  ever-running  stream.  There  is  "continual  comfort  in  a  face,  the  lineaments  of 
gospel  books."  2.  It  is  a  peetdiar,  a  private  possession.  Ver.  16  should  be  rendered 
interrogatively;  it  conveys  the  contrast  of  the  profaned  treasures  of  the  unchaste 
woman  s  love,  and  thus  fits  with  ver.  17.  The  language  of  lovers  finds  a  true  zest  in 
the  word,  "My  own!"  Life  becomes  brutish  where  this  feeling  dues  not  exist.  3. 
Yet  it  attracts  sympathy,  admiration,  and  good  will.    Ver.  18  is  the  blessing  wished 


CH.  V.  1— 23.]  THE  PUOVEEBS.  11» 


by  the  speaker  or  by  any  looker-on.  Wedding-feasts  bring  out  these  feelings;  and 
the  happiness  and  prosperity  of  married  pairs  are  as  little  exposed  to  the  tooth  of  envy 
as  any  earthly  good.  4.  It  is  satisfying ;  for  what  repose  can  be  more  sweet  and  secure 
than  that  on  the  bosom  of  the  faithful  spouse?  It  is  enrapturing,  without  being 
enfeebling,  unlike  those  false  pleasures,  "violent  delights  with  violent  endin>js,  that  in 
their  triumph  die  "  (ver.  19). 

III.  Concluding  exhoetation  (ver.  20),  founded  on  the  contrast  just  given.  1. 
The  true  rapture  (the  Hebrew  word  shdgdh,  "reel"  as  in  intoxication,  repeated)  should 
deter  from  the  false  and  vicious.  2.  To  prefer  the  bosom  of  the  adulteress  to  that  of 
the  true  wife  is  a  mark  of  the  most  vitiated  taste,  the  most  perverted  understantliug. — J. 

Ver.  21. — Qod  the  all-seeing  Judgt.  "Before  Jehovah's  eyes  are  man's  paths,  and  all 
his  tracks  he  suiveys", 

I.  Cynical  proverbs  concerning  secbect  are  condemned.  Such  as  "What  the 
eye  sees  not,  the  heart  does  not  grieve  over;"  "A  slice  from  a  out  cake  is  nuver 
missed ; "  "  Never  mind  so  long  as  you  are  not  found  out." 

n.  NoTHDJO  IB  REALLY  SECRET  OB  UNKNOWN.  We  are  naked  and  open  to  the  eyes 
of  him  with  whom  we  have  to  do.  The  whisper,  the  inarticulate  thought,  will  come 
back  one  day  in  thunder. — J. 

Vers.  22,  23. — Vice  suicidal.  I.  Wickedness  (like  goodness)  has  undesionbd 
RESULTS.  The  good  comes  back  to  nestle  in  the  bosom  of  the  giver  and  the  doer.  We 
never  do  right  without  invoking  a  blessing  on  our  own  heads.  Evil,  on  the  other  hand, 
designed  and  executed,  is  like  a  snare  set  for  one's  self,  a  net  in  the  meshes  of  which 
the  craft  V  is  entangled,  self-overreached. 

II.  Wickedness  and  ignorance  ark  in  close  connection.  "He  shall  die  fur 
want  o/"  instruction  " — the  correct  rendering  of  ver.  23.  Socrates  taught  that  vice  was 
ignorance,  virtue  identical  with  knowledge.  This,  however,  ignores  the  perversity  of 
the  will.     The  Bible  ever  traces  wickedness  to  wilful  and  inexcusable  ignorance. 

III.  Wickedness  is  a  kind  op  madness.  "  Through  the  greatness  of  his  folly  he 
shall  reel  about."  The  word  shdgdh  once  more.  The  man  becomes  drunk  and  frenzied 
with  pa.ssion,  and,  a  certain  point  passed,  staggers  to  his  end  unwitting,  careless,  or 

te.— J. 


Vers.  1 — 20. — Victims  of  vice.  One  particular  vice  is  here  denounced;  it  is  necessary 
to  warn  the  young  against  its  snares  and  sorrows.  What  is  here  said,  however,  of  this 
sin  is  applicable,  in  most  if  not  all  respects,  to  any  kind  of  unholy  indulgence ;  it  is  an 
earnest  and  faithful  warning  against  the  sin  and  shame  of  a  vicious  life. 

I.  Its  sinfulness.  The  woman  who  is  a  sinner  is  a  "strange"  woman  (ver.  3). 
The  temptress  is  all  too  common  amongst  us,  but  she  is  strange  in  the  si-ht  of  God. 
She  is  an  alien,  foreign  altogether  to  his  purpose,  a  sad  and  wide  departure  from  his 
thought.  And  all  vice  is  strange  to  him;  it  is  a  departure  from  his  thought  and  from 
his  will;  it  is  sin  in  his  sight;  it  is  offensive  to  him;  he  "cannot  look  on"  such 
iniquity  without  abhorrence  and  condemnation.  He  who  is  tempted  may  well  say, 
with  the  pure-miuded  and  godly  Joseph, "  How  can  I  do  this  great  wickedness,  and  sin 
against  God?" 

II.  Its  shame.  It  is  a  shame  to  a  man  to  allow  himself  to  be  deceived  by  a  vain, 
•hallow-minded  woman  (vers.  3,  4);  it  is  a  shame  to  a  man  to  permit  a  mere  selfish 
temptress  to  beguile  him,  to  prevent  him  from  entertaining  the  true  and  wise  thought 
in  his  mind,  to  hinder  him  by  her  artifices  from  reflecting  on  what  is  the  [lath  of 
life  and  what  the  way  of  death  (ver.  6) ;  it  is  a  shame  to  a  man  to  surrender  his  manly 
virtue  to  one  so  utterly  undeserving  of  his  honour  (vers.  7—9).  He  who  yields  to  the 
Bolicitations  of  the  temptress,  to  the  impulses  of  a  vicious  nature,  is  forfeiting  his 
honour,  is  resigning  his  true  manhood,  is  a  son  of  shame. 

III.  Its  folly.  (Vers.  15 — 20.)  How  senseless  is  sinl  how  stupid  is  vice  I  It 
embiaces  a  guilty  and  short-lived  pleasure  only  to  reject  a  pure  and  lasting  joy.  Why 
should  men  resort  to  shameful  lust  when  they  can  be  blest  with  lawful  and  honourable 
love  ?  Why  sink  in  debauchery  when  they  can  walk  along  those  goodly  heights  of 
moderation  and  of  pleasures  on  which  God's  blessing  may  be  invoked  V    Whatever  the 


120  THE  PROVERBS.  [oh.  v.  1—28. 

sense  may  be  (whether  of  seeing,  hearing,  etc.).  it  is  the  pure  pleasure  which  is  not 
only  high  and  manly,  but  is  also  iinaccompanief!  by  bitter  and  accusing  thoughts,  and 
is  lasting  as  life  itself.  Why  turn  to  devour  the  garbage  when  "angels'  food"  is  on  the 
table  ?     Vice  is  the  very  depth  of  folly. 

IV.  Its  pbnaltt.  This  is  threefold.  1.  Impoverishraent  (ver.  10).  Vice  soon 
scatters  a  man's  fortune.  A  few  years,  or  even  weeks,  will  suffice  for  dissipation  to  run 
through  a  good  estate.  Men  "  waste  their  substance  in  riotous  living."  2.  Remorse 
(vers.  11—14).  How  bitter  to  the  soul  the  pangs  of  self- accusation !  There  is  no 
poisoned  dart  that  wounds  the  body  as  the  arrow  of  unavailing  remorse  pierces  the  soul. 
3.  Death  (ver.  5,  "  Her  feet  go  down  to  death ;  her  steps  lay  hold  on  hell ").  Death 
physical  and  death  spiritual  are  the  issue  of  immorality.  The  grave  is  dug,  the  gates 
of  the  City  of  Sorrow  are  open,  for  the  lascivious,  the  drunken,  the  irnmoral.^0. 

Ver.  11  (first  clause). — Mourning  at  the  last.  What  multitudes  of  men  and  women 
have  there  been  who,  on  beds  of  piin,  or  in  homes  of  poverty,  or  under  strong  spiritual 
apprehension,  have  "  mourned  at  the  last " !  After  tasting  and  "  enjoying  the  pleasures 
of  sin  for  a  season,"  they  have  found  that  iniquity  must  meet  its  doom,  and  they  have 
"mourned  at  the  last."  Sin  makes  fair  promises,  but  breaks  its  word.  It  owns  that 
there  is  a  debt  due  for  guilty  pleasure,  but  it  hints  that  it  will  not  si-nd  in  the  bill  for 
many  years ; — perhaps  never :  but  that  account  has  to  be  settled,  and  they  who  persist 
in  sinful  indulgence  will  find,  when  it  is  too  late,  that  they  have  to  "  mourn  at  the  last." 
This  is  true  of — 

I.  Slothfulness.  Very  pleasant  to  be  idling  when  others  are  busy,  to  he  following 
the  bent  of  our  own  fancy,  dallying  with  the  passing  hours,  amusing  ourselves  the  whole 
day  long,  the  whole  year  through  ;  but  there  is  retribution  for  wasted  hours,  for  mis- 
spent youth,  for  negligent  and  idle  uianhood,  to  be  endured  further  on;  there  is  self- 
reproach,  condemnation  of  the  good  and  wise,  an  ill-regulaled  mind,  straitened  means 
if  not  poverty, — mouining  at  the  last. 

II.  Intemperance.  Very  tempting  may  be  the  jovial  feast,  very  fascinating  the 
sparkling  cup,  very  inviting  the  hilarity  of  the  festive  circle;  but  there  is  the  end  of  it 
all  to  be  taken  into  account,  not  only  to-morrow's  pain  or  lassitude,  but  the  forfeiture 
of  esteem,  the  weakening  of  the  soul's  capacity  for  pure  enjoyment,  the  depravation 
of  the  taste,  the  encircling  round  the  spirit  of  those  cruel  fetters  which  "at  the  last" 
hold  it  in  cruel  bondage. 

III.  Larciviousness.    (See  previous  homily.) 

IV.  WoBLDLiNESs.  There  is  a  strong  temptation  presented  to  men  to  throw  them- 
selves into,  so  as  to  be  absorbed  by,  the  affairs  of  time  and  sense — business,  politics, 
literature,  art,  one  or  other  of  the  various  amusements  which  entertain  and  gratify. 
This  inordinate,  excessive,  unqualified  devotion  to  any  earthly  pursuit,  while  it  is  to  be 
distinguished  from  abandonment  to  forbidden  pleasure,  is  yet  wrong  and  ruinous.  It 
is  wrong,  for  it  leaves  out  of  reckoning  the  supreme  obligation — that  which  we  owe  to 
him  in  whom  we  live  and  move  and  have  our  being,  and  who  has  redeemed  us  with  his 
own  blood.  It  is  ruinous,  for  it  leaves  us  (1)  without  the  heritage  we  were  meant  to 
have,  and  may  have,  in  God,  in  Jesus  Christ  and  his  blessed  service  and  salvation;  (2) 
unprepared  for  the  other  and  larger  life  which  is  so  near  to  us,  and  to  which  we 
approach  by  every  step  we  take.  However  pleasant  be  the  pursmts  we  engage  in  or 
the  prizes  we  win,  we  shall  wake  one  day  from  our  dream  with  shame  and  fear ;  we 
shall  "  mourn  at  the  last." — 0. 

Ver.  21. — Mem  in  OocPs  view.  This  verse  is  added  as  a  powerful  reason  why  the 
worst  sins  should  he  avoided.  A  man  under  temptation  may  well  address  himself 
thus — ' 

"  Nor  let  my  weaker  passions  dare 
Consent  to  sin ;  for  God  is  there." 

I.  Thb  vabied  bnbboieb  and  actions  op  man.  Many  are  "the  ways  of  man;" 
"all  his  goings"  cannot  easily  be  told.  There  is  (1)  his  innermost  thought  starting  in 
his  mind ;  (2)  then  his  feeling  or  desire  in  some  direction ;  (3)  then  his  resolution,  the 
decision  of  his  will;  (4)  then  his  planning  and  arranging;  (5)  then  his  consultation 
•od  co-operation  with  others ;  (6)  then  his  execution.  Or  we  may  consider  the  variety 


OH.  V.  1—23.]  THE  PROVERBS.  121 

of  his  actions  by  regarding  them  as  (1)  beginning  and  ending  with  himself;  (2) 
affecting  his  immediate  circle,  bis  own  family ;  (3)  reaching  and  influencing  his  neigh- 
bours ;  (4)  acting  upon  those  who  will  come  after  him.  The  forms  of  human  activity 
are  indefinitely  numerous — so  complex  is  his  nature,  so  various  are  his  relations  to  his 
kind  and  the  world  in  which  he  lives. 

II.  God's  notice  of  all  dub  doinqs.  "The  ways  of  a  man  are  before  the  eyes  of 
the  Lord."  Every  thought  is  thought,  every  feeling  felt,  every  resolve  made,  every 
plan  formed,  every  word  spoken,  every  deed  done,  under  his  all-observing  eye. 
"Neither  is  there  any  creature  that  is  not  manifest  in  his  sight,  but  all  things  are 
naked  and  opened  unto  the  eyes  of  him  with  whom  we  have  to  do  "  (Heb.  iv.  13 ;  see 
2  Chron.  ivi.  9  ;  Job  xxxi.  4 ;  Ps.  cxxxix.  2 — 12 ;  and  oh.  xv.  3).  The  eyes  of  the 
Lord  not  only  cover  the  earth  and  the  heavens,  but  they  look  everywhere  vrithin ; 
through  the  thick  curtains  of  the  night  his  own  band  has  spread,  and  through  the 
thickest  folds  our  hand  can  draw,  and  through  the  walls  of  our  human  frame  into  the 
inner  chambers  and  darkest  recesses  of  our  souls. 

III.  God's  measure  of  cub  doings.  "He  ponderetA  all  his  goings."  God  weighs 
all  that  he  sees  in  the  scales  of  his  Divine  vrisdom  and  righteousness.  He  marks  every 
thought,  word,  deed;  and  he  estimates  their  worth,  their  excellency  or  their  guilt. 
Never  any  way  taken,  any  course  entered  upon,  but  all  the  motives  which  led  to  its 
choice  and  execution  are  before  the  mind  of  God,  and  are  accepted  or  are  blamed  by 
him.     And  this  being  so,  there  must  be — 

IV.  GJOd'b  EBMEMBRANCE  of  OUE  past  as  well  as  his  OBBBBVATION  OF  OUB  PEESKNT 

LIFE.  For  the  Omniscient  One  cannot  forget;  and  it  may  be  that,  in  some  way 
unknown  to  us,  but  quite  in  accordance  with  some  ascertained  facts,  all  our  past 
actions  are  spread  out  before  his  sight  in  some  part  of  his  universe.  Certainly  the 
effects  of  all  we  have  done  abide,  either  in  our  own  character  and  life  or  in  those  of 
other  men.  Our  ways,  past  and  present,  are  le/ore  him ;  he  is  estimating  the  moral 
character,  for  good  or  ill,  of  all  our  goings. 

Therefore :  1.  In  view  of  all  our  guilt,  let  us  seek  his  mercy  in  Christ  Jesus.  For  it 
is  a  truth  consistent  with  the  foregoing,  that,  if  there  be  repentance  and  faith,  all  our 
sins  shall  "  be  cast  into  the  depths  of  the  sea "  (Amos  vii.  19).  God  will  "  hide  his 
face  from  our  sins,  and  blot  out  our  iniquities"  (Ps.  li.  9).  2.  In  view  of  God's 
observation  and  judgment,  let  ug  strive  to  please  him.  If  we  yield  our  herirts  to 
himself  and  our  lives  to  his  service,  if  we  accept  eternal  life  at  his  hands  through  Jesus 
Christ,  and  then  seek  to  be  and  to  do  what  is  right  in  his  sight,  we  shall  do  that  which 
he  wiU  look  upon  with  Divine  approval,  with  fatherly  delight  (Gal.  iv.  1 ;  Heb.  xi,  6 ; 
xiii.  16;  1  Pet.  li.  20,  etc.).— 0. 

Vers.  22,  23. — The  end  of  an  evil  course.  There  are  two  fearful  evils  in  which 
Impenitent  sin  is  sure  to  end,  two  classes  of  penalty  which  the  wrong-doer  must  make 
up  his  mind  to  pay.     He  has  to  submit  to — 

I.  An  inwabd  ttkannt  op  the  most  oeuki.  ohaeaoteb.  (Ver.  22.)  We  may 
never  have  seen  the  wild  animal  captured  by  the  hunter,  making  violent  efforts  to 
escape  its  toils,  failing,  desperately  renewing  the  attempt  with  fierce  and  frantic 
struggles,  until  at  length  it  yielded  itself  to  its  fate  in  suUen  despair.  But  we  have 
witnessed  something  far  more  romantic  than  that.  We  have  watched  some  human  soul 
caught  in  the  meshes  of  vice  (intemperance,  it  may  be),  or  entangled  in  the  bonds  of 
sin  (coveteousness,  it  may  be),  struggling  to  be  free,  failing  in  its  endeavour,  renewing 
the  attempt  with  determined  eagerness,  and  failing  again,  until  at  length  it  yields  to  the 
foe,  vanquished,  ruined,  lost  I  "  His  own  iniquities  have  taken  the  wicked  himself,  he 
is  holden  in  the  cords  of  his  sins."  1.  Sin  hides  its  tyranny  from  view ;  its  cords  are  so 
carried  that  they  are  not  seen ;  nay,  they  are  so  wound  around  the  soul  that  at  first 
they  are  not  felt,  and  the  victim  has  no  notion  that  he  is  being  enslaved.  2.  Gradually 
and  stealthily  it  fastens  its  fetters  on  the  soul ;  e.g.  intemperance,  impurity,  untruthful- 
ness selfishness,  worldliness.  3.  It  finally  obtains  a  hold  from  which  the  soul  cannot 
■hake  itself  free;  the  man  is  "holden;"  sin  has  him  in  its  firm  grip;  he  is  a  captive, 
a  spiritual  slave.     Beside  this  terrible  tyranny,  the  persistent   wrong-doer  has  to 

II,  AiTKB-00N8«<juENCEB  YET  MOBE  CALAMITOUS.    (Ver.  23.)    These  are:  1.  Death 


122 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[oh.  ti.  1— M. 


to  the  midst  of  folly.  "  He  shall  die  without  instruction,"  unenlightened  by  eternal 
truth,  in  the  darkness  of  error  and  sin ;  he  will  die, "  hoping  nothing,  helieving  nothing, 
and  fearing  nothing  " — nothing  which  a  man  should  die  in  the  hope  of,  nothing  which  a 
man  should  live  to  believe  and  die  in  the  faith  of,  nothing  which  a  man  should  fear, 
living  or  dying.  He  shall  die  without  peace  to  smooth  his  dying  pillow,  without  hope 
to  light  up  his  closing  eyes.  2.  Exclusion  from  future  blessedness  through  his  folly. 
*  In  the  greatness  of  his  folly  he  shall  go  astray."  While  the  simplest  wisdom  would 
have  led  him  to  seek  and  find  entrance  into  the  City  of  God,  in  the  greatness  of  his 
folly  he  wanders  off  to  the  gates  of  the  City  of  Sorrow. 

1.  If  the  path  of  folly  has  been  entered  upon  and  is  now  being  trodden,  return  at 
once  without  delay.  Further  on,  perchance  a  very  little  further  on,  it  may  be  too 
late — the  cords  of  sin  may  be  too  strong  for  the  soul  to  snap.  Arise  at  once,  in  the 
strength  of  the  strong  Deliverer,  and  regain  the  freedom  which  is  being  lost.  2.  Enter 
m  earliest  days  the  path  of  spiritual  freedom.  Bear  the  blessed  yoke  of  the  Son  of 
God,  that  every  other  yoke  may  be  broken.  Enrol  in  his  ranks  whose  "  service  is 
perfect  freedom." — 0. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  TL 
Vers.  1 — 35. — The  sixth  chapter  embraces 
four  distinct  discourseB,  each  of  which  is  a 
warning.  The  subjects  treated  of  are  (1) 
suretyship  (vers.  1—5);  (2)  sloth  (vers.  6 — 
11);  (3)  malice  (vers.  12—19);  and  (4) 
adultery  (ver.  20  to  the  end).  The  con- 
tinuity of  the  subject  treated  of  In  the  pre- 
ceding chapter  appears  to  be  somewhat 
abruptly  interrupted  to  make  way  for  the 
insertion  of  three  discourses  on  subjects 
which  apparently  have  little  connection 
with  what  precedes  and  what  follows. 
Their  unlooked-for  and  unexpected  appear- 
ance has  led  Hitzig  to  regard  them  as  inter- 
polations, but  it  has  been  conclusively 
pointed  out  by  Delitzsoh  that  there  is  suffi- 
cient internal  evidence,  in  the  grammatical 
construction,  figures,  word-formations,  de- 
lineations, and  threatenings,  to  establish  the 
position  that  they  proceeded  &om  the  same 
hand  that  composed  the  rest  of  the  book 
and  to  guarantee  their  genuineness.  But 
another  and  not  less  interesting  question 
arises  as  to  whetlier  any  connection  subsists 
between  these  discourses  and  the  subject 
which  thoy  apparently  interrupt.  Such  a 
connection  is  altogether  denied  by  Delitzsoh, 
Zockler,  and  other  German  commentators, 
who  look  upon  them  as  independent  dis- 
courses, and  maintain  that,  if  there  is  any 
connection,  it  can  be  only  external  and 
accidental.  On  the  other  hand.  Bishops 
Pairick  and  Wordsworth  discover  an  ethical 


connection  which,  though  not  clear  at  flrsi 
sight,  is  not  on  that  account  less  real  or 
true.  The  subject  treated  of  in  the  pre- 
ceding chapter  is  the  happiness  of  the 
married  life,  and  this  is  imperilled  by  in- 
cautious undertaking  of  suretyship,  and 
suretyship,  it  is  maintained,  induces  sloth, 
while  sloth  leads  to  malioioueness.  After 
treating  of  suretyship,  sloth,  and  malice  in 
succession,  the  teacher  recurs  to  the  former 
subject  of  his  discourse,  viz.  impurity  of 
life,  against  which  he  gives  impressive 
warnings.  That  such  is  the  true  view  there 
appears  little  doubt.  One  vice  is  intimately 
connected  with  another,  and  the  verdict  of 
experience  is  that  a  life  of  idleness  is  one 
of  the  most  prolific  sources  of  a  life  of  im- 
purity.   Hence  we  find  Ovid  saying — • 

"Quseritur,   .SIgisthns,    qu&    re  sit  factus 
adulter? 
In  promptu  causa  est — desidiosus  erat." 

"  Do  you  ask  why  .fflgisthus  haa  become  an 
adulterer? 
The  reason  is  elose  at  hand — ^he  was  full 
of  idleness." 

Within  the  sphere  of  these  discourses  them- 
selves the  internal  connection  is  distinctly 
observable,  vers.  16 — 19  being  a  refrain 
of  vers.  12 — 15,  and  the  phrase,  "  to  stir  up 
strife,"  closing  each  enumeration  (see  vers. 
14  and  19). 

Vers.    1 — 5.-9.   Ninth    admonitory    dit- 
course.     Warning  against  luretysJiip. 

Ver.  I. — The  contents  of  this  section  are 


ea.  n.  1— 38.] 


THE  PR0VERB3. 


123 


not  to  be  tnkpn  lo  mnch  ai  nn  abftnlnte 
unqualifled  prohibition  of  suretyship  as 
counsel  directed  against  the  incnnsi'lerate 
and  rash  undertaking  of  such  an  obligation. 
There  were  some  occasions  on  which  be- 
coming surety  for  another  was  demanded 
by  the  laws  of  charity  and  prudence,  and 
when  it  was  not  inconsistent  with  the 
humane  precepts  of  the  Mosaic  Law  as 
enunciated  in  Ley.  six.  19.  In  other  pas- 
sages of  our  book  the  writer  of  the  Proverbs 
lays  down  maxims  which  would  clearly 
countenance  the  practice  (eh.  xiv.  21 ;  xvii. 
17;  xviii.  24;  xxvii.  10),  and  in  the  apo- 
cryphal writings  the  practice  is  encouraged, 
if  not  enjoined  (Ecolus.  xxix.  14 ;  viii.  13). 
Notwithstanding  this  limitation,  however,  it 
is  observable  that  suretyship  is  almost  in- 
variably spoken  of  in  terms  of  condemna- 
tion, and  the  evil  consequences  which  it 
entailed  on  the  surety  may  be  the  reason 
why  it  is  so  frequently  alluded  to.  The 
teacher  refers  to  the  subject  in  the  following 
passages:  here;  ch.  xi.  15;  xvii.  18;  xxii. 
26;  XX.  16;  xxvii.  13.  My  son.  On  tliis 
address,  see  oh.  ii.  1 ;  iii.  1,  17.  If  thou  be 
surety  (Hebrew,  im-dravtd);  literally,  if 
thou  hast  heeome  surely;  LXX.,  eoj-  iyyia-ri ; 
Vulgate,  «t  spoponderw.  What  the  teacher 
counsels  in  the  present  instance  is  that,  if 
by  inadvertence  a  person  has  become  surety, 
he  should  by  the  most  strenuous  endeavours 
prevail  on  his  friend  to  free  him  from  the 
bond.  The  Hebrew  verb  drav  is  properly 
"  to  mix,"  and  then  signifies  "  to  become 
surety  "  in '  the  sense  of  interchanging  with 
another  and  so  taking  his  place.  The  fre- 
quent mention  of  suretyship  in  the  Proverbs 
is  alluded  to  above.  The  first  recorded 
instances  are  those  where  Judah  offers  to 
become  surety  for  Benjamin,  first  to  Israel 
(Gen.  xliii.  9),  and  secondly  to  Joseph 
(Gen.  xliT.  33).  It  is  singular  that  it  is 
only  once  alluded  to  in  the  Book  of  Job, 
■where  Job  says,  "Lay  down  now,  put  me 
in  surety  with  thee;  who  is  he  that  will 
strike  hands  with  me  ?  "  (Job  xvii.  3) ;  and 
once  only,  and  that  doubtfully,  in  the  whole 
of  the  Mosaic  writings,  in  the  phrase 
teiummat  yad,  i.e.  giving  or  striding  the 
hand  in  the  case  of  perjury  (Lev.  vi.  2). 
The  psalmist  refers  to  it  in  the  words,  "  Be 
surety  for  thy  servant  for  good  "  (Ps.  cxix. 
122).  It  is  spoken  of  twice  in  Isaiah 
(xxxviii.  14;  ixxvi.  8),  once  in  Ezekiel 
(xxvii.  27)  and  in  Nehemiah  (v.  3),  and  the 
cognate  noun,  arrabon,  "the  pledge,"  security 
for  payment,  is  met  with  in  Gen.  xxxviii. 
17  and  1  Sam.  xvii.  18.  These  scattered 
notices  in  the  Old  Testament  show  that  the 
practice  was  always  in  existence,  while  the 
more  frequent  notices  in  the  Proverbs  refer 
to  a  condition  of  society  where  extended  rom- 
ueiKiiAl  transactions  had  apparently  made 


it  a  thing  of  daily  oocnrrenee,  and  a  source 
of  constant  danger.  In  the  New  Testa- 
ment one  instance  of  suretyship  is  found, 
when  St.  Paul  offers  to  become  surety  to 
Philemon  for  Onesimng  (Philem.  19).  But 
in  the  language  of  the  New  Testament,  the 
purely  commercial  meaning  of  the  word  ia 
transmuted  into  a  spiritual  one.  The  gift  of 
the  Spirit  is  regarded  as  the  artdhon,  •  apaiSiv, 
"  the  pledge,"  the  earnest  of  the  Christian 
believer's  acceptance  with  God  (2  Oor.  i.  22 ; 
v.  5;  Eph.  i.  14).  For  thy  friend;  Hebrew, 
I'reeha.  The  Hebrew  rUh,  more  usually  rid, 
is  "the  companion  or  friend,"  and  in  this 
case  obviously  the  debtor  for  whom  one  has 
become  surety.  The  word  reappears  in  ver. 
3.  The  h  (V)  prefixed  to  rl&  is  the  dativus 
commodi.  So  Delitzsoh  and  others.  If;  not 
in  tlie  original,  but  rightly  inserted.  Thou 
hast  stricken  thy  hand  with  a  stranger 
(Hebrew,  tdkd'td  Idzzdr  ItapSykd) ;  properly, 
thou  host  stricken  thy  hand  for  a  strcmger. 
The  analogous  use  of  V  (h)  in  Idzzdr  deter- 
mines this  rendering.  As  in  the  corre- 
sponding Vrigyka,  the  ^  (V)  indicates  the 
person  for  whose  benefit  the  suretyship  is 
undertaken,  i.e.  the  debtor,  ami  not  the 
person  with  whom  the  symbolical  act  ig 
performed,  i.e.  tlie  creditor.  Compare  the 
following  passages,  though  the  construction 
witli  h  is  wanting :  "  He  that  is  surety  for  a 
stranger"  (ch.  xi.  15);  "Take  his  garment 
that  is  surety  for  a  stranger"  (ch.  xx.  16 
and  xxvii.  13).  "  The  straiiger,"  zdr,  is  not 
an  alien,  or  one  belonging  to  another 
nationality,  but  simply  one  extraneous  to 
one's  self,  and  so  equivalent  to  dkher, 
"  another."  The  meaning,  therefore,  seems 
to  be,  "If  thou  hast  entered  into  a  bond  for 
one  with  whom  thou  art  but  slightly  ac- 
quainted." Others  (Wordswortli,  Plumptre), 
however,  take  zdr  as  representing  the  foreign 
money-lender.  The  phrase,  "  to  strike  the 
hand,"  tdhd  kdph,  or  simply  "to  strike," 
tdka,  describes  the  symbolical  act  which 
accompanied  the  contract.  Tdkd  is  properly 
"  to  drive,"  like  the  Latin  defigere,  and 
hence  "  to  stri  W  and  indicates  the  sharp 
sound  with  which  the  hands  were  brought 
into  contact.  The  act  no  doubt  was  accom- 
plished before  witnesses,  and  the  hand 
which  was  stricken  was  that  of  the  creditor, 
who  thereby  received  assurance  tiiat  the 
responsibility  of  the  debtor  was  undertaken 
by  the  surety.  The  "  striking  of  the  hand  " 
as  indicating  the  completion  of  a  contract 
is  illustrated  by  the  author  of  tlie  '  Ka 
moos '  (quoted  by  Lee,  on  Job  xvii.  3),  who 
says, "  He  struck  or  clapped  to  him  a  sale 
...  he  struck  his  hand  in  a  sale,  or  on  his 
hand  ...  he  struck  his  own  hand  upon  the 
hand  of  him,  and  this  is  among  the  neces- 
sary  (transactions)   of  sale."    So   among 


124 


THE   PROVERBS. 


[oh.  VI.  1^35. 


Western  nations  the  giving  of  the  hand  haa 
been  always  regarded  as  a  pledge  of  bona 
fides.  Thus  Menelaus  demands  of  Helena 
(Enripides,  '  Hel.,'  838),  'Eirl  roiirSe  vvv 
ScliAj  ifirjs  elye, "  Touch  my  right  hand  now 
on  these  conditions,"  i.e.  in  attestation  that 
you  accept  them.  In  purely  verbal  agree- 
ments it  is  the  custom  in  the  present  day 
for  the  parties  to  clasp  the  hand.  A  further 
example  may  be  found  in  the  plightiug  of 
troth  in  the  Marriage  Service, 

Ver.  2.— Thou  art  snared  with  the  words 
i.f  thy  mouth,  etc.;  i.e.  the  inevitable  con- 
sequence of  an, inconsiderate  undertaking  of 
suretyship  is  that  you  become  entangled 
and  involved  by  your  own  -promises,  and 
hampered  by  self-imposed  obligations.  The 
Autlioiized  Version  rightly  regards  this  as 
the  conclusion.  So  the  Vulgate.  Others, 
liowever,  carry  on  the  hypothesis, and  insert 
tin,  "if:"  "If  thou  art  snared,"  etc.;  but 
without  warrant  (Zoclder,  Wordsworth, 
Plumptro).  Tlie  LXX.  throws  the  thought 
into  the  form  of  a  proverb,  as  "a  strong 
net  to  a  man  are  his  own  worJs."  A  dis- 
tinction is  to  be  drawn  between  the  verbs 
rendered  "entangled"  and  "taken;"  the 
former,  yalcSsh,  signifying  to  be  taken  un- 
warily, off  one's  guard;  the  latter,  IdkSd, 
referring,  as  before  observed  (cf.  oh.  v.  22), 
to  the  being  stricken  with  the  net.  They 
are  found  in  the  same  collocation  in  Isa. 
viii.  15, "Many  among  them  shall  be  snared 
and  taken."  The  repetition  of  the  phrase, 
"  with  the  words  of  thy  mouth,"  is  not  un- 
intentional or  purely  rhetorical.  It  is  made, 
as  Uelitzsoli  observes,  to  bring  with  greater 
force  to  the  mind  that  the  entanglements  in 
which  the  surety  is  involved  are  the  result 
of  his  own  indiscretion. 

Ver.  3. — In  this  verse  advice  is  -tendered 
as  to  what  is  to  be  done  under  the  circum- 
stances of  this  entanglement.  The  surety 
is  to  take  immediate  steps  to  be  set  free. 
The  urgency  of  the  advice  is  to  be  explained 
by  the  serious  consequences  which  would 
follow  in  the  event  of  the  debtor  not  satis- 
fying the  creditor  in  due  time.  The  surety 
became  liable  to  the  penalties  inflicted  by 
the  Hebrew  law  of  di  bt.  His  property 
could  be  distrained.  His  bed  and  his  gar- 
ment could  be  taken  from  him  (ch.  xxii.  27 
and  XX.  16),  and  he  wa.s  liable  as  well  as 
his  family  to  be  reduced  to  the  condition  of 
servitude.  So  we  find  the  son  of  Sirach 
saying,  "Suretyship  hath  undone  many  of 
good  estate,  and  shaken  them  as  a  wave  of 
the  sea :  mighty  men  hath  it  driven  from 
their  houses,  so  that  they  wandered  among 
strange  nations"  (Eeclus.  xxix.  18;  of.  2 
Kings  iv.  1 ;  Neh.  v.  8 — 5 ;  and  Matt,  xviii. 
25).  Compare  the  dictum  of  Thales,  the 
Greek  philosopher,  'Eyy^o  iriipa  S'  &ra, 
"  GiT«  surety,  and  rain  is  near ; "  and  that  of 


Ohilo  (Pliny,  'Nat.  Hist.,'  vi.  32),  "Spon- 
gioni  non  deest  jactura " — "  Loss  is  not 
wanting  to  a  surety."  The  same  Idea  is 
conveyed  in  the  modem  German  proverb, 
"Biirgen  soil  man'  wiirgen"— "Worry  a 
surety."  Do  this  now;  or,  therefore.  The 
particle  ephd  is  intensive,  and  emphasizes 
the  command,  and  in  this  sense  is  of  frequent 
occurrence  (Job  xvii.  15;  Gen.  xxvii.  32; 
xliii.  II ;  2  Kings  x.  10,  etc.).  It  appears 
to  be  equivalent  to  the  Latin  quod  dico. 
So  the  Vulgate, "  Do  therefore  what  I  say ; " 
similarly  the  LXX.  renders,  "  Do,  my  son, 
what  I  bid  thee  (ft  iyb  aoi  hreWoiuu)." 
It  carries  with  it  the  sense  of  instant  and 
prompt  action.  And  deliver  thyself;  when 
thou  art  come  into  the  hand  of  thy  friend; 
i.e.  set  thyself  free  when  thou  findest  thou 
art  actually  at  the  mercy  of  thy  friend  for 
wliom  thou  hast  become  surety.  The  W  ('3) 
is  not  hypothetical,  but  actual;  it  is  not "  if" 
you  are,  but  "  when  "  or  because  yon  actu- 
ally are  in  his  power.  The  Vulgate  and 
LXX.  render  '3  respectively  by  quia  and 
•ydp.  Go,  humble  thyself;  i.e.  present  thyself 
as  a  suppliant,  prostrate  thyself,  offer  thyself 
to  be  trodden  upon  (Michaelis),  or  humbh 
thyself  like  to  the  threshold  which  is 
trampled  and  trode  upon  (Bashi),  or  humble 
thyself  under  the  soles  of  his  feet  (Abeu 
Ezra).  The  expression  implies  the  spirit  of 
entire  submission,  in  which  the  surety  is  to 
approach  his  friend  in  order  to  be  released 
from  his  responsibility.  The  Hebrew  verb 
hlth'rappSs  has,  however,  been  rendered 
differently.  Radically  r&phds  signifies  "  to 
tread  or  trample  with  the  feet,"  and  this 
has  been  taken  to  express  haste,  or  the  be- 
stirring of  one's  self.  So  the  Vnlgate  reads 
fettina,  "  hasten ; "  and  the  LXX.  IrOi  nh 
4K\v6iievo5,  i.e.  "be  not  remiss."  But  the 
hithp.  clearly  determines  in  favour  of  the 
reflexive  rendering;  comp.  Ps.  Ixviii.  30, 
"  Till  every  one  submit  himself  with  pieces 
of  silver" — the  only  other  passage  where 
rdphds  occurs.  And  make  sure  thy  £riend 
(Hebrew,  r'hdv  reSykd) ;  rather,  importune 
thy  friend,  be  urgent  with  him,  press  upon 
him  to  fulfil  his  engagement.  The  verb 
rdhav  is  properly  "to  be  fierce,"  "to  rage," 
and  hence  with  the  accusative,  as  here,  "to 
assail  with  impetuosity."  In  Isa.  iii.  5  it  is 
used  with  a  (6'),  and  signifies  to  act  fiercely 
against  any  one.  The  meaning  of  the  pas- 
sage is  that  if  abject  submission  or  persua- 
sion does  not  avail,  then  sterner  measures 
are  to  be  resorted  to  to  gain  the  desired 
end. 

Ver.  4. — This  verse  carries  on  the  thought 
one  step  further.  The  appeal  to  the  friend 
is  not  to  be  confined  to  one  spasmodic  effort 
and  then  relinquished.  He  is  to  be  followed 
up  pertinaciously  and  continually,  with  un- 
wearied diligence,  until  prevailed  upon  t« 


OH.  VI.  1—35.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


125 


fulfil  his  engagemente.  Of  this  nnweaiied 
energy  in  the  pursuit  of  aa  object  in  which 
one  is  deeply  interested,  compare  David's 
resolution,  "I  will  not  give  sleep  to  mine 
eyes,  or  slumber  to  miae  eyelids,  until  I  find 
out  a  place  for  the  Lord,  an  habitation  for 
the  mighty  God  of  Jacob  "  (Pa.  czxxii.  4, 5). 
Ver.  5. — The  struggles  of  the  roe  and  the 
bird  to  escape  from  the  snare  are  employed 
flguratlTely  to  describe  the  efforts  which 
the  surety  is  to  make  to  tear  and  free 
himself  from  his  friend.  From  the  hand  of 
the  hunter  (Hebrew,  mlyyad);  literally, 
from  the  hand,  as  shown  by  the  italics.  The 
variation  in  all  the  ancient  versions,  with 
the  exception  of  the  Vulgate  and  Venetian, 
which  read  "  from  the  snare,"  suggests  that 
the  original  text  was  mippath  instead  of 
miyydd.  The  Hebrew  yad,  "hand,"  may, 
however,  be  used  by  metonymy  for  a  toil  or 
gin ;  but  this  is  improbable,  as  no  example 
of  this  kind  can  be  found.  With  regard  to 
the  addition,  "of  the  hunter,"  though  this 
does  not  occur  in  the  original,  the  paral- 
lelism would  seem  to  clearly  require  it,  and 
Bottcher  maintains,  but  upon  insufficient 
evidence,  and  against  the  reading  of  all 
manuscripts,  which  omit  it,  that  the  word 
Udyydd,  equivalent  to  "of  the  hunter," 
formed  part  uf  the  original  iext,  but  has 
fallen  out.  The  plain  reading,  "  from  the 
hand,"  may,  however,  be  used  absolutely,  as 
in  1  Kings  xx.  42,  "  Because  thon  hast  let 
go  out  of  thy  hand  (miyydd),"  in  which  case 
the  hand  will  not  be  that  of  the  hunter,  but 
that  of  the  person  for  whom  the  one  is  surety. 
Boe.  There  is  a  paronomasia  in  ta'vi,  equiva- 
lent to  "roe,"  and  Ulphdr,  equivalent  to 
"  bird,"  of  the  original,  which  is  lost  in  the 
Authorized  Version.  The  Ufvi  is  the  "  roe  " 
or  "  gazelle,"  so  named  from  the  beauty  of 
its  form  (see  also  Song  of  SoL  il.  7 — 9, 17 ; 
iii.  5;  viii.  14;  1  Kings  v.  3;  Isa.  xiiL  14). 
Ttippdr  is  a  generic  word,  and  represents 
any  small  biiil.  It  is  derived  from  the 
twittering  or  chirping  noise  which  the  bird 
makes,  the  root  being  tidphSr,  "  to  chirp,  or 
twitter."  As  to  its  identification  with  the 
span  ow.  Passer  montanus,  or  the  blue  thrush, 
JPetroeossyphus  cuanens  (see  '  Bible  Animals, 
Eev.  J.  G.  Wood,  p.  405,  edit.  1876). 

Vera.  6 — 11. — 10.  Tenth  admonitory  dis- 
eotirM.  Warning  against  sloth.  The  ethical 
connection  of  this  discourse  with  the  pre- 
ceding has  already  been  pointed  out.  Sloth 
militates  against  prosperity;  it  is  the  pro- 
lific parent  of  want,  and,  even  more  surely 
than  suretyship,  leads  to  misfortune  and 
ruin.  The  certainty  with  which  ruin  steals 
upon  the  sluggard  may  be  the  reason  why 
the  teacher  closes  the  discourse  in  the  way 


he  does.  In  the  case  of  suretyship  such  an 
issue  is  uncertain;  there  is  the  possibility 
of  escape,  the  surety  may  prevail  upon  his 
friend  to  release  him  from  his  obligation, 
and  so  he  may  escape  ruin ;  but  with 
sloth  no  such  contingency  is  possible,  its 
invariable  end  is  disaster.  So  far  as  the 
grammatical  structure  of  the  two  discourses 
is  concerned,  they  appear  to  be  quite  inde- 
pendent of  each  other,  the  only  points  of 
coincidence  observable  being  the  repetition 
of  one  or  two  words,  which  is  purely  acci- 
dental (cf.  "go"  in  vers.  3  and  6,  and 
"sleep"  and  "slumber"  in  vers.  4  and  10). 

Ver.  6. — Go  to  the  ant,  thou  sluggard; 
oonsider  her  ways,  and  be  wise.  The  ant 
(Hebrew,  n'maZa/t)  is  here  brought  forward 
as  supplying  an  example  of  wisdom  to  the 
sluggard.  The  habits  of  this  insect,  its 
industry  and  providence,  have  in  all  aged 
made  it  the  symbol  of  these  two  qualities, 
and  not  only  the  sacred,  but  also  profane 
writers  have  praised  its  foresight,  and  held 
it  up  for  imitation.  The  ant  is  only  men- 
tioned twice  in  the  Old  Testament,  and  on 
both  occasions  in  our  book  (see  present  pas- 
sage and  ch.  xxx.  25).  The  derivation  of 
n'mdldh  is  either  from  the  root  ndm,  with 
reference  first  to  the  silence  with  which  it 
moves,  and  secondly  to  its  active  yet  nnper- 
ceived  motion  (Delitzscb),  or  from  ndmdl, 
i.q.  maldl,  "  to  cut  off,"  from  its  cutting  of! 
or  consuming  seeds  (ab  incidendis  seminibiu) 
(Buxtorf,  Gesenius).  The  Aramaic  name, 
shum'sh'mdndh,  however,  points  to  its  activity 
and  rapid  running  hither  and  thither 
(Fleischer).  Sluggard;  Hebrew,  dtsel,  a 
verbal  adjective  found  only  in  the  Proverbs. 
The  primary  idea  of  the  root  dtsSl  is  that  of 
languor  and  laxity.  The  cognate  abstract 
nouns  Sts'ldh  and  dts'luth,  equivalent  to 
"  slothfulnesa,"  occur  in  ch.  xix.  15;  zxxi. 
27.  Consider  her  ways;  attentively  regard 
them,  and  from  them  derive  a  lesson  of 
wisdom.  Her  ways  are  the  manner  in 
which  the  ant  displays  her  industij  and 
foresight. 

Ver.  7. — Which  having  no  guide,  owiseer, 
or  mler.  This  statement  is  substiMttially 
correct,  for  tliough  the  most  recent  observa- 
tions made  by  modern  naturalists  have  dis- 
covered various  classes  of  ants  occupying 
the  same  ant-hill,  yet  there  appears  to  be 
a  total  want  of  that  gradation  and  sub- 
ordination in  ant-life  which  is  noticeable 
among  bees.  The  three  terms  used  here, 
kdtsd,  shSter,  mdshel,  all  refer  to  government, 
and  correspond  respectively  with  the  modem 
Arabic  terms,  kadi,  wali,  and  emir.  (Zooller). 
The  first  refers  to  the  judicial  office  and 
should  rather  be  rendered  "judge,"  the  toot 


m 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[oh.  vt  1— 3Sk 


IMidh  being  "  to  decids  "  (see  Isa.  i.  10 ;  iii. 
6,  7 ;  Micah  iii.  9).  The  word,  however,  is 
used  of  •  military  commander  in  Josli.  z.  21 ; 
Judg.  ii.  6 — 11,  and  iu  this  sense  it  is  under- 
itood  by  the  Valgate,  which  has  dux.  ShSter, 
tendered  " overseer,"  is  literally  "a  sf vibe," 
•nd  appears  as  the  general  designati  in  for 
any  o£Bcial.  In  Exod.  v.  6,  19  the  shdter 
is  the  person  employed  by  the  Egyptian 
taskmasters  to  urge  on  the  Israelites  in 
their  forced  labour;  in  Numb.  xi.  16  the 
tlidter  is  one  of  the  seventy  elders ;  and  in 
1  Ohron.  zxiii.  4  he  is  a  municipal  magis- 
trate. The  meaning  assigned  to  the  word 
in  the  Authorized  Version  seems  to  be  the 
correct  one.  The  ant  has  no  overseer;  there 
is  none  to  regulate  or  see  that  the  work  is 
done.  Each  ant  apparently  works  indepen- 
dently of  the  rest,  tliough  guided  by  a  com- 
mon instinct  to  add  to  the  common  store. 
In  mSshel  we  have  the  highest  title  of 
dignity  and  power,  the  word  signifying  a 
lord,  prince,  or  ruler,  from  mdshdl, "  to  rule." 
Ver.  8. — ^Provideth  her  meat  in  the  sum- 
mer, and  gathereth  her  food  in  the  harvest. 
It  is  this  characteristic,  combined  with  what 
has  just  bein  said,  which  gives  point  to  the 
ksaon  the  sluggard  is  to  learn.  The 
teacher,  as  it  were,  argues:  If  tlie  ant,  so 
insignificant  a  creature  in  the  order  of  the 
animal  kingdom,  is  so  provident,  hdw  much 
more  should  you  be — you,  a  man  endued 
with  superior  intelligence,  and  with  so  many 
more  resources  at  hand,  and  with  greater 
advantages  1  If  the  ant,  with  none  to  urge, 
direct,  or  control  her  work,  is  so  industrious, 
surely  she  provides  an  example  at  which 
you,  the  sluggard,  should  blush,  since  there 
is  every  external  incentive  to  rouse  you  to 
action — your  duty  to  the  community,  the 
urgent  advice  of  your  friends,  and  your 
dignity  as  a  man.  If  she  provides  for  the 
futnro,  much  more  should  jou  do  so,  and 
throw  oif  your  sloth.  Objection  has  been 
taken  to  what  is  here  stated  of  the  provident 
habits  of  tlie  ant  in  storing  food,  on  tlie 
ground  that  it  is  carnivorous  and  passes 
the  winter  in  a  state  of  torpidity.  That 
the  ant  does  lay  up  stores  for  future  use 
has,  hoivever,  been  the  opinion  of  all  ages. 
Thus  Hesiod  ('Days,'  14)  speaks  of  the  ant 
as  harvesting  the  grain,  calling  it  tSpis,  "the 
provident."  Virgil  says  ('Georg.,'  i  186; 
ef.  •  iEneid,'  iv.  4027)— 

"  Veluti  ingentem  formicas  farris  aoervum 
Quum  populant  hiemis  memores,  tectouuo 
reponunt" 

*  So  the  ants,  when  they  plunder  a  tall  heap 
of  corn,  mindful  of  the  winter,  store  it  iu 
their  cave."_  The  language  of  Horace  ('  Sat.,' 
i.  1.  32)  might  be  a  comment  on  our  pas- 
sage— 


"Parvula  (nam  exemplo  est)  magni  formica 

laboris  siout 
Ore  trahit  quodcunque  potest,  atque  addit 

aoervo. 
Quern  struit,  baud  ignara  ae  non  incanta 

futuri, 
Quas,  simul  universum  contristat  Aquarioa 

annum 
Kon  usquam  prorepit,  et  illis  utitur  anta 
Qu.-Esitis  sapiens." 

"  For  thus  the  little  ant  (to  human  lore 
No  mean  example)  forms  her  frugal  storey 
Gathered,  with   mighty  toiH  on   ever/ 

side. 
Nor  ignorant,  nor  careless  to  provide 
For  future  want;  yet  when  the  stars  ap- 
pear 
That  darkly  sadden  the  declining  year, 
No  more  she  comes  abroad,  but  wisely 

lives 
On   the  fair   store   industrious   summer 
gives." 

(Francis'  Translation.) 

TI;e  same  provident  character  is  noted  in 
iEsop's  fable,  'The  Ant  and  the  Grass- 
hopper;' see  also  Aristotle  ('Hist.  Nat.,' 
ix.  6).  All  objections  on  this  subject  appear 
to  bo  based  on  insufScient  data,  and  have 
been  conclusively  answered  by  recent  obser- 
vation. Apart  from  the  remark  of  Buftbn, 
that  "tlie  ants  of  tropical  climates  lay  up 
'provisions,  and  as  they  probably  live  the 
whole  year,  they  submit  themselves  to  regu- 
lations entirely  unknown  among  the  anfa 
of  Europe."  The  late  Professor  Darwin 
states  of  the  agricultural  ant  of  Texas, 
which  in  many  features  resembles  the  ant 
of  Palestine,  that  it  not  only  stores  its  food, 
but  prepares  the  soil  for  the  crops,  keeps 
the  ground  free  from  weeds,  and  finally 
reaps  the  harvest  (Journal  of  Linnsean 
Society,  vol.  i.  No.  21,  p.  29).  Canon  Tris- 
tram also  observes,  "  The  language  of  the 
wise  man  is  not  only  in  accordance  with 
the  universal  belief  of  his  own  time,  but 
with  the  accurately  ascertained  facts  of 
natural  history.  Contrary  to  its  habits  in 
colder  climates,  the  ant  is  not  there  dormant 
through  the  winter;  and  among  the  tama- 
risks of  the  Dead  Sea  it  may  bo  seen,  in 
January,  actively  engaged  in  collecting  the 
aphides  and  saccharine  exudations,  in  long 
files  passing  and  repassing  up  and  down 
the  trunk.  Two  of  the  most  common  species 
of  the  Holy  Land  (Alta  barbara,  the  black 
ant,  and  Alta  structor,  the  blown  ant)  are 
strictly  seed-feeders,  and  in  summer  hiy  up 
large  stores  of  grain  for  winter  use.  These 
species  are  spread  along  the  whole  of  the 
Mediterranean  coasts,  but  are  nnknown  in 
more  northern  climates.  Hence  writers  who 
were  ignorant  of  ants  beyond  those  of  tlieir 
own   countries    have   been    presnmptuoui 


OH.  TI.  1 — 35,] 


THE  PR0VERB8. 


127 


enough  to  deny  the  accuracy  of  Solomon's 
statement"  ('Nat.  Hist,  of  the  Bible,'  p. 
820).  The  Mishna,  section  'Zeraim,'  also 
contains  a  ouiioua  piece  of  legislation  which 
bears  testimony  to  the  storing  properties  of 
the  ant. 

Ver.  9. — ^Vers.  9 — 1 1  contain  a  call  to  the 
sluggard  to  rouse  himself  from  his  lethargy, 
and  the  warning  of  the  evil  consequences 
if  he  remains  heedless  of  the  reproof.  How 
long  wilt  thou  sleep,  0  sluggards  It  is  the 
same  as  if  it  were  said,  "  What  infatuation 
is  this  which  makes  you  lie  and  sleep  as  if 
you  had  nothing  else  to  do?"  The  double 
question  stigmatizes  the  sluggard's  utter 
indolence,  and  suggests  the  picture  of  his 
prolonging  his  stay  in  bed  long  after  every 
one  else  is  abroad  and  about  his  business. 
Mow  long  (Hebrew,  dd-mdthd;  Vulgate, 
utqueqiio);  literally,  till  whent  When; 
Hebrew,  mdthd;  Vulgate,  quando.  The 
■ame  words  are  used  in  the  same  order  in 
introducing  a  question  in  Neh.  ii.  6,  "  For 
how  long  will  the  journey  be?  and  when 
wilt  thou  return?"  Wilt  thou  .  .  .  sleep. 
The  Hebrew  tlsh'kdr  is  literally  "  wilt  tliou 
lie,"  but  the  verb  easily  passes  to  the 
secondary  meaning  of  "to  sleep."  The 
delineation  of  the  sluggard  is  again  drawn 
in  ch.  xxiv.  30—34  in  almost  identical  lan- 
guage, but  with  some  additions. 

Vei.  10. — Yet  a  little  sleep,  eto.  Is  this 
the  answer  of  the  sluggard  which  the 
teacher  takes  up  and  repeats  ironically,  and 
in  a  tone  of  contempt  ?  or  is  it  the  teacher's 
own  language  describing  how  the  sluggard 
slides  on  insensibly  to  ruin  ?  The  Vulgate 
favours  the  latter  view,  "  Thou  shalt  sleep 
a  little,  thou  slialt  slumber  a  little,  thou 
shalt  fold  thy  hands  to  sleep,  and  then,"  etc. 
Habits,  as  Aristotle  in  his  'Ethics'  has 
shown,  are  the  resultant  of  repeated  acts, 
and  habits  entail  consequences.  So  here 
the  inspired  teacher  would  have  it  learnt, 
from  the  example  of  the  sluggard,  that  the 
gelf-iudul^ence  which  he  craves  leads  on  to 
a  confirmed  indolence,  which  in  the  end 
leaves  him  powerless.  "Yet  a  little"  is 
the  phrase  on  the  lips  of  every  one  who 
makes  but  a  feeble  resistance,  and  yields 
supinely  to  his  darling  vice. 

Ver.  11. — So  shall  thy  poverty  come  as 
one  that  travelleth,  and  thy  want  as  an 
armed  man.  The  inevitable  consequences 
of  sloth — poverty  and  want,  two  terms  con- 
veying the  idea  of  utti*  destitution — are 
described  under  a  twofold  aspect:  first,  as 
certain;  second,  as  irresistible.  Poverty 
will  advance  upon  the  sluggard  with  the 
unerring  precision  and  swiftness  with  which 
a  traveller  tends  towards  the  end  of  hig 
journey,  or,  as  Michaelis  puts  it,  "quasi 
viator  qui  impigre  pergit  ac  proprius  venit 
donee  propositum  itineris  soopum  coutin- 


gat"  (Michaelis, '  Not»  Uberiores').    Muf- 
fet,  in  loo.,  keeping  to  the  figure,  however, 
explains  differently,   "Poverty  shall  over- 
take thee,  as  a  swift  traveller  does  one  who 
walks  slowly."    The  Authorized  Version, 
"as  one  that  travelleth,"  correctly  repre- 
sents the  original  hlm'hdlUk.    There  is  no 
ground  whatever,  from  the  use  of  the  verb, 
for  rendering  the  piel  participle  m'haHek 
as  "  a  robber."    The  verb  hdldic  invariably 
means  "to  go,  or  walk,"  and  the  piel  or 
intensive  form  of  the  verb  means  "to  walk 
vigorously,   or  quickly."      The    participle 
can  only  mean  this  in  the  two  other   p.is- 
sages  where  it  occurs — Ps.  civ.  3  and  Eceles. 
iv.   14.     The  substantive  hMSk  in  2  Sam. 
xii.  4  also  signifies  "a  traveller."    So  the 
Vulgate  here,  quasi  viator.   The  other  view, 
it  is  stated,  is   required  by  the  parallel 
expression  in  the  second  hemistich,  "  as  an 
armed    man,"  and   receives  some  support 
from  the  LXX.  reading,  Str-irep  Kaxhs  iSoi- 
Tr6pos,  "as  an  evil  traveller,'    which  may 
mean  either  a  traveller  bringing  evil  news, 
or  one  who  wanders  about  with  an  evil 
intention  and  purpose,  in  the  sense  of  the 
Latin  gratiator,  "  a  highwayman,"    In  this 
case  the  meaning  would  be  that  poverty 
shall  come  upon  the  sluggard  as  he  is  in- 
dulging in  his  sloth,  and  leave  him  destitute 
as  if  stripped  by  a  robber.     But  the  destitu- 
tion of  the  sluggard  will  not  only  be  certain 
and  swift,  it  will  be  also  irresistible.     His 
want  shall  come  upon  him  as  an  armed  man 
(ft'wft  mdgen) ;  literally,  as  a  man  of  a  ifdeld) 
Vulgate,  quasi  vir  armatus;  i.e.  like  one  fully 
equipped,  and  who  attacks  his  foe  with  such 
onset  and  force  that  against  him  resistance 
is  useless.     As  the  unarmed,  unprepared 
man  succumbs  to  such  an  opponent,  so  shall 
the  sluggard  fall  before  want.    The  expres- 
sions, "  thy  poverty  "  and  "  thy  want,"  repre- 
sent  the  destitution   of   the    sluggard  as 
flowing  directly  from  his  own  habit  of  self- 
indulgence.    It  is  his  in  a  special  manner, 
and  he,  not  others,  is  alone  responsible  for 
it.     Compare,  beside  the  parallel  passage 
ch.  xxiv.  33,  the  similar  teaching  in  ch.  z. 
4;   xiii.  4;   xx.  4.     The  Vulgate,  LXX., 
and  Arabic  Versions  at  the  close  of  this 
verse  add,  "  But  if  thou  art  diligent,  the 
harvest  shall  come  as  a  fountain,  and  want 
shall  flee  far  from  thee;"  the  LXX.  mak- 
ing a  further  addition,  "as  a  bad  runuer 
(ffi<rirep  xaxhs  Spofiehs)."    It  is  observable,  in 
comparing  this  section  with  the  preceding, 
that  the  teacher  pursues  the  subject  of  the 
sluggard  to  its  close,  while  he  leaves  the  end 
of  the  surety  undetermined.    The  explana- 
tion may  be  in  the  difference  in  character 
of  the  two.    The  surety  may  escape   ihe 
consequences  of  his  act,  but  there  is  no  such 
relief  for  the  sluggard.    His  slothfulness 
becomes  a  habit,  which  increases  the  more 


128 


THE  PROVE  BBa. 


LOH.  VI.  1 — 35. 


it  IB  Indulged  in,  and  leads  to  oonsequenceB 
which  are  as  iiremediable  as  they  are 
inevitable. 

Vers.  12 — 19. — 11.  Eleventh  admonitory 
discourse.  Warning  against  miiehievousneis 
as  a  thing  hateful  to  God.  The  connection 
of  this  with  the  preceding  discourse  is.  not 
at  first  sight  very  clear,  but  it  may  be  found 
in  the  fact,  attested  only  too  unhappily  by 
experience,  that  sloth  leads  those  who  in- 
dulge in  it  to  such  vices  as  are  next  enume- 
rated. The  sluggard  may  develop  into  a 
treacherous  and  deceitful  man,  and  even  if 
such  should  not  happen,  the  characteristics 
of  the  two  are  nearly  allied,  and  their  end  is 
much  the  same.  St.  Paul,  in  his  First  Epistle 
to  Timothy,  observes  this  same  combination 
of  character,  and  remarks  that  idlers  are  | 
"tattlers  also  and  busybodies,  speaking  j 
things  which  they  ought  not "  (see  1  Tim. 
vi.'13).  The  intention  of  the  discourse  is 
obviously  to  dissuade  all,  and  especially  the 
young,  from  the  vices,  and  to  preserve  them 
from  the  ruin,  of  those  men  of  whcm  "  the 
naughty  person  and  wicked  man"  is  the 
type. 

Ver.  12. — A  naughty  person,  a  wicked 
man,  walketh  with  a  froward  mouth.  The 
teachdJ  begins  by  stating  in  general  terms 
the  nature  and  character  of  the  man  whom 
he  now  holds  up  as  a  warning  to  others, 
and  then  proceeds  tu  point  out  the  various 
features  in  his  conduct  and  behaviour  by 
which  he  may  be  known.  In  concise  terms 
he  is  described  as  "a  naughty  person,  a 
wicked  man."  This  is  pre-eminently  his 
character,  and  the  tirst  feature  in  it  is  that 
Ills  life  is  one  of  wilful  and  injurious  mis- 
representation of  the  truth.  A  nauglity  per- 
son, a  wicked  man.  In  apposition  and 
mutually  explanatory.  The  grammatical 
ariiingement  of  the  sentences  which  follow, 
each  of  which  is  introduced  by  a  participle, 
and  is  thus  co-ordinate  to  the  others,  as 
well  as  the  parallel  terras,  "  person  "  (addm) 
and  "  man  "  (isA),  determine  this  apposition. 
So  Bertheau  and  Delitzsch.  Others  (as 
Zockler,  Noyes,  Kamph),  however,  connect 
the  second  expression  with  the  series  of 
characteristics  which  follow,  and  render, 
"A  worthless  person  is  a  deceiver,  who," 
etc.,  but  wrongly.  A  naughty  person  (He- 
brew, addm  b'liyyaal);  literally,  o  man  of 
Belial;  Vulgate,  liomo  apostata;  LXX., 
avrip  Hippav.  The  word  "  Belial "  is  derived 
from  b'li,  "  without,"  and  ydal,  "  |irofit  "  (i.e. 
"without  profit"),  or  from  b'li  and  61, 
■'  .yoke  "  (<.e.  "  witbaut  yoke  "),  and  strictly 


signifies  either  a  worthless  or  a  lawless 
person.  The  latter  derivation  is,  however, 
rejected  by  Geseniua  and  others.  Its  ab- 
stract signification  is  worthleasness,  use- 
lesBiiess;  its  concrete  or  adjectival,  worth- 
less. The  word  "  naughty  "  (Anglo-Saxon, 
ndht,  ne  aht,  "  not  anything,"  equivalent  to 
"  nothing "),  in  the  sense  of  good-for- 
nothing,  ne'er-do-well,  adopted  in  the 
Autliorized  Version,  exactly  reproduces  its 
strict  etymtdogical  meaning.  The -word, 
however,  always  carries  with  it  the  idea  of 
moral  turpitude.  In  the  present  instance 
its  meaning  is  determined  by  the  appoai- 
tional  phrase,  "  a  man  of  iniquity,"  or  "  a 
wicked  man,"  and  such  iniquity  as  takes 
the  form  of  mischief-making,  deceit,  and 
sowing  discord  among  brethren.  The  "  man 
of  Belial"  is  not  therefore  simply,  as  its 
etymological  derivation  would  imply,  a 
worthless  individual,  one  who  is  of  no  use 
either  to  himself  or  to  the  community  at 
large,  but  a  positively  wicked,  iniquitous, 
and  despicable  character.  The  meaning  of 
the  word  varies  in  other  passages.  Thus  in 
Deut.  xiii.  13,  where  it  first  occurs,  it  is 
used  to  designate  those  who  have  fallen 
away  into  idolatry,  and  induce  others  to 
follow  their  example.  In  this  sense  it  cor- 
responds with  tlie  Vulgate,  apostata,  as 
signifying  a  defection  from  the  worship  of 
the  true  God.  Again,  in  1  Sam.  i.  16  it 
is  applied  to  the  profanation  of  sacred 
places.  When  Hannah  is  accused  by  Eli 
of  drunkenness  in  God's,  house  at  Shilob, 
she  replies,  "  Count  not  thine  handmaid  for 
a  daugliter  of  Belial."  In  the  historical 
books  (e.g.  Judges,  1  Samuel,  1  Kings,  2 
Chronicles),  where  it  is  of  frequent  oc- 
currence, it  has  the  general  meaning  of 
"  wickedness,"  under  whatever  form  it  ap- 
pears. So  in  the  Psalms  (xviii.  4 ;  xli.  8 ; 
ci.  3)  and  Nahum  (i.  11,  15).  In  the  Book 
of  Job  (xxxiv.  18,  once  only)  it  is  used 
adjectively  and  as  a  term  of  repruach,  "  la 
it  fit  to  say  to  a  king.  Thou  art  wicked 
[b'liyyadl;  i.e.  '  worthless ']?  "  Individuals 
possessing  the  qualities  of  wortldessness, 
profanity,  or  wickedness  are  designated 
in  Holy  Scripture  either  as  "  sons,"  "  chil- 
dren," "daughters,"  or  "men  of  Belial." 
The  word  only  occurs  in  two  other  passages 
in  the  Proverbs — ch.  xvi.  27  and  xix.  28. 
In  the  New  Testament  (2  Cor.  vi.  15)  the 
word  "  Belial "  (Greek,  fiexiap  or  ^eA.Io\) 
appeal  s  as  an  appellative  of  Satan,  &  irovriph^, 
"the  (  vil  one,"  as  the  representative  of  all 
that  is  bad,  and  as  antichrist.  A  wicked  man 
(Hebrew,  Is/i  acen);  literally,  o  man  of 
vanity  ur  iniquity;  Vulgate,  vir  inutilis; 
LXX.,  av^p  irapdvo/ios.  The  radical  idea 
of  oufti  (from  «n,  "  nothing ")  is  that  of 
emptiness  or  vanity,  and  lias  much^  tliere- 
fore,  in  common  with  b'liyyaal.  Its  secondary 


«B.  TI.  1—35.1 


IHE  PBOYBRBSl 


129 


mefvning,  and  that  wbioh  it  usually  bears  in 
Sof ipture,  is  iniquity.  "  A  man  of  iuiquity  " 
is  pne  who  is  aUogethejc  dafioient  in  moral 
consciousness,  and  who  goes  about  to  work 
wickedness  and  do  hurt  and  iiyury  to  others 
(of.  ver.  18  and  Job  xxii.  15).    Walheth  with 
a  froward  mntth.    His  first  oharacteristlo, 
as  already  observed.    His  whole  lift  and 
conduct  are  marked  by  craftiness,  deceit,  per- 
Tersion,  and  roisrepresentfttion,  and  an  utter 
want  of  truth.  «  Walking"  is  here,  as  else- 
where in  Scripture,  used  of  some  particuUr 
course  of  conduct,    go  we  find  the  LXX, 
paraphrase,  irop$uV«  iSoiis  oi)«  B7a9tij,  "  he 
enters  or  walks  not  in  good  ways."    With  a 
froward    mouth   (Hebrew,    ih'shuth   p^h); 
literally,  wilA  perversity  of  mouth;  Vulgate, 
ore  perversa,      Symmaohus   has   vrpeSKti- 
Itaai  (rrd/iaro;,  "  with  perversity  of  mouth." 
The  mouth,  or  speech,  is  the  vehicle  by 
which  this  person  giveg  outward  expres- 
sion to  the  evil  thoughts  which  are  inwardly 
filling  his  heart.    The  phrase  occurs  before 
in  ch.  iv.  24.    Tlie  meaning  of  the  passage 
is  well  illustrated  in  Ps.  x.  7,  "  His  mouth 
is  full  of  misery,  deceit,  and  fraud :  under 
his  tongue  is  mischief  and  vanity." 

Ver.  13. — He  winketh  with  his  eyes,  he 
speaketh  with  his  feet,  he  teaoheth  with  his 
fingers.  He  employs  his  other  members 
for  the  same  nifarious  purpose.  In  the 
language  of  St.  Paul,  he  yields  his  members 
to  uncleanness,  and  to  iniquity  unto  iniquity 
(RoMi.  Ti,  19),  "  To  wink  with  tlie  eye  (Jca- 
rats  dyln),"  as  in  ob.  s;.  10  ami  Ps.  xxxv.  19, 
or  "  with  tlje  eyes  (karats  b'eynayim),"  is  pro- 
perly to  compress  or  nip  them  together,  and 
so  to  wink,  and  give  the  signal  to  others  not 
to  interfere  (Gesenius  and  Delitzsch) ;  cf, 
the  LXX-,  ivvfiei  hipSaXfi^ ;  and  the  Vul- 
gate, annuit  ocuUs.  Aquila  and  Thcodoret, 
however,  read,  Kcffei,  "  he  ver,es  or  annoys," 
The  obsei'vation  of  the  teacher  in  ch.  x. 
10  is,  "He  that  winketh  with  his  eyes 
causeth  sorrow."  The  same  verb  Itdruta  is 
also  used  of  the  compression  or  closing  of 
the  lips  in  ch.  xvi.  30.  Ee  epeaketh  with  his 
feet;  i.e.  ho  conveys  signs  by  them  to  his 
companion  i  cf.  the  LXX.,  (rriiiflyei  Sh 
iroSl,  and  the  Vulgate,  terit  pede,  which 
conveys  much  the  same  meaning.  He 
teaoheth  with  his  fingers ;  or,  as  more  fully 
expressed  in  the  LXX.,  SiSticncci  S^  ivveinain 
SaicTi\wy,  "  he  teaoheth  by  the  signs  of  his 
fingers."  Symmaohus  has  SoKTuAoSeiKTwy, 
whioli,  however,  in  its  strictly  classical  use 
(see  Demosthenes,  790.  20)  is  pointing  at 
with  the  finger.  "Teacliing"  is  only  the 
secondary  meaning  of  the  Hebrew  participle 
mdrgh,  which  is  here  used.  The  verb  ydi  ah, 
to  which  it  belongs,  means  properly  to  ex- 
tend or  stretch  out  the  hand  for  the  purpose 
of  pointing  out  tlie  way  (compaj?  the 
Hewew  shdiahh  yod,  and  the  Latin  mon- 

rSOTBBBS, 


««we),and  henoe  came  to  mean  "to  tettBh,»^^ 
ihe  crafty  and  deceitful  character  which  is 
bere  presented  to  us  is  strikingly  reproduq«d 
jn  Eoolesiastmug;  "He  that  winketh  wi* 
Oie  eyes  worketh  evil :  and  he  that  knowetb 
mm  will  depart  ftom  him,    wiien  thou  art 
pre^ient,  he  will  spouk  sweetly,  and  will 
admire  thy  words  i  but  at  the  last  he  will 
writhe  his  mouth,  and  slander  tliy  eayii.gs, 
1  have  hated  many  things,  but  nothing  like 
bun  J  for  the  Lord  will  hate  him  "  (Ecflus 
xxvii.  82-24).    The  heathen  poet  N»vins 
says  of  the  impudent  woaian-^ 
"  Alium  tenet,  alii  adnutat,  alibi  manns 
Est  oceupata :  est  alii  percellit  pedem." 

Compare  also  Ovid's  words  ('  Amor,,'  i,  ix 
16)— 

"  01am  mihi  tange  pedem : 
Me   specta,    mntusque    meos,    vultumnne 
loquacem. 

Verba  euperciliis  sine  voce  loquentia  dicam  j 
Verba  leges  digitis.'' 

So  TibuUus,  i.  12— 

"  Ilia  viro  coram  nutus  conferre  loqnaces 

Blandaque  oompositis  abdere  verba  notis." 
The  lesson  which  we  may  learn  from  this 
verse  is  not  to  abuse  the  members  of  our 
bodies,  by  employing  them  for  the  purposes 
of  deceit  and  hypocrisy,  and  so  to  promote 
evil,  but  to  put  them  to  thehr  natural  and 
legitimate  use. 

Ver.  14.— From  these  external  features 
the  teacher  passes  to  the  heart,  the  seat  of 
all  this  mischief  and  deceit.  In  this  respect 
we  observe  a  striking  correspondence  with 
tho  method  adopted  by  our  Saviour  in  his 
teaching,  who  referred  everything  to  the 
heart,  as  the  true  seat  of  all  that  was  gond 
or  bad  in  man.  Jrowarduess  is  in  his  heart 
(Hebrew,  tah'pUhdth  b'libbo);  i.e.  his  heart  is 
full  of  perverse  imaginations,  it  is  there 
he  nourishes  his  jealousy,  his  hatred,  his 
malice,  his  ill  will.  It  is  there,  too,  he 
deviseth  misqhief  continnaUy.  "Devising 
mischief"  carries  us  one  step  further  back 
in  the  history  of  evil.  It  is  this  feature, 
this  deliberate  premeditation  to  plot  mis- 
chief and  to  devise  means  to  curry  it  into 
execution,  which  makes  the  character  of  the 
man  simply  diabolical.  He  makus  his  lieart 
as  it  were  the  workshop  wherein  he  tUbri- 
cates  and  prepares  his  vi  Ualny.  The  Hebrew 
hhdrash  (to  which  the  participle  hhSresh 
belongs)  is  equivalent  to  the  Vulgate  ma- 
ehinari,  and  the  LXX.  reKTaiyoinai,  "  to 
fabricate,  devise,  plot."  (See  eh.  Hi.  29  and 
ver.  18 ;  and  cf.  Ps.  xxxvi.  4,  "  He  deviseth 
mischief  upon  his  bed.'')  The  LXX.  com- 
bines the  two  statements  in  one  proposition ; 
"A  perverse  heart   deviseth   evil   at  all 


130 


THE  PR0VEEB8, 


[oh.  VI,  1 — 35. 


times."  Similarly  the  Vulgate,  which,  how- 
ever, joins  "continually"  (Hebrew,  b'hol- 
elh;  Vulgate,  omni  tempore)  to  the  second 
hemistich,  thus :  "  And  at  all  times  he 
BOWS  diucord  (et  omni  tempore  jurgia  semi- 
nal)." He  soweth  discord  (Hebrew,  mid'- 
ydnim  (Keri)  y'shalUalih) ;  literally,  he  sends 
forth  (i.e.  excites)  strife ;  or,  as  the  margin, 
he  easteth  forth  strife.  The  Keri  reading 
mid'ydnim,  for  the  Kbetib  m'ddnim,  is  pro- 
bably, as  Hitzig  suggests,  derived  from 
Gen.  xxxvii.  a6.  The  phrase  occuis  again 
as  shllldkh  m'ddnim  in  ver.  19,  and  as  shll- 
lakh  mddSn  in  cli.  xvi.  28  (cf.  oh.  x.  12).  This 
is  the  culminating  point  in  the  character  of 
the  wicked  man.  He  takes  delight  in  break- 
ing up  friendship  and  in  destroying  concord 
among  brethren  (see  yet.  19),  and  thus 
destroys  one  of  the  most  essential  elements 
for  promoting  individual  happiness  and  the 
welfare  of  the  community  at  large.  This 
idea  of  the  community  is  introduced  into 
the  LXX.,  which  reads,  "Such  an  one 
brings  disturbance  to  the  city  (6  roaovros 
rapaxas  avviffrijirt  ir6\€i).**  The  motive 
cause  may  be  either  malice  or  self  interest. 
Ver.  15. — Therefore  shall  his  calamity 
oome  suddenly ;  suddenly  shall  he  he  broken 
without  remedy.  Great  sins,  as  Muffet, 
in  Joe.,  observes,  have  great  punishments; 
neither  only  great,  but  sudden.  Therefore  ; 
Hebrew,  al-ken.  A  Nemesis  or  retribution 
awaits  this  man  of  malice  and  deceit.  His 
calamity  or  destruction  is  represented  as 
the  direct  result  of,  as  flowing  forth  from, 
what  he  has  done.  If  is  calamity;  Hebrew, 
eydd.  On  eyd,  see  oh.  i.  26.  Shall  come 
tuddenly;  i.e.  sooner  than  he  anticipates; 
when  he  thinks  his  diubolical  plans  are 
gucceediug,  then  suddenly  his  victims  will 
discover  his  fraud  and  malice,  and  will  rise 
and  inflict  the  punishment  which  is  his  due. 
Huddenly ;  pgthS,  a  variation  of  plthdm  just 
used.  ShaLl  he  be  hrohen;  Hebrew,  ylsh- 
ehdvSr  ;  Vulgate,  conteretur.  The  verb 
shdvdr,  "to  break,"  "to  break  to  pieces," 
is  used  of  ships  which  are  wrecked  (Isa.  xiv. 
29  ;  Ezek.  xxvii.  34  ;  Jonah  i.  4) ;  of  an  army 
which  is  defeated  and  dispersed  (Dan.  xi. 
22;  2  Chrou.  xiv.  12);  of  tlje  destruction  of 
a  kingdom,  city,  or  people  (Ita.  viii.  15 ;  Jer. 
zlviii.  4) ;  and  of  the  complete  prostration 
of  the  spirit  of  man  by  affliction  (Ps.  xxxiv. 
19) ;  and  as  such,  in  the  passage  before  us, 
conveys  the  idea  of  the  complete  ruin  of  this 
man.  It  is  a  destruction  tiiat  shall  break 
him  up.  Without  remedy  (Hebrew,  v'eyn 
mar'pS;  lilerally,  and  there  is  no  remedy. 
There  shall  be,  as  Fleischer,  as  it  were,  no 
means  of  recovery  for  his  shattered  members. 
His  destniction  shall  be  irremediable,  or  as 
the  LXX.,  a  awTpt^-f]  avfai^ros,  a  contritio 
insanihilis;  or  as  the  Vulgate,  nee  habehit 
ultra  medicinam.     The  idea  seems  to  be 


taken  from  the  shattered  fragments  of  • 
potter's  vessel,  which  it  is  impossible  to  re- 
unite. So  in  the  case  of  the  man  whose  life 
has  been  one  of  fraud,  deceit,  and  malice, 
there  is  for  him  no  hope  of  any  recovery. 
The  language  may  seem  exaggerated,  but 
the  picture  is  painted  with  this  high  colour- 
ing to  exhibit  a  strong  deterrent  to  such  a 
line  of  conduct,  and  further,  it  may  be  re- 
marked that,  in  the  present  day,  only  the 
most  confiding  would  again  put  trust  in  a 
man  who  has  wilfully  and  maliciously 
deceived  them  (of.  Isa.  xxx.  14).  The 
second  humistich  of  this  verse  occurs  again 
verbatim  in  ch.  xxix.  1. 

Ver.  16. — The  whole  structure  and 
arrangement  of  the  thoughts  which  occur 
in  Vers.  16 — 19  clearly  show  that  this 
is  not  an  independent  section,  but  one 
closely  allied  to  that  which  has  just  pre- 
ceded. The  object  is  to  show  that 
those  evil  qualities  of  deceit-  and  malice 
which  are  disastrous  to  man  are  equally 
odious  in  the  sight  of  Jehovah,  and  con- 
sequently within  the  scope  of  the  Divine 
displeasure.  These  six  things  doth  the  Lord 
hate :  yea,  seven  are  an  abomination  unto 
him.  The  use  of  the  numerical  proverb, 
though  common  to  the  gnomic  liteiature  of 
Persia  and  Arabia,  as  Umbreit  shows,  is  by 
our  author  confined  to  this  single  instance. 
Other  examples  occur  in  our  book  in  the 
words  of  Agur  the  son  of  Jakeh  (see  ch. 
XXX.  7—9,  24—28),  and  the  midda,  the 
name  given  by  later  Jewish  writers  to  this 
form  of  proverb,  is  observable  in  the  apo- 
cryplial  Book  of  Ecolesiasticus  (see  xxiii. 
16 ;  XX.  7  and  ixvi.  5—28).  When,  as  in 
the  present  instance,  two  numbers  are  given, 
the  larger  number  corresponds  with  the 
things  enumerated.  So  in  Job  v.  19.  In 
Amos  i.  and  ii.,  however,  there  is  an  excep- 
tion to  this  rule,  where  the  numbers  appear 
to  be  used  indefinitely.  As  to  the  origin  of 
the  numerical  proverb,  the  most  probable 
explanation  is  that  given  by  Hitzig  and 
adopted  by  Zockler,  namely,  that  it  is  due 
to  the  exigencies  of  parallelism.  The  author 
first  adopts  one  number  optioimlly,  aud  then 
a  second  is  employed  as  a  parallel  to  it. 
Here,  however,  the  number  determined  on 
in  the  writer's  mind  is  the  larger  number 
seven,  and  the  smaller  number  six  is  used  as 
a  rhetorical  pandlel.  An  examination  of 
the  following  verses  will  show  that  the 
seven  exuctly  measures  the  things  which 
are  described  as  odious  to  the  Lord.  Tlie 
Authorized  Version,  so  far  as  the  numbers 
are  concerned,  exactly  represents  the  origi- 
nal, which,  by  the  use  of  the  cardinal 
number  "  seven "  (shgvd),  and  not  the 
ordinal  "  seventh,"  which  would  be  sh'vii, 
shows  that  the  things  enumerated  are  equally 
an  abomination  in  God's  sight.   .The  yiew^ 


OH.  VI.  1 — 35,] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


131 


therefore,  that  the  seventh  vice  is  odiong 
to  God  in  an  especial  degree  above  the 
others,  is  untenable,  thougli  it  has  found 
defenders  in  Lowensteiu,  Bertheau,  and 
Von  Gerlach,  and  is  supported  by  the 
Vulgate,  Sex  sunt  quse  odit  Dominus,  et 
teplimum  detestatur  anima  ejus.  All  the 
seven  things  are  execrable,  all  are  eq  unlly 
objects  of  the  Divine  abhorrence.  Besides, 
we  cannot  imagine  that  the  yice  of  sow- 
ing discord  among  brethren,  of  yer.  19,  is 
more  odious  to  God  than  the  crime  of  shed- 
ding innocent  blood  of  ver.  17.  Unto  him 
(Hebrew,  naph'sho) ;  literally,  of  his  sovi. 

Ver.  17. — The  enumeration  begins  with 
pride.  A  proud  look  (Hebrew,  eynayim 
rdmSth);  literally,  haughty  or  lofty  eyes,  as 
in  the  margin;  Vulgate,  oculos  siiblimes; 
LXX.,  o(/)flaAjnbs  uPpiffTov.  It  is  not  merely 
the  look  which  is  meant,  but  the  temper  of 
mind  which  the  look  expresses  (Wardlaw). 
The  lofty  look  is  the  indication  of  the 
swelling  pride  which  fills  the  heart,  the 
mentis  elatsB  tumor,  the  supreme  disdain, 
grande  supereilium,  for  everything  and 
everybody.  Pride  is  put  first,  because  it  is 
at  the  bottom  of  all  disobedience  and  rebel- 
lion against  God's  laws.  It  is  the  very 
opposite  of  humility,  which  the  apostle,  in 
Eph.  iv.  2,  mentions  as  the  basis,  as  it  were, 
of  all  the  virtues.  All  pride  is  intended, 
and  the  face  of  the  Lord  is  against  this 
pride.  He  "resisteth  the  proud;"  he 
"  knoweth  them  afar  off; "  he  "  hath  respect 
unto  the  lowly ; "  he  "  will  bring  down  high 
lo.iks"  (Ps.  xviii.  27);  he  judgeth  those 
that  are  high  (Job  xxi.  22).  It  is  against 
this  spirit  that  Job  prays  Jehovah  "  to  be- 
hold every  one  that  is  proud,  and  abase 
him,"  and  "to  look  upon  every  onethat  is 
proud,  and  bring  him  low  "  (Job  xl.  11, 12). 
The  next  thing  in  the  enumeration  is  a 
lying  tongue.  Lying  is  hateful  to  God, 
because  he  is  the  Gud  of  truth.  In  a  con- 
cise form  the  expression,  "a  lying  tongue," 
represents  what  has  been  already  said  in 
vers.  12  and  13  of  "  the  wicked  man"  who 
"walks  with  a  fro  ward  mouth,"  and  whose 
conduct  is  made  up  of  deceit  Lying  is 
the  wilful  perversion  of  truth,  not  only  by 
speech,  but  by  any  means  whatever  whereby 
a  false  impression  is  conveyed  to  the  mind. 
The  liar  "  sticks  not  at  any  lies,  flatteries, 
or  calumnies"  (Patrick).  Lying  is  else- 
where denounced  as  the  subject  whiuh 
excites  the  Divine  displeasure  (see  Ps.  v.  6; 
cxx.  3,  i;  Hos.  iv.  1—3;  Rev.  xxi.  8,  27); 
and  in  the  early  Christian  Church,  in  the 
case  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira,  it  was 
punished  with  death.  Ou  the  subject  of 
lying,  see  St.  Augustine,  'Enchiridion,'  o. 
xviii.,  wherein  he  says,  "  Mihi  autem  videtur 
peccatum  quidem  esse  omne  mendacium." 
Everj  lie  u  a  sin.     The  third  thing  is 


hands  that  shed  innocent  blood,  i.e.  a  mur- 
derous and  cruel  disposition,  which,  rather 
than  have  its  plans  frustrated,  will  imbue 
the  hands  with  innocent  blood,  i.e.  the 
blood  of  those  who  have  done  it  no  injury. 
The  Divine  command  is,  "Thou  shalt  do  no 
murder,"  and  those  who  break  it  will  find, 
even  if  they  escape  man,  that  the  Lord 
is  "the  avenger  of  blood,"  and  thtt  he 
"  maketh  inquisition  "  for  it  (cf.  ch.  i.  and 
ii.,  and  Isa.  lix.  7,  which  bear  a  close  resem- 
blance to  this  passage).  That  the  shedding 
of  innocent  blood  cries  for  vengeance,  and 
pulls  down  God's  heavy  judgments  on  the 
murderer,  appears  in  the  case  of  Cain  and 
Abel  (Muffet). 

Ver.  18. — The  fourth  thing  is  an  heart  that 
deviseth  wicked  imaginations.  "  Wicked 
imaginations"  are  literally  "thoughts  of 
iniquity;"  Hebrew,  mdhh'sh'vSth  avin; 
Vulgate,  cogitationes  pessimas;  LXX., 
\oyi<r)io)is  KaKobs.  The  same  expression  in 
Isa.  lix.  7  is  rendered  "thoughts  of  ini- 
quity." (On  deniseth,  Hebrew  khoresh,  see 
ver.  14  and  ch.  iii.  29.)  The  thought  is  a 
repetition  of  ver.  14a.  There  are  evil 
thoughts  in  all  men's  hearts ;  but  the  devis- 
ing, fabricating  of  them,  and  thus  making 
the  heart  into  a  devil's  workshop,  is  the 
mark  of  utter  depravity  and  wickedness, 
and  is  abhorrent  to  God.  The  devices  of 
the  heart,  though  planned  in  secret,  are 
clear  to  him  "  to  whom  all  hearts  are  open, 
all  desires  known,  and  from  whom  no  secrets 
are  hid."  The  peculiar  position  which  the 
heart  occupies  in  the  enumeration  is  to  be 
accounted  for  on  the  ground  that  it  is  the 
fountain,  not  only  of  those  vices  which  have 
been  already  mentioned,  but  of  those  which 
follow.  The  fifth  thing  is  feet  that  be 
swift  in  running  t6  mischief.  Again  we  are 
reminded  of  Isa.  lix.  7,  "  Their  feet  run  to 
evil."  "Mischief"  (Hebrew,  rd)  is  a  re- 
echo of  ver.  14  and  oh.  i.  16.  "To  run  to 
mischief"  is  to  carry  out  with  alaojity  and 
without  delay  what  has  already  been  devised 
in  the  heart.  It  implies  more  than  falling 
or  sliding  into  sin,  which  is  common  to  all. 
It  denotes,  Cornelius  li  Lapide  remarks, 
"  inexplebilem  sceleris  aviditatem,  et  desti- 
natum  studium." 

Ver.  19. — The  sixth  thing  is  perjury.  A 
false  witness  tliat  speaketh  lies;  literally, 
he  that  breathes  out,  or  utters,  lies  as  a  false 
witRBss.  So  the  Vulgate,  proferentem  men- 
daeia  testem  fallacem.  The  Hebrew  puakh 
is  "to  breathe,"  "to  blow,"  and  in  the 
hiph.  form,  which  is  used  here  Qjdphtdkh, 
hiph.  future),  it  is  "  to  blow  out "  or  "  utter," 
either  in  »  bad  sense,  as  in  the  present 
instance,  and  in  ch.  vi.  19;  xiv.  5;  xix.  5, 
9  (cf.  Ps.  X.  5;  xii.  5);  or  in  a  good  sense, 
"  to  utter  the  truth,"  as  inch.  xii.  17.  Lies} 
Hebrew,  VzdiAm,  plural  of  hazdv,  "false- 


132 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[oh.  ti.  1 — 35. 


hood,"  "lying"  (of.  ch.  xxL  28).  A  false 
witness  (Hebrew,  id-k'zavim),  as  in  margin, 
"a  witness  of  lies."  The  expression,  "as 
a  false  'nitneaa,"  as  it  apprars  in  the  original, 
is  explanatory,  and  indicates  the  particular 
aspect  under  which  the  speaking  of  lies  ia 
regarded.  Lying  in  its  more  general  sense 
has  been  already  spoken  of  in  ver.  17.  The 
vice  which  is  here  noted  as  odious  to  God 
is  expressly  forbidden  in  the  moral  code, 
"  Thou  shalt  not  bear  false  witness  against 
thy  neighbour "  (Bxod.  xx.  16).  But  this, 
thougli  the  chief,  is  only  one  view  of  the 
ease.  Perjury  may  be  employed,  not  only 
in  ruining  the  innocent,  but  also  in  screen- 
ing the  guilty.  "  Much  hurt,"  says  Muffet, 
in  loo.,  "doth  the  deceitful  and  lying  witness, 
for  he  corruptetli  the  judge,  oppresseth  the 
innocent,  suppresseth  the  truth,  and  in  the 
courts  of  justice  sinneth  against  his  own 
soul  and  the  Lord  himself  most  grievously." 
"  He  that  apeaketli  lies  as  a  false  witness," 
again,  may  be  the  vile  instrument  in  the 
hands  of  unscrupulous  and  inexorable  ene- 
mies, as  those  employed  against  our  Lord 
and  Stephen.  Perjury,  too,  destroys  the 
security  of  communities.  The  shipwreck 
of  society  which  it  occasions  may  be  seen 
in  the  frightful  misery  which  ensued  wlien 
the  system  of  delatores  was  not  only  counte- 
nanced, but  encouraged  under  the  Roman 
empire.  Truly  speaking,  he  that  lies  as  a 
false  witness  must  be  liateful  to  God.  And 
he  that  aoweth  discord  among  brethren ;  the 
seventh  and  last  thing  in  the  enumeration, 
but  not,  as  Delitzsch  holds,  the  ne  plus 
ultra  of  all  that  is  hated  of  God.  It  closes, 
as  in  ver.  14,  the  series,  but  witli  the  addi- 
tion •*  among  brethren ; "  thus  emphatically 
stigmatizing  the  conduct  of  that  man  as 
diabolical  who  destroys  the  harmony  and 
unity  of  those  who  ought  to  live  together 
iu  brotherly  affection,  and  who  disturbs  the 
peace  of  communities. 

Vers.  20— 35.— 12.  Twelfth  admonitory  dis- 
course. In  this  the  teacher  returns  again  to 
the  subject  which  he  has  already  treated  in 
the  eighth  discourse.  The  extreme  ten- 
dency of  men,  and  especially  young  men,  to 
sins  of  impui'ity  is  no  doubt,  as  Delitzsch 
remarks,  the  reason  why  this  subject  is  again 
resumed.  The  subject  is  gradually  worked 
up  to  the  preceding  admonitions  in  vers.  20 
—23,  pointing  out  that  the  way  of  life,  the 
way  of  safety,  is  to  be  secured  by  obedience 
to  the  precepts  of  parents,  whose  command- 
mentand  law  illumine  the  perilousroad  of  life, 
and  whose  reproofs  are  salutary  to  the  soul. 
The  argaments  against  the  sin  of  adultery 
are  cogent  in  theii  dissuaaiveneas,  and  none 


atronger  of  a  pxirely  temporal  nature  could 
be  devised.  It  may  be  objected  that  the  sin 
is  not  put  forward  in  the  higher  light,  as  ao 
offence  before  God,  and  that  the  appeal  is 
made  simply  on  the  lines  of  self-interest  j 
but  who  will  deny  that  the  sc.ipe  of  the 
teaching  is  distinctly  moral,  or  tliat  mankind 
is  not  influenced  and  dissuaded  from  ain  by 
such  a  category  of  evils  as  includes  personal 
beggary,  dishonour,  and  death  ? 

Ver.  20. — The  first  part  of  this  verse  is 
couched  in  almost  the  same  terms  as  that 
of  ch  i.  8,  except  that  mitifralh,  "i.rcoept," 
preceptum,  is  here  used  instead  of  musar, 
eruditio,  or  "  disciplinary  instruction,"  while 
the  latter  part  of  the  two  vcises  are  iden- 
tical. 

Ver.  21. — Thia  verse  recalls  also  ch.  iii.  3, 
and  reminds  us  of  thi;  use  of  the  phylacteries, 
or  tefelUm,  common  among  the  Jews  of  our 
Lord's  time,  and  the  practice  of  binding 
which  upon  various  parts  of  the  person  may 
have  had  its  origin  in  this  and  such  like 
passages.  The  "tying  about"  the  neck  may 
suggest  the  use  of  amulets,  an  Oriental  cus- 
tom, to  ward  off  evil,  but  it  is  more  likely 
that  it  refers  to  the  wearing  of  ornaments. 
Them;  i.e.  the  commandment  and  law  ot 
father  and  mother  respectively,  expressed  in 
the  Hebrew  by  the  suffix  -Sm,  in  the  verb 
hosh'rtm,,  equivalent  to  liga  ea,  and  again 
in  Sndem,  equivalent  to  vinei  ea.  (For  the 
persotial  use  of  this  figure,  see  Cant.  viii.  6.) 
Tie  them ;  Hebrew,  Ondem.  The  verb  anad, 
"  to  tie,"  only  occurs  twice  as  a  verb^here 
and  iu  Job  xxxi.  3U.  Leo  prefer*  "  to  bind ; " 
Delitzsch,  however,  states  that  it  is  equiva- 
lent to  the  Latin  circumplieare,  "to  wind 
about."  The  meaning  of  this  and  similar 
passages  (cf.  ch.  vii.  3 ;  Exod.  liii.  9 ;  Deut 
vi.  8 ;  xi.  13)  is  that  the  commandment, 
precept,  law,  or  whatever  is  intended,  should 
be  always  present  to  the  mind.  The  heart 
suggests  that  they  are  to  be  linked  to  the 
affections,  and  the  neok  that  they  will  be 
an  ornament  decking  the  moral  character. 

Ver.  22.— The  going,  sleeping,  and  awak- 
ing occur  in  the  same  order  in  the  Penta- 
teuch, from  which  the  ideas  of  this  and  the 
preceding  verse  are  evidently  derived  (aee 
Deut.  vi.  7  and  xi.  19).  Though  only 
specifying  three  conditions,  they  refer  to  the 
whole  conduct  of  life,  and  hence  the  verse 
promises  direction,  guardianship,  and  con- 
verse of  wisdom,  which  will  undoubtedly 
attend  life  where  the  precepts  of  parents 
are  lovingly  treasured  and  obediently  ob- 
served. The  Authorized  Version  conveys 
the  impression  that  it  ia  "the  keeping" 
of  the  parents'  precepts,  etc.,  which  is  to 
bear  such  results ;  but  it  ;g  bettei  j»  iuM!<ir< 


«.  Tt.  1—85.] 


The  peoveebs. 


13s 


•tand  "it"  RB  eignifying  the  whole  teaching 
or  doctrine  of  wisdom,  as  Deli(Z3oh.  Wisdom 
becomes  personified  in  the  representation, 
and  identified  with  lier  teaching.  It  shall 
lead  thee.  The  Hebrew  verb  ndlthdh,  "  to 
lead,"  in  the  sense  of  "to  direct,"  like  the 
Latin  dirigere  (Delitzsoh),  and  as  it  is  used 
in  Exodus  and  Numbers,  pasgim.  In  the 
Psalms  (v.  9 ;  xxvii.  11  ;  xxxi.  4,  etc.)  it  is 
employed  of  God  as  governing  men.  Hence, 
in  the  affairs  of  life.  Wisdom  will  so  guide 
and  control  us  that  we  shall  act  uprightly. 
There  is  the  further  notion  imported  into 
the  word  of  preservation  from  evil  (of.  oh. 
iii.  23,  "  Thou  shalt  walk  in  thy  way  safely, 
and  thy  foot  shall  not  stumble").  When  thou 
sleepest;  or,  when  thou  liest  down,  as  in 
ch.  iii.  24,  where  the  same  verb  occurs.  It 
shall  keep  thee ;  i.e.  watch  over,  keep  safe, 
or  preserve;  as  in  the  Vulgate,  custodire, 
and  the  LXX.  ^u\arTeTv.  We  have  had 
the  same  verb,  shdnidr,  before  in  ch.  ii.  11. 
Wisdom  will  be  as  it  were  a  guardian  angel 
in  our  hours  of  repose.  When  thou  awakest ; 
Hebrew,  hakitsdthd,  the  hipli.  perfect  of  kutz. 
This  word  only  occurs  here.  The  hiph. 
form,  hekitz,  is  intransitive,  "  to  be  arou&ed  " 
(of.  the  LXX.,  iyapa/iiy^).  It  shaU  talk 
with  thee;  rather,  she.  Bertheau  renders, 
"She  will  make  thee  thoughtful;"  and 
Dathe, "  Let  them  be  thy  meditation  ; "  but 
the  accusative  suffix  designates  the  person 
who  is  the  object  of  the  action  of  the  verb, 
ag  in  Pa.  v.  5 ;  xlii.  4 ;  Zeoh.  vii.  5  (Zookler) 
and  as  Delitzsch  remarks,  the  personification 
requires  something  more  than  a  mere  medi- 
tation with  one's  self  on  the  precepts  of 
Wisdom.  Wisdom  herself  shall  hold  con- 
verse with  thee  (cf.  the  LXX.,  (rv\\a\f  aai), 
she  shall  suggest  thoughts  how  thou  art  to 
behave  thyself.  The  meaning  of  the  verb, 
"to  meditate,"  "to  think  deeply,"  however, 
need  not  be  lost  sight  of. 

Ver.  23. — For  the  commandment  is  a 
lamp ;  and  the  law  is  light.  The  teacher 
takes  np  the  words  "commandment"  (He- 
brew, naUrdh)aai  "law"  (Hebrew,  tSrdh) 
from  ver.  20,  which  he  describes  respectively 
as  "  a  lamp  "  and  "  light."  The  "  comma'  id- 
ment"  is  any  special  or  particular  com- 
mandment which  harmonizes  with  God's 
Will,  and  commands  what  is  to  be  done  and 
forbids  what  is  to  be  left  undone.  The 
"  law  "  is  the  whole  law  of  God  in  its  en- 
tirety; not  here  the  Law  of  Moses  techni- 
cally, btlt  the  whole  system  of  generalized 
instruction.  They  stand,  therefore,  in  the 
same  relation  to  each  other  as  "a  lamp" 
and  "light,"  the  one  being  particular,  and 
the  other  general.  "Light"  (Hebrew,  6r) 
is  light  in  general,  as  the  light  of  the'  day 
and  the  sun,  while  "  a  lamp  "  (Hebrew,  nir, 
from  nur,  "  to  shine  ")  is  a  particular  light 
like  that  of  a  candle,  which  is  enkindled  at 


some  other  source.  The  "commandment" 
anil  the  "law"  alike  enlighten  the  con- 
science and  enable  one  to  walk  in  his  way 
of  life.    On  this  passage  Le  Olero  remarks, 

'Ut  in  tenebris  luoerna,  aut  fax  ostendit 
nobis,  qua  eundum  sit:  in  ignorantio  hu- 
manse  caligine,  qusa  nos  per  hano  totam 
vitam  cingit,  revelatio  divina  nos  docet,  quid 
sit  faciendum,  quid   vitandum."     So   the 
psalmist  says  in  Ps.  xii.  8,  "The  command- 
ment of  the  Lord  is  pure,  enlightening  the 
eyes ; "  and  again  in  Ps.  cxix.  105,  "  Thy 
Word  is  a  lamp  unto  my  feet,  and  a  light 
unto  my  path;"  i.e.  they  direct  and  show 
the  true  way  of  faith  and  life  (Gejenis). 
The  "commandment"  and  the  "law"  may 
stand  for  the  whole  revelation  of  God  with- 
out reference  to  any  particular  precept  (as 
Soott),  but  they  have  here  a  specific  bearing 
on  a  particular  form  of  human  Conduct,  as 
appears    from    the  following  verses.    And 
reproofs  of  instruction  are  the  way  of  Ufa. 
Meproofa  of  instruction ;  Hebrew,  toVlcMlh 
musdr,  disciplinary    reproofs,   «'.«.    reproofs 
whose  object  is  the  discipline  of  the  soul 
and  the  moral  elevation  of  the  character. 
The  LXX.  reads,  ko!  iheyxos  koI  iraiSeta; 
tlius  connecting  it  with  education  in  its 
highest  sense.    Such  reproofs  are  a  way  of 
life  (Hebrew,  dergk  Jchayyim),  i.e.  they  lead 
to  life;  they  conduce  to  the  prolongatiuu 
of  life.    This  view  of  the  subject,  so  promi- 
nent in  the  mind  of  the  teacher  in  other 
passages  (cf.  oh.  iii,  2  and  19),  must  not  be 
lost  sight  of,  though  the  words  are  suscep- 
tible of  another  interpretation,  as  indicating 
that  the  severest  reproofs,  inasmuch  as  tlicy 
correct  errors  and  require  obedience,  conduce 
to    the   greatest   happiness  (Patrick).    Or 
again,  it  may  mean  that  disciplinary  re- 
proofs are  necessary  to  life.    The  soul  to 
arrive  at  perfection  must  undergo  them  as 
part  of  the  conditions  of  its  existence,  and, 
consequently,  they  are  to  be  submitted  to 
with  the  consciousness  that,  however  irksome 
they  may  be,  they  are  imposed  for  its  even- 
tual benefit  (of.  Heb.  xii.  5).    But  this  in- 
terpretation is  unlikely  from  what  follows. 

Ver.  24. — To  keep  thee  from  the  evil 
woman.  The  speciiie  object  to  whicli  the 
discourse  was  tending.  The  "command- 
ment "  and  the  "  law  "  illuminate  the  path 
of  true  life  generally,  but  in  a  special  degree 
they,  if  attended  to,  will  guard  the  young 
against  sins  of  impurity,  fornication,  and 
adultery.  Tlie  evil  woman  (Hebrew,  eshSlh 
ra)  ;  strictly,  a  woman  of  evil,  or  vilenesa,  or 
of  a  wicked  disposition,  addicted  to  evil  in 
an  extraordinary  degree;  ra  being  here  a 
substantive  standing  in  a  genitive  relntion 
to  Ifheth,  as  in  ch.  ii.  12,  "  The  Way  of  evil 
(dmk  rd)."  Cf.  also  tdh'pultdth  rd,  per- 
verstate)  mali  (ch.  ii.  14),  and  makh'sh'volh 
rd,  cogitationes  mali  (ch.  xv.  26),  and  dn'iltif 


134 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[oh.  VI.  1—35. 


ra,  ri'rf  malt  (ch.  xxviii.  5).  The  Vulgate, 
1j.  wever,  gives  au  adjectival  foreo  to  ra, 
reudeiing,  o  muliere  mala.  The  LXX.  dvd 
yvvaiicbs  wrdfSpoVt  i.e.  "  from  the  married 
woman,"  arises  from  reading  red,  "a  oom- 
pimion,"  for  rd,  "evil."  From  the  flattery 
of  the  tongue  of  a  Btrange  woman  ;  i.e.  from 
her  enticements;  Hebrew,  mekliH'ltath  la'- 
eli6n  nSk'riyyah;  literally, "  from  the  smooth- 
nesa  of  a  strange  tongue,"  as  in  the  margin. 
Zockler,  however,  proposes  an  emendation  of 
the  Masoretic  text,  and  substitutes  the  con- 
struct case,  I'shon,  for  the  absolute,  ldsh6n, 
rendering  as  in  the  Authorized  Version, 
on  the  ground  that  the  emphasis  lies,  not  on 
the  "  tongue,"  which  would  be  the  case  if 
we  render  "of  a  strange  tongue,"  but  on 
"the  strange  woman,"  who  is  the  subject  of 
tlio  discourse,  as  in  ch.  ii.  16  and  v.  20.  But 
nolc'riyyah  is  feminine  of  the  adjective  nok'ri, 
and  in  agreement  with  laehSn,  which,  though 
common,  is  more  frequently  ieminine  (Gese- 
nius),  and  hence  the  two  words  may  stand 
in  agreement.  The  marginal  reading  is  to 
be  preferred  (Wordsworth).  Again,  mS- 
khgl'kdth,  the  construct  case  of  khgl'kdh,  lite- 
rally, "smoothness,"  and  metaphorically  flat- 
teiy,  with  the  prefix  me,  forms  one  member 
of  the  phrase,  while  the  compound  expres- 
sion, Idshdn  nok'riyyah,  forma  the  second. 
Ewald  and  Bertheau  render,  "from  the 
smooth-tongued,  the  strange  woman,"  thus 
connecting  mekh^'kath  Idshdn,  and  regarding 
ndk'riyyah  as  a  separate  and  distinct  idea. 
They  agree  with  SymmachusandTlieodotion, 
arrh  Keioy\:iffaov  ^fvTis,  i.e.  "from  the  smooth- 
tongued or  flattering  stranger."  So  the  Vul- 
gate, a  blandd  lingua  extranese,  i.e.  from  the 
smooth  tongue  of  the  strange  woman.  The 
LXX.  agaia  favours  the  marginal  reading, 
Airh  SmPo\tjs  y\di(raiis  aWorpIas,  "  from  the 
slander  of  a  strange  tongue."  So  the  Chiil- 
dee  Paraphrase.  The  Syriac  reads,  "from 
the  accusation  of  a  woman  of  a  strange 
tongue,"  i.e.  who  uses  a  foreign  language. 
If,  however,  the  Authorized  Version  be  re- 
tained, the  Hebrew  nSk'riyydh  will,  as  in 
other  passagea,  mean  "an  adulteress"  (Gese- 
nins);  ch.  v.  20;  vii.  5;  xxiii.  27.  Under 
any  circumstances,  we  have  here  attributed 
to  the  tongue  what,  in  fact,  belongs  to  the 
woman.  It  is  against  the  enticements  and 
blandishments  of  a  woman  of  depraved 
moral  character  that  the  "  commandment " 
and  "  law  "  form  a  safeguard  to  youth. 

Ver.  25. — Lust  not  after  her  beauty  in 
thine  heart.  The  admonition  of  this  verse 
embraces  the  two  sides  of  the  subject— the 
external  allurement  and  the  iiiteinal  predis- 
position to  vice.  Lust  not  after  (Hebrew, 
al-ldkli'mfid);  strictly,  desire  not,  since  the 
verb  khdmdd  is  properly  "  to  desire,  or  covet." 
The  same  verb  is  used  in  Exod.  xx.  17, 
•'  Thou  shalt  not  covet  thy  neighbour's  wife," 


and  xxxiv.  24,  "Neither  shall  any  man 
desire  thy  land "  (of.  Micah  ii.  2  and  oh. 
xii.  12).  In  Ps.  Ixviii.  19 ;  Isa.  i.  29 ;  liii.  2, 
it  has  the  sense  of  taking  delight  in  any- 
thing. It  may  be  questioned  whether  it 
ever  has  the  strong  meaning  given  in  the 
Vulgate  (non  eoncupiscaf)  and  adopted  in 
the  Authorized  Version,  "to  lust  after" 
(Holden).  Aquila,  Theodotion,  and  Sym- 
maohus  render  /tjj  iiriBv/Jiaris.  The  use  of 
khdmdd  here  reveals  the  warning  of  the 
Decalogue.  In  thine  heart ;  Hebrew,  hll'vd- 
vSkd.  corresponding  to  the  iv  rf  KapS'uf  airov 
of  Matt.  V.  28.  The  admonition  is  a  warn- 
ing to  repress  the  very  first  inclinations  to 
unchaste  desires.  They  may  be  unobserved 
and  undetected  by  others,  but  they  are 
known  to  ourselves,  and  the  first  duty  of 
repressing  them  calls  for  an  act  of  deter- 
mination and  will  on  our  part.  Our  Lord 
teaches  (Maft.  v.  28,  cited  above),  "That 
whosoever  looketh  on  a  woman  to  lust  after 
her  hath  committed  adultery  with  her 
already  in  his  heart."  The  LXX.  reading 
is  M'^  0-6  vixiiari  KdiWovs  kmBv/iia,  "  Let  not 
the  desire  of  beauty  conquer  thee."  Neither 
let  her  take  thee  with  her  eyelids ;  i.e.  do 
not  let  her  captivate  thee  with  her  aHiorous 
glances.  Take.  The  Hebrew  verb,  Idlidkh, 
is  "  to  captivate  "  with  blandishments,  "  to 
allure,  beguile"  (cf.  ch.  xi.  30);  LXX., 
/ijJSe  dypevOris.  With  her  eyelids  (Hebrew, 
h'dph'dppgydh');  or  perhaps  more  literally, 
with  her  eyelashes  (Zockler).  The  eyelids ; 
Hebrew,  dph'dppayim,  dual  of  aph'aph,  so 
called  from  their  rapid,  volatile  motion,  are 
here  compared  with  nets,  as  by  Philostratua 
('  Epistles  : '  rvyaiKi),  who  speaks  of  "  the 
nets  of  the  eyes  (tA  twi'  aiiiiiTuv  SUrva)." 
Tlie  eyelids  are  the  instruments  by  which 
the  amorous  woman  beguiles  or  catches  her 
victims.  She  allures  him  by  her  glances. 
So  St.  Jerome  says,  "  The  eye  of  an  harlot 
is  the  snare  of  her  lover."  The  wanton 
glance  is  expressed  in  the  Vulgate  by  nutibiu 
alius ;  of.  "  The  whoredom  of  a  woman  may 
be  known  in  her  haughty  looks  and  eye- 
lids "  (Eeclua.  xxvi.  9).  Milton  ('  Paradise 
Lost,'  xi.  620)  speaks  of  the  daughters  of 
men  "rolling  the  eye,"  amongst  other 
things,  in  order  to  captivate  the  sons  of  God. 
Piscator  and  Merceriis  understand  the  eye- 
lids as  standing  metonymically  for  the 
beauty  of  the  eye  ;  and  Bayne,  for  the 
general  adornment  of  the  head  in  order  to 
attract  attention.  Allusion  may  possibly  be 
made  to  the  custom  of  Eastein  women 
painting  the  eyelids  to  give  brilliancy  and 
expression;  cf.  2  Kinga  ix.  30  (Words- 
worth). A  striking  parallel  to  the  verse 
before  us  occurs  in  Propertius,  lib.  i. '  Eleg.' 
i.,  "  Cynthia  prima  suis  miserum  me  cepit 
ocellis." 

Ver.  26. — For  by  means    of   a   whorish 


OH.  VI.  1 — 35.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


13S 


woman  a  man  is  biongMto  apiece  of  bread. 
From  this  verse  onwards  to  the  end  of  the 
chapter  the  discourse  consists  of  a  series  of 
arguments,  each  calculated  to  deter  youth 
from  the  sins  of  fornication  and  adultery,  by 
exhibiting  the  evil  consequences  of  such 
indulgeuce.  The  first  is  the  poverty  and 
extreme  beggary  to  which  a  man  is  brought. 
For  by  means  of;  Hebrew,  ki  v'ad.  Lee 
gives  the  preposition  vadd  the  force  of 
"after,"  i.e.  after  associating  with.  The 
radical  idea  of  the  preposition  is  that  of 
nearness,  by,  near,  and  easily  passes  to  that 
of  "  because  "  (Gesenius)  or  "  by  means  of," 
as  in  the  Authorized  Version.  It  is  here 
used  for  per,  "through,"  aa  in  Josh.  ii.  15; 
2  Sam.  XX.  28,  and  so  indicates  the  transit 
through  the  way  of  fornication  to  extreme 
beggary  (Gejerus).  A  whorish  woman; 
Hebrew,  ishsMh  x6n£h;  Vulgate,  teortum; 
LXX.,  wipm ;  "  a  harlot,"  here  correspond- 
ing to  "  the  adulteress  "  (esMfh  IsK),  since 
the  root  zdnah,  "  to  commit  fornication,"  is 
attributed  both  to  married  and  unmarried 
women  (Gen,  xxxviii.  24;  Lev.  xix.  29; 
Hos.  iii.  3).  The  word  zSndh  is  sometimes 
written  alone,  as  in  Gen.  xxxviii.  15  and 
Deut.  xxiii.  19.  The  fuller  expression,  as 
here,  occurs  in  Lev.  xxi.  7 ;  Josh.  ii.  1 ;  Jndg. 
xi.  1.  To  a  piece  of  bread;  Hebrew,  ad- 
kiklcdr  IdkMm.  It  will  be  noticed  that  there 
is  an  ellipsis  in  the  Hebrew,  which,  how- 
ever, may  be  easily  supplied,  as  in  the 
Authorized  Version.  Delitzsch  supplies 
"  one  Cometh  down  to ;  "  so  Zookler.  "  A 
piece  of  bread"  is  properly  "a  circle  of 
bread,  a  small  round  piece  of  bread,  such  as 
is  still  baked  in  Italy  (pagnottd)  and  in  the 
East  (Arabic  kurs),  here  an  expression  for 
the  smallest  piece"  (Fleischer).  The  term 
occurs  in  Bxod.  xxix.  23 ;  1  Sam.  ii.  36,  in 
the  latter  of  which  passages  it  expresses  the 
extreme  destitution  to  which  the  members 
of  the  house  of  Eli  were  to  be  reduced.  As 
illustrating  the  term,  see  also  ch.  xxxviii. 
21  and  Bzek.  xiii.  19.  The  LXX.  and 
Vulgate  singularly  render,  "  For  the  price 
of  a  harlot  is  scarcely  that  of  a  bit  of  bread," 
which  may  mean,  as  Castalio,  that  she  is  of 
so  little  value ;  but  the  context  is  opposed 
to  this  rendering,  where  the  point  brought 
out  is  not  the  vile  character  of  the  harlot  as 
the  ruin  she  inflicts  or  is  the  cause  of.  Be- 
sides, the  Hebrew  ad  does  not  mean  ever 
"scarcely,"  or  "  hardly,"  which  the  Vulgate 
vix  gives  to  it.  And  the  adulteress  will 
hunt  for  the  precious  life.  The  adulteress 
is  ishgth  ith,  literally,  "the  woman  of  a 
man,"  or  "a  man's  wife,"  as  in  the  margin — 
as,  therefore,  strictly  an  adulteress  here  (of. 
Lev.  XX.- 10).  Will  hunt;  Hebrew,  tliatmd; 
LXX.,  dypeiei ;  Vulgate,  capit.  The  Hebrew 
verb  feijd,  "to  lie  in  wait  for,"  "to  hunt," 
•Iso  signifies  "  to  take,  or  capture,"  like  the 


Vulgate  capere.  The  rerb  In  its  meta- 
phorical use  also  occurs  in  Lam.  iii.  52 ; 
Micah  vii.  2 ;  Ps.  cxl.  12,  and  refers  to  those 
beguilements  resorted  to  by  the  adulteress  to 
seduce  youth.  In  Ezek.  xiii.  18  it  carries 
with  it  the  idea  of  death,  and  if  understood 
in  this  sense  here  it  may  have  reference  to 
the  death-penalty  inflicted  on  adulterer  and 
adulteress  by  the  Mosaic  Law  (Lev.  xx.  10), 
and  introduces  what  is  said  more  fully  in 
vers.  32, 34, 35.  The  precious  life ;  Hebrew, 
ngphSsh  y'lcdrdh.  The  epithet  y'lcdrdh  is 
appropriately  added  to  nSphSsk,  as  indicating 
the  high  value  of  the  life.  All  is  implied 
in  the  nSphSsh,  "  the  life,"  moral  dignity  of 
character,  the  soul  of  man.  It  is  the  ever- 
existing  part  of  the  man,  and  therefore  is 
precious — nothing  can  exceed  it  in  value. 
Our  Lord  says  (Matt.  xvi.  26),  "What  shall 
a  man  give  in  exchange  for  his  soul  ?  "  and 
the  psalmist  (Ps.  xlix.  8),  "  For  the  redemp- 
tion of  their  life  is  precious."  But  it  is  for 
this  life,  or  soul,  that  the  adulteress  hunts, 
and  which  she  destroys.  Lives  of  fornication 
and  adultery,  therefore,  carry  with  them  the 
severest  penalties,  the  loss  of  temporal 
possessions,  fbr  the  enjoyment  of  a  transient 
passion,  and  far  beyond  this  the  loss  of  life 
both  temporal  and  eternal.  We  cannot 
imagine  a  more  deterrent  warning. 

Ver.  27. — In  this  and  the  two  following 
verses  (28  and  29)  the  discourse  proceeds 
from  statement  to  illustration,  and  by 
examples  of  cause  and  eifect  the  teacher 
shows  "  the  moral  necessity  of  the  evU  con- 
sequences of  the  sin  nf  adultery  "  (Dslitzsch). 
The  meaning  of  the  verses  is  plain  enough, 
viz.  that  as  it  is  in  vain  to  suppose  that  a 
person's  garment  will  not  be  burnt  or  his 
feet  not  be  scorched  if  fire  is  brought  near 
them,  so  it  is  equally  inconceivable  that  a 
person  indulging  in  adultery  can  escape  its 
consequences  or  the  retribution  that  follows. 
The  two  questions  in  vers.  27  and  28  imply 
»  strong  negative,  and  so  prepare  for  the 
conclusion  in  ver.  30.  Take  fire.  The 
Hebrew  verb  kkdthdh  signifies  "to  take 
burning  or  live  coals  from  the  hearth" 
(Piscator);  and  hence  is  used  here  in  a 
pregnant  sense  "  to  take  from  the  hearth 
and  place  in  "  (cf.  oh.  xxv.  22,  "  For  thou 
wilt  take  coals  ['  and  heap  them  : '  Hebrew, 
gglehdlim  khdiheh]  on  his  head  ").  The  fuller 
expression  is  met  with  in  Isa.  xxx.  14,  "  So 
that  there  shall  not  be  found  in  the  bursting 
of  it  a  sherd  to  take  fire  from  the  hearth 
(Idlih'tdth  esh  miyydkAd)."  The  Vnlgate 
renders  by  absconder e,  "  to  hide  : "  Numquid 
potest  homo  dbeeondere  ignem  ;  and  the  LXX. 
by  diroSeic,  equivalent  to  the  Latin  alligare, 
"  to  tie  or  bind  fast."  Wordsworth  explaini 
"to  take  and  heap  up,  as  in  a  firepan  or 
censer."  In  his  bosom;  Hebrew,  b'ftMyW; 
LXX.,  iv  K6\irtf ;  Vulgate,  in  sinu  suo.  The 


136 


THE  i^ROVEBBS. 


[cH.  VI.  1—85 


word  Ichiyk  is  properly  "  an  undulation  "  (De- 
litzaoh),  not  the  !aj),but  as  in  the  Authorized 
Version  here,  "  the  bosom,"  and  "  the  bosom 
of  a  garment,"  as  in  oh.  xvi.  33 ;  XTii.  23 ; 
xxl.  14.  The  answer  to  the  question  of  this 
and  th»  next  verse  is  of  course  a  decided 
negative,  but  we  may  note  that  the  teaolier 
compares  adultery  to  a  burning  fire  in  its 
consequences. 

Ver.  28. — Can  one  go  upon  hot  coals,  etc.  ? 
The  repeated  question  is  intioduced  by  im, 
"  if,"  here  equivalent  to  the  Latin  an,  used 
in  double  questions,  as  in  Gen.  xxiv.  21 ; 
Exod.  ivii.  7;  Judg.  ii.  2,  etc.  Go;  i.e. 
walk  upon  hot  coals  (Hebrew,  al-higgSM- 
Itm) ;  literally,  upon  the  hot  coals.  'I'lie 
Hebrew  gdkMleih  is  coals  thoroughly 
ignited,  as  in  Lev.  xvi.  12  and  ch.  xxv.  22 ; 
different  from  pgkhdm  of  ch.  xxvi.  21,  which 
is  "a  blaok  coal,"  or,  as  Gesenius  explains, 
charcoal  unkindled.  Be  burned;  Hebrew, 
tlkk&elyndh;  i.e.  be  burned  or  scorched  so 
as  to  leave  a  mark  by  buruiiig,  as  in  Isa. 
xliii.  2;  this  being  the  force  of  the  verb 
k&vali.  The  flames  of  luut  will  cortainly  be 
visited  wiUi  iiunishment,  and  with  the 
stings  of  conscience.  Job,  speaking  on  this 
very  subject,  says  a  deviation  from  the 
paths  of  virtue  "  is  a  fire  that  consumeth  to 
destruction."  And  to  him  who  gives  way  to 
adultery  it  may  be  said,  in  the  words  of 
Huraee,  tliough  witli  a  different  application 
from  that  in  which  tLey  were  used  by  that 
poet,  "incedis  per  ignes  suppi. sites  cineri 
dolose."  "  Yon  aie  walking  over  lire  that  lies 
hidden  under  d. ceitful  ashes"  (Gejerue). 

Ver.  29. — So  he  that  goeth  in  to  Ml 
neighbour's  wife;  whosoever  touoheth  her 
shall  not  be  innocent.  It  is  as  great  a  folly 
to  suppose  that  an  adulterer  will  escape 
punishment  as  to  imagine  tliat  no  injury 
will  follow  where  tiro  has  been  applied. 
Dclitzseh  illustrates  this  verse  by  a  passage 
from Pythagoras's  maxim  ('Eclog.,'  c.  39), Ti) 
€15  TTvp  izaX  iis  yuvalKa  t/UTeffe«/  Xffov  virapxit, 
Goeth  in ;  Hebrew,  hahha  el ;  I.e.  has  inter- 
eouLce  with,  as  in  Gen.  vi.  4 ;  xix.  31 ; 
xxxviii.  9 ;  Ps.  li.  2.  The  same  in  force  as 
"touoheth."  Shallnot  he  innooent ;  Hebrew, 
lo-yinndlcHh;  i.e.  poma  vacuus,  "lxi  nipt  from 
punishment,"  or  shall  be  unpunished  (De- 
litz.  I'h,  Ziieklcr,  Gesenius) ;  of.  ch.  xi.  21, 
"  The  wicked  shall  not  be  unpunislied  (Zo 
ylnnakeh),"  as  here.  The  verb  nakah  signifies 
primarily  "to  be  pure  ;"  so tlie  Vulgate  ren- 
ders non  erit  mnndus, "  he  will  not  be  pure ; " 
but  the  LXX.  obaei  ves  the  secondary  mean- 
ing of  the  verb,  oiiK  iBa!a>8iia€rai,  non  erit  »n- 
noxius,  "he  shall  not  be  let  go  unpunished," 
from  the  Alexandrine  verb  d6u6a.  Certain 
and  the  very  heaviest  punishment  shall 
come  upon  him  (see  also  oh.  ivii.  5 ;  Jer. 
xxv.  29 ;  xlix.  12).  With  this  explanation 
kgree  Gejerus  and  Vatablus. 


Ver.  30. — The  teacher  continues  his  argu. 
ment  with  another  illustration,  ttill  keeping 
in  view  his  object,  which  is  to  show  that  the 
punishment  of   the  adulterer  is  a  surely 
impending  one  and  severe  in  its  character. 
The  argument   in  vers.  30—33   is  one  a 
fortiori.      If   men    do    not    overlook    but 
severely  punish  a  crime  which  has  been 
committed  under  extenuating  circumstances, 
much  less  will  they  do  so  where  the  crime 
is    of   a  much  graver  character  and  has 
nothing  to  excuse  it.    Theft  and  adultery 
are  brought  in  to  oompai  ison.  Theft  under  all 
circumstance.-)  is  a  lesser  crime  than  adultery, 
but  here  it  is   minimized    to  the  lowest 
degree.     The  case  of  a  man  is  taken  who 
steals  to  satisfy  his  hunger;  the  extent  of 
the  theft  cannot  be  large,  but  yet  he  is 
punished,  and  called    upon  to  make  the 
amplest  restitution.    Much  more,  does  the 
teacher  infer,  will  be  the  punishment,  and 
equally  certain,  where  adultery  is  in  ques- 
tion, and  the  crime  ia  of  the  most  heinous 
cliaracter    affecting     the     most     precious 
interests,  and  indulged  in  from  the  lowest 
of  motives.    Men  do  not  despise  a  thief, 
etc.;  i.e.  they  do  not  condemn  him  under 
the  circumstances,  non    grandis  est  (ttUpa 
(Vulgate),  "  the  fault  is  not  a  great  one;  " 
but  they  do  despise  an  adulterer — him  they 
hold  in  contempt  as  (me  "  who  laoketh  under- 
standing" and  de.strnyeth  his  own  soul  (ver. 
32).     The  verb  Jniz  has,  however,  been  other- 
wise  rendered  as  "to  overlook."     Zockler 
and   Holden   explain,  "men  do  not  over- 
look," though  the  former  gives  the  literal 
sense  as  "men  do  not  despise."    Gesenius 
renders  "  despise,"  but  explains,  "  i.e.  they 
do  not  let  him  go  unpunished."    Vatablus, 
the  Versions,  Arise,  Montani,  and  Munsteri, 
Hitzig,  Delitzscli,    and    Gesenius,  Stuart, 
Muenscher,  and  Wordsworth,  all  agree  in 
regarding  the  proper  moaning  of  the  verb 
to  be  "  to  despise"  or  "  to  treat  scornfully." 
The  verb  bUz,  moreover,  occurs  in  this  sense 
in  ch.  i.  7;  xi.  12;  xiii.  13;  xiv.  21;  xxiii. 
9 ;  and  Cant.  viii.  1,  7.    Michaelis's  expla- 
nation is  as  follows:  "although  a  theft  is 
deservedly  regarded    as   infamous   in  the 
commonwealth,  nevertheless,  if  it  be  com- 
pared with  adultery,  it   is    less    wicked." 
The  rendering  of  the  LX  X.,  ou  eavnaarbv  iiv 
oKif  Tis  K\4im>v,  i.e.  "  it  is  not  a  wonder  if 
any  tliief  be    tali  en,"    it    is    difficult    to 
reconcile  with    the    text  in  the   original, 
though  it  may  be  explained  as  expressing 
the  certainty  of  arrest  which  follows  theft, 
and   thus    gives  colour   to  the    secondary 
meaning    attached   to    the  verb,  t'.e.   that 
of   overlooking.     The   Syriac    and  Arabic 
Versions    follow     the    LXX.,   while   the 
Chaldee  Paraphrase  renders,  "It  is  not  a 
matter  of  surprise  if  a  thief  steals,"  etc. 
His  soul;  Hebrew,  niph'thd.     Niphlth  Is 


OH.  VI.  1—85.] 


tSb  proverbs. 


13t 


used  here  for  desire,  craving,  or  appetite,  as 
in  EcolPB.  vi.  2,7;  Ezek.  vii.  19.  "To 
nalisfy  hig  soul"  is  "to  sustain  his  life." 
Anima,  Vulgnto;  ^vx^i,  LXX. 

Yer.  31. — But  if  he  be  taken,  he  shall 
restore  sevenfold.  Men  do  not  despise  the 
thiL'f,  but  vet  they  apprehend  him  nnd 
insist  on  fullest  restitution.  Be  found;  i.e. 
seized  (Delitzscli),  or  legally  convicted 
(Gi  j  rua).  Ue shall  restore;  i.e.  he  must  re- 
stnri-  (Zookler).  Delitzsch,  hdwever,  under- 
stands the  future  y'shaUm,  as  potential,  "he 
may  restore."  Sevenfold;  Hehvevr,  siv'athd- 
yim;  LXX.,  iirTair\d(Tia;  Vulgate,  septulum. 
On  this  word  Geier  remarks,  "  Hseo  vox  nul- 
libi  in  sacris  ponitur  pio  numeio  definite;" 
i.e.  "  It  is  nowhere  put  in  Scripture  for  a 
definite  number."  It  is  therefore  to  be  under- 
stood indefinitely  of  complete  restitutiim  or, 
as  it  is  expiessed  in  the  second  and  parallel 
clauses,  "  all  the  substance  of  his  house." 
The  wurd  is  used  in  this  sense  in  Gen.  iv. 
24;  Lev.  xxvi.  28;  Job  v.  19  (Lapide). 
Theft  under  the  Mosaic  Law  was  punishable 
by  a  fivefold,  foui  fold,  and  twofold  restitution 
(Kxod.  xxii.  1 — 4,  9),  and,  in  the  event  of 
this  not  forthcoming,  the  delinquent  was 
to  be  sold  into  slavery  (Lev.  xxv.  39).  In 
2  Sam.  xii.  6  a  fourfold  restitution  is  men- 
tioned, and  in  the  New  Testament  Zacchseus 
promises  to  restore  fourfold  if  he  could  be 
convicted  of  fraud  (Luke  xix.  8).  In  the 
attempts  to  reooneile  the  "sevenfold  "  of  our 
passage  with  the  requirements  of  the  Mosaic 
Law,  Aben  Ezra  says  that  the  combined 
penalties  for  two  cases  of  theft  are  contem- 
plated, and  others  that  in  the  time  of  the 
writer  the  penalties  hiid  been  increased. 
But  proof  of  this  is  wanting.  Grotius's 
explanation  is  more  curious  than  correct, 
viz.  that  if  the  theft  be  repeated  seven 
times,  and  he  be  "  taken  "  seven  times,  the 
thief  should  only  be  punished  by  being 
forced  to  make  restitution  with  some 
addition.  Both  the  Greek  and  Roman  law 
demanded  a  twofold  restitution.  Selden 
maintains  that  theft  would  have  been  sub- 
jected to  the  usual  punishment  (Selden, 
'De  Jure  Not.  et  Gent.,'  vi.  c.  6).  We 
may  therefore  come  to  the  conclusion  that 
"  sevenfold  "  is  used  in  the  sense  indicated 
above.  As  to  any  objection  which  may  be 
raised  on  the  score  of  inconsiitenoy  in  talk- 
ing of  a  man  making  restitution,  and  giving 
all  his  substance  when  he  steals  to  satisfy 
his  hunger,  it  may  be  remarked  tliat  he 
need  not  necessarily  be  without  substance 
of  some  sort  or  other,  and  he  could  acquire 
subsequently  sufficient  to  satisfy  the  demand. 
On  the  question  whether  a  person  is  justi- 
fied by  extreme  want  in  stenling,  see  Grotius, 
'De  Jure  Belli  et  Pacis,'  ii.  c.  2.  §  6;  Puffen- 
dorf,  '  De  Jure  Not.  et  Gent.,'  ii.  o.  6.  §  5; 
Blackstone, '  Commentary,'  iv.  2.  §  4. 


Ver.  32.— But  whoso  oommitteth  adultery 
with  a  woman  lacketh  nnderstandin^. 
The  adversative  "but"  is  wanting  in  the 
original,  but  is  clearly  demanded  by  the 
cnutr.ist  which  is  instituted.  The  man  who 
steals  from  hunger  has  a  motive  for  so 
doing,  but  the  adulterer  has  no  such  excuse 
for  his  crime,  which  is  an  unwarrantable  in- 
vasion of  his  neighbour's  rights.  Because 
there  are  honest  ways  for  satisfying  his 
desires,  he  therefore  "lacketh  understand- 
ing." Committeih  adultery  with  a  woman; 
Hebrew,  ndeph  XshshSh ;  LXX.,  i  iwtxbs ; 
Vulgate,  qui  adulter  est ;  i.e.  an  adultqrer. 
The  Hebrew  nddph,  "  to  commit  adultery," 
is  here  followed  by  an  accusative,  as  in 
Lev.  XX.  10  and  Jer.  xxix.  23.  Laclceth 
understanding ;  Hebrew,  hhSsar-UV;  deficit 
corde.  The  verb  khdser  is  "to  be  devoid 
of  anything,"  "to  lack."  The  expression, 
which  occurs  again  in  ch  vii.  7  and  ix.  4, 
refei  s  to  the  brutish  and  stupid  condition  to 
which  lust  has  reduced  him.  Lust  has  dis- 
placed ri^ht  reason.  He  is  expert  judicii 
(Syriao),  devoid  of  judgment.  Without  in- 
telligence, senseless  and  stupid.  In  modern 
phraseology,  he  has  taken  leave  of  his  senses. 
Both  the  LXX.  and  Vulgate  have  combined 
the  two  branches  of  this  verse,  tlie  former 
rendering,  "  But  the  adulterer,  on  account  of 
want  of  intelligence,  compasses  the  loss  of 
his  life,"  and  the  latter,  "But  the  adnlterer, 
on  account  of  want  of  intelligence,  loses  his 
life."  He  that  doeth  it  destroyeth  his  own 
soul ;  or  literally,  whoso  will  destroy  his  life 
he  will  do  this,  i.e.  adultery.  So  Arias 
Moiitani,  Munsterus,  Chaldee  Targum.  The 
man  who  commits  adultery  is  a  self-murderer. 
The  phrase,  mdshMlh  naph'sho,  eorrumpent 
animam  suam,  may  be  resolved  into  the 
concrete  "  a  self-destroyer,"  as  "Delitzsch. 
The  following  verses  seem  to  indieAte  that 
it  is  the  temporal  life  which  is  referred  to 
in  nSphSsh,  but  the  meaning  of  the  term  may 
he  extended  to  embrace  not  only  physical 
loss  of  life,  but  also  moral  and  spiritual 
loss.  By  tlie  Levitioal  Law  adultery  was 
punished  by  death:  "The  man  that  com- 
mitteth  adultery  with  another  man's  wife 
.  .  .  the  adulterer  and  adulteress  shall 
surely  be  put  to  death"  (Lev.  xx.  10;  of. 
Deut.  xxii.  22 ;  John  viii.  4,  5 ;  see  also  1 
ThesB.  iv.  6). 

Ver.  33. — ^A  wound  and  dishonour  shall  he 
get;  and  his  reproach  shall  not  be  wiped 
away.  Two  other  things  more  immediate 
await  the  adulterer — personal  chastisement 
and  loss  of  reputation.  It  seems  clear  that 
"a  wound"  (Hebrew,  nlgdTi,  "a  stroke"  or 
"  blow "),  used  here  in  the  singular,  col- 
lectively refers  to  the  corporal  punishment, 
which  the  outrag.rd  husband  will  inflict 
upon  the  adulterei  (Delitzsch,  Zockler, 
Lapide).    (For  the  word,  see  Deot.  xvii.  8 


138 


THE   PROVERBS. 


[oh.  VI.  1—35. 


xii.  5.)  It  may  also  liave  reference  to  the 
punishment  inflicted  by  the  Law.  In  the 
LXX.  the  idea  is  expressed  by  SSivas,  i.e. 
"  pains,"  and  so  aives  colour  to  Lapide's  ex- 
planation of "  afflictions  of  every  kind  "  The 
Vulgate  gives  a  moral  turn  to  the  meaning, 
and  co-ordinates  the  word  with  "dishonour: " 
Turpitudinem  et  ignominiam  congregat  sibi, 
"Dishorumr  is  the  ignominions  treatment  he 
will  receive  on  all  hands."  The  second  part 
of  the  verse  states  that  a  brand  of  disgrace 
will  be  attached  to  his  name  which  will  be 
perpetual,  not  confined  to  this  life  only,  but 
extending  beyond  it,  so  that  men  will  never 
recall  it  but  with  this  stigma  (Patrick, 
Meroerus).  On  shall  he  .  .  .  wiped  away 
(Hebrew,  tlmmdlc^,  the  niph.  future  of 
mdkhah,  "  to  wipe  off,  or  away,"  and  in  liiph. 
"  to  be  blotted  out,"  equivalent  to  the  Latin 
delete),  see  Deut.  xxv.  6;  Ezek.  vi.  6 ;  Judg. 
xii.  17.  The  LXX.  renders  4^a\eup8i^a-erat, 
and  adds,  eis  rhv  aiava,  "for  ever."  The 
statements  of  the  verse  are  illustrated  by 
Horace,  '  Satires,'  lib.  i.  2.  37,  who  describes 
the  dangers  and  mishaps  which  befall  the 
adulterer  and  fornicator. 

"  Hie     se    prsBcipitem    tecto    dedit ;    ille 

fiagellis 
Ad  mortem  otesus :  fugiens  hie  deoidit 

acrem 
Prsedonum  in  turbam :  dedit  hie  pro  cor- 

pore  nummoB." 

Ver.  34. — For  jealousy  is  the  rage  of  a 
man :  therefore  he  will  not  ■  spare  in  the 
day  of  vengeance.  The  first  hemistich  is 
adduced  as  a  reason  for  what  has  preceded, 
while  the  concluding  hemistich  and  tlie 
following  snd  last  verses  are  a  deduction 
strengthening  what  has  been  stated  before, 
and  also 'showing  that  the  punishment  will 
be  inevitable.  The  general  consensus  nf  com- 
mentators and  texts  is  to  connect  the  two 
hemistiches  of  this  verse.  Thus  the  LXX., 
Mearbs  yap  Ctjhov  dvfihs  av^phs  avrTJs,  ov  (p^ifTe- 
rat  iv  vfiepcf  Kplireas,  "For  the  wrath  of  her 
husband  filled  with  jealousy  shall  not  spare 
in  the  day  of  judgment ; "  the  Vulgate, 
Quia  zelus  et  furor  viri  non  parcel  in  die 
vindietie,  "  For  the  jealousy  and  rage  of 
a  man  shall  not  spare  in  the  day  of  ven- 
geance;" the  Syriac,  Nam  gnia  furor  mariti 
plenut  est  zelotypid  non  parcel  in  die  retribu- 
■  tionis,  "  For  because  rnge  of  a  husband  is 
full  of  jealousy  he  shall  not  spare  in  the 
day  of  retribution."  So  the  Arabic,  and 
the  Tigurina  Vereio,  and  among  the  com- 
mentators Durandus.  Dathe,  Do<lerleiu, 
Holden.  But  the  Rpbrew  simply  makes 
the  statement,  M-lilmah  Ithamath-gdrer,  quia 
telttg  excandescentia  viri,  i.e.,  as  in  the 
Authorized  Version,  "  for  jealousy  is  the 
rage  of  a  man ; "  ki,  equivalent  to  the  Greek 
yap,  "foi,"  and  klndh  is  the  subject  of  the 


sentence.  The  Hebrew  Jctndh  is  "jealousy" 
as  in  ch.  xxvii.  4,  "  Who  is  able  to  stand 
before  envy?"  or,  aa  margin,  "jealousy." 
The  ordinary  copulative  verb  "is"  is  best 
understood  as  connecting  the  subject  and 
the  predicate;  "  the  rage  of  a  man,"  Hebrew 
leatndih-gdvSr,  as  above,  i.e.  "  the  g^low  of  a 
man's  anger"  (Delitzsch),  or  "a  man's 
fierce  anger  "  (Zockhr).  Jealousy  awakens 
and  inflames  the  wrath  and  anger  of  a,  man  or 
husband  to  its  highest  pitch.  It  evokes 
the  strongest  feelings  for  revenge.  Ifcss; 
Hebrew,  gdvKr,  equivalent  to  ish,  "  a  man," 
in  opposition  to  "  a  wife  " — "  a  husba/iid,"  as 
here.  The  woid  is  chiefly  found  in  poetry. 
Its  derivation,  from  gdear,  "  to  be  strong," 
serves  to  biing  out  the  idea  also  of  the 
intensity  or  force  of  the  jealousy — it  burns 
or  rages  with  all  tlie  might  of  the  man. 
The  latter  part  of  the  verse  in  the  Hebrew 
is  simply,  "and  he  will  not  spare  (c'Ztf- 
yShh'mol)  in  the  day  of  vengeance."  The 
Authorized  Version  "  therefore  "  serves  to 
bring  out  the  deduction,  though  it  does  not 
occur  in  the  original.  Be  will  not  spare; 
i.e.  the  injured  husband  will  not  show  any 
clemency  or  mercy  to  the  adulterer,  the  man 
who  has  wronged  him  so  deeply.  In  the 
day  of  vengeance;  Hebrew,  h'y&m  ndkdm. 
Tlie  expression  may  refer  to  the  time  when 
the  adulterer  is  brought  before  the  judges, 
but  more  probably  to  every  occasion  on 
which  the  husband  can  eseicise  his  ven- 
geance. So  Gejerus.  For  the  expression, 
cf.  Isa.  xxxiv.  8,  "  The  day  of  the  Lord's 
vengeance;"  Job  xx.  28,  "The  day  of  his 
wrath ; "  and  ch.  xi.  4,  "T'he  day  of  wrath." 
Jealousy  is  implacable  (see  Song  of  Solomon 
viii.  6,  "  Jealousy  is  cruel  as  the  grave"). 

Ver.  35. — He  will  not  regard  any  ransom; 
neither  will  he  rest  content,  though  thoa 
givest  many  gifts.  Ko  recompense  or 
atonement,  nor  any  gifts  however  great, 
will  buy  him  off.  These  are  supposed  to 
be  offered  by  the  adulterer  to  the  enraged 
husband,  who,  however,  will  never  rest  till 
he  effects  the  utter  ruin  of  his  injurer.  The 
literal  rendering  of  the  first  hemistich  is, 
"  He  will  not  accept  the  face  of  any  ransom." 
The  phrase  ndsd  phanim  is  equivalent  to 
the  Greek  irpia-oiiraii  Xa/iffdveiv,  and  signifies 
"  to  give  a  favourable  reception  to  the  out- 
ward expression  of  any  one."  The  figure 
is  taken  from  lifting  up  the  face  of  a  sup- 
pliant, the  radical  meaning  of  the  verb 
ndsd  being  "to  take  up,"  "to  lift  up." 
The  ransom;  Hebrew,  Itdph^r  (the  word 
usually  applied  to  designate  the  price  of 
redemption,  mulct,  or  fine  demanded  for 
expiation  of  a  crime;  see  Exod.  xxi.  80; 
XXX.  12;  Numb.  xxxv.  31,  32);  here  the 
bribe  offered  by  the  adulterer  to  be  let  off 
will  be  altogether  rejected,  however  alluring, 
the  word  p'ney,  "  face,"  carrying  with  it  tha 


OH.  VI.  1—35.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


ISO 


idea  of  Bomething  reooramecdatory.  For 
the  expression,  ndedphanim,  cf.  Gen.  xix.  21 ; 
xxlL  21 ;  Job  xiii.  10 ;  xlii.  8 ;  and  Mai.  i.  8. 
The  LXX.  rendering  is,  Oi!/c  IwraWd^eTat 
ciSevhs  K^Tpov  T^ivfyfipav,  "He  will  not  eom- 
mute  for  any  redemption  hia  enmity." 
Neither  will  he  rest  content;  literally,  and 
he  will  not  he  witting;  Hebrew,  v'U-yov^i; 
LXX.,  ov^i  fi^  SiaXrjflf,  "nor  may  it,  i.e.  his 
enmity,  be  dissolved  or  weakened."  (On  the 
verb  doah, "  to  consent  to,"  or  "  to  be  willing," 
Boe  ch.  i.  10.)  Many  gifts,  each  increasing 
in  value,  may  be  offered,  but  he  will  not  be 
willingto  forego hisrightof revenge.  Though 
thou  givest  many  gifts.  It  is  noticeable 
that  the  address,  which  has  been  adapted 
to  the  third  person,  here  becomes  personal, 
and  so  takes  up  the  form  originally  employed 
in  vers.  20—25.  A  hypothetical  case  has 
been  imagined  in  vers.  26— 35,  but  still  with 
the  thought  underlying  it  ttiat  it  applies 


to  the  person  addressed.  "Though  thou 
givest  many  gifts,"  or  more  literally,  "  though 
thou  muUipliest  the  gift,"  brings  the  maltei- 
home  to  the  young  man.  Gifts;  Hebrew, 
ehdleSd,  "the  gift,"  is  the  word  usually 
employed  to  designate  tlie  bribe  offered  to 
corrupt  a  judge  (see  Exod.  xxiii.  8 ;  Deut.  x. 
17;  xvi.  18;  xxvii.  25;  1  Sam.  viii.  3). 
Here  it  refers  to  the  money  offered  to  free 
from  punishment.  The  Vulgale  gives  the 
idea  that  these  gifts  or  bribes  are  offered  by 
a  third  party  on  behalf  of  the  adulterer  : 
Nee  acquiescet  cujusquam  precibus,  nee  sus- 
cipiet  pro  redemptione  dona  plnrima.  On 
these  two  last  verses  Lange  remarks,  "  Just 
as  little  as  tbe  adulterer,  taken  in  his 
adultery,  is  left  unpunished  by  the  injured 
husband,  so  little,  yea,  even  less,  will  the 
spiritual  adulterer  remain  unpunished  of 
the  Lord  (1  Cor.  iii.  17>" 


HGMILBTICS. 

Vers.  1 — B. — The  surety.  Our  Christian  charity  may  naturally  be  sHocted  at  the 
selfishness  apparently  inculcated  by  the  frequent  warnings  against  giving  security  for 
others  that  are  scattered  up  and  down  the  Book  of  Proverbs.  They  have  done  more 
than  anything  else  to  lead  people  to  regard  the  standard  of  morality  of  the  Proverbs  as 
low  and  worldly.    Let  us  consider  the  subject  from  various  points  of  view. 

I.  The  standard  of  moealitt  of  the  Book  of  Pbo verbs  is  lower  than  that 
OF  TKE  New  Testament.  Let  this  fact  be  clearly  recognized.  Revelation  is  pro- 
gressive. Doctrine  is  only  revealed  by  degrees.  The  same  applies  to  ethics.  Such  a 
method  is  most  suited  to  the  moral  education  of  the  race.  A  less-advanced  people  can 
only  live  up  to  a  less-elevated  principle.  If  the  standard  be  raised  too  high,  it  ceases  to 
be  effective,  and  becomes  like  a  counsel  of  perfection,  which  ordinary  people  disregard. 
On  the  other  hand,  Christians  have  no  excuse  for  taking  refuge  in  the  lower  principles 
of  an  obsolete  dispensation. 

II.  An  exclusive  attention  to  one  duty  will  always  militate  against  other 
DOTIEB.  Duties  cross  and  qualify  one  another.  Each  taken  by  itself  and  pressed  to 
its  extreme  will  lead  to  conflict  with  others.  Now,  here  prudence  only  is  commended. 
To  enforce  it  the  more  powerfully,  other  duties  are  for  the  time  left  out  of  sight. 
When  they  are  taken  up  they  will  qualify  it  considerably. 

in.  It  is  foolish  to  ckdebtakb  an  oblioation  which  we  are  unwilling  to 
CABBT  OUT.  It  is  SO  easy  to  make  chivalrous  promises.  But  immense  harm  is  done 
by  overhaste  in  professions  of  generosity.  Let  a  man  count  the  cost  enough  to  see 
whether  he  is  morally  able  to  bear  the  strain  before  making  a  very  liberal  offer. 

IV.  Much  evil  was  done  by  the  money-lendinq  system  or  the  Jews.  The 
laws  of  debt  were  most  stringent,  and  "  the  goods  of  the  sureties  might  be  distrained, 
or  they  even  sold  as  slaves,  just  as  in  the  case  of  insolvent  debtors."  Such  an  out- 
rageously cruel  state  of  things  was  justly  deprecated. 

V.  Other  more  pressing  claims  foubid  us  to  contract  some  or  the  most 
EXACTING  obligations.  The  good-natured  Jew  who  beggared  his  children  and  lost 
his  liberty  by  becoming  surety  to  a  spendthrift,  robbed  those  who  had  most  right  to  enjoy 
his  property,  and  hindered  himself  Irora  doing  more  gjod  in  the  future.  The  duty  of 
a  man  to  his  family  is  often  pleaded  as  an  excuse  for  some  act  of  mean  selfishness. 
Nevertheless,  the  duty  is  real,  and  must  not  be  neglected.  A  man  has  no  right  to  risk 
his  children's  welfare  in  order  to  oblige  a  friend.  People  who  are  too  hasty  in  putting 
their  names  to  bills  should  remember  this. 

VI    The  surety  is  only  advised  to  escape  by  just  means.    He  is  not  told  tn 


140  THE  PB0VEKB9.  [oh.  Ttl-Sfc 

break  his  promise,  (o  hide,  to  leave  the  country.  He  is  urged  to  seek  a  releam  by 
rec^uestiag  hid  friend  to  grant  it  him.     Such  a  course  is  humiliating.     But  it  is  not 

dishonest. 

Ver.  6. — Tht  ant.  Scripture  sends  us  to  nature.  Even  the  smallest  works  of  nature 
are  full  of  Divine  lessons  to  him  who  has  eyes  to  read  them.  Sometimes  we  are  bidden 
to  consider  the  heavens,  but  now  we  are  invited  to  consider  the  ant.  The  telescope 
has  its  lessons;  so  also  has  the  microscope.  But  when  a  man  refuses  to  hear  the  voice 
of  God,  will  he  hear  the  voice  of  an  insect-prophet  ?  Possibly.  It  takes  an  eagle's 
eye  to  gaze  at  the  sun  ;  bat  any  eye  can  look  on  the  earth.  If  a  man's  vision  is  too 
weak  to  look  at  the  burning  bush,  the  fiery  pillar,  the  mystic  Sheohinah,  let  him  turn 
his  eyes  to  the  glowworm  at  his  feet,  and  perhaps  even  that  humble  torch-bearer  may 
save  him  from  stumbling. 

I.  Go   TO   THE   ANT,  AND   LEABN  NOT  TO   DESPISE   LITTLE  THINGS.      Of  late  the  doingg 

of  the  ant  have  been  very  carefully  looked  into,  and  very  wonderful  facts  have  come  to 
light.  Among  ants  there  are  engineers,  constructing  elaborate"  tunnels  and  carrying  on 
complicated  building  operations;  stoch-keepers,  guarding  and  feeding  the  aphis,  like 
a  cow,  for  the  juice  they  exliact  from  it;  agriculturists,  carefully  clearin;:;  ground  of 
all  weeds,  in  order  to  let  only  certain  grasses  grow  within  the  prepared  area,  and 
storing  up  corn  underground,  which  by  a  marvellous  instinct  they  first  kill  so  as  to 
prevent  it  from  germinating ;  slave-holders,  who  attack  tribes  of  black  ants,  carry  off 
the  young  and  keep  these  to  wait  on  them  and  feed  them,  becoming  meanwhile  so 
helpless  as  to  be  absolutely  unable  to  feed  themselves,  and  dying  of  starvation  when 
deprived  of  the  lielp  of  their  slaves ;  and  some  so  far  imitating  our  habits  as  to  keep 
pet  insects — insects  which  they  feed  and  attend  to  but  which  apparently  render  them 
no  servicei     As  we  look  at  the  diminutive  ant,  we  may  well  wonder 

"  That  one  little  head  could  carry  all  he  knew." 

We  must  not  mistake  bigness  for  greatness.  Taitaryia  bigger  than  Greece.  Atheni 
was  a  little  city  in  comparison  with  Babylon.  Despise  not  one  of  the  little  ones.  And 
we  too  with  our  short  lives  and  dwarf  powers,  may  we  not  do  something  worth 
living  for  ? 

II.  Go  TO  THE   ANT,   AND   LEARN   NATBKE's  LESSON  OP   WORK.       It  is  wlth  UO  Small 

labour  that  the  agricultural  ant  of  Syria  clears  its  field,  keeps  it  well  weeded,  gathers 
in  the  com,  and  stores  this  in  subterranean  granaries.  Nature  is  a  great  factory.  All 
life  involves  work.  Even  the  silent  forest  apparently  sleeping  in  the  hush  of  noon  is 
busy,  and  if  only  we  had  ears  to  hear,  we  might  detect  the  elaboration  of  the  sap 
and  the  growth  of  the  leaf,  showing  that  every  tree  is  hard  at  work  on  its  appointed 
task.  1.  Work  according  to  ability.  The  ant  cannot  build  a  cathedral.  But  he  can 
make  an  ant-hill.  "  Whatsoever  thy  hand  flndeth  to  do,  do  it  with  thy  might."  2. 
Work  in  face  of  danger.  One  careless  footstep  may  demolish  a  whole  city  of  ant- 
life,  and  crush  hundreds  of  its  inhabitants.  Yet  the  little  creatures  toil  on  without 
heeJing  a  danger  which  they  cannot  avert.  3.  Work  perseveringly.  Any  one  wlio  baa 
watched  an  ant  struggling  with  a  heavy  load  may  well  be  rebuked  by  the  patient  insect. 
If  the  ant-hill  is  destroyed,  the  ants  soon  set  to  work  and  commence  mining  and  build- 
ing, and  reducing  the  chaos  to  order  again.  4.  Work  harmoniously.  It  is  the  union 
of  great  numbers  that  enables  the  ants,  though  a  Very  small  folk,  to  effect  very  con- 
siderable results.  The  Church  can  do  what  passes  the  power  of  individuals,  but  only 
when  the  individuals  are  severally  doing  their  share  of  labour. 

III.  Go  TO  THE  ANT,  AND  LEARN  THE  DUTY  OP  PROVIDINO  FOB  THE  FUTUHB. 

The  ant  works  from  instinct,  and  we  must  admire  the  wisdom  of  the  great  Maker,  who 
has  taught  it  unconscious  habits  of  providence.  But  we  are  endowed  with  powers  of 
looking  before  and  after,  and  therefore  are  left  to  our  own  will  to  be  deliberately  pro- 
vident. It  is  strange  that  many  people  have  no  prudence  in  temporal  things.  In 
prosperous  times  they  are  recklessly  self-indulgent.  In  harder  times  they  are  in 
destitution.  These  people  abuse  Christian  charity;  and  unwise  Christian  charity  Li 
guilty  of  indirectly  encouraging  their  improvidence.  Thus  they  lose  independence, 
•elf-reliance,  and  the  wholesome  discipline  of  present  restraints  for  the  sake. of  future 


OH.TI.  1— 35.]  THE  PROVERBS.  Ul 

needs.  But  if  earthly  prudence  ia  practised,  shall  we  stop  there?  Are  we  consistent 
in  our  providence?  We  have  provided  for  the  natural  winter:  have  we  provided 
for  other,  more  terrible,  winters?  We  may  have  a  philosophy  of  life  which  suits  the 
haipy  sunshine,  but  how  are  we  provided  against  the  storms  and  frosts  of  the  winter 
of  sorrow?  There  is  a  wintry  blast  that  ultimately  kills  the  hardiest  flower.  Have 
we  made  provision  for  the  winter  of  death?  Happy  they  who  in  biight  summer,  and 
happier  they  wh'i  in  youth's  spring-time,  have  fouud  a  Saviour  who  will  be  their  Bread 
of  life  and  their  Shelter  in  the  chills  of  grief,  in  the  dread  winter  of  death  1 

Ver.  14. — Sowing  discord.  I.  The  sdweb.  He  may  be  of  various  characters.  1. 
A  malignant  person.  Such  a  one  delights  in  the  mischief  he  makes.  He  flings  the 
firebrand  with  fiendish  glee  because  he  loves  to  witness  the  conflagration.  He  is  a  true 
child  of  Satan,  one  to  break  the  peace  of  Eden,  one  to  set  Cain  to  murder  his  brother. 
2.  A  person  greedy  of  power.  It  is  easier  to  make  trouble  than  to  mend  it.  Nothing 
is  more  simple  than  to  scatter  seeds  of  quarrels.  A  single  pebble  flung  into  the  middle 
of  a  mountain  tarn  will  shatter  the  fair  mirror  of  crag  and  sky,  and  spread  disturbing 
wavelets  to  every  shore.  There  is  a  sense  of  power,  of  producing  a  great  effect,  in  mis- 
chief-making. 3.  A  selfish  person.  If  we  always  claim  our  dues  and  exact  our 
pound  of  flesh,  we  must  be  perpetually  embroiled  in  quarrels.  Disregard  to  the  rights 
of  others,  which  is  only  too  common  with  the  selfish,  will  lead  one  individual  to  plunge 
a  whole  society  into  confusion.  4.  A  heedless  person.  It  is  so  easy  to  sow  discord  that 
we  may  do  the  mischievous  thing  before  we  are  aware  of  our  folly.  It  needs  care  and 
watchfulness  to  avoid  this  disastrous  conduct. 

II.  The  seed.  1.  A  misrepresentation.  Thomas  Oarlyle  pointed  out  how  often 
Qational  quarrels  and  wars  8[)ring  from  "  misunderstandings."  If  we  knew  each  other 
better  we  should  be  more  friendly.  Our  acquaintances  tend  to  become  our  friends. 
But  a  misrepresentation  is  the  parent  of  a  misunderstanding,  and  as  such  the  seed  of 
discord.  2.  A  hot  word.  If  we  approached  a  troublesome  question  calmly  and 
pationtiy  we  might  see  a  way  of  avoiding  all  quarrelling  over  it.  But  when  the  angei 
IB  roused  everything  appears  in  its  worst  light ;  there  ia  no  inclination  to  smooth  over 
a  difficulty ;  on  the  contrary,  opposition  ia  magnified.  3.  An  unkind  word.  This 
may  be  spoken  deUberately.     The  more  cool  the  speaker,  the  more  cuttmg  his  speech. 

in  Thb  soil  The  discord  is  sown  "  among  brethren."  1.  A  possible  soil.  One 
would  say  that  here  no  quarrels  can  grow.  But,  alasl  they  who  should  love  most 
can  hate  with  bitterest  hatred,  or,  if  no  deep  dislike  be  engendered,  they  inay  still 
nuarrel  most  fiercely.  The  fir.^t  quarrel  was  between  brethren— Cain  and  Abel.  Esau 
and  Jacob  the  two  Hebrews  whom  Moses  rebuked  in  Egypt,  the  nations  of  Israel  and 
Judah  were  all  brethren  in  discord.  2.  A  fruitful  soil.  Surely  it  would  be  thought 
discord  amon''  brethren  cannot  last  and  spread.  But  experience  proves  the  contrary. 
Family  feuds°are  deep,  bitter,  enduring.     Church  quarrels  are  most  rancorous.     Civil 

vvar^s  ^™|'^™^^g^  q^j^jg  discord  is  no  sli-ht  thing  like  the  breeze  that  disturbs  the 
lake  for  one  moment  and  speedily  leaves  it  to  resume  its  normal  placidity.  1.  It  is 
gainful  Pride  may  conceal  the  wound,  but  the  sore  is  not  slight.  No  misery  is  greater 
than  that  of  family  quaiTels.  2.  It  is  injurious.  It  raises  evil  passions,  hinders 
harmonious  action,  wastes  resources  in  internecine  strife.  Al  men  are  of  one  blood 
Sore  all  war  is  discord  among  brethren;  and  who  shall  measure  its  frightful 
harvest  of  woe?  3.  It  is  unchristian.  The  gospel  proclaims  and  enforces  brother- 
hod  It  hel^s  us  to  realize  the  dream  of  the  psalmist,  "  Behold  how  good  and  how 
pCknt  it  is  for  brethren  to  dwell  together  in  unity  1"  (Ps.  cxxxu,.  1).  Christ  blessed 
the  peacemaker  (Matt.  v.  9). 

Vers  16— 19.— Seven  hateful  things.  It  is  certainly  best  for  us  to  think  most  of 
«  whatever  things  are  lovely,  of  good  report,"  etc.  But  the  co«?««r  de  rose  view  of 
hi^rnXe  that  comes  of  a  fastidious  objection  to  look  at  the  darker  shades 
of  Xi^acter  is  not  only  false,  but  also  dangerous,  since  it  temp  s  us  to  ignore  our  own 
failtoas  and  to  neglect  the  duty  of  rebuking  sin  and  of  labouring  to  better  the  world. 
The  Physician  must  study  pathology.  The  patient  must  allow  his  disease  to  be 
iimini       We  must  therefore  sometimes  set  ourselves  to  the   unwelcome  task 


142  THE  PROVEEBS.  [oh.  vi.  1—86 

of  considering  hateful  things.    Let  us  look  at  the  general  features  of  the  seven 
abominations. 

I.  They  are  defined  in  detail.  We  are  not  only  told  that  sin  is  odious.  Par- 
ticular sins  are  specified.  A  general  confession  of  sin  may  be  made  without  any 
admission  of  guilt  in  regard  to  one's  own  special  faults.  The  proud  man  will  confess 
himself  a  miserable  siuner  while  he  refuses  to  see  the  evil  of  his  pride.  Therefore  we 
must  consider  our  sins  in  the  concrete.  Only  thus  can  we  feel  true  compunction  and 
make  practical  repentance.  Six  liateful  things  are  mentioned;  then  a  seventh  is 
added  as  a  sort  of  after-tliought,  and  to  suit  the  requirements  of  the  poetic  form  of  the 
enigma.  It  is  thus  made  apparent  that  the  seven  is  not  a  definite  number  intended 
to  exclude  all  others.  Seven  is  a  round  number,  and  the  list  might  easily  be  lengthened. 
In  fact,  we  have  just  seven  specimen  abominations.  Therefore  let  no  man  flatter  him- 
self because  his  peculiar  failing  may  happen  to  be  omitted.  All  transgression  of  the 
Law  is  sin,  and  is  hateful  in  the  sight  of  God.  When  particuhir  evils  are  denounced, 
remember  that  they  are  but  specimens  of  a  large  and  varied  and  wholly  abominable 
host  of  sins. 

II.  They  are  desoeibed  in  kefebenoe  to  paktictoab  osaANB.  A  look,  a  tongue, 
hands,  a  heart,  feet.  All  sin  is  the  abuse  of  some  power  or  laoulty.  The  organ  is 
innocent  in  itself,  but  it  is  prostituted  to  a  base  purpose.  Every  part  of  our  nature 
is  susceptible  of  this  degrailation.  The  more  powers  we  have,  the  greater  is  our  capacity 
of  evil-doing  as  well  as  of  well-doing. 

III.  They  are  apparently  very  unequal  in  guilt.  The  promiscuous  collec- 
tion of  hateful  things  is  surprising.  It  looks  as  though  they  were  flung  together  with 
little  consideration.  Possibly  this  is  designed,  that  we  may  not  so  much  compare 
respective  degrees  of  sin  but  hate  and  eschew  all  evil,  the  least  sin  being  hateful  to  Gkxi. 
Pride,  lying,  murder,  are  in  close  juxtaposition.  It  is  not  asserted  that  the  three  are 
equally  guilty.  But  no  measure  is  given  for  discriminating  between  them.  The 
casuistry  of  such  measurement  is  demoralizing.  Moreover,  the  difference  is  often  not 
so  great  as  we  think.  The  crime  that  sends  a  shock  of  horror  through  the  country  and 
leads  us  to  regard  the  doer  of  it  as  an  inhuman  monster,  may  come  from  no  blacker 
sink  of  iniquity  than  that  which  sends  forth  a  sin  wearing  a  much  less  tragic  hue. 

IV.  They  abb  as  a  whole  ohaeacterized  by  features  that  abb  specially 
reprobated  nr  Christian  ethics.  Tlie  first  and  the  last  of  the  hateful  things  are 
the  exact  opposites  of  the  first  and  the  last  of  the  graces  named  in  the  seven  Beatitudes 
of  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount.  Pride,  lying,  cruelty,  are  the  opposites  of  the  Christian 
duties  of  humility,  truthfulness,  aud  charity.  The  sin  of  the  heart  and  imagination  is 
condemned  as  well  as  that  of  the  hands. 

V.  They  abb  all  condemned  on  account  of  their  hatefulness  in  the  sioht 
OF  God.  Morality  is  not  created  by  the  fiat  of  the  Divine  will.  It  is  eternal,  necessary, 
immutable.  God  is  holy  because  he  lives  according  to  it.  But  God's  relation  to  morals 
adds  a  new  sanction.  Wickedness  then  becomes  sin.  The  hatefulness  of  sin  in  God's 
sight  should  be  to  us  its  greatest  condemnation,  not  only  because  God  will  punish  it, 
but  because  it  separates  us  from  the  love  of  God. 

Vers.  20 — 22. — Parental  training.  I.  Sound  parental  training  is  the  surest 
foundation  fob  a  good  afteb-life.  Both  parents  are  here  named.  Neither  has 
a  right  to  delegate  to  the  other  his  or  her  share  of  the  great  responsibility.  In  early 
days  this  rests  chiefly  with  the  mother,  and  throughout  life  her  moral  influence  is 
likely  to  be  the  more  persuasive.  Here  is  woman's  great  work.  Mau  fills  the  world 
uith  the  noise  of  his  busy  doings.  But  woman  has  a  no  less  great  and  useful  task  in 
moulding  the  characters  of  the  toilers  of  the  future.  Yet  the  father  has  his  duty  in 
parental  training;  and  there  are  often  special  circumstances  in  which  his  knowledge 
of  the  world  or  his  firmness  of  control  is  essential.  Let  parents  feel  that  nothing  can 
take  the  place  of  home  training.  The  Sunday  school  cannot  do  the  work  of  themother's 
counsel.  No  pressure  of  public  duty  should  let  a  man  excuse  himself  for  neglecting 
the  religious  training  of  his  children.  He  deludes  himself  if  he  thinks  he  can  do  it  by 
proxy,  be  the  substitute  ever  so  efficient  a  teacher.  Nothing  can  take  the  place  of  the 
anxious  watchfulness  of  parental  love. 

U.  Sound  parental  training  is  of  little  use  unless  it  is  sightly  bbobiveb 


OH.  VL 1—35.]  THE  PROVERBS.  143 

BY  THE  CHILDREN.  The  oMld  has  his  duty  in  regard  to  it  as  well  as  the  parent.  His 
will  is  free.  The  best  seed  may  be  wasted  on  bad  soil.  It  is  his  duty  to  treasure  up 
wholesome  home  lessons  as  the  most  valuable  portion  divided  to  hiiu.  How  mad  is 
the  desire  of  some  to  escape  from  the  control  of  the  home  to  the  fascinating  liberty  o^ 
the  world,  of  the  perils  and  deceits  of  which  they  are  bo  ignorant?  Why  should 
the  young  man  be  so  anxious  to  take  a  journey  into  a  far  country  out  of  the  sight  of 
those  who  have  his  interest  most  at  heart  ?  Perhaps  there  have  been  unwise  restraints 
in  the  home.  But  escape  from  them  is  no  excuse  for  rushing  to  the  utmost  bounds 
of  licence. 

III.  Sound  parental  training,  well  eeoeivbd  and  followed,  is  a  great  boon 
FOB  THE  WHOLE  OF  LIFE.  1.  It  is  a  source  of  quiet  restfulneas.  It  keeps  one  while 
Bleeping.  After  the  feverish  tumult  of  the  day,  to  retire  to  rest  with  hallowed  memories 
lovingly  recalled,  what  a  help  it  is  to  peace  of  heart !  2.  It  is  a  guide  in  duty  and  in 
danger.  "  When  thou  goest,  it  shall  lead  thee  .  .  .  When  thou  awakest,  it  shall  talk 
with  thee."  These  old  memories  rise  up  to  cheer  in  dismal  tasks  or  to  warn  from 
deceitful  temptations.  And  if  they  have  become  doubly  sacred  because  the  voice  that 
spake  the  words  of  counsel  is  hushed  in  death,  shall  they  not  also  be  more  reverently 
cherished?  Who  knows  but  what  those  patient,  geutle  eyes  that  followed  the  child  in 
his  nursery  griefs  and  joys  may  be  looking  down  from  the  heights  of  heaven  to  watch 
him  still  as  he  bends  to  the  hard  toil  of  life? 

Ver.  23. —  T?ie  object  of  religious  teaching.  L  It  is  to  serve  as  a  light.  How 
much  so-called  religious  teaching  "  darkens  counsel  with  word's  without  knowledge  "  I 
We  do  not  give  right  Christian  instruction  when  we  urge  upon  the  belief  of  people 
unintelligible  dogmas  in  phrases  which  are  to  them  meaningless.  Like  the  book 
Hamlet  was  readinjj,  very  much  that  is  crammed  into  children  is  "  words,  words, 
words."  You  cannot  teach  that  which  is  not  understood.  The  first  thing  is  to  open 
the  eyes  of  the  scholar,  to  throw  light  on  regions  of  the  unknown.  Revelation  is 
illumination.     Christianity  is  not  a  rule  of  dark  superstition,  but  a  religion  of  light. 

II.  This  light  gives  a  new  interpretation  to  all  things.  The  light  does 
not  create  the  objects  it  shines  upon,  it  only  makes  manifest  what  was  previously 
hidden,  but  not  the  less  solidly  existent.  So  religious  revelation  does  not  create.  The 
doctrines  of  Christianity,  if  they  are  true  at  all,  represent  eternal  facts.  The  New 
Testament  brings  these  facts  to  light.  Thus  Christ  has  taught  us  to  call  God  "  Father," 
but  he  was  our  Father  before  the  great  Teacher  came  into  the  world.  Earthly  facts 
have  new  meanings  as  new  lights  fall  upon  them.  The  light  of  eternity  transforms 
the  whole  appeaiance  of  life.  Under  its  rays  "  all  things  become  new."  The  pleasures, 
the  sorrows,  the  duties,  the  golJ,  the  food,  the  houses,  the  land,  are  there  still,  but  they 
take  on  quite  other  hues,  and  range  themselves  in  strangely  altered  ranks  of  interest. 
When  the  sun  rises,  the  horrible  monsters  that  loomed  on  us  through  the  night  resolve 
themselves  into  homely  barns  and  familiar  trees,  while  the  distant  mountain  range  that 
had  been  invisible  before  displays  its  silent  solitudes  in  all  their  awful  splendour. 

III.  The  mission  of  this  light  is  to  guide  our  conduct.  "  Reproofs  of  instruc- 
tion are  the  way  of  life."  This  teaching  is  not  given  merely  to  satisfy  our  curiosity, 
nor  simply  to  develop  our  mental  powers.  When  theology  is  pursued  with  the  thirst 
for  knowledge  only,  it  eludes  our  grasp.  When  it  is  degraded  to  the  functions  of  mental 
gymnastics,  it  is  wrecked  and  ruined.  The  end  of  revelation  is  practical  and  momentous. 
Scripture  is  to  serve  as  a  "  lamp  to  our  feet."  Religious  teaching  should  not  aim  at 
merely  exciting  intellectual  interest,  nor  at  solving  abstiact  problems,  nor  at  inculcat- 
ing authoritative  dogmas,  but  at  guiding  men  into  the  way  of  peace  and  life.  There- 
fore :  1.  Do  not  be  disappointed  if  it  adds  as  many  mysteries  as  it  explains ;  so  long  as 
it  sheds  light  on  our  path  we  can  afford  to  find  that  it  makes  the  darkness  in  some 
other  regions  the  more  visible.  2.  Do  not  be  content  with  hearing,  understanding, 
assentmg  to  religious  instruction.  It  fails  wholly  of  its  object  if  it  does  not  lead  us  to 
obey  it,  to  walk  in  its  light. 

Ver.  27. Fire  in  the  hosom.    I.  Sin  is  fire.    Fire  has  an  activity  that  mocks 

life ;  it  is  full  of  noise  and  movement.     It  hisses  like  a  demon-serpent ;  it  sends  forth 
its  tongues  of  flame  like  living  creatures.    Yet  it  is  lifeless  and  the  deadliest  enemy  to 


m  THE  PROVERBS.  [ch.  vi.  1— 35. 

all  life.  Though  some  animals  are  drowned  in  water,  others  are  fitted  to  find  it  their 
natural  element ;  but  all  living  creatwres  perish  in  fire.  The  phcEnix  is  an  impossibility. 
So  sin  mocks  life  and  beauty  and  healtliy  energy.  But  it  is  only  a  death-power.  L 
It  is  destructive.  Fire  exists  by  consuming  its  victims.  So  sin  does  not  simply  use, 
it  destroys  the  faculties  it  works  through.  2.  It  tends  to  spread.  Fire  leaps  from 
object  to  object,  rushing  over  a  wide  prairie,  enveloping  a  whole  city.  "Behold,  how 
great  a  matter  a  little  fire  kindleth  ! "  (Jaa.  iii.  5).  So  sin  spreads  through  the  soul, 
and  from  one  man  to  another.  3.  It  converts  into  fire  everything  that  it  lays  hold 
of.  So  sin  turns  all  that  comes  under  its  power  into  its  own  nature.  4.  It  rages 
furiously.  Nothing  is  ao  like  madness  as  a  gruat  fire.  It  is  infinitely  more  horrible 
than  the  wildust  tempest  of  wind  and  water.  Sin  is  a  fury  of  passion.  5.  It  leaves 
smouldering  embers  and  dismd  heaps  of  ashes.  When  the  fire  of  passion  is  burnt  out, 
the  soul  is  left  charred,  empty,  dismal,  as  but  dust  and  ashes. 

II.  Tub  sinneb  oabbibs  fibe  in  his  bohou.  1.  It  is  in  himself.  Tou  cannot 
kindle  the  fires  oF  your  sin  outside  your  own  soul  at  a  safe  distance.  Yon  cannot  even 
sin  with  your  hands  while  your  heart  is  untouched.  When  sin  is  indulged,  it  takes 
up  its  abode  in  a  man's  bosom.  It  enters  his  affections,  it  lies  close  to  bis  heart,  it 
coils  about  his  very  life.  2.  Moreover,  he  who  takes  this  fire  in  his  bosom  cannot  readily 
get  rid  of  it.  It  penetrates  deeper  and  deeper  and  sproails  further  and  further,  till  it 
fills  the  whole  man.  It  is  not  possible  to  sin  for  a  moment  ami  leave  the  scene  of  guilt 
scatlieless.  He  who  enters  the  furnace  of  sin  lets  the  fire  of  sin  enter  his  owti  bosom, 
and  when  he  goes  forth  carries  it  with  him — himself  a  furnace  of  sins! 

III.  The  sinneb  with  fibb  in  his  bosom  will  find  it  bubn  him.  Men  talk 
of  the  fires  of  retribution  as  though  they  were  kindled  in  some  remote  region  by  some 
unknown  executioner,  and  so  they  are  often  as  little  mnved  by  the  thought  of  them 
as  they  are  affected  by  the  heat  of  the  stars.  But  the  fire  in  a  man's  bosom  will  bring 
its  own  retribution.  The  wicked  man  has  a'hell  within  him.  He  is  becoming  like 
Milton's  S^tan  when  he  felt  the  impossibility  of  escaping  from  hell  becanse  of  his  own 
fearfid  state,  and  exclaimed,  "  Myself  am  Hell  I "  This  is  natural.  It  would  require  a 
miracle  to  prevent  the  fire  in  the  bosom  from  burning.  But  these  terrible  thoughts 
are  not  intended  to  induce  despair.  Bather  they  should  so  awaken  us  to  the  horror  of 
sin  as  to  lead  us  to  shun  it  as  we  would  run  from  a  house  on  fire,  and  make  us  so 
realize  our  danger  as  to  seek  safety  in  that  fountain  opened  for  all  imcleanness  which 
can  quench  the  fires  of  sin  and  stay  all  their  fatal  consequences. 

Vers.  30,  31. — Motive  and  responsibility.  I.  Guilt  is  to  be  mbascked  bt  motive. 
The  starving  pick-pocket  is  not  so  wicked  as  the  well-to-do  house-breaker.  Even  in 
the  low  depths  of  crime  moral  distinctions  need  to  be  observed,  lest  we  do  grievous 
injustice  to  our  most  unhappy  fellow-men.  The  principle  that  guilt  is  commensurate 
with  motive  rests  on  the  Christian  conception  of  it  as  an  inward  fact.  This  makes  it 
always  difficult  to  form  a  correct  judgment  of  other  people.  The  rough  external  standard 
I'f  the  law  must  be  applied  by  the  administrators  of  civil  justice,  because  no  other 
standard  is  within  their  power.  But  it  still  remains  true  that  the  judge  who  pro- 
nounces sentence  may  be  a  much  worse  man  than  the  prisoner  whom  he  sends  to  the 
hulks. 

II.  Pbimabt  nboesbaeies  abb  pbiob  to  conventional  laws.  It  is  an  instinct  of 
the  most  elementary  pharacter  that  prompts  the  hungry  man  to  take  food.  Of  course, 
it  is  still  possible  for  moral  laws  to  interfere  with  the  pursuit  of  the  object  of  that 
instinct,  and  we  must  always  recognize  that  moral  laws  are  higher  than  natural 
iiistiucts.  But  in  our  complicated  modern  civilization  we  are  not  dealing  with  the 
direct  and  simple  impact  of  those  lofty  and  inflexible  laws.  We  are  brought  into  con- 
tact with  very  curious  social  arrangements,  and  the  laws  of  right  and  justice  are  only 
allowed  to  work  themselves  out  by  means  of  an  extraordinary  social  machinery.  Under 
such  circumstances  there  may  be  room  for  a  protest  of  instinct  against  convention, 
though  there  can  never  be  an  excuse  for  the  enjoyment  of  any  personal  desire  when 
that  is  contradicted  by  absolute  morality.  The  hero  of  Victor  Hugo's  story,  'Les 
Miserables,'  is  not  regarded  as  a  vulgar  thief  when  he  steals  the  loaf  from  the  "baker's 
shop  to  feed  his  starving  family.  He  appears  as  a  revolutionist  protesting  against  what 
he  feela  to  be  an  unjust  iistribution  of  property.    A  healthy  Christian  conscience  must 


OH.  VI.  1—35.]  THE   PR0VEBB8.  145 

condemn  his  action ;  but  in  such  a  case  every  humaa  heart  will  give  great  weight  to 
"  extenuating  circumstances." 

III.  Besfonsibility  cannot  bb  measubed  by  uotive.  Here  a  new  element  it 
introduced — one  which  cannot  be  lightly  set  aside,  A  man  must  reap  the  consequences 
of  his  deeds,  no  matter  what  motives  prompted  them.  If  he  acts  foolishly  from  the 
best  of  motives,  he  must  suffer  for  his  folly ;  if  he  offends  against  social  law,  no  plea 
of  primary  necessity  will  exonerate  him  from  the  penalty.  In  a  world  of  law  and  order 
we  must  look  to  the  results  of  our  conduct  as  well  as  to  its  inward  urging  principle. 
Moreover,  if  we  injure  any  one  without  the  least  malice,  but  only  through  what  we 
regard  as  sheer  necessity,  the  fact  of  the  injury  does  not  vanish,  and  we  are  under  an 
obligation  to  take  the  first  opportunity  to  make  ample  amends.  Further,  it  is  the  duty 
of  society  to  see  that  external  right  is  done,  even  though  those  who  resist  it  may  be 
acting  with  the  best  of  excuses.  The  thief  must  be  punished,  though  his  starving  con- 
dition rouses  our  pity.  But  surely  these  painful  points  of  casuistry  should  never  arise. 
It  ia  the  duty  of  Christians  to  work  for  a  better  social  order,  wherein  no  injustice  can 
give  the  semblance  of  an  excuse  to  crime. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOEa 

y 

Vers.  1 — 5. — The  perils  of  luretyship.    Here  we  have — 

L  A  FEATURE  OF  ANCIENT  LIFE.  The  Warnings  against  incurring  this  responsibility 
are  very  frequent  in  this  book  (ch.  xi.  15 ;  xvii.  18 ;  xx.  16 ;  xxii.  26).  For  the  bail  was 
treated  like  the  insolvent  debtor  (2  Kings  iv,  1 ;  Matt,  xviii.  25).  He  was  subject  to 
distraint  or  to  be  sold  into  slavery.  Ben-Sira  (xxix.  18,  seq.)  says,  "  Suretyship  hath 
destroyed  many  that  were  doing  well,  and  swallowed  them  up  as  a  wave  of  the  sea.  It 
hath  turned  mighty  men  out  of  their  homes,  and  they  wandered  among  foreign  peoples." 
The  surety  struck  his  hand  into  that  of  the  debtor,  as  a  sign  that  he  would  answer  for 
him.  This  would  be  accompanied  by  a  verbal  declaration,  and  hence  the  man  had 
bound  and  confined  himself — "snared  himself  by  the  words  of  his  rnouth."  The 
rigidity  of  ancient  custom  in  this  particular  told  with  terrible  severity  against  thought- 
less incurrers  of  responsibility,  no  matter  how  kind  the  motive.     Hence — 

II.  The  urgent  keed  of  peudenoe.  Ver.  3:  "Since  thou  hast  come  into  the 
hacd  [power]  of  thy  neighbour,  stamp  with  thy  foot,  and  storm  thy  neighbour ; "  i.e.  be 
urgent  and  insistent  with  the  careless  debtor  for  whom  thou  hast  pledged  thyself,  press 
upon  him  the  fulfilment  of  his  responsibilities  before  it  be  too  late.  Exercise  a  sleep- 
less vigilance  (ver. 4,  "Tear  thyself  free  like  a  gazelle  from  its  haunt,  and  like  a  bird 
from  the  hand  of  the  fowler").  ,      ,      ■  -  ,  .v  .  >.v 

III.  Modern  reflections  and  lessons.  l.Let  us  be  thankful  that  the  seventy 
of  the  ancient  laws  and  customs  concerning  debt  and  suretyship  has  been  mitigated. 
The  history  of  the  changes  of  law  is  one  of  the  best  evidences  of  Christiamty,  and  proof 
that  prior  conceptions  of  God  advance  side  by  side  with  gentler  conceptions  of  social 
relations  and  duties.  2.  Prudence  is  a  constant  necessity,  and  its  cultivation  a  virtne, 
though  not  the  highest.  We  must  learn  to  adjust  the  claims  of  prudence  and  of 
neighbourly  love.  3.  Independence  is  not  only  a  "glorious  privilege,"  but  the  firm 
foimdation  for  the  best  life-enjoyment  and  life-work.  These  are  golden  words  from 
Ben-Sira  valid  for  all  time  :  "  Take  heed  to  thyself,  lest  thou  faiL  The  elemenU  ^  h/» 
are  water,  head,  and  a  coat  to  one's  back,  and  a  dweUing  to  hide  unseemliness.  Better 
the  poor  man's  life  in  his  hut  than  faring  luxuriously  in  others'  houses.  ...  It  is  an  ill 
life  from  house  to  house,  and  not  to  be  able  to  open  your  mouth  where  you  are  sojourn- 
ing." To  do  our  own  work  or  God's  work  well,  we  should  aim  at  detachment,  at$- 
eniatrrassment,  freedom  of  spirit. — J. 

Vers  6— 11— 2%e  sluggard  admonished.  I.  The  pictubb  of  insect  industbt. 
The  ant  was  viewed  as  the  very  picture  of  laborionsness  in  ancient  as  in  modern  times. 
It  is  interesting  that  the  German  word  for  "industrious"  (emsig)  seems  denvable  from 
amessi  "emmet,  ant."  The  like  may  probably  be  traceable  in  some  Enghsh  delects. 
1  The  industry  of  the  ant  has  all  the  appearance  of  a  viHue.  For  it  seems  unforced ; 
there  is  ed  judge,  luperintendent,  or  onlooker,  or  taskmaster,  to  supermtend  its  work. 
provsbbs. 


146  THE  PROVERBS.  [oh.  vi.  1— 35k 

Contrast  with  the  representations  on  various  monuments  of  the  taskmasters  with 
whips  superintending  gangs  of  labourers.  2.  It  is  provident  industry.  It  lays  up 
against  the  rainy  day.  The  closer  study  of  ant-life  by  modern  observers  opens  a  world 
of  marvel,  and  suggests  other  lines  of  thought.  It  is  sufBcient  for  didactic  purposes  to 
note  the  general  principle ;  the  external  appearances  of  nature  reveal  morai  analogies. 

XL  The  oontbast  of  human  sloth.  (Vers.  9 — 11.)  1.  The  lazy  man  seems  ai 
if  he  would  sleep  for  ever  (ver.  9).  2.  He  knows  not  when  he  has  repused  enough 
(ver.  10).  An  ironical  imitation  of  his  langour,  his  lazy  attitude.  The  arms  ever 
crossed,  instead  of  being  opeaed  and  ready  for  toil.  "  When  I  begin  to  turn  about," 
said  the  Duke  of  Wellington,  "  I  turn  out."  3.  The  result  of  sloth  (ver.  11).  Poverty 
surprises  him  like  a  robber,  and  want  like  an  armed  man.  A  striking  picture  of  the 
seeming  suddenness  with  which  men  may  sink  into  destitution.  But  it  is  only  seeming ; 
it  has  been  long  really  preparing. 

III.  MoBAL  ANALOGY  AND  APPLICATION.  Sloth  in  all  its  forms  is  ruinous  to  body 
and  soul.  Mental  inertness  and  vacuity  is  a  common  form.  The  mind  must  be  aroused, 
interested,  filled.  Here  is  one  of  the  great  sources  of  drunkenness,  because  of  depression. 
If  you  have  no  occupation,  invent  one.  Ooad  yow  temper  by  hopes  and  fears,  if  it  will 
not  wake  up  without  them.  In  religion  "  be  not  slothful."  Work  at  the  practical  or 
theoretical  side  of  it,  whichever  suits  your  capacity  best.  Work  out  your  own  salva- 
tion. Take  it  all  for  granted,  and  you  will  presently  find  that  all  has  slipped  away, 
and  naught  remains  but  an  impoverished  intellect,  a  stagnant  will. — J. 

Vers.  12 — 15. — A  picture  of  spite.  L  The  spiteful  man  defined  oeneballt. 
(Ver.  12.)  He  is  "  naughty,"  the  old  English  word  being  expressive ;  otherwise  "  a 
thing  of  naught,"  a  "slight  man"  (Shakespeare);  in  German  heiUoss,  "unsound," 
"  unworthy,"  and  so  worthless.  Gather  up  the  sense  and  force  of  these  adjectives,  and 
we  get  the  idea  comprehensively  of  badness,  the  sensuous  counterpart  of  which  is  rotten- 
ness, corruption. 

II.  His  CHARA0TEBISTIC8.  (Vers.  13,  14.)  1.  In  mien  and  gesture  and  language. 
His  mouth  is  twisted  to  a  false  expression,  and  utters  false  things.  There  is  au  obliquity 
and  uncertainty  in  his  glance  (comp,  cb,  x,  10).  He  is  full  of  shy  tricks  and  hints — 
the  thrust  of  the  foot,  nudges  and  signs  with  his  fingers.  "  The  shrug,  the  '  hum  I ' 
the  'hal'  those  petty  brands  that  calumny  doth  use"  (Shakespeare).  2.  In  spirit 
perverse.  It  is  a  nature  awry,  inwardly  deformed.  Busily  inventive,  scheming  mis- 
chief, breeding  quarrels  (comp.  on  oh.  iii.  29).  It  is  a  mind  naturally  active  and 
curious,  which,  disabled  from  good,  swings  inevitably  to  the  other  extreme. 

III.  His  DESTINY.  An  overthrow,  sudden,  utter,  irremediable.  1.  This  is  described 
constantly  as  the  common  doom  of  all  kinds  of  wickedness.  2.  The  Bible  makes  sharp 
distinctions,  and  opposes  characters  in  an  absolute  manner.  Fine  distinctions  would 
run  into  the  infinite.  But  we  must  make  them  in  every  particular  case.  3.  The  doom 
ever  stands  in  the  relation  of  correspondence  to  the  guilt. — J. 

Vers.  16 — 19. — A  catalogue  of  dominations.  L  What  I8  an  abomination  ?  The 
ipord  (as  a  verb)  is  of  Roman  or  pagan  origin,  and  denoted  the  feeling  of  abhorrence 
for  what  was  ill-omened.  In  the  moral  sphere  all  evil  conduct  is  like  a  had  omen, 
exciting  dread  and  aversion,  because  boding  calamity.  In  the  direct  language  of  the 
Bible,  referring  all  things  immediately  to  God,  abuminations  are  defined  as  "  things  that 
Jehovah  hates,  and  that  are  an  aversion  to  his  soul "  (ver.  16). 

II.  An  enumeration  of  these  Divine  aversions.  The  particular  number  is 
explained  by  the  parallelism  of  Oriental  poetry  generally.  It  has  no  direct  religious 
significance.  1.  Proud  eyes.  Literally,  lofty  eyes.  The  grande  super(^lium,  or 
haughty  brow,  of  the  Romans.  The  sensuous  expression  contains  and  implies  in  every 
case  the  inner  mood.  This  Divine  aversion  for  pride  is  deeply  marked  in  the  Bible 
and  in  ancient  thought  generally.  Pride  is  an  excess — the  excess  of  a  virtue  of  due 
self-valuation.  Therefore  it  is  a  disturbing  element  in  the  moral  worLl,  or  God's  order. 
It  tends  to  disjoint  the  social  system.  2.  A  lying  tongue.  The  liar  is  thus  absolvent 
of  society.  It  must  break  up  were  lying  to  become  universal,  and  must  decay  so  far  aa 
the  vice  of  individuals  becomes  the  custom  of  the  multitude.  3.  Hands  of  violenae  arid 
injustice.    The  tyrant  is  a  usmper  of  God's  authority.    He  "plays  such  tricks  .-..&■ 


OH.  VI.  1—35.]  THE  PROVERBS.  U1 


angels  weep  at."  The  judicial  murderer  sets  at  naught  the  justice  both  of  heaven  and 
earth,  the  rights  of  God  and  of  men.  4.  The  malicious,  sclieming  heart.  (See  on  ver. 
14.)  That  quick  "  forge  and  working-shop  of  thought "  (Shakespeare)  that  we  call 
the  imagination  may  become  a  very  devil's  smithy,  a  manufactory  of  the  newest 
implements  of  mischief,  from  the  patterns  of  hell.  5.  Feet  that  speed  to  mischief.  All 
couriers  of  ill  news,  eager  retailers  of  slander,  all  who  cannot  bear  to  be  forestalled  in 
the  hurtful  word,  who  are  ambitious  of  the  first  deadly  blow.  6.  2%e  "  Ireather  of  lies." 
(Ver.  19.)  The  false  witness,  the  lying  informer;  all  who  trade  in  falsehood,  and 
breathe  it  as  their  atmosphere.  7.  The  mischief-maker.  The  instigator  of  quarrels 
between  brethren  (see  on  ver.  14).  All  who  partake  of  the  leavened  bread  of  malice, 
rather  than  of  the  pure,  unfermented,  and  incorruptible  bread  of  sincerity  and  truth. 

I.  Our  aversions  should  be  God's  aversions.  2.  The  reasoning  antipathy  is  the 
counterpart  of  improper  sympathy.  3.  Our  love  and  our  hate  are  liable  to  aberration 
if  not  governed  by  reason  and  religion.  4.  Instinctive  antipathy  means  only  that  we 
have  found  in  another  something  that  is  opposed  to  our  personal  sense  of  well-being ; 
conscientious  antipathy,  that  we  have  found  that  which  is  opposed  to  the  order  of  God's 
world. — J. 

Vera.  20 — U.— Exhortation  to  ehaitity.  1.  Fbefaob.  (Ver.  20 ;  see  on  ch.  v.  1,  2 ; 
ch.  i.  8.) 

II.  Exhortation  to  mindfulness  of  eablt  lessons,  (Ver.  21 ;  see  on  ch.  ii.  3.) 
It  is  in  ohlivious  moments  that  we  sin.  We  may  forget  much  that  we  have  learned, 
having  outgrown  its  need.  We  can  never  outgrow  the  simple,  early  lessons  of  piety. 
The  chain  that  links  our  days  each  to  each  in  moral  progress  is  the  memory  of  those 
lessons. 

III.  Vital  vibtub  in  those  eemembkeed  lessons.  They  have  a  true  vis  vitalis. 
They  guide  in  action,  protect  in  passive  hours  (see  on  ch.  iii.  23,  24).  In  wakeful 
hours  of  the  night  they  seem  to  talk  to  the  heart,  as  it  "  holds  communion  with  the 
past."  "  Spirits  from  high  hover  o'er  us,  and  comfort  sure  they  bring."  The  truth 
becomes  as  a  guardian  angel.  There  is  a  junction  of  light  and  life  in  religion  (ver.  23). 
What  is  seen  iii  the  intelligence  as  true  translates  itself  into  health  in  the  habits. 

IV.  They  are  specially  peeservativb  against  the  wicked  woman  and  hkb 
wii.es.  (Ver.  24 ;  see  on  ch.  ii.  16 ;  v.  20.)  Nothing  is  said  directly  of  the  reflex 
effect  of  vice  upon  the  mind.  It  is  always  the  danger  externally  considered  that  is 
pointed  out.  But  this  is  due  to  the  objective  presentative  form  of  the  biblical  thought 
and  speech.  We  must  learn  to  render  the  objective  into  the  subjective  form,  to  note 
how  every  outward  drama  has  its  reflex  in  the  spirit  itself;  and  thus  we  draw  a  double 
benefit  from  Bible  lore.  The  pictures  must  be  taken  first  in  their  pioper  meaning, 
then  be  converted  into  figures  of  the  inner  life. — J. 

Vers.  25 — 35. —  Warning  against  adultery.  No  candid  student  can  ignore  the  fact 
that  the  view  of  this  sin,  and  the  motives  deterrent  from  it,  are  of  far  lower  order  than 
those  o{  pure  Christianity.  They  do  not  rise  above  those  of  Horace,  or  any  general 
morality  of  men  of  the  world.  In  the  sense  that  the  body  is  the  temple  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  that  the  soul  is  in  communion  with  God,  we  reach  that  loftier  point  of  view 
whence  the  odium  of  the  sin  is  clearly  discernible,  and  the  motives  against  it  are  the 
highest  that  can  be  known. 

I.  Sin  sprinqs  from  the  boot  of  debibb.  (Ver.  25.)  This  is  the  general  law 
(Jas.  i.  14,  15).  Hence  the  last  command  of  the  Decalogue  (Exod.  xx.  17 ;  Matt.  v. 
28).  The  objects  of  desire  may  be  good  in  themselves,  but  not  lawful  for  our  posses- 
sion, as  e.g.  anything  that  belongs  to  our  neighbour.  Or  the  object  may  only  seem  to  be 
good  in  itself,  and  its  possession  may  be  both  unlawful  and  pernicious.  This  is  the 
case  with  the  adulteress.  Her  beauty  is  a  deceitful  show.  It  is  a  symbol  with  no 
moral  worth  behind  it.  The  beauty,  the  "twinkling  eye,"  are  only  sensuous  charms. 
We  must  not  speak  of  desire  abstractly  as  if  it  were  wrong,  but  of  the  indiscriminating 
desire,  which  confounds  the  lawful  with  the  unlawful,  the  real  with  the  unreal. 

II.  Adulterous  desire  both  unlawful  and  pernicious.  1.  The  extravagance 
and  avarice  of  the  adulteress.  (Ver.  26.)  This  is  a  commonplace  of  observation. 
Excess  in  one  passion  affects  the  whole  moral  equilibrium,  and  she  who  will  lavish 


148  THE  PB0VBRB3.  [oh.  vi.  1--35, 

•way  her  honour  will  be  reckless  of  other  waste.  2.  Me  ii  a  spendthrift  of  her  lovet*$ 
life.  The  Hebrew  designates  the  soul  or  life  as  dear,  or  costly.  After  making  havoc  of 
his  possessions,  she  preys  upon  his  life,  more  precious  than  all.  3,  The  deadly  cer- 
tainty of  those  results  oj  such  liaisons.  (Vets.  27 — 29.)  By  two  impassioned  questions 
the  teacher  conveys  the  most  emphatic  denial  of  what  they  suggest.  4.  The  further 
certainty  of  penal  consequences  on  detection.  Conveyed  by  means  of  an  analogy  (vers. 
30,  31).  The  act  of  the  thief  who  steals  to  quiet  his  starving  stomach  is  not  over- 
looked. If  apprehended,  he  is  made  to  restore  sevenfold.  The  Mosaic  Law  says  four  or 
fivefold  (Exod.  xxi.  36 ;  xxii.  1,  sqq. ;  cf.  Luke  xix.  8).  The  "  sevenfold "  merely 
expresses  a  round  sum  generally ;  the  thief  might  have  to  buy  off  his  exemption  from 
legal  prosecution  with  all  he  had.  Much  less,  then,  can  the  graver  crime  of  adultery 
escape  punishment,  if  detected.  And  hence  the  senselessness  and  suicidal  conduct  of  tlia 
lover  (ver.  32).  5.  Other  risks  of  detection.  Castigation  and  ignominy  at  the  hands  of 
the  outraged  husband  (ver.  33).  Exposure  to  all  the  fury  of  excited  jealousy,  which 
is  unsparing,  fiercely  vindictive,  insatiable,  unappeasable  (vers.  34,  35). 

1.  The  lower  motive — fear  of  consequences — is  the  most  powerful  deterrent  from 
crime.  2.  But  the  higher  motives,  derived  from  the  sense  of  what  crime  is  in  itsilf 
and  in  relation  to  the  doer,  are  needed  when  the  other  is  not  acting.  3.  It  is  not 
leing  found  out  that  makes  the  evil  evil, — that  is  an  accident;  the  essence  of  the  ctime 
is  in  the  wrong  done  to  the  soul. — J. 

Vers.  1 — 5. — Answering  for  others;  danger  and  deliverance.  There  are  times  when 
we  are  invited  and  are  bound  to  answer  for  other  people — it  may  be  with  our  w(ird,  or 
it  may  be  with  our  bond.  We  have  all  been  indebted  to  the  kindnesses  of  our  friends 
in  this  direction,  and  that  which  we  have  received  from  our  fellows  we  should  be  ready 
to  give  to  them  in  return.  But  it  is  a  matter  in  which  it  is  very  easy  to  go  much  too 
far;  in  which  carelessness  is  wrong  and  even  criminal;  in  which,  therefore^  wise 
counsel  is  well  worth  heeding. 

L  That  good  men  abb  exposed  to  serious  dangek  in  the  way  of  suBETVsntp. 
(Vers.  1 — 3.)  Good  men,  as  such.  For  it  is  thoy  who  are  most  likely  to  be  in  a 
position  to  grant  the  help  which  is  desired,  and  who  are  most  likely  to  be  induced  to 
do  so.  The  danger  is  threefold.  1.  The  appeal  is  to  kindness  of  heart.  It  is  the 
young  at  starting,  or  it  is  the  unfortunate,  or  it  is  those  on  whom  the  helpless  are 
dependent,  who  supplicate  our  interposition;  and  it  is  difficult  for  the  tender-hearted 
to  turn  a  deaf  ear  to  their  entreaty.  2.  The  peril  is  easily  incurred.  It  was  but  the 
taking  of  the  hand  in  the  prt  sence  of  two  or  three  witnesses ;  it  is  but  the  signing  of 
a  name  at  the  foot  of  a  bond,  and  the  thing  is  done.  3.  The  result  is  remote  ai.d 
uncertain.  No  evil  may  ever  happen;  if  it  should,  it  will  fall  some  day  in  the 
distance. 

II.  That  godly  peinoiplb  ebquibeb  us  to  pdt  a  strong  check  on  mcLiMATioir. 
1.  However  much  our  sympathetic  feelings  may  be  stirred,  however  great  the  pleasure 
of  compliance,  and  however  deep  the  pain  of  refusal,  we  must  forbear,  when  we  have 
not  wherewith  to  meet  the  demand  that  may  be  made  on  us.  To  comply,  under  such 
conditions,  is  simple  dishonesty;  it  is  criminal;  it  is  an  essentially  false  action.  2. 
We  should  imperil  the  comfort  of  our  own  family.  Our  first  duty  is  to  the  wife  whom 
we  have  solemnly  covenanted  before  God  to  cherish  and  care  for,  and  to  the  children 
whom  the  Father  has  entrusted  to  our  charge.  3.  We  should  be  encouraging  a 
culpable  spirit  of  unsound  speculation.  4.  We  should  be  disregarding  the  general 
good.  No  minister  can  commend  to  a  Christian  community  a  brother  whom  he  believe* 
to  be  unfit  for  the  post  without  sinning  against  Christ  and  his  Church  most  seriously. 
No  man  can  recommend  an  incompetent  or  unworthy  neighbour  or  friend  to  a  position 
of  trust  and  influence  without  doing  a  wrong  which,  if  it  be  not  condemned  in  the 
Decalogue,  will  be  heavily  scored  in  the  Divine  account. 

III.  That  if  we  find  we  have  ebbed,  we  must  do  every  possible  thing  to  gaijt 
DELiVEBANOB.  (Vers.  3 — 7.)  There  should  be :  1.  The  utmost  promptitude  (ver.  4). 
When  the  blow  may  not  fall  for  some  tirne  to  come,  there  is  special  temptation  to  pro- 
crastinate until  it  is  too  late.  Seek  safety  at  once ;  let  not  the  sun  go  down  before  the 
fiist  step  is  taken.  2.  Energy  in  action  (ver.  5).  We  should  seek  to  extricate  ourselves 
»ud  thohe  who  are  dear  to  us  with  the  vigour  with  which  the  roe  escapes  from  the 


oa.  VI.  1—35.]  THE  PROVERBS.  1« 


hunter,  the  bird  from  the  fowler.    3.  If  necessary,  with  self-humiliation  (ver.  3).    We 
hate  to  "humble  ourselves,"  but  we  ought  to  be  ready  to  do  this  rather  than  allow 
trouble  and  ruin  to  hang  over  our  home. 
IV.  That  if  this  uegenot  be  dub  to  temporal  dakgebs,  how  much  more  ihpbba- 

TIVB  IS  our  duty  to  GAIN  DELIVERANCE  FROM  SPIRITUAL  PERILS !      We  may  Well  giTe 

"  no  sleep  to  our  eyes,  nor  slumber  to  our  eyelids,"  until  the  peril  is  passed  of  being 
called  by  the  Dirine  Creditor  to  meet  a  debt  when  we  '  have  nothing  to  pay." — 0. 

Vers.  6—11. — Sloth  and  diligence.  In  this  land  and  in  this  age,  in  England  in  the 
nineteenth  century,  there  is  little  room  for  the  sluggard ;  there  is  comparatively  little 
temptation  to  sluggishness ;  the  force  of  a  rushing  stream  carries  all  along  with  it  at  a 
rapid  pace.     Nevertheless,  it  is  true — 

I.  That  some  men  find  themselves  under  special  temptation  to  sloth.  Thii 
may  be  a  matter  of  (1)  bodily  infirmity,  the  misfortune  of  an  exceptional  physical  con- 
stitution ;  (2)  mental  disposition,  inherited  from  others,  and  to  a  large  extent  deserving 
of  pity  rather  than  censure ;  (3)  moral  character,  the  impress  of  a  bad  habit — a  spiritual 
result  which  has  to  be  blamed  as  much  as  to  be  deplored. 

II.  That  it  is  to  be  regarded  as  unworthy  of  Christian  manhood.  1.  It  it 
rebuked  by  the  humbler  creation  (vers.  6 — 8).  That  which  the  ant  does  instinctively, 
and  without  any  intelligent  guide  or  instructor,  we  ought  to  do,  who  are  endowed  with 
reason,  and  who  have  so  many  human  teachers  and  friends  to  direct,  admonish,  and 
prompt  us;  who  have,  moreover,  the  admonitions  of  a  Divine  Teacher  and  Friend  to 
enlighten  and  quicken  us.  2.  It  is  contemptible  in  the  sight  of  man,  our  brother. 
There  is  Something  more  than  a  tone  of  strong  remonstrance,  there  is  a  perceptible 
admixture  of  contempt  in  the  address, "  Thou  sluggard  "  (ver.  6),  and  also  in  the  raillery 
of  the  ninth  and  tenth  verses,  "  How  long  wilt  thou  sleep !  .  .  .  Yet  a  little  sleep,"  etc. 
The  industrious  man  cannot  look  at  the  slothfulness  of  the  sluggard,  at  the  supineness 
of  the  careless,  at  the  dilatoriness  of  the  half-hearted,  without  irrepressible  'feelings  of 
aversion  and  contempt;  he  is  compelled  to  scorn  them  in  his  heart. 

III.  That  it  must  be  overcome  in  our  own  temporal  interests.  (Ver.  11.) 
Sloth  soon  ends  in  ruin.  Bankruptcy  waits  on  negligence.  Temporal  ruin  comes :  1. 
Unexpectedly.  "Poverty  comes  as  one  that'travelleth."  It  has  started  a  longtime, 
it  has  traversed  many  a  road,  crossed  many  a  valley,  surmounted  many  a  hill ;  but, 
though  travelling  long,  it  is  only  in  sight  during  the  last  ten  minutes  of  its  journey. 
So  ruin  begins  its  course  m  soon  as  a  man  neglects  his  duties ;  it  travels  far  and  long, 
its  form  is  hidden  behind  the  hills,  it  is  only  just  toward  the  last  that  its  countenance 
is  seen  and  recognized;  then,  before  he  expected  it,  Poverty  stares  him  in  the  face,  and 
grasps  his  hand  with  cruel  clutch.  2.  Irresistibly.  "  Want  as  an  armed  man."  At 
last  no  measures  can  be  taken.  Friends  are  alienated,  relatives  are  wearied,  all  good 
habits  are  gone,  the  courage  which  might  have  risen  to  the  occasion  is  broken  by 
continued  sluggishness  of  spirit ;  the  man  is  disarmed  of  every  weapon,  and  is  at  the 
mercy  of  well-armed  Want.  Indolence  not  only  brings  about  ruinous  circunistances, 
but  it  robs  us  of  the  spirit  by  which  adversity  might  be  met  and  mastered ;  it  places 
us  helpless  at  the.  feet  of  the  strong. 

"  Let  us,  then,  be  up  and  doing ; "  for  while  sloth  is  rebuked  on  every  side,  and 
leads  down  to  inevitable  ruin,  on  the  other  hand,  diligence  (1)  is  in  accordance  with 
the  will  of  (Jod  concerning  us  (Bom.  xii.  11;  1  Tim.  v.  8;  2  Thess.  iii.  6—14);  (2) 
commands  a  genuine  prosperity  (see  ch.  xxii.  29);  (3)  braces  the  character  and 
imparts  spiritual  strength  ;  (4)  places  us  in  a  position  to  show  kindness  to  the  unfortunate 
(Eph  iv.  28) ;  (5)  in  the  sphere  of  religion  eusures  ultimate  and  complete  salvation  (2 
Pet.  i.  5,  10, 11 ;  2  Cor.  v.  9).— 0. 

Vers.  12—16. — The  character  and  doom  of  the  abandoned.  Perhaps  there  ie  no 
word  which  more  aptly  designates  the  man  who  is  here  described  than  the  word 
"  abandoned."  The  "  man  of  Belial "  ("  the  naughty  nnan  ")  is  he  who  is  abandoned,  who 
has  abandoned  himself,  to  the  promptings  of  his  own  evil  nature,  to  the  fascinations 
and  tyrannies  of  sin.     Here  we  see  the  features  of  his  character  and  his  doom. 

I.  That  in  speech  he  is  utterly  unprincipled.  "He  walks  with  a  froward 
mouth."     He  continually  and  remorselessly  uses  the  language  of  falsehood,  of  pro 


150  THE  PEOVBEBS.  [oh.  vi.  1—35. 


fanity,  of  lewdness,  of  slander.  From  his  mouth  there  constantly  issues  that  which 
God  hates  to  hear,  and  which  is  offensive  and  shameful  in  the  estimation  of  the  good 
and  pure. 

II.  That  in  pbactioe  he  habitttallt  resorts  to  low  cuNNiita.  (Ver.  13.)  He 
has  ways  of  communitiating  with  others  ooly  known  to  the  initiated.  He  cannot  afford 
to  be  frank  and  outspoken ;  he  must  have  recourse  to  subtlety,  to  low  tricks,  to  devices 
which  will  cover  his  thoughts  from  the  eye  of  the  upright.  This  is  (1)  degrading  to 
himself,  and  (2)  disgusting  to  others. 

III.  That  in  his  heart  he  ib  positively  malign.  (Ver.  14.)  He  takes  a  demo- 
niacal pleasure  in  doing  evil.  It  is  not  only  that  he  will  consent  to  sacrifice  the  claims 
or  injure  the  character  of  others  if  he  cannot  enrich  himself  without  so  doing ;  it  is  that 
he  finds  a  horrible  and  malignant  satisfaction  in  compassing  their  ruin ;  he  "  devises 
mischief  continualiy ;  he  sows  discord."  To  the  pure  it  is  incomprehensible  that  men 
can  positively  delight  in  impurity ;  to  the  kind  it  seems  impossible  that  men  can  enjoy 
cruelty,  etc.  But  it  is  the  last  result  of  a  sinful  course  that  the  "  froward  heart " 
scatters  mischief  on  every  hand  for  the  sake  of  the  evil  thing  itself;  to  him  vice  and 
misery  are  themselves  his  reward. 

IV.  That  God  will  being  down  on  his  head  irrembdiable  disaster.  (Ver.  15.) 
The  man  thinks  he  can  defy  his  Maker,  but  he  is  deceiving  himself.  God  is  not 
mocked;  he  that  sows  to  the  flesh  shall  reap  corruption  (Gal.  vi.  8).  He  has  broken 
away  from  all  Divine  restraints;  he  has  thrown  off  him  the  arresting  hand  of  a  merci- 
ful Eedeemer,  he  has  silenced  the  voice  of  a  pleading  spirit ;  but  God  is  not  altogether 
such  as  we  are  (Ps.  1.  21).  He  will  rebuke,  and  he  will  set  our  sins  before  our  souls 
aj;ain.  The  hour  will  come,  quite  unexpectedly,  when  judgment  will  overtake  him. 
It  may  be  (1)  public  indignation,  and  the  stem  rebuke  of  human  society ;  or  (2)  ruin 
in  his  temporal  affairs, — his  schemes  break  down  and  involve  him  in  their  fall,  or  some 
one  of  his  victims  turns  against  him ;  or  (3)  sudden  sickness  and  pain  lay  him  prostrate 
on  a  bed  from  which  he  may  n(!ver  rise,  and  on  which  his  iniquities  may  confront  him ; 
or  (4)  death  and  eternity  present  themselves,  and  demand  that  he  shall  look  them  full 
in  the  face  (see  ch.  xxix.  1). — C. 

Vers.  16,  17. — The  condemnation  of  pridt.  The  simple,  strong  language  of  the  text 
tells  us  that  pride  is  a  thing  which  God  hates.  We  should  therefore  make  some 
inquiries  concerning  it,  and  know  all  we  can  learn  about  it ;  for  who  would  like  to 
have  in  his  heart  and  life  that  which  is  positively  odious  to  the  Father  of  his  spirit  ? 

I.  Its  seat  is  in  the  sottl.  The  wise  man  speaks  of  the  "  proud  look "  or  the 
"  haughty  eyes,"  hut  he  specifies  this  as  it  is  a  most  common  manifestation  of  the  evil 
which  lies  within.  Its  seat  is  in  the  soul,  in  the  lurking  thought,  in  the  secret  senti- 
ment, in  the  nursed  and  nourished  convictions,  in  the  false  idea.  It  is  in  the  habit  of 
the  heart ;  it  is  embedded  in  the  character. 

II.  It  is  manifold  in  its  manifestation.  It  is  most  often  shown,  as  intimated, 
in  the  proud  look,  but  it  may  make  itself  felt  in  (1)  the  disdainful  tone ;  (2)  the  con- 
temptuous silence  or  non-observance ;  (3)  the  cutting  sentence ;  (4)  the  exclusive  action. 

III.  It  bprings  from  many  sources.  It  may  arise  from:  1.  A  consciousness  of 
physical  superiority — elegance  of  figure,  beauty  of  face,  muscular  strength,  etc.  2. 
Consciousness  of  mental  acquisitions— intellectual  force,  knowledge,  eloquence,  etc.  3. 
Social  prominence — rank,  office,  distinction.    4.  EecoUection  of  great  services  rendered. 

IV.  It  is  hateful  in  the  sight  of  God.  This  thing  "  doth  the  Lord  hate."  He 
hates  it,  for  doubtless  he  sees  in  it  a  heinousness  and  enormity  we  do  not  perceive. 
But  he  may  hate  it  because :  1.  It  is  an  essentially  false  thing.  We  give  ourselves 
credit  for  that  which  is  not  due.  "  What  have  we  that  we  have  not  received  ?  "  The 
pedestal  on  which  we  stand  is  a  false  Imagining.  2.  It  is  an  utterly  unbecoming  thing. 
Who  are  we,  the  sinful  children  of  men,  the  body  of  whom  is  deserving  of  condemna- 
tion, that  we  should  look  down  superciliously  on  others?  In  any  human  soul  pride  ia 
u»becoming,  unlovely.  3.  It  is  a  cruel  thing.  It  wounds,  and  it  wounds  the  most 
sensitive  spirits  worst.  We  place,  by  itself,  as  demanding  particular  reference,  one 
evil  in  pride  for  which  God  condemns  it,  viz. — 

V.  It  BHiTTS  US  OUT  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  HIS  GRACE.  How  c»n  We  possibly  go  ill 
humility  »nd  fwth  to  the  redeeming  Lord,  our  Saviour,  while  pride  occupies  the 


OH.  VL 1—35.:!  THE  PROVERBS.  lo* 

throne?  The  man  in  whom  the  proud  spirit  dwells  stands  afar  from  the  salvation  of 
God.  "  The  Lord  resisteth  the  proud,  but  giveth  grace  unto  the  humble."  "  Blessed 
are  the  poor  in  spirit :  for  theirs  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  "  Except  ye  be  converted, 
and  become  as  little  children,  ye  shall  not  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven." — C. 

Vera.  16,  17. — The  Divine  dislike  of  deceitfulness.  (See  ch.  xii.  22.)  God  hates 
"a  lying  tongue ;"  "  Lying  lips  are  abomiaation  to  the  Lord."     We  must  consider — 

L  What  is  the  deceitfulness  which  God  detests.  It  is  evident  that  the  "lying 
tongue  "  and  the  "  lying  lips  "  are  mentioned  as  the  principal  instrument  of  the  soul 
in  the  sin  which  is  rebuked.  It  is  the  sin  itself  which  is  the  object  of  the  Divine  dis- 
pleasure. That  sin  is  deceitfulness ;  conveying  false  impressions  to  the  mind  of  our 
neighbour,  the  wilful  blinding  of  his  eyes  by  untrue  words  or  by  false  actions.  This 
may  be  done  by:  1.  Downright  falsehood — the  most  shameless  and  shocking  of  all 
ways.  2.  Covert  insinuation  or  innuendo — the  most  cowardly  and  despicable  of  all 
ways.  3.  Prevarication,  the  utterance  of  a  half-truth  which  is  also  half  a  lie — the  most 
mischievous,  because  the  mosi  plausible  and  last  detected,  of  all  ways.  4.  Acted 
untruth — one  of  the  most  common  forms  of  falsehood,  and  perhaps  as  hurtful  to  the 
sinner  as  any,  because  it  avoids  apparent  guilt,  while  it  really  is  as  culpable  as  most,  if 
not  as  any,  of  these  manifestations  of  deceit. 

II.  Why  it  is  bo  odious  to  the  righteous  Pathbb.  What  makes  it  "  hateful," 
"  abominable  in  his  sight "  ?  1.  It  is  inherently  heinous.  The  sonl  has  to  make  a 
very  decided  departure  from  rectitude  to  commit  this  sin.  We  may  say  of  it,  "  Oh, 
'tis  foul !  'tis  unnatural  1 "  It  is  a  "  strange  "  thing  in  the  view  of  the  Holy  One  and 
the  True.  It  is  something  which  comes  into  direct  and  sharp  collision  with  his  Divine 
principles;  which,  in  its  own  nature,  is  a  painful,  oppressive  spectacle  to  his  pure 
spirit.  He  loves  and  lives  and  desires  truth — "  truth  in  the  inward  parts ; "  and  with 
the  same  intensity  with  which  he  loves  truth,  he  must  hate,  with  immeasurable  abomi- 
nation, every  shape  and  form  of  falsehood.  2.  It  is  minous  to  the  soul  that  practises 
it.  Nothing  so  surely  leads  down  to  spiritual  destruction  as  this  sin.  It  breaks  down 
the  walls  and  breaks  up  the  very  foundation  of  all  character.  For  those  who  habitually 
decline  from  the  truth,  in  word  or  deed,  are  constantly  teaching  themselves  to  consider 
that  there  is  nothing  sacred  in  truth  at  all;  they  are  sliding  down  the  incline  at  the  foot 
of  which  is  the  sceptic's  question,  "  What  is  truth  ?  "  A  man  who  is  false  in  language 
or  in  action  is  poisoning  his  soul  by  degrees;  he  is  a  spiritual  suicide.  3.  It  is 
mischievous  to  society.  "Putting  away  lying,  speak  every  man  truth  with  his 
neighbour ;  /or  we  are  members  me  of  another."  Human  society  depends  on  truthful- 
ness in  its  members  for  its  prosperity,  comfort,  and  almost  for  its  very  life.  What  if 
we  constantly  doubted  one  another's  word?  The  men  of  truth  and  trustworthiness 
are  the  salt  of  society.  The  men  of  lying  tongue  are  its  pest  and  its  peril.  Our 
neighbours  have  a  right  to  claim  of  us  that  we  shall  put  away  lying  lips  and  shall 
"  speak  the  truth  in  love."  God,  who  cares  for  the  well-being  of  this  human  world, 
hates  to  see  his  children  weakening,  wounding,  endangering  that  world  of  man  by 
falsehood  and  deceit.  tt       -n         i  ■  v 

III.  What  God  will  do  with  those  who  abe  guiltt.  He  will  surely  punish 
them.'  He  does  so  (1)  by  making  them  bear  their  penalty  in  the  shape  of  spiritual 
demoralization;  (2)  by  bringing  down  upon  them  first  the  distrust  and  then  the  repro- 
bation of  their  fellows;  (3)  by  excluding  them  firmly  and  finally  from  his  own  fellow- 
ship. He  that  does  not  "  speak  the  truth  in  his  heart "  may  not  abide  in  his  taberMcle 
here  (Ps.  xv.  1) ;  he  that  deserves  to  be  denominated  a  liar  will  be  banished  feom 
his  presence  hereafter  (Rev.  xxii.  15). — 0. 

Vers  1&— 19  —  TOe  Irand  of  God.  God  placed  a  brand  on  the  first  murderer's  brow, 
and  he 'carried  the  curse  with  him  to  his  grave.  He  does  not  mark  us  thus  now  with 
such  signs  of  guilt;  nevertheless,  he  has  made  it  clear  as  the  day  that  there  are  some 
men  who  are  the  objects  of  his  very  high  displeasure.  We  know  from  the  text  that 
among  these  are — 

I.  Men  op  a  pboud  heabt.    (See  above.) 

II.  Men  OF  a  false  SPIRIT.    (See  above.)  ,»\    rm,  v 
HI.  Men  that  abe  besponsible  fob  othebb'  death.     (Ver.  17.)    inoso  wnose 


162  THE  PROVERBS.  [oh.  vi.  1—35. 

"  bauds  shed  innocent  blood"  are  strongly  condemnod  of  him.    These  include,  not  only 

(1)  men  guilty  of  murder  and  manslaughter  in  the  literal  sense,  but  also  (2)  those 
v/ho  are  responsible  for  the  deatli  of  the  innocent  through  culpable  carelessness  (e.g.  an 

'  liidiffejent  and  negligent  judge  or  reckless  captain),  and  also  (3)  those  who,  by  their 
lioartlessness  in  family  or  social  life,  crush  the  spirit  and  shorten  the  life. 

IV.  Men  that  plot  mischief.  "  A  heart  that  deviseth  wicked  imaginations  "  (ver. 
18).  These  are  they  who  use  their  inventive  faculties,  not  for  the  good  of  their  race, 
iior  for  the  maintenance  of  their  families,  but  for  the  base  and  shameful  purpose  of 
bringing  some  of  their  fellows  into  distress,  if  not  into  ruin;  they  contrive  their  over- 
throw only  to  enjoy  their  discomfiture. 

V.  Cbubi,  executioners  or  wrath.  "  Those  whose  feet  are  swift  in  running  to 
mischief"  (ver.  18) ;  these  are  they  who  take  a  savage  delight  in  being  the  instruments 
of  punishment — the  gaoler,  the  soldier,  the  executioner,  who  gloat  over  their  work  of 
severity  or  blood. 

VI.  False  witnesses.  (Ver.  19.)  One  of  the  most  solemn  and  responsible  positions 
a  man  can  occupy  is  the  witness-box ;  he  stands  there,  invoking  the  dread  Name  of 
the  Eternal  himself  to  cause  justice  to  be  done.  If  then  he  perjures  himself,  and 
"  speaketh  lies  "  when  actually  under  oath,  he  defies  his  Maker,  perverts  justice,  wrongs 
the  innocent  or  releases  the  guilty,  is  disloyal  to  his  country,  outrages  his  own  con- 
science.    Well  may  he  be  among  those  whom  God  especially  condemns. 

VII.  Men  that  disturb  hakmont.  "  He  that  soweth  discord  among  brethren  " 
(ver.  19).  "  Blessed  are  the  peacemakers,''  said  the  Master.  '*  Cursed  are  the  mischief- 
makers,"  says  the  text.  If  we  do  not  actively  promote  peace  and  good  will,  surely 
we  need  not  be  the  abettors  of  strife.  There  are  two  degrees  of  guilt  here :  there  is 
the  mischief-making  which  is  due  to  culpable  thoughtlessness,  repeating  words  which 
should  have  been  allowed  to  fall  to  the  ground,  unintentional  but  decided  misrepresen- 
tation, etc. ;  and  there  is  the  darker  wrong,  to  which  a  heavier  penalty  is  due,  delibe- 
rate and  wanton  disturbance  of  previous  harmony.     This  is  (1)  bad  in  the  social  circle, 

(2)  worse  in  the  home,  (3)  worst  in  the  Church  of  Christ. 

Let  it  be  remembered  that:  1.  God  hates  these  tilings;  they  are  utterly  abhorrent 
to  him.  He  cannot  regard  them  without  Divine  repuonance.  2.  God  is  "  much  dis- 
pleased "  with  those  who  do  them ;  his  holy  and  awful  wrath  must  extend  to  those 
who  "  do  such  things."  3.  God  will  surely  punish  those  who  impenitently  persist  in 
tliem  (Rom.  ii.  2— 9).— 0. 

Vers.  20 — 35. — Sin  and  safety.  These  verses  may  teach  ui — 
I.  That  man  lies  open  to  stboso  and  sad  temptations.  The  reference  of  the 
text  is  to  the  sin  of  sensuality;  the  wise  man  is  warning  against  the  wiles  of  "the 
evil  woman,"  "  the  strange  woman  "  (ver.  24).  This  sin  of  sensuality  may  consist  in 
irregularities,  or  in  things  decidedly  forbidden,  or  in  gross  and  shameful  violations  of 
law  and  decency ;  it  may  be  secret  and  hidilen  from  every  eye,  or  it  may  be  unblushing 
and  may  flaunt  itself  before  high  heaven.  The  words  of  the  text  may,  in  part,  apply 
to  other  sins ;  e.g.  to  intemperance,  and  also  to  gambling.  To  all  of  these  the  strong 
pssions  of  youth  often  urge  the  soul;  it  finds  itself  drawn  or  driven  by  a  powerful 
impulse  which  it  is  difficult  to  overcome.    But  the  truth  must  be  faced  — 

n.  That  vice  leads  down  by  a  sure  and  short  road  to  the  worst  inflictions. 
It  leads  to:_l.  Self-reproach.  The  sinner  "shall  not  be  innocent"  (ver.  29),  and  will 
carry  the  miserable  consciousness  of  guilt  with  him  into  every  place.  2.  Corruption 
of  character — such  a  one  "  lacketh  heait"  (marginal  reading),  "destroyeth  his  own 
soul"  (ver.  32);  losing  all  self-respect,  his  character  is  as  a  substance  that  is  smitten, 
cracked  through,  ready  to  fall  to  pieces,  worthless;  "a  wound"  (ver.  33),  a  deep 
wound,  it  has  gotten.  3.  Shame.  Men  do  not  despise  a  thief  who  steals  to  allay  the 
gnawing  pangs  of  hunger;  they  may  compel  him  to  restore  sevenfold,  but  they  pity 
him  as  much  as  they  despise  him  (vers.  30,  31).  But  the  adulterer,  or  the  confirmed 
drunkard,  or  the  man  who  is  impoverishing  his  family  to  gratify  his  lust  for  gambling, 
him  men  do  despise  in  their  hearts;  they  dishonour  him  in  their  soul,  they  cry 
"shame"  upon  him  (ver.  33).  4.  Impoverishment.  Loss  of  money,  of  occupation, 
^Jeggaryt  the  humiliation  of  borrowing,  pledging,  etc.  (ver.  26).  5.  Penalty  from  those 
who  have  been  wronged  (vers.  34,  35).    Those  who  outrage  the  honour  of  their  fellcwi 


OH.  vn.  1—27.] 


THE  PROVERBa 


168 


may  exp^^ct  the  liittcrest  revongo.  To  steal  the  love  of  a  wife  from  her  husband,  or  of 
a  husband  from  his  wife,  is  to  make  one  enemy  whose  wrath  nothing  will  appease.  It 
is  an  evil  thing,  even  if  it  be  not  a  dangerous  thing,  to  go  through  life  bearing  th* 
malice,  exposed  to  the  intense  and  inextinguishable  hatred  of  a  human  soul. 

III.  That  tueke  is  one  path  op  safety.  It  is  that  which  is  suggested  in  vers. 
27,  28,  "  Can  one  go  upon  hot  coals,  and  his  feet  not  be  burned  ?  "  etc.  The  way  to 
escape  the  evil  is  not  to  touch  it,  to  steer  clear  of  it  altogether,  to  keep  well  out  of 
harm's  way — to  avoid  the  house  and  company  of  the  flippant  woman,  to  leave  the 
sparkling  cup  untasted,  to  refuse  to  stake  a  farthing  in  any  kind  of  lottery  whatever. 
This  is  the  only  secure  ground  to  take.  Once  begin  to  talk  with  the  seductive  woman, 
or  to  taste  the  pleasure  of  exhilaration  from  intoxicants,  or  to  enjoy  the  sweets  o( 
appropriating  money  gained  by  nothing  but  a  guess,  and  who  shall  say  what  the  end 
will  be  ?    Do  not  touch  the  fire,  and  you  will  not  be  burnt. 

IV.  That  the  young  should  bear  the  ouidino  lamp  op  teuth  about  them 
ALONG  THE  WHOLE  PATH  OF  LIFE.  (Veis.  20 — 23.)  In  order  to  sustain  the  resolution 
to  keep  away  from  the  destroying  fires,  consult  the  Word  of  God.  1.  Have  it  in 
continual  remembrance  (ver.  21).  2.  Illustrate  it  in  every  way  open  (ver.  20).  3. 
Find  it  a  steady  light,  accompanying  the  steps  everywhere  (vers.  22,  23). — C. 

Ver.  22. — QocPs  Word — guide,  guardian,  companion.  Man  is  insufficient  of  himself ; 
he  needs  help  from  on  high.  Often  in  the  course  of  his  life  he  has  goings  forth,  and 
then  he  wants  direction ;  often  he  finds  himself  helpless,  and  then  he  needs  a  guardian 
to  preserve  him ;  often  he  is  alone,  and  then  he  craves  a  friend  who  will  commune 
with  him.     All  this  he  lias  in  the  Word  of  the  living  God.     It  is — 

I.  In  ACTION,  OUE  GUIDE.  "  When  thou  goest,  it  shall  lead  thee."  We  go  "  from 
home,"  "  into  business,"  "  to  sea,"  "  abroad,"  etc.  In  all  these  goings  forth  we  want 
that  which  will  lead  lis  in  the  right  and  the  wise  way — the  way  of  truth,  purity, 
righteousness,  happiness.     The  Wpid  of  the  heavenly  Father  will  supply  this. 

II.  In  danger,  oub  defence.  "  When  thou  sleepest,  it  shall  keep  ihee."  Not  only 
when  we  are  "  asleep  "  on  our  couch  are  we  in  danger  from  those  who  might  wish  to 
injure  us,  but  when  we  are  unconscious  of  the  spiritual  dangers  by  which  we  are 
surrounded ;  when  in  a  state  of  "  innocence,"  of  being  uninitiated  into  the  secrets  of 
sin ;  when  we  are  not  alive  to  duty  and  opportunity  as  we  should  be ; — then  the  Word 
of  God  will  be  a  fence,  a  security.  Following  it,  coming  to  it  to  learn  God's  will,  we 
shall  know  which  way  to  take,  what  courses  to  avoid,  how  to  revive  and  to  be  reani- 
mated with  holy  energy  and  zeal. 

IIL  In  LONELINESS,  OUR  COMPANION.  "  When  we  awake,"  when  we  find  ourselves 
with  our  faculties  all  in  force,  and  no  one  to  hold  fellowship  with  us,  then  the  Word  of 
God  will  "  talk  with  us."  It  will  speak  to  us  of  God  our  Father,  of  the  supreme  value 
of  ovu:  spiritual  nature,  of  the  path  of  life,  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ  and  the  salvation 
in  him,  of  the  heavenly  homei.    "  Lamp  of  our  feet,  whereby  we  trace,"  etc  (ver.  23). — 0. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTEB  Vn. 

Vers.  1—27. — 13.  Thirteenth  admonitory 
discourse,  containing  a  warning  against 
adultery,  treated  under  »  different  aspect 
from  previous  exhortations,  and  strength- 
ened by  an  example.  In  this  chapter  and 
the  following  a  contrast  ia  drawn  between 
the  adulteress  and  Wisdom. 

Ver.  1.— My  son,  keep  my  words.  The 
teacher  enjoins  his  pupil,  as  in  ch.  ii.  1,  to 
observe  the  rules  which  he  gives.^  lay  up, 
as  a  precious  treasure  (see  on  ck.  ii.  1  and  7). 


The  IiXX.  adds  here  a  distich  which  is  not 
in  the  Hebrew  or  in  any  other  version,  and 
is  not  germane  to  the  context,  however 
excellent  in  itself:  "My  son,  honour  the 
Lord,  and  thou  slialt  be  strong,  and  beside 
Mm  fear  no  other."  With  this  we  may 
compare  Luke  xii.  5  and  lea.  viii.  12,  13. 

Ver.  2. — Keep  my  commandments,  and 
live  (see  on  ch.  iv.  4).  As  the  apple  Oi 
thine  eye;  literally,  the  little  man  (isAon, 
diminutive  of  ish)  of  the  eye;  so  called  from 
the  miniature  reflection  of  objects  seen  in 
the  pupil,  specially  of  the  person  who  looks 
into  another's  eye.  It  is  a  proverbial  ex- 
pression for  anything  particularly  preeioi.s 


1S4 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[oa.  vn.  1—27. 


■nd  liable  to  be  injured  unless  guarded 
with  scrupulous  care  (oomp.  Ps.  xvii.  8 ; 
Zech.  ii.  8).  Similarly  the  Greeks  called 
this  organ  xSpri,  "damsel"  or  "puppet," 
and  the  Latins  papilla. 

Ver.  3. — Bind  them  upon  thy  fingers. 
Wear  my  precepts  like  a  ring  on  thy  finger, 
BO  that  they  may  go  with  thee,  whatever 
thou  takest  in  hand.  Others  think  that  tlie 
so-called  tephiUin,  or  phylacteries,  are  meant. 
These  were  worn  both  on  the  hand  and  the 
forehead,  and  consisted  of  u  leather  box 
containing  strips  of  parchment,  on  which 
were  written  four  texts,  viz.  Eiod.  xiii. 
1—10;  11—16;  Deut.  Ti.  4— 9;  li.  13— 
21.  The  box  was  attached  to  a  leather 
strap  wound  seven  times  round  the  arm, 
three  times  round  the  middle  finger,  and 
the  remainder  passed  round  the  hand  (see 
(Exod.  xiii.  9,  16;  Jer.  xxli.  24).  Write 
them  upon  the  table  of  thine  heart  (see  on 
ch.  ill.  8  and  yi.  21 ;  and  comp.  Dent.  vi.  9). 

Vers.  4  and  5  contain  earnest  admonitions 
to  the  pursuit  of  Wisdom,  which  is  worthy 
of  the  purest  love. 

Ver.  4. — Say  unto  Wisdom,  Thou  art  my 
lister.  Wisdom  is  personified,  and  the  con- 
nection with  her  indicated  by  the  relation- 
ship which  best  expresses  love,  purity, 
confidence.  In  the  Book  of  Wisdom  viii. 
she  is  represented  as  wife.  Christ  calls 
those  who  do  God's  will  his  brother,  and 
sister,  and  mother  (Matt.  xii.  50).  Call 
■Understanding  thy  kinswoman ;  moda,  "  fa- 
miliar fiiend."  Let  prudence  and  sound 
sense  be  as  dear  to  thee  as  a  close  friend. 

Ver.  5. — That  they  may  keep  thee  from 
the  strange  woman  (see  on  oh.  ii.  16  and 
vi.  24).  When  the  heart  is  filled  with  the 
love  of  what  is  good,  it  is  armed  against 
the  seductions  of  evil  pleasure  or  whatever 
may  entice  the  soul  from  God  and  duty. 
Septuagint,  "  That  she  (Wisdom)  may  keep 
thee  (rum  the  strange  and  evil  woman,  if 
she  should  assail  thee  with  gracious  words." 

Vers.  6 — 23. — To  show  the  greatness  of 
the  danger  presented  by  the  seductions  of 
the  temptress,  the  vn-iter  introduces  no 
mere  abstraction,  no  mere  personification 
of  a  quality,  but  an  actual  example  of  what 
had  passed  before  his  own  eyes. 

Ver.  6.— For.  The  particle  introduces 
the  example.  At  the  window  of  my  house. 
He  gives  a  graphic  delineation  of  a  scene 
witnessed  outside  hia  house.  I  looked 
through  my  casement ;  eshniib, "  the  lattice," 
which  served  the  purpose  of  our  Venetian 
blinds,  excluding  the  sun,  but  letting  the 
ceol  air  pass  into  tlie  room  (comp.  Judg.  v. 
'ii>).    A  person  within  could  see  all  that 


passed  in  the  street  without  being  himself 
visible  from  without  (Oant.  ii.  9).  The 
Septuagint  reads  the  sentence  as  spoken  of 
the  woman  :  "For  from  the  window  glanc- 
ing out  of  her  house  into  the  streets,  at  one 
whom  she  might  see  of  the  senseless  chil- 
dren, a  young  man  void  of  understanding." 

Ver.  7. — And  beheld  among  the  simple 
ones.  Though  it  was  night  (ver.  9),  there 
was  light  enough  from  moon  or  stars  or  from 
illuminated  houses  to  show  what  was  pass- 
ing. "  The  simple "  are  the  inexperiencea, 
who  are  easily  led  astray  (see  on  ch.  i.  4). 
Looking  forth  into  the  street  on  the  throng 
of  young  and  thoughtlesg  persons  passing 
to  and  fro,  among  them  I  disoemed  .  .  , 
a  young  man  void  of  understanding;  a 
fool,  who,  without  any  deliberate  intention 
of  sinning,  put  himself  in  the  way  of  temp- 
tation, played  on  the  borders  of  trans- 
gression. The  way  of  escape  was  before 
liim,  as  it  is  in  all  temptations  (1  Cor.  x. 
13),  but  he  would  not  take  it.  Such  a  one 
may  well  be  said  to  lack  understanding,  or 
heart,  as  the  Hebrew  expresses  it  (ch.  ■»!. 
32,  where  see  note). 

Ver.  8. — Uear  her  corner.  He  kept  near 
the  corner  of  the  house  of  the  woman  for 
whom  he  waited.  Another  reading  gives, 
"near  a  corner;"  juxta  (in^ttZam,  Vulgate ; 
Trapct  yavlttv,  Septuagiot ;  i.e.  he  did  not  take 
to  the  broad,  open  street,  but  sneaked  about 
at  comers,  whence  he  could  watch  the 
woman's  house  without  being  observed  by 
others.  He  went  the  way  to  her  house. 
He  sauntered  slowly  along,  as  the  verb 
signifies.  Septuagint, "  Passing  by  a  comer 
in  the  passages  of  her  house  Qv  StiSots  oXkuv 
auTTJs)." 

Ver.  9. — In  the  twilight,  in  the  evening 
of  the  day.  So  termed  to  distinguish  it  from 
the  morning  twilight.  The  moralist  sees 
the  youtli  pacing  to  and  fro  in  the  early 
evening  hours,  and  still  watching  and  wait- 
ing when  the  darkness  was  deepest  (oomp. 
Job  xxiv.  15).  In  the  black  and  dark 
night;  literally,  in  the  pupil  of  the  eye  of 
night  and  in  darknest.  We  have  the  same 
expression  in  ch.  xx.  20  (where  see  note) 
to  denote  midnight.  Its  appropriateness 
is  derived  from  the  fact  that  the  pupil 
of  the  eye  is  the  dtirk  centre  in  the  iris. 
Septuagint:  the  youth  "speaking  in  the 
darkness  of  evening,  when  there  is  the 
stillness  of  night  and  gloom." 

Ver.  10. — And,  behold,  there  met  him  a 
woman.  His  long  watch  is  rewarded ;  the 
woman  comes  forth  from  her  house  into  the 
street — a  proceeding  which  would  at  once 
show  what  she  was,  especially  in  the  East, 
where  females  are  kept  secluded,  and  never 
appear  at  night  or  unattended.  With  the 
attire  of  an  harlot.  There  is  no  "  with  "  in 
the  original,  "woman"  and  "attire"  being 


en.  vn.  1—27.1 


THE  PEOVEEBS. 


1S6 


in  appOBition :  "  There  met  him  a  woman, 
a  harlot's  dresB"  (jshith,  Ps.  Ixxiii.  6);  her 
attire  catches  the  eye  at  once,  and  iden- 
tifies her  (comp.  Gen.  xxxviii.  14).  In 
Eev.  xvii.  4  the  harlot  ia  "  arrayed  in 
purple  and  scarlet,  and  decked  with  gold 
and  precious  stoneB  and  pearls;"  and  in 
the  present  case  the  female  is  dressed  in 
some  conspicuous  garments,  very  different 
from  the  sober  clothing  of  the  pnre  and 
modest.  SahtU  of  heart  (a*?,  rrnyj) ;  literally, 
of  concealed  heart;  i.e.  she  hides  her  real 
feelings,  feigning,  perhaps,  affwction  for  a 
husband,  or  love  for  her  paramour,  while  she 
seeks  only  to  satisfy  her  evil  passions.  The 
versions  have  used  a  different  reading. 
Thus  the  Septuagint :  "  Who  makes  the 
hearts  of  young  men  flutter  (^I^TTTotreai) ; " 
Vulgate,  pr^parata  ad  capiendas  animas, 
"  ready  to  catch  souls." 

Vers.  11  and  12  describe  the  character 
and  habits  of  this  woman,  not  as  she  ap- 
peared on  this  occasion,  but  as  she  is  knovm 
to  the  writer. 

Ver.  11. — She  ia  lend ;  boisterous,  clamor- 
ous, as  ch.  ix.  13.  The  description  applies 
to  a  brute  beast  at  certain  periods.  Stub- 
bom;  ungovernable,  like  an  animal  that 
will  not  bear  the  yoke  (Hos.  iv.  16).  Vul- 
gate, garrula  et  vaga,  "  talkative  and  un- 
settled;" Septuagint,  aveirrfpto/ifyTi  koI 
So-aiTof, "  flighty  and  debauched."  Her  feet 
abide  not  in  her  house.  She  is  the  oppo- 
site of  the  careful,  modest  housewife,  who 
stays  at  homo  and  manages  her  family 
affairs  (Titus  ii.  5).  The  Vulgate  inserts 
another  trait:  quietu  impatient,  "always 
restless." 

Ver.  12. — Now  is  she  without,  now  in  the 
streets.  At  one  moment  outside  her  own 
door,  at  another  in  the  open  street.  Septua- 
gint :  "  At  one  time  she  roams  without 
(€{»  pefiPerai)."  The  woman  is  represented 
not  as  a  common  prostitute,  but  as  a  licen- 
tious wife,  who,  in  her  unbridled  lustful- 
ness,  acts  the  part  of  a  harlot.  Lieth  in 
wait  at  every  comer;  seeking  to  entice 
some  victim.  Then  the  narrative  proceeds ; 
the  writer  returns  to  what  he  beheld  on  the 
occasion  to  which  he  refers. 

Ver.  13.— So  she  caught  him,  and  kissed 
him ;  being  utterly  lost  to  shame,  like  Poti- 
phar's  wife  (Gen.  ixxix.  12).  With  an 
impudent  face  said;  literally,  strengthened 
her  face  and  said;  put  on  a  bold  and  brazen 
look  to  suit  the  licentious  words  which  she 
spoke.  Wordsworth  quotes  the  delineation 
of  the  "strange  woman"  drawn  by  St. 
Ambrose  ('  De  Cain,  et  Abel.,'  i.  4) :  "  Domi 
inquleta,  in  plateis  vaga,  osculis  prodiga, 
pudore  vilis,  amiotn  dives,  genas  picts; 
meretrioio  procax  motn,  infracto  per  delicias 


incessu,  nutantiboa  oonlis,  et  ludentibus 
jaculans  palpebris  retia,  quibus  pretiosaa 
animas  juvenum  capit." 

Ver.  14. — I  have  peace  offerings  with  me. 
Shelamim,  "  peace  or  thank  offerings,"  were 
divided  between  Jehovah,  the  priests,  and 
the  offerer.  Part  of  the  appointed  victim 
was  consumed  by  fire ;  the  breast  and  right 
shoulder  were  allotted  to  the  priests ;  and 
the  rest  of  the  animal  belonged  to  the 
person  who  made  the  offering,  who  was  to 
eat  it  with  his  household  on  the  same  day 
as  a  solemn  ceremonial  feast  (Lev.  iii. ;  vii.). 
The  adulteress  says  that  certain  offerings 
were  due  from  her,  and  she  had  duly  made 
them.  This  day  have  I  payed  my  vows. 
And  now  (the  day  being  reckoned  from  one 
night  to  the  next)  the  feast  was  ready,  and 
she  invites  her  paramour  to  share  it  Tlie 
religious  nature  of  the  feast  is  utterly 
ignored  or  forgotten.  The  shameless  woman 
uses  the  opportunity  simply  as  a  convenience 
for  her  sin.  If,  as  is  probable,  the  "strange 
woman "  is  a  foreigner,  she  is  one  who  only 
outwardly  conforms  to  the  Mosaic  Law,  but 
in  her  heart  cleaves  to  the  impure  worship 
of  her  heathen  home.  And  doubtless,  in 
lax  times,  these  religiotu  festivals,  even  in 
the  case  of  worshippers  who  were  not  in- 
fluenced by  idolatrous  proclivities,  degene- 
rated into  self-indulgence  and  excess.  The 
early  Christian  agapas  were  thus  misused 
(1  Cor.  xi.  20,  etc.);  and  in  modem  times 
religious  anniversaries  have  too  often  become 
occasions  of  licence  and  debauchery,  their 
solemn  origin  and  pious  uses  being  entirely 
thrust  aside. 

Ver.  15.— Therefore  came  I  forth  to  meet 
thee.  As  though  she  would  invite  the  youth 
to  a  pious  rite,  she  speaks;  she  uses  religion 
as  a  pretext  for  her  proceedings,  trying  to 
blind  his  conscience  and  to  gratify  his 
vanity.  Diligently  to  seek  thy  face,  and  I 
have  found  thee  (see  on  ch.  i.  28).  She  tries 
to  persuade  her  dupe  that  he  is  the  very 
lover  for  whom  she  was  looking,  whereas 
she  was  ready  to  take  the  first  that  offered. 
Spiritual  writers  see  in  this  adulteress  a  type 
of  the  mystery  of  iniquity,  or  false  doctrine, 
or  the  harlot  described  in  Eevelation  (ii.  20, 
etc. ;  xvii.  1,  etc. ;  xviii.  9,  etc.). 

Ver.  16. — She  describes  the  preparation 
she  has  made  for  his  entertainment.  Cover- 
ings of  tapestry ;  marbaddim,  "  cushions," 
"pillows."  The  expression  occurs  again  in 
ch.  xxxi.  22.  It  is  derived  from  lai,  "  to 
spread,"  and  means  cushions  spread  out 
ready  for  use.  The  Septuagint  has  Kstpiais ; 
Yn\gsi,te,  funibus,  "cords."  These  versions 
seem  to  regard  the  word  as  denoting  a  kind 
of  delicate  sacking  on  which  the  coverlets 
were  laid.  Carved  works,  with  fine  linen  of 
Egypt ;  literally,  striped,  or  variegated,  cover- 
ings, Egyptian  linen.     The  words  are  in 


156 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[m.  vn.  1 — 27. 


apposition,  but  the  lattrr  point  to  the 
material  used,  which  is  )»N,  etun  (fiiraj 
Ksy6iiei/ov),  "linen  yarn  or  thread,"  hence 
equivalent  to  "  coverleta  of  Egyptian  thread." 
This  was  of  extreme  fineness,  costly,  and 
much  prized.  By  "  carved  works  "  (Hebrew, 
niapn,  chatuhoth)  the  Authorizeil  Version 
must  refer  to  bed-poles  or  bed-boards  elabo- 
rately carved  anil  polished ;  but  the  word  is 
better  taken  of  coverlets  striped  in  different 
colours,  which  give  the  idea  of  richness  and 
luxury.  Vulgate,  trapetihus  pictis  ex  ^gypto, 
"embroidered  rugs  of  Egyptian  work;" 
Septuagint,  afitfurdiroLS  Tois  &ff*  AiyvTrTov^ 
"  shaggy  cloth  of  Egypt."  The  mention  of 
these  articles  denotes  the  foreign  commerce 
of  the  Hebrews,  and  their  appreciation  of 
artistic  work  (comp.  Isa.  xix.  9 ;  Ezek.  ixvii. 
7).  The  Prophet  Amos  (vi.  4)  denounces 
tliose  that  "lie  upon  beds  of  ivory,  and 
stretch  themselves  upon  their  couches." 

Ver.  17. — ^I  have  perfumed  my  bed  with 
myrrh,  aloes,  and  cinnamon.  The  sub- 
stances mentioned  were  dissolved  in  or  mixed 
with  water,  and  then  sprinkled  on  tlie 
couch.  The  love  of  such  things  is  reckoned 
as  a  sign  of  luxury  and  vice  (Isa.  iii.  20, 
etc.).  Tlie  tliree  perfumes  are  mentioned 
together  in  Cant.  iv.  14 ;  "  myrrh,  aloes,  and 
cassia,"  in  Ps.  xlv.  8.  Septuagint,  "  I  have 
sprinkled  my  couch  witli  saffron,  and  my 
liouse  with  cinnamon."  Myrrh  is  nowadays 
imported  chiefly  from  Bombay,  but  it  seems 
to  be  found  in  Arabia  and  on  the  coasts  of 
the  Red  Sea  and  Persian  Gulf.  It  is  a 
gumnjy  substance  exuding  from  tlie  bark  of 
the  balsamodeudron  when  wounded,  and 
possessing  an  aromatic  odour  not  particularly 
agreeable  to  modern  tastes.  It  was  one  of 
the  ingredients  of  the  holy  oil  (Exod.  xxx. 
23),  and  was  used  in  the  purification  of 
women  (Esth.  ii.  12),  as  well  as  in  per- 
fuming persons  and  things,  and,  mixed  with 
aloes,  in  embalming  dead  bodies  (John  xix. 
39).  Aloes  is  the  inspissated  juice  of  the 
leaves  of  the  aloe,  a  leguminous  plant  grow- 
ing in  India,  Cochin  China,  Abyssinia,  and 
Socotra.  The  ancients  used  the  dried  root 
for  aromatic  purposes.  It  is  mentioned  by 
Balaam  (Numb.  xxir.  6).  Cinnamon,  wliich 
is  the  same  word  in  Hebrew  and  Greek,  is 
the  fragrant  bark  of  a  tree  growing  in 
Ceylon  and  India  and  the  east  coast  of 
Africa. 

Ver.  18.— let  ns  take  our  fill  of  love;  let 
us  intoxicate  ounelves  (inebriemur,  Vulgate) ; 
as  tFiough  the  reason  were  overthrown  by 
sensual  passion  as  much  as  by  drunkenness. 
The  bride  in  Cant.  i.  2  says,  "  Thy  love  is 
better  than  wine  "  (see  ch.  v.  15,  19,  and  note 
there). 

Ver.  19. — The  temptress  proceeds  to  en- 
.■Miirnge  the  youth  by  showing  that  there  is 
11(1  Irar  of  intorruption  or  detection.     The 


goodman  is  not  at  home.  "Gtoodman"  ii 
an  old  word  meaning  "  master  of  the  house," 
or  husband  (Matt.  xx.  11,  etc.);  but  the 
Hebrew  is  simply  "the  man,"  which  ii 
probably  a  contemptuous  way  of  (peaking 
of  the  husband  whom  she  was  outraging. 
He  is  gone  a  long  journey ;  he  has  gone  to 
a  place  at  a  great  distance  hence.  This 
fact  might  assure  her  lover  that  he  was  safe 
from  her  husband's  jealousy  (ch.  vi  34); 
but  she  has  further  encouragement  to  offer. 

Ver.  20. — He  hath  taken  a  bag  of  money 
with  him ;  not  only  to  defray  the  expenses 
of  the  journey  (a  fact  which  need  not  be 
dwelt  upon),  but  because  he  has  some 
pecuniary  business  to  transact  which  will 
occupy  his  time,  and  prevent  his  return  before 
the  appointed  hour.  And  will  come  home 
at  the  day  appointed ;  better,  as  the  Revised 
Version,  he  will  come  home  at  the  full  moon 
{in  die  plena  lunas,  Vulgate).  NM  here,  and 
nD3  Ps.  Ixxxi.  4,  are  rightly  translated 
"  tlie  full  moon,"  tliis  rendering  being  sup- 
ported by  the  Syiiao  kSso,  though  the 
etymology  is  doubtful.  As  it  has  before 
been  mentiuned  that  the  night  was  dark 
(ver.  9),  it  is  plain  that  tliere  were  still 
many  days  to  run  before  the  moon  was  full, 
and  the  husband  returned. 

Ver.  21. — Thus  far  we  have  had  the 
adulteress  introduced  speaking;  now  the 
narrative  proceeds.  With  her  mnch  fair 
speech  she  caused  him  to  yield.  First,  she 
influenced  hii  mind,  and  bent  his  will  to  her 
purpose  by  her  evil  eloquence.  The  Hebrew 
word  means  "  doctrine,  or  learning" — devil's 
pleading  (ch.  1.  5;  ix.  9).  St.  Jerome  has 
irretivit,  "she  netted  him;"  Septuagint, 
"  She  caused  him  to  go  astray  (ojreirAotyijo-t) 
by  much  converse."  She  talked  him  over, 
though  indeed  he  had  put  himself  in  the  way 
of  temptation,  and  had  now  no  power  to 
resist  lier  seductions.  Then  with  the  flatter- 
ing of  her  lips  she  forced  him ;  drew  him 
away.  His  body  followed  the  lead  of  hia 
blinded  mind;  he  acceded  to  her  solicita- 
tions. Septuagint,  "With  the  snares  of  her 
lips  she  ran  him  aground  (e{cSfc€iAE),  drove 
him  headlong  to  ruin." 

Ver.  22. — He  goeth  after  her  straightway ; 
suddenly,  as  though, casting  aside  all  scruples, 
he  gave  himself  up  to  the  temptation,  and 
with  no  further  delay  accompanied  her  to 
the  house.  Septuagint,  "  He  followed,  being 
cajoled  {Keir<paBeis),  ensnared  like  a  silly 
bird"  (see  the  article  on  Cepphus  Lanu, 
in  Erasmus's '  Adag.,'  ».r.  "  Garrulitas  ").  As 
an  ox  goeth  to  the  slaughter.  He  no  more 
realizes  the  serious  issue  of  his  action  than 
an  irrational  beast  which,  without  prevision 
of  the  future,  walks  contentedly  to  the 
slaughter-house,  and  is  stupidly  placid  in 
the  face  of  death.  Or  as  a  fool  to  the  cor- 
reotion  of  the  stocks.     There  is  some  diffi 


▼II.  1—27.] 


THE  PBOVEBBS. 


157 


oulty  in  the  ttanslation  of  this  clause.  The 
Authorized  Yeision,  with  which  Delitzsch 
virtually  agrees,  is  obtained  by  transposition 
of  the  nouns,  the  natural  rendering  of  the 
Hebrew  being  "  as  fetters  to  the  correction 
of  a  fool."  The  sense  thus  obtained  is 
obvious:  the  youth  follows  the  woman,  as 
a  fool  or  a  criminal  is  led  unresisting  to 
coufiuement  and  degradation.  Doubtless 
there  is  some  error  in  the  text,  as  may  bo 
seen  by  comparison  of  the  versions.  Septua- 
gint  (with  which  the  Syriao  agrees),  "  As 
a  dog  to  chains,  or  as  a  hart  struck  to 
the  liver  with  an  arrow  ; "  Vulgate,  "  As  » 
frisking  lamb,  and  not  knowing  that  as 
a  fuol  he  is  being  dragged  to  bondage." 
The  commentators  are  much  divided. 
Fleischer,  "  As  if  in  fetters  to  the  punish- 
ment of  the  fool,"  i,«.  of  himself;  Ewald, 
**  As  when  a  steel  trap  (springs  up)  for  the 
correction  of  a  fool,"  i.e.  when  a  hidden 
trap  suddenly  catches  an  incautious  person 
wandering  where  he  lias  no  business.  The 
direct  interpretation,  that  the  youth  follows 
the  harlot,  as  fetters  the  proper  punishment 
of  fools,  is  unsatisfactory,  because  the  paral- 
lelism leads  us  to  expect  a  living  being 
iustead  of  "  fetters."  We  are  constrained  to 
fall  back  on  the  Authorized  Version  as  ex- 
hibiting ti>e  best  mode  of  reconstructing  a 
corrupt  text.  The  youth,  with  his  insensate 
passion,  is  compared  tu  the  madman  or  idiot 
who  is  taken  away,  uncon^^cious  of  his  fate, 
to  a  shameful  deprivation  of  liberty. 

Ver.  23. — Till  a  dart  strike  through  his 
liver.  This  clause  would  be  bettor  taken 
with  the  preceding  verse,  as  in  the  Septua- 
gint,  or  else  placed  in  a  parenthesis;  then 
the  following  clause  introduces  a  new  com- 
parison. The~  youth  follows  the  harlot  till 
his  liver,  the  seat  of  the  passions,  id 
thoroughly  inflamed,  or  till  fatal  conse- 
quences ensue.    Theoor,  '  Id.,'  xi.  15— 

''Zx9t(rToy  tx"'  vroKipSwv  e\Kos 
KvTtpios  ix  fieyd\as  rh  oi  {jiraTi  m^e  $e\ffivov. 
"Beneath  his  breast 
A  hateful  wound  he  bore  b>  Cypiis  given, 
Who  in  his  liver  fixed  the  fatal  dart." 
Delitzsch  would  relegate  the  hemistich  to 
the  end  of  the  verse,  making  it  denote  the 
final  result  of  mad  and  illicit  love.     The 
sense   thus  gained  is  satisfactory^  but  the 
alteration    is  quite  arbitrary,  and  unsup- 
ported by  ancient  authority.      As  a    bird 
hasteth  to  the  snare.    This  is  another  com- 
parison (see  oh.  i.  17,  the  first  proverb  in 
the  book,  knd  note  there).     And  knoweth 


not  that  it  is  for  his  life ;  i.e.  the  infatuated 
youth  does  not  consider  that  his  life  is  at 
stake,  that  he  ia  bringing  upon  himself,  by 
his  vicious  rashness,  temporal  and  spiritual 
ruin  (oh.  v.  1 1 ). 

Ver.  24. — Tlie  narrative  ends  here,  and 
the  autlior  makes  a  practical  exhortation  de- 
duced from  it.  Hearken  unto  me  now  there- 
fore, 0  ye  children.  He  began  by  addressing 
his  words  to  one,  "my  son"  (ver.  1);  he 
htie  turns  to  the  young  generally,  knowing 
how  necessary  is  his  warning  to  all  strong 
in  passion,  weak  in  will,  wanting  in  ex- 
perience. The  Septuagint  has  "my  son," 
as  in  ver.  1. 

Ver.  25. — Let  not  thine  heart  decline  to 
her  ways,  Tlie  verb  satah  is  used  in  ch.  iv. 
15  (where  see  note)  of  turning  aside  from 
evil;  but  here,  as  Delitzsch  notes,  it  is 
especially  appiopriate  to  the  case  of  a  faith- 
less wife  whose  transgression,  or  declension 
from  virtue,  is  described  by  this  term  (Numb. 
V.  12).  Go.  not  astray  in  her  paths.  The 
LXX.  (in  most  manuscripts)  has  only  one 
rendering  for  the  two  clauses :  "  Let  not 
thine  heart  Inoliue  unto  her  ways." 

Ver.  26. — For  she  hath  oast  down  many 
wounded.  Delitzsch,  "For  many  are  the 
slain  whom  she  hath  caused  to  fall."  The 
harlot  marks  her  course  wiih  ruined  souls, 
as  a  ruthless  conqueror  leaves  a  field  of 
battle  strewn  with  corpses.  Yea,  many  strong 
(atswm)  men  have  been  slain  by  her.  One 
thinks  of  Samson  and  David  and  Solomon, 
the  victims  of  illicit  love,  and  suffering  for 
it.  Vulgate,  et  fortissimi  quique  interfecli 
sunt  ah  ea,  lint  the  Septuagint  and  many 
moderns  take  atsum  in  the  sense  of  "nu- 
merous," as  Ps.  XXXV.  18 ;  ayapiB/iifToi, 
"innumerable  are  her  slain."  The  former 
interpretation  seems  preferable,  and  avoids 
tautology. 

Ver.  27. — Her  house  is  the  way  to  hell 
(sheol).  A  warning  found  in  ch.  ii.  18  and 
ch.  V.  5.  Via}  in/eri  domus  ejus.  The  pluial 
<3"ii  is  well  exiiressed  by  Hitzig:  "Her 
house  forms  a  multiplicity  of  ways  to  hell." 
Manifold  are  the  ways  of  destruction  to 
which  adultery  leads ;  but  they  all  look  to 
one  awful  end.  Going  down  to  the  chambers 
of  death.  Once  entangled  in  the  toils  of 
the  temptress,  the  victim  may  pass  throuf^h 
many  stages,  but  he  ends  finally  in  the 
lowest  depth — destruction  of  body  and  soul. 
Spiritual  writers  see  here  an  adumbration  of 
the  seductions  of  false  dootriue,  and  the 
fate  to  which  it  brings  all  who  by  it  are  led 
astray. 


168  THE  PROVERBS,  [oh.  vii.  1—27. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — Keeping  the  commandments.  We  are  all  familiar  with  the  expression, 
" keeping  the  commandments."  But  do  we  all  fully  comprehend  what  this  involves! 
Let  as  consider  some  of  the  requisites. 

I.  Eemembbr  the  commandments.  "  Lay  up  my  commandments  with  thee."  The 
Law  was  treasured  in  the  ark.  It  is  important  that  great  principles  should  be  so 
impressed  upon  our  minds  as  to  perpetually  haunt  our  memories,  and  recur  to  our  vision 
in  critical  moments.  The  school-task  of  committing  the  ten  commandments  to 
memory  will  not  be  enough.  The  text  does  not  refer  to  the  Law  of  Moses,  but  to 
parental  instruction.     Great  Christian  principles  are  what  we  need  to  treasure  up. 

II.  Let  nothing  tamper  with  the  commandments.  "  Keep  my  law  as  the  apple 
of  thine  eye."  We  cannot  bear  the  smallest  speck  of  dust  in  the  eye.  The  slightest 
wound  is  most  painful.  Let  us  beware  of  allowing  the  least  injury  to  the  healthy 
condition  of  the  law  within  us.    Moral  scepticism  is  most  dangerous. 

III.  BRisa  THE  COMMANDMENTS  TO  BEAB  ON  DAiLT  LIFE.  "Bind  them  upon  thy 
fingers."  Thus  they  will  be  always  before  us,  and  brought  into  contact  with  practical 
affairs.  It  is  useless  to  keep  the  Law  only  in  the  closet.  It  must  be  carried  with  us  to 
the  workshop,  the  market-place,  the  senate-house.  How  many  people's  religion  never 
reaches  their  fingers !    Like  men  with  feeble  circulation,  they  have  cold  extremities. 

IV.  Cherish  the  commandments  afpeotionatelt.  "  Write  them  upon  the  table 
of  thine  heart."  This  means  impressing  them  upon  the  whole  being — understanding, 
memory,  affection.  The  secret  of  feeble  circulation  at  the  extremities  is  defective  action 
of  the  heart.  If  we  are  to  obey  the  Law  we  must  pray  that  God  will  "  incline  our 
hearts  to  keep  "  it. 

Vers.  6 — 27. — Profligacy.  [It  would  not,  perhaps,  be  wise  for  any  one  to  discuss  this 
subject  in  the  presence  of  a  general  congregation.  The  sin  is  so  fearfully  contaminating 
that  it  is  scarcely  possible  to  touch  it  in  any  way  without  contracting  some  defilement ; 
and  the  few  who  might  benefit  by  a  public  exposure  of  the  evils  of  profligacy  would 
be  greatly  outnumbered  by  the  multitude  of  people,  especially  the  young,  to  whom  the 
direction  of  attention  to  it  would  be  unwholesome.  But  on  special  occasions,  and  before 
special  audiences,  a  strong,  clear  denunciation  of  this  sin  may  be  called  for.  We  can 
avoid  the  subject  too  much,  and  so  leave  the  sin  unrebuked.  Certainly  some  men  do 
not  seem  to  realize  how  fearfully  wicked  and  how  fatally  ruinous  it  is.] 

I.  It  is  a  desecration  of  thb  temple  op  God.  It  is  a  sin  against  God  as  well 
as  an  offence  against  society.  Utterly  abandoned  men  will  set  little  weight  by  such  a 
consideration,  because  they  have  long  lost  all  serious  care  for  their  relations  with  God. 
But  it  is  important  that  they  who  are  in  danger  of  falling  should  remeoaber  the  solemn 
words  of  St.  Paul,  and  the  lofty  point  of  view  from  which  he  regards  the  subject  (1  Cor. 
vi.  18,  19).  The  Christian  is  a  temple  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Every  man  is  designed  to 
be  such  a  temple.     See  that  this  temple  is  not  converted  into  a  nest  of  corruption. 

II.  It  is  ruinous  to  any  one  who  succumbs  to  it.  It  ruins  the  mind,  degrading 
the  whole  tone  and  energy  of  thought.  It  is  the  most  gross  and  disastrous  dissipation. 
It  ruins  the  physical  health.  It  ruins  wholesome  interest  in  pure  delights.  It  ruins 
business  prospects.  It  ruins  reputation.  It  brings  other  sins  in  its  train.  It  ruins 
the  soul.    He  who  abandons  himself  to  it  is  indeed  a  lost  man. 

IIL  It  is  heartlessly  obukl.  The  heaviest  guilt  lies  with  the  tempter.  When 
a  man  has  deluded  and  ruined  a  woman,  society  regards  the  woman  with  loathing  and 
contempt,  while  the  man  often  escapes  with  comparative  impunity.  This  is  one  of  the 
grossest  instances  of  injustice  that  the  future  judgment  will  surely  rectify.  But  in  any 
case  of  profligacy  great  selfishness  and  cruelty  are  shown.  The  miserable  creatures 
who  live  by  sin  could  not  continue  their  wretched  traffic  if  men  did  not  encourage  it. 
The  demand  creates  the  supply,  and  is  responsible  for  the  hopeless  misery  that  results, 

IV.  It  IB  fatal  to  sound  social  order.  It  is  a  gangrene  in  society,  eating  out 
its  very  heart.  Nothing  more  surely  undermines  the  true  welfare  of  a  people.  It  ii 
fatal  to  the  sanctities  of  the  home — sanctities  on  which  the  very  life  of  the  nation 
depends. 


OH.  vn.  I— 27,]  THE  PEOVBBBS.  159 

V.  All   this    accompanies    the    INDULaENOB    OF    WHAT    IS    PtrBS0BD    SOLELY   AS   A 

SELFISH  PLEA8UBE.  The  profligate  man  has  not  the  thief's  excuse,  who  may  rob 
because  he  is  starving  (see  ch.  vi.  80 — 32);  nor  can  he  pretend  tbat  he  is  benefiting 
any  one  else  by  his  wickedness. 

In  conclusion:  1.  Let  the  Legislature  be  urged  to  repeal  any  laws  that  make  the 
indulgence  of  this  sin  more  easy  by  countertctiug  its  natural  penalties.  2.  Let  all  men 
avoid  the  smallest  temptation  towards  it — all  amusements  and  scenes  that  lead  thither. 
3.  Let  employers  endeavour  to  protect  young  people  under  theii- charge  from  the  fearful 
dangers  of  city  life.  4.  Let  Christians  seek  to  save  the  falling  and  rescue  the  fallen  in 
the  spirit  of  Christ,  who  received  penitent  ^linuers. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — ^27. — A  tragedy  of  temptation.  This  is  a  fine  piece  of  dramatic  moral 
description,  and  there  is  no  reason  why  it  should  not  be  made  use  of,  handled  with  tact 
and  delicacy,  with  an  audience  of  young  men. 

I.  The  pbologue.  (Vers.  1 — 5.)  On  ver.  1,  see  ch.  i.  8 ;  il.  1 ;  vi.  20.  On  ver.  2, 
see  on  ch.  iv.  4.  Here  an  expression  not  before  used  occurs.  "Keep  my  doctrine  as 
thine  eye-apple;"  literally,  "  the  little  man  in  thine  eye."  It  is  an  Oriental  figure  for 
what  is  a  treasured  possession  (Deut.  xxxii.  10 ;  Ps.  xvii.  8).  On  ver.  3,  see  on 
ch.  iii.  3;  vi.  21.  "Bind  them  on  thy  fingers,"  like  costly  rings.  Let  Wisdom  be 
addressed  and  regarded  as  "  sister,"  Prudence  as  "  intimate  friend  "  (ver.  4).  On  ver.  5, 
see  on  ch.  iL  16 ;  vi.  24.  On  the  prologue  as  a  whole,  remark  (1)  it  is  intense  in  feeling, 
(2)  concentrated  in  purpose,  and  hence  (3)  exhaustive  in  images  of  that  which  is 
precious  and  desirable  before  all  else.  It  is  an  overture  which  gives  the  theme  of  the 
drama  with  the  deepest  impressiveness. 

II.  The  fiest  act.  (Vers.  6 — 9.)  The  teacher  looked  through  a  grated  loophole, 
or  eshndb,  and  saw  among  the  silly  fools,  the  simple  ones,  who  passed  by  or  stood 
chatting,  one  simpleton'  in  particular,  who  attracted  his  notice.  He  watched  him  turn 
a  corner  (hesitating,  and  looking  around  a  moment,  according  to  Ewald's  explanation), 
and  pass  down  a  street.  The  Hebrew  word  finely  shows  the  deliberacy,  the  measured 
step,  with  which  he  goes ;  he  has  made  up  his  mind  to  rush  into  sin.  It  was  late  in 
the  evening — "  dark,  dark,  dark,"  says  the  writer,  with  tragic  and  suggestive  iteration 
— dark  in  every  sense.    The  night  is  prophetic. 

III.  The  second  act.  (Vers.  10 — 20.)  A  woman — "  the  attire  of  a  harlot "  (as  if 
she  were  nothing  hut  a  piece  of  dress),  with  a  heart  fidl  of  wiles,  meets  him.  She  was 
excitable,  noisy,  uncontrollable,  gadding — now  in  the  streets,  now  in  the  markets,  now 
at  every  corner  (vers.  11,  12).  Her  characteristics  have  not  changed  from  ancient 
times.  And  so  with  effrontery  she  seizes  and  kisses  the  fool,  and  solicits  him  with 
brazen  impudence.  Thank  offerings  had  "  weighed  upon "  her  in  consequence  of  a 
vow ;  but  this  day  the  sacrificial  animal  has  been  slain,  and  the  meat  which,  according 
to  the  Law,  must  be  consumed  within  two  days,  has  been  prepared  for  a  feast.  And 
she  invites  him  to  the  entertainment,  fires  his  fancy  with  luxurious  descriptions  of  the 
variegated  tapestries  and  the  neat  perfumes  of  her  couch,  and  the  promise  of  illicit 
pleasures.  She  alludes  with  cool  shamelessness  to  her  absent  husband,  who  will  not 
return  till  the  day  of  the  full  moon  (ver.  20).  "  This  verse  glides  smoothly,  as  if  we 
could  hear  the  sweet  fluting  of  the  temptress's  voice."  But  it  is  as  the  song  of  birds  in 
a  wood  before  an  awful  storm. 

IV.  The  THlBD  ACT.  (Vers.  21 — ^23.)  Her  seductive  speech,  the  "  fulness  of  her 
doctrine,"  as  the  writer  ironically  says,  and  the  smoothness  of  her  lips,  overcome  the 
yielding  imagination  of  her  victim.  Ver.  22  implies  that  he  had  hesitated ;  but  "  all  at 
once,"  passion  getting  the  better  of  reflection,  he  follows  her  like  a  brute  under  the 
dominion  of  a  foreign  will  driven  to  the  slaughter-house.  He  is  passive  in  the  power 
of  the  temptress,  as  the  fool  who  has  got  into  the  stocks.     "  Till  a  dart  cleave  his 

liver" the  supposed  seat  of  passion.     Hastening  like  a  bird  into  the  net,  he  knows  not 

that  his  life  is  at  stake.  ,  -        t 

V.  The  epilogue.  (Vers.  24—27.)  On  ver.  24,  see  on  ch.  v.  7.  "Let  not  thy 
heart  turn  aside  to  her  ways,  and  go  not  astray  on  her  paths."    Propeily,  "reel  not*' 


160  THE  PEOVEEBa  [ch.  viii.  1—36 

(iihdgdh),  aa  in  cb,  v.  20.  Beware  of  that  intoxication  of  the  senses  and  fancy  which 
leads  to  such  an  end.  For  she  is  a  feller  of  men,  a  cruel  murderess  (ver.  26).  Her 
house  is  as  the  vestibule  of  hell,  the  facilis  descensus  Averni — the  passage  ta  the 
chambers  of  death  (see  on  ch.  ii.  18 ;  v.  5). 

Lessons.  1.  Folly  and  vice  are  characteristically  the  same  in  every  age.  Hence 
these  scenes  have  lost  none  of  their  dramatic  power  or  iiioial  suggestion.  2.  Only 
virtue  is  capable  of  infinite  diversity  and  charm.  The  pleasures  of  mere  passion, 
violent  at  first,  pass  into  monotony,  thence  into  disgust.  3.  The  character  of  the 
utter  harlot  has  never  been  made  other  than  repulsive  (even  in  French  fiction,  as  Znla'g 
'Nana')  in  poetry.  What  exists  in  practical  form  is  mere  dregs  and  refuse.  4.  The 
society  of  pure  and  refined  women  is  the  best  antidote  to  vicious  tastes.  For  to  form 
s  correct  tas^e  in  any  matter  is  to  form,  at  the  same  time,  a  distaste  for  coarse  and 
spurious  quahiy.  Perhaps  reflections  of  this  order  may  be  more  useful  to  young  men 
than  much  declamation. — J. 

Vers.  1 — 27. — Tlie  two  ways.    Here  we  have— 

L  The  wat  op  sin  and  death.  This  is :  1,  The  way  of  thoughUesmeu.  It  is 
the  "simple  ones,"  the  "yoimg  men  void  of  understanding "  (ver.  7),  those  who  go 
heedlessly  "  near  the  comer,"  "  the  way  to  the  house  "  of  the  tempter  or  the  temptress 
(ver.  8).  It  is  those  who  "  do  not  consider,"  who  do  not  think  who  they  are,  what 
they  are  here  for,  whither  they  go,  what  the  end  will  be; — ^it  is  these  who  go  astray 
and  are  found  in  the  way  of  death.  2.  The  way  of  darkness.  (Ver.  9.)  Sin  hates  the 
light ;  it  loves  the  darkness.  It  cannot  endure  the  penetrating  glance,  the  reproachful 
look,  of  the  good  and  wise  man.  It  prefers  to  be  where  it  can  better  imagine  that  it  is 
tmseen  of  God.  3.  The  way  of  sAame.  (Vers.  10 — 20.)  The  result  of  habitual  sin  is 
to  rob  woman  of  her  native  purity,  to  make  her  impudent  and  immudest.  How  sad, 
beyond  almost  everything,  the  effect  of  guilt  that  will  put  shameful  thoughts  into  a 
woman's  mind,  shameless  words  into  a  woman's  lips  I  If  sin  will  do  this,  what 
enormity  of  evU  will  it  not  work  ?  4.  The  way  of  falsehood,  of  pretence,  of  imposture. 
(Vers.  14,  15.)  6.  The  way  of  weakness  and  defeat.  (Vers.  21,  22.)  A  man,  under 
the  power  of  sin,  yields  himself  up;  he  is  vanquished,  he  surrenders  his  manliness,  he 
has  to  own  to  himself  that  he  is  miserably  beaten.  The  strong  man  is  slain  by  sin,  tte 
wounded  is  cast  down  (ver.  26).  He  who  has  gained  victories  on  other  fields,  and  won 
trophies  in  other  ways,  is  utterly  defeated,  is  taken  captive,  is  humiliated  by  sin.  6. 
The  way  of  death  and  damnation.    (Ver.  27.) 

II.  The  way  of  niaHTEOUSNESS  and  life.  (Vers.  1 — 5.)  This  is:  1.  The  way 
o^  attention.  The  will  of  God  must  first  be  heeded  and  understood.  2.  The  way  of 
holy  love.  We  must  take  Divine  wisdom  to  our  heart,  and  love  it  as  that  which  is 
near  and  dear  to  us  (ver.  4).  3.  The  way  of  wise  culture.  (Vers.  1 — 3.)  We  are  to 
take  the  greatest  pains  to  keep  God's  thou?;ht  in  our  remembrance,  before  the  eyes  of 
our  soul.  We  are  to  take  every  needful  measure  to  keep  it  intact,  whole,  flawless  in 
our  heart.  We  are  to  find  it  a  home  in  (he  inmost  chamber,  in  the  sacred  places  of  our 
spirit.  Then  will  this  path  of  righteousness  prove  to  us  to  be :  4.  The  path  of  life. 
Keeping  his  commandments,  we  shall  "live"  (ver.  2).  We  shall  live  the  life  of  virtue, 
escaping  the  snares  and  wiles  of  the  vicious  (ver.  5).  We  shall  live  the  life  of  piety 
and  integrity,  beloved  of  God,  honoured  of  man,  having  a  good  conscience,  cherishing 
a  good  hope  through  giaoe  of  eternal  life. — 0. 

EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEB  Vm. 
Vers.  1 — 86. — 14.  Foarteenth  admonitory 
discourse  concemiDg  Wisdom — her  excel- 
lence, her  origin,  her  gifts.  She  is  con- 
trasted with  the  strange  woman  of  ch.  vii., 
and  the  exceeding  greatness  of  the  blessings 
wiuoh  she  offers  exhibits  in  the  most  marked 


manner  the  nothingness  of  the  deceiver's 
gifts.  One  is  reminded  of  the  celebrated 
episode  of  the  choice  of  Hercules,  delineated 
by  Xenophon,  'Memorab.,'  ii.  1.  21,  etc.  The 
chapter  divides  itself  into  four  sections.  (1) 
Introductory  (vers.  1 — 3) ;  Wisdom  calls  on 
all  to  listen,  and  gives  reasons  for  trusting 
to  her  (vers.  4—11).    (2)  She  displays  her 


OH.  vm.  1—86.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


161 


excellence  (vers.  12—21).  (3)  She  dis- 
courses of  her  origin  and  action  (yers.  22 — 
31).  (4)  She  again  inculcates  the  duty  of 
hearkening  to  lier  instructions  (vers.  32 — 
36). 

Ver.  1.— Doth  not  Wisdom  eryl  (see  on 
ch.  i.  20,  and  Introduction).  The  interroga- 
tive form,  which  expects  an  aflSrmative 
answer,  is  a  mode  of  asserting  a  truth  uui- 
versally  allowed.  Wisdom  is  personified, 
though  we  are  not  so  plainly  confronted  by 
an  individual,  as  in  the  preceding  case  of 
the  harlot.  But  it  must  be  remembered 
that,  whatever  may  have  been  the  author's 
exact  meaning,  liowever  worldly  a  view  the 
original  enunciation  may  have  attorded,  we, 
reading  these  chapters  by  the  light  cast 
upon  them  by  later  revelatidu,  see  in  the 
desci  iption  of  Wisdom  no  mere  ideal  of  pruc- 
tioiil  prudence  and  good  sense,  no  mere 
poetic  personification  of  an  abstract  quality, 
but  an  adumbration  of  him  wlio  is  the  Wis- 
dom of  God,  the  coeterual  Son  of  the  Father. 
The  open,  bold,  and  public  utterances  of 
Wisdom  are  in  happy  contrast  to  the  secret 
and  stealthy  enticements  of  Vice.  So  Christ, 
the  true  Wisdom,  says,  "  I  luive  spoken 
openly  to  the  world;  I  ever  taught  in  the 
synagogues,  and  in  tiie  temple,  where  all 
the  Jews  come  together;  and  in  secret 
eptike  I  nothing"  (John  xviii.  20).  The 
Siiptuafiint  changes  the  subji  ct  of  this  verse, 
and  iiiukea  the  pupil  addressed:  "Thou 
shalt  proclaim  (Kr)/)u'|eis)  wisdom,  that  un- 
derstanding {(ppivtiiris)  may  obey  thee;" 
which  seems  to  mean  that,  if  you  wish  to 
acquire  wisdiim,  so  that  i<  may  serve  you 
piaotically,  you  must  act_  as  a  herald  or 
preacher,  and  mike  your  "desire  generally 
known  St.  Gregory  has  some  remnrks 
about  wilful  ignorance  of  what  is  right.  "It 
is  one  thing,"  he  says,  "  to  be  ignorant ; 
another  to  have  refused  to  learn.  For  not 
to  know  is  only  ignorance;  to  refuse  to  learn 
is  pride.  And  they  are  the  less  able  to  plead 
ignorance  in  excuse,  the  more  that  know- 
ledge is  set  before  them,  even  against  their 
will.  We  might,  perhaps,  be  able  to  pass 
along  tlio  way  of  this  present  life  in  igno- 
rance of  this  Wisdom,  if  she  herself  had  not 
steod  in  the  corners  of  the  way  "  ('  Moral.,' 
XXV.  29). 

Ver.  2.— She  standeth  in  the  top  of  high 
places,  by  the  way.  She  takes  her  stand, 
not  in  thievish  coiners  of  the  streets,  like 
the  harlot,  but  in  the  most  open  and  elevated 
parts  of  the  city,  where  she  may  be  best  seen 
and  heard  by  all  who  lass  by  (see  ch.  i.  21, 
and  note  there).  In  the  places  of  the  paths ; 
i.e.  where  many  paths  converge,  and  where 
people  meet  from  different  quarters. 

Ver.  8. — The  expressions  in  the  text  indi- 
cate the  position  which  she  takes  and  its 

FS0TIBB8. 


capabilities.  At  the  hand  of  the  gates  (1 
Sam.  xix.  3) .  She  posts  herself  at  the  side 
of  the  city  gates,  under  the  archway  pierced 
in  the  wall,  where  she  is  sure  of  an  audience. 
At  the  month  of  the  city,  inside  the  gate, 
where  people  pass  on  their  way  to  the 
country.  At  the  coming  in  at  the  doors,  hj 
wliioh  persons  enter  the  town.  Thus  she 
catches  all  comers,  those  who  are  entering, 
as  well  as  those  who  are  leaving  the  city. 
Here  standing,  as  in  the  Agoia  or  Forum, 
sha  eiieth;  she  calls  aloud,  saying  what 
follows  (vers.  4 — 36).  It  is  a  fine  picture  of 
the  comprehensiveness  of  the  gospel,  which 
is  meant  for  high  and  low,  prince  and  peasant; 
which  is  proclaimed  everywhere,  iu  tiie  courts 
of  kings,  in  the  lanes  of  the  country,  in  the 
hovels  of  the  city ;  which  sets  forth  the  in- 
finite love  of  God,  who  is  not  willing  that 
any  should  perish,  but  would  have  all  meu 
come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth  (2  Pet. 
iii.  9).  Septuagint,  "By  the  gates  of  the 
mighty  she  sits,  in  the  entrances  she  sings 
aloud  (u/iyeiToi)." 

Vers.  4 — 11. — She  Bummoos  various  clas^ee 
of  persons  to  attend  to  her,  showing  how 
trustworthy  she  is,  and  how  precious  her 
instruction. 

Ver.  4. — Unto  you,  0  men,  I  call.  "  Men," 
ishim  (Q'?*'**) ;  equivalent  to  HvSpes,  viri,  meu 
in  the  highest  sense,  who  have  some  wisdom 
and  experience,  but  need  further  enlighten- 
ment (Isa.  llii.  3 ;  Fs.  oxli.  4).  The  sons  of 
man;  a:)^  >33,  "children  of  Adam ;  "  equiva- 
lent to  S.i'dpuTToi,  hmninee,  the  general  kind 
of  men,  who  are  taken  up  with  material 
interests.  St.  Gregory  notes  ('  Moral.,'  xxvii. 
6)  that  persons  (hominei)  of  perfect  life  are  in 
Scripture  sometimes  called  "men"  (viri). 
And .  again,  "  Scripture  is  wont  to  call  tliose 
persons  'men'  who  follow  the  ways  of  the 
Loid  with  firm  and  steady  steps.  Whence 
Wisdom  says  in  the  Proverbs,  '  Unto  you, 
O  men,  I  call.'  As  if  she  were  saying  openly, 
'  I  do  not  speak  to  women,  but  to  men ;  be- 
cause they  who  are  of  an  unstable  mind 
cannot  at  all  understand  my  words ' "  ('  Mo- 
ral.,' xxviii.  12,  Oxford  transl.). 

Ver.  5. — 0  ye  simple,  nnderstand  wisdom. 
*'  The  simple,"  those  not  yet  perverted,  but 
easily  influenced  for  good  or  evil.  See  ou 
ch.  i.  4,  where  alsj  is  explained  the  word 
ormdh,  used  here  for  "  wisdom ; "  equivalent 
to  ealliditas  in  a  good  sense,  or  iravovpyta,  as 
sometimes  employed  in  the  Septuagint ;  so 
here:  yoiiffare  &Kaicot  wavovpylap,  "subtletj'." 
Te  fools,  be  ye  of  an  understanding  heart. 
For  "fools"  (Ithesilim),  the  intellectually 
heavy  and  dull,  see  on  oh.  i.  22.  The  heart 
is  considered  the  seat  of  the  mind  or  under- 
standing (comp.  oh.  XV.  32;  xvii.  16,  eta.), 
Septuagint,  "  Ye  that  are  untaught,  take  in 


l«t 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[CH.  Tm.  1— 3«. 


heart  (^Acrle  KapSlav):'  The  call  thus 
addressed  to  TariouB  classes  of  persons  is 
like  the  section  in  1  John  ii.,  "  I  write  unto 
you,  little  children,"  etc. 

Ver.  6.— I  will  speak  of  excellent  tilings ; 
de  rebus  magnis,  Vulgate;  aenvi,  yap  ipu, 
Septuagint.  The  Hebrew  nagid  is  else- 
where used  of  persons ;  e.g.  a  prince,  leader 
(1  Sam.  ix.  16;  1  Ohron.  xxvi.  24);  so  it 
may  here  be  best  translated  "princely," 
"noble" — an  epithet  which  the  subject- 
matter  of  Wisdom's  discourse  fully  confirms 
(corap.  ch.  xxii.  20,  though  the  word  tlieie 
is  different).  Hitzig  and  others,  following 
the  Syriac,  prefer  the  meaning,  "  plain,  evi- 
dent truths  "  (comp.  ver.  9) ;  but  the  former 
interpretation  is  most  suitable.  The  open- 
ing of  my  lips  shall  be  right  things.  That 
which  I  announce  when  I  open  my  mouth 
is  just  and  right  (ch.  xiiii.  lu).  Septuagint, 
bpOa. 

Ver.  7. — Another  co-onUnate  reason  for 
attention.  My  mouth ;  cliek,  "  palate  "  (ch. 
V.  3,  where  see  note);  the  organ  of  speech. 
Shall  speak  truth ;  emelh,  (see  on  ch.  iii.  3). 
The  verb  n^g  (Jiagah)  properly  moans  "to 
speak  with  one's  stlf,"  "to  meditate;"  and 
so  the  versions  translate  here,  meditdbitm, 
/leAETjjo-ei ;  but  this  idea  is  not  appropriate 
to  the  word  joined  with  it,  "  the  palate," 
and  it  must  be  triken  to  signify  "to  utter," 
as  in  Ps.  xxxv.  28  ;  xxxvii.  30,  etc. 
Wickedness  is  an  abomination  to  my  lips. 
Besha,  "  wickedness,"  is  tlie  contrary  of 
moral  truth  and  right.  Septuagint,  "  False 
lips  are  abominable  In  my  sight." 

Ver.  8. — In  righteousness ;  i.e.  joined  with 
righteousness,  equivalent  to  "righteous." 
In  oh.  iii.  16  the  Septuiigint  has  an  addi- 
tion which  may  perhaps  be  an  echo  of  tl.ia 
passage:  "Out  of  her  nioutli  prooeeduth 
righteousness,  and  she  beareth  upon  her 
tongue  law  and  mercy."  But  more  probably 
it  is  derived  partly  from  Isa.  xlv.  23,  and 
partly  from  ch.  xxxi.  26.  There  is  nothing 
froward  or  perverse  in  them.  In  the  utter- 
ances of  Wisdom  there  is  nothing  crooked, 
no  distortion  of  the  truth ;  all  is  straight- 
forward and  direct. 

Vor.  9. — They  are  all  plain  to  Mm  that 
nnderstandeth.  The  man  who  listens  to 
and  imbibes  the  teaching  of  Wisdom  finds 
tliese  words  intelligible,  and  "to  the  point." 
Opening  his  heart  to  receive  Divine  in- 
struction, he  is  rewarded  by  having  his 
understanding  enlightened ;  for  while  "  the 
nntural  man  receiveth  not  the  Ihings  of  the 
Spirit  of  God"  (I  Cor.  ii.  14),  yet  "the 
secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear 
him"  (Ps.  XXV.  14),  and  "mysleries  are 
revealed  unto  the  meek"  (Eoclus.  iii.  19, 
Gompluiensian  K*).  Bight  to  them  that 
find  knowledge  (ver.  10).  They  form  an 
even   path    without    itumbling-blocks   for 


those  who  have  learned  to  discern  right 
from  wrong,  and  are  seeking  to  direct  their 
lives  in  accordance  With  high  -motives. 
Septuagint,  "They  are  all  present  (iviiria) 
to  those  that  understand,  and  right  (opSi)  to 
those  that  find  knowledge." 

Ver.  10. — Beceive  my  instmction,  and  not 
Bilver;  i.e.  acquire  wisdom  rather  than 
silver,  if  ever  the  choice  is  yours.  And 
knowledge  rather  than  choice  gold  (comp. 
ver.  19;  ch.  iii.  14).  (For  "knowledge," 
daath,  see  on  oh.  ii.  10.)  The  comparison  ii 
implied  rather  than  expressed  In  the  first 
clause,  while  it  is  made  clear  in  the  second. 
Thus  Hob.  vi.  6,  "  I  desired  mercy,  and  not 
sacrifice,"  the  second  matter  mentioned 
being,  not  necessarily  of  no  importance,  but 
always  in  such  cases  of  inferior  importance 
to  the  other.  We  may  quote  Horace's  com- 
plaint of  the  wurldliness  of  his  countrymen, 
a  marked  contrast  to  the  inspired  counsel  of 
Proverbs  ('  Eplst.,'  i.  1.  52)— 

"  Villus  argentum  est  auro,  virtutibus  aurum. 
O  oives,  cives  I  quserenda  pecunia  primum 

est. 
Virtus  post  nummoi." 

Ver.  11. — (See  ch.  iii.  14, 15,  and  notes.) 
Vers.  12— 21.— Wisdom  fells  of  her  own 
excellence. 

Ver.  12. — I  wisdom  dwell  with  prudence; 
rather,  as  in  the  Eevised  Version,  1  havt 
made  sublilty  (ver.  5)  my  dwelling.  Wisdom 
inhabits  prudence,  animates  and  possesses 
that  cleverness  and  tact  which  is  needed  for 
the  praclical  purposes  of  life.  So  the  Lord 
is  said  to  "inhabit  eternity"  (Isa.  Ivii.  15). 
Septuagint,  "  I  wisdom  dwelt  (/caTeo-Kiii/ojira) 
in  counsel  and  knowledge,"  which  recalls, 
"The  Word  wiis  made  flesh,  and  dwelt 
(^ff/frfi/iBirey)  among  us "  (John  i.  14).  In 
1  Tim.  vi.  16  we  find  the  expression,  "  Wlio 
alone  hath  (ji6vos  ex""}  immortality,"  ex- 
changed with  the  phrase,  "Who  dwelleth 
{o'ikS>v)  in  the  unapproachable  light."  And 
find  out  knowledge  of  witty  inventions. 
Tills  rendering  refers  to  the  production  and 
solution  of  dark  sayings  which  Wisdom 
effeols.  But  the  expression  is  better  ren- 
dered, "knowledge  of  deeds  of  discretion" 
(ch.  i.  4),  or  "of  right  counsels,"  and  it 
signifies  that  Wisdom  presides  over  all  well- 
considered  designs,  that  they  are  not  beyond 
her  sphere,  and  that  she  has  and  uses  the 
knowledge  of  them.  Septuagint,  "  I  (Iri) 
called  upon  understanding,"  i.e.  it  is  I  who 
inspire  all  good  and  righteous  thought. 

Ver.  13 The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  to  hate 

evil.  Wisdom  here  enunciates  the  proposi- 
tion which  is  the  foundation  of  all  lier  teach- 
ing, only  here,  as  it  were,  on  the  reverse 
side,  not  as  the  beginning  of  wisdom  (ch.  i. 
7 ;  ix.  10),  but  as  the  hatred  of  evD ;  sh« 


OK.  VUL  1—36,] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


168 


then  jeooeeds  to  partioulftrize  the  evil  which 
the  Lord  hates.  Taking  the  clause  in  this 
sense,  weTiave  no  need  to  alter  the  persons 
and  forms  of  the  verbs  to  "I  fear  the  Lord, 
I  bate  evil,"  as  Dathe  and  others  suggest ; 
still  less  to  suppress  the  whole  paragraph  as 
a  late  insertion.  These  violent  measures 
are  arbitrary  and  quite  unnecessary,  the 
present  text  allowing  a  natural  and  sufficient 
exposition.  There  can  be  no  fellowship 
between  liglitand  darkness;  he  who  serves 
the  Lord  must  renounce  the  works  of  the 
devil.  Fride  and  arrogancy,  which  are 
opposed  to  the  sovereign  virtue  of  humility, 
are  the  first  sins  which  Wisdom  names. 
These  are  among  the  things  which  the  Lord 
is  said  to  hate  (ch.  vi.  17,  etc.).  "Initium 
omnia  [leccati  est  superbia"  (Ecclus.  x.  15, 
Vet.  Lat.).  The  evil  way;  i.e.  sins  of  con- 
duct, "way"  being, as  commonly, equivalent 
to  "manner  of  life."  The  froward  month; 
literally,  mouth  of  perverseitees,  sins  of  speech 
(see  on  ch.  ii.  12 ;  and  comp.  x.  31) ; 
Vulgate,  08  biKngue. 

Ver.   14. — Having  said  what  she  hates, 
Wisdom  now  says  what  she  is,  and  what  she 
can   bestow  on   her  followers.     Counsel  is 
mine,  and  sound  wisdom.    There  is  some 
doubt    about    the    meaning   of   the    word 
translated    "sound    wisdom"    (tushiyyah'). 
The  Vulgate  has  eequitas;  the  Septuagint, 
iur^d\cia,  "safety."    The  word  occurs  else- 
where in  this  book  and  in  Job,  but  only  in 
two  other  places  of  Scripture,  viz.  Isa.  xxviii. 
29  and  Micah  vi.  9.     It  means  properly 
"  elevation  "  or  "  furtherance,"  or,  as  others 
say,  "substance;"  and  then  that  which  is 
essentially  good  and  useful,  which  may  be 
wisdom,  aid,  or  security  (see  on  ch.  ii.  7). 
Wisdom  affirms  that  she  possesses  counsel 
and  all  that  can  help  forward  righteousness ; 
see  Job  xii.  13,  16,  passages  very  similar  to 
the  present  (comp.  Wisd.  viii.  9,  etc.).    I 
am  understanding.     Wisdom  does  not  merely 
possess  these  attributes;  they  are  her  very 
nuture,  as  it  is  said,  "  God  is  love."    St. 
Jerome's  mea  est  prudentia,  and  the  LXX.'s 
f/iil  <j>p6pri(Tis,  lose  this  trait.    I  have  strength. 
Wisdom  directs  the  energies  and  powers  of 
her  pupils,  which  without  her  control  would 
be  spent  wrongly  or  uselessly  (comp.  Eccles. 
vii.    19).       Wisdom,    understanding,    and 
might  are  named  among  the  seven  gifts  of 
the  Spirit  In  Isa.  xi.  2 ;  and  we  may  see  in 
the  passage  generally  an  adumbration   of 
him  who  is  called  "  Wonderful,  Counsellor, 
the  Mighty  God"  (Isa.  ii.  6). 

Ver.  15.— By  me  kings  reign.  By  posses- 
sion of  wisdom  kings  are  enabled  to  discharge 
their  functions  duly  and  righteously.  So 
Solomon  prayed  for  wiadom  lo  enable  him 
to  rule  his  subjects  properly  (1  Kings  iii.  9 ; 
Wisd.  ix.  4).  Princes  (rozenim,  ch.  xxxi.  4) ; 
either  those  who  are  weighty,  inflexible,  or 


those  who  weigh  causes ;  the  latter  explana- 
tion seems  most  suitable.  Vulgate,  legum 
mnditorei;  Septuagint,  ol  Swiarai.  These 
are  said  to  decree  justice ;  literally,  to  engrave 
just  decreet  on  tahlett ;  ypd(j>ov<n  Siicamaivnv, 
Septuagint.  Early  expositors  take  these 
words,  as  spoken  by  Chridt,  to  whom  they 
are  very  plainly  applicable  (comp.  Isa. 
xxxii.  1). 

Ver.  16. — Frinoes;  here  mrim,  "leaders." 
All  the  judges  of  the  earth.  Tliese  words 
stand  without  a  conjunction,  in  apposition 
to  what  has  preceded,  by  what  is  called  asyn- 
deton tummativwm  (oh.  i.  21),and  gather  in  one 
view  kings,  princes,  and  leaders.  Thus  the 
Book  of  Wisdom,  which  speaks  of  the  duties 
of  rulers,  commences  by  addressing  ol 
Kphoyres  t^v  7^1',  "ye  tliat  are  judges  of 
the  earth."  In  the  East  judgment  of  causes 
was  an  integral  part  of  a  monarch's  duties. 
The  reading  of  the  Authorized  Version  is 
supported  by  the  Septuagint,  which  gives 
Kparovai  yris.  The  Vulgate,  Syriac,  and 
Chaldeeread,  pnx,  "justice,"  in  place  of  yn», 
"earth;"  but  this  seems  to  have  been  an 
alteration  of  the  original  text  derived  firom 
some  idea  of  the  assertion  there  made  being 
too  comprehensive  or  universal.  Nowack 
compares  Ps.  ii.  10  and  cxbiii.  11,  "Kings 
of  the  earth,  and  all  people;  princes,  and 
all  judges  of  the  earth."  The  Fathers  have 
taken  these  verses  as  spoken  by  God,  and  as 
asserting  his  supremacy  and  the  providential 
ordering  of  human  government,  according 
to  St.  Paul's  saying,  "  There  is  no  power  but 
of  God ;  and  the  powers  that  be  are  ordained 
of  God "  (Bom.  xiii.  1 ;  see  St.  Augustine, 
•  De  Civit.  Dei,'  v.  19). 

Ver.  17. — I  love  them  that  love  me.  So 
Christ  says  (John  xiv.  21),  "  He  that  loveth 
me  shall  be  loved  of  my  I?atlier,  and  I  will 
love  him,  and  will  manifiSt  myself  unto 
him."  Love  attracts  love.  "  Magues  amoris 
est  amor."  They  who  love  virtue  and  wis- 
dom are  regarded  with  favour  by  God,  whose 
inspiration  they  have  obeyed,  obtaining 
grace  for  grace.  So  Ben  Sira  says,  "  Them 
that  love  her  the  Lord  doth  love  "  (Ecclus.  iv. 
14);  80  Wisd.  vii.  28,  "God  loveth  none 
but  him  that  dwelleth  with  Wisdom."  The 
Septuagint  changes  the  verbs  in  this  clause, 
though  they  are  parts  of  the  same  word  in 
the  Hebrew :  '^yi>  Tohs  ifii  (piKovvras  ayairH. 
This  reminds  oiie  of  the  passage  in  the  last 
chapter  of  St.  John  (xxi.  15 — 17),  where  a 
similar  interchange  is  made.  Those  that 
seek  me  early  shall  find  me  (see  the  con- 
trast in  ch.  i.  28).  "  Eaily  "  may  mean  from 
tender  years;  but  more  probably  it  is  equiva- 
lent to  "earnestly,"  "strenuously,"  as  people 
deeply  interested  in  any  pursuit  rise  betimes 
to  set  about  the  necessary  work  (comp.  Isa. 
xxvi.  9;  Hos.  v.  15).  The  Septuagint, 
"  They  who  seek  (fijToiiiTft)  me  shall  flud." 


164 


THE  PE0VEEB3. 


[oh.  Tin.  1— 36i 


So  the  Lord  says  (Matt.  vii.  7), "  Seek  (fij- 
TfiTe),  and  ye  shall  flud;"Ecclus.  iv.  12, 
"He  that  loTeth  her  loveth  life;  and  they 
that  seek  to  her  early  (oi  opBp'iCovTes  iriihs 
oiJtV)  shall  be  filled  with  joy  "  (corap.  Luke 
xxi.  38). 

Ver.  18. — Eiches  and  honour  are  with  mo 
(see  ch.  iii.  16).  Wisdom  has  these  things  in 
her  possession  to  bestow  on  whom  she  will, 
as  God  gave  them  to  Solomon  in  reward  of 
his  petition  for  wisdom  (1  Kings  iii.  13). 
Durable  riches  and  righteousness.  Things 
often  regarded  as  incompatible.  Durable, 
pni)  (athek),  occurs  only  liere  (but  see  Isa. 

xxiii.  18),  and  means  "old,"  "venerable," 
"  long  accumulated ; "  hence  firm  and  last- 
ing, Bighteousness  is  the  hist  reward  that 
Wisdom  bestows,  without  wLicli,  indeed,  all 
material  blessings  would  be  nothing  worth. 
Wealth  obtained  in  a  right  way,  and  rightly 
used,  is  durable  and  stable.  This  was  espu- 
oially  true  under  a  temporal  dispensation. 
We  Christians,  however,  look  not  for  reward 
in  uncertain  riches,  but  in  God's  favour 
here  and  happiness  in  another  world.  The 
Septuagint,  "Possession  of  many  things, 
and  righteousness."  What  is  denoted  by 
"  righteouanois  "  is  further  explained  in  the 
following  verses,  19 — 21. 

Ver.  19. — My  fruit  is  better  than  gold. 
We  have  had  Wisdom  called  "a  tree  of 
life" (ch.  iii.  18), and  the  gain  from  possess- 
ing her  compared  to  gold  and  silver  (ch. 
iii.  14).  Fine  gold  (paz);  Septuagint  and 
'Vulgate,  "precious  stone."  The  word  signi- 
fies "purified  gold" — gold  from  wiiich  all 
mixture  or  alloy  has  been  separated.  My 
revenue;  VuJgate,  genimina  mea;  Septua- 
gint, ^ew^/ioTn;  Helirew,  tebuah,  "produce," 
"profits." 

Ver.  20.— I  lead  in  the  way  (better,  I  teallc 
in  the  way)  of  righteousness,  I  act  always 
according  to  the  rules  of  justice.  In  the 
midst  of  the  paths  of  judgment.  I  swerve 
not  to  one  side  or  the  other  (ch.  iv.  27).  So 
the  psalmist  prays,  "Teach  me,  O  Lord, 
the  way  of  thy  statutes;  and  I  shall  keep 
it  unto  the  end ; "  "  Cause  me  to  know  the 
way  wherein  I  should  walk  "  (Ps.  cxix,  33 ; 
cxliii.  8).  And  the  promise  is  given  to  the 
faithful  in  Isa.  xxx.  21,  "Tliine  ears  shall 
henr  a  word  beliiud  thee,  saying,  Tiiis  is  the 
way,  walk  ye  in  it,  when  ye  turn  to  the  right 
hand,  and  when  ye  turn  to  the  left."  Virtue, 
as  Aristotle  has  taught  us,  is  the  mean  be- 
tween two  extremes. 

Ver.  21. — That  I  may  cause  those  that 
love  me  to  inherit  substance;  tf_\  (yeeh), 
S-n-ap^ts,  "real,  valuable  po.  sessions."  Those 
who  love  Wisdom  will  walk  in  her  path, 
follow  her  leading,  and  Iherefore,  doing 
Gcod'i  will,  will  be  blessed  with  success. 
Such  will  lay  up  treasure  in  heaven,  will 
provide  bags  which  wax  not  old,  will  bu  pre- 


paring for  "an  Inheritance  inoorrnptible,  and 
undefiled,  and  that  fadeth  not  away  "  (Matt. 
Ti.  20;  Luke  xii,  83;  1  Pet.  i.  4).  The 
LXX.  here  inserts  a  paragraph  ai  a  kind  of 
introdcction  to  the  important  section  which 
follows:  "If  I  declare  unto  you  the  things 
which  daily  belall,  I  will  remember  to  re- 
count the  things  of  eternity ;  "  i.e.  thus  far  1 
have  spoken  of  the  advantages  derived  from 
Wisdom  in  daily  circumstances  ;  now  I  pro- 
ceed to  narrate  her  origin  and  her  doings 
from  all  eternity.  But  the  additii<n  appears 
awkward,  and  is  probably  not  now  in  its 
original  position. 

Vers,  22 — 31. — Wisdom  speaks  of  her 
origin,  her  active  operations,  the  part  which 
she  bore  in  the  creation  of  the  universe,  her 
relation  to  God  (see  on  ch.  i  20  and  iii.  19, 
and  Introduction).  It  is  impossible  to  decide 
what  was  the  exact  view  of  the  writer  with 
regnrd  to  the  wisdom  of  which  he  speaks  so 
eloquently;  but  there  can  be  no  doubt  that 
he  was  guided  in  his  diction  so  as  to  give 
expression  to  the  idea  of  hun  whom  St.  John 
calls  the  Word  of  God.  The  language  used 
is  not  applicahle  to  an  impersonal  quality, 
im  abstract  faculty  of  God.  It  describes 
the  nature  and  office  of  a  Person ;  and  who 
that  Person  is  we  learn  from  the  later  Scrip- 
tures, wliich  speak  of  Christ  as  the  "  Wis- 
dom of  God  "  (Luke  li.  49)  and  "the  Power 
of  God  and  the  Wisdom  of  God  "  (1  Cor.  i. 
24).  If  we  confine  our  inquiry  to  the  ques- 
tion—What was  in  the  mind  of  the  author 
when  lie  indited  this  wonderful  section  con- 
cerning Wisdom  ?  we  shall  fail  to  apprehend 
its  true  significance,  and  shall  be  disowning 
the  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  wtiich  in- 
spires all  Scripture,  which  prompted  the 
holy  men  who  spake  to  utter  words  of  which 
they  knew  not  the  full  spiritual  significance, 
and  which  could  only  be  underslood  by  sub- 
sequent revelation.  There  is,  then,  nothing 
forced  or  incongruous  in  seeing  in  this  epi- 
sode a  portraiture  of  the  Second  Person  of 
the  blessed  Trinity,  the  essential  Wisdom 
of  God  personified,  the  Logos  of  later  books, 
and  of  the  gospel.  This  iuterpretatii)n 
obtained  universally  in  the  Church  in  the 
earliest  times,  and  has  commended  itself  to 
the  most  learned  and  reverent  of  modern 
commentators.  That  much  which  was  con- 
tained in  their  own  utterances  was  unknown 
to  the  prophets  of  old,  that  they  did  not 
fully  perceive  the  myuteries  which  they 
darkly  enunciated,  we  learn  from  St.  Peter, 


OH.  vm.  1 — 36.] 


THE  PROVE  KBS. 


165 


who  tells  us  that  they  who  propheaied  of  the 
grace  of  Christ  sought  and  searched  dili- 
gently what  the  Spirit  of  God  that  was  in 
them  did  point  unto,  and  were  shown  that 
not  unto  themselves,  hut  unto  us,  they 
ministered  those  things,  secrets  which 
•ngels  themselyes  desire  to  look  into  (1  Pet. 
i.  10,  etc.).  Wisdom  as  a  human  endow- 
ment, anitoating  all  intellectual  and  even 
physicEiI  powers ;  Wisdom  as  communicat- 
ing to  man  moral  excellence  and  piety; 
Wisdom  as  not  only  an  attribute  of  God, 
but  itself  as  the  eternal  thought  of  God  ; — 
under  these  aspects  it  is  regarded  in  our 
book ;  but  under  and  through  all  it  is  more 
or  less  personified.  Khochmah  is  contrasted 
in  the  next  chapter,  not  with  an  abstraction, 
but  with  an  actual  woman  of  impure  Ufe — a 
real,  not  an  imaginary,  antagonist.  The 
personality  of  the  latter  intimates  that  of 
the  former  (sea  Liddon,  'Bampt.  Lects.,' 
ii.). 

Yer.  22. — ^e  Lord  possessed  me.  Great 
controversy  has  arisen  about  the  word 
rendered  "  possessed."    The  verb  used  is  njg 

{hanah),  which  meana  properly  "to  erect, 
set  upright,"  also  "  to  found,  form  "  (Gen. 
xivi  19,  22),  then  "to  acquire"  (ch.  i.  5; 
iv.  5,  7,  etc.)  or  "  to  possess  "  (ch.  xv.  32 ; 
lix.  8).  The  Vulgate,  Aquila,  Theodotion, 
Symmachus,  Venetian,  give  "  possessed ;  " 
Septuagint,  c/cTicre,  "  made,"  and  so  Syriao. 
The  Arians  took  tlie  word  in  the  sense  of 
"created"  (which,  though  supported  by 
the  LXX.,  it  seems  never  to  have  had),  and 
deduced  therefrom  the  Son's  inferiority  to 
the  Fatlier — tliat  he  was  made,  not  begotten 
from  all  eternity.  Ben  Sira  more  than  once 
employs  the  verb  kti^m  in  speaking  of  Wis- 
dom's origin;  e.g.  Ecclus.  i.  4,  9i  xxiv.  8. 
Opposing  the  heresy  of  the  Arians,  the 
Fathers  generally  adopted  the  rendering 
iKri<raro,  possedit,  "possessed;"  and  even 
those  who  received  the  translation  ^ktio-e,  ex- 
plained it  not  of  creating,  but  of  appointing, 
thus:  The  Fatlier  S(  tWisdom  over  all  created 
things,  or  made  Wisdom  to  be  tlie  efficient 
cause  of  his  creatures  (Rev.  iii.  14).  May 
we  not  say  that  the  writer  was  guided  to 
use  a  word  whicli  would-  express  relation  in 
a  twofold  sense  ?  Wisdom  is  regarded  either 
as  the  mind  of  God  expressed  in  operation, 
or  the  Second  Person  of  the  Holy  Trinity ; 
»nd  the  verb  thus  signifies  that  God 
possesses  in  himself  this  essential  Wisdom, 
and  intimates  likewise  tliat  Wisdom  by 
eternal  generation  is  a  Divine  Personality. 
St.  John  (John  i.  1),  before  saying  tliat  the 
Word  was  God,  affirms  that  "  the  Word  was 


with  God  (i  A6yos  ^v  rphs  rhv  ©frfv)."  So 
we  may  assert  that  Solomon  has  arrived  at 
the  truth  that  Wisdom  was  irpbs  t6v  Qeiv,  if 
he  has  left  it  for  later  revelation  to  declare 
that  ri  So<tila  or  d  A6yos  Beis  ^y.  Whichever 
sense  we  assign  to  the  verb  on  which  the 
difficulty  is  supposed  to  hang,  whether  wo 
take  it  as  "possessed,"  "formed,"  or  "ac- 
quired," we  may  safely  assume  that  the 
idea  conveyed  to  Christian  minds  is  this — 
that  Wisdom,  existing  eternally  in  the 
Godhead,  was  said  to  be  "formed"  or 
"brouglit  forth"  when  it  operated  in  crea- 
tion, and  when  it  assumed  human  nature. 
In  the  beginning  of  his  way.  So  the  Vulgate, 
in  initio  vinrum  suarum.  But  the  preposi- 
tion "in"  does  not  occur  in  the  original; 
and  the  words  may  be  better  translated, 
"as  the  beginning  of  his  way"  (Septua- 
gint, e/cTitre  /xe  apxhv  dStaf  outou);  i.e. 
as  the  earliest  revelation  of  his  working. 
Wisdom,  eternal  and  uncreated,  first  puts 
forth  its  eaergy  in  creation,  then  be- 
comes incarnate,  and  is  now  called,  "the 
Firstborn  of  all  creation  (wpmrSroKos  vitrris 
Kria-er^s)"  (Col.  i.  15).  Thns  in  Ps.  ii.  7, 
"Thou  art  my  Son;  this  day  liave  I  be- 
gotten thee"  (Heb.  i.  5);  and,  "When  he 
bringeth  in  the  Firstborn  into  tlie  world,  he 
saith,  And  let  all  the  angels  of  God  worship 
him  "  (Heb.  i.  6).  In  the  present  clause,  the 
ways  of  God  are  his  works,  as  in  Job  xxvi. 
14  and  il.  19,  where  behemoth  is  called 
"  chief  among  the  ways  of  God  "  (cump.  Ps. 
cxlv.  17,  where  "  ways  "  stands  as  a  parallel 
to  "  works  ").  Before  his  works  of  old.  These 
words  are  better  regarded  (with  Delitzsch) 
as  a  second  parallel  object,  dip  (kedem), 
translated  "  before,"  being  not  a  preposi- 
tion, but  denoting  previous  existence.  Hence 
we  translate,  "The  foremost  of  his  works  of 
old ; "  i.e.  the  earliest  revelation  of  his 
energy.  There  is  a  curious  passage  in  the 
'  Boolj  of  Enoch,'  ch.  xlii.,  which  speaks  of 
the  personality  and  pre-existence  of  Wis- 
dom, of  tier  desire  to  dwell  among  men, 
frustrated  by  man's  wickedness  :  "  Wisdom 
found  no  place  where  she  could  dwell; 
therefore  was  her  dwelling  in  heaven.  Wis- 
duiu  came  forth  in  order  to  dwell  among 
the  sons  of  men,  and  found  no  habitation ; 
then  she  returned  to  her  place,  and  tonk 
her  seat  among  the  angels."  We  may  add 
Wisd.  viii.  3,  "In  that  she  dwelleth  with 
God  (ffu/n/Sioxric  0€o5  ^xoi'0'<')i  '^^  magui- 
fieth  her  nobility." 

Ver.  23. — I  was  set  np  from  everlasting. 
The  verb  used  here  is  remarkable.  It  is 
TjDJ  (naso/c),  in  niph. ;  and  it  is  found  in  Ps. 
ii.  6,  "  I  have  set  my  King  uj)on  my  holy 
hill."  Both  here  and  there  it  lias  been 
translated  "anointed,"  which  would  make 
a  noteworthy  reference  to  Christ.    But  ther« 


16< 


THE  PEOVBRBS. 


[oh.  Tin.  1 — 86, 


leemB  ni  proof  that  the  word  has  this  mean- 
ing. It  signifies  properly  "  to  pour  forth " 
(as  of  molten  metal),  then  "  to  put  down,"  "  to 
appoint  or  establish."  The  versions  recog- 
nize tliis.  Thus  the  Septuagint,  "  he  estab- 
lished (^iBefiehlaxre)  me ; "  Vulgate,  ordinata 
Bum;  Aquila,  KaTfariBriv;  Symmachus,  irpoe- 
Xeipio-fiai ;  Venetian,  K6xw/»ai  (comp.  Ecclus.  i. 
9).  So  what  is  here  aiid  is  that  Wisdom  was 
from  everlasting  >  xalted  as  ruler  and  disposer 
of  all  things.  To  express  eternal  relation, 
three  synonymous  terms  are  used.  From 
everlasting ;  irph  to5  aiayosj  Septuagint,  as 
Delitzsoh  notes,  points  back  to  infinite 
distance.  From  the  beginning;  i.e.  before 
the  world  was  begun  to  be  made ;  as  St.  John 
says  (John  i.  1),  "  In  the  beginning  was  the 
Word ; "  and  Olirist  prays,  "  Glorify  thou  me 
with  tliine  own  self,  with  the  glory  which  1 
had  with  thee  before  the  world  was "  (John 
xvii.  5).  Or  ever  the  earth  was.  This  looks 
to  the  most  remote  time  after  the  actual 
creation,  while  the  earth  was  being  formed 
and  ud.ipted. 

Ver.  2i. — The  pre-existence  of  Wisdom  is 
still  more  expressly  set  forth.  When  there 
were  no  depths  (vers.  27,  28).  The  waste  of 
waters  which  covered  the  face  of  the  earth 
is  meant — that  great  deep  on  which  primeval 
darkness  brooded  (Gen.  i.  2).  Before  even 
this,  man's  earliest  conception  of  the  begin- 
ning of  the  world,  uncreated  Wisdom  was. 
Septuagint,  "before  he  made  the  abysses" 
(see  on  ch.  iii.  20).  I  was  brought  forth; 
Vulgale,  et  ego  jam  concepta  eram;  Septua- 
gint, at  the  end  of  ver.  25,  yew^  /le, "  he 
begetteth  me."  Tlie  verb  here  is  hv^  (chul), 
which  is  used  of  the  travailing  of  women, 
and  is  rightly  translated,  "  brought  forth 
by  generation."  It  indicates  in  this  place 
the  energizing  of  Wisdom,  her  conception  in 
the  Divine  mind,  and  her  putting  forth  in 
operation.  When  there  were  no  fountains 
abounding  with  water;  i.e.  springs  in  the 
interior  of  the  earth  (Gen.  vii.  11;  comp. 
Job  xxii.,  xxvL,  xxxviii.).  Septuagint, "Be- 
fore the  springs  of  the  waters  came  forward 
(vposMtiyy 

Ver.  2ii.  —  Before  the  mountains  were 
settled  (Job  xxxviii.  6).  It  is  questioned 
where  the  mountains  were  supposed  to  be 
fixed,  and  some  have  thought  that  they  are 
represented  as  fixed  in  the  depths  of  the 
earth.  But,  as  we  learn  from  Gen.  i.  9,  they 
aie  regarded  as  rising  from  the  waters,  their 
foundations  are  laid  in  the  great  deep.  So 
the  psalmist,  speaking  of  the  waters,  says, 
"  They  went  up  by  the  mountains,  they  went 
down  by  the  valleys,  unto  the  place  which 
thou  hast  founded  for  tuem"  (Ps.  civ.  8; 
eomp.  Ps.  xxiv.  2).  What  is  here  aCHrmed 
of  Wisdom  is  said  of  Jeho\ah  in  Ps.  xc.  2, 
"Before  the  mouutains  were  brought  forth, 
01  ever  thou   hadst  formed  the  earth  and 


the  world,  even  from  everlasting  to  eTor- 
lasting  thou  art  God." 

Ver.  26.— The  earth,  nor  the  fields.  The 
rlistiuction  intended  is  land  as  cultivated  and 
occupied  by  buildings,  etc.,  and  waste  un- 
cultivated land  outside  towns.  Septuagint 
"  The  Lord  made  countries  and  uninhabited 
places  (oouc^Tous)  ;  "  Vulgate,  Adhue  terram 
non  fecerai,  et  jlumina.  Hebrew,  chutsoth ; 
things  without,  abroad,  hence  open  country. 
The  Vulgate  rendering,  and  that  of  Aquila 
and  Symmachus,  e(6Sovs,  are  plainly  errone- 
ous, as  waters  have  already  been  mentioned 
(ver.  24).  The  highest  part  of  the  dust  of 
the  world ;  literally,  the  head  of  the  duttg  of 
the  world.  Some  have  interpreted  this  ex- 
pression of  "  man,"  the  chief  of  those  creatures 
which  are  made  of  the  dust  of  the  ground 
(Gen.  iii.  19 ;  Ecoles.  iii.  20).  But  the  idea 
comes  in  awkwardly  here ;  it  is  not  natural 
to  introduce  man  amid  the  ioanimate  works 
of  nature,  or  to  u^e  such  an  enigmatical 
designation  for  him.  St.  Jerome  has,  car- 
dines  orbis  terrarum,  "  the  world's  hinges ;  " 
Septuagint,  "  the  inhabited  summits  of  the 
earth  beneath  the  heavens;"  according  to 
St.  Hilary  ('De  Trinit.,'  xii.),  "cacumina 
qusB  habitantur  sub  coelo."  Others  take  the 
term  to  signify  the  capes  or  promontories  o( 
the  world,  the  peaks  and  elevations ;  others, 
the  clods  of  dry,  arable  land,  in  contrast 
to  the  uutilled  waste  of  waters;  others,  the 
chief  elements,  the  matter  of  which  the  earth 
is  composed.  This  last  interpretation  would 
lead  us  back  to  a  period  which  has  already 
been  passed.  Amid  the  many  possible  ex- 
planations, it  is  perhaps  best  (with  Delitzsch, 
Nowack,  etc.)  to  take  roih,  "  head  "  as  equiva- 
lent to  "  sum,"  "  mass,"  as  in  Ps.  cxxxix.  17, 
"How  great  is  the  sum  {rosk)  of  them  I" 
Then  the  expression  comprehensively  means 
all  the  mass  of  earth's  dust. 

Ver.  27. — After  asserting  the  pre-existenoe 
of  Wisdom,  the  writer  tells  her  part  in  the 
work  of  creation.  When  he  prepared  the 
hoavens,  I  was  there.  When  God  made 
the  firmament,  and  divided  the  waters  above 
it  and  below  (Gen.  i.  7),  Wisdom  co-operated. 
When  he  set  a  compass  upon  the  face  of  the 
depth.  iir\  (fshug),  "circle,"  or  "circuit" 
(as  Job  xxii.  14),  means  the  vault  of  heaven, 
conceived  of  as  resting  on  the  ocean  which 
surrounds  the  earth,  in  partial  accordance 
with  the  notion  in  Homer,  who  speaks  o( 
the  streams  of  ocean  Sowing  back  into  itself 
ia-^6^j>ooi),  •  Iliad,' xviii.  399;  '  Odyssey,' x. 
508,  etc.  That  the  reference  is  not  to  the 
marking  out  a  limit  for  the  waters  is  plain 
from  the  consideration  that  this  interpreta- 
tion would  make  the  verse  identical  with 
ver.  29.  Thus  in  Isa.  xl.  22  we  have,  "It 
is  he  that  sitteth  above  the  circle  (chug)  of 
the  earth ; "  »'.«.  the  vault  of  heaven  that  en- 
circles the  eaith.     Septuagint,  "  When  he 


OH.  vin.  1 — 36.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


167 


marked  out  (oKpdpi^i)  his  throne  upon  the 
windB."  The  translators  have  referred  tehom, 
"depth,"  to  the  waters  above. 

Ver.  28. — When  be  established  the  clouds 
above.  The  reference  is  to  the  waters  above 
the  firmament  (Gen.  i.  7),  wfainh  are  sus- 
pended in  the  ether;  and  the  idea  is  that 
God  thus  made  this  medium  capablo  of 
sustaining  tliem.  Yulgate,  Quando  «theia 
firmahat  sursum ;  Septuagint,  "  When  he 
made  strong  the  clouds  above "  (comp.  Job 
xxvi.  8).  'When  he  strengthened  the  foun- 
tains of  the  deep ;  rather,  as  in  the  Revised 
Version,  when  the  fountains  of  the  deep 
hecame  strong  ;  i.e.  when  the  great  deep  (Gen. 
vii.  11)  burst  forth  with  power  (comp.  Job 
xxxviii.  16).  The  Septuagint  anticipates 
the  following  details  by  here  rendering, 
"  When  he  made  secure  the  fountains  of  the 
earth  beneath  the  heaven." 

Ver.  29. — ^When  he  gave  to  the  sea  his 
decree  (ehok,  as  Job  xxviii.  26 ;  Jer.  v.  22) ; 
or,  its  bounds.  The  moaning  is  much  the 
same  in  either  case,  being  what  is  expressed 
in  Job  xxxviii.  8,  etc.,  "Who  shut  up  the 
sea  with  doors  .  .  .  and  prescribed  for  it 
my  decree,  and  set  bars  and  doors,  and  said. 
Hitherto  shalt  thou  cnme,  and  no  further, 
■  and  here  shall  tby  proud  waves  be  stayed?" 
The  LXX.  omits  this  hemistich.  When  he 
appointed  the  fonndations  of  the  earth. 
Job  xxxviii.  4,  "Where  wast  thou  when  I 
laid  the  foundations  of  the  earth  ?  .  .  .  Who 
determined  tiie  measures  thereof?  or  who 
stretched  the  line  upon  it?  Wherein  were 
the  foundations  thereof  fastened?  or  who  laid 
the  corner-stone  thereof  ?  " 

Ver.  30.— Then  I  was  by  him.  Wisd. 
ix.  9,  "Wisdom  was  with  thee;  which 
knoweth  thy  works,  and  was  present  when 
thou  madest  the  world."  So  John  i.  2, 
"  The  Word  was  with  God."  As  one  brought 
up  with  him ;  Vulgate,  eunota  componens ; 
Septuagint,  'H/niy  irap'  avT^  apfio^ovaa,  "  I 
was  with  him  arranging  things  in  har- 
mony." The  Hebrew  word  is  ]tot!!  {amon), 
"an artificer,"" workman"  (Jer.lii.  15).  Tlius 
in  Wisd;"  vii.  22  Wisdom  is  called  ri  -irdvrav 
t^XvItis,  "the  worker  of  all  things."  The 
Authorized  Version  takes  the  word  in  a 
passive  state,  as  equivalent  to  alumnus, 
"foster-child,"  and  this  interprettition  is 
etymologically  admissible,  and  may  possibly, 
as  gchultens  suggests,  be  glanced  at  in  St. 
John's  expression  (i.  18),  "the  only  begotten 
Son,  which  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father." 
But  as  the  point  here  is  the  creative  energy 
of  Wisdom,  it  is  best  to  take  the  term  as 
denoting  "artificer."  It  will  then  accord 
with  the  expreision  Siiiuovpy'hs,  applied  by 
the  Fathers  to  the  Word  of  God,  by  whom 
■U  things  were  made  (Eph.  iii.  9,  Textus 
Eeeeptus,  and  Heb.  i.  2).  And  I  was  daily 
Ills  delight ;  literally,  1  was  delights  day  by 


day,  which  may  moan  either  as  in  Authorized 
Version,  or  "  I  had  delight  continually,"  i.e. 
it  may  signify  (1)  either  that  God  took 
pleasure  in  the  wisdom  which  displayed  his 
workmanship,  saw  that  it  was  very  good 
(Gen.  i.  4,  etc.),  looked  with  delight  on  the 
beloved  Son  in  whom  he  was  well  pleased 
(Matt.  iii.  17,  cte.) ;  or  (2)  it  may  mean  that 
Wisdom  herself  rejoiced  in  her  pow6r  and 
her  work,  rejoiced  in  giving  effect  to  tlie 
Creator's  idea,  and  so  "founding  the  earth" 
(ch.  iii.  19).  \u]guie,  delectdbar  per  singulos 
dies.  The  Septuagint  adopts  the  former  of 
tliese  views,  "I  was  that  wherein  he  took 
delight."  But  tiie  second  interpretation 
seems  most  suitable,  as  the  paragraph  is 
stating  rather  what  Wisdom  is  in  herself 
than  what  she  was  in  the  eyes  of  Jehovah. 
What  follows  is  a  parallel.  Bejoicing always 
before  him ;  Vulgate,  ludens  coram  eo  omni 
t  m-pore,  as  though  the  work  of  creation  was 
a  sport  and  pastime  of  a  happy  holiday.  The 
expression  is  meant  to  denote  the  ease  with 
which  the  operations  were  performed,  and 
the  pleasure  wliich  their  execution  yielded. 
David  uses  tlie  same  word,  speaking  of  his 
dancing  before  tlie  ark,  when  he  says, 
"  Therefore  will  I  play  before  the  Lord " 
(2  Sam.  vi.  21 ;  comp.  oh.  x.  23). 

Ver.  31. — Bejoicing  in  the  habitable  part 
of  his  earth.  Wisdom  declares  wherein  she 
chiefly  delighted,  viz.  in  the  world  as  the 
habitation  of  rational  creatures.  "  And  God 
saw  everything  that  he  had  made,  and, 
behold,  it  was  very  good"  (Gen.  i.  31); 
comp,  Fs.  civ.  31,  and  see  the  eloquent 
account  of  Wisdom  in  the  book  so  named 
(vii.  22 — viii.  1).  My  delights  were  with  the 
sons  of  men,  Man,  made  in  the  image  of 
God,  is  the  principal  object  of  creative 
Wisdom's  pleasure ;  and  her  joy  is  fulfilled 
only  in  the  Incarnation.  When  the  Word 
became  flesh,  then  was  the  end  and  design 
of  creation  exhibited,  and  the  infinite  love 
of  God  towards  man  made,  as  it  were, 
visible  and  palpable.  Septuagint,  "  Because 
he  rejoiced  when  he  completed  the  world 
(rkiv  otKovii.iv'rtv),  and  rejoiced  in  the  children 
of  men." 

Vers.  32—36. — Wisdom  renewi  the  ex- 
hortation before  given  (ch.  v.  7;  vii.  24),  but 
now  on  higher,  and  not  merely  moral  or 
social  grounds.  She  deduces,  from  her 
Divine  origin  and  her  care  for  man,  the 
lesson  that  she  is  to  be  sought  and  prized 
and  obeyed  above  all  things. 

Ver.  32.— Now  therefore — ^having  regard 
to  what  I  have  revealed  of  myself— hearken 
nnto  me,  0  ye  children ;  Septuagint,  "  Hear 
me,  my  son."  Blessed  are  they  that  keep 
my  ways.  The  expression  is  interjectional : 
"  Blessings  on  the  man  1  salvation  to  the 


168 


THE  PB0VBRB8. 


[oh.  Ym.  1  —Sa. 


man!"  m  in  ch.  iil.  13.  For  the  tcoy*  of 
Wisdom,  Bee  ch.  iii.  17. 

Ver.  33.— Be  wise.  Thig  will  be  the 
effect  of  attending  to  the  injunction,  Hear 
instrnotion  (see  on  ch.  iii.  4).  The  Vatican 
text  of  the  Septuagint  omits  this  verse;  it 
is  added  in  the  Alexandrian  and  Sin.' 

Ver.  34. — ^Watching  daily  at  my  gates. 
The  idea  suggested  has  been  variously 
taken ;  e.g.  as  that  of  ea^er  students  waiting 
at  the  school  door  for  their  teacher's  appear- 
ance; clients  besieging  a  great  man's  por- 
tals; Levites  guarding  the  doors  of  the 
temple ;  a  lover  at  liis  mistress's  gate.  This 
last  notion  is  supported  by  Wied.  viii.  2, 
"  I  loved  her,  and  sought  her  out  from  my 
youth;  I  desired  to  make  her  my  spouse, 
and  I  was  a  lover  of  her  beauty."  Waiting 
at  the  posts  of  my  doors;  keeping  close  to 
the  entrance,  so  as  to  be  quite  sure  of  not 
missing  lier  whom  he  longs  to  see. 

Ver.  35. — For  whoso  findeth  me  findeth 
life,  Here  is  the  reaton  why  the  man  is 
blessed  wlio  attends  to  the  instruction  of 
Wisdom.  A  similar  promise  is  made  at  cli. 
iii.  16,  18,  22.  Tlie  truth  here  enunciated 
is  also  spoken  of  the  Word  of  God,  the  ever- 
lasting Son  of  the  Father.  John  i.  4,  "  In 
him  was  life;  and  the  life  was  the  light 
of  men;"  John  iii.  36,  "He  that  believeth 
on  the  Son  hath  eternal  life ; "  John  xvii. 
3,  "  This  is  life  eternal,  that  they  should 
know  thee  the  only  true  God,  and  him  whom 
thou  didst  send,  even  Jesus  Christ"  (com p. 
John  viii.  51 ;  1  John  v.  12 ;  Ecclus.  iv.  12). 
ShaU  obtain  favour  of  the  lord;  Vulgate, 
liauriet  ialutem,  which  happily  renders  the 


Hebrew  verb  (ch.  rii.  2).  The  grace  of  OoA 
bringeth  salvation  (Titus  ii.  11).  Septnv 
gint,  "  For  my  outgoings  (eloSoi)  are  the 
outgoings  of  life,  and  the  will  il  prepared 
by  the  Lord  (koI  iroiiidCerat  BtXtfiris  xoo4 
Kvplov)."  This  latter  clause  was  used  by 
the  Fathers,  especially  in  the  Pelagian 
controversy,  to  prove  the  necessity  of  pre- 
venient  grace  (see  St.  Augustine,  'Enchi- 
ridion,' ii.  32;  <De  Gralia,'  vi.  16,  IT). 

VcT.  36. — He  that  slnneth  against  me 
wrongeth  his  own  soul.  So  Septuagint  and 
Vulgate.  And  the  truth  stated  is  o)ivious — 
he  who  refuses  to  obey  Wisdom,  and  trans- 
gresses her  wholesome  rules,  will  smart  for 
it.  Every  sin  involves  punishment,  injurei 
the  spiritual  life,  and  demands  satisraction. 
But  Delitzsch  and  others  take  'ijp'n,  "  my 
sinning  one,"  "my  sinner,"  in  tlie  older 
sense  of  "  missing,"  as  Job  v.  24,  the  derived 
meaning  of  "binning"  springing  naturally 
from  the  idea  of  deviating  from  the  right 
way  or  failing  to  hit  the  mark.  So  here 
the  translation  will  be  "he  who  misseth 
me,"  which  is  a  good  contrast  to  "  whoso 
findelh  me,"  of  ver.  35.  He  who  takes  a 
path  which  does  not  lead  towisilom  is  guilty 
of  moral  suicide.  All  that  hate  me  love 
death  (ch.  vii.  27).  "  He  that  believotli  not 
the  Son  shall  not  see  life;  but  the  wrnth  of 
God  abideth  on  him  "  (John  iii.  36).  They 
wlio  will  not  hearken  to  Wisdom,  and  who 
scorn  her  counsels,  do  virtually  love  death, 
because  they  love  the  things  and  the  practises 
which  lead  to  death,  temporal  and  spiritual 
Job  iii.  10,  "They  that  sin  are  enemies 
to  their  own  life  "  (comp.  Wisd.  i.  12). 


EOMILETIOS. 

Ver.  5. — Wisdom  for  the  simple.  We  may  divide  the  simple  into  three  classes. 
1.  There  are  those  who  think  themselves  wise  while  they  are  but  fools:  there  is  no 
hope  for  such.  2.  There  are  people  who  make  no  pretence  to  wisdom,  but  who  have 
chosen  folly,  and  are  quite  indifferent  to  the  claims  and  charms  of  wisdom.  3.  There 
are  anxious  seekers  after  wisdom,  who  feel  their  present  ignorance  and  incompetence 
with  acute  distress,  and  long  to  be  among  the  wise,  but  despair  of  reaching  the  privi- 
leged circle.  The  first  class  will  refuse  to  believe  that  the  call  of  wisdom  is  for  them, 
but  to  the  other  two  it  may  come  with  eifect. 

I.  The  simple  kebd  wisdom.  This  reflection  should  concern  the  second  class — 
those  who  as  yet  have  despised  and  rejected  wisdom.  1.  Wisdom  is  a  joy.  Even 
pleasure  is  rejected  in  the  renunciation  of  truth,  knowledge,  thought,  the  vision  of 
God,  and  the  revelation  of  hi.s  will.  The  narrow  mind  is  a  dark  mind,  and  when  the 
light  of  God  breaks  in  it  will  be  seen  that  many  new  delights  of  knowledge  and  joys  of 
Divine  truth,  which  have  long  been  missed,  can  now  be  happily  received.  2.  Wisdom  is  a 
safeguard.  Men  stumble  in  the  dark.  Snares  are  set  for  the  unwary.  In  this  great, 
mysterious  world  we  may  easily  go  astray  and  be  lost,  perhaps  be  entrapped  in  fearful 
soul-perils.  It  is  much  to  know  the  way,  to  know  ourselves,  to  know  our  dangers,  to 
know  the  will  of  God  and  how  to  have  his  guiding  and  saving  help.  3.  Wisdom  is  life. 
The  foolish  soul  is  but  half  alive,  and  it  is  on  the  road  to  destruction.  Mere  knowledge 
itself  is  a  free  intellectual  life,  and  the  exercise  of  thought  in  the  practical  apiilioation 
of  the  truth  which  we  have  assimilated,  i.e.  wisdom,  is  a  living  activity.    It  is  motti 


OTLTm.  1— 36.]  THE  PROVERBS.  169 

unfortunate  that  many  young  men  in  the  present  day  seem  to  despise  all  intellectual 
pursuits,  and  confine  the  attention  of  tlieir  leisure  moments  to  idle  amusements  or  at 
best  to  athletics.  They  fail  to  see  the  mental  death  that  they  are  courting.  But 
infinitely  worse  are  they  wlio  turn  from  the  moral  side  of  wisdom — the  fear  of  the 
Lord — and  pursue  the  folly  of  godlessness,  for  this  is  soul-death. 

II.  The  simple  may  have  wisdom.  Here  is  the  encouragement  for  the  third  class 
of  the  simple.  It  is  fur  children,  for  weak  minds,  and  for  uneducated  people.  1.  Mental 
improvement  is  attainable.  Where  there  is  a  will  to  rise,  the  young  man  under  most 
disadvantageous  circumstances  will  find  the  means  to  cultivate  self-education.  2.  The 
highest  wisdom  is  spiritual.  This  wisdom  is  not  like  Greek  philosophy — only  open  to 
intellectual  culture.  It  is  the  truth  of  God  that  may  be  revealed  to  "babes  and  suck- 
lings" (Matt.  xxi.  16),  and  yet  it  is  the  highest  truth.  To  be  spiritually  wise  we  need 
not  be  mentally  clever.  What  is  wanted  is  a  sincere  love  of  truth,  a  pure  heart,  and  a 
childlike  teachibleness.  3.  3%e  gospel  brings  wisdom  to  the  simple.  That  gospel  wag 
Bcofied  at  for  its  apparent  simplicity.  Yet  it  was  indeed  the  wisdom  as  well  as  the 
power  of  God  (1  Cor,  i.  24).  Christ  comes  to  us  as  the  eternal  Wisdom  incarnate. 
The  simple  may  know  liim,  and  when  such  receive  Christ  they  receive  the  Light  of  the 
world  and  a  loftier  wisdom  than  wa^i  ever  reached  by  the  sages  of  antiquity  or  can 
ever  be  attained  in  the  cold  light  of  science. 

Ver.  9. — Plain  words.  The  words  of  wisdom  are  here  described  as  "  plain  words." 
This  expression  has  been  so  often  abused  that  it  is  almost  as  important  to  see  what  it 
doea  not  mean  as  to  consider  what  it  does  mean. 

I.  What  the  bxpbession  does  not  mean.  1.  Lack  of  grace.  A  mistake  arising 
from  the  confusion  of  two  meanings  of  the  term  "plnin"  has  been  pointed  out  by 
Archbishop  Whately,  and  yet  it  is  often  repented.  "Plain"  means  smooth,  simple, 
easy,  intelligible;  "plain"  also  means  bare,  unadorned,  unbenutiful.  The  two  mean- 
ings are  quite  distinct.  But  some  have  thought  that  a  plain  sermon  must  be  a  sermon 
wanting  in  all  grace  of  style  and  beauty  of  illustiation.  This  is  an  inappropriate  use 
of  the  word  "plain."  Tlie  woids  of  Christ  were  plain,  i.e.  clear  and  simple;  yet  they 
were  very  beautiful  .and  full  of  living  illustrations.  The  duty  to  be  plain  is  no  excuse 
for  slovenliness  of  speech.  2.  Intellectual  fiebleness.  Some  people  insist  on  having* 
"simple  gosiel"  in  a  way  that  leads  one  to  think  they  would  condemn  all  vigour  of 
thought.  They  forget  that  the  teaching  of  St.  Paul,  which  they  admire  so  much, 
teemed  with  the  highest  intellectuality,  and  that  he  regarded  the  truth  of  the  crucified 
Christ  as  the  wisdom  of  God,  and  only  as  falsely  mistaken  for  foolishness  by  the 
Greeks.  It  is  the  charm  of  the  highest  thinking  tliat  it  can  simplify  difficulties.  We 
sometimes  fail  to  detect  the  great  intellectual  power  of  a  writer  just  because  this  has 
been  so  perfect  as  to  disguise  all  effort  and  make  the  result  of  processes  of  thought  clear ; 
while  the  laboured  attempts  of  weaker  minds  induce  us  to  mistake  obscurity  for  pro- 
fundity. Any  subject  looks  simple  in  the  hands  of  a  master.  3.  Rudeness  and 
oWenaiveness.  Disagreeable  people  make  a  virtue  of  being  plain-spoken  when  they  are 
really  harsh  and  inconsiderate.  There  is  no  unkindness  about  the  plain  words  of  the 
Bible.     The   Christian   teacher  should  remember  the  admonitions,   "Be  pitiful,  be 

courteous."     '  ..    ^     .     .,.       ,    ^  ^i  j     *    •  j 

II.  What  the  expeession  dobs  mean.  1.  It  signifies  that  the  words  of  wisdom  are 
inteiligible.  The  first  object  of  revelation,  of  course,  is  to  reveal.  The  first  object  of 
speech  is  to  declare  thoughts.  It  is  the  neglect  of  this  simple  point  that  has  given  an 
excnse  for  the  sarcasm  that  "words  were  invented  to  conceal  thoughts.  Ihe  first 
duty  of  the  speaker  is  to  be  plain.  Afterwards  he  may  be  ornate  it  he  will.  But  when 
the  decorations  of  speech  encumber  its  free  movement  and  prevent  it  from  acoomphsh- 
ing  its  practical  ends,  they  are  altogether  encumbrances.  And  when  intellMtual  power 
is  wasted  on  a  mere  display  of  its  own  exercise,  or  confined  to  inventing  difficulties  and 
making  obscure  what  was  originally  clear  and  simple,  this  also  is  misdirected.  The 
Divine  wisdom  of  the  Bible  claims  to  be  intelligible.  It  is  true  that  many  people  find 
ereat  difficulties  in  its  pages,  and  all  of  us  must  confess  that  they  are  not  to  be  fully 
measured  and  sounded.  But  (1)  they  who  approach  them  in  a^  right  way  having  a 
spiritual  mind,  so  necessary  for  the  discernment  of  spiritual  things,  will  bj  able  to 
understand  th..*main,  most  important  truths  of  Christianity ;  and  (2)  whatever  disputes 


170  THE  PEOVEEBS.  [oh.  vm.  1—36. 

may  be  raised  about  the  meaning  of  the  more  abstract  doctrines,  the  directions  of  duty 
and  the  indications  of  the  things  we  are  to  do  for  our  soul's  welfare  are  plain;  indeed, 
the  obscurity  of  religious  subjects  varies  proportionately  with  their  abstractness,  with 
their  separation  from  our  life  and  duty.  2.  It  signifies  that  the  words  of  wisdom  indi- 
cate a  plain  and  simple  course  of  action.  They  .are  "  right,"  or  rather  "  straight  to 
those  that  find  knowledge."  We  are  not  called  to  any  complicated  course  of  aotiou. 
The  intricacies  of  casuistry  are  not  to  te  found  in  the  Book  of  Proverbs  nor  anywhere 
else  in  the  Bible.     The  way  of  duty  is  simple  and  straightforward. 

Ver.  13. — Hatred  of  evil.  I.  Eeligion  djcludbs  mobals.  This  is  the  broad  lesson 
of  the  text.  It  should  be  accepted  as  a  self-evident  truism.  Yet  it  has  been  often 
obscured  by  dangerous  sophisms.  Thus  some  have  regarded  religion  as  consisting  in 
correctness  of  creed  or  in  assiduity  of  devotinn — things  treated  by  Q-od  as  worthless 
unless  accompanied  by  rigUteousnoss  of  conduct  (Isa.  i.  10 — 17).  There  is  a  common 
impression  that  religious  merits  uiMy  be  pleaded  as  a  set-off  against  moral  deficiencies. 
No  assumption  can  be  more  false,  nor  can  any  be  more  degrading  or  more  injurious. 
The  reverse  is  true.  Eelii;iousness  increases  the  guilt  of  unrighteousness  of  life  by 
raising  the  standard  up  to  which  one  is  supposed  to  live,  and  also  adds  the  sin  of 
hypocrisy.  True  religion  is  impossible  without  a  proportionate  devotion  to  righteous- 
ness, because  it  consists  in  the  fear  of  God.  But  God  is  holy  ;  to  reverence  him  must 
involve  the  adoration  of  his  character — the  love  of  goodness  and  the  corresponding  detes- 
tation of  its  opposite. 

II.  EBLiaiON  INSPIRES  MORALS  WITH  STR0N8  EMOTION.  Morality  is  to  obey  the  law. 
Eeligion  goes  further,  and  hates  evil.  It  is  not  a  matter  of  outward  conduct  only.  It 
goes  down  to  the  secret  springs  of  action.  It  rouses  the  deepest  passions  of  the  soul. 
We  cannot  accept  Mr.  M.  Arnold's  definition  of  religion  as  "  morality  touched  with 
emotion,"  because  it  ignores  the  foundation  of  religion  in  "  the  fear  of  the  Lord,"  in 
devotion  to  a  personal  God;  but  the  phrase  may  serve  as  an  apt  description  of  an 
essential  characteristic  of  religion.  The  difficulty  we  all  feel  is  that,  while  we  know  the 
better  way  we  are  often  so  weak  as  to  choose  the  worse.  A  cold,  bare  exposition  of 
morality  will  be  of  little  use  with  this  difficulty.  What  we  want  is  a  powerful  impulse, 
and  that  impulse  it  is  the  function  of  religion  to  supply.  It  makes  goodness  not  only 
visible  but  beautiful  and  attractive,  and  it  inspires  a  hunger  and  thirst  after  righteous- 
less,  a  passion  for  a  God-like  life  in  the  love  of  God,  a  yearning  after  the  likeness  of 
Christ  in  devotion  of  heart  to  him.  It  also  makes  evil  appear  hideous,  detestable,  by  its 
horrilrle  opposition  to  these  affi  ctiuns. 

III.  Among  religious  emotions  is  the  passion  of  hatred.  Religion  is  not  based 
upon  hatred.  It  begins  with  "  the  fear  of  the  Lord,"  with  reverence  for  God  rising  up  to 
love.  No  strong  thing  can  rest  on  a  mere  negation.  Neither  morality  nor  religion 
starts  from  an  attitude  in  regard  to  evil.  But  they  lea'l  on  to  this,  and  they  are  not  perfect 
without  it.  The  passion  of  hatred  is  natural ;  it  has  a  useful,  though  a  low,  place  in 
the  array  of  spiritual  forces.  It  is  abused  when  it  is  spent  upon  persons,  but  it  is 
rightly  indulged  against  evil  principles  and  practices.  We  are  morally  defective  unless 
we  can  feel  "  the  hate  of  hate,  and  scorn  of  scorn."  One  of  the  means  by  which  we  are 
helped  to  resist  sin  is  found  in  this  hatred  of  it.  It  is  not  enough  that  we  disapprove 
of  it.     We  must  loathe  and  abhor  it  from  the  very  bottom  of  our  hearts. 

IV.  EeLIGIOUS  hatred  IS  detestation   op  EVIL  ITSELF,  NOT  THE   MERE  DISLIKE  OF 

ITS  CONSEQUENCES.  When  Paley,  in  his  '  Moral  Philosophy,'  described  the  function  of 
religion  in  aiding  morality  as  the  addition  of  the  prospect  of  future  rewards  and 
promises,  he  expressed  a  common-sense  truth,  but  a  very  low  truth  detached  from 
moie  spiritual  ideas  and  a  very  partial  representation  of  the  case.  Eeligious 
morality  is  not  simply  nor  chiefly  the  fear  of  God  as  a  Judge  who  will  punish  us  if  we  ■ 
do  wrong.  It  is  reverence  for  a  holy  Father  leading  to  hatred  of  all  that  is  displeasing 
to  him.  We  have  no  religion  till  we  go  beyond  the  instinctive  dislike  for  pain  that 
follows  sin  to  hatred  of  sin  itself.  This  is  the  test  of  true  religion — ^that  we  love  good- 
ness and  hate  evil /or  their  own  Bakes.  It  is  interesting  to  observe  that  the  sin  selected 
for  special  abhorrence  on  the  [lart  of  those  who  are  inspired  by  "  the  fear  of  the  Lord  " 
is  pride.  This  is  spiritual  wickedness  of  the  most  fatal  charjicter.  In  its  feeling  of 
personal  merit  and  self-sufficiency  it  excludes  both  repentance  and  faith the  two 


OH.  vm.  1—36.]  THE  PROVERBS.  171 


fundamental  conditions  of  spiritual  religion.  Therefore  the  spirit  of  the  Pharisee  and 
all  pride  must  be  hated  above  all  things,  and  will  be  hated  by  those  who  have  true 
reverence  for  the  great  and  holy  God,  and  true  love  for  the  lowly  Christ  who  promised 
the  kingdom  of  heaven  to  the  "  poor  in  spirit "  (Matt.  v.  3). 

Ver.  17. — The  bkssedness  of  loving  and  seeking  Christ.  Wisdom  is  here  personified. 
This  is  only  the  beginning  of  a  process  that  is  to  grow  tlirough  subsequent  ages,  mani- 
festing itself  in  the  Books  of  Wisdom  and  Bcclasiasticus,  and  finally  developing  into 
the  doctrine  of  the  "  Logos  "  and  the  great  revelation  of  Christ  as  the  incarnate  Word  of 
God.  We  must  not  pretend  to  see  the  perfected  thought  in  its  earliest  germ.  The 
first  personification  of  wisdom  is  little  more  than  a  figure  of  speech,  an  instance  of  the 
rich  imaginative  habits  of  Oriental  thinking.  Nevertheless,  we  know  Christ  to  be 
the  full,  living  embodiment  of  God's  wisdom.  What  is  true  of  that  wisdom  is  true  of 
him.  And,  therefore,  though  the  writer  of  the  wonis  before  us  had  no  thought  of 
Jesus  Christ  the  Son  of  God  and  Son  of  man,  his  teaching  concerning  Divine  wisdom 
may  be  most  useful  when  we  connect  it  with  the  one  perfect  revelation  of  wisdom  in 
our  Saviour. 

I.  Love  for  love.  1.  Love  to  Christ  must  precede  a  deep  knowledge  of  Christ.  We 
love  before  we  seek  and  find.  Of  course,  we  must  know  something  of  him  to  arouse 
our  love ;  but  when  this  initial  knowledge  is  atiained,  Love  must  have  her  perfect  work 
before  knowledge  can  ripen.  2.  Love  to  Christ  must  be  based  on  what  is  lovable  in  him. 
Wisdom  is  beautitul  and  attractive,  and  can  excite  love.  How  much  more,  then, 
should  the  incarnation  of  Wisdom  iu  our  brother  man  do  this !  The  contemplation  of 
the  beautiful  life  of  Christ  and  the  study  cf  his  perfect  character  urge  us  to  love  him; 
but  surely  what  he  has  done  for  us,  his  sacrifice  ol'  himself,  his  death  on  our  behalf, 
must  be  our  chief  grounds  for  loving  him.  3.  This  love  to  Christ  will  be  mtt  by  his  love 
in  return.  It  is  true  that  his  love  precedes  ours,  nay,  that  it  is  ihe  great  source  of  our 
love.  But  (1)  it  is  not  felt  and  enjoyed  till  it  is  returned,  so  that  then  it  seems  to  come 
afresh  as  an  answer  to  our  love;  and  (2)  there  must  be  a  stronger,  more  tender,  more 
intimate  love  to  those  who  appreciate  it  than  can  be  given  to  others.  Christ  loved  all 
men,  but  not  as  he  loied  St.  John.  Christians  loving  Christ  enjoy  his  peculiar  love. 
4.  To  be  loved  by  Christ  is  the  best  reward  of  loving  him.  True  love  is  satisfied  with 
nothing  less  than  a  return  of  love,  but  it  is  satisfied  with  this.  If  we  have  nothing  else 
we  have  a  pearl  of  great  price  in  the  love  of  Christ.  Then  we  can  afford  to  lose  all 
earthly  good  things,  can  count  them  but  dung,  that  we  may  win  Christ. 

II.  FiNDiNO  FOR  SBEKiNO.  1.  We  must  seek  Christ  if  we  would  possess  him.  He 
offers  himself  to  all  as  a  Saviour  and  a  Master.  But  he  must  be  followed  and  found. 
Our  love  to  him  will  be  the  great  attraction  ever  drawing  us  nearer  to  him.  2.  The 
search  for  Christ  must  be  earnest  if  it  is  to  be  successful.  He  will  not  answer  a  lialf- 
hearted  call.  Till  we  seek  him  with  determination,  reality,  persistence,  we  shall  meet 
no  response.  We  must  seek  him  before  all  things,  must  make  Christ  the  chief  end  of 
life.  3.  This  earnest  seeking  will  be  rewarded  by  the  receiving  of  Christ.  Wisdom 
comes  to  him  who  seeks  laboriously  and  patiently ;  much  more  will  Wisdom  incarnate. 
Wisdom  with  a  heart  to  sympathize.  Such  a  response  will  be  the  best  reward  of 
seeking.  Better  than  anything  that  Christ  could  send  us  will  be  his  own  coming  to 
dwell  in  our  hearts.  This  will  be  the  satisfaction  of  anxious  inquiry  in  a  full  response, 
the  blessing  of  love  with  love  and  close  communion. 

Vers.  22 — 31. — The  primeval  glory  of  Divine  wisdom.  I.  The  hfghest  wisdom  is 
CREATED  BY  GoD.  "  The  Lord  created  me  as  the  first  of  his  way."  This  idea  was 
suggested  to  the  Greeks  in  the  myth  of  Athene,  who  sprang  from  the  head  of  Zeus.  It 
is  the  poetic  form  of  the  great  truth  that  God  is  the  Creator  of  thoughts  as  well  as  of 
things;  and  it  suggests  that  he  not  only  called  individual  intelligences  into  being,  but 
originated  the  primary  laws  and  conditions  of  all  intelligence,  just  as  he  ordained  the 
laws  of  nature  and  the  conditions  of  physical  existence  as  well  as  the  rocks  and  plants 
and  animals  subsequently  created. 

IL  Divine  wisdom  was  antecedent  to  material  creation.  "'Twas  wrought 
from  everlasting,  from  the  beginning,  or  ever  the  earth  was."  Thought  precedes 
•etion.      Design    anticipates  execution.      The  architect  comes   before  the  builder. 


17a  THE  PBOVERSa  t<M- ▼ni.  1— Sft 

Archetypal  ideas  precede  creative  work.  In  the  awful  depths  of  priraeyal  antiquity 
the  great  Thinker  wrought  out  the  plans  of  the  universe  which  as  the  great  Worker  h< 
has  been  since  evolving  in  visible  existences. 

III.  Wisdom  accompanied  and  directed  phtsioal  creation.  "I  was  by  him  as 
a  II. aster-worker."  Wisdom  did  not  coase  when  force  appeared.  The  two  wrought 
together.  The  result  of  their  joint  operation  is  the  energetic  cosmos — force  and 
tliought  triumphing  over  death  and  chaos.  When  we  endeavour  to  discover  the  secrets 
of  nature,  we  are  searching  out  the  wisdom  of  Grod.  When  we  learn  the  laws  and  pro- 
cesses of  nature,  we  are  able  to  think  the  thoughts  of  God.  The  naturalist  shnuld  walk 
reverently,  for  he  is  treading  in  the  footsteps  of  the  mind  of  God.  It  should  be  our 
aim  in  studying  nature  to  find  God  in  his  wisdom. 

IV.  The  Divine  wisdom  in  creation  leads  on  to  the  triumph  of  lipb  and 
ORDER.  First  there  is  the  confusion  of  the  elements.  Gradually  these  elements  are 
marshalled  into  order  till  Wisdom  is  able  to  "rejoice  in  his  earthly  world."  The 
onward  movement  of  all  things  here  indicated  and  illustrated  very  fully  by  recent 
science  reveals  the  wisdom  of  God  with  increasing  clearness.  Instead  of  thinking  ol 
that  wisdom  as  chiefly  manifested  in  primitive  creation,  we  should  see  that  it  is  most 
active  and  most  glorious  in  the  latest  anil  richest  development  of  the  life  of  the  universe. 

V.  This  wisddm  is  one  of  the  most  glorious  of  the  Divine  attributes.  God 
has  glory  of  thought  as  well  as  glory  of  character.  There  must  be  all  phases  of  perfec- 
tion in  the  perfect  Mind.  God  is  not  only  to  be  regarded  on  the  side  of  moial  law  and 
religious  worship.  He  is  the  great  Mathematician,  Architect,  Philosopher,  Poet.  Our 
thoughts  of  God  are  too  "  Churchy."  God  is  not  only  in  the  church.  He  is  much  in 
the  fields.  Ho  has  his  workshops  as  well  as  his  temples ;  nay,  they  are  his  best  temples. 
Let  us  try  to  find  him  in  "  secular  "  thought  and  work,  and  worship  him  the  more  for 
the  wisdom  seen  in  his  "  earthly  world." 

Ver.  29. — The  decree  of  the  sea.  We  live  under  the  reign  of  law.  This  fact  is  taken 
to  be  the  late  revelation  of  rnodern  science.  But  it  is  embedded  in  Old  Testament 
teaching.  There  we  see  that  the  laws  of  nature,  which  are  but  the  ways  of  God  on 
earth,  are  recognized  as  fixed  and  stable.  But  the  Bible  helps  us  in  two  ways  in 
examining  those  laws.  First,  it  traces  them  back  to  their  origin  in  a  peisonal  will. 
These  are  not  merely  channels  of  a  blind  force.  .They  are  decrees  of  an  authority. 
Secondly,  it  teaches  us  to  believe  that  they  are  good,  wisely  directed  and  tending  to 
righteousness.  They  come  from  a  wise,  holy,  just,  and  benevolent  source.  The  decree 
of  the  sea  has  a  special  significance. 

I.  It  has  a  vast  domain.  The  sea  covers  three  parts  of  the  surface  of  the  globe. 
Leagues  upon  leagues  of  spreading  ocean  roll  roimd  the  earth  with  every  tide.  The  sea 
is  depp,  and  hides  in  its  many  waters  myriads  of  living  creatures.  The  fearful  storms 
that  sweep  its  surface  tell  sad  tales  of  its  more  than  giant  strength.  Here  we  are  face 
to  face  with  a  frightful  nature-power.  Yet  that  power  is  under  law.  God's  decree 
encircles  it,  and  his  hand  reins  it  in  with  irresistible  might.  The  sea  is  great,  but  God 
is  greater;  strong,  but  God  is  stronger.  As  we  look  at  the  fearful  might  and  majesty 
of  the  ocean,  we  are  called  to  bow  before  the  infinitely  greater  Power  who  holds  its 
waters  in  the"hollow  of  his  hand.  If  we  tremble  before  its  terror,  we  may  remember 
that  it  is  but  the  inanimate  slave  of  our  Father  in  heaven. 

II.  It  IB  ENSHRINED  IN  MYSTERY.  Men  have  discovered  some  of  the  laws  of  tides, 
currents,  storms,  etc.  Yet  the  ocean  is  still,  in  many  le-spects,  a  great  mystery.  What 
caverns  are  hidden  beneath  its  dark  waters  ?  What  monsters  of  the  deep  may  still 
elude  the  grasp  of  man's  observation?  What  secret  terrors  may  burst  upon  his 
astounded  gaze?  Here  is  indeed  a  mystery.  Yet  this  is  all  known  to  God,  governed 
by  God,  subject  to  his  law,  humbly  obedient  to  his  decree.  God  rules  over  all  the 
mysteries  of  the  universe. 

III.  It  GOVERNS  change.  The  sea  is  the  symbol  of  fickleness  and  deception — to-day 
smooth  as  a  mirror,  "  green  calm  below,  blue  quietness  above"  (Whittier) ;  to-morrow  a 
black  and  storm-tossed  chaos.  Its  restless  waves  never  cease  to  crawl  to  and  fro  on 
the  quietest  day ;  its  tides  are  ever  ebbing  and  flowing.  Yet  it  obeys  law.  T!  ere  are 
laws  of  chanfje,  as  in  night  and  day,  the  seasons,  etc.  God  rules  over  all  the  vicis»itude» 
of  life.    Change  does  not  mean  chance. 


OH,  Tin.  1—36.]  THE  PBOVBBBS.  173 

IV.  It  ovbrkitlbb  confusion.  God's  decree  does  not  prevent  the  tempest,  but  the 
tempest  itself  obeys  the  law  of  God.  The  wild  and  wintry  waste  of  waters,  flecked 
with  foam,  and  scoured  with  an^ry  billows,  is  all  under  law  and  order.  It  is  so  in  life. 
God  does  not  prevent  trouble ;  but  he  overrules  it  and  limits  its  extent. 

This  decree  of  the  sea  is  typical  of  the  Divine  government  of  what  looks  most 
tumultuous  and  lawless  in  life.  Apply  it  throughout  with  the  four  points — vastness, 
mystery,  change,  and  confusion — (1)  to  earthly  ciroiimstaaces ;  (2)  to  tlie  ocean  of 
human  life ;  (3)  to  the  soul,  that  sea  of  many  storms. 

Ver.  30. — The  pre-eminent  glory  of  Christ.  This  is  affirmed  of  wisdom,  and  wisdom 
in  the  Proverbs  is  always  an  abstraction,  an  attribute  of  God,  or  a  grace  conferred  upon 
man.  Thus  we  have  the  highly  imaginative  picture  of  a  certain  quality  of  thought 
described  like  a  personal  favourite  in  the  heavenly  presence.  But  surely  it  is  not 
necessary  for  us  to  rest  with  this  idea.  The  New  Tesbtnieiit  cannot  be  out  of  our 
minds  when  we  read  tlie  Old.  It  was  not  lon>i  before  Jews  learnt  to  personify  wisdom, 
and  when  Christ  appi  ared  he  realized  in  his  own  Person  what  had  previously  been 
ascribed  to  an  abstract  quality.  Christ  is  "  the  Truth "  (John  xiv.  6)  and  "  the 
Wisdom  of  God  "  (1  Cor.  i.  24).  His  pre-existence  is  affirme.l  by  himself  (John  viii. 
58)  and  repeatedly  asserted  by  his  apostles  (e.y.  Col.  i.  16).  We  may,  then,  think 
of  Christ  embodying  this  wisdom  of  God  in  the  awful  ages  of  the  past,  and  see 
how  truly  what  is  here  predicated  of  wisdom  applies  to  him  in  whom  that  wisdom 
dwelt. 

I.  Wisdom  in  Christ  was  with  God.  "  I  was  by  him."  1.  Wisdom  wot  cUtvaya 
vnth  Ood,  always  at  his  right  hand.  There  was  never  a  time  when  God  acted  blindly, 
imperfectly,  without  full  consciousness.  We  have  no  ground  for  ttiinking  of  a  lawless 
chaos  previous  to  the  exercise  of  Divine  wisdom  and  power  in  creation.  Even  when 
the  world  was  "  without  form  and  void  "  (Gen.  i.  2),  God's  wise  thought  presided  over  it. 
God's  mind  did  not  grow  like  ours,  from  infantile  simplicity.  He  was  ever  fully  God. 
2.  Christ  was  similarly  eternal  with  Ood.  "  The  Word  was  with  God "  (John  i.  1). 
When  he  came  to  our  earth  he  came  forth  from  God.  His  condescension  was  seen 
in  this,  that  he  left  his  place  by  the  right  hand  of  his  Father  and  came  down  to  dwell 
with  men. 

II.  Wisdom  in  Ohbist  was  concerned  in  creation.  1.  Ood  made  the  universe 
in  wisdom.  It  bears  the  impress  of  thought.  Deep  purposes  have  impregnated  it. 
Creation  is  a  parable  of  infinite  ideas.  2.  Qod  created  all  things  through  Christ.  "  By 
whom  he  made  the  worlds  "  (Heb.  i.  2).  Of  course,  the  humanity  of  Jesus  was  not  then 
existing.  But  the  Divine  side  of  our  Lord  was  not  only  eternal ;  it  was  even  directly 
active.     Therefore  there  is  a  Christ-spirit  in  nature. 

III.  Wisdom  in  Christ  was  God'b  daily  delight.  1.  Ood  rejoices  over  his  work, 
as  an  artist  over  the  thing  of  beauty  that  his  hnnd  has  fashioned  according  to  the 
dream  of  his  heart.  "  God  saw  that  it  was  good  "  (Gen.  i  10).  The  thought  that 
is  in  God's  wurk  is  his  especial  delight.  He  cares  not  for  mere  exhibitions  of  brute 
force.  He  loves  wisdom.  2.  Ood  rejoices  over  Christ.  So  Chi  ist  is  God's  "  beloved 
Son"  (Matt.  iii.  17).  There  are  times  when  we  grieve  our  Father,  though  at  other 
seasons  he  may  smile  upon  us.  But  Christ  always  dwelt  under  the  smile  of  his 
Father,  a  daily  delight — rejoiced  in  for  his  wisdom  and  the  holy  and  gracious  use  he 
luade  of  it. 

IV.  Christ,  by  his  wisdom,  was  bkjoicino  always  before  God.  Wisdom  is  a 
source  of  joy.  Wisdom  devoted  to  God  is  doubly  joyous.  Christ  had  an  ancient  joy 
(John  XV.  11).  He  left  a  happy  home  to  come  to  us.  The  word  for  this  joy  is  "  sport- 
ing." 1b  there  humour  in  nature  ?  May  there  be  in  heaven  those  lighter,  innocent 
joys  which  make  up  so  much  of  the  mirth  of  children  on  earth?  Why  should  Christ 
have  been  always  solemn  ? 

Vers.  35,  36. Life  and  favovr  with  Ood.    It  is  common  to  see  this  and  similai 

passages  applied  directly  to  the  soul's  possession  of  God,  or  to  the  special  Christian 
faith  in  Jesus  Christ.  Now,  it  is  quite  true  that  we  have  here  in  germ  what  will  lead 
up  to  those  experiences.  But  apart  from  the  mistake  of  ignoring  the  distinction 
between  the  elementary  truth  uid  its  full  developmentj  there  is  a  practical  considera- 


174  THE  PEOVBRBS.  [oh.  vm.  1— 3& 


tion  that  is  too  often  overlooked.  It  is  thought  to  be  good  policy  to  "Christianize" 
these  passages  of  the  Old  Testament ;  ».«.  it  is  thought  they  are  thus  most  profitably 
used.  On  this  low  ground  even  an  answer  can  be' given — it  may  be  shown  that  the 
policy  is  bad.  The  more  Christian  idea  is  true  in  itself.  But  it  is  expressed  clearly 
enough  in  the  New  Testament.  We  gain  no  new  light,  therefore,  if  we  contrive  to  see  it 
here.  -We  simply  repeat  a  lesson  that  we  have  learnt  elsewhere.  But  if  we  take  the 
more  literal  meaning  of  the  words,  then,  though  the  thought  given  to  us  may  not  be  so 
exalted  nor  so  valuable  as  the  perfected  Christian  thought,  it  may  have  a  distinct  worth 
and  use  of  its  own,  and  therefore  may  add  somewhat  to  our  knowledge  of  Divine  thinga 
— an  addition  which  we  should  not  have  if  we  read  the  words  as  a  mere  repetition  of 
what  we  had  already  learnt  elsewhere,  however  much  more  important  that  other  lesson 
might  be.  The  New  Testament  teaclies  us  that  we  have  life  in  Christ.  We  who 
have  that  later  and  fuller  revelation  gain  little  or  nothing  by  reading  the  same  truth 
in  the  Book  of  Proverbs.  That  life  is  to  he  found  in  the  Divine  wislom  may  be  a  liss 
valuable  thought.  But  it  is  a  distinct  thought,  and  therefore  some  addition  to  our 
knowledge ;  and  as  such  it  should  be  spiritually  helpful  to  us.  For  this  reason,  though 
it  may  be  perfectly  legitimate  for  us  to  show  how  the  words  of  our  text  foreshadow 
the  great  truths  of  Christianity,  it  may  be  more  profitable  for  us  to  keep  to  their  simple 
meaning,  and  see  how  life  and  Divine  favour  are  received  through  the  finding  of  Divine 
wisdom. 

I.  What  is  meakt  by  finding  Divine  wisdom.  1.  It  is  not  the  mere  knowledge  of 
religiom  doctrine.  Many  have  this,  and  yet  miss  the  life  eternal.  We  may  know  the 
Bible  without  knowing  God.  2.  It  is  not  the  results  of  some  rare  intuition,  nor  the 
achievements  of  elaborate  intellectual  effort ;  it  is  neither  the  vision  of  the  mystic  nor 
the  secret  of  the  Gnostic.  For  this  wisdom  is  repeatedly  offered  to  the  simple  with  a 
most  general  invitation  (e.g.  vers.  4,  5).  3.  To  fitid  Divine  wisdom  is  to  come  to  the 
knowledge  of  Ood  as  far  as  this  affects  our  own  conduct,  to  know  his  disposition 
towards  us,  his  will  regarding  our  conduct,  the  way  of  life  to  which  he  calls  us ;  it  ift 
further  to  know  so  much  of  God's  ways  and  thoughts  as  to  be  able  to  set  them  before 
us  as  a  pattern,  and  thus  to  imbibe  some  of  the  great  primeval  wisdom  described  in  the 
preceding  verses;  lastly,  it  is  to  set  these  thoughts  in  relation  to  practice  and  to  make 
the  knowledge  of  Divine  things  the  rule  of  life. 

II.  How  LIFE  AND  THE   FAVOUR  OF  GOD   BB8ULT  FROM   THE  FINDING  OF  WISDOM.      1. 

Life.  (1)  In  this  wisdom  we  see  the  way  to  life — that  life  which  is  to  Christians  here 
on  earth  as  well  as  hereafter  the  life  eternal.  (2)  The  only  life  worth  living  is  that 
lived  with  thoughts  of  God  and  aims  directed  by  the  knowledge  of  God.  Eternal  life 
corisistj  in  this  knowledge  of  God.  2.  The  favour  of  Ood.  God  is  pleased  with  ub 
in  so  far  as  we  walk  in  his  ways.  Divine  wisdom  only  can  direct  us  arijiht,  so  that  we 
may  please  God.  But  the  very  habit  of  mind  that  consists  in  the  thinking  of  Divine 
thoughts  and  the  desiring  and  attempting  to  accomplish  the  purposes  of  Divine  wisdom 
must  be  pleasing  to  God. 

"  Base-minded  they  that  want  intelligence ; 
For  God  himself  for  wisdom  most  is  prais'd, 
And  men  to  God  thereby  are  nighest  rais'd." 

(Spenser.) 

III.  How  BELF-INJUBT   AND   DEATH   RESULT   FROM  THE  LOSS  OF  THIS  WISDOM.      "  He 

that  misseth  me,"  etc.  1.  The  common  evils  of  life  will  lead  to  our  ruin  unless  we  are 
saved  by  higher  means.  The  traveller  who  rejects  the  guide  may  perish  in  the  perils 
of  his  path ;  the  patient  who  disobeys  the  physician  may  die  of  his  disease.  We  shall 
ruin  ourselves  in  sin  "  if  we  neglect  so  great  salvation."  2.  The  rejection  of  DiviTie 
wisdom  is  itself  a  fatal  sin.  It  is  our  duty  to  hearken  to  its  voice.  If  we  refuse  to 
do  this,  we  shaU  suffer  as  a  penalty  for  our  wilful  disobedience  to  the  message  bom 
Heaven. 


OH.  vm.  1—36.]  THE  PROVERBS.  176 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — ^9. — Wisdom's  proclamation.  Again  it  is  a  poetical  personification  of  truth, 
of  God's  Word,  of  religion,  morality,  sense,  prudence ;  for  all  these  are  included  in  the 
comprehensive  conception  of  wisdom  that  is  placed  before  us. 

I.  The  proclamation  of  truth  has  never  failed  in  the  wobld.  The  cry  ii 
coeval  with  the  world,  with  the  conscience  of  man.  The  preacher  has  an  institution 
second  to  none  in  antiquity  and  in  honour. 

II.  The  peeachee  must  be  conspicuous  to  and  audible  by  all.  (Vers.  2, 3.)  On 
Hused  ground,  in  lonely  paths  (ver.  2),  in  the  open  air,  in  the  field  and  forest;  and 
(ver.  3)  in  the  towns  and  cities,  at  the  places  of  public  resort  and  traflac,  at  the  gates 
in  the  Orient,  in  the  centre  of  Western  cities,  the  preacher's  voice  has  been  lieard. 
All  eminent  teachers  in  books  are  truly  agents  of  Wisdom,  and  heralds  of  the  king- 
dom of  God. 

III.  The  substance  of  true  prbaohinq  must  be  the  same  in  evert  aoe.  1.  It 
is  human  (ver.  3),  and  therefore  intelligible,  rational,  practical.  2.  It  is  especially 
addressed  to  inexperience — to  the  foolish  and  the  thoughtless  (see  on  ch.  i.  4).  3.  It 
deals  with  dear  and  manifest  truth  (see  Hitzig's  reading  of  ver.  6),  and  so  commends  itself 
to  every  man's  conscience  in  the  sight  of  God.  4.  It  is  disinterested,  free  from  sophistry 
and  compromise  (ver.  7).  5.  It  is  Just — correct  and  accurate  in  knowledge  of  human 
nature  and  of  Divine  things  (ver.  8).  And  thus  it  is:  6.  Acceptable  and  irresistible  by 
the  "  honest  and  good  heart"  (ver.  9). — J. 

Vers.  10 — 21. — Wisdom's  pleadings.  She  has  nothing  novel  to  say  concerning  her 
nature,  value,  and  blessings.  Preaching  must  in  the  main  be  repetition ;  the  iteration 
of  the  old,  not  with  dry  and  sterile  monotony,  but  with  that  freshness  which  com- 
parison with  everyday  facts  and  illustrations  gives.  New  combinations  of  facts  are  ever 
arising  in  which  to  frame  the  old  precepts  and  set  them  forth.  Besides,  love  gives 
novelty  to  old  truth,  as  the  old  song  is  enjoyed  from  the  lips  of  the  latest  sweet  singer. 

I.  She  appeals  to  comparison.  (Vers.  10,  11.)  By  comparison  we  increase  and 
strengthen  our  perceptions.  In  the  knowledge  of  man,  books,  art,  life,  comparison  is 
everything.  We  are  to  compare  Wisdom  with  material  objects  of  sense,  such  as  gold 
and  silver,  that  we  may  see  her  to  be  incomparable ;  and  so  each  for  ourselves  repeat 
the  choice  of  Solomon  (comp.  on  ch.  iii.  14, 15). 

II.  She  appeals  to  association.  (Ver.  12.)  Wisdom  dwells  with  prudence.  In 
modern  language,  the  general  implies  the  particular.  Wisdom  is  intelligence  in 
general ;  prudence,  the  appreciation  of  it  in  particular  cases.  In  the  poetical  mode  of 
representation  we  should  say  that  Piety  and  Prudence  are  sisters,  and  go  haad-in-hand, 
daughters  of  the  voice  of  God,  as  Wordsworth  said  of  duty.  So,  too.  Wisdom  has 
insii-'ht  into  enigmas,  dark  sayings,  and  geuerally  deep  things  of  God  (see  on  ch.  i.  4). 

III.  She  unfolds  the  contents  of  her  mind.  (Vers.  13,  14.)  One  of  her  many 
aliases  is  the  fear  of  Jehovah.  And  this  is  religion,  which  includes  all  wholesome 
aversions,  viz.  wickedness  in  general,  and  in  particular  assumption,  arrogance,  evil 
habits,  perverted  speech.  In  other  words,  her  sympathies  are  all  with  lowliness,  purity, 
love,  and  truth.  Insight  or  sharp  and  deep  perception  is  another  of  her  attributes,  and 
force  (comp.  on  ch.  ii.  7). 

IV.  She  claims  supreme  authority.  (Vers.  15, 16.)  Kings,  rulers,  princes,  poten- 
tates, judges, — all  received  those  places  and  fulfil  those  functions  through  her  and  her 
alone'.  Authority  in  politics  rests  on  consent  or  on  force,  or  both.  And  these  are 
traceable  ultimately  to  reason,  and  reason  is  the  "inspiration  of  the  Almighty." 
Exceptions  form  no  part  of  this  representation.  In  modem  language,  we  say  that 
government,  as  a  principle  or  institute,  rests  on  an  ultimate  Divine  basis.  The  text 
says  no  less  than  this,  nor  does  it  say  more.  v     tt     ,       . 

V.  She  is  in  ebcipeocal  relation  to  her  subjects.  (Ver.  17.)  Her  love  is  con- 
ditioned by  love;  the  winning  of  her  by  the  wooing.  The  notion  that  we  can  bo 
passive,  whether  in  knowledge  or  goodness,  is  an  entire  illusion.  Such  an  illusion  once 
prevailed  as  the  doctrine  of  "innate  Ideas"  now  exploded  in  philosophy.    AU  that 


176  THE  PEOVEBBa  [oh.  vni.  1—36. 

becomes  the  portion  of  head  or  heart  implies,  necessitates  a  preriouB  spiritual  activity 
in  us.     We  are  ignorant  because  we  will  not  learn,  unhappy  because  we  will  not  love. 

VI.  She  commands  wbalth  and  honour  and  the  avenues  to  them.  (Vers.  18 — 21.) 
Riches,  honour,  "self-increasing  goods,  and  righteous"  (comp.  on  ch.  iii.  16),  The 
righteous  here  is  elucidated  by  the  next  two  verses;  she  shows  the  right  way  to  all 
earthly  good.  She  is  a  tree  of  life,  and  yields  incomparable  fruit  both  for  value  and 
abundance  (ver.  19).  She  guarantees  possessions  to  her  votaries.  The  connection 
between  righteous  and  worldly  wealth  is  insisted  on.  Not  that  it  is  always  obvious.  Nor 
again  are  we  to  expect  notice  of  exceptions  in  teaching  that  is  from  first  to  last  absolute  ~ 
in  form.  The  stringency  of  the  comiection  is  what  we  have  to  recognize;  the  know- 
ledge of  its  complete  application  to  all  cases  opens  the  relations  of  eternity  and  demands 
the  omniscience  of  God. — J. 

Vers.  22 — 36. —  Wisdom  in  eternity  and  in  time.  This  sublime  view  lifts  us  at  once 
above  the  seeming  contradictions  of  time,  and  suggests  the  solution  of  all  its  problems 
in  God. 

I.  She  18  OF  THE  Divine  bboinninqs  ob  elements.  (Ver.  22.)  An  element  in 
chemistry  is  the  last  simple  substance  we  can  reach  in  analysis.  An  element  in  thouglit 
is  the  last  simple  notion  yielded  by  the  dialectic  of  the  understanding.  Wisdom  is 
thus  be/ore  the  visible  creation — the  earth,  the  sea,  the  mountains.  The  verses  do  but 
repeat  and  iterate  this  one  simple  and  sublime  thought.  We  may  in  like  manner  vary 
it  in  any  form  of  thought  and  expression  familiar  to  us.  She  is  the  Divine  a  priori; 
the  logic  of  nature  and  spirit;  the  last  and  first,  the  ground  of  all  existence;  the 
eternal  reason,  the  transcendent  cause,  the  alpha  and  omega  of  the  cosmic  alphabet. 
We  are  trying  to  express  the  inexpressible,  utter  the  unutterable,  define  the  undefinable, 
find  out  GoJ  to  perfection,  if  we  press  beyond  these  poor  forms  of  speech  and  igaore  the 
limit  which  separates  the  known  from  the  unknowable,  and  reason  from  faith. 

II.  'lUK   OBEATION  PBOCBEDrNS  FBOM   THE   DlVINB   WISDOM   FULFILS    ITS    COURSE    BY 

WISDOM.  (Ver.  27.)  What  we  term  in  science  the  discovery  of  law  is  for  religion  the 
revelation  of  the  mind  of  God  in  the  world  and  in  us.  The  cosmos  is  here  conceived 
under  the  forms  of  the  poetic  imagination — the  heavens  and  their  outstretched  circle  or 
vault ;  the  clouds  as  massive  bags  or  skins ;  the  springs  on  earth  as  set  in  motion  by 
direct  Divine  activity;  the  sea  as  bounded  by  a  positive  fiat;  the  earth  as  fixed  on 
firm  J  illars,  by  one  act  as  it  were  of  the  Divine  Architect.  And  then  was  Wisdom  at 
his  sijp  as  mistress  of  the  work  (ver.  30),  and  was  in  delight  day  by  day  (ver.  30), 
"  playing  before  him  always ;  playing  on  the  circle  of  the  earth,  and  I  had  my  delii;ht 
in  men  "  (ver.  31).  One  of  the  best  illustrations  of  the  poetical  force  and  sense  of  this 
passage  is  in  the  Wisdom  of  Siraoh  xxiv.:  "I  went  forth  from  the  mouth  of  the 
Highest,  and  as  a  mist  I  covered  the  earth.  I  pitched  my  tent  in  the  heights,  and  my 
throne  was  as  a  pillar  of  cloud.  The  gyre  of  heaven  I  encircled  alone,  and  in  the 
depths  of  abysses  I  walked  about.  In  the  billows  of  the  sea,  and  in  all  the  earth,  and 
among  every  people  and  nation,  I  was  busy  "  (vers.  3 — 6). 

III.  Wisdom's  appeal  and  promises.  (Vers.  32—86.)  1.  The  appeal.  "Listen 
to  me,  listen  to  instruction!"  Drink  out  of  this  spring  of  eternity,  whose  currents 
flow  through  all  the  tracts  of  nature  and  of  man.  "  Resist  not ! "  for  to  resist  is  to 
oppose  the  law  of  things  and  to  invite  destruction.  Let  them  be  so  eager  to  listen  and 
to  know  that  they  shall  daily  apply,  daily  stand  as  suppliants  or  visitors  at  her  door  I 
2.  The  promises.  Happiness  is  repeatedly  foretold  (vers.  32,  34).  Life  in  all  senses, 
intensive  and  extensive  (ver.  35).  Favour  with  Jehovah  (ver.  35).  And  it  follows,  as 
the  night  the  day,  that  he  who  sins  against  Wisdom,  whether  by  neglect  or  direct 
disobedience,  is  guilty  of  a  moral  suicide,  and  shows  a  contempt  for  life  and  happiness, 
a  perverse  preference  for  death  (see  on  ch.  iv.  13,  22 ;  vii.  27 ;  conip.  Ezek.  xviii.  21).— J. 

Vers.  1 — 21. — The  excellency  of  Divine  wisdom :  No.  1.  In  these  verses  we  have 
portrayed  to  us  the  surpassing  excellency  of  the  wisdom  of  God. 

I.  It  is  audible  to  evert  one.  "  Duth  not  Wisdom  cry,"  etc.?  (ver.  1 :  see  homily 
on  cL  i.  20— 23). 

II.  It  is  urgent  and  importunate.    (Vers.  2 — 4;  see  homily  on  ch.  i.  20 — 23.) 
IIL  It  makes  its  appeal  to  'jnivkrsal  man.    (Vers.  4,  5.)    "  Unto  you,  0  men, 


OH.  vm.  1—36.]  THE  PROVERBS.  177 

I  call,"  etc.  There  is  nothing  exclusive  or  partial  in  its  address.  Its  sympathies  are 
wide  as  the  human  aoul.  It  draws  no  lineii  of  latitude  or  longitude  in  any  kingdcu, 
beyond  which  it  does  not  pass.  It  appeals  to  man — Jew  and  Gentile,  male  and  fenwle, 
bond  and  free,  learned  and  ignorant,  wise  and  foolish  (simple),  moral  and  immoral  (fooU). 

IV.  It  18  IN  ruLL  harmony  with  all  that  is  best  within  ds.  Some  voices 
that  address  us  make  their  appeal  to  that  which  is  lower  or  even  lowest  in  our  nature. 
Divine  wisdom  appeals  to  that,  which  is  highest  and  best.  1.  To  our  sense  of  what  if 
right  and  good  (vers,  6,  7).    2.  To  our  love  of  tliat  which  is  true  (ver.  7). 

V.  It  is  an  appbeciablb  thing.  (Ver.  9.)  Though  it  takes  liigli  ground,  not 
rooting  itself  in  anything  base,  but  making  its  appeal  to  that  which  is  purest  and 
noblest  in  our  nature,  it  is  still  appreciable  by  all  who  can  estimate  anything  at  its 
true  worth.  To  "  him  that  understandeth,"  to  the  man  who  is  capable  of  any  discern- 
ment, the  words  of  heavenly  wisdom  will  be  plain — they  will  "receive  them  gladly;" 
while  to  those  who  have  reached  any  height  in  attainment,  the  teaching  of  wisdom 
will  be  recognized  as  the  excellent  thing  it  is.  The  students  of  law  will  find  in  it  the 
illustraticn  of  all  true  order;  the  disciples  of  ethics  will  perceive  in  it  all  that  is 
morally  sound  and  satisfying  to  the  conscience;  those  who  admire  "the  beautiful"  will 
recognize  that  which  is  exquisite,  admirable,  sublime.  The  te.iching  of  Divine  wisdom 
is  "  right  to  them  that  find  knowledge." 

VI.  It  is  intimately  associated  with  intelligent  observation.  It  consequently 
results  in  useful  contrivances  (ver.  12).  So  far  Irom  heavenly  wisdom  being  confined, 
in  its  principles  and  its  results,  to  the  realm  of  the  abstract  and  unseen,  it  is  most 
closely  allied  with,  and  is  constantly  found  in  the  company  of,  simple,  homely  discretion, 
the  careful,  intelligent  observation  of  all  surrounding  objects  and  passing  incidents. 
It  issues,  therefore,  in  "  witty  inventions." 

Vil.  It  issues  in,  and  is  illustrated  by,  moral  and  spiritual  worth.  (Ver.  13.) 
"  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom,"  and  the  fcai'  of  the  Lord  is  so 
intimately  and  essentially  bound  up  with  the  hatred  of  evil,  that  they  may  be  practically 
identified;  we  may  say  that  "the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  to  hate  evil" — evil  in  all  its 
forms,  "  pride,  arrogancy,"  etc. — C. 

Vers.  1 — 21  (continued). — The  excellency  of  Divine  wisdom:  No.  2.  We  have  also 
these  features  of  the  wisdom  of  God — 

I.  It  endows  with  the  wealth  which  is  the  product  of  virtue.  (Vers.  20,  21.) 
It  leads  in  that  "way  of  righteousness"  and  those  "paths  of  judgment"  which  res-ilt 
in  "inheriting  substance,"  and  being  "filled  with  treasures."  It  places  in  the  hand  of 
its  followers  all  that  measure  of  earthly  good  which  they  can  regard  with  holy  satisfaction 
and  enjuy  with  a  good  conscience. 

II.  It  is  a  boubcb  or  strength  and  influence  in  human  society.  (Vers.  14 — 16.) 
It  is  attended  with  that  breadth  of  understanding,  that  knowledge  of  affairs,  that  insight 
into  "  men  and  things,"  which  gives  sagacity  to  statesmen  and  stability  to  thrones. 

III.  It  reoipeooates  an  attachment.  (Ver.  17.)  The  more  we  know,  the  more 
attractive  does  knowledge  become  to  our  admiring  spirit.  The  further  we  advance  info 
its  domain,  the  firmer  becomes  our  footing  and  the  brighter  becomes  the  light.  More- 
over, the  hijihest  peaks  attainable  by  man  are  only  reached  by  those  who  begin  to  climb 
in  the  days  of  their  youth  (vide  homily  infra). 

IV.  It'is  of  incomparable  value  to  the  human  soul.  (Vers.  10,  11,  18,  19.) 
If  the  choice  should  lie  between  wealth  and  wisdom,  it  is  better  far  to  choose  the  latter ; 
for:  1.  While  wealth  will  not  buy  wisdom,  wisdom  will  leail  to  wealth,  later  if  not 
fooner,  of  ono  kind  if  not  of  another.  2.  Wisdom  itself  is  wealth ;  it  is  the  posseBsion 
of  the  mind,  it  is  the  inheritance  of  the  soul,  it  is  "durable  riehes  and  righteousness." 

The  excellency  of  Divine  wisdom :  No.  3  (see  below).— C. 

Vers.  1 — 21. — "  CTirist  the  Wisdom  of  Qod :"  No.  1.  Though  it  is  not  to  be  supposed 
that  Jesus  Christ  was  in  the  mind  of  the  writer  of  this  passage,  yet  as  he  does  personify 
wisdom,  and  as  wisdom  was  incarnated  in  that  Son  of  man  who  was  the  Son  of  God, 
wo  should  expect  to  find  that  the  words  of  the  wise  man  in  the  text  would  ajiply,  in 
lurge  measure,  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.     They  do  so,  and  suggest  to  us— 

I.  The  manner  or  his  te aching.    (Vers.  1—3.)    He  "spake  openly  to  the  world, 

rROVERBS.  ■ 


178  THE  PROVERBS.  [oh.  vm.  1—36. 

.  .  .  taught  in  the  synagogue,  and  in  the  temple,"  etc.  (John  xviii.  20;  Bee  Luke  It.  15 ; 
John  vii.  14,  26, 28 ;  Mark  vi.  34 ;  Matt.  v.  1,  2). 

IL  His  appeal  to  all  classes  and  conditions  of  men.  (Vera.  4,  5.)  He  came 
unto  the  world  at  large,  to  "  draw  all  men  unto  him."  None  were,  none  are,  so  poor 
or  so  rich,  so  ignorant  or  so  learned,  bo  simple  or  bo  subtle,  so  degraded  or  so  refined,  so 
spiritually  destitute  or  so  privileged,  as  to  he  out  of  range  of  his  heavenly  voice.  All 
need  his  message ;  all  are  welcome  to  his  kingdom. 

III.  His  manifestation  of  the  truth.  (Vers.  6 — 8.)  He  came  "  to  bear  witness 
unto  the  truth"  (John  xviii.  37).  He  came  to  he  the  living  Truth  himself  (John  xir. 
6),  so  that  the  more  we  know  of  him  and  grow  up  into  him,  the  more  of  Divine  truth 
do  we  receive  into  our  souls. 

IV.  Tee  appbeoiableness  of  his  messaoe.  (Ver.  9.)  When  he  spake  with  his 
own  lips,  men  received  his  words,  wondering  at  his  wisdom  and  his  grace  (see  Luke  ii. 
47 ;  iv.  22,  32 ;  Matt.  viL  28,  29).  "  Never  man  spake  like  this  Man,"  said  the  oflScers 
to  the  chief  priests  (John  vii.  46).  "  The  common  people  heard  him  gladly "  (Mark 
xii.  37).  And  now  that  he  speaks  to  mankind  from  heaven,  his  message  of  truth  and 
love  is  comprehensible  to  all  who  care  to  know  his  mind.  To  those  who  earnestly  seek, 
the  way  becomes  plain;  to  those  who  have  "  spiritual  discernment,"  the  deeper  tlungs  of 
God  are  intelligible;  to  those  who  "  know  him,"  his  dealings  are  seen  to  be  right  and  true. 

V.  His  kbsponsiveness.    (Ver.  17.)    (See  succeeding  homily.) 

VI.  His  mcoMPAEABLB  wobth.  (Vers.  10,  11.)  Jewels,  compared  with  him,  are 
empty  toys ;  gold,  compared  with  him,  is  sordid  dust.  So  great  is  his  worth  to  the 
hungering  heart,  to  the  suffering  spirit,  to  living,  dying  man,  that  all  forms  of  earthly 
good  are  not  to  be  named  or  c(.unted  in  comparison.  ^ 

VII.  His  seevioe  issues  in  the  best  op  all  possible  bbcompensk.  (Vers.  18 — 21.) 
The  fruit  of  the  service  of  Christ  is  honour,  joy  (including  peace),  righteousness  (ver.  20), 
the  "  inheritance  which  is  incorruptible,  and  undefiled,  and  that  fadeth  not  away  "  (ver 
21 ;  1  Pet.  i.  4).— 0. 

Vers.  10,  11. — Wisdom  and  wealth.  The  immeasurable  preference  of  heavenly 
wisdom  to  earthly  wealth  may  be  seen  if  we  consider — 

I.  The  failure  of  vtbalth.  Wealth  is  continually  found  to  fail ;  for :  1.  It  cannot 
even  buy  happiness.  It  may  purchase  a  certain  amount  of  excitement  and  jollity,  but 
it  will  not  secure  contentment,  even  for  one  brief  year.  2.  Much'  less  can  it  buy 
blessedness.  That  happy  state  of  which  our  Lord  so  often  spoke  as  blessedness — the 
deep  and  true  gladness  of  heart  which  God  plants  within  the  soul,  and  which  all  may 
well  wish  to  possess — this  wealth  is  utterly  unable  to  impart.  3.  It  will  equally  fail 
to  buy  wisdom.  Indeed,  it  may  be  truly  said  that :  4.  It  often  stands  positively  in 
the  way  of  its  acquisition  (Mark  x.  23 — 25). 

II.  The  capacity  op  wisdom.  1.  It  tends  to  provide  men  with  competency,  if  not 
with  abundance.  Honesty,  purity,  sobriety,  diligence,  frugality,  those  virtues  which 
go  with  the  "  fear  of  the  Lord,"  tend  to  supply  a  man's  home  with  all  that  is  needful 
and  desirable.  2.  It  secures  peace  and  joy  of  heart.  3.  It,  itself,  is  man's  chief 
treasure.  Better  the  knowledge  of  God,  the  love  of  Christ,  a  holy,  manly,  loving 
spirit,  than  any  external  advantages  whatsoever  (see  Jer.  ix.  23,  24).  4.  It  prepares 
for  the  enjoyment  of  the  treasures  which  are  in  heaven  (Matt.  vi.  19 — 21). — C. 

Ver.  17. — Th«  responsiveness  of  Christ.  Adapting  these  words  to  him  who  became, 
and  for  ever  will  be,  the  Wisdom  of  God,  they  may  speak  to  us  of — 

I.  Christ's  initiative  lovb.  It  is  quite  true  that  "  we  love  him  because  he  first 
loved  us."  We  should  first  consider  "  the  great  love  wherewith  he  loved  us,  even 
when  we  vvere  dead  in  sins  "  (Eph.  ii.  4,  5).  All  our  love  to  Christ  springs  from,  has 
its  source  in,  his  spontaneous  love  toward  us,  unexcited  by  our  affection,  floVing  from 
his  own  exceeding  grace. 

IL  His  responsive  lovb.  This  involves  much.  1.  His  special  interest  in  those 
who  are  inquiring  at  his  feet.  "Jesus  beholding  him,  loved  him,  and  said  into  him, 
Onp  thing  thou  laokest "  (Mark  x.  21).  Zacchwus  (Luke  xix.).  2.  His  Divine  favour 
accorded  to  those  who  have  accepted  him  as  their  Lord.  "  I  love  them  that  love  me  "' 
(see  John  xL  6).  These  are  his  Iriends  and  his  guests  (John  xiv.  23 ;  xv.  14, 15 ;  Rev.  iii 


OH.  Tin.  1—36.]  THE  PROVERBS.  179 


20).  3.  Spiritual  blessings  which  he  will  impart.  He  will  dwell  with  us  by  his  Spirit, 
and  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  will  abound  in  us.  If,  then,  our  interest  in  Christ,  and 
the  yielding  of  our  hearts  to  him,  result  in  his  close  friendship  and  in  those  highest 
impartations  which  flow  therefrom,  how  wise  must  be — 

III.  Bablt  discipleship  to  him!  For  if  we  would  make  sure  of  finding  him  and 
possessing  his  friendship,  we  should  seek  him  without  delay.  Delay  is  always  dangerous. 
There  may  intervene  between  ourselves  and  him :  1.  Other  objects  whicb  may  lascinate 
our  souls  and  lead  us  away  from  him.  2.  The  growth  of  the  deadly  spirit  of 
procrastination.  3.  A  sudden  close  of  our  present  life.  But  early  discipleship,  the 
coming  in  faith  to  his  feet,  to  his  cross,  to  his  kingdom,  to  his  vineyard,  means  the 
certainty  of  holiness  and  usefulness  below  and  the  assurance  of  blessedness  above. — C. 

Vers.  22 — 31. —  The  excellency  of  Divine  wisdom:  No.  3.  We  have  here  additional 
features  of  the  wisdom  of  God,  viz. — 

I.  That  the  wisdom  everywhere  illitstbated  dwelt  in  the  Divine  One 
FROM  eternity.  (Vers.  22 — 26.)  Before  anything  visible  was  created,  in  the  "  far 
backward  and  abysm  of  time,"  even  to  eternity,  wisdom  was  an  attribute  of  the 
infinite  God. 

II.  That  creation  and  providence  abb  the  deliberate  outworking  of  the 
Divine  idea.  "  When  he  prepared  the  heavens  . . .  then  I  was  by  him  "  (vers.  27 — 30). 
All  things  were  constructed  after  the  model  in  the  Divine  mind.  Perfect  intelligence, 
seeing  through  and  foreseeing  everything,  directed  everything  according  to  absolute 
wisdom ;  thus  the  kindest  end  was  gained  By  the  surest  means ;  thus  beauty  and 
serviceableness,  grandeur  and  loveliness,  are  bound  together  in  the  visible  world  because 
they  existed  together  in  the  mind  of  the  great  Architect  (see  Ps.  civ.  24). 

III.  That  the  wisdom  of  his  wobk  was  a  constant  source  of  satisfaction 
•so  the  mind  of  God.  (Ver.  30.)  "I  was  daily  his  delight."  We  find  a  pure  and 
God-given  satisfaction  in  the  execution  of  any  work  on  which  we  have  sijent  our 
utmost  energy.  We  might  have  hesitated  to  refer  this  to  the  Supreme  Intelligence, 
but  the  Word  of  God  warrants  us  in  doing  this  (Gen.  i.  31 ;  Ps.  civ.  31).  We  may, 
therefore,  believe  that  the  glories  and  beauties  of  creation  are  not  only  the  source  of 
joy  to  our  minds  (and  the  deeper  and  fuller  in  proportion  to  our  purity  and  piety),  but 
that  they  are  also  a  source  of  satisfaction  to  him  who  made  them  what  they  are. 

IV.  That  man  is  the  special  object  of  the  Wise  One's  oabb.  (Ver.  '31.)  "  My 
delights  were  with  the  sons  of  men."  1.  When  God  made  man  upright  he  "blessed 
him"  (Gen.  i.  28),  and  rejoiced  in  him  as  in  his  noblest  work  on  earth.  2.  When  man 
fell  God  was  grieved ;  the  heavenly  Father's  heart  was  saddened  at  his  children's 
disobedience  and  wrong-doing.  3.  When  man  returns  to  righteousness  God  is  well 
pleased  (Luke  xv.  23,  24).  There  is  no  such  wisdom  shown  Jn  creation  or  in  provi- 
dence as  in  redemption.  To  arrange  the  laws  of  a  material  universe,  to  direct  the 
affairs  of  an  illimitable  kingdom, — there  is  wondrous  wisdom  in  these  Divine  doings ; 
but  there  is  deeper  wisdom  still  in  redeeming  a  lost  world,  reconciling  an  alienated 
world,  cleansing  a  guilty  world,  sanctifying  an  unholy  world  and  fitting  it  for  the 
society  of  the  sinless  in  heaven. — 0. 

Vers.  22 — 31.—"  Christ  the  Wisdom  of  God : "  No.  2.  Again  regarding  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  as  the  Wisdom  of  God  incarnate,  we  may  let  these  words  suggest  to  us— 
L  His  eternity.    (Vers.  22—26.) 
IL  His  SoNSHiP.     (Vers.  22,  30.) 

III.  His  agency  in  cbbation.  (Vers,  37—29 ;  see  also  John  L  8, 10 ;  Eph.  ih.  9 ; 
Col.  i.  16 ;  Heb.  i.  2,  3,  10;  1  Cor.  viii.  6.)  ,_  ,. 

IV.  His  primal  blessedness.    (Ver.  30;  and  see  John  xvu.  5;  Fhil.  u.  6.) 

V.  His  supreme  interest  in  man.  (Ver.  31.)  "  His  delights  were  with  the  sons 
of  men."  The  interest  taken  by  our  Lord  in  oiUBelves  was  that  of  a  (1)  Creator,  (2) 
Divine  Ruler,  (3)  Redeemer  ;  it  is  now  that  of  a  (4)  sovereign  Saviour.— 0. 

Vers.  32 — 36. — ?%«  convincing  argument.  Here  is  a  very  strong,  "Now,  thereforB."* 
The  excellency  of  Divine  wisdom  has  been  so  forcibly,  so  irresistibly  urged  that  the 
speaker  is  entitled  to  drive  his  argument  home  and  make  a  practical  application.    But 


leo 


THE  PROVERBS. 


OH.  IZ.  1—18. 


the  urgency  of  the  case  is  summed  up  in  the  few  follovtring  sentencea.     This  is  the 
reasoning :  since — 

I.  Inattention  to  the  voice  of  wisdom  is  the  depth  of  folly.  For:  1.  It 
is  self-robbery.  " He  that  sinneth  against  me  wrongeth  his  own  soul"  (ver.  36).  The 
man  that  shuts  his  ears  when  God  speaks  robs  himself  of  all  those  precious  things 
which  might  make  his  heart  rich  and  his  life  noble — of  spiritual  peace,  of  sacred  joy, 
of  heavenly  hope,  of  an  elevating  faith,  of  holy  love,  of  Divine  comfort,  of  the  best 
forms  of  usefnlness.  2.  It  is  self-destruction.  "  All  they  that  hate  me  love  death  " 
(ver.  36).  To  harden  our  heart  against  the  invitations  and  warnings  of  Divine  wisdom 
is  to  tread  the  path  which  leads  straight  to  the  gates  of  spiritual  and  eternal  death. 

II.  Attention  to  the  voice  of  wisdom  is  our  highest  interest.  1,  It  leads 
to  "blessedness"  (vers.  32,  34);  it  ensures  that  state  of  soul  which  the  eternal  God 
declares  to  be  the  only  enviable  one,  to  be  that  which  should  be  the  object  of  uur 
earnest  aspiration.  2.  It  secures  his  own  Divine  favour  (ver.  35) — the  "favour  of  the 
Lord,"  the  sunshine  of  his  smile,  the  benediction  of  his  voice  ;  he  will  "  lay  his  hand 
upon  us  "  in  fatherly  love ;  he  will  surround  us  with  his  "  everlasting  arms  "  of  powerful 
protection.  3.  It  constitutes  life  in  its  very  essence  and  substance.  "  Whoso  iindeth 
me  findeth  life"  (ver.  35).  To  be  wise  with  the  wisdom  which  is  from  above,  to 
"  know  God  and  -lesus  Christ  whom  he  has  sent,"  "  to  understand  and  know  the  Lord 
that  exerciseth  loving-kindness,  judgment,  and  righteousness,"  to  have  gained  "the 
secret  of  the  Lord,"  to  have  learnt  by  blessed  experience  "  that  the  Lord  is  gracious," 
"  to  be  filled  with  the  knowledge  of  his  will," — this  ts  life,  human  life  at  its  highest, 
its  best,  its  noblest.  Moreover,  it  is  that  which  issues  in  the  eternal  life  on  the  other 
side  the  river,  in  the  land  where  life  is  enlarged  and  ennobled  far  beyond  the  reach 
of  our  present  thought.    Since  these  things  are  so, "  now,  therefore,"  we  conclude  that — 

III.  Diligent  disoitleship  is  the  only  open  coubsb.  "  Hearken,"  "  Lear  instruc- 
tion," "  refuse  it  not,"  etc.  (vers.  32 — 34).  This  includes :  1.  Earnest  attention,  heark- 
ening, watching,  waiting.  Something  much  more  than  allowing  ourselves  by  force  of 
custom  to  be  found  where  wisdom  is  discoursed,  "  putting  in  an  appearance "  at  the 
sanctuary.  It  implies  an  earnest  heedfulness  of  spirit ;  a  diligent,  intelligent,  patient 
inquiry  of  the  soul ;  a  hungering  of  the  heart  for  the  saving  truth  of  the  living  Gud. 
2.  Practical  obedience — "  keeping  the  ways  "  of  wisdom  (ver.  32).  "  If  we  know  these 
things,  happy  are  we  if  we  do  them  "  (John  xiii.  17 ;  see  Matt.  vii.  21 — 27).  As  earnest 
disciples  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  way  to  "  keep  his  ways  "  is  (1)  to  accept  himself  as  our 
Saviour  and  Lord,  with  our  whole  heart ;  (2)  to  strive  daily  to  embody  his  will  in  all 
the  relations  we  sustain.  That  is  to  say,  first  enter  into  right  relation  to  himself, 
making  liim  the  Saviour  of  our  soul,  the  Friend  of  our  heart,  the  Lord  of  our  life ;  then 
strive  to  carry  out  his  commandments  in  all  the  transactions  and  relationships  of  our 
human  life. — 0. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  IX. 


Vers.  1 — 18. — 15.  Fifteenth  admonitory 
ditoourse,  containing  in  a  parabolic  form  an 
invitation  of  Wisdom  (vers.  1 — 12),  and  that 
of  her  rival  Folly  (vers.  18—18).  The 
chapter  sums  up  in  brief  the  warnings  of 
the  preceding  part. 

Ver.  1. — Wisdom  was  represented  as  hav- 
ing a  house  at  wliose  portals  persons  waited 
eagerly  for  admission  (oh.  viii.  34) ;  the  idea 
is  further  (arried  on.  Wisdom  hath  bnilded 
her  house.  (For  the  plural  form  of  Ithoch- 
moih,  "  wisdom,"  a  plural  of  eicellenoy,  see 
on  oh.  i.  20.)  As  the  "strange  woman  "  in 
ch.   vii.   possessed  a  house    to  which   the 


seduced  her  victim,  so  Wisdom  is  represented 
as  having  a  house  which  she  has  made  and 
adorned,  and  to  which  she  invites  her  pupils. 
Spiritual  writers  see  here  two  references — one 
to  Christ's  incarnation,  when  he  built  for 
himself  a  human  body  (Johnii.  19) ;  and  an- 
other to  his  work  in  forming  the  Church, 
which  is  his  mystical  body  (1  Pet.  ii.  5). 
And  the  sublime  language  used  iu  this 
section  is  not  satisfied  with  the  bare  notion 
that  we  have  here  only  an  allegorical  repre- 
sentation of  Wisdom  calling  followers  to 
her.  Bather  we  are  constrained  to  see  a 
Divine  intimation  of  the  office  and  work  of 
Christ,  not  only  the  Creator  of  the  world,  as 
in  oh.  viii.,  but  its  Regenerator.  She  hath 
hewn  out  har  seven  pillars.  Arohitectnrnlly, 
according  to  Hitzig  and  others,  the  pillars 


«H.  IX.  1— 18.J 


THE   PROVERBS. 


181 


of  the  inner  court  are  meant,  which  Bup- 
ported  the  gallery  of  the  first  story.  Four 
of  these  were  in  the  corners,  three  in  the 
middle  of  thiee  sides,  while  the  entrance  lo 
the  court  was  through  the  fourth  side  of  the 
square.  The  number  seven  generally  denotes 
perfection ;  it  is  the  covemint  number,  ex- 
pressive of  harmony  and  unity  generally, 
the  signature  of  holiness  and  blessing,'  com- 
pleteness and  rest.  So  in  the  Apocalypse 
the  whole  Church  is  represented  by  the 
nuuiber  of  seven  Churches  (Eov.  i.  4,  etc  ; 
Bee  on  ch.  xxvi.  16).  Wisdom's  house  is  said 
to  be  thus  founded  because  of  its  perfection 
and  adaptability  to  all  states  of  men.  But 
deubtless  there  is  a  refeience  to  the  seven- 
fold gifts  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  which  rested 
upon  the  Christ  (Isa.  xi.  2,  etc.),  and  which 
are  the  support  ami  strength  of  the  Church, 
being  symbolized  by  the  seven-branched 
candlestick  in  the  temple. 

Yer.  2. — She  hath  killed  her  beasts.  So 
in  the  parable  of  the  marriage  of  the  king's 
son  (Matt,  xxii.,  which  is  parallel  to  the 
present),  the  king  sends  Ids  servants  to 
notify  the  guests  that  the  oxen  and  failings 
are  killed,  and  all  things  are  leady.  Wis- 
dom has  stores  of  nourishment  for  under- 
standing and  affection ;  and  Christ  lias 
offered  himself  as  a  Victim  in  our  behalf, 
and  now  makes  bounteous  offers  of  grace, 
and  especially  has  ordained  the  sacrament 
of  the  Lord's  Supper  for  the  strengthening 
and  refreshing  of  the  soul.  She  hath  mingled 
hsr  wine ;  Septuagint,  "  She  hath  mixed 
(iKepaatv)  her  wine  in  »  bowl."  The  wine 
which,  unterapered,  was  too  luscious  or  too 
fiery  to  drink,  was  made  palatable  by  a 
certain  admixture  of  water.  It  was  always 
BO  mixed  at  the  Passover ;  and  the  ancient 
Christian  Liturgies  direct  the  mixture  in 
the  celebration  of  the  Holy  Eucharist,  doubt- 
less from  traditional  use.  Some,  however, 
think  that  allusion  is  here  made  to  the  cus- 
tom of  adding  drugs  to  wine  in  order  to 
increase  its  potency.  Among  the  Greeks, 
&KpaTos  ohos  meant "  wine  without  water,"  and 
in  Eev.  xiv.  10  we  have  &KpaTov  KeKep<w/x4yov, 
"  undiluted  wine  mixed."  And  probably  in 
the  text  the  notion  is  that  the  fluid  for  the 
guests'  delectation  is  propei  ly  prepared,  that 
there  may  be  no  trouble  when  they  arrive  (see 
on  oil.  xxiii.  30).  She  hath  also  furnished 
her  table,  by  arranging  the  dishes,  etc., 
thereon  (JPs." xxiii,  5,  "Thou  prepare&t  a 
table  before  me,"  where  the  same  verb,  aralc, 
is  used ;  romp.  Isa.  xxi.  5).  Moralizing  on 
this  passage,  St.  Gregory  says,  "  The  Lord 
•kUled  tlie  sacrifices'  by  offering  himself  on 
our  behalf.  He  'mingled  the  wine,'  blend- 
ing together  the  cup  of  his  precepts  from 
the  historical  narration  and  the  spiritual 
•ignification.  And  he  '  set  forth  his  table,' 
I.e.  Holy  Writ,  which  with  the  bread  of  the 


Word  refreshes  us  wleu  we  are  wearied  and 
come  to  him  away  from  the  burdens  of  the 
world,  and  by  its  effect  of  refreshing 
strengthens  us  against  our  adversaries" 
('  Moral.,'  xvii.  43,  Oxford  tranal.). 

Ver.  3. — She  halh  sent  forth  her  maidens, 
as  in  Matt.  xxii.  3,  to  call  thnm  tliat  were 
■  bidden  to  the  feast.  The  Septuagint  hns 
Tois  lavTrjs  SoiXovs,  "  her  servants,"  but  the 
Authorized  Version  is  correct,  and  feminine 
attendants  are  in  strict  harmony  with  the 
rest  of  the  apologue.  By  them  are  repre- 
sented the  apobtles  and  preachers  and 
ministers,  who  go  forth  to  win  souls  for 
Christ.  St.  Gregory  sers  in  their  being 
called  "  maidens  "  an  intimation  that  they 
aro  in  themselves  weak  and  abject,  and  are 
only  useful  and  honoured  as  being  the 
mouthpiece  of  their  Lord  ('Moral.,'  xxxiii. 
33).  She  orieth  upon  the  highest  places  of 
the  city,  where  her  voice  could  best  be  heard, 
as  in  oh.  viii.  2 ;  Matt.  x.  27.  She  is  not 
satisfied  with  delegating  her  message  to 
others ;  she  delivers  it  herself.  Septuagint, 
"  calling  with  a  loud  proclamation  to  the  cup 
(c7r!  KpaTfjpa) ; "  Vulgate,  Misit  ancillas  suat 
ut  vooarent  ad  arcem  et  ad  moenia  eivilatie, 
"  She  has  sent  her  handmaids  to  invite  to 
the  citadel,  and  to  the  walls  of  the  town." 
On  which  rendering  St.  Gregory  comments, 
"  In  that  while  they  tell  of  the  interior  life, 
they  lift  us  up  to  the  high  walla  of  the  city 
above,  which  same  walls,  surely,  except  any 
be  humble,  they  do  cot  ascend  "  ('  Moral.,' 
xvii.  43> 

Vers.  4 — 12. — Here  follows  the  inritation 
of  Wisdom,  urging  the  attendance  of  guesia 
at  the  sumptuous  banquet  whioh  she  has 
prepared  (oomp.  Kev.  lix.  3). 

Ver.  4. — Whoso  is  simple,  let  him  turn  is 
hither.  This  is  a  direct  address  to  the  im- 
prudent and  inexperienced  (see  on  oh.  vii. 
7),  calling  them  to  turn  aside  from  the  way 
on  which  they  aro  going,  and  to  come  to  her. 
Vulgate,  $i  qw's  est  paroului  veniat  ad  me, 
which  reminds  one  of  Christ's  tender  words, 
"  It  is  not  the  will  of  your  Father  which  is 
in  heaven,  that  one  of  these  little  ones  should 
perish  "  (Matt,  xviii.  14).  As  for  him  that 
wauteth  understanding,  she  saith  to  him 
what  follows  (so  ver.  16).  Wisdom's  own 
speech  is  interrupted,  and  the  writer  himself 
introduces  this  little  clause.  She  calls  on 
the  simple  and  theUnwisOjbothas  necessarily 
needing  her  teaching,  and  not  yet  inveterate 
in  evil,  nor  wilfully  opposed  to  better  guid- 
ance. "  The  world  by  wisdom  knew  not 
God,"  and  he  "  hath  chosen  the  foolish  things 
of  the  world  to  confound  the  wise,  •nd  the 
weak  things  of  the  world  to  confound  the 
thiugd  that  are  mighty,  and  base  things  of 
the  world,  and  things  which  are  despised, 


1^^ 


tfifi  ttlOtfitlB&. 


to».  tt  1—18. 


hath  God  chosen "  (1  Cor.  i.  21,  26,  etc  j 

comp.  Matt.  xi.  25). 

Ver.  5. — Come,  eat  ye  of  my  bread.  Wis- 
dom now  directly  addresses  the  simple  and 
the  foolish  (oomp.  Eev.  xxii.  17).  And 
drink  of  the  wine  which  I  have  mingled  (see 
on  ver.  2).  Bread  and  wine  represent  all 
needful  nourishment,  as  flesh  and  wine  in 
ver.  2.  So  Christ  says  (John  vi.  51),  "  I  am 
the  living  Bread  which  came  down  from 
heaven  .  .  .  and  the  bread  that  I  will  give 
is  my  flesh,  which  I  will  give  for  the  life 
of  the  world."  Compare  the  invitation  in 
Isa.  Iv.  1,  "Ho,  every  one  that  tbirsteth!" 
etc.  The  Fathers  see  here  a  prophecy  of  the 
gospel  feast,  wherein  Clirist  gave  and  gives 
bread  and  wine  as  symbols  of  his  presence 
(Matt.  xxvi.  26,  etc.). 

Ver.  6. — Forsake  the  foolUh,  and  live; 
Vulgate,  relinquite  infantiam;  Septuagint, 
avoXiiir^Ti  d</)poffii>'j)>',"  leave  folly."  These 
versions  take  the  plural  D'tinp  (petatm)  as 
equivalent  to  an  abstract  noun,  which  gives  a 
good  sense ;  but  the  plural  is  not  so  used  in 
our  book,  so  we  must  admit  the  rendering  of 
the  Authorized  Version,  "  Quit  the  class, 
give  up  being  of  the  category  of  fools,"  or 
else  we  must  take  the  word  as  vocative, 
"Leave  off,  ye  simple  ones"  (Eevised 
Version),  i.e.  quit  your  simplicity,  your 
folly.  And  live  (see  on  ch.  iv.  4).  It  is  not 
•  merfi  prosperous  life  on  earth  that  is  here 
promised,  but  something  far  higher  and 
better  (John  vi.  51,  "If  any  man  eat  of 
this  bread,  he  shall  live  for  ever").  The 
LXX.  saw  something  of  this  when  they 
paraphrased  the  clause,  "  Leave  ye  folly, 
that  ye  may  reign  for  ever."  Go  in  the 
way  of  understanding.  Leaving  folly,  stay 
not,  but  make  real  progress  in  the  direction 
of  wisdom.  Septuagint, "  Seek  ye  prudence, 
and  direct  understanding  by  knowledge." 

Vers.  7 — 10. — These  verses  form  a  paren- 
thesis, showing  why  Wisdom  addresses  only 
the  simple  and  foolish.  She  giveth  not  that 
which  is  holy  untu  dogs,  nor  casteth  pearls 
before  swine  (Matt.  vii.  6). 

Ver.  7. — He  that  reproveth  a  scomer 
getteth  to  himself  shame.  He  who  tries  to 
correct  a  scorner  (see  on  ch.  i.  22  and  iii.  34), 
one  who  derides  religion,  loses  his  pains  and 
meets  with  ribald  mockery  and  insult.  It  is 
not  the  fault  of  messengers  or  message  tliat 
this  should  be,  but  the  hardness  of  heart  and 
the  pride  of  the  hearer  make  him  despise 
the  teaching  and  hate  the  teacher  (Matt, 
xxiv.  9).  He  that  rebuketh  a  wicked  man 
getteth  himself  a  blot ;  rather,  he  that  re- 
proteth  a  sinner,  it  is  Ma  hlot.  Such  a  pro- 
ceeding results  in  disgrace  to  himself.  This 
is  not  said  to  discourage  the  virtuous  from 
reproving  transgressors,  but  btates  the  effect 


which  experience  proves  to  occur  in  snch 
cases.  Prudence,  caution,  and  tact  are 
needed  in  dealing  with  these  characters. 
Evil  men  regard  the  reprover  as  a  personal 
enemy,  and  treat  him  with  contumely,  and 
hence  arise  unseemly  bickerings  and  dis- 
putes, injurious  words  and  deeds.  To  have 
wasted  teaching  on  such  unreceptive  end 
antagonistic  natures  is  a  shameful  expendi- 
ture of  power.  St.  Gregory  thus  explains 
this  matter :  "  It  generally  happens  that 
wlien  they  cannot  defend  the  evils  that  are 
reproved  in  them,  they  are  rendered  worse 
from  a  feeling  of  shame,  and  carry  them- 
selves so  high  in  their  defence  of  themselves, 
that  they  take  out  bad  points  to  urge 
against  the  life  of  the  reprover,  and  so  they 
do  not  account  themselves  guilty,  if  they 
fasten  guilty  deeds  upon  the  heads  of  others 
also.  And  when  they  are  unable  to  find 
true  ones,  they  feign  them,  that  they  may 
also  themselves  have  things  they  may  seem 
to  rebuke  with  no  inferior  degree  of  justice  " 
('  Moral.,'  X.  3,  Oxford  transl.). 

Ver.  8. — Beprove  not  a  seomer,  lest  h« 
hate  thee  (see  the  last  note,  and  comp.  ch. 
XV.  12,  and  note  there).  There  are  times 
when  reproof  only  hardens  and  exasperates. 
"  It  is  not  proper,"  says  St.  Gregory,  "  for 
tiie  good  man  to  fear  lest  the  scorner  should 
utter  abuse  at  him  when  he  is  chidden,  but 
lest,  being  drawn  into  hatred,  he  should  be 
made  worse  "  ('  Moral.,'  viii.  67).  "  Bad  men 
sometimes  we  spare,  and  not  ourselves,  if 
from  the  love  of  tliose  we  cease  from  the 
rebuking  of  them.  Whence  it  is  needful 
til  at  we  sometimes  endure  keeping  to  our- 
selves what  they  are,  in  order  ths  t  they  may 
learn  in  us  by  our  good  living  what  they  are 
not "  (ibid.,  xx.  47,  Oxford  transl.).  Bebuke 
a  wise  man,  and  he  will  love  thee.  So  Fs. 
cxli.  5,  "  Let  the  righteous  smite  me,  it 
shall  be  a  kindness ;  and  let  him  reprove 
me,  it  shall  be  as  oil  upon  the  head ;  let  not 
my  head  refuse  it "  (oomp.  ch.  xix.  25 ;  xxv. 
12 ;  xxvii.  6). 

Ver.  9. — Give  instruction  to  a  wise  man, 
and  he  will  he  yet  wiser.  The  Hebrew  is 
merely  "  give  to  the  wise,"  with  no  object 
mentioned;  but  the  context  suggests  "in- 
struction," even  though,  as  in  ver.  8,  it  takes 
the  form  of  rebuke.  Vulgate  and  Sep- 
tuagint, "  Give  an  opportunity  to  a  wise 
man,  and  he  will  be  wiser"  (comp.  Matt, 
xiii.  12 ;  xxv.  29).  To  make  the  best  use 
of  all  occasions  of  learning  duty,  whether 
they  present  themselves  in  a  winning  or  a 
forbidden  shape,  is  the  part  of  one  who  is 
wise  unto  salvation  (see  ch.  i.  5,  and  note 
there).  Teach  a  just  man,  and  he  will  in- 
crease in  learning.  Wisdom  buing  a  moral 
and  not  merely  an  intellectual,  quality, 
there  is  a  natural  interchange  of  "  wise " 
and  "just,"  referring  to  the  same  individual, 


titt.  li.  1—18.3 


THE  tEOVERBS. 


133 


in  the  two  olaneeB.  Vulgate,  festindhit 
accipere ;  Septuagint, "  Instruct  a  wise  man, 
and  he  shall  have  more  given  him."  The 
wise  are  thus  rewarded  with  larger  measures 
of  wisdom,  because  they  are  simple,  humble, 
and  willing  to  learn,  having  that  childlike 
spirit  which  Christ  commends  (Matt. 
xviii.  3). 

Ver.  10. — Wisdom  returns  to  the  first  apo- 
thegm and  principle  of  the  whole  book  (oh. 
i.  7).  Without  the  fear  of  God  no  teaching 
Is  of  any  avail.  The  knowledge  of  the  holy 
is  understanding.  The  word  translated 
"the  holy"  is  D'B'lp,  a  plural  of  excel- 
lence (see  on  ch.  xxx.  3)  like  Elohim,  and 
equivalent  to  "  the  Most  Holy  One,"  Jehovah, 
to  which  it  answers  in  the  first  hemistich. 
God  is  called  "  Holy,  holy,  holy  "  (Isa.  vi.  3), 
in  his  threefold  nature,  and  as  majestic 
beyond  expression.  The  only  knowleds;e 
woith  having,  and  which  is  of  avail  for  the 
practical  purposes  of  life,  is  the  knowledge 
of  God  (see  on  oh.  ii.  5).  Septuagint,  "  The 
counsel  of  the  holy  (ayiav)  is  understanding," 
with  the  explanatory  clause ;  "  for  to  know 
the  Law  is  the  character  of  good  thought." 
This  occurs  again  at  ch.  xiii.  15,  though  in 
the  Hebrew  in  neither  place. 

Ver.  11. — The  parenthetical  explanation 
being  concluded,  in  which  Wisdom  has  inti- 
mated why  it  is  useless  to  appeal  to  the 
scorr.er  and  the  wilful  sinner,  she  now  re- 
sumes the  direct  address  interrupted  at  ver. 
7,  presenting  a  forcible  reason  for  the  advice 
given  in  ver.  6,  though  there  is  still  some 
connection  with  ver.  10,  as  it  is  from  the 
wisdom  that  comes  from  the  fear  of  the 
Lord  that  the  blessings  now  mentioned 
spring.  For  by  me  thy  days  shall  be  multi- 
plied (see  ch.  iii.  2,  16 ;  iv.  10,  where  long 
life  is  promised  as  a  reward  for  the  posses- 
sion and  practice  of  wisdom).  The  same 
result  is  attributed  to  the  fear  of  God  (ch.  x. 
27 ;  xiv.  27,  etc.).  In  ver.  6  the  address  is 
in  the  plural ;  here  it  is  singular.  A  similar 
intirchange  is  found  in  ch.  v.  7,  8  (where 
see  note). 

Ver.  12. — If  thou  be  wise,  thou  shalt  be 
wise  for  thyself.  A  transition  verse. 
Wisdom  will  bring  thee  good;  as  thou 
hast  laboured  well,  so  will  be  thy  reward 
(1  Oor.  iii.  8).  The  LXX.  (Syriac  and 
Arabic),  with  the  id,ea  of  perfecting  the 
antithesis,  adds,  ko!  toij  Thrtalov,  "My 
son,  if  thou  art  wise  for  thyself,  thou  shalt 
be  wise  also  for  thy  neigliboura"— which 
contains  the  great  truth  ihat  good  gifts 
should  not  be  selfishly  enjoyed,  but  used 
and  dispensed  for  the  advantage  of  others 
(Gal.  vi.  6).  In  support  of  our  text  we  may 
quote  Job  xxii.  2,  "  Can  a  man  be  profitable 
unto  God?  Surely  he  that  is  wise  is  pro- 
fitable unto  himself."  But  if  thou  soomest, 
Ihon  alom  shalt  bear  it;  i.«.  atone  for  it,  bear 


the  sin,  as  it  is  expressed  in  Numb.  ix.  13, 
"  For  every  man  shall  bear  his  own  burden  " 
(Gal:  vi.  5).  Thus  Wisdom  ends  her  exhor- 
tation. Septuagint,  "  If  thou  turn  out  evil, 
thou  alone  shalt  bear  (avTAijo-eis)  evils." 
And  then  is  added  the  following  para2;raph, 
which  may  possibly  be  derived  &om  a  Hebrew 
originrtl.but  seems  more  like  a  congeries  made 
up  from  other  passiiges,  and  foisted  by  some 
means  into  the  Greek  text :  "  He  that 
stayeth  himself  on  lies  shepherdeth  winds, 
and  himself  pursueth  flying  birds;  for  he 
hath  left  the  ways  of  his  own  vineyard,  and 
hath  gone  astray  with  the  wheels  of  his  own 
husbandry;  and  he  goeth  through  a  water- 
less desert,  and  over  a  land  set  in  thiasty 
places,  and  with  his  hands  he  gathereth  un- 
fruitfnlness." 

Vers.  13 — 18. — This  section  contains  the 
invitation  of  Folly,  the  rival  of  Wisdom,  re- 
presented under  the  guise  of  an  adulteress 
(ch.  ii.  16 ;  v.  3,  etc. ;  vi.  24,  etc. ;  vii.). 

Ver.  13. — A  foolish  woman ;  literally,  the 
woman  of  folly,  the  genitive  being  that  of 
apposition,  so  that  this  may  well  be  rendered, 
in  order  to  make  the  contrast  with  Wisdom 
more  marked,  "  the  woman  .Folly."  She  is 
regarded  as  a  real  person ;  and  between  her 
and  Virtue  man  has  to  m;ike  his  choice. 
Is  olamorous;  turbulent  and  animated  by 
passion  (as  ch.  vii.  11),  quite  different  from 
her  calm,  dignified  rival.  She  is  simple ; 
Hebrew,  "  simplicity,"  in  a  bad  sense ;  she 
has  no  preservative  against  evil,  no  moral 
fibre  to  resist  temptation.  And  knoweth 
nothing  which  she  ought  to  know.  Ignor- 
ance is  the  natural  accompaniment  of  Folly; 
in  thip  case  it  is  wilful  and  persistent ;  she 
goes  on  her  way  reckless  of  consequences. 
Septuagint, "  A  woman  foolish  and  bold,  who 
knows  not  shame,  comes  to  want  a  morsel." 

Ver.  14. — She  sitteth  at  the  door  of  her 
house.  She,  like  Wisdom,  has  a  house  of 
her  own,  and  imitates  her  in  inviting  {guests 
to  enter.  She  does  not  send  forth  her  maidens ; 
she  does  not  stand  in  the  streets  and  proclaim 
her  mission.  Vice  has  an  easier  task;  all 
she  has  to  do  is  to  sit  and  beckon  and  use  a 
few  seductive  words.  Her  house  is  not  sup- 
ported by  seven  pillars,  built  on  the  giace  of 
God  and  upheld  by  the  gifts  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  like  that  of  Wisdom  (ver.  1) ;  it  is  an 
ordinary  habitation  of  no  stately  proportions, 
but  its  meanness  impedes  not  the  uses  to 
which  she  puts  it,  her  own  charms  causing 
her  victims  to  disregard  her  environments. 
On  a  seat  in  the  high  places  of  the  city. 
Her  house  is  in  the  highest  and  most  con- 
spicuous part  of  the  city,  and  she  sits  before 
her  door  in  reckless  immodesty,  plying  hei 
shameful  trade  (comp.  Gen.  xxxviii.  14;  Jer, 
iii.  2).    The  mimicry  of  her  rival  again  ap- 


184 


THE  PBOVBRBa 


[oh.  IX.  1— la 


peart,  for  Wisdom  "  orieth  upon  the  highest 
places  of  the  city  "  (vejr.  3). 

Ver.  15. — To  oall  passengers  who  go  right 
on  their  ways.  With  shamelees  effrontery 
ahe  cries  to  all  that  pass  by,  she  addresses 
her  solicitations  to  persons  who  are  gons 
straislit  on  their  way,  thinking  nothing  of 
her,  having  no  idea  of  deviating  from  tlieir 
pursued  ohject.  As  they  walk  in  tho  path 
of  light  aijd  duty,  she  tries  to  turn  thtm 
aside.  Septuagint,  "  Calling  to  herself  (Trpoir- 
Ka\ovn4vri)  those  that  pass  by  and  are  keep- 
ina  straight  in  their  ways."  The  Falhers 
nnd  htre  a  picture  of  the  seductions  of  here- 
tical teaching,  which  puts  on  the  musk  of 
orthodoxy  and  deceives  the  unwary.  Words- 
worth notes  that,  in  the  Apocalypse,  the  false 
teacher  bears  iome  emblems  of  the  Lamb 
(Rev.  xiii.  11).  AH  false  doctrine  retains 
some  element  of  truth,  and  it  is  because  of 
this  admixturethatit  procures  adherents  and 
thrives  for  a  time. 

Vers.  16,  17. — These  verses  contain  Ihe 
invitation  whioh'Vice,  in  imitation  of  Virtue, 
and  assuming  her  voice  and  manner,  offers 
to  the  wayfarers. 

Ver.  16. — Whoso  is  simple,  let  him  turn 
■,a  hither.  She  uses  the  very  same  words 
which  Wisdom  utters  (ver.  4).  The  latter 
had  addressed  the  simple  because  they  n  ere 
inexperienced  and  undecided,  and  might  be 
guided  aright;  the  former  now  speaks  to 
thera  because  they  have  not  yet  made  their 
final  choice,  can  still  be  swayed  by  lower 
considerations,  and  may  be  led  astray.  Such 
peisons  find  it  hard  to  distin'j;uish  between 
the  good  and  the  evil,  the  false  and  the  true, 
especially  when  their  sensual  appetite  is 
aroused  and  sides  with  the  temptress.  No 
marvel  is  it  that  such  are  easi.y'deceivcd; 
for  we  are  told  that,  under  certain  circum- 
stances, Satan  transforms  himself  into  an 
angel  of  light  (2  Cor.  xi.  14).  That  wanteth 
understanding.  This  is  the  other  diss  ad- 
dressed by  Wisdom,  and  which  Folly  now 
snliuits,  urging  them  to  follow  her  on  the 
path  of  pleasure,  promising  sensual  enjoy- 
ment and  security. 

Ver.  17. — This  is  wliat  she  says :  Stolen- 
waters  are  sweet,  and  bread  eaten  in  secret 
is  pleasant.  The  metaphor  of  "stolen 
waters  "  refers  primarily  to  adulterous  inter- 
course, as  to  "drink  waters  out  of  one's 
own  cistern  "  (ch.  v.  15,  where  see  note)  signi- 
fies the  chaste  connection  of  lawful  wedlock. 
Wisdom  offered  flesh  and  wine  to  her  guests; 
Folly  offers  bread  and  water.  Wisdom  in- 
vites openly  to  a  well-furnished  table ;  Folly 
calls  to  ai  secret  meal  of  barest  victuals. 
What  the  former  offers  is  rich  and  satisfying 
»nd  comforting ;  what  Vice  gives  is  poor 
and  mean  and  insipid.    Yet  this  latter  has 


the  charm  of  being  forbidden ;  it  ii  attraotlTa 
because  it  is  unlawful.  This  is  a  trait  of 
oorrupt  human  nature,  which  is  recognized 
universally.  Thus  Ovid, '  Amor.,'  iii,  4. 17— 
•'  Nitimur  in  vetitum  semper,  oupimusque 
negata; 
Sic  interdictis  imminet  eager  aquig." 

Things  easily  attained,  the  possession  of 
which  is  gotten  without  effort  or  danger  or 
breach  of  restraint,  soon  pall  and  cease  to 
charm.  To  some  minds  the  astuteness  and 
secrecy  required  for  success  I  rave  an  irre- 
sistible attraction.  Thus  St.  Augustine 
relates  ('  Conf.,'  ii.  4)  how  hp  and  some  com- 
panions committed  a  theft,  not  from  want  and 
poverty,  nor  even  from  the  wish  to  enjoy 
what  was  stolen,  but  simply  for  the  pleasure 
of  thieving  and  tlie  sin.  They  robbed  a 
pear  tree  by  night,  carried  off  gieat  loads, 
which  they  flung  to  the  pigs,  and  their  only 
satisfaction  was  that  they  were  doing  what 
they  ought  not  ("  dum  tamen  fleret  a  nobis, 
quod  eo  liberet  quo  non  liceret ").  Septua- 
gint, "Taste  ye  to  your  pleasure  secret 
bread,  and  sweet  water  of  theft."._  Where 
water  is  a  precious  "commodity,  as  in  many 
parts  of  Palestine,  doubtless  thefts  were 
often  committed,  and  persons  made  free  with 
their  neighbour's  tank  when  they  could  do 
so  undetected,  thus  sparing  their  own  re- 
sources and  felicitating  themselves  on  their 
cleverness.  On  the  metaphorical  use  ot 
"  waters  "  in  Holy  Scripture,  St.  Gregory 
says,  "  Waters  are  sometimes  wont  to  denote 
the  Holy  Spirit,  sometimes  sacred  knowledge, 
sometimes  calamity,  sometimes  drifting 
peoples,  sometimes  the  minds  of  those  follow- 
ing the  faith."  He  refers  to  these  texts  re- 
spectively :  John  vii.  38,  etc. ;  Ecclus.  xv.  3 ; 
Ps.  Ixix.  1 ;  Eev.  xvii.  15  ("  the  waters  are 
peoples");  Isa.  xxii.  20;  and  he  adds,  "By 
water  likewise  bad  knowledge  is  wont  to  be 
designated,  as  when  the  woman  in  Solomon, 
who  bears  the  type  of  heresy,  charms  with 
crafty  persuasion,  saying, '  Stolen  waters  are 
sweet '  "  ('  Moral.,'  xix.  9). 

Ver.  18. — The  deluded  youth  is  supposed 
to  be  persuaded  by  the  seductions  of  Folly, 
and  to  enter  her  house.  The  writer,  then, 
in  a  few  weighty  words,  shows  the  terrible 
result  of  this  evil  compliance.  But  he 
knoweth  not  that  the  dead  are  there  (see 
on  ch.  ii.  18  and  vii.  27).  There  are  none 
"  there,"  in  her  house,  who  can  be  said  to 
be  living,  they  arc  rephaim,  shadowy  ghosts 
of  living  men,  or  else  demons  of  the  nether 
world.  The  Septuagint  and  Vulgate,  With 
a  reference  to  Gen.  vi.  4,  translate  yriyevtis 
and  gigantes.  Her  guests  are  in  the  depthi 
of  hell  (eheol) ;  Septuagint,  "  He  knows  not 
that  giants  perish  at  her  side,  and  hn  meets 
with  a  trap  of  hell."  The  terrible  warning 
may  profitably  be  repeated  more  than  once. 


CB.  IX.  1—18.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


186 


It  is  like  Christ's  awful  saying,  three  times 
enunciated,  "  Where  their  worm  dieth  not, 
and  the  fire  is  not  quenched  "  (Mark  ix,  44, 
40,  48).  The  LXX.  has  another  paragraph 
it  the  end  of  this  verse,  whioh  has  no  counter- 
part in  the  Hebrew :  "  But  start  away,  delay 


not  in  the  phxoe,  nor  put  thy  name  ['eye,' 
al.']  by  her;  for  thus  shalt  thou  pass  over 
(Sia/S^iri))  strange  water;  but  abstain  thou 
from  strange  water,  and  of  a  strange  spring 
drink  not,  that  thou  mayest  live  long,  and 
years  of  life  may  be  added  to  thee." 


HOMTLETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 5. — The  banquet  of  wisdom.  I.  The  BANQiJET-HOtrsB.  1.  It  is  substantial. 
A  house,  not  a  mere  tent.  The  feast'  of  wisdom  is  no  brief  repast,  rarely  enjoyed. 
It  is  a  lasting  delight,  a  frequent  refreshment  always  ready.  2.  It  is  magnificent. 
Seven  ]  illars  are  hewn  out  for  the  house.  It  is  fitting  that  the  house  of  God  should 
be  more  beautiful  than  a  man's  dwelling.  He  who  enters  into  the  habitation  of  God's 
thoughts  will  tind  it  beautiful  and  glorious.  There  is  nothing  mean  about  Divine  truth. 
It  is  all  large,  noble,  magnificent.  He  who  comes  into  communion  with  it  will  find 
himself  in  no  poor  hovel.  He  will  be  in  a  palace  of  splendour,  with  whioh  the  material 
grandeur  of  marble  columns,  delicate  tracery,  etc.,  cannot  vie. 

.  II.  The  provision.  Rich  and  abundant — slaughtered  beasts,  spiced  wine,  a  well- 
furnished  table.  Nothing  looks  more  sordid  than  poor  fare  in  splendid  apartments.  This 
shall  not  be  seen  in  the  house  of  Divine  wisdom,  but,  on  ibe  contrary,  enough  for  all, 
and  that  of  the  best  quality.  No  thoughts  are  so  full  nor  so  rich  as  the  thoughts  of 
revelation.  There  is  variety  here  as  in  the  viands  of  the  banquet.  And  "  all  things  are 
ready."  The  table  is  spread.  It  waits  for  the  guests.  While  we  are  praying  for  light, 
the  light  is  shining  about  us.     God  has  revealed  his  truth.     Christ,  the  Light  of  the 

(Forid,  has  appeared  among  us.  The  feast  of  the  truths  of  the  glorious  gospel  of  the 
iflesaed  God  is  ready  for  all  who  will  come  and  share  in  its  bounties. 

III.  The  invitation.  The  maidens  are  sent  forth — not  one,  but  many — that  the 
message  may  go  to  all  quarters.  They  cry  ia  the  highest  places  of  the  city,  that  the 
message  may  have  the  greatest  publicity,  may  spread  over  the  widest  area,  may  reach 
all  classes.  This  is  the  character  of  the  call  of  God  to  us  in  his  trutb.  He  seeks  us 
be'bre  we  seek  him.  He  has  already  sought  us.  The  gospel  is  preached,  proclaimed 
as  by  heralds ;  and  this  gospel  contains  the  invitation  to  the  rich  banquet  of  Divine 
truth. 

IV.  The  guests.  "The  simple;"  "him  that  lacketh  understanding."  So  in  our 
Lord's  parable,  "  toe  poor,  and  the  maimed,  and  the  halt,  and  the  blind  "  are  called 
(Luke  xiv.  21).  The  whole  need  not  the  physician ;  the  full  need  not  the  feast.  They 
who  are  satisfied  with  their  own  knowledge  will  not  sit  humbly  at  the  feet  of  a  Divine 
revelation.  It  is  they  who  feel  themselves  to  be  foolish,  who  acknowledge  their 
ignorance  and  grope  dimly  after  the  light,  who  will  be  able  to  enjoy  the  banquet  of 
wisdom ;  and  these  people  are  specially  invited.  The  heathen,  the  illiterate,  the  weak- 
minded,  are  all  called  to  receive  the  saving  truth  of  Christ. 

V.  The  satisfaction.  "  Eat  of  my  bread,  and  drink  of  the  wine,"  etc.  1.  Divine 
truth  is  nourishing.  "  By  every  word  that  proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  Lord 
doth  man  live  "  (Deut.  viii.  3).  Christ,  the  "  Word,"  is  the  Bread  of  life.  2.  Divine 
truth  is  a  source  of  joy.  At  the  banquet  there  is  wine  that  maketh  glad  the  heart  of 
man.  -The  gospel  offers  no  prison  fare.  It  kills  the  fatted  beast.  It  gives  wine — 
spiced  wine,  things  of  pleasure  and  luxury.  Yet  the  pleasure  is  not  enervating;  the 
gospel  wine  is  not  harmfully  intoxicating.  How  much  better  this  banquet  than  the 
injurious  and  really  less  pleasing  feast  of  folly  (vers.  13 — 18)1 

Ver.  8. — Reproof.  I.  How  to  give  RBPKOor.  The  duty  of  reproving  is  oap  of  the 
most  difficult  and  delicate  ever  attempted.  The  people  who  are  most  rash  in  adventur- 
ing upon  it  too  often  fall  into  the  greatest  blunders,  while  those  who  are  really  fitted 
to  undertake  it  shrink  from  the  attempt.  The  mere  utterance  of  a  protest  is  generally 
worse  than  useless.  It  only  raises  anger  and  provokes  to  greater  obstinacy.  Unless 
there  is  some  probability  of  convincing  a  man  of  the  wrongness  of  his  conduct,  there  is 
little  good  in  admiuiBtering  rebukes  to  him.     It  ia  not  the  duty  of  any  man  to  raise  up 


186  ME  PaOVEUBS.  [oh.  tt.  1—18. 


enemies  without  cause.  We  should  all  seek,  as  far  as  in  ua  lies,  to  live  peaceably  with 
all  men.  Of  conrse,  it  may  be  incumbent  upon  us  sometimes  so  to  act  that  we  shall 
provoke  opposition.  Jesus  Christ  could  have  avoided  the  enmity  of  the  Jews,  but 
only  by  unfaithfulness  to  his  mission.  Where  we  are  in  the  way  of  our  mission,  or 
when  any  duty  will  be  accomplished  or  any  good  done,  we  must  not  shrink  from  rousing 
antagonism.  To  do  so  is  cowardice,  not  peaceableness.  But  if  no  good  is  done,  we  may 
only  bring  a  nest  of  hornets  about  our  heads  by  our  indiscretion.  Let  us  understand 
that  while  we  are  never  to  sRnction  evil-doing,  we  are  only  called  to  rebuke  it  when 
the  rebuke  will  not  be  certainly  rejected;  then  we  must  risk  insult  for  the  sake  of 
righteousness.  The  practical  point,  then,  is  that  we  consider  the  character  of  a  mau 
before  attempting  to  rebuke  him,  and  that  we  be  not  so  anxious  to  protest  against  sin 
as  to  counsel  the  sinner  and  guide  him  to  better  ways.  If  he  is  in  a  hard,  scornful 
mood,  we  had  better  wait  for  a  more  fitting  opportunity.  If  he  is  too  strong  for  us, 
we  shall  only  injure  the  cause  of  right  by  attempting  to  grapple  with  him.  Weak 
champions  of  Christianity  have  often  only  hurt  themselves,  discredited  their  cause,  and 
afforded  a  triumph  to  powerful  opponents  by  their  rash  encounters.  In  all  cases  to 
reprove  well  requires  wisdom,  tact,  simplicity,  humanity. 

II.  How  TO  RECEIVE  RBPBOor.  He  who  hates  the  reprover  will  become  himself  a 
scorner ;  the  wise  man  will  love  the  reprover.  Our  manner  of  accepting  merited  reproof 
will  therefore  be  a  test  of  our  character.  Thus  viewed,  may  not  the  text  class  many  of 
us  with  the  scorners,  though  we  had  little  suspected  where  our  true  place  was  to  be 
found  ?  It  is  too  common  for  a  man  to  reject  all  reproof  with  rage.  Not  inquiring 
whether  the  accusation  is  true,  he  unjustly  regards  it  as  an  attack  upon  himself,  as  a 
personal  insult.  There  may  be  fault  with  the  reprover — very  often  there  is.  But  a 
wise  man  will  not  shelter  himself  behind  that.  Granting  that  the  method  of  reproof 
was  unwise,  harsh,  offensive;  still,  was  there  no  ground  for  any  reproof?  To  be  angry 
at  all  reproof  is  to  be  one  of  the  worst  of  scorners — to  scorn  right  and  truth.  Per  the 
conscientious  man  will  not  dare  to  reject  appeals  to  his  conscience ;  he  will  feel  bound 
to  listen  to  them,  no  matter  how  unwelcome  the  voice  that  speaks  them.  He  will 
desire  to  be  free  from  faults.  Should  he  not,  therefore,  thank  those  people  who  show 
them  to  him  ?  If  he  loves  goodness,  he  ought  to  love  those  whose  advice  will  help  him 
to  remove  the  greatest  hindrances  to  attaining  it.  If  he  hates  sin  as  the  disease  of  his 
soul,  he  should  accept  reproof  as  medicine,  and  treat  the  reprover  as  a  valuable  physician. 

Ver.  9. — An  open  mind.  There  are  two  classes  of  minds  that  seem  to  be  armoiu:- 
proof  against  the  invasion  of  new  light.  One  contains  those  people  who,  to  use  the 
phraseology  of  the  Roman  Catholic  Church,  are  in  a  state  of  "  invincible  ignorance." 
The  other  contains  the  much  more  numerous  people  who  know  just  enough  to  feel  a 
pride  of  stiperiority  to  their  fellows,  and  who  wrap  themselves  up  in  the  infallibility 
of  self-conceit.  To  these  persons  Pope's  often  misapplied  maxim  may  be  fairly 
appropriated— 

"A  little  knowledge  is  a  dangerous  thing; 
Drink  deep,  or  taste  not  the  Pierian  spring." 

The  truly  wise  man  will  be  the  first  to  see  the  limits  of  his  knowledge  and  the  Infinite 
night  of  ignorance  with  which  the  little  spot  ef  light  that  he  has  as  yet  gained  is 
surrounded.  Having  drunk  of  the  wells  of  truth,  he  wUl  have  found  his  thirst  not 
slaked,  but  stimulated ;  he  will  be  a  philosopher,  a  lover  of  wisdom.  Such  a  man  will 
have  an  open  mind. 

I.  CoNSiDEB  THE  CHABACTBBisTios  OP  AN  OPEN  MIND.  1.  It  is  not  an  empty  mind. 
A  man  may  be  prepared  to  receive  fresh  light  without  abandoning  the  light  he  already 
possesses.  The  seeker  after  truth  need  not  be  a  sceptic.  There  may  be  many  things 
clearly  seen  and  firmly  grasped  in  the  mind  of  one  who  is  ready  to  welcome  all  new 
trutli.  2.  It  is  not  a  weak  mind.  If  a  man  is  not  a  bigot,  he  need  not  be  like  s 
shuttle-cock,  driven  about  by  every  wind  of  doctrine.  He  will  sift  truth.  He  nill ' 
consider  new  ideas  calmly,  impartially,  judicially.  3.  An  open  mind  is  willing  to  receive 
truth  from  any  quarter.  It  may  come  from  a  despised  teacher,  from  a  rival,  from  an 
enemy.  The  open  mind  will  not  exclaim, "  Can  any  good  thing  corne  out  of  Nazareth  ?  " 
i.  An  open  mind  is  ready  to  receive  unpleasant  truth.     The  new  light  may  threaten  to 


ttt.  IX.  1-ifij  «rfi»  tftov«iiS9.  Id? 


interfere  with  the  vested  interests  of  ancient  beliefs,  it  may  expose  the  folly  of  long- 
cherished  crotchets,  it  may  unsettle  miuch  of  one's  established  convictions,  it  may 
reveal  truths  which  are  themselves  unpalatable,  or  it  may  wound  our  pride  by  exposing 
our  errors.  Still,  the  open  mind  will  receive  it  on  one  condition — that  it  is  genuine 
truth.  5.  Such  characteristics  must  be  based  on  wisdom  and  justice.  It  is  the  wise 
man  and  the  just  who  is  ready  to  receive  instruction.  No  small  amount  of  practical 
wisdom  is  requisite  for  the  discernment  of  truth  amidst  the  distractions  of  prejudice. 
Justice  is  a  more  importaut  characteristic.  Indeed,  it  is  one  of  the  fundamental  condi- 
tions of  truth-seeking.  Science  and  philosophy  would  progress  more  rapidly,  and 
theology  would  be  less  confused  by  the  conflicts  of  bitter  sectaries,  if  men  could  but 
learn  to  be  fair  to  other  inquirers,  and  to  take  no  exaggerated  views  of  the  importance 
of  their  own  notions. 

II.  The  advaktagbb  of  an  open  mind.  1.  The  open  mind  will  attain  most  truth. 
Truth  is  praciioally  infinite.  But  our  knowledge  of  it  varies  according  as  we  are  able 
to  attain  to  a  large  and  yet  a  discriminating  receptivity.  To  the  nut  its  shell  is  its 
universe.  The  man  who  locks  himself  up  in  the  dungeon  of  prejudice  will  never  see 
anything  but  his  own  prison-walls.  2.  Every  attainment  in  knowledge  prepares  the 
way  for  receiving  more  knowledge.  It  intensifies  the  desire  of  possessing  truth.  Thus 
the  inquirer  may  say — 

**  The  wish  to  know — that  endless  thirst, 
Wliich  ev'n  by  quenching  ig  awak'd. 
And  which  becomes  or  blest  or  curst 

As  is  the  fount  whereat  'tis  slak'd— 
Still  urged  me  onward,  with  desire 
Insatiate,  to  explore,  inquire." 

But  not  only  is  the  thirst  thus  stimulated.  Putxu-e  knowledge  grows  upon  past 
experience.  Knowledge  is  not  an  endless  level  plain,  to  reach  one  district  of  which  we 
must  leave  another.  It  is  more  like  a  great  building,  and  as  we  rise  from  story  to  story, 
we  gain  new  treasures  by  mountiiig  on  those  previously  possessed.  The  more  we  know, 
the  easier  is  it  to  increase  knowledge.  This  applies  to  religious  as  well  as  to  secular 
things.  Prophets  and  devout  people  were  the  first  to  welcome  the  advent  of  the  Light 
of  the  world  (see  Luke  ii.  25 — 38).  The  more  the  Christian  knows,  the  more  wUl  he 
be  able  to  see  of  new  spiritual  truths.  Thus  he  will  come  to  welcome  instruction  with 
thankfulness. 

Ver.  12. — True  self-interest.  It  is  the  duty  of  the  Christian  to  bear  his  brother's 
burden,  and  the  duty  of  every  man  to  love  his  neighbour  as  himself;  it  is  also  the 
privilege  of  the  saint  to  lose  his  life  for  Christ's  sake,  and  to  "  spend  and  be  spent ''  in 
the  service  of  man.  But  there  still  remains  a  right  and  lawful,  and  even  an  obliga- 
tory, regard  to  self-interest.  For  one  thing,  if  a  man's  own  heart  and  life  are  wrong, 
his  work  in  the  world  must  be  wrong  also. 

I.  He  is  not  teult  wise  whose  own  soul  is  not  bapb.  1.  Se  may  know  the  truth. 
The  wisdom  that  can  unravel  many  mysteries  is  his.  He  has  searched  into  the  deep 
truthis  of  revelation.  A  diligent  reader  of  the  Bible,  he  is  well  acquainted  at  least  with 
the  words  that  God  teaches.  But  he  has  never  regarded  the  practical  bearing  of  all  this 
truth.  It  has  been  to  him  but  a  shadow.  Then  his  own  soul  may  be  wrecked,  though 
the  way  to  the  tiaven  is  clear.  2.  Ee  may  enlighten  others.  Perhaps  he  is  a  preacher 
of  the  gospel,  and  is  able  to  hold  up  the  torch  to  many  a  wayfarer.  He  is  even  urgent 
in  pressing  the  truth  upon  his  hearers.  Or  he  is  a  champion  for  the  defence  of  the 
truth,  arguing  vehemently  with  unbelievers.  But  all  the  wLile  he  never  applies  this 
truth  to  his  own  case.  Saving  others,  he  is  himself  a  castaway  (1  Cor.  ix.  27).  The 
pilot  leads  the  imperilled  mariners  home,  but  is  drowned  himself.  Surely  this  is  the 
height  of  folly  1 

XL  He  who  is  tbuly  wise  will  pbofit  by  his  wisdom.  1.  He  will  see  the  necessity 
of  applying  truth  to  himself.  This  will  be  a  part  of  his  wisdom.  We  are  all  sa.Uy 
tempted  to  delude  ourselves  into  a  false  sense  of  security,  and  we  need  light  and 
guidance  to  show  us  our  danger  and  our  course  of  safety.  It  is  a  mark  of  Gud-given 
wiadom  to  choose  that  course.    2.  He  taUl  recognize  the  practical  bearings  of  truth.    It 


188  THE  PRO  VERBS.  [oh.  ix.  1—18. 

will  do  little  good  to  re.ard  one's  self  only  as  ft  sort  of  example  to  which  certain  trutht 
are  attached.  Mere  self-examination  of  the  most  lucid  and  honest  character  will  not 
gave  our  souls.  We  have  to  go  a  step  further,  and  act  according  to  the  knowledge  that 
we  gain  in  the  light  of  God's  truth.  3.  He  will  find  the  application  of  wisdom  directly 
h.dpf'vil,.  When  a  man  does  not  hold  aloof  from  it  as  from  some  curiosity  only  to  be 
inspected,  but  embraces  the  truth  of  Christ,  taking  it  home  to  his  own  heart,  he  dis- 
covers that  it  is  a  saving  truth.  By  the  personal  reception  of  this  Divine  wisdom  he 
reaches  the  way  of  salvation.  Above  all,  when  we  remember  that  Christ  is  "  the 
Wisdom  of  Go;l,"  we  may  see  tbat  for  a  man  to  receive  that  wisdom,  i.e.  to  receive 
Christ,  is  to  be  wise  for  himself,  because  Christ  brings  the  light  of  God's  truth,  and 
Chi-ist's  presence  is  the  source  of  sure  salvation. 

Ver.  17. — " Stolen  waters''  A  fatal  fascination,  arising  out  of  its  very  lawlessness, 
attaches  itself  to  sin.  Illicit  pleasures  are  doubly  attractive  just  because  they  are 
illicit.     Let  us  consider  the  secret  of  these  evil  charms. 

I.  The  provooation  of  bestraints.  There  are  many  things  which  we  do  not  care 
to  have  so  long  as  they  are  within  our  reach,  but  which  are  clothed  with  a  sudden 
attractiveness  directly  they  are  shut  out  from  us.  If  we  see  a  notice,  "  Trespassers  will 
be  prosecuted,"  we  feel  an  irritating  restraint,  although  we  have  had  no  previous  desire 
to  enter  the  path  that  it  blocks.  Innumerable  fiuits  grew  in  Eden,  but  the  one  for- 
bidden fruit  excited  the  greatest  longing  of  appetite.  Advertisers  sometimes  head 
"their  placards  with  the  words,  "  Don't  read  this  ! " — judging  that  to  be  the  best  way  to 
call  attention  to  them.  If  you  say,  "  Don't  look  I "  everybody  is  most  anxious  to  look. 
To  put  a  book  in  an  index  expurgatorius  is  the  surest  means  of  advertising  it. 

II.  The  value  given  by  difficulty  of  acquisition.  We  value  little  what  we  can 
t»y  cheaply.  Rarity  raises  prices.  If  we  have  been  to  great  labour  and  have  run 
heavy  risks  in  obtaining  anything,  we  are  inclined  to  measure  the  worth  of  it  by  what 
it  has  cost  us.  Many  designs  of  sin  are  only  achieved  with  great  difficulty.  They 
involve  terrible  dangers.  When  once  accomplished,  they  are  the  more  valueii  for  this. 
The  pleasures  of  adventure,  the  Englishman's  peculiar  delights  of  the  chase,  are 
enlisted  in  the  cause  of  wickedness. 

"  All  thing!  that  are, 
Are  with  more  spirit  chased  than  enjoyed." 

III.  The  sense  or  power  and  liberty.  If  you  have  gained  your  end  in  spite  of 
law  and  authority,  there  is  a  natural  elation  of  triumph  about  it.  When  you  have 
succeeded  in  breaking  bounds,  you  taste  the  sweets  of  an  illicit  liberty. 

IV.  The  enjoyhent  of  secrecy.  To  some  minds  there  is  a  peculiar  charm  about 
this.  To  them  especially  "  bread  eaten  in  secret  is  pleasant."  Let  it  be  all  open  and 
above-hoard,  let  it  be  of  such  a  nature  that  one  would  have  no  objection  to  the  world 
knowing  it,  and  the  pleasure  loses  its  most  pungent  element.  The  air  of  mystery,  the 
sense  of  superiority  in  doing  what  those  about  one  little  suspect,  become  elements  in 
the  pleasures  of  sin.  But  surely  the  highest  natures  must  be  too  simple  and  frank  to 
feel  the  force  of  such  inducements  to  sin  1 

V.  The  fascination  of  wickedness.  Pure,  naked  evil  will  attract  on  its  own 
account.  There  is  a  charm  in  absolute  ugliness.  Some  men  really  seem  to  love  sin 
for  its  own  sake.  A  wild  intoxication,  a  mad  passion  of  conscious  guilt,  instils  a  fatal 
sweetness  into  stolen  waters.  But  it  is  the  sweetness  of  a  deadly  poison,  the  euthanasia 
of  crime. 

All  these  horrible  charms  of  sin  need  to  be  guarded  against.  We  must  not  trust  to 
our  own  integrity ;  it  is  not  proof  against  the  fatal  fascinations  of  temptation.  To 
resist  them  we  must  be  fortified  with  the  love  of  higher  joys,  fed  with  the  wholesome 
food  of  the  banquet  of  wisdom  (see  vers.  1 — 5),  attracted  by  the  beauty  of  hdliness, 
and  above  all,  led  to  the  pure  and  nourishing  delights  of  the  gospel  feast  by  faith  in  tha 
Lord  J«sus  Chriat 


on.  IX.  1—18.]  THE   PROVEEBS  181 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTH0B8. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — Wisdom's  banquet ;  or,  the  call  to  salvation.  I.  The  figubative  bepbe- 
BENTATION.  Wisdom  was  termed,  in  ch.  viii.  30,  a  "  workmistress,"  in  reference  to 
the  structure  of  the  physical  world.  Here  she  whose  delight  is  in  men  and  human  life 
is  represented  as  the  builder,  i.e.  the  founder  of  moral  and  social  order.  The  seven 
pillars  denote  grandeur,  and,  at  the  same  time,  sacredness.  Her  home  is  a  temple. 
Religion  is  "  the  oldest  and  most  sacred  tradition  of  the  race "  (Herder) ;  and  it 
contains  within  it  art,  science,  polity — all  that  makes  human  life  stable,  rich,  and 
beautiful.  Preparation  has  been  made  for  a  feast.  The  ox  has  been  skin,  the  spiced 
wine  has  been  mixed  (Isa.  v.  22 ;  ch.  xxiii.  30),  the  table  set  forth.  Her  servant  has 
been  sent  forth,  and  her  invitation  has  been  freely  marie  known  on  all  the  heights  of 
the  city.  It  is  an  invitation  to  the  simple,  the  ignorant,  the  unintelligent,  of  every 
degree. 

II.  The  spiritual  contents.  These  receive  a  richer  unfolding  in  the  gospel  (Matt. 
xxii.  1 — 14 ;  Luke  xiv.  16 — 24).  Instead  of  the  practical  personification  of  wisdom, 
we  have  the  living  presence  of  Christ,  "  the  Wisdom  of  God."  Instead  of  the  abstract, 
the  concrete ;  for  an  ideal  conception,  a  real  Example  and  a  present  Object  of  faith. 
Insieail  of  the  splendid  palace-temple,  on  the  other  hand,  we  have  the  thought  of  the 
kingdom  of  God,  or  the  Church,  resting  on  its  foundations  of  apostolic  truth.  To  the 
provisions  of  the  table  correspond  the  rich  spiritual  nourishment  derivable  from  Christ, 
ijjs  Word  and  work — the  true  Bread  sent  down  from  heaven.  To  the  invitatioil  of 
Wisdom,  the  call  to  salvation  by  Christ.  1.  The  New  Testament  echoes  thti  Old,  and 
the  gospel  is  essentially  the  same  in  every  way.  2.  The  gospel  of  Christ  is  the 
unfolding,  expansion,  enrichment,  of  the  ancient  spiritual  lore.  3.  The  relation  of 
the  Divine  to  the  human  remains  constant ;  it  is  that  of  supply  to  want,  knowledge 
to  ignorance,  love  and  light  to  sorrow  and  darkness.  4.  The  invitation  to  the  kingdom 
of  heaven  is  free  and  general,  conditioned  by  nothing  except  the'  need  of  its 
blessings. — J. 

Vers.  7 — 9. —  Warnings  against  refusal.  So,  in  connection  with  the  preceding 
section,  we  may  take  these  words. 

I.  Every  refusal  of  wisdom  implies  the  prbfeebnob  of  the  opposite.  It 
implies  that  the  associations  of  folly  are  more  congenial  than  those  of  sound  sense 
(ver.  6),  which  is  a  preference  of  death  to  life,  in  its  effect, 

II.  The  sooffino  habit  is  an  indication  or  folly.  (Ver.  7.)  Under  the  general 
head  of  fools  come  scoffers  and  wicked  men  of  every  degree.  The  cynic  may  prefer 
to  speak  of  evil  men  and  actions  3.%  fools  and  folly — "  worse  than  a  crime,  a  blunder  " 
—and  he  utters  more  truth  in  this  than  he  intends. 

III.  The  scoffek  is  abusive,  and  this  is  sionifioast  of  his  temper.  (Vers.  7,  8 ; 
comp.  Exod.  V.  16 ;  Ps.  cxv.  7.)  1.  He  neither  has  nor  desires  to  have  self-know- 
ledge, and  therefore  hates  the  teacher  who  holds  the  mirror  up  to  nature,  and  makes 
him  see  himself  as  he  is.  2.  He  is  the  foil  to  the  wise  man,  who  is  thankful  for 
corrections,  because  he  is  set  upon  improvement  and  progress ;  and  therefore  loves  the 
corrector,  holding  him  creditor  of  his  thanks,  and  recognizing  the  loyalty  qf  the  hand 
which  wounds.  3.  The  great  distinction  of  the  wise  man  from  the  fool  is  that  ttf 
former  has  indefinite  capacity  of  progress  ;  the  latter,  qvA  fool,  none.  4.  As  there  is 
an  indissoluble  connection  between  folly  and  wickedness,  so  are  wisdom  and  rectitude 
at  one  (ver.  9). — J. 

Vers.  10 — 12. — Recurrence  to  first  principles.  Life  is  made  up  of  ckoles.  We  are 
ever  coming  back  to  whence  we  started.  As  history  repeats  itself,  so  must  morality 
and  religion.  'Ihe shining  points  of  wisdom  appear  and  reappear  with  the  regularity 
of  the  heavenly  bodies.  The  vault  of  heaven  has  its  analogue  in  the  star-besprinkled 
vault  of  the  moral  relations.  Iteration  and  repetition  of  first  principles  are  con- 
stantly necessary,  ever  wholesome,  peculiarly  characteristic  of  Semitic  thought. 
Wherever  life  is  bounded  to  a  small  circle  of  interests,  the  same  truths  must  be  insisted 
on  "  over  and  over  again." 


19C  THE  PBOVBRBa.  [oh.  ix.  1—18, 


1.  Ebligion  a  fibbt  peinoipls!.  1.  Beligion  cliaracterized.  ThB/ea/r  of  Jehovah. 
In  other  words,  reverence  for  the  Eternal  One.  We  may  unfold  the  definition,  but 
can  we  substitute  a  better  for  it  ?  It  is  a  relation  to  the  eternal  and  unseen,  to  a 
supersensual  order,  as  opposed  to  that  which  is  visible  and  transient.  It  is  deep-seated 
in  feeling.  Beverence  is  the  ground-tone  in  the  scale  of  religious  feeling ;  we  descend 
from  it  to  awe  and  terror,  or 'rise  to  joy  and  ecstasy.  It  is  a  relation,  not  to  ourselves, 
or  a  projection  of  ourselves  in  fancy,  but  to  a  personal  and  holy  Being.  2.  Its  con- 
nection with  intelligence  firmly  insisted  on.  It  is  the  beginning,  or  root-principle,  of 
wisdom,  and  "acquaintance  with  the  Holy  is  true  insight"  (ver.  10).  The  question, 
often  discussed,  whether  religion  is  a  matter  of  feeling,  knowledge,  or  will,  arises  from 
a  fallacy.  We  may  distinguish  these  functions  in  thought ;  but  in  act  they  are  one, 
because  the  consciousness  is  a  unity,  not  a  bundle  of  things,  a  collocation  of  organs. 
In  feeling  we  know,  in  Isnowledge  we  feel,  and  from  this  interaction  arise  will,  acts, 
conduct.  Hence  so  far  as  a  man  is  soundly  religious,  he  is  likewise  soundly  intelligent 
In  the  truest  conception  religion  and  wisdom  are  identical. 

n.  Wisdom  a  first  pbhtciplb.  (Ver.  11.)  Here  we  come  down  from  the  region  of 
speculation  to  that  of  practical  truth.  1.  The  "  will  to  live"  is  the  very  spring  of  our 
activity.  2.  Only  second  to  it  in  original  power  is  the  wish  to  be  well,  t.e.  to  have 
fulness,  energy  of  life,  consciousness.  The  extensive  form  of  this  wish  is  naturally  the 
earlier,  the  more  childlike — to  enjoy  many  years,  to  live  to  a  green  old  age,  etc.  The 
intensive  form  is  later,  and  belongs  to  the  more  reflective  stage  of  the  mind.  "  Kon 
vivere,  sed  valere,  est  vita "  (Martial).  'Tis  "  more  life  and  fuller  that  we  want " 
(Tennyson).  "  One  hour  of  glorious  life  is  worth  an  age  without  a  name."  This  view 
comes  more  home  to  the  modern  mind  than  to  that  of  the  monotonous  East,  where  the 
Mine  fulness  of  interest  was  not  possible.  We  say, "  Better  twenty  years  of  Europe  than 
a  cycle  of  Cathay." 

ni.  Pbksonalitt  a  first  principle.  (Ver.  12.)  1.  We  have  a  distinct  indimdwd 
consciousness.  "  I  am  I,  and  other  than  the  things  I  touch."  1  know  what  my  acts  are 
as  distinguished  from  my  involuntary  movements,  my  thoughts  ag  distinct  fiom  th« 
passive  reflection  of  perceptions  and  phantasies  unbegotten  of  my  will.  2.  Our  wisdom 
or  folly  is  our  oton  affair,  both  in  origin  and  consequences.  We  begot  the  habit,  and 
must  reap  as  we  sow,  bear  the  brunt  of  the  conflict  we  may  have  provoked.  3.  Neither 
our  wisdom  can  enrich  nor  our  folly  impoverish  God  (Job  xxii.  2,  3 ;  xxxv.  6 — 9 ; 
Bom.  xi.  35  ;  Rev.  xxii.  11, 12).  (1)  It  is  a  solemn  thought ;  the  constitution  of  our 
being  reveals  the  decree  of  God,  and  may  be  thus  interpreted :  "  Let  him  alone  I "  We 
are  not  interfered  with.  We  are  suffered  to  develop  in  the  air  and  sun.  Woe  to  us 
if  we  pervert  the  kindly  gifts  of  God,  and  turn  his  truth  into  a  lie  1  (2)  "  Take  heed 
to  thyself."  The  effects  of  our  acts  may  extend  to  others,  but  we  cannot  make  otheri 
answer  for  them  in  the  end. — J. 

Vers.  13 — 18. — The  invitation  of  Folly.  The  picture  to  be  taken  in  contrast  with 
that  at  the  beginning  of  the  chapter. 

I.  The  temper  of  Folly.  T*  She  is  excitable  and  passionate  (ver.  13),  and  may 
he  fitly  imaged  as  the  harlot,  the  actress  and  mask  of  genuine  feeling.  2.  She  is 
irrational,  and  knows  not  what  is  what.  True  love  is  not  blind,  either  as  to  self  or  its 
objects.  3.  She  is  like  the  harlot  again  in  her  shawidessness  (ver.  14).  Polly  does  not 
mind  exposure,  and  rushes  on  publicity.  4.  She  is  solicitous  of  company  (ver.  15). 
Must  have  partners  in  guilt,  and  companions  to  keep  her  in  countenance.  Fools 
cannot  be  happy  in  solitude,  cannot  enjoy  the  sweet  and  silent  charms  of  nature. 
Wisdom  finds  good  both  in  the  forest  and  the  city,  in  the  cloister  or  amidst  the  "  busy 
hum  of  men."  5.  Folly  is  gregarious.  Wherever  there  is  a  crowd,  there  is  something 
foolish  going  on  (ver.  16).  It  may  be  safely  said  of  habitual  gatherings  in  taverns  and 
such  places,  "  mostly  fools."  The  wise  man  goes  apart  to  recover  and  strengthen  his 
Individuality ;  the  fool  plunges  into  the  throng  to  forget  himself.  6.  Folly  is  sly  and 
secretive  (ver.  17).  The  secret  feast  is  here  the  illicit  pleasure  (of.  ch.  xxx.  20).  The  fact 
that  people  like  what  they  ought  not  to  like  all  the  more  because  they  ought  not,  is  a 
complex  phenomenon  of  the  soul.  The  sweetness  of  liberty  recovered  is  in  it,  and 
forms  its  good  side.  Liberty  adds  a  perfume  and  spice  to  every  pleasure,  no  matter 
what  the  pleasure  may  be.    Augustine  tells  how  he  robbed  an  orchard  as  »  boy, 


OT.  tx.1— 18.]  THE  PROYERBa.  191 


admitting  that  he  Hid  not  want  the  pears,  and  arguing  that  it  must  therefore  have 
heen  his  depravity  that  led  him  to  find  pleasure  in  taking  theml  In  the  same 
way  one -might  prove  the  depravity  of  the  jackdaw  that  steals  a  ring.  Let  us  repu- 
diate the  affectation  of  depravity,  a  great  "  folly"  in  its  way;  and  rather  draw  the 
wholesome  lesson  that  the  love  of  liberty,  of  fun — ^in  short,  of  any  healthy  exercise 
of  energy,  needs  direction.  The  Instinct  for  privacy  and  liberty  gives  no  less  zest  to 
legitimate  than  to  illicit  pleasures. 

11.  The  end  of  Folly.  (Ver.  18.)  1.  It  is  represented  under  images  of  darkness 
and  dread.  Shadows,  "  children  of  death,"  dead  men,  departed  ghosts,  hover  about  the 
dwelling  of  Folly  and  the  persons  of  her  guests.  And  these,  while  even  they  sit  at 
her  table  amidst  feasting  and  mirth,  are  already,  in  the  eyes  of  Wisdom  the  spectator, 
in  the  depths  of  hell.  Thus  the  shadows  of  coming  ill  "  darken  the  ruby  of  the  cup, 
and  dim  the  splendour  of  the  scene."  2.  The  indefinable  is  more  impressive  in  its 
effect  than  the  definable.  As  e.g.  Burke  has  felicitously  shown  in  his  treatise  on 
'  The  Sublime  and  Beautiful.'  The  obscure  realities  of  the  other  world,  the  mysterious 
twilight,  the  chia/ro-oscuro  of  the  imagination  :  in  this  rngion  is  found  all  that  fasci- 
nates the  mind  with  hope  or  terror.  If  it  be  asked — What  precisely  will  be  the  doom 
of  the  wicked,  the  bliss  of  the  righteous  ?  the  answer  is — Definite  knowledge  has  not 
been  imparted,  is  impossible,  and  would  have  less  effect  than  the  vague  but  positive 
forms  in  which  the  truth  is  hinted.  3.  The  indefinable  is  not  the  less  certain.  It  is 
the  definite  which  is  contingent,  uncertain.  Our  life  is  a  constant  hecoming  from 
moment  to  moment.  This  of  its  nature  is  as  indefinable  as  the  melting  of  darkness 
into  day,  or  the  reverse. — J. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — The  Divine  invitation.  Wisdom  invites  the  sons  of  men  to  a  feast. 
Christ,  "  the  Wisdom  of  God,"  is  inviting  us  all  to  partake  of  eternal  life.  A  feast  may 
well  be  regarded  as  the  picture  and  type  of  life  at  its  fullest.  It  combines  so  many  of 
the  best  features  of  human  life — bounty  generously  offered  and  graciously  accepted, 
nourishment,  enjoyment,  social  intercourse,  intellectual  and  spiritual  as  well  as  bodily 
gratification.  In  the  gospel  of  Christ  there  is  oftered  to  us  life  at  its  very  fullest — 
Divine,  eternal.  We  are  invited  by  Eternal  Wisdom  to  partake  thereof,  to  "  lay  hold  " 
thereupon.     Those  verses  suggest  to  us — 

I.  The  coMPLBTENiss  OF  THE  DiviNB  PRBPABA.TI0N.  (Vers.  1,  2.)  The  house  is 
built,  the  full  number  of  pillars  hewn,  the  beasts  killed,  the  wine  mingled,  the  table 
set  out.  Everything  is  arranged  and  executed ;  nothing  is  forgotten  or  omitted. 
Every  guest  will  find  that  which  he  needs.  How  complete  is  the  preparation  which 
Qod  has  made  for  us  in  the  gospel  of  grace  and  life!  The  whole  of  the  Old  Testament 
inaay  be  said  to  be  a  part  of  the  history  of  his  preparation.  All  his  dealings  with  his 
ancient  people,  and  his  control  of  the  heathen  nations,  were  leading  up  to  the  one 
great  issue — the  redemption  of  mankind  by  a  life-giving  Saviour.  The  New  Testament 
continues  the  same  account ;  the  birth,  the  ministry,  the  life,  the  sorrows,  the  death, 
the  resurrection  and  ascension  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  evangelizing  work  and  the  inter- 
pretive letters  of  the  apostles,  form  the  last  part  of  the  Divine  preparation.  And  now 
everything  is  complete.  The  house  is  built,  the  table  is  spread,  the  wine  outpoured. 
There  is  nothing  which  a  guilty,  sorrowing,  striving,  seeking  soul  can  hunger  or  thirst 
for  which  it  will  not  find  at  this  heavenly  feast.  Mercy,  full  reconciliation,  unfailing 
friendship,  comfort,  strength,  hope,  joy  in  God,  everlasting  life, — everything  is  there. 

II.  Thd  GSA.CIIOUSNBSS  OF  THE  INVITATION.  (Vcrs.  3,  4.)  Wisdum  , sends  "her 
maidens"  and  "cries  upon  the  highest  places  of  Uie  city."  She  charges  those  to 
speak  who  are  likeliest  to  be  listened  to,  and  to  utter  her  invitation  where  it  is  surest 
to  be  heard.  Moreover,  she  does  not  restrict  her  call  to  those  who  may  be  said  to.  be 
her  own  children  (Matt.  xi.  19) ;  on  the  other  hand,  she  addresses  herself  specially  to 
those  who  are  strange  to  her— to  "  the  simple,"  to  "him  that  wanteth  understanding." 
In  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God  :  1.  It  is  the  gracious  Lord  himself  who  speaks  to 
us,  and  in  the  most  winning  way.  It  is  he  himself  who  says,  "  Come  unto  me ; "  "  II 
any  man  thirst,"  etc.;  "I  am  the  Bread  of  life,"  etc.  2.  He  has,  in  his  providence 
and  grace,  caused  the  message  of  mercy  to  be  sounded  where  all  can  hear  it — "  upon 
the  highest  places  of  the  city."  3.  He  calls  all  men  to  his  bountiful  board,  Bpecially 
those  who  are  in  the  greatest  need  (Luke  xiv.  21—23;  Matt.  ix.  12, 13). 


192  THE   PBOVBRBS.  [cH.  Tx.  1— 1& 

III.  The  charaotbe  op  the  message.  (Vers.  5,  6.)  Wisdom  calls  those  who  heai 
her  messengers  to  forsake  folly,  to.  walk  in  righteousness,  and  thus  to  enter  into  life. 
The  Wisdom  of  God  himself  calls  those  who  hear  his  voice  to :  1.  Turn  from  their 
iniquity,  turning  away  from  the  fellowship  of  the  unholy  as  well  as  from  the  practice 
of  sin.  2.  Euter  into  closest  fellowship  with  him  hinieelf;  thus  eating  of  the  bread 
and  drinking  of  the  water  of  life ;  thus  walking  in  the  way  of  truth,  holiness,  love, 
wisdom;  thus  "going  in  the  way  of  understanding."  3.  Partake  with  him  the  life 
which  is  Divine  and  eternal— life  for  God,  life  in  God,  life  with  God  for  ever. — 0. 

Vers.  7 — 9. — The  penalty  and  promise  of  instruction.  It  is  not  only  th«  function 
of  the  minister  cif  Christ  to  "reprove,  rebuke,  and  exhort"  (2  Tim.  iv.  2);  the  "  man 
of  God  "  is  to  be  so  furnished  from  Scripture  as  to  be  able  to  administer  "  reproof, 
correction,  and  instruction  in  righteousness  "  (2  Tim.  iil.  16,  17).  But  instruction, 
especially  when  it  takes  the  form  of  correction,  has  its  penalty  aa  well  as  its  recompense. 

I.  The  penalty  of  insteuotion.  (Vers.  7,  8.)  It  is  in  the  heart  of  the  wise  to 
rebuke  iniquity.  Those  who  are  upright  and  true,  who  hate  evil  even  as  Gud  hates  it, 
are  stirred  to  a  holy  indignation  when  they  behold  the  dark  and  shameful  manifasta- 
tions  of  sin,  and  remonstrance  rises  to  their  lips.  It  is  as  "fire  in  their  bones"  until 
they  have  "  delivered  their  soul."  2.  Eebuke  is  often  decidedly  advantageous.  It  not 
only  relieves  the  mind  of  the  godly  speaker,  but  it  shames  those  who  should  be  made 
to  blush  for  their  deeds.  Even  when  it  fails  to  impress  the  principal  defaultar,  the 
ai'ch-eriminal,  it  may  produce  a  wholesome  influence  on  the  minds  of  those  who 
witness  it.  A  burning  flame  of  righteous  wrath  will  sometimes  consume  much 
unrighteousness.  3.  Nevertheless,  it  is  true  that  the  wise  must  count  on  the  contrary 
being  the  result.  It  may  be  that  remonstrance  will  be  thrown  away,  that  it  will 
come  to  nothing  but  shame  on  the  part  of  him  that  reproves — a  "blot  on  tlie  page," 
and  nothing  but  provocation  to  him  that  is  rebuked,  inciting  him  to  hatred  (ver.  8). 
The  likelihood  must  be  reckoned,  and  the  wise  must  act  accordingly.  If  there  is  hope 
of  doing  good,  some  risk  may  well  be  run.  All  interposition  is  not  here  discounte- 
nanced. Good  men  must  use  their  discretion.  There  is  a  time  to  speak,  using  the 
language  of  strong  and  even  severe  reproach.  On  the  other  hand — thi»  is  the  truth 
of  the  text — there  is  a  time  to  be  silent,  to  leave  abandoned  and  guilty  men  to  be 
condemned  of  God.  Eeproach  would  be  lost  upon  them ;  it  would  only  come  back 
with  a  severe  rebound,  and  wound  the  speaker  (see  Matt.  vii.  6). 

II.  The  promise  op  instbdction.  (Vers.  8,  9.)  1.  There  are  those  in  whom  is  the 
spirit  of  docility.  They  are  ready  to  learn.  Of  these  are  the  young.  Our  Lord  com- 
mended the  spirit  of  childhood  partly  for  this  reason,  viz.  that  it  is  the  spirit  of 
docility.  It  has  openness  of  mind,  eagerness  of  heart  to  receive  instruction.  Of 
these,  also,  are  those  in  whom  the  spirit  of  wisdom  dwells,  but  who  have  fallen  into 
erior.  2.  Instruction  in  these  cases  will  be  well  repaid.  If  we  rebuke  a  wise  man, 
a  man  who  is  essentially  good  but  accidentally  wrong,  we  shall  meet  with  apiire- 
ciation :  "  he  will  love  us."  If  we  impart  instruction  to  those  already  wise,  we  shall 
add  to  their  excellency  (ver.  9).  So  that  intelligent,  well-timed  instruction  will  do 
two  things.  (1)  It  will  restore  the  erring — a  most  valuable  and  admirable  action,  on 
which  the  best  of  men  may  truly  congratulate  themselves.  (2)  It  will  multiply  tlie 
power  of  the  good.  It  will  add  knowledge  and  wisdom  to  those  who  are  already  wise ; 
it  will  make  good  men  better,  happier,  worthier, in  themselves;  it  will  also  make  them 
more  influential  for  good  in  the  sphere  in  which  they  move.  This,  then,  is  the  three- 
fold lesson  of  the  text:  1.  Know  when  to  be  silent  under  provocation.  "  2.  Speak  the 
word  of  reproach  iu  season.  3.  Communicate  knowledge  to  all  who  will  welcome 
it.— C. 

Vers.  10,  11.— Digging  deep,  rising  high,  lasting  long.  (See  homilies  on  ch.  i.  7 
and  iii.  1 — 4.)  The  fact  that  we  meet  with  the  opening  sentence  of  the  text  in  no 
less  than  three  other  places  (Job  xxvii.  28 ;  Ps.  cxi.  10;  ch.  i.  7),  gives  to  it  a  pecu- 
liar  significance.  It  indicates  that  the  Divine  Author  of  the  Bible  would  impress 
deeply  on  our  minds  the  truth — 

I.  That  on  the  fbab  of  God,  ab  on  a  solid  kock,  all  huh  an  wisdom  rests. 
Nothing  which  a  man  can  have  in  his  outward  circunjstances  or  in  his  mind  will 


OH.  DC.  1—18.]  THE  PROVERBS.  19? 

compensate  for  the  absence  of  this  principle  from  the  soul.  He  may  hare  erery 
conceivable  advantage  in  his  surroundings;  he  may  have  all  imaginable  shrewdness, 
dexterity,  cleverness,  acuteness  of  intellect;  but  if  everything  be  not  based  on  the  fear 
of  the  living  God,  his  character  must  be  fatally  incomplete,  and  his  life  must  be  a 
deplorable  mistake.  Ruverince  of  spirit,  devotion  of  habit,  the  obedience  of  the  life, — 
this  is  the  solid  ground  on  which  all  wisdom  rests.  Let  a  man  be  ever  so  learned  or 
so  astute,  if  this  be  absent  Wisdom  itself  writes  him  down  a  fool. 

II.  That  backed  truth  ib  the  loftiest  and  worthiest  subject  or  human 
STUDY.  It"  is  well  worth  our  while  to  give  our  careful  and  continuous  thought  to 
scientific,  economical,  historical,  political  truth.  These  will  repay  our  study ;  they 
will  enlarge  our  mind  and  heighten  our  understanding.  But  worthy  as  they  are,  they 
yield  in  importance  to  the  truth  which  is  sacred  and,  in  an  especial  sense,  Divine.  To 
"  understand  and  know  God,"  who  he  is,  what  is  his  character,  what  are  the  con- 
ditions of  his  abiding  love ;  to  know  man,  who  and  what  he  is,  what  constitutes  the 
real  excellence  and  nobility  of  human  character,  what  are  the  perils  which  threaten 
and  what  the  habits  which  elevate  it ;  to  know  the  "  path  of  life,"  the  way  back  to  God, 
to  holiness,  to  heaven ; — this  is  wisdom  indeed.  The  knowledge  of  the  holy  is  under- 
standing.   All  other  learning  is  slight  in  comparison  with  this  supreme  attainment. 

III.  That  the  service  of  God  is  insepabablt  connbotbd  with  the  lasting 
WELL-BEING  OF  MAN.  (Ver.  11.)  1.  Obedience  to  Jehovah  would  have  given  a  pro- 
longed and  enduring  life  to  the  Jewish  nation  in  their  own  favoured  land.  Conformity 
to  Divine  Law,  the  practice  of  truth,  purity,  uprightness,  simplicity  of  life  and  manners, 
— these  will  go  far  to  ensure  long  life  to  any  nation  now.     2.  Obedience  to  Divine  Law, 

-  especially  to  one  commandment  (Exod.  xx.  12),  gave  good  hope  of  longevity  to  the 
children  of  the  Law  (ver.  11 ;  ch.  iii.  2,  16).  Piety  and  virtue  now  have  ijromise  of 
life  and  health.  The  sober,  the  pure,  the  diligent,  those  mindful  of  God's  will,  are 
likely  to  have  their  days  multiplied  and  the  years  of  their  life  increased.  3.  To  the 
true  servants  of  Christ,  who  are  faithful  unto  death,  there  is  assured  »  "crown  of  life  " 
(Bev.  ii.  10).— C. 

Ver.  12. —  Wisdom  and  folly.  In  (his  short  verse  we  have  some  valuable  thoughts 
suggested  respecting  both  wisdom  and  folly. 

I.  The  disinterestedness  of  wisdom.  If  any  one  should  urge  against  the  claims 
of  Wisdom  that  they  are  very  high,  urgent,  oppressive,  that  God's  commandment  is 
"  exceeding  broad ; "  if  it  be  asked  by  the  young,  "  Why  fling  these  shadows  on  our 
path  ?  why  weigh  us  down  with  these  responsibilities  ? "  it  may  well  be  replied  by 
Wisdom,  "Tour  seiTices  are  not  necessary  to  me.  'If  I  were  hungry,  I  would  not  tell 
thee,'  etc. ;  if  I  plead  with  you,  it  is  for  your  sake.  You  have  need  of  my  voice  and 
my  control;  apart  from  me  you  cannot  be  blessed,  you  cannot  realize  the  end  of  your 
being.  I  can  do  well  without  your  devotion,  but  you  cannot  do  without  my  favour, 
ir  you  are  wise,  you  will  be  wise  for  yourself." 

II.  The  inalienable  character  of  wisdom  as  a  possession.  The  wise  man  in 
the  Book  of  Ecclesiastes  laments  that  riches  are  things  which  a  wise  man  may  take 
much  trouble  to  gather,  but  he  does  not  know  who  may  scatter  them.  A  man  may 
be  laborious  and  frugal,  but  not  for  himself;  all  the  good  may  go  to  others  who  come 
after  him.  Thus  is  it  with  various  acquisitions.  Men  po  sooner  gain  them  than  they 
leave  them  behind  for  others ;  e.g.  the  hero,  his  gloiy  ;  the  student,  his  learning ;  the 
wnqueror  or  discoverer,  the  territory  he  has  gained  or  found.  But  if  a  man  is  wise,  he 
IS  wise /or  himsd/aa  well  as  for  others;  he  has  a  prize  of  which  no  accident  will  rob 
him,  and  which  death  itself  will  not  take  from  his  hands.  Once  his,  it  is  his  for  ever 
— it  is  an  inalienable  possession. 

III.  The  profound  nature  of  true  wisdom.  There  is  a  very  shallow  philosophy 
which  assumes  the  name  of  wisdom,  which  invites  us  to  stake  everything  on  securing 
a  comfortable  and  prosperous  career  in  this  world,  leaving  out  of  account  the  supreme 
realities  of  our  obligations  to  God,  our  duty  to  our  own  spiriiual  and  immortal  nature, 
our  responsibilities  to  other  souls.  This  superficial  and  false  teaching  overlooks  the 
fundamental  fact  that  a  man  is  more  than  his  means,  that  ourself  is  greater  than  our 
circumstances,  that  it  is  a  poor  profit  to  gain  a  world  and  lose  a  soul,  that  if  we  ara 
wise  we  shall  be  wise /or  ourselvet. 

PB0VEBB8.  -  • 


194  THE  PB0VERB8.  [oh.  ix.  1—18. 

IV  The  startino-point  of  tbuk  wisdom.  Some  are  speaking  with  indignation, 
not  iaemcere,  against  so  much  insistence  on  a  man's  seeking  his  own  salvation.  They 
say  it  is  only  a  refined  selfishness.  It  may  be  true  that  there  are  Christian  teachers 
who  enlarge  on  this  aspect  disproportionately ;  but  it  must  ever  remain  a  truth  of 
great  prominence  that  a  man's  first  duty  to  God  is  the  duty  he  owes  to  himself.  First, 
because  his.  own  soul  is  his  primary  and  chief  charge ;  and,  secondly,  because  he  can 
do  little  or  nothing  for  the  world  till  his  own  heart  is  right.  If  a  man,  therefore,  will 
be  wise,  he  must  first  be  wise  for  himself. 

v.  Tee  fate  or  folly.  "  If  thou  scomest,  thou  alone  shalt  bear  it."  This  doe? 
not  mean  that  only  the  sinner  bears  the  consequences  of  his  guilt — tliat  is  deplorably 
untrue;  sin  is  widespreading  and  far-reaching  in  its  evil  consequences — it  circtdatet 
and  it  descends.  The  passage  means  that  the  foolish  man  will  have  to  bear  alone  the 
condemnation  of  his  folly ;  every  man  that  lives  and  dies  impenitent  must  "  bear  his 
own  harden  "  of  penalty.  The  remorse  and  self-reproach  of  the  future  none  will  be 
able  to  divide ;  it  must  be  borne  by  the  sinner  himself.  There  is  One  that  once  bore 
our  transgressions  for  us,  and  will  bear  them  away  unto  the  land  of  forgetfulness 
now. — C. 

Vers.  13 — 18. — 2%e  truth  abcmt  sin.  Solomon,  having  told  us  of  the  excellency  of 
Wisdom,  and  of  the  blessings  she  has  to  confer  on  her  children,  now  bids  us  consider 
the  consequences  of  listening  to  sin,  when  she,  the  foolish  woman,  utters  her  invitation. 
We  learn — 

I.  That  sin  in  its  later  dbvblopmbnts  is  a  vert  odious  thino.  What  a  painful 
and  repulsive  picture  we  have  here  of  the  foolish  woman,  who,  though  utterly  ignorant 
and  uti  worthy  (ver.  13),  assumes  a  conspicuous  position  in  the  city,  places  herself  "  on 
a  seat  in  the  high  places,"  speaks  with  a  "  clamorous  "  voice,  and,  herself  unaddressed, 
calls  aloud  to  those  who  are  going  on  their  way  I  When  we  present  the  scene  to  our 
imagination,  we  instinctively  shrink  from  it  as  repelling  and  odious.  All  sin  is  hateful 
in  tlie  sight  of  God;  to  him  it  is  "  that  abominable  thing"  (Jer.  iliv.  4).  And  to  all 
the  pure  in  heart  it  is  also,  though  not  equally,  repulsive.  In  its  later  stages  and  final 
developments  it  is  simply  and  thoroughly  detestable. 

II.  That  temptation  to  bin  besets  the  unwabt  as  well  as  the  bvil-mindbd. 
Folly  addresses  herself  to  "  passengers  who  go  right  on  their  ways  "  (ver.  15).  There 
are  those  who  go  wilfully  and  wantonly  in  the  way  of  temptation.  They  seek  the 
company  of  the  profane,  the  attentions  of  the  immoral.  These  walk  into  the  net,  and 
are  ensnared.  Then  there  are  others  who  have  no  thought  of  evil  in  their  heart ;  they 
are  not  "  purposing  to  transgress ; "  but  as  they  pass  right  on  their  way,  the  temptress 
throws  her  net  at  if  not  over  them,  that  she  may  entangle  them.  The  path  of 
human  life  is  beset  with  spiritual  perils;  it  is  necessary  to  be  prepared  against  all  forms 
of  evil.  We  must  not  only  be  upright  in  intention,  but  wary  and  well-armed  also. 
"  Be  sober,  be  vigilant,  because  your  adversary,"  etc.  (1  Pet.  v.  8). 

III.  That  to  dnsanotified  human  nature  bin  is  sometimes  a  terribly  beduo- 
TTVE  thing.  "  The  foolish  woman,"  though  she  is  said  to  "  know  nothing,"  yet  knows 
enough  to  say  truly,  "  Stolen  waters  are  sweet,"  etc.  (ver.  17).  It  is  useless,  because 
it  is  false,  to  deny  that  vice  has  its  pleasures.  Lasciviousness,  revelry,  avarice,  usurpa- 
tion, have  their  delights;  and  there  is  a  peculiar  pleasure  in  snatching  unlawful 
gratifications  rather  than  in  accepting  those  which  are  honourable.  When  our  nature 
is  unregenerated  and  unsanctified,  when  passion  is  at  its  height,  wht'U  in  the  soul 
there  is  the  ardour  and  energy  of  youth,  vice  has  powerful  attractions.  The  young 
may  well  provide  themselves  against  the  dark  hour  of  temptation  with  "  the  whole 
armour  of  God,"  or  they  may  not  be  able  to  stand  victorious. 

IV.  That  those  who  have  abandoned  themselves  to  sin  abb  in  thb  ehbraoi 
OF  ruin.  "  He  knoweth  not  that  the  dead  are  there ;  and  that  her  guests  are  in  the 
depths  of  hell "  (ver.  18).  Not  only  is  it  true  (1)  that  those  who  yield  themselves  to 
guilty  passion  are  on  the  high-road  to  ultimate  perdition;  but  it  is  also  true  (2)  that 
they  are  already  in  the  depth  of  ruin.  They  are  "  dead  while  they  live  "  (1  Tim.  v.  6) ; 
they  are  "  in  the  depths  of  hell "  (text).  To  be  sacrificing  manhood  or  womanhood  on 
the  altar  of  anunholy  pleasure,  or  an  immoral  gain,  or  an  enslaving  fascination ;  to 
be  sinning  continually  against  God,  and  to  be  systematically  degrading  our  own  soil; 


OH.  X.  1 — 32.] 


THE  PROVERBS.' 


195 


to  be  falling  lower  and  lower  in  tlie  estimation  of  the  wise  until  we  become  the  object 
of  their  pity  or  their  scorn  j — this  is  ruin.  No  need  to  wait  for  judgment  and  con- 
demnation ;  the  guests  of  sin  are  in  the  depths  of  hell.  If  near  the  door,  if  on  its 
step,  if  in  iti  hall,  "  escape  for  thy  life  "  (see  Wardlaw,  in  foe.),— 0. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  X. 


Ver.  1— ch.  xxii.  16.— Part  III.  First 
Great  Collection  (375)  or  Solomonio 
Proverbs. 

Ver.  1 — oh.  xii.  28. — First  section.  The 
sections  are  noted  by  their  oommencing 
usually  with  the  words, ''  a  wise  son." 

Ver.  1. — The  proverbs  of  Solomon.  This 
is  the  title  of  the  new  part  of  the  book ;  it 
is  omitted  in  the  Septuagint.  There  is  some 
kind  of  loose  connection  in  the  grouping  of 
these  proverbs,  but  it  is  difficult  to  follow. 
"Ordo  frustra  qutsritur  ubi  nullus  fuit 
obsei'vatus,"  says  Mart.  Geier.  Wordsworth 
considers  the  present  chapter  to  contain  ex- 
emplifications of  the  principles  and  results 
of  the  two  ways  of  life  displayed  in  the 
preceding  nine  chapters.  The  antithetical 
character  of  the  sentences  is  most  marked 
and  well-sustained.  As  the  book  is  specially 
designed  for  the  edification  of  youth,  it 
begins  with  an  appropriate  saying.  A  wise 
son  maketh  a  glad  father.  As  wisdom  com- 
prises all  moral  excellence,  and  folly  is  vice 
and  perversity,  the  opposite  characters  attri- 
buted to  the  son  are  obvious.  The  mother 
is  introduced  for  the  sake  of  parallelism; 
though  some  commentators  suggest  that,  as 
the  father  would  be  naturally  elated  by  his 
son's  virtues,  which  would  conduce  to  honour 
and  high  estate,  so  the  mother  would  be 
grieved  at  vices  which  her  training  had  not 
subdued,  and  her  indulgence  had  fostered. 
If  this  seems  somewhat  far-fetched,  we  may 
consider  that  the  futher  in  the  maxim  in- 
cludes the  mother,  and  the  mother  the  fatlier, 
the  two  being  ieparated  for  the  purpose  of 
contrast  (see  on  ch.  xxvi.  3).  The  word  for 
heaviness  occurs  in  cb.  xiv.  13  and  xvii.  21. 

Ver.  2. — Treasures  of  wickedness;  trea- 
sures acquired  by  wrong-doing  (Micah  vi. 
10).  Profit  nothing  "  in  the  day  of  calamity  " 
(Ecclus.  V.  8 ;  comp.  ch.  xi.  4).  The  LXX. 
renders,  "Treasures  will  not  profit  the 
wicked ; "  so  Aquila.  "  For  what  shall  a 
man  be  profited,  if  he  shall  gain  the  whole 
world,  and  forfeit  his  soul?"  (Matt.  xvi.  26). 
Bighteonsness  (ch.  xiv.  34);  not  simply 
justice  and  moral  goodness,  but  more  espe- 
cially liberality,  benevolence.  So  in  Matt, 
vi.  1  the  Revised  Version  (in  accordance 
with  the  best  manuscripts)  reads,  "Take 
need  that  ye  do  not  your  righteousness  be- 
fore men,  to  be  seen  of  them,"  (Xuist  pro- 


ceeding to  specify  three  outward  acts  as 
coming  under  this  term,  viz.  almsgiving, 
prayer,  and  fasting.  In  some  analogous 
passages  the  LXX.  rendprs  the  word  by 
iKfnijioamri,  e.g.  Ps.  cxi.  9 ;  Dan.  iv.  27 ;  Tobit 
xii.  9  (comp.  2  Cor.  ix.  10).  Delivereth 
from  death,  shows  that  a  man's  heart  is  riglit 
towards  God,  and  calls  down  special  grace. 
Such  a  man  lays  up  in  store  for  himself  a 
good  foundation,  that  he  may  attain  eternal 
life  (1  Tim.  vi.  19;  see  on  oh.  xvi.  6). 

Ver.  3. — The  Lord  will  not  suffer  lie  soul 
of  the  righteous  to  famish  (comp.  ch.  xix. 
23).  The  soul  is  the  life  (comp.  ch.  xiii.  25). 
So  the  psalmist  says  (Ps.  xxxvii.  25),  "I 
have  been  young,  and  now  am  old ;  yet  have 
I  not  seen  the  righteous  forsaken,  nor  liis 
seed  begging  their  bread."  Christ  speaks 
of  the  providence  that  watches  over  the 
lower  creatures,  and  draws  thence  a  lesson 
of  trust  in  his  care  of  man,  concluding, 
"  Seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  his 
righteousness,  and  all  these  things  shall  be 
added  unto  you"  (Matt.  vi.  26,  33).  But 
he  oasteth  away  the  substance  of  the  wicked; 
Septuagint,  "  He  will  overthrow  the  life  of 
the  wicked;"  Vulgate,  "He  overturns  the 
plots  of  sinners."  The  word  rendered  "  sub- 
stance" (havvaK)  is  better  understood  as 
"  desire."  God  ftustrates  the  eager  longing 
(for  food  or  other  good  things)  of  the  wicked; 
they  are  never  satisfied,  and  get  no  real 
enjoyment  out  of  what  they  crave  (comp.  ch. 
xiii.  25). 

Ver.  4. — That  dealeth  with  a  slack  hand; 
that  is  lazy  and  indolent  (comp.  ch.  vi.  10, 
11;  see  on  ch.  xix.  15).  The  Septuagint, 
with  a  different  pointing,  reads,  "Poverty 
humbleth  a  man."  The  hand  of  the  diligent 
(ch.  xii.  24)  maketh  rich.  The  words  for 
"hand"  are  different  in  the  two  clauses 
as  Wordsworth  remarks.  The  first  word 
is  eaph,  the  open,  ineffective,  hand  or  palm ; 
the  second  term  is  yad,  the  hand  tense  and 
braced  for  vigorous  work.  The  LXX.  in- 
troduces a  clause  here  which  seems  to 
interfere  with  the  connection :  Xlhs  reraiSeu- 
ficvos  irotphs  ^ffrai,  t^  Se  &<ppovi  SuucSytp 
Xfh'i'^rai,  "A  well-instructed  son  will  be 
wise,  and  he  will  use  a  fool  as  his  minister ; " 
i.e.  he  is  able  to  make  even  the  foolish 
subserve  his  ends.  The  sentence  is  quoted 
by  St.  Augustine,  '  De  Civit.  Dei,'  xvi.  2. 
The  Vulgate  inserts  another  paragraph, 
which  is  also  found  in  some  manascriptf 
of  the  Septuagint  at  oh.  ix.  12 :  Qui  nUitur 


196 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[cH.  X  1 — 32. 


mendadU,  hie  pascit  ventoi;  idem  autem 
ipse  lequitur  avei  volantes,  "  He  who  relieth 
on  lies  feedeth  on  the  winds,  and  puisueth 
flying  birds." 

Ver,  5. — Ho  that  gathereth  the  hairest 
into  the  barn  at  the  right  aea.son.  The  idea 
of  husbandry  is  continued  from  the  preceding 
verse.  Son  is  here  equivalent  to  "man," 
the  maxim  being  addressed  to  the  young. 
That  sleepeth;  literally,  that  $noreth;  Vul- 
gate, qui  stertit  (Judg.  iv.  21).  A  son  that 
oauseth  shame.  The  phrase  is  found  in  ch. 
xvii.  2 ;  lix.  26 ;  xxix.  15.  The  Septuagint 
has,  "The  son  of  understanding  is  saved 
from  the  heat ;  but  the  sinful  son  is  blasted 
by  the  wind  in  harvest." 

Ver.  6. — Violenoe  oovereth  the  mouth  of 
the  wicked.  So  ver.  11.  This  is  usually 
explained  to  mean  either  that  the  conscious- 
ness of  his  own  iniquity  silences  the  sinner 
wlien  he  would  speak  against  the  righteous, 
or  his  violence  and  injustice,  returning  on 
his  own  head,  are  like  a  bandage  over  his 
mouth  (Lev.  xiii.  45 ;  Mioah  iii.  7),  reducing 
him  to  shame  and  silence.  Others,  again, 
consider  the  signification  to  be — in  default 
of  the  good,  honest  words  which  should  pro- 
ceed from  a  man's  mouth,  the  sinner  pours 
forth  injustice  and  wickedness.  But  it  is 
best  (as  in  ver.  14)  to  take  "  mouth  "  as  the 
subject :  "  The  mouth  of  the  wicked  con- 
cealeth  violence,"  that  he  may  wait,  for  the 
opportunity  of  practising  it.  The  contrast 
is  between  the  inauit'est  blessedness  of  the 
righteous  and  the  secret  sinister  proceedings 
of  the  evil.  The  Vulgate  and  Septuagint 
give, "  the  blessing  of  the  Lord."  For  "  vio- 
lence" the  Septuagint  has  -alvBos  &apov, 
"  untimely  grief; "  tlie  Hebrew  word  chamat 
bearing  also  the  sense  of  "  misery." 

Ver.  7. — The  memory.  The  lasting,  fra- 
grant perfume  of  a  holy  life  is  contrasted 
witli  the  noisomencss  and  quick  decay  of 
an  evil  name  (comp.  Fs.  Ixxii.  17).  As  a 
commentator  asks,  "Who  ever  thinks  of 
calling  a  child  Judas  or  Nero?" 

Ver.  8. — Will  receive  commandments.  The 
wise  in  heart  is  not  proud  or  conceited ;  he 
accepts  the  Divine  Law  with  all  its  direc- 
tions (observe  the  plural  "commandments"), 
and  is  not  above  learning  from  others;  at 
the  iame  time,  he  makes  no  display  of  his 
wisdom.  The  fool  of  lips  (ver.  10) ;  one 
who  is  always  exposing  his  folly.  The 
literal  antithesis  is  better  shown  by  ren- 
dering "  the  solid  in  heart,"  and  "  the  loose 
in  lips."  So  Wordsworth.  The  Vulgate 
translates,  "The  fool  is  chastised  by  his 
lips;"  le.  the  folly  which  he  has  uttered 
falls  back  upon  him,  and  causes  him  to 
•uifer  punishment.  The  LXX.  renders  the 
last  clause,  "He  who  is  given  to  prating 
(inTeyos  ve£\«<r«),  walking  tortuonsly,  shall 
be  tripped  up." 


Ver.  9.— He  that  walketh  uprightly  (ch. 
ii.  7);  Vulgate  and  Septuagint,  "in  sim- 
plicity," having  nothing  to  conceal  or  to 
fear.  So  Christ  enjoins  his  followers  to  be 
guileless  as  children,  and  harmless  as  doves 
(Matt.  X.  16 ;  Mark  x.  15),  Surely ;  equiva- 
lent to  "  securely  ;  "  d'n^piiivais,  Aquila, 
having  no  fear  of  inopportune  exposure, 
because  he  has  no  secret  sin.  He  that  per- 
Terteth  his  ways ;  deals  in  crooked  practices. 
Shall  be  known  (ch.  xii.  16).  He  shall  be 
exposed  and  punished,  and  put  to  open 
shame.  Having  this  apprehension  always 
present,  he  cannot  walk  with  confidence  as 
the  innocent  does.  Hence  the  antithesis  in 
the  text. 

Ver.  10. — He  that  winketh  with  the  eye 
(ch.  vi.  13).  This  is  a  sign  of  craft,  malice, 
and  complicity  with  other  wicked  comradus. 
Ecclus.  xxvii.  22,  "  He  that  winketh  with 
the  eyes  worketh  evil."  Canseth  sorrow  (ch. 
XV.  13).  He  causes  trouble  and  vexation  by 
his  cunnino;  and  secrecy.  A  prating  fool  (as 
ver.  8).  The  two  clauses  are  intended  to 
teach  that  the  garrulous  fool  is  even  more 
certain  to  bring  ruin  on  himself  and  others 
than  the  crafty  plotter.  The  Septuagint  and 
Syriac  have  changed  the  latter  clause  into 
n  sentence  supposed  to  be  more  forcibly  anti- 
thetical, "  He  who  reproveth  with  boldness 
maketh  peace."  But  there  are  sentenoua 
not  strictly  antithetical  in  this  chapter,  t^. 
vers.  18,  22  (comp.  ch.  xi.  10). 

Ver.  11. — A  well  of  life  (ch.  xiii.  14; 
xviii.  4).  The  good  man  utters  words  of 
wisdom,  comfort,  and  edification.  God  him- 
self is  said  to  have  "  the  well  of  life "  (Ps. 
xxxvL  9),  and  to  be  "  the  Fountain  of  living 
waters"  (Jer.  ii.  13);  and  the  holy  man, 
drawing  from  this  supply,  sheds  life  and 
health  around.  The  second  clause  should 
be  taken  as  in  ver.  6,  but  the  month  of  the 
wicked  concealeth  violenoe,  the  contrast 
being  between  the  open  usefulness  of  the 
good  man's  words  and  the  harmful  reticence 
of  the  malicious  sinner.  The  Septuagint 
has,  "  A  fountain  of  life  is  in  the  hand  of 
the  righteous;  but  destruction  shall  cover 
the  mouth  of  the  wicked."  This  is  ex- 
plained to  mean  that  a  good  man's  words  and 
actions  tend  to  spiritual  health;  a  bad  man's 
words  bring  down  sorrow  and  punishment. 

Ver.  12. — Hatred  stirreth  up  strife  (ch. 
vi.  14).  Love  covereth  all  sins  (ch.  xviL 
9).  The  reference  is  primarily  to  the  blood- 
feud,  the  existence  of  which  led  to  the 
establishment  of  the  cities  of  refuge.  Hatred 
keeps  alive  the  old  feeling  of  revenge,  and 
seeks  opportunities  of  satisfying  it ;  but  love 
puts  aside,  forgets  and  forgives  all  offences 
against  itself.  This  sentiment  comes  very 
near  the  great  Christian  principle,  "Love 
oovereth  a  multitude  of  sins"  (1  Pet.  iv.  8; 
comp.  1  Cor.  xiii.  4 ;  Jas.  v.  20).    The  Tal- 


OH.  X.  1—82.] 


THE  PROVEEBS. 


197 


mud  prononnces,  "  To  love  a  thing  makes 
the  eye  blind,  the  ear  deaf;"  and  the  Arab 
gays, "  Love  is  the  companion  of  blindneBS." 
Septuagint,  "  Love  ((^iA(a)  covereth  all  those 
who  love  not  strife." 

Ver.  13. — Wisdom  is  found  (comp.  Ps. 
xxxvii.  30).  Tlie  man  of  understanding  is 
discreet  in  speech,  and  does  not  cause 
trouble  by  rash  or  foolish  words.  A  rod 
(ch.  xix.  29 ;  xxvi.  3).  A  fool  b^ing^  upon 
himself  punishment  by  his  insensate  talk. 
Void  of  understanding;  Hebrew,  "wanting 
in  heart;  "  Vulgate,  qui  indiget  corde.  The 
LXX.  combincB  the  two  members  into  one 
propmition,  "  He  who  putteth  foi  th  wisdom 
witli  his  lips  is  a  rod  to  chastise  the  man 
without  heart."  In  the  Hebrew  conception 
tlie  "heart"  is  the  seat,  not  only  of  the 
passions  and  afTections,  but  also  of  the  intel- 
lectual faculties. 

Ver.  14. — Lay  up  knowledge;  like  n  trea- 
sure, for  use  on  proper  occasions  (oh.  xii. 
23;  liv.  33;  oomp.  Matt.  vii.  6;  xiii.  52). 
Is  near  destruction.  "Near"  may  be  an 
adjective,  equivalent  to  "imminent,"  "  ever- 
threatening."  The  versions  are  proximum 
est  and  iyyl^ei.  The  foolish  are  always 
uttering  carelessly  what  may  bring  trouble 
on  themselves  and  otl.ers. 

Ver.  15. — His  strong  city  (ch.  xviii.  11). 
Wealth  is  a  help  in  many  ways,  securing 
from  dangers,  giving  time  and  opportunity 
for  acquiring  wisdom,  making  one  indepen- 
dent and  free  in  action  (Eocles.  vii.  12; 
Ecclus.  xl.  25,  etc.).  The  destruction  of  the 
poor  is  their  poverty.  The  poor  are  crushed, 
exposed  to  all  kinds  of  evil,  moral  and  ma- 
terial, by  their  want  of  means.  The  word 
for  "poor"  is  here  dot,  which  implies  weak- 
ness and  inability  to  help  one's  self ;  the  other 
word  commonly  used  for  "poor"  is  rash, 
which  signifies  rather  "  impeeuniosity,"  op- 
posed to  "  wealthy."  So  in  the  present  pas- 
sage the  LXX.  renders  i.(r9eyai>,"the  feeble." 
The  poor  were  but  lightly  regarded  till  Christ 
pronounced  the  benediction,  "  Blessed  be 
ye  poor :  for  yours  is  the  kingdom  of  God  " 
(Luke  vi.  20).  The  view  of  Theognis 
('  Parren.,'  177)  will  speak  the  experience 
of  many — 

Kal  y&p  dv^jp  irtvlri  ieB^Tjfiepos  oti  t«  Tt  flirtiy 
Otid*  cpfai  i^varai*  yh&ffo'a.  5^  oi  SeSerai, 
"  A  mau,  by  crushing  poverty  subdued. 
Can  freely  nothing  eitlier  say  or  do — 
Hii  veiy  tongue  is  tied." 

Ver.  16.— Tendeth  to  life  (ch.  xi  10). 
Honest  labour  biings  its  own  reward  in  the 
blessing  of  God  and  n  long  and  peaceful  life. 
The  fruit  of  the  wicked.  All  the  profit  that 
the  wicked  make  they  use  in  the  service  of 
sill,  which  tends  only  to  death  (Rom.  vi.  21). 
The  due  reward  of  honourable  industry  is 


contrasted  with  ihe  gains  obtained  by  •ny 
means,  discreditable  or  not. 

Ver.  17.— He  is  in  the  way  of  life  (ch. 
v.  6).  It  is  a  way  of  life  when  a  man 
keepeth  instruction,  taketh  to  heart  what  is 
taught  by  daily  providences  md  the  wisdom 
of  experience.  Such  teaohaolencss  leads  to 
happiness  here  and  hereafter.  Erreth  (Jer. 
xlii.  20) ;  not  "  causeth  to  err,"  as  in  the 
margin,  which  weakens  the  antithesis. 
Septuagint,  "Instruction  (TnuS^ia)  guardeth 
the  ways  of  life,  but  he  who  is  unaffected 
by  instruction  goeth  astray "  (comp.  Heh, 
xii.  7,  etc.). 

Ver.  18. — This  verse  ought  to  be  trans- 
lated, He  that  hideth  hatred  is  [a  man]  of 
lying  lips,  and  he  that  uttereth  slander 
is  a  fool.  He  who  cherishes  hatred  in  the 
heart  must  be  a  liar  and  a  hypocrite,  speak- 
ing and  acting  in  a  way  contrary  to  his  real 
seutiments;  if  he  divulges  his  slander,  he  is 
a  stupid  fool,  injuring  his  neighbour,  and 
procuring  ill  will  for  himself.  The  LXX. 
reads,  "  Just  (Si'/toia)  lips  conceal  hatred ;  " 
but  probably  SUaia  is  an  error  for  HSixa  or 
Si^Aio,  though  Ewald  defends  it,  and  would 
alter  the  Hebrew  to  suit  it. 

Ver.  19. — There  wanteth  not  sin ;  LXX., 
"  Thou  wilt  not  avoid  sin."  Loquacity  leads 
to  exaggeration  and  untruthfulness,  slander 
and  unoharitableuess  (comp.  Eccles.  v.  1 — 3; 
and  Christ's  and  James's  solemn  warnings. 
Matt. xii. 36;  Ja3.i.26;  iii.2,ete.).  "Speak 
little,"  says  Pinart  ('Meditations,'  ch.  vi.\ 
"  because  for  one  sin  which  we  may  commit 
by  keeping  silence  where  it  would  be  wi  11 
to  speak,  we  commit  a  hundred  by  speaking 
upon  aU  occasions"  (see  on  ch.  xvii.  27), 
Another  rendering  of  the  passage  gives  "  By 
multitude  of  words  sin  does  not  vanish 
away;"  i.e.  you  cannot  mend  a  fault  by 
much  talking.  But  this  weakens  the  con- 
trast, and  the  Authorized  Version  is  correct. 
Is  wise.  St.  James  calls  the  reticent "  a  per- 
fect man  "  (comp.  ch.  xiii.  3).  "  This  sen- 
tence of  Scripture,"  says  St.  Augustine,  in 
his  '  Eetractations,'  "  I  greatly  fear,  because 
my  numerous  treatises,  I  know  well,  contain 
many  things,  if  not  false,  at  any  rate  idle 
and  unnecessary." 

Ver.  20.— Choice  (ch.  viii.  10,  19);  tested, 
purified  by  fire;  ■n-arvpafx.ems,  Septuagint. 
Is  little  worth;  mere  dross,  in 'contradis- 
tinction to  choice  silver.  So  the  tongue  is 
coutrastcd  with  the  heart,  out  of  whose 
abindanoe  it  speaketh  (Ecclus.  xxi.  26, 
"  The  heart  of  fools  is  in  their  mouth ;  but 
the  moutli  of  the  wise  is  in  their  heart"). 
Septungint,  "  Tlio  heart  of  the  godless  shall 
fail  (iK\ei\fiei)." 

Ver.  21. — Feed  many.  The  righteous  by 
wise  counsel  teach,  support,  and  guide 
others  (Ecclea.  xii.  1 1 ;  Jer.  iii.  15).  So 
the  clergy  are  the  shepherds  of  their  flockj 


198 


THE   PROVERBS. 


[oh.  X.  1 — 3£ 


(John  xxi.  15;  Acts  xx.  28;  1  Pet.  v.  2). 
The  LXX.  has  a  different  reading,  "  know 
high  things."  FooIb  die  for  want  of  wisdom. 
Pax  from  "  feeding  "  others,  they  bring  ruin 
on  themselves  (oh.  v.  23).  Others  translate, 
"  die  through  one  who  wanteth  understand- 
ing;"  but  if  the  Hebrew  will  bear  tliis  ren- 
dering, it  is  obvious  that  fools  need  no  guide 
to  their  fall ;  their  fate  is  a  natural  result. 
In  this  ease  the  meaning  must  be  that  the 
foolish  man  involves  otheri  in  destruction. 
But  it  is  best  to  translate  as  the  Authorized 
Version. 

Ver.  22.— The  blessing  ol  the  Lord.  The 
Septuagint  adds,  "  upon  the  head  of  the 
righteous,"  as  in  ver.  6.  Not  chance  and 
luck,  not  even  industry  and  labour,  but 
Ood  giveth  the  increase  (Eecles.  v.  18, 19). 
He  addeth  no  sorrow  with  it ;  i.e.  with  the 
blessing.  In  acquiring  and  in  using  wealth 
thus  blessed,  the  good  man  is  contented  and 
happy,  while  unsanetified  riches  bring  only 
trouble  and  vexation.  But  this  seems  rather 
feeble,  and  it  is  better  to  render,  "  And  a 
man's  own  labour  addeth  nothing  thereto." 
A  man's  own  work  must  not  be  regarded 
as  an  equal  cause  of  prosperity  with  the 
favour  of  God.  This  sentiment  is  in  ac- 
cordance with  Ps.  cxxvii.  1,  2,  "Except 
the  Lord  build  the  house,  their  labour  is 
but  lost  tbat  build  it.  .  .  .  So  he  giveth 
unto  his  beloved  in  sleep" — what  others 
vainly  labour  for  God  giveth  to  the  righteous 
without  toil.  The  rei^dering  of  the  clause, 
"Trouble  is  of  no  avail  without  it,"  is 
scarcely  warranted  by  the  wording  of  the 
text. 

Ver.  23.— Ai  a  iport.  The  wicked  make 
their  pastime  and  amusement  in  doing  evil. 
A  man  of  nnderstandlug  hath  wisdom.  As 
thus  put,  the  sentence  is  jejune.  The  Re- 
vised Version  expresses  the  meaning  better: 
"  And  so  is  wisdom  to  a  man  of  understand- 
ing;" i.e.  the  wise  man  finds  his  refreshment 
in  living  a  wise  and  prudent  life,  which  is 
as  easy  and  as  pleasant  to  him  as  mischief 
is  to  the  vicious.  The  wisdom  intended  is 
practical  religion,  the  fyar  of  God  directing 
and  showing  itself  in  daily  action.  Septua- 
gint, "A  fool  doeth  mischief  in  sport  (ii/ 
yiKoTi),  but  wisdom  produceth  prudence  for 
a  man." 

Ver.  24. — This  verse  is  connected  in 
thought  with  the  preceding.  The  wicked, 
though  lie  lightly  carries  on  his  evil  prac- 
tices, is  troubled  with  the  thought  of  the 
retribution  which  awaits  him,  and  that 
which  he  fears  shall  come  apon  him  (oh.  1. 
26;  Job  iii.  25;  Isa.  Ixvi.  4);  Septuagint, 
"  The  wicked  is  involved  in  destruction." 
Ih*  desire  of  the  righteous.  The  righteous 
will  desire  only  that  which  is  in  agreement 
with  God's  will,  and  this  God  grants,  if  not 
in  this  world,  certainly  in  the  life  to  come. 


The  LXX.  has,  "  The  desire  of  the  juat  ii 
aweptable." 

Ver.  25. — As  the  whirlwind  passeth.  Ac- 
cording to  this  rendering  (which  has  the 
support  of  the  Vulgate)  the  idea  is  the 
speed  with  which,  under  God's  vengeance, 
the  sinner  is  consumed,  as  Isa.  xvii.  13; 
Job  xxi.  18.  But  it  is  better  to  translate, 
as  the  LXX.,  "  when  the  whirlwind  is  pass- 
ing," i.e.  when  the  storm  of  judgment  falls, 
as  Christ  represents  the  tempest  beating  ou 
the  ill-founded  house  and  destroying  it, 
while  that  which  was  built  on  the  rook 
remains  uninjured  (comp.  ch.  xii.  3 ;  Matt 
vii.  24,  etc. ;  comp.  Wisd.  v.  14,  etc.).  Ever- 
lasting foundation  (ver.  30  ;  Ps.  xci. ; 
cxxv.  1);  like  the  Cyclopean  stones  on 
which  Solomon's  temple  was  built.  It  is 
natural  to  see  here  an  adumbration  of  that 
Just  One,  the  Messiah,  the  chief  Corner- 
stone. The  LXX.  gives, "  But  the  righteous 
turning  aside  is  saved  for  ever." 

Ver.  26.— Vinegar  (Uuth  ii.  14 ;  Ps.  Ixix. 
21).  As  sour  wine  sets  the  teeth  on  edge. 
Septuagint,  "as  the  unripe  grape  is  harm- 
ful to  the  teeth "  (Ezek.  xviii.  2).  Smoke. 
In  a  country  where  chimneys  were  unknown, 
and  the  fuel  was  wood  or  some  substance 
more  unsavoury,  the  eyes  must  have  often 
been  painfully  affected  by  the  household 
fire.  Thus  laerimosuii,  "tear-producing," 
is  a  classical  epithet  of  smoke  (see  Ovid, 
'  Metam.,'  i.  6 ;  Hor., '  Sat.,'  i.  5.  80).  To 
these  two  annoyances  is  compared  the  mes- 
senger  who  loiters  on  his  errand.  The  last 
clause  is  rendered  by  the  LXX.,  "So  is 
iniquity  to  those  who  practise  it" — ^it  brings 
only  pain  and  vexation. 

Ver.  27. — The  fear  of  the  lord  prolongeth 
days.  The  promise  of  long  life  as  the  re- 
ward of  a  religious  conversation  is  often 
found  in  our  book,  where  temporal  retribu- 
tion is  set  forth  (see  oh.  iii.  2;  ix.  11;  xiv. 
27).  Shall  be  shortened,  as  Ps.  It.  23; 
Bcoles.  vii.  17. 

Ver.  28. — ^The  hope  of  the  righteous  shall 
be  gladness,  The  patient  expectation  of 
the  righteous  is  joyful,  because  it  has  good 
hope  of  being,  and  is,  fulfilled.  So  the 
apostle  (Rom.  xii.  12)  speaks,  "Rejoicing  in 
hope,  patient  in  tribulation."  Septuagint, 
"Gladness  delayeth  for  the  just."  The 
expectation  of  the  wioked;  that  which  the 
wicked  eagerly  hope  for  shall  come  to 
naught  (ch.  xi.  7 ;  Job  viii.  13 ;  Ps.  oxii,  10). 

Ver.  29. — The  way  of  the  Lord;  ».e.  the 
way  in  which  he  has  commanded  men  to 
walk — the  way  of  his  commandments  (Pb. 
xxT.  12 ;  oxii.  27),  that  which  the  Pharisees 
confessed  that  Christ  taught  (Matt.  xxii.  16). 
The  Septuagint  renders,  "the  fear  of  the 
Lord,"  which  praotically  gives  the  meaning. 
Or  "  the  Lord's  way  "  may  be  his  moral 
government  of  the  world.    Strength ;  battel 


OB.  X.  1^82.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


199 


a  fortreu  (tw.  15).  Doing  hie  simple 
duty,  ■  good  man  is  aafe ;  for,  as  St.  Fetei 
Bays,  "Who  is  he  that  will  harm  you,  if 
ye  be  zealous  of  that  which  is  good?" 
(1  Fet.  iii.  13).  Sut  destruction  shall  be; 
better,  hut  it  (the  way  of  Jehovah)  t«  dettruo- 
(ton.  The  two  effecte  of  the  Law  of  God  are 
contrasted,  according  as  it  is  obeyed  or  neg- 
lected. 'While  it  is  protection  to  the  right- 
eous, it  is  condemnation  and  ruin  to  sinners 
(see  on  oh.  xxi.  15)  So  Christ  at  one  time 
calls  himself  «the  Way"  (John  xiv.  6);  at 
another  says,  "For  judgment  I  am  come 
into  this  world"  (John  ix.  39);  and  Simeon 
declares  of  hira  (Luke  ii.  34),  "  This  Child 
is  set  for  the  fall  and  rising  again  of  many 
in  Israel "  (comp.  2  Cor.  ii.  15,  etc.). 

Yer.  30. — ^The  righteous  shall  never  be 
removed  (ch.  ii.  21 ;  xii.  3,  21 ;  Fs.  x.  6 ; 
xxxvii.  29).  This  is  in  agreement  with  the 
temporal  promise  made  to  the  patriarchs 
and  often  renewed,  as  in  the  fifth  command- 
ment. St.  Paul  says  (1  Tim.  iv.  8), "  Godli- 
ness is  profitable  for  all  things,  having 
promise  of  the  life  which  now  is,  and  of 
that  which  is  to  come."  The  wicked  shall 
not  inhabit  (or,  abide  not  in)  the  land.  The 
punishment  of  exile  was  threatened  upon 
the  Jews  for  their  disobedience,  and  they  are 
still  suffering  this  retribution  (Lev.  xxvi.  33 ; 
Deut.  iv.  27 ;  Isa.  ixil.  17).  Christ  gives 
the  other  aspect  of  God's  moral  government 
when  he  says  (Matt.  v.  5),  "  Blessed  are  the 
meek :  for  they  shall  inherit  the  earth." 


Yer.  31. — Bringeth  forth;  as  a  tree  pro- 
duces fruit,  and  the  fields  yield  their  in- 
crease. The  metaphor  is  common.  Thus 
Isaiah  (Ivii.  19)  speaks  of  "  the  fruit  of  the 
lips  "  (comp.  Heb.  xiii.  15  and  Fs.  xxxvii. 
30,  which  latter  passage  occurs  in  the  same 
connection  as  the  present).  The  Septuagint 
renders,  "  distilleth  wisdom."  So  Cant.  v. 
13,  "  His  lips  are  like  lilies,  dropping  sweet- 
smelling  myrrh."  The  froward  tongue  (ch. 
ii.  12,  14 ;  viii.  13,  which  speaks  only  what 
is  perverse  and  evil).  Shall  be  cut  out; 
like  a  corrupt  tree  that  cumbers  the  ground 
(Matt.  iii.  10;  Luke  xiii.  7).  The  abuse 
of  God's  great  gift  of  speech  shall  be  severely 
punished.  "  For  by  thy  words  thou  shalt 
be  justified,  and  by  thy  words  thou  shalt 
be  condemned  "  (Matt.  xii.  36,  37). 

Yer.  32. — Enow.  A  good  man's  lips  are 
conversant  with  what  is  accepts  ble  to  God 
and  man.  Such  a  person  considers  what 
will  please  God  and  edify  his  neighbour, 
and  speaks  in  conformity  therewith.  The 
LXX.  has, "  The.  lips  of  the  righteous  distil 
graces ; "  imo(TT(iCet  xipt'ras,  but  probably  the 
right  verb  is  iiriaraTai,  which  is  found  in 
some  manuscripts.  Speaketh  frowardnesi; 
rather,  Ttnowetlt,  or  is  perverieneis  (comp. 
Eph.  iv.  29) ;  Septuagint,  dTroffrpec^eTtti,  or, 
according  to  the  Sinaitic  corrector  and  some 
other  scribes,  /caracrTpc^cTai,  "is  turned 
aside,"  or  "  is  overthrown."  Delituoh  tnuu- 
lates,  "  is  mere  falaehood." 


HOMILBTICS. 

Ver.  1. — The  imjUtmet  tf  a  ton,  over  his  parents  happinei$.  It  Is  Impossible  to 
estimate  the  tremendous  influence  which  children  have  on  the  happiness  of  their  parents. 
The  unfortunate  thing  about  it  is  that  the  children  are  the  last  to  realize  it.  It  may 
be  that  a  misplaced  modesty  inclines  them  to  imagine  that  their  course  in  life  cannot 
be  of  much  consequence  to  any  one.  In  many  cases,  unhappily,  gross  selfishuesi 
engenders  sheer  indifference  to  the  feelings  of  those  who  have  most  claim  upon  them, 
80  that  they  never  give  a  thought  to  the  pain  they  are  inflicting.  But  behind  these 
■pecial  points  there  is  the  universal  fact  that  no  one  can  understand  the  depth  and 
overpowering  intensity  of  a  parent's  love  until  he  becomes  a  parent  himself.  Then,  in 
the  yearning  anxiety  he  experiences  for  his  own  children,  a  man  may  have  a  revelation 
of  the  love  which  he  had  received  all  the  days  of  his  life  without  ever  dreaming  of  its 
wonderful  power.  But  surely,  up  to  their  capacity  for  understanding  it,  children 
should  realize  the  great  trust  that  is  given  to  them.  They  are  entrusted  with  the  hap- 
piness of  their  parents.  After  receiving  from  them  life,  food,  shelter,  innumerable  good 
things  and  a  watchful,  tender  love  throughout,  they  have  it  in  their  power  to  make 
bright  the  evening  of  their  father's  and  mother's  life,  or  to  cloud  it  with  a  deep,  dark 
gloom  of  hopeless  misery, 

I.    The    8ECRBT    OF   THIS    INFLUENCE    IB   IN    THE    MOBAL    OONDTJOT    0»    THE    BON   OB 

DAUOHTBB.  "The  wise  son"— "The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom;" 
"the  foolish  son"— the  fool  in  the  Bible  is  more  morally  than  intellectually  defective. 
In  the  infancy  of  their  children  fond  parents  often  dream  of  the  earthly  prosperity  they 
would  wish  for  them— ft  brilliant  career,  success  in  business,  wealth,  renown,  happl. 
ness.  But  as  life  opens  out  more  fully  they  come  to  see  that  these  are  of  secondary 
Importance.     The  mother  whose  brooding  fancy  prophesied  a  young  Milton  in  her 


200  THB  PROTEKBS.  [ch.  X.  1— 32, 


wonderful  bo}'  is  perhaps  just  a  little  disappointed  as  by  slow  degrees  she  undergoes 
i;isillusioii,ai.d  sees  him  develop  into  an  ordinary  city  clerk ;  but  she  will  not  eon fess  her 
disappointment  to  herself,  and  it  is  soon  swalloweH  up  in  jnst  pride  and  delight  if  he  is 
upright  and  kind  and  good.  But  if  she  is  not  mistaken  about  the  genius  of  her  child, 
but  only  under  an  error  as  to  the  moral  direction  that  genius  will  take ;  if  her  Milton 
becomes  a  Byron,  then,  though  the  world  rings  with  his  fame,  she — supposing  her  to  be 
a  true,  wise  mother — will  be  broken-hearted  with  grief.  It  is  not  the  du'ness,  nor  iha 
lailures,  nor  the  troubles,  nor  the  early  death  of  chihlren  that  bring  a  father's  "  j^rey 
hairs  with  sorrow  to  the  grave."  It  is  their  sins.  If  these  sins  show  direct  unkind- 
ness,  the  grief  reaches  its  saddest  height.  Then  the  father  may  well  aay,  with  puor 
Lear — 

"How  sharper  than  a  serpent's  tooth  it  is 
To  have  a  thankless  child  1 " 

It  is  heart-rending  for  the  mother  to  part  with  her  infant  if  he  dies  an  early  death. 
But  the  grief  she  feds  when  she  looks  at  the  little  grave,  and  thinks  of  her  child 
quietly  sleeping,  safe  with  the  God  who  called  the  children  to  himself — this  grief  is  calm 
and  endurable  compared  with  the  awful,  crushing  agony  she  would  have  experienced 
if  the  child  had  lived  and  had.  fallen  into  sin  and  broi^ht  shame  upon  his  head. 
Parents  are  foolish  as  well  as  unsubmissive  when  they  pray  too  positively  for  their 
chUdreu's  lives.  Our  one  great  Father  knows  what  is  best.  Perhaps  it  is  safest  for  all 
that  the  child  should  be  taken  from  the  evil  to  come.  But,  of  course,  if  he  can  be 
spared  to  live  a  life  of  usefulness  and  honour,  this  is  most  to  be  desired,  and  the  parents' 
prayers  should  chiefly  go  out  for  the  safe  preservation  of  their  children's  letter  life, 

II.  The  possession  of  this  influence  should  be  a  stbonq  inducement  to 
WOETHT  LIVING.  It  fumishes  a  new  element  in  tlie  obligations  of  right.  The  son 
has  it  in  his  power  to  make  his  parents  happy  or  miserable.  So  great  a  trust  involves 
a  serious  responsibility.  "No  man  liveth  unto  himself."  Besides  his  higher  obliga- 
tions, the  sou  has  a  life  in  regard  to  his  father  and  mother.  He  is  not  at  liberty  to  run 
riot  as  he  chooses,  because  he  thinks  his  own  future  only  is  at  stake.  By  all  the 
terrible  pain  he  inflicts,  by  the  deep  gladness  he  might  have  conferred,  the  guilt  of  his 
sin  is  aggravated.  Should  not  such  considerations  urge  stronsjly  against  yielding  to 
temptation?  If  the  mad  young  man  cares  little  for  abstract  righteousness,  if  he  has 
lost  the  fear  of  God,  still  is  it  nothing  that  every  new  folly  is  a  stab  in  the  heart 
of  those  who  have  done  most  for  him  and  who  would  even  now  give  their  lives  to  save 
liim?  It  is  not  unmanly  to  say  to  one's  self,  "For  my  mother's  sake  I  will  not  do  tBis 
vile  thing."  It  is  devilish  not  to  be  capable  of  such  a  thought.  Similar  considerations 
may  help  ua  in  our  highest  relatione.  God  is  our  Father.  We  may  "grieve"  his 
Spirit  by  sin.  When  the  prodigal  returns  God  rejoices  in  the  presence  of  his  angels. 
Shall  we  not  hate  the  sins  that  made  Christ  mourn,  and  seek  to  do  better  for  the  sake 
of  the  love  of  God  ? 

Ver.  4. — Diligence.  Of  late  it  has  become  fashionable  to  claim  a  cheap  reputation 
for  loftiness  of  moral  aims  by  sneering  at  what  are  called  the  "  smug  virtues."  There 
is  a  great  deal  about  these  despised  virtues  in  the  Book  of  Proverbs,  and  consequently 
a  very  low  estimate  is  formed  of  that  portion  of  Scripture.  But  is  there  not  something 
hollow  about  this  assumption  of  ethical  elevation  ?  It  cannot  be  denied  that  the 
"  smug  virtues  "  have  a  real  obligation.  No  one  would  venture  to  say  that  they  can 
be  dispensed  with.  They  are  simply  of  a  comparatively  inferior  value.  But  till  they 
are  complied  with  it  is  often  ditiicult  to  rise  to  more  ethereal  heights  of  goodness. 
Meanwhile  that  man  is  little  short  of  a  hypocrite  who  neglects  the  plain  duties  that  lie 
at  his  door  for  the  pursuit  of  some  other  more  recondite  graces.  Diligence  is  one  oi 
the  first  of  these  duties,  and  it  is  requisite  for  various  reasons.     Note  some  of  them. 

I.  Wealth  depends  on  wouk  This  is  a  primary  law  of  providence.  God  might 
have  led  us  as  he  fed  the  ravens.  But  instead  of  putting  food  ready  for  our  mouths, 
he  gives  us  hands  with  which  to  work  for  it.  Social  arrangements  only  disguise  this 
law.  The  son  inherits  the  fruits  of  his  father's  industry.  The  idle  man  sucks  the 
honey  of  other  men's  toil.  But  it  remains  truth  that  work  makfs  wealth.  Every 
man's  wealth  depends  largely  on  the  work  of  some  one — his  own  or  somebody  else's.    It 


OH.  X.  1—32.]  THE  PROVERBS.  201 

is  the  duty  of  eveiybody  to  see  that  lie  is  not  dependent  upon  other  people's  labours  if  he 
can  help  himself.  The  man  who  squanders  his  money  in  prosperous  times,  and  throws 
himself  on  public  charity  directly  he  is  ill  or  out  of  work,  is  guilty  of  gross  selfishness 
amounting  to  dishonesty.  It  is  plainly  every  man's  duty  not  only  to  keep  himself  and 
his  family,  but,  where  it  is  possible,  to  make  fit  provision  for  the  future,  or  he  will  be 
robbing  otheii  of  their  maintenance.  Hence  one  obligation  to  be  industrious  and 
thrifty. 

II.  Work  is  fob  our  own  good.  People  talk  of  the  curse  of  toil,  little  knowing 
that  it  is  one  of  the  greatest  blessings  we  have.  Better  talk  of  the  curse  of  idleness. 
It  is  a  happy  thing  that  man  has  to  earn  his  bread  with  the  sweat  of  his  brow.  Work 
develops  strength — strength  of  mind  as  well  as  strength  of  limb.  The  self-made  man 
is  not  invariably  a  model  of  grace ;  but  he  is  usually  a  specimen  of  sturdy  vigour  of 
character,  as  different  from  the  limp  conventionality  of  indolence  as  granite  rock  from 
drifting  sea- weed. 

III.  We  ahb  all  stewards.  The  servant  is  required  to  be  industrious  for  hit 
master's  sake.  Uis  time  is  not  his  own.  He  is  not  at  liberty,  therefore,  to  lounge  about 
in  dreamy  idleness.  We  are  stewards  of  the  things  lent  us  by  God.  He  has  sent 
us  to  work  in  his  vineyard.  In  due  time  he  will  call  us  to  account.  "To  be  blame- 
less as  a  steward  of  Grod"  a  man  must  be  faithful,  honest,  industrious. 

IV.  Christianity  inculcates  diligence.  No  greater  mistake  can  be  made  than 
to  suppose  that  the  New  Testament  favours  indolence.  The  ideal  of  Oriental  monas- 
ticism  is  derived  from  other  sources.  Even  the  monks  in  the  West  knew  better.  In  its 
palmy  days  European  monastioism  was  the  centre  of  honest  toil.  The  monks  cleared 
forests,  reclaimed  bogs,  built  cathedrals,  cultivated  farms,  studied,  laboriously  copied 
and  preserved  for  us  the  invaluable  treasures  of  the  literature  of  antiquity.  Amongst 
other  fruits  of  grace  in  the  Christian's  heart  will  be  increased  diligence  in  business. 
Christian  principle,  however,  is  necessary  to  consecrate  industry.  Without  it  wealth 
will  be  a  god,  business  an  absorbing  worldly  iniluence,  and  success  a  source  of  low  selfish 
pleasure.  But  he  who  is  diligent  on  Christian  principle  will  make  his  business  holy 
by  working  in  it  as  the  servant  uf  Christ,  and  his  wealth  holy  by  dedicating  it  to  the 
use  of  God. 

Ver.  6. — Sleep  in  harvest.  I.  Sleep  in  harvest  is  foolish,  becauss  this  is  the 
time  for  the  harvest-wobk.  We  may  afford  to  be  slack  in  the  winter.  Through 
the  long  frosts  when  the  ground  is  like  iron,  during  heavy  rains  when  to  poach  on  the 
fields  is  only  injurious  to  the  crops,  much  work  is  necessarily  suspended.  But  harvest 
claims  all  time  and  aU  energy.  Every  man  must  be  at  work,  fresh  hands  taken  on,  and 
longer  hours  sjient  in  the  field.  How  preposterous  to  be  sleeping  thenl  There  are 
harvest-times  in  life — times  when  we  are  called  to  awake  to  more  than  ordinary  energy. 
Youth,  though  in  many  respects  a  seed-time,  also  has  some  of  the  characteristics  of 
harvest.  It  is  the  summer-time  when  work  is  pleasant,  and  when  there  is  little  to 
hinder  it.  If  a  man  will  not  work  in  these  bright  days,  how  can  he  expect  to  be  able 
to  labour  when  the  cramps  and  agues  of  wintry  old  age  seize  upon  him  ?  It  is  also 
the  time  of- a  great  ingathering,  when  knowledge  must  be  accumulated  fur  future  use. 
If  this  harvest  season  is  passed  in  idleness,  it  will  be  impossible  to  fill  the  granary 
of  the  mind  with  stores  of  knowledge  in  after-years.  But  there  are  other  special  oppor- 
tunities for  work.  We  seem  to  have  come  upon  the  great  season  of  the  world's  harvest, 
" The  fields  aie  now  white."  India  is  open,  China  and  Africa  are  opening  up ;  and  the 
call  is  loud  for  labourers  to  go  forth  and  gather  the  precious  sheaves  into  the  garner  of 
the  Lord.  If  there  may  have  been  some  excuse  for  indolence  in  the  dark  ages  .of 
tyranny  and  ignorance,  there  is  none  now,  when  communication  is  made  easy  and  vast 
opportunities  for  service  are  afforded  us. 

II.  Sleep  in  harvest  ib  foolish,  because  it  will  result  in  the  loss  of  ^l 
previous  labour.  The  monotonous  toil  of  the  ploughman,  the  careful  work  of  the 
sower,  the  tiresome  weeding,  all  the  lab  lur  of  spring  and  summer,  will  be  wasted  if  tha 
harvest  is  to  be  left  to  rot  in  the  fields.  All  this  was  only  intended  to  prepare  the  way 
for  the  harvest.  So  there  are  times  when  we  are  called  to  make  use  of  the  long 
preparatory  labours  of  after-years.  The  barristei  begins  to  plead,  the  surgeon  to 
practise,  the  minister  to  preach.    If  they  are  remiss  now,  their  university  honouri  will 


202  THB  PB0VEBB3.  fra.  x.  1— 82. 

add  to  the  discredit  of  failure  in  real  life.  The  training  is  all  wasted  if  we  negject  to 
put  it  to  its  final  use.  So  the  Christian  lahourer,  the  missionary,  the  preacher,  the 
Sunday  school  teacher,  should  feel  that  all  their  work  is  to  tend  to  the  gathering  in  of 
bouIb  for  Christ.  If  they  miss  that  result,  the  rest  is  of  Uttle  good.  Care,  diligence, 
prayer,  are  most  called  for  that  the  previous  labour  may  not  be  "in  vain  in  the  Lord.'' 
Hence  the  responsibility  of  the  teachers  of  elder  scholars  in  a  Sunday  school.  The 
harvest-time  of  the  school-work  falls  upon  them.  If  they  are  unfaithful,  all  the  pre- 
vious toil  of  preparing  the  soil  in  the  infant  school  and  sovring  the  seed  in  the  lower 
classes  may  be  thrown  away. 

III.  Sleep  in  harvest  is  foolish,  because  it  will  bring  famine  in  the  wintbe. 
The  narvest  is  a  brief,  swift  period.  It  is  soon  to  give  place  to  the  chill  autumn,  and 
that  to  the  dreary  winter.  If  the  fruit  is  not  gathered  then  it  can  never  be  gathered  in 
later  days.  Yet  it  will  be  sadly  wanted.  The  old  year's  com  will  rim  out,  and  a  great 
cry  for  bread  will  go  up  from  a  famished  people.  Then  the  folly  of  ultimate  indolence 
will  be  felt  in  slow  agony  and  death.  We  need  all  to  remember  that  there  is  a  winter 
coming.  Let  the  strong  man  labour  in  harvest  for  the  winter  of  growing  infirmities 
in  old  age ;  let  the  prosperous  labour  in  sea.-.onB  of  plenty,  that  they  may  have  by  them 
fat  kine  to  be  devoured  in  years  of  scarcity ;  let  the  happy  make  use  of  their  oppor- 
tunities, that  they  may  be  ready  for  the  sorrows  of  the  future.  Apply  the  lessoa  to 
national  affairs.  In  times  of  peace  and  plenty  see  that  debts  are  paid  off,  grievances 
reformed,  and  all  things  made  right  and  strong  in  preparation  for  possible  national 
calamities.  Apply  it  to  commercial  affairs,  so  that  times  of  good  trade  may  not  lead 
to  extravagance  and  luxury,  but  to  more  thrift.  Apply  it  to  spiritual  things — to  the 
church  generally,  that  in  peace  and  liberty  sound  principles  may  be  instilled  and  strong 
Christian  characters  built  up  fit  to  stand  the  shock  of  persecution ;  to  the  individual, 
and  see  that  we  gather  the  bread  of  life  now  which  shall  make  us  able  to  withstand  the 
barrenness  of  the  winter  of  death.  If  we  sleep  in  this  our  harvest-time,  what  dread 
awaking  must  we  look  forward  to  ? 

Ver.  7. — "  The  memory  of  the  jutt,"  L  The  wobld  conobbns  itself  with  th» 
BEPnTATiON  OF  THB  DEAD.  The  words  of  our  text  describe  a  fact  to  which  all  history 
bears  witness.  No  study  is  more  absorbing  than  history — ^including  biograiihy ;  and 
the  most  interesting  part  of  history  is  that  which  deals  with  individuals  and  discussei 
character.  In  spite  of  the  protests  of  the  philosophers,  we  are  all  more  attracted  by 
Shakespeare  and  Scott  than  by  Hallam  and  Buckle.  Statistics,  generalizations,  great 
laws  and  principles  of  national  growth,  all  ha\  e  their  claims  on  our  attention ;  but  the 
characters  of  individual  men  appeal  to  us  with  a  quite  different  human  interest.  Even 
the  most  commonplace  gossip  of  the  street-corner  has  some  justification  in  the  element 
of  sympathy  with  things  human  that  it  presupposes. 

it  The  MOST  impoktant  element  in  posthumous  reputation  is  chabacteb. 
Who  cares  for  Croesus?  But  the  slave  Epictetus  takes  a  high  place  in  the  world's 
thoughts.  The  reputation  for  wealth  that  brings  fawning  flatterers  in  a  man's  lifetime 
is  the  tirst  to  fade  after  death.  So  is  that  of  empty  titles.  The  present  duke — say 
the  seventh — is  treated  with  the  deference  considered  due  to  rank,  but  no  one  cares  to 
ask  in  what  the  third  duke  differed  from  the  fourth  duke.  Even  the  dazzling  con- 
queror's renown  soon  tarnishes  if  it  is  not  preserved  by  higher  qualities.  Few  men 
now  envy  the  reputation  of  Napoleon.  Genius,  perhaps,  carries  off  amongst  men  the 
palm  of  fame ;  the  first  place,  which  is  due  to  character,  is  reserved  for  the  next  world. 
Still,  moral  character  counts  for  more  in  common  human  reputation  than  the  cynical 
are  ready  to  admit.  At  all  events,  in  that  inner  circle  where  a  man  would  most  care 
for  his  reputation  this  takes  its  right  place.  If  it  is  better  to  be  loved  at  home  than  to 
be  admired  abroad,  it  is  better  to  leave  a  fragrant  memory  for  goodness  in'one's  ovm 
circle  than  to  leave  sorrow  in  the  home  and  to  reap  grand  funeral  honours  in  the  out- 
side world.  It  is  remarkable  to  observe  how  fair  is  the  verdict  of  history.  A  hypocrite 
may  deceive  his  contemporaries.    He  can  rarely  deceive  future  generations. 

III.  It  is  our  fiuTT  to  cherish  the  memory  of  the  just.  This  is  a  duty  we  owe 
to  them,  to  righteousness,  and  to  succeeding  ages.  The  honest  canonization  that  comes 
from  no  piapal  authority,  but  from  the  honest  conviction  of  admiring  multitudes,  is  a 
worthy  tribute  to  goodness.     Still,  let  us  beware  of  the  mockery  of  substituting  this  fol 


OH.  X.  1—82.]  THE  PROVERBS.  203 

our  duty  to  the  living — building  splendid  tombs  to  the  prophets  whom  wo  have  slain. 
How  often  have  great  men  been  slighted,  misunderstood,  oraelly  wronged,  during  their 
lifetime;  and  then  honoured  by  a  chorus  of  repentant  praise  as  soon  as  death  has  taken 
them  beyond  the  reach  of  it  1  Oa  the  other  hand,  beware  of  indiscriminate  adulation  of 
the  dead.  There  is  wholesome  truth  in  the  words,  "The  name  of  the  wicked  shall 
rot."  Nothing  is  more  false  than  the  common  style  of  epitaphs.  A  visit  -to  a  grave- 
yard would  suggest  that  the  world  was  a  paradise  of  Immaculate  saints.  Where  you 
cannot  justly  praise,  at  least  be  decently  silent.  Left  to  itself,  the  name  of  the  wicked 
will  melt  away  and  vanish — as  all  rotten  things  do. 

IV.  It    18    PBOFITABLH    TO    OONSIBBR    THE    LKSSONS    LEFT    BT   THE    LIVES    OP   THB 

DEPARTED.  We  need  not  go  the  length  of  the  early  Christians,  who,  beginning  by 
meeting  in  the  catacombs  where  the  martyrs  were  buried,  soon  came  to  worship  the 
martyrs  as  demi-gods.  But  we  may  gain  great  good  by  contemplating  the  beauty  of  good 
lives.  If  we  cherish  the  memory  of  those  who  have  gone  "  to  join  the  choir  invisible," 
we  may  be  helped  to  emulate  their  noble  qualities. 

Ver.  12. — The  doak  of  charity.  One  of  the  devices  of  the  parallelism  or  rhythm  of 
ideas,  which  is  the  general  cbaracteristic  of  Hebrew  poetry,  is  the  alternative  treatment 
of  the  same  thought  from  two  opposite  points  of  view — from  positive  and  negative 
poles.  Tlie  value  of  some  good  thing  is  emphasized  by  contrasting  it  with  the 
repulsive  nature  of  its  contrary,  as  Venetian  ladies  tried  to  appear  the  more  fair  by 
having  negro  pages  to  attend  them.  Thus  the  beautiful  work  of  love,  in  covering  all 
sins,  is  here  made  most  stttractive  by  being  brought  out  on  the  dark  background  of  the 
ugly  doings  of  hatred.  It  may  be  piofitable,  therefore,  for  ua  to  glance  at  the  more 
painful  subject  first. 

I.  The  daek  BACKOitonND.  "  Hatred  gtirreth  up  strifes."  1.  Where  there  is  hatred 
ttrifes  will  le  stirred  up.  This  hideous  passion  is  active,  powerful,  and  contagious. 
It  is  not  content  to  consume  itself  in  hidden  fires ;  it  will  blaze  out  and  spread  its  mis- 
chief abroad,  (1)  "  Hatred  stirreth  up  strifes "  because  it  starts  new  quarrels ;  it  is 
irritating,  provoking.  An  incendiary  will  always  find  plenty  of  fuel.  When  the  spark 
is  struck  the  tinder  is  ready  to  receive  it.  It  is  not  in  human  nature  to  submit  tamely 
to  insult.  Though  it  takes  two  to  make  a  quarrel,  when  one  man  shows  himself 
offensively  quarrelsome  he  will  not  be  long  in  finding  an  antagonist.  (2)  Then  "hatred 
stirreth  up  strifes  "  because  it  aggravates  old  quarrels.  It  pokes  the  fire.  It  freshens 
the  smouldering  embers  and  shakes  them  up  so  that  they  break  out  into  a  blaze  again. 
It  is  the  great  mischief-maker,  and  where  it  finds  a  little  rift  it  sets  diligently  to  work 
to  widen  this  into  a  great  chasm.  2.  Where  strifes  are  stirred  up  hatred  is  hehind 
them.  The  strifes  are  a  sign  of  the  presence  of  hatred.  True,  a  benevolent  man  may 
be  dragged  into  a  quarrel ;  but  he  will  not  provoke  it  himself,  and  he  will  not  maintain 
it  a  moment  longer  than  righteousness  requires.  A  quarrelsome  disposition  is  at  bottom 
grounded  on  hatred.  For  if  we  loved  one  another,  how  could  we  desire  to  be  at 
variance  ?  Tale-bearing,  reporting  words  that  one  knows  wiU  only  rouse  ill  feeling 
between  two  people,  presenting  things  in  their  worst  light  so  as  to  suggest  oflfensive 
thoughts,  exaggerating  the  unkindness  of  a  person  by  imputing  had  motives, — all 
such  conduct  is  inconsistent  with  Cliristian  charity ;  it  is  just  the  behaviour  of  the  old 
serpent,  who  brought  discord  into  Eden,  and  was  "  a  murderer  from  the  beginning." 

II.  The  bkight  piotubb.  "  But  love  oovereth  all  sins."  This  does  not  refer  to 
one's  own  sins — to  the  fact  that  one  who  loves  much  is  forgiven  much  (Luke  vii.  47). 
It  is  the  sins  of  others  that  love  covers.  1.  Love  covereth  aU  sins  against  one^s  self, 
"  Love  Buffereth  long,  and  is  kind "  (1  Cor.  xiii.  4).  The  Christian  must  forgive  his 
enemies  because  he  is  taught  to  love  them.  All  forgiveness  springs  from  love.  God 
pardons  us  for  nothing  that  we  do,  but  for  the  sake  of  his  love  in  Jesus  Christ.  But 
our  Lord  has  told  us  plainly  that  unless  we  forgive  men  their  trespasses  against  ui 
neither  will  our  heavenly  Father  forgive  us  our  trespasses.    This  is  therefore  no 

?uestion  of  counsels  of  perfection,  but  one  of  the  first  elements  of  the  Christian  life, 
f  we  cherish  a  vindictive  spirit  against  any  one,  we  are  ourselves  still  unforgiven  by 
God,  still  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins.  If  we  do  not  prove  our  love  by  forgiving  men, 
we  do  not  possess  it,  and  without  love  to  our  brethren  we  can  have  no  love  to  God. 
Therefore  so  long  as  we  obstinately  refuse  forgiveness  to  any  one  who  has  wronged  ua, 


2(H 


THE  PEOVBEBS.     .  ton- »•  1—32 

our  Chvislianity  ia  nothing  but  hypocrisy ;  it  Is  a  lie.  2.  Lovt  covereth  all  sins  in  others 
generally,  i.e.  it  leads  us  not  to  note  them,  not  to  report  them,  not  to  aggravate  the 
guilt  of  them,  not  to  make  mischief  hy  tale-bearing.  Further,  it  ia  not  conteut  to  ha 
negatively  obliyious  of  sin.  It  must  be  active  in  throwing  the  cloak  of  chaiity  upon 
it.  Of  course,  we  must  he  just  and  truthful.  But  these  obligations  leave  us  free  in 
most  cases  to  labour  to  prevent  mischief  by  a  charitable  behaviour  in  our  social 
influence.  The  Christian  is  not  called  to  be  an  informer.  At  least  Christian  love  wi.l 
make  a  man  a  peacemaker.  If  he  cannot  hide  the  sin  without  unfaithfulness  to  some 
trust,  he  can  endeavour  to  prevent  the  rising  of  evil  passions.  This  is  the  grand 
Christian  method  of  conquering  wickedness.  The  law  chastises  by  punishment;  the 
gospel  reforms  by  forgiveness.  So  Christ,  the  incarnation  of  God's  love,  covers  all  our 
sins,  and  renews  our  hearts  through  the  grace  of  forgiveness. 

Ver.  19. — Golden  silence.  I.  Thb  sinfol  ohabacteb  of  much  obdinaet  con- 
VEESATioN  SHOULD  INDUCE  GKBAT  CAUTION  IN  SPEECH.  It  is  a  giave  charge  to  bring 
against  the  tone  of  general  society  to  say  that  "  in  the  multitude  of  words  there  wanteth 
not  sin."  But  is  it  not  as  true  now  as  it  was  in  the  days  of  Solomon  ?  _  "  Out  of  the 
abundance  of  the  heart  the  mouth  speaketh ; "  but  "  the  heart  is  deceitful  above  all 
things,  and  desperately  wicked,"  and  therefore,  so  long  as  human  nature  is  corrupt, 
conversation  will  be  corrupt  also.  If  the  well  is  poisoned,  the  less  water  we  draw  frora 
it  the  better.  In  particular  two  or  three  bad  features  of  common  conversation  may  be 
observed,  viz. :  1.  Untruthfulness.  There  is  probably  a  little  more  conscious  lying 
even  in  society  that  professes  to  follow  the  code  of  honour  than  its  members  would  care 
to  admit.  But  untruthfulness  may  appear  in  a  more  disguised  form.  There  is  the 
equivocation  that  some  people  practise  so  skilfully — blinding  their  own  conscience 
while  throwing  dust  into  the  eyes  of  other  people.  The  tendency  to  exaggeration  for 
the  sake  of  dramatic  effect  is  very  common.  The  falsification  by  means  of  caricature, 
which  is  dishonest  because  it  is  not  confessedly  caricature,  is  another  source  of  deceit. 
But  hasty  speech  may  fall  into  unconscious  errors ;  and  then,  though  the  sin  of  lying  is 
not  committed,  harm  is  done  by  the  spread  of  reports  that  are  not  true.  2.  Unkindness. 
How  much  of  the  gossip  of  the  parlour  is  made  up  of  the  criticism  of  one's  neighbours 
—  at  least  in  some  circles  of  society  1  No  ill  feeling  may  be  felt,  but  cruel  injustice  is 
done  when  a  man's  actions  are  discussed  and  his  motives  dissected  on  very  insufficient 
evidence,  in  the  absence  of  the  accused,  by  a  small  coterie  of  persons  whom  he  trusts 
as  friends.  But  if  "love  covereth  all  sins,"  it  is  uncharitable  to  make  even  the  proved 
offences  of  our  neighbours  the  topic  of  idle  conversation.  3.  Unholiness.  When  no 
impure  words  are  spoken,  conversation  may  be  more  dangerously  defiled  by  innuendo. 
The  obscene  word  is  disgusting  in  its  coarseness,  but  the  skilful  ec[uivoque,  supposed  to 
be  more  fit  for  ears  polite,  carries  its  poison  to  an  unsuspecting  imagination.  When 
nothing  directly  immoral  is  suggested,  how  much  conversation  would  come  under  the 
cati'gory  of  what  our  Lord  calls  "  idle  words  "  ?  Such  words  are  very  different  from 
genuine  criticisms,  or  even  from  light  banter,  which  may  not  be  idle,  but  useful  as 
mental  refreshment. 

II.  The    DANQEKOUg    INFLUBNCE    OF    SPEECH    CONFIBMB    THE    WISDOM    OF    SILENCE. 

1.  Speech  is  remembered.  The  word  once  out  cannot  be  recalled.  It  remains  to  rankle 
in  the  wounded  breast  or  to  stain  permanently  the  imagination  of  the  hearer.  What 
is  said  in  the  heat  of  passion  will  be  remembered  against  us  in  the  coolness  of  vindictive 
spite.  The  unseemly  joke  of  a  frivolous  moment  may  perpetually  haunt  the  sacred 
subject  it  tampers  with.  2.  Speech  is  suggestive.  The  utterance  may  be  little  in  itself, 
but  it  starts  a  long  train  of  associations.  One  unkindly  word  will  suggest  a  whole 
realm  of  ungenerous  thoughts.  A  single  unholy  phrase  may  bring  to  view  a  whole 
theatre  of  unclean  images.  The  word  is  but  a  spark ;  yet  it- may  kindle  a  great  fire 
(Jas.  iii.  5).     The  most  hasty  speech  may  cut  deepest,  like  the  swiftest  sword-thrust. 

III.  In    many    SPECIAL    CIRCUMSTANCES    SILBKCE    IS   PECULIARLY    DESIRABLE.      1.  /fl 

quarrelsome  society.  When  we  know  that  our  words  will  only  fall  like  firebrands  in 
a  powder-magazine,  the  less  said  the  better.  If  we  cannot  persuade  a  person  to 
maintain  friendly  intercourse  with  us,  we  had  better  have  no  intercourse  with  him. 

2.  In  unsympathetic  society.  It  is  foolish  to  cast  pearls  before  swine.  We  must  beware 
of  the  Pharisaical  use  that  pride  will  make  of  this  maxim,  leading  us  to  preserve  a 


OH.X.  1— 32.J  THE  PE0VERB8.  205 

silence  of  contempt.  But  in  all  humility  and  charity  we  may  refrain  from  speaking 
where  we  shall  only  be  misunderstood.  If  our  hearer  cannot  receive  the  ideas  of  our 
speech,  we  only  waste  time  in  giving  bim  the  words — probably  we  do  worse,  and  lead 
him  into  delusions  through  the  wrong  construction  that  he  will  put  on  our  language. 
3.  In  degraded  society.  When  to  enter  into  conversation  will  only  stir  up  the  mud 
that  lies  at  the  bottom  of  the  now  stagnant  pool,  we  had  better  he  quiet.  In  general 
a  few  well-weighed  words  have  more  force  than  many  hasty,  thoughtless  utterances. 
We  do  not  all  possess  the  gift  of  laconic  terseness.  But  we  cau  at  least  set  a  guard 
on  our  speech,  and  when  called  to  speak  seek  Divine  grace  that  our  words  may  be 
"seasoned  with  salt." 

Ver.  28. — The  hope  of  the  righteous.  I.  We  all  live  bt  hops.  The  righteous  has 
•his  "hope,"  the  wicked  his  "expectation;"  both  live  in  the  future.  The  present  takes 
its  colours  chiefly  from  our  anticipations  of  the  future.  It  is  dark  or  bright  according 
as  shadows  or  light  fall  on  it  from  that  visionary  world.  The  man  who  has  no  hope 
here  or  hereafter  is  practically  dead.  Despair  is  suicide.  Hence  the  importance  of 
ueeing  to  our  hopes.     If  they  are  ill-grounded,  all  life  is  a  mistake. 

II.  The  lots  of  the  righteous  and  the  wicked  diffeb  less  in  thbib  pbesent 
CONDITION  THAN  IN  THji  FUTUBE  OP  THEIR  HOPES.  Old  Testament  saiuts  were  often 
distressed  at  the  sufierings  of  the  good  and  the  prosperity  of  the  bad.  It  is  when  we 
see  "  their  end"  that  we  discover  the  just  allotment.  The  house  on  the  sand  stands  as 
fairly  as  the  house  on  the  rock — till  the  storm  comes.  "When  the  whirlwind  passeth, 
the  wicked  is  no  more ;  but  the  righteous  is  an  everlasting  portion  "  (ver.  25).  Men  of 
very  different  deserts  may  have  equally  bright  hopes ;  for  hope  is  not  founded  an  the 
verdict  of  justice,  but  on  a  man's  own  ideas,  or  even  his  idle  fancies.  The  vigour  of  the 
hope  is  no  guarantee  of  the  certainty  of  its  fulfilment. 

III.  ThS  PROVIDENTIAL  JUSTICE  OF   GoD  WILL   OVEKBULB   THE   ISSUE  OF  ALL   HOPES. 

Our  views  of  the  future  can  only  be  safely  depended  on  when  they  are  determined  by 
what  we  know  of  God.  The  future  is  in  his  hands.  So,  of  course,  Is  the  present.  But 
it  is  only  in  the  course  of  a  long  time  that  the  modifying  influence  of  tempoiary 
accidents  is  removed  and  great  general  laws  exert  their  full  force.  What  will  then 
happen  \(^e  cannot  tell  by  only  investigating  present  phenomena,  because  of  the  confusion 
of  transient  influences.  We  must  study  the  character  of  God.  Then  we  shall  be  con- 
strained to  exclaim,  "  Shall  not  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  do  right  ?  "  Because  God  ii 
just,  justice  must  be  the  ultimate  outcome  of  all  things.  Through  all  time  God  is 
surely  working  on  to  this  end.  We  are  deceived  by  the  tardiness  of  the  process,  yet 
this  very  tardiness  is  effecting  the  more  complete  final  result. 

"The  mills  of  God  grind  slowly. 
But  they  grind  exceeding  imall," 

IV.  This  diffeeent  nature  of  the  hopes  of  men  of  different  chaeaotei 

LABOELT     DETERMINES    THE    QUESTION    OF    THBIB    FUTURE    FULFILMENT.      God    WOrks 

through  means  and  laws.  Some  hopes  are  naturally  doomed  to  failure,  others  contain 
seeds  of  immortal  fruition.  Now,  the  nature  of  our  hopes  is  dependent  on  our  character. 
Better  than  professions,  words,  or  even  deeds,  as  a  test  of  character,  are  a  man's  hopes. 
Tell  us  what  he  hopes,  and  we  can  say  what  he  is.  The  hope  is  an  emanation  of  the 
very  essence  of  the  soul.  Therefore  bad  men  have  bad  hopes,  and  good  men  good  hopes. 
If  both  seem  to  hope  for  the  same  thing,  the  hopes  are  still  wide  apart  as  the  poles;  for 
the  same  thing  objectively  is  quite  different  to  us  according  to  the  thoughts  with  which 
we  view  it.  'i'he  heaven  for  which  a  wicked  man  hopes  is  very  unlike  the  Christian's 
heaven.  Good  men  hope  for  what  is  good ;  t.e.  for  what  agrees  with  God's  will.  Thus 
their  hope  will  not  be  disappointed.  Christians  have  faith  in  "  Christ  in  us  the  Hope 
of  glory.      Such  an  expectation  presages  its  own  satisfaction. 

Ver.  31. — Sightenusness  and  wisdom.  These  two  attributes  appear  to  belong  to 
different  spheres — the  one  to  the  moral  and  the  other  to  the  intellectual.  Yet  they 
•re  here  associated  as  parent  and  child,  and  righteousness  is  seen  to  spiout  into  wisdom. 
Righteous  men  are  represented  as  speaking  wisely.  Now,  we  know  that  good  peopla 
have  not  a  monopoly  of  intellect.     Aristidei  the  virtuous  was  not  as  clever  a*  Tn*- 


206  THE  PEOVERBS.  [oh.  x.  1—32, 


miatocles.     There  are  small-minded  saints,  and  there  are  sinners  of  giant  intellect. 
Where,  then,  is  the  connection  between  righteousness  and  wisdom? 

I.  Righteousness  stbbnothens  the  whole  soul.  It  will  not  convert  a  peasant 
into  a  philosopher,  but  it  will  brighten  the  faculties  of  the  peasant.  While  sin 
deadens  the  soul,  dissipates  its  faculties,  and  lowers  its  powers,  the  calm  and  temperate 
life  of  a  good  man  helps  him  to  attain  to  such  vigour  of  thought  as  is  within  the 
reach  of  his  powers. 

II.  Righteousness  kemovbs  the  hindrance  of  pbbjudiob.  No  doubt  many  good 
people  have  their  prejudices.  But  that  is  in  spite  of  their  goodness,  and  the  goodness 
is  an  antidote  of  more  or  less  efficacy.  The  root  of  prejudice  is  self-will,  and  this  is 
also  the  root  of  sin.  Just  in  proportion  as  we  learn  the  self-distrust  of  humility  we 
shall  be  freed  from  the  blindness  of  prejudice. 

III.  Righteousness  instils  the  love  of  tbuth.  The  good  man  wishes  to  know 
truth ;  he  acknowledges  the  duty  of  seeking  light ;  he  will  not  let  indolence  keep  him 
in  ignorance.  Now,  an  earnest  pursuit  of  truth  is  not  likely  to  be  rewarded  with  failure. 
They  who  seek  Wisdom  earnestly  will  find  her  (ch.  viii.  17).  Thus  the  rousing  of  a 
motive  to  strive  after  wisdom  helps  us  to  reach  it,  and  this  is  the  fruit  of  righteousness. 

IV.  Righteousness  opens  the  etes  of  the  soul.  It  has  a  direct  influence  in 
purging  the  inward  vision.  There  are  truths  which  can  only  be  revealed  through 
channels  of  sympathy.  The  way  of  holiness  lies  hidden  from  the  gaze  of  the  corrupt. 
To  be  good  is  to  see  the  best  truth. 

V.  Righteousness  leads  to  the  practical  use  op  truth.  Wisdom  is  not  a 
merely  intellectual  attainment.  While  intimately  connected  with  the  thoughts  of  the 
mind,  it  also  has  vital  relations  with  the  resolves  of  the  will.  The  wise  man  is  not 
only  one  who  knows  the  right  way ;  he  practises  his  knowledge  by  walking  therein. 

VI.  Righteousness  is  truthful.  When  a  good  man  speaks  he  will  not  knowingly 
deceive.  His  earnest  desire  will  be  to  utter  just  what  he  believes  to  be  true.  But 
such  a  desire  will  help  him  to  put  forth  words  of  wisdom. 

A  practical  result  of  this  association  of  wisdom  with  righteousness  is  that  we  should 
look  well  to  the  character  of  our  teachers.  The  merely  popular  preacher,  or  the  merely 
clever  thinker,  will  not  be  so  useful  a  guide  in  the  higher  reaches  of  the  spiritual  life  as 
the  good  man  of  less  brilliant  natural  gifts  and  intellectual  attainments.  Thus  true 
wisdom  may  be  discovered  where  the  world  only  expects  foolishness  (1  Cor.  L  20,  21). 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  1.— ^We  enter  upon  a  mosaic-work  of  proverbs,  which  perhaps  hardly  admit  of 
any  one  principle  of  arrangemeut  except  that  of  moral  comparison  and  contrast.  This 
governs  the  whole.  Life  is  viewed  as  containing  endless  oppositions,  to  which  light 
and  darkness  correspond  in  the  world  of  sensuous  perception. 

Early  appearance  of  moral  contrast.  I.  The  familt  life  elicits  chabacter.  It 
is  a  little  world,  and  from  the  first  provides  a  sphere  oi probation  and  of  judgment  which 
is  the  miniature  of  the  great  world. 

II.  The  training  of  the  paeents  is  beflbctbd  in  the  children's  conduct. 
And  the  conduct  of  tbe  children  is  reflected  in  the  parents'  joy  or  grief.  Hence  the 
duty  of  wise  training  on  the  one  side,  loving  obedience  on  the  other ;  that  the  happy 
effects  may  be  secured,  the  unhappy  averted,  in  each  case. 

III.  To  LIVE   TO  MAKE   ONE's    PARENTS    (aND   OTHERS)   HAPPT    IB  ONE   OF    THE    BEST 

OF  MOTIVES.     To  see  our  actions  mirrored  in  their  mirth  and  others'  joy,  what  pleasure 
can  be  purer,  what  ambition  nobler  ? — J, 

Vers.  2 — 7. — Moral  contrast  in  earthly  lot  and  destiny.    I.  Ill-gotten  wealth  and 
REOTiruDE.    (Ver.  2.)    The  former  cannot  avert  sudden  death  or  shame  (vers,  25,  27) ; 
the  latter  is  vital,  and  stands  the  man  in  good  stead  in  every  hour  of  human  trial  and  ' 
of  Divine  judgment. 

n.  Honest  povbett  and  profligate  greed.  (Ver.  3.)  The  former  does  not 
hunger,  if  contented  with  little,  has  true  satisfaction.    The  latter  ui  never  satisfied, 


CH,  X.  1— 32.J  THE  PROVERBS.  201 


expands  with  every  indulgence,  is  like  the  "  dire  dropsy."  It  is  an  unappeasable  thirst. 
God  repudiates  it  by  Biing  it  in  perpetual  impotency,  while  the  temperate  and 
chastened  desires  are  rewarded  by  fulfilment. 

III.  The  lax  and  the  indijstbious  hand.  (Ver.  4;  comp.  ch.  xii.  24.)  The 
one  leading  to  poverty,  the  other  to  riches.  Languor  and  energy  have  their  physical 
conditions ;  but  how  much  lies  in  the  will  ?  We  live  in  a  day  when  it  is  the  fashion 
to  talk  of  "  determinism,"  and  to  extend  the  doctrine  of  "  causes  over  which  we  have 
no  control"  beyond  all  reasonable  limits.  We  need  to  fall  back  on  the  healthy 
common  sense  of  mankind,  and  on  the  doctrine  of  these  proverbs.  There  is  a  moral 
question  involved.  Laziness  is  immoral,  and  receives  the  condemnation  of  immorality ; 
Industry  is  a  virtue,  and  brings  its  own  reward  in  every  sphere.  The  opposition  is 
amplified  in  ver.  5  ;  active  forethought  being  contrasted  with  supine  indifference.  The 
hard  field  labour  referred  to  belongs  particularly  to  young  men;  and  to  young  men 
idleness  is  peculiarly  corrupting. 

IV.  Associations  of  blbssino  and  those  of  violence.  (Ver.  6.)  However  the 
verse  may  be  rendered  and  interpreted,  this  is  the  opposition.  Blessing  leads  the  mind 
through  such  a  series  of  associated  ideas  as  peace,  tranquillity,  order,  security ;  violence 
through  a  contrasted  series — trouble,  disquiet,  disorder,  and  all  that  implies  a  curse. 

V.  Beight  and  dabk  recollections.  (Ver.  7.)  The  good  man  lives  in  thankful 
memories ;  the  bad  man's  name  is  like  an  ill  odour,  according  to  the  literal  meaning  of 
the  Hebrew  word.  When  the  saying  is  quoted,  "  The  ill  men  do  lives  after  them,  the 
good  is  oft  interred  with  their  bones,"  we  should  recall  by  whom  this  was  said,  or 
feigned  to  be  said,  and  for  what  purpose.  In  the  memory  gf  Caesar's  ambition  Antony 
is  afraid  the  Romans  will  forget  his  services.  Momentarily  good  may  be  forgotten,  but 
ultimately  must  come  to  recognition  and  honour.  The  course  of  time  illustrates  the 
worth  of  the  good,  and  enhances  the  odium  of  evil  memories. — J. 

Vers.  8 — 10. — Folly  and  wisdom  in  manifold  contrast.  I.  The  wise  majt  is  mor» 
keadt  to  receivb  than  to  give  counsel;  the  fool,  the  opposite. 

II.  The  wise  man  knows  the  value  of  reserve  ;  the  fool  will  "  btill  bi 
talking." 

III.  The  wise  man  is  theiftt,  economical  of  words,  a  capitalist  of  thought  ; 
the  fool,  a  spendthrift  of  words,  a  bankrupt  of  thought. 

IV.  The  wise  man  rises  in  reputation,  in  position;  the  fool  comes  boonbb 
OB  later  to  a  "fall." 

V.  GUILBLESSNBSS     IS     SAFE,    WHILE     CRAFT    AND    CROOKED    POLICY    ABE    OERTAIX, 

SOONER  OE  LATER,  OP  EXPOSURE.  (Ver.  9.)  In  that  widest  sense  in  which  alone  the 
saying  is  noble  and  true,  "  Honesty  is  the  best  policy."  Cunning  overreaches  itself  and 
gets  into  trouble ;  and  the  mere  talher  never  ends  well.  Speech  should  only  be  prophetic 
of  deed ;  otherwise,  "  Many  will  say  to  me  in  that  day,"  etc. — J. 

Vers.  11 — 14. — Afmirfold  opposition.  I.  Speech  that  quiokens  and  speech  that 
KILLS.  (Ver.  11.)  1.  The  speech  of  the  wise  and  good  is  sound,  "  seasoned  with  salt ; " 
that  of  the  wicked  is  hollow  or  else  poisonous.  2.  The  former  edifies,  builds  up  and 
strengthens  the  good  principle  in  the  minds  of  those  who  converse  with  him ;  the  latter 
destroys  the  good,  and  sows  evil  in  its  steaH. 

II.  Quarrelsomeness  and  amiability.  (Ver.  12 ;  see  on  ch.  vi.  14.)  The  former 
hegets  evil,  increases  that  already  existing,  inflames  wounds,  leta  nothing  pass  that  may 
serve  as  fuel  to  its  fire.  The  latter  puts  an  end  to  much  evil,  prevents  the  rise  of  more, 
soothes  every  wound,  and  mitigates  every  mischief.  The  former  is  ever  dividing,  the 
latter  reconciling.  They  undo  one  another's  work;  but  love  in  the  end  prevails 
(ch.  xvii.  9;  1  Cor.  xiii.  4;  Jas.  v.  20;  1  Pet,  iv.  8). 

III.  The  grace  of  wisdom  and  the  disgrace  of  follt,  (Ver.  13.)  The  pure 
eloquence  of  the  good  man  attracts  admiiation  and  wins  confidence;  while  the  fallacies 
of  the  pretender,  the  spurious  rhetoric  of  the  insincere,  are  certain  to  be  exposed  and 
castigated.  The  life  of  the  House  of  Commons,  or  of  any  great  assembly,  fumishei 
constant  illustrations.  _ 

IV.  Prudent  reserve  and  pernicious  loquacity.  (Ver.  14.)  There  is  a  time 
and  place  for  silence,  the  wise  man  knows— both  for  the  recovery  of  his  own  thoughts, 


208  THE   PROVERBS.  [oh.  x.  1—32 

and  for  the  opportunity  of  watching  others.  By  a  bold  figure  of  ipeecb,  it  may  often 
be  that  silence  is  the  greatest  eloquence.  In  many  instances  we  tliink  we  have 
produced  no  effect,  have  not  committed  ourselves  to  the  expression  of  opinion ;  on  the 
contrary,  our  reserre  has  spoken.  In  all  this  lies  a  science  and  art  of  living.  The  fool 
does  not  see  this ;  he  is  too  self-absorbed  to  see  anything  that  passes  in  others'  minds, 
or  too  unsympathetic  to  feel ;  and  hence  blurts  out  things  that  had  better  have  been 
left  unsaid,  hurts  sensibilities,  blackens  reputations,  causes  false  positions  for  himself 
md  others. 

1.  The  heart  must  be  watched.  There  is  no  other  source  of  pleasing,  gentle  manners, 
nor  of  sound  behaviour  in  society.  Reserve  and  unreserve  of  the  right  kind  are  simply 
the  government  of  the  tongue  by  charity.  2.  The  tongue  must  be  watched.  And 
regulated  by  good  models  of  conversation.  Never  must  it  be  forgotten  how  mnch  we 
learn  by  imitation. — J. 

Vera.  15—21. — A  sevenfold  strain  of  experience.  For  the  most  part  these  sayings 
relate  to  earthly  goods — their  value,  and  the  means  for  their  acquisition.  Godliness  has 
the  promise  of  both  lives.  Equally  incredible  would  a  religion  Hvhich  ignored  the 
future  be  with  one  which  ignored  the  present.  Equally  one-sided  is  the  expectation 
only  of  earthly  good  from  wisdom,  and  the  expectation  only  of  heavenly  good.  We 
must  beware  of  a  false  materializing  and  of  a  false  spiritualizing  of  religion. 

I.  The  power  of  wealth  and  the  weakness  or  poverty.  The  former  like  a 
strong  city  or  fortress ;  the  latter  like  a  ruinous  dwelling,  which  threatens  at  any 
moment  to  tumble  about  the  dweller's  head.  The  teacher  is  thinking,  as  the  following 
verse  shows,  on  the  one  hand,  of  wealth  wisely  and  honourably  won,  which  becomes  a 
means  to  other  wise  ends;  on  the  other  hand,  of  blameworthy  poverty,  which  leads  in 
time  to  fiirther  vice  and  misery.  To  desire  competent  means  for  the  sake  of  worthy 
objects,  and  to  fear  poverty  because  of  its  temptations,  is  a  right  and  true  attitude  of 
mind. 

II.  The  tendenct  op  wealth  depends  on  the  mind  of  the  possessob.  (Ver. 
16.)  The  "  tendency  of  riches  "  is  in  itself  an  incomplete  thought.  Silver  and  gold 
have  no  tendency,  except  by  a  figure  of  speech.  In  the  heart  of  man  the  directing 
force  is  found.  Used  justly,  riches  are  a  good ;  they  are  simply,  like  bodily  strength, 
knowledge,  skill,  a  mass  of  available  means.  Used  wickedly,  so  that  they  simply  feed 
our  senses  and  our  pride,  or  become  corrupters  of  others'  integrity,  they  simply  increase 
the  possessor's  power  and  range  of  mischief.  When  we  poetically  speak  of  accursed 
gold,  or  base  dross,  we  should  be  aware  that  these  are  figures,  and  that  the  curse  can 
never  rest  on  anything  in  God's  creation  except  the  will  which  perverts  what  is  a  means 
to  good  into  a  means  to  evil. 

III.  The  causes  of  direction  and  misdirection  in  life.  (Ver.  17.)  Why  do 
gome  men  succeed,  and  others  fail,  in  perpetual  blundering  and  error?  The  particular 
cases  may  be  complex ;  but  as  to  the  genera]  rule  there  can  be  no  question.  In  the 
one  case  there  is  admission  of  faults  and  attention  to  the  correction  of  them.  In  the 
other,  blindness  to  faults,  inattention  to  warnings,  obstinate  persistence  in  error.  Be 
not  above  taking  a  hint,  especially  from  a  foe.  «  Temper  "  is  the  bane  of  many.  Any 
opportunity  is  sacrificed  rather  than  the  whim,  the  humour  which  seems  to  the  man 
BO  thoroughly  a  part  of  himself  that  he  cannot  give  it  up.  The  habit  of  calm  revision 
of  one's  progress  and  failures  in  the  hour  of  prayer  seems  needful  both  to  preserve  from 
over  self-confidence  and  from  over-reliance  on  the  advice  of  others. 

rV.  Concealed  hatred  and  open  malice  equally  odious.  (Ver.  18.)  Resent- 
ment that  one  dares  not,  or  thinks  it  polite  not  to,  express  makes  the  lips  turn  traitor; 
and  the  victim  is  both  "contemned  and  flattered."  God  has  placed  a  natural  hatred 
of  duplicity  in  our  hearts.  It  was  levelled  as  a  reproach  agninst  Euripides  that  he  had 
put  into  the  mouth  of  one  of  his  characters  the  sentiment,  "  My  tongue  did  swear,  my 
heart  remain'd  unswoiii.''  Not  so  dangerous  in  many  cases,  but  morally  worse,  is  the 
deliberate  slanderer,  who  goes  about  to  despoil  his  nfighbours  of  that  which  leaves  them 
much  poorer,  makes  him  none  the  richer.  He  is  a  fot.1,  because  his  arts  recoil  upon 
himself. 

V.  The  peril  of  the  babbling  tongue  ;  the  prudence  of  reserve.  (Ver.  19.) 
The  man  may  be  confronted  with  his  words.    The  "  written  letter  remains,"  and  "manv 


OH.  X.  1—83.]  THK  PE0VBBB8.  20« 


.  1  injunous  acta  can  be  got  over 

more  readily  than  stinging  words  of  sarcasm.  Words  have  a  more  deinite  shape  in 
thought  than  deeds;  tliey  Teveal  a  certain  view  of  you  which  has  some  truth  in  it. 
You  cannot  forget  it,  whiuh  means  with  most  you  cannot  forgive  it.  A  clean-cut 
sarcasm,  a  slander  which  has  just  that  vraiseinUance  about  it  which  gives  currency 
to  gossip,  stamps  a  certain  image  of  the  victim  in  the  public  mind.  The  gentler  motive 
to  prudence  is  the  hurt  we  may  do  others;  the  motive  consistently  here  is  the  treat- 
ment we  may  experience  ourselves.  If  a  person,  on  grounds  like  these,  were  to  take  a 
p'edge  of  total  abstinence  from  "  personal  talk  "  of  the  critical  kind,  his  prudence  must 
i>ti  respected.  An  approach  to  this  is  found  in  well-bred  society.  And  how  lamentable 
the  condition  of  some  so-called  religious  circles,  when  there  is  so  little  culture  that  con- 
Tersation  gravitates  as  if  by  necessity  to  the  discussion  of  the  chara'-ter  and  doings  of 
popular  preachers,  etc. ! 

VI.  The  tongue  and  the  hbabt  abb  in  immkdiatb  conhection.  (Ver.  20.) 
Just  as  Napoleon  said  his  brain  and  hand  were  in  immediate  connection.  The  analogy 
will  serve.  Tta  '  silver  tongue  "  (no  accents  are  silvery  but  those  of  truth)  bespeaks 
the  fine  disposition,  the  noble  heart.  And  what  can  the  produce  of  the  "  worthless  " 
heart  be  but  "  rot "  upon  the  tongue  ? 

"VII.  Good  breeds  good,  while  evil  cannot  keep  itself  alive.  (Ver.  21.)  The 
lips  of  the  just  pasture  many.  Good  words,  good  preachers,  good  books, — these  are  the 
food  of  the  world,  and  there  cannot  be  an  over-supply.  Bad  books  and  teachers  may 
be  let  alone.  As  Dr.  Johnson  said  of  a  poem,  it  had  not  enough  life  in  it  to  keep  it 
sweet  (or,  "  not  enough  vitality  to  preserve  it  from  corruption  "). — J. 

Vers.  22 — 25. — lAfe-seerett.  Lessing  says  of  the  Old  Testament,  as  an  elementary 
book  of  childlike  wisdom,  that  "its  style  is  now  plain  and  simple,  now  poetic,  full  of 
tavtologiea,  but  such  as  exercise  the  penetration  of  the  mind,  while  they  seem  now  to 
gay  something  fresh,  yet  say  the  same ;  now  seem  to  say  the  same,  and  at  bottom 
signify,  or  may  signify,  something  different."  The  Proverbs  are  the  constant  illustra- 
tion of  the  Law. 

I.  The  blessino  of  Jehovah  indispensable;  all  tkoublb  vain  without  it. 
(Vei-.  22.)  We  adopt  the  rendering,  "  Trouble  is  of  no  avail  without  it."  His  blessing 
is  all  in  all.  The  thought  thus  yielded  is  a  beautiful  one,  identical  with  that  in  Fs. 
cxzvii.  Jehovah  gives  bread  to  his  beloved  while  they  sleep  and  take  no  "anxious 
thought "  about  it.  The  thought  was  familiar  to  the  ancient  mind,  and  has  been 
wrought  up  in  parable  and  fable.  The  counterpart  is  that  the  blessing  of  God  is  not 
given  to  the  idle ;  that  "  God  loves  to  be  helped ; "  that  "  Heaven  helps  those  who  help 
themselves."    The  opposite  faults  are  indolence  and  over-anxiety. 

II.  The  true  and  the  false  souboe  of  ohebbfulness.  (Ver.  23.)  The  fool 
makes  mirth  out  of  mischief.  He  takes  delight  in  seeing  the  image  of  his  restless  and 
mischievous  activity  everywhere.  The  man  of  principle,  on  the  contrary,  draws  his 
seiene  cheerfulness  from  faith  in  the  Divine  law  of  things — the  sense  that  he  is  recon- 
ciled to  it,  and  that  good  must  ever  flow  from  it. 

III.  The  fearful  and  the  hopeful  tempers  traced  to  thbib  sionificanck. 
(Ver.  24.)  There  is  a  timidity  bred  of  an  evil  conscieuce — a  buoyant  expectation  of 
the  future  bred  of  a  good  conscience.  Both  are  creative  in  their  effect  on  the  imngina- 
tion,  and  thus  men  dwell  with  shapes  of  gloom  or  radiant  forms  of  fancy.  Both  are 
prophetic,  and  tend  to  realize  themselves.  This  is  a  profound  truth.  For  imagination 
in  turn  influences  the  will,  and  we  reap  the  guilty  ft-ars  or  the  pure  hopes  our  habits 
sowed. 

IV.  The  kesults  of  trial  and  trouble.  (Ver.  25.)  The  storm  sweeps  by  and 
overturns  the  hollow  and  untrue ;  while  they  who  are  based  on  the  righteousness  of 
God  remain  unmoved  (comp.  Matt.  vii.  24,'  eejq.).  We  do  not  know  a  man's  principlei, 
nor  whether  he  has  any,  until  the  time  of  suffering.  Theory  is  one  thing,  fact  another ; 
it  i»  not  the  statement  of  the  engineer,  but  tlie  tiial  of  winter's  floods  that  must  prorv 
tlie  soui  dnesn  of  the  bridge.  We  have  to  learn  the  truth  of  life  in  theory  first;  but 
we  do  not  make  it  our  own  until  it  is  put  to  the  test  of  experience.    Experierce  tnrov« 

raoTKsas.  '' 


210  THE  FBOVEBBS.  [ch.  x.  1— 32. 

lu  bad;  upon  the  truth  of  the  theory,  enriches  our  conception  of  it,  and  should  euble 
us  to  teach  it  with  the  greater  confidence  to  others. — J. 

Ver.  26. — The  lazy  man  a  tmisance.  I.  He  ieeitates  hib  euploykbb.  The 
images  of  the  teeth  set  on  edge,  the  blinded,  smarting  eyes,  give  the  thought  with  great 
force  and  great  naivete. 

n.  He  IB  WORSE  THAN  USELESS.  The  Bible  shows  a  great  aversion  from  idleness, 
sluggishness  (oh.  vi.  6,  seqq. ;  xii.  27  ;  lii.  24 ;  xxii.  13).  1.  Laziness  is  a  vice  and  the 
parent  of  worse.    2.  The  swift  discharge  of  duty  is  acceptable  to  God  and  man.— J. 

Vers.  27 — 32. — Impression  hy  tautology.  These  verses  contain  mostly  iterations  of 
maxims  already  delivered  (on  ver.  27,  see  on  ch.  iii.  2  ;  iz.  11 ;  on  ver.  28,  see  on  ver. 
24 ;  ch.  li.  7).  Tliat  religion  is  a  protector  to  the  man  of  good  conscience,  while  over- 
throw awaits  the  ungodly,  again  brings  out  an  often-expressed  thought  with  emphasis 
(ver.  30 ;  see  on  ver.  25 ;  ch.  iii.  21).  Vers.  31,  32  again  contrast  the  speech  of  the  good 
and  the  wiclsed;  the  former  like  a  sappy  and  fruitful  tree,  the  latter  destined  to 
oblivion ;  the  former  appealing  to  the  sense  ol  beauty  and  grace,  the  latter  shocking  by 
its  deformity. 

I.  There  ib  a  sameness  in  God.  Ha  does  not  and  cannot  change.  He  is  invariable 
substance,  unalterable  will  and  law. 

II.  There  is  a  sameness  in  nature.  The  heavens  above  us,  with  all  their  worlds, 
the  great  mountains  and  features  of  the  landscape,  the  daily  sights  of  sunrise  and  even- 
ing, form  and  colour.  Abraham  and  Solomon  looked  upon  essentially  the  same  world 
with  ourselves. 

III.  There  ib  a  sameness  in  human  natubb — its  passions,  strength,  and  weakness. 
The  same  types  of  character  appear  and  reappear  in  every  age  in  relatively  new  forma. 
And  it  is  proverbial  that  history  repeats  itself. 

rV.  The  essential  relations  op  man  to  God  must  be  the  same  in  bvekt  aqi. 
Hence  the  teacher's  deliverances  must  constantly  recur  to  the  same  great  points. 

V.  That  which  varies  re  the  trivial  or  transient  element;  that  which 

DOES  NOT  VARY  IS  THE  SUBLIME  AND  THE  ETERNAL. 

VI.  Every  true  teacher  may  thus  vary  the  form  or  his  instruction  ai 
MUCH  AS  HE  WILL.  Let  him  see  to  it  that  he  works  in  unison  with  God  and  nature, 
experience,  the  conscience,  and  leaves  a  few  great  impressions  firmly  fixed  in  the  mind. 
"  Line  upon  line,  precept  upon  precept,  here  a  little  and  there  a  little." — J. 

Ver.  1. — Our  joy  in  our  children :  a  sermon  to  parents.  We  may  take  it  for  granted, 
as  commonly  understood — 

I.  That  the  foundation  duty  and  interest,  with  ug  all,  is  to  be  in  a  right 
relation,  personally,  with  God.  Until  we  are  right  with  God  we  must  be  wrong 
altogether.     Then  we  must  contend — 

II.  That  the  question  op  next  vital  consideration  is  the  character  of  our 
children.  It  is  conceivable  that  God  might  have  placed  the  human  world  on  an 
entirely  different  basis  than  that  of  the  family.  But  he  has  rested  it  on  the  human 
home.  This  is  that  decision  of  our  Creator  which  makes  the  greatest  difference  to  us 
and  to  our  life.  How  much  it  is  to  those  who  are  parents  that  they  are  such  I  How 
would  their  life  have  been  another  and  a  smaller  thing  without  that  pure  and  sacr^ 
bond  1  What  deep  chasms  of  experience  has  it  opened!  what  fountaina  of  feeling  has 
it  unsealed  1  what  secrets  of  life  has  it  unlocked  1  What  heights  of  joy,  what  depths  of 
sorrow,  has  it  made  possible  to  the  heart  1 

HI.  That  there  is  a  sonship  which  gladdens,  as  there  is  one  that  grieves,  the 
parental  heart.  Who  is  the  wise  son  (of  the  text)?  Not  necessarily  the  learned,  or 
the  clever,  or  the  prosperous  son.  A  child  may  be  any  or  all  of  these,  and  yet  may  be 
a  grief  and  not  a  joy,  a  shame  and  not  an  honour,  to  his  parents.  It  is  he  who  hat 
learnt  uiitdom  of  Ood,  who  has  sat  diligently  and  efi'ectually  at  the  feet  of  that  great 
Teacher  who  came  to  be  the  Wisdom  of  God.  It  is  he  (1)  who  has  found  his  home  and 
his  heritage  in  a  Divine  Father ;  (2)  who  has  secured  an  unfailing  Friend  in  a  Divine 
Redeemer;  (3)  who  has  stored  his  mind  with  eternal  truth  and  filled  his  soul  with 
everlasting  principles;  (4)  who  is  building  up  his  character  by  the  teaching,  and  regu- 


OH.X.  1— 82.]  THE  PROVERBS.  2H 

lating  Ms  life  by  the  will,  of  Jesus  Christ.  This  is  the  son  of  whom  the  father  will 
never  be  ashamed,  who  will  not  use  the  language  which  it  would  pain  him  to  hear, 
nor  choose  the  friends  he  would  be  unwilling  to  acknowledge,  nor  be  guilty  of  the  con- 
duct it  would  wound  him  to  witness.  This  is  the  son  on  whose  character  and  on  whose 
life,  in  all  its  phases  and  developments,  he  looks  with  profoundest  gratitude  and 
unspeakable  delight. 

IV.  That  the  ohasaotbb  of  oub  childben  depends  mainly  on  ourselves.  They 
will :  1.  Believe  what  we  teach  them.  2.  Follow  the  example  we  set  them.  3.  Catch 
the  spirit  we  manifest  in  their  presence. — C. 

Vers.  2 — 6. — Four  conditions  of  well-being.  That  we  may  enjoy  a  prosperity  which 
Is  truly  human,  we  must  do  well  and  be  well  in  three  directions — in  our  circum- 
stances, in  our  mind  (our  intellectual  powers),  and  in  our  character.  And  that  which 
tends  to  build  up  on  the  one  hand,  or  to  destroy  on  the  other  hand,  will  be  found  to 
affect  us  in  these  three  spheres.  The  conditions  of  well-being  as  suggested  by  the 
passage  are— 

I.  Rectitudb.    (Vers.  2, 3.)    Righteousness  before  God  is  essential  to  all  prosperity : 

1.  Because,  if  we  deliberately  choose  the  path  of  iniquity,  we  shall  have  to  work  against 
the  arm  of  Omnipotence.     "  He  ca=teth  away  the  substance  of  the  wicked  "  (ver.  3). 

2.  Because,  on  the  contrary,  if  we  walk  in  moral  and  spiritual  integrity,  we  may  count 
on  the  direction  and  even  the  interposition  of  the  Divine  hand.  "  The  Lord  will  not 
suffer,"  etc.  (vsr.  3).  3.  Because  righteousness  means  virtue  and  prudence ;  it  means 
those  qualities  which  work  for  health  and  for  security,  which  "  relieve  from  death  " 
(ver.  2).  4.  Because  the  gains  of  ungodliness  are  never  satisfactory;  they  profit 
notbiag."  (1)  TIm;  are  unattended  by  the  joy  of  gratitude,  and  they  are  (often) 
accompanied  by  the  miseries  of  self-reproach ;  (2)  they  are  spoilt  by  the  condemna- 
tion of  the  good  and  the  holy;  (3)  they  are  apt  to  be  dispersed  far  more  freely  than 
they  are  acquired ;  (4)  they  cannot  and  they  do  not  satisfy  the  soul,  though  they  may 
continue  to  fill  the  treasury, — they  leave  the  heart  empty,  aching  and  hungering  for  a 
good  which  is  beyond,  for  a  blessing  which  is  from  above. 

II.  DiLiaxNCE.  (Ver.  4.)  1.  Tne  inattentive  and  sluggish  worker  is  constantly 
descending;  he  is  on  an  incline,  and  is  going  downwards.  'AH  things  connected  with 
his  vocation,  or  with  his  own  mind,  or  with  his  moral  and  spiritual  condition,  are 
gradually  but  seriously  suffering ;  decline,  decay,  disease,  have  set  in  and  will  spread 
from  day  to  day,  from  year  to  year.  2.  The  earnest  and  energetic  worker  is  continually 
ascending ;  he  is  moving  upwards ;  his  hand  is  "  making  rich  " — it  may  be  in  material 
wealth,  or  (what  is  better)  in  useful  and  elevating  knowledge,  or  (what  is  best)  in  the 
acquisitions  of  spiritual  culture,  in  the  virtues  and  graces  of  Christian  character. 

III.  Wakefulness.  (Ver.  6.)  This  is  a  very  important  qualification ;  we  must  be 
ready  to  avail  ourselves  of  the  hour  of  opportxmity.  To  gather  when  the  corn  is  ripe 
is  necessary  if  the  toil  of  the  husbandman  is  to  bear  its  fruit;  to  let  the  crop  alnne 
when  it  is  ready  for  the  sickle  is  to  waste  the  labour  of  many  weeks.  Readiness  to 
reap  is  of  as  much  consequence  as  willingness  to  work.  The  wakeful  eye  must  be  on 
every  field  of  human  activity,  or  energy  and  patience  will  be  thrown  away.  We  must 
covet  and  must  cultivate  mental  alertness,  spiritual  promptitude,  readiness  to  strike 
when  the  hour  has  come,  or  we  shall  miss  much  of  "  the  fruit  of  our  labour."  It  is  the 
general  who  knows  when  to  give  the  word  to  "  charge  "  that  wins  the  battle. 

IV.  Peaoeablkness.  (Ver.  6.)  The  conse(juences  of  violence  shut  the  mouth  of 
the  wicked.  He  that  "  seeks  peace  and  ensues  it "  will  "  see  good  days  "  (1  Pet  iii.  10, 
11).— C. 

Ver,  7. — "The  memory  of  the  just."  It  is  a  fact  that  the  name  of  the  good  man 
is  fragrant,  and  that  long  after  his  departure  there  lingers  in  the  memories  and  hearts 
of  men  a  sense  of  loss,  a  feeling 

"  Which  is  bat  akin  to  pain. 
And  resembles  sorrow  only 
As  the  mist  resembles  the  rain;" 

•  feeling  of  tender  regret  not  unmingled  with  sacred  joy  and  reverent  gratitude.  "Hils 
fact  is — 


2ia  THE  PROVERBS.  [oh.  x.  1—31 


L  A  BTBENOTH  TO  THE  JUST  MAN  WHILE  HE  LIVES.  "  What  has  posterity  douo  for 
us?"  asks  the  cynic.  " The  idea  of  posterity  has  done  great  things  for  us,"  replies  the 
moralist.  That  idea  and  the  hope  to  which  it  gives  birth  have  done  much  to  fortify 
virtue,  to  establish  character,  to  enlarge  and  ennoble  the  good  man's  life.  That  thought 
has  been  fruitful  of  earnest  work,  and  has  helped  men  to  gird  themselves  for  heroic 
suffering.  Good  men  have  been  better,  noble  lives  have  been  nobler,  because  we  care 
to  be  tenderly  remembered  and  kindly  spoken  of  when  we  are  no  longer  among  the 
living. 

II.  A  c»MF0BT  TO  THOSE  WHO  MOURN  HIM.  1.  It  is  true  that  the  more  admirable 
and  loving  a  man  is,  the  greater  is  our  loss  when  he  is  taken  from  us.  2.  But  it  is 
also  true  that  they  are  blessed  who  lose  the  worthiest  and  the  best.  3.  For  the  sorrow  we 
feel  at  such  loss  is  a  very  sacred  thing ;  it  comes  from  God  himself;  it  can  be  borne  with 
simple  and  pure  resignation;  it  is  unembittered  with  the  most  painful  regrets;  it  works 
for  the  renewal  and  purification  of  our  spirit  and  character.  4.  And  it  is  attended  with 
a  very  precious  mitigation ;  we  have  a  pure  and  holy  joy  in  the  recollection  of  what 
the  depaited  one  was,  what  he  did,  how  he  laboured  and  triumphed,  how  znany  hearts 
he  comforted,  how  many  lives  he  brightened,  what  he  was  to  ourselves.  And  these 
remembrances  bring  sunshine  over  the  shadowed  fields;  they  sweeten  the  bitter  cup; 
they  give  "  the  garment  of  praise  for  the  spirit  of  heaviness." 

III.  An  IN8MEATI0N  TO  ALL  WHO  KNEW  HIM.  Por  the  Completion  of  a  true  and 
godly  life  is  an  inspiration.  1.  It  is  another  proof  that  goodness  can  triumph  over 
every  obstacle  and  persevere  to  the  end.  2.  It  is  an  unspoken,  but  not  inaudible 
summons,  saying,  "  Follow  me."  3.  It  is  a  thing  of  beauty  as  well  as  worth ;  and  it 
attracts  all  who  have  an  eye  to  see  as  well  as  a  heart  to  feel.  (1)  Resolve  that,  what- 
ever else  you  leave  (or  fail  to  leave)  behind,  you  will  bequeath  the  memory  of  a  just 
man ;  that  is  the  best  legacy  to  leave.  (2)  Be  drawn,  as  by  a  powerful  fascination, 
toward  the  character  and  the  destiny  of  the  good  and  wise  who  have  gone  before  you. — 0. 

Vers.  8, 10, 11, 14, 18—21,  31,  32. — The  service  of  speech,  etc.  "Man  is  a  talking 
animal,"  we  say.  But  if  we  are  distinguished  from  the  brute  creation  by  the  mere  fact 
of  Biieech,  how  truly  are  we  divided  from  one  another  by  the  nae  we  make  of  that 
human  faculty  1  To  what  height  of  worthiness  one  man  may  rise,  and  what  inestimable 
servicu  he  may  render,  but  to  what  depth  of  wrong  another  man  may  fall,  and  what 
mischief  he  may  work,  by  the  use  of  his  tongue  1 

I.  The  bervicb  of  bpeeoh.  "  By  our  words  "  we  may  do  great  things,  as  our  Master 
has  told  us,  and  as  his  apostle  reminds  us  (see  Matt.  xii.  37 ;  Jas.  iii.  9).  1.  We  may 
give  deep  and  pure  gratification  (ver.  32 ;  and  see  Eccles.  xii.  10).  We  may  speak  (or 
read)  words  which  shall  be  (1)  charming,  soothing,  comforting,  encouraging,  even 
inspiring,  in  the  ear  of  man ;  and  also  (2)  pleasing  and  satisfying  to  our  Divine  Master. 
2.  We  m%j  follow  in  the  footsteps  of  the  Divine.  For  "  the  mouth  of  the  just  bringeth 
forth  wisdom "  (ver.  31).  We  may  utter  in  the  ears,  and  may  thus  convey  to  the 
minds  and  hearts  of  men,  the  truths  which  are  nothing  less  than  the  wisdom  of  God. 
Thus  we  may  be  speaking  to  others  the  very  thoughts  and  making  known  the  will  of 
God.  We  ourselves  may  be,  on  our  scale  and  in  our  sphere,  like  the  Lord  whom  we 
serve  and  follow,  ««the  Wisdom  of  God  "  (1  Cor.  i.  24,  30).  3.  We  may  enrich  the  life 
of  our  fellow-men.  "  The  tongue  of  the  just  is  as  choice  silver  "(ver.  20).  And  surely 
fine  thoughts,  brilliant  images,  sound  principles,  sustaining  truths,  elevating  conceptions 
of  God,  charitable  ideas  of  men, — these  are  more  enlarging  and  enriching  than  many 
pounds  of  silver  or  many  pilea  of  gold.  4.  We  may  nourish  the  said.  "  The  lips  of  the 
righteous/eed  many  "  (ver.  21).  Their  words  are  spiritual  bread  which  "  strengtheneth 
man's  heart,"  and  makes  him  able  to  watch,  to  work,  to  battle,  to  endure.  They  are 
the  wine  which  gives  new  life  when  he  is  ready  to  perish  (ch.  xxxi.  6),  which  restores 
him  in  the  languor  of  doubt  and  difficulty,  and  fills  his  soul  with  hopefulness  and 
energy.  6.  We  may  thus  contribute  to  the  true  and  real  life  of  men.  Our  mouth  will 
be  "  a  fountain  of  life  "  (ver.  11,  Revised  Version).  Whithersoever  the  river  of  Divine 
wisdom,  of  Christian  truth,  runneth,  there  will  be  that  spiritual  upspringing  which  ii 
the  true  life  of  man. 

II.  TiiG  MIBCBIEV  OF  ITS  ABUSE.  The  abuse  of  the  power  of  speech,  the  talking 
which  is  idle  and  vain,  is  a  great  and  sore  evil.    1.  It  brings  the  speaker  into  contempt  j 


0*.  1. 1—82.]  THE  PROVERBS.  tl8 

he  IB  thought  and  spoken  of  as  "  a  prating  fool  "  (verB.  8,  10),  and  he  comes  under  the 
contempt  of  the  wise.  2.  It  involves  men  in  sin.  "  In  the  multitude  of  words,"  etc. 
(ver.  19).  The  man  that  is  ever  speaking  with  little  forethought  is  sure  to  violate 
truth  and  righteousness  hefore  many  hours  have  passed.  3.  It  works  mischief  of  many 
kiada  (vers.  14  and  18).  It  is  sure  to  end  in  slander,  in  the  robhery  of  reputation. 
Tlie  mouth  (.f  the  foolish  is  "a  present  destruction"  (Revised  Version).  The  habit  of 
bad  speech,  especially  if  it  be  that  of  falsehood,  or  lewdness,  or  profanity,  is  a  "present 
destruction,"  (1)  in  that  it  constitutes  a  real  calamity ;  for  in  the  sight  of  God  there  can 
be  few  things  worse  than  such  a  pitiful  abuse  of  the  powers  he  has  entrusted  to  us. 
It  is  also  a  "  present  destruction,"  (2)  in  that  it  leads  with  a  fatal  swiftness  to  the 
deterioration  and  corruption  of  those  in  whose  hearing  it  is  uttered, — 0. 

Ver.  9.— (See  homily  on  ch.  xi.  3.)— 0. 

Ver.  12, — The  conquest  of  love.    "  Love  covereth  all  sinB."    It  does  this  in  that— • 

I.  It  carries  the  wbioht  of  mant  shobtoomings.  1.  On  the  one  hand,  many 
proprieties  will  not  atone  for  the  absence  of  love.  We  are  wholly  unsatisfied  if  one  who 
sustains  to  us  a  very  near  relationship  (husband,  wife,  son,  daughter,  etc.)  is  scrupulously 
C'^rrect  in  behaviour  if  love  be  wanting  from  the  heart.  Nothing  can  compensate  for 
tiiat.  The  kindness  that  is  not  prompted  by  affection  is  of  a  very  poor  order,  and  it 
does  not  satisfy  the  soul.  2.  On  the  other  hand<  the  presence  of  pure  and  strong 
affection  makes  many  things  tolerable  which  in  themselves  are  hard  to  bear.  Not 
that  any  one  has  a  right  to  excuse  himself  for  transgressions  of  law,  of  whatever  kind 
till  y  may  be,  on  the  ground  of  his  tenderness  of  heart.  It  is  a  complete  and  dangerous 
n.isreading  ol  our  Lord's  word  (Luke  vii.  47)  to  suppose  that  he  meant  that  sins  are 
fcirgiveii  because  of  the  presence  of  much  love;  it  is  the  presence  of  much  love  tliat  is 
the  proof,  not  the  ground,  of  forgiveness  (see  homily  in  foe),  Bilt  it  is  a  patent  and 
common  fact  of  human  life  that  we  can  not  only  bear  with  one  another,  but  can  lave 
and  honour  oi'.B  another  when  love  dwells  in  the  heart  and  shines  in  the  countenance 
and  breathes  and  burns  in  the  words  and  actions,  even  though  there  may  be  much 
faultiness  and  many  infirmities  that  have  to  be  forgiven. 

II.  It  is  peeparbd  with  OBNEROtrs  iNTEEPBETATiONS  of  much  misbehaviour. 
Where  a  hard,  cast-iron  severity  sees  nothing  but  transgression,  love  sees  mucli 
eitenuation  or  even  complete  excuse ;  or  it  goes  beyond  that,  and  sees,  or  Ijelieves  that 
it  sees,  a  worthy  and  not  an  unworthy  motive.  It  magnifies  or  invents  a  reason  which 
puts  conduct  in  another  light,  and  makes  it  appear  pardonable,  if  not  creditable.  It 
has  quite  a  different  account  to  give  of  the  transaction ;  it  is  that  which  only  generous 
love  could  see  and  could  supply. 

III.  It  has  a  large  fobqivbnebs  for  even  gbeat  offbnobs.  The  Divine  love 
"  abundantly  pardons."  It  blots  out  the  worst  misdeeds  and  pardons  the  negligence 
and  impiety  of  whole  periods  of  a  sinful  life.  The  human  love  that  is  Iikest  to  the 
Divine  can  overlook  very  dark  misdoings,  and  take  back  to  its  embrace  those  who  have 
gone  away  and  astray  into  a  very  "  far  country  "  of  sin, 

IV.  It  redeems  and  restores.  When  law  does  not  avail,  love  will  succeed  in 
winning  ti.e  erring  to  wiser  and  better  ways.  It  can  lay  its  hand  upon  the  sinner  with 
a  touch  that  will  tell  and  will  triumph.  It  has  a  power  to  break  the  obduracy  of  guilt 
for  which  violence  is  utterly  inadequate.  It  alone  can  lead  the  rebellious  spirit  into 
the  gate  of  penitence  and  faith,  and  make  its  future  life  a  life  of  obedience  and  wisdom. 
Thus  in  the  best  way,  winning  the  noblest  of  all  victories,  it  "covers  sin  "  by  conquering 
it,  by  leading  the  heart  to  the  love  oi  righteousness  and  the  practice  of  purity.  Where 
the  rough  winds  of  penalty  will  fsdl,  the  soft,  sweet  sunshine  of  love  will  succeed  most 
excellently. — 0, 

Ver.  19.— (See  homily  on  ch.  xxii.  11,) — 0. 

Ver.  22. — Divine  enrichment.  There  is  no  inconsistency  In  the  teaching  of  the  text 
with  that  of  ver.  4.  For  God  blesses  us  by  means  of  our  own  efforts  and  energy; 
indeed,  we  are  more  truly  and  fully  enriched  of  God  when  his  blessing  ojoies  to  u*  M 
the  consequence  of  our  faith  and  labour. 


214 


THE  PEOVERBS. 


[oh.  xt.  1— 8L 


L  The  objects  at  which  wb  aim.  Those  without  which  we  are  apt  to  oon-idet 
ourselves  poor,  'i'hey  are  these :  1.  Material  substance,  or  (as  we  commonly  put  it  to 
ourselves)  money.  2.  Honour.  A  good  measure  of  regard,  duly  and  clearly  paid  by 
our  fellows.  3.  Power.  The  holdiug  of  a  position  in  which  we  are  able  to  decide  and 
to  direct.  4.  Learning,  or  unusual  sagacity;  that  intellectual  superiority  which 
enables  us  to  lead  or  to  command. 

If.   THK    condition   UNDEB  which    IHB8E   MAY    BS   EEQAHDBD    AS   THB    BLEgeiNO   OF 

QoD.  This  is  when  we  can  truly  say  that  there  is  "  no  sorrow,"  i.e.  no  real  cause  for 
regret  that  we  have  come  to  possess  and  to  enjoy  them.  But  when  is  this?  1.  When 
they  have  been  acquired  without  any  reason  for  self-reproach — justly,  purely,  honour- 
ably. 2.  When  we  have  not  lost  as  much  as  we  have  gained  by  their  acquisition. 
We  may  lose  so  much  in  time,  or  in  health  and  energy,  or  in  wise  and  elevating  Iriend- 
ship,  or  in  the  opportunity  for  worship  and  service,  that  the  balance  in  the  sight  of 
heavenly  wisdom  may  be  against  us.  3.  When  they  do  not  become  a  heavy  burden 
which  we  can  ill  bear.  This  they  often  do  become.  Frequently  wealth  becomes  more 
of  a  burden  than  a  blessing  io  its  possessor.  He  would  be  a  much  lighter-hearted  and 
less  care-encumbered  man  if  he  had  not  so  much  substance  to  dispose  of  and  to  preserve. 
And  so  of  power  and  influence.  4.  When  they  do  not  become  a  snare  to  us,  le.iding  us 
into  pride,  or  into  a  selfish  separateness  and  unneighbourliness,  or  into  a  guilty  self- 
indulgence,  or  into  "an  unenlightened  and  unchristian  disdain  of  the  common  people," 
or  into  an  overweening  and  fatal  miscalculation  of  our  own  power  and  importance,  or 
into  a  deadening  and  suicidal  worldliness.  These  great  evils  may  not  mean  present 
"sorrow,"  as  we  ordinarily  understand  that  term.  But  they  are  such  evils  as  our 
Divine  Father  sees  with  Divine  regret ;  they  are  such  as  our  heavenly  Friend  would 
fain  deliver  us  from ;  and  when  riches  of  any  kind  end  in  them,  they  cannot  be  said 
to  be  the  result  of  his  blessing.  Moreover,  they  all  lead  on  and  down,  sooner  or 
later,  to  grievous  ends ;  those  who  yield  to  them  are  on  their  way  to  "  pierce  them- 
selves through  with  many  sorrows  "  (1  Tim.  vi.  10).     Henoc^ — 

III.  The  pbo found  wisdom  ok  modebation  in  all  human  and  earthly  ambitions. 
Who  shall  say  how  much  of  riches  he  can  stand  ?  Who  can  tell  where  that  point  is  to 
be  found,  on  the  other  side  of  which  is  spiritual  peril  and  ultimate  "sorrow"  of  tlie 
worst  kind  ?  "  Give  me  neither  poverty  nor  riches."  is  the  wish  and  the  prayer  of  the 
wise  and  reverent. — 0. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XI. 

Ver.  1.— A  false  balance ;  literally, 
halances  of  deceit  (ch.  xi.  23).  The  repeti- 
tion of  the  injunctions  of  Deut.  xxv.  13,  14 
and  Lev.  lii.  35,  36  points  to  fraud  conse- 
quent on  increased  commercial  dealings,  aud 
the  necessity  of  moial  ami  religious  con- 
siderations to  control  practices  which  the 
civil  authority  could  not  adequately  super- 
vise. The  Bt;indard  weights  and  measures 
were  deposiied  in  the  sanctuary  (Exod. 
XIX.  13 ;  Lev.  xxvii.  25 ;  1  Cljron.  xxiii. 
29),  but  cupidity  wus  not  to  be  restrained 
by  law,  and  the  prophets  had  continually  to 
inveigh  against  this  besetting  sin  (see  Ezek. 
xlv.  10;  Amos  viii.  5;  Mieah  vi.  11). 
Honesty  and  integrity  are  at  the  foundation 
of  social  duties,  which  the  author  is  now 
teaching.  Hence  comes  the  reiterat'ou  of 
tliese  warnings  (ch.  xvi.  11  ;  xx.  10).  A 
just  weight ;  \Ae\  My,  a  perfect  stone,  stones 
having   been  used  as  weights  from  early 


times.  So  we  read  (2  Sam.  xiv.  26)  that 
Absalom  weighed  hii  hair  "by  the  king's 
stone  "  (ehen). 

Ver.  2. — Then  oometh  shame  (ch.  xvi.  18 ; 
xviii.  12);  literally,  comelh  pride,  cometh 
also  shame.  Pride  shall  have  a  fall ;  self- 
asseition  and  self-confidence  shall  meet  with 
mortification  and  disgrace  in  tlie  end. 
"  Whosoever  exalteth  liimself  shall  be 
abased"  (Luke  xiv.  11);  "Let  him  that 
thiuketh  he  standeth  take  heed  lest  he  fall " 
(1  Cor.  X.  12).  Septuagint, "  Where  violence 
(Sfipis)  entereth,  there  aLso  dishonour." 
But  with  the  lowly  is  wisdom.  "  Mysteries 
are  revealed  unto  the  meek"  (Ecclus.  iii. 
19,  Oomplutensian ;  Ps.  xxv.  9,  14).  The 
humble  are  already  rewarded  with  wisdom, 
because  their  disposition  fits  them  to  receive 
grace  and  God's  gifts  (oomp.  ch.  xv.  33). 
Septuagint,  "The  mouth  of  the  humble 
meditateth  wisdom." 

Ver.  3.  —  The  integrity — the  limple 
straightforwardness- of   the  upright  shall 


OH.  TL.  1—31.] 


THE   PROVERBS. 


215 


gnids  th«m  in  the  right  war,  and  gire  them 
Buccesi  in  their  undertakings  with  the 
bleasing  of  God  (oomp.  ver.  5).  Septuagint, 
"  the  perfection  of  the  straiglitforward  " 
(oh.  X.  9).  The  perverseueas  (^seleph)  ; 
oh.  IT.  4,  and  there  only.  Vulgate, 
$upplantatio ;  Septuagint,  iTro(rKe\i(7ii6s, 
"the  tripping  up,"  making  others  fall, 
putting  a  stumbling-block  in  others'  way. 
Transgressors;  treacherous  and  deceitful. 
Such  persons  shall  be  caught  in  their  own 
net  (Ps.  xxxv.  8);  they  not  only  bring 
punishment  on  tbemselves  when  their  evil 
designs  are  disoovered  and  frustrated,  but 
they  ruin  their  moral  nature,  lose  all  sense 
of  truth  and  right,  and  are  rejected  of  God. 
This  clause  and  the  following  verse  are 
omitted  in  the  Vatican  and  some  other 
manuscripts  of  the  Septuagint. 

Ver.  4. — Profit  not  |  afford  no  refuge  (ch. 
X.  2).  In  the  day  of  wrath  (ch.  yi.  34), 
when  God  visits  individuals  or  nations  to 
punish  them  for  sin  (comp.  Eoclus.  v.  8). 
Such  visitations  are  often  spoken  of  (comp. 
Isa.  X.  3 ;  Ezek.  vii.  19 ;  Zeph.  i.  15, 18,  e\e.). 
More  especially  will  this  be  true  in  the 
great  dies  irm.  Bighteonsness  .  .  ..  death 
(see  on  ch.  x.  2  ;  and  comp.  Tobit  iv.  10  ; 
xil.  9).  The  Septuagint  here  adds  a  sentence 
vliich  ii  similar  to  ver.  10 :  "  When  the 
righteous  dieth  he  leaveth  regret,  but  the 
destruction  of  the  wicked  is  easy  and 
delightsome  (wp6xf'pos  Kcd  Mxapros)." 

Ver.  5. — The  perfect ;  the  upright  and 
honest.  Vulgate,  "simple;"  Septuagint, 
"blameless."  Shall  direct — make  straight 
or  smooth— his  way  (ch.  iii.  6).  The  good 
man,  not  blinded  by  passion,  follows  a  safe 
and  direct  path  of  life ;  but  the  wicked,  led 
by  his  own  evil  propensions,  and  losing  the 
light  of  conscience  (John  xi.  10),  stumbles 
and  falls.  Septuagint,  "  Bighteonsness 
cutteth  straight  (opBoro/ieT)  blameless  paths, 
but  ungodliness  walketh  in  iniquity."  'Opdo- 
To/ida  occurs  in  ch.  iii.  6,  and  nowhere  else 
in  the  Septuagint.  St.  Paul  adopts  the 
word  in  2  Tim.  ii.  15. 

Ver.  6. — An  emphatic  reiteration  of  the 
preceding  sentences.  Naughtiness;  "strong 
desire,"  as  ch.  i.  3,  which  leads  to  sin  (oh. 
V.  22 ;  Micah  vii.  3).  The  indulgence  of 
their  passions  destroys  sinners.  Septua- 
gint, "Transgressors  are  taken  by  lack  of 
counsel." 

Ver.  7. — His  expeotation ;  that  which  he 
hoped  for  and  set  his  heart  upon,  worldly 
prosperity,  long  life,  impunity, — all  are  cut 
off,  and  the  moral  government  of  God  is 
'  confirmed,  by  his  death  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  17 — 19). 
(For  "the  hope  of  the  ungodly,"  see  the 
forcible  expressions  in  Wisd.  v.  14.)  Of 
nigastmen;  Yvdg&te,  tollicilorum ;  Septua- 
gint, T&v  aaefiSi'.  The  word  seems  to  mean 
"  ranitiea,"  •'.«.  "  men  of  Tanity  " — abstract 


for  concrete.  Others  translate,  "godless 
hope,"  or  "  expectation  that  bringeth  grief," 
or  "  strong,  self-confident  men  ; "  "  men  in 
the  fulness  of  their  vigour."  But  the  ren- 
dering of  the  Authorized  Version  is  well 
supported,  and  the  two  clauses  are  co- 
ordinate. The  Septuagint,  in  order  to 
accentuate  th*  implied  antithesis,  has  seem- 
ingly altered  the  text,  and  introduced  a 
thought  which  favours  the  immortality  of 
the  soul,  "When  a  righteous  man  dieth, 
hope  perisheth  not;  but  the  boast  of  the 
wicked  perisheth  "  (Wisd.  iii.  18). 

Ver.  8.— Out  of  trouble;  t.e.  God  is  at 
hand  to  help  the  righteous  out  of  straits 
(de  angustia,  Vulgate) ;  or  takes  him  away 
from  the  evil  to  come  (Isa.  Ivii.  1 ;  Wisd.  iv. 
10—14).  Septuagint,  "escapeth  from  the 
chase."  In  his  stead  (ch.  xxi.  18).  The 
evil  from  which  the  rightuous  is  saved  falls 
upon  the  wicked.  As  Abraham  says  to  Dives 
in  the  parable,  "  He  is  comforted,  but  thou 
art  tormented"  (Luke  xvi.  25).  Of  this 
substitution  many  instances  occur  in  Scrip- 
ture. Thus  Haman  was  hanged  on  the 
gallows  which  he  had  erected  for  Morilecai 
(Esth.  vii.  10);  Daniel's  accusers  were  cast 
into  the  den  of  lions  from  which  he  was 
saved  (Dan.  vi.  24 ;  oomp.  Isa.  xliii.  4). 

Ver.  9. — An  hypocrite  (cAaTiepA) ;  eimula- 
tor,  Vulgate.  So  translated  continually  in 
Job,  e.g.  viii.  13 ;  xiii.  16,  etc.  Others  take 
it  to  mean  "  profane,"  "  godless."  Such  a 
man,  by  his  falsehoods,  insinuations,  and 
slanders,  destroys  his  neighbour  as  far  as  he 
is  able  (ch.  xii.  6).  Septuagint,  "In  the 
mouth  of  the  wicked  is  a  snare  for  fellow- 
citizens."  Through  knowledge.  By  the 
knowledge  which  the  just  possess,  and 
which  they  display  by  judicious  counsel, 
peace  and  safety  are  secured.  Septuagint, 
"Knowledge  affords  an  easy  path  (fioSos) 
for  the  just." 

Ver.  10.— The  city;  any  city.  Bwald 
would  argue  that  such  language  could  not 
be  used  of  the  capital  of  the  Jews  till  the 
times  of  Asa  or  .lehoshaphat.  But  what  is 
to  prevent  the  sentence  being  taken  gene- 
rally of  any  city  or  community  ?  The 
Vatican  manuscript  of  the  Septuagint  and 
some  others  give  here  only  the  first  clause, 
"In  the  prosperity  of  the  righteous  the  city 
succeeds,"  adding  from  ver.  11,  "but  by  the 
mouths  of  the  wicked  it  is  overthrown  "  (see 
on  ver.  4 ;  comp.  Ps.  Iviii.  10,  etc.). 

Ver.  11. — This  verse  gives  the  reason  of 
the  rejoicing  on  the  two  occasions  just 
mentioned  (comp.  ch.  xiv.  34;  xxviii.  12). 
By  the  blessing  of  the  upright;  t.e.  their 
righteous  acts,  counsels,  and  prayers  (Wisd. 
vi.  24).  By  the  mouth  of  the  wicked.  Theif 
impious  language  and  evil  advice  bring  ruin 
upon  a  city. 

Ver.  12.— He  that   U  void   of  wisdom 


aie 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[CH.  XI.  1—31. 


deipisetli  Ui  neighbonr;  uses  words  of 
contempt  Bbout  his  neighbour.  Septuagint, 
"  gneere  at  his  fellow-citizens."  The  follow- 
ing clause  inilicatcs  that  contemptuous 
language  is  chiefly  intended.  Eoldeth  hia 
peaoe.  An  intelligent  man  is  slow  to  con- 
demn, makes  allowance  for  others'  difiS- 
culties,  and,  if  he  cannot  approve,  at  least 
knows  how  to  be  silent.  Nam  nvlU  taeuisse 
nocet,  nocet  eise  loautum.  "  Speech  is  silver," 
says  the  proverb,  "  silence  is  golden."  Sep- 
tuagint, "  A  man  of  sense  keeps  quiet." 

Ver.  13. — A  tale-bearer.  The  word  implies 
one  who  goes  about  chattering,  gossiping, 
and  slandtring  (Lev.  xix.  16);  Vulj^ate, 
qui  amlmlai  fraudulenter ;  Septnagint,  "  the 
man  of  double  tongue."  To  such  a  man  it 
is  safe  to  trust  nothing ;  he  revealeth  secrets 
(ch.  XX.  19).  He  that  is  of  a  faithful  spirit ; 
a  steadfast,  trusty  man,  not  a  gadder  abuut ; 
he  retains  what  is  committed  to  him  (Ecclus. 
xivii.  16,  "  Whoso  disoovereth  secrets 
losetb  his  credit,  and  Bliall  never  find  friend 
to  his  mind").  Septuagint,  'He  that  is 
faithful  in  spirit  [Trvoij,  as  in  ch.  u.  27, 
where  see  note]  concealuth  matters." 

Ver.  14. — Where  no  counsel  is.  The 
word  properly  means  "  stcersmanship," 
"pilotage"  (ch.  i.  5;  xii.  5;  xxiv.  6).  So 
Vulgate,  gubernatoT  ;  Septuagint,  KvPip- 
vriffis,  "  They  who  have  uo  government  fall 
like  leaves,'  reading  alim  instead  of  am. 
In  the  multitude  of  ootmsellars  (eh.  xv.  22 ; 
XX.  18;  xxiv.  6).  This  would  go  to  prove 
the  superiority  of  a  popular  government 
over  the  despotism  of  a  single  ruler.  But 
the  caution  of  our  homely  proverb  is  not 
inopportune,  "  Too  many  couks  spoil  the 
broth." 

Ver.  15. — He  that  is  surety  for  a 
stranger;  or,  for  another  (see  ch.  vi.  1). 
Shall  smart  for  it.  "  Evil  shall  fall  on  him 
evilly  who  is  suret^y."  He  that  hateth 
suretyship ;  guaranteed,  as  tlie  word  implies, 
by  the  striking  of  hands  in  public  (oh.  xvii. 
18).  Vulgate,  "  who  is  cautious  of  snares," 
especially  of  the  insidious  dangers  that  lurk 
in  suretyship.  Is  sure;  is  at  rest  and  l^as 
nothing  to  fear.  There  is  no  paronomnsia 
in  the  Hebrew.  The  play  on  "suretyship " 
ami  "sure"  in  the  Authorized  Version  is 
either  accidental  or  was  introduced  with 
the  idea  of  giving  point  to  the  seutenco. 
The  Septuagint  translates  differently,  "A 
wicked  man  doeth  evil  when  he  mixes  with 
the  righteous;  he  hateth  the  sound  of  safety 
(^X""  cujipiAelai)."  This  perhaps  means 
tJiat  the  fraudulent  creditor  deceives  the 
good  man  who  has  stood  security  lor  him ; 
and  henceforward  the  good  man  cannot  bear 
to  heur  immunity  and  safety  spoken  of  (see 
note  on  ch.  xx.  16). 

Ver.  16. — A  gracious  woman;  a  woman 
ftill    of    grace.       Septuagint,     (ixdpia-Tos, 


"  agreeable,"  "  chai  ming."  The  author  ii 
thinking  of  personal  attraction!,  whiohr  he 
says,  win  favour;  but  we  may  apply  his 
expression  to  moral  excellences  also,  which 
obtain  higher  recognition.  Betaineth  .  .  , 
retain ;  better,  obtain  . . .  win,  as  in  ch.  xxix. 
23.  The  two  clauses  are  parallel  in  form, 
nut  in  sense,  and  imply  that  beauty  is  mnre 
effective  than  strength,  and  honour  is  better 
than  wealth.  TheS  ptuugiut  takes  a  narrow 
view  :  "A  graceful  woman  bringeth  glory  to 
lier  husband."  The  last  oliiuae  is  rcnilered, 
"The  manly  (ivipeioi)  are  supported  by 
wealth."  Between  the  two  clauseg  the 
LXX.  and  the  Syriac  introduce  the  follow- 
ing parngraphg :  "  But  a  seat  of  dishonour  is 
a  woman  that  hatetii  righteousness.  The 
indolent  come  to  want  wealth,  but  the 
manly,"  etc. 

Ver.  17. — The  merciful  man;  the  kind, 
loving  man.  Septuagint,  aviip  i\i4]ijMv. 
His  own  soul ;  i.e.  himself.  His  good  deeds 
return  in  blessings  upon  himself.  "  Blessed 
are  the  merciful :  for  they  shall  obtain 
mercy"  (Matt.  v.  7).  Troubleth  Ms  own 
flesh ;  brings  retribution  on  himself.  Some 
commentators,  comparing  Ecclus.  xiv.  5 
("  He  that  is  evil  to  himself,  to  whom  will 
he  1)6  good?"),  translate,  "He  who  does 
good  to  him.-^elf  is  a  kind  man  to  others,  and 
he  who  troubles  his  own  body  will  be  oruel 
to  others."  The  sentiment  is  quite  untroe. 
Self-indulgence  does  not  lead  to  regard  for 
others;  and  a  severe,  ascetic  life,  while  it 
encourages  stern  views  of  human  weak- 
nesses, does  not  make  a  man  cruel  and 
nncharitabla  The  Vulgate  takes  "his 
own  flesh"  to  mean  "his  neighbours,"  as 
Judah  calls  his  brotlier  Joseph  "our  flesh" 
(Gen.  xxxvii.  27).  But  tlie  parallelism 
confirms  the  Authorized  Version. 

Ver.  18. — A  deceitfnl  work;  work  that 
brings  no  reward  or  profit,  belying  hope, 
like  "  fundus  meudax  "  ot  Horace,  *  Od.,'  lii. 
1.  30.  The  Septuagint  has,  "unrighteous 
works,"  which  seems  a  jejnne  rendering, 
and  does  not  bring  out  the  contrast  of  the 
sure  reward  in  the  second  member  (comp. 
ch.  X.  2, 16).  To  him  that  soweth  righteoua- 
ness  (Hos.  x.  12;  Gal.  vi.  8,  9).  To  "sow 
righteousness  "  is  to  act  righteously,  to  live 
in  such  a  way  that  the  result  is  holiness. 
The  "reward,"  in  a  Jew's  eyes,  would  be  a 
long  life  in  which  to  enjoy  the  fruits  of  his 
good  conduct.  We  Christians  have  a  better 
hope,  which  is,  perhaps,  adumbrated  by  this 
analogy  :  as  the  seed  sown  in  the  field  doet 
not  proidnce  its  fruit  till  the  time  of  harvest, 
lo  righteousness  meets  with  its  full  recom- 
pense only  in  the  great  harvest  at  tbe  end  of 
all  things.  The  Revised  Version  renders, 
The  wioked  eamefh  deceitful  wages :  but  hi 
that  eoweth  rigkieouaneae  hath  a  aure  reward. 
This  makes  a  good  antithesis.   The  Septua- 


OH.  XL  1—31.] 


THE  PBOVEBBa 


217 


fdnt  lenders  the  last  clause,  "but  the  seed 
of  the  righteous  is  a  true  rew»rd  (jutrBhs 
cUi)9£las)." 

Ver.  19. — This  verse  is  not  to  be  connected 
with  the  preceding,  as  in  the  margin  of  the 
Revised  Version,  "so  li^btenuEness,"  etc., 
eaioh  couplet  in  these  ctupttrs  being  in- 
dependent, the  connection,  such  as  it  is, 
being  maintained  by  the  use  of  catchvroids, 
such  as  "  righteous,"  "  wicked,"  "  upright," 
etc.  As  righteousness  tendeth  to  life.  The  ' 
various  uses  of  the  first  word  p_  (hen)  have 
led  to  dififerent  renderings.  The  Authorized 
Version  takes  it  for  "as;"  the  Kevised 
Version  as  an  adjective :  He  that  is  steadfast 
in  righteousness.  It  is,  perhaps,  better,  with 
Nowack,  to  regard  it  as  an  abverb :  "  He 
who  is  honestly,  strictly,  of  rigliteouBness, 
is  to  life."  The  meaning  is  plain:  real, 
genuine  righteousness  hatli  the  promise  of 
this  life  and  of  that  which  is  to  come 
(1  Tim.  iv.  8).  The  LXX.,  reading  ]3  (ben), 
translate,  "A  righteous  son  is  born  for 
life."  He  that  pursueth  evil  (oh.  xiii. 
21);  Septuagint,  "the  persecution  of  the 
impious,"  i.e.  that  which  an  impious  man 
inflicts.  But  the  Authorized  Version  is 
corieot,  and  the  clause  means  that  he  who 
practises  evil  brings  ruin  eventually  on 
himself — a  warning  trite,  but  unheieded 
(comp.  ch.  i.  18). 

Ver.  20. — They  that  are  of  a  froward  heart 
(ch.  xvii.  20);  Septuagint,  "  perverse  ways." 
The  word  means  "distorted  from  the  right," 
"  obstinate  in  error."  Upright  in  their  way 
(ch.  ii.  21 ;  xxix.  27 ;  Ps.  cxix.  1). 

Ver.  21. — ^Though  hand  join  in  hand  (ch. 
xvi.  5);  literally,  hand  to  hand,  which  may 
be  taken  variously.  The  Septuagint  and 
some  other  versions  take  the  phrase  in  the 
sense  of  unjust  violence :  "  He  who  layeth 
hand  upon  hand  unjustly ;  "  Vulgate,  mauut 
inmanu,  "hand  in  hand,"  which  ia  as 
enigmatical  as  the  Hebrew.  Some  Jewish 
interpreters  consider  it  an  adverbial  ex- 
pression, signifying  simply  "  soon."  Some 
modems  take  it  to  mean  "  soomr  or  later," 
as  the  Italian  da  mano  in  mano,  or,  in  suc- 
cession of  one  generation  after  another 
(Gesenius,  Wordsworth).  Others  deem  it  a 
form  of  adjuration,  equivalent  to  "  I  hereby 
attest,  my  hand  upon  it!"  And  this  seems 
the  most  probable  interpretation  ;  assuredly 
the  Divine  justice  shall  be  satisfied  by  the 
punishment  of  tlie  wicked  (comp.  Ps. 
xxxvii.).  The  Aulhorized  Version  gives  a 
very  good  sense:  "Though  bauds  be  pli;^htid 
in  faith,  and  men  may  associate  together  in 
evil,  the  wicked  shall  not  go  unpunished  " 
(comp.  Isa.  xiviii.  15).  St.  Gregory  ('  Mor. 
in  Job,'  lib.  xxv.)  takes  a  veiy  Jiffereut 
view :  "  Hand  in  hand  the  wicked  shall  not 
be  innocent;"  for  hand  is  wont  to  be  joined 
with  hand  when  it  rests  at  ease,  and  no 


laborious  employment  exercises  it  Ai 
though  he  were  say  It)?,  "Even  when  the 
hand  rests  from  sinful  deeds,  yet  the  wicked, 
by  reason  of  his  thoughts,  is  not  innocent" 
(Oxford  transl.).  This  exposition  is,  of 
course,  divorced  from  the  context.  The  seed 
of  the  righteous.  This  is  not  "the  pos- 
terity of  the  righteous,"  but  is  a  periphrasis 
for  "the  righteous,"  as  In  Ps.  xxiv.  6;  exit. 
2,  "  the  generation  of  the  righteous  "  (comp. 
Isa.  Ixv.  23).  The  climax  which  some  se« 
.here — as  if  the  author  intended  to  say, 
"  Not  only  the  good  themselves,  but  their 
descendants  also  shall  be  delivered" — is 
non-existent  and  unnecessary.  Septuagint, 
"  But  he  that  soweth  righteousness  shall 
receive  a  sure  reward,"  which  is  another 
rendering  of  the  second  member  of  ver.  18. 
Shall  be  delivered ;  >.«.  in  the  time  of  God's 
wrath  (vers.  4,  23;  ch.  ii.  22). 

Ver.  22. — This  is  the  first  instance  of 
direct  "similitude"  in  the  book.  As  a 
jewel  [a  ring]  of  gold  in  a  swine's  snout. 
The  greatest  incongruity  is  thus  expressed. 
Women  in  the  East  jfore,  and  still  some- 
times wear,  a  ring  run  through  the  nostril, 
and  hanging  over  the  mouth,  so  that  it  ia 
necessary  to  hold  it  up  when  tMking  food. 
Such  a  nezem  Abraham's  serva'it  gave  to 
Rebekah  (Gen.  xxiv.  22;  comp.  Isa.  iii.  21; 
Ezek.  xvi.  12).  The  Septuagint  has  ivdniov, 
"  an  ear-ring."  So  is  a  fair  woman  which  is 
without  .discretion ;  without  taste,  deprived 
of  the  faculty  of  saying  and  doing  what  is 
seemly  and  fittinjf.  The  external  beauty  of 
such  a  woman  is  as  Incongruous  as  a  pre- 
cious ring  in  the  snout  of  a  pig.  Les^tre 
quotes  an  Arab  proverb :  "  A  woman  with- 
out modesty  is  food  vrithout  salt."  Whether 
swine  in  Eastern  countries  were  "  ringed," 
as  they  are  with  us  nowadays,  is  unknown ; 
if  they  were  thus  treated,  the  proverb  is  still 
more  vivid. 

Ver.  23.— (Comp.  oh.  x.  28.)  The  desire  of 
the  righteous  is  only  good.  They  want  only 
what  is  just  and  honest,  and  therefore  they 
obtain  their  wishes.  The  expectation  of  the 
wicked — that  on  which  they  set  their  hope 
and  heart— is  wrath  (ch.  xi.  4),  is  an  object 
of  God's  wrath.  Other  commentators, 
ancient  and  modern,  take  the  clause  to 
im[)ly  that  the  wishes  of  evil  men,  animated 
by  wrath  and  ill  temper,  are  only  satisfied 
by  inflicting  injuries  on  others.  Delitzsch 
would  translate  ^ah,  "  excess,"  "  presump- 
tion," as  in  ch.  xxi.  24.  But  the  first  inter- 
pretation seems  most  suitable  (comp.  Bom. 
ii.  8,  9).  The  LXX.,  pointing  differently, 
for  "  wrath  "  reads  "  shall  perish." 

Ver.  24.— There  is  that  seatterethj  that 
giveth  liberally,  as  Ps.  cxii.  99,  "He  hath 
disperseil,  he  hath  given  to  the  needy." 
And  yet  iucreaseth  ;  becomes  only  the  richer 
in  wealth  and  more  blessed  by  God  (comp, 


218 


THE  PROVEBBS. 


[oa.  XL  1 — 31. 


ch.  six.  17).  Nutt  quotes  the  old  epitaph, 
"  Wbat  we  spent,  we  had  ;  what  we  saved, 
we  lost;  what  we  gave,  we  have."  Ex- 
perience proves  that  no  one  ultimately  losea 
who  gives  the  tithe  of  his  income  to  God 
(see  on  ch.  ixviii.  27).  There  ia  that  with- 
holdeth  more  than  is  meet ;  i.e.  is  niggardly 
where  he  ought  to  be  liberal.  But  the 
expression  Is  best  taken  as  in  the  margin  of 
the  Eevised  Version,  "  that  withholdeth 
what  is  justly  due,"  either  as  a  debt  or  as  a 
proper  act  of  generosity  becoming  one  wha 
desires  to  please  Qod  and  to  do  his  duty. 
But  it  tendeth  to  poverty.  That  which  is 
thus  withheld  is  no  real  benefit  to  him,  it 
only  increases  his  want.  Septuagint  and 
Vulgate,  "There  are  who,  sowing  what  is 
their  own,  make  the  more ;  and  there  are 
who,  gathering  what  is  another's,  suffer 
loss."  Dionysius  Oato, '  Distich,  de  Mor.,' 
liv.  4. 1— 

"  Despice  divitias,  si  vis  animo  esse  beatus, 
Quas  qui    suscipiunt  mendicant    semper 
avari." 

Ver.  25. — The  sentiment  of  the  preceding 
verse  is  here  carried  on  and  confirmed. 
The  liberal  soul ;  literally,  the  soul  of  bleta- 
ings,  tlie  man  that  blesses  others  by  giving 
liberally.  Shall  ba  made  fat  (ch.  xiii.  4; 
xxviii.  25).  The  term  is  used  of  the  rich 
and  prosperous  (Ps.  xxii.  29).  Septuagint, 
"  Every  simple  soul  is  blessed."  .  He  that 
watereth — benefits  and  refreshes  others — 
shall  be  watered  also  himself;  shall  receive 
the  blessing  which  he  imparts.  The  Vul- 
gate introduces  another  idea.  Qui  inehriat, 
ipse  qtwque  inelridbitur,  where  the  verb 
implies  rather  abundance  than  excess,  as  in 
ch.  V.  19,  etc.  The  Septuagint  departs  widely 
from  the  present  text :  "  A  passionate  man 
is  not  graceful "  (e4(rx^M'>'»')>  *-8-  '8  ugly  in 
appearance  and  manner — a  sentiment  which 
may  be  very  true,  but  it  is  not  clear  how 
it  foun  1  its  way  into  the  passage.  St. 
Chrysostom  comments  upon  it  in  'Horn.' 
xvii.  on  St.  John.  There  are  some  Eastern 
proverbs  on  the  stewardship  of  the  rich. 
When  a  good  man  gets  riches,  it  is  like  fruit 
falling  into  the  midst  of  the  village.  The 
riches  of  the  good  are  like  water  turned  into 
a  rice-field.  The  good,  like  clouds,  receive 
only  to  give  away.  The  rivers  themselves 
drink  not  their  water;  nor  do  the  trees  eat 
their  own  sweet  fruit,  and  the  clouds  eat 
not  the  crops.  The  garment  in  which  you 
clothe  another  will  last  longer  than  that  in 
which  you  clothe  yourself.  Who  gives  alms 
sows  one  and  reaps  a  thousand. 

Ver.  26.— He  that  withholdeth  com.  The 
practice  reprehended  is  not  confined  to  any 
one  time  or  place.  The  avaricious  have 
always  been  found  ready  to  buy  corn  and 
other  necessary  articles  of  consumjitijw  when 


plentiful,  and  wait  till  there  was  dearth  in 
the  market  or  scarcity  in  the  land,  and  then 
sell  them  at  famine  prices.  Amos  sternly 
reproves  this  iniquity  (viii.  4,  etc.).  It  is 
a  sin  against  justice  and  charity,  ami  it  is 
said  of  him  who  is  guilty  of  it,  the  people 
shall  curse  him  (ch.  xxiv.  24).  Such  sel- 
fishness has  often  given  rise  to  tumult 
and  bloodshed,  and  has  been  punished  in 
a  signal  manner.  Tlie  legend  of  Bishop 
Hatto  shows  the  popular  feeling  concerning 
these  Dardanarians,  as  they  were  called 
by  Ulpian  ('Digest.  Justin.,'  xlvii.  H.  6). 
Such  •  one  St.  Chrysostom  ('  Horn,  in  1 
Cor.,'  xxxix.)  calls  ".a  common  enemy  of  the 
blessings  of  the  world,  and  a  foe  to  the 
liberality  of  the  Lord  of  the  world,  and  a 
friend  of  mammon,  or  rather  his  slave." 
The  Septuagint  gives  a  curious  rendering: 
"  He  who  holdeth  corn  may  he  leave  it  for 
the  peoples  I "  i.e.  may  neither  he  nor  his 
heirs  be  benefited  by  his  store,  but  may  it 
be  distributed  among  others  far  and  near  t 
That  selleth  it;  literally,  that  breakelh  it, 
as  it  is  said  of  Joseph  when  he  sold  com 
to  the  Egyptians  (Gen.  xli.  56 ;  xlii.  6). 

Ver.  27. — He  that  diligently  seeketh 
good ;  literally,  he  that  leekelh  in  the  mnm- 
ing,  as  so  often  in  Scripture,  the  phrase, 
"  rising  early,"  implies  unimp.iired  powers 
and  diligence  (ch.  xxviL  14 ;  Jer.  viL  13, 
etc.).  Frocureth  favour;  better,  aeekelh 
favour;  by  his  very  act  of  striving  after 
what  is  good,  he  is  striving  to  do  what 
may  please  and  benefit  others,  and  thus 
to  please  God.  Vulgate,  "  Well  does  he 
rise  early  who  seeketh  good."  It — mis- 
chief— shall  come  unto  him;  the  conse- 
quences of  his  evil  life  shall  fall  upon  his 
head.  Saj  s  an  Indian  proverb,  "  When  men 
are  ripe  for  slaughter,  even  straws  turn  into 
thunderbolts." 

Ver.  28. — There  are  many  expressions  in 
this  and  the  following  verses  which  recall 
Fs.  i.  He  that  trusteth  in  bis  riches  shall 
fall  (oh.  X.  2 ;  Ps.  xltx.  6,  7 ;  lii.  7 ;  Eoclus. 
V.  8).  Wealth  is  of  all  things  the  most  uu- 
certain,  and  leads  the  heart  astray  from 
God  (1  Tim.  vi  17).  As  a  branch ;  "  as  a 
lenV  (Ps.  i.  3;  Isa.  xxxiv.  4).  The 
righteous  grow  in  grace  and  spiritual 
beauty,  and  bring  forth  the  fruit  of  good 
works.  Septuagint,  "  He  who  layeth  hold 
on  what  is  righteous  [or, '  helpeth  the  right- 
eous ']  shall  spring  up  ^ivaTeKet)." 

Ve».  29.— He  that  troubleth  his  own 
house;  he  that  annoys  and  worries  his 
family  and  household  by  niggardliness,  bad 
management,  and  captious  ill  temper.  So 
the  Son  of  Siraoh  writes  (Bcclus.  iv.  30), 
"  Be  not  as  a  lion  in  thy  house,  nor  frantic 
^^avTaaoKOTray,  'suspicious')  among  thy 
servants."  Septuagint,  "he  who  has  no 
friendly  intercourse  (i  /ij)  irvij.nepi<pepiiiiyo$) 


cm.  XX.  1— Al.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


21» 


with  his  own  house."  Shall  inherit  the 
wind ;  he  will  be  the  loser  in  the  end ;  no 
one  will  lend  him  a  helping  hand,  and  his 
affaiiB  will  fall  to  ruin.  The  fool — the  man 
who  acts  thus  foolishly — shall  be  servant 
to  the  wise  of  heart ;  to  the  man  who 
administers  his  household  matters  in  a 
better  and  more  orderly  manner  (see  on  oh. 
xii.  21).  It  is  implied  that  the  troubler 
of  hi9  own  house  shall  be  reduced  to  such 
extremity  as  to  liave  to  apply  for  relief  to 
the  wise  of  heart.  The  other  side  of  the 
question  is  given  by  the  Son  of  Sirach : 
"  Unto  the  servant  that  is  wise  shall  they 
that  are  free  do  service "  (Ecclua.  i.  25). 
Tlie  prodigal  in  the  parable  prayed  his 
fatlier  to  make  him  one  of  his  hired  servants 
(Luke  XV.  19). 

Ver.  30. — The  fruit  of  righteousness  (of 
the  righteous)  is  a  tree  of  life  (ch.  iii.  18 ; 
xiii.  12);  lignum  viite,  Vulgate.  That 
which  the  righteous  eay  and  do  is,  as  it 
were,  a  fmitful  tree  which  delights  and 
feeds  many.  A  good  man's  example  and 
teaching  promote  spiritual  health  and 
lead  to  immortal  life.  Septuaginf,  "From 
the  fruit  of  righteousness  epringeth  a  tree 
of  life."  And  he  that  winneth  souls  is 
wis« ;  rather,  he  that  it  wiee  icinneth  touts. 
The  latter  member  is  parallel  to  the  former. 
He  who  gives  men  of  the  tree  of  life  attracts 
souls  to  himself,  to  listen  to  his  teaching 
and  to  follow  his  example.  With  this 
"  winning  of  souls "  we  may  compare 
Christ's  promise  to  the  apostles  that  they 
should  "catch  men"  (Luke  v.  10;  comp. 


Jas.  V.  20).  The  Septuagint  introduces 
an  antithesis  not  found  in  our  Hebrew 
text :  "  But  the  souls  of  transgressors  are 
taken  untimely  away."  Ewald  and  others 
change  the  present  order  of  clauses  in  vers. 
29  and  30,  thinking  thus  to  improve  the 
parallelism.  They  would  rearrange  the 
passage  in  the  following  way:  "He  that 
troubleth  his  own  house  shall  inherit  the 
wind ;  but  the  fruit  of  the  righteous  is  a 
tree  of  life.  The  foolish  shall  be  servant  to 
the  wise  of  heart;  but  he  that  is  wise 
winneth  souls."  There  is  no  authority 
whatever  in  the  versions  or  older  com- 
mentators for  this  alteration ;  and  the  exist- 
ing arrangement,  as  we  have  shown,  giv(  s  a 
very  good  sense. 

Yer.  31. — The  righteous  shall  be  recom- 
pensed in  the  earth.  There  are  two  ways 
of  understanding  this  verse.  The  word 
rendered  "  recompensed,"  uh\^  (thalarn),  is  a 
vox  media,  and  can  be  taken  either  in  a 
good  or  bad  sense.  So  the  meaning  will  be, 
"  The  righteous  meets  with  his  reward  upon 
earth,  much  more  the  sinner,"  the  "  re- 
ward "  of  the  latter  being,  of  course,  punish- 
ment. But  the  versions  lead  to  another 
interpretation,  by  which  "  rpcompensed  "  is 
rendered  "  chastised ; "  and  the  meaning 
is — if  even  the  righteous  shall  be  punished 
for  their  trespasses,  as  Moses,  David,  etc., 
how  much  more  the  wicked!  The  Septua- 
gint, quoted  exactly  by  St.  Peter  (1  Epist  iv. 
18)  has,  "  If  the  righteous  scarcely  be  saved, 
where  iball  the  ungodly  and  the  sinner 
appear?" 


HOMILETIOS. 

Ver.  1. — Just  weights.  The  point  of  this  proverb  is  different  from  that  of  our  low- 
toned  though  often  useful  saying,  "  Honesty  is  the  best  policy."  Every  day  we  are 
discovering  more  and  more  how  profoundly  true  that  saying  is,  if  not  in  tliu  narrow 
view  some  taike  of  it,  yet  in  its  broad  issues  and  in  the  long  run.  But  no  man  will 
be  truly  honest  who  puts  policy  before  honesty,  and  bases  his  morality  on  iiclfish 
expediency.  Therefore,  if  we  are  ever  to  reap  the  personal  profit  promised  in  the 
English  proverb,  we  must  mould  our  conduct  on  higher  principles,  such  as  that  of  the 
Hebrew  proverb,  which  teaches  us  that  dishonesty  in  trade  is  hateful  to  God,  and  that 
justice  is  his  delight. 

I.  COMMBKCB  18  INCLUDED  IN  THE  EIQHTFUL  DOMAIN  OF  BELIGION.      PcW  men  WOuld 

deny  the  abstract  proposition  that  commerce  has  its  morale,  though  many  may  be  very 
indifferent  in  the  application  of  them.  But  it  must  be  further  seen  that  commerce  has 
its  religion.  There  is  a  religious  way  of  carrying  on  trade,  and  an  irreligious  way_  of 
doing  it.  God  is  in  the  shop  as  well  as  in  the  church.  He  is  as  much  concerned  with 
the  manner  in  which  we  buy  and  sell  as  with  the  style  in  which  we  pray ;  nay,  more 
so,  for  his  chief  interest  Is  with  our  real,  daily,  practical  life. 

II.  Religion  requires  just  weights  in  trade.  Religion  requires  them.  No  one 
would  dare  to  admit  that  morality  did  not  require  them.  But  we  have  now  to  see  that 
religion  especially  demands  them.  This  is  the  place  where  the  incidence  of  religion  on 
trade  is  to  be  felt.  Religion  carried  into  business  does  not  mean  praying  for  prosperity 
and  then  cheating  our  neighbours  in  order  to  secure  the  ansvver  to  o>ir  prayer,  nor 
giving  to  missionary  coUections  a  small  dole  out  of  the  profits  of  swindling.    It  meanj 


820  THE  PBO VERBS.  t<».  XL  1—31. 


honesty  in  business  preserved  for  God's  sake.  He  will  not  hear  our  prayers  while  the 
weights  and  measures  are  being  tampered  with. 

III.    The   RBLIGIODB  BEQITIRBMENT  op  just   WBIGHTB  is  based  on   the  OBLIOATIOH8 

OF  TRUTH  AND  OF  otJB  DUTY  TO  ouB  NEiQHBODRS.  1.  Truth.  God  ha'es  all  lies 
False  balances  are  concrete  lies.  They  are  worse  than  verbal  untruths;  for  they  ant 
deliberate  and  permanent.  A  weak  man  may  be  surprised  into  a  hasty  expression  that 
d<ies  not  accord  with  his  convictions  under  the  shock  of  a  sudHen  temptation.  But  ts 
construct  and  keep  false  balances  is  to  deceive  with  full  consideration  of  what  is  being 
done.  Adiilteiation  is  a  similar  offence.  People  who  construct  elaborate  machinery 
for  the  very  purpose  of  adulterating  articles  of  trade  should  feel  that  all  their  ingenuity 
airgravates  their  condemnation.  2.  Our  duty  to  crwr  neighbours.  In  a  Ubristian 
country  surely  we  should  have  some  regard  for  the  great  maxim  of  Christ,  that  we 
should  do  to  others  as  we  would  that  they  would  do  unto  us.  The  tradesman  should 
put  himself  in  the  customer's  case,  the  buyer  in  that  of  the  seller.  Brotherly  kindnesm 
is  the  best  human  safeguard  for  integrity ;  but  above  this  should  be  our  regard  for  the 
appriival  of  God.  We  please  God  not  so  much  by  singing  hymns  and  offering  sacrifices 
as  by  honest  business.    "A  just  weight  is  his  delight." 

Ver.  2. — Tht  shame  of  pride  and  the  wisdom  of  humility.  L  The  shame  of  pride. 
Pride  claims  honour,  and  thinks  itself  secure  of  obtaining  it.  It  would  dread  disgrace 
above  all  things,  would  rather  starve  and  perish  than  suffer  from  contempt.  Yet  a 
true  insight  into  life  shows  that  pride  is  the  direct  precursor  of  shame,  of  the  very 
thing  it  would  most  wish  to  keep  off.    Thus,  like  ambition,  pride  "o'erleaps  itself." 

1.  Pride  claims  too  high  a  place.  The  proud  man,  thinking  highly  of  liimself,  thrusts 
himself  into  positions  where  he  is  unable  to  meet  what  is  required  of  him.  If  he  took 
the  lower  place,  no  one  would  tliink  ill  of  him;  he  might  then  be  respected.  But  he 
makes  himself  ridiculous  by  aiming  too  high.  The  greatest  of  men  have  found  out  the 
folly  of  this  ambition  of  pride.     Others  besides  Shakespeare's  Wolsey  can  say— 

"  I  have  ventured, 
Like  little  wanton  boys  that  B»im  on  bladders, 
This  many  summers  iu  a  sea  of  glory ; 
But  far  beyond  my  depth  :  my  high-blown  pride 
At  length  broke  under  me;  and  now  has  left  me, 
Weary,  and  old  with  service,  to  the  mercy 
Of  a  rude  stream,  that  must  for  ever  hide  me." 

2.  Pride  refuses  to  receive  correction.  It  will  not  stoop  to  confess  itself  in  error. 
Satisfied  with  iis  own  condition,  it  will  not  listen  to  advice,  nor  try  for  any  improve- 
ment. 'I'hus  it  remains  stationary.  The  flecks  and  flaws  of  character  which  a  humble 
man  would  allow  his  neighbour  to  point  out  and  help  him  to  remove  become  stereotyped 
in  the  proud  man.  Thus  faults  which  would  be  forgiven  and  forgotten  if  they  were 
only  transitory  in  the  growth  of  character  bring  disgrace  by  becoming  permanent  and 
characteristic.  3.  Pride  provokes  criticism.  No  man  is  wise  in  being  proud  until  he 
knows  he  is  without  reproach.  For  the  very  attitude  of  pride  challenges  attacks. 
Ic  offends  the  pride  of  others,  and  in  sheer  self-defence  they  will  set  to  work  to 
discover  the  faults  which  charity  or  a  happy  indifference  would  otherwise  leave 
undisturbed. 

II.  The  wisdom  of  humilitv.  Humility  is  not  only  right  and  beautiful;  it  is  also 
wise.  Both  the  Old  aud  the  New  Testaments  insist  upon  this  truth.  It  was  the 
mistake  of  Stoicism — the  highest  effort  of  secular  morality — that  it  failed  to  see  this. 
Epictetus  ar>i  Marcus  Aurelius — in  other  respects  so  near  to  the  Christian  ideal — are 
here  severed  from  it  by  an  impassable  chasm.  Tliey  were  both  Pharisees.  The  shame 
which  pride  brings,  of  course,  suggests  the  wisdom  of  its  opposite.  But  this  wisdom 
has  its  positive  recommendations.  Humility,  choosing  lowly  places,  finds  refuge  in 
safe  ones ;  admitting  imperfection,  confessing  sin,  it  is  ready  to  repent,  and  therefore 
capable  of  beginning  a  better  life  and  of  rising  to  perfection.  Winning  the  hearts  of 
men  by  its  uniissuming  character,  it  escapes  jealou.s  criticism,  and  finds  that  faults  are 
covered  by  love.  Humility  need  not  be  the  confession  of  unworthiness,  Christ  the 
Sinless  Oue,  Christ  the  Son  of  God,  was  the  humblest  and  meekest  of  men.    Th« 


OH.  XL  1—31.]  THE  PK0VERB8.  221 


ChiiBtian  is  called  to  walk  in  the  steps  of  his  Master,  and  to  seek  hia  joy  in  renouncing 
himself.  Ultimately  he  will  Snd  his  honour  in  the  same  course.  "  For  every  one  that 
humbleth  himself  shall  be  exalted." 

Ver.  13. — The  tale-hearer.  Tale-bearing  may  result  from  spite  and  malice,  or  it  may 
be  an  incident  of  idle  gussip;  but  even  in  its  milder  phases  it  is  a  most  mischievous 
practice,  and  one  deserving  of  severe  reprobation.  Connected  with  what  are  called  the 
minor  moralities  of  life,  the  evil  of  it  is  far  too  little  recognized  by  many  (Jhristiau 
people,  people  who  undoubtedly  endeavour  on  the  whole  to  square  their  conduct  with 
right  principles.  It  is  very  impoitant,  therefore,  that  the  character  of  this  very 
common  fault  should  be  exposed. 

I.  When  cosfidence  has  been  reposed,  tale-bbabin»  re  shamefully  dishonoub- 
ABLB.  All  of  us  admit  in  the  abstract  that  it  is  mean  and  dastardly  to  betray  confidence. 
But  the  practice  is  teiribly  frequent  with  people  whose  character  should  be  proof  against 
ir,.  Of  course,  no  man  of  principle  would  deliberately  worm  a  secret  out  of  an  innocent, 
trusting  friend  for  the  very  purpose  of  blazing  it  abroad.  But  there  are  cuses  in  which 
the  evil  is  less  clearly  reco;inized.  1.  Oonfideiice  may  be  implied  when  it  i»  not  expressed. 
A  man  need  not  say  in  so  many  words  that  he  is  telling  us  a  secret,  and  bind  us  over 
to  keep  silent  by  solemn  promises,  in  order  to  put  us  under  an  obligation  not  to  betray 
his  confidence.  If  he  evidently  trusts  us,  calls  us  into  his  counsels  as  an  exceptional 
privilege  of  friemlbhip,  and  tells  us  what  we  know  he  would  not  wish  us  to  make 
public,  the  duty  not  to  reiicai  his  words  is  scarcely  less  binding.  If,  through  being 
admitted  into  a  man's  house,  we  have  discovered  the  skeleton  in  his  cupboard,  by 
accepting  his  hospitality,  we  are  pledged  not  to  reveal  it.  2.  Confidence  may  he  betrayed 
through  carelessness.  If  any  one  leiids  a  jewel  to  a  friend,  he  is  required  not  only  not 
to  sell  it,  but  not  to  leave  it  exposed  to  the  danger  of  theft.  Confidence  is  a  jewel.  It 
must  be  guarded.  Should  we  through  recklessness  reveal  what  is  entrusted  to  us,  we 
are  culpable.  Two  practical  considi  rations :  (1)  Do  not  be  oTer-anxious  to  It  am  secrets 
They  bring  with  them  painful,  difficult  obligations.  Those  people  who  are  most 
careless  in  betraying  confidence  are  generally  most  eager  in  their  curiosity  to  pry  into 
the  affairs  of  their  neighbours.  Both  habits  imply  a  low  moral  tone.  (2)  Be  careful 
how  you  give  confidence.     This  is  not  merely  a  maxim  of  prudence;  it  is  a  rule  of 

■  charity,  for  the  trust  is  an  obligation,  possibly  a  vejy  arduous  one.     Why  should  you 
force  it  upon  a  friend,  and  so  increase  his  burdens? 

II.  When  cokfidence  has  not  been  keposed,  tale-bbarinq  is  dnoharitable. 
1.  It  is  unkind,  even  if  nothing  damaging  to  character  is  said.  We  may  know  many 
innoount  things  about  a  man  which  it  would  be  highly  unbecoming  to  make  public. 
The  modest  will  respect  decency  of  »■  ul  as  well  as  of  body.  The  veil  of  mental  reserve 
is  a  requirement  which  should  distinguish  the  civilized  man  from  the  savage  as  much 
as  the  clothing  of  his  body.  One  of  the  penalties  of  royalty  is  the  exposure  of  private 
and  home  life  in  "  the  fierce  light  that  beats  upon  a  throne."  Unhappily,  this  evil 
grows  upon  public  characters;  and  the  tendency  of  "society  papers"  to  pander  to 
idle  curiosity  vrith  personal  gossip  about  celebrities  is  one  of  the  most  imwholesome 
habits  of  our  day.  2.  It  is  often  injurious  when  no  harm,  is  meant.  The  report  is 
misunderstood,  or  it  is  unfairly  judged  by  going  forth  without  the  lights  and  shailes  of 
accompanying  circumstances,  like  a  text  without  its  context.  Thus  a  deed  appears 
harsh  which  would  be  condoned  if  the  causes  which  led  up  to  it  were  all  known.  Like 
a  rolling  snowball,  rumour  grows  as  it  progresses  through  the  world.  Th»  love  of 
dramatic  effect  unconsciously  colours  the  "  simple,  round,  unvarnished  tale,"  till  the 
author  could  no  longer  recognize  it.  3.  It  is  ungenerous  when  it  is  a  true  tale  of  ijuilt. 
We  are  not  called  to  tell  all  the  evil  which  we  know  of  our  neighbours.  Charity  would 
hide  it.  It  is  most  inhuman  to  take  pleasure  in  the  vivisection  of  character.  On  the 
other  hand,  we  must  bear  in  mind  that  it  is  sometimes  our  duty  to  speak  oui  unplea  ^ant 
truths,  as  in  bearing  witnesi  to  a  crime  from  obligations  of  justice,  and  in  giving  a 
servant's  character;  untruthfulness  in  the  latter  case  is  dishonest,  unjust  to  employers, 
and  direcily  unfair  to  persons  of  good  character  by  the  depreciation  of  the  value  of 
truthful  testimonials  in  the  loss  of  confidence  in  all  such  documents. 

In  conclusion,  see  how  injurious  tale-bearing  is  to  the  tale-bearer.  1.  It  rouses  retali- 
ation.   Who  among  us  can  defy  the  tongue  of  slander  thui  provoked  ?    2.  It  degrade! 


222  THE   PROVERBS.  [OH.XI.  1—31, 

the  mind.  Wordsworth  has  described  the  lowering  influence  of  narrow  personal  talk 
in  contrast  with  conversation  on  topics  of  larger,  nobler  interest — 

"  Sweetest  melodies 
Are  those  that  are  by  distance  made  more  sweet. 
Whose  mind  is  but  the  mind  of  his  own  eyes, 
He  is  a  slave— the  meanest  we  can  meet." 

Ver.  ll.-^The  merciful  man.  It  would  be  our  duty  to  be  mercifiil  if  we  suffered 
thereby,  and  indeed  we  can  never  be  truly  merciful  solely  from  motives  of  self-interest, 
■ince  genuine  mercy  must  spring  from  sympathy.  Nevertheless,  we  sadly  need  all  aidi 
to  rigbteousness — the  lower  as  well  as  the  higher;  and  therefore  it  may  be  useful  for 
us  to  consider  how  much  it  makes  for  our  own  profit  that  we  should  be  merciful. 

I.  The  merciful  man  will  obtain  mbbcy  fbom  other  men.  We  never  know 
in  what  straits  the  future  may  find  us.  Proud  in  our  independence  to-day,  we  may  be 
in  abject  need  before  long,  or  at  least  in  circumstances  which  make  our  welfare  largely 
dependent  on  others.  We  are  so  much  members  one  of  another  that  it  is  not  for  our 
own  good  that  we  should  injure  one  another.  He  is  in  the  most  precarious  position 
who  has  provoked  enemies  by  his  cruelty.  Let  him  beware  of  the  turn  of  the  tide  of 
fortune.  The  tyrant  calls  forth  the  assassin.  Employers  who  grind  down  their  work- 
people cause  that  very  indifference  to  their  interests  of  which  they  complain.  If 
generosity  wins  friendship,  surely  it  is  a  valuable  grace.  None  love  so  much  as  they 
who  have  been  forgiven  much. 

n.  Only  the  mebcifdl  man  will  obtain  mercy  from  God.  This  is  an  absolute 
principle  the  importance  of  which  is  too  little  recognized.  In  the  Old  Testament  God 
tells  us  that  he  desires  "mercy,  and  not  sacrifice"  (Hos.  vi.  6);  t.e.  that  the  practice 
of  the  former,  rather  than  the  offering  of  the  latter,  is  the  ground  of  acceptance  by  him. 
Christ  signalizes  mercy  by  giving  it  a  place  in  the  Beatitudes,  and  saying  that  the 
blessing  of  the  merciful  is  that  they  shall  obtain  mercy  (Matt.  v.  7) ;  calls  upon  us  to 
love  our  enemies  (Matt.  v.  44);  inserts  in  his  model  prayer  one  sole  condition — that 
God  "  forgives  us  our  debts  as  we  have  forgiven  our  debtors "  (Matt.  vL  12) ;  and  tells 
us  that  our  offerings  to  God  must  be  preceded  by  our  forgiveness  of  men  (Matt.  v.  23, 
24).  Therefore  the  cruel  man  troubleth  his  own  flesh,  for  he  excludes  himself  from 
the  enjoyment  of  God's  mercy — the  one  essential  of  his  eternal  welfare. 

"  Consider  this — 
That  in  the  course  of  justice,  none  of  us 
Should  see  salvation :  we  do  pray  for  mercy : 
And  that  same  prayer  should  teach  us  all  to  render 
The  deeds  of  mercy." 

m.   The    merciful   man   is   blessed   in   the    very    EXEECIgB    OP   MEROY.      1.    Tlie 

exercise  of  mercy  is  pleasing.  The  temptation  to  hatred  promises  a  devilish  pleasure ; 
but  it  is  a  delusive  promise.  Once  the  passion  is  indulged,  it  works  pain  in  the  soul. 
The  expression  of  rage  is  no  sign  of  pleasure.  Cruelty  makes  a  hell  within,  and 
peoples  it  with  demons  that  torture  the  man  himself  even  more  than  its  victims.  By  a 
singular  law  of  nature  the  exercise  of  mercy  begins  in  the  pain  of  self-sacrifice,  but  it 
soon  bears  fruit  in  inward  peace  and  gladness.  2.  The  exercise  of  tnercy  is  elevating 
and  ennobling.  Cruelty  degrades  the  soul.  Charity  refines,  exalts,  sanctifies.  The 
glory  of  God  is  in  his  mercy. 

"  Wilt  thou  draw  near  the  natnie  of  the  gods  7 
Draw  near  them  then  in  being  merciful : 
Bweet  mercy  is  nobility'i  true  badge." 

Thus,  to  quote  one  more  familiar  saying  of  Shakespeare's,  we  find  that  mercy 

"  la  twice  bless'd, 
It  blesses  him  that  gives  and  him  that  takes." 

Ver.  24. — Mtannesi.  The  Book  of  Proverbs  is  sometimes  accused  of  taking  too  low 
and  worldly  a  view  of  conduct,  and  of  giving  undue  importance  to  prudentiij,  self- 
regarding  duties.  Whatever  truth  there  may  be  in  these  charges — and  no  doubt  the 
New  Testament  does  describe  so  pure  and  lofty  an  ideal  of  life  as  to  leave  the  morali 


OH.xi,l— SL]  THB  PBOVEBBS.  228 


of  Solomon  and  his  compeerg  in  a  decidedly  inferior  rank — gives  only  the  greater 
emphasis  to  tbose  maxima  of  broad  and  noble  character  which  are  bo  clear  and 
imperatiTe  as  to  claim  attention  even  from  moralists  who  observe  the  less  exalted 
standard*  of  character.  Thus  it  is  very  significant  that,  with  all  its  inferiority  to 
Christianity,  the  ethics  of  the  Book  of  Proverbs  unhesitatingly  and  repeatedly  condemn* 
all  meanness,  and  does  honour  to  liberal  habits.  Even  from  a  selfish  and  comparatively 
worldly  point  of  view,  meanness  is  shown  to  be  a  miserable  mistake,  and  generosity  a 
wise  and  profitable  virtue.  It  is  evident  that  high  Christian  principles  would  condemn 
me^inness.  It  is  interesting  to  see  that  the  morals  of  the  Proverbs  are  equally  opposed 
to  it. 

I.  MBAHNEBi    IB   CKPBOFITABLB    BECfAUSB    IT    IB    DISPLBASINO    TO    GOD.      Let  US   BCt 

this  consideration  first,  as  of  highest  importance.  Too  many  leave  it  to  the  last  or 
ignore  it  altogether.  They  calculate  the  consequences  of  their  actions  on  narrow, 
earthly  principles ;  possibly  they  inquire  what  view  their  neighbours  may  take  of  it. 
But  God's  judgment  on  it  they  consider  to  be  of  little  or  no  account.  Yet  surely,  if 
there  is  a  God  at  aU,  the  fiist  question  should  be — How  far  will  our  conduct  be  approved 
by  him?  If  there  is  a  providence  that  "shapes  our  ends,"  schemes  that  ignore  tUis 
leave  out  of  account  the  most  important  factor  in  determining  the  final  issue  of 
events.  If  God  is  really  overruling  our  life,  and  will  mete  out  to  us  curse  and  blessing 
according  to  his  view  of  it,  the  way  in  which  he  will  regard  it  is  no  mere  problem  of 
idle  speculation ;  it  is  the  most  pressing  question  of  practical  life,  morq  important  than 
all  other  things  put  together.  Now,  God  does  hate  selfishness,  greed,  and  meanness, 
and  he  loves  unselfishness  and  generosity ;  he  will  therefore  punish  the  one  and  reward 
the  other. 

II.  Meanness  is  unprofitable  because  it  excludes  ub  prom  the  btmpatht  of 
OTHEES.  No  vice  is  more  anti-social.  Even  cruelty  does  not  seem  to  sever  the  ties  of 
friendship  more  thoroughly.  Begarded  only  from  a  commercial  point  of  view,  it  is  short- 
sighted. The  mean  customer  who  strikes  off  the  odd  pence  in  the  payment  of  a  bill 
doei  this  at  the  cost  of  checking  all  generosity  in  those  who  deal  with  him.  The  mean 
employer  of  labour  saves  a  little  by  his  grinding  harshness,  but  he  loses  far  more  by  pro- 
voking his  workpeople  to  take  no  interest  in  their  work.  Meanness  destroys  those  groat 
pleasures  and  comforts  of  life  which  come  from  the  love  and  friendship  of  our  neighbours. 

III.  Meanness  is  unprofitable  because  it  fails  to  saorificb  tub  present  for 
THE  future.  The  mean  farmer  will  not  sow  sufficient  seed,  and  consequently  he  will 
reap  a  short  harvest.  In  business  men  must  launch  out  liberally  if  they  are  to  make 
large  returns.  From  the  lowest  up  to  the  highest  concerns  of  life,  self-sacrifice  and 
generosity  are  requisite  for  ultimate  profit.  We  must  be  willing  to  give  up  earthly 
wealth  for  the  heavenly  inheritance.  The  miser  who  clutches  at  his  gold  when  God 
claims  it  will  fail  to  obtain  the  pearl  of  great  price. 

IV.  Meanness  is  unprofitable  because  it  degrades  and  narrows  the  soul. 
It  is  a  vice  that  destroys  all  noble  aspirations  and  all  lofty  aims.  It  dwarfs  the  spiritual 
stature.  It  shuts  out  visions  of  the  infinite.  It  confines  thought,  affection,  and  desire 
to  a  miserable  little  world_of  worthless  interests.  In  groping  after  the  small  gain  that 
meanness  idolizes,  we  lose  all  power  of  pursuing  better  things.  The  same  meanness 
may  be  carried  into  religion,  to  our  soul's  undoing.  The  pursuit  of  selfish  salvation  to 
the  neglect  of  our  duty  to  olhers  overreaches  itself.  Whosoever  desires  to  save  his 
life,  or  his  soul,  will  lose  it.  But  in  working  for  the  good  of  others  while  forgetting 
our  own  advantage,  we  find  oiu:  own  soul  most  profited.  "He  that  watereth  shall  be 
watered  also  himself." 

HOMILIES  BY  VABIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Yers.  1 11. The  way*  of  honour  and  of  shame.    I.  Justios  akd  in  justice  di 

COMMON  thinos.  Jehovah  delights  in  "full  weight,"  and  abominates  the  tricky 
balance.  This  may  be  applied:  1.  Literally,  to  commerce  between  man  and  man. 
2.  Pifuratively,  to  all  social  relations  in  which  we  may  give  and  receive.  Work  ia 
only  honest  if  thorough ;  if  honest  and  thorough,  it  is  religious.  If  principle  be  th« 
basis  of  all  our  transactions,  then  what  we  do  is  dona  "  unto  the  Lord,  and  not  unto 


824  THE  PROVERBS,  [oh.  xt.  1—31 

men."    If  we  are  indifferent  to  principle  in  the  common  transactions  of  the  week,  it  u 
impossible  to  be  really  religious  in  anything  or  on  any  day. 

II.  Haughtiness  and  modtistt.  Extremes  meet.  The  former  topples  over  into 
8hame;  the  latter  is  lifted  into  the  heights  of  wisdom.  1.  No  feeling  was  more  deeply 
stamped  on  the  ancient  mind  than  this.  Among  the  Greeks  hubris,  among  the  Romans 
inidlence,  designated  an  offence  peculiarly  hateful  in  the  eyes  of  Heaven.  We  see  it 
reappearing  in  the  songs  and  proverbs  of  the  gospel;  "He  hath  brought  down  the 
mighty  from  their  seat,  and  exalted  them  of  low  degree;"  "  Every  one  that  humblcth 
himself  shall  be  exalted;  but  he  that  exaltebh  himself  shall  he  abased."  2.  It  is 
■tamped  upon  all  languages.  Thus,  in  English,  to  be  high,  hanghty,  lofty,  overhearing, 
are  terms  of  censure ;  lowly,  humble,  terms  of  praise.  In  the  German  the  words  vehr- 
muth,  hochmuth,  point  to  the  same  notion  of  excess  and  height  in  the  temper.  8.  At  the 
same  time,  let  us  remember  that  the  good  temper  may  be  counterfeited.  Nothing  is 
more  easy  than  to  suppose  .  e  have  humbled  ourselves  by  putting  on  a  manner.  Yet 
nothing  is  more  detestable  than  the  assumption  of  this  particular  manner.  True 
humility  springs  from  seeing  ourselves  as  we  are ;  pride,  from  nourishing  a  fanciful  or 
ideal  view  of  ourselves.  Wisdom  must  begin  with  modesty;  for  a  distorted  or  exag- 
gerated view  of  self  necessarily  distorts  our  view  of  all  that  comes  into  relation  frith 
self. 

III.  Rectitude  and  faithlessness.  (Ver.  3.)  The  former  means  guidance,  for 
it  is  a  clear  light  within  the  man's  own  breast;  the  latter,  self-destructioo.  As 
scriptural  examples  of  the  one  side  of  the  contrast,  may  be  cited  Joseph  and  Daniel ; 
of  the  other,  the  latter,  Saul,  Absalom,  Ahithophel,  Ahab,  and  Ahaziah. 

IV.  Rectitude  and  bichbs.  (Ver.  4;  see  on  ch.  x.  2.)  1.  Riches  cannot  purchase 
the  grace  of  God,  nor  avert  his  judgments.  2.  Rectitude,  thou:j;h  not  the  first  cause 
of  salvation,  is  its  necessary  condition.  To  suppose  that  we  can  be  saved  from  condem- 
nation without  being  saved  from  sin  is  a  gross  superstition. 

V.  Self-consbbvative  and  sblf-destbuctivb  habits.  (Vers.  6,  6;  comp.  ch.  iii. 
6;  X.  3.)  Honesty  and  rectitude  level  the  man's  path  before  him;  wickedness  causes 
him  to  stumble  and  fall.  Straightforwardness  means  deliverance  out  of  dangers,  per- 
plexities, misconceptions ;  while  the  eager  greed  of  the  dishonest  man  creates  distrust, 
embarrassment,  inextricable  difficulty. 

"He  that  hath  light  within  his  own  clear  breast 
May  sit  in  the  centre  and  enjoy  bright  day; 
But  he  that  hides  a  dark  soul  and  foul  thoughts, 
Benighted  walks  under  the  midday  sun; 
Himself  is  his  own  dungeon." 

(Milton.) 

VI.  HoPK  AND  DESPONDBNOT  IN  DEATH.  (Ver.  7.)  The  former  seems  implied.  D 
the  Old  Testament  says  expressly  so  Uttle  about  a  future  life,  some  of  its  sayings  may 
be  construed  as  allusions  to  and  indications  of  it.  It  is  little  that  we  can  know 
definitely  of  the  future  life.  But  the  least  we  do  know  is  that  hope  is  inextinguish- 
able in  the  good  man's  soul;  it  is  its  own  witness,  and  "reaps  not  shame."  But 
despondency  and  despair  are  the  direct  result  of  wicked  livina.  To  cease  to  hope  is  to 
cease  to  wish  and  to  cease  to  fear.  This  must  be  the  extinction  of  the  soul  in  the 
must  dreadful  way  in  which  we  can  conceive  it. 

VII.  The  exchanob  of  places  follows  moral  law.  (Ver.  8.)  The  good  man 
comes  out  of  distress,  and  the  evil  becomes  -his  substitute  in  surrow.  So  with  the 
Israelites  and  rhaiaoh,  a  great  typical  example;  so  with  Mordecai  and  Haman;  with 
Daniel  and  his  accuse, s.  Great  reversals  of  human  judgments  are  to  be  expected; 
many  that  were  last  shall.be  first,  and  the  first  last. 

VIII.  The  social  pest  and  the  true  keighboub.  (Ver.  9.)  The  pernicious 
povyer  of  slander.  The  best  people  are  most  injured  by  it,  as  the  best  fruit  is  that 
which  the  birds  have  been  pecking  at;  or,  as  the  Tamil  proverb  says,  "Stones  are  only 
thrown  at  the  fniit-laden  tree."  The  tongue  of  shinder  "out-vmoms  all  the  worms 
of  Nile."  It  siiares  neither  sex  nor  age,  nor  helplessness.  It  is  the  "foulest  whelp 
of  sin."  It  promotes  nothing  that  is  good,  but  destroys  much.  Knowledge,  on  the 
other  hand— in  the  form  of  sound  sense,  wide  experience— if  readily  imparted"  is  a  booa 


OH.XI,  1— 31,]  THE  PROVERBS.  226 


to  all.    Aiid  the  liest  of  boons,  for  gifts  and  charities  soon  lose  their  benefit,  while 
a  hint  of  wisdom  lives  and  germinates  in  the  mind  in  which  it  has  been  deposited. 

IX.  Objects  of  btmpatht  and  antipathy.  (Ver.  10.)  Gladness  follows  the 
success  of  the  good  and  the  downfall  of  the  evil.  The  popular  feeling  about  men's 
lives,  as  manifested  at  critical  periods  of  failure  or  success,  is  a  moral  index,  and 
suggests  moral  lessons.  There  is  a  true  sense  in  which  the  voice  of  the  people  is  the 
voice  of  God.  Compare  the  scene  of  joy  which  followed  Hezekiah's  success  in  ibe 
promotion  of  tiue  religion  (2  Chron.  xxii.,  xxx.),  and  the  misery  under  Abaz  (2  Chron. 
xxviii.);  also  ■the  rejoicings  on  the  completion  of  Nehemiah's  work  (Neh.  viii.);  and 
for  jubilation  tt  evil  men's  deaths,  Pharaoh,  Sisera,  Athaliah  (Exod.  xt.  ;  Judg.  y. ; 
2  Kings  xi.  13—20). 

X.  SoTJND  POLITICS  AND  PEBNioiouB  COUNSELS.  (Ver.  11.)  The  blessing,  i.e.  the 
beneficial  pri^^ciples  and  administration  of  good  and  wise  men  exalt  a  city  (or  state). 
On  the  other  hand,  unprincipled  counsels,  even  if  temporarily  successful,  lead  in  the 
end  to  ruin.  "  It  is  impossible,"  said  Demosthenes,  "  0  men  of  Athens,  that  a  man 
who  is  unjurt,  perverse,  and  false  should  acquire  a  firm  and  established  power.  His 
policy  may  answer  for  once,  may  hold  out  for  a  bri(  f  period,  and  flourish  marvelloubly 
in  expectations,  if  it  succeed ;  but  in  course  of  time  it  is  found  out,  and  rushes  into  ruin 
of  its  own  Y  eight.  Just  as  the  foundation  of  a  house  or  the  keel  of  a  ship  should  be 
the  strongerit  part  of  the  structure,  so  does  it  behove  that  the  sources  and  principles  of 
public  condact  should  be  true  and  just.  This  is  not  the  case  at  the  present  time  with 
the  aotioni  of  Philip."  Compare  the  examples  of  Elisha  (2  Kings  xiii.  14,  etc.), 
Hezekiah,  and  Isaiah  (2  Chron.  xxxii.  20 — 23),  on  the  one  hand;  and  the  Babel- 
builders  (Gen.  xi.  4 — 9)  and  the  Ammonites  (Ezek.  ixv,  3,  4)  on  the  other ;  also 
Jer.  xxiii.  10 ;  Hos.  iv.  2, 3. — J. 

Vers.  12 — 15. — Social  sins  denout\ced.  I,  The  effects  of  social  bin.  It  dis- 
solves mutual  bonds  of  confidence,  corrupts  and  disintegrates  the  social  order  and 
stability.  In  the  mixed  condition  of  human  character  and  society  there  are  elements 
of  weakness  and  elements  of  strength.  Our  speech  about  others  and  behaviour  to 
them  tends  either  to  bring  out  their  weaknesses,  so  promoting  discontent,  suspicion, 
and  distrust,  or  it  tends  to  bring  out  their  good  qualities,  so  promoting  genial  confidence 
and  good  will. 

II.  Some  examples  of  social  sins.  Great  stress,  as  usual,  is  laid  upon  the 
tongue.  1.  There  is  contemptuous  talk  about  our  neighbour.  The  art  of  depre- 
ciation is  cruel  to  others,  and  moreover  is,  as  the  text  says,  senseless.  What  good 
can  come  of  it?  Of  Byron's  poetry  the  great  Goethe  said,  "  His  perpetual  fault-finding 
and  negation  are  injurious  even  to  his  excellent  works.  For  not  only  does  the 
discontent  of  the  poet  infect  the  reader,  but  the  end  of  all  opposition  is  negation ;  and 
negation  is  nothing.  If  1  call  bad  bad,  what  do  I  gain  ?  But  if  I  call  good  bad,  I  do 
a  great  deal  of  mischief.  He  who  will  work  aright  must  never  rail,  must  not  trouble 
himself  at  »11  about  what  is  ill  done,  but  only  do  well  himself.  For  the  great  point 
is,  not  to  pull  down,  but  to  build  up;  and  in  this  humanity  finds  pure  joy."  2.  Still 
worse  is  open  slander  (ver.  13).  Secret  detraction  is  like  an  arrow  shot  in  the  dark, 
and  does  much  secret  mischief.  Open  slander  is  like  the  pestilence  that  rages  at  noon- 
day. It  sweeps  all  before  it,  levelling  the  good  and  bad  without  distinction.  A 
thousand  fall  beside  it,  and  ten  thousand  on  its  rij;ht  hand.  They  fall,  so  rent  and 
torn  in  their  tender  parts,  as  sometimes  never  to  recover  the  wounds  or  the  anguish 
of  heart  which  they  have  occasioned  (Sterne).  3.  Independent^  counsels  (ver.  14) 
are  another  source  of  social  mischief.  As  when  there  was  no  king  in  Israel,  and  when 
every  man  did  that  which  was  right  in  his  own  eyes,  and  the  people  became  the  prey 
of  their  enemies  (Judg.  ii.  19,  seq.';  xvii.  6 ;  xxi.  25).  The  spiiitual  forces  in  a  nation, 
the  intelligence  and  honest  patriotism  of  its  rulers,  are  ever  of  more  importance  than 
Wealth,  fleets,  or  armies.  4.  Bash  undertakings.  (See  on  ch.  vi.  1,  seg.)  To  promise 
more  than  there  is  a  reasonable  prospect  of  performing;  to  enter  imprudently  into 
bargains,  covenants,  or  treaties,  not  easy  to  abide  by,  yet  involving  disgrace  and 
dishonour  if  broken.  The  serious  penalties  which  follow  acts  of  imprudence  should 
instruct  us  as  to  their  real  sinfulness.  The  good  intention  is  marred  by  the  hasty  oc 
thoughtless  execution. 

PEOVBEBS.  ^ 


228  THE  PEOVBBBS.  [oh.  xi.  1— 8L 

IIL  SouB  BooiAL  SAFEQUABDs.  1.  Seasonable  silence.  (Ver.  12.)  As  we  are  not 
to  iMlieve  all  we  hear,  so  neither  are  we  to  speak  all  we  know;  to  be  cautious  in 
believing  any  ill  of  our  neighbour,  and  to  be  cautious  in  repeating  what  we  do 
believe,  are  alike  duties.  2.  Kindly  desire.  "The  honest  man's  ear  is  the  sanctuary 
of  his  absent  friend's  name,  of  his  present  friend's  secret ;  neither  of  them  can  miscarry 
in  his  trust "  (Bishop  Hail).  3.  Fulness  of  counsel.  (Ver.  14.)  The  "  multitude  of 
counsellors"  implies  association,  conference,  and  co-operation.  By  the  exchange  of 
ideas  we  enrich,  define,  classify,  or  correct  our  own.  The  same  subject  needs  to  be 
looked  at  from  opposite  points  of  viey,  and  by  minds  of  different  habit ;  and  the  just 
medium  is  thus  arrived  at.  4.  Caution,  (Ver.  15.)  Especially  with  reference  to  the 
incurring  of  responsibilties.  To  fetter  or  lose  our  freedom  of  action  is  to  deprive 
ourselves  of  the  very  means  of  doing  further  good.  One  of  the  acts  of  benefaction  is 
to  contrive  that  neither  the  doer  of  the  kindness  shall  be  hampered  by  excessive 
responsibility  nor  the  recipient  of  it  by  excessive  obligation.  H.  As  the  foundation  of 
all,  intelligence  and  love — the  inner  light  which  fills  the  intellect  with  illumination  and 
the  heart  with  glowing  affection.  These  are  the  sources  of  truth  in  friendship^  aafety 
in  counsel,  general  usefulness  to  (ociety. — J. 

Ver.  16. — I%e  true  grace  of  womanhood.  Even  as  the  mighty  keep  a  firm  hold  upon 
their  possessions,  so  does  the  virtuous  woman  watch  over  her  chastity  and  honour, 
to  guard  it  from  assault. 

L  Thb  pubitt  of  woman  IB  HEB  "  HIDDEN  8TBBN0TH "  (Miltou).  "  She  that  hai 
that  is  clad  in  complete  steeL" 

n.  It  is  HEB  CHIEF  OBNAUENT.  It  clothes  her  amidst  dangers  with  "  unblenched 
majesty  "  and  "  noble  grace." 

IIL  It  is  booted  in  beliqiov,  founded  like  manly  tbcth  m  thx  vxab  or 

OtOD. 

IV.  It  IB  FBXoioDs  in  tee  bioht  of  God. 

"  So  dear  to  Heaven  is  saintly  chastity. 
That  when  a  soul  is  found  sincerely  so^ 
A  thousand  liveried  angels  lackey  her. 
Driving  far  off  each  thing  of  sin  and'gnilt, 
And  in  clear  dream  and  solemn  vision 
Tell  her  of  things  that  no  gross  ear  can  hear." 

(Milton.) 

Ver.  17. — Religion  and  ulf-interest.  The  loving  man  does  good  to  himself,  whUe 
the  cruel  afflict  their  own  souls.  As  examples  of  the  former,  see  Joseph  in  prison 
(Gen.  xl.  6),  the  Kenites  (1  Sam.  xv.  6),  David  and  the  Egyptian  slave  (1  Sam.  xxx. 
11 — 20),  David's  conduct  to  Jonathan  (2  Sam.  ix.  7;  xxi.  7),  Job  praying  for  his 
friends  (Job  xlii.  10),  the  centurion  and  the  Jews  (Luke  vii.  2 — 10),  the  people  of 
Melita  to  Paul  (Acts  xxviii.  1 — 10).  For  examples  of  the  latter,  see  Joseph's  brethren 
(Gen.  xxxvii. ;  xlii.  21),  Adoni-bezek  (Judg.  i.  6,  7),  Agag  (1  Sam.  xv.  33),  Haman 
(Esth.  ix.  25). 

L  Ebli«ion  appeals  to  the  whole  eanqb  of  oub  motives,  fbom  the  lowest 
TO  THE  highest.    We  should  cultivate  the  higher,  but  not  ignore  the  lower. 

II.  To  DO  GOOD  TO  0THEB8  IS  TO  DO  CERTAIN  OOOD  TO  ODB8ELVK8.      We  thuS  make 

friends,  and  they  are  a  defence. 

III.  To    INJTJBB    OTHEBS    18    OBBTAINLT    TO    INJTJRB    0UB8ELVB8.       Thufl    We    make 

enemies.    And  "  he  that  hath  a  thousand  friends  bath  not  one  to  ipare ;  he  that  hath 
an  enemy  shall  meet  him  everywhere." — J. 

Ver.  18. — The  principle  of  recompense.    I.  Eveet  action  is  a  becondabt  oaubi, 

AND   18   FOLLOWED   BY   ITS   COBKESPONDING   EFFECT. 

IL  The  effect  cobrbsponds  in  kind  and  in  degree  to  thb  oaube. 

III.  Human  conduct  may  thus  be  viewed  as  a  sowing  followed  by  BEAForaL 

WORK   BY   WAGES,  ACTION   BY   REACTION. 

IV,  The  gain  of  the  wiokei)  is  deception  illusobt.    Ulustratioiu :  PharMb'i 


CH.  XL  1—31.]  THE  PROVBBBS.  BW 

attempt  to  decrease  Israel  resulted  in  their  increase  and  his  own  destruction.  Caia- 
phas  seeking  by  murderous  expediency  to  save  the  nation  brought  about  its  ruin.  The 
persecution  of  the  Church  at  Jerusalem  led  to  the  greater  diffusion  of  the  gospel 
(Acts  viii.). 

V.  The  bewabd  or  tbb  biohteous  is  btablb  and  bctbe.  Illustrations:  The 
patient  continuance  in  well-doing  of  Noah,  Abraham,  Joseph.  Compare  the  sowing  of 
St.  Paul  ill  tears,  t.g.  at  Fhilippi  (Acts  xri.),  with  his  joyous  reaping,  as  his  Epistle  to 
the  Philippians  witnesses.  The  reward  is  eternal — "  a  crown  of  righteousness  that 
fadeth  not  away."    "  What  we  weave  in  time  we  shall  wear  in  eternity." — J. 

Ver.  19. — The  tendenciea  o/condtxt.    I.  All  actions  havb  an  immediate  and  a 

EBMOTE   KB8ULT. 

II.  It  is  the  final  besdlt  that  mcst  be  considered  in  estimatino  different 

COUESEB  of   conduct. 

III.  There  are  two  ideal  termini  to  conduct — life  and  death.  An  old  proverb 
says', "  We  know  not  who  live  or  die."  But  we  may  know  towards  which  issue  certain 
habits  are  tending. 

IV.  Tenacious  eeotitude  is  the  wat  of  life;  bund  pursuit  or  the  objects 

OF   PASSION,   THE   WAT   TO  DEATH. — J. 

Ver.  20. — The  Divine  view  of  the  oppositions  in  conduct,  I.  God  views  pebvkrbitt 
WITH  displeasure.  Moral  perversity  is  analogous  to  physical  deformity ;  the  line  is 
crooked  when  it  should  be  straight. 

II.  He  views  rectitude  with  delight.  The  morally  right  is  the  sesthetically 
beautiful.  The  true,  the  beautiful,  and  the  good  are  one  in  God,  and  he  caa  only 
delight  in  that  which  reflects  himself.  Hence  his  delight  in  the  well-beloved  Son,  and 
in  all  who  are  conformed  to  his  image.— J. 

Ver.  21. — Inevitable  doom  arid  certain  escape.  I.  A  solemn  absevebation  of 
DOOM.  The  first  words  should  be  rendered,  "  The  hand  upon  it ! "  referring  to  the 
custom  of  striking  hands  in  a  compact,  and  meaning  the  same  as  "  My  word  for  it  I " 
Experience,  the  laws^of  nature,  the  assurances  of  God's  prophets,  the  voice  of  conscience, 
all  ratify  this  doom ;  the  sinner  must  meet  his  fate,  and  there  is  no  ultimate  deliverance. 

II.  An  asbueancb  of  safety.  The  generation  of  the  righteous,  i.e.  all  that  belong 
to  that  class,  will  escape  from  affliction,  distress,  condemnation,  all  woes  that  belong  to 
time ;  for  his  refuge  is  in  the  eternal  arms.  If  exiled  from  earth,  it  is  to  find  a  home  in 
the  bosom  of  God. — J. 

Ver.  22. — Beauty  ill  set  off.  The  comparison  of  the  gold  ring  in  the  swine'B  snout 
suggests  the  idea  of  glaring  incongruity.  And  the  like  is  the  incongruity  between 
beauty  and  impurity  in  woman. 

I.  The  source  of  odb  delight  in  physical  bbautt  is  that  it  exphebsbs  moral 
WORTH.  Philosophers  have  always  found  it  impossible  to  define  the  beautiful  as  an 
object.  Analysis  at  last  results  in  this— that  in  every  beautiful  object  we  detect  an 
analogy  to  some  perception  in  our  own  minds.  It  iis  a  visible  presentation  of  spiritual 
beauty. 

II.  OUB  DIBFLEABUBB  IN  THE  ASSOCIATION  OF  PHYSICAL  BEAUTY  WITH  MOBAL 
WOETHLESSNESS  ABIBlilB  FROM  THE   PBBSBNOB   OF   A   OONTBADIOTION.      And  the  mind  is 

made  to  love  harmony. 

III.  Thus  we  have  a  witnesb  in  oubselves  that  God  dbbionbd  beauty  and 
VIRTUE  TO  BE  iNDissoLUBLY  UNITED.  As  the  Sign  and  the  thing  signified — the  body 
and  the  soul.  Sin  ever  puts  asunder  what  God  has  joined,  and  all  vice  is  incongruous 
with  the  beauty  of  his  world. — J. 

Ver.  23. — WisJies  and  hopes.  The  wishes  of  the  righteous  are  only  good,  for  (Jod 
prospers  and  fulfils  them ;  but  the  hope  of  the  wicked  is  extinguished  in  calamity  (the 
wrath  of  God). 

I.  Wishes  and  hopes  have  a  oertaib  fowbb  to  ruLFiL  theusblvbs.  (Se« 
Moiley's  fine  sermon  on  this  subject.) 


SS8  THE  PEOVBBBS.  [oh.  zi.  1— «1. 

n.  The  beoulation  of  the  wishes  is  an  impoetant  pabt  of  bblf-disoiplinb. 
HL  To  wish  and  to  hope  fob  nothino  but  the  best  (in  aooobd  with  the 
wiu.  OF  God)  is  an  insubancb  against  disappointment. 
IV.  Selfish  hopes  lead  to  unanbwebed  fbateks  and  to  bitteb  obaobins. — J. 

Vers.  24 — 26. — 2%e  narrow  and  the  large  heart.  I.  Thrifty  spending.  All  wise 
outlay  of  money  is  a  form  of  thrift  The  increase  of  capital  depends  upon  the  observ- 
ance of  certain  laws  and  rules  of  prudence ;  and  the  prudence  which  enables  to  amass 
enables  also  to  spend.  Spending  in  works  of  benevolence  is  seldom  known  to 
impoverish  a  man,  for  it  is' seldom  disjoined  from  calculation  and  economy  in  personal 
habits.  But  whether  we  can  trace  out  the  manner  of  the  connection  in  every  instance 
or  not,  it  is  real  and  profound.  Wise  distribution  is  the  condition  of  steady  increase.  In 
the  highest  point  of  view  benevolence  is  a  "  lending  to  the  Lord." 

II.  Unthhiftt  savinq.  Niggardliness  tends  to  poverty,  because  it  stints  the 
energies.  It  springs  from  a  false  view  of  the  value  of  money,  or  an  exaggerated 
view.  The  true  source  of  happiness,  as  of  wealth,  lies  at  last  in  the  will,  its 
energy,  its  industry.  He  who  has  so  little  faith  in  this  as  to  put  all  his  reliance 
on  the  mere  means  of  living,  may  well  become  poor  outwardly,  as  he  certainly  is 
inwardly. 

III.  The  satisfaction  of  doing  good.  Here,  again,  we  must  look  to  the  reflex 
effect  of  actions.  The  indirect  results  are  the  wider  land  the  more  important.  From 
every  free  forth-going  of  the  heart  in  acts  of  love  and  kindness  there  is  a  certain  return 
into  the  heart.  It  is  not  sufficiently  considered  that  whatever  gives  expansion  to  the 
mind — large  views,  broad  sympathies — is  so  much  gain  in  actual  power.  And  again, 
that  we  cannot  directly  do  much  towards  the  removal  of  our  own  troubles,  but 
obliquely  may  quell  or  diminish  them  by  aiming  at  removing  the  troubles  of  others. 
Fulness  of  interests  in  the  heart  will  not  give  room  for  grief  to  gnaw. 

IV.  Selfishness  and  generosity  in  oommeecb.  (Ver.  26.)  In  time  of  dearth  the 
avaricious  proprietor,  keeping  back  his  corn  to  secure  a  higher  price,  brings  down  upon 
himself  curses ;  while  he  who  thinks  of  humanity  more  than  of  personal  profit  earns 
the  blessings  of  the  poor.  The  maxim  that  "business  is  business"  is  true,  but  may 
be  pushed  too  far.  If  a  trader  profits  by  a  war  or  scarcity,  that  is  an  accident;  but  it 
is  not  an  accident,  it  is  a  crime,  if  he  votes  for  war  or  interferes  with  the  natural 
action  of  the  market  with  a  view  to  personal  gain.  If  the  same  conditions  of  trade 
m  ke  the  man  rich  which  impuverish  the  many,  he  will  feel  it  to  be  his  duty  to  give 
the  more  out  of  his  abundance. — J. 

Vers.  27 — 31. — Temporal  and  eternal  contrasts.  I.  Men  find  what  they  seek. 
fVer.  27.)  The  favour  of  God,  which  includes  all  the  elements  of  happiness  by  well- 
doing, or  sorrow  by  ill-doing.  This  law  of  antecedence  and  consequence  in  moral 
things,  thus  so  reiteratedly  pressed  upon  us,  cannot  be  too  constantly  before  the  mind. 
Every  moral  action  is  a  prophecy  before  the  event;  every  moral  result,  a  fulfilment 
of  a  previous  prophecy. 

II.  The  causes  of  decay  and  of  prosperity.  (Ver.  28.)  Trust  in  riches  leads  to 
moral  downfall  (comp.  ch.  x.  2 ;  Ps.  xlix.  6,  7).  By  trust  in  riches  is  meant  the  habit 
of  depending  on  them  and  their  accessories — ^luxury  and  ease — as  the  main  good  in  life. 
It  is  in  this  sense  that  "riches  slacken  virtue  and  abate  her  edge."  The°laxity  and 
dissoluteness  of  the  mind  may  well  be  compared  to  the  limp  and  falling  leaf.  He,  on 
the  other  hand,  whose  trust  is  in  spiritual  resources — the  treasures  of  the  kingdom  of 
God— is  like  a  tree  full  of  sap;  his  foliage  is  abundant;  his  leaf  ever  sreen  fPs.  xcii 
13;  Isa.  Ixvi.  14).  .  ^ 

III.  The  betbibution  op  greed  and  oppression.  (Ver.  29.)  The  man  who 
"troubles  his  house"  is  the  close-fisted  and  greedy,  who  in  his  covetousness  keeps  his 
household  upon  scant  fare  or  withholds  from  them  their  due  pay  (ch.  xv.  27).  Aliab 
is  thus  charged  by  Elijah  as  a  "  troubler  of  Israel "  (1  Kings  xviii.  17, 18).  But  he  reaps 
the  wind,  i.e.  nothing  from  his  misplaced  care  and  exertion  (ls\.  xxvi.  14;  Hos. 
viii.  7).  Nay,  he  so  comes  down  in  the  scale  as  actually  often  to  fall  into  slavery  to 
a  just  and  merciful  lord  (ver.  24).  These  reversals  in  human  life— more  marked  or 
•asily  observable,  perhaps,  in  ancient  times  than  with  ourselves— remind  men  of  • 


oB.«.  1—31.1  TfiE  PROVERBS. 


Buperior  judgment,  which  constantly  revises  and  corrects  the  short-sighted  and  super- 
ficial judgments  of  men. 

IV.  The  pboduots  of  rightboubness.  (Ver,  30.)  All  that  the  good  man  says  and 
does  hecomes  a  source  of  blessing  and  life  (a  "  tree  of  life  ")  to  many.  He  exercises  an 
attractive  power,  and  gathers  many  souls  to  his  side  for  the  service  of  God  and  th« 
cause  of  truth. 

V.  The  oeetaintt  of  rboompbnse.  (Ver.  31.)  This  may  be  taken  as  an  argument 
from  the  greater  to  the  less.  The  sins  of  the  righteous  do  not  escape  chastisement ; 
how  much  less  those  of  men  unreconciled  to  God!  "If  the  righteous  scarcely  ba 
saved,  where  shall  the  ungodly  and  the  sinner  appear  ?  "  (1,  Pet.  iv.  18).— J. 

Ver.  1. — (See  homily  on  ch.  xvi.  11,  including  oh.  xx.  10 — 23.) — 0. 

Ver.  2. — (See  homily  on  ch.  xvi  18.) — 0. 

Vers.  3 — 5,  8 — 11,  19,  20,  28,  31. —  The  pricdessness  of  integrity.  We  hare  here 
a  view  of  the  exceeding  worth  of  moral  integrity,  or  of  righteousness ;  we  see  what,  in 
the  judgment  of  the  wise,  it  will  do  for  its  possessor.     It  will — 

I.  DiKKOT  HIS  WAT.  "  The  integrity  of  the  upright  shall  guide  them ;  ...  the  righteous- 
ness of  the  perfect  [i.e.  the  upright]  shall  direct  his  way  "  (vers.  3 — 5).  And  we  read 
(ch.  X.  9)  that  "  he  that  walketh  uprightly  walketh  surely,"  The  man  who  honestly 
and  earnestly  seeks  guidance  of  God  wUl  find  what  he  seeks  ;  he  will  know  what  he 
should  do,  and  whither  he  should  go,  and  how  he  should  act,  in  the  various  relations  of 
life.  Instead  of  moving  onwards  and  backwards,  instead  of  inclining  this  way  and  that, 
he  will  walk  straight  on  in  the  highway  of  justice,  purity,  devotion.  And  he  will 
walk  "  surely."  It  is  not  in  the  way  of  holiness  that  the  snares  of  sin  or  the  stumbling- 
Uucks  of  folly  are  scattered  about. 

II.  Deliveb  him  in  DANflEn  OR  DISTRESS.  (Vers.  4,  8,  9.)  "  Many  are  the  afflic- 
tians "  even  "  of  the  righteous,"  but  "  the  Lord  delivereth  him,"  etc. ;  "  Unto  the 
upright  there  ariseth  light  in  the  darkness "  (Ps.  cxii.  4).  Righteousness  brings 
deliverance  in  many  ways.  1.  It  secures  the  favour,  and  thus  the  merciful  interposi- 
sition,  of  the  Almighty.  2.  It  commands  the  esteem,  and  thus  the  succour,  of  the  good 
and  true.  3.  It  confers  mental  and  physical  vigour  on  its  subjects,  and  makes  them 
strong  for  the  day  of  peril  and  of  need,  4.  It  endows  with  those  moral  qualities — con- 
scientiousness, consciousness  of  rectitude,  courage,  patience,  hopefulness,  perseverance — 
which  lead  to  victory. 

III.  Make  him  the  sourcb  of  enlargement  to  others.  "  The  city  is  exalted  " 
(ver.  11).  Every  man  is  something  the  better  for  the  integriiy  of  his  neighbour;  and 
the  contribution  of  many  righteous  men  to  the  exaltation  and  enlargement  of  the  city, 
or  the  Church,  or  the  society,  is  very  great.  They  are  the  salt  which  preserves  it ;  thej 
are  the  fountain  and  the  garner  which  supply  its  need  and  minister  to  its  strength. 

IV.  Promote  his  prosperity.  (Vers.  28,  31.)  As  a  rule,  upon  the  whole,  the 
righteous  man  will  prosper  and  be  recompensed  "  on  the  earth."  Sobriety,  purity, 
justice,  prudence;  in  fact,  integrity  conducts  to  well-being  now  and  here. 

V.  Secure-  fob  him  the  good  pleasure  of  the  Highest.  (Ver.  20.)  What  a 
recompense  is  this — "  to  be  a  delight  unto  the  Lord,"  to  "  have  this  testimony,  that  h« 
pleases  God  "  1  What  a  reward  of  the  purest  and  most  enduring  kind  to  the  Ciiristian 
man,  that  he  is  "  pleasing  Christ,"  is  living  every  day  in  the  sunshine  of  his  Lord's 
approvall 

VI.  Issues  in  the  fulness  of  life.  "  He  that  is  steadfast  in  righteousness  shall 
attain  unto  life."  1.  Unto  the  fulness  of  spiritual  life  below ;  nearness  of  access  to  God ; 
a  real  approval  by  God  and  of  delight  in  him ;  constancy  of  service  rendered  unto 
him ;  growing  likeness  to  his  Divine  spirit  and  character.  2.  Unto  the  fulness  of 
eternal  life  hereafter. — C, 

Vers.  7 — 10  (latter  part).— Tu/o  sad  aspects  of  death.  Death  is  the  most  unwelcome 
of  all  themes  for  human  thought,  certainly  for  the  thought  of  the  wicked.  Yet  has  he 
special  reason  for  considering  its  approach.  For  it  is  likely  to  arrive  sooner  than  if  he 
were  righteous,    A»  we  read  in  this  chapter,  "  Righteousness  delivereth  from  death  " 


THE  PROVERBS.  [oh.  XL  1—3:1. 


(ver.  4) ;  on  the  other  hand,  "The  wicked  shall  fall  by  his  own  wickedness  "  (ver.  5). 
"  The  wages  of  sin  is  death,"  and  every  departure  from  rectitude  is  a  step  towards  the 
grave.     But  how  melancholy  a  thing  is  the  death  of  the  wicked  I     It  means — 

I.  A  MELANCHOLY  EXTINCTION.  Not,  indeed,  of  the  man  himself,  bnt  of  his  work  and 
of  his  hope.  When  the  wicked  dies,  everything,  except,  indeed,  the  evil  influences  he 
has  created  and  circulated,  comes  to  »  dreary  end.  His  expectation,  his  hope,  perishes. 
He  can  take  nothing  that  he  has  toiled  for  into  that  other  world  which  he  is  entering. 
All  his  laborious  exertion,  his  elaborate  contrivances,  hi»  selfish  schemes,  his  painful 
humiliations,  come  to  nothing;  they  are  buried  in  the  grave.  He  may  have  a  powerful 
and  well-stored  mind,  but  he  has  cherished  no  desire,  has  entertained  no  ambition 
which  reaches  beyond  the  horizon  of  mortal  life,  and  with  the  stopping  of  his  heart- 
beat, every  imagination  of  his  spirit  perishes  j  there  is  an  untimely  and  utter  end  of  all 
his  brightest  hopes.  A  sad  and  dismal  outlook  for  a  human  spirit  1  How  great  and 
how  blessed  the  contrast  of  a  good  man !  His  largest  hopes  are  then  on  the  point  of 
being  realized ;  his  purest  and  brightest  expectations  are  about  to  be  fulfilled.  This 
earth  is,  more  or  less,  the  scene  of  disappointment;  but  in  the  country  whose  bourne 
he  is  about  to  croas,  he  will  find  himself  where 

"  Trembling  Hope  shall  realize 
Her  full  felicity." 

n.  A  PADTFUL  EBLIEP.  "  When  the  wicked  perish,  there  is  shouting."  1.  It  is  bad 
enough  when  a  man's  death  is  only  felt  by  a  very  few  souls.  With  the  many  oppor- 
tunities we  have  of  connecting  ourselves  honourably  and  attaching  ourselves  strongly 
to  our  fellows,  we  ought  to  be  so  much  to  our  neighbours,  that  when  we  pass  away  there 
will  be  many  to  regret  us  and  to  speak  with  a  kindly  soitow  of  our  departure.  Poor 
and  fruitless  must  that  life  have  been  when  this  is  not  so.  2.  It  is  seriously  sad  when 
a  man's  death  excites  no  regret ;  when  "  the  mourners  "  do  not  mourn ;  when  the  only 
thing  that  is  real  about  the  funereal  scene  is  the  drapery  of  woe.  It  is  a  pitiful  thing 
when  Christ's  minister  cannot  pray  for  Divine  comfort,  because,  though  there  are  those 
who  are  bereaved,  there  is  none  that  is  afUcted.  3.  It  is  a  most  melancholy  thing 
when  a  man's  death  is  felt  to  be  a  positive  relief ;  when,  as  he  is  borne  to  the  grave, 
those  who  knew  him  cannot  help  being  glad  that  one  more  root  of  mischief  is  plucked 
up,  one  more  source  of  sorrow  taken  away.  That  a  man,  created  to  be  a  light,  a 
refuge,  a  blessing,  a  brother,  a  deliverer,  should  be  put  away  with  a  feeling  in  every 
one's  heart  of  gladness  that  he  will  be  seen  no  more,  put  out  of  sight  with  the  senti- 
ment that  the  sooner  he  is  forgotten  the  better, — this  is  sad  indeed.     What,  then,  is — 

III.  The  coNCLrsiON  or  the  wise?  It  is  this:  "Let  me  die  the  death  of  the 
righteous."  But  the  disappointing  career  of  the  author  of  these  words  (Numb,  xxiii. 
10 ;  Josh.  xiii.  22)  should  be  a  solemn  warning  and  a  powerful  incentive  to  form  the 
firm  resolution  to  live  the  life  of  the  righteous,  lest,  as  in  Balaam's  case,  death  should 
overtake  \is  when  we  are  in  the  ranks  of  the  enemy. — 0. 

Ver.  17. — Honourable  self-love ;  the  effect  of  conduct  on  character.  Our  great  temp- 
tation, and  therefore  our  great  peril,  is  to  loot  at  all  things  in  a  selfish  light ;  to  ask 
ourselves,  concerning  each  event  as  it  unfolds  itself — How  toill  it  affect  me  f  This  ia 
very  far  indeed  from  the  spirit  of  Christ ;  his  spirit  is  that  of  unselfishness,  of  generous 
regard  for  the  welfare  of  others.  To  bear  one  another's  burdens  is  to  fulfil  his  law  and 
to  reproduce  his  life.  Yet  is  there  one  respect  in  which  we  certainly  do  well  to  con- 
sider ourselves.  We  do  well  to  pay  very  particular  attention  to  the  effect  of  our  con- 
duct on  our  own  character,  to  ftsk  ourselves — How  are  these  actions  of  mine  telling  on 
my  manhood  ?  Are  they  building  up,  or  are  they  causing  to  crumble  and  decay  ?  The 
consideration  is  twofold. 

I.  The  djjubt  we  mat  do  otJrselveb,  espeolallt  bt  unxinvnebs.  "  He  that  is 
cruel  troubleth  his  own  flesh."  Habitual  cruelty  does  even  more  harm  to  itself  than 
to  its  victim.  That  indeed  is  bad  enough ;  for  it  is  not  only  the  present  suffering 
which  is  inflicted  by  it ;  it  is  the  diseased  sensitiveness  and  the  abjectness  of  spirit ;  it 
ia  the  loss  of  courage  and  of  confidence  and  of  hopefulness  that  is  left  behind,  which 
is  thedeepest  and  the  darkest  mark  of  cruelty  on  the  object  of  it.  But  worse  than  even 
this  is  the  moral  injury  which  cruelty  does  to  itself.    It  not  only  (1)  calls  down  the 


OH.  XL  1—31.]  THE  PROVERBS.  231 

strong  condemnation  of  man,  and  (2)  draws  forth  the  strong  rebuke  and  penalty  of 
God ;  (3)  it  indurates  the  sold  of  the  sinner.  It  makes  him  shockingly  insensitive  to 
human  sufiering.  It  may  go  so  far  as  to  cause  him  to  take  a  savage  and  a  diabolical 
delight  in  inflicting  and  in  witnessing  it.  Thus  it  drags  a  man  down  to  the  very  lowest 
levels.  And  what  is  true  of  cruelty,  or  of  unkindness  which  very  soon  becomes  cruelty, 
is  true  in  other  ways  of  other  sins.  All  wrong-doing,  falsehood,  dishonesty,  lascivious- 
nesB,  profanity,  covetousness,  intemperance,  makes  its  mark  and  leaves  its  stain  upon 
the  soul  of  the  evil-doer;  and  the  further  he  goes  and  the  deeper  he  continues  in  sin, 
the  deeper  is  the  mark  and  the  darker  and  broader  is  the  stain. 

IL  Thb  BLEBsma  wb  mat  butsq  upon  ourselvks,  kspeciallt  by  KiNDtrBss.  "  The 
merciful  man  doeth  good  to  his  own  soul."  Mercy  may  here  stand  for  any  form  of  kind- 
ness or  of  goodness  of  heart.  It  will  include  kindliness  of  manner,  generosity  of  disposi- 
tion, practical  helpfulness,  pity  for  those  who  suffer  or  are  sad,  patience  with  the  erring 
and  the  froward,  magnanimity  under  ill  treatment,  considerateness  toward  the  weak  and 
the  unprivileged.  All  these  forms  of  "  mercy  "  bring  a  blessing  to  the  merciful  heart. 
They  secure  the  appreciation  aud  the  affection  of  the  best  among  men ;  they  gain  the 
approval  and  benediction  of  God.  And  they  react  with  most  valuable  benignity  on 
the  heart  itself.  They  contribute  to ;  1.  A  tenderness  of  spirit,  a  responsiveness  of 
heart,  which  allies  us  very  closely  to  our  Divine  Lord.  2.  An  excellency  and  even 
nobility  of  action  which  makes  us  "  the  children  of  our  Father  in  heaven  "  (Matt.  v.  45). 
3.  A  breadth  of  sympathy  and  largeness  of  view  which  make  u(  owtelvet  truly  wise 
and  worthy  in  the  sight  of  God. — 0, 

Ver,  21. — Divine  providence.  "  Eeckonest  thou  this,  0  man,  who  doest  such  things, 
that  thou  shalt  escape  the  judgment  of  God  ?'"  (Horn.  ii.  3).  No  doubt  men  do  indulge 
the  thought  that  they  will  do  wrong  things  with  impunity ;  that,  though  others  suffer, 
yet  will  they  succeed  in  eluding  justice ;  that  they  will  have  shrewdness  enough  to  stop 
at  the  right  point  and  to  save  themselves  from  the  penalty  of  indiscretion.  Sin  is 
deceitful,  and  it  imposes  on  its  victims  with  strong  and  fatal  "delusions. 

I.  The  CBBTAiNTr  that  bin  will  SDFrBE.  "Though  hand  join  in  hand,  the 
wicked  shall  not  be  unpunished."  1.  How  impotent  must  mere  numbers  be  against 
the  decision  and  the  action  of  the  Almighty  I  There  is  a  certain  sense  of  security  that 
men  have  in  being  a  part  of  a  large  multitude.  But  it  is  a  false  sense.  What  do 
numbers  avail  against  the  action  of  the  elements  of  nature,  or  against  the  outworking 
of  the  laws  which  determine  the  well-being  and  ill-being  of  the  soul  ?  2.  Confederacies 
of  evil  men  are  confessedly  insecure.  "  Hand  may  join  in  hand ; "  the  covetous,  the 
dishonest,  the  violent,  may  combine ;  but  in  the  heart  of  evil  there  are  the  seeds  of 
imfaithfulness  and  treachery ;  and  the  alliance  will  break  down  in  time.  Sin  carries 
in  its  folds  the  germ  of  its  own  undoing.  3.  Against  the  continued  success  of  sin 
many  forces  are  combining.  (1)  All  honest  and  true  men  have  a  direct  and  strong 
interest  in  deposing  and  dishonom  ing  it.  (2)  It  usually  inflicts  on  some  one  man,  or 
family,  or  city,  an  Injury  which  calls  forth  an  intense  and  invincible  resentment.  (3) 
It  has  within  it  the  elements  of  physical  and  moral  weakness,  which  are  sure  to  be 
developed  in  time.  (4^  It  is  always  open  to  the  accusation  of  conscience  and  to 
consequent  exposure.  (5)  It  must  move  and  even  hasten  towards  utter  demoralization 
and  the  loss  of  all  that  is  most  worth  keepiig.  (6)  It  has  against  it  the  decree  and 
the  overruling  action  of  the  Holy  One  (Ps.  xxxiv.  16 ;  and  text).  Sin  never  is  abso- 
lutely unpunished,  even  when  it  imagines  that  it  is ;  and  it  never  remain$  unpunished, 
though  it  may  seem  to  have  excellent  chances  of  escape.  The  Judgment  of  God  will 
overtake  it  in  time. 

IL  The  hope  of  the  bighteotjs.  "  The  seed  of  the  righteous  shall  be  delivered." 
"  The  generation  of  the  upright  shall  be  blessed  "  (Ps.  cxii.  2).  Even  if  God  allowsa 
man  to  go  on  long  without  the  proof  of  his  Divine  favour,  yet  will  he  not  withhold  his 
blessing.  It  will  come  upon  the  children,  if  not  upon  the  upright  man  himself.  And 
who  is  there  that  would  not  be  more  than  willing;  that  God  should  bless  him  through 
his  offspring  ?  To  clothe  them  with  honour,  to  satisfy  them  with  substance,  to  deliver 
them  in  their  time  of  trouble,  to  make  them  citizens  of  the  kiiigdom  of  Christ,  to  employ 
them  as  ambassadors  of  Christ, — ^is  not  this  a  most  ample  and  rich  reward  for  all  om 
personal  fidelity  ?    If  God  blesses  us  in  our  children,  we  are  blessed  indeed. — 0. 


B32  THE  PROVERBS.  [aa.  n.l—ii. 

Vers.  24 — 26. — Expentive  economy,  etc.  We  are  accustomed  to  speak  as  if  the  man 
who  spends  freely  is  a  spend tkiift,  and  as  if  the  man  who  restrains  his  hand  is  on  the 
way  to  wealth.  Bat  it'  that  is  our  thought,  we  are  often  and  much  mistaken.  There 
is  an — 

I.  EiPENBiVB  ECONOMY.  "  There  is  that  withholdeth,"  etc.  1.  If  we  keep  back  the 
wage  that  is  due  to  the  workman,  we  shall  miss  the  blessing  that  goes  with  justice,  and 
suffer  the  curse  which  attends  injustice  (Jas.  v.  1 — 4).  2.  If  we  keep  back  the  corn 
we  should  sow  more  plentifully,  or  the  strength  we  should  expend  more  liberally,  or  the 
mental  power  we  should  employ  more  patiently  and  systematically,  we  shall  reap  less 
bountifully,  we  shall  make  les^  profit,  we  shall  do  less  work  in  the  spiritual  sphere., 
"  He  that  soweth  sparingly  shall  reap  also  sparingly  "  (2  Cor.  iz.  6).  3.  If  we  shut  up 
our  thought  and  our  care  to  our  own  heart,  or  even  our  own  home,  we  shall  lose  all  the 
harvest  ol  love  and  blessing  we  might  reap  if  we  did  not  withhold  ourselves  from  those 
outside  our  door.    It  is  a  poor  economy,  indeed,  that  hides  its  talent  in  a  napkin. 

II.  Pbofitable  expenditure.  There  is  a  bound  beyond  which  we  should  not  go  in 
putting  forth  our  resources,  physical,  pecuniary,  mental,  spiritual.  What  that  limit  is 
every  one  must  decide  for  himself.  Regard  should  certainly  be  had  to  the  preservation 
of  health  and  to  the  necessity  for  replenishment.  But  we  may  often  wisely  and  rightly 
go  very  much  further  than  we  do  ;  and  if  we  did  we  should  find  that  we  were  liberally 
repaid.  Our  scattering  would  mean  increase,  our  liberality  would  mean  nourishment, 
our  endeavour  to  enrich  others  would  result  in  our  own  growth  and  ripeness ;  watering 
them,  we  should  ourselves  be  watered.  This  is  true  of:  1.  Ifuman  sympathy  and  love. 
The  friendly  man  makes  many  friends;  and  to  have  true  friends  is  to  be  blessed  indeed. 
2.  The  energetic  pursuit  o{  om  vocation,  whatever  it  may  be.  It  is  the  man  who  throws 
his  full  energies  into  his  work  who  is  repaid  in  the  end.  3.  Generous  hdpfvlness.  Give 
money,  time,  thought,  counsel,  whatever  you  have  to  give,  unto  those  wlio  need  it,  unto 
the  young,  the  ignoiaut,  the  bafiSed  and  beaten,  the  unfortunate,  the  slain  in  life's 
battle-field ;  and  there  shall  come  back  to  you  that  which  will  be  far  more  valuable 
than  anything  or  all  that->you  have  expended.  There  shall  come  to  you  (1)  the  smile 
of  that  Divine  Saviour  who  gave  himself  for  us,  who,  though  he  was  rich,  for  our  .sake 
became  poor ;  (2)  the  gratitude  of  those  whom  you  serve,  afterwards  and  yonder  if  not 
now  and  here ;  (3)  spiiitual  enlargement,— the  " soul  will  be  made  fat,"  the  heart  will 
expand,  and  Cliristiaa  graces  of  many  kinds  and  of  much  beauty  will  make  their  home 
there. 

in.  The  supkmob  claim.  (Ver.  26.)  A  man  has  a  right  to  do  the  best  he  can  for 
himself;  the  best,  even,  for  hisiawn  purse,  though  that  is  saying  something  very  different 
and  much  less.  But  this  right  may  soon  be  traversed.  It  is  so  crossed  when  a  man 
cannot  go  any  further  without  injuring  his  brethren;  that  bars  his  way;  obligation 
limits  claim.  In  other  words,  the  claim  of  our  fellow-men  is  greater  far  than  that  of 
our  individual  self.  When  the  people  are  lacking  bread,  we  may  not  hold  back  our 
corn.  God  has  given  us  our  powers  and  our  resources,  not  that  we  may  build  up 
a  fortune,  but  that  we  may  be  of  true  service  in  a  world  which  is  full  of  need.  To 
grow  rich  is  not  at  all  necessary  to  any  one,  and  proves  to  be  a  curse  to  multitudes ;  to 
feed  the  hungry,  to  minister  to  want  and  sorrow,  to  still  the  cry  of  pain  or  perishing, 
to  make  glad  the  heart  and  bright  the  life,— that  is  the  real  privilege  and  heritage  of 
man. — C. 

Vcr.  30. —  Wiadom't  brightest  crown  and  hardest  task.  "He  that  winneth  souls  is 
wise."     Wisdom  does  many  things  for  us ;  but  we  shall  find — 

I.  Its  brightest  crown  in  the  souls  that  it  wins.  Wisdom  wins  wealth,  honour, 
friendship,  knowledge ;  acquaintance  with  men  and  with  nature ;  high  position  and  com- 
manding rule;  the  gratification  that  attends  achievement.  Wisdom  makes  great 
changes  in  the  face  of  nature,  and  effects  great  results  in  the  organization  of  men.  But 
the  crown  which  it  wears  is  its  beneficent  work  in  human  souls.  "He  that  winneth 
souls  is  wise  "  indeed.  For  to  do  that  is :  1.  To  arrest  a  stream  of  evU  influence,  the 
full  outflow  and  consequence  of  which  it  is  impossible  to  estimate.  2.  To  originate  a 
stream  of  holy  and  helpful  influence,  the  growing  and  widening  range  of  which  we 
cannot  imagine.  3.  To  tuin  back  a  human  spirit  from  a  course  which  leads  downward 
to  an  op^t«  course  which  leads  homeward  and  heavenward ;  it  ia  to  change  th« 


oa.  xn.  1—28,]' 


TfiB  PEOVEEBS. 


m 


direction  of  one  in  whom  are  boundless  capacities  of  accompIislimeDt  and  of  endurance, 
and  to  change  it  permanently  for  the  better.  4.  It  is  to  give  joy  of  the  purest  kind  to 
hearts  of  the  greatest  worth,  and  satisfaction  to  the  Divine  Saviour  himself  (see  Jas.  v. 
19,  20).    It  is  wisdom's  briglitest  crown  ;  but  it  is  also— 

II.  Its  habsest  task.  He  that  vvinneth  souls  must  be,  or  needs  to  be,  wise  indeed; 
for  he  has  a  very  great  thing  to  do.  He  has  :  1.  To  oppose  himself  to  he  knows  not 
what  supernatural  hostilities  (Bph.  vi.  12).  2.  To  do  battle  with  human  obduracy 
and  the  evil  spirit  of  procrastination.  3.  To  contend  with  the  spiritual  blindness  and 
insensibility  which  are  the  sad  consequence  of  long  disloyalty.  4.  To  bafSe  the  arts  of 
false  friendship  and  overcome  the  blandishments  of  an  evil  world.  5.  To  silence  the 
deceitful  voices  which  whisper  to  the  awakened  soul  that  there  is  no  need  to  render  an 
immediate  and  whole-hearted  decision ;  and  thus  to  lead  it  to  a  full  surrender  to  Christ 
and  to  his  service.  6.  To  persuade  to  a  life  of  tamest  and  habitual  devotion  and  Inoly 
usefulness.  The  practical  lessons  of  the  text  are :  (1)  That  we  cannot  expend  ourselves 
too  lavishly  in  the  great  work  of  winning  men  to  Jesus  Christ.  There  is  no  room  for 
extravagance  here.  (2)  That  we  have  need  to  put  forth  our  whole  strength  to  gain  so 
great  a  victory.  (3)  That  when  we  have  done  all  we  can  do  we  must  remember  that 
nothing  is  accomplished  without  the  influence  which  is  from  above. — G. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTEB  XIl 


Ve».  1. — Instruction;  correction,  disci- 
pline, which  shows  a  man  liis  faults,  gives 
him  a  lowly  opinion  of  himself,  and  opens 
his  mind  to  receive  knowledge,  especially 
the  knowledge  of  himself  and  of  all  moral 
obligations.  Is  trntish ;  is  as  insensible  to 
higher  aspirations,  to  regret  for  the  past  or 
hope  of  amendment,  as  a  brute  beast  (comp. 
ch.  XXX.  2).  On  this  point  St.  Augustine  is 
quoted :  "  Quicumque  corripi  non  vis,  ex  eo 
sane  corripiendus  e»  quia  corripi  non  vis. 
Non  vis  enim  tua  tibi  vitia  demonstrari ; 
non  vis  ut  feriantur,  fiatque  tibi  utilis  dolor, 
quo  medlcum  quteras ;  non  vis  tibi  tu  ipse 
extendi,  ut  cum  deforniem  te  vides,  reforma- 
tuium  desideres,  eique  supplices  ne  in  ilia 
remaneas  fceditate"  ('De  Corrept.  et  Grat.,' 
v.).  Such  conduct  is  unworthy  of  one  who 
is  possessed  of  an  immortal  soul  and  infinite 
capacity  for  progress  and  improvement. 

Ver.  2.— A  good  man.  The  word  is  general, 
the  particular  virtue  intended  being  often 
modified  by  the  context.  In_  view  of  the 
contrast  in  the  second  clause,  it  means  here 
"  pure,"  "  straightforwaid,"  having  a  heart 
free  from  evil  thoughts.  As  the  psalm  says, 
"Surely  God  is  good  to  Israel,  even  to 
such  as  are  pure  in  heart "  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  1). 
Obtaiueth  favour  of  the  Lord  (cli.  viii.  .S5) ; 
Septuagint,  "  Better  is  he  who  findeth 
favour  from  the  Lord."  A  man  of  wicked 
devices  (ch.  xiv.  17);  one  whose  thouglits 
are  perverse  and  artful.    Will  he— Jehovah 

condemn;   Vulgate,  "He  who  trusts   to 

his  imaginations  doeth  wickedly  ; "  Septua- 
gint, "A  man  that  is  a  sinner  shall  be 
passed  over  in  silence  (Trapa<najrri6ij<riTai)." 

Ver.  3.— -A  man  shall  not  be  established 


by  wickedness.  Man  ii  metaphorically 
compared  to  a  tree,  especiiilly  the  olive. 
Wickedness  gives  him  no  firm  hold  for 
growth  or  life  (comp.  ch.  x.  25).  The  root 
of  the  righteous  shall  not  be  moved.  The 
righteous  are  planted  in  a  good  soil,  are 
"  rooted  and  grounded  in  love "  (Eph.  iii. 
17),  aiid  tiie  rout  being  thus  well  placed,  the 
tree  is  sufe,  and  brings  forth  much  fruit 
(comp.  ver.  12 ;  Job  xiv.  7 — 9J. 

Vers.  4 — 12  contain  proverbs  ccncerning 
the  management  of  a  house  and  business. 

Ver.  4. — A  virtuous  woman;  one  whose 
portrait  is  beautifully  traced  in  ch.  xxxi. 
The  term  is  applied  to  Euth  (Buth  iii.  11). 
The  Vulgate  renders,  diligene ;  Septuagint, 
av^piia.  The  expression  means  one  of  power 
either  in  mind  or  body,  or  both.  The  same 
idea  is  contained  in  ap^r))  and  virtus.  Such 
a  woman  is  not  simply  loving  and  modest 
and  loyal,  but  is  a  crown  to  her  husband ; 
is  an  honour  to  him,  adorns  and  beautifies 
his  life,  making,  as  it  were,  a  joyous 
festival.  So  St.  Puul  (1  Thess.  ii.  19)  calls 
his  converts  "  a  crown  of  glorying."  The 
allusion  is  to  the  crovra  worn  by  the  bride" 
groom  at  his  marriage,  or  to  the  garlands 
worn  at  feasts  (comp.  Cant.  iii.  11 ;  Isa, 
Ixi.  10;  Wisd.  u.  8).  The  Son  of  Sirach 
has  much  praise  for  the  virtuous  woman: 
"Blessed  is  the  man  that  hath  a  good 
(ar/aSris)  wife,  for  the  numljer  of  his  days 
shall  be  double.  A  virtuous  (ixSpefa) 
woman  rejoiceth  her  husband,  and  he  shall 
luldl  the  years  of  his  life  in  peace"  (Ecclug. 
xxvi.  1, 2).  She  that  maketh  ashamed;  "that 
doeth  shamefully  "  (oh.  x.  5;  xix.  26);  one 
who  is  a  tumble  coutrast  to  the  woman  of 


234 


THE   PROVERBS. 


[oh,  xn.  1—28 


•trong  character — weak,  indolent,  immodeBt, 
wasteful,  I9  as  rottenness  in  his  bones 
(oh.  xiT.  30;  Hab.  iii.  16).  Such  a  wife 
poisons  her  husband's  life,  deprives  him  of 
strength  and  vigour;  though  she  is  made 
"  bone  of  his  bones,  and  flesh  of  his  flesh  " 
(Gen.  ii.  23),  far  from  being  a  helpmate  for 
him,  she  saps  his  very  existence.  Septua- 
gint,  "As  a  worm  in  a  tree,  so  an  evil 
woman  destroyeth  a  man."  Here  again 
Biraoides  has  much  to  say,  "  A  wicked 
woman  abateth  the  courage,  maketh  an 
heavy  countenance  and  a  wounded  heart: 
a  woman  that  will  not  comfort  her  husband 
in  distress  maketh  weak  hands  and  feeble 
knees"  (Ecclus.  xxv.  23).  Thus  runs  a 
Spanish  maxim  (Kelly,  'Proverbs  of  All 
Nations ') — 

"  Him  that  has  a  good  wife  no  evil  in  life 
that  may  not  be  borne  can  befall ; 
Him  that  has  a  bad  wife  no  good  thing  in 
life  that  chance  to,  that  good  you  may 
call." 

Ver.  5. — ^Tho  thoughts  of  th«  righteous 
■TO  right ;  literally,  judgments ;  i.e.  just  and 
fair,  much  more  then  words  and  actions. 
Bt.  Gregory  ('  Mor.  in  Job,'  lib.  xxv.)  takes 
another  new,  seeing  in  "judgments  "  the 
•tings  of  conscience,  and  a  reheaieal  of  the 
day  of  account.  "  'The  righteous,"  he  says, 
"  approach  the  secret  chambers  of  the 
Judge  in  the  recesses  of  their  own  hearts ; 
they  consider  how  smartly  he  smites  at 
last,  who  long  patiently  bears  with  them. 
They  are  afraid  for  the  sins  which  they 
remember  they  have  committer! ;  and  they 
punish  by  their  tears  the  faults  which 
they  know  they  have  perpetrated.  They 
dread  the  searching  judgments  of  God, 
even  in  those  sins  which  perchance  they 
cannot  discover  in  tliemselves.  And  in 
this  secret  chamber  of  inward  judgment, 
constrained  by  the  sentence  of  their  own 
conduct,  they  chasten  with  penitence  that 
which  they  have  committed  through  pride  " 
(Oxford  tiansl.).  But  the  counsels  of  the 
wicked — which  they  offer  to  others — are 
deceit.  The  mere  "thoughts"  are  con- 
trasted with  the  mature,  expressed  "  coun- 
sels." Septuagint,  "The  wicked  steer  (ki;;8e()- 
raffi)  deceits."  (For  "  counsels,"  see  notes, 
oh.  i  5  and  xx.  18.) 

Ver.  6. — The  words  of  the  wicked  are  to 
lie  in  wait — a  lying  in  wait — for  blood  (see 
ch.  i.  11).  The  wicktd,  by  their  lies, 
•landers,  false  accusations,  etc.,  endanger 
men's  lives,  as  Jezebel  compassed  Naboth's 
death  by  false  witness  (1  Kings  xxi.  13). 
The  mouth  of  the  upright  shall  deliver 
them;  t.e.  the  innocent  whose  blood  the 
wicked  seek.  The  good  plead  the  cause  of 
the  oppressed,  using  their  eluquence  in  their 
&TOUI,  as    iu    the   Apocryphal    Story    of 


Busannah,  Daniel  saved  the  aoonsed  woman 
from  the  slanders  of  the  elders. 

Ver.  7. — The  wicked  are  overthrown,  and 
are  not ;  or,  overthrow  the  wicked,  and  they 
shall  be  no  more.  The  verb  is  in  the 
infinitive,  and  may  be  rendered  either  way; 
but  the  notion  is  scarcely  of  an  overthrow. 
The  Vulgate  has,  verte  impios;  i.e.  change 
them  a  little  from  their  previous  state,  let 
them  suffer  a  blow  from  any  cause  or  of 
any  degree,  and  tliey  succumb,  they  have 
no  power  of  resistance.  What  the  stroke  is, 
or  Whence  it  cornea,  is  not  expressed;  it 
may  be  the  just  judgment  of  God — tempta- 
tion, trouble,  sickness — but  whatever  it  is, 
tliey  cannot  withstand  it  as  the  righteous 
do  (see  ch.  xi.  7).  Some  oommentatori 
see  in  the  phrase  the  idea  of  suddenness, 
"While  they  turn  themselves  round,  they 
are  no  more"  (ch.  x.  25;  Job  xx.  5). 
Septuagint,  "  Wheresoever  the  wicked  turn, 
he  is  destroyed."  The  house  of  the  right- 
eous, being  founded  on  a  secure  foundation, 
shall  stand  (Matt.  vii.  24,  "etc). 

Ver.  8. — According  to  his  wisdom.  A 
man  who  gives  practical  proof  of  wisdom 
by  life  and  character,  whose  words  and 
actions  show  that  he  is  actuated  by  high 
views,  is  praised  and  acknon  lodged  by  all 
(see  on  oh.  ixvii.  21).  Thus  we  read  of 
David,  that  he  behaved  himself  wisely, 
"  and  he  was  acceptable  in  the  sight  of  all 
the  people  "  (1  Sam.  xviii.  5).  The  Septua- 
gint, taking  Uphi  differently,  renders,  "The 
mouth  of  the  prudent  is  commended  by 
men."  He  that  is  of  a  perverse  heart; 
Vulgate,  "  a  vain  and  senseless  man ; " 
Septuagint,  "one  slow  of  heart  (ra0poKdp- 
Sios)."  One  who  talces  distorted  views  of 
things,  judges  unfairly,  has  no  sympathy 
for  others,  shall  be  despised. 

Ver.  9. — This  verse  may  be  translated. 
Better  is  a  man  who  is  lighthj  esteemed  and 
hath  a  slave,  than  he  that  boasts  himself  and 
lackelh  bread ;  i.e.  the  man  who  is  thought 
little  of  by  his  fellows,  and  is  lowly  in  his 
own  eyes,  if  he  have  a  slave  to  minister  to 
his  wants  (which  all  Orientals  of  even 
moderate  wealth  possess),  is  better  off  than 
one  who  boasts  of  his  rank  and  family,  and 
is  all  the  while  on  the  verge  of  starvation 
"  Respectful  mediocrity  is  better  than  boast- 
ful poverty."  Eoclus.  i.  27,  "Better  is  he 
that  labonreth  and  aboundeth  in  all  things 
than  he  that  boasteth  himself,  and  wanteth 
bread."  But  the  words  rendered,  hath  a 
slave,  are  literally,  o  servant  to  himself.  Sc 
the  Vulgate  has,  tufficiens  sibi,  "sufficing 
himself,"  and  the  Septuagint,  SovKeiicv 
EauT^i,  "  serving  himself."  And  the  expres- 
sion implies  attending  to  his  own  concerns, 
supplying  his  own  wants.  Hence  the  gnome 
means,  "  It  is  wiser  to  look  after  one's  own 
busiuess  and  provide  for  one's  own  nece«u< 


OH.  xn.  1—28.] 


THE  PROVEEBS. 


286 


ties,  even  if  thereby  he  meets  with  con- 
tempt and  detraction,  than  to  be  in  real 
trant,  and  all  the  time  assuming  the  aira 
of  a  rich  and  prosperous  man."  This  latter 
explanation  leems  most  suitable,  as  it  is  not 
at  all  clear  that,  at  the  time  the  book  was 
written,  the  Israelites  of  moderate  fortune 
kept  slaves,  and  the  proverb  would  lose  its 
force  if  they  did  not  do  bo.  Sayf  a  mediwval 
jingle— 

"Nobilitas  momm  plus  omat  quam  geni- 
torum." 

Ver.  10. — A  righteons  man  regardeth  the 
life  of  hia  beast.  For  "regardeth,"  the 
Hebrew  word  is  literally  "  knoweth  "  (Ezod. 
xxiii.  9);  he  knows  what  animals  want, 
what  they  can  bear,  and  treats  them 
accordingly  (comp.  oh.  xxvii.  23).  The 
LXX,  translates  "  pitieth."  The  care  for 
tlie  lower  animals,  and  their  kind  treat- 
ment, are  not  the  produce  of  modem  senti- 
ment and  oivilizatioa.  Mosaic  legislation 
and  various  expressions  in  Scripture  recog- 
nize the  duty.  God's  mercies  are  over  all 
his  works;  he  saves  both  man  and  beast; 
he  bateth  nothing  that  he  hath  made  (Ps. 
zxxvi.  6;  oxlv.  9;  Jonah  iv.  11;  Wisd.  xi. 
21).  Ss  he  enacted  that  the  rest  of  the 
■abbath  should  extend  to  the  domestic 
•nimals  (Ezod.  xx.  10) ;  that  a  man  should 
help  the  over-burdened  beast,  even  of  his 
enemy  (Exod.  xxiii.  1,  5) ;  that  the  unequal 
strength  of  the  ox  and  the  ass  should  not 
be  yoked  together  in  the  plough  (Dent, 
xxii.  10);  that  the  ox  should  not  be  muzzled 
when  he  was  treading  out  the  com  (Deut. 
XXV.  4) ;  that  the  sitting  bird  should  not  be 
taken  from  her  little  brood  (Deut.  xxii.  6), 
nor  a  kid  seethed  in  its  mother's  milk  (Exod. 
xxiii.  19).  Such  humane  injunctions  were 
perhaps  specially  needed  at  a  time  when 
man's  life  was  Uttle  regarded,  and  animal 
sacrifices  had  a  tendency  to  make  men 
cruel  and  unfeeling,  when  their  symbolical 
meaning  was  obscured  by  long  familiarity. 
These  enactments  regarding  animals,  and 
the  mysterious  significance  afSxed  to  the 
blood  (Gen.  ix.  4;  Lev.  xvii.  10 — 14), 
afforded  speaking  lessons  of  tenderness  and 
consideration  for  the  inferior  creatures,  and 
k  fortiori  taught  regard  for  the  happiness 
and  comfort  of  fellow-men.  Our  blessed 
Lord  has  spoken  of  God's  care  of  flowers 
and  the  lower  creatures  of  his  hand.  But 
the  tender  mercies;  literally,  the  boweh, 
regarded  as  the  seat  of  tieeling.  The 
wicked  cannot  be  supposed  to  have  "  tender 
mercies ; "  hence  it  is  best  to  take  the  word 
in  the  sense  of  "feelings,"  "affections." 
What  should  be  mercy  and  love  are  in  an 
evil  man  only  hard-heartedness  and  cruelty. 

Ver.  11. — A  contrast  between  industry 
Mid   idleness,  repeated  at  oh.  zxviii.  19. 


He  that  tilleth  his  land.  Agricultoie  wm 
the  first  of  industries,  and  always  highly 
commended  among  the  Jews,  bringing  a 
sure  return  to  the  diligent  (ch.  x.  5;  xx. 
4;  xxvii.  18,  23—27;  and  Ecclus.  xx.  28). 
He  that  followeth  after  vain  persons; 
rather,  vain  things;  liiraitt,  Septuagint, 
empty,  useless  employments,  profitless  busi- 
ness, in  contrast  to  active  labour  on  the 
land.  The  Vulgate  renders,  qui  leetatur 
otiwm,  "he  who  studieth  ease;"  but  the 
original,  reilcim,  will  not  bear  this  meaning. 
Is  void  of  nnderstandlng ;  be  not  only,  as 
is  implied,  will  be  reduced  to  poverty,  but 
shows  moral  weakness  and  depravity.  The 
Septuagint  and  Vulgate  here  introduce  a 
paragraph  not  found  in  our  Hebrew  text: 
"  He  who  takes  pleasure  (Ss  imv  riMs)  in 
carouses  of  wine  will  leave  disgrace  in  his 
strongholds  (pxvpdiuurt)  "  (Jsa.  xxviii.  7,  8 ; 
Hab.  ii.  16).  Probably  this  verse  is  de- 
rived from  the  following,  with  some  corrup- 
tion of  the  text. 

Ver.  12. — ^Modern  commentators  have  en- 
deavoured to  amend  the  text  of  this  verse 
by  various  methods,  which  may  be  seen  in 
Nowack's  note  on  the  passage ;  but  the 
existing  reading  gives  an  appropriate  sense, 
and  alteration  is  nut  absolutely  needed, 
though  it  is  plain  that  the  LXX.  had  before 
them  something  different  from  the  Masoretic 
text.  The  wicked  desireth  the  net  of  evil 
men  (Eccles.  vii.  26),  that  he  may  use  the 
means  which  they  take  to  enrich  them- 
selves ;  or  matBod  may  mean,  not  the  instra- 
ment,  but  the  prey — "such  booty  as  evil 
men  capture ; "  or  yet  again,  the  word  may 
mean  "fortress,"  i.e.  tho  wicked  seeks  the 
protection  of  evil  men.  So  the  Vulgate,  De- 
eiderium  impii  muniinenlum  eat  pessimorum, 
"  What  the  wicked  desire  is  the  support  of 
evil  men,"  or,  it  may  be,  "tlio  defence  of 
evil  men,"  i.e.  that  these  may  be  secured 
from  suppression  aud  interruption.  Another 
interpretation,  which,  however,  seems  some- 
what forced,  is  that  "  the  net "  is  a  meta- 
phor for  the  judgment  of  God,  which 
overtakes  sinners,  and  into  which  they  run 
with  such  blind  infatuation  that  they  seem 
to  "desire"  it.  The  safest  explanation  is 
the  second  one  given  above,  which  signifies 
that  the  wicked  man  seeks  by  every  means 
to  obtain  the  prey  which  he  fees  sinners 
obtain,  and,  as  is  implied,  gets  small  return 
for  his  labour,  dues  not  advance  his  in- 
terests. But  the  root  of  the  righteous 
yieldeth  fruit.  The  root  supplies  the  sap  aud 
vigour  needed  for  healthy  produce.  With- 
out any  evil  devices  or  plotting,  the  righteous 
gain  all  that  they  want  as  the  natural  result 
of  their  high  principles.  Another  rendering 
is,  "  He  (the  Lord)  will  give  a  root  of  the 
righteous,"  will  enable  them  to  stand  firm 
in  time  of  trial.    Septuagint,  "  The  desires 


336 


THE  PUOVERBS. 


[oh.  xn.  1— 2a 


of  the  impious  are  eyil;  but  the  roots  of 
the  pious  are  in  strongholds,"  i.e.  are  secure. 

Ver.  13. — The  wicked  is  snared  by  the 
transgression  of  his  lips  ;  rather,  in  the 
transgression  of  the  lips  is  an  evil  snare  (ch. 
xviii.  7).  A  man  by  speaking  unadvisedly 
or  intemperately  brings  trouble  upon  him- 
self, involves  himself  in  difficulties  which 
he  did  not  foresee.  Often  when  he  hag 
spoken  in  order  to  injure  others,  the  slander 
or  the  censure  has  redounded  on  himself 
(oomp.  Ps.  vii.  15,  16;  ix.  16).  The  just; 
the  man  who  does  not  offend  with  his  lips, 
avoids  these  snares.  The  Septuagint  here 
introduces  a  couplet  not  found  in  the 
Hebrew :  "  He  who  looketh  gently  (<  ^xivav 
\iia)  shall  obtain  mercy;  but  he  who  fre- 
quents the  gates  [or,  'contends  in  the  gates,' 
avvavrav  eV  'riXais]  will  harass  souls." 
This  seems  to  mean  the  man  who  is  calm 
and  considerate  for  others  will  himself  be 
treated  with  pity  and  consideration  (Matt. 
T.  7);  but  he  who  is  a  gossip,  or  a  busy- 
body, or  litigious,  will  be  always  vexing  his 
neighbours. 

Ter.  14. — A  man  shall  be  satisfied  with 
good  by  the  fruit  of  his  mouth  (oh.  xiii.  2  ; 
xiv  14;  xviii.  20).  A  man's  words  arelike 
seeds,  and  if  they  are  wise  and  pure  and 
kindly,  they  wUl  bring  forth  the  fruit  of  love 
and  favour  and  respect.  Christian  commen- 
tators see  here  a  reference  to  the  day  of 
judgment,  wherein  great  stress  is  laid  on  the 
W'irus  (Matt.  xii.  37).  Of  a  man's  hands. 
That  which  a  man  has  done,  his  kindly 
actions,  shall  meet  with  full  reward  (comp. 
Isa.  iii.  10,  11;  Mutt.  xxv.  85,  etc.;  Bom. 
u.  6). 

Ver.  15. — The  way  of  a  fool  is  right  in 
his  own  eyes ;  i.«.  in  his  own  judgment  (cli. 
iii.  7 :  xvi.  2).  The  seoonrl  clause  is  best 
translated,  as  in  the  Bovised  Version,  "  But 
he  that  is  wise  hearkeneth  unto  counsel," 
distrusting  his  own  unaided  judgment,  which 
might  lead  him  astray  (ch.  xiii,  10;  xiv. 
12;  xvi.  25;  xxi.  2;  comp.  Ecclus.  xxxv. 
19  ;  Tobit  iv.  18).     Theoguis,  221,  etc.— 

*Os  Tis  TOi  SoK€€i  rhv  TrXrtffioy  tSfi^yai  ouS^Vy 

'AAA*  aiirhs  fiovyos  TFOtKi\a  tiiv^^  «X^*''i 
Kfiv6s    y'    dcppav    iffrl,    v6ov    Pe^Ka/x/ifvos 
ifr6\ov, 
*'l(rft)y  yap  irdyres  irotKi\'  iiriimlfieOcu 
"  Who  thinks  his  neighbour  nothing  knows. 
And  he  alone  can  see, 
Is  but  a  fool,  for  we  perhaps 
Know  even  more  than  he." 

Ver.  16. — A  fool's  wrath  is  presently  ("  in 
the  day,"  aiiQtjfiepSy)  "known,  A  foolish  man, 
if  he  is  vexed,  insulted,  or  slighted,  has  no 
idea  of  controlling  himself  or  checking  the 
expression  of  his  aroused  feelings;  he  at 
once,  in  the  same  day  on  which  he  has  been 
incensed,  makes  his  vexation   known.     A 


prudent  man  oovereth — ooneealeth — shame; 
takes  no  notice  of  an  affront  at  the  momenf^ 
knowing  that  by  resenting  it  he  will  only 
make  matters  worse,  and  that  it  is  best  to 
let  passions  cool  before  he  tries  to  set  the 
matter  right  (oomp.  ch.  ix.  22;  xxiv.  29). 
Christ's  injunction  goes  far  beyond  thii 
maxim  of  worldly  prudence:  "I  say  unto 
you  that  ye  resist  not  evil ; "  "  Unto  him 
that  smiteth  thee  on  the  one  cheek,  offer 
also  the  other"  (Matt.  v.  39;  Luke  vi.  29); 
and  it  is  certain  that  these  maxims  miu;ht 
be  carried  into  practice  much  more  than 
they  are,  even  in  the  present  state  of  society, 
Septuagint,  "A  clever  man  (iravoSpyos; 
callidus,  Vulgate)  ooneealeth  his  own  dis- 
grace." Corn.  2t  Lapide  quotes  a  Hebrew 
proverb  which  asserts  that  a  man's  character 
is  accurately  discerned  "by  purse,  by  cup, 
by  anger;"  t.e.  by  hig  conduct  in  money 
transactions,  under  the  influence  of  wine, 
and  in  the  excitement  of  anger. 

Ver.  17. — He  that  speaketh — breatheth 
on  t  fearlessly  (ch.  vi.  19) — ^truth  ^oweth  forth 
righteousness.  The  truth  always  conduces 
to  justice  and  right,  not  only  in  a  matter  of 
law,  but  generally  and  in  all  cases.  V  ulgate, 
"He  who  speaks  tliat  which  he  knows  ig 
a  discoverer  of  justice ; "  Septuagint,  "  A 
just  man  announces  well-proved  assurance 
[or, '  the  open  truth ']  (^^wiSernvvfUyriv  ulaTiv)." 
A  false  witness  showeth  forth  deceit  (ch. 
xiv.  5,  25) ;  exhibits  his  true  character, 
which  is  fraud,  treachery,  and  wrong-doing. 

Ver.  18. — There  is  that  speaketh.  The 
word  implies  speaking  thoughtlessly,  rashly; 
hence  we  may  render,  "a  babbler,"  "prater." 
Such  a  one  inflicts  wounds  with  his  sense- 
less tattle.  Like  the  pieroings  of  a  sword. 
The  point  of  the  simile  is  seen  when  we 
remember  that  the  edge  of  the  sword  is 
called  its  "mouth"  in  the  Hebrew  (Gen. 
xxxiv.  26;  Exod.  xvii.  13,  etc.;  comp.  Ps. 
lix.  7  ;  Ixiv.  3).     The  Greek  gnome  says — 

lS,i<pos  TirpiiffKei  tra/io,  -rhv  84  vovv  \6yos- 
"A  sword  tlie  body  wounds,  a  word  the 

soul." 

Vulgate,  est  qui  prtnnittit,  which  restricts 
the  scope  of  the  clause  to  the  making  o£ 
vain  promises  (Lev.  V.  4 ;  Numb.  xxx.  7 — 9), 
continuing,  et  quasi  gladio  pungitur  con- 
sdentieB,  "  And  is  pierced  as  it  were  by  the 
8 word  of  his  conscience,"  where  "con- 
science "  is  added  to  make  the  meaning 
plain.  Such  a  man  suffers  remorse  if  hn 
breaks  his  promise,  or  if,  like  Jephthah,  lie 
keeps  it.  The  tongue  of  the  wise  is  health ; 
it  does  not  pierce  and  wound  like  that  of 
the  chatterer,  rather  it  soothes  and  heals 
even  when  it  reproves  (oh.  iv.  22 ;  x.  11). 

Ver.  19.— The  lip  of  truth  shaU  be  sstab- 
llshed  for  ever.  Truth  is  consistent,  in- 
vincible, enduring;   and  the  fact  belougl 


OH.  xn.  1 — ^28.] 


THE  PROVEEBS. 


237 


not  only  to  Divine  truth  (Pg.  oxvii.  2 ;  Matt. 
xxiy.  35),  but  to  human,  in  its  measure. 
Septuagint, "  True  lips  establish  testimony," 
pointing  the  last  word  ad  at  ed.  Is  but  for 
a  moment ;  literally,  mhile  I  wink  the  eye 
(Jer.  xlix.  19 ;  1.  44).  Lying  never  anawem 
in  the  end;  it  is  soon  found  out  and 
punished  (ch.  xix.  9 ;  Pa.  lii.  5).  Septua- 
gint, "But  a  hasty  (jaxlisl  repentinus,  Vul- 
gate) witness  hath  an  unjust  tongue."  One 
who  gives  his  testimony  without  due  con-  \ 
sideration,  or  influenced  by  evil  motives,  . 
readily  falls  into  lying  and  injustice.  With 
the  lalter  lialf  of  the  verse  we  may  compare 
the  gnome — 

'AA\'  oiSiv  epirn  ificSSoi  tls  fTJpas  XP^O"' 
"  Unto  old  age  no  lie  doth  ever  live." 

"  A  lie  has  no  legs,"  is  a  maxim  of  wide 
nationality;  and  "Truth  may  be  blamed, 
but  shall  ne'er  be  shamed." 

Ycr.  20.— Deceit  is  in  the  heart  of  them 
that  imagine  evil ;  «.e.  that  give  evil  advice ; 
such  are  treacherous  counsellors,  and. their 
advice  can  only  work  mischief,  not  joy  and 
comfort  (see  ou  ch.  iii.  29).  But  to  the 
counsellors  of  peace  (health  and  prosperity) 
is  joy.  They  who  give  wholesome  advice 
diffuse  joy  around.  Vulgate,  "  Joy  attends 
them ; "  Septuagint,  "  They  shall  bo  glad  ;" 
but  the  original  signifies  rather  to  cause 
joy  than  to  feel  it. 

Ver.  21. — There  shall  no  evil — ^mischief- 
happen  to  the  just.  The  mischief  (aven)  in- 
tended is  not  misfortune,  calamity,  but  the 
evil  consequences  that  follow  on  ill-doing 
(oh.  xxii.  8) ;  from  tliese  the  righteous  are 
saved.  Our  Lord  goes  further,  and  says 
(Matt.  vi.  33),  "  Seek  ye  first  the  kingdom 
of  God,  and  his  righteousness;  and  all 
these  (temporal)  things  shall  be  added 
unto  you."  Vulgate,  "Nothing  that 
happens  can  make  a  just  man  sorrowful ; " 
for  he  knows  it  is  all  for  the  best,  and  he 
looks  toward  another  life,  where  all  seeming 
anomalies  will  be  cleared  up.  Septuagint, 
"The  just  man  takes  pleasure  in  naught 
that  is  unjust."  The  wicked  shall  be  filled 
with  mischief;  rather,  with  evil,  moral  and 
physical  (Ps.  xxxii.  10).  The  Old  Testament 
takes  a  general  view  of  God's  moral  govern- 
ment without  regarding  special  anomalies. 

Ver.  22.— (Oomp.  ch.  vi.  17;  xi.  20.) 
They  that  deal  truly;  Septuagint,  i  5i 
romv  iritTTcis,  "he  who  acts  in  good  faith." 

Ver.  23. — A  prudent  man  oonoealeth  know- 
ledge (ver.  16;  oh.  x.  14).  He  is  not  wont 
to  utter  unadvisedly  what  he  knows,  but 
waits  for  fitting  opportimity,  either  from 
humility  or  wise  cnuLiou.  Of  course,  in 
some  oases  reticence  is  siufnL  The  LXX., 
reading  the  passage  difl"Lreiitly,  renders, 
"  A  prudent  man  is  the  seat  of  intelligence 
(fii>6yot    ntrBiiVfus)."     The  heart    of   fools 


proolaimeth  foolishness  (ch.  xiii.  16;  xv.  2). 
A  foolish  man  cannot  help  exposing  the 
stupid  ideas  that  arise  in  liis  mind,  which 
he  considers  wisdom.  Septuagint,  "The 
heart  of  fools  shall  meet  with  curses." 

Vers.  24—28  speak  of  the  means  ol 
getting  on  in  life. 

Ver.  24. — The  hand  of  the  diligent  shall 
bear  rule  (ch.  x.  4).  For  "diligent"  the 
Vulgate  has  fortium,  "the  strong  and 
wotive;"  Septuagint,  ixKeKTuy,  "choice." 
Such  men  are  sure  to  rise  to  the  surface, 
and  get  the  upper  hand  in  a  community, 
as  the  LXX.  adds,  "with  facility,"  by  a 
natural  law.  But  the  slothful  (literally, 
ilotbfulneiii)  shall  be  under  tribute;  or, 
reduced  to  compulsory  lervice,  like  the 
Gibeonites  in  Joshua's  time,  and  the 
Canaanites  nnder  Solomon  (Josh.  ix.  21, 
23;  1  Kings  ix.  21).  So  ch.  xi.  29,  "The 
fool  shall  be  slave  to  the  wise ; "  and  an 
Israelite  reduced  to  poverty  might  be  made 
a  servant  (Lev.  xxv.  39,  40).  The  LXX., 
taking  the  word  in  another  sense,  translates, 
"  The  era  fty  shall  be  for  plunder ;  "  i.e.  they 
who  think  to  succeed  by  fraud  and  trickery 
shall  become  the  prey  of  those  who  are 
stronger  than  themselves. 

Ver.  25. — Heaviness — care — in  the  heart 
of  man  maketh  it  stoop  (ch.  xv.  13 ;  xvii. 
22).  Care  brings  dejection  and  despair; 
hence  the  Christian  is  bidden  to  beware 
of  excessive  anxiety,  and  not  to  perplex 
himself  with  solicitude  for  the  future  (Matt. 
vi.  34 ;  1  Pet.  v.  7).  A  good  word  maketh 
it  glad. 

A^TTTiv  yhp  eCyovs  oTSev  iatr9ou  hiyos. 
"  A  word  of  kindness  griefs  keen  smart  can 
heal." 

Septuagint,  "  A  word  of  terror  disturbs  the 
heart  of  a  (righteous)  man,  but  a  good 
message  will  gladden  him."  The  "  word  of 
terror"  may  be  an  unjust  censure,  or  evil 
tidings.  ISays  a  Servian  proverb,  "  Give 
me  a  comrade  who  will  weep  with  mp ;  one 
who  will  laugh  I  can  easily  find." 

Ver.  2G. — The  righteous  is  more  excellent 
than  his  neighbour.  This  rendering  lias 
the  authority  of  the  Clialdee,  and  would 
signify  that'  a  good  man  is  superior  to 
others  morally  and  socially,  is  more  re^ 
spected  and  stands  higher,  though  his 
worldly  position  be  inferior.  But  the  clause 
is  better  translated.  The  just  inan  is  a  guidt 
to  his  neighbour,  directs  him  in  the  right 
way;  as  the  Syriac  puts  it,  "gives  good 
counsel  to  his  friend."  Septuagint,  "The 
righteous  wise  man  (iirtyv^iim')  will  be  a 
friend  to  himself;"  Vulgate,  "He  who 
re^tards  not  loss  for  a  friend's  sake  is 
righteous,"  which  is  lilfo  Christ's  word, 
"  Greater  love  bath  no  man  than  this,  that 


238 


THE  PROVEBBa 


[oh.  xn.  1— 5S8. 


•  man  lay  down  his  life  for  hi«  friends" 
(John  XV.  13).  Hitzig,  Delitzsch,  and  others, 
reading  differently,  tranelate,  "  A  just  man 
spieth  out  (or,  looketh  after)  his  pasture  ; " 
».e.  he  is  Hot  like  tlie  sinner,  hampered  and 
confined  by  the  chain  of  evil  habits  and 
•ssooiations,  but  is  free  to  follow  the  lead 
of  virtue,  and  to  go  whither  duty  and  his 
own  best  interests  call  liim.  This  gives  a 
very  good  sense,  and  makes  a  forcible  anti- 
thesis with  the  succeeding  clause.  But  the 
way  of  the  wicked  seduoeth  them  j  "  causes 
them,  the  wicked,  to  orr."  Far  from  guiding 
others  aright,  the  wicked,  reaping  the  moral 
consequences  of  their  sin,  drift  hopelessly 
astray  themselves.  Before  the  last  clause 
some  manuscripts  of  the  Septuagint  add, 
"But  the  juilgments  of  the  wicked  are 
harsh;  evils  shall  pursue  sinners"  (ch.  liii. 
21).    The  whole  is  probably  a  gloss. 

Ver.  27. — The  slothful  man  (literally, 
flotK)  roasteth  not  that  which  he  took  in 
hunting.  There  is  some  doubt  concerning 
the  correct  meaning  of  the  word  translated 
"roasteth"  (-|Tn)i  which  occurs  only  in  the 
Ohaldee  of  Dan.  iii.  27,  where  it  signifies 
"burned"  or  "singed,"  according  to  the 
traditional  rendering.  It  seems  to  be  a 
proverbial  saying,  implying  either  that  a 
lazy  man  will  not  take  the  trouble  to  hunt, 
or,  if  he  does  hunt,  will  not  prepare  the  food 
which  he  has  taken  in  the  chase,  or  that 
he  does  not  enjoy  it  when  he  has  gotten 
it.  Others  render,  "  will  not  start  his  prey ; " 
or  "  catch  his  prey,"  Septuagint ;  or  "  secure 
his  prey,"  i.e.  will  not  keep  in  his  net  what 
he  has  caught,  but  carelessly  lets  it  escape. 
The  Vulgate  renders,  "  The  cheat  will  gain 
no  profit."  The  word  rendered  "cheat," 
fraudulentus  in  the  Latin,  and  S6\ios  in  the 
Greek,  is  the  same  as  that  rightly  translated 
"  slothful "  (ver.  24).  But  the  substance  of 
a  diligent  man  is  precious ;  i.e.  the  substance 
which  an  honest,  industrious  man  acquires 
by  his  labour  is  stable  and  of  real  value. 
This  second  clause,  however,  is  variously 
translated.  Revised  Version,  But  the 
precioui  lubstance  of  men  is  to  the  diligenty 
01-,  is  to  be  diligent ;  Delitzsoh,  "  Diligence  is 
a  man's  precious  possession ; "  Septuagint,  "A 
pure  man  is  a  precious  possession."  The 
Authorized  Version  is  probably  erroneous, 
«ud  the  rendering  ehotud  bo,  as  Delitzseh 


and  Nowaok  take  it,  _"  But  a  precions  pM 
session  of  a  man  is  diligence." 

Ver.  28. — In  the  way  of  rlghteoniness  is 
Ufe  (comp.  ch.  x.  2).  For  the  promise  of 
temporal  prosperity  which  the  Jew  saw  in 
such  passages  as  these  we  substitute  a  better 
hope.  And  in  the  pathway  thereof — of 
righteousnesi — there  is  no  death.  Many 
combine  the  two  words  tlius:  "no-death," 
i.e.  immortality ;  but  examples  of  such 
combination  are  not  forthcoming,  and  the 
anomaly  is  not  necessitated  by  the  failure 
of  the  usual  rendering  to  afford  an  adequate 
sense.  The  Greek  and  Latin  versions  are 
noteworthy.  Septuagint,  "The  ways  of 
the  revengeful  (ji,vTt<r"(i.K<ev)  are  unto  (?!*,  not 
^N)  death."  St.  Ohrysostom  refers  ('  Hom. 
xvi.  in  Eph.')  to  this  rendering :  "  He  here 
speaks  of  vindictiveuess ;  for  on  the  spur 
of  the  moment  he  allows  the  sufferer  to  act 
in  order  to  check  the  aggressor ;  but  further 
to  bear  a  grudge  he  permits  not;  because 
the  act  then  is  no  longer  one  of  passion,  nor 
of  boiling  rage,  but  of  malice  premeditated. 
Now,  God  forgives  those  who  may  be  carried 
away,  perhaps  upon  a  sense  of  outi  age,  and 
rush  out  to  resent  it.  Hence  he  says, '  eye 
for  eye;'  and  yet  again  'The  ways  of 
the  revengeful  lead  to  death."  Vulgate, "  A 
devious  path  leads  to  death" — a  path,  that 
is,  which  turns  aside  from  the  right  direc- 
tion, a  life  and  conversation  which  are 
alien  from  justice  and  piety.  But  both  the 
Septuagint  and  the  Vulgate  have  missed 
the  right  meaning  of  the  words  in  question ; 
derek  nethibah,  "pathway."  Many  see  in 
this  verse  a  plain  evidence  that  the  writer 
believed  in  the  immortality  of  the  soul.  We 
have  reason  to  suppose  that  such  was  his 
faith,  but  it  cannot  be  proved  from  this 
passage,  though  we  may  consider  that  he 
was  guided  to  speak  in  terms  to  which  later 
knowledge  would  affix  a  deepei?  interpreta- 
tion (see  ch.  xiv.  32,  and  note  there).  It  is 
Jesus  Christ  "  who  hath  brought  life  and 
immortality  (,ii.(peap<rlav)  to  light  through  the 
gospel"  (2  Tim.  i.  10).  Writers  in  Solomon^i 
time  could  speak  only  darkly  about  this 
sublime  and  comforting  hope,  though  later, 
ai  in  the  Book  of  Wisdom  and  throughout 
most  of  the  Apocryphal  books,  it  formed 
a  common  topic,  and  was  used  as  a  reason 
for  patience  and  lesignatioii. 


HOMILETICa. 

Ver.  3. — 77ie  tnstdbiliiy  of  wickedneu.  I.  Wickedness  mat  bbiko  teufobal 
PROSPERITY.  It  is  important  to  observe  the  limitations  of  our  subject.  The  Bible  ia 
not  an  unreasonable  book  ;  it  does  not  ignore  the  patent  facts  of  life ;  it  does  not  deny 
that  there  are  pleasures  of  sin.  The  very  statement  that  "  a  man  shall  not  be  estahUshed 
by  wickedness  "  implies  that  he  may  be  lifted  up,  and  may  really  enjoy  prosperity  for 
a  season.    Though  not  built  wv,  he  may  be  puffed  tip.    This  ia  to  be  borne  in  mind. 


OH.  XII.  1—28.]  THE  PR0VBBB3.  239 

lest  the  experience  come  as  a  delusion.  All  the  warnings  ahout  the  fatality  of  a  ginful 
course  are  giren  with  a  frank  recognition  of  its  transient  advantages.  Therefore  the 
occurrence  of  these  advantages  does  not  contradict  the  warnings. 

II.  Wickedness  does  not  sbocbb  stable  pbospemtt.  It  does  not  "  esidblith." 
There  is  no  faculty  for  building  in  it.  There  are  "  tents  of  wickedness ;  "  but  these  are 
frail  and  flimsy  compared  to  "  the  house  of  the  Lord"  (Ps.  Ixxxiv.).  When  at  its  beat 
and  brightest,  the  product  of  evil  is  but  a  bubble  that  wiU  burst  with  a  touch  of  right- 
eous judgment.  The  equilibrium  is  unstable.  There  is  no  foundation  of  truth  to 
support  the  poor  structure ;  it  is  not  built  according  to  the  laws  of  righteousness ;  it  is 
not  guarded  against  the  shock  of  adverse  circumstances.  The  bad  prosperous  man  has 
many  enemies.  All  the  course  of  the  universe  is  in  the  long  run  directed  against  him. 
He  has  not  Gud  on  his  side,  and  at  any  moment  the  suspended  hand  of  justice  may  fall 
upon  his  unsheltered  head. 

III.  Wickedness  will  not  lead  to  pbbmanbnt  prospebitt.  The  pleasures  of 
sin,  at  the  best,  do  but  endure  for  a  season.  The  sinner  lives,  so  to  speak,  "  from  hand 
to  mouth."  If  in  this  life  only  he  had  hope,  the  prospect  would  be  poor  j  for  most  of 
the  delights  of  wickedness  are  very  brief,  and  the  consequences  of  shame  and  trouble 
soon  follow  even  upon  earth.  The  harvest  of  a  young  man's  folly  may  be  reaped  by 
middle  age.  But  when  we  consider  the  eternal  future,  the  utter  inability  of  wickedness 
to  establish  any  enduring  prosperity  becomes  clearly  visible.  For  no  one  can  pretend 
that  his  wicked  devices  extend  beyond  the  grave ;  and  no  one  can  fortify  himself  against 
the  pains  of  a  future  state  by  any  successful  Maccbiavellianism,  however  cleverly  devised 
it  may  be  with  a  view  to  worldly  security. 

IV.  Wickedness  secuees  no  prospebitt  to  a  man  himself.  "  A  man  shall  not 
be  established  by  wickedness."  His  business  may  be  so  established ;  his  plans  and 
devices  may  be  made  firm.  But  these  things  are  not  the  man  himself,  and  all  the 
while  they^  are  prospering  he  may  be  tottering  to  ruin,  like  a  consumptive  millionaire 
or  a  paralytic  winner  of  a  lottery-prize.  Then  the  whole  pursuit  has  ended  in  failure ; 
for  what  is  the  use  of  the  huntsman's  success  in  shooting  the  game  if  he  cannot  bring 
home  and  enjoy  what  he  has  acquired  ? 

V.  EiOHTBOUSNESS  IS  A  'tbub  sbcuritt.  It  has  a  root  in  the  eternal  laws  of  God. 
Though  the  storm  tear  off  its  "  peaceable  fruits,"  this  deep  and  hidden  source  remains. 
We  cannot  be  satisfied  with  only  wearing  a  "  robe  of  righteousness."  We  must  have 
the  living  thing  with  its  deep  root — a  growth  which  Christ  plants  (Bom.  iii.  22). 

Ver.  10. — Justice  to  animals,  L  Animals  have  bights  which  mat  be  cuTBAaED 
BT  nsTJUBTiCE.  We  hear  more  of  kindness  to  animals  than  of  justice  towards  them. 
It  seems  to  be  assumed  that  they  have  no  rights,  and  that  all  our  consideration  for 
them  must  spring  from  pure  generosity,  perhaps  even  from  a  superabundant  condescen- 
sion. The  exercise  of  it  is  treated  almost  as  a  work  of  supererogation.  These  assump- 
tions are  based  on  an  inordinate  regard  for  our  own  supremacy.  Man  may  consider 
himself  as  the  lord  of  creation.  If  he  may  take  this  exalted  view  of  himself,  he  cannot 
on  that  account  shake  off  all  obligations  towards  the  dumb  serfs  on  his  estate.  This 
natural  feudalism  requires  protection,  etc.,  from  the  aristocracy  of  creation,  while  it 
allows  of  the  exaction  of  dues  from  the  underlings.  For  we  are  all  animals,  though 
men  are  more  than  animals.  All  orders  of  creation  are  made  by  one  God,  and  all  share 
in  many  common  wants  and  feelings.  The  young  lions  are  represented  as  crying  to 
God  for  their  food,  and  he  as  giving  them  their  meat  in  due  season.  Christ  tells  ua 
that  God  feeds  the  ravens — ^those  wild  birds  of  the  mountains,  while  not  a  homely 
sparrow  falls  to  the  ground  without  the  notice  of  our  heavenly  Father.  It  is  not  for 
us  to  be  above  giving  their  due  to  fellow-creatures  for  whom  God  cares  so  tenderly. 
These  animals  not  only  make  mute  appeals  to  our  compassion ;  they  cannot  be  ill  treated 
without  injustice. 

II,  The  ohabactbb  of  a  man  will  be  bkvbalbd  bt  his  tbeatment  of  anmals. 
1.  Character  i»  revealed  in  the  treatment  of  the  MpUss.  A  man's  cattle  are  hi« 
property,  and  they  are  in  his  power.  He  is  more  free  in  his  treatment  of  them  than 
in  his  behaviour  towards  his  fellow-men.  Therefore  his  true  character  will  come  out 
the  more  clearly  when  he  is  in  his  stable  than  when  he  is  in  his  dining-room,  2.  Thf 
lower  creatures  daim  consideration.     (1)  Their  very  inferiority  gives  point  to  th 


240  THE  PBOVERBS.  [ch.  xn.  1— 2a 


claim.  Man  stands  to  them  somewhat  in  the  position  of  a  God.  Therefore  it  becomes 
him  to  show  the  spirit  of  a  limited  Providence  in  his  treatment  of  them.  (2)  More- 
OTer,  when  he  owns  any  animals,  he  is  involved  in  especial  responsibilities.  He  is  their 
guardian,  and  their  welfare  largely  depends  upon  him.  (3)  Further,  if  they  render  him 
patient  service,  the  least  that  he  can  do  is  to  give  them  all  things  necessary  to  make 
their  lot  of  bondage  happy  to  them.  (4)  Lastly,  their  affectionateness  vastly  strengthens 
the  ties  of  obligation.  Horses  and  dogs  learn  to  love  their  masters,  and  love  has  ft! 
sacred  claims  in  animals  as  well  as  in  men.  3.  Lack  of  consideration  for  animals  is  a 
sign  of  a  hose  nature.  The  very  sympathy  of  the  wicked  is  cruelty,  but  this  cruelty  is 
not  possible  without  the  evil  heart,  of  which  it  is  the  corrupt  fruit.  The  brutal  cattle- 
drover,  and  the  heartless  horseman  who  lashes  his  weary,  patient  animal,  do  but  make 
a  public  exhibition  of  their  own  low  natures. 

Ver.  17. — Truth  and  righteousness.  We  have  here  a  suggestion  of  the  close  con- 
nection between  truth  and  righteousness.  This  connection  is  based  on  a  reciprocal 
relation.  Truthfulness  is  a  trait  of  righteousness,  and  righteousness  is  advanced  by 
truthfulness. 

I.  Tedthfulnbss  is  a  tbait  op  righteousness.  The  truth  here  referred  to  ia 
that  which  is  most  often  mentioned  in  the  Bible,  viz.  subjective  truth,  the  agreement 
between  our  convictions  and  our  utterances.  We  cannot  attain  to  perfect  objective 
truth,  to  the  truth  which  consists  in  an  agreement  between  our  beliefs  and  the  facts 
of  the  universe,  because  all  men  sometimes  err  even  with  the  most  innocent  inten- 
tion of  finiing  the  truth.  We  are  liable  to  delusions  from  without,  and  to  the  influence 
of  an  unconscious  bias  from  within.  But  we  can  all  utter  what  we  believe  to  be  true. 
Now,  this  truth-speaking  is  one  of  the  most  solemn  and  absolute  obligations  of  right- 
eonsness.  1.  The  grounds  of  the  obligation.  Q)  We  recognize  the  awful  duty  of 
truthfulness  in  our  conscience.  (2)  The  Teutonic  conscience  is  supposed  to  respond 
to  this  duty  more  readily  than  the  Oriental  conscience.  Yet  it  is  clearly  and  firmly 
insisted  on  in  the  Bible.  (3)  It  is  most  evident  in  the  transparent  life  of  Christ,  who 
is  a  true  Witness  to  the  truth  (John  xviii.  37).  (4)  All  social  arrangements  presuppose 
truthfulness ;  without  it  society  becomes  a  confusion.  Truth  cements  the  social,  fabric ; 
lying  dissolves  it.  A  city  of  universal  liars  would  be  an  inferno  of  mutual  distrust, 
suspicion,  and  necessary  isolation.  2.  The  hearing  of  the  obligation.  (1)  On  small 
things.  Slight  inaccuracies  of  speech  may  seem  to  b<!  of  no  importance ;  but  they  open 
the  door  for  more  gross  forms  of  deceit,  by  generating  a  habit  of  indifference  to  truth. 
Apart  from  this  tendency,  the  least  untruth  is  treason  against  the  royal  supremacy  of 
truth.-  (2)  In  difficult  cases.  When  we  are  severely  tried,  it  is  hard  to  speak  the 
truth.  Yet  it  is  just  then  that  truthfulness  becomes  a  positive  quality.  Under  such 
rircumstanoes  only  a  character  that  is  morally  sound  will  stand  the  strain.  Indeed, 
it  needs  the  grace  of  Christ  to  keep  true  in  word  and  deed  under  all  provocations  t« 
easier  paths. 

II.  Righteousness  is  advanced  by  trutbpulness.  1.  In  the  individual.  Untruth- 
fulness is  certain  to  issue  in  a  lower  moral  tone  all  round.  We  cannot  abandon  one  of 
the  guardian  towers  of  the  soul  without  risking  the  whole  citadel.  The  liar  is  not  only 
a  person  who  uses  false  language.  His  cowardly  habit  eats  into  the  very  heart  of 
virtue  and  rots  the  moral  fibre  of  his  soul  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  no  more 
bracing  moral  tonic  than  a  loyal  and  reverent  regard  for  truth.  The  true  man  is 
likely  to  be  honest,  just,  and  pure  in  all  respects.  2.  In  the  world.  Truth  always 
ra  ikes  for  righteousness.  No  greater  blunder  was  ever  made  than  the  supposition 
that  "pious  frauds"  could  be  used  for  advancing  the  cause  of  Christianity.  Any 
temporary  gain  that  could  be  produced  in  this  way  must  be  unsound  from  "the  first, 
and  the  ultimate  issue  is  certain  to  be  moral  indifference  and  unbelief.  Some  truths 
are  un|ileasant,  some  ugly,  some  seemingly  hurtful.  Yet,  in  the  end,  truth  makes  for 
soul-health.  Above  all,  is  not  he  who  is  "the  Truth"  also  the  great  Source  of  the 
world's  righteousness  ? 

Ver.  23. — Concealing  Knowledge.  L  Knowledge  must  first  be  possessbd.  We 
cannot  hide  what  we  do  not  hold.  The  idea  of  secreting  knowledge  suggests  the  owning 
0^  a  large  amoimt  of  it,  or  at  least  of  knowledge  of  some  value.    The  tradesman  who 


OH.  XII.  1—28.]  THE  PROVEEBa 


241 


puts  all  his  wares  in  the  window  is  not  the  proprietor  of  a  large  stock.  It  cannot 
be  a  superficial  mind  which  conceals  much  kuowledge.  Such  an  action  suggests  a 
giaiiary  of  truth,  a  storehouse  of  ideas,  a  territory  rich  in  minerals  that  lie  fer  below 
the  surface. 

II.  Knowledge  must  then  be  pbizbd.  Men  may  hide  things  from  various  motives 
—from  shame  as  much  as  from  love,  because  the  things  are  bad  quite  as  much  as  on 
account  of  any  value  set  upon  them.  Thus  the  criminal  tries  to  hide  the  evidences  of 
his  crime— buries  his  victim  in  a  wood,  or  flings  the  tell-tale  knife  into  a  pond.  But 
it  is  not  with  this  ugly  knowledge,  which  a  man  would  only  too  gladly  bimlsh  from 
his  own  mind,  that  we  are  now  concerned.  There  are  choice  secrets,  rare  attHinment.s 
and  much-valued  stores  of  information.  Such  knowledge  may  well  be  kept  for  its  own 
sake. 

III.  KNowiiBDOB  SHOULD  NEVER  BE  DISPLAYED.  The  Vanity  which  would  make  a 
show  of  knowledge  is  one  of  the  weakest  traits  of  humanity.  It  is  usually  a  sign  that 
but  little  is  really  known.  A  great  pretence  is  madn  by  the  aid  of  a  mere  smattering  of 
information  claverly  arranged,  like  the  scenery  on  a  small  stage  adjusted  to  suggest  a 
long  vista.  Such  a  parade  of  learning  springs  from  more  love  of  admiration  than  love 
of  truth.  The  loyal  seeker  after  truth  will  have  little  thought  of  "making  an  effect  " 
by  the  exhibition  of  his  mental  properties.  He  will  prize  his  possessions  on  their  own 
account,  though  no  one  else  may  be  aware  of  their  existence. 

ly.  Knowledge  may  sometimes  be  abused.  We  may  know  damaging  facts  about 
a  neighbour,  and  then  charity  will  urge  us  to  hide  our  knowledge.  The  feveiish  |  assion 
for  gossiping  tears  the  cloak  of  common  deoe«cy  which  should  cover  the  knowledge  of 
what  is  bad.  It  is  shocking  that  details  of  crime  and  vice  are  made  familiar  to  milliuns 
by  the  blare  of  the  newspaper  trumpet.  But,  further,  the  knowledge  of  good  things 
may  sometimes  be  abused.  The  revelation  may  be  premature;  God  did  not  send 
forth  his  Son  till  "  the  fulness  of  the  times.'"  Truth  may  be  misapprehended.  The 
most  sacred  things  may  be  degraded  by  irreverent  handling. 

V.  Knowledge  is  to  be  used.  We  do  not  have  it  as  a  hiddea  jewel  to  be  laid 
by  in  a  secret  place  and  forgotten.  Though  buried  in  the  soul  and  little  talked  about, 
it  is  a  living  thing,  like  a  seed  in  the  soil.  It  is  given  us  that  it  may  influence  our  lives 
and  become  a  vital  part  of  our  souls. 

VI.  Knowledge  should  be  wisely  imparted.  We  have  no  right  to  keep  to  our- 
selves any  knowledge  that  would  be  helpful  to  our  brethren.  Concealment  must  never 
go  so  far  as  to  hide  from  others  the  good  news  of  God.  The  gospel  is  for  the  world. 
All  Divine  truth  is  for  all  honest  inquirers.    "  He  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  lot  hiiu  hoar." 

Ver.  25. — Depression.  This  proverb  shows  us  depression  of  soul  in  its  own  distress 
and  gloom,  and  then  gives  a  hint  of  the  way  in  which  it  may  be  remedied. 

I.  The  state  op  depression.  The  heart  is  bowed  down  with  heaviness.  This  is 
very  different  from  external  adveisity  and  from  the  natural  feelings  that  are  pioduced 
by  such  a  condition.  It  may  be  quite  independent  of  circumstances.  The  buoyant 
soul  will  face  great  calamities  with  comparative  cheerfulness,  while  the  heavy  heart  is 
depressed  among  signs  of  unbroken  prosperity.  1.  Depression  is  caused  by  personal 
conditions.  Not  being  the  reflection  of  circumstance,  it  must  be  the  expression  of 
internal  experience.  Frequently  it  is  a  result  of  a  man's  bodily  state,  a  merely  nervous 
disorder  or  a  consequence  of  derangedjiealth.  We  look  for  religious  remedies  when 
the  true  cure  is  in  the  hands  of  the  physician.  But  it  may  be  that  melancholy  thoughts 
have  depressed  the  soul.  Then  the  gloom  within  is  projected  on  to  the  world  without, 
and  the  sunniest  scenes  are  overclouded.  2.  Depression  is  a  deplorable  state  of  mind. 
It  is  a  source  of  deep  distress  to  the  sufferer.  It  spreads  an  atmosphere  of  gloom 
among  others.  It  checks  enterprise  by  paralyzing  hope.  If  the  joy  of  the  Lord  is  our 
strength,  sorrow  of  soul  must  be  a  source  of  weakness.  Depressed  Christian  people 
discredit  the  name  of  religion  by  making  it  appear  unai  tractive  to  the  world.  Gratitude 
is  scarcely  compatible  with  depression,  and  the  soul  that  has  given  way  to  thii 
deplorable  experience  is  not  likely  to  sing  the  praises  of  God.  Thus  depression  tends 
to  check  worship.  On  the  other  hand,  it  reveals  the  soul's  great  need  of  God,  who  iu 
his  long-suftering  compassion  has  pity  on  his  distressed  children.  "  He  knuweth  our 
frame,  he  remembereth  that  we  are  dust." 

fbovebbs.  B 


242  THE  PB0VBBB8.  loB.  xn.  1—28. 

IL  Tkb  cuez  op  DBPBE88ION.  Wheii  it  is  due  to  physical  causes,  physical  remedial 
may  bo  needed.  In  many  oases,  change  of  scene  and  brighter  circumstances  may  help 
to  remove  it.  But  there  are  also  social  and  moral  remedies,  among  which  not  the  least 
valuable  is  a  wise  expression  of  brotherly  kindness.  Pure  condolence  may  do  more  harm 
than  good  by  aggravating  the  painful  symptoms,  and  yet  •'  a  good  word  maketh  "  the 
heart "  glad."  1.  The  utterance  of  the  wwd  may  be  helpful.  Isolation  and  silence  are 
■  depressing.  "  It  is  not  good  for  man  to  be  alone."  The  heavy  heart  seeks  solitude,  and" 
uncongenial  society  cannot  be  helpful.  But  sympathetic  society  is  healing,  even  though 
it  be  admitted  with  reluctance.  Christ  founded  a  Church.  He  sought  to  cheer  hit 
people  amid  the  various  scenes  of  their  heavenward  pilgrimage  by  means  of  Christian 
companionship.  2.  The  contents  of  the  word  should  be  helpful.  We  may  not  do  much 
good  by  moralizing.  Though  advice  for  the  depressed  is  easy  to  find,  it  is  not  often 
•cceptable.  But  words  of  affection  are  wonderfully  healing.  Cheerful  thoughts  should 
help  the  depressed.  3.  It  is  our  duty  to  relieve  the  depressed.  To  blame,  to  shun,  or 
to  patronize  are  all  un-Christlike  methods.  But  the  Christian  should  endeavour  to 
make  the  world  brighter  by  his  presence.  Above  all,  if  it  is  possible  to  lead  the  depressed 
to  hope  in  God,  the  surest  method  of  cure  is  within  our  reach. 

Vor.  28. — Sighteousness  and  life.  I.  The  association  of  biqhteodbnkss  ahd  lite. 
It  is  something  to  have  two  such  great  ideas  brought  into  close  juxtaposition.  Theii 
very  proximity  is  a  revelation.  They  mutually  illumine  one  another.  We  know  more 
of  righteousness  when  we  see  its  bearing  on  life,  and  we  have  a  better  understanding  of 
life  when  we  recognize  its  dependence  on  righteousness.  There  is  thus  a  relationship 
of  ideas  to  be  recognized  here  over  and  above  the  separate  forms  of  the  ideas  themselves. 
The  limitation  of  the  subject  is  also  instructive.  We  do  not  see  to  what  else  righteous- 
ness may  be  related.  It  may  or  it  may  not  bring  happiness,  wealth,  and  success.  What 
it  is  related  to  is  distinct  from  all  these  ends,  and  greater  than  any  of  them — ^viz. 
life. 

II.  The  fobh  of  biohteousmess  teat  ib  comiEOTED  with  life.  This  is  the  path 
of  righteousness.  It  is  not  righteousness  regarded  as  an  abstract  idea,  or  viewed  only 
as  a  law.  It  is  not  an  external  garment  of  righteousness,  nor  an  internal  principle  of 
righteousness.  It  does  not  consist  in  one  or  more  isolated  deeds  of  righteousness.  On 
the  contrary,  what  is  here  presented  to  us  is  a  view  of  a  continuous  course  of  righteous 
action.  It  may  not  be  the  highest  path  of  holiness,  but  it  is  at  least  a  right  path.  The 
traveller  may  stumble  upon  it,  loiter  by  the  way,  even  forget  himself  at  times,  and 
sleep.  Yet,  on  the  whole,  this  is  the  course  he  pursues.  He  is  trying  to  do  the  right 
thing  in  his  daily  experience. 

III.  The  inflttence  of  eightbotjsnbss  upon  life.  The  path  is  life.  1.  It  is  the 
path  of  a  living  soul.  No  one  can  continuously  pursue  a  right  course  unless  he  has 
the  spiritual  life  in  him.  Dead  souls  may  be  galvanized  into  momentary  spasms  of 
goodness  by  an  electrifying  example  or  the  shock  of  a  great  authority.  But  the  path 
of  righteousness  can  only  be  trodden  by  those  who  have  within  them  the  soul-energy 
to  follow  it.  2.  It  is  the  path  that  quickens  life.  It  is  not  like  the  deadly  tracts  of 
sin,  those  ways  of  wickedness  that  lead  down  into  the  fatal  swamps  of  soul-death. 
This  path  runs  over  bracing  mountain  heights.  3.  It  is  the  path  that  leads  to  life. 
There  is  a  fuller  life  beyond,  not  yet  reached ;  and  righteousness  is  the  way  to  it. 
Every  attainment  in  holiness  is  accompanied  by  a  deepening  of  the  Boul-life.  The  way 
of  Gtod  leads  to  eternal  life.  The  gospel  of  Christ  does  not  set  aside  this  Old  Testament 
principle,  but  it  gives  the  new  righteousness  of  a  new  life. 

IV.  The  fatal  eesult  of  lea  vino  bighteousnbss.  "  A  devious  way  leadeth  to 
death."  1.  The  way  of  evil  is  devious.  It  is  not  only  an  alternative ;  it  is  a  departure 
from  the  normal  course.  He  who  is  in  it  is  where  he  ought  not  to  bg.  Then  this  way 
is  no  direct  high-road ;  it  is  a  wandering  bypath.  2,  The  deviousness  of  the  tooy  « 
fatal  to  the  traveller  upon  it.  The  higher  way  is  made  for  the  good  purpose  of  leading 
to  the  city  of  life.  The  devious  way  is  not  purposely  made ;  it  is  a  lawless  beaten  track, 
which  runs  out  into  the  wilderness.  It  must  be  dangerous  to  follow  such  ft  ooune. 
To  pursue  it  to  the  end  is  to  court  soul-destruction. 


OH.  xii.  1—28.]  THE  PROVERBS.  ZH 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — Primary  truths.  I.  The  wisdom  of  bubmissiow,  the  folly  of 
KESiSTANCE,  TO  BEPKOOF.  As  self-knowledge  Is  the  most  precious  and  imiispensable, 
and  as  it  comes  to  us  by  chastisement,  i.e.  by  disappointment,  humiliation,  pain  of 
various  kinds, — to  welcome  correction,  to  be  willing  and  anxious  to  know  our  faults, 
is  the  mark  of  true  wisdom.  To  fret  at  reproof,  to  be  angry  with  the  counsellor,  to 
hate  the  revealing  light,  is  the  worst  fully  and  stupidity. 

II.  The  favoub  and  the  dtsfavoue  of  God  ake  disobiminatin».  The  good  reap 
his  good  will ;  the  crafty  and  malicious  are  exposed  to  his  condemnation. 

III.  Moral  stability  and  instability.  Wickedness  gives  no  firm  foundation. 
The  bad  man  is  insecure,  as  a  tottering  wall  or  a  leaning  fence.  The  good  man  is 
like  the  oak,  firmly  and  widely  rooted,  which  may  defy  »  thousand  blasts  and 
storms. — J. 

Vers.  4 — 11. — Blessings  and  miseries  of  domestic  life.  I.  Elements  of  happiness 
in  the  home.  1.  The  virtuous  wife.  (Ver.  4.)  The  word  is  literally  "  a  woman  of 
power"  and  the  idea  of  force  lies  in  the  word  and  the  idea  of  virtvte.  Her  moral  force 
and  influence  makes  itself  felt  in  all  the  life  of  the  household  (ch.  xxii.  10 ;  Ruth  iii. 
11).  She  is  her  husband's  "  crown  of  rejoicing  "  (comp.  1  Thess.  ii.  19),  his  glory 
and  pride. 

"  A  thousand  decencies  do  daily  flow 
From  all  her  thoughts  and  aotioni." 

2.  Noble  thoughts  and  words.  (Ver.  5.)  This  expression  includes,  of  course,  noble 
words  and  deeds,  and  implies  all  that  we  speak  of  as  high  principles.  And  these  are 
the  very  foundations  and  columns  of  the  home.  But  expressly  also  the  straightforward 
speech  of  the  good  man  is  named.  (Ver.  6.)  There  is  "  deliverance  "  in  the  mouth  of 
the  righteous ;  men  may  build  upon  his  word,  which  is  as  good  as  his  bond.  3.  Hence, 
stability  belongs  to  the  house  of  the  good  man.  (Ver.  7.)  If  we  trace  the  rise  of  great 
families  who  have  become  famous  in  the  annals  of  their  country,  the  lesson  is  on  the 
whole  brought  home  to  us  that  it  is  integrity,  the  true  qualities  of  manhood,  which 
formed  the  foundation  of  their  greatness.  On  a  smaller  scale,  the  history  of  village 
households  may  bring  to  light  the  same  truth.  There  are  names  in  every  neighbour- 
hood known  as  synonyms  of  integrity  from  father  to  son  through  generations.  4. 
Prudence  is  an  indispensable  element  in  character  and  reputation.  But  let  us  give  the 
proper  extension  to  the  idea  of  prudence  which  it  has  in  this  book.  It  is  the  wide 
view  of  life — the  mind  "  looking  before  and  after,"  the  contemplation  of  all  things 
in  their  long  issues,  their  bearings  upon  God,  destiny,  and  eternity.  The  prudence 
which  oftpn  passes  by  that  name  may  be  no  prudence  in  this  higher  sense.  5.  Self- 
help.  (Ver.  9.)  To  be  "  king  of  two  hands,"  and  bear  one's  part  in  every  useful  toil 
and  art,  to  be  a  true  "  working  man,"  is  the  only  honourable  and  true  way  of  living. 
"  Trust  in  thyself ; "  every  heart  vibrates  to  that  iron  string.  "  Heaven  helps  those 
who  help  themselves."  Proverbs  unite  with  experience  to  bid  us  lean  upon  the 
energies  God  has  placed  in  brain  and  hand  and  tongue.  He  is  never  helpless  who 
knows  the  secret  of  that  self-reliance  which  is  one  with  trust  in  God.  6.  Mercifulness. 
(Ver.  10.)  The  good  man  "  knows  the  soul  of  his  beast ;  "  enters  into  their  feelings, 
pains,  and  needs,  and  feeds  them  well.  The  Law  of  Moses  is  noted  for  its  kindness  to 
animals.  And  in  the  East  generally  there  is  a  deep  sense  that  animals  are  not  only 
the  slaves  of  man,  but  the  creatures  of  God.  A  person's  behaviour  to  dumb  creatures 
is,  like  behaviour  to  women  and  children,  a  significant  part  of  character.  7.  Industry 
and  diligence,  (Ver.  11.)  The  picture  of  the  hard-working  farmer  or  peasant  rises  to 
the  mind's  eye.  Enough  bread,  competence,  is  ever  conditioned  by  industry.  Times 
may  go  hard  with  the  farmer,  but  the  evil  that  is  foreseen  and  fought  against  by  extra 
diligence  is  no  evil  when  it  comes ;  and  how  seldom  are  the  truly  industrious  known 
to  want,  even  in  the  most  unfavourable  seasons  I  This  is  a  bright  picture  of  domestic 
soundness,  happiness,  and  prosperity.  Let  us  contrast  it  with — 
XL  Elements  of  miseby  nr  the  home.    1.  I9ie  vidous  wife.    Like  a  canker  in  bei 


244  THE  PROVERBS.  [oh.  xil  1—28. 


husband's  bones.  The  slothful,  or  drunken,  or  extravagant,  or  frivolous  wife  is  the 
centre  of  all  evil  in  the  house;  she  is  like  a  stagnant  pool  in  a  weed-grown  garden. 
One  may  tell  in  many  cases  by  the  mere  aspect  of  the  house  whether  there  be  a  good 
wife  and  mother  dwelling  there  or  not.  2.  Unprincipled  habits.  (Ver.  5.)  Where 
the  speech  is  impure,  where  there  is  mutual  reserve  and  concealment,  conspiracy  and 
counter-conspiracy  going  on,  neither  truth  nor  love,  how  can  a  home  be  otherwise  than 
curs^?  3.  Fierce  spite.  (Ver.  6.)  All  spite  is  murderous,  and  if  it  does  not  issue 
in  the  last  extreme  of  violence,  at  least  it  lacerates  the  heart,  burns,  and  is  self-con- 
suming. When  taunts,  recriminations,  answering  again,  fill  the  air  of  a  house,  the 
very  idea  of  the  family  and  its  peace  must  vanish.  4.  Dissolution  and  hreak-up. 
There  are  homts  that  go  to  pieces,  names  that  sink  into  obscurity,  families  that  die 
out;  and  a  moral  lesson  may  here  too  be  often  inferred.  5.  Moral  perversity  is  at  the 
root  of  these  evils  (ver.  8).  There  is  a  twist  in  the  affections,  a  guilty  misdirection  of 
the  will.  Contempt  in  others'  minds  reflects  the  moral  basis,  and  prophesies  its 
miserable  end.  6.  Idle  vanity  and  pride,  aga,m,  oontrfisted  with  that  habit  of  honest 
self-help  which  is  free  from  false  shame,  is  another  of  the  tokens  that  things  are  not 
going  well.  To  be  above  one's  situation,  to  shun  humble  employment,  to  stand  upon 
one's  dignity, — these  are  sure  enough  marks  of  want  of  moral  power,  and  so  of  true 
stability,  7.  Gruelty,  again,  to  inferiors  or  to  dumb  creatures  marks  the  corrupt  heart. 
Even  the  comparative  tenderness  of  the  bad  man  is  a  spurious  thing,  for  there  is  no 
real  kindness  from  a  heart  without  love.  8.  The  frivolous  pursuit  of  pleasure,  again, 
the  "  chase  after  vanity,"  opposed  to  steady  industry,  is  one  of  the  unfailing  accom- 
paniments of  folly  and  conducements  to  failure,  poverty,  and  misery. 

Lbssokb.  L  The  indications  of  a  sound  state  of  things  in  the  household,  or  the 
reverse,  are  numerous  and  manifold,  but  all  connected  together.  Partial  symptoms 
may  point  to  widespread  and  deeply  seated  evil.  2.  At  bottom  the  one  conditioil  of 
happiness  is  the  fear  of  God  and  the  love  of  one's  neighbour ;  and  the  cause  of  misery 
is  a  void  of  buth. — J. 

Vers.  12 — 22. —  Virtims  and  vices  in  civil  life.  I.  Some  vices  of  socibtt.  1. 
Envious  greed.  (Ver.  12.)  The  wicked  desires  the  "  takings "  of  the  evil.  It  is  a 
general  description  of  greedy  strife  and  competition,  one  man  trying  to  forestall 
another  in  the  baigain,  or  to  profit  at  the  expense  of  his  loss;  a  mutually  destructive 
process,  a  grinding  of  egoistic  passions  against  one  another,  so  that  there  can  be  no 
mutual  confidence  nor  peace  (Isa.  xWiii.  22;  Ivii.  21).  The  hard  selfishness  of 
business  life,  which  may  be  worse  than  war,  which  elicits  generosity  and  self-denial. 
2.  Tricks  of  speech.  (Ver.  13.)  How  much  of  this  there  is,  in  subtler  forms  than 
those  of  ancient  life,  in  our  day !  Exaggerations  of  value,  suppression  of  faults  in 
articles  of  commerce,  lying  advertisements,  coloured  descriptions,  etc., — all  tliese  are 
snares,  distinct  breaches  of  the  moral  law ;  and  were  they  not  compensated  by  truth 
and  honesty  in  other  directions,  society  must  crumble.  3.  Conceit  of  shrewdness 
(ver.  14)  is  a  common  mark  of  dishonest  men.  This  may  seem  right  in  their  own 
eyes,  no  matter  wliat  a  correct  moral  judgment  may  have  to  say  about  it.  There  may 
lurk  a  profound  immorality  beneath  the  constant  phrase,  "It  pays!"  Want  of 
principle  never  does  pay,  in  God's  sense.  The  seeming  success  on  which  such  men 
pride  themselves  is  not  real.  They  laugh  at  the  preacher,  but  expose  themselves  to 
a  more  profound  derision.  4.  Passion  and  impetuosity,  (Ver.  16.)  The  temper 
unfits  for  social  intercourse  and  business.  Flaming  out  at  the  first  provocation,  it 
shows  an  absence  of  reflection  and  self-control.  How  many  unhappy  woumis  have 
been  inflicted, either  in  won!  or  deed;  how  many  opportunities  lost,  friendships  broken, 
through  mere  temper  1  5.  Lying  and  deceit.  (Ver.  17.)  The  teaching  of  the  book 
harps  upon  this  string  again  anil  again.  For  does  not  all  evil  reduce  itself  to  a  lie 
in  its  essence?  And  is  not  deceit  or  treachery  in  some  form  the  real  canker  in  a 
decaying  society,  the  last  cause  of  all  calamity  ?  "  We  are  betrayed  1 "  was  the 
constant  exclamation  of  the  French  soldiers  during  the  last  war,  upon  the  occurrence 
of  a  defeat.  But  it  is  self-betrayal  that  is  the  most  dangoroua.  6.  Foulness  or 
violence  of  speech.  (Ver.  18.)  The  speech  of  the  fool  is  compared  to  the  thrusts  of  a 
sword.  Not  only  all  abusive  and  violent  language,  but  all  that  is  wanting  in  tact, 
imagination  of  others'  situation,  is  ccndemmd.  ■  7.  Designing  craft.    (Ver.  20.)    The 


CM.  xn.  1—28.3  THE  PROVERBS  M 

wiclted  heart  is  s  constant  forge  of  mischief.  And  yet,  after  this  catalogue  of  social 
ills,  these  moral  diseases  that  prey  upon  the  hody  of  society  and  the  state,  let  us  be 
comforted  in  the  recollection  (1)  that  all  evil  is  transient  (ver.  19)  j  and  (2)  that  its 
just  and  appropriate  punishment  is  inevitable.  The  first  and  last  of  frauds  with  the 
wicked  is  that'he  has  cheated  himself  and  laid  a  train  of  malicious  devices  which  wiU 
take  effect  upon  his  own  soul  certainly,  whoever  else  may  escape. 

II.  Social  virtues.    1.  They  are  the  condition  of  security  to  the  practiser  of  them. 
The  root  of  the  righteous  is  firmly  fixed  (ver.  12).    In  time  of  distress  he  finds 
resources  and  means  of  escape  (ver.  13).    2.  They  yield  him  a  revenue  of  blessing. 
He  reaps  the  good  fruit  of  his  wise  counsels  and  pure  speech.    They  come  back  to  him 
in  echoes — the  words  of  truth  he  has  spoken  to  others  (ch.  xiii.  2 ;  xviii.  20).    And 
so  too  with  his  good  actions.    They  come  back  with  blessing  to  him  who  sent  them 
forth  with  a  prayer  (ver.  14).     Spiritual  iuvcBtmeuts  bring  certain  if  slow  returns. 
3.  Some  characteristics  of  virtue  and  wisdom  enumerated.    (1)  It  is  the  part  of 
wisdom  to  listen  to  all  proffered  advice,  from  any  quarter,  to  discriminate  and  select 
that  which  is  good,  and  then  follow  it  (ver.  15).    In  critical  times  we  ought,  indeed, 
to  find  ourselves  our  own  best  counsellors,  in  the  privacy  of  prayer,  in  communion  with 
the  Divine  Spirit.    But  it  is  ever  well  to  consult  friends.    Conversation  with  such 
wonderfully  helps  us  to  clear  our  own  perceptions,  resolve  our  own  doubts,  confirm  our 
own  right  decisions.    (2)  It  is  the  part  of  prudence  to  ignore  affronts  (ver.  16),  instead 
of  hastily  resenting  them  like  the  fool.    A  good  illustration  may  be  taken  from  Saul, 
as  showing  the  contrast  in  the  same  person  of  wisdom  and  folly  in  this  matter 
(1  Sam.  X.  27  and  xx.  30 — 3^.    In  the  heathen  world,  Socrates  was  a  noble  example 
of  patience  under  injuries.    He  taught  his  disciples  that  the  man  who  oft'ered  an 
unjust  affront  really  more  injured  himself  than  him  who  received  it;  and  that  if  the 
insulted  person  resented  it,  he  did  but  place  himself  on  a  level  with  the  aggressor. 
Either  you  have  deserved  the  aS'ront  or  you  have  not.    If  you  have,  submit  to  it  as 
a  chastisement;  if  you  have  not,  content  yourself  with  the  testimony  of  your  con- 
science.   But  above  all,  the  example  of  our  Saviour  is  the  example  for  us,  "  who  wnea 
he  was  reviled,  reviled  not  again,  but  submitted  himself  to  him  that  judgeth  ngnt- 
eously."    Hia  whole  behaviour  at  his  trial  should  make  a  deeper  impression  upon  us 
than  a  thousand  arguments.    4.  Truthful  speech  is  one  of  the  most  eminent  signs  ot 
virtue  and  godliness.    How  constantly  is  this  emphasized!    (1)  TruWul  ««<*  "f^' 
speech  can  bnly  proceed  from  the  truthful  mind.    "He  who  ^^atbes  truth,   aayi 
ver.  17,  "  utters  right."    We  must  make  truth  the  atmosphere  of  our  being,  our  very 
Ufe  itself,  as  in  ancient  thought  the  breath  is  identified  with  the  life.    (2)  2r««^«< 
and  wise  speech  is  also  known  by  its  effects  (ver.  18).    It  heah,  ,t  b™gs  salvation- 
correction  tb  error,  comfort  to  the  wounded  heart.    Compare  the  Future  of  our  W 
in  the  synagogue  at  Nazareth,  and  the  words  he  quotes  from  Ij!«ah  as  ^F^ssive  « 
the  purport  of  his  ministry  (Luke  iv.  16,  etc.).    (3)  It  is  vahdalid^ng.  Permanent 
in  va"ue  (ver.  19).     Much  in  our  knowledge  is  subject  to  the  aw»  of  change  and 
«owth?  We  grow  out  of  the  old  and  into  the  new.    But  the  simple  Bentunents  o^ 
Sety  and  duty  common  to  all  good  men  are  capable  of  no  change  no  decay-    O^j  ^^"^ 
idl  the  2O0d  man  will  ever  say,  "So  was  it  when  I  was  a  boy;  so  is  it  now  l  am  a 
man-  sflet  irbe  Xn  I  grow  old  1 »     5.  Joy,  peace,  and  eternal  safety  are  the  portion 
rrh'e  wise  and  iurtTers20721).    Joy  in  the  heart,  p.  ace  in  the  home  and  amongst 
ii  Xr.SerbeVand  berelfter/ Translated  into  f  l-g-f/„,*X^ospd 
"Glory,   honour,  immortality,  and  eternal  lifel     (Rom.  u.  7).     l- ur  m  one  wuru, 
enjoys  the  favour  of  his  God,  and  this  contains  all  things  (ver.  22).-J. 

Ver.   iZ.-Experimental   truths:     1.  Prudent    reserve  and.  foolUh  labhUng.    L 

PRnDBNCE  HAS  RBGAKD  TO  TIMK,  PLACE,  AND  TERSONS  ;   FOLLY  HAS  NONE. 

nPBUDENCB  KNOWS  THAT  T^ERB  IS  A  TIME  FOB  SILENCE  ;   THE  FOOL  WILL  STILL  B. 

'''i^'lJ.rL*^if'^'l7oirZ^O:.t..    MAX    BE   BHT    ANXIKT.    TO    EXAL. 

OBESELvr  Great'talker's  are  great  nuisances.     The  ambitious  aim  U>  shine  cannot 
he  hidden     The  fool  talks  as  if  he  were  ambitious  to  be  known  for  a  fool. 

IV  TiFVOE    18    ALWAYS     SEASONABLE    IN     BBFBBENCE    TO    SUBJECTS    WE    DO    NOT 

CNisTANr  Were  this  rule  observed,  conversation  would  be  generally  more  enter- 


24«  THE  PEOVBBBS.  [oh.  xn.  1—28 


tainlog  aod  more  profitable.  At  the  same  time,  s  great  many  pulpits  would  ba 
emptied,  and  publishers  and  printers  would  have  a  sorry  time  of  it  (comp.  1  Tim.  i.  6, 7). 
Let  uB  confess  that  there  is  a  great  deal  of  the  fool  in  every  one  of  us.— J. 

Ver.  24. — 2.  The  fromothn  of  th«  diligent  and  the  subjection  of' the  elothfid.  I. 
Thx  diligeht  bibe  in  life.  This  if  too  obvious  to  need  insisting  upon.  But  often, 
when  wonder  is  expressed  at  the  rise  of  ordinary  men,  this  solution  may  be  recurred  to. 
As  a  rule,  it  is  not  the  greatest  wits  who  fill  the  high  places  of  the  realm,  but  the 
greatest  workers, 

II.  He  only  is  fit  to  oovbkn  who  has  been  wiliinq  to  bbevb.  For  in  truth  the 
spirit  of  the  true  servant  and  that  of  the  true  ruler  are  alike  in  principle ;  it  is  respect 
for  law,  for  right  beyond  and  above  self-will  and  self-interest,  which  animates  both. 
If  this  has  been  proved  in  the  trials  of  an  inferior  situation,  its  genuineness  has  been 
discovered,  and  it  becomes  a  title  to  promotion.  Abraham's  servant  (Qen,  zxiv.  2, 10) 
and  Joseph  (Gen.  xzxix.  4,  22)  are  illustrations  from  patriarchal  life. 

III.  The  slothful  decay.  This  too  is  obvious.  But  perhaps  we  often  fail  to  fix 
the  stigma  of  sloth  in  the  right  place.  Many  busy,  energetic,  fiissy  people  miscarry 
because  their  activity  is  ill-placed.  To  neglect  one's  proper  vocation  and  work  is 
idleness,  no  matter  what  may  be  the  uncalled-for  activity  in  other  directions. — J. 

Ver.  25. — 3.  Depression  and  comfort.    L  Depression  is  common. 

II.  Trouble  affects  the  heart.  When  we  use  the  word  "  discouragement "  we 
point  to  a  state  that  is  both  bodily  and  psychical.  The  action  of  the  heart  is  lowered, 
and  there  is  less  energy  to  act  and  to  endure. 

III.  The  immediate  effect  of  sympathy.  The  kindly  word,  and  all  that  it 
expresses  of  love  and  fellow-feeling  on  the  part  of  our  friend,  quickens  the  pulse,  and 
restores,  as  by  ma^c,  the  tone  of  the  mind.— J. 

Ver.  26. — L  Oood  guidance  and  misleading  counsels.  The  true  translation  seems  to  be, 
"  The  righteous  directs  his  friend  aright :  but  the  way  of  the  wicked  leads  them  astray." 

I.  We  abb  all  susceptible  to  thb  influences  op  those  about  us.  This  is  true 
even  of  the  strongest  minds ;  how  much  more  of  the  feebler! 

II.  We  abb  always  safe  in  thb  company  of  men  of  rectitude.  The  character 
of  the  man,  not  his  mere  opinions,  is  the  force  that  goes  forth  from  him  to  enlighten 
and  guide.  ' 

ni.   We  ABE   NEVEB  SAF«  IN  THB   COMPANY  OP  UNPRINOIPLBD   PERSONS ;   DO  matter 

how  correct  their  conversation  or  unexceptionable  their  expressed  opinions. — J. 

Ver.  27. — 5.  Laxity  and  industry.  I.  Laxity  odes  empty-handed.  The  proverb 
seems  to  call  up  the  image  of  a  hunter  who  is  too  lazy  to  pursue  the  game. 

II.  Industby  18  itself  a  capital.  Toil  is  as  good  as  treasure ;  such  seems  to  be 
the  force  of  the  proverb.  And  we  may  be  reminded  of  the  paiable  of  the  farmer  who 
indicated  t»  his  sons  the  treasure  in  the  field ;  their  persevering  toil  in  digging  led  to 
their  enrichment. — J. 

Vei-.  28. — 6.  The  straight  road  and  the  bypath.  L  Rectitude  mat  bk  compared 
to  a  stbaioht  eoad.  It  has  a  definite  beginning,  a  clearly  marked  course,  a  happy 
ternnnation.  =  *  .         rrj 

XL  All  immobality  and  ibebliqion  mat  be  compared  to  bypaths.  Bee  Bunyan's 
Bypath  Meadow  in  '  Pilgrim's  Progress.' 

III.  Life  AND  death  abb  the  two  great  terminl  All  the  more  impressive 
because  we  know  not  what  they  contain  of  blissful  or  of  dread  meaning :  "  Behold,  I  set 
before  you  life  and  death  I "  is  the  constant  cry  of  wisdom,  of  every  true  teacher,  of  the 
unchanging  gospel. — J. 

Vers.  1,  16.— The  downward  and  the  upward  paths.     Whether  we  are  daily 
ascending  or  descending  depends  very  much  on  whether  we  are  ready  or  are  refusing 
.    ?• ,  ■■■';«  "i'"i  01  open  mind  is  he  who  moves  up,  but  the  man  whose  soul  is  shut 
against  the  light  is  he  who  is  going  down. 


OH.  XII.  1—28.]  THE  PROVBUBS.  247 

L  The  downward  path.  We  strike  one  point  in  this  patli  when  we  come  to :  1. 
The  forming  of  a  false  estimate  of  oursdf.  When  "  our  way  is  right  in  our  own  eyes  " 
(ver.  15),  and  that  way  is  the, wrong  one,  we  are  certainly  in  the  road  that  dips  down- 
ward. The  wise  who  love  ua  truly  are  grieved  when  they  see  us  imagining  ourselves 
to  be  hvuuble  when  we  are  proud  of  heart,  generous  when  we  are  selfish,  spiritual 
when  we  are  worldly  minded,  sons  of  God  when  we  are  children  of  darkness ;  they 
know  well  and  sorrow  much  that  we  are  in  a  bad  way,  in  the  downward  road.  2.  The 
consequent  refusal  to  receive  instruction.  The  man  who  thinks  himself  right  is  one 
who  will  oppose  himself  to  all  those  who,  and  to  aU  things  which,  approach  him  to 
instruct  and  to  correct.  He  takes  up  a  constant  attitude  of  rejection.  Whenever  God 
speaks  to  him  by  any  one  of  his  many  agents  and  influences,  he  is  resolutely  and 
persistently  deaf.  3.  The  consequent  sinking  into  a  lower  state ;  he  becomes  "  brutish." 
A  man  who  never  admits  correcting  and  purifying  thouglits  into  his  mind  is  sure  to 
decline  morally  and  spiritually.  If  our  soul  is  not  fed  with  truth,  and  is  not  cleansed 
with  the  purifying  streams  of  Divine  wisdom,  it  is  certain  to  recede  in  worth ;  it  will 
partake  more  and  more  of  earthly  elements.  The  finer,  the  nobler,  the  more  elevating 
and  enlarging  elements  of  character  will  be  absent  or  will  grow  weaker ;  the  man  will 
sink ;  he  will  become  brutish. 

II.  The  0PWARD  PATH.  This  is,  naturally  and  necessarily,  the  reverse  of  the  other. 
It  is  that  wherein:  1.  We  form  a  trUe  estimate  of  ourselves.  2.  We  open  our  mindi 
to  welcome  wisdom  from  all  quarters.  We  hearken  "  unto  counsel,"  i.e.  to  the  wordi 
of  those  who  are  wiser  than  ourselves.  And  it  may  be  that  some  who  have  much  less 
learning,  or  experience,  or  intellectual  capacity  than  we  can  claim  are  in  a  position  to 
advise  us  concerning  the  way  of  life.  It  may  be  even  "the  little  child"  who  will 
"lead"  us  into  the  circle  of  truth,  into  the  kingdom  of  God.  And  not  only  unto 
•'  counsel "  shall  we  hearken ;  we  shall  give  heed,  if  we  are  wise,  to  the  suggestions  of 
nature,  to  the  teaching  of  events,  to  the  promptings  of  the  Divine  Spirit,  We  shall  be 
always  ready  and  even  eager  to  learn  and  willing  to  apply.  3.  We  attain  to  a  higher 
•nd  deeper  wisdom.  "  Whoso  loveth  instruction  loveth  knowledge."  In  the  upward 
way  which  he  of  the  humble  heart  and  open  mind  is  travelling  there  grow  the  rich 
fruits  of  heavenly  wisdom.  The  higher  we  ascend,  the  more  of  these  shall  we  see  and 
gather.  To  love  counsel  is  to  love  knowledge ;  it  is  to  love  truth;  it  is  to  become  the 
friend  and  disciple  and  depository  of  wisdom.  There  is  a  knowledge  which  is  very 
precious  that  may  be  had  of  all  men;  it  is  found  on  the  plain  where  all  feet  can  tread. 
There  is  also  a  knowledge  which  dwells  upon  the  hills ;  only  the  traveller  can  reach 
this  and  partake  of  it ;  and  the  path  which  climbs  this  height  is  the  path  of  humility 
and  heedfulness ;  it  is  taken  only  by  those  who  are  conscious  of  their  own  defect, 
and  who  are  eager  to  learn  all  the  lessons  which  the  Divine  teacher  is  seeking  to 
impart. — 0. 

Vers.  3,  12. — Strength  andfruitfulness.  Concerning  the  righteous  man  two  things 
•re  here  affirmed. 

I.  In  him  IB  STRENGTH.  "  The  root  of  the  righteous  shall  never  he  moved."  The 
atrong  wind  comes  and  blows  down  the  tree  which  has  not  struck  its  roots  far  into  the 
■oil ;  it  tears  it  up  by  the  roots  and  stretches  it  prone  upon  the  ground.  It  has  no 
strength  to  stand  because  its  root  is  easily  moved.  The  righteous  man  is  a  tree  of 
another  kind  ;  his  root  shall  never  be  moved ;  he  will  stand  against  the  storm.  But  he 
must  be  a  man  whodeserves  to  be  called  and  considered  "  righteous"  because  he  is  such 
in  deed  and  in  truth  ;  for  they  are  many  who  pass  for  such  of  whom  no  such  affirma- 
tion as  this  can  be  made.  The  man  of  whom  the  text  speaks :  1.  7s  well  rooted.  He  it 
rooted  (1)  in  Divine  truth,  and  not  merely  in  human  speculation ;  (2)  in  deep  con- 
viction, and  not  merely  in  indolent  acceptance  of  inherited  belief,  or  in  strong  but 
evanescent  emotion;  (3)  in  the  fixed  habit  of  the  soul  and  of  the  life,  and  not  merely 
in  occasional,  spasmodic  outbursts.  2.  Is  immovable.  There  may  come  against  him 
the  strong  winds  of  bodily  indulgence,  or  of  pure  affection,  or  of  intellectual  struggle 
and  perplexity,  or  of  worldly  pressure ;  but  they  do  not  avail ;  he  is  immovable ;  his 
roots  only  strike  deeper  and  spread  further  in  the  ground.  He  "  stands  fast  In  the 
Lord'"  he  i»  a  conqueror  through  Christ  who  loves  him.  For:  3.  He  is  t^hdd  iy 
Divine  power.    While  his  own  spiritual  condition  and  his  moral  habits  have  mneh  t0 


248 


THE  PROYBBBS.  [oh.  in.  1—28, 


do  with  hig  steadfastness,  ho  will  be  the  first  to  say  that  God  if  "upholding  him  in  his 
integrity,  and  settins  him  before  bis  face."  .,,.,,■.»/-        -.ov 

II.  Ih  him  is  fruitpulness.  "  The  root  of  the  righteous  yieldeth  fruit  (ver.  12). 
The  ungodly  man  cannot  be  said  to  bear  fruit,  for  the  product  of  his  soul  and  of  his  Ufa 
does  not  deserve  that  fair  name.  1.  The  forms  of  godly  fruitfulness  are  these  .  (1)  all 
excellency  of  spirit ;  (2)  all  beauty  and  worthiness  of  life,  the  presence  of  that  which 
is  pleasing  in  the  sight  of  God  and  admirable  in  the  sight  of  man ;  (3)  all  earnest 
endeavour  to  do  good,  the  patient,  persevering  effort  to  instil  the  thoughts  of  Christ  into 
the  minds  of  men,  to  awaken  their  slumbering  consciences,  to  lift  up  their  lives,  to 
ennoble  their  character,  to  enlarge  their  destiny.  2.  The  source  and  the  security  of 
such  fruitfuhieas  are  :  (1)  Union  with  the  living  Vine.  (2)  Abiding  in  him  (John  it. 
1__8).  (3)  The  wise  and  kind  discipline  of  the  Divine  Husbandman  (John  xv.  2 ; 
Heb.  lu.  10, 11).— C. 

Ver.  5.-— Bight  (Just)  thoughts.  "  The  thoughts  of  the  righteous  are  right,"  or  are 
"just"  (Revised  Version).  There  is  something  more  than  a  truism  in  these  words. 
We  may  see  first — 

I,  The  place  of  thought  in  man.  This  is  one  of  the  greatest  importance,  for  it  is 
the  "deepest  of  all;  it  is  at  the  very  foundation.  1.  Conduct  rests  on  character.  It  is 
often  said  that  conduct  is  the  greater  part  of' life;  it  is  certainly  that  part  which 
is  most  conspicuous,  and  therefui  e  must  influential.  But  it  is  superficial ;  it  rests  on 
character ;  it  depends  on  the  principles  which  are  within  the  soul.  It  is  those  which 
determine  a  man's  position  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  "2.  Character  is  determined  by 
our  prevalent  and  established  feeling ;  by  what  we  have  learned  to  love,  by  what  we 
have  come  to  hate.  As  a  man  thinkeih  in  his  heart,  as  he  feels  in  his  soul,  so  is  he;  it 
is  our  final  and  fixed  attachments  and  repulsions  that  decide  our  character.  3.  Feeling 
springs  from  thought.  As  we  think,  we  feel.  By  the  thoughts  admitted  to  our  minds 
and  entertained  there  are  determined  our  loves  and  our  hatreds.  Life,  therefore,  is 
ultimately  built  on  thought.  What  are  we  thinking  ? — this  is  the  vital  question.  Now, 
the  thoughts  of  the  righteous,  the  upright,  the  good,  the  true  man,  are  right,  mjust. 

II.  The  just  thoughts  of  the  good.  A  good  man's  thoughts  are  such  as  are : 
1.  Just  to  himself.  He  owes  it  to  himself  to  think  only  those  thoughts  which  are  pure 
and  true.  If  he  harbours  those  which  are  impure  and  untrue,  he  is  dning  himself 
deadly  injury,  he  is  inflicting  on  his  spirit,  on  himself,  a  fatal  wound.  This  he  has  no 
right  to  do  ;  he  is  bound,  in  justice  to  himself,  to  guard  the  gate  of  his  mind  against 
these — to  admit  only  those  which  are  true  and  pure.  2.  Just  to  his  neighbours.  He 
owes  it  to  them  to  think  thoujchts  that  are  honest  and  charitable.  We  wrong  our 
brethren,  in  truth  and  fact  if  not  in  appearance,  when  we  think  of  them  that  which  is 
not  fair  toward  them.  Every  really  righteous  man  will  therefore  banish  thoughts 
which  are  not  thoroughly  honest,  and  also  those  which  are  uncharitable ;  for  to  be 
uncharitable  is  to  be  essentially  and  most  materially  unjust.  3.  Just  to  God.  We 
owe  to  our  Divine  Creator  and  Redeemer  all  thoughts  which  are  (1)  reverent,  leading 
us  to  piety  and  devotion  ;  (2)  grateful,  leading  us  to  thankful  praise ;  (3)  submissive, 
leading  us  to  the  one  decisive,  all-inclusive  act  of  self-surrender,  and  tp  daily  and  hourly 
obedience  to  his  holy  will ;  (4)  trustful,  leading  us  to  a  calm  assurance  that  all  is  well 
with  us,  and  that  the  darkness  or  the  twiUght  will  pass  into  the  perfect  day. — C. 

Ver.  9. —  Consideration  or  comfort  f  It  is  worth  remarking  that  we  might  obtain  a 
very  wholesome  truth  from  the  teit,  if  we  take  the  exact  reverse  of  the  proverb  as 
worded  in  our  version ;  for  then  we  reach  the  wise  conclusion — 

I.  That  sblf-rbspeot,  however  indiobnt,  is  better  than  "being  ministered  unto'' 
at  the  cost  of  reputation.  It  is  better  to  lack  bread,  or  even  life  itself,  really  honouring 
ourself,  than  it  is  to  receive  any  amount  of  service  from  others,  if  we  have  forfeited  the 
regard  of  the  good,  and  are  deservedly  "  despised."  But  taking  the  words  as  they  are, 
and  reaching  the  sense  intended  by  the  writer,  we  gather — 

II.  That  domestic  comfort  and  suffioienct  are  much  to  be  prbferbed  to  the 
OBATiFicATioN  OF  PERSONAL  VAKiTY.  One  man,  in  order  that  he  may  have  consideration 
and  deference  from  his  neighbours,  expends  his  resources  on  those  outward  appearances 
which  will  command  that  gratification ;  to  do  this  he  has  to  deny  himself  the  attend- 


OH.  xii.  1— 28.]  THE  PROVERBS.  249 

ance  which  he  would  like  to  have,  and  even  the  nourishment  he  needs.  Another  man_ 
diaregariis  altogether  the  slights  he  may  suffer  from  his  meddlesome  and  intruBive' 
neighbours,  in  order  to  supply  hia  home  with  the  food  and  the  comforts  which  will 
benefit  his  family.  It  is  the  latter  who  is  ihe  wise  man.  For :  1.  The  gratiScation 
of  vanity  is  a  very  paltry  satisfaction;  there  is  nothing  honourable,  but  rather  ignoble 
about  it ;  it  lowers  rather  than  raises  a  man  in  the  sight  of  wisdom.  2,  The  gratifica- 
tion thus  gained  is  likely  to  prove  very  ephemeral,  and  to  diminish  constantly  in  its 
value ;  moreover,  it  is  personal  and,  in  that  sense,  selfish.  3,  Domestic  comfort  is  a 
daily  advantage,  lasting  the  whole  year  round,  the  whole  life  long.  4.  Domestic  com- 
fort not  only  benefits  the  head  of  the  household,  but  all  the  members  of  it,  and  he  who 
makes  a  happy  homo  is  contributing  to  the  good  of  his  country  and  his  kind.  Using 
now  the  words  of  the  text  as  suggestive  of  truths  which  they  do  not  actually  hold,  we 
learn — 

III.  That  these  is  a  valuable  bbrviob  which  all  mat  secube.  "  He  that  hath  a 
servant."  Men  are  divisible  into  those  that  are  servants  and  those  that  have  them. 
Some  are  the  slaves  of  their  evil  habits ;  these  are  to  be  profoundly  pitied,  however 
many  menservants  or  maidservants  they  may  have  at  their  call.  But  we  may  and 
should  belong  to  those  who  hold  their  habits,  whether  of  the  mind  or  of  the  life,  under 
their  control  and  at  their  command.  If  that  be  so  with  us,  then,  though  we  should 
have  no  dependents  at  all  in  our  employ,  or  though  we  ourselves  should  he  dependents, 
living  in  honourable  and  useful  service,  we  shall  have  the  most  valuable  servants 
always  at  hand  to  minister  to  us,  building  up  our  character,  strengthening  our  mind, 
enlarging  our  life. 

IV.  That  we  should  secure  nourishmbkt  at  all  costs  whatever.  We  must  never 
be  "  the  man  that  lacketh  bread."  To  attain  to  any  honour,  to  receive  any  adulation, 
to  indulge  any  fancy,  and  to  "  lack  bread,"  is  a  great  mistake.  For  nourishment  is 
strength  and  fulness  of  life ;  it  is  so  in  (1)  the  physical,  (2)  the  intellectual,  (3)  the 
moral  and  spiritual  realm.  With  the  regularity  and  earnestness  with  which  we  ask 
fw  "daily  bread,"  we  should  labour  and  strive  to  secure  it,  for  our  whole  nature. — 0. 

Ver.  16. — (See  homily  on  oh.  xxix.  11.)-— OL 

Ver.  24. — (See  homily  on  oh.  xxvii.  23.)— 0. 

Ver.  26. — Growth  and  seductiveness.  The  goal  which  a  man  will  reach  must  depend 
on  the  tendency  of  the  habits  he  has  formed,  or  the  way  iu  which  his  life  inclines, 
whether  upward  or  downward.  Are  his  habits  such  that  we  can  properly  speak  of 
them  as  growing  toward  perfection,  or  such  as  may  be  more  properly  thought  of  as 
conducting  or  seducing  to  wrong  and  ruin  ? 

I.  The  growth  of  goodness..  "The  righteous  is  more  abundant  than  his  neigh- 
bour "  (marginal  reading).  He  is  more  abundant  because :  1.  The  blessing  of  God 
rests  upon  him,  and  his  reward  is  in  fruitfulness  in  some  direction.  2.  Righteousness 
means  or  includes  virtue,  temperance,  industry,  thrift,  culture;  and  these  mean 
prosperity  and  success.  3.  God's  great  prevailing  law  that  "  to  him  that  hath  [uses,  or 
puts  out,  what  powers  he  has]  is  given,  and  he  shall  have  abundance,"  is  constantly 
operating  here  and  now,  in  all  realms  of  human  action  ;  consequently,  tho  good  man 
is  reaping  the  beneficial  result.  (1)  In  the  physical  wnrld,  bodily,  muscular  exeicise 
"  is  profiting,"  and  ends  in  abounding  health  and  strength  and  capacity  of  endurance. 
(2)  In  the  mental  world,  study  and  patient  observation  result  in  abounding  know- 
ledge and  intellectual  grasp.  (3)  In  the  spiritual  world,  devotion  and  the  daily 
learning  of  Christ  (Matt.  xi.  28)  end  in  abounding  virtue,  in  the  "  more  abundant  life  " 
which  the  Saviour  offers  to  confer.  Thus  the  life  of  the  righteous  man  is  one  of  con- 
tinual growth  in  all  good  directions,  and  he  is  "  more  abundant  than  his  neighbour." 

II.  The  seductiveness  or  sin.  "  The  way  of  the  wicked  seduceth  them."  We 
read'(Heb.  iii.  13)  of  "  the  deceitfulness  of  sin."  And  we  know  only  too  well  by  experi- 
ence and  observation  how  seductive  and  deceitful  are  its  ways.  1.  It  begins  with  a 
pleasureableness  which  promises  to  continue,  but  which  fails,  which  indeed  turns  to 
misery  and  ruin  (see  ch.  vii.  6—27).  At  first  it  is  a  soft  green  slope,  but  the  end  is  a 
steep  and  rooky  precipice  over  which  the  victim  fells.    2.  It  promises  an  easy  esca^ 


250  THE  PROVERBa  [oh,  xm.  1—26, 

,  from  its  hold,  but  it  coils  its  cords  around  its  subjects  with  quiet  hand,  until  it  holds 
them  in  a  fast  captivity.  3.  It  persuades  its  adherents  that  its  ways  are  right  when 
they  are  utterly  wrong,  and  thus  sings  to  sleep  the  conscience  which  should  be  aroused 
and  active.  4.  It  pleads  the  crowded  character  of  its  path,  and  assures  of  safety; 
although  the  presence  of  a  multitude  is  no  guard  or  guarantee  whatever  against  the 
condemnation  and  the  retribution  of  the  Almighty.  But  let  youth  understand  that  all 
these  are  "  refuges  of  lies."  For  the  truth  is  that  (1)  the  way  of  transgressors  is  all  too 
soon  found  to  be  "hard"  indeed.  (2)  After  a  very  little  way  is  trodden,  it  is  most 
difficult,  and  further  on  all  but  impossible  to  return.  (3)  The  paths  of  sin  are  all 
grievously  wrong  in  the  sight  of  Divine  purity.    (4)  "  The  wages  of  sin  is  death." — 0. 

ITer.  28. — The  one  way  of  life.    "  All  that  a  man  hath  will  he  give  for  his  life ; " 

but  of  what  worth  is  life  to  many  men  ?    What  does  it  mean  to  them  but  work  and 

sleep  and  indulgence?    Of  how  many  is  it  true  that  they  "  are  dead  while  they  live"  1 

■  But  "  in  the  way  of  righteousness  there  is  life,  and  in  the  pathway  thereof  is  no  death." 

I.  The  way  op  eighteousness  the  one  path  op  life.  It  is  the  one  and  only 
path ;  for  the  paths  of  sin  are  those  of  spiritual  death.  In  them  the  human  traveller 
is  separated  from  God,  from  all  excellency  of  character,  from  all  true  and  lasting  joy ; 
and  what  is  this  but  death  in  everything  except  the  name  ?  It  is  not  the  true,  the 
Tenl  life  of  man.  Bat  righteousness  in  the  full,  broad  sense  in  which  the  word  is  here 
employedj  Includes :  1.  Devotion ;  the  spirit  of  reverence,  the  act  of  prayer,  the 
approach  of  our  human  spirit  to  God,  and  our  habitual  walking  with  him  and  worship 
of  him.  2.  Virtue;  the  practice  of  truthfulness,  temperance,  purity,  integrity;  the 
exercise  of  self-restraint,  the  discharge  of  the  duties  which  we  owe  to  our  fellow-men, 
respecting  ourselves  and  honouring  them.  3.  Service ;  the  endeavour,  in  a  spirit  of 
loving-kindness,  to  raise,  to  succour,  to  guide,  to  bless,  all  whom  we  can  reach  and 
influence.  4.  Joy ;  i.e.  not  mere  excitement  or  gratification,  which  may  expire  at  any 
moment,  and  may  leave  a  sting  or  a  stain  behind,  but  rather  that  honourable  and  pure 
elation  of  spirit  which  springs  from  conscious  rectitude,  which  is  the  consequence  of 
our  being  in  harmony  with  all  that  is  around  us,  and  with  him  who  is  above  us,  which 
lasts  through  the  changes  of  circumstances,  which  "  through  all  time  abides,"  which 
"  satisfies  and  sanctifies  the  soul."  This  is  life ;  this  is  life  indeed ;  this  is  worth  call- 
ing life ;  and  this  is  in  the  way  of  righteousness. 

II.  Its  immunity  fbom  death.  "  In  the  pathway,"  etc.  1.  No  death  during  mortal 
life ;  80  long  as  we  walk  in  the  light  of  Divine  truth  there  is  no  fear  of  our  stumbling 
into  error  and  falling  into  the  condition  of  spiritual  death ;  our  life  in  God  and  with 
him  will  be  steadily  maintained.  2.  No  real  death  at  the  end  of  that  life ;  for  though 
we  must  pass  through  "  the  portal  we  call  death,"  yet  "  it  is  not  death  to  die,"  when 
the  termination  of  mortal  existence  is  the  starting-point  of  the  celestial  life ;  when  the 
being  unclothed  of  the  earthly  tenement  means  the  "  being  clothed  upon  with  our  house 
which  is  from  heaven,"  when  "  absence  from  the  body  "  means  "  presence  with  the 
Lord."  3.  Fulness  and  enlargement  of  life  for  ever;  for  our  hope  and  confident  expec- 
tation is  that,  along  whatever  paths  our  God  may  lead  us  in  the  heavenly  spheres, 
the  way  we  shall  take  will  be  one  that  will  be  ever  disclosing  greater  grandeurs,  evn- 
opening  new  sources  of  joy,  ever  unfolding  new  secrets,  and  making  life  mean  more 
and  more  to  our  rejoicing  spirits  as  the  years  and  ages  pass. — 0. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XIU. 
Ver.  1 — oh.  xv.  19. — Second  section  in 
this  collection. 

Ver.  1. — A  wise  son  heareth  his  father's 
butraotion.  The  Authorized  Version  intro- 
duces the  verb  from  the  second  member. 
The  Hebrew  is  elliptical,  "  A  wise  son,  his 
bthei's  diwipUne,"  •'.«.  is  the  object  or  the 


result  of  his  father's  edncation ;  be  owes  Us 
wisdom  to  it.  Septuagint,  "  A  clever  (irav- 
tvpyos)  son  is  obedient  to  his  father."  But  ft 
Ecorner  (ch.  i.  22)  heareth  not  rebuke ;  one 
who  mocks  at  goodness  and  despises  filial 
piety  will  not  listen  to  reproof.  Septua- 
gint, "  A  disobedient  son  is  in  destruction." 
Compare  the  case  of  Eli's  sons,  and  their  fate 
(ISam.  iL25:  iv.  17). 


CB.  zm.  1—25.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


251 


Ver.  2. — A  man  shall  eat  good  by  the  frnlt 
of  his  month  (oh.  xii.  14 ;  xviii.  20).  By  his 
kindly  speech  and  wise  counsels  he  shall 
eain  the  good  will  of  his  neighbours  and  the 
blessing  of  God.  Sohultens  observes  that 
the  word  rendered  "good"  (fob)  means 
what  is  pleasant  to  taste  and  smell,  while 
that  translated  "violence"  (chamas)  signi- 
fies literally  what  is  crude  and  unripa  The 
Bonl  of  the  transgressors  shall  eat  violenoe 
(ch.  L  31).  The  Authorized  Version  intro- 
duces the  verb  from  the  first  clause  unneces- 
sarily. The  meaning  of  this  rendering  is 
iiiat  sinners,  especially  the  treacherous, 
bring  on  themselves  retribution;  the  in- 
juries which  they  devise  against  others 
recoil  on  their  own  heads  (ch.  x.  6).  The 
Hebrew  is,  "The  soul  (i.e.  the  desire,  or 
delight)  of  the  perfidious  (is)  violenoe." 
Buch  men  have  only  one  thing  at  heart, 
viz.  to  wrong  their  neighbour,  and  to  in- 
crease their  own  property  hy  any,  even 
nefarious,  proceedings.  Septuagint,  "  Of 
the  fruits  of  righteousness  the  good  man 
shall  eat;  but  the  lives  of  transgressors 
shall  perish  untimely." 

Ver.  3. — He  that  keepeth  (guardeth)  his 
mouth  keepeth  his  life  (ch.  xviii.  21 ;  xxi. 
23;  eomp.  Fs.  xxxix.l:  Jas.  i  26).  Thus 
the  gnome — 

*H  yKaffira  voWohs  els  tKeOpov  ^ayey» 
"The  tongue  hath  many  to  destruction  led." 

And  Ecelus.  xxviii.  25,  "  Weigh  thy  words 
in  a  balance,  and  make  a  door  and  bar  for 
thy  mouth.  Beware  thou  slide  not  by  it, 
lest  thou  fall  before  him  that  lieth  in  wait." 
But  he  that  openeth  wide  his  lips  shall  have 
dastrnotion  (ch.  x.  14).  The  Vulgate  para- 
phrases, "  He  who  is  inconsiderate  in  speech 
shall  experience  evils;"  Septuagint,  "will 
terrify  himself" — will  occasion  to  himself 
many  terrible  alarms  and  inflictions.  Hence 
the  psalmist  prays,  "  Set  a  watch,  0  Lord, 
before  my  mouth;  keep  the  door  of  my 
lips."  So  we  have  in  the  Danish, "  A  silent 
man's  words  are  not  brought  into  court;" 
and  in  the  Spanish, "  Let  not  the  tongue  say 
what  the  head  shnll  pay  for ; "  while  the 
Italians  tell  us,  "  The  sheep  that  bleats  is 
strangled  by  the  wcif ; "  and  "  Silence  was 
never  written  dowv> "  (Kelly).  (See  on  oh. 
xviii.  6 ;  xx.  1!)  ) 

Ver.  4. — (Coiop.  ch.  x.  4.)  The  soul  of  the 
tluggard  desii'^Oh,  and  hath  nothing  ;  li- 
terally, and  nothing  is  there — he  gains  no- 
thing (ch.  xi"  6 ;  xx.  4).  He  has  the  wish, 
but  not  tht  vtill,  and  the  empty  wish  with- 
out corresponding  exertion  is  useless  (ch. 
XxL  25,  etc.).  Vulgate,  "  The  indolent 
wishes,  and  wishes  not;"  he  wishes  for 
something,  but  he  wishes  not  for  the  labour 
of  getting  it;  he  would  like  the  result,  but 
bo  bates  the  process  by  which  tbe>iesult  is 


to  be  obtatned.  Septuagint,  "In  desires 
every  idle  man  is  occupied;"  his  mind  is 
fixed  wholly  on  aimless  wishes,  not  on 
action.  Shall  be  made  fat  (oh.  xi.  25); 
Septuagint,  "The  hands  of  the  vab'ant  are 
fully  occupied  (^i/  eiriij.e\el^." 

Ver.  5. — Lying;  \vlga.te,verivmmendax; 
Septuagint,  \iy6v  &Sikoi/  ;  literally,  o  word 
of  falsehood.'  But  debar,  "word,"  is  used, 
like  (S^juo  in  Hellenistio  Greek,  in  a  general 
sense  for  "  thing,"  i.e.  the  subject  of  speech. 
So  here  it  is  not  only  verbal  lying  that  is 
meant,  but  every  kind  of  deceit  and  guile, 
This  naturally  betrays  itself  by  the  speech, 
according  to  the  proverb,  "  Show  me  a  liar, 
and  I  will  show  you  a  thief."  A  wicked 
man  is  loathsome,  and  oometh  to  shame. 
The  clause  is  variously  b'anslated.  Vulgate, 
eonfundit  et  eonfundetur,  "  causes  shame  to 
others  and  to  himself."  Septuagint,  "is 
put  to  shame,  and  shall  not  have  licence  of 
tongue  (iraffi-naiav)."  The  Kevised  Version 
margin,  "causeth  shame  and  bfingeth  re- 
proach." Delitzsch,  "  brings  into  bad 
odour  (Gen.  xxxiv.  30)  and  causes  shame." 
Hitzig,  "behaveth  injuriously  and  shame- 
fully." The  antithesis  is  best  brought,  out 
by  the  rendering  that  marks  the  effect  of 
the  wicked  man's  "lying ; "  "He  brings 
disgrace  upon  others  (who  have  trusted  him 
or  have  been  associated  with  him)  and  causes 
shame." 

Ver.  6. — EightfM)usnesskeepsth(gunrileth) 
him  that  is  upright  in  the  wsy ;  literally, 
uprightness  of  way,  abstract  for  concrete,  as 
in  the  second  member,  "  sin  "  for  "  siuner." 
Those  who  are  good  and  innocent  in  the 
walk  of  life  are  preserved  from,  evil,  moral 
and  material.  Wickedness  overthroweth  the 
sinner  ;  literally,  sin.  "  Overthroweth," 
makes  to  slip.  Vulgate,  supplantat.  The 
LXX.  inverts  the  clause,  "Sin  makes  the 
impious  worthless  ((^oiiAous)"  (see  ch.  xi.  3, 
5.  6).  The  verse  is  omitted  in  many  Greek 
manuscripts. 

Ver.  7.— There  Is  that  maketh  himself 
rich,  yet  hath  nothing,  "Maketh"  may 
mean  "feigns."  There  are  some  who  pre- 
tend to  be  rioh  while  really  they  are  poor 
(as  ch.  xii.  9),  and  there  are  some  who  make 
themselves,  t.«.  pretend  to  be  poor  (as  misers) 
while  they  have  much  wealth.  The  Vul- 
gate elucidates  this  meaning  by  rendering, 
quasi  dives  and  quasi  pauper;  and  the 
Hebrew  verbs  confirm  its  correctness.  The 
proverb  in  both  members  teaches  one  not  to 
trust  to  appearances.  Septuagint,  "There 
are  who  enrich  themselves,  having  nothing; 
and  there  are  who  humble  themselves  amid 
much  wealth."  It  is  obvious  that  such  a 
version  lends  itself  to  a  Christian  interpreta- 
tion. The  first  clause  reminds  one  of  the 
rich  fool  who  laid  up  treasure  for  himself, 
and  was  not  rioh  toward  God  (Lake  xii. 


262 


THE  PROVERBa 


[oh.  mil  1—26. 


21;  comp.  Key.  iii.  17,  18).  The  second 
clause  teaches  that  wealth  expended  in 
God's  service  makes  a  man  rich  in  the 
treasury  of  heaven  (Luke  xii.  21,  33).  One 
who  thus  uses  the  means  entrusted  to  him 
Bould  be  spoken  of  like  St.  Paul,  "  as  poor, 
yet  making  many  rich ;  as  having  nothing, 
and  yet  possessing  all  things"  (2  Cor.  vi. 
10). 

Ver.  8. — The  ransom  of  a  man's  life  are 
his  riches.  A  rich  man  can  save  himself 
from  many  difficulties  and  dangers  by  the 
sairifice  of  a  portion  of  his  wealth,  e.g.  when 
his  money  or  his  life  is  demanded  by  a 
robber;  when  men  in  authority  make  ex- 
tortionate demands  on  pain  of  death;  or 
when  he  has  incurred  extreme  penalty  by 
infringement  of  law  (Eiod.  xxi.  22,  30). 
Spiritually  discerned,  the  passage  recalls 
Christ's  injunction,  "Make  to  yourselves 
friends  of  the  mammon  of  unrighteousness, 
that  when  it  shall  fail,  they  may  receive 
jou  into  the  eternal  tabernacles"  (Luke  xvi. 
9).  The  poor  heareth  not  rebuke ;  has  not 
to  listen  to  (Job  iii.  18)  threats  from  tjje 
covetous  or  abuse  from  the  envious.  He 
has  nothing  to  lose,  and  no  one  can  gain 
anything  by  interfering  with  him.  So  the 
p»or  man  is  at  peace.  "  A  hundred  men 
cannot  rob  one  pauper." 

"  Cantabit  yacuus  coram  latrone  viator." 

Ver.  9. — ^The  light  of  the  righteous  re- 
joioeth ;  Uetificat,  Vulgate.  "But  the  verb 
is  intransitive,  and  means  "  burn  joyfully," 
bright  and  clear,  as  the  sun  rejoices  as  a 
strong  man  to  run  a  race  (Ps.  xix.  5).  This 
light  (or)  is  the  grace  and  virtne  which  adorn 
the  good  man's  life,  and  which  beam  through 
all  his  actions  with  acheerful, kindly  radiance 
(comp  ch.  iv.  18,  19).  This  is  a  true  light, 
kinilled  in  his  heart  by  God,  different  from 
the  lamp  (ner)  of  .  the  wicked,  which  is 
devised  and  liglited  by  themselves,  and  lias 
no  element  of  permanence,  but  soon  shall  he 
put  out  (ch.  xxiv.  20 ;  comp.  ch.  xx.  20 ;  Job 
xviii.  5 ;  John  i.  8 ;  v.  35,  where  the  dis- 
tinction between  "light"  and  "lamp"  is 
maintained).  The  lamp  of  the  wicked  is  the 
false  show  of  wisdom  or  piety,  which  may 
glimmer  and  deceive  for  a  time,  but  is  ere 
long  detected  and  brought  to  naught.  There 
may  be  here  an  allusion  to  a  common  custom 
in  the  East.  "  No  house,  however  poor," 
says  Dr.  Geikie  ('  Holy  Land,'  i.  117), 
"is  left  witiiout  a  light  burning  in  it  all 
night ;  the  housewife  rising  betimes  to  secure 
its  continuance  by  replenishing  the  lamp 
with  oil.  If  a  lamp  goes  out,  it  is  a  fatal 
omen  "  (comp.  1  Kings  xv.  4 ;  Jer.  xxv.  10  ; 
Eev.  xviii.  23).  Scptuagint,  "The  light  of 
the  rigliteous  is  everlasting ;  bat  the  light  of 
sinners  is  quenched."  Tlien  is  introduced 
a  couplet  not  found  in  the  Hebrew,  of  which 


the  latter  part  is  borrowed  from  Pb.  zzxvii. 
21  or  cxii.  5,  "  Crafty  souls  go  Bstray  in 
sins ;  righteous  men  show  mercy  and  pity." 
The  Vulgate  inserts  this  paragraph  after 
ver.  13. 

Ver.  10. — Only  by  pride  oometh  contention. 
Some  render  "  surely "  (rag)  for  "  only," 
as  in  Gen.  xx.  11.  Others  rightly  trans- 
late, "By  pride  cometh  only,  nothing  but, 
contention."  Vulgate,  "  Between  the  proud 
disputes  are  always  rife."  One  who  is 
haughty  and  overbearing,  or  who  is  too  con- 
ceited to  receive  advice,  is  sure  to  quarrel 
with  others.  Septuagint,  "An  evil  man 
with  insult  doeth  evil."  With  the  well- 
advised  is  wisdom ;  those  who  are  not,  like 
the  proud,  above  taking  advice  and  follow- 
ing it,  are  wise  (ch.  xi.  2 ;  xii.  15).  As  the 
Vulgate  puts  it,  "  They  who  do  all  things 
with  counsel  are  directed  by  wisdom."  The 
LXX.,  reading  differently,  has,  "  They 
who  know  themselves  are  wise,"  which  im- 
plies that  the  wise  know  their  own  weakness 
and  imperfection,  and  hearken  humbly  to 
good  counsel. 

Ver.  11. — Wealth  gotten  by  vanity  shall 
be  diminished ;  literally,  wealth  by  a  ireath ; 
i.e.  wealth  obtaiiied  without  labour  and 
exertion,  or  by  illegitimate  and  dishonest 
means,  is  soon  dissipated,  is  not  blessed  by 
God,  and  has  no  stability.  Vulgate,  "  riches 
acquired  hastily ; "  Septuagint,  "  substance 
gotten  hastily  with  iniquity."  This  makes 
the  antithesis  more  marked,  the  contrast 
being  between  wealth  gotten  hastily  and 
that  acquired  by  diligent  labour.  Cito 
nata,  cito  pereunt,  "Quickly  won,  quickly 
gone  "  (see  on  ch.  xx.  21 ;  xxi.  5).  Says  the 
Greek  maxim — 

"  Haste  not  for  wealth,  lest  thou  be  quickly 
poor." 

He  that  gathereth  by  labour;  literally, tett/t 
the,  hand,  handful  after  handful.  Vulgate, 
pauJatim,  "little  by  little,"  by  patient  in« 
dustry.  Labor  imprdbxu  omnia  rlneit. 
Septuagint,  " He  that  gathereth  for  liiniself 
with  piety  shall  be  increased."  Then  is 
added,  "  A  good  man  is  merciful  and 
lendeth,"  from  Ps.  xxxvii.  26.  The  Septua- 
gint here  uses  tlie  term  euo-e'/Seio,  which  is 
received  in  St.  Paul's  pastoral  Epistles  and 
St.  Peter's,  taking  the  place  of  the  earlier 
phrase,  ij)6pos  Kvplou. 

Ver.  12. — Hope  deferred  maketh  the  heart 
sick.  Delay  in  the  accomplishment  of  some 
much-desired  good  occasions  sinkiPg  of  the 
spirits,  languor,  and  despondence.  Many 
refer  this  sentence  to  the  impatient  hinging 
for  heaven  which  holy  men  feel,  such  as  we 
may  read  in  *  De  Imitatione,'  iii.  48,  49,  and 
in  the  hymns,  "For  thee,  O  dear,  dear 
country,"  and  •'  We've  no  abiding  city,"  etc, 


CH.  XIII.  1-^25.] 


THE  PROVKKBS. 


253 


And  St.  Paul  can  exclaim  (Bom.  yii.  24), 
"  O  wretched  man  that  I  am  I  who  shall 
deliver  me  from  the  body  of  tliis  deiithf" 
(comp.  Bom.  viii.  23 ;  Phil.  i.  28).  Septua- 
gint,  "  Better  is  he  who  taketh  in  hand  to 
aid  with  all  his  heart,  than  he  who  pnimisea 
and  raises  hopes"  (couip.  Jas.  ii.  15,  Iti). 
When  the  desire  oometh — when  the  object 
of  the  longing  is  obtained — it  is  a  tree  of 
life  (ch.  li.  80);  there  are  then  no  longer 
languor  and  despondence,  but  etrungtb  and 
refreshment  and  vigorous  action.  Septua- 
gint,  "  A  good  desire  is  a  tree  of  life." 

Ver.  13. — Whoso  despiseth  the  word  shall 
bo  destroyed.  "  The  word "  is  either  the 
commandment  of  God  (Deut.  xxx.  14),  or 
warning  and  instruction.  He  who  despises 
and  neglects  this  word  "brings  on  himself 
destruction."  Many  good  authoritius  take 
the  latter  verb  in  another  sense,  "  is  pledged 
by  it ; "  as  Bevised  Version  in  margin, 
"maketh  himself  a  debtor  thereto,"  i.e.  is 
still  bound  to  fulfil  his  obligations  to  it ;  he 
cannot  escape  duty  by  ignoring  or  despising 
it,  but  is  pledged  to  do  it,  an"d  will  suffer 
for  its  neglect  Hence  Christ's  injunction 
to  agree  with  our  adversary  quickly  while 
we  are  in  tlie  way  with  him  (Matt,  v.  25). 
Vulgate, "  He  who  disparages  (detrahit)  any- 
thing binds  himself  for  the  future."  Septua- 
giut,  "He  who  despises  a  thing  (irpay/iaroj, 
?  rdyimrvs,  '  a  command ')  shall  be  despised 
by  it."  Virtui  se  eontemnentem  contemnit. 
He  that  feareth  the  commandment  shall  be 
rewarded  (oh.  xi.  33i).  The  Vulgate  render- 
ing, "  shall  live  in  peace,"  and  that  of  the 
Septuagint,  "shall  be  healthful,"  are  not 
go  BUitiible.  The  "fearing  the  command- 
ment" imidies  obedience  to  it;  and  reward 
is  considered  as  fully  pledged  to,  obedience 
as  punishment  is  to  neglect.  The  Septua- 
gint here  adds  a  distich  which  Ewald  re- 
gards as  genuine,  "  Unto  a  crafty  son  there 
shall  be  nothing  good ;  but  to  a  wise  servant 
all  actions  shall  prosper,  and  his  way  shall 
be  guided  aright."  This  is  also  found  in  the 
Vulgate  of  oh.  liv.  16.  The  Vulgate  here 
inserts  the  paragraph  found  in  the  Septua- 
gint at  ver.  9  (g.f.),  Animss  dolonee  errant  in 
peceatis ;  justi  aulem  misericordeg  sunt  tt 
miieranlur. 

Ver.  14. — ^The  law  (instruction)  of  the 
wise  is  a  fountain  of  life  (ch.  x.  11),  which 
has  and  imparts  life  (Ecclns.  xxi.  13 ;  Ps. 
zxxvi.  9).  The  rules  and  teaching  of  w  ise 
men  are  a  source  of  life  to  thoae  who  follow 
them,  so  that  they  depart  from  the  snares 
of  death  (oh.  xiv.  27).  Obedience  tn  ■;ood 
teaching  saves  from  many  dangers,  material 
and  spiritual,  especially  from  the  snare  of 
the  devil  (2  Tim.  ii.  26).  With  "  snares  of 
death"  vfe  may  compare  Ps.  xviii.  5  and 
Horace's  ('  Oarm.,'  ill.  24.  8) 

«  Non  mortis  laqueis  expedies  caput." 


Septuagint,  "  The  fool  shall  perish  by  th« 
snare." 

Ver.  15. — Good  understanding  giveth 
favour  (ch.  iii.  4) ;  makes  one  aocejjtable 
to  God  and  man.  We  are  told  of  Christ 
that  " he  inonased  in  wisdom  and  in  stature, 
and  in  favour  with  God  and  man"  (Luke 
ii.  52).  As  a  good  and  wise  man  uses  his 
gifts  and  graces  prop.rly,  he  wins  higher 
favour  flora  God,  an.l  kindks  the  love  and 
respect  of  his  fellow-men.  Afte:'  this  clause 
the  Septuagint  introduces  that  which  occurs 
also  in  ch.  ix.  10,  "It  belongs  to  a  good 
understanding  (Siavotas)  to  know  the  Law." 
The  way  of  transgressors  is  hard ;  rough 
and  rugged,  leading  to  desolation,  not  to 
waters  of  comfort.  Ecolus.  xxi.  10,  "  The 
way  of  sinner."?  is  made  plain  with  stones, 
but  at  the  end  thereof  is  the  pit  of  hell." 
Vulgate,  "In  the  way  of  scorners  is  an 
abvss ; "  Septuagint,  ■'  The  ways  of  scorners 
end  in  destruction." 

Ver.  16. — Every  prudent  man  dealeth 
(worketh,  aetuth)  with  knowledge ;  i.e.  with 
thought  and  deliberation,  having  previously 
well  considered  tlie  bearings  and  issues  of 
his  plans.  But  a  fool  layeth  open  his  folly ; 
Bevised  Version,  spreadeth  oat  folly,  as  if 
exposing  the  wares  of  his  shop  (ch.  xii.  23; 
XV.  2).     One  works ;  the  other  talks. 

Ver.  17.— A  wicked  messenger  faUethinto 
mischief;  misfortune,  calamity  (ch.  xvii.  20). 
A  messenger  who  is  false  to  his  employer 
shall  be  detected  and  punished.  The  LXX., 
reading  meleh  for  inalak,  reiiders,  "  A  rash 
king  shall  fall  into  evils."  Such  a  one 
adopts  inconsiderate  measures,  makes  war 
unadvisedly,  etc.  A  faithful  ambassador 
(literally,  an  ambassador  of  faithfulness,  ch. 
XXV.  13)  is  health.  One  who  faithfully  per- 
forms his  errand  is  a  source  of  comfort  and 
satisfaction  both  to  his  employer  and  to 
those  to  whom  he  is  sent.  Septuagint, 
"  But  a  wise  messenger  shall  deliver  him" 
— the  king. 

Ver.  18. — Poverty  and  shama  shall  be  to 
him  that  refuseth  instruction;  correction, 
discipline.  Nowat-k  takes  the  two  nouns  as 
prediontes:  "He  that  refuseth  discipline  is 
poverty  and  shame,"  i.e.  they  are  his  lot. 
Such  a  one  indulges  his  own  lusts  and 
passions,  is  hendstrong  in  pursuing  his  own 
plans,  and  thus  dissipates  his  fortune  and 
acquires  the  contempt  of  all  good  men. 
Septuagint,  "  Discipline  taketh  away 
poverty  and  disgrace."  He  that  regardelh 
reproof  shall  be  honoured.  To  listen  to 
rebuke  and  to  profit  therchy  is  a  proof  of 
humility  and  tclf-knowlcdge,  which  wins 
respect  from  others.  Lcsetie  refers  to  Theo- 
dosius's  submission  to  the  sentence  imposed 
upon  him  by  Sf!  Ambrose  as  a  real  honcui 
and  glory  to  him  (comp.  ch.  xii.  1 ;  xv.  5. 
32). 


264 


THE  PB0VBRB8. 


[oh.  xni.  1 — 2Sk 


Ver.  19. — The  desire  accomplished  (comp. 
Ter.  12).  This  is  usually  taken  to  mean 
the  desire  of  what  is  good  and  honest, 
when  it  is  fulfilled  and  realized,  is  a  snurce 
of  highest  joy  and  comfort  to  the  wise. 
Septuagint,  "The  desires  of  the  pious  are 
sweet  to  the  soul."  But  it  is  abomination 
to  fooli  to  depart  from  evil.  The  antithesis 
is  not  very  ohvious,  but  it  may  be:  it  is 
sweet  to  a  good  man  to  obtain  his  wish; 
but  for  a  wicked  man  to  leave,  to  abandon 
evil  to  which  he  clings  so  fondly,  is  a 
detestable  alternative.  Or  the  latter  clause 
may  mean  that  the  wicked  will  not  give  up 
the  evil  which  makes  the  satisfaction  of 
their  desire  impossible.  But  it  is  best  to 
take  the  first  clause  as  a  general  statement, 
viz.  the  latlsfitction  of  desire  is  pleasant  to 
all  men;  then  the  latter  member  gives  a 
special  case  and  will  signify,  "  For  the 
sake  of  this  pleasure  bad  men  will  not 
give  np  their  evil  wishes  and  plans ; 
fiiey  will  pursue  what  they  have  set  their 
heart  upon  because  they  hate  the  idea  of 
foregoing  their  evil  designs."    Septuagint, 

The  deeds  of  sinners  are  far  from  know- 
ledge," ».«.  from  practical  wisdom,  prudence, 
ana  piety.  The  Vulgate  introduces  quite 
another  thought,  "Fools  abhor  those  who 
flee  from  evil."  Compare  the  passage  in 
Wisd,  ii.  concerning  the  sinner's  hatred  of 
the  good. 

Ver.  20. — He  that  walketh  with  wise  men 
shall  be  wise  ;  or,  according  to  the  Khctib, 
walk  with  wise  men,  and  than  shalt  be  wise. 
Ecclus.  vi.  36,  "If  thou  seest  a  man  of 
understanding,  get  thee  betimes  unto  him, 
and  let  thy  foot  wear  the  stepi  of  his  door." 
So  the  Greek  maxim — 

"So^ois  ifii^Mv  Kavrhs  ^K^^irji  tTo<p6s. 

"  With  wise  conversing  thou  wilt  wise  be- 
come." 

And  Eurip.,  <  Bhesns,'  206 — 
3o(j>ov  rap  avSphs  XP^  ao(\>6y  ri  ri'-<f  ivav. 

"  A  man  that's  wise  will  thee  imr,  visdom 
teach." 

A  oompanion  of  fools  shall  be  da^^oyed; 
literally,  shall  he  broken,  shall  eiiftb^  moral 
min;  Eevised  Version  margin,  "si  aS!  smart 
for  it."  But  the  antithesis  is  !:ijt  well 
brought  out  by  this  rendering;  and  as  the 
word  may  bear  the  sense  of  "doing  \',\"  as 
well  as  of  "  suffering  ill,"  the  interpretation 
of  the  Vulgate  intimates  the  correct  idea  of 
the  clause :  "  The  friend  of  fools  shall  turn 
out  the  same  ;  "  "  He  who  associates  with 
fools  shall  do  evil."  Septuagint,  "  He  who 
loams  about  with  fools  shall  be  known." 
"  Tell  me  your  companions,  and  I  will  tell 
you  what  you  are." 

"TaUa   quia  esse    pntator   qnalis   ei   est 
Bodalitaa." 


A  Dutch  proverb  aays,  "  He  that  lives  vrith 
cripples  learns  to  limp ; "  and  the  Spanish, 
"  Ire  that  goes  with  wolves  learns  to  howL^ 
We  have  a  honvely  English  proverb,  "He 
that  lies  down  with  dogs  shall  rise  up  with 
fleas ; "  so  the  Orientals  say,  "  He  that  takes 
the  raven  for  his  guide  shall  light  upon 
carrion." 

Ver.  21. — ^Evil  pursneth  sinners.  Sinners 
suffer  not  only  the  natural  consequences  of 
crime  in  external  evil,  injury  to  body,  estate, 
reputation,  etc.  (Ps.  xi.  6),  but  also  stings  of 
conscience  and  remorse ;  even  seeming  pros- 
perity is  often  a  chastisement,  and  long 
impunity  is  only  augmenting  the  coming 
retribution.  As  the  shadow  attends  the 
substance,  so  guilt  is  attached  to  sin,  and 
brings  with  it  punishment.  To  the  lighteous 
good  shall  be  repaid ;  or,  he,  Jehovah,  ihaU 
repay  good  (comp.  ch.  xii.  14);  Bevised 
Version,  "The  righteous  shall  be  recom- 
pensed with  good."  They  shall  have  the 
answer  of  a  good  conscience,  happiness  here 
and  hereafter;  Septuagint, "  Good  shall  take 
possession  of  (or,  overtake)  tlie  righteous." 

Ver.  22. — A  good  man  leaveth  an  in- 
heritance to  his  children's  children.  This 
would  be  especially  notable  where  a  system 
of  temporal  rewards  and  punishments  was 
expected  and  generally  experienced.  The 
wealth  of  the  sinner  is  laid  np  for  the  just. 
Property  unjustly  acquired,  or  wickedly 
used,  is  taken  from  those  who  have  it,  and 
ultimately  finds  its  way  into  better  hands. 
They  cannot  keep  it,  and  consequently  can- 
not leave  it  to  their  children. 

"  De    male    qunaitis    non    gandet   tertius 

hjeres." 
"  Ill-gotten    wealth   no   third   descendant 

holds." 

This  has  often  been  the  fate  of  property 
obtained  by  the  sacrilegious  seizure  of  what 
was  dedicated  to  God's  service.  For  the 
general  view  of  the  clause,  comp.  ch.  xxviiL 
8 ;  Job  xxvii.  16,  17 ;  Eccles.  ii.  26 ;  and 
the  case  of  Jacob  (Gen.  xxxi.  9),  and  the 
Israelites  (Exod.  xii.  85,  36),  when  "the 
righteous  spoiled  the  ungodly"  (Wisd.  x. 
20). 

Ver.  28.— Much  food  is  in  the  tillage 
(tilled  ground)  of  the  poor  (ch.  xii.  11).  The 
woid  rendered"  tillage"  (nir)  means  ground 
worked  for  the  first  time,  and  therefore  that 
on  which  much  labour  is  bestowed.  Hence 
the  Vulgate  rightly  renders,  novalibm.  It 
occurs  in  Jer.  iv.  8  and  Hos.  x.  12,  where 
our  version  tas  "fallow  ground."  The 
poor,  but  righteous  man,  who  industriously 
cultivates  his  little  plot  of  ground,  secures 
a  good  return,  and  is  happy  in  eating  the 
labour  of  his  hands  (Ps.  cxxviii.  2).  Instead 
of  "  the  poor,"  the  Vulgate  Ims,  "  the 
fathers,"  taking  O'vtn  in  tins  sense ;  so  that 


OH.  xxn.  1 — 26.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


255 


the  meaningr  would  be  that  children  who 
properly  oultivate  their  paternal  or  heredi- 
tary fields  obtain  good  crops.  But  the 
Authorized  Version  rendering  is  doubtless 
preferable.  There  is  that  is  destroyed  for 
want  of  judgment ;  rather,  as  the  Kevised 
Version,  by  reason  of  injustice.  Rich  men 
are  often  brought  to  ruin  by  their  disregaid 
of  right  and  justice  (mishpat).  Some  (poor 
men)  are  amply  supplied  by  honest  labour; 
others  (rich)  lose  all  by  wrong  dealing. 
Vulgate,  "  For  others  it  (food)  is  gathered 
contrary  to  justice  j  "  Septuagint,  quite 
astray,  "The  righteous  shall  pass  many 
years  in  wealth;  but  the  unvigJiteous  shall 
suddenly  perish" — which  seems  to  be  an 
explanation  or  amplification  of  ver.  22. 

_  Ver.  24.— He  that  spareth  his  rod  hateth 
his  son.  Correction  of  children  is  a  great 
point  with  our  author  (see  ch.  xix.  18;  xxii. 
15 ;  xxiii.  13,  etc. ;  xxix.  15, 17).  So  Ecolus. 
XXX.  1,  "He that  loveth  his  son  causeth  him 


ofib  to  feel  the  rod,  that  he  may  hare  joy  of 
him  in  the  end."  Dukes,  "  Gold  must  be 
beaten,  and  a  boy  needs  blows"  ('Rabbin. 
Blumenlese,'  71).  Chasteneth  him  betimes ; 
literally,  early  in  the  morning  (ch.  i  28 1 
viii.  17),  which  may  mean,  in  the  morning 
of  life,  ere  evil  habits  have  time  to  grow, 
or  directly  after  the  offence.  Or  the  ex- 
pression may  signify  "diligently."  Vul- 
gate, instanter;  Septuagint,  eiri/xcASi. 

Ver.  25.— The  righteous  eateth  to  th« 
satisfying  of  his  soul  (comp.  ch.  x.  3 ;  Pg. 
xxxiv.  10).  The  good  man  has  always 
enough  to  satisfy  his  wants,  because  he  is 
temperate,  and  his  substance  has  the  bless- 
ing of  God.  "  The  chief  thing  for  life,"  says 
Siraeides  (Ecclus.  xxix.  21),  "is  water,  and 
bread,  and  clothing,  aud  a  house  to  cover 
shame."  The  belly  of  the  wicked  shall 
want  The  wicked  are  punished  by  penury 
and  desires  never  satisfied.  These  different 
results  are  providentially  ordered. 


HOMILBTICS. 

Ver.  1. — "  A  wise  ton."  The  young  man  who  conBiders  him?elf  to  be  exceptJonally 
clever  is  tempted  to  idolize  his  own  notions  and  despise  parental  correction.  We  are 
reminded  that  such  conduct  may  be  a  grievous  mistake  and  a  proof  of  essential  folly, 
and  that  true  wisdom  will  follow  a  more  humble  course  of  filial  duty.  It  is  not  merely 
obligatory  on  the  son  to  submit  to  his  father ;  it  is  for  his  own  interest  to  follow 
paternal  advice,  and  a  mark  of  wisdom.  Of  course,  this  ia  taken  as  a  general  principle. 
A  conscientious  son  may  be  cursed  with  a  base-minded  parent,  whose  directions  it  will 
bo  anything  but  wise  to  follow.  By  manly  intelligence  and  with  Oliristian  liberty, 
general  maxims  can  only  be  applied  in  view  of  suitable  circumstances.  We  may  take 
it  that  on  the  whole,  when  the  relationship  is  normal,  wisdom  will  prompt  submission 
to  paternal  correction. 

I.  No  ONE  CAN  TEULT  ESTIMATE  HIB  OWN  CONDUCT.  We  Cannot  stand  off  from  our- 
•elves  and  view  ourselves  in  perspective.  We  make  the  most  egregious  mistakes  in 
judging  ourselves,  because  we  cannot  see  ourselves  as  others  see  us.  The  object  is  also 
the  subject,  and  subjective  feelings  colour  our  objective  perceptions  of  self.  It  is 
therefore  a  great  security  for  a  young  man  to  have  a  guide  apart  from  himself  whom  he 
can  trust,  as  he  can  trust  a  father. 

II.  A  FATHEB  coBBEOTS  IN  LOVB.  There  are  brutal  parents,  whose  chastisement 
implies  anything  but  sound  correction.  But  the  true  father  considers  the  highest 
interests  of  his  son.  If  he  expresses  disapproval  it  is  because  he  believes  some  material 
wrong  has  been  done.     His  rebuke  is  for  wholesome  improvement. 

III.  A  FATHEB  EAS    LASOEB    EXPEBIENCE   THAN   HIS     SON.      His   age   givCS  him  the 

advantage  of  fuller  knowledge  and  riper  judgment.  It  may  also  bring  a  certain  stiffen- 
ing of  notions  and  aversion  to  innovation.  But  even  then  it  may  still  be  keen  to 
detect  real  errors  and  right  in  warning  against  them. 

IV.  A  FATHEB  HAS  AUTHOEiTT  ovBB  HIS  SON.  This  was  recoguized  longer  in  former 
tinjes  than  in  the  present  day,  when  many  sons  are  over-anxious  to  emancipate'them- 
selves  from  parental  control.  Now,  there  is  a  certain  wisdom  in  submitting  to  estab- 
lished authority.  Rebellion  can  only  be  justified  by  extreme  wrong.  Where  no  plain 
cause  for  rebellion  exists,  it  is  wise  as  well  as  right  to  submit. 

V.  The  pabehtal  eelation  on  eakth  is  typical  or  the  relation  between  God 
AND  HIS  people.  All  the  arguments  which  point  to  the  wisdom  of  a  son's  submitting 
to  correction  from  an  earthly  parent  apply  with  immensely  greater  force  to  man'i 
position  before  God.  God  regards  us  with  love ;  he  knows  everything ;  he  has  a  right 
and  power  to  direct  and  correct  us.    Whatever  modern  notions  of  domeitic  revoltf 


J56  THE  PROVERBS.  [oh.  xiii.  1— 25 


may  be  entertained  by  any  of  us,  it  still  remains  clear  that  it  is  wise  to  bow  before  tlie 
correction  of  God,  our  great  and  good  Father. 

Ver.  10. — Pride  and  contention,  I.  The  ebasons  why  peidb  PRODtrcEs  contention. 
1.  It  is  sdf-assertive.  The  pro\id  man  claims  a  large  and  promiaeiit  place  for  himself. 
He  will  not  endure  a  secondary  position.  He  demands  his  rights  not  so  much  because 
he  really  wishes  to  enjoy  them,  as  because  they  are  his  riglits.  He  will  not  forego 
them  even  when  he  gains  no  advantage  by  the  exercise  of  them.  Nuw,  this  self- 
assertiveness  threatens  the  supposed  rights  of  others  where  the  boundary-line  is  as  yet 
uncertain.  It  also  provokes  a  similar  spirit  in  a  man's  neighbours.  2.  It  is  exacting. 
Pride  claims  its  dues.  The  proud  lord  will  have  every  ounce  of  respect  from  his 
underlings.  Even  those  who  are  met  on  equal  terms  are  narrowly  scrutinized  to  see 
If  they  withhold  a  shadow  of  the  supposed  rights  from  the  jealousy  of  pride.  3.  It  is 
overbearing.  It  will  not  endure  opposition ;  it  is  intolerant  of  differences  of  opinion ; 
it  would  rather  trespass  on  the  rights  of  others  than  surrender  any  of  its  own  claims. 
Thus  it  is  perpetually  challenging  all  who  cross  its  path. 

II.  The  regions  in  which  pkide  produces  contention.  1.  Among  nations.  It 
was  thought  that  war  sprang  from  the  pride  and  jealousy  of  monarcbs,  and  that  when 
the  people  gained  power  war  would  cease.  But  republics  declare  war.  There  is  a 
dangerous  form  of  national  pride.  It  is  possible  for  a  whole  people  to  be  carried  away 
by  imreasoning  elation,  and  to  make  inordinate  claims  for  itself,  or  to  be  unduly  sensi- 
tive to  affront.  2.  In  society.  Pride  is  here  one  of  the  chiei^  dangers  to  the  order  and 
peace  of  cities.  The  poor  would  endure  the  sight  of  the  prosperity  of  the  rich  if  they 
were  not  goaded  by  the  more  irritating  spectacle  of  insulting  pride.  The  least  that 
they  can  do  who  have  more  than  their  share  of  the  good  things  of  life  is  to  hold  them 
with  quiet  humility.  To  flaunt  their  superiority  of  good  fortune  in  the  face  of  their 
miserable  fellow-citizens,  and  to  make  it  a  ground  for  scorn  and  contempt,  is  to  rouse 
the  latent  rage  of  men  who  are  already  chafing  under  wliat — whether  rightly  or 
wrongly — they  regard  as  a  grossly  unjust  social  order.  3.  In  private  life.  Piide  is  the 
most  direful  source  of  family  quarrels.  It  separates  the  best  friends,  and  it  sets  up  the 
most  invincible  barriers  against  a  speedy  reconciliation.  When  love  would  hold  out 
the  hand  of  forgiveness,  pride  hangs  back  in  gloomy  resentfulness. 

III.  The  way  to  prevent  pride  from  producing  contention.  There  is  but  one 
way ;  pride  must  be  humiliated  and  cast  out.  This  monster  sin  is  directly  aimed  at  in 
the  preaching  of  the  gospel  of  the  cross.  It  is  found  lurking  in  the  breasts  of  men  who 
are  regarded  as  saints ;  but  it  is  no  part  of  their  saintliness.  It  is  still  a  sin  in  the 
sight  of  God.  Christ  cannot  endure  it,  and  one  who  would  follow  Christ  must  forsake 
it.  There  is  no  better  way  of  destroying  it  than  by  submisiiiun  to  the  yoke  of  him 
who  was  "  meek  and  lowly." 

Ver.  11. — Fraudulent  gain.  I.  The  delusive  appearjlncb  of  fraudulent  gain. 
This  looks  very  different  from  coarse,  vulgar  robbery.  The  sleek  swindler  owns  no 
common  brotherhood  with  the  brutal  burglar.  Fraudulent  gain  is  got  in  the  way  of 
business ;  it  is  not  at  all  like  the  money  directly  stolen  from  a  m;m's  pocket.  The 
process  is  so  very  roundabout  that  it  is  difiSoult  to  trace  the  transition  from  fair  dealing 
to  cheating.  The  decorous  thief  would  be-  horrified  at  hearing  his  true  name.  He 
knows  his  actions  are  not  quite  straightforward,  but  the  crookedness  of  them  is  almost 
hidden  from  himself  by  neat  contrivances.  Now,  all  this  makes  the  [lursiiic  of  fraudu- 
lent gain  the  more  treacherous  and  dangerous.  A  man  who  foilowa  such  a  course  is 
lost  before  he  owns  himself  to  be  dishonest. 

II.  The  temptations  to  make  fraudulent  gain.  They  spring  from  various 
•ources.  1.  Keen  competition.  It  is  so  hard  to  make  a  living  in  the  fierce  contest  of 
business  life,  when  every  rival  is  treated  as  an  enemy,  that  any  extra  advantage  is 
eagerly  sought  after.  2.  Large  promises.  As  the  margin  of  profits  shrink  while  the 
requirements  of  energy  and  alertness  grow,  any  expedient  that  promises  more  speedy- 
and  remunerative  returns  is  likely  to  present  a  fascinating  appearance.  3.  Compro- 
mising customs.  Business  is  not  always  conducted  on  perfectly  honest  grounds,  and 
the  dishonesty  that  is  prevalent  claims  to  be  sanctioned  by  usage.  Moreover,  if  som* 
departure  from  absolute  right  is  permitted,  a  greater  degree  of  dishonesty  is  but 


OH.  xni.  1— 26.]  THE  PROVERBS.  Ml 


another  step  in  the  same  direction.  4.  ffope)  of  secrecy.  The  man  of  business  cannot 
afford  to  lose  his  good  name,  and  therefore  plain  self-interest  holds  him  back  from  open 
theft.  But  the  subtle  pursuit  of  a  more  refined  form  of  dishonesty  appears  to  be 
possible  without  any  loss  of  character.  Thus  as  the  pressure  of  the  opinion  of  society 
is  eluded,  the  only  conscience  which  some  men  recognize  ceases  to  operate. 

III.  The  K0INOTJS  besults  of  making  fkaudui.ent  gain.  1.  It  is  a  great  sin. 
The  delusive  appearance  of  the  pursuit  blinds  people  to  its  true  character.  But  theft 
cannot  be  made  honest  by  becoming  refined.  All  the  laws  of  righteousness  bristle  up 
in  front  of  the  man  who  pursues  dishonesty,  and  threaten  his  ruin.  Even  though 
social  and  civil  retribution  be  evaded,  there  is  a  higher  court  of  justice  than  any  of 
man's  jurisdiction,  and  before  its  awful  bar  the  wealthy,  respected  thief  must  ultimately 
stand  condemned.  2.  It  is  likely  to  lead  to  earthly  ruin.  The  man  whose  life  is  one 
huge  lie  lives  in  a  frail  shell,  which  may  be  broken  at  any  moment  to  expose  him  to 
pitiless  punishments.  Then  what  has  he  to  full  back  upon?  He  who  has  laid  up 
treasures  in  heaven  can  afford  to  lose  his  poor,  earthly  stores ;  but  one  who  has  sold  bis 
prospects  of  heaven  for  brief  earthly  profits  loses  all  when  the  gains  of  this  Ufe  are 
snatched  from  him.  The  way  of  peace  and  safety  can  never  be  any  other  than  the 
way  of  right. 

Ver.  12. — Hope  deferred.  I.  The  hope  that  is  defbhbed.  Most  men  who  live 
to  any  purpose  live  by  hope.  It  is  scarcely  possible  to  press  forward  with  energy  to 
a  future  that  is  wholly  dark.  The  prospect  of  some  future  good  is  a  present  inspira- 
tion.    Thus  hope  takes  a  large  place  in  the  heart  of  rrian.     Note  some  of  its  forms, 

1.  The  hope  of  youth.  It  is  natural  for  youth  to  believe  in  the  future,  to  treat  ita 
possibilities  as  certainties,  and  to  colour  its  grey  outline  with  the  gorgeous  hues  of  a 
fresh  imagination.  2.  The  hope  of  this  world.  Pursuits  of  business  or  pleasure  allur* 
those  who  enter  them  with  good  promises.  3.  The  hope  of  heaven.  They  who  havt 
been  disappointed  in  all  earthly  anticipations  may  cherish  this  glorious  dream.  4.  The 
hope  that  is  unselfish.  Hope  need  not  be  centred  in  personal  pleasure.  We  may  hope 
for  a  great  cause,  and  hope  to  see  some  good  effected,  though  by  the  sacrifice  of  our- 
selves. 5.  The  hope  that  is  in  God.  A  sorrowful  soul  may  hope  in  God  with  no 
distinct  visions  of  any  possible  future  advantage,  making  God  himself  the  Hope. 
"  Christ  our  Hope." 

II.  How  THE  HOPE  IS  DEFERRED.  1.  By  disHliision.  From  the  first  the  hope  may 
be  too  sanguine.  The  mirage  is  mistaken  for  the  oasis.  Or  perhaps  distance  is  mis- 
judged. We  think  that  we  are  near  to  the  future  that  still  lies  in  the  remote  distance 
with  leagues  of  desert  between  us  audit.     Experience  must  dispel  such  an  illusion. 

2.  By  direct  disappointment.  The  well-founded  hope  may  be  deferred  by  a  chani^e  of 
ciiBumstances,  or  failure  of  ability  to  accomplish  it,  unfaithfulness  to  a  promise,  etc. 
Thus  in  life  the  expected  "  good  time  coming  "  is  continually  receding  as  men  approach 
it.  Hope  may  be  deferred  by  trying .  changes  of  circumstances,  or  by  a  man's  own 
mistakes  and  failures. 

III.  Wht  the  heart  is  made  bitter.  To  be  lifted  up  and  dropped  down  gives  a 
shock  which  is  not  felt  if  we  remain  on  the  low  ground.  Disappidntment  is  a  source 
of  keen  pain  in  any  case ;  but  when  it  is  repeated  after  vague  anticipations  and  uncer- 
tainties, it  is  far  more  distressing.  The  hope  deferred  is  not  denied.  We  cannot  banish 
it  as  a  mistake.  Such  an  act  would  be  easier  to  bear ;  there  would  be  first  a  great 
shock  of  disappointment,  and  theu  the  dead  hope  would  be  buried  out  of  sight,  and 
the  grief  of  the  loss  of  it  would  grow  lighter  with  time.  But  when  the  hope  is  deferred, 
it  is  continually  present,  yet  as  a  disappointment.  The  mind  is  first  on  the  rack  of 
wondering  expectation,  and  then  there  follows  a  sense  of  unutterable  weariness — true 
heart-sickness.  It  is  said  that  sea-sickness  is  produced  by  the  sinking  from  beneath  a 
person  of  the  support  on  which  he  rests.  The  heart-sickness  of  a  hope  long  deferred 
arises  from  a  similar  cause  in  the  experience  of  souls. 

IV.  How  this  bittbrnebs  mat  be  odbed.  1.  By  the  satiffaction  of  the  hope. 
Long  deferred,  it  may  yet  come.  When  we  are  most  despairing  the  tide  may  turn. 
The  heart-sick  mother  is  startled  with  a  suddej  joy  in  the  rettirn  of  her  long-lost 
sailor-lad  when  she  is  relinquishing  the  weary  hope  of  ever  seeing  him  again.  2.  By 
the  rising  of  a  new  hcpe.    If  this  may  not  be  found  in  earthly  experience,  and  the  verj 

FBOYBBBS.  ■ 


258  THE  PROVERBS.  ips.  xra.  1—25. 

mention  of  it  sounds  like  treason  to  the  faithful  soul,  it  may  indeed  appear  in  higher 
regions  of  life.  In  the  hitterness  of  earthly  disappointment  Christ's  great  hope  may  he 
received.  3.  By  trusting  in,  Ood.  "  Oh  rest  in  the  Lord,  and  wait  patiently  for  him.' 
The  earthly  hope  may  be  deferred,  disappointed,  shattered ;  yet  some  soul-satisfying 
answer  will  be  given  to  the  prayer  of  faith. 

Ver.  17. — A  faithful  messenger.  In  early  times,  when  no  public  postal  arrangements 
existed,  and  when  reading  and  wiiting  were  not  generally  cultivated,  communications 
were  more  often  sent  by  verbal  messages  and  personal  messengers.  Great  mischief 
would  then  accrue  through  unfaithfulness  on  the  part  of  one  of  these  agents  of  business 
or  friendship.  But  important  as  would  be  the  social  effects  arising  out  of  this  condition 
of  affairs,  far  more  momentous  consequences  must  flow  from  the  action  of  messengers 
between  God  and  man.     They  indeed  need  to  be  faithful. 

I.  The  Christian  fbeagheb  is  a  messgnqer.  1.  Se  carries  a  message.  He  has  to 
declare  the  truth  of  God  as  he  has  received  it.  He  is  the  custodian  of  a  gospel.  The 
pTophet  has  to  utter  the  word  of  inspiration,  and  the  apostle  to  proclaim  the  kingdom 
of  heaven,  and  Christ  as  its  King.  Something  of  the  prophet  and  apostle  must  be 
found  in  every  Christian  preacher.  He  is  to  go  forth  with  the  message  that  God  has 
given  him.  2.  He  delivers  his  message  in  person.  The  message  is  not  posted ;  it  is 
carried  personally,  and  delivered  by  the  mouth  of  the  messenger.  It  is  not  enough 
that  God's  truth  is  recorded  in  the  Bible,  and  that  the  Bible  is  circulated  throughout 
the  world.  The  living  voice  of  the  living  man  is  needed.  The  missionary  is  God's 
messenger — so  also  is  every  true  preacher  of  the  gospel. 

II.  The  mbssenoeb  is  required  to  be  faithful.  1.  Ee  must  deliver  his  message. 
The  missionary  must  travel ;  the  preacher  at  home  must  work  among  his  people. 
Jonah  was  unfaithful  in  fleeing  to  Tarshisb.  Mere  silence  is  unfaithfulness  when  one 
is  entrusted  with  a  message  to  deliver.  2.  Ee  must  give  it  intact.  He  may  neither 
add  to  it  nor  detract  from  it.  Faithfulness  in  a  Christian  preacher  means  not  shunning 
to  declare  the  whole  counsel  of  God,  and  not  adding  "vain  philosophy"  or  "traditions 
of  men  "  thereto.  Of  course,  there  is  room  for  thought,  reasoning,  imagination,  adapta- 
tion of  the  truth  to  the  hearer,  but  not  so  as  to  modify  the  essential  message.  3.  He 
must  disregard  consequences.  It  may  seem  to  him  that  the  message  is  useless.  Men 
may  reject  it ;  they  may  resent  his  offer  of  it ;  they  may  turn  upon  him  and  rend  him. 
Yet  it  is  just  his  duty  to  give  the  message  that  is  entrusted  to  him. 

III.  The  fidelity  of  the  message  secures  health  op  soul.  Elsewhere  we 
read,  "  The  tongue  of  the  wise  is  health  "  (oh.  xii.  18).  1.  It  is  an  evidence  of  honesty 
and  moral  courage.  The  existence  of  messengers  who  are  faithful  even  under  the 
most  trying  circumstances  proves  that  honour  and  right  are  regarded.  It  is  for  the 
health  of  a  community  at  large  that  such  virile  qualities  should  be  found  among 
the  leaders  of  thought.  2.  It  secures  the  presentation  of  truth  to  men.  All  lies  and 
delusions  are  noxious  poisons.  Truth  is  food  and  medicine  for  the  souU  A  community 
that  is  fed  on  truth,  though  the  truth  be  tough  or  bitter,  is  nourished  with  wholesome 
diet.  That  is  indeed  a  healthy  society  in  which  all  the  citizens  are  led  by  honest 
teachers  to  unsophisticated  truth.  3.  It  hrings  the  most  needful  messages  to  the  tvorld. 
The  Christian  teacher  is  called  upon  to  preach  Christ — ^to  show  the  need  of  Christ  in 
the  ruin  of  sin,  the  grace  of  Christ  to  save,  and  the  right  of  Christ  to  rule.  These  are 
hejilth-giving  truths;  they  constitute  the  direct  antidote  to  the  deadly  poison  of  sin. 
He  who  honestly  proclaims  them  makes  for  the  health  of  his  fellow-men. 

Ver.  24. — Sparing  the  rod.  The  primitive  rigour  of  the  Book  of  Proverbs  is  repudi- 
ated by  modern  manners.  Not  only  in  domestic  training,  but  even  in  criminal  law, 
people  reject  the  old  harsh  methods,  and  endeavour  to  substitute  milder  means  ol 
correction.  No  doubt  there  was  much  that  was  more  than  rough,  even  brutal,  in  th< 
discipline  of  our  forefathers.  The  relation  between  father  and  child  was  too  often 
lacking  in  sympathy  through  the  undue  exercise  of  parental  authority,  and  society 
generally  was  hardened  rather  than  purged  by  pitiless  forms  of  punishment.  But  now 
the  question  is  whether  we  are  not  erring  towards  the  opposite  extreme  in  showing 
more  tenderness  to  the  criminal  than  to  his  victim,  and  failing  to  let  our  children  feel 
ike  need  of  some  painful  discipline.    We  idolize  comfort,  and  we  are  in  danger  of  think- 


OH.  xin.  1— 26.]  THE  PKOVERBa  Ml 


ing  pain  to  he  worse  than  sin.    It  may  he  well,  therefore,  to  consider  some  of  th« 
disadvantages  of  neglecting  the  old-fashioned  methods  of  chastisement. 

I.  It  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  the  kod  to  be  obuel  bbcaubb  it  hubts.  This 
mistake  is  made  qtute  as  much  hy  the  hand  that  should  hold  the  rod  as  by  the  hack 
that  should  feel  it.  Pain  may  be  most  wholesome.  The  highest  form  of  punishment 
is  that  in  which  the  cure  of  the  offender  is  aimed  at.  To  think  more  of  the  sufferings 
of  the  offender  than  of  his  sin  is  to  show  a  failure  of  conscience,  a  lack  of  appreciation 
of  the  really  evil  condition  of  the  sinner.  We  should  learn  that  it  is  worse  to  sin  than 
to  suffer, 

II.  There  aee  certain  special  conditions  under  which  painful  chastisement 
IB  the  most  wholesome  roRM  OF  oobbbotion.  1.  In  the  offender.  Some  natures 
are  redeemed  by  a  process  of  punishment  which  will  only  crush  others.  A  low  and 
cruel  nature  especially  needs  painful  punishment.  2.  In  the  offence.  Sins  of  the 
morally  degrading  class  are  best  punished  with  sharp  pains.  The  treatment  which 
may  suit  a  more  spiritual  sin,  and  may  well  reTeal  the  shame  and  evil  of  it,  would  not 
touch  these  coarser  forms  of  wickedness. 

III.  It  is  a  BiaN  of  weakness  or  selfishness  to  withhold  needful  ohastisk- 
MENT.  1.  0/  weakness.  The  lawful  authority  may  not  have  the  energy  to  proceed  to 
an  extremity.  So  serious  an  action  requires  strength  of  purpose.  2.  0/  selfishness. 
It  must  be  simply  agonizing  for  a  kind-hearted  father  to  have  to  bring  pain  and  dis- 
grace on  his  son.  But  to  hold  back  from  the  exercise  of  wholesome  discipline  on  this 
account  is  really  to  give  way  to  sinful  self-indulgence.  The  true  father  will  hurt  him- 
self in  punishing  his  child.  No  doubt  a  certain  self-indulgent  softness  ia  to  be  found 
in  the  present  objection  of  society  to  punish  criminals  with  due  severity. 

lY.  God's  chastisement  of  his  children  is  for  their  oood.  He  does  not  hate 
his  sons;  therefore,  at  times,  he  does  not  spare  his  rod  (see  ch.  iii.  12).  There  is 
neither  weakness  in  the  Almighty  nor  selfishness  in  the  All-merciful.  He  must  and 
trill  chastise  sin  for  the  correction  of  the  sinner.  We  must  suffer  if  we  sin,  though  it 
is  for  us  to  choose  whether  we  are  to  endure  the  pimishmeut  of  the  imfenitent  or  the 
chastisement  of  the  penitent. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  1. — General  truths  of  health  and  salvation.  I.  Docility  as  contrasted  with 
BTUBBOBNNEss.  (Ver.  1.)  Let  us  carry  this  into  the  distinctly  religious  sphere.  To 
be  wise  is  to  be  a  good  listener.  In  the  expressive  phrase  of  the  Bible,  to  "  hearken  to 
the  voice  of  Jehovah,"  to  listen  to  the  suggestions  of  the  inward  monitor,  is  the  secret 
tif  a  sober,  well-balanced  habit  of  mind,  and  of  every  safe  line  of  conduct.  All  that 
God  teaches,  by  the  voice  of  inspired  teachers,  by  our  own  experience,  by  the  inner 
revelations  of  the  heart,  is  "  a  father's  instruction."  Above  all,  instruction  by  means 
of  suffering  is  God's  fatherly  way  with  souls.  And  we  have  the  great  example  of  Christ 
to  guide  us  and  to  sweeten  obedience,  for  he  "  learned "  it  by  the  things  which  he 
suffered.  On  the  other  hand,  the  scorner  has  cast  aside  all  reverential  awe  in  the 
presence  of  the  Holy  One.  To  refuse  the  faithful  warnings  of  friends,  to  he  no  better 
tor  those  lessons  of  experience  which  are  written  in  personal  suffering,  is  to  disown 
one's  filial  relation,  and  to  estrange  one's  self  from  God. 

IL  'True  life-enjoyment  and  its  control.  (Ver.  2.)  1.  Enjoyment  represented 
ander  the  figure  of  eating.  As  indeed  eating  is  a  most  significant  act,  the  foundation 
of  life,  the  pledge  of  social  communism.  2.  The  foundation  of  enjoyment  is  in  one's 
inward  state  and  one's  social  relations.  The  more  widely  we  can  enter  into  the  life  of 
others,  the  richer  our  life-joy.  The  unsocial  life  not  only  dries  up  the  springs  of  joy, 
but  is  positively  punished — in  extreme  cases  by  law,  as  in  crimes  of  violence  alluded  to 
in  the  text,  always  by  the  alienation  of  sympathy. 

III.  The  use  and  abuse  of  speech.  (Ver.  3;  see  on  oh.  x.  19,  31;  xxi.  23.) 
How  often  this  lesson  recurs  1  1.  In  the  lower  aspect  it  is  a  lesson  of  prudence. 
Reserve  and  caution  make  the  safe  man ;  loquacity  and  impulsiveness  of  speech  the 
unsafe  man.  2.  In  a  higher  point  of  view,  the  habit  of  silence,  implying  much  medita- 
tion and  se^-communion,  is  good  for  the  soul. 


260  THE  TBOVEBBS.  [oh.  iin.  1—26. 

"  Sacred  silence !  thon  that  art  offspring  of  the  deeper  heart, 
FroBt  of  the  month  and  thaw  of  the  mind," 

How  easy,  on  the  other  hand,  to  injure  our  souls  by  talking  much  about  religion  or 
subjectB  that  lie  on  the  circumference  of  religion,  and  falling  into  the  delusion  that  talk 
may  be  substituted  for  lifel — J. 

Vers.  4,  7,  8,  11. — The  value  and  use  of  property.  I.  The  wobth  of  this  wobld'i 
GOODS  IS  ASSUMED.  It  IS  needless  to  sliow  that  property  is  a  necessary  institution  of 
life  under  present  conditions.  AU  the  strong  things  said  in  the  gospel  about  riches  do 
not  dispute  their  value ;  it  is  in  the  relation  of  the  spirit  to  them  that  evil  arises. 
Their  value  as  a  means  to  the  ends  of  the  spirit  is  unquestioned,  and  everywhere 
assumed. 

II.  The  vanity  op  mchbs  without  oobrespondins  aotion.  Wishes  are  a  great 
force  in  our  nature  (compare  Mozley'.s  sermon  on  the  '  Power  of  Wishes ').  Still,  they 
have  no  practical  effect  unless  they  are  transformed  into  will  and  into  exertion  of  means 
to  an  end.  It  is  the  very  characteristic  of  the  fool  that  his  mind  evaporates  in  wishes ; 
he  is  always  desiring,  but  never  at  the  pains  to  get  anything.  He  is  always  idly  expect- 
ing something  to  "  turn  up."  This  is  a  sheer  superstition,  a  sort  of  clinging  to  the 
magical  belief  that  the  course  of  nature  can  be  altered  for  one's  private  benefit.  The 
lesson  is,  of  course,  equally  applicable  to  higher  things.  "  He  would  lain  go  to  heaven 
if  a  morning  dream  would  cany  him  there."  He  wishes  to  be  good,  to  die  the  death  of 
the  righteous,  but,  at  the  same  time,  to  continue  in  a  way  of  life  that  can  lead  neither 
to  the  one  uor  to  the  other.     Hell  is  paved  with  good  intentions. 

III.  The  secret  op  pbospebitt  is  diligence.  Here  desire  is  imited  with  exertion, 
and  it  is  an  almost  irresistible  combination,  as  the  careers  of  men  who  have  jisen  con- 
stantly show.  To  conceive  a  good  thing  with  such  is  to  desire  it ;  to  desire  it  is  to 
begin  at  once  to  work  for  it.  This  course  must  bring  " rich  satisfaction" — the  satisfac- 
tion, by  no  means  the  least,  of  the  pursuit,  and  the  satisfaction  in  the  end  of  entire  or 
partial  fruition.  And  so  in  moral  and  spiritual  progress.  We  cannot  overcome  our 
weaknesses  and  sins  by  direct  resistance,  but  we  may  react  upon  them  by  filling  the 
mind  with  profitable  matter  of  thought.  The  rich  satisfaction  depends  in  every  case 
upon  the  same  law ;  the  personal  energies  mtist  be  aroused,  and  an  object  must  be 
aimed  at.  Satisfaction  is  the  complete  joy  of  the  mind  in  closing  with  and  possessing 
a  worthy  and  desirable  object, 

IV.  The  conceit  op  eiohes  is  not  beai  biches.  (Ver.  7 ;  comp.  ch.  xii.  9.)  The 
laying  may  be  directed  against  the  foolish  priile  of  birth  and  ostentation  without  any- 
thing real  to  back  it  up.  It  strikes  a  common  vice  of  modern  times — the  aim  to  keep 
up  appearances,  and  to  pass  for  something  greater  in  position  than  one  really  is.  The 
contrasted  example  teaches  the  lesson  of  preierring  the  substance  to  the  show,  of  bein.^ 
willing  to  appear  much  less  than  one  is.  And  so  in  higher  matters ;  lake  care  to  be 
what  is  sound  and  good  in  principle,  and  the  seeming  may  be  left  for  the  most  part  to 
take  care  of  itself.    No  appearances  deceive  God,  and  nothing  that  is  real  escapes  him. 

V.  The  pbaotioal  sbbvice  op  kiohes.  (Ver.  8.)  They  may  provide  a  ransom 
from  captivity,  iirom  penal  judgment,  from  the  hand  of  robbers.  Their  power  to 
procure  deliverances  from  the  evils  of  life  is  much  wider  in  the  present  day.  The 
poor  man,  on  the  contrary,  "  listens  to  no  rebuke,"  ».e.  no  threats  can  extort  from  him 
what  he  has  not  got  He  is  helpless  for  want  of  means.  A  lesson  not  often  tiiught 
from  the  pulpit,  and  perhaps  not  needed  for  the  majority — prudent  regard  to  the 
possible  advantages  of  money,  stimulating  to  industry  in  the  quest  for  it.  StiU,  some 
do  need  the  lesson.  And  the  Bible  has  no  affectation  of  a  false  contempt  for  the  means 
of  living.  Business  men  should  be  encouraged  in  their  pursuit  of  wealth,  and  guided 
in  their  application  of  it. 

VI.  Wealth  onlv  pbbmanent  when  wbll-qotten.  (Ver.  11.)  Perhaps  the 
translation  to  be  preferred  is,  "Swindled  wealth  becomes  small."  Hastily  gotten 
generally  means  hastily  spent.  And  dishonest  gain  burns  the  fingers.  How  olten  do 
we  see  a  feverish  passion  for  spending  going  Land-in-hand  with  unlawful  or  unhealthy 
getting !  A  healthy  acquisition  of  wealth  is  gradual,  and  the  result  of  steady  industry. 
Bapid  fortune-making,  or  sudden  "  strokes  of  luck,"  are  certainly  not  to  be  envied  is 
view  of  the  good  of  the  BouL 


OH.  xnu  1—25.]  THE  PEOVBRBS.  261 


Lessons.  1.  Wealth  is  s  good  in  itself.  When  we  speak  of  it  as  an  evil,  we  are 
using  a  certain  figure  of  speech ;  for  the  evil  is  in  the  false  relation  ot  the  soul  to  this 
as  to  other  earthly  objects.  2.  In  the  desires  that  relate  to  wealtli,  their  proiicr  control 
and  direction,  the  moral  discipline  probably  of  tho  majority  must  ever  lie.  3.  Safety 
is  to  be  found  in  the  religious  habit,  which  sees  in  eartlily  objects  good  only  as 
they  can  be  connected  with  that  which  is  beyond  themselves,  and  is  Divine  and 
eternal. — J. 

Ver.  6. — Purity  and  impurity  of  sentiment.  I.  Aversion  from  all  tJNTRtTTH  a 
LEADING  CHARACTER  OP  PURITY.  This  does  not  imply  that  the  good  man  -never  falls 
into  acts  or  wurds  which  are  untrue  to  his  nature.  But  as  a  child  of  God,  there  is  in 
his  spiritual  or  ideal  nature  a  rooted  antipathy  to  lies,  and  a  deep  sympathy  with  truth 
in  all  its  forms.  'Tis  only  truthfulness  which  can  impart /ra^rojice,  charm,  delight,  to 
character. 

IT.  The  contrary  disposition  of  the  wicked  is  loathsome  and  bhambfdl. 
Atitip.'vthy  to  truth — and,  alas!  perversion  may  actually  bring  men  to  this — produces 
upon  the  pure  moral  taste  an  impression  akin  to  that  of  nausea  or  deformity  upon  the 
physical  sensibility.  And  we  blush  lor  it  as  a  common  odium  and  disgrace  of  human 
nature. — J. 

Ver.  6. — The  outward  correspondence  with   the  inward.    I.  Uprightness  is  the 

DESIGNATION  07  BOTH  AN  INWARD  AND   AN   OUTWARD   STATE.      1.    As  a  SenSUOlXS  image, 

uprightness  suggests  strength,  confidence,  well-grounded  stability.  2.  As  a  figure  of 
the  mind  and  character,  it  denotes  moral  principle,  fixed  purpose,  based  upon  firm 
faith  in  Gtod  and  his  moral  order..  3.  Its  consequence  is  a  state  of  security  amidst 
danger,  freedom  from  evil. 

II.  Wickedness  and  buin  abb  intbeosangbablb  thoughts.  1.  The  ruin  begins 
injhe  inward  decay  of  moral  piinciple.  2.  it  is  consummated  in  outward  decay — ol 
reputation,  of  possessions,  of  health,  of  life. — J. 

Ver.  9. — Joy  and  gloom.    I.  Light  is  the  symbol  of  jot. 

II.  Hence  the  cheerful  burning  of  a  light  is  the  symbol  of  the  good  man's 
heart.     He  sits  in  tho  centre  and  enjoys  clear  day. 

III.  Q-LOOM   IS   the   natural   emblem   or   BORROW. 

IV.  The  PUTTING  out  of  a  lamp  in  darkness  is  the  emblem  of  the  extinction 
OF  joy,  of  hope — of  all  that  makes  life  worth  having,  and  of  life  itself. — J. 

Ver.  10. — Pride  and  teachableness.  Pride  begets  controversy,  which  can  seldom 
be  oaebibd  on  long  without  degenerating  into  egotism.  1.  There  is  contention 
for  contention's  sake,  which  is  ever  idle  and  baneful.  2.  There  is  contention  for 
truth's  sake.  But  in  the  latter  lie  many  dangers  to  purity  of  temper.  Whenever 
we  becouje  angry  in  controversy,  as  a  great  man  said,  wo  cease  to  contend  for  tho 
truth,  and  begin  to  contend  for  ourselves. — J. 

Ver.  12. — The  sickness  of  disappointment  and  the  Joy  of  fruition.  I.  Hope  delayed. 
Who  has  nut  known  tliat  sicliness  of  the  heart,  that  slow-consuming  misery  of  which 
the  text  speaks  ?  It  is  a  sorrow  of  every  age.  Life  itself  is  by  some  spent  in  this 
still  lingering  delay.  The  stem  experience  of  the  com-se  of  the  world  teaches  us  that 
the  sentimental  and  romantic  view  of  the  future,  so  natural  to  youth,  must  give  way 
to  realities. 

II.  Hope  delayed  is  the  trial  of  faith.  The  duration  of  the  trial  rather  than 
the  intensity  is  painful.     So  with  Abraham  in  reference  to  Isaac  (&en.  xv.  2,  3). 

III.  There  is  a  loving  providential  meaning  at  the  heart  of  thesr  trials. 
They  are  essentially  time  trials ;  they  have  an  end — rthe  "  end  of  the  Lord."  So  the 
boy  named  "Laughter"  came  to  Abraham  ;  so  the  Lord  turned  again  the  captivity 
of  Zion,  and  the  delivered  were  like  unto  them  that  drean:i  !•  So  Simeon  could  sing 
his  Nunc  dimittis  on  the  appearance  of  the  long-expected  Saviour ;  and  on  his  resur- 
rection the  disciples  "believed  not  for  J03',  and  wonrlered." 

IV.  A  CBETAIN  fruition   IS    PROMISED  TO   THE   DKSIIIB  OF  THE  RIGHTEOUS.      "  Yet  • 


262  THE  PROVBBBS.  [oh.  xm.  1—25. 

little  while,  and  he  that  shall  come  will  come,  and  will  act  tarry"  (oomp.  Rom.viiL  23; 
2  Cor.  T.  2— 4).— J. 

Vers.  13 — 17. — 77ie  value  of  the  Divine  Word.  I.  Eeverbncb  and  ierevebewob 
FOR  THE  Divine  Word.  The  "  Word  "  is  any  revelation  man  receives  of  God,  whether 
through  nature,  oracles  of  the  prophets,  or  in  his  immediate  consciousness.  The  last, 
in  the  deepest  sense,  is  the  condition  of  all  other  revelations.  Irreverence  is  shown 
either  when  men  are  deaf  and  indifferent  to  the  Divine  voice,  or  when  they  suffer  it 
to  he  out-clamoured  by  other  voices — of  passion,  policy,  etc.  The  result  is  that  he  who 
thus  sins  is  "pledged"  or  forfeited  to  the  Divine  Law,  here  personified  or  regarded  as 
a  superhuman  power.  Hence  appears  the  truth  from  this  figure,  that  in  disobedience 
our  freedom  is  lost.  On  the  contrary,  reverence  and  obedience  receive  a  certain 
reward :  "  Glory,  honour,  and  peace  to  every  man  that  worketh  good  "  (Rom.  ii.  10). 

II.  The  doctrine  of  the  wise.  (Ver.  14.)  The  teaching  that  is  founded  on 
Divine  revelation  is  a  source  of  life,  and  a  safeguard  against  the  snares  of  death 
(comp.  ch.  X.  11). 

III.  There  must  be  beceptivitt  towards  this  doctrine.  The  Word  must  be 
"  mixed  with  faith  in  those  that  hear."  The  favour  of  God  is  free  in  one  sense,  i,e. 
is  no  earned  result  of  our  conduct ;  but  it  is  conditional  in  another,  viz.  it  depends 
on  our  compliance  with  his  will.  The  contrast  to  the  life  in  the  light  of  God's  favour, 
watered  by  vital  nourishment  from  the  springs  of  truth,  is  the  "  way  of  the  faithless," 
which  is  "  barren,"  dry,  as  in  "  a  dry  and  thirsty  land  where  no  water  is." 

IV.  Prttdbnob  and  good  counsel  must  be  added  to  beverbnob.  (Ver.  16.) 
Thoughtfulness  is  needed  in  studying  the  evidences,  the  substance,  the  applications 
of  religion.  And  in  the  practical  conduct  of  life  how  necessary  I  for  more  errors  are 
committed  for  want  of  judgment  and  discrimination  as  to  time,  place,  and  circum- 
stances, than  for  want  of  true  and  right  purpose.  The  man  destitute  of  tact  pours 
folly  abroad ;  temper,  vanity,  caprice,  are  exposed  in  all  that  he  does  and  says. 

V.  Faithful  and  unfaithful  ministry.  (Ver.  17.)  The  wicked  messenger 
prepares  misfortune  both  for  his  master  and  for  himself;  while  the  faithful  servant 
will  amend  even  his  master's  mistakes.  Applied  to  sacred  things,  every  Christian 
should  consider  himself  a  messenger,  an  apostle  in  however  humble  a  sphere,  of  God 
and  his  truth.     And  "  it  is  required  of  stewards  that  they  be  found  faithful."--J; 

Vers.  18 — 25. — The  lilessinge  of  obedience  and  their  counterpart.  I.  The  blbssinqs 
or  OBEDIENCE.  1.  HonowT.  (Ver.  18.)  "  'Tis  a  good  brooch  to  wear  in  a  man's  hat 
at  all  times,"  says  one  of  our  old  poets.  Love  is  common  to  all  the  creatures,  as  life 
and  death ;  honour  belongs  to  men  alone ;  and  dishonour  must  be  worse  than  death. 
The  praise  of  others  is  the  reflection  of  virtue,  and  a  good  name  like  fragrant  ointment. 
2.  Satisfied  desire.  (Ver.  19.)  And  what  is  sweeter  than  the  attainment  of  worthy 
"ends  and  expectations"?  And  if  we  will  but  have  faith,  this  satisfaction  may  be 
ours,  by  setting  our  hearts  on  internal  blessings,  the  kingdom  of  God  and  his  righteous- 
ness, i.  Improving  eompanionship.  (Ver.  20.)  Friendship  with  the  wise  makes 
daylight  in  the  understanding  out  of  darkness  and  confusion  of  thoughts.  Our  wits 
and  understanding  clarify  and  break  up  in  communicating  and  discoursing  with  one 
another.  "  We  toss  our  thoughts  more  easily,  marshal  them  more  soberly ;  see  how 
they  look  when  turned  into  words ;  we  wax  wiser  than  ourselves,  and  that  more  by 
an  hour's  discourse  than  by  a  day's  meditation"  (Lord  Bacon).  4.  Unfailing  com- 
pensations. All  things  are  double,  one  against  another.  An  eye  for  an  eye,  a  tooth 
for  a  tooth,  on  the  one  side;  measure  for  measure,  love  for  love,  on  the  other.  "  Give, 
and  it  shall  be  given  you;"  "He  that  watereth  shall  be  watered  himself."  "  What 
will  you  have?]'  saith  God;  "pray  for  it,  and  take  it."  "If  you  serve  an  ungrateful 
master,  serve  him  the  more.  Put  God  in  your  debt.  Every  stroke  shall  be  repaid. 
The  longer  the  payment  is  withholden,  the  better  for  you;  for  compound  interest  on 
compound  interest  is  the  rate  and  usage  of  this  exchequer."  5.  Hereditary  good. 
(Ver.  22.)  We  desire  to  prolong  our  blessings,  in  the  view  of  fancy,  beyond  our  lives; 
and  the  desire  to  leave  behind  a  fortune,  or  a  name  and  fame,  is  one  of  the  raost 
common  and  natural.  The  thouj^ht  that  all  the  good  our  life  has  produced  will  be 
till  a  germinant  power  with  our  descendants  after  we  are  gone,  is  one  of  the  noblest 


OH.xin  1—25.]  THE  PROVERBS.  263 

and  most  inspiring.  6.  Fruitful  poverty.  (Ver.  23.)  The  image  is  that  of  the  poor 
man's  field,  which  becomes  rich  in  produce  through  the  investment  of  his  toil  in  it. 
The  improvement  of  the  ground  is  the  most  natural  way  of  obtaining  riches ;  it  is  our 
great  mother's  blessing,  the  earth.  The  blessing  of  God  visibly  rests  upon  the  honest 
labour  of  the  poor.  7.  Wise  training  of  the  young.  (Ver.  24.)  The  rod  may  stand 
as  a  figure  for  all  correction,  firm  yet  kindly  discipline,  and  instruction.  The  wise 
father  will  seek  to  anticipate  moral  evil  by  subduing  early  the  passionate  temper.  He 
will  incessantly  follow  up  his  child  with  prayer,  with  discipline,  with  exhortations, 
that  he  may  not  later  rue  the  absence  of  seasonable  warnings.  8.  Temperate  eiijoyment 
and  sufficient  supplies.  (Ver.  25.)  The  mind  governed  by  religion  and  wisdom  learns 
to  reduce  its  wants  to  a  small  compass;  and  this  is  a  great  secret  of  content  and  of 
true  riches.  He  who  wants  only  what  is  necessary  for  the  life  and  free  action  of  the 
soul  may  rely  with  confidence  on  the  infinite  bounty  of  Providence. 

II.  The  counterpart.  1.  Poverty  and  shame.  (Ver.  18.)  The  one  an  outward 
misery,  patent  to  all ;  the  other  not  so  patent,  but  more  acute;  for  contempt,  as  the 
Indian  proverb  says,  pierces  through  the  shell  of  the  tortoise.  So  long  ago  as  old  Homer, 
we  find  the  sentiment,  "  Shame  greatly  hurts  or  greatly  helps  mankind  "  ('  Iliad,'  xxiv. 
45 ;  Hesiod,  'Op.,'  316).  "Take  one  of  the  greatest  and  most  approved  courage,  who  makes 
nothing  to  look  death  and  danger  in  the  face,  ...  in  a  base  and  a  shameful  action,  and 
the  eye  of  the  discoverer,  like  that  of  the  basilisk,  shall  strike  him  dead.  So  inexpressibly 
great  sometimes  are  the  killing  horrors  of  this  passion"  (South,  vol.  ii.  ser.  vii.).  The  Bible 
designates  this  as  a  peculiar  fruit  of  sin.  2.  I%e  unquenchable  fire  of  lust.  (Ver.  19.) 
To  this  the  correct  rendering  of  the  second  member  of  the  verse  appears  to  point  (Jas. 
L  14, 15).  'Tis  hard  to  give  up  the  bosom  sin,  which  still  in  better  moments  is  hated — 
a  loathsome  tyranny,  yet  one  which  cannot  be  cast  off.  3.  Depraving  companionship. 
(Ver.  20.)  Wicked  companions  invite  to  hell.  "  There  are  like  to  be  short  graces  when 
the  devil  plays  the  host."  4.  Haunting  troublers.  (Ver.  21.)  Much  romance  has  been 
woven  about  "  haunted  hoiisss;"  but  what  haunted  house  so  gruesome  as  the  bad  man's 
heart?  His  sin  draws  God's  wrath  and  punishments  after  it,  even  as  the  shadows 
follow  his  feet.  5.  Forfeited  wealth.  (Ver.  22.)  Riches  that  come  from  the  devil  go 
back  to  him.  Fraud,  oppression,  and  unjust  dealing  are  not  really  retentive;  or  wealth 
obtained  by  flattering,  complying  with  others'  humours,  and  servility  does  not  prosper. 
The  Proverbs  see  the  outrush  of  life  with  great  clearness ;  they  do  not  always  explain 
the  inner  connection  of  cause  and  effect,  which  should  be  clear  to  us.  6.  Self-destruc- 
tion. (Ver.  23.)  Many  a  man  is  "  carried  away  by  his  unrighteousness."  "  In  contrast 
with  the  contented,  humble  condition  of  the  good  man,  the  selfish  and  profligate  '  lovers 
of  themselves  without  a  rival,'  are  often  unfortunate;  and  whereas  they  have  all  their 
time  sacrificed  to  themselves,  they  become  in  the  end  themselves  sacrifices  to  the 
inconstancy  of  fortune,  whose  wings  they  thought  by  their  self-wisdom  to  have 
pinioned"  (Lord  Bacon).  7.  Weak  indulgence  to  children.  (Ver.  24.)  A  most 
injurious  error.  It  tends  to  weaken  the  young  minds  and  foster  all  the  violent  passions; 
just  as  the  opposite  extreme  tends  to  debase  and  incite  to  deceit.  E.  Irving,  in  one  of 
his  works,  hints  that  a  great  proportion  of  the  inmates  of  lunatic  asylums  have  been 
only  and  spoilt  children.  8.  Want.  (Ver.  25.)  "Great  wants,"  it  has  been  said, 
"proceed  from  great  wealth;  but  they  are  undutiful  children,  for  they  sink  wealth 
down  to  poverty." — J. 

Vers.  1,  13,  li.—The  vnsdom  of  docility,  etc. :  a  sermon  to  the  young.  We  have  the 
positive  and  negative,  the  happy  and  the  sorrowful  aspects  of  the  subject  brought  into 

I.  The  wisdom  of  docilitt.  The  excellency  of  docility  is  seen  in  its  results :  1. 
In  character.  It  is  a  "  wise  son  "  who  heareth  his  father's  instruction.  (1)  Already 
he  is  wise.  Apart  from  all  that  he  will  gain  by  his  teachableness,  readiness  to  receive 
instruction  is  in  itself  an  admirable  feature  of  character ;  it  is  so  more  particularly 
in  the  young.  In  them  it  is  positively  essential  to  spiritual  beauty  and  worth ;  and  it 
goes  a  long  way  to  constitute  such  worth.  It  is  a,n  attribute  of  mind  which  is  pleasing 
to  God,  and  which  commends  itself  greatly  to  the  esteem  of  man.  (2)  It  has  the 
promise  of  wisdom  further  on.  For  he  who  is  ready  to  learn,  and  more  especially  if 
he  iB  willing  to  "  regard  reproof,"  is  on  the  high-road  to  much  attainment  in  knowledge, 


864  THE  PROVERBS.  [oh.  xiii,  1—26. 

and  also  to  heights  of  virtue  and  godliness.  This  habit  of  his  will  save  him  from  many 
snares,  and  wUl  enrich  his  soul  with  pure  principles  and  honourable  aspirations  and 
right  afiTeotions.  2.  In  circumstance.  The  docile  eon  will  "be  rewarded,"  will  "be 
honoured."  The  path  he  treads  is  one  which  leads  to  competence,  to  comfort,  to 
health,  to  honour,  to  "  a  green  old  age."  But  there  are  three  things  which  must  be 
incluaed  in  this  readiness  to  learn.  No  one  will  be  "  wise,"  and  no  one  can  expect  to 
reap  these  desirable  results,  unless  he  (1)  is  docile  in  the  home,  receiving  "his  father's 
(and  his  mother's)  instruction  (ver.  1) ;  (2)  has  respect  to  the  "  commandment,"  the 
will  of  Q-od  as  revealed  in  his  Word  (ver.  13) ;  (3)  is  willing  to  be  corrected  when  he 
has  gone  astray,  unless  he  "  regards  reproof"  (ver.  18).  For  all  of  us  fall  into  some 
error,  make  some  mistakes,  go  astray  in  some  directions ;  and  we  all  need  the  kind 
hand  that  will  lead  us  back  and  replace  us  in  the  right  road. 

II.  The  folly  and  the  doom  of  the  untbachable.  What  should  we  think  of 
the  young  captain  who  insisted  on  setting  sail  without  any  chart,  trusting  to  his  native 
cleverness  to  shun  the  shoals  and  rocks,  and  to  make  his  way  to  port?  We  know 
what  to  judge  concerning  him,  and  what  to  prophesy  concerning  his  vessel;  we  are 
sure  that  the  one  is  a  fool,  and  that  the  other  will  be  a  wreck.  And  what  shall  we 
think  of  youth  when  it  resolves  to  sail  forth  on  the  great  sea  of  life,  disregarding  the 
experiences  of  the  wise,  and  trusting  to  its  own  sagacity?  To  take  this  course  is:  1. 
To  he  wnivise.  Apart  from  all  consequences  which  are  in  the  future,  it  is  the  indication 
of  a  foolish  spirit  which  is  in  itself  deplorable.  It  shows  a  very  ill-balanced  judgment, 
a  very  exaggerated  conception  of  one's  own  ability,  a  lack  of  the  modesty  the  presence 
of  which  is  so  great  a  recommendation,  and  the  absence  of  which  is  so  serious  a  draw- 
back. It  calls  for  and  it  calls  forth  the  pity  of  the  wise;  it  is  well  if  it  does  not  elicit 
their  contempt.  2.  To  move  in  the  direction  of  disaster.  It  is  to  be  in  the  way  which 
conducts  (1)  to  the  loss  ol'  much  that  is  very  valuable,  to  "poverty"  of  more  kinds 
than  one  (ver.  18) ;  (2)  to  shame  (ver.  18),  the  forfeiture  of  good  men's  regard,  and  a 
descent  to  a  condition  in  which  self-respect  also  is  lost ;  (3)  to  ultimate  destruction 
(ver.  13).  He  that  feareth  not  God's  commandment,  nor  regards  man's  warning,  is  « 
candidate  for  contempt,  is  a  swift  traveller  on  the  road  to  ruin. — 0. 

Ver.  4. — (See  homily  on  ch.  xxvii.  23.) — 0. 

Ver.  7. —  Wrong  views  of  owselves,  given  and  received.  One  proverb  may  have  many 
interpretations  and  many  applications.  This  is  such  a  one.  It  may  well  suggest  to  us 
two  things. 

I.  The  omLT  of  conveying  a  false  view  of  ourselves  ;  whether  this  be  done 
by  the  merchant  in  his  office,  or  by  the  charlatan  on  the  platform,  or  by  the  quack  in 
his  surgery,  or  by  the  preacher  in  his  pulpit,  or  by  the  "  phihmihropist "  in  tho  news- 
paper, or  by  the  man  or  woman  of  embellishment  in  society,  or  by  the  artist  on  canvas, 
or  by  the  author  in  his  book,  or  whether  done  hy  the  common  miser  or  the  conscienceless 
beggar.  Heie  is  the  double  iniquity  of:  1.  Falsehood,  or,  at  any  Ta.te,  falseness.  The 
man  is  false  to  himself,  and  forgets  what  is  due  to  himself;  consequently,  he  does  that 
which  wrongs  and  injures  himself.  2.  Fraud;  imposture.  A  man  practises  ou  his 
neighbours;  he  deceives  them;  in  the  worst  cases  he  induces  others  to  run  most 
serious  risks  to  their  health  or  their  fortune. 

II.  The  misfortune  op  forming  a  wrong  estimate  of  ourselves.  1.  This  la 
sometimes  an  appropriate  penalty.  For  if  a  man  "  makes  himself  rich  or  poor  in  the 
eyes  of  others,  it  is  e.'ctremely  likely  that  he  will  before  long  imagine  himself  to  be  so. 
It  is  one  of  the  well-attested  facts  of  human  experience,  that  what  men  try  to  persuade 
their  fellows  to  think,  they  come  in  time  to  believe  themselves.  And  this  holds  good 
when  the  object  as  well  as  the  subject  is  the  man  himself.  Try  to  convince  others 
that  you  are  clever,  learned,  kind,  pious,  and  before  many  months  have  been  spent  in 
the  endeavour  you  will  actually  credit  yourself  with  these  qualities.  And  the  result 
is  an  entirely  mistaken  view  of  yourself.  This  is  a  punitive  consequence;  for  there 
is  no  moral  condition  from  which  we  have  such  urgent  need  to  pray  and  strive  that  we 
may  be  delivered.  Is  it  not  the  last  stage  on  the  downward  road?  2.  It  is  a  grave 
ipiritual  peril.  Solemn,  indeed,  is  the  warning  addressed  by  the  risen  Lord  to  the 
Church  at  Laodioea  (Rev.  iii.  14 — 19).    But  no  warning  can  be  too  serious  or  too 


OH.  xiii.  1— 26.]  THE  PROVERBS.  26b 

strong,  whether  addressed  to  the  Church  or  the  Individual,  when  there  is  a  false 
estimate  of  self,  a  supposition  of  wealth  which  is  but  imaginary,  a  false  confidenca 
which,  if  not  awakened  now,  will  be  terribly  aroused  and  shattered  further  on.  3.  But 
a  false  estimate  of  ourselves  may  be,  not  a  penalty,  but  rather  a  pity.  When  the 
heart  thinks  itself  (makes  itself)  poor  and  destitute,  while  it  is  really  "rich  toward 
God,"  it  suffers  as  it  need  not  suffer,  and  it  lacks  the  strength  for  doing  good  which  it 
need  not  lack.  And  this  is  not  unfrequently  the  case.  Men  have  been.raisinstructed 
concerning  the  kingdom  of  Christ ;  and  long  after  they  have  been  within  it  they  have 
been  supposing  themselves  to  stnnd  outside  it.  Wherefore  let  {hose  who  teach  take 
care  how  they  teach,  and  let  all  disciples  "  take  heed  how  they  hear,"  that  they  may 
not  think  themselves  wrong  when  they  are  right  with  God,  rebels  against  the  Divine 
Ruler  when  they  are  his  accepted  children. — C. 

Ver.  12,  vrtth  ver.  9  (first  part)  and  ver.  19  (first  part). — Hop*  and  diswppointmmi. 
We  learn  that — 

I.  Hope  ib  planted  as  an  instinot  in  the  human  hbabt.  "  Thou  didst  make  ma 
hope  when  I  was  upon  my  mother's  breasts,"  says  the  psalmist  (xxii.  9).  We  start  on 
our  course  with  a  precious  store  of  hopefulness  in  our  soul ;  and  it  takes  much  to  kill 
or  to  exhaust  it.  It  lasts  most  men  through  life,  though  the  troublous  experiences  wo 
pass  through  weaken  it,  if  they  do  not  wound  it  unto  death. 

II.  It  is  a  source  of  gbeat  strength  and  joy  to  us.  1.  It  is  a  source  of  strength 
to  us.  It  leads  us  to  entertain  and  to  enter  upon  new  ventures.  It  carries  us  on 
during  many  toils  and  through  many  difficulties.  It  sustains  us  to  the  end,  when  we 
are  weary,  and  when  we  are  opposed  and  baffled.  "  We  are  saved  by  hope."  2.  It 
is  also  a  perennial  source  of  joy.  Rob  life  of  its  anticipations,  and  you  deprive  it  of  a  very 
large  proportion  of  its  sweetness  and  satisfaction. 

III.  Sin  has  introduoed  disappointment.  We  must  regard  this  as  one  part,  and 
one  very  serious  part,  of  the  penalty  of  sin.  Not,  of  course,  that  each  case  of  disappoint- 
ment is  the  consequence  of  some  particular  antecedent  wrong-doing;  but  that  it  forms 
a  part  of  that  whole  burden  and  trial  of  life  which  is  the  mark  and  the  penalty  of  human 
sin.  There  are  lighter  disappointments  which  may  not  count  for  much,  though  these 
put  together  would  make  up  no  small  aggregate  of  evil.  But  there  are  heavier  dis- 
appointments which  constitute  a  very  large  and  serious  part  of  our  life-sorrow.  "  Hope 
deferred"  does  indeed  make  the  heart  sick.  The  long  and  weary  waiting  for  the  return 
of  the  absent ;  for  the  manifestation  of  love  ungratefully,  and  perhaps  cruelly,  withheld ; 
for  the  health  and  strength  which  no  treatment  will  restore ;  for  the  opening  which 
would  prove  a  great  opportunity ;  for  the  signs  of  reformation  in  a  beloved  relative  or 
friend;  for  the  relenting  and  reconciliation  of  one  who  has  been  long  estranged; — 
this  does  fill  the  soul  with  an  aching  such  as  no  other  trouble  brings.  It  is  one  of 
hfe's  very  heaviest  burdens.  It  is  sometimes  the  burden  and  even  the  blight  of  a 
human  life. 

IV.  It  is  the  part  of  Christian  wisdom  to  avert  it.  Not  that  it  can  be  wholly 
averted — that  is  quite  beyond  our  power.  Not  that  there  is  any  real  blessing  in  the 
absence  or  the  littleness  of  expectation.  Bat  that :  1.  We  should  discourage  and 
renounce  the  perilous  and  injurious  habit  of  idle  day-dreams.  2.  We  should  moderate 
our  hopes  according  to  our  circumstances,  and  be  contented  only  to  look  for  that  which, 
in  "the  providence  of  God,  we  may  reasonably  and  rightly  expect  to  partake  of. 

V.  It  is  the  part  op  Christian  submission  to  accept  it.  We  must  suffer  when 
our  hopes  are  unfulfilled ;  but  we  may  find  great  relief  in  the  thought  that  it  is  the  will 
oi  God  that  we  are  submitting  to.  The  feeling  that  it  is  our  Divine  Friend  who  is 
letting  us  pass  through  the  dark  shadow  of  disappointment,  and  that  it  is  the  holy  Lord 
seeking  our  highest  good  who  is  sending  us  through  the  lefining  fires, — this  will  give 
balm  to  our  wounded  spirit;  this  will  lighten  the  heavy  load  we  bear. 

VI.  God  will  oivb  his  people  some  oood  measure  of  fulfilmbnt.  We  shall 
prove  by  our  experience  in  many  ways  and  in  many  spheres — particularly  In  those  of 
(1)  our  inner  life  and  (2)  our  work  for  our  Lord— that  "  the  light  of  the  righteous 
rejoicfth,"  that  "when  desire  cometh,  it  is  a  tree  of  life,"  that  "desire  accomplished  ia 
sweet  to  the  soul."  If  we  rest  in  the  Lord,  and  wait  patiently  for  him,  he  will  give  ui 
our  heart's  desires  (Ps.  xxxvii.  4,  7). 


266  THE  PROVERBS.  [oh.  xni.  1— 25 

VII.  There  is  onb  supbemb  hope  which  may  well  sustain  us  in  the  darkest  triab 
(1  Pet.  i.  3,  4).— 0. 

Ver.  20. — Friendship :  a  sermon  to  the  young.  We  have  here  a  topic  which  comes 
very  close  home  to  us  all,  but  especially  to  the  young. 

I.  God  has  given  tjs  great  power  over  one  another.  There  are  two  sources  of 
power  we  exercise.  1.  ITiat  of  ideas.  As  we  speak  or  write  to  one  another,  we  impart 
ideas  to  the  mind ;  and  as  thought  lies  beneath  feeling,  and  feeling  beneath  character 
and  conduct  (see  homily  on  ch.  xii.  5),  it  is  clearly  of  the  gravest  consequence  what 
ideas  we  do  instil  into  the  mind  of  another.  These  ideas  include  information  or  know- 
ledge, the  presentation  of  motive  and  inducement,  new  aspects  in  which  things  are 
regarded,  new  views  and  conceptions  of  life,  etc.  2.  That  of  influence.  As  we  associate 
with  one  another,  we  influence  one  another  by  (1)  the  character  which  commands 
respect ;  (2)  aflfectioiiateaess  of  disposition ;  (3)  charm  of  manner ;  (4)  strength  of  will ; 
(5)  superiority  in  age  or  in  social  position ;  (6)  facility  and  force  of  utterance.  All 
these  are  elements  of  influence;  they  are  sometimes  united,  and  in  combination  they 
become  a  great  moral  forde. 

II.  Closeness  op  intimacy  shows  this  power  at  its  height.  When  two  "  walk 
together  because  they  are  agreed ;  "  when  there  is  a  close  and  intimate  union  of  heart 
with  heart,  of  mind  with  mind, — there  is  an  opening  for  the  exertion  of  a  power 
immeasurably  great.  Friendship  has  done  more  than  anything  else  to  enlarge  or  to 
warp  the  mind,  to  save  or  to  betray  the  soul,  to  bless  or  to  corrupt  the  life.  The 
influence  of  a  beloved  friend  or  of  a  favourite  author  is  wholly  heyond  calculation,  and 
is  almost  beyond  exaggeration.  We  give  ourselves  to  one  another;  we  impress  our 
mind  upon  one  another;  we  draw  one  another  up  or  we  drag  one  another  down. 
Hence — 

III.  It  is  or  strPEBME  impobtanob  that  wb  choose  our  tbiends  well.  The  friend- 
ships we  form  will  either  make  or  mar  us.  We  shall  certainly  be  conformed  in  spirit 
and  in  character  to  those  whom  we  admit  to  the  sanctuary  of  our  soul ;  our  lives  will 
move  with  theirs  toward  the  same  goal ;  and  we  shaU  share  their  destiny  for  good  or 
evil.  How  needful,  then,  that  we  bring  to  this  choice  our  whole  intelligence,  our 
greatest  care,  that  we  do  not  let  the  accidents  of  locality  or  family  connection  or 
business  association  decide  the  intimacies  of  our  life !  There  is  no  action  on  which  our 
future  more  decisively  depends  than  on  this  choice  we  make ;  let  youth  and  young 
manhood  (womanliooii)  look  well  to  it.  He  that  walketh  with  wise  men  will  himself 
be  wise,  and  he  will  reap  all  the  fruits  of  wisdom ;  but  the  companion  of  fools,  of  those 
who  fear  not  God  and  who  honour  not  man,  of  the  irreligious  and  the  immoral,  will 
be  destroyed  with  a  terrible,  because  a  spiritual,  destruction. 

IV.  How  wise  to  walk  the  path  of  life  with  a  Divine  Friend  ! — with  him  who 
himself  is  "  the  Wisdom  of  God ; "  intimacy  with  whom  will  draw  our  spirit  up  toward 
all  that  is  worthiest  and  noblest;  whose  presence  will  ensure  guardianship  from  all 
serious  evil,  and  enrichment  with  every  true  blessing,  and  will  gladden  with  all  pure 
and  lasting  joy, — C. 

Ver.  21. — Penalty  pursuing  sin.  These  are  striking  words,  and  they  give  ug  a 
graphic  picture  of  penalty  in  pursuit  of  the  guilt  which  is  seeking  and  hoping  to  escape, 
but  which  is  certain  to  be  overtaken. 

I.  Sin  and  suffering  are  inseparably  associated  in  thought.  In  our  judgment 
and  in  our  feeling  they  go  together ;  they  belong  to  one  another.  There  is  no  need  to 
so  beyond  this  point;  it  is  ultimate.  If  we  sin,  we  deserve  to  suffer,  and  must  expect 
to  suffer.  It  is  right  that  we  should,  and  the  hand  that  brings  it  about  is  a  righteous 
hand. 

II.  They  often  seem  to  be  divided  nr  fact.  As  we  observe  human  life,  we  see 
that  the  murderer  sometimes  escapes  the  reach  of  law,  that  the  swindler  sometimes 
flourishes  upon  the  losses  of  his  victims,  that  the  tyrant  sometimes  reigns  long  over  the 
nation  he  has  defrauded  of  its  freedom,  that  sometimes  the  man  who  lives  in  the 
practice  of  vice  continues  to  enjoy  health  for  many  years,  that  the  dishonest  author 
may  reap  a  considerable  reputation  and  may  long  remain  unexposed,  etc.  But  in 
this  case — 


OH.  xin.  1— 26.]  THE  PROVERBS.  267 


III.  Penalty  is  pubbuino  bin  and  will  ovebtakb  it.  "  Evil  pursneth  sinners.'' 
Justice  is  on  the  track,  and  sooner  or  later  will  lay  its  hand  upon  its  victim.  1.  It 
wUl  most  likely  do  so  here.  Very  frequently,  indeed  almost  always,  some  penalty 
immediately  overtakes  guilt ;  if  not  in  bodily  loss  or  suffering,  yet  in  spiritual  injury. 
And  if'not  at  once,  penalty  soon  follows  crime,  vice,  wrong-doing.  Or  if  not  soon,  yet 
after  many  years,  the  "  evil "  comes  and  lays  its  stern  hand  upon  the  shoulder.  The 
man  may  not,  probably  does  not,  see  or  even  believe  in  its  approach.  Its  step  is  silent, 
and  it  may  be  slow,  but  it  is  constant  and  certain.  The  "evil"  may  be  physical,  and 
very  often  it  is  so;  or  it  may  be  mental,  intellectual;  or  it  may  be  circumstantial;  or 
it  may  be  in  reputation ;  or  it  may  be  in  character,  and  this  last,  though  least  seen 
and  often  least  regarded,  is  in  truth  the  saddest  and  the  most  serious  of  all,  for  it 
affects  the  man  himself — ^he  "loses  his  own  soul."  Thus,  "though  leaden-footed," 
penalty  is  "  iron-handed."  2.  It  mil  surely  do  so  hereafter.  (See  Matt.  xxv.  31,  32  ; 
2  Cor.  V.  10,  etc.)    Yet  not  inconsistent  with  all  this — 

IV.  'rHEBB  is  one  meboiful  intebception.  If  we  truly  repent  of  our  sin,  we  shall 
be  freely  and  abundantly  forgiven.  1.  Grod  will  change  his  condemnation  into  accept- 
ance and  parental  favour,  so  that  we  shall  walk  thenceforward  in  the  light  of  his 
countenance.  2.  He  will  avert  the  heavier  consequences  of  our  sin  by  introducing  into 
our  heart  and  life  all  the  remedial  and  restorative  influences  of  righteousness.  And 
there  must  be  considered — 

V.  The  converse  beneficent  law  apfectinq  the  biohteous.  "  To  the  righteous 
good  shall  be  repaid."  1.  All  right  acts  are  immediately  followed  by  an  inner  and 
spiritual  blessing;  we  must  be  something  the  better  in  soul  for  every  really  right  thing 
we  do.  2.  All  right  actions,  done  in  a  reverent  and  filial  spirit,  will  bring  God's  bless- 
ing down  further  on.  He  is  "  not  unrighteous  to  forget  our  work  of  faith  and  our  labour 
of  love."  Such  blessings  come  in  many  forms,  and  4t  various  intervals ;  but  they  do 
come ;  they  are  following  the  upright,  and  they  will  overtake  them  and  crown  them, 
3.  The  reward  of  integrity  and  faithfulness  only  comes  in  part  below ;  God  holds  great 
things  in  reserve  for  us  (Matt.  xxv.  21 ;  1  Cor.  iv.  5). — G. 

Ver.  24. — Parental  correction.  Few  proverbs  "  come  home  "  to  us  lika  those  which 
affect  the  daily  government  of  our  household.  They  make  their  appeal  to  the  human 
heart,  to  universal  experience. 

I.  The  pabental  instinct.  1.  This  is,  to  let  the  child  have  his  way ;  to  give  him 
the  gratification  he  desires,  to  find  a  present  pleasure  in  his  momentary  happiness.  2. 
This  is,  to  spare  him  suffering.  No  parent  can  hear  his  child  cry  without  suffering 
himself  (herself).  Our  instinct  is  to  save  our  children  from  every  trouble,  small  and 
great,  from  which  we  can  exempt  them.  And  it  "  goes  against  the  grain "  to  inflict 
punishment,  to  cause  pain,  to  deprive  of  some  known  enjoyment.  But  we  dare  not  be 
blind  to- 
ll. The  lesson  of  expebienoe.  Universal  experience  proves  that  to  act  on  mere 
parental  instinct  is  nothing  less  than  selfish  cruelty.  It  is  to  act  as  if  we  positively 
hated  our  children.  For  it  is  the  one  sure  way  to  spoil  them  for  life,  to  ruin  their 
character.  The  undisciplined  child  becomes  the  wayward  boy,  the  dissipated  young 
man,  the  wreck  of  manhood.  He  becomes  self-centred,  incapable  of  controlling  his 
spirit,  exacting  in  all  his  relations,  disregardful  of  all  law  and  of  all  claims.  It  is  to 
withhold  the  one  condition  under  which  alone  we  can  expect  any  one  to  attain  to  an 
admirable  and  honourable  manhood.  It  is  to  deny  to  our  own  children  the  moso 
essential  element  of  education.  Experience  proves  that  he  who  spares  the  rod  acts  as 
if  he  positively  hated  his  son. 

III.  The  peactiob  of  wisdom.  This  is  the  well-moderated  correction  of  love.  This 
correction  should  be:  1.  Carefully  proportioned  to  the  offence;  the  lighter  ones,  such  as 
carelessness  or  inaptitude,  being  followed  by  the  lighter  rebuke,  and  the  graver  ones, 
such  as  falsehood  or  cruelty,  being  visited  with  severer  measures.  2.  Administered, 
not  in  the  heat  of  temper,  but  in  the  calmness  of  conviction,  and  with  the  manifest 
sorrow  of  true  affection.  3.  As  free  as  possible  from  physical  violence.  The  "  rod  "  need 
not  be  mkde  of  wood  or  iron.  A  look  of  reproach  (Luke  xxii.  61),  a  just  rebuke  or 
remonstrance,  a  wisely  chosen  exclusion  from  some  appreciated  privilege,  may  do  much 
more  good  than  any  blows  upon  the  body.    4.  Strictlyjust,  with  a  leaning  to  charitable 


236S 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[oh.  XIV.  1—35. 


constructinn.  For  one  unjust  infliction  will  do  more  harm  than  many  juBt  ones  will  do 
good.  5.  Occasional  and  of  brief  duration.  Nothing  defeats  its  own  purpose  more 
certainly  than  perpetual  fault-finding,  or  constantly  repeated  punishment,  or  penalty 
that  is  unrighteously  severe.  It  behoves  us  alway."!  to  remember  that  as  our  heavenly 
Father  does  not  "deal  with  us  after  our  sins"  with  rigorous  penalties,  and  is  not 
"strict  to  mark  iniquity"  with  unfailing  chastisement,  so  it  becomes  us,  as  parents, 
in  the  treatmeat  of  our  children,  to  let  pity  and  charity  have  a  very  large,  modifying 
influence  on  our  conection.  He  that  loveth  chastens  "betimes;"  he  is  not  always 
chastening.  He  takes  care  to  let  his  children  know  and  feel  that  beneath  and  above  and 
throughout  his  fatherly  righteousness  is  his  parental  love. — C. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTEB  XIV. 


Ver.  1. — Every  wise  woman  bnildeth  her 
house.  Wise  women  order  well  thpir  house- 
hold matters  and  their  families ;  they  have 
an  important  influence,  and  exercise  it 
beneficially. 

rvvaiKhs  ^<rflA^s  iffrl  irc&^eiv  oiKiav. 
"  A  good  wife  is  the  saving  of  a  house." 

The  versions  render  as  above.  A  different 
pointing  of  the  word  translated  "  wise " 
(chalihmoth)  will  give  "  wisdom "  (chokh- 
moth),  which  it  seems  best  to  read  here,  as 
the  parallel  to  the  abstract  term  "  folly  "  in 
the  second  member.  So  we  have,  "  Wisdom 
hath  builded  her  house"  (ch.  ix,  1;  com  p. 
eh.  i.  20).  Thus :  "  The  wisdom  of  women 
buildeth  their  house"  (ch.  xii.  4;  xxiv.  3). 
But  the  foolish  pluoketh  it  down  with  her 
hands;  "but  Folly  pluoketh  it  down  with 
her  own  hands ; "  of  course,  the  folly  of 
women  is  intended. 

Fwii  yap  otxtf  Tnjfia  Kal  irariipia. 
"  Bane  or  salvatioa  to  a  house  is  woman." 

Foolish,  unprincipled  women,  by  their  bad 
management  or  their  evil  doings,  ruin  their 
families  materially  and  morally.  "The 
husband  should  labour,"  says  a  Servian 
proverb ;  "  the  wife  should  save." 

Ver.  2. — He  that  walketh  in  his  upright- 
ness feareth  the  lord.  So  the  Septuagint. 
He  who  lives  an  upright  life  does  so  because 
ho  fears  the  Lord;  and  liis  holy  conversa- 
tion is  an  evidence  that  he  is  influenced  by 
religious  motives.  The  outward  conduct 
shows  the  inward  feeling.  So  he  that  is 
perverse  in  his  ways  despiseth  him — the 
Lord.  A  man  is  evil  in  his  actions  because 
he  has  cast  off  the  fear  of  Godj  and  such 
wickedness  is  a  proof  that  he  has  lost  all 
reverence  for  God  and  care  to  please  him. 
Delitzsoh  renders,  "He  walketh  in  hla 
uprightness  who  feareth  Jahve,  and  perverse 
in  his  ways  is  he  that  despiseth  him ;  "  i.e. 
the  conduct  of  the  two  shows  the  way  in 
which  they  severally  regard  God  and  religion, 
the  former  acting  ocusoientiously  and  up- 


rightly, the  latter  following  Us  own  lusts, 
which  lead  him  astray.^  Either  interpreta- 
tion is  admissible.  Septuagint,  "He  that 
walketh  in  crooked  ways  (o-KoA.icSfwi'  rats 
65o7f  avTov)  shall  be  dishonoured."  The 
Vulgate  gives  quite  a  different  turn  to  the 
sentence,  "He  who  walketh  in  the  right 
way  and  feareth  the  Lord  is  despised  by 
him  who  pursneth  the  path  of  shame." 
This  intimates  the  hatred  which  sinners 
feel  for  the  godly  (oomp.  Job  xii.  4;  and 
especially  Wisd.  ii.  10 — 20;  and  our  Lord's 
warning,  John  xv.  18 — 21). 

Ver.  3. — In  the  month  of  the  foolish  is  • 
rod  of  pride.  iDh  (choter),"  rod,"  or  "  shoot," 
is  found  also  in  Isa.  xi.  1.  From  tie  mouth 
of  the  arrogant  fool  proceeds  a  growth  of 
vaunting  and  conceit,  accompanied  with  in- 
solence towards  others,  for  which  he  is  often 
chastised.  So  the  tongue  is  compared  to  a 
sword  (e.g.  Ps.  Ivii.  4 ;  Ixiv.  3 ;  Jer.  xviii.  18 ; 
Eev.  1 16).  St.  Gregory  ('  Mor.  in  Job.,'  xxiv.) 
applies  this  sentence  to  haughty  preachers, 
who  are  anxious  to  appear  superior  to  other 
people,  and  study  more  to  chide  and  reprove 
than  to  encourage;  "they  know  how  to 
smite  sharply,  but  not  to  sympathize  with 
humility."  Septuagint,  "B^m  the  mouth 
offools  Cometh  a  staff  of  insolence."  The  lips 
of  the  wise  shall  preserve  them — the  wise 
(oh.  xiii.  3).  These  do  not  abuse  speech 
to  insult  and  injure  others;  and  their  words 
tend  to  conciliate  others,  and  promote  peace 
and  good  will  (comp.  ch.  xii.  6,  18). 

Ver.  4. — Where  no  oxen  (eattU)  are,  the 
crib  is  clean.  This  does  not  mean,  as  some 
take  it,  that  labour  has  its  rough,  disagree- 
able side,  yet  in  the  end  brings  profit;  but 
rather  that  without  bullocks  to  labour  in 
the  fields,  or  cows  to  supply  milk — that  is, 
without  toil  and  industry,  and  necessary 
ins(rument8 — the  crib  is  empty,  there  is 
nothing  to  put  in  the  granary,  there  are  no 
beasts  to  fatten.  The  means  must  be  adapted 
to  the  end.  Uuch  increase  is  by  the  strength 
of  the  ox.  This,  again,  is  not  an  exhortation 
to  kindness  towards  animals,  which  makes 
no  antithesis  to  the  first  clause;  but  it  is 
parallel  with  ch.  xii.  11,  and  means  that 


OH.  xrv.  1 — 35.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


M9 


vhere  agrioultnral  works  are  diligently 
carried  on  (the  "  plonghing  ox  "  being  taken 
aa  the  type  of  industry),  large  returns  are 
secured.  Septuagint,  "Where  fruits  are 
plentiful  the  strength  of  the  oi  is  manifest." 
Ver.  5. — A  repetition  of  ch.  xii.  17  (see 
also  ch.  vt  19).  A  faithful  Mritness  cannot 
be  induced  to  swerve  from  the  truth  by 
threat  or  bribe.  Will  utter;  Hebrew, 
breatheth  forth.  A  false  witness  with  no 
compulsion,  as  it  were  naturally,  puts  forth 
lies  (oorap.  ver.  25 ;  oh.  six.  5).  Septuagint, 
•'An  nnnghteous  witness  kindleth  (iienaUi) 
falsehood." 

Ver.  6.— A  soorner  seeketh  wisdom,  and 
lindeth  it  not;  literally,  it  it  not — there  ii 
none  (oh.  xiii.  7).  A  scorner  may  affect 
to  be  seeking  wisdom,  but  he  can  never 
attain  to  it,  because  it  is  given  only  to  him 
who  is  meek  and  fears  the  Lord  (Ps.  xxv.  9). 
Wisd.  i.  4,  "Into  a  malicious  soul  wisdom 
Bhull  not  enter;  nor  dwell  in  the  body  that 
is  pledged  to  sin  "  (comp.  Pe.  oxi.  10).  True 
wisdom  is  not  to  be  won  by-those  who  are 
too  conceited  to  receive  instruction,  and 
presume  to  depend  upon  their  own  judgment, 
and  to  weigh  everything  by  their  own  stan- 
dard. This  is  especially  true  of  the  know- 
ledge of  Divine  things,  which  "scorners" 
never  really  acquire.  Septuagint,  "Thou 
shalt  seek  wisdom  among  the  wicked,  but 
thou  shalt  find  it  not."  Knowledge  is  easy 
unto  him  that  understandeth ;  "that  hath 
understanding,"  i.e.  to  the  man  who  realizes 
that  the  fear  of  God  is  a  necessary  condition 
to  the  acquiring  of  wisdom,  and  who  seeks 
it  as  a  boon  at  his  hands.  This  acquisition, 
ai  it  is  difScult,  nay,  impossible  for  the 
scorner,  is  comparatively  easy  for  the 
humble  believer  who  seeks  it  with  the  right 
temper  and  in  the  right  way.  "  Mysteries 
are  revealed  unto  the  meet "  (Ecolus.  iii.  19, 
in  some  manuscripts): 

Ver.  7.— Bo  from  the  presence  of  a  foolish 
man.  Th  ere  is  some  doubt  about  ( he  render- 
ing of  this  passage.  The  Vulgate  gives, 
vade  contra  stultum,  which  is  probably  to  be 
taken  in  the  sense  of  the  Authorized  Version. 
The  Revised  Version  has,  "Go  into  the 
presence  of  a  foolish  man."  The  Hebrew 
IBD  (minnegecC)  may  mean  "from  before," 
"over  against,"  "  in  the  presence  of."  Hence 
arises  an  ambiguity.  The  Authorized  Ver- 
sion considers  the  sentence  to  be  an  injunction 
to  turn  away- from  a  stupid  man  when  you 
perceive  that  you  can  do  him  no  good. 
The  Revised  Version  is  equivalent  to  "if 
you  go  into  the  presence,"  etc.  When  thou 
perceivest  not  in  him  the  lips  of  knowledge ; 
Revised  Version,  and  thou  shalt  not  perceive 
in  him,  etc.,  which  embodies  a  truism  with 
no  special  point.  The  whole  sentence  is 
better  translated,  Oo  /orlh  from  the  pt<, 
tenet   of   a  foolith    ■»»,  and    thou    hatt 


not  hnouin  the  lipi  of  knowledge;  1.6,  as 
Nowack  explains,  "Leave  the  presence  of 
a  fool,  and  you  carry  nothing  away  vrtth 
you;  after  all  your  intercourse  with  him, 
you  quit  his  presence  without  havin;; 
gained  any  advance  in  true  knowledge" 
(see  on  ch.  xx.  15).  The  LXX.  presents 
a  very  different  version:  "All  tilings  are 
adverse  to  a  foolish  man ;  but  wise  lips  are 
the  arms  of  knowledge  (oiVfl^o-eow)."  A 
foolish  man,  by  his  inconsiderate,  slanderous, 
or  bitter  words,  makes  every  one  his  enemy; 
a  wise  man  uses  his  knowledge  to  good 
purposes ;  his  words  are  the  instruments  by 
which  he  shows  what  he  is. 

Ver.  8. — The  wisdom  of  the  prudent  is  to 
understand  Ms  way.  The  wisdom  of  the 
prudent  is  shown  by  his  considering  whither 
his  actions  lead,  the  motives  from  which 
they  spring,  the  results  that  attend  them. 
As  the  apiistle  enjoins  (Eph.  v.  15),  "See 
that  ye  walk  oircumspeetly,  not  as  fools, 
but  as  wise."  Or  the  clause  may  be  taken 
as  enjoinhig  a  wise  choice  in  life,  a  selection 
of  such  a  calling  or  occupation  as  best  suits 
one's  capabilities,  station,  and  opportunities. 
The  folly  of  fools  is  deceit.  This  is  not  self- 
deceit,  which  the  word  does  not  denote,  but 
deceit  of  others.  Stupid  persons  show  their 
folly  in  trying  to  cheat  others,  though  they 
are  sure  to  be  detected,  and  their  fraud 
recoils  on  themselves.  Tn  the  case  of  fools 
what  they  would  call  wisdom  is  folly;  hence 
the  wording  of  the  sentence. 

Ver.  9. — Fools  make  a  mock  at  sin.  So 
the  Vulgate  (comp.  ch.  x.  23).  Foolf, 
wicked  men,  commit  sin  lightly  and  cheei- 
fuUy,  give  specious  names  to  grievous  trans- 
gressions, pass  over  rebuke  with  a  joke, 
encourage  others  in  crime  by  their  easy  way 
of  viewing  it.  But  in  the  original  the  verb 
is  in  the  singular  number,  while  the  noun  is 
plural,  and  the  clause  could  be  translated 
as  in  the  Authorized  Version  only  with  the 
notion  that  the  number  of  the  verb  is  altered 
in  order  to  imlividualizs  the  application  of 
the  maxim  ('  Speaker's  Commentary ').  '  But 
there  is  no  necessity  for  such  a  riolent 
anomaly.  The  subject  is  doubtless  the 
word  rendered  "sin"  (aeftam)  which  means 
both  " sin "  and  "sin  offering."  So  we  may 
render,  "  Sin  mocks  fools,"  i.e.  deceives  and 
disappoints  them  of  the  enjoyment  which 
they  expected.  Or  better,  as  most  in 
harmony  with  the  following  member,  "  The 
iin  offering  of  fools  mocks  them "  (ch.  xv. 
8).  Thus  Aquila  and  Theodotion,  &<fipovas 
XXfviiCei  ir\7jjii/teAeia,  where  irAij/ijucAem  may 
signify  "sin  offering"  (Ecclus.  vii.  31).  It 
is  vain  for  such  to  seek  to  win  God's  favour 
by  ceremonial  observances;  offerings  from 
them  are  useless  expenditure  of  cost  and 
trouble  (ch.  xxi.  27).  Tho  Son  of  Sirach 
has  well  expressed  this  truth:   "He  that 


270 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[oh.  xrv.  1—  85. 


Bacriflceth  of  a  thing  nnlawfuUy  gotten,  his 
offering  is  mockery  (/itc/x<uK7)jueio;),  and  the 
mookeriee  of  unjust  men  are  not  well- 
pleasing.  The  Most  High  is  not  pleased 
with  the  offerings  of  the  godless,  neither  is 
he  propitiated  for  sin  by  the  multitude  of 
sacrifices"  (Eoclus.  zxxi.  18, 19).  It  is  always 
the  disposition  of  the  heart  that  conditions 
the  acceptableness  of  worship.  Among  the 
righteous  there  is  favour — tlie  favour  and 
good  will  of  God,  which  are  bestowed  upon 
them  because  tlieir  heart  is  right.  The 
word  ratson  might  equally  refer  to  the 
good  will  of  man,  which  the  righteous  gain 
by  their  kindness  to  sinners  and  ready 
sympathy;  but  in  that  case  the  antithesis 
would  be  less  marked.  Septuagint,  "The 
houses  of  transgressors  owe  purification 
(^otpeiK'lia'ovffi  Ka6afnff^6v)\  but  the  houses 
of  the  just  are  acceptable."  This  is  ex- 
plained to  signify  that  sinners  refuse  to  offer 
the  sacrifice  which  they  need  for  their  legal 
purification;  but  the  righteous,  while  tliey 
have  no  necessity  for  a  sin  offering,  are  ac- 
ceptable when  they  present  their  free-will 
TOWS  and  thanksgivings. 

Ver.  10. — The  heart  knoweth  its  own 
bitterness ;  literally,  the  heart  (leb)  Itnoweth 
the  bitterness  of  his  soul  (_nephem).  Neither 
our  joys  nor  our  sorrows  can  be  wholly 
shared  with  another;  no  person  stands  in 
such  intimate  relation  to  us,  or  can  put  him- 
self so  entirely  in  our  place,  as  to  feel  that 
which  we  feel.  There  is  many  a  dark  spot, 
many  a  grief,  of  which  our  best  friend  knows 
notmng ;  the  skeleton  is  locked  in  the  cup- 
board, and  no  one  has  the  key  but  ourselves. 
But  we  can  turn  with  confidence  to  the 
God-Man,  Jesus,  who  knows  our  frame,  who 
wept  human  ttars,  and  bore  our  sorrows, 
and  was  in  all  points  tempted  like  as  we  are, 
and  who  lias  taken  his  human  experience 
with  him  into  heaven.  A  stranger  doth  not 
intermeddle  with  its  joy.  The  contrast  is 
between  the  heart's  soitow  and  its  joy; 
both  alike  in  their  entirety  are  beyond  the 
ken  of  strangers.  St.  Gregory  remarks  on 
this  passage  ('Moral.,'  vi.  23),  "The  human 
mind  'knoweth  its  own  soul's  bitterness' 
when,  inflamed  with  aspirations  after  the 
eternal  land,  it  learns  by  weeping  the 
sorrowfulnebs  of  its  pilgrimage.  But  'the 
stranger  doth  not  intermeddle  with  his  joy,' 
in  that  he,  that  is  now  a  stranger  to  the 
grief  of  compunction,  is  not  then  a  partaker 
in  the  joy  of  consolation."  A  homely  pro- 
verb says,  "  No  one  knows  where  the  shoe 
pinches  so  well  as  he  that  wears  it; "  and 
an  Italian  maxim  runs,  "  Ad  ognuno  par  pill 
grave  la  croee  sua  " — "  To  every  one  bis  own 
cross  eeems  heaviest."  Septuagint,  "The 
heart  of  man  is  sensitive  (e«<re77Tiic^),  his  soul 
is  sorrowful ;  but  when  it  rejoices,  it  baa  no 
Intermingling  of  insolence;"  «'.&  when  a 


man's  mind  is  sensitive  It  is  easily  depressed 
by  grief;  but  when  it  is  elated  by  joy,  it 
should  receive  its  pleasure  and  i  elief  without 
arrogance  and  ribaldry. 

Ver.  11. — The  house  .  .  .  the  talemacle. 
The  house  of  the  wicked,  which  they  build 
and  beautify  and  love,  and  which  they  look 
upon  as  a  lasting  home,  shall  perish ;  the 
hope  which  they  founded  upon  it  shall  come 
to  a  speedy  end  (oh.  xii.  7);  but  the  riglit- 
eous  rear  only  a  tent  on  earth,  as  becomes 
those  who  are  strangers  and  pilgrims ;  and 
yet  this  abode  is  more  secure,  the  hopes 
founded  upon  it  are  more  lasting,  for  it  con- 
tinues unto  everlasting  life.  The  text  in 
its  first  sense  probably  means  that  sinners 
take  great  pains  to  increase  their  material 
prosperity,  and  to  leave  heirs  to  carry  on 
their  name  and  family,  but  Providence 
defeats  their  efforts ;  good  men  do  their 
duty  in  their  state  of  life,  try  to  please  God 
and  benefit  their  neighbour,  leaving  anxious 
care  for  the  future,  and  God  prospers  them 
beyond  all  that  they  thought  or  wished 
(comp.  ch.  iii.  33).  Shall  flourisli,  The 
word  applies  metaphorically  to  the  growth, 
vigour,  and  increase  of  a  family  under  the 
blessing  of  God.  Septuagint,  "  The  tents 
of  the  upright  shall  stand."  There  is  a 
cognate  proverb  at  ch.  xii.  7. 

Ver.  12. — This  verse  occurs  again  in  ch. 
xvi.  25.  There  is  a  way  which  seemeth  right 
unto  a  man.  This  may  refer  to  the  blinding 
effects  of  passion  and  self-will ;  for  these 
make  a  man  think  his  ovm  way  best  and 
most  desirable.  But  it  seems  better  to  take 
it  as  a  warning  against  following  a  perverted 
or  uninstructed  conscience.  Conscience 
needs  to  be  informed  by  God's  Word  and 
ruled  by  God's  will  to  make  it  a  safe  guide. 
Wlien  properly  regulated,  it  is  able  to  pro- 
nounce a  verdict  upon  contemplated  action, 
and  its  verdict  must  always  be  obeyed.  But 
warped  by'  prejudice,  weakened  by  disuse 
and  disobedience,  judicially  blinded  in 
punishment  and  in  consequence  of  sin,  it 
loses  all  power  of  moral  judgment,  and 
becomes  inoperative  of  good ;  and  then,  as 
to  the  way  that  seemed  at  the  moment 
right,  the  end  thereof  are  the  ways  of  death 
(oh.  V.  5).  The  man  is  following  a  false 
light,  and  is  led  astray,  and  goes  headlong 
to  destruction  (comp.  Bom.  i.  28 ;  1  Tim.  iv. 
2 ;  see  on  ver.  13).  St.  Gregory  ('  Moral.,' 
V.  12)  has  some  words  on  this  subject: 
"There  are  times  when  we  are  ignorant 
whether  the  very  things  which  we  believe 
we  do  aright,  are  rightly  done  in  the  strict 
Judge's  eye.  For  it  often  liappens  that  an 
action  of  ours,  which  is  cause  for  our  con- 
demnation, passes  with  ns  for  the  aggran- 
dizement of  virtue.  Often  by  the  same 
act  whereby  we  think  to  appease  the  Judge, 
he    is   urged   to  anger  when  favourable^ 


OH.  XIV.  1 — 35.] 


THE  PEOVEEBS. 


2n 


Hence,  while  toly  men  are  getting  the 
mastery  oyer  their  evil  habits,  their  very 
good  practices  even  become  an  object  of 
dread  to  them,  lest,  when  they  desire  to  do 
a  good  action,  they  be  decoyed  by  a  sem- 
blance of  the  thing,  lest  tlie  baleful  canker 
of  corruption  lurk  under  the  fair  appearance 
of  a  goodly  colour.  For  they  know  that 
they  are  still  charged  with  the  burden  of 
corruption,  and  cannot  exactly  discern  the 
things  that  be  good"  (Oxford  transl.). 

Ver.  13. — Even  in  laughter  the  heart  is 
sorrowful  (comp.  ver.  10).  This  recalls 
Luoretius's  lines  (iv.  1129) — 

"  Medio  de  fonte  lepornm 
8urgit  amari  aliquid,  quod  in  ipsis  floribus 

angat." 

The  text  is  scarcely  to  be  taken  aa  univer- 
sally true,  but  either  as  specially  applicable 
to  those  mentioned  in  the  preceding  verse, 
or  as  teaching  that  the  outward  mirth  often 
cloaks  hidden  sorrow  (comp.  Virgil, '  ^neid,' 
i.  208,  etc.).  And  the  end  of  that  joy  is  bitter- 
ness ;  it  has  in  it  no  element  of  endurance, 
and  when  it  is  past,  the  real  grief  that  it 
masked  comes  into  prominence.  In  this 
mortal  life  also  joy  and  sorrow  are  strangely 
intermingled;  sorrow  follows  closely  on 
the  steps  of  joy;  as  some  one  somewhere 
says,  "The  sweetest  waters  at  length  find 
their  way  to  the  sea,  and  are  embittered 
there."  Lesfetre  refers  to  Pascal, '  Pensfes,' 
ii.  1 :  "  Tons  se  plaignent .  .  .  de  tout  pays, 
de  tout  temps,  de  tous  &ges,  et  de  toutes  con- 
ditions. TJne  preuve  si  longue,  si  contiuuelle 
et  si  uniforme,  devrait  bien  nous  convaincre 
de  I'impuissance  oh  nous  sommes  d'airiver 
an  bien  par  nos' efforts:  mais  I'exeraple  ne 
nous  intruit  point  .  .  .  Le  present  ne  nous 
satisfaisant  jamais,  I'esp^rance  nous  pi^pe, 
et,  de  malheur  en  malheur,  nous  meue 
jusqu'i  la  mort,  qui  en  est  le  comble  eter- 
nel.  C'est  une  chose  strange,  qu'il  n'y  » 
rien  dans  la  nature  qui  n'ait  ete  capable  de 
tenir  la  place  de  la  fin  et  du  bonheur  de 
I'homme.  .  .  .  L'homme  ^tant  dechu  de  son 
^tat  naturel,  il  n'y  a  rien  ik  quoi  il  n'ait  4tS 
capable  de  se  porter.  Depuis  qu'il  a  perdu 
le  vrai  bien,  tout  ^galement  peut  lui  paraitre 
tel,  jusqu'i  aa  destruction  propre,  toute 
contraire  qu'elle  est  &  la  raison  et  &  la 
naturs  tout  ensemble."  This  illustrates 
also  ver.  12.  Proverbs  like  "  There  is  no 
rose  without  a  thorn  "  are  common  enough 
in  all  languages.  The  Latins  said,  "  Ubi 
uber,  ibi  tuber;"  and  "Ubi  mel,  ibi  fel." 
Greek  experience  produced  the  gnome — 
'A/  itrrl  avyyevis  ti  \ivq  koI  plos. 
"  Sorrow  and  life  are  very  near  of  kin." 
The  Christian  leiurns  another  lesson, 
"  Blessed  are  they  that  mourn :  for  they 
shall    be   oomforted"    (Matt.  v.  4).    The 


LXX.  has  introduced  a  negative,  which 
gives  a  sense  exactly  contrary  to  the  He- 
brew and  to  all  the  other  versions :  "  In  joys 
there  is  no  admixture  of  sorrow,  but  the 
final  joy  cometh  unto  grief."  'The  negative 
has  doubtless  crept  inadvertently  into  the 
text;  if  it  were  genuine,  the  sentence  might 
be  explained  of  the  sinner's  joy,  which  he 
finds  for  a  time  and  exults  in,  but  which 
does  not  last,  and  is  felt  to  be  a  delusion  as 
life  closes. 

Ver.  14. — ^The  backslider  in  heart — he 
who  turns  away  from  God  (Ps.  xliv.  18) — 
shall  be  filled  with  his  own  ways,  shall  reap 
the  fruits  of  his  evil-doings  (ch.  i.  31 ;  xii.  14). 
Matt.  vi.  2,  "Verily  I  say  unto  you,  they 
have  their  reward."  And  a  good  man  shall 
be  satisfied  from  himself.  There  is  no  verb 
expressed  in  this  clause,  "shall  be  satis- 
fied" being  supplied  by  our  translators. 
Delitzsch  and  oUiers  read,  "  and  a  good  man 
from  his  own  deeds."  It  is  simpler  to  repeat 
the  verb  from  the  former  clause :  "  A  good 
man  shall  be  filled  with  that  which  belongs 
to  him ;  "  t.e.  the  holy  thoughts  and  righteous 
actions  in  which  he  delights.  Isa.  iii.  10, 
"Say  ye  of  the  righteous  that  it  shall  be 
well  with  him ;  for  they  shall  eat  the  fruit 
of  their  doings."  The  Vulgate,  neglecting 
the  prefix,  translates,  "  And  over  him  shall 
be  the  good  man ; "  Septuagint, "  And  a  good 
man  from  his  thoughts,"  the  produce  of  his 
heart  and  mind. 

Ver.  15. — The  simple  believeth  every  word. 
"Simple"  (pethi),  the  credulous  person, 
open  to  all  influences  (ch.  i.  22).  The 
Vulgate  has  innocent,  and  the  Septuagint' 
txaKos;  but  the  word  is  best  taken  in  an 
unfavourable  sense.  The  credulous  fool 
believes  all  that  he  hears  without  proof  or 
examination ;  having  no  fixed  principles  of 
his  own,  he  is  at  the  mercy  of  any  adviser, 
and  is  easily  led  astray.  Ecclus.  xix.  4, 
"  He  that  is  hasty  to  give  credit  is  light- 
minded,  and  he  that  sinneth  (thus)  shall 
offend  against  his  own  soul."  It  is  often 
remarked  how  credulous  are  unbelievers  in 
supernaturalism.  They  who  refuse  to  credit 
the  most  assured  facts  of  Christ's  history 
will  pin  their  faith  on  some  philosophical 
theory  or  insufficiently  supported  opinion, 
and  will  bluster  and  contend  in  maintenance 
of  a  notion  to-day  which  to-mnrrow  will 
prove  untenable  and  absurd.  Many  who 
despise  the  miraculous  teaching  of  the 
Bible  accept  the  follies  %  and  frauds  of 
spiritualisiu  (oomp.  John  v.  43).  Hesiod, 
'Ep7.,  372— 

nlirreis  S'  &p  rot  in&s  kA  hvurrlau  &\eirai 
&vipas. 

"  Belief  and  unbelief  alike  are  fatal." 

Cato, '  Dist.,'  ii.  20— 


272 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[oh.  xit.  1 — 36. 


"Noll  tn  qnsedam  refcrenti  credere  semper; 
Exigna   hii  tribuends   fides  qui    muUa 
loqunntur." 

The  prudent  man  looketh  well  to  his  going 
(ver.  8) ;  Vulgate,  Aatutus  considerat  gretsut 
«uo«.  The  prudent  man  considers  whither 
the  advice  given  will  lead  him,  always  acta 
with  deliberation.  This  maxim  is  attributed 
to  Pythagoras — 

"Let  none  persuade  thee  by  his  word  or 
deed 

To  say  or  do  what  is  not  really  good ; 

And  before  action  well  deliberate, 

Lest  thou  do  foolishly." 

{Xpuff.  "ETrTi,  25,  iqq.) 

Septuagint,  "  The  clever  man  (Travoipyos') 
Cometh  unto  repentance  [or, '  afterthought '] 
(jifTCLvomv) ; "  i.e.  if  he,  like  the  simpleton, 
is  too  credulous,  he  will  smart  for  it,  Mera- 
ma,  so  common  in  the  New  Testameut,  is 
not  found  elsewhere  in  the  Greek  Version 
of  the  canonical  Scriptures,  though  it  ofours 
ill  BccluB.  xliv.  16 ;  Wisd.  xi.  23,  etc.  The 
Vulgate  here  introduces  the  Septuagint 
addition  in  ch.  xiii.  13. 

Ver.  16.— A  wise  man  feareth,  and  de- 
parteth  from  evil  (ch.  xxii.  3).  In  oh. 
iii.  7  we  had,  "  Fear  the  Lord,  and  depart 
from  evil ; "  but  hero  the  idea  is  different.  A 
wise  man  fears  the  evil  that  lurks  in  every- 
thing, and  examines  and  ponders  actions 
by  the  standard  of  religion,  and  is  thus 
saved  from  many  evils  which  arise  from 
hastiness  and  inadvertence.  The  fool  rageth, 
.  and  is  confident  (ch.  xxi.  24 ;  xxviii.  26). 
The  fool  easily  falls  into  a  rage,  and  has  no 
control  over  himself,  and  is  confident  in  his 
own  wisdom,  in  conti  aet  to  the  wise  man,  who 
has  trust  in  God,  au<l  is  calm  and  thoughtful 
(Isa.  XXX.  15).  Kevioed  Version,  "  beareth 
himself  insolently,  anrl  is  confident; "  but,  as 
Nowaok  remarks,  the  word  (mlihabber), 
where  it  occurs  elsewliere,  means,  "to  be 
excited,"  "  to  be  in  a  passion  "  (comp.  ch. 
xxi.  24 ;  xxvi.  17 ;  Ps.  Ixxviii.  21,  59,  62), 
and  this  usual  signification  gives  a  good 
meaning  here.  Vulgate,  transilit,  "  he 
overleaps"  all  laws  and  restrictions.  The 
LXX.,  by  transposition  of  the  letters,  reads 
mithareh,  and  translates  /iiyyurai, "  The  fool 
trusting  to  himself  mixes  himself  up  with 
sinners." 

Ver.  17. — He  that  is  soon  angfry  dealeth 
foolishly.  The  contrast  to  the  irascible, 
passionate  man  is  seen  in  tho  man  i>low  to 
anger  (ver.  29;  ch.  xv.  18).  Such  a  one, 
in  his  haste  and  passion,  does  things  which 
in  calmer  moments  he  must  see  are  foolish 
and  ridiculous.  Says  Euripides  ('Hyp.,' 
Fragm.) — 

'Efoj  ykp  opyrjs  irSf  aviip  (ro<(iiiTfpos. 
"  Wiser  is  every  man  from  passion  freed." 


"Be  not  angry,"  says  the  Talmud,  "md 
you  will  not  sin."    Oato, '  Dist.,'  i.  37— 
"  Ipse  tibi  moderare  tuis  ut  pareere  possis." 

And  a  man  of  wicked  devioes  is  hated. 
The  contrast  is  not  between  the  different 
ways  in  which  the  two  characters  are 
regarded,  as  that  one  is  despised  and 
ridiculed,  and  the  other  bated;  but  two 
kinds  of  evil  are  set  forth  in  contradistinc- 
tion, viz.  hasty  anger  and  deliberate  plotting 
against  others.  Septuagint,  "  The  irascible 
man  (o{iJ9u/*os)  acts  without  deliberation, 
but  the  prudent  man  endureth  much." 
The  Hebrew  term,  "  man  of  devices,"  being 
ambiguous,  the  LXX.  takes  it  in  a  favour- 
able sense,  (f>p6uiiios;  and  they  have  a 
different  reading  of  the  verb. 

Ver.  18. — The  simple  inherit  folly.  The 
credulous  simpleton  naturally  falls  into 
possession  of  folly,  feeds  upon  it,  and  enjoys 
it.  The  LXX.  regards  the  simple  as 
communicating  their,  folly  to  others,  and 
translates,  "  Fools  will  divide  malice."  But 
the  prudent  are  crowned  with  knowledge; 
put  on  knowledge  as  a  crown  of  glory,  in 
accordance  with  the  Stoic  saying,  quoted  in 
the  '  Speaker's  Commentary,'  "  The  wise  is 
the  only  king."  Nowack  thinks  the  abi>vi^ 
translation  and  the  idea  alike  belong  to 
later  times,  and  prefers  to  render,  "The 
prudent  embrace  knowledge,"  which  is 
parallel  to  the  sentiment  of  ver.  6.  The 
word  is  found  only  in  Ps.  cxlii.  8,  where  it 
is  translated  either  "  shall  compass  me 
about "  or  "  crown  themselves  through  me." 
The  Vulgate  has  expectabunt,  i.e.  "  wait  for 
it  patiently,"  as  tbe  fruit  of  labour  and 
perseverance.  Septuagint,  "  The  wise  shall 
get  possession  of  (KpaTi')<row<''i>')  knowledge." 

Ver.  19.— The  evil  bow  before  the  good ; 
and  the  wicked  stand  at  the  gates  of  the 
righteous  (ch.  viii.  34).  The  final  victory  of 
good  over  etil  is  here  set  forth.  However 
triumphant  for  a  timo  and  apparently  pros- 
perous the  wicked  may  be,  their  success  is 
not  lasting  ;  they  shall  in  the  end  succumb 
to  the  righteous,  even  as  the  Canaauite  kings 
crouched  before  Joshua's  captains  (Josh. 
X.  24),  and,  hurled  from  their  high  estate, 
they  shall  stand  humbly  at  the  good  man's 
door,  begging  for  bread  to  support  their 
life  (1  Sam.  ii.  36).  Tbe  contrast  here 
indicated  is  seen  in  our  Lord's  parable  of 
Dives  and  Lazarus,  when  the  beggar  ii 
comforted  and  the  rich  man  is  tormented, 
and  when  the  latter  urgently  sues  for  the 
help  of  the  once  despised  outcast  to  miti- 
gate the  agony  which  he  is  suffering  (comp. 
Wisd.  V  ). 

Ver.  20. — ^The  poor  is  hated  even  of  his 
own  neighbour  (ch.  xix.  4,  7).  Thie  sad 
experience  of  selfishness  (oomp.  Ecolas.  vi. 
8,  etc.;  xii.  8)  is  oorreoted  by  the  following 


OH.  XIV.  1 — 35.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


27S 


Terse,  which  mnst  be  taken  in  connection 

with  tbis;  at  the  same  time,  it  is  a  trnth 
which  has  been  expressed  in  various  ways 
by  many  moralfsts  and  satirists.  Says  the 
Greek  Theognis — 

nSs  Tij  vKoitriov  ivtpa  rfei.  Met  Si  ireyixpiv- 
"The  rich  all  honour,  but  the  poor  man 
slight." 

Says  Ovid, '  Trist.,'  i.  9.  6— 

"Doneo  eris  felix,  multos  numerabis  amicos; 
Tempora  gi  fuerint  nubila,  solus  eris." 
"Prosperous,  you  many  friends  will  own ; 
In  cloudy  days  you  stand  alone." 

In  the  Talmud  we  find  (Dukes,  'Babb. 
Blum.'),  "  At  the  door  of  the  tavern  there 
are  many  brethren  and  friends,  nt  tlie  poor 
man's  gate  not  one."  The  rich  hath  many 
friends.    Says  Theognis  again — 

ES  /ifv  cxovTOS  i/toS  TsAAoi  <pl\or  ifr  Si  ri 

3vyKip<rjj,  vaSpoi  viirThv  ^X'""''  "^ov. 

And  again,  a  distich  which  might  have 
been  written  to-day — 

n\ii6(i  8*  hvBpinrav  lipfrii  ula  ylyverat  {JSe, 
HKovTtty  Twv  6'  &?\Jiav  oitSev  &p*  9iy  Sipf\os, 

"  One  only  virtue  you  must  needs  possess 
(As  say  the  most  of  men),  and  that  is 

wealth; 
All  others  are  of  small  account." 

Ver.  21. — He  that  despiseth  Ms  neighbour 
Einneth.  Taken  in  connection  with  the 
preceding  verse,  this  teaches  that  it  is  a  sin 
to  despise  and  shun  a  man  because  he  is 
poor  or  of  low  estate;  such  a  one  has  a 
claim  for  love  and  pity,  and  it  is  a  crime  to 
withhold  them  from  him  for  selfish  con- 
siderations. The  Christian  view  is  taught 
by  the  parable  of  the  good  Samaritan.  Bat 
he  that  hath  mercy  on  the  poor,  happy  is 
he;  hail  to  him  I  (ch.  zvi.  20).  Contempt 
is  contrasted  with  mercy,  sin  with  blessing. 
"  Blessed  are  the  merciful,"  said  Christ 
(Matt.  v.  7):  "for  they  shall  obtain  mercy;" 
and  St.  Paul  preserves  another  precious 
word, "  It  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to 
receive  "  (Acts  xx.  35).  The  merciful  dis- 
position, which  shows  itself  in  works  of 
mercy,  is  a  proof  that  the  soul  is  in  union 
with  God,  whose  mercy  is  over  all  his 
works,  whose  mercy  endureth  for  ever,  and 
therefore  such  a  soul  is  blessed.  "The 
poor,"  wrote  James  Howell,  "  are  God's 
receivers,  and  the  angels  are  his  auditors" 
('Five  Hundred  New  Sayings').  The 
Vulgate  here  appends  a  line  absent  from 
the  Hebrew  and  the  other  versions,  "  He 
who  believeth  in  the  Lord  loveth  mercy." 
The  true  believer  is  charitable  and  bounti- 
ful, knowing  that  he  will  not  hereby  im- 
poverish himself,  but  lay  up  a  rich  store 

PB0VEBB8. 


of  blessing:  he  acts  thus  not  flrom  mere 
philanthropy,  but  from  higher  motives ;  he 
has  the  grace  of  charity  which  springs  from 
and  rests  upon  his  faith  in  God. 

Ver.  22.— Do  they  not  err  that  devise 
eviH  or,  WiU  they  not  go  astray  1  The 
question  is  an  emphatic  mode  of  asserting 
the  truth.  They  who  meditate  and  practise 
evil  (cb.  iii.  29 ;  vi.  14)  go  astray  from  the 
right  way— the  way  of  life;  their  views  are 
distorted,  and  they  no  longer  see  their 
proper  course.  Thus  the  remorseful  volup- 
tuary bemoans  himself,  "We  have  erred  from 
the  way  of  truth,  and  the  light  of  righteous- 
ness hath  not  shined  unto  us.  .  .  .  We 
wearied  ourselves  in  the  way  of  wickedness 
and  destruction ;  yea,  we  have  gone  through 
deserts,  where  there  lay  no  way  ;  but  as  for 
the  way  of  the  Lord,  we  have  not  known  it " 
(Wisd.  V.  6,  etc.).  Mercy  and  truth  shall  be 
to  them  that  devise  good.  God's  blessing 
vrill  rest  upon  them.  The  combination  of 
"  mercy  and  truth  "  is  found  in  Ps.  Ixi.  7 ; 
in  Wisd.  iii.  9  and  iv.  15,  and  in  1  Tim.  i.  2 
we  have  "grace  and  mercy"  (see  note  on  ch. 
iii.  3,  where  the  two  words  occur  in  connec- 
tion; and  comp.  ch.  xvi.  6;  xx.  28).  The 
two  graces  in  the  text  signify  the  love  and 
mercy  which  God  bestows  on  the  righteous, 
and  the  truth  and  fidelity  with  which  he 
keeps  the  promises  which  he  has  made. 
The  Vulgate  makes  the  two  graces  human, 
not  Divine :  "  Mercy  and  truth  procure  bless- 
ings." The  Septuagint  renders,  "The  good 
devise  mercy  and  truth."  It  adds  a  para- 
phrase not  found  in  the  Hebrew,  "  The 
devisers  of  evil  know  not  mercy  and  faith  ; 
but  alms  and  faith  are  with  the  devisers  of 
good." 

Ver.  23 In  all  labour  there  is  profit. 

All  honest  industry  has  a  reward,  and  all 
care  and  pain  borue  for  a  good  object  bring 
comfort  and  content  (comp.  oh.  x.  22).  So 
the  Greek  distich  says — 

*'A7rai'Ta  Tce  Ka\h  rod  Trovovvros  yiyverau 
"To  him  who  labours  all  fair  things  be- 
long." 

In  contrast  to  the  diligent  are  those  who 
talk  much  and  do  nothing.  But  the  talk  of 
the  lips  tendeth  only  to  penury  (oh.  xxi.  5). 
Those  who  work  much  get  profit ;  those  who 
talk  much  and  do  little  come  to  want.  So  in 
spiritual  matters  Christ  teaches  that  they  who 
think  that  prayer  is  beard  for  much  speaking 
are  mistaken ;  and  be  adds, "  Not  every  one 
that  saith  unto  me.  Lord,  Lord,  shall  enter 
into  the  kingdom  of  heaven;  but  he  that 
doeth  the  will  of  my  Father  which  is  in 
heaven  "  (Matt.  vi.  7 ;  vii.  21).  Septuagint, 
"In  every  one  who  taketh  thought  (>icpi- 
HvavTi)  there  is  abundance ;  he  who  livetb 
pleasantly  and  without  pain  shall  be  in 
want."    Cato, '  Dist.,'  i.  10— 

T 


274 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[oh.  XIV.  1— 5Si 


"  Contra  verboaos  noli  contendere  verbis; 
Sermo  datug  cunotia,  animi  eaplentia  pan- 
els." 

"  Again  st  the  wordy  strive  not  thon  in  words ; 
Converse  with  all,  but  to  the  favoured  few 
Impart  thy  heart's  deep  wisdom." 

Oriental  proverbs:  "Sweet  words,  empty 
hands ; "  "  To  speak  of  honey  will  not  make 
the  mouth  sweet ; "  "  We  do  not  cook  rice 
by  babbling  "  (Lane).  Turkish,  "  The  lan- 
guage of  actions  is  more  eloquent  than  the 
lan^-uage  of  words." 

\<!i.  24. — The  crown  of  the  wise  is  their 
riches.  This  is  taken  by  some  ('  Speaker's 
Commentary')  to  mean  the  glory  of  the 
wise  man,  the  fame  ard  splendour  which 
■urround  him,  constitute  las  wealth;  but 
it  is  better  to  interpret  it  thus :  Riches  are 
an  ornament  to  a  wisr.  man ;  they  enhance 
and  set  off  his  wisdom  in  the  eyes  of  others, 
enable  him  to  use  it  to  advantage,  and  are 
not  the  snare  which  they  might  be  because 
they  are  employed  religiously  and  profitably 
for  the  good  of  'ithers.  Eccles.  vii.  11, 
"Wisdom  is  good  togetlier  with  an  inheri- 
tance, and  profitr  hie  to  them  that  see  the 
SUE."  The  Sep'.aagint  has,  "  The  crown  of 
the  wise  is  the  clever  man  (wavoSpyos)," 
for  which  h'lS  been  substituted  by  some 
editors,  in  agreement  with  the  present 
Hebrew  t/,xt,  ttAoCtos  avrSv, "  their  wealth.*' 
The  Gr«ek  translators,  according  to  their 
reading,  denote  that  one  eminently  clever 
man  is  a  glory  to  the  whole  body  of  wise 
men.  But  the  folly  of  fools  is  only  folly; 
that  is,  even  though  it  were  accompanied 
with  riches.  Decorate  folly  as  you  may, 
trick  it  out  in  gaud  and  ornament,  it  is  still 
nothing  but  folly,  and  is  discerned  as  such, 
and  that  all  the  more  for  being  made  con- 
spicuous. Schultens,  followed  by  Words- 
worth, finds  a  play  of  words  liere.  The 
words  rendered  "fool"  and  "folly"  imply 
"fatness,"  like  the  Greek  iraxis  and  the 
Latin  crasius,  which  have  also  this  double 
meaning.  So  the  sentence  reads,  "Riches 
arc  a  crown  to  the  wise ;  but  the  abundant 
fatness  of  fools  is  only  fatness."  The  last 
clause  is  translated  by  the  LXX.,  "  But  the 
fools'  way  of  life  (SmrpiySJ;)  is  evil."  St. 
Gregory  ('  Moral.,'  xxii.  8)  comments  on  tliis 
voree  tlius:  "It  was  tliese  riclies  of  wisdom 
that  Solomon  having  before  his  eyes,  saith, 
'The  crown  of  the  wise  is  their  riches.' 
Which  same  persim,  because  it  is  not  metals 
of  earth,  but  understanding,  tliat  he  calls 
by  the  name  ol  riches,  thereupim  adds  by 
way  of  a  contrary,  '  But  the  foolishness  of 
fools  is  imprudence.'  For  if  he  called 
earthly  riclies  the  crown  of  the  wise,  surely 
ho  would  own  the  senselessness  of  fools  to 
be  poverty  rather  than  impmdence.  But 
wbercai  he  added, '  the  foolishness  of  foolg  is 


Imprudence,'  he  made  it  plain  that  he  called 
prudence  'the  riches  of  the  wise'"  (Oxford 
transl.). 

Yer.  25. — h.  tme  witness  delivereth  sooli 
(ver.  5 ;  ch.  xii.  17).  A  true  witness  saves 
persons  who  are  in  danger  owing  to  false 
accusation  or  calumny ;  saves  lives ;  "  save* 
from  evils,"  says  the  Septnagint.  But  a 
deceitful  witness  speaketh  lies,  and  there- 
with endangers  lives.  Literally,  He  who 
breatheth  out  lies  U  deceit;  he  is  a  per- 
sonification of  fraud,  dominated  and  informed 
by  it ;  it  has  become  bis  very  nature. 
"Falsehood  is  the  devil's'  daughter,  and 
speaks  her  father's  tongue."  Septuagint, 
"But  a  deceitful  witness  kindles  (iicKalei) 
lies." 

Ver.  26. — In  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  strong 
confidence.  The  fear  of  God  casts  out  all 
fear  of  man,  all  despairing  anticipations  of 
possible  evil,  and  makes  the  believer  confi- 
dent and  bold.  St.  Gregory  ('Moral.,'  v. 
33),  "  As  in  the  way  of  the  world  fear  gives 
rise  to  weakness,  so  in  the  way  of  God  fear 
produces  strength.  In  truth,  our  mind  so 
much  the  more  valorously  sets  at  naught  all 
the  terrors  of  temporal  vicissitudes,  the 
more  thoroughly  that  it  submits  itself  in 
fear  to  the  Author  of  those  same  temporal 
things.  And  being  stablished  in  the  fear 
of  the  Lord,  it  encounters  nothing  without 
it  to  fill  it  with  alarm,  in  that  whereas  it  if 
united  to  the  Creator  of  all  things  -by  a 
righteous  fear,  it  is  by  a  certain  powerful 
infiuence  raised  high  above  them  all."  Comp. 
Ps.  xxvii.  1  and  St.  Paul's  words,  "If  God 
be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us?"  (Rom. 
viii.  31).  Septuagint,  "In  the  fear  of  the 
Lord  is  hope  of  strength."  And  his  children 
shall  have  a  place  of  refuge  (Ps.  xlvi.  1). 
There  is  an  ambiguity  as  to  whose  children 
are  meant.  The  LXX.  renders,  "And  to 
his  children  he  will  leave  a  support"  Thus 
many  refer  the  pronoun  to  th  ■  Lord  named 
in  the  first  clause — God's  children,  those 
who  love  and  trust  him,  and  look  up  to 
him  as  a  Fa:her,  an  expression  used  more 
specially  in  the  New  Testament  than  in  the 
Old.  But  see  Pg.  lixiii.  15,  and  passages 
('.J.  Hos.  xi.  1)  whore  God  calls  Israel  his 
son,  a  type  of  all  who  are  brouglit  unto  liim 
by  adoption  and  grace.  Others,  again,  refer 
the  pronoun  to  "the  fear  of  the  Lord,"  "it» 
children,"  which  would  be  quite  in  cou- 
forniity  with  Hebrew  idiom;  as  we  have 
"  sons  of  wisdom."  "  children  of  obedience," 
equivalent  to  "  wise,"  "obedient,"  etc.  But 
most  modem  commentators  explain  it  of 
the  children  of  the  God-fearing  man,  com- 
paring Exoii.  XX.  6  and  Ps.  ciii.  17.  Such  a 
one  shall  confer  lasting  benefits  upon  hia 
posterity  (oh.  xiii.  22;  xx.  7).  So  God 
blessed  the  descendants  of  Abraham  and 
David ;  so  he  shows  mercy  unto  thousauda^ 


on.  XIV.  1—35.] 


THE   PROVERBS. 


276 


i.e.  the  thousandth  generation  of  them  that 
loye  him  and  keep  his  commandments  (see 
Gen.  xvii.  7,  etc. ;  Bxod.  xxxiv.  7 ;  1  Kings 
xi.  12,  etc. ;  Jer.  xxxiii.  20,  etc.). 

Ver.  27. — A  repetition  of  ch.  xiii.  14, 
Bobstituting  the  fear  of  the  Lord  for  "  the 
law  of  the  wise."  The  fear  of  the  Lord  can 
be  called  a  fountain  of  life,  because,  showing 
itself  in  obedience,  it  nourishes  the  flowers 
and  fruits  of  faith,  produces  graces  and 
virtues,  and  prepares  the  soul  for  immor- 
tality. Septuagint,  "  The  commandment  of 
the  Lord  is  a  fountain  of  life,  and  makes 
one  decline  from  the  snare  of  death." 

Ver.  28. — ^In  the  multitude  of  people  is 
the  king's  honour  (glory) ;  but  in  the  want 
of  people  is  the  destruction  of  the  prince;  or, 
of  the  prineipality.  This  maxim  is  not  in 
accordance  with  the  views  of  Oriental  con- 
querors and  despots,  who  in  their  selSsh 
lust  of  aggrandizement  oared  not  what 
suffering  they  inflicted  or  what  blood  they 
shed ;  who  made  a  wilderness  and  called  it 
peace.  The  reign  of  Solomon,  the  peaceful, 
gave  an  intimation  that  war  and  conquest 
were  not  a  monarch's  highest  glory;  that 
u  happy  and  numerous  people,  dwelling 
securely  and  increasing  in  numbers,  was  a 
better  honour  for  a  king  and  more  to  be 
desired  (1  Kings  iv.  20).  Increase  of  popu- 
lation is  not,  as  some  political  economists 
would  teach,  in  itself  an  evil ;  it  is  rather 
a  sign  of  prosperity,  and  is  in  agreement 
with  the  primeval  blessing,  "  Increase  and 
multiply;"  and  though  it  may  be  hard  to 
maintain  the  exact  equilibrium  between  pro- 
duction and  consumers,  yet  wise  legislation 
can  foresee  and  remedy  the  difficulty,  the 
abundance  in  one  part  can  supply  the 
scarcity  in  another,  the  providence  of  God 
watching  over  all. 

Ver.  29. — He  tliat  is  slow  to  wrath  is  of 
great  understanding.  The  Hebrew  expres- 
sion for  what  the  Septuagint  calls  /laxpi- 
Bu/ios,  "long-suffering,"  and  the  Vulgate, 
patios,  is"  long  in  nostrils"  (oh.  xv.  18), 
as  the  contrary  temper,  which  we  had  in 
ver.  17,  is  "short  in  nostrils."  That  organ, 
into  which  was  breathed  the  breath  of  life 
(Gen.  ii.  7),  is  taken  as  the  seat  of  the  in- 
ward spirit,  and  as  showing  by  exterior  signs 
the  dominant  feeling.  The  original  is  very 
terse,  "long  in  nostrild,  great  in  under- 
standing." A  man's  prudence  and  wisdom 
are  displayed  by  his  being  slow  to  take 
offence  and  being  patient  under  injury.  He 
that  is  hasty  of  spirit  exalteth  folly;  t.e. 
flaunts  it  in  the  eyes  of  all  men,  makes 
plain  exposure  of  it.  Septuagint,  "  He  who 
is  short  in  temper  is  a  mighty  fool."  "Pas- 
sion," says  an  old  saw,  "  makes  fools  of  the 
wise,  and  shows  the  folly  of  the  foolish" 
(oomp.  oh.  xii.  23;  xiii.  16).  The  word 
render«<^  "  exalteth,"  D'lO  (marim),  occurs 


in  ch.  iii._  35,  and  is  taken  by  Delitzsch  aad 
Nowack  in  the  sense  of  "  carries  away  "  ai 
the  assured  result.  "By  anger,"  says  St. 
Gregory  ('  Moral.,'  v.  78), "  wisdom  is  parted 
with,  BO  that  we  are  left  wholly  in  ignoranct 
what  to  do,  and  in  what  order  to  do  it.  .  .  . 
Anger  withdraws  the  light  of  understand- 
ing, while  by  agitating  it  troubles  the 
mind." 

Ver.  30. — A  sound  heart  is  the  life  of  thi 
flesh.  The  heart  tliat  is  healthy,  morally 
and  physically,  spreads  its  beneficent  in- 
fluence over  the  whole  body  in  all  its  func- 
tions and  relations ;  this  is  expressed  by  the 
word  for  "flesh"  (jbesarim),  being  in  the 
plural  number,  as  the  Vulgate  renders,  vita 
cammm.  But  the  contrast  is  better  de- 
veloped by  taking  NEno  in  its  other  signifi- 
cation of  "calm,"  "gentle,"  "meek,"  as 
Eccles.  X.  4.  Thus  the  Septuagint, "  The  man 
of  gentle  mind  (irpavSu/ios)  is  the  physician 
of  the  heart."  "the  tranquil,  well-controlled 
heart  gives  health  and  vigour  to  the  wliole 
frame  (see  on  ch.  xv.  4).  But  envy  is  the 
rottenness  of  the  bones  (ch.  xii.  4).  Envy, 
like  a  canker,  eats  away  a  man's  life  and 
strength ;  it  tells  on  his  physical  as  well  as 
his  moral  condition.  We  have  parallel  ex- 
pressions in  classical  authors.  Thus  Horace, 
•Epist.,'i.257— 

"  Invidus  alterius  macrescit  rebus  opimis." 

Martial, '  Epigr.,'  v.  28— 

"Rubiginosis  ouncta  dentibus  rodit; 
Hominem  malignum  forsan  esse  tu  credas. 
Ego  esse  miserum  credo,  cui  placet  nemo." 

Bengal  proverb,  "  In  seeing  another's  wealth 
it  i^  not  good  to  have  the  eyes  smart." 
Arabic,  "Envy  is  a  raging  fever,  and  has 
no  rest "  (Lane).  "  0  invidia,"  cries  St. 
Jerome  ('Epist.,'  45),  "primum  mordax 
tui."  "  When  the  foul  sore  of  envy  corrupts 
the  vanquished  heart,"  says  St.  Gregory 
('Moral.,'  V.  85),  "the  very  exterior  itself 
shows  how  forcibly  the  mind  is  urged  by 
madness.  For  paleness  seizes  the  com- 
plexion, the  eyes  are  weighed  down,  the 
spirit  is  inflamed,  while  the  limbs  are  chilled, 
there  is  frenzy  in  the  heart,  there  is  gnash- 
ing with  the  teeth,  and  while  the  growing 
hate  is  buried  in  the  depths  of  the  heart, 
the  pent  wound  works  intu  the  conscience 
with  It  blind  grief."  Septuagint,  "A  sen- 
sitive heart  (^xapSla  oiitSjjtiki^)  is  a  worm 
(<rfis)  in  the  bones."  A  heart  that  feels  too 
acutely  and  is  easily  affected  by  external 
circumstances,  prepares  for  itself  con^itant 
vexation  and  grief. 

Ver.  31. — He  that  oppresseth  the  poor  ra- 
proaoheth  his  Maker,  even  God,  who  hath 
placed  men  in  their  several  conditions  (oli, 
xvii.  5;  xxii.  2).  "The  poor  shiiU  nevei 
cease  out  of  the  land  "  (Deut.  xv.  11);  "  Ths 


276 


THE   PEOVERBS. 


[oh.  xrv.  1 — 35. 


poor  ye  have  always  with  you,"  said  Christ 
(Matt.  xxvi.  11);  therefore  to  harass  and 
oppress  the  poor  because  he  is  in  this  lowly 
condition,  is  virtually  to  arraign  the  provi- 
dence of  God,  who  is  the  Father  of  all,  and 
has  made  all  men  brothers,  however  differing 
in  worldly  position.  Christ  puts  the  duty  of 
aiding  the  poor  on  the  high  ground  of  his 
solidarity  with  his  people  (Matt.  xxv.  40, 
45),  how  that  in  miuistering  unto  the  least 
of  these  his  brethren  men  are  ministering 
unto  him.  "  Prosperity  and  adversity,  life 
and  death,  poverty  and  riches,  come  of  the 
Lord  "  (Ecolus.  xi.  14).  Even  the  heathen 
could  say — 

"  Deem  ever  that  the  poor  are  God'i  own 

gift." 
tieptuagint,  "He  that  calumniates  (jtoko- 
(pavTuy;  ealumniatur,  Vulgate)  the  poor 
angers  him  who  made  him."  This  version 
refers  to  oppression  of  the  poor  by  means 
of  calumny  or  false  and  frivolous  accusation. 
But  he  thathonoureth  him — tlie  Lord — hath 
meroy  on  the  poor;  or,  better,  he  that  halTi 
mercy  upon  the  poor  lionoureth  him;  for  lie 
shows  that  he  has  proper  regard  to  God's 
ordinance,  acts  on  high  motives,  and  is  not 
led  astray  by  worldly  considerations.  Christ 
himself  has  consecrated  poverty  by  coming 
in  low  estate  (2  Cor.  viii.  9),  aud  they  wlto 
love  and  honour  him  are  glad  to  minister  to 
his  brethren  in  their  poverty  and  distress 
(comp.  Jas.  i.  ^7). 

Ver.  32. — The  wicked  is  driven  away  in 
his  wickedness.  So  the  Greek  and  Latin 
Versions.  In  his  very  act  of  sin,  flagrante 
delicto,  the  wicked  is  defeated,  driven  from 
hope  and  life;  as  the  Revised  Version 
renders,  "  The  wicked  is  thrust  down  in  liis 
evil-doing;"  ».«.  there  is  some  element  of 
weakness  in  an  evil  deed  which  occasions 
its  discovery  and  punishment  sooner  or 
later.  Thus  "  murder  will  out,"  we  say. 
But  the  contrast  is  better  emphasized  by 
taking  ra  in  i^s  other  sense  of  "  calamity," 
''  misfortune,"  tljus :  "  In  his  calamity  the 
wicked  is  cast  down"  (ch.  xxiv.  16). 
When  misfortune  comes  upon  him,  he  has 
no  defence,  no  liope ;  he  collapses  utterly ; 
all  his  friends  forsake  him ;  there  is  none 
to  comfort  or  uphold  liim  (comp.  Matt, 
vii.  26,  27).  But  the  righteous  hath  hope^ 
in  his  death  (oomp.  Ecclus.  i.  13).  Primarily, 
the  claucie  means  that  even  in  the  greatest 
danger  the  good  man  loses  not  his  trust  in 
God.  It  is  like  Job's  word  (if  our  reading 
is  correct.  Job  liii.  15),  "  Thougli  he  slay 
me,  yet  will  I  trust  in  him;"  and  the 
psalmist,  "Though  I  walk  through  the 
Talley  of  the  shadow  of  death,  I  will  fear 
no  evil :  for  thou  art  with  me ;  thy  rod  and 
thjr  staff  they  comfort  me  "  (Ps.  xxiii.  4). 


Thus  the  Christian  martyrs  went  joyfully 
to  the  stake,  and  gentle  women  aud  little 
children  smiled  on  the  sword  which  sent 
them  home.  It  is  natural  to  see  in  this 
clause  a  belief  in  a  future  life,  and  a  state 
of  rewards  and  punishments ;  and  some 
commentators,  holding  that  this  doctrine 
was  not  known  in  pre-exilian  days, 'have 
taken  occasion  from  its  plain  enunciation  in 
this  paragraph  to  afiSx  a  very  late  date  to 
our  book,  'riiere  are  two  answers  to  be 
made  to  this  assertion.  First,  it  is  capable 
of  proof  that  the  belief  in  the  immortality 
of  the  soul,  with  its  consequences  in  another 
state,  was  held,  however  vaguely,  by  the 
Jews  long  before  Solomon's  time  (see  note, 
ch.  xii.  28);  secondly,  the  present  passage 
is  by  some  read  differently,  whence  is  ob- 
tained another  rendering,  which  removes 
from  it  all  trace  of  the  doctrine  in  question. 
Thus  Ewald  and  others  would  read  the 
clause  in  this  way:  "The  righteous  hath 
hope,  or  taketh  refuge,  from  his  own  deeds." 
Tliere  can  be  no  reasonable'  doubt  that  the 
usual  reading  and  translation  aie  correct; 
but  the  above  considerations  show  that  no 
argument  as  to  the  date  of  the  Proverbs  can 
be  safely  founded  on  this  verse.  The  LXX. 
has  a  different  reading  for  iniD3,  "  in  his 
death,"  and  translates,  "  But  he  who  trusteth 
in  his  own  holiness  is  just " — which  looks 
like  a  travesty  of  Scripture,  but  probably 
refers  to  the  consciousness  of  haying  a  heart 
righ  i  with  God  and  obedient  to  the  require- 
ments of  the  Divine  I. aw. 

Ver.  33. — Wisdom  resteth  in  the  heart  ot 
him  that  hath  understanding.  The  wise 
man  is  not  always  blurting  out  and  making 
a  display  of  his  wisdom  ;  he  lets  it  lie  still 
and  hidden  till  there  is  occasion  to  use  it  with 
effect  (ch.  x.  14 ;  xii.  23).  But  that  which 
is  in  the  midst  of  fools  is  made  known ;  lite- 
rally and  better,  but  in  the  midst  of  fooU 
it,  wisdom,  maketh  itself  known.  That  is,  in 
contrast  to  the  folly  of  fools,  wisdom  is  seen 
to  great  advantage ;  or,  it  may  be,  the  con- 
ceited display  of  the  fool's  so-called  wisdom 
is  contrasted  with  the  modesty  and  reticence 
of  the  really  intelligent  mail.  "A  fool's 
heart  is  ev(;r  dancing  on  his  lips,"  says  a 
proverb.  So  Ecolus.  xxi.  26,  "  The  heart  of 
fools  is  in  their  month ;  but  the  mouth  of 
the  wise  is  in  their  heart."  Theognis, 
1163— 

'O(/>0a\/tal   Kal   y\£(r(ra  Koi    oSara    (cat   yios 
avSpuv 
'Ej/  fieaffq}  (TTTjdeojv  if  (rvverots  ipivrat* 
"  The  eyes,  and  tongue,  and  ears,  and  mind 
alike 
Are  centred  in  the  bosom  of  the  wise." 

Vnlgate,  "In  the  heart  of  the  prudent  resteth 
wisdom,  and  it  will  teach  all  the  unlearned." 
Wisdom  sits  enshrined  in  the  intelligent 


en.  XIV.  1—35.] 


THE   PROVERBS. 


»n 


man's  niind,  and  thence  disseminates  in- 
gtruotion  and  light  around  to  all  who  need 
it.  The  Septuagint,  with  which  agree  the 
Byriao,  Aquila,  and  Thendotion,  inserts  a 
negative  in  the  second  clause,  thus:  "In  the 
good  heart  of  a  man  shall  rest  wisdom,  but 
in  the  heart  of  fools  it  is  not  discerned" 
(Wisd.  i.  4). 

Ver.  34. — Righteousness  exalteth  a  nation. 
"Rigliteousness"  (ch.  x.  2)  is  the  rendering 
to  all  their  due,  whetlier  to  God  or  man. 
We  are  taught  the'  salutary  lesson  that  a 
nation's  real  greatness. consists  not  in  its 
conquests,  magnificence,  military  or  artistic 
skill,  but  in  its  observance  of  tlie  require- 
ments of  jus  tice  and  religion.  Hesiod,  "Epy, 
223— 

Oi  $i  SUxs  ^elvoKTi  KaX  M'liiiOiiri  SiSovffiv 
'Idelas  KaX  fjffj  ri  icapeK&aivovffi  StKaioVf 
Tolffi  tcStj Ae  Tr6his,  Kaol  5'  iipQeuffty  eif  a&Tp. 

But  sin  is  a  reproach  to  any  people ;  to  peoples. 
The  words  for  "nation"  (goi)  and  "peoples" 
Qeummim)  are  usually  applied  to  foreign 
nations  rather  than  to  the  Hebrews;  and 
Wordsworth  sees  here  a  statement  ft/orWori; 
if  righteousness  exalts  and  sin  degrades 
heathen  cations,  how  much  more  must  this 
be  the  case  with  God's  own  people,  who 
have  clearer  revelations  and  heavier  usspon- 
(ibilities  I  "Ipn  (ehesed)  occurs  in  the  sense 
of  "reproach/'  in  Lev.  xx.  17,  and  with  a 
different  punctuation  in  ch.  xxv.  10  of  tliis 
book.  Its  more  usual  meaning  is  "  mercy  " 
or  "piety;"  hence  some  have  explained  the 
clause :  "  The  piety  of  the  peoples,  i.e.  the 
vcaehip  of  the  heathen,  is  sin : "  and  others, 


talcing  "  sin  "  as  put  metonymioally  for  "  sin 
offering,"  render :  "  Piety  is  an  atonement  for 
the  peoples."  But  there  is  no  doubt  that  the 
Authorized  Version  is  correct  (comp.  ch.  li. 
11).  Thus  Syramaohus  renders  it  by  SveiSos, 
"  shame ; "  and  in  the  same  sense  the  Chal- 
dee  Paraphrase.  The  Vulgate  and  Septua- 
gint, owing  to  the  common  confusion  of  the 
letters  dalefh  and  resli,  have  read  cheser 
instead  of  chesed,  and  render  thus :  Vulgate, 
"  Sin  makes  peoples  miserable;"  Septuagint, 
"  Sins  diminish  tribes."  The  sin  of  nations 
contrasted  with  the  righteousness  in  the 
first  clause  must  be  injustice,  impiety,  and 
violence.  See  a  grand  passage  in  the  fifth 
book  of  St.  Augustine's  '  De  Civitate  Dei,' 
ch.  xii. 

Ver.  35. — The  king's  favour  is  toward  a 
wise  servant;  servant  that  dealeth  wisely 
(Revised  Version).  Thus  Joseph  was  ad- 
vanced to  the  highest  post  in  Egypt,  owing 
to  the  wisdom  which  he  displayed ;  so, 
too,  in  the  case  of  Daniel  (comp.  Matt 
xxiv.  45,  47).  But  his  wrath  is  against 
him  that  causeth  shame;  literally,  he  that 
doeth  shamefully  shall  be  (the  object  of) 
his  wrath.  The  .Vulgate  translates,  Ira- 
cundiam  ejus  inutilis  sustinebit ;  the  Septua- 
gint malces  the  second  clause  parallel  to  the 
first,  "An  intelligent  servant  is  acceptable 
to  the  king,  and  by  his  expertuessi(ei!o-T/)o- 
</)fii)  he  removeth  disgrace."  Tlien  is  added, 
before  the  first  verse  of  the  next  chapter, 
a  paragraph  which  looks  like  an  explana- 
tion of  the  present  clause,  or  an  introduction 
to  ver.  1  of  oh.  xv. :  "Anger  destroyeth 
even  the  prudent." 


HOMILBTICS. 

Ver.  10. — Incomrmmicabh  experience.  I.  The  deepest  expbbibnob  is  bolitabt. 
This  applies  both  to  sorrows  and  to  joys.  There  are  profound  sorrows  which  must  lie 
buried  in  the  hearts  of  the  sufferers,  and  lofty  joys  which  cannot  be  breathed  to  another 
soul.  Sorrow  has  her  shrine,  which  no  intruder  can  enter  without  desecrating  it ;  and 
joy  her  sweet  silence,  to  break  which  is  to  shatter  the  delight  1.  Each  soul  lives  a 
separate  life.  We  are  like  planets,  moving  in  our  own  spheres.  Though  we  mingle  in 
•ooial  intercourse,  we  do  not  touch  in  our  most  vital  being.  The  "abysmal  depths  of 
personality  "  are  utterly  solitary.  2.  No  two  natures  are  Just  alike.  In  common  wo 
share  many  pleasures  and  pains.  But  when  we  come  to  what  is  most  characteristic, 
we  reach  a  line  of  demarcation  which  the  most  sympathetic  can  never  cross.  Wo 
cannot  enter  into  experiences  quite  unlike  our  own.  We  have  not  the  key  to  unlock 
the  mystery  of  a  lonely  sorrow  or  a  rare  joy.  3.  The  deepest  experience  is  shy  on* 
reserved.  ITiose  who  feel  most  do  not  cry  out  the  loudest.  It  is  the  silent  grief  that 
eats  out  a  man's  heart.  Though  yearning  for  sympathy,  he  feels  that  he  cannot  breathe 
a  word  of  his  awful  trouble.  On  the  other  hand,  there  are  pure  and  lofty  joys  of  soul 
that  would  be  sullied  with  a  breath.  v,i    ^    ..    •  •         -tu  tuo^ 

II  PoKCBD  SYMPATHY  IS  HUBTFUL.  We  ought  to  be  able  to  "rejoice  with  them 
that  do  rejoice,  aod  weep  with  them  that  weep  "  (Rom.  xii.  1 5).  When  sympathy  can 
be  real,  it  may  be  most  helpful.  But  there  is  no  opposition  between  this  thought  and 
that  of  our  text.  For  just  as  real  sympathy  helps,  unreal  sympathy  hurts.  ;sow, 
lympathy  may  be  unreal  without  being  hypocritical,  and  even  when  it  is  well-meant 


278  THE  PROVERBS.  [oh.  xiv.  1—36. 

and  heartfelt ;  if  we  do  not  understand  a  person's  feelings,  we  cannot  sympathize  with 
him.  We  may  feel  kindly  towards  him,  and  may  desire  to  show  compassion.  But  it 
will  he  all  in  vain,  we  shall  not  touch  the  fringe  of  the  trouhle,  or,  if  we  do  penetrate 
further,  we  shall  jar  and  wound  the  sensitive  soul  by  blundering  incompetence.  It  will 
be  like  a  surgeon  trying  to  dress  a  wound  in  the  dark.  Thus  Macduff,  when  robbed  of 
all  his  children  at  one  cruel  stroke,  is  only  vexed  by  the  kindly  but  impotent  con- 
dolence of  Malcom,  and  cries,  "  He  had  no  children." 

ni.  God's  sympathy  penetbateb  to  the  deepest  experience.  1.  Ee  Jcnowt  all. 
We  have  not  to  explain  our  case  to  him,  and  then  be  misunderstood  and  misjudged 
after  all,  as  often  happens  in  the  attempt  to  open  out  the  heart  to  a  fellow-man.  For 
God  reads  our  most  secret  thoughts,  and  the  feelings  that  we  will  not  even  confess  to 
ourselves  are  perfectly  known  to  him.  2.  Eefeda  with  his  children.  He  is  not  like 
the  scientific  vivisectionist,  who  handles  quivering  nerves  without  a  spark  of  compunc- 
tion. God  tenderly  pities  his  children  in  their  sorrows,  and  graciously  smiles  on  their 
innocent  joys.  3.  Ee  can  touch  us  with  sympathy.  This  sympathy  of  God  is  not  a 
distant  heavenly  experience  hidden  in  the  bosom  of  Gkid.  It  is  shed  abroad  over  his 
children  for  their  consolation  in  sorrow  and  their  blessedness  in  joy.  4.  We  should  con- 
fide in  the  sympathy  of  Qod.  It  is  not  wholesome  for  the  soul  to  be  buried  in  the 
seclusion  of  its  own  feelings.  There  is  healing  in  the  sympathizing  touch  of  God  and 
a  consecrating  benediction  in  his  smile.  Christ  is  the  incarnation  of  God's  human 
sympathy,  and  Christ's  sympathy  can  reach  and  save  and  bless  us  alL 

Ver.  12. — The  way  that  seemeth  right.  I.  Its  attkactive  appearance.  This  way 
does  not  only  seem  pleasant ;  it  seems  to  be  right.  This  is  a  course  of  life  which  a  man 
is  tempted  to  follow  because  it  flatters  him  with  fair  promises.  1.  It  promises  good. 
We  are  greatly  tempted  to  judge  of  the  means  by  the  end,  and,  if  we  think  that  the 
thing  to  be  attained  is  good,  to  condone  the  questionable  conduct  that  secures  it. 
Thxis  men  have  justified  CI)  war,  (2)  persecution,  (3)  the  deceit  of  "  pious  fraud," 
(4)  business  irregularities.  2.  Jt  flatters  self-will.  Men  believe  in  their  own  way, 
just  because  it  is  the  way  they  have  chosen.  The  statesman  makes  the  best  of  the 
politics  of  his  party.  In  private  life  what  accords  with  our  desire  is  warped  into  the 
semblance  of  right.  3.  It  is  followed  by  others.  Fashion  condones  folly.  The  conduct 
of  the  multitude  creates  a  social  conscience.  Men  measure  by  the  standard  of  the 
average  rather  than  by  the  gauge  of  absolute  rectitude.  4.  No  evil  is  apparent.  At 
present  the  path  is  easy,  pleasant,  flowery,  and  to  all  appearances  quite  safe.  Short- 
sighted men  judge  of  it  by  so  much  as  is  in  view,  as  though  the  end  of  a  road  could 
be  knovra  by  the  character  of  its  beginning. 

II.  Its  delusive  chabaotbb.  1.  It  is  only  right  in  appearance.  It  "seemeth 
right."  But  "  things  are  not  what  they  seem."  A  flame  seems  good  to  a  moth;  thin 
ice,  safe  to  a  heedless  child ;  the  undermined  road,  sound  to  the  hoodwinked  general ;  the 
sparkling  water,  refreshing  to  one  who  knows  not  that  the  well  from  which  it  is  drawn 
has  been  poisoned.  The  bad  social  custom  appears  to  be  innocent  to  the  slave  of  fashion. 
The  way  of  sin  "  seemeth  right "  to  the  blunt  conscience.  2.  It  is  only  right  in  the  eye 
of  man.  It  is  "to  man  "  that  this  doubtful  way  "  seemeth  right."  But  man  is  not  the 
highest  surveyor  of  life,  and  the  map  that  he  draws  is  not  the  supreme  authority.  Man 
is  prejudiced,  confused,  ignorant,  self-deceiving.  There  is  a  higher  Judge  than  man,  and 
it  may  be  that  the  way  which  "  seemeth  right  to  man  "  is  seen  to  be  wrong  by  God. 

III.  Its  fatal  end.  This  pleasant,  inviting  path  is  a  tributary  to  a  high-road. 
Innocent  as  it  looks  in  itself,  it  leads  into  other  ways,  and  those  the  ways  of  death.  It 
is  like  a  winding  lane  between  green  hedgerows  and  flower-strewn  banks,  that  brings 
the  traveller  out  at  length  into  a  very  different  road  from  that  he  supposed  he  was 
nearing.  There  are  questionable  coui'ses  that  do  not  seem  to  be  evil  in  themselves,  but 
they  lead  to  evil.  There  are  amusements  that  seem  to  be  innocent  enough,  yet  they 
are  paths  towards  more  dangerous  things,  and  in  the  end  they  bring  the  unwary  to 
the  very  gates  of  hell.  Now,  the  chief  question  to  ask  about  any  road  is — ^Whither 
does  it  lead  ?  If  it  will  bring  us  to  a  treacherous  bog,  a  homeless  waste,  a  dark  and 
dangerous  forest,  or  a  perilous  precipice,  it  matters  little  that  its  early  course  is  harm- 
less. Whither  does  the  way  tend  ?  If  it  is  the  path  of  sin,  it  must  lead  to  death 
(Bom.  vl.  23). 


auSTr.l— 36.]  THE  PKO VERBS.  279 

IV.  The  need  or  waenino.  1.  The  preacher  mnat  warn  the  heedless.  There  i» 
danger  of  8elf-d(.'oeption,  and  the  end  may  be  ruia.  Then  men  should  not  be  iudignaot 
if  they  are  invited  to  examine  their  ways.  2.  Each  man  should  consider  his  own  ways. 
We  live  too  much  by  appearances.  But  "life  is  real."  Let  us  turn  from  the  pic/:ure 
that "  seemeth "  to  the  fact  that  is.  3.  We  need  Divine  guidance.  He  who  knows 
all  ways,  and  can  see  the  end  from  the  beginning,  is  the  only  safe  Guide  into  the  way 
of  life. 

Ver.  13. — Uie  sadness  that  lies  behind  laughter.  This  verse  reads  like  one  of  the 
melancholy  reflections  of  the  pessimist  preacher  in  Eoolesiastes.  Yet  there  is  a  pro- 
found truth  in  it,  as  all  thoughtful  minds  must  recognize.  Physically,  intense  laughter 
preducea  acute  pangs.    Laughter  "  holds  his  sides  "  with  pain.    Shelley  sang  truly— 

"Our  sincerest  laughter 
With  some  pain  is  fraught." 

A  long  laugh  naturally  fills  the  eyes  with  tears  and  dies  away  in  a  sigh  of  weariness. 
Further,  a  season  of  undue  elation  is  usually  followed  by  one  of  depression.  The  mind 
rebounds  from  glee  to  gloom  by  natural  reaction.  But  there  is  a  deeper  experience 
than  all  this.  Without  taking  a  dark  view  of  life,  we  must  acknowledge  the  existence 
of  a  very  common  background  of  sorrow  behind  many  of  the  sunniest  scenes  of  life. 
We  may  trace  the  causes  of  this  experience  both  to  the  facts  and  nature  of  sorrow,  and 
to  the  quality  and  limitation  of  laughter. 

I.  Thb  facts  and  natubb  op  borrow,  1.  Sorrow  is  common.  Man  is  bom  to 
trouble.  There  may  not  be  a  skeleton  in  the  cupboard  of  every  house,  but  there  are 
few  homes  in  which  there  is  no  chamber  of  sad  memories.  We  mistake  the  common 
nature  of  mankind  if  we  suppose  that  the  merry  soul  has  not  its  griefs.  The  roarin>< 
clown  may  be  acting  with  a  bruken  heart.  Wit  that  spreads  a  ripple  of  laugliter  in  all 
directions  may  even  be  inspired  by  a  very  hitterness  of  soul.  2.  Sorrow  is  enduring. 
We  cannot  divide  our  lives  mechanically  into  days  of  pain  and  days  of  pleasure,  'i  he 
great  sorrow  that  once  visits  us  never  utterly  forsakes  us.  It  makes  a  home  in  the 
soul.  It  may  be  toned  and  softened  by  time,  and  driven  from  the  front  windows  to 
dark  back  chambers.  Still,  there  it  lurks,  and  sometimes  it  makes  its  presence  sorely 
felt  even  when  we  would  fain  forget  it.  The  very  contrast  of  jiresent  delight  may  rouse 
its  restless  pains.  Even  when  it  is  not  thought  of  it  lingers  as  a  sad  undertone  in  our 
songs  of  gladness. 

n.  The  quality  and  limitations  or  LAUaHTER.  1.  Laughter  is  superficial.  Even 
while  it  is  rippling  over  the  surface  of  life,  grief  may  lie  beneath  in  sullen  darkness, 
unmoved  by  the  feeble  gaiety.  This  does  not  condemn  laughter  as  an  evil  thing,  for 
while  "  the  laughter  of  fools  "  is  contemptible,  and  that  of  scorners  sinful,  the  mirth  of 
the  innocent  is  haimless  and  even  healthful.  Caasar  rightly  suspected  the  sour  visage 
of  Ginna.  The  monkish  notion  that  Christ  never  laughed  finds  no  countenance  in  the 
Bible.  But  while  sinless  laughter  is  good  and  wholesoipe,  it  is  never  able  to  reach  the 
deepest  troubles.  Some  foolish  fears  and  fancies  may  best  be  laughed  away,  but  not 
the  great  soul-agonies.  2.  Laughter  is  temporary.  Inordinate  laughter  is  not  good ; 
too  much  laughter  is  a  sign  of  frivolity ;  and  no  man  can  laugh  eternally.  If  a  man 
drown  care  in  laughter,  this  can  be  but  for  a  season,  and  afterwards  the  dreary  trouble 
will  rise  again  in  pitiless  persistence. 

The  remedy  for  trouble  must  be  found  in  the  peace  of  God.  When  that  is  in  the 
soul,  a  man  is  happier  than  if  he  were  only  hiding  an  unhealed  sore  behind  the  hollow 
mask  of  laughter.  When  Christ  has  cured  the  soul's  greatest  trouble,  there  is  a 
possibility  of  the  laughter  of  a  new  joy,  with  no  tears  to  follow. 

Ver.  15. — Credulity.  It  is  the  constant  hahit  of  religious  teachers  to  encourage  faith, 
and  to  regard  scepticism  and  unhelief  as  evil  things.  Are  we,  then,  to  suppose  that 
credulity  is  meritorious,  and  that  all  doubt,  inquiry,  suspense  of  mind,  and  rejection  of 
bold  assertions  are  bad  ?  According  to  this  view,  truth  would  be  of  no  importance. 
It  would  be  as  well  to  believe  error  as  truth,  and  to  swallow  superstition  wholesale 
would  be  a  mark  of  superior  piety.  There  are  not  wanting  critics  who  scornfully 
ascribe  haHta  of  thia  character  to  Christians — identifying  faith  with  credulity,  anij 


280  THE  PROVERBS.  [oh.  xiv.  1— 3B. 

charging  the  heliever  with  folly.  No  douht  the  extravagant  utterances  of  some  Chris- 
tian people  have  given  much  excuse  for  this  libel;  e.g.  the  assertion  of  Anselm,  "Credo 
quia  nou  intelligo."  But  suoh  utteiaaces  are  not  justified  by  Scripture  or  ChiiBtiau 
wisdom. 

I.  Observe  the  nature  op  CBKDtJLiTT.  When  a  person  is  too  hasty  in  believing 
without  sufficient  reason,  and  especially  when  he  accepts  statements  on  slight  authority 
in  opposition  to  a  rational  view,  we  call  him  credulous.  Credulity  is  just  a  disposition 
to  believe  without  sufficient  ground.  1.  It  springs  from  mental  weakness'.  It  is  a  mark 
of  childishness,  while  faith  is  a  sign  of  childlikeness.  The  feeble  mind  is  credulous. 
Faith  is  virile,  credulity  anile.  2.  It  is  favoured  h/  prejudice.  The  credulous  person 
is  unduly  ready  to  believe  according  to  his  desires.  So  men  say,  "  The  wish  is  father 
to  the  thought."  3.  It  is  increased  Jy/ecw,  which  paralyzes  the  reasoning  faculties  and 
inclines  people  to  believe  in  the  most  absurd  impossibility.  The  terrors  of  superstition 
ensnare  the  credulous. 

II.  CoNSiDEit  THE  EVIL  OF  CEEDULITT.  1.  It  dishonours  truth.  When  a  person 
shows  indifference  to  the  vital  question  as  to  whether  what  he  believes  is  true  or  false, 
he  displays  a  fatal  .disloyalty  to  truth.  For  truth  will  not  endure  an  admixture  of  false- 
hoods. Therefore  those  very  people  who  vainly  imagine  themselves  to  be  the  loyal  and 
humble  servants  of  the  whole  round  of  truths  are  the  very  persons  who  iindermine  the 
sanctity  of  truth  itself.  2.  It  tempts  to  fatal  acts.  Men  act  according  to  their  beliefs. 
If  they  believe  lies,  they  will  have  the  practical  side  of  their  lives  flung  into  confusion. 
Truth  is  a  beacon-light ;  error  sheds  a  false  glare,  like  that  of  a  wrecker's  lamp  on  a 
rock-bound  coast.  It  is  dangerous  to  accept  delusions  of  superstition  with  fatuous 
credulity.    Life  is  real  and  earnest,  and  men  need  true  lights  to  guide  them  safely. 

III.  Note  the  remedy  of  credulity.  1.  This  is  not  to  be  found  in  unlimited 
scepticism.  The  sceptic  is  often  the  slave  of  foolish  fancies.  Escaping  from  Christian 
faith,  perhaps  he  falls  into  spiritualism  or  some  other  equally  wild  delusion.  2.  Unbelief 
is  not  the  remedy ;  for  unbelief  is  but  the  reverse  of  faith.  Indeed,  it  is  negative  faith. 
It  is  believing  the  negative  of  those  propositions  concerning  which  faith  believes  the 
affirmative.  3.  Agnosticism  is  not  the  remedy ;  for  agnosticism  is  more  than  a  con- 
fession of  ignorance ;  it  is  an  assertion  that  knowledge  in  certain  regions  is  unattain- 
able. Thus  it  is  dogmatic  and  possibly  credulous. .  4.  The  remedy  lies  in  well-grounded 
faith.  We  must  learn  lessons  of  patience,  and  be  wLUing  at  first  to  creep  along  step  by 
step.  We  need  not  wait  to  say,  with  Abelard,  "  Credo  quia  intelligo,"  for  we  may 
accept  mysteries  which  we  cannot  explain.  But  we  need  to  be  satisfied  that  we  have 
good  ground  for  doing  so.  Fundamentally,  a  wise  Christian  faith  is  trust  in  Chtist, 
resting  on  an  intelligent  ground  of  assurance — that  he  ia  trustworthy. 

Ver.  30. — A  quiet  spirit.  Translate  the  first  clause  of  the  verse  thus :  "  The  life  of 
the  body  is  a  quiet  spirit." 

I.  The  chaeaotbbistics  of  a  quiet  spirit.  The  habit  and  disposition  of  quiet- 
ness need  not  be  accompanied  by  torpor.  There  is,  indeed,  a  quietness  of  sleep,  as 
there  is  also  a  silence  of  the  grave.  But  in  the  passage  before  us  the  quiet  spirit  is 
directly  connected  with  life.  The  body  may  be  busy  while  the  spirit  is  quiet ;  nay,  the 
mind  may  be  nimble  and  alert,  even  full  of  activity,  while  jet  the  spirit  is  at  rest. 
Observe,  then,  the  marks  of  a  quiet  spirit.  1.  Peace.  There  is  peace  within  the  soul, 
and  therefore  quiet.  The  turbulent  spirit  is  like  a  mutinous  crew  that  may  make 
tumult  on  board  the  ship  while  the  sea  is  as  still  as  glass,  and  the  peaceful  spirit  is  like 
a  well-conducted  crew  that  works  in  quiet  while  the  sea  is  torn  with  tempest.  2. 
Patience.  The  quiet  spirit  does  not  complain  under  chastisement,  nor  does  it  angrily 
resent  unkindness.  The  psalmist  was  "dumb"  under  calamity.  Christ  was  led  as  a 
lamb  to  the  slaughter  (Isa.  liii.  7).  3.  Unostentatiousness.  .Some  give  more  show  than 
service,  and  make  more  noise  than  profit.  Eager  to  attract  attention,  they  "  sound 
a  trumpet  before  them  "  (Matt.  vi.  2).  Not  so  the  quiet  in  spirit,  who  labour  in  silence, 
content  to  be  obscure  so  long  as  they  know  they  are  not  living  in  vain. 

II.  The  blessedkess  of  a  quiet  spirit  It  is  here  set  forth  as  a  source  of  life. 
No  doubt  fretful  restlessness  wears  out  the  life  of  the  bad.  Placidity  makes  for  health. 
Moreover,  the  life  that  is  dissipated  in  noise  produces  no  good,  and  therefore  does  not 
collect  the  means  of  its  own  support.    The  quiet  in  spirit  best  make  a  liTelihood. 


OH.  XIV.  1—35.]  THE  PROVERBS,  281 


Further,  certain  special  advantages  of  this  quietness  may  be  noted.  1.  Depth.  "  Still 
waters  run  deep."  We  can  look  far  into  the  quiet  lake,  while  only  the  surface-waves 
of  one  that  is  fretted  with  cross-winds  can  be  seen.  The  calm,  brooding  soul  knows 
depths  of  thought  and  secret  experience  that  are  unfathomable  to  the  foolish,  restless, 
noisy  souL  2.  Strength.  The  silent  forest  grows  strong.  The  mind  is  made  vigorous 
by  patient  endurance.  One  who  is  calm  is  master  of  the  .situation,  while  another  who 
is  fretted  and  flurried  feels  lost  and  helpless.  3.  Fruitfulnesa.  The  calm,  strong, 
silent  soul,  vigorous  and  yet  unostentatious,  ripens  best  the  fruits  of  experience.  Such 
a  one  does  most  real  work.  4.  Beneficence.  Noise  vexes  the  world,  and  a  restless, 
complaining  spirit  is  a  weariness  to  men.  The  quiet  spirit  breathes  a  perpetual  benedic- 
tion.   Its  very  presence  is  soothing  and  healing. 

III.  The  attainmekt  of  a  quiet  spirit.  No  doubt  there  are  great  constitutional 
differences  in  this  respect,  and  while  some  are  naturally  or  by  ill  health  restless, 
irritable,  demonstrative,  others  are  naturally  quiet,  self-possessed,  even  reserved.  Due 
allowance  must  be  made  for  these  differences  before  we  attempt  to  judge  our  brethren. 
Still,  there  is  a  measure  of  quietness  attainable  by  the  use  of  the  right  means,  viz. : 
1.  Self-mastery.  When  a  man  has  conquered  himself,  the  tumult  of  civil  war  in  his 
breast  ceases.  2.  Faith.  To  trust  God,  to  know  that  he  is  doing  all  well,  to  seek  and 
obtain  the  help  of  his  Holy  Spirit,  are  to  find  the  secret  of  peace  and  quietness  of  soul. 
3.  Love.  Selfishness  makes  us  restless.  "A  heart  at  leisure  from  itself"  can  learn  to 
be  patient  and  calm. 

Ver.  34. — National  righteousness.  I.  Eiqhteotjsnbss  ib  bequibbd  in  a  nation. 
Morality  has  not  yet  been  sufiiciently  applied  to  politics.  It  is  forgotten  that  the  ten 
commandments  relate  to  communities  as  well  as  to  individuals,  because  they  are  based 
on  the  eternal  and  all-embracing  principles  of  righteousness.  Men  have  yet  to  learn 
that  that  which  is  wrong  in  the  individual  is  wrong  in  the  society.  Nations  make  war 
oa  one  another  for  reasons  which  would  never  justify  individual  men  in  fighting  a  duel. 
Yet  if  it  is  wrong  for  a  man  to  steal  a  field,  it  must  be  wrong  for  a  nation  to  steal  a 
province;  and  if  an  individual  man  may  not  cut  his  neighbour's  throat  out  of  revenge 
without  being  punished  as  a  criminal,  there  is  nothing  to  justify  a  whole  community 
in  shooting  down  thousands  of  people  for  no  better  motive.  If  selfishness  even  is  sinful 
In  one  man,  selfishness  cannot  be  virtuous  in  thirty  millions  of  people.  The  reign  of 
righteousness  must  govern  public  and  national  movements  if  the  will  of  God  is  to  be 
respected. 

II.  Righteousness  is  a  blessing  to  a  nation.  To  the  cynical  politician  such 
"counsels  of  perfection"  as  command  conscience  in  government,  and  especially  in 
international  action,  appear  to  be  simply  quixotic.  He  holds  the  application  of  it  to 
be  wholly  impracticable;  he  imagines  that  it  must  involve  nothing  but  national  ruin. 
Hence,  it  is  maintained,  there  is  no  right  but  might,  because  there  is  no  international 
tribunal  and  no  general  authority  over  the  nations.  The  two  points  must  be  kept  dis- 
tinct— the  internal  life  of  the  nation  and  its  foreign  policy.  1.  Internal  life.  There 
are  national  sins  in  the  sense  of  sins  committed  by  a  great  part  of  a  nation — sins  that 
shamefully  characterize  it.  Thus  drunkenness  is  to  a  large  extent  an  English  national 
S'n.  The  oppression  of  one  class  by  another,  a  general  prevalence  of  business  dishonesty, 
&  frivolous  pleasure-seeking  fashion,  all  affect  the  nation's  life  when  they  are  largely 
extended  among  any  people.  These  things  eat  out  the  very  heart  of  a  nation._  For  a 
nation's  sin  the  punishment  is  on  earth,  because  the  nation  goes  on  while  individuals 
die,  and  so  there  is  time  for  the  deadly  Iruit  of  sin  to  ripen.  So  was  v.  with  Israel, 
Babylon,  Rome,  etc.  2.  Foreign  policy.  Wars  of  aggression  may  aggrandize  the  vic- 
torious people  for  a  time.  But  they  rouse  the  hatred  of  their  victims.  A  high-handed 
poHcy  thus  multiplies  a  nation's  enemies.  It  is  dangerous  to  be  an  outlaw  among  the 
nations.  Above  all,  there  is  a  just  Ruler,  who  will  put  down  the  tyrant  and  punish  the 
guilty  nation. 

HI.  Righteousness  mat  be  obtained  in  a  nation  bt  followino  the  bulb  or 
Christ.     It  is  difficult  to  make  an  unchristian  nation  behave  in  a  Christian  manner. 
The  sermon  on  the  mount  was  addressed  to  disciples  of  Christ  (Matt.  v.  1).    National- 
righteousness  will  follow  national  submission  to  the  will  of  Christ.    The  reason  why 
the  nations  snarl  at  one  another  like  wild  beasts  is  just  that  the  inhabitants  of  the 


THE  PROVERBS.  [oh.  xit.  1—35. 


nations  do  not  yet  follow  CSirist.  He  came  to  set  up  the  kingdom  of  heaven  on  earth, 
and  when  this  kingdom  is  established  in  the  hearts  of  the  citizens,  the  nations,  which 
are  but  the  aggregates  of  citizens,  will  learn  to  foUow  righteousness. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1—7. — Traits  of  wisdom  and  foUy.  I.  Feminine  wisdom.  (Ver.  1.)  1.  Its 
peculiar  scope  is  the  home.  Women  are  physically  and  morally  constructed  with  :> 
view  to  the  stationary  life  and  settled  pursuits  of  home.  Its  comfort,  the  strength  if 
the  race,  the  well-being  of  society,  are  rooted,  more  than  in  any  other  human  means, 
in  the  character,  the  princiijle,  the  love  and  truth  of  the  wife  and  mother.  2.  The 
absence  of  it  is  one  of  the  commonest  causes  of  domestic  misery.  The  fact  is  but  too 
well  known  to  all  who  are  acquainted  with  the  homes  of  the  poor,  and  indeed  of  all 
clnsses.  The  cause  is  not  far  to  seek.  The  word  "  home  "  has  hardly  a  meaning  with- 
out the  presence  of  a  virtuous  woman ;  and  a  home  has  seldom  been  wrecked  while  a 
virtuous  woman  remained  in  it. 

II.  The  steict  connection  op  keltqion  and  mobality.  (Ver.  2.)  1.  Fear  of 
Jehovah  includes  reverence  for  what  is  eternal,  faith  in  what  is  constant,  obedience  to 
what  is  unchanging  law.  2.  Contempt  for  Jehovah  means  the  neglect  of  all  this;  and 
the  preference  of  passion  to  principle,  immediate  interest  to  abiding  good ;  what  is 
■elfish  and  corruptible  to  what  is  pure  and  durable  and  Divine. 

III.  Speech  a  scoubgb  ob  a  shield.  (Ver.  3.)  The  word  of  haste,  which  is  at 
the  same  time  the  word  of  passion  and  of  inconsiderateness,  recoils  upon  the  speaker. 
As  an  old  proverb  says,  "  Curses  come  home  to  roost."  And  what  can  put  a  stronger 
armour  about  a  man,  or  cover  him  more  securely  as  a  shield,  than  the  good  words  he 
has  thrown  forth,  or  in  general  the  expression  of  his  spirit  in  all  that  is  wise  and  loving  ? 
The  successive  accretions  of  substance  from  year  to  year  in  the  trunk  of  the  oak  tree 
may  typify  the  strength  coincident  with  growth  in  the  good  man's  life. 

IV.  The  connection  op  means  and  ends.  (Ver.  4.)  Such  seems  to  be  the 
point  of  the  saying.  "iJothing  costs  nothing."  If  you  keep  no  oxen,  you  have  no 
manger  to  supply.  But  at  the  same  time,  nothing  brings  nothing  in.  The  larger 
income  is  secured  by  the  keeping  of  oxen.  This  is,  in  fact,  the  sense  of  the  old  saw, 
"  Penny  wise  and  pound  foolish."  In  short,  it  is  part  of  the  science  of  life  to  know 
the  limits  of  thrift  and  of  expense.  "  A  man  often  pays  dear  for  a  small  frugality." 
"  Cheapest,"  says  the  prudent, "  is  the  dearest  labour."  In  the  more  immediate  interests 
of  the  soul,  how  true  is  it  that  only  first  expense  of  thought,  time,  love,  upon  others  \» 
the  truest  condition  of  our  own  blessedness  1 

V.  Tbdth  and  lies.  (Ver.  5.)  Again  and  again  we  strike  upon  this  primary 
stratum  of  character.  We  cannot  define  the  truthful  or  untruthful  man.  We  can 
feel  ihim.  The  reason  is  as  "simple  as  gravity.  Truth  is  the  summit  of  being; 
justice  is  the  application  of  it  to  affairs.  The  natural  force  is  no  more  to  be  withstood 
than  any  other  force.  We  can  drive  a  stone  upwards  for  a  moment  into  the  air,  but  it 
is  yet  true  that  all  stones  will  fall ;  and  whatever  instances  may  be  quoted  of  impunished 
theft,  or  of  a  lie  which  somebody  credited,  justice  must  prevail,  and  it  is  the  privilege 
of  truth  to  make  itself  believed." 

VI.  The  unwisdom  op  the  scorpEB.  (Ver.  6.)  He  places  himself  in  a  false 
relation  to  truth ;  would  measure  it  by  his  small  mind,  and  weigh  it  in  his  imperlect 
scales.  He  has  one  principle  only  to  apply  to  everything,  and  that  the  limited  percep- 
tion of  his  faculty  or  the  narrow  light  of  his  experience.  The  description  well  applies 
to  the  free-thinkers,  the  illvminati  so  called  of  the  last  century  in  Ensland,  France, 
and  Germany,  and  their  successors  in  the  present  day.  There  is  the  air  of  superior 
intelligence  and  zeal  for  truth,  frequently  concealing  some  passion  of  a  very  different 
order.  Or,  again,  there  is  the  shallow  assumption  that  absolute  truth  is  to  be  found 
by  the  human  intellect,  which  has  led  philosophers  into  many  aberrations.  The  end  is 
some  fallacy  and  glaring  self-contradiction.  How  diRerent  the  spirit  of  him  whom  the 
teacher  describes  as  "  intelligent "  in  this  place  1  It  is  "  easy  "  for  him  to  be  wise.  It 
is  like  opening  his  lungs  to  the  bountiful  and  all-embracing  air,  or  expatiating  on  the 
boundlesB  shore,  like  great  Newton.    Wisdom  springs  from  the  sense  that  truth  in  iti 


OH.  xw.  1—35.]  THE  PEOVERBS.  283 

infiuity  ig  ever  beyond  iis.  But  the  reference  here  is  more  to  practical  wisdom,  the 
science  of  living  from  day  to  day.  And  good  sense  is  the  main  requisite  for  its 
acquirement,  the  very  opposite  of  which  is  the  supercilious  temper  which  disdains  to 
learn  from  any  and  all. 

VII.  Thb  evil  of  poolibh  compant.  (Ver.  7.)  And  of  all  its  conversation,  its 
atmosphere,  its  temper.  "  Cast  not  pearls  before  swine."  "  Avoid  the  mixture  of  an 
irreverent  commonness  of  speaking  of  holy  things  indifferently  in  all  companies" 
(Leighton).  "  Do  not  overrate  ypur  strength,  nor  be  blind  to  the  personal  risks  that  may 
be  incurred  in  imprudent  efforts  to  do  good  "  (Bridges).  "  Better  retreat  from  cavillers  " 
(ibid.). — J. 

Vers.  8 — 19. — The  understanding  of  one's  way.  I.  The  general  principle. 
(Ver.  8.)  To  note,  to  observe,  .to  take  heed  to  one's  way,  is  the  characteristic  of  the 
man  who  is  prudent  for  time  and  wise  for  eternity.  And,  on  the  contrary,  the  very 
principle  of  folly  is  self-deception — to  be  followed  in  turn  by  a  terrible  awakening  to 
sobriety  and  recognition  of  the  truth  (comp.  Ps.  vii.  15 ;  Job  iv.  8).  The  right  way 
is  illustrated  both  positively  and  negatively. 

II.  Some  particular  illustrations.  (Ver.  9,  tqq.)  1.  The  vanity  of  mere  ritualism. 
(Ver.  9.)  According  to  the  probably  correct  translation,  "  the  guilt  offering  scorns 
the  fools  ; "  in  other  words,  his  worship  is  useless,  missing  its  aim,  failing  of  God's 
favour,  while  the  righteous  who  has  washed  and  made  himself  clean,  and  put  away 
iniquity  (see  Isa.  i.),  comes  with  acceptance  before  Jehovah.  2.  Respect  for  others' 
Borrows.  (Ver.  10.)  Acute  distress  isolates  a  man ;  he  cannot  communicate  what  he 
feels.  And  it  is  aa  unkind  thing  to  force  counsel  on  others  at  a  time  when  they  know 
they  cannot  be  understood,  when  the  sympathy  of  silence  is  best.  To  sit  by  our 
friend,  to  clasp  his  hand  with  loving  pressure,  to  mingle  our  tears  with  his,  will  be  far 
more  delicate  and  soothing  than  to  attempt  to  "  charm  ache  with  airs,  and  agony  with 
words."  3.  Consideration  of  the  end,  (Vers.  11 — 13.)  The  old  reminder  recurs, 
Bespice  finem.  Perhaps  a  contrast  is  intended  between  the  "  house  of  the  wicked  "  as 
»eeming  firmer,  nevertheless  doomed  to  overthrow,  and  the  "  tent  of  the  righteous," 
seeming  more  frail,  yet  destined  to  "  sprout,"  to  flourish,  and  extend.  Again,  resuming 
the  image  of  the  way,  the  seeming  right  way  is  not  ever  the  right  nor  the  safe  way. 
It  may  be  broad  at  first  and  well  travelled,  but  may  narrow  by-and-by,  and  end  in  the 
pathless  forest,  or  the  desert  waste,  or  the  fatal  precipice.  To  be  safe  we  must  still 
coutiider  the  end ;  and  the  heginning,  which  predicts  and  virtually  contains  the  end. 
Various  are  the  illusions  to  which  we  are  subject.  One  example  of  this  is  that  the 
smiling  face  may  hide  the  aching  heart,  and  the  opposite  (Eccles.  vii.  4)  may  also 
obtain.  Boisterous  and  immoderate  mirth  is  no  good  symptom;  it  foretells  a  sad 
reaction,  or  conceals  a  deep-seated  gloom.  Human  faces  and  appearances  are  masks, 
which  hide  the  real  countenance  of  things  from  us.  4.  Consideration  of  the  sources  oj 
enjoyment.  (Ver.  14.)  First  the  vicious  source.  The  man  who  has  fallen  away  from 
God  seeks  satisfaction  out  of  God,  in  something  practically  atheistic,  in  the  fruit  of 
godless,  sinful  deeds  (ch.  xii.  14 ;  xiii.  2 ;  xxviii.  19).  But  in  the  matters  of  the  spirit 
that  which  is  out  of  God  is  nothing,  emptiness  and  vanity.  He  is  feasting  upon  wind. 
The  genuine  source  of  enjoyment  is  in  the  spirit  itself,  in  the  consciousness,  where  God 
is  known  and  realized  and  loved ;  in  the  sense  of  union  and  reconciliation  of  thought 
aud  affection  with  the  Divine  Object  thought  of  and  believed.  The  kingdom  of  God  is 
within  us,  and  is  "  righteousness,  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost."  5.  Credidity 
and  caution.  (Ver.  15.)  Credulity  is  a  weakness,  and  certainly,  like  every  weakness, 
may  become  a  sin.  It  is  the  opposite  of  genuine  faith ;  it  is  confidence  placed  where  we 
have  no  right  to  place  it.  God,  who  has  set  up  and  kindled  a  light  in  each  breast, 
requires  us  to  use  it,  each  for  himself.  To  forsake  it  for  any  other  is  a  desertion  of  our 
trust.  Would  that  we  might  ever  take  heed  to  the  light  that  is  within  us,  and  so 
steer  our  way  I  There  is  no  true  faith  possible  which  does' not  begin  with  this.  Again 
(ver.  16),  wisdom  is  seen  in  a  certain  self-distrust  in  presence  of  evil.  To  use  an 
expressive  phrase,  we  should  know  when  to  "  fight  shy  "  of  certain  persons  or  associa- 
tions. So  powerful  a  passion  as  fear  was  not  given  us  for  nothing,  nor  should  we  be 
•shamed  of  a  timidity  which  leads  us  to  give  a  wide  berth  to  danger,  to  keep  out  of  the 
tioa'a  path.    OT«r<onfidence  springs  from  the  want  of  a  true  estimate  of  our  proper 


284  THE  PBOVBRBS.  [oh.  xiv.  1—36, 

strength  and  weakness,  and  the  security  it  begets  is  false.  6.  Passionatenes3  and  trieki- 
ness.  (Ver.  17.)  The  former  precipitates  men  into  all  follies.  Seneca  saith  well  that 
"  anger  is  like  rain,  which  breaks  itself  upon  that  whereon  it  falls."  Anger  is  certainly 
a  kind  of  baseness ;  as  it  appears  well  in  the  weakness  of  those  subjects  in  whom  it 
reigns — children,  women,  old  folks,  sick  folks.  Bitter,  unforgivable  words,  the  revela- 
tion of  secrets,  the  breaking  off  of  business, — such  are  among  the  foUies  which  anger 
constantly  [lerpetrates.  But  the  tricky  intriguing  man  is  both  foolish  and  odious. 
Listen  to  one  of  the  greatest  of  Bnglishmerf,  when  he  bears  testimony  that  "  the  ablest 
men  that  ever  were  born  all  had  an  openness  and  frankness  of  dealing,  and  a  name  of 
ci  rtainty  and  veracity."  There  is  a  fine  line  between  the  wisdom  of  reserve  and  the 
vicious  cunning  of  concealment ;  nothing  but  the  loving  and  true  purpose  of  the  heart 
can  redeem  any  habit  of  secrecy  from  odium.  7.  Life  a  progress  in  folly  or  wisdom. 
(Ver.  18.)  We  are  ever  gaining,  according  to  the  image  of  the  text.  The  mind  has 
its  accretions  like  those  of  the  tree.  A  man  becomes  a  greater  fool  the  older  he  giows, 
or  becomes  of  deeper  sagacity,  richer  and  wider  views.  All  depends  on  how  we  start. 
Admit  an  error  into  thought,  keep  it  there  after  it  is  proved  an  error,  close  the  mind 
in  any  quarter  to  the  light  and  keep  it  closed,  and  ensure  a  bigoted  and  foolish  age. 
Let  God  into  the  mind  from  the  first,  open  daily  every  win  low  of  the  soul  to  the 
light,  and  grow  old  "  learning  something  fresh  every  day."  8.  The  ascendancy  of  good- 
ness. (Ver.  19.)  The  picture  is  presented  of  the  envoy  of  a  conquered  people  who 
kneels  at  the  palace-gate  of  the  conqueror  and  waits  on  his  commands  (compare  on 
the  thought,  ch.  xiii.  9,  22;  Ps.  xxxvii.  25).  There  is  a  might  in  goodness;  may  we 
not  say  the  only  true  might  is  that  of  goodness,  for  it  has  omnipotence  at  its  back?  It 
is  victorious,  irresistible,  in  the  end.  It_i8  content  to  be  acknowledged  in  the  end  by 
all,  the  evil  as  well  as  the  good.    Hypocrisy  is  the  homage  paid  by  vice  to  goodness. — J. 

Vers.  20 — 27. — Causes  and  effects.  To  grasp  this  principle — there  is  nothing  causelesd 
and  unaccountable  in  life — and  to  apply  it  is  one  of  the  main  principles  of  wisdom. 
Let  us  note  some  of  its  applications — 

L  To  SOCIAL  RELATIONS.  1.  Poverty  an  olfect  of  dislike,  and  riches  magnetic  of 
good  will.  (Ver.  20.)  Widespread  parallels  may  be  found  in  ancient  literature  to 
this  saying.  Its  truth  is  equally  obvious  to-day.  It  is  a  truth  of  human  nature,  and 
has  its  bad  and  its  good  side.  We  are  apt  to  be  impatient  of  those  who  are  always 
needing  help,  and  are  disposed  to  serve  those  who  need  nothing.  It  is  a  lower  illustra- 
tion of  the  law  that  "  to  him  that  hath  it  shall  be  given."  Independence  of  any  kind 
which  implies  power  and  self-help  is  attractive  to  all;  and  we  should  seek  it  by  all 
legitimate  means.  If  a  man  is  shunned  by  others,  it  may  be  because  they  instinctively 
feel  there  is  nothing  but  dejection  to  be  found  in  his  company,  while  they  need  cheerful 
confidence  and  helpfulness.  The  good  man  should  strive  after  competence  that  he 
may  secure  good  will,  and  have  free  scope  for  the  cultivation  of  virtue  and  the  exercise 
of  his  powers.  Another  indirect  lesson  is  that  friendship  thrives  best  in  equal  conditions 
of  life.  2.  The  sources  of  contempt  and  of  compassion.  (Ver.  21.)  This  seems  to 
correct  what  might  appear  harsh  in  the  former  saying.  Contempt  for  anything  but 
what  is  evil  in  life,  or  petty  and  trivial  in  thought  and  sentiment,  springs  from  a  bad 
•tate  of  the  heart.  There  are  things  we  ought  all  to  despise — i.e.  look  down  upon — but 
certainly  the  mere  poverty  of  our  neighbour  or  friend  is  not  one  of  them.  Compassion 
upon  those  who  are  in  trouble  is,  on  the  other  hand,  a  feeling  truly  Divine.  It  extorts 
the  blessing  of  men ;  it  receives  the  approval  of  God,  the  All-compassionate  One.  3. 
The  sources  of  social  tecwrity.  (Ver.  25.)  "Souls  are  saved,"  human  life  ifl  preserved, 
the  bonds  of  intercourse  are  held  together,  by  the  truthful  man.  Hearts  are  betrayed, 
covenant!!  are  broken,  the  integrity  of  life  is  shattered,  by  the  deceiver,  the  hypocrite, 
and  the  slanderer. 

11.  To  PKESONAL  BLESSINGS  AND  THE  BEVERSE.  1.  the  sources  of  perplexity  OP  oj 
peace  a/re  in  the  man's  own  mind.  (Ver.  22.)  His  errors  come  from  the  falsity  and 
malice  of  his  own  counsels,  as  the  effect  from  the  cause.  And  equally  the  blessed 
sense  of  the  Divine  presence  and  the  Divine  favour  is  conditioned  by  the  seeking  of  it 
in  the  mind,  the  heart,  the  life.  To  imagine  that  we  can  enjoy  good  without  being 
good  is  a  sort  of  superstition.  2.  Causes  of  gain  and  want.  (Ver.  23.)  One  of  the 
most  valuable  of  Carlyle's  teachings  was  to  this  effect — the  reward  that  we  all  receive 


OH.  XIV.  1—35.]  THE  PBOVERBS.  285 

and  of  which  we  are  perfectly  cevtaln,  if  we  have  deserved  it,  consists  in  having  don» 
our  work,  or  at  least  having  taken  pains  to  do  our  work,  for  that  is  of  itself  a  great 
blessing,  and  one  is  inclined  to  say  that,  properly  speaking,  there  is  no  other  reward  in 
this  world.  And  men  bring  themselves  to  want  by  neglecting  their  proper  work,  by 
idle  talk,  and  waste  of  time  and  daylight.  "  Work  while  it  is  called  to-day."  3.  Hence, 
well-gotten  wealth  is  a  testimonial  to  the  earner  of  it.  (Ver.  24.)  It  is  an  ornament, 
a  decoration  in  which  he  may  feel  a  juster  pride  than  in  stars,  or  garters,  or  patents  of 
nobility,  which  carry  no  such  significance.  On  the  other  hand,  the  folly  of  the  fool  is 
and  remains  folly,  however  he  may  plume  himself,  however  by  means  of  wealth  or 
factitious  advantages  he  may  seek  to  pass  for  somebody  before  the  world.  4.  But 
deeper  than  these  are  the  specifically  religious  blessings.  (Ver.  26.)  Security  springs 
from  religion ;  and  religion  is  the  constant  habit  of  regard  for  God,  his  will  in  loving 
obedience,  his  favour  as  the  most  precious  possession.  God  himself  is  a  Uefuge  to  his 
children,  and  they  will  not  fear.  The  very  source  of  life  itself  is  religion,  and  nothing 
but  the  fear  of  God  in  the  heart  can  preserve  from  the  deathful  snares  which  attend 
our  way. — J. 

Vers.  28 — 35. — Life-contrasts.  I,  In  public  life.  1.  Fulnest  and  scantiness  of 
population.  (Ver.  28.)  The  Hebrew  had  a  deep  sense  of  the  value  of  fruitfulness  in 
the  wedded  life,  and  of  increase  in  the  nation.  The  majesty  of  the  monarch  is  the 
reflection  of  the  greatness  of  his  people,  and  the  decay  must  represent  itself  in  his 
feebleness  for  action.  It  is  our  duty  as  Christian  men  to  study  with  intelligence 
political  questions,  and  to  support  all  measures  which  tend  to  freedom  of  commerce  and 
abundance  of  food.  2.  National  exaltation  and  shame.  (Ver.  34.)  The  common  ideas 
of  national  glory  and  shame  are  false.  There  is  no  glory  in  victory  over  feeble  foes, 
no  shame  in  seeking  peace  in  the  interests  of  humanity.  Too  often  these  popular  ideas 
of  glory  represent  the  bully  and  the  coward  in  the  nation,  rather  than  its  wisdom  and 
honour.  There  is  no  other  real  secret  of  a  nation's  exaltation  than,  in  the  widest  sense, 
its  right  dealing,  and  no  other  shame  for  a  nation  than  its  vices — such  as  drunkenness, 
selfishness,  lust  for  territory.  Could  Englishmen  see  the  national  character  in  the 
light  in  which  it  often  appears  to  foreijiners,  it  would  be  a  humbling  view.  3.  Soyal 
favour  or  disfavour  is  an  index  of  worth.  (Ver.  35.)  Not,  of  course,  the  only  or  the 
truest  index ;  and  yet  how  seldom  it  happens  that  a  man  rises  to  high  position  in  the 
service  of  his  sovereign  and  country  without  eminent  worth  of  some  description  or 
other  1  Here,  again,  moral  law  is  exemplified.  There  is  nothing  accidental.  If  it  be 
mere  prudence  which  gains  promotion,  still  prudence  is  of  immense  value  to  the  state, 
and  moral  law  is  confirmed  by  its  advancement. 

II.  In  private  life.  1.  Patience  and  haste  of  temper.  (Ver.  29.)  They  are 
branded  respectively  with  the  mark  of  sense  and  of  folly.  "  The  Scripture  exhorteth 
us  to  possess  our  souls  in  patience ;  whosoever  is  out  of  patience  is  out  of  possession  of 
his  soul."  2.  The  calm  and  the  seething  heart.  (Ver.  30.)  The  first  member  seems 
more  correctly  rendered,  "  life  of  the  body  is  a  gentle  or  tranquil  mind."  Zeal,  on  the 
other  hand,  or  envy,  is  a  constant  ferment  within  the  soul.  Men's  minds  must  either 
feed  upon  their  own  good  or  others'  evil.  Inquisitive  people  are  commonly  envious ; 
it  is  a  "gadding  passion,"  and  an  old  proverb  says  that  "Envy  keeps  no  holidays." 
Lord  Bacon  says  it  is  the  vilest  passion  and  the  most  depraved.  Christian  humility 
and  love  can  only  sweeten  the  heart,  and, dilute  or  wash  away  its  natural  bitterness 
3.  ITie  violent  death  and  the  peaceful  end.  (Ver.  32.)  A  sudden  death  was  viewed 
as  a  visitation  from  God  (Ps.  xxxvi.  13 ;  Ixii.  4).  It  was  thought  that  the  wicked 
could  hardly  come  to  any  other  end.  But  the  righteous  has  confidence  in  his  death. 
Considering  the  great  silence  of  the  Old  Testament  on  the  future  life,  it  can  hardly  be 
honest  exegesis  to  force  the  meaning  of  hope  of  a  future  life  into  this  passage.  Nor  is 
it  necessary.  It  is  the  consciousness  that  all  is  well,  the  soul  being  in  God's  hands, 
that  the  future  may  be  left  with  him  who  has  revealed  himself  in  the  past,  which 
sheds  peace  into  the  dying  souL  4.  Silent  wisdom,  and  noisy  pretence.^  (Ver.  33.) 
The  still  and  quiet  wisdom  of  the  sensible  man  (ch.  x.  14 ;  xii.  16,  23)  is  contrasted 
with  the  eager  and  noisy  utterances  of  what  the  fool  supposes  to  be  wisdom,  but  in 
reality  is  the  exposure  of  his  folly.  "  There  is  no  decaying  merchant  or  inward  beggar 
hath  go  many  tricks  to  uphold  the  credit  of  their  wealth  as  those  empty  persons  have 


286  THE  PEOVERBS.  [oh.  xiv.  1—35 

to  maintain  the  credit  of  their  sufficiency."  Wisdom  and  piety  are  felt  and  fragrant, 
like  the  Tiolet  in  the  hedge,  from  humble  places  and  silent  lives.  Let  us  aim  to  be, 
not  to  seem. — J. 

Ver.  1. —  Woman  as  a  builder.  Where  the  light  of  revelation  has  shone,  woman 
has  had  a  position  and  a  power,  an  honour  and  a  happiness,  such  as  she  has  not  enjoyed 
elsewliere.  Under  the  teaching  of  Christian  truth  she  has  been,  or  is  being,  rapidly 
raised  to  her  rightful  place,  and  is  becoming  all  that  the  Creator  intended  her  to  be. 
We  cannot  forecast  the  future,  but  we  may  predict  that  her  own  especial  province,  the 
sphere  where  she  will  always  shine,  will  be,  as  it  is  now,  the  home.  It  is  "  her  house  " 
that  she  will  either  buUd  up  or  pluck  down  "  with  her  own  hands."  Whether  she  will 
du  the  one  or  the  other  depends  on  the  question  whether  she  shows — 

I.  Goodness  (moral  worth)  or  guilt. 

II.  Impaetiality  or  an  unwise  and  unrighteous  preference  of  one  child  to  another. 

III.  DiLiQENOB  in  the  discharge  of  her  household  duties,  or  neoliobnok. 

IV.  Kindness  or  asperity  in  her  bearing  toward  all  the  members  of  the  home. 

V.  Patienoe  or  impatience  in  the  government  of  her  family  and  her  servants. 
Ami  since  the  upbuilding  or  the  down-plucking  of  "the  house,"  the  promotion  or 

the  ruin  of  domestic  harmony  and  happiness,  depends  in  so  large  a  degree  on  the  wisdom 
or  the  folly  of  the  woman  who  is  the  wife  and  the  mother,  therefore :  1.  Let  every 
wise  man  think  many  times  before  he  makes  his  choice.  2.  Let  every  woman  who  is 
entering  on  this  estate  go  forth  to  occupy  it  in  (1)  humility,  (2)  prayerfulness,  (3) 
wise  and  holy  resolution. — 0. 

Ver.  4. — Daintiness  and  usefulnesi.  It  is  a  very  great  thing  to  prefer  the  greater  to 
the  i^maller,  the  more  serious  to  the  less  serious,  in  the  regulation  of  our  life.  It  makes 
all  the  difference  between  success  and  failure,  between  wisdom  and  folly. 

I.  A  SERIOUS  MISTAKE,  to  prefer  nicety  or  daintiness  to  fruitfulness  or  usefulness.  This 
grave  mistake  is  made  by  the  farmer  who  would  rather  have  a  clean  crib  than  a  quantity 
of  valuable  manure ;  by  the  housetoi/e  who  cares  more  for  the  elegance  of  the  furniture 
than  the  cimfort  of  the  family;  by  the  minister  who  spends  more  strength  on  the 
wording  than  on  the  doctrine  of  his  discour.^e ;  by  the  teacher  who  lays  more  stress  on  the 
composition  of  classical  verses  than  on  the  history  of  his  country  or  than  on  the  strength- 
etiing  of  the  mind;  by  the  poet  who  takes  infinite  pains  with  his  rhymes  and  gives 
little  thought  to  his  subject  or  his  imagery ;  by  the  statesman  who  is  particular  about 
the  draughting  of  his  bills,  and  has  no  objection  to  introduce  retrograde  and  dishonouring 
measures ;  by  the  doctor  who  insists  much  on  his  medicine,  and  lets  his  patient  go  on 
neglecting  all  the  laws  of  hygiene ;  etc. 

II.  The  WISDOM  or  the  wise.  This  is  found  in  subordinating  the  trivial  to 
ihe  important;  in  being  willing  to  submit  to  the  temporarily  disagreeable  if  we  can 
attain  to  the  permanently  good ;  in  being  content  to  endure  the  sight  and  the  smell  of 
the  unclean  crib  if  there  is  a  prospect  of  a  fruitful  field.  The  great  thing  Ls  increase, 
fruitfulness,  the  reward  of  honest  toil  and  patient  waiting  and  believing  prayer.  This 
increase  is  to  be  sought  and  found  in  five  fields  in  particular.  1.  Bodily  health  and 
strength.  2.  Knowledge,  in  all  its  various  directions.  3.  Material  wealth,  that 
ministers  to  the  comfort  and  thus  to  the  well-being  of  the  families  of  man.  4.  Wis- 
dom ;  that  noble  quality  of  the  soul  which  distinguishes  between  the  true  and  the  false, 
the  pure  and  the  impure,  the  imperishable  and  the  ephemeral,  the  estimable  and,the 
unworthy,  and  which  not  only  distinguishes  but  determinately  chooses  the  former  and 
rejects  the  latter.  6.  Spiritual  fruitfulness ;  the  increase  of  our  own  piety  and  virtue, 
and  also  the  growth  of  the  kingdom  of  our  Lord. — C. 

Ver.  8. — Understanding  our  way,  A  man  may  be  "prudent,"  he  may  be  clever, 
learned,  astute ;  yet  he  may  miss  his  way,  he- may  lose  his  life,  he  may  prove  to  be  a 
failure.  The  wisdom  of  the  prudent,  that  which  makes  prudence  or  ability  really 
valuable,  that  which  constitutes  its  virtue,  is  the  practical  wideratanding  of  life,  the 
knowledge  which  enables  a  man  to  take  the  right  path  and  keep  it,  the  discretion  which 
chooses  the  line  of  a  true  success  and  maintains  it  to  the  end.  It  is  to  perceive  and  to 
puniie  the  way  that  is — 


OH.  XIV.  1—35.]  THE  PROVBRSa.  287 

I.  FmANOlALLT  80USD;  avoiding  that  which  leads  to  embarraBsment  and  rnin; 
Bhunning  those  which  conduct  either  to  a  sordid  parsimony  in  one  direction  or  to  a 
wasteful  extravagance  on  the  other  handj  choosing  that  which  leads  to  competence  and 
generosity. 

II.  Bducationallt  wise;  forming  the  habits  which  strengthen  and  develop  the 
faculties  of  the  mind,  Instead  of  those  which  dwarf,  or  narrow,  or  demoralize  them. 

III.  Socially  satisfactory;  not  going  the  way  of  an  unwise  and  unsatisfactory 
ambition  which  ends  in  disappointment  and  chagrin;  seeking  the  society  wiiich  is 
suitable,  elevating,  honourable. 

IV.  In  accohdancb  with  individital  endowment  ;  so  that  we  do  not  expend  all 
our  time  and  all  our  powers  in  a  way  which  cuts  a<;aiast  all  our  individual  incliuatinns, 
but  in  one  which  gives  room  for  our  particular  aptitudes,  aud  develops  the  special 
faculty  with  which  our  Creator  has  endowed  our  spirit. 

V.  Morally  safe.  It  is  a  very  great  part  of  "  the  wisdom  of  the  prudent "  for  a 
man  to  know  what  he  may  allow  himself  to  do  and  where  to  go;  what,  on  the  other 
hand,  he  must  not  permit,  and  whither  he  must  not  wend  his  way.  The  path  of  safety 
to  one  man  is  the  road  to  ruin  with  another.  "  Happy  is  he  who  condemneth  not  him- 
self in  that  thing  which  he  alloweth"  (Rom.  xiv.  22).  Wise  is  it  in  those,  and  well  is 
it  for  them,  who  have  discerned  and  who  have  decided  upon  those  habits  of  life  which 
are  establishing  in  their  hearts  all  Christian  virtues  and  making  to  shine  in  their  lives 
all  Christian  graces. 

VI.  The  way  op  holy  sbbviob.  The  way  of  sacred  service  is  so  essentially  the 
way  of  wisdom,  that  any  "prudence"  or  cleverness  that  misses  it  makes  the  supreme 
mistake.  On  the  other  hand,  the  wisdom  that  leads  to  it  and  that  preserves  the  soul  la 
it  is  the  wisdom  to  attain  unto.  This  way,  which  is  the  end  of  our  being  and  the  crown 
of  our  life,  includes  (1)  the  service  of  Christ,  and  (2)  the  service  of  man. — U. 

Ver.  9. — The  sadness  of  sin.  It  is  foolish  enough  to  use  the  words  "sin  "and  "sinner" 
in  the  light  and  flippant  way  in  which  they  are  frequently  employed.  But  to  "  make 
a  mock  at  sin  "  itself,  to  treat  otherwise  than  seriously  the  fact  and  forces  of  sin,  is  folly 
indeed.     For  sin  is — 

I.  The  saddest  and  sternest  fact  in  all  the  nNivBBSE  of  GfOD.  It  is  the 
ultimate  cause  of  all  the  disorder,  misery,  ruin,  and  death  that  are  to  be  found  beneath  any 
sky.  There  is  no  curse  or  calamity  that  has  befallen  our  race  that  is  not  due  to  its 
disastrous  power. 

II.  The  darkest  experience  we  have  in  review.  We  may  look  back  on  many 
dark  passages  in  our  lifu-history,  but  none  can  be  so  black  as  the  experiences  for  which 
we  have  to  reproach  ourselves,  as  those  wherein  we  broke  some  plain  precept  of  God 
or  left  undischarged  some  weighty  obligation. 

HI.  A  POWERFUL,  hostile  FORCE  STILL  CONFRONTING  US.  Sin  "  easily  bcsets  us." 
1.  It  is  exceedingly  deceptive,  eMMxvag,  undermining,  l)etraying.  2.  It  Ss  a.  very  present 
enemy,  near  at  hand  when  least  suspected,  entering  into  all  the  scenes  and  spheres  of 
life.  3.  It  strihes  deep,  going  down  into  the  innermost  places  of  the  soul.  4.  It  is  very 
extensive  in  its  range,  covering  all  the  particulars  of  life.  5.  It  stretches  far  into  the 
future,  crossing  even  the  dividing-line  of  death,  and  reaching  iuto  eternity.  6.  It  is 
fatal  in  its  results,  leading  the  soul  down  into  the  dark  shadows  of  spiritual  death. 

The  only  wise  course  we  can  take  in  view  of  such  a  force  as  this  is  (1)  to  realize  its 
heinousness ;  (2)  to  confess  its  guiltiness ;  (3)  to  strive  with  patient  strenuousnesa 
against  its  power ;  (4)  to  seek  the  aid  of  the  Holy  and  Mighty  Spirit  that  it  may  be 
uprooted  from  the  heart  and  life. — 0.  >' 

Vers.  10—13. — Loveliness  a/nd  latighter.  The  tenth  verse  suggests  to  us  the  serious 
unrl  solemnizing  fact  of —  mi.    i_         v.  v  • 

I.  The  element  of  loneliness  in  human  lifk.  "The  heart  knoweth  its  own 
bitterness,"  etc.  In  one  aspect  our  life-path  is  thronged.  It  is  becoming  more  «nd 
more  difficult  to  be  alone.  Hours  that  were  once  sacred  to  solitude  are  now  mvaded  by 
society.  And  yet  it  remains  true  that  "  in  the  central  depths  of  our  nature  we  are 
alone."  There  is  a  point  at  which,  as  he  goes  inward,  our  nearest  neighbour,  our  most 
intimate  friend,  must  stop;   there  U  a  sanctuary  of  the  soul  into  which  no  fooi 


888  THE  PROVEBB&  [oh.  xiv.  1— 35. 

intrudes.  It  is  there  where  we  Toske  our  ultimate  decision  for  good  or  evil ;  it  is  there 
where  we  experience  our  truest  joys  and  our  profoundest  griefs ;  it  is  there  wljere  we 
live  our  truest  life.  We  may  so  crowd  our  life  with  duties  and  with  pleasures  that  wo 
may  reduce  to  its  smallest  radius  this  innermost  circle;  but  some  time  must  we  spend 
there,  and  the  great  decisive  experiences  must  we  there  go  through.  There  we  tast« 
our  very  sweetest  satisfactions,  and  there  we  bear  our  very  heaviest  burdens.  And  no 
one  but  the  Father  of  spirits  can  enter  into  that  secret  place  of  the  soul.  So  true  is  it 
that 

"  Not  e'en  the  dearest  heart,  and  nearest  to  our  own, 
Knows  half  the  reasons  why  we  smile  or  sigh." 

It  is  well  for  us  to  remember  that  there  is  more,  both  of  happiness  and  of  sorrow,  than 
we  can  see ;  well,  that  we  may  not  be  overburdened  with  the  weight  of  the  manifold 
and  multiplied  evils  we  are  facing ;  well,  that  we  may  realize  how  strong  is  the  reason 
that,  when  our  cup  of  prosperity  is  full,  we  may  have  "  the  heart  at  leisure  from  itself, 
to  soothe  and  sympathize"  with  those  who,  beneath  a  smiling  countenance,. may  carry 
a  vi-ry  heavy  heart.     For  we  have  to  consider — 

II.  The  superficial  element  in  much  human  gladness.  "Even  in  laughter," 
etc.  A  man  may  smile  and  smile,  and  be  most  melancholy.  To  wear  a  smile  upon 
our  countenance,  or  to  conclude  our  sentencfs  with  laughter,  is  often  only  a  mere  trick 
of  style,  a  mere  habit  of  life,  cultivated  with  little  difficulty.  A  true  smile,  an  honest 
laugh,  that  conies  not  from  the  lips  or  from  the  lungs,  but  from  the  heart,  is  a  very- 
acceptable  and  a  very  admirable  thing.  But  a  false  smile  and  a  forced  laugh  bespeak 
a  double-minded  soul  and  a  doubtful  character.  Surely  the  angels  of  God  weep  almost 
as  much  over  the  laughter  as  over  the  tears  of  mankind.  For  beneath  its  sound  they 
may  hear  all  too  much  that  is  hollow  and  unreal,  and  not  a  little  that  is  vain  and 
guilty.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  to  smile  with  the  glad  and  to  laugh  with  the  morry 
is  a  sympathetic  grace  not  to  be  despised  (Rom.  xii.  15,  first  clause). 

III.  The  issue  of  false  satisfactions.  "The  end  of  that  mirth  is  heaviness." 
How  often  is  heaviness  the  end  of  mirth  !  All  enjoyment  that  does  not  carry  with  it 
the  approval  of  the  conscience,  all  that  is  disregardful  of  the  Divine  Law,  all  that  is  a 
violation  of  the  laws  of  our  physical  or  our  spiritual  nature,  must  end  and  does  end, 
sooner  or  later,  in  heaviness — in  depression  of  spirit,  in  decline  of  power.  It  is.a  sorry 
thing  for  a  man  to  accustom  himself  to  momentary  mirth,  to  present  pleasure  at  the 
expense  of  future  joy,  of  well-being  in  later  years. 

Lessons.  1.  Let  the  necessary  solitariness  of  life  lead  us  to  choose  the  very  Ses^fHend- 
ships  we  can  form ;  that  we  may  have  those  who  can  go  far  and  often  with  us  into  the 
recesses  of  our  spirit,  and  accompany  us,  as  far  as  man  can,  in  the  larger  and  deeper 
experiences  of  our  life,  2.  Let  the  superficiality  of  much  happiness  lead  us  to  inquire 
of  ourselves  whether  we  have  planted  in  our  soul  the  deeper  roots  of  joy  ;  those  which 
will  survive  every  test  and  trial  of  life,  and  which  will  be  in  us  when  we  have  left  time 
and  sense  altogether  behind  us.  3.  Let  the  perilous  nature  of  some  gratifications 
impose  on  us  the  duty  of  a  wise  watchfulness ;  that  we  may  Vanish  for  ever  from  heart 
and  life  all  injurious  delights  which  "  war  against  the  soul,"  xad  rob  us  of  our  true 
heritage  here  and  in  the  heavenly  country. — 0. 

Ver.  13.— (See  homily  on  ch.  xvi.  25.)— 0. 

Vers.  17,  29.— (See  homily  on  ch.  xvi.  32.)— C 

Ver.  21. — TTie  sin  of  contempt.  We  are  in  danger  of  despising  our  neighbours.  The 
rich  despise  the  poor,  the  learned  despise  the  ignorant,  the  strong  and  healthy  despise 
the  weak  and  ailing,  the  devout  despise  the  irreverent.  But  we  are  wrong  in  doinc  this. 
There  is,  indeed,  one  thing  which  may  draw  down  a  strong  and  even  intense  reproba- 
tion— moral  baseness,  meanness,  a  cruel  and  heartless  selfisliness,  vr  a  slavish  abandon- 
ment to  vice.  But  even  there  we  may  not  wholly  despise  our  neighbour ;  unmitigated 
contempt  is  always  wrong,  always  a  mistake.     For — 

I.  We  are  all  the  children  of  God.  Arc  we  not  all  his  offspring,  the  creature* 
of  one  Creator,  the  children  ot  one  Father  ?    Does  it  become  us  to  despise  our  owe 


ca.  XIV.  1—35.]  THE    PHOVERRS.  289 

brethren,  our' own  sisters?  Inasmuch  as  we  are  "members  one  of  another,"  of  one 
family,  we  are  bound  to  let  another  feeling  than  that  of  contempt  take  the  deepest 
place  in  our  heart  when  we  think  of  men  and  women,  whoever  they  may  be,  whatevei 
they  may  have  been. 

II.  Sblf-olorification  is  exclitded.  What  makes  us  to  differ  from  others? 
Whence  came  our  s.'ip6riority  in  wealth,  in  knowledge,  in  strength,  in  virtue?  Did  il 
not  come,  uliimately,  from  God?  Trace  thin.'s  to  their  source,  and  we  find  that  all 
"boasting  is  excluded."  It  is  by  the  favour  and  the  grace  of  God  that  we  are  who  and 
what  we  are.  Not  a  iiaughty  contemptuousncss,  but  a  humble  thankfulness,  becomes 
us,  if  we  stand  higher  than  our  neighbour.  * 

III.  No  MAN  IS  wnoLliT  DESPICABLE.  He  may  have  some  things  about  his  character 
which  we  deplore  and  which  we  condemn,  on  account  of  which  we  do  well  to  remon- 
strate with  him  and  to  make  him  feel  that  we  have  withdrawn  our  regard  and  confi- 
dence. But  no  man  is  wholly  to  be  despised.  1.  Much  of  what  is  bkd  or  sad  about 
him  may  be  the  consequence  of  misfortune.  Wliat  did  he  inherit?  Who  were  his 
earliest  counsellors?  What  were  his  adverse  influences?  Against  what  hurtful  and 
damaging  forces  has  he  had  to  contend  ?  How  few  and  how  weak  have  been  his 
privileges  ?  how  many  his  privations  ?  2.  There  is  the  genn  of  goodness  in  him.  There 
is  no  man,  even  among  the  most  dep/aved,  who  has  not  in  him  that  on  which  wisdom 
and  love  may  lay  their  merciful  hold,  and  by  which  the  man  himstlf  may  be  redeemed. 
Many  marvellous  and  most  cheering  facts  pi-ove  that  the  worst  among  the  bad  may  be 
recovered — the  most  profane,  besotted,  impure,  dishone^^t.  The  Christian  thought  and 
faith  is  that  all  men"  are  within  the  reach  both  of  the  mercy  and  the  redeeming  love  of 
God.  Let  Divine  truth  be  spoken  to  them  as  it  may  be  spoken ;  let  Divine  and  human 
love  embrace  them  and  lay  its  fatherly  or  brotherly  hand  upon  them  ;  let  the  Divine 
Spirit  breathe  upon  them,  and  from  the  lowest  depths  of  guilt  and  shame  they  may  rise 
to  noble  heights  of  purity  and  honour. — 0. 

Ver.  23. —  Talking  and  toiling.  These  words  contain  solid  and  valuable  truth ;  that 
truth  does  not,  however,  exclude  the  facts — 

I.  That  much  labour  is  worse  than  useless.     All  that  which  is  conceived  and 
Carrie  1  out  for  the  purpose  of  destruction,  or  of  fraud,  or  of  vice,  or  of  impiety.     Only 
toe  often  men  give  themselves  infinite  trouble  which  is  worse  than  thrown  away, . 
the  putting  forth  of  which  is  sin,  the  end  of  which  is  evil— misery  or  even  ruin  and 
death. 

II.  That  much  spbakino  tends  to  enrichment.  There  <»  a  "talk  of  the  liis" 
which  is  worthy  of  taking  rank  with  the  most  profitable  toil.  1.  It  may  cost  the 
speaker  much  care  and  effort  and  expenditure  of  vital  force.  2.  It  may  be  a  g  -eat 
power  for  good  in  the  minds  of  men  and  even  in  the  histories  of  peoples — 

"  Like  Luther's  in  the  days  of  old, 
Half-battles  for  the  free." 

3.  It  may  bring  light  to  the  darkened  mind,  comfort  to  the  wounded  heart,  rest  to  the 
weary  soul,  strength  and  inspiration  to  the  spirit  that  needs  revival.  But,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  truth  which  the  proverb  is  intended  to  impress  upon  us  is  this— 

III.  That  much  verbiage  is  vert  profitless  and  vain.  There  is  a  "  talk  of 
the  lips  "  that  does  indeed  tend  to  poverty.  1.  That  which  does  nothing  more  than 
consume  time.    This  is  pure  waste ;  and  in 

"  An  age  Qike  this)  when  every  hour 
_  Must  fweat  lier  sixty  minutes  to  the  death," 

this  can  by  no  means  be  afforded.  2.  That  which  gives  false  ideas  of  life ;  which 
encourages  men  to  trust  to  chance,  or  to  despise  honest  toil,  or  to  hope  for  the  success 
which  is  the  fruit  of  chicanery  and  dishonesty,  or  to  find  a  heritage,  not  in  the 
consciousness  of  duty  and  of  the  favour  of  God,  but  in  superficial  and  short-lived 

IV.  That  conscientious  labour  is  the  one  fruitful  thing.  "  In  all  labour  there 
is  profit."  1.  Physical  labour  not  only  cultivates  the  field  and  builds  the  house  and 
clothes  the  naked,  but  it  gives  strength  to  the  muscles  and  health  to  the  whole  b<idT 

PBOYEBBB.  " 


290 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[oh.  IV.  1-  -33. 


2.  Mental  labour  not  only  designs  the  painting,  or  the  sculpture,  or  the  oratorio^  and 
writes  the  poem  or  the  history,  but  it  invigorates  the  mind  and  braces  all  the  mental 
faculties.  3.  Moral  struggle  not  only  saves  from  vice  and  crime,  but  makes  the  soul 
strong  for  noble  and  honourable  achievement.  4.  Spiritual  endeavour  not  only  refines 
the  highest  faculties  of  our  nature,  prepares  us  for  the  companionship  of  the  holiest,  and 
accomplishes  the  highest  purposes  of  the  Redeemer,  but  brings  us  into  the  favour  and 
leads  us  into  the  likeness  of  God  himself. — 0. 

Ver.  88.— (See  Iftmily  on  ch.  iiii.  11.) — 0. 

Ver.  34. — The  strength  and  the  reproach  of  nations.  L  Sin  the  nation's  bhahe. 
1.  A  sinful  nation  in  the  sight  of  God.  This  is  a  nation  of  which  the  people  have  gone 
astray  fiom  him;  do  not  approach  him  in  worship;  do  not  consult  his  will  as  revealed 
in  his  Word;  have  no  ear  to  lend  to  those  that  speak  in  his  Name;  lose  all  sense  of 
sacred  duty  in  the  pursuit  of  ftain  and  pleasure.  2.  The  flagrant  guilt  to  which  such 
godlessness  leads  down.  (1)  It  is  prolable,  in  a  high  degree,  that  impiety  will  lead  to 
iniquity,  that  the  absence  of  all  religious  restraint  will  end  in  abandonment  to  evil  in 
all  its  forms.  (2)  History  assures  us  that  it  does  so.  The  denial,  or  the  defiance,  or 
the  entire  disregard  of  God  and  of  his  will,  conducts  to  and  ends  in  vice,  in  crime,  in 
violence,  in  despotism,  in  the  dissolution  of  old  and  honourable  bonds,  in  the  prevalence 
of  despair  and  suicide,  in  utter  demoralization.  3.  This  is  the  reproach  to  a  people. 
A  country  may  lose  its  population,  or  its  wealth,  or  its  pre-eminent  influence,  without 
being  the  object  of  reproach ;  but  to  fall  into  general  impiety,  and  to  live  in  the 
practice  of  wrong-doing, — this  is  a  disgrace;  it  brings  a  nation  down  in  the  estimate  of 
all  the  wise ;  its  name  is  clothed  with  shame ;  its  fame  has  become  infamy. 

II.  Righteousness  a  nation's  stbenoth.  National  righteousness  does  not  consist 
in  any  public  professions  of  piety,  nor  in  the  existence  of  great  religious  organizations, 
nor  in  the  presence  of  a  multitude  of  ecclesiastical  edifices  and  officers;  nations  have 
had  all  these  before  now,  and  they  have  been  destitute  of  real  righteousness.  That 
consists  in  the  possession  of  a  reverent  spirit  and  an  estimable  character,  and  the 
practice  of  purity,  justice,  and  kindness  on  the  part  of  the  people  themselves  (see  Isa. 
Iviii, ;  Micah  vi.  6-— 8).  In  this  is  a  nation's  strength  and  exaltation,  for  it  will  surely 
issue  in :  1.  Physical  well-being.  Virtue  is  the  secret  of  health  and  strength,  of  the 
multiplication  and  continuance  of  life  and  power.  2.  Material  prosperity ;  for  right- 
eousness is  the  foundation  of  educated  intelligence,  of  intellectual  energy  and  vigour, 
of  commercial  and  agricultural  enterprise,  of  maritime,  intrepidity  and  success.  3. 
Moral  and  spiritual  advancement.  4-.  Estimation  and  influence  among  surrounding 
nations.  5.  The  abiding  favour  of  Ood  (Ps.  Ixxxi.  13 — 16).  We  may  learn  from  the 
text  (1)  that  no  measure  of  brilliancy  in  statesmanship  will  compensate  for  debauch- 
ing the  minds  of  the  people,  for  introducing  ideas  or  sanctioning  habits  which  are 
morally  unsound  and  corrupting ;  (2)  that  the  humblest  citizen  whose  life  tends  to 
establish  righteousness  amongst  his  neighbours  is  a  true  patriot,  however  narrow  his 
sphere  may  be. — 0. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XV. 


Ver.  1. — A  soft  answer  tumeth  away 
wrath.  Two  tilings  are  here  to  be  observed: 
an  answer  should  be  given — the  injured 
person  should  not  wrap  himself  in  sullen 
silence;  and  that  answer  should  be  gentle 
and  conciliatory.  This  is  tersely  put  in  a 
iiieditBval  rhyme — 

"  Frangitur  ir»  gravis 
Quando  est  responsio  suavis." 
■•  Anger,  however  yreat, 
Is  checked  by  answer  sweet." 


Septuagint,  "  A  submissive  (fcroirfirrot/ira) 
answer  averteth  wrath."  Thus  Abigail 
quelled  the  excessive  anger  of  David  by 
her  judicious  submission  (1  Sam.  xxv.  24, 
etc.).  But  grievous  words  stir  up  anger. 
A  word  that  causes  vexation  makes  anger 
rise  the  higher. 

'Opy^s  fiaralas  et(rlv  oUtioi  \6yoi, 
"  Of  empty  anger  words  are  oft  the  cause." 

Ver.  2. — The  tongue  of  the  wise  useth 
knowledge  aright.  Tins  means  either, 
brings  it  forth  opportunely,  at  the  light 


CH.  XV.  1—33.] 


THE   PROVERBa 


2D1 


time  and  place,  or  illustrates  it,  makes  it 
beautiful  and  pleasant,  as  ver.  13.  The  wise 
man  not  only  has  knowledge,  but  can  give 
it  appropriate  expression  (comp.  ch.  xvi.  23). 
Vulgate,  "  The  tongue  of  the  wise  adorneth 
wisdom."  The  wise  man,  by  producing  his 
sentiments  and  opinions  in  appropriate  lan- 
'  guage  and  on- proper  occasions,  commends 
wisdom,  and  renders  it  acceptable  to  his 
hearers.  Septuagint,  "The  tongue  of  the 
wise  knoweth  what  is  fair  {KaK£)"  But 
the  month  of  fools  poureth  out  foolishness 
(Ter.  28).  A  fool  cannot  open  his  mouth 
without  exposing  his  folly ;  he  speaks  with- 
out due  ounsideration  or  discretion ;  as  the 
Vulgate  terms  it,  ebullit, "  he  bubbles  over," 
like  a  boiling  pot,  which  emits  its  contents 
inopportunely  and  uselessly.  Septuagint, 
"  The  inouth  of  fools  proclaimeth  evil." 

Ver.  3. — The  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  in  every 
place,  beholding  -keeping  watch  on — the 
evil  and  the  good.  The  omnipresence  and 
omniscience  of  Jehovah,  the  covenant  God, 
is  strongly  insisted  upon,  and  the  sacred 
name  recurs  continually  in  this  and  the 
next  chapter,  and  indeed  throughout  this 
Book  of  the  Proverbs  (see  Wordsworth,  in 
loe.).  The  LXX.  renders  tlie  verb  a-Koireii- 
ovm,  "are  watching,"  as  from  a  tower  or 
high  place.  To  the  usuol  references  we 
may  add  Ecclus  xv.  18,  19;  xxiii.  19,  20. 
Corn.  Ii  Lapide  quotes  Prudentius's  hymn, 
used  in  the  Latin  Church  at  Thursday 
Lauds — 

"  Speculator  adstat  deauper, 
Qui  nos  diebus  omnibus 
Actusque  nostros  prospicit 
A  luce  prima  in  vesperum." 

"  For  God  our  Maker,  ever  nigh. 
Surveys  us  with  a  watchful  eye ; 
Our  every  thought  and  act  he  knows, 
From  early  dawn  to  daylight's  close." 

Ver.  4. — A  wholesome  tongue  is  a  tree  of 
life;  a  tongue  that  brings  healing,  that 
soothes  by  its  words.  Septuagint,  "the 
healing  of  the  tongue."  But  the  Vulgate 
rendering  is  better,  lingua  placabilis,  "  the 
gentle,  mild  tongue "  (see  on  ch.  xiv.  30). 
Speech  from  such  a  source  refreshes  and 
vivifies  all  who  come  under  its  influence, 
like  the  wholesome  fjuit  of  a  prolific  tree 
(comp.  ch.  iii.  18;  xi.  30). 

^uxvs  voaoifffis  iari  tpApfiaKov  \irfos, 
"The  sick  soul  by  a  healing  word  is  cured." 
But  perverseness  therein — in  the  tongue — 
is  a  breach  in  the  spirit.  The  perverseness 
intended  must  be  falsehood,  perversion  of  the 
truth.  This  is  ruiu  and  vexation  (Isa.  Ixv. 
14,  where  the  saine  word  is  used)  in  the 
spirit,  both  in  the  liar  himself,  whose  higher 
aatuie  is  thus  terribly  marred  and  spoiled, 
nnd  ia  the  caae  ot  hit  neighbour,  who  is 


injured  by  his  slander  and  falsehood  to  the 
very  core.  The  LXX.,  with  a  different 
reading,  translates,  "But  he  who  keepeth 
it  [the  tongue]  shall  be  filled  with  th« 
spirit." 

Ver.  5. — A  fool  despiseth  his  father's  in- 
struction (ch.  X.  1):  but  he  that  regardeth 
reproof  is  prudent  (oh.  xix.  25).  The  son 
who  attends  to  his  father's  reproof  doaleth 
prudently,  or  becomes  yiser.  Aglutior  fiet, 
Vulgate;  iravovpySrepos,  Septuagint.  The 
Vulgate  lias  here  a  distich  which  is  not  in 
the  Hebrew,  but  a  similar  paragraph  is 
found  in  the  Septuagint.  Thus  Vulgate, 
"  In  the  abundance  of  righteousness  virtue 
is  greatest;  but  the  imaginations  of  the 
wicked  shall  be  rooted  up;"  Septuagint, 
"In  the  abunilance  of  righteousness  is 
much  strength;  but  the  impious  shall  be 
destroyed  from  the  very  root."  The  addi- 
tion seems  to  have  been  an  explanation  of 
the  following  verse,  which  has  been  foisted 
into  the  text  here. 

Ver.  6. — In  the  house  of  the  righteous  is 
much  treasure  (chosen;  see  on  ch.  zxvii. 
24).  The  "good  man's  store  is  not  wasted 
or  wrongly  used,  and  is  blest  by  God ;  and 
therefore,  whetlier  absolutely  much  or  little, 
it  is  safe,  and  it  ia  sufficient.  In  a  spiritual 
sense,  the  soul  of  the  righteous  is  filled  with 
graces  and  adorned  with  good  works.  Sep- 
tuagint, "  In  the  houses  of  the  righteous  is 
mucli  strength ; "  plurima  fortitudo,  Vul- 
gate. But  in  the  revenues  of  the  wicked  is 
trouble.  Great  revenues  acquired  by  wrong 
or  expended  badly  bring  only  trouble,  vexa- 
tion, and  ruin  upon  a  man  and  his  family. 
Septuagint,  "  The  fruits  of  the  wicked  shall 
perish."  Spiritually,  the  works  of  the 
wicked  cause  misery  to  themselves  and 
others. 

Ver.  7. — ^The  lips  of  the  wise  disperse  know- 
ledge (ver.  2 ;  ch.  x.  31).  The  LXX.  takes 
the  verb  nr>  in  its  other  signification  of 
"binding"  or  "embracing,"  and  translates, 
"The  lips  of  the  wise  are  bound  (Se'Serai) 
with  kuowledge ;  "  i.e.  knowledge  is  always 
on  them  and  controls  their  movements.  The 
wise  know  when  to  speak,  when  to  be  silent, 
and  what  to  say.  Bat  the  heart  of  the 
foolish  doeth  not  so ;  i.e.  doth  not  disperse 
knowledge.  Vulgate,  cor  ttultorum  disii- 
miU  erit,  "  will  be  unlike,"  which  probably 
means  the  same  as  the  Authorized  Version. 
(Compare  a  similar  use  of  the  words  la-hen 
in  Gen.  xlviii.  18;  Bxod.  x.  11.)  But  tlie 
contrast  is  stated  rather  weakly  by  this 
rendering,  lips  and  heart  having  the  same 
office  to  perform;  hence  it  is  better,  with 
Delitzsch,  Bwald,   and  others,  to  take   p. 

(hen)  as  an  adjective  in  the  sens^  of  "right" 
or  "  trustworthy,"  and  either  to  supply  the 
former  verb,  "  disperseth  that  which  is  not 
right,"  or  to  render,  "  The  heart  ot  the  fool 


292 


THE  PROVERBS, 


[en.  XV.  1 — 33. 


U  not  directed  right ; "  the  fool  goes  astray, 
and  leads  himself  and  others  into  error. 
Septungint,  "The  hearts  of  fools  are  not 
safe  (iuripaheis')." 

Ver.  8. — The  Baorifioe  of  the  wicked  is  an 
aliomination  nnto  the  Lord.  The  costly 
Bacri6ce  of  the  wicked  is  contrasted  with 
the  prayer,  unaccompanied  with  sacrifice, 
of  the  upright.  The  first  clause  occurs 
again  in  ch.  xxi.  27,  and  virtually  in  ch. 
xxviii.  9.  But  in  tlie  latter  passige  the 
prayer  of  the  wicked  is  denounced  as 
abomination.  Sacrifice,  as  legal  and  cere- 
monial, would  be  more  naturally  open  to 
the  charge  of  deadness  and  unreality;  wliile 
prayer,  as  spontaneous  and  not  legally  en- 
joined, might  be  deemed  less  liable  to  for- 
malism ;  all  the  more  hateful,  therefore,  it  is 
if  not  offered  from  the  heart.  The  worth- 
lessness  of  external  worship  without  obedi- 
ence and  devotion  of  the  heart  is  often 
urged  by  tlie  prophets  (see  1  Sam.  xv.  22 ; 
Isa.  i.  11,  etc. ;  Jer.  vi.  20;  Hos.  v.  6;  Amos 
v.  22 ;  see  also  Ecclua.  xxxi.  18,  etc.).  The 
lesson  was  needed  that  the  value  of  sacrifice 
depended  upon  the  mind  and  disposition  of 
the  offerer,  the  tendency  being  to  rest  in 
the  opuK  operatum,  as  if  the  external  action 
was  all  that  was  necessary  to  make  the 
worshipper  accepted.  This  text  was  wrested 
by  the  Donatists  to  support  their  notion  of 
the  iiiefflcacy  of  heretical  baptism.  St. 
Augustine  replied  that  the  validity  of  the 
eacrament  depended  not  on  the  spiritual 
condition  of  the  minister,  but  on  the  appoint- 
ment of  Christ.  The  text  has  also  been 
applied  to  confirm  the  opinion  that  all  the 
acts  of  unjustified  man  are  sin.  The  truer 
view  is  that  God's  grace  docs  act  beyond 
the  limits  of  his  visible  Church,  and  that 
the  inspiration  of  the  Holy  Spirit  concurs 
with  the  free-will  of  man  before  he  is  for- 
mally justified.  The  second  clause  recurs 
virtually  in  ver.  29. 

Ver.  9. — This  verse  gives  the  reason  for 
the  treatment  specified  in  the  preceding 
verse  (comp.  ch.  xi.  20;  xii.  22).  Follovfeth 
after ;  chaseth,  implying  effort  and  persever- 
ance, as  iu  the  pursuit  of  game  (cu.  xi.  19 ; 
xxi.  21). 

Ver.  10. — Correcticn  is  grievous  unto  him 
that  forsaketh  the  way.  The  verse  is  cli- 
macteric, and  the  first  clause  ii  better  trans- 
lated, Tliere  ie  a  grievous  correction  for  him 
that  forsalieth  the  way;  then  the  second 
clause  denotes  what  that  correction  is :  he 
that  hateth  reproof — i.e.  he  that  forsaketh 
the  way — shall  die.  "The  way"  is  the 
path  of  goodness  and  righteousness  (ch.  ii. 
13).  "  The  way  of  life,"  the  Vulgate  calls 
it;  to  ell.  jC.  17.  Ecolus.  xxi.  6,  "He  that 
hateth  reproof  is  in  the  way  of  sinners." 
The  Authorized  Version  is  quite  allowable, 
Kod  ia  supported  in  some  degree  by  the 


Vulgate,  Doctrina  mala  deserenti  viam  vitm. 
The  sinner  is  annoyed  by  discipline,  correc- 
tion, or  true  teaching,  because  they  curb  the 
indulgence  of  his  passions,  make  him  un- 
easy in  conscience,  and  force  him  to  look  to 
future  issues.  Septuagint,  "  The  instruc- 
tion of  the  guileless  {aKixov)  is  known  by 
passers-by ;  but  they  who  hate  reproofs  die 
shamefully."  The  Syriao  adopts  the  sau  e 
rendering;  but  it  is  a  question  whether  tlie 
word  ought  not  to  be  kokou.  Menander 
says — 

'O  /4^  Sapels  livBpoyiras  ov  iraiSe^cToi, 
"Man  unohastised  learns  naught." 
Ver.  11. — Hell  and  ftestruction  are  before 
the  Lord.  T'he  two  words  rendered  "  hell " 
and  " destruction" are  respeclively  Sheolemd 
Aladdon,  Infernus  and  Perditio,  'AiSrjs  and 
airtiKeia  (comp.  ch.  xxvii.  20).  The  former 
is  used  generally  as  the  pliice  to  which  the 
EoulsoftliedcaJ  are  consigned — tliereceptaole 
of  all  departed  spiiits,  whether  good  or  bad. 
Abaddon  ia  the  lowest  depth  of  hell,  the 
"abyss"  of  Luke  viii.  31;  Kev.  ix.  2,  etc.; 
XI.  1,  etc.  The  clause  means  that  God's 
eye  penetiates  even  the  moht  secret  corners 
of  the  unseen  world.  As  Job  (xxvi.  6) 
says,  "  Sheol  is  naked  before  him,  and  Abad- 
don hath  no  covering  "  (comp.  Ps.  cxxxix. 
7,  etc.).  How  much  more  then  the  hearts  of 
the  children  of  men  ?  (For  the  form  of  the 
expression,  comp.  ch.  xi.  31  and  xix.  7;  and 
for  the  import,  ch.  xvi.  2 ;  xxi.  2 ;  Jer.  xvii. 
10.)  If  God  knows  the  secrets  of  the  world 
beyond  the  grave,  mueh  more  does  hcknow 
the  secret  thoughts  of  men  on  earth.  The 
heart  is  the  source  of  action  (see  Matt.  xv. 
19,  etc.). 

Ver.  12.^ A  Boomer  loveth  not  one  that 
reproveth  him  (ch.  ix.  8 ;  Amos  v.  10).  For 
"scorner"  the  Vulgate  has  pestilens,  and 
the  Septuagint  diroiSeuTos,  "  undisciplined." 
"Soorners"  are  spoken  of  elsewhere,  as  ch. 
i.  22  (where  see  note) ;  they  are  conceited, 
arrogant  persons,  free-thinkers,  indifferent 
to  or  sceptical  of  religion,  and  too  self- 
opinionated  to  be  open  to  advice  or  reproof. 
Neither  will  he  go  unto  the  wise,  who 
would  correct  and  teach  him  (ch.  xiii.  20). 
Septuagint, "  He  will  not  converse  (4;aiA.^<rei) 
with  the  wise."  He  does  not  believe  the 
maxim — 

Soi^ov  trap'  ivSphs  xph  oo<piv  ri  ixatSiyeiy. 
"  From  a  wise  man  you  must  some  wisdom 
learn." 

A  Latin  adage  mm  — 

'*  Argue  consultum,  te  dili°;et ;  argue  stnltum, 
Avcrtet  vultum,  nee  te  dimitlet  iuultum." 

Ver.  13. — A  merry  heart  maketh  a  oheerfol 
Gountenance.  The  face  is  the  index  of  the 
condition  of  the  mind. 


m.  XT.  1— 3«J 


THE   PROVERBS. 


293 


"In  the  forehrad  and  the  eye 
The  lecture  of  the  mind  doth  lie." 

And,  again, "  A  blithe  heart  mates  a  bloom- 
ing visage"  (oomp.  Ecclus.  xiii.  25,  etc.). 
Septnagint,  "  When  the  heart  is  glad,  the 
face  bloometh  (edWei)-"  But  by  sorrow  of 
heart  the  spirit  is  broken  (ch.  xii.  25). 
Happiness  ia  shown  in  the  outward  look, 
but  sorrow  has  a  deeper  and  more  abiding 
influence ;  it  touches  the  inner  life,  destroy  s 
the  natural  elasticity,  oieates  despondency 
and  despair  (comp.  ch.  xvi.  24;  xvii.  22). 
Com.  5i  Lapide  quotes  St.  Gregory  Niizi- 
anzen's  definition — 

"  Leetitia  quidnam  ?    Mentis  est  diffusio. 
Tristitia?    Cordis  morsus  et  turbatio." 

Hitzig  and  others  translate  the  iecond 
clause,  "But  in  sorrow  of  heart  is  the 
breath  oppressed."  It  is  doubtful  if  the 
words  can  be  so  rendered,  and  certainly  the 
parallelism  is  not  improved  thereby. 

Yer.  14:. — The  heart  of  him  that  hath 
understanding  seeketh  knowledge  (ch.  xviii. 
15).  The  wise  man  knows  that  he  knows 
nothing,  and  is  always  seeking  to  karn 
more. 

2o^fo  yip  iirri  koI  iia9eTv  t  fiii  voe7s. 
"  To  learn  what  thou  hast  never  thought  is 
wisdom." 

Fhe  mouth  of  fools.  Another  reading,  ia 
"  the  face  of  fools ; "  but  the  former  is  more 
suitable  to  what  follows.  Feedeth  on  foolish- 
nesa.  So  the  Vulgate  and  Septuagint,  "  The 
mouth  of  the  undisciplined  knoweth  evil." 
The  fool  is  always  gaping  and  devouring 
every  silly,  or  slanderous,  or  wicked  word 
that  comes  in  his  way,  and  in  his  tuin  utters 
and  disseminates  it. 

Ver.  15. — All  the  days  of  the  aflicted  are 
evil.  "  The  days  of  the  poor  are  evil,"  says 
the  Talmud  ('  Dukes,'  73)  ;  but  in  our  verse 
the  contrasted  clause  restricts  the  sense  of 
"the  afflicted"  to  mental,  not  material,  evil. 
The  Vulgate  pauperii  gives  a  wrong  im- 
pression. The  persons  intended  are  such  as 
take  a  gloomy  view  of  things,  who  are 
always  in  low  spirits,  and  cannot  rise 
superior  to  present  circumstances.  These 
never  have  ahappy  moment ;  they  are  always 
taking  anxious  thought  (Matt.  vi.  25),  and 
forecasting  evil.  The  LXX.,  reading  -n 
for  "w,  translates,  "At  all  times  the  eyes  of 
the  evil  expect  evil."  But  he  that  is  of  a 
merry  heart  hath  a  continual  feast.  The 
ciieei-ful  man's  condition  is  a  banquet  un- 
ceasingly, a  fixed  state  of  joy  and  content- 
ment. Septuagint,  "But  the  righteous  are 
at  peace  always;"  Vulgate,  "A  secure  mind 
is  like  a  perpetual  feast."  "  For,"  says  St. 
Gregory  ('  Moral,'  xii.  44),  "  the  mere  repdse 
of  iMsurity  is  like  the  continuance  of  refresh- 


ment. Whereas,  on  the  other  hand,  the  evil 
mind  is  always  set  in  pains  and  labours, 
since  it  is  either  contriving  mischiefs  that  it 
may  bring  down,  or  fearing  lest  these  be 
brought  down  upon  it  by  others."  Our  own 
proverb  says,  "  A  contented  mind  ia  a  con- 
tinual feast." 

Ver.  16. — Better  is  little  with  the  fear  of 
the  Lord.  The  good  man's  little  store, 
which  bears  npon  it  the  blessing  of  the  Lord, 
is  better  than  great  traasure  and  trouble 
therewith,  i.e.  with  the  treasure  (ch.  xvi. 
8;  Ps.  xxxvii.  16).  The  trouble  intended  is 
the  care  and  labour  and  anxiety  attending 
the  pursuit  and  preservation  of  wealth. 
"  Much  coin,  much  care  "  (comp.  Eccles.  vi.4). 
It  was  good  advice  of  the  old  moralist,  "Sis 
pauper  honeste  potius  quain  dives  male; 
Namque  hoc  fert  crimen,  illud  misericor- 
diara."  Vulgate,  thesauri  magni  et  iniati- 
dbilee,  "treasures  which  satisfy  not;"  Sep- 
tuagint, "Great  treasures  without  fear  (of 
the  Lord)."  Christ's  maxim  is,  "Seek  ye 
first  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  his  righteous- 
ness; and  all  these  things  shall  be  added 
unto  you  "  (Matt.  vi.  33). 

Ver.  17. — Better  is  a  dinner  (portion)  of 
herbs  where  love  is.  A  dish  of  vegetables 
would  be  the  common  meal,  whereas  flesh 
would  be  reserved  for  festive  occasions. 
Where  love  presides,  the  aimijlOBt  food  is 
choerfi.lly  received,  and  contentment  and 
happiness  abound  (ch.  xvii.  1).  Lesfetre 
quotes  Horace's  invitation  to  his  friend 
Torquatus  ('  Epist.,'  i.  5.  1) — 

"Si    potes    Archiacis    conviva    recumbere 
lectis. 
Nee  mod ica  eenare  times olus omne  patella, 
Supremo  te  sole  domi,  Torquate,  manebo." 
"If,  dear  Torqu.itus,  you  can  rest  your  head 
On  couches  such  as  homely  A'rchias  made. 
Nor  on  a  dish  of  simple  pot-herbs  frowu, 
I  shall  expect  you  as  the  sun  goes  down." 
(Howes.) 

So  the  old  jingle — 

"  Cum  dat  oluscula  raeusa  minuscula  pace 

quieta, 
Ne  pete  grandia    lautaque    prandia    lite 
repluta." 

A  stalled  ox  is  one  taken  up  out  of  the 
pasture  and  fatted  for  tlie  table.  'J'liua  we 
read  (1  Kings  iv.  23)  that  part  of  Solomon's 
provision  for  one  day  was  ten  fat  oxen  and 
twenty  oxen  out  of  the  pastures;  and  the 
prophets  speak  of  "calves  of  the  stall" 
(Amos  vi.  4;  Mai.  iv.  2;  oomp.  Luke  sw. 
23).  The  fat  beef  implies  a  sumptuous  and 
magnificent  entei  tainraent ;  but  suuh  a  feast 
is  little  worth  if  accompanied  with  feelings 
of  hatred,  jealousy,  and  ill  will.  This  and 
the  |)receding  vcrtO  emphasize  and  explaiu 
ver.  15. 


2H 


THE  PE0VEBB8. 


[cH.  XV,  1—83. 


I  or.  It).— A  wrathful  man  stirreth  up 
BtrUe  (contention).  This  clause  recurs 
almost  identically  in  oh.  xxix.  22  (oomp. 
»lso  ch.  xxvi.  21  and  ixviii.  25).  He  that 
is  slow  to  anger  appeaseth  strUe  (oh.  ziv. 
29).  In  the  former  clause  the  word  for 
"  contention  "  is  madon,  in  the  latter  "  strife  " 
is  rib,,  which  often  means  "law  dispute." 
It  requires  two  to  make  a  quarrel,  and  where 
one  keeps  bis  temper  and  will  not  be  pro- 
voked, anger  must  subside.  Vulgate,  "  He 
who  is  patient  soothes  aroused  quarrels 
(lusdiatais)."  Septuagint, "  A  long-suffering 
man  appeases  even  a  coming  battle." 

"  Begina  rerum  omnium  patientia." 

The  LXX.  here  introduces  a  second  rendering 
of  the  verse :  "  A  long-suffering  man  will 
quench  suits;  but  the  impious  rather 
awaketh  tbem." 

Ver.  19. — The  way  of  the  slothful  man  is 
as  an  hedge  of  thorns.  The  indolent  slug- 
gard ig  always  finding  or  imagining  difiScul- 
ties  and  hindrances  in  his  path,  which  serve 
as  excuses  for  his  laziness.  The  word  for 
"  thorn  "  here  is  chedek.  It  occurs  elsewhere 
only  in  Micah  vli.  4,  where  the  Authorized 
Version  has  "  briar ; "  but  the  particular 
plant  intended  is  not  ascertained.  Most 
writers  consider  it  to  be  some  spinous 
specimen  of  the  lolanum.  The  word  refers, 
it  is  thought,  to  a  class  of  plants  the  name 
of  one  of  which,  at  least,  the  miscalled 
"  apple  of  Sodom,"  is  well  known  in  poetry, 
and  is  a  proverbial  expression  for  anything 
which  promises  fair  but  utterly  disappoints 
on  trial.  "  This  plant,  which  is  really  a  kind 
of  potato,  grows  everywhere  in  the  wanner 
parts  of  Palestine,  rising  to  a  widely  branch- 
ing shrub  from  tliree  to  five  feet  high ;  the 
wood  thickly  set  with  spines;  the  flower 
like  that  o^  the  potato,  and  the  fruit,  which 
is  'larger  than  the  potato  apple,  perfectly 
round,  and  changing  from  yellow  to  bright 
red  as  it  ripens.  .  .  .  The  osher  of  the  Arab 
is  the  true  apple  of  Sodom.  A  very  tropical- 
looking  plant,  its  frrut  is  like  a  large  smooth 
apple  or  orange,  and  hangs  in  clusters  of 
tliree  or  four  together.  When  ripe,  it  is 
yellow,  and  looks  fair  and  attractive,  and  is 
soft  to  the  touch,  but  if  pressed,  it  bursts 
with  a  crack,  and  only  the  broken  shell  and 
a  row  of  small  seeds  in  u  half-open  pod, 
with  a  few  dry  filaments,  remain  in  the 
hand"  (Geikle,  'Holy  Land  and  Bible,'  ii. 
74,117).    Cato, 'DiBt.,'liv.  3.  5— 

"  Segnitiem  fugito,  quta  vitse  ignavia  fertur; 
Ham  quum  animut  languet,  consumit  in- 
ertia corpus." 

To  the  sluggard  is  opposed  the  righteous  in 
the  second  member,  because  indolence  is 
a  grievous  sin,  and  the  greatest  contrast  to 
the  active  industry  of  the  man  who  fears 


God  and  does  his  duty.  The  way  of  the 
righteous  is  made  plain ;  "  is  a  raised  cause- 
way;" selulah,  as  ch.  xvi.  17:  Isa.  xl.  3; 
xlix.  11.  The  upright  man,  who  treads  the 
path  appointed  for  him  resolutely  and  trust- 
fully, finds  all  difficulties  vanish;  before 
him  the  thorns  yield  a  passage;  and  that 
which  the  sluggard  regarded  as  dangerous 
and  impassable  becomes  to  him  as  the  king'^ 
highway.  Vulgate,  "  The  path  of  the  just 
is  without  impediment ;  "  Septuagint,  "  The 
roads  of  the  manly  (ivSpeluv)  are  well 
beaten."  St.  Gregory  ('MoraL,'  xxx.  51), 
"Whatever  adversity  may  have  fallen  in 
their  way  of  life,  the  righteous  stumble  not 
against  it.  Because  with  the  bound  of 
eternal  hope,  and  of  eternal  contemplation, 
they  leap  over  the  obstacles  of  temporal 
adversity  "  (comp.  Ps.  xviii.  29). 

Ver.  20— ch.  xii.  25. — Third  section  of 
this  collection. 

Ver.  20.— (For  this  verse,  see  ch.  i.  1.) 
A  foolish  man  despiseth  his  mother,  and' 
therefore  is  "heaviness"  to  her.  Or  the 
verb  may  mean  "  shameth."  "  A  foolish 
man  "  is  literally  "  a  fool  of  a  man." 

Ver.  21.— roUy  is  joy  to  him  that  is 
destitute  of  wisdom ;  literally,  void  of  heart ; 
i.e.  of  understanding  (ch.  x.  23).  The 
perverse,  self-willed  fool  finds  pleasure  in 
going  on  his  evil  way,  and  exposing  the 
fiituity  which  he  takes  for  wisdom.  Septua- 
gint, "  The  ways  of  the  senseless  are  want- 
ing in  intelligence."  A  man  of  understand- 
ing walketh  uprightly ;  goes  the  right  way. 
It  is  implied  that  the  fool  goes  the  wrong 
way. 

Ver.  22. — Without  counsel — where  no 
counsel  is — purposes  are  disappointed  (ch. 
xi.  14) ;  there  can  be  no  concerted  action,  or 
the  means  used  are  not  the  best  that  could 
be  devised.    Hesiod,  "Epy.,  293 — 

*E<r6\hs  5*  aS  KaKe7iios  t>s  ed  eiirdyTi  vlBtjTai' 
*Os  Sh  K€  fjAir*  avrhs  vo^ip  i^'fji'  &?ilKov  aKoiay 

'Ev  Sv/tfT  $iiK\TiTai,  i  S'  ail'  i.xP^"'^  iviip. 
(Comp.  oh.  zx.  18.)  In  the  multitude  of 
counsellors  they  are  established  (ch.  xxiv.  6). 
We  read  of  "  counsellors  "  as  almost  regular 
officials  in  the  Hebrew  court,  as  in  modern 
kingdoms  (see  1  Ohron.  xxvii.  32;  Isa.  i. 
26;  Micah  iv.  9;  comp.  Ezra  vii.  28).  There 
is,  of  course,  the  danger  of  secrets  being 
divulged  where  counsellors  are  many ;  and 
there  is  Terence's  maxim  to  fear,  "Quot 
homines,  tot  sententiss;"  but,  properly 
guarded  and  discreetly  used,  good  counsel 
is  above  all  price.  Septuagint, "  They  who 
honour  not  councils  (trvy4Spia)  lay  aside 
{tnreprldtvTai)  conclusions  («.«.  put  off  coming 
to  any  definite  decision);  but  in  the  hearts 
of  those  who  consult  counsel  abideth" 
(compare  the  parallel  clause,  ch.  xiz.  21). 


OH.  XV.  1—33.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


296 


Ver.  23.— A  man  hath  joy  hy  the  answer 
of  bis  nioutli.  The  idea  of  the  preceding 
verso  concerning  counsel  is  maintained.  A 
counselloi  gives  -wise  and  skilful  advice,  or 
makes  a  timely  speech ;  and,  knowing  how 
much  harm  is  done  by  rash  or  evil  words,  he 
naturally  rejoices  that  he  has  been  able  to 
be  useful,  and  has  avoided  the  errors  which 
the  tongue  is  liable  to  incur.  A  word 
spoken  in  due  season,  $ermo  opporttmus,  is 
advice  giwn  at  the  right  moment  and  in 
the  moat  suitable  manner,  when  the  occasion 
and  the  interests  at  stake  demand  it  (comp. 
ch.  XXV,  11).  The  LXX.  connects  this  verse 
with  the  preceding,  and  renders,  "  The  evil 
man  will  not  hearken  to  it  (counsel),  nor 
will  he  say  aught  in  season  or  for  the  publio 
good." 

Ver.  24.— The  way  of  life  is  above  to  the 
\riBe ;  Revised  Version,  to  the  wise  the  way 
of  life  goeth  upward.  The  writer  means 
primarily  that  the  wise  and  good  lead  such 
a  life  as  to  preserve  them  from  death  (ch. 
xiv.  32).  The  patlj  may  be  steep  and  painful, 
but  at  any  rate  it  has  this  compensation — 
it  leads  away  from  destruction.  It  is  obvious 
to  read  into  the  passage  higher  teaching. 
The  good  man's  path  leads  heavenward,  to  a 
high  life  here,  to  happiness  hereafter;  hii 
conversation  is  in  heaven  (Phil.  iii.  20),  his 
affections  are  set  on  things  above  (Ool,  iii.  2). 
Such  an  upward  life  tends  to  material  and 
■piritual  health,  as  it  is  added,  that  he  may 
depart  from  hell  {SheoT)  beneath.  Primarily, 
•  long  and  happy  life  is  promised  to  the 
man  who  fears  the  Lord,  as  in  ch.  iii.  16 ; 
secondarily,  such  a,  one  avoids  that  down- 
ward course  which  ends  in  the  darkness  of 
hell.  Vulgate,  "  The  path  of  life  is  above 
the  instructed  man,  to  make  him  avoid 
the  nethermost  (novissimo)  hell;"  Septua- 
gint, "  The  thoughts  of  the  prudent  man  are 
the  ways  of  life,  that  turning  from  Hades 
he  may  be  safe." 

Ver.  25. — The  Lord  will  destroy  the  house 
of  the  proud  (oh.  xii.7 ;  liv.  11 ;  ivl.  18).  The 
proud,  self-confident  man,  with  his  family 
and  household  and  wealth,  shall  be  rooted 
up.  The  heathen  saw  how  retribution 
overtook  the  arrogant.  Thus  Euripides 
•ays  ('  Heracl.,'  387)— 

Tuv  ippov7}fidrcap 
'O  Zeiis  KoXaiTT^s  rav  &yav  iirfpippivav. 
"Zeus,    the    chastiser    of     too  -  haughty 
thoughts." 

Sut  he  will  establish  the  border  of  the 
widow.  He  will  take  the  widow  under 
his  protection,  and  see  that  her  landmark 
is  not  removed,  and  that  her  little  portion 
is  secured  to  her.  The  widow  is  taken  as 
the  type  of  weakness  and  desolation,  as 
often  in  Scripture  (comp.  Deut.  i.  18 ;  Ps. 
exlvi.  9).    In  a  country  where  property  was 


defined  by  landmarks — stones  or  lome  snch 
objects — nothing  was  easier  than  to  remove 
these  altogether,  or  to  alter  their  position. 
That  this  was  a  common  form  of  fraud  and 
oppression  we  gather  from  the  stringency 
of  the  enactments  against  the  offence  (sea 
Deut.  xix.  14;  xxvii.  17;  and  comp.  Job 
xxiv.  2 ;  oh.  xiii.  28).  In  the  Babylonian 
and  Assyrian  inscriptions  which  have  been 
preserved,  there  are  many  invoking  curses, 
curious  and  multifarious,  against  the  dis- 
turbers of  boimdaries.  Such  marks  were 
considered  sacred  and  inviolable  by  the 
Greeks  and  Komans  (see  Plato, '  De  Leg.,' 
viii.  842,  843;  Ovid,  '  Fast.,'  ii.  639,  etc.). 

Ver.  26.— The  thoughts  of  the  wicked  (or, 
evil  devices)  are  an  abomination  to  the  Lord. 
Although  the  Decalogue,  by  forbidding 
coveting,  showed  that  God'i  Law  touched 
the  thought  of  the  heart  as  well  as  tlie  out- 
ward  action,  the  idea  here  refers  to  wicked 
plans  or  designs,  rather  than  emphatically 
to  the  secret  movements  of  the  mind.  These 
have  been  noticed  in  ver.  11.  But  the  wordi 
of  the  pure  are  pleasant  words;  literally, 
pure  are  words  of  pleasantness ;  i.e.  words 
of  soothing,  comforting  tone  are,  not  an 
abomination  to  the  Lord,  as  are  the  devices 
of  tlie  wicked,  but  they  are  pure  in  a 
ceremonial  sense,  as  it  were,  a  pure  and 
acceptable  offering.  Revised  Version, 
pleasant  words  are  pure.  Vulgate,  "  Speech 
pure  and  pleasant  is  approved  by  him  " — 
which  is  a  pharaphrase  of  the  clause.  Sep- 
tuagint, "  The  words  of  the  pure  are  honoured 
(o-eMwO." 

Ver.  27. — He  that  ii  greedy  of  gain 
troubleth  his  own  house  (ch.  xi.  29).  The 
special  reference  is  doubtless  to  venal  judges, 
who  wrested  judgment  for  lucre.  Such 
malefactors  were  often  reproved  by  the 
prophets  (see  Isa.  i.  23;  x.  1,  eto. ;  Micah 
iii.  11;  vii.  3).  But  all  ill-gotten  gain 
brings  sure  retribution.  The  Greeks  have 
many  maxims  to  this  effect.    Thus — 

KipSji  trovjiph,  iriiiiaii  aA  ^iptu 

And  again — 

T^  5'  ataxp^  ItfpSri  rvfupopas  ipyd(eT»i, 
"  Riches  ill  won  bring  ruin  in  their  train." 

An  avaricious  man  troubles  his  house  in 
another  sense.  He  harasses  his  family  by 
niggnrdly  economies  and  Lis  domestics  by 
overwork  and  under-feeding,  deprives  big 
household  of  all  comfort,  and  loses  the 
blessing  of  God  upon  a  righteous  use  of 
earthly  wealth.  The  word  "troubleth" 
(akar,  "  to  trouble ")  reminds  one  of  the 
story  of  Aehan,  who,  in  his  greed,  appro- 
priated some  of  the  spoil  of  the  banned 
city  Jericho,  and  brought  destruction  upon 
himself  and  his  family,  when,  in  punishment 
of  the  crime,  he  and  all  his  were  stoned  ia 


290 


THE  PEOVERBS. 


[oh.  tw.  1—83, 


the  Valley  of  Achor  (Josh.  vii.  25).  So  the 
coTetouBnesB  of  Oehazi  caused  the  infliction 
of  the  penalty  of  leprosy  upon  himself  and 
his  children  (2  Kings  v.  27).  Professor 
Plumptre  ('  Speaker's  Commentary,'  in  loo.) 
notes  that  the  Chaldee  Targum  paraphrases 
this  clause,  referring  especially  to  lucre 
gained  by  unrighteous  judgments,  thus  : 
"  He  wlio  gathers  the  mammon  of  unright- 
eousness destroys  his  house ; "  and  he 
suggests  that  Christ's  use  of  that  phrase 
(Luke  xvi.  9)  may  have  had  some  connec- 
tion with  this  proverb  through  the  version 
then  popularly  used  in  the  Palestinian  syna- 
gogues. He  that  hateth  gifts  shall  live 
(comp.  Ecoles.  vii.  7).  Primarily  this  refers 
to  the  judge  or  magistrate  who  is  incorrup- 
tible, and  gives  just  judgment,  and  dispenses 
his  patronage  without  fear  or  %vour,-  he 
shall  "  prolong  his  days  "  (ch.  xxviii.  16). 
And  ia  all  cases  a  man  free  from  covetousnoss, 
who  takes  no  bribes  to  blind  his  eyes  withal, 
who  makes  no  unjust  gains,  shall  pass  a  long 
aud  happy  life  undisturbed  by  care.  We  see 
here  a  hope  of  immortality,  to  which  integrity 
leads.  The  LXX.,  with  the  view  of  making 
the  two  clauses  more  marked  in  anti- 
thesis, restricts  the  application  thus :  "  The 
receiver  of  gifts  destroyeth  himself;  but  he 
who  hateth  the  receiving  of  gifts  liveth." 
The  Vulgate  and  Septuagint,  after  this 
verse,  introduce  a  distich  which  recurs  in 
oh.  xvi.  6.  The  Septuagint  transposes  many 
of  tlie  verses  at  the  end  of  this  chapter  and 
the  beginning  of  the  next. 

Ver.  28. — The  heart  of  the  righteous 
Btudieth  to  answer.  The  good  man  de- 
liberates before  he  speaks,  takes  time  to 
consider  his  answer,  lest  he  should  say  nny- 
thing  false,  or  inexpedient,  or  injurious  to 
his  neighbour.    A  Latin  adage  runs — 

"  Qui  bene  vult  faii  debet  bene  prasmedi- 
tari." 

Says  Theognis — 

Bov\€vQv  Bis  Kod  rpls,  &  rol  i^  M  rhy  v6ov 

'Arnphs  ykp  if\  \d$pos  iviip  rf\i0ft. 

"  Whate'er  comes  in  your  mind,  deliberate  ; 
A  hasty  man  but  rushes  on  his  fute." 

Septuagint,  "  The  heart  of  the  prudent  will 
meditute  Tri'oTtij,"  which  may  mean  "  truth," 
"  fidelity,"  or  "  proofs."  The  Vulgate  Las 
"obedience,"  implying  attention  tu  the 
inward  warnings  of  conscience  and  grace, 
before  the  mouth  speaks.  Poureth  out  (ver. 
2).  The  wicked  man  never  considers ;  evil 
is  always  on  his  lips  and  running  o\  er  from 
his  mouth.  Septuagint,  "  The  mouth  of  the 
ungodly  answcreth evil  tilings."  The  LXX.. 
here  inserts  ch.  xvi.  7. 

Ver.  29. — The  Lord  is  far  from  the  wicked. 
The  maxim  is  similar  to  that  in  ver.  8  and 


John  ix.  31,  "We  know  that  God  hcareth 
not  sinners  :  but  if  any  man  be  a  worshipper 
of  God,  and  do  liis  will,  him  he  heareth." 
God  is  said  to  be  "  far  "  in  the  sense  of  not 
listening,  not  regarding  with  favour  (comp. 
Ps.  X.  1).  His  attention  to  the  righteous  is 
seen  in  Ps.  cxlv.  18,  19.  The  LXX.  intro- 
duces here  ch.  xvi.  8,  9. 

Ver.  30. — The  light  of  the  eyes  rejoioeth 
the  heart  (oh.  xvi.  15).  The  beaming  glance 
that  shows  a  pure,  happy  mind  and  a 
friendly  disposition,  rejoices  the  heart  of 
him  on  whom  it  is  turned.  There  is  some- 
thing infectious  in  the  guileless,  joyful  look 
of  a  happy  man  or  child,  which  has  a  cheer- 
ing effect  upon  those  who  observe  it.  The 
LXX.  makes  the  sentiment  altogether  per- 
sonal: "The  eye  that  seeth  what  is  good 
rejoiceth  the  heart."  A  good  report  (good 
tidings)  maketb  the  hones  fat ;  strengthens 
them  and  gives  them  health  (com p.  ch.  iii. 
8 ;  xvi.  24).  Sight  and  hearing  are  com- 
pared in  the  two  clauses,  "  bones  "  in  the 
latter  taking  the  place  of  "heart"  in  the 
former.  The  happy  look  and  good  news 
alike  cause  joy  of  heart. 

Ver.  31. — The  ear  that  heareth  (hearkeneth 
to)  the  reproof  of  life  ahideth  among  the  wise 
(ch.  vi.  23).  The  reproof,  or  instruction,  of 
life  is  that  which  teaches  the  true  way  of 
pleasing  God,  which  is  indeed  the  only  life 
worth  living.  The  ear,  by  zynecdoehe,  is 
put  for  the  person.  One  who  attends  to  and 
profits  by  such  admonition  may  be  reckoned 
among  the'  wise,  and  rejoices  to  be  conver- 
sant with  them.  Wordsworth  finds  a  more 
recondite  sense  here :  the  ear  of  the  wise 
dwells,  lodges,  passes  the  night  (ch.  xix.  23) 
in  their  heart,  whereas  the  heart  of  fools  is 
in  their  mouth  (ch.  xiv.  33).  This  verse  is 
omitted  in  the  Septuagint,  though  it  is  found 
in  the  other  Greek  versions  aud  the  Latin 
Vulgate. 

Ver.  32. — This  verse  carries  on  and  puts 
the  climax  to  the  lesson  of  the  preceding. 
He  that  refnseth  instmctian  despiseth  Ms 
own  soul;  "hateth  himself,"  Septungint; 
commits  moral  suicide,  because  he  does 
not  follow  the  path  of  life.  He  is  like 
a  sick  man  who  thrusts  away  (airicfleiTai, 
Septuagint)  the  wholesome  medicine  which 
is  hit  only  hope  of  cure.  He  that  heareth 
(listeneth  to)  reproof  getteth  understanding ; 
literally,  possesseth  a  heart,  and  therefore 
does  not  despise  his  soul,  but  "loves  it" 
(ch.  xix.  8),  as  the  LXX.  renders. 

Ver.  33.— The  fear  of  the  lord  is  the 
instruction  of  wisdom;  that  which  leads  to 
and  gives  wisdom  (see  oh.  i.  3,  7,  etc. ;  ix. 
10).  '  Pirke  Aboth,'  iii.  26,  "  No  wisdom, 
no  fear  of  God ;  no  fear  of  God,  no  wisdom. 
No  knowledge,  no  diBuernment;  no  discern 
ment,  no  knowledge."  Before  honour  ii 
huniility  (ch.  xviii.  12).    A  man  who  feari 


OH.  XV.  1 — 33.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


297 


God  must  be  humble,  and  hb  the  fear  of 
Gtod  leads  to  wisdom,  it  may  be  said  that 
humility  leads  to  the  honour  and  glory  of 
being  wise  and  reckoned  among  the  wise 
(ver.  31).  A  man  with  a  lowly  opinion  of 
himself  will  heiirken  to  the  teaching  of  the 
wise,  and  scrupulously  obey  the  Law  of  God, 
and  will  lie  blessed  in  his  ways.  For  "  God 
resisteth  the  proud,  but  giveth  grace  unto 
the  humble  "  (Jas.  iv.  6  ;  comp.  Luke  i.  52). 
The  maxim  in  the  second  clause  has  a 
general  application.  "  Ho  that  shall  humble 
himself  shall  be  exalted "  (Matt,  xxiii.  12; 
comp.  Luke  xiv.  11 ;  Jas.  iv.  6).  It  is 
Bsnotioned  by  the  example  of  Christ  him- 


self, the  Spirit  itself  testifying  beforehand 
his  sutt'orings  that  were  to  precede  his  glory 
(1  Pet.  i.  11 ;  see  also  Phil.  ji.  5,  etc.).  Sep- 
tuagint,  "  The  ieur  of  the  Li  jd  is  discipline 
and  wisdom,  and  the  beginning  of  gloiy  shall 
answer  to  it."  Another  reading  adds, 
"  Glory  gocth  before  the  humble,"  which  ia 
explained  to  mean  that  the  humble  set 
before  their  eyes  the  reward  that  awaits 
their  humility,  and  patiently  endure,  like 
Christ,  "  who  for  the  joy  that  was  set  before 
him  endured  the  cross,  despising  the  shame, 
and  is  set  down  at  the  right  hand  of  the 
throne  of  God"  (Heb.  xii.  2). 


HOMILBTICS. 

Ver.  1. — A  toft  answer  and  a  hitter  word.  Both  of  these  are  regarded  as  replies  to 
angry  words.  They  represent  the  wise  and  the  foolish  ways  of  treating  such  words. 
They  give  us  a  bright  and  a  dark  picture.     Let  us  look  at  each. 

L  The  bright  picture.  1.  The  answer.  A  sofD  answer  need  not  be  a  weak  one; 
nor  should  it  imply  any  compromise  of  truth,  nur  any  yielding  of  righteousness.  It 
may  be  firm  in  substance,  though  soft  in  language  and  spirit.  Very  often  the  most 
effective  reply  is  given  in  the  mildest  tone.  It  is  impossible  to  resent  it,  yet  it  is 
equally  impossible  to  answer  it.  But  olten  we  may  go  further.  When  no  vital 
intere.st  of  truth  or  righteousness  is  at  stake,  it  may  be  well  to  yield  a  point  of  our  own 
will  and  pleasure  in  order  to  secure  peace.  2.  It>  inspiration.  Such  an  answer  might 
well  be  prompted  by  wisdom,  for  it  is  suggested  on  the  ground  of  prudence  in 
"  Proverbs."  Yet  there  is  a  higher  motive  for  softness  in  reply  to  wrath.  Christian 
love  will  inspire  the  kinder  method,  for  love  is  more  desirous  of  peace  and  good  feeling 
than  of  securing  all  that  might  be  justly  demanded.  To  stand  on  one's  rights  and 
resent  the  slightest  intrusion  upon  them  is  to  act  from  self-interest,  or  at  beat  from 
a  sense  of  self-regarding  duty.  A  higher  feeling  enters  and  a  largei  view  follows  when 
we  are  considering  our  brother's  feelings)  the  sorrow  of  a  quarrel  and  thp  blessedness  of 
peace.  3.  Jts  results.  It  is  successful — not,  perhaps,  in  gaining  one's  own  way,  but  in 
allaying  wrath.  It  turns  away  wrath.  The  angry  opponent  is  silenced.  For  very 
shame  he  can  say  no  more ;  or  his  wrath  dies  out  for  want  of  fuel ;  or  he  is  won  to 
a  better  feeling  by  the  generous  treatment.  At  the  worst  he  can  find  little  pleasure  in 
fighting  an  unarmed  and  unresisting  dpponent. 

II.  Thb  dark  picture.  The  ugly  contrast  of  this  second  picture  is  necessary  in 
order  to  emphasize  the  beaury  of  the  former  one.  But  however  interesting  they  may 
be  in  art,  BembraniHesque  effects  are  terrible  in  real  life;  for  here  they  represent  agonies 
and  tragedies — hatred,  cruelty,  and  misery.  Yet  they  need  to  lie  consiiiered  if  only  that 
they  may  be  abolished.  1.  The  hitter  answer.  This  is  more  than  an  angry  retort. 
Bitterness  is  more  pungent  than  wrath.  While  rage  thunders,  bitterness  stabs.  It 
contains  a  poisonous  element  of  malice,  and  it  means  moie  ill  will  thati  the  hot  but 
perhaps  hasty  words  that  provoke  it.  2.  The  root  of  itshilterni ss.  No  doubt  this  springs 
from  a  fceliug  of  injury.  The  angry  man  has  wronged  his  companion,  or,  at  hast, 
wounded  him,  and  the  retort  is  provoked  by  pain.  But  pain  alone  would  not  engender 
bitterness.  A  new  element,  a  virus  of  ill  will,  is  stirred  when  the  bitter  word  is  flung 
back,  and  it  is  the  outflow  of  this  ill  will  that  gives  bitterness  to  the  answer.  3.  The 
anger  that  it  rouses.  This  new  anger  is  worse  than  that  which  commenceii  the  quarrel. 
Each  reply  is  more  hot,  more  furious,  more  cruel.  Thus  a  great  wrath  is  roused  and 
a  great  fire  kindled  by  a  very  little  spark  that  has  been  fanned  into  a  flame  when  it 
should  have  been  quenched  at  the  outset. 

There  is  no  question  as  to  which  of  these  two  pictures  best  accords  with  Christian 
principle.     The  gospel  of  Christ  is  God's  soft  answer  to  man's  rebellious  wrath. 


298  THE  PROVERBS.  [oh.  iv.  1—33. 


Ver.  3. — "  The  eyes  of  the  Lord."  I.  God  has  byes.  We  must  always  describe  the 
Infinite  and  Invisible  One  in  "figurative  language.  But  just  as  we  speak  of  the  arms 
and  hands  of  God  when  thinking  of  his  power  and  activity,  so  we  cannot  better 
conceive  of  his  wondirful  observing  faculty  than  by  saying  that  he  has  eyes.  God  can 
see ;  he  can  watch  his  creatures.  It  would  be  an  awful  thing  if  the  universe  were 
governed  by  a  blind  power.  Yet  that  is  the  condition  imagined  by  those  who  regnrd 
force,  unconscious  energy,  as  the  highest  existence  in  the  universe  and  the  cause  of  all 
things.  We  could  but  tremble  before  a  blind  god.  What  awful  confusion,  what 
terrible  disasters,  would  result  from  the  almighty  energy  of  such  a  being  crashing 
through  all  the  complicated  and  delicate  machinery  of  the  world's  life ! 

II.  God  uses  his  byes.  He  is  not  a  sleeping  deity.  He  never  slumbers,  never 
closes  his  eyes.  Day  and  night  are  alike  to  him.  There  is  never  a  moment  when  he 
ceases  to  observe  the  world  and  all  that  is  in  it.  There  are  men  of  whom  we  can  say, 
"  Eyes  have  they,  but  they  see  not ; "  unobservant  people,  who  pass  by  the  most 
obvious  facts  without  noticing  them;  dreamers,  who  live  in  a  world  of  their  own 
fancies,  and  fail  to  see  the  things  that  are  really  happening  about  tliem.  God  is  not 
thus  self-contained.  He  has  an  outer  life  in  the  universe,  and  he  neither  scorns  nor 
fails  to  observe  all  that  is  happening.  We  have  to  do  with  an  ever-watchful,  keenly 
observant  God. 

III.  God's  eyes  are  bveeywhekb.  We  can  only  see  clearly  what  is  near  to  us. 
All  but  the  largest  objects  are  lost  in  distance,  and  the  horizon  melts  into  obscurity. 
Not  so  with  God,  1.  He  sees  the  distant.  Indeed,  nothing  is  distant  from  him.  He  is 
everywhere,  so  that  what  we  should  regard  as  the  most  remote  objects  are  under  hia 
close  ken.  No  Siberian  solitude,  no  far-off  deserted  planet,  no  star  lost  to  the  rest  of  the 
universe  and  rushing  off  into  the  awful  waste  of  space,  can  be  far  from  God's  presence 
and  observation.  2.  He  sees  the  ohsciir^  No  fog  dims  his  vision  ;  no  night  blots  out 
the  objects  he  is  ever  gazing  upon ;  no  hiding  in  secret  chambers,  deep  cellars,  black 
mines  of  the  earth,  can  remove  anything  from  God's  sight.  3.  He  sees  the  unattractive. 
Our  vision  is  selective.  Many  objects  pass  close  before  our  eyes,  yet  we  never  see 
them,  because  we  are  not  interested  in  them.  God  is  interested  in  all  things.  Not 
a  sparrow  falls  to  the  ground  without  his  notice. 

IV.  God's  eyes  see  the  evil.  Though  he  is  merciful,  he  is  too  true  to  refuse  to 
see  the  sin  of  his  children.  1.  The  sinner  cannot  escape  by  secrecy.  If  God  does  not 
strike  at  once,  this  is  not  because  he  does  not  know.  Meanwhile  the  deluded  sinner 
is  but  "  treasuring  up  wrath."  2.  Ood  is  Iqng-f.uffering.  If  he  forbears  to  strike  at 
once  and  yet  knows  all,  it  must  be  that  he  waits  to  give  us  an  opportunity  to  repent. 
His  gospel  is  offered  in  full  view  of  our  sin.  There  is  nothing  to  be  discovered  later  on 
that  may  turn  God's  mercy  from  us.    He  knows  the  worst  \\hen  he  offers  grace. 

V.  God's  eyes  bee  the  good.  1.  Me  observes  his  children's  secret  devotion. 
Unnoticed  by  men,  they  are  not  unheeded  by  God.  Misunderstood  and  misjudged  on 
earth,  they  are  quite  understood  by  him.  Should  it  not  be  enough  to  know  that  God 
knows  all,  and  will  recognize  faithful  service  ?  2.  Ee  observes  his  children's  need. 
Prayer  is  necessary  to  express  our  faith,  etc.,  but  not  to  give  information  to  God. 
He  knows  our  condition  better  than  we  do.  Therefore,  though  he  seems  to  neglect  us, 
it  cannot  be  so  really.  No  mother  ever  watched  over  her  sick  infant  as  God  watches 
over  his  poor  children. 

Ver.  13. — A  Joyous  heart  or  a  broken  spirit.  These  are  the  two  extremes.  The  lesi 
we  have  of  the  one  the  more  we  tend  towards  the  other.  The  first  is  encouraged  that 
it  may  save  us  from  the  disasters  of  the  second  condition. 

I.  The  condition  op  the  heart  is  op  vital  importance.  "Out  of  it  are  the 
issues  of  life  "  (ch.  iv.  23).  The  first  essential  for  one  whose  life  has  been  wrong  is  the 
creation  of  "  a  clean  heart "  (Ps.  11.  10).  According  as  we  think  and  feel  in  our  hearts, 
so  do  we  truly  live.  Now,  it  is  the  merit  of  Christianity  that  it  works  directly  on  the 
heart,  and  only  touches  the  outer  life  through  this  primary  inward  operation.  We  must 
set  little  store  on  the  external  signs  of  prosperity  if  the  heart  is  wrong.  When  that  is 
right  the  rest  is  likely  to  follow  satisfactorily. 

II,  The  joy  or  sorrow  of  the  heart  ark  not  matters  of  indiffbrbnoe. 
The  religion  of  the  Bible  is  not  Stoicism,    It  is  nowhere  represented  to  us  in  tbii  book 


OH.  XV.  1—33.]  THE  PROVERBS.  29* 

that  it  matters  not  whether  mec  grieve  or  are  joyous.  On  the  contrary,  the  Bible 
contains  valuable  recipes  against  heart-pangs.  God's  pity  for  his  children  would  luad 
to  his  concerning  himself  with  such  matters.  Christ's  human  sympathy,  which  led  to 
his  being  frequently  "  moved  with  compassion,"  made  him  alleviate  suffering  and  seek 
to  give  bis  J3y  to  his  disciples.  The  special  mission  of  sorrow  and  the  large  healing 
and  strengthening  influence  of  the'  highest  kind  of  joy  make  these  experiences  to  be  of 
real  interest  to  the  spiritual  life. 

III.  'I'hb  outbb  life  18  BRIGHTENED  BT  JOT  OK  HEART.  It  is  possible  for  the  actor 
to  assume  a  smiling  countenance  when  his  heiirt  is  bursting  with  agony,  but  that 
is  juBt  because  he  is  an  actor.  It  is  not  intended  by  Providence  that  the  face  should 
be  a  mask  to  bide  the  soul.  In  the  Ion;:  run  the  set  expression  of  the  countenance 
must  correspond  to  the  prevalent  condition  of  the  spirit  within.  The  sad  heart  will 
be  revealed  by  a  clouded  countenance,  the  heart  of  care  by  the  fretted  lines  of  a  worn 
face,  the  peaceful  heart  by  a  serene  expression,  and  the  glad  heart  by  unconscious 
smiles.  Thus  we  shed  gloom  or  sunshine  by  our  very  presence.  "  The  joy  of  the 
Lord  is  your  strength"  (Neb.  viii.  10).  With  the  brightened  countenance  there  comes 
revived  energy.  Moreover,  the  cheerful  expression  of  a  Christian  is  a  winning  invitation 
to  others.    It  makes  the  gospel  attractive. 

IV.  The  spirit  is  broken  by  borrow  or  heart.  It  must  be  confessed  that  we 
have  here  only  a  partial  view  of  sorrow.  The  richer  revelation  which  the  New  Testa- 
ment makes  of  the  Divine  gospel  of  sorrow  gives  it  a  new  meaning  and  a  higher 
blessedness.  Since  Christ  suffered.  Buffering  has  been  sanctified,  and  the  Vi4  Dolorosa 
has  become  the  road  to  victory.  Nevertheless,  mere  sorrow  is  still  trying,  wearing, 
grinding  to  the  soul.  To  bear  the  cross  for  Christ's  sake  is  to  render  noble  service,  but 
simply  to  groan  under  the  load  of  pain  is  not  to  be  inspired  with  strength.  Jesus  was 
not  only  "  a  Man  of  sorrows,  and  acquainted  with  grief; "  he  could  speak  of  his  joy 
just  before  feeling  bis  deepest  agony.  A  life  of  utter  sorrow  must  be  one  of  utter 
weariness.  1.  Therefofe  we  should  seek  the  grace  of  Christ  to  conquer  sorrow  in  our 
own  hearts.  There  is  no  virtue  in  yielding  to  it  with  self-made  martyrdom.  2.  It  is 
a  good  work  to  lessen  the  world's  sorrow. 

Vers.  16,  17. — The  better  things.  Earthly  good  is  comparative.  Many  things 
regarded  by  themselves  appear  to  be  eminently  attractive;  but  if  they  exclude  more 
desirable  things  they  must  be  rejected.  We  need  not  make  the  worst  of  this  world  in 
order  to  make  the  best  of  the  higher  world.  Taking  earth  at  its  brightest,  it  is  still 
outshone  by  the  glories  of  heaven.  But  earth  is  not  always  at  its  brightest ;  and  we 
must  make  our  comparison  with  the  actual  facts  of  life,  not  with  ideal  possibilities. 

I.  Godly  poverty  is  better  than  troubled  wealth.  1.  Wealth  is  disappointing. 
It  might  be  shown  that  wealth  at  its  best  cannot  satisfy  the  soul ;  for  (1)  it  is  only 
external,  and  (2)  it  is  but  a  means  of  obtaining  other  ends.  But  plain  experience 
shows  that  the  advantages  of  wealth  are  very  commonly  neutralized  by  trouble.  (1) 
For  wealth  will  not  prevent  trouble.  Rich  men  suffer  from  disease,  disappointment, 
discontent,  the  unkindness  of  friends,  etc.  The  child  of  affluence  may  die.  (2)  Wealth 
may  bring  trouble.  It  has  its  own  anxieties.  Antonio,  who  has  ships  at  sea,  is 
distressed  at  the  storms  that  do  not  trouble  the  poor  man.  Many  interests  lead 
to  conflicting  claims,  and  the  cares  of  riches  are  often  as  great  as  those  of  poverty. 
(3)  Wealth  cannot  compensate  for  trouble.  The  small  vexations  of  life  may  be 
smoothed  away  by  money,  and  of  course  certain  specific  troubles — such  as  hunger, 
sold,  nakedness — may  be  quite  prevented.  But  the  greater  troubles  remain.  Gold  will 
not  heal  a  broken  heart.  2.  Godliness  is  satisfying.  It  may  be  found  with  wcaltli. 
Then  it  will  correct  the  evils  and  supply  the  defects.  But  it  may  be  seen  with  poverty, 
and  in  this  case  it  will  prove  itself  the  true  riches  which  will  give  what  money  can 
never  supply.  Indeed,  in  presence  of  this  real  good  the  question  as  to  whether  even 
great  earthly  treasure  is  to  be  added  need  not  be  raised.  It  is  lost  in  the  infinitely 
gT'sater  possession.  The  ocean  will  not  be  concerned  to  know  whether  the  trickling 
Bireamlet  that  flows  into  its  abundant  waters  be  full  or  failing.  Further,  it  is  to  be 
noted  that  God  satisfies  the  soul  directly,  while  at  best  riches  can  only  pretend  to  do  so 
indirectly.  Riches  .seek  to  buy  happiness.  Inward  religion  directly  confers  blessedness. 
To  have  God  is  to  be  at  rest. 


800  THE  FROVERBS.  ten.  xv.  1—33. 


n.  Love  with  privations  is  bbttkr  thak  hatred  with  sdpekfutitt.  1.  Hatred 
neutralizes  superfluity.  What  is  the  use  of  the  ox  in  the  stall  if  hatred  makes  a  hell 
of  the  home?  How  often  is  it  seen  that  the  comforfs  of  aflBuence  only  mock  the 
wretchedness  of  their  master,  because  the  more  essential  joys  of  affection  have  been 
shattered!  A  household  of  discord  must  be  one  of  misery.  Family  feuds  cannot  but 
bring  vmhappiness  to  all  concerned  in  them.  Hatred  in  the  house  leads  to  wretched- 
ness in  proportion  to  the  blessedness  that  love  would  have  conferred.  We  are  more 
touched  by  our'  relations  with  persons  than  by  our  relations  with  things.  Therefore, 
if  those  closer  relations  are  marred,  no  prosperity  of  external  affairs  can  bring  peace. 
2.  Love  can  neutralize  privations.  The  dinner  of  herbs  may  not  be  hurtful  in  itself. 
Daniel  and  his  companions  throve  on  it  (Dan.  i.  15).  If  it  is  not  attractive  and 
appetizing,  other  considerations  may  withdraw  our  attention  from  it  and  fill  the  heart 
with  joy.  Love  is  more  than  meat.  Nay,  even  bitter  herbs  may  be  not  unpalatable 
when  seasoned  with  affection,  while  an  alderman's  feast  will  be  insipid  to  a  ^uest  who 
is  preoccupied  with  vexatious  thoughts. 

Ver.  23. — The  word  in  season.  1.  What  it  is.  The  word  in  season  is  the  right 
word  spoken  at  the  right  time.  It  may  not  be  the  word  that  is  sought  and  asked  for. 
It  may  even  be  an  unwelcome  word,  a  startling  word,  a  word  of  rebuke.  What  can  be 
more  seasonable  than  to  cry,  "  Halt ! "  to  one  who  is  nearing  the  precipice  in  the  dark  ? 
Yet  he  neither  expects  the  word,  nor  for  the  moment  accepts  it  with  favour.  The 
great  requisite  is  that  the  word  should  be  suitable  for  the  occasion.  This  has  a  special 
bearing  on  the  word  of  highest  wisdom,  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.  We  should  be  on 
the  look  out  for  suitable  moments — e.g.  in  sorrow,  when  the  henrt  is  softened;  in  leisure 
hours,  when  the  mind  is  open ;  at  new  departures,  when  special  guidance  is  needed; 
after  mistakes  have  been  made,  to  correct  and  save ;  when  doubts  have  been  expressed, 
to  remove  their  paralyzing  influence ;  when  Christ  has  been  dishonoured,  to  vindicate 
his  holy  Name.  These  are  all  times  for  speech,  but  not  for  uttering  the  same  words. 
The  occasion  must  determine  the  character  of  the  word. 

II.  Why  it  is  good.  1.  The  toil  must  be  in  a  right  condition,  or  the  seed  that  is 
flung  upon  it  will  be  wasted.  It  is  useless  to  cast  bushels  of  the  best  wheat  by  the 
wayside,  and  foolish  to  cast  pearls  before  swine.  Men  do  not  sow  seed  in  the  heat  ol 
August  nor  during  a  January  frost.  Our  business  is  to  sow  beside  all  waters,  and  yet 
to  watch  for  the  rising  of  the  waters  and  make  a  right  use  of  the  seasons.  There  is 
a  time  to  speak  and  a  time  to  keep  silence,  not  because  these  epochs  are  fixed  by  some 
Divine  almanack  of  destiny,  but  just  because  silence  is  golden  when  mind  and  heai:t 
need  rest  and  privacy,  and  speech  is  precioiis  when  sympathy  is  craved,  or  when  wise 
words  can  be  received  with  thoughtful  attention.  There  are  "  words  that  help  and 
heal."  2.  The  special  condition  of  the  hearer  determines  what  he  will  best  receive. 
We  should  not  preach  consolation  to  a  merry  child,  nor  talk  of  the  difficulties  of 
religion  before  a  person  who  has  never  been  troubled  with  them.  On  the  other  hand, 
it  is  useless  simply  to  exhort  the  soul  perplexed  with  diverse  thoughts  to  "  believe  and 
be  saved."  Indeed,  in  private  conversation  the  peculiar  characteristics  of  each  indi- 
vidual will  require  a  different  mode  of  approach.  We  cannot  discuss  theology  with 
an  uneducated  man  as  we  may  have  to  discuss  it  with  a  young  graduate. 

III.  How  it  mat  be  spoken.  It  is  noteasy  to  find  the  word  in  season, and  certain 
conditions  are  absolutely  essential  to  the  production  of  it.  1.  Sympathy.  This  is  the 
primary  condition.  It  may  be  almost  affirmed  that  where  this  is  strong  the  rest  will 
follow.  We  cannot  speak  wisely  to  a  fellow-man  until  we  have  learnt  to  put  ourselves 
ra  his  place.  2.  Thought.  Great  considerateiiess  is  necessary  that  we  choose  the  right 
word,  and  tlien  speak  it  just  at  the  right  moment.  If  a  man  blurts  out  the  first  thought 
that  comes  into  his  mind,  he  may  ilo  infinite  harm,  tliough  he  be  acting  with  the  best 
intention.  3.  Courage.  Those  who  are  most  fitted  by  sympathy  and  thoughtfulness 
are  often  most  backward  to  utter  the  word  in  season.  To  such  it  seems  easier  to  preach 
tea  thousand  heaiers  than  to  talk  directly  with  one  soul.  Yet  personal  conversation 
is  most  fruitful.  It  was  Christ's  method,  e.g.  with  Nicoilemus,  the  woman  at  the  well, 
etc.    This  duty  is  sadly  neglected  from  lack  ol  moral  courage. 

Ver.  2d.— Character  and  prayer.     The  character  of  a  man  has  much  to  do  with  tht 


tH.  XV.  1—33.]  THE  PROVE  HBa  801 

efficacy  of  his  prayer.  The  prayers  of  different  men  are  not  of  equal  value.  One  iiiau's 
most  urgent  petition  is  but  wasted  breath,  while  the  slightest  sigh  of  another  is  heard 
in  heaven,  and  answered  with  showers  of  blessing.  Let  us  consider  how  these  gieat 
diversities  come  to  be. 

I.  A  man's  nearness  to  God  is  to  be  mbasueed  by  his  ohabactek.  Some  men 
appear  to  have  what  is  called  a  gift  of  prayer,  bat  in  reality  they  are  only  cursed  with 
a  fatal  fluency  in  phrases.  By  long  habit  they  have  acquired  a  facility  of  pouring  forth 
▼oluminous  sentences  with  a  certain  unctuousness  that  persuades  inconsiderate  hearers 
into  the  notion  that  they  are  "  mighty  in  prayer."  Yet,  in  truth,  this  facility  is  of  no 
account  whatever  with  God,  who  does  not  hear  our  "  much  speaking."  On  the  other 
hand,  if  a  man's  heart  is  wrong  with  God,  he  is  cut  off  from  access  to  heaven.  Such  a 
man  cannot  truly  pray,  though  he  may  "say  his  prayers."  It  may  be  said  that  even 
the  worst  sinner  can  pray,  for  pardon,  and  of  course  this  is  a  great  and  glorious  truth. 
But  he  can  only  do  so  effectually  when  he  is  penitent.  The  man  whose  heart  and  life 
turn  towards  goodness  is  brought  into  sympathy  with  God,  so  that  he  is  spiritually 
near  to  God,  and  his  prayers  find  ready  access  to  heaven. 

II.  The  character  of  the  man  will  detbkuine  the  ohakacteb  op  his 
PBAYERB.  He  may  be  known  by  his  prayers,  if  only  we  can  tell  what  those  prayers 
really  are.  His  true  heartfelt  desires,  not  his  due  and  decorous  devotions,  are  the  best 
expression  of  his  real  self.  Now,  a  bad  man  will  desire  bad  things,  and  a  good  man 
good  things.  It  would  be  most  unfitting  in  God,  indeed  positively  wrong,  to  give  tlie 
bad  man  the  desires  of  his  heart.  But  he  who  prays  in  the  name  of  Christ,  i.e.  witli 
his  authority,  can  only  pray  for  the  things  of  which  Christ  approves,  and  he  will  only 
do  this  when  he  has  the  spirit  of  Christ,  and  is  in  harmony  with  the  mind  and  will  of 
his  Lord.  The  holy  man  will  only  pray — consciously,  at  least — for  things  that  agree 
with  holiness.  It  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  his  prayers  will  be  heard  when  the  ill 
petitions  of  the  bad  man  are  rejected. 

III.  The  chabacteb  op  a  man  affects  his  fitness  to  beceive  Divine  answers 
TO  HIS  prayers.  Two  men  may  ask  for  precisely  similar  tilings  in  the  way  of 
external  blessings.  Yet  one  is  selfish,  sinful,  rebellious,  and  ungrateful.  To  give  to 
this  man  what  he  asks  will  be  hurtful  to  him,  injurious  to  others,  dishonouring  to 
God.  But  a  good  mau  will  know  how  to  receive  blessings  from  God  with  gratitude, 
and  how  to  use  them  for  the  glory  of  his  Master  and  the  good  of  his  brethren.  Further, 
in  regard  to  internal  blessings,  what  would  bo  good  for  the  man  whose  heart  and 
life  are  in  the  right,  would  be  hurtful  to  the  impenitent.  Saint  and  sinner  both  pray 
for  peace.  To  the  saint  this  is  a  wholesome  solace ;  to  the  sinner  it  would  be  a  dangerous 
narcotic.  Therefore  God  responds  to  the  prayer  of  the  one,  and  rejects  the  petition  of 
the  other. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1,  2,  4,  7. — Virtues  and  vice)  of  the  tongue.  I.  Mildness  and  violence. 
(Ver.  1.)  The  soft  answer  is  like  the  water  which  quenches,  and  the  bitter  retort,  the 
"  grievous  words,"  like  the  oil  which  increases  the  conflagration  of  wrath.  As  scriptural 
examples  of  the  former,  may  be  mentioned  Jacob  with  Esau  (Gen.  xxxii.,  xxxiii.), 
Aaron  with  Moses  (Lev.  x.  16 — 20),  the  Reubeiiites  with  their  brethren  (Josh,  xxii. 

15 34),  Gideon  with  the  men  of  Ephraim  (Judg.  viii.  1 — 3),  David  with  Saul  (1  Sam. 

xxiv.  9 — ^21),  Abigail  with  David  ( L  Sam.  xxv.  23 — 32).  And  of  the  latter,  Jephthah 
(Judg.  xii.  1—6),  Saul  (1  Sam.  xx.  30—34),  Nabal  (1  Sam.  xxv.  10—13),  Rehoboam 
(1  Kmgs  xii.  12 — 15),  Paul  and  Barnabas  (Acts  xv.  39). 

II.  The  attractiveness  or  wise  speech  and  the  repulsiveness  op  rooLtsn 
TALK.  (Ver.  2.)  If  this  verse  be  more  correctly  rendered,  it  means  that  the  tongue 
of  the  wise  makes  knowledge  lovely,  wldle  the  mouth  of  the  fool  foams  with  folly.  The 
speech  of  the  former  is  apt  to  time  and  place — coherent — and  wins  upon  tlje  listener. 
The  latter  is  unseasonable,  confused,  nonsensical,  repellent.  Notice  the  tact  of  St. 
Paul's  addresses  (Acta  xvii.  22,  23;  xxvi.  27—29),  and  what  he  says  about  foolish 
babbling  in  2  Tim.  ii.  16—18 ;  Titus  i.  10. 

III.  Modkbation   and   EXTRAVAaANca.      (Ver.  4.)    A  calm  and  measured  ton* 


302  THE  PROVERBS.  [oh.  XT.  1—33. 

should  be  cultivated,  as  well  as  a  pure  and  peaceful  heart ;  these  mutually  react  upon 
one  another.  The  extravagant,  immoderate,  licentious  tongue  is  "  like  a  blustering  wind 
among  the  boughs  of  the  tiees,  rushing  and  tearing  the  life  and  spirit  of  a  man's  self 
and  others"  (Bishop  Hall).     Beware  of  exaggeration. 

IV.  Speech  a  diffusive  inflcence.  (Ver.  7.)  The  lips  of  the  wise  scatter  seeds 
of  good  around  them ;  not  so  with  the  heart  and  lips  of  the  fool.  "  They  trade  only 
with  the  trash  of  the  world,  not  with  the  commerce  of  substantial  knowledge."  The 
preaching  of  the  gospel  is  compared  to  the  scattering  of  good  seed,  and  evil  activity  i« 
the  sowing  of  tares  in  the  world-field  (Matt.  xiii.  24,  etc.). — J. 

Ver.  3. — Hie  omnipresence  of  Qod.  I.  God  is  a  Spirit.  We  cannot  exhaust  the 
sublimity,  the  awfulness,  the  comfort,  the  meaning,  in  this  thought. 

II.  God  sees  all  and  knows  all.  Both  the  good  and  the  evil.  In  looking  upon 
evil  deeds  which  pass  unchastised  in  appear^tnse,  we  aie  ready  to  exclaim,  '*  And  yet 
God  has  never  spoken  a  word  ! "     But  G  kI  has  seen,  and  will  requite. 

III.  Hence  let  us  possess  oub  souls  in  patience.  Commit  them  unto  him  in 
well-doing,  and  wait  for  the  "end  of  the  Lord,"  He  knows,  among  other  things,  the 
need  of  his  children,  and  bethinks  him  of  helping  and  delivering  them. — J. 

Ver.  5. —  Contempt  and  respect  for  instruction.  The  fool  Is  as  a  "  wild  ass's  colt " 
(Job  xi.  12),  recalcitrant,  stubborn ;  while  he  who  early  shows  a  willingness  to  listen 
to  good  advice  has  the  germ  of  prudence,  the  prophecy  of  a  safe  career. 

I.  A  MunuuRiN'}   temper,  a  reluctance  to  submit  to  necessity  and  the 

COURSE   OF   LIPB,   IS  IN   REALITY   A   CONTEMPT   OF   GoD. 

II.  Submission  to  the  inevitable,  oomplianob  to  the  laws  of  livino,  is 
DOCILITY  TO  God. — J. 

Ver.  6. — Tnie  and  false  gains.  I.  A  man  may  be  poob,  yet  possess  all  thinss, 
(2  Cor.  vi.  10.)    Deus  mens,  et  omnia  I 

II.  A   MAN   may    be   rich,    YET   DESTITUTE,   POOR,   BLIND,    AND   MISERABLE.        If    We 

are  not  satisfied,  we  are  not  rich.     If  we  are  content,  we  are  never  poor. 

III.  God  is  the  true  and  only  Gain  or  the  soul.  We  have  a  nature  which 
will  be  satisfied  with  nothing  short  of  the  Infinite.  To  attempt  to  feed  it  with  anything 
less  is  found  to  be  a  cheat  and  a  self-delusion.  —J. 

Vers.  8,  9. — God's  hatreds  and  Ood's  delights.  We  all  have  our  aversions,  natural 
antipathies,  acquired  hatreds.  A  noted  author  not  long  ago  published  a  book  called 
'Mes  Haines.'  What  are  the  hatreds  of  him  who  is  Love?  They  should  be  our 
aversions. 

I.  The  sacrifice  of  the  wicked.  (Ver.  8.)  Itisnot  the  man's  works  which  make 
him  good,  but  the  justified  man — the  man  made  right  with  God — produces  good  works, 
and  these,  though  imperfect,  are  well-pleasing  to  God.  The  lack  of  heart-sincerity  must 
stamp  every  sacrifice,  as  that  of  Cain,  as  an  abomination. 

II.  The  prayer  of  the  good  man.  Symbolized  by  fragrant  incense,  sweet  to  him 
are  pious  thoughts,  wishes  for  the  best,  charitable  aspirations,  all  that  in  the  finite  heart 
aims  at  the  Infinite. 

III.  The  way  of  the  wicked.  A  prayerless  life  is  a  godless,  and  hence  a  corrupt 
life.  It  is  a  meaningless  life,  and  God  will  not  tolerate  what  is  insignificant  in  his  vast 
significant  worU. 

IV.  The  pursuit  of  good.  .  He  who  hunts  after  righteousness,  literally,  is  loved  of 
God.  We  learn  the  necessity  of  patience,  constancy,  diligence  in  well-doing.  In  no 
other  way  can  genuineness  and  thoroughness  be  shown. — J. 

Ver.  10. — The  principle  of  judgment.    T.  It  is  neveb  causeless. 

II.  The  connection  of  cause  and  effect  is  often  mysterious.  Hence  we 
should  be  slow  to  trace  the  judgment  of  God  upon  sinners. 

III.  Some  sins  that  foretell  judgment.  1.  Desertion  of  duty ;  forsaking  of 
God's  ways ;  travelling  in  paths  we  Jmow  to  be  crooked  or  unclean.  2.  Indifference  to 
rebuke.     For  even  in  error,  if  we  will  heed  the  timely  warning  and  correct  the  dis' 


OH.  XV.  1-53.]  THE  PROVERBS.  803 


covered  fault,  judgment  may  be  averted.     If  not,  there  is  no  way  of  avoiding  the  law  of 
doom.    The  soul  that  sinneth  shall  and  "  must  die." — J. 

Ver.  11. — The  heart  open  to  Ood.  I.  The  heart  a  provound  mtstbet.  We 
specalate  about  the  mysteries  of  the  world  without  us,  as  if  these  were  the  great  secrets, 
forgetful  what  an  abyss  of  wonder  is  within. 

II.  This  mvstery  may  be  compared  to  that  of  Hades  and  the  kingdom  of 
THE  devil.  1.  It  is  equally  profovmd.  2.  It  is  equally  fascinating.  3.  It  is  equally 
hidden  from  our  knowledge.  Peruse  our  greatest  masters  of  the  human  heart — a 
Shakespeare,  Bacon,  Montaigne — we  have  still  not  touched  the  bottom. 

III.  The  mysteev  or  all  worlds  is  known  to  God,  the  internal  no  less  than 
the  external.  1.  This  is  a  thought  of  awe.  2.  Still  more  it  should  be  of  comfort. 
My  God,  thou  knowcst  all,  all  that  fain  would  hide  itself  from  others,  eveu  from  myself 
— and  yet  "  hast  stooped  to  ask  of  me  the  love  of  this  poor  heart "  1— J. 

Vers.  12 — 15.— Sullen  folly  and  cheerful  wisdom.  I.  Dislike  or  criticism,  (Ver. 
12.)  Often  seen  in  those  who  are  most  critical  themselves.  The  jiber  is  easily  galled 
by  a  telling  retort.  The  satirical  man  least  loves  satire  upon  himself.  But  one  of  the 
lessons  we  learn  from  truly  great  minds  is  that  of  willingness  to  turn  a  jest  against  one's 
self,  and  to  find  positive  pleasure  in  a  criticism  of  one's  own  character  that  hits  the  mark, 
provided  it  be  good-natured.  But  with  ill  nature  no  one  can  be  pleased.  Most 
necessary  it  is  for  the  health  of  the  soul  to  be  often  with  those  who  know  more  than 
we  do. 

II.  The  appearance  the  mirboe  of  the  man.  The  placid,  serene,  smiling, 
winning  visage  reflects  the  soul ;  and  so  with  the  downcast  brow  and  dejected  mien. 
It  may  surprise  us  that  so  commonplace  an  observation  should  be  thought  worth 
recording ;  but  tliere  was  a  time  when  such  flashed  upon  man  as  a  new  discovery.  Per- 
haps it  may  be  a  discovery  to  many  that  they  may  do  much  by  assuming  a  cheerful 
manner  to  legulate  and  calm  the  heart. 

III.  But  appearances  are  nothing  without  reality.  (Ver.  14.)  To  be  truly 
wise  is  not  to  know  a  great  deal,  but  to  be  always  on  the  track  and  pursuit  of  know- 
ledge ;  and  to  be  utterly  foolisli  it  is  only  neccsary  to  give  the  reins  to  vanity,  to  yield 
to  idleness,  to  follow  every  passing  pleasure.  The  countencmct  of  the  fool  is  expressive 
of  what?    Of  the  want  of  impressions,  of  vacancy  and  vanity. 

IV.  The  folly  or  gloom  and  the  wisdom  op  cheerfulness.  (Ver.  15.)  In  what 
sense  can  we  ever  say  that  our  days  are  evil,  except  that  we  have  made  them  so? 
And  how  more  readily  can  we  mak«  them  so  than  by  yielding  to  the  dark  and  gloomy 
mood,  and  ever  looking  on  the  dark  side  of  things?  The  side  of  things  on  wiiich  we 
see  the  reflection  of  our  narrow  selves  is  ever  dark;  that  on  which  we  see  God's  attributes 
mirrored — the  beauty  of  his  nature,  the  wisdom  of  his  providence — is  bright  and 
inspiring.  It  is,  indeed,  a  feast  to  the  soul  to  have  found  God;  for  thought,  for 
feeling,  for  every  practical  need,  he  is  present,  he  alone  "shall  supply  all  our  need." 
Our  Lord  thus  speaks  of  his  body  and  his  blood,  of  which  to  eat  is  life. — J. 

Vers.  16, 17. — Alternatives.  I.  Poverty  with  piety,  oe  riches  with  discontent. 
Which  shall  we  choose?  Naturally  all,  or  nearly  all,  will  prefer  to  take  riches  with  its 
risks  rather  than  poverty  with  its  certain  privations.  Our  Bible  is  precious  because  it 
reminds  us  that  there  is  another  side  in  this  matter.  Riches  are  too  dearly  gained  at 
the  expense  of  peace  of  conscience ;  poverty  is  blessed  if  it  brings  us  nearer  to  God. 

II.  Scanty  fare  with  eich  spiritual  seasoning,  or  kich  fare  with  a  poor 
HEART.  Which?  For  ourselves  and  our  personal  comfort?  For  others  and  the 
hospitality  we  should  like  to  dispense  to  them?  For  ourselves,  high  thinking  with 
low  living;  for  others,  slight  fare  with  large  welcome  will  make  a  true  feast. — J. 

Vers.  18 — 23. — Facets  of  moral  truth.  Again  flashing  upon  us,  mostly  in  the  light 
of  contrast.  As,  indeed,  from  precious  stones  and  false  paste,  up  to  the  highest  truths 
of  the  spirit,  we  can  know  nothing  truly  except  by  the  comparison  of  its  opposite. 

I.  Hastk  of  TEMPER  AND  LONQ-suFPERiNG.  (Ver.  18.)  Quarrclsomeneiss,  irritable 
words  (would  that  w«  could  recall  them !),  a  thousand  stabs  and  wounds  to  the  heart  of 


804  THE   PROVERBS.  [oh.  xv.  1— 3a 


our  friend  and  to  our  own,  the  result  of  the  former.  For  the  latter,  read  the  exquisite 
descriptions  of  the  New  Testament  wherever  the  word  "long-suffering"  occurs,  and  see 
the  matchless  beauty,  and  learn  to  covet  the  possession  of  that  character — the  impress  of 
God  in  human  uaiure — and  those  best  gifts  which  belong  to  "  the  more  excellent  way." 

II.  Idleness  and  honesty.  (Ver.  19.)  The  way  of  the  former  beset  with  difficulty. 
Lazy  people  take  the  most  trouble,  in  the  affairs  of  the  soul  as  in  everything.  The 
honest  path  is  the  only  easy  path  in  the  long  run.  We  must  remember  that  it  is  a 
lortg  run  we  have  to  pass  o\er,  and  must  make  our  choice  accordingly.  Life  la  no 
mere  picnic  or  excursion.  For  amusement  of  the  leisure  hour  we  may  strike  into  a 
by-path,  but  never  lose  sight  of  the  high-road  <  f  faith. 

III.  PabbntaIi  jot  and  sobbow.  (Ver.  20.)  On  the  whole,  these  are  one  of  the 
best  indices  of  a  man's  character.  A  truly  good  parent  may  not  understand  his  child, 
as  Mary  misunderstood  Jesus;  but  at  the  bottom  of  the  heart,  v/hen  there  is  filial 
goodness  there  is  parental  sympathy  and  approval. 

IV.  Spueious  jot  and  quiet  persistence  in  biqht.  (Ver.  21.)  This  is-  a  good 
contrast.  The  fool  is  not  content  with  saying  or  doing  the  foolish  thing;  he  must 
needs  chuckle  over  it  and  make  a  boast  of  it,  often  gaining  applause  for  his  mere 
audacity.  But  the  man  of  true  sense  is  content  to  forego  the  momentary  triumph,  and 
goes  on  his  way.  Ever  to  forsake  the  way  we  know  to  be  right,  even  in  momentary 
hilarity,  brings  its  after-sting. 

V.  Failube  and  success  in  counsels.  (Ver.  22.)  Wild  tumultuous  passion 
causes  the  former ;  and  calm  deliberation,  the  comparison  and  collision  of  many  minds, 
brings  about  sound  and  stable  policy.  To  lean  upon  one's  own  weak  will;  to  act  in 
haste  or  under  impulse,  how  seldiim  can  a  prosperous  issue  come  of  this !  See  how 
individuals  rush  into  lawsuits,  nations  into  war,  speculators  into  bankruptcy, — all  for 
want  of  consultation  and  good  advice.  We  need  the  impetus  of  enthusiasm,  not  less 
the  direction  of  cool  prudence ;  if  one  or  the  other  factor  be  omitted,  disaster  must  ensue. 

VI.  Seasonable  wobds.  (Ver.  23.)  We  must  consider  not  only  the  matter,  but 
the  manner,  of  our  utterances.  This  requires  "  a  mind  at  leisure  from  itself"  to  seize 
the  happy  opportunity,  to  refrain  from  introducing  the  jarring  note,  to  turn  the 
conversation  when  it  threatens  to  strike  on  breakers.  Oh,  happy  art !  admirable  and 
enviable  in  those  that  possess  it,  but  cultivable  by  all  who  have  the  gentle  heart.  We 
cannot  conceive  that  the  conversations  of  Christ  were  ever  other  than  thus  seasonable. — J. 

Vers.  24 — 33. — Seligion  and  common  sense.  What  is  religion  without  common 
sense?  Fanaticism,  extravagance,  and  folly.  What  is  common  sense  without 
religion?  Dry,  bald,  uninspired  and  uninspiring  worldliuess.  What  are  they  united V 
The  wisdom  of  both  worlds,  the  wisdom  of  time  and  of  eternity.  Let  us  look  at  som» 
of  their  combined  teachings. 

I.  Teachinos  of  common  sense.  1.  To  avoid  danger  and  death.  (Ver.  24.)  This 
is  obvious  enough,  but,  unguided  by  religion,  prudence  may  easily  make  mistakes. 
2.  To  avoid  unjust  gains.  (Ver.  27.)  Every  advantage  must  be  paid  for,  in  some 
coin  or  other.  Then,  "is  the  game  worth  the  candle  ?"  Will  a  dishonest  speculation, 
looked  at  on  mere  commercial  principles,  pay  f  3.  To  be  cautious  in  speech.  (Ver.  28.) 
Speech  is  the  one  thing  that  many  think  they  have  a  right  to  squander.  There  is  no 
more  common  profligacy  than  that  of  the  tongue.  Yet,  is  there  anything  of  which 
experience  teaches  us  to  be  more  economical  than  the  expense  of  the  tongue?  4.  To 
be  generous  of  hind  looks  and  words.  (Ver.  30.)  What  can  cost  less,  or  be  worth,  in 
many  cases,  more?  "Good  words,"  says  George  Herbert,  "are  wortfi  much,  and  cost 
little."  5.  To  be  a  good  listener.  (Ver.  31.)  And  this  implies  willingness  to  receive 
rebuke.  All  superior  conversation  in  some  way  or  other  brings  to  light  our  ignorance 
and  checks  our  narrowness.  And  just  as  he  is  not  fit  to  govern  who  has  not  learned  to 
serve,  so  only  he  who  has  long  sat  at  the  feet  uf  the  wise  will  be  entitled  himself  to 
take  his  place  among  the  wise.  One  of  Socrates'  disciples  excLiimed  that  life  indeed 
was  to  be  found  in  listening  to  discourses  like  his.  May  we  all  feel  the  like  in  sittiug 
at  the  feet  of  our  Master,  who  commends  those  who  have  thus  chosen  the  good  part 
which  shall  never  be  taken  away  from,  them !  6.  2'o  avoid  conceit  and  cultivate  humiliiy. 
(Ver.  32.)  It  is  the  over-estimate  of  self  which  makes  us  contemptuous  in  any  seiwo 
towards  others.    But  to  look  down  as  from  a  superior  height  on  others  is  the  mwt 


CH.  XY.  1—33.]  THE  PROVBKBS.  3<» 

misicliievous  hinfiraxice  to  progress  in  sense  and  knowledge.  A  raaster-mind  of  our 
times  says  tliat  he  hati-s  to  be  praised  in  tlie  newspapers,  and  begins  to  liave  some  hope 
for  himself  when  people  find  fault  with  him.  7.  To  found  humility  upon  religion. 
(Ver.  33.)  Its  only  genuine  and  deep  foundation.  What  are  we  in  relation  to  the 
God  whose  perfection  is  revealed  to  us  in  nature,  in  the  ideals  of  the  soul,  in  the 
fulfilment  of  the  living  Person  of  Christ?  From  this  depth  only  can  we  rise;  for 
honour  springs  from  a  lowly  root ;  and  he  that  exalteth  himself  shall  be  abased. 

II.  Teachings  of  ebligion.  We  have  already  seen  how  they  blend  with  those  of 
common  sense.  But  let  us  bring  them  into  their  proper  distinctiveness  and  force. 
1.  To  choose  the  upward  path  and  shun  the  downward.  (Ver.  24.)  To  cleave  to  God ;  to 
love  him  with  mind,  and  lieart,  and  soul,  ami  strength ;  to  be  ever  seeking  the  Divine 
meaning  in  the  earthly  objects,  the  Divine  goal  through  the  course  of  common  events, 
the  true,  the  beautiful,  and  the  good,  in  their  ineffable  blending  and  unity  in  God; — this 
is  the  upward  way.  To  be  striving  nfter  emnnoipation  from  self,  in  all  the  coarser  and 
grosser,  in  all  the  more  refined  and  subtle  forms  of  lust  and  greed, — ^this  is  the  avoidance 
of  hell  and  of  the  downwRrd  way.  "Seeking  those  things  which  are  above,  where 
Christ  sitteth  on  the  right  hand  of  God,"  implies  and  demands  "  the  mortification  of 
the  members  which  are  upon  the  earth."  2.  To  consider  the  Judgments  of  God.  (Vers. 
25,  27.)  There  was  a  period  in  the  ancient  world  when  men  thoixght  of  Divine  power 
as  blind  caprice,  fortune,  fate,  destiny,  setting  down  and  raising  up  whomsoever  it 
would  by  no  .fixed  moral  law.  It  was  a  great  revelation  and  a  magnificent  discovery 
when  men  saw  that  there  was  a  law  in  the  events  of  life,  and  this  law  noue  other  than 
the  holy  will  of  Jehovah.  One  of  the  principles  of  his  judgment  is  here  set  forth. 
Godless  pride  is  obnoxious  to  his  disapproval,  and  incurs  extinction  at  his  hands.  But 
he  is  Compassion,  and  the  poor  and  friendless,  especially  the  widow,  are  certain  of  his 
protection.  It  is  as  if  a  charmed  circle  were  drawn  around  her  liumble  dwelling,  and 
a  Divine  hand  kept  the  fire  glowing  on  her  hearth.  3.  To  consider  the  religious  aspect 
of  thoughts  avd  words.  (Ver.  26.)  Words  and  thoughts  are  one,  as  the  body  and  the 
soul.  A  great  thinker,  indeed,  defined  thought  as  talkinij  to  one's  self — as  all  our  words 
to  others  should,  indeed,  be  as  thought  overheard.  Tims  we  are  thrown  back  on  the 
heart,  and  the  elementary  maxims  for  its  guidance  in  purity.  Keep  it  with  all  diligencel 
But  perhaps  not  less  important  is  iherejiex  influence;  for  if  bad  words  be  scrupulously 
kept  from  the  tongue,  evil  images  will  less  readily  arise  in  the  heart.  4.  To  consider 
the  conditions  of  access  to  Ood.  (Ver.  29.)  He  is  a  moral  Being,  and  must  be 
approafched  in  a  moral  character  and  a  moral  mood.  To  suppose  that  he  can  b« 
flattered  with  empty  compliments  or  gifts,  as  if  he  were  a  barbarous  Monarch  and  not 
a  just  God,  is  essentially  superstitious.  He  is  the  Hearer  of  prayer,  but  only  of  the 
just  man's  prayer.  To  the  aspiration  of  the  pious  soul  never  fails  the  inspiration  of  the 
holy  God.  But  of  the  bad  heart  it  must  ever  be  true,  "  'i'he  words  fly  up,  the  thoughts 
remain  below."  Thus  to  view  all  life's  relations  in  God  is  both  "the  beginning  of 
wisdom"  and  "  the  conclusion  of  the  whole  matter." — J. 

Ver.  1. The  soft  answer.    This  text  has  been  on  the  lips  of  many  thousands  of 

people  since  it  was  first  penned,  and  has  probably  helped  many  thousands  of  hearts  to 
win  an  honourable  and  acceptable  victory. 

I.  The  fact  which  confronts  us;  viz.  that  in  this  life  which  we  are  living  wo 
must  expect  a  large  measure  of  misunderstanding.  "It  is  impossil.le  but  that  offences 
will  come."  With  all  our  various  and  complex  relntionsbips ;  with  all  that  we  are 
expectino-  and  requiring  of  one  another  in  thought,  word,  and  deed ;  with  the  limita- 
tions to  which  we  are  subject  both  in  mind  and  in  spirit;— how  could  it  be  otherwise? 
A  certain  considerable  measuie  of  mistake,  and  of  consequent  vexation,  and  of  conse- 
quent anger,  will  arise,  as  we  play  our  pa^t  in  this  world.  Occasions  will  arise  when 
our  neighbours,  when  our  friends,  wi.en  onr  near  relatives,  will  speak  to  us  with  dis- 
pleasure in  their  hearts,  and  with  annoyance,  if  not  anger,  in  their  tone.    This  we  must 

lay  our  account  with.  __  .i-i.ii-j.ij 

II   The  temptation  which  assails  us.     This  is  to  a  resentment  which  utters  itseH 
in  "grievous  words."    Anger  provokes  anger  and  makes  it  angrier  still ;  vexation  grows 
into  positive  bitterness,  and  bitterness  ends  in  miserable  strife.     Thus  the  "  little  fire 
will  "kindle  a  great  matter;"  thus  a  spaik  becomes  a  flame,  and  sometimes  a  flams 

PRfiVERBS. 


306  THE  PROVERBS,  [oh.  xv.  1— 3a 

becomes  a  fire  and  even  a  conflagration.  Many  a  feud  may  be  traced  back  to  the 
uUeiance  of  a  few  hasty  words,  which  might  have  been  met  and  quieted  by  a  pacific 
answer,  if  they  had  fallen  on  patient  and  wise  ears. 

III.  Thb  bearing  which  becomes  us.  To  return  "the  soft  answer."  It  does 
bL'Corae  us,  because :  1.  This  is  the  true  victory  over  our  own  spirit  (see  homily  on  ch, 
xvi.  32).  2.  It  is  also  the  worthiest  victory  over  the  man  who  provokes  us.  We 
"  turn  away  wrath ; "  and  how  much  nobler  a  thing  it  is  to  win  by  kindness  than  to 
crush  by  severity  1  3.  It  is  to  render  an  essential  service  to  many  beside  the  actual 
six)ke«man.  When  one  man  starts  a  quarrel,  a  great  many  suffer  on  both  sides.  And 
when  one  man  quenches  a  quarrel,  he  saves  many  from  misery  (and  perhaps  from  sin) 
into  which  tliey  would  otherwise  fall  (see  Jud<;.  viii.  1 — 3).  4.  It  is  to  act  in  accord- 
ance with  the  will  and  the  example  of  our  Lord. — 0. 

Ver.  3. —  Ood's  searching  glance.  The  text,  with  others  treating  of  the  same  subject, 
assures  us,  concerning  the  Divine  notice  of  us,  that — 

I.  It  is  absolutely  universal.  The  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  "  in  every  place."  There 
is  no  secret  place,  however  screened  from  the  sight  of  man,  which  is  not  "  naked  and 
open  unto  the  eyes  of  him  with  whom  we  have  to  do  "  (see  Ps.  cxxxix. ;  Jer.  xxiii.  24; 
Heb.  iv.  13). 

II.  It  is  constant.  Absolutely  unintermitted,  day  and  night ;  through  youth  and 
age ;  in  prosperity  and  in  adversity ;  under  all  imaginable  conditions. 

III.  It  is  thorough.  Penetrating  to  the  innermost  sanctuary  of  the  soul,  searching 
its  most  secret  places,  "  discerning  the  thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart ; "  discoverini; 
(1)  beneath  the  fair  exterior  that  which  is  foul  within;  (2)  beneath  the  rugged  surface 
the  inward  beauty  which  is  breaking  forth. 

IV.  It  is  to  be  feared  by  the  bebelliodb  and  the  disobedient.  1.  Those  who 
are  living  and  are  purposing  to  live  in  the  commission  of  some  flagrant  sin.  2.  Those 
who  are  deliberately  rejecting  the  authority  and  disregarding  the  merciful  overtures  of 
God  in  Jesus  Christ.  3.  And  also  those  who  are  continually  postponing  the  hour  of 
decision  and  of  return  to  their  allegiance.  These  souls  may  fear  to  think  that  the  eye 
of  the  Holy  One  is  continually  upon  them ;  or  they  may  be  ashamed  as  they  think 
that  the  eye  of  the  appealing  and  disappointed  Saviour  is  regarding  them. : 

V.  It  is  to  be  couktbd  by  thb  true  and  faithful.  1.  The  hearts  that  are 
turning  toward  a  Divite  Redeemer  may  be  encouraged  to  believe  that  his  glance  of 
kind  encouragement  is  upon  them  (see  Mark  x.  21).  2.  The  hearts  that  are  surrender- 
ing themselves  to  Christ  in  faith  and  love  may  fill  with  peace  and  rest  as  they  are 
assuicd  of  his  acceptance  (Matt.  xi.  28 — 30;  John  v.  24;  vi.  46,  47).  3.  The  hearts 
that,  in  his  holy  service,  are  honestly  and  earnestly  striving  to  follow  and  to  honour 
him  and  to  do  his  work  may  be  glad  with  a  pure,  well-founded  joy  as  they  count  on  his 
precious  regard,  his  loving  approval.  To  these  it  will  be  a  perpetual  delight  that  the 
"  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  in  every  place,"  beholding  every  human  heart  and  every  human 
life.— 0. 

Vers.  8,  9. —  With  whom  God  is  pleased.  With  whom  Is  God  well  pleased  ?  A  gre»t 
question,  that  has  had  many  answers.     The  statement  of  the  text  gives  us — 

I.  God's  attitude  toward  the  wicked.  1.  Their  whole  life  is  grievotis  to  him. 
"  The  way  of  the  wicked  is  an  abomination,"  etc.  And  this,  not  because  they  hold 
some  erroneous  opinions,  nor  because  they  make  many  serious  mistakes,  nor  because 
they  are  betrayed  into  occasional  transgressions ;  but  because  they  determinately  with- 
hold themselves  from  his  service ;  because  they  claim  and  exercise  the  right  to  dispose 
of  their  own  life  according  to  their  own  will ;  because  they  deliberately  disregard  the 
will  of  God.  They  are  thus  in  a  state  of  fixed  rebellion  against  his  rule,  of  settled 
disavowal  of  his  claims  upon  them,  of  consequent  neglect  of  his  holy  Law.  Therefore 
their  entire  course  or  "  way  "  is  one  of  disobedience  and  disloyalty  ;  it  must  be  painful, 
grievous,  even  "abominable"  in  the  sight  of  the  Holy  One.  2.  Their  worship  ii 
wholly  unacceptable  to  him.  If  we  "  regard  iniquity  in  our  heart,  the  Lord  will  not 
hear  us"  (Ps.  1.  16—22;  Ixvi.  18;  Isa.  i.  15).  God  "desireth  truth  in  the  inward 
parts ; "  he  cannot  and  will  not  accept  as  of  any  value  whatever  the  offering  that 
comes  from  a  heart  in  a  state  of  determined  disloyalty  to  himself  and  hatred  of  \a» 


HB.  XV.  1—33.]  THE  PROVERBS.  807 

law.  _  3.  Their  worship  is  positively  offensive.  It  is  "  an  abomination "  unto  him. 
And  it  is  so,  because :  (1)  It  is  an  act  of  conscious  rejection  of  his  claim ;  the  worshipper 
is  taking  his  Name  and  his  Law  upon  his  lips,  and  at  the  very  time  he  is  consciously 
keeping  back  from  God  what  he  knows  is  his  due.  (2)  It  is  an  act  of  positive  insult, 
inasmuch  as  it -supposes  that  God  will  be  indifferent  to  the  wrong  things  the  worshipper 
Is  doing,  that  he  will  take  a  few  words  or  offerings  instead  of  purity,  truthfulness, 
integrity,  submission. 

II.  God's  plbasueb  with  the  righteous.  1.  Who  they  are.  (1)  They  are  not 
the  absolutely  perfect  in  creed  or  conduct ;  for  these  are  not  to  be  discovered.  (2)  They 
are  those  who  recognize  in  God  the  One  whose  they  are  and  to  whom  they  desire  and 
intend  to  surrender  their  hearts  and  lives.  It  may  be,  it  must  be,  an  imperfect  sacrifice ; 
but  it  will  be  a  genuine  and  therefore  an  acceptable  one.  2.  With  what,  in  them,  Qod 
is  well  pleased.  (1)  With  the  whole  spirit  and  aita  of  their  life.  "  They  follow  after 
righteousness ; "  they  have  set  their  lieart  on  being  just — to  God  their  Creator ;  to  their 
neighbours,  and  especially  thuse  closely  related  to  them;  to  themselves.  And  then- 
.  daily  and  hourly  life  will  be  an  iionest  and  devout  endeavour  to  realize  their  aim  (see 
Phil.  i.  20;  iii.  12 — 15).  It  is  they  who  truly  desire  and  steadfastly  endeavour,  against 
whatever  obstacles  and  with  whatever  stumblings  and  baitings,  to  be  right  and  to  do 
right,  with  whom  God  is  pleased.  (2)  With  their  devotion.  The  prayer  of  these 
"upright"  souls  is  God's  "delight."  He  is  pleased  when  they  reverently  approach 
him,  when  they  humbly  conless  their  failures,  when  they  gratefully  bless  him  for  his 
patience,  when  they  earnestly  ask  him  for  strength  and  grace  for  coming  duties  and 
struggles. — C. 

Ver.  11. — The  certainty  of  OocCs  notice.    First  we  have— 

I.  The  DiFFicuiiTT  SUQQESTED.  It  is  uot  Unnatural  to  ask — Does  God  in  very  deed 
take  notice  of  such  beings  as  we  are?  does  he  condescend  to  watch  the  workings  of 
our  mind?  are  the  flitting  thoughts  that  cross  our  brain,  the  fugitive  feelings  that  pass 
through  our  weak  human  hearts,  within  the  range  of  his  observation  ?  Is  that  worth 
his  while  ?    Are  they  not  beyond  the  pale  of  his  Divine  regard  ? 

II.  The  aequment  from  secrecy.  If  "  Sheol "  is  before  the  Lord,  if  that  region  of 
darkness  where  "  the  light  (itself)  is  as  darkness,"  if  the  place  of  mystery  and  shadow 
is  within  his  Divine  regard,  how  much  more  are  those  who  are  living  in  the  light  of 
day,  on  whom  the  sunshine  falls,  who  live  their  life  openly  beneath  the  heavens!  The 
writer  evidently  felt  that  there  was  nothing  so  particularly  hidden  or  secret  about  the 
mind  of  man.  And  we  may  well  argue  that  there  is  nothing  inscrutably  hidden  within 
our  hearts;  for  do  we  not  read,  continually  and  correctly,  the  minds  of  our  children  ? 
We  know  what  they  think  and  feel.  And  if  their  minds  are  open  to  us,  how  much 
more  must  our  minds — the  minds  of  the  children  of  men — he  "  naked  and  open "  to 
our  heavenly  Father!  If  our  superior  intelligence  supplies  us  with  the  key  to  their 
secrets,  what  docs  not  Omniscience  know  of  us,  even  of  those  thoughts  and  motives  we 
are  most  anxious  to  conceal  ? 

III.  The  aegumbnt  from  unattractivenbss.  "Abaddon  [destruction]  is  before 
the  Lord."  That  which  has  no  manner  of  interest  in  itself,  that  from  which  Benevo- 
lence would  willingly  turn  its  eyes,  that  which  is  repelling  to  the  sight  of  love  and 
life, — that  even  is  before  God ;  he  never  ceases  to  regard  a  scene  so  utterly  uninviting. 
How  much  more,  then,  will  he  regard  the  hearts  of  his  own  offspring  I  There  is  nothing 
beneath  the  skies  so  interesting  te  him.  What  has  the  most  charm  to  us  in  our  home  ? 
Surely  not  any  furniture  or  any  treasurrs,  however  rare,  or  costly,  or  beautiful  these 
may  be.  It  is  our  children ;  it  is  their  hearts  of  love  for  which  we  care.  It  is  to  them 
that  we  come  home  in  joyful  expectation.  It  is  on  them  our  eye  rests  with  beiiignity 
and  delight.  So  with  our  Divine  Father.  He  does  look  on  all  the  furniture  of  this 
wonderful  home  in  which  we  dwell  (Ps.  civ.  31) ;  he  ever  has  before  him  the  sphere 
and  scene  of  destruction ;  but  that  which  draws  his  eye  of  tender  interest  and  kindly 
pity  and  holy  love  is  the  heart  of  his  sons  and  daughters.  We  are  poor  and  needy, 
but  we  are  all  his  offspring,  and  "  the  Lord  thinheth  upon  us."  1.  With  what  parental 
grief  does  he  look  upon  (1)  our  separation  from  himself  in  sympathy ;  (2)  our  unlike- 
aess  to  himself  in  spirit  and  in  character;  (3)  our  disobedience  to  his  will  I  2.  With 
what  parental  satisfaction  does  he  view  (1)  our  return  to  his  side  and  his  service;  (2) 


308  THE  PKOVERBS.  fCH.  xr.  t— 33, 

our  increasing  likeness  to  our  Leader  and  Exemplar ;  (3)  our  filial  obedience  and  sub- 
missiiiU  to  his  will! — 0. 

Vers.  13, 15 — 17. — The  source  of  satisfaction.    We  leam — 

I.  That  there  sometimes  rests  a  long  and  deep  shadow  on  the  path  ot  human 
LIFE.  1.  Sometimes  a  long  one.  "All  the  days  of  the  afflicted  are  evil."  They  are 
not  a  few  who  have  to  make  np  their  minds  for  many  months  or  years  of  separation 
or  pain,  or  even  for  a  lifelong  trouble.  They  know  that  they  will  carry  their  burden  to 
the  grave.  2.  Sometimes  a  deep  one.  "  By  sorrow  of  heart  the  spirit  is  broken."  The 
burden  is  greater  than  the  spirit  can  bear,  it  breaks  beneath  it ;  the  heart  is  simply 
overwhelmel ;  all  hope  has  diad  out,  all  gladness  is  gone  from  the  life,  all  light  from 
the  countenance,  all  elasticity  from  the  step ;  the  heart  is  fairly  broken. 

II.  That  favourable  circumstances  cannot  command  satisfaction  to  the 
SPIRIT.  1.  Wealth  will  not  do  it.  Great  treasure  often  means  great  trouble  (ver.  16) ; 
shares  and  stocks  often  bring  as  much  burden  as  blessing  with  them  ;  he  who  piles 
gold  on  his  counter  may  be  heaping  anxiety  upon  his  heart.  2.  Sumptuous  fare  will 
fail  (ver.  17).  All  the  delicacies  that,  can  be  spread  upon  the  table  will  not  give  enjoy- 
ment to  him  that  has  a  restless  spirit,  or  a  secret  that  he  knows  he  cannot  hide,  or  a 
debt  he  knows  he  cannot  meet,  or  a  bounden  duty  he  knows  he  has  neglected. 

III.  That  happiness  must  be  heart-dkbp,  or  it  is  nothing.  (Ver.  13.)  If  it  is 
not  the  merry  heart  that  produces  the  cheerful  countenance,  the  smile  can  very  well 
be  spared,  both  by  him  who  smiles  and  by  those  who  are  in  his  presence.  Few  things 
are  sadder  to  hear  tlia  i  hollow  laughter,  or  to  see  than  a  forced  and  weary  smile. 

IV.  That  a  cHKiiiiFOL  spirit  is  a  valuable  bestowmbnt.  (Ver.  15.)  Better 
tlian  the  large  e&tate  ur  the  high  position,  or  the  induential  circle,  is  the  buoyant  spirit 
which 

"  Ever  with  a  frolic  welcome  take* 
The  thunder  and  the  sunshine." 

V.  That  a  loving  spirit  is  a  still  greater  gift  of  God.  "Where  love  is," 
there  is  peace  and  there  is  joy,  liowever  mean  the  home  or  slight  the  fare.  He  who 
carries  with  him  to  every  table  ami  every  hearth  a  loving  spirit  is  a  friend  of  God's  own 
sending ;  he  is  "  the  welcome  guest ;  "  he  has  a  treasure  in  his  breast  which  no  coffers 
will  supply. 

VI.  That  pibtt  is  the  all-comprnsating  good.  1.  It  makes  the  poor  man  rich 
— "  rich  in  faith,"  "rich  toward  God,"  rich  with  a  wealth  which  "  no  thief  can  steal." 
2.  It  brings  comfort  to  the  sorrowful,  and  introduces  that  Divine  Physician  who  can 
bind  up  the  broken  heart,  and  li  nl  its  wounds.  3.  It  speaks  of  a  heavenly  portion 
to  those  who  have  no  hope  of  deliverance  here  ;  there  may  be  "  afiiiciion  all  the  days" 
of  life  (ver.  15),  but  "  the  righteous  hath  hope  in  his  lieath  "  (ch.  xiv.  32).  Blessed, 
then,  is  he  in  whose  heai  t  is  "  the  lear  of  the  Lord." — C. 

Ver.  29. — Oo(Ps  distance  from  us  and  nearness  to  u».  "The  Lord  is  far  from  the 
wicked ; "  and  yet  huw  xm  ar  to  us !  ''  He  is  not  far  from  any  one  of  us ;  "  "  He  compasses 
us  behind  and  before,  anri  layeth  his  hand  upon  us."     We  may,  indeed,  insist  upon — 

I.  God's  local  and  effective  nearness  to  the  wicked  an  aggravation  of 
their  guilt.  'J'he  fact  that  "  iu  him  thev  do  live,  and  move,  and  have  their  being," 
that  by  his  opeiative  presence  they  are  momemly  sustained  in  being,  that  bv  the 
working  of  his  liand  around  and  upon  them  they  are  supplied  with  all  their  comfort, 
and  filled  with  all  their  joys, — this  great  fact  makes  more  heinous  the  guilt  of  for  .ettul- 
ness  of  God,  of  indifference  to  his  will,  of  rebellion  against  his  ride.  But  the  truth  oi. 
the  text  is — ■ 

If.  God's  distakok  in  sympathy  and  in  spirit  from  the  wicked.  God  is  far 
from  the  wicked  in  that :  1.  He  is  utterly  nut  of  sympnthy  with  them  in  all  their 
thought  and  feeling,  in  their  tastes  and  indi  ations,  in  their  likings  and  dislikincrg. 
He  hates  wliat  thev  love;  he  is  infiniiely  repelhd  from  that  wiiich  they  are  drawn  to. 
2.  He  reganls  them  with  a  .serious  Dioine  displeasure.  He  is  "  angry  with  the  wicked 
every  day."  His  "  soul  finds  no  iilea.sure  in  them."  He  is  grieved  with  them;- in  hit 
holy  and  loving  heart  there  ia  the  pain  of  strong  parental  disapproval.     3.  He  is  proc- 


aa.  XVI.  1—83.] 


THE  PKOVBBBS. 


809 


iically  inaccessible  to  them.  It  is  only  he  "  that  has  clean  hands  and  a  pure  heart" 
who  is  free  to  draw  nigh  unto  God.  "  The  saorifioe  of  the  wicked  is  an  abomination  " 
unto  him  (see  homily  on  ver.  8).  God  cannot  hear  us  if  we  "regard  iniquity  in  our 
hearts;"  we  virtually  withdraw  ourselves  from  him,  we  place  a  terrible  spiritual 
distance  between  our  Creator  and  ourselves,  when  we  take  up  an  attitude  of  disloyalty 
toward  him,  or  when  we  abandon  ourselves  to  any  evil  course.  Yet  let  it  be  alwa,v  a 
kept  in  mind,  that:  4.  To  the  penitent  and  believing  he  is  always  near;  in  whatevei 
far  country  the  wayward  son  is  living,  he  may  address  himself  immediately  to  his 
heavenly  Father. 

III.  God's  sympathetic  nbakness  to  his  childben.  "He  heareth  the  prayer  of  the 
righteous."  Those  who  are  earnestly  desirous  of  serving  God,  of  following  Jesus  Christ, 
maybe  assured  :  1.  Of  his  actual  and  observant  nearness  to  them  when  they  approach 
him  in  prayer.  2.  Of  his  tender  and  loving  interest  in  them  (Mark  x.  21).  3.  Ol  his 
acceptance  of  themselves  when  they  offer  their  hearts  and  lives  to  him  and  his  service. 
4.  Of  his  purpose  to  answer  their  various  requests  in  such  ways  and  times  as  he  knows 
to  be  best  for  them. — 0. 


EXPOSITION, 


CHAPTEE  XVI. 


Vers.  1 — 7. — These  are  specially  religiouB 
maxims,  and  they  all  contain  the  name 
Jehovah. 

Ver.  1. — The  Authorized  Version  makes 
one  sentence  of  tliis  verse  without  any  contrast 
or  antithesis.  Ttiis  is  plainly  wrong,  there 
being  intended  a  contrast  between  the 
thought  of  the  heart  and  the  well-ordered 
speeih.  It  is  better  translated.  Hie  plans 
of  the  heart  are  man's:  but  the  answer  of  the 
tongue  is  from  Jehovah.  Men  make  plans, 
arrange  speeches,  muster  arguments,  in  the 
mind;  but  to  put  these  into  proper,  per- 
suasive words  is  a  gift  of  God.  "Our 
BufBoiency  is  of  God  "  (2  Cor.  iii.  5).  In  the 
case  of  Balaam,  God  overruled  tlie  wishes 
and  in  ten  tions  of  the  proph  et,andconstramed 
him  to  give  utterance  to  something  very 
different  from  his  original  mental  concep- 
tions. But  the  present  sentence  attributes 
the  outward  expression  of  what  the  mind  has 
conceived  in  everv  case  unto  the  help  of 
God  (comp.  vers.  9,  33  ;  ch.  xv.  23).  Christ 
enjoined  his  disciples  to  trust  to  momentary 
inspiration  in  their  apologies  or  defences 
before  unbelievers  (Matt.  x.  19).  This 
verse  is  omitted  in  the  Septuagint. 

Ver.  2. — All  the  ways  of  a  man  are  clean 
in  his  own  eyes  (ch.  xxi.  2).  He  may 
deceive  himself,  and  be  blind  to  his  own 
faults,  or  be  following  an  ill-informed  and 
ill-regulated  conscience  (ch.  xii.  15;  liv. 
12),  yet  this  is  no  excuse  in  God's  eyes. 
The  Lord  weigheth  the  spirits.  Xot  the 
"  ways,"  the  outward  life  and  actions  only, 
but  motives,  intentions,  dispositions  (Heb. 
Iv.  12).  He  too  knows  our  secret  faults, 
unsuspected  by  others,  and  perhaps  by  our- 
selves (Ps.  xix.  12).  The  Septuagint  has 
here,  "All  the  works  of  the  liumble  ate 


manifest  before  God,  but  the  impious  shall 
perish  in  an  evil  day."  The  next  verse  is 
omitted  in  the  Greek ;  and  the  other  clauses 
up  to  ver.  8  are  dislocated. 

Ver.  3. — Commit  thy  works  unto  the  lord. 
"Commit"  (goZ) is  literally  "roll"  (KiKurov, 
Theodotion),  as  in  Fs.  xxii.  8  find  xxxvii.  5; 
and  the  injunction  means,  "  Transfer  thy 
burden  to  the  Lnrd,  cast  upon  him  all  tiat 
thou  hast  to  do;  do  all  as  in  his  sight,  and  ai 
an  act  of  duty  to  him."  Thus  Tobit  says  to 
his  son,  "Bless  the  Lord  thy  God  alway, 
and  desire  of  him  that  thy  ways  may  be 
directed,  and  that  all  thy  paths  and  counsels 
may  prosper  "  (Tobit  iv.  19).  The  Vulgate, 
using  a  different  punctuation  (gal),  rendera, 
"  Keveal  to  the  Lord  thy  works."  As  a  child 
ojiens  its  hairt  to  a  tender  parent,  so  do 
thou  show  to  God  thy  desires  and  intentions, 
trusting  to  his  care  and  providence.  And 
thy  thoughts  shall  be  established.  The 
plans  and  deliberations  out  of  which  the 
"  works "  spiang  shall  meet  with  a  happy 
fulfilment,  because  they  are  undertaken 
according  to  the  will  of  God,  and  directed 
to  the  end  by  his  guidance  (comp.  ch.  xix. 
21 ;  Ps.  xc.  17;  1  Cor.  iii.  9).  This  verse  is 
not  in  the  Septuagint. 

Ver.  4. — The  Lord  hath  made  all  things 
for  himself.  So  the  Vulgate,  propter  semet- 
ipsum;  and  Origen  ('Pisef.  in  Job'),  i' 
iavrSv.  That  is,  God  hath  made  everything 
for  his  own  purpose,  to  answer  the  design 
which  he  hath  intended  from  all  eternity 
(Hev.  iv.  11).  But  this  transhition  is  not 
in  accordance  with  the  present  reading, 
inpya^,  which  means  rather  "for'  its  own 
end,"  for  its  own  proper  use.  Everything 
in  God's  design  has  its  own  end  and  object 
and  reason  for  being  where  it  is  and  such  as 
it  is  ;  everything  exhibits  his  goodness  and 
wisdom,  and  tends  to  his  glory.    Septuagint, 


810 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[oh.  xw  1—33. 


"All  the  worki  of  the  Lord  «re  with 
righteousnesB."  Yea,  eyen  the  wioked  for 
the  day  of  evil.  This  clause  has  been  per- 
verted to  snpport  the  terrible  doctrine  of 
reprobation — that  God,  whose  will  must  be 
always  efficacious,  has  willed  the  dami;ation 
of  some ;  whereas  we  are  taught  that  C-od'B 
will  is  that  "  all  men  sliould  be  saved,  and 
come  unto  the  inowledge  of  the  truth," 
and  that  "  Ood  sent  his  Son  not  to  condemn 
the  world,  but  that  the  world  through  him 
might  be  saved  "  (1  Tim.  ii.  4 ;  John  iil.  17 ; 
comp.  Ezek.  xxxiii.  U).  Man,  having  free- 
will, can  reject  this  gracious  purpose  of  God, 
and  render  the  means  of  salvation  nugatory ; 
but  this  does  not  miike  God  the  cause  of 
man's  destruction,  but  man  himself.  In 
saying  that  Gnd  "mado  the  wioked,"  the 
writer  does  not  mean  tliat  God  made  him  as 
such,  but  made  him  as  he  made  all  other 
fliiugi,  giving  him  powers  and  capacities 
which  he  might  have  used  to  good,  but 
which,  as  a  fact,  he  uses  to  evil.  It  will  be 
useful  here  to  quote  the  wise  words  of  St. 
Gregory  ('  Moral.,'  vi.  33),  "  The  Juit  and 
Merciful  One,  as  he  disposes  the  deeds  of 
mortals,  vouchsafes  some  things  in  mercy, 
and  permits  other  things  in  anger ;  and  the 
things  which  he  permits  he  so  bears  with 
that  he  turns  them  to  the  account  of  his 
purpose.  And  hence  it  is  brought  to  pass 
in  a  marvellous  way  that  even  that  which 
is  done  without  the  will  of  God  is  not 
contrary  to  the  will  of  God.  For  while 
evil  deeds  are  converted  to  a  good  use,  the 
very  things  that  oppose  his  design  render 
service  to  his  design."  The  day  of  evil  is 
the  hour  of  punishment  (Isa.  x.  3 ;  Job  xxi. 
30),  which  by  a  moral  law  will  inevitably 
fall  upon  the  sinner.  God  makes  man's 
wickedness  subserve  hia  purposes  and  mani- 
fest his  glory,  as  we  see  in  the  case  of 
Pharaoh  (Exod.  ix.  16),  and  the  crucifixion 
of  our  blessed  Lord  (Acts  ii.  23 ;  comp.  Eom. 
IX.  22).  It  is  a  phase  of  God's  moral  govern- 
ment that  an  evil  day  should  be  appointed 
for  transgiesBors,  and  it  is  from  foreknow- 
ledge of  their  deserts  that  their  punishment 
is  prepared.  The  perplexing  question,  why 
God  allows  men  to  come  into  the  world 
whom  he  knows  will  meet  with  perdition, 
is  not  handled  here.  Septiiagint,  "  But  the 
impious  is  kept  for  an  evil  day."  Cato, 
'  Dist.,'  ii.  8— 

" Nolo  putes  pravos homines peccata lucraii ; 
Temporibus  peccata  latent,  sed  tempore 
patent." 

Ver.  5. — (For  the  first  member,  see  oh. 
vL  17;  viii.  13.)    Says  the  maxim — 

'AAofovcfos  oi!  Tij  ixffiyet  SIktiv. 

"Pride  hath  its  certain  punishment." 

We  read  in  the  Talmud,  "  Of  every  proud 


man  God  says,  He  and  I  cannot  live  in  tha 
world  together."  A  medieeval  jingle  ruoi — 

"Hoc  retine  verbum,  fcangit  Deua  omne 
superbura." 

Septuagint,  "  Impure  in  the  sight  of  God  is 
every  high-hearted  man  {u\f/r)\oKdpSios)." 
The  second  member  is  found  in  ch.  xi.  21, 
and  must  be  taken  as  a  form  of  adjuration. 
Septuagint,  "Putting  hands  on  hand  un- 
justly, he  shall  not  be  innocent ; "  i.e.  one 
who  acts  violently  and  unjustly  shall  be 
held  guilty— which  seems  a  trite  truism. 
Many  commentators  interpret  the  clause  as 
if  it  meant  that  the  co-opeiation  and  combi- 
nation of  sinners  in  evil  practices  will  not 
save  them  from  retribution.  But  hand 
clasping  hand  in  token  of  completing  a 
bargain  or  alliance  is  scarcely  an  early 
Oriental  custom.  There  is  an  analogous 
saying  in  Greek  which  implies  mutual 
assistance — 

Xe!p  X^V"  viimi,  SaitTv\is  re  HktvKov. 

"  Hand  washes  hand,  and  finger  finger." 
The  LXX.  has  here  two  distiches,  the  first 
of  which  occurs  in  the  Vulgate,  but  the 
second  is  not  found  there.  Neither  appears 
in  our  present  Hebrew  text.  "  The  beginning 
of  the  good  way  is  to  do  what  is  just ;  this 
is  more  acceptable  to  God  than  to  sacrifice 
sacrifices.  He  who  seeketh  the  Lord  shall 
find  knowledge  with  righteousness;  and 
they  who  seek  him  rightly  shall  find 
peace." 

Ver.  6.— By  mercy  and  truth  iniquity  ii 
purged;  atoned  for.  The  combination  "mercy 
and  truth"  occurs  in  ch.  iii.  3  (where  sea 
note),  and  intimates  love  to  God  and  mau, 
and  faithfulness  in  keeping  promises  and 
truth  and  justice  in  all  dealings.  It  is  by 
the  exercise  of  those  graces,  not  by  mere 
external  rites,  that  God  is  propitiated  (see 
on  oh.  i  2).  A  kind  of  expiatory  value  is 
assigned  to  these  virtues,  which,  indeed, 
must  not  be  pressed  too  closely,  but  should 
be  examined  by  the  light  of  such  passvi?ea 
in  the  New  Testament  as  Luke  xi.  41 ;  Acta 
X.  4.  Of  course,  such  graces  show  them- 
selves only  in  one  who  is  really  devout  and 
God-fearing  J  they  are  the  fruits  of  a  hciiifc 
at  peace  with  God  and  man,  and  react  on 
the  character  and  conduct.  The  LXX., 
which  places  this  distich  after  ver.  27  of 
ch.  XV.,  translates,  "By  alms  and  faith- 
fulness (irlma-iv)  sins  are  cleaused,'*  con- 
fining the  term  "mercy"  to  one  special 
form,  as  it.  one  reading  of  Matt.  vi.  1, 
"  Take  heed  that  ye  do  not  your  right- 
eousness [al.  alms]  before  men."  By  th« 
fear  of  the  lord  men  depart  from  evil. 
The  practice  of  true  religion,  of  course, 
Involves  abstinence  from  sin  j  and  this  seems 
BO  unnecessary  a  truth  to  be  formally  stated 


OH.  XVI.  1—33.] 


THE  PROVERBa 


311 


that  some  take  the  "evil"  named  to  be 
physical,  not  moral  evil;  calamity,  not 
transgreSBion,  But  the  two  clauses  are  co- 
ordinate, and  present  two  aspects  of  the 
same  truth.  The  first  intimates  how  sin  is 
to  be  expiated,  the  second  how  it  is  to  be 
avoided.  The  morally  good  man  meets  with 
pardon  and  acceptance,  and  he  who  fears 
God  is  delivered  from  evil.  So  we  pruy,  in 
the  Lord's  Prayer,  "  Forgive  us  our  tres- 
passes, and  deliver  us  from  evil."  Septua- 
gint,  "By  the  fear  of  the  Lord  every  one 
declineth  from  evil "  (comp.  oh.  xiv.  27). 

Ver.  7. — When  a  man's  ways  please  the 
lord,  which  they  can  do  only  when  they 
are  religious,  just,  and  chnritable.  He 
maketh  even  his  enemies  to  be  at  peace 
with  him;  to  submit  themselves.  Experience 
proves  that  nothing  succeeds  like  success. 
Where  a  man  is  prosperous  and  things  go 
well  with  him,  even  ill-wishers  are  content 
to  cast  away  or  to  dissemble  their  dislike, 
and  to  live  at  peace  with  him.  Thus 
Abimelech  King  of  Gerar  fawned  upon 
Isaac  because  he  saw  tliat  the  Lord  was 
with  him  (Gen.  xxvi.  27,  etc.).  This  is 
the  worldly  side  of  the  maxim.  It  lias  a 
higher  asjiect,  and  intimates  the  far-reach- 
ing influence  of  goodness — how  it  disarms 
opposition,  arouses  reverence  and  love,  gives 
no  occasion  for  disputes,  and  spreads  around 
an  atmosphere  of  peace.  To  the  Jews  the 
maxim  was  taught  by  external  circumstances. 
While  they  were  doing  the  will  of  the  Lord, 
their  land  was  to  be  preserved  Trom  hostile 
attack  (Exod.  xxxiv.  24 ;  2  Chron.  xvii.  10). 
And  Christians  leara  that  it  is  only  when 
they  obey  and  fear  God  that  they  can  over- 
come the  assaults  of  the  enemies  of  their 
soul — the  devil,  the  world,  and  the  flesh 
Talmud,  "He  who  is  agreeable  to  God  is 
equally  agreeable  to  men." 

Ver.  8. — Better  is  a  little  with  righteous- 
ness (ch.  XV.  16;  Ps.  xxxvii.  16).  "Eigliteous- 
ness "  may  mean  here  a  holy  life  or  just 
dealing ;  as  without  right,  or,  with  injustice, 
in  the  second  clause,  may  refer  either 
generally  to  wickedness,  or  specially  to 
fraud  and  oppression  (Jer.  xxii.  13).  Says 
Theognia — 
BoiiAco  8'e6irf;8ea)y  o\lyots  <rhy  xp^A"""'"'  olKe7y, 

*H  irAovTcTv  &S(Ka)S  xp^/""""  iraa'diievos. 
"  Wish  thou  with  scanty  means  pious  to  live, 

Bather  than  rich  with  large,  ill-gotten 
wealth." 
Another  maxim  says  to  the  same  effect — 
AcTrraJs  Ka\a)s  Cv"  "peia'irov,  %  Ka/iirpws  Kaicus. 

Septuag^int,  "  Better  is  small  getting  (Aiji/^is) 
with  righteousness,  than  great  revenues  with 
iniquity  "  (see  on  ch.  xv.  29). 

Ver.  9. — A  man's  heart  deviseth  his  way : 
bnt  the  Lord  direoteth  his  steps  (ver.  I). 


"Man  proposes,  God  disposes;"  or,  as  the 
Germans  say,  "Der  Mensch  denkt,  Gott 
lenkt "  (comp. ch.  xi.  24).  The  word  rendered 
"  deviseth  "  implies,  by  its  species,  intensity 
of  thought  and  care.  Man  meditates  and 
prepares  his  plans  with  the  utmost  solicitude, 
but  it  rests  with  God  whether  he  shall  carry 
them  to  completion  or  not,  and  whether,  if 
they  are  to  he  accomplished,  it  be  done 
with  ease  or  with  painful  labour  (comp. 
Gen.  xxiv.  12,  etc.).  We  all  remember 
Shakespeare's  words  in  '  Hamlet ' — 

"  There's  a  divinity  that  shapes  our  ends, 
Eough-hew  them  how  we  will." 

Septuagint,  "  Let  the  heart  of  man  consider 
what  is  just,  that  his  steps  may  be  by  God 
directed  aright "  (comp.  Jer.  x.  23). 

Ver.  10. — A  Divine  sentence  is  In  the 
lips  of  the  king  .  DCg  (gueaem)  is  "  divina- 
tion," "sootlisajing,"  oracular  utterance. 
Septuagint,  iiavretov.  The  king's  woids 
have,  in  people's  minds,  the  certainty  and 
importance  of  a  Divine  oracle,  putting  an 
end  to  all  controversy  or  division  of  opinion. 
It  seems  to  be  a  general  maxim,  not 
especially  referring  to  Solomon  or  the 
theocratic  kingdom,  but  ratlier  indicating 
thetraditionalvirwoftheabsolute  monarchy. 
The  custom  of  deifying  kings  and  invoking 
them  as  gods  was  usual  in  Egypt  and 
Eastern  couulries,  and  made  ils  way  to  the 
West.  "  It  is  the  voice  of  a  god,  and  not 
of  a  man,"  cried  the  people,  When  Herod 
addressed  them  in  the  amphitheatre  at 
Csesarea  (Acts  xii.  22).  The  Greeks  could 
say — 

EiK^r  5^  PairtXeis  itxriv  ifx^uxos  ©eoiJ. 
"  God's  very  living  image  is  the  king." 

And  thus  his  utterances  were  regarded  as 
irrefragably  true  and  decisive.  His  mouth 
transgresseth  not  in  judgment.  The  decisions 
which  he  gives  are  infuUible,  and,  at  any 
rate,  irresistible.  We  may  refer  to  Solomon's 
famous  verdict  concerning  the  two  mothers 
(1  Kings  iii.  16,  etc.),  and  such  sentences  as 
ch.  viii.  15,  "  By  me  (wisdom^  kings  reign, 
and  princes  decree  justice"  (see  below  on 
ver.  12;  ch.  xxi.  1);  and  David's  words 
(2  Sam.  xxiii.  3),  "He  that  ruleth  over  men 
must  be  just,  ruling  in  the  fear  of  God"  (Wisd. 
ix.  4,  10,  12).  Delitzsch  rej^arJs  the  second 
hemistich  as  giving  a  warning  (consequent 
on  the  former  clause),  and  not  stating  a 
fact,  "In  the  judgment  his  mouth  should 
not  err."  The  present  chapter  contains 
many  admonitions  to  kings  which  a  wise 
father  like  Solomon  may  have  uttered  and 
recorded  for  the  benefit  of  his  son.  If  this  is 
the  case,  it  is  as  strange  as  it  is  true  that 
Rehoboam  made  little  use  of  the  counsels, 
and  that  Solomon's  latter  days  gave  the  lii. 
to  many  of  them. 


312 


THE   PROVERBS. 


[oh.  XVI.  1—38 


Ver.  11.— A  just  weight  and  balance  are 
th«  Lord's  (eh.  xi.  1);  literally,  the  halmiee 
and  tcales  of  Justine  (are)  the  Lord's.  They 
come  under  his  U.v,  are  subject  to  the 
Divine  ordinancos  which'  regulate  all  man's 
dealings.  The  great  principles  of  truth 
and  justice  govern  all  the  transactions  of 
buying  an  1  selling;  religion  enters  into 
the  business  of  trading,  and  weights  and 
measures  are  sacred  things.  Vulgate,  "  The 
weights  and  the  balance  are  juilgments  of 
the  Lord;"  being  truo  and  fair,  they  are 
regarded  as  God's  judgment.  Septuagint, 
"The  turn  of  the  balance  is  justice  before 
God."  All  the  weights  of  the  bag  are  his 
work.  Some  have  lound  a  difficulty  hero, 
because  the  bag  may  contain  false  as  well 
as  true  weights  (Duut.  xxv.  13),  and  it 
could  not  be  saiil  that  the  light  weights 
were  the  Lord's  work.  This  surely  is 
captious  criticism.  The  maxim  Hjerely 
states  that  the  trader's  weights  take  their 
origin  and  autl.ority  from  God's  enactment, 
from  certain  eternal  principles  which  he 
has  establisi.ed.  What  man's  chicanery  and 
fraud  make  of  them  does  not  cnme  into 
view,  (For  the  law  that  regulates  such 
matters,  see  Lev.  xix.  35,  etc.)  That  cheat- 
ing in  this  respect  was  not  uncommon  we 
learn  from  the  complaints  of  the  prophets, 
as  Mioah  vi.  11.  The  religious  character  of 
the  standard  weights  and  measures  is  shown 
by  the  term  "shekel  of  the  sanctuary"  (Exod. 
xxxviii.  24,  and  elsewhere  continually), 

Ver.  12. — It  is  an  abomination  to  kings 
to  commit  wickedness.  This  and  the  follow- 
ing verse  give  the  ideal  view  of  the  monarch 
— that  which  he  ought  to  be  rather  than 
what  he  is  (oomp.  Ps.  Ixxii.).  Certainly 
neither  Solomon  mir  many  of  his  successors 
exhibited  this  high  chiiraiter.  Tlie  Septua- 
gint, followed  by  euino  modern  commentators, 
translates,  "  Ho  who  doeth  wickedness  is  an 
abomination  to  kings;  "but  as  the  "righteous- 
ness" in  the  second  clause  (the  throne  is 
established  by  righteousness)  undoubtedly 
refers  to  the  king,  so  it  is  more  natural  to 
take  the  "  wickedness  "  in  the  first  member 
as  being  his  "Own,  not  his  subjects'.  When 
a  rider  acts  justly  and  wisely,  punishes  the 
unruly,  rewards  the  virtuous,  acts  as  God's 
vicegerent,  and  himself  sets  the  example 
of  the  chiiracter  which  becomes  so  higii  a 
position,  ho  wins  th«  affection  of  his  jieoplo, 
they  willingly  obey  him,  and  are  ready  to 
die  for  him  and  his  family  (oomp.  ch.  xxv. 
5 ;  lea.  xvi.  5).  Law-makers  should  not  be 
law-breakers.     Seneca,  'Thyest.,'  215 — 

"  Ubi  non  est  pudor, 
Nee  cura  juris,  eanctitas,  pietas,  fides, 
Instabile  rcgnum  est." 

Ver.  13. — Highteous  \\\»  an.-  the  delight 
9f  kings.     The  ideal  king  lakes  pleasure  in 


tho  truth  and  justice  which  his  subj  ctj 
display  in  their  conversation.  Such  s 
one  hates  flattery  and  dis^'mulation,  and 
encourages  honest  speaking.  They  (kingi?) 
love  him  that  speaketh  right;  thai  whiah 
is  just  (ch.  viii.  6).  The  two  dausea  are 
co-ordinate.  Septuagint, "  He  lovetli  upright 
words"  (oomp.  oh.  xxii,  11). 

Ver.  14. — The  wrath  of  a  king  is  as 
measengers  of  death.  In  a  duspotic  monarchy 
the  death  of  an  offender  follows  quickly  on 
the  offence.  Anger  the  king,  and  punish- 
ment is  at  hand ;  instruments  are  always 
ready  who  will  carry  out  the  sentence,  and 
that  before  time  is  given  for  reconsileration, 
Tho  murder  of  Thomas  ik  Becket  will  oconr 
as  an  illustration  (comp.  Esth.  vii.  8,  eta). 
The  LXX.  translates,  "  The  king's  wrath  is 
a  messenger  of  death,"  taking  the  plural 
as  put  by  enallage  for  the  singular;  but 
possibly  the  plural  may  intimate  the  many 
agents  who  are  prepared  to  perform  the 
ruler's  behests,  and  the  various  means  which 
he  posseaaes  for  punisliing  ofienders.  Thia 
first  clause  implies,  without  expressly  saying, 
that,  such  being  the  caae,  none  but  a  fool 
will  excite  the  monarch's  resentment  (oomp. 
Eccles.  viii.  4);  then  the  second  clause 
comes  in  naturally.  But  a  wise  man  vill 
pacify  it.  He  will  take  care  not  to  provoke 
that  anger-  which  gluts  its  reaentment  so 
quickly  and  ao  fatally  (ch.  xix.  12 ;  xx.  2). 
Septuagint,  "  A  wise  man  will  appease  hira," 
the  king ;  as  Jacob  propitiated  Eaau  by  the 
present  which  he  sent  forward  (Gen.  x^xiL 
20,  21). 

Ver.  15. — In  tbe  light  of  the  king's  counte- 
nance la  life  (oh.  xv,  30;  Fa.  iv.  6).  As 
the  king's  anger  and  the  darkening  of  hia 
countenance  are  death  (ver.  14),  ao,  when 
his  look  is  cheerful  and  bright,  it  aheda  joy 
and  life  around,  as  the  rain  refreahea  the 
parched  ground.  A  cloud  of  the  latter  rain. 
The  former  rain  in  Palestine  falls  about  the 
end  of  October  or  the  beginning  of  November, 
when  the  seed  is  sown;  the  latter  rain 
comes  in  March  or  April,  and  ia  absolutely 
necessary  for  the  due  swelling  and  ripening 
of  the  grain.  It  ia  accompanied,  of  course, 
with  cloud,  which  tempers  the  heat,  while  it 
brings  fertility  and  vigour.  To  this  the 
kaig's  favour  is  well  compared.  "He  shall 
come  down,"  says  the  paalmist,  "like  the 
ruin  upon  the  mown  grasa,  aa  showera  that 
water  iho  earth  "  (Pa.  Ixxii.  6).  The  LXX., 
reading  -ja  (beni)  for  '3S  (pent),  tranalates, 
"In  the-light  of  life  ia  the  son  of  the  king; 
and  they  who  are  acceptable  to'  him  are  aj 
a  cloud  of  the  latter  rain." 

Ver.  lU.— To  get  wisdom  than  gold  (oomp. 
ch.  iii.  14;  viii.  10, 11, 19);  and  to  get  nnder- 
atanding  rather  to  be  chosen  than  silver; 
Revised  Version  better,  yea,  to  jet  «n<Ier««an<J- 
iiicj  is  rather  to  he  chosen  than  [to  get]  silver 


ca.  XVI.  1—33.] 


THE  PBOVEEBS. 


313 


If  the  clauaos  are  not  simply  parallel,  and 
the  compaiatiTe  yalue  of  silver  and  gold  is 
to  be  oousidered,  we  may,  with  Wordsworth, 
see  here  an  intimation  of  tho  superiority  of 
wisdom  (chochmah)  over  intelligenoe  (binah), 
the  former  being  the  guida  of  life  and 
including  the  practice  of  religion,  the  latter 
denoting  discernment,  the  faculty  of  dis- 
tinguishing between  one  thing  and  another 
(see  note  on  oh.  xxiii.  4,  and  the  quotation 
from  'Pirke  Aboth'  on  ch.  xv.  33).  The 
LXX.,  for  Henon  reading  himint,  have  given 
a  version  of  which  the  Fathers  have  lurgcly 
availed  themselves :  "  The  nests  of  wisdom 
are  preferable  to  gold,  and  tlie  nests  of 
knowledge  are  preferable  above  silver." 
Some  of  the  old  coiumeutators  take  tliese 
"  nests  "  to  be  the  problems  and  apothegms 
which  enshrine  wisdom;  others  eouside'r 
them  to  mean  the  children  or  scholars  wlio 
are  taught  by  the  wisu  man. 

Ver.  17. — The  highway  of  the  upright  is 
to  depart  from  evil.  To  avoid  ti.e  dangerous 
byways  to  which  evil  leads,  one  must  walk 
straight  in  the  path  of  duty  (comp.  ch.  xv.  19). 
Septuagint,  "  The  paths  of  life  decline  from 
evil; "  and  this  version  adtls  some  paragraplis 
in  iUugtvation,  which  are  nit  in  the  Hebrew: 
"And  the  ways  of  righteousness  are  lenglh 
of  life.  He  who  reoeiveth  instruction  will 
l«  among  the  s;ood  [or,  '  iu  prosperity,'  iv 
ayaSois],  and  he  who  observcth  reproof  shall 
become  wise."  He  that  keepeth  his  way 
preserveth  his  soul.  He  who  continues  in 
tlie  right  way,  and  looks  carefully  to  his 
goings,  will  save  himself  from  ruin  and 
death  (ch.  xiii.  3).  Septuagint,  "He  who 
watcheth  his  own  ways  keepeth  his  life." 
And  then  is  added  another  maxim,  "He 
that  loveth  his  life  will  spare  his  mouth." 

Ver.  18. — Pride  goeth  before  destruction. 
A  maxim  continually  enlbrcud  (see  ch.  xi. 
2;  xvii.  19;  xviii.  12).  Here  is  the  contrast 
to  the  blessing  on  humility  promised  (oil. 
XV.  33).  A  haughty  spirit— a  lifting  up  of 
spirit— goeth  before  a  fall  (cump.  Dan.  iv. 
29.  etc.).  Thus,  according  to  Herodotus 
(vii.  10),  Artabanus  warned  the  arrogant 
Xeixes,  "  Seest  thou  how  God  strikes  with 
the  thunder  animals  which  overtop  others, 
and  suffers  them  not  lo  vaunt  themselves, 
but  the  small  irritate  him  not?  And  seest 
thou  how  he  hurls  bis  bolts  always  against 
the  mightiest  buildings  and  the  loftiest 
trees  ?  For  God  is  wont  to  cut  short  what- 
ever is  too  highly  exLdtcd  "  (comp.  Horace, 
'  Carm.,'  ii.  10. 9,  etc.).  Says  the  Latin  adage, 
"Qui  petit  alta  nimis,  rc-tro  lapsus  pouitur 
imis."  CiBsar,  'Bell.  Gall.,'  i.  H,  '■  Oonsiiesse 
Deos  immortales,  quo  gravius  homines  ex 
commutatione  rerum  doleant,  qu'S  pro 
Bcolere  eorum  ulcisci  velint,  his  secundiores 
iuterdum  re,  et  diuturuiorLm  impu.iilatem 
ooncedere."     The  Chinese  iay,  "  Who  flics 


not  high  falls  not  low ; "  and,  "  A  great  tree 
attracts  the  wind."  The  Basque  proverb 
remarks,  "  Pride  sought  flight  in  heaven, 
fell  to  hell."  And  an  Eastern  one,  "  What 
is  extended  will  tear;  what  is  long  will 
break  "  (Lane). 

Ver.  19. — This  verse  is  couiieoted  ia 
thonght,  as  well  as  verbally,  with  the  pre- 
ceding. B:>tbeT  it  is  to  bo  of  an  humble 
spirit  with  tha  lowly.  The  Revised  Version 
has,  wiih  the  poor;  but  "inetk"  or  "lowly" 
better  contrasts  with  "proud"  of  the  second 
clause.  Pa.  Ixxxiv.  10,  "I  had  rather  be 
a  doorkeeper  in  the  house  of  my  God,  than 
to  dwell  in  thu  tents  of  wickedness."  Thau 
to  divide  the  spoil  with  the  proud.  To 
share  in  the  fruits  of  the  operations  and 
pursuits  of  the  pioml,  and  to  enjoy  their 
pleasure  8,-a  man  must  east  in  his  lot  with 
them,  undergo  their  risks  and  anxieties,  and 
participate  in  the  crimes  by  which  they 
gain  their  wealth.  The  result  of  such  asso- 
ciation was  told  in  ver.  18.  The  Germaui 
express  the  connection  Ijetween  abundance 
aud  folly  by  the  terse  apothegm,  "Voll, 
toll ; "  "  Full,  fool."  Septuagint,  "  Better  is 
the  man  of  gentle  mind  with  humility,  than 
he  who  divideth  spoil  with  the  violent." 

Ver.  20.— He  that  handleth  a  matter 
wisely.  Dahar,  translated  "  matter,"  is 
better  rendered  "  word,"  as  in  eh.  xiii.  13, 
with  wl)i('h  passage  the  present  is  in  con- 
trast. Thus  Eevised  Version,  he  that  giveth 
heed  unto  the  word.  Shall  find  good;  Vul- 
gate, erudilus  in  verbo  reperiet  bona.  The 
"  Word"  is  the  Law  of  God;  he  who  attends 
to  this  shall  prosper.  The  rendering  of  the 
Authorized  Version  is  supported  by  the 
Septuagint,  "  The  man  prudent  in  affairs  ia 
a  finder  of  gnod  things;"  ho  attends  to  his 
business,  and  thinks  out  tlie  best  mode  of 
aceonipliohing  his  plans,  and  therefore 
succeeds  in  a  worldly  sense  (comp.  oh.  xvii. 
20).  Whjso  trusteth  in  the  Lord,  happy  is 
he;  or,  hail  to  him,  as  in  ch.  xiv.  21.  To 
heed  the  Word  and  to  trust  in  the  Lord 
are  correlative  things;  handling  a  matter 
wisely  can  hardly  belong  to  the  same 
category.  The  Septuagiut  contrasts  the 
worldly  success  of  one  who  manages  business 
wisely  and  discreetly  with  tlie  blessedness 
of  him  who,  when  he  has  done  all,  com- 
mits his  cause  to  God  and  trusts  wholly  to 
him  :  "  He  who  hath  trusted  iu  the  Lord  is 
ble.-sed  (jtaKapi(rT6s)." 

Ver.  21. — The  wise  in  heart  shall  be 
called  prudent.  True  wisdom  is  recognized 
and  acknowledged  as  such,  especially  when 
it  has  the  gift  of  expressing  itself  appro- 
priately (see  on  ch.  xxiv.  8).  The  sweetness 
(ch.  xxvii.  9)  of  the  lips  increaseth  learning. 
People  listen  to  instruction  at  the  mouth  of 
one  who  speaks  well  and  wiiuiingly.  Such 
a  one  augments  knowledge  in  otheti,  and 


314 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[oh.  XVI.  1 — 33. 


in  himself  too,  for  he  learns  by  teaching. 
Knowledge  ought  not  to  be  buried  in  one's 
own  mind,  but  produced  on  fit  occasions 
and  in  suitable  words  for  the  edifloation  of 
others.  Eoclus.  xx.  30,  "Wisdom  that  is 
hid,  and  treasure  that  is  hoarded  up,  what 
profit  is  in  them  both?"  (see  Matt.  T.  15). 
Septuagint,  "The  wise  and  prudent  they 
call  worthless  (^pav\ovs') ;  but  they  who  are 
•weet  in  word  shall  hear  more."  Wise  men 
are  called  bad  and  worthless  by  the  vulgar 
herd,  either  because  they  do  not  impart  all 
they  know,  or  because  they  are  envied  for 
their  learning ;  but  those  who  are  eloquent 
and  gracious  in  speech  shall  receive  much 
instruction  from  what  they  bear,  every  one 
being  ready  to  converse  with  them  and  im- 
part any  knowledge  which  tliey  possess. 

Ver.  22. — Understanding  is  a  veil-spring 
of  life  nnto  him  that  hath  it  (ch.  x.  11 ;  xlii. 
14).  The  possessor  of  understanding  has 
in  himself  a  source  of  comfort  and  a  vivi- 
fying power,  which  is  as  refreshing  as  a  cool 
spring  to  a  thii  sty  traveller.  In  all  troubles 
and  d.fficuUies  he  can  fall  back  upon  his 
o«n  good  sense  and  prudence,  and  satisfy 
himself  therewith.  This  is  not  conceit,  but 
the  result  of  a  well-grounded  experience. 
But  the  instruction  of  fools  is  folly ;  i.e.  the 
instruction  which  fools  give  is  folly  and  sin ; 
such  is  the  only  teaching  which  tliey  can 
offer.  So  the  Vulgate,  doctrina  stuUorum 
fatuUat;  and  many  modem  commentators. 
But  mumr  is  better  taken  in  the  sense  of 
"discipline"  or  "chastisement"  (as  in  ch. 
i.  7;  vii.  22;  xv.  5),  which  the  bad  man 
Builers.  His  own  folly  is  the  scourge  which 
punishes  him;  refusing  the  teaching  of 
wisdom,  he  makes  misery  for  himself, 
deprives  himself  of  the  happiness  which 
virtue  gives,  and  pieroes  himself  through 
with  many  sorrows.  Septuagint,  "The 
instruction  of  fools  is  evil." 

Ver.  23. — The  heart  of  the  wise  teaeheth 
his  mouth.  Out  of  the  abundance  of  )iis 
heart  the  wise  man  speaks ;  the  spirit  within 
him  finds  fit  utterance.  Pectus  est  quod 
disertosfadt.  The  thought  and  mind  control 
the  outward  expression  and  make  it  eloquent 
and  persuasive  (comp.  ch.  xv.  2).  And  addeth 
learningto  his  lips ;  Vulgate, "  addeth  grace." 
But  lekacli,  which  means  properly  "  recep- 
tion," "  taking  in,"  is  best  rendered  "  learn- 
ing," as  in  ver.  21 ;  ch.  i.  5,  etc.  The 
intellect  and  knowledge  of  the  wise  display 
themselves  in  their  discourse.  Delitzsch, 
"  Learning  mounteth  up  to  his  lips."  Ecclus. 
xxi.  26,  "The  heart  of  fools  is  in  their 
mouth ;  but  the  mouth  of  the  wise  is  in 
their  heart."  Septuagint,  "  The  heart  of 
the  wise  will  consider  what  pioceedeth  from 
his  mouth ;  and  on  his  lips  he  will  carry 
prudence  (ijtiyvait.oaivitv)" 

Ver.   24.— Fleaaant   word»   •!•    as    an 


honeyoomb.  "Pleasant  words"  are  words 
of  comforting,  soothing  tendency,  as  in  ch. 
XV.  26 ;  Ps.  xix.  10.  The  writer  continues 
his  praise  of  apt  speech.  The  comparison 
with  honey  is  common  in  all  languages  and 
at  all  times.  Thus  Homer  sings  of  Nestor 
('Iliad,'!.  248,  etc.)— 

"The  smooth-tongued  chief,  from    whose 
persuasive  lips 
Sweeter  than  honey  flawed  the  stream  of 
speech." 

(Derby.) 

So  the  story  goes  that  on  the  lips  of  St. 
Ambrose,  while  still  a  boy,  a  swarm  of  bees 
settled,-  portending  his  future  persuasive 
eloquence.  Sweet  to  the  soul,  and  health 
to  the  bones  (ch.  xv.  30).  The  verse  forms 
one  sentence.  The  happy  results  of  plea- 
sant words  are  felt  in  body  and  soul. 
Honey  in  Palestine  is  a  staple  article  of 
food,  and  is  also  used  as  a  medicinal  remedy 
Of  its  reviving  eifects  we  read  in  the  case  of 
Jonathan,  who  from  a  little  portion  hurriedly 
taken  as  he  marched  on  had  "his  eyes 
enlightened  "  (1  Sam.  xiv.  27).  Septuagint, 
"Their  sweetness  is  the  healing  of  the 
soul." 

'larphs  i  \iyos  ToD  Ka-ri  rfivxhy  irdOovs. 

"  Speech  the  physician  of  the  soul's  annoy." 

Ver.  25. — A  repetition  of  ch.  xiv.  12. 

Ver.  26. — He  that  lahoureth  laboureth 
for  himself;  literally,  the  eovl  of  him  that 
laboureth  lahoureth  for  him.  "  Soul "  here 
is  equivalent  to  "desire,"  "appetite"  (comp. 
ch.  vi.  30),  and  the  maxim  signifies  that 
hunger  is  a  strong  'ncentive  to  work — the 
needs  of  the  body  spur  the  labourer  to 
diligence  and  assiduity;  he  eats  bread  in 
the  sweat  of  his  brow  (Gen.  iii.  19).  Says 
the  Latin  gnome — 

"  Largitor  artium,  ingeniique  magister 
Venter." 

"  The  belly  is  the  teacher  of  all  arts. 
The  parent  of  invention." 

"De  tout  s'avise  h  qui  pain  faut,"  "He  who 
wants  bread  thinks  of  everything."  There 
is  our  own  homely  saw,  "  Need  makes  the 
old  wife  trot ; "  as  the  Italians  say,  "  Hunger 
sets  the  dog  a-hunting"  (Kelly).  For  his 
mouth  craveth  it  of  Mm;  his  mouth  must 
have  food  to  put  in  it.  The  verb  f]5« 
(alcaph')  does  not  occur  elsewhere ;  it  means 
properly  "  to  bend,"  and  then  to  put  a  load  on, 
to  constrain,  to  press.  So  here,  "  His  mouth 
bends  over  him,  i.e.  urgeth  him  thereto" 
(Revised  Version).  Eccles.  vi.  7,  "All 
labour  of  man  is  for  his  mouth; "  we  should 
say  stomach.  Hunger  in  some  sense  is  the 
great  stimulus  of  all  work.  "We  commanded 
you,"  says  St.  Paul  (2  Thess.  iii.  10),  "  that 


OH.  XVI.  1—33.] 


THK   PROVERBS. 


316 


if  any  would  not  work,  neither  should  he  eat."  i 
There  is  a  Bpiiitual  hunger  without  which 
grace  cannot  be  sought  or  obtained — that 
hungering  and  thirsting  after  righteousness 
of  which  Christ  speaks,  and  which  he  who 
is  the  Bread  of  life  is  ready  to  satisfy  (Matt. 
V.  6 ;  John  vl.  58).  The  Septuagiut  expands 
the  maxim:  "  A  man  in  labouis  labours  for 
himself,  and  drives  a^ay  (iuffidCerai)  his 
own  destruction ;  but  the  perverse  man  upon 
his  own  mouth  carrieth  destruction." 

Ver.  27. — This  and  the  three  following 
verses  are  concerned  with  the  case  of  the 
evil  man.  An  ungodly  man — a  man  of 
Belial — diggeth  up  evil.  A  man  of  Belial 
(oh.  vi.  12)  is  a  worthless,  wicked  person, 
what  the  French  call .  a  vaurien.  Such 
a  one  digs  a  pit  for  others  (oh.  xxvi.  27 ; 
Ps.  vii.  15),  devises  mischief  against  his 
neighbour,  plots  against  him  by  lying  and 
slandering  and  overreaching.  Wordsworth 
confines  the  evil  to  the  man  himself;  he 
digs  it  as  treasure  in  a  mine,  loves  wicked- 
ness for  ils  own  sake.  But  analogy  is 
against  this  interpretati(jn.  Septuagiut, 
"  A  foolish  man  diggeth  evils  for  himself." 
So  Eoclus.  xxvii.  26,  "  Whoso  diggeth  a  pit 
shall  fall  therein ;  and  he  that  setteth  a  trap 
shall  be  taken  therein."  As  the  gnome  says— 

'H  8e  leaxii  $ov\ii  r^  0ov\ei(TavTi  ko/ciitti). 

And  in  his  lips  there  is  as  a  burning  fire 
(ch.  xxvi.  23).  His  words  scorch  and  injure 
like  a  devouring  flame.  Jas.  iii.  6,  "  The 
tongue  is  a  fire ;  the  world  of  iniquity 
among  our  members  is  the  tongue,  which 
defilem  the  whole  body,  and  settetli  on  fire 
the  wheel  of  nature,  and  is  set  on  fire  by 
hell."  Septuagint,  "And  upon  his  lips  he 
treasureth  up  fire." 

Ver.  28. — A  froward  man  soweth  strife 
(ch.  vi.  14,  19).  The  verb  means,  literally, 
"  sends  forth,"  which  may  signify  "  scatters 
as  seed"  or  "hurls  as  a  missile  weapon." 
The  character  intended  is  the  perverse  man, 
who  distorts  tlie  truth,  gives  a  wrong  impres- 
sion, attributes  evil  motives;  such  a  one 
occasions  quarrels  and  heaitburnings.  And  a 
whisperer  separateth  chief  friends  (oli.  xvii. 
9).  Nirgan  is  either  "  a  chatterer,"  or  "  a 
whisperer,"  "calumniator."  In  ch.  xviii.  8 
•nd  xxvi.  20, 22  it  is  translated  "  tale-bearer." 
"  Be  not  called  a  whisperer  (}f/ieupos),"  says 
the  Son  of  Sirach  (Ecclus.  v.  14),  speaking 
of  secret  slander.  "  Slanderers,"  says  an  old 
apothegm,  "  are  Satan's  bellows  to  blow  up 
contention.''  Septuagint,  "  A  perverse  man 
sendeth  abroad  evils,  and  kindleth  a  torch 
of  deceit  for  the  wicked,  and  separateth 
friends."  The  alternative  rendering  of  the 
second  clause,  "estrangeth  a  leader,"  i.e. 
alienates  one  leader  from  another,  or  from 
bis  army,  is  not  confirmed  by  the  authority 
of  the  veTBions  or  the  best  commentators. 


Ver.  29. — A  violent  man  enticeth  his 
neighbour.  The  man  of  violence  (eh.  iii.  31) 
is  one  who  wrongs  others  by  injurious  con- 
duct, by  fraud  or  oppression.  How  such  a 
one  "  enticeth,"  talks  a  man  over,  we  see  in 
ch.  i.  10,  etc.  Septuagint,  "The  lawless 
man  tempts  (airoireLpaTai)  friends."  And 
leadeth  him  into  the  way  that  is  not  good 
(Ps.  xxxvi.  4 ;  Isa.  Ixv.  2) ;  a  position  where 
he  wiU  suffer  some  calamity,  or  be  induced 
to  commit  some  wickedness. 

Ver.  30. — This  verse  is  better  taken  as 
one  sentence  (so  the  Septuagint),  and  trans- 
lated, as  Nowack,  "  He  that  sliutteth  his 
eyes  in  order  to  contrive  froward  things, 
he  that  compresseth  his  lips,  hath  already 
brought  evil  to  pass ; "  he  has  virtually 
effected  it.  Prom  sucii  a  crafty,  malignant 
man  yon  need  not  expect  any  more  open 
tokens  of  his  intentions.  He  shutteth  his 
eyes  (comp.  Isa,  xxxiil.  1 5) ;  either  that  he 
may  better  think  out  his  evil  plans,  or  else 
he  cannot  look  his  neighbour  in  the  face 
while  he  is  plotting  against  him.  Tlie 
Vulgate  has,  attonitu  oculis;  Septuagint, 
"fixing  ((TTTjpffmj')  his  eyes."  Moving  his 
lips ;  rather,  he  viho  eompretaeth  hia  lips,  to 
hide  the  malignant  smile  with  which  he 
might  greet  his  neighbour's  calamity  (comj). 
ch.  vi.  13,  etc. ;  x.  10),  or  that  neither  by 
word  nor  expression  he  may  betray  his 
thoughts.  Others  take  tho  two  outward  ex- 
pressions mentioned  as  signals  to  confede- 
rates ;  but  this  is  not  so  suitable,  as  they  are 
the  man's  own  feelings  and  sentiments  that 
are  meant.  One  who  gives  these  tokens 
bringeth  evil  to  pass ;  he  has  perfected  his 
designs,  and  deems  them  as  good  as  accom- 
plished, and  you  will  do  well  to  note  what 
his  bearing  signifies.  Some  take  the  mean- 
ing to  be,  brings  punishment  on  himself; 
but  the  warning  is  not  given  for  the  sinner's 
sake.  Septuagint,  "He  defines  (ipifei)  all 
evils  with  his  lips ;  he  is  a  furnace  of  evil." 

Ver.  31. — The  hoary  head  is  a  orown  of 
glory  (eh.  xx.  29).  (For  "  crown,"  see  on 
ch.  xvii.  6.)  Old  age  is  the  reward  of 
a  good  life,  and  therefore  is  an  honour  to 
a  man  (comp.  ch.  iii.  2, 16 ;  iv.  10  ;  ix.  11 ;  x. 
27).  If  it  he  found — rather,  it  shall  be  found 
— in  the  way  of  righteousness ;  the  guerdon 
of  obedience  and  holiness;  whereas  "bloody 
and  deceitful  men  shall  not  live  out  half 
their  days  "  (Pa.  Iv.  23).  It  is  well  said  in 
the  Book  of  Wisdom  (iv.  8,  etc.),  "  Honour- 
able age  is  not  that  which  standeth  in 
length  of  time,  nor  that  is  measured  by 
number  of  years.  But  wisdom  is  the  grey 
hair  unto  men,  and  an  unspotted  life  is  old 
age." 

Ver.  32. — He  that  is  slow  to  anger  (oh. 
liv.  29)  is  better  than  the  mighty.  The 
long-suffering,  non-irascible  man  is  more  of 
a  hero  than  the  valiant  commander  of  • 


316 


TUB  PROVERBS. 


[on,  xw  1 — 33. 


great  army.  Oueovircomes  external  foes  or 
obstacles;  the  other  conquers  himself;  as 
it  is  said,  And  he  that  itileth  his  spirit 
than  he  that  taketh  a  city  (oh.  xxv.  28). 
'Pirke  Aboth,'  iv.  ],  "Who  is  the  hero? 
The  man  that  restrains  his  thoughts." 
Maxims  about  self-mastery  are  common 
enough.  Says  an  unknown  poet,  "  Fortior 
fst  qui  se  quam  qui  fortissima  vincit 
Mceuia,  uec  virtus  altius  ire  potest."  So 
Publ.  Syr.,  '  Sent.,'  795,  "  Fortior  est  qui 
oupiditates  suas,  quam  qui  hostes  subjicit." 
And  the  mediaeval  jingle — 

"Linguam  fraenare 
Plus  est  quam  castra  domare." 

At  the  end  of  thig  verse  the  Alexandrian 
Manuscript  of  the  Septuagint,  followed  by 
later  hands  in  some  other  uncials,  adds, 
"  and  a  man  having  prudence  [is  betterj 
.  than  a  great  farm." 

Ver.  33. — The  lot  is  oast  into  the  lap, 
The  bosom  or  fold  of  the  garment  (oh.  vi. 
27  ;  xvii.  23  ;  xxi.  14).  It  is  not  quite  clear 
what  articks  the  Jews  used  in  their  divina- 
tions by  lot.  Probably  they  employed 
stones,  differing  in  sliape  or  colour,  or  liaving 
some  distinguisliing  mark.  These  were 
placed  in  a  vessel  or  in  the  fold  of  a 
garment,  and  drawn  or  shaken  thence. 
Bnch  a  practice  has  been  common  in  all  ages 
and  countries;  and  thougli  only  cursorily 
mentioned  in  the  Mosaic  legislation  (Numb, 
xxvi,  5.5),  it  was  used  by  the  Jews  from  the 
time  of  Joshua,  and  in  the  earliest  days  of 
tho  Cliristian  Church  (see  Josli.  xviii.  10  ; 
Judg.  XX.  9;  1  Sam.  x.  20,  21 ;  Acts  i.  24, 


etc.).  As  by  this  means  man's  agency  wai 
minimized,  and  all  partiality  and  chicanery 
were  excluded,  the  decision  was  regarded 
as  directed  by  Providence.  There  i»  one 
case  only  of  ordeal  in  the  Law,  and  thai 
under  suspicion  of  adultery  (Numb.  T.  12, 
etc.).  In  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  in 
place  of  the  lot  we  read  (vi.  16),  "An 
oath  for  confirmaticb  is  to  them  an  end  of 
all  strife."  The  whole  disposing  thereof 
is  of  the  lord.  In  these  cases  the  Jew 
learned  to  see,  in  what  we  call  chance,  the 
overruling  of  Divine  power.  But  this  was 
not  blind  superstition.  He  did  not  feel 
justified  in  resorting  to  this  practice  on 
every  trivial  occasion,  as  persons  used  the 
Sortes  Virgiliana  .  or  even  the  verses  of 
the  Bible  for  the  same  purpose.  The  lot 
was  employed  religiously  in  oases"  where 
other  means  of  decision  were  not  suitable 
or  available ;  it  was  not  to  supersede  com- 
mon prudence  or  careful  investigation  ;  but, 
for  example,  in  trials  where  the  evidence 
was  conflicting  and  the  judges  could  not 
determine  the  case,  the  merits  were  ascer- 
tained by  lot  (comp.  ch.  xviii.  18).  After 
the  effusion  of  tlie  Holy  Spirit,  the  apostles 
never  resorted  to  divination,  and  the  Chris- 
tian Church  has  wisely  repudiated  the  prac- 
tice of  all  such  modes  of  discovering  the 
Divine  will.  Septuagint,  "For  the  uu- 
righteous  all  things  fall  into  their  bosom, 
but  from  the  Lord  are  all  just  things,"  which 
may  mean  either  that,  though  the  wicked 
seem  to  prosper,  God  still  works  out  his 
righteous  ends ;  or  the  evil  suffer  retribu- 
tion, and  thus  God'f  justice  ia  displayed. 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  1. — Man's  thought  and  God's  work.  Theology  and  philosophy  have  ever  been 
confronted  with  the  problem  of  the  inter-relation  of  the  Divine  and  the  human  in  life.  If 
God  is  supreme,  what  room  is  there  for  man's  will,  thought,  and  individual  personality? 
If  man  has  freedom  and  power,  how  can  God  be  the  infinite  Euler  and  Disposer  of  all 
things  ?  It  may  not  be  possible  to  reconcile  the  two  positions.  But  it  must  be  unwise 
to  ignore  either  of  them.  If  we  cannot  mark  their  conflneg,  we  can  at  least  observe  the 
contents  of  the  domain  of  each. 

I.  Man  has  freedom  of  thought.  "Man's  are  the  counsels  of  the  heart." 
Though  extemally  constrained  by  circumstances,  he  is  free  to  roam  at  large  in  the  ample 
fields  of  itoagination.  Tho  min-l  has  a  certain  originative  jiower.  It  is  well-nigh  a 
creatorof  thoughts— at  least  it  can  select  the  ideas  that  occur  to  it,  arrange  them,  draw 
deductions  from  tliem  ;  or  it  can  let  its  fancies  grow  into  new  shapes;  or,  again,  it  can 
organize  schemes,  project  plana,  formulate  purposes.  Now,  this  liberty  and  the  power 
it  implies  carry  with  them  certain  momentous  consequences.  1.  We  are  responsible 
for  our  thoUyUs.  They  are  all  known  to  God,  and  they  will  all  be  judged  by  him.  Let 
us  therelore  take  heed  what  follies  and  fancies  we  harbour  in  our  most  secret  "  chambers 
of  imagery."  2.  We  may  exercise  power  ivith  our  thoughts.  These  thoughts  are  seeds 
of  actioiis.  Inasmuch  as  we  can  direct  them,  we  can  turn  the  first  springs  of  events. 
Here  it  i.><,  in  this  inner  workshop  of  the  mind,  that  a  man  must  forge  his  own  future 
and  strike  out  works  of  public  good.  8.  We  cannot  he  coerced  in  our  thoughts.  The 
tyrant  mnv  fling  a  man  into  a  dungeon,  but  he  cannot  destroy  the  convictions  that  are 


<au  ivi.  1— 33.]  THE  PROVERBS.  317 

enthroned  in  the  hosom  of  Ms  victim ;  he  may  tear  out  his  tongue,  but  he  can  never 
tear  out  his  thoughts.  Here  the  powers  of  despotism  fail ;  here  the  inalienable  "  right! 
of  man  "  are  ever  in  exercise. 

II.  God  works  through  man's  life.  "The  answer  of  the  tongue  is  from  the 
Lord."  Though  a  maa  thinlss  out  his  ideas  with  originative  power,  wlienhe  comes  into 
the  world  of  action  other  influences  lay  hold  of  him,  and  his  utterances  are  not  wholly 
his  own.  This  is  conspicuously  true  of  the  prophet,  who  is  not  a  mere  mouthpiece  of 
Divine  words,  but  a  living,  thinking  man ;  and  yet  whose  utterances  are  inspired  by 
Grod.  The  remarkable  fact  now  is  that  it  is  true  also  of  every  man,  of  the  godless  man 
as  well  as  the  devout  man.  God  controls  the  outcome  of  every  man's  life.  1.  He 
controls  through  internal  impulses.  Conscience  is  the  voice  of  God,  and  every  maa  has 
a  conscience.  When  conscience  is  disobeyed,  the  willing  service  of  God  is  rejected,  but 
still  an  unconscious  doing  of  God's  will  may  be  brought  about.  In  the  days  of  the 
Exodus  God  was  guiding  even  the  stubborn  Pharaoh  to  consent  at  last  to  the  Divin.; 
purpose  in  the  liheration  of  the  Hebrews.  2.  He  controls  through  external  circum- 
stances. These  modify  a  man's  words  and  deeds,  Even  after  he  has  spoken,  they  give 
point  and  direction  to  what  he  has  said  and  done. 

Ver.  4. — Tlie  purpose  of  creation.  It  is  commonly  asserted  that  God  made  the 
world  in  love,  that  he  created  it  from  the  goodness  of  his  heart,  because  he  desired  to 
have  creatures  to  bless.  From  this  point  of  view,  creation  represents  grace,  giviiijr, 
surrender,  sacrifice,  on  the  part  of  God.  But  another  and  apparently  a  contrary  view 
.is  suggested  by  the  words  before  us.  Here  it  would  seem  that  God  created  all  things 
from  self-regarding  motives,  as  a  man  makes  a  machine  fur  his  own  use.  The  cimtra- 
diction,  however,  is  only  superficial.  For  if  we  take  the  second  view,  we  must  siill 
bear  in  mind  what  the  character  of  God  is.  Now,  God  is  revealed  to  us  as  essentially 
lov#.  Therefore  only  those  things  will  please  him  that  agree  with  love.  A  cruel  Being 
Eiigiib  make  for  himself  creatures  that  would  amuse  him  by  exhibiting  contortions  ot 
agony,  but  a  fatherly  Being  will  be  best  pleased  by  seeing  his  family  truly  good  and 
happy.  If  the  universe  is  made  to  please  Divine  love,  it  must  be  made  for  blessedness. 
Yet  it  cannot  be  made  for  selfish  happiness.  It  must  be  created  so  as  to  find  its  own 
good  in  God,  and  thus  to  give  itself  up  to  him  as  the  End  of  its  being.  Apply  this 
principle — 

I.  In  ebgarb  to  the  univbrsb  at  large.  The  law  of  gravitation  is  universal. 
All  things  tend  to  rush  to  their  centres  ot  attraction.  In  a  large  way  the  universe  is 
drawn  to  God,  its  Centre,  1.  It  is  ever  more  and  more  realizing  the  purpose  of  God. 
This  is  seen  in  all  growth — the  seed  becomes  the  flowering  plant,  etc.  It  is  strikingly 
exemplified  in  the  doctrine  of  evolution.  The  great  thought  of  God  concerning  the 
universe  is  slowly  emerging  into  fact.  2.  It  is  continually  approaching  the  thought  of 
God.  The  higher  orders  of  creatures  are  nearer  to  the  nature  and  thou;4ht  of  the 
Infinite  Spirit  than  the  lower.  The  upward  movement  is  a  Godward  movement.  3.  It 
is  groviingly  fulfilling  the  purpose  of  God.  Prom  the  formless  and  void  past  the 
universe  moves  on  lo  "  one  far-off  Divine  event,"  when  God's  will  shall  be  completely 
accomplished. 

II.  In  regard  to  evil.  Evil  in  itself,  moral  evil,  cannot  have  been  made  by  God, 
who  is  only  holy.  But  in  two  respects  evil  may  come  within  God's  purposes.  1. 
Physical  evil  directly  works  out  God's  purposes.  It  is  only  evil  to  our  eyes,  as  shadows 
look  gloomy  and  winter  feels  painful.  Really  it  is  good,  because  it  is  part  of  the  whole 
good  plan  of  the  universe.  God  sends  pain  in  love,  that  the  issue  of  it  may  be  the 
higher  blessedness  of  his  children.  2.  Moral  evil  will  be  overruled  for  Divine  purposes. 
The  bad  man  has  his  uses.  Nebuchadnezzar  was  essential  to  the  chastisement  of 
Israel.  Judas  Iscaiiot  was  an  agent  in  the  chain  of  events  that  isbued  io  Christ's  great 
work  of  redemption. 

III.  In  regard  to  individuat,  sotTLS.  We  are  all  made  for  God.  He  is  the  End 
of  our  being,  not  only  as  the  home  and  rest  we  need,  but  as  the  goal  after  which  we 
should  aim?  The  great  aim  of  Christ's  work  is  to  bring  all  thin:!S  in  snbjectinn  to  God, 
that  he  "may  be  All  in  all"  (1  Cor.  xv.  28).  The  mistake  of  men  is  in  seeking  their 
own  "ood  first,  even  though  this  be  the  higher  good  of  "  other-worldliness,"  For  (hu 
great  end  is  to  forget  self  in  God. 


318  THE  PEOVERBS.  [ch.  xvi.  1— 3& 

Ver.  24. — Pleasant  words.  I.  Pleasant  words  aeb  good  in  social  intbrcouesb. 
They  are  said  to  cost  little,  while  they  are  worth  much.  But  often  they  are  not  to 
be  had  without  trouble.  1.  Sympathy.  We ,  must  put  ourselves  to  the  trouble  of 
entering  into  our  brother's  feelings  if  we  would  speak  with  real  kindness  to  him.  2. 
Self-suppression.  Angry  words  may  be  the  first  to  rise  to  our  lips ;  bitter  words  ol 
scorn  or  melancholy  words  springing  from  the  gloom  of  our  own  minds  may  come 
more  readily  than  the  pleasant  words  that  are  due  to  our  neighbours.  3.  Thought, 
Words  of  honey  soon  cloy  if  no  satisfying  thoughts  lie  behind  them.  Pleasant  words 
should  be  more  than  words — they  should  be  messengers  of  healing,  suggestions  of  help- 
fulness. Nosv,  as  some  trouble  is  required  for  the  production  of  this  kind  of  speech 
in  daily  intercourse,  it  is  well  to  consider  how  valuable  it  is.  It  draws  hearts  together. 
It  lightens  the  load  of  life  and  oils  its  wheels.  There  are  enough  of  clouds  about  the 
souls  of  most  men  to  make  it  desirable  that  we  should  shed  all  the  sunshine  that  we 
possibly  can.  It  would  be  like  a  migration  from  Northern  gloom  to  Southern  sunshine 
for  all  speech  to  be  seasoned  with  truly  pleasant  words. 

II.  Pleasant  wobds  aeb  needed, in  Christian  teaohino.  The  preacher  is  not 
to  be  a  false  prophet  of  smooth  sayings,  whispering,  "  Peace,  peace,"  when  there  is  no 
peace.  There  are  times  when  hard  words  must  be  spoken,  and  most  unpleasant  truths 
do  need  to  be  driven  home  to  unwilling  hearers.  But  it  will  be  only  the  pressing 
necessity  of  the  subject  that  will  force  men  of  tender  hearts  to  utter  painful  words. 
When  the  topic  is  not  of  this  character,  tbe  most  winning  words  should  be  chosen. 
1.  In  teaching  the  young.  The  gloom  of  some  good  people  has  repelled  the  young. 
Children  ought  to  see  the  sunny  side  of  religion.  All  who  are  themselves  bright  and 
happy  should  know  that  there  is  a  greater  gladness  for  them  in  Christ.  The  preacher 
of  the  gospel  belies  his  message  when  he  proclaims  it  like  a  funeral  dirge.  2.  In 
interesting  the  careless.  We  cannot  frown  men  into  the  Church.  If  we  show  the 
attractiveness  of  the  gospel  by  cheerful  manners,  we  help  to  commend  it  to  the  world. 
3.  In  comforting  the  sorrowful.  It  is  ni)t  necessary  to  speak  sad  words  to  the  sad  in 
order  to  prove  our  sympathy.     It  should  be  our  aim  to  lighten  the  load  of  their  sorrow. 

III.  Pleasant  words  are  fodnd  m  the  gospel  of  Christ.  Christ  preached  so 
that  "  the  common  people  heard  him  gladly."  Men  wondered  at  the  "  gracious  words  " 
that  fell  from  his  lips.  Christianity  is  a  religion  of  Divine  grace.  Surely  there  must 
be  found  many  pleasant  words  in  the  description  of  it.  The  words  of  the  gospel  are 
pleasant,  in  particular,  on  several  accounts.  1.  They  tell  of  QocTs  love.  2.  Z%ey 
portray  Christ.  3.  They  invite  men  to  salvation,  4.  They  reveal  the  blessedness  of  the 
kingdom  of  heaven. 

Ver.  25. — The  treacherous  path.  What  way  have  we  here  referred  to  ?  If  the  path 
be  so  deceptive,  surely  the  guide  should  indicate  it.  Yet  the  way  to  destruction  is  not 
named,  nor  is  its  place  pointed  out  on  the  chart  of  life.  No  doubt  the  reason  of  this 
indefiniteness  of  expression  is  just  that  the  dangerous  way  is  a  broad  road,  very  easy  to 
discover,  yet  there  are  many  tracks  along  it,  and  each  person  may  take  his  own  course. 
It  is  80  broad  that  any  description  of  it  may  possibly  leave  out  some  of  its  devious 
paths.  Therefore  it  is  better  only  to  indicate  its  character  and  leave  it  for  each  to 
consider  the  warning,  that  an  attractive  appearance  iu  the  path  is  no  proof  of  a 
safe  end. 

I.  The  apparent  rightness  or  the  way.  1.  The  fact.  It  is  not  only  said  that 
the  way  of  death  is  attractive,  like  a  smooth  garden-path  winding  among  flower-beds, 
.while  the  way  of  life  is  a  steep  and  rugged  mountain-track  ;  but  this  way  even  seems 
to  be  right.  There  is  an  apparent  justification  for  following  it.  Conscience  is  in  danger 
of  being  deluded  into  giving  it  a  quasi-sanction.  2.  The  cause.  We  are  always 
tempted  to  condone  the  agreeable.  If  no  danger  is  apparent,  sanguine  minds  refuse  to 
believe  that  they  are  approaching  one.  Convention  simulates  conscience.  The  multi- 
tude who  tread  the  broad  way  tempt  us  into  trusting  tbe  sanction  of  their  example. 
It  is  difficult  to  believe  that  that  is  wrong  which  fashion  encounges.  3.  The 
limitations.  (1)  The  way  only  "  seemeth  "  right  We  need  to  be  guarded  against 
succumbing  t6  the  bondage  of  appearances.  The  question  is  not  as  to  what  a  "thing 
seems,  but  what  it  is.  (2)  It  is  right  in  the  eyes  of  the  man  who  is  tempted  to  follow 
it.    But  it  is  not  right  in  the  eyes  of  God.    Wci  have  to  look  to  the  higher  standard  o< 


CH.  XVI.  1—33.]  THE  PROVERBS.  319 

God's  approval.  It  is  of  no  use  that  our  course  seems  right  to  ourselves  if  it  is  wrong 
before  God.  On  the  other  hand,  it  may  be  objected  that  these  considerations  destroy 
the  validity  of  conscience ;  for  if  we  are  not  to  follow  our  own  conscience,  what  higher 
guide  can  we  have?  The  answer  may  be  threefold.  (1)  Seeming  right  may  not  be  the 
verdict  of  our  true  consciences,  but  only  the  too  readily  accepted  conclusion  of  more 
worldly  considerations.  (2)  Conscience  may  be  perverted.  (3)  At  all  events,  while 
we  have  the  light  of  revelation  in  Scripture  and  especially  in  Christ,  we  have  a  guide 
for  conscience,  to  neglect  which  is  to  be  left  without  excuse. 

II.  The  fatal  end  of  the  way.  1.,  Tfie  importance  of  the  end.  The  great 
question  is — Whither  are  we  going  ?  The  purpose  of  a  road  is  not  to  serve  as  a  platform 
for  stationary  waiting,  but  to  lead  to  some  destination.  It  is  foolish  for  the  traveller  to 
neglect  the  sign-post,  and  only  follow  the  attractiveness. of  the  road,  if  he  wishes  to  reach 
his  home.  In  life  the  value  of  the  course  chosen  is  determined  by  its  issues.  2.  The 
character  of  the  end.  The  end  is  "  the  way  of  death."  This  is  true  of  every  course  of 
sin.  Dark  and  dreadful,  without  qualification  of  any  kind,  this  goal  ever  stands  at  the 
end  of  the  way  of  wickedness.  -Disappointment  may  come  first,  and  sorrow,  and  weari- 
ness ;  it  will  be  well  for  us  if  they  warn  us  before  we  take  the  final  plunge  into  soul- 
destruction.  3.  The  manner  of  reachu,,g  the  end.  The  pleasant  way  does  not  lead 
directly  into  the  pit  of  destruction.  It  is  only  a  preliminary  stage  in  the  downward 
journey.  It  brings  the  traveller  to  "  the  ways  "  of  death.  It  may  be  regarded  as  a 
by-path  running  into  the  broad  road.  There  are  questionable  amusements  and  dan- 
gerous friendships  that  are  not  themselves  fatal,  but  they  incline  the  careless  to  ways 
of  evil.     They  are  perilous  as  subtle  tempters  fashioned  like  angels  of  light. 

Ver.  31. — 77ie  glory  of  old  age.  I.  Old  age  mat  be  crowned  with  glokt  nf  the 
COMPLETION  OF  LIFE.  It  is  uot  natural  to  die  in  youth.  We  talk  of  the  bud  gathered 
before  it  has  opened  on  earth,  that  it  may  bloom  with  perfection  in  heaven,  etc. ;  but  we 
must  confess  that  there  is  a  great  mystery  in  the  death  of  children.  If  God  so  wills  it, 
it  is  better  to  live  through  the  whole  three  score  years  and  ten  into  full  old  age.  The 
broken  column  is  the  symbol  of  the  unfinished  life.  "  Such  a  one  as  Paul  the  aged" 
could  say,  "I  have  finished  my  course."  1.  Life  is  good.  It  may  be  sorrow-stricken 
and  it  may  be  wrecked  on  the  rocks  of  sin.  Then,  indeed,  it  is  evil.  There  was  one  of 
whom  it  was  said,  "  It  had  been  good  for  that  man  if  he  had  not  been  born  "  (Matt. 
Mvi.  24).  But  in  itself  life  is  good.  Men  in  mental  sanity  prize  it.  •  The  Old- Testa- 
ment idea  of  the  value  of  a  full  long  life  is  more  hi  althy  than  the  sickly  sentimentaliam 
that  fancies  an  early  death  to  be  a  Heaven-sent  boon.  2.  Time  is  for  service.  There- 
fore the  longer  the  time  allotted  to  one,  the  mure  opportunity  is  there  for  doing  good. 
This,  again,  may  be  abused  and  misspent  in  sin.  But  the  old  age  of  a  good  man  means 
the  completion  of  a  long  day's  work.  Surely  it  is  an  honour  to  be  called  into  the  field 
in  the  early  morning  of  life,  and  to  be  permitted  to  toil  on  till  the  shadows  descend  on 
a  long  summer  evening. 

II.  Old  age  mat  be  obownbd  with  globt  in  its  own  attainments.  A  bad 
old  age  presents  a  hideous  picture.  A  hoary-headed  sinner  is,  indeed,  a  spectacle  of 
horror.  Mere  old  age  is  not  venerable  in  itself.  Reverence  for  years  implies  a  belief 
that  the  years  have  gathered  in  a  harvest  of  venerable  qualities.  Old  age  has  its 
defects,  not  only  in  bodily  frailty,  but  in  a;certain  mental  stiffening.  Thus  Lord  Bacon 
says  "Men  of  age  object  too  much,  consult  too  long,  adventure  too  little,  repent  too 
soon  and  seldom  drive  business  home  to  the  full  period,  but  content  themselves  with  a 
mediocrity  of  success;"  and  Madame  de  Stael  says,  "To  resist  with  success  the  frigidity 
of  old  age,  one  must  combine  the  body,  the  mind,  and  the  heart ;  to  keep  these  in 
parallel  vigour  dne  must  exercise,  study,  and  love."  But,  on  the  other  hand,  there  are 
inward  attainments  of  a  ripe  and  righteous  old  age  that  give  to  the  late  autumn  of  life 
a  mellow  flavour  which  -is  quite  unknown  in  its  raw  summer.  "  Age  is  not  all  decay/ 
says  a  modern  novelist;  "it  is  the  ripening,  the  swelling,  of  the  fresh  life  within,  that 
withers  and  bursts  the  husk."  It  has  been  remarked  that  women  are  most  beautiful  in 
youth  and  in  old  age.  The  wisdom,  the  judiciousness,  the  large  patience  with  varieties 
of  opinion  which  should  come  with  exi)erience,  are  not  always  found  m  old  people,  who 
sometimes  stiffen  into  bigotry  and  freeze  into  dreary  customs.  But  when  these  grace* 
are  found  in  a  large  and  healthy  soul,  no  stage  of  life  can  approach  the  glory  of  old  age. 


820  THE  PROVEEBS,  [ch.  xvi.  1—33. 

Etsb  when  there  is  not  capacity  for  such  attainments,  there  is  a  beautiful  serenity  of 
soul  that  sim['ler  people  can  reach,  and  that  makes  their  very  presence  to  be  a 
benediction. 

III.  Old  age  may  be  crowned  with  gEort  in  its  preparation  for  the  future. 
In  unraasl<ing  the  horrible  aspect  of  death  and  revealiiij;  the  nngel-face  beneath, 
Christianity  has  shed  a  new  glory  over  old  agB.  It  is  tlie  vestibule  to  the  temple  of  a 
higher  life.  The  servant  of  God  has  been  tried  and  disciplined  by  I'lessing,  .suffering, 
and  service.  At  length  he  is  "meet  for  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light."  He 
can  learn  to  resist  the  natural  melancholy  of  declining  powers  with  the  vision  of 
renewed  energy  in  the  lieavenly  future.  Or,  if  he  cares  for  rest,  he  may  know  that  it 
will  be  a  rest  with  Christ,  and  he  can  say,  with  the  typical  a'^ed  saint  Simeon,  "Lord, 
now  lettest  thou  thy  servant  depart  in  peace,  for  mine  eyes  have  seen  thy  salvatioo." 

Ver.  32. — Self-control.  The  world  has  always  made  too  much  of  military  glory. 
Flora  the  days  of  the  Pharaohs,  when  brutal  monarchs  boasted  of  the  number  of  cities 
ihey  had  sacked,  to  our  own  time,  when  successful  generals  receive  thanks  in  Parlia- 
niint,  and  grants  of  money  far  beyond  the  highei^t  honours  and  emoluments  ever 
bestowed  upon  the  greatest  and  most  useful  civilians,  it  has  been  the  habit  of  men  to 
flatter  and  pamper  soldiers  out  of  all  proportion  to  their  di  serts.  But  we  are  here 
reminded  of  a  simple  and  private  victory  which  is  really  greater  tl  an  one  of  those 
great  military  exploits  that  send  a  shock  of  amazment  round  the  world.  It  is  a 
more  noble  leat  to  be  able  to  rule  one's  own  spirit  than  to  capture  a  city.  Consider 
some  of  the  ways  in  which  this  supreme  excellence  of  8  If-control  is  apparent. 

I.  It  is  greater  in  eptort.  In  ancient  days,  before  the  invention  of  heavy 
oiiinance,  a  siege  taxed  all  the  energies  of  the  most  skilful  and  powerful  general. 
This  provincial  city  of  Jerusalem  was  long  able  to  hold  out  against  the  legions  of 
Ilt)me.  But  self-control  is  even  more  difficult.  1.  The  enemy  is  within.  The  war  of 
the  soul  is  a  civil  war.  We  may  be  successful  in  external  life,  and  yet  unable  to  cope 
with  the  inner  foes  of  our  own  hearts.  2.  The  enemy  is  turbulent.  Some  races  aie 
harder  to  rule  than  others ;  but  no  half-savage,  wholly  fanatical  dervishes,  could  be 
mcire  fierce  than  the  wild  passions  that  rage  within  a  man's  own  brea-^t.  3.  The 
enemy  has  acquired  great  power.  The  uprising  of  passion  is  not  a  veiled  sedition;  it 
is  out-and-out  rebellion.  Long  habit  lias  given  it  a  sort  of  vested  iiiterest  in  the 
privileges  of  its  lawlessness.  4.  Tlie  enemy  is  subtle.  "The  heart  is  deceiiful  above 
all  things."  It  is  plotting  treason  when  all  looks  safe.  The  careless  soul  slumbers 
I'ver  a  mine  of  dynamite  in  the  region  of  its  own  passions.  It  needs  a  supreme  effort 
to  quell  and  curb  ai.d  rule  such  a  fne. 

II.  It  is  greater  in  results.  At  first  sight  this  proposition  must  appear 
ab.-urd.  The  man  who  curbs  his  own  spirit  does  something  inward,  private,  secret. 
^I'l  e  man  who  taki  s  a  city  makes  his  mark  on  histoiy.  How  can  the  self-control  be 
the  more  fruitful  thing?  1.  It  means  more  to  the  individual  man.  '1  he  successful 
geneial  las  won  a  name  of  glory.  Yet  at  its  best  it  is  but  superficial  and  empty.  He 
may  l-e  des]  ising  himself  while  the  world  is  sliouting  his  praises.  But  the  strong  soul 
that  has  learnt  to  cuiitrol  itself  has  the  inward  satisfaction  of  its  self-mastery.  2.  It 
means  more  to  the  world.  Weak  men  may  win  a  lemporiiry  success,  but  in  the  long 
inn  their  inner  feebleness  is  certain  to  expose  Itself.  Such  men  may  lake  a  city,  but 
they  cannot  rule  it.  They  may  do  startling  things,  but  not  really  great  things,  and 
the  niischief  of  their  follies  will  be  more  disastrous  than  the  gain  ol  their  successes.    ^ 

III.  It  is  greater  in  character.  True  greatness  is  not  to  be  measured  by 
achievements,  which  depend  largely  upon  external  circumstances.  One  man  has  an 
oi>|  ortunity  of  doing  sometliing  striking,  and  another  is  denied  every  chance.  Tet  the 
obscure  person  may  be  really  lar  cieater  than  the  foriimate  instrument  of  victory. 
True  greatness  is  in  the  soul.  He  is  great  who  lives  a  great  soul-life,  while'* 
Napoleon  n  ay  be  mean  in  spite  of  his  brilliant  powers  and  achiuvem'.nts.  In  the 
s  ght  of  Heaven  lie  stands  liighest  who  best  fights  the  emmies  in  hid  own  breast, 
beeaube  he  exercises  the  liighett  soul-powers.  It  is  the  province  of  Christian  grace  to 
substitule  the  glory  of  self-victory  for  the  vulgar  glare  of  military  success, 

Ver,  33. —  TTie  lottery  of  Ufa.     I.  Iipe  appears  to  be   a   i.ottkhv.     "The  lot  !• 


OH.  XVI.  1—33.]  THE  PROVERBS.  821 

east  into  the  lap."  We  seem  to  depend  largely  on  ohanoe.  1.  We  are  ignorant  of 
importaait  facts.  We  are  obliged  to  grope  our  way  through  many  dark  place*.  Lifo 
comes  to  ub  veiled  in  mystery.  It  may  be  that  certain  material  ounsiderations  woulJ 
greatly  modify  our  action  if  only  we  knew  them,  yet  we  must  act  without  regard  to 
them,  from  sheer  ignorance.  2.  We  cannot  predict  the  futwe.  Even  when  we  du 
grasp  the  essential  points  of  our  situation  in  the  present,  we  cannot  tell  what  new 
possibilities  may  emerge.  A  sudden  turn  of  the  kaleidoscope  may  give  an  entirely 
novel  complexion  to  life.  3.  We  are  unahle  to  master  our  circvmstances.  We  find 
ourselves  surrounded  by  innumerable  influences  which  we  may  understand,  more 
or  less,  but  which  we  cannot  alter.  Sometimes  it  appears  as  though  we  were 
QO  more  free  agents  than  the  driftwood  that  is  cast  up  on  the  beach  by  the  angry 
^urf.  Circumstances  are  too  strong  for  us,  and  we  must  let  circumstances  take  their 
course.  4.  We  cannot  control  tht  course  of  events.  Many  things  hajipen  quite  outside 
the  range  of  our  lives,  yet  their  results  will  strike  across  the  path  of  our  own  actions. 
Other  people  are  busy  planning  and  working,  and  we  do  not  all  consult  together  and 
work  in  harmony.  When  many  hands  throw  the  shuttle  it  is  impossible  to  bring  out 
any  sure  design. 

II.  God  disposes  of  the  lottbbt  of  life.  Volt.iire  says,  "  Chance  is  a  wonl  void 
of  sense;  nothing  can  exist  without  a  cause."  It  is  but  a  name  for  our  ignorance  of 
the  course  of  events.  Nevertheless,  if  there  were  no  mind  behind  the  apparent  con- 
fusion of  life,  universal  causation  would  but  give  us  a  blind  and  purposeless  fate — no 
better,  surely,  than  a  wild  and  chaotic  chance.  But  to  one  who  believes  in  God  the 
terrible  uncertainty  of  the  lottery  of  life  is  a  great  reason  for  prayer  and  trust.  1.  Ood 
knows  all.  He  knows  every  fact,  and  he  foresees  the  whole  future.  Herein  we  have  a 
grand  reason  for  faith.  One  who  knows  so  much  more  than  we  do  must  needs  often 
act  in  a  way  that  we  do  not  understand.  But  his  infinite  knowledge  is  a  reason  for 
our  unlimited  trust  in  him.  2.  God  controls  all.  Kvents  seem  to  be  tossed  about  in 
the  lap  of  chance.  Yet  just  as  surely  as  laws  of  motion  govern  the  slightest  movement 
of  all  the  leaves  that  are  blown  by  an  autumn  wind.  Divine  purposes  control  all 
human  events,  in  the  midst  of  their  seeming  confusion.  This  must  be  so  if  God 
is  God. 

"He  maketh  kings  to  sit  in  sovereignty; 

He  maketh  subjects  to  their  power  obey ; 
He  puUeth  duwn,  he  setteth  up  on  high ; 

He  gives  to  this,  from  that  be  t^es  away ; 

For  all  we  have  is  his ;  what  he  will  do,  he  mar  " 

(tiyvuam.) 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 3.  —  J%e  rule  and  guidance  of  Jehovah.  I.  God  the  Object  and  fulfil- 
MKNT  OF  HUMAN  DESIBB.  We  are  wishful,  craving  creatures,  "  with  no  language  but  » 
sigh."  The  answer  of  the  praying  tongue  and  heart  is  God  himself — in  the  fulness  of 
his  wisdom  and  love,  the  generosity  of  bis  gifts,  the  accessibility  of  his  presence.  A 
philosopher  of  this  century  actually  taught  that  God  was  the  Creator  of  human  wishes 
and  imagination.  Let  us  rather  say,  it  is  God  who  creates  and  calls  forth  the  longings 
of  the  finite  heart,  which  (as  Augustine  says)  is  restless  till  it  rests  in  him. 

II.  GoD  THE  CoBEECTOR  OF  OUR  FALSE  jrDQMENTS.  (Ver.  2.)  We  are  prone  to 
judge  of  actions  and  choices  by  their  aesthetic  volue,  i.e.  by  reference  to  our  feeling  of 
pleasure  and  pain ;  God  pronounces  on  their  ethical  value,  their  relation  to  his  Law  and 
to  the  ideal  of  our  own  being. 

III.  God  the  Support  of  our  weakness.  (Ver.  3.)  What  is  the  source  of  all  care 
and  over-anxiety,  but  that  we  are  unequal  to  the  conflict  with  laws  mightier  than  our 
frail  energies  and  endeavours?  Without  God,  we  stand  trembling  in  the  presence  of  a 
giant  fate  which  can  crush  us.  But  there  is  no  such  fate  to  the  believer  in  God,  only 
a  holy  power  and  immovable  will.  "  We  are  a  care  to  the  gods,"  said  Socrates.  Much 
more  can  the  Christian  say  this,  and  learn  to  get  rid  of  his  troubles  by  making  them  in 
childlike  faith  God'i  trouble*,  his  sares  God's  cares.    Our  pkus  become  fixed,  our 

PS0VEBB8.  V 


S22  THE  PROVEBBS.  [oh.  xvi.  1— 88. 

purposes  firm,  when  we  are  conscious  that  they  are  God'i  plant  and  purposes  being 
wrought  out  through  us.— J. 

Vfivs.  4 — 9. — Tlie  administration  of  rewards  and  punishmentt.  I.  The  mobal 
DESiatTi!  OF  GrOD.  (Yer.  4:.)  The  creation  is  teleological;  it  has  a  beginning,  a  process, 
and  an  end  in  view,  all  determined  by  the  will  and  wisdom  of  God.  If  this  ii  true  of 
every  plant,  of  every  mollusc,  it  is  true  of  every  man.  We  are  formed  to  illustrate  his 
praise.    Disobedience,  with  its  consequences,  ratifies  bis  just  and  holy  laws. 

II.  The  mobal  feelings  of  God.  (Yer.  6.)  Only  that  which  stands  in  a  true 
relation  to  him  can  be  true.  Haughtiness  and  arrogance  are,  so  to  speak,  in  the  worst 
taste.  In  the  eyes  of  God  they  are  not  beautiful,  and  cannot  escape  his  criticism  and 
correction. 

III.  His  peovision  foe  the  oblivion  of  guilt  and  the  cube  of  mobal  evil. 
(Yer.  6.)  In  social  relations  he  has  opened  a  fountain,  sweet  and  healing,  for  mutual 
faults  and  sins.  Love  hides  a  multitude  of  sins.  "  I  say  unto  thee,  Her  sins,  which 
are  many,  are  forgiven;  for  she  loved  much"  (comp.  Isa.  Iviii.  7;  Dan.  iv.  27).  But 
prevention  is  better  than  healing,  and  in  religion  is  the  prophylactic  against  evU. 

lY.  God's  ekconciling  love.  (Yer.  7.)  What  sweeter  pleasure  does  life  yield  than 
reconciliation  ?  'Tis  a  deeper  blessing  than  peace  which  has  never  been  broken.  Life 
is  full  of  the  principle  of  opposition ;  and  God  is  manifest«d,  first  in  the  drawing  of 
us  to  himself,  and  then  in  the  union  of  estranged  human  hearts  to  one  another. 

Y.  The  law  of  compensation.  (Yer.  8.)  He  hath  set  the  one  over  against  the 
other,  that  we  should  seek  nothing  after  him.  Poverty  has  great  advantages,  if  we  will 
see  it  so — is  more  favourable,  on  the  whole,  to  mural  health  than  the  reverse  condition. 
And  the  h^rd  crust  of  honest  poverty,  how  sweet  I  the  luxurious  living  of  the  dishonest 
rich,  how  insipid!  or  how  bitter  1 

YI.  Divine  eectifications.  (Yer.  9.)  We  must  take  heed  to  our  own  way ;  yet 
with  all  our  care,  we  cannot  ensure  right  direction  or  security.  We  need  God's  rectifica- 
tion and  criticism  at  every  point,  and  hence  should  ever  say  to  ourselves,  "  If  the  Lord 
will,  we  will  do  this  or  that "  (Jas.  iv.  15).  The  blending  of  human  with  Divine  counsel, 
human  endeavour  with  God's  guidance,  may  defy  analysis,  but  is  known  in  experience 
t  J  be  real. — J. 

Yers.  10 — ^15. — Divine  and  human  authority.  L  The  debit ation  of  authoritt 
AND  law  feom  God.  (Yer.  10.)  The  true  rvder  is  the  representative  of  Giod.  Boyal 
decrees  and  legal  statutes  profess  to  rest,  and  must  rest  ultimately,  if  they  are  to  be 
binding,  upon  the  moral  Law  itself.  Hence  the  reverence  in  old  days  for  "  the  Lord's 
anointed,"  thoi^h  in  the  person  of  a  Charles  Stuart,  was  the  popular  witness  to  a 
deep  truth,  which  lies  at  the  foundation  of  society. 

II.  Peinciplbs  of  stable  bulb.  (Yer.  11.)  The  pair  of  scales  have  ever  been 
viewed  as  the  emblems  of  justice,  and  so  the  expressions,  symbolically,  of  the  nature  of 
God.  The  second  allusion  is  to  the  stone  weights  which  the  Oriental  meichant  carries 
in  his  bag,  serving  the  purpose  the  more  exactly,  as  not  liable  to  rust.  The  exact 
balance  and  the  just  weight,  then,  if  symbols  of  Jehovah,  must  be  the  symbols  of 
every  righteous  human  government. 

in.  The  peinoifles  of  rotal  favoub  and  dispavoitb.  (Yers.  12 — 15.)  1.  The 
ruler  must  be  of  pure  sentiment,  abhorring  all  kinds  of  immorality,  keeping  his  court 
pure,  "rearing  the  white  flower  of  a  blameless  life  in  the  fine  light  that  beats  upon 
the  throne."  How  much  we  owe  in  these  respects  to  the  example  of  our  sovereign 
and  her  husband  is  written  on  the  thankful  heart  of  every  religious  Englishman.  2. 
Strong  moral  convictions.  That  the  throne  securely  rests,  not  upon  might,  but  right ; 
not  upon  bayonets,  but  upon  the  Word  of  God.  The  influence  proceeding  from  such 
a  mind  will  be  constantly  felt  as  antipathetic  to  falsehood  and  corruption,  and  the 
other  eating  mildews  of  high  places.  3.  Sympathy  with  honest  polidet.  How 
common  is  it  to  assume  that  politics  have  little  or  nothing  to  do  with  morality!  No 
one  who  believes  in  the  teaching  of  his  Bible  can  accept  such  a  dogma.  Ho  who  acts 
upon  it  is  already  a  traitor  to  his  country  and  his  God.  As  Greece  had  its  Demosthenes, 
who  has  been  called  a  "  saint  in  politics,"  so  we  have  bad,  thank  God,  in  our  time  men 
of  eloq.uent  tongue  and  true  heart  in  the  nation«l  councils.     May  their  line  and  tradi- 


CRxvi.  1— 38.]  THE  PROVERBS.  811 


tion  never  become  extinct !  4.  Their  dread  Judicial  power.  (Ver.  14.)  The  authoritieg 
who  represent  the  penal  powers  of  law  are  a  terror  to  evil-doers.  There  must  be 
the  power  to  punish.  And  a  measured  and  well-tempered  severity  does  in  a  sense 
"  reconcile"  numbers,  not  to  be  affected  otherwise,  to  a  course  of  law-abiding  and  just 
conduct.  5.  I%e  attractions  of  their  smile.  (Ver.  15.)  Ever,  while  human  nature 
cnntinues  what  it  is,  the  smile  of  the  sovereign,  the  tokens  of  his  favour — the  star,  the 
medal,  the  garter,  the  uniform — will  be  sought  a/ter  with  eagerness  and  worn  with 
pride.  There  may  be  a  side  of  idle  vanity  in  this,  yet  equally  a  side  of  good.  It  is 
good  to  seek  association  with  greatness,  though  the  ideal  of  greatness  may  often  be 
mistaken.  Only  let  us  see  that  there  is  no  real  greatness  which  does  not  in  some  way 
reflect  the  majesty  of  God. — J. 

Vers.  16 — 26. — 2%e  Divine  justice  in  respect  to  the  wise  and  fools.  We  see  the  moral 
order  of  God  revealed  in  the  character  and  life  of  men  in  various  ways.  Their  conduct 
has  a  good  or  evil  effect  on  themselves,  on  their  fellows,  and  is  exposed  to  Divine 
judgment.    Let  us  take  these  in  their  order. 

I.  Thb  reflexive  effect  of  man's  conddot.  1.  Wisdom  is  enriching  (ver. 
16).  To  acquire  it  is  better  than  ordinary  wealth  (ch.  iii.  14;  viii.  10,  11,  19).  2. 
Rectitude  is  safety  (ver.  17).  It  is  a  levelled  and  an  even  way,  the  way  of  the  honest 
and  good  man ;  not,  indeed,  always  to  his  own  feeling,  but  in  the  highest  view,  "  He 
that  treads  it,  trusting  surely  to  the  rislit,  shall  find  before  his  journey  closes  he  it 
close  upon  the  shining  table-lands  to  which  our  God  himself  is  Sun  and  Noon."  The 
only  true  way  of  self-preservation  is  the  way  of  right.  3.  The  truth  of  contrast  (ver. 
18).  Pride  foretells  ruin;  the  haughty  spirit,  overthrow  and  destruction  (ch.  xv.  25, 
33).  The  thunderbolts  strike  the  lolty  summits,  and  leave  unharmed  the  kneeling 
vale  J  shiver  the  oak,  and  pass  harmless  over  the  drooping  flower.  We  are  ever  safe 
upou  our  knees,  or  in  the  attitude  of  prayer.  A  second  contrast  appears  in  ver.  19. 
The  holy  life  with  scant  fare  better  than  a  proud  fortune  erected  on  unjust  gains. 

"  He  that  ii  down  need  fear  no  fall ; 
He  that  is  low,  no  pride." 

4.  The  effe(^  of  religious  principle  (ver.  20).  We  need  constantly  to  carry  all  conduct 
into  this  highest  light,  or  trace  it  to  this  deepest  root.  Piety  here  includes  two 
things:  (1)  obedience  to  positive  command;  (2)  living  trust  in  the  personal  God. 
Happiness  and  salvation  are  the  fruit.  "  1  have  bad  many  things  in  my  hands,  and 
have  lost  them  all.  Whatever  I  have  been  able  to  place  in  God's  hands,  I  still  possess  " 
(Luther). 

IL  Effects  in  belation  to  othbbs.  1.  The  good  man  is  pleasing  to  others 
(vers.  21,  24).  There  is  a  grace  on  his  lips,  a  charm  in  his  conversation,  in  a  "  speech 
alway  with  grace,  seasoned  with  salt."  How  gladly  men  listened  to  our  great 
Exemplar,  both  in  public  and  in  private  I  Thus,  too,  the  good  man  sweetens  instruction, 
and  furthers  its  willing  reception  in  the  mind  ef  his  listeners.  2.  He  earns  a  good 
reputation  for  sense,  discretion,  prudence  (vers.  21,  22).  And  this  not  only  adds  to  his 
own  happiness  (lor  we  cannot  be  happy  without  the  good  will  of  our  fellows),  but  it 
gives  weight  to  his  teaching  (ver.  23).  The  teacher  caa  produce  little  effect  whose 
words  stand  not  out  in  relief  from  the  background  of  character.  The  true  emphasis 
is  supplied  by  the  life.  3.  The  contrast  (ver.  22).  The  folly  of  fools  is  self-chastising. 
The  fool  makes  himself  disagreeable  to  others;  even  if  he  chances  upon  a  sound  word 
or  right  action,  it  is  devoid  of  the  value  and  weight  which  only  character  can  give. 
He  incurs  prejudice  and  opposition  on  every  hand,  sows  thorns  in  his  own  path,  and 
invites  his  own  destruction. 

III.  The  pbinciplb  of  Divine  judgment  in  all.  Every  one  of  these  effects 
marks  in  its  way  the  expression  of  the  Divine  will,  the  laws  of  a  Divine  order.  But, 
above  all,  the  end  determines  the  value  of  choice  and  the  quality  of  life.  The  great 
distinction  between  the  seeming  and  the  real  is  the  distinction  between  facts  as  they 
appear  in  the  light  of  our  passions,  our  wishes,  our  lusts,  our  various  illusions  and 
sell-deceptions,  and  facts  as  they  are  in  the  clear  daylight  of  eternal  truth  and  a 
judgment  which  cannot  err  (ver.  25).  To  guard  against  the  fatal  illusions  that  beset 
us,  we  should  ask:  1.  Is  this  course'  of  conduct  according  to  the  definite  rules  of 


824  .THE  tEOVERBS.  [oh,  xvi.  1—33, 

conduct  as  they  are  laid  down  in  God's  Word  ?  2.  Is  it  according  to  tiie  best  examples 
of  piety  ?    Above  all,  is  it  Christ-like,  God-like  ?— J. 

Ver.  26. — l%t  hlissiny  of  hunger.     I.  At  bottom,  Hdn&er,  the  need  of  brbad, 

18   THE   GEBAT   STING  AND   QOAD   TO    ALL  BXEBTION,  TO  UBBFUL  ACTIVITY  IN   GENERAL. 

II.  Hence  hunger  is  the  helper  of  Oub  toil.  And  we  may  thank  God  for 
every  stimulus  to  do  our  best.  Have  not  the  best  things  been  done  for  the  world  in 
eveiy  department  by  poor  men  ? 

III.  As    APPLIED    to    religion,    IT    IB    THE    HUNGER    OP    THE    BOUL    WHICH    PROMPTS 

us  TO  SEEK  FOR  RIGHTEOUSNESS ;  the  omptiness  of  other  joys  which  sends  us  to  the 
feast  of  the  gospel.  Through  toil  and  trouble,  the  worst  unrest  and  distress  can  alone 
be  overcome. — J. 

Vers.  27 — 30. — Penal  judgments  on  guilt.  Godless  strivings.  Life  is  full  of 
success  and  failure.  There  are  successes  which  cost  the  soul,  and  failures  in  wliioh  is 
contained  the  reaping  of  life  eternal.  Tlie  activity  of  the  worthless  raan  (ver.  27).  1. 
It  is  mischievous  in  spirit  and  in  end.  He  is  depicted  as  one  who  digs  a  grave  for 
others  (ch.  xxvi.  27 ;  Jer.  xviii.  20,  sqq.).  And  his  Words  are  like  fire  that  scorches, 
blasting  reimtation,  withering  the  buds  of  openin;;  good  in  the  sentiment  of  the  young, 
scoffing  down  the  right  and  true.  2.  It  is  contentious ;  breeding  quarrels,  creative  of 
strife,  introducing  breaches  between  friends,  disuniting  households.  "Envy  and 
every  evil  work  "  is  wherever  he  goes.  3.  It  is  the  activity  of  the  tempter,  the  Seducer. 
Not  content  with  error  himself,  he  would  have  partners  in  sorrow  and  in  guilt.  It 
is  thus  truly  diahoUcal.  4.  It  is  meditated  and  determined  (ver.  30).  Very  striking 
is  the  picture  of  this  verse — the  eyes  half  closed,  the  bit  lips,  the  firm  line  about  the 
mouth'  of  one  resolved  on  dark  designs  and  their  determined  execution.  What  a 
power  is  thought  for  good  or  evil  1  Oh  for  its  right  direction  by  tlie  loving  and  creative 
Spirit  of  all  wisdom  and  goodness,  that  it  may  be  ever  inventive  of  kind  and  healing 
deeds,  that  may  "  seal  up  the  avenues  of  ill,"  rather  than  open  them  more  widely  to 
the  processions  of  darkness  and  liatei-^-J. 

Vers.  31,  32. — The  gentle  life.     Portrayed  with  exquisite  sweetness  and  beauty. 

I.  An  honoured  age.  The  biblical  pictures  of  the  aged  pious  are  very  charming, 
and  Polycarp,  with  his  eighty-six  years  upon  him,  passing  to  another  crown,  that  of 
martyrdom,  is  sublime ;  also  "  Paul  the  aged  and  the  prisoner."  The  text  points  out 
what  we  must  all  recognize  for  an  aesthetic  truth,  that  it  is  the  association  of  age  with 
goodness  which  makes  it  truly  respectable,  venerable,  beautiful. 

IL  Moral  heroism.  The  heathen  type  of  heroism  was  strength  of  arm — bodily 
strength,  manly  courage  against  an  outward  foe.  The  spiritual  and  the  Chiistian  type 
is  in  strength  of  will  against  evil,  self-mastery,  self-conquest,  sublime  patience. 
Better  than  to  be  members  of  any  knightly  order,  "Companions"  of  I  he  Bath,  or  any 
similar  society  speaking  of  the  lower  and  carnal  virtues,  to  be  "companions  in  tribu- 
lation, and  in  the  kingdom  and  patience  of  Jesus  Christ." — J. 

Ver.  33. — Chance  and  providence.  I.  Chance  is  but  an  expeession  of  human 
IGNOKANCB.  When  we  speak  of  that  which  is  contingent,  we  mean  something  the  law 
of  which  is  not  yet  known. 

II.  Man's  control  over  events  ib  limited.  We  can  give  the  external  occasion 
to  a  decision ;  the  decision  itself  rests  with  a  higher  power. 

IlL  God  overrules  all  things,  and  overrules  them  fob  the  best.  To 
pretend  that  we  are  not  free  is  to  deny  our  nature,  and  so  to  deny  him ;  and  it  is 
also  a  denial  of  him  to  think  that  we  can  be  absolute  masters  of  our  fate.  Between 
night  and  day — truths  that  are  obscure  and  convictions  that  are  clear — our  life  is 
balanced  Ijife  rests  on  two  pillars — the  providence  of  God  and  the  responsibility  of 
man. — J 

Vers.  1, 3,  9. — Thought,  action,  prayer.  It  may  be  said  that  the  three  main  elements 
ef  human  experience  are  those  of  thinking,  of  acting,  and  of  praying.  We  have  not 
done  our  beit  until  we  have  done  all  of  these. 


OH.  XVI.  1—33.]  THE  PBOVEEBS.  326 

I.  Thought.  '«The  preparations  of  the  heart  helong  to  man"  (Revised  Version). 
"Thy  thoughts"  ("thy  purposes,"  Revised  Version).  We  are  told  of  Peter,  after  the 
denial,  that  "  when  he  thought  thereon,  he  wept "  (Mark  liv.  72).  But  if  he  had 
thought  beforehand  what  grief  he  would  cause  his  Master  by  such  uiiwortbiness,  he 
would  not  have  had  ocoasion  to  weep  at  all.  "  When  Judas  saw  that  he  was  con- 
demned, he  repented."  But  if  he  had  thought,  he  would  have  seen  that  this  was  the 
plain  and  inevitable  issue  of  his  action.  The  pity  is  that  we  do  not  think  as  we  should 
before  we  act.  The  preparation  of  the  heart  belongs  to  us ;  it  is  our  most  bounden 
duty  to  think,  and  to  think  well,  before  we  act.  And  we  must  remember  that  speech 
i*  action,  and  often  most  important  and  decisive  action  too.  We  should  include  ju  our 
thought,  when  we  are  forming  our  "  purposes  "  (Revised  Version),  the  consideration  of 
the  effects  of  our  prepared  action  upon  (1)  our  whole  nature — bodily,  mental,  spiritual ; 
(2)  our  family  and  our  friends;  (3)  our  neighbours  and  associates;  (4)  our  fellow- 
worshippers  and  fellow-workers;  (6)  the  cause  of  Jesus  Christ;  (6)  not  only  the 
immediate,  but  the  further  future.  We  should,  so  far  as  we  can,  think  the  whole 
subject  through,  look  at  it  from  all  those  points  of  view  that  we  command ;  above  all, 
we  should  take  a  decreasingly  selfish  and  an  increasingly  generous  and  devout  view  of 
the  subjects  that  come  before  us. 

II.  AoTlOK.  "Thy  works."  Thought  must  be  followed  by  vigorous  effort,  or  it  will 
"  lose  the  same  of  action."  Our  works  include  not  only  those  industries  in  which  we 
are  professionally  engagedy — these  are  of  great  importance  to  us,  as  those  which  occupy 
the  greater  part  of  our  time  and  most  of  our  strength ;  but  they  include  also  our  cou- 
tributions,  larger  or  smaller,  worthy  or  unworthy,  to  the  condition  of  our  homes,  to  the 
character  and  the  destiny  of  our  children,  to  the  comfort  and  well-being  of  our  depen- 
dents or  our  employers,  to  the  improvement  of  our  locality,  to  the  stability  and  freedom 
and  success  of  the  institutions  (social,  literary,  pcclesiasticnl,  municipal,  national)  upon 
which  we  can  bring  any  influence  to  bear.  We  may  move  in  a  humble  .-sphere,  and 
yet,  when  all  is  told  that  the  chronicles  of  heaven  can  tell,  we  niay  include  in  a  busy 
and  conscientious  life  many  "  works "  that  will  not  want  the  Divine  approval  or  the 
blessing  of  mankind. 

III.  Pbatbb.  "The  answer  of  the  tongue  is  from  the  Lord  .  .  .  a^d  thy  thoughts 
shall  be  established."  The  two  clauses  imply,  respectively,  (1)  that  God  sometimes 
makes  other  issues  to  result  than  those  which  we  expect;  (2)  that  God  continually 
brings  to  pass  that  which  we  strive  to  accomplish,  especially  when  we  commend  our 
cause  to  his  Divine  favour.  The  practical  conclusions  are  these,  respectively  :  1.  That 
we  must  be  quite  willing  for  the  hand  of  God  to  give  a  different  direction  to  our 
activities;  quite  prepared  to  accept  another  issue  from  that  which  we  had  set  before 
our  own  minds.  For  God  "seeth  not  as  we  see,"  and  he  works  out  his  gracious  pur- 
poses in  other  ways  than  those  of  our  choosing.  2.  That  we  should  always  realize  our 
dependence  on  God  for  a  favourable  issue,  and  earnestly  ask  his  blessing  on  our  labour. 
It  is  the  touch  of  his  Divine  hand  that  must  quicken  into  life,  that  must  crown  with 
true  success. — C. 

Ver.  2.— (See  homily  on  ver.  25.) — 0. 

Ver.  QI^T/iepenitenfa  review  and  prospect.  Placing  ourselves  in  the  position  of  the 
man  who  has  sinned  and  suffered,  aal  has  been  led  to  repentance  and  subiiiissiun,  of 
the  mail  who  is  earnestly  desirous  of  escaping  from  the  sinful  past  and  ol  becoming  a 
;iew  man  and  of  living  a  new  life,  let  us  ask — What  is  his  hope?  what  are  his 
possibilities  ? 

L  In  view  of  the  past  and  of  his  relations  with  God.  What  is  his  hope 
there?  What  are  the  possibilities  of  his  sins  being  forgiven,  his  iniquity  purged 
away?  What  he  must  rely  upon,  in  this  great  domain  of  thought,  is  this — truth  in 
himself  and.  mercy  in  God.     1.  He  himself  must  be  a  true  penitent,  one  that 

"...  feels  the  sins  he  owns, 
And  hates  what  he  deplores;" 

that  intends  with  full  purpose  of  heart  to  turn  from  all  iniquity  and  to  cleave  to 


82«  THE  PEOVEEBS.  [ch.  xyi.  1— 33. 


righteousness  and  purity.     2.  He  must  cast  himselt  on  the  houndless  mercy  of  God 
gained  for  him  and  promised  to  him  in  Jesus  Christ  his  Saviour. 

II.  In  view  of  thb  past  and  op  his  bblations  with  men.  God  accepts  true 
penitence  of  spirit  and  right  purpose  of  heart,  for  he  can  read  our  hearts,  and  knows 
what  we  really  are.  But  man  wants  more.  Before  he  receives  the  sinner  to  his  con- 
fidence and  restores  him  to  the  position  from  which  he  fell,  he  wants  clear  proofs  of 
penitence,  manifestations  of  a'new  ana  a  clean  heart.  The  man  who  has  put  away  his 
sin  can  only  "purge"  the  <zuilty  past  by  the  practice  of  "mercy  and  truth,"  of  kind- 
ness and  integrity,  of  grace  and  purity.  He  has  done  that  which  is  wrong,  false, 
hurtful.  Let  him  now  do  that  which  is  just,  true,  right ;  that  which  is  kind,  helpful, 
pitiful,  generous;  then  we  shall  see  that  he  means  all  that  he  says,  that  his  professions 
are  sincere ;  then  he  may  be  taken  back — ^his  iniquity  purged — to  the  place  which  he 
has  lost. 

III.  In  view  op  the  futueb,  having  regabd  to  himself.  How  shall  the  penitent 
make  good  the  promises  he  has  made  to  his  friends  ?  How  shall  he  ensure  his  future 
probity  and  purity  ?  how  shall  he  engage  to  walk  in  love  and  in  the  path  of  holy 
service,  as  he  is  bound  to  do,  taking  on  him  the  name  of  Christ  ?  The  answer  is,  by 
walking  on  in  reverence  of  spirit,  by  proceeding  in  "  the  fear  of  the  Lord ; "  thus  will  he 
"  depart  from  evil,"  and  do  good.  It  is  the  man  who  cultivates  a  reverent  spirit,  who 
realizes  the  near  presence  of  God,  who  walks  with  God  in  prayer  and  holy  fellowship, 
who  treasures  in  his  mind  the  thoughts  of  God,  and  reminds  himself  firequently  of  the 
will  of  God  concerning  him — it  is  he  who  will  "  never  be  moved  from  his  integrity ; " 
he  will  redeem  his  word  of  promise,  he  will  live  the  new  and  better  life  of  £»ith  and 
holiness  and  love. — 0. 

Ver.  11  (and  see  ch.  li.  1 ;  xi.  10,  23). — Honesty  in  husiness.  The  repetition  of 
this  maxim  (see  above)  is  an  indication  of  the  importaoce  that  should  be  attached  to 
the  subject.  It  is  one  that  affects  a  very  large  proportion  of  mankind,  and  that  affects 
men  nearly  every  day  of  their  life.     The  text  reminds  us — 

I.  That  business  is  within  the  pbovinob  or  belioion.  The  man  who  says, 
"  Business  is  husiness,  and  religion  is  religion,"  is  a  man  whose  moral  and  spiritual 
perceptions  are  sadly  confused.  "  God's  commandment  is  exceeding  broad,"  and  its 
breadth  is  such  as  will  cover  all  the  transactions  of  the  market.  Commerce  and  trade, 
as  much  as  agriculture,  are  "  the  Lord's ;  "  it  is  an  order  of  human  activity  which  is 
in  ftill  accord  with  his  design  concerning  us ;  and  it  is  a  sphere  into  which  he  expects 
us  to  introduce  our  highest  principles  and  convictioni,  in  which  we  may  be  always 
servino;  him. 

II.  That  dishonesty  is  offensive  in  his  sight.  "  A  false  balance  is  his  abomina- 
tion "  (ch.  xi.  1 ;  XX.  10).  Dishonesty  is  evil  in  his  sight,  inasmuch  as :  1.  It  is  a 
flagrant  violation  of  one  of  his  chief  commandments.  The  second  of  all  the  command- 
ments is  this,  "Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself"  (see  Matt.  xxii.  29).  But 
to  cheat  our  neighbour  in  the  market  is  to  do  to  him  what  we  should  strenuously  pro- 
test against  his  doing  to  us.  2.  It  is  a  distinct  breach  of  what  is  due  to  our  brother. 
It  is  a  most  unbrotherly  action;  it  is  an  act  done  in  conscious  disregard  of  all  the 
claims  our  fellow-men  have  on  our  consideration.  Moreover,  it  is  an  injury  to  the 
society  of  which  we  are  members ;  for  it  is  one  of  those  wrongs  which  are  crimes  as  well 
as  sins  ;  it  is  an  act  which  strikes  at  the  root  of  all  fellowship,  all  commerce  between 
man  and  man.  3.  It  is  an  injury  done  by  a  man  to  himself.  No  man  can  rob  his 
brother  without  wronging  his  own  soul.  He  is  something  the  worse  for  every  act  of 
dishonesty  he  perpetrates.  And  he  who  is  sy.stematically  defrauding  his  neighbours  ia 
daily  cutting  into  his  own  character,  is  continually  staining  his  own  spirit,  is  destroying 
himself. 

III.  That  honesty  is  aoobptablb  to  God.  "A  just  weight  is  his  delight."  Not 
that  all  honest  dealing  is  equally  acceptable  to  him.  Much  here,  as  everywhere, 
depends  upon  the  motive.  A  man  may  be  honest  only  because  it  is  the  best  policy, 
because  he  fears  the  exposure  and  penalty  of  fraud  :  there  is  small  virtue  in  that.  On 
the  other  hand,  he  may  be  strictly  fair  and  just  in  all  his  dealings,  whether  his  work 
be  known  or  unknown,  because  he  has  a  conviction  of  what  is  due  to  his  neighbour,  or 
because  ho  has  an  abiding  sense  of  what  God  would  have  him  be  and  do.    In  this  case 


OH.  XTi.  1— 83.]  THE  PBOVBRBa  827 

his  honesty  is  as  truly  an  act  of  piety,  of  holy  service,  as  was  a  saci-iflce  at  the  temple 
of  Jehovah,  as  is  a  prayer  in  the  sanctuary  of  Christ,  it  is  an  act  rendered  "  unto  the 
Lord,"  and  it  is  well-pleasing  in  the  sight  of  God  his  Saviour ;  he  "  serves  the  Lord 
Christ"  (Col.  iii.  23,  24).  It  isa  great  thing  that  we  need  not  leave  the  shop  or  the 
ship,  the  office  or  the  field,  in  order  to  render  acceptahle  sacrifice  unto  the  Lord  our 
God.  By  simple  conscientiousness,  by  sterling  and  immovable  integrity,  whatever  tlie 
post  we  occupy,  maintained  by  us  with  a  view  to  the  observant  eye  of  our  ever-pres:.'nt 
Master,  we  may  honour  and  please  him  as  much  as  if  we  were  bowing  in  prayer  or 
lifting  up  our  voice  in  praise  in  the  worship  of  his  house. — 0. 

Ver.  16. — (See  homily  on  oh.  viii.  10, 11.) — 0. 

Vers.  18, 19  (ch.  xi.  2 ;  xviii.  12). — Pride  and  humility.  Great  insistance  is  laid  in 
Scripture  on  the  evil  of  pride  and  the  value  of  humility.  The  subject  has  a  large  place 
in  those  "  thoughts  of  God,"  which  are  communicated  to  us  in  his  Word. 

I.  The  evil  of  pride.  1.  It  is  hased  on  falsity.  For  what  has  the  richest  or  the 
■trongest  or  the  cleverest  man,  what  has  the  most  beautiful  or  the  most  honoureil 
woman,  that  he  or  she  has  not  received  (1  Cor.  iv.  7)  ?  Ultimately,  we  owe  everything 
to  our  Creator  and  Divine  Benefactor ;  and  the  thought  that  our  distinction  is  due  to 
ourselves  is  an  essentially  false  thought.  Hence:  2.  It  is  irreverent  and  ungrateful; 
for  it  is  constantly  forgetful  of  the  heavenly  source  of  all  our  blessings.  3.  It  is  ugly 
and  offensive  in  the  sight  of  man.  That  self-respect  which  makes  a  man  superior  to  all 
meanness  and  all  unworthiness  of  himself  is  honourable  and  excellent  in  our  eyes ;  but 
pride,  which  is  an  overweening  estimate  of  our  own  importance  or  virtue,  is  wholly 
unbeautiful ;  it  marks  a  man's  chardcter  as  a  scar  marks  his  countenance ;  it  makes  the 
subji  ct  of  it  a  man  whom  we  look  upon  with  aversion  rather  than  delight — our  soul 
finds  no  pleasure  in  regarding  him.  It  is  positively  offensive  to  our  spirit.  4.  It  it 
repeatedly  and  severdy  condemned  hy  Ood  as  a  seiious  sin  (ch.  viii.  Id ;  Fs.  xii.  3 ; 
xxxL  23;  ci.  6;  cxxxviii.  6;  Isa.  ii.  12;  Mark  vii.  22;  1  Tim.  iii.  6;  2  Tim.  iii.  2; 
Jas.  iv.  6,  etc.).  5.  It  is  spiritually  perilous  in  a  very  high  degree.  No  truth  is  more 
constantly  illustrated  than  that  ol  the  text,  "Pride  goeth  before  destruction,"  etc. 
Pride  begets  a  false  confidence;  this  begets  un wariness,  and  leads  into  the  place  of 
danger;  and  then  comes  the  fall.  Sometimes  it  is  in  health;  at  other  times,  in  husi- 
ness ;  or  it  may  be  in  office  and  in  power ;  or,  alas  1  it  may  be  in  morals  and  in  piety. 
There  is  no  field  of  human  thought  and  action  in  which  pride  is  not  a  most  dangerous 
guide.     It  leads  up  to  and  (only  too  often)  over  the  precipice. 

II.  The  bxcbllencb  of  hdmilitt.  "  Better  to  be  of  a  humble  'spirit  with  the 
lowly,"  etc.     And  it  is  better  because,  while  pride  is  open  to  all  these  condemnations 

ias  above),  humility  is  to  be  commended  and  to  be  desired  for  the  opposite  virtues.  1. 
t  is  founded  on  a  true  view  of  our  own  hearts.  The  lowlier  the  view  we  take  of  our- 
selves, the  truer  the  estimate  we  form.  There  «  a  lowliness  of  word  and  demeanour 
that  is  feigned  and  that  is  false.  A  man  may  be  "  proud  of  his  humility,"  and  may 
declaim  his  own  sins  with  a  haughty  heart.  But  real  humility  is  based  on  a  thoroiigh 
knowledge  of  our  own  nature,  of  its  weakness  and  its  openness  to  evil;  on  a  full 
acquaintance  with  our  own  character,  with  its  imperfection  and  liability  to  fail  us  in 
the  trying  hour.  2.  It  is  admirable  in  itself.  We  do  not,  indeed,  admire  servility ;  we 
detest  it  heartily.  But  we  do  admire  genuine  humility.  It  is  a  very  valuable  adorn- 
ment of  a  Christian  character;  it  graces  an  upright  life  with  a  beauty  no  other  quality 
can  supply.  There  is  no  one  whom  it  does  not  become,  whom  it  does  not  make  much 
more  attractive  than  he  (or  she)  would  otherwise  be.  3.  ■  It  is  the  very  gateway  into 
the  kingdom  of  God.  It  is  the  humble  heart,  conscious  of  error  and  of  sin,  that  seeks 
the  Teacher  and  the  Saviour.  It  is  the  guide  which  conducts  our  spirit  straight  to  the 
feet  and  to  the  cross  of  our  Redeemer.  4.  It  is  an  attribute  of  Christian  character 
which  commends  us  to  the  love  and  to  the  favour  of  our  Lord.  5.  It  is  the  only 
ground  on  which  we  are  safe.  Pride  is  a  slippery  place,  where  we  are  sure  to  sUp  and 
fall ;  humility  is  the  ground  where  devotion  finds  its  home,  which  a  reverent  trustful- 
ness frequents,  where  God  is  ready  with  the  shield  of  his  guardianship,  from  which 
temptation  shrinks  away,  where  human  souls  live  in  peace  and  purity  and  attain  to 
their  maturity  in  Jeaus  Christ  their  Lord. — C. 


t98  THE  PROTERBS.  [om.  xvi.  1— 88. 

Ver.  25  (see  ch.  xlv.  12). — T?ie  mpreme  mistake.  We  may  well  be  startled,  and  we 
may  well  be  solemnized,  as  we  witness — 

I.  The  habyellous  banqb  op  human  complaobnot.  It  is  simply  wondmful  how 
men  will  allow  themselves  to  be  deceived  respecting  themselves.  That  which  they 
ought  to  know  best  and  most  thoroughly,  they  seem  to  be  least  acquainted  with — their 
own  standing,  their  own  spirit,  their  own  character.  They  believe  themselves  to  be 
all  right  when,  in  fact,  they  are  all  wrong.  They  suppose  themselves  to  be  travelling 
in  one  way  when  they  are  moving  in  the  very  opposite  direction.  This  strange  and 
sad  fact  in  our  experience  applies  to:  1.  Our  direct  relation  to  God.  We  may  be 
imagining  ourselves  reconciled  to  him,  in  favour  with  him,  enjoying  his  Divine  friend- 
snip,  engaged  on  his  side,  promoting  his  kingdom,  while,  all  the  time,  we  are  far  from 
liim,  are  condemned  by  him,  are  doing  the  work  of  his  enemies,  are  injuring  his  cause 
and  his  kingdom.  Witness  the  hypocrites  of  our  Lord's  time,  and  the  formalists  and 
ceremonialists  of  all  times;  witness  also  the  persecutors  of  every  age;  witness  those  of 
every  land  and  age  who  have  failed  to  understand  that  it  is  he,  and  only  he,  who 
"  doeth  righteousness  that  is  righteous  "  in  the  sight  of  God.  2.  Our  relation  to  our 
fellow-men.  How  often  men  have  thought  themselves  just  when  they  have  been 
miierably  unjust,  kind  when  they  have  been  heartlessly  cruel,  faithful  when  they  have 
been  guiltily  disloyalj  3.  What  we  owe  to  ourselves.  Only  too  often  men  think  that 
cou'luct  pure  which  is  impure,  consistent  with  sobriety  which  is  a  distinct  step  toward 
insobriety,  agreeable  which  is  objectionable,  safe  which  is  seductive  and  full  of  peril. 

II.  The. DISASTROUS  end  of  a  serious  mistake.  The  way  seems  right  to  a  man, 
and  he  goes  comfortably  and  even  cheerily  along  it,  but  the  end  of  it  is — death.  1.  In 
some  cases  this  end  is  premature  physical  decline  and  dissolution.  2.  In  all  cases 
it  is  s|iiritual  decay  and  the  threatened  death  of  the  soul,  the  departure  and  ultimate 
loss  of  all  that  makes  human  life  honourable,  all  that  makes  a  human  spirit  fair  in  the 
sight  of  God.    3.  'I'he  death  which  is  eternal. 

III.  OuB  CLBAB  WISDOM  IN  VIEW  OF  THIS  POSSIBILITY.  It  IS !  1.  To  ask  ourselvea 
how  we  stand  in  Q-od's  sight.  Man  may  be  accepting  us  on  our  own  showing,  but  God 
does  not  do  that.  "  The  Lord  weigheth  the  spirits  "  (ver.  2).  He  "  looketh  upon  the 
heart ; "  he  considers  the  aim  that  is  before  us  and  the  spirit  that  is  within  us ; 
what  is  the  goal  we  are  really  seeking;  what  is  the  motive  by  which  we  are  really 
animated;  what  is  the  deep  desire  and  the  honest  and  earnest  endeavour  of  our  heart. 
2.  To  6e  or  to  become  right  with  him.  If  we  find  ourselves  wrong  in  his  view,  to 
humble  bur  hearts  before  him ;  to  seek  his  Divine  forgiveness  for  all  our  wandering ; 
to  ask  his  guidance  and  inspiration  to  set>  forth  upon  a  new  course  and  to  maintain 
it  to  the  end.    He  alone  can  "  show  us  the  path  of  life." — 0. 

Ver.  28. — (See  homily  on  ch.  xvii.  9.) — C. 

Ver.  31. — The  crown  of  old  age.  Many  are  the  crowns  which,  in  imagination,  we 
see  upon  the  head.  Many  are  eagerly  desired  and  diligently  sought;  sucli  are  those 
of  fame,  of  rank,  of  wealth,  of  power,  of  beauty.  These  are  well  enough  in  their  way ; 
but  (1)  that  which  is  spent  in  winning  them  is  often  far  more  valuable  than  the  good 
for  which  the  sacrifice  is  made ;  and  (2)  the  crown,  when  it  is  worn,  usually  weighs 
heavier  and  gives  less  satisfaction  than  was  imagined  in  the  ardour  of  pursuit.  Old 
age  is  a  crown.  It  is  natural  that  men  should  desire  it,  for  two  reasons.  1.  It  means 
a  prolongation  of  life ;  and  life,  under  ordinary  conditions,  is  greatly  desired,  so  that 
ujen  cling  to  it  even  tenaciously.  2.  It  means  the  completion  of  the  course  of  life. 
Age  is  one  of  its  n:)tural  stages.  It  has  its  privations,  but  it  has  also  its  own  honours 
and  enjoyments  ;  those  who  have  passed  through  life's  other  experiences  may  rightly 
wish  to  complete  their  course  by  wearing  the  hoary  head  of  old  age.  But  in  connec- 
tion with  age,  there  is— 

I.  The  cbown  of  shame.  For  it  is  not  always  found  in  the  way  of  righteousness. 
An  old  man  who  is  still  ignorant  of  those  truths  which  he  might  have  learned,  but  has 
neglected  to  gather;  or  who  is  addicted  to  dishonourable  indulgences  which  he  has 
had  time  to  conquer,  but  has  not  subdued  ;  or  who  yields  to  unbcautiful  habits  of  the 
spirit  which  he  should  long  ago  have  expelled  from  his  nature  and  his  life ;  or  who 
has  tiot  yet  returned  unto  that  Divine  Father  who  has  been  seeking  and  calling  him 


OH.  XVI.  1—88.]  THE  PR0VEBB8  829 

all  his  days; — such  an  old  man,  with  his  grey  hairs,  wears  a  crown  of  dishonour  rather 
than  of  glory.  But  while  we  may  feol  that  he  is  to  be  condemned,  we  feel  far  m'>re 
inclined  to  pity  than  to  blame.  For  what  is  age  not  found  in  the  way  of  righteousness 
— •ge  without  excellency,  age  without  virtue,  age  uncrowned  with  faith  and  hope  ? 
Surely  one  of  the  most  pitiable  spectacles  the  world  presents  to  our  eyes.  It  is  pleasant, 
indeed,  to  be  able  to  regard — i 

II.  The  obown  or  honoub.  When  old  age  ii  found  in  the  way  of  righteousness, 
it  is  a  crown  of  honour,  in  that :  1.  It  has  upon  it  the  reflection  of  an  honourable 
fast.  It  speaks  of  past  virtues  that  have  helped  to  make  it  the  "  green  old  age  "  it  is ; 
of  past  luccessei  that^  hare  been  gained  in  the  battle  of  life ;  of  past  services  that  have 
been  diligently  and  faithfully  rendered ;  of  past  sorrows  that  have  been  meekly  borne ; 
of  past  struggles  that  have  been  bravely  met  and  passed ;  for  it  was  in  the  rendering 
and  in  the  bearing  and  in  the  meeting  of  these  that  the  hair  has  been  growing  grey 
from  year  to  year,  2.  It  has  the  special  excellency  of  the  present.  "  A  crown  of  beauty  " 
(ma'ginal  reading).  In  the  "  hoary  head  "  and  in  the  benignant  countenance  of  old 
age  there  is  a  beauty  which  is  all  its  own;  it  is  a  beauty  which  may  not  be  observable 
to  eveiy  eye,  but  which  is  there  nevertheless ;  it  is  the  beauty  of  spiritual  worth,  of 
trustfulness  and  repose,  of  calmness  and  quietness;  it  is  a  beauty  if  not  the  beauty  of 
holiness.  He  who  does  not  recognize  in  the  aged  that  have  grown  old  in  the  service 
of  God  and  in  the  practice  of  righteousness  something  more  than  the  marks  of  tiipe, 
fails  to  see  a  crown  of  beauty  that  is  visible  to  a  more  discerning  eye.  3.  It  has  the 
blessed  anticipation  of  the  future.  It  looks  homeward  and  heavenward.  A  selfish  and 
a  worldly  old  age  is  grovelling  enough;  it  "hugs  its  gold  to  the  very  verge  of  the 
churchyard  mould ; "  but  the  age  that  is  found  in  the  ways  of  righteousness  has  the 
light  of  a  glorious  hope  in  its  eyes;  it  wears  upon  its  brows  the  crown  of  a  peaceful 
ai.d  blessed  anticipation  of  a  rest  that  remains  for  it,  of  a  reunion  with  the  helovid 
that  have  gone  on  before,  of  a  ieatiflc  vision  of  the  Saviour  in  his  glory,  of  a  larger  lift 
IB  a  nobler  sphere,  oaly  a  few  paces  further  on. — 0. 

▼er.  32  (with  eh.  xiv.  17,  29). — I%e  command  of  ourselves.  Our  attention  is  called 
to  the  two  sides  of  the  subject. 

I.  The  evil  of  impatience.  How  bad  a  thing  it  is  to  lose  command  of  ourselves 
anil  to  speak  or  act  with  a  ruffled  and  disquieted  spirit  appears  when  we  consider  that : 
1.  It  is  wrong.  God  gave  us  our  understanding,  our  various  spiritual  faculties,  on 
purpose  that  we  might  have  ourselves  under  control;  and  when  we  permit  ourselves 
to  he  irritated  and  vexed,  to  be  provoked  to  anger,  we  do  that  which  crosses  his  Divine 
purpose  concerning  us  and  his  expectation  of  us;  we  do  that  which  disappoints  and 
grieves  our  Father.  2.  It  is  a  defeat.  We  have  failed  to  do  that  which  was  set  us 
to  do.  The  hour  when  our  will  is  crossed  is  the  hour  of  trial ;  then  it  is  seen  whether 
we  succeed  or  fail ;  and  when  we  lose  control  of  our  spirit  we  are  defeated.  3.  It  is 
an  exhibition  of  folly.  He  that  is  hasty  of  spirit  "  exalteth  folly  "  (ch.  xiv.  29).  He 
gives  another  painful  illustration  of  folly;  he  shows  that  he  is  not  the  wise  man  we 
could  wish  that  he  were.  He  shows  once  more  how  soon  and  how  easily  a' good  man 
may  be  overcome,  and  may  be  led  from  the  path  of  wisdom.  4,  It  conducts  to  evil. 
"  He  that  is  soon  angry  will  deal  foolishly  "  (ch.  xiv.  17).  A  man  who  loses  the 
balance  of  a  good  temper  will  certainly  "deal  foolishly."  We  are  never  at  our  best 
when  we  are  angry.  Our  judgment  is  disturbed ;  our  mental  faculties  are  disordered  ; 
they  lose  their  true  proportion.  We  do  not  speak  as  wisely,  we  do  not  act  as 
judiciously,  as  we  otherwise  should.  In  all  probability,  we  speak  and  act  with  positive 
folly,  in  a  way  which  brings  regret  on  our  own  part  and  reproach  from  our  neighbour. 
Very  possibly  we  say  and  do  that  which  cannot  easily,  if  ever,  be  undone.  We  take 
the  bloom  off  a  fair  friendship ',  we  plant  a  root  of  bitterness  which  we  are  not  able  to 
pluck  up;  we  start  a  train  of  consequences  which  will  run  we  know  not  whither. 

II.  The  tbub  conquest.  To  be  master  of  ourselves  is  to  be  "of  great  understand- 
ing," to  be  "  better  than  the  mighty,"  or  than  "  he  that  taketh  a  cit^."  It  is  so,  inas- 
much as :  1.  It  is  an  essentially  spiritual  victory.  To  take  a  city  is,  in  part,  to  triumph 
over  physical  obstacles,  over  walls  and  moats  and  bullets ;  but  he  that  ruleth  his  spirit 
ie  doing  battle  with  evil  tempers  and  unholy  inclinations  and  unworthy  impulses.  He 
is  striving  "  not  against  flesh  and  bluod,"  but  against  the  mightier  enemiei  that  couch 


330 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[oh.  xvn.  1 — 28. 


and  spring  on  the  human  soul ;  he  is  fighting  with  far  nobler  weapons  than  sword  or 
bayonet  or  cannon — with  thought,  with  spiritual  energy,  with  deep  resolve,  with 
strenuous  will,  with  conscience,  with  prayer.  The  victory  is  fought  and  won  on  the 
highest  oround,  1;he  arena  of  a  human  spirit.  2.  It  is  a  victory  over  oureelf.  And 
this  is  worthier  and  better  than  one  gained  over  another.  (1)  There  is  no  humiliation 
in  it;  on  the  contrary,  there  is  self-respect  and  a  sense  of  true  manfulness.  (2)  Our 
first  duty  is  that  we  owe  to  ourselves.  God  has  committed  to  each  human  spirit  the 
solemn  charge  of  his  own  character.  We  have  other  high  and  sacred  functions  to  dis- 
charge, but  the  first  and  greatest  of  them  all  is  to  honour,  to  train,  to  rule,  to  cultivate, 
to  ennoble,  our  own  spirit.  We  are  therefore  carrying  out  the  express  will  of  God  when 
we  victoriously  command  ourselves.  3.  It  is  Woodless  and  beneficent.  The  warrior 
may  well  forget  the  honours  he  has  received  when  he  is  obliged  to  remember  the  cries 
of  the  wounded  on  the  battle-field,  and  tlie  tears  of  the  widows  and  the  orphans  who 
are  the  victims  of  war.  But  he  who  rules  his  own  spirit  has  no  sad  memories  to  recall, 
no  heart-rending  scenes  to  picture  to  his  mind.  His  victories  are  unstained  with  blood ; 
by  the  conquest  of  himself  he  has  saved  many  a  heart  from  being  wounded  by  a  hasty 
word,  and  he  has  preserved  or  restored  that  atmosphere  in  which  alone  happiness  can 
live  and  prosperity  abound. — 0. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XVII. 


Ver.  1.— (Comp.  eh.  xv.  16,  17 ;  xvi.  8.) 

Better  (sweeter)  is  a  dry  morsel,  and  quiet- 
ness therewith.  Dry  bread  was  soaked  in 
wine  or  water  before  it  was  eaten.  Thus 
Boaz  bid  Ruth  "dip  her  morsel  in  the 
vinegar"  (Ruth  ii.  14);  thus  Jesus  gave 
the  sop  to  Judas  when  he  had  dipped  it 
(John  xiii.  26).  The  Septuagint  is  pleo- 
nastic, "  Better  is  a  morsel  with  joy  in 
peace."  Aben  Ezra  connects  this  verse 
with  the  last  two  of  ch.  xvi.,  confining  the 
application  to  the  patient  man ;  but  the 
sentence  seems  rather  to  bo  independent 
and  general.  Than  an  house  fnll  of  sacri- 
fices with  strife.  Of  the  thank  or  peace 
offerings  part  only  was  burnt  upon  the 
altar,  the  rest  was  eaten  by  the  offerer  and 
his  family ;  and  as  the  victims  were  always 
the  choicest  animals,  "  a  house  full  of  sacri- 
fices" would  contain  tlie  materials  for 
Bumi>tuouB  feasting  (see  on  ch.  vii.  14). 
The  joyous  family  festival  often  degenerated 
into  excess,  which  naturally  led  to  quarrels 
and  strife  (see  1  Sam.  i.  5, 6, 13 ;  ii.  13,  etc.). 
So  the  agapsB  of  the  early  Church  were 
desecrated  by  licence  and  selfishness  (1  Cor. 
xi.  20,  etc.).  Septuagint, "  than  a  house  full 
of  many  good  things  and  unrighteous  vic- 
tims with  contention."  With  this  verse 
compare  the  Spanish  proverb,  "Mas  vale 
un  pedazo  de  pan  con  amor,  que  galliuas 
con  dolor." 

Ver.  2. — A  wise  servant  shall  have  rule 
over  a  son  that  causeth  shame.  Here  is 
intimated  the  supremacy  of  wisdom  over 
folly  and  vice.  The  contrast  is  better  em- 
phasized by  translating,  A  servant  that 
dealeth  teitdy  ihall  have  rule  over  a  son  that 


doeth  shamefully;  i.e.  a  son  of  his  master. 
(For  similar  contrast  between  "  wise  "  and 
"  shameful,"  comp.  ch.  x.  5 ;  xiv.  35.)  >  Slaves 
were  often  raised  to  high  honour,  and  niiu-ht 
inherit  their  master's  possessions.  Thus 
Abraham's  servant,  Eliezer  of  Damascus, 
was  at  one  time  considered  the  patriarch's 
heir  (Gen.  xv.  2,  S);  Ziba,  Saul's  servant, 
obtained  the  inheritance  of  his  lord  Mephi- 
bosheth  ("  the  Shameful,"  2  Sam.  xvi.  4) ; 
Joseph  was  advanced  to  the  highest  post  in 
Egypt.  BccluB.  X.  25,  "Unto  the  servant 
that  is  wise  shall  they  that  are  free  do 
service ;  and  lie  that  is  wise  will  not  grudge 
when  he  is  reformed."  Septuagint, "  A  wise 
household  servant  shall  rule  over  foolish 
masters."  "  I  have  seen,"  says  Ecolesiastes 
(x.  7),  "  servants  upon  liorses,  and  princes 
walkmg  as  servants  upon  the  earth."  Shall 
have  part  of  the  inheritance  among  the 
brethren ;  shall  share  on  equal  terms  with 
the  sons  of  the  house.  This  innovation  on 
the  usual  disposition  of  property  could 
happen  only  in  the  case  of  an  abnormally 
intelligent  and  trusted  slave.  In  1  Chron. 
ii.  34,  etc.,  mention  is  made  of  a  case  where 
a  master,  having  no  son,  gave  his  daughter 
in  marriage  to  a  slave,  and  adopted  him 
into  the  fiimily.  Delitzsoh  understands  the 
clause  to  mean  that  the  slave  shall  have 
the  ofBce  of  dividing  his  master's  inheri- 
tance among  the  heirs,  shall  be  the  executor 
of  his  deceased  master's  will ;  but  this  ex- 
planation hardly  seems  to  do  justice  to  the 
merits  of  the  "wise  servant,"  and  takes  no 
account  of  the  idea  involved  in  "  shameful 
son."  But  the  Septuagint  appears  to 
countenance  this  view,  rendering,  "and 
among  the  brethren  he  shall  divide  the 
portions." 


OH.  XVII.  1—28.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


331 


Ver.  3. — The  fining-pot  is  for  silver,  and 
the  furnaoe  for  gold.  The  word  matsreph, 
"fiuing-pot,"  occurs  also  in  oh.  xxvii.  '2,1. 
It  is  not  certain  what  ia  meant  by  it.  There 
is  no  evidence  that  the  Isiaelites  were 
acquainted  with  the  use  of  acids  in  the 
manipulation  of  impure  or  mixed  mtital.-i; 
otherwise  the  "  pot "  and  the  "  furnace " 
would  represent  the  two  usual  modes  of 
reduction;  but  it  is  most  jaoliable  that 
both  allude  to  the  same  method  of  smelting 
the  ore  in  crucibles,  for  the  purpose  of 
separating  the  pure  metal  from  the  dross. 
That  silver  and  gold  were  plentiful  in  Solo- 
mon's time  is  abundantly  evident;  indeed, 
the  amount  of  the  pieoious  metals  collected 
by  David  and  liis  son  is  almost  incredible 
(see  1  Chron.  xxii.  11;  xxix.  2,  etc.,  from 
which  and  similar  passages  it  is  inferred 
that  the  sums  enumeiated  equalled  more 
than  nine  hundred  millions  of  pounds 
sterling).  But  the  Lord  trieth  the  hearts 
(oh.  XV.  11;  xxiv.  12).  That  which  fire 
does  for  the  metals,  the  Lord  does  for 
men's  hearts ;  he  purifies  them  from  dross, 
brings  forth  the  good  that  is  in  them, 
purgeil  from  eartlily  infirmities.  God's  pro- 
cess is  the  application  of  sorrow,  sickni  ss, 
temptation,  that,  duly  meeting  these,  the 
soul  may  emerge  frr)in  the  trial  as  pure  gold, 
fit  for  ^e  Master's-  use  (comp.  Jer.  ]3i.  3 ; 
MaL  iu.  2;  1  Pet.  i.  7  ;  Eev.  iil.  18). 

Ver.  4. — A  wicked  doer  giveth  heed  to 
false  (evil)  lips.  A  bad  man  delights  in 
and  hearkens  to  evil  words;  he  takes  pleasure 
in  those  who  counsel  wickedness,  because 
they  are  after  his  own  heart.  Like  mates 
with  like.  And  a  liar  giveth  ear  to  a 
naughty  (mischievous)  tongue.  One  who 
is  himself  mendacious  listens  with  avidity 
to  any  tale  that  may  injure  a  neighbour, 
however  monstrous  and  improbable  it  may 
be.  Septuagint,  "  A  wicked  man  listens  to 
the  tongue  of  transgressors ;  but  a  just  man 
heedeth  not  false  lips."  The  Greek  adds 
here,  or  in  some  manuscripts,  after  ver.  6, 
a  paragraph  which  is  not  found  in  the 
Hebrew,  Syriac,  or  Latiu  :  "  To  him  who 
is  faitliful  the  whole  world-wealth  belongs ; 
but  the  unfaithful  is  not  worth  an  obole." 
On  this  the  Fathers  have  frequently  com- 
mented (see  Corn,  k  Lapide,  in  toe.). 

Ver.  5.— Whoso  mocketh  the  poor  (see 
eh.  liv.  31,  which  is  nearly  identical).  He 
that  is  glad  at  calamities  shall  not  be  un- 
punished (ch.  xi.  Ul ;  xxiv.  17,  18).  The 
particular  calamity  primarily  intended  seems 
to  be  that  which  reduces  a  person  to  poverty. 
Deliglit  in  otliers'  misfortunes,  even  those 
of  enemies,  is  a  most  detestable  form  of 
selfishness  and  malice.  Job,  testifying  to 
his  own  integrity,  was  thankful  to  think  that 
be  was  free  from  this  vice  (Job  xxxi.  29). 
The  Greeki  had  a  name  for  it,  and  called  it 


^irixoipeKoKia,  which  is  used  by  Aristotle 
('  Eth.  Nic.,'  ii.  6.  18).  The  pious  author 
looks  for  retributive  punishment  on  such 
spiteiulness.  The  LXX.  tries  to  improve 
the  contrast  by  inserting  a  gloss,  "He  who 
rejoices  at  one  who  perishes  shall  nut  go 
unpunished ;  but  he  who  hath  compassion 
shall  obtain  mercy,"  which  is  remarkably 
like  Christ's  sentence,  "  Blessed  are  the 
merciful:  for  they  shall  obtain  mercy." 

Ver.  6. — Children's  children  are  the  crown 
of  old  men  (comp.  Ps.  cxxvii. ;  cxxviii.)^ 
(For  the  term  "crown,"  comp.  oh.  ivi.  31.) 
Thua  St.  Paul  calls  his  converts  his  "joy 
and  crown  "  (Phil.  iv.  1 ;  1  Thess.  iL  19).  Iu 
the  East  a  large  number  of  children  is  con- 
sidered a  great  blessing,  being  a  guarantee 
of  the  stability  of  the  family.  Thus  writes 
Euripides  ('  Ipli.  Taur.,'  oT) — 

^rihoi  yitp  oXkcdv  iraTdes  eltrtv  Apireves. 
"Male  children  are  the  pillars  of  the  house." 

The  glory  of  children  are  their  fathers.  A 
long  line  of  good  or  celebrated  ancestors  is 
the  glory  of  their  descendants,  and  brings  a 
blessing  on  them  (see  1  Kings  xi.  13;  xv. 
i).  Hereditary  nobility,  based  on  descent 
from  some  eminent  progenitor,  may  be  a 
■onrce  of  not  unseemly  pride^  and  a  spur  to 
a  life  worthy  of  such  excellent  ancestry. 

Ver.  7. — Excellent  speech  beeometh  not  a 
fool,  "iri;  rsB' ;  verba  composita,  Vulgate, 
i.e.  studied,  complicated,  expressions ;  x^^^V 
iriffTo,  "faithful  lips,"  Septuagint.  Others 
translate,  "  arrogant,"  "  pretentious."  It  ia 
literally,  a  lip  of  excttt  or  tuperabundanee, 
and  is  best  taken  in  the  above  sense,  as 
arrogant  or  assuming.  A  ndbal,  a  "  vicious 
fool,"  ought  not  to  flaunt  his  unwisdom  and 
his  iniquities  before  the  eyes  of  men,  but  to 
keep  them  hidden  as  much  as  possible.  As 
such  presumptuous  behaviour  is  incon- 
giuous  in  the  case  of  a  fool,  much  less  do 
lying  lips  [become]  a  prince;  a  nijble  per- 
son, such  a  one  as  is  called  in  Isaiah 
(xxxii.  8)  "  liberal,"  where  the  same  word, 
nadib,  is  useil.  This  is  an  illustration  of 
the  saying,  "  Noblesse  oblige."  Thus  the 
Greek  gnome — 

'E\ev6epov  yap  hySphs  &K'fj6€iav  Keyety, 
"  A  free  man's  part  it  is  the  truth  to  speak." 
To  John  the  Good,  King  of  France,  is 
attributed  the  noble  maxim  which  well 
became  his  chivalrous  character,  "Si  la 
bonne  foi  ^tait  bannie  du  reste  du  monde, 
il  faudrait  qu'on  la  retrouv&t  dana  le  coeui 
des  rois "  (Bonneohose,  '  Hist,  de  France,' 
i.  310).  "  My  son,"  says  the  rabbi  in  the 
Talmud,  "avoid  lying  first  of  all;  for  a 
lie  will  tarnish  the  brightness  of  thy  honcnr." 
For  "  prince,"  the  Septuagiut  has,  "  «  just 
man,"  which  makes  the  maxim  •  mei« 
truism. 


832 


THE  PROVERBS, 


[oh.  xvn.  1 — 28, 


Ver.  8. — There  it  a  breath  of  satirp  in 
tliis  verse.  A  gift  is  as  a  precious  stone  in 
the  eyes  of  him  that  hath  it.  "  A  precious 
Btone  "  is  literally  "  a  etone  of  grace  "  (oh. 
i.  9)  'I'he  gnome  expresses  the  idea  that  a 
bribe  is  like  a  blight  jewel  that  dazzles  the 
sight  and  aJTects  the  mind  of  him  who 
receives  it  (see  on  oh.  it.  27;  oomp.  Deut. 
xvi.  19 ;  I  Sam.  lii.  a).  Ovid, '  Art.  Amat.,' 
iii.  663— 

"  Munera,  crede  mihl,  captnnt  hominesque 
deosque ; 
Placatur  doni«  Jupiter  ipse  datii." 
It  18  poBsible  that  the  gnome  may  have  a 
more  general  applii  ation,  and  apply  to  gifts 
given  to  appease  anger  or  to  prove  friend- 
ship (ch.  xix.  6 ;  zxi.  14).  Septuagint,  "  A 
reward  of  graces  is  discipline  to  those  who 
use  it;"  i.e.  moral  discipline  brings  an  ample 
reward  of  graces  to  those  who  practise  it. 
Whithersoever  it  turneth,  it  prosporeth. 
The  Authorized  Version  refers  these  words 
to  the  gift.  DelitzBch  points  out  that  the 
words  are  more  properly  taken  of  tlie  person 
who  receives  the  gift,  so  that  tiiey  nhould 
be  rendered,  "Wheresoever  he  turneth  bim- 
self  he  dealeth  wisely."  Inflamed  by  sordid 
liopes  and  the  love  of  gain,  he  acts  with  all 
possible  skill  and  prurjcnee  in  order  to  work 
out  his  wages  and  »how  that  he  was  rightly 
selected  to  receive  the  present.  The  verse 
merely '  states  a  common  trait  among  uii- 
Bcrqpalons  men,  and  pronounces  no  judgment 
upon  it. 

Ver,  9.— He  that  oovereth  a  transgression 
seeketh  love ;  i.e.  strives  to  exercise,  put  in 
practice,  love  (eomp.  Zeph.  ii.  3;  1  Cor. 
xiv.  i).  Thus  Nowack.  One  who  bears 
patiently  and  silently,  extenuates  and  con- 
ceals, something  done  or  said  against  him, 
that  man  follows  after  charity,  obeys  the 
great  law  of  love  (oomp,  ch,  x.  12).  Some 
explain  the  clause  to  mean,  '•  procures  love 
for  himielf;"  but  the  second  member  cer- 
tainly is  not  personal,  therefore  it  is  more 
natural  to  take  the  first  in  a  general  sense. 
He  that  repeateth  (harpeth  on)  a  matter 
•eparateth  very  friends  (ch.  xvi.  28).  Ho 
who  is  always  dwelling  on  a  grievance, 
returning  to  it  and  bringing  it  forward  on 
every  occasion,  alienates  the  greatest  friends, 
only  embitters  the  injury  and  makes  it 
chronic.  Ecclus.  lix.  7,  etc.,  "Eehenrse 
not  nnto  another  that  which  is  told  unto 
tliee,  and  thou  slialt  fare  never  the  woise. 
Whether  it  be  to  friend  or  foe,  talk  not 
nf  other  men's  liyes;  and  if  thou  canst 
without  offence,  reveal  them  not.  For  he 
hoard  and  ohserved  thee,  and  when  time 
coinetl)  ho  will  hate  thee.  If  thou  hast 
heard  a  word,  let  it  die  with  thee ;  and  be 
bold,  it  will  not  burst  theo."  So  the  rabbia 
said;    "Abstain   from    quarrels    with    tUy 


neighbour;  and  if  thou  hast  scon  something 
bad  of  thy  friend,  let  it  not  pas.s  thy  tongue 
as  a  slander"  (Dukea,  §  6i).  The  Mosaic 
Law  had  led  the  way  to  this  duty  of  forbear- 
ance; "Thou  shait  not  avenge,  nor  bear 
any  grudge  against  the  children  of  thy 
people,  but  thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour 
ao  thyself"  (Lev.  xix.  18).  Septuagnji, 
"  He  who  ooncealeth  injuries  seeketh  friend- 
ship; but  he  who  bateth  to  conceal  them 
■eparateth  friends  and  households." 

Ver.  10. — A  reproof  entereth  more  (deei>er) 
into  a  wise  man  than  an  hundred  stripes 
into  a  fool.  A  deserved  rebuke  makes  n 
deeper  impression  upon  a  man  of  under 
standing  than  the  severest  chastistment 
upon  a  fool,  Hitzig  quotes  S.illusl,  'Jug.,' 
xi„  "Verbum  in  pectus  Jufjurtlise  altius, 
qnam  quisquam  ratus  est,  dcscendit." 
Quint.  Curt.,  liv.  7,  "Nobilis  equus  umbra 
quoque  virga  regitur,  ignavus  ne  calcari 
quidem  concitari  potest,"  The  antithesis 
is  put  more  forcibly  in  the  Septuagint,  "A 
threat  breaks  the  heart  of  a  prmluut  man; 
a  fool  even  scourged  feels  it  not." 

Ver.  IX, — An  evil  man  seeketh  only  re- 
bellion. So  the  Greek  and  Latin  Ver.-ione ; 
but,  as  Nowack  intimates,  a  bad  man  seeks 
many  other  things  which  do  not  come 
directly  in  the  category  of  rehallion ;  and  it 
is  better  to  take  meri,  "  rebellion,"  as  the 
subject,  regarding  it  as  put  for  the  concrete, 
thus ;  "  A  rebellious  man  strivcth  only  fai 
what  is  evil."  From  the  point  of  view  ol 
an  Eastern  potentate,  this  is  true  enough. 
Absolute  government  looks  upon  any  rising 
against  constituted  authority,  any  movement 
in  the  masses,  as  necessarily  evil,  and  o  he 
repressed  with  a  high  hand.  Hence  the 
succeeding  clause,  Therefore  a  cruel  mes- 
senger shall  be  sent  against  him.  The 
"cruel  messenger"  (oh.  xvi.  14)  is  tlie 
executioner  of  the  king's  wrath  (comp.  1 
Kings  ii.  29,  etc.).  He  is  called  "cruel" 
because  bis  errand  is  deadly,  and  he  ia 
pitiless  in  its  performance.  'This  seems  to 
be  the  sense  intended.  The  LXX.  gives  a 
dilferent  notion,  derived  from  the  ambiguous 
term  malak,  like  the  Greek  iyyiXof  :  "  The 
Lord  will  send  forth  a  pitiless  angel  against 
him."  The  verse  then  becomes  a  statement 
concerning  the  retribution  inflicted  by  God 
on  obstinate  sinners,  sucli  as  Pharaoh  and 
the  Egyptians.  These  are  delivered  over  to 
"the  tormentors"  (Matt,  xviii.  34),  the 
angels  that  execute  the  wrath  of  God,  as  in 
Ps.  Ixxviii.  49  and  Rev.  viii.  6,  ete.  As  all 
sin  is  rebellion  against  God,  it  is  natural 
to  read  into  the  passage  a  religious  mean- 
ing, and  for  homiletical  purposes  it  is 
legitimate  to  do  so.  But  the  writer's  in- 
tention is  doubtless  as  explained  above, 
though  his  language  may  be  divinely 
directed  to  afford  a  further  application. 


OH.  xvn.  1—28.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


338 


Ver.  12. — Let  a  bear  robbed  of  her  whelps 
meet  a  man.  Thu  Syrian  bear  was  once 
common  throughout  Palestine;  it  is  now 
fouud  in  but  few  localities,  such  as  the  hills 
of  Hermon  and  Lebanon,  and  in  the  wilds 
east  of  the  Jordun,  the  destruction  of  wood 
and  forest  liaving  deprived  these  animals 
of  tlie  shelter  necessary  to  their  existence. 
The  ferocity  of  the  bear  when  deprived  of 
its  young  liad  become  pioverbial  (see  2  Sam. 
xvii.  8 ;  Hos.  xiii.  8  ;  Hart, '  Animals  of  the 
Bible,'  28,  etc.).  Bather  than  a  fool  in  Ms 
folly;  i.e.  in  the  paroxysm  of  his  passion. 
Compare  Saul's  ungoverned  language  to 
Jonathan  (1  Sam.  xx.  30),  and  Herod's 
murder  of  the  children  (Matt.  ii.  16).  So 
we  read  of  the  people  being  filled  with  &voia 
against  Jesus  (Luke  vi.  11).  Oort  suppose* 
that  this  proverb  arose  from  the  riddle, 
"What  is  worse  to  meet  than  a  bear?" 
Scptuagint,  "  Care  will  fall  upon  a  man  of 
understanding ;  but  fools  imagine  evils." 
The  Greek  tr.inslators  take  "  bear  "  as  ui  d 
nietaphorieally  for  terror  and  anxiet),  but 
go  fur  astray  from  the  Hebrew  text. 

Ver.  13. — Whoso  re wardeth  evil  for  good. 
This  wag  David's  complaint  of  the  chujlish 
Nabal  (1  Sam.  xxv.  21)  Ingratitude  shall 
surely  be  punished.  £vU  BhaU  not  depart 
from  his  house.  Terribly  has  the  ingrati- 
tude of  the  Jews  been  visited.  They  cried 
in  their  madness,  "  His  blood  be  on  us  and 
on  our  children  I  "  and  their  punishment  is 
still  going  on.  Injunctions  on  this  subject 
are  frequent  in  the  New  Testament  (see 
Matt.  V.  39 ;  Kom.  xii.  17 ;  1  Thess.  v.  15  ; 
1  Pet.  iii.  9).  The  Talmud  says,  "  Do  not 
throw  a  stone  into  the  well  whose  waters 
you  have  drunk."  The  Greeks  felt  the 
sting  of  ingratitude.  Thus  Leiodes  com- 
plains to  Ulysses  ('  Od.,'  xxii.  319)— 

"fls  oJk  ftrri  x(Jpis/ieT<(7ri(r9'  eiiepyday. 

Two  sayings  of  Publius  Syrus  are  quoted 
('Sent.,'  vv.  219,  274):  "Ingratus  unus 
omnibus  niiseris  nooet;"  "Malignog  fieri 
maxime  ingi'ati  docent." 

Ver.  14.— The  beginning  of  strife  is  as 
when  one  letteth  out  water.  The  small 
rift  in  the  bank  of  a  reservoir  of  water,  if 
not  immediately  secured,  is  soon  enlarged 
and  gets  beyond  control,  occasioning  wide- 
spread ruin  and  destruction ;  so  from  small 
and  insignificant  causes,  which  might  at 
first  have  been  easily  checked,  arise  feuds 
and  quarrels  which  extend  in  a  wide  circle, 
and  cannot  be  appeased.  Palestine  was 
largely  dependent  upon  its  reservoirs  for 
the  storage  of  water,  perennial  iprings 
being  of  rare  occurrence.  The  three  pools 
of  Solomon  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Beth- 
leliem,  which  were  connected  by  channels 
with  Jerusalem,  are  itill  to  be  seen  in  all 
their  massive  grandeur ;  and,  indeed,  every 


town  had  its  reservoir,  or  tank,  as  we  find 
in  India  at  the  present  time.  'These  recep- 
tacles )iad  to  be  kept  in  good  repair,  or 
disastrous  consequences  might  ensue.  On 
the  tendency  of  a  quarrel  to  grow  to  a 
dangerous  extent,  a  Bengal  proverb  speaks 
of  "  going  ill  a  needle  and  coming  out  a 
ploughshare."  Vulgate,  Qui  iMmittil  aquam, 
caput  eet  jurgiorum,  which  seems  to  mean 
that  the  man  who  needlessly  lets  the  water 
of  a  cistern  run  to  waste  gives  occnsion  to 
quarrels.  But  St.  Gregory  ('Moral.,'  v. 
13),  commenting^on  the  passage,  interprets 
differently :  "  It'  is  well  said  by  Solomon, 
'  He  that  letteth  out  water  is  a  head  of 
stritie.'  For  the  water  is  let  out  when  tho 
flowing  of  the  tongue  is  let  loo-se.  And  he 
that  letteth  ont  water  is  made  the  beginning 
of  strife,  in  that,  by  the  incontinenoy  of  tlie 
lips,  the  commencement  of  discord  is  af- 
forded" (Oxford  transl.).  Probably,  how- 
ever, in  the  Latin,  as  in  the  Hebrew,  the 
partiele  of  comparison  is  suppressed,  so  tli  t 
tlie  clause  means,  "As  he  who  lets  out 
water,  so  is  he  who  gives  occasion  to  striCe." 
Therefore  leave  off  contention,  before  it  ba 
meddled  with.  The  last  word  y^jnn  is  of 
doubtful  interpretation.  It  occurs  in  cli. 
xviii.  1  and  xx.  3,  and  is  variously  trans- 
lated, "  before  it  rushes  forward,"  ''  before 
it  grows  warm,"  "  before  a  man  becomes 
wrathful."  But  Hitzig,  Nowaok,  and  others 
take  it  to  signify,  "  before  men  show  their 
teeth,"  like;  angry  dogs  snarling  at  one 
another.  The  moralist  advises  men  to  sub- 
due angry  passions  at  once  before  tliey 
become  exacerbated.  The  Vulgate  seems 
to  have  quite  mistaken  the  clause,  trans- 
lating, Antequam  patiatur  oontumeHam, 
judicium  deserit,  which  seems  to  mean  that 
a  patient,  peace-loving  man  (in  contrast 
with  the  irasoible)  avoids  lawsuits  before 
he  is  involved  in  a  lastiug  quarrel.  Septu- 
agint,  "The  beginning  (apx^)  °f  justice 
gives  power  to  words ;  but  discord  and  con- 
tention lead  the  way  to  want."  The  Greek 
commentators  see  here  an  allusion  to  the 
clepsydra,  the  water-clock  which  regulated 
the  length  of  the  speeches  in  a  court  of 
law ;  but  the  reference  is  by  no  means  clear. 

Ver.  16 He  that  jnstifieth— in  a  foren- 
sic sense,  declares  righteous,  acquits— the 
wicked,  etc.  Two  forms  of  the  perversion 
of  justice  are  censured,  viz.  the  aoquiital 
of  a  guilty  person  and  the  condemnation  of 
an  innocent  one  (comp.  ch.  xxiv.  24 ;  Isa. 
V.  23). 

Ver.  16. — Wherefore  is  tliere  a  price  in 
the  hand  of  a  fool  to  get  wisdom  1  A  fool 
thinks  that  there  is  a  royal  road  to  wisdom, 
and  that  it,  like  other  things,  ia  to  be  pur- 
chased with  money.  Vulgate,  Quid  prodesi 
thUto  habere  divitias,  cum  sapientiam  emere 
non  poisit  1    The  rabbia  in  later  time  were 


S34 


THE  PEOVEBB& 


[oh.  xvn.  1 — ^28. 


not  allowed  to  take  fees  for  teaching;  bnt 
it  was  customary  to  make  offerings  to  seeia 
a'ld  wise  men,  wlieu  their  services  were 
engaged  or  their  advice  was  asked  (see 
the  case  of  Saul  and  Samuel,  1  Sam.  ix. 
1.  8).  The  last  clause  gives  the  reason  why 
it  is  useless  for  a  fool  to  try  to  learn  wisdom 
even  at  a  large  expenditure  on  teachers. 
Seeing  he  hath  no  heart  to  it ;  t.«.  no  capa- 
bility for  receiving  it;  his  mental  digestion 
cannot  assimilate  it.  The  heart,  as  we  have 
already  noticed,  is  regarded  as  the  seat  of 
the  understanding.  Thus  the  LXX.,  •'  Why 
doth  a  fool  have  wealth?  for  a  man  without 
heart  cannot  acquire  wisdom."  In  the 
Gospel  Christ  calls  his  disciples  "fools  and 
Blow  of  heart  to  believe  what  the  prophets 
had  written,  and  himself  opened  their  mind 
(jiy  vovv),  that  they  might  understand  the 
Scriptures"  (Luke  xxiv.  25,  45).  The  Sep- 
tuagint  and  Vulgate  here  introduce  a  dis- 
tich derived  from  portions  of  vers.  19,  20, 
"He  who  raises  his  house  high  seeketii 
destruction ;  and  he  who  perversely  de- 
clineth  from  learning  (4  i\  aKoAiiC""  '''»•' 
fua^uv)  shall  fall  into  evils." 

Ver.  17. — A  friend  loveth  at  all  times, 
and  a  brother  is  born  for  adversity.  Some 
find  a  climax  in  the  two  clauses,  and  translate 
the  last  aa  Revised  Version  margin, "  And 
is  born  as  a  brother  for  adversity,"  the  same 
person  being  meant  in  both  members  of  the 
sentence.  A  real  friend  loves  his  friend  in 
prosperity  and  adversity;  yea,  he  is  more 
than  a  friend  in  time  of  need — ^he  is  a 
brother,  as  affectionate  and  as  trusty  as  one 
connected  by  the  closest  ties  of  relationship 
(oomp.  ch.  xviii.  24).  Siraoidea  gives  a 
very  cruel  version  of  thii  proverb,  "  A  friend 
cannot  be  known  in  prosperity;  and  an 
enemy  cannot  be  hidden  in  adversity.  la 
the  prosperity  of  a  man  enemies  will  be 
grieved  ;  but  in  his  adversity  even  a  friend 
will  depart "  (Ecclus.  xii.  S,  etc.).  Cicero 
had  a  truer  notion  of  the  stability  of  friend- 
ship when  he  quoted  Ennius's  dictum, 
"Amicus  certuB  in  re  incerta  cernitur" 
('De  Amicit.,' xvii.).  Misfortune,  says  our 
maxim,  is  the  touchstone  of  friendship; 
and  one  Greek  gnome  enjoins— 

^IZfni  v6m^s  Tuv  (pl\tijv  Tcis  avfitpopds, 
"  Thy  friend's  niisfortuaes  deem  to  he  thine 
own ; " 

while  another  runs — 

Kpij/et  tpl\ovs  &  KaiphSf  &s  xpvirhif  rh  vvp, 
"  The  crisis  tests  a  friend,  as  fire  the  gold." 
Septuagint,  "  Have  thou  u  friend  for  every 
crisis,  and  let  brethren  be  uselul  in  adver- 
sities ;  for  for  this  they  are  made."  Com- 
menting ou  the  expression,  "is  bom," 
Wordsworth  fancifully  reiuarks,  "Adversity 
brings  him  forth.    He  comes,  as  it  were,  out 


of  the  womb  of  calamity,  and  seems  to  be 
born  for  it." 

Ver.  18. — ^A.  man  void  of  understanding 
(Hebrew,  heart)  striketh  hands;  clinches 
the  bargain  which  makes  him  responsible 
(see  on  suretyship,  ch.  vi.  1,  etc. ;  and  note, 
XX.  16).  Becometh  surety  in  the  presence 
of  his  friend;  to  his  friend  for  some  third 
party.  What  is  here  censured  is  tlie  weak- 
ness which,  for  the  sake  of  perhaps  w&rth- 
lees  companions,  lets  itself  be  hampered  and 
endangered  by  others'  obligations.  For,  as 
our  adage  runs,  he  that  is  surety  for  another 
is  never  sure  himself.  The  Septuagint 
takes  the  "  striking  of  hands  "  to  be  a  sign 
of  joy  (Vulgate,  plaudet  manibus),  "The 
foolish  man  claps  (^iriKporei)  and  rejoices 
in  himself,  so  also  he  who  pledges  himself 
for  his  friend." 

Ver.  19.— He  lovoth  transgression  that 
loveth  strife,  because  strife  leads  to  many 
breaches  of  the  commandments  (comp.  ch. 
xxix.  22;  Jag.  i.  20).  Septuagint,  "He 
who  loveth  sin  rejoices  in  battles."  And 
he  that  ezaltsth  his  gate  seeketh  destrnc- 
tion.  He  who  builds  a  sumptuous  house 
and  lives  in  the  way  that  his  magnificent 
surroundings  demand  draws  rain  on  him- 
self, either  because  he  affects  a  state  which 
he  is  nnable  to  support,  or  acts  so  at 
to  provoke  reprisals  and  injurious  conse- 
quences. The  entrance  to  a  Palestinian 
house  would  usually  be  of  humble  dimen- 
sions and  sparse  ornamentation;  any  dnor- 
way  of  great  architectural  pretensions  would 
be  uncommon,  and  would  be  regarded  as 
a  token  of  extraordinary  wcaltli  or  rei>re- 
hensible  pride.  Aben  Ezra,  taking  "  gate  " 
as  a  metaphor  for  "mouth,"  explains  the 
hemistich  of  the  danger  of  random  or  exces- 
sive speech.  This  makes  a  good  parallel 
with  the  first  clause;  but  it  is  doubtful 
whether  the  words  will  bear  this  interpre- 
tation (see  Hitzig);  and  the  two  clauses 
may  present  two  forms  of  selfishness,  eap- 
tiousness  and  ostentation,  both  of  which 
lead  to  quarrels  and  ruin  (cnmp.  ch.  xvi. 
18). 

Ver.  20. — He  that  hath  a  froward  heart 
findeth  no  good.  (For  "  froward,"  see  on 
oh.  xi.  20;  for  "find  good,"  on  ch.  xvi.  20.) 
The  perverse,  wilful  man  shall  not  prosper, 
shall  win  no  blessing  in  his  worldly  matters, 
much  less  in  spiritual  things.  Septuagint, 
*'  He  who  is  hard  of  heart  meeteth  not  with 
good  things."  He  that  hath  a  perverse 
tongue  falleth  into  mischief;  literally,  he 
who  turns  himself  about  with  hit  tongue. 
Baying  one  thing  at  one  time  and  somethiiig 
quite  contrary  at  another.  Vulgate,  qui 
vartit  Urtguam;  Septuagint,  &yiip  fbi^eri- 
fio\os  yKda-aji,  "easily  changed  in  tongue" 
(comp.  ch.  viii  13 ;  x.  31,  where  the  word 
is  different).   "  Mischief"  (ro)  "  is  trouble," 


OH.  XVII.  1—28.] 


THE   PB0VEBB8. 


835 


"  calamity,"  as  in  oh.  xiii.  17.  Speaking  of 
the  yarious  aspects  which  worilB  may  assume, 
Cato  ('  Dist.,'  iv.  20)  says— 

"  Sermo  hominum  mores  et  celat  et  indicat 
idem." 

"  Man's  words  his  character  reveal. 
But  often  they  hia  mind  conceal." 

Ver.  21. — He  that  begettoth  a  fool  doeth 
it  to  his  sorrow  (coiiip.  ver.  25).  The  words 
for  "fool"  in  the  two  clauses  are  different. 
Here  it  is  ketil,  which  implies  bold,  self- 
confident  folly,  the  worst  form  of  the  vice ; 
in  the  second  hemistich  it  is  tidbal,  whicli 
rather  denotes  dulness  and  stupidity,  a  want 
of  mental  power,  A  conceited,  offensive  fool 
causes  infinite  trouble  to  his  father,  both 
fi-om  his  need  of  constant  correction,  and 
the  watchfulness  required  to  repair  the  con- 
sequences of  his  foolish  actions.  There  is 
also  the  grief  at  seeing  instruction  and 
warning  thrown  away  on  a  worthless  object. 
Septuagint,  "  The  heart  of  a  fool  is  a  pain 
to  him  who  possesseth  it."  The  father  of  a 
fool  hath  no  joy.  The  contrast  in  the  case 
of  a  good  son  is  seen  in  ch.  xv.  20  and 
xxiii.  24.  The  LXX.  adds  a  clause  from 
ch.  X.  1,  with  the  view  of  improving  the 
parallelism,  "But  a  prudent  son  rejoiceth 
his  mother." 

Ver.  22. — A  meny  heart  doeth  good  like 
a  medicine.  So  Aben  Ezra,  understanding 
the  particle  of  comparison,  which  is  not 
in  the  Hebrew.  The  word  translated 
"medicine"  (gehah)  occurs  nowhere  else, 
and  probably  means  "healing,"  "relief." 
The  clause  is  better  rendered,  a  cheerful 
heart  maketh  a  good  healing  (comp.  ch.  xv. 
13;  xvi.  24).  Vulgate,  letatem  floridam 
faeit;  Septuagint,  eveKTfiv  xoiei,  "makes 
one  to  be  in  good  case."  A  cheerful,  con- 
tented disposition  enables  a  man  to  resitit  the 
attacks  of  disease,  the  mind,  as  every  one 
knows,  having  most  powerful  influence  over 
the  body.  Bcclus.  xxx.  22,  "The  gladness 
of  the  heart  is  the  life  of  man,  and  the 
joyfulneas  of  a  man  prolongeth  his  days." 
A  broken  spirit  drieth  the  bones;  destroys 
all  life  and  vigour  (comp.  ch.  iiL  8;  Ps. 
xxii.  15;  xxxii.  4).  We  all  remember  the 
distich — 

"  A  merry  heart  goes  all  the  day, 
Your  sad  tires  in  a  mile-a." 

So  the  rabbis  enjoin,  "  Give  care  no  room  in 
thine  heart,  for  care  hatU  killed  many" 
(Dukes,  p.  68).  Eeligioua  gladness  is  a 
positive  duty,  and  "low  spirits,"  as  Isaac 
Williams  says,  "  are  a  sin."  Asks  the  Greek 
moralist — 

'Ap'  icrl  avyyeyh  ri  \ir))  ical  filosi 

And  Lucretius  (lii.  473)  affirm*— 


"Nam    dolor    ao    morbus    leti    fabricator 
nterque  est." 

"  Workers  of  death  are  sorrow  and  disease.* 

Ver.  23. — A  gift  ont  of  the  bosom;  i.e. 
secretly  from  the  fold  of  the  garment,  and 
not  from  the  purse  or  bajf  wherein  money 
was  ostensibly  carried.  A  corrupt  judge 
"  taketh,"  t.e.  receives  a  bribe  conveyed  to 
him  secretly  (ch.  xxi.  14).  4)0  pervert  the 
ways  of  judgment.  Tlje  judges  had  no 
appointed  salaries;  hence  the  unprincipled 
among  them  were  open  to  bribery.  The 
strict  injunctions  of  the  Law,  and  the  stern 
denunciations  of  the  prophets,  were  alike 
ineffectual  in  checking  corruption  (see 
Exod.  xxiii.  8;  Deut.  xvi.  19;  Isa.  i.  23; 
Jer.  xxii.  17;  Ezuk.  xiii.  19;  Hos.  iv.  18, 
etc.).  Septuagint,  "The  man  that  reeeiveth 
gifts  in  his  bosom  unjustly,  his  ways  shall 
n<it  prosper."  For,  as  Job  avows  (xv.  34), 
"Fire  shall  consume  the  tabernacles  of 
bribery."  The  LXX.  adds,  "The  impious 
turns  aside  from  the  ways  of  righteousness." 

Ver.  24. — Wisdom  is  before  [the  face  of] 
him  that  hath  understanding.  The  idea  is 
that  the  intelligent  mau  directs  his  look 
towards  Wisdom,  and  thi  refore  she  beams 
upon  him  with  all  her  light ;  as  the  Vulgate 
puts  it,  "In  the  face  of  the  prudent  wisdom 
shines."  He  has  one  object  to  which  he 
directs  all  his  attention  (ch.  xv.  14).  The 
Septuagint  rendering  is  not  so  satisfactory : 
"The  countenauce  of  a  prudent  man  is 
wise ; "  he  shows  in  his  look  and  bearing 
the  wisdom  that  guides  him.  Thus  Eccles. 
viii.  1,  "A  man's  wisdom  maketh  his  face 
to .  shine,  and  the  hardness  of  his  face  is 
changed."  The  eyes  of  a  fool  are  in  the 
ends  of  the  earth.  A  fool  has  no  one  definite 
object  in  view;  he  pursues  a  hundred 
different  things,  as  they  happen  to  come  in 
his  way,  but  misses  the  most  important 
quest  of  all,  and  fritters  away  the  powers 
which  might  have  aided  him  to  obtain 
wisdom. 

Ver.  25. — This  verse  is  more  or  less  a 
repetition  of  ver.  21 ;  ch.  x.  1 ;  xv.  20 ;  and 
comp.  xix.  13.  A  grief  (Iiaaa).  The  Vulgate 
and  Septuagint  translate,  "anger."  A  foolish 
son  provokes  the  wrath  of  his  father,  and  is 
bitterness  to  her  that  bare  him.  "Bitter- 
ness" (TJiemer)  occurs  nowhere  else;  mar 
and  marar  are  common  enough. 

Ver.  26. — Also  (gam).  This  may  be 
intended  to  connect  this  verse  with  what 
was  said  above  (ver.  23)  about  the  perversion 
of  justice ;  or,  as  is  more  probable,  it  is  used 
to  emphasize  what  is  coming.  To  punish 
the  just  is  not  good.  Damnwm  inferre  justo, 
Vulgate ;  ^-niuow,  Septuagint ;  and  the  word 
has  a  special  reference  to  punishment  by 
fire.  Nor  to  strike  princes  for  equity ;  the 
expresiiion,  "  is  not  good,"  being  understood 


838 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[oh.  xvn.  1 — 2a 


from  the  fonner  clause.  "  Princes  "  are  the 
noble  in  character  rather  than  In  position 
only.  Two  forms  of  evil  are  named,  Tiz.  to 
punish  the  innocent,  and  to  visit  with  con- 
tumely and  injury  the  man  of  high  character 
who  oarmot  be  induced  to  pervert  justice. 
Revised  Version,  nor  to  imite  the  nohle  for 
their  uprightness.  So  virtually  the  Vulgate, 
Septnagint,  and  Syriac.  Another  rendering 
is,  "to  strike  the  noble  is  against  rigbt," 
which  seems  feeble  and  less  suitable  to  the 
parallelism. 

Ver.  27. — He  that  hath  knowledge  spareth 
his  words ;  Revised  Version,  he  that  spareth 
his  words  hath  knowledge ;  he  shows  his 
common  sense,  not  by  rash  talk  or  saying 
all  he  knows,  but  by  restraining  his  tongue 
(eiimp.  ch.  X.  19;  Jus.  i.  19).  'Pirke 
Aljoth '  (i.  18),  "  All  my  days  I  have  grown 
up  amongst  tiie  wise,  and  have  not  found 
aught  good  for  a  man  but  silence;  not 
learning  but  doing  is  the  groundwork,  and 
whoso  multiplies  worJs  occasions  sin."  Say 
the  Greek  gnomes — 

'Evioiy  rh  ffty^y  iffrl  Kpetrrov  rov  Keyeiy. 
Kpe7'TT0v  'ffuaiT^v  ^  \a\etif  &  fi^  rpeweu 

And  Theognis  (v.  815)  writes — 

Boil    fioi    4ir)    y\<iasiis    Kparepy    iroSl    aA{ 

'lo'x^'  KuriWeiy  Kalrtp  ImirTdiieeov. 

"Speech  for  a  sliekcl,  silence  for  two;  it  is 
like  a  precious  stone"  ('  Qoheleth  Rabbah,' 
V.  5).  Septuagint,  "  He  who  spareth  to  utter 
a  liarsh  speech  is  prudent"  (^wtypi/iiav).  A 
man  of  understanding  is  of  an  excellent 
spirit;  Revised  Version,  he  that  is  of  a 
cool  spirit  is  a  man  of  understanding;  i.e, 
he  who  considers  before  he  speaks,  and 
never  answers  in  hot  haste,  proves  that  he 
is  wise  and  intelligent.  Septuagint,  "The 
long-suffering  man  ia  prudent."  The  above 
is  the  reading  of  the  Khetib,  followed  by 


most  interpreters.  The  Eeri  gives,  "of  a 
precious  spirit "  (pretiosi  spiritus,  Vulgate), 
that  is,  one  whose  words  are  weighty  and 
valuable,  not  lavishly  thrown  about,  but 
reserved  as  costly  jewels. 

Ver.  28. — ^Even  a  fool,  when  he  haldelh 
his  peaos,  is  ooonted  wise.  Mot  betraying 
his  ignorance  and  ineapaoity  by  words,  a 
foolish  man  is  credited  with  possessing  sen»e 
(comp.  Job  xiii.  5).  Proverbs  to  this  effect 
are  found  in  all  languages.  Thus  the  Greek — 

lias  Tis  ImatSevTos  tppoyi/idra/ros  iffri  auniv. 

Cato,  'Dist.,'L3— 

"Virtutem  primam  esse  puta  compescere 
linguam ; 
Proximus  ille  Deo  qui  scit  ratioue  tacere." 

Talmud,  "Silence  becomes  the  wise,  much 
more  fools."  The  Dutch  have  appropriated 
tliis  maxim,  "Zweigeu  do  dwazen  zij  waren 
wijs,"  "Were  fools  silent,  they  would  pass 
for  wise."  "  Si  taomsges,  philosophus  man- 
sisses."  "  Silence,"  says  the  Sansl(rit  gnome, 
"is  the  ornament  of  the  ignorant."  "Talk- 
ing comes  by  nature,"  say  the  Germans, 
"silence  of  understanding."  The  LXX. 
gives  a  different  turn  to  the  first  clause: 
"A  foolish  man  inquiring  of  wisdum  will 
have  wisdom  imputed  to  him;"  the  ex- 
pressed desire  of  knowledge  will  be  taken 
as  a  proof  of  intelligence.  The  second 
clause  is  co-ordinate  with  the  former.  He 
that  shutteth  his  lips  is  esteemed  a  man  cf 
understanding;  Revised  Version,  when  he 
thutteth  his  lips,  he  is  esteemed  as  prudent; 
Septuagint,  "A  man  making  liimsulf  dumb 
will  seem  to  be  prudent."  Theoplirastus  is 
said  to  have  thus  addressed  a  guest  who 
was  very  silent  at  table :  "  If  you  are  a  fool, 
you  act  wisely;  if  you  are  wise,  you  act 
foolishly."  "  Let  every  man,"  says  St. 
James  (i.  19),  "be  swift  to  hear,  slow  to 
speak," 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  6.— Mocking  the  poor.  The  terrible  inequality  of  human  lota  was  never  more 
apparerit  than  it  is  in  the  present  day.  England  is  renowned  for  her  wealth ;  yet 
England  is  a  haunt  of  hungry  misery.  It  is  nothing  but  selfish  hypocrisy  to  justify 
this  condition  of  affairs  by  quoting  the  words  of  our  Lord,  "  The  poor  always  ye  have 
with  you  "  (John  xii.  8).  If  they  are  always  with  us  in  abject  need  and  distress,  so 
much  the  worse  for  the  condition  of  society.  The  statement  of  a  distressing  fact-is  no 
justification  for  it.  Meanwhile,  if  the  huge  evil  of  pauperism  caunot  be  abolished  at 
uucc,  it  is  our  duty  to  lessen,  not  to  aggravate  it. 

1.  Consider  in  what  ways  the  poob  aek  mookbd.  1.  When  their  condition  is 
disregarded.  There  are  thousands  of  people  living  in  affluence  who  simply  ignore  the 
fact  that  they  have  needy  brethren.  Dives  at  his  feast  does  not  give  a  thought  to 
L  izarus  pining  at  his  gate.  Surely  it  is  a  mockery  to  the  awful  misery  of  the  Bast 
End  that  the  West  End  feasts  and/e<es  itself  with  undisturbed  complacency.  2.  When 
their  rights  are  neglected.  This  hajipens  in  many  ways,  even  in  an  age  and  a  country 
that  boasts  of  its  administration  of  justice.    (1)  The  so-called  "  sweating  system  "  is 


«H.  xvu.  1— 28,]  THE  PROVERBS.  S37 

nothing  better  than  robbery,  by  means  of  which  the  strong,  take  advantage  of  the 
necessities  of  the  weak.  (2)  It  is  liard  for  poor  people  to  avail  themselves  of  the  law- 
courts;  so  that  the  cry  is  raised  that  "  there  is  one  law  for  the  rich  and  another  for  the 
poor."  (3)  Poor  men  have  the  natural  rights  of  their  manhood  treated  with  contempt. 
The  courtesy  which  is  offered  to  the  well-to-do  is  denied  to  them.  Rough  treatment 
is  meted  out  to  them.  Common  politeness  is  refused  to  a  man  with  a  threadbare  coat. 
3.  When  their  deficiencies  are  ridiculed.  The  poor  man  is  generally  illiterate,  his 
"  speech  bewrayeth  him."  He  has  never  karnt  the  manners  of  good  society.  So  the 
classes  above  him  put  up  their  eye-glasses  to  inspect  him,  as  though  he  were  some 
strange,  repulsive  animal.  4.  When,  their  merits  are  ignored.  There  is  honest  poverty. 
There  are  brave  men  fighting  against  adverse  circumstances  with  the  courage  of  heroes. 
Are  these  people  to  be  mocked  at  simply  because  they  cannot  put  money  in  their 
purses?  The  kindness  of  the  poor  to  the  poor  is  a  rebuke  to  the  cynicism  of  the  rich. 
Yet  how  difficult  it  is  for  poor  men  to  be  duly  recognized  1  Dr.  Johnson  spoke  from 
experience  when  he  said — 

"This  mournful  truth  is  everywhere  confeas'd. 
Slow  rises  worth  by  poverty  depressed." 

The  world  mocks  the  poor  when  it  judges  people  by  the  fashion  of  theb  clothes  and  tha 
size  of  their  houses,  instead  of  looking  to  their  character  and  lives. 

II.  Consider  tbe  great  sin  of  mookino  the  poor.  He  who  does  this  "  reproacheth 
his  Maker."  For  the  God  who  made  the  rich  man  also  made  the  poor  man.  The 
reproach  of  the  child  is  a  reproach  of  his  Father.  We  do  more  than  wrong  our 
brethren  when  we  treat  the  unfortunate  with  contempt ;  we  insult  our  God.  He  is  the 
God  of  the  poor,  and  he  takes  their  wrongs  as  injuries  to  himself.  This  is  no  slight, 
shadowy  offence.  It  is  an  awful  sin  in  the  sight  of  Heaven.  The  only  reason  that  is 
suggested  why  Dives  should  be  writhing  in  torments  of  fire  is  that  he  was  a  rich  man 
who  gave  no  heed  to  the  misery  of  his  neighbour.  Here  is  an  awful  prospect  for  the 
careless  comfortable  classes  of  England !  The  evil  is  aggravated  with  us,  because  we 
profess  that  religion  which  preaches  a  gospel  to  the  poor.  In  the  Church  of  Christ 
rich  and  poor  meet  together.  For  the  rich  man  to  despise  his  fellow-Christian,  then,  is 
for  him  to  deny  his  Master,  "  who  had  not  where  to  lay  his  head."  Let  it  be  remem- 
bered that  Christ,  who  was  rich,  "  for  our  sakes  became  poor."  He  is  the  Friend  and 
Brother  of  the  poor. 

Ver.  10. — ITie  wisdom  of  aecepting  a  reproof.  I.  It  is  difficult  to  accept  a 
BEPROOF.  Only  the  wise  man  will  take  it.  Many  difficulties  stand  in  the  way.  1.  It 
is  hard  to  believe  that  the  reproving  counsellor  is  a  true  friend.  He  appears  to  be 
censorious.  We  think  he  takfs »  pleasure  in  finding  fault  with  us.  We  accuse  him 
of  a  Pharisaic  self-satisfaction  in  comparing  his  own  virtue  with  our  fault.  2.  It  is 
difficult  to  admit  the  application  of  the  accusation  to  ourselves.  David  is  indi;inant  at 
Nathan's  recital  of  the  parable  of  the  ewe  lamb.  Yet  he  fails  to  see  that  the  moral  of 
it  comes  home  to  himself  till  the  prophet  exclaims, "  Thou  art  the  man !  "  3.  It  is  not 
easy  to  cotifess  our  own  humiliation.  When  we  see  that  we  are  accused,  pride  rises  up 
to  defend  us.  It  is  possible  for  a  lar^ie  amount  of  pride  to  lodge  with  a  great  quantity . 
of  folly.  Indeed,  the  more  a  person  is  emptied  of  real  worth  the  more  room  is  there  in 
him  lor  self-inflation.  4.  It  is  troublesome  to  yield  to  a  reproof.  To  do  so  we  must 
not  merely  admit  our  fault,  but  consent  to  mend  our  ways.  We  must  allow  the 
reproof  to  work  actively  in  us  if  it  is  to  be  of  any  use.  The  drunkard  is  often  ready  to 
'  confess  his  sin,  but  he  is  not  so  eager  to  renounce  the  canse  of  it.  5.  It  u  distressing 
to  bear  the  reproof  of  Ood.  In  reading  the  Bible  people  are  tempted  to  appropnate 
the  promises  to  themselves  and  to  leave  the  threatenings  for  their  brethren.  It  needs 
a  divinely  inspired  wisdom  to  help  us  to  profit  by  the  warnings  of  Scripture. 

II.  It  is  wise  to  accept  a  reproop.  Many  as  are  the  obstructions  that  stand  in 
the  way  of  our  receiving  and  acting  upon  it,  we  should  do  well  to  conquer  them.  He 
is  but  a  foolish  person  who  despises  correction.  The  wise  man  may  shrink  from  it, 
but  he  « ill  not  reject  it.  1.  A  true  reproof  is  Justly  due.  We  have  earned  it  by  our 
own  fault.  It  is  foolish  to  kick  against  the  consequences  of  our  own  conduct.  2.  A 
rejrroof  is  a  wholesome  corrective.    It  is  not  a  judge's  sentence,  but  a  friend  s  counsel. 

FBOVEBBa.  ' 


338  THE  PR0VEEB8.  [oh.  xvii.  1— 28. 


Its  object  is  not  condemnation,  but  salvation.  3.  A  reproof  is  a  mtld  substitute  for 
harder  treatment.  While  we  foolishly  rail  at  its  harshness,  we  should  be  thankful  for 
the  lenity  of  the  most  stem  well-deserved  reproof.  It  might  have  been  dispensed  with, 
and  we  might  have  received  condign  punishment.  The  rejiroof  is  not  bo  hard  to  bear 
as  the  "  hundred  stripes  "  that  may  follow  if  it  is  disregarded.  It  is  wise  to  close  with 
the  earlier  counsel.  4.  A  reproof  is  an  element  of  Divine  grace.  Christ  sends  the 
Comforter  to  convict  the  world  of  sin  as  well  as  of  righteousness  and  judgment  (John 
xvi.  8).  It  is  to  our  own  cost  that  we  receive  this  gracious  Guest  with  resentful  dis- 
courtesy. But,  on  the  other  hand,  we  plainly  need  Divine  grace  to  accept  a  reproof  in 
a  meek  and  humble  spirit.  The  wisdom  to  receive  a  reproof  w^ll  is  so  difficult  to 
attain  that  we  need  to  seek  it  as  an  inspiration  from  God. 

Ver.  14. — "  !Z%e  leginning  of  strife."  I.  SiBirE  mat  have  a  small  beginnino. 
It  is  not  necessary  to  intend  great  mischief  if  a  quarrel  is  to  be  started.  One  word  of 
an  unfriendly  character  may  be  enough  to  mar  the  peace  of  brethren.  A  single^  act  of 
unkindness  may  be  the  beginning  of  discord,  provoking  retaliation,  and  so  originating 
a  long-continued  state  of  war.  A  quarrel  may  arise  among  very  insignificant 
persons.  It  may  be  concerned  with  very  unimportant  questions.  It  may  appear  as  a 
very  slight  affair — "  a  tempest  in  a  tea-cup." 

II.  Strife  gbows  wider.  The  small  hole  in  the  dyke  through  which  a  little  water 
oozes  is  worn  by  the  escaping  stream  so  that  it  becomes  larger,  and  the  larger  it  is  the 
more  water  pours  through  it;  and  this,  in  turn,  will  tear  still  greater  pieces  from 
the  banks.  A  little  rift  within  the  lute  is  the  commencement  of  the  mischief  that 
will  silence  all  the  music.  A  dispute  between  two  frontier  officers  may  lead  to  a  war 
between  two  nations.  Thus  the  strife  between  a  few  grows  into  a  quarrel  between 
many  persons. 

III.  Strife  grows  more  intense.  It  not  only  involves  more  persons;  it  also 
becomes  aggravated  in  its  violence.  Increasihg  in  volume,  it  also  grows  in  vehemence. 
The  flood  rushes  with  alarming  velocity.  The  misunderstanding  becomes  a  war.  The 
coldness  between  friends  turns  into  the  bitterness  of  enmity.  Anger  degenerates  into 
hatred. 

IV.  Strife  becomes  uncontbollablb.  It  might  be  arrested  in  its  early  stage.  A 
boy  pressing  his  knee  against  the  small  hole  in  the  dyke  could  hold  back  the  trickling 
stream.  But  if  the  mischief  is  not  checked  in  an  early  stage,  "all  the  king's  horses" 
cannot  arrest  the  mad  career  of  the  escaping  river.  An  insignificant  person  may  start 
a  quarrel,  which  many  wise  and  strong  men  will  fail  to  allay.  It  is  easier  to  be  a 
war-maker  than  a  peace-maker  Events  grow  too  strong  for  the  most  powerful  energies 
of  man. 

V.  Strife  issues  in  iNOALCULABiiE  results.  The  flood  pours  down  through  the 
valley  and  over  the  plain,  uprooting  trees,  devastating  fields,  deluging  homesteads, 
drowning  men  and  cattle.  The  mischief  is  enormous,  and  the  course  and  extent  of  it 
cannot  be  measured  beforeliand.  No  one  can  tell  what  harm  may  grow  out  of  his 
meddlesome  mischief-making.  A  foolish  person  may  mean  to  do  no  real  harm,  only  to 
show  a  little  passing  spite.  But  he  has  let  out  the  waters ;  the  flood-gates  are  open ; 
the  huge  army  of  destruction  is  scouring  the  country.  Amazed  and  aghast  at  the 
unexpected  consequences  of  his  folly,  he  would  fain  undo  the  reckless  deed  or  stay  its 
fatal  consequences.  But  it  is  too  late.  Those  consequences  have  passed  beyond  hia 
reach.     He  can  never  tell  how  far  the  evil  effects  of  what  he  has  done  may  extend. 

VI.  Strife  should  be  checked  in  its  earliest  stage.  It  is  best  to  avoid  the 
very  beginning  of  it.  But  if,  unhappily,  it  has  been  started,  it  should  be  stayed  at  once. 
To  nurse  a  quarrel  is  worse  than  to  cherish  a  viper  in  one's  bosom.  Fling  it  away  and 
crush  it,  before  it  spawns  a  deadly  brood  of  evil.  The  great  human  quarrel  with  heaven, 
begun  in  Eden,  was  like  the  lotting  out  of  waters.  So  is  the  soul's  quarrel  with  God. 
It  is  best  to  make  peace  at  once,  through  repentance  and  contrition. 

Ter.  17. — The  true  friend.  I.  The  portrait  of  the  true  friend.  We  must 
«tudy  its  lineaments  that  we  may  know  the  original.  The  word  "friend"  is  used  so 
loosely,  often  as  a  term  of  mere  politeness,  that  some  such  inquiry  is  necessary  if  w« 
would  disentangle  it  from  frivolous  associations  and  aflix  it  to  its  worthy  object. 


OH.  XVII.  1—28.]  THE  PROVERBS.  339 

1.  The  essential  note  cf  true  friendship  is  invariaMlity  of  affection.  The  friend 
"  loveth  at  all  times."  This  does  not  mean  that  he  is  always  displaying  his  affection. 
Effusiveness  is  no  proof  of  sincerity.  "  Still  waters  run  deep."  Neither  are  we  to 
suppose  that  the  affection  must  be  always  shown  in  the  same  way.  The  manifestation 
of  it  must  vary  according  to  the  moods  and  feelings  of  the  friend,  and  also  according 
to  the  circumstances  and  behaviour  of  the  object  of  afiection.  There  are  times  when 
friendship  must  be  angry,  when  love  must  frown.  Still  the  love  must  remain.  (1) 
True  friendship  is  independent  of  time.  It  does  not  wear  out  with  years.  The  true 
friend  of  youth  is  the  friend  of  manhood.  (2)  It  is  independent  of  circumstances.  It 
survives  the  loss  of  social  delights.  It  holds  on  through  poverty  (3)  It  is  not  shaken 
by  slander.  (4)  It  even  outlives  unworthy  treatment.  2.  The  great  test  of  trvx  friend- 
ship is  adversity.  (1)  Then  the  friendship  is  most  valuable.  If  it  will  not  serve  then 
it  is  of  little  use.  We  want  friends  to  whom  we  can  go  in  the  hour  of  need.  (2)  Then 
its  qiAlity  is  proved.  The  shallow,  selfish  man  cuts  his  acquaintances  in  their  trouble. 
Poverty  severs  the  cords  of  pretended  friendship.  But  real  friendship  is  proved  and 
comes  out  at  its  best  under  adverse  circumstances.  Then  its  brotherly  character  is 
revealed.  The  friend  of  prosperous  days  becomes  the  brother  in  days  of  trouble.  3. 
The  secret  of  true  friendship  is  love.  Love  is  stronger  than  death,  and  love  can  survive 
the  loss  of  all  things.  It  endures  through  time  and  change,  and  in  spite  of  violent 
strains  upon  its  strength. 

II.  The  discovery  of  the  tbtte  friend.  The  portrait  is  ideal.  Do  we  ever  see 
the  ideal  realized  ?  In  a  measure,  yes,  and  that  repeatedly.  The  cynical  pessimism 
that  disbelieves  in  any  generous,  unselfish  friendship  is  false  to  the  nature  of  man,  and 
false  to  the  noble  tale  of  good  lives.  Generosity  is  not  dead.  Friendship  is  possible. 
But  every  human  friend  is  imperfect.  Surely  the  portrait  of  the  true  friend  must 
suggest  to  us  One  who  alone  perfectly  answers  to  its  noble  features.  We  discover  the 
true  Friend  in  Christ.  1.  He  gives  us  the  note  of  true  friendship  in  invariability  of 
affection.  His  love  to  the  race  endures  through  the  ages.  His  love  to  each  individual 
of  his  people  is  ever-abiding  and  constant.  It  outlasts  many  provocations,  frequent 
unfaithfulness,  great  unworthiness  on  their  part.  Christ  did  not  cease  to  love  St.  Peter 
when  the  apostle  denied  his  Master.  2.  Se  is  a  Brother  in  affliction.  The  Companion 
of  our  joys,  he  is  especially  our  Helper  in  trouble;  he  came  expressly  to  save  from 
the  terrible  evil  of  sin.  He  is  the  sympathizing  Friend  for  all  sorrow.  3.  2'Ac  secret 
of  his  friendship  is  love.  It  is  not  our  claim  or  attractiveness,  but  the  love  of  Christ, 
that  makes  him  our  abiding,  faithful  Friend.  If  we  would  measure  the  durability  of 
his  friendship,  we  must  gauge  the  greatness  of  his  undying  love. 

Ver.  22. — The  healing  effects  of  cheerfulness.  I.  Chberfulness  is  commended  in 
Scripture.  The  Bible  does  not  put  a  premium  on  eonbreness.  It  never  suggests  that 
there  is  a  merit  in  gloom.  It  urges  the  need  of  repentance,  calls  upon  men  to  grieve 
for  their  sins,  threatens  the  wrath  of  God  against  impenitence,  and  so  brings  up 
occasions  for  distress  of  soul;  it  also  rebukes  "the  laughter  of  fools,"  the  empty 
merriment  of  frivolity  and  the  riot  and  revelry  of  dissipation  (Eccles.  vii.  6).  But  it 
does  not  commend  sorrow  on  its,  own  account.  On  the  contrary,  it  brings  joy  and 
encourages  gladness.  Christ  gave  his  joy  to  his  people  (John  xv.  11).  St.  Paul 
emphatically  reiterated  his  advice  to  his  readers  to  rejoice  (Phil.  iv.  4).  God  loves 
his  children  and  delights  in  their  happiness.  God  is  blessed,  therefore  happy  ;  and  he 
desires  for  his  children  a  share  in  his  blessedness,  which  must  involve  a  participation  in 
his  gladness. 

11.  Cheerfulness  exerts  a  healing  influekob  over  the  individual  soul. 
Too  mnch  indulgence  in  sorrow  induces  a  morbid  condition.  It  is  not  healthy  in  itself, 
for  man  is  not  meant  to  be  a  perpetual  incarnation  of  pain.  The  natural  merriment  of 
children  is  not  only  innocent;  it  is  positively  helpful  to  the  sane  growth  of  their 
mmds.  Cheerful  Christians  are  strong  Christians;  for  "the  joy  of  the  Lord  is  your 
strength "  (Neh.  viii.  10).  It  is  easier  to  bear  disappointment  when  the  spirit  is  free 
and  buoyant.  Temptation  is  less  powerful  against  a  contented  soul  than  against  one 
that  is  enfeebled  by  fretful  dissatisfaction.  We  can  do  our  work  best  when  we  do  it 
gladly.  In  a  cheerful  mood  we  take  the  widest,  wisest,  healthiest  views  of  truth. 
Sour  feelings  lead  to  false  estiiaates  of  the  world.    Even  after  sin  and  repentance,  when 


340  THE  PEOVERBS.  [oh.  xvn.  1— 2a 


the  sinner  ii  pardoned,  a  sober,  humble  cheerfulness  is  healthier  than  perpetual 
lamentation.    Therefore  the  fatted  calf  is  killed,  etc. 

III.  ChBEBFULNESS  IB  A  BOURCE  OF  HEALTHY  INPLUENOB  FOB  0THKB8.      The  gloomy 

saint  cultivates  his  own  sombre  sanctity  at  the  expense  of  his  neighbours.  He  should 
be  helping  them  and  attracting  them  into  the  way  of  life.  But  he  is  repelling  and 
hindering  them.  Children  are  best  won  by  a  cheerful  presentation  of  religion.  The 
indifferent  are  made  to  see  that  the  cross  of  Christ  does  not  mean  perpetual  distress 
and  trouble  to  the  Christian.  The  lost  and  fallen  have  hopes  inspired  within  them 
when  they  are  approached  with  hopes  of  better  things.  The  gospel  is  goodness;  it 
should  be  preached  with  a  cheerful  spirit ;  its  "  glad  tidings  of  great  joy  "  speak  healing 
to  the  nations. 

IV.  GhEEBFULNESS   18  TO   BE   BEST   ATTAINED  IN   THE  CHRISTIAN   LIFE.      The  merry 

soul  may  be  only  superficially  glad,  or  even  sinfully  delighted,  when  it  should  he 
humbled  in  repentance.  But  afttr  repentance  and  pardon  God  gives  his  own  dee^sure 
joy.  This  joy  rests  on  the  love  of  God  and  fellowship  with  him.  It  is  confirmed  by 
service.  When  one  can  say,  "  I  delight  to  do  thy  will,  0  my  God"  (Ps.  xl.  8),  he  has 
reached  the  true  fountain  of  a  cheerful  spirit.  Such  a  jny  can  master  adversity  and 
rejoice  in  tribulation  (2  Cor.  vi.  10).  It  was  when  engaged  in  an  apostolic  mission  that 
Paul  and  Silas  were  able  to  sing  in  prison  (Acts  xvi.  25). 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 9. — Traits  of  outward  and  inward  happiness.  Happiness  dependi  more  on 
the  inward  state  than  on  the  outward  condition.    Hence — 

I.  Contentment  ab  an  element  op  happiness.  (Ver.  1.)  The  dry  morsel,  with 
rest  and  quiet  in  the  spirit,  is  better,  says  the  preacher,  than  the  most  luxurious  meal ; 
the  allusion  being  to  slaughtered  sacrificial  animals  as  the  chief  constituents  of  a  rich 
repast  (ch.  ix.  2 ;  Gen.  xliii.  16).  It  suggests  the  picture  of  "  holy  love,  found  in  u 
cottage  "  (Matthew  Henry).  The  secret  of  happiness  lies  rather  in  limiting  our  desires 
than  in  increasing  our  substance. 

II.  Pbudence  and  THRIFT.  (Ver.  2.)  The  prudent  servant  may  rise,  and  probably 
not  seldom  did  rise  in  ancient  times,  to  superiority  over  the  idle  and  dissipated  son  of 
the  house.  la  this  light  Abraham  looked  upon  Eliezer — that  he  might  probably  step 
into  the  place  of  a  son  in  his  house.  How  much  more  depends,  in  reference  to  power 
and  influence  in  this  world,  upon  sense  and  prudence  than  upon  birth  and  every 
external  advantage  1 

III.  The  true  heabt.  (Ver.  3.)  The  heart  which  has  been  tried  in  the  scales  of 
Jehovah,  assayed  by  the  tests  of  an  infallible  truth.  We  need  to  remind  ourselves  how 
little  we  know  of  the  depths  of  human  character.  Our  inquiries  and  our  teachings  are 
inadequate  and  deceptive.  The  search  of  the  human  heart  is  a  royal  privilege  of  Gud. 
Without  the  true,  the  divinely  approved  heart,  there  is  no  real  root  of  good  or  bliss. 

IV.  A  SINCERE  tempeb.  (Ver.  4.)  This  is  suggested,  as  often,  by  the  hideous  con- 
trast of  the  wicked,  inwardly  corrupt  heart,  which  willingly  takes  note  of  and 
inclines  to  lying  words,  to  the  tempter  and  his  wishes.  It  takes  pleasure  in  the 
"naughty  words"  it  dares  not,  perhaps,  utter  itself;  is  glad  to  borrow  words  from 
another  to  fit  its  own  evil  thoughts.  In  contrast  to  this,  the  spirit  of  the  candid  and 
sincerely  good  manis  that  expressed  by  Bishop  Hall,  "If  I  cannot  stop  other  men's 
mouths  from  speaking  ill,  I  will  either  open  my  mouth  to  reprove  it,  or  else  I  will  stop 
ray  ears  from  hearing  it,  and  let  him  see  in  my  face  that  he  hath  no  room  in  my 
heart." 

V.  Compassion,  pitt,  and  btmpatht.  (Ver.  5.)  Contempt  of  the  poor  is  con- 
tempt of  the  majesty  of  God.  The  greater  part  of  poverty  is  not  wilful ;  it  is  in  the 
course  of  the  providence  of  God.  "  To  pour  contempt  on  the  current  coin  with  tiie 
king's  image  on  it  is  treason  against  the  sovereign."  There  is  something  worse  than 
even  this,  viz.  to  rejoice  in  the  calamities  of  others.  It  is  a  peculiarly  inhuman  view, 
and  is  certain  to  be  punished  in  the  remorse  of  the  conscience,  in  the  closing  up  of  the 
way  to  God's  heart  in  the  time  of  one's  own  need, 

VI.  Family  joy*.    (Ver.  6.)    To  leave  out  these  would  be  to  leave  out  that  which 


OT.  xvn.1-28.]  THE  PROVERBS.  841 

gives  to  life  its  chief  fragrance  and  oliarm.  As  children  aie  the  pride  and  ornament 
of  the  parents,  so  the  sons,  on  the  other  hand,  so  long  as  they  themselves  are  not 
fathers,  can  only  fall  back  upon  the  father.  The  faiiiily  tree,  the  higher  it  rises  and 
the  more  widely  it  extends,  increases  the  honour  of  the  race. 

VII.  Nobleness  oi'  speech.  (Ver.  7.)  The  first  element  of  this  is,  as  so  often 
insisted  upon,  truthfulness  in  the  inward  parts.  The  second  is  appropriateness,  regard 
to  what  is  becoming.  Thus  a  high  assuming  tone  ill  befits  the  fool ;  much  less  falsity, 
affectation,  hypocrisy,  a  noble  mind.  To  recollect  what  is  becoming  in  us  is  a  great 
safeguard  to  morality  and  guide  to  conduct.  In  the  common  affairs  of  life  we  should 
not  seek  to  rise  above  our  station,  nor  should  we  fall  below  it.  In  religion  there  is 
also  a  just  mean — the  recollection  of  what  it  is  to  be  a  Christian ;  and  the  effort  not  to 
rise  above  the  humility  of  that  position,  as  not  to  fall  below  its  grandeur  and  nobility. 
"  If  truth  be  banished  from  all  the  rest  of  the  world,"  said  Louis  IX.  of  France,  "  it 
ought  to  be  found  in  the  breast  of  princes."     Let  us  substitute  the  word  "  Christians." 

VIII.  The  value  of  gifts.  (Ver.  8.)  There  seems  to  be  no  reason  for  taking  this 
only  in  the  bad  sense  with  reference  to  ijribery.  Lawful  gifts  and  presents  have  their 
charm  as  well  as  unlawful.  The  power  of  gold  to  corrupt;  the  saying  of  Philip 
of  Macedon,  that  there  was  no  fortress  so  strong  but  that  it  might  be  stormed  if 
an  ass  laden  with  gold  were  driven  to  the  gate ; — all  this  is  well  known.  But  equally 
true  IB  it  that  honest  gifts  of  kindness,  having  no  impure  purpose  in  view,  are  like 
jewels.  They  sparkle  with  the  lustre  of  human  love  when  turned  in  any  light,  and 
win  friends  and  good  will  for  the  giver  wherever  he  goes.  It  is  the  generous  freedom 
to  give,  not  necessarily  of  silver  and  gold,  but  of  "  such  things  as  we  have,"  which  is 
here  commended  and  noted  as  one  of  the  secrets  of  happiness.  The  deepest  joy  is,  in 
all  true  gifts,  to  be  expressing  the  one  great  gift  of  the  heart  to  God. 

IX.  CoNOEALiNO  AND  FOROiviNO  LOVE.  (Ver.  9.)  Let  us  remind  ourselves  that  in 
the  Law  the  word  for  forgiving  or  atoning  is  "  cover."  And  frequently  we  read  of 
God  covering  the  sins  of  the  penitent.  This  relation  is  for  the  imitation  of  Christians, 
"  followers  of  God  as  dear  children."  '•  Love  covers  a  multitude  of  sins."  Like  the  heal- 
ing hand  of  Nature,  which  we  see  everywhere  busy  concealing  unsightliness,  veiling  the 
old  ruin  with  the  beautiful  ivy  and  other  creeping  plants.  On  the  contrary,  the  tale- 
bearer has  an  eye  for  every  crack  and  seam  in  the  structure  of  society ;  tears  open  and 
causes  to  bleed  the  wounds  that  might  have  been  healed.  Be  true,  be  gentle,  be 
generous,  be  God-like  and  Christ-like, — such  are  the  main  lessons  of  this  section.— J. 

Vers.  10 — 15. — Bark  phases  of  human  character.  We  may  take  ver.  10  as  an 
introduction  to  what  follows.  Exhortations  are  to  bo  given,  and  the  preacher  would 
prepare  us  to  receive  them.  On  the  sensitive  mind  the  censure  of  the  good  makes  a 
deeper  impression  than  a  hundred  blows  on  the  back  of  the  fool.  Sincerity,  love  of 
truth  and  tender  sympathy,  become  the  exhbrter,  and  humble  docility  the  object  of 
his  warnings  or  rebukes.  "  Let  the  righteous  smite  me,  and  it  shall  be  a  kindness  " 
(Ps.  cxli,  5). 

I.  The  contentious  spirit.  (Ver.  11.)  1.  His  temper.  He  seeks  rebellion.  In 
private  life  he  may  be  the  man  who  revolts  from  the  established  usages  of  society, 
delights  in  singularity  for  its  own  sake,  in  defyin;;;  opinion,  showing  disrespect  to  names 
of  authority.  In  public  life  he  may  become  the  heartless  demagogue  and  pest  of  the 
commonwealth.  2.  His  doom.  A  cruel  angel  shall  he  sent  against  him  by  God ;  that 
is,  generally,  his  offence  will  be  visited  upon  him  severely.  The  curse  upon  the  conten- 
tious spirit  is  the  counterpart  of  the  great  evanMlical  blessing  on  the  peacemakers, 
wlio  shall  be  called  "the  children  of  God."  3.  Eis  dangerous  qualities.  (Ver.  12.)  Rage 
is  the  principle  of  his  action,  the  motive  of  his  life.  To  irritate  him,  to  thwart  him,  is 
like  bringing  on  one's  sell  the  fierce  attack  of  the  bear  robbed  of  her  Vhelps.  Rage 
united  with  Intelligence  is  the  most  fearful  combination  of  deadly  force  known  in  the 
world.  From  so  dread  a  picture  we  turn  with  the  prayer,  "  From  hatred  and  malice, 
good  Lord,  deliver  us  1 "    "  Oh,  may  we  live  the  peaceful  life ! " 

IL  The  ungrateful  man.  (Ver.  13.)  1.  Bis  conduct.  He  requites  good  with 
evil."  As  there  is  no  virtue  so  natural,  so  spontaneous,  so  pleasurable,  as  gratitude,  m 
there  is  no  mere  negative  vice  so  odious  as  ingratitude.  But  the  positive  reversal  of 
gratitude  in  returning  evil  for  good— for  this  there  is  no  one  word  in  our  (nor  probably 


842  THE  PEOVEBBS.  [oS-  »▼"•  1—28. 

in  any)  language.  It  is  s  wickedness  indeed  unuiterahle.  2.  Sis  doom  is  punish- 
ment from  God,  And  the  severity  of  the  punishment  teaches  by  contrast  how  dear  is 
gratitude  to  God.  As  evil  shall  ever  haunt  the  house  of  the  dark  rebel  against  light 
and  love,  so  shall  joy  and  peace  attend  the  steps  of  the  peaceful  child  of  God, 

III.  The  cossequbnoes  of  mischief  incalculable.  (Ver.  14.)  A  homely  figure 
impresses  the  truth  in  a  way  not  to  be  forgotten.  Similarly,  James  compares  the  pro- 
gress of  mischief  to  the  sparks  which  may  be  easily  fanned  into  a  great  -conflagration 
(iii.  5).  How  great  the  service  that  may  be  rendered  by  those  who,  id  the  interests  of 
peace,  at  once  trample  out  the  sparks  or  seal  up  the  avenues  of  the  flood.  Tliose 
rules  are  good  for  the  avoidance  of  strife.  Consider :  1.  Whether  the  dispute  is  not  about 
words  rather  than  things.  2.  Whether  we  really  understand  the  subject,  3,  Whether 
it  is  worth  disputing  about. 

IV.  Moral  ihdiffeeence.  (Ver.  15.)  To  speak  the  bad  man  fair,  to  justify  or 
excuse  his  evil,  and  to  censure  or  criticize  or  condemn  the  good,  from  prudence  or 
other  motive, — this  shows  a  blindness  to  moral  distinctions,  a  wilful  insensibility  which 
is  incompatible  with  religion,  and  incurs  the  deep  disapproval  and  judgment  of  Jehovah. 
We  have  examples  in  Ezra  iv.  1 — 16 ;  Acts  xxiv.  1 — 9.  Religion  teaches  us  to  dis- 
tinguish between  things  that  differ ;  if  we  have  not  learnt  that  lesson,  we  have  learned 
nothing.  If,  having  learned  it,  we  disregard  it,  our  profession  of  religion  becomes  con- 
verted into  an  hypocrisy  and  an  abomination. — J. 

Vers.  16 — 20. — Light  in  the  head,  love  in  the  heart.  I.  Monet  useless  without 
SENSE.  (Ver.  16.)  The  true  view  of  money  is  that  of  means  to  ends.  But  if  the  ends 
are  not  seen,  or,  being  seen,  are  not  earnestly  desired,  of  what  avail  the  means  ?  If  our 
heart  be  set  upon  the  right  objects  of  life,  opportunities  will  always  present  themselves. 
If  blind  to  life's  meaning,  no  advantages  will  seem  to  be  advantages. 

II.  The  beauty  of  friendship.  (Ver.  17.)  1,  In  general.  It  is  constant ;  it  is 
unvarying  ;  it  is  adapted  to  all  the  various  states  and  vicissitudes  of  life.  2.  In  par- 
ticular. It  takes  new  life  out  of  sorrow.  In  distress,  the  friend  is  developed  into  the 
"  brother,"  and  is  taken  close  to  the  heart.  True  friendship  gladdens  at  the  opportunity 
of  self-devotion  for  the  beloved  one's  good.  It  is  the  distress  of  our  sin  which  makes  us 
acquainted  with  him  "  that  sticketh  closer  than  a  brother."  But  thank  God  for  all 
those  who  are  new-born  to  us  in  the  freshly  revealed  grace  and  goodness  of  their  hearts 
amidst  the  scenes  of  suffering, 

III.  The  strict  duty  of  caution  in  reference  to  responsibility.  (Ver.  18.) 
The  consequences  of  becoming  bail  for  a  defaulter  were  in  ancient  life  very  terrible. 
Nowadays  there  are  prudent  men  who  will  never  set  their  hand  to  an  acceptance. 
Although  all  moral  duties  are  not  equally  amiable  in  their  aspect,  it  must  be  remem- 
bered that  the  ability  to  do  good  to  others  rests  upon  strict  prudence  with  reference  to 
one's  self.    We  may  be  maimed  or  destroyed  by  imprudence. 

IV.  Besistancb  to  the  BEGUiNiNQs  OF  EVIL.  (Ver.  19.)  Contention  or  temper  and 
passion  in  general  leads  on  to  graver  sin.  Open  the  way  to  one  sin,  and  others  will 
immediately  troop  forward  in  its  rear.  Again,  contentiousness  and  pride  are  in  close 
connection ;  the  latter  is  generally  the  spring  of  the  former.  And  both  are  ruinous  in 
their  tendency.  High  towers  invite  the  lightning;  but  he  that  does  not  soar  too 
loftily  will  suffer  the  less  by  a  fall.  A  modest  way  of  life,  withm  our  means,  is  the 
only  truly  Christian  life. 

V.  The  true  heart  and  the  ouilblbss  tongue.  (Ver.  20.)  There  is  no  health, 
no  salvation  for  self  or  others,  in  the  false  heart  and  the  tongue  that  flickers  and  waver* 
between  opposing  impulses.  Old  Homer  has  the  sentiment  that  he  who  speaks  one 
thing  and  thinks  another  in  his  heart  is  hateful  as  the  gates  of  hell.  1.  There  is  no 
true  light  in  the  head  without  love  in  the  heart.  2,  There  is  no  dualisiTi  in  our  moral 
character.  3.  There  ig  a  correspondence  between  our  outward  lot  and  our  inward 
choice. — J. 

Vers.  21 — 28. —  Varied  experiences  of  good  and  evil  in  life.  We  may  divide  them 
Into  the  sorrowful,  the  joyous,  and  the  mixed  experiences. 

I.  Sad  experiences.  The  sorrow  of  thankless  children.  (Vers.  21,  25.)  To  name 
[t  is  enough  for  those  who  have  known  it.     It  has  its  analogue  in  Divine  places.    How 


efi.tvn.  1— 28J  THE  PR0VEEB3.  843 

pathetically  does  the  Bible  speak  of  the  grief  of  God  over  the  rebellious  children  he  has 
nourished  and  brought  up  1  and  of  Christ's  lamentation  as  of  a  raother  over  Jerusalem ! 
Let  UB  remember  that  our  innocent  earthly  sorrows  are  reflected  in  the  bosom  of  our 
God, 

II.  Joyous  experiences.  (Ver.  22.)  The  blessing  of  a  cheerful  heart,  who  can 
overprize  it  in  relation  to  personal  health,  to  social  charm  and  helpfulness  ?  Contrasted 
with  the  troubled  spirit,  like  a  parching  fever  in  the  bones,  it  is  the  perpetual  sap  of 
life  and  source  of  all  its  greenness  and  its  fruit.  A  simple  faith  is  the  best  kuown 
source  of  cheerfulness.  It  was  a  fine  remark  of  a  good  friend  of  Dr.  Johnson's,  that 
*  he  had  tried  to  be  a  philosopher,  but  somehow  always  found  cheerfulness  creeping  in." 
IIL  Mixed  bxperibnoes  op  human  ohaeacter.  1.  The  briber,  (Ver.  23.)  How 
strongly  marked  is  this  sin  in  the  denunciations  of  the  Bible!  and  yet  how  little  the 
practice  seems  affected  in  a  land  which  boasts  above  others  of  its  love  for  the  Bible! 
The  stealth  and  so  the  shf^me,  the  evil  motive,  the  perverse  result,  all  are  branded  here. 
"  He  that  shaketh  his  hands  from  holding  of  bribes,  he  shall  dwell  on  high  "  (Isa.  xxxiii. 
15).  2.  Tlie  quick  perception  of  wisdom  and  tJie  warning  glance  of  folly.  The  one  sees 
before  him  what  is  to  be  known  or  done  at  once ;  the  other  is  lost  in  cloudy  musings. 
The  more  a  man  gapes  after  vanity,  the  more  foolish  the  heart  becomes.  In  religion  we 
see  this  temper  in  the  restless  roving  to  and  fro,  the  constant  query,  "Who  will  show 
us  any  good  r  "  "  He  is  full  of  business  at  church ;  a  stranger  at  home ;  a  sceptic  abroad ; 
an  observer  in  the  street;  everywhere  a/ooZ."  S.  Earshness  in  judges.  (Ver.  26.)  Fining 
and  flogging  are  mentioned.  The  writer  had  observed  some  such  scene  with  the  horror 
of  a  just  man.  Inequity  or  inhumanity  in  the  judge  seems  an  insvdt  against  the 
eternal  throne  of  Jehovah.  4.  The  wisdom  of  a  calm  temper  and  economy  of  words. 
(Vers.  27,  28.)  An  anxiety  to  talk  is  the  mark  of  a  shallow  mind.  The  knowledge 
cf  the  season  of  silence  and  reserve  may  be  compared  to  the  wisdom  of  the  general  who 
•  knows  when  to  keep  his  forces  back  and  when  to  launch  them  at  the  foe.  The  com- 
posed S]xrit  comes  from  the  knowledge  that  truth  will  prevail  in  one  way  or  another,  and 
the  time  for  our  utterance  will  arrive.  Lastly,  the  wisdom  of  silence,  so  often  preached 
by  great  men.  Even  the  fool  may  gain  some  credit  for  wisdom  which  he  does  not 
possess  by  holding  his  tongue;  and  this  is  an  index  of  the  reality.  Our  great  example 
here  is  the  silence  of  Jesus,  continued  for  thirty  years ;  out  of  that  silence  a  voice 
at  length  proceeded  that  will  ever  vibrate  through  the  world. — J. 

Ver.  3. — Divine  proving  and  purifying.  Heat,  like  water,  is  a  very  bad  master 
but  a  very  excellent  servant.  It  proves  whether  our  acquisition  has  or  has  not  any 
value,  whether  it  should  be  carefully  preserved  or  be  "trodden  underfoot;"  and  it 
refines  that  which  has  any  worth  at  all,  separating  the  dross  and  securing  for  us  the 
pure  metal  which  we  want  for  use  or  ornament.  What  we  do  with  our  materials  God 
does  with  ourselves ;  but  the  fires  through  which  he  sends  us  are  of  a  very  different 
kind  from  those  we  kindle. 

I.  The  fires  through  which  Goo  passes  us.  These  are  the  disciplinary  experiences 
through  which,  in  his  holy  providence  and  in  his  fatherly  love,  he  causes  us  to  pass. 
And  of  them  we  may  say  that  their  name  is  legion,  for  "  they  are  many."  They  vary 
as  do  the  histories  of  human  life.  It  may  be  (1)  a  change  for  the  worse,  sudden  or 
gradual,  permanent  or  transient,  in  our  temporal  conditions,  afSuenoo  sinking  into 
competence,  or  competence  into  pecuniary  embarrassment,  or  into  hard  toil  and  scant 
enjoyment;  or  (2)  bereavement  and  consequent  loneliness  of  spirit,  the  loss  of  some 
near  companion  whose  fellowship  was  sweet  beyond  expression,  or  whose  guidance  was 
incalculably  helpful ;  or  (3)  disappointment,  the  going  out  of  some  bright  hope  in  the 
light  of  which  our  path  had  been  trodden  and  the  extinction  of  which  throws  the  future 
into  thick  darkness;  or  (i)  the  loss  of  health  and  strength,  when  we  are  taken  away 
from  activities  which  were  congenial  or  apparently  necessary  to  us,  and  are  shut  in  to 
an  enforced  idleness,  from  which  we  long  to  be  delivered;  or  (5)  the  endurance  of 
pain ;  or  (6)  our  failure  to  accomplish  some  good  work  ou  which  we  had  set  our  heart 
and  put  our  hand. 

II.  His  trial  of  our  spirit.  God  thus  proves  us.  These  troubles  are  trials ;  they 
■how  to  our  Creator  and  to  ourselves  what  manner  of  men  we  are,  what  is  "  the  spirit 
we  are  of."  They  prove  to  him  and  to  us  whether  we  care  more  about  our  circumstances 


344  THE  PROVERBS.  [CH.  xvil.  1—28. 

tlian  we  do  abont  ourselves  and  our  character ;  they  prove  whether  we  have  a  deep 
spirit  of  Bubmission  and  of  trustfulness,  or  whether  onr  subjection  to  the  will  of  God  la 
very  shallow  and  departs  as  soon  as  it  is  tested ;  they  prove  whether  in  the  hour  of 
need  we  look  above  us  for  strength  and  succour,  or  whether  we  have  recourse  only  to 
those  persons  and  things  which  are  around  us,  or  whether  we  descend  to  props  and 
stays  that  are  positively  beneath  us.  They  prove  the  quality  of  our  Christian 
character ;  they  sometimes  demonstrate  its  actual  unreality. 

III.  God's  befininq  goodness  and  wisdom.  God  tries  our  hearts,  not  merely  that 
he  or  we  may  see  what  is  in  them,  but  that  they  may  be  purified  (see  Isa.  xlviii.  10). 
Many  purifying,  practical  lessons  we  learn  in  affliction  which  we  are  very  slow  to 
receive,  and  which,  but  for  its  discipline,  we  might  never  gain  at  all.  They  are  these, 
among  others.  1.  The  unsatisfying  character  of  all  that  is  earthly  and  human.  2. 
Tlie  transitoriness  of  the  present,  and  the  wisdom  of  laying  up  treasures  in  heaven. 
3.  Tlie  secondariness  of  all  claims  to  those  that  are  Divine,  and  our  consequent  obligation 
to  give  the  first  place  to  the  will  and  the  cause  of  our  Redeemer.  4.  Our  deep  need  of 
Christ  as  the  Lord  whom  we  are  to  be  faithfully  serving  and  the  Friend  in  whose 
fellowship  we  are  to  spend  our  days.  With  these  great  spiritual  truths  burnt  into  our 
souls  by  the  refining  fires,  we  shall  have  our  worldliness  and  our  selfishness  expelled, 
and  be  Tessels  of  piue  gold,  meet  for  the  Master's  use. — 0. 

Vers.  6,  21,  25. — Fatherhood  and  sonship.  Certainly,  some  of  our  very  greatest 
mercies  are  those  that  come  to  us  in  our  domestic  relationships. 

I.  The  jot  and  crown  or'  fatherhood  and  of  grandfathkrhood.  Our  Lord  speaks 
of  the  mother  forgetting  her  anguish  "  for  joy  that  a  man  is  born  into  the  world"  (John 
xvi.  21).  The  joy  of  parentage  is  keen,  and  it  is  common ;  it  may,  indeed,  be  said  to 
be  universal.  And  it  is  pure  and  good ;  it  elevates  and  enlarges  the,  soul,  taking 
thought  and  care  away  from  self  to  another,  and  by  so  doing  it  distinctly  benefits  and- 
blesses  the  nature.  And,  like  all  pure  joys,  it  is  lasting  ;  it  does  not  evaporate  with 
time;  on  the  other  hand,  it  grows  and  deepens  as  the  child  of  its  affection  develops 
and  matures.  Moreover,  in  the  kind  providence  of  God,  it  is  renewaWe  in  another 
generation ;  for  the  grandfather  has  almost  as  much  delight  in  his  grandson  as  the 
father  in  his  child  (text;  Gen.  1.  23;  Ps.  cxxviii.  6).  Fatherhood  (motherhood)  isj 
1.  A  natural  desire  of  the  human  heart.  2.  Often  the  reward  which  God  gives  to 
patient  industry  and  virtue  in  earlier  days ;  for  the  setting  up  of  a  home  is,  in  many 
if  not  in  most  cases,  the  attainment  of  a  hope  for  which  the  young  have  striven  and 
waited.  3.  Sometimes  a  source  of  grievous  disappointment  and  saddest  sorrow  (vers. 
21,  25).  There  is  no  one  in  the  world  who  can  pierce  our  souls  with  such  bitter 
anguish  as  can  our  own  child  when  he  or  she  goes  astray  from  wisdom  and  righteous- 
ness. 4.  Always  an  entail  of  the  most  serious  responsibility;  for  what  we  are  in 
spiritand  in  character  it  is  most  likely  that  our  children  will  become.  5.  Therefore 
a  noble  opportunity ;  for  it  is  in  our  power,  by  wisdom  and  virtue,  by  kindness 
and  piety,  to  lead  our  sons  into  the  gates  of  privilege  and  up  to  the  gates  of  the 
kingdom  of  Christ.  6.  And  therefore  usually  a  source  of  pr.ifoundest  gratitude  and 
gladness,  and  the  means  by  which  we  can  hand  down  our  principles  and  our  influence, 
through  our  own  direct  endeavours,  to  the  second  and  the  third  generation. 

JI.  The  glory  of  childhood.  "  The  glory  of  children  are  their  fathers."  1.  It  is 
the  greatest  of  all  earthly  heritages  to  have  parents  that  can  be  esteemed  and  loved. 
Happy  is  the  son  who,  as  his  judgment  matures,  can  honour  his  father  with  an 
andiminishing  or  even  a  growing  regard  and  deepening  joy.  2.  It  is  a  very  real  delight 
to  be  able  to  look  back,  through  all  the  later  years  of  life,  and  recall  the  memories  of 
the  beloved  and  revered  parents  who  have  "  passed  into  the  skies."  3.  It  is  the  duty 
of  childhood  to  make  the  very  best  response  it  can  make  for  the  love,  care,  pains, 
patience,  prayerful  solicitude,  its  parents  have  expended  upon  it.  4.  It  will  remain 
a  lasting  source  of  thankfulness  and  joy  that  every  possible  filial  attention  was  paid 
that  could  be  paid ;  lighting  and  smoothing  the  path  of  the  parents  to  the  very  dcor  of 
heaven. — C. 

Ver.  9  (with  ch.  xvi.  28).— Friendship ;  the  silence  that  saves  and  the  speech  th«t 
separates  it.     Wo  may  learn — 


OH.  XTii.  1—28.]  THE  PROVERBS.  346 

L  Thb  GoorLiNBSs  or  rBUNDSHip.  "  Very  friends,''  or  "  oliief  friends,"  points  to 
intimate  frieudship.  This  is  one  of  the  very  fairest  and  worthiest  things  under  the 
sun.  The  man  to  whom  G-od  gives  a  lifelong  faithful  friendship  is  rich  in  a  treasure 
which  wealth  cannot  buy  and  the  excellency  of  which  it  does  not  equal.     It  should  be : 

1.  Founded  on  common  attachment  to  the  same  great  principles,  and  on  mutual  esteem. 

2.  Independent  of  the  changes  that  occur  in  circumstances  and  conditions.  3. 
Strengthened  by  adversity.  4.  Elevated  by  piety.  5.  Lasting  as  life.  Then  It  is 
something  which,  for  intriiisio  beauty  and  substantial  worth,  cannot  be  surpassed. 

II.  The  bilenor  that  may  bavb  it.  There  is  a  Bpetch  that  saves  it.  Often  the 
interposition  of  a  few  words  of  explanntinn,  removing  an  offence  which  would  have 
grown  into  seriousness,  will  save  a  rupture.  Sometimes  a  kindly  word  of  coitnscl  ot  . 
remonstrance  to  the  imprudent  or  to  the  mistaken  may  have  the  same  happy  effect. 
But,  at  other  times,  silence  will  save  it.  We  are  often  tempted,  even  strongly  tempted, 
to  say  that  which  would  come  between  two  human  hearts.  To  say  what  we  know 
would  only  be  to  speak  the  truth;  it  would  gratify  the  curiosity  of  those  present;  it 
would  be  a  pleasant  exercise  of  power  or  the  use  of  an  advantage  we  happen  to  possess. 
The  words  rise  to  our  very  lips.  But  no ;  it  is  not  always  our  duty  to  say  all  that  we 
know  I  it  is  often  our  duty  to  be  silent.  There  are  times  when  to  "cover  transgression" 
is  an  act  of  wisdom,  of  kindness,  of  generosity,  of  Christ-likeness  (see  John  viii.  1—11). 
Let  the  fact  remain  untold ;  let  the  hearts  that  have  been  united  remain  bound 
together ;  seek  and  secure  the  permanence  of  "  love." 

III.  The  bpbbch  that  will  skpabatb  it.  A  whisperer,  one  that  repeats  a  matter, 
does  separate  friends.  1.  There  is  always  some  occasion  for  silence  in  every  man's 
life.  No  man  is  so  correct  in  thought  and  speech  that  he  could  afford  to  have  every 
utterance  repeated  to  any  one  and  every  one.  We  all  want  the  kindly  curtain  of  silence 
to  be  drawn  over  some  sentences  that  pass  our  lips.  2.  There  are  always  some  thnught- 
less  speakers — men  and  women  who  will  carry  injurious  reports  from  house  to  house, 
from  heart  to  heart ;  there  are  some  who  are  cruelly  careless  what  things  they  promul- 
gate; there  are  some  who  consciously  and  guiltily  enlarge  and  misrepresent,  who 
form  the  dangerous  and  deadly  habit  of  exaggeration,  of  false  colouring,  and  who  end 
in  systematic  falsehood.  Those  who  idly  and  foolishly  report  what  is  true  are,  indeed, 
less  guilty  than  they  who  enlarge  and  pervert.  But  they  are  far  from  guiltless.  We 
are  bound  to  speak  wiih  suEfioient  caution  to  save  ourselves  from  the  charge  of  circu- 
lating evil  and  spreading  sorrow.  We  are  respuiisible  to  God  not  only  for  the  carefully 
prepared  speech,  but  also  for  the  casual  interjection ;  that  is  the  meaning  of  our  Lord  in 
his  familiar  words  (Matt.  xii.  36).  It  behoves  us  to  remember  that  our  brother's  i&jutii- 
tion,  usefulness,  hapi)iness,  is  in  our  charge,  and  one  slight  whiap&r  may  destroy  it  all. 
One  breath  of  unkindness  may  start  a  long  train  of  sad  consequences  which  we  have  no 
power  at  all  to  stop.  A  very  few  uncunsidered  and  unhappily  uttered  words  may 
sever  hearts  that  have  been  beating  long  in  loving  unison,  may  disunite  lives  that  have 
been  linked  long  in  the  bonds  of  happy  love. — C. 

Ver.  14. — The  growth  of  strife.     Experience  shows  us  that — 

I.  Stbifh  18  a  gbowth.'  It  is  as  when  one  letteth  out  water ;  first  it  is  the  trickling 
of  a  few  drops,  then  a  tiny  rill,  then  a  stream,  etc.  So  with  strife ;  first  it  is  a  disturb- 
ing thought ;  then  it  becomes  a  warm  or  a  hot  feeling ;  then  it  utters  itself  in  a  strong, 
provoking  word  which  leads  to  an  energetic  resentment  and  response;  then  it  swells 
into  a  decided,  antagonistic  action;  then  it  grows  into  a  course  of  opposition,  and 
becomes  a  feud,  a  corjtention;  a  war. 

II.  Thk  growth  of  strife  is  a  calamity.  1.  It  is  the  source  of  untold  and 
jncalculable  misery  to  many  hearts.  2.  It  betrays  several  souls  into  feelings  and  into 
actions  v?hich  are  distinctly  wron^'  and  sinful.  3.  It  presents  a  moral  spectacle  which 
is  grievous  in  the  sight  of  Christ,  the  Lord  of  love.  4.  It  rends  in  twain  that  which 
should  be  united  in  one  strong  and  happy  cu-cle— the  home,  the  family  connection,  the 
Church,  the  society,  the  nation.  5.  It  arrests  the  progress  which  would  otherwise  be 
made  in  wisdom  and  in  worth;  for  it  causes  numbers  of  men  to  expend  on  bitter 
controversy  and  contention  the  energy  and  ingenuity  they  would  otherwise  expend  on 
rendering  service  and  doing  good. 

ILL  Oan  duty,  cub  wisdom,  is  to  arbest  it  at  its  Bnavsisaia.    Hon  cannot  extin- 


846  THE  PBOVEKBS.  [oH.  xrn.  1—28. 

guish  the  conflagration,  but  you  can  stamp  out  the  spark ;  you  cannot  stop  the  flow  of 
the  river,  but  you  can  dam  the  rill  with  the  palm  of  your  hand.  You  cannot  heal  a 
great  schism,  but  you  can  appease  a  personal  dispute ;  or,  what  is  better,  you  can  recall 
the  offensive  word  you  have  yourself  spoken ;  or,  what  is  better  still,  you  can  repress  the 
rising  thought,  you  can  call  in  to  your  aid  other  thoughts  which  calm  and  soothe  the 
soul ;  you  can  remember  him  who  "  bore  such  contradiction  of  sinners  against  himself," 
who  "  as  a  sheep  before  her  shearers  is  dumb,  so  he  openedaot  his  mouth,"  and  you  can 
maintain  a  magnanimous  silence.  When  this  is  no  longer  possible,  because  the  first 
inciting  word  has  been  uttered  and  resented,  then  let  there  be  an  earnest  and  deter- 
mined effort  to  quell  all  heat  in  your  own  heart,  and  to  pacify  the  one  whose  anger  has 
been  aroused.  "  Blessed  are  the  peacemakers,"  etc.  (see  also  Matt.  y.  25 :  Bom.  zii. 
18).— 0. 

Vers.  16,  24. — Use  and  neglect.  "There  is  everything  in  use,"  we  say.  And 
certainly  a  man's  position  at  any  time  depends  far  less  upon  his  bestowments  and 
advantages  than  upon  the  use  he  has  made  of  them.  The  wise  man,  in  these  verses, 
laments  the  fact  that  the  price  of  wisdom  should  so  often  be  in  the  hand  of  a  man  who 
fails  to  turn  it  to  account  (ver.  16),  and  that  the  foolish  man  wastes  his  capacities  by 
directing  them  to  things  at  a  distance  instead  of  giving  his  attention  to  that  which  is 
wittiin  his  reach.    The  facts  of  human  life  abundantly  justify  the  lament 

L  The  presence  of  opi'OBTcnity.  The  price  of  wisdom,  and  also  of  worth  and  of 
usefulness,  is  "  in  our  hand."  It  is  not  afar  off,  that  we  should  ask — Who  will  ascend  to 
the  height  or  tiavel  across  the  sea  to  find  and  fetch  it?  Opportunity  is  amongst  and 
even  "  w'n bin  us."  We  find  it  in  :  1.  Our  natural  capacities ;  here  represented  by  the 
eyes  of  a  man  (ver.  24).  We  have  the  power  of  vision,  not  only  bodily,  but  mental 
and  spiritual.  God  has  given  us  the  faculty  of  perception,  of  observation,  of  intuition ; 
we  can  see  what  is  before  us — our  interest,  our  duty,  our  possibilities.  2.  Our  various 
mdvantages ;  the  education  we  rteceive,  the  friends  and  kindied  who  surround  us,  the 
literature  which  is  at  our  command,  the  resources  we  inherit,  the  openings  and  facilities 
that  are  offered  us  as  we  move  on  into  life.  These  are  "  the  price  "  wherewith  we  may 
•*  buy  wisdom  "  and  happiness,  usefulness  and  power.  "  The  gift  of  God  "  is  a  valuable 
opportunity  (see  John  iv.  10). 

II.  OnK  rooLiSH  and  guilty  neglect  op  it.  Those  who  have  the  very  fairest 
chance  of  attaining  to  wisdom  and  usefulness  sometimes  wantonly  throw  it  away. 
The  foolish  boy,  at  the  best  school  in  the  land,  will  refuse  to  learn,  and  comes  out 
a  dunce.  The  foolish  apprentice,  with  the  best  sources  of  technical  or  professional 
knowledge  at  his  command,  wastes  his  hours  in  frivolity,  and  when  his  time  is  up  is 
utterly  unfit  for  the  occupation  of  his  life.  Information  of  what  is  happening  all  over 
the  world  may  now  be  had  for  a  penny  a  day,  and,  what  is  far  more  precious,  the 
knowledge  of  the  will  of  God  as  revealed  in  the  life  and  by  the  lips  of  Jesus  Christ 
may  be  had  for  twopence;  but,  with  "the  price  of  wisdom"  at  these  figures,  there  are 
those  who  know  nothing  of  the  hopes  or  struggles  of  mankind,  and  nothing  of  the 
way  to  eternal  life.  I)uty,  secular  and  sacred,  is  immediately  before  the  eyes  of  the 
foolish,  but  their  gaze  is  fixed  upon  anything  and  everything  else ;  they  are  dreaming, 
by  day  and  by  night,  of  impossible  or  of  hopelessly  improbable  fortune,  and  while  they 
might  be  patiently  and  successfully  building  up  a  good  estate,  the  chances  of  life  are 
Blipping  through  their  hands.  Such  neglect  of  God-given  opportunity  is :  1.  A  most 
serious  sin.     It  is  the  act  of  hiding  our  talent  in  the  earth  which  calls  forth  the  stron"- 

condemnation,  "Thou  wicked  and  slothful  servant"  (Matt.  xxv.  24 26).     2.  The 

greatest  possible  folly.  It  is  a  practical  renunciation  of  the  fair  heritage  of  life  which  our 
heavenly  Father  offers  us ;  it  is  the  act  of  flinging  the  price  of  wisdom  "  into  the  waste." 

III.  Our  wise  use  of  it.  The  wise  man  is  he  who  makes  the  most  and  the  best  he 
can  make  of  that  which  is  within  his  reach,  that  which  is  "  before  his  face."  He  does 
not  spend  time  in  looking  and  longing  for  that  which  is  ''at  the  ends  of  the  earth;"  he 
sets  himself  to  cultivate  the  patch  of  ground,  however  small  and  poor,  that  is  just 
outside  his  door.  He  puts  out  his  talents,  however  mean  they  may  be.  He  works  his 
capital,  liowever  small  it  may  be.  He  reads  well  his  books,  however  limited  his  library 
may  be.  He  tries  to  serve  others,  however  narrow  his  sphere  may  be.  So  doing,  he  i« 
in  the  way  of  constant  growth  and  of  a  large  reward  (Matt.  xxv.  20 24). 0. 


oil.  xtm.  1—24.]  THE  PEOVERBS.  84? 

Ver.  17. —  The  friend  in  need.  However  we  read  this  passge  (see  Exposition),  we 
have  before  ub  the  subject  of  true  and  lasting  friendship.  As  is  stated  in  a  previous 
homily  (see  on  ver.  9),  this  is  founded  on  a  common  attachment  to  the  same  great 
principles,  moral  and  religious ;  and  also  on  a  mutual  esteem,  each  heart  holding  the 
other  in  a  real  regard.  When  such  intelligent  esteem  ripens  into  strong  affection,  we 
have  a  result  that  deserves  to  bear  the  beautiful  and  honourable  name  of  friendship. 
The  true  friend  is  one  that  "  loves  at  all  times,"  and  he  is  a  "  brother  bom  for 
adversity."  A  false  or  a  weak  friendship  will  not  hear  the  strain  which  the  changeful 
and  hard  experiences  of  life  will  put  upon  it ;  it  will  break  and  perish.  But  a  true 
friendship,  well  founded  and  well  notirished  upon  Chribtian  truth,  will  bear  all  strain*, 
even  those  of — 

I.  Distance. 

II.  Change  of  view  and  or  occnpATioN.  Friendship  usually  begins  In  youth  or 
in  the  earlier  years  of  manhood ;  then  will  come,  with  maturity  of  mirtd  and  enlarge- 
ment of  knowledge  and  change  of  occupation,  difference  of  view  on  things  personal, 
political,  literary,  social.     But  true  friendship  will  endure  that  strain. 

III.  Eeductiok,  The  loss  of  health;  of  property  or  income,  and  the  consequent 
reduction  in  style  and  in  resources ;  mental  vigour  with  the  lapse  of  time  or  from 
the  burden  of  oppressive  care  and  overwork.    But  faithfulness  will  triumph  over  this. 

IV.  Pkospbeity.  One  may  ascend  in  circumstances,  in  social  position ;  may  be 
attended  and  even  courted  by  the  wealthy  and  the  powerful;  may  liave  his  time  much 
occupied  by  pressing  duties;  and  the  friendship  begun  years  ago,  in  a  much  lower 
position,  may  be  threatened ;  but  it  should  not  be  sacrificed. 

V.  DiSHONOUB.  It  does  occasionally  happen  to  men  that  they  fall  into  undeserved 
reproach.  They  are  misunderstood  or  they  are  falsely  accusud ;  and  the  good  name  is 
tainted  with  some  serious  charge.  Neighbours,  casual  acquaintances,  those  associated 
by  the  slighter  social  bonds,  fall  away ;  they  "  pass  by  on  the  other  side."  Then  is 
the  time  for  the  true  friend  to  make  his  faithfulness  felt;  then  he  is  to  show  himself 
the  man  who  "loves  at  all  times,"  the  " brother  born  for  adversity."  Then  he  will  no* 
only  remember  where  his  friend  is  living,  but  he  will  identify  himself  with  him  in 
every  open  way,  will  stand  by  him  and  walk  with  him,  and  honour  him,  not  reluctantly 
and  feebly,  bat  eagerly  and  energetically. 

VI.  Declension.  It  may  happen  that  one  to  whom  we  have  given  our  heart  in 
tender  and  loyal  affection,  between  whom  and  ourselves  there  has  existed  a  long  and 
intimate  friendship,  will  yield  to  temptation  in  one  or  other  of  its  seductive  and 
powerful  forms.  It  may  be  that  he  will  gradually  decline ;  it  may  be  that  he  will 
fall  with  some  sad  suddenness  into  serious  wrong-doing.  Then  will  come  to  him 
compunction,  humiliation,  desertion,  loneliness.  All  his  ordinary  com)  anions  will  fall 
from  him.  It  will  be  the  extreme  of  adversity,  the  lowest  deep  of  misery.  Then  let 
true  friendship  show  its  hand,  offer  its  strong  arm,  open  its  door  of  refuge  and  of  hope ; 
then  let  the  friend  prove  himself  a  "  brother  born  for  adversity."  1.  Be  worthy  to  love 
the  best,  that  you  may  form  a  true  friendship.  2.  Ennoble  your  life  and  yourself  by 
unwavering  fidelity  in  the  testing  hour,  when  your  friend  is  most  in  need  of  your 
loyalty,  3.  Secure  the  abiding  love  of  that  Friend  who  is  "the  same  yesterday, 
and  to-day,  and  for  ever." — 0. 

Vers.  21, 25. — (See  homily  on  ch.  x.  1.) — OL 

EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XVIIL 

Ver.  1. — This  is  a  difficult  verse,  and  has 
obtained  various  interpretations.  The  Au- 
thorized Version  gives.  Through  desire  a.  man, 
having  separated  himself,  seeketh  and  inter- 
maddleth  with  all  wisdom ;  t.e.  a  man  who 
has  an  earnest  desire  for  self-improvement 
will  hold  himself  aloof  from  worldly  en- 


tanglements, and,  occupying  himself  wholly 
in  this  pursuit,  will  become  conversant  with 
all  wisdom.  This  gives  good  sense,  and 
offers  a  contrast  to  the  fool  in  ver.  2,  who 
"hath  no  deliglit  in  understanding."  But 
the  Hebrew  does  not  rightly  bear  this  inter- 
pretation. Its  conciseness  occasions  am- 
biguity. Literally,  For  hit  de$ire  a  man 
who  teparatei  himself  seekt ;  in  (or  againtt) 


348 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[oh.  xTin.  1-^24. 


all  wisdom  he  mingles  himeelf.  There  is  a 
doubt  whether  the  lile  of  isolation  ia  praised 
or  censured  in  this  verse.  Aben  Ezra  and 
others  of  Pharisaic  tendencies  adopt  the 
former  alternative,  and  explain  pretty  much 
as  the  Authorized  Version,  thus :  "  He  who 
out  of  love  of  wisrlom  divorces  himself  from 
home,  country,  or  secular  pursuits,  such  a 
man  will  mix  with  the  wise  and  prudent, 
and  be  conversant  with  such."  But  the 
maxim  seems  rather  to  blame  this  separa- 
tion, though  here,  agaiu,  there  is  a  variety 
of  interpretation.  Delitzscb,  Ewald,  and 
otliers  translate,  "He  that  dwelleth  apart 
81  eketh  pleasure,  against  all  sound  wisdom 
hH  showeth  his  teeth  "  (comp.  ch.  xvii.  14). 
Nowaok,  after  Bertheau,  renders,  "  He  who 
separates  himself  goes  after  his  own  desire ; 
with  aU  that  ii  useful  h«  &lls  into  a  rage." 
Thus  the  maxim  is  directed  against  the 
conceited,  self-willed  man,  who  sets  himself 
Bgiiinst  public  opinion,  delights  in  differing 
fiom  received  customi,  take!  no  counsel 
from  others,,  thinks  nothing  of  public  in- 
terests, bnt  in  his  mean  isolation  attends 
only  to  his  own  private  ends  and  fancies 
(comp.  Heb.  x.  25).  The  Septuagint  and 
Vulgate  (followed  by  Hitzip:)  read  in  the 
first  clause,  for  taavah,  "desire,"  taanah, 
"  occasion  ;  "  thus  :  "  He  who  wishes  to 
separate  from  a  friend  seeks  occasions  ;  but 
at  all  time  he  will  be  worthy  of  censure." 
The  word  translated  "  wisdom  "  (tushiyaK) 
also  means  "  substance,"  "  existence ;  " 
hence  the  rendering,  "  at  all  time,"  omni 
existentia,  equivalent  to  omni  tempore. 

Ver.  2. — A  fool  hath  no  delight  in  under- 
standing. This  may  mean  that  he  takes  no 
pleasure  in  the  wisdom  of  others,  is  self- 
opinionated  ;  or,  it  may  be,  does  not  care  for 
understanding  in  itself,  apart  from  the  use 
which  he  can  make  of  it.  Vulgate,  "  The 
fool  receives  not  the  words  of  wisdom ; " 
Septuagint,  "A  man  of  no  sense  has  no 
need  of  wisdom."  To  try  to  teach  a  fool  is 
to  cast  pearls  before  swine,  and  to  give  that 
which  is  holy  unto  dogs.  But  that  Ms  heart 
may  discover  itself;  i.e.  his  only  delight  is 
in  revealing  his  heart,  displaying  his  un- 
wisdom and  his  foolish  thoughts,  as  in  ch. 
xii.  23 ;  xiii.  16 ;  xv.  2.  He  thinks  that 
thus  he  is  showing  himself  superior  to 
others,  and  benefiting  the  world  at  large. 
The  LXX.  gives  the  reason,  "  For  rather  by 
folly  he  is  led." 

Ver.  3.— When  the  wicked  oOmeth,  then 
Cometh  also  contempt.  The  contempt  here 
spoken  of  is  not  that  with  which  the  sin- 
ner is  regarded,  but  that  which  he  him- 
self learns  to  feel  for  all  that  is  pure  and 
good  and  lovely  (Ps.  xxxi.  18).  As  the 
LXX.  interprets,  "  When  the  wicked 
cometh  into  the  depth  of  evil,  lie  despiscth," 
he  turat  a  despiser,   6o  the  Vulgate.  Going 


forward  in  evil,  adding  sin  to  sin,  he  ends 
by  casting  all  shame  aside,  deriding  the 
Law  Pivine  and  human,  and  saying  in  his 
heart,  "There  is  no  God,"  St.  Gregory, 
"  As  lie  who  is  plunged  into  a  well  is  con- 
fined to  the  bottom  of  it ;  so  would  the  mind 
fall  in,  and  remain,  as  it  were,  at  the  bottom, 
if,  after  having  once  fallen,  it  were  to  confine 
itself  within  any  measure  of  sin.  But  when 
it  cannot  be  contented  with  the  sin  into 
which  it  has  fallen,  while  it  is  daily  plung- 
ing into  worse  offences,  it  finds,  as  it  were, 
no  bottom  to  the  well  into  which  it  has 
fallen,  on  which  to  rest.  For  there  would 
be  a  bottom  to  the  well,  if  there  were  any 
bounds  to  his  sin.  Whence  it  is  well  said, 
'  When  a  sinner  hath  come  into  the  lowest 
depth  of  sins,  he  contemneth.'  For  he  puts 
by  returning,  because  he  has  no  hope  that 
he  can  be  forgiven.  But  when  he  sins  still 
more  through  despair,  lie  withdraws,  as  it 
were,  the  bottom  from  the  well,  so  as  to  find 
therein  no  resting-place"  ('Moral.,'  Slvi. 
69,  Oxford  transl.).  Even  the  heathen  could 
see  this  terrible  consequence.  Thus  Juvenal 
is  quoted  ('  Sat.,'  xiii.  240,  etc.) — 

"  Nam  quis 
Peecandi  finem  posnit  sibi  ?  quando  receplt 
Ejectum  semel  attrita  de  fronte  ruborem  ? 
Quisnam  hominum  est,  quern  tu  coutentum 

videris  uno 
Flagitio?" 

And  with  ignominy  cometh  reproach.  Here 
again  it  is  not  the  reproach  suffered  Ky  the 
sinner  that  is  meant  (as  in  ch.  xi.  2),  but 
the  abuse  which  he  heaps  on  others  who 
strive  to  impede  him  in  his  evil  courses. 
AU  that  he  says  or  does  brings  disgrace, 
and  he  is  always  ready  to  revile  any  who 
are  better  than  himself.  Both  the  Septua- 
gint and  the  Vulgate  make  the  wickea  man 
the  victim  instead  of  the  actor,  thus :  "  but 
upon  him  there  cometh  disgrace  and  re- 
proach." The  Hebrew  does  not  well  admit 
this  interpretation. 

Ver.  4. — ^The  Words  of  a  man's  month  are 
as  deep  waters.  "Man"  (igh)  here  means 
the  ideal  man  in  all  his  wisdom  and  in- 
tegrity, just  as  in  ch.  xviii.  22  the  ideal 
wife  is  intended  under  the  general  term 
"  wife."  Such  a  man's  words  are  as  deep 
waters  which  cannot  be  fathomed  or  ex- 
hausted. The  metaphor  is  common  (see 
ch.  XX.  5 ;  Ecoles.  vii.  24 ;  Eoolus.  xxi.  13). 
For  "  mouth,"  the  Septuagint  reads  " heart :" 
"  Deep  water  is  a  word  in  a  man's  heart." 
The  second  hemistich  explains  the  first: 
The  well-spring  of  wisdom  as  a  flawing 
(gushing)  brook.  A  man's  words  are  now 
called  a  wellspring  of  wisdom,  gushing 
forth  from  its  source,  the  wise  and  under- 
standing heart,  pure,  fresh,  and  inex> 
I  haustible.     Septuagint,  "And  it  lekpetk 


CH.  xvin.  1 — 24.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


349 


forth  (ivairqtvfi)  B  river  and  a  fonntEnn  of 
life."  Or  we  may,  with  Delitzsoh,  take  the 
whole  as  one  idea,  and  consider  that  a  man's 
words  ave  deep  waters,  a  bubbling  brook, 
and  a  fountain  of  wisdom. 

Ver.  5. — It  is  not  good  to  accept  the  person 
of  the  wicked.  To  "  accept  the  person  "  is 
to  show  partiality,  to  be  guided  in  judgment, 
not  by  the  facts  of  a  cuse,  or  the  abBtract 
principles  of  right  or  wrung,  but  by  extra- 
neous considerations,  as  a  man's  appearance, 
manners,  fortune,  family.  (For  the  expres- 
sion, comp.  Lev.  xix.  15 ;  Deut.  i.  17 ;  and  in 
our  book,  ch.  xziv.  23 ;  xxviii.  21.)  The  Sep- 
tuagint  phrase  is  Bavnaa-ai  ■!rp6(rwirov,  which 
St.  Jude  adopts  (ver.  16).  Other  writers  in 
the  New  Testament  use  Xa/iPivuv  irp6(ruTov 
in  the  same  sense ;  e.g.  Luke  xz-.  21 ;  Oal.  ii. 
6).  To  overthrow  (turn  aside)  the  righteous 
in  judgment  is  not  good  (oomp.  Isa.  x.  2). 
The  construction  is  the  same  as  iu  ch.  xvii. 
26.  The  LXX.  adds  in  the  second  clause, 
ou5€  oo-ioy,  which  makes  the  sentence  clear ; 
not  seeing  this,  the  Vulgate  renders,  ut 
declines  a  veritate  judicii.  The  offence 
censured  is  the  perversion  of  justice  in 
giving  sentence  against  a  righteous  man 
whose  cause  the  judge  has  reason  to  know 
is  juat. 

Ver.  6. — A  fool's  lips  enter  into  conten- 
tion ;  literally,  come  with  guarre!(comp.  Ps. 
Ixvi.  13);.  t'.e.  they  lead  him  into  strife  and 
quarrels ;  misoent  se  rixiB,  Vulgate ;  "  lead 
him  into  eviisi"  Septuagint.  The  foolish 
man  meddles  with  disputes  in  which  he  is 
not  concerned,  and  by  his  silly  iuterfeience 
not  only  exposes  himself  to  reprisals,  but 
also  exacerbates  the  original  difficulty.  His 
mouth  oalleth  for  strokes,  His  words  pro- 
voke severe  punishment,  "stripes  for  his 
back,"  as  it  is  said  in  ch.  xix.  29.  Septua- 
gint, "  His  mouth  which  is  audacious  calls 
for  death." 

Ver.  7. — The  results  of  the  fool's  disposi- 
tion and  actions  are  further  noted.  A  fool's 
mouth  is  his  destruction  (comp.  oh.  x.  14 ; 
xiii.  3;  Bccles.  x.  12).  A  mediseval  adage 
pronounces,  "  Ex  lingua  stulta  veniunt  in- 
commoda  multa."  His  lips  are  the  snare  of 
his  soul ;  bring  his  life  into  danger  (see  on 
oil.  lii.  13 ;  comp.  ch.  xiii.  14 ;  xiv.  27 ; 
xvii.  28).  So  St.  Luke  (xxi  35)  speaks  of 
the  last  day  coming  upon  men  like  "a 
snare  (irayis),"  the  word  used  by  the  Septua- 
gint in  this  passage. 

Ver.  8. — The  words  of  a  tale-bearer  are  as 
wounds,  Nirgwn,  "tale-bearer,"  is  better 
rendered  "  whisperer  "  (see  on  ch,  xvi.  28). 
The  Authorized  Version  reminds  one  of  the 
mediffival  jingle — 

"  Lingua  susurronis 
Est  pejor  felle  draconis." 

The  Tsrse  reoun  in  oh.  xxvi.  22;  bat  the 


word  rendered  "  wounds  "  (mitlahamim)  is 
to  be  differently  explained.  It  is  probably 
the  hithp.  participle  of  laham, "  to  swallow," 
and  seems  to  mean  "dainty  morsels,"  such 
as  one  eagerly  swallows.  Thus  Gesonius, 
Schultens,  Delitzscb,  Nowack,  and  others. 
So  the  clause  means,  "A  whisperer's  words 
are  received  with  avidity ;  calumny,  slander, 
and  evil  stories  find  eiiger  listeners."  The 
same  metaphor  is  found  in  oh.  xix.  28 ;  Job 
xxxiv.  7.  There  may,  at  the  same  time,  be 
involved  the  idea  that  these  dainty  morsels 
are  of  poisonous  oliaraoter,  Vulgate,  Verba 
bilinguii,  quasi  simplicia,  "  The  words  of  a 
man  of  double  tongue  seem  to  be  simple," 
which  contains  another  truth.  They  go  down 
into  the  innermost  parts  of  the  belly  (ch,  xx. 
27, 30),  The  hearers  take  in  the  slanders  and 
treasure  them  up  in  memory,  to  be  need  as 
occasion  shall  offer.  The  LXX.  omits  this 
verse,  and  in  its  place  introduces  a  paragraph 
founded  partly  on  the  next  verse  and  partly 
on  ch.  xix.  15.  The  Vulgate  also  inserts 
the  interpolation,  "Fear  overthrows  the 
sluggish;  and  the  souls  of  the  Lffeminate 
(flvSpoyvycay)  shall  hunger." 

Ver.  9.— He  also  that  il  slothful  ^slack) 
in  his  work.  A  man  that  does  his  work  in 
some  sort,  but  not  heartily  and  diligently, 
as  one  who  knows  that  labour  is  not  only 
a  duty  and  necessity,  but  a  means  of  sancti- 
ficatiun,  a  traiidng  for  a  higher  life.  Is 
brother  to  him  that  is  a  great  waster;  a 
destroyer.  "Brother"  is  used  as  "com- 
panion "  in  ch.  xxviii.  24  (comp.  Job  xxx. 
29),  for  one  of  like  attributes  and  tendencies; 
as  we  say, "  next  door  to  ; "  and  the  destroyer 
is,  as  Nowack  says,  not  merely  one  who 
wastes  his  property  by  reckless  expenditure, 
butone  who  delights  iu  such  destruction,  finds 
a  morbid  pleasure  iu  havoc  and  ruin.  So  the 
maxim  asserts  that  remissness  in  duty  is  as 
mischievous  as  actual  dottruotiveness,  "  An 
idle  brain,"  say  the  Italians,  "is  the  devil's 
workshop."  The  wurd  rendered  "  great  "  is 
baal(ch.i.  19),  "owner," paf»-oiio(Moutanu8), 
domino  (Vatab  I  us);  and,  taking  this  sense, 
according  to  Wordsworth  and  others,  the 
sentence  implies  that  the  servant  who  is 
slothful  is  brother  to  a  master  who  is  a 
prodigal.  But  the  interpretation  given 
above  is  best  founded.  The  LXX.,  reading 
KsiriD  instead  of  noinn,  renders,  "  He  who 
healetb  no>  (i  jii)  i^jjavos)  himself  in  his 
works  is  brother  to  him  who  destroyeth 
himself."  Maxims  concerning  laziness  aie 
found  in  other  places;  e.g.  ch.  x.  4;  xii.  11, 
24 ;  xxiii.  21, 

Ver.  10.— The  Name  of  the  Lord  is  a 
strong  tower.  The  Name  of  the  Lord 
signifies  all  that  God  is  in  himself — his 
attributes,  his  love,  mercy,  power,  know- 
ledge; which  allow  man  to  regard  him  aa 
a  sure  Befuge.    "  Thou  Viast  b«en  a  Sheltei 


350 


THE   PROVERBS. 


[oh.  XVIII.  1 — 24. 


for  ae,'  eays  the  psalmist  (Pa.  Ixi.  3),  "  and 
B  sti'oug  Tower  from  the  enemy."  The  words 
bring  before  us  a  picture  of  a  capitol,  or 
central  fortress,  in  which,  at  times  of  danger, 
the  surrounding  population  could  take 
riit'uge.  Into  this  Name  we  Christians  are 
baptized  ;  and  trusting  in  it,  and  doing  the 
duties  to  which  our  profession  calls,  with 
faith  and  prayer,  we  are  safe  in  the  storms  of 
life  and  the  attacks  of  spiritual  enemies. 
The  righteous  runneth  into  it  (the  tower), 
and  is  safe ;  literally,  t»  set  on  high;  exalta- 
hitur,  Vulgate ;  he  reaches  a  position  where 
ho  ig  set  above  the  trouble  or  the  danger 
that  besets  him.  Thus  St.  Peter,  speaking 
of  Christ,  exclaims  (Acts  iv.  12),  "Neither 
is  there  salvation  in  any  other ;  for  there  is 
none  other  Name  under  heaven  given  among 
men,  whereby  we  must  be  saved."  "  Prayer," 
says  TertuUian  ('  De  Orat.,'  29),  "is  the  wall 
of  faith,  our  arms  and  weapons  against  man 
who  is  always  watching  us.  Therefore  let 
us  never  go  unarmed,  night  or  day.  Under 
the  arms  of  prayer  let  us  guard  the  standard 
of  our  Leader;  let  us  wait  for  the  angel's 
trumpet,  praying."  Septuagint, "  From  the 
greatness  of  his  might  is  the  Name  of  the 
Lord ;  and  running  unto  it  the  righteoufl  are 
exalted." 

Ver.  11. — In  contrast  with  the  Divine 
tower  of  safety  in  the  preceding  verse  is 
here  brought  forward  the  earthly  refuge  of 
the  worldly  man.  The  rich  man's  wealth 
is  his  strong  city.  The  clause  is  repeated 
from  ch.  i.  15,  but  with  quite  a  different 
conclusion.  And  as  an  high  wall  in  his  own 
'  onoeit.  The  rich  maa  imasiues  his  wealth 
to  be,  as  it  were,  an  unassailable  defence, 
to  preserve  him  safe  amid  all  the  storms  of 
life,  inafepa  Qiemaskitho),  rendered  "  in  his 
own  conceit,''  is,  as  Venetian  has,  iv  <pavTa(Tt<f 
auToS,  "  in  his  imagination,"  maekith  being 
"  an  image  or  picture,"  as  in  Lev.  xxvi.  1 ; 
Ezek.  viii.  12 ;  but  see  on  cb.  xxv.  11.  Aben 
Ezra  brings  out  the  opposition  between  the 
secure  and  stable  trust  of  the  righteous  in 
tlie  Lord's  protection,  and  the  confidence 
of  the  rich  worldling  in  his  possessions, 
which  is  only  imaginary  and  delusive. 
Vulgate,  Et  qiiasi  murus  validus  circumdans 
eum,  "  Like  a  strong  wall  surrounding  liim ; " 
Septuagint,  "And  its  glory  (S6^a)  greatly 
overshadows  him ; "  t.e.  the  pomp  and  splen- 
dour of  his  wealth  are  his  protection,  or 
merely  paint  him  like  a  picture,  having  no 
real  substance.  The  commentators  explain 
tlie  word  iin<rKid(ei  in  both  senses. 

Ver.  12.— (Comp.  oh.  xvi.  18;  xv.  33; 
where  the  maxims  are  found  in  almost  the 
same  words.) 

Ver.  13. — He  that  answereth  a  matter,  etc. 
Thus  Ecolus.  xi.  8,  "  Answer  not  before 
thou  hast  heard  the  cause ;  neither  interrupt 
men  in  the  midst  of  their  talk."    A  remi- 


niscence of  the  passage  occurs  in  the  Talmud 
('  Aboth,'  5.  10),  "I  weighed  all  things  in  the 
balance,  and  found  nothing  lighter  tlian 
meal;  lighter  than  meal  is  the  betrothed 
man  who  dwells  in  the  house  of  his  intended 
fatlier-in-law ;  lighter  than  he  is  a  guest 
who  introduces  a  fiiend ;  and  lighter  than 
he  is  the  man  who  answers  before  he  has 
heard  the  other's  speech"  (Dukei,  p.  72, 
§  21).     So  Menander— 

'O  ■npoKarayvyv^ffKav  S^,  vpiv  it.Kovtra,i  iratpus 
Avrhs  voV7]p6s  ^itti,  •Jrtffreiffas  KaKas. 

Seneca,  '  Medea,'  199 — 

"  Qui  statuit  aliquiJ,  parte  Inaudita  altera, 
JEqymm  licet  statuerit,  baud  tequus  erit" 

Ver.  14. — The  spirit  of  a  man  will  sustain 
his  infirmity.  That  high  property  or  faculty 
of  man  called  "  spirit "  enables  the  body  to 
bear  up  against  trouble  and  sickness  (comp. 
ch .  xvii.  22).  The  influence  of  the  mind  over 
the  body,  in  a  general  sense,  is  here  ex- 
pressed. But  taking  "  spirit "  in  the  highest 
sense,  in  the  trichotomy  of  human  nature,  wa 
see  an  intimation  that  the  grace  of  God,  the 
supernatural  infusion  of  his  presence,  is  that 
which  strengthens  the  man  and  makes  him 
able  to  endure  with  patience.  Bat  a 
wounded  (broken)  spirit  who  can  heart 
The  body  can,  as  it  were,  fall  back  upon 
the  support  of  the  spirit,  when  it  is  distressed 
and  weakened;  but  when  the  spirit  itself 
is  broken,  grieved,  wearied,  debilitated,  it 
has  no  resource,  no  higher  faculty  to  which 
it  can  appeal,  and  it  must  succumb  beneath 
the  pressure.  Here  is  a  lesson,  too,  con- 
cerning the  treatment  of  others.  We  should 
be  more  careful  not  to  wound  a  brother's 
spirit  than  we  are  to  refrain  from  doing  a 
bodily  injury;  the  latter  may  be  healed  by 
medical  applications;  the  former  is  more 
severe  in  its  effects,  and  is  ofteu  irremedi- 
able. In  the  first  clause,  rm,  "spirit,"  ia 
masculine,  in  the  second  it  Is  feminine,  in- 
timating by  the  change  of  gender  that  in 
the  former  case  it  is  a  manly  property,  a 
virile  moral  quality,  in  the  latter  it  has  , . 
become  weakened  and  depressed  through 
affliction.  Septuagint,  "  A  prudent  servant 
soothes  a  man's  wrath ;  but  a  man  of  faint 
heart  (_o\iy6\fivxov)  who  will  endure?"  The 
LXX.  take  "  spirit "  in  the  sense  of  anger, 
and  "  infirmity  "  as  standing  for  a  servant, 
though  where  they  find  "prudent"  is 
difficult  to  say.  Vulgate,  Spirittim  vera  ad 
irascmdum  fdeilem,  quia  poterit  sustineret 
The  Latin  interpreter  takes  one  form  of 
weakness  of  spirit,  viz.  irascibility,  as  his 
interpretation  of  nsoj,  "wounded."  St. 
Gregory  ('Moral.,'  v.  78)  has  yet  another 
version,  "  Who  can  dwell  with  a  man  whose 
spirit  is  ready  to  wrath  ?  "  adding,  "  For  he 
tnat  does  not  regulate  his  feelings  by  the 


3H.  XTIU,  1—24.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


351 


reaEon  that  is  proper  tn  man,  must  needs 
live  alone  like  a  beast." 

Ver.  15. — The  first  clause  is  similar  to 
oh.  XV.  14 ;  the  second  gives  a  kind  of  ex- 
planation of  the  former — tlie  understanding 
of  the  wise  man  is  always  expanding  and 
increasing  its  stores,  because  his  ear  is  open 
to  instiuotion,  and  his  ability  grows  by 
wholesome  exercise  (comp.  oh.  i.  5).  Daath, 
"  knowledge,"  which  is  used  in  both  clauses, 
the  LXX.  translates  by  two  words,  ai(r0i)irii> 
and  svyoiav. 

Ver.  16.— A  man's  gift  maketh  room  for 
him  (comp.  oh.  xix.  6).  Mattam,  "gift," 
has  been  taken  in  different  senses.  Some 
consider  it  to  mean  a  bribe  offered  for  Under- 
hand or  fraudulent  purposes ;  but  the  con- 
text does  not  lead  to  this  conclusion,  and 
the  parallel  passage  mentioned  above  makes 
against  it.  Hitzig  sees  in  it  a  spiritual 
gift,  equivalent  to  x^P"^!*"'  I'"*  si^ch  a 
moaning  is  not  elsewhere  attached  to  the 
word.  The  term  here  signifies  the  present 
which  duty  or  friendship  offers  to  one  whom 
one  wishes  to  please.  This  paves  a  man's 
way  to  a  great  person's  presence.  Bringeth 
him  before  great  men.  The  Oriental  custom 
of  offering  suitable  gifts  to  one  in  authority, 
when  a  favour  or  an  audience  is  desired,  is 
here  alluded  to  (comp.  1  Sam.  x.  27 ;  1  Kings 
iv.  21 ;  X.  25).  So  the  Magi  brought  gifts 
to  the  new-bom  King  at  Bethlehem  (Matt. 
ii.  11).  In  a  spiritual  sense,  the  right  use 
of  riclies  opens  the  way  to  eternal  life, 
evincing  a  man's  practical  love  of  God  and 
man;  as  Christ  says  (Luke  xvi.9),  "Make 
to  yourselves  friends  by  means  of  the 
mammon  of  unrighteousness ;  that,  when  it 
shall  fail,  they  may  receive  you  into  the 
eternal  tabernacles"  (Revised  Version). 

Ver.  17. — He  that  is  first  in  Ms  own  cause 
seemetli  just;  Kevised  Version,  he  that 
pleadeth  his  cause  first  seemeth  just.  A  man 
who  tells  his  own  story,  and  is  the  first  to 
open  his  case  before  the  judge  or  a  third 
party,  s^em3  for  the  moment  to  have  justice 
on  his  side.  But  his  neighbour  Cometh  and 
searcheth  him  out  (oh.  xxviii.  11).  The 
"  neighbour  "  is  the  opposing  party — 6  &vTi- 
SiKos,  Septuagint,  which  recalls  Matt.  v.  25 — 
he  sivts  and  scrutinizes  the  statements 
alrearly  given,  shows  them  to  be  erroneous, 
or  weakens  the  evidence  which  appeared  to 
support  them.  Thus  the  maxims,  "One 
story  is  good  till  the  other  is  told,"  and  "Audi 
alteram  partem,"  receive  confirmation. 
Vulgate,  Judas  prior  est  accusator  sui.  So 
Septuagiut,"Tberighteous  is  hisown  accuser 
in  opening  the  suit  (ev  irpaToKoyi^)."  He 
cuts  the  ground  from  under  the  adversary's 
feet  by  at  once  owning  his  fault.  St.  Gregory 
more  than  once,  in  his  '  Moralia,'  adduces 
this  rendering.  Thus  on  Job  vii.  11,  "To 
put  the  mou&  to  labour  ii  to  employ  it  in 


the  confession  of  sin  done,  but  the  righteoui 
man  doth  not  refrain  his  mouth,  in  that,  fore- 
stalling the  wrath  of  the  searching  Judge, 
he  falls  wroth  upon  himself  in  words  of 
self-confession.  Hence  it  is  written,  'The 
just  man  is  first  the  accuser  of  himself" 
(so  lib.  xxii.  33). 

Ver.  18. — The  lot  causeth  contentions  to 
cease  (comp.  oh.  xvi.  33).  If  this  verse  is 
taken  in  connection  with  the  preceding,  it 
refers  to  the  decision  in  doubtful  cases, 
where  the  evidence  is  conflicting  and  ordi- 
nary investigation  fails  to  elicit  the  truth 
satisfactorily.  The  lot,  being  considered  to 
show  the  judgment  of  God,  settled  the 
question.  And  parteth  between  the  mighty. 
If  it  were  not  for  the  decision  by  lot,  persons 
of  eminence  and  power  would  settle  their 
differences  by  violent  means.  Tliis  peaceful 
solution  obviates  all  such  contentions.  The 
Septuagint,  in  place  of  "  lot "  (K\ijpos),  reads 
now  iri-yrtp6s,  "silent;"  but  it  is  evidently 
originally  a  clerical  error,  perpetuated  by 
copyists.  Tlie  error  is  noted  by  a  second 
hand  in  the  margin  of  the  Sinaitic  Manu- 
script. 

Ver.  19. — A  brother  offended  is  harder  to 
be  won  than  a  strong  city;  Sometliing  must 
be  supplied  on  which  the  comparative  notion 
min,  "  than,"  depends.  So  we  may  under- 
stand "  resists  more,"  or  something  similar. 
A  brother  or  a  once  close  friend,  when  injured 
or  deceived,  becomes  a  potent  and  iireeon- 
cilable  enemy.  The  idea  of  the  preceding 
verses  is  carried  on,  and  the  primary  thought 
is  still  concerning  lawsuits  and  matters 
brought  before  a  judge.  'I'his  is  shown  in 
the  second  clause  by  the  use  of  the  word 
"  contentions  "  (midyanim).  And  their  con- 
tentions are  like  the  bars  of  a  castle.  They 
close  the  door  against  reconciliation,  shut 
the  heart  against  all  feeling  of  tenderness. 
True  it  is,  XaKeKoX  irSKe/ioi  aSe\(l>(Si'  (Eurip., 
'  Fragm.').     And  again, '  Iph.  Aul.,'  376— 

A^iyhy,  KacnyvfjroLffi  yiyifeffBat  \6yovs 
iJldxas  ff,  (irav  TroT*  ifnr4<rQKriy  e*s  epiv, 

Aristotle  also  writes  thus  ('  De  Eepubl.,'  vii. 
7):  "If  men  receive  no  return  from  those 
to  whom  they  have  shown  kindness,  they 
deem  themselves,  not  only  defrauded  of  due 
gratitude,  but  actually  injured.  Whence  it 
is  said, '  Bitter  are  the  quarrels  of  friends ; ' 
and,  '  Those  who  love  beyond  measure  also 
hate  beyond  measure.' "  An  English  maxim 
gloomily  decides,  "  Friendship  once  injured 
is  for  ever  lost."  Pliny  ('  Hist.  Nat.,'  xxxvii. 
4),  "  Ut  adamas,  si  frangi  contingat  malleis, 
in  minutissimas  dissidit  crustas,  adeo  ut  vix 
oculis  cerni  queant ;  ita  arctissima  necessi- 
tudo,  si  quando  contingat  dirimi,  in  sum- 
mam  vertitur  simultatem,  et  ex  arctissimia 
fuederibus,  si  semel  rumpantur,  maxima 
nascuntis:  dissidia."    Eoclus.  ri.  9,  "  There 


352 


THE  PK0VERB8. 


[oh.  XVIII.  1 — 24, 


ia  ft  friend,  who  beiug  tiUDed  to  enmity  will 
also  discover  thy  disgraceful  strife,"  f.«.  will 
disclose  the  quarrel  which  according  to  his 
representation  will  redound  to  thy  discredit. 
The  Vulgate  and  Beptuagint  have  followed 
a  different  reading  from  that  of  the  present 
Hebrew  text:  "Brother  aided  by  brother 
is  like  a  strong  and  high  city,  and  he  is 
powerful  as  a  well-founded  palace,"  Sep- 
tuagint.  The  last  clause  is  rendered  in  the 
Vulgate,  Et  judicia  quad  vectes  urHum; 
where  jii(licia  means  "  lawsuits,"  legal  dis- 
putes ;  these  bar  out  friendship.  The  fiist 
member  of  the  sentence  in  the  Greek  and 
Latin  recalls  Ecoles.  iv.  9,  etc.,  "  Two  are 
better  than  one  ;  because  they  have  a  good 
reward  for  their  labour,"  eto.  St.  Chrysostom, 
commenting  on  Eph.  iv.  3  ('Hom.,'  ix.), 
writes,  "  A  glorious  bond  is  this ;  with  this 
bond  let  us  bind  ourselves  together  alike  to 
one  another  and  to  God.  This  is  a  bond 
that  bruises  not,  nor  cramps  the  hands  it 
binds,  but  it  leaves  them  free,  and  gives 
them  ample  play  and  greater  energy  than 
those  wl.ich  are  at  liburty.  The  strong,  if 
he  be  bound  to  the  weak,  will  support  him, 
and  not  suffer  him  to  perish ;  and  if  a^ain 
he  be  tied  to  the  indolent,  lie  will  rather 
rouse  and  animate.  'Brother  helped  by 
brother,'  it  is  said,  'is  as  a  strong  city.' 
This  chain  no  distance  of  place  can  inter- 
rupt, neither  heaven,  nor  earth,  nor  death, 
nor  anything  else,  but  it  is  more  powerful 
aad  stionger  than  all  things." 

Ver.  20. — With  the  first  clause,  comp.  ch. 
xii.  14,  and  with  the  second,  ch.  xiii.  2.  A 
man's  belly ;  i.e.  himself,  his  mind  and  body, 
equivalent  to  shall  he  be  filled,  or  satisfied, 
in  the  second  clause.  A  man  must  accept 
the  consequences  of  his  words,  good  or  evil. 
The  next  verse  explains  this. 

Ver.  21.— Death  and  life  are  in  the  power 
of  the  tongue ;  literally,  in  the  hand  of  the 
tongue.  The  tongue,  according  as  it  is  used, 
deals  forth  life  or  death ;  for  speech  it  the 
picture  of  the  mind  (comp.  ch.  xii.  18 ;  ixvi. 
28).  The  vast  importance  of  our  words  may 
be  learned  from  jas.  iii. ;  and  our  blessed 
Lord  says  expressly  (Matt.  xii.  86,  etc.), 
"  Every  idle  word  that  men  shall  speak,  they 
shall  give  account  thereof  in  the  d;iy  of 
judgment.  For  by  thy  words  thon  shalt  be 
justified,  and  by  thy  words  tliou  sljalt  bo  con- 
demned."   Hence  the  gnome — 

TKwtTffa  TUX??,  yXSiiTffa  Sai^vy, 

intimating  that  the  tongue  is  the  real  con- 
troller of  man's  destiny ;  and  another — 

Aiyip  StotKctrai  ffpOTwv  $ios  fiSvip, 
"  By  words  alone  is  life  of  mortals  swayed." 
And  they  that  love  it  (the  tongue)  shall  eat 
the  fruit  thereof.    They  who  use  it  much 
must  abide  the  consequences  of  their  words. 


whether  by  kind  and  pure  and  edifying  con- 
versation they  contribute  health  and  life  to 
themselves  and  others,  or  whether  by  foul, 
calumnious,  corrupting  language  they  in- 
volve themselves  and  others  in  mortal  sin. 
For  "  they  that  love  it,"  the  Septuagint  has, 
01  Kparovvres  avrris,  "they  who  get  the 
mastery  over  it." 

Ver.  22.— Whoso  flndeth  a  wife  flndeth  a 
good  thing.  A  good  wife  is  meant  (as  the 
Septuagint  iins  it,  ywaiKa  ayaS'liv ;  muUerem 
bouam,  Vulgate),  a  virtuous,  prudent  help- 
mate, as  in  ch.  xii.  4;  xix.  14;  and  xxzi. 
The  epithet  is  omitted,  because  the  moralist 
is  thinking  of  the  ideal  wite,  the  one  whose 
union  is  blessed,  who  alone  deserves  the 
holy  name  of  wife.  Thus  in  ver.  4  we  had 
the  ideal  man  spoken  of.  Septuagint,  (dpf 
Xiip'Tov, "flndeth  graces,"  viz.  peace,  union, 
plenty,  order  (see  a  different  view,  Ecoks. 
vii.  26 — 28).  And  obtaineth  favoTir  of  the 
Lord  (oh.  vlii.  35 ;  xii.  2) ;  or,  hath  ohtained 
(oh.  iii.  13),  as  shown  by  the  consort  whom 
God  has  given  him.  liaison,  "good  will," 
"favour,"  is  rendered  by  the  Septuagint 
iXapiTnra,  and  by  the  Vulgate,  juemiditatem, 
"cheerfulness,"  "joyousness"(see'on  ch.xi;!. 
12).  Ecclus.  xxvi.  1,  etc.,  "Blessed  is  the 
man  that  hath  a  good  wife,  for  the  number  of 
his  days  shall  be  double.  A  virtuous  (aVSpefc) 
woman  rejoiceth  her  husband,  and  lie  shall 
fulfil  the  years  of  his  life  in  peace.  A  good 
wife'is  a  good  portion  which  shall  be  given 
in  the  portion  of  them  thiit  fear  the  Lord." 
"  A  good  wife,"  says  the  Talmud,  "  is  a  good 
gift ;  she  shall  be  given  to  a  man  that  feai  eth 
God."  And  again,  "  God  did  not  make 
woman  from  man's  head,  that  she  should 
not  rule  over  him ;  nor  from  his  feet,  that 
she  should  not  be  his  slave ;  but  from  his 
side,  that  she  should  bo  near  his  heart" 
(Dukes,  p.  69).    A  Greek  gnome  runs — 

Tvyii  BiKata  tov  $iov  ffuTTipia. 

The  Septuagint  and  Vulgate  here  introduce 
a  paragraph  which  is  not  in  the  Hebrew, 
and  only  partly  in  the  Syriac.  It  seems  to 
be  a  further  explanation  of  the  statement  in 
the  text,  founded  on  the  practice  prevalent 
at  the  time  when  the  Septuagint  Version  was 
composed,  which  appears  to  have  made 
divorce  a  recognized  necessity  in  the  case 
of  adultery  :  "  He  who  castetb  away  a  good 
wife  castetb  away  good  things;  but  he  who 
retaineth  an  adulteress  is  a  fool  and  im- 
pious." The  advice  of  Siraeidts  concerning 
a  wicked  wife  is  austere :  "  If  she  go  not  as 
thou  wouldest  have  her,  cut  her  off  from 
thy  flesh"  (Ecclus.  xxv.  26).  Notliing  ia 
here  said  about  the  marriage  of  divorced 
persons ;  hut  the  absolute  indissolubility  of 
the  marriage  bond  was  never  held  among 
the  Jews,  a  certain  laxity  being  allowed 
because  of  the  hardness  of  their  heart  (Matt 


M.  xvni.  1 — ^24.] 


THE  PEOVBRBB. 


8R3 


V.  32 ;  xix.  8,  eto.).  The  original  integrity 
of  the  mRTriage  contract  was  re-established 
by  Olirist. 

Ver.  23. — This  and  the  following  verse, 
and  the  first  two  verses  of  the  next  chapter, 
are  not  found  in  the  cliief  niannscripts  of  the 
Septuagint,  though  in  later  codices  they 
have  been  supplied  from  the  version  of 
Theodotion.  The  Oodex  Venetus  Maroianus 
(23,  Holmes  and  Parsons)  is  the  only  uncial 
that  contains  them.  The  poor  aseth  in- 
treaties ;  bnt  the  rich  answereth  roughly. 
The  irony  of  the  passage  is  more  strongly  ex- 
pressed by  Siracidcs  :  "  The  rich  man  hath 
done  wrong,  and  yet  he  threateneth  withal : 
the  poor  is  wronged,  and  he  must  intreat 
also  "  (Bccliis.  xiii.  8).  The  rich  man  not 
only  does  wrong,  but  accompanies  the  injury 
with  passionate  language  and  abuse,  as  if  he 
were  the  sufferer;  wliile  the  poor  man  has 
humbly  to  ask  pardon,  as  if  he  were  in  the 
wrong.    Thus  the  Eoman  satirist  writes — 

"  Libertas  pauperis  hsoc  est : 
Pulsatus  rogat  et  pugnis  concisus  adorat, 
Ut  lioeat  paucis  cum  dentibua  inde  reverti." 
(Juv., '  Sat.,'  iii.  299.) 

Aben  Ezra  explains  the  verse  as  denoting 
tliat  a  poor  man  making  a  submis-ivu,rcque8t 
from  a  rich  man  ie  answered  cruelly  and 


roughly.  The  hardening  efiect  of  wealth  is 
seen  in  our  Lord's  parables  of  Dives  and 
Lazarus  (Luke  xvi.),  and  the  Pharisee  and 
the  publican  (Luke  xviii.). 

Ver.  24. — A  man  that  hath  friends  must 
show  himself  friendly.  The  Authorized 
Version  is  ceitainly  not  correct.  The  He- 
brew is  literally,  a  man  of  friend)  vriU  come 
to  destruction.  The  word  pvnnri  (Jiithroea) 
is  the  hithp.  infinitive  of  yy\,  "  to  break  or 
destroy"  (comp.  laa.  xxiv.  19);  and  the 
maxim  means  that  the  man  of  many  friends, 
who  lays  himself  out  to  make  friends  of  bad 
and  good  alike,  does  so  to  his  own  ruin. 
They  will  fi  ed  upon  him,  and  exhaust  hig 
resources,  but  will  not  stand  by  him  in  the 
day  of  calamity,  nay,  rather  will  give  a  help- 
ing hand  to  his  downfall.  It  is  not  the  number 
of  so-called  friends  that  is  really  useful  and 
precious.  But  there  is  a  friend  that  sticketb 
closer  than  a  brother  (ch.  xvii.  17;  xxvii. 
10). 

N(i,ai^  (J5eA(/>oi's  robs  d\Tj6tvoiis  tpl\ov5, 
"  Thy  true  friends  hold  as  very  brethren." 

The  Vulgate  has,  Vir  amabilis  ad  ioeieta- 
lem  magii  amicus  erit  quam  frater,  "  A  man 
amiable  in  intorcouroe  will  be  more  of  a 
friend  than  even  a  brother." 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  10. — "A  strong  tower."  These  words  suggest  to  us  an  image  of  a  disturbed 
country  with  a  massive  fortified  tower  standing  in  its  midst,  ready  to  serve  as  a  refuge 
for  the  peasants,  who  till  the  fields  when  all  is  peaceful,  but  who  flee  to  the  tower  for 
shelter  when  they  see  the  enemy  scouring  over  the  plain.  The  baronial  castles  of 
England  served  the  same  purpose  when  our  own  country  was  suffering  from  the  ravages 
of  war.     In  the  dangers  of  life  the  Name  of  the  Lord  is  a  similar  refuge  for  his  people. 

L  Note  the  nature  of  the  towbb.  "  The  Name  of  the  Lord."  1.  Ood  himself, 
"  God  is  our  Refuge  and  Strength  "  (Ps.  ilvi.  1).  He  does  not  send  an  angel  to  protect 
us.  The  Church  is  not  a  citadel  for  those  who  have  not  first  found  their  shelter  in  God. 
But  God  is  with  his  people  for  their  protection.  Even  when  we  have  sinned  we  must 
"flee  from  God  to  God" — from  his  wrath  to  his  mercy.  2.  The  Qod  of  Israel.  The 
Lord,  Jehovah.  He  is  known  in  revelation,  and  he  has  been  proved  in  history.  This  is 
no  new  tower  that  has  not  been  tried  and  may  be  found  faulty  in  the  hour  of  need,  like 
a  fortress  that  has  never  been  besieged.  The  story  of  God's  people  in  all  ages  is  one 
long  confirmation  of  its  venerable  strength.  3.  Ood  as  he  is  revealed — in  his  Name. 
This  implies  two  things.  (1)  Our  knowledge  of  God.  The  name  is  significant  of  the 
attributes.  God  is  what  his  Name  signifies.  (2)  God's  own  glory  and  faithfulness. 
He  is  sometimes  appealed  to  for  his  Name's  sake.  For  the  sake  of  his  glory,  and  alw 
his  fidelity  to  hi.s  promises,  his  protecting  grace  is  expected. 

IL  Observe  the  cnABACTEB  op  the  refuge.  A  tower.  1.  Strong.  God  is  a 
Fortress.     We  do  nut  confide  in  a  weak  goodness.     Our  security  is  in  God's  strength. 

2.  Lofty,  The  tower  stands  high  up  above  the  plain.  It  is  the  opposite  to  a  mine. 
We  must  look  up  for  shelter.     We  must  climb  to  God.    Our  safety  is  in  aspiration. 

3.  In  owr  midst.  Though  the  top  of  the  tower  soars  above  our  heads,  its  foundation  is 
at  our  feet,  and  we  can  enter  it  from  where  wo  stand.  God  is  near  at  hand  for  shelter 
and  safety.  4.  Conspicuous.  A  cave  may  not  be  easily  discovered  among  the  rooks  of 
the  hillside,  but  a  tower  is  visible  to  all.  Though  the  presence  of  God  is  not  visible 
(o  the  eye  of  Bense,  the  revelation  of  the  gospel  is  open  anii  conspicuous. 

FB0TEBB8.  2   A 


554  THE  PEOVBRBS.  [oh.  xvin.  1—24. 


in.  CoNsiDEK  HOW  THE  REFtTOE  MAT  BE  USED.  1.  FoT  the  rigliUous.  The  tower 
is  a  shelter  from  undeserved  suffering,  as  in  the  case  of  Job.  Here  wronged  innocence 
is  safe.  It  is  also  for  all  the  redeemed  who  stand  before  God  in  the  new  righteousness 
of  Christ.  We  cannot  be  sheltered  by  God  till  we  are  reconciled  to  God.  2.  By 
entering  it.  There  is  no  safety  in  looking  at  it.  It  is  necessary  to  flee  to  God  in  order 
to  be  protected  by  him.  The  fugitive  may  even  need  to  run  to  roach  the  tower  before 
the  foe  overtakes  him.  3.  With  safety.  It  is  not  a  palace  with  a  banqueting-hall  and 
couches  of  ease.  It  is  a  fortress,  and  therefore  it  may  not  always  be  comfortable;  but 
it  is  safe.     We  are  safe  with  God. 

Ver.  13. — The  folly  of  hasty  judgment.  We  may  observe  some  of  the  cases  in  which 
this  folly  of  answering  a  matter  before  it  is  heard  is  commonly  practised. 

I.  The  social  relations.  Men  are  often  too  quick  in  forming  their  opinions  of 
other  people.  A  superficial  glance  is  considered  enough  for  an  irrevocable  verdict. 
The  sentence  is  pronounced  and  the  neighbour  is  characterized  before  he  has  had  a  fair 
chance  of  revealing  his  true  nature.  1.  This  is  ungenerous.  We  ought  to  give  a  man 
every  opportunity  of  showing  the  good  that  is  in  him,  and  to  be  ready  to  believe 
that  there  may  be  an  unseen  goodness  that  is  slow  to  come  to  the  surface.  2.  It  is 
vntruthful.  The  verdict  should  never  go  beyond  the  evidence.  3.  It  is  hurtfvi. 
Much  harm  has  been  done  by  the  hasty  circulation  of  raw  tales  of  idle  calumny.  It 
would  be  well  to  take  warning,  pause,  and  inquire  before  encouraging  such  mischievous 
gossip.  4.  It  is  foolish.  Surely  we  ought  to  know  that  a  human  character  is  not  to 
be  thus  rapidly  read  off.  If  we  are  wise  we  shall  be  slow  in  forming  a  judgment  on 
our  neighbours. 

n.  fi  RELIGIOUS  BELIEF.  Men  are  only  too  hasty  in  forming  their  opinions  in 
religion.  A  minimum  of  evidence  and  a  maximum  of  prejudice  contribute  to  form  the 
faith  of  many  people.  The  same  is  equally  true  in  regard  to  unbelief.  It  does  not 
require  much  knowledge  to  show  that  prejudice  is  rife  in  the  camp  of  those  who 
venture  to  call  themselves  "  free-thinkers."  Bigotry  is  always  blind.  No  men  are  so 
perverse  as  the  dogmatic.  Just  in  proportion  to  their  assurance  is  the  weakness  of  the 
grounds  on  which  they  base  their  assertions.  On  the  other  hand,  the  fear  of  forming 
a  false  judgnaent  should  not  drive  us  into  a  perpetual  suspension  of  inqmry.  We  can 
hear  the  matter  of  Divine  revelation.  Our  duty  is  neither  to  rush  to  a  hasty  conclusion 
nor  to  retreat  into  paralyzing  doubt;  but  to  "  search  the  Scriptures,"  "  try  the  prophets," 
and  "  hear "  the  teaching  on  which  we  can  found  our  convictions.  To  fail  of  this  is 
foolishness  tliat  must  end  in  shame,  because  in  the  end  truth  must  conquer,  and  then 
all  the  votaries  of  prejudice  will  be  confounded. 

III.  In  oub  conduct  towards  God.  This  is  more  personal  and  practical  than  the 
question  of  religious  belief,  although  the  two  things  are  very  closely  connected.  We 
are  tempted  to  misjudge  providence,  rebel  against  the  action  of  God,  and  try  to 
answer  him  who  is  unanswerable.  Yet  we  have  not  the  materials  for  judging  God  if 
the  very  thought  of  so  doing  were  not  presumptuous.  We  cannot  understand  his 
ways,  which  are  other  than  ours — higher,  wider,  wiser,  better.  Perhaps  wo  shall  hear 
the  matter  at  some  future  time.  It  may  be  that  when  we  have  reached  the  other  side 
of  the  grave  we  may  be  able  to  look  back  upon  the  course  of  life  witli  the  light  of 
heaven  upon  it,  and  so  to  solve  some  of  the  enigmas  of  earth.  Meanwhile  we  have  no 
alternative  but  to  walk  by  faith.  Any  attempt  at  a  higher  flight  will  but  reveal  our 
folly  and  issue  in  our  shame. 

Ver.  14. — Strong  in  spirit.  This  thought  is  near  akin  to  that  of  ch.  xvii.  22,  where 
the  medicinal  properties  of  a  merry  heart  are  commended.  But  there  is  some  difference 
between  the  two.  Both  ascribe  vital  energy  to  the  inner  life,  and  commend  such 
a  cultivation  of  it  as  shall  conquer  weakness  and  suffering  ;  but  the  verse  now  before 
ns  treats  of  vigour  of  spirit,  while  the  earlier  passage  commends  cheerfulness. 

I.  A  man's  true  strength  BESIDES  IN  HIS  INNER  LIFE.  Samsou  was  a  weak  man, 
although  he  had  bodily  strength,  because  he  had  not  strength  within.  St.  Paul  wai 
regarded  as  contemptible  in  bodily  appearance  (2  Cor,  x.  10),  yet  he  was  a  hero  of  fiery 
energy  and  rock-like  steadfastness.  He  could  say,  "When  I  am  weak,  then  am  I 
•trong  "  (2  Uor.  xii.  10).    The  true  self  is  within.    AU  real  weakness  or  power,  feilui* 


OH.  xvin.  1— 24.J  THE  PB0VEEB8.  868 


or  success,  must  ultimately  spring  from  this  true  self.  Therefore  the  first  question  ii 
as  to  the  condition  of  the  inner  life.  Those  people  who  live  only  in  the  outer 
experiences  do  not  yet  know  the  deeper  meaning  of  life.  We  have  all  to  learn  how  to 
cultivate  the  powers  of  the  spirit. 

II.  Stbbngth  in  the  inner  life  can  support  exteenai,  infirmity.  1.  Weah- 
»€ss  of  body.  No  doubt  the  normal  condition  of  health  would  be  one  of  mens  sana  in 
eorpore  sano.  But  when  that  is  not  attained,  mental  health  will  do  much  to  counteract 
the  evil  effects  of  bodily  disease.  The  mind  has  so  great  power  over  the  body  that 
some  forms  of  functional  disease  are  actually  cured  through  mental  influences,  as  in 
what  is  called  "faith-healing."  The  will  to  live  is  a  great  help  to  recovery  from  an 
illness.  A  crushed  and  broken  spirit  too  often  brings  the  body  into  a  condition  which 
is  the  despair  of  the  physician.  Higher  considerations  tell  in  the  same  direction,  and 
spiritual  health— though,  perliaps,  not  what  is  meant  in  our  text — will  sustain,  under 
disease,  if  it  will  not  lead  to  bodily  cure.  2.  Tempore^  trouble.  Misforlune  can  be 
borne  by  a  biave,  strong  spirit;  while  a  crushed,  feeble  spirit  succumbs  under  it  3. 
Spiritual  infirmity.  It  is  difficult  to  resist  the  frailty  of  our  own  souls.  But  when 
we  cultivate  our  better  selves  we  are  best  able  to  overcome  infirmities  of  temper, 
Belfishness,  etc. 

III.  Strength  op  spirit  is  a  Divine  grace.  1.  A  gift  of  God.  He  can  make 
the  weak  strong.  "  He  giveth  power  to  the  faint,  and  to  them  that  have  no  might  ha 
increaseth  strength  "  (Isa.  xl.  29).  2.  An  acquisition  of  faith.  "They  that  wait  upon 
the  Lord  shall  renew  their  strength"  (Isa.  xl.  31).  It  is  possible  for  the  weak  to 
become  strong,  because  all  can  "  wait  upon  the  Lord."  No  grace  is  more  needed,  and 
no  grace  proves  itself  to  be  more  fruitfuL 

Ver.  17. — Private  judgment.  The  Protestant  claim  to  the  right  of  private  judgment 
is  not  without  its  limitations.  Applied  to  general  truths  it  is  unanswerable;  but 
carried  out  in  personal  affnirs  it  is  often  very  dangerous.  Every  man  mRy  B<iy  that 
he  is  the  best  judge  of  what  concerns  himself.  But  two  considerations  modify  that 
contention.  1.  No  one  truly  knows  himself.  2.  A  man's  doings  are  not  confined  to 
himself.  They  cross  the  boundaries  of  other  lives  and  interests.  Therefore,  while  • 
mau  is  seemingly  making  an  innocent  demand  concerning  his  own  business,  he  is  really 
claiming  to  be  the  judge  of  what  affects  his  neighbours.     Hence  the  need  of  caution. 

I.  Private  judgment  is  apparently  just,  even  when  it  is  brrojjeous.  It  is 
rarely  that  a  mnn  will  own  himself  to  be  in  the  wrong  when  he  is  engaged  in  any 
contention  with  his  neighbour.  1.  Judgment  is  prejudiced  by  previous  opinions.  We 
all  approach  a  subject  with  a  sfock  of  prepossessions.  Even  while  honestly  intending 
to  make  a  fair  estimate,  we  cannot  but  apply  the  standards  of  our  old  set  notions. 
Hence  the  need  of  working  out  "  the  personal  equation."  2.  It  is  biassed  by  self-interest. 
This  may  be  quite  unintentional  and  unconscious.  We  may  not  he  aware  that  we  are 
showing  any  favour  to  ourselves.  Yet  so  long  as  the  selfishness  of  human  nature 
remains  as  it  is,  there  must  be  a  secret  weight  in  the  scale  inclining  it  to  our  own  side. 
3.  It  is  distorted  by  self-deception.  Not  knowing  ourselves,  we  misread  our  own 
position.  We  give  ourselves  credit  for  aims  that  do  not  exist,  and  we  disregard  the 
real  motives  that  actuate  our  conduct.  4.  It  is  perverted  by  ignorance  of  the  position 
of  other  people.  We  think  we  are  acting  justly  when  wa  do  not  know  all  the  circum- 
stances of  the  case.  If  we  could  see  all  the  rights  and  claims  of  our  neighbours  we 
might  be  ready  to  admit  our  own  error. 

II.  Private  judgment  may  be  coerbotbd  by  general  testimony.  We  recognize 
in  the  law-courts  that  it  is  only  right  for  both  parties  to  a  suit  to  be  heard.  The  same 
concession  is  necessary  for  obtaining  a  just  estimate  of  all  matters  in  regard  to  which 
differences  of  opinion  are  expressed.  In  private  life,  in  public  affairs,  in  theological 
controversies,  we  want  to  learn  how  to  hear  the  other  side.  The  very  difficulties  of 
private  judgment  call  for  the  correction  that  may  be  thus  afforded.  But  other 
considerations  also  demand  it.  1.  Truth  is  many-sided.  Even  if  we  be  right,  it  if 
possible  that  our  neighbours  may  not  be  wrong.  Our  narrowness  prevents  us  from 
seeing  the  solid  foim  of  iruth  and  its  various  facets.  2.  Other  people  have  rights. 
Until  these  have  been  considered  we  cannot  be  sure  that  what  lool;s  like  a  most  just 
eontflntion  ov  our  own  part  may  not  be  a  trespass  upon  them.    3.  Justice  may  rtquirt 


ase  THE  PEOVERBS.  [oh.  xviii.  1—24 

investigation.  We  see  the  way  in  whicli  a  skilful  counsel  will  break  down  the  most 
plausible  evidence  by  probing  into  its  weak  places ;  how  he  will  worm  secrets  out  of 
the  most  reticent  witness.  Truth  is  often  revealed  through  antagonism.  The  man 
who  prides  himself  on  hoodwinking  his  fellows  is  foolish  and  short-sigbted.  If  his 
insincerity  is  not  discovered  on  earth,  it  will  be  revealed  at  the  great  judgment. 

Ver,  22. — 2%e  blessedness  of  true  marriage.  The  Bible  does  not  regard  marriage  as 
"a  failure,"  nor  does  it  treat  celibacy  as  a  more  saintly  condition.  Even  St.  Paul,  who 
does  not  seem  to  have  been  a  married  man,  and  who  is  thought  by  some  to  undervalue 
marriage,  gives  to  it  a  eulogium  in  describing  the  union  of  husband  and  wife  as  a  copy 
of  the  mystical  union  of  Christ  and  his  Church  (Eph.  v.  22 — 32). 

I.  The  blessedness  op  mabbiage.  1.  The  companionship  <f  love.  The  creation 
of  woman  is  ascribed  to  the  need  of  this.  "  And  the  Lord  God  said,  It  is  not  good  that 
the  man  should  be  alone  "  (G-en.  ii.  18).  In  a  true  marriage  a  man's  wife  is  his  best 
friend.  Fellowship  of  soul  makes  the  union  more  than  a  mere  contract  of  external 
relationship.  Now,  this  fellowship  is  greatly  needed  for  solace  amid  the  cares  of  life, 
and  strength  to  face  its  difficulties.  The  wife  is  able  to  give  it  to  her  husband,  and 
the  husband  to  the  wife,  as  no  persons  in  the  outer  circle  of  social  relationship  can  hope 
to  offer  it.  2.  Mntwil  helpfulness.  In  the  narrative  of  the  creation,  God  says,  con- 
cerning Adam,  "  I  will  make  him  a  help  meet  for  him "  (Gen.  ii.  18).  Woman  is 
degraded  when  she  is  treated  as  a  toy  of  idle  hours,  to  amuse  in  the  drawing-room,  but 
not  to  take  her  share  in  the  serious  concerns  of  life.  No.  true  woman  would  desire  so 
idle  a  position.  The  wife  who  understands  the  Christian  calling  « ill  aim  at  ministering 
to  her  husband  in  all  ways  of  helpfulness  that  are  within  her  power,  but  chiefly  in 
helping  his  higher  life;  and  the  duty  of  the  husband  towards  the  wife  will  be  similar. 
3.  Variety  of  ministration.  The  wife  is  not  the  counterpart  of  the  husband,  but  the 
complement.  Human  nature  is  completed  in  the  union  of  the  two.  Therefore  it  is 
not  the  part  of  women  to  imitate  men,  nor  is  inferiority  to  be  assigned  to  women 
because  they  differ  from  men.  The  rich,  full,  perlect  human  life  is  attained  by  the 
blending  of  differences. 

II.  The  sbcbet  of  this  blessedness.  No  ideal  of  human  life  can  be  more  beautiful 
tlian  that  of  tKe  happy  home.  The  serious  question  is  how  it  shall  be  realized.  1,  By 
ada/ptation.  Every  woman  is  not  suituble  for  everj'  man.  Hasty  courtships  may  leail  to 
miserable  marriages.  So  serious  a  matter  as  the  choice  of  a  companion  for  life  is  not 
to  be  lightly  undertaken  if  there  is  to  be  any  hope  of  its  issuing  in  happiness.  2.  By 
sympathy.  There  must  be  mutual  confidence  between  husband  and  wife  if  the  marriage 
is  to  be  one  of  true  and  lasting  blessedness.  The  Oriental  cruelty  of  imprisonment  in 
the  harem,  and  the  Western  cruelty  of  degradation  in  domestic  drudgery,  are  both  fatal 
to  the  idea  of  marriage.  Whatever  be  their  position  in  the  social  scale,  it  is  possible  for 
husbands  and  wives  to  share  one  another's  interests  and  enlarge  one  another's  lives  by 
conceding  the  fullest  mutual  confidence.  3.  By  self-saarifice.  Selfishness  is  fatal  to 
marriage.  Love  must  learn  to  give,  to  suffer,  to  endure.  The  happiness  is  most 
complete  when  each  seeks  it  chiefly  for  the  other.  4.  By  religion.  The  true  marriage 
must  be  ratified  in  heaven.  Its  happiness  may  be  wrecked  on  so  many  hidden  rocks 
that  it  is  not  safe  to  venture  on  to  the  unknown  sea  without  the  assurance  that  God 
is  guiding  the  voyage- 

Ver,  24. — "  The  Friend  that  sticketh  closer  than  a  brother."  Without  determining 
for  certain  which  of  the  various  renderings  of  the  first  clause  of  this  verse  should  be 
adopted,  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  it  points  to  the  difficulty  of  maintaining  a  wide 
circle  of  friends  in  true  affection,  contrasted  with  the  blessedness  of  enjoying  one  deep 
and  real  friendship.  Tlie  second  cause  which  describes  that  friendship  claims  our 
attention  on  its  own  account. 

I.  The  natube  of  bbothbbly  affection.  If  the  true  friend  is  even  more  than 
a  brother,  he  will  have  the  marks  of  brotherhood  in  an  exceptional  degree.  Now, 
we  have  to  ask — What  are  those  peculiarities  of  the  relation  of  brotherhood  that  deter- 
mine the  brother's  affection?  1.  Blood-relationship.  We  must  all  feel  the  peculiar 
oneness  that  belongs  to  membership  in  the  same  family.  2.  Ghse  companionship. 
Brothers  are  usually  brought  up  together.     They  share  the  same  hardships,  and  they 


m.  XVIII.  1—24.]  THE  PR0YBBB8.  85? 

enjoy  the  same  family  favours.  They  are  knit  together  by  similarity  of  experience. 
3.  Community  of  interests.  Brotters  share  certaip  family  interests  in  common.  Thus 
families  learn  to  hold  together  for  the  geneial  well-being  of  the  members.  4.  Similarity 
of  constitution.  Brothers  resemble  one  another,  more  or  less.  To  some  extent  they 
have  common  traits  of  mind,  feelings,  sympathies,  desires.  Hence  they  aie  drawn 
together.  How  great,  and  wonderful  must  be  the  friendship  that  excuoils  even  this 
close  brotherly  affection  1  Without  the  natural  cause,  it  yet  surpasses  the  love  of 
brotherhood ! 

II.  The  sicjn  of  bkotherlt  affection.  It  is  seen  in  cleaving  to  one's  friend.  With 
the  highest  type  of  friendship  this  will  be  observed  under  the  most  tryin.  circum- 
stances. 1.  In  spite  of  the  lapse  of  time.  Soiiie  friendships  are  but  temporary.  But 
brotherhood  is  lifelong.  So  also  is  the  truest  friendship.  2.  In  sore  need.  Then 
shallow  friendship  proves  to  be  false.  But  at  such  a  time  brother  should  otand  by 
brother.  3.  When,  faithfulness  is  costly.  Possibly  one  is  under  a  cloud  and  cruelly 
misjudged ;  the  brotherly  soul  will  claim  this  as  the  most  suitable  time  for  showing 
true  affection.  Or  it  may  be  that  some  great  sacrifice  must  be  made  to  render  needed 
assistance;  this  requirement  will  discover  the  nature  of  a  friendship,  and  show  whether 
it  be  truly  that  of  a  brother.  4.  When  love  is  tried  by  indifference  or  enmity.  Though 
a  man  be  unworthy  of  his  brother,  still  true  brotherly  love  will  not  cast  him  off.  This 
is  also  the  case  with  the  highest  friendship. 

.  No  doubt  the  object  of  Solomon  was  simply  to  give  us  a  type  and  picture  of  true 
friendship.  But  as  in  a  previous  case  (ch.  xvii.  17),  it  is  impossible  for  Christians  not 
to  recognize  the  application  of  the  picture  to  Jesus  Clirist.  His  friendship  is  in  all 
senses  truly  brotherly.  He  became  a  brother  Man  in  order  that  he  might  enter  into 
closest  relations  of  love  and'sympathy  with  us,  and  he  proves  his  friendship  by  doing 
more  than  any  man  ever  did  for  his  brother. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 9. —  Unsocial  vices.    There  is  an  inner  connection  between  them  all. 

I.  Misanthropy.  (Ver.  1.)  If  this  verse  be  more  correctly  rendered,  this  is  the 
meaning  yielded.  From  a  diseased  feeling  the  man  turns  aside  to  sullen  s  ilitude,  and 
thus  rejects  wisdom.  This  affords  a  fine  meaning.  It  is  one  thing  to  feel  the  need  of 
occasional  solitude,  another  to  indulge  the  passion  for  singularity. 

II.  Obtkusiveness.  (Ver.  2.)  Contrast  ver.  4.  The  talkative  fool  is  the  very 
opposite  of  the  misanthrope  in  his  habits ;  yet  the  two  have  this  in  common — they  both 
unfit  themselves  for  society.  We  may  go  out  of  solitude  to  indulge  our  spleen,  or 
into  society  to  indulge  our  vanity.  Talking  for  talking's  sake,  and  all  idle  conversation, 
are  here  marked,  if  as  minor  vices,  still  vices. 

III.  Baseness.  (Ver.  3.)  The  word  rendered  "  contempt "  points  ratLer  to  deeds  of 
shame.  And  the  meaning  then  will  be  that  the  evil  of  the  heart  must  nscessarily 
discover  itself  in  the  baseness  of  the  life.  As  the  impure  state  of  the  blood  is  revealed 
in  eruptions  and  blotches  on  the  skin,  so  is  it  with  moral  evil. 

IV.  CoNSPiBAoy  AND  PLOTTING.  (Ver.  6.)  The  figure  euiployed,  literally,  to  lift 
up  a  person's  face,  signifies  to  take  his  part.  All  party-spirit  is  wrong,  because  it 
implies  that  truth  has  not  the  first  place  in  our  affections.  But  party-spirit  on  behalf 
of  the  wicked  is  an  utter  abomination,  for  it  implies  a  positive  contempt  for,  or  unbelief 
in,  right  and  truth. 

V.  Quaeeelsomenbss.  (Vers.  6,  7.)  "The  apostle,  when  giving  the  anatomy  of 
man's  depravity,  dwells  chiefly  on  the  little  member  with  all  its  accompaniments — the 
throat,  the  tongue,  the  lips,  the  mouth.  It  is  'a  world  of  iniquity,  defiling  the  whole 
body.'"  It  leads  to  violence.  The  deadly  blow  is  prepared  for  and  produced  by  the 
irritating  taunting  word.  But  there  is  a  recoil  upon  the  quarrelsome  man.  The  tongue 
to  which  he  has  given  so  evil  licence  finally  ensnares  iiim  and  takes  him  prisoner. 
And  the  stones  he  has  cast  at  others  fall  back  upon  himself.  Thus  does  Divine  judg- 
ment reveal  itself  in  the  common  course  of  life. 

VI.  Slandeboubness.  (Ver.  8.)  The  word  '  tale-bearer"  is  represented  more 
•xpressively  in  the  Hebrew,    't  is  the  man  that  *'  blows  in  th«  ew."    And  the  picture 


858  THE  PROVEBBa  [oh.  xvm.  1—84. 

comes  up  before  the  mind  of  the  calumnious  word,  whispered  or  jestingly  uttered,  which 
goes  deep  into  the  most  sensitive  places  of  feeling,  and  wounds,  perhaps  even  unto 
death. 

VII.  Idleness.  (Ver.  9.)  Here  we  strike  upon  the  root  of  all  these  hideous  vices. 
It  is  the  neglect  of  the  man's  proper  work  which  suffers  these  vile  weeds  to  grow.  What 
emphasis  there  needs  to  be  laid  on  thi"  great  precept,  "  Do  thine  own  work  "  1  The  idler 
is  brother  to  the  corrupter,  or  vicious  Man,  and  his  kinship  is  certain  sooner  or  kter  to 
betray  itself.  The  parable  of  the  talents  may  be  compared  here.  Then,  again,  how 
close  are  the  ideas  of  wickedness  and  sloth  I— J. 

Vers.  10 — 16. — Some  conditions  of  weal  and  woe.  I.  Constitdtions  of  lifb-wbau 
1.  First  and  foremost,  religion  (ver.  10)  and  humility  (ver.  12).  The  Name  of  Jehovah 
stands  for  ail  that  God  is  (the  "  I  am  ").  Trust  in  the  Eternal  is  the  real  ground  of 
•onlidence  for  a  creature  so  transient  and  frail  as  man.  To  put  the  same  truth  in 
another  way,  it  is  religious  principle  which  can  alone  sustain  the  soul  calm  anderect 
■midst  distress.  And  with  true  religion  is  ever  connected  humility.  The  knowledge 
of  one's  just  position  in  the  world  is,  on  the  whole,  humbling.  It  is  the  conceit  that 
one  is  greater  than  one  really  is  which  is  so  pernicious  inwardly,  and  will  prove  so 
outwardly.  2,  Competence  of  worldly  means.  (Ver.  11.)  It  is  the  worst  hypocrisy 
and  affectation  to  deny  the  good  of  money,  even  with  reference  to  the  culture  of  the 
soul.  Here  we  have  the  common  view  of  riches ;  they  are  a  source  of  strength.  Truly ; 
but  one  easily  exaggerated.  3.  A  cheerful  temper.  (Ver.  14.)  Health  is  the  grand 
elementary  and  all-inclusive  blessing.  Well  1  one  of  the  main  conditions  of  health  is 
a  merry  heart,  or  a  disposition  to  look  on  the  best  side  of  things.  "  I  thank  it,  poor 
fool ;  it  keeps  on  the  windy  side  of  care."  4.  An  open  mind.  (Ver.  15.)  The  intelli- 
gent heart  and  the  ever-listening  ear, — these  are  the  great  instruments  or  means  of 
knowledge  and  wisdom.  It  is  good  to  have  many  and  large  windows  in  the  house ; 
And  to  keep  the  soul  open  on  all  sides  to  the  light  of  God.  5.  Judicious  liberality. 
(Ver.  16.)  We  found  this  lesson  insisted  on  in  ch.  xvii.  8.  The  heathen  poet  said, 
"  Gifts  persuade  the  gods,  gifts  persuade  dread  kings."  Often  as  the  principle  is  made 
bad  use  of,  let  us  recollect  it  has  an  opposite  aspect,  and  make  friends  to  ourselves  of 
the  "  mammon  of  unrighteousness." 

II.  SoxjECEB  OF  TKOUBLB.  1.  Pride.  (Ver.  12.)  How  emphatic  by  repetition  is 
the  warning  against  this  inward  vice  (ch.  xvi.  18)  1  Like  the  clouds  going  up  the  hill, 
portending  rain,  so  does  self-conceit  prophesy  sorrow.  2.  Excessive  eagerness.  (Ver. 
13.)  "  Condemn  no  one,"  says  the  Book  of  Jesus  Sirach  (Ecolus.  xi.  7),  "  before  thou 
knowest  the  matter  in  question :  know  first,  and  then  rebuke.  Thou  shalt  not  judge 
before  thou  hearest  the  matter ;  and  let  others  speak  first."  Ignoiance  and  self-conceit 
are  ever  forward ;  wisdom  holds  its  strength  in  reserve.  3.  Indulgence  in  depression. 
(Ver.  14.)  •*  A  cast-down  spirit  who  can  bear  ?  "  We  must  remember  that  the  ailments 
of  the  mind  are  strictly  anakigous  to  those  of  the  body ;  and  if  the  latter  are  to  an 
indefinite  degree  under  the  control  of  the  will,  so  too  are  the  former.  We  must  believe 
in  the  God-given  power  of  the  will,  or  no  medicine  can  avail  us. — J. 

Vers.  17 — 21. — Evils  of  tht  tongue  and  of  contention.  I.  The  folly  of  haste  in 
DEBATE.  (Ver.  17.)  "  One  tale  is  good  till  another  be  told."  This  saw  holds  good  of 
private  life,  of  lawsuits,  of  controversies  in  philosophy  and  theology.  Avdi  alteram 
pattern, "  Listen  to  both  sides."  This  is  the  duty  of  the  judge,  or  of  him  who  for  the 
time  being  plays  the  judicial  part.  If  we  are  parties  in  a  debate  or  a  suit,  then  nothing 
will  hold  good  except  to  have  the  "  conscience  Toid  of  offence." 

II.  The  advantage  of  abbitbation.  (Ver.  18.)  The  lot  was  the  ancient  mode 
of  arbitration  and  settlement  of  disputes  in  a  peaceful  manner.  Something  correspond- 
ing to  it  in  modern  times  may  be  adopted  as  a  wise  resource  where  other  means  of 
reconciliation  have  failed.  StiU  better,  the  general  lesson  may  be  drawn^-commit  the 
decision  to  the  wisdom  of  God. 

III.  The  MI8BBT  OF  DISSENSION.  (Ver.  19.)  The  alienated  brother  or  friend  is 
compared  to  an  impregnable  fortress.  "  Oh  how  hard  to  reconcile  the  foes  that  once 
were  friends  1 "  The  sweeter  the  wine,  the  sharper  tte  vinegar  j  and  the  greater  the 
Utural  love,  the  more  violent  the  hate  where  that  lore  has  been  injured. 


at  xvm.  1— 24.]  THE  PROVERBS.  869 

IV.  The  satisfaction  of  wise  counsels.  (Ver.  20 ;  comp.  oh.  xii.  14 ;  xiii.  2.) 
The  mode  of  expression  is  strange  to  a  modem  ear,  but  the  thought  is  familiar  and 
welcome.  Words  here  stand  for  thoughts ;  the  fruit  of  the  lips  comes  from  the  root  of 
the  heart.  When  an  intensely  modern  writer  says,  "  Nothing  can  bring  you  peace 
but  the  triumph  of  your  principles,"  he  puts  the  old  truth  in  a  new  light. 

V.  Life  and  death  in  the  tongue.  (Ver.  21.)  Here  is  another  great  principle, 
vast  in  its  sweep.  "  Life  and  death  are  in  the  power  of  witnesses  according  to  the 
testimony  they  bear,  of  judges  according  to  the  sentence  they  pass,  of  teachers  accord- 
ing to  the  doctrine  they  preach,  of  all  men  who  by  their  well  or  evil  speaking  bring 
death  or  life  to  themselves  or  to  others  "  (Gill).  Perhaps  it  is  true  that  the  tongue  has 
slain  its  ten  thousands  where  the  sword  has  slain  only  its  thousands.  The  employ- 
ment of  the  tongue,  whether  for  good  or  for  evil,  in  blessing  or  in  cursing  (Jas.  iii.  9; 
1  Cor.  xii.  3),  brings  its  own  fruit  and  reward  to  the  sjieaker.  "  By  thy  words  thou 
shalt  be  justified,  and  by  thy  words  thou  shalt  be  condemned." — J. 

Vers.  22 — 24. — Love  in  different  relations.  I,  Conjugal  love.  (Ver.  22.)  The 
blessing  of  a  good  wife.  "  Young  men's  mistresses ;  companions  for  middle  age ;  and 
old  men's  nurses  "  (Lord  Bacon).  On  the  choice  of  a  wife  none  but  a  recluse  or  a 
pedant  would  pretend  to  lay  down  infallible  precepts  or  counsels.  But  every  man  who 
has  been  happy  in  the  married  relation  will  recognize  his  happiness  as  among  the 
chiefest  of  blessings  from  above.  It  is  indeed  a  good  that  is  found,  cannot  be  inherited 
nor  deserved. 

n.  Compassion.  (Ver.  23.)  Here,  as  so  often,  the  duty  is  suggested  by  means  of  a 
lark  picture  of  the  opposite,  of  its  neglect.  The  rich  man  who  "  against  the  houseless 
itr«nger  shuts  the  door,"  or  who,  like  Dives,  fares  luxuriously  while  Lazarus  lies  in  sores 
it  his  gate, — these  revolt  the  heart  and  may  more  move  the  conscience  than  declama- 
tionB  on  the  positive  duty.  When  chilled  by  the  coldness  and  severity  of  selQsh  man, 
let  the  poor  and  afflicted  turn  to  the  "  God  of  all  compassion,"  and  to  the  revelation  of 
lim  in  the  "  good  Samaritan,"  in  Jesus  Christ. 

HL  Pkiendship.  (Ver.  24.)  1.  The  spurious  friendship.  The  more  correct  rendering 
f  the  first  half  of  the  verse  seems  to  be,  "  a  man  of  many  companions  will  prove  him- 
elf  to  be  worthless."  Mere  agreeableness  may  be  a  surface  quality,  may  spring  more 
rom  variety  than  anything  else,  will  soon  wear  out,  cainot  be  counted  on.  Number 
:0iintB  for  little  in  friendship.  2.  The  genuine  friendship.  More  tenacious  than  the 
nere  natural  love  of  kindred,  beonuse  founded  on  the  affinity  of  soul  with  soul. 
VU  the  purest  types  of  earthly  affection  and  friendship  are  but  hints  of  the  eternal  love 
if  him  who  calls  the  soul  into  espousal,  friendship,  and  eternal  communion  with 
imself. — J. 

Ver.  2.— (See  homily  on  ch.  xvii.  16,  24.)— 0. 

Yer,  4. — Xhe  utterances  of  wisdom.    Taking  the  sense  of  this  passage  to  be  con- 

nuous  and  not  antithetical,  and  understanding  it  to  refer  to  the  utterances  of  the 

ijidom  which  is  from  above,  we  notice  their  constant  characteristics,  viz. — 

L  Thbib  depth.     The  words  which  come  from  the  mouth  of  wisdom  are  "  as  deep 

.aters."     How  shallow  is  much,  if  not  most,  that  is  spoken  in  our  hearing  !    It  strikes 

10  deeper  than  "  the  hour's  event,"  than  the  mere  gilding  of  our  lile  ;  it  only  extends  to 

he  circumstances  or  to  the  conventionalities  of  life;  it  deals  with  tastes  and  customs, 

vith  regulation  and  proprieties ;  it  goes  no  further  than  pecuniary  or  social  expecta- 

ions ;   it  lies  upon  the  surface  and  does  not  touch  "  the  deep  heart  and  reality  of 

hings."    But  the  wisdom  of  the  wise  strikes  deep ;  it  goes  down  into  tlie  character ; 

t  touches  first  principles ;  it  has  to  do  with  the  sources  and  springs  of  human  action ; 

t  concerns  itself  with  the  intrinsically  true,  the  really  beautiful,  the  solidly  and 

ermanently  good. 

II.  Their  bpontanbitt.  The  utterances  of  men  who  are  not  truly  wise  are  lacking 
,n  this.  They  can  only  repeat  what  they  have  learned ;  they  have  to  consult  their 
■■'  authorities  "  in  order  to  know  what  they  should  say ;  they  have  to  labour  and  strive 
in  order  to  express  themselves.  Not  so  the  truly  wise.  Their  words  come  from  them 
M  water  from  a  well-spring;  their  speech  is  the  simple,  natural,  unconstrained  outfio\' 


860  THE  PROVEBBS.  [oh.  xvni.  1— 2t 

of  their  soul ;  they  speak  from  the  heart,  not  from  the  book.  Their  spirit  is  full  of 
Divine  wisdom;  they  "have  understan(1ing "  (ch.  xvii.  24);  they  have  knowledge, 
insight,  love  of  the  truth  ;  they  "  cannot  but  speak  "  the  truth  they  have  learned  of 
God,  the  things  they  have  heard  and  seen.  And  the  spontaneity  of  their  utterance  is 
one  real  element  in  their  eloquence  and  their  influence. 

III.  Their  communicativeness.  They  are  "  as  a  flowing  brook."  As  water  that  is 
not  pent  up  like  a  reservoir,  but  flows  on  through  the  thirsty  land,  communicating 
moisture,  and  thus  ministering  to  life  and  growth,  so  the  words  of  the  wise  are  con- 
tinually flowing;  they  spread  from  heart  to  heart,  from  land  to  land,  from  age  to  age. 
And  as  they  flow  they  minister  to  the  life  and  the  growth  of  men ;  they  communicate 
those  living  truths  which  enlighten  the  mind,  which  soften  and  change  the  heart, 
which  transform  and  ennoble  the  life.  Their  career  is  never  closed,  for  from  soul  to 
soul,  from  lip  to  lip,  from  life  to  life,  wisilom  passes  on  in  its  blessed,  unbroken  course. 
1.  Be  ever  learning  of  God.  He  himself,  in  the  book  which  he  has  "written  far  our 
learning,"  is  the  Divine  Source  of  such  wisdom  as  this.  Only  as  we  receive  from  him 
who  is  "  the  Wisdom  of  God  "  shall  we  be  partakers  and  possessors  of  this  heavenly 
wisdom.  And  therefore :  2.  Come  into  the  closest  communion  and  connection  with 
JesuB  Christ  himself.     3.  Open  your  mind  to  aU  sources  of  truth  whatsoever.— 0. 

Ver.  8. — (See  homily  on  ch.  xviL  9.) — 0. 

Ver.  9. — NeedUii  destitution.    This  strong  utterance  suggests— 

I.  Thb  pbkvalbnob  of  dbstitution.  How  much  of  human  life  is  needlessly  low ! 
how  many  men  live  low  down  in  the  scale  who  might  just  as  well  be  living  high  up 
it !  how  sadly  do  mtn  be] eave  themselves  of  good  I  This  applies  to :  1.  Their  eireum- 
stances:  their  daily  surroundings;  the  homes  in  which  they  live,  their  food  and 
laiment,  the  occupations  in  which  they  are  engaged;  their  companionships,  etc.  2. 
Their  intdligence ;  their  intellectual  activity,  their,  knowledge,  their  acquaintance  with 
their  own  complex  nature  and  with  the  world  in  which  they  live,  their  familiarity  with 
(or  their  ignorance  of)  men  and  things.  3.  Their  moral  and  spiritual  condition:  their 
capacity  or  incapacity  to  control  their  temper,  to  govern  their  spirit,  to  regulate  their 
life,  to  form  honourable  and  elevating  habits,  to  worship  God,  to  set  their  lives  in 
accordance  with  the  will  and  after  the  example  of  Christ. 

II.  The  two  main  sources  or  it.  These  are  those  which  are  indicated  in  tie 
text.  1.  The  absence  of  energy  in  action  ;  being  "  slothful  [or,  '  slack,'  Revised  Version] 
in  work."  Men  who  lail  in  their  department,  of  whatever  kind  it  may  be,  are  usually 
those  who  do  not  throw  any  heart,  any  earnestness,  any  continuous  vigour,  into  their 
work.  They  do  what  is  before  them  perfunctorily,  carelessly,  or  spasmodically.  Hence 
they  make  no  proiits,  they  earn  low  wages,  they  have  poor  crops,  they  gain  few 
customers  or  patients,  they  win  no  success  ;  hence  they  read  few  instructive  books, 
they  make  no  elevating  and  informing  friendships,  they  acquire  no  new  ideas,  they 
store  up  no  new  facts,  they  make  no  nlental  progress ;  hence  they  do  not  cultivate 
their  moral  and  spiritual  nature,  they  do  not  "  build  themselves  up"  on  the  foundation 
of  truth;  they  are  adding  no  stones  to  the  living  temple;  they  do  not  grow  in 
wisdom,  or  in  worth,  or  in  grace.  The  other  source  is  :  2.  The  presence  of  prodigality. 
He  that  is  slothful  in  work  is  "  brother  to  him  that  is  a  grtat  waster."  What  sad 
wastefulness  is  on  every  hand !  what  dissipatiun  of  gathered  treasure  1  what  expenditure 
of  means  and  of  strength  on  that  which  does  not  profit  1  For  these  are  the  two  forms 
of  waste.  (1)  Allow  ing  to  depart  that  which  it  would  be  wise  to  hold  in  hand — money, 
goods,  friends,  BU|)porters,  resuuroes.  (2)  Expending  power  on  that  which  does  not 
jirofit ;  letting  our  time,  our  strength,  our  mental  forces,  our  moral  energies,  be 
employed  upon  those  things  which  j  ield  no  return,  or  no  adequate  and  proportionate 
return.  Were  men  to  spend  their  money  on  profitable  aiid  fruit-bearing  labour,  their 
brains  on  enlightening  and  enlarging  study,  their  spiritual  energies  on  intelligent 
worship  or  redeeming  woik,  instead  ot  wasting  them  as  now  they  do,  how  would  the 
desert  become  a  fruitful  field,  in  every  sphere  1  But  we  must  not  overlook  the  fact 
that  there  is — 

III.  A  SOLID  bemainder,  not  thus  accounted  fob.  Although  sloth  and  wast* 
together  explain  a  very  large  part  indeed  of  the  destitution  on  the  earth,  they  leave 


OH.  xvm.  1—24.]  THE  PKOVERBS.  861 


mucl]  ^till  to  be  accounted  for.  And  of  this  remainder  part  ia  due  to  simple  and  pure 
misfortune  or  incapacity,  and  part  to  the  guilt  of  others  who  are  not  the  sufferers.  All 
this  destitution  is  the  proper  field  for  Christian  effort.  It  is  the  proper  object  of  our 
genuine  compassion,  and  of  our  strenuous  enileavour  toward  removal.  But  to  those 
who  are  culpably  destitute  wo  have  to  go  and  say — Your  way  upward  is  liefore  you; 
you  must  exert  yourselves  if  you  would  rise.  No  one  can  really  enrich  a  human  soul 
but  hinvself.  1.  Bring  a  sustained  energy  to  bear  on  the  work  in  which  you  are 
engaged.  2.  Guard  with  a  wise  watchfnlncss  what  you  hfive  won.  3.  Put  out  your 
powers  upon  that  which  is  worthy  of  them  and  that  which  will  repay  them. — 0. 

Ver.  10. — Ood  our  Refuge.  By  "  the  Name  of  the  Lord  "  we  understand  the  Lnrd  as 
he  has  revealed  himself  to  us,  the  Lord  as  he  lias  taught  us  to  thinls  and  to  speak  of 
him.     He  is  our  strong  Tower  in  the  time  of  trouble. 

I.  -OuB  NEED  OF  A  EEFUGB  IN  THE  BATTLE  OF  LIFE.  There  may  be  much  in  our 
life  that  may  kad  us  to  sjieak  of  it  as  a  song  or  a  tale,  or  as  a  march  or  pilgrimage ;  but 
there  is  much  that  compels  us  to  consider  it  a  battle  or  a  struggle.  Many  are  the 
occasions  when  we  have  to  look  about  us  for  a  refuge  to  which  we  may  flee ;  for  we 
have,  at  different  times  and  under  different  circumstances,  to  confront :  1.  Oppression. 
Ill  treatment,  severity;  the  injustice,  or  the  inconsiderateness,  or  the  assumption  of 
those  who  can  afflict  us.  2.  Disaster.  The  loss  of  that  which  is  valu;ible  or  of  those 
who  are  precious  to  us.  3.  Difficulty,  The  uprising  of  great  obstacles  which  seem  to 
be  insurmountable.  4.  Temptation.  Which  may  act  upon  us  quietly  but  continuously, 
and  therefore  effectively,  or  which  may  come  down  upon  us  with  almost  overwhelming 
suddenness  and  force.  Then  we  ask  ourselves — What  is  the  refuge,  the  hi^h  tower, 
to  which  we  shall  resort  ? 

II.  Two   RESOURCES   WHICH   ABE    GOOD,    BUT    INSUFFICIENT.      1.    OuT    OWn  fortitude. 

This  is  that  to  which  Stoicism,  the  noblest  form  of  ancient  philosophy,  had  recourse — 
our  courage  and  determination  as  brave  men,  who  are 

"  Strong  in  will 
To  strive,  to  seek,  to  find,  and  not  to  yield" 

2.  The  sympathy  and  succour  of  our  friends.  The  kind  heart  and  the  helping  hand  ol 
those  who.  love  us,  with  whom  we  have  walked  along  the  path  of  life,  and  who  have 
linked  their  heart  and  hand  with  ours.  Both  of  these  are  good ;  but,  as  all  histury  and 
observation  teach  us,  they  do  not  suffice.  We  want  another  heart  that  comes  nearer 
to  us,  ano'^^her  power  that  can  do  more  for  us  than  these.     S )  we  thankfully  turn  to— 

III.  The  refuge  we  have  in  God.  We  know  that  with  him  is:  1.  Perfect 
sympathy.  He  is  "  afflicted  in  all  our  affliction ; "  he  is  "  touched  with  a  feeling  of 
our  infirmity;"  ho  "knows  what  is  in"  us — what  pain  of  borly,  what  desolateness  of 
spirit,  what  wrestlings  and  agonies  of  the- soul.  2.  Boundless  wisdom.  He  knows 
what  to  save  us  from,  and  what  to  let  us  suffer ;  how  far  and  in  h  hat  way  he  may 
relieve  and  restore  us ;  how  he  can  help  us  so  as  to  bless  us  truly  and  permanently. 

3.  A/mighty  power.  Our  eyes  may  well  be  lifted  up  unto  him,  for  he  can  "  pluck  our 
feet  out  of  the  net."  "  Our  God  is  a  Eock ; "  all  the  billows  of  human  rebellion  will 
break  in  vain  upon  his  power.  Into  the  "strong  tower"  of  his  Divine  protection  we 
may  well  "  run  and  be  safe."     "  Who  is  he  that  can  harm  us  "  there  ? — 0. 

Ver.  12. — (See  homily  on  ch.  xvi.  18.) — 0. 

Ver.  14. The  wounded  spirit.    How  much  is  a  man  better  than  a  sheep?    By  the 

whole  range  of  his  spiritual  nature.  The  joys  and"  sorrows  of  a  man  are  those  of  his 
spirit ;  yet  no  inconsiderable  proportion  of  his  experiences  come  to  him  through  the 
flesh.    The  text  tells  us — 

I.  That  the  conquering  spirit  within  us  triumphs  over  the  bodily  infirmity. 
There  have  been  times  when,  and  people  by  whom,  the  very  worst  bodily  afflictions 
have  beeu  borne  with  lofty  indifference  or  with  still  loftier  and  nobler  resignation. 
Such  was  the  Roman  whose  right  hand  was  consumed  in  the  fire  without  a  groan ;  such 
were  the  Christian  martyrs;  such  have  been  and  such  are  they  who  are  condemned  to 
long  years  of  privation  or  of  suffering,  and  who  wear  the  face  of  a  holy  contentment. 


sea  THE  PEO VERBS.  [en.  xviii.  1—29^ 

of  even  a  beautiful  cheerfulness  of  spirit.     Beneath  the  infirmity  of  the  flesh  is  the 
sustaining  spirit :  hut  what  of  the  wounded  spirit  itself? 

II.  That  it  is  the  wounded  spikit  fob  which  help  is  needed.  There  are 
many  ways  in  which  our  spirit  may  be  wounded.  1.  There  is  the  merciful  wound 
from  the  hand  of  God.  For  Grod  does  wound ;  he  wounds  in  part  in  order  that  he  may 
heal  altogether;  for  the  moment,  that  he  may  make  whole  for  ever.  The  weapon  (or 
one  weapon)  with  which  he  smites  the  soul  is  the  human  conscience.  We  have  all 
felt  the  smart  from  its  righteous  blow.  We  have  before  us  the  alternative  of  either 
blunting  the  edge  of  the  instrument  or  learning  the  lesson  and  turning  away  from  the 
sin.  To  do  the  former  is  to  take  the  path  which  leads  to  wrong  and  ruin ;  to  do  the 
latter  is  to  walk  in  the  way  of  life.  2.  T%e  faithful  wound  from  the  hand  of  man. 
There  are  circumstances  under  which,  and  there  are  relations  in  which,  we  are  simply 
bound  to  wound  one  another's  spirit.  As  Christ  wounded  the  spirit  of  Peter  with  a 
reproachful  glance  (Luke  xxii.  61,  62);  as  Paul  wounded  the  Corinthian  Christian! 
(2  Cor.  ii.  1 — 10);  so  will  the  faithful  minister  of  Christ,  the  conscientious  parent  or 
teacher,  the  true  and  loyal  friend,  now  administer  rebuke,  offer  remonstrance,  address 
an  appeal  which  will  fill  the  heart  with  compunction  and  regret.  3,  The  cruel  wound 
from  the  hand  of  man.  This  includes  (1)  the  wound  of  neglect, — often  a  very  deep  and 
sore  wound  is  this,  coming  from  the  hand  that  should  sustain  and  heal ;  (2)  of  hasti- 
ness and  rashness ;  (3)  of  malice.  4.  Spare  to  wound  another's  spirit.  It  is  worse 
to  hurt  the  feelings  than  to  filch  the  purse ;  to  cause  a  bad  heart-ache  than  any  suffering 
of  the  nerve.  "The  spirit  of  a  man  can  sustain  his  infiimity;  but  a  wounded  spirit 
who  can  hear  f  "  5.  When  your  heart  is  wounded  repair  to  the  One  who  can  heal  it. 
There  is  only  One  who  can  "  heal  the  broken  heart,  and  bind  up  its  wounds." — 0. 

Ver.  17. — Eear  the  other  side.  There  is  no  truer,  as  there  is  no  homelier  maxim, 
than  that  we  should  "  hear  the  other  side,"  or — what  is  virtnally  the  same  thing — 
"  there  are  two  sides  to  everything."     This  is  the  idea  in  the  text ;  the  lessons  are — 

L  Wb  should  not  expect  absolute  accuract  when  a  man  tells  his  own 
CASE.  1,  He  may  intentionally  misrepresent  it.  2.  He  may  unconsciously  misstate 
it.  How  things  shape  themselves  to  our  mind  depends  on  our  individual  standpoint; 
and  when  two  men  regard  a  subject  from  different  and  even  opposite  points  of  view, 
they  necessarily  see  it,  and  as  necessarily  state  it,  with  considerable  variation.  Such 
are  the  limitations  of  our  mental  faculties,  and  such  is  our  tendency  to  be  biassed  in 
our  own  favour,  that  no  wise  man  will  expect  his  nei^^hbour  to  give  him  the  whole 
case,  without  eitlier  addition,  colouring,  or  omission,  when  he  pleads  his  own  cause. 

II.  We  should  bbmbmbeb  the  inequality  in  men's  capacity  op  peesentment. 
Some  men  can  make  a. very  lame  cause  look  like  a  sound  one;  but  others  cannot  give 
to  a  good  cause  the  appearance  of  justice  to  which  it  is  entitled.  Truth  often  yields  to 
advocacy. 

III.  Wb  should  insist  on  nEARiyo  the  other  side.  This  is  due  to  both  sides, 
1.  It  is  m  the  true  interest  of  the  complainant,  or  he  will  peisiiaile  us  to  <;ive  him 
credence  to  which  he  is  not  morally  entitled ;  he  will  then  wrong  his  brother';  he  will 
be  an  oppressor  or  a  defamer;  fronn  this  evil  end  we  should  save  him  by  our  good 
sense.  2.  It  is  due  to  the  defendant;  fur  otherwise  he  will  have  judgment  passed  when 
things  have  been  left  unspoken  which  certainly  ought  to  be  taken  into  the  account. 
Justice  imperatively  demands  that  we  should  never  condemn  our  neighbour  until  wa 
have  heard  what  he  has  to  say  for  himself.  3.  It  is  due  to  ourselves ;  otherwise  we 
iihall  not  be  just,  and  it  is  our  Saviour's  express  desire  that  we  should  "judue  righteous 
judgment"  (John  vii.  24),  and  we  shall  not  be  like  unto  "him  who  judgeth  right- 
eously." Our  Ciiristian  character  will  be  incomplete  and  our  life  will  be  blemished. 
Moreover :  4.  It  is  due  to  (he  cause  of  Ghrist ;  for  if  we  condemn,  or  acquit  without  full' 
and  impartial  inquiry,  we  shall  do  injustice  to  many,  and  we  shall  certainly  do  injury 
in  many  ways  to  the  cau»e  and  kingdom  of  our  Lord. — 0. 

Ver.  19.— Brethren  at  strife.    The  refirence  in  the  text  is  to — 
I.  A  DIFFICULTY  EVERYWHERE  ACKNOWLEDGED.     It  secms  to  have  been  universally 
felt  that  a  "  brother  offended  "  is  very  hard  indeed  "  to  be  won."     It  is  more  easy  to 
effect  a  reconciliation  between  strangers  than  between  those  united  by  ties  of  blood 


OH.  xvm.  1— 24,]  THE  PBOVBKBa.  863 

Hence  a  family  feud  is  usually  a  very  long  as  well  as  a  very  aad  one.  This  dots  not 
seem  to  be  a  local  or  a  national  peculiarity.  Wliat  Solomon  wrote  in  his  land  and  age 
might  be  written  by  any  English  or  continental  moralist  to-day.    It  is  human. 

II.  Its  explanation.  1.  It  is  an  aggravated  difficulty,  inasmuch  as  the  bitterness 
•roused  is  more  intense.  For  always  in  proportion  to  the  fulness  of  our  love  is  the 
greatness  of  our  wrath.  Anger  is  love  reversed.  Whom  we  love  the  most  we  are  in 
danger  of  disliking  the  most ;  it  is  against  his  own  wife  that  the  madman  first  turns 
his  hand.  And  how  should  we  love  another  with  all  the  affection  we  feel  for  the  com- 
panion of  our  childhood  and  our  youth,  the  sharer  of  our  joys  and  sufferings  from  the 
very  cradle  and  under  the  parental  roof?  2.  We  shrink  with  greatest  sensitiveness 
from  humbling  ourselves  before  our  kindred.  Beconciliation  usually  means  apology, 
and  apology  means  a  measure  of  hiimiliation.  And  we  do  not  like  to  humble  our 
hearts  before  one  with  whom  we  have  had  and  may  have  so  much  to  do.  3.  We  are 
inclined  to  "  stand  upon  the  order  of  our  going ; "  each  thinks  the  other  should  make 
the  first  move;  the  younger  thinks  the  elder  should  because  he  is  the  elder,  and  the 
elder  the  younger  because  he  is  the  younger.  4,  We  are  apt  to  resent  interposition  as 
interference;  to  any  peacemaker  who  would  intervene  we  are  inclined  to  say,  "Do  not 
intrude  into  our  family  secrets." 

III.  Our  dut?  in  view  op  this  pact.  It  is  clearly  this :  1.  To  avoid  all  serious 
differences  with  our  near  kindred ;  (1)  to  heal  at  once  the  first  small  breach  that  may 
occur,  for  while  a  rupture  may  be  beyond  remedy,  a  small  difference  is  easily  healed; 
(2)  to  consider  that  almost  any  sacrifice  of  money,  or  of  position,  or  of  goods  is  worth 
making  to  retain  the  love  of  the  children  of  our  own  parents,  the  playmates  of  our  child- 
hood and  oiir  youth.  2.  To  make  a  determined  effort,  after  earnest  thought  and  prayer, 
to  master  the  difficulty  we  find  in  our  heart,  and  make  the  first  overture  to  the  offended 
brother.  So  shall  we  win  a  really  noble  victory  over  ourselves ;  so  shall  we  gain  th« 
warm  approval  of  the  Prince  of  peace.— 0. 

Ver.  24:.— The  unfailing  Friend.  If  these  words  tad  occurred  in  a  book  written  any 
time  A.D.,  we  should  unhesitatingly  have  referred  them  to  our  Lord;  they  are  beauti- 
fully and  perfectly  applicable  to  him.  For  closer  than  any  brother  is  he  who  is  "  not 
•shamed  to  call  us  brethren." 

I.  He  combs  nearer  to  us  than  ant  brother  can,  A  human  brother  can  draw 
very  near  to  us  in  his  knowledge  of  us  and  his  brotherly  sympathy  with  us;  but  not 
as  Christ,  our  Divine  Friend,  can  and  does.  His  knowledge  of  ua  is  perfect.^-of  our 
hopes  and  fears,  of  our  struggles  and  our  sorrows,  of  our  aspirations  and  endeavours,  of 
all  that  passes  within  us.  And  his  sympathy  with  us  and  his  succour  of  us  are  such  as 
man  cannot  render.  He  can  pity  us  with  a  perfect  tenderness  of  spirit,  and  he  can 
touch  our  hearts  with  a  sustaining  and  healing  hand  as  the  kindest  and  wisest  of  men 
cannot. 

II.  He  is  always  the  same  to  ns;  cub  bhothbb  is  not.  We  can  never  be 
quite  sure  that  our  kindest  brother  will  be  in  a  mood  or  in  a  position  to  lend  us  his 
ear  or  his  hand.  But  we  have  not  to  make  this  qualification  or  enter  into  this  con- 
sideration when  we  think  of  Christ.  We  know  we  shall  not  find  him  too  occupied  to 
hear  us,  or  indisposed  to  sympathize  with  us,  or  unable  to  aid  us.  He  is  always  the 
•ame,  and  ever  ready  to  receive  and  bless  us  (Heb.  xiii.  8). 

III.  His  patience  is  inexhaustible  ;  our  brother's  is  not.  By  our  importunity, 
or  by'our  infirmity,  or  by  our  unworthiness,  we  may  weary  the  most  patient  human 
friend  or  brother ;  but  we  do  not  weary  the  Divine  Friend ;  and  even  though  we  do 
that  or  be  that  which  is  evil  and  hurtful,  which  is  painful  and  grievous  in  his  sight,  still 
he  bears  with  ua,  and  at  our  first  moment  of  spiritual  return  he  is  prepared  to  welcome 

and  restore  us.  ■■   a    i     i.    i 

IV.  He  ever  livkth;  our  brother  mat  be  taken  from  us.  1.  beek  the  lasting 
favour  and  friendship  of  Jesus  Christ.  2.  Eealize  the  honour  of  that  friendship,^  and 
walk  worthily  of  it.  3.  Gain  from  it  all  the  comfort,  strength,  and  sanctity  wliich  a 
close  and  living  friendship  with  him  will  surely  yield.  4.  Introduce  all  whom  you  can 
to  him,  that  they  may  share  this  invaluable  blessing. — 0. 


364 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[oh.  xnc  1 — 20, 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XIX. 


Ver.  1. — Better  is  the  poor  that  walketh 
In  his  integrity.  The  word  for  "  poor  "  is, 
here  and  in  vers.  7,  22,  rash,  which  signi- 
fies "  poor "  in  opposition  to  "  rich."  In 
the  present  reading  of  the  second  clause, 
than  he  thai  is  perverse  in  his  lips,  and  is 
a  fool,  there  seems  to  be  a  failure  in  anti- 
thesis, unless  we  can  understand  the  fool  as 
a  rich  fool.  This,  the  repetition  of  the 
maxim  in  ch.  xxviii.  6  ("  Than  he  that  is 
perverse  in  liis  ways,  though  he  be  rich  "), 
would  lead  one  to  admit.  The  Vulgate 
accordingly  has,  Q^lam  divet  torqtiem  laMa 
eua,  et  insipiens,  "  Than  a  rich  man  who  is 
of  perverse  lips  and  a  fool."  With  this  the 
Syriac  partly  agrees.  So  that,  if  we  take 
this  reailing,  the  moralist  says  that  the 
poor  man  who  lives  a  guileless,  innocent 
life,  content  with  his  lot,  and  using  no 
wrong  means  to  improve  his  fortunes,  is 
happier  and  better  tlian  the  rich  man  who 
is  hypocritical  in  his  words  and  deceives 
others,  and  has  won  bis  wealth  by  such 
means,  thus  proving  himself  to  be  a  fool,  a 
morally  bad  man.  But  if  we  content  our- 
selves with  the  Hebrew  text,  we  must  find 
the  antithesis  in  the  simple,  pious,  poor  man, 
contrasted  with  the  arrogant  rich  man,  who 
ineers  at  his  poor  neighbour  as  an  inferior 
creature.  The  writer  would  seem  to  in- 
sinuate that  there  is  a  natural  connection 
between  poverty  and  integrity  of  life  on  the 
one  hand,  and  wealth  and  folly  on  the 
other.  He  would  assent  to  the  sweeping 
assertion.  Omnia  dieet  aut  iniquus  out  iniqui 
keres,  "  Every  rioli  man  is  either  a  rascal  or 
a  rascal's  heir." 

Ver.  2. — Also,  that  the  sonl  be  without 
knowledge,  it  is  not  good.  "  Also  "  (gam), 
Wordsworth  would  render  "even,"  "even 
the  soul,  i.e.  life  itself,  without  knowledge 
is  not  a  bletsing ; "  it  is  jSi'os  oi  fiiairis.  At 
first  sight  it  looks  as  if  some  verse,  to  which 
this  one  was  appended,  had  fallen  out ;  but 
there  is  no  trace  in  the  versions  of  any  such 
loss.  We  have  had  a  verse  beginning  in 
the  same  manner  (ch.  xvii.  26),  and  here  it 
seems  to  empliasize  what  follows — folly  is 
bad,  so  is  ignorance,  when  the  soul  lacks 
knowledge,  i.e.  when  a  man  does  not  know 
what  to  do,  how  to  act  in  the  circumstances 
of  his  life,  has  in  fiict  no  practical  wisdom. 
Other  tilings  "  not  good  "  are  named  in  oh. 
xviii.  .') ;  x.i.  23 ;  xxiv.  23.  And  he  that 
hasteth  with  his  feet  sinneth ;  misstth  his 
way.  Dclitzsch  confines  tlie  mcnning  of 
this  hemistich  to  the  undisciplined  pursuit 
of  ki.owledgo  :  "  He  who  hasteneth  with  the 
legs  after  it  gneth  astray,"   because  lie  is 


neither  intellectually  nor  morally  clear  as  to 
his  path  or  object.  But  the  gnome  is  better 
taken  in  a  more  general  sense.  The  igno- 
rant man,  who  acta  hastily  without  dua 
dtiliberation,  is  sure  to  make  grave  mistakes, 
and  to  come  to  misfortune.  Haste  is  opposed 
to  knowledge,  because  the  latter  involves 
prudence  and  circumspection,  while  the 
former  blunders  on  hurriedly,  not  seeing 
whither  actions  lead.  We  all  have  occasion 
to"  note  the  proverbs,  Fettina  lente;  "  More 
haste,  less  spee  1."  The  history  of  Fabius, 
who,  as  Ennius  said, 

"  Unus  homo  nobis  cunctando  restituit  rem," 

shows  the  value  of  deliberation  and  caution. 
The  Greeks  recognized  this — 

npo^ereia  voWoh  iarlf  curia  KaKwy, 

"  Bash  haste  is  cause  of  evil  unto  many." 

Erasmus,  in  his  'Adagia,'  has  a  long  article 
commenting  on  Festinatio  praipropera.  The 
Arabs  say,  "  Patience  is  the  key  of  joy,  but 
haste  is  the  key  of  sorrow."  God  is  patient 
because  he  is  eternal. 

Ver.  3. — The  foolishness  of  man  per- 
verteth  his  way;  rather,  overturns,  turns 
from  the  right  direction  and  causes  a  man 
i  to  fall  (oh.  xiii.  6).  It  is  his  own  folly  that^ 
I  leads  him  to  his  ruin ;  but  he  will  not  see' 
this,  and  blames  the  providence  of  Glod. 
And  Ms  heart  fretteth  against  the  Lord. 
Septuagint,  "  He  acouseth  God  in  his 
heart"  (oomp.  Ezek.  xviii.  25,  29;  xxxiii. 
17, 20).  Ecolus.  XV.  11,  etc,  "  Say  not  thou, 
It  is  through  the  Lord  that  I  fell  away;  for 
thou  oughtest  not  to  do  the  things  that  he 
bateth.  Say  not  thou.  Ho  has  caused  me 
to  err;  for  ho  hath  no  need  of  the  sinful 
man,"  etc.  The  latter  part  of  this  im- 
portant passage  St.  Augustine  quotes  thus : 
"  Item  apud  Salnmoneni :  Deus  ab  initio 
constituit  hominem  et  rellquit  cum  in  manu 
consilii  sui ;  adjtcit  ei  mandata  et  prsBcepta ; 
si  voles  pra>(.'e|ita  servaro,  servabunt  te,  et  in 
posterum  fid  cm  placitam  faoere.  Apposuit 
tibi  aquaiii  et  ignem,  ad  quod  vis  porrige 
manura  tuam.  Ante  hominem  bonum  et 
malum,  vita  et  mors,  paupertas  et  honcetaa 
a  Domino  Deo  sunt "  ('  De  Perf.  Just.  Horn.,' 
cap.  xix.  §  41).  And  again,  "  Manifestum 
est,  quod  si  ad  igncm  manum  mittit,  et 
malum  ao  mors  ei  placet,  id  voluntas 
hominis  operatur ;  si  autem  bonum  et  vilam 
diligit,  non  solum  voluntas  id  agit,  sed 
diviuitus  adjuvatur"  (' De  Gest.  Pelag.,' 
cap.  iii.  §  7).    Homer,  '  Od.,'  i.  32,  etc.— 

"Perverse  mankind  I   whose  willi,  created 
free, 
Charge  all  their  woes  on  absolute  decree  j 


OH.  XIX.  1 — 29.] 


THE  PROVBBBS. 


365 


All  to  the  dooming  gods  their  guilt  trans- 
late, 

And  follies  are  miscalled  the  crimes  of 
fate." 

(Pope.) 

Ver.  4. — Wealth  maketh  many  friends 
(vers.  6,  7 ;  ch.  xiv.  20).  A  Greek  gnome 
expresses  the  same  truth — 

'Eeisi'  5'  i^anfv  xp^M"^'  ^o/iev  <f>(Xov>. 

The  poor  is  separated  from  his  neighbonr. 
But  it  is  better  to  make  the  act  of  separa- 
tion emanate  from  the  friend  (as  the  Hebrew 
allows),  and  to  render,  with  the  Kevised 
Version,  The  friend  of  the  poor  eeparateth 
himself  from  Mm.  The  word  for"  poor "  is 
here  dot,  whicli  means  "  feeble,"  "  languid ; " 
so  ver.  17;  and  the  eame  word  (rea),  "friend  " 
or  "neighbour,"  is  used  in  both  clauses. 
The  idea  of  man's  selfiahness  is  carried  on  in 
Vers.  6  and  7.  The  Law  of  Moses  had  tried 
to  counteract  it  (Dout.  xv.  7,  etc.),  but  it 
was  Christianity  that  introduced  the  prac- 
tical realization  of  the  law  of  love,  and  the 
hononring  of  the  poor  as  members  of  Christ. 
Septnagint,  "  But  the  poor  is  deserted  even 
by  his  whilom  friend." 

Ver.  5. — This  verse  is  repeated  below 
(ver.  9).  It  comes  in  awkwardly  here,  in- 
terrupting the  connection  which  subsibia 
between  vers,  i  and  6.  Its  right  place  is 
doubtless  where  it  occurs  below.  The  Law 
not  only  strictly  forbade  false  witness  (Exod. 
XX.  16;  xxiii.  1),  but  it  enacted  severe 
penalties  against  offenders  in  this  particular 
(Deut.  xix.  16,  etc.) ;  the  lex  talionis  was  to 
be  enforced  against  them,  they  were  to 
receive  no  pity :  "  Life  shall  be  for  life,  eye 
for  eye,  tooth  for  tooth,  hand  for  hand,  foot 
for  foot."  He  that  speaketh  lies  shall  not 
escape.  The  Septnagint  confines  the  notion 
of  this  clause  to  false  accusers,  'O  5e  4yKa\S,p 
dSixas,  "He  who  maketh  an  unjust  charge 
shall  not  escape,"  which  renders  the  two 
clauses  almost  synonymous.  We  make  a 
distinction  between  the  members  by  seeing 
in  the  former  a  denunciation  against  a  false 
witness  in  a  suit,  and  in  the  second  a  more 
sweeping  menace  against  any  one,  whether 
accuser,  slanderer,  sycophant,  who  by  lying 
injures  a  neighbour.  The  History  of  Susanna 
is  brought  forward  in  confirmation  of  the 
well-des>erved  fate  of  false  accusers. 

VevSiis  SiajSoX))  rbv  ^iov  Xvfialverat. 
"  A  slander  is  an  outrage  on  man's  life." 
Ver.  6. — Many  will  intreat  the  favour  of 
the  priuoe ;  literally,  will  stroke  the  face  of 
the  prince,  of  the  liberal  and  powerful  man, 
in  expectation  of  receiving  some  benefit  from 
him  (oh.  xxix.  26 ;  Job  xi.  19).  Every  man 
ii  a  friend  to  him  that  giveth  gifts  (see  on 
(h.  xvii.  8).    The  LXX.,  reading  vjiyhf  for 


p^i?"^?,  renders,  "Every  bad  man  is  a  re- 
proach to  a  man,"  which  may  mean  that  a 
sordid,  evil  man  brings  only  disgrace  on  him- 
self; or  that,  while  many  truckle  to  and  try 
to  win  the  interest  of  a  prince,  bad  courtiers 
bring  on  hia  not  glory,  but  infamy  and 
shame. 

Ver.  7.— This  is  one  of  the  few  tristichs 
in  the  book,  and  probably  contains  the 
mutilated  remains  of  two  distichs.  Tlie 
thiid  line,  corrected  by  the  Septnagint, 
which  has  an  addition  here,  ruus  into  two 
clauses  (Clieyne).  All  the  brethren  of  the 
poor  do  hate  him.  Even  his  own  brothers, 
children  of  the  same  parents,  hate  and  shun 
a  poor  man  (oh.  xiv.  20).  Much  more  do  his 
friends  go  far  from  him.  There  should  be 
no  interrog.ition.  We  have  the  expression 
(uph-hi)  in  ch.  xi.  31 ;  xv.  11,  etc.  Euripides, 
'Wedea,'561- 

"  Each  single  friend  far  from  the  poor  man 
flies." 

Septnagint,  "  Every  one  who  hateth  a  poor 
brother  will  be  also  far  from  friendship." 
'I'hen  follows  an  addition  not  found  in  the 
Hebrew,  "  Good  thought  draweth  nigh  to 
those  who  kiiow  it,  and  a  prudent  man  will 
find  it.  He  wlio  doeth  much  evil  brings 
malice  to  peifection  (reAeirioupyer  xaicla^; 
and  he  who  rouses  words  to  anger  shall  not 
be  safe."  He  pursueth  them  with  words, 
yet  they  are  wanting  to  him ;  or,  tliey  are 
gone.  He  makes  a  pathetic  appeal  to  his 
quondam  friends,  but  they  hearken  not  to 
him.  But  the  sense  is  rather, "  He  pursueth 
alter,  craves  for,  words  of  kindness  or 
promises  of  help,  and  there  is  naught,  or 
ho  gets  words  only  and  no  material  aid." 
Wordsworth  quotes  Catullus,  'Carm.,' 
xxxviii.  5 — 

"  Quem  tu,  quod  minimum  facillimumque 
est. 
Qua  solatus  es  adloculione? 
Iraseor  tibi.     Sic  meos  amores  ?  " 

Vulgate,  Qui  tantum  verba  sectatur,  nihil 
habehit,  "  He  who  pursues  words  only  shall 
have  naught."  The  Hebrew  is  literally, 
"Seeking  words,  they  are  not."  This  "is 
according  to  the  Khetib ;  the  Keri,  instead 
of  the  negation  tih,  reads  1^,  which  makes 
the  clause  signify,  "  He  who  pursues  words, 
they  are  to  liim ; "  i.e.  he  gets  words  and 
nothing  else.  Delitzsoh  and  others,  supply- 
ing the  lost  member  from  the  Septnagint, 
read  the  third  line  thus:  "He  that  hath 
many  friends,  or  the  friend  of  every  one,  is 
requited  with  evil;  and  he  that  seeketh 
(fair)  speeches  shall  not  be  delivered." 
Choyne  also  makes  a  distich  of  this  line, 
takiiog  the  Septuagint  es  representing  tha 


860 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[oh.  XIX.  1— 2S. 


original  reacllng;,  "He  that  does  much  evil 
perfecta  mischief:  He  that  provokes  with 
words  shall  not  escape."  That  something 
has  fallen  out  of  the  Hebrew  text  is 
evident ;  it  seems  that  there  are  no  examples 
of  tristichg  In  this  part  of  our  book,  though 
they  are  not  unknown  in  the  first  and  third 
divisions.  The  Vulgate  surmounts  the 
diflSeulty  by  connecting  this  third  line  with 
the  following  verse,  which  thus  is  made 
to  form  the  antithesis.  Qui  tantum  verba 
lectatur,  nihil  liabehit ;  Qui  autem  possessor 
est  mentis,  diligit  animam  euam,  et  custos 
prudentise  inveniet  hona." 

Ver.  8. — He  that  getteth  wisdom  loveth 
his  own  soul.  "  Wisdom  "  is,  in  the  Hebrew, 
leb,  "  heart ; "  it  is  a  matter,  not  of  intellect 
ouly,  but  of  will  and  affections  (see  on  ch. 
XV.  32).  Septuagint,  ayav^  iavT6v,  "loveth 
himself."  The  contrary,  "  hateth  his  own 
soul,"  occu)8  in  ch.  xxlx.  24.  By  striving 
to  obtain  wisdom  a  man  shows  that  he  lias 
regard  for  the  welfare  of  his  soul  and  body. 
Hence  St.  Thomas  Aquinas  ('Sum.  Theol.,' 
L  2,  qu.  25,  art.  7,  quoted  by  Com.k  Lapide) 
takes  occasion  to  demonstrate  that  only  good 
men  are  really  lovers  of  themselves,  while 
evil  men  are  practically  self-haters,  proving 
his  position  by  a  reference  to  Aristotle's 
enumeration  of  the  chaffaeteristics  of  friend- 
ship, which  the  former  exhibit,  and  none 
of  which  the  latter  can  possess  ('Eth. 
Nio.,'  ix.  4).  He  that  keepeth  nnder- 
Btanding  shall  find  good  (ch.  xvi.  20),  A 
man  must  not  only  strive  hard  and  nse 
all  available  means  to  get  wisdom  and 
prudence,  he  must  guard  them  like  a 
precious  treasure,  not  lose  them  for  want  of 
care  or  let  them  lie  useless;  and  then  he 
will  find  that  they  bring  with  themselves 
innumerable  benefits. 

Ver.  9. — A  repetition  of  ver.  5,  except 
that  shall  perish  is  substituted  for  "  shall 
not  escape."  Septuagint,  "And  whosoever 
shall  kindle  mischief  shall  perish  by  it." 
The  Greek  translators  have  rendered  the 
special  reference  in  the  original  toslanrlerers 
and  liars  by  a  general  term,  and  introduced 
the  notion  of  Divine  retribution,  which  ia 
not  definitely  expressed  in  the  Hebrew. 

Ver.  10. — Delight  is  not  seemly  for  a 
fool  (comp.  ch.  xvii.  7 ;  xxvi.  1).  Taanug, 
rendered  "  delight,"  implies  rather  delicate 
living,  luxury  ;  Tpv<l>-fi,  Septuagint.  Such  a 
life  is  ruin  to  a  fool,  who  knows  not  how 
to  use  it  properly;  it  confirms  him  in  his 
foolish,  sinful  ways.  A  man  needs  religion 
and  reason  to  enable  him  to  bear  prosperity 
advantageously,  and  these  the  fool  lacks. 
"Secundw  res,"  remarks  Sallust  ('Catil.,' 
xi.),  "  sapientium  animos  fatigant,"  "  Even 
wise  men  are  wearied  and  hiirassed  by 
prosperity,"  much  more  must  such  good 
fortune  try  those  who  havs  no   practical 


wisdom  to  guide  and  control  tleir  enjoy, 
ment.  Vatablus  explains  the  clause  to  mean 
that  it  is  impossible  for  a  fool,  a  sinner,  to 
enjoy  peace  of  conscience,  which  alone  ig 
true  delight.  But  looking  to  the  next 
clause,  we  see  that  the  moralist  ia  thinking 
primarily  of  the  elevation  of  a  slave  to  s 
high  position,  and  his  arrogance  in  conse- 
quence thereof.  Much  less  for  a  servant 
to  have  rule  over  princes.  By  the  nnwise 
favouritism  of  a  potentate,  a  slave  of  lowly 
birth  might  be  raised  to  eminence  and  set 
above  the  nobles  and  princes  of  the  land. 
The  writer  of  Ecclesiastes  gives  his  ex- 
perience in  this  matter:  "I  have  seen 
servants  upon  horses,  and  princes  walking 
as  servants  upon  the  earth  "  (Eccles.  x,  7). 
The  same  anomaly  is  mentioned  with  cen- 
sure (ch.  XXX.  22  and  Ecolua.  xi.  5). 
What  is  the  behaviour  of  unworthy  persons 
thus  suddenly  raised  to  high  position  has 
formed  the  subject  of  many  a  satire.  It  is 
the  old  story  of  the  "  beggar  on  horseback." 
A  German  proverb  declares,  "  Kein  Scheer- 
messer  scharfer  schiest,  als  wenn  der  Bauer 
zu  Herm  wird."  Claud.,  'In  Eutrop.,'  i  181, 
etc. — 
"  Asperius  nihil  est  humili,  qunm  siffgit  in 

altuiu ; 
,  Cuncta  ferit,  dum  cuncta  timet;  dessevii 

in  omnes, 
Ut  se  posse  putent;  nee  bellua  tetriornlla 
Quam   seivi  rabies   in  libera  colla  fn- 

rentia." 

Aa  an  example  of  a  different  disposition, 
Cornelius  &  Lapide  refers  to  the  history  of 
Agathocles,  Tyrant  of  Syracuse,  who  rose 
from  the  humble  occupation  of  a  potter  to 
a  position  of  vast  power,  and,  to  remind  him- 
self of  Ills  lowly  origin,  used  to  dine  off  mean 
earthenware.  Ausoniua  thus  alludes  to  this 
humility  ('  Epigr.,'  viii.)— 

"Fama  est   fictilibus  ccenasse   Agathoclea 
regem, 
Atque  abaonm  Samio  smpe  onerasse  luto; 
Fercula  gemmatis  cum   poneret  horrida 
vasis, 
Et  misceret  opes  pauperiemque  simul. 
Quserenti  causam,  respoiidit :  Eex  ego  qui 
sum 
SicaniiB,  figulo  sum  genitore  satus. 
Fortunam  reverenter  habe,  quiounque  »■ 
peute 
Dives  ab  exili  progrodiere  loco." 
Ver.  11.— The  discretion  of  a  man  de- 
ferreth  his    anger;   maketh    him    slow    to 
anger.    "  A  merciful  man  is  long-suffering," 
Septuagint;    "The   teaching   of  a  man  is 
known  by  patience,"  Vulgate.  (See  ch.  liv.  17, 
29.)    The  Greek  moralist  gives  the  advice— 

"  Thlue  anger  quell  by  reason's  timely  aid." 


OH.  xix<  1—29.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


867 


The  contrary  disposition  betokens  folly  (ch. 
siv.  17).  It  is  hie  glory  to  pass  oyer  a  trans- 
gression. It  is  a  real  triumph  and  glory  for 
a  man  to  forgive  and  to  take  no  notice  of 
injvu'ies  offered  Ijlm.  Thus  in  his  poor  way 
he  imitates  Almighty  God  (Micah  vii.  18, 
"  Who  is  a  God  like  unto  thee,  that 
pardoneth  iniquity,  and  passeth  by  the 
transgression  of  the  remnant  of  his  heri- 
tage? he  retaineth  not  liis  anger  for 
ever,  because  he  delighteth  in  mercy"). 
Here  it  is  discretion  or  prudence  that  makes 
a  man  patient  and  forgiviug ;  elsewhere  the 
same  effect  is  attributed  to  love  (ch.  x.  12; 
xvii.  9).  The  Septuagint  Version  is  hard  to 
understand :  Th  Se  icavxvi^'^  avTov  iirepx^rat 
vapav6iiois,  "  And  his  glorying  cometh  on 
the  transgressors  ; "  but,  taken  in  connection 
with  the  former  hemistich,  it  seems  to  mean 
that  the  patient  man's  endurance  of  the 
contradictions  of  sinners  is  no  reproach  or 
disgrace  to  him,  but  redounds  to  his  credit 
»nd  virtue.  "  Vincit  qui  patitur,"  "  He  con- 
quers who  endures." 

Ver.  12. — The  king's  wrath  is  a»  the  roar- 
ing of  a  lion,  which  inspires  terror,  as  pre- 
luding danger  and  death.  The  same  idea 
occurs  in  cli.  xx.  2  (comp.  Amos  iii.  4,  8). 
The  Assyrian  monuments  have  made  us 
familiar  with  the  lion  as  a  type  of  royalty  ; 
and  the  famous  throne  of  Solomon  was 
ornamented  with  figures  of  lions  ou  each  of 
its  six  steps  (1  Kings  x.  19,  etc.).  Thus 
St.  Paul,  alluiling  to  the  Roman  emperor, 
says  (2  Tim.  iv.  17),  "I  was  delivered  out 
of  the  mouth  of  the  lion."  "The  lion  is 
dead,"  announced  Marsyas  to  Agrippa,  on 
the  decease  of  Tiberius  (Josephus,  'Ant,,' 
xviii.  6.  10).  The  moralist  here  gives  a 
monition  to  kings  to  repiess  their  wrath 
and  not  to  let  it  rage  uncontrolled,  and  a 
warnhig  to  subjects  not  to  offend  their  ruler, 
lest  he  tear  them  to  pieces  like  a  savage 
beast,  which  an  Eastern  despot  had  full 
power  to  do.  But  Ms  favour  is  as  dew  upon 
the  grass.  In  oh.  xvi.  15  the  king's  favour 
was  compared  to  a  cloud  of  the  latter  rain ; 
here  it  is  likened  to  the  dew  (comp.  Ps.  Ixxii. 
6).  We  hardly  understand  in  England  the 
real  iiearing  of  this  comparison.  "  The  secret 
of  the  luxuriant  fertility  of  many  parts  of 
Palestine,"  says  Dr.  Geilrie  ('Holy  Land 
and  Bible,'  i.  72,  etc.),  "lies  in  the  rich  supply 
of  moisture  afforded  by  the  sea-winds  which 
blow  inland  each  night,  and  water  the  face 
of  the  whole  land.  There  is  no  dew, 
properly  so  called  in  Palestine,  for  there 
is  no  moisture  in  the  hot  summer  air  to  be 
chilled  Into  dewdrops  by  the  coolness  of 
the  night,  as  in  a  climate  like  ours.  From 
May  till  October  rain  is  unknown,  the  sun 
shining  with  unclouded  brightness  day  after 
day.  The  heat  becomes  intense,  the  ground 
hard ;  oud  vegetuliou  would  perish  but  for 


the  moist  west  winds  that  come  each  night 
from  the  sea.  The  bright  skies  cause  the 
heat  of  the  day  to  radiate  very  quickly  into 
space,  so  that  the  nights  are  as  cold  os  the  day 
is  the  reverse.  ...  To  this  coldness  of  the 
night  air  the  indispensable  watering  of  all 
-plant-life  is  due.  The  winds,  loaded  with 
moisture,  are  robbed  of  it  as  they  pass  over 
the  land,  the  cold  air  condensing  it  into 
drops  of  water,  which  fall  in  a  gracious 
rain  of  mist  on  every  thirsty  blade.  In  the 
morning  the  fog  thus  created  rests  like  a 
sea  over  the  plains,  and  far  up  the  sides  o( 
the  hills,  which  raise  their  heads  above  it 
like  so  many  islands.  .  .  .  The  amount  of 
moisture  thus  poured  on  the  thirsty  vegeta- 
tion during  the  night  is  very  great.  Dew 
seemed  to  the  Israelites  a  mysterious  gift 
of  Heaven,  as  indeed  it  is.  That  tho  skies 
should  be  stayed  from  yielding  it  was  a 
special  sign  of  Divine  wrath,  and  there 
could  be  no  more  gracious  conception  of  a 
loving  farewell  address  to  his  people  than 
where  Moses  tells  them  that  his  speech 
should  dibtil  as  the  dew.  The  favour  of  au 
Oriental  monarch  could  not  be  more  bene- 
ficially conceived  than  by  saying  that,  while 
his  wrath  is  like  the  roaring  of  a  lion,  his 
favour  is  as  the  dew  upon  the  grass."  pxT 
(ratson),  "favour,"  is  translated  by  the  Sep- 
tuagint, tJp  t\ap6v,  and  by  the  Vulgate, 
hilaritaa,  "  oheerfulnesB "  (as  in  ch.  xviii 
22),  which  gives  the  notion  of  a  smiling, 
serene,  benevolent  countenance,  as  con- 
trasted with  the  angry,  lowering  look  of  a 
displeased  monarch. 

Ver.  13. — With  the  first  clause  we  may 
compare  ch.  x.  1;  xv.  20;  xvii.  21,  25. 
Calamity  in  the  Hebrew  is  in  the  plural 
number  (contritiones,  Pagn.),  as  if  to  mark 
the  many  and  continued  sorrows  which  a 
bad  son  brings  upon  his  father,  how  he 
causes  evil  after  evil  to  harass  and  distress 
him.  The  oontentions  of  a  wife  are  a  con- 
tinual dropping  (comp.  ch.  xxvii.  15).  The 
flat  roofs  of  Eastern  houses,  formed  of  planks 
loosely  joined  and  covered  with  a  coating  of 
clay  or  plaster,  were  always  subject  to  leak- 
age in  heavy  rains.  The  irritating  alterca- 
tions and  bickering  of  a  cross-grained  wife 
are  compared  to  the  continuous  drip  of  water 
through  au  imperfectly  constructed  roo£ 
Tecta  jugiter  persUUantia,  as  the  Vulgate 
has  it.  The  Scotch  say,  "A  leaky  house 
and  a  scolding  wife  are  two  bad  com- 
panions." The  two  clauses  of  the  verse 
are  co-ordinate,  expressing  two  facts  that 
render  home  life  miserable  and  unendur- 
able, viz.  the  misbehaviour  of  a  sou  and  the 
ill  temper  of  a  wife.  The  Septuagint,  folio  w- 
ing  a  different  reading,  has,  "Nor  are  off  r- 
ings  from  a  harlot's  lure  pure,"  which  is  an 
allusion  to  Deut.  xxiii.  18. 
Ver.  11.— House  and  richei  ar*  •&  inheii- 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[en.  XII.  1—29 


tanee  of  (from)  fathen.  Any  man,  worthy 
or  not,  may  inherit  property  from  progeni- 
tors; any  man  may  bargain  for  a  wife,  or 
give  a  dowry  to  his  son  to  further  his  matri- 
monial prospects.  But  a  prudent  wife  is 
from  the  lord.  She  is  a  special  gift  of  God, 
a  proof  of  his  gracious  care  for  his  servants 
(see  on  ch.  xviii.  22).  Septuap;int,  Uapli  St 
Kvplov  opjU(J^eTat  yvv^  dySpif  "It  is  by  the 
Lord  that  a  man  is  matclied  with  a  woman." 
There  is  a  special  providence  that  watches 
over  wedlock;  as  we  say,  "Marriages  are 
made  in  heaven."  But  marriages  of  con- 
venience, marriages  made  in  consideration 
of  worldly  means,  are  a  mere  earthly  ar- 
rangement, and  claim  no  particular  grace. 

Ver.  15. — Slothfulness  casteth  into  a  deep 
sleep ;  "causes  deep  sleep  to  fall  upon  a  man " 
(comp.  ch.  vi.  9;  xiii,  4).  The  word  for 
"  sleep "  (np.'jnn,  tardemah)  is  that  used  for 
the  supernatural  sleep  of  Adam  wlien  Eve 
was  formed  (Gen.  ii.  21),  and  implies  pro- 
found insensibility.  Aquila  and  Symma- 
chns  render  it,  eKirracriv,  "trance."  Sloth- 
fulness  enervates  a  mnn,  renders  him  as 
useless  for  labour  as  if  he  were  actually 
asleep  in  his  bed;  it  also  enfeebles  the  mind, 
corrupts  the  higher  faculties,  converts  a 
raticinal  being  into  a  witless  animal.  Otium 
e»t  vivi  hominis  sepuUura,  "Idleness  is  a 
living  man's  tomb."  An  idle  soul  shall 
suffer  hunger.  We  have  many  gnomes  to 
this  effect  (see  oh.  x,  4 ;  xii.  24 ;  xx.  13 ; 
xxiii.  21).  The  LXX.  has  introduced 
something  of  this  verse  at  ch,  xviii.  8,  and 
here  render,  A5t\la,  KaTe'xei  avSpSyui^ov^ 
"  Cowardice  holdeth  fast  the  effeminate, 
and  the  soul  of  the  idle  shall  hunger." 
"  Sloth,"  as  the  proverb  says,  "is  the  mother 
of  poverty." 

Ver.  16. — Keepeth  his  own  soul.  Obedi- 
ence to  God's  commandments  preserves  a 
man's  natural  and  spiritual  life  (comp.  ch. 
xiii.  13;  xvi.  17).  So  we  read  in  Eccles. 
viii.  5,  "  Whoso  keepeth  the  commandment 
(mitsvah,  as  here)  shall  feel  no  evil  thing." 
He  that  despiseth  his  ways  shall  die.  He 
that  cares  nothing  what  he  does,  whether 
his  life  pleases  God  or  not,  shall  perish. 
'ATro\iTTai,  Septuagint;  mortificahitur,  Vul- 
gate. The  result  is  understood  differently. 
The  Khetib  reads,  nnv  (iumath),  "  shall  be 
punished  with  death"  according  to  the 
penalties  enacted  in  the  Mosaic  Law.  The 
Keii  reads,  ma;  (iamuth'),  "  shall  die,"  as  in 
ch.  XV.  10;  and  this  seems  more  in  agree- 
ment with  what  wo  find  elsewhere  in  the 
book,  as  in  ch.  x.  21 ;  xxiii.  13.  This  in- 
sensate carelessness  leads  to  ruin,  whether 
its  punishment  be  undertaken  by  outraged 
law,  or  whether  it  be  left  to  tte  Divine 
retribution. 

Ver.  17. — He  that  hath  pity  upon  the 
poor   Undeth     onto    the    Lord.     English 


Chnrch-people  are  familiar  with  this  dis- 
tich, as  being  one  of  the  sentences  of  Scrip- 
ture read  at  the  Offertory.  The  word  fni 
"poor"  is  here  dal,  "feeble"  (see  on  vers. 
1  and  4).  It  is  a  beautiful  thought  that  by 
showing  mercy  and  pity  we  are,  as  it  were, 
making  God  our  debtor;  and  the  truth  is 
wonderfully  advanced  by  Christ,  who  pro- 
nounces (Malt.  XXV.  40), " Inasmuch  as  ye 
have  done  it  unto  one  of  the  least  of  these 
my  brethren,  ye  have  done  it  unto  me  "  (see 
on  ch.  xi.  24 ;  ixviii.  27).  St.  Chrysostom 
('  Horn.,'  XV.,  on  1  Cor.  v.),  "  To  the  more 
imperfect  this  is  what  we  may  say,  Give  of 
what  you  have  unto  the  needy.  Increase 
your  substmco.  For,  saith  he,  'He  that 
giveth  unto  the  poor  lendeth  unto  God.' 
But  if  you  are  in  a  hurry,  and  wait  not  for 
the  time  of  retribution,  think  of  those  who 
lend  money  to  men ;  for  not  even  these 
desire  to  get  their  interest  immediately;  but 
they  are  anxious  that  the  principal  should 
remain  a  good  long  while  in  the  hands  of 
the  borrower,  provided  only  the  repayment 
be  secure,  and  they  have  no  mistrust  of  the 
borrower.  Let  this  be  done,  then,  in  the 
present  case  also.  Leave  them  with  God, 
that  he  may  pay  thee  thy  wages  manifold. 
Seek  not  to  have  the  whole  here ;  for  if  you 
recover  it  all  here,  how  will  you  receive  it 
back  there  ?  And  it  is  on  this  account  that 
God  stores  thom  up  there,  inasmuch  as  this 
present  life  is  full  of  decay.  Uut  he  gives 
even  here  also ;  for,  '  Seek  ye,*  saith  he, '  the 
kingdom  of  heaven,  and  all  these  things 
shall  be  added  unto  you.*  Well,  then,  let 
us  look  towards  that  kingdom,  and  not  be  in 
a  hurry  for  the  repayment  of  the  whole,  lest 
we  diminish  our  recompense.  But  let  us 
wait  for  the  fit  season.  For  the  interest  in 
these  cases  is  not  of  that  kind,  but  is  such 
as  is  meet  to  be  given  by  God.  This,  then, 
having  collected  together  in  great  abun- 
dance, so  let  us  depart  hence,  that  we  may 
obtain  both  the  present  and  the  future  bless- 
ings" (Oxford  transl.).  That  which  he  hith 
given  will  he  pay  him  again;  Viciesitudi- 
nem  mam  reddet  ei,  Vulgate,  "According 
to  his  gift  will  he  recompense  him."  ^iDi 
(gemul),  "good  deed"  (ch.  xii.  14,  where  it 
is  rendered  "recompense").  Ecclus.  xxxii. 
(xxxv.)  10,  etc.,  "  Give  unto  the  Most  High 
according  as  he  hath  enriched  thee;  and  as 
thou  hast  gotten  give  with  a  cheerful  eye. 
For  the  Lord  recompeuseth,  and  will  give 
thee  seven  times  as  much."  Tliere  are 
proverbs  rife  in  other  lands  to  the  same 
effect.  The  Turk  says,  "  What  you  give  in 
charity  in  this  world  you  take  with  you  after 
death.  Do  good,  and  throw  it  into  the  sea  • 
if  the  fish  does  not  know  it,  God  does.'' 
And  the  Russian,  "Tlirow  bread  and  salt 
behind  you,  you  get  them  before  you" 
(Lane). 


OH.  xiz.  1 — 29.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


869 


Yer.  18. — Chasten  thy  Bon  while  there  ii 
hope;  or,  $eeing  thai  there  i$  hope.  Being 
still  young  and  impreBslonable,  and  not  con- 
firmed in  bad  libbits,  he  may  be  reformed 
by  judioioua  chaBtisement.  The  same  ex- 
pression occurs  in  Job  xi>  18 ;  Jen  xxxi.  16. 
"  For  80  he  shall  be  well  hoped  of"  (eBeAiriOf 
Septuagint  (comp.  ch.  xxiii.  13).  And  let 
not  thy  sonl  spare  for  his  crying.  "  It  is 
better,"  says  a  German  apothegm,  "  that  the 
child  weep  than  the  father."  But  the  render- 
ing of  the  Authorized  Version  is  not  well 
established,  and  this  second  clause  is  in- 
tended to  inculcate  moderation  in  punish- 
ment. Vulgate,  Ad  interfectionem  autem  ejits 
neponaa  animam  tuam;  Revised  Version,  Set 
not  thine  heart  on  hia  destruction.  Chastise 
him  duly^nd  sufficiently,  but  not  so  heavily 
as  to  occasion  his  death,  which  a  father  had  no 
right  to  do.  The  Law  enjoined  the  parents 
who  had  an  incorriijibly  bad  ion  to  bring 
him  before  the  judge  or  the  elders,  who 
alone  had  the  power  of  life  and  death,  and 
might  in  certain  cases  order  the  offender  to 
be  stoned  (Deut.  xxi.  18,  etc.).  Christianity 
recommended  moderation  in  punishment 
(see Bph.  vi.  4 ;  Col.  iii.  2 1).  Septuagint,  "Be 
not  excited  in  the  mind  to  despiteful  treat- 
ment (eij  t$piv) ; "  i.e.  be  not  led  away  by 
passion  to  unseemly  acts  or  words,  but  re- 
prove with  gentleness,  while  you  are  firm 
anrl  uncompromising  in  denouncing  evil. 
This  is  much  the  same  advice  as  that  given 
by  the  apostle  in  the  passages  just  cited. 

Ver.  19. — Some  connect  this  verse  with 
the  preceding,  as  though  it  signified,  "If 
you  are  too  severe  in  chastising  your  son, 
you  will  suffer  for  it."  But  there  is  no  con- 
necting particle  in  the  Hebrew,  and  the 
statement  seems  to  be  of  a  general  nature. 
A  man  of  great  wrath ;  literally,  roiigh  in 
anger;  Vulgate,  impatient;  Septuagint, 
Kaiei<^pinv  avfip.  Such  a  one  shall  snifer 
punishment;  shall  bear  the  penalty  which 
his  want  of  self-control  brings  upon  him. 
Tor  if  thou  deliver  him,  yet  must  thou  do  it 
again.  You  cannot  save  him  from  the  con- 
sequences of  hia  intemperance ;  you  may  do 
BO  once  and  again,  but  while  his  disposition 
is  unchanged,  all  your  efforts  will  be  use- 
less, and  the  help  which  you  have  given 
him  will  only  make  him  think  that  he  may 
continue  to  indulge  his  anger  with  impunity, 
or,  it  may  be,  he  will  vent  his  impatience  on 
hJB  deliverer. 

BA((irT6i  rhy  ivSpa  Ju/ifti  fls  ipy^y  vtiriiy. 

"Anger,"  says  an  adage,  "is  like  •  ruin, 
which  breaks  itself  upon  what  it  falls." 
Septuagint,  "If  he  destroy  (iciy  Si  Xoinei- 
i7ToO,  lie  shall  add  even  his  life ; "  if  by  his 
anger  he  inflict  loss  or  damage  on  his  neigh- 
bour, he  bhall  pay  for  it  in  hia  own  person  ; 
Vulgate,  Et  cum  rapuerit,  aliud  apponet, 

PBOVTBBBB. 


Another  interpretation  of  the  passage,  but 
not  BO  suitable,  is  this :  "  If  thou  seek  to  save 
the  sufferer  (e.g.  by  soothing  the  augry  man), 
tliou  wilt  only  the  more  excite  liim  (the 
wrathful) :  therefore  do  not  intermeddle  in 
■juarrels  of  other  persons." 

Ver.  20.— (Comp.  ch,  viii.  10;  xii.  Ifl.) 
The  Septuagint  directs  the  maxim  to 
children,  "  Huar,  0  son,  the  instruction  of 
thy  father."  That  thou  mayest  be  wise  in 
thy  latter  end.  Wisdom  gathered  and 
digested  in  youth  is  seen  in  tije  prudence 
and  intelligence  of  manhood  and  old  age. 
Job  viii.  7,  "Though  thy  beginning  was 
small,  yet  thy  latter  end  should  greatly  in- 
crease." Ecclua.  XXV.  6,  "  0  liow  comely  is 
the  wisdom  of  old  men,  and  understanding 
and  counsel  to  men  of  honour!  Much  ex- 
perience is  the  crown  of  old  men,  and  the 
fear  of  God  is  their  glory."  "  Wer  nicht 
horen  will,"  say  the  Germans, "  muss  fiililen," 
"He  that  will  not  hear  must  feel."  Among 
Pytliagoras's  golden  words  we  read — 
Bov\evou  5^  trph  epyov  tvcos  ju^  fxaipa  ■ntKiirai, 
"  Before  thou  doest  auglit,  deliberate, 
Lest  folly  thee  befall." 
Ver.  21. — The  immutability  of  the  counsel 
of  God  is  contrasted  with  the  shifting,  fluc- 
tuating purposes  of  man  (comp.  oh.  xvi, 
1,  9 ;  Numb,  xxiii.  19 ;  Mai.  iii.  6).  Aben 
Ezra  connects  this  verse  with  the  preceding, 
as  though  it  gave  the  reason  for  the  advice 
contained  therein.  But  it  is  most  natural  to 
take  the  maxim  in  a  general  sense,  as  above. 
Wisd.  ix.  14,  "The  thoughts  of  morif-1 
men  are  miserable,  and  our  devices  are  bu  i 
uncertain."  The  counsel  of  the  Lord,  that 
shall  stand ;  permanebit,  Vulgate ;  eh  rhv 
alana  liivei,  "  shall  abide  for  ever,"  Septua- 
gint (Ps.  XXX  iii.  11). 

Ver.  22. — The  desire  of  a  man  is  his  kind- 
ness. The  Eevised  Version  rather  para- 
phrases the  clause.  The  deaire  of  a  tnan  u 
the  measure  of  his  kindnese;  i.e.  the  wish 
and  intention  to  do  good  is  that  which 
gives  its  real  value  to  an  act.  The  word  for 
"  kindness  "  is  che'sed,  "  mercy ; "  and,  look- 
ing to  the  context,  we  see  the  meaning  of 
the  maxim  to  be  that  a  poor  man's  desire  of 
aiding  a  distressed  neighbour,  even  if  he  is 
unable  to  carry  out  his  intention,  is  taken 
for  the  act  of  mercy.  "The  desire  of  a 
man"  may  signify  a  man's  desirableness, 
that  which  makes  him  to  be  desired  or 
loved ;  this  is  found  in  his  liberality.  But  the 
former  explanation  is  most  suitable.  Septua- 
gint, "  Mercifulness  is  a  gain  unto  a  man," 
which  is  like  ver.  17 ;  Vulgate,  Homo  indigent 
misericors  est,  takinga  man's  desire  as  evidenc- 
ing his  need  and  poverty,  ami  intiodueing  the 
idea  that  the  experience  of  misery  conduces 
to  pity,  as  says  Uido  (Virgil, '  Mn.,'  i.  6S0) — 

•'  Non  ignara  mali  misoris  succurrere  disca" 

2  B 


S70 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[cH.  rix.  1—20 


A.  poor  man  ia  better  than  a  liar,  A  poor 
man  who  gives  to  one  in  diatresB  his  sym- 
pathy and  good  wishes,  even  if  he  can  afford 
no  substantial  aid,  is  better  than  a  rich  man 
who  promises  much  and  does  nothing,  or 
wlio  falsely  professes  that  he  is  unable  to 
help  (comp.  oh.  iii.  27, 28).  Septuagint,  "  A 
poor  righteous  man  is  better  than  a  rich 
liar."  A  Buddhist  maxim  says,  "Like  a 
beautiful  flower,  full  of  colours,  but  without 
scent,  are  tlie  flue  but  fruitless  words  of  him 
who  does  not  act  accordingly"  (Max  Mfiller). 

Ver.  23.— The  fear  of  the  Lord  tendeth  to 
life  (cl).  xiv.  27).  True  religion,  obedience 
to  God's  commandments,  was,  under  a  tem- 
poral dispensation,  rewarded  by  a  long  and 
happy  life  in  this  world,  an  adumbration  of 
the  blessedness  that  awaits  the  righteous  in 
the  world  to  come.  And  he  that  hath  it 
shall  abide  satisfied.  The  subject  passes 
from  "  the  fear  "  to  its  possessor.  Perhaps 
better,  and  satisfied  he  shall  pass  the  night, 
which  is  the  usual  sense  of  p'  (lun),  the 
verb  here  ti-anslated  "abide"  (so  oh. 
XV.  31).  God  will  sat'ofy  the  good  man's 
hunger,  80  that  he  layi  liim  down  in  peace 
and  takes  his  rest  (comp.  ch.  a.  3).  Vul- 
gate, In  plenitudine  commorabitur, "  He  shall 
dwell  in  abundance."  He  shall  not  be 
visited  with  evil,  according  to  the  promises 
(Lev.  xxvi,  6 :  Deut.  xi.  15,  etc.).  Under 
our  present  dispensation  Christians  expect 
not  immunity  from  care  and  trouble,  but 
have  hope  of  protection  and  grace  sufficient 
for  the  occasion,  and  conducive  to  edifica- 
tion and  advance  in  holiness.  The  LXX. 
translates  thus :  "  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is 
unto  life  for  a  man ;  but  he  that  is  without 
fear  (d  St  Hcf^o^os)  shall  sojourn  in  places 
where  knowledge  is  not  seen ; "  i.e.  shall  go 
from  bad  to  worse,  till  he  ends  in  society 
where  Divine  knowledge  is  wholly  absent, 
and  lives  without  God  in  the  world.  The 
Greek  interpreters  read  pT  (dea),  "know- 
ledge," instead  of  yT  (ra),  "evil." 

Ver.  24. — A  slothful  man  hideth  his  hand 
in  his  bosom ;  Eevised  Version,  the  sluggard 
burieth  his  hand  in  the  dish.  The  word 
tsallachath,  translated  "  bosom  "  here  and 
in  the  parallel  passage,  ch.  xxvi.  15  (where 
see  note),  is  rightly  rendered  "  dish "  (2 
Kings  xxi.  13).  At  an  Oriental  meal  the 
guests  sit  round  a  table,  on  which  is  placed  a 
dish  containing  the  food,  from  which  every 
one  helps  himself  with  his  fingers,  knivts, 
spoons,  and  forks  being  never  used  (comp. 
Uuth  ii.  14;  Matt.  xxvi.  23).  Sometimes 
the  host  himself  helps  a  guest  whom  he 
wishes  to  honour  (comp.  John  xiii.  26).  And 
will  not  so  much  as  bring  it  to  his  month 
again.  He  finds  it  too  great  an  exertion  to 
feed  himself,  an  hyperbolical  way  of  denoting 
the  grosa  laziness  which  recoils  from  the 


slightest  labour,  and  will  not  take  the  least 
trouble  to  win  its  livelihood.  An  Arabic 
proverb  says, "  He  dies  of  hunger  under  the 
date  tree."  Septuagint,  "He  who  unjustly 
hideth  his  hands  in  his  bosom  will  not  even 
apply  them  to  his  mouth  ; "  i.e.  he  who  will 
not  work  will  never  feed  himself. 

Ver.  25. — Smite  a  scomer,  and  the  simple 
will  beware ;  will  learn  prudenoe,  Revised 
Version  (comp.  ch.  xxi.  11 ;  and  see  note  on 
oh.  i.  22).  The  scorner  is  hardened  to  all 
reproof,  and  is  beyond  all  hope  of  being 
reformed  by  punishment;  in  his  case  it  ia 
retribution  for  outraged  virtue  that  is  sought 
in  the  penalty  which  he  is  made  to  pay. 
Tiliwpttt,  not  Ki\ans — ^retributive,  not  correc- 
tive punishment.  Seeing  this,  the  simple, 
who  is  not  yet  confirmed  in  evil,  and  is  still 
open  to  better  influences,  may  be  led  to 
take  warning  and  amend  his  life.  So  St. 
Paul  enjoins  Timothy,  "  Them  that  sin  re- 
buke before  all,  tiiat  others  also  may  fear  " 
(1  Tim.  V.  20).    There  is  the  trite  adage— 

"Felix  quern  faciunt  aliena  pericula  cautum." 

"  Happy  they 
Who  from  their  neighbours'  penis  caution 
learn." 

Septuagint,  "When  a  pestilent  fellow  is 
chastised,  a  fool  will  be  cleverer  (iravovpy6- 
Tepos)."  So  Vulgate,  Pestilenteflagellato  stul- 
tus  sapientior  erit.  Beprove  one  that  hath 
understanding,  and  he  will  understand 
knowledge.  The  scorner  does  not  profit 
by  severe  punishment,  but  the  intelligent 
man  is  improved  by  censure  and  admonition 
(comp.  ch.  xiii.  1 ;  xv.  12).  Says  the  adage, 
"  Sapientem  nutu,  stultum  fuste  (coriipe)," 
"  A  nod  for  the  wise,  a  stick  for  the  fool." 

Ver.  26— ch.  xxii.  16.— Fourth  secticn  of 
this  collection. 

Ver.  26. — He  that  wasteth  his  father. 
The  verb  shadad,  used  here  and  in  ch.  xxiv. 
15,  may  be  taken  in  the  sense  of  "  to  spoil," 
"  to  deprive  of  property ; "  but  it  is  better 
to  adopt  a  more  general  application,  and  to 
assign  to  it  the  meaning  of  "  to  maltreat," 
whether  in  person  or  property.  Chaseth 
away  his  mother;  by  his  shameless  and 
evil  life  makes  it  impossible  for  her  to  con- 
tinue under  the  same  roof  with  him;  or, 
it  may  be,  so  dissipates  his  parents'  means 
thnt  they  are  driven  from  their  home.  A 
son  that  canseth  shame,  and  bringeth  re- 
proach (comp.  ch.  z.  5 ;  xiii.  5 ;  xvii.  2). 

Ver.  27. — Cease,  my  son,  to  hear  the  in- 
struction that  causeth  to  err  from  the  words 
of  knowledge.  This  version  fairly  repre- 
sents the  terse  original,  if  musar,  "  instruc- 
tion," be  taken  in  a  bad  sense,  like  the 
"  profane  and  vain  babblings  and  opposi- 
tions of  the  knowledge  which  is  falsely  so 
called,"  censured  by  St.  Paul  (1  Tim.  vi.  20^ 


«H.  XIX.  1 — 29.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


871 


But  as  musar  is  used  in  a  good  sense 
throughout  tliis  book,  it  is  better  to  regard 
the  injunction  as  warning  against  listening 
to  wise  teaching  with  no  intentioil  of  profit- 
ing by  it:  "Cease  to  hear  instruction  in 
onlcr  to  err,"  etc. ;  i.e.  if  you  are  only  going 
to  continue  your  evil-doings.  You  will  only 
increase  your  guilt  by  knowing  the  way  of 
righteousness  perfectly,  while  you  refuse  to 
walk  therein.  The  Vulgate  inserts  a  nega- 
tion, "  Cease  not  to  hear  doctrine,  and  be 
not  ignorant  of  the  words  of  knowledge  ; " 
Septuagint,  "  A  son  who  fails  to  keep  the 
instruction  of  his  father  will  meditate  evil 
sayings."  Solomon's  son  Eehoboam  greatly 
needed  the  admonition  contained  in  this 
verse. 

Ver.  28. — An  ungodly  (worthlesB)  witness 
soorneth  judgment ;  derides  the  Law  which 
denounces  perjury  and  compels  a  witness  to 
speak  truth  (Exod.  xx.  16;  Lev.  v.  1),  and, 
as  is  implied,  he  bears  false  testimony,  thus 
proving  himself  "  a  witui  bs  of  Belial,"  ac- 
cording to  the  Hebrew  term.  Septuagint, 
"He  who  becometh  security  for  a  foolish 
child  outrages  judgment."  The  mouth  of 
the  wicked  devoureth  iniquity;  swallows  it 
eagerly  as  a  toothsome  morsel  (ch.  xviii.  8). 


So  we  have  in  Job  xv.  16, "  A  man  that 
drinketh  iniquity  like  water "  (see  on  ch. 
xxvi.  6).  Such  a  man  will  lie  and  slander 
with  the  utmost  pleasure,  living  and  batten- 
ing on  wickedness.  Septuagint, "  The  mouth 
ofthe  impious  drinketh  judgment3(Kp((r«ii)," 
i.e.  boldly  transgresses  the  Law. 

Ver.  29. — Judgments  are  prepared  for 
Boomers  (see  on  ver.  25).  The  judgments 
here  are  those  inflicted  by  the  providence 
of  God,  as  in  ch.  iii.  34.  Scorners  may 
deride  and  affect  to  scorn  the  judgments  of 
God  and  man,  but  they  are  warned  that 
retribution  awaits  them.  And  stripes  for  the 
back  of  fools ;  Vulgate,  Et  mallei  percu- 
tientes  atultorum  eorporibus  (oorap.  ch.  x.  13; 
xxvi.  3).  We  had  the  word  here  rendered 
"stripes"  (rniyhiTO,  malialumoth)  in  ch. 
xviii.  6.  The  certainty  of  punishment  in 
the  case  of  transgrcsaors  is  a  truth  often  in- 
sisted on  even  by  heathens.  ,  Examples  will 
occur  to  all  readers,  from  the  old  Grgek 
oracle,  OySeis  ai/Qpc^trtov  h^iKuv  rlfftv  ouk 
diroTi'o-ei,  to  Horace's  "  Earo  antecedentem 
scelestum,"  etc.  (See  on  oh.  xx.  30,  where, 
however,  the  punishment  is  of  human  in- 
fliction.) 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  1. — Poverty  and  integrity.  L  It  is  possible  for  poverty  to  be  found  with 
INTEOBITT.  We  do  not  always  see  integrity  leading  to  wealth.  Circumstance*  may 
not;  open  up  an  opportunity  for  attaining  worldly  prosperity.  Illicit  "  short  cuts  "  to 
riches  may  be  within  the  reach  of  a  person  who  refuses  to  use  them  on  grounds  of 
principle.  A  man  may  be  honest  and  yet  incapable,  or  he  may  refuse  to  pursue  his 
own  advantage,  preferring  to  devote  his  energies  to  some  higher  end.  No  one  has 
a  right  to  suppose  that  God  will  interfere  to  heap  up  riches  for  him  on  account  of  his 
ntegrity.     He  may  be  upright,  and  yet  it  may  please  God  that  he  shall  also  be  poor. 

II.  It  IS  POSSIBLE   FOE   INTEOKITY  TO   BE   FOUND  WITH   POVERTY.      We  nOW  approach 

the  subject  from  the  opposite  side.  Here  we  first  see  the  poverty,  and  we  then  find 
that  there  is  no  reason  why  the  character  should  be  low  because  the  outside  circum- 
stances are  reduced.  There  is  no  more  vulgar  or  -false  snobbishness  than  that  which 
treats  poverty  as  a  vice,  and  assumes  that  a  shady  character  must  be  expected  with 
shabby  olothfS.  We  sometimes  hear  the  expression,  "  Poor  but  honest,"  as  though 
there  were  any  natural  antithesis  between  the  two  adjectives!  It  would  be  quite  as 
just  to  think  of  an  antithesis  between  wealth  and  uprightness.  But  experience  shows 
that  no  one  section  of  society  holds  a  monopoly  of  virtue. 

III.  When  integrity  and  poverty  are  found  together,  the  one  is  a  consolatiom 
FOB  the  other.  It  may  be  said  that  a  hungry  man  cannot  feed  upon  his  honesty. 
But  when  pressing  wants  are  supplied,  it  is  possible  to  endure  a  considerable  amount 
of  hardship  if  a  person  is  conscious  of  being  upright  and  true.  The  sturdy  inde- 
pendence of  the  honest  man  will  lift  him  out  of  the  sliame  of  penury.  If  he  feels  that 
he  is  walking  in  the  path  of  duty,  he  will  have  a  source  of  strength  and  inward  peace 
that,  no  wealth  can  bestow.     The  gold  of  goodness  is  better  than  the  guineas  of  hoarded 

wealth. 

IV.  Integrity  with  any  external  disadvantages  is  better  than  coerctption 
OF  character  with  all  possible  worldly  profit.  Here  is  the  point  of  the  subject. 
It  is  not  affirmed  that  poverty  is  good  in  itself— the  natural  instincts  of  man  lead  him 
to  endeavour  to  escape  from  it  as  an  evil.    It  is  not  even  asserted  that  it  is  right  (gr 


372  THE  PBOVEKBS.  [oh.  xix.  1—29 

upright  men  to  l)e  poof,  for  surely  one  would  desire  that  the  power  of  wealth  should 
be  in  the  hands  of  those  people  who  would  use  it  most  justly.  But  when  we  have  to 
compare  integrity  joined  to  the  disadvantages  of  poverty  with  an  uiiWorthy  oharactef 
in  no  matter  what  circumstances,  the  infinite  superiority  of  moral  to  raateiial  worth 
should  lead  us  to  prefer  the  former.  In  higher  regions,  the  Christian  character  is  itself 
a  source  of  blessedness,  whatever  he  the  condition  of  the  outer  life.  Character  and 
conduct  are  the  easeatials  of  life  ;  all  other  things  are  but  the  accidents. 

"Ver.  3. — Fretting  against  the  Lord.  This  is  a  condition  of  inward  rebellion,  or  at 
best  «f  grieving  over  the  will  of  God  instead  of  submittiug  to  it  in  silence  if  it  is  not 
yet  within  our  power  to  embrace  it  with  affection.  Consider  this  condition  in  its 
various  relations. 

I.  It  IB  POSSIBLE.  It  might  be  supposed  that,  however  one  fretted  against  his 
cifCijmstances,  he  would  not  carry  his  complainings  back  to  God.  But  Moses  told  the 
Israelites  that  when  they  murmured  against  him  they  were  really  mnimuring  against 
God  (Bxod.  xvi.  8).  If  we  resist  God's  ordinances  we  resist  God  himself.  He  who 
fires  on  the  meanest  sentry  is  really  making  war  on  that  sentry's  sovereign.  We  may 
not  intend  to  act  the  proud  part  of  Milton's  Satan,  and  wage  war  against  Heaven. 
OTert  blasphemy  and  rank  rebellion  may  be  far  from  our  thoughts.  Yet  complaints 
of  our  lot  and  resistance  to  Providence  have  the  same  essential  character.  We  may 
even  try  to  confine  our  rebellious  thoughts  to  ourown  breasts,  and  simply  fret  inwardly. 
But  to  God,  who  reads  hearts  and  dwells  within,  this  is  real  opposition. 

II.  It  springs  fkom  various  souboes.  1.  Trouble.  It  is  easy  for  Dives  to  talk 
of  submission  to  Providence ;  the  difficulty  is  with  Lazarus.  Job  in  prosperity  offers 
glad  sacrifices  without  constraint :  will  Job  in  adversity  "  curse  God  and  die  "  ?  2. 
Self-vjill.  We  naturally  desire  to  follow  the  way  of  our  own  choice,  and  when  that 
is  crossed  by  God's  will  we  are  tempted  to  fret,  as  the  stream  frets  itself  against  an 
obstruction,  though  it  m»y  have  been  flowing  sihntly  and  placidly  so  long  as  it  had  a 
free  course.  It  is  just  this  crossing  of  wills  that  is  the  test  of  obedience,  which  is  easy 
sq  long  as  we  are  required  only  to  follow  the  path  of  our  own  inclinations.  But  that 
cannot  be  always  allowed.  3.  Sin.  Direct  sinfulness  resists  God's  will  of  Set  purpose, 
just  because  it  Is  his  will.     The  evil  heart  will  fret  against  God  in  all  things. 

III.  It  is  foolish.  "The  foolishness  of  man"  is  at  the  root  of  this  mistake. 
1.  We  do  nut  know  what  is  best.  It  is  but  foolish  for  the  fractious  child  to  fret  against 
ids  father's  cominands,  for  he  is  not  yet  able  to  judge  as  his  father  judges.  All 
rebellion  against  God  implies  that  the  soul  is  in  a  position  to  determine  questions  that 
lie  iu  the  dark,  and  which  only  he  who  is  resisted  can  answer.  2.  We  cannot  succeed,  in 
rebellion.  The  poor  heart  that  frets  itself  against  God  can  but  we.ir  itself  out,  like  the 
wave  that  breaks  on  the  rock  it  can  never  shake.  How  foolish  to  raise  our  will  in 
opposition  to  the  Almighty  1 

IV.  It  IS  CULPABLE.  We  must  never  forget  that  "  foolishness  "  in  the  Bible  stands 
for  a  defect  that  is  more  moral  than  intellectual.  It  is  next  door  to  perversity.  This 
fretting  of  the  heart  against  the  Lord  is  foolish  in  the  biblical  sense ;  it  is  sinful. 
1.  He  ii  ov/r  Master.  It  is  our  duty  to  obey  him,  whether  we  like  it  or  not.  When 
we  resist  ordinances  of  man  we  may  be  fighting  for  rights  of  liberty.  But  we  have  no 
liberty  to  claim  against  the  Lord  of  all.  2.  Be  is  our  Fatfter.  This  murmuring 
against  him  is  a  sign  of  domestic  ingratitude.  Impatience  under  the  rod  is  even  sinful, 
for  We  know  that  it  can  only  smite  in  love. 

v.  It  is  danqeeoub.    1.  It  means  present  unrest.    There  is  peace  of  soul  in  sub- 


that  sweeps  the  mountain-path,  and  carries  all  on  it  to  an  awful  death, 


Ver.  11. — Deferred  anger.  I.  Dbkbrbed  angbb  is  saved  prom  patal  eRkoe. 
"  Anger,"  says  the  familiar  Latin  proverb,  "  is  a  short  madness."  While  it  lasts  a 
man  loses  full  control  of  himself.  Then  he  utters  strong,  hot  words  without  weighing 
the  meaning  of  them  or  considering  how  thoy  may  strike  their  object.  He  is 
tempted  to  nit  out  wildly,  and  to  do  far  more  mischief  than  h*  would  ever  approve  of  in 


H.  iix.  1— 29.]  THE  PEOVBBBSw  373 

calmer  TOoments,  The  words  and  deeds  vf  anger  are  but  momentary  ;  yet  their  fatal 
effects  are  irrevocable.  These  effects  endure  and  work  harm  long  afler  the  fierce  flame 
of  passion  out  of  which  they  sprang  has  died  down  into  grey  ashes  of  remorse. 
Inasmuxsli  aci  it  is  not  possible  to  reason  calmly  when  under  a  fit  of  anger,  the  only  safe 
expedient  is  to  hold  back  and  wait  for  a  more  suitable  occasion  of  speaking  and  acting. 
IL  Defebbed  angeb  will  most  probably  btjbn  itself  out.    Anger  is  like 

"  A  full-hot  horee,  who,  being  allow'd  his  way, 
Self-mettle  tires  him." 

(Bhakespeaie.) 

It  is  of  the  nature  of  anger  to  be  more  fierce  than  the  occasion  demands.  Therefor* 
it  is  to  be  expected  that  time  for  reflection  will  moderate  it.  Now,  if  it  is  modified  by 
time,  its  earlier  excess  is  demonstrated,  and  it  is  made  evident  that  delay  saved  us 
from  disaster.  For  it  is  not  simply  the  case  that  we  tire  of  anger,  that  we  have  not 
energy  enough  to  be  perpetually  angry,  that  well-earned  wrath  expires  of  its  own 
feebleness.  The  fact  is  we  are  all  tempted  to  show  needless  anger  against  those  who 
in  any  way  injure  us.  Time  may  reveal  unexpected  excuses  for  their  coniiuct,  or  lead 
us  to  see  the  better  way  of  forgiveness.  We  do  but  need  an  oppoituiii  y  to  go  into  our 
chamber,  and  shut  to  the  door,  and  pray  to  our  Falher  in  secret,  lo  (lisouvcr  how  wrong 
and  foolish  and  dangerous  our  hasty  wrath  was,  and  to  learn  the  uisJum  of  meekness 
and  patience. 

III.  Dbfebkbd  anger  mat  yet  be  bxbboisbd.  There  are  circumstances  under 
which  we  should  do  well  to  be  angry ;  for,  as  Thomas  Fuller  says, "  Anger  is  one  of  the 
sinews  of  the  soul."  Christ  was  "moved  with  indignation"  when  his  disciples  forbad 
the  mothers  of  Israel  to  bring  their  children  to  him  (Mark  x.  14),  and  he  showed 
great  anger  against  the  hypocrisy  of  the  Pharisees.  It  is  not  right  that  we  should 
witness  cruel  injustice  and  oppression  with  equanimity.  It  may  reveal  a  culpable 
weakness,  cowardice,  or  selfishness  in  us  for  sights  of  wrong-doing  not  to  move  us  to 
anger.  But  such  anger  as  is  earned  and  needed  by  justice  can  bear  to  be  reflected  on. 
Even  with  this  justifiable  wrath  haste  may  lead  to  disaster.  Thus  the  violent  explosion 
of  popular  indignation  that  follows  the  discovery  of  some  foul  crime  or  some  grievous 
wrong  is  in  great  danger  of  falling  into  fatal  blunders;  sometimes  it  makes  a  victim 
of  an  innocent  person,  simply  for  want  of  consideration.  There  is  no  excuse  for 
"  lynch  law."  "  The  courts  are  open,"  and  calm  investigation  and  orderly  methods 
will  not  lessen  the  equity  of  the  punishment  they  deliberately  bring  on  an  offender. 
Justice  is  not  to  behave  like  a  ravenous  beast  raging  for  its  prey.  There  is  room  for 
calmness  and  reflection  in  connection  with  those  great  waves  of  popular  indignation 
that  periodically  sweep  over  the  surface  of  society.  When  the  anger  has  been  wisely 
deferred,  and  yet  has  been  ultimately  justified,  its  outburst  is  the  more  terrible  ;  it  is 
the  flowing  out  of  wrath  "treasured  up  against  the  day  of  wiath."    Dryden  says — 

"  Beware  the  fury  of  a  patient  man." 

Vei.  16. — Smil-keeping.  The  "Power  that  makes  for  righteousness,"  though  not 
impersonal,  as  Mr.  Matthew  Arnold  assumed,  is  nevertheless  active  as  by  a  oonstaut 
law.  It  is  so  ordered  in  nature  and  providence  that  goodness  preserves  life,  and  badness 
tends  to  ruin  and  death.     Lot  us  endeavour  to  see  how  the  process  is  worked  out. 

I.  The  flBBAT  result  of  riqhtbousness  is  soul-keewno.  1.  It  may  not  ha  wealth. 
We  cannot  assume  that  goodness  tends  to  riches.  Keeping  the  commandments  does  not 
always  result  in  a  man's  making  his  fortune.  Christ  was  a  poor  man.  2.  It  may  not 
he  earthly  happinesf.  Other  things  being  equal,  a  clear  conscience  should  bring  peace 
and  inward  joy.  But  there  are  troubles  that  fall  upon  us  independently  of  our  conduct. 
There  are  distresses  that  come  directly  from  doing  right.  Christ  was  a  "  Man  of 
sorrows."  3.  It  may  not  he  long  life  on  earth.  No  doubt  this  was  expected  in  Old 
Testament  times,  for  then  but  dim  notions  of  any  existence  beyond  the  grave  ever 
entered  the  minds  of  men.  On  the  whole,  no  doubt,  goodness  tends  to  health  of  body 
and  mind.  Still,  very  good  people  may  die  young.  Christ  died  at  thirty-three  years 
of  age,  4.  It  will  be  the  real  preservation  of  the  soul.  The  true  life  will  be  safe.  The 
•elf  will  abide.  Now,  all  our  being  really  resides  in  our  personal  self.  If  this  continues 
ha  safety,  we  hare  the  highest  personal  security,    iiut  if  not,  all  other  gain  is  but  « 


motkery  ;  for  "  what  is  a  man  profited  if  he  should  gain  the  whole  world,  and  lose  hii 
own  soul — his  life,  himself?"  (Matt.  xvi.  26). 

II.  ElQHTBOUSNBSS  LEADS   TO   SOUL-KEEPINa   BT  NATURAL   LAWS.      It  iS  ft  matter  of 

Divine  ordering  that  obedience  should  be  followed  by  life,  disobedience  by  death. 
This  was  seen  in  the  trial  of  Adam  (Gen.  iii.  3).  It  lies  at  the  root  of  the  great 
sanctions  of  the  Mosaic  Law  (Ezek.  iii.  18).  He  who  gave  the  commandments  also 
gives  life.  Our  life  is  in  the  hand  of  our  Lawgiver.  It  is  in  his  power  to  withhold  the 
life  if  we  break  the  law.  But  we  may  look  more  closely  into  this  process.  God's 
commandments  are  not  arbitrary.  They  follow  the  natural  lines  of  spiritual  health. 
His  prohibitions  are  really  the  warnings  against  the  course  that  leads  naturally  and 
inevitably  to  death.  Goodness  is  itself  vitality,  and  badness  has  a  deadening  effect  on 
the  soul.  The  faculties  are  quickened  by  use  in  the  service  of  what  is  right,  and  they 
are  dwarfed,  perverted,  paralyzed,  and  finally  killed  by  reckless,  lawless  conduct.  The 
profligate  is  a  suicide. 

III.  OhBISTIANITT  helps  08  TO  TRUE  SOtJL-KBEPINO  BY  LEADING  US  TO  RIGHTEOUS- 
NESS. We  find  ourselves  in  the  unhappy  condition  of  those  who  have  not  kept  the 
commandments.  Therefore  we  are  in  danger  of  death.  We  have  "despised  our 
ways."  The  law  and  the  promise  are  not  addressed  to  us  as  to  new  beings ;  but  they 
meet  us  in  our  sin  and  on  our  road  to  ruin.  Therefore,  if  there  were  no  gospel,  there 
would  be  no  hope.  Hence  the  need  of  a  Saviour.  But  when  we  enter  the  realm  of 
Christian  truth  we  cannot  turn  our  backs  on  the  principles  of  the  older  economy.  We 
cannot  regard  them  as  the  laws  of  another  planet,  out  of  the  reach  of  which  we  have 
escaped.  They  are  eternal  truths,  and  we  are  still  within  their  range.  Christ  helps 
us,  not  by  teaching  us  to  despise  moral  considerations  as  though  they  were  irrelevant 
to  those  who  had  entered  into  the  covenant  of  grace,  but  by  giving  us  his  own 
righteousness  to  be  in  us  as  well  as  on  us.  He  puts  us  in  the  way  of  obedience,  while 
he  cancels  the  consequences  of  the  old  disobedience.  Thus  he  saves  our  souls  by 
helping  us  to  preserve  them  in  a  new  fidelity  to  the  ancient,  eternal  right. 

Ver.  17. — Lending  unto  the  Lord.  I.  In  vthat  lending  to  the  Lord  consists. 
It  is  having  pity  upon  the  poor.  This  is  more  than  almsgiving.  Doles  of  charity  may 
be  given  to  the  needy  from  very  mixed  motives.  Inasmuch  as  "  the  Lord  looketh  at 
the  heart,"  the  thoughts  and  feelings  that  prompt  our  charity  are  of  primary  impor- 
tance with  him.  In  the  same  way,  also,  sympathy  is  prized  by  our  suffering  brethren 
on  its  own  account,  and  the  gifts  that  are  flung  from  an  unfeeling  hand  bring  little 
comfort  to  the  miserable.  Therefore,  both  for  God's  sake  and  for  the  sake  of  our 
suffering  brethren,  the  first  requirement  is  to  cultivate  a  spirit  of  sympathy  with  the 
helpless.  When  this  spirit  is  attained,  the  application  of  practical  remedies  will  require 
thought.  It  is  easy  to  toss  a  sixpence  to  a  beggar,  but  the  inconsiderate  act  may  work 
more  ha.rm  than  good.  True  sympathy  will  lead  us  to  inquire  into  the  unfortunate 
man's  circumstances,  and  to  see  whether  there  may  not  be  some  wiser  way  of  helping 
him.  This  is  one  of  the  most  pressing  problems  of  our  complicated  condition  of 
society.  It  is  not  so  easy  to  be  wisely  helpful  to  the  poor  as  it  was  in  the  simpler 
circumstances  of  ancient  times.  A  true  Christian  sympathy  must  lead  us  to  study 
the  deep,  dark  problem  of  poverty.  How  can  the  lowest  classes  be  permanently 
raised?    How  can  they  be  really  saved  ?    How  can  we  help  people  to  help  themselves  ' 

n.  How  this  comes  to  be  lending  to  the  Lord.  In  the  olden  times  people 
thought  to  offer  to  God  in  material,  visible  sacrifices  by  slaying  animals  on  the  altar. 
Now  money  and  service  given  to  a  Christian  Church  and  to  directly  missionary 
agencies  for  spreading  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  and  so  jilorifying  God,  are  regarded  as 
devoted  to  God.  Thus  we  are  to  see  that  we  can  serve  him  by  ministering  directly  to 
the  well-being  of  our  fellow-men.  1.  Men  are  God's  children.  He  who  helps  the 
cbild_  pleases  the  father.  2.  God  has  pity  op.  the  suffering.  Therefore  for  us  to  have 
pity  IS  to  be  like  God,  and  so  to  please  him;  it  is  to  do'his  will,  to  do  the  thing  he 
would  have  us  do,  and  so  to  render  him  service.  3.  This  is  within  our  reach.  The 
difficulty  is  to  see  how  we  can  do  anything  to  help  the  Almighty,  or  give  anything 
to  enrich  the  Owner  of  all  things.  The  cattle  upon  a  thousand  hills  are  bis.  But  the 
poor  we  have  always  with  us.  Inasmuch  as  we  do  a  kindness  to  one  of  the  least  of 
these,  Christ's  brethren,  we  do  it  unto  him  (Matt.  ixv.  40).    All  real  love  to  man  is 


6U.tix  1— 2d.J  THE  PEOYERBS.  d?5 

also  love  to  God.  The  noblest  liturgy  is  the  ministry  of  human  chaiity.  "  Pure 
religion  and  uuilefiled  befure  God  and  the  Father  is  this,  to  visit  the  latherless  and 
widows  in  their  affliction,  and  to  keep  himself  unspotted  from  the  world"  (Jas.  i.  27). 

III.  Why  this  ib  only  lending  to  the  Lokd.  It  is  returned  to  the  giver.  Such 
a  thought  seems  to  lower  the  tone  of  the  subject.  To  give,  hoping  for  no  return,  is 
Christ's  method,  and  this  lifts  us  to  a  higher  level.  Love  asks  for  no  payment.  The 
pity  that  calculates  its  recompense  is  a  false  and  selfish  sentiment.  Assuredly  we 
must  learn  to  love  for  love's  sake,  and  to  pity  because  we  are  moved  with  compassion, 
irrespective  of  returns.  1.  Yet  the  fact  that  there  is  a  return  remains.  It  may  be 
well  for  selfish  men  who  refrain  from  showing  sympathy  for  the  needy  to  reflect  on 
this.  .Their  selfishness  is  short-sijihted.  2.  ITie  return  is  spiritual.  We  are  not  to 
look  for  our  money  back  again.  That  would  involve  no  real  giving.  The  leturn  is 
different  in  kind.  It  is  of  a  higher  character,  and  comes  in  peace  of  soul,  in  enlaige- 
meut  of  affection,  in  the  satisfaction  of  seeing  good  results  flowing  from  our  sympathy. 

Ver.  18. — Timely  chastisement.  I.  Chastisement  bhould  be  timely.  "  Preven- 
tion is  better  than  cure."  If  we  wait  till  the  weeds  run  to  sued  it  is  in  vain  fur  us  to 
pull  them  up — they  will  have  sown  another  and  larger  crop.  The  lion's  cub  may  be 
caught  and  caged ;  the  full-grown  beast  is  dangerous  to  approach,  and  out  of  our 
power.  Consider  some  practical  applications  of  these  truths.  1.  They  show  us  the 
importance  of  early  home-training.  The  first  seeds  are  sown  at  home.  If  an  evil 
disposition  reveals  itself  there,  it  should  be  checked  before  it  develops  into  a  fatal 
habit.  Foolishly  fond  parents  laugh  at  exhibitions  of  bad  temper  and  other  faults  in 
very  young  children,  amused  at  the  quaintness  and  pitying  the  helplessness  of  these 
miniature  sins.  But  surely  a  wiser  cour.se  would  be  to  nip  the  evil  in  the  bud.  2. 
They  enhance  the  value  of  Sunday  school  work.  Five  million  children  were  under 
Sunday  school  teaching  in  England  during  the  year  1888.  The  great  mass  of  the 
population  passes  through  this  instruction.  Surely  more  should  be  made  of  the  golden 
opportunity  thus  afforded  of  giving  a  right  course  to  the  lives  of  the  people.  Most 
working  men  will  not  go  to  church.  But  they  will  permit  their  children  to  attend 
Sunday  school.  We  have  the  working  classes  with  us  in  their  childhood.  3.  They 
point  to  an  enlargement  of  the  agency  of  industrial  schools.  Already  juvenile  crime  has 
been  reduced  by  one-half — this  is  one  of  the  most  cheering  signs  of  the  times.  But 
still  there  are  multitudes  of  children  who  breathe  an  atmosphere  of  crime  from  their 
cradles.  There  is  no  more  Christian  work  than  the  effort  to  save  these  victims  of  the 
vices  of  their  parents.  The  juvenile  offender  should  be  an  object  of  peculiar  solicitude 
to  one  who  has  the  well-being  of  society  at  heart. 

II.  Chastisement  should  be  hopeful.  There  is  hope  for  all  in  their  youth.  We 
may  not  be  able  to  recover  the  degraded,  besotted  wrecks  of  humanity  in  their  more 
advanced  years.  But  the  children  are  amenable  to  saving  influences,  and  the  treat- 
ment of  them  should  be  inspired  with  a  belief  that  they  may  be  trained.  Directly 
«ny  parent  or  teacher  despairs  of  a  child  he  proves  himself  no  longer  competent  to 
dave  the  charge  of  him.  Reading  the  second  clause  of  the  verse  in  the  language  of 
the  Revisers,  we  are  warned  against  vindictive  chastisement :  "  And  set  not  thy  heart 
on  kis  destruction."  The  old  notion  of  punishment  was  purely  retributive ;  the  newer 
notion  of  it  is  more  disciplinary.  We  want  fewer  prisons  and  more  reformatories. 
But  for  encouragement  in  such  efforts  we  must  have  grounds  of  hope.  Observe  some 
of  these.  1.  Z%e  elasticity  of  youth.  The  young  are  capable  of  great  changes  and  of 
large  development.  2.  The  Divine  direction.  The  providence  of  God  overruling  our 
attempts  at  correction  is  needed  to  bring  them  to  a  successful  issue.  But  we  have  a  right 
to  look  for  this  end,  for  God  desires  the  salvation  and  recovery  of  his  children.  3.  The 
power  of  love.  We  can  never  correct  to  good  purpose  unless  we  do  so  from  motives  of 
love.  When  these  motives  are  felt  they  cannot  but  make  themselves  effective  in  the 
end.  Then,  though  the  chastisement  may  have  been  resented  at  first,  the  good  piu-pose 
that  instigated  it  will  be  ultimately  recognized,  and  may  rous*  the  better  nature  o( 
the  wrong-doer. 


376  THE  PROVERBS.  [oh.  inc.  1—29. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 7. — Z%e  lowly  and  gentle  life.  He  who  is  truly  humble  before  his  God  wiL 
be  Bweet,  kind,  and  peaceable  io  his  relations  to  men. 

I.  The  attributes  of  this  life.  (Vers.  1 — 3.)  1.  It  is  the  life  of  innocence,  in 
the  seeking  to  have  a  conscience  "  void  of  ofl'ence  toward  God  and  toward  men."  This 
makes  poverty  rich  and  privation  blessed,  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  for  suQh.  The 
copsciousness  of  being  dear  to  God  is  the  true  wealth  of  the  sonl ;  the  sense  of  being 
alienated  from  him  darkens  and  distresses  even  amidst  wealth  and  luxury.  In  additir^n 
to  this,  let  us  recollect  the  paradox  of  the  apnstle,  "  Poor,  yet  making  many  rich."  It 
is  such  lives  that  have  indeed  enriched  the  world.  2.  It  is  the  life  of  thought/ulneis. 
3.  It  is  the  life  of  content. 

II.  Its  tbials  and  consolations.  1.  It  often  incurs  the  coldness  of  the  world 
(ver.  4).  A  man  who  goes  d.own  in  the  scale  of  wealth  finds,  in  the  same  degree,  the 
circle  of  ordinary  acquaintances  shrink.  2.  But  there  is  consolation^— a  sweetness  even 
in  the  heart  of  this  bitter  experience,  for  the  soul  is  thrown  the  more  entirely  upon 
God.  When  friends,  when  even  father  and  mother  forsake,  the  Lord  takes  up.  Deus 
mens  et  omnia !  We  are  naturally  prone  to  rely  more  upon  man  than  upon  God  ;  and 
have  to  rewrite  upon  our  memories  the  old  biblical  maxim,  "  Put  not  your  trust  in 
man."  Poverty  may  separate  us  from  so-called  friends,  but  "  who  shall  se^iarate  us 
from  the  love  of  Christ  ?  " 

III.  The  BBPni;SivE  contrast  to  this  life.  A  victim  of  vice  and  moral  poverty 
amidst  outward  wealth.  1.  Folly  and  untruth.  (Ver.  1.)  The  wdrds  and  the  thoughts 
are  interchangeable.  The  godless,  selfish  rich  mafi's  life  is  a  livi7ig  lie.  The  outward 
parts  of  Dives  and  l.azarus  are  in  the  sight  of  Heaven  reversed.  2.  Thoughtless  rash- 
ness. (Ver.  2.)  The  "  making  haste  to  be  rich,"  so  strong  a  passion  of  our  day,  may  be 
chiefly  thought  of.  But  any  excessive  eagerness  of  ambitious  desire,  or  sensual  pleasure 
which  blinds  the  soul  to  thought,  and  indisposes  for  serious  reflection,  comes  under 
this  head.  But  the  unreflective  life  is  neither  safe  nor  happy.  It  is  to  such  thought- 
less ones  the  solemn  warning  comes,  "Thou  fnol !  thy  so^d  shall  be  n quired  of  thee." 
3.  Murmuring  discontent.  (Ver.  3.)  The  source  of  the  vicious  kind  of  discontent  ia 
a  conscience  at  wiir  with  itself,  and  perversely  mistaking  the  true  nature  of  the  satis- 
faction it  needs.  The  "  Divine  discontent"  which  springs  from  the  sense  of  our  inward 
poverty  carries  in  it  the  seed  of  its  own  satisfaction.  It  is  the  blessed  hunger  and 
thirst  which  shall  be  fed.  4.  False  social  relations.  (Ver.  4.)  Of  the  friends  made 
by  riches  it  is  true  that  "  riches  harm  them,  not  the  man  "  (liishop  Hall).  And  the 
great  man  lives  amidst  illusions;  and,  in  moments  of  insiglit,  doubts  whether  among 
the  obsequious  crowd  there  be  a  heart  he  can  claim  as  his  own.  In  such  an  atmosphere, 
false  witness  and  lies,  in  all  their  forms  of  scandal,  slander,  destruction,  spring  up 
(ver.  5).  It  is  a  hollow  life,  and  the  fires  of  judgment  murmur  beneath  it.  Yet  the 
fulsome  flattery  which  rises  like  a  cloud  of  incense  before  the  rich  man,  and  the  throng 
of  easily  bought  "friends,"  still  hide  from  him  the  true  state  of  the  case.  Well  may 
Divine  Wisdom  warn  of  the  difficulty  which  attends  the  rich  man's  entrance  into  the 
kingdom.  Heie  there  are  great  lessons  on  compensation.  God  hath  set  the  one  thing 
over  against  the  other,  to  the  end  that  we  should  seek  nothing  after  him  (Eocles.  vij.  14)T 
The  gentle  and  humble  poor  may  convert  their  poverty  into  the  fine  gold  of  the  spirit ; 
while  the  rich  man  too  dearly  buys  "position  "  at  the  expense  of  the  soul. — J. 

Vers.  8 — 17. — Maxims  of  intelligence.  I.  The  worth  of  intellioencb.  1,  Tt  is 
self-conservative  (ver.  8).  We  all  love  our  own  soul  or  life  in  any  healthy  state  of  body 
and  mind.  We  all  want  to  live  as  long  as  possible.  It  is  natural  to  desire  to  live  again 
beyond  the  grave.  Then  let  us  understand  that  there  is  no  way  to  these  ends  except 
that  of  intelligence,  in  the  highest  and  in  every  sense.  2.  It  ip  the  source  of  happiness. 
(Ver.  8.)  The  truth  is  very  general  and  abstract,  like  ths'truth  of  the  whole  of  these 
proverbs.  It  does  not  amount  to  this — that  good  sense  will  in  every  case  procurt 
happiness,  but  that  there  is  no  true  happiness  without  it. 

II.  Some  maxims  of  intelligence.  1.  The  sorrow  that  falsehood  brings.  (Ver.  9.) 
It  il  certain.     M»ny  a  lie  is  not  immediately  found  out  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  theM 


OH.  xa..  1--29.]  THE   PROVERBS.  377 

words;,  but  it  is  always  found  in  the  mail's  mind.  It  vitiates  the  intelligence,  under- 
mines tlie  moral  strength.  The  rest  must  follow  in  its  time — iomewhere,  somehow. 
2.  Vanity  stands  in  its  own  light.  (Ver.  10.)  Those  who  have  given  way  to  over- 
weening self-esteem  and  arrogance  of  temper — like  Eehoboam,  or  like  Alexander  the 
Great,  or  Napoleon — become  only  the  more  conceited  and  presumptuous  in  success. 
The  opposite  of  vanity  is  not  grovelling  self-disparagement,  but  the  sense  which  teaches 
us  to  know  our  place.  3.  The  prudence  of  toleration  and  of  conciliation.  (Vers. 
11,  12.)  Socrates  was  a  noble  example  of  these  virtues  in  the  heathen  world.  We 
who  have  "  learned  Christ"  should  not  at  least  fall  behind  him.  To  bear  our  wrongs 
with  patience  is  the  lower  degree  of  this  virtue.  Positively  to  "overcome  evil  with 
good"  stands  higher.  Highest  of  all  is  the  Divine  art  to  turn  persecutors  into  friends 
(1  Pet.  ii.  19 ;  Matt.  v.  44,  sqq.).  4.  The  arcana  of  domestic  life.  (Vers.  13,  14.) 
(1)  The  foolish  son.  "  Many  are  the  miseries  of  a  man's  life,  but  none  like  that  wliicli 
Cometh  from  him  who  should  be  the  stay  of  his  life."  "  Write  this  man  childless  " 
would  have  been  a  boon  in  comparison.  (2)  The  tiresome  spouse-.  Wearing  the  lieart 
that  is  firm  as  stone  by  her  continual  contentions.  (3)  The  kind  and  good  wife.  No 
gift  so  clearly  shows  the  tender  providence  of  Qod.  5.  The  inevitable  fate  of  idleness. 
(Ver.  15.)  (1)  It  produces  a  lethargy  in  the  soul.  (Ch.  vi.  9,  10.)  The  faculties  that 
are  not  used  become  benumbed  and  effete.  (2)  Thus  it  leads  to  want.  Although  these 
are  general  maxims  of  a  highly  abstract  character,  still  how  true  on  the  whole — if  not 
without  exception — they  are  to  life !  "  He  thatwill  not  work,  neither  let  him  eat." 
6.  The  wisdom  of  attention  to  Ood^s  commands.  (Ver.  16.)  (1)  To  every  man  his  soul 
is  dear ;  i.e.  his  life  is  sweet.  (2)  The  great  secret,  in  the  lower  sense  of  self-preservation, 
in  the  higher  of  salvation,  is  obedience  to  lavj.  (3)  Inattention  is  the  chief  source 
of  calamity.  In  the  lower  relation  it  is  so.  The  careless  crossing  of  the  road,  the 
unsteady  foot  on  the  mountain-side,  seems  to  be  punished  instantly  and  terribly.  And 
this  is  the  type  of  the  truth  in  higher  aspects.  7.  The  reward  of  pity  and  benevolence. 
(Ver.  17.)  Sir  Thomas  More  used  to  say  there  was  more  rhetoric  in  this  sentence  than 
in  a  whole  library.  God  looks  upon  the  poor  as  his  own,  and  satisfies  the  debts  they 
cannot  pay.  In  spending  upon  the  pour  the  good  man  serves  God  in  his  designs  with 
reference  tp  men.-— J. 

Vers.  18 — 21. — The',  true  prudence.  I.  In  the  parental  relation.  (Ver.  18.) 
1.  The  necessity  of  discipline.  The  exuberance  of  youth  needs  the  hand  of  the  pruner ; 
the  wildness  of  the  colt  must  be  early  tamed,  or  never.  Weak  indalgenoe  is  the  worst 
unkiudness  to  children.  2.  The  unwisdom  of  excessive  severity.  Cruelty  is  not 
discipline;  too  great  sharpness  is  as  bad  as  the  other  extreme.  Children  are  thus  made 
base,  induced  to  take  up  with  oad  company,  and  to  surl'eit  and  run  to  excess  when  they 
become  their  own  masters. 

II.  In  the  relation  or  belf-qovernment.  1.  The  folly  and  vnjuriousness  of 
passion.  (Ver.  19.)  Not  only  in  theiarmful  deeds  and  words  it  may  produce  towards 
others,  but  in  the  havoc  it  produces  in  one's  own  bosom.  How  fine  the  saying  of  Plato 
to  his  slave,  "  I  would  beat  thee,  but  that  I  am  angry  "  I  "  Learn  of  him  who  is  meek 
and  lowly  of  heart."  2.  The  wisdom  of  a  teachable  spirit.  (Ver.  20.)  Never  to  be 
above  listening  to  proffered  advice  from  otheM,  and  tu  find  in  every  humiliation  and 
every  failure  an  admonition  from  (he  Father  of  siarits, — this  is  life-wisdom.  And  thus 
a  store  is  being  laid  up  against  the  time  to  come,  that  we  may  lay  hold  on  eternal  life. 

III.  Prudence  but  afinitb  wisdom.  (Ver.  21.)  God  is  our  best  Counsellor;  without 
him  our  prudence  avails  not,  and  along  with  all  prudence  there  must  be  the  recognition 
of  his  overruling,  all-controlling  wisdom.  To  begin  with  God  is  the  true  secret  of 
success  in  every  enterprise.     May  he  prevent,  or  go  before,  us  in  all  our  doings ! — J. 

Vers.  22— 29.— il&ed  maxims  of  life-wisdom.  I.  Human  kindness.  (Ver.  22.) 
There  is  no  purer  delight  than  in  the  feelings  of  love  and  the  practical  exercise  of 
universal  kindness.  If  the  mere  pleasure  of  the  selSsh  and  the  benevolent  life  be  the 
criterion,  without  question  the  latter  has  the  advantage. 

11,  Truthfulness.  (Vers.  22,  28.)  So  the  honest  poor  outweighs  the  rich  or 
successful  liar  in  intrinsic  happiness  as  well  as  in  repute.  The  worthless  witness  is  • 
pest  to  society,  an  abomination  to  God. 


m  TSte  tEOVERBS.  [oB.  iix.  1— 2{i 

III.  Piety.  (Ver.  23.)  It  is  a  living  principle  in  every  sense  of  the  wnrd — lialh 
the  promise  of  life  in  both  worlds.  It  provides  for  the  soul  satisfaction,  reot,  tlia 
consciousness  of  present  and  eternal  security. 

IV.  Idleness.  (Ver.  24.)  Exposed  by  a  vivid  picture  of  the  idle  man's  attitude. 
It  reminds  one  of  the  saying  concerning  a  certain  distinguished  writer's  idleness,  that 
were  he  walking  through  an  orchard  where  the  fruit  brushed  against  his  mouth,  he 
would  be  too  idle  to  open  it  to  bite  a  morsel.  No  moral  good  can  be  9urs  without 
seeking. 

V.  Scoffing  folly  contrasted  with  simplicity  and  sense.  (Vers.  25,  29.)  He 
that  places  himself  above  instruction  ends  by  bringing  himself  beneath  contempt. 
Scorn  for  good  has,  like  every  sin,  its  own  determined  punishmeut.  And  "  God  strikes 
some  that  he  miy  warn  all." 

VI.  Filial  impiety.  (Vers.  26,  27.)  The  shame  and  sorrow  that  it  brings  to 
parents  is  coustantly  insisted  on  as  a  lesson  and  a  warning  to  the  latter.  If  these  bitter 
experiences  are  to  be  avoided,  let  children  be  timely  trained  to  obedience,  respect,  and 
reverence  for  God.  God's  Word  is  the  true  rule  and  guide  of  life,  and  he  who  departs 
from  it  is  a  corrupt  and  seductive  teacher. — J. 

Ver.  2. — 77ie  evil  of  ignorance.  Manifold  are  the  evils  of  ignorance.  All  evil  of  all 
kinds  has  been  resolved  into  error;  but,  if  we  do  not  go  so  far  as  this,  we  may  truly 
say — 

I.  That  ignorance  of  God  is  fatal.  "  This  is  life  eternal,  to  know  God ;"  and  if 
the  knowledge  of  God  is  life,  what  must  the  ignorance  of  him  be  ?  History  and  observa- 
tion only  too  fully  assure  us  what  it  is  :  it  is  spiritual  and  moral  death ;  the  departure 
of  the  soul  from  all  that  enlightens  and  elevates,  and  its  sinking  down  into  grovelling 
and  debasing  superstitions.  To  be  without  the  knowledge  of  God  is  simply  fatal  to  the 
soul  of  man. 

II.  That  ionoeancb  op  otjb  human  natueb  is  pbrilotts.  1.  Not  to  know  its 
nobler  iiossibilities  is  to  be  without  the  needful  incentive  to  lofty  aspiration  and 
strenuous  endeavour.  2.  Not  to  know  its  weaknesses  and  its  possibilities  of  evil  is  to 
go  forward  into  the  midst  of  bristling  dangers,  unarmed  and  undefended. 

III.  That  ignorance  of  the  world  (op  men  and  things)  is  highly  undesirable. 
1.  To  study,  and  thus  to  be  acquainted  with  nature  as  God  has  fashioned  it,  to  bo 
familiar  with  the  ways  and  with  the  arts  and  sciences  of  man, — is  to  be  braced  and 
strengthened  in  mind,  is  to  be  far  better  able  to  understand  and  to  apply  the  truth  of 
God  as  revealed  in  his  Word.  2.  To  be  ignorant  of  all  this  is  to  be  correspondingly 
weak  and  incapable.  Knowledge  is  power,  and  ignorance  is  weakness,  in  every  direc- 
tion. To  go  on  our  way  through  the  world,  failing  to  acquire  the  grasp  of  fact  and 
truth  which  iutelligent  observation  and  patient  study  would  secure, — this  is  to  leave 
untouched  one  large  part  of  the  heritage  which  our  heavenly  Father  is  offering  to  us. 
There  is  one  paiticular  consequence  of  ignorance  whioh  tiie  wise  man  specifies;  for  he 
reminds  us — 

IV.  That  precipitancy  in  word  and  deed  is  positively  guilty.  "He  that 
hasteth  with  his  feet  sinneth."  An  unwise  and  hurtful  precijiitancy  is  the  natural 
accompaniment  oi  ignorance.  The  man  who  knows  only  a  vny  little,  does  not  know 
when  he  has  heard  only  one-half  of  all  that  can  be  learnt ;  hence  he  decides  and  speaks 
and  acts  off-hand,  without  waiting  for  additional,  complementary,  or  qualifying 
particulars.  And  hence  he  judges  falsely  and  unjustly;  hence  he  acts  unrighteously 
and  foolishly,  and  often  cruelly;  he  takes  steps  which  he  has  laboriously  and 
ignouiiniously  to  retrace;  he  does  harm  to  the  very  cause  which  he  is  most  anxious 
to  help.  It  is  the  man  of  wide  knowledge  and  expanded  view,  it  is  the  large-miaded 
and  well-informed  soul,  that  bears  the  best  testimony,  that  does  the  worthiest  and 
most  enduring  work,  that  lives  the  largest  and  most  enviable  life. — C. 

Ver.  3. — Disquietude  and  complaint.    We  have — 

I.  God's  righteous  way.  The  way  in  which  God  intended  man  to  walk  was  that 
way  of  wisdom,  all  of  whose  paths  are  peace.  This  divinely  appointed  way  is  that  of 
holy  service.  Man,  like  every  other  being  above  him,  and  every  other  creature  below 
him  in  the  universe,  was  created  to  serve.     We  wore  created  to  serve  our  God  and  our 


eH.m.  1-29.3  'me  MoVfitlSS. 


kind;  and  in  this  double  service  we  should  find  our  rest  and  our  heritage.   This,  which 
is  God's  way,  should  have  been  our  way  also. 

II.  Man's  perverted  way.  Man,  in  his  sin  and  his  folly,  has  "  perverted  his  way ; " 
he  has  attempted  another  path,  a  short  out  to  happiness  and  success.  He  has  turned 
out  of  the  hgh-road  of  holy  service  into  the  by-path  of  selfishuess  ;  he  has  sought  his 
satisfaction  and  his  portion  in  following  his  own  will,  in  giving  himself  up  to  worldly 
ambitions,  in  indulging  in  unholy  pleasure,  in  living  for  mere  enjoyment,  in  making 
himself  the  master,  and  his  own  good  the  end  and  aim  of  his  life. 

III.  His  consequent  disquietude.  When  anything  is  in  its  wrong  place,  there  is 
certain  to  be  unrest.  If  in  the  meclianism  of  the  human  body,  or  in  the  machinery  of 
an  engine,  or  in  the  working  of  some  organization,  anything  (or  any  one)  is  misplaced, 
disorder  and  disquietude  invariably  ensue.  And  when  man  puts  his  will  above  or 
.against  that  of  his  Divipe  Creator,  that  of  his  heavenly  Father,  there  is  a  displacement 
and  reversal  such  as  may  well  bring  about  disturbance.  And  it  does.  It  is  hardly 
saying  too  much  to  say  that  all  the  violence,  disease,  strife,  misery,  poverty,  death,  we 
see  around  us  arise  fmmthis  (iisastrous  perversion — from  man  trying  to  turn  God's  way 
of  blessedness  into  his  own  way.  Man's  method  has  been  utterly  wrong  and  mistaken, 
and  the  penalty  of  his  folly  is  heart-ache,  wretchedness,  ruin. 

IV.  His  vain  and  guilty  complaint.  He  "  fretteth  against  the  Lord."  Instead 
of  smiting  himself,  he  complains  of  God.  He  fails  to  see  that  the  source  of  his  unrest 
is  in  his  own  heart;  he  ascribes  it  to  his  circumstances,  and  he  imputes  these  to  his 
Creator.  So,  either  secretly  or  openly,  he  complains  of  God ;  he  thinks,  and  perhaps 
says,  that  God  has  dealt  hardly  with  him,  has  denied  to  him  what  he  has  given  to 
others  ;  in  the  dark  depths  of  his  soul  is  a  guilty  rebelliousness. 

V.  The  one  way  of  rest.  This  is  to  return  unto  the  Lord  in  free  and  full 
submission.  1.  To  recognize  God's  righteous  claim  upon  us,  rs  our  Creator,  Preserver, 
Rede(!mer.  2.  To  acknowled„e  to  ourselves  and  to  confess  to  him  that  we  have  guiltily 
withheld  ourselves  from  him,  and  sinfully  complained  of  his  holy  will.  3.  To  ask  his 
mercy  in  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour,  and  offer  our  hearts  to  himself  and  our  lives  to  his 
service.     This  is  the  one  way  of  rest  and  joy ;  it  is  "  the  path  of  life." — C. 

Vers.  8,  16. — Making  the  most  of  ourself  and  our  life.  How  shall  we  most  truly 
"  love  our  own  soul  "  but  by  making  all  we  can  make  of  the  nature  and  the  life  God 
has  entrusted  to  our  care  I  And  how  shall  we  do  this  ?  Snrely  by  "  getting  wisdom  " 
and  "  keeping  understanding."  To  look  at  the  subject  negatively  and,  beginning  at  the 
bottom,  to  take  an  upward  path,  we  remark — 

I.  That  contemptuous  carelessness  means  certain  ruin.  "He  that  despiseth 
his  ways  shall  die."  The  man  who  never  pauses  to  consider  what  he  can  accomplish, 
how  he  shall  spend  his  days  and  his  powers,  but  who  goes  aimlessly  onward,  letting 
youth  and  manhood  pass  without  any  serious  thought  at  all,  and  content  to  snatch  the 
enjoyment  of  the  passing  hour, — is  a  man  of  folly,  and  he  can  expect  nothing,  as  he 
certainly  will  find  nothing,  but  the  most  meagre  portion  and  a  very  speedy  end  of 
everything.  He  sows  to  the  flesh,  and  of  the  flesh  he  reaps  corruption.  To  "  despise 
our  way  "  in  this  fashion  is  to  forfeit  our  inheritance  and  come  to  utter  destitution. 
Moving  higher  up,  but  still  failing  to  reach  the  right  standard,  we  remark — 

II.  That  any  counsel  which  is  not  of  God  will  prove  disappointing.  There 
is  much  cleverness  and  keenness  that  is  not  wisdom ;  there  is  much  concern  about 
ourself  and  our  future  which  is  not  a  true  "  love  for  our  own  soul."  There  are  many 
counsellors  who  will  advise  us  to  seek  certain  pleasures,  or  to  aim  at  certain  honours, 
or  to  chmb  to  a  certain  position,  or  to  seek  entrance  into  some  particular  society,  or  to 
secure  a  certain  treasure, — and  it  will  be  well  with  us.  But  any  coimsel  which  falls 
short  of  telling  us  the  will  of  God,  which  leaves  untold  the  wisdom  which  is  from 
above,  will  certainly  prove  to  be  unsound.  A  point  will  come  in  our  experience  where 
it  will  break  down.  It  will  not  meet  the  deeper  necessities  of  our  nature  nor  the 
darker  passages  of  our  life.     We  must  take  higher  ground^that  on  which  we  see — 

III.  That  Divine  wisdom  will  lead  us  to  true  and  lasting  blessedness. 
"  The  fear  of  the  Lord,  that  is  wisdom ;  and  to  depart  from  evil  is  understanding " 
(Job  xxviii.  28-;  see  ch.  i.  7 ;  ix.  10).  And  surely  :  1.  To  know  God  is,  in  itself,  a  real 
and  a  great  blessing  (Jer.  ix.  24).    To  know  God  as  he  is  revealed  in  Jesus  Christ  ig 


880  THE  PROVERBS.  [oh.  xra.  1— 8« 

to  be  enriched  in  the  most  precious  and  valnaHe  knowledfje ;  It  is  "  to  be  wiser  than 
the  ancients; "  it  is  to  have  that  in  our  mind  which  is  of  m&ve  intrinsic  worth  than  all 
that  men  can  put  into  their  pockets.  2.  To  know  QoH  in  Jesus  Christ  is  to  have 
rest  of  heart  (Matt.  xi.  28,  29).  Those  who  love  themselves  will  surely  care  for  spiritual' 
rest — for  a  peace  which  no  favouring  circumstances  can  confer.  3.  To  learn  of  Christ 
and  keep  his  commandments  is  to  be  preserved  in  moral  and  spiritual  integrity ;  he 
that  "keepeth  the  commandments"  by  consulting  the  will  of  Christ  will  certainly 
"keep  his  own  soul  "  from  all  that  stains  and  slf>ys  a  human  spirit  and  a  human  life 
— from  impurity,  insobriety,  untruthfulness,  dishonesty,  profanity,  selfishness;  he  will 
"  keep  his  soul "  in  the  love  of  God,  in  the  light  of  his  countenance,  under  his  guardian 
care.  To  remain  loyal  to  the  wisdom  of  God  (to  "  keep  understanding ")  is  to  find 
every  good  that  is  open  to  us.  It  is  to  move  along  that  path  which  is  evermore 
ascending;  which  conducts  to  the  loftier  heights  of  moral  excellency,  of  exalted  spiritual 
joy,  of  holy  and  noble  service :  which  leads  to  the  very  gates  of  heaven  and  the  near 
presence  of  God. — 0. 

.     Ver.  17  (see  also  ch.  x.  14,  31 ;  xvii.  5). — Valuable  kindness.    We  gather — 

I.  That  hauohtt  unkindnkss  is  a  heinous  sin.  To  mock  the  poor  or  to  opprew 
the  poor  is  to  reproach  our  Maker.  For  he  that  made  us  made  them ;  and,  in  many 
instances,  made  them  to  be  as  they  are.  The  Son  of  man  himself  was  poor,  having 
nowhere  to  lay  his  head;  and  although  it  is  true  that  poverty  is  very  often  the 
consequence  and  penalty  of  sin,  yet,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  often  (1)  the  accompani- 
ment of  virtue  and  piety  ;  and  (2)  frequently  it  has  been  the  penalty  of  faithfulness 
to  conviction,  and  therefore  the  sign  of  peculiar  worth.  To  treat  with  disdain  a 
condition  which  God  himself  has  associated  with  piety  and  even  with  nobility  of 
character  is  to  mock  our  Maker.  And  to  oppress  such  is  to  be  guilty  of  a  flagrant  sinj 
it  is  to  take  advantage  of  weakness  in  order  to  do  a  neighbour  wrong ;  this  is  to  add 
meanness  to  cruelty  and  injustice.  It  is,  moreover,  to  do  that  which  our  Lord  has  told 
us  he  will  consider  to  be  directed  against  himself  (Matt,  xxv.  43,  43), 

II.  That  practical  pitiftjlness  is  a  much-bewaeded  viktue.  1.  It  is  acceptsd 
by  our  Divine  Lord  as  a  service  rendered  to  himself  (text ;  Matt.  xxv.  35,  36).  How 
gladly  would  we  minister  to  Jesus  Christ  were  we  to  recognize  in  some  weary  and 
troubled  neighbour  none  other  than  the  Redeemer  himself  clothed  in  human  form 
again  1  But  we  need  not  long  for  such  an  opportunity;  nor  need  we  wait  for  it.  It 
is  ours.  We  have  but  to  show  practical  kindness  to  "  one  of  the  least "  of  his  brethren, 
and  we  show  it  unto  him,  the  Lord  himself  (Matt.  xxv.  40).  And  what  we  do  shall 
be  rendered  unto  us  again;  i.e.  we  shall  receive  in  return  from  our  Father  that  which 
will  fully  compensate  us.  Our  reward  will  include  not  only  this  gracious  acceptance, 
but:  2.  We  shall  earn  the  gratitude  of  thankful  hearts;  and  if  (as  is  likely  enough) 
we  go  sometimes  unblessed  of  man,  yet  at  other  times  we  shall  not  want  the  cordial, 
loving,  prayerful  gratitude  of  a  human  heart ;  and  what  better  treasure  could  we  hold 
than  that?  3.  God  will  bless  us  in  our  own  hearts  for  every  kindness  we  render.  He 
has  BO  mads  our  spirits  that  they  are  affected  for  good  or  evil  by  everything  we  do. 
Each  thought,  each  deed,  leaves  us  other  than  we  were;  stronger,  wiser,  wurthier,  or 
else  weaker,  less  wise,  less  excellent,  than  before.  Our  character  is  the  final  result 
of  everything  that  we  have  ever  done,  both  in  mind  and  in  the  flesh.  So  that  each 
gracious  word  we  speak,  each  kindly  service  we  render  to  any  one  in  need,  is  one  more 
stroke  of  the  chisel  which  is  carving  a  beautiful  character,  fair  in  the  sight  of  God 
himself.  4.  We  gain  the  present  favour  of  our  Divine  Lord,  and  may  look  for  bis 
strong  succour  in  our  own  time  of  need.  5.  We  shall  receive  his  word  of  honour  in 
the  day  "when  every  man  shall  have  praise  of  God"  (1  Cor.  iv.  5). — C. 

Ver.  18. — (See  homily  on  ch',  xiii,  24.) — 0. 

Ver,  20. — Beady  at  the  end.  The  wise  man  always  shows  his  wisdom  by  looking 
well  before  him.  It  is  the  sure  mark  of  a  fool  to  content  himself  wiih  the  immediate 
present.  We  do  not  wonder  that  proverbs  should  deal  much  with  the  future.  "  Pas- 
«ion  and  Patience"  is  the  picture  which  is  always  being  exhibited  before  the  eyes  ol 
meD, 


CH.  xiT.  1—29.]  IHB   PROVEEBa  381 

I,  Tbe  Need  of  readiness  at  the  end,  "How  shall  we  enjoy  the  present  time?" 
asks  one;  "How  shall  we  make  ready  for  the  end?"  asks  another  and  a  wiser  soul. 
The  question  presents  itself  to  the  youth,  as  he  looks  forward  to  the  end  of  the  term 
and  the  coming  of  the  examination  or  the  writing  of  the  report ;  to  the  young  man — 
the  apprentice,  the  articled  clerk,  the  student — as  he  cotisidors  how  he  shall  go  through 
his  trial-hour  and  be  prepared  for  his  business  or  profession  ;  to  the  man  in  middle  life, 
as  he  foresees  the  time  coming  when  he  can  no  longer  do  as  he  is  doing  now,  and  must 
have  something  to  fall  back  upon  in  his  declining  days;  to- the  man  in  later  life,  as  lie 
is  compelled  to  feel  that  his  powers  are  fast  failing,  and  that  the  hour  is  not  distant 
when  he  will  stand  on  the  very  verge  of  life  and  confront  the  long  and  solemn  future. 
It  should  also  be  present  in  the  mind  of  those  who  are  soon  to  go  forth  into  the  Sterner 
cojiflict  of  life,  to  meet  alone,  away  from  home-influences,  tl  e  serious  and  strong 
temptations  of  an  evil  world.  Whatever  the  stage  through  which  we  are  now  passing, 
it  moves  towards  its  close — an  end  which  is  sure  to  open  out  into  somelhing  beyond, 
and,  most  likelyj  something  more  important,  weighted  with  graver  responsibilities  and 
leading  to  larger  issues.  Are  we  so  living,  the  wise  will  ask,  that  we  shall  be  ready 
for  that  end  when  it  comes? 

II.  The  consbqubnt  need  to  learn  of  God.  "Hear  counsel,"  etc.  1.  There  is 
much  need  to  learn  of  men — from  our  parents,  from  our  teachers,  from  every  form  of 
instructive  literature,  from  all  that  the  experiences  of  men,  as  we  watch  their  life,  are 
saying  to  us.  Whoso  would  be  wise  at  the  end  of  his  career  should  have  an  open  mind 
that  eveiy  one  and  everything  may  teach  him.  Lessons  are  to  be  learnt  from  every 
event,  however  simple  ar;d  humble  it  may  be.  The  wide  world  is  the  school  which  the 
wise  will  never  "  leave."  2.  There  is  much  more  need  to  learn  of  God,  to  learn  of 
Christ.   For :  (1)  He  can  speak  authoritativdy,  as  man  cannot.   (2)  He  giyeaua  wisdom 

-unmingled  with  error,  as  man  does  not.  (3)  He  can  tell  us  how  to  find  his  Divine 
favour  and  how  to  reach  his  nearer  presence,  as  no  man  c«n.  Let  us  learn  of  Christ 
and  be  wise.— 0. 

Ver.  21. —  The  mind  of  man  and  the  mind  of  God.  Here  is  a  contrast  which 
we  do  well  to  consider.  Between  our  human  spiritual  nature  and  that  of  the  Divine 
Spirit  it  is  possible  to  find  resemblances  and  contrasts.  Both  are  interesting  and 
iiistrnotive. 

I.  The  thoughts  of  man's  mind.  We  know  how  fugitive  these  are ;  how  they 
come  and  go  like  the  flash  of  the  lightning ;  and  even  those  which  linger  are  but  short- 
lived, they  soon  give  place  to  others.  Eveli  those  thoughts  which  become  "  fixed," 
which  settle  down  into  plans  and  purposes,  have  but  a  brief  tenure  in  our  brain ;  they, 
too,  pass  away  and  make  room  for  others  in  their  turn.  Our  thoughts  are:  1.  Fluc- 
tuating and  therefore  many.  We  care  for  one  pleasure,  we  pursue  one  object  now ; 
but  in  a  few  weeks,  or  even  days,  we  may  weary  of  the  one,  we  may  be  compelled  to 
turn  our  attention  from  the  other.  2.  Feeble  and  therefore  many.  We  propose  and 
adopt  one  method,  but  it  fails ;  and  then  we  try  another,  and  that  fails ;  then  we  resort 
to  a  third,  which  also  fails.  We  pass  from  thought  to  thought,  from  plan  to  plan ;  our 
very  feebleness  accounting  for  the  rnanifoldness  of  our  devices.  3.  False  and  therefore 
many.  We  hold  certain  theories  to-day;  to-morrow  they  will  be  exploded,  and  we 
shall  entertain  another ;  before  long  that  will  yield  to  a  third.  4.  Sinful  and  there- 
fore many.  Nothing  that  is  wrong  can  last;  it  must  be  dethroned,  because  it  is  evil, 
immoral,  guilty.  5.  Selfish  and  therefore  many.  We  are  concerning  ourselves 
supremely  about  our  own  affairs  or  those  of  our  family ;  but  these  are  passing  interests, 
changing  with  the  flitting  hours. 

II.  The  thoughts  which  are  in  the  mind  of  God.  His  counsel  stands  (text). 
"The  connsel  of  the  Lord  standeth  for  ever,  the  thoughts  of  his  heart  to  all  genera- 
tions "  (Ps.  xxxiii.  11).  God's  purpose  holds  from  age  to  age.  For :  1.  He  rules  in 
righteciusness.  He  is  governing  the  world  by  Divine  and  unchanging  principles.  "  With 
him  is  no  variableness,"  because  he  ever  loves  what  is  righteous  and  hates  what  i» 
unholy  and  impure  and  unkind.  He  cannot  change  his  course,  because  he  cannot 
change  his  character.  2.  He  is  working  out  one  great  beneficent  conclusion.  He  is 
redemning  a  lost  world,  reconciling  it  unto  himself,  uprooting  the  multiform  sourcta 
ot  wrong  and  wretchedness,  establishing  the  blessed  kingdom  of  Christ,  the  kingdom  o! 


382  THE  PH0VBEB3.  [cH,  xix.  1—29 

heaTen  on  the  eart>i.  3.  He  has  ample  time  and  power  at  his  command;  he  has  no 
need  to  change  his  plan,  to  resort  to  "  devices." 

"  His  eternal  thought  moves  on 
His  undisturbed  affairs ; ' 

and  is  working  out  a  glorious  consummation  which  nothing  shall  avail  to  avert. 
4 .  His  perfect  wisdom  malces  quite  unnecessary  the  adoption  of  any  other  course  than 
that  which  he  is  employing.  (1)  Steadfastness  is  one  sign  of  wisdom.  If  we  see 
a  man  or  a  Church  perpetually  changing  its  methods,  we  may  be  sure  that  it  is  weak. 
(2)  Let  us  make  God's  great  and  holy  purpose  ours ;  (a)  for  it  is  that  with  which  our 
eternal  interest  is  bound  up;  (6)  it  is  certain  to  be  victorious.  3.  Let  us  work  on  for 
our  Lord  and  with  him,  in  the  calmness  that  becomes  those  who  are  confident  of 
ultimate  success. — C. 

Ver.  23. —  The  praise  of  piety.    What  could  he  said  more  than  is  said  here  in  praise 

of  piety  ?    What  more  or  better  could  anything  do  for  us  than — 

I.  Ensure  ottB  safety.  So  that  we  shall  not  be  visited  with  evil.  But  is  not  the 
good  man  visited  with  evil?  Do  not  his  crops  fail,  his  vessels  sink,  his  shares  fall, 
his  difficulties  gather,  his  children  die  ?  Does  not  his  health  decline,  his  hope  depart, 
his  life  lessen?  Yes;  but:  1.  From  the  worst  evils  his  piety  secures  him.  The 
"  fear  of  the  Lord,"  that  Holy  One  before  whom  he  stands  and  with  whom  he  walks, 
keeps  him  from  folly,  from  fraud,  from  vice,  from  moral  contamination,  from  that 
"death  in  life  "  which  is  the  thing  to  be  dreaded  and  avoided.  2.  And  the  troubles 
and  sorrows  which  do  assail  him  lose  all  their  bitterness  as  thiy  wear  the  aspect  of 
a  heavenly  Father's  discipline,  who,  in  all  that  he  sends  or  suffeis,  is  seeking  the 
truest  and  the  lasting  well-being  of  his  children.  The  man  who  is  living  in  the  fear  of 
God,  and  in  the  love  of  Jesus  Christ,  may  go  on  his  homeward  way  with  no  anxiety  iu 
his  heart,  for  he  has  the  promise  of  his  Saviour  that  all  things  shall  work  together  for 
good — those  things  that  are  the  least  pleasant  as  well  as  those  that  are  the  most 
inviting. 

II.  Satisfy  octb  soul.  "  Shall  abide  satisfied."  Certainly  it  is  only  the  man  of 
real  piety  of  whom  this  word  can  be  used.  Discontent  is  the  mark  which  "  the  world 
and  the  things  which  are  in  the  world "  leave  on  the  countenance  and  write  on  the 
heart  of  man.  Nothing  that  is  less  than  the  Divine  giyes  rest  to  the  human  spirit. 
Mirth,  enjoyment,  temporary  happiness,  may  be  commanded,  but  not  abiding  satis- 
faction. That,  however,  is  found  in  the  devoted  service  of  a  Divine  Redeemer.  Let 
a  man  yield  himself,  his  whole  powers  and  all  his  life,  to  the  Saviour  who  loved  him 
unto  death,  and  in  following  ami  serving  him  he  will  "  find  rest  unto  his  soul."  Not 
half-hearted  but  whole-hearted  service  brings  the  joy  which  no  accident  can  remove 
and  which  time  does  not  efface  or  even  lessen.  The  secret  of  lifelong  blessedness  is 
found,  not  in  the  assertion  of  an  impossible  Ireedom  from  obligation,  but  in  an  open, 
practicable,  elevating  service  of  the  living  God,  our  Divine  Saviour. 

III.  Constitute  our  like  and  conduct  to  a  still  uigher  form  of  it.  "The 
fear  of  the  Lord  tendeth  to  life."  It  is  not  merely  that  a  regard  for  God's  will  conduces 
to  health  and  loads  to  long  life  (Ps.  xci.  16) ;  it  is  not  only  that  it  tends  to  secure  to 
its  possessor  an  honourable  and  eslimable  life  among  men.  It  is  much  more  than  this; 
it  is  that  it  constitutes  human  life.  "  This  is  life  eternal,  to  know  thee,  the  only  true 
God."  For  man  to  live  in  ignorance  or  in  forgetfulness  of  his  Divine  Father  is  to 
miss  or  to  lose  his  life  while  he  hns  it  (or  seems  to  have  it).  On  the  other  hand, 
to  live  a  life  of  reverence,  of  trustfulness  in  God,  of  love  to  him,  of  filial  obedience 
and  submission,  of  cheerful  and  devoted  co-operation  with  him  in  the  great  redemptive 
work  he  is  outworking,  to  be  attaining  more  and  more  to  his  own  spiritual  likeness, — 
this  IS  life  itself,  life  in  its  excellency,  its  fulness,  its  beauty.  Moreover,  it  itself,  with 
all  its  worth,  is  but  the  prelude  of  that  which  is  to  come.  It  is  the  "fair  beo'lnnimr " 
of  tliat  which  shall  realize  a  glorious  consummation  a  little  further  on.  AVith  all  that 
hinders  and  hampers  t.iken  away,  and  with  all  that  facilitates  and  enlaiges  bestowed 
upon  us,  wc  entoi-  upon  the  nobler  lile  beyond,  which  we  have  no  language  to  describe 
because  wc  have  no  faculty  that  can  conceive  its  blessedness  or  its  glory.  1.  Let  the 
perils  of  human  life  point  to  a,  D:  vine  Hefuge.     2.  Let  the  weariness  of  earthly  good 


m.  XX.  1—30.] 


THE  PBOVERBS. 


3»! 


lead  to  the  Divine  Source  of  rest  and  joy.    3.  In  the  midst  of  the  deathfulness  of  Bin, 
lay  hold  on  eternal  life. — 0. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTEE  XX. 


Ver.  1. — Wine  Is  a  mooker;  or,  tcomer, 
the  word  (luts)  being  talren  up  from  the  last 
chapter.  The  liquor  is,  as  it  were,  personi- 
fied, as  doing  what  men  do  under  its  in- 
fluence. Thus  inebriated  persons  scoff  at 
■what  is  holy,  reject  reproof,  ridicule  all  that 
is  serious.  Septuagint,  ' {^K6\aarov  oTvos, 
"Wine  is  an  undisciplined  thing;"  Vulgate, 
Luxuriosa  res,  vinum.  Strong  drink  is  rag- 
ing; a  irawler.  Revised  Version.  Shelcar, 
atxepa  (Ijuke  1.  15),  is  most  frequently  em- 
ployed of  any  intoxicating  drink  not  made 
from  grapes,  e.g.  palm-wine,  mead,  etc.  The 
inordinate  use  of  this  renders  men  noisy  and 
boisterous,  no  longer  masters  of  themselves 
or  restrained  by  the  laws  of  morality  or 
decency.  Septuagint,  "t^pta-Tuchv  /neSri, 
"Drunkenness  is  insolent."  Theognis  has 
some  sensible  lines  on  this  matter  ('  Fareen.,' 
479)— 

*Os    S'  ttv  {nrep$ciM.Ti    vSinos    /terpov,   ouketi 
Keivos 
Tris  'avTOV  y\^fftr7}S  Kaprephsy  oiiSe  ySov' 
MufleiToi    5'   aTriKa/iva,   Tci   vli^offi   ylyverai 
altrxpti'  • 

AiSetVai  8'  tpSaiv  oiSfV,  orav  /leBiri, 
Ti  Trpiv  eci)V  ffdKppui/  t6t€  fiimos. 
Whosoever  is  deceived  thereby  is  not  wise. 
No  one  who  reels  under  the  influence  of,  is 
overpowered  by,  wine  is  wise  (Isa.  xxviii.  7). 
Septuagint, "  Every  fool  is  involved  in  such." 
Says  a  Latin  adage — 
"Ense  cadunt  multi,  perimit  sed  erapula 

plurea." 
"More  are  drowned  in  the  wine-cup  than 
in  tlie  ocorm,'  say  the  Germans  (oomp.  ch. 
xxiii.  29,  etc. ;  Eph.  v.  18). 

Ver.  2.— The  fear  of  a  king  is  as  the  roar- 
ing of  a  lion  (see  ch.  xix.  12).  The  terror 
which  a  king  causes  when  his  anger  is  rising 
is  like  the  roar  of  a  lion,  which  betokens 
danger.  Septuagint,  "  The  threat  of  a  king 
differeth  not  from  the  wrath  of  a  lion." 
<•  Whoso  provoketh  him  to  anger  sinneth 
against  his  own  soul;  imperils  Ms  life, 
which  he  has  no  right  wilfully  to  jeopard. 
Septuagint,  "  He  who  enrageth  him  (6  irapof- 
ii'CDv  a\iT6v)."  Tlie  Complutensian  and  some 
Greek  versions  introduce  tlie  words.  xaX 
firtijuyv'iiJ.ei'os,  "and  has  intercourse  with 
him ; "  i.e.  he  who  having  aroused  a  king's 
resentment  does  not  avoid  his  presence,  ex- 
poses himself  to  certain  death. 
Ver.  3. — It  is  an  honour  to  a  man  to  oease 


from  strife;  or  better,  as  Delilzsch  and 
others,  to  remain  far  from  strife.  A  pru- 
dent man  will  not  only  abstain  from  causing 
quairel,  but  will  hold  himself  aloof  from  all 
contention,  and  thus  will  have  due  care  for 
his  own  honour  and  dignity.  How  different 
is  this  from  the  modern  code,  which  makes 
a  man's  honour  consist  in  his  readiness  to 
avenge  fancied  injury  at  the  risk  of  his  own 
or  his  neighbour's  life  I  Septuagint,  "  It  is 
a  glory  to  a  man  to  hold  himself  aloof  from 
revilings."  Every  fool  will  be  meddling  (see 
on  oh.  xvii.  14 ;  xviii.  1).  Delitzsch,  "  Who- 
ever is  a  fool  showeth  his  teeth,"  find* 
pleasure  in  strife.  Septuagint,  "  Every  fool 
involves  himself  in  such,"  as  in  ver.  1. 

Ver.  4. — The  sluggard  will  not  plough  by 
reason  of  the  cold ;  propter  frigus,  Vulgate. 
But  finh  (ehoreph)  denotes  the  time  of 
gathering — the  autumn ;  so  we  would  trans- 
late, "  At  the  time  6f  harvest  the  sluggard 
ploughs  not" — ^just  when  the  ground  is  most 
easily  and  profitably  worked.  "  The  weak- 
ness of  the  coulter  and  other  parts  of  the 
plough  requires  that  advantage  be  taken,  in 
all  but  the  most  friable  soils,  of  the  softening 
of  the  surface  by  the  winter  or  spring  rains ; 
BO  that  the  peasant,  if  industrious,  has  to 
plough  in  the  winter,  though  sluggards  still 
shrink  from  its  cold,  and  have  to  beg  in  the 
harvest"  (Geikie,  'Holv  Land  and  Bible,' 
ii.  491).  Therefore  shaU  he  beg  in  harvest, 
and  have  nothing.  So  the  Vulgate,  Mendi- 
cdbit  ergo  lettate,  et  nan  dahitur  illi.  But 
this  does  not  accurately  represent  the  mean- 
ing of  the  clause.  If  ever  the  prosperous 
are  disposed  to  relieve  the  needy,  it  would 
be  at  the  time  when  they  have  safely  gar- 
nered their  produce;  an  appeal  to  theii 
charity  at  such  a  moment  would  not  be 
made  in  vain.  Bather  the  sentence  signifies 
that  the  lazy  man,  having  neglected  to  have 
his  land  ploughed  at  the  proper  time, "  when 
he  asks  (for  his  fruits)  at  narvest-time,  there 
is  nothing."  He  puts  off  tilling  his  fields 
day  after  day,  or  never  looks  to  see  if  his 
labourers  do  their  duty,  and  so  his  land  is 
not  cultivated,  and  he  has  no  crop  to  reap 
when  autumn  comes.  "  By  the  street  of  By- 
and-by  one  arrives  at  the  house  of  Never" 
(Spanish  proverb).  Taking  a  different  in- 
terpretation of  the  word  ehoreph,  the  LXX, 
renders,  "  Being  reproached,  the  sluggard  is 
not  ashamed,  no  more  than  he  who  borrowi 
corn  in  harvest." 

Ver.  5. — Counsel  in  the  heart  of  man  ii 
like  deep  water.     The  thoughts  and  pur 


384 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[oh.  XX.  1— 3ft 


poses  of  a  man  are  hidden  in  his  breast  like 
deep  water  (oh.  xviii.  4)  in  the  bosom  of  the 
earth,  hard  to  fathom,  hard  to  get.  But  a 
man  of  understanding  will  draw  it  out. 
One  who  is  intelligent  and  understands 
human  nature  penetrates  the  seuret,  and,  by 
judicious  questions  and  remarks,  draws  out 
(^fai/TA^irei,  Septuagint)  the  hidden  thnught. 
Ver.  6. — Most  men  will  proclaim  every 
one  his  own  goodness;  cliesed,  "kindness." 
"  mercy,"  "  liberality,"  as  in  eh.  xix.  22.  So 
Bwald  and  others.  Hitzig  and  Kamphausen 
translate,  "  Many  a  man  one  names  his  de-ir 
friend;"  Delitzsoh  and  Nowack  prefer, 
"  Most  men  meet  a  man  who  is  gracious  to 
them ; "  i.e.  it  is  common  enough  to  meet  a 
man  who  seems  benevolent  and  well  dis- 
posed. .Vulgate,  "Many  men  are  culled 
merciful ; "  Septuagint,  "  Man  is  a  great 
thing,  and  a  merciful  man  is  a  precious 
thing."  The  renderings  of  most  modern 
commentators  imply  the  statement  that  luve 
and  mercy  are  common  enough,  at  least  in 
outward  expression.  The  Authorized  Ver- 
sion pronounces  that  men  are  ready  enough 
to  parade  and  boast  of  their  liberality,  like 
the  hypocrites  who  were  said  proverbially  to 
sound  a  trumpet  when  they  performed  their 
almsdeeds  (Matt.  vi.  2).  Commenting  on 
the  Greek  rendering  of  the  clause  given 
above,  St.  Ohrysostom  observes,  "This  is 
the  true  character  of  man  to  be  merciful ; 
yea,  rather  the  character  of  God  to  show 
mercy.  .  .  .  Those  who  answer  not  to  this 
description,  though  they  partake  of  mind, 
and  are  never  so  capable  of  kuowlcdge,  the 
Scripture  refuses  to  acknowledge  them  as 
men,  but  calls  them  dogs,  and  horses,  and 
serpents,  and  foxes,  and  wolves,  and  if  there 
be  any  animals  more  contemptible"  ('Hom. 
iv.  in  Phil.'  and  '  Hom.  xiii.  in  1  Tim.,'  Ox- 
ford transl.).  The  contrast  bel;weon  show, 
or  promise,  and  performance  is  developed  in 
the  second  clause.  But  a  faithful  man  who 
can  find?  The  faithfulness  intended  is 
fidelity  to  promises,  the  practical  execution 
of  the  vaunted  benevolence;  this  is  rare 
indeed,  so  that  a  psalmist  could  cry,  "  I  said 
in  my  haste.  All  men  are  liars"  (Ps.  cxvi. 
11;  comp.  Kom.  iii.  4).  Lesfetre  refers  to 
Massillon's  sermon,  'Sur  la  Gloire  Hu- 
maine,'  where  we  read  (the  preacher,  of 
course,  rests  on  the  Latin  Version),  "Ces 
hommes  vertueux  dont  le  monde  se  fait  tant 
d'honneur,  n'ont  au  fond  souvent  pour  eux 
que  I'erreur  publique.  Amis  fidfeles,  je  le 
veux ;  mais  o'est  le  gnttt,  la  vanite  on  I'in- 
t^r€t,  qui  lea  Ue;  et  duns  leur  amis,  ils 
n'amient  qu'  eux-memes.  .  .  .  En  un  mot, 
dit  I'Eoriture,  on  les  appelle  mise'ricorditux, 
ils  ont  toutes  les  vertuapnur  le  public;  mais 
n'^tant  pas  fidfeles  k  Dieu,  ils  u'en  out  pas 
nne  seule  pour  eux-m€nies." 

Ver.  7. — The  just  man  walketh  in  his 


integrity.  It  is  belter  to  connect  the  two 
clauses  together,  and  not  to  take  the  first  at 
a  separate  sentence,  thus :  "  He  who  as  a  just 
man  walketh  in  his  integrity  " — Blessed  are 
his  children  after  him  (comp.  eh.  xiv.  26). 
So  the  Septuagint  and  Vulgate.  The  man 
of  pure  life,  who  religiously  performs  his 
duty  tiiwards  God  and  man,  shall  bring  a 
blessing  on  his  children  who  follow  his  good 
example,  both  during  his  life  and  after  his 
death.  The  temporal  promise  is  seen  in 
Exod.  XX.  6;  Deut.  iv. '40;  Ps.  cxii.  2,  eti-. 
Some  see  here  an  instance  of  utilitarianism ; 
but  it  CEiuuot  be  supposed  that  the  writer 
inculcates  viitue  for  the  sake  of  the  worldly 
advantnges  connected^  with  it;  ralher  he 
speaks  from  experience,  and  from  a  faithful 
dependence  on  Providence,  of  the  hapjiy 
results  of  a  holy  life. 

Ver.  8. — A  loyal  and  right  noble  mnxiin. 
A  king  that  sitteth  in  the  throne  of  judg- 
ment scattereth  away  all  evil  with  his  eyes. 
The  king,  sitting  on  the  tribunal  and  exe- 
cuting his  judiciary  olfiie,  sees  through  all 
devices  and  pretences  which  cloak  evil,  and 
Bcatterd  them  to  the  winds,  as  the  chuif  ilies 
before  the  winnowing-fan.  Nothing  un- 
righteous can  abide  in  his  presence  (comp. 
ver.  26 ;  ch.  xvi.  10,  etc.).  See  here  an 
adumbration  of  the  characteristic  of  the 
Messiah,  the  great  King  whose  "  eyes  behold, 
whose  eyelids  try,  the  children  of  men"  (Ps. 
xi.  4) :  who  is  "  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold 
evil "  (Hab.  i.  13) ;  who,  "  with  righteous- 
ness shall  judge  the  poor,  and  reprove  with 
equity  for  the  meek  of  the  earth :  and  shall 
smite  the  earth  with  the  rod  of  his  mouth, 
and  with  the  breath  of  his  lips  shall  slay 
the  wicked  "  (Isa.  xi.  4  ;  comp.  Matt.  iii.  12). 
Septuagint,  "  When  the  righteous  king  shall 
sit  upon  his  throne,  nothing  that  is  evil 
shall  offer  itself  befoie  his  eyes." 

Ver.  9. — Who  can  say,  l"  have  made  try 
heart  clean,  I  am  pure  from  my  sini  Tlie 
question  implies  the  answer,  "  No  one." 
This  is  expressed  in  Job  xiv.  4,  "  Who  can 
bring  a  clean  thiner  out  of  an  unclean?  not 
one."  At  the  dedication  of  the  t'iniple, 
Solomon  enunciates  this  fact  of  man's  cor- 
ruption, "There  is  no  man  that  sinueth  nut" 
(1  Kings  viii.  46).  The  prophet  testifir.s, 
"  Tho  heart  is  deceitful  above  all  things,  and 
it  is  desperately  sick :  who  can  know  it  ?  " 
(Jer.  xvii.  9).  And  St.  John  warns,  "  If 
we  say  tliat  We  have  no  sin,  we  deceive  our- 
selves, aTid  the  truth  is  not  in  us  "  (1  John 
i.  8).  The  heart  is  cleansed  by  self-exami- 
nation and  repentance ;  but  it  is  so  easy  to 
deceive  one's  self  in. this  matter,  sins  may  liirk 
undetected,  motives  may  be  overlooked,  so 
that  no  one  eau  rightly  be  self-righteous,  or 
conceited,  or  proud  of  his  spiritual  state. 
The  "my  sin"  at  the  end  of  the  clause  li 
rather  possible  than  actual   sin;   and  th4 


CH.  XX.  1—30.] 
• 


THE  PROVERBS. 


expression  means  that  no  one  can  prulo 
himself  on  being  secure  from  yielding  to 
temptation,  however  clean  for  a  time  his 
ooiisoience  may  be.  The  verse,  therefore, 
offers  a  stern  corrective  of  two  grievous 
spiritual  errors — presumption  and  apathy. 

Ver.  10.— Divers  weights,  and  divers 
measures ;  literally,  ttone  and  itone,  ephah 
and  ephah.  The  stones  were  used  for  weigh- 
ing ;  dishonest  traders  kept  them  of  different 
weiglits,  and  also  measures  of  different 
capacities,  substituting  one  for  the  other  in 
order  to  defiaud  unwary  customers.  The 
Septuagint  makes  this  plain  by  rendering, 
"  A  weight  great  and  small,  and  measures 
double"  (see  on  oh.  xi.  1  and  xvi.  11 ;  and 
uomp.  ver.  23).  The  ephah  was  a  dry 
measure,  being  one-tenth  of  the  homer,  and 
occupying  the  Fame  position  in  so, ids  as  the 
bath  did  in  liqui  's.  It  equalled  about -three 
pecks  of  our  measure.  Both  of  them  are 
alike  abomination  to  the  Lord  (ch.  xvii.  15 ; 
oomp.  Lev.  xix.  36;  Deut.  xxv.  13,  etc.); 
Septuagint,  "Are  impure  before  the  Lord, 
even  both  of  them,  and  he  who  doeth  them." 
Pseudo-Bernard  ('De  Pass.  Dom.,'  xvii.), 
applying  the  passage  mystically,  teaches 
that  a  man  may  be  said  "to  keep  a  double 
measure,  who,  being  conscious  of  his  own 
evil  character,  endeavours  toappearrighteous 
toothers;  who,  ns  he  puts  it,  "Suo.judicio 
terrsB  proximus  est,  et  aliis  cupit  elevatus 
videri."  Others,  connecting  this  verso  in 
thought  with  the  preceding,  see  in  it  a 
warning  ag.iinst  judging  a  neighbour  by 
a  standard  whiqh  we  do  not  apply  to  our- 
selves. The  Septuagint  Version  arranges 
the  matter  from  ver.  10  onwards  differently 
from  the  Hebrew,  omitting  vers.  14 — 19,  and 
placing  vera.  10—13  after  ver.  22. 

Ver.  11. — Even  a  chilcl  is  known  (maketh 
himself  known)  by  his  doings.  (For  "  even  " 
(gam),  see  on  oh.  xvii.  26.)  A  child  is  open, 
simple,  and  straightforward  in  his  actions ; 
he  has  not  the  reserves  and  concealments 
which  men  practise,  so  you  see  by  liis 
conduct  what  his  real  character  and  dis- 
position are.  Ewuld  takes  yhhyn  in  the 
sense  of  "  play,"  "  games  ;  "  but  it  seems 
never  to  have  this  meaning,  and  there  is  no 
need  to  change  the  usual  signification.  The 
habits  of  a  life  are  learned  in  early  age. 
The  boy  is  father  of  the  man.  Delitzsch 
quotes  the  German  proverbs,  "  What  means 
to  become  a  hook  bends  itself  early,"  and 
"  What  means  to  become  a  thorn  sharpens 
itself  early ;  "  and  the  Aramaean,  "  That 
which  will  become  a  gourd  shows  itself  in 
the  bud."  Whether  his  work  be  pure 
("clean,"  as  ver.  9  and  ch.  xvi.  2),  and 
whether  it  be  right,  His  conduct  will  show 
tlius  much,  and  will  help  one  to  prognosti- 
cate the  future.  Septuagint  (according  to 
the  Vatican),   ''In   his  pursuits  (iriTijSiv- 

PBOVEBBS. 


nua-iti)  a  young  man  will  be  fettered  in 
company  with  a  holy  man,  and  his  way  will 
be  straight,"  which  seems  to  mean  that  a 
gooLl  man  will  restrain  the  reckless  doings 
of  a  giddy  youth,  and  will  lead  him  into 
better  courses. 

Ver.  12.— The  hearing  ear,  and  the  seeing 
eye,  the  lord  hath  made  even  both  of  them. 
This  apothegm,  which  seems  to  be  nothing 
but  a  trite  truism,  brings  to  notice  many 
important  consequences.  First,  there  is 
the  result  noted  in  Ps.  xciv.  9,  "He  that 
planted  the  ear,  shall  he  not  hear  ?  He  that 
formed  the  eye,  shall  he  not  see?"  Hence 
we  learn  the  sleepless  providence  of  God. 
So  'Pirke  Aboth,'  "Know  that  which  is 
above  thee,  an  eye  that  seeth  all,  an  ear  that 
heareth  all."  We  learn  also  that  all  things 
are  directed  and  overruled  by  God  (comp. 
ch.  XV.  3 ;  xvi.  4).  Then  there  is  the  thought 
that  these  powers  of  ours,  being  the  gift  of 
God,  should  be  used  piously  and  in  God's 
service.  "  Mine  ears  hast  thou  opened  .  .  . 
Lo,  I  come  ...  I  delight  to  do  thy  will,  O 
my  God  "  (Ps.  xl.  6,  etc.).  The  eye  should 
be  blind,  the  ear  deaf,  to  all  that  might 
defile  or  excite  to  evil  (see  Isa.  xxxiii.  15). 
But  it  is  the  Lord  alone  that  enablps  the 
spiritual  organs  to  receive  the  wondrous 
things  of  God's  Law ;  they  must  be  educated 
by  grace  to  enable  them  to  perform  their 
proper  functions.  "  God  hath  given  us  eyes," 
says  St.  Chrysostotn  ('Hom.  xxii.  in  1 
Cor.'),  "  not  that  we  miiy  look  wantonly,  but 
that,  admiring  his  handiwork,  we  may  wor- 
ship the  Creator.  And  that  this  is  the  use 
of  our  eyes  is  evident  from  the  things  which 
are  seen.  For  the  lustre  of  the  sun  and  of 
the  sky  we  see  from  an  immeasurable  dis- 
tance, but  a  woman's  beauty  one  cannot 
discern  so  far  off.  Seesf  thou  that  for  this 
end  our  eye  was  chiefly  given?  Again,  he 
made  the  ear,  that  we  sijould  entertain  not 
blas|.hemou3  words,  but  saving  doctrines. 
Wliercfore  you  see,  when  it  receives  any- 
thing dissonant,  both  our  soul  shudders  and 
our  very  body  also.  And  ii  we  liear  anything 
cruel  or  merciliss,  again  our  flesh  creeps; 
but  if  anytliing  di  corons  and  kind,  we  even 
exult  and  rejoice."  "  He  that  hath  ears  to 
hear,  let  him  hear,"  Septuagint,  "  The  ear 
heareth  and  tlie  eye  seeth,  and  both  are  the 
works  of  the  Lord." 

Ver.  13. — Love  not  slee.p  lest  thou  come 
to  poverty  (see  ch.  vi.  9,  eto.>  The  fate  of 
the  sluggard  is  handled  again  in  oh.  xxiii. 
21,  as  often  before ;  e.g.  ch.  xii.  11 ;  xix.  15. 
The  LXX.,  taking  n:a  (shenah),  "sleep," 
as  perhaps  connected  with  the  verb  hje' 
(shanah),  triinslate,  "Love  not  to  rail,  that 
thou  be  not  exalted  (ha  /»?)  ^fapflpj),"  t.e. 
probably,  "Do  u  it  calumniate  otliers  in 
order  to  raise  yourself; "  others  translate, 
"  lest  ihou  be  out  off."     Open  thine  eyes, 

2  0 


386 


THE  PROVBBBS. 


[CH.  II.  1 — 3 


and  thou  shalt  ,be  satisfied  with  bread. 
These  words  seem  to  connect  this  clause  with 
Ter.  12.  God  gives  the  faculty,  but  man 
must  make  due  use  thereof.  The  gnomist 
urges,  "  Do  not  slumber  at  your  post,  or  sit 
down  idly  waiting ;  but  be  up  and  doing,  be 
wakeful  and  diligent,  and  then  you  shall 
prosper." 

Ver.  14. — It  is  naught,  it  is  naught,  saith 
the  buyer.  Tlie  purchaser  depreciates  the 
goods  which  he  wants,  in  order  to  lower  the 
price  demanded— a  practice  as  common  now 
as  in  old  time.  "I  don't  want  it,  I  don't 
want  it,"  says  the  Spanish  friar ;  "  but  drop 
it  into  my  hood."  The  Scotch  say,  "He 
that  lacks  (disparages)  my  mare  would  buy 
my  mare  "  (Kelly).  But  when  he  is  gone 
his  way,  then  he  boasteth.  When  he  has 
completed  his  purchase  and  obtained  the 
goods  at  his  own  price,  he  boasts  how  he  has 
tricked  the  seller.  Th«  LXX.  omits  Ters. 
14—19. 

Ver.lS. — There  is  gold,  and  a  multitude 
of  .rubies.  For  peninim,  which  is  rendered 
"rubies,"  "pearls,"  or  "coral,"  see  on  ch. 
iii.  15.  There  is  gold  which  is  precious, 
and  there  is  abundance  of  pearls  which  are 
still  more  valuable.  But  the  lips  of  know- 
ledge are  a  precious  jewel,  and  worth  more 
than  all.  We  had  the  expression,  "  lips  of 
knowledge,"  in  ch.  xiv.  7 ;  it  means  lips  that 
utter  wisdom.  Kelt,  often  translated  "jewel" 
in  the  Authorized  Version,  also  bears  the 
meaning  of  "vessel,"  "utensil."  So  here 
the  Vulgate,  vas  pretiosum;  and  the  wise 
man's  lips  are  called  a  vessel  because  they 
contain  and  distribute  the  wisdom  that  is 
within.  (On  the  excellence  and  value  of 
wisdom,  see  ch.  iii.  14,  etc. ;  viii.  11,  etc.) 
Connecting  this  with  the  preceding  verse, 
we  are  led  to  the  thought  of  buying,  and 
the  Lord's  parable  of  the  merchant  seeking 
goodly  pearls,  and  bartering  all  his  wealth 
to  gain  possession  of  a  worthy  jewel  (Matt, 
siii.  45,  etc.). 

Ver.  16. — Take  his  garment  that  is  surety 
for  a  stranger.  The  maxim  is  repeated  in 
ch.  xxvii.  13 ;  and  warnings  against  surety- 
ship are  found  in  ch.  vi.  1,  etc. ;  xi.  15 ;  xvii. 
18;  xxii.  26,  etc.  The  second  portion  of 
the  clause  is  translated  also,  "For  he  is 
surety  for  another."  If  a  man  is  so  weak 
and  foolish  as  to  become  security  for  any 
one,  and  is  unable  to  make  good  his  engaged 
payment,  let  him  lose  his  garment  which 
the  creditor  would  seize;  his  imprudence 
must  bring  its  own  punishment.  And  take 
a  pledge  of  him  for  a  strange  woman.  The 
Authorized  Version  probably  adopts  this 
rendering  in  conformity  with  ch,  xxvii.  13, 
where  it  occurs  in  the  text,  as  here  in  the 
margin  (the  Keri).  But  the  Khetib  has,  "  for 
strangers,"  which  seems  to  be  the  original 
reading;  and  the  first  words  ought  to  be 


translated,  "  hold  him  in  pledge ; "  «.«.  seize 
his  person  for  the  sake  of  the  strangers  for 
whom  he  has  stood  security,  so  as  not  to 
suffer  loss  from  them.  The  Law  endeavoured 
to  secure  lending  to  needy  brethren  without" 
interest  (see  Ps.  xv.  5;  Bzek.  xviii.  8,  13, 
etc. ;  xxii.  12);  but  it  allowed  the  creditor  to 
secure  himself  by  taking  pledges  of  his 
debtor,  while  it  regulated  this  system  so  as 
to  obviate  most  of  its  severity  and  oppressive- 
ness (see  the  restrictions  in  Exod.  xxii. 
26,  etc.;  Dent.  xxiv.  6, 12,  etc.).  "  Where  the 
debtor  possessed  nothing  which  he  could 
pledge,  he  gave  the  personal  security  of 
a  friend.  This  was  a  very  formal  proceed- 
ing. The  surety  gave  his  hand  both  to  the 
debtor  and  to  the  creditor  before  an  assembly 
legally  convened,  he  deposited  a  pledge,  and, 
in  accordance  with  this  twofold  promise,  was 
regarded  by  the  creditor  in  just  the  same 
light  as  the  debtor  himself,  and  treated 
accordingly.  If  the  debtor,  or  in  his  place 
the  surety,  was  unable  to  pay  the  debt  when 
it  fell  due,  he  was  entirely  at  the  mercy  of 
the  creditor.  The  authorities  troubled 
themselves  but  little  about  these  relations, 
and  the  law,  so  far  as  it  is  preserved  to  us, 
gave  no  directions  in  the  matter.  We  see, 
however,  from  many  allusions  and  narratives, 
lyhat  harsh  forms  these  relations  actually 
took,  especially  ia  later  times,  when  the 
ancient  national  brotherly  love  which  the 
Law  presupposed  was  more  aud  more  dying 
out.  The  creditor  could  not  only  forcibly 
appropriate  all  the  movable,  but  also  the 
fixed  property,  including  the  hereditary 
estate  (this  at  least  till  its  redemption  in 
the  year  of  jubilee),  nay,  he  could  even  (if 
he  could  find  nothing  else  of  value)  carry 
off  as  a  prisoner  the  body  of  his  debtor,  or 
of  his  wife  and  child,  to  employ  them  in  his 
service,  though  this  could  only  be  done  for 
a  definite  period"  (Ewald,  ' AJatiquities,'  p. 
184,  etc.,  transl.). 

Ver.  17.— Bread  of  deceit  is  sweet  to  a 
man;  He  vised  Version,  bread  of  faleehood ; 
i.e.  bread  gained  without  labour,  or  by 
unrighteous  means  (comp.  ch.  x.  2).  This  is 
agreeable  becauseit  is  easily  won,  and  has  the 
relish  of  forbidden  fruit.  "Wickedness  is 
sweet  in  his  mouth"  (Job  ix.  12).  But 
afterwards  his  month  shall  be  filled  with 
gravel.  He  will  find  in  his  "bread"  no 
nourishment,  but  rather  discomfort  and  posi- 
tive injury  (comp.  Job  xx.  14).  The  expres- 
sion, "  to  eat  gravel,"  is  intimated  in  Lam. 
iii.  16,  "He  hath  broken  my  teeth  with 
gravel-stones;"  it  implies  grievous  disap- 
pointment and  unprofitableness.  See  here 
a  «  arning  against  evil  pleasures — 

ievy'  TiSoviiv  (pepouffay  Sartpoy  ll\d$nr. 

"Sperne  volnptates:   nooet  empta  dolon 
voluptas." 


OH.  XX.  1—30.] 


THE  PBOVEBBa 


887 


Oort  supposes  that  the  gnome  in  the  text  is 
derived  from  a.  riddle,  which  asked,  "  What 
is  aweet  at  first,  but  afterwards  like  sand  in 
the  mouth?" 

Ver.  18. — Every  purpose  is  estahlished  by 
coTinsel  (comp.  oh.  xv.  22,  where  see  note). 
The  Tiilmud  says,  '.'  Even  the  most  prudent 
of  men  needs  friends'  counsels;"  and  none 
but  the  most  conceited  would  deem  himself 
superior  to  advice,  or  would  fail  to  allow 
that,  as  the  Vulgate  puts  it,  cogitationes 
eonsiliis  rdborantur.  This  is  true  in  all 
relations  of  life,  in  great  and  small  matters 
alike,  in  peace,  and,  as  our  moralist  adds, 
in  war.  With  good  advice  make  war; 
Vulgate,  Gubernaculis  tractanda  sunt  hetta  ; 
Eevised  Version,  By  wise  gmdanee  make 
thou  war.  The  word  here  used  is  tahebuUith, 
for  which  see  note,  ch.  i.  5.  It  is  a  maritime 
metaphor,  rightly  retained  by  the  Vulgate, 
and  might  be  rendered  "  pilotings,"  "  eteer- 
ings."  War  is  a  necessary  evil,  but  it  must 
be  undertaken  prudently  and  with  a  due 
consideration  of  circumstances,  means,  etc. 
Our  Lord  illustrates  the  necessity  of  due 
circumspection  in  following  him  by  the  case 
of  a  thieatened  conflict  between  two  con- 
tending  kings  (Luke  xiv.  31,  etc.).  Giotius 
quotes  the  gnome— 

rvwiiai  irXeov  Kparovaa/  %  <r6evos  x^P''"- 
"Than  strength  of  hands  availeth  counsel 

more." 
To  which  we  may  add — 

YiovKrts  yap  opdrjs  ovSev  hr<pa\i(rTepoV' 

"  Good  counsel  is  the  safest  thing  of  all." 
(Comp.  oh.  xxiv.  6,  where  the  hemistich  is 
re-echoed.) 

Ver.  19. — He  that  goeth  ahout  as  a  tale- 
bearer revealeth  secrets.  Almost  the  same 
proverb  occurs  in  ch.  xi.  13.  The  gadding 
gossiper  is  sure  to  let  out  any  secret 
entrusted  to  him;  therefore,  it  is  im[jlied, 
be  careful  in  what  you  say  to  him.  Meddle 
not  with  him  that  flattereth  with  his  lips ; 
rather,  that  openeth  wide  hit  lips — that 
cannot  keep  his  mouth  shut,  a  babbler,  as 
ch.  xiii.  3  (where  see  note).  The  Vulgate 
erroneously  makes  one  sentence  of  the 
verse,  "  With  him  who  reveals  secrets,  and 
walketh  deceitfully,  and  openeth  wide  his 
lips,  have  no  dealings."  Talmud,  "When 
I  utter  a  word,  it  hath  dominion  over  me ; 
but  when  I  utter  it  not,  I  have  dominion 
over  it."  Says  the  Persian  poet,  "The 
silent  man  hath  his  shoulders  covered  with 
the  garment  of  security."  Xenocrates  used 
t»  say  that  he  iometimes  was  "sorry  for 
having  spoken,  never  for  having  kept 
gilence"  (Cahen).  ^    .  ., 

Ver.  20. This  is  an  enforcement  ot  tne 

fifth  commandment,  by  denouncing  the 
punishment  which  the  moral  government 


of  God  shall  exact  from  the  unnatural 
child.  The  legal  penalty  may  be  seen 
(Exod.  xxi.  17;  Lev.  xx.  9);  but  this  was 
probably  seldom  or  never  carried  into 
execution  (comp.  Matt.  xv.  4 ;  Mark  vii. 
10).  His  lamp  shaU  be  put  out  in  obsoura 
(the  blackest)  darkness  (comp.  ch.  xiii.  9). 
The  expression  is  peculiar;  it  is  literally, 
according  to  the  Khetib,  In  the  apple  of  the 
eye  of  darkness,  as  in  ch.  vii.  9 ;  i.e.  in  the 
very  centre  of  darkness;  he  will  find 
himself  surrounded  on  all  sides  by  midnight 
darkness,  without  escape,  with  no  hope  of 
Divine  protection.  "  Lamp  "  is  a  metaphor 
applied  to  the  bodily  and  the  spiritual  life, 
to  happiness  and  prosperity,  to  a  man's 
fame  and  reputation,  to  a  man's  posterity; 
and  all  these  senses  may-  be  involved  in 
the  denunciation  of  the  disobedient  and 
stubborn  child.  He  shall  suffer  in  body 
and  soul,  in  character,  in  fortune,  in  his 
children.  His  fate  is  the  exact  counterpart 
of  the  blessing  promised  in  the  Law. 
Septuagint,  "  The  lamp  of  him  that  revileth 
father  and  mother  shall  be  extinguished, 
and  the  pupils  of  his  eyes  shuU  behold 
darkness."  Talmud,  "  Whosoever  abandons 
his  parents  means  bis  body  to  become  the 
prey  of  scorpions."    Cato, '  Dist.,'  iii.  23 — 

"  Dilige  non  jegra  oaros  pietate  parentes; 
Nee  matrem  ofi'endas,  dum  vis  bonus  esse 
parenti." 

One  of  the  evil  generations  denounced  by 
Agur  (ch.  XXI.  11)  is  that  which  curse th 
parents. 

Ver.  21. — An  inheritance  may  be  gotten 
hastily  at  the  beginning — or,  which  in  the 
beginning  is  obtained  in  haste — ^but  the  end 
thereof  shall  not  be  blessed ;  or,  its  end  shall 
not  be  blessed.  The  Khetib  gives  n^nhp, 
which  (comp.  Zech.  xi  8)  may  mean 
« detested,"  but  this  gives  no  sense ;  it  is 
better,  with  the  Keri,  to  replace  Icheth  with 
he,  and  read  n^n'ap  (meboheleth'),  "hastened," 
"hastily  acquired"  (see  ch.  xiii.  11,  Septua- 
gint). The  maxim,  taken  in  connection 
with  the  preceding  verse,  may  apply  to  a 
bad  son  who  thinks  his  parents  live  too 
long,  and  by  violence  robs  them  of  their 
possessions ;  or  to  one  who,  like  the  prodigal 
in  the  parable,  demands  prematurely  his 
portion  of  tha  paternal  goods.  But  it  may 
also  be  taken  generally  as  denouncing  the 
fate  of  those  who  make  haste  to  be  rich, 
being  unscrupulous  as  to  the  means  by 
which  they  gain  wealth  (see  on  ch.  xxiii. 
11 ;  xxviii.  20,  22).  A  Greek  gnome  sayi 
roundly — 

OvSels  iirXoiriicrev  tox^"»  SUcuos  &*. 
'  No  righteous  man  e'er  grew  rich  suddenly." 

Ver.  22.— Say  not  thou,  I  will  recompenB* 


388 


THE  PBOVEBBS. 


[oh.  XX.  1 — 30, 


e»il  (ch.  xxiv.  29).  Tlie  Jni  talionit  is  the 
natural  feeling  of  man,  to  do  to  others  as 
they  have  done  unto  you,  to  requite  evil 
with  evil.  But  the  moralist  teaches  a 
better  lesson,  urging  men  not  to  study 
revenge,  and  approaching  neiuer  to  Christ's 
injunction,  which  gives  the  law  of  charity, 
"  Whatsoever  ye  would  (Jitra  tiv  0eA.7jT6)  that 
men  should  do  to  you,  do  ye  even  so  to 
them  '■  (Matt.  vii.  12).  The  Christian  rule 
is  expounded  fully  hy  St.  Paul  (Kom.  xii. 
H,  17,  etc.).  It  was  not  unknown  to  the 
Jews ;  for  we  read  in  'I'obit  iv.  15,  "  Do  that 
to  uo  man  which  thou  hatest ;  "  and  Hillel 
enjoins,  "Do  not  thou  that  to  thy  neighbour 
which  thou  hatest  when  it  is  done  to  thee." 
Even  Ihe  heathens  had  excogitated  this 
great  principle.  There  is  a  saying  of 
Aristotle,  preserved  by  Diogenes  Laertius, 
"Act  towards  your  friends  as  you  would 
wish  them  to  act  towards  you."  The 
Chinese  have  a  proverb,  "  Water  does  not 
remain  on  the  mountain,  or  vengeance  in  a 
gi-eat  mind."  Wait  on  the  Lord,  and  he 
shall  save  thee.  The  pious  writer  urges 
the  injured  person  to  commit  his  cause  to 
the  Lord,  not  in  the  hope  of  seeing 
vengeance  taken  on  his  enemy,  but  in  the 
certainty  that  God  will  help  him  to  bear 
the  wrong  and  deliver  him  in  his  own 
good  time  and  way.  The  Christian  takes 
St.  Peter's  view,  "  Who  is  he  that  will 
harm  you,  if  ve  be  followers  of  that  which 
is  good  ?"  (1  Pet.  ili.  13),  knowing  that  "  all 
things,  work  together  for  good  to  them  that 
love  God"  (Rom.  viii.  28;  comp.  Ecclus. 
ii.  2,  6).  Septuagint,  "Say  not,  I  will 
avenge  myself  on  my  enemy,  but  wait  on 
the  Lord,  that  ('/j/a)  he  may  help  thee."  The 
last  clause  may  be  grammatically  rendered 
thus,  but  it  is  more  in  accordance  with  the 
spirit  of  the  proverb,  as  Delitzsch  observes, 
to  regard  it  as  a  promise.  Vulgate,  et 
liberabii  te. 

Ver.  23. — This  is  a  repetition,  with  a 
slight  variation,  of  ver.  10  and  ch.  li.  1 
(where  see  notes).  Is  not  good.  A  litotes, 
equivalent  to  "  is  very  evil,"  answering  to 
"abomination  "  in  the  first  member.  Septua- 
gint, "  is  not  good  before  him "  (comp.  oh, 
xxiv.  23). 

Ver.  24.— Kan's  goings  are  of  the  Lord. 
In  the  first  clause  the  word  for  "man"  is 
geber,  which  implies  "  a  mighty  mnn ; "  in 
the  stcond  clause  the  word  is  adam,  "a 
human  creature."  So  the  Septuagint  has 
iiv)]p  in  one  clause  and  9vtit)>s  in  tlie  other. 
The  proverb  says  that  the  steps  of  a  great 
and  powerful  man  depend,  as  their  final 
cause,  upon  the  Lord;  he  conditions  and 
controls  results.  Man  has  free-will,  and 
is  responsible  for  his  actions,  but  (xod 
foreknows  them,  and  holds  the  thn  ad  that 
eonnects  them  together ;  he  gives  prevent- 


ing grace;  he  gives  efficient  grace;  and 
man  blindly  works  out  the  designs  of 
Omnipotence  according  as  he  obeys  oi 
resists.  A  similar  maxim  is  found  in  Pg. 
xxxvii.  23,  "  A  man's  goings  are  established 
of  the  Lord,"  but  the  meaning  there  is  tliat 
it  is  God's  aid  which  enables  a  man  to  do 
certain  actions.  Here  we  have  very  much 
the  same  intimation  that  is  found  in  ch.  ii.  6 
and  xix.  21 ;  and  see  note  on  ch.  xvi.  9.  Hence 
arises  the  old  prayer  used  formerly  at  piime, 
and  inserted  now  (with  some  omissions) 
at  the  end  of  the  Anglican  Communion 
Service:  "O  almighty  Lord,  and  ever- 
lasting God,  vouchsafe,  we  beseech  thee, 
to  direct,  sanctify,  and  govern,  both  our 
hearts  and  bodies,  our  thoughts,  words,  and 
actions,  in  the  ways  of  thy  laws,  and  in 
the  works  of  thy  commandments ;  that 
through  thy  most  mighty  protection  we 
may  be  preserved  both  here  and  for  ever." 
If  man  cannot  see  all  sides,  as  God  does, 
cannot  comprehend  the  beginning,  middle, 
and  end  in  one  view,  how  then  can  a  man 
(a  weak  mortal)  understand  his  own  way  ? 
How  can  he  find  out  of  himself  whither  he 
should  go,  or  what  will  be  the  issue  of  his 
doings  (comp.  ch.  xvi.  25;  Jer.  x.  23)? 
St.  Gregory,  "It  is  well  said  by  Solomon 
[Eooles.  ix.  1],  'There  are  lighteous  and 
wise  men,  and  their  works  are  in  tlie  liand 
of  God  ;  and  yet  no  man  knoweth  whether 
he  is  deserving  of  love  or  of  hatred;  but  all 
things  are  kept  uncertain  for  the  time  to 
come.'  Hence  it  is  said  again  by  the  same 
Solomon, '  What  man  will  be  able  to  under- 
stand his  own  way  ? '  And  any  one  doing 
good  or  evil  is  doubtless  known  by  the 
testimony  of  his  own  conscience.  But  it  is 
said  that  their  own  way  is  not  knovra  to 
men,  for  this  reason,  because,  even  if  a  man 
understands  that  he  is  acting  rightly,  yet 
he  knows  not,  under  the  strict  inquiry, 
whither  he  is  going  "  ('  Moral.,'  xxix.  34). 

Ver.  25. — It  is  a  snare  to  the  man  who 
devoureth  that  which  is  holy.  This  verse, 
which  is  plainly  a  warning  against  rash 
vows,  has  received  more  than  one  interpre- 
tation. The  Vulgate  has,  Buina  est  liomini 
devorare  sanctos,  which  is  explained  to  mean 
that  it  is  destruction  for  a  man  to  persecute 
the  saints  of  God.  But  the  word  devorara 
is  not  certain,  as  the  manuscripts  vary 
between  this  and  four  other  readings,  viz. 
devotare,  denotare,  devovere,  and  devocare. 
The  Authorized  Version  signifies  that  it  is 
a  sin  to  take  for  one's  own  consumption 
things  dedicated  to  God,  as  firstfruits,  tlie 
priests'  portions,  etc. ;  or  a  man's  snare,  i.e. 
his  covetousuess  (1  Tim.  vi.  9),  leads  him  to 
commit  sacrilege.  So  Wordsworth.  But  it 
is  best,  with  Delitzsch,  to  take  yb^  (yala)  aj 
the  abbreviated  future  of  yi^  or  M^,  "to 


Cfl.  XX.  1—30.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


369 


Bpealc  rashly ; "  and  then  hodenh,  "  holinpss," 
will  be  an  exclamation,  like  korban  (Mark 
v.i.  11).  The  clause  will  tlien  run,  "It  is  a 
snare  to  a  man  rashly  to  cry.  Holiness  1" 
equivalent  to  "  It  is  holy  1 "  i.e.  to  use  the 
formula  for  consecrating  something  to  holy 
purposes.  Septuagint,  "It  is  a  snare  to  a 
man  hastily  to  consecrate  sometliing  of  his 
own"  (comp.  Bodes,  v.  2,  4,  etc.).  And 
after  vows  to  make  inquiry;  i.e.  after  lie  has 
made  his  vow,  to  begin  to  consider  whether 
he  can  fulfil  it  or  not.  This  is  a,  snare  to 
a  man,  strangles  his  conscience,  and  leads 
him  into  the  grievous  sins  of  perjury  and 
sacrilege.  Septuagint,  "For  after  vowing 
ensueth  repentance." 

Ver.  26. — A  wise  king  scattereth  the 
wicked  (ver.  8).  The  verb  is  zarah,  which 
means  "to  winnow,  or  sift,"  The  king 
separates  the  wicked  and  the  good,  as  the 
winnowing  fan  or  shovel  divides  the  chaff 
from  the  wheat.  The  same  metaphor  ia 
used  of  Christ  (Matt.  iii.  12),  "Whose  fan  is 
in  I  lis  hand,  and  he  will  througlily  purge 
his  floor,  and  gather  his  wheat  info  the 
garner;  but  he  will  burn  up  the  chaff 
with  unquenchable  tire"  (comp.  Jer.  xv.  7). 
Septuagint,  "  A  winnower  (Km/i'fiTmp)  of  the 
ungodly  is  a  wise  king."  And  bringeth  the 
Wheel  over  them.  The  threshing-wheel  is 
meant  (see  Isa.  xxviii.  27 ;  Amos  i.  3).  This 
was  a  wooden  frame  with  three  or  four 
rollers  under  it  armed  with  iron  teeth.  It 
was  drawn  by  two  oxen,  a  id,  aided  by  the 
weight  of  the  driver,  who  had  his  seat  upon 
it,  it  crushed  out  the  grain,  and  cut  up  the 
straw  into  fodder.  Another  machine  much 
used  in  Palestine  was  made  of  two  thick 
planks  fastened  together  side  by  side,  and 
having  sharp  stones  fixed  in  rows  on  the 
lower  surface.  It  is  not  implied  that  the 
king  employed  the  corn-drag  as  an  instru- 
ment of  punishment,  which  was  sometimes 
so  used  in  war,  as  possibly  may  be  inferred 
from  2  Sam.  xii.  31;  1  Chron.  xx.  3;  and 
Amos  i.  8.  The  idea  of  threshing  is  carried 
on,  and  the  notion  is  )ather  of  separation 
than  of  punishment,  though  tlie  latter  is 
not  wholly  excluded.  The  wise  ruler  will 
not  only  distinguish  between  the  godless 
and  the  good,  but  will  show  his  discrimi- 
nation by  visiting  the  evil  with  condign 
punishment.  Septuagint,  "  He  will  bring 
the  wheel  upon  them  ;  "  the  Vulgate  has 
curiously,  Incurvat  super  eot  fornicem,  "  He 
bends  an  arch  over  them,"  which  Latin 
commentators  explain  as  a  triumphal  arch, 
meaning  that  the  king  conquers  and  subdues 
the  wicked,  and  celebrated  his  victory  over 
them.  A  patent  anachronism  which  needs 
no  comment  I 

Ver.  27. — The  spirit  of  man  is  the  candle 
(lamp)  of  the  lord.  Neshamah,  "  spirit,"  or 
•'bteafli,"  ia  the  principle  of  lite  breathed  into 


man  by  God  himself  (Gen,  ii.  7),  distinguish- 
ing man  from  brutes— the  conscious  human 
soul.  We  may  consider  it  as  equivalent  to 
what  we  Christians  call  conscience,  with  its 
tW'fold  character  of  receiving  light  and 
illumination  from  God,  and  sitting  as  judge 
and  arbiter  of  actions.  It  is  named  "the 
Lord's  lamp,"  because  this  moral  sense  is 
a  direct  gift  of  God,  and  enables  a  man 
to  see  his  real  condition.  Our  Lord  (Matt, 
vi.  23)  speaks  of  the  light  that  is  in 
man,  and  gives  a  solemn  warning  against 
the  danger  of  letting  it  be  darkened  by 
neglect  and  sin;  and  St.  Paul  (1  Cor.  ii.  11) 
argues,  "  Who  among  men  knoweth  the 
things  of  a  man  save  tlie  spirit  of  the  man, 
which  is  in  him?"  As  Bllhu  says  (Job 
xxxii.  8),  "There  is  a  spirit  in  man,  and 
tlie  breath  of  the  Almighty  giveth  them 
understanding."  And  Aristotle  speaks  of 
practical  wisdom  (_<f>p6ffiins)  combined  with' 
virtue  as  "the  eye  of  the  soul  (Sjina  rrjs 
tf/uxvs)."  Searchmg  all  the  inward  parts  of 
the  belly;  i.e.  ihe  very  depths  of  the  soul, 
probing  thoughts,  desires,  affections,  will, 
and  approving  or  reproving,  according  as 
they  are  in  conformity  with  or  opposition 
to  God's  Law.  We  must  remember  that 
Eastern  houses,  before  the  introduction  of 
glas<,  had  very  scanty  openings  to  admit 
light,  and  lamps  were  necessary  if  for  any 
purpose  the  interior  had  to  be  thoroughly 
illuminated.  Hence  tlie  metaphor  used  above 
would  strike  an  Oriental  more  forcibly  than 
it  strikes  us.  Septuagint,  "The  breath 
(iryoii,  as  eh.  xi.  13)  of  man  is  a  light  of  the 
Lord,  who  searches  the  chambers  of  the 
belly."  St.  Gregory  ('  Moral.,'  xii.  64),  "We 
ought  to  bear  in  mind  that  in  holy  Writ  by 
the  title  of  the  '  belly,'  or  the  '  womb,'  the 
mind  is  used  to  be  understood.  For  the 
light  of  grace,  which  comes  from  above, 
affiirds  a  'breathway'  to  man  unto  life, 
which  same  light  is  said  to  '  search  all 
the  inward  parts  of  the  belly,'  in  that  it 
penetrates  all  the  secrets  of  the  heart,  that 
the  things  which  weie  liidden  in  the  soul 
tnuching  itself  it  may  bring  back  before  the 
eyes  thereof"  (Oxford  tr.iusl.). 

Ver.  28. — Mercy  and  truth  preserve  the 
kin^,  (For  "  mercy  and  truth,"  see  note  on 
ch.  iii.  3.)  The  love  and  faithfulness  which 
the  king  displays  in  dealii-g  with  liia  subjects 
elicits  the  like  virtues  in  them,  and  these 
are  the  safeguard  of  his  throne.  His  throne 
is  upholden  by  mercy ;  or,  lave.  So  the  king 
is  well  called  the  father  of  his  people,  aJid 
in  modern  time?  the  epithet  "gracious"  is 
applied  to  the  si  ivereifjn  as  being  the  fountain 
of  mercy  and  coude  cension.  Sallust,  '  Jn- 
gurlha,'  X.,  "  Non  exercitus  noquo  thesauri 
prasoidia  regni  sunt,  veruui  amiei,  quos 
neque  armis  cogcie  neque  auro  parare 
queas;  ofSoio  et  fide  pariuntur."  Septuagint, 


THE  PBOVBBBS. 


[CH.  XX.  1—30. 


"  Mercy  (}\€7iiio<rivn)  and  truth  are  a  guard 
to  a  king,  and  will  surround  his  throne  with 
righteousness."  "  The  subject's  love,"  says 
our  English  maxim,  "is  theMng'slife-guard." 
Ver.  29. — The  glory  of  young  men  is  their 
strength.  That  which  makes  the  ornament 
(tiplieretli)  of  youth  is  unimpaired  strength 
and  vigour,  which  can  only  be  attained  by 
due  exercise  combined  with  self-control. 
The  moralist  (Eccles.  xi.  9)  bids  the  young 
man  rejoice  in  his  youth,  and  let  his  heart 
cheer  him  in  those  happy  days,  but  at  the 
same  time  remember  that  be  is  responsible 
for  the  use  which  he  makes  of  his  powers 
and  faculties,  for  for  all  these  things  God 
will  bring  him  to  judgment  The  Greek 
gives  •  needful  warning — 

Kiliviiiro  v4os  Hv  &s  yipuv  Iotj  itotL 
"  In  youth  remember  thou  wilt  soon  be  old." 

.  Septuagiht,  "Wisdom  is  an  ornament  to 
young  men."  But  Tcoach  is  bodily,  not 
mental,  power.  The  beauty  of  old  men  is 
the  grey  head  (ch.  xvi  31).  That  which 
gives  an  honourable  look  to  old  age  is  the 
hoary  head,  which  suggests  wisdom  and 
experience  (comp.  Ecclus.  XXT.  3 — 6).  On 
the  other  hand,  the  Greek  gnomist  wains — 

TloKih.  ■j(p6vov  fffiJ/vtrts  oi  tppovijffefcs, 
"  Grey  hairs  not  wisdom  indicate,  but  age." 

Ver.  30. — The  blueness  of  a  wound  oleanseth 
away  evil.  So  the  Vulgate,  Livor  vulnerit 
absterget  mala.  GhahwoOi  means  "  stripes," 
and  the  proverb  says  that  deep-cutting 
stripes  are  the  only  effectual  cure  of  evil; 
i.e.  severe  punishment  is  the  best  healing 
process  iii  cases  of  moral  delinquency  (ch. 
xix.  29).  Painful  remedies,  incisions, 
cauteries,  amputations,  are  often  necessary 
in  the  successful  treatment  of  bodily  ail- 
ments;   spiritual    sickneia    needs    sterner, 


more  piercing,  remedies.  So  do  stripes  the 
inward  parts  of  the  belly;  or  better,  and 
ttrolcee  that  reach,  etc.  The  stings  of 
conscience,  warnings  and  reproofs  which 
penetrate  to  the  inmost  recesses  of  the 
heart,  chastisement  which  affects  the  whole 
spiritual  being, — these  are  needful  to  the 
correction  and  purification  of  inveterate  evil. 
Aben  Ezra  connects  this  verse  with  the 
preceding  thus:  as  strength  gives  a  glory 
to  young  men,  and  hoar  hairs  adorn  an  old 
man,  so  wounds  and  bruises,  so  to  speak, 
ornament  the  sinner,  mark  him  out,  and  at 
the  same  time  heal  and  amend  him.  It 
may  also  be  connected  with  ver.  27.  If  a 
man  will  not  use  the  lamp  which  God  has 
given  him  for  illumination  and  correction,  he 
must  expect  severe  chastisement  and  sternest 
discipline.  Septuagint,  "Bruises  (Jmilmia) 
and  contusions  befall  bad  men,  and  plagues 
that  reach  to  the  chambers  of  the  belly." 
St.  Gregory,  'Moral.,'  xxiii.  40,  "By  the 
blueness  of  a  wound  he  implies  the  discipline 
of  blows  on  the  body.  But  blows  in  the 
secret  parts  of  the  belly  are  the  wounds  of 
the  mind  within,  which  are  inflicted  by 
codipunction.  For  as  the  beUy  is  distended 
when  filled  with  food,  so  is  the  mind  puffed 
up  when  swollen  with  wicked  thoughts. 
The  blueness,  then,  of  a  wound,  and  blows 
in  the  secret  parts  of  the  belly,  cleanse  away 
evil,  because  both  outward  discipline  does 
away  with  faults,  and  compunction  pierces 
the  distended  mind  with  the  punishment  of 
penance.  But  they  differ  from  each  other 
in  this  respect,  that  the  wounds  of  blowi 
give  us  pain,  the  sorrows  of  compunction 
have  good  savour.  The  one  afflict  and 
torture,  the  others  restore  when  they  afSiet 
us.  Through  the  one  there  is  sorrow  in 
affliction,  through  the  other  there  is  joy  in 
grief"  (Oxford  transl.). 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  1. —  Wine  the  mocker.  Intemperance  was  not  so  common  a  vice  in  biblical 
times  as  it  has  become  more  recently,  nor  did  the  light  wines  of  the  East  exercise  so 
deleterious  an  effect  as  the  strong  drink  that  is  manufactured  in  Europe  is  seen  to  pro- 
duce. Therefore  all  that  is  said  in  the  Bible  against  the  evil  of  drunkenness  applies  with 
much-increased  force  to  the  ajjgravated  intemperance  of  England  to-day. 

I.  Wine  is  a  mocker  beoausb  it  allures  the  weak.  It  makes  great  promises. 
Strong  drink  is  pleasant  to  the  palate.  The  effect  of  it  on  the  nervous  system  is  at 
first  agreeably  stimulating.  In  weakness  and  weariness  it  seems  to  give  comlortable 
relief.  The  associations  connected  with  it  are  made  to  be  most  attractive.  It  goes  with 
genial  companionship,  and  it  appears  to  favour  the  flow  of  good  fellowship.  In  sick- 
ness it  promises  renewed  strength ;  it  offers  consolation  in  sorrow ;  at  festive  seasons  it 
pretends  to  heighten  the  joy  and  to  take  its  place  as  a  cheering  friend  of  man.  Moreover, 
all  these  attractive  traits  are  aggravated  with  the  weak.  The  need  of  the  stimulus  is 
more  keenly  felt  by  such  persons ;  the  early  effects  of  it  are  more  readily  and  pleasantly 
recognized ;  there  is  less  power  of  will  and  judgment  to  resist  its  alluring  influence. 

n.  Wine  ib  a  mocker  because  it  deceives  the  unwary.  The  danger  that  lurki 
in  tfie  cup  is  not  seen  at  first,  and  the  sparkling  wine  looks  as  innocent  as  a  divint 


<H.  XX.  1—30.]  THE  PEOVERBS.  391 

nectar.  The  evil  that  it  prorluces  comes  on  by  slow  and  insidious  stages.  No  one 
thinks  of  becoming  a  drunkard  on  the  first  day  of  tasting  iutoxicating  drink.  Every 
victina  of  the  terrible  evil  of  intemperance  was  once  an  innocent  child,  and,  whether 
he  began  in  youth  or  in  later  years,  every  one  who  has  gone  to  excess  commenced  with 
moderate  and  apparently  harmless  quantities.  HappUy,  the  majority  of  those  who 
take  a  little  are  wise  or  strong  enough  not  to  abandon  themselves  to  the  tyranny  of 
drinking  habits.  But  the  difficulty  is  to  determine  beforehand  who  will  be  able  to  stand 
and  who  will  not  have  sufficient  strength.  Under  these  circumstances,  it  is  a  daring 
piece  of  presumption  for  any  one  to  be  quite  sure  that  he  will  always  be  so  wary 
as  to  keep  out  of  the  snare  that  has  been  fatal  to  many  of  his  brethren  who  once 
stood  in  exactly  the  same  free  and  healthy  position  in  which  he  is  at  present.  It  is 
far  safer  not  to  tempt  our  own  natures,  and  to  guard  ourselves  against  the  mockery 
of  wine,  by  keeping  from  all  use  of  the  strong  drink  itself. 

III.  Wine  is  a  mocker  because  it  brings  ruin  on  its  victims.  It  has  no  pity. 
It  hounds  its  dupes  on  to  destruction,  and  then  it  laughs  at  their  fate.  When  once  it 
holds  a  miserable  wretch  it  will  never  willingly  release  him.  Too  late,  he  discovers 
that  he  is  a  slave,  deceived  by  what  promised  to  be  his  best  friend,  and  flung  into  a 
dungeon  from  which,  by  his  unaided  powers,  he  can  never  effect  an  escape.  There  is  a 
peculiar  mockery  in  this  fate.  The  victim  is  disgraced  and  degraded.  His  very  human 
nature  is  wretched,  insulted,  almost  destroyed.  His  social  position  is  lost ;  his  business 
scattered  to  the  winds ;  his  family  life  broken  up  and  made  unutterably  wretched ;  his 
soul  destroyed.  This  is  the  work  of  the  wine  that  sparkles  in  the  cup.  We  should 
allow  no  quarter  to  so  vile  a  deceiver. 

Ver.  3. — The  honow  of  peace.  The  old  world  looked  for  glory  in  war ;  the  Christian 
ideal — anticipated  in  Old  Testament  teaching — is  to  recognize  honour  in  peace.  It  is 
better  to  keep  peace  than  to  be  victorious  in  war,  better  to  make  peace  than  to  win 
battles.     Consider  the  grounds  of  this  higher  view  of  conflict  and  its  issues. 

I.  The  honour  of  peace  may  be  seen  in  self-suppression.  It  is  much  more  easy 
to  give  the  reins  to  ill  will  and  hasty  passion.  Men  find  it  harder  to  fight  their  own 
temper  than  to  do  battle  with  alien  foes.  It  is  the  same  with  nations  when  the  spirit 
of  war  has  maddened  them.  Heedless  of  consequences  to  themselves,  and  blind  to  the 
rights  of  their  neighbours,  they  hurl  themselves  headlong  into  the  horrors  of  battle. 
But  if  men  could  learn  to  curb  their  own  strong  feelings,  they  would  really  show  more 
strength  than  by  raging  in  unrestrained  fury. 

II.  The  honour  of  peace  mat  be  becosnized  in  maonanimitv.  It  may  be  that  we 
are  in  the  right,  and  our  foes  unquestionably  in  the  wrong.  Still,  it  is  not  essential 
that  we  should  fight  to  the  bitter  end.  We  may  forego  our  right.  It  may  be  a  generous 
and  noble  thing  to  suffer  wrong  without  resisting  it.  We  cannot  but  see  how  much 
more  harm  is  done  in  asserting  just  claims  by  force  than  would  result  from  silent  sub- 
mission after  a  dignified  protest.  Often  the  more  magnanimous  conduct  wili  result  in 
<he  very  end  that  would  have  been  sought  through  violent  measures.  For  it  is  possible 
a  appeal  to  the  generous  instincts  of  opponents. 

m.  The  homoub  of  peace  mat  be  observed  in  charitt.  We  should  ever 
remember  that  even  those  who  behave  to  us  as  enemies  are  still  our  brethren.  We 
have  their  welfare  to  consider  even  while  they  may  be  plotting  evil  against  us.  Christ 
prayed  for  his  persecutors  (Luke  xxiii.  34).  So  did  St.  Stephen  (Acts  vii.  60).  Indeed, 
our  Lord  died  for  his  enemies.  He  came  to  make  an  end  of  the  fearful  strife  between 
man  and  God.  But  while  he  did  so,  he  suffered  from  the  fray.  The  Peacemaker  was 
the  victim  of  the  passions  of  the  rebellious.  By  suffering  in  meek  dignity  he  made 
peace.  If  the  mind  that  was  in  Christ  is  found  in  us,  we  shall  be  the  earnest  advocates 
of  peace  for  the  good  of  the  very  people  who  delight  in  war. 

IV.  The  honour  of  peace  mat  be  recognized  in  humility.  The  special  form  in 
which  the  recommendation  of  peace  is  thrown  is  that  of  a  cessation  of  strife.  This 
implies  a  case  in  which  there  has  been  warfare ;  but  one  of  the  parties  refirains  from 
prosecuting  the  quarrel  any  further,  although  he  has  neither  been  worsted  nor  won 
the  victory.  This  means  a  change  of  policy.  Now,  it  is  particularly  difficult  to  effect 
such  a  change  in  the  midst  of  a  conflict.  Due's  motives  are  likely  to  be  suspected,  and 
what  iB  done  from  love  3f  peace  is  likely  to  be  set  down  to  cowardice.    It  need* 


392  THB  PROVERBS.  [<«.  XX.  1— »0. 

humility  thus  to  withdraw  and  sacrifice  one's  pretensions.  Having  taken  a  certain 
position  we  are  tempted  to  hold  it  at  all  hazards  from  sheer  pride.  This  Is  especially 
true  in  the  soul's  conflict  with  God.  Here  we  are  called  upon  to  humble  ourselves 
enough  to  confess  ourselves  entirely  in  the  wrong.  When  the  "  fearful  striving  "  has 
ceased  there  is  honour  in  repentance  and  the  new  life  of  peace  with  Grod. 

Ver.  9. — Universal  sinfulneat.  We  must  distinguish  between  the  idea  of  universal 
sinfulness  and  that  of  total  depravity.  We  may  hold  that  there  is  some  gleam  of 
goodness  in  a  human  heart  without  maintaining  its  immaculate  purity.  It  is  possible  to 
believe  that  there  are  great  varieties  of  character,  many  different  degrees  of  sin,  and  yet 
to  see  that  the  highest  saint  has  his  faults. 

I.  No  ONE  CAN  CIiEAR  HIMSELF  FROM  THE  CHARGE  OF  8INFOLMBS8.      Who  Can  Say,  "  I 

have  made  my  heart  clean  from  all  imputations  of  guilt  '?  1.  The  lest  confess  that  they 
are  sinful.  Canonized  by  their  admiring  brethren,  they  cast  themselves  down  in 
humility  and  shame  before  the  holiness  of  God.  No  nif  a  have  so  deep  a  sense  of  the 
sinfulness  of  their  own  hearts  as  those  who  live  most  near  to  God.  2.  The  most  sJdl/iii 
cannot  excuse  themselves.  It  is  possible  to  formulate  specious  pleas  that  will  deceive 
unwary  men ;  but  we  have  to  do  with  the  great  Searcher  of  hearts,  before  whose  piercing 
gaze  all  sophistries  ami  pretences  melt  as  the  mists  before  the  sun.  3.  The  deceitful- 
ness  of  the  heart  bHnd.i  many  to  their  otun  guilt.  Men  naturally  desire  to  defend 
themselves ;  they  are  excellent  advocates  of  themselves  to  themselves.  The  familiar 
sin  is  softened  by.  liabit.  Tlie  conventional  sin  is  condoned  by  custom.  4.  False 
standards  of  holiness  confuse  men's  estimat^of  their  own  sinfulness.  Some  people  seem 
to  take  a  feeling  ot  placidity  as  an  assurance  of  inward  perfection,  as  though  not  to  be 
conscious  of  strife  were  to  be  assured  of  peace  with  God.  But  it  is  possible  to  slumber 
under  the  influence  of  spiritual  narcotics.  A  keener  conscience  might  rouse  a  new, 
unlooked-for  sense  of  sin  and  shame.  It  is  thought  that  there  is  no  shortcoming  simply 
because  the  surrounding  mists  hide  the  far-oif  goal.  Or  it  may  be  that  negative  correct- 
ness is  mistaken  lor  a  satisfactory  condition,  while  many  positive  active  duties  are  left 
undone.  Perhaps  the  soul  that  thinks  its  aspiration  after  purity  satisfied  is  wanting  in 
charity,  or  in  the  very  act  of  claiming  sinlf  ssness  it  may  be  puffed  up  with  pride.  The 
most  dangerons  delusion  is  that  which  denies  the  ownership  of  guilt  because  bin  is  sup- 
posed to  be  relegated  to  bodily  infirmity,  while  the  true  self  is  spotless.  This  is  a  most 
deadly  snare  of  the  devil. 

II.  No  ONE  CAN  CLEAR   HIMSELF   FROM    THE   SINS  WHICH   HB  HAS  COMMITTKD.      Who 

can  say,  "I  have  purged  my  (jwn  conscience,  cleansed  my  own  heart,  cleared  o(T  my 
record  of  guilt?"  1.  J t  is  impossible  to  undo  sins.  Deeds  are  irrevocable.  What  has 
been  committed  is  stereotyped  in  the  awful  book  of  the  changeless  past.  What  I  have 
\vritten,  spoken,  done — I  have  written,  spoken,  done.  2.  It  is  impossible  to  compensate 
for  past  sins  by  future  service.  The  luture  service  is  all  owing;  at  our  best  we  are 
"unprofitable  servants" — there  is  no  margin  of  pmfit — for  "  we  have  only  done  that 
which  it  was,  our  duty  to  do."  3.  It  is  impossible  to  atone  for  our  sins  hy  any 
sacrifice.  The  hardest  penance  can  bo  of  no  value  wiih  God.  Its  only  use  could  be  in 
self-discipline.  For  God  is  not  pleased  with  the  suderings  of  his  children.  We  can 
offer  him  nothing;  for  "the  cattle  on  a  thousand  hills"  are  his.  4.  It  is  impossible  to 
change  owr  own  inner  sinfulness  by  ourselves.  We  cannot  create  clean  hearts  in  our 
own  breasts.  We  cannot  kill  our  own  love  of  sin.  5.  It  is  only  possible  for  sin  to  be 
cleansed  in  the  blood  of  Christ.  "  There  is  a  fouutnin  opened  for  all  uncleauness."  The 
adnjission  of  guilt,  the  repentance  that  turns  from  the  old  sin  and  seeks  forgiveness, 
the  renunciatioB  of  all  claims  but  that  of  the  grace  of  G^d  in  Christ, — these  things 
open  the  door  to  the  true  way  of  making  the  heart  clean,  both  in  pardon  and  la 
purification. 

Ver.  H. — A  child  and  his  doings.  I.  A  picture  of  childhood.  Pir.st,  let  this 
picture  be  rc;:arded  on  its  own  iiccoimt.  Childhood  is  worthy  of  stuily.  1.  Achildhas 
his  character.  Very  early  in  life  varieties  of  disposition  may  be  seen  in  the  several 
members  of  a  young  I'amily.  One  is  hot-tempered,  another  patii-nt ;  one  demonstra- 
tive, another  reserved ;  one  energct  ic,  another  inactive.  Moral  distinctions  are  painfully, 
■nd  glaringly  apparent.     As  childhood  advances  these  varieties  of  ilisposition  merge 


CH.  XX.  1-30.]  tHfi  PBOVEUBS.  893 


in  deeper  differences  of  character.  Though  the  character  is  supple  and  mobile,  It  is 
nevertheless  real.  There  are  good  and  bad  children — children  who  are  pure,  true, 
honest,  kind ;  and  children  who  are  marked  with  the  reverse  of  these  qualities.  2.  A 
child  18  responsibh  for  his  deeds.  Unless  he  is  crushed  by  tyranny,  within  the  scope 
of  a  reasonable  child-liberty  he  has  room  in  which  to  play  his  small  part  on  the  stage 
of  life.  He  must  not  be  brought  up  with  the  notion  that  he  is  an  irresponsible  agent 
because  he  is  young  and  weak.  Conscience  needs  to  be  enlightened,  trained,  and 
strengthened  in  early  days.  3.  A  child's  character  is  revealed  in  his  deeds.  The 
character  may  be  slight  and  feeble;  and  the  deeds  may  be  simple  and  insignificant. 
Yet  even  in  the  nursery  cause  and  effect  are  at  work ;  fruits  reveal  the  nature  even  of 
saplings.  Even  children  cannot  be  jndged  by  outward  appearance.  "With  them  inno- 
cent looks  maj'  cover  sinful  thoughts.  Children  also  may  deceive  themselves,  or  make 
false  pretences,  though  we  do  not  see  the  hardened  hypocrisy  of  the  world  in  the 
simpler  deception  of  the  nursery.  Still,  it  is  to  the  conduct  of  children  that  we  must 
look  for  indications  of  their  true  characters. 

II.  A  LESSON  FOB  ALL  AGES.  If  eveu  a  child  is  to  be  known  by  his  doings,  the 
inference  is  that  much  more  may  a  man  be  known  in  a  similar  way.  1.  Character 
ripens  with  yiars.  If  it  begins  to  appear  in  childhood,  it  will  be  much  more  vigorous 
in  manhood.  There  is  something  dolefully  prophetic  in  the  vices  of  infancy.  Though 
often  laughed  at  by  foolish  observers,  these  vices  are  the  early  sprouts  of  terrible  evils 
that  will  increase  with  growing  strength  and  enlarging  opportunities.  The  more 
clearly  we  are  able  to  detect  differences  of  character  even  in  childhood,  the  more  certain 
is  it  that  similar  differences  are  aggravated  in  manhood.  2.  Sesponsibility  i/roivs  with 
opportunity.  The  deeds  of  children  are  to  be  regarded  as  characteriatic — as  either 
culpable  or  praiseworthy  according  to  their  moral  tone.  How  much  more  must  this  be 
the  case  with  grown  men  and  women,  who  know  more,  have  larger  powers,  and  suffer 
from  fewer  restrictions  I  If  the  child  who  has  continual  restraint  upon  him,  and  who 
lives  under  perpetual  tutelage,  yet  manifests  characteristic  conduct,  the  free  man  cannot 
escape  from  the  responsibility  of  his  doings.  3.  Conduct  is  always  a  sure  sign  of 
character.  It  is  so  even  with  children  who  know  little,  and  who  are  constantly 
hampered  by  superior  authority.  It  must  be  so  with  double  certainty  in  the  case  of 
adults.  It  is  vain, indeed,  for  men  and  women  to  pretend  that  the  index  hand  does  not 
point  ti'uly.  In  the  freedom  of  adult  age  there  is  no  excuse  to  be  urged  against  the 
iuferenoe  thntour  deeds  are  the  fruits  of  our  character.  Therefore,  if  the  conduct  is 
evil,  the  heart,  needs  to  be  renewed. 

Ver.  14. —  The  buyer.  I.  The  conduct  of  the  buyer  calls  for  considbbation. 
It  is  usual  to  discuss  questions  of  trade  morality  chiefly  in  regard  to  the  conduct  of  the 
nian  wlio  sells.  Deception,  adulteration,  dishonest  work,  the  grinding  of  employes, 
etc.,  are  denounred  by  indignant  onlookers.  But  the  conduct  of  the  customer  is  less 
severely  handled.  Yet  there  are  many  reasons  why  it  should  not  be  Overlooked. 
All  are  not  sellers,  but  everybody  buys.  Therefore  when  commercial  morality  is  dis- 
cussed in  rejiard  to  buying,  the  subject  does  not  only  appiy  to  traders,  it  concerns 
all  people.  Moreover,  if  men  cheat  and  do  wrong  in  their  business  when  selling,  though 
there  is  no  fair  excuse  for  their  conduct,  it  may  be  urged  that  they  are  driven  to 
extremes  by  the  pressure  of  competition  and  by  the  difficulty  ■  f  earning  a  livelihood. 
But  wlicn  many  people  are  making  ordinary  purchases  they  are  not  in  the  same  positinn 
and  under  the  same  temptation.  Traders, of  course, are  buyers  in  the  way  of  b'siness. 
But  people  of  affluent  circumstances  aie  also  buyers  without  any  consideration  of 
business  exigencies,  but  solely  for  their  own  convenience.  If  such  pi  ople  do  not  behave 
honourably  they  are  doubly  guilty. 

II.  'J"he  buyer  is  subject  to  moral  obligations.  1.  He  owes  justice  to  the  seller. 
He  lias  no  right  to  squeeze  the  unfortunate  tiader's  profit  by  the  pressure  of  undue 
influence,  threatening  to  withdraw  his  custom  or  to  injure  the  connection  among  his 
friends,  taking  advantage  of  the  fact  that  the  seller  is  in  want  of  money,  etc.  It  is  his 
duty  to  ]iay  a  fair  price,  even  though  by  the  stress  of  circumstances  he  might  force  a 
sale  at  a  lower  rate.  2.  Ee  owes  truth  to  the  s'ller.  He  may  misrepresent  the  absolute 
value  of  his  purchase,  perhaps  knnvvini;  more  of  its  true  worth  than  the  seller,  but 
trying  to  deceive  hini.    Thus  the  skilled  connoisseur  may  take  an  unfair  advantage  of 


394  THE  PB0VERB8.  [oh.  xx.  1— Stt 

the  ignorance  of  the  trader  from  whom  he  buys  some  rare  article  of  vertu.  Or  s  person 
may  pretend  not  to  want  what  he  secretly  covets  most  eagerly.  Such  a  device  is  false 
and  unworthy  of  a  Christian  profession.  3.  He  owes  humanity  to  the  seller.  It  is  a 
gross  abuse  of  trade  to  make  it  a  condition  of  warfare.  A  man  is  not  necessarily  one's 
enemy  because  one  does  business  with  him.  The  unfortunate  person  who  must  needs 
sell  at  a  great  loss  rather  than  not  sell  at  all,  is  not  the  legitimate  prey  of  the  first 
greedy  customer  who  is  able  to  pounce  upon  him.  The  curse  of  trade  is  hard,  cruel, 
brutal  selfishness.  Christianity  teaches  us  to  regard  the  man  with  whom  one  does 
business  as  a  brother.  The  buyer  should  learn  to  treat  the  seller  as  he  desires  to  hp 
treated  in  turn,  and  so  to  fulfil  the  law  of  Christ.  The  same  principle  requires  iindli- 
ness  of  manner. 

III.  The.oblioations  op  the  btjtbr  are  commonly  nbglbctrd.  The  oause»  of 
this  negligence  are  manifold ;  e.g. :  1.  Inconsiderateness,  Often  there  is  no  intention 
of  doing  an  injustice.  The  buyer  simply  forgets  the  rights  of  the  seller.  This  incon- 
siderateness does  harm  in  various  ways.  Careless  customers  give  needless  trouble  to 
shop-people.  Some  order  for  view  more  goods  than  they  need  to  effect  a  purchase; 
some  persist  in  shopping  late  in  the  evening,  etc.  2.  Selfishness.  The  chief  cause  of 
the  evil  is  a  sole  regard  for  self.  People  who  are  reasonable  and  kind  in  their  own 
homes  will  manifest  the  most  tyrannical  spirit,  the  most  cynical  selfishness,  in  their 
shopping.  When  the  veneer  of  social  habits  is  broken  this  ugly  vice  is  more  visible 
in  tho  most  polished  society  than  among  rougher  people.  3.  Sinfulness.  The  evil 
heart  is  seen  here  as  elsewhere.  For  the  buyer  to  force  injustice  and  to  cheat  the  seller 
is  for  him  to  reveal  himself  as  a  slave  of  sin  as  truly  as  if  he  broke  out  in  wanton 
violence  and  open  robbery. 

Ver.  22. — Revenge  and  its  antidote.  I.  The  sto  ant>  folly  of  eevenub.  This 
passion  appears  to  spring  from  a  natural  instinct;  it  pretends  to  justify  itself  as  the 
fair  return  for  some  wrong,  and  it  offers  a  compensation  for  the  wrong  suffered  in  the 
triumph  which  it  gains  over  the  wrong-doer.  But  it  is  both  culpable  and  foolish.  1.  It 
is  culpable.  Even  if  revenge  were  desirable,  we  have  no  right  to  wreak  it  on  the  bead  of 
the  offender.  We  are  not  his  judge  and  executioner.  God  says,  "Vengeance  is  mine,  I 
will  repay."  We  have  no  excuse  for  antedating  the  Divine  vengeance  in  our  impatience 
by  taking  the  law  of  retribution  into  our  own  hands.  If  another  has  hurt  us,  that  fact 
is  no  excuse  whatever  for  our  hurting  him.  Two  wronas  do  not  make  one  right.  The 
spirit  of  vengeance  in  man  is  a  spirit  of  hatred,  and  therefore  one  for  which  there  is  no 
excuse.  Much  as  an  enemy  may  have  injured  us,  he  is  still  our  fellow-man  to  whom 
we  owe  charity  and  forgiveness.  2.  It  is  foolish.  At  best  it  can  offer  but  a  gl'iomy 
compensation.  Unless  our  nature  delights  in  malignity,  there  can  be  no  real  satisfaction 
in  seeing  an  enemy  suffer.  Though  a  natural  passion  may  seem  to  be  satisfied  with  a 
gleam  of  fierce  joy  in  the  moment  of  triumph,  this  must  be  succeeded  by  a  dismal 
sense  of  the  vanity  of  any  such  feelings.  The  after-thought  of  revenge  must  be  bitter. 
Moreover,  the  exercise  of  vengeance  will  not  cure  enmity,  but  only  intensify  it.  There- 
fore it  may  just  provoke  a  second  and  greater  wrong  than  that  which  it  is  avenging. 
There  is  no  prospect  before  it  but  increasing  rancour,  hatred,  strife,  misery. 

II.  The  antidote  to  revenge.  We  are  not  to  be  left  to  suffer  wrong  without 
compensation  or  hope.  We  may  find  a  prospect  of  something  better  than  the  bitter 
harvest  of  vengeance  if  we  turn  from  sinful  man  to  God.  Then  we  shall  see  the  true 
antidote.  1.  It  springs  from  faith.  We  have  to  be  assured  that  God  can  and  will 
help  us.  We  can  thus  afford  to  ignore  the  wrong  that  has  been  done  us,  or,  if  that  be 
impossible,  we  can  learn  to  look  above  it  aud  feel  confident  that,  if  God  undertakes  our 
cause,  all  will  be  well  in  the  end.  This  faith  will  not  desire  the  ruin  of  our  enemy. 
It  is  not  an  entrusting  of  vengeance  to  God,  though  he  must  see  justice  done  to  the 
wrong-doer.  But  it  is  a  quiet  confidence  in  God's  saving  grace.  It  is  better  to  be 
delivered  from  the  trouble  brought  on  us  by  the  misconduct  of  others  than  to  remain 
in  that  trouble  and  see  the  guilty  persons  punished.  We  can  afford  tp  be  magnanimous 
and  forget  the  unkindness  of  man  when  we  are  enjoying  the  kindness  of  God.  2.  It  it 
reaUzed  through  prayer,  patience,  and  hope.  (1)  Prayer.  We  must  wait  on  the  Lord. 
Vengeance  is  lost  in  prayer.  We  shall  cease  to  feel  the  boiling  of  rage  against  our  foe 
vihen  on  our  knees  before  God.     There  we  cannot  but  remember  how  utterly  we 


OH.  XX.1— 30.J  THE  PROVERBS.  495 

depend  upon  meioy.  (2)  Patience.  Waiting  on  God  generally  implies  some  delay. 
We  must  wait  for  the  answer.  Deliverance  does  not  come  at  once.  Hasty  revenge 
must  be  restrained  by  patience  in  prayer.  (3)  Hope.  God  will  save  at  last,  if  not 
immediately.  The  prospect  of  this  deliverance  is  a  pleasing  substitute  for  the  hideous 
Tision  of  revenge  on  an  enemy. 

Ver.  29. —  Toung  men  and  old.  I.  Evkry  time  or  life  has  its  own  peouliak 
KXCELLEKCE.  1.  Every  age  of  man  has  some  excellence.  Youth  appears  vain  in  the 
grave  vision  of  age,  and  age  looks  gloomy  to  the  bright  eyes  of  youth.  Yet  both  youth 
and  age  have  their  mead  of  praise.  It  is  possible  for  a  man  to  miss  all  excellence  in 
life  and  to  live  in  dishonour  from  youth  to  age.  But  that  depends  upon  his  own  con- 
duct, and  he  only  will  be  to  blame  for  spoiling  every  age  of  his  life  if  he  does  thus  live 
in  dishonour.  There  are  honourable  and  desirable  conditions  for  life  throughout  its 
whole  length.  2.  The  excellences  of  the  various  ages  of  man  are  different.  The  glory 
of  a  young  man  is  not  identical  with  the  beauty  of  an  old  man.  The  common  mistake 
is  that  in  the  narrowness  of  our  personal  experience  we  judge  of  other  periods  of  life  by 
the  standards  that  only  apply  to  those  in  which  we  are  severally  living.  Hence  either 
undue  admiration  or  unreasonable  disgust.  It  is  cheeriog  to  know  that  a  very  different 
condition  from  that  which  floats  before  us  as  our  ideal  may  be  equally  happy  and 
honourable. 

II.  The  peculiar  excellence  of  youth  is  found  in  its  eneeot  and  the  use 
IT  MAKES  OF  IT.  1.  Energy  is  a  characteristic  of  youth.  Then  the  fresh  unfaded 
powers  are  just  opening  out  to  their  full  activity.  This  is  the  time  for  service.  The 
young  men  go  to  the  wars.  "It  is  well  for  a  man  to  bear  the  yoke  in  his  youth."  All 
kinds  of  fresh  activities  spring  out  of  the  fertile  soil  of  youth.  An  indolence  in  youth  is 
simply  disgraceful.  2.  Touthful  energy  is  admirable.  (1)  Physical  strength.  This  is 
a  gift  of  God.  It  is  a  natural  perfection  of  bodily  life.  It  carries  with  it  possibilities 
of  manly  work.  "  Muscular  Christianity  "  may  be  as  holy  as  feeble  asceticism.  (2) 
Mental  strength.  The  intellectual  feats  of  brain-athletics  indicate  noble  energies  and 
arduous  industry.  The  mind  is  from  God,  and  its  ripened  powers  render  him  glory. 
(3)  Moral  strength.  Daniel  was  stronger  than  Samson.  The  chief  glory  of  youthful 
strength  is  here — the  power  to  resist  temptation,  to  live  a  true  life,  to  fight  alt  lies  and 
shameful  thoughts  and  deeds,  and  stand  up  firmly  for  the  right.  3.  Touthful  energy 
should  be  used  in  the  service  of  Christ.  Then  its  glory  is  radiant.  A  lower  use  of  it 
dims  its  lustre.     Degradation  to  purposes  of  sin  turns  its  splendour  into  shame. 

III.  The  SPECIAL  excellence  of  age  is  to  be  seen  in  its  bipbned  expbeibnce. 
1.  Ea^erience  ripens  with  years.  The  suggestion  of  that  fact  may  be  seen  in  the  picture 
of  the  grey  head,  the  beauty  of  which  chiefly  resides  in  the  thought  of  the  harvest  of 
years  that  it  represents.  Strength  may  be  lost,  but  experience  is  gained.  There  is  an 
exchange,  and  it  is  not  for  any  to  say  on  which  side  the  real  advantage  lies.  2.  The 
experience  of  years  has  a  heauty  of  its  own.  We  usually  associate  youth  and  beauty, 
and  we  think  of  beauty  declining  with  advancing  years.  Painful  signs  of  life's  stem 
battle  break  the  fair  charms  of  youth.  But  old  age  brings  a  new  beauty.  This  is  often 
seen  even  in  the  countenance,  finely  chiselled  with  delicate  lines  of  thought  and  feeling 
into  a  rare  grace  and  dignity.  But  the  higher  beauty  is  that  of  soul,  the  beauty  of 
Simeon  when  he  held  the  infant  Saviour  in  his  arms.  The  crowning  beauty  of  age  is 
in  a  perfected  saintliness.  To  attain  to  this  is  to  go  beyond  the  glory  of  youtli.  Yet 
there  must  accompany  it  a  certain  melancholy  at  the  thought  of  the  lost  energy  of 
earlier  years,  until  the  old  man  can  look  forward  to  the  renewed  youth,  the  eternal 
energy  of  the  life  beyond. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 5.—Evffs  to  le  avoided.  I.  Some  special  evils  and  dangers.  1.  Drunken- 
ness. (Vcr.  1.)  The  spirit  or  demon  of  wine  is  spoken  of  as  a  personal  agent.  It 
leads  to  frivolity,  scoffing,  profane  and  senseless  mirth.  To  be  drunk  with  wine,  as  St. 
Paul  points  out  (Bph.  v.  18),  is  the  opposite  of  being  "filled  with  the  Spirit"  (see  F. 
W.  Robertson's  sermon  on  this  subject).     2.   The  wrath  of  kings.    (Ver.  2.)    In  those 


BOe  THE  PROVERBS.  [««•  "•  ^—^^ 

times  of  absolute  rule,  the  king  represented  the  uncontrollable  arbitration  of  life  and 
death.  As  in  the  case  of  Adonijah,  he  who  provoked  the  king's  wrath  sinned  against 
his  own  soul.  What,  then,  must  the  wrath  of  the  eternal  Sovereign  be  (Ps.  ic,  11)? 
To  invoke  the  Divine  judgment  is  a  suicidal  act.  3.  Gontentiousness,  (Ver.  3.) 
Quick-flaming  ang-r  is  the  mark  of  the  shallow  and  foolish  heart.  The  conquest  ol 
anger  by  Christian  meekness  is  one  of  the  chiefest  of  Christian  gracei.  "Let  it  pas-g 
for  a  kind  of  sheepishness  to  be  meek,"  aays  Archbishop  Leighton;  "it  is  a  likeness 
to  him  that  w  is  as  a  sheep  before  his  shearers."  4.  Idleness.  (Ver.  4.)  The  idle  man 
is  unseasonable  in  his  repose,  and  equally  unseasonable  in  his  expectation.  To  know 
our  time,  our  opportunity  in  worldly  matters,  our  day  of  grace  in  the  atfairs  of  the  soul, 
all  depends  on  this  (Rora.  xii.  11 ;  Bph.  v,  15 — 17). 

II.  The  bafeguabd  of  pbudbnce.  (Ver.  5.)  The  idea  is  that,  though  the  project 
which  a  man  has  formed  may  be  difficult  to  fathom,  the  prudent  man  will  bring  the 
secret  to  light.  "  There  is  nothiilg  hidden  that  shall  not  he  made  known."  1.  Every 
department  of  life  has  its  principles  and  laws.  2.  These  may  bo  ascertained  by  observa- 
tion and  inquiry.  3.  In  some  sense  or  other,  all  knowledge  is  power;  and  that  is  the 
best  sort  of  knowledge  which  arms  the  mind  with  force  against  moral  dangers,  and 
places  it  in  constant  relation  to  good. — J. 

Vers.  6 — 11. — The  frailty  of  mankind.  I.  Tm?  rabitt  of  trttb  FRiBifDSHn'. 
(Ver.  6.)  Many  are  ready  to  promise,  few  willing  tn  perform.  Many  eager  to  say, 
"  Lord,  Lord ! "  comparatively  few  to  do  the  will  of  the  Father  in  heaven.  There  is  no 
want  of  good  notions  in  the  world ;  but,  according  to  the  Italian  proverb,  many  are  so 
good  thnt  they  are  good  for  nothing.  The  spirit  may  be  willing,  the  flesh  is  weak. 
Inclination  to  good  needs  to  be  fortified  by  faith  in  God. 

II.  The  just  and  oood  man.  (Ver.  7.)  We  cannot  but  feel  that  he  is  an  ideal 
character.  Poets  and  preachers  have  delighted  to  describe  him,  have  surrour.ded 
liim  with  a  halo,  depicted  the  safety  and  blessedness  of  his  life.  But  how  seldom  does 
he  appear  on  the  actual  scene  I  Our  being  is  a  struggle  and  a  series  of  failures.  Ths 
one  thing  Dcodful  is  to  have  a  lofty  ideal  before  us,  and  never  to  despair  of  approaching 
a  little  nearer  to  it  with  every  right  effort. 

III.  The  impahtial  judob.  (Ver.  8.)  The  earthly  judge  upon  his  seat  reminds  us 
of  the  mixed  state  of  human  nature — of  the  need  of  a  process  of  sifting,  trial,  purifica- 
tion, over  going  on.  Judgment  is  an  ever-present  fact,  a  constant  process.  We  are 
being  tried,  in  a  sensCj  every  day,  and  "must  all  stand  before  the  judgment-seat  of 
Christ."    Let  us  "  labour  that  we  may  be  accepted  of  him." 

IV.  The  clean  conscience.  (Ver.  9.)  This  pointed  question  silences  our  boasting, 
and  checks  the  disposition  to  excuse  ourselves.  By  unwise  comparison  with  others  we 
may  seem  to  stand  well;  but  in  the  light  of  his  own  mere  standard  of  right  and  duty, 
who  is  not  self-coudomned?  "  If  we  say  that  wo  have  no  sin,  we  deceive  ourselves,  and 
the  truth  is  not  in  us"  (1  John  i.  8,  9). 

V.  Equitable  conduct.  (Ver.  10.)  How  common  are  the  tricks  and  evasions  of 
tiade!  And  there  is  something  more  in  this  than  mere  desire  for  gain.  The  general 
experience  of  the  world  is  so  strong  against  dishonesty,  as  seen  in  common  proverbs,  as 
"bad  policy,"  that  we  must  look  to  a  deeper  cause  of  its  existence,  viz.  the  perversity 
of  man's  heart. 

VI.  Eablt  symptoms  op  character.  (Ver.  11.)  Tendencies  of  evil  and  (never 
let  us  omit  to  acknowledge)  tendencies  of  good  are  seen  very  early  in  children.  The 
Germans  have  a  quaint  proverb,  "What  a  thorn  will  become  may  easily  be  guessed." 
How  much  depends  on  Christian  culture;  for  "as  the  twig  is  bent,  so  is  the  tree 
inclined." — J. 

Vers.  12 — 19. — Religion,  industry,  prudence,  and  honesty.  I.  God  the  Soubob  of 
ALL  GOOD.  1.  Of  all  bodily  good.  The  eye,  the  ear,  with  all  their  wondrous 
mechnnism,  with  all  their  rich  instrumentality  of  enjoyment,  are  from  him.  2.  Of  all 
spiritual  faculty  and  endowment,  tne  analogues  of  the  former,  and  "every  good  and 
poifect  gift"  (Jas.  i.  16).  The  now  heart,  the  ri^;ht  mind,  should,  above  all,  be  recog- 
nized as  his  gifts.  3.  In  domestic  and  in  public  life.  Good  counsels  of  Divine 
wisdom,  and  willing  obedience  of  subjects  to  them,  are  the  conditions  of  the  weal  o' 


OH.xx.1-^.]  THE  PROVERBS.  897 

the  state ;  and  it  may  be  that  these  are  designed  by  the  preacher  under  the  figures  of 
the  eye  and  the  ear. 

II.  Virtues  indispbnsablb  to  happiness.  1.  Ldhoriousness.  (Ver.  13.)  This  is 
a  command  of  God  :  "  If  any  man  will  not  work,  neither  let  him  eat ;  "  ior  which  the 
seeing  eye  and  hearing  ear  are  needed.  Viewed  in  one  light,  of  imagination,  labour 
may  appear  as  a  curse ;  for  it  thwarts  our  natural  indolence,  our  love  of  ease,  and  oui 
sentimental  views  in  general.  But  viewed  in  the  light  of  actual  experience,  the  law 
of  labour  is  one  of  the  divinest  blessings  of  our  life-constitution.  2.  Honesty.  (1) 
Craft  and  tricJciness  exposed.  (Vers.  14,  17.)  Here  the  cunning;  tricks  of  trade  are 
struck  ;  in  particular  the  arts  of  disparagement,  by  which  the  buyer  unjustly  cheapens 
the  gouds  he  desires  to  invest  in.  The  peculiar  manner  in  which  trade  is  still  con- 
ducted in  the  East,  the  absence  of  fixed  prices,  readily  admits  of  this  species  of 
unfairness.  But  the  rebuke  is  general.  (2)  The  deceptiveness  of  sinful  pleasures. 
(Ver.  17.)  There  is,  no  doubt,  a  certain  pleasure  in  dishonesty,  otherwise  it  would  not 
be  so  commonly  practised  in  the  very  teeth  of  self-interest.  There  is  a  peculiar  delight 
in  the  exercise  of  skill  which  outwits  others.  But  this  is  only  while  the  conscience 
sleeps.  When  it  awakes,  unrest  and  trouble  begin.  The  stolen  gold  burns  in  the 
pcicket ;  the  Dead  Sea  fruits  turn  to  ashes  on  the  lips.  3.  Sense  and  prudence.  (Vers. 
15, 16, 18.)  (1)  Sense  is  compared  to  the  most  precious  things.  What  in  the  affairs 
of  life  is  comparable  to  judgment?  Yet  compared  only  to  be  contrasted.  As  the 
common  saying  runs,  "  There  is  nothing  so  uncommon  as  common  sense."  The  taste 
for  material  objects  of  price  may  be  termed  universal  and  vulgar ;  that  for  spiritual 
qualities  is  select  and  refined.  (2)  Good  sense  is  shoivn  hy  caution  and  avoidance  of 
undue  responsibility.  This  has  been  bsfore  emphasized  (oh.  vi.  1 — 5 ;  xi.  15 ;  xvii. 
18).  We  have  enough  to  do  to  answer  for  ourselves.  (3)  Prudence  in  war.  There 
are  justifiable  wars;  but  even  these  may  be  carried  on  with  folly,  reckless  disregard 
of  human  life,  etc.  "The  beginning,  middle,  and  end,  0  Lord,  turn  to  the  best 
account ! "  was  the  prayer  of  a  prudent  and  pious  general.  4.  Seserve  with  the  tongue, 
or  caution  against  flatterers.  (Ver.  19.)  The  verse  may  be  taken  in  both  these 
senses.  In  all  thoughtless  gossip  about  others  there  is  somethin;^  of  the  malicious  and 
slanderous  spirit;  there  is  danger  in  it.  As  to  the  listener,  rather  let  him  listen  to 
those  who  point  out  his  faults  than  to  those  who  flatter. — J. 

Vers.  20—23. — Smitten  sins.  I.  Hatred  to  parents.  (Ver.  20.)  1.  It  is 
unnatural  beyond  most  vices,  like  hating  the  hand  that  lifts  food  to  the  mouth.  2.  It 
is  disobedience  to  a  primary  Divine  command.  3.  It  incurs  the  Divine  curse  and  the 
darkest  doom. 

II.  The  vice  of  graspino.  (Ver.  21.)  It  springs  from  excessive,  irregular,  dis- 
ordered desire,, and  generally  from  an  ill-led  life.  We  must  wait  upon  God's  order; 
must  distinguish  the  necessary  from  the  superfluous  and  the  luxurious,  and  seek  no 
enterprises  that  lie  out  of  our  proper  vocation,  if  we  would  arm  ourselves  against  this 
unholy  temptation,  and  avoid  the  curse  which  attends  compliance  with  it.  For  ill- 
gotten  wealth  can  never  prosper. 

III.  The  bevenqeful  spirit.  (Ver.  22.)  It  costs  more  to  avenge  injuries  than 
to  endure  them.  "He  that  studieth  revenge  keepeth  his  wounds  open."  Let  us 
recall  the  lessons  of  the  sermon  on  the  mount,  and  if  there  is  any  one  who  has 
aroused  our  dislike,  pray  for  him  (not  in  public,  but  in  the  privacy  of  the  heart). 

IV.  In  equity,  whether  in  commerce  ok  in  gbnebal  relations.  (Ver.  23 ;  see 
ver.  10.)  What  is  shameful  when  detected  is  no  less  hideous  in  the  sight  of  God, 
though  concealed  from  men. — J. 

Vers.  24—30. — The  truth  of  life  if*  diverse  aspects.  We  may  divide  the  matter  as 
follows. 

I.  Divine  providencb.  (Ver.  24.)  It  is  needful,  for  human  wisdom  is  short- 
sighted, and-human  direction  inadequate.  It  is  a  giacious  fact,  and,  if  acknowledged, 
brings  blessing  to  the.  trustful  mind  and  heart.  Bach  man  has  a  life-vocation.  God 
appoints  it,  and  will  reveal  the  means  for  the  attainment  of  it.  We  cannot  enter  the 
kingdom  except  through  the  guidance  of  Christ. 

U,  Human  ebsponbibujtt.    (Ver.  27.)    There  is  a  light  within  us,  or  consdeaet 


898  THE   PROVERBS.  [oh,  xx.  1— Stt 


in  the  most  comprehensive  sense.  By  the  help  of  reason  we  may  judge  other  men ; 
by  that  of  conscience,  ourselves.  It  is  in  another  statement  the  power  of  reflection,  the 
inner  mirror  of  the  soul. 

III.  General  related  troths.  1.  The  necessity  of  pondering  wed  our  wishes. 
(Ver.  25.)  We  should  think  thrice  before  we  act  once.  To  act  first  and  reflect  after- 
wards is  foolish  and  helpless ;  thus  we  reap  the  good  of  neither  thought  nor  action. 
2.  The  necessity  of  discrimination  in  rulers.  (Ver.  26.)  The  figure  is  borrowed 
from  agriculture,  from  the  process  of  sifting  and  threshing — the  latter  in  a  penal  sense 
(2  Sam.  xii.  31 ;  1  Chron.  xx.  3 ;  Amos  i.  3).  It  is  carried  into  the  gospeh  The 
Divine  Judge's  "  fan  is  in  his  hand,  and  he  will  throughly  purge  his  floor."  We  must 
submit  to  law  or  be  crushed  by  its  penal  action.  3.  The  necessity  of  love  cmd  faithful- 
ness in  government.  (Ver.  28.)  For  human  government,  to  be  sound,  siable,  and 
respected,  must  be  a  reflection  of  the  Divine  government.  And  the  eternal  features 
of  the  latter  are  love  and  faithfulness.  Clemency  and  severity  are  but  two  sides  of 
the  one  living  and  eternal  love  which  rules  men  only  for  their  salvation.  4.  The  leauty 
of  piety  in  youth  and  age.  (Ver.  29.)  Let  the  young  man  in  Christ  approve  his 
strength  by  manful  self-conquest,  and  the  old  man  by  riper  wisdom  and  blameless 
conversation  (1  John  ii.  13,  14).  5.  The  necessity  of  inward  pwrifitatim,.  (Ver.  30.) 
And  to  this  end  the  necessity  of  chaslisement.  In  bodily  disease  we  recognize  the 
struggle  of  life  against  that  which  is  inimical  to  it ;  and  in  the  afflictions  of  the  soul 
the  struggle  of  the  God-awakened  soul  against  its  evils.  Luther  says,  "  Evil  is  cured, 
not  by  words,  but  by  blows ;  suflering  is  as  necessary  as  eating  and  drinking." — J. 

Ver.  1. — Strong  drink :  four  delusions.  That  may  be  said  to  mock  us  which  first 
professes  to  benefit  us,  and  then  proceeds  to  injure  and  even  to  destroy  us.  This  is 
what  is  done  by  strong  drink.  First  it  cheers  and  brightens,  puts  a  song  into  our 
moutli,  makes  life  seem  enviable ;  tben  it  weakens,  obfuscates,  deadens,  ruins.  How 
many  of  the  children  of  men  has  it  deceived  and  betrayed!  how  many  has  if  robbed 
of  their  virtue,  their  beauty,  their  strength,  their  resources,  their  peace,  their  reputa- 
tion, their  life,  their  hope !     There  are — 

I.  Four  delusions  in  which  men  indulge  HEaAEDiNO  it.  1.  That  it  is  necessary 
to  health.  Id  ordinary  conditions  it  has  been  proved  to  be  wholly  needless,  if  not 
positively  injurious.  2.  That  it  is  reliable  as  a  source  of  pleasure.  It  is  a  fact  that  the 
craving  for  intoxicants  and  anodynes  continually  increasus,  while  the  pleasure  derived 
therefrom  continually  declines.  3.  That  it  renders  service  in  the  time  of  heavy  trial. 
Woe  be  unto  him  who  tries  to  drown  his  sorrow  in  the  intoxicating  cup !  He  is  giving 
up  the  true  for  the  false,  tlie  elevating  for  the  degrading,  the  life-bestowing  for  the 
death-dealing  consolation.  4.  That  it  is  a  feeble  enemy  that  may  be  safely  disregarded. 
Very  many  men  and  women  come  into  the  world  with  a  constitution  which  makes  any 
intoxicant  a  source  of  extreme  peril  to  them ;  and  many  more  find  it  to  be  a  foe  whosa 
subtlety  and  strength  require  all  their  wisdom  and  power  to  master.  An  under- 
estimate of  the  force  of  this  temptation  accounts  for  many  a  buried  reputation,  for 
many  a  lost  spirit. 

II.  The  conclusion  of  the  wise.  1.  To  avoid  the  use  of  it  altogether,  if  possible ; 
and  thus  to  be  quite  safe  from  its  sting.  2.  To  use  it,  when  necessary,  with  the  most 
rigorous  carefulness  (ch.  xxxi.  6  ;  1  Tim.  v.  23).  3.  To  discourage  those  social  usages 
in  which  much  danger  lies.  4.  To  act  on  the  principle  of  Christian  generosity  (Bom. 
xiv.  21).— C. 

Ver.  3. — (See  homily  on  ch.  xxix.  11.) — 0. 

Vers.  6,  7. — The  blessings  of  goodness.  Here  are  brought  out  again,  in  proverbial 
brevity,  the  blessings  which  belong  to  moral  worth. 

I.  The  doubtful  value  of  self-praise.  "Most  men  will  proclaim,"  etc.  1.  On 
the  one  hand,  nothing  is  better  than  the  approval  of  a  man's  own  conscience. 
"  Populus  me  sibilat,  at  mihi  plaudo,"  says  the  Roman  writer,  livt  a  man  have  the 
commendation  of  his  own  conscience,  and  he  can  hear  the  hisses  of  the  people  with 
very  little  concern.  It  has  been  in  this  spirit  that  the  very  noblest  things  have  been 
done  by  honourable  and  even  heroic  men.    2.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  a  vast 


CH.  XX.  1—30.]  THE  PROVERBS.  39S( 

amount  of  self-congratulation  amongst  men  which  is  nothing  more  or  hotter  than 
mere  complacency.  It  is  self-flattery,  and  that  is  not  beautiful,  but  ugly ;  it  is  not 
true,  but  false.  And  such  is  the  tendency  in  man  to  assure  himself  that  he  is  right, 
even  when  he  is  thoroughly  and  lamentably  wrong,  that  we  have  to  wait  and  to 
inquire  before  we  take  men's  word  about  themselves.  Between  the  heroic  spirit  of  a 
Luther,  or  a  Columbus,  or  a  Galileo,  and  the  miserable  self-satisfaction  of  some  petty 
tyrant  gloating  over  his  tyranny,  there  is  the  entire  breadth  of  the  moral  world.  It 
is  well  for  us  all  to  be  able  to  do  without  the  honour  that  cometh  from  man  only ;  it 
is  well  for  us  also  to  recognize  the  truth  that  our  own  commendation,  so  far  from  being 
the  voice  of  God  within  us,  may  be  nothing  but  the  very  unsightly  crust  of  a  dangerous 
and  even  deadly  complacency. 

II.  The  excellency  op  faithfulness.  Solomon  seemed  to  find  fidelity  a  rare 
thing.  "  Who  can  find  it  ?  "  he  asked.  With  Christian  truth  sown  in  so  many  hearts, 
we  do  not  feel  the  lack  of  it  as  he  did.  We  thank  God  that  in  the  home  and  the  school, 
in  the  shop  and  the  factory,  in  the  pulpit  and  the  press,  in  all  spheres  of  honourable 
activity,  we  find  instances  of  a  solid  and  sound  fidelity — men  and  women  occupying 
their  post  and  doing  their  work  with  a  loyalty  to  those  whom  they  serve,  which  is  fair 
indeed  in  the  sight  both  of  heaven  and  of  earth.  There  is  abundance  of  unfaithfulness 
also,  it  has  to  he  owned  and  lamented ;  and  this  is  sometimes  found  where  it  is  simply 
disgraceful — among  those  who  wear  the  name  of  that  Master  and  Exemplar  who  was 
•'  faithful  in  all  his  house."  It  is  required  of  us,  who  are  all  stewards,  that  we  he 
found  faithful  (1  Cor.  iv.  2) ;  and  we  must  not  only  expect  to  give  account  to  our 
brother  here,  but  to  the  Divine  Judge  hereafter. 

III.  The  wobth  or  guiding  principles.  "A  just  man  walketh  in  his  integrity.*' 
What  fairer  sight  is  tliere  beneath  the  sun  ?  A  just  or  upright  man,  a  man  who  is 
(1)  yielding  to  God  that  which  is  due  to  his  Creator  and  his  Redeemer,  viz.  his  heart 
and  his  life ;  who  is  (2)  giving  to  his  neighbours  what  is  due  to  them ;  and  who  is  (3) 
nonouring  himself  as  is  his  dne ; — this  man  is  "  walking  "  along  the  path  of  life  in  his 
integrity,  every  step  directed  by  righteous  principles  and  prompted  by  honourable 
impulses ;  his  way  is  never  crooked,  but  lies  straight  on ;  it  is  continuously  upward, 
and  moves  to  noble  heights  of  virtue  and. wisdom  and  piety.  Who  would  not  be  such 
as  he  is — a  man  God  owns  as  his  son,  and  the  angels  of  God  as  their  brother,  and  all 
his  fellow-men  as  their  helper  and  their  friend  ? 

IV.  The  ceown  op  human  blessedness,  "His  children  are  blessed  after  him." 
Then  is  a  good  man  crowned  with  an  honour  and  a  joy  which  no  diadem,  nor  rank, 
nor  office,  nor  emolument,  can  confer,  when  his  children  are  found  "walking  in  the 
truth  "  of  God,  their  affections  centred  in  that  Divine  Friend  who  will  lead  them  in 
the  path  of  heavenly  wisdom,  their  life  governed  by  holy  principles,  themselves 
enriched  and  encircled  by  a  holy  and  beautiful  character,  their  influence  felt  on  every 
hand  for  good — "  a  seed  which  the  Lord  hath  blessed." — 0. 

Ver.  9. — Purity  of  heart.  A  subject  that  stretches  back  and  looks  onward  as  far  as 
the  limits  of  human  history.  But  Jesus  Christ  has  introduced  into  the  world  a  power 
for  purity  which  is  peculiar  to  his  gospel. 

I.  The  uttbe  ugliness  op  impurity.  To  the  eye  of  holy  men  there  is  an  unspeak- 
able offensiveness  in  any  form  of  impurity — selfishness,  worldliness,  covetousaess, 
sensuality,  whatever  it  may  be.  And  how  much  more  hideous  and  intolerable  must 
it  be  in  the  eyes  of  the  Holy  One  himself  (Hab.  i.  13 ;  Ps.  v.  5)  !  This  is  one  explana- 
tion of  choosing  leprosy  as  a  type  and  picture  of  sin,  viz.  its  fearful  loathsomeness  in 
the  sight  of  God. 

II.  Its  exclusion  from  the  presence  and  kingdsm  op  Gad.  (See  Ps.  1.  16; 
Ixvi.  18 ;  ch.  XV.  29 ;  xxviii.  9 ;  Isa.  i.  10—17 ;  Matt.  v.  8 ;  Heb.'  xii.  14.) 

III.  The  one  way  op  return.  When  the  heart  sees,  and  is  ashamed  of,  its  corrup- 
tion, and  returns  in  simple  penitence  to  God,  then  there  is  mercy  and  admission.  But 
sincere  repentance  is  the  only  gateway  by  which  impurity  can  find  its  way  to  the 
favour  and  the  kingdom  of  God. 

IV.  The  establishment  op  inward  purity.  When  the  heart,  conscious  of  guilt, 
has  sought  and  found  mercy  of  God  in  Jesus  Christ,  and  is  "  cleansed  of  its  iniquity,' 
«o  that  there  i«  "  ft  clean  heart  and  a  right  spirit "  before  God,  all  is  not  yet  done  that 


400  THE  PROVERBS.  [oh.  sx.  1—30. 


has  to  be  accomplished.  What  Christian  man  can  say,  "  I  have  made  my  heart  clean ; 
I  am  pure  from  my  sin  "  ?  "  If  we  [who  are  in  Christ  Jesus]  say  that  we  have_  no  sin, 
we  deceive  ourselves,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  us  "  (1  John  i.  8).  "  la  many  things  we 
ofifenil  all "  (Jas.  iii.  2).  We  are  washed,  but  we  "  need  to  wash  our  feet"  (John  xiil 
10).  'i'here  yet  lingers  within  the  heart  of  the  humble  and  the  pure  that  which  needs 
purifloation  before  they  will  be  "  holy  as  he  [the  Lord]  is  holy,"  What  are  these  cleansing 
forces  which  will  best  do  this  much-needed  and  most  desirable  work  ?  Are  they  not :. 
1.  The  avoidance  of  that  which  defiles ;  the  deliberate  turning  away  of  the  eyes  of  the 
ioul  (so  far  as  duty  to  others  will  allow)  from  all  that  stains  and  soils  ?  2.  Much  fellow- 
ship with  Jesus  Christ  the  Holy  One,  and  much  intercourse  with  his  true  friends  and 
followers  ?  3.  The  earnest,  determined  pursuit  of  that  which  is  noblest  in  man,  especially 
by  the  study  of  the  worthiest  lives  ?  4.  Prayer  for  the  cleansing  influences  which  come 
direct  from  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God  (Ps.  li.  10}  cxxxix,  23,  24;  2  Thess.  ii.  17;  Heb. 
Xiii.  20,21)?— a 

Ver.  10. — (See  homily  on  ch.  xvi.  11.) — 0. 

Ver.  11. — Childhood :  a  transparency,  a  prophecy,  a  study.  It  isnot  apparent  why 
Solomon  says, "  Even  a  child  is  known."  It  is  a  familiar  fact,  at  which  we  may  glance, 
and  which  seems  to  be  the  main  thought  of  the  text. 

I.  The  tbanspaebnoy  of  childhood.  Some  men  are  full  of  guile  and  of  hypocrisy ; 
they  have  acquired  the  power  of  concealing  their  real  thought  and  feeling  beneath  their 
exterior,  and  you  are  never  quite  sure  what  they  mean.  You  dare  not  trust  them ;  for 
their  words,  or  their  demeanour,  or  their  present  action  may  entirely  belie  them.  Not 
BO  the  child.  He  means  what  ho  says.  If  he  does  not  love  you,  he  will  not  affect  any 
liking,  for  you.  You  will  soon  find  from  his  behaviour  what  he  thinks  about  men  and 
things,  about  the  studies  in  which  he  is  occupied,  about  the  service  in  which  you  want 
him  to  engage.  And  whether  he  is  living  a  pure  and  faithful  life,  whether  he  is  obedient 
»nd  studious,  or  whether  he  is  obstinate  and  idle,  you  will  very  soon  discover  if  you 
try.  It  requires  but  very  little  penetration  to  read  a  child's  spirit,  to  know  a  child's 
character.  But  the  truth  which  is  not  so  much  on  the  surface  respecting  the  know- 
ledge we  have  of  or  from  the  child  relates  to — 

II.  The  peophbct  op  childhood.  "  Even  a  child  "  will  give  some  idea  of  the  man 
into  whom  he  will  one  day  grow.  "  The  child  is  father  to  the  man."  In  him  are  the 
geims  of  the  nobility  or  the  meanness,  the  courage  or  the  cowardice,  the  generosity  or 
the  selfishness,  the  studiousness  or  the  carelessness,  the  power  or  the  weakness,  that  is 
to  be  witnessed  later  on.  He  that  has  eyes  to  see  may  read  in  the  child  before  him  the 
future — physical,  mental,  moral — that  will  be  silently  but  certainly  developed.  Hence 
we  may  regard — 

in.  Childhood  ab  a  study.  If  men  have  found  an  insect,  or  a  flower,  or  a  seed,  or 
a  stone  well  worth  their  study,  how  much  more  is  the  little  child  1  For^  on  the  one 
hand,  ignorant  assumption  may  spoil  a  life.  To  conclude  hastily,  and  therefore  falsely, 
resijecting  the  temper,  the  tastes,  the  capacities,  the  inclinations,  the  responsibilities, 
the  culpability  or  praiseworthiness  of  the  child,  and  to  act  accordingly,  may  lead  down 
into  error  and  unbelief  and  despair  the  spirit  that  might,  by  other  means,  have  been 
led  into  the  light  of  truth  and  the  love  of  God.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  a  conscientious 
and  just  conclusion  on  these  most  important  characteristics  of  childhood  may  make  a 
life,  may  save  unimaginable  misery,  may  result  in  an  early,  instead  of  a  late,  unfolding 
of  power  and  beauty,  may  make  all  the  difference  in  the  history  of  a  human  sou].  And 
only  the  Father  of  spirits  can  tell  what  that  dij^'ercnce  is. — C. 

.  Ver.  12. — Ood  our  Maker.    Truly  we  are  "  wonderfully  made ; "  and  "  the  hand  that 
made  us  is  Divine."     The  human  ear  and  eye  are — 

I.  Instances  of  Divine  skill  and  power.  That  we  should  be  able,  by  means  of 
this  small  apparatus  included  in  "the  ear,"  to  detect  such  a  variety  of  notes,  to  dis- 
tinguish sounds  from  one  another  so  readily,  through  lo  many  years,  to  perceWe  the 
faintest  whisper  in  the  trees,  and' to  enjoy  the  roll  of  the  reverberating  thunder;  that 
we  should  be  able,  by  means  of  two  small  globes  in  our  face,  to  see  tilings  as  minute  as 
•  bud  or  a  dewdrop  and  as  mighty  as  k  mountain  or  as  the  "  great  wide  sea,"  to  detect 


on.  XX.  1—30.]  THE  PROVERBS.  401 

that  which  is  dangerous  and  to  gaze  with  delight  and  even  rapture  on  the  heauties 
and  glories  of  the  world; — this  is  a  very  striking  instance  of  the  wonderful  skill  and 
power  of  our  Creator. 

II.  Evidences  of  Divine  goodness.  For  what  sources  of  knowledge,  of  power,  of 
pure  gladness  of  heart,  of  mental  and  moral  cultivation  and  growth,  has  not  God  given 
to  us  in  sculpturing  for  us  "  the  hearing  ear,"  in  fashioning  for  us  "  the  seeing  eye"? 

III.  Suggestive  of  the  Divine  knowledgb.  "  He  that  planted  the  ear,  shall  ha 
not  hear?  he  that  formed  the  eye,  shall  he  not  see?"  (Ps.  xciv.  9).  The  wonderful 
Worker  who  has  supplied  us,  his  finite  and  feeble  creatures,  with  such  power  of  hearing 
and  of  vision,  with  such  sources  of  knowledge, — ^how  great,  liow  perfect,  how  houndless, 
must  be  his  own  Divine  percepli^n!  How  certainly  must  he  hear  the  whisper  wa 
would  fain  make  inaudible  to  him!  how  inevitably  must  he  see  the  action  we  would 
gladly  hide  from  his  starching  sight!  How  absolute  must  God's  knowledge  be,  both 
of  our  outward  life  and  of  the  inner  workings  of  our  soul  I 

IV.  Opportunity  foe  Divine  sebviob.  For  here  are  the  means  we  want  of  learning 
of  God,  of  knowing,  that  we  may  do,  his  holy  will.  Our  eye  not  only  conveys  to  us  the 
sight  of  the  beautiful,  the  richly  stored,  the  glorious  world  that  God  has  made  for  us, 
but  it  enables  us  to  read  "the  book  he  has  written  for  our  learning,"  wherein  we  can 
find  all  that  we  need  to  know  of  his  nature,  his  character,  and  his  will.  And  our  ear 
not  only  conveys  to  us  the  melodies  of  the  outer  world,  but  it  places  within  the  reach 
of  our  spirit  the  Divine  truths  which  are  uttered  in  our  presf nee.  These,  as  they  come 
from  the  lips  of  parent,  or  teacher,  or  pastor,  can  "  make  us  wise  unto  salvation,"  can 
fill  our  hearts  with  holy  purpose,  with  true  and  pure  emotion,  with  abiding  peace.  And 
we  may  add  that  the  speaking  lips  are  also  that  which  "  the  Lord  hath  made ;  "  and 
what  an  opportunity  these  give  us  of  uttering  his  truth,  of  helping  his  children,  of 
furthering  his  cause  and  kingdom !  Such  excellent  service  can  our  bodily  organs  render 
to  (lur  immortal  spirit;  and  so  may  they  be  impressed  into  the  holier  service  of  their 
Divine  Author. — C. 

Ver.  17.— (See  homily  on  ch.  iii.  6— 8.)— 0. 

Ver.  22  (ch.  xxiv.  29). — Besentment  and  forgiveness.  The  Christian  doctrine  of  for- 
giveness finds  here  a  distinct  anticipation ;  but  that  doctrine  was  not  found  in  the 
highway,  but  rather  in  the  byway  of  pre-Christian  morals.  It  made  no  mark.  It  did 
not  find  its  way  into  the  thought  and  the  feeling  of  the  people. 

I.  \Tb  must  expect  to  be  WRONCJED,  OB  TO  BELIEVE  OUllSELVES  WRONGED,  AS  WE  00 

ON  OUB  WAT.  So  conflicting  are  our  interests,  so  various  our  views,  so  many  are  ilie 
occasions  «  hen  an  event  or  a  remark  will  wear  an  entirely  different  aspect  according 
to  the  point  of  view  from  which  it  is  regarded,  that  it  is  utterly  unliltely,  morally 
impossible,  that  we  should  not  be  often  placed  in  a  position  in  which  we  seem  to  lie 
wronged.  It  may  be  some  sentence  spoken,  or  some  action  taken,  or  some  purpose 
settled  upon,  slight  or  serious,  incidental  or  malevolent,  but  we  may  take  it  that  it  is 
one  part  of  the  portion  and  burden  of  our  life. 

II.  BiTTEB  RESENTMENT  IS  DISTINCTLY  DISALLOWED.  It  is  natural,_  it  js  human 
enough.  As  man  has  become  under  the  reign  of  sin,  it  finds  a  place  in  his  heart  if 
not  in  his  creed,  everywhere.  It  seems  to  be  right.  It  has  one  element  that  is  right— 
the  element  of  indignation.  But  this  is  only  one  part  of  the  feeling,  and  by  no  means 
the  chief  part.  A  bitter  animosity,  engendered  by  the  thought  tliat  something  has 
been  done  against  us,  is  the  main  in^^redient.  And  this  is  positively  disallowed.  "  Say 
not,  I  will  recompense  evil;"  "It  hath  been  said,  .  .  .  hate  thine  enemy;  but  I  say 
unto  you,  Love  your  enemies  ...  do  good  to  them  that  hate  you;"  "Avenge  not 
yourselves,  but  rather  give  place  unto  wrath  ; "  "  Let  all  bitterness  and  wrath  and 
anger  ...  be  put  away  irom  you,  with  all  malice"  (Matt.  v.  43,  44;  Rom.  xii.  19; 

Eph.  iv  31).  ,     T     J  I.      A  I. 

III.  We  have  an  admieable  alteenativb.  We  can  "wait  on  the  Lord,  and  he 
will  "  save  us."  We  can :  1.  Oo  to  God  in  prayer;  take  our  wounded  spirit  to  Ijim  ; 
east  onr  burden  upon  him ;  seek  and  find  a  holy  calm  in  communion  with  him.  2. 
Commit  our  cause  unio  him  ;  be  like  unto  our  Leader,  "who,  when  he  was  reviled, 
reviled  not  again;  when  he  »ufiered,  he  threatened  not;  but  committed  himself  to  him 

PBOVERIW.  *  *    " 


402  THE  PhOVEBBS.  [oH.  xx.  1— 30. 


that  judgeth  rii;hteously  "  (1  Pc;t.  ii.  23).  We  shall  thus  ask  God  to  save  vnfrom,  ow- 
idves,  from  indulgi'ig  thouglits  and  feelings  toward  our  neighbour  wliich  shame  rather 
than  honour  us,  which  separate  iis  in  spirit  from  our  great  Exemplar  (1  Pet.  ii.  21);  and 
ti)  asu'e  US  from  those  who  would  injure  us,  working  outf'  or  us,  in  his  uwu  way  and  time, 
our  deliyerance  and  recovery. 

IV.  We  win  the  true  viotoky.  To  he  avenged  on  our  enemy  ia  a  victory  of  a 
certain  kind;  the  moment  of  success  is  a  moment  of  triumph,  of  exultation-.  But:  1. 
That  is  a  victory  luhich  is  greatly  and  sadly  qualified.  Whin  we  regard  the  matter 
disinterestedly  ami  dispassionately,  can  we  really  envy  such  triumph  ?  Should  we  like 
to  have  in  our  heart  the  leclings  which  are  surging  and  swelling  in  the  breast  of  the 
victor — feelings  of  hittt-r  hatred,  and  of  positive  rieliglit  in  a  broher's  humiliation,  or 
suffering,  or  loss  ?  2.  Tlie  victory  of  forgiveness  is  pre-eminently  Christian,  It  places 
us  by  the  side  of  our  gracious  Lord  himself  (Luke  xxiii.  34),  and  of  the  best  and 
worthiest  of  his  disciples  (Acts  vil.  60;  2  Tim.  iv.  16).  3.  It  gives  to  us  a  distinct 
tpiritual  resemblance  to  our  heavenly  Father  himself.    (Matt.  v.  45.) — 0. 

Ver.  23. — (See  homily  on  ch.  xvi.  11.) — 0, 

Ver.  27. — The  inioard  light.  Man  may  be  said  to  be  governed  from  above,  from 
■without,  and  also  from  within ;  by  the  power  which  is  from  heaven,  by  human  society, 
and  also  by  the  forces  which  are  resident  in  his  own  spiritual  nature. 

I.  Our  spiritual  nature.  God  created  man  in  his  own  image;  i.e.  he  created  hirh 
a  spirit.  God  is  a  spirit ;  so  also  is  man,  his  offspring,  his  human  child.  Our  spiritual 
nature  is  endowed  with  the  faculties  of  perception,  of  memory,  of  imagination,  of  reason. 
These  ii.cluile — some  would  say  that  to  these  there  has  to  be  added — the  power  which 
is  usually  called  conscience,  the  exercise  of  our  spiritual  faculties  directed  to  all  ques- 
tions of  morality.  This  moral  judgment,  or  conscience,  of  ours:  1.  Distinguishes 
between  right  and  wrong.  Decides  what  is  good  and  what  evil,  what  is  just  anrl  what 
unjust,  what  is  pure  and  what  impure,  what  is  true  and  what  false,  what  is  kind  and 
what  cruel.  It  is  an  inward  light;  it  is  "the  candle  of  the  Lord,"  etc.  2.  Approves 
of  the  one  and  disapproves  of  the  other.  3.  Acts  with  such  force  that,  on  the  one  hand, 
there  is  a  dibtinct  satisfaction,  and  even  joy-;  that,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  distinct 
dissatisfaction,  and  even  pain,  sometimes  amounting  to  an  intolerable  agony.  There  is 
hardly  any  delight  we  can  experience  which  is  so  worthy  of  ourselves  iis  the  children 
of  God,  as  is  that  which  fills  our  heart  when  we  know  that,  regardless  of  our  own 
interests  and  prospects,  we  have  done  the  right  thing;  there  is  no  wretchedness  so 
unbearable  as  remorse,  the  stinging  and  smarting  of  soul  when  our  conscience  rebukes 
us  for  some  sad  transgression.  4.  Is  a  prof oundly  penetrating  power.  It  "  searches  all 
the  inward  parts  "  of  the  soul ;  it  considers  not  only  what  is  on  the  surface,  but  what  is 
far  beneath.  It  deals  with  thoughts,  with  feelings,  with  purpo  es  and  desires,  with  the 
motives  which  move  us,  and  with  the  spirit  that  animates  us. 

II.  The  injury  our  nature  suffers  from  oub  sin.  He  that  sinneth  against  Divine 
wisdom,  and  therefore  against  the  Divine  One,  does  indeed  "wrong  his  own  soul." 
Every  wrong  action  tends  to  weaken  the  authority  of  conscience,  and,  after  a  while, 
it  disturbs  its  judgment,  so  that  its  decision  is  not  as  true  and  straight  as  it  was.  This 
is  the  saddest  aspect  of  the  consequence  of  sin.  When  the  inward  light,  the  candle  of 
the  Lord,  begins  to  grow  dim,  and  ultimately  becomes  darkened,  then  the  soul  is  con- 
fused and  the  path  of  life  is  lost.  If  our  eye  is  evil,  our  whole  body  is  full  of  dark- 
ness ;  if  the  light  that  is  in  us  be  darkness,  how  great  must  the  darkness  be  (Matt, 
yi.  23)!  When  that  which  should  be  directing  us  into  the  truth  and  wisdom  of  heaven 
is  misleading  us,  and  is  positively  directing  us  to  folly  and  wrong,  we  are  far  on  the 
road  to  spiritual  ruin.  We  have  to  mourn  the  fact  that  this  is  no  rare  occurrence  ; 
that  sin  does  so  confuse  and  blind  our  souls  that  men  do  very  frequently  fall  into  the 
moral  condition  in  which  they  "  call  evil  good,  and  good  evil."  The  light  that  is  in 
them  is  darkness. 

III.  OuK  hbstobation  through  Christ  cub  Lord.  Jesus  Christ  offers  himself  to 
us  as  the  Divine  Physician ;  lie  sayg  to  us,  "  Wilt  thou  be  made  whole  ?  "  And  he  who 
BO  graciously  and  mightily  healed  the  bodies  heals  nlso  the  souls  ol'  men.  He  does  so 
by  recalling  our  aiieotion  to  God  oui  P.'vther,  by  setting  uur  heart  right.    Then  loving 


OH.  XX.  1—30.]  THE  PROVERBS.  408 

him,  we  love  his  Word,  his  truth;  we  study  and  we  copy  the  life  of  onr  Lord.  And  m 
the  heart  is  renewed  and  the  life  is  changed,  the  judgment  also  is  restored;  we  see  all 
things  in  another  light ;  we  "  see  light  in  God's  light."  The  candle  of  the  Lord  is 
rekindled,  the  lamp  is  trimmed ;  it  gives  a  new  light  to  all  that  are  in  the  house — to 
all  the  faculties  that  are  in  the  house  of  our  nature.  Let  us  yield  ourselves  to  Christ 
our  Lord,  let  us  study  his  truth  and  his  life,  and  our  conscience  will  become  more  and 
more  true  in  its  decisions,  and  in  its  peaceful  light  we  shall  walk  "  all  the  day  long," 
truly  happy  in  heart,  enjoying  the  constant  favour  of  "  the  Father  of  lights." — C. 

Ver.  28.— (See  homily  on  oh.  xvi.  12.)— 0. 

Ver.  29. — The  glory  of  young  manhond.  A  weak  young  man  Is  not  a  sight  that  we 
like  to  see.  Between  young  manhood  and  weakness  there  is  no  natural  agreement; 
the  two  things  do  not  accord  with  one  another.  In  young  men  we  look  for  strength, 
and  delight  to  see  it  there.  Moreover,  youth  itself  is  proud  of  the  strength  of  which 
it  is  conscious,  and  "  glories"  in  it.     We  look  at — 

I.  That  whebeon  we  congbatulatb  it.  We  look  with  satisfaction,  and  perhaps 
with  pride,  upon  the  young  man  who  possesses :  1.  Physical  strength.  Well-developed 
muscular  power  and  skill,  the  attainment  of  the  largest  possihle  share  of  bodily  vigour 
and  capacity,  this  is  one  element  of  manliness,  and,  although  it  is  not  the  highest,  it 
is  good  in  itself,  and  so  far  as  it  goes.  2.  Intellectual  power.  The  possession  of  know- 
ledge, of  mental  vigour  and  grasp,  of  reasoning  faculty,  of  husiness  shrewdness  and 
capacity,  of  imaginative  power,  of  strength  of  will ;  but  especially :  3.  Moral  and 
spiritual  strength.  Power  to  resist  the  evil  forces  which  are  around  us;  to  put  aside, 
without  hesitation,  the  solicitafions  to  unholy  pleasure  or  unlawful  gain ;  to  decline 
the  fellowship  and  friendship  which  might  he  pecuniarily  or  socially  advantageous,  but 
which  would  be  morally  and  spiritually  injurious ;  to  move  onward  in  the  way  of  duty, 
unscathed  by  the  darts  and  arrows  of  evil  which  are  in  the  air;  to  imdertake  and  v} 
execute  beneficent  work ;  to  range  one's  self  with  the  honourable  and  holy  few  against 
the  unworthy  multitude;  to  bear  a  brave  witness  on  behalf  of  truth,  purity,  sobriety, 
righteousness,  whatever  the  forces  that  are  in  league  against  it; — this  is  the  noblest 
element  of  streiigth,  and  this  is  pre-eminently  the  glory  of  young  manhood. 

II.  Its  peculiar  temptation.  The  temptation  of  the  strong  is  to  disregard  and 
even  to  despise  the  weak,  to  look  down  with  a  proud  sense  of  superiority  on  those  who 
are  less  capable  than  themselves.  This  is  both  foolish  and  sinful.  For  comparative 
weakness  is  that  from  which  the  strung  have  themselves  come  up,  and  into  which  they 
wiil  themselves  go  down.  It  is  a  question  of  time,  or,  if  not  of  time,  of  privilege  and 
bestowment  (see  infra),  and  a  proud  contempt  is  quite  misplaced.  The  young  should 
clearly  understand  that  strength,  when  it  is  modest,  is  a  beautiful  thing,  but  when 
haughty  and  disdainful,  is  offensive  in  the  sight  both  of  God  and  man. 

III.  Its  clear  obligation.  The  first  thing  that  human  strength  should  do  is  to 
recognize  the  source  whence  it  came,  and  to  let  its  recognition  find  expression  in  devout 
and  reverent  action.  "  Thy  God  hath  commanded  thy  strength."  As,  ultimately,  all 
strength  of  every  kind  proceeds  from  God;  and  as  he  constantly  sustains  in  power,  and 
the  strong  as  much  as  the  weak  are  dependent  on  his  fatherly  kindness;  and  as  the 
strong  owe  more  to  his  goodness  than  the  weak  (inasmuch  as  they  have  received  more 
at  his  hand) ; — the  first  thing  they  should  ask  themselves  is —  What  can  we  render  untt 
the  Lordf  And  they  will  find  that  to  devote  their  strength  to  the  service  of  their 
Saviour  and  of  their  kind  is  to  find  a  source  of  blessedness  immeasurably  higher,  as 
well  as  far  more  lasting,  than  that  which  comes  from  the  sense  of  power.  It  is  not 
what  we  have,  but  what  we  give,  that  fills  the  soul  with  pure  and  abiding  joy. — C. 

Ver.  29  (latter  claus-j).— (See  homily  on  ch.  xvi.  31.)— 0, 


404 


THE   PROVERBS. 


[oh.  XXI.  1—31. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXI. 


Ver.  1. — The  king's  heart  Is  in  the  hand 
of  the  Lord,  as  the  rivers  of  water.  We 
are  to  think  of  tbe  little  channels  used  for 
irrigation.  As  these  are  altogether  under  the 
gardener's  control,  so  the  heart  of  the  king, 
who  might  seem  to  have  no  superior,  is 
directed  by  God.  He  turneth  it  waither- 
soever  he  will.  By  hidden  influences  and 
providential  arrangements  God  disposes  the 
monarch  to  order  his  government  so  as  to 
carry  out  his  designs,  to  spread  around  joy 
and  plenty.  The  system  of  irrigation  signi- 
fied in  this  passage  is  still  to  be  seen  in 
Eastern  lands.  "  Flower-beds  and  gardens 
of  herbs  are  always  made  at  a  little  lower 
level  than  the  surrounding  ground,  and  are 
divided  into  small  squares,  a  slight  edging 
of  earth  banking  the  whole  round  on  each 
side.  Water  is  then  let  in,  and  floods  the 
entire  surface  till  the  soil  is  thoroughly 
saturated;  after  which  the  moisture  is 
turned  off  to  another  bi  d,  by  simply  closing 
the  opening  in  the  one  under  water,  by  a 
turn  of  the  bare  foot  of  the  gardener,  and 
making  another  in  the  same  way  with  the 
foot,  in  the  next  bod,  and  thus  the  whole 
garden  is  in  due  course  watered.  .  .  .  Only, 
in  this  ease,  the  hand  is  supposed  to  make 
the  gap  in  the  clay  bank  of  the  streamlet, 
and  divert  the  current"  (Geikle,  'Holy 
Land  and  Bible,'  i.  9).  So  in  Virgil  we  find 
(' Eel.,' iii.  Ill)— 

"  Claudite  jam  rivoB,  pueri ;  sat  prata  bibe- 

runt." 
"  Now  close  the  cuts ;  enouglx  the  meads 

have  drunk." 

Ver.  2. — This  is  similar  to  ch.  xvl.  2 
(where  see  note.  Comp.  also  ch.  xiv.  12 ; 
ivi.  25;  XX.  21).  See  here  a  warning 
against  self-deception  and  that  silly  self- 
complacency  which  thinks  its  own  ways  the 
best.  Septuagint,  "  Every  man  appears  to 
himself  righteous,  but  the  Lord  directs  the 
he  arts." 

Ver.  3. — To  do  jnstice  and  judgment  is 
more  acceptable  to  the  Lord  than  saoriflce. 
The  superiority  of  moral  obedience  to  cere- 
monial worship  is  often  inculcated  (see  note 
on  ch.  XV,  8,  and  below,  ver.  27  ;  and  comp. 
Micah  vi,  6—8  and  Matt.  xii.  7).  "  Justice  " 
and  "judgment"  (faeddkdh  and  mishpat) 
are  combined  in  Gen.  xviii.  19 ;  2  Sam.  viii. 
15 ;  Job  xixvii.  23  ;  Isa.  Ivi.  1,  etc.  They 
imply  equity  and  justice  proceeding,  not 
from  bare  regard  to  law,  but  from  the  prin- 
ciple of  love.  Septuagint,  "To  do  justly 
and  to  speak  the  trutii  are  more  ploaoiug  to 
God  than  the  bluod  uf  saerilicud.' 


Ver.  4.— An  high  look  and  a  prond  heart ; 
Vulgate,  exaltalio  oeulorum  est  dilatatio 
cordis,  "The  lifting  up  of  the  eyes  is  a 
swelling  of  the  heart."  But  it  is  best  to 
make  the  whole  verse  one  idea,  as  in  the 
Authorized  Vorsiun.  The  lifting  of  the  eyes 
is  a  term  implying  pride,  as  shown  iu  super- 
cilious looks,  as  if  oth'er  people  were  of 
inferior  clay  and  not  wortliy  of  notice.  So 
we  have  "  haughty  eyes "  in  oh.  vi.  17 
(where  see  note) ;  and  in  ch.  xxx.  13  we 
read,  "  There  is  a  generation,  oh  how  lofty 
are  their  eyes!  and  tlieir  eyelids  are  lifted 
up."  "The  enlargement  of  the  heart"  is 
the  cause  of  the  proud  look,  for  it  signifies 
the  evil  affections  and  concupiscence  of  the 
will,  wholly  tilled  up  nith  self,  and  con- 
trolling the  actions  and  e.'ipressiou  of  the 
body.  Septuagint,  "A  high-minded  man 
Qieya.\6(ppuiv)  is  stout-hearted  iu  his  pride." 
And  the  ploughing  of  the  wicked  is  sin. 
The  Authorized  Version  takes  the  reading 
"i:  (nir),  which  means  "tillage"  (oh.  xiii. 
23),or,  as  Delitzsch  supposes,  "land  ploughed 
for  the  first  tinlfe  "  (iiovale).  The  proverb, 
taken  thus,  will  mean,  "high  look,  proud 
heart,  even  all  the  field  which  the  godless 
cultivate,  all  that  they  do,  is  sin."  "  Pride," 
says  tlie  Talmud,  "  is  worse  than  sin."  But 
another  pointing  gives  a  different  and  very 
appropriate  (comp.  oh.  xiii.  9 ;  xxiv.  20) 
meaning,  nj  («er)  signifies  "a  lamp." 
Thus  the  Vulgate,  Lucema  impiorum  pecca- 
tum,  "  The  lamp  of  the  wicked  is  sin  ; "  and  _ 
the  Septuaj^int,  Aaiiirr^p  Se  aat^Sv  aftajnta. 
"  Lamp"  is,  as  often,  a  metaphor  for  pros- 
perity and  happiness  (comp.  2  Sam.  xxii. 
29 ;  1  Kings  xi.  36) ;  and  it  is  here  said 
that  the  sinner's  outward  prosperity  and 
joyousuess,  springing  from  no  good  source, 
being  founded  in  self;  and  not  resting  on 
virtue  and  godliness,  are  in  themselves  sin- 
ful and  displeasing  to  God. 

Ver.  5. — The  thoughts  of  the  diligent 
tend  only  to  plenteousness.  Patient  in- 
dustry is  rewarded  by  a  certain  increase 
(comp.  oh.  xii.  11 ;  xiii.  11 ;  xiv.  23).  Says 
an  English  maxim,  "  Diligence  is  a  fair  for- 
tune, and  industry  a  good  estate."  The 
Greek  guomists  have  said  tersely — 

*" hiravTa  ri  KaKh  tov  iroi  ovi/ros  yiyverat. 

"  To  him  who  labours  all  good  things  accrue. 
The  man  who  labours  God  himself  assists." 

But  of  every  one  that  is  hasty  only  to  want. 
Diligence  is  contrasted  witli  hastiness.  The 
hasting  to  be  rich  by  any.^cven  nefarious, 
means  (ch.  xx.  21  ;  xxviii.  20)  will  bring  a 
man  to  poverty.    There  are  uuuiuruUB  pro- 


aa.  xn.  1—31.] 


THE  PROVEBBS. 


405 


Terbg  warning  against  precipitancy,  which 
will  occur  to  every  one:  Festina  lente; 
"More  haste,  less  speed;"  "Eile  mit  Weile." 

TlpoirdTeia  iroXXoTs  iffrlv  alrla  RaKwv, 

(See  a  long  dissertation  on  Feetinaiio  prsspro- 
pera  in  Erasmus's  '  Adagiii.')  This  vtrse  is 
omitted  in  the  chief  manuscripts  of  the 
Septuagint. 

Ver.  6. — The  getting  of  treasures  by  a 
lying  tongue— the  acquisition  of  wesilth  liy 
fraud  and  falseliood — is  a  vanity  tossed  to 
and  fro  of  them  that  seek  death.  The  latter 
clause  is  variously  rendered  and  interpreted. 
The  Hebrew  is  literally,  a  fleeting  breath, 
those  seeking  death.  The  Revised  Voi-sion 
makes  the  last  words  a  separate  proposition, 
"They  that  seek  them  seek  death."  But 
this  seems  unnecessary,  and  somewliat  op- 
posed to  the  gnomic  style,  wliioh  often  com- 
bines two  predicates  in  one  construction ;  and 
there  is  no  reason  why  we  should  not  ren- 
der the  words,  as  in  the  Au  thorized  Version, 
"of  seekers  of  death."  Sucli  a  mode  of  ob- 
taining wealtli  is  as  evanescent  and  unstable 
as  the  very  breath,  and  ends  in  death,  which 
is  practically  the  result  of  tlieir  quest.  Tims 
Wisd.  V.  14,  "U'he  hupe  of  the  ungodly  is 
like  dust  that  is  blown  away  with  the  wind  ; 
like  a  thin  froth  tliat  is  driven  away  with 
the  storm  ;  like  as  the  smoke  which  is  dis- 
persed here  and  there  with  the  tempest, 
and  passeth  away,  as  the  remembrance  of  a 
guest  that  tameth  but  a  day."  Some  think 
that  the  comparison  regards  the  mirage  of 
the  desert,  which  deceives  travellers  with 
the  phantasms  of  cool  waters  and  refreshing 
shaiie.  Such  an  allusion  is  found  in  Isa. 
XXXV.  7.  The  Talmud  enjoins,  "  Speak  no 
word  that  accords  not  with  the  truth,  Ihat 
thy  honour  may  not  vanish  as  the  waters  of 
a  brook."  The  Septuagint  and  Vulgate  have 
followed  a  diiferent  reading  (niD-'ts'  pia), 
and  render  thus :  Vulgate,  Vanus  et  excors 
est,  et  impingetur  ad  lagueos  mortis,  "  He  is 
^ain  and  foolish,  and  will  be  taken  in  the 
snares  of  death;"  Septuagint,  "pursues 
vain  things  unto  the  snares  of  death  (eVl 
irayiSa!  BaviToii)"  (ch.  xiii.  14;  xiv.  27). 
So  St.  Paul  says  (1  Tim.  vi.  9),  -'They  that 
desire  to  be  rich  fall  into  a  temptation  and 
a  snare  (tto^^So),  and  many  foolish  and  hurtful 
luS'.s,  such  as  drown  men  in  destruction  and 
perdition." 

Vc]-.  7. — The  robbery  of  the  wicked  shall 
de3troy  them;  Vulgate,  rapinx  impiorum 
de'rahenieos;  Revised  Versirn, "  The  violence 
of  (he  wicked  shall  sweep  them  away,"  like 
ch  ff  before  the  wind.  The  violence  with 
which  they  tre.it  others  shall  rebound  on 
themselves,  shall  bring  its  own  punishment ; 
they  shall  sink  in  the  pit  that  they  made, 
and  their  foot  shall  bo  taken  in  the  net  which 
(hey  hid  (Ps.  /iz.  15;  uomp.  eh.  i.  IS,  19). 


Septuagint,  "Destruction  shall  Bojoqm  as  a 
guest  (€iri|e>'tofl^(r6Tai)  with  the  ungodly." 
The  reason  of  this  fate  is  given  in  the  con- 
cluding hemistich :  Because  they  refuse  to 
do  judgment.  This  is  a  judicial  retribution 
on  them  for  wilfully  declining  (ver.  25)  to 
do  what  is  right. 

Ver.  8. — The  way  of  man  is  froward  and 
strange ;  Vulgate,  Perversa  via  viri,  aliena 
est.  Both  this  and  the  Authorized  Version 
miss  the  antithesis  between  the  guilty  and 
the  pure  man,  which  is  intended.  In  lii 
translated  "and  strange"  (which  seems  to 
mean  "alien  from  what  is  right"),  the  vai 
is  not  the  copulative,  but  part  of  the  word, 
which  is  an  adjective  signifying  "laden 
with  guilt;"  so  that  the  clause  ouglit  to  be 
rendered,  "Crooked  is  the  way  of  a  guilty 
man"  (see  note  on  ch.  ii.  15,  where,  however, 
the  word  is  different,  though  the  idea  is 
analogous).  An  evil  man's  way  of  life  is 
not  open  and  straightforward,  simple  and 
uniform,  but  stealthy,  crooked,  perverse, 
whither  his  evil  inclinations  lead  him. 
Septuagint,  "To  the  crooked  (o-KoXiofis) 
God  sendeth  crooked  ways ; "  which  recalls 
Ps.  xviii.  26,  "With  the  pure  thou  wilt 
show  thyself  pure;  and  with  the  perverse 
thou  wilt  show  thyself  froward."  God 
aUnws  the  wicked  to  punish  themselves  by 
falling  into  mischief.  As  for  the  pure,  his 
work  is  right ;  or,  straight  (ch.  xx.  1 1 ). 
The  pure  in  heart  will  be  right  in  a  ticn ; 
lie  follows  his  conscience  and  God's  law, 
anil  goes  direct  on  his  course  without  turning 
or  hesitation.  The  LXX.  refers  the  clause 
to  God :  "  for  pure  and  right  are  his  ways." 

Ver.  9. — It  is  better  to  dwell  in  a  corner 
of  the  housetop.  One  is  to  think  of  the  fiat 
roof  of  an  Eastern  house,  which  was  used  as 
an  apartment  for  many  purposes;  e.g.  for 
sleeping  and  conference  (1  Sam.  ix.  25,  26), 
for  exercise  (2  Sam.  xi.  2),  for  domestic 
matters  (Josh.  ii.  6),  for  retirement  and 
prayer  (Ps.  cii.  7 ;  Acts  x.  9).  This,  though 
exposed  to  the  inclemency  of  the  weather, 
would  be  not  an  uncomfortable  situation 
during  a  great  pai  t  of  the  year.  But  the  pro- 
verb implies  a  position  abnormally  inconve- 
nient as  an  alternative  preferable  to  a  resi- 
dence inside.  Hence,  perhaps,  it  is  advisable 
to  render,  with  Delitzsch,  "  Better  to  sit  on 
the  pinnacle  of  a  house-roof."  Septuagint, 
"It  is  beHer  to  dwell  in  a  corner  of  a  place 
ripen  to  the  sky  {viraiBpov)."  Than  with  a 
brawling  (conteniious)  woman  in  a  wide 
house;  literally,  a  house  of  society;  i.e.  a 
house  in  common  (com p.  ver.  19  and  ch. 
XXV.  24).  A  solitary  corner,  replete  with 
inconveniences,  is  to  be  preferred  to  a  house 
shared  with  a  woman,  wife  or  other  fen  ale 
relation,  of  a  quarrelsome  and  vexatious 
temper.  The  I;XX.  puts  the  matter  forcibly, 
*'  than  iu  cieled  rooms  with  unrighteouanesi 


40« 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[oh.  XXI.  1 — 31. 


and  in  a  common  house."  80  the  Latin 
proverb,  "Non  quam  late,  Bed  quam  Isete 
habites,  refert."  The  Scotch  have  a  proverb 
to  the  same  effect :  "  A  house  wl'  a  reek  and 
a  wife  wi'  a  reerd  (scold)  will  snne  mak' 
a  man  run  to  the  door."  "I  had  rather 
dwell,"  says  the  Son  of  Sirach  (Ecolus.  .Tiv. 
]  6),  "  with  a  lion  and  a  dragon,  than  to  keep 
house  with  a  wicked  woman." 

Yer.  10. — The  soul  of  the  wicked  desiretb 
veil.  A  wicked  u.'an  cannot  rest  without 
planning  and  wishing  for  some  new  evil 
thing.  Nothing  is  safe  from  his  malignant 
activity  (oomp.  ch.  iv.  16;  x.  23).  His 
neighbour  findeth  no  favour  in  lus  eyes 
(Isa.  xiii.  18 ;  xxvi.  10).  He  does  not 
look  with  pity  on  friend  or  neighbour,  if 
they  stand  in  the  way  of  the  gratification 
of  his  desires;  he  will  sacrifice  any  one, 
however  closely  connected,  so  that  he  may 
work  his  will.  Nothing  makes  a  man  more 
atrociously  selfish  and  hard-hearted  than 
vice  (see  ch.  xii.  10,  and  the  note  there). 
The  LXX.  takes  the  sentence  in  a  passive 
sense,  "The  soul  of  the  ungodly  shall  not 
be  pitied  by  any  one."  Tliey  who  have  no 
pity  for  others  shall  meet  with  no  pity 
themselves;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
Lord  says,  "Blessed  are  the  merciful:  for 
they  shall  obtain  mercy"  (Matt.  v.  7). 

Ver.  11. — When  the  soomer  is  punished, 
the  simple  is  made  wise.  We  had  the 
same  thought  at  ch.  xix.  25  (where  see 
note).  The  simple  (parvwlus.  Vulgate) 
profit  by  the  punishment  of  tlie  incorrigibly 
evil.  But  the  wise  need  not  chastisement 
for  their  improvement.  When  the  wise  is 
instmoted  (Ps.  xxxii.  6),  he  (the  wise) 
reeeiveth  knowledge.  The  wise  man  uses 
every  opportunity,  takes  advantage  of  every 
circumstance  and  event,  to  increase  his 
knowledge  and  experience.  The  Vulgate 
carries  on  the  suljject,  "And  if  he  (the 
simple)  follow  the  wise  man,  he  shall  attain 
knowledge."  Septuagint,  "When  the  in- 
temperate man  is  punished,  the  simple  is 
mode  cleverer;  and  a  wise  man  under- 
standing will  receive  knowledge."  "For 
it  often  happens,"  says  St.  Gregory  ('Moral.,' 
xviii.  38),  "  that  the  mind  of  the  weak  is 
the  more  unsteadied  from  the  hearing  of  the 
trutli,  as  it  sees  the  despisers  of  the  truth 
flourishing;  but  when  just  vengeance  takes 
awav  the  unjust,  it  keeps  others  away  from 
w  ck.jdness." 

Ver.  12. — The  righteous  man  wisely  con- 
sioereth  the  house  of  the  wicked ;  but  God 
overthroweth  the  'wicked  for  their  wicked- 
ness. The  Authorized  Version  introduces 
the  words  "  but  God  "  in  order  to  eke  out 
the  sense  desired ;  the  Revised  Version,  for 
the  same  reason,  has,  "  how  the  wicked  are 
overthrown ;  "  and  both  versions  signify  that 
the  good  man  contemplates  the  fortunes  and 


seeming  prosperity  of  the  wicked,  and,  look- 
ing to  the  end  of  these  men,  sees  how  hollow 
is  their  success  and  what  a  fatal  issue 
awaits  them.  The  Vulgate  refers  the  pas- 
sage to  the  zeal  of  the  righteous  for  the 
salvation  of  sinners— a  thought  quite  foreign  ~ 
to  the  present  subject — thus:  Exeogitatjustiu 
de  domo  impii,  ut  detrdhat  impios  a  malo, 
"  The  righteous  man  reflects  concerning  the 
house  of  the  wicked  how  he  may  deliver 
them  from  evil."  The  Hebrew  is  literally 
A  righteous  one  looketh  on  the  house  of  the 
wicked:  he  precipitates  the  wicked  to  de- 
ttruetion.  There  is  no  change  of  subject  in 
the  two  clauses,  and  "a  righteous  One" 
(tsaddik")  is  God,  put  indeterminately  to 
excite  the  greater  awe  (comp.  Job  ixxiv. 
17).  The  Lord  keeps  the  sinners  under  his 
eye,  that  he  may  punish  them  at  the  fit 
moment  (comp.  ch.  xxii.  12;  Job  xii.  19). 
The  notion  of  God's  moral  government  ot 
the  universe  prevails  most  strongly  in  every 
pronouncement  of  the  writer.  The  LXX. 
interprets  "the  house"  as  heart  and  con- 
science, and  renders,  "A  righteous  man 
understands  the  hearts  of  the  godless,  an  I 
despises  the  impious  in  their  wickednesses ;  " 
he  sees  through  their  outward  felicity,  knows 
well  its  unreahty,  and  despises  them  for  the 
low  aims  and  pursuits  which  satisfy  them. 

Ver.  13. — Whoso  stoppeth  his  ears  at  the 
cry  of  the  poor.  A  twofold  retribution  i> 
threatened  on  the  unmerciful  man.  He  also 
shall  cry  himself,  but  shall  not  be  heari. 
He  himself  shall  fall  into  distress,  and  shall 
appeal  to  his  neighbours  for  help  in  vain. 
"  With  the  same  measure  that  ye  mete 
withal,  it  shall  be  measured  to  you  again  " 
(Luke  vi.  38).  This  is  true  also  in  spiritual 
matters  and  in  the  final  judgment  (see  on 
ch.  xiv.  21  and  xix.  17;  and  comp.  Matt 
xviii.  23,  etc. ;  xxv.  41,  etc. ;  Jas.  ii.  13). 

Ver.  14. — A  gift  in  secret  pacifieth  anger. 
We  have  had  above  various  maxims  about 
bribes a.nd  presents;  e.g.  ch.  xvii.  8, 23;  xviii. 
16.  The  word  translated  "pacifieth"  is 
from  the  oTrof  Xeyiii^vov  verb  npD,  "  to  turn 
away,"  "avert."  Septuagint,  'avarpiitii; 
Vulgate,  extinguit;  Venetian,  xd/irtet.  A 
gift  offered  secretly  to  one  incensed,  whether 
personal  enemy,  juilge,  or  prince,  averts  the 
consequences  of  the  offence.  The  next 
hemistich  is  parallel  in  meaning.  And  a 
reward  (present)  in  the  bosom  strong  wrath. 
A  present  kept  handy  in  the  bosom  of  the 
petitioner's  garment,  ready  to  be  transferred 
at  a  fitting  moment,  as  experience  proves, 
calms  the  most  violent  wrath.  Septuagint, 
"  He  that  is  sparing  of  gifts  arouses  strong 
wrath." 

Ver.  15.— It  is  joy  to  the  just  to  do  judg- 
ment. The  righteous  feel  real  pleasure  in 
doing  what  is  right ;  they  have  the  answer 
of  a  good  conscience,  and  the  feeling  that 


ott.  xxt  1—31.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


40? 


they  are,  as  far  as  they  can,  raakiiig  God's 
will  their  will,  and  this  brings  deep  comfort 
and  stable  joy  (see  some  contrary  experiences, 
vei.  10  and  oh.  z.  23;  xv.  21).  But  destrno- 
tion  shall  be  to  the  workers  of  iniquity.  The 
Authorized  Version,  by  inserting  "  shall  be," 
and  making  this  clause  a  separate  assertion, 
obscures  the  force  of  the  original,  which,  as 
In  ch.  X.  29  (where  see  note),  contrasts  the 
effect  of  right-doing  on  the  good  and  the  evil. 
It  is  a  joy  to  the  former,  "  but  destruction 
[or,  'terror']  to  them  that  work  iniquity." 
M  pavor  operantibus  iniquitatem,  Vulgate. 
They  cannot  trust  themselves  to  do  rightly 
without  fear ;  they  cannot  commit  the  result 
to  God,  as  the  righteous  do ;  if  ever  they  do 
act  uprightly,  it  is  against  their  inclination, 
and  such  action  wUl,  as  they  fear,  bring 
them  to  ruin.  Septuagint,  "  It  is  the  joy  of 
the  righteous  to  do  judgment;  but  a  holy 
man  is  abominable  (aicdSapTos)  among  evil- 
doers." So  Wisd.  ii.  15,  "He  [the  right- 
eous] is  grievous  unto  us  even  to  behold: 
for  his  life  is  not  like  other  men's,  his  ways 
are  of  another  fashion  ...  he  abstaineth 
from  our  ways '  a*  from  filthiness  (a/ca- 
daptrtavy 

Ver.  16. — The  man  that  wandereth  out  of 
the  way  of  understaiiding.  (For  Ssfcin,  "  un- 
derstanding," see  note  on  ch.  i.  3.)  He  who 
forsakes  the  way  of  wisdom,  the  path  of 
virtue,  the  religious  life,  and  thus  becomes 
in  proverbial  language  "a  fool,"  he  shall 
remain  (rest,  dweU)  in  the  congregation  of 
the  dead;  in  txxtu  gigantwm  commordbitur. 
"The  dead"  is,  in  the  Hebrew,  rephaim, 
for  which  see  note  on  ch.  ii.  18.  The  de- 
nunciation means  primarily  that  the  sinner 
shall  soon  be  with  the  shades  of  the  dead, 
shall  meet  with  a  speedy  death.  Words- 
worth considers  that  the  writer  is  saying  in 
bitter  irony  that  the  evil  m^n  shall  rest  as 
a  guest  at  a  banquet,  shall  lie  down  and  be 
regaled,  but  it  will  be  in  the  company  of 
the  dead.  The  contrast  seems  to  lie  between 
'^be  wandering  and  the  resf,  and  this  rest 
is  regarded  as  penal ;  so  that  one  must  needs 
see  here  an  intimation  of  retribution  after 
death;  and  comp.  ch.  xxiv.  14,  20.  Tije 
Fathers  reg  rded  the  Bepliaim, "  the  giants," 
as  the  descendants  of  the  rebel  angels,  in 
accordance  with  their  interpretation  of  Gen. 
vi.  1 — i.  Thus  St.  Gregory  writes  ('  Moral.,' 
xvii.  30),  quoting  our  passage,  "  For  whoso- 
ever foraiikeB  the  way  of  righteousness,  to 
whose  number  does  he  join  himself,  8a.ving 
to  the  number  of  the  proud  spirits  ?  " 

Ver.  17. — He  that  loveth  pleasure  shall 
be  a  poor  man;  qui  diligit  epulas,  Vulgate; 
for  feasts  are  chiefly,  though  not  exclusively, 
intended.  He  shall  become  "a  man  of 
want"  (maoheior)  as  ch.  xi.  24.  He  that  loveth 
wine  and  oil  shall  not  be  rich.  "  Wine  and 
oil  *  were  the  usual  i^djuncts  of  banquets  (Ps. 


xxiii.  S ;  civ.  15).  Some  unguents  used  for 
anointing  honoured  guests  were  very  costly. 
The  pound  of  spikenard  expended  by  Mary 
of  Bethany  was  worth  more  than  three 
hundred  pence— the  wages  of  a  labourer  for 
nearly  a  whole  year  (see  John  xii.  3 ;  Matt. 
XX.  2).  Indnlgence  in  such  luxuries  would 
be  a  token  of  prodigality  and  extravagance, 
which  are  the  sure  precursors  of  ruin;  while, 
on  the  other  hand,  according  to  the  trite 
proverb.  Magnum  vectigal  eat  parsimonia. 
That  fulness  of  meat  and  luxurious  habits 
tend  to  spiritual  poverty  and  the  loss  of 
grace,  need  not  be  insisted  on.  Septuagint, 
"  A  man  in  want  (^ySejJr)  loveth  mirth, 
loving  wine  and  oil  unto  wealth  (els 
7rA.oBToy)."  Some  translate  the  last  words, 
"  in  abundance,"  as  if  the  meaning  was  that 
the  poor  endeavours  to  mitigate  the  severity 
of  his  lot  by  getting  all  the  pleasure  he  can 
from  creature  comforts  however  procured. 
Others  think  that  a  negative  has  fallen  out 
of  the  Greek,  which  should  be,  "not  unto 
wealth,"  i.e.  he  shall  not  be  enriclied  thereby. 

Ver.  18. — The  wicked  shall  be  a  ransom 
for  the  righteous.  The  same  thought  occurs 
in  oh.  xi.  8  (where  see  note),  nss  (kopher), 
"price  of  atonement,"  means  of  reconcilia- 
tion. Delitzsoli  instances  that  the  great 
movement  which  gathered  the  nations  to- 
gether for  the  destruction  of  Babylon  put 
an  end  to  Israel's  exile ;  and  that  Gyrus,  the 
scourge  of  so  many  heathen  peoples,  was  the 
liberator  of  the  Jews  (comp.  Isa.  xliv.  28). 
And  the  transgressor  for  the  upright.  The 
faithless  takes  the  place  of  the  upright ;  tlie 
stroke  passes  over  the  latter,  4o  fall  on  the 
former,  as  in  Egj-pt  the  destroying  angel 
spared  the  houses  of  the  Israelites,  and 
poured  his  wrath  on  the  Egyptians.  Sep- 
tuagint, "  A  transgressor  is  the  offscouring 
(ireptKdSapua,  perhaps  equivalent  to  'ran- 
som ')  of  a  righteous  man." 

Ver.  19. — A  variant  of  ver.  9.  Here,  in- 
stead of  the  "  corner  of  the  roof,"  we  have 
a  wilderness,  a  desert  land,  as  the  refuge  to 
which  the  persecuted  man  must  flee.  Than 
with  a  contentious  and  an  angry  (fretful) 
woman.  So  the  Vulgate.  But  it  seems 
better,  with  many  modern  commentators, 
to  take  DBD1,  not  as  another  epithet,  but  as 
equivalent  to  "  and  vexation,"  i.e.  a  quarrel- 
some wife,  and  the  vexation  that  accompanies 
such  an  infliction.  The  LXX.  adds  a  word 
to  the  text,  as  being  at  the  root  of  the 
matter,  "  Than  with  a  quarrelsome,  talkative, 
and  passionate  woman." 

Ver.  20. — There  is  treasure  to  be  desired 
and  oil  in  the  dwelling  of  the  wiS3.  Precious 
treasure  and  store  of  provision  and  rich  un- 
guents (ver.  17)  are  collected  in  the  house 
of  the  wise  man,  by  which  he  may  fare 
sumptuously,  exercise  hospitality,  and  lay 
up  for  the  future  (comp.  ch.  xxiv.  4).    Bat  a 


408 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[oh.  XXI.  1— St. 


foolish  man  spendetb  it  up.  "  A  fnol  of  a 
man"  (oh.iv.  20)Boon  swallows,  runs  through 
and  exhausts,  all  that  lias  been  accumulated 
(ver.  17).  Septuagint,  "  A  desirable  ( einBu- 
firiThs)  treasure  will  rest  on  the  mouth  of  the 
wise,  but  foolish  men  will  swallow  it  up." 
It  is  obvious  to  apply  the  maxim  to  spiritual 
things,  seeing  in  it  the  truth  that  the  really 
wise  man  stores  up  treasures  of  Divine  love 
and  the  oil  of  God's  grace,  while  the  foolish 
man  wastes  his  opportunities,  squanders  his 
powers,  and  drives  the  Holy  Spirit  from 
him. 

Ver.  21. — He  that  foUoweth  after  right- 
eousness and  mercy.  "  Righteousness  " 
(tsedakali),  in  the  first  hemistich,  signifies 
the  virtue  which  renders  to  all,  God  and 
man,  their  due,  which  is  the  oliaracteristio 
of  the  righteous  man  (see  ou  ch,  xv.  9). 
"Mercy"  (cftesed)  is  the  conduct  towards 
others,  animated  by  love  and  sympathy  (see 
note  on  ch.  iii.  3).  Fiudeth  life,  righteous- 
ness, and  honour.  "  Righteousness  "  here  is 
the  gift  of  God  to  bis  faithful  servants,  grace 
to  live  a  holy  life.  This  becomes  habit,  and 
forms  the  righteous  character  (Job  xxix. 
14;  xxxiii.  26).  "Life"  is  a  long  and 
prosperous  life  in  the  world  (eh.  iii.  16); 
"  honour  "  is  respect  and  reverence  among 
fellow-men,  and  glory  in  another  world. 
"  Whom  he  justified,  them  be  also  glorified  " 
(Rom.  viii.  30).  "  Life  and  honour  "  stand 
together  in  ch.  xxii.  i.  "The  fear  of  the 
Lord,"  says  Siracides, "  is  honour, and  glory, 
and  gladness,  and  a  crown  of  rejoicing  .  .  . 
maketh  a  merry  heart  .  .  .  and  giveth  lono- 
life  "  (Ecclus.  ill,  etc.).  The  LXX.  omita 
the  second  "  righteousness  "  by  mistake  : 
"  The  way  of  righteousness  and  mercy  will 
find  life  and  glory  "  (Matt.  vi.  33). 

Ver.  22. — A  wise  man  sealeth  the  city  of 
the  mighty.  The  courage  and  strength  of 
valiant  men  cannot  defend  a  city  against  the 
skilful  counsel  of  a  wise  strategist.  And  he 
oasteth  down  the  strength  of  the  confidence 
thereof.  He  lays  low  the  strength  in  which 
the  defenders  trusted ;  he  not  only  takes  the 
fortress,  but  also  demolishes  it.  Wisdom  is 
stronger  than  bodily  miglit  (ch.  xx.  18.  See 
the  apologue,  Eccles.  Ix.  14,  etc.).  Sep- 
tuagint, "  A  wise  man  cometh  upon  strong 
cities^  and  casteth  down  the  stronghold 
(KuSfiAe  ri  axipa/xa)  in  which  the  ungodly 
trusted."  Thus  St.  Panl,  speaking  of  the 
weapons  which  God  gives  us  to  fight  withal 
in  the  sijiritual  battle,  says  (2  C!or.  x.  4) 
that_  thev  are  "  mighty  before  him  to  the 
casting  down  of  strongholds  (irphs  xaeaXpiCiv 
oxvpufidTwv)." 

Ver.  23.— We  have  had  similar  maxims 
before  (ch.  xiii.  8  and  xviii.  21,  where  see 
notes).  He  ketpeth  his  mouth,  who  knows 
when  to  speak  and  when  to  be  silent ;  and 
he  keejetu  his  tongue,  who  says  only  what 


is  to  the  purpose.  We  have  all  heard  iha 
proverb,  "  Speech  is  silver,  silence  is  gold." 
One  who  thus  takes  heed  of  his  words, 
keepethhis  soul  from  troubles.  The  troubles 
(angorea,  Vulgate)  are  such  as  these — re- 
morse for  the  evil  occas'o:ied,  distress  of 
conscience,  vexation  and  strife  with  offi  nded 
neighbours,  danger  of  liberty  and  life,  and, 
above  all,  the  anger  of  God,  and  retribution 
in  the  judgment. 

Ver.  24. — Proud  and  haughty  scomer  is 
his  name,  who  dealeth  in  proud  wrath.  (For 
"  scornor "  ('j''?),  the  esprit  fort,  the  free- 
thinking  sceptic  of  Solomon's  day,  see  notes 
on  ch.  i.  22  and  xiv.  6.)  The  verse  is  better 
translated,  A  proud,  arrogant  man,  scnffer 
is  Ms  name,  who  worheth  in  superfluity  of 
pride,  ninr  (ebrah),  translated  "wrath," 
denotes  also  want  of  moderation,  excess, 
presumption  (see  note  on  ch.  xi.  2.S).  The 
proverb  explains  the  moaning  of  the  name, 
lelz,  given  to  these  rationalists ;  their  con- 
tempt of  revealed  religion  proa  eds  from 
pride  of  intellgot,  which  retuse.s  instruction, 
and  blinds  the  eyes  to-tlie  truth.  The 
warning  comes  home  to  iis  in  these  times, 
when  the  "  higher  eritici.-ro  "  too  often  runs 
into  gioss  soepticicm  and  infidelity,  f'ep- 
tnagint,  "A  bold  and  self-willed  and  inso- 
lent man  is  called  a  pest  (\oi/ii)s),  and  be 
that  remembers  injuries  is  a  transgressor." 

Ver.  25. — The  desire  of  the  slothful  kiUeth 
him.  The  craving  for  ease  and  rest,  and 
the  consequent  disinclination  for  labour, 
prove  fatal  to  the  slothful  man.  Or,  it  may 
be,  the  mere  wish,  combined  with  no  active 
exertion  to  secure  its  accomplishment,  is  fatal 
to  soul,  body,  and  fortu.ie  (cnmp.  oli.  xiii. 
4 ;  xix.  24).  Lesetre  quotes  Bosauet,  "  Le 
paresseux  spirituel  s'expose  aussi  k  la  mort 
eternelle ;  car  les  bons  de'sirs  ne  suffisient 
pas  pour  le  salut ;  il  faut  encore  les  ODUvres " 
(see  Matt.  vii.  21 ;  Rom.  ii.  13). 

Ver.  26.— St.  Jerome  and  many  commen- 
tators connect  this  verse  with  the  preceding, 
considering  the  two  to  form  a  tetrastich,  thus : 
The  desire  of  the  slothful  ...  he  ooveteth 
greedily  all  the  day  long,  but  the  righttous 
giveth  and  spareth  not.  But  in  this  division 
of  our  book  there  are  only  pure  distichs; 
and,  as  Delitzsch  observes,  to  make  the  con- 
trast, one  requires  in  the  first  hemistich  an 
expression  like,  "and  hath  nothing"  (oh. 
xiii.  4 ;  comp.  oh.  xx.  4).  So  it  is  correct  to 
consider  this  distich  indepemient,  and  to 
translate.  There  is  that  (or  one)  Aesireth 
greedily  always,  but  the  righteous  givelh  and 
withholdeth  not.  There  are  claims  made  on 
all  sides,  demands  for  help,  importunat  • 
prayers,  such  as  one  would  think  no  man 
could  satisfy ;  but  the  righteous  has  means 
enough  and  to  spare,  be  is  generous  and 
charitable,  he  is  industrious,  and  uses  his 
stewardship  well   (Luke    xvi.   9),  and    8< 


CH.  XXI.  1 31.] 


THE  PROVEBBS. 


409 


urrangei  liia  expenditure  that  he  has  to 
give  to  him  that  needeth  (Bph.  iv,  28). 
Septuagint,  "An  ungodly  man  devises  evil 
devices  all  the  day  long,  but  the  righteous 
pitieth   and   showeth   compassion    uiispar- 

ingly." 

Ver.  27. — The  first  hemistich  occurs  in 
eh.  IV.  8  (wliere  see  note).  How  much  more, 
when  he  bringeth  it  with  a  wicked  mind! 
rather, /or  evU,  equivalent  to  "in  order  to 
atone  for  wickedness."  The  sacrifice  of  the 
sinner  is  abominable,  as  offered  formally 
without  repentance  and  faith;  much 'more 
abominable,  when  be  brings  his  offering  to 
win,  fts  it  were,  God's  connivance  in  the  sin 
which  he  commits  and  lias  no  intention  of  re- 
nouncing,— brings  it  as  a  kind  of  bribe  and 
recompense  to  compensate  for  his  transgres- 
sion. Such  an  outrage  on  God's  purity  and 
justice  may  well  be  called  an  abomination. 
Septuagint,  "  The  sacrifices  of  the  ungodly 
are  abomination  unto  the  Lord,  for  they 
offer  them  wickedly  (Tvapav6fia>sy  The 
notion  of  propitiating  the  Deity  by  sharing 
with  him  the  proceeds  of  sin  is  expressed  in 
proverbial  languaige.  We  have  the  homely 
saw,  "  Steal  the  goose,  and  give  the  giblets 
in  alms ; "  and  the  Spaniards  say,  "  Huerto 
el  puerco,  y  dar  los  pies  por  Dios,"  "  Steal 
the  pig,  and  give  away  the  pettitoes  foi' 
God's  sake"  (Kelly).  (See  Eoolua.  xxxi. 
18,  etc.) 

Ver.  28. — (For  the  first  hemistich,  see  ch. 
vi.  19;  xix.  5,9.)  Shall  perish.  His  testimony 
is  worthless,  and  both  he  and  it  come  to  no- 
thing. The  man  that  heareth  speaketh  con- 
stantly ;  Vulgate,  vir  obediens ;  Septuagint, 
*Av^p  vTT-fjKoos  fl}v\a(r(r6fievos  \a\-fi(rei,  *'  An 
obedient  man  will  speak  guardedly."  "The 
man  that  heareth  "  is  one  who  is  attentive, 
who  listens  before  he  gpeaks,  and  reports 
only  what  he  has  heard.  -  Such  a  one  will 
speak  "  for  continuance,"  ;g  that  what  he 
says  is  never  falsified,  or  silenced,  or  re- 
futed. Vulgate,  loquetur  victoriam.  And 
so  Aquila,  Theodotion,  and  Symmaohus, 
fls  v'iKos.  Revised  Version,  unchaMenged. 
The  expression  thus  rendered  is  lanetsach, 
wliioh  means,  in  Hebrew  at  any  rate,  in 
perpetuum,  "fur  continuance."  But  St. 
Jerome's  rendering  has  been  much  used  by 
the  Fathers,  who  have  drawn  therefrom 
lessons  of  obedience.  Thus  St.  Augustine, 
'In  Psalm.,'  Ixx.,  "Sola  obedientia  tenet 
palmani,  sola  inobedientia  invenit  pcenam." 
St.  Gregory,  '  Moral.,'  xxxv.  28,  "  An  obe-  ^ 
dient  man  in  truth  speaketh  of  viotoiies, ' 
because,  when  we  humbly  submit  ourselves 
\,y  the  voice  of  jnother,  we  overcome  our- 
selves in  our  heart"  (Oxford  transl.).  See 
a  long  dissertation  on  obedience  in  the 
note  of  Corn,  h  Lapide  on  this  passage  of 
Proverbs. 
Yer.  29. — ^A  wicked  man  hardeneth  his 


faoe;  is  shameless  (as  ch.  vii.  I.S),  and  ii 
insensible  to  rebuke  or  any  soft  feeling. 
This  obduracy  he  shows  with  his  counte- 
nance. Septuagint,  "An  ungodly  man 
shnmelessly  withstands  with  his  face."  But 
as  for  the  upright,  he  directeth  his  way. 
He  gives  it  the  right  direction  (2  Chron. 
xxvii.  6).  This  is  the  reading  of  the  Khetib, 
j'3;  but,  though  generally  adopted  by  the 
versions  (except  the  Septuagint),  it  does  not 
m  ike  a  suitable  antithesis  to  the  rash  stub- 
bornness of  the  wicked.  Hence  modern 
commentators  prefer  the  reading  of  the 
Kerl,  ]'3;,  "  he  considereth,  proveth,"  his 
way ;  he  acts  only  after  due  thought,  giving 
proper  weight  to  all  circumstances.  Septua- 
gint, "  But  the  upright  man  himself  under- 
stands (o-uviei)  his  ways."  The  contrast  lies 
in  the  audacious  self-confidence  of  the  un- 
principled man,  and  the  calm  circumspec- 
tion and  prudence  of  the  saint. 

Ver.  30. — There  is  no  wisdom,  nor  under- 
standing, nor  counsel  against  the  Lord ;  i.e. 
in  opposition  to  him,  which  can  be  com- 
pared with  his,  or  which  can  avail  against 
him  (comp.  Job  v.  13 ;  Ps.  xx-xiii.  10,  11 ; 
Isa.  xxix.  14;  1  Oor.  i.  20;  iii.  19).  Sep- 
tuagint, "  There  is  no  wisdom,  there  is  no 
courage  (wSpeia),  there  is  no  counsel,  in 
respect  of  the  ungodly;"  vphs  t^v  acrefiij, 
neged  Jahve,  being  taken  as  "  that  which  is 
against  Jahve,"  equivalent  to  "impious." 
Wordsworth  quotes  Horace, '  Oarm.,'  iii.  6. 
5,  etc. — 

"D's  te  minnrem  quod  gerls,  imperas: 
Hinc  omne  principium,  hue  refer  exitum." 

The  following  verse  carries  on  and  applies 
the  import  of  this  one :  As  men's  wisdom 
is  nothing  worth,  equally  vain  is  all  trust  in 
external  means  and  appliances. 

Ver.  31. — The  horse  is  prepared  against 
the  day  of  battle.  The  horse  is  an  emblem 
of  military  power  and  activity.  To  the 
earlier  Jews,  who  were  unaccustomed  to  its 
use,  and  indeed  forbidden  to  employ  it 
(Deut.  xvii.  16),  the  horse  and  horse-drawn 
chariots  were  objects  of  extreme  terror  (Josh, 
xvii.  16;  Judg.  iv.  3),  and  tliough  Solomon 
had  largely  imported  them  from  Egypt 
(1  Kings  iv.  26 ;  i.  26,  etc.),  these  animals 
were  used  exclusively  for  war,  and,  at  this 
time,  their  services  were  never  applied  to 
agricultural  purposes.  The  proverb  asserts 
that,  though  all  preparations  are  made  for 
the  battle,  and  material  forces  are  of  the 
best  and  strongest  descriptio.i,  but  safety 
(victory)  is  of  the  Lord  (see  Ps.  xx.  7; 
xxxiii.  16,  etc.).  Septuagint, "  But  from  th» 
Lord  is  the  help  (ri  jSoijfleta)."  The  great 
truth  here  taught  may  be  applied  to  spiritual 
matters.  The  only  safety  against  spiritual 
enemies  is  the  grace  of  God;  we  can  cry, 
with  St.  Paul  (1  Oor.  iv.  57),  "Thanks  b« 


AlO 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[cH.  XXL  1—31. 


to  God,  which  giveth  us  the  victory  through 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  "  By  the  name 
'horse,'"  says  St.  Gregory  (' Moral.,' xxxi. 
43),  "  is  understood  the  preparation  of  right 
intention,  as  it  is  written, '  The  horse  is  pie- 


pared,'  etc.  i  because  the  mind  prepares 
itself  inrleed  against  temptation,  but  con- 
tends not  healthfully  unless  it  be  assisted 
from  above." 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  5. — Patient  industry.  The  contrast  between  diligence  and  haste  suggests  the 
idea  that  there  must  be  an  tlement  of  patience  and  perseverance  in  the  former  if  it  is  to 
be  crowned  with  success.  This  may  be  very  different  from  the  Herculean  efforts  of 
genius,  which  astonish  the  world  with  spasms  of  effort  and  then  sink  into  indifference. 
It  is  a  quiet,  constant,  persistent  activity.  We  are  to  see  how  much  this  is  superior  to 
the  more  flashy  performances  which  are  not  seconded  by  diligence. 

I.  Patient  industry  in  commbbcb.  This  is  the  direct  opposite  of  the  gamhler's 
method.  The  terrible  evil  of  gambling  has  not  been  sufficiently  weighed.  Its  awful 
temptations,  its  widespread  influence,  the  frightful  moral  havoc  it  is  making  in  all 
classes  of  society,  are  not  yet  appreciated ;  for  if  those  evils  were  duly  considered,  all 
who  are  concerned  about  the  welfare  of  England  would  start  up  in  horror  at  the  sight 
of  a  stupendous  cause  of  ruin  that  is  rampant  in  our  midst.  One  of  our  leading  judges 
has  pronounced  gambling  to  be  the  greatest  national  evil  of  England.  Now,  the  spirit 
of  gambling  is  seen  in  trade,  and  the  Stock  Exchange  is  with  many  no  better  than  a 
huge  betting-saloon.  The  greedy  race  for  wealth  makes  men  reckless.  But  experience 
shows  that  it  is  highly  dangerous.  The  solid  success  of  business  men  is  not  attained 
in  this  way.  The  lives  of  such  men  as  George  Moore  and  Samuel  Morley  show  that 
honourable  industry  is  a  better  road  to  wealth.  Even  when  riches  are  not  acquired — 
and  but  a  few  can  ever  win  the  prizes — it  is  the  road  of  safety  and  peace.  This  means 
self-denial,  hard  work,  patient  waiting,  courage  under  adverse  circumstances.  In  these 
respects  the  difference  between  success  and  failure  depends  on  our  character  and  effort. 
When  a  man  is  in  calm  earnest  his  very  thoughts  are  fertile. 

II.  Patibnt  industry  in  learning.  There  is  a  temptation  for  beginners  to  seek 
Borne  royal  road  to  knowledge ;  but  it  has  never  yet  been  found.  The  true  student  must 
"scorn  delights,  and  live  laborious  days."  Genius  may  be  more  than  an  unlimited  capacity 
for  hard  work;  but  assuredly  the  highest  genius  will  fail  of  its  best  fruits  if  it  be 
swathed  in  indolence.  The  lives  of  great  men  are  nearly  always  lives  of  bard-workin" 
men.  Old-fashioned  scholarship  may  appear  less  tempting  than  a  short  cut  to  popu- 
larity over  the  flowery  fields  of  literary  smartness.  But  the  notoriety  that  is  won  so 
easily  is  an  empty  bubble  that  vanishes  at  a  touch.  Study,  thought,  intellectual 
industry,  will  always  secure  more  solid  and  enduring  rewards. 

III.  Patient  industry  m  Christian  work.  The  modern  temptation  is  to  snatch 
at  superficial  success.  An  empty  popular  style  and  light  attractive  methods  seem  to 
secure  results  that  are  denied  to  more  serious  conscientious  labours.  But  such  a  success 
is  a  rotten  fruit,  worthless,  and  soon  ending  in  shame  and  bitterness.  It  is  the  duty  of 
all  who  undertake  Christian  work  to  adapt  it  to  the  people.  It  is  useless  to  preach  if 
none  will  come  to  hear.  The  preacher  ought  to  try  to  interest  and  win  his  congrega- 
tion. There  is  no  merit  in  dulness.  The  diligent  must  have  his  "  thoughts."  St. 
Patil  was  too  wise  to  waste  his  efforts  in  "  beating  the  air  "  (1  Cor.  ix.  26).  But  the 
main  efforts  must  be  serious,  persistent,  persevering.  If  the  seed  is  sown  deeply,  it 
will  bo  slow  to  show  itself;  but  it  will  be  safely  buried  in  the  soil.  In  the  mission 
field  patient  industry  succeeds,  while  more  exciting  and  hasty  efforts  only  end  in  an 
ultimate  collapse. 

Ver.  10. — Desiring  evil.  I.  Men's  desires  are  determined  by  their  natures. 
Good  men  have  good  desires,  and  bad  men  bad  desires.  No  doubt  natural  desires  may 
spring  up  in  an  innocent  heart  under  circumstances  which  forbid  ^e  satisfaction  of 
them  without  sin.  Only  so  can  one  be  tempted  as  Christ  was  tempted,  i.e.  without 
sin.  Some  indeed  have  maintained  that  even  Christ,  in  becoming  a  partaker  uf  "  sinful 
flesh  "  (Kom.  viii.  3),  actually  took  upon  him  a  sinful  nature,  which  he  purged  and 
redeemed.    But  we  have  no  scriptural  or  historical  evidence  of  any  such  transactions  in 


ca.  XXL  1—31.]  THE  PEOYEEBS.  411 

the  Person  of  Chr?at.  1.  We  must  distinguish,  tlierefore,  letween  desires  luggenfed  and 
desires  encouraged.  The  first  may  be  brought  by  the  tempter  to  the  innocent.  It  is 
in  the  case  of  the  second  that  the  desires  become  signs  of  sin.  2.  Many  desires  are 
in  themselves  sinful.  Such  desires  find  no  place  in  a  pure  heart.  The  very  fact  that 
they  exist  is  an  evidence  of  indwelling  sin. 

II.  The  woest  natubbs  are  those  that  DBsreB  eviIi  fob  its  own  sake.  l.'It 
is  possible  to  be  surprised  into  sin  without  having  previously  cherished  any  desire  for 
it.  It  is  a  darker  thing  to  sin  deliberately,  after  nursing  the  vile  project  and  waiting 
long  for  an  opportunity  to  carry  it  out.  2.  Or  it  may  be  that  the  desire  is  for  some 
definite  object  which  is  thought  to  be  attractive  on  its  ovin  account.  Then  there  is  no 
wish  to  sin ;  on  the  contrary,  the  fact  that  there  is  no  reaching  the  goal  without  trans- 
gressing the  law  of  righteousness  may  be  regarded  with  regret.  The  desire  is  gratified 
in  spite  of  it?  sinfulness,  not  because  of  its  sinfulness.  3.  The  worst  state  is  that  of 
desiring  the  sin,  loving  evil,  finding  a  fascination  in  it — of  two  paths  choosing  the 
downward  just  because  it  descends.    This  is  diabolic  wickedness. 

III.  Evil  desires  are  sinful.  This  is  the  clear  teaching  of  Christ  (Matt.  v.  28). 
1.  They  are  sinful  as  indicating  a  wicked  heart.  The  bad  fruit  condemns  the  bad  tree. 
The  world  may  not  detect  the  hidden  fires  of  suppressed  dests ;  but  they  are  known 
to  the  All-seeing.  2.  They  are  sinful  as  showing  the  exercise  of  sin ;  i.e.  if  they  are 
entertained.  When  we  resist  and  seek  to  crush  evil  desires,  this  second  stage  of  sin- 
fulness is  not  reached.  But  brooding  over  them  and  giving  them  good  room  to  live 
and  grow  in  the  heart  add  to  their  guilt.  3.  They  are  sinful  as  leading  to  wicked  deeds. 
Evil  desires  are  seeds  buried  in  the  soul.  Left  to  themselves  and  unchecked,  they  are 
sure  to  grow  up  and  reveal  their  badness  in  wicked  conduct. 

IV.  Evil  desibbs  should  be  checked  at  once.  The  above  considerations  should 
show  us  that  it  would  be  wrong  to  wait  until  the  desires  had  reached  the  outer  door  of 
action  in  the  world.  They  should  be  checked  for  various  reasons.  1.  Because  they 
are  already  evil.  Even  if  we  were  sure  that  we  could  always  keep  them  secret  and 
inoperative,  their  natural  and  present  wickedness  makes  it  incumbent  on  us  to  destroy 
them.  The  snake  should  be  destroyed,  though  it  lurks  hidden  in  the  thicket.  2. 
Because  they  can  be  mottt  readily  destroyed  t»  an  early  stage.  It  is  easier  to  kill  the 
young  brood  in  the  nest  than  to  slay  the  monsters  when  they  have  grown  to  full  size. 
3.  Because  they  will  be  beyond  our  control  when  they  have  issued  in  actions.  Deeds 
are  irrevocable ;  but  desires  can  be  suppressed.  Therefore  men  need  the  grace  of  Christ 
before  they  have  fallen  into  actual  sin.  The  best  form  of  redemption  is  for  the 
heart  to  be  cleansed  from  its  evil  desires. 

Ver.  13. — Ignoring  the  cry  of  the  poor.  T.  The  %m.  1.  Tlie  cry  of  the  poor  is 
exceedingly  hitter.  It  may  not  be  clamorous,  but  it  is  grievous.  There  is  no  mora 
pressing  problem  for  society  in  the  present  day  than  the  question  how  to  deal  with  the 
wretched,  overcrowded,  poverty-stricken  quarters  of  our  great  cities.  (1)  The  evil  is 
mdespread.  It  concerns  the  misery  of  tens  of  thousands  of  people.  (2)  It  is  intense. 
No  one  who  has  not  inquired  into  the  subject  can  conceive  of  the  depth  of  misery  that 
it  represents — pale  children  crying  for  bread,  weary  women  heart-sick  with  despair, 
strong  men  enfeebled  with  hunger  and  embittered  with  the  sight  of  wealth  that  seems 
to  mock  their  misery.  The  wonder  is  that  the  poor  bear  their  hard  lot  so  patiently 
that  the  world  of  wealth  scarcely  heeds  it.  (3)  It  is  moral.  Overcrowding,  ignorance, 
and  despair,  lead  to  gross  moral  degradation,  drunkenness,  reckless  animalism,  brutality, 
hatred,  and  outrage.  2.  It  is  our  duty  to  hear  this  bitter  cry.  The  very  poor  are  our 
fellow-men— our  brothers  and  sisters.  Only  the  Cains  among  us  can  dare  to  ask,  "Am 
I  my  brother's  keeper?"  Christ  has  bidden  us  to  love  our  neighbour  as  ourselves,  and 
in  the  parable  of  the  good  Samaritan  he  has  shown  who  is  our  neighbour.  We  cannot 
pass  by  on  the  other  side  without  giiilt  in  the  sight  of  God.  3.  The  neglect  of  this 
bitter  ery  is  wilful.  The  sin  is  that  of  a  man  who  "stoppeth  his  ears."  It  is  true  he 
does  not  now  hear  the  cry.  But  he  is  not  the  less  guilty,  for  he  refuses  to  hear  it. 
There  is  a  culpable  ignorance.  Well-to-do  people  may  say  that  they  do  not  know  of 
the  miserable  condition  of  their  brethren.  It  is  the  more  shameful  that  they  are  thus 
ignorant.  It  is  their  duty  to  inquire  into  it.  If  the  West  End  luxuriates  in  pleasures 
while  the  East  End  toils  and  starves  in  misery,  the  more  fortunate  section  of  society 


112  THE  PB0TERB8.  |oh.  xxr.  1— 31. 

has  ample  meana  of  ascertaining  the  condition  of  the  unhappy  portion.     Heedlesii 
indifference  is  cruel  selfishness. 

II.  The  punishment.  "  He  also  shall  cry  himself,  but  shall  not  be  heard."  1.  Hi» 
own  circumstances  may  bring  him  into  distress.  We  see  strange  reverses  of  fortune. 
8ome  of  the  mosc  wretched  denizens  of  the  lowest  quarters  were  once  in  affluent 
dlreumstances.  The  breaking  of  a  bank,  the  failure  of  a  mine,  the  losses  of  speculation, 
the  ruin  of  gambling,  may  bring  a  wealthy  man  down  to  destitution.  Then  if-he  has 
(encouraged  the  neglect  of  the  poor  by  his  conduct  in  more  fortunate  days,  he  will  suffer 
from  the  bad  social  custom  that  he  has  helped  to  foster.  2.  A  social  revolution  may 
bring  fearful  punishment  on  the  scornful  who  now  neglect  the  cry  of  their  brethren. 
So  it  was  in  France  a  hundred  years  ago.  There  are  not  wanting  signs  that  the  whole 
civilization  of  Europe  may  be  endangered  by  a  huge  social  upheaval.  The  scandalous 
inequality  of  lots  is  glaritigly  apparent  to  all,  and  the  privileges  of  the  few  maybe 
ruthlessly  torn  from  them  in  the  interest  of  the  many.  If  the  volcano  overflows  there 
will  be  little  respect  for  vested  interests,  abstract  righis,  or  person  il  claims.  But  if 
we  dread  a  violent  revolution  which  might  shatter  the  whole  fabric  of  civilization,  we 
must  attend  to  the  cry  of  poverty.  To  disregnrd  this  is  to  sit  on  the  safety-valve  while 
we  wait  for  the  coming  explosion.  3.  In  the  future  world  the  cry  of  the  cruel  and 
negligent  will  be  unheeded.  Dives  in  torment  cries  in  vain  for  Lazarus  to  cool  his 
burning  tongue.  He  is  the  very  type  of  those  who  stop  their  ears  againsc  the  cry  of 
the  poor.    His  i  unishment  is  to  suffei'  from  a  similar  neglect, 

Ver.  17. —  The  love  of  pleasure.  The  love  of  pleasure  is  here  described  as  a  cause  of 
poverty.  No  doubt  this  was  meant  to  refer  to  physical  destitution.  But  we  cannot 
fail  to  see  niany  other  forms  of  poverty  resulting  from  the  same  foolish  infatuation. 

I.  It  impoverikhes  a  man's  pubsb.  Tliis  dinct  meaning  of  the  text  is  not  without 
its  value.  No  mau  desires  to  come  down  in  the  social  scale  and  to  lose  the  comforts  of 
life.  Bat  least  of  all  will  the  pleasure-lover  welcome  such  a  prcspect.  High-minded, 
unselfish,  unworldly  men  submit  to  the  loss  of  all  things,  and  "count  them  but  dung" 
for  the  sake  of  some  noble  end.  The  pleasure-lover  is  not  of  this  category.  To  him 
earthly  loss  must  be  a  terrible  infliction.  Therefore,  while  the  text  may  be  of  us&for 
all,  it  is  a  direct  argumentum  ad  hominem  for  such  a  person.  Now,  experience  proves 
the  truth  of  it.  1.  For  pleasure  a  man  neglects  his  business.  In  the  present  day  of 
hard  comietition  such  folly  is  fatal.  2.  Many  pleasures  are  costly.  They  cannot  be 
had  without  great  expenditure,  and  the  passion  for  them  leads  to  reckless  extravagance. 
3.  Some  pleasures  destroy  the  business  powers  of  a  mam.  They  are  literally  dissipations. 
Brain  and  nerves  are  weakened,  and  the  degraded  slave  of  self-indulgence  becomes  a 
wreck,  unable  to  fight  the  stern  battle  of  life.  The  diunkard  is  incompetent.  The 
dissolute  man  is  lacking  in  business  promptness  and  energy.  Other  men  will  not  trust 
the  pleasui'e-f^eeker,  and  so  business  forsakes  him.  4.  There  are  pleasures  that  directly 
impoverish.    Gambling — now  so  fearfully  prevalent — is  a  direct  road  to  poverty. 

II.  It  impovemshes  a  man's  intellect.  Even  though  the  pleasure-seeker  be 
prudent  enough  to  preseive  his  fortune  from  shipwreck,  or  so  exceedingly  wealthy  that 
he  cannot  easily  squander  all  his  possessions,  he  may  aud  he  will  impoverish  himself, 
Though  he  may  always  Lave  money  in  his  purse,  his  own  mind  will  be  emptied  oi 
all  woithy  possessions.  The  love  of  pleasure  directly  weakens  the  intellect.  The 
physical  effect  of  dissipation  impoverishes  the  brain.  The  exciting  distractions  of  a  life 
of  gaiety  destroy  the  powers  of  deep,  continuous  thinking.  The  mind  is  thus  wasted 
away  in  frivolity.  The  pleasure-seeker  will  not  have  patience  to  study  solid  literature, 
to  think  out  great  truths,  to  discuss  with  serious  men  grave  questions  of  life  and  death. 
Exciting  novels  and  plays  will  be  his  staple  intellectual  food,  and  the  result  will  be 
mental  ruin. 

III.  It  impoverishes  a  man's  heart.  The  pleasure-seeker  is  often  snppbsed  to  be 
a  good-natured  man  because  he  is  a  genial  companion.  No  doubt  manyloose-Bving,  self- 
indulgent  men  have  shown  great  generosity  to  their  friends.  But  that  is  because  they 
are  not  given  up  to  pure  pleasure-seeking.  In  itself  pleasure-seeking  is  selfish,  hard, 
cruel  The  Romans  of  the  old  empire  made  a  fine  art  of  the  ctiltivation  of  pleasure,  and 
they  became  monsters  of  cruelty.  The  tortures  of  the  amphitheatre  furnished  tliem  with 
:lie  most  exquisite  delig".  ts.   Pleasure-loving  Eoman  ladies  treated  their  poor  sla"e-girl» 


OH.  XXI.  1—31.]  THE  TKOVJiBBS. 


4ia 


with  heartless  cruelty.     It  is  a  gross  mistake  to  suppose  that  kindliness  goes  with 
pleasure-seeking,  and  that  its  opposite  is  a  sour,  ill-natured  Puritanism. 

IV.  It  IMP0VEBISHB8  A  man's  sool.  The  greatest  loss  is  not  that  of  money  nor 
even  that  of  thought  or  heart.  The  chief  treasure  which  the  pleasure-lover  loses  is 
the  pearl  of  great  price— the  kingdom  of  heaven.  He  may  gain  the  whole  world,  but 
he  loses  his  own  soul.  Pleasure-seeking  destroys  the  spiritual  faculties.  It  is  not 
required  that  the  Christian  should  be  an  ascetic,  denying  himself  innocent  deliirhts,  nor 
13  it  to  be  supposed  that  all  pleasures  are  evil.  The  evil  is  the  love  of  pleasure.  Even 
the  love  of  pleasures  that  are  innocent  in  themselves  may  be  the  rock  on  which  a  so- 
is  ruined,  if  this  be  the  supreme  passion  of  that  soul,  eclipsing  the  love  of  God. 

Ver.  31. — National  defenoe.  The  Jews  were  repeatedly  warned  against  keeping 
cavalry.  Cavalry  were  for  pitched  battles,  and  could  only  be  used  on  the  plains.  But 
the  old  successful  Jewish  warfare  was  among  the  hills.  As  a  q^uestion  of  military 
tactics,  the  advice  meant  that  it  was  better  for  the  Jews  to  act  on  the  defensive  in 
their  impregnable  strongholds  than  to  descend  into  the  field  for  open  warfare.  A 
deepoi  thought  was  that,  while  defensive  warf.irn  might  sometimes  be  required,  the 
Jews  were  not  to  embroil  themselves  in  the  affairs  of  their  neighbours.  This  was 
especially  desirable  for  a  little  state  wedged  in  between  the  two  great  empires  of  Ejjypt 
and  Assyiia,  like  Afghanistan  between  Russia  and  India.  A  still  deeper  and  more 
momentous  thought  has  yet  to  be  reached.  The  Jews  were  to  learn  that  their  true 
defence  was  not  in  armies,  not  in  military  prowess,  not  in  naturally  strong  fortresses. 
God  was  their  Bock  and  Tower  of  strength.  Now,  we  have  no  reason  to  consider  that 
the  idea  which  was  brought  out  in  the  history  of  Israel  with  magnificent  emphasis 
applies  to  that  little  ancient  race  alone.  It  is  true  of  every  nation  that  will  recognize 
God,  that  "safety  is  of  the  Lord."  We  undergo  periodical  panics  concerning  our 
national  dangers.  It  would  be  well  if  we  could  rise  to  the  position  urged  upjn  Israel 
by  the  teachers  of  Old  Testament  days. 

I.  Observe  how  safety  comes,  feom  God.  1.  By  a  providential  control  of  events. 
God  delivered  Israel  from  Egypt  by  opening  a  path  through  the  Bed  Sea.  He  saved 
Jerusalem  from  Sennacherib  by  the  sword  of  the  desiiroying  angel.  He  protected 
England  from  the  Spanish  Armada  by  the  tempest  that  strewed  the  coast  of  Norway 
with  the  wrecks  of  Spanish  galleons.  When  no  such  marked  events  occur,  God  can 
save  his  people  by  the  quiet,  unseen  control  of  the  course  of  history.  2.  By  a  Divine 
influence  exerted  over  the  minds  of  men.  God  is  in  the  secret  counsels  of  the  most 
astute  statesmen.  He  can  suggest  and  direct  their  thoughts  and  plans.  He  can 
awaken  conscience  in  the  reckless  invader,  and  allay  the  passions  of  the  enraged  enemy. 
Thus  God  saved  .Jacob  from  Esau.  3.  By  help  given  to  the  attacked  in  the  hour  of 
danger.  God's  interference  may  Be  so  as  to  guide  and  strengthen  those  who  trust  in 
him,  and  so  to  lead  them  on  to  safety.  There  is  much  to  be  done  through  wise 
counsels,  righteous  decisions,  and  brave,  true  actions.  These  God  can  inspire.  4. 
By  ftnal  deliverance  from  all  trouble.  (1)  After  death.  God's  people  may  be  killed; 
yet  he  will  save  them  and  take  them  home  to  himself.  (2)  On  earth.  National 
deliverance  may  come  after  national  calamity.  It  may  be  just  and  right  and  necessary 
that  a  fearful  defeat  should  come.  Yet  God  may  bring  ultimate  salvauon— a  i  lising 
up  of  the  fallen  from  their  shame  and  distress.- 

II.  CONSIDBB    HOW   SAFETY    MAY    BE    OBTAINED    FROM    GoD.      We  have  nO   riglt    tO 

believe  ourselves  to  be  privileged  people  whom  God  will  favour  in  preference  to  I.  issia, 
or  Prance,  or  Germany.  All  the  nations  are  cared  for  by  God,  and  no  nation  can  be 
assured  of  his  protection  without  pursuing  the  right  means  to  find  it.  We  have  no 
right  Ui  pray  that  God  will  scatter  our  enemies,  if  they  are  in  the  right,  and  oui :  aie 
the  "  knavish  tricks."  How,  then,  is  safety  to  be  found  in  God?  1.  By  acting  justly 
towards  our  neighbours.  God  will  never  protect  us  when  we  are  wronging  an  tlier 
nation.  2.  By  living  at  peace  with  Ood.  If  our  conduct  at  home  is  inimical  to  God, 
we  cannot  expect  him  to  defend  us  in  the  field.  Godlessuess  in  peace  will  bring  '  rod- 
desertion  in  war.  National  sin  will  alienate  the  protection  of  God.  The  first  step 
must  be  national  repentance.  3.  By  trusting  Ood.  If  we  are  reconciled  to  God,  and 
seeking  to  do  the  right,  we  can  pray  for  his  help,  and  believe  we  shall  have  it,  with  our 
armies  if  they  must  be  called  out ;  but,  better  far,  without  Ihem,  in  maintaining  p  ace 


414  THE  PEOVERBS.  [oh.  xxt  1— 31. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1— 3.— 3%«  providence  and  government  of  God.  I.  The  Divinb  contboi,  of 
HUMAN  PUBPOSES.  (Ver.  1.)  As  the  streams  of  water  are  led  by  canals  and  trenches 
through  the  land,  that  it  may  be  refreshed  and  fructified,  so  are  the  thoughts  and 
counsels  of  the  ruler,  if  wise  and  true,  a  means  of  strength  and  blessing  to  the  people. 
And  all  such  wise  counsels  are  of  God.  He  forms  and  turns  the  purposes  of  the  heart, 
as  the  potter  with  the  clay.  To  Cyrus  he  says,  "  I  have  called  thee  by  name,  have 
surnamed  thee,  though  thou  hast  not  known  me"  (Isa.  xlv.  4.  See  Dr.  Bushnell's  fine 
sermon  on  this  text  in  '  The  New  Life '). 

II.  All  human  aotions  abb  weighed  in  the  scales  op  Divine  judgment. 
(Ver.  2.)  We  can  say  little  about  motives ;  we  may  be  blind  to  our  own,  but  God  ia 
not.  Hence  the  duty  of  pondering  (notice  the  original  meaning  of  the  word)  our  own 
doings  and  plans,  weighing  them,  that  is,  in  the  scales  of  a  judgment  enlightened  by 
his  holy  Word. 

III.  The  tbub  Divine  sebviob.  (Ver.  3.)  There  is  an  outwwrd  and  an  inward 
side  of  the  religious  life.  The  outward,  viz.  ritual  and  moral  conduct,  is  only  of  value 
as  it  is  an  expression  of  true  desires  in  the  heart.  The  inward  worship  of  God  in  spbit 
and  in  truth  (John  iv.  24)  must  precede  and  accompany  the  outward  worship,  or  the 
latter  is  nothing  worth  (ch.  xv.  8 ;  Ps.  1. 7,  sg-j. ;  1  Sam.  xv.  22 ;  Micah  vi.  6— 8).— J. 

Vers.  4 — 9.— A  family  of  vices.  There  is  a  kinship  between  all  vices  as  between 
all  virtues.  All  sins  spring  from  a  disturbance  of  our  true  relations  to  God,  as  all 
virtues  rest  upon  the  deep  consciousness  of  that  relation. 

r.  The  sin  of  pbide.  (Ver.  4.)  Its  aspect — the  lofty  eyes,  the  haughty  glance — and 
its  principle  in  the  heart  are  struck  by  the  Divine  rebuke.  The  meaning  of  the  secoiid 
clause  is  not  quite  clear;  probably  it  is,  "The  light  of  the  wicked  is  only  sin,"  *.e.  his 
haughty  and  overweening  temper  is  compared  to  a  flaming  or  a  lurid  light,  contrasted 
with  the  mild  serene  ray  that  seems  to  stream  from  a  good  man's  life. 

II.  The  vice  op  covbtousness.  (Ver.  5.)  Shown  by  an  eager  and  selfish  haste  to 
obtain  the  wealth  which  Providence  has  apportioned  only  as  the  reward  of  pains- 
taking toil.  Religion  teaches  us  moderation,  measure  in  all  things.  "Unhasting, 
unresting,"  expresses  the  measure  of  diligence  in  all  our  life-business. 

IIL  The  use  op  dishonest  means.  (Ver,  6.)  This  can  never  lead  to  aught  but  a 
seeming  success  (see  the  exegesis  of  this  passage).  "  Man  is  a  shadow's  dream,"  said 
Pindar.  "  What  shadows  we  are  1  and  what  shadows  we  pursue ! "  said  a  great 
Englishman.  But  of  none  is  the  word  more  true  than  of  him  who  seeks  gain  at  the 
expense  of  inner  truth,  profit  by  the  loss  of  the  soul! 

IV.  Violent  deeds.  (Ver.  7.)  All  violence  recoils  upon  the  perpetrator.  The 
desolation  which  godless  men  bring  upon  others  finally  carries  away  themselves.  No 
'>ne  who  persistently  sets  himself  against  right  can  stand,  can  abide,  for  right  Is  the  very 
loiradatiou  and  constitution  of  things  in  the  order  of  God.  And  so  of  criminality  or 
impurity  in  general  (ver.  8).  It  is  a  crooked  way,  a  twisted  web.  Perplexities, 
miserable  intricacies  of  doubt,  are  generally  to  be  traced  to  the  fault  of  the  will ;  and 
the  straightforward  man  is  he  who  walks  by  the  light  of  a  pure  heart. 

V.  The  contentious  temper.  (Ver.  9.)  It  unfits  for  society.  It  makes  the  hom« 
intolerable.  The  vexing,  captious,  irritable  temper  makes  a  solitude  around  it,  and  calls 
it  peace.  The  very  idea  of  the  Christian  household  is  peace.  Wherever  struggle  may 
be  necessary,  it  is  certainly  out  of  place  there.  Let  us  seek  the  "  things  that  make  for 
peace" — these  first  and  foremost.  Every  wife,  mother,  daughter,  should  be  in  reality, 
if  not  in  name,  a  "  Salome  1 "  ("a  peaceful  one  "). — J. 

Vers.  10 — 13. — Lessons  and  warnings  from  life-experience.  I.  The  meecilbssnebs 
op  evil  dbsiee.  (Ver.  10.)  There  is  nothing  more  cruel  than  unbridled  appetite  of 
any  kind.  All  bad  desires  are  perversions  of  self-love,  and  men  thus  became  "  hateful 
and  hating  one  another."  It  is  the  grace  of  God  which  converts  the  selfish  imagina- 
tion, ever  fixed  on  one  r.arrow  object,  to  the  all-embracing  imagination  which  is  nec«*« 
sary  to  the  fulfilment  of  the  "golden  rule"  (Matt.  vii.  12) 


OH.  XXI.  1—31.]  THE  PEOVERBS.  416 

II.  The  lessons  of  punishment  and  of  eewakd.  (Vers.  11, 12.)  Daily  life  is  full 
of  this  contrast,  will  we  but  heed  its  warnings.  When  the  evil  meet  their  just  doom,  let 
us  say  with  the  psalmist,  "Thou  puttest  away  the  wicked  of  the  earth  like  dross; 
therefore  I  love  thy  testimonies  "  (Ps.  cxix.  119).  And  not  less  when  the  wise  and 
good  are  made  happy  (this  is  the  sense  of  the  next  clause)  let  us  own  tliehand  of  him 
who  pronounces  concerning  every  good  deed,  "  It  shall  in  no  wise  lose  its  reward." 

III.  BETBiBnTioN  ON  THE  HARD  HEART.  (Ver.  13.)  The  pitiless  man  closes  the 
door  of  pity  against  himself  in  the  time  of  need.  If  the  cries  of  the  poor  are  not  heard 
by  us,  they  will  be  heard  against  us  (Exod.  xxii.  23 ;  Matt.xviii.  30—34).  The  parable 
of  the  unmerciful  servant  is  the  best  commentary  on  this  text. — J. 

Vers.  14 — 17. — Lights  and  shades  of  the  earthly  scene.  I.  The  power  of  gifts. 
(Ver.  14.)  They  are  neither  good  nor  evil  in  themselves,  but  may  be  employed  for 
good  or  evil  ends.  Let  us  make  a  good  use  of  this  text.  We  learn  that  gifts  should  be 
quiet,  unuhtrusive,  unobserved ;  and  the  same  is  true  of  all  acts  of  kindness,  which  are 
real  gifts  from  the  heart.  They  should  neither  irritate  pride  nor  depress  independence. 
By  such  little  attentions  and  marks  of  love,  how  much  evil  may  be  warded  off,  how 
many  asperities  of  temper  or  circumstance  may  be  soothed  I 

II.  Delight  in  or  disgust  fob  bight  conduct.  (Ver.  15.)  There  is  no  joy  in 
the  world  to  be  compared  for  depth  and  purity  to  that  of  the  good  conscience ;  no 
exercise  that  brings  so  much  health  and  pleasure  as  acting  rightly  and  doing  good. 
But  the  corrupt  mind  of  evil  men  can  take  no  delight  in  looking  at  goodness,  in  contem- 
plnting  pure  and  noble  conduct.     For  the  consequences  can  only  be  the  judgment  and 

"punishment  of  their  own  iniquity. 

III.  The  end  of  all  moral  observations.  (Ver.  16.)  One  of  the  most  solemn 
pas  ages  of  the  Bible.  Taken  literally  or  figuratively,  of  the  present  or  of  the  future, 
they  C(jntain  a  statement,  a  prophecy,  a  fact.  The  wicked  and  unrepentant  pass  into  a 
ni^ht  without  the  hope  of  a  sunrise  to  follow. 

IV.  The  end  of  idle  and  frivolous  mirth.  (Ver.  17.)  He  that  will  squander  more 
than  his  plough  can  earn  must  utteily  waste  (Sirach  viii.  32).  Maynum  vectigal  est 
parsimonia,  or  "  Economy  is  income  ; "  "  Waste  not,  wnnt  not."  "  Better  than  merry 
Nineveh"  is  recorded  as  an  old  proverb  (see  Zeph.  ii.  15). — J. 

Vers.  18—20. — Alternatives  presented  to  choice.  I.  The  just  and  upright,  the 
faithless  and  wicked  life.  (Ver.  18.)  It  occurs  in  many  cases  that  the  Divine 
wrath  in  judgment  turns  aside  from  the  just  man  to  roll  upon  the  head  of  the  sinner. 
See  this  in  a  natural  liglit  in  Isa.  xliii.  3,  and  in  the  great  Christian  light  of  redemption 
(2  Cor.  V.  21 ;  1  Pet.  iii.  18).  Christ  became  as  sin,  or  in  the  place  of  the  sinner,  for  us. 
We  must  not,  however,  confuse  the  evident  meaning  of  the  text,  which  is  that  in 
critical  moments  of  calamity  the  faithful  minority  appear  to  escape  unscathed;  and 
the  lesson  that  righteousness  alone  is  safe. 

II.  Solitude  or  unpleasant  society.     (Ver.  19 ;  see  on  ver.  9.) 

III.  Wise  storing  or  foolish  squandering.  (Ver.  20.)  Thrift  and  economy 
give  meetness  to  every  hume  enjoyment  they  purchase.  Waste  is  without  zest,  and 
brings  positive  dishonour. — J. 

Vers.  21— 23.— The  wise  and  the  loving  life.  I.  It  is  an  ardent  enthusiabtio 
LIFE.  (Ver.  21.)  Literally,  he  wlio  hunts  after  justice  and  love  will  find  life, 
righteousness,  and  honour.  So  in  other  figures — of  hungering  and  thirsting,  of  digging 
eagerly  for  hid  treasures,  etc. — the  earnest  enthusiasm  of  the  true  life  is  depicted. 

II.  It  is  a  LIFE  OF  present  possession  and  enjoyment.  So  in  the  New  Testament 
(Rom.  iii.  26 ;  Gal.  iii.  21). 

III.  The  resistless  power  of  wisdom.  (Ver.  22.)  The  like  penetrative  power 
to  that  which  we  ascribe  to  the  subtlest  forces  of  nature — heat,  magnetism,  etc. — is 
possessed,  but  in  a  higher  degree,  by  the  intelligence  and  the  will  of  man.  The 
harriers  of  time  and  space  seem  to  fall  before  him  who  knows  and  him  who  loves.  Let 
none  rely  on  walls  and  fastm-sses.  What  man's  hands  have  raised  man's  hands  can 
break  to  pieces.  We  are  truly  strong  only  by  means  of  the  arts  and  works  of  intelli- 
gence and  love. 


41(1  THE   PKOVEEBS.  [ch.  xxi.  1—31. 


rV.  The  bapett  of  the  phupent  tongue.  (Ver.  23.)  As  one  quaintly  says, 
"God,  as  the  Cieator,  has  placed  a  douhle  wall  before  the  mouth — the  teeth  and  li|  s, 
to  show  that  we  ought  to  use  and  guard  the  tongue  with  all  care."  "  He  that  hath  a 
satirical  vein,  us  he  maketh  others  alraid  of  his  wit,  so  he  had  need  to  be  afiaid  o/ 
others'  memory."  "  Discretion  of  speech  is  more  than  eloquence ;  and  to  speak  agreeably 
with  him  with  whom  we  deal  is  more  than  to  speak  in  good  words  or  in  good  order " 
(Bacon). — J.  ' 

Vers.  24 — 26. — The  process  of  vice.  I.  Vices  hako  t-ogetheb  like  the  links  ok 
A  CHAIN.  (Ver.  24.)  Contempt  is  bom  of  pride,  wiatb  of  contempt,  and  from  wrath 
scoffing  and  manifold  injuries. 

II.  Idleness  lies  in  close  affinity  to  many  vices.  (Veis.  25,  26.)  We  have 
here  a  brief  anatomy  of  idleness.  It  is  wishing  without  corresponding  exertion.  The 
idle  man  would  rather  sit  still  and  starve  than  set  his  hand  or  head  to  painful  toil.  He 
would  live  by  wishing.  The  effort  to  rise  from  the  easy-chair,  to  take  the  hand  from 
the  bosom,  is  too  great  for  him ;  hence  he  is  consumed  with  vain  desires.  The  hope  of 
enjoyment  is  out  of  reach,  though  not  out  of  sight,  for  want  of  exertion.  In  rel^ion 
mere  wishes,  idle  prayers,  will  not  bring  us  good.  The  knucking  and  seeking  must  go 
with  the  asking.  And  again  (ver.  26),  in  this  analysis  we  aie  reminded  of  the  selfish- 
ness which  is  at  the  root  of  this  indolence.  In  contrast  to  a  habit  of  coveting  for  self, 
we  have  the  hand  of  the  righteous  man,  who  "  gives  and  spaies  not."  Willing  labour, 
surrender  of  time  and  thought  fur  others'  good, — this,  indeed,  i  n  iches  the  soul,  and  the 
man  who  waters  others  waters  himself,  and  is  a  "  blessing  in  the  laud." — J. 

Vers.  27 — 31. —  The  jnxt  judgments  of  the  Eternal.  I.  On  religious  acts.  (Ver. 
27;  ch.  XV.  8.)  Q'lie  hypocrisy  of  devotion,  the  play-acting  of  leligion,  is  as  hideouis 
a  sight  as  true  worship  is  beautiful.  All  tlie  conditions  of  genuine  worship  are  wanting 
in  the  bad  man ;  there  is  no  heart,  no  way  of  access,  no  faith  (Bridges).  We  have 
scriptural  examples  in  Balaam  (Numb,  xxiii.),  Saul  (1  Sam.  xiii.),  Absalom  (2  S:ini. 
XV.),  Jezebel,  the  Pharisees.  Compare  the  terrible  invective  of  Isaiah  (i.)  against 
those  who  come  with  hands  full  of  blood  to  worship  and  offer  vain  oblations. 

II.  On  falsehood.  (Ver.  28.)  Compare  the  ninth  commandment.  "The  essence 
of  a  lie  is  the  intention  to  deceive."  But  exaggeration,  the  vice  of  those  who  perpetu- 
ally talk  for  talking's  sake,  seems  also  pointed  at.  'J'he  second  clause  describes  the 
quality  of  the  trustworthy  witness.  To  hear  before  we  speak  ;  and  witness  to  nothing 
hut  what  we  have  heard  and  seen  and  known  to  be  true.  It  is  more  from  carelessness 
about  truth  than  unintentional  falsehood,  that  there  is  so  much  untruth  in  the  world 
(Dr.  Johnson). 

III.  On  insolence  and  presumption.  (Ver.  29.)  Effrontery,  which  assumes  the 
brazen  brow  u|)on  guilt.  There  was  nothina  among  the  heathen  wliich  was  thought 
more  to  expose  a  man  to  the  wrath  of  Heaven  than  presumption.  The  picture  of  the 
opposite  temper  is  given  as  a  willing  docility  to  rebuke,  anxiety  for  improvement, 
which  biings  honour  in  the  sight  of  God  and  of  man.  Insolent  presumption  would 
force  its  will  and  way  in  spite  of  God ;  true  humility  would  seek  direction  in  its  way 
by  the  will  of  God.  Ver.  30  reminds  us  of  the  folly  and  presumption  of  vain  hunian 
creatures  to  lift  themselves  up  in  rivalry  to  heaven.  Earthly  greatness,  state  policy, 
pride,  stoical  firmness,  avail  nothing  against  the  Divine  wisdom  and  the  eternal  will. 
Entire  obedience  and  resignation  are  our  duty  and  our  safety.  May  all  lur  doings  be 
begun,  continued,  and  ended  in  God!  'J'here  is  no  success  without  God  (ver.  31).  The 
horse  maybe  ready  for  th*  cattle,  the  "powder  maybe  dry,"  but  all  is  Tain  unless 
his  ble> sing  has  been  sought  and  gained;  and  this  cannot  be  unless  our  enterprise  is 
just.  Kever  act  without  dependence  on  God,  nor  without  attention  to  the  appropriate 
means  of  success. — J. 

Ver.  1. — Buman  power  and  Divine  direction.  The  course  of  human  »ffairs 
impresses,  we  might  perhaps  say  oppresses,  us  with  the  thought — 

1.  How  MUCH  POWER  IS  IN  ONE  man's  HAND.  We  shall  always  have  kings  amnngsi 
•ii — ol  one  kind  or  another.  They  may  not  hear  that  name;  they  may  not  occupy 
the  precise  social  position  indicated  by  the  word;  but  there  wUl  always  be  men  who 


on.  XXI.  1—31.]  THE  PROVERBS.  417 

will  exercise  such  distinguished  power  and  hold  snch  eminent  position  that  they  will 
be  "as  kiogs,"  if  they  are  not  so  called  by  their  fellows.  God  endows  us  ?erv 
differently,  and  he  puts  it  in  the  power  of  a  few  to  wield  commanding  influence,  tn 
rise  to  high  rank,  to  sway  a  wide  and  powerful  control  over  their  countrymen.  An<i 
it  has  often  been  a  matter  for  serious  concern  that,  to  a  very  large  extent  indeed,  the 
prosperity  and  well-being  of  an  entire  people  has  rested  with  the  decision  of,  has  been 
hold  in  the  balance  by,  a  single  hand.     Then  we  naturally  think  that — 

n.   How  HIS   HAND   WILL   MOVE    DEPENDS   UPON   HIS   HEABT.       As   the  hcart   fccls  the 

hand  directs.  Behaviour  is  the  outcome  of  character.  Given  a  stern,  insensitive  heart, 
and  we  count  on  a  hard  and  cruel  policy  ;  but  given  a  kind  and  considerate  heart,  and 
we  reckon  on  a  just  and  humane  career.  A  country  has  therefore  the  deepest  interest 
in  the  character  of  its  rulers,  as  it  has  in  the  moral  and  spiritual  condition  of  its 
leaders  in  any  and  every  sphere  of  thought  and  action.  We  therefore  gladly  remember 
that — 

III.  The  heart  of  the  powerful  is  in  the  hand  of  God.  "  As  rivers  of  water 
he  turneth  it,"  etc.  In  the  formation  of  this  globe,  in  the  arrangement  of  land  and 
water,  in  the  upbuilding  of  the  great  mountains,  in  the  cutting  of  the  Iruitful  plains, 
in  the  tracing  of  the  fertilizing  streams,  we  recognize  the  hand  of  God.  He  has  used 
a  great  variety  of  agencies  to  bring  about  all  these  and  all  such  results ;  but  everythiiii; 
on  the  surface  of  the  globe  bears  the  impress  of  his  wise  hand.  The  rivers  do  not  run 
where  they  list — they  flow  along  the  water-courses  which  his  wisdom  has  arranged. 
And  so  with  the  hearts  of  the  great  and  the  strong,  of  the  king  and  the  counsellor,  ol 
the  warrior  and  the  niioister.  God  has  access  to  them ;  he  can  as  easily  touch  and 
affect  them  in  their  thoughts  and  judgments  as  he  can  determine  the  channels  in  whicli 
the  springs  shall  run.  He  can  arrest  them  in  their  purpose ;  he  can  change  or  even 
reverse  their  course.  Our  human  minds,  as  well  as  all  material  objects,  are  subject  tu 
his  sway,  and  own  the  touch  of  his  controlling  hand.     Therefore  we  conclude  that — 

IV.  We  never  need  despair,  but  should  always  hope.  For  in  the  darkest  hour 
we  know  that  we  have  one  resource.  When  we  can  touch  no  other  human  or  earthly 
springs,  we  can  make  our  appeal  to  God.  We  can  seek  to  "  move  the  hand  which 
moves  the  universe,"  and  which  "  turneth  the  hearts  of  kings  whithersoever  he  will." 
We  are  sure  that :  1.  God  is  never  regardless  of,  or  indifferent  to,  the  course  which  hi.« 
strong  sons  are  taking.  2.  He  is  ruling  the  world  in  the  interest  of  righteousness. 
3.  He  is  willing,  and  indeed  wishful,  to  be  sought  by  those  who  love  and  trust  him. 
Let  the  people  of  God,  therefore,  cherish  hope  in  the  midst  of  dire  trouble  and  impend- 
ing evil ;  and  let  the  enemies  of  God  beware.  One  touch  of  the  Divine  finger,  and  their 
fine  fabric  of  oppression  falls  instantly  to  the  ground. — 0. 

Ver.  2.— .(See  homily  on  ch.  xvi.  2.) — 0. 

Ver.  3. — Devotion  and  duty.  It  is  certainly  noticeable  that  this  truth  should  be 
expressed  by  Solomon.  For  the  one  great  work  of  his  life  was  the  erection  of  the 
temple  wherein  sacrifice  should  be  offered  to  the  Lord.  He  might  hiivo  been  excuseii 
if  his  leaning  had  been  toward  the  ceremonial  rather  than  the  moral.  But  lie  was  nut 
the  first  Hebrew  thinker  to  give  utterance  to  the  idea.     It  is  interesting  to  trace— 

I.  Its  history  in  Hebrew  thought.  We  find  :  1.  Samuel  holding  this  view,  iii.d 
declaring  it  in  firm  and  powerful  language  (1  Sam.  xv.  22).  2.  David  filled  with  a 
deep  sense  of  it  as  he  humbled  his  soul  before  God  (Ps.  li.  10,  15 — 19).  3.  Asaph 
powerfully  affected  by  it  as  he  wrote  his  sacred  song  (Ps.  1.  8 — 15).  4.  Isaiah, 
Jeremiah,  and  Micah  insisting  upon  this  truth  in  strong  and  fervent  words  (Isa.  i. 
11 — 17 ;  Jer.  vii.  22,  23 ;  Micah  vi.  6 — 8).  5.  John  the  Baptist  making  nothing  of 
ceremonial  religion,  and  making  everything  of  a  true  and  genuine  repentance.  6.  Our 
Lord  himself,  by  his  teaching  and  his  attitude,  prefeiring  the  penitent  publican  and 
harlot  to  the  much-sacrificing  but  hard-hearted  Pharisee;  while  by  his  own  sacrificial 
death  he  removed  for  ever  the  need  of  any  further  offering  on  any  altar  whatsoever. 
7.  His  inspired  apostles  declaring  the  needlessness  of  any  sacrifice  except  those  which 
are  of  a  spiritual  order  (Rom.  xii.  1 ;  Heb.  ix.  28 ;  x.  12  ;  xiii.  15,  16). 

n.  Its  8IONIFICANCE  TO  ourselves.  We  naturally  ask — What  is  the  relation  ot 
devotion  to  duty  or  righteousness?  and  we  answer:  1.  No  measure  of  devotion  can 

FBOYCRBS.  8   B 


tl8  THE  PR0VBBB8.  [oh.  xxi.  1—31 

make  up  for  moral  laxity.  We  might  be  worshipping  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  day 
and  night ;  but  if  we  were  false,  or  cruel,  or  dishonest,  or  impure  in  our  daily  practice, 
we  should  certainly  incur  his  righteous  anger.  2.  Moral  probity  by  itselif  will  not 
take  the  place  of  the  direct  approach  of  our  hearts  to  God.  It  is  much  that  a  maa 
should  be  just  in  all  his  dealiugs,  kind  in  his  various  relationships,  blameless  in  his 
bearing  and  behaviour — very  tmich.  But  it  is  not  everything;  it  leaves  out  one 
essential  thing.  God  desires  and  demands  of  us  that  we  ourselves  come  into  close  and 
living  union  and  communion  with  himself,  that  we  look  to  him  and  address  him, 
and  trust  and  love  him  as  our  Divine  Father  and  Redeemer.  And  no  propriety  of 
behaviour,  no  excellency  of  life,  will  take  the  place  of  this.  3.  Devotion  and  duty 
must  coexist,  and  will  sustain  one  another.  (1)  We  should  so  worship  God  that  we 
shall  be  stronger  to  obey  his  commandments  in  the  home  and  in  the  school  and  in 
the  shop — everywhere.  We  may  safely  conclude  that  our  sacrifice  on  the  sabbath  is 
altogether  imperfect  nnd  unsatisfactory  if  it  does  not  lead  to  a  worthier  life  in  the 
week.  (2)  And  we  should  so  act  in  all  the  various  paths  of  life  that  "  with  clean  hands 
and  a  pure  heart "  we  can  go  up  to  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  render  acceptable 
service  of  prayer  and  praise  as  we  bow  before  him  in  the  sanctuary.  They  are  com- 
plementary one  to  the  other ;  and  no  wise  man  will  disregard  or  disparage  either. — (J. 

Ver.  5. — (See  homily  on  ch.  xxvii.  23.) — 0. 

Vers.  6 — 8. — Marks  of  sin.  Here  we  have  four  marks  of  that  many-sided  evil  which 
God  condemns  as  sin. 

I.  Its  manifoldness  of  foem.  Of  its  varied  developments  we  have  four  forms 
here  specified.  1.  Falsehood,  with  a  view  to  temporal  enrichment,  or  the  sin  of  cheat- 
ing— a  crime  which  has  dishonoured  the  markets  and  counting-houses  of  every  land. 
2.  Violence,  with  the  same  end  in  view — the  breaking  into  the  neighbour's  treasury,  or 
the  assault  committed  on  his  person.  3.  Injustice,  or  the  sin  of  withholding  from  our 
neighbour  that  which  we  know  is  his  due  ;  whether  it  be  a  weekly  wage  (Jas.  v.  4), 
or  whether  it  be  the  appointment  to  which  he  is  entitled  by  his  merit,  or  the  honour 
he  has  gained  by  his  services.  4.  Perversity,  or  frowardness — ^the  attitude  of  wanton 
ai  d  determined  rebelliousness  against  God's  rule,  or  insubmission  to  his  claim,  or 
disobedience  of  his  particular  commandment. 

II.  The  0NSUBSTANTIAL  NATURE  OP  ITS  SUCCESS.  Enrichment  by  falsehood  is  "a 
vanity  [or, '  a  vapour ']  tossed  to  and  fro."  It  is  proverbial  that  wealth  that  is  ill-gotten 
is  quickly  lost ;  this  is  to  be  accounted  for  by  the  action  of  God's  righteous  punitive 
laws  apart  from  the  doctrine  that  sin  commands  his  condemnation.  Independently  of 
this,  it  is  certain  tliat  the  satisfaction  which  comes  from  sin  is  short-lived  and  con- 
tinually declines.  Sin  allures  its  victims  with  fine  promises,  but  it  breaks  every  one 
of  them ;  its  bread,  may  be  sweet  for  a  moment,  but  "  afterwards  the  mouth  is  filled 
with  gravel "  (ch.  xx.  17).  The  hope  of  the  sinner  is  very  fair,  but  soon  comes  the 
strong  wind  of  penal  law,  and  its  cattle  is  on  the  ground ;  it  is  "  swept  away  "  (ver.  7, 
Revised  Version). 

III.  Its  suicidal  character.  These  guilty  ones  are  ••  of  them  that  seek  death." 
"  Death  is  the  wages'  of  sin,"  and  those  who  consciously  live  in  sin  and  those  (more 
especially)  who  know  that  this  is  so  may  be  fitly  spoken  of  as  "  seeking  death." 
Suicide  is  not  confined  to  those  who  deliberately  take  away  their  life  with  the  pistol- 
shot,  or  the  cup  of  poison,  or  the  fatal  plunge.  It  is  a  foUy  and  a  crime  that  is  being 
committed  day  by  day  at  the  hearth  and  at  the  table,  in  the  office  and  in  the  study. 
Men  are  transgressing  those  known  laws  of  God  on  the  observance  of  which  life  as 
well  as  health  depends.  They  who  live  in  conscious  wrong-doing  are  determinately 
travelling  toward  death,  and  are  guiltily  "  seeking  "  it. 

IV.  Its  deep  and  wide  dbpartueb  from  the  holt  purpose  of  God.  The  way 
of  (the)  man  (of  whom  we  are  speaking)  is  "strange"  (ver.  8).  It  is  quite  foreign 
to  the  thought  and  contrary  to  the  will  of  God.  He  is  saying,  "  Go  not  along  this 
path  ;  turn  from  it,  and  pass  away,"  It  is  sin  which  has  cut  this  path  for  the  feet  of 
the  human  traveller,  and  it  is  one  which  lies  quite  outside  the  King's  highway.  So 
strange  is  it  to  him,  so  alien  to  his  purpose,  so  far  from  his  present  desire,  that  he  is 
ever  saying  to  hii  erring  children,  "Return,  return  I"    And  he  haa  mad%  in  the 


OH.  XXI.  1—31.]  THE  PEOVBBBS.  419 

gospel  of  his  Son,  a  way  of  return  and  restoration.  Indeed,  it  is  his  Son  Jesus  Christ 
who  is  "  the  Way."  To  know  him  and  to  love  and  serve  him  is  to  have  our  feet  planted 
in  "  the  path  of  life."— 0. 

Ver.  13. — Sowing  and  reaping.  It  is  true,  indeed,  that  as  we  sow  we  reap.  It  is 
not  only  true  that  God  will  in  some  way  or  other  cause  iniquity  to  suffer  and  righteous- 
ness to  he  recompensed,  but  we  find  that  sin  meets  with  its  appropriate  penalty,  and 
worth  with  its  appropriate  reward.  "  Whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also 
reap."     We  have  an  illustration  of  this  in  the  text,  as  we  find  many  others  elsewhere. 

I.  Inhumanitt  and  pity.  "  Whoso  stoppeth  his  ears,"  etc.  Men  wiU  have  no 
mercy  on  the  merciless.  Let  a  man  he  known  to  be  hard-hearted,  selfishly  and  cruelly 
indifferent  to  the  distress  of  his  neighbours,  and  when  the  time  of  his  calamity  comes 
he  will  discover  that  there  is  no  eye  to  pity  and  no  hand  to  help  him.  On  the 
contrary,  his  misfortune  will  give  a  secret  if  not  an  open  satisfaction.  But  let  a  man 
be  pitiful  and  generous  in  the  day  of  his  prosperity,  then  when  adversity  overtakes 
him  the  hearts  and  the  hands  of  many  will  open  to  sympathize  and  succoiar.  The 
same  principle  is  applicable  to  an  evil  which  is  similar  though  not  quite  su  serious, 
■nd  to  its  corresponding  virtue,  viz. — 

II.  Severity  and  leniency.  Our  fellow-men  will  be  sure  to  treat  us  with  the  same 
severity  we  impose  on  them.  Austerity  constantly  begets  austerity ;  it  is  not  long 
before  it  hears  the  echo  of  its  own  harshness.  Be  down  with  rigid  particularity  on 
eveiy  offence  you  detect  in  your  child,  or  your  servant,  or  your  neighbour,  and  you 
may  reckon  confidently  on  having  the  same  unbending  rigorousness  of  judgment 
applied  to  any  deviation  that  can  be  discovered  in  yourself.  But  leniency  brings  forth 
leniency;  charity  is  the  beautiful  mother  of  charity.  Make  every  kind  and  just 
allowance  as  you  judge  your  brother,  and  you  shall  have  every  extenuation  granted 
you  when  your  infirmity  leads  you  into  err^r.  We  have  the  same  thing  showing  itself, 
the  appropriateness  and  correspondence  of  the  penalty  or  the  reward  to  the  offence  or 
the  virtue  in — 

III.  Gbossness  and  pueity.  "  He  that  soweth  to  the  flesh,  of  the  flesh  reaps  cor- 
ruption; and  he  that  soweth  to  the  Spirit,  of  the  Spirit  reaps  life  everlasting"  (Gal. 
vi.  8).  Bodily  indulgence  means  bodily  degeneration ;  spiritual  culture  means  spiritual 
enlarsjement, 

IV.  GoDi,EssNE8S  AND  GODLINESS.  The  man  who  lives  without  God  has  to  do 
without  God  in  life  and  at  the  end  of  life  as  well  as  he  can.  He  has  to  dispense  with 
all  the  comfort  and  support  of  the  consciousness  of  God's  favour  and  that  Divine 
indwelling  which  only  comes  with  faith  and  love.  But  he  who  walks  witli  God  and 
lives  unto  him  enjoys  all  the  unspeakable  and  inestimable  advantages  of  the  near 
presence,  the  gracious  power,  the  continual  comfort  and  succour  of  the  Divine  Spirit. 
As  he  sows,  he  reaps. — 0. 

Ver.  21. — The  successful  search.  What  a  lamentable  history  might  be  written  of 
human  lives  that  would  be  correctly  described  as  unsuccessful  searches !  Who,  save 
the  Omniscient  One,  can  tell  how  many  have  lived  and  toiled,  have  struggled  and 
suffered,  in  search  of  a  goal  which  they  never  reached? — it  may  have  been  in  business, 
or  in  the  domain  of  the  affections,  or  in  the  pursuit  of  art  or  of  science,  or  in  politics, 
or  in  exploration  on  land  or  sea.  It  is  a  thought  of  relief  and  comfort  that  no  human 
life  need  be  a  failure — none,  at  least,  on  which  the  light  of  Divine  truth  has  shone. 
It  is  also  pleasant  to  think  that  tlie  higher  we  aim  the  likelier  we  are  to  reach  our 
mark.  He  who  seeks  satisfaction  on  the  lowei-  and  grosser  levels  is  most  likely  to 
fail ;  but  he  whose  aspiration  is  toward  wisdom  and  worth,  toward  goodness  and  God, 
is  a  seeker  that  will  find — 

I.  The  true  quest  op  a  human  heart.  Solomon  speaks  of  "  following  after 
righteousness  and  mercy."  These  two  words  may  be  takeu  as  covering  the  entire 
field  of  rectitude  and  love,  being  just  in  all  our  relations,  and  being  animated  by  the 
spirit  of  kindness  toward  all  with  whom  we  have  to  do.  Thus  understood,  they  point 
to  the  endeavour  of  the  human  soul  to  find :  1.  Acceptance  with  the  living  God ;  for 
there  is  no  happy  sense  of  rightness  or  rectitude  until  his  favour  has  been  secured,  and 
we  feel  that  we  stand  before  him  as  those  that  are  true  and  loyal,  his  faithful  subjeits, 


420  THE  PROVERBS.  [oh.  xxi.  1—31. 


his  reconciled  children.  2.  Purity  of  heart  and  life — deliverance  from  the  power  and 
bondage  of  sin,  of  the  evil  forces  which  stir  within  and  which  play  around  the  soul. 
3.  A  course  of  honesty  and  equity  in  the  sight  of  man ;  such  a  regulation  of  conduct 
as  will  result  in  doing  to  others  as  we  would  that  they  should  do  to  us,  walking 
along  the  path  which  brings  no  regrets  and  no  reproaches.  4.  A  heart  of  kindness ; 
nourishing  within  ourselves  the  prevailing  feeling  of  considerateness  for  others;  the 
blessed  faculty  of  forgetting  our  own  personal  tastes  and  preferences  and  passing 
interests  in  order  to  remember  the  wants  and  well-being  of  our  friends  and  our  fellow- 
men  ;  the  mental  and  spiritual  habit  of  sympathizing  with  sorrow  and  succouring  need 
with  an  open  and  a  willing  hand, 

II.  The  way  to  the  qoal.  We  who  have  learnt  of  Christ  need  not  miss  our  way  ; 
we  may,  and  (if  we  are  in  earnest)  we  shall,  find  all  that  we  seek.     We  shall  attain  to : 

1.  Bighteousness.  (1)  Acceptance  with  God,  being  right  with  him  by  faith  in  Jesus 
Christ  (Rom.  v.  1,  2 ;  viii.  1).  (2)  The  growth  within  us  of  those  virtues  and  graces 
which  come  with  the  service  of  the  holy  Lord,  with  the  study  and  the  love  of  the 
sinless  Friend,  with  prayer  for  the  sanctifying  influences  of  the  indwelling  Spirit. 

2.  Life;  for  he  that  lives  thus  unto  God,  who  is  becomiog  daily  like  God,  who  is 
rejoicing  in  the  friendship  of  God,  does  live  indeed.  This  is  life — life  spiritual.  Divine, 
eternal.  3.  Honour.  No  small  share  of  the  honour  which  comes  from  those  whose 
esteem  is  worth  possessing;  and  in  the  end  the  honour  whiuh  will  come  fronf  the 
appraising  and  approving  Lord,  wheu  he  says,  "Well  donel"  to  his  faithful 
servants. — 0. 

Ver.  22^See  homily  on  vers.  29— 31.)— 0. 

Ver.  27 J — (See  homily  on  ch.  xv.  8.) — 0. 

Vers.  29 — 31  (with  ver.  22). — The  achievements  and  Umitations  of  tvisdom.  There 
is  great  virtue  in  wisdom;  Solomon  never  wearies  of  praising  it.  Here  he  adds  another 
commendation,  but  he  calls  attention  to  a  boundary  beyond  which  it  may  not  pass. 

I.  The  achievements  op  wisdom.  "  A  wise  man  scaleth  the  city  of  the  mighty," 
etc.  (ver.  22).  How  often  have  men  stood  behind  their  strong  ramparts — not  of  stone 
or  rock  only — and  looked  down  with  complacent  contempt  upon  the  despised  adver- 
saries outside  and  below  them ;  but  when  the  shook  of  the  battle  came  they  found,  to 
their  dismay,  that  wisdom  is  stronger  than  all  defences  that  could  be  raised,  and  that 
it  can  cast  down  the  confidence  of  the  proud!  It  is  not  ouly  the  city  which  is  built 
of  brick  or  stone  which  is  at  the  command  of  the  truly  wise ;  it  is  also  the  city  of 
falsehood  and  of  error ;  it  is  the  city  of  oppression  and  of  wrong ;  it  is  also  the  city 
of  knowledge  and  of  truth.  However  hard  to  win  may  be  its  walls,  the  wise  man — 
who  is  the  man  of  rectitude,  of  unselfishness,  of  purity,  of  diligence,  of  earnestness, 
of  patience,  of  devotion — will  strive  and  toil  until  he  stands  within  the  citadel. 

II.  One  of  its  CHiBr  characteristics.  On  the  one  hand,  a  wicked  (who  is  an 
unwise)  man  "  hardeneth  his  face."  He  may  be  proved  to  be  in  the  wrong;  he  may 
be  suffering  seriously  for  his  folly  ;  but  he  will  not  change  his  course.  He  is  obstinate, 
perverse,  proud ;  he  will  go  on  his  way,  come  what  will.  But,  on  the  other  baud,  the 
upright  (who  is  the  wise)  man  direoteth  (or  rather,  considereth)  his  way.  Even  when 
he  is  right,  and  things  are  profitable  and  promising  with  him,  he  is  often  pondering  his 
path,  looking  to  his  chart,  carefully  considering  whether  he  is  moving  on  in  the  right 
direction.  But  when  he  has  been  induced  to  wander  into  some  byway,  and  when  he 
is  admonished  either  by  God's  providence  or  by  man's  fidelity,  then  he  seriously  con- 
siders his  way,  and,  if  he  fimls  that  he  has  erred,  he  immediately  retraces  his  steps, 
until  he  is  found  again  in  the  King's  highway.  The  habit  of  considering  is  one  of  the 
clearest  marks  of  wisdom. 

III.  Two  OF  ITS  LIMITATIONS.  1.  It  Cannot  succeed  against  God  (ver.  30).  Good 
men  and  true,  who  are  within  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  may  put  forth  all  their  mental 
powers  and  moral  energies  to  brinj;  about  that  which  God  has  condemned ;  they  have 
watched  and  thought  and  striven  for  the  cause  which  has  not  been,  as  they  imagined, 
the  cause  of  Christ,  and  they  have  hoi)elesaly  failed.  History  will  supply  abundant 
illustrations.    2.  It  cannot  succeed  without  God  (ver.  31).     Equip  your  cavalry,  arm 


em.  xxn.  1—29.] 


TUB   PI10VERB8. 


421 


your  infantry,  and  collect  your  artillery  for  the  day  of  battle ;  bring  forth  your  most 
experienced  general,  who  will  be  ready  with  his  most  brilliant  tactics ;  still  the  issue 
will  not  be  determined  thus.  There  may  arise  a  sudden  unaccountable  panic ;  tliere 
may  be  a  movement  made  by  the  enemy's  captain  wholly  unexpected  and  practically 
irresistible;  there  are  forces  at  work  on  the  great  battle-field  of  the  world  against 
which  no  military  skill  can  provide.  God  is  present  there.  He  can  act  upon  the  mind 
of  one  man  or  of  many  men  in  such  wise  that  the  battle  will  not  be  to  the  strong,  the 
victory  not  be  to  the  seasoned  troops  and  the  confident  commander.  Without  God's 
consent,  without  his  blessing,  any  battle  on  any  field  whatever,  military  or  moral,  must 
be  lost< — G. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXn. 


Ver.  1. — A  good  name  is  rather  to  be 
chosen  than  great  riches.  It  will  be  ob- 
served tliat  "  good  "  in  the  Authorized  Ver- 
sion is  in  italics,  showing  that  tlie  epithet 
is  not  expressed  in  the  Hebrew,  which  is 
simply  Dti*  (gJiem),  "name."  But  tliis  word 
carried  with  it  the  notion  of  good  repute, 
as  in  Eocles.  vii.  1 ;  for  being  well  known 
implied  honour  and  reputation,  while  being 
nameless  (Job  xxx.  8)  signified  not  only 
obscurity,  but  Ignominy  and  discredit. 
Hence  tlie  versions  liave  Svoita  Kax6v,  nomen 
bonum,  and  Ecclus.  xli.  12,  "Have  regard 
to  thy  name  (irepl  ov6fiaTos),  for  that  shall 
continue  with  thee  above  a  thousand  great 
treasures  of  gold.  A  good  life,"  the  moralist 
continues,  "  hath  but  few  days ;  but  a  good 
name  endnreth  for  ever  "  (contrast  ch.  x.  7). 
And  loving  favour  rather  than  silver  and 
gold ;  or,  more  accurately,  and  before  gold  and 
silver  gra/;e  is  good ;  i.e.  grace  is  far  better 
than  gold.  Grace  (chen)  is  the  manner  and 
demeanour  which  win  love,  as  well  as  the 
favour  and  affection  gained  thereby;  taken 
as  parallel  to  "  name,"  in  the  former  hemi- 
stich, it  means  here  "favour,"  the  regard 
conceived  by  others  for  a  worthy  object. 
Publ.  Syr.,  "Bona  opinio  hominum  tutior 
peounia  est."  The  French  have  a  proverb, 
"  Bonne  renommfe  vaut  mieux  que  celnture 
dore'e."  The  latter  hemistich  gives  the 
reason  for  the  assertion  in  the  former — a 
good  name  is  so  valuable  because  it  wins 
affection  and  friendsiiip,  which  are  far  pre- 
ferable lo  material  riches, 

Ver.  2. — The  rich  and  poor  meet  together 
(ch.  xxix.  13) ;  the  Lord  is  the  Maker  of  them 
all  (Job  xxxiv.  19).  God  has  ordained  that 
there  shall  be  riol}  and  poor  in  the  world, 
and  that  they  should  meet  in  the  intercourse 
of  life.  These  social  inequalities  are  ordered 
for  wise  purposes ;  the  one  helps  the  other. 
The  labour  of  the  poor  make.i  the  wealth  of 
the  rich ;  the  wealth  of  the  rich  enables  him 
to  employ  and  aid  the  poor.  Their  common 
humanity,  their  fatherhood  in  God,  should 
make  them  regard  one  another  as  brethren. 


without  distinction  of  rank  or  position;  the 
rich  should  not  despise  the  poor  (ch.  liv. 
31 ;  xvii.  5;  Job  xxxi.  15),  the  poor  should 
not  envy  the  rich  (ch.  iil.  31),  but  all  gliould 
live  in  love  and  harmony  as  one  great  family 
of  God. 

Ver.  3.— A  prndent  man  foreseeth  the 
evil,  and  hideth  himself.  The  whole  verse 
is  repeated  in  ch.  xxvii.  12.  St.  Jerome  has 
callidus,  and  the  LXX.  has  vavoSpyos,  as 
the  translation  of  any  (arum);  but  it  must 
be  taken  in  a  good  sense,  as  cautious,  far- 
seeing,  prudent  (see  note  on  ch.  1.  4).  Sucti 
a  man  looks  around,  takes  warning  from 
little  circumstances  which  might  escape  the 
observation  of  careless  persons,  and  provides 
for  his  safety  in  good  time.  Thus  the  Chris- 
tians at  the  siege  of  Jerusalem,  believing 
Christ's  warnings,  retired  to  Pella,  and  were 
saved.  A  Spanish  proverb  runs,  "That 
which  the  fool  does  in  the  end,  the  wise 
man  does  at  the  beginning."  The  simple 
pass  on,  and  are  punished,  The  subject  of 
the  former  hemistich  is  in  the  singular 
number,  for  a  really  prudent  man  is  a  com- 
paratively rare  being;  the  second  clause  is 
plural,  teaching  us,  as  Hitzig  observes,  that 
many  simple  ones  are  found  for  one  prudent. 
These  silly  persons,  blundering  blindly  on 
their  way,  without  circumspection  or  fore- 
thought, meet  with  immediate  punishment, 
incur  dangers,  suffer  loss.  A  Cornish  proverb 
runs,  "He  who  will  not  be  ruled  by  the 
rodder  must  be  ruled  by  the  rock."  Sep- 
tuagint,  "An  intelligent  man  {vavaiipyos) 
seeing  a  wicked  man  punished  is  himself 
forcibly  instructed ;  but  fools  pass  by,  and 
are  punished"  (comp.  ch.  xxi.  11). 

Ver.  4. — By  humility  and  the  fear  of  the 
Lord,  etc.  "This  does  not  seem  to  be  the 
best  rendering  of  the  original.  The  word 
rendered  "by"  (app.  e/(c6),  "  in  reward  of,"  is 
also  taken  as  the  subject  of  the  sentence : 
"  The  reward  of  humility  ['  and,'  or, '  which 
is']  the  fear  of  God,  is  riches,"  etc.  There 
is  no  copulative  In  the  clause,  and  a  similar 
asyndeton  occurs  in  ver.  5 ;  so  there  is  no 
renson  why  we  should  not  regard  the  clause 
in  this  way.  Thus  Revised  Version,  Nowaok, 


422 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[oh.  xxil  1—29. 


and  othera.  But  Delitzsch  makes  the  first 
hemistich  a  concluded  sentence,  which  the 
second  member  carries  on  thus:  "The  re- 
ward of  humility  is  the  fear  of  the  Lord ;  it 
[the  reward  of  humility]  is  at  the  same  time 
riclies,"  etc.  Vulgate,  Finis  modestis  timor 
Domini,  divitise  et  gloria  et  vita;  Septua- 
gint,  "The  generation  (ysvtii)  of  wisdom 
is  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  and  wealth,"  etc. 
It  is  preferable  to  translate  as  above,  taking 
the  two  expressed  virtues  as  appositional, 
thus :  "  The  reward  of  humility,  the  fear  of 
the  Lord."  Humility  brings  with  it  true 
religion,  which  is  expressed  by  "the  fear 
of  the  Lord."  The  feeling  of  dependence, 
the  lowly  opinion  of  self,  the  surrender  of 
the  will,  the  conviction  of  sin,  all  effects 
which  are  connected  with  humility,  may 
well  be  represented  by  this  term,  "  the  fear 
of  God,"  which,  in  another  aspect,  is  itself 
the  source  of  every  virtue  aud  every  bless- 
ing ;  it  is  riches,  and  honour,  and  life.  These 
are  God's  gifts,  the  guerdon  of  faithful  ser- 
vice (see  notes  on  ch.  iii.  16  and  xxi.  21 ; 
and  comp.  ch.  viii.  18).  The  Easterns  have 
a  pretty  maxim, "  The  bending  of  the  humble 
is  the  graceful  droop  of  tlie  branches  laden 
witli  fruit."  And  again,  "  Fruitful  trees 
bend  down ;  the  wise  stoop ;  a  dry  stick  and 
a  fool  can  be  broken,  not  bent "  (Lane). 

Ver.  5. — Thorns  and  snares  are  in  the 
way  of  the  froward.  The  words  are  in  the 
Hebrew  without  the  conjunction  (see  note, 
ver.  4),  though  the  versions  generally  add  it. 
Thns  the  Septuagint,  Tplfio\oi  kuI  -iraylSes; 
Vulgate,  arma  et  gladii ;  but  the  Venetian, 
6,KavBai  TrayiSes.  It  la  a  question  whether 
the  thorns  are  what  the  perverse  prepare  for 
others,  or  what  they  themselves  suffer.  In 
ch.  XV.  19  the  hedge  of  thorns  represented 
the  difSoulties  in  the  sluggard's  path  ;  but 
here,  viewed  in  connection  with  the  follow- 
ing hemistich,  the  thorns  and  snares  refer 
to  the  hindrances  proceeding  from  the 
froward,  which  injuriously  affect  others; 
"thorns"  being  a  figure  of  the  pains  and 
troubles,  "snares"  of  the  unexpected  dangers 
and  impediments  which  evil  men  cause  as 
they  go  on  their  crooked  way.  The  word 
for  "fiiorns"  is  D'M,  which  occurs  in  Job 
V.  5.  The  plant  is  supposed  to  be  the 
Bhamnua  paliurus,  but  it  has  not  been 
accurately  identified.  He  that  doth  keep 
his  soul  shall  be  far  from  them  (comp.  ch. 
xiii.  3 ;  ivi.  17).  The  man  who  has  regard 
to  his  life  aud  morals  will  go  far,  will  keep 
wholly  aloof,  from  those  perils  and  traps 
into  which  the  perverse  try  to  entice  them. 

Ver.  6. — Train  up  a  child  in  the  way  he 
Bhonld  go.  The  verb  translated  "train" 
(chanaU)  means,  first,  "to  put  something 
into  the  mouth,"  "  to  give  to  be  tasted,"  as 
nurses  give  to  infanta  food  which  they  have 
maiticated  in  order  to  prepare  it  for  their 


nurslings ;  thence  it  comes  to  signify  "  to 
give  elementary  instruction,"  "to  imbue," 
"  to  train."  The  Hebrew  literally  is, 
Initiate  a  child  in  accordance  with  his  way. 
The  Authorized  Version,  with  which  Ewald 
agrees,  takes  the  maxim  to  mean  that  the 
child  should  be  trained  from  the  first  in  the 
right  path — the  path  of  obedience  and  re- 
ligion. This  is  a  very  true  and  valuable 
rule,  but  it  is  not  what  the  author  intends. 
"  His  way  "  must  mean  one  of  two  things — 
either  his  future  calling  and  station,  or  his 
character  and  natural  inclination  and 
capacity.  Delitzsch  and  Plumptre  take  the 
latter  interpretation ;  Nowack  and  Bertheau 
the'  former,  on  the  ground  that  derek  is  not 
used  in  the  other  sense  suggested.  But,  as  far 
as  use  is  concerned,  both  explanations  stand 
on  much  the  same  ground ;  and  it  seems  more 
in  conformity  with  the  moralist's  age  and 
nation  to  see  in  the  maxim  an  injunction  to 
consider  the  child's  nature,  faculties,  and 
temperament,  in  the  education  which  is 
given  to  him.  If,  from  his  early  years,  a 
ciiild  is  thus  trained,  when  he  is  old,  he 
will  not  depart  from  it.  This  way,  this 
education  in  accordance  with  his  idiosyn- 
crasy, will  bear  fruit  all  his  life  long;  it 
will  become  a  second  nature,  and  will  never 
be  obliterated.  The  Vulgate  commences 
the  verse  with  Proverhium  est,  taking  the 
first  word  substantively,  as  if  the  author 
here  cited  a  trite  saying ;  but  the  rendering 
is  a  mistake.  There  are  similar  maxims, 
common  at  all  times  and  in  all  countries. 
Virg.,  'Georg.,'  ii.  272— 

"  Adeo  in  teneris  consuesoere  multum  eat" 
Horace, '  Epist.,'  i.  2.  67— 

"  Nunc  adbibe  pnro 
Peotore  verba,  puer." 

For,  as  he  proceeds — 

"Quo    semel  est   imbuta    recens,  servabit 
odorem 
Testa  diu." 

Thus  we  have  two  mediaeval  jingles — 

"  Cui  puer  assuescit,  major  dimittere  nescU." 

"  Quod  nova  testa  capit,  iuveterata  sapit." 

Then  there  is  the  German  saw,  "Jung 
gewohnt,  alt  gethan."  "  What  youth 
learns,  age  does  not  forget,"  says  the  Danish 
proverb.  In  another  and  a  sad  sense  the 
French  exclaim,  "Si  jennesse  savaiti  si 
vieillesse  pouvait  I  "  All  the  early  manu- 
scripts of  the  Septuagint  omit  this  verse ; 
in  some  of  the  later  it  has  been  supplied 
from  Theodotion. 

Ver.  7.— The  rich  mleth  over  the  poor. 
"The  rich  man  (singular)  will  rule  over 
the  poor"  (plural);  for  there  are  many  poor 
for  one  rich  (see  on  ver.  3).    This  is  the  way 


OH.  XXH.  1- 


THE  PROVERBS. 


423 


of  the  world  (ch.  xviii.  23).  Aben  Ezra  ex- 
plains the  Knome  as  showing  the  advantage 
of  wealth  and  the  iuoonvenlenoe  ol  poverty ; 
the  former  bringing  power  and  pre-emi- 
nence, tlie  latter  trouble  and  servitude ;  and 
hence  the  moralist  implies  that  every  one 
should  strive  and  labour  to  obtain  a  compe- 
tency, and  thus  avoid  the  evils  of  im- 
pecuniosity.  The  borrower  is  servant  to  the 
lender.  (For  the  relation  between  borrower 
and  lender,  or  debtor  and  creditor,  tee  on 
ch.  XX.  16;  and  oomp.  Matt,  xviii.  25,  34.) 
Delitzsuh  cites  the  German  saying,  "  Borg- 
hart  (borrower)  is  Lehnhart's  (lemler's) 
servant."  We  have  the  proverb,  •'  He  that 
goes  a-borrowing  goes  a-sorrowiug."  The 
Septuagint  departs  from  the  other  vtTt^Jons 
and  our  Hebrew  text,  translating,  "The  rich 
will  lule  over  the  poor,  and  household 
servants  will  lend  to  their  own  masters" — 
a  realing  on  which  some  of  the  Fathers 
ban  1  ommented. 

Ver.  8. — He  that  soweth  iniquity  shall 
reap  vanity;  shall  gain  nothing  substantial, 
shall  have  nothing  to  show  for  his  pairs. 
But  arm  also  means  "calamity,"  "trouble," 
88  ch.  xii.  21 ;  so  the  gnome  expresses  the 
truth  that  they  who  do  evil  shall  meet  with 
punishment  in  their  very  sins — the  exact 
contrast  to  the  promise  to  the  righteous 
(eh.  xi.  18),  "To  him  that  soweth  righteous- 
ness shall  be  a  sure  reward."  Thus  we  have 
in  Job  iv.  8,  "They  that  plough  iniquity, 
and  sow  wickedness,  reap  the  same ; "  and 
the  apostle  asserts  (Gal.  vi.  7,  etc.),  "  What- 
soever a  man  soweth,  that  shall  lie  also 
reap.  For  he  that  soweth  to  his  flesh  shall 
of  the  flesh  reap  corruption ;  but  he  that 
soweth  to  the  Spirit  shall  of  the  Spirit  reap 
life  everlasting."  Eastern  proverbs  run, 
"  As  the  sin,  so  the  atonement ; "  "  Those  who 
sow  thorns  can  only  reap  prickles"  (comp.  oh. 
xii.  14).  And  the  rod  of  his  anger  shall  fail. 
The  writer  is  thinking  especially  of  cruelty 
and  injustice  practised  on  •  neighbour,  as 
X)elitzsch  has  pointed  out,  and  he  means 
jbat  the  rod  which  he  has  raised,  the 
'Violence  intended  against  the  innocent 
victim,  shall  vanish  away  or  fall  harm- 
lessly. Ewald  and  others  think  that  the 
rod  is  the  Divine  anger,  and  translate  the 
verb  (haldh)  "  is  prepared,"  «■  sense  which 
liere  it  will  not  well  bear,  though  the 
LXX.  has  lent  some  countenance  to  it 
by  rendering,  "  And  shall  fully  accomplish 
the  plague  (ir^rryiiy,  1 '  punishment ')  of  his 
deeds."  The  rendering,  "  shall  fail,"  "  shall 
be  consumed,  or  annihilated,"  is  confirmed 
by  Gen.  xxi.  15;  Isa.  i.  28;  xvi.  4,  etc. 
The  Septuagint  adds  a  distich  here,  of 
which  the  first  member  is  a  variant  of  ver. 
9a,  and  the  second  another  rendering  of  the 
latter  hemistich  of  the  present  verse:  "A 
cheerful  man  and    a  giver  God    blessoth 


(i,vZ(ia  l\ap6v  (cal  iSriit'  ft\oyt7  t  9t6s); 
but  he  shall  bring  to  an  end  (avireKfirfT) 
the  vanity  of  his  works."  The  first  hemi- 
stich is  remarkable  for  being  quoted  by 
St.  Paul  (2  C!or.  ix.  7),  with  a  sliglit  varia- 
tion, 'IKapdv  y^p  5<1ttiv  ayair^  6  @e6s-  So 
Eoelus,  xxxii.  (xxxv.)  9,  "In  all  thy  gifts 
show  a  cheerful  oounteuauoe  (i\dpa<roy  t6 
irp^ffcimdv  irov)" 

Ver.  9. — He  that  hath  a  bountiful  eye 
shall  he  blessed.  The  "  good  of  eye  "  ie  the 
kindly  looking,  the  benevolent  man,  in 
contrast  to  him  of  the  evil  eye,  the  envious, 
the  unfriendly  and  niggardly  man  (oh 
xxiii.  6;  xxviii.  22).  St.  Jerome  renders. 
Qui  pronui  est  ad  misericordiam.  Such  a 
one  is  blessed  by  God  in  this  world  and  the 
next,  in  time  and  in  eternity,  according  to 
tlie  sentiment  of  oh.  xi.  25.  Thus  in  the 
temporal  sense  (Ecclus.  xxxiv.  (xxxi.)  23). 
"Him  that  is  liberal  in  food  lips  shall 
bless,  and  the  testimony  of  bis  liberality 
will  be  believed."  Septuagint,  "  He  that 
hath  pity  upon  the  poor  shall  himself  be 
continually  sustained  (StaTpatp^trerai),"  The 
reason  is  added,  For  he  giveth  of  his  bread 
to  the  poor.  The  blessing  is  the  con- 
sequence of  his  charity  and  liberality. 
2  Cor.  ix.  6,  "  He  that  soweth  bountifully 
shall  reap  also  bountifully  (iv'  fv\oytats)." 
The  Vulgate  and  Septuagint  add  a  distich 
not  in  the  Hebrew,  Victoriam  et  honorem 
acquiret  qui  dat  munera;  animam  autem 
aufert  accipientium ;  Ni'/frjc  koI  n/itiv  irepi 
iroteTTat  b  S(Spa  Sohs,  t^j/  fievroi  ^v^^y  a(^ai 
petrai  Ttuy  ttiKTTifxevuv^  "  Victory  and  honour 
he  obtaineth  who  giveth  gifts;  but  he 
takes  away  the  life  of  the  possessors." 
The  first  hemistich  appears  to  be  a  variant 
of  ch.  xix.  6fc,  the  second  to  be  derived  from 
ch.  i.  196.  The  second  portion  of  the  Latin 
addition  may  mean  that  the  liberal  man 
wins  and  carries  away  with  him  the  souls 
Of  the  recipients  of  his  bounty.  But  this, 
though  Ewald  would  fain  have  it  so,  cannot 
be  the  signification  of  the  corresponding 
Greek,  which  seems  to  mean  that  the  man 
•  who  is  so  liberal  in  distributing  gifts  . 
obtains  the  power  to  do  so  by  oppressing 
and  wronging  others. 

Ver.  10. — Cast  out  the  soomer,  and  con- 
tention shall  go  out;  Septuagint,  tic$a\e 
ix  trvveSplov  \oifi^Vf  "  Cast  out  of  the 
company  a  pestilent  fellow."  Chase  away 
the  seorner  (ch.  i.  22),  the  man  who  has 
no  respect  for  tilings  human  or  Divine, 
and  the  disputes  and  ill  feeling  which  he 
caused  will  be  ended ;  for  "  where  no  wood 
is,  the  fire  goeth  out "  (oh.  xxvi.  20).  Yea, 
strife  and  reproach  shall  cease.  The  re- 
proach and  ignominy  (ji^jJ,  kcdon)  are  those 
which  the  presence  and  words  of  the  scomer 
bring  with  them;  to  have  luoh  a  one  i 


424 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[oh.  xxn.  1—29. 


the  company  is  a  disgrace  to  all  good  men. 
Thus  Ishmael  and  his  mother  were  driven 
from  Abraham's  dwelling  (Gen.  xxi.  9,  etc.), 
and  the  apostle  quotes  (Gal.  iv.  30),  "  Cast 
out  (eKj3a\e)  the  boudwomau  and  her  son." 
Septuagint,  "For  when  he  sits  in  the 
company  he  dishonours  all."  The  next 
verse  gives  a  happy  contrast. 

Ver.  11. — He  that  loveth  pnreness  of 
heart;  he  who  strives  to  be  pure  in  heart 
(Malt.  V.  8),  free  from  guile,  lust,  cupidity, 
vice  of  every  kind.  The  next  clause  carries 
on  the  description  of  the  perfect  character, 
and  is  best  translated.  And  hath  grace  of 
lips,  the  king  is  his  friend.  He  who  is  not 
only  virtuous  and  upright,  but  has  the 
gilt  of  graciousness  of  speech,  winning 
manner  in  conversation,  such  a  man  will 
attach  the  king  to  him  by  the  closest  bonds 
of  friendship.  We  have  had  something  very 
similar  at  ch.  xvi.  13.  Some  of  the  veisious 
consider  that  by  the  king  God  is  meant. 
Thus  the  Septuagint,  "The  Lord  lovetli  holy 
hearts,  and  all  blameless  persons  are  accept- 
able with  him."  The  rest  of  the  clause  is 
connected  by  the  LXX.  with  the  following 
verse,  "A  king  guides  his  flock  (iroi/icuVei) 
with  his  lips;  but  the  eyes  of  the  Lord," 
etc. 

Ver.  12. — The  eyes  of  the  Lord  preserve 
knowledge.  'Ihe  expression,  "preserve 
knowledge,"  is  found  at  ch.  v.  2  (where  Bce 
note)  in  the  sense  of  "  keep,"  "  retain,"  and, 
taken  by  itself,  it  might  here  signify  that 
the  Lord  alone  possesses  knowledge,  and 
alone  imparts  it  to  his  servants  (1  Sam. 
ii.  3);  but  as  in  the  following  clause  a 
person,  the  transgressor,  is  spoken  of,  it  is 
natural  to  expect  a  similar  expression  in 
the  former.  Tlie  Revised  Version  is  cnrreot 
in  rendering  the  abstract  "  knowledge  "  by 
the  concrete  "  I  lim  that  hath  knowledge  ;  " 
BO  that  the  clause,  says  that  God  watolies 
over  and  protects  the  man  who  knows  him 
and  walks  in  his  ways,  and  uses  his  means 
and  abilities  for  the  good  of  others  (see  ch. 
xi.  9).  But  he  (the  Lord)  overthroweth  the 
words  of  the  transgressor.  The  transgressor 
here  is  the  false,  treacherous,  perfidious 
man ;  and  the  gnome  asserts  that  God 
frustrates  hy  turning  in  another  direction 
the  outspoken  intentions  of  this  man,  wliich 
he  had  planned  against  the  righteous 
(comp.  ch.  xiii.  6;  xxi.  12).  Septuagint, 
"  But  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  preserve  know- 
ledge, but  the  transgressor  dospiseth  words," 
i.e.  commands,  or  words  of  wisdom  and 
warning. 

Ver.  13.— The  slothful  man  saith,  There 
is  a  lion  withoi:.t  (ch.  xxvi.  13).  The 
nbsurd  nature  rf  the  sluggard's  excuse  is 
hardly  unders'-ood  by  the  casual  reader. 
The  suppose.!  lion  is  without,  in  the  open 
country,  ana    yet    he  professes  to    be  in 


danger  in  the  midst  of  the  town.  I  BhaU 
be  slain  in  the  streets.  Others  coniider 
that  the  sluggurd  makes  two  excuses  for 
his  inactivity.  If  work  calls  him  abroad, 
he  may  meet  the  lion  which  report  says  is 
prowling  in  the  neighbourhood;  if  he  has 
to  go  into  the  streets,  he  may  be  attacked 
and  murdered  by  ruffians  for  motives  of 
plunder  or  revenge.  "Sluggards  are  pro- 
phets," says  the  Hebrew  proverb.  Septua- 
gint, "The  sluggard  maketh  excuses,  and 
saitli,  A  lion  is  in  the  ways,  there  are 
murderers  in  the  streets."  Lions,  though 
now  extinct  in  Palestine,  seem  to  have 
lingered  tUl  the  time  of  the  Crusades,  and 
such  of  them  as  became  man-eaters,  the 
ohl  or  feeble,  were  a  real  danger  in  the 
vicinity  of  villages  (comp.  Jer.  xlix.  19; 
1.  44). 

Ver.  14. — The  mouth  of  strange  women  is 
a  deep  pit.  The  hemistioii  reappears  in  a 
slightly  altered  form  at  ch.  xxiii.  27.  (For 
"  strange  woman  "  as  equivalent  to  "  a  harlot" 
or  "  adulteress,"  see  note  on  ch.  ii.  16.)  By 
her  "mouth"  is  meant  her  wanton,  seduc- 
tive words,  which  entice  a  man  to  destruc- 
tion of  body  and  soul.  It  may  be  that 
theology  lather  than  morals  is  signified 
here — rather  false  doctrines  than  evil 
practice.  In  this  case  the  mention  of  tho 
strange  or  foreign  woman  is  very  appro- 
priate, seeing  that  perversions  of  belief  and 
worship  were  always  introduced  into  Israel 
from  extenial  sources.  He  that  is  abhorred 
of  the  Lord  shall  fall  therein.  He  wbc  has 
incurred  the  wiath  of  God  by  previous 
unfaithfulness  and  sin  is  left  to  himself  to 
full  a  prey  to  the  allurements  of  the  wicked 
woman  (comp.  Eccles.  vii.  26).  Septuagint, 
"The  mouth  of  a  transgressor  (7rapav6nov) 
is  a  deep  ditch ;  and  he  that  is  hated  of  tho 
Lord  shall  fall  therein."  Then  are  added 
three  lines  not  in  the  Hebrew,  which, 
however,  seem  to  be  renjinisoences  of  other 
passages:  "There  are  evil  ways  before  a 
man,  and  lie  loveth  not  to  turn  away  from 
them ;  but  it  is  needful  to  turn  away  from  a 
perverse  and  evil  way." 

Ver.  15. — Foolishness  is  bound  is  the 
heart  of  a  child.  Foolishness  (ivcelHh)  here 
implies  the  love  of  mischief,  the  wayward- 
ness and  self-will,  belonging  to  children, 
bound  up  in  their  very  nature.  Septuagint, 
"Folly  is  attached  (Ij^irrai)  to  the  heart 
of  the  young,"  in  which  version  Cornelius  k 
Lapide  sees  an  allusion  to  the  ornament 
hung  by  fond  parents  round  the  neck  of  a 
child  whom  they  were  inclined  to  spoil 
rather  than  to  train  in  self-denying  ways. 
To  such  »  child  folly  adheres  as  closoly  as 
the  huUa  with  which  he  is  decorated.  Bui 
the  rod  of  correction  shall  drive  it  far  from 
him.  Judieior.B  education  overcomes  this 
natural   tendency,   by   punishing   it   when 


OB.  XXII.  1 — 29.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


425 


exhibited,  and  imparting  wisdom  and  piety 
(see  on  ch.  xiii.  24  and  xix.  18 ;  and  comp. 
ch.  xxiii.  13 ;  xxix.  15 ;  Ecclns.  xxx.  1,  etc.). 
The  IjXX.  pursue  theli  notion  of  the  too- 
indulgent  parents  letting  the  child  have  his 
own  way,  for  tliey  render  the  last  clause, 
"  But  the  rod  and  discipline  are  far  from  him." 
Ver.  16. — He  that  oppresseth  the  poor  to 
increase  his  riches  (so  the  YulgE^te),  and  he 
that  giveth  to  the  lioh,  shall  surely  come  to 
want.  There  are  various  renderings  and 
explanations  of  this  Terse.  Tho  Autliorizrd 
VersioQ  says  that  he  who  oppressetli  tlie 
poor  to  enrich  himself,  and  he  who  wastes 
his  means  by  giving  to  those  who  do  not 
need  it,  will  come  to  poverty.  But  the  an- 
tithesis of  this  distich  is  thus  lost.  The 
Hebrew  literally  rendered  brings  out  the 
contrast,  Whosoever  oppreeseth  tlte  poor,  it 
is  for  hia  gain ;  whosoever  giveth  to  the  rieh, 
it  ii  for  his  loss.  Delitzsch  explains  the 
sentence  thug :  "  He  who  enriches  himself  by 
extortion  from  the  poor,  at  any  rate  gains 
what  he  desires;  but  he  who  gives  to  the 
rich  impoverishes  himself  in  vain,  has  no 
thanks,  reaps  only  disappointment."  One 
cannot  but  feel  that  the  maxim  thus  inter- 
preted is  poor  and  unsatisfactory.  The  in. 
terpretation  in  the  '  Speaker's  Commentary ' 
is  more  plausible :  The  oppressor  of  the  poor 
will  himself  suffer  in  a  similar  mode,  and 
will  have  to  surrender  his  ill-gotten  gains 
to  eame  equally  unscrupulous  rich  man. 
liut  tlie  terse  antithesis  of  the  original  is 
wholly  obscured  by  this  view  of  the  distich. 
It  is  far  better,  with  Hitzig,  Ewald,  and 
others,  to  take  the  gain  in  the  first  hemi- 
stich as  that  of  the  poor  man,  equivalent  to 
"doth  but  bring  him  gain;"  though  the 
sentence  is  not  necessarily  to  be  explained 
as  suggesting  that  the  injustice  which  the 
poor  man  suffers  at  the  hand  of  his  wealthy 
neighbour  is  a  stimulus  to  him  to  exert 
himself  in  order  to  better  his  position,  and 
thus  indirectly  tends  to  his  euriohinent.  Tlie 
maxim  is  really  conceived  in  the  religious 
style  of  so  many  of  these  apparently  worldly 
pronouncements,  and  states  a  truth  in  the 
moral  government  of  God  intimated  else- 
where, e.g.  ch.  xiii.  22 ;  xxviii.  8 ;  and  that 
truth  is  that  the  riches  extorted  from  the 
poor  man  will  in  the  end  redound  to  his 
benefit,  that  by  God's  providential  control 
the  oppression  and  injustice  from  which  he 
has  suffered  shall  work  to  his  good.  In  the 
second  hemistich  the  loss  is  that  of  the  rich 
man.  By  adding  to  the  wealth  of  the  rich 
the  donor  increases  his  indolence,  encourages 
his  luxury,  vice,  and  extravagance,  and  thus 
loads  to  his  ruin — "  bringeth  only  to  want." 
Septuagint,  "  He  that  calumniates  ((Tukoi^oc- 
rap)  the  poor  inoreaseth  his  own  substance, 
but  giveth  to  the  rich  at  a  loss  (iw'  ihdjr- 
T3ri)"  I «.  so  as  to  lessen  his  substance. 


Ver.  17— oh.  xxiv.  22.— Part  IV.  First 
Appendix  to  the  First  Great  Collection, 
containing  "  words  of  the  wise." 

Vers.  17— 21.— The  introductiim  to  this 
first  appendix,  containing  an  exhortation 
to  attend  to  the  words  of  the  wise,  an  out- 
line of  the  instrnotion  herein  imparted,  with 
a  reference  to  teaching  already  given. 

Ver.  17. — Incline  thine  ear  (comp.  ch.  iv. 
20;  v.  1).  The  words  of  the  wise;  verba 
sapientimn,  Vulgate.  "  Wise "  is  in  the 
plural  number,  showing  tliat  this  is  not 
a  portion  of  the  collection  called,  •  The  Pro- 
verbs of  Solomon '  (ch.  x.  1),  but  a  distinct 
work.  (For  the  term,  see  note  on  oh.  i.  6.) 
My  knowledge.  The  knowledge  which  I 
impart  by  bringing  to  notice  these  sayings 
of  wise  men.  Septuagint,  "Incline  (Trapa- 
fiaWe)  thine  ear  to  the  words  of  wise  men, 
and  hear  my  word,  and  apply  thine  heart, 
that  thou  mayest  know  tliat  they  are  good.'' 

Ver.  18. — This  vurso  gives  the  reason  for 
the  previous  exhortation.  It  is  a  pleasant 
thing  if  thou  keep  them  within  thee  ;  in  thy 
mind  and  memory  (comp.  cli.  xviii.  8;  xx. 
27).  Thus  Ps.  oxivii.  1,  "  It  is  good  to  sing 
praises  unto  our  God;  for  it  is  pleasant, 
and  praise  is  comely."  They  shall  withal 
be  fitted  in  thy  lips.  This  rendering 
hardly  suits  the  hortatory  nature  of  the 
antroduction.  It  is  better  to  take  the 
clause  in  the  optative,  as  Delitzsch,  Ewald, 
Nowack,  and  otiiers :  "  Let  them  abide  alto- 
gether upon  thy  lips ;  "  i.e.  be  not  ashamed 
to  profess  them  openly,  let  them  regulate 
thy  words,  teach  thee  wisdom  and  discretion. 
Septuagint,  "  And  if  thou  admit  them  to 
thy  heart,  they  shall  likewise  gladden  thee 
on  thy  lips." 

Ver.  19. — That  thy  trust  may  be  in  the 
lord.  The  Greek  and  Latin  versions  make 
this  clause  depend  on  the  preceding  verse. 
It  is  better  to  consider  it  as  dependent  on 
the  second  hemistich,  the  fact  of  instruc- 
tion being  placed  after  the  statement  of  its 
object.  All  the  instruction  lieiciu  afforded 
is  meant  to  teach  that  entire  confidence  in 
the  Lord  which,  as  soon  as  his  will  is  known 
and  understood,  leads  a  man  to  do  it  at 
any  cost  or  pains,  leaving  the  result  in  God's 
hands..  I  have  made  them  known  to  thee 
this  day,  even  to  thee.  The  repetition  of 
the  personal  pronoun  brings  home  the  teach- 
ing to  the  disciple,  and  shows  that  it  is 
addressed,  not  merely  to  the  mass  of  men, 
but  to  each  individual  among  them,  who  thus 
becomes  responsible  for  the  use  which  he 
makes  of  it  (comp.  ch.  xxiii.  15).  The  ex 
pression,  "  this  day,"  further  emphasizes  the 
exhortation.  The  learner  is  not  to  remember 
vaguely  that  some  time  or  other  he  received 
this  instruction,  but  that  on  this  particular 


426 


THE   PROVERBS. 


[cH.  xxn.  1 — 29. 


day  the  warning  was  given.  So  in  Heb.  iii. 
7,  13  we  read,  "  As  the  Holy  Ghost  eaith, 
To-day  if  ye  will  hear  bis  voice,  harden  not 
your  hearts.  .  .  .  Exhort  one  another  daily, 
so  long  as  it  is  called  To-day,  lest  any  of 
you  be  hardened  by  the  deceitfulness  of  sin." 
Septiiagiut,  "  That  thy  hope  may  be  in  the 
Lord,  and  he  may  make  thy  way  known  unto 
thee."  Cheyne  ('  Job  and  Solomon ')  quotes 
Bickell's  correction  of  this  verse,  "  That 
thy  confidence  may  be  in  Jehovah,  to  make 
known  unto  thee  thy  ways ; "  but  the  altei'a- 
tion  seems  arbitrary  and  unnecessary. 

Ver.  20. — Have  not  I  written  to  thee  ex- 
cellent things  in  counsels  and  knowledge  f 
There  is  a  difBculty  about  the  word  ren- 
dered "excellent  things."  The  Khetib  has 
n\i^h\l),  "the  day  before  yesterdHy,foimerly;" 
but  the  word  occurs  nowhere  alone,  and,  as 
Nowaok  says,  can  hardly  have  been  the 
original  reading.  However,  Ewald,  Ber- 
thoaa,  and  others,  adopting  it,  suppose  that 
the  author  refers  to  some  earlier  work. 
Cheyne  cites  Bickell's  rendering,  "Now, 
yeiirs  before  now,  have  1  written  unto  thee 
long  before  with  couiisels  and  knowledge," 
and  considers  the  words  to  mean  either  that 
the  compiler  took  a  long  time  over  his  work, 
or  that  this  was  not  the  first  occasion  of  his 
writing.  One  does  not  see  why  stress  should 
be  here  laid  on  former  instruction,  unless, 
perhaps,  as  Plumptre  suggests,  in  contrast 
to  "  this  day  "  of  the  pravious  verse.  The 
LXX.  renders  tlie  word  Tpuro-as  thus,  "And 
do  thou  record  them  for  thyself  tr'ply  for 
counsel  and  knowledge  npun  the  table  of 
thine  heart."  St.  Jerome  has,  hcce  descripsi 
earn  tibi  triplieiter,  in  cogitationibus  et 
teientiU.  Other  versions  have  also  given  a 
numerical  explanation  to  the  term.  In  it  is 
senn  an  allusion  to  the  three  supposed  works 
of  Solomon — Proverbs,  Ecclesiastes,  Canticles 
— which  is  abiurd;  others  refer  it  to  the 
threefold  division  of  the  Testament — Law, 
Prophets,  and  Hagiographa ;  others,  to  three 
classes  of  youths  for  whom  the  admonitions 
were  intended  ;  others,  again,  think  it  equi- 
valent to  "oftentimes,"  or  "in  many  forms." 
But  the  reading  is  as  doubtful  as  the  ex- 
planations of  it  are  unsatisfactory.  The 
genuine  word  is  doubtlfss  preserved  in  the 
Keri,  which  gives  D'B'Sij'  (thalhhim),  pro- 
porly  a  military  term,  applied  to  chariot- 
ti'jhters  and  men  of  rank  in  the  army.  The 
LXX.  translates  the  word  by  TpurrdTris  e.g. 
Bxod.  xiv.  7 ;  xv.  4),  which  is  equivalent  to 
"chieftain."  Hence  the  Hebrew  term, under- 
stood in  the  neuter  gender,  is  transferred  to 
the  chief  among  proverbs — "choice  pro  virbs," 
as  Delitzsch  calls  them.  The  Venetian,  by 
a  happy  turn,  gives  Tpianfyia-ra.  Thus  we 
come  back  to  the  rendering  of  the  Authorized 
Version  as  most  coiruct  and  intelligible. 
Ver.  21. — That  I  might  make  &e«  know 


the  certainty  of  the  words  of  truth.  The 
object  intended  is  to  teach  the  disciple  the 
fixed  rule  (firmUatem,  Vulgate)  by  which 
truthful  words  are  guided  (see  Luke  i.  4). 
Septuagint,  "I  therefore  teach  thee  a  true 
word  and  knowledge  good  to  learn."  That 
thou  mightest  answer  the  words  of  truth  to 
them  that  ~send  unto  thee.  This  implies 
that  the  pupil  will  be  enabled  to  teach 
others  who  apply  to  him  for  instruction; 
"  will  be  ready,"  as  St.  Peter  says,  "  always 
to  give  an  answer  to  errry  man  that  asketh 
you  a  reason  of  the  hope  that  is  in  you  " 
(1  Pet.  iii.  15).  But  the  last  expression  is 
better  translated,  "them  that  send  thee;" 
illis  qui  mistrunt  te,  Vulgate  (see  ch.  xxv. 
13) ;  and.  we  must  conceive  of  these  as  being 
parents  or  tutors  who  send  a  youth  to  a 
school  or  wise  man  to  be  educated.  The 
moralist  expresses  his  desire  tiiat  the  dis- 
ciple will  carry  home  such  wholesome,  truth- 
ful doctrines  as  will  prove  that  the  pains 
expended  upon  him  have  not  been  useless. 
Septuagint,  "  That  thou  mayest  answer 
words  of  truth  to  thoss  who  put  questions  to 
thee  (tois  irpofidKKonhois  aoi)"  The  Syriafl 
•dds,  "  That  I  may  make  known  unto  thee 
counsel  and  wisdom."  Bickell's  version 
(quoted  by  Cheyne)  is,  "That  thou  m;iyest 
know  the  rightnesa  of  these  words,  that 
thou  mayest  answer  in  true  words  to  them 
that  ask  thee." 

Ver.  22— ch.  xxiv.  22. — Here  commence 
the  "  words  of  the  wise." 

Ver.22. — This  and  the  following  verse  form 
a  telra-^tich,  whi'h  connects  itself  in  though! 
with  ver.  16.  Eob  not  the  poor,  because  he 
is  poor.  The  word  for  "poor"  is  here  dal, 
which  means  "  feeble,"  "  powerless  "  (see  on 
ch.  xix.  4),  and  the  writer  enjoins  the  dis- 
ciple not  1 1  be  induced  by  his  weakness  to 
injure  and  despoil  a  poor  man.  Neither 
oppress  the  afflicted  in  the  gate.  The  gate 
is  the  place  of  judgment,  the  court  of  justice 
(comp.  Job  ixxi.  21).  Tlie  warning  points 
to  the  particular  form  of  wrong  inflicted  on 
the  lowly  by  unjust  judges,  who  could  give 
sentences  from  which,  however  iniquitous, 
there  was  practif-ally  no  appeal. 

Ver.  23. — For,  thcngh  they  are  powerless 
to  defend  themselves,  and  have  no  (arthly 
patrons,  the  Lord  will  plead  their  cause  (ch. 
xxiii.  11).  Jehovah  will  be  their  Advocate 
and  Protector.  And  spoil  the  soul  of  those 
that  spoiled  them ;  rather,  despoil  of  life  those 
that  de$poil  them.  So  the  Revised  Version. 
God,  exercising  his  moral  government  on 
human  oonceras,  will  bring  ruin  and  death 
on  the  unjust  judge  or  the  rich  oppressor  of 
the  poor.  Jerome  has,  Configet  eoa  qui  con- 
fixerunt  animam  ejus.  The  verb  tised  is 
ynp  (Jedbah),  which  is  found  only  here  kud 
Mai.  iii.  8,  where  it  means  "to  defraud'or 


OH.  XXII.  1—29.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


427 


"despoil."  In  the  Chaldee  and  Syriao  it 
may  signify  "  to  fix,"  "  to  pierce."  Septua- 
gint,  "  The  Lord  will  judge  his  cause,  and 
thou  shalt  deliver  thy  soul  unharmed  l&<rv 
Kov) ; "  t'.e.  if  you  refrain  from  iujustice  and 
oppression,  you  will  be  saved  from  evil  and 
dwell  securely. 

Vers.  24,  25. — Another  tetrastich.  Hake 
no  friendship  with  an  angry  (irasaible}  man. 
Have  no  close  intercourse  with  a  man  given 
to  fits  of  pfissiuu.  And  with  a  furious  man 
thou  shalt  not  go.  Avoid  the  society  of 
such  a  one.  The  reason  follows  :  Lest  thou 
learn  his  ways ;  his  manner  of  life  and  con- 
duct, as  oh.  i.  15  (wliere  ate  note).  Anger 
breeds  anger;  impatience,  impatience.  St. 
Basil  ('  De  Ira '),  quoted  by  Corn,  h,  Lapide, 
enjoins,  "  Take  not  your  adversary  as  your 
teacher,  and  be  not  a  mirror  to  reflect  the 
angry  man,  showing  his  figure  in  thyself." 
And  get  a  snare  to  thy  soul;  bring  destruc- 
tion on  thyself.  Anger  unsubdued  not  only 
mars  the  kindliness  of  social  life,  but  leads 
to  all-sorts  of  dangerous  complications  which 
taay  bring  ruin  and  death  in  their  train 
(oomp.  ch.  XV.  18). 

Vers.  26,  27. — A  warning  against  surety- 
ship, often  repeated.  Be  not  thou  one  of 
them  that  strike  hands ;  i.e.  that  become 
guarantee.1  for  others  (see  on  oh.  xvii.  18 ; 
XX,  16;  and  oomp.  ch.  vi.  1 ;  xi.  15).  Sure- 
ties for  debts.  The  writer  explains  what 
kind  of  guarantee  he  means.  Why  should 
he  (the  creditor)  take  away  thy  bed  from 
under  thee  ?  Why  should  you  ("from  respect 
of  person,"  Septuagint)  act  so  weakly  as  to 
give  a  creditor  power  to  seize  your  very  bed 
as  a  pledge?    The  Law  endeavoured  to 


mitigate  this  penalty  (Exod.  xxii.  26,  27 ; 
Deut.  xxiv.  12,  13).  But  doubtless  its  mer- 
ciful provisions  were  evaded  by  the  money- 
lenders (se'e  Neh.  v.  11 ;  Ezek.  iviii.  12, 
"  hath  not  restored  the  pledge  "). 

Ver.  28.— The  first  line  is  repeated  at  ch. 
xxiii.  10.  (On  the  sanctity  of  landmarks,  see 
note  on  ch.  xv.  25.)  Some  of  the  stones, 
exhibiting  a  bilingual  inscription,  which 
marked  the  boundaries  of  the  Levitical  city 
of  Gezer,  were  discovered  by  Ganneau  in 
1874  ('  Quart.  Statement  Pal.  Explor.  Fund,' 
1874).  The  Septuagint  calls  the  landmarks 
Spia  altifta, 

Ver.  29 — A  tristich  follows.  Seest  thou 
a  man  diligent  in  his  business  1  Mere  dili- 
gence would  not  commend  a  man  to  high 
notice  unless  accompanied  by  dexterity  and 
skill;  and  though  Tna  (nMldr)  means 
"  quick,"  it  also  has  the  notion  of  "  skilful," 
and  is  better  here  taken  in  that  sense. 
He  shall  stand  before  kings.  This  phrase 
meairs  to  serve  or  minister  to  another  ((Jen. 
xli.  46 ;  1  Sam.  xvi.  21,  22  ;  1  Kings  x.  8 ; 
Job  i.  6).  A  man  thus  expert  is  fitted  for 
any,  even  the  highest  situation,  may  well 
be  employed  in  afi'airs  of  state,  and  enjoy 
the  confidence  of  kings.  He  shall  not  stand 
before  mean  men.  "  Mean  "  (  D's^fn  )  are  the 
men  of  no  importance,  ignnhiles,  obscure. 
An  intellectual,  clever,  adroit  man  would 
never  be  satisfied  with  serving  such  masters; 
his  ambition  is  higher ;  he  knows  that  he  is 
capable  of  better  things.  Septuagint,  "  It 
must  needs  be  that  an  observant  (ipariKb;') 
man,  and  one  wlio  is  keen  in  his  business, 
should  attend  on  kings,  and  not  attend  on 
slothful  men." 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  1. — A  good  name  and  loving  favour.  Both  of  these  blessings — which,  indeed, 
are  closely  allied — are  here  preferred  to  great  riches.  It  is  better  to  be  poor  with  either 
than  rich  with  neither.     Let  us  examine  the  excellence  of  each  of  them. 

I.  The  excellence  op  a  good  name.  Why  is  this  rather  to  be  chosen  than  riches  ? 
1.  Because  it  is  a  higher  order  of  good.  Wealth  is  a  material  thing.  The  best  of  it  is 
eni[)ty  and  vain  by  the  side  of  what  is  intellectual,  moral,  or  spiritual.  It  is  possible 
to  have  great  riches  and  yet  to  be  miserable  and  degraded,  if  the  higher  reaches  of  life 
are  impoverished.  2.  Beca^tse  it  is  personal.  A  man's  good  name  is  nearer  to  him  than 
all  his  property.  The  most  personal  property  is  distant  and  alien  compared  with  the 
name  he  carries ;  the  reputation  that  attaches  to  him  is  his  closest  garment — it  is 
wrapped  round  his  very  self.  If  a  person  wears  sackcloth  next  his  skin,  he  can  have 
little  comfort  in  being  clothed  outside  this  with  purple  and  fine  linen.  3.  Because  it  is 
social.  The  good  name  is  known  among  a  man's  fellows.  It  is  this  that  gives  him  his 
true  status.  Now,  we  cannot  afford  to  neglect  social  considerations.  It  is  a  terrible 
thing  to  live  under  the  stigma  of  the  rebuke  of  mankind.  He  is  either  more  or  less 
than  a  man  who  can  look  with  indifference  on  the  good  or  the  ill  opinion  of  his 
brethren.  Mere  fame  may  be  of  little  value.  A  good  name  is  far  more  desirable  than 
a  great  name.  It  is  not  necessary  that  people  should  have  a  high  opinion  of  us.  But 
it  is  important  that  our  name  should  be  free  from  disgrace,  should  be  honoured  for 
purity  and  integrity  of  character.    4.  Because  it  it  a  sign  of  other  exrtlUnett.    It  may 


4WI  THE  PKO  VERBS.  [oh.  xxn.  1— 2a 

be  given  by  mistake  to  a  worthless  deceiver,  or  it  may  be  witbdrawn  from  a  worthy 
person  through  some  cruel  misapprehension.  We  cannot  always  take  a  man's  reputa- 
tion as  a  true  measure  of  his  character.  But  when  it  is  justly  earned,  the  good  name  is 
the  sacrament  of  a  good  character,  and  therefore  an  outward  and  visible  sign  of  what  is 
most  excellent,  for  it  is  better  to  be  good  than  to  own  riches.' 

II.  The  excellence  of  loving  favoub.  Why  is  this  better  than  ilver  and  gold? 
1.  Because  it  is  human.  Silver  and  gold  are  but  dead  metals.  They  may  be  bright, 
beautiful,  and  precious;  but  they  can  have  no  sympathy  with  their  possessors.  Eiohes 
are  heartless  things,  that  take  themselves  wings  and  fly  away  without  a  qualm  of 
compunction.  But  human  interests  and'  affections  touch  our  hearts  and  rouse  our 
sympathies  in  return.  It  is  better  to  be  poor  among  friends  than  to  be  rich  but  love- 
less and  friendless.  2.  Because  it  brings  direct  bleasingt.  Biches  are  at  best  indirect 
sources  of  good.  But  love  is  a  good  itself,  and  it  breathes  a  benediction  on  all  to  whom 
it  is  extended.  Eeputation  is  good,  but  affection  is  better.  The  best  love  cannot  be 
enjoyed  if  the  good  name  has  been  lost  by  wrong-doing.  But  there  may  be  no  fame, 
no  great  name  in  the  world,  and  yet  much  love.  It  is  better  to  be  loved  by  one  than 
admired  by  a  thousand.  3.  Because  it  it  the  type  of  higher  blessings.  The  loving  favour 
of  man  is  an  earthly  emblem  of  the  grace  of  God.  This  is  better  than  silver  and  gold, 
first,  as  a  human  source  of  peace  and  power,  and  then  as  a  promise  of  eternal  life  and 
wealth  in  the  heavenly  inheritance,  after  death  has  robbed  a  man  of  all  his  silver 
and  gold. 

Ver.  2. — Social  distinctions.  L  The  sad  oondition  of  sooial  disttnctions.  1.  Thest 
distinctions  are  very  marked.  There  is  an  enormous  separation  between  the  condition 
of  the  rich  and  that  of  the  poor.  The  one  class  is  overwhelmed  with  luxury,  the  other 
pinched  with  penury.  There  seems  to  be  a  tendency  to  an  aggravation  of  this  separa- 
tion. As  wealth  grows,  poverty  does  not  perceptibly  recede.  Three  millions  are  on  the 
borders  of  starvation  among  the  riches  of  Kngland.  2.  These  distinctions  are  not  deter- 
mined by  desert.  No  doubt  honest  industry  tends  to  prosperity,  while  idleness  and 
dissipation  lead  to  poverty.  But  there  are  bad  rich  men  and  good  poor  men.  3.  These 
distinctions  are  grossly  unjust.  It  is  impossible  to  maintain  that  there  is  equity  in  the 
present  distribution  of  property  throughout  the  community,  though  it  may  be  urged 
that  most  attempts  at  remedying  the  injustice  that  have  been  proposed  hitherto  would 
be  worse  than  the  disease.  4.  These  distinctions  generate  greater  evils.  They  destroy 
the  sense  of  human  brotherhood,  fostering  a  spirit  of  pride  on  the  part  of  the  rich,  and 
rousing  passions  of  hatred  among  those  who  feel  themselves  to  be  robbed  of  their  share 
of  the  world's  wealth.  One  man  is  not  to  be  thought  of  as  necessarily  superior  to  hi» 
neighbour  simply  because  he  is  in  possession  of  more  property ;  nor,  on  the  other 
hand,  should  the  owner  of  wealth  be  regarded  as  a  wholesale  brigand. 

II.  The  means  of  recokoilinq  bocial  distinctions.  "The  rich  and  poor  meet 
together,"  1.  It  is  desirable  that  there  should  be  more  intercourse  between  the  various 
classes  of  society.  "Very  much  of  the  antagonism  of  the  classes  arises  from  ignorance. 
The  simple,  honest,  poor  man,  seeking  his  rights  in  the  rough  style  natural  to  his 
circumstances,  is  regarded  as  a  red-handed  revolutionist  by  the  fastidious  upper-class 
person,  who,  in  turn,  is  treated  by  his  indigent  neighbour  as  a  monster  of  cruelty  and 
selfishness,  a  very  ogre.  The  first  step  towards  a  better  understanding-is  more  freedom 
of  intercourse.  It  is  the  same  with  the  quarrel  between  capital  and  labour.  Mutual 
conferences  might  bring  about  a  common  understanding.  2.  In  the  Church  of  God  rich 
and  poor  meet  on  common  ground.  Here  pride  of  class  is  utterly  inexcusable.  Happily, 
the  old  distinction  between  the  curtained,  carpeted,  and  cushioned  squire's  pew,  and  the 
bare  benches  of  the  villagers,  is  being  swept  away.  But  the  spirit  that  this  distinction 
suggested  is  not  so  easily  exorcised.  Christian  brotherhood  should  bring  all  together  in 
a  common  family  spirit.  It  was  so  in  early  ages,  when  the  slave  might  be  a  privileged 
communicant,  while  the  master  was  a  humble  catechumen  on  the  threshold  of  the 
Church.  3.  Death  levels  all  class  distinctions.  Rich  and  poor  meet  together  in  the 
grave.     After  death  new  distinctions  emerge.     Dives  cannot  scorn  Lazarus  in  Hades. 

III.  The  motive  fob  ovekooming  booial  distinctions.  This  is  to  be  discovered 
m  a  consideration  of  the  common  relation  of  men  to  their  Maker.  Nothing  short  of 
religion  will  heal  the  fearful  wounda  ol  society.    Forcibk  methods  will  not  succeed; 


OH.  xxn.  1—29.]  THE  PROVEBBS.  i2% 

e.g.  in  the  French  Revolution.  A  universal  redistrihution  of  property  would  soon  be 
followed  by  the  old  distinctions.  Socialism  would  destroy  virtues  of  independence  and 
energy.  But  faith  in  God  will  work  inwardly  towards  a  reconciliation.  1.  All  daisei 
are  equally  low  before  God.  The  highest  earthly  mountains  vanish  in  astronomy. 
2.  Ow  common  relation  to  Ood  is  the  ground  of  our  mutual  relations  with  one  another. 
All  men  have  one  Father;  therefore  all  men  must  be  brethren.  The  recognition  of  the 
Fatherhood  of  Gtod  will  lead  to  the  admission  of  family  duties  and  claims  among  men, 
Christ,  who  teaches  the  Fatherhood  of  God,  inspires  the  "  enthusiasm  of  humanity." 

Ver.  4. — Two  gracet,  and  their  reward.  I,  Two  graces.  1.  The  social  gntce. 
"  Humility."  This  is  becoming  in  all  men,  but  it  is  especially  seemly  where  its  attain- 
ment is  must  difficult ;  e.g.  among  the  high  in  station,  the  wealthy,  the  famous,  the 
gifted,  the  popular.  It  is  as  difficult  for  the  demagogue  to  be  humble  as  for  the  lord — 
perhaps  more  difficult,  for  the  former  is  more  conscious  of  his  own  powers,  and  more 
recently  lifted  above  bis  fpUows.  Humility  is  difficult  to  acquire,  because  it  is  so 
essentially  different  from  mere  weakness  and  self-effacement.  It  is  seen  best  in  the 
strongest  and  most  pronounced  natures.  There  is  no  virtue  in  falling  back  from  one's 
highest  aims  in  order  to  escape  notice.  The  grace  of  humility  is  discovered  in  an 
earnest  effort  to  press  forward  energetically,  without  a  thought  of  self  or  a  care  for  the 
admiration  of  the  world.  2.  The  religious  grace.  "  The  fear  of  the  Lord."  Pride  excludes 
true  religion.  In  the  childlike  spirit  of  humble  dependence  we  are  open  to  the  influence 
of  Heaven.  Thus  the  one  grace  is  linked  to  the  other.  Now,  the  whole  of  the  Old 
Testament  conception  of  religion  is  summed  up  in  "  the  fear  of  the  Lord  " — not  because 
there  was  nu  room  in  it  for  any  emotion  but  terror,  but  because  the  root  of  the  ancient 
faith  was  reverence.  This  is  the  root  of  all  religion.  It  maybe  so  richly  mingled  with 
love  as  we  come  to  discern  the  Fatherhood  of  God,  that  its  more  dread  features  are 
utterly  lost.  Yet  love  without  reverence  would  not  be  a  religious  emotion,  or,  at  all 
events,  not  one  suited  for  God  as  he  is  revealed  to  us  in  the  Bible.  The  Greeks 
seemed  to  dispense  with  the  fear  of  God  in  their  light,  gay  religion;  but  they  also 
dispensed  with  conscience.  A  feeling  of  sin  and  a  perception  ol  the  holiness  of 
God  must  lay  a  deep  foundation  of  awe  beneath  the  most  happy  and  trustful  religious 
experience. 

II.  A  THREEFOLD  REWARD.  1.  Biches.  This  is  the  lowest  aspect  of  the  reward. 
It  is  in  the  si)irit  of  the  Proverbs,  which  calls  especial  attention  to  the  secular  con- 
sequences of  good  and  ill.  We  know  that  the  humble  and  good  are  often  poor  and 
oppressed.  But  there  is  a  tendency  for  quiet  self-renunciation  to  be  recognized  and 
rewarded.  The  meek  are  to  be  blessed  with  the  inheritance  of  the  earth  (Matt.  v.  5). 
When  full  justice  is  done,  the  best  men  will  receive  the  best  things  in  this  world  as 
well  as  the  life  of  that  to  come.  At  present  we  wait  for  the  accomplishment  of  this 
social  rectification.  2.  Honour.  The  humble  who  do  not  seek  honour  shall  have  it, 
while  the  proud  are  cast  down  in  shame.  The  first  shall  be  last,  and  the  last  shall  be 
first.  Men  delight  to  honour  self-forgetful  merit.  But  the  highest  honour  comes  from 
God,  who  discerns  the  heart,  puts  down  the  proud,  and  exalts  them  of  low  degree. 
3.  Life.  Whether  this  is  given  in  the  Hebrew  manner— in  old  age — or  not,  Christ  has 
taught  us  to  see  his  true  eternal  life  as  the  greatest  blessing  for  his  people.  The 
iaumility  in  which  a  man  loses  his  life  is  the  very  means  of  finding  the  true  life;  the 
reverence  of  religion  leads  U8  from  the  shallow  frivolity  of  earth  to  the  deep  life 
of  God. 

Ver.  6. — The  training  of  a  child.  I.  The  need  op  the  training.  This  arises 
from  various  causes.  1.  An  undeveloped  condition.  Each  child  begins  a  new  life.  If 
all  that  were  desirable  could  be  found  wrapped  up  in  his  son!,  this  would  need  to  be 
developed  by  education.  2.  Ignorance.  The  child  does  not  come  into  the  world  with 
a  ready-made  stock  of  knowledge.  He  must  learn  truth  and  be  made  to  see  the  right 
path,  which  is  at  first  unknown  to  him.  3.  Weakness.  The  child  needs  not  only  to 
be  taught,  but  to  be  trained.  He  must  be  helped  to  do  what  is  at  first  too  much  for 
his  strength.  His  better  nature  must  be  drawn  out,  nourished,  and  confirmed.  4. 
Evil.  A  child's  mind  is  not  a  taluJa  rasa.  We  need  not  go  back  to  Adam  for  evidence* 
of  hereditary  evil.    The  child  inherits  the  vices  of  his  ancestors.    Thu»  "  foolithnesa 


130 


IHE  PROVERBS.  [oh.  xxn.  1— 29. 


is  bound  up  in  the  heart  of  a  child."  Before  he  is  guilty  of  conscious  sin  the  tendency 
to  wickedness  begins  to  work  within  him. 

II.  The  age  of  the  training.  This  is  to  be  in  childhood,  for  various  reasons. 
1.  Its  susceptibility.  (1)  Susceptibility  to  training.  The  young  mind  is  plastic; 
habit  is  not  yet  confirmed.  It  is  easier  to  form  a  character  than  to  reform  it.  (2)  Sus- 
ceptibility to  religion.  "  Of  such  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  Young  children  an 
peculiarly  open  to  religious  impressions. 

"  Heaven  lies  about  ns  in  our  infancy  I 
Shades  of  the  prison-house  begin  to  close 

Upon  the  growing  boy. 
But  he  beholds  the  light,  and  whence  it  flows, 
He  sees  it  in  his  joy." 

(Wordsworth.) 

Faith  is  natural  to  children.  They  cannot  become  theologians,  but  they  may  be  citizens 
of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  Thoughts  of  God  and  Christ,  and  the  call  to  the  better  life, 
can  be  well  received  by  them.  2.  Its  dangers.  Children  are  open  to  temptation.  If 
not  trained  in  goodness,  they  will  be  trained  in  evil.  Some  have  thought  that  children 
should  not  be  biassed  in  their  religious  ideas,  but  left  in  freedom  to  choose  for  them- 
selves. We  do  not  do  this  in  secular  matters,  trusting  them  to  choose  their  own  methods 
of  spelling  and  to  manufacture  their  own  multiplication- table.  If  we  believe  our  religion 
to  be  true  and  good  and  profitable,  it  is  only  a  cruel  pedantry  that  will  keep  it  from 
children  for  fear  of  prejudicing  their  minds.  3.  Its  duties.  Early  years  should  be 
given  to  Christ.     He  seeks  the  opening  bud,  not  the  withered  leaf. 

III.  The  law  of  the  teaining.  1.  In  action.  There  is  a  practical  end  in  educa- 
tion. We  are  not  merely  to  teach  doctrine,  but  chiefly  to  train  conduct.  2.  Accord- 
ing to  right.  Tliis  is  not  a  question  of  taste.  There  is  a  way  in  which  a  child  ought  to 
ga  It  is  his  duty  to  tread  it,  and  ours  to  lead  him  in  it.  3.  According  to  future  require- 
ments. While  the  main  principles  of  education  must  be  the  same  for  all  children,  the 
special  application  of  them  will  vary  in  different  cases.  We  have  to  apply  them  to  the 
specific  career  expected  for  each  child.  The  prince  should  be  trained  for  the  throne, 
the  soldier  for  the  field,  etc.  4.  According  to  personal  qualities.  Each  child's  nature 
needs  separate  consideration  and  distinctive  treatment.  The  training  that  would  ruin 
one  child  might  save  another.  We  have  not  to  drill  all  children  into  one  uniform 
fashion  of  behaviour ;  we  have  rather  to  call  out  the  individual  gifts  and  capacities, 
and  guard  against  the  individual  faults  and  weaknesses.  Thus  the  training  of  a  child 
will  be  the  directing  of  his  own  specific  nature. 

IV.  The  consequences  of  the  training.  "  When  he  is  old,  he  will  not  depart 
from  it."  Age  stiffens.  It  is  well  that  it  should  grow  firm  in  the  right.  Here  is  the 
reward  of  teaching  the  young.  The  work  is  slow  and  discouraging,  and  at  first  we  see 
few  results ;  perhaps  we  imagine  that  all  our  efforts  are  wasted  upon  thoughtless  minds. 
But  if  the  work  is  hard  to  begin,  there  is  this  compensation  in  it — when  it  has  fairly 
laid  hold  of  a  child,  it  is  not  likely  to  be  ever  effaced.  The  teachings  of  the  Sunday 
school  are  remembered  after  many  a  long  year. 

Vers.  20,  21. — Certainty.  I.  The  truth-seekeb  desires  certainty.  With  him 
"  the  certainty  of  the  words  of  truth  "  is  the  great  object  sought  after.  1.  Certainty 
must  he  distiiiguished  from  positiveness.  Doubt  is  often  violent  in  assertion,  as  though 
to  silence  the  opposition  that  cannot  be  answered.  We  may  be  very  positive  without 
being  at  all  certain.  2.  Certainty  must  he  distinguished  from  certitude.  Certitude  is 
the  feeling  of  certainty.  Now,  we  may  feel  uo  doubt  on  a  subject,  and  yet  we  may  be 
in  error.  Real  certainty  is  a  well-grounded  assurance.  3.  Certainty  is  desired  hecause 
truth  is  precious.  If  a  person  is  indifferent  to  truth,  he  maj'  be  satisfied  with  doubt,  or 
acquiescent  in  error.  This  is  the  contemptuous  condition  of  the  cheerful  Sadducee, 
His  scepticism  is  no  pain  to  him,  because  he  does  not  feel  the  loss  of  truth.  Not  valuing 
truth,  it  is  a  light  matter  to  him  that  he  misses  it.  Such  a  condition  of  mind  is  an 
insult  to  truth  itself.  A  man  who  recognizes  the  royal  glory  of  truth  will  be  in  the 
greatest  distress  if  he  thinks  it  has  eluded  his  grasp.  To  him  the  feeling  of  doubt  will 
be  an  agony.    4.  Certainty  it  lought  ieoauM  it  is  not  cUtaay$  present,    ft  may  be  very 


OH.  xxii»l— 29.]  THE  PROVERBS.  431 

difBcult  to  find.  We  gropein  ignorance,  error,  and  confusion  of  mind.  Then  the  great 
want  is  some  solid  assurance  of  truth.  Without  this  the  world  is  dark,  our  voyaga 
may  end  in  shipwreck,  and  we  cannot  know  God,  ourselves,  or  our  destiny. 

II.  The  tbdth-sbbker  may  secure  certainty.  The  Bible  denies  agnosticism. 
It  offers  revelation.  1.  Truth  is  revealed.  The  written  Word  contains  the  record  of 
revelation.  God  has  spoken  to  us  through  his  prophets,  but  chiefly  in  his  Son  (Heb. 
i.  1,  2).  Everything  that  lifts  the  Bible  above  common  books  and  impresses  its  mes- 
sage upon  our  hearts  as  from  God,  urges  us  to  believe  in  the  truth  of  what  it  teaches, 
for  God  is  the  Source  of  all  truth.  If  the  Bible  does  not  teach  truth,  the  Bible  must  be 
an  earthly  book,  uninspired  by  God.  2.  Truth  must  be.practised  and  studied.  "  Excel- 
lent things  in  counsels  and  knowledge  "  are  written  in  the  Bible.  But  to  find  their 
truth  we  must  do  the  commandment,  follow  the  counsel,  enter  thoughtfully  into  the 
knowledge.  3.  Truth  should  be  taught.  "  That  thou  mightest  answer  the  words  of  truth 
to  them  that  send  unto  thee."  (1)  Inquirers  need  counsel  and  guidance.  (2)  Truth 
is  no  private  possession,  but  a  public  trust.  (3)  They  who  teach  others  especially  need 
to  know  the  truth  themselves. 

Ver.  28. — Ancient  landmarks.  I.  Ancient  landmarks  gv  property.  The  stone 
that  divided  one  man's  vineyard  from  his  neighbuur's  was  regarded  as  a  sacred  thing, 
on  no  account  to  be  touched.  This  arrangement  helped  to  perpetuate  family  holdings. 
It  prevented  the  accumulation  of  large  estates  by  the  wealthy,  and  the  alienation  of 
the  land  from  the  poor.  It  guarded  the  weak  from  the  oppression  of  the  strong.  It 
was  a  protection  against  deceit,  error,  and  confusion.  Ahab  transgressed  the  Law  in 
seeking  to  acquire  Naboth's  vineyard.  It  would  be  well  if  we  could  appreciate  the  spirit 
of  .the  old  Hebrew  sanctity  of  the  landmark.  It  would  be  well,  too,  if  there  were  more 
people  who  had  a  personal  interest  in  the  soil  of  the  country.  The  "  sacred  rights  of 
property  "  cannot  confer  on  the  owner  any  power  to  oppress  the  tiller  of  the  soil ;  but, 
on  the  other  hand,  they  should  protect  the  owner  from  the  violence  of  social  revolution. 

II.  Ancient  landmarks  of  history.  The  field-stones  of  Palestine  were  historic 
Their  very  presence  served  as  a  record  of  the  lives  and  doings  of  a  past  ancestry.  As 
Buch  they  gathered  a  certain  sanctity  of  association.  It  is  no  small  thing  that  we  in 
England  belong  to  a  historic  nation.  The  forward  movement  that  is  so  characteristic 
of  our  day  should  not  blind  us  to  the  lessons  of  the  past.  Noble  lives  and  great  events 
are  landmarks  on  tlie  vast  field  of  history.  They  help  us  to  map  out  the  past,  and  they 
also  assist  us  to  gain  wisdom  for  the  present.  We  cannot  dispense  with  the  landmarks 
of  Scripture  history.  Christianity,  without  the  facts  of  the  life  of  Christ,  would  be 
boneless  and  shapeless.  It  is  strong  as  a  historical  religion.  Directly  it  is  treated 
merely  as  an  idea,  a  sentiment,  or  a  "  spirit,"  it  will  languish  by  the  loss  of  the  old 
landmarks  of  concrete  facts  in  the  Birth,  Life,  Passion,  Death,  and  Resurrection  of 
Christ. 

III.  Ancient  landmarks  op  doctrine.  We  live  in  an  age  when  many  of  these  have 
been  uprooted  and  flung  on  one  side.  No  doubt  some  of  them  had  been  converted  into 
obstructions  standing  up  in  the  middle  of  the  road  of  truth.  We  need  to  ascertain 
whether  we  are  really  dealing  with  the  truly  ancient  landmarks,  and  are  not  deceived 
by  fraudulent  inventions  of  later  ages.  The  primary  landmarks  of  Christianity  are  in 
the  teachings  of  Christ  and  his  apostles.  We  may  have  to  clear  away  a  great  deal  of 
the  rubbish  of  the  ages  in  order  to  get  back  to  these  original  truths  of  Christianity.  It 
is  not  right  to  accuse  those  who  are  loyal  to  Christ  with  removing  the  ancient  land- 
marks, when  they  are  only  taking  away  these  later  accretions.  But  we  cannot  dispense 
with  the  truly  ancient  landmarks.  If  we  forsake  the  New  Testament,  we  forsake 
Christianity. 

IV.  Ancient  landm  abks  or  morals.  Many  practices  of  antiquity  may  be  abandoned. 
Some  may  be  superseded  by  better  ways,  others  left  behind  as  unsuited  to  the 
circumstances  of  the  new  times.  But  behind  and  beneath  all  these  changing  fashions 
there  are  the  solid  rocks  of  truth  and  righteousness.  Whatever  else  may  be  shaken, 
we  cannot  afi'ord  to  shift  these  landmarks.  We  may  improve  upon  old  customs  ;  but 
we  cannot  cast  away  the  ten  commandment!. 


132  THE  PROVEBBB.  [oh.  xMi.  1— 29. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 16. — The  theme  of  the  earlier  part  of  the  chapter  may  be  said  to  be  the 
good  name:  the  blessings  in  the  possession  of  it,  and  the  conditions  for  the  acquirement 
of  it — partly  negatively,  partly  positively,  described. 

Vers.  1 — 5. —  The  general  conditions  of  a  good  name.  I.  What  dotcs  not  con- 
stitute ITS  FOUNDATION.  1.  Biches.  (Ver.  1.)  Riches  have  their  worth ;  roputatiou 
has  its  wortli ;  but  the  latter  is  of  an  order  altogether  different  from  the  former.  The 
former  gives  a  physical,  the  latter  a  moral,  power.  It  is  right  that  we  should  h;\ve 
regard  to  the  opinion  of  gooii  men.  "An  evil  name  shall  inherit  disgrace  and  reproach," 
says  Sirach  vi.  1.  And  we  have,  as  Christians,  clearly  to  think  of  the  effect  a  good 
or  evil  name  must  have  upon  "  them  that  are  without "  (1  Cor.  v.  12 ;  x.  31,  sqq. ;  Phil. 
iv.  8).  2.  Agido,  poverty  with  a  good  name  is  infinitely  preferable  to  riches  associated 
with  an  evil  character  (ver.  2).  It  is  according  to  general  laws  of  providence  that  one 
is  rich,  the  other  poor.  The  great  point  is  to  recognize  that  we  cannot  all  possess  the 
lower  good,  but  that  the  higher  good  is  offered  to  all,  made  the  duty  of  all  to  seek.  Let 
the  poor  man  not  exaggerate  the  worth  of  riches,  nor  murmur  against  God,  but  humble 
himself  under  his  hand,  and  trust  the  promises  of  his  Word  (Matt.  v.  3).  And  let  th« 
rich  man  not  put  his  confidence  in  riches  (1  Tim.  vi.  17),  but  lay  up  an  inward  store 
against  the  time  to  come.  It  is  religion  alone  which  solves  the  contradiction  between 
riches  and  poverty  bv  reducing  both  under  the  true  standard  of  value. 

II.  The  POSITIVE  conditions  of  the  good  name.  1.  Prudence.  (Ver.  3.)  To 
/oresee  evil  at  a  distance— to  have  a  cultivated  spiriual  stnse,  analogous  to  the  keen 
scent  of  the  lower  animals,  that  may  enable  us  to  detect  the  danger  not  apprchensilile 
by  the  duller  sense — is  necessary  to  our  safety.  And  what  is  necessary,  to  safety  is 
necessary  ultimately  with  a  view  to  the  good  name.  To  go  too  near  the  fire  may  lead 
to  the  scorching  of  the  reputation,  if  not  to  the  loss  of  the  life.  To  conceal  ourselves 
beneath  the  wings  of  the  Almighty  and  to  abide  in  communion  with  God  (Ps.  xci.  1) 
is  the  best  refuge  from  all  danger.  2.  Humility.  (Ver.  4.)  He  that  would  attain  to 
the  glory  must  first  "  know  how  to  be  abased."  Clearly  to  recognize  our  pnsiiion  and 
part  in  life  always  implies  humility.  For  it  is  always  less  and  lower  than  that  which 
imagination  dreams.  Another  important  lesson  from  this  verse  is  that  reputation  and 
the  good  attached  to  it  come  through  seeking  something  else  and  something  better. 
To  do  our  own  worh  is  really  to  do  something  that  has  never  been  attempted  before. 
For  each  of  us  is  an  original,  and  success  in  that  which  is  peculiar  to  us  brings  more 
honour  than  success  in  a  matter  of  greater  difficulty  in  which  we  are  but  imitators  of 
others.  _  3.  The  fear  of  God.  (Ver.  4.)  Religion  gives  reality  to  character.  And 
reputation  must  at  last  rest  on  the  presence  of  a  reality ;  and  those  who  have  it  not 
are  perpetually  being  found  out.  4.  Sectitude  of  conduct.  (Ver.  5.)  What  pains, 
anxieties,  what  dangers,  rebufi's,  and  disappointments,  and  what  loss  of  all  that  makes 
life  sweet  and  good,  do  not  the  dishonest  in  every  degree  incur !  The  path  of  rectitude 
and  truth  seems  rugged,  hut  roh;e.-i  siriuu;  up  around  it,  so  soon  as  we  begin  fairly  to 
tread  it ;  the  way  of  the  transgressors  seems  inviting,  but  is  indeed  "  hard." — J. 

Vers.  6 — 12. — ifeans  to  the  preservation  of  the  good  name.  I.  Early  training. 
(Ver.  6.)  The  young  twin  must  be  early  bent.  Experience  teaches  us  that  nothing  in 
the  world  is  so  mighty  for  good  or  evil  as  custom;  and  therefore,  says  Lord  Bacon, 
"  since  custom  is  the  principal  magistrate  of  man's  life,  let  man  by  all  means  endeavour 
to  obtain  good  customs.  Custom  is  most  perfect  when  it  beginneth  in  young  years; 
this  we  call  education,  which  is  in  effect  but  an  early  custom.  The  tongue  is  more 
pliant  to  all  expressions  and  sounds,  the  joints  more  supple  to  all  feats  of  activity  and 
motions,  in  youth  than  afterwards.  Those  minds  are  rare  which  do  not  show  to  their 
latest  days  the  ply  and  impress  they  have  received  as  children." 

II.  Independence.  (Ver.  7.)  How  strongly  was  the  worth  of  this  felt  in  those 
ancient  times!  Poverty  and  responsibility  to  others  are  to  be  avoided.  Many  are 
forced  into  distress  of  conscience  and  to  the  loss  of  a  good  name  by  being  tempted,  for 
the  Kak«  of  the  rich  man's  gold  or  the  gieat  man's  smile,  to  vote  contrarj  to  their  con- 


OH.  xxn.  1—29.]  THE  PROVERBS.  48S 

victions.  Others  will  sell  their  liberty  to  gratify  their  luxury.  It  is  an  honest 
ambition  to  enjoy  a  competence  that  shall  enable  one  to  afford  to  be  honest,  and  have 
the  luxury  of  the  freest  expression  of  opinion.  Hence  frugality  becomes  so  clear  a 
moral  duty. 

III.  Integkity.  (Ver.  8.)  Ill-gotten  gains  cannot  prosper.  "  The  evil  which  issues 
from  thy  mouth  falls  into  thy  bosom,"  says  the  Spanish  proverb.  The  rod  wherewith 
the  violent  and  unjust  man  struck  others  is  broken  to  pieces. 

IV.  Nbiqhbourly  lovb.  (Ver.  9.)  "  Charity  gives  itself  rich,  covetousness  hoards 
itself  poor,"  says  the  German  proverb.  "Give  alms,  that  thy  children  may  not  ask 
them,"  says  a  Danish  proverb.  "  Drawn  wells  are  never  dry."  So  give  to-day,  that  thou 
mayest  have  to  give  to-morrow ;  and  to  one,  that  thou  mayest  have  to  give  to  another. 
Let  us  reinember,  with  the  Italian  proverb,  that  "our  last  robe  is  made  without 
pockets."  Above  all,  if  our  case  is  that  "  silver  and  gold  we  have  none,  let  us  freely 
substitute  the  kindly  looks  and  the  healing  words,  which  are  worth  much  and  cost 
little." 

V.  A  PBACEFUL  TEMPER.  (Vcr.  10.)  Let  the  scoflSng,  envious,  contentioug 
temper  be  cast  out  of  our  breast  first.  As  for  others,  let  us  strike,  if  possible,  at  the 
cause  and  root  of  strife.  Let  there  be  solid  argument  for  the  doubter,  and  practical 
relief  for  actual  grievances.  Let  us  learn  from  the  old  fable,  and  follow  the  part  of 
Epimetheus,  who,  when  evils  flew  abroad  from  the  box  of  Pandora,  shut  the  lid  and 
kept  hope  at  the  bottom  of  the  vessel. 

VI.  A  FAlTHrnii  AND  CONSTANT  HEART.  (Ver.  11.)  The  greatest  treasure  to  an 
earthly  monarch,  and  dear  above  all  to  the  King  of  kings.  "  He  who  serves  God 
serves  a  good  Master."  Grace  and  truth  are  upon  the  lipa  of  God's  Anointed  for  ever- 
more. And  to  clench  these  proverbs,  let  us  recollect  that  nothing  but  truth  in  the 
inward  parts  can  abide  before  the  eye  of  Jehovah.  "  A  lie  has  no  legs."  It  carries 
along  with  itself  the  germs  of  its  own  dissolution.  It  is  sure  to  destroy  itself  at  last. 
Its  priests  may  prop  it  up,  after  it  has  once  fallen  in  the  presence  of  the  truth ;  but  it 
will  fall  again,  like  Dagon,  more  shamefully  and  irretrievably  than  before.  Truth  is 
the  daughter  of  God  (Trench). — J. 

Vers.  13 — 16. — Hindrances  to  the  attainment  of  a  good  name.  I.  Sloth.  (Ver.  13.) 
It  is  full  of  ridiculous  excuses  here  satirized.  While  a  noble  energy  refuses  to  own 
the  word  "  impossible,"  it  is  ever  on  the  lips  of  the  indolent.  As  in  the  Arabic  fable 
of  the  ostrich,  or  "  camel-bird,"  they  said  to  it,  "  Carry !  "  It  answered,  "  I  cannot, 
for  I  am  a  bird."  They  said,  "  Fly  I "  It  answered,  "  I  cannot,  for  I  am  a  camel." 
Always,  "I  cannot!  "  He  who  in  false  regard  to  his  own  soul  refuses  to  go  out  into 
the  world  and  do  God's  work,  will  end  by  corrupting  and  losing  his  soul  itself  (John 
xii.  25). 

II.  Pbofliqaot.  (Ver.  14.)  Lust  digs  its  own  grave.  Health  goes,  reputation 
follows,  and  presently  the  life,  self-consumed  by  the  deadly  fire,  sinks  into  ruin  and 
ashes.  If  men  saw  how  plainly  the  curse  of  God  is  written  on  vice,  it  would  surely 
become  as  odious  to  them  as  to  him. 

III.  Ungovbbned  folly.  (Ver.  15.)  Nothing  more  pitiable  than  an  old  fool, 
whose  folly  seems  to  stand  in  clear  relief  against  the  background  of  years.  Hence, 
again,  the  urgent  need  of  firm  discipline  for  the  young.  And  what  occasion  for  thank- 
fulness to  him  who,  in  his  wise  chastisements,  will  not  "  let  us  alone,"  but  prunes  and 
tills  the  soul  by  affliction,  and  plncks  up  our  follies  by  the  root! 

IV.  Oppressiveness.  (Ver.  16.)  To  become  rich  at  the  expense  of  other's  loss  is 
no  real  gain.  The  attempt  cuts  at  the  root  of  sound  trade  and  true  sociality.  Hastily 
gotten  will  hardly  be  honestly  gotten.  The  Spaniards  say,  "  He  who  w;!!  be  rich  in  a 
year,  at  the  half-year  they  hang  him."  Mammon,  which  more  than  anything  else  men 
are  tempted  to  think  God  does  not  concern  himself  about,  is  given  and  taken  away  by 
him  according  to  his  righteousness — given  sometimes  to  his  enemies  and  for  their 
greater  punishment,  that  under  its  fatal  influence  they  may  grow  worse  and  worse 
(Trench).-^. 

Vers,  17 — 21. —  The  wvds  of  the  wite  to  he  taken  to  heart.  I.  Tuet  yield  Divinb 
PLBABUEK.     (Ver.  18.)     Ind  all  the  pleasure  of  the  world  is  not  to  be  weighed  again* 

PBOVESBS.  '   ' 


434  THE  PROVERBS.  [oh.  xxii.  1— 29. 


it.  Let  those  who  have  "  tasted  of  the  good  Word  of  God  '  bear  their  witness.  The 
human  soul  is  made  for  truth,  and  delights  in  it.  There  is  pleasure  in  grasping  a 
mathematical  demonstration  or  a  scientific  law;  and  the  successful  inquirer  may  shout 
his  "  Eureka ! "  with  joy  over  every  fresh  discovery.  But  above  all,  "  how  charming 
is  Divine  philosophy!" — tliat  which  traces  the  clear  path  of  virtue,  warns  against  vice, 
shows  the  eternal  reward  of  the  former  and  the  doom  of  the  latter.  Eeceived  with  the 
appetite  of  faith,  Divine  truth  is  food  most  sweet. 

II.  They  lead  us  on  to  confidence  in  God.  (Ver.  19.)  And  this  is  our  true 
foundation.  He  is  Jehovah,  the  Eternal  One.  He  is  the  Constant  One.  His  Name  is 
the  expression  of  mercy,  of  truth,  and  of  justice.  To  love  and  to  trust  him  is  to  be 
in  living  intercourse  with  all  that  is  true  and  beautiful  and  good, 

III.  They  abb  bich  in  manifold  instbuotion.  (Ver.  20.)  They  are  "princely 
words,"  i.e.  of  the  highest  and  noblest  dignity.  Prone  to  sink  into  the  commonplace, 
the  mean,  the  impure,  they  lift  us  to  high  views  of  our  calling,  our  duty,  and  our 
destiny. 

IV.  They  pboduob  justice  of  thought  and  soundness  of  bpeeoh.  (Ver.  21.) 
Thought  and  speech  together  form  the  garment  of  the  soul.  It  is  only  the  living  sap 
of  God's  truth  within  us  which  can  impart  greenness  and  beauty,  blossom  and  fruit,  to 
the  life.  As  water  rise^  to  the  level  from  which  it  descended,  so  does  all  truth  received 
into  the  soul  go  back  in  some  form  to  the  imparter,  in  thanks  and  in  blessing. — J. 

Vers.  22 — 29. — Right  in  social  relations.  I.  Relations  to  the  pooe.  (Vers.  22, 
23.)  1.  Robbery  and  oppression  are  a  breach  of  the  positive  external  law  (Exod.  xx. 
15),  much  more  of  the  inward  and  eternal  law  written  in  the  heart,  "Thou  shalt 
love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself."  2.  The  perversion  of  law  and  magisterial  authority 
to  this  end  is  an  aggravation  of  the  offence.  It  makes  the  refuge  of  the  poor  the 
market  for  bribery.  3.  Above  all,  such  oppression  shows  contempt  for  the  authority 
of  God.  Among  his  titles  to  the  throne  of  the  world  are  these — that  he  is  Protector 
of  the  helpless.  Father  of  the,  fatherless.  Judge  of  willows.  The  judgment  on  Ahab 
and  the  Captivity  in  Babylon  (1  Kings  xxi.  18 — 24  ;  Isa.  xxxiii.  1)  may  be  referred  to 
as  examples  of  retributive  judgment  on  the  spoilers  of  the  poor. 

II.  Against  association  with  passionate  and  pbecipitate  men.  (Vers.  24,  28.) 
It  is  a  contagious  temper.  How  soon  is  the  habit  of  hot  and  violent  language  caught 
up  from  another !  It  is  a  dangerous  temper.  "  Kever  anger  made  good  guard  for 
itself."  It  becomes  more  hurtful  than  the  injury  which  provoked  it.  It  is  often  an 
affected  temper,  compounded  of  pride  and  folly,  and  an  intention  to  do  commonly  more 
mischief  than  it  can  bring  to  pass. 

III.  Against  the  bash  incubbing  or  lubilitieb.  (Vers.  26,  27 ;  we  on  ch.  vi. 
1—4 ;  xi.  15 ;  xvii.  18 ;  xx.  16.) 

rV.  Against  the  bbmoval  of  the  old  landmabkb.  (Ver.  28.  See  the  express 
commands  of  the  Law,  Deut.  xix.  14  ;  xxvii.  17 ;  Job  xxiv.  2 ;  Hos.  v.  10.)  A  strict 
respect  for  the  rights  of  others  is  the  foundation  of  all  social  order.  And  connected 
with  this  is  the  duty  of  respect  for  the  feelings  for  what  is  ancient  and  time-honoured. 
There  should  be  no  violent  change  in  old  customs  of  life  and  thought.  Necessity  may 
compel  them ;  caprice  should  never  dictate  them.  A  spirit  ever  restless  and  bent  on 
innovation  is  a  nuisance  in  society.  The  existence  of  a  custom  is  a  proof  of  its  meaning 
and  relative  worth ;  until  it  is  discerned  that  the  signiBcance  is  now  a  false  one,  it 
should  not  be  swept  away. 

V.  On  the  pbinciples  of  success.  (Ver.  29.)  1.  A  man  must  know  his  hisiness 
in  the  world.  This  is  determined  partly  by  his  talents,  partly  by  providential  circum- 
stances. "  Know  thy  work  "  is  as  important  a  precept  as  "  Know  thyself."  2.  He  must 
he  diligent  in  hisJmsiness,  doing  "with  his  might"  what  his  hand  finds  to  do,  labouring 
"  with  both  hands  earnestly  "  in  every  good  cause.  3.  The  result  will  be  advancement 
and  honour.  We  have  shining  examples  in  Joseph,  Nehemiah,  Daniel.  Ability  and 
capacity  are  no  less  acquired  than  natural ;  use  alone  fully  brings  to  light  the  talent, 
and  to  it  Providence  opens  the  suitable  sphere  of  activity.  Men  may  seem  to  be 
bilures  in  this  world  who  are  not  really  so.  He  alone  can  judge  of  the  fidelity  of  the 
breart  who  is  to  utter  at  the  end  of  the  sentence,  "Well  done,  gool  and  faithful 
servant  1  "    "  Many  that  art  fint  will  be  last,  and  the  last  first."— J. 


OB.  xxn.  1— 29.]  THE  PEOVERBS.  4S5 

Ver,  1. — Siehes  or  reputation  f  Both  of  these  things  are  good  in  their  way  and  in 
their  measure.  They  may  be  held  together,  for  many  wealthy  men  have  enjoyed  a 
good  name  and  much  "  loving  favour."  But  it  is  not  given  to  all  men  to  command 
both  of  these.  A  large  proportion  of  rich  men  have  lost  their  reputation  for  equity 
and  humanity  by  the  way  in  which  they  have  gained  their  wealth.  And  they  must 
necessarily  be  many  who  are  compelled  to  take  and  keep  their  place  among  the  poor. 
But  if  only  one  of  these  two  desirable  things  is  open  to  us,  we  may  be  very  well 
eatislied  that  this  is  not  the  wealth,  but  the  worthiness,  not  the  full  treasury,  but  the 
good  name  and  the  kind  regard.     For — 

I.  Wealth  is  veby  limited  in  its  capacities.  It  is  true  that  it  commands 
considerable  material  advantages,  and  that  it  puts  it  in  the  power  of  its  possessor  to 
enlarge  his  own  mind,  to  extend  his  social  circle,  and  ix>  multiply  his  usefulness.  This, 
however,  it  only  does  as  an  instrument.  It  does  not  ensure  any  of  these  things.  Men 
may  possess  it,  and  they  may,  as  very  many  of  them  do,  altogether  neglect  to  avail 
themselves  of  the  opportunity.  It  does  not  even  dispose  men  to  do  these  wise  things; 
it  is  as  likely  as  not  to  allure  them  in  other  and  even  contrary  directions.  The  power 
of  mere  wealth,  apart  from  the  character  of  its  owner,  is  very  much  slighter  than  it 
seems.  It  only  really  secures  bodily  comforts  and  the  means  of  advancement.  1.  It 
does  not  confer  even  happiness,  for  mere  jollity  or  transient  excitement  is  not 
happiness.  2.  It  does  not  supply  knowledge,  much  less  capacity,  and  still  less  wisdom. 
3.  It  does  not  provide  the  friendship  which  is  worthy  of  the  name,  for  no  man  who 
respects  himself  will  be  the  friend  of  the  rich  simply  because  he  is  rich.  We  do  not 
love  a  man  because  he  has  a  large  account  at  his  bank.  4.  It  does  not  include  the 
possession  of  any  estimable  moral  qualities,  nor,  therefore,  the  favour  of  God. 
Moreover — 

II.  Wbalth  has  its  8EKIOU8  DBAWBACKS.  1.  It  involves  heavy  burdens,  great 
anxieties  lest  it  should  be  lost.  2.  It  entails  the  most  serious  responsibility,  lest  its 
misuse  or  its  non-use  should  bring  down  the  weighty  condemnation  of  God  (Matt.  xxv. 
26).  3.  It  tempts  to  a  dishonourable  and  degrading  self-indulgence ;  also  to  a  cynical 
and  guilty  contempt  of  the  poor  and  lowly. 

III.  A  GOOD  BEPUTATION   INCLUDES   OB   IMPLIES    THE  BEST  THINGS.      Of  COUrse,  men 

may  acquire  a  fair  name  and  even  loving  favour  by  very  superficial  qualities ;  but  if 
they  do,  it  is  usually  but  short-lived.  It  breaks  down  under  the  weight  of  hard  fact 
and  accumulated  experience.  The  good  name  which  Solomon  is  thinking  of,  and 
which  is  the  only  thing  of  the  kind  worth  pursuing,  is  that  which  is  built  upon  or 
which  springs  from  a  sound  character.  It  therefore  implies  the  possession  of  upright- 
ness, of  purity,  of  truthfulness,  of  kindness,  of  reverence  ;  and  it  therefore  implies  the 
possession  of  piety  and  t\ie  favour  of  Ood. 

IV.  A   GOOD    BEPUTATION   IS    A    SOUECB   OF    TBUB    AND    PURE    SATISFACTION.      1.    It 

satisfies  our  self-respect;  for  we  rightly  wish  to  enjoy  the  intelligent  esteem  of  our 
neighbours.  We  are  rightly  troubled  when  we  lose  it ;  we  are  justified  in  our  satisfac- 
tion that  we  possess  it.  It  is  a  pure  and  lasting  gratification.  2.  It  satisfies  ottr 
affections.  To  have  the  "  loving  favour "  of  men  is  to  have  much  true  gladness  of 
heart. 

Y.  A  GOOD  REPUTATION  IB  A  BOUBOE  OF  MUCH  POWER.  While  the  bad  rich  man 
is  steadUy  declining  in  his  command,  his  humbler  neighbour,  who  is  esteemed  for  hia 
wisdom  and  his  worth,  is  gaining  an  influence  for  good  with  every  passing  year. — 0. 

Ver.  2. — "  Bich  and  poor."  The  great  problem  of  excessive  wealth  and  pitiable 
poverty  conirouts  us  si  HI,  and  seems  likely  to  task  our  united  wisdom  for  many  years, 
if  not  for  several  generations.     We  may  regard — 

I.  The  bboad  and  naked  fact  visible  to  bvebt  eye.  The  fact  that,  while  thii 
world  is  stored  with  wealth  beneath  the  ground,  and  is  capable  of  bringing  forth  upon 
its  surface  ample  supplies  for  all  the  need  of  the  race,  there  is  found  amongst  us  a 
vast  mass  of  miserable  indigence.  Children  are  bom  into  the  world  in  homes  where 
parents  do  not  know  how  to  feed  and  clothe  them,  where  an  early  death  would  seem 
to  be  the  happiest  fate ;  and  other  children  are  born  into  and  brought  up  in  homea 
where  parents  have  a  great  deal  more  than  they  need  to  provide  for  their  neoessitiea^ 
and  where  life  offers  every  opportunity  for  enjoyment  with  no  necessity  for  labour. 


43«  THE  PROVERBS.  [oh.  xxii.  1—29. 

IL  How  FAB  THIS  DISTINCTION  18  OT  GoD.  1.  Such  deep  and  wide  distinctions  ai 
now  exist  must  be  contrary  to  his  purpose.  We  cannot  possibly  suppose  that  it  is  in 
accordance  with  his  mind  that  thousands  of  his  children  should  be  starving,  unclad  or 
ill  clad,  homeless,  exposed  to  the  saddest  sufferings  and  the  darkest  evils,  while  other 
thousands  of  his  children  have  more  than  they  need  or  know  how  to  make  good  use 
of.  2.  These  distinctions  are  the  ultimate  result  of  the  laws  which  he  ordained. 
Poverty  has  its  origin  in  sin  ;  it  is  one  of  the  penalties  of  wrong-doing.  All  the  evil 
we  see  and  sigh  over,  of  every  kind,  we  must  trace  to  sin  and  to  the  consequences 
which  sin  entails.  It  is  a  Divine  law  that  sin  and  suffering  go.  together.  3.  Some 
inequalities  amongst  us  are  directly  due  to  his  Divine  ordering.  He  creales  us  with 
very  different  faculties.  Some  are  fitted  and  enabled  to  do  great  things,  which  raise 
them  in  position  and  in  circumstance  above  their  brethren;  others  are  not  thus 
qualified  Much,  though  very  far  indeed  from  everything,  depends  upon  our  natural 
endowments. 

III.  The  undesirable  separation  which  exists  between  the  rich  and  the 
rooR.  We  do  not  know  our  neighbours  as  we  should.  Wo  pass  one  another  with  cold 
indifference.  Too  often  men  turn  away  from  their  inferiors  (in  circumstance)  with  a 
contemptuous  disregard  which  signifies  that  the  poor  man  is  beneath  their  notice ;  too 
often  men  fail  to  appeal  to  their  fellows  because  they  think  themselves  unworthy  to 
address  themi  Between  man  and  man,  between  brother  and  brother,  there  is  a  gulf 
of  isolation  which  must  be  painful  and  pitiful  in  the  sight  of  the  common  Father,  the 
Maker  of  them  both. 

ly.  The  occasions  when  thbt  meet.  1.  Those  on  which  they  must  feel  the 
distinction  between  them— in  business  and  in  society.  2.  Those  on  which  they  should 
not  do  so — when  they  meet  in  public  worship  or  for  Christian  work,  then  all  differences 
of  a  material  and  social  kind  should  be  forgotten  and  ignored.  (1)  What  are  these  in 
presence  of  that  which  separates  both  rich  and  poor  from  the  Infinite  and  Almighty 
One  ?  (2)  What  are  these  in  comparison  with  the  question  of  moral  and  spiritual 
worth  ?  In  the  sight  of  Q-od,  the  poor  but  holy  man  is  far  more  acceptable  than  the 
rich  but  unholy  man.  With  him  all  questions  of  income  or  of  title  are  utterly 
insignificant,  positively  invisible  in  presence  of  the  questions  of  moral  rectitude  and 
spiritual  worth.    3.  One  on  which  they  will  not  do  so  (Rev.  xx.  12). 

1.  Do  your  best  to  bridge  the  gulf,  or,  still  better,  to  fill  up  the  chasm  which 
separates  one  class  from  another.  2.  Take  care  to  have  that  distinction  which  will 
survive  the  shocks  of  time  and  change. — 0. 

Ver.  S.~Thought/idness  and  thoughtlessness.  All  men  might  be  divided  into 
the  thoughtful  and  the  thoughtless.  They  lielong  either  to  those  who  look  before 
them  and  prepare  for  the  struggle  or  the  danger  that  is  coming,  and  avoid  it ;  or  else 
to  those  who  go  blindly  on  and  stumble  over  the  first  impediment  in  their  way.  The 
"  prudent  man  "  of  the  text  is  not  only  the  cautious  man ;  he  is  the  man  of  sagacity 
and  foresight,  who  takes  large  and  extended  views  of  things.  There  are  many  illus- 
trations of  the  thought,  of  which  we  may  select. 

J.  The  evil  or  pecdniart  e>tanglembnt.  The  prudent  man  forbears  to  enter 
mto  that  alliance,  or  into  those  relationships,  or  on  to  that  course  of  action  which  will 
demand  more  resources  than  he  can  supply.  But  the  simple  "pass  on"— become 
involved,  and  pay  the  penalty  of  prolonged  anxiety,  of  great  distraction,  of  painful 
humiliation,  of  grave  dishonour,  of  financial  ruin. 

n.  The  strain  of  uNvnsB  companionship.  A  prudent  man  will  consider  well 
what  company  he  can  wisely  keep,  whose  society  will  be  beneficial  and  whose  injurious 
to  him,  whether  or  not  he  can  bear  the  pressure  that  will  be  put  upon  him  to  indulge 
m  this  or  that  direction,  and  he  will  shun  the  social  circle  that  would  be  perilous  to 
his  integrity.  But  the  simple  take  no  heed,  accept  the  first  invitation  that  comes  to 
them,  become  associated  with  those  whose  influence  is  deteriorating,  succumb  to  their 
solioitaMon,  and  pay  the  penalty  of  serious  spiritual  declension. 

IIL  Thb  force  op  some  particular  temptation.  The  wise  perceive  the  danger 
of  the  mtoxicatmg  cup,  of  the  saloon,  of  the  racecourse,  of  the  gambling-table,  and 
they  keep  steadfastly  away.  The  simple  pass  on-self-confident,  prisumptuous, 
■  loomed,  and  they  are  punished  indeed. 


m.  xxn.  1—29.]  THE  PROVEBBR.  437 

IV.  The  pabsaoe  of  youth.  Th&  prudent  recognize  the  fact  that,  unless  youth 
yields  its  own  particular  fruit  of  knowledge,  of  acquisition,  of  capacity  for  work  in 
one  field  or  other,  the  prizes  of  life  must  be  foregone ;  and,  recognizii^  this,  they  do 
not  waste  the  golden  hours  of  study  in  idleness  or  dissipatioo.  But  the  simple  take  no 
heed,  trust  to  the  chapter  of  accidents,  wait  upon  fortune,  fling  away  their  precious 
chances,  and  are  "punished"  by  having  to  take  the  lower  path  all  the  rest  of  their 
days. 

V.  The  risk  of  losing  health.  The  prudent  man  sees  that,  if  he  urges  his  powers 
beyond  the  mark  which  kind  and  wise  nature  draws  for  him,  he  will  gain  a  present 
advantage  at  the  cost  of  future  good,  and  he  holds  himself  in  check.  The  simple  pass 
on — over-work,  over-study,  strain  their  faculties,  and  break  down  long  before  their 
time. 

VL  The  loss  ov  life.  The  wise  man  will  count  on  this ;  he  will  reckon  that  any 
day  he  may  be  called  to  pass  from  his  business  and  his  family  and  his  pleasure  to  the 
great  account  and  the  long  future;  and  he  lives  accordingly,  ready  for  life  or  for 
death,  prepared  to  encounter  the  hour  when  he  will  look  his  last  on  time  and  confront 
eternity.  The  simple  leave  this  stern  fact  out  of  their  account ;  they  pass  on  their 
way  without  making  preparation  either  for  those  whom  they  must  leave  behind  or 
for  themselves  when  they  enter  the  world  where  material  treasures  are  of  no  account 
whatever ;  they  pass  on,  and  they  "  are  punished,"  for  they,  too,  reach  the  liour  of 
departure,  but  they  awake  to  the  sad  fact  that  that  has  been  left  undone  for  which  a 
long  life  is  not  too  long  a  prepaiation. — C. 

Ver.  5. — 2%e  path  of  the  perverse.  By  "the  fro  ward  "  we  understand  the  spiritually 
perverse — those  that  will  go  on  their  own  way,  deaf  to  the  commandments  and  the 
entreaties  oftheir  heavenly  Father. 

I.  The  path  of  the  peevbhsb.  This  is :  1.  One  of  guUt.  These  froward  souls 
who  shoose  their  own  way,  declining  that  to  which  G-od  calls  them,  are  most  seriously 
guilty.  Whether  their  disobedience  be  due  to  careless  inattention  or  whether  to 
deliberate  recusancy,  it  is  disloyal,  ungrateful,  presumptuous,  offensive  in  a  high  degree. 
It  is  no  wonder  that  it  proves  to  be :  2.  One  of  suffering.  No  wonder  that  "  thorns  " 
are  in  that  way,  thorns  that  pierce  and  pain — grievous  troubles,  poverty,  sickness, 
loneliness,  fear,  remorse,  forsakenness  of  God.  Departure  from  God  leads  down  to 
tangled  places,  causes  men  to  be  lost  in  thorny  wildernesses  where  suffering  abounds. 
It  is  also :  3.  One  of  danger.  It  is  a  place  of  "  snares."  Without  the  "  lamp  unto 
the  feet  and  the  light  unto  the  path,"  how  should  the  traveller  in  "  this  dark  world 
of  sin "  do  otherwise  than  fall  ?  Outside  the  service  of  Christ,  and  apart  from  his 
guidance,  when  the  heart  is  uncontrolled  from  above,  there  is  the  greatest  danger  of 
the  spirit  giving  way  to  one  evil  after  another,  of  yielding  to  that  multitude  of  strong 
temptations  which  attend  the  traveller's  steps. 

II.  The  WAT  OF  the  wise.  There  is  no  necessity  for  man  finding  the  path  of  his 
life  a  path  full  of  thorns  and  snares.  It  is  true  that  no  prudence  or  wisdom  will  prove 
an  absolute  guard  therefrom  ;  hut  if  a  man  will  "  keep  his  soul "  as  he  may  keep  it, 
he  will  be  preserved  in  his  integrity,  he  will  even  "  be  far  "  from  the  worst  evils  which 
overtake  the  froward  and  perverse.  To  "  keep  our  soul  "is  to :  1.  Understand  its 
inestimable  worth;  to  understand  that  it  far  transcends  in  value  any  property  we 
may  hold,  or  any  position  we  may  reach,  or  any  prizes  or  pleasures  we  may  snatch. 
2.  Realize  that  God  claims  it  as  his  own;  that  to  the  Father  of  spirits,  to  the  Saviour 
of  souls,  our  hearts  and  lives  belong;  that  to  him  they  should  be  willingly  and  heartily 
surrendered,  that  they  may  be  placed  in  his  strong  and  holy  keeping.  3.  Guard  it  by 
the  help  of  Divine  wisdom ;  apply  those  precious  truths  which  are  in  the  pages  of 
God's  Word  to  its  necessity;  study  the  life  and  form  the  friendship  of  that  One  Who 
himself  is  the  Wisdom  of  God,  walking  with  whom  along  the  path  of  life  we  shall  be 
safe  from  the  wiles  of  the  wicked  one. — 0. 

Y;er.  fi. — Parental  training.  Very  many  parental  hearts  have  leaned  their  weight 
of  hope  on  these  cheering  words — many  to  be  sustained  and  gladdened,  some  to  be 
disappointed.     We  look  at — 

L  The  bkoad  bphkee  of  fabentai.  tbainin(».    What  is  the  way  in  which  •  child 


488  THE  PB0VERB3.  [oh.  xxil  1— 2Si 

should  be  trained  to  go?  It  is  one  that  comprehends  much.  It  includes  :  1.  Manners. 
These  are  not  of  the  first  importance,  but  they  have  their  value.  And  if  politeness, 
demeanour,  bearing,  be  not  engraven  in  the  young,  it  will  not  be  perfectly  attained 
afterwards.  2.  Mind.  The  habit  of  ob.serving,  of  thinking,  of  reasoning,  of  sound 
reading,  of  calm  consideration  and  discussion.  3.  Morals.  The  all-important  habits 
of  truthfulness,  of  temperance,  of  industry,  of  self-command,  of  courage,  of  pure  and 
stainless  honesty,  of  unselfish  considerateness,  of  generous  forgiveness.  4.  Religion. 
The  habit  of  reverence  in  the  use  of  the  Divine  Name,  of  public  wor.ship,  of  private 
prayer,  of  readiness  to  learn  all  that  in  any  way  God  is  willing  to  teach  us. 

II.  The  8TKENGTH  OP  THE  PARENTAL  HOPE.  Let  the  child  be  trained  in  these  right 
way."!,  "  and  when  he  is  old,"  etc.  1.  The  assurance  of  habit.  When  we  have  firmly 
planted  a  good  habit  in  the  mind  and  in  the  life,  we  have  done  a  very  great  and  a  very 
good  thing — we  have  gone  far  toward  the  goal  we  seek.  For  habit,  early  formed,  is 
not  easily  broken.  We  sometimes  allude  to  habit  as  if  it  were  an  enemy.  But,  in 
truth,  it  is  our  best  friend.  It  is  a  gracious  bond  that  binds  us  to  wisdom  and  virtue. 
Without  it  we  should  have  no  security  against  temptation ;  with  it  we  have  every 
reason  to  hope  that  youth  will  pass  into  prime,  and  prime  into  old  age,  clothed  with 
all  the  wisdom  and  adorned  with  all  the  grace  that  it  received  in  its  early  years. 
What  makes  the  assurance  the  more  strong  is  that  habit  becomes  more  powerful  with 
each  effort  and  each  action.  Every  day  the  good  habits  we  have  formed  and  are 
exercising  become  more  deeply  rooted  in  the  soil  of  the  soul.  2.  The  assurance  of  the 
mrmmon  experience  of  mankind. 

III.  The  necessabt  limit.  Not  the  very  best  training  of  the  very  wisest  parents 
in  the  world  can  positively  secure  goodness  and  wisdom  in  their  children.  For  when 
they  have  done  everything  in  their  power,  there  must  remain  that  element  of  indi- 
viduality which  will  choose  its  own  course  and  form  its  own  character.  Our  children 
may  choose  to  reject  the  truth  we  teach  them,  and  to  slight  the  example  we  set  them, 
and  to  despise  the  counsel  we  give  them.  In  the  will  of  every  child  there  is  a  power 
which  cannot  be  forced,  which  can  only  be  won.  Therefore  :  1.  Let  all  parents  seek, 
beside  training  their  children  in  good  habits,  to  win  their  hearts  to  that  Divine 
Wisdom  in  whose  friendship  and  service  alone  will  they  be  safe.  Where  sagadty  may 
fail,  affection  will  triumph.  Command  and  persuasion  are  the  two  weapons  which 
parental  wisdom  will  do  its  best  to  wield.  2.  Let  all  children  understand  that  for 
their  character  and  their  destiny  they  must  themselves  be  responsible.  All  the  very 
worthiest  and  wisest  influences  of  iome  will  lead  to  no  good  result  if  they  oppose  to 
them  a  rebellious  spirit,  if  they  do  not  receive  them  in  the  spirit  of  docility.  There 
is  but  one  gate  of  entrance  into  life,  and  that  is  the  personal,  individual  acceptance 
of  Jesus  Christ  as  the  Lord  and  Saviour  of  the  spirit.  The  parent  may  lead  his  child 
up  to  it,  but  that  child  must  pass  through  it  of  his  own  accord. — 0. 

Ver.  13. — Excuses.  Pew  things  are  oftener  on  human  lips  than  excuses.  Men  ar« 
continually  excusing  themselves  from  doing  what  they  know  in  their  hearts  they 
ought  to  do.  There  is  no  sphere  from  which  they  are  excluded,  and  there  is  hardly 
any  evil  to  which  they  do  not  lead. 

I.  The  spheres  m  which  they  are  pound.  The  child  excuses  himself  from  the 
obedience  which  he  should  be  rendering  to  his  parents ;  the  scholar,  from  the  application 
he  should  be  giving  to  his  studies ;  the  apprentice,  from  the  attention  he  should  be 
devoting  to  his  business ;  the  agriculturist,  from  the  labour  he  should  be  puiiting  forth 
in  the  fields;  the  captain,  from  setting  sail  on  the  troubled  waters;  the  unsuccessful 
tradesman  or  merchant,  from  investigating  his  books  and  seeing  how  he  really  stands  ; 
the  failing  manufacturer,  from  closing  his  mill ;  the  statesman  from  bringing  forward 
his  perilous  measure;  the  minister,  from  seeking  his  delicate  and  difficult  interview; 
the  soul  not  yet  reconciled  to  Grod,  from  a  searching  inquiry  into  its  own  spiritual 
condition  and  present  obligation. 

II.  Their  moral  oharactkb.  1.  There  is  a  decided  ingredient  of /a?seAood  about 
them.  Those  who  fashion  them  know  in  their  hearts  that  there  is  something,  if  not 
much,  that  is  imaginary  about  them.  The  lion  is  not  without ;  the  slothful  man  will 
not  be  slain  in  the  streets.  The  evil  which  is  anticipated  in  all  cases  of  excuse  ii 
exaggerated,  if  it  is  not  invented.    We  d<r  not,  kt  such  times,  tell  ourselves  the  whole 


«B.  xm.  1— 29.]  THE  PBOVBBBS.  439 

truth ;  we  "  deceiT6  our  own  selves."  2.  There  is  something  of  meanness  or  unman- 
liness  about  ihem ;  we  "  let '  I  dare  not '  wait  upon  '  I  would.' "  We  allow  a  cr.i vuii 
feeling  of  apprehension  to  enter  in,  to  take  possession,  to  prevail  over  our  better  self. 
8.  There  is  an  element  of  disobedience  and  unfaithfulness.  We  shrink  from  doing  the 
thing  which  is  our  duty  to  do ;  we  relegate  to  the  rear  that  which  we  should  keep  in 
the  front ;  we  prefer  that  which  is  agreeable  to  that  which  is  obligatory ;  we  obey  the 
lower  voice;  we  leave  unfulfilled  the  will  of  God. 

III.  The  fatb  op  those  who  indulge  them.  1.  To  have  a  very  pitiable  retro- 
spect ;  to  have  to  look  back,  self-condemned,  on  work  left  undone,  on  a  life  not  well 
lived.  2.  To  lose  all  that  might  have  been  gained  by  energy  and  decision,  and  whicli 
has  been  lost  by  sloth  and  weakness.  And  who  shall  say  what  this  amounts  to  in  the 
years  of  a  long  life?  3.  To  miss  the  "  Well  done"  of  the  Master,  if  not,  indeed,  to 
receive  his  final  and  sorrowful  condemnation. — C. 

Yer.  15. — (See  homily  on  ch.  xiii.  24.) — C. 

Vers.  16,  22.— (See  homily  on  ver.  28.)— 0. 

Vers.  24,  26<— (See  homily  on  ch.  xvi.  32.)— 0. 

Veri.  26,  27.— (See  homily  on  ch.  vi.  1— 6.)— 0. 

Ver.  28. —  The  ancient  landmark.  The  text  clearly  refers  to  the  ancient  division  o( 
property  by  which  the  land  was  carefully  marked  out,  and  each  family  had  its  own 
proper  share.  The  man  who  removed  these  boundaries  in  his  own  material  interest 
was  simply  appropriating  what  did  not  belong  to  him.  Perhaps  "  the  removal  of  the 
ancient  landmark  "  became  a  pro/erbial  phrase  to  signify  any  serious  departure  from 
rectitude.     It  will  be  worth  while  to  consider — 

I.  What  is  not  fokbidden  in  this  precept.  1.  A  change  in  social  customs.  It 
is  found  by  experience  that  we  are  all  the  better  for  leaving  certain  usages  behind  us. 
We  outgrow  them,  and  they  become  hindrances  rather  than  aids  to  us.  2.  The 
remodelling  of  old  institutions.  The  time  comes  when  the  old  order  changes,  giving 
place  to  new,  by  common  consent  and  to  the  general  advantage.  With  new  methods, 
new  organizations,  there  may  come  new  life  and  renewed  power.  3.  The  change  of 
religions  vocabulary.  There  is  nothing  wrong  in  putting  the  old  doctrine  in  new 
forms;  indeed,  it  becomes  more  living  and  more  telling  when  uttered  in  the  language 
of  the  time.  Ancient  phraseology  is  to  be  respected,  but  it  is  not  sacred ;  it  rn^iy  and 
must  give  place  to  new.  4.  The  modification  of  Christian  doctrine ;  not,  indeed,  a 
change  of  "  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints  " — a  departure  from  "  the  truth  as  it 
is  in  Jesus,"  but  such  a  varying  account  and  statement  of  it  as  comes  with  increased 
light  from  the  study  of  nature  or  of  man,  and  with  further  reverent  research  of  the 
Word  of  God.     But  what  is — 

il.  The  wrono  which  is  here  forbidden.  It  is  all  criminal  selfishness,  more 
specially  such  as  that  referred  to — the  appropriation  of  land  by  immoral  means,  or 
the  securing  of  any  kind  of  property  by  tampering  with  a  deed  or  other  docunK^nt.  It 
may  include  the  act  of  obtaining  any  advantage  in  any  direction  whatever  by  means 
that  are  dishonourable  and  unworthy.  In  all  such  cases  we  need  the  ear  to  hear  a 
Divine,  "  Thou  shalt  not."  To  act  thus  is  a  sin  and  a  mistake.  It  is :  1.  To  disobey 
the  voice  of  the  Lord,  who  emphatically  denounces  it.  Especially  does  God  rebuke 
and  threaten  the  wronging  of  the  poor  and  feeble  because  they  are  such ;  to  do  this  is 
to  add  meanness  and  cowardice  to  selfishness  and  crime  (see  vers.  16,  22).  2.  To 
injure  ourselves  far  more  seriously  and  irremediably  than  we  hurt  our  neighbour.  It  ii 
to  lose  the  favour  of  God,  the  approval  of  our  own  conscience,  and  the  esteem  of  the 
Just— 0. 

Ver.  ».— (See  homily  on  eh.  vL  6—11 ;  xxviL  23.)— C 


440 


THK  PROVERBS. 


[oh.  xxm.  1 — 35. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXIII. 
Ver».  1 — 3. — A  hexastich  closely  con- 
nected with  the  last  versa  of  the  preceding 
oliapter,  as  if  the  warning  was  addressed  to 
the  man  of  skill  whom  his  talents  had  made 
the  guest  of  kings. 

Ver.  1. — When  thon  sittest  to  eat  with  a 
ruler.  This,  of  course,  would  be  a  great 
honour  to  a  man  of  lowly  birth,  or  to  one  of 
the  middle  class,  to  whom  the  manners  of 
courts  and  palaces  were  pr;icticallyunknown. 
Consider  diligently  what  is  before  thee. 
So  the  Vulgate,  Qufe  apponta  sunt  ante  fadem 
ttiam ;  and  the  Septua;;int,  Tc^  vapaTtSf/ievi 
aoi.  Take  heed  lest  the  unusual  dainties  on 
the  table  tempt  thee  to  exoobs,  which  may 
lead  not  only  to  unseenily  beliaviour,  but 
also  to  unruly  speecli,  revealing  of  secrets, 
etc.  But  the  latter  words  may  also  be  ren- 
dered, "  hira  tliat  is,"  or, "  wTio  is  before  thee." 
And  this  gives  a  very  appropriate  sense. 
The  guest  is  enjoined  to  fix  his  attention, 
not  on  the  delicate  food,  but  on  the  host, 
who  is  his  superior,  and  able  to  exalt  and  to 
destroy  him  (compare  the  cautious  maxim* in 
EocluB.  xiii.  2,  6,  7,  11,  etc.). 

Ver.  2. — And  put  a  knife  to  thy  throat,  if 
thou  be  a  man  given  to  appetite.  "  Stab 
thy  gluttony,"  Wordsworth.  Restrain  thy- 
self .  by  the  strongest  miiisures,  convince 
thyself  that  thou  art  in  the  utmost  peril,  if 
thou  art  a  glutton  or  wine-bibber  (Ecclus. 
xxxiv.  [xxxi.]  12).  The  LXX.  gives  a  dif- 
ferent turn  to  the  injunction,  "  And  apply 
{iTrifioKKi)  thy  hand,  knowing  that  it  behoves 
thee  to  prepare  such  things."  This  is  like 
tho  warning  of  Siraoides,  in  the  chapter 
quoted  above,  where  the  disciple  is  admon- 
ished not  to  attend  the  banquets  of  rich 
men,  lest  he  should  be  tempted  to  vie  with 
them,  and  tlius  ruin  himself  by  attempting 
to  return  their  civilities  in  the  same  livish 
manner.  The  earlier  commentators  hare 
used  the  above  verses  as  a  lesson  concerning 
the  due  and  reverent  partaking  of  the  Holy 
Communion,  thus :  "  Wiien  you  approach 
the  table  of  Ciirist,  consider  diligently  what 
is  represented  by  the  elements  before  you, 
and  have  discernment  and  faitii,  lest  you  eat 
and  drink  unworthily  ;  and  after  communi- 
cating walk  warily,  mortify  all  evil  desires, 
live  as  in  the  presence  of  the  Lord  Jesus, 
the  Giver  of  the  feast." 

Ver.  3. — Be  not  desirous  of  his  dainties. 
(For  "dainties,"  see  on  ver.  6.)  Be  not  too 
gree.ly  of  the  bounties  of  the  royal  table,  so 
as  to  forget  discretion,  and  be  led  tu  say  and 
do  things  which  are  inexpedient  or  unseemly. 
For  they  are  deceitful  meat.     Ofteniimee 


such  entertainment  is  not  offered  for  Mend- 
ship's  sake,  but  for  some  sinister  purpose — to 
make  t>  man  expose  himself,  tu  get  at  a 
man's  real  character  or  secrets.  Far  from 
being  a  sign  of  favour  and  good  will,  the 
seeming  honour  is  deceptive  and  dangerous. 
We  all  know  Horace's  lines,  '  Ars  Poet.,' 
434,  etc.— 

"  Reges  dicuntur  multis  urgere  culullii 
Et  torquere  mero,  quern  perspexisse  la- 

borant. 
An  sit  amicitia  dignus." 

Hitzig  quotes  the  Eastern  proverb,  "He 
who  eats  of  the  sultan's  soup  burns  his  lips, 
even  though  it  be  after  a  length  of  time." 
We  have  too  the  Indian  saying,  "  An  epicure 
digs  his  grave  witli  his  teeth,"  which  is  true 
in  more  senses  than  one.  "  Keep  thee  far  from 
the  man  that  hath4)ower  to  kill,"  says  Sira- 
oides (Ecdlus.  ix.  l.S);  "so  shalt  thou  not 
be  troubled  with  fear  of  death :  and  if  thou 
come  unto  him,  commit  no  fault,  lest  he 
presently  take  away  thy  life ;  remember  that 
thou  goest  in  the  midst  of  snares,  and  that 
thou  walkest  upon  the  battlements  of  the 
city."  Then  for  the  reasons  which  induce  a 
ruler  to  ply  a  guest  with  wine,  we  have, 
"  In  vino  Veritas.  Quod  est  in  corde  sobrii, 
est  in  ore  ebrii."    Theognis  writes — 

'Ej/  TTvpl  fi^v  XP^'^^  "^^   '^"^   &pyupoy  tSpics 
&vSp€s 
riyv^ffKova',  avSphs  S*  oTvos  eSeiJe  yior, 
Kal  ij.ii\a  trep  irtvvrov,  rhy  virep  fi.4rpOi'  ^paro 

"ClffTi  KaTaiGX^^^^  'f^^  TTpXv  Hvra  ffoipov. 
The  Septuagint  corabi nes  the  ending  of  ver.  2, 
"  But  if  thou  art  more  insatiable,  desire  not 
his  victuals,  for  these  appertain  to  (^x^oi) 
a  false  life." 

Vers.  4,  5.  -  -These  form  a  pentastioh. 

Ver.  4. — Labour  not — weary  not  thyself 
— to  he  rich.  John  vl.  27,  "  Labour  not 
for  the  meat  that  perislieth,"  where  the 
warning  is  against  that  absorbing  eagerness 
for  wealth  wliich  leads  to  evil-doing  and 
neglect  of  all  higher  interests.  Cease  from 
thine  own  wisdom.  The  wisdom  (binah,  ch. 
iii.  5)  is  that  which  is  necessary  for  making 
and  keeping  wealth.  Vulgate,  Prudentise 
turn  pone  modum.  This  is  not  the  highest 
form  of  wisdnm  (chochmah),  but  rather  the 
faculty  of  distinguishing  one  thing  from 
another,  mere  discernment,  which  may  exist 
without  any  religious  or  keen  moral  sense 
(see  note  on  ch.  xvi.  16,  where  possibly  the 
contrast  is  expressed).  Talmud,  "  He  who 
augments  his  riches  augments  his  carea." 
Eiasmus, '  Adag.,'  quotes  oi  writes — 


CH.  xxni.  1 — 35.] 


THK   raOVERTJR. 


441 


"  Jupiter  ementitui  opes  mortalibua  ipse, 
Bio  visum  ut  fuerit,  ouiounque,  bonove, 
malove." 

Septuagint,  "If  thou  art  poor,  measure  not 
thyself  (fiii  irapeKrelvov)  with  a  rich  mau, 
but  in  tliy  wisiiom  refrain  thyself." 

Ver.  5. — Wilt  then  set  thine  eyes  upon  i 
that  which  is  not?  more  literally,  unit 
thou  let  thine  eyes  fly  upon  it,  and  it  is  gone  ? 
Why  cast  longing  looks  towards  this  wealth, 
and  so  prepare  loi-  yourself  loss  and  clit-ap- 
pointment  ?  The  pursuit  is  vain,  and  the 
result  is  never  secure ;  what  you  gained  by 
long  toil  and  prudent  care  may  be  lost  in  an 
hour.  Do  you  wish  to  incur  this  danger? 
Wordsworth  quotes  Persius,  '  Sat.,'  iii.  61 — 

"  An  passim  sequeris  corvos  testaque  lu- 
toque?" 

For  riches  certainly  make  themselves  wings. 
The  subject,  unexpressed,  is  riches,  and  the 
Hebrew  phrase  implies  absolute  certainty : 
Making  they  will  make  for  themselves.  They 
fly  away  as  an  eagle  toward  heaven  ;  or, 
likean  eagle  thatflieth  toward  heaven,  where 
not  even  sight  can  follow.  Publ.  Syr.,  255, 
"  Longiuquum  est  omne  quod  cupiditas 
flagitat."  The  Telugu  compares  worldly 
prosperity  to  writing  upon  water.  Says  the 
Greek  moralist — 

Bf^aiov  ovBev  iv  0iif>  SoKei  ireXetf, 
"  There's  naught  in  life  that  one  can  deem 

secare." 
Septuagint,  "  If  thou  fix  thine  eye  upon  him 
(the  riuh  patron),  he  will  nowhere  be  soen, 
for  wings  like  an  eagle's  are  leady  prepared 
for  him,  and  he  will  retiun  to  the  house  of 
his  master  (roi?  vf>oetT'nf\K6ros  au'roC),  and 
leave  you  to  shift  for  yourself." 

Vers.  6^8. — Another  maxim,  here  a  hep- 
tastich,  concerning  temperance. 

Vei.  6. — Eat  thou  not  the  bread  of  him 
that  hath  an  evil  eye;  the  envious  and 
jealous  man,  in  contrast  to  the  "good  of 
eye"  (ch.  xxii.  9).  Vulgate,  Ne  comedas 
cum  homine  invido.  Septuagint,  dcSp! 
ficuTKiiviji,  the  man  who  has  the  evil  eye  that 
fascinates,  which,  however,  is  a  later  idea; 
here  the  notion  is  rather  of  a  grudging,  sor- 
did temper,  that  cannot  bear  the  sight  of 
others'  happiness  or  prosperity  (comp.  Dent. 
XV.  9 ;  Matt.  xx.  15).  Ecclus.  xvi.  8,  Tlovriphs 
■  S  Pairicaivay  6<\>BaKiufi, "  The  envious  man  hath 
an  evil  eye ;  he  turneth  away  his  face,  and 
he  is  one  who  despiseth  men."  Bainty 
meats ;  as  in  ver.  3.  The  «  ord  Qmaiammoth') 
occurs  also  throughout  Gen.  xxvii.,  where 
it  is  rendered,  "savoury  meat."  Talmud, 
"To  ask  a  favour  from  a  miser  is  as  if  you 
asked  wisdom  from  a  woman,  n.odesty  from 
a  harlot,  fish  on  the  dry  land  " 
Yer.  7, For  ai  he  thinketh  in  his  heart. 


so  is  he.  The  verb  here  used  is  irt!'  (shaar), 
"to  estimate,"  "to calculate," and  the  clause 
is  best  rendered.  For  as  one  that  calculates 
with  himsdf,  so  is  he.  The  meaning  is  that 
this  niggardly  host  watches  every  morsel 
wliieh  his  guest  eats,  and  grudges  what  he 
appears  to  ofi'cr  su  liberally.  In  the  Autho- 
rized Version  the  word  "heart"  occurs  twice 
in  this  verse,  but  the  Hebrew  words  are 
different.  The  first  is  nephesh,  "  breath," 
equivalent  to  "mind;"  the  second  is  leb, 
"heart."  The  Vulgate  paraphrases  the 
clause,  Qiumiam  in  similitudinem  arioli  et 
conjectoris,  sesHmat  quod  ignorat,  "  For  like 
a  soothsayer  or  diviner  he  conjectures  that 
of  which  he  is  ignorant."  Eat  and  drink, 
saith  he  to  thee.  He  professes  to  make  you 
welcome,  and  with  seeming  cordiality  in- 
vites you  to  partake  of  the  food  upon  his 
table.  But  his  heart  is  not  with  thee.  He 
is  not  glad  to  see  you  enjoy  yourself,  and 
his  pressing  invitation  is  empty  verbiage 
with  no  heart  in  it.  The  Septuagint,  point- 
ing differently,  translates,  "  For  as  if  one 
should  swallow  a  hair,  so  he  eats  and  drinks." 
The  Greek  translators  take  the  gnome  to 
apply  to  one  who  invites  an  envious  man  to 
his  table,  and  finds  him  eating  his  food  as 
if  it  disgusted  him.  They  go  on,  "Bring 
him  not  in  to  thee,  nor  eat  thy  morsel  with 
him  ;  for  (ver.  8)  he  will  vomit  it  up,  and 
outrage  thy  fair  words."  In  agreement  with 
the  gnome  above,  we  find  in  the  Talmud, 
"  My  son,  eat  not  the  bread  of  the  covetous, 
nor  sit  thou  at  his  table.  The  bread  of  the 
covetous  is  only  pain  and  anguish;  the 
bread  of  the  generous  man  is  a  source  of 
healtli  and  joy." 

Ver.  8. — The  morsel  which  thou  hast  eaten 
Shalt  thou  vomit  up.  Food  thus  grudgingly 
bestowed  will  only  create  disgust,  and  do 
thee  no  good;  thou  wilt  feel  annoyed  to 
have  eaten  it,  and  wilt  long  to  get  rid  of  it. 
And  lose  thy  sweet  words.  You  w  ill  have 
expended  in  vain  your  civil  speeches  and 
thanks  for  the  entertainment  provided  for 
you ;  you  really  owe  no  gratitude  for  fare 
so  grudgingly  bestowed.  Some  think  that 
by  the  "sweet  words"  are  meant  the  con- 
versation at  table  with  which  you  have  en- 
deavoured to  amuse  your  host — the  witty 
sayings,  enigmas,  and  apothegms,  which 
entered  so  largely  into  the  programme  of  a 
good  talker.  All  such  efforts  are  thrown 
away  on  the  jealous,  morose  host.  But  the 
former  explanation  is  more  agreeable  to  the 
context. 

Ver.  9. — Here  is  another  case  in  which 
"  sweet  words  "  are  lost.  Speak  not  in  th* 
ears  of  a  fool.  This  does  not  mean,  as  it 
would  in  our  English  phrase — whisper  not  to 
a  fool;  but  do  rot  take  the  trouble  to  try 
to  make  him  understand,  impart  nothing  to 
him.     The  "fool"  here  (kriil)  ia  the  dull, 


442 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[oh.  xxm.  1 — 35. 


etolifl,  itupid  man,  who  cannot  be  moved 
from  his  own  narrow  groove  (see  on  ch.  i. 
22).  It  18  a  mere  casting  of  pearls  before 
swine  (Matt.  vii.  6)  to  speak  to  such  a  man 
of  high  aims,  righteous  motives,  self-sacrifice 
(comp.  ch.  ix.  8).  He  will  despise  the  wis- 
dom of  thy  words.  He  cannot  enter  into  the 
meaning  of  words  of  wisdom;  he  has  no 
appetite  for  them,  he  cannot  assimilate 
them;  and  in  his  self-satisfied  dulness  he 
feels  for  them  nothing  but  contempt  (Eoclus. 
xxii.  7,  etc.,  "  Whoso  teacheth  a  fool  is  as 
one  that  glueth  a  potsherd  together,  and  as 
he  that  waketh  one  from  a  sound  sleep.  He 
that  telleth  a  tale  to  a  fool  speaketh  to  one 
in  a  slumber :  when  he  hath  told  his  tale, 
he  will  say,  What  is  the  matter?")  . 

Vers.  10, 11. — An  enlargement  of  oh.  ixii. 
88  combined  with  ch.  xxii.  22,  23. 

Ver.  10.— Enter  not  into  the  fields  of  the 
fatherless.  Do  not  think  to  appropriate  the 
fields  of  orphans,  as  if  there  were  no  one  to 
defend  their  rights  (comp.  ch.  xv.  25). 

Ver.  11. — For  their  Eedeemer  is  mighty. 
The  redeemer  (god)  is  the  near  kinsman, 
who  had  to  avenge  bloodslied,  carry  on  the 
blood-feud,  or  vindicate  the  cause  of  a 
relation  otherwise  unsupported  (see  Numb. 
XXV.  12,  19,  21 ;  Lev.  xxv.  25;  Ruth  iii.  2, 
9,  12).  God  himself  will  be  the  orphans' 
Goel.  This  term  is  often  applied  to  God; 
e.g.  Job  xix.  25  ;  Ps.  xix.  14 ;  Jer.  1.  34.  He 
shall  plead  their  cause  with  thee.  He  will, 
as  it  were,  conduct  their  cause,  try  thee, 
convict  thee  of  injustice,  and  pronounce  thy 
condemnation  (ch.  xxii  23). 

Ver.  12  commences  a  new  series  of  pro- 
verbs of  wisdom.  This  general  admonition 
is  addressed  to  all,  tntor  and  disciple,  edu- 
cator and  educated.  Apply  thine  heart  unto 
instruction.  (For  musar,  "  instruction,"  see 
note  on  ch.  i.  2.) 

Ver.  18. — An  injunction  to  the  tutor  or 
parent  (comp.  ch.  xili.  24;  xix.  18;  xxii.  15; 
xxix.  17).  For  if  thou  beatest  him  with  the 
rod,  he  shall  not  die.  This  has  been  under- 
stood in  various  senses ;  e.g.  "  Though  thou 
scourge  him,  that  correction  will  not  kill 
him;"  "If  thou  chastise  him,  thou  wilt 
save  him  from  the  doom  of  the  rebellious 
son"  (Dent.  xxi.  18—21) ;  or,  "  He  shall  not 
(lie  eternally,"  which  rather  anticipates  the 
conclusion  in  the  next  verse.  The  expres- 
sion merely  means — Do  not  be  weak,  think- 
ing that  you  will  injure  your  child  by  judi- 
cious correction,  an{l  in  this  fear  withholding 
your  hand;  but  punish  him  firmly  when 
necessary,  and,  far  from  harming  him,  you 
will  be  doing  him  the  greatest  good. 

Ver.  14. — Shalt  deliver  his  soul  from  hell 
(theol);  de  inferno,  Vulgate;  4k  Savdrov, 
Septuagint.  Premature  death  was  regarded 
w  a  puniahmeut  of  (in,  as  long  life  was  the 


reward  of  righleougness.  Proper  discipline 
preserves  a  youth  not  only  from  m«ny  material 
dangers  incident  to  unbridled  passions,  but 
saves  him  from  spiritual  death,  the  decay 
and  destruction  of  grace  here,  and  the  retri- 
bution that  awaits  the  sinner  in  another 
world  (comp.  Ecclus.  xxx,  1 — 12). 

Ver.  15. — The  moralist  now  addresses  the 
disciple,  and  so  to  the  end  of  the  chapter. 
If  thine  heart  be  wise ;  become  wise  by  pro- 
fiting by  discipline,  and  having  its  natural 
folly  (ch.  xxii.  15)  eradicated.  My  heart 
shall  rejoioe,  even  mine.  The  pronoun  is 
repeated  for  the  sake  of  emphasis  (as  in  ch. 
xxii.  19),  the  speaker  thus  declaring  hii 
supreme  interest  in  the  moral  progress  of 
his  pupil. 

Ver.  16. — My  reins  shall  rejoice.  The 
"  reins  "  (helaynth),  kidneys,  are  regarded  as 
the  seat  of  feeling  and  sensation  (Job  xix. 
27),  or  of  the  inner  nature  generally  (Ps. 
xvi.  7 ;  Eev.  ii.  22).  I  shall  rejoioe  in  my 
very  soul  when  thy  lips  speak  right  things ; 
i.e.  when  thy  heart-  is  so  replete  with  wis- 
dom, tliy  mind  so  well  instructed  as  to  utter 
naught  but  what  is  true  and  sensible  (di, 
viii.  6).  The  composition  of  these  two  verses 
is  noteworthy,  15o  being  parallel  to  166,  and 
156  to  16(1.  Septuagint,  "Ami  thy  lips 
shall  linger  in  words  (eV5iaTp(i//ei  \6yais) 
with  my  lips,  if  tliey  be  riglit,"  which  seems 
to  mean,  "If  thy  lips  utter  what  is  right, 
they  will  gather  wisdom  from  my  words  and 
impart  it  to  others." 

Ver.  17. — Let  not  thine  heart  envy  sinners, 
when  thou  seest  them  apparently  happy 
and  prosperous  (comp.  ch.  iii.  31 ;  ixiv.  1, 
19 ;  Ps.  xxxvii.  1 ;  Ixxiii.  3).  The  Autho- 
rized Version,  in  agreement  with  the  Septua- 
gint, Vulgale,  Arabic,  and  other  versions, 
takes  the  second  clause  of  this  verse  as  an 
independent  one ;  but  it  seems  evidently  to 
be  constructionally  connected  with  the  pre- 
ceding, and  to  be  governed  by  the  same 
verb,  so  that  there  is  no  occasion  to  insert 
"  be  thou."  But  be  thou  in  the  fear  of  the 
lord  all  the  day  long.  Jerome,  corrected, 
would  read,  Non  asmuletur  cor  tuum  pecca- 
tores,  sed  timorem  Domini  tola  die.  As 
Delitzsch  and  Hitzig,  followed  by  Nowack, 
have  pointed    out,  the  Hebrew  verb,  f*^j5 

(kana),  is  here  used  in  two  senses.  In  the 
first  clause  it  signifies  to  be  envious  of  a 
person ;  in  the  second,  to  be  zealous  for  a 
thing,  botli  senses  combining  in  the  thought 
of  being  moved  with  eager  desire.  ZijXo- 
Twtca  is  used  in  this  double  senSe,  and 
semtUor  in  Latin.  So  tlie  gnome  comes  to 
this — -Show  your  lieart's  desire,  not  by  envy 
of  the  sinner's  fortune,  but  by  zeal  for  true 
religion,  that  fear  of  the  Lord  which  leads 
to  strict  obedience  and  earnest  desire  to 
please  him. 
Ver.  18. — Tor   inrely  ther*  If  aa  wd. 


oa.  xiiit  1— 3§.3 


THE  PROVERBS. 


443 


Some  take  the  hemistich  fonditinnally,  ren- 
deriug  DN  "  when,"  or  "if  the  end  comes ; " 
but  one  eees  no  object  in  the  thought  being 
expressed  conditionally  ;  and  it  is  best,  with 
the  Authoiized  Tersion,  Nowaok,  and  others, 
to  take  DN  '3  equivalent  to  "assuredly,"  as 
in  Judg.  XV.  7 ;  2  Sam.  xv.  21.  "  End " 
(aeharith)  is  the  glorious  future  that  awaits 
the  pious  (ch.  xxiv.  14;  Jer.  xxix.  11).  The 
prosperity  of  sinners  is  not  to  be  envied,  for 
it  is  transitory  and  deceptive;  but  for  the 
righteous,  however  depressed  at  times,  there 
is  a  happy  end  in  prospect.  And  thine  ex- 
peotatiou  (hope)  shall  not  be  out  off.  The 
hope  of  comfort  here  and  reward  hereafter 
shall  be  abundantly  realized.  The  writer 
has  a  firm  belief  in  the  moral  government 
of  God,  and  in  a  future  life  which  shall 
rectify  all  anomalies  (comp.  ch.  xiv.  32 ; 
Wisd.  V.  15,  etc. ;  Bcclus.  i.  13).  Septua- 
gint,  "For  if  thou  keep  them,  thou  shalt 
have  posterity,  and  thy  hope  shall  not  be 
removed"  (Fa.  xxxvii.  9;  Job  xlii.  12). 

Vers.  19 — 21. — An  exhortation  to  temper- 
ance, as  one  of  the  results  of  the  fear  of  God. 
prefaced  by  an  exhortation  to  wisdom. 

Ver.  19. — Hear  thou.  The  pronoun  gives 
force  and  personality  to  the  injunction  (Job 
xxxiii.  33).  Guide  thine  heart  in  the  way. 
(For  "TUltn,  "  to  guide  straight,"  see  on  ch.  iv. 
14.)  "  The  way  "  is  the  right  way,  in  dis- 
tinction to  the  many  wrong  paths  of  life — 
the  way  of  understanding,  as  it  is  called 
(oh.  ix.  6).  Septuagint,  "  Direct  aright  the 
thonghtB  of  thy  heart,"  for  right  thoughts 
lead  to  right  actions. 

Ver.  20. — ^Wine-Mhberf ;  persons  who  meet 
together  for  the  express  purpose  of  drinking 
intoxicating  liquors.  Among  riotous  eaters 
of  flesh.  The  Hebrew  is  "  of  flesh  for  them- 
selves," whence  some  take  the  meaning  to 
be  "of  their  own  flesh,"  i.e.  who  by  their 
gluttony  and  luxury  ruin  their  own  bodies. 
But  the  parallelism  with  the  wine-drinker 
■hows  plainly  that  the  flesh  which  they  eat 
is  meant,  and  the  idea  is  that  they  eat  for 
the  gratification  of  their  own  appetites, 
caring  nothing  for  anything  else.  The 
combination  of  glutton  and  wine-bibber  was 
used  as  a  reproach  against  our  blessed  Lord 
(Matt.  xi.  19).  The  versions  of  Jerome  and 
the  LXX.  point  to  the  contributed  enter- 
tainments, where  each  guest  brought  some 
article  to  the  meal,  like  our  picnics.  Thus 
Vulgate,  "  Be  not  among  parties  of  drinkers, 
nor  at  the  banquets  of  those  who  contribute 
flesh  to  eat ; "  Septuagint,  "  Be  not  a  wine- 
bibber,  and  strain  not  after  contributed  feasts 
{avij.$o\ais)  and  purchases  of  meats." 

Ver.  21. — Intemperance  leads  to  prodi- 
gaUty,  carelessness,  and  ruin.  And  drowsi- 
ness shall  clothe  a  man  with  rags.  The 
luxury  and  exoeii  spoken  of  above  lead  to 


drowsiness  and  inability  to  work,  and 
poverty  follows  as  the  natural  result  (comp. 
ch.  xix.  15;  xxiv.  33,  etc.).  The  Vulgate 
still  harps  on  the  same  string  as  in  the 
previous  verse,  "Those  who  waste  time  in 
drinking,  and  who  give  picnics  (dantes  sym- 
hola),  shall  be  ruined,  aud  somnolence  shall 
clothe  with  rags."  Tiie  LXX.  introduces 
a  new  idea,  which  the  Hebrew  does  not 
warrant,  "  For  every  drunkard  and  whore- 
monger shall  be  poor,  and  every  sluggard 
shall  clothe  himself  with  tatters  and  rags." 

Vers.  22 — 25. — An  ootastich,  containing 
an  earnest  exhortation  to  the  disciple. 

Ver.  22.— That  begat  thee.  This  is  a 
claim  on  the  attention  and  obedience  of  tlie 
son.  When  she  is  old.  When  old  age  with 
its  consequent  infirmities  comes  upon  thy 
mother,  despise  her  not,  but  rather  thank 
God  for  giving  her  long  life,  and  profit  by 
her  love  and  long  experience  (oomp. 
Bcclus.  iii.  1,  etc.,  where  the  exhortation  to 
honour  parents  is  very  full  and  touching). 

Ver.  2? — Buy  the  truth,  and  sell  it  not 
(comp.  ch.  iv.  5,  7 ;  xvi.  16).  Consider 
truth  as  a  thing  of  the  highest  value,  and 
spare  no  pains,  cost,  or  sacrifice  to  obtain 
it,  and,  when  gotten,  keep  it  safe;  do  not 
barter  it  for  earthly  profit  or  the  pleasures 
of  sense ;  do  not  be  reasoned  out  of  it,  or 
laughed  out  of  it ;  "  sell  it  not,"  do  not  part 
with  it  for  any  consideration.  The  second 
clause  gives  the  sphere  in  which  truth 
moves,  or  the  three  properties  which  apper- 
tain to  it.  These  are :  wisdom  (chochmali), 
practical  knowledge;  instruction  (musar), 
moral  culture  and  discipline;  aud  under- 
standing Qnnali),  the  faculty  of  discernment 
(see  notes  on  ch.  i.  2).  Tliis  verse  ib  omitted 
in  the  chief  manuscripts  of  the  Septuagint. 

Ver.  24. — The  father  of  the  righteous 
shall  greatly  rejoice.  The  father  of  a 
righteous  son  who  has  won  truth  and 
profited  by  the  possession  has  good  cause 
to  be  glad  (ch.  x.  1).  Septuagint  erroneously, 
"  A  righteous  father  brings  up  children  well." 
The  second  clause  repeats  the  first  in  dif- 
ferent words,  with  the  further  idea  that  the 
wise  son  affords  his  father  practical  proof  of 
the  excellence  of  his  moral  training.  The 
contrast  is  seen  in  oh.  xvii.  21. 

Ver.  25. — Shall  be  glad;  or,  let  them 
be  glad;  gaudeat,  Vulgate;  fv<\:paivtaBa, 
Septuagint.  She  that  bare  thee.  As  in 
ver.  24  the  father's  joy  was  expressly  men- 
tioned, so  here  prominence  is  given  to  that 
of  the  mother.  In  the  former  case  it  is 
"  he  that  begetteth ; "  here,  "  she  that 
beareth." 

Vers.  26 — 28. — A  bexastich,  in  which 
Wisdom  herself  is  the  speaker,  and  warns 
against  unchaatity. 


444 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[oh.  xxm.  1 — 38. 


Ver.  26  —Give  me  thine  heart.  Do  not 
waste  thy  powera  and  affections  on  evil 
objects,  but  set  thy  soni  witli  all  its  best 
faculties  on  rae,  Wisdom,  who  alone  can 
satisfy  its  desires  and  aspirations.  There  is 
an  eloquent  passage  in  a  tract  that  has  gone 
by  St.  Bernard's  name,  though  not  written 
by  him  ('Epist.  de  Beg.  VitSB  Spirit.,'  ii. 
1604,  Mab.),  which  is  worth  quoting :  "  Cor 
nostrum  nihil  dignius  perficere  potest,  quam 
ut  ei  se  restituat  a  quo  factum  est :  et  hoc  a 
nobis  Dominua  expetit  dicens, '  Pili,  da  mihi 
cor  tuum.'  Tunc  siquidem  cor  hominam 
Deo  datur,  quando  omnia  cogitatio  terrai- 
natur  in  eum,  gyrat  et  circumflectitur  super 
eum,  et  nihil  vult  possidere  prater  eum. 
Sicque  colligate  sibi  animo,  eum  diligit, 
ut  sine  ipso  amarus  sit  omnis  amor.  Neo 
aliud  dixeiim  cor  Domino  dare,  quam  ipsum 
captivare  in  omne  obsequium  ejus,  et  ita 
volunlati  ejus  ex  toto  auppouere,  ut  nihil 
aliud  velit,  quam  quod  noyerit  eum  velle." 
Let  thine  eyes  observe  my  ways;  keep 
closely  to  the  paths  of  virtue  which  I  teach 
thee,  especially  the  path  of  purity,  as  the 
next  verse  shows.  Vulgate,  Via»  meas 
custodiant;  Septuagint,  'E/iks  iSobs  rripfi- 
TOKTav.  This  is  the  reading  of  the  Keri, 
npxn;  the  Khetib,  which  Delitzsoh  and 
others  prefer,  reads  rijsnn,  "  deliglit  in  "  my 
ways. 

Ver.  27. — The  need  of  the  emphatic  in- 
junction in  ver.  26  is  exemplified  by  the 
dangers  of  impurity.  A  deep  ditch ;  as  ch. 
xxii.  14.  A  strange  woman  is  a  narrow  pit. 
(For  "  strange  woman,"  equivalent  to  "  har- 
lot," see  on  ch.  ii.  16.)  A  narrow  pit  is  one 
with  a  narrow  mouth,  from  which,  if  one 
falls  into  it,  it  is  difficult  to  extricate  one's 
self.  The  verse  indicates  the  seductive 
nature  of  the  vice  of  uuehastity :  how  easy 
it  is  to  be  led  into  it  1  how  difficult  to  rise 
from  it!  Tims  St.  Chrysostom  ('Horn.  xi. 
in  1  Cor.'),  "  When  by  unclean  desire  the 
soul  is  miide  captive,  even  as  a  cloud  and 
mist  darken  the  eyes  of  the  body,  so  that 
desire  intercepts  the  foresight  of  the  mind, 
and  8u£fei  s  no  one  to  see  any  distance  before 
him,  either  precipice,  or  hell,  or  fear ;  but 
thenceforth,  having  that  deceit  as  a  tyrant 
over  him,  lie  comes  to  be  easily  vanquished 
by  sin;  and  there  is  raised  up  before  his 
eyes  as  it  were  a  partition  wall,  and  no 
windows  in  it,  which  suffers  not  the  ray  of 
righteousness  to  shine  in  upon  the  mind, 
the  absurd  conceits  of  lust  enclosing  it  as 
with  a  rampart  on  all  sides.  And  then, 
and  from  that  time  forward,  the  unchaste 
woman  is  everywhere  meeting  him — before 
his  eyes,  before  his  mind,  before  his 
thoughts,  in  station  and  presence.  And  as 
the  blind,  although  they  stand  at  high 
noon  beneath  the  very  central  point  of  the 
heaven,  receive  not  the  light,  theii  eyes 


being  fast  closed  up ;  just  so  these  also, 
though  ten  thousand  doctrines  of  salvation 
sound  in  their  ears  from  all  quarters,  having 
their  soul  preoccupied  with  this  passion, 
stop  their  ears  against  all  discourses  of  that 
kind.  And  they  know  it  well  who  have 
made  the  trial.  But  God  forbid  that  you 
should  know  it  from  actual  experience  I " 
The  LXX.  has  changed  the  allusion :  "  For 
a  strange  house  is  a  pierced  wine-jar  (vlSos 
nrfntiifvos),  and  a  strange  well  is  narrow," 
where  the  idea  seems  to  be  that  the  private 
well,  which  is  dug  for  the  convenience  of 
one  family  only,  is  not  to  be  relied  upon, 
and  will  yield  not  enough  to  supply  others' 
wants.  Hence  would  arise  a  warning  against 
coveting  a  neighbour's  wife.  There  is  a 
Greek  proverb  about  drawing  wine  into 
pierced  jars  (Xen.,  '  Q5con.,'  vii.  40). 

Ver.  28.— She  also  lieth  in  wait  as  for  a 
prey.  "Yea,  she  [ch.  xxii.  19]  lieth  in 
wait,"  as  is  graphically  described  in  ch.  vii. 
(comp.  Jer.  iii.  2).  Ghethaph  is  better  taken, 
not  as  "  prey,"  but  in  a.  concrete  sense  as 
the  person  who  snatches  it,  the  robber. 
Vulgate,  Insidiatur  in  via  quati  latro  (comp. 
Ps.  X.  9).  And  increaseth  the  transgressors 
among  men.  The  Greek  and  Latin  versions 
have  taken  t'I'D'n  as  meaning  "  kills,"  "  de- 
stroys." But  the  verb  yasaph  always  means 
"  to  add,"  here  "  to  multiply."  The  special 
transgression  indicated  is  treachery  or  faith- 
lessness. The  harlot  leads  her  victim  to  be 
faithless  to  his  God,  his  wife,  his  parents, 
his  tutor,  his  master.  Septuagint,  "For  he 
shall  perish  suddenly,  and  every  trans- 
gressor sliall  be  destroyed," 

Vers.  29 — ^35. — Here  follows  a  mashal 
ode  or  song  on  the  subject  of  drunkenness, 
which  is  closely  connected  with  the  sin 
mentioned  in  the  previous  lines. 

Ver.  29.— Who  hath  woet  who  hath 
sorrow  1  Hebrew,  lemi  of,  lemi  abot,  where 
oi  and  dbot  are  interjections  of  pain  or  griefs 
So  Venetian,  t(ci  ot,  rim  <j>ev;  Revised  Ver- 
sion margin,  Who  hath  Oh  f  who  hath  Alas  1 
The  Vulgate  has  stumbled  at  the  second 
expression,  which  is  an  aTro|  Key6iifvov,  and 
resolving  it  into  two  words,  ti-anslates,  Oujut 
patri  vml  Contentions;  the  brawling  and 
strife  to  which  drunkenness  leads^ch.  ix.  1). 
Babbling ;  n-&  (^siach)  is  rather  "  meditation," 
"  Bonowful  thought "  showing  itself  in  com- 
plaining, regret  for  lost  fortune,  ruined 
health,  alienated  friends.  Others  render 
"misery,"  "penury."  St.  Jerome's /o«ea» 
is  derived  &om  a  different  reading.  The 
LXX.  has  Kpt(reis,  "lawsuits,"  iaiSlca  koi 
\eaxai,  "  disgust  and  gossipings."  Wounds 
without  cause ;  wounds  which  might  have 
been  avoided,  the  result  of  quarrels  in  which 
a  sober  mau  would  never  have  engaged. 


OH.  xxin.  1 — 35.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


445 


Bedntss  of  eyoi.  The  Hebrew  word  ehnkli- 
liUh  is  commonly  taken  to  moan  the  flashing 
of  eyei  oocasioned  by  vinous  excitement. 
The  Authorized  Version  refers  it  to  the 
bloodshot  appearance  of  a  drunkard's  eyes, 
as  in  Gen.  xlix.  12,  according  to  the  same 
version.  But  Delitzsoh,  Nowack,  and  many 
modem  commentators  consider  that  the 
word  indicates  "  dimness  of  sight,"  that 
change  in  the  power  of  vision  when  the 
stimulant  reaches  the  brain.  Stptuagiut, 
"Whose  eyes  are  livid  (ttcAiSj/oO?"  The 
eifeets  of  intemperance  are  described  in  a 
well-known  passage  of  Lucretius, '  De  Ber. 
Nat.,'  iii.  475,  etc.— 

"  Denique,  cor   hominum    qnom  vini    vis 

penetravit 
Acris,  et  in  venaa  discessit  diditns  ardor, 
Consequitnr   gravitas    membrorum,   pree- 

pcdiuntur 
Orura  TacUlanti,  tardescit  lingua,  madet 

mens, 
Naut   oculei;   clamor,    singultus,  jurgia 

gliscunt." 

We  may  refer  to  the  article  in  Jeremy 
Taylor's  'Holy  Living'  on  "Evil  Conse- 
quents to  Drunkenness,"  and  to  Ecolus. 
xxxiv.  (xxxi.)  25,  etc. 

Ver.  30. — The  answer  to  the  above  search- 
ing questions  is  here  given.  They  that  tarry 
long  at  the  wine  (Isa.  v.  11),  who  sit  till 
late  hours  drinking.  They  that  go  to  seek 
mixed  wine ;  i.e.  go  to  the  wine-house,  place 
of  revelry,  where  they  may  taste  and  give 
their  opinion  upon  "  mixed  wine,"  mimedk, 
wine  mingled  with  certain  spices  or  aromatic 
substances,  or  else  simply  with  water,  as  it 
was  too  luscious  to  be  drunk  undiluted  (see 
on  ch.  ii.  2).  Septuagint,  "  those  who  hunt 
-  out  where  carousals  are  taking  place." 
Ver.  31. — Look  not  thou  upon  the  wine 
when  it  is  red.  Be  not  attracted  by  its 
beautiful  appearance.  The  wine  of  Pales- 
tine was  chiefly  "red,"  though  what  we  call 
white  wine  was  not  unknown.  The  Vulgate 
flavetcit  points  to  the  latter.  When  it  giveth 
his  colour  in  the  cup.  For  "  colour "  the 
Hebrew  has  ''eye,"  which  refers  to  the 
sparkling  and  gleaming  which  show  them- 
selves in  wine  poured  into  the  cup.  It  is 
as  though  the  cup  had  an  eye  which 
glanced  at  the  drinker  with  a  fascination 
which  )ie  did  not  resist.  When  it  jnoveth 
itself  aright.  Having  warned  against  the 
attractiou  of  sight,  the  moralist  now  passes 
to  tlie  seduction  of  taste.  Hebrew,  when 
it  goeih  by  tJie  right  road.  This  may  refer  to 
its  transierence  from  the  jar  or  skin  to  the 
drihktng-cup ;  but  it  more  probably  alludes  to 
the  drinker's  throat,  and  is  best  translated, 
"  when  it  glidotli  down  smoothly."  Vul- 
gate, ingreditur  blande.    Tlie  wine  pleases 


the  palate,  and  passes  over  it  without  rougli- 
ness  or  iiarshness  (comp.  Cant.  vii.  9).  The 
LXX.  has  enlarged  on  tlie  original  thus: 
"  Be  ye  not  drunk  with  wine,  but  converse 
with  just  men,  and  converse  in  public 
places  (iv  TfepiirdTois).  For  if  thou  set  thine 
eyes  on  goblets  and  cups,  afterwards  thou 
slialt  walk  more  bare  than  a  pestle  (yv/i.i'i- 
Tfpos  ivepov)."  This  last  expression,  pis- 
tillo  nudioT,  is  a  proverb.  Regarding  the 
danger  of  looking  on  seductive  objects,  the 
Arab,  in  his  sententious  language,  says, 
"  The  contemplation  of  vice  is  vice." 

Ver.  32. — At  the  last  it  biteth  like  a  serpent. 
Wine  is  like  the  subtle  poison  of  a  serpent, 
which  affects  the  whole  body,  and  produces 
the  most  fatal  consequences  (comp.  Ecclua. 
xxi.  2).  Nachash  is  the  generic  name  for  any 
of  the  larger  tribe  of  snakes  (Gen.  iii.  1,  etc.) ; 
the  poisonous  nature  of  its  bite  was,  of  course, 
well  known  (Numb.  xxi.  9).  Stingeth  like  an 
adder.  The  Hebrew  word  is  tsiphoni,  which 
is  usually  rendered  "  cockatrice "  in  the 
Authorized  Version,  but  the  particular  species 
intended  has  not  been  accurately  identified. 
There  was  some  confusion  in  men's  minds 
as  to  the  orgau  which  inflicted  the  poisonous 
wound.  Thus  a  psalmist  says,  "  They  have 
sharpened  their  tongue  like  a  serpent"  (Ps. 
cxl.  3).  But  the  verb  "sting"  is  to  be 
taken  in  the  sense  of  puncturing,  making 
a  wound-  Vulgate,  Sicut  regulus  venena 
diffundtt,  "  It  will  diffuse  its  poison  like  a 
basilisk  : "  Septuagint,  "  But  at  the  last  he 
stretches  himself  like  one  stricken  by  a 
serpent,  and  the  venom  is  diffused  through 
him  as  by  a  horned  snake  (/cepacrToi;)." 

Ver.  33. — The  excitement  occasioned  by 
wine  is  now  described.  Thine  eyes  shaU 
behold  strange  women.  Ewald,  Delitzsch, 
and  others  take  nnj  to  mean  "strange 
things,"  as  affording  a  better  parallel  to  the 
"  perverse  things  "  of  the  next  clause.  In 
this  case  the  writer  intends  to  denote  the 
fantastic,  often  dreadful,  images  produced 
on  the  brain  by  the  feverish  condition  of 
the  inebriated.  But  the  often  denounced 
connection  between  drunkenness  and  incon- 
tinence, the  constant  reference  to  "  strange 
women  "  in  this  book,  and  the  general  con- 
sensus of  the  versions,  lead  one  to  uphold 
the  rendering  of  the  Authorized  Version. 
It  seems,  too,  somewhat  meagre  to  note 
these  illusions  as  one  of  the  terrible  effects 
of  intemperance,  omitting  all  mention  of  the 
unbriilliug  of  lust,  when  the  eyes  look  out 
for  and  rove  after  unchaste  women.  Thine 
heart  shall  utter  perverse  things  (comp. 
ch.  XV.  28 ;  Matt.  xv.  19).  The  drunkard's 
notions  are  distorted,  and  his  words  partake 
of  the  same  character;  he  confuses  right 
and  wrong ;  he  says  things  which  he  would 
never  speak  if  he  were  in  full  pessessiou  nf 
his  senses.     Septuagint,  "  AVhen  thine  eyes 


449 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[oh.  xxax.  1 — 35. 


bhall  see  a  strange  woman,  then  thy  month 
shall  Bpeak  perverse  things." 

Ver.  31. — As  he  that  Ueth  down  In  the 
midst  of  the  sea.  The  dazed  and  uncon- 
scious condition  of  a  drankard  is  described 
by  one  familiar  with  sea  life,  as  in  Ps.  civ. 
25,  etc.;  cvii.  23,  etc.  The  Hebrew  has 
"  in  the  heart  of  the  sea  "  (Jonah  ii.  4),  i.e. 
the  depth.  Many  understand  the  idea  to 
be  that  the  drunkard  is  compared  to  a  man 
asleep  in  a  frail  boat,  or  to  one  slumbering 
on  board  a  ship  sunk  in  the  trough  of  the  sea. 
But  the  "lying"  here  does  not  imply  sleep,  but 
rather  immersion.  The  inebriated  person  is 
assimilated  to  one  who  is  drowned  or  drown- 
ing, who  is  cut  off  from  all  his  former  pursuits 
and  interests  in  life,  and  has  become  uncon- 
scious of  surrounding  circumstances.  This 
much  more  exactly  represents  the  case  than 
any  notion  of  sleeping  amid  danger.  Sep- 
tuagint,  "  Thou  shalt  lie  as  in  the  heart  of 
the  sea."  Or  as  he  that  lieth  upon  the  top  of 
a  mast;  the  extreme  point  of  the  sailyard, 
where  no  one  could  lie  without  the  greatest 
peril  of  falling  off.  The  drunkard  is  exposed 
to  dangers  of  all  kinds  from  being  unable  to 
take  care  of  himself,  and  yet  is  all  the  time 
unconscious  of  his  critical  situation.  Com. 
k  Lapide,  followed  by  Flumptre,  considers 
that  the  cradle,  or  look-out,  on  the  top  of  the 
mast  is  meant,  where,  if  the  watchman  slept, 
he  would  be  certain  to  endanger  his  life. 
Vulgate,  "like  a  pilot  fallen  asleep,  who 
has  dropped  the  tiller,"  and  is  therefore  on 
the  way  to  shipwreck.  Septuagint,  "as  a 
pilot  in  a  great  storm." 

Ver.  35. — The  drunkard  is  represented  as 
speaking  to  himself.  The  LXX.  inserts, 
"and  then  ehalt  say,"  as  the  Authorized 


Version  does :  They  have  stricken  me,  shalt 
thou  say,  and  I  was  not  sick ;  or,  I  was  not 
hurt.  The  drnnken  man  has  been  beaten 
(perhaps  there  is  a  reference  to  the  "conten- 
tions," ver.  29),  but  the  blows  did  not  pain 
him  ;  his  con<£tion  has  rendered  him  insen- 
sible to  pain.  He  has  some  vagne  idea  tha 
he  has  suffered  certain  rough  treatment  at 
the  hands  of  his  companions,  but  it  has 
made  no  impression  on  him.  They  have 
beaten  me,  and  I  felt  it  not ;  did  not  even 
know  it.  Far  from  recognizing  his  degra- 
dation and  profiting  by  the  merited  chastise- 
ment which  he  has  incurred,  he  is  repre- 
sented as  looking  forward  with  pleasure  to 
a  renewal  of  his  debauch,  when  his  drunken 
sleep  shall  be  over.  When  shall  I  awake  1 
I  wUl  seek  it  (wine)  yet  again.  Some  take 
^np  (matliai)  as  the  relative  conjonctive: 
"When  I  awake  I  will  seek  it  again;"  but 
it  is  always  used  interrogatively,  and  the 
expression  thus  becomes  more  animated, 
as  Delitzsch  observes.  It  is  as  though  the 
drunkard  has  to  yield  to  the  effects  of  his 
excess  and  sleep  off  his  intoxication,  but  he 
is,  as  it  were,  all  the  time  longing  to  be 
able  to  rouse  himself  and  recommence  his 
orgies.  We  have  had  words  put  into  the 
mouth  of  the  sluggard  (ch.  vi.  10).  The 
whole  verse  is  rendered  by  the  LXX.  thus : 
"  Thou  shalt  say.  They  smote  me,  and  I  was 
not  pained,  and  they  mocked  me,  and  I 
knew  it  not.  When  will  it  be  morning, 
that  I  may  go  and  seek  those  with  whom 
I  may  consort  ?  "  The  author  of  the  '  Trac- 
tatus  de  Conscientia '  appended  to  St.  Ber- 
nard's works,  applies  this  paragraph  to  the 
case  of  an  evil  conscience  indurated  by 
wicked  habits  and  insensible  to  correction. 


H0MILETIC8. 

Vers.  1 — 8. — Byeophaney  and  independence.  The  reader  is  here  warned  against  the 
danger  of  depending  too  mach  on  the  favour  of  great  people.  Possibly  that  favour  is 
only  offered  as  a  bribe,  and  the  unwary  recipient  of  it  may  be  no  better  than  a  dupe, 
who  has  unconsciously  sold  himself.  At  the  best  it  tends  to  destroy  the  spirit  of 
independence. 

I.  He  who  depends  on  the  fayoub  of  a  obeat  han  pnTs  himbelf  dj  his  power. 
In  proportion  to  the  power  to  help  is  the  power  to  hurt.  It  is  a  dangerous  thing  to  trust 
one's  interests  to  man  at  all ;  but  it  is  doubly  dangerous  where  there  is  no  equality  of 
relationship. 

II.  Dbpbndbnok  on  the  favour  of  the  great  tempts  to  dibhonourable  con- 
duct. The  sycophant  is  in  danger  of  stooping  to  unworthy  actions  in  order  to  please 
his  patron.  He  is  tempted  to  deceive  and  flatter  in  the  hope  of  winning  favour.  The 
will  of  the  great  man  supersedes  the  conscience  of  his  dependant.  1'hus  sycophancy 
wrecks  the  moral  nature. 

III.  This  dependence  debtboys  true  manliness.  The  poor  creature  who  lives 
on  the  favour  of  the  great  loses  all  self-reliance.  The  honest  industrr  that  earns  a 
night's  repose  is  exchanged  for  miserable  tricks  c(  cringing  slavery.  Such  conduct  may 
earn  the  dainties  of  luxury,  but  only  at  the  cost  of  all  that  life  is  worth  living  for.  It 
is  infinitely  better  to  be  independent,  though  compelled  to  live  on  the  coarsest  fw*. 


CH.  xxm.  1—36.]  THE  PROVERBS.  447 


IV.  SUOH  A  DEPENDENCE  ON  THE   GREAT  IS   SDBK   TO   BE   DISAPPOINTING.      The  BVCO- 

phant  succeeds  in  obtaining  a  place  at  the  banquet.  But  he  cannot  enjoy  the  feast  like 
those  guests  who  meet  the  host  on  terms  of  equality.  He  sita  in  constant  dread  of ' 
offending  the  great  man.  Though  hungry,  he  shrinks  from  eating  too  much.  He  must 
almost  put  a  knife  to  his  throat  to  check  his  appetite;  i.e.  he  must  be  always  nervously 
Du  his  guard  against  trespassing  too  far  on  the  good  will  of  his  host.  Surely  such  a 
condition  must  be  miserable  at  the  best  1 

V.  The  only  safe  dependence  is  that  op  man  on  God.  This  is  not  degrading, 
but  ennobling ;  for  God  is  worthy  of  all  trust,  honour,  and  adoration.  He  never  deceives' 
those  who  put  their  confidence  in  him.  There  is  no  painful  fear  for  those  who  accept 
his  gracious  invitation  to  the  "  wedding-feast,"  for  he  is  kind  and  merciful. 

VI.  Among  men  the  safest  condition  is  one  of  manly  independence.  This 
does  not  mean  churlish  indifference  and  selfish  isolation  from  all  social  intercgurse.  The 
text  supposes  a  person's  presence  at  the  great  man's  table,  while  it  warns  against  the 
danger  of  the  situation.  We  want  to  learn  to  be  friendly  with  all  men,  and,  at  the  same 
time,  self-reliant  through  inward  dependence  on  God  alone. 

Ver.  4. — Labouring  to  be  rich.  Never  was  the  advice  of  the  wise  man  more  appro- 
priate than  it  is  in  the  present  day ;  but  never  were  people  more  slow  to  accept  it.  Let 
us  consider  the  grounds  on  which  is  based  the  warning,  "  Labour  not  to  be  rich." 

I.  It  is  impossible  fob  most  people  to  become  rich.  In  the  lottery  of  life  the 
prizes  are  few  and  the  blanks  many.  If  the  race  for  wealth  is  accelerated,  the  stakes 
are  not  multiplied.  Or,  if  it  be  by  production  ratlier  than  by  commerce  that  the  riches 
are  to  be  got,  so  that  greater  industry  may  actually  create  more  wealth,  still  each  of 
the  multitude  of  the  toilers  can  share  but  a  fraction  of  the  total  produce.  Riches  only 
fall  into  the  hands  of  a  very  small  number  of  persons.  Consequently,  labouring  to  be 
rich  often  becomes  just  a  species  of  gambling.  It  frequently  partakes  of  the  selfish, 
cruel  character  of  gambling,  the  few  fortunate  persons  enriching  themselves  at  the 
expense  of  the  large  number  of  unfortunate  persons.  If  a  man  can  be  content  to  work 
with  his  fellows  and  share  with  them,  he  will  be  saved-  from  a  multitude  of  anxieties 
that  must  besiege  him  the  moment  he  enters  the  exciting  race  for  riches. 

IL  The  cost  of  labouring  to  be  rich  is  exorbitant.  1.  In  energy/.  The  fierce 
battle  of  life  tries  a  man  who  only  strives  to  keep  his  ground.  They  who  would  force 
their  way  on  to  marked  success  must  toil  with  double  effort.  Rising  early,  sitting  tip 
late,  taking  no  holidays,  working  at  high  pressure,  they  must  put  out  every  effort  if 
they  would  pass  equally  eager  competitors.  2.  In  time.  The  riches  are  not  usually 
reached  soon.  As  a  rule,  it  takes  many  years  to  pile  up  a  great  fortune,  and  when  the 
coveted  end  is  attained,  the  tired  toiler  is  too  old  and  weary  to  enjoy  it.  3.  In  higher 
riches.  The  wealth-seeker  sinks  into  a  low  materialism.  He  becomes  a  mere  machine 
for  coining  guineas,  and  his  soul  is  ground  to  dust  in  the  money-making  mill. 

III.  When  the  pursuit  of  riches  is  successful,  the  attainment  is  disappoint - 
iNG.  Riches  bring  new  cares.  There  is  an  anxiety  to  retain  what  has  been  won  at  so 
great  a  cost.  They  may  make  themselves  wings,  and  "fly  away  as  an  eagle'  toward 
heaven  "  (ver.  5).  If  no  fear  is  felt  on  this  account,  wealth  itself  is  found  to  be  unsatis- 
factory. The  mere  money-seeker  has  not  cultivated  any  taste  for  the  finer  enjoyments 
which  his  wealth  could  buy  him.  He  cannot  satisfy  his  soul  with  money;  he  has  no 
soul  to  enjoy  the  best  things  in  art,  etc.,  which  money  can  purchase.  But  even  if  he 
could  enjoy  those  things,  they  would  not  satisfy;  for  man  has  deep  wants  which  neither 
money  nor  its  purchases  can  ever  meet.     Riches  are  a  poor  salve  for  a  breaking  heart. 

IV.  Labouring  to  be  rich  leads  to  the  neglect  of  the  nobler  pursuits  of 
LIFE.  1.  Mind-culture.  It  might  be  better  to  be  more  poor  and  to  have  time  for 
reading,  music,  meditation.  2.  Social  intercourse.  Buried  in  business,  the  fierce  toiler 
after  money  has  no  leisure  or  heart  for  cultivating  the  friendship  of  his  neighbours. 
3.  The  service  of  Ood.  "  Life  is  more  than  meat ;  "  "  Seek  first  the  kingdom  of  God 
and  his  righteousness."  Labouring  to  be  rich  too  often  means  working  for  self  and 
toiling  for  earth.  Men  sometimes  make  family  claims  an  excuse  for  doing  nothing 
directly  in  the  service  of  Christ ;  when,  if  they  were  honest,  they  would  confess  that 
they  are  simply  labouring  to  be  rich.  The  family,  which  in  this  case  is  a  larger  self, 
becomes  a  shield  for  selfishnesi. 


MS  THE  PROVBRBa  [oh.  ixni.  1— «6. 

Ver.  11. — The  mighty  Redeemer.  I.  Thb  helpless  need  a.  miohty  Rbdbbmke. 
In  simple,  rough  times  some  provision  had  to  be  made  to  protect  the  weak  from  the 
oyerbearing  insolence  and  tyranny  of  the  strong.  When  the  arm  of  the  law  was  not 
capable  of  maintaining  justice,  private  friends  were  required  and  authorized  to  take  up 
the  cause  of  the  wronged.  The  goel,  or  avenger,  vyas  then  needed  to  stand  up  for  his 
helpless  kinsfolk.  But  there  were  extreme  cases  in  which  no  such  assistance  could 
bring  deliverance,  either  because  no  relative  was  living  who  could  undertake  the  task, 
or  because  the  distress  was  so  desperate  that  no  human  hand  could  relieve  it.  This 
might  happen  with  heart-broken  wiiiows  robbed  of  husband,  children,  and  land,  and 
left  penniless  and  friendless.  But  even  such  cases  of  the  utmost  distress  are  not  so 
desperate  as  that  of  the  soul  in  its  sin  and  wretchedness,  utterly  and  hopelessly  undone 
unless  some  mighty  hand  of  redemption  is  stretched  out  to  save  it. 

II.  God  i^  A  MiQHTT  Redeemer.  "  Two  essential  conditions  were  required  in  the 
redeemer.  He  must  have  a  right  to  interfere,  and  he  must  have  power  to  succeed. 
God  has  both.  1.  The  right.  The  ri^iht  of  the  old  Hebrew  redeemer  was  blood- 
relationship.  The  nearest  kinsman  was  called  to  act  as  goel.  God  is  nearly  related  to 
man.  He  is  the  Father  of  all.  The  friendless  poor  have  One  left  who  regards  them  as 
of  his  family.  Christ  came  as  a  brother-man  to  be  the  Redeemer  of  the  hnman  race. 
2.  The  power.  (1)  God  has  power  us  the  Almighty.  He  can  overthrow  ihe  greatest. 
If  the  poor  man  has  God  on  his  side,  he  need  not  fear  the  most  imptrious  tyranny ;  it 
is  as  child's  play  before  the  majesty  of  heaven.  (2)  Christ  has  power  as  the  crucified. 
Saviour.  The  great  redemption  from  man's  worst  enemy,  sin,  is  won  by  the  cross  of 
Christ.    Now  he  is  "able  to  save  unto  the  uttermost." 

III.  God's  miohty  bedemption  is  available.  He  is  not  only  a  mighty  Redeemer; 
he  is  willing  to  help,  and  he  does  afford  succour.  1.  He  a^ta  in  justice.  "  Shall  not 
the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  do  right  ?  "  (Gen.  xviii.  25).  At  present  we  witness  cruel 
injustice.  The  poor  are  oppressed  by  the  strong.  Haid-toiling  men,  women,  and  children 
in  manufacturing  centres  are  ground  into  penury  by  the  fierce  mill  of  competition, 
while  ruthless  "  middle-men  "  fatten  on  their  ill-paid  labour.  The  few  in  prosperity 
revel  in  luxury  that  they  wring  out  of  the  many  in  penury.  God  will  not  permit  sncU 
cruel  wrongs  to  last  for  ever.  'The  Redeemer  is  an  Avenger.  The  blood  of  the  victims 
of  those  who  make  haste  to  be  rich  at  the  expense  of  their  starving  brethren  cries  out 
to  heaven  for  vengeance.  It  will  not  always  cry  in  vain.  (1)  Meanwhile,  seeinj;  that 
the  Redeemer  of  the  poor  is  mighty,  it  would  be  well  for  the  reckless  oppressors  to 
repent  before  the  sword  of  judgment  is  unsheathed.  (2)  They  who  are  working  at  the 
apparently  hopeless  task  of  helping  the  poor  and  oppressed  have  a  great  encouragement. 
God,  the  mighty  Avenger,  is  on  their  side.  2.  He  acts  in  mercy.  He  pities  the  suffer- 
ing poor.  They  are  his  children,  and  he  will  not  forget  their  needs.  Love  is  thi' 
inspiration  of  Divine  redemption.  This  is  the  secret  of  Christ's  great  redempt'nn  of 
sinners.  Justice  is  ultimately  satisfied  here;  but  the  first  motive  is  mercy,  for  the 
helpless  are  also  the  ill-deserving.     Yet  even  their  Redeemer  is  mighty. 

Vers.  17, 18. — Envying  sinners.  I.  There  is  a  great  temptation  to  envv  sinners. 
The  wise  man  would  waste  words  in  giving  a  warning  if  he  saw  no  danger.  This  tempt-i- 
tion  is  fascinating  on  various  accounts.  1.  Sinners  prosper.  This  \\  as  the  old  ground 
of  the  psalmist's  perplexity.  The  righteous  were  suHeiiug  while  the  wicked  were  fat- 
tening in  ill-earned  luxury  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  3 — 9).  2.  Sinners  take  forhidden  paths  with 
impunity.  They  trespass  and  are  not  arrested.  Thus  they  attain  their  ends  by  easy 
ways  from  which  conscientious  people  are  restrained.  They  are  not  troubled  with 
scruples.  3.  Sinners  escape  onerous  duties.  There  are  great  and  weighty  obligations 
that  rest  like  a  heavy  yoke  on  the  shoulders  of  an  earnest  man  who  tries  to  do  his  duty 
to  God  and  his  fellows,  all  of  which  are  simply  ignored  by  the  man  of  L.wer  morals. 
Hence  the  apparently  easier  course  of  the  latter.  He  can  refuse  the  subsorrijtion  list, 
decline  to  work  in  the  benevolent  society,  and  shirk  all  the  burdens  that  come  from 
sympathy  with  the  suffering.  4.  Sinners  enjoy  wicked  pleasures.  They  are  pleasure- 
seekers,  and  they  seem  to  obtain  pleasure.  Thus  at  a  superficial  jtlance  they  appear  to 
have  sources  of  happiness  from  which  those  who  are  more  rigorous  in  regarding  the- 
law  of  righteousness  are  excluded.  The  child  of  the  Puritan  home  envies  the  gay  cavaliei 
his  merry  revelry. 


3H.  xxin.  1— 35.]  THE  PROVERBS.  449 

II.  It  is  wkono  to  envy  sinners.  1.  This  is  to  doubt  Ood^s  justice.  Though  we 
cannot  yet  see  the  issue  of  events,  we  must  believe  that  God  will  not  allow  injustice  to 
flourish  for  ever,  unless  he  cares  not  for  the  course  of  the  world  or  is  unable  to  set  it 
li^ht.  To  suppose  any  such  condition  is  to  distrust  God.  2.  This  is  to  form  a  low 
estimate  of  the  purpose  of  life.  We  are  not  sent  into  the  world  simply  to  enjoy  ourselves, 
but  primarily  to  do  our  duty.  If  we  are  fulfilling  that  great  purpose,  it  is  a  degradatinn 
to  envy  those  who  seem  to  be  more  fortunate  than  ourselves  in  the  mere  enjoyment 
of  worldly  pleasures.  3.  This  is  to  yield  to  the  attraction  of  univorlhy  delights.  The 
pleasures  of  sinners  are  sinful.  To  lust  after  such  forbidden  fruit  is  to  l)ave  a  depraved 
appetite.  The  soul  that  is  truly  pure  will  loathe  the  delights  of  sin.  It  will  not  be  hard 
(in  a  good  man  that  his  conscience  forbids  him  to  frequent  the  haunts  of  vicious  revelry. 
He  could  find  no  true  pleasure  for  himself  amid  such  scenes. 

III.  In  the  end  the  mistake  op  envtino  sinnbks  will  be  dbmonstkated.  "  For 
surely  there  is  an  end."  The  pleasure-seeker  is  short-sighted.  To  judge  of  the  wisdom 
of  following  his  course,  we  must  see  what  it  leads  to.  1.  The  pleasure  must  end.  The 
delights  of  evil  are  brief,  and  they  are  followed  by  wretchedness.  The  wild  devotee  of 
pleasure  soon  becomes  a  debauched  and  hlase  wreck  of  humanity.  If  one  is  prudent 
enough  to  avoid  extreme  folly,  still  death  will  soon  come  and  put  an  end  to  all  worldly 
pleasure.  2.  Sinful  pleasure  produces  suffering.  It  corrupts  body  and  soul;  it  sows 
seeds  of  disease  and  misery.  They  who  sow  to  the  flesh  will  reap  corruption.  3.  There 
mil  be  retribution  in  the  next  world.  There  is  a  future.  Does  the  sinner  consider  this  7 
Does  the  foolish  mikn  who  envies  him  remember  it  ? 

Ver.  26. — Our  Father's  claim.    I.  God  claims  NOTHiNf)  less  than  the  heart, 

1.  Some  offer  belief  of  the  intellect.  It  is  well  to  understand  truth  and  to  believe  in  that 
which  is  revealed  about  God.  We  may  give  many  thoughts  to  God ;  but  these,  with- 
out the  heart,  wiU  not  satisfy  him.  2.  Some  offer  external  service.  This  is  claimed  by 
God,  but  only  as  the  fruit  of  a  loving  heart.  Given  in  hard,  mechanical  work,  without 
love  or  devotion,  it  is  worthless  in  the  sight  of  God.  3.  Some  offer  money,  sacrifices, 
worship.  All  such  things  are  acceptable  only  as  growing  out  of  the  heart.  In  heart- 
less worshippers  these  are  but  mockery,  and  are  rejeoteil  by  God.  4.  God's  true  children 
must  give  their  hearts.  They  must  give  themselves,  their  inmost  being,  their  very  lives, 
thoughts,  affections,  desires^ 

II.  The  heart  is  claimed  by  God  above  all.  1.  Tlie  world  tries  to  claim  it.  Some 
men  are  enchained  in  its  fascinations,  and  so  withdrawn  from  God.  2.  Sin  endeavours 
to  ensnare  it.  If  it  is  not  a  divine  possession,  it  will  be  held  by  sin.  It  cannot  be 
detached.  It  will  be  given  to  evil  if  not  to  God.  8.  /SeJ^  hopes  to  hold  it.  lu  selfish- 
ness men  would  retain  their  hearts,  their  love  and  devotion,  for  their  own  interests.  Yet 
in  doing  so  their  hearts  harden,  shrink,  and  perish.  4.  Ood  has  the  supreme  claim  on 
the  heart.  We  must  not  be  satisfied  with  devotion  to  tlie  Church  or  with  good  will 
towards  men.  The  first  duty  is  to  love  the  Lord  our  God  with  all  our  heart.  He  must 
be  first. 

III.  The  heart  must  be  wholly  given  to  God.  We  must  not  be  content  to 
love  God  half-heartedly.  We  must  give  our  heart  to  God,  and  give  it  wholly,  if  we 
would  satisfy  his  claim.  1.  Give  it  in  affection.  This  means  a  supreme  surrender  of 
our  heart's  love  to  God.  2.  Give  it  in  devotion.  God  expects  loyal  service,  not  merely 
ihe  adoration  of  the  lips  or  the  work  of  the  hands,  but  the  consecration  of  the  very  soul 
»nd  life  and  being  to  him.  3.  Give  it  in  trust.  If  one  truly  gives  his  heart  to  God,  it 
is  put  in  a  safe  place,  to  he  guarded  from  harm  and  sin.  God  is  the  safest  treasuiy  for 
man's  most  precious  treasure.  When  the  heart  is  entrusted  to  God,  he  will  not  betray 
It ;  its  affection  and  devotion  will  lead  it  not  to  desire  evil ;  it  wiU  be  in  a  sanctuary 
amid  the  storms  and  battles  of  life. 

IV.  God  claims  the  heart  of  his  son  because  he  is  a  Father.  This  is  a  family 
claim.  The  call,  "  My  son,"  justifies  the  claim,  "  Give  me  thine  heart."  1.  The  claim 
rests  on  the.obligations  of  the  filial  tie.  A  young  man  may  freelj  choose  or  refuse  a 
particular  person  to  be  his  friend.  But  he  is  not  thus  free  in  regard  to  his  father.  He 
owes  duty  and  love  to  a  father.  God  is  represented  by  Malachi  as  saying,  "A  son 
honoureth  his  father  ...  if  then  I  be  a  Father,  where  is  mine  honour? "  (Mai.  i.  6) 

2.  The  claim  is  strengthened  by  the  love  of  Ood.     He  is  a  good  Father ;  he  does  not  ask 

FKOVEEBB.  2  O 


150  THE  PROVERBS.  [oh.  ixm.  1— S& 

his  son  to  do  ^rhat  he  has  not  done  himself.    God  first  gives  his  heart  to  his  child,  and 
then  seeks  the  child's  heart  in  return. 

V.  The  hbabt  must  be  given  voluntarilt  to  Gdn.  God  is  Lord  of  all,  and  he 
has  a  right  to  enforce  universal  ohedienoe.  But  he  cares  not  for  loveless,  compulsory 
service.  Therefore  he  condescends  to  wait  for  willing  devotion,  and  to  ask  for  the  hoart 
of  his  son.  1,  Perhaps  the  heart  is  not  yet  given  to  God.  God  seelts  what  he  has  not 
received.  2.  2%«  heart  can  only  be  given  by  decision  of  will.  We  shall  remain  away 
from  God  unless  we  decide  to  respond  to  the  call  of  our  Father,  and  freely  offer  him  our 
hearts. 

Vers.  31,  32. —  The  danger  of  strong  drink.  I.  It  is  tbbriblt  fascinatino.  1.  It 
is  leauti/ul  to  the  eye.  The  wine  sparkles  in  the  cup.  2.  It  is  palatable.  Though 
children  at  first  shudder  at  it,  as  at  some  unnatural  product,  the  early  dislike  is  easily 
surmounted,  and  then  nothing  can  be  more  attractive.  3.  It  is  exhilarating.  It  gives 
pleasurable  excitement,  stimulates  jaded  energies,  enlivens  .conversation,  drowns  sorrow, 
and  promises  still  larger  enjoyments.  4.  It  is  recommended  by  social  influences.  Good- 
fellowship  seems  to  go  with  the  use  of  strong  drink.  In  some  circles  to  decline  it  appears 
unsociable. 

11.  It  is  peabfullt  dangebous.  The  mischief  is  not  seen  at  first.  It  is  "  at  last " 
that  "  it  biteth  like  a  serpent."  Hence  its  snake-like  deception,  as  well  as  the  deadli- 
ness  of  its  venom.  But  this  venom  is  so  deadly  that  all  need  to  be  warned  against  its 
fatal  consequences.  It  bites  in  many  places;  e.g.:  1.  The  purse.  Money  runs  out  like 
water,  business  fails,  the  home  is  wrecked  and  broken  up  as  the  effect  of  this  serpent- 
bite  of  strong  drink.  2.  The  health.  The  firm  hand  becomes  palsied,  the  bright  eye 
dimmed,  and  the  strong  body  diseased  when  this  venom  of  intoxication  is  in  the  blood. 
3.  The  mental  powers.  The  brain  is  weakened  with  the  body.  Thought  is  paralyzed 
or  reduced  to  inanity.  The  lawyer,  the  doctor,  the  scholar,  lose  the  faculties  neces- 
sary for  their  avocations.  4.  The  moral,  nature.  The  one  sin  of  intemperance  too  often 
debauches  the  conscience  and  prepares  the  way  for  other  sins  (see  ver.  33).  5.  Reputa- 
tion. Tlie  drunkard  loses  his  character.  His  good  name  vanishes  in  smoke  when  this 
deadly  serpent  lays  hold  of  him.  6.  Soul-l^e.  This,  too,  is  poisoned  and  slain. 
Seiig-k/n  is  wrecked.    The  drunkard  cannot  enter  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 

in.  It  should  be  utterly  shunned.  It  is  urged  that  all  these  indisputably  evil 
things  only  come  fi-om  drinking  to  excess.  They  are  the  results  of  the  abuse,  not  of  the 
use  of  strong  drink.  Men  should  be  wise  enough  to  take  warning,  and  not  to  go  to 
excess  with  what,  used  in  moderation,  is  perfectly  harmless.  This  was  not  the  opinion 
of  the  wisest  man.  He  not  only  urged  his- reader  to  refrain  from  excess ;  he  would  have 
him  not  even  look  at  the  fascinating  cup,  lest  he  should  be  ensnared  by  its  snake-like 
charms.  Many  things  concur  to  demand  this  extra  caution.  1.  2%e  terrible  extent  and 
einl  of  intemperance.  This  is  no  small  failing,  but  a  national  vice,  and  a  source  of  wide 
and  awful  wretchedness.  As  no  ordinary  enemy  has  to  be  faced,  so  no  ordinary  means 
will  secure  us  against  it.  2.  The  insidious  nature  of  the  temptation.  It  works  by  sl(  w 
degrees.  At  first  it  appears  to  be  harmless.  The  fatal  steps  lead  down  slowly  and 
without  a  shock  of  surprise,  till  it  is  too  late  to  return.  It  is  best  to  hold  back  at  first. 
3.  The  needlcssness  of  the  strong  drink.  Except  in  particular  conditions  of  weakness 
and  illness,  it  is  not  required.     To  renounce  it  is  not  to  sacrifice  any  really  good  thing. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1—8. — Hints  and  warnings  on  conduct.  I.  Perils  of  oourtlt  life.  (Vers. 
1— 3.)  The  Arab  proverb  says,  "  He  who  sups  with  the  sultan  bums  his  lips,"  and, 
"  With  kings  one  sits  at  the  table  lor  honour's  sake,  not  for  that  of  appetite."  Horace 
says  that  kings  are  said  to  press  dainties  and  wine  upon  thost  whom  they  desire  to 
scrutinize  and  test,  as  to  whether  they  be  worthy  of  friendship.  The  caution  is  therefore 
one  dictated  by  prudence.    And  in  general  it  may  be  thus  understood :   Beware  of 

fomg  to  places  and  frequenting  society  where  watchfulness  and  prudence  are  likely  to 
e  overborne ;  and  take  care  that  the  body,  by  being  pampered,  becomes  not  the  master 
of  the  soul. 


OH.  xxin.  1— 36.]  THE  PROVERBS.  461 

n.  Perilb  and  vanity  of  riches.  (Vers.  4,  5.)  This  precept  does  not  forbid 
industry  and  diligent  toil  for  worldly  gain ;  but  only  excessive  carefulness  in  regard  to 
it,  over-valuation  of  its  worth,  and  the  burning  lust  of  avarice,  which  implies  want  of 
confidence  in  God  aud  of  the  sense  of  our  true  position  in  the  world.  The  antidote  is 
the  exhortation  of  the  Saviour  to  lay  up  treasures  in  heaven — to  make  certain  of  the 
incorruptible  riches  (Matt.  vi.  19,  20).  "  It  is  a  wise  course  to  be  jealous  of  our  gain, 
and  more  to  fear  than  to  desire  abundance.  It  is  no  easy  thing  to  carry  a  full  cup 
with  an  even  hand  "  (Leighton). 

IIL  CoERUPTiON  FROM  EVIL  ASSOCIATIONS.  (Vers.  6—8.)  The  man  of  the  evil  eye 
is  the  jealous  or  envious  temper;  his  heart  is  dyed  in  its  dark  colour.  There  is  no 
genuine  hospitality  here ;  it  is  like  that  of  the  Pharisees  who  invited  our  Lord.  This 
bitter  sauce  of  envious  hatred  will  presently  be  found  giving  a  disgusting  flavour  to  his 
delicacies.  Discontent  will  poison  the  best  food  and  wine.  "  Men's  minds  will  either 
feed  on  their  own  good  or  others'  evil,  and  whoso  wanteth  the  one  will  prey  upon  the 
other."  Envy  takes  no  holidays.  The  devil  is  represented  as  the  envious  man  who 
sows  tares  among  the  wheat  at  night.  Always  it  works  subtly,  in  the  dark,  and  to 
the  prejudice  of  good  things,  such  as  is  the  wheat  (Bacon).  Instead  of  seeking  the 
pleasures  which  bring  disgust,  let  us  secure  a  humble  fare  with  Christian  content 
(Phil.  iv.  11).— J. 

Vers.  9 — 11. — Holding  aloof  from  evil.  I.  The  pooTj.  (Ver.  9.)  There  is  "  a  time 
to  keep  silence."  Truth  may  be  desecrated  in  certain  company  by  speech  and  honoured 
by  silence.  Pearls  are  not  to  be  cast  before  swine.  The  silence  of  Christ  was  equally 
eloquent  with  his  words.  How  much  does  the  sentence  convey,  "  He  answered  him 
never  a  word"!  Beyond  a  certain  point  explanations  are  worse  than  useless;  the 
caviller  only  takes  them  as  food  for  his  folly  and  encouragement  to  his  perversity. 

II.  The  oppressor.  (Ver.  10.)  The  property  of  the  widow  and  the  fatherless  is  in 
the  protection  of  the  Almighty.  He  is  the  Eternal  Vindicator  of  down-trodden  right. 
In  the  bright  evangelical  picture  of  conduct  it  is  the  very  opposite  of  violence  and 
oppression  to  the  weak  that  is  held  up  for  our  emulation  :  "  To  visit  the  fatherless  and 
the  widow  in  their  affliction."  And  the  negative  side  is,  in  one  word,  "  to  keep  one's 
self  unspotted  from  the  world." — J. 

Vers.  12 — 18. — Discipline  in  Divine  wisdom.  I.  The  temper  of  dooilitt.  (Ver. 
12.)  It  is  submission  of  the  affections  to  a  higher  law.  It  is  the  resignation  of  the  will 
to  a  higher  leading.  It  is  the  opening  of  the  understanding  to  Divine  counsels.  It  is 
the  realization,  on  the  one  hand,  of  dependence  and  need ;  on  the  other,  of  the  light, 
the  wisdom,  and  the  goodness  which' ever  meet  that  need. 

II.  The  necessity  of  discipline  foe  the  yoxjno.  (Vers.  13,  14;  see  on  ch.  iii. 
27;  xix.  18;  xxii.  15.)  Luther  says,  in  his  blunt  way,  "Beat  your  son,  and  the 
hangman  will  not  beat  him.  There  must  be  a  beating  once  for  all ;  if  the  father  does 
it  not.  Master  Hans  will;  there  is  no  help  for  it.  None  ever  escaped  it;  for  it  is  God's 
judgment."  Another  sternly  says,  "Many  parents  deserve  hell  on  their  children's 
account,  because  they  neglect  to  train  them  in  piety." 

III.  Joy  in  dutiful  children.  (Vers.  15, 16.)  It  is  next  to  the  joy  in  the  personal 
sense  of  God's  grace.  None  but  a  parent  knows  the  heart  of  a  parent — the  "  travailing 
in  birth  "  over  their  souls,  the  joy  of  discovering  symptoms  of  the  new  life.  "  May  all 
my  suns  be  Benaiahs,  the  Lord's  building;  then  will  they  all  be  Abners,  the  father's 
light:  all  my  daughters  Bithiahs,  the  Lord's  daughters;  and  then  they  will  be  all 
Abigails,  their  father's  joy  "  (Swinnock).  What  must  be  the  joy  in  heaven  and  in  th« 
bosom  of  God  over  his  returning  and  dutiful  children  1 

IV.  Envy  of  the  wicked  rebuked.  (Vers.  17,  18.)  When  Socrates  was  asked 
what  was  most  troublesome  to  good  men,  he  replied,  "  The  prosperity  of  the  wicked." 
Here,  then,  is  a  great  temptation.  It  needs  an  antidote  in  reason.  There  is  no  reason 
for  this  envy.  They  are  not  truly  happy.  We  look  at  them  from  the  outside ;  the 
dark  discontent  of  the  heart  is  concealed  from  us.  To  -live  in  the  communion  of  God, 
on  the  other  hand,  is  a  secret,  a  certain,  a  profound  and  all-compensating  joy.  The 
enjoyment  of  the  vdcked,  such  as  it  is,  must  have  its  end ;  while  the  child  of  God  ends 
omy  to  begin  saew — sinks  below  the  horizon  to  rise  in  the  power  of  an  endless  life. 


462  THE  PBO VERBS.  [oh.  ixiu.  1—35. 

Wo  have  thus  three  resources  against  sin :  the  avoidance  of  evil  example ;  revereuce 
before  Gud ;  and  constant  recollection  of  the  blessings  of  piety  and  virtue. — J. 

Vers.  19 — ^25. — The  perils  of  dissipation  and  the  antidote.  "Who  hath  ears  to  hear, 
let  him  hear." 

I.  rBRiLS  OF  DISSIPATION.  (Vers.  20,  21.)  Gluttony  and  wine-bibbing.  As  the 
stomach  is  the  centre  of  health,  so  it  is  also  of  disease.  A  v?ise  man  (Dr.  Johnson) 
sail!  that  if  one  did  not  care  for  one's  stomach,  one  was  not  likely  to  care  for  anything. 
It  is  equally  true  that  he  who  cares  only  or  chiefly  for  the  flesh  will  make  a  wreck  of 
everything  else.  Gluttony  has  been  pointed  to  as  "the  source  of  all  our  infirmities, 
the  fountain  ol  all  our  diseases.  As  a  lamp  is  choked  by  superabundance  of  oil,  a  fire 
extinguished  by  excess  of  fuel,  so  is  the  natural  heat  of  the  body  destroyed  by 
intemperate  diet."  By  slow  degrees,  and  more  and  more,  the  habits  of  self-indulgence 
nnderraine  the  strength  of  body,  still  more  certainly  the  vigour  of  mind,  until  poverty 
comes  like  an  armed  man. 

II.  The  antidote.  1.  Early  instruction  to  he  constantly  recalled.  (Ver.  22.)  Along 
with  the  affectionate  association  of  the  parents  who  gave  it.  That  "  men  shall  be  dis- 
obedient to  their  own  parents  "  (2  Tim.  iii.  2)  is  one  of  the  marks  of  the  great  apostasy 
in  Scripture.  But "  comely  and  pleasant  to  see,  and  worthy  of  honour  from  the  I  eholder," 
is  a  child  understanding  the  eye  of  his  parent  (Bishop  Hall).  2.  The  truth  of  life  to  be 
held  in  supreme  value.  (Ver.  23.)  Wisdom,  discipline,  insight, — these  are  various  names 
(if  the  one  thing,  difi'erent  aspects  of  the  pearl  of  great  price.  There  are  required  in  the 
truth-seeker — attention,  willingness  for  toil,  judgment,  the  constant  preference  of  reason 
to  prejudice,  teachableness,  humility,  self-control.  Translated  into  Christian  terms, 
this  pearl  of  great  price  is  "  the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord." 
Buuyan  beautifully  describes  the  pilgrims  answering  the  sneering  reproach,  "  What 
will  you  buy?"  They  lifted  their  eyes  above:  "We  will  buy  the  truth!"  And  no 
sacrifice  is  too  costly  with  this  end  in  view,  as  the  example  of  holy  men  and  martyrs 
teaches — Moses,  Paul,  the  Hebrews  (Heb.  xi.  24 — 26).  To  sell  one's  birthright  for 
a.  mess  of  pottage  (as  Esau,  Judas,  and  Demas)  is  indeed  to  "  gain  a  loss."  3.  Con- 
sideration of  the  joy  we  give  to  others  by  well-doing.  (Vers.  24,  25.)  That  heart  must 
be  unnatural  or  utterly  depraved  which  feels  not  the  force  of  this  motive — to  repay  a 
father's  anxious  love,  and  the  yearning  tenderness  of  her  that  bare  him.  A  selfishness 
inay  supply  the  motive  even  here,  since  parental  gladuess  is  the  child's  own  joy  as  he 
walks  in  the  ways  of  pleasantness  and  peace. — J. 

Vers.  26 — 28. —  The  harlot's  true  character.  I.  It  is  dangerous  and  pernicious. 
(Vers.  27,  28.)  It  may  be  compared  to  a  deep  pit  or  to  a  narrow  and  deep  well,  out  of 
which,  if  one  falls  therein,  there  is  no  easy  escape.  Or  to  a  fell  robber  lying  in  wait  for 
the  unwary  and  the  weak. 

II.  The  true  resource  of  safety.  This  is  in  the  heart  ^ven  up  to  God  (ver.  26). 
If  that  heart  be  already  polluted,  he  can  wash  it  and  make  it  clean.  But  he  who 
yields  his  heart  to  the  prince  of  this  world  becomes  the  enemy  of  God  and  of  his 
eternal  wisdom. — J. 

Vers.  29 — 35. — TJie  perils  of  drunhennea.  I,  The  immediate  external  effects. 
(Vers.  29,  30.)  Trouble,  qnarrels,  violence,  deformity.  "No  translation  or  paiaphrase 
can  do  justice  to  the  concise,  abrupt,  and  energetic  manner  of  the  original."  "Oh  that 
mtn  should  put  an  enemy  in  their  mouths  to  steal  away  their  brains  I  that  we  should 
witli  joy,  revel,  pleasure,  and  applause,  transform  ourselves  into  beasts  1" 

II.  The  ultimate  consequences.  (Ver.  32.)  It  "  bites  like  a  serpent,  and  spits 
poison  like  a  basilisk."  This  is  the  course  of  all  sin ;  like  Dead  Sea  fruits  that  tempt 
the  taste,  and  turn  to  ashes  on  the  lips.  It  is  the  "  dangerous  edge  of  things,"  against 
which  men  have  to  be  on  their  guard.  The  line  between  use  and  abuse  is  so  easily 
liassed  over.     Gorruptio  optimi  pessima. 

III.  The  effect  especially  on  the  intellioencb.  (Vers.  33 — 35.)  The  mind 
falls  into  bewilderment,  and  sees  double  or  awry.  The  victim  of  intoxication  is  indeed 
"  at  sea,"  and  like  one  sleeping  on  the  very  verge  of  danger  and  sudden  death.  In  • 
spiritual  sense  he  is  drunk  who  doei  not  perceive  the  great  danger  of  his  soul,  but 


Oft.  xxm.  1— M.]  THB  PBOTBRM.  463 

becomes  more  secure  and  stubborn  under  every  chastisement  (Jer.  v.  3).  It  is  the 
dreadful  insensibility— iepiotei  by  ver.  35  which  imitates  the  thought  and  speeoli  of 
the  drunkard — which  is  among  the  worst  consequences  of  the  vice.  "The  sight  of 
•  drunkard  is  a  better  sermon  against  that  vice  than  the  best  that  wag  ever  preached 
upon  the  subject."  "  He  who  hath  this  sin,  hath  not  himsejf ;  whosoever  doth  commit 
it,  doth  not  commit  sin,  but  he  himself  is  wholly  sin  "  (Augustine). — J. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — The  temptation  of  the  table.  It  is  probable  that  Solomon  had  in  view 
thciS6  who  did  not  often  sit  down  to  a  "good  dinner,"  and  who,  when  they  were  invited 
to  a  feast  by  some  one  who  was  able  to  spread  his  table  with  delicacies,  found  themselves 
subjecied  to  a  strong  temptation  to  unusual  indulgence.  Dr.  Kitto  tells  us  that,  in 
the  East,  men  would  (and  now  will)  eat  an  almost  incredible  amount  of  food  when 
a  rare  opportunity  offered  itself.  From  the  moral  and  the  religious  standpoint  this 
matter  of  appetite  demands  our  attention  to — 

I.  A  SPECIAL  SPHERE  OF  OBEDIENCB  AND  SELF-CONTROL.  Appetite  is  Undoubtedly 
of  God;  and  for  few  things,  on  the  lower  level,  have  we  more  occasion  to  thank  our 
Creator  than  for  the  fact  that  he  has  made  our  food  to  be  palatable,  and  cansed  us 
so  to  crave  it  that  the  partaking  of  it  is  a  pleasure.  Otherwise,  the  act  of  eati  g 
in  order  to  keep  ourselves  alive  and  strong  would  be  a  daily  weariness  and  penalty 
to  us.  But  as  it  is,  the  necessary  act  of  eating  is  a  constant  source  ot  jileasme.  3ut 
with  the  pleasure  there  enters  inevitably  a  temptation.  Appetite  in  man,  strengthen-  d 
ks  it  is  by  man's  imaginative  faculty,  and  fostered  as  it  is  by  the  inventiveness 
which  provides  all  kinds  of  inviting  dainties,  becomes  one  of  those  things  which  all  me 
to  excess,  and  thus  to  sin.  To  maintain  the  golden  mean  between  asceticism  on  tlie 
one  hand  and  epicurism  or  gluttony  on  the  other  hand  is  not  found  to  be  an  easy  task. 
Medical  science  inclines  now  to  the  view  that  a  very  large  proportion  of  people  take 
more  to  eat  than  is  really  for  their  good — especially  in  later  life.  Frequently,  pei  haps 
generally,  this  is  rather  a  mistake  than  an  offence.  But  the  wise  man  will  carc'ully 
consider  how  far  he  should  go,  and  where  he  should  draw  the  line.  In  doin^  tlii.-i  he 
will  more  especially  consider  two  things.  1.  How  he  should  act  at  the  table,  sd  as  not 
in  any  way  to  weaken  his  intelligence  by  what  he  eats  or  drinks.  2.  How  he  slionld 
act  so  as  to  keep  himself  in  health  and  strength  for  all  useful  activity  in  the  days  to 
come.  By  resolving  to  act  with  a  firm  self-command,  with  the  higher  and  indeed  the 
highest  end  in  view,  he  may,  in  eating  and  drinking,  do  what  he  does  "  to  the  glory  o/ 
God''(seelCor.  X.  31). 

II.  Those  to  whom  this  forms  a  specially  strong  temptation.  "  If  thou  be 
a  man  given  to  appetite."  Some  men  are  so  constituted  that  to  have  the  greatest 
delicacies  in  the  world  before  them  would  be  no  temptation  to  them  ;  olheis  have  an 
appetency  which  they  have  the  greatest  difficulty  in  controllinz, — this  may  arise  either 
from  heredity,  or  from  their  individual  bodily  organization,  or  (as  is  oftenest  the  case) 
from  the  habit  of  indulgence.     Tliere  are  also — 

III.  Occasions  when  this  temptation  is  specially  seveeb.  Such  as  ihat  indi- 
cated in  the  text  (see  also  1  Cor.  x.  27).  There  are  times  when  it  would  be  churlish, 
and  even  unchristian,  to  refuse  an  invitation;  but  the  presence  of  food  or  of  stimu- 
lants upon  the  table  may  be  a  serious  inducement  to  transgression,  'i'he  i  "put  a 
knife  to  thy  throat; "  determinately  stop  at  the  point  of  strict  moderation ;  resolutely 
and  fearlessly  refuse  that  of  which  you  know  well  that  you  have  no  right  to  partake; 
distinctly  and  definitely  decline  the  dish  or  the  cup  which  you  cannot  take  with  a 
good  conscience.    For  consider — 

IV.  The  folly  and  the  bin  of  indulgence.  "  They  are  deceitful  meat."  Excess 
may  bring  some  momentary  enjoyment,  but :  1.  It  is  quickly  followed  by  pain,  dis  Tder,  ■ 
feebleness,  incapacity;  even  if  not  of  a  serious  order,  yet  humiliating  enough  to  a  man 
who  respects  himself.  2.  The  habit  of  it  leads  with  no  uncertain  step  to  physical  and 
also  to  mental  and  moral  degeneracy.  3.  The  pleasure  afforded,  like  all  the  grosser- 
gratifications,  declines  with  indulgence.  4.  All  excess  is  sin.  It  is  a  misuse  ami 
profanation  of  that  body  which  is  given  us  as  the  orgaa  of  our  own  spirit,  and  should 
be  regarded  and  treated  as  "  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost "  (1  Cor.  vi.  19). — C. 

Vers.  4,  6. — The  wortMessnem  of  wealth.    Wealth  is  not,  indeed,  absolutely  worth- 


454  THE  PROVERBS.  [oh.  xxm.  1—85 

lesB ;  it  has  a  distinct  value  of  its  own ;  but  relatively  to  man's  deeper  necessities,  and 
to  his  other,  spiritual  resources,  it  is  to  be  held  in  slight  esteem, 

I.  The  unsubstantial  as  distinouished  from  the  seal.  "  Wilt  thou  set  thine 
eyes  upon  that  which  is  not?"  Money  regarded  as  that  which  purchases  food,  clothing, 
shelter,  books,  etc.,  lias  a  certain  value  not  easily  overstated.  But  mere  wealth,  at 
wealth,  has  but  a  fictitious  and  unreal  virtue.  A  man  may  have  it  and  have  it  not 
at  the  same  time.  A  rich  man  may  be,  to  all  intents  and  purposes,  a  very  poor  one. 
He  may  own  land  the  scenery  upon  which  he  is  wholly  unable  to  appreciate;  soil 
which  he  has  not  the  spirit  or  the  wisdom  to  cultivate;  houses  which  he  neither 
inhabits  nor  causes  to  be  inhabited;  gardens  whose  paths  no  feet  are  treading,  and 
whose  beauty  no  eyes  are  admiring ;  books  which  he  has  not  the  taste  or  even  the 
power  to  read,  etc.  In  fact,  his  wealth  is  only  a  possibility  and  not  a  reality  to  him. 
Practically,  he  "  sets  his  eyes  upon  that  which  is  not."  .  And  it  is  quite  a  common 
thing  for  men  to  be  wealthy  far  beyond  their  capacity  of  enjoyment;  their  riches  do 
not  serve  them  any  real  purpose ;  they  remain  unused,  and  are  as  if  they  were  not  at 
all  (see  Matt.  xxv.  29 ;  Luke  viii.  18).  On  the  other  hand,  knowledge,  wisdom,  pure  and 
holy  love,  a  generous  interest  in  the  welfare  of  others,  joy  in  God  and  in  the  friendship  uf 
the  good, — these  are  real  blessings.  A  man  who  has  these  must  be  and  is  enriched  thereby. 

n.  The  transient  as  distinguished  from  the  abiding.  "  Riches  certainly  make 
themselves  wings,"  etc.  1.  They  are  insecure.  It  is  impossible  to  mention  any 
"investment"  tliat  is  absolutely  secure.  Even  "real  property"  has  been  found  to 
become  depreciated  and  even  positively  worthless  in  the  market.  And  of  the  more 
ordinary  sources  of  wealth,  it  is  proverbial  that  they  have  all  a  limited,  and  many  of 
them  but  a  slight,  security.  A  revolution  in  government,  in  trade,  even  in  fashion  or  in 
taste,  and  the  ample  means  are  reduced  to  nothing,  the  millionaire  is  brought  down  to 
bankruptcy.  A  poor  foundation,  indeed,  on  which  to  build  the  structure  of  human  hap- 
piness and  well-being  is  the  possession  of  riches.    2.  They  must  soon  he  laid  down. 

III.  The  human  as  distinguished  from  the  Divine.  To  "labour  to  be  rich"  is 
of  man.  To  work  for  wealth,  and  even  to  live  for  it  is  to  be  borne  along  on  the  current 
of  human  energy,  is  to  breathe  the  atmosphere  which  human  society  is  throwing  round 
him.  It  is  "our  own  wisdom."  But  it  is  not  the  wisdom  of  God.  That  says  to  us, 
"  Labour  not  for  the  meat  which  perisheth ; "  "  Lay  not  up  for  yourselves  treasures  on 
earth ; "  "A  man's  life  does  nut  consist  in  the  abundance  of  the  things  which  he 
possesseth."  The  wisdom  which  is  from  above  speaks  to  us  of  "  forsaking  all  to  follow 
■Christ ; "  of  parting  with  everything  for  one  inestimable  pearl ;  of  agonizing  to  enter  in 
at  the  strait  gate.  It  tells  us  that  the  service  of  God,  the  friendship  of  Jesus  Christ, 
the  life  of  holy  usefulness,  the  life-testimony  to  a  Divine  Redeemer,  the  rest  of  soul 
which  comes  with  spiritual  rectitude,  the  inheritance  which  is  incorruptible  and  unde- 
filed  and  which  fadoth  not  aw.iy, — ^that  all  this  is  not  only  more  precious  than  gold, 
it  is  absolutely  priceless;  it  is  the  one  thing  for  which  it  is  worth  our  while  to  labour 
with  all  our  strength,  to  sacrifice  all  that  we  have. — 0. 

Vers.  6 — %.—The  graces  of  giving,  receiving,  and  refusing.    The  text  treats  of  a 
hospitality  which  does  not  deserve  the  name,  and  of  our  duty  when  we  are  invited  to 
accept  a  gift  that  is  grudged.     It  thus  opens  the  whole  subject  of  giving  and  receiving.  ' 
There  are  three  graces  here. 

I.  The  grace  of  giving.  This  is  one  which  is  readily  recognized  as  heaven-born. 
1.  God  commends  it  to  us.  He  says,  "  Give,  and  it  shall  be  given  unto  you"  (Luke  vi. 
38);  "Give  to  him  that  asketh  thee"  (Matt.  v.  42);  "He  that  giveth  let  him  do  it 
with  liberality"  (Revised  Version);  "given  to  hospitality"  (Rom.  lii.  8, 13).  2.  It 
i«  the  best  reward  of  labour  (Bph.  iv.  28).  3.  It  is  the  most  God-like  of  all  graces. 
For  God  lives  to  give ;  he  is  ever  giving  forth  to  all  his  creation ;  he  is  feeding  the 
multitudes  and  millions  of  his  creatures  beneath  every  sky.  4.  It  is  the  source  of  the 
purest  and  most  elevating  joy.     "  It  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive." 

IL  The  grace  op  receiving.  If  it  is  right  and  good  for  some  men  to  give  of  their 
abundance,  then  the  correlative  act  of  receiving  must  also  be  right  and  good.  There  is, 
indeed,  a  virtue,  a  grace,  in  receiving  cheerfully  and  cordially  as  well  as  gratefully, 
which  may  be  almost,  if  not  quite,  as  acceptable  to  God  as  that  of  generosity  itself 
There  is  truth  in  Miss  Proctor's  lines — 


OH.  xxra.  1— 35.]  THE  PBOTERBS.  465 


"I  hold  him  great  who  for  love's  sake 
Can  give  with  generous,  earnest  will; 
Yet  he  who  takes  for  love's  sweet  sake, 
I  think  I  hold  more  generous  still." 

III.  The  obaob  of  BBrusiNG.  1.  We  may  rightly  refuse  a  gift,  whether  it  be  in 
the  way  of  hospitality  or  not,  which  we  are  sure  the  giver  cannot  honestly  affnrd ;  we 
do  not  wish  to  be  enriched  or  entertained  at  the  expense  of  his  creditors.  2.  We  may 
properly  decline  a  gift  if  wefeel  that  it  is  oftered  us  under  a  misconception ;  when  we 
are  imagined  to  be,  or  to  believe,  or  to  be  working  toward,  that  which  is  contrary  to  our 
spirit,  our  creed,  our  aim.  3.  We  do  well  to  decline  the  hospitality  which  does  not 
come  from  the  heart.  The  host  is  "as  he  thinketh  in  his  heart."  His  fair  or 
"  sweet  words  "  are  no  real  part  of  himself;  they  only  come  from  his  lips ;  and  if  he  is 
grudging  us  what  he  gives  us,  we  may  well  wish  ourselves  far  away  from  his  table. 
No  man  who  has  any  self-respect  whatever  will  wish  to  take  a  crust  from  the  man 
who  counts  what  he  gives  his  friends.  Such  food  as  that,  however  dainty,  would 
choke  us  as  we  ate  it.  Nor  is  it  begrudged  hospitality  alone  that  we  should  have  the 
independence  to  refuse,  but  all  else  that  is  in  the  shape  of  gift ;  all  money,  all  position, 
all  friendship.  Better  to  go  entirely  without  than  to  have  abundance  at  the  cost  of 
our  own  self-respect.  Better  to  toll  hard  and  wait  long  than  to  accept  such  offers  as 
those.  Better  to  turn  to  him  "  who  giveth  liberally  and  upbraideth  not,"  and  ask  of 
him. — 0. 

Ver.  10.— (See  homily  on  ch.  ixii.  28.) — 0. 

Vers.  13, 14. — (See  homily  on  ch.  xiii.  24.) — 0. 

Vers.  17, 18. — God's  righteous  judgment.  Nothing  is  more  foolish  than  to  endeavour 
to  found  a  proof  of  the  righteousness  of  God's  rule  upon  a  single  case  of  human  experi- 
ence. Yet  is  that  often  done.  A  good  man  seizes  upon  a  piece  of  good  fortune  in 
a  godly  man's  life,  and  exaggerates  its  importance ;  a  bad  man  pounces  upon  a  piece 
of  bad  fortune  and  draws  unwarrantable  conclusions  therefrom.  But  are  there  not 
indications,  if  not  proofs,  to  be  had  for  the  seeking,  that  all  things  are  under  the 
direction  of  a  just  and  righteous  Euler  ?  Yes ;  if  we  look  far  and  wide  enough.  For 
as  we  look,  we  see  that  all  men,  good  and  bad,  are  rewarded  according  to  their  works. 

I.  All  the  laws  which  regulate  the  recompense  of  labour  exist  fob  the  unbightbods 
AS  WELL  AS  FOB  THE  BiQHTBOUB.  Take,  e.g.  i  1.  The  covetous  man.  Consider  all  that 
he  foregoes  in  order  to  reap  his  harvest — all  the  physical,  social,  domestic,  literary, 
philanthropic,  religious  advantages  and  delights  that  he  sacrifices;  consider  all. the 
immense  and  ceaseless  pains  and  toils  he  goes  through,  and  the  risks  he  runs,  to  achieve 
his  object.  And  he  gets  his  prize ;  he  has  earned  it.  He  will  find  it  weighted  with 
more  burdens  and  freighted  with  fewer  and  smaller  blessings  than  he  thought,  and  it 
will  not  last  him  long.  Do  not  envy  him  or  begrudge  him  what  he  receives ;  he  has  paid 
3  very  heavy  price  for  it,  and  is  surely  welcome  to  it.  2.  The  hypocrite.  He  is  a  very 
^ingtaking,  hardworking  man  ;  be  spares  himself  no  trouble,  no  sacrifice ;  he  makes 
long  prayers,  for  which  he  has  no  heart ;  he  abstains  from  food  he  would  fain  be  eating ; 
he  parts  with  money  which  he  longs  to  keep ;  he  goes  through  the  most  wearisome 
experiences  iti  order  that  he  may  win  a  little  passing  honour.  He  has  his  reward;  he 
is  very  welcome  to  it.  He  has  earned  it ;  we  will  not  envy  him ;  there  is  nothing 
more  for  him  to  rieceive  (Matt.  vi.  5).  3.  The  man  of  pleasure.  He  also  pays  a  very 
high  price  for  his  momentary  gratifications — the  degradation  of  his  powers,  the  dis- 
regard of  his  friends,  the  loss  of  his  self-respect,  the  decline  of  his  health,  etc. ;  and  all 
this  for  mere  enjoyment  which  becomes  less  keen  and  vivid  every  day.  We  will  not 
envy  him.     Unholy  pleasure  is  the  costliest  thing  in  the  whole  world. 

n.  All  the  laws  which  regulate  the  recompense  of  labour  exist  fob  the  eiohtbous 
MAN  AS  WELL  AS  FOB  THE  trNBiQHTBOUS.  1.  By  returning  \mto  God  in  penitential  self- 
surrender  we  seek  reconciliation,  peace,  joy,  the  full  re-establishment  of  our  filial 
relations  with  God ;  and  we  find  what  we  seek.  "  Surely  there  is  a  reward  "  (Revised 
Version)  for  us,  and  "  our  expectation  is  not  cut  off."  2.  By  "  walking  in  the  fear  of 
the  Lord  all  the  day  long,"  consulting  his  will  and  endeavouring  to  follow  him,  we  seek 


iSt  THE  PEOVEEBS.  [oh.  xxm.  1— 36. 

bU  Divine  favour  and  a  growing  measure  of  likeness  to  our  Lord.  '  And  we  find  what 
we  seek.  3.  By  kind  Christian  helpfulness,  hy  sympathy  and  succour  freely- ami 
gladly  given  to  those  in  need,  we  seek  the  blessedness  of  him  that  gives  (Acts  xx.  35), 
the  gratitude  of  true  and  loving  hearts,  the  present  smile  and  final  benediction  of  the 
Son  of  man  (Matt.  xxv.  34—40).  And  we  find  and  shall  find  it.  Surely  there  is 
a  reward  for  us;  our  hope  shaU  not  be  cut  off.  No;  let  us  "envy  not  the  sinner;" 
let  us  make  him  welcome  to  all  he  has ;  let  us  try  to  elevate  and  enlarge  his  hope  and 
bis  reward  by  changing  the  spirit  of  his  mind.  As  for  ourselves,  let  it  be  in  our  hearts 
to  say,  "God  is  faithful  who  hath  called  us  to  the  fellowship  of  his  Son;"  let  ua 
anticipate  the  anthem  of  the  angels,  and  sing  a'ready,  "  Great  and  marvellous  are  thy 
works.  Lord  God  Almighty, ytts<  and  true  are  thy  ways,  0  thou  King  of  saints!" — 0. 

Vers.  20,  21.— (See  below.)— 0. 

Ver.  23. — The  freedom  and  the  price  of  truth.     We  have  often  to  insist  upon — 

I.  The  freedom  of  the  truth.  In  one  sense,  truth  is  essentially  free.  If  firm 
and  strcng  as  the  granite  rock,  it  is  also  fluent  as  the  water,  elastic  as  the  air.  It 
belongs  to  no  man,  and  cannot  be  patented  or  monopolized ;  it  is  the  inheiitance  of 
mankind.  We  are  all  of  us  bound  to  communicate  it  freely,  to  "pass  it  on  like  bread 
at  sacrament."  This  is  emphatically  the  case  with  the  truth  flf  the  gospeL  "Hoi 
every  one  that  thirsteth,  come  ye  to  the  waters,  and  he  that  hath  no  money ;  come  ye, 
buy,  and  eat .  ,  .  without  money  and  without  price;"  "Whosoever  will,  let  him  take 
the  water  of  life /ree^y."    But  the  lesson  of  the  text  is —  ' 

II.  The  price  of  truth.  Truth  has  sometimes  to  be  paid  for ;  it  has  its  own  price, 
and  we  must  be  willing  to  buy  it.  1.  That  truth  for  which  we  involuntarily  pay  some 
•price.  We  go  forth  into  the  world  with  crude,  immature  notions,  which  we  find,  by 
painful  experience,  have  to  be  corrected  and  peihaps  changed.  Sometimes  this  necessary 
lesson  is  very  costly  to  us.  In  this  way  wu  have  to  buy  the  truth  as  to :  (1)  The 
checkered  character  of  our  human  life.  We  have  to  learn,  painfully  enough,  that  it  does 
not  answer  to  our  early  dreams,  but  is  sadly  dashed  with  disappointuKut,  with  failure, 
with  loss,  with  trouble ;  that  it  is  many-coloured,  with  a  large  admixture  of  the  dull  or 
even  the  dark.  (2)  The  imperfections  of  the  good.  That  there  is  a  large  amount  of  profes- 
sion without  any  reality  at  all ;  that  some  really  good  men  allow  themselves  to  be  over- 
taken in  serious  fault ;  that  all  gooil  men  have  some  defects  which  tarnish  the  perfect 
brightness  of  their  character;  that  human  excellency  is  not  so  much  an  attainment 
as  an  earnest  and  admirable  endeavour.  (3)  The  strength  and  weakness  of  our  own 
character.  We  have  to  find,  at  the  cost  of  much  humiliation,  where  our  strength  ends 
and  our  weakness  begins.  Such  truths  as  these  we  buy  without  bargain  ;  we  do  not 
agree  to  the  price  that  we  pay.  There  is  not  the  freedom  of  contract  we  usually  have 
in  any  purchase  we  make.  But  we  may  part  willingly,  and  even  cheerfully,  as  we  are 
called  upon  to  do,  with  that  which  we  lose,  thankfully  accepting  the  truth  we  acquire ; 
and  so  doini;  we  piiictically  and  wisely  "  buy  the  truth."  2.  The  truth  for  which  we 
voluntarily  pay  the  price.  (1)  A  com|>leter  knowledge  of  God's  Word.  Our  knowledge 
of  the  book  of  God  is  very  varied;  it  may  be  ver.y  slight  or  it  may  be  very  deep  and 
full.  How  dei  p  or  how  full  depends  on  whether  or  not  we  will  pay  the  price  of  this 
excellent  wisdom ;  the  price  is  that  of  patient,  reuerent  study.  (2)  The  surpassing 
blessedness  of  true  consecration  ;  the  peace  and  the  joy  to  be  had  in  Christ  ana  m  nis 
holy  and  happy  serrice.  We  do  not  know  as  much  as  we  might,  and  as  we  should,  of 
this ;  but  we  do  not  pay  the  price  of  knowledge.  That  price  is  whole-hearted  sui  render 
of  ourselves  to  our  Saviour  and  to  his  service.  So  long  as  we  "keep  back  part  of  the 
price "  we  cannot  know  this  experience ;  but  if  we  will  "  yield  ourselves  unto  God  " 
unreservedly,  we  shall  know  the  truth  in  its  fulness.  We  may  make  a  special  point  of 
(3)  the  beauty  and  excellency  of  Christian  work;  and  the  price  of  knowing  this  is  the 
act  of  hearty  and  faithful  labour,  sustained  by  much  earnest  prayer  for  the  inspiration 
and  the  blessing  of  God.     We  complete  the  thoujiht  of  the  text  by  considering — 

III.  The  absolute  pricelessnbss  of  the  teuth.  "  Sell  it  not."  Heavenly  wisdom, 
once  tiainod,  is  not  to  be  parted  with  for  any  consideration  whatever.  Nothing  on 
earth  represents  its  value.  To  lose  it  is  to  sign  away  our  inheritance.  It  is  to  be  held 
at  all  costs  whatever. — 0. 


CH.  XXIV.  1—34.]  THE  PROVERBS.  457 

Vers.  24— 26.— (See  homily  on  eh.  x.  1.)— C. 

Vers.  29 — 35  (with  vers.  20,  21). — Drunkenness.  A  most  striking  picture  is  given 
us  here  of  the  manifold  evils  of  this  great  curse.  In  a  few  strokes  Solomon  brings 
before  us  most,  if  not  all,  of  its  painful  and  pitiable  consequences.  Their  name  is 
legion,  for  they  are  indeed  many. 

I.  The  CONTEMPT  OF  THE  SOBEB.  (Ver.  20.)  The  very  word  "  drunkard,"  or  "  wine- 
bibber,"  is  indicative  of  the  deep  disregard  in  which  the  victim  of  this  vice  is  held  by 
sober  men. 

II.  Poverty.  (Ver.  21.)  It  is  striking  and  surprising  how  soon  men  of  large 
means  are  brought  down  to  straitness  of  circumstance,  and  even  poverty  itself.  It  is 
what  they  spend  on  this  craving,  and  what  they  lose  by  its  ill  effects  upon  them,  that 
drag  them  down. 

III.  Physical  deteriobation.  (Ver.  29.)  Dissipation  soon  tells  on  a  man's  personal 
appearance ;  he  shows  by  his  garments,  and  still  more  by  his  countenance,  that  lie  is 
mastered  by  that  which  he  puts  into  his  mouth.     Vice  nuans  ugliness. 

IV.  Contentiousness.  (Ver.  29.)  We  need  all  our  jiowers  in  ^ood  bain  nee  to 
control  ourselves  so  that  we  are  not  provoked  to  the  hasty  word  and  to  the  ia-^iing 
quarrel.  But  the  man  who  is  excited  by  wine  is  in  the  worst  possible  condition  fur 
ruling  his  spirit  and  commanding  his  tongue.  He  is  likely  enough  to  speak  the  sent  uoe 
which  is  followed  by  the  blow,  or,  what  is  worse,  the  Uing-continued  feud. 

V.  Impurity.  (Ver.  33.)  The  excitement  of  the  intoxicating  cup  has  had  much  to 
io  with  the  saddest  departures  from  the  path  of  purity  and  honour ;  with  the  entrance 

.  upon  the  road  of  utter  ruin. 

VI.  Infatuation.  (Vers.  34,  35.)  The  drunkard  is  seen  by  his  friends  to  be 
sinking  and  falling;  in  his  circurnstances,  his  reputation,  his  health,  his  character,  lie 
is  palpably  perishing.  Those  who  really  love  and  pity  him  warn  him  w  th  earnest 
rimonstrance,  with  affectionate  entreaty,  but  it  is  of  no  avail.  He  acts  with  as  niuoh 
infatuation  as  would  a  man  who  made  a  bed  of  the  waves  or  the  top  of  a  mast.  After 
he  has  been  stricken  and  has  suffered,  he  goes  back  to  his  cups,  and  is  stricken  and 
suffers  again. 

VII.  The  agony  op  remorse.  "At  the  last  it  biteth  like  a  serpent,"  etc.  The  sting 
of  remorse  which  a  man  suffers  when  he  awakes  to  a  full  sense  of  his  folly  is  something 
pitiful  to  witness!  and  must  be  far  more  terrible  to  endure.  The  man  suffers  a  penalty 
which-is  worse  than  bodily  torture;  it  is  the  just  punishment  in  his  own  soul  fur  his 
folly  and  his  sin.  In  one  sense  it  is  self-administered,  for  it  is  the  stern  rebuke  of 
conscience ;  in  another  sense  it  is  the  solemn  and  strong  condemnation  of  the  Supreme. 

VIII.  Bitter  bondaqe.  Worse,  if  possible,  than  the  sting  of  remorse  is  the  sensn 
of  helpless  bondage  in  which  he  finds  that  he  is  held.  "At  the  last  "is  a  tyranny 
which  the  evil  habit,  the  strong  craving,  exercises  over  the  man's  spirit.  He  knows 
and  feels  his  humiliation  and  loss ;  he  essays  to  escape ;  he  strives,  he  writhes  to  become 
freed ;  but  he  tries  in  vain ;  he  is  "  holden  with  the  cords  of  his  sins  "  (oh.  v.  22) ;  he  is 
a  poor,  miserable  captive,  the  slave  of  vice. 

Such  are  the  consequences  of  departure  from  sobriety.  It  is  the  first  step  which  is 
the  most  foolish  and  the  most  avoidable.  When  a  certain  stage  is  reached,  restoration, 
though  not  impossible  or  impracticable,  is  very  difficult.  Let  nil  men,  as  they  love 
their  soul,  keep  well  within  that  boundary-line  that  divides  sobriety  from  intempi  ranee. 
Moderation  is  good ;  abstinence  is  better,  for  it  is  safer,  and  it  is  kinder  to  others. 
"  Look  not "  on  the  tempting  cup ;  turn  the  eyes  to  purer  and  nobler  pleasure. — 0. 

EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 
Ver.  1. — We  return  here  to  the  mcire  usual 
form,  the  tetrastich.  Be  not  thou  envious 
against  evil  men  (see  on  ch,  xxiii.  17, 
where  a  similar  warning  is  given,  and  comp 
ver.   19  below>      "Men    of   wickedness," 


whrlly  given  over  to  evil.  Neither  desire 
to  be  with  them.  Their  company  is  ijollu- 
tion,  and  association  with  them  makes  you  a 
partner  in  their  sinful  doings.  The  Septua- 
gin  t  prefaces  the  paragraph  with  the  personal 
address,  u/e,  "  son." 

Ver.  2. — Tor  their  heart  studieth  destrufr 


4S8 


THE   PBOVEEBS. 


[oh.  XXIV.  1 — 84, 


tion.  The  grounds  of  the  warning  are  here 
given,  as  in  "li.  i.  15.  " Destruction  "  (tlwd); 
Vulgate,  rapinat,  "  violence  "  of  all  kinds, 
e.g.  robbery,  murder.  Their  lips  talk  of 
mischief;  utter  lies  and  slanders  which 
may  injure  other  people  or  bring  themselves 
profit.  Admiration  of  such  men  and  inter- 
course witli  them  must  be  repugnant  to 
every  religious  soul.  The  LXX .  refers  the 
verse  to  evil  imaginations  issuing  in  evil 
talk ;  "  For  their  heart  meditates  falsehoods, 
and  their  lips  speak  misoliiefs  (tiSvovs)." 

Vers.  3, 4. — In  contrast  with  the  conversa- 
tion of  the  evil,  wisdom  is  commended. 

Ver.  3. — ^Throug-h  wisdom  is  an  house 
boilded  (see  on  ch.  xiv.  1).  By  prudence, 
probity,  and  the  fear  of  God  a  family  is  sup- 
ported and  blessed,  maintained  and  pros- 
pered. Established  (see  on  ch.  iii.  19); 
Septnagint,  avopBoOrai. 

Ver. 4. — (Oomp.  ch.  i.  1 3  and  note  ch.  iii.  10.) 
With  all  precioua  and  pleasant  (ch.  xxii.  18) 
riches.  Material  prosperity,  copious  store  of 
necessaries,  and  wealth,  follow  on  wisdom ; 
how  much  more  do  spiritual  blessings  attend 
the  fear  of  Ood  I 

Vers.  5,  6. — Wisdom  is  beneficial  in  peace 
and  war. 

Ver.  5.— A  wise  man  is  strong,  nya,  "in 
strength,"  full  of  strength,  because,  however 
feeble  in  body,  he  is  wise  in  counsel,  firm 
in  purpose,  brave  in  conduct,  thoroughly  to 
be  depended  upon,  and  supported  by  his 
perfect  trust  in  God  (comp.  ch.  xxi.  22).  The 
Septuagint,  with  which  agreetheSyriaoand 
Chaldee,  reading  differently,  renders,  "A 
wise  man  is  better  than  a  strong  man  " — a 
sentiment  which  Lesfetie  compares  to  Cicero's 
"aidant  arma  tog Ee,"  A  man  of  knowledge 
mcreaseth  strength ;  literally,  strengtheneth 
power;  shows  greater,  superior  power,  as 
Amos  ii.  14.  The  Septuagint,  from  some 
corruption  of  the  text,  renders,  "  And  a  man 
having  prudence  (is  better)  than  a  larpe 
estate  (yewpyiou  n^yiKov);"  i.e.  wisdom  will 
bring  a  man  more  worldly  advantages  than 
the  possession  of  extensive  farms.  The 
gnome  is  proved  by  wiiat  follows. 

Ver.  6. — Thy  war;  war  for  thyself,  for 
thy  profit,  equivalent  to  "successful  war" 
(comp.  Exod.  xiv.  14).  The  clause  is  an 
echo  of  ch.  xx.  18  (where  see  note).  The 
last  line  is  a  repetitiuu  of  ch.  xi.  14  (comp. 
also  eh.  xv.  22).  Septuagint,  "  War  is  made 
with  generalship  (xvfiepviifffus'),  and  help 
with  a  heart  that  counsels." 

Vers.  7 — 10. — Some  distichs  now  follow, 
concerned  with  wisdom  and  its  opposite. 

Ver.  7. — Wisdom  is  too  high  for  a  fool. 
It  is  beyond  his  reach,  he  cannot  follow  its 
lead,  and  has  nothing  to  say  when  bis  counsel 


is  asked,  and  no  ability  to  judge  of  any 
question  presented  to  him.  "  Wisdom " 
{choohTnotK)  is  in  the  plural  number,  inti- 
mating the  various  attributes  connoted  by 
it,  or  the  different  aspects  in  which  it  may 
be  regarded  (see  note  on  oh.  i.  20).  "  Too 
high  "  (niDsn,  ramoth)  is  also  pluial ;  and 
Delitzsch  and  Xowack  take  it  to  mean,  not 
so  much  "high  things  "  as  "  precious  things," 
such  as  pearls  or  precious  stones,  in  accord- 
ance with  Job  xxviii.  18,  "  No  mention 
shall  be  made  of  coral  or  of  crystal;  yea, 
the  price  of  wisdom  is  above  rubies."  In 
this  sense  Delitzsch  translates,  "Wisdom 
seems  to  the  fool  to  be  an  ornamental  com- 
modity," a  costly  and  unnecessary  appendage, 
which  is  not  worth  the  sacrifices  entailed 
by  its  pursuit.  Whichever  way  we  take  it, 
the  point  is  the  rarity  and  inaccessibility  of 
wisdom,  and  the  repugnance  of  fools  to  make 
any  exertion  in  order  to  obtain  it.  St.  Augus- 
tine thus  sums  up  the  steps  by  which  wisdom 
is  reached :  fear  of  God,  piety,  knowledge, 
fortitude,  mercifulness,  sincerity  ('De  Doctr. 
Christ.,'  ii.  7).  He  openeth  not  his  month 
in  the  gate.  When  men  gather  in  the  usual 
place  of  assembly  (ch.  viii.  3;  xxii.  2),  to  take ' 
counsel  on  public  matters,  he  has  nothing 
to  say ;  he  listens  fatuously,  and  is  silent. 
Septuagint, "  Wisdom  and  good  thought  ai  e 
in  the  gates  of  the  wise ;  the  wise  turn  not 
aside  from  the  moutii  of  the  Lord,  but  reason 
in  assemblies." 

Ver.  8. — He  that  deviseth  to  do  evil.  He 
who  shows  a  certain  kind  of  misapplied 
cleverness  (in  contrast  to  the  true  wisdom) 
in  planning  and  pursuing  evil  schemes. 
Shall  be  called.  Defined  and  explained,  as 
ch.  xvi.  21  (oomp.  ch.  xxi.  24).  A  mis- 
chievous person ;  literally,  lord  of  mischief; 
i.e.  owner,  possessor  of  mischief.  One  must 
not  be  led  by  such  a  man's  apparent  astute- 
ness to  attribute  to  him  wisdom;  he  is  an 
impostor,  a  mere  intriguer,  who  is  sure  to  be 
exposed  ere  long.  Septuagint,  "  Death  be- 
falls the  undisciplined." 

Ver.  9. — The  thought  of  foolishness  is  sin. 
"  Sin  "  is  the  subject  in  this  clause  as  "  the 
Bcorner  "  is  in  the  next ;  and  what  it  says 
is  that  sin  is  the  excogitation,  the  contriving 
of  folly.  The  sinner  is  the  real  fool,  in  that 
he  does  not  pursue  his  proper  end,  prepares 
misery  for  himself,  is  blind  to  his  best  in- 
terests. The  connection  between  siu  and 
folly,  as  between  wisdom  and  righteousness, 
is  continually  enforced  throughout  the  book. 
The  soorner  is  an  abomination  to  men.  The 
man  who  scoffs  at  religion  and  every  high 
aim  is  an  object  of  abomination  to  the  pious, 
and  is  also  a  cause  of  evil  to  others,  leading 
them  to  thoughts  and  acts  which  are  hatefiU 
in  the  eyes  of  God.  Septuagint,  "  The  fool 
dieth  in  sins  (John  viii.  24),  and  unclean- 
ness  belongeth  to  a  pestilent  man."    Th( 


IB.  XMT.  1 — 84.] 


THB  fBdYiBftBS. 


MM 


text  here  followed,  as, in  other  passages  of 
this  chapter,  is  quite  different  from  the  re- 
ceived one. 

Ver.  10. — ^If  then  faint  in  the  day  of  ad- 
versity, thy  strength  is  small.  The  gnome 
seems  to  be  nnconnected  with  the  preceding. 
There  is  a  paronomasia  between  rT^^  (tsarah}, 
"adversity,"  and  ix  (tiar),  "small,"  narrow, 
which  is  retained  by  Fleischer :  "  Si  segnis 
fueris  die  angastise,  angustse  sunt  vires  tusa." 
So  we  may  say  in  English,  "  If  thou  faint  in 
time  of  straitness,  straitened  is  thy  strength." 
Kyou  fail,  and  succumb  to  anxiety  or  danger, 
instead  of  rising  to  meet  the  emergency,  then 
you  are  but  a  weakling  or  a  coward,  and  the 
strength  which  you  seemed  to  possess,  and 
of  which  you  boasted,  perhaps,  is  nothing 
worth.  Such  a  man  hearkens  not  to  the 
Sibyl's  counsel  (VirgU, '  ^ueid,'  vi.  95)— 

"  Tu  ne  cede  malis,  sed  contra  audontior  ito, 

Quam  tua  te  fortuaa  sinet." 
The  LXX.  again  varies  from  the  received 
text,  "He  shall  be  polluted  in  an  evil  day, 
and  in  a  day  of  afSiction,  until  he  fail,"  or 
«  die  "  (^/c\(irj)). 

Vers.  11,  12. — ^A  hexastioh,  inculcating 
humanity  on  the  ground  of  God's  omni- 
ecieuce. 

Ver.  11. — If  thou  forbear  to  deliver  them 
that  are  drawn  unto  death.  The  sentence 
is  not  conditional,  dm  in  the  second  line  being 
equivalent  to  i?,  utinam,  "  oh  that  I  "  "  would 
that  I"  So  the  first  hemistich  should  be 
rendered,  "Deliver  them  that  are  haled  to 
death,"  and  the  second,  "And  those  that 
are  tottering  to  slaughter,  oh,  hold  them 
back  I "  The  sentence  is  somewhat  obscure, 
but  Cheyne  well  explains  it  thus:  "Some 
victims  of  a  miscarriage  of  justice  are  about 
to  be  dragged  away  to  execution,  and  the 
disciple  of  wisdom  is  exkorted  to  use  his 
endeavours  to  deliver  them "  ('  Job  and 
Solumon ').  In  the  case  supposed  a  moral 
obligation  lies  on  the  piuus  and  well-in- 
"ormed  to  save  a  human  life  unjustly  im- 
perilled. At  the  same  time,  there  is  nothing 
in  the  passage  which  absolutely  shows  that 
the  punishment  of  the  guiltless  is  here 
deprecated ;  it  looks  rather  as  if  Wisdom  bad 
no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  men,  innocent 
or  not,  and  that  the  victims  of  an  extreme 
sentence  claimed  pity  at  lier  hands,  whatever 
might  be  the  circumstances  of  the  verdict. 
Septuagint,  "Deliver  those  that  are  being 
led  away  to  death,  and  redeem  {ixTrplov) 
those  that  are  appointed  to  be  slain ;  spare 
not  (to  help  them)  "  (comp.  Ps.  Ixxxii.  3,  4). 
Ver.  12. — If  thou  saycst,  Behold,  we  knew 
it  not.  The  disciple  of  Wisdom  may  excuse 
himself  from  making  any  efiort  for  the 
prisoners'  release,  by  saying  he  had  not 
.    heard  of  the  case.     St.  Jerome  makes  the 


excuse  to  be  inability,  vlrei  non  suppetunt. 
The  LXX.  makes  it  a  personal  matter,  ig- 
noring the  plural  form  of  the  previous 
paragraph.  "I  know  him  not,  he  Is  no 
friend  of  mine ;  why  should  I  trouble  myeeU 
about  him  ?  "  Such  a  selfish  person,  like  the 
priest  and  Levite  in  the  parable,  would  "  pass 
by  on  the  otlier  side."  Doth  not  he  that 
pondereth  the  heart  consider  it  ?  Qod  knows 
the  truth— knows  that  the  excuse  is  vain ; 
for  he  is  the  Weiglier  and  Searcher  of  hearts 
(ch.  xvi.  2;  xxi.  2).  Cain's  plea,  "Am  I 
my  brother's  keeper?"  is  unavailable;  the 
law  of  love  is  limited  by  no  circumstances. 
He  that  keepeth  thy  soul,  doth  not  he  know 
it  ?  The  expression,  "  keeping  the  soul,"  may 
be  equivalent  to  "  preserving  the  life ; "  but 
it  more  probably  means  watching,  observing, 
the  inmost  secrets  of  the  nature  (Job  vii.  20). 
The  verb  used  is  ISJ  (natsar),  which  has 
both  significations.  The  sense  of  "  forming," 
which  some  give  it,  seems  not  allowable. 
(For  "heart"  Qeb)  and  "soul"  (nepliesh), 
see  note  on  ch.  ii  10.)  ShaU  not  he  render 
to  every  man  according  to  his  works  ?  Know- 
ing the  heart  and  the  motive,  God  deals  out 
retributive  justice  (oh.  xii.  U ;  Ps.  Ixii.  12 ; 
Eom.  ii.  6).  Septuagint,  "  But  if  thou  say, 
I  know  not  this  man,  know  that  the  Lord 
knoweth  the  hearts  of  all ;  and  he  who  formed 
CirKdiras')  breath  for  all,  himself  knoweth  all 
things,  who  rendereth  to  every  man  according 
to  his  works." 

Vers.  13,  H. — An  exhortation  to  the  study 
of  wisdom,  with  an  analogy. 

Ver.  13. — Eat  thou  honey,  because  it  is 
good.  Honey  entered  largely  into  the  diet 
of  the  Oriental,  and  was  regarded  not  only 
as  pleasant  to  the  taste  and  nutritions,  but 
also  as  possessed  of  healing  powers.  It  was 
especially  used  for  children's  food  (Isa.  vii. 
15),  and  thus  becomes  an  emblem  of  the 
purest  wisdom.  "  I  have  eaten  my  honey- 
comb with  my  honey,"  says  the  lover  in 
Cant.  V.  1 ;  and  the  psalmist  saj  s  that  the 
ordinances  of  the  Lord  are  "  sweeter  than 
honey  and  the  honeycomb"  (Ps.  xix.  10; 
see  on  ch.  xxv.  16).  Palestine  was  a  land 
flowing  with  milk  and  honey  (Exod.  iii.  8) ; 
hence  is  derived  the  continual  reference  to 
this  article  of  diet  in  the  Bible.  • 

Ver.  14. — So  sliall  the  knowledge  of 
wisdom  be  unto  thy  soul;  better,  know, 
apprehend  wisdom  to  he  tuch  for  thy  soul — 
to  be  as  pleasant  and  nourishing  and 
profitable  to  thy  soul,  as  honey  is  to  thy 
taste  and  thy  body.  The  moralist  would 
have  his  disciple  feel  the  same  relish  for 
wisdom  that  he  has  for  sweet  food,  recognize 
it  not  simply  as  useful,  but  as  delightful 
and  enjoyable.  When  thou  hast  found  it 
To  find  wisdom  is  to  get  possession  of  it  and 
use  it  (oomp.  oh.  iii.  13,  and  note  there).  Then 


460 


THE  PE0VKRB8. 


[en.  xiiv.  1— S4. 


there  ihall  be  a  rewari.  The  apodosis 
begins  here.  We  have  had  the  Bame  as- 
surance in  ch.  ixiii.  18  (where  see  note). 
The  word  is  literally  future.  One  who 
has  obtained  wisdom  has  a  glorious  hope 
before  him ;  haiebia  in  novisBtmis  tpem, 
Vulgate ;  but  his  hope  is  better  than  that — 
it  goes  with  him,  not  in  hii  last  hour  only, 
but  all  his  life  long.  Septuagint,  "Then 
shalt  thou  perceive  wisdom  in  thy  soul ;  for 
if  thou  find  it,  fair  shall  be  thine  end,  and 
hope  shall  not  fail  ihee." 

Vers.  15, 16. — A-  warning  against  plotting 
for  the  ruin  of  a  good  man's  house,  with  a 
view  doubtless  of  profiting  by  the  disaster. 

Ver.  15.— Lay  not  wait,  0  wicked  man, 
against  the  dwelling  of  the  rightecmi.  U^l 
(raslia)  is  vocative  (comp.  Ezek.  xxxiii.  8) ; 
taken  appositionally,  as  in  Kevised  Version 
margin,  "  as  a  wicked  man,"  it  is  senseless  ; 
for  how  could  he  lay  wait  in  any  other  cha- 
racter? Spoil  not  his  resting-place.  "Spoil," 
as  ch.  xix.  26  (where  see  note).  Drive  him  not 
from  his  house  by  violence  and  chicanery. 
Vulgate,  "Seek  not  impiety  in  the  house 
of  the  righteous ; "  do  not  attempt  to  cloak 
your  insidious  designs  by  detecting  some 
evil  in  the  good  man,  and  making  yourself 
the  instrument  of  retribution,  as  if  you  were 
doing  God  service  in  afHicting  him  (John 
xvi.  2).  Septuagint,  "  Bring  not  an  ungodly 
man  into  the  pasture  (m/i^)  of  the  righteous, 
neither  be  thou  deceived  by  the  feasting 
of  the  belly." 

Ver.  16. — A  just  man  falleth  seven  times, 
and  riseth  up  again.  The  fall  may  be  taken 
of  sin  or  of  calamity.  Preachers,  ancient 
and  modem,  have  made  much  use  of  this 
text  in  the  first  sense,  expatiating  how  a 
good  man  may  fall  into  venial  or  more 
serious  sins,  but  he  never  loses  his  love  of 
God,  and  rises  from  his  fall  by  repentance' 
on  every  occasion.  We  also  often  find  tbe 
words  in  die,  "  a  day,"  added,  which  indeed 
occur  in  some  manuscripts,  but  are  not  in  the 
original.  But  the  verb  naphal  seems  not  to 
be  used  in  the  sense  of  "  falling"  tuorally ; 
and  the  meaning  here  is  that  the  just  man 
frequently  falls  into  trouble, — he  is  not  se- 
cure against  worldly  cares  and  losses,  or  the 
insidious  attacks  of  th^  man  mentioned  in 
ver.  15;  but  he  never  loses  his  trust  in  God 
or  offends  by  fretfulness  and  impatience, 
and  always  God's  providence  watcbes  over 
him  and  delivers  him  out  of  all  Eis  afilio- 
tions.  "  Seven  times  "  means  merely  often, 
that  number  being  used  to  express  plurality 
or  completeness  (see  on  ch.  vi.  31 ;  xxvi.  16 ; 
and  comp.  Gen.  iv.  24  ;  Job  v.  19  (which  is 
like  our  passage);  and  Matt,  xviii.  22). 
The  expectation  which  the  sinner  conceived 
when  He  saw  the  good  man  distressed,  that 
he  might  seize  the  opportunity  and  use  it 


to  his  own  benefit,  is  woefully  disappointed. 
In  contrast  with  the  recovery  ami  re- 
establishment  of  the  righteous,  when  the 
wicked  suffer  calamity  there  is  no  recuper.i- 
tion  for  them.  The  wicked  shall  fall  into 
mischief;  Revised  Vertiun  better,  are  over- 
thrown by  calamity  (comp.  ch.  xiv.  32,  and 
note  there).  Septuagint,  "  But  the  ungodly 
shall  be  weak  in  evils," 

Vers.  17,  18. — A  warning  against  vin- 
dictiveness,  nearly  approaching  the  great 
Christian  maxim,  "  Love  your  enemies " 
(Matt.  V.  44). 

Ver.  17. — ^Eejoice  not  when  thine  enemy 
falleth.  "Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour" 
wfis  a  Mosaio  precept  (Lev.  xix.  18);  the 
addition,  "and  hate  thine  enemv,"  was  a 
PJiarisaio  gloss,  arising  from  a  misconcep- 
tion concerning  the  extermination  of  the 
Cunaauites,  which,  indeed,  had  a  special 
cause  and  purpose,  and  was  not  a  precedent 
for  the  treatment  of  all  aliens  (see  ch.  xx  v.  2 1 , 
22).  When  he  stumbleth ;  rathei',  whin  he 
is  overthrown.  The  maxim  refers  to  private 
enemies.  The  overthrow  of  public  enemies 
was  often  celebrated  with  festal  rejoicing. 
Ti.us  we  have  the  triumph  of  Mnses  at  tlie 
defeat  of  the  Araalekites,and  over  Pharaoh's 
host  at  the  Bed  Sea ;  of  Deborah  and  Barak 
over  Sisera(Exod.  xv. ;  xvii.  15;  Jucig.  v.); 
and  the  psalmist,  exulting  over  the  destruc- 
tion of  his  country's  foes,  could  say,  "  The 
righteous  shall  rejoice  when  he  seeth  the 
vengeance;  he  shall  wash  his  feet  in  the 
blood  of  the  wicked"  (Ps.  Iviii.  10).  But 
private  revenge  and  vindictiveness  are 
warmly  censured  and  repudiated.  So  Cato, 
'  Distich.'  iv.  46— 

"Morte  repentina  noli  gaudere  malorum; 
Felioesobeunt quorum  sineoriminuvitaest.'' 

Of  very  different  tone  is  the  Italian  proverb, 
"  Revenge  is  a  morsel  for  God ;  "  and  "  Wait 
time  and  place  to  act  thy  revenge,  for  it  is 
never  well  done  in  a  hurry"  (Trench). 

Ver.  18. — Lest  the  Lord  see  it,  and  it 
displease  him.  This  malignant  pleasure 
at  others'  misfortunes  (which  Aristotle, 
'  Eth.  Nio.,'  ii.  7.  15,  calls  iTnxaiptKaKia.) 
is  a  sin  in  the  eyes  of  God,  and  calls  for 
punishment.  And  he  turn  away  his  wrath 
from  him ;  and,  as  is  implied,  direct  it  upon 
tliee.  But  it  seems  a  mean  motive  to 
adduce,  if  the  maxim  is  taken  baldly  to 
mean,  "  Do  not  rejoice  at  your  enemy's 
calamity,  lest  God  relieve  him  from  the 
evil ; "  for  true  charity  would  wish  for  such 
a  result.  Bede  considers  "  his  wrath "  to 
be  the  enemy's  ill  will  against  thee,  which 
God  by  his  grace  changes  to  love,  and  thou 
art  thus  covered  with  confusion  and  shame 
for  thy  former  vindictiveness.  But  th« 
point  is  not  so  much  the  removal  of  God's  - 


OH.  XXIV.  1 — 34.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


461 


displeasure  from  the  enemy  as  the  punish- 
ment of  the  malignant  man,  either  mentally 
or  materially.  To  a  malignant  mind  no 
severer  blow  could  be  given  than  to  see  a 
foe  recover  God's  favour  and  rise  from  his 
fall.  The  moralist  then  warns  the  disciple 
against  giving  way  to  this  iTrixoipe/caK/a, 
lest  he  prepare  for  himself  bitter  mortifica- 
tion by  having  to  witness  the  restoration  of 
the  hated  one,  or  by  being  himself  made  to 
suffer  that  evil  which  he  had  rejoiced  to  see 
his  neighbour  experieuce  (comp.  oh.  xvii.  5, 
and  note  there). 

Vers.  19, 20. — A  warning  against  envying 
the  prosperity  of  the  wiclted. 

Ver.  19. — Fret  not  thyself  because  of  evil 
men  (comp.  ver.  1  and  Ps.  xxxvli.  1).  The 
verb  (eharah)  means  "to  burn,"  "to  be 
angry  ; "  so  here  we  may  render,  "  Be  not 
enraged  on  account  of  evil-doers."  The 
anger  would  arise  on  account  of  the  apparent 
inequitable  distribution  of  blessings.  St. 
Jerome  has,  A'e  contendas  cum  pesiimii; 
Septuagint,  "Rejoice  not  over  (eVl)  evil- 
doers." Neither  he  thou  envious  at  the 
wicked;  i.e.  do  not  fancy  that  their  pro- 
sperity is  to  be  desired,  nor  be  led  to 
imitate  their  doings  in  order  to  secure  like 
succOiiS.  The  next  verse  sbows  the  solemn 
reason  for  this  warning. 

Ver.  20. — For  there  shall  he  no  reward  to 
tie  evil  man.  He  has  no  happy  "  future "  to 
e.xpect,  as  ver.  14 ;  eh.  xxiU.  18  (where  see 
note).  The  candle,  etc.  (see  oh.  xiii.  9,  where 
ti.e  clause  appears).  Septuagint,  "For  the 
evil  man  shall  have  no  posterity,  and  the 
torch  of  the  wicked  shall  be  quenched." 

Vers.  21,  22. — An  injunction  urging 
loyalty  to  God  and  the  king. 

Ver.  21. — Fear  thou  the  Lord  and  the 
king.  The  king  is  God's  vicegerent  and 
representative,  and  therefore  to  be  honoured 
and  obeyed  (see  Eccles.  viii.  2;  x.  20;  1 
Pet.  ii.  17).  Ueddle  not  with  them  that 
are  given  to  change.  There  is  some  doubt 
alDOut  the  interpretation  of  the  last  word 
D'juj'  (shonim),  which  may  mean  those  who 
change,  innovators  (in  which  transitive 
sense  the  verb  does  not  elsewhere  occur), 
or  those  who  think  differently,  dissidents, 
who  respect  neither  God  nor  tlie  king. 
The  verb  njB*  signifies  transitively  "  to  re- 
peat," and  intransitively  "  to  be  changed ; " 
so  it  may  be  most  accurately  translated  here, 
Willi  Delitzsch,  "those  who  are  otherwise 
disposed,"  who  have  not  the  proper  senti- 
ments of  fear  and  lionour  for  God  and  the 
king.  St.  Jerome  has,  M  cum  detractoribut 
non  oommitoearis,  by  which  word  he  pro- 
bably means  what  we  call  revolutionists, 
persons  who  disparage  and  despise  all 
authority.     Septuagint  "  Fe»r  God  and  the 


king,  and  disobey  neither  of  them.''  The 
verse  has  been  largely  used  as  a  text  by 
preachers  who  desired  to  recommend  loyalty 
and  to  censure  disaffection  and  rebellinn. 
It  has  been  a  favourite  motto  for  discouiscs 
on  tlie  Gunpowder  Treason  and  the  execution 
of  Charles  I. 

Ver.  22, — For  their  calamity  shall  rise 
suddenly.  Though  these  dissidents  seem  to 
succeed  for  a  time,  yet  retribution  shall  fall 
suddenly  upon  them.  And  who  knoweth 
the  ruin  of  them  bothi  This  seems  to 
mean  the  two  classes,  those  who  dishonour 
God  and  those  who  dishonour  the  king; 
but  no  such  distinction  is  made  in  thy 
previous  verse;  the  rebels  are  classed  under 
one  category.  Wordsworth  renders,  "the 
stroke  of  vengeance  from  them  both,"  i.e. 
from  God  and  the  king.  Otherwise,  we 
must  give  another  signification  to  arrJE*, 
and,  with  the  Syriac  and  many  modern 
commentators,  take  it  in  the  sense  of 
"years,"  which  D,y}!tf  will  bear,  as  Job 
xxivi.  11,  and  translate,  "The  destruction 
[equivalent  to  'end']  of  their  years,  who 
knoweth?"  No  one  can  tell  when  tlio 
crisis  of  their  fate  shall  come;  but  it  will 
arrive  some  day,  and  then  the  time  of  their 
prosperity  wiU  be  at  an  end.  Septuagint, 
"  For  they  (God  and  the  king)  will  suddeiily 
punish  the  ungodly;  and  who  shall  know 
the  vengeance  of  both'(T&s  rifiapias  i.n(po- 
reptev)?"  After  this  the  LXX.  inserts  three 
proverbs  not  found  now  in  the  Hebrew, 
which,  however,  Ewald  ('Jahrb.  der  Bibl. 
Wissensch.,'  xi.  17,  etc.)  considers  to  have 
been  translated  from  a  Hebrew  original: 
"A  son  that  keepeth  the  coihmandment 
shall  be  safe  from  destruction  (ch.  xxix.  27, 
Vulgate),  and  he  hath  fully  received  it  (the 
word).  Let  no  lie  be  spoken  by  the  tongue 
of  the  king ;  and  no  he  shall  proceed  from 
his  tongue.  The  king's  tongue  is  a  sword, 
and  not  of  flesh ;  and  whosoever  shall  be 
delivered  unto  it  shall  be  destroyed ;  for  if 
his  anger  be  inflamed,  he  consumes  men 
with  their  nerves,  and  devours  men's  bones, 
and  burns  them  up  as  a  flame,  so  that  they 
are  not  food  for  the  young  eagles."  The 
allusion  at  the  end  is  to  animals  killed 
by  lightning.  Here  follows  the  series  of 
proverbs  (oh.  xxx.  1 — 14)  called  in  the 
Hebrew,  "  The  words  of  Agur."  The  second 
part  of  "the  words  of  Agur,"  and  "tlie 
words  of  Lemuel"  (oh.  xxx.  15 — xxxi.  9) 
follow  in  the  Greek  after  ch.  xxiv.  3i  of  the 
Hebrew.  Delitzsch  explains  the  matter  thus : 
In  the  copy  from  which  the  Alexaudrim  s 
translated,  the  appendix  (ch.  xxx.— xxxi.  9) 
was  divided,  into  two  parts,  half  of  it 
standing  after  "  the  words  of  the  wise  "  (ch. 
xxii.  17 — xxiv.  22),  and  half  after  the 
supplement  containing  further  sayings  of 
wise  men  (oh.  xxiv.  23—34). 


462 


THE   PROVERBS. 


[oh.  XXIV.  1 — 3t 


Vers.  23— 34.— Part  V.  A  Sboond  Col- 
lection, forming  a  second  supplement  to 
the  first  Solomonic  book,  and  containing 
further  "  words  of  the  wise." 

Vers.  23 — 25. — Partiality  and  impartiality 
It  hexastioh. 

Ver.  23. — These  things  also  belong  to  the 
wise;  are  the  sayings  of  wise  men.  The 
following  proverbs,  as  well  as  the  preceding, 
are  derived  from  wise  men.  Mistaking  this 
superscription,  the  LXX.  makes  it  a  personal 
address :  "  This  I  say  to  you  who  are  wise, 
BO  that  ye  may  learn."  The  first  line  is  not 
a  proverb,  but  the  introduction  to  the  ensuing 
collection.  It  is  not  good  to  have  respect 
of  persons  in  judgment  (see  ch.  xviii.  5, 
and  note  there;  and  xxviii.  21,  where  the 
expression  is  the  same  as  here).  To  regard 
one  person  before  another  is  to  be  partial 
and  unjust.  To  say  this  error  is  "  not  good  " 
is  a  meiosis,  the  meaning  being  that  it  is 
very  evU  and  sinful  (comp.  ch.  xx.  23). 
The  statement  is  developed  and  confirmed 
in  the  next  two  verses,  which  sliow  the 
results  of  partiality  and  its  opposite. 

Ver.  24. — He  that  saith  unto  the  wicked, 
Thou  art  righteous.  The  judge  is  supposed 
to  be  acquitting  a  guilty  person.  Him  shall 
the  people  curse.  The  Hebrew  is  "  peoples," 
as  Septuagint  and  Vulgate,  maledicent  eis 
popuU.  Nations  shall  abhor  him.  Not 
individuals,  nor  families  only,  but  the  whole 
community,  wherever  such  an  iniquitous 
ruler  is  found,  shall  execrate  and  hate  him. 
The  voice  of  the  people  is  universally  against 
him;  no  one  is  so  blind  and  degraded  as 
openly  to  applaud  his  acts.  The  verb  nakab, 
"to  curse,"  means  primarily  "to  boi'e  or 
pierce ; "  hence  some  have  translated  it  here, 
"him  shall  the  peoples  stab."  But  the 
word  is  used  in  the  sense  of  distinguishing 
by  a  mark  or  brand,  and  tlience  passes  into 
the  sense  of  cursing,  as  at  ch.  xi.  26 ;  Lev. 
xxiv.  11;  Job  iii.  8.  In  oh.  xvii.  J  5  the 
unjust  judge  is  called  an  abomination  to  the 
Lord.    In  this  case  the  vox  populi  is  vox  Dei. 

Ver.  25. — But  to  them  that  rebuke  him 
shall  be  delight  (see  on  oh.  ii.  10).  They 
who  punish  the  wicked,  with  them  it  is 
well;  they  are  approTed  by  God  and 
applauded  by  the  people.  Vulgate,  Qui  ar- 
guunt  eum,  laudahuntur,  "  They  who  convict 
him  shall  be  praised."  And  a  good  blessing 
shall  come  upon  them;  literally,  o  bletiing 
of  good — one  that  has  iu  it  all  good  things, 
the  happy  contrast  to  the  cuisea  which  meet 
the  unjust  judge.  Septuagint,  "  But  they 
that  convict  them  (the  guilty)  shall  appear 
more  excellent,  and  upon  thqm  shall  come 
blessing." 

Ver.  26.— A  distich  connected  with  the 
Bubjaot  of  the  preceding  powgiapl].  Every 
man  A»%  Mc6  his  lips  that  givoth  a  right 


answer;  or  better,  Tie  hisseth  the  lips  who 
giveth  a  right  answer.  An  answer  that  is 
fair  and  suitable  to  the  circumstances  is  as 
pleasant  and  assuring  to  the  hearers  as  a 
kiss  on  the  lips.  Such  a  salutation  would 
be  a  natural  sign  of  sympatliy  and  affection. 
Thus  Absalom  won  the  hearts  of  the  people 
by  kissing  those  who  Ciime  to  court  with 
their  suits  (2  Sam.  xv.  5).  In  Gen.  xli.  40, 
where  the  Authorized  Version  has,  "  Accord- 
ing to  thy  word  shall  all  my  people  ba 
ruled,"  the  Hebrew  runs,  "  Thy  mouth  shall 
all  my  people  kiss,"  i.e.  they  shall  do  homage- 
to  thee,  which  is  another  signification  of 
this  action.  This,  however,  would  not  be 
suitable  here,  as  the  kiss  is  supposed  to  ba 
given  by  the  speaker,  though  the  LXX. 
mistakenly  translates,  "  But  men  will  kiss 
lips  that  answer  good  words." 

Vtr.  27. — Prepare  thy  work  without.  The 
proverb  enjoins  a  man  to  look  well  to  hig 
resources  before  he  undertakes  to  build  a 
house  or  to  establish  a  family.  ■'  Without" 
(chuts)  (oh.  vii.  12;  viii.  26);  in  the  field.?. 
Put  in  due  order  all  immediate  work  in  thy 
farm.  And  make  it  fit  for  thyself  in  the 
field;  and  get  ready  for  what  has  to  come 
next.  That  is,  iu  short,  steadily  and  with 
due  foresight  cultivate  your  land;  provide 
abundant  means  of  subsistence  before  you 
attempt  to  build  up  your  house.  A  suitor 
had,  as  it  were,  to  purchase  his  bride  from  her 
relations  by  making  considerable  presents; 
it  was  therefore  necessary  to  provide  a  cer- 
tain amount  of  wealth  before  contemplating 
matrimony.  And  afterwards  build  thy  house. 
This  is,  indeed,  the  meaning  of  the  passage ; 
but  the  Hebrew  makes  a  difficulty,  as  it  is 
literally,  "afterwards  and  thou  shalt  build." 
Some  have  supposed  that  some  words  have 
dropped  out  of  the  text  (Cheyne,  'Job  and 
Solomon').  But  vav  in  p'jai,  coming  after 
a  date  or  notification  of  time,  as  here  after 
ins  (comp.  Gen.  iii.  5),  "has  the  future  signi- 
fication of  a  perfect  consecutive"  (Delitzsch), 
equivalent  to  "  after  that,  then,  thou  mayest 
build."  Septuagint,  "  Prepare  thy  works  for 
thy  going  forth  (eii  tV  efoSoi/),  and  get 
ready  for  the  field,  and  come  after  me,  and 
thou  shalt  buUd  up  thine  house."  In  a 
spiritual  sense,  the  heart  must  be  first  cleared 
of  thorns,  and  opened  to  genial  influences, 
before  the  man  can  build  up  the  fabric  of 
virtuous  habits,  and  thus  arrive  at  the 
virtuous  character. 

Ver.  28. — Be  not  a  witness  against  thy 
neighbour  without  cause  (chinnam) ;  gratui- 
tously (ch.  iii.  30;  xxiii.  29;  xxvi.  2),  when 
you  are  not  obliged  iu  the  performance  of 
a  plain  duty.  Persons  are  not  to  put 
themselves  forward  to  give  testimony  to  a 
neighbour's  discredit,  either  officiously  as 
busybodiei,  or  maliciously  as  Blanderers. 
The  maxim  is  expressed  in  general  terms 


OH.  xxrv.  I — 34.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


463 


and  is  not  to  be  confined  to  one  category,  as 
the  Syriac  and  Septuagint  render,  "  Be  not 
a  false  witness  against  thy  fellow-citizen." 
And  deoeive  not  with  thy  lips.  The  Hebrew 
is  really  interrogative,  "  Ami  wonkiest  tliou 
deceive  with  thy  lips?"  (Ps.  lx.\viii.  36). 
The  deceit  is  not  so  much  intentional  false- 
hood as  misrepresentation  arising  from  haste 
and  inconsiderateness  consequent  on  this  un- 
necessary eagerness  to  push  forward  testimony 
unsought.  Septuagint, "  Neither  exaggerate 
(jrXaTivav)  witli  thy  lips." 

Ver.  29. — The  subject  is  still  continued, 
as  if  the  moralist  would  say,  "Though  a 
man  has  done  you  an  injury  by  gratuitously 
testifying  agninst  ^•ou,  do  not  you  retaliate 
in  the  same  way."  Say  not,  I  will  do  so  to 
him  as  he  hath  done  to  me  (see  ch.  xx.  2^, 
and  note  there).  The  lex  talionit  should 
not  be  applied  to  private  wrongs.  The 
high  morality  of  the  Christian  code  is  here 
anticipated,  the  Holy  Spirit  guiding  both. 

Vers.  30— 34.— A  mashal  ode  concerning 
the  sluggard  (for  similar  odes,  comp.  ch.  vii. 
6—23;  Job  v.  3—5;  Pb.  xixviL  35,  etc.; 
Isa.  v.  1—6). 

Ver.  30. — The  field  ;  .  .  the  vineyard ;  the 
two  chief  objects  of  the  farmer's  care,  which 
need  constant  labour  if  they  are  to  prove 
productive.  Moralizing  on  this  passage,  St. 
Gregory  ('Moral.,'  xx.  54)  says,  "To  pass 
by  the  field  of  the  slothful,  and  by  the  vine- 
yard of  the  man  void  of  understanding,  is 
to  look  into  the  life  of  any  careless  liver, 
and  to  take  a  view  of  his  deeds." 

Ver.  31. — Thorns.  Kimmashon  is  the  word 
here  used,  but  the  plant  has  not  been  certainly 
identified  (comp.  Isa.  xxxiv.  13).  Nettles 
(charul).  The  stinging-nettle  is  quite  com- 
mon in  Palestine,  but  the  plant  here  meant  is 
probably  the  prickly  acanthus,  which  quickly 
covers  any  spot  left  uncultivated  (Job  xxx. 
7).  Revised  Version  margin  suggests  wild 
vetches.    Ovid, '  Trist.,'  v.  12.  21— 

"  Adde,  quod  ingenium  longa  rubigine  IsBsum 
Torpet,  et  es  t  multo,  quam  fuit  ante,  mi  nus. 
Pertilis,  assiduo  si  non  renovetur  aratro, 
Nil,nisi  cnm  spinis  gramen,  habebit  ager." 

So  spiritual  writers  have  used  this  apologue 


as  teaching  a  lesson  concerning  the  soul  and 
the  life  of  man,  how  that  spiritual  sloth 
allows  the  growth  of  evU  habits,  anl  the 
carelessness  which  maintains  not  the  d«fence 
of  law  and  prayer,  but  admits  the  enemy, 
and  the  result  is  the  loss  of  the  true  richeii 
and  the  perishing  of  the  heavenly  life.  The 
two  verses  are  thus  rendered,  or  rooially 
applied,  iu  the  Septuagint:  "A  foolisli  man 
is  as  a  farm,  and  a  man  wanting  in  sense  is 
as  a  vineyard ;  if  you  leave  hira,  he  will  be 
barren,  and  will  be  altogether  covered  with 
weeds,  and  he  will  become  deberted,  and  hia 
fences  of  stone  are  broken  down." 

Ver.  32. — Then  I  saw,  and  considered  it 
well  (oh.  xxii.  17).  I  looked  on  this  sight, 
and  let  it  sink  into  my  mind.  I  looked 
upon  it,  and  received  instruction  (ch.  viii. 
10).    I  learned  a  lesson  from  what  I  saw. 

Vers.  33, 34. — These  verses  are  a  repetitinn , 
with  very  slight  variations,  of  oh.  vi.  10,  11 
(where  see  notes),  and  possibly  have  been 
introduced  here  by  a  later  editor.  Ver.  33 
seems  to  be  the  sluggard's  own  words ;  ver. 
34  shows  the  result  of  his  sloth.  There  are 
numberless  proverbs  dedicated  to  this  subject 
in  all  languages;  e.g.  "No  sweat,  no  sweet ; " 
"No  pains,  no  gains;"  "He  that  wad  eat 
the  kernel  maun  crack  the  nut ; "  "A 
puSadas  outran  las  buenas  hadas,"  "Good 
luck  enters  by  dint  of  cuflFs"  (Spanish); 
"  Nihil  agendo  male  ager'i  disoimus ; "  "  The 
dog  in  the  kennel,"  say  the  Chinese,  "  barks 
at  his  fltas ;  the  dog  that  hunts  docs  not 
feel  them"  (Kelly).  "Sloth  and  much 
sleep,"  say  the  Arabs,  "remove  from  God 
and  bring  on  poverty."  The  LXX.  is 
somewhat  dramatic  in  its  rendering :  "  After- 
wards I  repented  (/lerevSriffa),  I  looked  that 
I  miglit  receive  instruction.  'I  slumber  a 
little,  I  sleep  a  little,  for  a  little  I  clasp 
(epajKaXiCoiiai)  my  hands  across  my  breast' 
But  if  thou  do  this,  thy  poverty  will  come 
advancing,  and  thy  want  like  a  good  runner 
(ayaflbs  Spo/jieis')."  The  word  eVa7Ka\(5|b/xai 
occurs  in  ch.  vi.  10,  but  nowhere  else  in  the 
Septuagint.  It  is  used  by  St.  Mark  (ix  36 ; 
X.  16).  It  "has  been  thought  that  the 
original  mafhal  ended  with  ver.  32,  the 
following  passage  being  added  by  a  scribe 
as  illustrative  in  a  marginal  Bote^  which 
afterwards  crept  into  the  text 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver  9.— Sin  andfoUy.  HoweTcr  these  words  are  read,  they  point  to  an  association 
of  sin  and  folly.  This  may  be  regarded  from  two  points  of  view,  according  as  we  start 
with  the  thought  of  the  sin  or  with  that  of  the  folly. 

I.  Sin  implies  folly.  1.  It  chooses  the  worse  of  two  courses.  Thus  it  blundeni 
into  self-injury.  Evil  is  not  only  culpable  in  the  sight  of  God ;  it  is  hurtful  to  the 
evil-doer.  Iti  path  is  dark,  degraded,  disappointing.  It  is  foolish  to  turn  from  the 
way  of  light  and  honour  and  satisfaction  to  such  a  course.     2.  It  is  short-sighted.    In 


464  THE    PROVERBS.  Ich.  xxiv.  1—34. 

choosing  a  way  one  should  look  to  the  eni  of  it.  It  is  madness  for  the  helated  traveller 
to  turn  aside  to  the  grassy  path  when  the  rough,  stony  road  would  take  him  home,  and 
be  knows  not  whither  the  pleasanter  way  will  lead  him.  "The  wages  of  sin  it 
death ; "  it  is,  then,  nothing  but  folly  to  work  for  the  master  without  considering  his 
direful  payment.  3.  It  perverts  the  thoughts.  Sin  involves  folly,  and  it  also  leads  to 
greaier  folly.  Many  sins  directly  poison  and  paralyze  the  intellectual  faculties.  All 
siiis  confuse  the  lines  of  right  and  truth.  Thus  the  man  who  lives  in  sin  is  Winding 
his  eyes  to  the  greatest  facts.  To  know  of  the  doctrine  we  must  do  the  commandment 
(Juhh  vii.  17).  The  wilful  sinner  obscures  the  doctrine  by  breaking  the  commandment. 
II.  FoLLT  ISSUES  IN  SIN.  We  now  look  at  the  conjunction  from  the  opposite  point 
of  view.  We  start  with  the  folly.  This  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  seed  of  sin.  It  is  true 
that  sin  is  primarily  concerned  with  the  moral  nature.  A  man  cannot  really  sin 
altogether  in  ignorance,  because  if  he  does  not  know  that  he  is  doing  a  wrong  thing,  to 
him  the  thing  is  not  wrong.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  a  culpable  ignorance, 
arising  from  carelessness,  disregard  for  truth,  moral  obliquity.  Now,  as  sin  is  at  tha 
rout  of  that  ignorance,  so  the  ignorance  may,  in  such  a  case,  serve  as  a  link  in  tha 
miserable  chain  of  consequences  that  drags  new  sins  into  existence.  These  facts  should 
lead  us  to  certiun  practical  conclusions.  1.  It  is  our  duty  to  seek  the  light  that  we  may 
avoid  sin.  Truth  is  not  merely  given  as  a  luxury.  It  is,  first  of  all,  a  beacon-light, 
It  is  to  guide  us  over  the  wilderness  in  the  right  way.  2.  The  teaching  of  children 
is  a  moral  and  religious  duty.  The  advantages  of  education  are  usually  discussed  from 
a  utilitarian  standpoint.  But  the  chief  advantage  is  that  it  should  open  the  eyes 
of  children  to  the  wisdom  of  doing  right  and  to  the  foUy  of  wickedness.  Many  poor 
children  grow  up  among  scenes  of  vice  and  crime  without  having  an  opportunity  of 
knowing  of  a  better  way.  The  Christian  Church  is  called  to  be  a  light  in  the  world, 
leading  from  sin,  not  forcibly,  but  by  showing  the  clear  wisdom  of  goodness,  as  well  aa 
its  moral  obligation. 

Ver.  10. — Fainting  in  the  day  of  adversity.  I.  Stbbnoth  is  tested  by  the  dat 
OF  ADVERsiTT.  1.  The  day  of  adversity  will  come.  Ail  have  not  an  equally  painful 
lot.  It  is  only  the  pessimist  who  refuses  to  admit  that  God  sends  a  happy  life  to  some; 
and  if  the  lines  have  fallen  in  pleasant  places,  nothing  but  ingratitude  or  sentimenlality 
will  deny  the  fact.  Nevertheless,  the  dark  day  of  adversity  will  rise  on  every  soul  of 
man.  It  cannot  be  eluded,  though  in  youth  and  health  the  spirit  refuses  to  anticipate 
it.  It  is  well  to  be  prep  ired  to  meet  it.  2.  Strength  is  wanted  for  the  day  of  adversity. 
This  vrill  be  a  time  of  assault,  strain,  pressure.  The  soul  will  then  be  besieged, 
buffeted,  and  in  danger  of  being  crushed.  Therefore  there  is  need  of  sufficient  strength, 
not  only  for  prosperous  times,  but  for  this  harder  occasion.  The  lighthouse  must  not  only 
be  strong  enough  to  stand  in  calm  weather ;  it  should  be  able  to  resist  the  battering- 
rams  of  the  tempest.  The  ship  must  be  built  for  the  storm.  The  army  that  can 
look  smart  in  a  review  is  useless  if  it  goes  to  pieces  on  the  field  of  battle.  The  model 
navy  is  an  extravagant  ornament  if  it  will  not  serve  us  in  action.  The  lamp  is  useless 
if  it  goes  out  in  the  hour  of  darkness.  Religion  is  lor  the  time  of  trial  and  temptation. 
The  spiritual  life  needs  to  be  strong  enough  to  hold  on  through  terror,  temptation,  ami 
trouble ;  or  it  is  a  delusion.  3.  Faulty  strength  will  fail  in  the  day  of  adversity. 
'I'rouble  is  trial.  The  season  of  affliction  will  assuredly  be  severe  enough  to  prove 
our  strength.  It  is  vain  for  any  one  to  live  on  empty  boasts  and  idle  pretences.  The 
hollowness  of  such  folly  will  be  exposed  at  the  fatal  moment.  The  soft-metal  sword 
will  certainly  double  up  in  the  battle  and  bring  disaster  on  its  unhappy  owner. 

II.  Faith  and  coukaqe  will  give  strength  in  the  day  op  adversity.  1.  To 
faint  in  the  day  of  adversity  is  to  make  one's  strength  small.  Such  a  collap^e  will 
undermine  one's  energy.  The  coward  is  always  weak.  To  fear  is  to  fail.  But  courage 
inspires  strength,  and  he  who  is  able  to  keep  up  a  brave  heart  in  the  day  of  adversity 
is  most  likely  to  conquer.  Few  men  have  been  called  upon  to  endure  such  hardships 
and  to  face  such  perils  as  Livingstone,  alone  in  the  heart  of  Africa.  Now,  Livingstone 
was  characterized  by  a  wonderful  buoyancy  of  temperament,  by  high  spirits  and  unfail- 
ing cheerfulness.  Nelson  is  said  not  to  have  known  iear.  Gordon  was  as  ready  to 
face  death  as  to  go  to  his  daily  duty.  No  doubt  such  heroic  courage  is  largely  due 
to  the  natural  greatness  of  the  men  who  possessed  it.     But  it  is  not  independent  of 


OH.  XXIV.  X— S-l.]  THE  PROVKRBS.  465 

moral  qnalitiea.  For ;  2.  The  secret  of  the  highest  courage  i$  faith.  He  who  trusts 
God  is  armed  with  the  miglit  of  God.  This  is  higher  than  natural  strength,  hecsiiae 
"even  the  youths  shall  faint  and  bo  weary,  and  the  young  men  shall  utterly  fall: 
but  they  that  wait  upon  the  Lord  shall  renew  their  strength;  they  shall  mount  up 
with  wings  as  eagles ;  they  shall  run,  and  not  be  weary  ;  and  they  shall  wa^k,  and  not 
-faint"  (Isa.  xl.  30,  31).  'ihus  there  is  a  strength  that  is  perfected  in  weakness  (2  Cor. 
xii.  9).  3.  Tlterefore  we  have  no  excuse  to  faint  in  the  day  of  adversity.  With  such 
stores  of  strength  for  the  weakest,  failure  is  culpable.  Note :  We  are  not  to  blame  for 
meeting  with  adversity — we  cannot  escape  it;  nor  for  suffering  under  it — this  is 
natural;  but  only  for  fainting,  i.e.  for  collapse  and  despair.  Yet  even  this  may  \\i\ 
mean  utter  failure.  We  may  still  hnve  soma  strength,  though  it  be  sickly  and  fast 
ebbing  away.     Like  Gideon's  herLics,  we  may  be  "  faint,  yet  pursuing"  (Judg.  viii.  4). 

Vers.  11,  12. —  Culpable  negligence.  Following  the  Revised  Version  and  the  row 
generally  accepted  rendering  of  these  verses,  we  will  read  the  first  as  an  exhortation 
to  deliver  men  from  death,  and  tlie  secoud  as  a  warning  against  neglecting  this  duty. 

L  The  exhortation.  "Deliver  them  that  are  carried  away  unto  death,  and  tbuse 
that  are  ready  to  be  slain  see  that  thou  hold  back."  Note  first  the  grounds,  and  then 
the  application,  of  this  exhortation.  1,  The  grounds  of  it.  (1)  It  springs  from  human 
need.  Men  are  in  danger  in  war,  famine,  poverty,  disease,  sin.  The  world  cannot 
go  on  without  mutual  assistance.  The  selfish  policy  of  sauve  qui  peut  would  be 
fatal  to  society,  (2)  It  is  based  on  human  brotherhood.  God  has  made  all  men  of 
one  blood  (Acts  xvii.  26).  Our  fellow-creatures  of  the  animal  world  have  okirns  upon 
us;  for,  like  us,  they  are  sensitive,  and  God  made  both  us  and  them.  Much  more 
are  our  fellow-men  in  our  care.  (3)  It  is  urged  by  Divine  commands.  The  Bible 
teaches  duty  to  man  as  well  as  to  God,  on  Divine  authority.  The  mainly  negative 
requirements  of  the  ten  commandments  do  not  cover  nil  our  duty.  We  are  called 
upon  to  lovo  our  neighbours  as  ourselves.  (4)  It  is  confirmed  by  the  example  of  God. 
lie  has  given  us  our  lives,  spared  them  when  forfeited  by  sin,  and  saved  them  from 
many  dangers.  He  has  given  his  Son  in  death  to  save  us  from  ruin.  Such  redeeming 
mercy  makes  churlish  negligence  on  our  part  doubly  culpable.  2.  The  applicafion  of 
it.  (1)  There  should  he  mercy  in  war.  It  is  heathenish  to  refuse  quarter.  The 
Christian  soldier  will  dress  the  wounds  of  his  enemy.  (2)  We  should  render  assistance 
in  cases  of  accident  and  danger.  It  is  horrible  to  read  in  the  newspapers  of  men  who 
would  watch  a  child  drown  because  they  were  not  officers  of  the  Royal  Humane  Society, 
heeause  it  was  not  their  business  to  save  life,  and  even  bocaDse  they  had  good  clothes 
which,  they  did  not  wish  to  soil.  Selfish  people  will  see  a  man  half  murdered  in  a  street- 
quarrel  without  interferin,'.  (3)  We  should  help  the  poor.  This  applies  to  our  own 
poor  first,  then  to  those  of  our  neighbourhood,  but  the  obligation  extends  as  far  as 
a  China  famine.  (4)  Hospit^\l8  deserve  support,  for  ministrations  to  the  sick  <lirectly 
tend  to  preserve  life.  (5)  Social  reforms  doniand  Christian  assistance.  (6)  It  is  our 
supreme  duty  to  spread  the  pospel  throughout  the  world.  This  is  a  "  Word  of  life" 
( I'hil.  ii.  16).  To  let  men  perish  for  lack  of  the  bread  of  life  is  culpable  negligence.  The 
lepers  of  Samaria  rebuke  such  conduct  (2  Kings  vii.  9). 

II.  The  warning.  1.  Ignorance  is  no  excuse.  "  Behold,  we  knew  it"  (or  "him") 
"not."  Of  course,  this  does  not  apply  to  unavoidable  ignorance.  But  the  rich  should 
know  the  condition  of  the  poor.  It  is  the  duty  of  the  West  Knd  to  investigate  the 
condition  of  the  Bast  End.  While  this  duty  is  neglected  the  comfortable  complacency 
of  ignorance  is  unpardonable.  Further,  if  the  attempted  excuse  be  that  the  sufferer 
is  personally  unknown  to  us,  this  must  not  be  admitted.  He  is  still  our  hrother.  The 
parable  of  the  good  Samaritan  shows  that  the  perfect  stranger  has  claims  upon  us. 
2.  God  ohtrves  this  negligence.  He  "pondereth  the  heart."  He  reads  our  secret 
thoughts  and  weighs  our  motivis.  Thus  he  knows  whether  we  are  kept  back  by 
unavoidable  ignorance  or  inabdity  to  help,  or  whether  the  negligence  is  wilful.  With 
this  awful  fact  before  us,  that  there  is  One  who  "  pondereth  the  heart,"  all  flimsy 
excuses  must  shrivel  up  and  leave  the  negligence  of  the  needy  in  its  naked  guilt.  3. 
Ood  will  treat  us  according  to  our  treatment  of  our  felloic-mfv.  "  With  what  measure 
ye  mete  it  shnll  be  measured  to  vou  (i^':iio"  (Matt,  vii.  'J).  .Moieover,  in  reg.vul  to  the 
duty  now  before  US,  it  is  to  be  observed  that  God  takes  note  of  omissions  as  well  as 
rnoTKRM.  '  ^ 


466  THE  PROVERBS.  [cH.  xxiv.  1—34 

of  transgresBioDB.  The  "eternal  fire"  is  not  spoken  of  by  our  Lord  for  thieveB, 
murderers,  etc.,  but  for  those  who  failed  to  help  the  hungry,  the  thirsty,  tho  needy 
(Matt.  XXV.  41—46). 

Ver.  16. — Th»  fall  of  a  good  mem.  I.  It  is  possible  fob  a  oood  mak  to  fall. 
1.  Here  is  a  warning  against  preswmpUon.  "  Let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth  take 
heed  lest  he  fall "  (1  Cor.  x.  12).  No  one  is  so  perfect  as  to  be  impeccable.  Peter, 
who  little  expected  it,  failed  in  the  moment  of  trial.  2.  He  it  a  warning  against 
wrong  judgments.  If  a  good  man  stumbles  it  is  commonly  thought  that  he  proyei 
himself  to  have  been  a  hypocrite  from  the  first.  No  notion  could  be  more  unwarrant- 
able. It  is  possible  that  the  former  life  was  honest  and  true  and  up  to  its  profession, 
but  that  a  sudden  change  for  the  worse  has  occurred  through  yielding  to  overpowering 
temptation.  The  citadel  was  honestly  guarded;  but  in  an  unwary  moment,  when  the 
custodian  was  sleeping,  or  careless,  or  weak,  it  fell  before  the  assaults  of  the  ever- 
watchful  foe.  This  may  even  be  repeated  many  times.  We  can  scarcely  think  of 
a  really  good  man  lapsing  utterly  from  the  right  way  as  many  as  seven  times  and 
as  often  returning  to  it.  But  some  measure  of  sin  is  committed  many  times.  There 
18  not  a  Christian  who  does  not  fall  into  numerous  sins. 

II.  If  a  good  man  falls  he  is  likblt  to  msb  up  aoaik.  We  need  not  now 
discuss  the  thorny  doctrine  of  "final  perseverance."  Without  retreating  into  the 
tangled  thicket  of  a  priori  dogmatics,  we  may  discover  certain  plain  and  practical 
considerations  which  will  encourage  us  to  believe  in  the  recovery  of  the  lapsed.  1. 
77ie  hent  of  a  good  man's  life  is  towards  goodness.  He  is  a  just  man.  Righteoilsness  is 
characteristic  of  him.  It  is  his  habit.  His  fall  is  an  event,  his  righteousness  is  his  life. 
He  is  not  the  less  guilty  in  his  sin.  He  cannot  shake  it  off  and  disown  it,  fortifying 
himself  against  the  charge  of  it  under  the  guise  of  his  habitual  righteousness.  A  long 
career  of  goodness  is  no  excuse  for  a  single  wrong  deed.  Nevertheless,  beneath  and 
behind  the  sin  into  which  the  man  has  been  surprised  are  the  general  tone  and  temper 
of  his  life.  This  will  make  his  fall  an  agony.  One  look  from  Christ,  and  the  shame- 
faced disciple  goes  out  to  weep  bitterly  (Matt.  xxvi.  75).  Th«  Christian  who  has  been 
surprised  in  an  hour  of  weakness  will  be  in  the  greatest  distress  afterwards.  He  can 
have  no  rest  till  he  is  forgiven  and  restored.  Hence  there  is  a  hope  for  him  which 
we  cannot  cherish  on  behalf  of  the  bad  man  who  has  had  no  experience  of  the  better 
way  and  who  has  no  inclination  to  follow  it.  2.  A  good  man  may  return.  There 
is  danger  in  despair.  The  miserable  penitent  fears  that  he  may  have  committed  the 
unpardonable  sin,  forgetting  that  his  very  grief  is  a  proof  that  that  dark  eternity  of 
guilt  has  not  yet  been  reached.  God  is  long-suffering  and  merciful.  Seven  times  the 
poor  man  falls ;  seven  times  he  is  forgiven  and  restored  by  his  compassionate  Lord. 
3.  The  grace  of  Ood  assists  recovery.  Indeed,  without  this  it  were  impossible.  But 
with  it  who  shall  despair?  On  the  other  hand,  after  a  wicked  man  has  indulged  in 
sin  he  refuses  to  open  his  heart  to  Divine  grace.  The  one  means  by  which  he  might 
climb  up  out  of  his  deep  ruin  is  rejected  by  him. 

In  conclusion,  we  may  gather  from  a  consideration  of  this  subject  that  the  first 
essential  is  the  character  of  a  man's  life,  rather  than  that  of  isolated  and  perhaps 
exceptional  deeds.  Gtod  notes  every  deed,  and  not  one  can  go  unavenged.  But  the 
fundamental  question  is — How  does  a  man  live  in  the  main  ?  is  the  set  of  bis  life  towardi 
goodness?  does  he  habitually  face  the  light  or  the  darkness?  Though  with  many 
stumbles  and  shameful  bruises,  is  be,  on  the  whole,  going  up,  not  down  ?  If  so,  he 
is  one  of  God's  sons. 

Ver.  19. — A  needless  trouble.  I.  Thebe  is  a  temptation  to  be  distbessed  at 
THE  PBOSFERITY  OF  BAD  HEN.  1.  It  is  unjust.  Tbls  was  an  ancient  source  of  per- 
plexity and  trouble  of  mind.  While  good  men  often  suffer,  bad  men  aro  often 
exceptionally  free  from  the  world's  ills.  This  pains  us  as  a  frightful  discord  in  the 
psalm  of  life.  It  raises  doubts  as  to  the  presence,  or  the  power,  or  the  justice  of  GKxl. 
If  the  just  Lord  is  in  our  midst  and  is  almighty  to  rule,  why  does  he  permit  such 
a  condition  of  society?  2.  It  it  hurtful.  Prosperity  confers  power.  Thus  great 
resources  are  at  the  disposal  of  bad  men,  who  are  able  to  expend  them  in  extensir* 
schemes  of  wickedness.    A  successful  Napoleon  can  deluge  a  continent  with  blood,  and 


OH.  XXIV.  1—34.]  THE  PROVERBS.  463 

bring  misery  into  thousands  of  households.  The  triumph  of  bad  men  not  only  enables 
them  to  inflict  suffering  to  a  frightful  extent ;  it  gives  them  exceptional  opportunities 
for  spreading  the  infectious  malaria  of  their  sin.  When  a  bad  man  prospers  he  con- 
taminates his  trade,  lowers  the  character  of  business  generally,  and  tempts  his  employes 
to  do  wrong  on  a  scale  that  is  proportionate  to  his  enterprises.  3.  It  seems  to  h> 
enviable.  Sin  looks  like  a  short  cut  to  success.  It  is  hard  for  a  good  man  who  resists 
temptations  to  be  rewarded  with  distresses  which  he  would  have  escaped  if  b)  bad 
yielded. 

II.  It  is  foolish  to  be  distbbssed  at  the  prosperity  of  bad  men.  1.  Prosperity 
is  infinitely  inferior  to  character.  The  great  question  is  not  as  to  what  a  man  has,  but 
as  to  what  he  is.  It  is  far  more  important  to  be  upright  and  holy  in  life  than  to  be 
rich,  successful,  and  happy  in  one's  circumstances.  Surely  he  who  values  true  good- 
ness will  feel  that  it  is  a  pearl  of  great  price — the  cost  of  which  would  not  be  com- 
pensated for  by  all  the  wealth  of  the  In(Ues.  Therefore  to  envy  the  prosperity  of  the 
wicked  is  to  turn  aside  from  the  higher  possession  which  may  be  enjoyed  in  poverty  and 
adversity.  2.  The  prosperity  of  the  wicked  is  delusive  and  unsatisfactory.  It  professes 
to  give  pleasure,  but  it  cannot  afford  real  happiness,  for  it  has  nothing  in  it  to  respond 
to  the  deeper  cravings  of  the  soul.  He  who  feasts  upon  it  is  like  a  man  who  would 
fill  himself  with  chaff  and  saw-dust.  In  his  very  satiety  he  is  miserably  hungry. 
Full,  he  yet  starves.  Or  worse,  he  is  like  one  who  drinks  madly  of  salt  water,  and  is 
plunged  into  an  agony  of  thirst  in  consequence.  If,  as  may  happen,  however,  he  feels 
a  measure  of  satisfaction,  this  can  only  be  by  deadening  his  higher  nature.  Such  a 
state  is  delusive  and  more  terrible  than  open  complaining.  3.  2%is  prosperity  is  short- 
lived. "  The  candle  of  the  wicked  shall  be  put  out "  (ver.  20).  The  psalmist  who  was 
alarmed  at  the  prosperity  of  the  wicked  saw  another  picture  when  he  came  to  consider 
their  end.  He  who  would  share  the  purple  and  fine  linen  of  Dives  on  earth  must 
also  share  his  bed  of  fire  after  death.  It  is  only  the  short-sighted,  earthly  minded  man 
who  will  much  envy  the  prosperity  of  the  wicked.  A  deeper-thinking  man  will  dread 
it,  and  be  well  satisfied  if  he  has  the  true  blessedness  of  life  eternal. 

Ver.  29. — Rendering  tvU  for  evil.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  this  conduct  is  not 
only  rebuked  by  Jesus  Christ,  but  also  forbidden  in  the  Old  Testament,  and  even  in 
the  Book  of  Proverbs,  which  is  thought  to  deal  too  much  in  temporal  and  self-regarding 
motives.  So  utterly  is  it  foreign  to  right-mindedness.  Yet  it  is  most  common,  and 
apparently  most  natural. 

I.  Let  us  consideb  how  it  seems  natural  to  render  evil  for  evil.  1.  li 
appears  to  le  Just.  There  is  a  natural  fitness  in  things,  and  this  seems  to  be  satisfied 
by  the  lex  talionis,  "  An  eye  for  an  eye,  and  a  tooth  for  a  tooth."  2.  It  offers  to  check 
evil.  It  appears  to  be  a  natural  form  of  punishment.  Indeed,  it  was  sanctioned  in 
rough,  primitive  times,  though  subject  to  judicial  inquiry  (Exod.  xxi.  24).  3.  It 
satisfies  the  craving  foi»revenge.  This  is  the  reason  which  encourages  it  far  more  than 
considerations  of  abstract  justice  or  anxiety  about  the  public  weal.  "  Revenge  is  sweet," 
and  to  restrain  the  impulse  to  strike  an  offender  in  return  for  his  blow  is  hard  and 
painful.  4.  It  agrees  with  prevalent  customs.  It  is  "  after  the  manner  of  man "  to 
avenge  a  wrong,  and  apparently  the  habit  springs  from  innate  instincts.  At  all  events, 
it  works  without  reflection.  Therefore  it  appears  to  be  a  part  of  the  economy  of  nature. 
To  refuse  it  is  lUce  denying  a  natural  appetite. 

II.  Let  us  leabn  why  it  is  wrong  to  render  evil  for  evil.  1.  The  sense  of 
revenge  lies  in  our  lower  nature.  It  is  shared  by  the  brute  creation,  like  hunger  and 
lust.  But  it  is  aggravated  by  the  sin  of  hatred  and  by  selfishness.  There  is  nothing 
noble  or  elevating  in  it.  On  the  contrary,  it  drags  us  down.  Long-suffering  braces  the 
moral  fibres  of  the  soul ;  revenge  relaxes  them.  2.  We  are  not  called  upon  to  execute 
sentence  on  our  fellow-men.  If  there  is  to  be  a  requital,  this  must  come  from  God,  to 
whom  belongs  just  vengeance  (Eom.  xii.  19).  We  are  usurping  the  rights  of  God  when 
we  impatiently  take  it  into  our  own  hands.  Moreover,  we  are  the  worst  possible 
judges  of  our  own  rights.  When  deeply  wounded,  or  irritated  by  insults,  or  blindi:d 
by  passion,  we  are  not  in  a  fit  ccaditibn  to  exercise  jiidicial  functions.  Yet  it  is  just 
on  such  occasions  that  we  are  most  tempted  to  wreak  vengeance  on  the  head  of  an 
offender,     3.   It  is  our  duty  to  forgive  and  save  our  fellow-man.     Jiven  if  punishmeni 


468  THE  PBOTBBBS.  [ch.  xxiv.  1-^34 

be  due  to  him,  vengeance  from'  us  is  not  owing.  Our  business  is  to  seek  to  reclaim  by 
"  heaping  coals  of  Are"  on  our  wrong-doer.  Instead  of  doing  to  him  as  he  has  done  to 
us,  our  Christian  motto  is  to  do  to  him  as  we  would  that  he  should  do  to  us.  4. 
Beoerige  is  un-Christlike.  Christians  are  called  to  follow  in  the  footsteps  of  the  pitieni 
and  brave  Jesus,  who  was  patient  under  provocation,  even  praying  for  his  enemieii.  5. 
Revenge  is  unseemly  in  those  who  need  forgiveness.  We  are  depeniient  oa  the  mercy  o 
Grod.  He  has  not  taken  vengeance  on  us.  But  if  we  forgive  not  men  their  trespasst-s, 
neither  will  our  heavenly  Father  forgive  us  our  trespasses.  Thus  Portia  rightly  »ay!> 
to  Shylock — 

"  Gonsider  this — 

That  in  the  coarse  of  justice,  none  of  us 

Should  see  salvatiou :  we  do  pray  for  mercy; 

And  that  same  prayer  doth  teach  ua  all  to  render 

The  deeds  of  mercy." 

Vers.  30 — 34. — Thefidd  of  the  slothftd.  Nothing  is  more  characteristic  of  the  Book 
of  Proverbs  than  its  scorn  of  slothfulness  and  its  strenuous  inculcation  of  industry. 
No  doubt  these  subjects  were  especially  important  in  view  of  the  perennial  indolence 
of  Orientals.  But  slothfulness  is  not  unknown  in  the  West,  and  in  the  fierce  com- 
petition of  modern  life  a  smaller  indulgence  in  idleness  will  bring  sure  disasters.  Men 
often  blame  their  circumstances,  the  injustice  of  fate,  etc.,  when  they  should  accuse  their 
own  lack  of  energy.  The  difference  between  the  successful  and  those  who  fail  to 
attain  anything  in  life  is  more  often  than  not  just  that  between  hard  work  and  self- 
indulgent,  easy  living.  Moreover,  many  men  who  are  diligent  in  business  are  most 
■lothful  in  spiritual  matters.     Hence  applications  of  the  parable  in  the  present  day. 

I.  The  state  of  the  field.  1.  This  is  visible  to  the  casual  wayfarer.  The  writer 
simply  "  went  by  "  it ;  yet  he  took  in  enough  at  a  glance  to  understand  its  condition. 
A  man's  character  is  impressed  upon  his  work.  A  slovenly  man  will  have  a  slovenly  , 
hand.  The  neglected  field  and  the  ill-kept  vineyard  reveal  the  idle  and  foolish  nature 
of  their  owner.  2.  The  field  is  seen  to  he  in  a  miserable  condition.  (1)  It  is  over- 
grown with  thorns  and  nettles.  It  is  not  left  empty  if  it  is  untilled.  Weeds  grow  on 
the  neglected  land.  If  we  fail  to  do  our  duty,  positive  mischief  wUl  follow.  If  wo 
neglect  the  field  of  the  world,  briars  of  ignorance,  foUy,  and  sin  will  spring  up;  if  we 
fail  to  train  the  vineyard  of  our  own  family,  nettles  of  evil  will  appear  in  the  minds  of 
our  children,  to  sting  us  for  our  indolence.  Thus  was  it  with  Eli,  who  failed  to 
rebuke  his  sons.  If  we  do  not  cultivate  the  gardens  of  our  own  souls,  rank  weeds  of  sin 
will  certainly  grow  up  there  and  bear  their  poisonous  fruits.  (2)  Its  defences  are 
broken  down.  The  indolent  man  lets  his  walls  fall  into  dilapidation.  Thus  his 
property  lies  open  to  the  robber  and  the  destroyer.  The  wild  boar  from  the  wood  will 
root  up  his  vine.  If  we  are  not  watchful  and  careful,  evil  will  come  in  from  without 
and  spoil  our  work,  our  home,  our  souls.    It  needs  care  to  guard  gainst  aggression. 

II.  The  conduct  or  the  owneb.  1.  It  is  slothful.  (1)  His  evil  is  negative.  He 
commits  no  offence.  Yet  he  is  ruined.  We  may  be  undone  by  simple  omission 
without  any  transgression.  (2)  His  evil  is  in  delaying  to  do  his  duty.  He  does  not 
mean  to  forego  it.  He  only  postpones  fulfilment.  Yet  he  is  ruined  and  disgraced.  We 
owe  duties  to  time.  We  do  wrong  by  not  accomplishing  our  work  promptly,  though 
we  intend  to  accomplish  it  ultimately.  We  have  not  unlimited  time  before  us.  To- 
day's neglected  task  cannot  be  performed  to-morrow  without  hindering  to-morrow's 
work.  The  foolish  virgins  failed  by  being  too  late.  2.  It  is  self-indulgent.  The 
sluggard  enjoys  his  sleep.  Selfishness  is  the  root  of  idleness.  But  this,  in  turn,  is 
stupefying.  One  does  not  note  how  the  fresh  morning  glides  away  while  he  lies  with  his 
eyes  closed  in  sinful  sleep.  So  also  the  slumber  of  the  soul  that  neglects  the  call  to  its 
highest  duty  is  a  selfish  sleep.  3.  It  is  foolish.  The  sleep  is  a  poor  compensation  for 
poverty  and  shame. 

III.  The  certain  consequences.  1.  Buin  follows.  Poverty  comes  on  the  slothful 
nian  of  business  as  a  natural  punishment.  Poverty  uf  soul,  emptiness,  fruitiessness, 
and  finally  death  follow  spiritual  sloth.  2.  This  may  be  unsuspected.  "  Like  a 
highwayman."     3.  It  will  lie  irresis'ible.     The  want  will  come  "a»  an  armed  man." 

CoKcix'SioN.  Sloth  is  peouliarl^  liable  to  creep  into  one's  habits  without  being 
noticed.    Therefore  the  need  of  ver.  32. 


».  xxrr,  1— 34.]  THB  PROVERBS.  460 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 
Vers.  1,  2. —  Warning  against  evil  company.    I.  The  Lova  of  sooibtt  m  a  natdbai 

nfSTlNCT. 

XL  Evil  company  is  often  most  fascinating. 

III.  The  associations  that  are  founded  upon  mere  kellowshii'  in  pj,ea.-.iihk 

ARE  seldom  SATISFAOTORy,  OFTEN  CORRUPTING. 

IV.  The  bad  man's  company  is  more  to  be  shunned  than  that  of  one  suffeui^n  ; 
FROM  A  CONTAGIOUS  DISEASE.  "  Wicked  Companions,"  said  a  man  of  the  world,  the 
novelist  Fielding,  "invite  us  to  hell."  "They  are  like  to  be  short  graces  when  the 
devil  plays  the  host,"  said  another. — J. 

Vers.  3 — 6. — Wisdom  edifies  and  invigorates.  How  fine  a  word  is  "ediSoition,'" 
building  up,  in  its  moral  and  Christian  uses  I  Here  the  image  of  the  house  is  diiecUy 
introduced,  and  may  be  variously  anpUed. 

I.  Wisdom  the  foundation  of  lioMES'i;^o  stability  and  happiness.  (Veis.  3,  4.) 
The  same  great  principles  apply  in  the  least  as  well  as  the  most  important  tliin<>;s. 
Every  day  brings  humble  occasions  for  the  practice  of  the  grandest  laws,  no  less  in  the 
House,  the  farm,  or  the  shop,  than  in  the  council-chamber  or  on  the  battle-field. 
"  Method  is  as  eflScient  in  the  packing  of  firewood  in  a  shed,  or  the  harvesting  uf 
fruits  in  a  Cellar,  as  in  Peninsular  campaigns  or  the  files  of  a  department  of  stale." 

•  Let  a  man  keep  the  Law,  and  his  way  will  be  strewn  with  satisfactions.  There  is 
more  difference  in  the  quality  of  our  pleasures  than  in  the  anaount.  Coiiifurt  and 
abundance  in  the  home  are  the  certain  signs  of  prudence  and  sense  and  action 
constantly  applied. 

II.  Wisdom  the  source  of  manly  bteength.  (Vers.  5,  6.)  It  was  a  great  man 
who  said,  "  Knowledge  is  power."  It  is  not  the  force  of  brute  strength,  but  that  of 
spiritual  energy,  which  in  the  long  run  rules  the  world.  The  illustration  of  the  text 
is  antly  selected  from  war,  where,  if  anywhere,  brute  force  might  be  supposed  to 
prevail.  Experience  shows  that  it  is  not  so.  The  complete  failures  of  men  like 
Hannibal  and  Napoleon  show  it  in  one  way.  Recent  wars  have  illustrated  the  trutli 
that  it  is  the  deliberate  and  matured  designs  of  the  strategist  and  far-seeing  statesman 
which  command  success,  rather  than  the  "great  battalions"  on  the  side  of  which 
Providence  was  said  to  be.  And  in  another  application,  sheer  force  of  intellect  is  often 
surpassed  and  outdone  by  the  steady  and  constant  employment  of  humbler  powers. 
Strength  in  any  form  without  prudence  is  like  a  giant  without  eyes.  Violence  and 
craft  may  seem  the  readiest  way  to  wealth;  yet  experience  shows  that  prudence  and 
piety  lead  most  surely  to  desirable  prosperity. — J. 

Vers.  7 — -10. — Some  traits  of  folly  and  sin.  I.  The  grovelling  mind.  (Ver.  7.) 
Wisdom  is  too  high  for  the  indolent  to  climb  to,  for  the  sensual  and  earthly  to  admire 
and  love.  They  are  like  Muck-rake,  in  Banyan's  parable.  Prom  such  no  good 
counsel  ever  comes.  They  are  dumb  "in  the  gate,"  on  every  important  occasion,  when 
help,  light,  sympathy,  are  needed.  The  base  prudence  which  inspires  many  popular 
proverbs — the  prudence  "which  adores  the  rule  of  three,  which  never  subscribes, 
never  gives,  seldom  lends,  and  asks  but  on«  question  of  any  project,  '  Will  it  bake 
bread?'" — ^is  indeed  folly.  "Selfs  the  man,"  says  a  Dutch  proverb.  But  those  who 
would  gain  all  for  self  end  by  losing  self  and  all. 

II.  The  malicious  temper.  (Ver,  8.)  There  are  degrees  in  vice  as  in  virtue.  It 
is  a  short  step  from  grovelling  egotism  to  active  malice.  Extract  the  root  of  self- 
seeking  out  of  any  dispute,  private  or  public,  in  Church  or  state,  and  the  other 
differences  may  soon  be  adjusted.  To  make  mischief  is  a  diabolic  instinct,  and  it 
certainly  springs  up  in  the  mind  void  of  healthy  occupation  and  of  interest  for  the  true, 
beautiful,  and  good ;  for  the  mind's  principle  is  motion,  and  it  cannot  cease  to  act. 

III.  Sin  in  the  thought  and  the  mood.  (Ver.  9.)  When  busy  invention  and 
meditation  are  at  work  in  the  mind  of  the  wicked  and  the  fool,  nothing  good  is 
produced.    Still  more  is  it  the  case  with  the  scotfer.    In  him  the  ripened  and  practiseil 


4TO  THE   PROVERBS.  [oh.  xxiv.  1— 3i 

powers  of  the  mind  are  brought  into  alliance  with  evil  desire.  Such  a  habit  of  mind, 
once  detected,  excites  the  utmost  odium  and  abhorrence.  The  man  who  can  sneer  at 
goodness,  or  hold  what  is  by  common  consent  good  and  beautiful  in  contempt,  is  already 
an  outcast  from  his  kind,  and  need  not  complain  if  he  is  treated  as  such. 

IV.  Cowardly  faint-hbartednbss.  (Ver.  10.)  The  pressure  of  circumstances 
should  rouse  in  us  the  God-given  strength.  The  man  who  makes  duty  his  polar  star, 
and  trusts  in  God,  can  actually  do  more  when  things  seem  to  be  against  him  than 
wlien  all  is  in  his  favour.  Moral  cowardice  is  closely  connected  with  the  root-sin  of 
unbelief.  Indulgence  in  it  impoverishes  and  weakens  the  soul,  so  that  the  man  ends 
by  being  actually  unable  to  do  what  once  he  only  fancied  himself  unable  to  do.  Here 
is  an  illustration  of  Christ's  saying,  "  To  him  that  hath  shall  be  given,  and  from  him 
that  hath  not  shall  be  taken  that  which  he  hath." — J. 

Vers.  11, 12. — Compassion  for  the  wronged.  L  The  hbabt  and  hand  should  eveb 
BE  READY  AT  THE  CALL  OP  DISTRESS.  (Ver.  11.)  The  picture  seems  to  be  placed 
before  us  of  one  arriving  at  the  place  of  judgment,  seeing  an  innocent  sufferer  yet,  like 
the  priest  and  the  Levite  in  the  parable,  passing  by  "  on  the  other  side." 

**  To  see  sad  sights  moves  more  tlian  hear  them  told ; 
For  then  the  eye  intergrets  to  the  ear 
The  heavy  motion  that  it  doth  behold." 

To  respond  to  these  mute  appeals  from  any  of  God's  creatures  is  to  obey  a  law 
immediately  known  within  our  breast;  to  resist  them  is  to  sin  against  him  and  against 
our  own  souls. 

II.  Neglect  of  duty  cannot  escape  punishment.  (Ver.  12.)  1.  Human  nature 
is  fertile  in  excuses.  For  the  burden  of  blame  and  of  conscious  guilt  is  the  heaviest  we 
can  bear.  But  searching  is  the  truth  of  the  proverb,  "Whoso  excuses,  accuses  himself." 
Isnorance  of  duty  needs  no  excuses ;  but  excusps  for  neglect  can  never  be  valid.  2. 
Bjxcuses  may  avail  with  man,  hut  not  with  Ood.  With  fallible  men  they  may  and 
often  do  pass  for  truth.  At  all  events,  they  must  often  be  accepted  by  those  who  need 
in  turn  to  make  them.  But  God  knows  the  truth  of  every  heart,  and  in  every  case; 
and  to  him  excuses  are  either  needless  or  worse.  3.  Judgment  will  he  executed  in  spite 
of  our  excuses.  Fur  God  is  the  Vindicator  of  the  wronged,  and  the  Eecompenser  of  all 
according  to  their  deeds.  Scripture  is  very  impressive  on  the  sin  of  neglect  of  kindly 
duties  to  others,  in  regard  to  which  the  conscience  is  so  often  dull  (Luke  xiv.  18,  etc.). 
Men  content  themselves  with  the  reflection  that  they  have  not  done  others  positive 
harm — a  negative  position.  But  the  other  negative  position,  that  we  have  not  done 
the  good  we  had  a  call  to  do,  on  this  the  teaching  of  Christ  fixes  a  deeper  guilt.  Noble 
as  it  is  to  save  a  life  from  bodily  death,  still  more  glorious  in  its  consequences  is  it  to 
save  a  sovl  from  death,  and  hide  a  multitude  of  sins. — J. 

Vers.  13,  14. — Zeal  in  the  pursuit  of  wisdom.  L  The  sweetness  op  wisdom. 
(Ver.  13.)  Not  without  deep  meaning  is  the  sense  of  knowing  the  truth  compared  to 
the  sensuous  relish  of  the  palate  for  sweet  food.     Here  is,  indeed,  a 

"  Perpetual  feast  of  neotared  sweets, 
Where  no  crude  surfeit  reims." 
(Cf.  Ps.  xix.  11.) 

IL  Encodeabement  in  its  pursuit.  (Ver.  14.)  It  brings  a  true  satisfaction  both 
during  the  pursuit  and  at  its  end,  which  can  be  said  of  few  other  objects  of  eager 
ambition  in  this  world.  The  seeker  for  truth  may  be  compared  to  the  maiden  of  the 
parable,  who  timely  fills  her  lamp  with  oil,  and  "  hope  that  reaps  not  shame."  The 
pursuit  of  wisdom,  or  of  truth  as  understood  and  taught  in  this  book,  is  no  chase  of 
dreams  or  abstractions ;  it  is  the  affair  of  all.  Truth  is  all  that  touches  and  convinces 
man,  whether  as  an  individual,  or  as  a  member  of  society,  or  the  citizen  of  a  nation. 
It  is  that  which  tells  him  that  he  is  not  isolated  in  the  midst  of  unknown  beings;  but 
that  beyond  his  individual  life  he  partakes  in  a  life  that  is  universal.  All  that  in  th« 
past,  whether  facts,  thoughts,  or  sentiments,  aie  in  question,  that  makes  us  contem- 
porary  with  the  facts,  fellow-heirs  with  hamanity  in  great  thoughts,  sympathetic  with 
great  sentiments,  is  truths — J. 


OB.  MiV.  1— 84.]  THE  PROVERBS.  471 

Vers.  15 — 18. —  Violence  and  shameful  joy  defeated.  I.  The  attit  itdk  of  the  mah 
OF  FRAUD  AND  viOLBNOB  DEPICTED.  (Ver.  15.)  He  is  like  the  pro-Rrling  wild  beast, 
seeking  whom  he  may  devour.  Q-cd  the  Creator  has  not  armed  us  with  tooth  or  tusk 
or  other  means  of  defence,  like  the  wild  beasts  which  are  formed  for  making  war  on 
others.  We  are  strongly  furnished  for  defence,  not  for  attack.  Ferocity  is  distinctly 
an  unnatural  vice  in  us. 

II.  His  activity  ib  devastattno.  Here,  again,  he  resembles  the  wild  beast  in  his 
blind  fury,  the  boar  that  uproots  and  overturns  in  the  cultivated  garden. 

III.  The  self-bbcovbry  of  the  riohteous.  (Ver.  16.)  To  fall  into  sin  and  to 
fall  into  trouble  are  two  different  ihings.  Avoid  the  former,  and  God  will  not  forsake 
thee  in  the  latter.  Seven  falls  stand  for  many^an  indefinite  number  of  falls.  There  is 
an  elasticity  iu  rectitude  like  that  of  the  young  sapling;  bent  to  the  earth,  it  rebounds 
with  strong  upspring.  "  It  may  calm  the  apprehension  of  calamity  to  see  how  quiet 
a  bound  nature  has  set  to  the  utmost  infliction  of  malice.  We  rapidly  approach  a 
brink  over  which  no  enemy  can  follow  us."  But  evil,  being  purely  negative,  a  zero, 
the  absence  of  internal  power  and  virtue,  has  but  an  illusory  existence,  and  quickly 
passes  away. 

IV.  Base  jot  turnbd  into  shame.  (Vers.  17, 18.)  He  who  rejoices  in  the  trouble 
of  another,  his  own  trouble  stands  behind  the  door.  Why  should  he  fear  who  takes 
his  post  with  Omnipotence  at  his  back  ? 

"  Souls  that  of  God's  own  good  life  partake 
He  loves  as  his  own  self ;  dear  as  his  eye 
They  are  to  him ;  he'll  never  them  forsake. 
When  they  shall  die,  then  God  himself  shall  die ; 
They  live — they  live  in  blest  eternity." 

The  tyrant  and  his  victim  are  made  to  change  sides.  The  "  wrath  "  which  seems 
expressed  in  the  calamities  of  the  latter  is  transformed  into  the  revelation  of  an  "  ever- 
lasting kindness,"  while  terror  strikes  the  heart  of  him  who  sought  to  infuse  it  into  his 
foe  (compare  R.  Browning's  striking  poem, '  Instans  Tyrannus '). — J. 

Vers.  19 — 22. — Religion  fortifies  the  heart  against  envy.  L  The  temptation  to 
KNVT  the  prospbeitt  OF  THE  WICKED.  It  Is  Very  marked  in  the  Old  Testament.  It 
is  a  common  temptation.  For  we  look  at  the  outside  of  man's  condition,  and  are 
deceived  by  illusions.  A  pirate's  vessel  in  the  distance,  a  mansion  built  and  inhabited 
by  infamy,  are  beautiful  objects  of  wsthetio  contemplation.  So  it  is  that  the  show  and 
bravery  of  success  master  our  senses. 

II.  The  ANTIDOTE  TO  THESE  FEELiNas.  (Ver.  20.)  "  Consider  the  end  " — darkness 
and  the  blackness  of  darkness.  The  wicked  have  no  future.  When  this  is  once 
clearly  seen,  the  charm  on  the  surface  fades  away,  and  the  edifice  of  proud  but  godless 
prosperity  sinks  almost  into  a  smoking  ruin. 

III.  Religion  and  morality  the  only  foundation  of  security  and  blbbsed- 
VE88.  (Vers.  21, 22.)  The  one  comprehensive  word  for  religion  is  the  "  fear  of  Jehovah, 
«everence  for  God,  and  for  all  that,  being  true,  is  of  the  very  nature  of  God.  And 
obedience  to  the  king  includes  all  those  civil  and  social  duties  which  we  incur  as 
members  of  an  ordered  commonwealth.  Religion  and  loyalty  go  together;  and  the 
best  way  to  make  good  subjects  to  the  queen  is  to  make  men  good  servants  of  God. 
They  will  not  make  conscience  of  civil  duties  who  make  none  of  Divine. — J. 

Vers.  23 — 25.^— Partiality  and  equality  in  judgment.  I.  Respect  of  pbesons. 
The  literal  translation  is,  "  To  distinguish  persons  in  judgment  is  not  good."  The  judge 
should  be  impartial  as  the  pair  of  scales,  the  emblem  of  his  office,  and  blind  to  the 
persons  who  appear  before  him,  that  is,  to  their  rank  and  position,  as  the  symbolical 
figure  of  Justice  is  represented  to  be.  "  One  foul  sentence  doth  more  hurt  than  many 
foul  examples ;  these  do  but  corrupt  the  stream,  the  other  corrupteth  the  fountain." 

II.  The  wilful  perversion  of  bight.  (Ver.  24.)  When  the  just  man  is  suffered 
to  fail  in  his  cause  before  his  adversary,  the  very  nerve  of  public  right  is  unstrung.  It 
strikes  a  direct  blow  at  the  common  weal,  and  hence  brings  down  the  curses  of  peoples 
and  the  enmity  of  states. 

III.  Equal  and  just  judgment.    (Ver.  25.)    "  A  judge  ought  to  prepare  his  way 


472  THE  PEOVEEBS.  [oh.  xxiv.  1—34. 


to  a  just  sentence,  as  God  useth  to  prepare  his  way,  by  raisin<:  valleys  anr!  taking  down 
hills  ;  so  when  there  appeareth  on  either  side  a  high  hand,  violent  persecution,  cunning 
advantages  taken,  combination,  power,  great  counsel,  then  is  the  virtue  of  a  judge  seeu 
to  make  inequality  equal ;  that  he  may  plant  his  judgment  as  upon  an  even  ground  " 
(Bacon).  In  the  present  text  the  glance  is  towards  a  proper  and  due  severity,  which 
will  not  allow  the  wicked  to  escape.  "  Odium  may  equally  be  incurred  by  him  who 
winks  at  crime  and  by  him  who  hai  no  regard  to  mercy.  For  in  causes  of  life  and 
death,  judges  ought,  as  far  as  the  law  permits,  in  justice  to  remember  mercy,  and  to  cast 
a  severe  eye  upon  the  example,  but  a  merciful  eye  upon  the  person  "  (Bacon).  The  purity 
ol  the  judicial  bench  is  one  of  the  greatest  of  public  blessings.  Let  us  be  thankful  that 
we  enjoy  it  in  our  country,  and  pray  that  it  may  ever  continue. — J. 

"Vers.  26 — 29.— Just  conduct  to  our  neighbour.  I.  True  witness.  (Ver.  26.)  Ha 
who  gives  true  and  faithful  answers — especially  in  courts  of  justice— delights,  even  as 
the  sweetest  kiss  upon  the  mouth  delights.  The  poet  alludes  to  the  effect  upon  the 
ear.  The  understanding  can  no  more  he  delighted  with  a  lie  than  the  will  can  choose 
an  apparent  evil.  "  Strange  as  it  may  seem,"  says  one  playfully,  "  the  human  mind 
loses  truth."  We  may  add,  "  when  passion  does  not  blind  the  intellectto  its  beauty." 
'  In  the  court  of  justice,  all  but  the  guilty  and  those  Interested  in  his  fate  see  the 
beauty  of  truth,  and  prize  it  above  all  things.  Hence  to  sptak  the  truth,  the  whole 
truth,  and  nothing  but  the  truth,  is  the  solemn  oath  of  witnesses. 

II.  False  and  uncalled-fob  witness.  (Ver.  28.)  To  bear  false  witness  strikes 
at  the  very  root  of  conscience  and  moral  obligation.  But  criminal,  though  in  a  less 
degree,  is  the  volunteering  of  evidence  without  cause  against  another ;  i.e.  when  no 
object  but  private  hatred  and  revenge  is  to  be  served.  Compare  the  case  of  Doeg 
(1  Sam.  xiii.  9,  10) ;  the  Pharisees  with  the  wretched  sinner  in  John  viii. ;  the  words 
of  the  Lord  in  John  xv.  25.  Speak  evil  of  no  man,  not  only  that  evil  which  is  alto- 
gether false  and  groundless,  but  that  which  is  true,  wheu  speaking  of  it  will  do  more 
harm  than  good  (Matthew  Henry). 

III.  Delibebatb  deception.  About  a  court  of  Justice,  which  represents  truth,  there 
gathers  a  dark  shade  of  roguery  and  falsehood ;  "  persons  that  are  full  of  sinister  tricks 
and  shifts,  whereby  they  pervert  the  plain  and  direct  courses  of  courts,  and  bring  justice 
into  oblique  lines  and  labyrinths." 

IV.  Blinp  indulgence  of  vindictive  temper.  (Ver.  29  ;  comp.  oh.  xx.  22.) 
Nothing  is  more  deeply  impressed  in  the  Bible  than  the  truth  of  compeisation  or 
retribution.  But  men  must  not  take  the  law  into  their  own  hands.  "  Vengeance  is 
mine,  I  will  repay,  saith  Jehovah."  "  Revenge  is  a  kind  of  wild  justice,  which  the 
more  man's  nature  runs  to,  the  more  ought  law  to  weed  it  out.  In  taking  revenge  a 
man  is  but  even  with  his  enemy;  but  in  passing  it  over  he  is  superior.  It  is  tha 
glory  of  a  man  to  pass  by  an  offence.  The  man  who  studies  revenge  keeps  his  own 
wounds  green,  which  otherwise  would  heal  and  do  well "  (Bacon). — J. 

Ver.  27. — The  prudence  and  policy  of  industry.  I.  All  labour  is  hooted  in  tub 
tillage  of  the  earth.  'Tis  thus  that  bread  was  first  wrung  from  her — by  universal 
field-labour.  Our  ancestors  were  all  agricultural  labourers.  All  other  industry  must 
be  fruitless  and  stop  without  the  action  of  this  spring.  It  is  therefure  the  part  of  all 
prudent  and  good  men  to  encourage  cultivatinn,  to  improve  the  condition  of  the 
labourer  and  the  farmer.  All  honour  to  the  great  statesmen  of  our  time  who  have 
wrought  in  this  cause.  It  is  edifying  to  recollect  that  God  has  made  Mother  Earth  the 
eternal  mediator  and  minister  to  us  of  material  blessings  which  lie  at  the  foundation  of 
all  our  life. 

II.  Domestic  comfort  and  independence  rest  dpok  labour.  It  is  the  "  pm- 
dence  of  a  higher  strain  "  than  that  which  begins  and  ends  with  mere  sensual  comfort 
thnt  is  taught  in  this  book.  It  is  attention  to  law,  it  is  unbelief  in  luck,  which  con- 
stitutes its  principle.  Self-command,  unslothful  habits,  constant  exertion,  put  the 
bread  a  man  eats  at  his  own  disposal,  so  that  he  stands  not  in  bitter  and  false  relations 
to  other  men. — J. 

Venk  80 — 34. —  The  sluggard  $  vineyard  :  a  parable  of  iloth.      I.  A  piotubi  of 


OH.  XXIV.  1—34.]  THB  PEOVERBS.  473 

INDOT.BNCB.  (Vers.  30,  31.)  The  vineyard  in  the  East  corresponds  to  the  garden, 
orchard,  or  small  farm  in  the  West.  In  the  parable  it  is  overgrowa  with  nettles  and 
thorns.  The  stone  fence  is  crumbling  for  want  of  repair.  We  may  contrast  the  picture 
in  Isa.  V.  1,  iqq,,  of  what  a  vineyard  ought  to  be.  The  way  in  which  God  tilled  the 
chosen  people  is  the  way  in  which  he  would  have  each  of  us  attend  to  the  garden  of 
the  soul. 

II.  The  sight  carries  a  lesson  and  a  warninq.  (Vers.  32 — 34.)  Let  ns  attend 
to  the  parables  of  Nature.  The  eye  is  the  great  critical  organ,  and  we  never  want 
lessons  if  we  use  it.  The  lesson  here  is — the  effect  has  a  canse — the  wildness  of  Nature 
betrays  the  sin  of  man.  Neglect  marks  itself  on  her  trnthfiil  lace.  The  sluggard's 
soul  is  revealed  in  her  aspect  not  less  than  in  the  unkempt  hair  and  squalid  face  of  the 
human  being.  Here  is  the  "  vile  sin  of  self-neglect,"  which  involves  all  other  neglect, 
clearly  mirrored.  In  such  spectacles  and  in  the  gloomier  ones  of  malarious  swamps, 
once  smiling  fields,  God  writes  his  judgment  on  the  broad  earth's  face  against  the  crime 
of  sloth.  The  warning  is  against  poverty  and  want,  which  stride  on  with  noiseless 
footsteps,  rushing  in  at  last  with  sudden  surprise  upon  dreaming  self-indulgence,  like  an 
armed  robber.    Sudden-seeming  woes  are  long  preparin.E;,  and  no  curse  "  causeless  comes." 

III.  The  moral  application.  1.  The  analogy  of  Nature  and  the  human  spirit. 
Both  are  of  God.  Both  contain  principles  of  life,  beauty,  and  use.  Both  need  cultiva- 
tion in  order  to  their  perfection.  In  both  sloth  and  neglect  are  punished  by  loss  and 
ruin.  2.  The  personal  moral  duty.  To  "awake  from  sleep,"  to"  stir  up  the  gift  within 
us,"  to  "  work  out  our  salvation,"  to  be  good  husbandmen,  good  and  faithful  servants 
in  this  garden  of  the  Lord — the  soul.  If  not  faithful  here,  how  can  it  be  expected  that 
we  shall  be  faithful  in  spheres  more  remote  ? — J. 

Ver.  J.— (Se«  homily  on  ch.  xiiii.  17, 18.)— 0. 

Vers.  3—  6. — Building  with  wisdom.  God  is  the  Divine  Builder.  "  He  that  built 
all  things  is  God  "  (Heb.  iii.  4).  Man,  also,  is  a  great  buihler.  The  whole  scenery  of 
the  earth  is  not  a  little  changed  by  the  houses  and  temples,  by  the  bridges  and  factories, 
by  the  manifold  structures  of  every  size  and  shape,  that  ho  has  built.  But  these  are 
not  the  most  serious  and  important  of  his  works.     We  look  at — 

I.  The  houses  we  are  BulLDiNa.  Of  these,  three  are  the  most  deserving  of  atten- 
tion. 1.  Our  estate.  The  position  and  provision  we  secure  for  ourselves  and  our  family ; 
an  honourable  place  we  take  among  men,  as  neighbours  and  fellow-citizi  ns.  Every 
man  has  to  set  this  before  him  as  a  thing  to  be  patiently  pursued  and  ultimatey 
attained.  Some  men  think  of  little  else  or  nothing  else,  therein  making  a  fatal  mis- 
take ;  but  it  is  the  manifest  duty  as  -well  as  the  clear  interest  of  us  all,  to  build  up  a 
house  of  this  kind.  2.  Our  character.  This  is  "  a  house  "  of  the  first  importance.  Wa 
are  here  for  this  express  purpose — that  we  maybe  daily  and  hourly  building  up  a  noble 
and  estimable  character ;  such  a  character  as  God  will  himself  approve ;  such  as  man 
will  admire,  and  will  do  well  to  copy ;  such  as  will  command  the  commendation  of  our 
own  conscience ;  such  as  will  stand  firm  and  strong  against  all  the  perils  by  which  it  is 
beset ;  such  as  will  contain  many  virtues  and  graces  in  its  various  "  chambers  "  (ver.  4). 
"  Precious  and  pleasant  rubies,"  indeed,  are  these.  3.  Some  cause  of  Christian  usefulness. 
We  should  all  be  diligently  occupied  in  raising  or  sustaining  some  "  work  "  of  holy  use- 
fulness, by  which  the  seeds  of  truth  may  be  scattered,  hearts  may  be  cdmfortod,  live* 
may  be  brightened,  souls  may  be  won  to  righteousness  and  wisdom,  Christ  may  ba 
honoured,  and  his  kingdom  advanced. 

II.  The  indispensable  materials.  The  wisdom  which  is  from  above.  "  Through 
wisdom  is  a  house  built,  and  by  understanding  it  is  established"  (ver.  3).  For  wisdom 
includes  or  secures :  1.  The  fear  and  therefore  the  favour  of  God.  (See  ch.  i.  7 ;  ix.  10.) 
(1)  To  walk  and  to  work  in  the  fear  of  God  is  to  do  all  things  npriglitly  and  honourably, 
truly  and  faithfully,  heartily  and  thoroughly;  and  this  is  the  way  to  build  up  any  one 
of  these  three  "  houses."  (2)  To  enjoy  the  favour  of  God  is  to-  have  behind  us  that 
energizing  and  sustaining  power  without  which  all  labour  is  vain  (Ps.  cxxvii.  1) ;  it 
is  to  possess  the  protecting  care  which  will  shield  us  from  the  storms  that  might  other- 
wise overthrow  us  (Ps.  cxxi.).  2.  The  various  orders  of  strength  which  we  need  for 
good  building  (ver.  5).    (1)  It  tends  to  physical  health  and  strength.    (2)  It  conducea 


i74  THE  PEOVERBS.  [oh.  xxiv.  1— 34. 

to  mental  strength  and  the  increase  of  knowledge;  it  supplies  ub  with  good  judgment, 
with  tact,  with  prudence,  with  patienop,  with  the  very  implements  of  successful 
labour.  (3)  It  ministers  to  moral  and  spiritual  strength;  for  it  brings  us  into  com- 
munion with  God  and  to  the  study  of  his  Word.  3.  The  power  of  resistance  and  attack. 
By  "  wise  counsel  we  make  war  "  (ver.  6).  It  is  a  very  great  matter,  in  aU  spheres  of 
activity,  to  know  when  to  make  peace  and  when  to  show  a  fearless  front  of  oppositicm. 
And  when  the  latter  course  has  to  be  taken,  there  is  much  true  wisdom  needed  in  order 
that  our  house,  our  stronghold,  may  not  be  carried  and  dismantled.  We  need  couiage, 
decision,  watchfulness,  energy,  self-command,  readiness  to  make  terms  at'  the  right 
moment.  To  attain  to  the  wisdom  which  vsdll  thus  build  up  our  house,  we  need  to 
(1)  yield  our  hearts  fully  to  the  only  wise  God  and  Saviour ;  (2)  open  our  minds  daily 
to  receive  his  heavenly  wisdom ;  (3)  ask  of  him  who  "  giveth  to  all  men  liberally, 
upbraiding  not." — C. 

Ver.  9. — "  The  thought  of  foolishness.^'  It  will  be  well  to  be  on  our  guard  against 
a  possible  mistake  here ;  for  next  in  importance  to  our  knowledge  of  what  things  are 
wrong  and  hurtful,  is  our  freedom  from  imaginary  fears  and  morbid  anxieties  respecting 
those  things  which  are  perfectly  innocent  and  pure.    We  look,  then,  at — 

I.  Thoughts  which  mat  seem  to  be,  but  are  not,  condemned  by  these  wobds. 
1.  The  serious  but  mistaken  thoughts  of  childhood  or  of  uneducated  manhood.  It  is 
not  every  thought  which  cannot  be  characterized  as  wisdom  that  must  be  condemned 
as  "  foolishness."  The  honest  attempts  of  artless  simplicity  to  solve  problems  or  to 
execute  commands  may  be  honourable  and  even  commendable  failures  ;  they  are  the 
conditions  of  growth.  2.  The  lighter  thoughts  of  the  cultured  and  mature,  thoughts 
of  merriment  and  frolicsomeness,  moving  to  honest  laughter,  are  far  from  being  sinful. 
They  are  clearly  in  accordance  with  the  will  of  the  Divine  Father  of  our  spirits,  who 
is  the  Author  of  our  nature,  with  its  faculties  and  tendencies ;  they  are  often  found  to 
be  a  necessary  relief  under  the  otherwise  intolerable  strain  of  oppressive  care  and 
burden  Slime  toil.  One  of  the  most  serious  and  one  of  the  most  kind-hearted  and 
successful  servants  of  our  race  (Abraham  Lincoln)  was  only  saved  from  complete  mental 
derangement  during  the  terrible  time  of  the  civil  war  by  finding  occasional  refuge  fn 
humour.     But  what  are — 

II.  The  thoughts  which  are  herb  condemned?  The  thoughts  of  foolishness. 
1.  Our  responsibility  for  our  thoughts.  Impalpable  and  fugitive  as  they  are,  our  thoughts 
are  a  voiy  reiil  part  of  ourselves,  and  they  constitute  a  serious  part  of  our  responsi- 
bility to  God.  That  they  do  so  is  clear  ;  for  :  (1)  On  them  everything  in  human  life 
and  action  ultimately  depends.  Action  depends  on  will,  will  on  feeling,  and  feeling  on 
thought.  It  is  what  we  think  and  how  we  think  that  determines  what  we  do  and  what 
we  are.  "  As  a  man  thinketh  in  his  heart,  so  is  he."  Thought  is  the  very  foundation 
of  character.  (2)  Thought  is  free.  We  may  be  compelled  to  speak  or  to  act  in  certain 
prescribed  ways ;  but  we  are  masters  of  our  own  minds,  and  we  can  think  as  we  like. 
How  we  think  depends  on  our  own  volition.  (3)  We  either  choose  deliberately  the 
subject  of  our  thoughts  (by  selecting  our  friends,  our  books  and  papers,  our  topics  of 
conversation),  or  we  are  led  to  think  as  we  do  by  the  mental  and  moral  character 
which  we  have  been  deliberately  forming ;  we  are  responsible  for  the  stream  because 
we  are  responsible  for  the  spring.  2.  The  sinful  character  of  foolish  thoughts.  Foolish 
thoughts  may  be  (1)  irreverent,  and  all  irreverence  is  sin;  or  they  mav  be  (2)  seJ^sh, 
and  all  selfishness  is  sin ;  or  (3)  impure,  and  aU  impurity  is  sin ;  or  (4)  unJdnd  and 
mconsiderate,  unloving  or  vindictive,  and  all  unkindness  is  sin ;  or  (5)  short-sighted 
and  worldly,  and  all  worldliness  is  sin  (1  John  ii.  15—17).  The  conclusion  of  the  whole 
matter  is  that  if  we  would  be  right  with  God,  "  harmless  and  blameless,"  we  must  be 
right  in  our  "  inward  thought "  (see  Heb.  iv.  12) ;  and  that  if  we  would  be  right  there, 
in  those  central  depths  of  our  nature,  we  must  (o)  place  our  whole  nature  under  the 
^rect  rule  of  the  Holy  One  himself;  (6)  seek  daily  for  the  cleansing  influences  of  his 
Holy  Spirit,  the  continual  renewal  of  our  mind  by  his  inspiration ;  (c)  "  keep  our  heart* 
beyond  all  keeping  "  (oh.  ii.  23),  especially  by  welcoming,  with  eagernesi  and  delight, 
all  the  wisdom  of  God  that  we  can  gather  firom  his  Word. — C. 

Veri.  10,  15. — The  test  of  adversity.     We  have  all  of  us  to  expect — 


Oft.  xxiY.  1—31]  THE  PBOVEEBS.  4?l 

I.  The  testing-time  that  comes  to  all  men.  It  la  true  that  prosperity  has  its 
own  perils,  and  makes  its  own  demands  on  the  human  spirit.  But  when  the  sky  is 
clear  above  us,  when  loving  friends  stand  round  us  with  protecting  care,  when  privileges 
abound  on  every  side,  it  is  comparatively  easy  to  maintain  an  equable  and  obedient 
mind.  We  can  all  row  with  the  stream  and  sail  with  the  favouring  wind.  But  the 
hour  must  come  to  us  that  comes  to  all  in  time,  when  we  have  to  face  difficulty,  or  to 
bear  obloquy,  or  to  sustain  heavy  loss,  or  to  go  on  our  way  with  a  lonely  heart,  or  to 
suffer  some  keen  aud  all  but  crushing  disappointment.  When  we  are  moved  to  say  with 
Jacob,  "  All  these  things  are  against  me ; "  with  Elijah,  "  Lord,  take  away  my  life ;  " 
we  faint  and  fall  in  the  day  of  adversity. 

II.  The  bbsoueoks  that  should  be  at  oub  command.  When  that  hour  comes 
to  us,  as  it  certainly  will,  we  should  be  prepared  to  bear  ourselves  bravely  and  well ; 
for  there  are  many  sources  of  strength  with  which  we  should  be  supplied.  There  is: 
1.  Ordinary  human  fortitude.  Such  manliness  and  strength  of  will  as  have  enabled 
many  thousands  of  souls — even  without  any  aid  from  religion — to  confront  danger  or 
death,  or  to  show  an  undisturbed  equanimity  of  mind  in  the  midst  of  severe  sorrows. 
But  beyond  this  there  is  for  us :  2.  Christian  resignation.  The  willingness  to  leave 
the  whole  disposal  of  our  lives  to  the  wisdom  and  the  love  of  Grod ;  readiness  to  endure 
the  holy  will  of  a  Divine  Father,  of  our  best  Friend.  3.  Christian  faith.  The  assurance 
that  God  is  dealing  with  us  in  perfect  wisdom  and  parental  love  at  those  times  when 
we  can  least  understand  his  way.  4.  Christian  hope.  The  confidence  that  "  unto  the 
upright  there  will  arise  light  in  the  darkness ; "  that  God  will  grant  a  happy  issue  out 
of  all  our  afBictions  ;  that  though  the  just  man  fall  seven  times,  he  will  rise  again  (see 
ver.  15) ;  that  though  weeping  may  endui^e  even  for  a  long  and  stormy  ni^hf;,  joy 
will  come  in  the  morning  (Ps.  xxx.  5).  6.  Communion  with  Ood.  To  the  distressed 
human  spirit  there  remains  that  most  precious  refuge,  the  leaning  of  the  heart  on  God, 
the  appeal  of  the  soul  to  him  in  earnest,  believing  prayer. 

III.  The  inference  we  abe  obliged  to  deaw.  If,  with  all  thpsfl  resources  at 
our  command,  we  "  faint; "  (1)  if  we  indulge  a  rebellious  spirit,  repining  at  our  lot  and 
thinking  ourselves  hardly  used ;  or  (2)  if  we  yield  ourselves  to  misery  and  melancholy, 
showing  ourselves  unequal  to  the  duties  that  devolve  upon  us,  resigning  the  useful 
activities  in  which  we  have  been  engaged ; — then  we  must  conclude  that "  our  strength 
is  small ; "  we  have  failed  tj  enrich  our  souls  with  that  spiritual  power  of  which  we 
might  and  should  have  become  possessed.  But  that  we  may  not  have  to  rleplore  our 
weakness  in  the  day  of  adversity,  and  that  we  may  not  give  a  sorry  illustration  of 
Christian  life  as  it  ought  not  to  be  seen,  let  us  learn  what  is — 

IV.  Oub  wisdom  at  the  present  time.  And  that  is  to  be  gaining  strength,  to 
be  continually  becoming  "  strong  in  the  Lord,  and  in  the  power  of  his  might."  This  is 
axi  imperative  duty  (Eph.  vi.  10 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  1 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  18).  And  we  are  not  without 
the  necessary  means.  If,  in  the  days  of  sunshine  and  prosperity,  we  are  daily  nourish- 
ing our  faith,  our  love,  our  hope,  our  pray  erf ulness,  by  constant  exercise  in  devotion 
and  in  sacred  duty,  by  using  the  privileges  so  amply  supplied  to  us,  by  cultivating  and 
cherishing  our  union  with  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  we  shall  be  strong,  and  we  shall  not 
faint. — 0. 

Vers.  11, 12. — Inexcusahh  indifference.  The  principles  contained  in  this  passage  are 
these— 

I.  That  all  human  need  is  a  claim  fob  help.  God  has  so  "  fashioned  our  hearts 
alike,"  and  has  so  bound  together  our  lives  and  our  interests,  that  we  are  under  serious 
obligation  to  one  another.  Bo  man  is  at  liberty  to  live  an  isolated  life ;  he  owes  too 
much  to  those  that  have  gone  before  him,  and  is  too  closely  related  to  those  who  are 
-around  him,  to  allow  of  such  a  course.  To  wish  it  is  unnatural,  to  attempt  it  is 
immoral.  "  We  are  members  one  of  another ; "  we  are  brethren  and  sisters  one  of 
another.  And  whenever  any  one  about  us — whoever  or  whatever  he  or  she  may  be — 
is  in  any  kind  of  difBculty  or  distress,  is  in  need  of  sympathy  and  succour,  there  is 
an  imperative  demand,  as  clear  as  if  it  came  from  an  angel's  trumpet  or  straight  out 
of  the  heavens  above  us,  that  we  should  stop,  should  inquire,  should  help  as  best  w» 
can  (see  1  John  iii.  17, 18). 

XL  That  the  extbkmitt  of  human  need  is  a  most  powerful  plea.    H  any 


476  THE  PROVERBS.  [oh.  txit.  1— S4. 

sufferer  on  life's  highway  ia  a  man  to  be  pitied  and  reliered,  how  much  more  are  they 
who  are  "  drawn  unto  death,"  who  are  "  ready  to  be  slain  "  I  To  see  our  brother  or  our 
sister — made  like  ourselves,  and  capable  as  we  are  of  intense  suffering,  holding  life  as 
precious  as  we  ourselves  regard  it — in  circumstances  of  keen  distress  or  of  utmost 
danger,  and  to  withhold  our  pity  and  our  aid, — this  is  condemned  of  God.  Whether 
we  "  pass  by  on  the  other  side "  (Luke  x.  31),  so  as  to  hide  our  cruel  indifference  as 
well  as  we  can  from  our  own  sight ;  or  whether  we  pass  close  by,  clearly  recognizing 
onr  duty,  but  cynically  and  heartlessly  declining  to  do  it ;  or  whether  we  stand  awhile 
and  pity,  but  conclude  that  help  will  be  too  costly,  and  so  pass  on  without  helping; 
— we  are  guilty,  we  are  unbrotherly,  inhuman,  altogether  unlike  our  Lord. 

III.  That  excuses  will  not  avail  us.  If  we  want  to  escape  from  our  plain  duty 
we  seldom  refuse  it  point-blank.     We  do  not  say  to  our  Lord  or  to  ourselves,  "  We 

will  not ; "  we  say,  "  We  would  if ,"  or  "  We  will  when "    When  our  brother 

is  in  difiSculty  or  in  sorrow,  and  urgently  needs  the  extricating  tiand,  the  sympathizing 
«ord,  we  may  plead,  to  ourselves  or  to  our  neighbours,  our  ignorance  of  the  sutlerer,  our 
imperfect  acquaintance  with  the  circumstances,  our  want  of  time,  our  incapacity  for 
assisting  in  that  kind  of  trouble,  our  multitudinous  and  pressing  duties  and  claims,  etc. 
These  may  succeed  with  men,  but  they  will  not  avail  with  God.  God  knows  the 
hoUowness  of  these  poor  pleas ;  to  his  eye  they  are  only  thin  veils  that  do  not  hide 
our  cruel  selfishness ;  he  judges  that  nothing  justifies  us  in  abandoning  the  perisliing 
to  their  fate,  and  he  condemns  us. 

IV.  That  God  is  qrievbd  with  ub  fob  oub  own  sake.  He  "  that  keepeth  our 
soul "  knows  it.  And  because  God  does  "  keep  our  soul,"  ho  is  grieved  to  see  us  take 
up  'an  attitude  towards  our  brother  which  (1)  proves  us  to  be  unbrotherly,  and  (2) 
helps  to  fix  us  in  our  cold-heartedneas.  For  every  act  and  instance  of  selfishness 
hardens  our  heart  and  makes  it  more  capable  of  cruel  indifference  than  before. 

V.  That  obdbltt  and  kindness  move  to  thbib  bewabd.  "  Shall  he  not  render," 
etc.?  Cruelty  and  kindness  must  be  cursed  or  blessed  by  the  immeiliate  effects  they 
ieave  in  the  soul  of  the  agent.  But  they  also  move  toward  a  day  of  award.  'I  hen 
will  a  selfish  indifference  hear  its  strong,  Divine  condemnation  (Matt.  ixv.  41 — 46) 
Then,  also,  will  a  generous  kindness  listen  to  its  warm,  Divine  commeudation  (Mait. 
ixv.  34— 40).— 0. 

Vers.  17,  18,  29. — The  ignohler  and  the  nobler  spirit.  (See  homily  on  ch.  xx.  22.) 
Tliere  can  be  no  question  at  all,  for  the  testimony  of  human  history  is  everywhero  and 
at  all  times  the  same,  as  to — 

L  Oub  disposition  unpee  sin,  in  view  of  cub  enemies.  These  two  passages 
indicate  it.  It  is  both  passive  and  active.  1.  A  dis]lo^ition  to  rejoice  at  their  dis- 
comfiture ;  to  exult  in  the  secret  places  of  the  soul  when  we  hi^ar  of  tlieir  failure,  of 
their  defeat,  or  even  of  their  suffering.  2.  A  disposition  to  inflict  some  injury  on 
them  by  our  own  effort.  The  impulse  of  the  man  who  is  struck  is  to  strike  again ; 
that  of  the  man  who  is  cheated  is  to  take  the  next  opportunity  of  overreaching  the 
treacherous  neighbour;  the  prevalent  feeling,  under  the  long  reign  and  malignant 
influence  of  sin,  is  to  compass,  in  some  way  or  other,  the  humiliation,  or  the  loss,  or 
the  anger  of  the  man  who  has  injured  us.  We  rejoice  when  our  enemy  falls ;  we  do 
more  and  worse  than  that — we  do  our  best,  we  use  our  injienuity  and  put  forth  even 
our  patient  labour,  to  bring  about  his  overthrow.  So  common,  so  universal,  is  this 
sentiment  of  revenge  and  retaliation,  that  no- one  is  in  a  position  to  siieak  severely  of 
his  neighbour  or  to  condemn  him  harshly.     Tet  we  understand  now — 

II.  Its  unwoethiness  of  oub  natueb.  It  was  not  to  cherish  such  thoughts  as 
these,  nor  was  it  to  act  in  such  a  way  as  this,  that  our  Divine  Father  called  us  into 
being,  and  gave  to  us  our  powers.  1.  We  were  made  to  love  and  to  pity  ;  and  for  us 
to  harbour  in  our  souls  a  feeling  of  positive  delight  when  we  witness  the  misery  or 
misfortune  of  a  brother  or  a  sister  is  really  inhuman ;  it  is  a  perversion,  under  the 
malign  power  of  sin,  of  the  end  and  purpose  of  our  being.  2.  We  were  made  to  help 
and  bless;  and  for  us  to  expend  the  powers  with  which  we  are  endowed  to  injure,  io 
inflict  suffering  and  loss,  to  send  as  far  as  we  can  on  the  downward  road  a  human 
heart  or  human  life, — this  is  wholly  unworthy  of  ourselves,  it  ii  a  sad  departure  from 
the  intention  of  our  Creator.    We  see  clearly — 


OH.  XXIV.  1—34.]  THE  PBOVBBBS.  477 

III.  Its  OFFBNSIVBNB88  TO  GoD.    "  Lest  the  Lord  see  it,  and  it  displease  him." 

1.  God  has  told  us  fully  what  is  his  mind  respecting  it  (Matt.  v.  43 — 48;  Bom.  lii. 
14,  20).  2.  It  is  altogether  unlike  his  own  action ;  for  he  is  daily  and  momently 
blessing  with  life  and  health  and  innumerable  bounties  those  who  have  forgotten  or 
disregarded  or  even  denied  him.  3.  There  are  two  aspects  in  which  it  must  ba 
obnoxious  to  him.  (1)  He  is  the  Father  of  our  spirits,  and  how  can  he  look  « ith 
anything  but  sorrow  on  antagonism  and  hatred  between  his  children?  (2)  He  is  the 
Holy  and  the  Loving  One,  and  how  can  he  see  with  anything  but  displeasure  the 
hearts  of  men  filled  with  the  feelings  of  malevolence,  the  hands  of  men  occupi'  d  in 
dealing  bitter  blows  against  one  another  ?  What,  however,  is  the  way  by  whicii  this 
deep-rooted  disposition  can  be  expelled,  and  another  and  nobler  spirit  be  planted  iu 
our  souls  ?    What  is  the  way  to— 

IV.  The  woethier  and  noblbb  spibit.  The  one  way  to  rise  above  vindictivenesa 
and  retaliation  and  to  enter  into  the  loftier  and  purer  air  of  forgiveness  and  mag- 
nanimity is  to  connect  ourselves  most  closely  with  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  1.  To 
surrender  ourselves  wholly  to  him,  and  thus  to  receive  his  Divine  Spirit  into  our 
hearts  (John  vii.  38,  39 ;  xv.  4 ;  xvii.  23).  2.  To  have  our  hearts  filled  with  that 
transforming  love  to  our  Father  and  our  Saviour  which  will  make  us  to  become, 
uuoonsciously  and  gradually,  like  him  in  spirit  and  behaviour.  3.  To  let  our  minds 
be  filled  with  the  knowledge  of  his  will,  by  patient  and  prayerful  study  of  his  Word 
and  of  his  life. — C. 

Vers.  30 — 34. — The  neglected  garden.  The  whole  scene  ii  before  us.  The  sluggard 
is  asleep  while  everything  is  going  wrong ;  instead  of  the  flower  is  the  thorn ;  the 
ground  is  coloured  with  the  green  weeds ;  the  wall  is  breaking  down ;  where  should 
be  beauty  is  unsightliness ;  where  should  be  fruitfulness  is  barrenness  or  wilderness ; 
ruin  is  written,  on  everything,  everywhere.  So  is  it  with  the  farmer,  with  the  trades- 
man, with  the  merchant  or  manuifacturer,  of  the  sluggard  order.  Consider  it  well. 
Negligence,  dilatoriness,  half-heartedness,  in  any  department  means  decay,  break-down, 
ruiu.  Poverty  is  on  its  way,  and  will  certainly  be  knocking  at  the  door ;  want  will 
present  itself  with  a  force  that  cannot  be  resisted.  1.  We  have  all  of  us  a  garden,  an 
estate  of  our  own,  which  God  has  given  us  to  cultivate — that  which  is  of  more  value 
than  many  thousands  of  acres  of  fertile  soil,  that  which  no  riches  can  buy— owr  own 
tnte  self,  our  own  human  spirit.  God  has  solemnly  charged  us  to  cultivate  that,  to 
weed  it  of  error  and  prejudice,  of  folly  and  of  passion ;  to  plant  truth  there,  his  own 
living,  abiding  truth ;  to  plant  righteousness  there,  purity  of  heart,  integrity  of  soul ; 
to  plant  love  there,  such  as  fills  his  own  gracious  Spirit ;  to  build  there  walls  of  wise, 
strong,  protecting  habits,  which  will  fence  and  guard  the  soul  from  intruding  enemies. 

2.  There  are  all  too  many  who  treat  this  garden,  this  estate,  with  careless  negligence ; 
they  throw  their  energy  and  force  into  everything  else — business,  love,  politics,  art, 
pleasure,  society ;  but  themselves,  their  own  spirit,  their  own  character,  they  leave  to 
fare  as  best  it  may  without  care  and  without  culture.  3.  Very  sad  indeed  are  the 
results  of  this  foolish  and  guilty  negligence.  This  picture  of  the  sluggard's  garden 
will  tell  us  what  they  are. 

I.  Unsiohtliness.  What  a  dreary  picture — weeds,  thistles,  thorns,  a  broken  wall  I 
The  eye  turns  from  it  with  repugnance.  And  the  neglected  garden  of  the  soul? 
Instead  of  the  beautiful  flowers  of  Christian  reverence  and  love,  and  the  fair  fruits  of 
holiness  and  zeal,  and  the  strong  walls  of  a  noble  character,  there  are  seen  by  God  and 
man  the  unsightly  weeds  of  transgression,  of  selfishness,  of  untruthfulness — perhaps 
the  thorns  ol  intemperance  and  impurity  and  profanity. 

II.  Waste.  African  travellers  tell  us  that  passing  over  uncultivated  regions  they 
have  to  make  their  way  through  all  kinds  of  rank  growth,  grass,  or  shrub  which  is 
high,  strong,  or  thorny,  covering  many  miles  at  a  stretch.  What  waste  is  there  1 
What  corn,  what  fruit,  would  not  that  land  produce  ?  Alasl  for  the  pitiful  waste  of 
an  uncultured  human  soull  What  beauties  might  not  be  seen  there,  what  fruits 
might  not  be  grown  there,  what  graces  and  virtues  might  not  be  produced  there,  if 
only  the  truth  of  Christ  were  received  into  .ihe  mind  and  welcomed  to  the  heart  1 

III.  Mischief.  These  weeds  will  not  be  confined  to  the  sluggard's  garden ;  theil 
seeda  will  be  carried  by  the  winds  into  his  neighbour's,  and  do  mischief  enough  there, 


478 


THE   PROVEEBS. 


[oh.  XXV.  1—28, 


A.  neglected  soul  is  a  mischief-working  soul.  It  cannot  confine  its  influence  to  itself 
or  its  own  life.  Those  influences  cross  the  wall  and  get  into  the  neighbour's  ground. 
And  the  seeds  of  sin  are  hurtful,  poisonous  things,  spreading  error,  falsehood,  delusion, 
into  the  minds  of  men.  If  we  are  not  blessing  our  neighbours  by  the  lives  we  live,  we 
are  an  injury  and  an  evil  to  them. 

IV.  EuiN.  The  man  who  neglects  his  estate  is  really,  steadily,  ruining  himself. 
He  may  not  see  it  until  it  is  too  late.  Poverty  has  been  travelling  toward  him,  but 
only  at  the  last  bend  of  the  road  does  it  come  in  sight.  Want  suddenly  .appears  "  as 
an  armed  man,"  strong,  irresistible ;  there  is  no  way  of  escape ;  bankruptcy  is  before 
him.  The  soul  that  is  neglected  is  being  ruined ;  day  by  day  it  is  being  enfeebled, 
enslaved,  deteriorated ;  the  good  that  was  there  is  lessening  and  disappearing ;  the 
hard  crust  of  selfishness  aiwi  worldliness  is  thickening.  The  soul  is  being  lost ;  it  is 
perishing.  "  I  considered  it  well "— "  set  my  heart  upon  it "  (marginal  reading).  This 
is,  indeed,  a  thing  to  be  well  considered,  to  "set  the  heart  upon,"  for  the  issues  of  it 
are  those  of  life  or  death.  There  is  time  to  restore  it  j  but  a  little  more  negligence,  and 
the  horn-  of  "  ruin  "  will  have  struck. — 0. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXV. 


Ver.  1— ch.  xxix.— Part  VI.  Second 
Great  Collection  qf  Solomonic  Pkovekes, 
gathered  by  "  the  men  of  Hezekiah,"  in 
wliich  wisdom  is  set  forth  as  the  greatest 
blessing  to  the  king  and  his  subjects. 

Ver.  1. — The  supencription :  These  are 
also  pi^overbs  of  Solomon,  which  the  men  of 
Hesekiali  King  of  Judah  copied  out.  Tlie 
word  "  also  "  implies  that  a  previous  collec- 
tion was  known  to  the  compiler  of  the 
present  book — probably  the  one  which  we 
have  in  oh.  x.— xxii.  16,  of  which  nine  pro- 
verbs are  inserted  here.  But  there  vpas  still 
a  large  number  of  proverbial  sayings  attri- 
buted to  Solomon,  and  preserved  partly  by 
oral  tradition  and  partly  in  writing,  which 
it  was  advisable  to  collect  and  secure  before 
they  were  lost.  The  zeal  of  Hezekiah  took 
tills  in  hand.  He  was  not,  as  far  as  we 
know,  an  author  himself,  but  he  evidently 
felt  a  warm  interest  in  literature,  and  "  the 
men  of  Hezekiah,"  not  mentioned  elsewhere, 
must  have  been  his  counsellors  and  scholars, 
to  whom  was  entrusted  the  duty  of  gather- 
ing together  into  a  volume  the  scattered 
sayings  of  the  wise  king.  Among  these 
contemporaries,  doubtless,  Isaiah  was  emi- 
nent, and  it  is  not  improbable  that  Shebna 
the  scribe  and  Joah  the  chronicler  were 
members  of  the  learned  fraternity  (2  Kings 
xviii.  18).  The  vcL-b  rightly  translated 
"  copied  out "  (athali)  means,  properly,  "  to 
remove,"  "to  transfer"  from  one  place  to 
another  (transtulerunt,  Vulgate) ;  hence  it 
signifies  here  to  copy  into  u.  book  words 
taken  from  other  writings  or  people's 
m  uths.  The  sayings  thus  collected,  whether 
truly  Solomon's  or  not,  were  extant  under 
his  name,  and  were  regarded  as  worthy  of 


his  reputation  for  wisdom.  The  title  ii 
given  in  the  Septuagint,  thus:  Avrai  at 
%at5e7aL  ^a\Q>fj.uyros  at  cLdtdxptToty  &s  i^eypaip' 
avTO  01  (pt\oi  'E^eKiov  rov  ^aciKius  tti^ 
'lovSalas.  What  is  meant  by  aSiaKpirot  is 
uncertain.  It  has  been  translated  "  impos- 
sible to  distinguish,"  equivalent  to  "mis- 
cellaneous ; "  "  beyond  doubt,"  equivalent 
to  "  genuine,"  "  hard  to  interpret,"  as  in 
Polyb.,  XV.  12.  9.  St.  James  (iii.  17)  ap- 
plies the  term  to  wisdom,  but  the  interpre- 
ters there  are  not  agreed  as  to  the  meaning, 
it  being  rendered  "  without  partiality," 
"  without  variance,"  "  without  doubtful- 
ness," etc.  It  seems  best  to  take  the  word 
as  used  by  the  LXX.  to  signify  "  mixed," 
or  "  miscellaneous." 

Vers.  2 — 7.— Proverbs  concerning  kings. 

Ver.  2. — It  is  the  gloryjof  God  to  couceal 
a  thing.  That  which  is  the  chief  glory  of 
God  is  his  mysteriousness,  the  unfathomable 
character  of  his  nature  and  attributes  and 
doings.  The  more  we  search  into  these 
matters,  the  more  complete  we  find  our 
ignorance  to  be  ;  finite  faculties  are  utterly 
unable  to  comprehend  the  infinite;  tliey 
can  embrace  merely  what  God  chooses  to 
reveal.  "  Secret  things  belong  unto  the 
Lord  our  God"  (Dent.  xxix.  29),  and  the 
great  prophet,  favoured  with  Divine  revela- 
tions, can  only  confess,  "  Verily,  thou  art  a 
God  that  hidest  thyself"  (Isa.  xlv.  15; 
oomp.  Ecoles.  viii.  17 ;  Bom.  xi.  33,  etc.).  But 
the  honour  of  kings  is  to  search  out  a  matter. 
The  same  word  is  used  for  "glory"  and 
"  honour  "  in  both  clauses,  and  ought  to  have 
beenrendered  similarly.  It  is  the  king'sglory 
to  execute  justice  and  to  defend  the  rights 
and  safety  of  his  people.  To  do.  this  effec- 
tually he  must  investigate  matters  brought 
before  him,  look  keenly  into  political  diffl- 
culties,  get  to  the  bottem  of  all  complioa- 


«H.  XXV.  1 — 28.] 


THE  PBOVERBS. 


479 


tions,  and  watch  against  possible  jlangers. 
The  contrast  between  the  glory  of  God  and 
that  of  the  king  lies  in  this — that  whereaa 
both  God  and  the  king  desire  man's  welfare, 
the  former  promotes  this  by  making  him 
feel  his  ignorance  and  littleness  and  entire 
dependence  upon  this  mysterious  Being 
whose  nature  and  designs  mortals  cannot 
understand ;  the  latter  advances  the  good 
of  his  subjects  by  giving  them  confidence  in 
his  zeal  and  power  to  discover  truth,  and 
using  his  knowledge  for  their  benefit. 
Septuagint,  "  The  glory  of  God  ooncealeth 
a  word  {\iyov):  but  the  glory  of  a  king 
honoureth  matters  {npiy/iaTo)." 

Ver.  3. — TIds  proverb  is  connected  with 
the  preceding  by  the  idea  of  "searching" 
(cJialtar)  common  to  both.  Such  emblematic 
proverbs  are  common  in  this  second  collec- 
tion (see  ver.  11).  Three  subjects  are  stated, 
of  which  is  predicated  the  torm  unsearchable, 
viz.  The  heaven  for  height,  and  the  earth 
for  depth,  and  the  heart  of  kings.  As  you 
can  never  rise  to  the  illimitable  height  of 
the  heavens,  as  you  can  never  penetrate 
to  the  immeasurable  depth  of  the  eartli,  so 
you  can  never  fathom  the  heart  of  a  king, 
can  never  find  out  what  he  really  ttiinksaml 
intends  (comp.  Job  xi.  8).  It  may  be  thnt 
tacitly  a  warning  is  intended  aorainst  flattej- 
Ing  one's  self  that  one  knows  and  can  reckon 
on  the  favour  of  a  king ;  his  good  disposi- 
tion towards  you  may  be  only  seeming,  oi 
may  any  ujument  become  changed.  'The 
Septuagint  lias  tor  "unsearchable"  (}% 
-ipn)  oj/fJe'Aey/cToj,  "  unquestionable."  The 
commentators  refer  to  a  passage  in  Tacitus 
('  Ann.,'  vi.  8),  where  IM.  Terentius  defendti 
himself  for  being  a  friend  of  Sijanus  by 
the  fact  of  the  impossibility  of  investigating 
a  great  man's  real  sentiments.  "  To  us,"  he 
says  to  Tibrrius,  "  it  appertains  not  to  judge 
wliom  you  exalt  above  all  others  and  for 
wliat  reason  you  do  so.  Facts  which  are 
obvious  we  all  notice.  We  see  who  is  the 
man  upon  whom  you  heap  wealth  and 
honours,  who  it  is  that  has  the  chief  power 
of  dispensing  rewards  aud  punishments; 
that  these  were  possessed  by  Sejanus  no  one 
lan  deny.  But  to  pry  into  the  hidden 
thoughts  of  a  prince,  aud  the  designs  which 
he  meditates  in  secret,  is  unlawful  and 
hazardous ;  nor  would  the  attempt  succeed." 

Vers.  1,  5. — ^A  tetrastich  in  an  emble-  | 
mutical  form.  I 

Ver.  1. — Take  away  the  dross  from  the 
silver.  Silver  was  most  extensively  used 
by  the  Hebrews  (see  '  Dictionary  of  the 
Bible,'  «u6  voc.),  whether  obtained  from 
native  mines  or  imported  from  foreign 
countries  ;  and  the  process  of  separating 
the  ore  from  the  extraneous  matters  mixed 


with  it  was  well  known  (Pa.  xii.  6 ;  Ezek. 
xxii.  20,  etc.;  see  on  ch.  xvii.  3).  And 
there  shall  oome  forth  a  vessel  for  the  finer 
(tsaraph) ;  the  goldsmith.  The  pure  silver 
is  ready  for  the  artist's  work,  who  from  this 
material  can  malce  a  beautiful  vessel. 
Septuagint,  "Beat  untested  silver,  an  i  all 
shall  be  made  entirely  pure,"  vfhere  the 
allusion  is  to  the  process  of  reducing  mine- 
rals by  lamination. 

Ver.  5.— Take  away  the  wicked  from 
before  the  king.  Let  the  wicked  be  removed 
from  the  presence  of  the  king,  as  dro^a  is 
separated  from  the  pure  silver  (see  the 
same  metaplior,  laa.  i.  25 ;  Jer.  vi.  2  i,  etc.). 
And  his  throne  shall  be  established  in 
righteousness  (oli.  xvi.  12  ;  xiix.  14;.  The 
king  detects  the  evil  and  punishes  them  ; 
and  this  confirms  hia  rule  and  secures  the 
continuance  of  his  dynasty.  Thus  righteous- 
ness triumphs,  and  wickedness  is  properly 
dealt  with.  Septuagint,  "  Slay  the  ungodly 
from  the  face  of  the  king,  and  his  throne 
shall  prosper  in  righteousness." 

Vers.  6,  7. — Another  proverb  (a  penta- 
stich)  connected  with  kings  and  great  men. 

Ver.  6.— Put  not  forth  thyself  in  the 
presence  of  the  king.  Do  not  make  display 
of  yourself  ai  though  vying  .with  the  king 
in  outward  circumstances.  Septuagint, 
"Boast  not  thyself  (juJ)  aXaCoveiov)  in  the 
presence  of  a  king."  Stand  not  in  the  place 
of  great  men.  Do  not  pretend  to  be  the 
equal  of  those  who  occupy  high  places  in 
the  kingdom  (ch.  xviii.  16).  Septuagint, 
"And  take  not  your  stand  (u</>i<rToo-o)  in  the 
places  of  cliieftains."  Says  a  Latin  gnome, 
"  Qui  cum  fortuna  convenit,  dives  oat; "  and 
Ovid  wrote  well  ('  Trist.,'  iii.  i.  25,  etc.) — 

"  Crede  mihi ;  bene  qui  latuit,  bene  vixit ; 
et  intra 
Fortunam  debet  quisque manere  suam. . . 
Tu  quoque  formida  nimium  sublimia  sem- 
per; 
Propositique  memor  contrahe  vela  tui," 

Ver.  7. — For  better  it  is  that  it  be  said 
unto  thee,  Come  up  hither.  It  is  better  for 
tlie  prince  to  select  you  for  elevation  to  a 
high  post ;  to  call  you  up  near  his  throne. 
The  rel'erenoe  is  not  necessarily  to  position 
at  a  royal  banquet,  though  the  maxim  lends 
itself  readily  to  such  application.  This 
warning  against  arrogance  and  presumption 
was  used  by  our  blessed  Lord  in  enforcing 
a  lesson  of  humility  and  self-disciplino 
(Luke  xir.  7,  etc.).  Septuagint,  "  For  it  ia 
better  for  thee  that  it  should  be  said.  Come 
up  unto  me  (avdPait/e  irphs  jue)"  (Trpotravd$qdt 
ia/direpov,  Luke  xiv.  7).  Than  that  thou 
shonldest  be  put  lower  in  the  presence  of 
the  prince  whom  thine  eyes  have  seen.  The 
last  words  have  been  variously  interpreted : 


480 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[oh.  XXV.  1—281 


"  to  whom  thon  haBt  come  with  a  request 
for  preferment ; "  "  into  whose  august  pre- 
genoe  thou  hast  been  admitted,  bo  as  to  see 
his  face  "  (2  Sam.  xiv.  24) ;  "  who  knows 
all  about  thee,  and  will  thus  malce  thee  feel 
thy  humiliation  all  the  more."  But  nadib, 
rendered  "  prince,"  is  not  the  king,  but  any 
noble  or  great  man ;  and  what  the  maxim 
means  is  this — that  it  is  wise  to  save  your- 
self from  the  mortification  of  being  turned 
out  of  a  place  which  you  have  knowingly 
usurped.  Your  own  eyes  see  that  lie  is  in 
the  company ;  you  are  aware  of  what  is  his 
proper  position ;  you  have  occupied  a  post 
which  belongs  to  another;  justly  you  are 
removed,  and  all  present  witness  your 
humiliation.  Tlie  moralist  knew  that  the 
bad  spirit  of  pride  was  fostered  and  encour- 
aged by  every  act  of  self-assertion;  hence 
the  importance  of  his  warning.  The  Sep- 
tuagint  makes  a  separate  sentence  of  these 
last  words,  "  Speak  thou  of  what  thine  eyes 
saw,"  or,  perhaps,  like  St.  Jerome,  the 
Syriac,  and  Symmachus,  attach  them  to 
the  next  verse. 

Vtr.  8. — A  tristich  with  no  parallelism. 
Go  not  forth  hastily  to  strive.  The  idea  is 
either  of  one  entering  into  litigation  with 
undue  haste,  or  of  one  hurrying  to  meet  an 
adversary.  St.  Jerome,  taking  in  the  linal 
wnnls  of  the  previous  verse,  renders,  Qux 
viderMnt  oeuli  tui,  ne  prof  eras  in  jurgio  cito, 
"  What  thine  eyes  have  seen  reveal  not 
hastily  In  a  quarrel."  This  is.  like  ver.  9 
bel'iw,  and  Christ's  injunction,  "If  (hy 
brother  shall  trespass  against  thee,  go  and 
tell  him  his  fault  between  thee  and  him 
alone"  (Matt,  xviii.  15).  Lest  thou  know 
not  what  to  do  in  the  end  thereof.  The 
Hebrew  is  elliptical,  "Lest  by  chance  (1?) 
t'.  ou  do  something  (bad,  humiliating)  in  the 
end  thereof."  But  Delitzsch,  Nowack,  and 
others  consider  the  sentence  as  interrogative 
(as  1  Sam.  xx.  10),  and  translate,  "  That  it 
may  not  be  said  in  the  end  thereof,  What 
wilt  thou  do?"  Either  way,  the  warning 
comes  to  this — Do  not  enter  hastily  upon 
strife  of  any  kind,  lest  thou  be  utterly  at 
a  loss  what  to  do.  When  thy  neighbour 
hath  put  thee  to  shame,  by  putting  tliee  in 
the  wrong,  gaining  his  cause,  or  getting  the 
victory  over  thee  in  some  way.  Septuaglnt,. 
"  Fall  not  quickly  into  a  contest,  lest  tliou 
repent  at  the  last."  There  is  an  English 
proverb,  "  Anger  begins  with  folly  and  ends 
with  repentance ; "  and  "  Haste  is  the  begin- 
ning of  wrath,  its  end  is  repentance." 

Vera.  9, 10. — A  tetrastich  without  parallel- 
ism, connected  with  the  preceding  maxim. 

Ver.  9. — Debate  thy  cause  with  thy  neigh- 
bour himself  (Matt,  xviii.  15 ;  see  on  ver.  8). 
If  you  have  any  quarrel  with  a  neighbour, 
or  are  drawn  into  a  controversy  with  him, 


deal  with  him  privately  in  a  friendly  manner. 
And  discover  not  a  secret  to  another;  rather, 
the  secret  of  another.  .  Do  not  biing  in  a 
third  party,  or  make  use  of  anything  en- 
trusted to  you  by  another  person,  or  of 
which  you  have  become  privately  informed, 
in  order  to  support  your  cause. 

Ver.  10. — Lest  he  that  heareth  it  put  thee 
to  shame ;  i.e.  lest  any  one,  not  the  olfeniled 
neighbour  only,  who  hears  how  treacherous 
you  have  been,  makes  your  proceeding 
known  and  cries  shame  upon  you.  And 
thine  infamy  turn  not  away.  The  stigma 
attached  to  you  be  never  obliterated.  Thus 
Siracides :  "  Whoso  discovereth  secrets  lost  th 
his  credit ;  and  shall  never  find  friend  to  his 
mind.  Love  thy  friend,  and  be  faithful 
unto  him :  but  if  thou  bewrayest  his  secrets, 
follow  no  more  after  him.  For  as  a  man 
hath  destroyed  his  enemy ;  so  hast  thou  lost 
the  love  of  thy  neighbour "  (Ecclus.  xxvii. 
16,  etc. ;  comp.  also  xxii.  22).  The  motive 
presented  in  our  text  is  not  the  highest, 
being  grounded  on  the  fear  of  shame  and 
disgrace  in  men's  eyes ;  but  it  is  a  very 
potent  incentive  to  right  action,  and  the 
moralist  has  good  reason  for  employing  it. 
That  it  does  not  reach  to  the  height  of 
Christian  morality  is  obvious.  The  gnome 
is  thus  given  in  the  Greek :  "  When  thy 
friend  shall  reproach  thee,  retreat  backward, 
despise  him  not,  lest  thy  friend  reproach 
thee  still;  and  so  thy  quarrel  and  enmity 
shall  not  pass  away,  but  shall  be  to  thee 
like  death."  Then  the  LXX.  adds  a  para- 
graph, reproduced  paitly  by  St.  Jerome, 
"Kindness  and  friendship  set  a  man  free 
(eAeueepoi) ;  preserve  thou  these,  that 
thou  become  not  liable  to  reproach  Qirovei- 
SuTTos,  exprobahilis);  but  guard  thy  ways 
in  a  conciliating  spirit  (^eicrwaWaKTusy 

Ver.  11. — One  of  the  emblematical  dis- 
tiches in  which  this  collection  is  rich.  A 
word  fitly  spoken.  V}dn-^p  may  be  trans- 
lated "  in  due  season,"  or  "  upon  its  wheels  " 
(Venetian,  sttI  tuv  rpox&v  aiir^s).  In  the 
latter  case  the  phrase  may  mean  a  word 
quickly  formed,  or  moving  easily,  spoken 
ore  rotunda,  or  a  speedy  answer.  But  tlie 
metaplior  is  unusual  and  inappropriate;  and 
it  is  best  to  understand  a  word  spoken 
under  due  consideration  of  time  and  place. 
Vulgate,  Qui  loquitur  verbum  in  tempore 
suo;  Aquila  and  Theodotion,  67r!  apfilioviny 
auT^,  "  in  circumstances  that  suit  it ;  "  the 
Septuagint  has  simply  oSras.  Is  like  apple* 
of  gold  in  pictures  of  silver.  In  these  em- 
blematical distiohs  the  words,  "  is  like,"  in 
the  Authorized  Version,  are  an  insertion. 
The  Hebrew  places  the  two  ideas  merely 
in  sequence;  the  object  with  which  some- 
thing is  compai-ed  usually  coming  before 
that  which  is  compai'ed  with  it,  as  liere, 
"  Apples  of  gold— a  word  fitly  spoken  "  (m 


OH.  XXV.  1 — ^28.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


48] 


in  vers.  14,  18,  19,  26,  28).  There  is  a 
doubt  about  the  meaning  of  the  word 
tendered  "pictures,"  maskith  (see  on  ch. 
xviil.  11).  It  seems  to  be  used  generally  in 
the  sense  of  "  image,"  "  sculpture,"  being 
derived  from  the  verb  nj'^,  "  to  see ;  "  from 
this  it  comes  to  signify  "ornament,"  and 
here  most  appropriately  is  "  basket,"  and, 
as  some  understand,  of  filagree  work.  St. 
Jeromfl  mistakes  the  word,  rendering,  in 
lectu  •trgenteit.  The  Septuagint  Ijbs,  iv 
Sp/j.l<ritif  aapSiov;  "  on  a  necklace  of  iardius." 
"Apples  of  gold"  are  apples  or  other  fruits 
of  a  golden  colour,  not  made  of  gold,  whieh 
Would  be  very  costly  and  heavy  ;  nor  would 
the  comparison  with  artiiicial  fruits  be  as 
suitable  as  that  with  natural.  The  "  word  " 
is  the  fruit  set  off  by  its  circumstances,  as  the 
latter's  beauty  is  enhanced  by  the  grace  of 
the  vessel  which  contains  it.  The  "  apple  " 
has  been  supposed  to  be  the  orange  (called 
in  late  Latin  pornum  aurantium)  or  the 
citron.  We  may  cite  here  the  opinion  of  a 
competent  traveller:  "For  my  own  part," 
says  Canon  Tristram  (' Land  of  Israel,-  p. 
605),  "I  have  no  liesitation  in  expressing 
my  conviction  that  the  apricot  alone  is  the 
'apple'  of  Scripture.  .  .  .  Everywhere  the 
apricot  is  common;  perhaps  it  is,  with 
the  single  exception  of  the  fig,  the  most 
abundant  fruit  of  the  country.  In  highlands 
and  lowlands  alike,  by  the  sliorcs  of  the 
Meiliterranean  and  on  the  banks  of  the 
Jordan,  in  the  nooks  of  Judsea,  under 
the  lieighti  of  Lebanon,  in  the  recesses  of 
Galilep,  and  in  the  glades  of  Gilead,  the 
apricot  flourishes,  and  yields  a  crop  of  pro- 
digious abundance.  Its  ch  avacteristics  meet 
every  condition  of  the  '  tappuaoh '  of  Scrip- 
ture. 'I  sat  down  under  his  shadow  with 
great  delight,  and  his  fruit  was  sweet  to 
my  taste'  (Cant.  ii.  3).  Near  Damascus, 
and  on  the  banks  of  the  Barada,  we  have 
pitched  our  tents  under  its  shade,  and  spread 
our  caipets  secure  from  the  rays  of  the  sun. 
•  The  smell  of  thy  nose  (shall  be)  like  tap- 
puach '  (Cant.  vii.  8).  There  can  scarcely 
be  a  more  deliciously  perfumed  fruit  tliau 
the  apricot;  and  what  fruit  can  better  fit 
the  epithet  of  Solomon,  'apples  ot  gold  in 
pictures  of  silver,'  than  this  golden  fruit,  as 
its  branches  bend  under  the  weight  in  their 
setting  of  bright  yet  pale  foliage?"  Imagery 
similar  to  that  fuund  in  this  verse  occurs 
in  ch.  X.  31 ;  xii.  14 ;  xiii.  2 ;  xviii.  20.  There 
is  a  famous  article  on  the  analogies  between 
dowers  and  men's  characters  iu  the  Spectator, 
No.  455. 

Ver.  12. — Another  distich  concerning  the 
seasonable  word,  of  tlie  same  character  as 
the  last.  '  As  an  earring  of  gold,  and  an 
ornament  of  fine  gold.  In  this,  as  in  many 
of  the  proverbs,  the  comparison  is  not  ex- 
pressed, but  is  merely  implied  by  juztaposi- 

PR0VKBB8. 


tion.  Nezem,  in  ch.  xi.  22,  was  a  nose-ring, 
here  probably  an  earring  is  meant;  ehali. 
"ornament,"  is  a  trinket  or  jewel  worn  sus- 
pended on  neck  or  breast.  The  two,  whetlier 
worn  by  one  peroon  or  more,  form  a  lovely 
corabiniition,  and  set  off  the  wearer's  grace 
and  beauty.  Vuljjatc,  Inanris  aurea  il 
margaritum  fulgens,  "A  golden  earring 
and  a  brilliant  pearl."  Septuagint,  •■  A 
golden  earring  a  precious  sardiua  also  is 
set,"  So  is  a  wise  reprover  upon  an  obediont 
ear.  The  obedient  ear  receives  the  proce|  t.-i 
of  the  wise  reprover,  and  wears  th(  m  at  a 
valued  ornament.  In  ch.  i.  9  the  instruct!  n 
of  parents  is  compared  to  a  chaplet  on  ihu 
head  and  a  fair  chain  on  tie  neck.  Septu  i- 
gint,  "  A  wise  word  on  an  ol  e Jient  ear." 

Ver.  13.— A  comparative  tristioii  con- 
cerning words.  As  the  cold  of  snow  in  the 
time  of  harvest.  Tliis,  of  course,  does  not 
mean  a  snowstorm  or  h.ilstorm  iu  the  tinju 
of  harvest,  which  would  bo  anything  but  a 
blessing  (ch.  xxvi.  1 ;  1  Sam.  xii.  17,  IS;, 
but  either  the  distant' view  of  the  enow  in 
Hermon  or  Lebanon,  which  gave  an  idea  of 
refreshment  in  the  heat  of  autumn,  or  moi-e 
probably  snow  used  to  cool  drink  in  warm 
weather.  This  luxury  was  not  unknown  n 
the  time  of  Solomon,  who  ha'l  a  summer 
palace  on  Lebanon  (1  Kings  ix.  19),  thou;-'li 
it  could  have  been  enjoyed  by  very  few,  aud 
would  not  speak  to  the  personal  expefiun^* 
of  the  burgher  class,  to  whom  the  proverbj 
seem  to  have  been  addrcbsed.  Xenopli  m 
writes  of  the  use  of  euow  to  cool  w'no 
('Memorab.,'  ii.  1.  30).  Hitzig  qnotet  a 
passage  from  the  olilhistory  of  the  Crusades, 
called  '  Qesta  Dei  per  Francos,'  which  ruuo 
thus:  "Nix  frigiilissiraa  a  monte  Libano 
defertur,  nt  vino  comini.xta,  tanquam  glaoiem 
ipsum  frigidum  rcdlat."  So  in  tlie  pr8^8Mt 
day  snow  is  sold  in  Damasous  bazaars.  The 
LXX.,  not  realizin;?  what  harm  snob  an  un- 
timely storm  might  cfTect,  translates,  "As  a 
fall  (?{o5os)  of  snow  in  harvest  is  of  use 
against  heat,  so  a  failhful  raos.senger  benefits 
those  who  sent  him."  So  is  a  faithful 
messenger  to  them  that  send  him.  (For 
"faithful  meesoTiger,"seeonch. xiii.  17;  and 
for  "them  ti. at  tend,"  see  on  ch.  xxii.  21.) 
Tiie  comp.irisou  is  explained.  For  he  re- 
fresheth  the  soul  of  his  masters.  He  brings 
as  great  refietihmcnt  to  his  m  isters'  mind  as 
would  a  drink  of  snow-cooled  water  iu  the 
burning  harvest-field. 

Ver.  14. — The  Hebrew  is,  Clouds  and  wind 
without  rain — he  that  boasteth  himself  in 
a  gift  of  falsehood  (see  on  ver.  11).  'lire 
proverb  is  concerned  with  promises  dis- 
appointed. Clouds  and  wind  are  geneially 
iu  the  East  the  precursors  of  heavy  rain,  as 
we  road  in  1  Kings  xviii.  45,  "In  a  little 
while  the  heaven  was  black  with  clouds  and 
wind,  and  there  waj  a  great  rain."    After 

2  I 


183 


THE  PE0VBBB3. 


[CH.  XXT.  1 — 2& 


such  phenomena,  which,  according  to  current 
meteorologioal  observation,  gave  every  hope 
of  a  refreshing  shower  in  the  time  of  summer 
drought,  to  see  the  clouds  pass  away  with- 
out affording  a  single  drop  of  rain  is  a 
grievous  disappointment.  The  metaphor  is 
found  in  the  New  Testament.  St.  Jude 
(ver.  12)  calls  false  teachers  "  clouds  without 
water,  carried  along  by  winds."  "A  gift  of 
falsehood,"  equivalent  to  "  a  false  gifV'  one 
that  deceives,  because  it  is  only  promised 
and  never  given.  A  man  makes  a  great 
parade  of  going  to  bestow  a  handsome  pre- 
sent, and  then  sneaks  out  of  it,  and  gives 
nothing.  Such  a  one  is,  as  St.  Jerome 
renders,  Vir  gloriosus,  et  promissa  non  com- 
plens.  The  oM  commentators  quote  Ovid, 
'Heroid.,' vi.l09— 

"Mobilis  .SIsonide,  vernaque  incertior  aura. 
Cur  tua  polUoito  pondere  verba  oarent  ?  " 

"  Deeds  are  fruits,"  says  the  proverb, "  words 
are  but  leaves ; "  and  "  Vain-glory  blossoms, 
but  never  bears  fruit."  Concerniug  the 
folly  of  making  stupid  boasts,  the  Bengalee 
proverb  speaks  of  a  pedlar  in  ginger  getting 
tidings  of  his  ship.  The  Septuagint  is  in- 
correct, "Ai  winds,  and  clouds,  and  rains 
are  most  evident  (JiTi(pav4aTaTa),  ao  ia  he 
who  boasts  of  a  false  gift." 

Ver.  15.— By  long  forbearing;  i.e.  by  pa- 
tience, calmness  tliat  does  not  break  out 
into  passion  whatever  be  the  provocation, 
even,  it  is  implied,  in  the  face  of  a  false  and 
malicious  accusatiou  (comp.  ch.  xiv.  29). 
li  a  prince  persuaded.  Katton  is  rather 
"  an  arbiter,"  or  judge,  than  "a  prince,"  and 
the  proverb  says  that  such  an  officer  ii  led 
to  take  a  favourable  view  of  an  accused 
person's  case  when  he  sees  him  calm  and 
coDiposed,  ready  to  explain  the  matter  with- 
out any  undue  heat  or  irritation,  keeping 
steadily  to  the  point,  and  not  seduced  by 
calumny  or  misrepresentation  to  forget  him- 
self and  lose  his  temper.  Such  a  bearing 
presupposes  innocence  and  weighs  favour- 
ably with  the  judge.  The  LXX.  makes  the 
gnome  apply  to  monarchs  alone,  "  In  long- 
suffering  is  prosperity  unto  kings."  A  soft 
tongut  breeketh  the  bone.  A  soft  answer 
(ch.  IV.  1),  gentle,  conciliating  words,  over- 
come opposition,  and  disarm  the  most  deter- 
mined enemy,  and  make  tender  in  him  that 
which  wai  hardest  and  most  uncompromis- 
ing. "  Gutta  cavat  lapidem,  non  vi,  sed  ssspe 
cadendo."  Similar  proverbs  are  found  else- 
where, though  probably  in  a  different  sense. 
Thus  in  modem  Greek,  "The  tongue  has 
no  bones,  yet  it  breaks  bones ; "  in  Turkish, 
"  The  tongue  has  no  hone,  yet  it  crushes ; " 
again,  "  One  drop  of  honey,"  says  the  Turk, 
"  catches  more  bees  than  a  ton  of  vinegar." 

Ver.  16. — Ha»t  thou  found  honey  1  Honey 
would  be  found  in  crevices  of  rocks,  in 


hollow  trees  (1  Sam.  xiy.  27),  or  in  more 
unlikely  situations  (Judg.  xiv.  8),  and  was 
extensively  used  as  an  article  of  food.  All 
travellers  in  Palestine  note  tlie  great  abun- 
dance of  bees  therein,  and  how  well  it 
answers  to  its  description  as  "  a  land  flowing 
with  milk  and  honey."  Eat  so  much  as  is 
sufficient  for  thee.  I'he  agreeable  sweetness 
of  honey  might  lead  the  finder  to  eat  too 
much  of  it.  A  gainst  such  excess  the  moralist 
warns:  Lest  thou  be  filled  therewith,  and 
vomit  it.  Thus  wrote  Fiudar,  'Nem.,'  viL 
51— 

AAXek  yhp  &vd'wav(rts  iw  iravrl  yXvKcta  ^p7^ 

K6pov  S'ex** 
Kal  fi€\i  KaX  Tck  ripw*  &y0e'  'Atppo^ttria^ 

MijS^i/  &yay,  Ne  quid  nimis,  is  a  mnxim  eon 
tinually  urged  by  those  who  wished  to  teach 
moderation.  Says  Hotner, '  Iliad,'  xiii.  636— 

"  Men  are  with  all  tilings  sated — sleep,  and 
love, 
Sweet  sounds  of  music,  and  the  joyous 
dance." 

(Lord  Derby.) 
Says  Horace,  '  Sat.,*  i.  1.  100— 

"Est  modus  in  rebus,  sunt  certi  deniqus 
fines, 
Quos    ultra    citraque    nequit   consistera 
rectum." 

The  honey  is  a  figure  of  all  that  pleases  tha 
senses;  but  the  maxim  is  to  be  extended 
beyond  physical  matters,  though  referring 
primarily  to  such  pleasures.  The  mind  may 
be  overloaded  as  well  as  the  body;  only 
such  instruction  as  can  be  digested  and 
assimilated  is  serviceable  to  the  spiritual 
nature;  injudicious  cramming  produces 
satiety  and  disgust.  Again,  "To  'find 
honey,' "  says  St.  Gregory  ('  Moral.,'  xri.  8), 
"is  to  taste  the  sweetness  of  holy  intelli- 
gence, which  is  eaten  enough  of  then  when 
our  perception,  according  to  the  measure  of 
our  faculty,  is  held  tight  under  control.  For 
he  is  *  filled  with  honey,  and  vomits  it '  who, 
in  seeking  to  dive  deeper  than  lie  hrs  capa- 
city for,  loses  that  too  from  whence  he 
miglil^  have  derived  nourishment."  And  in 
another  place  (ibid.,  xx.  18), "  The  sweetness 
of  spiritual  meaning  he  who  seeks  to  eat 
beyond  what  he  contains,  even  what  he  had 
eaten  he  '  vomiteth ; '  because,  whilst  he 
seeks  to  make  out  things  above,  beyond  his 
powers,  even  the  things  that  he  had  made 
out  aright,  he  forfeits"  (Oxford  transl.). 

Ver.  17. — Withdraw  thy  foot  from  thy 
neighbour's  house ;  literally,  make  thy  /out 
precious,  rare;  Septuagint,  "Bring  thy 
foot  sparingly  QrvlyMv)  into  thy  friend's 
house."  The  proverb  seems  to  be  loosely 
connected  with  the  preceding,  as  urging 
moderation.    Du  not  pay  too  frequent  visiU 


OH.  XXV.  1—28.] 


THB  PBOVERBS. 


4es 


to  your  neigkbours'  house,  or  make  your- 
self too  much  at  home  there.  The  Sou  of 
Sirach  lias  an  utterance  on  a  somewhat 
similar  subject,  "  Give  place,  thou  stranger, 
to  an  iionourable  man ;  my  brother  cometh 
to  be  lodged,  and  I  have  need  of  mine 
bouse.  These  things  are  grievous  to  a  man 
of  understanding ;  the  upbraiding  of  house- 
room,  and  reproaching  of  the  lender" 
(EcoluB.  xxix.  27,  etc.).  Lest  he  be  weary 
of  thee,  and  so  hate  thee.  Such  a  result 
might  easily  arise  from  too  constant  inter- 
course. Cornelius  &  Lapide  quotes  from 
Seneca  ('  De  Benefic.,'  i.  15),  "  Barum  esse 
oportet  quoil  diu  carum  veils,"  "  That  should 
be  rare  which  you  would  eiiduringly  bear." 
And  Martial's  cynicnl  advice — 

"NuUi  te  facias  nimis  sodalem; 
Gaudebis  minus,  et  minus  dolebia." 

The  same  poet  ('  Epigr.,'  iv.  29.  3)  writes — 

"Bara   juvaut;    primia    sio    major    gratia 
pomis, 
Hibernse  pretium  sic  meruere  rosse." 

Ver.  18. — Hebrew,  A  manl,  and  a  sword, 
and  a  sharp  arrow — a  man  that  beareth 
false  witness  against  his  neighbour  (see  on 
yei.  11).  One  who  bears  false  witness 
against  his  neighbour  prepares  for  him  the 
instruments  of  death,  such  as  those  men- 
tioned here.  "  A  maul "  (mephits),  usually 
a  heavy  wooden  hammer  (compare  malleus 
and  "mallet");  here  a  club,  or  mace,  used 
in  battle,  ^((iroAoi' (Septuagint ;  comp.  jer  li. 
20).  There  is  a  kind  of  climax  in  the  three 
offensive  weapons  named — the  club  bruises, 
the  sword  indicts  wounds,  the  arrow  pierces 
to  the  heart;  and  the  three  may  represent 
the  various  baneful  effects  of  false  testimony, 
how  it  bruises  reputation,  spoils  possessions, 
deprives  of  life.  The  second  clause  is  from 
the  Decalogue  (Exod.  xx.  16). 

Ver.  19. —Hebrew  (see  on  ver.  11),  A 
broken  tooth,  and  a  foot  out  of  joint— con- 
fidence in  an  unfaithful  man  in  time  of 
trouble.  A  faithless  man  is  as  little  to  be 
relied  on  in  a  time  of  need  as  a  loose  or 
broken  tooth,  and  a  foot  unsteady  or  actually 
dislocated.  You  cannot  bite  on  the  one, 
you  cannot  walk  on  the  other ;  so  the  per- 
fidious man  fails  you  when  most  wanted. 
Septuagint,  "The  way  [dShs,  Vatican,  is  pro- 
bably a  clerical  error  for  boobs,  aJ.]  of  the 
wicked,  and  the  foot  of  the  transgressor, 
■ball  perish  in  an  evil  day."  A  Bengal 
maxim  runs,  "A  loose  tooth  and  a  feeble 
friend  are  equally  bad  "  (Lane). 

Ver.  20. — As  he  that  taketh  away  a  gar- 
ment in  cold  weather.  The  proverb  gives 
three  instances  of  whit  is  wrong,  incon- 
gruous, or  unwise,  the  first  two  leading  up 
to  the  third,  which  is  the  pitli  of  the  maxim. 
But  there  is  some  doubt  about  tho  reuiicring 


of  the  first  clause.  The  Authorized  Tcnion 
has  the  authority  of  the  Syriac,  Aquila,  and 
others,  and  gives  an  appropriate  sense,  the 
unreasonable  proceeding  being  the  laying 
aside  of  some  of  one's  own  clothes  in  cold 
weather.  Bat  the  verb  here  used,  n-ji 
Cadah),  may  also  mean  "to'adorn,"  e.g.  with 
fine  garments;  hence  some  expositors  under- 
stand the  incongruity  to  be  the  dressing 
one's  self  in  gay  apparel  in  winter.  But,  as 
Delitzsch  remarks,  there  is  no  reason  why 
fine  clothes  should  not  be  warm ;  and  if  they 
are  so,  there  is  nothing  unreasonable  in 
wearing  them.  The  rendering  of  our  version 
is  probably  correct.  St.  Jerome  annexes 
this  line  to  the  preceding  verse,  as  if  it  con- 
firmed the  previous  instances  of  misplaced 
confidence,  Et  amitUt  pallium  in  diefrigorit, 
"Such  a  one  loses  nis  cloak  in  a  day  of 
frost."  Vinegar  upon  nitre.  Our  nitre,  or 
saltpetre,  is  nitrate  of  potash,  which  is  not 
the  substance  intended  oy  iri]  (netA«r).  The 
substance  signified  by  this  term  is  a  natural 
alkali,  known  to  the  ancients  as  natron,  and 
composed  of  carbonate  of  soda  with  some 
other  admixture.  It  was  used  extensively 
for  washing  purposes,  and  in  cookery  and 
bread-making.  It  effervesces  with  an  acid, 
such  as  vinegar,  and  changes  its  character, 
becoming  a  salt,  and  being  rendered  use- 
less for  all  the  purposes  to  which  it  was 
applied  in  its  alkaline  condition.  So  he 
who  pours  vinegar  on  natron  does  a  foolish 
thing,  for  he  spoils  a  highly  useful  article, 
and  produces  one  which  is  of  no  service  to 
him.  Septuagint,  "As  vinegar  is  inexpe- 
dient for  a  wound  (cAkei),  so  suffering  fall- 
ing on  the  body  pains  the  heart."  Sohultens, 
Ewald,  and  others,  by  referring  nether  to  an 
Arabic  source,  obtain  the  meaning  "  wound," 
or"80re,"  thus:  "As  vinegar  on  a  sore."  This 
gives  a  most  appropriate  sense,  and  might 
well  be  adopted  if  it  had  sufficient  authority. 
But  this  is  doubtful.  Cornelius  ii  Lapide 
translates  the  Septuagint  rendering,  'ntrvep 
S^os  eAkei  d<riiiupopoy,  "  Siout  acetum  trahit 
inutile;"  and  explains  that  vinegar  draws 
from  the  soil  the  nitre  which  is  prejudicial 
to  vegetation,  and  thus  renders  ground  fer- 
tile— a  fact  in  agricultural  chemistry  not 
generally  known,  though  Columella  vouches 
for  it.  A  somewhat  similar  fact,  however, 
is  of  common  experience.  Land  occasionally 
becomes  what  farmers  term  "  sour,"  and  is 
thus  sterile ;  if  it  is  then  dressed  with  salt, 
its  fertility  is  restored.  So  is  he  that  siugeth 
longs  to  an  heavy  heart.  The  inconsistency 
lies  in  thinking  to  cheer  a  sorrowful  heart 
by  singing  marry  flongs.  "  A  tale  out  of 
season,"  says  Siracides,  "is  as  music  in 
mourning"  (Ecclus.  xxii.  6).  The  Greeks 
denoted  cruel  incongruity  by  the  proverb,  '£► 
irtpeoSa-i  vaiCeiV,  "Ludere  inter  nuerentes." 
Aa  the  old  hymn  says — 


184 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[oh.  XXV,  1—28. 


"  Strains  of  gladncis 
Suit  not  souls  with  anguish  torn.*' 

Tlie  true  Oliristinn  sympathy  teaohee  to 
•'rejoice  with  them  that  rejoice,  to  weep 
with  them  that  weep"  (Horn.  xii.  15). 
Flumptre,  in  the  'Speaker's  Commentary,' 
suggests  that  tlie  effervescence  caused  by 
the  mixture  of  a -id  and  alkali  is  taken  as  a 
type  of  the  irritation  produced  by  tlie  inop- 
portune songs.  But  this  is  importing  a 
modem  view  into  »  paragraph,  such  as 
would  never  have  occurred  to  the  writer. 
Tlie  Septuagint,  followed  partially  by 
Jerome,  the  Syriao,  and  the  Targum,  intro- 
duces another  proverb  not  found  in  the 
Hebrew,  "  As  a  moth  in  u  garmen  fc,  and  a 
worm  in  wood,  so  the  sorrow  of  a  man  hurts 
his  heart." 

Vers.  21 ,  22. — This  famous  tetrasirich  is 
reproduced  (with  the  exception  of  the  fouith 
line)  from  the  Septuagint  by  St.  Paul  (Rum. 
xii.  20). 

Ver.  21. — The  traditional  hatred  of 
enemies  is  here  strongly  repudiated  (see  ch. 
xiiv.  17, 18,  and  notes  there).  Thus  Elisha 
trintcd  the  Syrians,  introduced  blindly  into 
the  midst  of  Samaria,  ordering  the  King  of 
Israel  to  set  Inad  and  water  before  them, 
imd  to  send  them  away  unharmed  (2  Kings 
VI.  22).  "  Punish  your  enemy  by  benefiting 
liim,"  say  the  Arabs,  though  they  are  far 
fjom  practising  the  injunction ;  " Sweet 
words  break  the  bones ; "  "  Bread  and  salt 
humble  even  a  robber,"  say  the  KuBsiana. 

Yer.  22. — For  thou  shalt  heap  coals  of  fire 
upon  his  head.  This  expression  has  been 
taken  in  various  senses.  It  has  been  thought 
to  mi  an  that  the  forgiveness  of  the  injured 
peroon  brings  to  tlie  cheek  of  the  offender  the 
burning  blush  of  shame.  But  heaping  coals 
ou  the  head  cannot  naturally  be  taken  to 
express  such  an  idea.  St.  Chrysostom  and 
other  Fathers  consider  that  Divine  ven- 
geance is  implied,  as  in  Ps.  xi.  6,  "  Upon  the 
wicked  he  bhall  rain  snares ;  fire  and  brim- 
stone and  burning  wind  shall  be  their  por- 
tion ;  "  and  Ps.  cxl,  10,  "  Let  burning  coals 
fall  upon  them."  Of  course,  in  one  view, 
kiiidnc  ss  to  an  evil  man  only  gives  him 
occasion  for  fresh  ingratitude  and  hatred, 
and  tlieiefore  increases  God's  wrath  ngiiinst 
him.  But  it  would  be  a  wicked  motive  to 
act  this  beneficent  part  only  to  have  the 
satiufaciiou  of  seeing  your  injurer  humbled 
or  punished.  And  tlie  gnome  implies  that 
the  sinner  is  benefited  by  the  clemency 
shown  to  him,  that  the  requital  of  evil  by 
good  brings  the  offender  t»  a  better  mind, 
and  aids  his  spiiitual  life.  "  Coals  of  fire  " 
are  a  metaphor  for  the  penetrating  pain  of 
remorse  and  repentance.  The  unmerited 
kindness  which  he  receives  forces  upon  him 


the  consciousness  of  his  ill  doing,  which  ii 
accompanied  by  the  sharp  pain  of  regret, 
St.  Augustine,  "Ne  dubitaveris  figurate 
dictum  .  .  .  ut  intelligaa  caihones  ignis 
esse  urentes  poeniteutin  gemitus,  quibua 
superbia  sauatur  ejus,  qui  doiet  se  inimicum 
fuisse  hominis,  a  quo  ejus  miserise  subveui- 
tur"('De  Doctr.  Christ.,'  iii.  16).  Lesfetre 
quotes  St.  Francis  de  Sales,  who  gives  again 
a  different  view,  "  You  are  not  obliged  to 
seek  reconciliation  with  one  who  has 
offended  you;  it  may  be  rather  his  part  to 
seek  you ;  yet  nevertheless  go  and  follow 
the  Saviour's  counsel,  prevent  him  with 
good,  render  him  good  for  evil ;  heap  coala 
of  fire  on  his  head  and  on  his  heart,  which 
may  burn  up  all  ill  will  and  constrain  liim 
to  love  you  "  ('  De  I'Am.  de  Dieu,'  viii.  9). 
And  the  Lord  shall  reward  thee.  This  con- 
sideration can  scarcely  be  regarded  as  the 
chief  motive  for  the  liberality  enjoined, 
though  it  would  be  piesent  to  the  kind  per- 
son's mind,  and  be  a  support  and  comfort  to 
him  in  a  course  of  conduct  repugnant  to  the 
natural  man.  He  would  remember  the 
glorious  reward  promised  to  godliness  by 
the  prophet  (Isa.  Iviii.  8,  etc.),  and  how  Saul 
had  expressed  his  consciousness  of  David's 
magnanimity  in  sparinji;  his  life.  "Thou  art 
more  righteous  than  I;  for  thou  hast  re- 
warded me  good,  whereas  I  have  rewarded 
thee  evil  .  .  .  wherefore  the  Lord  reward 
thee  good  for  that  thou  hast  done  unto  me 
this  <lay  "  (1  Sam.  xxiv.  17, 19  and  xxvi.21). 
Ver.  23.— The  north  winddriveth  awayrain. 
So  St.  Jerome  (Fenfus  Aquilo  dUeipat  plit- 
vias),  Symmaehup,  Aben  Ezra,  and  others. 
The  north  wind  is  called  by  the  natives  of 
Palestine  "  the  heavenly,"  from  the  bright 
effect  which  it  produces  in  the  sky.  "  By 
means  of  the  north  wind  oometli  he  (the  sun) 
forth  as  gold "  (Job  xxivii.  22).  But  the 
verb  here  used  (h^n)  means  "  to  bring  forth, 
produce"  (Ps.  lo.  2);  hence  the  Revised 
Version  rightly  renders,  "  The  north  wind 
bringeth  forth  rain."  This  is  quite  true  if 
"  north  wind "  be  taken  as  equivalent  to 
"wind  from  the  dark  qualter  "(Umbreit), 
like  (6^os  M  Greek ;  and,  in  fact,  the  north- 
west wind  in  Palestine  does  bring  rain.  Sep- 
tuagint, "  The  north  \vind  arouseth  (^{eytt- 
pei)  clouds."  So  doth  au  angry  countenance  a 
backbiting  tongue.  Carrying  on  the  inter- 
pretation intended  by  the  Authorized  Ver- 
sion, this  clause  means  that  an  angry  look 
will  check  a  slanderer  and  incline  him  to 
hold  his  peace  from  prudential  motives. 
But  with  the  rendering  given  above, 
"bringeth  forth,"  another  explanation  is 
involved,  viz.  "  So  does  a  secret,  slandering 
tongue  cause  a  troubled  countenance." 
When  a  man  discovers  that  a  secret  slanderer 
is  working  against  him,  he  shows  it  by  his 
gloomy  and  angry  look,  as  the  tky  is  dark 


OH.  xxy.  1—28.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


4d6 


•with  clouds  when  a  storm  is  threatened. 
"Countenance"  ia  plural  in  tlie  Hebrew 
denoting,  as  Hitzig  points  out,  tliat  the 
calumniator  does  not  affect  one  persoa  only, 
but  occasions  trouble  far  and  wide,  destroys 
friendly  relations  between  many,  excites 
■uspioion  and  enmity  in  various  quarters. 
Septuagint,  "  An  .  impudent  couutenauce 
provokes  the  tongue." 

Ver.  24. — A  repetition  of  ch.  xxi.  9,  taken 
therefore  from  the  Solomonic  collection. 

Ver.  25. — As  cold  waters  to  a  thirsty  soul. 
The  particle  of  comparison  is  not  in  this 
first  clause  in  the  Hebrew.  (For  "cold 
waters,"  oomp.  Jer.  xviii.  14.)  So  is  good 
news  from  a  far  country.  The  nostalgia  of 
an  exile,  and  tlie  craving  for  tidings  of  liim 
felt  by  his  friends  at  home,  are  like  a  parch- 
ing thirst.  Tlie  relief  to  the  latter,  when 
they  receive  good  news  of  the  wanderei',  is 
as  refreshing  as  a  draught  of  cool  water  to  a 
fainting,  weary  man.  We  do  not  know  that 
the  Hebrews  were  great  travellers  in  those 
days ;  but  any  ooinmuuioation  from  a  distant 
country  would  be  very  uncertain  in  arriving 
at  its  destination,  and  would  at  any  rate 
take  a  long  time  in  transmission.  In  most 
cases  there  would  be  nothing  to  rest  upon 
but  vague  report,  or  a  message  carried  by 
some  travelling  merchant.  There  is  a  some- 
what similar  proverb  found  at  ver.  13  and 
eh.  XV.  80.  Tlie  ancient  commentators  liave 
Been  in  this  news  from  a  distant  country 
the  announcement  of  Olirist's  birth  by  the 
angels  at  Bethlehem,  or  the  preaching  of  the 
gosi  el  that  tells  of  the  joys  of  heaven,  the 
Und  that  is  very  far  off  (Isa.  xxxiii.  17). 

Ver.  26. — Hebrew  (spe  on  ver.  11),  A 
troubled  fountain,  and  a  aormpted  spring — 
a  righteous  man  giving  way  to  the  wicked. 
A  good  man  neglecting  to  assert  himself  and 
to  hold  his  own  in  the  face  of  sinners,  ia  as 
useless  to  society  and  as  harmful  to  the  good 
cause  as  a  spring  that  has  been  defiled  by 
mud  stirred  up  or  extraneous  matter  intro- 
duced is  unserviceable  for  drinking  and  pre- 
judicial to  those  who  use  it.  The  mouth  of 
the  lighttous  should  be  "  a  well  of  life " 
(ch.  x.  11),  wholesome,  refreshing,  helpful ; 
his  conduct  should  be  consistent  and 
straightforward,  fearless  in  upholding  the 
light  (Isa.  11.  12,  etc.),  uncompromising  in 
opposing  sin.  When  such  a  man,  for  fear, 
or  favour,  or  weakness,  or  weariness,  yields 
to  the  wickeil,  compromises  principle,  no 
longer  makes  a  stand  for  truth  and  purity 
and  virtue,  he  loses  his  high  character, 
brings  a  scandal  on  religion,  and  lowers  his 
own  spiritual  nature.  It  is  this  moral 
cowardice  wliich  Christ  so  sternly  rebukes 
(Matt.  X.  33),  "Wlios(jever  shall  deny  me 
before  men,  him  will  I  also  deny  before  my 
Father  which  is  in  heaven."  Some  have 
asaumuU  that  the  guouiu  is  coucerued  with  a 


good  man's  fall  into  misfortune  owing  to  the 
machinations  of  sinners ;  but  in  this  case 
the  comparison  loses  its  force ;  such  persecu- 
tion would  not  disturb  the  purity  or  lower 
the  character  of  the  righteous  man ;  it 
would  rather  enhance  his  good  qualities, 
give  occasion  for  their  exercise  and  develop- 
ment, and  therefore  could  not  be  described 
as  fouling  a  pure  spring. 

Ver.  27. — It  is  not  good  to  eat  much 
honsy.  The  ill  effects  ot  a  surfeit  of  honey 
have  been  already  mentioned  (ver.  16) ;  but 
here  the  application  is  different,  and  oeea- 
sions  some  difBculty.  The  Authorized  Ver- 
sion, in  order  to  clear  up  the  obscurity  of 
the  text,  inserts  a  negative.  So  for  men  to 
search  their  own  glory  is  not  glory,  which 
seems  to  be  a  warning  against  conceit  and 
self-adulation.  This  is  hardly  warranted 
by  the  present  Hebrew  loxt,  which  is  lite- 
rally, as  Venetian  renders,  "Epewd  re  S6ias 
avToiv  S(({a,  "  The  search  of  their  glory  [is] 
glory."  But  who  are  meant  by  "their"? 
No  persons  are  mentioned  in  the  verse  to 
whom  the  suffix  in  Dim?  can  be  referred,  and 
it  is  not  improbable  that  some  wonls  have 
dropped  out  of  the  text.  At  the  same  time, 
we  might  naturally  in  thought  supply  "  for 
men"  after  "  it  is  not  good,"  such  omissions 
being  not  uncommon  in  proverbial  sayings ; 
the  suffix  then  would  refer  to  them.  Com- 
mentators have  endeavoured  to  amend  the 
text  by  alterations  which  do  not  commend 
themselves.  Sohultens  supposes  that  the  suf- 
fix had  reference  to  the  Divine  law  and  reve- 
lations, and,  as  T33  may  mean  both  "glory" 
ami "  weight,"  translates,  "  Vestigatio  gravi- 
tatis eorum, giavitas."  Bertheau  takes Xabod 
in  two  different  senses, "  The  searching  out  of 
their  glory  is  a  burden."  So  Delitzsch,  by  a 
little  manipulation  of  the  pointing  (D13?) 
oblains  the  rendering,  "  But  to  search  out 
hard  things  is  an  honour."  Tukea  thus,  the 
maxim  says  that  bodily  pleasures  sicken 
and  cloy,  but  diligent  study  brings  honour. 
This,  however,  is  not  satisfactory  ;  it  gives 
a  word  two  different  senses  in  the  same 
clause,  and  it  affords  a  very  feeble  contrast. 
One  would  naturally  expect  the  proverb  to 
say  that  the  excess,  which  was  deprecated  in 
the  first  hemistich  as  regards  one  depart- 
ment, must  be  equally  rejected  in  another 
sphere.  This  is  somewhat  the  idea  given 
by  Jerome,  Bic  qui  scrutator  est  majestatis 
opprimetur  a  gloria.  The  truth  here  stated 
will  be  explained  by  translating  our  text, 
"  The  investigation  of  weighty  matters  is  a 
weight."  Thus  the  clauses  are  shown  to  be 
well  poised.  Honey  is  good,  study  ie  good ; 
but  both  may  be  used  so  as  to  be  prejudicial. 
Bating  may  be  carried  to  excess;  study 
may  attempt  to  investigate  things  too  hard 
or  too  high.  That  this  is  a  real  danger  w« 
kuow  well  from  the  ooutrovei»ies  about  pr*- 


48« 


THE  PEOVEBBS. 


[oh.  XXV.  1—28. 


deBtination  and  election  in  time  past,  and 
those  concerning  spiritualism  and  theurgy 
in  our  own  day  (see  Jeremy  Taylor, '  Cer- 
tainty of  Salvation,'  iii  176,  edit.  Heb. ;  and 
'  Holy  Living,'  oh.  iii.  §  5).  This  is  the 
view  taken  of  the  passage  by  St.  Gregory 
('Moral,'  liv.  32),  'If  the  sweetness  of 
honey  be  taken  in  greater  measure  than 
there  is  occasion  for,  from  the  same  source 
whence  the  palate  is  gratified,  the  life  of  the 
eater  is  destroyed.  The  "searching  into 
majesty  "  is  also  sweet ;  but  he  that  seeks  to 
dive  into  it  deeper  than  the  cognizance  of 
human  nature  admits,  finds  the  mere  glori- 
ousness  thereof  by  itself  oppresses  him,  in 
that,  like  honey  taken  in  excess,  it  bursts 
the  sense  of  the  searcher  which  is  not 
capable  of  holding  it."  And  again  (ibid., 
XX.  18),  "For  the  glory  of  the  invisible 
Creator,  which  when  searched  into  with 
moderation  lifts  us  up,  beino;  dived  into  be- 
yond our  powers  bears  us  down  "  (Oxford 
transl.).  (Oomp.  Dent.  xxix".  29;  Ecolus. 
iii.  21,  etc.)  Septuagint,  "To  eat  much 
honey  is  not  good,  but  it  behoves  us  to 
honour  glorious  sayings." 

Ver.  28. — A  proverb  like  the  last,  con- 
ceriied  with  self-control.  In  the  Hebrew  it 
runs  thus  (see  on  ver.  11) :  A  city  that  is 
broken  down  without  wall — a  man  on 
whose  spirit  ifl  no  restraint.  "A  city 
broken  down"  is  explained  by  the  next 
words,  "without  wall,"  and  therefore  un- 
defended and   open   to    the   first  invader 


(comp.  2  Chron.  xxxii.  5;  Neh.  ii.  13).  To 
such  a  city  is  compared  the  man  who  puts 
no  restraint  on  his  passions,  desires,  and 
affections;  he  is  always  in  danger  of  being 
carried  away  by  them  and  involved  in  sin 
and  destruction;  he  has  no  defence  when 
temptation  assaults  him,  having  lost  self- 
control  (comp.  oh.  ivL  32).  The  old 
gnomes  hold  always  true— 

@vfXov  Kparriffai  KairiOvfitat  Ka\6v, 
"  Desire  and  passion  it  is  good  to  rule," 
Ta/Jiie7ou  iper^y  itrri  tratppotrvyii  ti6vn. 
"Virtue's  tme  storehouse  is  wise  self-con- 
trol." 
A  Chinese  maxim  says,  "  Who  can  govern 
himself  is  fit  to  govern  the  world."  Septua- 
gint, "As  a  city  whose  walls  are  broken 
down  and  which  is  un  walled,  su  is  a  man 
who  does  anght  without  counsel"  St. 
Jerome,  by  the  addition  of  the  words,  in 
loquendo,  applies  the  proverb  to  intem- 
perance in  language,  "  So  is  he  who  is  not 
able  to  restrain  his  spirit  in  speaking."  Com- 
menting on  this,  St.  Gregory  ('  Moral.,'  vii. 
59)  says,  "Because  it  is  without  the  wall  of 
silence,  the  city  of  the  mind  lies  open  to  the 
darts  of  the  enemy,  and  when  it  casts  itself 
forth  in  words,  it  exhibits  itself  exposed  to 
the  adversary,  and  he  gets  the.  mastery  of  it 
without  trouble,  in  proportion  as  the  soul 
that  he  has  to  overcome  combats  against  its 
own  self  by  much  talking  "  (Oxford  transL). 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  1. — Ancient  lore.  This  superscription  gives  us  a  hint  of  a  very  interesting 
hislorical  event  of  which  we  have  no  account  elsewhere.  It  suggests  a  picture  of  the 
days  of  Hezekiah ;  we  see  his  scribes  busily  engaged  in  ransacking  the  ancient  libraries, 
and  bringing  together  the  long-forffotten  sayings  of  his  famous  predecessor. 

I.  A  EBVivAii  OF  RELIGION  SHOULD  LEAD  TO  A  REVIVAL  OF  LEABNiNQ.  The  Renais- 
sance preceded  the  Eeformation,  and,  because  it  had  no  deep  spiritual  1  a-^is,  it  threatened 
to  degenerate  into  dilletantism  and  pedantry.  But  after  the  second  movement  had 
taken  hold  of  Europe,  real,  solid  learning  received  a  powerful  impulse,  because  men 
were  then  in  earnest  in  the  search  for  truth.  It  would  seem  that  a  similar  result  was 
produced  in  the  days  of  Hezekiah.  Then  there  was  a  religious  reformation,  and  that 
was  followed  by  a  newly  awakened  interest  in  the  national  literature.  Of  course,  this 
was  the  more  natural  among  the  Jews,  because  their  national  genius  was  religious,  and 
their  literature  was  the  vehicle  of  their  religious  ideas.  The  danger  of  a  time  of  religious 
excitement  is  that  it  shall  be  accompanied  by  attenuated  knowledge.  But  the  more  the 
religious  feelings  are  roused,  the  more  reason  is  there  that  they  should  bo  directed  by 
truth.  Revival  preachers  should  be  studious  men  if  they  wish  their  work  not  to  be 
perverted  into  wrong  and  false  courses  through  ignorance. 

II.  It  IB  WISE  TO  PRoriT  BY  THE  THOUGHTS  OF  OTHER  MEN.  The  men  of  Hczekiah 
were  not  above  learning  from  Solomon,  who  had  left  a  reputation  for  unparalleled  wisdom. 
But  lesser  lights  have  also  their  claims.  It  is  a  ujistake  to  live  on  one's  o\yn  thoughts 
without  guidance  or  nourishment  derived  from  the  thoughts  of  other  men.  Private 
thinking  tends  to  narrowness  unless  it  is  enlarged  by  the  reception  of  a  variety  of  ideas 
from  external  sources.  The  mind  will  ultimately  starve  if  it  is  left  to  feed  upon  its  own 
Juices.    We  must  judge  for  ourselves,  and  only  accept  what  we  honestly  believe  to  b* 


OH.  XXV.  1— 28.J  THE  PROVERBS.  487 

trnc — seek  truth,  and  think  out  our  own  convictions.  But  we  shall  do  those  things  the 
better  if  we  also  allow  that  others  may  have  light  to  give  us.  Above  all,  the  Christian 
thinker  needs  to  found  his  meditations  on  the  Bible.  Of  the  New  Testament  it  may  be 
Baid,  "A  Greater  than  Sulomon  is  here."  If  the  men  of  Hezekiah  did  well  to  collect 
the  proverbs  of  Solomon,  much  more  is  it  desirable  to  treasure  up  the  sayin<js  of  him 
who  spake  as  never  man  spake. 

III.  We  mat  learn  lessons  from  A>fTiQuiTT.  Nearly  three  hundred  years  had 
passed  between  the  days  of  Solomon  and  the  time  of  Hezekiah — a  period  equal  to  that 
which  separates  us  from  the  great  Elizabethan  writers ;  so  that  Solomon  was  as  far 
anterior  to  Hezekiah  as  the  poet  Spenser  is  to  our  own  generation.  He  belonged  to 
the  antique  age.  Yet  the  glamour  of  the  great  Hezekiah  did  not  blind  men  to  the 
glory  of  the  greater  Solomon.  In  the  splendid  achievements  of  the  present  day  we 
are  threatened  with  an  extinction  of  antiquity.  The  nineteenth  century  is  the  new 
image  of  gold  that  has  been  set  up  on  our  Plain  of  Dura  for  all  men  to  worship.  We 
shall  suffer  an  irreparable  loss,  and  our  mental  and  spiritual  life  will  be  sadly  stunted, 
if  we  fail  to  hearken  to  the  teachings  of  our  forefathers.  We  are  not  to  be  the  slaves  of 
the  past.  The  new  age  may  have  its  new  truths,  as  well  as  its  new  needs  and  duties. 
But  what  was  true  in  the  past  cannot  cease  to  be  so  by  simply  going  out  of  fashion  ; 
for  truth  is  eternal.  The  very  diversity  of  the  ages  may  instruct  us  by  widening  our 
notions  and  correcting  the  follies  of  prevalent  customs.  The  age  of  Solomon  was  very 
different  from  that  of  Hezekiah ;  yet  the  wisdom  of  the  royal  sage  could  profit  the  newer 
generation. 

Ver.  11. — Apphi  of  gold  in  a  framework  of  silver.  This  is  a  picture  of  Oriental 
decoration.  A  gorgeous  cuamber  is  richly  and  elaborately  ornamented  with  the  precious 
metals,  by  fruit  carved  in  gold  being  set  in  dainty  work  of  silver — as  brilliant  a  piece 
of  decoration  as  can  well  be  imagined.  This  finely  turned  metaphor  is  chosen  by  the 
writer  in  order  to  give  the  highest  possible  praise  to  "  the  word  fitly  spoken," 

I.  The  nature  and  character  of  the  word  fitly  spoken.  1.  It  is  a  word. 
Here  we  see  an  immense  value  set  upon  a  word.  Words  have  weight  to  crush,  force 
to  drive,  sharpness  to  pierce,  brightness  to  illumine,  beauty  to  delight,  consolation  to 
cheer.  He  is  a  foolish  man  who  despises  words.  2.  It  may  he  hut  one  word.  We 
cannot  value  words  by  the  length  of  them,  nor  weigh  them  by  their  bulk.  Many  words 
may  be  worthless,  while  one  word  is  beyond  all  price — if  only  it  be  the  right  word. 
3.  It  must  he  a  real  word.  It  must  not  be  a  mere  sound  of  the  lips.  A  word  is  an 
uttered  thought.  The  soul  of  it  is  its  idea.  When  that  has  gone  out  of  it,  the  empty 
sound  is  a  dead  thing,  though  it  be  voluminous  and  thunderous  as  the  noise  of  many 
waters.  4.  It  needs  to  he  an  apt  word;  i.e.  (1)  true;  (2)  fit  to  be  uttered  by  the 
speaker;  (3)  suitable  for  the  hearer;  (4)  adapted  to  the  occasion ;  (5)  shaped  with 
point  and  individual  character — a  word  that  will  go  home  and  stick.  5.  It  should  he 
a  spoken  word.  There  is  a  world  of  difference  between  living  speech  and  written  or 
printed  sentences.  The  press  can  never  supersede  the  human  voice.  We  see  that  the 
■newspaper  has  not  suspended  the  functions  of  the  political  orator ;  it  has  only  given 
breadth  and  additional  enthusiasm  to  his  utterances.  The  publication  of  the  daily 
paper  has  not  prevented  St.  James's  Hall  from  being  crowded  nor  Hyde  Park  from  being 
thronged  by  thousands  of  eager  listeners  when  some  great  question  is  agitating  the 
public  mind.  It  is  the  same  with  the  pulpit.  The  vocation  of  the  preacher  can  never 
cease  while  the  sympathy  of  personal'  presence  is  a  power.  In  private  life  a  short  word 
goes  further  than  a  long  letter.  6.  It  ought  to  he  wisely  spoken.  Here,  too,  aptness  is 
needed,  to  find  the  right  moment  and  speak  in  the  best  manner.  Formalism,  pomposity, 
hardness  or  coldness  of  manner,  may  spoil  the  effect  of  the  most  suitable  word. 

II.  The  supreme  excellence  of  the  word  fitly  spoken.  1.  It  is  rare.  Such 
decoration  as  is  described  in  the  text  could  not  have  been  often  witnessed  even  amid 
the  "  barbaric  splendour "  of  Solomon's  days.  It  is  not  often  that  the  best  words  are 
spoken.  We  live  in  a  din  of  speech ;  it  rains  words.  But  most  of  the  words  we  hear 
are  neither  gold  nor  silver.  2.  It  is  costly.  The  ornamentation  of  gold  and  silver  would 
be  very  expensive,  first  in  material,  then  in  artistic  skill.  It  cannot  always  be  truly 
said  that  "  kind  words  cost  little."  The  best  words  cost  time,  care,  consideration,  self- 
suppression,  sympathy.    What  costs  the  speaker  nothing  is  likely  to  be  valued  by  the 


488  THE  PROVERBS.  [oh.  xxw.  1—28. 


hearer  at  the  same  price.  3.  It  U  heauUfiil.  The  metaphor  describes  what  would  hfl 
regarded  as  exceedingly  lovely  in  Oriental  art.  But  good  words  are  more  beautiful 
still.  Poetry  is  more  lovely  than  sculpture,  for  it  has  more  soul  and  life  and  thought 
in  it.  Words  of  wisdom  and  love  have  the  beauty  of  the  graces  that  inspire  them. 
4.  It  is  precious.  Some  costly  things  are  of  little  value,  for  one  may  squander  wealth 
for  what  is  worthless.  But  words  of  truth  and  goodness  are  beyond  price.  How 
supremely  is  this  true  of  the  words  of  Christ  1  How  well  also  does  it  apply  to  the 
wise  proclamation  of  the  gospel! 

YerB.  21,  22.— "  Goals  of  fire."  I.  The  Chbist-like  Dnry.  1.  H  it  positive.  It 
is  more  than  turning  the  other  cheek  to  the  smiter,  or  letting  the  thief  of  the  cloak 
carry  off  the  coat  also.  Passive  non-resistance  is  to  be  surpassed  by  active  kindness. 
The  command  is  not  merely  to  refrain  from  acts  of  vengeance ;  it  is  to  bos'ir  one's  self 
in  acti\-e  benevolence  for  the  good  of  an  enemy — to  return  good  for  evil.  2.  It  is  diffi- 
cult. Perhaps  this  is  not  so  exceedingly  diflScult  as  silence  under  provocation ;  for 
nothing  seems  so  hard  as  to  he  still  when  one  is  wronged.  Now,  a  new  channel  for  the 
energy  of  vengeance  is  provided — to  do  good  to  the  offender.  Still  this  is  very  difficult;. 
3.  It  is  Ohrist-like.  We  have — what  Solomon  had  not — the  great  example  of  Chiist; 
not  merely  led  as  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter,  but  also  freely  giving  himself  in  suffering 
and  death  for  the  salvation  of  those  who  persecuted  him.  If  we  would  be  Christians, 
we  must  walk  in  the  footsteps  of  our  Master.  Here,  indeed,  is  a  case  in  which  the 
disciple  is  called  upon  to  deny  himself — to  deny  the  natural  impulse  of  revenge — and 
to  take  up  his  cross  and  follow  Christ.  4.  It  is  only  possible  with  Divive  grace.  We 
ask  for  grace  to  bear  our  troubles.  We  should  seek  further  grace  to  inspire  us  with 
more  than  a  forgiving  spirit — with  active  benevolence  towards  a  foe. 

II.  Its  MiiiAcuLtjus  consequences.  1.  Enmity  is  conquered.  This  is  the  last  result 
that  worldly  men  would  expect.  They  would  rather  suppose  that,  if  they  gave  their 
enemy  an  inch,  he  would  take  an  ell.  But  there  are  two  ways  of  conquering  a  foe — 
by  coercing  him  and  by  destroying  his  enmity.  When  one  makes  a  friend  out  of  an  old 
enemy  he  does  most  effectually  vanquish  and  utterly  destroy  his  enmi'y.  2.  This  results 
from  the  rousing  of  generous  sentiments^  It  goes  on  the  presumption  that  there  are 
noble  sentiments  present,  if  latent,  in  the  breast  of  an  antagonist.  The  tendency  of_ 
enmity  is  to  paint  our  foe  with  the  blackest  colours.  But  he  may  be  no  worse  than 
we  are.  Or,  if  he  bo  an  exceptionally  bad  man,  still  he  is  not  a  (lerfect  demon.  Though 
a  man  does  wrong,  we  dare  not  assume  that  there  is  no  capacity  for  better  things  in 
him.  Now,  the  heathen  method  is  to  address  him  only  on  his  evil  side;  but  the 
Christian  method — already  anticipated  in  the  Old  Testament — is  to  appeal  to  his 
hiijher  self  This  is  God's  way  in  saving  sinners.  We  deserve  wrath  and  vengeance. 
But  instead  of  our  deserts,  God  has  given  us  grace  and  a  gospel  of  salvation.  He  heaps 
coals  of  fire  on  our  heads,  and  conquers  enmity  with  love.  The  enemy  who  is  thus 
treated  loses  the  satisfaction  of  having  provoked  his  victim.  He  is  chagrined  at  dis- 
covering his  own  impotence.  It  is  useless  to  spit  malice  at  a  man  who  is  strung  and 
grand  enotigh  to  give  back  kindness.  Such  action  reflects  on  the  degradation  of  the 
conduct  C'f  the  enemy.  If  he  has  a  sense  of  self-respect,  it  comes  to  him  as  burning; 
coals  of  shame.  3.  This  method  may  be  successful  in  various  regions.  (1)  In  private 
quairels.  (2)  In  religious  differences.  If  the  sects  laboured  to  help  one  another,  instead 
of  biting  and  devouring  each  other,  sectarianism  would  be  consumed  in  the  burning 
coals  of  Chiistian  love.  (3)  In  national  quarrels.  We  have  tried  the  old  heathen 
method  of  war  long  enough,  and  with  no  good  results.  It  is  time  we  turned  to  the 
Christian  method  of  magnanimity,  4.  Tliis  method  receives  the  approval  of  Qod.  Besides 
conquering  the  foe,  it  secures  God's  favour,  which  the  method  of  revenge  loses. 

Ver.  25. — "  Oood  news  from  afar  country."  I.  The  literal  application  or  the 
PR0VI5KB.  1.  It  maybe  that  a  rumour  lias  come  that  a  distant  ally  is  marching  to 
succour  a  nation  in  its  distress,  when  it  had  thought  itself  forgotten,  isolated,  and  help- 
less. 2.  Or  perhaps,  when  there  is  famine  in  the  land,  the  newi  «rrivcs  that  "  there  ia 
corn  in  Egypt."  3.  Or,  again,  the  nation,  like  Tyre  in  antiquity,  like  Venice  and 
Holland  later,  like  England  in  the  presenf,  day,  may  do  business  on  the  great  waters. 
She  has  ]iosses8ions  m  distant  lands,  and  her  wealth  is  entrusted  to  the  sea.     As  sh* 


M.  XXV.  1— 9«.]  THBPEOTHRB*.  480 

learns  that  her  enterprises  are  prospering,  she  rejoices  at  the  good  news  from  a  far 
country.  4.  Another  way  of  applying  the  proverb  is  in  relation  to  our  kinsfolk  across 
the  sea.  It  would  be  well  if  England  took  more  interest  in  her  colonies.  Coldness, 
inoonsideratsness,  and  officialism  may  do  much  to  alienate  our  children  in  the  new 
worlds.  If  we  would  be  drawn  together  in  closer  ties  of  mutual  assistance,  we  must 
give  more  attention  to  colonial  aflfairs.  5.  Those  who  have  relations  in  distant  lands 
anxiously  watch  for  the  post.  How  refreshing  to  his  widowed  mother  is  the  soldier's 
cheering  letter  from  a  distant  land,  telling  of  his  safety  I  how  much  more  so  if  it  breathes 
words  of  love  and  gratitude,  and  reveals  a  heart  kept  true  among  sore  temptations  I 
6.  Lastly,  good  news  from  the  mission-field  is  most  refreshing  for  the  Churches  at 
home.  We  should  all  be  the  better  for  taking  a  wider  view  of  the  world,  and  rejoicing 
in  everything  good  and  hopeful  among  our  fellow-men. 

II.  The  symbolioal  suggestion  of  this  pkoteeb.  Such  a  proverb  as  that  before 
us  cannot  but  suggest  a  reference  to  the  good  news  of  which  the  angels  sang  at  the 
bii-th  of  Christ,  and,  although  we  cannot  assert  that  any  such  idea  was  in  the  mind  of 
Solomon,  the  principle  being  true  in  itself,  may  be  applied  by  us  to  the  Christian 
gospel.  1.  This  comes  from  a  far  country.  (1)  It  comes  from  heaven.  Christ  came 
down  from  heaven,  sent  to  us  by  his  Father.  The  highest  truth  is  a  revelation.  Chris- 
tianity is  a  God-given  religion.  If  we  had  to  deal  with  "cunningly  devised  fables,"  it 
would  not  be  worth  while  to  pay  much  attention  to  the  Christian  legend.  Its  great 
importance  rests  on  its  truth  as  a  message  from  God.  (2)  Heaven  is  a  far  country, 
while  we  are  in  our  sin.  Though  God  is  locally  near,  spiritually  he  is  far  away.  The 
prodigal  has  strayed  into  a  far  country.  Yet  even  there  he  is  not  forgotten.  God  has 
sent  from  his  distant  heavens  a  message  to  his  wandering  children.  3.  It  is  good  news. 
(1)  It  tells  of  God's  'love  and  mercy.  (3)  It  declares  Christ's  mission  to  save — his 
incarnation,  ministry,  death,  and  resurrection.  (3)  It  brings  to  us  the  offer  of  free 
deliverance  from  all  evil  and  of  a  heavenly  inheritance.  The  Siberian  exile  learns  from 
the  capital  that  he  is  pardoned.  The  pauper  is  told  that  he  is  heir  to  untold  wealth  in 
a  distant  land.  (4)  It  is  of  universal  application.  The  good  news  is  for  all.  3.  It  is 
most  refreshing.  It  is  " as  cold  waters  to  a  thirsty  soul."  (1)  It  is  much  needed.  The 
soul  of  man  naturally  thirsts  for  knowledge  of  the  unseen.  A  deeper  need  is  that  of 
blessedness  in  union  with  God.  (2)  It  refreshes.  We  have  not  enough  truth  to  clear 
up  all  mystei'ies,  but  we  have  enough  to  Invigorate  us  and  cheer  us  on  our  way 
yet  the  full  feast,  but  refreshing  waters  on  the  journey. 

Ver.  28. — "  A  city  that  is  irolcen  down."  Elsewhere  the  wise  man  has  told  us  that  it  is 
greater  for  a  man  to  get  the  victory  over  his  own  passions  than  to  take  a  city  (ch.  xvi.  32). 
Now  we  learn  the  reverse  truth — the  shame,  misery,  and  ruin  of  lack  of  self-control. 

I.  'Ihb  lack  of  self-control.    We  need  to  see  what  this  condition  really  is.    E-  ery 
man  is  permitted,  in  a  large  measure,  to  be  his  own  sovereign.     No  tyrant  can  invade 
the  secret  smciiiaiy  of  his  thoughts.    His  ideas,  passions,  and  will  are  his  own.    Mi>re- 
over,  God  fias  given  to  us  freedom  of  will,  so  that  we  can  give  the  rein  to  our  passions 
or  restrain  tl  em.    The  inner  man  is  like  a  city  full  of  life.    We  are  each  called  upon  to 
keep  or<!ci-  in  our  own  cities,  and,  if  we  do  not  respond  to  the  call,  the  result  will  b« 
liptous  confusion.     There  are  wild  beasts  within  that  must  be  chained  and  cagi  d,  or, 
they  will  break  loose  and  ravage  the  streets — murderous  propensities  that  must  be  shuiki 
in  a  di  ep  dungeon ;  ugly  and  vile  tendencies  to  sin  that  need  to  be  crushed  lest  thesft 
usurp  the  contiol  of  the  life.    When  the  will  is  not  fortified  and  exercised  against  thesa 
evil  things,  we  s:iffer  from  lack  of  self-control. 

II.  The  consequences  of  lack  of  self-contkol.  The  "  city  is  broken  down,  and 
without  walls."  1.  Dilapidation.  The  city  falls  into  ruins ;  its  palaces  and  temples 
are  wrecked ;  rain  penetrates  its  broken  roofs ;  thu  wind  blows  through  the  crevices 
of  its  ill-kent  tenements.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  a  dilapidatid  soul.  Bemains  of  its 
former  glory  may  yet  be  detected,  but  they  only  add  to  the  shame  of  its  p)esent  condi- 
tion. By  failing  to  control  himself,  the  foolish  man  haa  let  his  passions  tear  his  very 
soul  to  pieces.  His  character' is  a  wreck.  2.  An  unprotetied  condition.  The  walls 
have  vauisbed.  'i  he  city  lies  open  to  the  Invader.  Self-control  serves  as  a  wall  to  pro- 
tect the  soul  from  temptation ;  when  this  disappears,  tlie  soul's  shelter  is  lost.  Then 
worse  evils  follow.    Wolves  from  the  forest  join  with  the  unclean  creatures  of  the  city 


490  THE  PROVERBS.  [oh.  xxv.  1— 2a 


in  wasting  the  miserable  place.  It  is  given  over  to  the  enemy.  Such  is  the  final  con- 
dition of  one  without  self-control.  He  is  subject  to  all  sorts  of  bad  foreign  influences.  In 
the  end  he  becomes  like  a  city  sacked  by  devils. 

III.  The  cause  and  the  remedy  of  the  lack  of  self-control.  1..  ITie  cause — 
weak  self-indulgence.  At  first  the  man  might  have  held  himself  under;  but  he  com- 
menced to  indulge  his  passions,  and  now  they  have  the  mastery  over  him.  He  did  nut 
begin  by  choosing  evil ;  indeed,  he  has  never  decidedly  chosen  it.  All  he  has  done  has 
been  to  permit  "  sin  to  reign  "  in  his  "  mortal  body."  This  was  not  the  choice  of  sin, 
but  it  was  culpable  weakness.  2.  The  remedy — Divine  strength.  We  are  all  too  weak 
to  stand  alone ;  but  when  we  have  lost  control  over  ourselves,  there  is  no  remedy  but 
in  the  mighty  salvation  of  Christ.  This  gives  strength  for  the  future,  by  means  of 
which  we  may  crucify  the  3«sh.  If  we  cannot  rule  our  spirits,  we  may  seek  that 
Christ  shall  take  possession  ( f  them  and  reign  within.  He  will  build  up  the  broken 
walls  and  restore  the  ruined  dwellings. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  2 — 5. — Kings :  their  attributes  and  duties.  I.  Contrast  between  Divinb 
AND  human  government.  Divine  government  is  a  mystery  in  its  principles  and  its 
ends.  Partial  revelation  only  is  given  of  its  method  in  the  Scriptures  and  in  the 
actual  course  of  the  world.  Actual  relations  are  one  thing,  their  secret  spring  another. 
The  former  may  be  known,  the  latter  is  veiled  from  our  scrutiny.  On  the  contrary, 
human  government  should  be  founded  on  principles  intelligible  to  all  and  commend- 
able to  tne  conscience  and  reason  of  all.  In  the  kingdom  of  God,  says  Luther,  we 
must  not  seek  to  be  wise,  and  wish  to  know  the  why  and  wherefore,  but  have  faith  in 
everything.  In  the  kingdom  of  the  world  a  governor  should  know  and  ask  the  why  and 
wherefore,  and  trust  in  nothing. 

II.  'i'HB  RESERVE  OP  RULERS.  (Ver.  3.)  If  the  heart  in  general  is  unsearchable, 
much  more  must  theirs  be  who  have  not  their  own  merely,  but  the  secrets  of  nations 
in  their  keeping;.  The  lesson  is  taught  of  abstaining  from  hasty  censure  of  the  actions 
and  policy  of  those  in  power;  the  grounds  of  that  policy  may  be  far  deeper  than  any- 
thing that  meets  the  eye. 

III.  Thb  DUTY  OF  DISCERNMENT  IN  RULERS.  (Vers.  4,  5.)  As  the  refiner  separates 
the  dross  frum  the  silver,  which  mars  its  beauty  and  purity,  so  should  the  king  exclude 
from  his  presence  and  counsels  the  profligate  and  the  base.  A  pure  or  vicious  court 
has  immense  influence  on  the  manners  and  morals  of  the  community.  Christ  speaks 
in  like  manner  of  gathering  out  of  his  kingdom  at  the  day  of  judgment  all  offenders 
and  workers  of  iniquity. 

IV.  The  true  foundation  of  authority.  (Ver.  5.)  Not  force,  but  moral  power; 
not  might,  but  right.  How  often  in  our  time  have  thrones  tottered  or  the  occupant 
fallen  when  physical  force  alone  was  recognized  as  the  basis  of  security !  Justice  is 
imprinted  upon  the  nature  of  man.  And  let  rulers  who  would  maintain  their  power 
ever  appeal  to  reason  and  to  right.  He  who  takes  the  motto,  "  Be  just  and  fear  not," 
for  the  maxim  uf  his  policy  lays  the  only  stable  foundation  of  law  and  government. — J. 

Vers.  6,  7. — A  lesson  in  courtly  manners.  Nothing  in  conduct  is  unimportant. 
Fitting  and  graceful  manners  are  those  which  become  our  station  in  life.  Here  the 
relations  to  our  superiors  are  touched  upon. 

L  We  should  know  our  place,  and  not  step  out  of  it.  (Ver.  6.)  As  the  Arabic 
proverb  finely  says, "  Sit  in  thy  place,  and  no  man  can  make  thee  rise."  "  All  that  good 
manners  demand,"  says  a  great  writer, "  is  composure  and  self-content."  We  may  add  to 
this  "  an  equal  willingness  to  allow  the  social  claims  of  others  as  to  rely  upon  our  own." 
Self-respect  is  complemented  by  deference.  We  need  a  ready  perception  of  worth  and 
beauty  in  our  companions.  If  it  is  folly  to  refuse  respect  to  admitted  external  rank, 
much  more  to  the  native  rank  of  the  soul. 

_  II.  We  should  assume  the  lowest  rather  than  the  highest  place.  (Ver.  7.) 
The  lesson  rims  all  through  life,  from  the  outward  to  the  inward  and  the  spiritual  (see 
Luke  jdv.  8 — 11).     "  Comme  Ufaut — '  as  we  must  be' — is  the  Frenchman's  description 


OH.  XXY.  1— 28.]  THB  PROVERBS.  491 

•f  good  society ."  The  lesson  is  mainly  against  presumption  in  any  and  all  of  its  forms, 
ail  offence  hateful  to  man  and  God.  To  take  the  lowly  place  in  religion  here  becomes 
us,  and  it  leads  to  exaltation ;  to  grasp  at  more  than  our  due  is  to  lo^ie  all  and  earn  our 
condemnation.  Christianity  has  a  deep  relation  to  manners.  There  is  nothing  go 
beautiful  as  the  coda  of  manners  given  in  the  New  Testament. 

"  How  near  to  good  is  \rhat  is  fair  I 
Which  we  no  sooner  see, 
iSut  with  the  lines  and  outward  air, 

Our  senses  taken  be."  i    J. 

Vers.  8 — ^10. — Some  social  pests.  I.  The  contkntious  person.  (Ver.  8.)  He  i« 
irritable,  easily  takes  offence,  is  readily  piovoked,  barbs  even  the  playlul  darts  ot  jest 
with  poison.  When  the  consequences  of  this  ill  temper  have  broken  out  in  full  force, 
its  mischief  is  seen  and  exposed  too  late.  Beware,  then,  of  "  entrance  to  a  quarrel." 
The  contentious  man  may  make  real  in  the  end  the  enmity  of  which  he  only  dreams. 

II.  Manful  conduot  in  disputes.  (Ver.  9.)  If  an  unavoidable  dispute  has  begun, 
bear  thyself  in  it  with  energy,  but  with  honour.  It  is  unmanly  and  base  to  employ 
agfunst  one's  opponent  the  secrets  that  have  been  learned  from  him  in  some  earlier 
confidential  moment.  Go  first  to  your  adversary,  and  siek  a  cordial  explanation  of  the 
difference,  and  a  fair  and  honourable  settlement.  And  do  not  be  tempted  to  mix  up 
foreign  matters  with  it.    "Agree  with  thine  adversary  quickly." 

III.  Thb  bvil  of  KOUKisHma  quabbblb.  (Ver.  10.)  Lawsuits  consume  time, 
money,  rest,  and  friends.  Worst  of  all  consequences,  however,  is  that  in  the  man's  own 
mind.  He  lights  a  fire  in  his  own  bosom,  and  keeps  it  ever  supplied  with  the  fuel  of 
passion,  and  may  turn  his  heart,  and  perhaps  his  home,  into  a  hell. — J. 

Vers.  11 — 15. — Similitudes  of  moral  beauty  and  goodness.  I.  Thb  apt  word. 
Compared  to  "  golden  apples  in  silver  frames."  Carved  work  adorning  the  ceilings  of 
rooms  is  perhaps  alluded  to.  The  beauty  of  the  ground  sets  off  the  worth  of  the 
object.  Just  so  the  good  word  is  set  off  by  the  seasonableness  of  the  moment  of  its 
utterance  (1  Pet.  iv.  11).  The  apt  word  is  "a  word  upon  wheels,  not  forced  or 
dragged,  but  rolling  smoothly  along  like  chariot-wheels."  Our  Lord's  discourses  (e.g. 
on  the  bread  and  water  of  life)  sprang  naturally  out  of  the  course  of  passing  con- 
versation (John  iv.;  Luke  xiv.).  So  with  Paul's  famous  discourse  on  Mars'  Hill 
(Acts  xvii.). 

II.  Wise  censure  in  thb  willing  bar  is  compared  to  a  goldf.n  barring.  (Ver. 
12.)  For  if  all  wisdom  is  precious  as  pure  gold,  and  beautiful  as  ornaments  in  that  material, 
to  receive  and  wear  with  meekness  in  the  memory  and  heart  such  counsels  is  hotter 
than  any  other  decoration.  "The  wisest  princes  need  not  think  it  any  diminution  to 
their  greatness  or  derogation  to  their  sufBoienoy  to  rely  upon  counsel.  God  himself  is 
not  without,  but  hath  made  it  one  of  the  great  names  of  his  blessed  Son,  '  The  Coun- 
sellor"' (Hacon).  He  who  willingly  gives  heed  to  wise  chastisement  does  a  better 
service  to  his  ears  than  if  he  adorned  them  with  the  finest  gold  and  with  genuine 
pearls. 

III.  A  PAITHFtIL  MESSENGBB  IS.COMPAEBD  TO  COOLING  SNOW.     (Ver.  13.)     In  the  heat 

of  harvest-labour  a  draught  of  melted  snow  from  Lebanon  is  like  a  "  winter  in  summer  " 
(Xen., '  Mem.,'  ii.  1. 30).  A  traveller  says,  "  Snow  so  cold  is  brought  down  from  Mount 
Lebanon  that,  mixed  with  wine,  it  renders  ice  itself  cold."  So  refreshing  is  faithfulness 
in  service.    The  true  servant  is  not  to  be  paid  with  gold. 

IV.  Idle  pbetensions  compaeed  to  clouds  and  wind  without  rain.  (Ver.  14.) 
Promise  without  performance.  Let  men  be  what  they  would  seem  to  be.  "  What  Las 
he  done  ?  is  the  Divine  question  which  searches  men  and  transpierces  every  false  repu- 
tation. . . .  Pretension  may  sit  still,  but  cannot  act.  Pretension  never  ft-ijined  an  act  of 
real  greatness.  Pretension  never  wrote  an  '  Iliad,'  nor  drove  back  Xerxes,  nor  Chris- 
tianized the  world,  nor  abolished  slavery." 

V.  "J'he  poweb  op  patience.  (Ver.  15.)  Time  and  patience  are  persuasive ;  a  proverb 
compares  them  to  an  inaudible  file.  Here  patience  is  viewed  as  a  noiseless  hammer, 
silently  crushiDg  resistance.    «  He  who  would  break  through  a  wall  with  his  hand, 


499  THE  PE0VEBB9.  [oh.  xxy.  1— 2fc 

days  an  oU  commentator,  "  will  hardly  succeed  1 "  But  how  do  gentleness  and  mild 
DISS  win  their  wayl  "I  Paul  beseech  you  by  the  meekness  and  gentlunesa  ol 
Christ "  (2  Cor.  x.  1).— J. 

Vers.  16— 20. — Excesses  and  errort.  I.  Warnino  AftAiNST  satiett.  (Vers.  16, 17.) 
The  stories  of  Samson  and  of  Jonathan  may  be  read  in  illustration  of  the  saying  (Judg. 
xiv.  8,  9;  1  Sam.  xiv.  26).  Ver.  27  points  the  warning  against  incurring  the  pain  of 
satiety.    "  Honey,  too,  hath  satiety,"  says  Pindar— 

"A  inrfeit  of  the  sweetest  things, 
The  deepest  loathing  to  the  stomach  brings." 

1.  We  should  beware  of  a  too  frequent  repetition  of  even  innocent  iileasnres.  "  If  a 
man  will  not  allow  himself  leisure  to  be  (Siirsty,  he  can  never  know  the  true  pleasure  of 
drinking."  Self-indulgence  far  more  than  suffering  unnerves  the  soul.  It  may  well  be 
asked — How  can  men  bear  the  ills  of  life,  if  its  very  pleasures  fatigue  them?  2.  A 
special  application  of  the  warning.  Do  not  weary  your  friends.  There  should  be  a 
sacred  reserve  of  a  delicate  mutual  respect  even  in  the  most  intimate  relations  of 
fi  iendship.  To  invade  a  busy  privacy,  with  a  view  to  enjoy  a  snatch  of  gossip  or 
secure  some  paltry  convenience,  is  an  offence  against  the  minor  morals.  Defect  in 
manners  is  usually  owing  to  want  of  delicacy  of  perception.  Kindly  utterance  must 
rest  on  the  conscientious  observance  of  great  Christian  principles ;  let  daily  life  be  evan- 
gelized by  their  all-pervading  power.  Let  tis  make  our  "foot  precious"  to  our  neigh- 
bour by  not  intruding  it  too  often  in  his  home.  Better  that  our  visits  should  be  like 
aijgels',  few  and  iax  between,  than  fi'equent  and  wearisome  as  those  of  a  beggar  or 
a  dim. 

II.  The  tonqub  of  the  talsb  witwess.  (Ver.  18.)  Compared  to  destructive 
weapons  (comp.  Ps.  lii. 4 ;  Ivii.  4;  liiv. 4;  cxx.  4).  "The  slanderer  wounds  three  at 
once — himself,  him  he  speaks  of,  and  him  that  hears"  (Leigbton).  Not  only  falsehood, 
but  the  perverse  and  distorted  way  of  telling  the  truth,  comes  under  this  ban.  "In 
the  case  of  the  witness  against  our  Lord,  the  words  were  true,  the  evidence  false ;  while 
they  reported  the  words,  they  misrepresented  the  sense ;  and  thus  swore  a  true  false- 
hood, and  were  truly  foresworn  (Matt.  xxvi.  60)  "  (Bishop  Hall). 

III.  Misplaced  confidenob.  (Ver.  19.)  Compared  to  a  broken  tooth  and  a 
disjointed  foot.  It  is  a  too  common  experience,  and  suggests  the  counsel  to  select  as 
confi.lants  only  good  men.  ".Be  continually  with  a  godly  man,  whom  thou  knowest  to 
keep  the  commandments  of  the  Lord,  whose  mind  is  according  to  thy  mind,  and  will 
sorrow  with  thee,  if  thou  shalt  miscarry;  . , .  and  above  all,  pray  to  the  Most  High, 
that  he  will  direct  thy  way  in  truth  "  (Ecclus.  xxxviL  12 — 15>  Above  all,  "  let  God 
be  true,  and  every  man  a  liar." 

IV.  Inapt  and  unreasonable  mieth.  (Ver.  20.)  It  is  like  the  mixture  of  acid 
with  soda,  by  which  the  latter  is  destroyed ;  while  the  combination  with  oil,  etc.,  pro- 
duces a  useful  compound.  It  is  like  laying  aside  a  garment  in  cold  weather.  Dis- 
cordant behaviour,  the  words  or  the  manner  out  of  tune  with  the  occasion,  is  the  fault 
pointed  at.  It  springs  from  thoughtlessness  and  want  of  sympathy.  The  Spirit  of 
Christ  teaches  us  to  cultivate  imagination  and  sympathy  with  others.  "Rejoice  with 
them  that  do  rejoice,  and  weep  with  them  that  weep." — J. 

Vers.  21,  22. — Love  to  our  enemy.  I.  Lotb  dbliohts  in  its  oppobtunitt.  (Ver. 
21.)  And  to  true  Christian  love  there  is  no  opportunity  sweeter  than  the  distress  of 
a  foe. 

II.  Love  delights  in  suppLTiNa  need.  It  is  the  epposite  of  egotism,  which 
clamours  for  personal  satisfaction,  and  closes  the  avenues  of  pity  to  the  distressed. 

III.  Love  is  victorious  over  evil.  (Ver.  22.)  A  wholesome  pain  is  excited  ia 
the  mind  of  the  enemy.  He  begins  to  feel  regret  and  remorse.  The  torch  of  a  love 
divinely  kindled  dissolves  the  barrier  of  ice  between  soul  and  soul.  Evil  is  overcome 
by  good. 

I V.  Love  is  sure  of  its  reward.  Both  present,  in  conscience ;  and  eternal  iu  tL« 
fruits  and  in  the  award  of  God.   Not  a  cup  of  cold  water  shall  be  forgotten.— J. 


OH.  KY.  1—28.]  THE   PROVERBS.  498 

Vers.  23 — 28. — Moral  invectives.  I.  Aoatost  slander.  (Ver.  23.)  Here  is  a 
Btriking  picture.  Cunning  and  slanderous  habits  beget  a  dark  and  gloomy  expression 
on  the  brow ;  as  a  homely  German  proverb  says,  "  He  makes  a  face  like  three  days' 
rainy  weather."  The  countenance,  rightly  read,  is  the  mirror  of  the  soul.  Without 
the  candid  soul  the  brow  cannot  be  clear  and  open.  If  we  look  into  the  m' nor,  we  may 
see  the  condemnation  which  nature  (that  is,  God)  statnps  upon  our  evil  and  unholy 
moods. 

II.  AOAINST  CONTENTIOUSNESS.  (Ver.  24.)  Better  solitude  than  the  presence  of  the 
quarrelsome  in  the  home.  A  wife  is  either  the  husliand's  most  satisfying  delight  or 
the  cruellest  thorn  in  his  side. 

III.  Unholy  cowardice.  (Ver.  26.)  Paint-heartedness  springs  from  need  ol 
genuine  faith.    To  see  the  chief  struck  down  in  battle  dismays  the  band. 

"  He  ii  gone  from  the  mountain,  he  is  lost  to  the  fnrest, 
Like  a  summer-dried  fountain,  when  our  need  was  the  sorest  I " 

And  if  the  good  man  is  a  fountain  of  help  and  encouragement  by  his  example,  how 
does  the  drying  up  of  such  a  spring — the  failure  to  assert  the  truth  and  confront  the 
gainsayer — dismay  and  paralyze  those  who  look  on  1 

IV.  Excess  in  speculative  thought.  (Ver.  27.)  There  may  be  too  much  of  any 
good  tiling,  even  of  the  pursuit  of  knowledge.  It  is  too  much  when  it  distnrbs  the 
health;  as  a  common  proverb  of  the  Germans  says,  "To  know  everything  gives  ihe 
headache."  It  is  too  much  when  it  disturbs  the  moral  balance  and  unfits  for  society. 
We  must  know  when  to  leave  the  heights  of  speculation  and  nestle  in  the  lowly  vale  of 
faith. 

V.  Want  of  SELr-coNTROL.  (Ver.  28.)  It  is  like  an  undefended  city  or  one  in  ruins. 
How  weak  is  it  to  be  able  to  endure  nothing,  to  deem  it  a  mark  of  strength  to  resist 
every  |irovocation  and  injury  I  Let  us  learn,  after  Christ's  example,  to  be  abused  with- 
out being  angry;  to  give  soft  words  and  hard  arguments;  and  to  cultivate  self-control 
in  matters  of  small  moment,  in  preparation  for  those  of  greater.  For  "  if  we  have  rim 
with  the  footmen,  and  they  have  wearied  us,  how  shall  we  contend  with  horses  ?  " — J. 

Ver.  25. — Good  news  from,  abroad.  I.  It  is  refreshing  and  ever  welcome.  This 
ne(ds  no  illustration.  Absence  and  distance  raise  a  thousand  fears  in  the  fancy. 
Division  and  space  from  loved  ones  chill  the  heart.  The  arrival  of  good  tidings  bridges 
over  great  gulfs  in  thought. 

II.  It  18  A  parable  of  the  spiritual  sphere.  God  has  sent  us  good  news  from 
what,  in  our  sins  and  ignorance,  seems  a  far  country.  We  have  friends  there.  There 
is  a  real  link  between  ub.  We  are  really  near.  There  is  the  prospect  of  a  final 
reunion. — J. 

Ver.  2. — God's  glory  in  concealing.  A  contrast  is  here  drawn  betweenthe  glory  of 
God  and  the  honour  of  man,  especially  of  one  class  of  men — the  order  of  kings. 

I.  The  honour  of  man  in  investigatinq.  1.  The  honour  of  royalty.  This  ii 
"  to  search  out  a  matter."  The  king  is  acting  in  a  way  that  honours  Uim  when  (1)  he 
searches  human  nature  and  knows  all  that  he  can  learn  about  mankind,  all,  thereore, 
that  he  can  know  about  his  subjects ;  (2)  he  acquaints  himself  with  the  character,  the 
disposition,  the  career,  of  those  immediately  about  him,  in  whom  he  trusts,  on  whom 
he  leans ;  (3)  he  investigates  different  afi'airs  as  they  arise,  probing  and  sifting  most 
carefully,  not  satisfied  until  he  has  searched  the  whole  thing  through.  It  becomes  a 
king  to' make  the  most  complete  and  patient  investigation  into  all  national  affairs. 
2.  The  honour  of  mankind  generally.  This  is  to  "  search  out "  and  become  practically 
familiar  with  (1)  all  the  resources  this  earth  will  yield  us  for  our  use  and  our  enlarge- 
ment; (2)  the  physical,  mental,  moral,  and  spiritual  necessities  of  those  around  us; 
(3)  what  is  the  true  way  to  supply  their  need.  This  is  that  which  most  honours  the 
disciples  of  that  Son  of  man  who  came  to  minister  and  to  redeem. 

II.  The  glory  of  God  in  concealing.  The  thought  of  the  writer  is  obscure. 
We  shall  certainly  get  into  the  track  of  it  if  we  consider  the  three  truths :  1.  Thai 
Ood  has  no  need  to  investigate.  "  All  things  aie  naked  and  open  to  the  eyes  of  him 
with  whom  we  l»»ve  to  dej "  all  th«  dark  places  of  the  earth,  the  hearts  of  men,  the 


494  THE  PBOVEBBS.  [oh.  xxr.  1— 28. 


most  sbstniM  problems  which  are  so  perplexing  in  our  light.  2.  That  he  Mmulf  t'l 
the  Inscrutable  One.  "  Hia  thoushts  are  very  deep,"  his  "  ways  past  finding  out."  3. 
That  it  is  necessary  for  him  to  conceal  in  order  that  he  may  truly  hless ;  that  he  knows 
more  than  he  can  wisely  reveal  at  once.  Parents  readily  understand  this,  for  they 
have  frequently,  constantly,  to  keep  some  truths  out  of  sight,  ready  for  a  later  day  and 
fuller  powers ;  also  to  decline  to  reveal,  and  to  leave  their  children  to  find  out  by  their 
own  patience  and  ingenuity.  This  is  very  frequently  the  case  with  our  heavenly 
Father.  For  our  own  sake  he  half  reveals  to  us  and  half  conceals  from  us  (1)  the  way 
to  become  materially  enriched,  leaving  us  to  find  out  what  we  need  to  know  about  agri- 
culture and  the  stores  of  wealth  that  are  far  beluw  the  surface ;  (2)  the  way  to  be 
mentally  enlarged  and  established;  (3)  the  way  to  moral  and  spiritual  good.  God 
Las  designedly  and  for  our  ultimate  benefit  and  blessing  left  much  to  be  searched  for 
and  brought  out  of  the  Bihle — his  providential  dealings  with  us,  our  future,  both  here 
and  hereafter.  It  is  the  glory  of  man  that  he  can  discover  and  reveal  what  his  fellow- 
men  are  unable  to  make  out.  It  is  the  glory  of  God  that  he  cannot  make  known  to 
us  all  that  is  present  to  his  eye,  or  such  revelation  of  present  good  and  future  blessed- 
ness would  injure  us ;  that  he  must  hide  from  us  a  part  of  his  infinite  wisdom,  some 
of  his  inexhaustible  stores,  and  leave  us  to  search  and  ascertain,  that  by  our  searching 
we  may  be  "  lifted  up  and  strengthened." — 0. 

Vers.  6,  7. — Modesty  and  self-assertion.  Some  amount  of  self-assertion  is  no  doubt 
necessary  for  honourable  success  and  fruitful  achievement.  But  nothing  is  more 
common  than  for  this  quality  to  go  beyond  its  true  limit  and  become  distasteful  and 
even  offensive  both  to  God  and  man.  What  Solomon  here  deprecates,  our  Lord  also 
condemns ;  what  he  honours,  the  Divine  Teacher  also  prefers  (see  Luke  xiv.  9). 

I.  The  BAuaBB  of  belf-assbbtion.  Its  temptation  is  to  assume  such  proportions 
that  (1)  it  becomes  immodesty,  and  this  is  a  positive  evil,  a  blemish  in  character,  anci 
a  blot  upon  the  life;  and  (2)  it  defeats  its  own  ends,  for  it  provokes  antagonism  and  is 
discomfited  and  dishonoured.  Every  one  is  pleased  when  the  presumptuous  man  is 
humiliated. 

II.  The  peefebenoe  of  modebtt.  1.  It  is  frequently  sucressful.  Modesty  com- 
mends us  to  the  good;  we  secure  their  good  will;  tliey  are  inclined  to  help  us  and  to 

, further  our  desires;  they  promote  our  prosperity.  Every  one  is  gratified  when  the  maji 
who  "  does  not  think  more  highly  of  himself  than  he  ought  to  think  "  is  the  object  of 
esteem,  and  takes  the  place  of  honour.  2.  It  is  always  beautiful.  It  is  quite  possible 
that,  as  a  matter  of  worldly  policy,  modesty  may  not  "answer."  It  may  be,  it  will 
often  happen,  that  a  strong  complacency  and  vigorous  self-assertion  will  pass  it  in  the 
race  of  life.  Yet  is  it  the  fitting,  the  becoming,  the  beautiful  thing.  It  is  an  adorn- 
ment of  the  soul  (see  1  Pet.  iii.  3).  It  makes  the  other  virtues  and  graces  which  are 
possessed  to  shine  with  peculiar  lustre.  It  gives  attractiveness  to  Christian  character 
and  lends  •  sweetness  and  influence  which  nothing  else  could  confer.  To  be  lowly 
minded  is  a  far  better  portion  than  to  have  the  gains  and  honours  which  an  ugly 
assertiveness  may  command  (see  homily  on  Luke  xiv.  7 — 11). — C. 

Vers.  8,  9. — The  wise  way  of  settlement.    We  look  at — 

I.  The  inevitableness  of  disputes.  It  is  quite  impossible  that,  with  our  present 
complication  of  interests — individual,  domestic,  social,  civic,  national— differences  and 
difficulties  should  not  arise  amongst  us.  There  must  be  a  conflict  of  opinion,  a  clash  of 
wishes  and  purposes,  the  divergence  which  may  issue  in  dissension.  What  reason 
would  teach  us  to  anticipate  experience  shows  us  to  exist.  , 

II.  The  temptation  of  the  hastt.  This  is  to  enter  at  once  upon  strife;  to 
"carry  it  to  the  court,"  to  "enter  an  action,"  to  make  a  serious  charge ;  or  (in  the  case 
of  a  community)  to  take  such  hostile  action  as  threatens,  if  it  does  not  end  in,  war. 
The  folly  of  this  procedure  is  seen  in  the  considerations:  1.  That  it  interposes  an 
inaurraountal lo  barrier  between  ourselves  and  our  neighbours;  we  shall  never  again 
live,  in  perfect  amity  with  the  man  with  whom  we  have  thus  striven ;  we  are  sowing 
seeds  ot  bitterness  and  discord  which  will  bear  fruit  all  our  days.  2.  That  we  are 
likely  enough  to  be  discomfited  and  ashamed.  (1)  Those  who  judge  "  hastily  "  are 
usuilly  in  the  wrong.    (2)  No  man  is  »  wis*  and  good  judge  in  his  own  cause;  to 


OH.  rsv  1—28.]  THE   PROVERBS.  496 

every  man  that  which  makes  for  himself  seems  stronger,  and  that  which  makes  for  his 
opponent  seems  weaker,  than  it  appears  to  a  disinterested  observer.  (3)  Whether  a 
case  will  prosper  or  not  at  law  depends  on  several  uncertainties  ;  and  even  if  we  have 
•  righteous  cause  we  may  be  entirely  defeated — ^a  brilliant  advocate  against  us  will 
easily  "  make  the  worse  appear  the  better  cause."  (4)  The  issue  may  be  such  that  we 
shall  be  impoverished  and  ashamed.  And  that  which  will  aggravate  our  misery  will 
be  that  we  have  so  foolishly  neglected — 

III.  The  WAT  OF  THE  WISE.  To  go  at  once  to  the  offender  and  to  state  our  com- 
plaint to  him.  This  is  in  every  way  right  and  wise.  1.  It  is  the  way  of  manliness 
and  honour.  To  talk  to  a  third  person  about  it  is  more  easy  and  pleasint  "  to  the  flesh," 
but  it  is  not  the  straightforward  and  manly  course.  2.  It  is  the  way  that  is  becoming. 
It  is  not  the  fitting  thing  to  disclose  our  secrets  to  another;  personal  and  domestic 
and  ecclesiastical  contentions  are  hidden  by  the  wise  and  the  worthy  rather  than  made 
known  to  the  world.  3.  It  is  the  way  of  peace ;  for,  in  the  majority  of  cases,  a  very 
little  explanation  or  a  very  simple  apology  at  the  beginning  will  set  everything  right. 
4,  It  is  the  distinctly  Christian  way  (Matt.  v.  25,  26 ;  xviii.  15). — C. 

Ver.  11. —  Welcome  words.     But  what  are— 

I.  The  woeds  that  abb  welcome.  They  are:  1.  Words  that  travel;  "words 
upon  wheels  "  (literally).  They  are  words  that  do  not  "  fall  to  the  ground  like  water 
which  cannot  be  gathered  up  again ; "  but  words  which  are  not  allowed  "  to  fall  to  the 
ground,"  which  pass  from  lip  to  lip,  from  soul  to  soul,  from  land  to  land,  from  age  to 
age.  2.  Words  that  are  level  with  our  human  understanding ;  which  do  not  require 
special  learning,  or  profundity,  or  experience  to  be  appreciated,  but  which  make  tlieir 
appeal  to  the  common  intelligence  of  mankind.  3.  Words  that  nieet  our  spiritual 
necessities ;  that  direct  us  in  doubt,  that  comfort  us  in  sorrow,  that  strengthen  us  in 
weakness,  that  nerve  us  in  duty,  that  calm  us  in  excitement,  that  sustain  us  in  disap- 
pointment, that  give  us  hope  in  death. 

II.  Thbih  commendation.  They  are  like  golden  apples  in  silver  caskets ;  i.e.  they 
are  things  that  excite  our  admiration  and  bring  us  refreshment.  We  do  well  to  admire 
the  true  and  wise  word ;  the  saying  or  the  proverb,  the  terse,  sagacious  utterance  which 
holds  a  little  world  of  wisdom  in  its  sentences,  is  a  thing  to  be  admired  by  us  all.  The 
man  who  first  launches  it  is  a  benefactor  of  his  people.  And  we  do  still  better  to 
appropriate  and  employ  it;  to  find  refreshment  and  even  nourishment  in  it.  Many  a 
wise  word  has  given  needed  strength  to  a  human  soul  in  the  very  crisis  of  its  destiny. 

III.  Theib  otTLTTVATioN.  How  shall  we  learn  to  speak  these  "  words  upon  wheels  " 
— ^these  fitting,  wholesome,  strengthening  words?  They  come :  1.  From  a  true  heart; 
a  heart  that  is  true  and  loyal  to  its  God  and  Saviour.  First  of  all  we  must  be  right  with 
him;  only  from  a  pure  fountain  will  come  the  healing  stream.  2.  Prom  a  kind  heart. 
It  is  love,  pity,  sympathy,  that  will  prompt  the  right  utterance.  Where  the  learned 
deliverance  or  the  brilliant  bon-mot  would  entirely  fail,  the  simple  utterance  of  affection 
will  do  the  truest  work,  will  hit  the  mark  in  the  very  centre.  Love  is  the  beat  inter- 
preter and  the  ablest  spokesman  as  we  make  the  pilgrimage  and  bear  the  burdens  of 
our  life.  3.  From  a  thoughtftd  spirit.  It  is  not  the  superficial  talker,  that  discourses 
upon  every  possible  topic,  but  rather  the  man  who  thinks,  who  ponders  and  weighs 
what  he  knows  and  sees,  who  tries  to  look  into  things,  and  who  takes  the  trouble  to 
look  back  and  to  look  onward, — it  is  he  who  has  something  to  say  which  it  will  be 
worth  our  while  to  listen  to.  4.  From  practised  lips.  We  do  not  acquire  this  sacred 
art  of  wise  and  helpful  speech  in  a  day  or  in  a  year ;  it  is  the  happy  and  exquisite 
product  of  patient  effort,  it  is  a  growth,  it  is  a  holy  and  beneficent  habit,  it  is  a  thing 
to  be  cultivated;  we  may  begin  poorly  enough,  but  by  earnest  endeavour  we  shall 
succeed  if  we  will  only  "  continue  in  well-doing." — C. 

Vers.  16,  27. — The  wisdom  of  moderation.  We  can  only  eat  a  small  quantity  of 
honey ;  if  we  go  beyond  the  limit  we  find  out  our  mistake.  Of  this,  as  of  all  very 
sweet  things,  the  words  of  the  great  dramatist  are  true,  that  "a  little  more  than 
enough  is  by  much  too  much."  This  is  particularly  applicable  to  that  to  which  it  is 
here  referred.  . 

I.  Self-pbaibb,    We  may  go  a  little  way  in  that  direction,  but  not  t»r.     It  w« 


496  THE  PROYERBS.  [CH.  XXT.  1—28, 

transgress  the  narrow  bounds  allowed,  we  shall  soon  find  that  we  have  done  ourselves 
harm  in  the  estimation  of  our  neighbour.  And  even  to  talk,  without  praise,  of 
ourselves  is  a  habit  to  be  held  well  in  cheek,  or  it  will  run  into  an  offensive  and 
injurious  egotism  (see  homily  on  ch.  xvii.  2). 

II.  Self-examination.  To  "search  out  our  own  glory"  is  not  glorious,  but  rather 
inglorious.  It  is  allowable  enough  for  a  man  sometimes  to  recall  what  he  has  been  to 
others,  and  what  he  has  done  for  others  ;  but  he  may  not  practise  this  beyond  a  very 
circumscribed  limit.  To  hold  up  his  own  achievements  before  his  own  eyes  is  to  beget 
a  very  perilous  complacency  ;  to  find  them  out  for  other  people's  ediScation  is  quite  as 
dangerous.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  for  men  to  be  searching  their  hearts  or  their  lives 
to  discover  what  is  evil  in  them,  to  be  instituting  a  constant  examination  of  their  souls 
to  ascertain  whereabouts  they  stand, — this  is  open  to  grave  mistake,  and  may  soon 
become  unwise-  and  hurtful.  Self-examination  is  very  good  up  to  a  certain  point ; 
beyond  that  point  it  becomes  morbid  and  is  a  serious  mistake. 

III.  Bodily  exercise  and  indulgence.  This  is  very  pleasant  and  (the  latter)  very 
"  sweet,"  like  the  eating  of  honey.  And  to  go  some  way  in  both  of  these  is  good  and 
wise.  But  let  the  athlete  beware  lest  his  very  love  of  bodily  exerciso  betrays  him  into 
excesses  which  undermine  his  strength  and  bring  on  premature  decline  and  death. 
And  as  to  bodily  indulgence,  let  us  be  often  reminding  our-elves  that  only  in  the  cup 
of  strict  modertition— whatever  that  cup  may  be — is  real  pleasure  or  lasting  health  to 
be  found.     All  excess  here  is  as  foolish  as  it  is  sinful. 

IV.  Spiritual  koumshmbnt.  Can  we  have  too  much  of  this  ?  Undoubtedly  wo 
can.  Those  who  are  perpetually  pa' taking  of  one  particular  kind  of  religions  nourish- 
ment, however  good  that  may  be  in  its  way  and  iueasure,  are  over-eiiting  of  one  kind 
of  food,  and  they  will  suffer  for  so  doiriL'.  They  will  not  grow  as  God  meant  them  to 
grow,  proportionately  and  symmetrically;  there  will  be  a  lopsidedness  about  their 
mind  or  character  which  is  very  noticeable  and  very  ugly.  Whether  it  be  the  con- 
templative, or  the  poelical,  or  the  speculative,  or  the  evangelistic,  or  the  didactic,  or 
any  other  side  of  truth  in  which  men  surfeit  their  souls,  they  make  a  mistake  in  so 
doing.  They  should  understand  that  Divine  truth  has  many  sides  and  aspects,  that, 
there  is  not  any  one  of  them  that  constitutes  wisdom  or  is  sufficient  to  fill  the  mind 
and  build  up  the  character  of  a  man.  Our  wisdom  is  to  partake  of  the  various  dishes 
which  are  on  the  table  our  bountiful  Host  has  provided  for  us;  for  as  the  body  is  the 
better  for  eating  of  many  "  meats,"  so  is  the  soul  all  the  stronger  ami  all  the  fairer  for 
partaking  in  moderation  of  all  the  various  sources  of  spiritual  nutrition  that  are  within 
its  reach. — C. 

Vers.  20,  25.—  The  inopportune  and  the  acceptable.  "  A  man  that  hath  friends  must 
show  himself  frieudly  "  (ch.  xviii.  24).  And  il  we  would  do  this  we  must  be  careful  to 
choose  our  time  for  speaking  the  truth  to  our  friends,  and  must  study  to  do  not  only 
the  right  but  the  appropriate  thing.     We  must — 

I.  Abstain  from  the  inopportune.  (Ver.  20.)  It  should  require  but  a  very 
humble  share  of  delicacy  to  understand  that  what  is  very  vaUiable  at  one  time  is 
altogether  misplaced  and  unpalatable  at  another.  We  should  carefully  abstain  from  : 
1.  All  merriment  in  the  presence  of  great  sorrow.  By  indulgence  in  it  then  we  only 
add  fuel  to  the  fire  of  grief.  2.  ITie  discussion  of  business  or  the  proposals  of  pleasure 
in  the  presence  of  earnest  spiritual  solicitude.  When  men  are  profoundly  anxious  about 
their  relations  with  God,  they  do  not  want  us  to  harass  and  burden  them  with  talk 
about  terapojal  affairs  or  about  social  entertainments;  these  are  good  in  their  time,  but 
not  at  such  a  time  as  that.  3.  Entering  into  the  affairs  of  life  in  the  presence  of  the 
dymg.  Tliose  who  stand  very  near  indeed  to  the  future  world  do  not  want  to  be  vexed 
with  matters  which  they  are  leaving  behind  for  ever.  Similarly,  it  is  a  mistake  to  be 
always  or  even  often  discnssing  death  and  the  future  with  those  who,  while  not 
unready  for  either,  are  charged  with  the  duties  and  responsibilities  of  active  life.  ■4. 
An  urgent  insistance  upon  spiritual  obligations  in  presence  of  acute  bodily  suffering  or 
severe  destitution.  The  Chrii-tian  course,  in  such  a  case,  is  to  call  in  the  doctor  or  the 
baker. 

II.  CuLTiVATB  THB  AccEPTABLK.  (Ver.  25.)  How  acceptable  to  the  human  heart 
18 :  1.  Good  news  froir  our  friends  and  kindred  when  afar  off  from  us.    It  is  worth  whilt 


«SB.  XXV.  1—28.]  THE  PROVERBS.  497 

to  take  much  trouble,  to  «pnt  ourselves  quite  out  of  our  way,"  in  order  to  convey  this! 
It  w  one  of  the  friendliest  of  friendly  acU.  2.  Society  in  loneliness;  the  kindly  visit 
paid  to  the  solitary,  a  conversation  (however  brief  and  simple)  with  those  whose  hearth 
M  uncheered  by  companionship,  3.  Encouragement  in  depression.  The  heart  often 
aches  and  hungers  for  a  word  of  cheer,  and  one  very  short  sentence  may  lift  it  up  from 
depths  of  disappointment  and  depression  into  the  bracing  air  of  hopefulness  and 
determination.  4.  Sympathy  in  sorrow.  Grief  does  not  crave  many  or  tine  words;  it 
asks  for  genuine  sympathy— the  "  feeling  with  "  it ;  if  it  has  this,  it  will  gratefully 
accept  any  simplest  utterance  in  word  or  deed,  and  will  be  comforted  and  stren-ithened 
by  it.  Real  sympathy  is  always  the  acceptable  thing,  5.  Guidance  in  perplexity. 
When  we  do  not  know  which  way  to  turn,  then  the  brief  word  of  direction  from  one 
who  has  "  gone  that  way  before  us "  is  valuable  indeed.  There  is  no  kinder  friend 
than  the  true  and  faithful  guide.  If  we  would  take  our  part  well  and  be  to  our 
brethren  all  that  it  is  in  our  power  to  become,  we  must  study  to  do  the  congenial  and 
acceptable  thing.  The  man  who  has  acquired  this  art  is  worthy  of  our  admiration  and 
our  love;  we  are  sure  that  he  will  not  go  without  our  Mastei's  commendation; 
for  is  it  not  he  who  is  feeding  the  hungry,  and  giving  the  thirsty  to  drink?  is  it  not 
he  who  is  clothing  the  naked  and  healing  the  sick  ?  While  we  do  these  two  things, 
should  we  not  also — 

III.  Be  prepared  for  evert  possible  condition?  We  may  bo  sure  that  uncon- 
genial and  congenial  things  will  be  said  to  us,  timely  and  untimely  attitudes  will  be 
taken  toward  us;  some  men  will  aggravate  and  others  will  heal  our  spirits.  The  wiss 
man  will  see  to  it  that  he  is  (1)  rooted  in  those  principles  which  never  change  bur 
always  su-itain ;  (2)  has  his  strength  in  the  One  "  with  whom  is  no  variableness  nor 
shadow  of  turning." — 0. 

Ver.  21. —  Tilt  true  tritimph.  (See  homily  on  ch.  xxiv.  17, 18,  29.)  To  the  truth 
on  this  subject  there  affirmed,  may  be  added  the  consideration  that  to  return  good  for 
evil  is  the  true  triumph ;  for — 

I,  To  BE  AVENGED  IS  REALLY  0NSATI8FACTOET.  It  is,  indeed,  to  have  a  momentary 
gratifiaition.  But  of  what  character  is  this  satisfaction?  Is  it  not  one  tba'  we  share 
with  the  wild  beast,  with  the  savage,  nay,  even  with  the  fiend  ?  Is  it  onu  t)ial  we  can 
approve  in  our  calmer  hour,  that  we  can  look  back  upon  with  any  thankl'ulness  or  pure 
delight  ?  In  fact,  it  is  to  be  really  and  inwardly  defeated ;  for  we  then  give  way  to  a 
malevolent  passion — we  are  "  overcome  of  evil "  instead  of  overcoming  it.  We  allow 
thoughts  to  enter  our  mind  and  feelings  to  harbour  in  our  heart  of  which,  in  woithier 
moments,  we  are  utterly  ashamed. 

II.  To  ACT  MAONANiMousLY  18  THE  VICTORIOUS  THING.  1.  It  18  to  gain  a  Very 
real  victory  over  our  self,  over  our  lower  passions.  2.  It  is  to  win  our  enemy.  To 
make  him  suffer,  to  wounii  him,  to  damage  his  reputation,  to  cause  him  serious  loss 
and  injury, — that  is  a  very  poor  thing  indeed  to  do.  Any  one  is,  in  a  moral  sense, 
equal  to  that ;  mere  malevolence  can  do  that  and  can  be  at  home  in  the  act  of  doing  it. 
But  to  win  an  enemy,  to  turn  his  hatred  into  love,  his  contempt  into  esteem,  hii 
cruelty  into  kindness,  his  hostility  into  friendship, — that  is  to  triumph  over  him  indeed, 
it  is  to  "  heap  coals  of  fire  upon  his  head," 

UI.  To  ACT  MAGNANIMOUSLY  IS  TO  ACT  DIVINELY,  For  it  is :  1.  To  Carry  out  a 
Divine  comniaudment  (text;  Matt,  v,  43 — 48;  Rom,  xii.  14,  19,  21),  2.  To  act  as 
the  Divine  Father  does,  and  as  Jesus  Christ  did  when  he  was  with  us  (Matt.  v.  45 ; 
Luke  xxiii.  24).  3.  To  receive  a  Divine  reward  (text).  God  will  bestow  a  bnuntilul, 
spiritual  blessing  on  those  who  thus  resolutely  keep  his  word,  gain  dominion  uvei 
themselves,  bless  their  neighbour,  and  follow  in  the  footsteps  of  their  Lord. — 0. 

Ver,  26.— (See  homily  on  oh.  ixvL  1.)— a 

V«r.  28.— (See  homily  oa  ch.  x?i.  22.)— 0. 


nOVBBM,  I  ■ 


498 


THE  PB0VBRB8. 


[oh.  XXVI.  1 — 23 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXVL 


Vers.  1 — 12. — Certain  proverbs  concern- 
ing the  fool  (ketil),  with  the  exception,  per- 
haps, of  Ter.  2  (gee  on  oh.  i.  22). 

Yer.  1. — As  snow  in  snmmer,  and  as  tain 
in  harvest.  Snow  in  summer  would  be  quite 
unnatural  and  unheard  of  (see  on  ch.  ixv. 
13).  Kain  falls  in  the  usual  course  of 
tilings  only  at  stated  times;  whence  arose 
tlie  phraaeof"  the  early  and  of  latter  rains" 
(see  on  ch.  ivi.  15).  From  spring  to  Octo- 
ber or  November  was  the  dry  season,  and  a 
storm  at  harvest-time  was  regarded,  not 
merely  as  destructive  or  inconvenient,  but 
B3  portentous  and  even  supernatural  (see 
1  Sam.  xii.  17,  etc.).  The  two  cases  are 
types  of  all  that  is  incongruous  and  unsuit- 
able. The  LXX.,  apparently  regarding 
tlieir  experience  in  Egypt  rather  than  the 
actual  text,  translate,  "As  dew  in  harvest, 
and  as  rain  in  summer."  So  honour  is  not 
sesmly  for  a  fool  (ver.  8 ;  oh.  xix.  10).  It  is 
quite  out  of  place  to  show  respect  to  a 
Btupid  and  ungodly  man,  or  to  raise  him  to 
•  post  of  dignity;  such  conduct  will  only 
oonflrm  hira  in  his  folly,  give  others  a  wrong 
impression  concerning  him,  and  afibrd  him 
increased  power  of  mischief.  Tlie  Greeks 
had  a  proverb  about  giving  honour  to  un- 
suitable objects :  they  called  it  washing  an 
ass's  head  with  nitre. 

Ver.  2.— As  the  bird  by  wandering,  at 
the  swallow  by  flying.  "Bird"  (tsippor') 
is  the  sparrow,  which  is  fonnd  throughout 
Palestine;  "swallow"  (deror),  the  free  ilier. 
The  Authorized  Version  hardly  gives  the 
sense.  The  line  should  be  rendered,  a»  the 
epnrrow  in  (in  respect  of)  its  wandering,  as 
the  swallow  in  its  flying.  The  point  of  com- 
parison is  the  vagueness  and  aimlessness  of 
the  birds'  flight,  or  the  uselessness  of  trying 
to  catch  them  in  their  course.  So  the  curse 
causeless  shall  not  oome.  It  shall,  as  it  were, 
spend  its  force  in  the  air,  and  fall  not  on  the 
head  on  which  it  was  invoked.  A  causeless 
curse  is  that  which  is  uttered  against  one 
who  has  done  nothing  to  deserve  such 
denunciation.  Septuagint,  "As  birds  and 
sparrows  fly,  so  a  causeless  (/uoTo(a)  curse 
shall  como  upon  no  one "  (comp.  I  Sam. 
xvii.  43 ;  Neh.  xiii.  2.)    Bailey, '  Foetus  '— 

"Blessings  star  forth  for  ever;  but  a  curse 
Is  like  a  cloud — it  passes." 

Closely  connected  with  the  superstition  that 
dreads  a  curse  is  that  which  is  alarmed  by 
onienf.  Against  this  iirational  fear  we 
find  some  Eastern  proverbs  directed;  e.g. 
"The  jackal  howls:   will  my  old   bu£faU> 


die  ?  "  -  The  dog  barka-etOl  the  caravan 
passes :  will  the  barking  of  the  dog  reach 
the  skies?"  (Lane).  Instead  of  «h,  "  not," 
the  Keri  reads  "i^,  "to  him."  This  makes 
the  proverb  say  that  the  unprovoked  curse 
shall  return  upon  him  who  uttered  it.  But 
this  reading  is  not  to  be  accepted,  as  it  does 
not  suit  the  terms  of  comparison,  though  it 
seems  to  have  been  used  by  St.  Jeromf,  who 
translates,  Sio  maledictum  frxatra  prolatum 
in  quempiam  superveniet.  This  retribu- 
tive justice  is  often  alluded  to  elsewhere; 
e.g.  ver.  27  (where  see  note).  So  we  find 
in  various  languages  proverbs  to  the  same 
effect.  Thus  in  English,  "Harm  watch, 
harm  catch;"  Spanish,  "Who  sows  thorns, 
let  him  not  walk  barefoot ; "  Turkish, 
"Curses,  like  chickens,  always  come  home 
to  roost ; "  Yoruba,  "  Ashes  always  fly  back 
in  the  face  of  him  that  throws  them" 
(Trench). 

Ver.  3.— A  whip  for  the  horse,  a  bridls 
for  the  ass.  We  should  be  inclined  to 
invert  the  words,  and  say  a  bridle  for  the 
horse,  and  a  whip  for  the  ass;  but  it  must 
be  remembered  that  in  early  times  the 
horse  was  not  ridden,  but  only  driven.  The 
animals  used  in  riding  were  the  ass  and 
mulo,  and  sometimes  the  camel.  The 
Eastern  ass  is  really  a  fine  animal,  larger, 
more  spirited,  and  more  active  than  the 
poor  creature  which  we  are  wont  to  see.  Or 
the  whip  and  bridle  may  be  intended  to 
apply  to  both  animals,  though  divided  be- 
tween the  two  for  rhythmical  or  antithetical 
reasons  (see  on  ch.  x.  1).  A  rod  for  the  fool'l 
back.  Sharp  correction  is  both  useful  and 
necessary  for  the  fool  (so  ch.  x.  13;  xix.  29). 
Similar  treatment  Sirucides  advises  to  be 
employed  in  the  case  of  an  idle  servant 
(Ecclus.  XXX.  24—28).  Septuagiuli  "As  a 
whip  for  a  horte  and  a  goad  for  an  asi^  so  is 
a  rod  for  a  lawless  nation." 

Ver.  4. — Answer  not  a  fool  aoeording  to 
his  folly.  Do  not  lower  yourself  to  the 
fool's  level  by  answering  his  silly  questions 
or  arguing  witli  him  as  if  he  were  a  sensible 
man.  Lest  thon  also  be  like  nnto  him; 
lest  you  be  led  to  utter  folly  yourself  or  to 
side  with  him  in  his  opinions  and  practices. 
Our  blessed  Saviour  never  responded  to 
foolish  and  captious  questions  in  the  way 
that  the  questioner  hoped  and  desired.  He 
put  them  by  or  gave  an  unexpected  turn  to 
them  which  silenced  the  adversary.  la- 
stanoes  may  be  seen  in  Matt  xxi.  23,  eto. ; 
xxii.  21,  22;  Lake  xiii.  23,  eto. ;  John  xxi. 
21,  etc. 

Ver.  5. — Answer  a  fool  according  to  his 
folly.      This  maxim  at  first  sight   seems 


OH.  XXVI.  1—28.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


499 


absolutely  antagonistic  to  the  purport  of  the 
preceding  verse;  but  it  is  not  so  really. 
The  words,  "according  to  his  folly,"  in  this 
verse  mean,  as  his  folly  deserves,  in  so  plain 
a  way  as  to  expose  it,  and  ihame  him,  and 
bring  him  to  a  better  mind.  Lest  he  be  wise 
in  his  own  ooneeit ; '  thinking,  it  may  be, 
that  he  has  said  something  worth  hearing, 
or  put  you  to  silence  by  his  superior  in- 
telligence. 

Ver.  6. — He  that  sendeth  a  message  by 
the  hand  of  a  fool. .  This  clause  comes  in 
the  Hebrew  after  the  next.  Cntteth  off  the 
feet,  and  drinketh  damage.  To  entrust  an 
important  commission  to  a  fool  is  to  deprive 
one's  self  of  the  means  of  having  it  properly 
executed,  and  to  bring  upon  one's  self 
shame  and  injury.  A  man  who  is  so  silly 
as  to  employ  such  an  unfit  messenger,  as  it 
were,  outs  off  the  feet  which  should  bear 
him  on  his  errand,  and,  instead  of  enjoying 
the  satisfaction  of  seeing  the  business  well 
performed,  he  will  be  mortified  and  damaged 
by  the  blunder  and  stupidity  of  his  emissary. 
Septuagint, "  He  maketh  for  himself  reproach 
from  his  own  ways  (^SSav,  ?  woSiiv)  who 
sendeth  a  word  by  a  foolish  messenger." 
The  Vulgate  rsads  the  first  participle  in  a 
passive  sense,  claudus  pedibua;  but  this  is 
u  mocessary.  We  have  similar  plirases  to 
"  drinketh  damage"  elsewhere;  e.g.  Job  xv. 
16,  "drinketh  in  iniquity;"  xxxiv.  7, 
"  drinketh  up  aoom ; "  and  with  a  different 
word,  ch.  xix.  28,  "devoureth  iniquity." 

Ver.  7. — The  legs  of  a  lame  man  are  not 
eqnal.  The  first  word  of  this  verse,  vhi, 
has  occasioned  some  difficulty.  It  is  con- 
sidered as  an  imperative  from  rhl,  "draw 
off,"  "take  away."  Thus  the  Septuagint, 
o^fXoC;  Venetian,  iwdpare.  But  the  verb 
seems  never  to  have  this  meaning ;  nor,  if  it 
had,  would  the  sense  be  very  satisfactory, 
for,  as  DelitZBch  points  out,  lame  legs  are 
better  than  none,  and  there  ig  a  gfeat  differ- 
ence between  tlie  perfectly  crippled  or 
fiarulytic  who  has  to  be  carried,  and  the 
ame  man  (nes)  who  can  limp  or  get  along 
on  crutches.  And  when  we  explain  the 
proverb  in  this  sense  (as  Flumptre),  "  Tnke 
away  the  legs  of  the  lame  man  and  the 
parable  from  the  mouth  of  fools,"  for  both 
alike  are  useless  to  their  possessors,  and 
their  lois  would  not  be  felt — we  must 
recognize  that  the  conclusion  is  not  true. 
No  one  would  think  of  amputating  a  man's 
legB  simply,  because  he  was  lame,  and  such 
a  one's  legs  cannot  be  considered  absolutely 
nsele^s.  Others  regard  the  word  as  third 
plural  kal, "  the  legs  hang  loose ; "  tliough  the 
form  is  not  sufficiently  accounted  for.  All 
explanations  of  the  word  as  a  verbal  form 
hfive  such  difficulties,  that  some  take  it  as 
»     Douu,   meuuiuK     "dancing,"    which    is   | 


Luther's  interpretation,  "As  dancing  to  • 
cripple,  so  it  becometh  a  fool  to  talk  of 
wisdom."  But  the  word  could  never  signify 
anything  but  "limping,"  and  could  not 
express  the  elegant  motion  of  dancing.  The 
Authorized  Version  considers  the  Hebrew 
to  mean,  "are  lifted  up,"  i.e.  are  unequal, 
one  being  longer  or  stronger  than  tlie  other ; 
but  this  loses  the  force  of  the  comparison. 
There  seems  to  be  no  better  interpretation 
than  that  mentioned  above, "  The  legs  of  the 
lame  hang  loose,"  i.e.  are  unserviceable, 
however  sound  in  appearance.  St.  Jerome 
has  expressed  this,  though  in  a  strange 
fashion,  "  As  it  is  vain  for  a  Jame  man  to 
have  seemly  legs."  So  is  a  parable  in  the 
month  of  a  fooL  "Parable  "  {mashal),  sen- 
tentious saying,  the  enunciation  of  which, 
as  well  as  the  recital  of  stories,  was  always 
a  great  feature  in  Eastern  companies,  and 
afforded  a  test  of  a  man's  ability.  A  fool 
fails  in  the  exhibition ;  he  misses  the  point 
of  the  wise  eaying  which  he  produces ;  it 
falls  lame  from  his  mouth,  affords  no  in- 
struction to  others,  and  makes  no  way  with 
its  hearers.  Siracides  gives  another  reason 
for  the  incongruity,  "A  parable  shall  be 
rejected  when  it  cometh  out  of  a  fool's 
mouth;  for  he  will  not  speak  it  in  its 
season  "  (Ecolus.  xx.  20).  Septuagint,  "  Take 
away  the  motion  of  legs,  and  transgression 
(irapavoiitav,^  wapoifiiav,  Lag.)  from  the  mouth 
of  fools." 

Ver.  8. — As  he  that  bindeth  a  itone  in  a 
Bling,  So  Septuagint,  *Os  airoSetrfifvfi  KiBov 
iv  (r(pevS6m.  This  gives  a  very  good  sense, 
the  point  being  either  that  the  stone,  after 
being  firmly  fitted  in  its  place,  quickly  passes 
away  from  the  sling,  or,  if  more  stress  is 
laid  on  the  word  "  bindeth,"  that  the  stone 
is  so  firmly  fixed  that  it  cannot  be  slung, 
and  therefore  never  reaches  the  mark.  The 
alternative  rendering  adopted  by  the  Re- 
vised Version  is  this,  "As  a  bag  of  gems 
in  a  heap  of  stones ; "  where  the  incongruity 
would  consist  either  in  exposing  jewels  on 
a  cairn,  or  sepulchral  monument,  whence 
they  could  easily  be  filched,  or  in  attract- 
ing undesirable  attention.  But  there  are 
grammatical  and  etymological  reasons 
against  this  interpretation ;  and  the  Autho- 
rized Version  is  to  be  considered  correct. 
The  Vulgate  is  curious:  Sicut  qui  mittit 
lapidem  in  aeervum  Mereurii.  This  render- 
ing points  to  tlie  custom,  with  which 
Jerome  must  have  been  familiar,  of  erect- 
ing statues  of  Mercury  on  the  highways, 
which  were  thus  placed  under  his  protection. 
Bound  these  statues  were  ranged  heaps  of 
stones,  to  which  every  wayfarer  contributed 
by  throwing  a  pebble  as  he  passed.  The 
absence  of  the  critical  faculty  which  dis- 
cerned no  abs'irility  in  this  nnncbronism  is 
(ullicieutly  rumaikablo.     The  Latin  sayin? 


600 


THE  PBOVEEBS. 


[oh.  xxvt  1— 28i 


■eems  intended  to  denote  useless  labour,  as 
we  speak  of  "  carrying  coals  to  Newcastle." 
Bo  is  he  that  giveth  hononr  to  a  fooL     You 

Ely  respect  to  a  fool,  or  place  him  in  an 
ononraDle  position,  but  your  labour  is 
wasted ;  he  oannot  act  up  to  bis  dignity,  be 
cannot  maintain  the  honour ;  it  passes  away 
like  the  stone  from  the  sling,  or,  if  it  re- 
mains, it  is  useless  to  him. 

Ver.  9. — As  a  thorn  goeth  np  into  the 
hand  of  a  drnnlcard.  There  is  here  no  idea 
of  the  drunkard's  hand  being  pierced  with  a 
thorn  while  he  is  inseasible  to  the  pain,  but 
rather  of  his  being  armed  with  it,  and  ripe 
for  mischief.  So  it  is  best  to  render,  "A 
th  imbush  cometh  into  the  hand  of  a 
drunkard;"  he  somehow  gets  possession  of 
it,  and  in  his  stupid  excitement  is  liable  to 
become  dangerous.  Some  understand  nhj)  of 
tl  le  growth  of  the  thorn ;  thus  the  Septuagint, 
''  Thorns  grow  in  the  hand  of  a  drunkard ; " 
Vulgate,  "Aa  if  a  thorn  grew  in  the  hand 
of  a  drunkard."  But  one  does  not  see  the 
bearing  of  such  an  expression;  and  the 
translation  given  above  is  more  appropriate. 
So  is  a  parable,  eto.  (as  ver.  7).  In  that 
p:iESage  the  wise  saying  in  a  fool's  mouth 
was  compared  with  something  useless,  here  it 
is  compared  with  something  injurious.  He 
employs  it  purposely  to  wound  others ;  or  by 
the  ignorant  use  of  some  sharp-edged  word 
he  does  much  mischief.  In  this  hemistich 
the  LXX.  has  read  ^tifO  with  a  different 
vocalization,  and  renders, "  servitude  (Sou\ela) 
in  the  hand  of  fools."  This  seems  to  mean 
that  it  comes  natural  to  fools  to  be  manacled 
aad  restjained  by  force, 

Ver.  10. — Few  passages  have  given  greater 
difBoulty  than  this  verse ;  almost  every  word 
lias  beeii  differently  explained.  The  Autho- 
I  ized  Version  is,  The  great  God  that  formed 
all  things  both  rewardeth  the  fool,  and  re- 
wardeth  transgressors ;  Revised  Version,  A$ 
an  archer  (Job  xvi.  13)  that  woundeth  all,  so 
it  he  that  hireth  the  fool  and  he  thai  hireih 
Ihem  that  pan  by.  At  first  sight  one  would 
hardly  suppose  that  these  could  be  versions 
of  the  same  passage.  To  show  the  diversity 
that  obtained  in  early  times  we  quote  the 
Greek  and  Latin  versions.  Septuagint, "All 
the  flesh  of  fools  is  much  distressed  (iroAA.^ 
XcMC^ai),  for  their  distraction  (^kcttoo-ij) 
is  brought  to  nought;"  Vulgate,  "Judg- 
ment decides  causes,  and  he  who  imposes 
silence  on  a  fool  appeases  wrath."  From 
the  various  interpretations  of  which  this  pro- 
verb is  capable,  it  may  be  surmised  that  it 
was  originally  one  of  those  hard  sayings 
which  were  intended  to  exercise  the  inge- 
nuity of  auditors.  It  has  certainly  had  that 
effect  in  modoru  times.  We  may  at  once 
eliminate  the  rendering  of  the  Authorized 
V-^rsion.  though  the  sense  is  good  and  scrip* 


tural,  denoting  that  the  great  Creator  recom- 
penses the  good  and  puni.^lies  sinners.  So 
the  mediaival  jingle — 

"  Ante  Dei  vultum  nihil  unquam  restat  innl- 
tum." 

"  God "  is  not  in  the  Hebrew,  and  rah, 
"  great,"  is  never  used  absolately  as  equiva- 
lent to  "  God."  Nor  is  the  word  used  else- 
where to  mean  "  head-workman ; "  so  the 
Revised  Version  margin,  "a  master-worker 
formeth  all  things,"  is  suspicious.  Some 
translate,  "A  great  man  woundeth  [equi- 
valent to  '  puuisheth ']  all ;  he  renders  their 
due  to  fools  and  to  transgressors."  One 
does  not  see  why  this  should  be  attributed 
to  the  great  man ;  it  certainly  is  not  gene- 
rally true.  Eosenmiiller,  "  The  mighty  man 
causes  terror  ;  so  does  he  who  hires  the  fool 
and  the  transgressor;"  but  it  is  not  clear 
why  the  hiring  of  a  fool  should  occasion 
terror.  The  rendering  in  the  Bevised  Ver 
sion,  or  something  very  similar,  has  found 
favour  with  many  modem  commentators, 
though  quite  unknown  to  the  more  ancient 
versions.  According  to  this  interpretation, 
the  proverb  says  that  a  careless,  randi  m 
way  of  doing  business,  taking  into  one's 
service  fools,  or  entrusting  matters  of  impor- 
tance to  any  chance  loiterer,  is  as  dangerous 
»5  shooting  arrows  about  recklessly  without 
caring  whither  they  flew  or  whom  they 
wounded.  |To  this  view  Nowack  objects 
that  it  is  unparalleled  to  present  an  archer 
as  a  pictiure  of  what  is  unusual  and  profit- 
less; that  it  does  not  explain  why  "hireth" 
is  twice  repeated ;  that  the  coimection  be- 
tween shooter  and  the  hire  of  fool  and 
loiterer  is  not  obvious;  and  tiiat  O'-ay  does 
not  mean]  "vagabonds"  or  "passers-by," 
None  of  these  objections  are  of  much  impor- 
tance ;  and  this  interpretation  still  holds  its 
ground.  There  is  also  much  to  be  said  for 
the  rendering  of  the  Bevised  Version  mar- 
gin, which  is  virtually  that  of  Gesenius^ 
Fleischer, 'Wordsworth,  Nutfc,  and  others: 
A  skilful  man,  a  master-\,orkman,  pro- 
duces, makes,  everything  by  his  own  aire 
and  superintendence;  but  he  that  liires  a 
fool  to  do  his  work  hires,  as  it  were,  any 
casual  vagabond  who  may  know  nothing  of 
the  business.  One  objection  to  this  inter- 
pretation is  that  the  verb  hh)n,doee  not  else- 
where have  the  meaning  here  attributed  to  it. 
Considering  all  the  above  interpretations  un- 
satisfactory, Hitzig,  after  TJmbreit,  followed 
herein  by  Delitzsoh  and  Nowack,  translates, 
"  Much  bringeth  forth  all,"  which  means  that 
he  who  possesses  much  can  do  anything,  or, 
as  St.  Matt,  xiii.  12,  "Whosoever  hath,  to 
hi  m  shall  be  given  "  (comp,  oh ,  i.  5).  But  the 
seeond  hemistich  comes  in  rather  lam^y, 
"But  he  who  hires  a  fool  is  as  one  who 
hirts  a  vagabond."     Hence  Delitzsoh  reads 


cm.  XXVI.  1—28.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


501 


■i3»i  for  th*  Drjt  "'5»%-  ind  renders,  "  Bnt 
the  hire  and  the  hirer  of  the  fool  pass 
Bway,"  t.e.  what  the  fool  gets  as  wages  is 
soon  squandered,  and  the  person  who  took 
him  into  his  serrice  ii  ruined  by  his  inca- 
pacity. In  this  case  the  connection  of  the 
two  clauses  would  be  this :  A  rich  man,  in 
the  nature  of  things,  grows  richer  ;.but  there 
are  exceptions  to  this  rule;  for  he  who 
employs  stupid  and  incapable  people  to  do 
his  business  suffers  for  it  in  property,  repu- 
tation, and  probably  in  person  also ;  and  the 
incompetent  person  derives  no  benefit  from 
the  connection.  It  is  impossible  to  gire  a 
decided  preference  to  any  of  these  exposi- 
tions ;  and  the  passage  must  be  left  as  a 
crux.  It  is  most  probable  that  the  Hebrew 
text  is  defective.  This  would  account  for 
the  great  variations  in  the  versions. 

Ver,  11. — As  the  dog  returneth  to  his 
vomit  (see  2  Pet.  ii.  22,  which,  however,  is 
not  quoted  from  the  Septuagint),  so  a  fool 
retometh  to  his  folly ;  or,  repeateih  his  folly. 
The  fool  never  frees  himself  from  the  tram- 
mels of  his  foolisliness;  his  deeds  and  words 
always  bear  the  same  character  to  the  end. 
The  same  truth  holds  good  of  the  sinner, 
especially  the  drunkard  and  the  sensualist. 
If  they  feel  temporary  compunction,  and 
reject  their  sin  by  partial  repentance,  they 
do  not  really  shake  it  off  wholly ;  it  has 
become  a  second  nature  to  them,  and  they 
soon  relapse  into  it.  Septuagint,  "  As  when 
a  dog  goes  to  his  own  vomit  and  becomes 
hateful,  so  is  a  fool  who  returns  in  his 
wickedness  to  his  own  sin."  The  LXX. 
adds  a  distich  which  is  found  in  Ecclus.  iV. 
21,  "  There  is  a  shame  that  bringeth  sin,  and 
there  is  a  shame  that  is  glory  and  grace." 

Ver.  12. — Seest  thou  a  man  wise  in  his  own 
oonoeitl  (ch.  iii.  7).  Nothing  so  shuts  the 
door  against  improvement  as  self-conceit. 
"  Woe  unto  them,"  says  Isaiah  (v.  21),  "that 
are  wise  in  their  own  eyes,  and  prudent  in 
their  own  sight."  Such  person*;  profeseing 
themselves  wise,  become  fools  (Rom.  i.  22 ; 
xii.  16 ;  Rev.  iii.  17, 18).  Touching  conceit, 
Qui  sjbi  «op»7,  ewmme  detipit.  The  Oritntal 
speaks  of  the  fox  finding  his  shadow  very 
large,  and  of  the  wolf  when  alone  thinking 
himself  a  lion.  There  is  mor«  hope  of  a  fool 
than  of  him  (ch.  xxix.  20).  A  fool  who  is 
conscious  of  unwisdom  may  be  set  right; 
bnt  one  who  fancies  himself  perfect,  and 
needing  no  improvement,  is  beyond  cure; 
his  case  is  hopeless.  So  the  sinner  who 
feels  and  acknowledges  his  iniquity  may  be 
converted ;  but  the  self-righteous  Pharisee, 
who  considers  himself  to  have  no  need  of 
repentance,  will  never  be  reformed  (see  Matt. 
ix.  12;  Luke  xv.  7;  xviii.  14).  St.  Chry- 
sostom  ('Hom.  in  Phil.,'  vii.),  "Haughti- 
ness is  a  great  evil ;  it  is  better  to  be  a  fool 
than  haughty ;  for  in  the  one  case  the  folly 


is  only  a  perversion  of  intellect,  but  in  the 
other  case  it  is  still  worse ;  for  it  is  folly 

i'oined  with  madness.  The  fool  is  an  evil  to 
limeelf ;  but  the  haughty  man  is  a  plague 
to  others  too.  One  cannot  be  haughty- 
minded  without  being  a  fool.  .  .  .  The  soul 
which  is  puffed  up  has  a  worse  disease  than 
dropsy,  while  that  which  is  under  restraint 
is  freed  from  all  evil "  (Oxford  transl.). 

Vers.  13 — 16. — Proverbs  concerning  the 
sluggard. 

Ver.  13. — This  is  virtually  the  same  as 
ch.  xxii.  13.  The  words  for  "  lion  "  are  dif- 
ferent in  two  parts  of  the  verse,  shalihal 
being  the  lion  of  advanced  age,  art  the  full- 
growu  animal;  the  latter  may  possibly  be 
assumed  to  be  the  more  dangerous  of  the 
two,  and  so  a  climax  would  be  denoted. 
Tliere  is  a  proverb  current  in  Bechuana, 
which  says,  "  The  month  of  seed-time  is  the 
season  of  headaches." 

Ver.  14. — As  the-  door  tumeth  upon  its 
hinges.  The  door  moves  on  its  hinges  and 
makes  no  progress  beyond  its  own  confined 
sphere  of  motion ;  so  the  slothful  man  turns 
himself  on  his  bed  from  side  to  side,  but 
never  leaves  it  to  do  his  work.  Other 
analogies  have  been  found  in  this  proverb. 
Thus :  The  door  opens  to  let  the  diligent  go 
forth  to  his  daily  business,  while  the  slug- 
gard is  rolling  upon  his  bed ;  the  door  creaks 
when  it  is  moved,  so  the  lazy  man  groans 
when  he  is  aroused ;  the  door  now  is  opened, 
now  is  shut,  so  the  sluggard  at  one  time 
intends  to  rise,  and  then  falls  back  in  his 
bed,  and  returns  to  his  sleep  (comp.  ch.  vi. 
9,  10 ;  xxiv.  33). 

Ver.  15. — Very  nearly  identical  with  ch. 
xix.  24.  It  forms  a  climax  to  the  two  pre- 
ceding verses.  Wordswortli  takes  "  the 
dish  "  as  a  type  of  sensual  pleasure,  which 
the  slothful  loves,  while  he  has  no  liking 
for  active  work. 

Ver.  16. — The  sluggard  is  wiser  in  his  own 
conceit.  The  sluggard  is  here  one  who  is 
too  idle  to  think  a  matter  out,  and  considers 
his  own  cursory  view  as  sure  to  be  right. 
He  is  one  who  deems  study  to  be  an  un- 
necessary weariness  of  the  flesh  (Booles.  xii. 
12),  and  flatters  himself  that  he  is  quite 
able  without  it  to  give  a  satisfactory  ac- 
count of  any  question  presented  to  him. 
Than  seven  men  that  can  render  a  reason. 
"Seven"  is  the  number  of  completeness 
(comp.  ch.  vi.  31;  ix.  1;  xxiv.  16).  The 
idle  fool  sets  more  value  by  his  own  judg- 
ment than  by  the  sense  of  any  number  of 
wise  men.  Revised  Version  margin,  "  that 
can  answer  discreetly,"  is  perhaps  nearer 
the  Hebrew,  which  implies  the  being  able 
to  return  a  wise  and  proper  answer  to  any- 
thing asked  of  them.  The  LXX.  reading  a 
little  differently,  reudurs,  "'Wiaei   seems  a 


*flte  ^tioveftfis. 


tea.  ixvL  1—28. 


sluggard  to  himself  than  one  who  in  satiety 
(^K  irArjo-juoi^)  brings  back  a  message."  This 
is  explained  to  mean  that  a  sluggard  thinks 
himself  wise  in  not  helping  a  neighbour 
with  an  errand  or  a  message,  though  he 
would  have  probably  been  repaid  with  a 
good  dinner  for  his  tandness. 

Vers.  17 — 28. — A  series  of  proverbs  con- 
nected more  or  less  with  peacefulness  and 
its  opposite. 

Yer.  17.— He  that  passeth  by,  and  meddleth 
with  strife  belonging  not  to  hun.  "  Meddleth 
with  strife"  should  be  "  vexes,  excites  liim- 
self,  with  a  quarrel."  Is  like  one  that  taketh 
a  dog  by  the  ears,  and  thus  needlessly  pro- 
vokes him  to  bark  and  bite.  Begarding  the 
position  of  the  two  participles  in  this  verse, 
without  any  connecting  link,  Delitzsch  takes 
"  passing  by  "  as  attributed  to  the  dog,  thus : 
"He  seizes  by  the  ears  a  dog  passing  by, 
who  is  excited  by  a  strife  that  concerns  him 
not."  Tiie  stray  dog  corresponds  to  the 
quarrel  with  which  one  has  nothing  to  do. 
The  present  accentuation  does  not  support 
this  view;  otherwise  it  is  suitable  and  pro- 
bable. Septuagint,  "  As  he  who  lays  hold 
of  a  dog's  tail,  so  is  he  who  sets  himself 
forth  as  champion  in  another's  cause." 
Ecclus.  xi.  9,  "  Strive  not  in  a  matter  that 
concerns  thee  not."    Says  a  Greek  gnome — 

XloKvirpay/toviii'  riX'^.STpia  /uj)  j3aS\ou  Kaxd. 

Our  English  proverb  says,  "  He  that  inter- 
meddles with  all  things  may  go  shoe  the 
goslings."  The  Telugu  compares  such  in- 
terference to  a  monkey  holding  a  snake  in 
his  paw ;  it  is  hard  to  liold,  dangerous  to  let 
go  (Lane). 

Vers.  18,  19. — A  tetrastich,  but  without 
parallelisms.  As  a  mad  man  who  casteth 
firebrands,  arrows,  and  death.  The  word 
rendered  "  madman  "  is  an  SiroJ  Keyiiaemv, 
and  has  been  variously  explained ;  but  the 
Authorized  Version  is  probably  correct. 
"  Firebrands "  are  darts  with  some  blazing 
material  attached  to  them.  "  Death  "  forms 
a  climax  with  the  other  dangers  mentioned, 
which  the  madman  deals  forth  recklessly 
and  indiscriminately.  So  is  the  man  that 
deceiveth  his  neighbour,  and  saith.  Am  not 
I  in  sport  f  When  a  man  has  injured  his 
neighbour  by  lies  or  malice,  the  plea  that  he 
was  only  in  joke  is  not  allowed ;  the  injury  is 
not  less  real  because  he  excuses  it  by  alleg- 
ing it  was  done  not  seriously,  but  playfully ; 
no  more  than  the  fatal  effects  of  the  use  of 
murderous  weapons  are  lessened  by  their 
being  employed  by  the  hands  of  a  maniac. 
Practical  joking  is  often  a  most  serious 
matter.    A  mediaeval  adage  sayi  wisely — 

"  Com  joous  est  verus,  jocui  est  malus  atque 
Sfverui." 


Septuagint,  "  Even  as  those  who  are  nndei 
medical  treatment  (icijucvoi)  throw  words  at 
men,  and  he  who  first  meets  the  word  will 
be  overthrown ;  so  are  all  they  that  lay  wait 
for  their  own  firiends,  and  when  they  are 
seen,  say,  I  did  it  in  jest."  As  insane  per- 
sons who  abuse  and  ill  treat  their  pbysiciims 
are  excused  by  reason  of  their  infirmity,  so 
those  who  injure  friends  in  secret  try  to 
excuse  themselves  when  f  mud  out  by  alleg- 
ing that  they  were  only  joking. 

Ver.  20. — Some  proverbs  follow  concerning 
the  slanderer.  Where  no  wood  is,  there  the 
fire  goeth  out.  Where  the  wood  fails,  and 
that  was  the  only  fuel  then  used,  the  fire 
must  go  out.  So  where  there  is  no  tale- 
bearer, the  strife  ceaseth ;  comes  to  silence 
(ch.  xxii  10).  (.For  nirgan,  "  whisper,"  see 
on  ch.  xvi.  28.)  Septuagint,  "  With  much 
wood  fire  groweth,  but  where  there  is  not 
one  discordant  (StSu/ios),  strife  is  at  rest." 

Ver.  21. — As  coals  are  to  burning  coals. 
As  black,  cold  charcoal  feeds  glowing  char- 
coal, as  wood  feeds  a  lighted  fire,  so  a  quar- 
relsome man  (ch.  xxi.  9 ;  xxvii  15)  supports 
and  nourislies  strife.  The  verse  is  the 
counterpart  of  the  preceding.  Septuagint, 
"  A  hearth  for  coal  and  logs  for  wx,  and  a 
reviling  man  for  tumult  of  strife." 

Ver.  22 — (See  ch.  xviii.  8,  where  the 
gnome  occurs.)  Septuagint,  "  The  words  of 
knaves  (KepKdirav)  are  soft,  but  they  strikt 
to  the  secret  chambers  of  the  bowels." 

Ver.  23. — The  next  proverbs  are  coucernod 
with  hypocrisy.  The  Hebrew  denoles  the 
comparison  simply  by  position  (see  on  ch. 
XXV.  11),  thus:  An  earthen  vessel  (or,  pot- 
therd)  overlaid  with  silver  dross — glowing 
lips  and  a  wicked  heart.  So-called  "  silver 
dross  "  is  litharge,  an  oxide  of  lead  usfid  to 
this  day  to  put  a  glaze  on  pottery  (comp. 
Ecclus.  xxxviii.  30).  The  comparatively 
worthless  article  is  thus  made  to  assume  a 
fine  appearance.  Tiius  lips  that  seem  to  burn 
with  affection,  and  give  the  kiss  of  glowing 
love,  may  mabk  a  heart  filled  with  envy  and 
hatred.  Judas  kisses  and  words  of  friend- 
ship hide  the  bad  feelings  that  lurk  within. 
Septuagint,  "Silver  given  with  guile  is  to 
be  considered  as  a  potsherd ;  smooth  (KfTa< 
lips  hide  a  grievous  heart"  (comp.  Matt, 
xxiii.  27). 

Ver.  24.— He  that  hateth  dissemhleth  with 
his  lips.  This  and  the  next  verse  form  a 
tetrastich.  St.  Jerome,  Ldbiis  suis  intelli- 
gitur  inimicus.  But  the  verb  here  used, 
"D3,  bears  the  meaning  "  to  make  one's  self 
unknown,"  as  well  as  "to  make  one's  self 
known,"  and  hence  "  to  make  one's  self  un- 
recognizable "  by  diess  or  change  of  counte- 
nance (1  Kings  xiv.  5).  This  is  much  more 
appropriate  in  the  present  connection  than 
the  uther  explanation.  The  man  cloaka 
hi*  hatred  with  honeyed  worda.    And  Uyetb 


«t.»trt.  1— 28.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


603 


up  deceit  within  him;  meditating  all  the 
time  treachery  in  his  heart  (Jer.  ix.  8). 
Septuagint,  "An  enemy  weeping  piomisea 
•11  things  with  his  lips,  but  in  his  iieart  he 
eontriveth  deceits."  The  tears  in  this  case 
are  hypocritical  signs  of  sorrow,  inteuded 
to  deceive  the  dupe. 

Ver.  25. — When  he  speaketh  fair,  believe 
him  not.  When  ho  lowers  his  voice  to  a 
winning,  agreeable  tone,  put  no  trust  in 
him.  Septuagint,  "  If  thine  enemy  eutreat 
thee  with  a  loud  voice,  be  not  persuaded." 
For  there  are  seven  abominations  in  hii 
heart.  His  heart  is  filled  with  a  host  of 
evil  thoughts  (see  on  ver.  16),  as  if  seven 
devils  had  entered  in  and  dwelt  there  (Matt, 
xii.  45;  Marli  ivi.  9).  Ecclus.  lii.  10,  etc., 
"Never  trust  thine  enemy ;  for  lilie  as  iron 
rusteth,  so  is  his  wickedness.  Though  he 
humble  himself,  and  go  crouching,  yet  take' 
good  heed  and  beware  of  him."  Plato's 
verdict  concerning  hypocrisy  is  often  quoted, 
'EtTX^'^V  ^ticla.  SoKelv  S'tKatov  ejj/ai  fi^  6vTa^ 
"It  is  the  very  worst  form  of  injustice  to 
appear  to  be  just  without  bein;;  so  in  reality  " 
('  De  Bep.,'  ii.  p.  361,  A).  With  this  Cicero 
agrees  ('De  Offic.,'  i.  13),  "  Totius  injustitiss 
nulla  capitalior  est  quam  eorum,  qui  turn 
cum  maxime  fallunt  id  aguut  ut  viri  boni 
esse  videantur." 

Ver.  26. — Whose  hatred  is  covered  by 
deceit ;  or,  hatred  may  be  concealed  by  deceit, 
as  was  said  above  (ver.  24).  (But)  his 
wickedness  shall  be  showed  before  the  whole 
congregation.  The  hater's  real  wickedness, 
at  some  time  or  other,  in  spite  of  all  his 
efforls  to  hide  it,  will  be  openly  displayed. 
He  will  show  it  before  some  thiid  party 
and  thus  it  will  be  divulged.  At  any  rate, 
this  will  be  the  case  at  the  judgmeut-day, 
when  he  who  hateth  his  brother  shall  be 
shown  to  be  not  only  a  murderer,  but  a 
hater  of  God  also  (1  John  iii.  15;  iv.  20). 
Septuagint,  "He  that  hideth  enmity  pre- 
pareth  deceit,  but  he  revealeth  his  own  sius, 
Veing  well  known  in  assemblieB." 

Ver.  27.— Whoso  diggeth  a  pit  shall  fall 
Atiern.  This  thought  is  found  often  else- 
where ;  e.y.  Fs.  vii.  16 ;  iz.  16 ;  Ecoles.  x.  8; 
Ecclus.  xxvii.  26,  26.  The  pit  is  such  a 
one  as  was  made  to  catch  wild  animals;  the 
maker  is  supposed  to  approach  incautiously 
one  of  these  traps,  and  to  fall  into  it.  And 
he  that  rolleth  a  stone,  it  will  return  upon 
him  This  does  not  refer  to  throwing  stones 
into  th9  air,  which  fall  upon  the  head  of 
the  thrower,  but  to  rolling  stones  up  a 
height  in  order  to  hurl  them  down  upon  the 


enemy  (comp.  Judg.  ix.  58;  2  Sam.  xi.  21). 
Of  such  retributive  justice  we  have  numerous 
examples ;  e.gi.  Haman  hung  on  the  gallows 
which  he  had  prepared  for  Mordecai  (Esth. 
vii.  9,  etc.).  So  the  old  story  tolls  how 
Perillns,  the  inventor  of  the  brazen  bull  in 
which  prisoners  were  to  be  burned  alive,  was 
himself  made  to  prove  the  efScacy  of  his 
own  invention  by  the  tyrant  Phalaris;  as 
Ovid  says — 

"  Et  Phalaris  tauro  violenti  membra  Perilli 
Torruit;  infelix  imbuit  auotor  opus." 
('  Art.  Amat.,'  i.  653  ) 
So  we  have,  "  Damnosus  aliis,  damnosus  est 
sibi ; "  'H  Sh  0ovKii  t^  fiovXeiaavrt  KaKiiTTTj. 
St.  Ohrysostom  speaks  of  the  blindnesd  of 
malice :  "  Let  us  not  plut  against  others, 
lest  we  injure  ourselves.  When  we  supplant 
the  reputation  of  others,  let  us  consider  that 
we  injure  ourselves,  it  is  against  ourselves 
that  we  plot.  For  perchance  with  men  we 
do  him  harm,  if  we  have  power,  but  our- 
selves in  the  sight  of  God,  by  provoking 
him  against  us.  Let  us  not,  then,  injure 
ourselves.  For  as  we  injure  ourselves  when 
we  injure  our  neighbours,  so  by  benefiting 
them  we  benefit  oui selves"  ('Horn.  xiv.  in 
Phil.,'  Oxford  transl.). 

Ver.  28. — A  lying  tongue  hateth  those  that 
are  afflicted  by  it ;  or,  ttiose  whom  it  crusheth 
(ch.  XXV.  15).  Tliere  is  a  consensus  of  the 
Vulgate,  Septuagint,  Syriac,  and  Targum  to 
translate  l'3T  "truth,"  thinking  apparently 
of  the  Aramseaii  Koi,  "  that  which  is  pure." 
But  the  hemisticli  would  thus  state  the 
baldest  trui:,m,  and  modern  commentators 
unite  in  assigning  to  the  word  some  such 
sense  as  that  given  above  in  the  Authorized 
Version.  A  liar  shows  his  want  of  charity 
by  slandering  his  neighbour  ;  and  that  men 
dislike  those  whom  they  have  injured  is 
a  common  experience.  "  It  is  a  cliaracter- 
istic  of  human  nature,"  saysTaoitusC  Agrio.,' 
42),  "  to  hate  those  whom  one  has  injured." 
Seneca, '  De  Ira,'  ii.  33,  "  Hoc  habent  pessi- 
mum  animi  magna  fortuna  insolentes,  quos 
Iseserunt,  et  oderunt."  A  flattering  mouth 
worketh  ruin;  brings  destruction  on  those 
who  succumb  to  its  seductive  words.  Vul- 
gate, Os  lubricum  operatur  ruinat;  Septua- 
gint, "A  mouth  uncovered  (SoTeyo^)  causeth 
tumults."  (For  "  the  smooth  moutli,"  comp. 
ch.  V.  3;  Ps.  xii.  3;  Iv.  21;  Isa.  xxx.  10.) 
The  word  for  "tumults"  is  d/coTocTTao-far, 
which  does  not  occur  elsewhere  in  the 
Septuagint,  but  is  common  in  the  New 
Testament ;  e.g.  Luke  xxi.  9 ;  1  Cor.  xiv.  33. 


504  THE  PB0VBRB8.  [oh.  xxn.  1—28. 


H0MILETIC8. 

Ver.  2. — 2%e  carte  causeless.  I.  God  will  not  hear  a  sinful  pkatsr.  A  curBe 
is  a  prayer.  No  one  has  ihe  power  of  inflicting  direct  harm  upon  his  victim  by  sheei 
force  of  malignant  worda.  Only  the  superstition  of  magic  could  suppose  any  sucli 
thing  to  be  possible.  A  curse  is  just  a  prayer  for  evil  to  come  on  the  head  of  the 
devoted  person.  Bat  God  will  not  heed  such  a  petition  if  he  disapproves  of  it.  Prayer 
is  not  a  force  that  compels  God  ;  it  is  but  a  petition  that  seeks  his  aid,  and  the  response 
to  it  is  entirely  dependent  on  his  will. 

II.  Thebb  I8-A  PBOVIDENOB  ovBB  LIFE.  Curses  Cannot  fly  about  like  black-plumed 
birds  of  evil,  ruosting  wherever  their  authors  choose.  Above  the  most  poient  and 
direful  curse  of  man  is  the  calm,  fair,  equable  government  of  God.  Though  the 
whole  human  race  combined  to  curse  one  on  whom  God  smiled,  not  a  shadow  of  real 
evil  could  light  on  his  head.  Balaam  saw  the  uselessness  of  trying  to  curse  a  people 
whom  God  had  blessed  (Numb,  xxiii.  8). 

III.  It  is  mobb  important  to  win  the  favoub  or  God  than  to  esoapb  prom 
THE  CURSES  OF  MAN.  Thls  conclusion  must  necessarily  result  from  the  previous  con- 
siderations. Man  cannot  really  curse  or  bless.  Our  whole  future  depends,  not  on 
man's  opinions,  but  on  God's  treatment  of  us.  Yet  many  men  are  in  an  agony  of 
distress  when  they  are  visited  with  the  disapproval  of  society,  while  they  take  no  steps 
to  secure  the  favour  of  God.  This  "  fear  of  man  bringeth  a  snare."  It  is  a  cowardly 
thing,  and  reveals  great  weakness.  We  need  a  more  tough  moral  fibre.  How  grand 
was  the  courage  of  John  Bright,  when,  after  standing  on  the  pinnacle  of  popular  fame 
in  his  triumph  over  the  corn  laws,  he  suddenly  stepped  down  into  a  position  of  isola- 
tion and  unpopularity  by  denouncing  the  Crimean  War! 

IV.  It  is  worse  to  dbsbbvb  the  cuese  that  is  not  arvEN  than  to  iieceivi 
THE  CURSE  THAT  18  NOT  DESBBVED.  It  may  be  that  vile  conduct  is  concealed  nr  con- 
doned by  a  low  tone  of  social  morality;  whilu  right  conduct  is  misinterpreted  or 
condemned  by  a  false  standard.  Men  shudder  at  crimes  when  they  are  guilty  of  more 
sinful  vices.  Nevertheless,  what  is  evil  deseives  execration,  and  for  the  quick  con- 
science ill  desert  is  more  dreadful  than  public  disapproval. 

V.  No  malignity  can  ultimately  FEUBTBATB  the  cause  of  truth  and  RIGHTEOUS- 
NESS. The  curse  causeless  was  flung  at  Christ.  It  appeared  to  alight  on  his  head  and 
he  died  in  ghiom  a  shameful  death.  Then  lie  rose  and  triumphed,  and  shook  off  the 
harmless  curse  in  his  joyous  victory.  The  enemies  of  Christ  have  cursed  his  gospel. 
But  they  have  failed  to  destroy  it.  On  the  contrary,  it  flourishes  under  the  curses  of 
bad  men.  Though  Satan  and  all  his  hosts  combined  against  it  they  could  n«t  stay  its 
glorious  progress. 

VI.  No  Satanic  cubsbs  can  hurt  the  true  disciple  of  Christ.  All  the  curses 
of  hell  cannot  touch  a  hair  of  the  head  of  him  who  is  sheltered  by  the  grace  of  Christ. 
Even  the  deserved  curses  of  his  sin  are  not  to  hurt  the  Christian,  pardoned  and  renewed. 

Vers,  i,  5. — The  wite  treatment  of  folly.  These  two  verses  need  not  be  taken  as 
mutually  contradictory.     They  balance  one  another. 

I.  It  is  DlPFifcuLT  TO  AN3WBB  FOLLY.  Whichever  Way  we  take  it,  we  are  in  danger 
of  blnndering.  If  we  meet  it  on  its  own  ground  we  may  share  its  shiime.  If  we  treat 
it  soberly  we  may  only  incur  ridicule.  Both  courses  are  beset  with  difficulties.  Thiv 
is  especially  true  of  folly  in  the  biblical  sense  of  the  word,  according  to  which  it  is  not 
so  much  stupidity  as  wilful  perverseness,  light-hearted  but  depraved.  It  is  not  easy 
to  find  any  point  of  attachment  through  which  to  influence  this  condition  of  soul. 
We  need  great  grace  in  endeavouring  to  recover  the  thoughtless,  foolish  evil-livers. 
The  sad  may  be  approached  through  their. troubles,  but  the  frivolous  elude  our  grasp. 

II.  It  is  a  fatal  mistake  to  imitate  the  folly  of  tiIe  foolish.  St.  Paul  would 
become  all  things  to  all  men  in  the  hope  that  he  might  by  any  means  save  some. 
But  he  would  never  descend  to  frivolity ;  that  would  have  been  lowering  to  his  true 
dignity  as  a  servant  of  Christ.  It  is  not  necessary  to  be  always  grave.  We  may 
arouse  and  interest  thoughtless  peopla  by  using  methods  that  would  not  be  desirabU 


OH.  XXVI.  1—28.]  THE  PROVERBS.  6M 


or  acceptable  in  the  case  of  earnest  men  and  -women.  Assuredly  there  is  no  virtue  in 
pretence,  pomposity,  pride,  a  stilted  style,  etc.  But  it  can  never  be  right  nor  wise  to 
•ay  or  do  anytiiing  that  would  lower  the  majesty  of  truth  and  righteousness  or  degrade 
the  ideal  of  Christian  conduct.  It  may  be  possible  to  "  draw  "  crowds  by  such  mora 
than  questionable  methods,  but  it  is  certainly  impossible  to  "raise"  them  by  such 
means,  and  what  is  the  use  of  massing  people  together  under  pretence  oi  leligious  work 
when  our  course  of  action  is  not  likely  to  inspire  the  reverence  which  is  the  root  of 
religion  ?  It  would  be  a  far  more  successful  method,  as  well  as  a  more  worthy  one, 
to  have  much  humbler  aims  in  regard  to  numbers,  but  much  higher  ones  in  regard  to 
the  spiritual  character  of  our  work. 

III.  It  is  kecessart  to  treat  the  foolish  in  reoard  to  their  roLLT.  We 
are  not  to  give  back  foolish  answers  to  foolish  questions,  nor  to  attempt  to  attract  the 
frivolous  by  frivolous  methods.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  not  wise,  nor  is  it  right, 
to  treat  foolish  people  as  though  they  were  serious  and  thoughtful.  Thus,  if  questions 
are  raised  in  mockery,  it  is  our  duty  to  treat  them  accordingly,  and  therefore  lo  refuse 
to  answer  them.  If  it  is  evident  that  an  inquirer  is  not  in  earnest  it  i^  not  for  his  good 
nor  for  the  honour  of  truth  to  meet  him  with  the  language  which  would  be  suitable 
for  an  honest  truth-seeker.  To  do  so  would  be  to  cast  pearls  before  swine.  It  may  be 
well  to  meet  folly  with  gravity  and  to  rebuke  frivolity.  This  is  answering  a  fool 
according  to  his  folly,  in  tlife  right  way  ;  for  it  is  taking  note  of  his  folly  and  directing 
attention  to  it.  Mockery  should  not  go  unohastised.  Insincerity  ought  to  be  tiposod. 
Pompous  folly  is  sometimes  best  met  by  ridicule.  Thus  Erasmus  castigated  hypocritical 
pretences  to  piety  with  the  keen  rapier  of  his  wit.    It  is  wise  to  piick  a  wind-bag. 

Ver.  12. — 8elf-concHt.  I.  Its  character.  Self-conceit  is  just  the  cherishing  of  an 
undue  ojiinion  of  one's  own  worth,  powers,  chanmler,  or  attainments.  This  is  not  pride, 
because  pride  need  not  n)ake  special  pretences,  so  lonj;  as  it  asserts  itself  with  dignity, 
while  seif-conceit  is  concerned  with  the  actual  mntents  of  the  mental  life.  This  is  not 
vanity,  for  it  is  not  merely  a  desire  to  be  admired  ;  it  may,  and  probably  will,  stimulate 
this  dasire  ;  but  possibly  it  will  be  too  proud  to  cherish  it.  Self-conceit  is  absorbed  with 
an  inordinate  conception  of  its  possessor's  own  inner  wealth.  It  makes  a  weak  man 
believe  that  he  can  carry  the  gates  of  Gaza  like  a  second  Samson,  and  a  foolish  man 
think  that  he  can  solve  the  riddle  of  the  Sphinx.  It  is  profoundly  honest  in  this.  No 
-  Don  Quixote  could  be  more  grave  in  the  service  of  an  illusion  than  the  self-conceited 
man  in  pursuit  of  his  hopeless  aims. 

II.  Its  mischief.  1.  It  blinds  to  self-knowledge.  It  stands  between  a  man  and  a 
true  vision  of  his  condition  and  character.  It  substitutes  its  own  inventions  for  the 
facts  of  his  inner  life.  Instead  of  seeing  himself  as  he  is,  the  conceited  man  only  sees 
himself  as  he  is  painted  by  his  besetting  Weakness.  He  mistakes  the  flattering  picture 
for  a  photographic  likeness.  2.  It  shuts  the  door  on  true  knowledge.  The  conceited 
man  will  not  learn,  for  he  will  npt  believe  in  his  own  ignorance.  He  starts  with  a 
consciousness  of  omniscience.  3.  It  refuses  to  follow  guidance.  In  his  exalted  opinion 
of  himself  the  poor  deluded  self -worshipper  declines  to  be  guided  by  those  who  are  far 
more  capable  than  he  is.  The  captain  dispenses  with  the  pilot,  the  patient  doctors 
himself,  the  suitor  conducts  his  own  case;  in  religious  matters  the  self-conceited  man 
prefers  his  own  notions  to  the  teachings  of  prophets  and  apostles.  His  "  views  "  out- 
weigh Bible  truths. 

III.  Its  causes.  1.  It  springs  from  self-love.  Dwelling  much  on  one's  own 
excellences  generates  an  inordinate  conception  of  them.  Love  is  a  iiatterer,  and  self- 
love  flatters  self.  2.  It  is  nourish  d  in  ignorance.  It  is  usually  through  a  lack  ol 
perception  of  the  narrowness  of  the  horizon  that  the  self-conceited  man  believes  so 
much  in  himself.  His  village  is  the  world.  In  looking  at  a  panorama  the  picture 
seems  to  retreat  into  a  great  distance,  whereas  it  is  but  a  few  feet  from  the  observer. 
3.  It  is  sheltered  h/  indolence.    The  conceited  man  will  not  rouse  himself  to  inquire. 

IV.  Its  remedies.     These  must  follow  the  diagnosis  of  the  disease  and  its  causes, 

1.  Enlarged  knowledge.    As  knowledge  grows,  the*  consciousness  of  ignorance  inoreasea 

2.  Failure.  Give  it  time,  and  self-conceit  will  woik  its  own  cure,  through  humiliating 
disasters.  3.  Grace.  A  vision  of  the  truth  and  righteousness  of  God  and  an  endow- 
Dent  of  the  grace  of  Divine  wisdom  and  goodness  will  humble  a  man  into  shame  at 


B6«  TSfi  P&0VERB8.  [Cft.  itx*L  1-28. 

hi»  own  previous  self-conceit.     So  Nicodemus  was  humbled  when  Christ  sent  him  back 
to  his  cradle. 

Ver.  13. — "  A  lion  in  the  way."  I.  Indolence  cbeates  ditfioulties.  The  hindrance 
is  not  real ;  it  is  purely  imaginary.  The  lion  is  not  in  <Ae  way,  but  in  the  fancy  of  the 
slothful  man.  If  a  man  is  not  in  earnest  in  undertaking  any  work,  he  is  certain  to 
picture  to  himself  insuperable  obstacles.  Thus  missionary  enterprises  are  discouraged 
by  those  who  have  no  missionary  zeal.  The  call  of  Christ  to  service  and  sacrifice  is 
shirked  by  men  whose  inventive  ingenuity  has  manufactured  unsound  excuses.  The 
course  of  the  Christian  life  is  forsaken  by  some  who  see  it  beset  with  dangers  that  only 
spring  out  of  their  own  reluctance  to  deny  themselves,  take  up  their  cross  and  follow 
Christ.  Often  when  the  slothful  man  cries,  "  There  is  a  lion  in  the  way,"  it  is  a  lie ; 
there  is  no  lion. 

II.  Indolence  is  cowardlt.  It  is  possible  that  the  indolent  person  really  believes 
that  the  beast  of  the  forest  has  actually  invaded  the  city,  is  indeed  prowling  about  its 
streets.  He  shrinks  from  a  danger  that  he  truly  fears.  Perhaps  there  is  real  danger. 
We  do  meet  with  difficulties  and  dangers  in  life.  Threatening  lions  roar  on  the  devoted 
servant  of  Christ.  But  then  the  true-hearted  man  will  be  brave  to  face  difiBculty,  and 
only  the  coward  will  shrink  and  fail. 

III.  Danger  is  no  excuse  fob  indolence.  If  there  be  a  lion  in  the  street  it  may 
be  all  the  more  incumbent  on  a  true  man  to  go  out  of  his  house.  For  the  lion  has  no 
right  to  be  in  the  city.  He  should  be  slain  forthwith.  To  leave  him  there  at  large  is 
to  yield  to  him.  Are  the  streets  to  be  given  up  to  the  daring  intruder  because  no  one 
is  bold  enough  to  face  him  ?  Meanwhile  he  may  work  fearful  havoc.  There  may  be 
children  in  the  street.  While  the  idle  coward  bolts  and  bars  his  doors  and  sits 
shivering  in  his  house,  the  helpless  little  ones  are  left  unprotected,  a  sure  prey  for  the 
fierce  brute.  To  shrink  from  the  task  of  expelling  the  lion  is  to  be  guilty  of  shameful 
negligence.  Because  of  the  hindrances  and  difficulties  of  Christ's  work  cowardly  and 
idle  people  permit  the  souls  of  their  fellow-men  and  the  poor  ignorant  children  of 
miserable  degraded  families  to  be  destroyed.  • 

IV.  Danger  is  overcome  by  being  faced.  Perhaps  the  lion's  roar  is  worse  than 
his  bite.  Who  can  tell  but  that  he  is  a  coward  and  will  turn  tail  directly  he  is  faced  ? 
Possibly,  like  Bunyan's  lions,  he  la  chained.  But  we  shall  never  know  till  we  go 
boldly  up  to  him.  Many  apparent  dangers  are  but  empty  threats.  There  are 
difficulties  that  need  only  to  be  confronted  to  vanish.  The  valiant  Christian  soldier 
will  find  that  his  enemies  will  give  way  before  the  "  sword  of  the  Spirit." 

V.  Fob  the  indolent  ma»  these  is  a  lion  in  the  house.  While  he  shrinks  with 
terror  from  venturing  forth  there  is  greater  danger  at  home.  The  hypochondriacal 
patient  who  dreads  meeting  the  chill  of  fresh  air  for  fear  of  catching  cold  becomes  a 
martyr  to  dyspepsia  at  home.  The  idle  man  is  slain  by  his  own  indolence.  Satan, 
who  goes  about  as  a  roaring  lion  seeking  whom  he  may  devour,  is  kept  Qut  by  no  looks 
and  finds  his  victims  in  their  most  private  retreats. 

Ver.  20. — 2%«  fuel  of  strife.  I.  Strife  will  die  out  if  it  be  not  supplied  with 
fresh  fuel.  The  fire  will  not  burn  after  the  stock  of  wood  is  all  exhausted.  The 
quarrel  will  not  continue  if  the  angry  feelings  that  rage  in  it  are  not  ted  by  fresh 
provocations.  The  unhappy  experience  of  most  quarrels  is  that  these  provocations  are 
too  readily  supplied.  But  if  one  party  to  a  quarrel  really  wishes  for  peace,  he  can  often 
obtain  it  by  simply  abstaining  from  maintaining  his  contention.  His  opponent  will 
tire  of  a  one-sided  war.  Patience,  meekness,  and  quiet  endurance  will  thus  make  peace 
in  the  end.  This  was  Christ's  method.  He  brought  peace  by  peaceably  submitting 
to  wrong. 

II.  Stbife  is  too  often  maintained  with  the  fresh  fuel  added  by  strangers. 
If  the  two  principals  in  a  qnarrel  were  lelt  to  themselves,  they  might  tire  of  per- 
petual disputes.  But  a  third  party  interferes,  not  as  a  peacemaker,  but  to  take  one 
side;  or  to  meddle  in  pure  mischief-making,  delighting  to  stir  up  the  embers  of 
nrife ;  or  to  show  his  own  power  and  importance.  This  conduct  is  the  opposite  of  that 
©f  one  who  serves  the  Prince  of  Peace. 

IIL  TAiiX-BKABQia  ASD8  FUKi.  TO  BTsm.    1.  /( nui^  U  trv.    W«  may  hear  wme- 


te.  itvi.  1-28.]  Tfifi  PftOVEftBS.  66? 

thing  of  one  party  in  a  qnarrel  which  wo  know  to  be  correct,  and  report  it  to  the  other, 
though  it  was  never  intended  to  be  repeated.  This  rouses  angry  passions  and  renews 
the  old  battle.  Immense  harm  is  done  by  merely  inconsiderate  gossip,  When  an 
element  of  spite  is  added  and  there  is  a  deliberate  attempt  to  aggravate  a  quarrel,  the 
conduct  of  the  tale-bearer  is  simply  diabolical.  2.  It  is  likely  to  be  exaggerated.  Most 
tales,  like  snowballs,  grow  as  they  proceed.  Passing  from  one  to  another,  they  are 
unii^aitionally  exaggerated.  Surmise  and  inference  are  mixed  up  with  the  original 
narrative  as  part  of  the  story.     Rhetorical  point  is  gained  at  the  expense  of  accuracy. 

IV.  It  is  the  ddtt  op  the  Ohbistian  to  allat  strife.  His  should  be  the 
blessedness  of  the  peacemaker  (Matt.  v.  9).  If  we  have  Christian  love  we  shall  desire 
to  do  this,  for  charity  covers  a  multitude  of  sins  (1  Pet.  iv.  8).  Immense  harm  would 
be  prevented  by  the  merely  negative  course  of  refraining  from  repeating  all  words  that 
have  the  slightest  tendency  to  provoke  ill  will  between  other  people.  There  is  virtue 
in  reticence.  Silence  here  is  indeed  golden.  But  sometimes  we  should  go  further,  and 
endeavour  to  make  the  best  of  people  to  one  another,  and  so  to  heal  quarrels. 

V.  No   TALE-BEAEBB    CAN    REVIVE   THE    STRIFE    BETWEEN   THE    SOUL   AND    GoD.      If 

there  be  no  more  fuel,  this  will  vanish.  God  desires  to  be  reconciled  with  his  children. 
If  they' will  but  lay  down  their  arms,  the  old  quarrel  will  cease  at  once.  1.  God  knows 
tJie  worst  of  us.  He  knows  all.  Therefore  he  never  makes  discoveries  that  will  rouse 
his  wrath  agirinst  our  pardoned  past.  2.  He  cannot  he  misled  by  deceivers.  Tale-bearers 
may  malign  our  character  before  men,  never  before  God.  3.  The  only  thing  to  continue 
our  strife  with  Ood  is  to  amtinue  our  rebellious  lives.  While  we  seek  peace,  peace  is 
secure. 

Ver.  27. — Caught  in  one's  own  snare.  One  man  may  be  supposed  to  have  dug  a  pit 
in  some  dark  place  in  the  road,  or  to  have  concealed  it  by  covering  it  with  boughs  and 
earth — like  an  Indian  tiger-trap — so  that  he  may  catch  some  wild  animal,  or  perhaps 
make  a  prisoner  or  a  victim  of  his  enemy.  Then,  not  heeding  its  whereabouts,  he  falls 
into  his  own  snare.  Another  may  be  rolling  a  stone  against  his  enemy,  when  it  falls 
back  and  crushes  the  author  of  the  mischief.  Consider  first  some  cases  in  which  these 
things  might  happen,  and  then  the  principle  that  underlies  them. 

I.  Instances.  1.  The  deceiver.  The  pit  la  a  snare.  It  is  meant  to  deceive.  Those 
who  deceive  others  are  likely  to  be  deceived.  They  brand  and  blind  the  faculty  of 
truth.  They  acclimatize  themselves  in  a  zone  of  falsehood.  In  the  very  belief  that 
they  think  this  well  for  them,  they  prove  themselves  deluded.  2.  The  swindler.  This 
man  may  entrap  unwary  folk  who  trust  his  offers,  and  at  first  he  may  thrive  and  fatten 
on  his  ill-gotten  gains;  but  his  success  is  almost  sure  to  be  short-lived.  Swindlers 
rarely  prosper  till  old  age.  3.  The  tempter.  One  who  Imitates  the  work  of  the  devil 
may  have  the  devil's  wicked  triumph  over  weakness  and  ignorance.  He  may  succeed 
in  luring  his  victims  to  shame  and  ruin,  and  he  may  find  a  hellish  glee  in  the  awful 
ease  with  which  he  overcomes  their  virtue.  But  he  is  a  short-sighted  self-deceiver. 
There  is  a  pit  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels,  and  the  tempter  is  one  of  the  latter. 
Satan  makes  hell,  and  every  tempter  prepares  his  own  pit  of  destruction.  4.  The 
mppmient  of  Christ.  The  Jews  rejected  their  Lord  and  laid  snares  for  catching  him. 
He  was  keen  to  reply,  and  turned  the  shame  on  the  head  of  each  party  in  succession 
—Pharisee,  Sadducee,  Herodian.  In  the  end  they  accomplished  his  death.  But  they 
were  punished  in  the  frightful  overthrow  of  their  city.  The  world's  rejection  of  Christ 
would  mean  the  world's  ruin.  Every  soul  that  plots  against  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
unwarily  plots  for  its  own  undoing. 

II.  The  UNDBRLTiNa  PBiNcrPLB.  This  principle  is  that  sin  brings  its  own  retribution. 
There  is  no  need  for  the  conception  of  a  Deus  ex  machind.  No  heralds  of  justice  are 
wanted  to  proclaim  the  guilt  of  the  offender;  no  heavenly  executioners  with  flaming 
swords  are  required  to  bring  swift  vengeance  on  the  guilty.  If  only  the  foolish  sinner 
is  left  to  himself,  he  will  certainly  reap  the  fatal  consequences  of  his  wickedness.  Sin 
is  naturally  fatal.  "  Whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap.  For  he  that 
loweth  to  the  flesh  shall  of  the  flesh  reap  corruption."  The  vile  harvest  of  death 
grows  in  the  soil  of  the  man's  own  life.  He  is  his  own  executioner.  No  doubt  this 
terrible  fact  is  based  on  a  Divine  decree  that  lies  deeply  embedded  in  the  very  constitution 
pf  the  univerM.    Therefore,  as  the  forest  traveller  unconsciously  makes  a  cirouit  and 


608  THE  PROVERBS.  [oh.  xxiri.  1_2«. 

returns  to  his  old  camp-fire,  so  the  sinner  comes  hack  to  his  own  evil  deedl^  but  to  find 
them  now  as  snares  to  entrap  him  and  itones  to  crush  him. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 3  —Sayings  ayainst  folly.  I.  The  inaptness  of  honoueb  to  the  foolish 
MAN.  (Ver.  i.)  According  to  Jerome,  it  is  something  unheard  of  or  impossible  to 
ex,  erience,  rain  in  the  harvest-time  (see  1  Sam.  xii.  17,  s??.).  The  advancement  oi 
the  fool  appears  to  all  men  unseasonable,  even  shocking.  High  place  reveals  the  more 
clearly  the  sniallness  of  small  souls.  Honour  is  the  just  reward  of  virtue  and  abilit\. 
Let  men  he  virtuous  and  vfise,  that  they  may  he  honoured,  and  that  external  distinctions 
may  not  rather  invite  the  contempt  of  observers. 

II.  The  harmlessnbss  op  tjnmebited  curses.  (Ver.  2.)  Aimless  as  the  wa3  waid 
flight  of  sparrow  or  swallow,  they  fail  to  strike  their  object  (see  that  in  2  Sam.  xvi. 
5,  sqq. ;  1  Kings  ii.  8).  "  I  would  not  hesitate  to  say,"  observes  Trench,  "  that  the 
great  glory  of  proverbs  in  their  highest  aspect,  and  that  which  makes  them  so  full  ot 
blessing  to  those  who  cordially  accept  them,  is  the  conviction,  of  which  they  are  full, 
that,  despite  all  appearances  to  the  contrary,  this  world  is  God's  world,  and  not  the 
world  of  the  devil  or  of  those  wicked  men  who  may  be  prospering  for  the  hour.  A 
lie  hat  no  legs."  Truth  may  be  temporarily  depressed,  but  cannot  fall  to  the  ground 
(Ps.  xciv.  15 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  9).  But  as  for  the  lie ;  its  priests  may  set  it  on  its  feet  again 
after  it  has  once  fallen  before  the  presence  of  the  truth,  yet  this  will  all  be  labour  in 
vain ;  it  will  only  be,  like  Dagon,  again  to  fall. 

III.  FoLLT  INVITES  ITS  OWN  CHASTISEMENT.  (Ver.  3.)  The  instlncts  of  flesh  and 
blood  show  like  untamed  and  unbroken-in  animals,  especially  in  idleness,  and  demand 
the  like  severe  treatment.  "  Our  flesh  and  sense  must  be  subdued,"  not  flattered  and 
fed.    If  we  do  not  practise  self-control,  God  will  administer  his  chastisements. — J. 

Vers.  4 — 12. — Discussion  offoUy  and  its  treatment.  I.  How  to  answer  the  fool. 
(Vers.  4,  6.)  1.  Not  according  to  his  folly ;  i.e.  so  chiming  in  with  his  nonsense  that 
you  become  as  he  is.  Do  not  descend  into  the  arena  with  a  fool.  Preserve  self-respect, 
and  observe  the  conduct  of  the  Saviour  when  to  folly  he  "answered  not  again."  2. 
According  to  his  folly;  that  is,  with  the  sharp  and  cutting  reply  his  folly  invites  and 
deserves.  We  have  also  examples  of  this  in  the  conduct  of  our  Lord ;  e.g.  in  reference 
to  the  inquiry  of  the  Jews  concerning  the  purging  of  the  temple,  which  he  answeied 
by  a  reference  to  John's  baptism  (Matt.  xxi.  25,  etc.).  The  twofold  treatment  of  iha 
fool  reminds  that  the  spirit  and  motive  must  determine  the  act,  and  that  •ipposite 
methods  may  be  equally  good  at  different  times. 

II.  The  fool  is  not  to  be  trusted.  (Vers.  6,  7.)  1.  With  messages  and  com- 
misHons.  (Ver.  6.)  He  who  does  so  is  like  one  who  amputates  his  own  limbs, 
deprives  himself  of  the  means  of  gaining  his  object,  or  who  voluntarily  drinks  of  an 
evil  brewage.  2.  ffis  words  are  not  to  be  trusted.  (Ver.  7.)  Sayings  in  the  mouth 
of  the  fool  are  purposeless  and  pointless,  when  they  even  do  no  harm.  Fools  will  not 
be  prudent,  says  Luther,  and  yet  would  ever  play  the  part  of  wise  men.  "  A  wise 
Baying  doth  as  ill  become  a  fool  as  dancing  does  a  cripple."  The  wise  and  weightj 
saying  becomes  in  his  mouth  a  jest.  He  who  would  instruct  others  in  Divine  wisdoa 
must  first  have  embraced  it  himself.  Solemnity  may  be  a  cover  for  a  sot ;  and  th» 
greatest  folly  is  to  impose  on  one's  self. 

III.  The  fool  is  not  to  be  honoured.  (Ver.  8.)  To  lift  him  out  of  his  place  by 
compliments  or  honours  is  as  inapt  as  to  lay  a  jewel  upon  a  common  heap  of  stones. 
The  sling  makes  the  stone  bound  in  it  an  implement  of  death ;  and  to  flatter  the 
undeservmg  brings  disgrace  upon  one's  self.  It  is  like  putting  sword  or  pistol  into 
a  madman's  hand.  But  the  other  interpretation  is  better.  Ver.  9  shows  how 
mischievous  are  even  good  things  in  the  lips  and  hands  of  those  who  only  abuse  them. 
Luther  quaintly  says,  "  If  a  drunkard  sports  with  a  briar,  he  scratches  more  with  it 
than  he  allows  to  smell  the  roses  on  it ;  so  does  a  fool  often  work  more  mischief  with 
the  Scripture  than  good."  (The  meaning  of  ver.  10  is  so  obscure,  it  must  be  left  t« 
exegetes;  it  appears  to  coincide  with  the  foregoing — the  fool  is  not  to  be  trusted.) 


OH.  XXVI.  1— 2a]  THE  PEOVEBBS.  509 

IV.  Tub  pool  ib  inoorbiqiblb.  (Vers.  11,  12 ;  see  2  Pet.  ii.  22.)  He  returns  to 
his  exploded  nonsense,  his  often-repeated  fallacies ;  and  to  his  exposed  errors  of  conduct 
(Matt.  xii.  45 ;  John  v.  14 ;  Heb.  vi.  4 — 8).  Relapses  into  sin,  as  into  sickness,  ars 
dangerous  and  deadly.  "A  raw  sin  is  like  a  blow  to  a  broken  leg,  a  burden  to  a 
crushed  arm."  The  cause  of  these  relapses  and  this  incorrigibility  is  pointed  out^ 
deep-rooted  self-conceit.  This  is  the  fruitful  mother  of  follies.  Let  none  deem  himself 
perfect,  but  let  every  one  cultivate  humility  as  his  dearest  [lossession.  God  gi  veth  grace 
to  the  lowly,  but  resisteth  the  proud  and  them  that  are  wise  in  their  own  conceits. — J. 

Vers.  13— 16. — The  vice  of  idhneai.  I.  It  is  pull  of  excuses.  (Ver.  13.)  There 
Is  always  some  pretext  for  evading  duty,  however  frivolous  and  absurd,  with  the  idle 
man.  Idleness  is  the  parent  of  almost  every  sin ;  here  of  cowardice.  He  who  excuses, 
accuses  himself.  Every  manly  act  of  exertion  is  imagined  to  be  full  of  danger  by  the 
lazy  mind.  The  sluggard  does  not  see  what  danger  of  another  and  deadlier  kind  there 
is  in  stagnation.  Danger  is  the  brave  man's  opportunity,  difficulty  the  lion  in  the  way, 
by  victory  over  which  he  may  earn  the  laurel  of  victory  and  gain  the  joy  of  new 
cunscious  power. 

n.  It  loves  ebposb  and  bblp-indulobnob.  (Ver.  14.)  As  the  door  swings 
perpetually  upon  its  hinges,  without  moving  a  step  from  its  fixed  position,  so  with  the 
sluggard.  He  "  turns  round  and  round,  with  dull  stupidity,  like  the  dyer's  horse  in 
the  ring"  (oh.  xix.  24).  How  often  the  cannot  of  the  slave  of  vice  or  evil  habit  only 
disguises  the  tvill  not  of  the  sloth-eaten  heart!  To  make  mere  rest  our  life-object  is  to 
contend  against  the  order  of  God. 

HI.  It  hates  exertion.  (Ver.  16.)  Even  the  most  necessary  exertion  may  becom* 
by  liabit  distasteful.  To  take  his  hand  from  his  bosom,  even  merely  to  reach  after  the 
bread  of  life.  Is  too  much  labour  for  him.  And  thus  his  life,  instead  of  being  a  continual 
feast,  sinks  into  spiritual  indigence  and  starvation.    "  The  idle  soul  shall  suffer  hunger." 

IV.  It  bbeeds  conceit  and  folly.  (Ver.  16.)  This  is  the  strange  irony  of  the 
vice,  that  the  empty  hand  shall  fancy  itself  full  of  wisdom.  But  such  fancies  are  the 
very  growth  of  the  soil  of  indolence.  It  is  impossible  to  make  such  a  one  understand 
bis  ignorance,  for  it  requires  knowledge  to  perceive  it ;  and  he  who  can  perceive  it  has 
it  not  (Jeremy  Taylor).  The  evil  may  creep  into  the  Church.  One  may  fall  into  an 
idle  and  passive  piety,  content  with  sitting  still,  hearing,  praying,  singing,  from  one 
end  of  the  year  to  the  other,  without  advancing  one  step  in  the  practical  Christian 
hfe  (1  These,  v.  6) J. 

Vers.  17 — 19. — Wanton  petulance.  I.  Meddling  in  otheks'  quarrels.  (Ver.  17.) 
By  a  veiy  homely  image  the  folly  of  this  is  marked.  To  interfere  in  disputes  which 
do  not  concern  one  is  to  get  hurt  one's  self.  No  doubt  the  proverb  admits  of  a  very 
selfish  application.  We  may  excuse  indifference  to  right  on  such  a  plea.  But  a  true 
instinct  of  Christian  justice  and  love  will  find  a  middle  course.  We  should)  be  sure  of 
our  call  to  act  before  we  meddle  in  others'  affairs.  It  is  rare  that  it  can  lie  our  duty  to 
volunteer  the  office  of  judge.   Benevolent  neutrality  is  generally  our  most  helpful  attitude. 

II.  Makino  spobt  of  mischief.  (Vers.  18, 19.)  There  is  an  ape-like  line  of  mischief 
in  human  nature  that  needs  to  be  watched.  Amusing  in  trifling  matters,  it  may,  if 
encouraged,  fly  at  high  game.  He  that  purposely  deceives  his  neighbour  under  colour 
of  a  jest  is  no  less  prejudicial  to  him  than  a  lunatic  that  doth  wrong  out  of  frenzy  and 
distraction  (Bishop  Hall).  The  habit  of  teasing  should  be  corrected  in  children.  What 
seems  comparatively  harmless  in  itself  at  first  may  readily  become  a  habit  and  harden 
into  a  vice.  It  is  in  the  littfe  delicacies  of  daily  life,  no  less  than  in  the  greatest 
matters,  that  we  are  called  to  practise  the  golden  rule.  We  must  consider  the  effect, 
as  well  as  the  intention,  of  our  actions;  for,  as  in  the  old  fable,  what  is  sport  tc  ug 
may  be  grievous  hurt  to  another. — J. 

Vers.  20 — 28. — Spite,  cunninij,  and  deceit.  1.  I'he  tale-beakee  and  mischief- 
maker.  (Vers.  20—22.)  1.  Ei$  inflammatory  character.  (Vers.  20,  21.)  He  keeps 
alive  quarrels  which,  but  for  his  vice,  would  die  down  for  want  of  fuel.  It  is  easy  to 
fire  the  imagination  with  tales  of  evil,  not  so  easy  to  quench  the  flames  thus  kindled. 
If  the  character  is  odious,  let  us  beware  of  countenancing  it  by  opening  our  ears  t« 


510  THE  PBOVEEBS.  [cm.  xxvi.  1— 2a. 

scandal.  Personal  gossip  has  in  onr  day  become  an  offence  in  the  public  press.  But 
were  there  no  receivers,  there  would  be  no  thieves.  If  we  cannot  stop  the  scandal- 
monger's mouth,  wo  can  stop  our  own  ears ;  and  "  let  him  see  in  our  face  that  he  has 
no  room  in  our  heart."  2.  The  pain  he  causes.  (Ver.  22.)  Slander  is  deadly — it 
"  outvenoms  all  the  worms  of  Nile."  "  A  whispered  word  may  stab  a  gentle  heart." 
"  What  weapon  can  be  nearer  to  nothing  than  the  sting  of  a  wasp?  yet  what  a  painful 
wound  may  it  givel  The  scarce-visilale  point  how  it  envenoms  and  rankles  and 
swells  up  the  flesh !  The  tenderness  of  the  part  adds  much  to  the  grief."  If  Grod  has 
given  us  a  sting,  or  turn  for  satire,  may  we  use  it  for  its  proper  work — to  cover  evil 
with  contempt,  and  folly  with  ridicule,  and  not  at  the  devilish  instigation  of  envy  and 
spite.    Lot  us  dread  and  discourage  the  character  of  the  amusing  social  slanderer. 

n.  The  bad  hbabt.  (Vers.  23 — 25.)  1.  It  may  be  varnished  over,  but  m  stiU  the 
bad  heart.  It  is  like  the  common  sherd  covered  with  impure  silver,  the  common 
wood  with  veneer.  The  burning  lips  seem  here  to  mean  glowing  professions  of  friend- 
ship, like  the  kiss  of  Judas.  2.  Duplicity  is  the  sign  of  the  had  heart.  The  dissembler 
smiles,  aud  murders  while  he  smiles.    The  fair  face  hides  what  the  false  heart  doth  know, 

**  Neither  man  nor  angel  can  discero 
Hypocrisy,  the  only  evil  that  walks 
Invisible,  except  to  God  alone. 

Oft,  though  wisdom  wakes,  suspicion  sleeps 
At  wisdom's  gate,  and  to  simplicity 
Beaigas  her  charge,  wliile  goodness  thinks  no  iU 
Where  no  ill  seems." 

3.  The  need  of  prudence  and  reserve.  "  Trust  not  him  that  seems  to  1m  ■  saint." 
Indeed,  it  is  an  error  to  place  perfect  trust  in  anything  human  or  finite.  But  the 
special  warning  here  is  against  suffering  flattery  to  blind  us  to  the  real  character  of  one 
who  h«s  once  been  revealed  in  his  true  colours. 

III.  The  kxposubb  op  wickedness.  (Vers.  26,  27.)  Vain  is  the  attempt  of  men 
to  conceal  for  any  length  of  time  their  real  character.  What  they  say  and  what  they 
do  not  say,  do  and  do  not  do,  reveals  them  sooner  or  later.  And  the  revelation  brings 
its  retribution.  The  intriguer  falls  into  his  own  pit,  is  crushed  beneath  the  stone  he 
set  in  motion.  Curses  come  home  to  loost ;  the  biter  is  bitten ;  and  the  villain  suffers 
from  the  recoil  of  his  own  weapon.  This  appears  also  to  be  the  sense  of  ver.  28. 
Though  a  lie  has  no  legs,  it  has  wings,  and  may  fly  far  and  wide,  but  it  "  hates  its  own 
master  "  (according  to  one  rendering),  aud  flies  back  to  perch  on  his  Moulder  and  betray 
him  to  his  ruin. — J. 

Vers.  1,  6,  9. — Honouring  the  unworthy.  There  are  different  ways  in  which  we  may 
honour  men,  whether  the  wise  or  the  unwise.  We  may  (1)  put  them  in  positions  of 
rank  and  dignity,  in  which  men  bow  (or  fall)  before  them  (ch.  ixv.  26) ;  or  (2)  entrust 
to  them  offices  of  importance  and  responsibility  (ver.  6) ;  or  (3)  allow  them  to  under- 
take the  work  of  public  instruction  (vers.  7,  9).  It  is  only  the  wise  and  good  that  we 
should  honour  in  these  ways.  Unfortunately,  in  the  confusion  and  perversity  which 
sin  has  wrought  in  the  world,  it  often  happens  that  it  is  not  the  wise  man  but  the  fool 
who  is  chosen  for  the  post  or  the  task.  How  foolish  it  is  to  honour  the  xmworthy  is 
seen  if  we  consider — 

I.  Its  painful  inoongbuitt.  "As  snow  in  summer,  and  as  rain  in  harvest,  so 
honour  is  not  seemly  for  a  fool."  To  hear  a  fool  attempting  lamely  to  discourse 
wisdom  is  suggestive  of  the  motion  of  a  man  whose  "  legs  are  not  equal."  For  the  post 
of  honour  to  bo  occupied  by  one  who  has  disgraced  himself  by  guilty  foolishness,  or  who 
has  neglected  his  opportunities,  and  is  empty-minded  and  incapable,  this  is  something 
which  is  manifestly  unfitting ;  it  offends  our  sense  of  the  appropriate  and  the  becoming. 
Shamelessness  and  honour,  stupidity  and  responsibility,  have  no  sort  of  ao-reement : 
they  are  miserably  and  painfully  ill-mated.  " 

II.  Its  positive  beversal  op  the  true  obdeb  of  thinqb.  The  fool  ought  to  be 
positively  dishonoured.  He  need  not  be  actually  despised.  There  is  too  much  of 
capacity,  of  indefinitely  great  possibility  in  every  human  spirit  to  make  it  right  for  us 
to  despise  our  brethren.     We  are  to  "  honour  all  men  "  because  they  are  men  because 


mt  xxn.  1— 28.]  THE  PROVERBS.  5H 

they  are,  with  us,  the  offspring  of  God,  and  may  be  his  children  in  the  highest  and 
deepest  sense  (1  Pet.  ii.  17).  Yet  is  it  our  clear  duty  to  see  that  folly  is  dishonoured, 
that  it  is  made  to  take  the  lowest  place,  that  the  man  who  does  shameful  things  is  put 
to  shame  betoro  his  fellows.  Let  those  who  dishonour  Qod,  disregard  their  fellows,  and 
disgiaoe  themselves,  feel  the  edge  of  holy  indignation;  they  should  be  smitten  in  faiths 
fulness  that  they  may  be  healed  in  mercy. 

III.  Its  INJ0BIOUBNES8.  To  honour  the  fool  by  giving  him  rank,  or  responsibility, 
or  the  opportunity  of  speech,  is :  1.  To  injure  him.  For  it  is  to  make  him  "  think  him- 
self to  be  something  [or, '  somebody ']  when  he  is  nothing  [or, '  nobody ']."  It  is  to  fasten 
him  in  bis  present  position  of  unworthiness,  and  thus  to  do  him  the  most  serious  harm 
we  can  inflict  upon  him.  The  flatterer  of  the  fool  is  his  deadliest  enemy.  2.  Toinjwe 
the  wmmunity.  It  is  "  to  drink  damage,"  to  bind  a  stone  in  a  sling  that  is  most  likely 
to  Mt  and  htirt  our  neighbour,  to  smart  with  a  wound  from  some  sharp  thorn.  The 
foolish,  the  guilty,  the  wrong  in  heart  and  mind,  do  serious  harm  when  they  hold  the 
reins  of  ofBce  or  sit  in  the  seat  of  honour.  Their  very  elevation  is  itself  an  encourage- 
ment to  folly  and  vice,  and  a  discouragement  to  wisdom  and  virtue.  They  administer 
injustice  instead  of  justice.  They  let  all  things  down  instead  of  rtusing  them  up.  They 
advance  those  who  are  like-minded  with  themselves,  and  neglect  those  who  deserve 
honour  and  promotion.  Speaking  from  "  the  chair,"  they  make  falsity  and  foolishness 
to  appear  to  be  truth  and  wisdom,  and  w  they  mislead  the  minds  and  darken  the  Uvea 
and  betray  the  souls  of  men. — C. 

Vers.  2,  3. — What  to  fear.  Pear  enters  largely  into  human  experience.  It  is  an 
emotion  which  is  sometimes  stamped  upon  the  countenance  so  that  it  is  le^ble  to  all 
who  look  upon  it.  Under  its  baleful  shadow  some  men  have  spent  a  large  part  of  their 
life.  We  may  well  ask  what  to  fear  and  how  to  be  delivered  from  its  eviL  There  are 
•ome — 

I.  Things  that  have  been,  but  need  not  hate  been,  feabed.  1.  ,Men  and 
women  have  dreaded  "  the  evil  eye  "  of  their  fellow-men.  They  have  been  alarmed  by 
evil  omens,  by  signs  and  portents  that  have  boded  misfortune  or  calamity,  by  presenti- 
ments of  approaching  death,  etc.  All  these  things  have  been  purely  imaginary,  and 
they  have  added  largely  and  lamentably  to  the  burdens  and  sorrows  of  existence.  It  is 
painful  to  think  how  many  thousands,  how  many  millions  of  mankind  have  had  their 
hearts  troubled  and  their  lives  darkened,  or  even  blighted,  1^  fears  that  have  been 
wholly  needless — fears  of  some  evil  which  has  never  been  more  or  nearer  to  them  in 
fact  than  the  shadow  of  the  bird's  wing  as  it  circles  in  the  air  or  flies  away  into  the 
forest.  2.  Of  these  imaginary  evils  that  which  is  conspicuous  among  others  is  the  curie 
of  the  wicked — "  the  curse  that  is  causeless."  The  bitter  imprecation  of  the  heart  that 
is  full  of  unholy  hatred  may  make  the  spirit  quiver  at  the  moment,  but  its  effect  should 
be  momentary.  Let  reason  do  its  rightful  work  and  the  anxiety  will  disappear.  What 
possible  harm  can  come  of  the  bad  man's  curse  ?  He  has  no  power  to  bring  about  its 
fulfllrnent.  Not  in  his  hand  are  the  laws  of  nature,  the  issues  of  events,  the  future  of 
the  holy.  Let  the  feeling  of  apprehension  pass  away  with  a  reflection  that  all  these 
things  are  in  the  hand  of  the  Supreme.  Let  it  be  as  the  wing  of  the  flitting  bird,  out 
of  siglit  in  a  moment.    Let  it  be  "  as  the  idle  wind  which  we  regard  not." 

II.  Things  that  must  sometimes  be  bbavbd.  Although  we  may  entirely  disre- 
gard the  malediction  of  the  guilty  and  the  godless,  we  are  obliged  to  attach  some 
importance  to  their  active  opposition.  When  imprecation  passes  into  determined 
hostility,  we  have  then  to  lay  our  account  with  it.  We  have  then  to  consider  what  we 
must  do  to  meet  it.  But  if  we  are  obviously  and  consciously  in  the  right,  we  can 
afford  to  brave  and  breast  it.  We  are  not  alone.  God  is  with  us.  Almighty  power, 
irresistible  wisdom,  Divine  sympathy,  are  with  us ;  we  may  go  on  our  way,  doing  our 
duty,  and  bearing  our  testimony,  fearless  of  our  foes  and  of  all  their  machinations. 
There  is,  however — 

III.  One  thino  vboh  which  it  is  natubal  to  shbink  ;  the  enmity  of  a  human 
heart-  We  may  make  light  of  the  weapons  of  our  adversaries ;  we  may  be  fearless  of 
their  designs  and  their  doings ;  but  from  the  feeling  of  hatred  in  their  hearts  we  do  well 
to  shrink.  It  is  far  from  being  nothing  that  human  hearts  are  actually  hating  us, 
jnalavolently  wishing  us  evil,  prepared  to  rejoice  in  our  sorrow,  in  our  downfall.    We 


612  THE  PB0VERB8.  [oh.  xxvi.  1—28. 


should  not  surely  be  entirely  unaffected  by  the  thought.  It  is  a  consideration  that 
should  move  us  to  pity  and  to  prayer.  We  should  have  a  sorrowful  feeling  that  ends 
in  prayer  that  God  would  turn  their  heart,  that  leads  also  to  the  first  available  oppor- 
tunity of  winning  them  to  a  better  mind.     And  there  are  those  who  should  cherish — 

IV.  One  salutary  fear.  (Yer.  3.)  Those  who  are  wrong  in  heart  and  life  may 
dread  the  coming  down  upon  them  of  that  rod  of  correction  which  ia  found  to  be  the 
only  weapon  that  will  avail. — 0. 

Vers.  4,  5. — The  two  ways  of  meeting  folly.    They  are  these — 

I.  The  cabbfijl  avoidance  op  repeatino  it.  (Ver.  4.)  Only  too  often  men 
allow  the  foolish  to  draw  them  into  a  repetition  of  their  fully,  so  that  one  fool  makes 
another.  Folly  is  contagious,  and  we  are  all  in  some  danger  of  catching  it.  This  is 
the  case  with  us  when  :  1.  We  let  the  word  of  anger  provoke  us  to  a  responsive  bitter- 
ness ;  then  we  are  "  overcome  of  evil "  instead  of  "  overcoming  evil  with  good  "  (Bom. 
xii.  21).  2.  We  allow  one  exaggeration  to  lead  us  into  another.'  When  two  men  are 
in  conversation,  one  is  often  tempted  to  lead  the  other  into  statements  that  exceed  the 
truth ;  and  exaggeration  is  only  another  name  for  falsehood.  3.  We  accept  a  foolifh 
challenge.  The  young,  more  particularly,  are  fond  of  exciting  one  another  to  deeds  of 
folly,  and  it  often  requires  courage,  steadfastness,  even  nobility  of  spirit,  to  refuse  to 
follow  the  leading  of  unwisdom.  4..  We  indulge  in  idle  gossip;  letting  the  first  state- 
ment about  our  nefghbour,  which  is  unfounded  and  slanderous,  conduct  us  to  idle  and 
mischievous  talk  in  the  same  foolish  strain.  5.  We  permit  ourselves  to  follow  the  lead 
of  the  man  whose  thoughts  and  words  are  in  the  direction  of  a  doubtful,  or  a  dishonour- 
able, or  »  defiling  region.  In  all  these  cases  it  behoves  us  "  not  to  answer  a  fool 
accoriling  to  his  folly,"  to  be  silent  altogether ;  or  else  to  break  away  into  another  and 
worthier  strain ;  or  even  to  "  take  up  our  parable"  against  that  which  has  been  said  in 
oar  hearing.     But  here  we  reach  the  other  method,  viz. — 

II.  The  wise  condemnation  of  it.  Folly  is  sometimes  to  be  rebuked  (ver.  5). 
Silence  on  our  part  would  be  mistaken  and  abused ;  it  would  be  regarded  as  acquiescence 
or  as  incapacity  to  meet  what  has  been  said,  and  folly  would  go  on  its  way,  its  empty 
head  held  higher  than  before.  We  must  use  discretion  here ;  must  understand  "  when 
only  silence  suiteth  best,"  and  also  when  silence  would  be  a  mistake  and  even  a  sin.- 
The  times  to  answer  a  fool  according  to  his  folly,  t.e.  in  the  way  which  is  demanded  by 
his  folly,  are  surely  these :  1.  When  ignorance  needs  to  be  exposed.  2.  When  pre- 
tentiousness and  presumptuousness  want  to  be  put  down.  3.  When  irreverence  or 
actual  profanity  requires  to  be  rebuked  and  silenced.  4.  When  vice  or  cruelty 
deserves  to  be  smitten  and  abashed.  Then  let  the  true  and  brave  man  speak ;  let  the 
name  and  the  honour  cf  his  holy  Saviour,  let  the  cause  of  truth  and  righteousness,  let 
the  interests  of  the  young  and  the  poor  and  the  weak  unloose  his  tongue,  and  let  him 
pour  forth  his  indignation.  In  so  doing  he  will  be  following  in  the  footsteps  of  the 
Lord  of  truth  and  love,  and  of  the  noblest  and  worthiest  of  hia  followers. — 0. 

Ver.  13.— (See  homily  on  ch.  xxii.  13.)— 0. 

Vers.  18,  19. — The  condemnation  of  tin.  We  have  here,  In  afew  strong  sentences,  a 
most  forcible  presentation  of  the  evil  and  the  guiltiness  of  wrong-doing.     We  see — 

I.  Its  ugliest  feature — deception.  "  The  man  that  deceiveth  his  neighbour  "  is 
not  here  simply  the  man  who  overreaches  his  customer  or  who  introduces  a  low 
cunning  into 'his  business ;  he  is  rather  the  man  who  deliberately  misleads  his  acquaint- 
ance, his  "  friend,"  and  induces  him  to  do  that  which  is  unwise  and  unworthy.  He  is 
the  man  who  knows  better  himself,  but  who  indoctrinates  the  inexperienced  and  the 
unwary  with  the  principles,  or  rather  the  vain  imaginations,  of  folly.  He  stoops  so 
low  that  he  does  not  hesitate :  1.  To  recommend  forbidden  pleasure  as  an  object  worthy 
of  pursuit,  though  he  knows  well  (or  ought  to  know,  if  he  can  learn  fron  experience) 
that  guilty  gratification  is  the  very  costliest  thing  that  any  man  can  buy.  2.  To 
peisuade  men  that  an  unprincipled  life  is  a  profitable  life,  as  if  "  a  man's  life  consisted 
in  the  abundance  of  the  things  which  he  possessed  ; "  as  if  a  life  without  integrity  were 
not  the  most  utter  and  miserable  failure.  3.  To  recommend  selfishneRs  and  indulgence 
w  a  condition  of  liberty,  when  ia  fact  it  is  the  beginning  and  is  sure  to  end  in  the  most 


CH.  xivi.  1—28.]  THE  PROVERBS.  613 

humiliating  bondage.  4.  To  represent  the  service  of  God  and  of  man  as  a  drudgery 
and  a  dreariness,  when  in  truth  it  is  the  height  of  human  nobility  and  the  very  essence 
,if  enjoyment.  5.  To  prevail  upon  the  young  to  snatch  at  honour  and  success  instead 
of  honestly  labouring  and  patiently  waiting  for  it.  There  is  no  more  painful  and 
repulsive  thing  under  heaven  than  the  siglit  of  experience  and  maturity  breathing  ite 
fallacies,  its  sophisms,  its  delusions,  into  the  ear  of  inexperience  and  innooency. 

II.  Its  bitteb  fruit.  What  do  these  delusions  bring  forth?  The  deceiver  is  a 
man  wlio  "  scatters  firebrands,  arrows,  and  death."  The  ultimate  consequences  of  the 
"  deceitfulnesB  of  sin  "  are  sad  indeed  ;  they  are :  1.  Impoverishment  in  circumstance. 
2.  The  loss  of  the  love  and  the  honour  of  the  wise  and  good.  3.  Eemorse  of  soul  and, 
frequently,  if  not  usually,  the  departure  of  self-respect.  4.  Hopelessness  and  death.  5. 
The  extension  of  the  evil  which  has  been  imbibed  to  those  around ;  becoming  a  source 
of  poisonous  error,  a  fountain  of  evil  and  wrong  and  misery. 

III.  Itb  practical  insanity.  The  fool  who  does  wantonly  scatter  the  seeds  of 
deadly  delusions  in  the  minds  of  men  is  "  as  a  madman."  Tlj-ere  is  no  small  measure  of 
insanity  in  sin.  Sin  is  a  spiritual  disease ;  it  is  our  spiritual  nature  in  a  state  of  com- 
plete derangement,  our  mind  filled  with  false  ideas,  our  heart  affected  with  delusive 
hopes  and  fears.  There  is  no  soundness,  no  wholeness  or  health  about  us,  so  fur  as  we 
are  under  the  dominion  of  sin.  We  do  things  which  we  could  not  possibly  have  done 
if  only  reason  and  rectitude  held  sway  within  us. 

IV.  Its  poor  and  pitiful  apology.  "He  saith,  Am  not  I  in  sport ?"  When  a 
man  deludes  and  betrays,  when  he  wrongs  and  ruins  a  human  soul,  and  then  makes 
a  joke  of  it,  he  only  adds  meanness  to  his  transgression.  Who,  outside  the  bottomless 
pit,  can  see  any  fun  in  a  blighted  life,  in  a  wounded  and  bleeding  spirit,  in  a  soiled  and 
stained  soul,  in  the  ruin  of  reputation,  in  the  blasting  of  a  uoble  ho|ie,  in  the  shallow 
of  spiritual  death  ?  Human  life  and  character  and  destiny  are  infinitely  serious  things ; 
they  are  not  to  be  the  butt  of  fools. — C. 

Ver.  22. — (See  homily  on  ch.  xvii.  9.) — 0. 

Vers.  23—28. — On  guard.  Unfortunately,  we  have  to  treat  men  as  we  find  them, 
not  as  we  wish  that  they  were  and  as  their  Creator  meant  them  to  be.  We  are  com- 
pelled to  learn  caution  as  we  pass  on  our  way. 

I.  OuK  first  duty  and  its  natural  reward.  Our  first  duty,  natural  to  the 
young  and  the  unsophisticated,  is  to  be  frank,  open-minded,  sincere,  trustful ;  to  say  all 
that  is  in  our  heart,  and  to  expect  others  to  do  the  same ;  to  believe  that  men  mean 
what  they  say  and  say  what  they  mean.  And  the  reward  of  this  simplicity  and  truth- 
fulness on  our  part  ia  an  ingenuous,  an  unsuspicious  spirit,  a  spirit  as  far  removed  as 
possible  from  that  of  cunning,  of  artifice,  of  worldliness. 

II.  The  correction  op  experience.  All  too  soon  we  discover  that  we  cannot  act 
on  this  theory  without  being  wounded  and  hurt.  We  find  that  what  looks  like  pure 
silver  may  be  nothing  better  than  "  earthenware  of  the  coarsest  kind  lacquered  over 
with  silver  dross."  Behind  the  lips  that  burn  and  breathe  afi'ection  for  us  and  interest 
in  us  is  a  wicked  heart  in  which  are  "  seven  abominations,"  in  which  dwells  every  evil 
imagination.  We  find  that  those  who  affect  to  be  our  friends  when  they  stand  m  our 
presence  are  in  fact  our  bitterest  and  most  active  enemies.  We  discover  that  our 
words,  spoken  in  good  faith  and  purity  of  heart,  are  misrepresented,  and  are  made  a 
sword  to  smite  us.     Experience  compels  caution,  reticence,  sometimes  absolute  silence. 

HI  The  two  main  evils  against  which  to  guard.  These  are :  1.  Fair  spiak- 
ing  which  is  fake.  The  false  words  that  are  ostensibly  spoken  in  our  interest,  hy  one 
that  means  us  harm ;  words  which  would  lead  to  trust  and  expectation  when  we  should 
be  alive  with  solicitude  and  alert  to  avoid  the  danger  which  impends.  By  these  our 
treasure,  our  position,  our  friendship,  our  reputation,  our  happiness,  may  be  senous  y 
endangered.  2.  Flattery.  The  invention  and  utterance  of  that  which  is  not  felt  at  al^ 
or  the  careless  and  y  '^'aps  well-meant  exaggeration  of  a  feeling  which  is  entertained 
in  the  heart.  Few  things  are  more  potent  for  harm  than  flattery.  (1)  It  is  readily 
received.  (2)  It  is  carefully  treasured ;  men's  self-love  prompts  them  to  accept  and 
to  retain  that  which,  if  it  were  of  an  opposite  character,  they  would  reject.  (3)  It  m 
harmful  in  three  different  directions ;  (o)  It  gives  a  wrong  impression  of  our  estate,  ant 
nravuBBB.  ^ 


514 


THE  PB0VEBB8. 


[oh.  rxvii.  I — 27. 


may  lead  to  financial  "  ruin  "  (rer.  28).  (J)  It  encourages  an  over-estimate  of  ouf 
capacity,  and  may  lead  to  our  undertaking  that  for  which  we  are  incompetent,  and  thus 
to  an  humiliating  and  distressing  failure,  (e)  It  engenders  a  false  idea  of  our  personal 
worth,  and  may  lead  to  spiritual  infatuation,  and  thus  to  the  ruin  of  ourselves. 

TV.  Thb  dutt  and  the  wisdom  of  WABCmss.  As  these  things  are  so,  as  human 
society  does  hold  a  large  number  of  dissemblers  (ver.  24),  as  it  is  possible  that  the  next 
acqunintance  we  make  may  be  an  illustration  of  this  sad  fact,  it  follows  that  absolute 
trustfulness  is  a  serious  mistake.  We  must  be  on  our  guard.  We  must  not  open  our 
hearts  too  freely.  We  must  know  men  before  we  trust  them.  We  must  cultivate  the 
art  of  penetration,  of  reading  character.  To  be  able  to  distinguish  between  the  true 
and  the  false  in  this  great  sphere  is  a  very  large  part  of  wisdom.  Next  to  knowing 
God,  and  to  acquainting  ourselves  with  our  own  hearts,  is  the  duty  of  studying  men 
and  discerning  between  the  lacquered  potsherd  and  the  pure  silver. 

V.  The  doom  of  deceit.  To  be  rigorously  exposed,  to  be  unsparingly  denounced, 
to  be  utterly  ashamed  (vers.  26,  27).— <). 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXVn. 
Vers.  1 — 6. — These  verses  are  grouped  in 
pairs,  eacb  iw>  being  connected  in  subject. 

Ver.  1. — Boast  not  thyself  of  to-morrow. 
He  boasts  himself  (ch.  xxv.  14)  of  to-morrow 
who  counts  upon  it  presumptuously,  settles 
that  he  will  do  this  or  that,  as  if  his  life  was 
in  his  own  power,  and  he  could  make  sure 
of  time.  This  is  blindness  and  arrogance. 
?or  thon  knowest  not  what  a  day  may  bring 
forth.  Our  Lord  gave  a  lesson  on  this 
matter  in  the  parable  of  the  rich  fool  (Luke 
xii.) ;  and  an  analogous  warning,  Viaserl  on 
our  verse,  is  given  by  St.  James  (iv.  13, 
etc.).  On  thip,  topic  moriilists  and  poets 
are  always  dilating.  Very  familiar  are  the 
words  of  Horace  ('  Carm.,'  iv.  7.  17) — 

"Quis  scit,  an  adjiciant  hodiernis  crastina 
Bummse 
Tempora  di  superi?" 

Euripides, '  Ale.,'  783 — 

OvK  etTTt  Bj/riTwv  ocTis  i^€7r((rraTat 
.Till/  aipiov  fUT^ovffav  ei  jStt^trerat. 
1  h  TTJs  Tvxns  y&p  axfiavh  of  irpo/S^o-eTot, 
KfifTT*  ov  StdaKT6v,  oiJS'  oKiaK^Tai  rexvi). 

"Every  day  in  thy  life,"  says  tlie  Arab, 
"is  a  leaf  in  thy  history."  Seneca  wrote 
('  Tbyest.,'  621)— 

"  Nemo  tarn  divos  habuit  faventet, 
Crastinum  ut  possit  sibi  polliceri, 
Kes  deus  nostras  celeri  oitatas 
Turbine  versat." 

There  is  the  adage,  "Nescis  quid  serus 
vesper  vehat."  The  LXX.  has,  as  at  ch. 
lii.  28,  "Thon  knowest  not  what  the  next 
day  {ri  kmovira)  shall  bring  forth."  (For 
the  expression,  ^  eVioSira,  comp.  Acts  vii.  26; 
xvi.  11.) 
Ver.  3. — Let  another  man  praise  thee,  and 


not  thine  own  mouth;  Septuagint,  "Let  thy 
neighbour  (d  ireKas)  laud  thee."  A  stranger; 
»l?j,  properly,  "an  unknown  person  from 
ah  unknown  country ; "  but,  like  nt  in  the 
former  hemistich,  used  inditt'eri^utly  for 
"  another  "  (see  on  ch.  ii.  16).  "  If  I  honour 
myself,"  said  our  Lord  (John  viii.  54),  "  my 
honour  is  nothing."  And  a«  St.  Paul  testi- 
fies (2  Cor.  X.  18;, "  Not  he  tiiat  commendeth 
himself  is  approved,  but  whom  the  Lord 
commendeth." 

"tirip  treavTov  f,ii  ^pdaps  iyxiipLia, 
■aid  the  Greek  gnomist;  and 

^i\av  iTraivoy  /uiKKor  tl  iravToS  \4ye. 

And  a  trite  maxim  runs,  "In  ore  proprio 
laus  sordet ; "  and  an  English  one  decides, 
"He  who  praises  himself  is  a  debtor  to 
others."  Delitzsch  quotes  a  German  pro- 
verb (which  loses  the  jingle  in  translation), 
"  Eigeu-lob  stinkt,  Freundes  Lob  hinkt, 
fremdes  Lob  klingt,"  "Self-praise  stinks, 
friends'  praise  limps,  strangers'  praise 
sounds." 

Ver.  3. — A  stone  is  heavy,  and  the  sand 
weighty;  literally,  heaviness  of  a  stone, 
weight  of  the  sand.  The  substantives  are 
more  forcible  than  the  corresponding  adjec- 
tives would  be ;  the  versions  rather  weaken 
the  form  of  the  expression  by  rendering. 
Grave  est  saxum,  etc.  The  quality  in  the 
things  mentioned  is  weight,  heaviness,  pon- 
derosity;  that  is  what  we  are  bidden  regard. 
A  fool's  wrath  is  heavier  than  them  hoth. 
The  ill  temper  and  anger  of  a  headstrong 
fool,  which  he  vents  on  those  about  him, 
are  harder  to  endure  than  any  material 
weight  is  to  can  y.  Ecclus.  ixii.  15,  "  Sand 
and  salt  and  a  mass  of  iron  are  easier  to 
bear  than  a  man  without  understanding." 
The  previous  verse  asks,  «  What  is  heavier 
than  lead?  and  what  is  the  name  thereof 


OH.  xxTn.  1—27.] 


THE  PROTBRBB. 


S15 


[i.e.  of  the  heavier  thing],  but  a  fool?" 
Job  speaks  of  his  grief  being  heavier  than 
the  sand  of  the  sea  (Job  vi.  3). 

Ver.  4. — Wrath  is  cruel,  and  anger  is  out- 
rageous. Again  subBtantives  are  used,  as 
in  ver.  3, "  Cruelty  of  wrath,  and  overflowing 
of  anger."  Figure  to  yourself  the  fierceness 
and  cruelly  of  a  sudden  excitement  of  anger, 
or  the  biusting  forth  of  passion  which,  like 
a  flood,  carries  all  before  it ;  these  may  be 
violent  for  a  time,  yet  they  will  subside 
when  they  have  spent  themselves.  But 
who  is  able  to  stand  before  envy  I  or  rather, 
jealousy.  The  reference  is  not  so  much  to 
the  general  feeling  of  envy  as  to  the  out- 
raged love  in  the  relation  of  husband  and 
wife  (see  ch.  vf.  34,  and  note  there).  Cant, 
viii.  6,  "  Love  is  strong  as  death ;  jealousy 
is  cruel  as  the  grave:  the  flashes  thereof 
arc  flashes  of  fire,  a  very  vehement  flame." 
Such  jealousy  does  not  blaze  forth  in  some 
sudden  outbreak,  and  ttien  die  away;  it 
lives  and  bioods  and  feeds  itself  hourly  with 
fresh  aliment,  and  is  ready  to  act  at  any 
moment,  hesitating  at  no  means  to  gratify 
itself,  and  sacrificing  without  mercy  its 
victim.  Septuagint, "  Pitiless  is  wrath,  and 
sliarp  is  anger;  but  jealousy  (C^Aoi)  submits 
to  nothing." 

Ver.  5. — Open  rebuke  is  better  than  secret 
love.  Love  that  is  hidden  and  never  dis- 
closea  itself  in  acts  of  self-denial  or  gene- 
rosity, especially  that  which  from  fear  of 
offending  does  not  rebuke  a  friend,  nor 
speak  the  truth  in  love  (Eph.  iv.  15),  when 
there  is  good  reason  for  such  openness — 
such  disguised  love  is  worse,  more  objec- 
tionable, less  beneficial,  than  the  plain 
speaking  which  bravely  censures  a  fault, 
and  dares  to  correct  what  is  wrong  by  well- 
timed  blame.  To  hold  back  blame,  it  has 
been  said,  is  to  hold  back  love.  "I  love 
not  my  friend,"  wrote  Seneca  ('Bp.,'  25), 
"if  I  do  not  offend  him."  Plautus,  'Triuum.,' 
i.  2.  57— 

"  Sed  tu  ex  amiois  certis  mi  es  certissimus. 
Si  quid  scis  me  fecisse  inscite  aut  im- 

probe, 
Si  id  non  me  aoousas,  tu  ipse  objurganJus." 

Publ.  Syr.,  'Sent.,'  16,  "Amici  vitia  si 
feras,  facis  tua,"  which  Erasmus  expounds 
by  adding,  "If  you  take  no  notice  of  your 
friend's  faults,  they  will  be  imputed  to 
you."  Cicero  ('De  Amioit.,'  xxiv.,  xxv.) 
Las  some  sensible  remarks  on  this  subject : 
"When  a  man's  ears  are  shut  against  the 
truth,  so  that  he  cannot  hear  the  truth  from 
a  friend,  the  welfare  of  such  a  one  is  hope- 
less. Shrewd  is  the  observation  of  Cato,  I  hat 
some  are  better  served  by  bitter  enemies 
than  by  friends  who  seem  to  be  agreeable ; 
for  the  former  often  speak  the  truth,  the 
latter  never.  ...  As  therefore  both  to  give 


and  receive  advice  is  the  charaoteristio  of 
true  friendship,  and  that  the  one  should  act 
with  freedom,  but  not  harshly,  and  that  the 
other  should  accept  remonstrance  patiently 
and  without  resistance,  so  it  should  be  con- 
sidered that  there  is  no  deadlier  bane  to 
friendship  than  adulation,  fawning,  and 
flattery." 

Ver.  6. — Faithful  are  the  wciuflds'  of  a 
friend.  This  and  the  next  verse  aflbrd 
examples  of  the  antithetic  form  of  proverb, 
where  the  second  line  gives,  as  it  were,  the 
reverse  side  of  the  picture  presented  by  the 
first.  The  wounds  which  a  real  friend  in- 
fiicts  by  his  jnst  rebukes  are  directed  by 
truth  and  discriminating  affection  (see  Fs. 
oxli.  5).  But  the  kisses  of  an  enemy  are 
deceitful.  So  St.  Jerome,  Fraudulenta  osculd 
odientis.  But  the  verb  here  used  ("iny)  has 
the  meaning,  among  others,  "to  be  abun- 
dant or  frequent;"  hence  it  is  better  to 
take  it  in  this  sense  here,  as  "  plentiful,  pro- 
fuse." An  enemy  is  lavish  with  his  Judas 
kisses  to  liide  his  perfidy  and  hatred. 
Septuagint,  "More  to  be  trusted  are  the 
wounds  of  a  friend  than  the  spontaneous 
Qkicoia-ta)  kisses  of  an  enemy."  "  Non  omnis 
qui  parcit,"  wrote  St.  Augustine  ('  Ep,,'  48, 
'  ad  Vincent.'),  "  amicus  est,  neque  omnis 
qui  verberat,  inimicus." 

Ver.  7. — The  full  soul  loatheth  »n  honey- 
comb. For  "loathes"  the  Hebrew  is  lite- 
rally "  treads  upon,"  "  tramples  underfoot," 
which  is  the  expression  of  the  greatest  dis- 
gust and  contempt;  or  it  may  mean  that 
the  well-fed  man  will  not  stoop  to  pick  up 
the  comb  which  may  have  dropped  in  his 
path  from  some  tree  or  rock.  But  which- 
ever way  we  take  it,  the  same  truth  is  told — 
Self-restraint  increases  enjoyment;  over- 
indulgence pri)duces  satiety,  fatigue,  and 
indolence.     Horace,  ;  Sat.,'  ii.  2.  3S — 

"  Jejunus  rare  stomachus  vulgaria  temnit." 

But  to  the  hungry  soul  every  bitter  thing 
is  sweet.  So  the  prodigal  in  the  partible 
would  fain  fill  himself  with  the  husks 
wliich  the  swine  did  eat.  So  we  say, 
"  Hunger  is  the  best  sauce ; "  the  Germans, 
"  Hunger  makes  raw  beans  sweet; "  and  the 
Portuguese,  "  Brackish  water  is  sweet  in  a 
dry  land." 

Ver.  8. — As  a  bird  that  wandersth  from 
her  nest.  Jerome's  avis  transmigram  con- 
veys to  us  a  notion  Of  a  migratory  bird 
taking  its  annual  journey.  But  the  idea 
here  is  of  a  bird  which  leaves  its  own  nest 
either  wantonly  or  from  some  external 
reason,  and  thereby  exposes  itself  to  dis- 
comfort and  danger  (comp.  Isa.  xvi.  2).  So 
is  a  man  that  wandereth  from  his  place ;  i.e 
his  own  home  (comp.  Ecolus.  xxix.  21,  eto., 
and  xxxvi.  28  in  Vet.  Lat.,  "Quis  credit 
ei  qui  non  habet  nidum,  et  defiectens  ubi- 


lit 


THE  FBOVERBa 


[oh.  xzm.  1—27. 


emnqne  obscnraTerit,  qaaai  incoinctni  latro 
ezBiliens  de  oWitate  in  oivitatem?").  The 
proTerb  indirectly  inculcate!  loTe  of  one'i 
tome  and  one's  native  land.  To  be  "a 
fugitive  and  »  vagabond"  (Oen,  It.  12) 
was  a  terrible  pilniibment,  ai  the  Jews 
have  learned  by  the  ezperienoe  of  many 
centuries.  Language  and  religion  placed  a 
barrier  against  residence  in  any  country 
but  their  own  (see  Ps.  Izxxiv.) ;  and  though 
at  the  time  when  this  book  was  probably 
written  they  knew  little  of  foreign  travel, 
yet  they  regarded  sojourn  in  a  strange  land 
ai  an  evil,  and  centred  all  their  ideas  of 
happiness  and  comfort  in  a  home  life  sur- 
ronnded  by  friends  and  countrymen.  The 
.  word  "wander"  may  have  the  notion  of 
going  into  exile.  Septuagint,  "  As  when  a 
bird  flies  down  from  its  own  nest,  so  is  a 
man  brought  into  bondage  when  he  ii 
banished  (iro^evaiBy')  from  his  own  place." 
Some  have  reasoned  from  this  expression 
that  the  idea  of  exile  had  become  familiar 
to  the  writer,  and  hence  that  this  portion  of 
the  Proverbs  is  of  very  late  origin  (Cheyne) 
— surely  a  very  uncertain  foundation  for 
such  a  conclusion.  The  love  of  Orientals 
for  their  native  soil  is  a  passion  vrhioh  no 
sordid  and  miserable  (Urroundings  can  ex- 
tinguish, and  a  man  would  consider  even  a 
change  of  home  an  unmixed  evil,  though 
such  change  was  not  the  result  of  exile. 
Our  view  of  the  fortunes  of  one  who  is 
always  shifting  his  abode  is  expressed  in 
the  adage,  **▲  rolling  stone  gather*  no 
moss." 

Yer.  9. — Ointment  and  perfame  rejoice  the 
heart  (For  the  use  of  nnguenti  in  the 
honourable  treatment  of  guests,  see  ch.  vii. 
16,  etc. !  xxi.  17.)  Similarly,  perfumes  pre- 
pared from  spices,  roses,  and  aromatic  plants 
were  employed ;  rooms  were  fumigated,  per- 
sons were  sprinkled  with  rose-water,  and 
incense  was  applied  to  the  face  and  beard, 
as  we  read  (Dan.  ii.  46)  that  Nebuchadnezzar 
ordered  that  to  Daniel,  in  recognition  of  his 
wisdom,  should  be  offered  an  oblation  and 
•weet  odours  (see  '  Diet,  of  Bible,'  and  Eitto, 
'  Cyclop.,'  BOO.  «  Perfumes  ").  The  heat  of 
the  climate,  the  insalubrious  chanuster  of 
the  houses,  the  profuse  perspiration  of  the 
assembled  guests,  rendered  this  attention 
peculiarly  acceptable  (oomp.  Cant.  iii.  6). 
The  LXX.,  probably  with  a  tacit  reference 
to  Ps.  civ.  15,  renders, "  The  heart  delighteth 
in  ointments,  and  wines,  and  perfumes."  So 
doth  the  sweetness  of  a  man's  friend  by 
hearty  oonnsel.  This  is  rather  clumsy ;  the 
Kevised  Version  improves  it  by  paraphras- 
ing, that  Cometh  from  hearty  counsel.  The 
meaning  is  that  as  ointment,  etc.,  gladden 
the  heart,  so  do  the  sweet  and  loving  words 
of  one  who  speaks  from  the  depths  of  his 
leul.    The  idea  is  primarily  af  a  friend  who 


givea  wise  counsel,  speaking  the  truth  in 
loTe,  or  shows  bis  approval  by  discreet  com- 
mendation.   The  LXX.  has  pointed  differ- 
ently,  and   translates,  "But   the  soul   is 
broken    by  calamities   (jcarap^^ryvuTai    6r^ 
tvnTTuii&rttv);"    Vulgate,    "The   soul   is 
sweetened  by  the  good  counsels  of  a  friend." 
Ver.  10.— Another  proverb,  a  tristich,  in 
praise  of  friendship.    It  seems  to  be  a  com- 
oiuation  of  two  maxims.    Thine  own  friend, 
and  thy  father's  friend,  forsake   not.     A 
father's  friend  is  one  who  is  connected  with 
a  family  by  hereditary  and  ancestral  bonds; 
^i\ov  naTf^ov,  Septuagint.     Such  a  one  is 
to  be  cherished  and  regarded  with  the  utmost 
affection.     Neither  go  into  thy  brother's 
house  in  the  day  of  thy  calamity.    The  tried 
friend  is  more  likely  to  help  and  sympathize 
with  yon  than  even  your  own  brother,  for 
a  friend  is  bom  for  adversity,  and  there  is 
a  friend  that  sticketh  closer  than  a  brother 
(ch.  xviL  17 ;  xviii.  24,  where  see  notes). 
The  mere  blood-relationship,  whioh  is  the 
result  of  circumstances  over  which  one  has 
had  no  control,  is  inferior  to  the  affectionate 
connection  which  arises  from  moral  con- 
siderations and  is  the  effect  of  deliberate 
choice.    We  must  remember,  too,  that  the 
practice  of  polygamy,  with  the   separate 
establishments  of  the  various  wives,  greatly 
weakened  the  tie  of  brotherhood.    There 
was  little  love  between  David's  sons;  and 
Jonathan  was  far  dearer  to  David  himself 
than  any  of  his  nnmerofts  brothers  were. 
Better  is  a  neighbour  that  is  near  than  • 
brother  far  off.    "  Near  "  and  "  far  off "  may 
be  taken  as  refen-ing  to  feeling  or  to  local 
position.     In  the  former  case  the  maxim 
says  that  a  neighbour  who  is  really  attached 
to  one  by  the  bonds  of  affection  is  better 
than  the  closest  relation  who  has  no  love  or 
sympathy.    In  the  latter  view,  the  proverb 
ennuciates  the  truth  that  a  friend  on  the 
spot  in  time  of  calamity  is  more  useful  tban 
a  brother  living  at  a  distance  (juiKphi.y  o'ikuv, 
Septuagint);  one  is  sure  of  help  at  once 
from  the  former,  while  application  to  the 
latter  must  occasion  delay,  and  may  not  be 
successful.      Commenlators    quote   Hesiod, 
'Epy.  Kal  'Hm.,  841— 

T^v  Si  /icUiiTTa  KoAfw  2rru  tiin  iyyUt 

falei, 
Ei  yil>  TOt  (tal  XPW'  iyKii/uov  SAXo  y^yriTmi, 
TtlroyfS  iCaaToi  ixioy,  i^aano  Ji  in|»£. 

Ver.  11.— My  son,  be  wise,  and  make  my 
heart  glad.  The  exhortation  of  a  father  to 
his  son,  or  of  a  teacher  to  his  pupil.  Such 
address  is  not  found  elsewhere  in  this  latter 
portion  of  the  book,  though  common  in 
previous  parts.  Delitzsch  translates,  "be- 
come wise."  toiphs  ylvov,  Septuagint  Such 
development  of  wisdom  delights  a  father'! 
heart,  as  oh.  X.  1 ;  xxiii.  IS,  24.    Ihatliuj 


OK.  xxvn.  1— 27J 


THE  PKOVEBBS. 


6n 


answer  Mm  tbat  reproaobetli  me  (Ps.  cxfx. 
42;  comp.  Ps.  ozxvii.  5;  EroluB.  xxx.  2). 
If  tUi'  pupil  did  not  show  wisdom  and  mora- 
lity in  hia  conduct,  the  teacher  would  incur 
blame  for  the  apparent  failuro  of  his  educa- 
tion ;  wheieas  the  high  tone  of  the  disciple 
might  be  appealed  to  as  a  proof  of  the  merit 
and  effloaoy  of  the  tutor's  discipline.  On 
the  otlier  hand,  the  evil  doings  of  Hebrews 
often  made  the  Name  of  God  to  be  blas- 
phemed among  the  Qentilea;  just  as  nowa- 
days the  inconsistent  lives  of  Christians  arc 
the  greatest  impediment  to  the  success  of 
missionary  efforts  in  heathen  countries.  St. 
Jerome  has,  Ut  possis  exprobanti  respondere 
lermonem.  So  Septuagint,  "And  remove 
from  thyself  reproachful  words."  But  the 
first  person  is  in  accordance  with  the 
Hebrew. 

Ver.  12.— A  repetition  of  oh.  xxii.  3.  The 
'•entence  is  asyndeton. 

Ver.  13.— A  repetition  of  oh.  xx.  16.  The 
LXX.,  which  omits  this  passage  in  its 
proper  place,  hero  translates,  "Take  away 
his  garment,  for  a  scorner  passed  by,  wlio- 
ever  lays  waste  another's  goods." 

Ver.  14. — He  that  blesseth  his  friend  with 
a  load  Toioe,  rising  early  in  the  morning. 
\Vhat  is  meant  is  ostentatious  salutation, 
which  puts  itself  forward  in  order  to  stand 
well  with  a  patron,  and  to  be  beforeliaiid 
witli  other  servile  competitors  for  favour. 
Juvenal  satirized  such  parasitical  effusion 
(' Sat.,' v.  19)— 

"Habet  Trebius,  propter  quod  rumpere 
somnum 
Debeat  et  ligulas  dimittere,  sollicitus,  ne 
Tota  salutaris  jam  turba  peregerit  orbem, 
Sideribns  dnbiis,  aut  illo  tempore,  quo  si! 
Frigida  eiroumagunt  pigri  surraca  Bootas." 

The  "  Joud  voice  "  intiraatea  the  importunate 
nature  of  such  public  trumpeting  of  gi  ati- 
tude,  as  the  "rising  early"  denotes  its 
inopportune  and  tactless  insistency,  which 
cannot  wait  for  a  convenient  opportunity 
for  its  due  expression.  It  shall  he  counted 
•  onrse  to  him.  The  receiver  of  this  sordid 
adulation,  and  indeed  all  the  bystanders, 
would  just  as  soon  be  cursed  by  the  parasite 
as  blessed  in  this  offensive  manner.  This 
cliuuorous  outpouring  of  gratitude  is  not 
accepted  as  a  return  by  the  benefactor;  he 
sees  the  mean  motives  by  which  it  is  dic- 
tated—self-interest, hope  of  future  benefits 
—and  he  holds  it  as  cheap  as  he  would  the 
eurses  of  such  s  person.  The  nuisance  of 
•uoh  flattery  is  mentioned  by  Euripides, 
•Orest.,' 1161— 

Bipos  Ti  Kay  t^S'  laTiv,  alye7a9ai  \lai'. 

"Duo  sunt  genera  proaccutorum,"  says  St. 
Augustine   ('In    Psalm V  Uix.),    "scilicet 


Tituporantium  et  adulantiura ;  eed  plus 
prosequitur  lingua  adiilatoris,  qnam  raanni 
pro-ecutoris."  ''  Woe  unto  you,"  said  Christ 
(Luke  vi.  26),  "when  all  men  shall  speak 
well  of  you."  "  Do  I  seek  to  please  men?  " 
asked  St.  Paul  (Gal.  i.  10);  "for  if  I  yet 
pleased  men,  I  should  not  be  the  servant  of 
Christ." 

Vers.  15  and  16  form  a  tetrastich  on  tb<i 
subject  of  the  termagant  wife. 

Ver.  15.— The  single  line  of  the  second 
clanso  of  ch.  xix.  13  ii  here  formed  into 
a  distich.  A  oontinnal  dropping  in  a  veij 
rainy  day.  "A  day  of  violent  rain,"  th^d 
(eagrir),  which  word  occurs  nowhere  else  in 
thu  01(1  Testament.  And  a  oonteutious 
woman  are  alike.  The  word  rendered  "  are 
alike"  (n^ji^j)  is  nsually  taken  to  be  the 
third  perf.  n'ithp.  from  IVUli  but  the  beat- 
ealablished  reading,  according  to  Hitzig, 
Delitzsoh,  and  Nowaok,  is  iTf}^},  which  is 
regarded  as  a  niph.  with  a  transposition  of 
cousonants  for  nriiB'j.  Septuagint,  "Drops 
of  rain  drive  a  man  out  of  his  house  on  a 
stormy  day."  The  ill-constructed  roofs  of 
Eastern  houses  were  very  subject  to  leakage, 
being  flat  and  foiinod  of  porous  material. 

Ver.  16.— Whosoever  hideth  her  hideth 
tha  wind.  Whoever  tries  to  restrain  a 
shrewisli  woman,  or  to  conceal  her  faults, 
might  as  well  attempt  to  confine  the  wind 
or  to  chock  its  violence.  And  the  ointmeiit 
of  his  right  hand,  which  bewrayeth  itself. 
He  might  as  well  try  to  hide  the  ointment 
which  signifies  its  presence  by  its  odour. 
Bnt  there  is  no  "which"  in  the  origiu'il, 
which  runs  liteially,  "his  right  hand  calls 
oil,"  or,  "  oil  meets  Ids  right  baud."  The 
former  is  supposed  to  mean  that  he  is  hurt 
iu  the  struggle  to  coerce  the  vixen,  and 
needs  ointment  to  heal  his  wound ;  but  the 
latter  seems  the  correct  rendering,  and  the 
meaning  then  is  that,  if  he  tries  to  hold  or 
stop  his  wife,  she  escapes  him'liko  the  oil 
which  you  try  in  vain  to  keep  in  your  hand. 
An  old  adage  says  that  there  are  three 
things  which  canncit  be  hidden,  but  always 
betray  themselves,  viz.  a  woman,  the  wind, 
and  ointment.  Tlie  LXX.  has  read  the 
Hebrew  differently,  translating, "  The  north- 
wind  is  harsh,  but  by  name  it  ia  called 
lucky  (imS^^tos) ;  "  i.e.  because  it  clears  the 
sky  and  introduces  fine  weather.  The 
Syriau,  Aquila,  and  Symmaohus  have 
adopted  the  same  reading. 

Ver.  17. — Iron  sharpeneth  iron.  The 
proverb  deals  with  the  influence  which  men 
have  upon  one  another.  So  a  man  sharpeneth 
the  countenance  of  his  friend.  So  the  Vulgate, 
Bomo  exaouit  faciem  amid  sui.  The  action 
of  the  file  is  probably  meant  (1  Sam.  xiii. 
21);   and  the  writer  names  iron    m   the 


618 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[oh.  XX  vu.  1 — 27 


■harpener  rather  than  the  whetstone,  because 
he  wishes  to  denote  that  one  man  is  of  the 
same  nature  as  another,  and  that  this 
identity  is  that  which  makes  mutual  action 
possible  and  arlvantageous.  Some  have 
taken  the  proverb  in  a  bad  sense,  as  if  it 
meant  that  one  angry  word  leads  to  another, 
one  man's  passion  excites  another's  rage. 
Thus  Aben  Ezra.  The  Septuagint  perhaps 
supports  this  notion  by  rendering,  'Ayiip  Si 
Trapo^ivei  •irp6(rcinov  eralpov.  But  the  best 
commentators  understand  the  maxim  to  say 
that  intercourse  with  other  men  influences 
the  manner,  appearance,  deportment,  and 
character  of  a  man,  sharpens  his  wits,  con- 
trols his  conduct,  and  brightens  his  very  face. 
Horace  uses  the  same  figure  of  speech, '  Ars 
Poet.,'  304— 

"  Fnngar  vice  cotls,  acutum 
Bed'lere  ansa    ferrum    valet,   eisors    ipsa 

secaudi." 
On  the  subject  of  mutual  intercourse  Euri- 
pides says,  *  Androm.,'  683 — 

'H  S*  S/uXla 
TldvTttv  fipoToitTL  ylyyerai  SiidffKdKos, 

"  Companionship 
Is  that  which  teachei  mortals  everything." 

Ver.  18. — Whoso  keepeth  the  fig  tree  shall 
eat  the  fruit  thereof.  He  who  watches, 
tends,  and  cultivates  the  fig  tree  will  in 
due  time  have  the  rewurd  of  his  labqur  in 
eating  its  fruit.  The  abundance  of  the 
produce  of  this  tree  makes  it  a  good  figure 
of  the  reward  of  faithful  service.  Septua- 
gint, "  He  that  planteth  a  fig  tree  shall  eat 
the  fi-uits  thereof"  (2  Tim.  ii.  6).  So  he 
that  waiteth  on  his  master  shall  be  honoured. 
He  who  pays  attention,  has  loving  regard 
to  his  master,  shall  meet  with  honour  as  his 
reward  at  his  master's  hands,  and  also  from 
all  who  become  acquainted  with  his  merits. 
The  gnome  may  well  be  applied  to  the  case 
of  those  whosdo  true  and  laudable  service  to 
their  heavenly  Master,  and  who  shall  one 
day  hear  from  his  lips  the  gracious  word, 
"  Well  done,  thou  good  anrl  faithful  servant : 
thou  hast  been  faitlifnl  over  a  few  things, 
I  will  make  thee  ruler  over  many  things : 
enter  thou  into  the  joy  of  thy  Lord  "  (Matt. 
XXV.  21). 

Ver.  19. — As  in  water  face  answereth  to 
faoe,  so  the  heart  of  man  to  man ;  Vulgate, 
Quomodo  in  aquis  resplendent  valtut  proe- 
picientium,  tie  corda  Imminum  manifesta 
eunt  prudentibus.  As  in  clear  water  the 
face  of  the  gazer  is  reflected,  so  man 
finds  in  his  fellow-man  the  same  feelings, 
sentiments,  passions,  which  he  has  himself. 
He  sees  in  others  the  likeness  of  himself; 
whatever  he  knows  himself  to  be,  he  will 
see  others  presenting  the  same  cnaracter. 
"^elf-kuowledge,  too,  leads  to  insight  into 


others'  minds ;  "  for  what  man  knoweth  the 
things  of  a  man,  save  the  spirit  of  man 
which  is  in  him?"  (1  Cor.  ii.  11).  There  is 
a  solidarity  in  human  nature  which  enables 
us  to  judge  of  others  by  ourselves.  The 
difficulties  in  the  construction  and  wording 
of  the  sentence  do  not  affect  the  interpre- 
tation. They  are,  however,  best  met  by 
rendering,  with  Delitzsch,  "As  it  is  with 
water,  face  corresponds  to  face,  so  also  the 
heart  of  man  to  man."  Septuagint,  "As 
faces  are  not  like  faces,  so  neither  are  the 
thoughts  of  men ; "  which  is  like  the  saymg 
of  PersiuB,  'Sat.,'  v.  52— 

"Mille  hominum  species,  et  terum  discolor 
usus; 
Velle  suumcniqne  est,  neovoto  vivituruno." 

Ver.  20. — Hell  and  destmotion  are  never 
full,  "  Hell "  is  sheol,  the  under-worl'd. 
Hades,  the  place  of  the  departed;  "destrub- 
tion "  is  the  great  depth,  the  second  death, 
personified  (see  on  ch.  xv.  11,  where  the 
terms  also  occur).  These  "  are  never  satis- 
fied," they  are  insatiable,  all-devouring 
(comp.  oh.  XXX.  16;  Isa.  v.  l4;  Hab.  ii.  5). 
So  the  eyes  of  man  are  never  satisfied.  The 
verb  is  the  same  in  both  clauses,  and  ought 
to  have  been  so  translated.  The  eye  is 
taken  as  the  representative  of  ooncupisuence 
in  general.  What  is  true  of  "the  lust  of 
the  eyes"  (1  John  ii.  16)  is  true  of  all  the 
senses;  the  craving  for  their  gratification 
grows  as  it  is  fed.  Tlierefore  the  senses 
should  be  carefully  guarded,  lest  they  lead 
to  excess  and  transgression.  "Turn  away 
mine  eyes  from  beholding  vanity,"  said  tlie 
psalmist,  "and  quicken  me  in  thy  way" 
(Pb.  cxix.  37).  The  LXX.  here  introduces 
a  paragraph  not  in  the  Hebrew  or  the  Latin 
Versions :  "  He  that  fixes  (irTjjpifioi')  liis  eye 
[i.e.  staring  impudently]  is  an  abomination 
to  the  Lord,  and  the  uuinstructed  restrain 
not  their  tongue." 

Ver.  21. — Fining-pot,  etc.  (see  on  oh.  xviL 
3;  comp.  also  ch.  xxv.  1).  So  is  a  man  to 
his  praise.  The  Hebrew  is  literally,  Tin 
crucible  for  silver,  and  the  furnace  for  gold, 
and  a  man  according  to  his  praise;  i.e.  as 
the  processes  of  metallurgy  test  the  precious 
metals,  so  a  man's  public  reputation  shows 
wliat  he  is  really  worth,  as  is  stated  in  ch. 
xii.  8.  As  the  crucible  brings  all  impuri- 
ties to  the  surface,  so  public  opinion  dragt 
forth  all  that  is  bad  in  a  man,  and  he  who 
stands  this  test  is  generally  esteemed. 
Certainly  praise  is  a  stimulus  to  exer- 
tion, an  incentive  to  try  to  make  one's  self 
worthy  of  the  estimation  in  which  one  is 
held,  especially  if  he  purifies  it  from  the 
dross  and  earthliness  mixed  with  it,  and 
I  takes  to  himself  only  what  is  genuine  and 
I  just.  But  public  opinion  is  very  commonly 
I  false,  and  is  always  a  very  unsafe  criterion 


on.  xxvn.  1—27.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


619 


of  moral  excellence.  Hence  other  interpre- 
tations have  been  proposeil.  Ewald  renders, 
"and  a  man  according  to  his  boasting," 
that  is,  aooording  to  that  which  he  most 
praises  in  himself  and  others.  So  virtually 
Hitzig,  Bottcher,  Zockler,  and  others.  In 
this  view  the  gnome  denotes  that  a  man's 
real  character  is  best  examined  by  the  light 
cast  upon  it  by  his  usual  line  of  thought, 
what  he  most  prides  himself  upon,  what  he 
admires  most  in  other  men.  Plumptre, 
after  Gesenius  and  Fleischer,  has,  "  So  let 
a  man  be  to  his  praise,"  t.e.  to  the  mouth 
which  praises  him;  let  him  test  this  com- 
mendation, to  see  what  it  is  worth,  before 
he  accepts  it  as  his  due.  The  explanation 
first  given  seems  on  the  whole  most  suitable, 
when  we  reflect  that  the  highest  morality  is 
not  always  enunciated,  and  that  secondary 
motives  are  widely  reeoguized  as  factors  in 
action  and  judgment.  There  are  not  wanting 
men  in  modem  days  who  uphold  the  maxim, 
Vox  popiHi,  vox  Dei.  Septuagint,  • "  The 
action  of  fire  is  a  test  for  silver  and  gold,  so 
a  man  is  tested  by  the  mouth  of  thom  that 
praise  him."  No  surer  teat  of  a  man's  true 
character  can  be  found  than  his  behaviour 
nnder  pr.dae ;  many  men  are  spoiled  by  it. 
If  a  man  comes  forth  from  it  without  injury, 
not  rendered  vain,  or  blind  to  his  defects,  or 
disdainful  of  others,  his  disposition  is  good, 
and  thfl  commendation  lavished  upon  him 
may  be  morally  and  spiritually  beneficial. 
Vulgate,  Sic  probatur  homo  ore  laudantis, 
"  So  is  a  man  proved  by  the  mouth  of  him 
that  praises  him."  The  following  passage 
from  St.  Gregory,  commenting  on  this,  is 
worth  quoting,  "  Praise  of  one's  self  tortures 
the  just,  but  elates  the  wicked.  But  while 
it  tortures,  it  purifies  the  just ;  and  while  it 
pleases  the  wicked,  it  proves  them  to  be 
reprobate.  For  these  revel  in  their  own 
praise,  because  they  seek  not  the  glory  of 
their  Maker.  But  they  who  seek  the  glory 
of  their  Maker  are  tortured  with  their  own 
vraise,  lest  that  which  is  spoken  of  without 
should  not  exist  within  them;  lest,  if  that 
<rhich  is  said  teally  exists,  it  should  be 
made  void  in  the  sight  of  God  by  these  very 
honours;  lest  the  praise  of  men  should 
soften  the  firmness  of  their  heart,  and 
sliould  lay  it  low  in  self-satisfaction;  and 
Icat  that  which  ought  to  aid  them  to  increase 
tiieir  exertions,  should  be  even  now  tlie 
recompense  of  their  labour.  But  when  they 
s.ee  that  their  own  praises  tend  to  the  glory 
of  God,  they  even  long  for  and  welcome 
them.  For  it  is  written,  "That  they  may 
see  your  good  works,  and  glorify  your 
Father  which  is  in  heaven  "  ('  Moral.,'  xxvi. 
62,  Oxford  transl.).  The  LXX.  adds  a 
verse  which  is  not  found  in  the  Hebrew,  but 
occurs  in  some  manuscripts  of  the  Latin 
Version,  "The   heart  of  the  tranagressor 


seeketh  ont  evils,   bnt  an   npright   heaH 

seeketh  knowledge." 

Ver.  22. — Though  thou  shouldest  bray  s. 
fool  in  a  mortar  among  wheat  with  a  pestle. 
"To  bray"  is  to  pound  or  beat  small. 
"  Wheat,"  man,  riphoth  (only  in  2  Sam. 
xvii.  19),  "  bruised  corn."  Vulgate,  In  pila 
quasi  ptisanaa  (barley- groats)  feriente; 
Aquila  and  Theodotion,  'Ev  /leV^  ifjiirnir(ro- 
jjAvav,  "  In  the  midst  of  grains  of  corn  being 
pounded."  The  LXX.,  reading  diiferently, 
has,/' Though  thou  scourge  a  fool,  disgracing 
him  (fri/  juefT^  trvv^^plov)  in  the  midst  of 
the  congregation."  Of  course,  the  process 
of  separating  the  husks  from  the  cora  by 
the  use  of  pestle  and  mortar  is  much  more 
delicate  and  careful  than  threshing  in  the 
usual  clumsy  way;  hence  is  expressed  tlie 
idea  that  the  most  elaborate  pains  are 
wasted  on  the  incorrigible  fool  (see  on  oh. 
i.  20).  His  fooUshness  will  not  depart  from 
him.  An  obstinate,  self-  willed,  unprincipled 
man  cannot  be.  reformed  by  any  means ;  his 
folly  has  become  a  second  nature,  aud  is  not 
to  be  eliminated  by  any  teaching,  discipline, 
or  severity.  There  is,  too,  a  judicial  blind- 
ness, when,  after  repeated  warnins^s  wilfully 
rejected  and  scorned,  the  sinner  is  left  to 
himself,  given  over  to  a  reprobate  mind. 
"  Whoso  teaeheth  a  fool,"  Siracides  pro- 
nounces, "is  as  one  that  glueth  a  potsherd 
together,  and  as  he  that  waketh  one  from  a 
sound  sleep"  (Boclus.  xxii.  7).  Again, 
"  The  inner  [larts  of  a  fool  are  like  a  broken 
vessel,  and  he  will  hold  no  knowledge  as 
long  as  he  liveth"  (Ecclus.  xxi.  14).  In 
Turkey,  we  are  told,  great  criminals  were 
beaten  to  pieces  in  huge  mortars  of  iron,  in 
which  they  usiially  pounded  rice.  "You 
cannot  straighten  a  dog's  tail,  try  as  you 
may,"  says  a  Telugu  maxim  (Lane).  There 
is  a  saying  of  Schiller's  which  is  quite 
proverbial,  "Heaven  and  earth  fight  in 
vain  against  a  dunce."  Horace,  '  Kpist.,'  i. 
10.  24— 

"Naturam    expellas    furca,    tamen    nique 
reoun'et." 

Juvenal, '  Sat.,'  xiii.  239— 

"  Tamen  ad  mores  natura  reourrlt 
Damnatos,  fixa  et  mutari  nescia." 

Vers.  23— 27.— A  mashal  ode  in  praise  of 
a  pastoral  and  agricultural  life.  The  moralist 
evidently  desires  to  recall  his  countrymen 
from  the  luxury  of  cities  and  tho  temptations 
of  money-making  to  the  simple  ways  of  the 
patriarchs  and  the  pleasures  of  country 
pursuits — which  are  the  best  foundation  of 
enduring  prosperity. 

Ver.  23.— Be  thou  diligent  to  know  the 
state  of  thy  flooks.    "  State ; "  o'j?  (pant**)  • 


620 


THT5   PROVKRBS. 


[of.  xxvn.  1 — ^S87, 


miltum,  Vulgate;  the  face,  look,  appearance. 
The  LXX.  has  'f/ux'^'f  which  may  perhaps 
meat!  "  the  number  " — a  necessary  precaution 
when  the  sheep  wandered  on  the  downs  and 
mountains,  and  had  to  be  collected  in  the 
evening  and  folded.  These  precepts  are 
naturally  applied  to  all  rulers,  and  especially 
to  Christian  pastors  who  have  the  oversight 
of  the  flock  of  Christ  (1  Pet.  v.  2—4). 
Eoclns.  vii.  22,  "  Hast  thou  cattle?  have  an 
eye  to  them ;  and  if  they  be  for  thy  profit, 
keep  them  witli  thee." 

Ver.  24.— For  riches  are  not  for  ever ;  as 
cli,  xxiii.  5.  Money  and  other  kinds  of 
wealth  may  be  lost  or  wasted ;  it  is  therefore 
expedient  to  have theresnuroesof  agriculture, 
lanil  and  herds,  to  depend  upon.  Chosen  (ch. 
XV.  .6),  translated  "riches,"  is  "strength," 
"abundance}"  "treasure  laid  up."  Pelitzsoh 
renders,  "jirosperity;"  Septuagint,  "  A  man 
has  no4  ttrength  and  power  for  ever ; "  Vul- 
gate, A'ore  liahebis  jugiter  potestatem,  i.e."you 
will  not  al  ways  be  able  to  tend  your  flocks ; 
intirniity  and  old  age  will  prevent  you." 
And  doth  the  crown  endure  to  every  genera- 
tion I  The  crown  or  diadem,  "iij  (nezer),  is 
the  symbol  of  royal  authority,  or  of  the 
hiv'hest  dignity  of  the  priesthood  (Exod. 
ixix.  6;  xxxix.  30).  These  positions  are 
not  secure  from  generation  to  generation; 
jiiuch  less  stable,  in  fact,  than  the  possession 
of  fnrws  iiiid  cattle.  St.  Jerome,  Sed  corona 
Iribuetur  in  generationem  et  generationem, 
where  corona  is  the  headship  of  the  family. 
Septuagint,  "Neither  doth  he  transmit  it 
(his  strength)  from  generation  to  generation." 

Ver.  25. — As  ver.  23  commended  the  rear- 
ing of  cattle,  and  ver.  24  supported  the 
injunction  by  showing  its  comparative  per- 
manence, BO  this  and  the  following  verses 
ilisfuss  the  material  advantages  of  such 
occupation.  The  hay  appeareth ;  rather,  ffia 
(jiiixs  pasaeth  away,  is  cut  and  carried.  This 
is  tliu  first  stage  in  the  agricultural  operations 
described.    And  ths  tender  grass  showeth 


Itself;  the  aftermath  appears.  And  th« 
herbs  of  the  mountain  are  gathered;  the 
fodder  from  off  the  hills  is  cut  and  stored. 
All  these  verbs  are  best  taken  h ypothetioally, 
the  following  verses  forming  the  apodosis. 
When  all  these  operations  are  complete, 
then  come  the  results  in  plenty  and  comfort. 
Septuagint,  "Have  a  care  of  the  heibage 
(xAoi/jSv)  in  the  plain,  and  thou  shalt  cut 
grass,  and  gather  thou  the  mountain  hay." 

Ver.  26. — The  lambs  are  for  thy  clothing. 
Thy  sheep  will  provide  thee  with  clothing 
by  their  skin  and  wool,  and  by  the  money 
which  then  wilt  obtain  by  the  sale  of  them 
The  goats  are  the  price  of  the  field;  the  sale 
of  thy  goats  and  their  produce  will  pay  for 
thy  field  if  thou  wish  to  buy  it  (see  on  ch. 
XXX.  31).  Septuagint,  "  That  thou  raayest 
have  sheep  for  clothing;  lionour  thy  land 
that  thou  mayest  have  lambs." 

Ver.  27.— Goats'  mUk.  Dr.  Geikie  ('  Holy 
Land  and  Bible,'  i.  311)  notes  that  in  most 
parts  of  Palestine  goats'  milk  in  every  form 
— sour,  sweet,  thick,  thin,  warm,  or  cold — 
makes,  with  eggs  and  bread,  the  main  fnod 
of  the  people.  And  maintenance  for  thy 
maidens ;  who  milk  the  goats,  etc.,  and 
tend  the  cattle,  and  do  the  household  work. 
There  is  no  mention  of  the  use  of  animal 
flesh  as  food.  It  was  only  on  great  occasions, 
as  high  festivals,  or  the  presence  of  an 
honoured  guest,  that  kids,  lambs,  and  calves 
were  killed  and  eaten.  This  picture  ot 
rural  peace  and  plenty  points  to  a  time  of 
security  and  prosperity,  free  alike  from 
internal  commotion  and  external  danger. 
The  famous  passage  in  Cicero, '  De  Seneot.,' 
XT.,  on  the  pleasures  and  advantages  of  the 
agricultural  life,  will  occur  to  all  claasioal 
readers.  So  also  Horace  ('Epod.,'  2), 
"  Beatus  ille  qui  piooul  negotiis,"  etc.  The 
LXX.  makes  short  work  of  this  verse.  "  My 
son,  thou  hast  from  me  sayings  mighty  for 
thy  life  and  fox  the  life  of  thy  servants." 


HOMILBTICS. 

Ver.  1. — Boatting  of  the  morrow.  I.  Its  pollt.  No  man  is  a  prophet.  At  the 
best  we  can  but  calculate  probabilities.  The  man  who  has  never  had  a  day's  illness 
niay  be  suddenly  laid  low,  struck  down  with  paralysis,  arrested  by  unsuspected  heart- 
ilisease,  blood-porsoned  by  a  whiff  of  bad  air  from  a  drain,  at  death's  door  from 
|ineiiroonia  caught  in  an  unheeded  draught.  The  business  which  looks  fair  and  pros- 
liyroiia  may  suddenly  collapse.  The  trusted  bank  may  break.  Our  life  is  dependent 
u|«)n  so  many  unseen  sources,  and  is  affected  by  so  many  complicated  circumstances, 
that  no  man  can  unravel  the  tendencies  or  predict  the  results.  Astronomy  is  a  simple 
.-cience  compared  with  sociology.  The  movements  of  the  solar  system  are  altogether 
more  intelligible  than  those  of  the  homeliest  soul.  We  cannot  predict  our  own  conduct. 
Moreover,  there  are  other  minds  to  be  considered  Above  all,  ttiere  is  the  inso'rutabla 
providence  of  (Jod. 

II.  Its  canoer.     "  Boasting  of  the  morrow "  leads  to  carelessness.     The  man  who 


oH.xxTn.  1—27.1  THE  PR0VERB3.  621 

is  confident  without,  warrant  Is  likely  to  be  off  his  guard.  Believing  that  all  is  safe, 
he  does  not  fortify  himself  against  a  possible  surprise  of  mischief.  He  is  just  in  the 
condition  most  lavourable  for  attack.  The  wily  tempter  is  aware  of  this.  Therefore 
the  danger  is  all  the  greater  because  it  is  ignored.  Thus  Peter,  weakened  through 
over-confidence,  fell  into  sin,  even  though  he  had  been  warned  against  it. 

III.  Its  sin.  This  is  not  merely  a  question  of  prudence  and  personal  welfare.  It 
touches  our  relations  with  Gbd.  He  who  boasts  himself  of  the  morrow  acts  either 
aiheistically ,  denying  the  Divine  control  of  life,  or  presumptuously,  assuming  without 
reason  that  God  will  aid  his  plans.  Such  conduct  reveals  a  guilty  pride.  It  is  opposed 
to  the  humility  of  one  who  would  bow  low  before  the  inscrutable  providence  of  the 

■  Almighty. 

IV.  Its  punishment.  Such  boasting  is  certain  to  be  punished  by  failure.  It 
would  not  be  well  to  let  it  proceed  to  success,  for  such  a  result  would  only  confirm  and 
aggravate- the  evil  habit.  Partial  and  temporary  victory  may  be  attained,  but  ultimate 
triumph  cannot  be  won  in  this  way.  God  casts  down  and  humbles  the  boaster,  and 
in  his  shame  he  has  an  opportunity  of  learning  wisdom. 

V.  Its  antidote.  This  is  not  to  be  found  in  a  cowardly  shrinking  from  the  future, 
nor  is  it  to  be  had  in  a  habit  of  despair,  ever  painting  the  days  to  come  in  the  blackest 
hues,  with  the  melancholy  motto,  "Blessed  is  he  that  expecteth  little;  for  he  shall  not 
be  disappointed."  The  true  antidote  is  to  be  discovered  in  a  spirit  of  trust,  God  has 
indeed  hung  an  impenetrable  curt;\ln  between  our  vision  and  the  land  of  the  future. 
Even  the  very  morrow  dwells  as  yet  in  a  land  of  darkness,  and  we  vainly  try  to  discern 
irs  features.  But  it  is  perfectly  familiar  to  God,  before  whom  all  eternity  is  as  a  clear 
picture  ever  present,  And  God,  who  knows  the  future,  controls  it.  Therefore  we  are 
s;ife  when  we  trust ;  and,  eschewing  boastfulness,  we  can  learn  not  to  be  anxious  about 
the  morrow,  because  we  can  trust  our  Father  who  holds  the  secrets  of  all  the  morrows 
in  his  hand. 

Ver.  t.~^  Self-praise.  I.  Sblf-pbaise  is  iLL-rouNDBD.  It  may  be  true  to  fact,  but 
we  cannot ,be  sure  that  it  is.  1.  Possibly  it  is  insincere.  So  many  motives  of  vanity 
and  self-interest  urge  a  person  to  pretend  to  be  better  than  he  is,  that  a  certificate 
ol'  merit  given  hy  himself  on  behalf  of  himself  cannot  he  taken  at  a  high  value. 
2.  Prvbably  it  is  delusive.  Even  when  it  is  perfectly  sincere  it  is  likely  to  he  perveited 
by  unconscious  misconceptions.  It  is  very  easy  to  be  honestly  mistaken  as  to  one's 
own  worth.  We  are  the  worst  conceivable  judges  of  our  own  characters  and  deserts. 
Evea  when  we  can  calmly  and  fairly  estimate  our  powers  we  are  likely  to  be  very 
wrong  in  valuing  our  use  of  them. 

II.  Sblf-pbaisb  bpbinqs  pbom  selfishness.  1.  It  reveals  a  self-regarding  habit. 
If  a  man  is  given  to  expatiate  on  his  own  merits,  he  must  be  accustomed  to  turn  his 
thoughts  inwards;  he  must  be  familiar  with  the  contemplation  of  himself.  Now,  this 
is  not  wiioksome.  The  less  a  man  thinks  about  himself  the  better  for  his  own  Boul'i 
health.  2.  It  implies  a  desire  of  self-aggrandizement.  There  is  tisually  a  motive 
behind  the  habit  of  self-praise,  and,  though  this  may  be  nothing  worse  than  childish 
vanity,  it  carries  with  it  a  desire  for  exciting  the  admiration  of  others;  it  aims  at 
reaping  a  harvest  of  laudation.  But  possibly  the  end  sought  is  more  far-reaching,  and 
the  I  iretentious  person  indicts  his  own  testimonials  with  a  deliberate  intention  of 
securing  some  tangible  advantage  thereby.  The  self-praise  is  then  just  an  ugly,  glaring 
blossom  of  selfishness. 

III.  Sblf-pbaibe  pbovokeb  jealousy.  It  rarely  secures  the  admiration  that  it 
seeks.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  generally  received  with  suspicion;  and  even  when  it  is 
honest  and  true,'  a  large  discount  is  taken  off  its  claims.  1.  Its  defective  authority  is 
perceived.  This  is  a  point  to  which  vanity  is  singularly  blind.  Yet  all  the  weakness 
of  the  situation  is  apparent  to  every  beholder ;  for  it  is  universally  recognized  that  a 
man  is  strongly  tempted  to  make  out  a  good  case  for  himself,  and  that  he  is  likely  to 
be  deceived  into  an  inordinate  estitnate  of  his  own  value.  Therefore  self-praise  i» 
usually  wasted.  2.  It  irritates  the  vanity  of  others.  The  tendency  is  for  the  hearer 
to  imagine  that  the  vain  speaker  desires  to  exalt  hi'mself  at  the  expense  of  others.  A 
comparison  of  merit  seems  to  be  challenged,  and  this  at  once  rouses  the  jealousy  of  the 
audience.     Thus  self-praise  does  not  win  friends.     What  it  may  perhaps  succeed  in 


622  THE  PROVERBS.  [oh.  xivil  l—TI. 

extracting  in  the  form  of  admiration  is  paid  for  dearly  by  the  dislike  that  it  also 
creates. 

IV.  Selp-pbaisb  IB  CONTRARY  TO  CHRISTIAN  HUMILITY.  It  represents  a  wholly 
alien  spirit.  Doubtless  it  is  a  common  weakness  of  men  who  are  truly  Christian  and 
kiad-iiearted,  for  no  man  is  perfect;  but  still  it  is  a  weakness,  and  it  is  foreign  to  the 
genius  of  the  religioa  under  which  it  finds  a  shelter.  The  often-repeated  rule  of  Christ 
Is  that  "  Whosoever  exalteth  himself  shall  be  abased ; "  "  The  first  shall  be  last."  'J'ha 
true  disciple  is  not  to  choose  the  upper  seat  in  the  synagogue.  Humility,  self-forgetful- 
ness,  the  preference  of  others,  are  the  Christian  graces.    Self-praise  is  useless  before  God. 

V.  SbLF-PRAISB     only     aims    AT    WHAT    CAN    BE    BETTER    ATTAINED    WITHOUT    IT. 

"Let  another  man  praise  thee."  Self-praise  silences  the  lips  of  admiration  from 
others.  The  truly  humble  man  will  not  crave  such  admiration.  But  all  men  of  right 
feeling  must  desire  to  stand  well  with  their  fellows.  It  is  happy  to  feel  that  we  have 
the  respect  and  confidence  of  those  whose  opinion  we  value.  Now,  these  encourage- 
ments are  better  secured  by  unpretentious  merit,  and  humility  in  earnest,  simple 
attempts  to  do  right. 

Ver.  6. — "  TTie  wounds  of  a  friend."  The  principle,  implied  in  this  verse  is  apparent 
at  a  glance.  It  is  better  that  one  who  loves  and  truly  considers  the  interests  of  another 
should  wound  him  for  his  good  than  that  a  superficial  flatterer  should  refrain  from 
doing  so  for  the  sake  of  pleasing  and  winning  continuous  favour.  The  only  difficulties 
lie  in  the  practical  application  of  the  principle. 

I.  True  friendship  will  dare  to  wound.  It  is  painful  and  difficult  to  do  that 
which  we  know  will  grieve  one  who  is  greatly  loved.  Therefore  if  it  is  really  necessary 
it  will  put  the  love  to  the  test.  1.  Trite  friendship  considers  the  welfare  of  another. 
The  chief  thought  is  not  on  behalf  of  agreeable  companionship,  but  as  to  what  will 
really  benefit  one's  friend.  2.  The  welfa/re  <f  another  may  require  a  painful  treatment. 
There  are  so-called  "  candid  friends,"  who  secretly  delight  in  saying  unpleasant  things. 
With  such  people  there  is  no  merit  in  giving  pain,  nor  is  it  likely  that  much  advantage 
will  result  from  their  rough  conduct.  But  it  may  be  possible  to  point  out  a  frieud'i 
mistakes,  to  warn  him  against  temptation,  to  gravely  deprecate  his  wrongful  conduct, 
to  n  ake  him  feel  his  deterioration  of  character.  Then,  though  the  process  must  be 
keenly  painful  on  both  sides,  love  will  attempt  it. 

IL  The  wounds  of  true  friendship  should  be  patiently  heobived.  1.  Th« 
cost  of  thim  should  be  considered.  If  they  do  indeed  come  from  a  friend  they  show  his 
genuine  regard,  his  unselfish  devotion.  They  also  indicate  how  thorough  is  his  con- 
fidence ;  for  they  show  that  he  expects  to  be  rightly  understood,  and  that  his  painful 
action  will  not  be  resented.  He  risks  a  breach  of  the  friendship  for  the  sake  of  benefit- 
ing his  friend.  This  is  a  generous  action,  and  it  should  be  generously  accepted.  But 
it  needs  ma'.,'nanimity  both  to  give  and  to  take  the  wounds  of  friendship.  2.  The 
value  of  them  should  be  appreciated.  The  first  impulse  is  to  feel  aggrieved,  to  resent 
the  intrusion,  to  treat  the  well-meant  rebuke  as  an  insult,  to  justify  one's  self,  perhaps 
even  to  overwhelm  the  friend  who  wounds  with  rage  and  revenge.  This  is  as  foolish 
as  it  is  ungrateful.  If  we  only  knew  it,  we  shoidd  confess  that  we  have  no  better 
friends  than  those  who  dare  to  wound  us.  It  is  just  from  such  friends  that  we  can 
learn  wisdom.     Flattery  kisses  and  slays;  friendship  wounds  and  saves. 

III.  The  Divine  friendship  wounds  to  save.  The  world  flatters  and  promises 
only  pleasant  things  to  its  slaves  when  it  first  enthralls  them.  God  treats  us  in  the 
opposite  way,  warning  us  of  danger,  rebuking  our  sins,  even  chastising  us  with  heavy 
biowa.  But  "  whom  the  Lord  loveth  he  chasteneth."  1.  Ood  proves  himself  to  be  our 
Friend  by  wounding  us.  He  might  have  left  us  alone  to  rot  in  our  own  wretched  ruin. 
But  in  his  great  love  he  has  interfered  to  save,  though  his  advances  are  met  with 
insult  and  anger.  God  loves  enough  to  give  pain.  2.  It  would  be  wise  to  receive 
Qod's  wounding  as  that  of  a  Friend.  It  is  for  our  good ;  then  the  best  course  is  to 
take  it  accordingly,  to  endeavour  to  profit  by  it.  Christ  lays  a  cross  on  his  disciples, 
and  saves  them  by  leading  them  to  follow  in  bis  l^ia  Dolorosa,  and  to  be  crucified 
vith  him  (Gal  ii.  20). 

Ver.  &J—A  bird  wandering  from  her  n«$t.    Let  us  consider  first  in  what  respaoti  a 


OH.  XXVII.  1—27.]  THE  PROVERBS.  623 

man  may  he  saW  to  be  wandering  from  his  place,  and  then  how  the  evil  of  this  con- 
dition may  be  illustrated  by  the  metaphor  of  a  bird  wandering  from  its  nest. 

I.  How  A  MAN  MAY  WANDER  FROM  HIS  PLACE.  1.  He  may  leave  the  work  lie  ii 
ntited/or.  There  is  no  reason  why  a  man  should  not  endeavour  to  rise  in  the  social 
scale.  Christianity  does  not  consecrate  any  system  of  caste.  But  there  are  works  for 
which  certain  men  have  natural  aptitude,  or  for  which  they  have  been  trained,  and 
other  works  for  which  they  are  not  thus  suited.  Unhappily,  our  inclination  does  not 
always  coincide  with  our<capacity.  To  follow  one's  likings  outside  the  range  of  one's 
powers  is  to  wander  from  one's  place.  2.  He  may  forsake  his  duty.  Every  man's 
rightful  place  is  at  the  post  of  duty.  No  danger,  no  difficulty,  no  disagreeableness, 
can  justify  any  one  in  forsaking  that  place.  3.  He  may  depart  from  Qod.  Then 
indeed  will  he  have  wandered  from  his  true  place.  For  the  home  of  the  soul  is  with 
God.  Absence  from  God  is  to  be  out  of  one's  place,  (1)  though  in  a  very  paradise  of 
delights,  (2)  though  among  the  most  congenial  companions,  (3)  though  with  an 
eminently  attractive  occupation.  4.  He  may  renounce  his  human  status.  (1)  In 
descending  to  that  of  an  animal.  Bestial  lust  and  brutal  cruelty  are  inhuman.  He 
who  plunges  into  such  vile  things  necessarily  vfaiiders  from  himself  as  a  man.  He 
gives  up  the  rank  of  a  human  being.  (2)  In  degrading  himself  to  diabolical  living. 
This  happens  to  one  who  chooses  evil  for  its  own  sake,  loving  wickedness  and  pur- 
suing it. 

II.  How   BT70H   A   MAN   MUST   SUFFER   AS    A    BIRD     THAT   WANDERS   FROM   HER   NEST. 

1.  He  loses  peace.  The  neat  is  typical  of  quiet  and  restfulness.  To  forsake  it  is  to  be 
at  large  in  the  noisy,  tumultuous  world.  So  one  who  is  out  of  his  place  is  cast  adrift 
on  a  homeless  waste.  He  sacrifices  peace  in  pursuit  of  novelty.  2.  He  is  removed 
from  congenial  companionship.  The  poor  young  bird  leaves  her  fellows  and  flies  into 
unknown  regions,  where  she  finds  hers'lf  alone  among  strange  creatures.  A  man  who 
is  out  of  his  element  will  be  equally  alone  and  friendless.  The  very  fact  that  he  is 
in  the  wrong  place  implies  that  he  cannot  find  true  sympathy  in  his  new  sphere. 
Perhaps  he  has  bejn  foolishly  aiming  at  entering  some  higher  circle  of  life  than  one 
that  he  is  fitted  for.  If  so,  he  will  only  be  supremely  uncomfortable,  perpetually 
regarded  as  an  intruder  or  ridiculed  as  a  blunderer.  It  is  better  to  cultivate  the 
affections  of  one's  own  home  circle  and  true  old  friends.  3.  He  is  not  able  to  fulfil 
his  mission.  It  may  be  that  a  mother-bird  is  here  thought  of.  In  wandering  from 
her  nest  she  forsakes  her  yoiiiig.  So  he  who  leaves  his  rightful  place  neglects  his 
obligations.  He  fails  to  do  his  duty  to  those  naturally  dependent  on  him.  Charity 
be<'i'ns  at  home.  4.  He  is  exposed  to  danget.  The  poor  wandering  bird  may  be  lost 
in  "the  forest;  she  may  starve  for  want  of  Ibod;  birds  of  prey  may  pounce  upon  her  in 
the  darkness.  There  is  no  safety  off  the  path  of  duty.  Even  unsuitable  spheres  are 
dangerous,  because  a  man  does  not  know  how  to  behave  himself  in  them.  Away  from 
God  there  is  danger  of  ruin  without  hope  of  escape. 

Ver.  12. — Foresight  of  evil.  I.  It  is  not  possible  to  foresee  AtL  futube  evil. 
God,  in  his  great  mercy,  has  drawn  a  thick  veil  over  the  face  of  futurity.  We  can 
reason  of  probabilities ;  in  some  cases  we  can  almost  predict  certainties ;  but  taking 
the  whole  round  of  life,  and  the  full  reach  of  futurity,  we  have  to  recognize  the  fact 
that  the  evil  to  come  a?  well  as  the  good  are  largely  hidden  frora  our  view.  It  would 
not  be  possible  for  us  to  bear  the  sight  if  all  dark  experiences  were  crowded  into  one 
horrible  picture  and  presented  before  our  imagination  at  once.  We  can  take  one  by 
one  the  evils  that  would  crush  us  if  we  beheld  them  all  together  in  a  mighty,  terrible 
phalanx.     When  the  trouble  comes  the  strength  may  be  given  to  bear  it,  but  not 

before. 

II.  It  is  foolish  to  fret  ourselves  with  anxieties  about  the  morrow. 
This' is  the  distinct  teaching  of  Clirist,  based  on  various  grounds.  1.  We  have  enough 
to  bear  in  the  present.  "  Sufficient  unto  the  day  is  the  evil  thereof."  2.  We  cannot 
command  the  future.  No  man  by  being  anxious  can  add  one  cubit  to  his  stature  or 
change  the  natural  colour  of  his  hair.  3.  Qod  is  our  Father.  Ho  feeds  the  wild  birds 
and  clothes  the  fields.  Much  more  will  he  feed  and  clothe  his  own  children.  4.  We 
lave  higher  considerations  to  absorb  our  attention.  "Seek  first  the  kingdom  of  Gnl. 
and  his  righteounnesa." 


624  THE  PB0VERB3.  [oh.  xxvn,  1— 27 

in.  We  need  to  make  a  reasonablb  provision  for  thb  futubk.  Tt  may 
appear  that  the  prudence  of  the  Book  of  Proverbs  is  rebuked  by  teachings  of  Christ, 
No  doubt  our  Lord  does  lift  us  into  a  higher  atmosphere.  But  there  is  no  contradiction 
between  the  two  positions.  Indeed,  we  are  best  able  to  banish  needless  care  when  we 
have  mide  proper  provision  for  the  future.  Thrift  does  not  create  anxiety.  The  man 
who  has  insured  his  bouse  against  fire  does  not  dread  the  incendiary  more  than  the 
mtin  who  has  not  provided  himself  against  the  contingency  of  a  conflagration.  He  who 
is  prepared  for  death  need  not  fear  death. 

IV.    It   is   a   mark  op   TRUI!   wisdom    to  GTJABD    AOAINST    THE    BVIL   THAT   MAT  BE 

AVOIDED.  1.  l%is  obtains  in  secular  pursuits.  Ignorance  is  no  excuse  for  not  pro- 
viding against  a  disaster  when  reasonable  thoughtfulness  would  have  foreseen  it.  The 
reckless  general  who  burns  the  bridges  behind  him  is  guilty  of  the  blood  of  his  soldiers 
who  are  slaughtered  after  a  great  defeat.  2.  T/iis  is  most  true  in  the  spiritual  world. 
(I)  Here  we  may  foresee  danger.  For  Grod  has  revealed  the  fatal  consequences  of  sin. 
No  one  who  reflects  can  say  that  he  has  no  reason  to  expect  that  his  sin  will  be 
punished.  The  very  nature  of  sin  foreshadows  its  own  dreadful  doom.  (2)  Here  we 
may  pro\  iJe  against  it.  It  is  not  an  inevitable  destiny.  "God  has  opened  up  a  way 
of  escai  e."  It  is  wise  to  consider  the  danger  of  sin,  in  order  to  flee  from  it  to  safety  in 
Christ  (1  John  ii.  1). 

Ver.  17. —  TOe  advantages  of  society.  I.  Obsbrvb  ts  what  thb  advamtaqbs  of 
BOCIKTT  CONSIST.  We  have  ancient  authority  for  the  idea  that  it  is  not  good  for  man  to 
be  alone  (Gen.  ii.  18).  Man  is  naturally  a  gregarious  being.  Though  some  people  are 
more  sociable  than  others,  no  one  can  be  healthy  in  perpetual  solitude.  The  isolation  of 
the  hermit  engendered  the  wildest  hallucinations  of  fanaticism  together  with  the  narrowest 
conception  of  the  world.  Prisoners  of  the  Bastille,  in  solitary  confinement,  were  reduced 
to  a  condition  of  semi-idiocy.  Robinson  Crusoe  made  the  best  of  his  situation,  yet  he 
oo'ild  not  live  without  the  companionship  of  animal  pets,  and  he  was  glad  of  the  humble 
friendship  of  a  poor  savage.  1.  Society  quickens  a  man's  intelligence.  Even  Words- 
worlh  was  thought  by  some  to  have  deteriorated  mentally  in  his  comparative  seclusion 
at  liydal  Mount,  and  yet  there  were  other  men  of  high  mental  power  in  his  neighbour- 
hoo  1.  Men's  thoughts  are  stimulated  and  shai'pened  by  conversation.  2.  Society  rouses 
a  man's  energy.  Empty  society  of  mere  pleasure-seekers  only  dissipates  a  man's  powers 
in  frivolity.  But  the  society  of  earnest  men  stimulates  by  sympathy,  emulation,  and 
encouragement.  3.  Society  broadens  a  man's  views.  He  is  able  to  see  how  other  men 
think  and  feel.  They  may  not  all  have,  greater  advantages  than  he  possesses ;  but  at 
lonst  they  are  differently  constituted  and  situated  from  himself.  Thus  he  is  lifted  out 
of  the  narrowness  of  his  own  single  vision.  Such  breadth  gives  strength  when  it  is 
accompanied  by  an  earnest  love  of  truth  and  right. 

II.  Consider  how  the  advantages  of  society  mat  be  realized.  1.  2%ey  are 
d  pendent  on  a  man's  residence,  Horace's  old  dispute  between  the  town  and  the  country 
mouse  has  never  been  settled.  Cowper  wrote,  "  God  made  the  country,  man  made  the 
town ; "  and  no  doubt  there  is  to  be  seen  a  certain  restful ness,  a  purity,  and  a  quiet  power 
in  nature  that  those  men  miss  who  reside  in  the  heart  of  a  wilderness  of  houses.  Never- 
tlieless,  there  are  compensations  for  the  disagreeable  pressure  of  population  in  great 
cities.  The  mind  is  quickened.  Still,  as  evils  also  result  from  this  manner  of  living, 
it  is  certainly  important  that  those  who  are  able  to  select  their  own  residences  should 
consider  wholesome  society  to  be  as  important  as  a  pure  water  supply.  2.  Viey  can  be 
found  in  sympathetic  friendship.  One  good,  true  friend  is  more  helpful  than  a  score  of 
mere  acquaintances.  It  is  in  the  close  intercourse  of  genuine  friendship  that  the  best 
results  of  the  mutual  play  of  thought  and  feeling  can  be  obtained.  Hence  the  supreme 
imjiortance  of  cultivating  friendship  with  the  wise  and  good.  3.  They  should  be 
obtained  in  tlie  Christian  Church.  Christ  not  only  called  disciples  to  himself,  one 
by  one ;  he  founded  the  Church,  and  his  apostles  established  local  Churches  wherever 
they  could  gather  together  a  few  converts.  Christian  companionship  should  be  a  help 
to  Christian  life  and  thought.  Tliere  was  a  time  when  they  who  ftared  the  Lord  ppake 
often  one  to  another  (Mai.  iii.  16).  Above  this  earthly  friendship  the  Christian  iiods 
•  mental  and  spiritual  quickening  in  the  friendship  of  Christ  (Luke  xxiv.  32). 


CH.  XXTO.  1— 27.]  THE  PROVEEBS. 


626 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

(Ter.  1)  1.  On  the  ground  of  our  limited  knowledge.  The  homely  proverb  Vavl 
«  Do  not  ooimt  your  chickens  before  they  are  hatched."  The  future  exists  for  us  only 
in  imagination.  "Who  knows,"  asks  Horace,  "whether  the  gods  above  will  add 
to-morrow's  time  to  the  sum  of  to-day  ?  "  ('  Od.,'  iv.  7.  17) ;  and  Seneca,  -'VnehS 
gods  so  favourable  as  that  he  may  promise  himself  to-morrow's  good  "  2  On  th« 
ground  of  the  Divine  reserve  of  the  secrets  of  destiny.  To  boast  is  to  lift  ourselves  in 
effect  out  of  that  finite  sphere  of  thought  and  feeling  in  which  we  have  been  placed  by 
the  Divine  ordination.  So  says  Horace  again  (and  a  distinctly  Christian  turn  mav  be 
given  to  his  exhortation),  "Shun  to  inquire  into  the  future  and  the  morrow  and 
whatever  day  fortune  shall  afford  thee,  count  it  as  gain  "  ('  Od.,'  i.  9. 13).  Common  sense 
and  religious  humility  unite  to  teach  us  to  "  live  for  the  day," 

II.  Self-1'RAI8B  oensdrbd.  (Ver.  2.)  «  Let  another  piaise  thee,  and  not  thine  own 
mouth.'  "  Self-praise  stinks,"  and  «  Not  as  thy  mother  says,  but  as  the  neighbours 
say,  are  Arabic  proverbs.  Every  individual  has  a  certain  value;  the  sense  of  this  is 
the  foundation  of  all  self-respect  and  virtue.  But  to  show  an  over-consciousness  of  thii 
worth  by  self-praise  is  a  social  offence,  because  it  is  an  exaction  of  that  which  ought 
to  be  a  free  tribute,  and  betrays  a  desire  of  self-exaltation  above  others  not  easilv 
forgiven.  ' 

IIL  The  pabsion  op  the  fool  intolerablb.  (Ver.  3.)  Wli  ether  it  be  envy 
furious  resentment  of  rebuke,  or  jealousy,  it  is  a  burden  intolerablu  to  the  person  himself 
and  to  those  with  whom  he  has  to  do.  The  pious  may  readily  sin  in  their  anger,  how 
much  more  the  ungodly  I 

"  Ira  furor  brevii  eit ;  anlmum  rege ;  qui,  nisi  paret, 
Imperat  j  huno  froenis,  huno  tu  oompesce  catena." 

(Horace,  '  Ep.,'  L  2  C2.) 

It  is  like  a  weight  of  stone  or  sand,  being  without  cause,  measure,  or  end  (Foole). 

IV.  The  terrible  force  op  jealousy  and  envy.  (Ver.  4.)  It  exceeds  all 
ordinaiy  outbursts  of  wrath  in  violence  and  destructiveness.  Envy  Is  the  daughter  ol 
pride,  the  author  of  revenge  and  murder,  the  beginner  of  sedition,  and  the  perpetual 
tormentor  of  nature  (Socrates).  It  never  loves  to  honour  another  but  when  it  may  be 
an  honour  to  itself.     "  From  enm/  .  .  .  good  Lord,  deliver  us !  " 

V.  False  love  and  faithful  fbiensship  contrasted.  (Vers.  5,  6.)  False  love 
refuses  to  tell  a  friend  of  his  faults,  from  some  egotistic  and  unworthy  motive.  "  If 
you  know  that  I  have  done  anything  foolishly  or  wickedly,  and  do  not  blame  rae  for 
it,  you  yourself  ought  to  be  reproved"  (Plaut., ' Trinum.,'  i.  2.  57).  "It  is  no  good 
office,"  says  Jeremy  Taylor,  "to  make  my  friend  more  vicious  or  more  a  fool;  I  will 
restrain  his  folly,  but  not  nurse  it."  "I  think  that  man  is  my  friend  through  whube 
advice  I  am  enabled  to  wipe  off  the  blemishes  of  my  soul  before  the  appearance  of  the 
awfuljudge "  (Gregory  I.).  Christians  should  "speak  the  truth  in  love"  (Eph.  iv. 
15).  If  the  erring  one  dees  not  learn  it  from  the  lips  of  love,  he  will  have  to  learn  it 
from  a  harsher  source  and  in  ruder  tones  (comp.  Job  t.  17, 18 ;  Fs.  cxli.  5 ;  Rev.  iii. 
19;  ch,  xxviii,  23).  There  cannot  be  a  more  worthy  improvement  of  friendship  than 
in  a  fervent  opposition  to  the  sins  of  those  we  love  (Bishop  Hall). — J. 

Vers.  7,  8. — The  hlestmg  of  contentment  I.  Thb  contented  mind.  (Ver.  7.) 
"  Enough  is  as  good  as  a  feast ;  "  "  Hunger  is  the  best  sauce."  To  know  when  we  are 
well  off  is  the  cure  for  the  canker  of  envy  and  discontent.  Deprivation  for  a  time 
teaches  us  the  need  of  common  blessings.  The  good  of  affliction  ia  that  it  brings  us 
Dearer  to  God ;  and  of  poverty  of  spirit,  that  it  is  never  without  food. 

IL  The  evil  op  bbstlbssnebs.  (Ver.  8.)  "  The  rolling  stone  gathers  no  moss." 
Barely  does  the  wanderer  better  his  condition.  Unstable  as  water,  he  doth  not  excel. 
Those  who  seek  satisfaction  for  the  soul  out  of  God  are  like  those  who  wander  into  a 
far  country,  like  the  prodigal.  "  0  my  wandering  ways  I  Woe  to  the  soul  which  pre- 
sumed*!/it  departed  from  thee,  that  it  should  find  anythins  better!    I  turned  on  every 


BZ«  TEE  PEOVBEBS.  [oh.  xxvu.  1—27. 


sidf,  and  all  things  were  hard,  and  thou  alone  wast  my  Rest.    Thou  hast  made  us  foi 
thyself,  0  God,  and  our  heart  is  restless  till  it  finds  rest  in  thee." — J. 

Ver«.  9,10. — The  praises  of  friendship.  I.  Its  swbetnbs*  (Ver.  9.)  It  is  compared 
to  fragrant  unguent  and  incense  (Ps.  civ.  15 ;  cxzziii.  2).  It  is  more  delightful  to  listen 
to  the  counsel  of  a  dear  friend  than  sternly  to  rely  on  self.  It  is  in  human  nature  to 
love  to  see  itself  reflected  in  other  objects ;  and  the  thoughts  we  approve,  the  opinions 
we  form,  we  recognize  gladly  on  another's  lips.  Talking  with  a  friend  is  better  than 
thinking  aloud. 

II.  Time-honoured  friendship  should  above  all  be  held  deab.  (Ver.  10.) 
The  presumptiin  is  that  your  own  and  your  father's  friend  is  one  tried  and  approved, 
and  may  be  depended  upon. 

"  The  friends  tbon  hast  and  their  adoption  triod. 
Grapple  them  to  thy  soul  with  hooks  of  steel." 

III.  Fbibndbhip  is  FOtiNDED  UPON  SPIRITUAL  SYMPATHY.  And  this  ranks  before 
the  ties  of  blood.  The  thought  meets  us  in  the  proverbs  of  the  ancient  world  in 
general.  In  the  touching  story  of  the  friendship  of  Orestes  and  Pylades,  e.g.,  it  has 
its  application.  "  This  is  what  people  say, '  Acquire  friends,  not  relations  alone ; '  since 
a  man,  when  he  is  united  by  disposition,  though  not  of  kin,  is  better  than  a  host  of 
blood-relations  for  another  man  to  possess  as  his  friend  "  (of.  Euripides,  '  Or,'  804). 
And  Hesiod  says,  "  If  aid  is  wanted,  neighbours  come  ungirt,  but  relations  stay  to  tuck 
up  their  robes."  Divine  friendship  is  the  highest' illustration  of  this  love.  Christ  is 
above  all  the  "  Friend  that  stioketh  closer  than  a  brother." — J. 

Vers.  11 — 13. — The  need  of  prudence.  I.  Prudent  conduct  reflects  credit  upoh 
one's  parents.  (Ver.  11.)  'Ihe  graceless  children  of  gracious  parents  are  a  special 
reproach,  bringing  dishonour  even  upon  the  Name  of  God  (Gen.  xxxiv.  30;  1  Sam.  ii. 
17).  The  world  will  generally  lay  the  blame  at  the  parents'  door.  The  Mosaic  Law 
severely  punished  the  sins  of  the  priest's  daughter  for  the  disgrace  brought  upon  the 
holy  office  (Lev.  xxi.  9). 

II.  The  heed  and  advantage  of  forethought.  (Ver.  12.)  Prudence  has  been 
described  as  "the  virtue  of  the  senses."  It  is  the  science  of  appearances.  It  is  the 
outward  action  of  the  inward  life.  It  is  content  to  seek  health  of  body  by  complying 
with  physical  conditions,  and  health  of  mind  by  complying  with  the  laws  of  intellect. 
It  is  possible  to  give  a  base  and  cowardly  interpretation  of  the  duty  of  prudence ;  that 
"  which  makes  the  senses  final  is  the  divinity  of  sots  and  cowards,  and  is  the  subject  of 
all  comedy.  The  true  prudence  admits  the  knowledge  of  an  outward  and  real  world." 
Thus  true  prudence  is  only  that  which  foresees,  detects,  and  guards  against  the  ills 
which  menace  the  life  of  the  soid ;  for  there  is  no  profit  in  the  prudence  which  seeks 
the  world  and  risks  the  soul.  Those  are  "  simple  "  who,  often  with  the  utmost  regard 
for  their  material  interests,  go  on  heedless  of  the  moral  perils  which  their  habits 
incur. 

m.  Thb  folly  of  thoughtless  suretyship.  (Ver.  13.)  This,  as  we  have  seen, 
is  often  dwelt  on  in  this  book.  It  refers  to  a  different  condition  of  society  from  our  own. 
We  may  generalize  the  warning.  Prudence  includes  a  proper  self-regard,  a  virtuous 
egotism,  so  to  speak.  When  good-natured  people  complain  that  they  have  been  deceived, 
taken  in,  and  turn  sourly  against  human  nature,  do  they  not  reproach  themselves  for 
having  lacked  this  primary  virtue  of  prudence  ?  The  highest  virtues  can  grow  only 
out  of  the  root  of  independence  (see  ch.  xx.  16). — J. 

Ver.  14. — Insincerity  in  friendship.  The  picture  is  that  of  one  who  indulges  in  the 
noisy  ostentation  of  friendship,  without  having  the  reality  of  it  at  his  heart. 

I.  Excess  in  praise  or  blame  is  to  be  guarded  AOArusT.  Luther  shrewdly 
observes,  "  He  who  loudly  scolds,  praises ;  and  he  who  excessively  praises,  scolds.  They 
are  not  believed  because  they  exaggerate."  Too  great  praise  is  half-blame.  Language 
should  be  used  with  sobriety  and  temperance. 

II.  Insinceritv  is  subject  TO  A  CURSE,  It  is  odious  to  God  aud  to  man.  One  of 
the  constant  moral  trials  of  life  is  in  the  observance  of  the  golden  mean  of  condoet  ia 


CH.  XXVII.  1—27.]  THE  PROVERBS.  627 

social  relations — to  be  agreeable  without  flattery,  and  sincere  without  rudeness.  Here, 
as  ever,  we  must  walk  in  the  bright  light  of  our  Saviour's  example,  the  All-loTine,  yet 
the  All-faithful.— J.    . 

Vers.  15,  16. — The  quarrelsome  wife.  She  is  compared  to  the  continual  dropping  of 
a  shower;  and  the  attempt  to  restrain  her  is  like  seeking  to  fetlei  the  wind  or  to  grasp 
at  oil. 

I.  The  monotony  of  ill  temper.  It  persists  in  one  mood,  and  dyes  all  it  touches 
with  one  colour,  and  that  a  dismal  one. 

II.  The  cobkodino  effect  upon  others'  minds.  Fine  tempers  cannot  resist  this 
perpetual  wear  and  tear ;  the  most  buoyant  spirits  may  be  in  time  depressed  by  this 
dead  weight. 

III.  The  rNFLEXiBiLiTT  OF  n,L  TEMPER.  Alas  1  it  is  one  of  those  things  we  are 
tempi  ed  to  say  cannot  be  mended.  Kothing  indeed  but  that  Divine  grace  which  can 
turn  the  winter  of  the  soul  into  summer  is  able  to  remedy  this  ill.  la  reliance  upon 
this,  the  exhortation  may  be  given,  "  Purge  out  the  old  leaven  1 " — J. 

Vers.  17 — 22. —  Wisdom  for  self  and  for  others.  I.  The  benefit  of  intelligent 
sociBTT.  (Vers.  17, 19.)  1.  The  collision  of  mind  with  m,ind  elicits  truth,  strikes  out 
Hashes  of  new  perception.  A  man  may  grow  wiser  by  an  hour's  discourse  than  by  a 
day's  meditation.  "  Speech  is  like  embroidered  cloth  opened  and  put  abroad,"  said 
Themistocles  to  the  King  of  Persia.  In  the  collision  of  minds  the  man  brings  his  own 
thoughts  to  light,  and  whets  his  wits  against  a  stone  that  cuts  not  (Bacon).  2.  2%e 
reflection  of  mind  in  mind.  (Ver.  19.)  For  we  are  all  "  like  in  difference,"  and  never 
see  so  clearly  what  is  in  our  own  spirit  as  through  the  manifestation  of  another's.  As 
we  have  not  eyes  in  the  back  of  our  head,  so  is  introspection  difficult — perhaps,  strictly 
speaking,  impossible.  Self-knowledge  is  the  reflection  of  the  features  of  oilier  minds  In 
our  own. 

II.  Spiritual  laws.  1.  Diligent  husbandry  is  rewarded.  (Ver.  18.)  Whether  we 
cultivate  the  tree,  the  master,  the  friend,  our  own  soul,  this  law  must  ever  hold  good. 
Everything  in  this  world  of  God's  goes  by  law,  not  by  luck ;  and  what  we  sow  we 
reap.  Trust  men,  and  they  will.be  true  to  you ;  treat  them  justly,  and  they  will  show 
themselves  just,  though  they  make  an  exception  in  your  favour  to  all  their  rules  of 
conduct.  2.  The  quenchless  thirst  of  the  spirit.  (Ver.  20.)  Who  can  set  a  limit  to  the 
human  desire  to  know,  to  do,  to  be  ?  The  real  does  not  satisfy  us ;  we  are  ever  in  quest 
of  the  ideal  or  perfect.  Evil  excesses  and  extravagances  of  vicious  passion  are  the 
reverse  of  this  undying  impulse  of  an  infinite  nature.  God  is  our  true  Good ;  our 
insatiable  curiosities  are  only  to  be  satisfied  by  the  knowledge  of  himself.  3.  Tlie 
criterion  of  cliaracter.  (Ver.  21.)  According  to  the  scale  of  that  which  a  man  boasts 
of,  is  he  judged.  If  he  boasts  of  praise,  worthy  things,  he  is  recognized  as  a  virtuous 
and  honest  man ;  if  he  boasts  of  vain  or  evil  things,  he  is  abhorred.  "  Show  me  what 
a  man  likes,  and  I  will  show  you  what  he  is  "  (this  according  to  what  seems  the  true 
rendering  of  this  proverb).  4.  Folly  in  grain.  (Ver.  22.)  In  the  East  the  husk  is 
beaten  from  the  com  by  braying  in  a  mortar.  ■  But  from  the  fool  the  husk  of  folly  will 
not  depart.  It  is  possible  to  despise  the  lessons  of  affliction,  to  harden  one's  back  against 
the  rod.  Mere  punishment  cannot  of  itself  correct  or  convert  the  soul.  The  will,  the 
conscious  spiritual  activity,  must  co-operate  with  God.  A  great  man  speaks  of  "  that 
worst  of  afflictions — an  affliction  lost." — J. 

Vers.  23 — 27. — The  man  diligent  in  his  business.  I.  Economy  and  foresight. 
(Vers.  23—25.)  He  looks  after  the  outgoings  of  his  farm,  well  aware  that  there  is  in 
all  things  constant  waste,  that  even  the  royal  crown  is  a  perishable  thing.  All  know- 
ledge is  useful,  and  prudence  applies  through  the  whole  scale  of  our  being.  Let  the 
man,  "  if  he  have  hands,  handle ;  if  eyes,  measure  and  discriminate ;  let  him  accept 
and  hive  every  fact  of  chemistry,  natural  history,  and  economy  ;  the  more  he  has,  the 
less  he  is  willing  to  spare  any  one.  Time  is  always  bringing  the  occasions  that  disclose 
their  value.  Some  wisdom  comes  out  of  every  natural  and  innocent  action."  Te 
preserve  and  hold  together  are  as  necessary  as  to  gain  in  every  kind  of  riches. 

IL  Thx  frcits  of  industry.    (Vers.  26,  27.)    Joyous  is  lie  »ight  when  m*n'»  toll. 


528  THE  PROVEEBS.  (oh.  Kvn.  1— 27. 


united  with  the  forces  of  nature,  has  heen  blessed  with  the  abundant  harvest*  and  th« 
rich  flocks.  Let  a  man  keep  the  laws  of  God,  and  his  way  will  be  strewn  with  satisfac- 
tions. To  find  out  the  secret  of  "  working  together  with  God  "  in  all  the  departmeuts 
of  our  life  is  one  of  the  deepest  secrets  of  satisfaction  and  blessedness. — J. 

Ver.  1. — Man  in  presence  of  the  future:  our  greatnesi  and  our  lUtlentst.  It  is  well 
to  glance  at — 

I.  OuK  aRBATNESS  IN  REGARD  TO  THE  FUTUBB.  1.  There  need  be  no  lound  at  all  tc 
our  hope  and  aspiration  in  respect  of  the  future.  We  are  warranted  in  looking  forward 
to  an  endless  life  heyond,  to  an  actual  and  absolute  eternity  of  blessedness  and  glory, 
Whosoever  believeth  in  Jesus  Christ  has  everlasting  life.  2.  We  can  and  we  should 
prepare  for  a  very  long  time  to  come.  The  legislator  should  devise  his  measures,  the 
religious  leader  or  organizer  should  lay  his  plans,  the  architect  should  make  his  designs, 
anri  the  builder  provide  his  materials  with  a  view  to  the  next  century  as  well  as  to  the 
next  decade.  3.  We  should  have  regard  to  the  coming  years  as  well  as  to  the  passing 
days;  teaching  our  pupils  so  that  they  will  not  only  pass  the  approaching  examina- 
tion, but  be  ready  for  the  battle  of  life;  offering  and  enforcing  truths  and  principles 
which  will  not  only  tide  men  over  to-morrow,  but  carry  them  victoriously  through  all 
the  vicissitudes  of  their  course,  and  solace  and  strengthen  them  in  their  declining  days. 
But  the  lesson  of  the  text  is — 

II.  OuB  LITTLENESS  IN  EEQARD  TO  THE  FUTURE.  We  do  not  kuow  what  a  day 
may  bring  forth.  1.  How  our  purposes  may  be  deranged,  and  all  that  we  are  pro- 
posing to  do  may  have  to  be  abandoned  in  favour  of  some  more  imperative  duty  (see 
Jas.  iv.  13 — 15).  2.  How  our  prospects  may  be  aSfeoted ;  we  may  possibly  rise  from 
indigence  to  afBuence,  but  we  are  much  more  likely  to  be  suddenly  and  seriously 
reduced.  Financial  calanliitieB  are  many,  but  "  windfalls  "  are  few.  3.  How  our  circle 
of  friendship  may  be  narrowed,  or  how  soon  we  may  be  called  on  to  leave  home  and 
kindred.  4.  How  our  hope  of  health  or  life  may  be  extinguished.  "  Between  the 
morning  and  the  evening"  (see  Job  iv.  19 — 21,  Revised  Version)  we  may  discover 
that  we  are  afflicted  with  a  disease  which  will  complete  its  work  in  a  few  months  at 
most,  or  we  may  be  stricken  down  with  a  blow  which  will  bring  us  face  to  face  with 
death  and  eternity.  With  this  uncertainty  there  are  three  lessons  we  should  learn. 
(1)  All  unqualified  and  unreserved  declarations  are  unbecoming.  If  there  be  no  verbal 
qualification,  there  should  be  a  mental  reservation,  a  feeling  below  the  surface  that  all 
our  plans  and  movements  are  subject  to  the  will  of  God.  (2)  Wo  should  do  to-day's 
work  before  its  hours  are  over.  Since  we  may  not  be  able  to  do  a  stroke  to-morrow, 
let  us  see  that  every  day's  work  is  well  and  thoroughly  done.  We  are  not  responsible 
for  the  future,  but  we  are  for  the  present.  And  not  only  is  it  of  no  use  for  us  to  be 
anxious  to  do  much  in  the  coming  years,  but  it  is  foolish  and  unfaithful  of  us  to  be 
concerned  about  it.  Our  Master  sets  us  our  work,  and  he  gives  us  our  time.  All  that 
We  should  be  solicitous  about  is  the  diligent  and  devoted  discharge  of  our  duty  in  his 
appointed  time  and  way.  If  he  takes  the  weapon  out  of  our  hand  here,  it  will  be 
because  he  has  a  better  one  to  give  us  in  a  brighter  and  broader  sphere.  (3)  We  ought 
to  be  prepaied  for  any  and  every  event.  We  should  have  vrithin  us  principles  that 
will  sustain  or  preserve  us  in  any  trouble  or  in  any  elevation  that  may  be  awaiting  us. 
We  should  have  our  house  in  such  order  that,  if  death  should  come  suddenly  to  our 
door,  those  whom  we  leave  behind  us  will  suffer  the  least  possible  affliction,  and  wo 
oJirselves  shall  pass  to  the  great  inheritance  beyond. — C. 

Vers.  2,  21. —  The  praise  of  man.  How  far  we  should  go  in  praisins;  others,  an''  in 
what  spirit  we  should  accept  their  praise,  is  a  matter  of  no  small  importance  ii;  the 
conduct  of  life. 

I.  The  duty  of  praisinq  othbrb.  "Let  another  man  praise  thee"  can  hardly  be 
said  to  be  imperative  so  far  as  he  is  concerned.  But  it  suggests  the  propriety  of 
another  man  speaking  in  words  of  commendation.  And  the  duty  of  praising  those 
who  have  done  well  is  a  much-forgotten  and  neglected  virtue.  1.  It  is  the  correlatire 
of  blame,  and  if  we  blame  freely  (as  we  do),  why  should  we  not  freely  praise  the 
scholar,  the  servant,  the  son  or  daughter,  the  workman,  etc.?  2.  With  many  hearts, 
perhap*  with  mofit,  a  little  praise  would  prove  a  fax  more  powerful  incentive  than  » 


H.  xxvn.  1— 27.]  THE  PROVERBS.  629 

large  quantity  of  lilame.  3.  To  praise  for  doing  well  is  to  follow  in  the  footsteps  of 
Jesus  Christ  and  of  liis  apostles;  it  is  to  act  as  the  most  gracious  and  the  most  useful 
men  and  women  have  always  acted.  4.  It  is  to  do  to  others  as  we  would  they  should 
do  to  us.  We  thirst  for  a  measure  of  approval  when  we  have  doue  our  best,  and  what 
we  crave  from  others  we  should  give  to  others. 

II.  Thk  wisdom  of  abstaining  fbom  self-pbaisb.  The  injunction  of  Solomon 
appeals  to  our  common  sense.  Yet  is  it  by  no  means  unrequired.  Miny  men  are 
guilty  of  the  unseemliness  and  the  folly  of  praising  themselves — thuir  ingenuity,  ibeir 
sluewdnesB,  their  persuasiveness,  their  generosity,  etc.  Probably  if  they  knew  how 
very  little  they  commend  themselves  by  so  doing,  how  very  soon  they  weary  their 
audience,  how  often  their  language  becomes  positively  nauseous,  they  would  abstain. 
Sell'-vindioation  under  a  false  charge  is  a  duty  and  even  a  virtue;  a  very  miuute 
modicum  of  self-commendation  may  be  occasionally  allowable ;  anytiiing  beyond  tliis 
U,  at  least,  a  mistake. 

III.  The  necessity  of  TESTiNa  rsAiSE.  "The  ordinary  interpretation  makes  tU 
praise  try  the  man,  but  the  words  ...  in  the  original  make  the  man  try  the  praise" 
(Wardlaw).  What  the  fining-pot  is  to  silver,  that  a  man  should  be  to  his  praise — he 
siiould  carefully  and  thorouglily  test  it.  For  praise  is  often  offered  some  part  of  wnah 
should  be  rejected  as  dross.  The  simple-minded  and  the  unscrupulous  will  prai.-e  us 
beyond  the  bounds  of  our  desert,  and  to  drink  too  much  of  this  intoxicating  cup  is 
dangerous  and  demoralizing  to  us, 

IV.  The  PKACTlcAL  proof  of  praibb.  The  duties  and  the'  difficulties  that  are 
before  us  will  be  the  best  possible  proof  of  the  sincerity  and  of  the  truthfulness  of  the 
praise  we  receive.  We  shall  either  be  ajjproved  as  the  wise  men  we  are  said  to  be,  or. 
we  shall  be  convicted  of  being  lesg  worthy  than  we  are  represented  to  be.  Therefore 
let  us  be  (1)  judicious  as  well  as  generous  in  our  praise  of  others,  remembering  that 
they  will  be  thus  tested ;  and  let  us  (2)  be  contented  with  a  modest  measure  of  honour, 
realizing  that  we  have  to  live  up  to  the  esteem  in  which  we  are  held.  But  we  may 
learn  a  valuable  lesson  from  the  common  (if  not  the  correct)  interpretation,  and 
consider — 

V.  The  TEST  which  phaise  affords.  We  stand  blame  better  than  praise ;  though 
it  is  right  to  recollect  that  we  cannot  stand  more  than  a  certain  measure  of  blame,  and 
few  people  are  more  objectionable  or  more  mischievous  than  the  scold.  But  much 
praise  is  a  great  peril.  It  elates  and  exalts;  it  "puffs  up."  It  too  often  undernines 
that  humility  of  spirit  and  dependence  on  God  which  are  the  very  root  of  a  strong  anil 
beautiful  Christian  character.  1.  Discourage  all  excess  in  this  direction  ;  it  is  dangerous. 
2.  Gate  more  for  the  approval  of  an  instructed  and  well-trained  conscience.  3.  Care 
must  for  the  commendation  of  Christ. — 0. 

Vers.  5, 6, 9, 10, 17, 19. — Four  services  of  friendship.  (And  see  homily  on  "  Friend- 
ship," ch.  liii.  20.)  We  have  suggested  in  the  nineteei  th  verse  two  conditions  of 
friendship:  (1)  likeness  of  character;  and  (2)  reciprocity  in  action.  There  can  be  no 
true  friendship  where  one  heart  does  not  answer  to  another  as  the  face  reflected  from  a 
mirror  answers  to  that  which  is  before  it.  Men  must  be  like-minded  in  their  principles 
and  sympathies;  and  they  must  be  sensitive  enough  to  feel  with  one  another  and  to 
give  back  the  thoughts  which  are  expressed  by  one  or  the  other,  if  their  intimacy  is  to 
be  worthy  of  the  sacred  name  of  friendship.  There  are  four  services  which  this  most 
precious  gift  of  God  secures  for  us. 

I.  Correction.  (Vers.  5,6.)  "Open  rebuke  isbetterthan  hidden  love"— better  than 
^he  love  which  hides  from  a  friend  its  disappointment  or  its  dissatisfaction  with  him. 
The  wounds  of  friendship  are  faithful.  Many  are  they  whose  charact.  r  is  seriously 
defective,  and  whose  usefulness  suffers  considerable  abatement  from  want  of  discipline; 
they  are  not  told  of  their  faults,  they  are  allowed  to  go  on  deepening  their  roots 
and  nmltiplying  their  fruits,  because  no  wise  and  faithful  friend  is  near  to  say,  "Pluck 
out  and  prune."  What  no  authority  may  dare  to  speak,  love  can  say  without  lear  and 
with  excellent  result.  .  u     ^  ic 

II.  Refreshment.  (Ver.  9.)  We  who  are  weary  travellers  along  the  path  of  hfe 
often  need  that  which  refreshes  our  spirit  and  turns  languor  into  energy,  gloom  into 
gladness  of  heart.     For  that  we  look  to  friendship ;  it  is  as  "ointment  and  |iiriume" 

FB0VEBB8.  *   •• 


530  THE  PROVERBS.  [ch.  xxvii.  1— 27. 

to  the  senses.    We  may  be  jaded  and  worn,  but  the  look,  the  grasp,  the  words,  of  our 
friend  reanimate  and  renew  us. 

III.  Consolation.  (Ver.  10.)  We  may  do  well  to  avoid  the  house  of  our  kindred 
in  the  day  of  our  calamity,  especially  if  we  have  passed  it  by  in  the  time  of  our 
prosperity ;  if  our  "  brother  "  has  been  kept  or  has  kept  himself  at  a  distance.  But 
the  "  neighbour  that  is  near,''  the  friend  that  has  been  "  sticking  closer  than  a  brother  " 
will  not  shut  the  door  of  his  heart  against  us.  He  is  the  "  brother  who  is  born  for 
adversity ; "  he  will  claim  the  right  of  friendship  to  open  his  heart,  to  pour  forth  his 
sympathy,  to  offer  his  succour,  to  6e/We»d  us  in  every  way  in  which  affection  can 
solace  and  strength  can  sustain  us. 

IV.  Ikoitembnt.  (Ver.  17.)  It  is  the  opportunity  and  the  high  privilege  of  friend- 
ship to  urge  to  honourable  achievement,  to  rekindle  the  lamp  of  holy  aspiration  when 
the  light  burns  low;  to  sustain  Christian  devotedness  when  it  is  putting  forth  its 
strength,  by  every  possible  encouragement ;  to  hold  up  the  hands  of  that  consecrated 
activity  which  is  fearlessly  speaking  the  truth  and  diligently  buUding  up  the  kingdom 
of  Jesus  Christ. — C. 

Ver.  7. — Superabundance  and  scarcity.    We  have  here — 

I.  A  PAMiLiAB  FACT  OF  OUR  PHYSICAL  NATUBE.  Tliose  who  are  Well  fed  become 
very  choice  and  dainty,  while  those  who  "  lack  bread "  are  thankful  for  the  coarsest 
food.  There  are  thousands  of  the  sons  and  daughters  of  luxury  whose  appetite  can 
hardly  be  tempted ;  for  them  cookery  has  to  be  developed  into  one  of  the  fine  arts,  and 
nothing  is  palatable  to  their  exquisite  taste  but  delicacies.  Living  within  five  minutes' 
walk  of  their  residence,  and  sometimes  smelling  the  odours  that  come  from  their 
kitchens,  are  poor,  pinched,  struggling  men  and  women,  who  wUl  devour  with  great 
delight  the  first  soiled  crust  that  is  offered  them.  There  are  thousands  in  our  great 
cities  that  weigh  long  and  seriously  the  questioiv  what  nice  beverage  they  shall  drink 
at  their  table ;  and  there  are  to  be  found  those  who  would  gladly  quench  their  thirst 
in  the  first  foul  water  they  can  find.  Indulgence  makes  all  things  tasteless,  while 
want  makes  all  things  sweet  to  us. 

II.  A  COEBESPONDINO  TRUTH  IN  CUB  MORAL  NATURE.  1.  Superabundance  tends  to 
selfishness  and  ingratitude.  We  are  apt  to  imagine  that  we  have  a  prescriptive  right 
to  that  which  is  continued  to  us  for  any  time ;  and  as  soon  as  it  is  withdrawn  we 
murmur  and  rebel.  There  are  no  more  thankless,  no  more  querulous  hearts  to  be 
found  anywhere  than  in  the  homes  of  the  affluent,  than  among  those  who  can  command 
all  that  their  hearts  desire.  They  find  no  pleasure  in  what  they  have,  and  they  give 
God  no  thanks  for  it.  2.  On  the  other  hand,  scarcity  is  very  frequently  associated 
with  contentment  and  piety.  When  our  resources  are  not  so  large  and  full  that  we  do 
not  stop  to  ask  ourselves  whence  they  come,  when  some  solicitude  or  even  anxiety 
leads  us  to  look  prayerfully  to  the  great  "  Giver  of  all,"  then  we  recognize  the  truth 
that  everything  we  are  and  everything  we  have,  the  cup  itself  and  all  that  it  holds,  all 
our  powers  and  all  our  possessions,  are  of  God,  and  our  hearts  fill  with  gratitude  to  our 
heavenly  Father,    Aud  thus  it  is  not  exceptionally  but  representatively  and  commoolj 


true  tJrat — 


"  Some  murmnr  when  their  sky  is  clear 

And  wholly  bright  to  view, 
If  one  small  speck  of  dark  appear 

In  their  great  heaven  of  blue. 
And  some  with  thankful  love  arc  filled 

If  but  one  streak  of  light, 
One  ray  of  God's  good  mercy,  gild 

The  darkness  of  their  night. 

**  In  palaces  are  hearts  that  ask. 
In  discontent  and  pride, 
Why  life  is  such  a  dreary  task, 
And  all  good  things  denied. 
And  hearts,  in  poorest  huts,  admin 

How  love  has,  in  their  aid— 
Lovo  that  not  ever  seems  to  tiro — 
Such  rich  provision  made." 

CEnnak.) 


OH.  xxvu.  1— 2?.]  THE  PBOVERBS.  631 

III.  Its  application  to  Christian  pmvilbqb.  Here  we  have:  1.  The  peril  oj 
abundance.  We  are  tempted  to  become  indifferent  to  that  which  we  can  employ  and 
enjoy  at  any  time,  and  consequently  to  neglect  it.  2.  The  compensation  of  scarcity. 
That  which  is  often  out  of  reach,  of  which  we  can  only  occasionally  avail  ourselves, 
we  appreciate  at  its  true  worth.  Hence,  while  persecuted  Christians  have  been  willing 
to  walk  many  miles  to  take  part  in  the  worship  of  God,  or  to  give  large  sums  of  money 
for  a  few  pages  of  Scripture,  those  who  live  in  the  full  light  of  privilege  are  negli- 
gent of  the  sanctuary  and  the  Word  of  Crod.  This  will  apply  to  prayer,  to  praise, 
to  Christian  work,  to  Christian  fellowship. — C. 

Ver.  8.— (See  homily  on  vers.  23— 27.)— 0. 

Ver.  14. — (See  homily  on  oh.  xxv.  20.)-^<3. 

Ver.  18. — The  reward  of  faithfid  service.  This  Is  a  question  which  very  Intimately 
and  importantly  concerns  us ;  for — 

I.  Sbevicb  constitutes  the  gkeatbb  paet  op  BtniAN  LIFE.  We  have  to  considei 
how  large  a  proportion  of  our  race  is  formally  and  regularly  engaged  in  service  as  the 
occupation  of  their  life.  When  we  have  counted  domestic  servants,  agricultural 
labourers,  and  all  orders  of  "  workman ; "  and  when  we  have  included  all  those  who,  in 
the  press,  or  the  pulpit,  or  the  legislature,  are  the  avowed  and  actual  servants  of  the 
pubUc,  we  aave  referred  to  a  very  large  portion  indeed  of  the  whole  population.  So 
that  "he  that  waiteth  on  his  master,"  though  he  may  (in  the  literal  sense  of  the 
phrase)  be  confined  to  a  small  section,  yet  actually  stands  for  the  majority  of  man- 
kind. Indeed,  we  must  be  occupying  a  very  strange  position  if  we  are  not  of  those 
who  are  engaged  in  serving  in  some  form  or  other. 

II.  Many  THisas  demand  that  service  shall  be  faithful.  1.  Ood  is  requiring 
it  of  us.  It  is  required  by  him  that  we  who  are  stewards  be  found  faithful  (1  Cor.  iv.  2 ; 
Col.  iii.  22 — 25).  2.  The  best  and  noblest  men,  whose  character  and  course  we  admire, 
were  men  "  faithful  in  all  their  house "  (see  Heb.  iii.  5).  3.  We  can  only  retain  our 
self-respect  by  faithfulness.  To  do  our  work  slowly  or  slovenly,  in  such  wise  that  we 
should  be  ashamed  to  have  it  inspected  by  "  the  master "  (whoever  he  may  be),  in 
such  a  manner  that  it  will  not  stand  the  test  of  time,  is  to  undermine  all  respect  for 
ourselves,  is  to  sink  sadly  and  pitifully,  if  not  fatally,  in  our  own  esteem.  4.  Faith- 
fulness has  a  large  and  a  sure  reward.  Careful  culture  of  the  fig  tree  is  sure  to  he 
rewarded  with  the  eating  of  its  fruit  in  due  time.  Faithful  service  is  sure  to  bring  its 
due  recompense.  (1)  It  brings  honour.  We  respect  the  true  and  conscientious 
labourer  in  our  own  hearts,  and  we  do  not  fail  to  honour  him  in  the  estimation  of 
others.  Loyal  and  valuable  service  commands  no  small  esteem  when  it  has  had  time  to 
make  an  impression  on  the  mind.  (2)  It  brings  personal  attachment  and  even  affec- 
tion. Often  between  those  who  serve  and  those  who  are  served  there  arises  a  true  and 
deep  affection  which  is  very  honourable  to  both,  very  beautiful  in  its  character,  and 
lasting  as  long  as  life.  (3)  Due  material  recompense.  This  may  be  delayed,  but  it 
comes  in  time.  (4)  Enlargement  of  capacity.  Perhaps  the  best  reward  of  faithful 
sei  vice  is  found  here— in  the  enlargement  of  the  faculty  of  service.  Do,  and  you  will 
do  better;  serve  to-day,  and  you  will  serve  more  skilfully  and  efBciently  to-morrow; 
put  out  your  one  talent  in  the  lowly  sphere,  and  you  wUl  soon  have  two  talents  (of 
&culty  and  aptitude)  to  put  out  in  a  higher  oue. 

"  I  will  ask  for  no  reward, 
Except  to  serve  thee  still  " 

—and  to  serre  thee  letter.  But  if  it  be  said  that,  after  all,  human  service  it  some- 
times unappreciated  and  unacknowledged,  that  the  labourer's  hure  is  withheld  and  not 
paid  that  the  "master"  does  not  render  the  honour  that  is  due  to  him  who  has 
"  waited  on"  him  long  and  served  him  well— as  it  may  sometimes  be  truly  said— then 
let  us  retire  to  the  truth  that — 

III  There  is  one  service  in  which  there  b  no  disappointment.  We  are  the 
servants  of  Christ.  We  delight  to  call  him  Master  (John  liii.  13).  We  owe  him  every- 
thing and  we  offer  him  the  subjection  of  our  will,  the  trust  of  our  hearts,  the  service 


638  THE  PBOVEBBS.  [obu  xxviii.  1—28 

of  our  Uvea.  Ue  will  not  disappoint  ub.  He  will  not  forget  our  work  of  faith  and  oui 
labour  of  love.  The  slightest  service  shall  "in  no  wise  lose  its  reward."  He  will 
generously  regard  what  we  do  for  his  humble  disciples  as  something  rendered  to 
himself.  Here  we  shall  possess  his  loving  favour,  and  there  his  bountiful  recom- 
pense.— 0. 

Vers.  23 — ^27  (and  ver.  8). — A  commendation  of  diligence.  It  is  likely  enough  that 
Solomon,  oppressed  with  the  burdens  and  vexations,  with  the  diflSoulties  and  dangers,  of 
the  throne,  looked  longingly  toward  those  pastoral  scenes  which  he  here  describes. 
But,  keen  and  shrewd  man  that  he  was,  he  must  have  known  that  contentment  does 
not  always  find  a  home  in  the  homestead,  and  that  there  may  be  as  much  disquietude 
of  heart  in  the  fields  of  the  beautiful  country  as  there  is  in  the  streets  of  the  crowded 
city.  We  look  for  something  more  than  an  ordinary  "pastoral"  in  these  verses.  We 
recognize  in  them  a  royal  commendation  of  diligence. 

I.  Therb  is  need  of  diligbncb  in  every  8PHBEE.  "Be  diligent  to  know  the 
state  of  thy  flocks,  and  l-iok  well  to  thy  herds."  Pastoral  prosperity  demands  the  care 
and  the  labour  of  the  shepherd  or  the  herdsman,  as  well  as  do  the  transactions  of  princes 
and  the  afiairs  of  state.  It  will  be  a  poor  season  and  a  bad  harvest  if  the  farmer  is 
dreaming  all  day  long.  It  is  true  that  kids  and  calves  and  "lambs  grow  up  "of  them- 
selves," and  that  "the  earth  bringeth  forth  fruit  of  itself"  (Mark  iv.  28)  j  but  it  is  also 
true  that  without  watchful  care  on  the  shepherd's  part  the  flock  wiU  be  sickly  and 
small,  and  that  without  toil  and  skill  on  the  part  of  the  farmer  the  hay  crop  and  the 
wheat  crop  will  be  quite  disappointing.  And  so  in  everything.  Whatever  the  sphere 
may  be,  diligence  is  the  invariable  condition  of  success.  The  man  who  will  not  take 
pains,  who  does  not  work  and  strive,  who  does  not  throw  his  strength  ami  energy  into 
bis  occupation,  will  soon  find  how  great  is  his  mistake. 

n.  DlLIOENOE   MUST   BB   OONOENTBATED   IF  IT  IS  TO  BE   REUUNBBATIVE.      (Ver.    8.) 

A  man  that  is  everywhere  but  at  home,  who  is  interested  in  everybody's  business  but 
his  own,  who  can  tell  his  neighbours  how  to  improve  their  estate  while  his  own  is 
neglected,  who  has  a  hand  in  a  hundred  activities,  may  be  exceedingly  busy  and  (in 
his  way)  diligent;  but  he  is  not  a  "  man  of  business,"  and  he  does  not  show  the  dili- 
gence which  yields  a  good  result.  Let  a  man  know  "  his  place "  and  keep  it ;  and, 
while  selfishness  and  narrowness  of  spirit  are  bad  and  blameful  enough,  it  is  needful 
for  him  to  give  his  strength  to  his  own  sphere,  his  forces  to  his  own  fields. 

IlL  A  WISE  DiLioENCE  WILL  BE  WELL  BEWAKDED.  1.  It  will  procure  domestic 
comfort  (vers.  25 — 27).  2.  It  will  lead  to  honour  and  reputation  (ch.  xxii.  29).  3.  It 
will  invest  with  power  (ch.  xii.  24).  4.  It  wUl  enrich  with  various  kinds  of  human 
wealth  (ch.  z.  4;  xiii.  4;  zxi.  6).  Patient  industry  is  the  source  of  all  the  good  which 
beautifies  and  brightens,  which  adorns  and  enlarges,  human  life. 

IV.  ThEBB    is   a    SERIOUS    UNCERTAINTY    AGAINST    WHICH    TO    PROVIDE.      (Ver.   24.) 

You  may  be  the  son  of  a  king,  but  the  crown  sometimes  changes  hands ;  dynasties  are 
not  immortal.  You  may  have  a  large  treasure  at  command,  but  the  thief,  who  wears 
many  guises  and  comes  to  us  in  many  forms,  may  steal  it  away.  Better  depend  on 
self-reliance  than  on  such  props  as  these ;  have  the  diligent  hand  at  your  side,  and  you 
will  be  able  to  defy  the  chances  and  the  losses  that  come  in  the  hour  and  in  the  way 
when  we  look  not  for  them. 

V.  ThBBB    is    one    sphere   IN    WHICH   DILIGENCE    IS    OF    INESTIMABLE    VALUE — THB 

KEEPINO  OP  OUR  OWN  HEABT.  With  the  must  devout  and  the  most  sedulous  care 
should  we  "keep"  our  spiritual  nature,  for  from  it  flow  the  streams  of  life  or  death 
(see  homily  on  ch.  iv.  23). — 0. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXVUL 

This  chapter  is  still  part  of  the  Heiekiah 
eoHcction,  and  not  a  new  series  by  another 
•utbor.    It  may  be  regarded  m  describing 


the  varions  destinies  of  the  powerful  and  th« 
weak,  the  sinner  and  the  righteous. 

Ver.  1. — The  wicked  flee  when  no  man 
pnrsueth.  The  unreasoning  terror  of  the 
sinner  arises  partly  bom  his   unea^iy  con- 


OH.  xxvnr.  1 — 28.] 


THT:  r'RnvKT^B'^. 


53S 


Boienoe,  which  will  not  permit  hira  to  trans- 
gress without  warning  of  consequences,  and 
partly  from  tlie  judgment  of  God,  according 
to  the  threats  denounced  in  Lev.  xxvi.  36,  37. 
A  terrible  picture  of  this  instinctive  fear  is 
drawn  in  Job  xv.  20,  etc.,  and  Wiad.  xvii.  9, 
etc.  There  are  numerous  proverbs  about 
unreasonable  timidity,  such  as  being  afraid 
of  one's  own  shadow  (see.  Erasmus,  *  Adag.,' 
I.V.  "  Timiditas  ").  As  the  Eastern  puts  it, 
"  The  leaf  cracked,  and  your  servant  fled ; " 
and  "Among  ten  men  nine  are  women" 
(Lane).  On  the  cowardice  of  sinners  St. 
Chrysostom  says  well,  "  Such  is  the  nature 
of  sin,  that  it  betrays  while  no  one  linds 
fault;  it  condemns  whilst  no  one  accuses; 
it  makes  the  sinner  a  timid  being,  one  that 
trembles  at  a  sound ;  even  as  righteousness 
has  the  contrary  effuot.  .  .  .  How  doth  Iho 
wicked  flee  when  no  man  pnrsueth?  He 
hath  that  witliin  which  drives  him  on,  an 
accuser  in  his  own  conscience,  and  this  he 
carries  about  everywhere;  and  just  as  it 
would  be  impossible  to  Hee  from  himself,  so 
neither  can  he  escape  the  persecutor  within, 
but  wherever  he  goeth  lie  is  scourged,  and 
hatli  an  incurable  wound"  ('Horn,  in  Stat.,' 
viii.  3,  Oxford  transl.).  But  the  righteous 
are  bold  as  a  lion.  They  are  undismayed 
in  the  presence  of.  danger,  because  their 
cousoience  is  at  rest,  they  know  that  God  is 
on  their  side,  and,  whatever  happens,  they 
are  safe  in  the  everlasting  arms  (see  Ps. 
xci.).  Thus  David  the  shepherd-boy  quailed 
not  before  the  giant  (1  Sam.  ivii.  32,  etc.), 
remembering  the  promise  in  Lev.  xxvi.  7,  8. 
The  heathen  poet  Horace  could  say  of  the 
upright  man  ('  Carm.,'  iii.  3.  7) — 

"  Si  fractus  illabatur  orbis, 
Impavidum  ferient  ruins.* 

"  Whoso  feareth  the  Lord  shall  not  fear  nor 
be  afraid ;  for  he  is  his  Hope  "  (Bcclus.  xxxi. 
(xxxiv.)  14,  etc.).  St.  Gregory  ('Moral.,' 
xxxi.  55,  "The  lion  is  not  afraid  in  the 
onset  of  beasts,  because  he  knows  well  that 
he  is  stronger  than  them  all.  Whence  the 
fearlessness  of  a  righteous  man  is  rightly 
compared  to  a  lion,  because,  when  he  beholds 
any  rising  against  him,  he  returns  to  the 
confidence  of  his  mind,  and  knows  that  he 
overcomes  all  his  adversaries  because  he 
loves  him  alone  wtom  he  cannot  in  any 
way  lose  against  his  will.  For  whoever 
geeks  after  outward  things,  which  are  taken 
from  him  even  against  his  will,  subjects 
himself  of  his  own  accord  to  outward  fear. 
But  unbroken  virtue  is  the  contempt  of 
earthly  desire,  because  the  mind  is  both 
placed  on  high  when  it  is  raised  above  the 
meanest  objects  by  the  judgment  of  its  liopes, 
and  is  the  less  aifected  by  all  adversities, 
the  more  safely  it  is  fortified  by  being  placed 
9n  thing!  above  "  (Oxford  transl.}. 


Ver.  2. — For  the  transgr-ssion  of  a  land 
many  are  the  princes  thereof.  This  implies 
that  the  wickedness  of  a  nation  is  punished 
by  frequent  changes  of  rulers,  who  impose 
new  laws,  taxes,  and  other  burdens,  which 
greatly  oppress  the  people;  but  regarding 
the  antithesis  in  the  second  hemistich,  we 
take  the  meaning  to  be  tliat  when  iniquity, 
injustice,  apostasy,  and  other  evils  abound, 
a  country  becomes  the  prey  of  pretendeii 
and  partisans  striving  for  the  suprema'-y. 
The  history  of  the  northern  kingdom  of 
Israel,  especially  in  the  disastrous  period 
succeeding  the  death  of  Jeroboam  II.,  affords 
proof  of  the  truth  of  the  statement  (comp. 
Hos.  viii.  4).  Septuagint,  "Owing  to  the 
sins  of  ungodly  men,  qunirels  (Kpttris,  law- 
suits) arise."  But  by  a  man  of  understanding 
and  knowledge  the  state  tliereof  shall  be 
prolonged.  "  The  state  "  is  the  stability,  the 
settled  condition  of  the  country.  The  word 
is  15  (ken),  here  a  substantive,  equ>i?alent  to 
"station,"  "base."  Umbreit,  Nowack,  and 
others  translate  it,  "justice,"  "authority," 
"order."  When  a  wise  and  religious  man 
is  at  the  helm  of  state,  justice  continues, 
lives,  and  works;  such  a  man  intioduces  an 
element  of  enduring  good  into  a  land  (ooaip. 
ch.  xxi.  22;  Ecoles.  ix.  15).  The  good  kings 
Asa,  Jehoshaphat,  Uzziah,  and  Hezekiah 
had  long  and  prosperous  reigns.  Septuagint, 
"  But  a  clever  man  (jrarodpyos')  will  quench 
them  (quarrels)." 

Ver.  3. — A  poor  man  that  oppresseth  the 
poor.  The  words  rendered  "poor"  are 
different.  The  former  is  raah,  "  needy," 
the  latter  dal,  "  feeble "  (see  on  ch.  x.  15). 
Delitzsoh  notes  that,  in  accordance  with  the 
accents  in  the  Masoretic  text,  we  should 
translate,  "  A  poor  man  and  an  oppressor  of 
the  lowly— a  sweeping  rain  without  bringing 
bread,"  which  woulil  mean  that  a  tyrant 
who  oppresses  the  lowly  bears  tho  same 
relation  to  the  poor  that  a  devastating  rain 
does  to  those  whom  it  deprives  of  their  food. 
But  it  is  pretty  certain  that  "the  poor"  and 
"tlie  oppressor"  designate  the  same  person 
(though  the  vocalization  is  against  it); 
hence  the  gnome  refers  to  a  usurper  who, 
rising  to  power  from  poor  estate,  makes  the 
very  worst  and  most  tyrannical  ruler.  Such 
a  one  has  learned  nothing  from  his  former 
condition  but  callous  indifference,  and  now 
seeks  to  exercise  on  others  that  power  which 
once  galled  him.  Thus  among  schoolboys 
it  is  found  that  the  greatest  bully  is  ono 
who  has  himself  been  bullied;  and  needy 
revolutionists  make  the  most  rapacious  and 
iniquitous  demagogues.  Of  such  tyrants 
the  prophets  complain  (see  Isa.  v.  8,  etc. ; 
Micah  ii.  2).  Wordsworth  refers,  as  an 
illustration,  to  Catiline  and  his  fellow- 
conspirators,  who  were  moved  by  selfish 
interests  to  overthrow  the-  oommonwealth, 


534 


fnt  PiioVEfiSS. 


[oa.  xxvm.  1—28. 


Many  modern  oonime'itatora  (e.g.  Hitzig, 
Delitzsch,  Nowack),  in  view  of  the  present 
text,  regarding  the  combination  wi  133,  and 
noting  tliat  elsewhere  the  oppressor  and  the 
poor  are  always  introduced  in  opposition 
(oomp.  ch.  xxix.  13),  read  vi^l,  or  consider 
»i  as  equivalent  to  it — rosh,  "  the  head,"  in 
the  signification  of  "  master,"  "  ruler."  The 
gnome  thus  becomes  eoncinnous,  the  ruler 
who  ought  to  benefit  his  dependents,  but 
injures  them,  corresponding  to  the  rain 
which,  instead  of  fertilizing,  devastates  the 
crops.  The  LXX.  liad  a  different  reading, 
as  it  renders,  "  A  bold  man  in  his  impieties 
(ovSpeTos  4r  iurefieiats)  calumniates  the  poor." 
Is  like  a  sweeping  rain  which  leaveth  no 
food;  literally,  and  not  bread.  A  violent 
storm  coming  at  seed-time  a:  id  washing 
away  soil  and  seed,  or  happening  at  harvest- 
time  and  destroying  the  ripe  corn.  Vulgate, 
Similis  est  inibri  vehementi,  in  giu>  paratur 
fames.  Ewald  supposes  that  such  proverbs 
as  tliese  and  the  following  belong  to  the 
time  of  Jeroboam  II.,  when  the  prosperity 
of  the  people  induced  luxury  and  arrogance, 
and  was  accompanied  witli  much  moral 
evil,  oppressiion,  and  perversion  of  justice 
('Hist,  of  Israel,'  iii.  126,  Eng.  transl.). 
The  Bengalee  compares  the  relation  of  the 
rich  oppressor  to  the  poor,  not  with  the 
rainstorm,  but  with  that  of  the  carving-knife 
to  the  pumpkin. 

Ver.  4. — They  that  forsake  the  law  praise 
the  wicked.  This  they  do  because  they 
love  iniquity,  and  like  to  see  it  extend  its 
Influence,  and  arm  itself  against  the  good, 
who  are  a  standing  reproach  to  them.  St. 
Paul  notes  it  as  a  mark  of  extreme  wicked- 
ness that  gross  sinners  "not  only  do  the 
same  iuiquitics,  but  have  pleasure  in  them 
that  do  them  "  (Bom.  i.  32).  Such  as  keep 
the  Law  contend  with  them;  are  angry 
with  them.  They  are  filled  with  righteous 
indignation;  they  cannot  hold  their  peace 
when  they  see  God's  Law  outraged,  and 
must  have  the  offenders  punished  (comp. 
1  Kings  xix.  14;  Ps.  Ixxiv.  11,  etc.;  cxix. 
136,  139 ;  cxxxix.  21).  The  LXX.  ooimects 
this  verse  with  the  latter  part  of  the  preced- 
ing, thus:  "As  an  impetuous  and  profitless 
rain,  thus  those  who  forsake  the  Law  praise 
ungodliness;  but  they  who  love  the  Law 
raise  a  wall  around  themeelves." 

Ver.  5. — Evil  men  understand  not  judg- 
ment ;  or,  tehat  is  right.  An  evil  man's  moral 
conception  is  perverted,  he  cannot  distinguish 
between  right  and  wrong ;  the  light  that  was 
in  him  has  become  darkness  (comp.  ch.  xxix. 
7).  Many  men,  by  giving  themselves  over  to 
wickedness,  are  judicially  blinded,  according 
to  John  xii.  39, 40.  They  who  seek  the  Lord 
understand  all  things.  Those  who  do  God's 
will,  seeking  him  in  prajjer,  know  wliat  is 
ttioi-ally  right  in  every  ciioumstauce,  Lave 


a  right  judgment  in  all  things  (eomp. 
Eccles.  viii.  5;  1  Cor.  ii.  15).  iSo  1  John 
ii.  20,  "  Ye  have  an  unction  from  the  Holy 
One,  and  ye  know  all  things ; "  and  oui 
Lord  has  declared,  "  If  any  man  willeth  to 
do  his  will,  he  shall  know  of  the  doctrine  " 
(John  vii.  17). 

Ver.  6. — This  is  almost  the  same  as  ch. 
xix.  1,  but  varies  a  little  in  the  second 
hemistich :  than  he  that  is  perverse  in  his 
ways,  though  he  be  rich.  The  Hebrew 
literally  is,  perverse  of  two  ways;  Le.  who, 
-going  one  way,  pretends  to  go  another;  the 
"  two  ways  "  being  the  evil  which  he  really 
pursues,  and  the  good  which  he  feigns  to  fol- 
low. Delitzsch  calls  him  "a  double-going  de- 
ceiver." So  Slracides  imprecates,  "  Woe  to  the 
sinner  that  goeth  two  ways  "  (Ecclus.  ii.  12). 
"  A  double-minded  man,"  says  St.  James  (i. 
8),  "  is  unstable  in  all  his  ways."  It  is  not 
the  endeavouring  to  serve  God  and  mammon 
at  the  same  time  that  is  meant,  but  putting 
on  the  appearance  of  religion  to  mask  wicked 
designs — in  the  present  case  in  order  to 
gain  wealth.  Septuagint,  "A  poor  man 
walking  in  truth  is  better  than  a  rich  liar." 

Ver.  7. — Whoso  keepeth  the  Law  is  a  wise 
son.  "  Law "  is  torah,  as  ver.  4 ;  but  it 
seems  here  to  include  not  only  the  Deca- 
logue, but  also  the  father's  instruction  and 
commands.  Such  an  obedient  and  prudent 
son  brings  honour  and  joy  to  a  parent's 
heart  (see  ch.  x.  1 ;  xxix.  3).  He  that  is 
a  companion  of  riotous  men  shameth  his 
father ;  literally,  he  thap  feedeth,  hath  fel- 
lowship with,  gluttons  (ch.  xxiii.  20).  The 
eon  who  herds  with  debauchers,  and  wastes 
his  substance  in  riotous  living,  brings 
shame  on,  wounds,  and  insults,  all  con- 
nected with  him.  Such  a  one  transgresses 
the  Law  and  his  father's  commands,,  and 
brings  them  into  contempt  (eomp.  oh.  xxvii. 
1 1).  Hence  the  antithesis  of  the  two  clai  iscs. 
Septuagint,  "  He  that  cherishes  debauchery 
(iroifLuivei  da-iDTlav)  dishonours  his  father" 
'Aaarla  occurs  only  in  2  Maco.  vi.  4,  but  is 
common  in  the  New  Testament;  «.</.  Eph. 
V.  18 ;  Titus  i.  6. 

Ver.  8. — He  that  by  usury  and  unjust 
gain  inoreaseth  his  substance.  "Usury" 
(neshek)  is  interest  on  money  lent  taken  ia 
money;  "unjust  gain  "  (tartftt)  is  interest 
taken  in  kind,  as  if  a  man,  having  lent  a 
bushel  of  corn,  exacted  two  bushels  in 
return.  All  such  transactions  were  for- 
bidden by  the  Law  of  Moses,  at  any  rate 
between  Israelites  (see  Lev.  xxv.  36,  37, 
"Thou  shalt  not  give  thy  brother  thy 
money  upon  usury  (nesftefc),  nor  lend  him 
thy  victuals  for  increase  [marbith,  equiva 
lent  to  tarbith,  which  is  used  in  ver.  36]  "). 
Septuagint,  Meri  -riKuv  koI  iiKfovaaiuav, 
"With interest  and  usury."  (For  censure  ol 
usury,  see  Pa.  oix.  11 ;  Ezek.  xviii.  13 ;  and 


OH.  xrvm,  1 — 28. J 


THE  PBOVERSa 


83S 


contrast  Pb.  xv.   5;  Ezek.   xviii.  8.)     He 

shall  gather  it  for  him  that  will  pity  the 
poor.  He  shall  never  enjoy  it  himself,  and 
It  sliall  fall  into  llie  banils  of  one  who  will 
make  a  better  use  of  it  (see  on  eh.  xxii.  16; 
and  comp.  ch.  xiii.  22 ;  Job  xxvii.  16,  etc.). 
In  our  Lord's  parable  the  pound  is  taken 
from  one  who  made  no  good  use  of  it  and  is 
given  to  a  more  profitable  servant  (Luke 
xix.  24). 

Ver.  9, — He  that  tnmeth  away  his  ear  from 
hearing  the  Law.  He  who  refuses  to  hearken 
to  and  to  practise  the  dictates  of  the  Divine 
Law(comp.  ch.  i.  24).  Even  his  prayer  shall 
be  aiomination  (comp.  ch.  xv.  8,  and  note 
there).  "  God  heareth  not  sinners  "  (John 
ix.  31).  Such  a  man's  prayer,  if  he  does 
pray,  is  not  hearty  and  sincere,  and  there- 
fore lacks  the  element  which  alone  can 
make  it  acceptable.  He  will  not  resolve  to 
forsake  his  favourite  sin,  even  while  paying 
outward  worship  to  the  God  whose  Law  he 
breaks :  what  wonder  that  the  prophet  so 
sternly  denounces  snch  offenders  (Isa.  i. 
11,  etc.),  and  the  psalmist  cries  with  terrible 
rigour,  "When  he  shall  be  juclged,  let 
him  be  condemned;  and  let  his  prayer 
become  sin"  (Ps.  cix.  7)?  St.  Gregory 
('  Moral.,'  X.  27),  "  Our  heart  blames  us  in 
offering  up  our  prayers,  when  it  calls  to 
mind  that  it  is  set  in  opposition  to  the 
precepts  of  him  whom  it  implores,  and  the 
prayer  becomes  abomination,  when  there  is 
a  'turning  away'  from  the  control  of  the 
-  Law ;  in  that  verily  it  is  meet  that  a  mnn 
ihonld  be  a  stranger  to  the  favours  of  him 
to  whose  bidding  he  will  not  be  subject." 
And  again  (ibid.,  xviii.  9,  10),  "If  thst 
which  he  bids  we  do,  that  which  we  ask 
we  shall  obtain.  For  with  God  both  these 
two  do  of  necessity  match  with  one  anotljer 
exactly,  that  practice  should  be  sustained 
by  prayer,  and  prayer  by  practice"  (Oxford 
transl.). 

Ver.  10. — A  tristich.  Whoso  canseth  the 
<4ghteaus  to  go  astray  in  an  evil  way.  It 
a  doubtful  whether  physical  clanger  or 
moral  seduction  is  meant,  l^he  gnome  is 
true  in  either  case;  he  who  misleads  one 
who  trusted  liim,  and  who,  being  simple 
and  good,  ought  to  have  been  respected  and 
to  liave  received  better  treatment,  shall  fall 
into  the  destruction  which  he  prepared  for 
the  other  (ch.  xxvi.  27).  Taking  the 
proverb  in  a  moral  sense,  we  find  this 
truth :  If  the  good  man  does  ever  yield  to 
the  temptations  of  the  sinner,  the  latter 
does  not  reap  the  enjoyment  which  he  ex- 
pected from  the  other's  lapse,  rather  he  is 
made  twofold  more  the  child  of  hell,  he 
himself  iinks  the  deeper  and  more  hope- 
lessly for  playing  the  devil's  part,  while 
the  just  rises  from  his  temporary  fall  more 
bumble,  watchful,  and    guarded   for    the 


future.  But  the  npright  si;  all  hare  good 
things  in  possession ;  or,  shall  inherit  good 
(ch.  iii.  35).  He  sliall  be  abundantly 
rewarded  by  God's  grace  and  protection, 
by  the  comfort  of  a  conscience  at  rest,  and 
by  prosperity  in  his  worldly  concerns — an 
adumbration  of  the  eternal  reoompfnse 
awaiting  him  in  the  life  to  come.  St. 
Jerome  has  changed  the  incidence  of  the 
gnome  by  inserting  ejus,  thus:  M  eim- 
pHees  possidebunt  bona  ejut,  which  makes 
the  meaning  to  be  that  the  righteous 
shall  be  the  instruments  of  retribution  on 
the  deceiver,  whose  riches  shall  pass  over 
into  their  possession.  But  the  Hebrew 
gives  no  countenance  to  this  interpretation. 
Septuagint,  "The  transgressors  shall  pass 
by  good  things,  and  shall  not  enter  into 
them,"  where  the  translator  has  misunder- 
stood the  original. 

Ver.  11. — The  rich  man  is  wise  in  hig  own 
conceit  (comp.  ch.  xviii.  11).  A  rich  man 
thinks  so  highly  of  his  position,  is  so  flattered 
by  parasites,  an<l  deems  himself  placed  so 
immeasurably  above  social  inferiors,  that  he 
learns  to  consider  himself  possessed  of  other 
qualifications,  even  mental  and  intellectual 
gifts,  with  which  wealth  has  no  concern. 
This  purse-proud  arrogance  which  looks 
upon  financial  skill  and  sharpness  in  bar- 
gaining as  true  wisdom,  is  confined  to  no 
age  or  country.  But  the  poor  man  that  hath 
understanding  searcheth  him  out  (ch.  xviii. 
17).  Wisdom  is  not  to  be  bought  with 
money.  A  poor  man  may  be  wise,  his 
poverty  probably  making  him  a  keener 
critic;  and  if  he  is  brought  into  communica- 
tion with  this  self-deluding  plutocrat,  he 
soon  sees  through  him  and  recognizes  his 
real  value.  Septuagint,  "An  intelligent 
poor  man  will  condemn  him." 

Ver.  12. — When  righteous  men  do  rejoice, 
there  is  great  glory  (comp.  ch.xxix.  2;  xi.  10). 
"  Rejoice,"  rather  triumph,  as  conquerors, 
right  prevailing  and  wickedness  being  over- 
come. Then  there  is  great  show  of  joy,  aud, 
as  the  expression  implies,  men  put  on  their 
festal  garments  to  do  honour  to  the  occasion 
See  the  description  of  Solomon's  time  (1 
Kings  iv.  20,  25).  If  we  take  this  verse  in 
connection  with  ver.  2,  we  may  see  in  it  the 
triunJ|)h  of  order  after  a  period  of  confusion 
and  anarchy.  Septuagint,  "Through  the 
help  of  righteous  men  great  glory  arises." 
But  when  the  wicked  rise,  a  man  is  hidden 
(comp.  ver.  28,  where,  however,  the  verb  is 
different).  The  Authorized  Version  means 
that  when  the  wicked  rise  to  power,  people 
have  to  hide  themselves  in  order  to  escape 
danger  to  life  and  property.  The  verb  is 
more  literally  rendered,  "are  searched  for," 
i.e.  they  have  betaken  themselves  to  hiding- 
places,  and  have  to  be  looked  for ;  they  feai 
oppression    and    injury,   and   venture   no 


636 


THE   PROVERBS. 


[oh.  xxrm.  1 — 28. 


looser  into  the  streets  and  open  place*. 
Vulgate,  Iiegruintibu$  impiis  ruinx  hominum, 
''When  eTU  men  are  in  power,  there  is 
general  ruin ; "  Septuagint,  "  In  the  places 
of  the  ungodly  men  are  caught."  Other 
interpretations  of  the  proverb  have  been 
«uggested,  though  none  is  so  satisfactory  a* 
♦.hat  given  above.  Thus  some  take  the 
rearohing  out  to  mean  testing,  in  the  sense 
that  evil  times  try  men's  characters,  and 
bring  out  their  true  nature  (1  Cor.  xi.  19). 
Otlurs  explain  that,  under  the  reign  of  the 
impious,  men  do  not  come  forward  to  take 
part  in  public  affairs,  but  retire  sullenly 
'oio  private  life. 

Vtr.  13. — He  that  covereth  his  »ins  shall 
not  prosper.  To  cover  one's  sins  is  either 
absolutely  to  disown  them  or  to  make 
excuses ;  a  man  who  does  this  is  never  f lee 
from  a  burden  of  guilt,  as  the  psalmist  says, 
•'When  I  kept  silence,  my  bones  waxed  old 
Ihrongh  my  roaring  all  the  day  long.  For 
day  and  night  thy  hand  was  heavy  upon  me  " 
'Ps.  xxxii.  3,  etc.).  Whoso  coufesseth  and 
iorsaketh  them  shall  have  mercy.  Confession 
alone  without  amendment,  or  what  is  called 
tljeologically  satisfaction,  does  not  win 
pardon  and  mercy.  It  is  when  the  sinner 
acknowledges  his  transgression,  and  turns* 
from  it  to  newness  of  life,  that  God  heals 
his  backsliding,  and  turns  away  his  anger 
and  renews  the  tokens  of  his  love  (Hos. 
xi  V.  i).  Confession  is  made  to  God,  against 
whom  all  sin  is  committed  (Josh.  vii.  19 ; 
Job  xxxi.  33 ;  1  John  i.  8,  etc.) ;  and  to 
man,  if  one  has  transgressed  against  him, 
or  if  he  be  in  a  position  to  give  spiritual 
eounsel.  Thus  the  people  confessed  their 
Bins  before  John  the  Baptist  (Matt.  iii.  6) 
and  the  apostles  (Acts  xix.  18 ;  comp.  Jas. 
V  16).  Among  the  Jews,  the  high  priest, 
acting  as  the  mouthpiece  of  the  people  on 
the  great  Day  of  Atonement,  confessed  their 
iniquities,  laying  them  on  the  scapegoat; 
and  particular  confession  was  also  enjoined, 
and  was  part  of  the  ritual  accompanying  a 
sacrifice  for  sin,  by  which  legal  purification 
was  obtained  (Numb.  v.  6,  7,  "When  a 
man  or  woman  shall  commit  any  sin  .  .  . 
tlien  they  shall  confess  their  sin  which 
they  have  done ; "  so  Lev.  v.  5).  And  the 
very  offering  of  a  trespass  ofifedn^was  a 
public  recognition  of  guilt,  which  was  ex- 
hibited by  the  offerer  laying  his  hand  on 
the  head  of  the  victim  (Lev.  i.  4).  Such 
confession  is  spoken  of  strongly  by  Siraoides, 
"  Be  not  ashamed  to  confess  thy  sins,  and 
force  not  tho  course  of  the  river  "  (Ecclus. 
iv.  26);  i.e.  do  not  attempt  the  impossible 
task  of  trying  to  hide  them.  The  LXX. 
has,  "He  who  sets  forth  accounts  (^riyoi- 
fifvos  l\iyxom,  i.e.  blames  himself)  shall  be 
loved."  Lesitre  quotes  Sedulius,  '  Carm. 
J*as<*  '  It.  76— 


"Magna  eat  medicina  fateri 
Quod  noeet  absoondi ;  quoniam  sua  vuluera 

nutrit 
Qui    tegit,    et    plagam    trepidat    nudare 

medenti." 

"Mighty  relief 
T'  expose  what  rankles  while  'tis  hiilden 

still. 
He  feeds  who  hides  his  wounds  and  shuns 

to  show 
His  he..rt'8  plague  to  the  good  physician." 

Ver.  14.— Happy  is  the  man  that  feareth 
alway.  Some  have  taken  the  feiir  mentioned 
to  be  the  fear  with  whioli  God  is  to  be  re- 
garded. Thus  Aben  Ezra.  But  it  is  ratlnr 
the  fear  of  sin  which  is  meant — that  tenler 
conscience  and  watchful  heart  wldch  lead 
a  man  to  be  prepared  for  temptation  and  able 
to  resist  it  when  it  arises.  Such  a  one  dis- 
trusts himself,  takes  heed  lest  he  fall  (1  Cor. 
X.  12),  and  works  out  his  salvation  with  feat 
and  trembling(Phil.  ii.  12;  comp.  ch.  xiv.  16). 
"GrownotthonghtlesBof  retribution  "('Pirko 
Abotli,'  i.  8).  A  horror  of  sin  cannot  be 
instilled  too  early  into  the  young.  Septua- 
gint, "Happy  is  the  man  who  piously  (5i' 
euArfjSeiov)  fears  all  things."  St.  Bernard 
('lu  Cant.  Serm.,'  liv.  9), "In  veritate  didici, 
nil  ssque  efBoax  esse  ad  gratiam  piometen- 
dam,  retinendam,  recuperandam,.  quam  si 
omni  tempore  coram  Deo  iuveniaris  uon 
altum  sapere,  sed  timere.  Time  ergo  cum 
arriserit  gratia,  time  cum  abierit,  time  cum 
denuo  revertetur;  et  hoc  est  semper  pavidum 
esse."  He  that  hardeneth  his  heart  shall 
fall  into  mischief;  or,  calamity  (ch..ivii.  20). 
A  man  hardens  his  h<art  who  attends  not 
to  the  voice  of  conscience,  the  restraints  of 
religion,  the  counsel  of  friends,  the  war]iin;;3 
of  experience  (comp.  ver.  26;  ch.  xxix.  1; 
Exod.  viii.  15 ;  Ps.  xcv.  8).  This  man  kcoms 
the  grace  of  God,  loses  his  pioteotion,  and 
must  come  to  misery. 

Ver.  15. — A  wicked  ruler  over  the  poor 
people ;  a  people  weak  and  resourceless.  To 
such  a  powerful  tyrant  is  as  fatal  as  a  roar- 
ing lion  or  a  hungjy  bear  prowling  in  quest 
of  food.  The  prophets  compare  evil  rulers 
to  ravenous  lions  (see  Jer.  iv.  7;  Ezek.  xix. 
6).  They  are  like  lions  in  strength  and 
cruelty,  like  bears  in  craft  and  ferocity. 
Septuagint,  "  A  hungry  lion  and  a  thirsty 
wolf  is  he  who,  being  poor,  rules  over  an 
indigent  nation.""  The  poverty  of  the  sub- 
jects embitters  the  conduct  of  the  ruler. 

Ver.  16.-T:Xhe  prince  that  wanteth  under- 
standing is  also  a  great  oppressor ;  literally, 
and  rick  in  opprettion.  Ewald,  Delitzsch, 
Nowack,  and  others  take  the  verse,  not  as 
a  statement,  but  as  a  warning  addressed  to 
the  ruler,  as  we  have  so  many  addressed  to 
a  son,  and  as  the  author  of  the  Book  of 
Wisdom  calls  upon  the  judges  of  the  earth 


OH.  xxvin.  1—28.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


S37 


to  listen  to  his  a'InioTiition*.  Tliey  tTiBrofore 
Sender  thna :  "  O  prince,  Toid  of  understand- 
ing, hut  rich  in  oppression!  "  Tlie  wording 
and  itocentnation  of  the  passage  confirm  this 
view.  Oaher  renders,  "  A  prince  that  wants 
understanding  increased  tus  exactions."  The 
"want  of  inteUigence  makes  a  prince  cruel 
and  tyrannical  and  callous  to  suffering ;  not 
poasessing  the  ^nsdom  and  prudence  neces- 
sary for  right  govermnent,  he  defrauds  his 
■ubjects,  treats  them  unjustly,  and  causes 
great  misery.  See  the  prophet's  denuncia- 
tion of  Shallum  and  Jehoiakiin  for  these 
very  crimes  (Jer.  xxii.  13 — 19).  Septuagint, 
"A  king  wanting  revenues  is  a  great  op- 
pressor (<ruKo<piirnis)"  Ha  that  hateth 
aovetansness  shall  prolong  his  days  (oh.  xv. 
27).  The  prince  addressed  is  thus  warned 
that  his  oppressive  acts  will  be  visited  upnn 
him  judicially;  that  only  a  ruler  who  deals 
with  his  subjects  liberally  and  equitably  can 
a  I  tain  to  old  age,  and  that  his  conduct  will 
shorten  his  life.  An  early  death  is  reckoned 
as  a  token  of  God's  indignation.  The  second 
hemistich  Caher  translates,  "  But  he  who 
hates  lucre  shall  reign  long."  Septuagint, 
"  He  who  hateth  iniquity  shall  live  a  long 
time."  (For  "  covetousness  "  (betta),  see  on 
eh.  i.  19.) 

Ver.  17. — A  man  that  doeth  violence  to 
the  blood  of  any  person  shall  flee  to  the  pit. 
This  should  bo,  a  man  oppremed,  (Isa. 
sx:!viii.  14),  hurdenedy  with  the  blood  of  any 
one.  The  wilful  murderer,  with  his  guilt 
upon  bis  soul,  flies  in  vain  from  remorse ; 
his  crime  pursues  him  even  to  the  grave. 
For  inadvertent  manslaughter  the  cities  of 
refuge  offered  an  asylum,  but  for  deliberate 
murder  there  was  no  safe  refuge,  either  from 
the  stings  of  conscience  or  from  the  avenger 
of  blood,  but  death.  The  homicide,  like 
Cain  (Gen.  iv.  14),  must  be  a  fugitive  and  a 
vagabond  in  tlie  earth.  "  Pit "  (bar),  some 
take  to  mean  any  hiding-place,  "a  cave,  or 
well ; "  but  it  is  very  commonly  found  in  the 
sense  of  "  sepulchre  "  (Ps.  xxviii.  1 ;  Isa.  xiv. 
19,  etc.),  and  is  so  explained  here  by  most 
commentators.  Let  no  man  stay  him.  We 
had  in  ch.  xxiv.  11,  etc.,  an  injunction  to 
save  human  life;  but  the  case  wai  quite 
different  from  this  of  wilful  murder.  Here 
it  is  directed  that  no  one  attempt  to  save 
him  from  the  punishment  which  he  has  in- 
curred, or  to  comfort  him  under  the  remorse 
which  he  suffers.  Let  him  be  left  alone  to 
meet  the  fate  which  he  has  merited.  The 
iiXX.  gives  a  different  idea  to  the  gnome, 
••  He  who  becomes  bail  for  a  man  charged 
with  murder  shall  be  banished  and  shall  not 
be  in  safety."  They  add  a  verse  which  we 
shall  meet  again,  almost  in  the  same  words 
(oh.  xxix.  17, 18), "  Chasten  thy  son,  and  he 
will  love  thee,  and  will  give  honour  to  thy 
soul ;  be  shall  not  obejr  •  sinful  nation." 


Ver,  18. — Whoso  walketh  uprightly  shall 
besaved.  "Uprightly"  (tamim) ;  innocently, 
blamelessly  (Ps.  xv.  2).  Vulgate,  timplieiler ; 
Septuagint,  Sixalas;  Aquila,  Symmachus,  r^- 
\fios,  "He  is  helped  (3fj8og59)jTai),"  Septua- 
gint. Things  shall  prosper  with  him  ;  God 
will  work  with  him,  and  save  him  in  Hangers 
temporal  and  spiritual.  But  he  that  is  per- 
verse in  his  ways  shall  fall  at  once.  "  He 
that  is  perverse  of  two  ways,"  or  "  in  a 
double  way,"  as  ver.  6.  The  man  who  is 
not  straightforward,  but  vacillates  between 
right  and  wrong,  or  pretends  to  be  pursuing 
one  path  while  he  is  really  taking  another, 
sliall  full  suddenly  and  without  warning. 
nnxa  means  "  all  at  once,"  or  "  once  for  all," 
and  so  that  nothing  else  is  possible,  equiva- 
lent to  penitut.  Schultens  quotes  Virgil, 
'  .ffineid,'  li.  418— 

"Procubuit  moriens  et  humum  semel  ore 
moraordit." 

Septuagint,  "  He  that  walketh  in  crooked 
ways  will  be  entangled." 

Ver.  19. — A  variation  of  oh.  xii.  11.  Shall 
have  poverty  enough.  The  new  clause  marks 
the  antithesis  more  clearly  than  that  above. 

Ver.  20. — A  faithful  man  shall  abound 
with  blessings.  "Faithful,"  as  in  ch.  xx. 
6,  one  on  whom  one  can  depend,  honest 
and  upright.  Septuagint,  AIiotthttoj.  The 
blessings  signified  are  such  as  come  from 
God  and  man.  Men  will  utter  his  no  me 
with  praise  and  benediction  (comp.  Job  xxix. 
8,  etc.),  and  God  will  show  his  approval  by 
sending  material  prosperity.  He  that  maketh 
haste  to  be  rich  shall  not  he  innocent  (comp. 
ver.  22,  and  note  there;  ch.  xiii.  11 ;  -vx.  21 ; 
xxi.  5).  One  who  is  only  anxious  to  become 
quioltly  rich,  and  is  unscrupulous  as  to  m«in3, 
cannot  be  "  a  faithful  man,"  and  therefore 
cannot  be  blessed.  Instead  of  "  innocent," 
many  expositors  render  "unpunished"  (as 
eh.  xvii.  5),  which  bettor  contrasts  with  the 
blessings  mentioned  in  the  first  hemistich, 
though  the  two  ideas  are  co-ordinate.  On 
this  haste  of  covetouauess,  Juvenal  writea 
('  Sat.,'  xiv.  173)— 

"Inde    fere    scelerum    causae;    nee    plura 
venena 

Miscuit  aut  ferro  grassatur  saapius  ullum 

HumaniB  mentis  vitiuiii,  quam  s»va  cn- 
pido 

Immodici  census;  nam  dives  qui  fieri  vult, 

Et  cito  vult  fieri.     Sed  quae  reverentia 
legum, 

Quis  metus  aut  pudor  est  unquam  proper- 
autis  avari?  " 

The  Septuagint  waters  down  the  gnome, 
"  But  the  wicked  shall  not  be  unpunished." 
Ver.  21. — The  first  hemistich  occurs  a 
little  fuller  in  ch.  xxiv.  23,  referring  there, 
as  here,  to  the  admhustration  of  justice, 


68d 


THE  PEOVEKBS. 


[oh.  xxvm.  1 — 28. 


For  for  a  piece  of  bread  that  man  will 
transgress.  Tims  translated,  tliie  clause 
confirms  tlie  former,  and  saya  that  a  judge 
given  to  favouritism  will  swerve  from  right 
under  the  smallest  temptation.  But  to  bribe 
a  judge  with  a  morsel  of  bread  seems  an 
nnlikely  idea ;  and  the  gnome  is  of  general 
application,  "  And  for  a  morsel  of  bread  a 
man  [not  'that  man']  will  transgress."  As 
gome  men  in  responsible  positions  are  often 
swayed  by  low  and  unworthy  considerations, 
so  in  social  life  a  very  insignificant  cause  is 
sufiBcient  to  warp  the  judgment  of  some 
per.-ons,  or  draw  ♦hem  aside  from  the  line 
of  rectitude.  (For  "  a  piece  of  bread,"  as 
denoting  object  poverty  or  a  thing  of  no 
value,  see  on  eh.  vi.  26.)  The  commen- 
tators cite  Aul.  Gell.,  'Noct.  Att.,'  i.  15, 
"  Frusto  panis  oonduoi  potest  vel  uti  taceat 
vel  uti  loquatur."  Septuagint,  "He  that 
regards  not  the  persons  of  the  just  is  not 
good;  such  a  one  will  sell  a  man  for  a 
morsel  of  bread." 

Ver.  22. — He  that  hasteth  to  be  rich  hath 
an  evil  eye  (see  ver.  20) ;  better,  the  man  of 
mil  eye  hatteth  after  riches.  The  man  of 
evil  eye  (eh.  xxiii.  6)  is  the  envious  and 
covetous  man ;  such  a  one  tries  to  improve 
his  position  and  raise  himself  speedily  to 
the  height  of  him  whom  he  envies,  and  is 
quite  unscrupulous  as  to  the  means  which 
he  uses  to  effect  his  purpose,  and  keeps  all 
that  he  gains  selfishly  to  himself.  And  yet 
''fl  is  really  blind  to  his  own  best  interests 
(comp  nh.  xx.  21).  And  considereth  not  that 
poverty  shall  come  upon  Mm  (comp.  ch.  xxiii. 
4,  5).  His  grasping  greed  brings  no  bless- 
ing with  it  (oh.  xi.  25),  excites  others  to 
defraud  him,  and  in  the  end  consigns  him 
to  merited  poverty.  The  LXX.  here  reads 
somewhat  differently,  and  translates,  "An 
envious  man  bastcth  to  be  rich,  and  knows 
not  that  the  merciful  man  (chasid  instead 
of  eheser')  will  liave  the  mastery  over  him," 
t.e.  will  take  his  wealth,  as  ver.  8.  Proverbs 
concerning  hastily  gotten  wealth  havealready 
been  given.  Here  are  a  few  more :  Spanish, 
"  Who  would  be  rich  in  a  year  gets  hanged 
in  half  a  year;"  Italian,  "Tha  river  dosB 
not  become  swollen  with  clear  water; "  says 
a  Scotch  proverb,  "  Better  a  wee  fire  to  warm 
ns  than  a  meikle  fire  to  bum  us." 

Ver.  23. — He  that  rebuketh  a  man  after- 
wards shall  find  more  favour.  The  word 
rendered  "afterwards"  {poetea,  Vulgate), 
'inN  (acharai),  creates  a  difficulty.  The 
■uffix  eonnot  be  that  of  the  first  person 
singular,  which  would  give  no  sense ;  hence 
most  interpreters  see  in  it  a  peculiar  adverb 
attached  to  the  following  verb,  "  shall  after- 
wards find."  DelitZBch,  Lowenstein,  and 
Kowack  take  it  for  a  nonn  with  the  termi- 
aation  -at,  and  translate,  "  a  man  that  goeth 
backward,"  "a  backslider"  (as  Jer.  vii.  24). 


Hence  the  translation  will  run,  "He  who 
reproveth  a  backsliding  man,"  i.e.  one 
whom  he  sees  to,  be  turning  away  from  God 
and  duty.  He  shall  find  more  favour  than 
he  that  flattereth  with  the  tongue  (comp. 
ch.  xxvii.  6 ;  xxix.  5).  A  faithful  counsellor, 
who  tells  a  man  his  faults,  brings  them 
home  to  his  conscience,  and  checks  him  in 
his  downward  course,  will  be  seen  to  be  a 
true  friend,  and  will  be  loved  and  respected 
both  by  the  one  whom  he  has  warned  and 
advised  and  by  all  who  are  well  disposed. 
Jas.  V.  19,  "  If  any  of  you  do  err  from  the 
truth,  and  one  convert  him,  let  him  know 
that  he  which  oonverteth  the  sinner  from 
the  error  of  his  way  shall  save  a  aoul  from 
death,  and  shall  hide  a  multitude  of  sins." 
"  Laudat  adulator,  sed  non  est  verus  ama- 
tor."  The  flatterer  says  only  what  is  agree- 
able to  the  man  whom  he  flatters,  and  thus 
makes  him  conceited  and  selfish  and  unable 
to  see  himself  as  he  really  is;  the  true 
friend  says  harsh  things,  but  they  are 
wholesome  and  tend  to  spiritual  profit,  and 
show  more  real  affection  than  all  the  soft 
words  of  the  fawning  parasite.  Septuagint, 
"He  that  reproveth  a  man's  ways  shall 
have  more  thankg  than  he  who  flattereth 
with  the  tongue." 

Ver.  24. — Whoso  robbeth  his  father  or  hig 
mother  (comp.  ch.  xix.  26);  taking  from 
them  what  belongs  to  them.  Septuagint, 
"  He  who  oasts  off  (otto^oWetoO  father  ,or 
mother."  And  saith,  It  is  no  transgression. 
He  salves  his  conscience  by  thinking  all 
would  be  his  ere  long  in  the  course  oi 
nature;  or  he  uses  the  plea  of  Corlan 
denounOed  by  our  Lord  (Mark  vii.  11,  etc.). 
The  same  is  the  companion  of  a  destroyer 
(ch.  xviii.  9);  ia  no  better  than,  stands  in 
the  position  of,  one  who  practises  openly 
against  his  neighbour's  life  and  property. 
He  is  a  thief,  and  faila  in  the  aimplest  duty. 
Vulgate,  partieeps  homicidsa  est.  There 
may  be  an  allusion  to  the  guilt  incurred  by 
a  witness  in  concealing  his  knowledge  oi 
a  crime,  which  is  denounced  in  Lev.  t.  1 
(comp.  judg.  xvii.  2). 
■  Ver.  25.— He  that  is  of  a  proud  heart 
Btirreth  up  strife  (ch.  xv.  18;  xxix.  22); 
literally,  he  that  is  of  a  wide  soul.  '1  hia 
may  certainly  denote  pride  (qui  se  jactat  et 
dilatat,  Vulgate),  in  which  case  the  gnome 
says  that  one  who  thinks  much  of  himself 
and  despises  others  is  the  cause  of  qiiariela 
and  dissensions,  occasioned  by  his  strngeles 
for  pre-eminence  and  the  ill  feeling  arisi'ig 
from  hisoverbearing  andsuperoiliousoonduot. 
Others,  and  rightly,  take  the  wide  soul  to  de- 
note covetousiieM  (comp.  ch.  xxiii.  2 ;  Isa.  y. 
14 ;  Hab.  ii.  5).  It  is  the  man  of  insatiable 
desire,  the  grasping  avaricious  man,  who 
excites  quarrels  and  mars  all  peace,  and  in 
the  end  deatroyi  himself.    "Whence  com* 


em.  xt*m.  1—28,] 


THE  PRoVEftBS. 


m 


wars,"  nslfg  St  James  (iv.  1),  "and  wlience 
come  figbtinga  among  you?  come  they 
not  hence,  even  of  your  pleasures  that 
war  in  your  members?  To  lust,  and  have 
not ;  ye  kill,  and  coTet,  and  cannot  obtain : 
ye  fight  and  war."  Septuagint,  "An  un- 
belieying  [Airurros,  Alexand.  fiir\7j<rToi,  in- 
satiate] man  judgeth  rashly."  Bnt  he  that 
pntteth  his  trust  in  the  Lord  shall  be  made 
fat  (ch.  xi.  25;  ivi.  20;  xxlx.  25).  The 
character  here  opposed  to  the  covetous  is 
that  of  the  patient,  God-fearing  man,  who 
is  contented  to  do  his  duty,  and  leave  the 
result  in  the  Lord's  hands.  This  man 
shall  be  made  fat,  shall  be  comforted  and 
largely  blessed,  while  he  who  puts  his  hope 
in  material  things  shall  fall  into  calamity. 
Septuagint,  "He  who  trusts  in  the  Lord 
will  be  in  his  care  (^ii'  iiri)ie\t(:f  effrai)." 

Ver.  26. — He  that  trnsteth  in  his  own 
heart  is  a  fool  (see  Oen.  vi.  5;  viii.  21). 
What  is  here  censured  is  that  presump- 
tuous confidence  in  one's  own  thoughts, 
plans,  and  imaginations  which  leads  a 
man  to  neglect  both  God's  inspirations 
and  the  counsel  of  others  (comp.  ver.  14; 
ch.  xiv.  16).  "Let  him  that  thinketh  he 
standeth  take  heed  lest  he  fall"  (1  Cor. 
z.  12).  Septuagint,  "Whoso  trusteth  to  a 
bold  heart,  such  a  one  is  a  fool."  Whoso 
walketh  wisely,  he  shall  be  delivered.  This 
man  looks  outside  himself  for  direction;  he 
trusts  in  the  wisdom  which  is  from  above ; 
he  walks  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  and  is 
saved  from  the  dangers  to  which  self-con- 
fidence exposes  the  fool.  The  best  com- 
mentary on  the  gnome  is  Jer.  ix.  23,  24, 
"Let  not  the  wise  man  glory  in  his  wisdom, 
neither  let  the  mighty  man  glory  in  his 
might,  let  not  tlie  rich  man  glory  in  his 
riches:  but  let  liim  that  glorieth  glory  in 
this,  that  he  understandeth  and  knoweth 
me,  that  I  am  the  Lord  which  exercise 
loving-kindness,  judgment,  and  righteous- 
ness, in  the  earth:  for  in  these  things  I 
deUght,  lalth  the  Lord," 


Ver.  27.— He  that  giveth  unto  th«  poor 
shall  not  lack  (see  ch.  xi.  24,  etc. ;  xix.  17). 
God  in  some  way  compensates  what  is  spent 
in  almsdeeds  by  shedding  his  blessing  on 
the  benevolent.  "Der  Geiz,"  runs  the 
German  maxim,  "sammlet  sich  arm,  die 
Milde  giebt  sich  reich,"  "Charity  gives 
itself  rich ;  covetousness  hoards  itself  poor  " 
(Trench).  "  Alms,"  said  the  rabbis, "  are  the 
salt  of  riches."  But  he  that  hideth  his  eyes 
shall  have  many  a  curse  (ch.  xi.  26).  The 
uncharitable  man  either  turns  away  his  eyes 
that  he  may  not  see  the  misery  around  him, 
or  pretends  not  to  notice  it,  lest  his  com- 
passion should  be  claimed.  The  expression, 
"hiding  the  eyes,"  occurs  in  Isa.  i.  15, 
"  When  ye  spread  forth  your  hands,  I  will 
hide  mine  eyes  from  you."  The  unmerciful 
man  meets  with  the  curses  of  those  whom 
he  has  neglected  to  relieve  when  he  had  the 
power,  and  such  curses  are  ratified  and 
fulfilled  because  they  are  deserved,  and 
Divine  retribution  attends  them  (see  the 
opposite  view,  ver.  20).  "Turn  not  away 
thine  eye  from  the  needy,"  says  the  Son  of 
Sirach,  "and  give  him  none  occasion  to 
curse  thee ;  for  if  he  curse  thee  in  the  bitter- 
ness of  his  soul,  his  prayer  shall  be  heard 
of  him  that  made  him"  (Ecclus.  iv.  4,  etc. ; 
com^.  Tobit  iv.  7).  So  in  the  'Didache,' 
ch.  iv.,  we  have,  Oiix  h-Kotrrpa<pi](rri  rhv 
svSe6iievov,  "Thou  shalt  not  turn  tliyself 
from  one  in  need."  Septuagint,  "He  that 
turneih  away  his  eye  shall  be  in  great  dis- 
tress;" Vulgate,  Qui  deipieit  deprecantem 
sustinehit  penuriam. 

Ver.  28. — When  the  wicked  rise,  men 
hide  themselves  (see  ver.  12);  Septuagint, 
"In  the  places  of  the  ungodly  the  righteous 
groan."  But  when  they  perish,  the  right- 
eous increase  (ch.  xi.  10 ;  xxix.  2,  16).  The 
overthrow  of  the  ungodly  adds  to  the  pros- 
perity of  the  righteous,  removes  an  opposing 
element,  and  promotes  their  advancement  in 
influence  and  numbers. 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  1. — The  cowardice  of  guilt  and  the  courage  of  righteousness.  I.  The  cowardic* 
OF  GUILT.  "The  wicked  flee  when  no  man  pursueth."  1.  This  cowardice  springs 
from,  a  natural  feeling  of  ill  desert.  "Conscience  doth  make  cowards  of  us  all."  Apart 
from  all  authoritative  revelation,  when  no  prophet  of  God  is  charging  a  man  with  hi» 
sin,  an  awful  voice  within  clamours  against  his  guilt  and  shakes  the  very  foundations 
of  his  confidence.  Though  he  has  never  breathed  a  word  of  his  misdeed  in  the  ear  of 
a  fellow-man,  though  all  the  world  is  deceived  into  believing  him  to  be  innocent,  he 
cannot  silence  that  dread  inner  voice.  In  many  cases  it  utterly  unnerves  a  man,  though 
outwardly  he  dwells  in  perfect  security.  2.  This  cowardice  is  nourished  ly  a  perception 
of  Divine  justice.  A  person  who  knows  the  levealed  will  of  God,  and  his  wrath  against 
sin,  must  be  prepared  to  expect  judgments  of  condemnation  on  guilt.  Though  the 
»venging  hand  is  stayed,  it  may  fall  at  any  moment.  The  miserable  guilty  man  is  like 
one  in  the  condemned  cell  under  seutence  of  death,  who  does  not  know  the  day  or  hour 


MO  THE   PR0VEBB3.  [cr.  txttti.  1— 2R 

'  .^■^— ^^_— ^__^^^_^^^^.^^^__^^_^^^_^-^-^— ^-_____^^^-^_ 

of  execution,  but  who  trembles  at  every  footfall  lest  it  should  be  th«t  of  the  niffl<i<ienger 
who  summons  him  to  his  doom.  3.  Thii  cowardice  gives  rise  to  needless  alarm*.  The 
murderer  starts  at  the  fall  of  a  leaf — so  utterly  unstrung  is  he  under  tlie  tremendous 
consciousness  of  guilt.  Can  any  condition  be  more  dreadful?  Rather  than  endure 
this  agony  of  apprehension,  men,  who  were  in  no  danger  of  being  arrested,  have  con- 
fessed their  crimes  and  given  themselves  up  to  justice.  When  we  consider  the  relation 
of  sin  to  God  and  to  his  judgments,  it  is  foolish  indeed  to  live  in  the  cowardly  shame 
of  g;uiU,     For  there  are  peace  and  pardon  for  the  penitent. 

II.  The  codbaoe  of  kiohtkousnbss.  1.  2%is  couroffe  is  haaed  on  a  clean  conscience. 
(1)  The  feeling  of  innocence.  Una  can  brave  the  lion  and  subdue  its  savage  nature  to 
her  service  because  the  panoply  of  her  innocence  is  her  perfect  protection.  The  martyr 
can  face  the  fury  of  the  persecutor,  strong  in  the  consciousness  of  right  and  truth.  It 
is  painful  to  he  wrongly  accused,  but  a  sensible  man  should  learn  to  bear  calumny 
when  he  knows  that  he  is  not  guilty  in  the  sight  of  God.  (2)  The  new  experience  of 
regeneration.  One  who  has  been  redeemed  by  Christ  and  renewed  by  the  Holy  Spirit 
ueed  not  live  in  the  perpetual  fear  of  guilt  and  shame.  He  is  forgiven  and  restored. 
He  is  like  the  prisoner  who  can  walk  boldly  out  of  the  jail  with  a  royal  pardon.  Yit 
his  confidence  can  never  be  the  same  as  that  of  original  innocence.  It  must  always 
have  a  certain  humility.  2.  This  courage  is  justified  by  experience.  The  true  man 
does  not  find  his  boldness  fail  him.  He  is  as  safe  as  he  feels  himself.  The  first 
guarantee  of  success  in  any  cause  is  a  clear  consciousness  that  we  are  in  the  right.  In 
the  end,  right  and  truth  must  trijamph.  But  if  they  meet  with  temporary  defeat,  their 
champion  need  fear  no  real  evil.  He  now  gives  his  life,  as  he  has  before  given  his 
strength,  to  the  good  cause.  Whether  he  serves  it  by  life  or  by  death,  be  does  nobly, 
and  he  need  not  fear  that  he  will  be  deserted  by  God. 

Vcr.  9. — ITie  prayer  that  is  an  abomination.  God  does  not  hear  all  prayer.  There 
are  even  prayers  that  he  rejects  with  wrath.  The  broken  words  of  the  penitent,  the 
simple  cry  of  the  little  child,  and  the  ungrammatical  sentences  of  the  ignorant  person 
may  be  all  acceptable  to  God,  while  prayers  faultless  in  form  and  impressive  in  utter- 
ance are  flung  back  as  insults  to  the  Divine  majesty.  The  first  consideration  is  not  as 
to  the  nature  of  the  prayer,  but  as  to  the  character  of  the  supposed  worshipper.  The 
prayer  that  is  an  abomination  is  one  which,  however  perfect  it  may  appear  to  be  in 
itself,  comes  from  contaminated  lips.  We  need  to  examine  ourselves  rather  than  to 
weigh  our  phrases. 

I.  The  conduct  that  makes  the  prayer  an  abomination.  This  is  the  conduct  of 
one  "  that  txirneth  away  his  ear  from  hearing  the  Law."  Such  conduct  carries  with  it 
two  evil  things.  1.  Wilful  error.  The  heathen  who  do  not  know  the  Law  may  well 
be  dealt  with  leniently  when  they  blunder  into  superstition,  and  even  confuse  their 
consciences  with  degraded  forms  of  religion,  for  their  error  is  involuntary.  But  when 
a  man  has  an  opportunity  of  coming  to  a  knowledge  of  the  truth,  but  rejects  it  in 
indolence  or  aversion,  he  is  to  blame  for  the  wrong  notions  which  would  have  been 
corrected  but  for  his  voluntary  acceptance  of  darkness  rather  than  light.  Devotion 
ought  to  be  enlightened  by  instruction.  The  Bible  should  be  rei\d  in  public  worship. 
Scripture  truth  is  needed  as  a  guide  to  prayer.  2.  Deliberate  disobedience.  The  turning 
aside  from  hearing  the  Law  is  not  likely  to  spring  from  a  meie  reluctance  to  learn  its 
doctrines.  Behind  this  there  lies  a  dislike  to  obeying  its  precepts,  which  reveals  a 
stubborn  self-will  in  opposition  to  the  will  of  God.  Now,  such  an  evil  state  of  the  heart 
precludes  all  favour  from  Heaven. 

II.  The  reason  why  the  prayer  is  an  abomination.  This  may  be  looked  for  in 
two  directions.  It  may  lie  in  the  prayer  itself,  or  it  may  he  found  in  the  man  who 
utters  It.  1.^  bad  prayer  is  offered.  If  the  worshipper  is  wilfully  ignorant,  he  is  to 
blame  for  asking  for  things  which  he  would  refrain  from  seekin<T  when  in  a  more 
enlightened  condition.  If  he  is  self-willed  and  disobedient,  he  is  guilty  of  asking  amiss 
for  what  he  may  spend  on  his  own  lusts  (Jas.  iv.  3),  instead  of  seeking  what  is  in 
accordance  with  the  will  of  God.  2.  A  prayer  proceeds  from  sinful  lips.  There  are 
moments  of  distress  when  the  most  undevout  man  would  be  glad  of  heavenly  aid  if 
only  It  would  come  like  the  help  given  by  Homer's  gods  and  goddesses  to  his  heroes  in 
tlieir  times  of  danger.    There  i>  no  spiritual  religion  in  the  cry  f<}T  help  UBd«  luch 


«■.  xxvm.  i— 28.]  THE  PB0VBKB8.  Ul 

circumstances.  If  the  soul  is  alienated  from  God,  and  there  is  no  sign  of  penitence, 
the  prayer  for  deliverance,  though  genuine  and  heartfelt,  may  well  be  rejected.  But 
worse  than  this  is  the  mock-worship  of  one  who  would  have  the  honour  of  being 
religious  together  with  the  profit  of  being  sinful.  There  can  be  no  true  religion  without 
right  conduct.  God  looks  to  the  behaviour  of  the  life  more  than  to  the  language  of  the 
prayer.  He  cares  nothing  for  reverence  in  the  temple  if  he  sees  wicke£ie8s  in  the 
market-place. 

Ver.  10. — The  tempter.  I.  The  greatest  sin  is  temptdto  anotheb  to  bin.  This 
is  Satanic  wickedness,  following  the  example  of  the  devil.  1.  It  is  most  guilty  because 
it  tends  to  increase  wickedness.  It  is  sowing  evil  seeds.  It  is  bad  enough  to  cultivate 
the  deadly  fruit  in  one's  own  life,  but  to  propagate  it  dsewhere  is  to  be  a  source  of 
trouble  and  manifold  wickedness.  2.  It  is  particularly  guilty  because  it  ruins  louh. 
It  is  an  attack  upon  other  men.  The  tempter  is  a  murderer.  At  least,  he  is  an  enemy 
who  sows  tares  in  his  neighbours'  fields,  and  so  brings  trouble  wantonly  on  others. 

IL  This  suj  is  committed  by  means  of  evil  example.  The  tempter  need  not 
whisper  enticing  words,  much  less  need  he  approach  his  victim  in  the  attitude  of  "  a 
roaring  lion,  seeking  whom,  he  may  devour."  It  is  enough  that  his  conduct  sets 
a  pattern  of  wickedness.  We  are  responsible  for  the  examples  we  exhibit  before  the 
world.  Most  important  in  the  presence  of  children,  who  are  naturally  imitative,  and 
who  take  their  latterns  from  the  manners  of  the  elder  people  among  whom  they 
live,  the  example  of  heads  of  families  is  peculiarly  impressive.  Therefore  the  guilt  of 
such  persons  is  grave  indeed  when  their  reckless  wickedness  drags  poor  children  down 
to  sin. 

III.  This  sin  mat  be  successful.  It  is  possible  to  cause  the  righteous  to  go  astray 
in  an  evil  way.  1.  This;  may  happen  with  innocent  children.  They  are  naturally 
righteous;  for  "of  such  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  But  they  are  not  unassailable  in 
their  simplicity  and  early  purity.  The  most  awful  fact  in  life  is  the  corruption  of 
childhood  by  the  wickedness  of  older  and  stronger  life.  2.  It  is  possible  with  good  men 
and  women.  To  be  good  is  not  to  be  above  temptation.  Even  Christ  was  tempted, 
though  he  resisted  successfully.  Therefore  (1)  when  a  good  man  is  led  astray  we  have 
no  proof  that  his  goodness  was  a  hypocritical  pretence ;  and  (2)  no  one  can  be  so  secure 
in  his  consciousness  of  integrity  as  to  afford  to  play  with  temptation  and  to  boast  of  his 
own  strength.  There  are  joints  in  the  thickest  armour,  and  keen  darts  that  find  out 
the  smallest  weak  places. 

rV.  The  sin  of  tempting  anothee  to  sin  will  bbinq  buin  on  the  tempteb.  Of 
all  sins  this  one  cannot  be  let  go  unchecked  and  unpunished.  For  the  sake  of  the 
victims  who  are  threatened  by  it  God  will  assuredly  visit  it  with  wrath.  The  tempter 
is  a  deadly  serpent,  whose  horrible  enticements  only  make  its  venom  the  more  dangerous ; 
and  all  the  resources  of.  righteousness  must  be  put  forth  to  crush  and  destroy  such 
a  pest.  But  no  miraculous  interference  is  needed  to  punish  the  sin  of  tempting.  We 
have  not  to  summon  the  Archangel  Michael  to  fight  the  dangerous  reptile.  In  the  end 
it  will  turn  its  sting  on  itself.  The  tempter  will  fall  into  his  own  pit.  He  will  alienate 
his  victims,  and  be  will  make  an  enemy  of  sU  that  is  good.  Friendless  and  helpless,  he 
must  perisli  in  the  hour  of  his  need. 

Vers.  13, 14. — C(mfession.  I.  It  i8  danoebocs  foe  a  man  to  deny  his  sin.  1.  It 
it  false.  1i  a  man  pretends  to  be  virtuous  when  he  knows  that  he  is  guilty,  that  man's 
life  is  a  lie.  He  lives  in  a  continuous  falsehood.  Such  a  conrlition  is  rotten,  turning 
his  whole  course  into  a  delusion,  and  leading  to  a  confused  estimate  of  right  and  wrong. 
The  very  landmarks  of  righteousness  are  lost  sight  of  in  a  fog  of  bewildering  pretences. 
2.  It  precludes  forgiveness.  God  will  only  pardon  the  penitent,  and  penitence  is 
impossible  without  an  admission  of  guilt.  Therefore  the  Divine  covering  of  sin  which 
will  utterly  bury  it  and  allow  of  no  ugly  resurrection  in  a  revival  of  old  accusations, 
is  hindered  by  the  sinner's  foolish,  cowardly  attempt  to  cover  it  in  his  own  way  by 
a  paltry  concealment.  The  wretched  rags  that  he  draws  over  the  foul  thing  will 
not  really  hide  it,  but  they  will  prevent  the  massive  shield  of  Divine  forgiveness  from 
being  cast  over  it.  3.  Jt  confirms  the  sin.  Sin  is  not  destroyed  by  being  covered.  It 
in  no  more  killed  than  the  seed  of  a  poison  plant  is  killed  when  it  is  lown  in  the  Mil, 


641  THE  PBOVERBS.  [oh.  xxtol  1--2& 

and  so  temporarily  buried  out  of  fight.  Driven  back  to  the  secret  chambers  of  th« 
soul,  the  evil  thing  grows  there  and  spreads  its  deadly  influence.  Confession  would 
clear  out  the  noxious  malaria  of  guilt;  concealment  only  shuts  it  up  to  breed  in  the 
stifling  atmosphere  of  its  own  corruption.  Such  a  condition  hardens  the  heart  in 
wickedness. 

II.  It  is  happy  for  a  man  to  confess  his  sin.  1.  This  con/esiion  must  mean  an 
earnest  desire  to  be  free  from  it.  The  man  who  conceals  his  sin  keeps  it  while  he 
covers  it,  and  holds  it  tight  even  when  he  is  denying  it.  But  one  who  confesses  his 
sin  aright  hates  it  though  he  admits  it.  Three  things  are  here  implied.  (1)  He  owns 
his  guilt.  Confession  includes  an  admission  both  of  the  fact  and  of  its  evil  character. 
He  who  confesses  a  sin  must  own  that  he  did  the  deed,  and  that  it  is  bad.  (2) 
He  forsakes  the  sin.  A  right  confession  is  accompanied  by  repentance.  It  is  the  very 
opposite  of  the  brazen-faced  guUt  that  glories  in  its  shame,  because  it  loathes  what 
still  it  cannot  but  own.  (3)  He  first  fears  to  sin  again.  He  has  learnt  a  wholesome 
lesson.  He  looks  back  in  owning  his  guilt,  and  then  forward  in  fear  of  repeating  it. 
2.  ySucA  confession  will  le  followed  by  Ood's  forgiveness  and  a  new  joy  to  the  penitent. 
(1)  God  wUl  forgive  the  penitent.  He  "  shall  have  mercy."  Pride  claims  high  deserts, 
but  the  humility  of  confession  only  seeks  for  mercy.  It  inspires  the  publican's  prayer, 
"  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner ! "  Now,  as  God  is  waiting  to  be  gracious  aad  loves 
mercy,  as  soon  as  the  obstruction  of  impenitence  is  removed,  his  grace  is  free  to  flow  in 
and  heal  the  humbled  soul.  (2)  The  penitent  will  experience  a  new  joy.  He  will  be  , 
happy  even  in  his  fear.  He  will  "  rejoice  with  trembling."  No  longer  living  in  the 
miserable  fear  of  being  "  found  out,"  the  new  fear  that  makes  him  trust  his  soul  to 
God  will  be  associated  with  the  blessedness  of  forgiveness  and  the  peace  of  a  Divine 
protection. 

Ver.  20. — "  A  faithful  man."  I.  His  chaeacteb.  Nothing  can  be  more  grand  than 
fidelity.  When  found  in  a  man  it  is  an  image  of  the  eternal  constancy  of  God ;  it  is 
like  that  Divine  righteousness  which  the  psalmist  compared  to  the  "  everlasting  hills" 
— so  firm,  so  enduring,  so  changeless.  It  would  be  well  if  this  grand  Old  Testament 
grace  were  more  prized  and  cultivated  in  the  Christian  Church.  Let  us  consider  it  in 
some  of  its  manifold  aspects.  What  is  the  character  of  the  faithful  man?  1,  Eeit 
true  to  himself.  This  fidelity  must  lie  at  the  root  of  his  fidelity  to  others.  The  faithful 
man  must  act  out  honestly  what  he  feels  to  be  demanded  by  his  own  inner  convictions. 
2.  He  is  true  to  his  Gud.  The  man  of  God  is  faithful  as  well  as  trustful.  Thus  hia 
faith  has  the  tveo  sides  of  passive  submission  and  active  loyalty.  The  primary  duty  to 
God  must  be  observed  before  the  secondary  duty  to  man  can  he  kept.  3.  He  is  true 
to  his  friend.  This  does  not  merely  mean  that  he  keeps  his  pledges.  It  Edso  involves 
his  regarding  the  welfare  of  his  friend  and  coming  to  his  aid  in  the  hour  of  need, 
danger,  and  helpful  service.  4.  //«  is  true  to  his  word — one  who  "sweareth  to  his  own 
hurt  and  changeth  not."  It  is  nothing  that  we  keep  our  promises  when  they  run  along 
the  lines  of  our  own  inclinations.  The  test  is  that  they  are  equally  honoured  when 
they  involve  self-sacrifice.  5.  Ife  is  true  when  unobserved.  Faithful  service  is  the 
opposite  of  eye-service.  The  faithful  man  will  do  well,  though  he  never  expects  to  be 
called  to  account.  Faithful  work  is  that  which  never  meets  the  eye,  and  yet  is  as  well 
wrought  as  the  most  conspicuous  work,  6.  He  is  true  in  face  of  danger.  Here  is  the 
test  of  fidelity.  The  faithful  servant  of  Christ  is  one  who  will  not  forsake  his  Lord 
when  persecution  threatens  him.     The  martyr  is  "  faithful  unto  death  "  (Rev.  ii.  10). 

II.  His  FBUITFULNESS.  He  "abounds  with  blessings."  He  is  like  Abraham,  "the 
father  of  the  faithful,"  who  was  both  blessed  himself  and  a  blessing  to  others  (Gen.  xii. 
2).  1.  Ee  is  a  recipient  of  abundant  blessings.  It  is  a  happy  thing  to  be  faithful  even 
though  fidelity  be  met  with  misunderstanding  or  persecution.  (1)  Fidelity  is  itself 
a  blessing.  This  grace  is  its  own  reward.  To  have  grace  to  live  a  strong,  true,  noble 
life  is  to  be  one  of  God's  blessed  sons,  though  no  further  reward  be  anticipated.  (2) 
Fidelity  brings  many  earthly  blessings.  It  may  not  secure  worldly  wealth,  though 
generally  integrity  is  a  saler  road  to  success  in  life  than  the  crooked  paths  of 
dishonour.  But  it  will  secure  peace,  and  in  the  long  run  it  is  likely  to  be  recognized 
and  rewarded  with  well-merited  honour.  To  be  accounted  a  faithful  servant  is  to  be 
crowned  with  better  than  Olympian  garlands.    (3)  Fidelity  will  be  rewarded  with 


OH.xxvnLl— 2aj  THE  PBO  VERBS.  644 


heavenly  favour.  This  is  ju3t  the  chief  of  Divine  approvals  singled  out  by  Christ  for 
his  servants,  "  Well  done,  good  and  faithful  servant "  (Matt.  xxv.  21).  2.  He  it  a 
source  of  abundant  blessings.  One  true,  faithful  soul — what  a  tower  of  strength  !  what 
a  treasury  of  helpl  what  a  haven  of  refuge!  He  is  rich  indeed  who  ha8°a  failhlul 
friend.  The  fiiithful  man  can  be  relied  on  to  help  in  time  of  need,  whea  the  faithless 
man,  who  perhaps  is  much  stronger,  deserts  his  trusting  friend.  Christ  is  faithful 
(2  Tliess.  iii.  3),  and  as  such  is  a  source  of  abundant  blessings  to  his  people.  Hia 
fidelity  is  the  ground  of  our  faith. 

Ver.  26. — The  folly  of  trusting  oneh  own  heart.  I.  What  it  is  to  trust  in  one's 
OWN  heaet.  1.  It  is  to  trust  in  one's  own  wisdom.  The  heart  here,  as  throughout  the 
Bible,  stands  for  the  intellectual  as  well  as  the  emotional  nature.  Therefore  we  may 
be  said  to  trust  in  it  when  we  lean  to  our  own  understanding  (ch.  iii.  5)  rather  thau 
seek  counsel  from  God  in  prayer  and  the  use  of  the  Scriptures.  2.  It  is  to  trust  in 
our  own  charcKter.'  We  may  think  highly  of  our  own  goodness  and  moral  strength, 
and  so  venture  into  temptation  needlessly  or  rush  into  difficult  enterprises  without 
counting  the  cost.  3,  It  is  to  trust  in  our  own  affections.  Thus  we  are  led  to  believe, 
like  Peter,  that  our  love  to  Christ  will  not  fail  (Matt.  xxvi.  35).  4.  It  is  to  trust  in 
owr  own  energy.  Thinking  we  can  do  more  than  we  are  capable  of  accomplishing, 
through  over-estimating  our  mental  or  spiritual  powers  we  unduly  rely  on  our  own 
resources. 

II.  How  ONE  IB  tempted  TO  TRUST  IN  onb's  OWN  HEART.  1.  Pride  tempts.  It  is 
humiliating  to  own  weakness.  A  high  opinion  of  one's  own  merits  inevitably  leads  to 
a  dangerous  self-confidence.  2.  Unbelief  tempts.  If  men  had  more  faith  in  God  they 
woulii  not  be  so  content  to  rely  on  their  own  poor  resources.  It  is  the  worldly  spirit 
that  leads  to  the  limitation  of  view  to  human  powers.  3.  Self-will  tempts.  Men 
naturally  desire  to  have  their  own  will  fulfilled.  The  less  they  look  away  from  them- 
selves, the  more  does  it  appear  that  they  can  do  as  they  like.  A  selfish  life  tends  to  be 
a  self-contained  life. 

III.  Why  IT  IS  FOOLISH  to  trust  in  one's  own  heart.  1.  The  heart  is  deceitful 
"  Deceitful  above  all  things  "  (Jer.  xvii.  9).  We  do  not  know  our  own  hearts.  There 
are  hidden  weaknesses,  unsuspected  snares,  unlooked-for  limits.  Ignorance  of  our  own 
inner  selves  makes  the  self-trust  a  confidence  without  foundation.  2.  The  heart  is 
sinful.  "  Desperately  wicked "  (Jer.  xvii.  9).  Too  often  he  who  trusts  in  his  own 
heart  trusts  in  an  evil  heart.  Therefore  he  is  likely  to  be  led  astray  by  his  thoughts 
and  desires.  Until  the  heart  is  cleansed  and  renewed,  the  worst  possible  course  is  to 
trust  it.  On  the  contrary,  it  must  be  distrusted,  resisted,  restrained.  3.  2%e  heart  is 
frail.  Even  when  it  has  been  freed  from  the  dominion  of  sin,  the  heart  of  man  is 
liable  to  fall,  open  to  temptation,  and  in  danger  of  yielding  in  the  moment  of  trial. 

IV.  In  what  way  one  can  avoid  trusting  in  his  own  heart.  It  is  not  enough 
to  see  the  danger  and  folly  of  this  trust,  for  a  man  must  have  something  to  rest  upon, 
and  if  the  best  foundation  is  unstable  he  will  still  build  upon  it  rather  than  abandon 
himself  to  despair.  Now,  the  cure  for  the  tendency  to  trust  in  a  wrong  security  is  to 
be  found  in  the  possession  of  a  better  faith,  a  faith  that  is  wise  and  safe.  One  great 
mischief  of  a  man's  trusting  in  his  own  heart  is  that  he  is  thus  led  to  forsake  God. 
The  remedy  is  found  in  returning  to  the  true  ground  of  the  soul's  confidence  in  God. 
He  who  thus  trusts  is  wise.  1.  &od  is  true.  Unlike  the  fickle  heart,  he  is  faithful 
and  can  always  be  trusted.  2.  God  is  good.  Therefore  we  should  turn  from  the  sinful 
heart  to  the  holy  and  gracious  God.  3.  Ood  is  strong.  The  frail  heart  fails;  the 
mighty  God  is  a  steadfast  Bock. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 5. — Canons  of  moral  truth.  I.  Wickedness  is  fearful,  goodness  u 
couraseous.  (Ver.  1.)  A  good  conscience  is  better  than  a  thousand  witnesses;  an 
evil  conscience  unmans  (Job  xv.  21).  What  passes  by  the  name  of  courage  is  oftoi 
the  effect  of  fear  of  men;  and  that  which  is  discountenanced  as  want  of  spirit  may 
proceed  from  the  profoundest  reverence  for  God.     We  shall  never  find  anything  in  the 


544  THE   PROVERBS.  [oh.  xxviii.  1— 5!a 

I      — _^_— ^^^^-^— ^^— — — — ^^-^— ^— — ^^^^^^  ^_..«^^^_^^— ^-^— — 

world  more  to  be  feared  than  the  warring  presence  within  our  own  breast.  True 
courage  is  the  knowledge  that  we  are  for  the  time  at  one  with  God.  The  light  of  hig 
countenance  is  life,  dispersing  the  darkest  cloud,  and  calming  the  most  turbulent 
tempe-it.     An  evil  conscience  is  "  the  worm  that  dies  not." 

II.  Politics  and  morals.  (Ver.  2.)  Rebellion  arising  from  the  collision  of  party 
and  personal  interests  must  be  very  injurious  to  the  well-being  of  a  small  state.- 
Rebellion  can  only  be  justified  when  there  is  not  only  the  greatest  wrong  existing,  but 
also  the  clearest  possible  prospect  of  success.  If  peoples  in  time  of  distress,  instead  of 
CMTsing  and  rising  against  their  rulers,  would  patiently  search  into  the  causes  of  their 
grievances,  a  shorter  way  would  often  be  found  to  redress.  A  certain  unity  of  feeling 
is  essential  to  the  well-being  of  a  state.  "  When  any  of  the  four  pillars  of  govoinment 
are  mainly  shaken  or  weakened  (which  are  religion,  justice,  counsel,  and  treasure),  men 
had  need  to  pray  for  fair  weather  "  (Bacon). 

III.  The  odium  of  petty  irRANNY.  (Ver.  3.)  There  is  nothing  more  detestable 
than  the  oppressive  rule  of  an  upstart.  A  base  mind  becomes  mote  corrupt  from  hasty 
elevation,  a  narrow  heart  more  cruel,  as  in  the  case  of  Robespierre  and  other  historical 
examples.  As  with  learning,  so  with  power;  the  smatterers  are  the  most  ostentatious 
of  their  knowledge ;  those  "  dressed  in  a  little  brief  authority  "  love  to 

"  Play  such  fantastic  tricks  before  high  heaven. 
As  make  the  angels  weep." 

The  Divine  nile  is  strong  in  gentleness. 

IV.  The  secret  op  moral  sympathy  and  antipathy.  (Ver.  4.)  Those  that 
secretly  love  sin  have  pleasure  in  them  that  do  it.  "  The  world  loveth  its  own."  It  is 
fearful  to  sin ;  more  fearful  to  delight  in  it ;  yet  more  to  defend  it  (Bishop  Hall).  The 
pure  heart  has  no  "fellowship  with  the  unfruitful  works  of  darkness."  We  reveal  or 
betray  ourselves  by  our  sympathies.  The  homely  proverb  says,  "Like  lips,  like 
lettuce."  And  the  important  lesson  arises  here — that  we  should  dwell  on  the  best  and 
brightest  examples,  for  the  sake  of  their  effect  on  our  character;  the  eye  becomes 
sunny  as  it  gazes  at  the  sun. 

V.  The  effect  of  vice  on  the  intelligence.  (Ver.  5.)  It  is  a  most  important 
principle  that  insight  into  intellectual  relations  of  trutli  is  affected  by  the  mood  of  the 
heart.  The  clearest  knowledge  of  the  letter  is  here  of  no  avail.  "  If  any  man  shall  do 
God's  will,  he  shall  know  of  the  doctrine."  The  pure  conscience  conditions  the  bright 
intelligence.  The  understanding  is  darkened  "  because  of  the  blindness  of  men's  heart ; " 
and  these  call  darkness  light,  and  light  darkness.  Many  things  dark  to  reason  are 
simplifii'd  to  knowledge.  The  Divine  mysteries  are  mysteiius  of  love,  and  through 
love  only  may  be  known, — J. 

Vers.  6 — 12. — The  moral  quality  of  life.  Nothing  we  can  touch,  no  relation  we  can 
enter  info  or  observe,  but  has  its  moral  bearina;.  This,  indeed,  is  the  great  lesson,  in 
hundredfold  iteration,  of  this  book. 

I.  Poverty  with  innocence,  wealth  with  perversity.  (Ver.  6.)  Whatever 
be  the  compensations  of  poverty  in  a  lower  point  of  view,  most  men  would  vote  for 
riches  if  they  had  the  opportunity  at  the  price  of  all  its  inconveniences,  and  we  need  to 
be  reminded  that  he  who  would  sell  his  peace  of  conscience  for  wealth  does  but  "gain 
a  loss."  Better  go  to  heaven  in  rags  than  to  hell  in  embroidery.  Better  God  than 
gold ;  better  be  poor  and  live,  than  rich  and  perish. 

II.  A  MAN  IB  known  by  THE  COMPANY  HE  KEEPS.  (Ver.  7.)  The  first  example 
is  tlat  of  the  man  whose  delight  is  in  the  Law,  who  is  in  fellowship  with  the  tiuth,  and 
who  is  therefore  a  companion  "  of  all  them  that  fear  God  and  keep  his  precepts."  The 
second  is  that  of  one  who  keeps  company  with  the  dissipated,  stains  his  name,  and 
brings  dishonour  on  his  family.  In  society  lie  the  greatest  perils  and  the  greatest 
safeguards.  The  Christian  Church  is  tlie  Divine  society  which  aims  at  the  true  and 
holy  ideal  of  living.  As  with  books,  so  with  men;  the  rule  is — ^keep  company  only 
with  the  best. 

III.  Ill-gotten  wealth  dwindles.  (Ver.  8.)  Wealth  is  not  his  who  gets  it,  but 
his  who  enjoys  it.  And  if  gotten  by  ill  means,  it  cannot  be  enjoyed ;  and  "  111  got,  ill 
spent,"  says  the  proverb.    Wealth,  diverted  by  force  or  fraud  from  its  natural  channels. 


OH.  xxvin.  1—28.]  THE  PROVERBS.  6 14 

flows  back  by  a  law  of  economic  gravitation.  A  man  labours  for  himself  with  selflsli- 
ness  and  wickedness,  and  the  harvest  falls  into  better  hands;  "not  inteoding  it  ol 
himself;  but  it  is  so  done  through  God's  secret  providence," 

IV.  Praters  are  vitiated  by  injusticib.  (Ver.  9.)  They  are  tainted  by  a 
horrible  lie.  In  prayer  the  goodness,  the  moral  perfection,  of  God  is  assumed ;  and 
prayer  impiies  that  the  holy  will  ouj:ht  to  be  done.  Yet  how  great  the  contradiction 
between  such  prayers  on  the  lips  and  tlie  heart  bent  upon  defeating  that  will  I  "  .lust 
reason  that  God  shall  refuse  to  hear  him  who  refuses  to  hear  God."  Without  the 
"ceasing  to  do  evil,  and  the  learning  to  do  well,"  sacrifices  are  vain  oblations,  and 
incense  is  an  al)omination  to  God  (Isa.  i.  11 — 15). 

V.  The  seducer  is  self-seddcbd.  (Ver.  10.)  So  the  snare  of  Balaam,  laid  for 
Israel,  became  the  cause  of  his  own  ruin.  If  the  retribution  is  not  visible,  it  is  a  fact 
in  the  soul.  Among  the  ingredients  of  remorse,  none  is  more  bitter  than  the  recollection 
of  having  led  youth  and  innocence  astray.  It  is  a  sin  most  difficult  of  self-rorKiveiiess. 
But  the  righteous  inherit  salvation.  There  is  a  real  sense  in  which  men  should  seek  to 
realize  the  character  of  "just  men  that  need  no  repentance."  There  is  no  salvation  in 
telfishness — none  which  does  not  imply  a  regeneration  of  the  social  consciousness. 

VI.  PovBRTT  and  riches  HAVE  THEIR  COMPENSATION.  (Ver.  11.)  Confidence  in 
riches  begins  in  illusory  self-confidence;  and  there  is  much  to  abet  and  foster  it  in  the 
opinion  of  the  nmltitude;  for,  as  the  old  saying  rimg,  "Rich  men  have  no  faults." 
But  the  poor  man,  endued  with  sense  and  with  religion,  sees  through  these  false 
estimates ;  knows  that  the  rich  feel  misfortunes  which  pass  over  his  own  head ;  that 
they  pay  a  tax  of  constant  care  and  anxiety ;  and  that  it  is  ever  better  to  fare  hard 
with  good  men  than  to  feast  with  bad. 

VII.  "  The  voice  op  the  people  the  voiob  or  God."  (Ver.  12.)  Whatever  be 
the  love  of  greatness  and  splendour,  of  rank  and  position,  in  the  common  mind,  the 
people  cannot  but  rejoice  in  good  rulers,  and  be  depressed  under  evil.  A  gen<Toii3 
acclamation  breaks  .from  the  popular  heart  when  good  men  are  raised  to  honour. 
"  When  Mordecai  went  out  from  the  presence  of  the  king  in  the  king's  royal  apparel, 
.  . .  the  city  of  Shushan  rejoiced  and  was  glad.  The  Jews  had  light,  and  gladness,  and 
joy,  and  honour ;  in  every  province  . ,  ,  a  feast  and  a  good  day  "  (Esth.  viii.  15 — 17). — J. 

Vers.  13,  14. — The  inner  conditions  of  peace  and  of  misery.  I.  The  concealment 
OF  BIN.  (Ver.  13.)  It  is  like  a  worm  in  the  bud,  preying;  upon  the  cheek  and  upon 
the  heart.  The  deepest  way  of  such  concealment  is  when  the  sinner  persuades  himself 
that  "  he  has  no  sin,"  apologizing  to  himself,  giving  a  false  colour  to  his  wrong.  The 
sense  of  a  dualism  in  our  being  unreconciled  will  not  admit  of  peace  and  rest. 

II.  The  confession  and  renunciation  of  sin.  To  admit  the  truth  about  ourselves, 
neither  extenuating  nor  exaggerating  our  sin  and  fault;  to  allow  the  detecting  aud 
discriminating  light  of  God's  judgment  to  fall  clear  and  full  on  the  conscience ; — this  is 
what  confession  requires.  But  it  must  be  completed  by  renunciation;  otherwise  it  is 
ft  mockery.    To  say — 

"  We're  sorry  and  repent, 
And  then  go  on  from  day  to  day, 
Just  as  we  always  went " 

— in  the  words  of  the  child's  hymn — is  mere  sentimentality  and  weakness.  But  never 
»re  these  conditions  fulfilled  without  a  sense  of  the  Divine  pity  striking  into  the  heart. 
God  is  faithful  and  just  to  forgive  our  sins;  and  the  conscience  is  assured  tliat  he  is 
too  just  to  permit  the  sinner  who  has  become  a  sufferer  from  godly  sorrow  to  bf 
tormented  by  remorse  one  moment  longer  than  is  necessary  for  his  healing. 

in.  The  tender  conscience.  (Ver.  14.)  It  is  well  with  him  whose  heart  is  iu 
the  constant  habit  of  reverential  dependence  upon  God.  His  law  for  human  conduct 
env'lops  all  life  from  the  greatest  to  the  minutest  matters.  It  is  the  atmosphere  of 
the  soul  that  we  need  to  keep  pure;  it  is  the  fellowship  with  the  Spirit  who  is  holiness 
that  we  need  most  jealously  to  guard. 

IV,  The  hardening  of  the  heart.  (Ver.  14)  Making  light  of  sin  leads  to  its 
repetition  ;  repetition  indurates  the  conscience.  Disregard  of  the  delicacies  of  the  soul 
leads  surely  to  a  benumbed,  and  presently  to  a  lost,  sensibility.    It  is  better  to  feel  tog 

rBOVERBS.  2   H 


546  THE  PROVERBS.  [oh.  xxvm.  1—28 

keenly  than  not  to  feel  at  all ;  better  the  weak  conscience  than  no  conscience  at  ftlL 
He  who  presumes  upon  the  mercy  of  God  will  have  to  reckon  with  his  justice. — J. 

Vers.  15,  16. — Tlie  wicked  ruler.  I.  The  simile.  (Ver.  15.)  He  is  like  a  fierce 
and  devouring  beast.  No  pity  softens  his  bosom ;  no  justice  regulates  his  conduct. 
Complaint  provokes  further  exactions;  resistance  kindles  him  into  fury.  He  looks 
upon  his  people,  not  as  a  flock  to  be  tended,  but  to  be  preyed  upon.  He  roars  around 
them  like  the  nightly  bear  about  the  fold.    Such  monsters  have  often  appeared  in  history. 

II.  The  boubcb  of  oppression.  It  lies  in  the  ignorance  of  the  oppressor's  heart — 
ignorance  ol  policy,  of  huTnanity,  of  Divine  and  eternal  right.  The  great  generalization, 
"  They  know  not  what  they  do,"  covers,  indeed,  all  kinds  of  sin,  but  does  not  exempt 
from  guilt.  Men  might  know  better;  but,  without  the  practice  of  what  we  know,  our 
light  itself  becomes  darkness. 

III.  The  good  edleb.  (Ver.  16.)  The  trait  that  "he  hates  covetousness "  may 
be  made  general ;  for  false  or  perverted  desire  is  the  real  motive  of  all  such  wickedness. 
"Lust  and  desire  to  have"  gold,  territory,  power,  etc.,  is  selfish  and  cruel,  and  turnjj 
every  man  governed  by  it  into  a  being  more  or  less  resembling  the  non-moral  brute. 
Politics  can  never  be  excluded  from  Christianity;  and  the  immense  effect  for  good  or 
evil  of  the  acts  of  those  in  power  is  a  reason  why  all  good  Christians  should  take  a  close 
interest  in  politics,  and  not  permit  any  rank  or  station  to  be  exempt  from  criticism. — J. 

Vers.  17 — 22. — Judgments  on  transgressors.  I.  The  violent  man.  (Ver.  17.)  His 
doom,  here  as  elsewhere,  is  viewed  as  sudden;  he  hastes  to  Hades — lives  not  out  half 
his  days.  The  truth  is  general,  reflecting  the  intuition  of  the  moral  order.  And  in 
accordance  with  that  order  it  is  that  pity  will  be  turned  away  from  him  that  shows  no 
pity.  This  is  no  argument  for  capital  punishment,  but  it  is  an  argument  for  such  a 
treatment  of  criminals  as  wiU  best  deter  froni  crime. 

n.  Tub  inSecueity  of  evil  ways.  (Ver.  18.)  Integrity  is  alone  safe ;  and  in  one 
or  other  of  his  crooked  ways  (such  may  be  one  meaning  of  the  text)  the  sinner  will 
ultimately  fall.  The  dangerous  feat  is  tried  once  too  often.  Our  interest  is  attracted 
to  "  the  dangerous  edge  of  things,"  and  we  are  astonished  that  men  can  stand  upon  it 
so  often  without  falling.  "We  do  not  see  the  result  of  the  last  and  fatal  attempt ;  or, 
seeing  it,  we  do  not  sui-mise  the  previous  successful  attempts  to  defy  the  law  of  things. 
Scripture  is  right;  but  we  do  not  know  enough  of  events  absolutely  to  verify  its  truths. 

III.  PovEBTY  AS  A  JUDGMENT.  (Ver.  19.)  Here,  again,  we  have  a  general  truth— 
an  abstract  from  the  great  broad  field  of  life's  facts.  On  the  whole,  there  is  no  secret 
■of  abundaoce  but  industry;  nor  of  poverty  but  idleness  and  indulgence  in  pleasure 
and  amusement  as  a  pursuit.  Repose  and  pleasure  are  the  illusions  from  which  the 
stern  voice  of  God,  speaking  through  daily  experience,  is  ever  rousing  us.  Hardly  any 
disease  of  body  or  of  mind,  «ny  social  evil,  is  there  which  may  not  be  traced  to  sell- 
indulgence  and  inertia. 

IV.  Habtb  to  be  rich.  (Ver.  20.)  This  temper  is  contrasted  with  that  of  the 
faithful  man.  There  is  a  different  scale  of  value  in  the  two  cases.  The  good  man 
values  things  by  the  moral  standard,  the  covetous  man  only  by  the  standard  of  gold. 
The  true  way  of  looking  at  wealth  is  as  an  available  means  to  all  ends  of  health, 
wi.-dom,  benevolence.  These  alone  are  rational  ends;  but  they  may  be  lost  sight  of  in 
the  passionate  pursuit  of  the  means.  It  was  a  thought  deeply  inpressed  on  the  ancient 
world  that  over-eagerness  for  riches  mnst  involve  dishonesty.  "-No  one  quickly  grows 
rich,  being  at  the  same  time  a  just  man,"  says  Menander.  "  For  he  who  desires  to 
become  rich  desires  to  become  rich  quickly.  But  what  reverence  for  the  laws  ?  what 
fear  or  shame  is  there  ever  in  the  covetous  man  who  hastes  to  be  rich  ?  "  says  Juvenal. 
To  lessen  our  desires  rather  than  to  increase  our  means  is  the  true  wisdom  of  life— to 
study  to  give  account  of  our  little  rather  than  to  make  our  little  more. 

V.  Respect  of  persons  in  judgment.  (Vers.  21,  22.)  The  vice  springs  from  some 
nieau  source— from  fear,  covetousness,  or  obsequiousness.  Cato  used  to  say  of  Cselius 
the  tribune,  that  he  might  be  hired  for  a  piece  of  bread  to  speak  or  hold  his  peace. 
lo  prefer  interest  to  the  truth,  this  is  the  fiery  temptation  in  one  form  or  other  of  us 
all.  And  the  keeping  back  of  a  part  of  the  truth  may  be  as  injurious  to  others  as  the 
utterance  of  direct  falsehood.    Any  meanness  harboured  in  the  soul  exposes  to  constant 


OH.  xxvin.  1— 28.]  THE  PROVEBUS.  541 

danger.  Timidity  may  fall  into  worse  sins  than  those  it  seeks  to  avoid.  And  in  othei 
ways  extremes  meet.  While  the  haster  to  be  rich  casts  an  evil,  envious  eye  on  the 
property  of  others,  he  is  blind  to  the  menace  of  poverty  from  behind.  In  any  case, 
poverty  of  soul  follows  from  the  constant  drain  of  thought  and  energy  towards  things 
that  "perish  in  the  using."  How  much  need  have  all  to  beware  of  those  passions 
which  are  the  "thorns"  that  spring  up  and  choke  the  good  word  of  Qod  in  the 
heart ! — J. 

Ver.  23. — Faithful  cwmsel,  I.  To  give  it  mat  require  the  highest  moral 
COURAGE.  It  may  be  in  the  teeth  of  the  interest  of  tjie  adviser ;  it  may  turn  a  friend 
into  an  enemy;  it  may  inflict  a  keen  smart.  Nothing  but  the  highest  regard  to  truth 
on  the  one  hand,  to  love  on  the  other,  may  be  sufBcient  to  nerve  for  the  task. 

II.  The  temporary  displeasure  of  a  friend  is  to  be  faced  rather  than 
THAT  HE  SHOULD  SUFFER  LASTING  EVIL.  To  save  a  soul  from  death,  this  is  the  great 
duty  imposed  by  Christian  love.  And  to  that  principle  we  must  be  true,  whether  we 
gain  or  lose  a  brother  to  our  heart. 

III.  Flattery  turns  out  to  be  bitter,  good  counsel  humbly  received  ever 
SWEET  IN  the  end.  The  former,  swelling  our  self-conceit,  blinds  us  to  both  our 
advantage  and  our  duty ;  lures  us  to  folly  and,  perhaps,  to  ruin.  The  latter  opens  our 
eyes  to  ourselves  and  to  our  circumstances,  and  turns  our  foot  from  the  precipice.  We 
have  reason  to  be  thankful  for  the  warning  word  that  has  ^aved  us,  and  to  bless  the 
faiihful  heart  which  dictated  it;  reason  ourselves  to  pray  that  we  may  miss  no  such 
opportunity  of  another's  salvation. — J. 

Vers.  24,  25. — Sins  of  greed.  I.  They  may  lead  to  unnatural  vices — even 
THE  bobbery  OF  PARENTS.  (Ver.  24.)  The  heart  must  be  proloundly  corrupted  that 
can  sacrific<i  filial  affection  on  the  shrine  of  the  base  lust  for  gain.  Theft  is  not  less 
but  more  a  orime  if  committed  against  one's  own  blood. 

II.  They  lead  to  strife.  (Ver.  25.)  They  overcome  the  instinct  for  justice  and 
social  right,  and  the  man  becomes  an  oppressor  and  a  murderer — if  not  in  act,  in  spirit 
and  purpose— of  his  kind.  Wars  and  fightings  come  of  the  "lusts  in  our  members." 
It  is  confidence  in  the  eternal  God — his  gracious  providence  and  goodness,  which  calms 
excessive  desire,  and  fills  the  heart  with  peace  and  content.  And  the  riches  the  soul 
thus  gains  are  surer  and  more  permanent  thau  any  treasures  laid  up  on  earth. — J. 

Ver.  26. — FoUy  and  wisdom  in  the  personal  relation.  I.  The  principle  of  folly 
IS  life  in  and  foe  self  alone.  The  thought  that  is  superior  to  counsel  and 
comparison  with  other  minds ;  the  feeling  which  shuts  out  consideration  and  sympathy ; 
the  will  which  would  act  as  if  it  knew  no  law  but  its  own ; — these  are  manifestations 
of  that  folly  which  is  at  once  immoral  and  irreligious. 

II.  Pkactioal  wisdom  well  compared  to  a  walk.  This  is  the  rising  in  thought 
towards  universal  truth.  It  is  governed  by  the  pulse  of  charity  in  the  soul ;  it  moves 
towards  all  worthy  Divine  and  human  ends.  .In  folly  we  advance  to  perdition,  in 
aiming  at  our  weal,  in  wisdom,  .enouncing  self,  we  enter  blessedness. — J. 

Vers.  27,  28. — The  life  thai  "breeds  perpetual  heiiediction."  I.  The  kindly  and 
GENEROUS  heart.  (Ver.  27.)  Tnis  prompts  the  generous  hand ;  gathers  more  than  it 
sows;  is  not  suffered  to  want  any  good  thing.  It  stands  out  in  bright  colours  and 
winning  aspect  against  the  dark  background  of  the  selfish,  self-concentrated,  hard- 
hearted life.  Let  us  cultivate  the  open  eye  which  drinks  in  the  knowledge  of  all  that 
concerns  our  fellows,  and  the  open  hand  in  harmony  with  it. 

II.  Its  worth  is  heightened  by  wntrast.  (Ver.  28.)  Men  cower,  their  brows 
contract,  their  mien  becomes  depressed,  their  soul  enslaved,  their  manhood  unmaniied. 
beneath  the  proud  man's  oppression  aid  the  wicked's  scorn.  Persecution  drives  tho 
moral  sunshine  out  of  the  world,  and  tends  to  depopulate  its  moral  life.  As  the  increase 
of  goodness  depends  largely  on  sound  social  and  polilical  conditions,  it  must  be  an 
object  of  prayer  and  of  endeavour  wiiu  all  good  men  to  overthrow  tyranny  and 
abolish  fraud,  that  "the  fruits  of  righteousness  may  abound  and  increase  on  every 
hand."— J. 


648  THE  PEOTEEBS.  [oh.  xxvra.  1—28. 


Vers.  1, 13,  25  (latter  part). — The  source  of  disturbance  and  the  tecret  of  security. 
We  hardly  need  the  pen  of  the  wise  man  to  assure  us  that — 

I.  Sin  means  disttjebancb  to  cub  souii.  1.  It  is  had  enough  to  be  unfortunate; 
to  suffer  from  privation  or  loss.  2.  It  is  far  worse  to  be  guilty.  We  soon  accommodate 
ourselves  to  our  misfortunes ;  we  readily  adjust  ourselves  to  our  circumstances,  even 
though  these  may  be  very  narrow.  But  sin  strikes  deep,  and  its  wound  lasts  lonp;. 
Among  other  painful  consequences  it  fills  the  soul  with  a  tormenting  fear.  (1)  Jt 
dreads  the  pursuing  penalty  of  Qod^s  ordaining.  And  it  has  reason  to  do  so,  for  "evil 
pursueth  sinners"  (see  homily  on  ch.  xiii.  21).  In  accordance  with  Divine  Law,  suffer- 
ing, sorrow,  shame,  death,  are  following  in  the  track  of  iniquity,  and,  except  there  be 
merciful  interposition,  will  lay  their  hand  upon  it.  (2)  It  dreads  Ihe  pursuing  penalty 
of  man.  More  often  than  not  sin  is  pursued  by  man,  either  by  public  law  or  by  private 
resentment;  and  he  who  has  wronged  his  neighbour,  either  by  fraud  or  force,  has 
reason  to  expect  arrest  and  punishment.  It  is  well  that  it  should  be  so.  We  have 
come  lately  to  understand  that  it  is  our  wisdom  to  abandon  the  heavy  sentence  which 
was  seldom  inflicted  for  the  lighter  one  which  is  far  more  freely  dispensed.  The  great 
thing  in  administering  justice  is  to  connect  penalty  luith  sin  as  closely  as  possible-  in 
the  mind  of  those  who  are  tempted  to  violate  the  law.  (3)  It  dreads  penalty  when 
there  is  no  punishment  at  all.  "The  wicked  flee  when  no  man  pursueth."  The 
murderer  cannot,  dare  not,  stay  in  the  presence  of  the  body  he  has  slain.  The  thief 
turns  aside  from  the  officer  who  has  no  intention  of  apprehending  him.  He  who  has 
inflicted  the  greatest  wrong  that  one  man  can  do  another  shrinks  from  his  neighbour's 
eye  long  before  his  sin  has  been  suspected.  Sin  fills  the  soul  with  a  harassing,  a 
tormenting,  fear.  The  guilty  heart  imagines  a  hundred  dangers  before  the  hand  of 
judgment  is  outstretched  to  seize,  or  even  its  pursuing  feet  are  on  the  path  of  appre- 
hension. We  reckon  badly  indeed  if  we  only  count  the  actu^il  and  palpable  inflictions 
of  justice  which  evil  pays;  in  that  penalty  must  be  included  all  the  anxieties,  the 
alarms,  the  quakings  and  shiverings  of  the  soul,  the  abject  and  haunting  terrors  which 
agitate  the  soul  before  the  chains  are  on  the  wrist  or  the  prisoner. is  at  the  bar.  3. 
There  are  two  alternatives  open  to  guilt.  (Ver.  13.)  (1)  It  may  try  concealment ;  but 
this  is  a  mistaken  as  well  as  a  wrong  course.  Ifwill  " not  prosper; "  the  time  of  con- 
cealment will  be  one  of  constant  disquietude,  and  it  will  end  in  exposure  and  humilia- 
tion, for  again  and  again  it  is  seen  that  there  is  "nothing  hidden  which  is  not 
revealed."  (2)  It  should  adopt  the  course  of  confession  and  amendment ;  whoso  doei 
this  "  shall  have  mercy  "  of  G.  d,  and  will  very  likely  indeed  have  mercy  of  man  also. 
But  even  if  not,  the  w  ay  of  confession  and  of  penalty  is  less  hard  and  thorny  than  the 
path  of  sin  and  secrecy,  of  cowardice  anil  terror.  It  is  often  true  that  while  to  bear 
punishment  is  tolerable,  the  miserable  effort  to  escape  it  isabsolutely  intolerable. 

II.  EiQHTEOusNESs  MEANS  BEcoBiTT  AND  SEKENiTT.  "  The  righteous  are  bold  as  a 
lion."  To  the  upright  there  are  two  sources  of  rest  and  strength.  1.  2%e  consciousness 
of  integrity.  He  tiiat  knows  and  feels  his  purity,  his  innocency,  has  a  fearless  heart, 
and  shows  a  brave  front  to  the  enemy.  He  does  not  fear  that)  the  shafts  of  falsehood 
will  pierce  his  strong  armour  of  truth  and  equity.  2.  The  favour  of  Qod.  (Ver.  25.) 
He  "  puts  his  trust  iu  the  Lord ; "  he  commits  his  cause  to  the  Righteous  One ;  he 
is  assured  that  God  is  on  his  side,  and  he  "  does  not  fear  what  man  can  do  unto  him." 
"  The  Lord  is  his  salvation ;  whom  should  he  fear  ? "  (see  Ps.  xxvii.  1 — 3 ;  Ixxxiv. 
11,  12).— 0. 

Vers.  4,  5. — The  practice  and  effect  of  sin  and  righteousness.  We  have  a  double 
contrast  here  .  between?  the  practice  of  the  sinner  and  of  the  righteous  man,  and 
between  the  consequence  of  sin  and  of  goodness  upan  the  mind  of  the  guilty  and  of 
the  good. 

I.  The  peacticb  op  sinful  men.  They  "praise  the  wicked;"  they  "bless  the 
covetous  "  (Ps.  X.  3).  1.  It  is  a  fact  that  they  do  so.  We  hear  the  voice  of  ungodli- 
ness lifti'd  up  in  favour  of  what  is  utterly  wrong  in  the  sight  of  God ;  it  is  expressed 
in  the  language  of  the  lips  and  in  every  form  of  literature.  There  is  hardly  an  evil 
thing  perpetrated  by  men  which  does  not  find  its  advocate  in  some  quarter.  2.  It  is 
comprehensible  that  they  uould  do  so.  And  this  for  two  reasons.  The  wicked,  as 
such,  have  an  interest  in  lowering  the  standard  of  public  morals;  the  more  they 


Oft.  XSvni.  1—28.]  THB  PR0T1RB8.  64% 


can  reduce  this,  the  less  will  be  their  own  conilemnation,  and  the  higher  they  may- 
hope  to  move  in  the  society  they  affect.  But  perhaps  the  main  accoant  of  it  is 
found  in — 

II.  The  blindino  influence  of  sin.  Those  who  break  God's  Law  praise  those 
who  are  wicked  and  that  which  is  unworthy,  because  they  "  understand  not  judcmeut " 
(ver.  5).  It  is  the  fearful  and  fatal  effect  of  sin  upon  the  soul  to  pervert  the  moral 
judgment,  to  deprave  the  conscience,  to  make  men  regard  with  a  diminishing  dis- 
appr-va]  the  wnmgness  of  evil  deeds,  until  they  become  absolutely  indifferent  °to  it, 
imtil  they_  positively  approve  the  actions  which  they  once  hated  and  denounced! 
Tlien  rlie  light  that  is  in  them  is  darkness,  and  how  great  and  how  sad  that  darkness 
is  (see  Matt.  v.  23) !  Everything  is  seen  in  a  false  light ;  truth  appears  as  falsehood, 
good  as  evil,  wisdom  as  folly;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  all  those  miserable  delusions 
which  a  sinful  heart  holds,  and  which  are  leading  it  down  to  death,  appear  as  truth, 
and  wrong  and  guilty  actions  appear  as  right,  and  lives  which  are  dismal  failures 
seem  to  be  successes. 

III.  The  function  of  the  kightbous.  Their  duty,  or  one  of  their  duties,  is  to 
"  contend  with  the  wicked."  This  was  the  ofiBoe,  the  service,  of  righteous  Noah,  of 
Lot,  of  Elijah,  of  Daniel,  of  Nehemiah,  of  John  the  Baptist,  of  Paul;  it  has  been  the 
function  of  every  true  and  loyal-hearted  man  placed  in  the  midst  of  those  who  are 
opposinj;  the  will  of  God.  Contention  is  not  the  highest,  as  it  certainly  is  not  the 
most  inviting,  duty  we  have  to  take  in  hand.  But  it  is  often  very  necessary,  and  is 
sometimes  quite  noble  service.  1.  We  may  have  to  contend  with  the  flagrantly  bad, 
to  denounce  violence,  oppression,  injustice,  vice,  profanity,  etc.;  or  with  the  mere 
hypocrite,  who  is  right  in  foi-m  but  wrong  in  heart ;  or  with  those  who  are  half- 
hearted, and  who  are  practically  opposing  the  truth  and  the  Isingdom  of  God.  2.  We 
should  be  very  sure  of  our  ground  before  we  take  up  the  attitude  and  use  the 
weapons  of  hostility.  3.  We  should  oppose  ourselves  to  those  who  are  wrong  in  no 
spirit  of  animosity  against  men,  but  of  hatred  of  all  evil. 

IV.  The  effect  and  bbward  of  righteousness.  "  They  that  seek  the  Lord 
understiind  all  things."  It  is  the  most  blessed  effect  of  obedience  that  it  elevates  the 
doer;  it  puri6es  his  heart,  it  clarifies  his  vision,  it  unlocks  the  door  within  which  are 
rare  treasures  of  immortal  truth,  it  makes  the  soul  to  see  and  to  rejoice  in  that  to  which 
it  had  been  wholly  blind.  It  unveils  the  living  truth  of  God.  It  enables  us  :  1.  To 
know  ourselves  as  God  knows  us.  2.  To  understand  our  life  as  God  intended  us  to 
regard  it.  3.  To  appreciate  the  words  and  to  recognize  the  will  of  the  Divine  Teacher. 
i.  To  know  him  himself,  "  whom  to  know  is  life  eternal." — 0. 

Ver.  8.— (See  homily  on  vers.  20,  22.)— 0. 

Ver.  9. — (See  homily  on  oh.  xv.  8.) — 0. 

Vers.  12,  28.— Hidden  manhood.  The  two  main  truths  here  taught  have  been 
anticipated  by  a  foregoing  proverb,  viz.  the  advantage  to  society  of  promoting  the 
good  ;  and  the  injury  done  by  the  advancement  of  the  wicked  (see  ch.  xi.  10).  But 
there  is  »  truth  suggested  by  the  wise  man's  language  which  dues  not  elsewhere 
appear;  he  says  that  when  the  wicked  rise  "a  man  is  hidden,"  that  "men  hide 
themselves."  The  fact  here  alluded  to  is  clear  enough;  we  have  often  read,  it  haie 
freq-iently  observed,  that  the  best  men  retire  to  seclusion  and  inactivity  when  iniquity 
is  on  the  throne,  when  unprincipled  cleverness  holds  the  reins;  they  will  not  sene 
under  a  sovereign  whom  they  despise,  or  in  circumstances  which  make  office-holding 
a  disgrace,  if  not  a  danger.  But  beyond  and  beneath  this  fact  the  language  is  fitted 
to  suggest  10  us  that  there  is  much  of  hidden  manhood  amongst  us.     We  fin<l  it  in — 

1.  Pbematubb  retirement.  Not  only  under  the  conditions  stated  in  the  text, 
when  the  withdrawal  of  honourable  men  is  necessary  to  the  upright  and  the  high- 
minded,  but  also  under  very  different  conditions.  When  men  are  allured  by  a  desire 
for  quietude  and  ease,  or  when  they  are  disheartened  by  disappointment,  or  are 
disgusted  by  the  slowness  of  their  ascent  to  place  and  power,  or  when  they  under- 
estimate their  capacity  and  their  opportunity,  and  they  therefore  lay  down  the  weapon 
and  leave  the  field.   This  is  a  serious  loss.   Then  "a  man  is  hidden;"  a  man  is  burying 


560  THE  PROVERBS.  oh.  xxviii.  1—2 


the  wisdom  of  maturity,  the  large  result  of  manifold  experience,  the  gathered  fruit  ot 
many  years.  He  is  hiding  in  his  own  home  the  cultured  capacity  he  should  be 
expending  on  the  city,  on  the  country  of  his  birth. 

II.  Undeveloped  facultt.  We  do  not  know  how  often  it  happens  that  men  are 
born  with  great  capacities  in  their  nature,  and  who  live  and  die  without  manifesting 
them  to  the  world.  Tliey  fail  to  receive  the  education  which  would  bring  them  forth, 
or  they  are  confined  within  a  range  so  narrow  that  they  have  no  chance  of  showing 
what  they  could  be  and  do.  They  "  die  with  all  their  music  in  them ; "  they  pass  away, 
unknown,  unproved,  unfelt.  •  That  is  expended  upon  unimportant  trifles  which  might 
have  directed  the  affairs  of  some  great  company,  or  glided  the  activities  of  some 
influential  Church,  or  decided  the  course  of  some  powerful  nation.  A  "  man  is 
hidden,"  and  a  community  is  left  unonriched. 

III.  Undisciplinbo  fobcb.  When  God  gives  to  a  human  spirit  a  strong  power  of 
will,  there  is  an  imperative  necessity  that  it  should  be  wisely  and  rightly  guided  and 
controlled  in  youth.  Faithfully  disciplined,  such  a  one  becomes  a  most  useful  man, 
who  will  contribute  largely  to  the  advancement  and  happiness  of  the  world.  But  if 
that  discipline  be  withheld,  and  the  clever,  wilful  boy  be  allowed  to  grow  up  into 
untrained  and  uncultured  manhood,  there  will  be  a  sad  waste  of  power.  He  will  be 
more  likely  than  not  to  do  harm  rather  than  good  to  his  generation ;  he  may  be  a 
blight  instead  of  a  blessing.  There  is  "  a  man  hidden ; "  one  who  has  it  in  him  to  be 
one  of  the  highest  and  worthiest,  but  who,  as  it  is,  is  lost  or  even  worse  than  lost,  to 
his  contemporaries  and  his  country. 

IV.  Uneescued  wkong.  Even  when  we  see  humanity  at  its  very  worst,  in  its  very 
foulness  and  baseness,  we  do  well  to  feel  that  beneath  the  humiliating  and  pitifiil 
exterior  is  a  hidden  manhood.  It  is  the  noble  work  of  Christian  beneficence  to  get 
down  to  this,  to  lay  its  kind  and  lioly  hand  upon  it,  to  raise  and  to  restore  it,  to  bring 
it  into  the  sunshine  of  truth  and  love,  to  make  it  visible  and  even  beautiful  in  the 
sight  of  God  and  in  the  estimate  of  man. — C. 

Ver.  18. — (See  homily  on  ch.  xi,  3.) — 0. 

Ver.  19. — (See  homily  on  ch.  xxvii.  23.)— 0. 

Vers.  20,  22  (and  ver.  8). —  Wealth  or  faithfulness  f  a  sermon  to  young  men.  What 
shall  the  young  man  set  before  him  as  his  goal  when  he  stands  face  to  face  with  active 
life?  Shall  he  make  up  his  mind  to  be  rich,  or  shall  he  resolve  that,  whatever  his 
circumstances  may  be,  he  will  be  counted  among  those  who  are  faithful  to  their  trust? 
Shall  he  fix  his  mind  upon  and  find  his  heritage  in  a  large  estate  or  in  an  honourable 
and  a  useful  life  ?     Let  such  an  inquirer  consider — 

I.  The  obaye  doubt  about  wealth.  To  have  sufficiency  of  money  for  a  comfort- 
able home,  for  education,  for  the  furtherance  of  the  cause  of  God,  and  for  the  relief  of 
human  want, — this  is  certainly  a  very  desirable  thing.  He  who  is  facing  the  future 
may  honestly  desire  to  attain  it,  and  he  who  has  won  it  may  well  give  God  hearty 
thanks  for  the  goodness  which  has  placed  this  blessing  in  his  power.  But  the  meie 
acquisition  of  wealth,  on  which  so  many  set  their  hearts',  to  which  they  devote  their 
lives;  and  for  which  they  sacrifice  the  best  and  highest  things  of  all,  ensures  nothing  at 
all  of  that  which  is  valuable  to  a  man  who  uses  his  reason  and  cares  for  his  character. 
For  who  can  be  sure:  1.  How  it  will  be  gained.  There  are  temptations  on  every  hand 
to  gain  money  dishonestly  or,  if  not  fraudulently,  by  questionable  means;  by  takin" 
advantage  of  the  weak  and  struggling  in  a  way  which,  if  it  be  not  positively  unjust,  is 
inconsiderate  and  imkind.  Of  those  who  "  make  haste  to  be  rich,"  how  very  large  a 
proportion  fail  to  "  be  innocent "  (ver.  20) !  They  either  deviate  from  the  straight  line 
of  perfect  equity,  or  they  wander  into  ways  of  rank  injustice  and  shameful°wroncr. 
Who  shall  say  whether  the  next  aspirant  will  not  be  counted  in  their  number  ?  And 
what  does  it  profit_^a  man  to  gain  a  fortune  and  to  lose  his  integrity?  2.  ffow  long  it 
will  stay.  He  "  considereth  not  that  poverty  shall  come  upon  "him."  Few  thin  "s  are 
less  certain  than  the  duration  of  wealth.  Who  that  has  reached  middle  life  has  not 
frequently  known  of  those  that  were  supposed  to  be  beyond  the  reach  of  misfortune 
being  suddenly  reduced  or  positively  beggared  (see  ch.  xxiii.  5)?    3.  Sow  much  H 


OH.  xxvm.  1— 28.]  THE  PBOVBBBS.  661 

win  do  /or  its  possessor.  "He  that  hasteth  .  .  .  hath  an  evil  eye;"  so  far  is  he 
from  being  satisfied  with  his  fortune,  and  from  looking  graciously  and  generously  upon 
all  his  neighbours,  rich  and  poor,  that  he  looks  enviously  upon  those  that  are  wealthier 
than  himself,  proudly  upon  those  that  are  less  successful,  and  grudgingly  upon  those 
that  are  poor,  lest  they  should  want  his  aid  and  diminish  his  store.  4.  Whither  it  will 
go.  If  dishonestly  obtained,  it  is  likely  enough  that  wealth  will  soon  meet  with  the 
penalty  it  deserves,  and  pass  to  another  holder.  It  may  go  to  him  that  will  "  pity  the 
poor,"  or  it  may  get  into  the  hands  of  "  the  fool,"  who  will  squander  it  in  some  kind 
of  folly  (Eccles.  ii.  18,  19,  21).  There  is,  then,  an  utter  uncertainty  about  riches.  It 
may  be  that  God  has  not  intended  a  man  to  be  rich,  but  to  be  hajipy  in  a  very  humble 
station  (ch.  xxx.  9) ;  and  a  pertinacious  endeavour  to  secure  what  Q-od  has  not  placed 
within  reach  irntst  end  in  a  wretched  failure  and  a  badly  bruised  spirit.  To  such  as 
these  the  strong  words  of  Paul  are  applicable  (1  Tim.  vi.  9, 10). 

II.  The  oertainty  about  faithfulness.  "A  faithful  man  shall  abound  with 
blessings."  And  there  is  no  room  for  questioning  it.  Let  a  man  be  faithful  to  hia 
convictions ;  let  him  be  to  God,  his  Father  and  his  Saviour,  what  he  knows  in  his 
heart  he  should  be;  let  him  be  true  and  upright  in  all  his  relations  with  his  fellow- 
meij,  and  he  will  be  regulating  his  life  by  a  sovereign  principle  which  will  "  abound 
with  blessings."  It  will :  1.  Build  up  a  strong  and  noble  character.  2:  Establish  an 
honourable  reputation  and  win  the  confidence  of  men.  3.  Secure  as  large  a  measure  of 
peace  and  of  happiness  as  is  the  lot  of  disciplined  humanity.  4.  Dispense  much  good 
of  many  kinds  to  those  around,  both  in  public  and  in  domestic  life.  5.  Lead  down  to 
a  peaceful  end,  and  on  to  a  glorious  future.  What  wise  man  would  endanger  the  loss 
of  these  priceless  blessings  for  the  uncertain  and  transient  good  of  worldly  wealth? — C. 

Ver.  23. — (See  homily  on  oh.  xxvii.  6,  6.) — 0. 

Ver.  24. — Filial  duly.  These  words  may  be  taken  not  only  as  condemnatory  of 
filial  wrong,  but  as  suggestive  of  filial  obligation.    We  look  first  at — 

I.  Thbbe  forms  of  filial  wrong.  1.  OulpaUe  carelessness.  Doing  things  or 
leaving  them  undone,  so  that  the  money  of  parents  (which,  perhaijs,  can  ill  be  spared) 
is  wasted.  2.  Unconscientious  appropriation.  Which  may  ascend  from  picking  out  of 
the  pot  or  taking  from  the  cupboard  up  t»  a  serious  appropriation  of  property.  3. 
Unprincipled  involvement.  Either  in  the  form  of  (1)  contracting  debts  which  (it  may 
be  well  known)  will  have  to  be  paid  out  of  the  father's  purse ;  or,  what  is  still  worse, 
(2)  following  an  evil  course  of  conduct  which  will  discredit  the  family  name  and  rob 
it  of  its  honoured  and  prized  reputation. 

II.  Its  guiltiness  before  God.  They  who  do  such  things  may  justify  them  to 
their  own  minds;  they  may  say  to  themselves,  "It  is  no  transgression;  what  is  our 
parents'  is  our  own ; "  but  this  is  not  the  light  in  which  it  shows  to  Heaven.  It  is  not 
only  the  wise  man,  but  the  Son  of  God,  who  has  affixed  his  solpmn  condemnation  to 
filial  shortcoming  (Matt.  xv.  5).  Undutiful  conduct  toward  parents  is  a  very  heinous 
•vn.  1.  It  is  in  most  distinct  violation  of  the  Divine  command  (Exod.  xi.  12 ;  Deut. 
axvii.  16;  Matt,  xix.  19;  Bph.  vi.  1,  2;  Col.  iii.  20).  2.  It  is  a  wrong  done  to  those 
»ho,  ki  virtue  of  their  relationship,  have  the  strongest  claim  upon  us.  3.  It  is  a  sin 
against  those  who  have  spent  on  us  the  most  patient,  sacrificial  love.  To  rob  them  to 
whom  we  owe  more  than  we  can  owe  any  other  human  being  is  an  aggravated  offence 
indeed.    It  is  well  to  consider — 

III.  The  true  filial  feeling.  A  true  son,  who  realizes  what  is  due  to  his 
parents,  will  not  only  shrink  from  taking  the  advantage  which  his  father's  trustfulness 
places  in  his  power,  but  he  will  consider  how  he  may  make  some  return  for  all  that  he 
has  received  at  his  parents'  hands.  And  he  will  understand  that  this  is  to  be 
rendered  by :  1.  Eesponsive  affection.  2.  Prompt  and  cheerful  obedience.  3.  Beady 
acquiescence  in  those  things  which  are  beyond  his  reach ;  docility  and  submissiveness 
of  spirit.  4.  Practical  willingness  to  share  the  burdens  of  the  home.  Thus  he  will 
lighten  the  labour  and  brighten  the  lives  of  those  who  were  the  first,  and  will  perhaps 
be  thi'  longest,  if  not  the  last,  to  love  him. — 0. 

Vers.  25  (latter  part)  md  26  (former  part). — In  whom  to  trust.    They  who  look 


563 


THE  PE0O)RBS. 


[oh.  XXIX.  1—27. 


forward  to  human  life  from  the  sanguine  standpoint  of  youth  may  see  in  it  liltle  to  b« 
afraid  about;  but  they  who  have  reached  the  latter  end  of  it,  and  look  back  upon  it, 
know  how  much  there  is  in  it  to  give  ground  for  serious  apprehension.  It  is  thoy  who 
are  concerned  for  the  young,  and  who  are  bo  devoutly  solicitous  that  tliese  should  put 
their  trust  in  that  which  will  sustain  them.  There  are  three  principles  which  are 
applicable. 

I.  Self-beliancb  is  better  than  leaning  Opon  othem.  To  be  kept  from  "  the 
evil  which  is  in  the  world  "  by  the  authority,  or  the  counsel,  or  the  entreaty  of  others 
is  quite  unsatisfactory  in  any  but  the  very  young.  These  human  props  will  be  talien 
away,  and  where,  then,  is  our  virtue? 

II.  Moral  principle  is  better  than  right  disposition.  It  is  well  enough  to 
inherit  or  to  imbibe  right  inclinations,  pure  impulses,  honourable  feeling.  But  these 
may  go  down  before  the  force  of  some  one  very  strong  temptation,  or  be  (as  iiuleel 
they  often  are)  worn  down  and  worn  out  by  the  droppings  of  hostile  influences.  1\1  ral 
principle,  well  rooted  in  the  soul,  will  stand  the  rough  wind  and  still  lift  up  its  head  to 
heaven, 

III.  To  TRUST  IN  GrOD  IS  INCOMPAKABLT  WISER  THAN  KBSTINO  in  OUBSELVES.       1.    To 

"  trust  in  our  own  heart "  is  great  folly.  For,  on  the  one  hand,  we  do  not  know  what 
we  may  have  to  encounter.  Possibly  our  life  may  be  comparatively  free  from  evil, 
material  and  moral ;  but  perhaps  it  may  not  be  so.  There  may  he  before  ua  trials  of 
the  utmost  severity,  for  which  the  very  greatest  endurance  will  be  required ;  or  tliere 
may  be  temptations  of  the  severest  kind,  which  will  assail  us  with  tremendous  and 
overwhelming  force ;  or  there  may  he  demanded  of  us  high  duties,  large  services  of 
even  heroic  order,  only  to  be  rendered  by  a  noble  self-abnegation;  or  there  may  await 
us  splendid  opportunities,  to  be  unequal  to  which  would  be  a  lifelong  regret,  to  avail 
ourselves  of  which  would  crown  us  with  joy  and  honour.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  we 
do  know  that,  associated  even  with  moral  principle,  there  is  some  measure  of  human 
weakness.  Every  man  has  his  vulnerable  point ;  and  to  every  man's  strength  of  mind 
and  character  there  is  a  limit  which  is  only  too  easily  reached.  Who  of  us  would  dare 
to  say  that  he,  of  himself,  however  fortified  he  may  be  even  by  sound  convictions  as 
well  as  excellent  inclinations,  is  strong  enough  to  withstand  any  storm  that  may  beat 
against  him,  to  swim  any  current  into  which  he  may  be  cast,  to  rise  to  any  height 
that  he  may  be  called  upon  to  climb  ?  2.  To  trust  in  Ood  is  the  true  wisdom.  For 
(1)  God  is  ahle  to  make  us  stand  (Rom.  xiv.  4).  He  can  make  us  to  know  "  the 
exceeding  greatness  of  his  power  to  usward  who  believe."  We  can  "  do  all  thinsrs  in 
Christ  who  strengtheneth  us."  (2)  He  has  promised  to  sustain  and  to  enable  us,  if  we 
do  put  our  trust  in  him  (Ps.  xxxii.  10  j  cxxv.  11 ;  Isa.  xxvi.  3 ;  xl.  30, 31 ;  2  Tim.  i.  12). 
God  has  given  us  abundant  reason  to  believe  that,  if  we  practically  and  devoutly  trust 
in  him,  he  will  see  us  safely  through  every  evil  we  may  have  to  meet  and  master,  and 
will  guide  us  to  bis  own  home  and  glory. — 0. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXIX. 


This    chapter  reinforces  many   precept 
given  previously. 

Ver.  1.— He  that  bein^  often  reproved 
hardeneth  his  neck;  literally,  a  man  of 
reproofs — one  who  has  had  a  long  experience 
of  rebukes  and  warnings.  Oumpare  "  a  man 
of  sorrows  "  (Isa.  liii.  3).  The  hardening  of 
the  neck  is  a  mi.taphor  derived  from  obsti- 
nate draught  animals  who  will  not  submit  to 
the  yoke  (Deut.  a.  16  ;  Jer.  ii.  20 ;  xxvii.  8). 
Christ  calls  his  yoke  easy,  and  bids  his 
followers  to  bear  it  bravely  (Matt.  li.  29, 
etc.).  The  reproofs  may  arise  from  the 
Holy  Spirit  and  the  conscience,  from  the 


teaching  of  the  pa«t,  or  from  the  counsel  of 
friends.  The  LXX.  (as  some  othtr  Jewish 
interpreters)  takes  the  expression  in  the  text 
aetivtly,  "A  man  who  reproves  (dK^yxav) 
is  better  than  one  of  stiff  neck."  Shall 
suddenly  be  destroyed,  and  that  without 
remedy  (oh.  vi.  15;  xv.  10).  The  incor- 
rigible and  self-deluding  sinners  shall  come 
to  a  fearful  and  sudden  end,  though  relriliu- 
tion  be  delayed  (comp.  Job  xxxiv.  20;  Pd. 
ii.  9;  Jer.  xix.  11).  And  there  is  no  hii|ie 
in  their  end ;  despising  all  correction,  tliey 
can  have  no  possibility  of  restoration.  We 
may  refer,  as  an  illustration,  to  that  t.  rri'^le 
passage  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  (^vi. 
4,  etc.),  and  to  the  fate  of  the  Jews   unto 


ea.  xtix.  1— 2t,] 


tHK  PROVEtlRS. 


$<)3 


the  present  day.    Septimgliit, "  Tor  when  he 
is  burning  sudflonly,  there  iB  no  remecly." 

Vcr.  2. — When  the  righteous  are  in 
authority;  rather,  as  in  ch,  xxviii.  28,  when 
the  righteous  are  increased;  Vulgate,  t'n  multi- 
pliaatione  justorum.  When  sinners  are  put 
away,  and  the  righteous  are  in  the  majority. 
Septuagint,  "when  the  just  are  com- 
mended." When  good  men  give  the'  tone 
to  aooiety  and  conduct  all  affairs  according 
to  their  own  high  standard,  the  people  re- 
joice ;  there  is  general  happiness,  prosperity 
abounds,  and  voices  ring  olieerfully  (ch.  xi. 
10 ;  xxviii.  12).  When  the  wicked  beareth 
rule,  the  people  mourn ;  they  suffer  violence 
and  injustice,  and  have  bitter  cause  for 
complaint  and  lamentation.  This  proverb 
is  not  applicable  to  the  age  of  Solomon. 

Ver.  3. — The  first  hemistich  is  a  variation 
ofch.  X.'  1  (where  see  note).  Keepeth  com- 
pany with  ;  literally,  feedeth,  as  ch.  xxviii. 
7.  Harlots  (see  on  oh.  vi.  26).  Such  vice 
leads  to  the  wasting  of  substance  (Luke  xv. 
13),  and  the  great  sorrow  of  the  parent. 
Beptuagint,  "  Uut  he  that  pastureth  (roi/ial- 
»ei)  harlots  shall  wnste  wealth." 

Ver.  4. — Many  of  the  proverbs  in  this 
chapter  seem  to  suit  the  time  of  Jeroboam  II. 
(see  on  ch.  xxviii.  3).  The  king  by  judgment 
establisheth  the  land.  The  king,  the  foun- 
tain of  justice,  by  his  equitable  government 
brings  his  country  into  a  healthy  and  settled 
condition  (1  Kings  xv.  4 ;  oomp.  ver.  14 ;  eh. 
xvi.  12;  XXV.  5).  In  the  security  of  the 
throne  the  land  and  people  participate.  He 
that  receivath  gifts  overthroweth  it.  The 
expression,  ninnn  »''«  {ith  terumoth),  "man 
of  offerings,"  "  man  of  gifts,"  is  ambiguous : 
it  may  mean  "  the  taker  of  bribes,"  tlie  un- 
righteous ruler  who  sells  justice  (ch.  xv.  27), 
or  it  may  signify  "  the  imposer  of  taxes " 
(Ezek.  xlv.  13,  etc.)  or  forced  benevo- 
lences. Aquila  and  Theodotion  have  aniip 
cufyaipeiiiTuv,  "man  of  heave  offerings,"  and 
Wordsworth  regards  him  as  a  man  who 
claims  and  receives  gifts,  as  if  he  were  a 
deity  on  earth.  Whichever  sense  we  give 
to  the  phraae,  the  contrast  lies  between  the 
inflexibly  upright  ruler  and  the  iniquitous 
or  extortionate  prince.  The  Septuagint 
gives  TropcJyo/ioi," a  transgressor;"  Vulgate, 
vir  avarue. 

Ver.  5.— A  man  that  flattereth  his  neigh- 
bour ;  says  only  wliat  is  agreeable,  applauds 
his  woids  and  actions  indiscriminately,  and 
makes  him  think  too  well  of  himself,  he 
is  no  true  friend  (see  oh.  xxviii.  28). 
Spreadeth  a  net  for  his  feet ;  his  steps  (oh. 
xxvi.  28;  Job  xviii.  8,  etc.).  If  a  man 
listens  to  such  flattering  words,  and  is  in- 
fluenced by  them,  he  works  his  own  ruin ; 
self-deceived,  he  knows  not  his  real  condition, 
and  accordingly  makes  grievous  disaster  of 
his  life.    The  LXX.  gives  a  different  turn 


to  the  sentence,  "  He  tlint  prepareth  a  net 
before  his  friend  entangles  liis  own  feet 
therein  "  (comp.  ch.  xxvi.  27 ;  xxviii.  10). 

Ver.  6. — In  the  transgression  of  an  evil 
man  there  is  a  snare  (ch.  xil.  13).  The 
snare  is  that  the  sinner  is  caught  and  held 
fast  by  his  sin,  and  cannot  escape,  as  he 
knows  nothing  of  repentance,  and  ha^  no 
will  to  cast  off  evil  habits  (ch.  xxiv.  16). 
(For  "snare,"  comp.  ch.  xviii.  7;  xx.  25; 
xxii.  25.)  Septuagint,  "For  a  man  sinning 
there  lies  a  great  snare."  But  the  righteous 
doth  sing  and  rejoice.  The  antithesis  i? 
not  very  obvious.  It  may  mean  that  the 
good  man  has  a  conscience  at  peace,  is  fr.  e 
from  the  snare  of  sin,  and  tlierefoie  is  glad ; 
or  that,  in  spite  of  a  momentary  fill,  though 
he  has  transgressed,  he  knows  that  Gncl 
forgives  him  on  his  repentance,  and  this 
makes  him  happy ;  or,  generally  that  ho 
rejoices  in  the  happy  life  which  his  viitiie 
procures  for  him  here  and  hereafter  (]\Iatt. 
v.  12).  In  the  original  "sing"  repre  on  s 
the  sudden  outburst  of  joy,  "  rrjoice  "  the 
continued  state  of  happiness.  "Therighteous 
shall  be  in  joy  and  gladness  («V  x"/'?  "»' 
in  evcfipo(r6yri),"  Septuagint. 

Ver.  7. — Considereth  the  cause;  recognizes 
the  claims,  and,  as  the  word  din  implies, 
supports  them  at  the  seat  of  juilginent 
(comp.  Job  xxix.  12,16;  Ps.  Ixxxii.  3,  etc.). 
Septuagint,  "A  righteous  man  knows  hnw 
to  judge  for  the  poor."  The  wicked  re- 
gardeth  not  to  know  it.  This  is  a  clumsy 
translation;  it  means,  pays  no  attention  so  as 
to  become  fully  acquainted  with  its  deiails 
and  bearings.  But  the  woids  signify  rather, 
as  in  the  Revised  Version  margin,  "  untler- 
standeth  not  knowledge "  (ch.  xix.  25 ; 
xxviii.  5),  has  no  knowledge  which  would 
lead  him  to  enter  into  the  poor  man's  case, 
and  to  sympathize  with  him  in  his  distruis  ; 
the  claims  of  the  feeble  to  recognition  and 
relief  at  his  hands  are  utterly  unknown  ami 
disregarded.  He  can  daily  look  on  Lazarus 
at  his  gate,  and  find  no  call  for  his  pity  and 
charity;  he  can  see  the  wounded  travelhr 
in  the" road,  and  pass  by  on  the  other  side. 
The  LXX.  offers  two  translations  of  tlie 
latter  clause,  reading  the  second  lime  it/-] 
instead  of  j;»"i,  and  thereby  not  iiupio\ing 
the  sense:  "But  the  ungodly  uuihrstanil- 
eth  not  knowledge,  and  the  poor  uaat  ii.ilh 
not  an  understanding  mind." 

Ver.  8.— Scornful  men  bring  a  city  into  a 
snare,  "Men  of  derision  "  (Isa.  xxviii.  14) 
are  those  who  despise  and  scff  at  all  tilings 
great  and  high,  whether  sacred  or  profane 
(see  on  ch.  i.  22).  These  are  the  persons 
who  raise  rebellion  in  a  country  ami  excite 
opposition  to  constituted  authority.  Tlio 
rendering  of  VTb;,  "bring  into  a  snare," 
as  in  the  Authorized  Versioa,  is  supported 
by  some  of  tlje  Jewish  versions  and  com- 


6S4 


THE  PROVERB& 


[oh.  XXIX.  1—27. 


mentaries;  but  the  more  correct  rendering 
is  "blow  into  a  blaze,  inflame,"  as  the 
Revised  Version  (comp.  Job  xx.  26;  Ezek. 
xxii.  20,  21).  These  Bcorners  excite  the 
populace  to  acts  of  fury,  when  all  respect 
for  piety  and  virtue  is  lost ;  they  fan  the 
passions  of  the  fickle  people,  and  lead  them 
to  civil  discord  and  dangerous  excesses 
(comp.  oh.  xxii.  10).  Septuagint,  "  Lawless 
men  burn  up  a  city."  But  wise  men  turn 
away  wrath;  by  their  prudent  counsels 
allay  the  angry  passions  roused  by  those 
evil  men  (see  ver.  11  and  ch.  xv.  1, 18). 

Ver.  9. — If  a  wise  man  oontendeth  with 
a  foolish  man — if  a  wise  man  has  a  contro- 
Torsy,  either  legal  or  social,  with  a  wicked 
fool— whether  he  rage  (is angry)  or  laugh, 
there  is  no  rest.  It  is  a  question  whether 
the  wise  mau  or  the  fool  is  the  subject  of 
this  clause.  St.  Jerome  makes  the  former 
the  subject,  Vir  sapient,  ei  cum  stulto  oon- 
tenderit,  live  irasoatur,  live  rideat,  non 
invmiet  Tfquiem.  It  matters  not  how  the 
wise  man  treats  the  fool ;  he  may  be  stern 
and  angry,  he  may  be  gentle  and  good- 
tempeied,  yet  the  fool  will  be  none  the 
better,  will  not  be  reformed,  will  not  cease 
from  his  folly,  will  carry  on  his  cavilling 
Oduteution.  Hitzig,  Delitzsoh,  and  others, 
deeming  that  the  rage  and  the  laughter  are 
not  becoming  to  the  character  of  the  wise 
man,  take  the  fool  as  the  subject;  so  that 
the  sense  is,  that  after  all  has  been  said, 
the  fool  only  falls  into  a  passion  or  laughs 
at  the  matter,  argument  is  wasted  upon  him, 
and  the  controversy  is  never  settled.  This 
seems  to  be  the  best  interpretation,  and  is 
somewhat  supported  by  the  Septuagint, 
"  A  wise  man  shall  judge  the  nations,  but 
a  worthless  man,  being  angry,  laughs  and 
fears  not  [^Karaye\aTat  Ktd  ov  KarairT'tiffaei, 
which  may  also  mean,  'is  derided  and 
terrifies  no  one']."  Wordsworth  notes  that 
the  irreligious  fool  is  won  neither  by  the 
austere  preaching  of  John  the  Baptist  nor 
by  the  mild  teaching  of  Christ,  but  rejects 
both  (Matt.  xi.  16—19). 

Ver.  10.— The  bloodthirsty  hate  the  up- 
right; him  that  it  perfect,  Revised  Version; 
S<riov,  Septuagint.  His  life  is  a  tacit  re- 
proach to  men  of  blood,  robbers,  murderers, 
and  such-like  sinners,  as  is  finely  expressed 
in  the  Book  of  Wisdom  ii.  12,  etc.  (comp. 
2  Cor.  vi.  14).  But  the  just  seek  his  soul. 
The  explanation  of  this  hemistich  is  doubt- 
ful. The  following  interpretations  have  been 
offered :  (1)  The  just  seek  the  soul  of  the 
upright  to  deliver  him  from  death  temporal 
and  spiritual  (comp.  ch,  xii.  6;  Ps.  oxlii. 
4).  (2)  The  just  seek  the  murderer's  life, 
take  vengeance  on  him  (comp.  Ps.  Ixiil.  9, 
10).  (3)  "As  for  the  just,  they  (the  mur- 
derers) attempt  his  life,"  where  the  change 
of  subject,  though  b^  no  means  uup aralleled, 


is  awkward  (comp.  Ps.  xixvii.  14).    The 

second  explanation  makes  the  righteous  the 
executioners  of  vengeance  on  the  delin- 
quents, which  does  not  seem  to  be  the  idea 
intended,  and  there  is  no  confirmation  of  it 
in  our  book.  The  interpretation  first  given 
has  against  it  the  fact  that  the  phrase,  "  to 
seek  the  eoul,"  is  used  of  attempts  against 
the  life,  not  of  preserving  it.  But  this  is 
not  fatal;  and  the  above  seems  to  be  the 
most  likely  explanation  offered,  and  gives 
a  good  antithesis.  Men  of  blood  hate  a 
virtuous  man,  and  try  to  destroy  him ;  the 
righteous  love  him,  and  do  their  utmost  to 
defend  and  keep  him  safe.  If  this  interpre- 
tation is  rejected,  the  third  explanation  is 
allowable,  the  casus  pendens — "  the  just, 
they  seek  his  life  " — ^may  be  compared  with 
Gen.  xxvi.  15;  Deut.  ii.  23.  Septuagint, 
"But  the  upright  will  seek  (eKfiiTVo""") 
his  life." 

Ver.  11. — A.  fool  nttereth  all  his  mind; 
his  spirit;  "inn,  i.e.  "his  anger;"  eu/iSv, 
Septuagint  (comp.  ch.  xvi.  32).  The  word- 
ing of  the  second  hemistich  confirms  this 
rendering.  A  fool  pours  out  his  v/rath, 
restrained  by  no  consideration.  It  is  a 
wise  maxim  that  says,  "Command  your 
temper,  lest  it  command  you  ; "  and  again, 
"When  passion  enters  in  at  the  foregale, 
wisdom  goes  out  at  the  postern."  So  we 
have  the  word  attributed  to  EvenusParius— 

noWixis  avSpiimiiy  ipyij  viav  4(€KdKv\fie 
KpuirT6iievov,  iiaylat  irouAfi  x^P^'^'''^P'>i'- 

"Wrath  often  hath  revealed  man's  hidden 
mind, 
Than  madness  more  pernicioui." 

A  wise  man  keepeth  it  in  till  afterwards. 
This  clause  is  capable  of  more  thm  one 
explanation.  The  Authorized  Version  says 
that  the  wise  man  restrains  his  own  anger 
till  he  can  give  it  proper  vent.  The  term 
■iin^3  occurs  nowhere  else,  and  is  rendered 
"at  "last,"  "finaUy,"  and  by  Delitzsch, 
"  within,"  ».8.  in  his  heart.  The  verb 
rendered  "keepeth  in"  (fi7ia6ao?0  is  rather 
"  to  calm,"  "to  hush,"  as  in  Ps.  Ixv.  7 ;  Ixxxix. 
10, "  Which  stilleth  the  noise  of  the  seas."  So 
we  have  the  meaning :  The  wise  man  calms 
the  anger  within  liim;  according  to  the  pro- 
verb, Irie  dilatio,  mentis  pacatio.  Or  the 
anger  calmed  may  be  that  of  the  fool :  The 
wise  man  appeases  it  after  it  has  been  exhi- 
bited; he  knows  how  to  apply  soothing 
remedies  to  the  angry  man,  and  in  the  end 
renders  him  calm  and  amenable  to  reason. 
This  seems  the  most  suitable  explanation. 
Septuagint,  "A  wise  man  husbands  it 
(ranieieTtti)  in  part." 

Ver.  12. — All  his  servants  are  wicked. 
The  ruler  is  willing  to  be  deceived,  and 
does  nut  care  to  hear  the  truth,  ao  his 


OH.  xxrs.  1 — ^27.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


S5> 


servants  flatter  and  lie  to  him,  and  the 
whole  atmosphere  is  charged  with  unreality 
and  deceit.  QualU  rex,  talis  grex.  Ecclus. 
x.'2,  "As  the  judge  of  the  people  is  him- 
self, so  are  his  offloers ;  and  what  manner 
of  man  the  ruler  of  the  city  is,  such  are  all 
that  dwell  therein."  Glaudian, '  IV.  Cons. 
Hon.,'  299— 

"  Componitur  orbis 
Regis   ad    exemplum:    nee   sio   inflectere 

sensus 
Humanos  edicta  valent,  ut  vita  regentis. 
Mobile    mutator     semper    oum     prinoipe 

vulgus." 

"  By  the  king's  precedent 
The  world  is  ordered ;  and  men's  minds  are 

moved 
Less  by  stem  edicts  than  their  ruler's  life. 
The   fickle  crowd    aye  by  the    prince  is 

swayed." 

Cicero,  'De  Leg.,'  iii.  13,  "TJt  euim  oupidi- 
tatibus  principum  et  vitiis  infioi  solet  tota 
civitas,  sic  emendarl  et  coiTigi  continentia." 
And  ibid.,  14,  "Quo  pernioiosius  de  re- 
publica  merentur  vitiosi  principes,  quod 
aon  solum  vitia  concipiunt  ipsi,  sed  ea 
infundunt  in  civitatem;  neque  solum  obsunt, 
ipsi  quod  oorrumpuntur,  Bed  etiam  quod 
corrumpunt,  plusque  exemplo,  quam  peccato, 
nocent." 

Ver.  13.— A  variation  of  ch.  xxii.  2.  The 
deceitful  man.  This  makes  no  contrast 
with  the  poor.  "  The  nian  of  oppressions" 
(iekakim)  is  the  usurer,  from  whom  the 
poor  suffer  most  wreng  and  cruelty.  The 
needy  man  and  the  rich  lender  are  thrown 
together  in  social  life.  St.  Jerome  calls 
them  pauper  et  creditor.  Septuagint, 
"  When  the  creditor  and  debtor  meet 
together,  the  Lord  maketh  inspection  (ivi- 
ffKoirV)  of  I'o^'"'"  "^^^  ^°^^  Ughteneth 
both  their  eyek.  Both  rich  and  poor,  the 
oppressor  and  the  oppressed,  owe  their 
light  and  life  to  God ;  he  makes  the  sun  to 
rise  on  the  evil  and  on  the  good ;  he  sends 
rain  on  the  just  and  the  unjust;  he  is  the 
Father,  Euler,  and  Judge  of  all.  Here  is 
comfort  for  the  poor,  that  he  has  a  tender 
Father  who  watches  over  him;  here  is 
a  warning  for  the  rich,  that  he  will  have 
to  give  an  account  of  his  stewardship.  The 
former  proverb  spoke  only  generally  of 
God  being  the  Maker  of  both  (comp.  Ps. 
xiii .  3 ;  Ecoles.  xi.  7).  _ 

Ver.  14.— The  king  that  faithfully  judgetn 
the  poor  (comp.  ch.  xvi.  12;  xx.  28;  xxv. 
5).  Inflexible  fidelity  to  duty  is  intended— 
that  perfect  impartiality,  which  dispenses 
justice  alike  to  rich  and  poor,  uninfluenced 
by  personal  or  social  considerations.  His 
throne  shall  be  established  for  ever.  Being 
founded  on  righteousness,  it  shall  pass  on 
to   his  desoendants  for  many  generations 


(comp.  Jer.  xxii.  3,  etc.).  The  LXX., 
pointing  differently,  have,  "Hia  throne 
shall  be  established  for  a  testimony " 
Qahed,  instead  of  lahad), 

Ver.  15. — The  rod  and  reproof  give  wisdom 
to  the  young.  The  former  denotes  bodily 
correction,  what  we  call  corporal  punish- 
ment; the  latter,  discipline  in  words,  re- 
buke administered  when  any  moral  fault 
is  noticed.  The  idea  here  enunciated  is 
very  common  in  this  book  (see  ch.  x.  1,  13; 
xiii.  24 ;  xxiii.  13).  But  a  child  left  to  him- 
self hringeth  his  mother  to  shame.  The  verb 
translated  "left"  (n^^,  sMlacli)  is  used  in 
Job  xxxix.  5  of  the  wild  ass  left  to  wander 
free  where  it  wills.  A  child  allowed  to  do 
as  he  likes,  undisciplined — spoiled,  as  we 
call  it — is  a  shame  to  his  mother,  whose 
weakness  has  led  to  this  want  of  restrainc, 
fond  love  degenerating  into  over-indulgeueo 
(comp.  ch.  xvii.  21 ;  xxviii.  7).  Septuagint, 
"A  son  that  goeth  astray  shameth  his 
parents." 

Ver.  16. — ^When  the  wicked  are  multi- 
plied, transgression  inoreaseth.  The  verb 
ralah  is  used  in  both  parts  of  the  sentence, 
and  should  have  been  so  translated.  When 
the  wicked  increase,  transgression  increaseth. 
Septuagint, "  When  the  godless  are  liiany, 
sins  become  many."  Where  the  wicked 
get  the  upper  hand  in  a  community,  their 
evil  example  is  copied,  and  a  lowering  of 
moral  tone  and  a  general  laxity  in  conduct 
prevail  (see  on  ver.  12 ;  comp.  also  ver.  2 ; 
ch.  xxviii.  12,  28).  But  the  righteous  shall 
see  their  fall.  Eetribution  shall  overtake 
them,  and  God's  justice  shall  be  vindicated. 
This  the  righteous  shall  witness,  and  shall 
rejoice  in  the  vengeance,  when  his  eye  shall 
see  its  desire  upon  his  enemies  (Ps.  liv.  7 ; 
see  also  Ps.  xxxvii.  34;  Ixxiii.  17,  etc.). 
Septuagint  (punctuating  differently)," But 
when  they  (the  godless)  fall,  the  righteous 
become  fearful  (jcari^ofioC) ; "  they  are  awe- 
struck at  the  sudden  and  grievous  fall  of 
sinners. 

Ver.  17. — Correct  thy  son,  and  he  shall 
give  thee  rest  (ch.  xix.  18);  Septuagint, 
mairaiffei  ffe.  He  will  be  no  longer  a 
source  of  care  and  disquiet  to  you.  Delight 
'  (maadanim) ;  properly,  dainty  dishes,  and 
then  any  great  and  special  pleasure  (oorap. 
Ecclus.  XXX.  1 — 12).  Septuagint,  "  He 
shall  give  ornament  (jciaiiov)  to  thy  soul." 
This  verse  and  the  following  are  presented 
by  the  Greek  version  in  a  mutilated  form 
after  ch.  xxviii.  17  (where  see  note). 

Ver.  18.— Where  there  is  no  vision,  the 
people  perish  |  rather,  cast  off  restraint,  be- 
come ungovernable,  cannot  be  reined  in 
(Exod.  xxxii.  22,  25).  «  Vision  "  (chaion), 
prophecy  in  its  widest  sense,  denotes  the 
revelation  of  God's  will  made  throu{:;h 
agents,  which  directed  the  course  of  events, 


8M 


THE  PROVERBS. 


foH.  XXIX.  1— 2t. 


and  was  intenied  to  be  oo-ordinate  with  the 
supreme  secular  authority.  The  prophets 
were  tlie  Instructors  of  tlie  people  in  Divine 
things,  standing  witnesses  of  the  truth  and 
power  of  religion,  teaching  a  higher  than 
mere  liuman  morality.  The  fatal  effect  of 
the  absence  of  such  revelation  of  God's  will 
is  stated  to  be  confusion,  disorder,  and  re- 
bellion; the  people,  uncontrolled,  fall  into 
grievous  excesses,  which  nothing  but  high 
principles  can  restrain.  We  note  the  licence 
of  Eli's  time,  whei»  tliere  was  no  open  vision 
(1  Sara,  iii.) ;  in  Asa's  days,  when  Israel  had 
long  been  without  a,  teaching  priest  (2 
Cliron.  XV.  3);  and  when  the  impious  Ahaz 
"  made  Judah  naked  "  (2  Chron.  xiviii.  19) ; 
or  when  the  people  were  destroyed  by  reason 
of  lack  of  knowledge  of  Divine  things  (Hos. 
iv.  6).  Thus  the  importance  of  prophecy  in 
regulating  the  life  and  religion  of  the  people 
is  fully  acknowledged  by  the  writer,  in 
whose  time,  doubtless,  the  proplietioal  ofBce 
was  in  full  exercise :  but  this  seems  to  be 
the  only  passage  in  the  book  where  such 
teaching  is  directly  mentioned ;  the  in- 
structors and  preceptors  elsewhere  intro- 
duced as  disseminating  the  principles  of  the 
ehochmah  being  parents,  or  tutors,  or  pro- 
fessors, not  inspired  prophets.  But  he  that 
keepeth  the  Law,  happy  is  he !  "  The  Law  " 
(tordh)  is  not  merely  the  written  Mosaic 
Law,  but  the  announcement  of  God's  will 
by  the  mouth  of  his  representatives ;  and 
the  thought  is,  not  the  blessedness  of  those 
who  in  a  time  of  anarchy  and  Irreligion  keep 
to  the  authorized  enactments  of  the  Sinaitio 
legislation,  but  a  contrast  between  the  law- 
lessness and  ruin  of  a  people  uninfluenced 
by  religious  guidance,  and  the  happy  state 
of  those  who  obey  alike  the  voice  of  God, 
whether  conveyed  in  written  statutes  or 
by  the  teaching  of  living  prophets.  (For 
"  happy  Is  he,"  comp.  ch.  xiv.  21 ;  xvi.  20.) 
Septuagint,  "There  shall  be  no  interpreter 
Givyririis^  to  a  sinful  nation,  but  he  that 
keepeth  the  Law  is  most  blessed." 

Ver.  19. — A  servant  will  not  be  corrected 
by  words.  Mere  words  will  not  suffice  to 
teach  a  slave,  any  more  than  a  chiUI,  true, 
practical  wisdom.  He  needs  severer  mea- 
sures, even  the  correction  of  personal  disci- 
pline. Septuagint,  "By  words  a  stubborn 
(rr/£\7)plij)  slave  will  not  be  instructed." 
The  next  cliiuse  gives  an  explanation  of 
Ihis  necessity.  For  though  he  understand 
he  will  not  answer.  Tlie  answer  is  not 
merely  the -verbal  response  to  a  command, 
«8,  "  I  go,  sir;  "  but  it  implies  obedience  in 
action.  The  reluctant  slave  thoroughly  un- 
derstands the  order  given,  but  he  pays  no 
heed  to  it,  will  not  trouble  himself  to  exe- 
cute it,  and  therefore  must  meet  with  stem 
treatment  (comp.  ver.  15 ;  oh.  xxiii.  13,  etc. ; 
xxri.  3).    "  That  servant  which  knew  his 


Lord's  will,  und  made  not  ready,  nor  did 
according  to  his  will,  shall  be  beaten  with 
many  stiipes"  (Luke  xii.  47).  Septuagint, 
"  For  even  if  he  understand,  ha  will  not 
obey." 

Ver.  20. — Seestthon  a  man  that  is  hasty  in 
hia  words?  (comp.  ch.  xxvi.  12);  Vulgate, 
velonem  ad  loquendum ;  Septuagint,  raxhv  Iv 
\iyot!.  Jas.  i.  19, "  Let  every  man  be  swift  to 
hear,  slow  to  speak."  "  A  talkative  (■yAoiir- 
(TciSns)  man  is  dangerous  in  his  city ;  and  he 
that  is  rash  (irpoirer-^i)  in  his  words  shall  be 
hated"  (Ecolus.  ix.  18).  We  might  also 
translate,  "  hasty  in  his  matters,"  "  hasty  in 
business,"  and  the  gnome  would  be  equally 
true  (see  note  on  ch.  xii.  2).  There  is  more 
hope  of  a  fool  than  of  him.  The  dull,  stupid 
man  (kesil)  may  be  instructed  and  guided 
and  made  to  listen  to  reason  ;  the  hasty  and 
ill-advised  speaker  consults  no  one,  takes 
no  thought  before  he  speaks,  nor  reUects  on 
the  effect  of  his  words;  such  a  man  it  is 
almost  impossible  to  reform  (see  Jas.  iii.  5, 
etc.).  "Every  one  that  speaks,"  says  St. 
Gregory,  "  while  he  waits  for  his  hearer's 
sentence  upon  his  words,  is  as  it  were  sub- 
jected to  the  judgment  of  him  by  whom  he 
is  heard.  Accordingly,  he  that  fears  to  be 
condemned  in  respect  of  his  words  ought 
first  to  put  to  the  test  that  which  he  de- 
livers— that  there  may  be  a  hind  of  impartial 
and  sober  umpire  sitting  between  the  heart 
and  tongue,  weighing  with  exactness  whether 
the  heart  presents  right  words,  which  the 
tongue  taking  up  with  advantage  may  bring 
forward  for  the  I  learer's  j udgment "  ('  Moral., ' 
viii.  5,  Oxford  transl.). 

Ver.  21. — He  that  delicately  bringeth  up 
his  servant  from  a  child.  The  verb  panak, 
which  is  not  found  elsewhere  in  the  O.d 
Testament,  is  rightly  here  translated  as  in 
the  Vulgate,  qui  delicate  nutrit.  It  refers 
to  the  spoiling  a  person  by  over-refinement, 
luxury,  and  pampering — a  treatment  pecu- 
liarly unsuitable  in  the  case  of  a  bond- 
servant, and  one  which  makes  such  forgetful 
of  his  dependent  position.  Septuagint, 
"He  that  liveth  wantonly  (KoTaffTraToAij) 
from  childhood  shall  br  a  servant."  Shall 
have  him  become  his  son  at  the  length ;  i.e. 
at  length,  like  "  at  the  last,"  equivalent  to 
"at  last"  (oh.  v.  11).  The  word  rendered 
"  son  "  (]'i3Q,  manon)  is  of  doubtful  meaning, 
and  has  been  variously  understood  or  mis- 
understood by  interpreters.  Septuagint, 
"  And  in  the  end  shall  have  pain  {oSuvri- 
fl^ireTai)  over  himself;"  Symmaeiras,  "shall 
have  murmuring  (to-Ta,  7077110^/11(5);"  Vul- 
gate, Postea  sentiet  eum  contumacem.  Ewald 
translates  "  ungrateful ;  "  Uelitzseh,  ''  plaig 
of  increase,"  i.e.  a  household  of  pampiTcd 
scapegraces;  but  one  does  not  see  how  the 
disaster  can  be  called  a  place  or  a  house. 
It  seems  safest  in  tliis  uncertainty  to  adopi 


OH.  XXIX,  1 — 27.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


65'i 


the  Jewish  interpretation  of  "  progeny  : " 
"he  will  be  as  a  son."  The  pampered 
servant  will  end  by  claiming  the  privileges 
of  a  son,  and  perhaps  ousting  the  legitimate 
children  from  tiieii-  inheritance  (comp,  ch. 
xvii.  2 ;  and  the  case  of  Ziba  and  Mepliibo- 
Bheth,  2  Sam.  xvi.  4).  "Fodder,  a  stick, 
»nd  burdens  are  for  the  ass;  and  bread,  cor- 
rection, and  work  for  a  seivant.  If  thou  set 
thy  servant  to  labour,  thou  shalt  find  rest ; 
but  if  thou  let  him  go  idle,  he  will  seek 
liberty"  (Ecdus.  xxxiii.  24,  etc.).  Spiritual 
writers  have  applied  this  proverb  to  the 
pampering  of  the  flesh,  which  ought  to  be 
under  the  control  of  its  master,  the  spirit, 
but  which,  if  gratified  and  unrestrained, 
gets  the  upper  hand,  and,  like  a  spoiled 
servant,  dictates  to  its  lord. 

Ver.  22. — An  angry  man  stirreth  up  strife. 
This  is  a  variation  of  oh.  xv.  18  and  ch. 
ixriii.  25  (which  see).  A  furious  man 
aboundeth  in  transgression.  "A  furious 
iiian  "  is  a  passionate  person,  who  gives  way 
to  vioUnt  fits  of  anger  (ch.  xxii.  24).  Such 
a  ma  L  both  makes  enemies  by  his  ooiulurt 
and  falls  into  manifold  excesses  of  word  and 
action  while  under  the  influence  of  his 
wrath.  "The  wrath  of  man  worketh  not 
the  righteousness  of  God  "  (Jas.  i.  20).  The 
Greek  gnome  says — 

'OfjyJ)  Si  xoWia  Spfy  h/ayx&Cei  Ktutd. 
And  again — 

n6w'  iffriv  hjrpis  ^|  iita,  V-Voi;  itaKii. 

"  Unchastened  anger  lead*    .  many  ills." 

Septuagint,  "  A  passionate  man  diggeth  up 
siu  "—a  forcible  expressim,  which  is  not 
unusual  in  reference  to  quarrels. 

Ver.  23.— A  man's  pride  shall  bring  him 
low.  The  same  thought  is  found  in  ch.  xv. 
33;  xvi.  18;  xxv.  6,  etc.;  Luke  xiv.  11. 
Honour  shaU  uphold  the  humble  in  spirit ; 
belter,  as  the  Revised  Version,  lie  that  is 
of  a  Jowly  spirit  shall  obtain  honour  (comp. 
fh.  xi.  16;  fia.  Ivii.  15).  The  humble  man 
does  not  seek  honour,  but  by  his  life  and 
action  unconsciously  attains  it  (comp.  Job 
xxii.  29).  Septuagint,  "  Haughtiness  brings 
a  man  low,  but  the  lowly-minded  the  Lord 
upholdeth  with  glory." 

Ver.  24. — Whoso  is  partner  with  a  thief 
hateth  his  own  soul.  The  accomplice  of  a 
thief  puts  his  own  safety  in  danger.  This 
i.s  explained  by  what  follows:  He  heareth 
cursing,  and  bewrayeth  it  not;  better,  he 
heareth  the  adjuration,  and  teiJeth  not.  This 
refers  to  the  course  of  proceeding  defined 
by  Lev.  v.  1,  and  intimated  in  J  udg.  xvii. 
2.  When  a  theft  "  "s  c-mraitted,  the  person 
wronged  or  the  jndj;e  pronounced  an  impre- 
cation on  the  thief  und  on  any  one  who  was 
privy  to  the  cium\  and  refrained  from  giving 
information ;  u  witness  who  saw  and  knew  of 


It,  and  wat  silent  under  this  formal  adjura- 
tion, has  to  bear  his  iniquity  ;  ho  is  not  only 
an  accomplice  of  a  criminal,  he  is  also  a 
perjurer;  one  sin  leads  to  another.  Some 
commentators  explain  the  first  hemistich  as 
referring  only  to  the  crime  of  receiving  or 
using  stolen  goods,  by  which  a  man  commits 
a  crime  and  exposes  himself  to  punishment; 
but  it  is  best  taken,  as  above,  in  conneclion 
with  the  second  clause,  and  as  elucidated 
thereby. 

Ver.  25. — The  fear  of  man  bringeth  a 
snare.  He  who,  through  fear  of  what  man 
may  do  to  him,  think  or  say  of  him,  does 
what  he  knows  to  be  wrong,  lets  his  moral 
cowardice  lead  him  into  sin,  leaves  duly 
undone, — such  a  man  gets  no  real  gond  from 
his  weakness,  outrages  conscience,  displeases 
God.  See  our  Lord's  words  (Matt.  x. 
28;  Mark  viii.  38;  and  comp.  Isa.  li.  12, 
etc.).  Whoso  putteth  his  trust  in  the  Lord 
shall  be  safe  (ch.  xviii.  10).  Such  trust 
carries  a  man  safe  through  all  dangers , 
fearing  to  offend  God,  living  as  alwajj 
under  his  eye,  he  feels  Divine  protection, 
and  knows  tliat  whatever  happens  is  for  the 
best.  The  LXX.  joins  this  to  the  pre- 
ceding verse,  thus:  "He  who  sharetli  with 
a  thief  hateth  his  own  ^oul;  and  if,  whei 
an  oath  is  offered,  they  who  hear  it  givj 
no  information,  they  fearing  and  reverencing 
men,  are  overthrown,  but  he  that  trusteth 
in  the  Lord  shall  rejoice."  They  add 
another  rendering  of  the  last  vterse,  "  Un- 
godliness causeth  a  man  to  stumble,  but 
he  who  trusts  in  the  Lord  (M  t^  SeffirdTri 
2  Pet.  ii.  1)  shall  be  saved."  Aea-irST-ns  ia 
used  fcr  Jehovah  in  the  New  Testament,  e.g 
Lukeii.  29;  Acts  iv.  24. 

Ver.  26. — Many  seek  the  ruler's  favour; 
literally,  the  countenance  of  the  ruler.  A 
vstriation  of  ch.  xix.  6.  There  are  numbers 
who  are  always  trying,  by  means  fair  or 
surreptitious,  to  onrry  favour  with  a  great 
man  who  has  anything  to  bestow  (comp.  I 
Kings  X.  24 ;  Ps.  xlv.  12).  But  every  man's 
judgment  cometh  from  the  Lord.  The  real 
and  only  reliable  judgment  comes,  not  from 
an  earthly  prince  (who  may  be  prej  udiced 
and  is  certainly  fallible),  but  from  the  Lord, 
whose  approval  or  disapproval  is  final  and 
indisputable.  Therefore  one  should  seek  to 
please  him  rather  than  any  man,  however 
great  and  powerful  (comp.  1  Sam.  xvi.  7; 
Isa.  xlix.  4 ;  1  Cor.  iv.  5). 

Ver.  27. — An  unjust  man  is  an  abomina- 
tion to  the  just.  This  great  moral  contrast, 
marked  and  universal,  is  a  fitting  close 
of  the  book.  The  word  "abomination" 
(toehah)  occurs  more  than  twenty  times 
in  the  Proverbs ;  it  is  appropriate  here 
because  the  good  man  looks  upon  the  sinner 
as  the  enemy  of  God,  ai  the  psalmist  says, 
"Do  not  I  hate  them,  0  Lord,  that  hat« 


668 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[oh.  XXIX.  1 — 27 


thee?  and  am  not  I  grieved  with  those  that 
riae  np  against  thee?  I  hate  them  with 
perfect  hatred :  I  count  them  thine  enemies  " 
(Ps.  cxxxix.  21,  etc.).  He  that  is  upright  in 
the  way  is  abomination  to  the  wicked; 
because  he  is  a  standing  reproach  to  him, 
and  by  every  tone  and  look  and  action  seems 
to  express  his  condemnation  (see  on  ch.  xxi. 
15,  and  the  Septuagint  Version  there;  and 


comp.  1  Kings  xxi.  20  ;  Isa.  liii.  3 ;  Matt, 
viii.  34;  John  xv.  19).  Septuagint,  "A 
direct  way  is  an  abomination  to  the  law- 
less." The  Vulgate  ends  the  chapter  with 
a  paragraph  which  is  found  in  some  manu- 
scripts of  the  Septuagint  after  ch.  xxiv.  22 
(where  see  note),  Verbtim  cuatodiena  fiUm 
extra  perditionvm  trit. 


HOMILBTICa 

Ver.  1. — Hardened  under  reproof.  I.  Reproof  mat  be  bejectbd.  It  is  not  violent 
and  compulsory  correction.  We  have  free  wills,  and  (Jod  does  not  destroy  our  wills  in 
Older  to  reform  our  conduct,  for  he  only  delights  in  voluntary  obedience ;  but  he  sends 
warnings  and  chastises  us  as  his  children.  This  treatment  should  lead  to  repentance. 
Still,  it  is  addressed  to  our  reason,  our  conscience,  our  affections.  Pharaoh  repeatedly 
rejected  Divine  reproofs,  when  he  refused  to  let  the  Hebrews  go  after  each  successive 
plague  was  removed.  The  Israelites  in  the  wilderness  murmured  and  rebelled  again 
and  again,  in  spite  of  continuous  mercies  and  numerous  sharp  rebukes.  God  is  often 
warning  his  children  now.  The  faithful  preaching  of  his  truth  is  a  rebuke  to  the 
thoughtless  and  the  sinful.  The  interior  voice  of  conscience  utters  its  own  solemn 
Divine  reproof.  If  we  sin  heedlessly,  we  do  not  sin  unwarned.  The  rejection  of  the 
reproof  is  no  sign  of  its  weakness  or  insufficiency.  Even  the  warning  words  of  Christ 
failed  to  arrest  the  wilful  people  of  Jerusalem  in  their  headlong  race  to  destruction 
(Matt,  xxiii.  37). 

II.  Reproof  is  rejected  by  stubborn  self-will.  The  neck  is  hardened.  The 
obstinate  man  is  like  a  hoise  that  will  not  obey  the  reins ;  like  one  that  has  taken  the 
bit  into  its  teeth  and  will  rush  on  in  its  own  wild  course.  1.  This  implies  determination'. 
One  who  was  unreproved  might  plead  ignorance  or  forgetfulness.  Such  an  excuse 
cannot  be  put  forward  by  the  man  who  has  been  often  reproved.  His  disregarded 
warnings  will  rise  up  in  the  judgment  to  condemn  him.  Meanwhile  his  continuous 
refusal  to  give  heed  to  them  is  a  sure  sign  of  deliberate  sinfulness.  2.  This  also 
implies  hardness  of  heart.  It  is  the  hard  heart  that  makes  the  neck  hard.  The  stiff- 
necked  generation  is  a  stony-hearted  generation.  The  repeated  rejection  of  reproof 
tends  to  harden  the  heart  more  and  more.  The  ear  grows  deaf  to  the  often-neglected 
alarum. 

III.  Reproof,  when  rejected,  is  followed  by  ruin.  The  reproof  is  a  warning. 
Itg  very  sternness  is  inspired  by  love,  because  it  is  intended  to  guard  the  foolish  soul 
against  impending  danger.  But  after  this  has  lucen  heard  unheeded  there  can  be  no 
escape.  1.  There  is  no  excuse.  The  warning  has  been  uttered.  Everything  possible 
has  been  done  to  arrest  the  downward  career  of  the  stubborn  reprobate.  2.  There  is 
douhle  guilt.  The  rejection  of  the  reproof  is  an  additional  sin — an  insult  to  the  Divine 
righteousness  and  love.  3.  There  can  he  no  hope  of  escape.  The  destruction  may  be 
sudden,  after  its  long  delay,  and  "  that  without  remedy." 

IV.  Reproof,  when  heeded,  leads  to  restoration.  1.  It  contains  hope.  For 
if  there  were  no  way  of  escape  open  the  language  of  reproof  would  be  wasted.  In 
that  case  it  would  come  too  late,  and  might  as  well  be  spared.  The  sternest  reproof  is 
a  call  to  repentance,  and  this  call  points  to  a  restoration,  2.  It  prepares  for  the  gospel. 
John  the  Baptist  makes  straight  the  way  for  Christ.  After  wo  have  humbly  submitted 
to  reproof,  we  shall  hear  the  joyous  message  of  the  gospel. 

Ver.  2. — The  religion  of  politics.  I.  Reliqion  is  concerned  with  politics.  Too 
often  the  two  spheres  are  kept  disastrously  distinct.  On  the  one  hand,  it  is  pretended 
that  the  sacred  character  of  religion  would  be  desecrated  by  its  being  dragged  into  the 
political  arena  ;  and  on  the  other  hand,  the  claim  of  religion  to  have  a  voice  in  public 
affairs  is  set  down  to  the  ambition  and  tyranny  of  priestcraft.  Now,  it  is  not  to  l^a 
•upposed  that  purely  religious  subjects  should  be  obtruded  on  the  uncongenial  pktforiB 


SH.  XXIX.  1—27.]  THE  PROVERBS.  669 


of  a  pnblio  meeting.  Very  possibly  they  would  be  resented ;  we  are  not  to  cast  pearls 
before  swine.  Moreover,  there  is  a  time  for  everything.  But  religion  claims  to 
inSuence  politics,  to  be  a  leading  factor  in  public  movements,  to  hold  the  standard  by 
which  all  political  actions  are  to  be  judged.  It  must  do  this  if  it  is  to  carry  out  its 
mission  of  leavening  the  whole  lump.  It  should  leave  no  region  of  hfe  untouched ; 
commerce,  literature,  art,  science,  recreation,  society,  and  politics  must  all  come  under 
its  influence.  ITor  religion  to  withdraw  from  politics  is  to  hand  that  important  region 
of  life  over  to  the  d'-iril.  We  find  that  the  Bible  has  much  to  say  on  the  conduct  of 
public  affairs. 

II.  The  welfare  or  a.  people  is  lakoblt  determined  bt  the  moral  chahactbb 
OF  THE  GOVERNMENT.  1.  The  principal  influence  of  religion  on  politics  must  be  moral. 
In  public  life  nice  distinctions  of  creed,  fine  varieties  of  abstract  dogma,  and  academic 
discussions  of  theoretical  divinity  are  brushed  aside  as  mere  cobwebs  compared  to  the 
serious,  practical,  present-day  questions  that  are  at  stake.  But  the  moral  influence  of 
religion  does  not  belong  to  any  of  these  categories.  That  influence  is  direct,  practical, 
and  real.  The  religion  of  politics  is  the  morality  of  public  life  viewed  in  the  light  of 
God.  2.  The  m^ral  character  of  public  affairs  is  of  vital  interest  to  the  people.  States 
are  ruined  by  immoral  government.  Bad  passions  stir  up  needless  strife.  Wicked 
greed,  jealousy,  or  revenge  are  at  the  root  of  most  wars.  A  government  of  a  high 
moral  character  would  have  found  a  means  of  keeping  the  peace,  where  one  of  lower 
tone  has  plunged  the  nation  into  all  the  horrors  of  war.  The  right  and  peaceable 
relation  of  class  to  class  within  the  community  can  only  be  preserved  when  justice 
and  humanity  are  observed  in  the  conduct  of  public  affairs. 

III.  It  is  the  duty  op  Christian  men  to  see  that  the  riohtboub  abb  in 
AUTHORITY.  1.  /«  a  System  of  popular  government  aU  who  have  a  voice  should  make 
that  voice  heard.  It  is  a  distinct  dereliction  of  duty  for  any  Christian  man  to  withdraw 
from  all  influence  in  public  life.  It  may  be  urged  that  the  tone  of  that  life  is  worldly. 
If  so  there  is  the  more  reason  why  unworldly  men  should  enter  it  in  order  to  give  it 
a  higher  character.  The  Christian  is  not  a  recluse.  He  is  called  to  be  the  salt  of  the 
earth,  to  season  all  society  with  wholesome  thought  and  action.  It  is  unfair  to  leave 
the  burden  of  public  afiairs  to  others,  and  then  to  profit  by  their  labours ;  and  yet  this 
is  what  is  done  by  those  people  who  are  too  devout  to  assist  in  the  making  of  good 
laws,  but  by  no  means  too  devout  to  avail  themselves  of  those  laws  when  they  are 
made.  2.  Beligion  will  best  influence  politics  by  good  men  being  at  the  head  of  affairs. 
Good  men  will  make  good  measures.  It  is  therefore  necessary  to  select  men  of  high 
character  for  parliament  and  also  for  municipal  ofSces. 

Ver.  8. — Scornful  m*n.  The  evil  of  a  contemptuous  treatment  of  life  and  duty  is  to 
be  seen  in  many  relations.     Let  us  consider  some  of  them. 

I.  Scorn  for  the  people.  This  was  the  tern  per.  of  the  old  monarchical  and 
aristocratic  systems.  The  mischief  of  it  was  seen  in  the  explosion  of  the  French 
Revolution.  The  "  dim  multitude  "  cannot  be  treated  as  so  much  chaff  of  the  threshing- 
floor.  The  nation  is  the  people.  The  first  interest  of  the  nation  is  the  welfare  of  the 
great  bulk  of  the  population,  not  the  luxury  of  what  is  regarded  as  "  the  cream  of 
society." 

II.  Scorn  for  the  poor.  This  was  the  attitude  of  the  wealthy  Jews  in  ancien' 
Israel,  which  called  forth  stern  rebukes  from  the  prophets  of  God  (e.g.  Amos  vi.  3 — 6) , 
and  the  same  fault  was  detected  in  the  Christian  Church  by  St.  James  (Jas.  ii.  1 — 3). 
The  indifference  which  too  many  of  the  prosperous  feel  for  their  hard-pressed,  suffering 
brethren  is  one  of  the  most  dangerous  symptoms  of  society.    It  lies  at  the  root  of  socialism. 

III.  Scorn  for  injustice.  In  some  cases  there  is  worse  than  poverty;  there  is 
positive  wrong-doing.  The  powerful  oppress  the  weak.  Strong  masters  hold  down 
miserable  slaves.  This  evil  condition  was  a  perpetual  cause  of  danger  to  Rome  in  ita 
most  prosperous  age.     It  is  seen  in  the  "  sweating  system  "  in  England  to-day. 

IV.  Scorn  for  danger.  Misery  and  injustice  are  sources  of  danger,  But  other 
and  direct  dangers  may  menace  a  country.  The  scorn  of  pride  will  be  no  security 
against  those  dangers.  We  shall  not  be  protected  by  smgiag,  "Rule,  Britannia,"  or  by 
shouting,  "  Britons  never  shall  be  slaves." 

V.  Soorn  fob  wickduness.    The  greatest  danger  of  the  state  is  not  in  poverty  at 


660  THE    PROVERBS.  [oh.  xxix.  1—27, 


home;  nor  is  it  in  war  from  abroad.  It  lies  in  the  moral  corruption  of  the  people. 
Wholesale  debaucliery,  widespread  drunkenness,  a  perfect  epidemic  of  gambling, 
profli'^acy,  dishonesty, — these  are  the  cankers  that  eat  out  the  vital  strength  of  a  nation. 
Indifference  to  such  evils  is  contempt  for  moral  law. 

VI.  Scorn  fob  belioion.  In  the  race  for  wealth,  in  the  dance  of  pleasure,  in  the 
mid  orgy  of  worldly  engagement,  multitudes  treat  the  :laims  of  religion  with  scorn. 
Oilers,  in  their  misery  and  despair,  refuse  to  believe  that  any  help  or  hope  can  come  to 
tl.ein  from  heaven.  This  scornful  attitude  towards  the  first  duties  and  the  highest 
interests  of  life  must  be  fraught  with  fatal  consequences.  Meanwhile  the  scornful 
attitude  entirely  excludes  the  beginnings  of  better  things.  Humility  and  repentance 
are  impossible  so  long  as  this  defiant  mood  is  cherished. 

Ver.  18. — No  vision  f  The  revelation  of  ancient  prophecy  was  not  continuous  and 
uninterrupted,  but  it  came  in  flashes,  between  which  there  were  intervals  of  darkness. 
Sometimes  those  intervals  were  long  and  most  distressing  to  a  people  that  had  learnt 
to  draw  its  chief  lessons  from  Divine  oracles.  Such  a  time  was  experienced  in  the 
d  lys  of  Eli,  for  "  the  word  of  the  Lord  was  rare  in  those  days ;  there  was  no  open 
vision  "  (1  Sam.  iii.  1) ;  and  another  and  longer  period  was  that  of  the  "  four  centuries 
of  silence"  between  the  closing  of  the  Old  Testament  and  the  opening  of  the  New 
Testament. 

I.  Men  nerd  a  heavenly  vision.  This  requirement  was  recognized  in  Israel  on 
especial  grounds,  because  the  people  felt  themselves  to  be  a  divinely  directed  nation, 
with  God  for  their  King  and  Leader.  The  fading  away  of  the  prophet's  vision  would 
be  like  the  vanishing  of  the  pillar  of  cloud  and  fire  in  the  wilderness;  a  necessary 
gui'lance  would  be  lost.  But  heavenly  visions  are  not  less  needed  by  all  men.  1.  Men 
iieed  to  know  heavenly  truth.  (1)  la  order  to  do  the  will  of  Grod.  The  servant  must 
know  his  master's  will  if  he  is  to  do  his  duty.  Earthly  knowledge  is  not  enough. 
Heavenly  messages  are  wanted,  or  the  duty  to  God  will  be  neglected.  (2)  For  the 
saving  of  a  man's  own  soul.  We  are  not  merely  earthly  animals.  We  are  naturally 
related  to  heaven.  To  be  starved  of  heavenly  truth  is  to  be  loft  to  perish  in  earthly- 
mindedness.  2.  Men  cannot  discover  heavenly  truth.  It  must  be  revealed.  Without 
a  vision  from  God  the  world  is  in  spiritual  darkness. 

II.  Men  can  have  a  heavenly  vision.  God  has  not  left  his  people  to  grope  in 
a  gross  Cimmerian  darkn  "s.  Light  has  fallen  from  heaven  on  earth.  1.  This  is  given 
in  the  Bible.  That  recui  nf  old  revelation  enshrines  a  perpetual  vision  of  God  for  all 
who  have  eyes  to  behold  it.  Therefore  it  is  the  duty  of  Christian  people  (1)  to  study 
the  Scriptures,  (2)  to  circulate  them  throughout  the  world,  and  (3)  to  teach  and 
expound  them  to  children  and  the  ignorant.  2.  This  is  enjoyed  in  personal  experience. 
Every  man  can  have  his  own  vision,  nay,  must  have  it  if  he  would  really  see  truth. 
It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  everybody  can  be  a  Daniel  or  an  Ezekiel,  can  behold 
Isaiah's  wonderful  vision  of  God  (Isa.  vi.)  or  St.  John's  glorious  apocalypse  of  the 
heavenly  Jerusalem  (Rev.  xxi,).  Mtich  less  is  each  man  to  look  for  his  own  separate 
gospel,  and  to  feel  called  upon  to  write  his  own  newer  Testament.  But  in  the  under- 
standing and  appreciation  of  truth  we  must  each  see  it  for  ourselves  by  the  aid  of  a 
Divine  inspiration.  This  was  predicted  by  Joel  of  the  new  dispensation  (Joel  iL  28), 
and  claimed  by  St.  Peter  (Acts  ii.  16 — 21). 

III.  Men  mat  lose  their  heavenly  vision.  God  is  not  capricious.  If  the  Divine 
voice  is  silent,  this  must  be  because  there  are  no  obedient  ears  to  receive  it.  The 
vision  is  only  withdrawn  when  the  eyes  of  men  are  so  blinded  by  sin  and  worldliness 
that  they  cannot  behold  it.  Then  God  may  send  a  famine  of  the  Word  of  truth  (Amos 
viii.  11).  It  is  a  fearful  thing  to  be  incapable  of  seeing  the  truth  of  God  or  hearing 
his  voice.  But  this  condition  is  dependent  on  our  own  conduct.  We  blind  our  eyes 
a;jainst  the  light  of  heaven  when  we  plunge  into  the  mire  of  sio.  We  need  to  pray, 
"Open  thou  mine  eyes,  that  I  may  behold  wondrnus  things  out  of  thy  Law"  (Ps.  cxix. 
18).  Christ  came  to  open  blind  eyes  (Luke  iv.  18),  and  to  give  new  visions  olGod'i 
auth  (John  xviii.  37). 

Ver.  25.— IZVis  fear  of  man.  I.  The  feak.  1.  In  what  it  consisU.  This  fear  is  a 
dread  of  the  disfavour  of  man,  and  its  hurtful  reiults.     It  may  take  various  forms.    (1) 


OH.  XXIX.  1—27.]  THE   PROVERBS.  661 


Fear  of  human  authority.  Thus,  in  days  of  persecution,  the  weak  shrink  from 
miirtyrdom.  Wrongs  are  often  permitted  for  fear  of  the  consequences  of  agitating 
against  them.  (2)  Fear  of  the  great.  Some  men  have  an  awe  of  mere  rank  and  station. 
They  bow  obsequiously  before  riches;  they  dread  to  oppose  important  personages. 
(3)  Fear  of  society.  "Mrs.  Grundy"  is  regarded  with  awe.  It  is  thought  to  be  a 
dreadful  thing  to  be  out  of  the  fashion.  Social  impropriety,  in  the  eyes  of  the  fastidious, 
is  regarded  as  worse  than  moral  delinquency.  (4)  Pear  of  the  multitude.  This  is  the 
new  fear  of  man  peculiarly  mischievous  in  our  democratic  age.  Tliere  is  a  danger  lest 
Inen  should  concede  to  popular  clamour  what  they  do  not  believe  to  be  good  or  right. 
(5)  Fear  of  those  we  love.  Perhaps  this  is  the  most  difficult  fear  to  resist  (but  see. 
Matt.  X.  37).  2.  How  it  originates.  (1)  In  cowardice.  This  is  an  unworthy  fear.  It 
is  selfish  and  immoral.  It  springs  from  too  much  regard  for  our  own  feelings,  and  too 
little  reverence  for  duty.  (2)  In  godlessness.  Man  takes  the  place  of  God.  The  mob 
is  deified.     Human  action  is  treated  as  supreme. 

II.  Its  snake.  1.  The  deception  of  it.  (1)  In  regard  to  duty.  Pear  takes  the  place 
of  conscience.  It  blinds  us  to  the  sense  of  right  and  wrong,  blurring  the  great  outlines 
of  morality.  Instead  of  asking,  "What  is  right?"  a  person  who  is  haunted  by  this 
sliameful  fear  only  inquires,  "What  is  safe?"  Now,  there  is  no  more  self-deluded 
mortal  than  the  man  who  is  only  sure  of  being  "  safe."  When  he  folds  his  arms  in 
smug  complacency,  he  is  really  "  in  the  gall  of  bitterness  and  the  bonds  of  iniquity." 
(2)  In  regard  to  danger.  Subservience  to  the  opinion  of  other  people  can  never  afford 
real  security.  It  is  but  a  shallow  and  tficky  device.  We  can  never  please  all  men, 
and  in  attempting  to  escape  the  wrath  of  one  party  we  rouse  that  of  another.  If, 
however,  the  sleek  time-server  were  clever  enough  to  propitiate  all  human  enmity,  be 
would  have  left  himself  exposed  to  the  far  more  terrible  wrath  of  Heaven.  2.  Hie 
fatcditij  of  it.  This  fear  brings  a  snare.  It  entraps  its  unwary  victim.  When  once 
the  craven-hearted  man  is  caught  in  the  meshes  of  worldly  fears,  he  finds  it  vain  to 
Etrugale  for  liberty.  This  fear  creates  a  miserable  bondage.  No  serf  under  the  old 
feudal  system  was  more  bound  to  his  lord  than  the  poor  slave  of  public  opinion  is  to 
his  hydra-headed  master.  This  wretched  fear  of  man  is  fatal  to  all  true  manliness.  It 
will  make  shipwreck  of  the  most  honourable  career.  The  only  needful  fear  is  fear  of 
doing  wrong,  fear  of  the  devil  (Matt.  x.  28). 

III.  Its  antidote.  We  are  to  find  a  refuge  from  the  ensnaring  fear  of  man  by 
putting  our  trust  in  the  Lord.  God  Is  mightier  than  the  whole  world.  A  howling 
mob  hounding  its  victims  to  death  cannot  shake  the  confidence  of  one  who  has  made 
tlie  Lord  his  Refuge.  Trust  in  God  saved  Shadraoh,  Meshach,  and  Abednego  from 
cowardice  when  threatened  by  cruel  Nebuchadnezzar  and  cast  into  the  burning  fiery 
furnace.  Christ  was  calm  and  fearless  before  all  his  foes,  fortified  by  the  praj'ers  of 
Gethsemane.  We  need  to  rise  into  a  higher  atmosphere  above  all  the  mists  of  popular 
opinion.  Men  may  frown  and  rage,  or  laugh  and  ridicule ;  but  he  who  dwells  in  the 
secret  place  of  the  Most  High  shall  abide  under  the  shadow  of  the  Almighty  (Ps.  ici.  1). 

"Earth  may  be  darkness;  Heaven  will  give  thee  light." 

Ver.  26. — The  supreme  Arbiter.  I.  It  is  a  common  mistake  to  asckibb  to  man 
THE  INFLUENCE  WHICH  BELONGS  ONLY  TO  GoD.  In  the  previous  versc  we  have  been 
warned  against  falling  into  the  snare  of  the  fear  of  man,  and  encouraged  to  find  our 
safety  in  trust  in  God.  A  similar  contrast  is  again  presented  to  us,  but  from  the 
opposite  side.  We  are  tempted  to  flatter  the  great  in  order  ta  win  their  favour  ;  but 
we  are  now  reminded  that  our  destiny  does  not  lie  in  their  hands,  but  in  the  hands  ol 
One  who  is  supreine  in  judgment,  though  hia  rule  is  too  often  ignored  by  us.  Helena, 
in  '  All's  Well  .that  ends  Well,'  says — 

"  It  is  not  so  Willi  liim  that  all  things  knows. 
As  'tis  with  us  that  square  our  gfuess  by  sbowt; 
But  most  it  is  presumption  in  na  when 
The  help  of  Heaven  we  count  the  act  ol  men." 

1.  This  common  mistake  arises  partly  from  the  fact  that  the  human  influence  is  visible, 
while  that  of  God  is  unseen.    The  molehill  at  our  feet  thus  seems  to  be  more  important 

FBOYSBSa.  *   * 


562  THE  PROVERBS.  [oh.  xxix.  1—27 


than  the  mountain  that  hounds  our  horizon  but  is  wrapped  in  mist.  2.  It  is  also 
caused  by  the  further  fact  that  much  of  God's  judgment  is  postponed.  We  do  not  yet 
experience  the  full  effect  of  the  Divine  arbitrament. 

II.  God's  judgment  will  be  experienced  by  bveky  man.  He  is  not  only  the 
Arbiter  of  the  fate  of  those  who  call  in  his  aid  ;  he  is  the  "  Judge  of  all  the  earth " 
(Gen.  xviii.  25).  Abraham  recognized  the  fact  that  God  was  the  Judge  of  Sodom  and 
Gomorrah,  though  no  doubt  the  wicked  cities  of  the  plain  utterly  repudiated  his 
authority.  The  godless  will  be  judged  by  God.  Those  men  who  do  not  choose  to  put 
their  case  in  the  hands  of  God  will  nevertheless  receive  their  sentence  from  him. 

III.  It  is  good  news  foe  thb  wobld  that  God  is  the  supreme  Arbiteb. 
This  is  not  set  before  us  as  a  truth  of  terror.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  declared  as  a  great 
consolation  among  the  ills  of  life.  1.  God  ia  Just.  He  is  perfectly  fair,  utterly  im'partial, 
no  Respecter  of  persons.  Rich  and  poor  stand  on  equal  grounds  before  his  judgment- 
seat.  2.  God  is  wise.  The  most  acute  human  judge  may  be  deceived.  But  he  that 
searcheth  the  heart  knows  all  facts  about  all  men.  His  judgment  must  be  based  on 
truth.  3.  Goi  is  strong.  He  is  able  to  execute  his  sentence.  When  he  declares  what 
is  right,  he  will  also  establish  his  judgment. 

IV.  It  is  well  fob  men  to  acknowledge  God  as  thbib  Arbiter.  We  shall 
all  have  to  submit  to  his  judgment  in  the  end.  It  would  be  wise  for  us  to  acknowledge 
his  rule  throughout  life.  Surely  it  is  most  fatally  foolish  to  labour  for  the  favour  even 
of  the  most  influential  men,  if  this  involves  disregarding  the  thoughts  and  will  of  God. 
The  verdict  of  the  lower  court  will  be  overridden  by  the  judgment  of  the  higher  court. 
Therefore  what  is  most  incumbent  on  all  men  is  to  see  that  they  are  right  and  straight 
in  the  eyes  of  the  One  supreme  Judge.  By  sin,  as  we  must  acknowledge,  we  are  all 
wrong  in  his  eyes.  Therefore  no  human  favour  can  save  us  till  we  have  been  put  right 
and  justified  through  the  grace  of  Christ. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 7. — Private  morality  and  the  public  weal.  1.  Tbuths  of  perbonal  con- 
duct. 1.  The  obstinate  offender  and  his  doom.  (Ver.  1.)  The  repeated  oomplamt  against 
Israel  was  that  they  were  a  "  stiff-necked  people."  Self-willed,  haughty,  persistent, 
defying  rebuke  and  chastisement,  is  the  habit  described.  It  invites  judgment.  "  When 
lesser  warnings  will  not  serve,  God  looks  into  his  quiver  for  deadly  arrows."  They 
who  will  not  bend  before  the  gentle  persuasions  of  God's  Holy-Spirit  must  feel  the  rod. 
Men  may  make  themselves  outlaws  from  the  kingdom  of  God.  2.  Wisdom  and 
virtue  inseparable  in  conduct.  (Ver.  3.)  So  much  so  that  the  same  word  may  occa- 
sionally do  duty  for  either  notion.  Thus  the  French  mean  by  one  who  is  "  sage  "  one 
who  is  chaste  and  virtuous.  The  effects  are  alike.  Joy  is  given  to  parents  by  the  sage 
conduct  of  children ;  and  vice  is  seen  to  be  folly  by  the  waste  and  want  it  brings  in  its 
train  (comp.  ch.  vi.  26 ;  x.  1 ;  xxviii.  7).  3.  The  dishonesty  of  flattery.  (Ver.  5.)  It 
may  be  designed  to  deceive,  and  is  then  coloured  with  the  darkest  hue  of  treachery. 
Or  it  may  be  undesigned  in  its  effects.  But  in  either  case,  the  web  of  flattering  lies 
becomes  a  snare  in  which  the  neighbour  stumbles  to  his  fall  (comp.  ch.  xxvi.  24, 25, 28). 
The  kiss  of  the  flatterer  is  more  deadly  than  the  hate  of  a  foe.  "  When  we  are  most 
praised  for  our  discernment,  we  are  apt  to  act  most  fciolishly ;  for  praise  tends  to  cloud 
the  understanding  and  pervert  the  judgment."  4.  Delusive  and  genuine  Joy.  (Ver.  6.) 
The  serpent  is  concealed  amidst  the  roses  of  illicit  pleasures ;  a  canker  is  at  the  core  of 
the  forbidden  fruit.  A  "  sh.tdow  darkeus  the  ruby  of  the  cup,  and  dims  the  splendour 
of  the  scene."  But  ever  there  is  a  song  in  the  ways  of  God.  See  the  example  of  Paul 
and  Silas  even  in  prison  (Acts  xvi.  25).  "Always  there  are  evil  days  in  the  world; 
always  good  days  in  the  Lord  "  (Augustine,  on  Ps.  xxxiii.). 

II.  The  influence  op  personal  goodness  on  social  and  public  weal.  1.  2%« 
ffvneral  happiness  is  dependent  on  the  conduct  of  individuals.  (Ver.  2 ;  comp.  ch. 
xxviii.  12,  28.)  For  society  is  a  collection  of  individuals.  "It  is  no  peculiar  con- 
ceit, but  a  matter  of  sound  consequence,  that  all  duties  are  by  so  much  the  better  per- 
formed, by  how  much  the  men  are  more  religious  from  whose  abilities  the  same  proceed, 


OH.  XXIX.  1—27.]  THE  PROVERBS.  B63 


For  if  the  couine  of  political  affairs  cannot  in  any  good  sort  go  forward  without  fit 
instruments,  and  that  which  fitteth  them  he  their  virtues,  let  polity  acknowledge  itself 
iQdehted  to  religion,  godliness  being  the  ohiefest,  top,  and  well-spring  of  all  true  virtue, 
even  as  God  is  of  all  good  things."  "Religion,  unfeignedly  lived,  perfeoteth  man's 
abilities  nnto  all  kinds  of  virtuous  services  in  the  commonwealth "  (Hooker,  '  Eccl. 
Pol.,  V.  1),  2.  The  effect  of  just  administration  and  of  hrihery.  (Ver.  4.)  The  best 
laws  are  of  no  avail  if  badly  administered.  God's  throne  is  founded  on  justice  (Pa 
Ixxxix.  14).  And  this  only  can  be  the  foundation  of  national  stable  polity  and  of  the 
common  weal.  "We  will  sell  justice  to  none,"  says  the  Magna  Charta.  The  theocracy 
was  overthrown  in  the  time  of  Siimuel  by  the  corruption  of  his  sons.  The  just  adminis- 
tration of  David  «  bore  up  the  pillars  "  of  the  land  (2  Sam.  viii.  15).  The  greed  of 
Jehoiakim  again  shook  the  kingdom  to  its  foun-lations  (Jer.  xxii.  13—19).  Righteous- 
ness alone  exalteth  a  natinn.  3.  Justice  to  the  poor.  (Ver.  7.)  The  good  man  enters 
into  the  feelings  of  others,  and  makes  the  lot  of  the  oppressed,  in  sympathy  and  imagi- 
nation, his  own.  The  evil  and  hard-hearted  man,  looking  at  life  only  from  the  outside, 
treats  the  poor  as  dumb  driven  cattle,  and  easily  becomes  the  tyrant  and  the  oppressor. 
Peculiarly,  sympathy,  consideration,  compassion  for  the  lowly  and  the  poor,  have  been 
infased  into  the  conscience  of  the  world,  and  made  "  cuiTent  coin  "  by  the  example  and 
spirit  of  the  Redeemer. — J. 

Vers.  8 — 11. — Dishonourable  passions.  Such  ii  the  designation  given  by  St.  Paul 
(see  Revised  Version  of  the  New  Testament,  Rom.  1.  .26,  etc.)  to  the  various  workings 
of  the  evil  leaven  in  the  soul.     Here  is  a  description  of  gome  of  these  "  lusts." 

I.  Scoffing.  (Ver.  8.)  Set  on  fire  of  hell,  it  inflames  others,  disturbs  the  peace  of 
communities,  produces  failures  and  tumults  in  public  life.  But  wisdom  calms,  and 
turns  all  things  to  the  best.  The  scoffer,  the  malevolent  critic  of  existing  institutions, 
is  a  public  pest ;  the  judicious  man,  a  public  blessing.  The  one  raises  tumults,  the 
other  quells  them. 

II.  Contentiousness.  (Ver.  9.)  It  delights  in  dispute  for  dispute's  sake.  The 
man  of  this  vice  does  not  want  to  elicit  truth,  but  to  find  fuel  for  his  passion.  Alter- 
nating between  rage  and  ridicule,  he  uses  words  merely  as  weapons  of  offence  and 
defence.    Egotism  is  at  the  root  of  all  his  activity. 

III.  The  sanghinart  temper.  (Ver.  10.)  AH  hatred  to  the  truth  involves  hatred 
to  the  truth-speaker  and  the  truth-doer.  Here  lies  the  secret  of  all  persecution  and  of 
all  judicial  murd'ers.  But  in  ourselves,  whenever  we  detect  the  rising  of  resentment 
against  him  who  exposes  our  faults  or  fallacies,  we  may  find  something  of  the  dark 
temper  of  him  "  who  was  of  the  wicked  one,  and  slew  his  brother"  (1  John  iii.  12). 

IV.  Want  of  self-control.  (Ver.  11.)  The  impetuous,  unbridled  temper,  which 
explodes  with  wrath  at  the  smallest  provocation,  or  with  ill-considered  opinions.  He 
is  wise  who  knows  when  to  hold  his  peace.  We  are  not  always  to  speak  all  we  feel  or 
think,  but  when  we  do  speak  should  ever  think  what  we  say.  We  must  remember 
that  "  there  is  a  time  to  speak,  aud  a  time  to  keep  silence." — J. 

Vers  12 — 17. — Qovernment  in  truth  wnd  equity.  I.  There  must  be  the  foboe  of 
EXAMPLE.  (Ver.  12.)  Especially  in  regard  to  truthfulness.  Nothing  is  more  easily 
CKught  than  an  example  of  untruthfulness,  evasion,  hypocrisy.  Servants'  manners 
reflect  their  masters'  characters.  The  more  conspicuous  the  station,  the  further  the 
influence  of  the  example  extends. 

II.  There  must  be  respect  to  the  Ruler  and  Judge  of  all.  (Ver.  13.)  He  is 
no  Respecter  of  persons ;  but  he  is  the  Protector  of  all,  and  the  Judge  between  man  and 
man.  The  distinctions  of  ruler  and  subject,  of  rank  and  rank,  of  class  and  class,  are 
temporary ;  th^  common  relation  of  all  to  God  is  spiritual  and  eternal. 

III.  There  must  be  reoabd  to  the  lowly.  (Ver.  14.)  Must  not  the  test  of  every 
government  be  at  last  this — ^What  did  it  accomplish  for  the  poor,  for  the  burdened,  for 
the  slave  and  the  oppressed  ?  "  Glorious  "  wars  and  additions  of  territory  can  never 
compensate  for  injustice  at  home;  the  renown  of  arms  for  a  people's  misery.  The 
throne  that  is  not  propped  by  bayonets,  but  built  upon  a  people's  gratitude  and  loyalty, 
may  defy  the  storms  of  revolution. 

IV.  Domestic  government  teaches   the   same  truths  on  a  hmallsb  bcals. 


664  THE  PBOVBRBS.  [oh.  xxix.  1-27. 

(Vers.  15 — 17.)  1.  There  is  the  same  need  of  firmness  and  discipline.  Absolute  liberty 
is  licence.  All  our  freedom  is  bounded  by  necessity.  The  good  of  the  whole  demands 
fixed  law ;  and  this  must  be  observed  in  the  household  as  in  the  body  poUtio.  A 
weakness  in  the  administration  of  acknowledged  law  is  fatal  to  the  purity  of  the  homn, 
to  the  welfare  of  nations.  Evil-doers  must  be  kept  down;  if  their  character  cannot 
,be  changed,  their  power  to  work  mischief  must  be  taken  from  them  by  the  unflinoliin'^ 
administration  of  law.  And  lastly,  firmness,  so  far  from  alienating,  really  wins  the 
good  will,  the  respect,  and  obedience  of  subjects  in  the  petty  commonwealth  of  home 
and  iu  the  larger  sphere  of  the  state. — J. 

Vers.  18 — 2.3. — Fatal  defects  in  the  social  state.  I.  The  want  of  commanding 
RKLiGious  TEACHIKO.  'I'he  great  prophets  of  Israel  were  the  great  instructors  of  the 
people.  Theydeclarcil  Juhovah's  living  oraolesj  they  made  clear  the  eternal  principles 
of  the  moral  law  ;  they  forecast  what  must  be  the  future  under  moral  conditions.  The 
Christiim  ))reacher  lias  succeeded  to  the  office  of  the  Jewish  prophet.  Woe  to  the 
nation  if  the  supply  of  preachers  ceases !  if,  sunk  in  material  interests,  they  are  allnwed 
to  forget  that  the  "  Word  of  the  Lord  "lives  and  endures,  and  obedience  to  it  must  be 
the  foundation  of  all  private  blessing,  all  public  prosperity  I 

II.  The  want  of  firm  policy  and  conduct.  (Ver.  19.)  There  always  will  be  a 
class  more  or  less  of  "slaves,"  who  must  be  governed,  not  by  mere  rhetoric  or  the 
appeal  to  feeling,  but  by  the  knowledge  that  words  will  be  backed  by  deeds.  God 
means  what  he  says.  The  laws  of  nature  are  no  mere  abstract  statements  of  truth  ; 
they  are  stern  and  solemn /ocfe,  which  cannot  be  defied  with  impunity.  And  the  law- 
less must  understand  that  what  ought  to  be  shall  be. 

III.  The  want  of  calm  deliberation.  (Ver.  20.)  Whether  in  private  or  in 
public  Hile,  this  too  may  be  a  ruinous  defect.  Thus  rash  enterprises  are  begim, 
hostilities  break  out  without  warning,  a  lifelong  alienation  or  the  misery  of  a  gene- 
ration may  spring  from  the  passion  or  the  pique  of  the  moment. 

IV.  Want  of  due  severity  in  discipline.  (Ver.  21.)  The  exegesis  of  the  verse 
certainly  points  to  this  meaning.  Men  are  stung  by  the  ingratitude  or  contumacy  of 
those  whom  they  had  weakly  petted,  and  whose  faults  they  had  nourished  by  their 
smiles.  But  human  nature  will  only  respond  to  just  and  true  treatment ;  and  injurious 
kinlness  will  reap  a  thorny  crop  of  ingratitude. 

V.  Want  of  sei.f-control  and  op  sblp-knowlbdoe.  (Vers.  22,,  23.)  (For  the 
first,  see  ch.  xv.  18  ;  xxviii.  25.)  Wrath  is  the  very  hot-bed  of  transgression  and  every 
"  evil  work."  And  self-esteem  is  a  neighbour  vice.  So  near  are  extremes  in  life :  the 
moment  we  are  highest  in  our  own  imagination  we  are  really  lowest  in  power,  in 
position,  in  prospect.  "He  that  would  build  lastingly  must  lay  his  foundation  low. 
As  man  falls  by  pride,  he  recovers  by  humility."  And  the  more  God  honours  men,  the 
more  they  should  humble  themselves. — J. 

Vers.  24 — 27. — Prudence  in  alliance  with  religion.  I.  Prudence  and  beligion 
ABB  ever  in  harmony.  There  can  be  no  divorce  between  them.  We  are  not  placed 
between  cross-lights  here.  What  intelligent  regard  to  self  prescribes,  God's  Law 
commands.  Approach  the  facts  of  life  from  these  two  opposite  sides,  travel  by  either 
of  these  two  paths,  they  meet  at  last  in  duty,  in  safety,  ia  peace,  and  salvation. 

II.  Some  examples  of  this  harmony.  1.  All  dishonesty  or  complicity  with  it  is  felf- 
destructive.  (Ver.  24.)  Enlightened  experience  says  so,  and  stamps  itse'f  in  the  clear 
<lictum,  "  Honesty  is  the  best  policy."  God's  Word  says  so,  and  here  and  in  a  thousand 
similar  declarations  and  warnings  pronounces  a  curse  upon  the  sin.  2.  Fear  of  man  is 
perilous;  confidence  in  the  Eternal  is  safety.  (Ver.  25.)  Experience  again  ratifies  this. 
The  coward  dies  a  thousand  deaths ;  the  brave,  but  once.  The  feeble-hearted  daily  miss 
opportunities;  the  brave  create  them.  Moral  cowardice  springs  from  want  of  inner 
conviction  of  the  might  of  truth ;  moral  strength,  from  the  inner  certainty  that  nothing 
but  truth  is  victorious.  Positive  revelation  here  again  fortifies  the  hints  of  common 
knowledge.  3.  The  vanity  of  honour  from  others;  the  true  honour  that  comes  from 
God.  (Ver.  26.)  What  bitter  things  have  been  written  down  in  the  experience  of 
men  of  the  world  coucerning  the  favour  of  the  great,  and  the  folly  of  courting  it  and 
depending  upon  it  1  and  how  does  the  same  lesson  echo  back  from  the  pa^e  of  Holy 


OB.  XXIX.  1—27.]  THE  PROVERBS.  665 


Writ  I  Act  well  your  part  in  JehovaVs  sigTit ;  seek  the  honour  that  cometh  from 
him  only; — how  common  and  Divine  wisdom  effect  a  juncture  onoe  more!  4.  I''ternal 
aritipathiei.  (Ver.  27.)  What  experience  teaches  us  in  one  form,  that  fellowship 
must  be  founded  on  sympathy,  that  tastes  must  be  respected,  that  deep,  undefinable 
feelings  attract  us  to  or  repol  us  from  others,  God's  Word  again  confirms :  "  IJave  no 
fellowship  witli  the  unfruitful  works  of  darkness."  Acquaintance  is  mere  collocation 
of  persons ;  ftieudship  and  Christian  communism  are  the  eternal  affinity  of  souls  in 
God.--J. 

Ver.  1. — TOe  doom  of  obduracy.    There  are  four  stages  which  conduct  to  spiritual  ruin. 

I.  Human  disloyalty.  Man  is  found  (or  finds  himself)  at  enmity  with  God  ;  he 
dfies  not  reverence,  love,  honour,  serve,  him.  He  owes  everything  to  his  Maker  and 
Preserver  and  >;enerous  Benefactor;  but  he  has  not  paid  his  great  debt,  and  now  he  is 
estranged  in  spirit,  and  his  life  is  one  of  disloyalty  and  rebellion. 

II.  Divine  summons  to  return.  God  is  saying,  "Return  unto  me,  and  I  will 
return  unto  you;"  "Let  the  wicked  forsake  his  way  .  .  .  and  let  him  return  unto 
the  Lord."  By  many  messengers,  in  many  voicus,  God  calls  us  to  repentance  and 
reconciliation. 

III.  Human  becusanct.  God  calls,  but  men  will  not  hearken  or  they  will  not 
heed.  They  either  (1)  deliberately  decline  to  listen;  or  they  (2)  do  listen  wiihuut 
being  seriously  impressed;  or  they  (3)  are  impressed  without  coming  to  any  right  and 
wise  decision ;  they  linger  and  delay ;  they  continually  postpone ;  and  every  new 
prccrastination  makes  indecision  easier  and  delay  more  dangerous. 

IV.  Divine  patience.  God  "bears  long"  with  men.  We  see  his  merci''ul  and 
wonderful  patience  when  we  look  at :  1.  Tlie  time  during  which  he  continues  to  them 
))reservation  and  privilege.  Through  childhood  and  youth,  through  manhood  and  the 
days  of  decline,  up  to  extreme  old  age,  God  continues  to  men  his  sustaining  and 
preserving  ^ottier,  and  all  the  fulness  of  Christian  privilege ;  though  all  the  while  ihey 
arc  abusing  his  gift  of  life  by  retaining  it  for  their  own  personal  enjoyment,  ai.d  his 
gif'  of  opportunity  by  slighting,  or  despairing,  or  misusing  it.  2.  The  various  mrans 
he  employs  in  order  to  reach  and  restore  us.  (1)  God  invites  mt'n,  through  his  Wuid, 
and  through  the  Christian  ministry,  and  by  tiie  voices  of  the  home  and  of  hunian 
frienrtship.  (2)  He  commands ;  he  requires  that  all  men  should  repent  and  believe. 
(3)  He  warns.  (4)  He  reproves;  he. often  reproves.  "He  that  is  often  reproved," 
and  very  commonly  a  disloyal  heart  is  often  rebuked  of  God.  Time  after  time  he 
receives  the  admonition  of  his  fellows,  or  he  suffers  the  penalty  of  his  guilt.  God 
makes  him  to  understand  that  "the  way  of  transgressors  is  hard;"  the  merciful  hand 
of  the  Divine  Father  interposes  many  obstacles  in  the  way  of  his  children's  ruin,  that 
they  may  be  stopped  and  may  be  led  to  return  on  their  way.  But  sin  doi  s  its  fatal 
work  of  indurating  the  heart,  of  paralyzing  the  conscience,  of  blinding  the  eyes  of  the 
children  of  men ;  and  the  man  who  is  "  often  rebuked  "  only  "  hardens  his  neck,"  and 
then  comes  the  end — 

V.  Sudden  and  irremediable  ruin.  1.  Sometimes  (perhaps  frequently,  in  the 
case  of  those  who  are  guilty  of  flaarant  sin)  the  day  of  probation  ends  with  startling 
suddenness :  "  They  are  brought  into  desolation  in  a  moment."  Death  comes  down 
u|jon  them  without  any  warning.  In  the  full  flow  of  iniquity  their  soul  is  that  very 
night  required  of  them,  and  they  pass  from  guilt  to  judgment.  2.  Commonly,  the 
end  comes  without  expectation,  and  so  without  preparation.  Men  are  going  on  with 
the  engagements  and  the  indulgences  of  life ;  and  they  are  expecting  to  go  on  inde- 
finitely. Then  comes  the  serious  illness,  the  sick-chiimber,  the  medical  attendant,  the 
anxious  inquiry,  the  unfavourable  respon.se,  the  solemn  comnuinicatinn,  and  the  dis- 
tressed and  stated  soul  has  to  say,  "  My  hour  is  eome,  and  I  am  not  ready  for  its 
toming." — 0. 

Ver.  2. — (See  homily  on  ch.  xi.  10.) — 0. 

Ver.  6. — (See  homily  on  ch.  xxvii.  5,  6.) — 0. 

Ver.  7. — (See  homily  on  ch.  xix.  17.)— C, 


see  THE  PROVERBS.  [oh.  xxix.  1—27 

Vers.  8 — 10. — TTie  senselessnett  of  scorn,  etc.  Here  is  a  triplet  of  truths  we  may 
gather  from  these  three  texts. 

I.  The  8BNSBLEBSNEBS  OF  SCORN.  (Ver.  8.)  To  be  of  a  scornful  spirit,  to  bestow 
scorofiil  looks,  to  use  scornful  language, — this  is  gross  folly.  1.  It  is  utterly  unbe- 
coming. Not  one  of  us  is  so  removed  above  his  fellows  as  to  be  entitled  to  treat  with 
entire  disregard  what  they  may  have  to  say  or  what  they  propose  to  do.  2.  The  wisest 
men,  and  even  the  Wise  One  himself,  think  well  to  listen  to  what  the  humblest  can 
suggest.  3.  It  leads  to  a  blind  opposition  to  true  wisdom ;  for  often  wisdom  is  found 
with  those  in  whom  no  one  expects  to  discover  it;  even  as  the  scornful  Q-reek  and  the 
proud  Roman  found  it  in  the  despised  teachers  from  Judaaa.  4.  It  ends  disastrously. 
It  "  brings  a  city  into  a  snare,"  "  sets  a  city  in  a  flame."  It  refuses  to  consider  the 
serious  danger  that  is  threatened,  or  it  provokes  to  uncontrollable  anger  by  its  disdain- 
fulness ;  and  the  end  is  discord,  confusion,  strife.  5.  It  deliberately  neglects  the  one 
way  of  peace.  A  wise  man  who  does  not  refuse  to  listen  and  to  learn,  who  prefers  to 
treat  neighbours  and  even  enemies  with  the  respect  that  is  their  due,  "turns  away 
wrath,"  and  saves  the  city  from  the  flame.  Scorn  is  thus  a  senseless  thing  in  eveiy 
light. 

II.  The  uselbssness  of  oostf-ntion.  (Ver.  9.)  We  are  not  to  understand  that 
it  is  a  vain  or  foolish  thing  to  endeavour  (I)  to  enlighten  the  ignorant,  or  (2)  to  con- 
vince the  mistaken.  Where  there  is  an  honest  and  loyal  spirit,  it  may  be  of  great 
service  to  do  this.  What  is  useless  is  (3)  to  debate  with  the  contentious.  Nothing 
comes  of  it  but  the  clatter  of  the  tongue  and  the  triumph  of  the  complacent  "  fool." 
He  may  "  rage  "  or  he  may  "  laugh ;  "  he  may  passionately  declaim  or  he  may  indulge 
in  banter  and  in  bailinage,  but  he  does  not  seek,  and  he  wiU  not  find,  the  truth.  He 
is  no  nearer  to  wisdom  at  the  end  than  he  was  at  the  beginning.  Time  is  wasted ;  the 
heart  of  the  wise  is  disappointed ;  the  wayward  man  is  confirmed  in  his  folly ; — let  him 
alone. 

III.  The  aim  of  the  uprioht.  This  is  twofold.  1.  Peace.  The  wise  man,  who 
is  the  upright  man,  "  turns  away  wrath ; "  and  he  objects  to  a  contest  with  the  con- 
tentious, because  "  there  is  no  rest."  Those  in  whom  is  the  Spirit  of  Christ  are  always 
setting  this  before  them  as '  a  goal  to  be  reached ;  they  speak  and  act  as  those  that 
"  make  for  peace."  They  feel  that  everything  which  can  be  should  be  avoided  that 
makes  for  dissension  and  strife  j  they  are  the  "  peacemakers,"  and  theirs  is  the  blessing 
of  the  children  of  God  (Matt.  v.  9).  2.  Life.  They  (the  upright)  "  seek  the  soul,"  or 
the  life,  of  the  man  whom  the  bloodthirsty  hate  (ver.  10).  To  "  seek  the  soul "  or  the 
life  of  men  is  the  characteristic  of  the  good.  (1)  They  care,  in  thought  and  deed,  for 
the  preservation  and  the  protection  of  human  life ;  they  seek  the  removal  of  all  that 

threatens  it.     (2)  They  care  much  for  all  that  enlarges  and  ennobles  human  life 

education,  morality,  sound  discipline.  (3)  They  care  most  of  all  for  that  one  thing 
which  crowns  human  life,  and  may  be  said  to  constitute  it — the  return  of  the  soul  to 
God  and  its  life  in  him.  In  this  deepest  and  truest  sense  they  "  seek  Ms  soul  •  "  for 
they  are  regarding  and  pursuing  its  spiritual  and  eternal  welfare. — C. 

Ver.  11  (and  see  oh.  xii.  16;  xiv.  SS).—The  time  to  be  silent.  There  is  a  time  to 
keep  silence  as  well  as  a  time  to  speak  (see  Eccles.  iii.  7).  According  to  our  individual 
temperament  we  need  the  one  injunction  or  the  other.  There  are  few,  however  of 
either  sex  or  of  any  disposition  who  do  not  need  to  be  urged  to  guard  the  door  of  'the 
lip.    This  is  one  of  those  things  in  which  we  all  offend  in  our  time  and  in  our  way. 

Impatience  most  frequently  leads  to  transgression ;  but  there  are  other  provocations 

there  are  other  occasions  when  the  warning  word  is  wanted.  We  should  carefully 
command  our  tongue  when  there  is  in  our  mind — 

L  The  idea  of  achievement.  It  is  unwise  to  talk  of  what  we  are  going  to  do  as 
soon  as  it  occurs  to  us  to  act.  We  may  think  ourselves  capable  or  our  circumstances 
favourable  when,  on  further  consideration  or  inquiry,  we  find  that  we  are  not  equal 
to  the  task  or  that  our  position  makes  it  impossible  to  us.  We  should  think  before  we 
widertake. 

II.  The  thought  of  ionobanoe.  Nothing  but  harm  can  come  of  counsel  given  in 
ignorance  of  any  case  before  us.  Either  we  persuade  our  friends  and  colleagues  to  taka 
action  which  is  unwise  and  will.prore  to  be  injurious  and  possibly  disastrous;  or  wa 


ca.  xxrt.  1— 27.]  THE  PROVERBS.  S67 


are  at  once  corrected  by  those  who  know  better,  and  we  are  ashamed.  Do  not  go  to 
the  council  withovrt  learning  the  facts  and  understanding  the  matter,  or  else  wait  well 
and  learn  patiently  before  you  speak  at  all. 

III.  The  feeling  op  resentment.  "  A  fool  uttereth  all  his  anger,  but  a  wise  man 
keepeth  it  back  and  stilleth  it "  (Revised  Version  ;  ch.  xii.  16).  Nothing  more  dis- 
tinctly marks  the  presence  of  wisdom  or  folly  than  the  habit  of  speaking  quickly  or 
restraining  speech  under  provjoation.  It  is  an  unfailins  criterion.  The  reasons  for 
silence  at  such  a  time  are  obvious  enough,  and  they  should  be  strong  enough.  1.  Hasty 
speech  is  (1)  very  likely  indeed  to  be  incorrect,  imperfect,  if  not  wholly  wrong,  for  our 
judgment  is  sure  to  be  disturbed. and  unhinged  when  our  spirit  is  wounded;  (2)  most 
likely  to  provoke  our  opponent  to  feel  strongly  and  to  strike  severely,  and  thus  the 
flood-gates  of  strife  are  opened;  (3)  unworthy  of  the  wise  and  strong,  lowering  in  the 
eyes  of  our  best  friends  and  in  our  own  regard ;  (4)  condemned  of  God  (Jas.  i.  19,  20). 
2.  Conscientious  silence  under  provocation  is  (1)  an  admirable  victory  over  our  lower 
nature  (oh.  xvi.  32) ;  (2)  the  way  of  peace  in  the  council,  in  the  home,  in  tJie  Church ; 
(3)  the  path  in  which  we  follow  Christ  our  Lord,  and  gain  his  Divine  approval  (Matt. 
xxvii.  12;  vi.9).— 0. 

Ver.  13. — (See  homily  on  ch.  ixii.  2.) — 0. 

Vers.  15 — 17. — (See  homily  on  ch.  xiii.  24.) — 0. 

Ver.  18. — Spiritual  ignorance  and  obedience.  (See  also  homily  on  ch.  lix.  2.)  Two 
things  are  clear:  1.  That  God  has  provided  us  with  many  sources  of  knowledge.  We 
have,  for  materials  to  work  with,  a  very  complex  and  richly  endowed  nature  ;  and  we 
have,  for  materials  to  work  upon,  (1)  that  same  nature  of  ours  with  all  its  instincts, 
impulses,  desires,  hopes ;  (2)  the  great  visible  system  around  us  into  which  we  can 
constantly  be  looking,  and  of  which  we  might  be  expected  to  learn  much ;  (3)  human 
life,  and  the  providence  of  God  as  manifested  therein.  2.  That  these  sources  of  wisdom, 
which  are  constant  and  common  to  our  race,  prove  to  be  lamentably  insufficient.  Man, 
under  the  dominion  and  depression  of  sin,  cannot  read  aright  the  lessons,  which  his  own 
nature,  the  visible  universe,  and  the  providence  of  God  are  fitted  and  intended  to  teach 
him.  He  shows  himself  utterly  incapable ;  he  is  completely  false  in  his  ideas,  and 
pitiably  wrong  in  his  course  of  action.   Hence  we  come  to  the  conclusion  of  the  text — 

I.  The  lamentable  result  op  spiritual  ignorance.  "  Where  there  is  no  vision, 
the  people  perish."  Where  there  is  no  special  Divine  revelation,  supplementing  the 
knowledge  and  correcting  the  ignorance  of  the  unenlightened,  there  is  a  "  perishing  "  or 
a  "  nakedness  "  in  the  land.  The  sad  and  miserable  result,  as  all  lands  and  all  ages 
testify,  is  :  1.  Literal,  physical  death.  Without  the  knowledge  of  God,  and  in  the  abseuce 
of  the  control  which  the  knowledge  of  his  will  can  supply,  (1)  there  is  strife,  violence, 
war,  and  of  this  death  is  the  continual  fruit ;  (2)  there  is  vice,  and  this,  when  it  is 
finished,  bringeth  forth  death.  2.  Loss  of  character.  Not  only  of  that  which  is  sometimes 
understood  by  character,  viz.  reputation,  but  also  of  character  itself.  Where  God's 
Word  and  will  are  unknown,  there  is  such  a  deplorable  descent  into  the  erroneous  and 
ihe  immoral,  that  both  of  these  go  down  and  perish.  3.  Absence  of  spiritual  life.  The 
life  of  our  life  is  in  God,  and  not  only  in  his  kindness  to  us,  but  in  our  knowledge  of 
hirru  To  be  in  utter  ignorance  of  him,  to  have  lost  all  belief  in  him,  to  be  spending  our 
day  B  in  spiritual  separation  from  him, — is  not  this  to  be  so  destitute  of  all  that  beautifies 
and  brifjhtens,  of  all  that  enlarges  and  ennobles,  human  life,  as  to  be  "  dead  while  we 
live  "  ?  So  thought  and  taught  the  great  Teacher  and  his  great  apostle  (Luke  ix.  60 ; 
John  V.  24;  1  Tim.  v.  6).  It  is  not  merely  that  there  is  a  sad  exclusion,  at  the 
end,  from  the  heavenly  kingdom;  it  is  that  spiritual  ignorance  of  God  constitutes  dtath, 
and  they  who  are  living  without  God,  and  becoming  more  and  more  alienated  from  and 
unlike  to  him,  are  perishing  "  day  by  day." 

II.  The  blessedness  op  obedience.  "  He  that  keepeth  the  Law,''  etc.  Happy  is 
the  man  who  walks  in  the  fear  of  God,  in  the  love  and  the  service  of  Jesus  Christ ;  for : 
1  He  is  walking  in  the  path  where  all  the  worst  evils  cannot  harm  him ;  he  is  defended 
from  "  the  evil  which  is  in  the  world ;  "  he  is  upheld  in  his  purity  and  his  integrity. 
g.  He  is  living  a  life  which  will  command  the  esteem  and  win  the  love  of  the  wise  and 


568  THE   PROVE   B>.  [ch.  xxix.  1— 27. 

the  worthy.  3.  He  abides  under  the  wing  of  a  heavenly  Father's  favour ;  he  is  enjoying 
the  friendship  of  a  Divine  Saviour.  4.  He  is  expending  his  powers  in  the  conscious,  the 
happy  service  of  him  "  whose  he  is,"  and  in  whose  service  is  true  and  lasting  freedom. 
5.  He  is  exeicing  a  benignant  influence  in  every  circle  in  which  he  moves.  6.  He  i« 
travelling  homewards. — 0. 

Vers.  20,  22.— (See  homily  on  ver.  11.)— O. 

Ver.  23.— (See  homily  on  oh.  xvi.  18.)— C. 

Vers.  25,  26. —  Two  temptations  and  two  resources.  As  responsible  human  souls,  w« 
find  ourselves  exposed  to  two  dangers,  and  we  have  two  sources  of  refuge  and  strength 
of  a  very  similar  character. 

I.  Two  TRMPTATI0N8.  1.  To  be  unduly  affected  by  the  fear  of  man's  displeasure. 
"  The  feai^of  man,"  etc.  Now,  the  fear  of  man  :  (1)  May  be  dutiful.  It  is  the  duty  of 
children  to  have  a  reverential  regard  for  their  parents,  and  to  shun  most  carefully  their 
disapproval.  There  is  a  "  fear  "  appropriate  to  servants  (Eph.  vi.  5).  We  should  fear 
to  dissatisfy  those  who  have  a  right  to  our  faithful  service.  (2)  May  be  desirable.  We 
should,  as  wise  co-workers  with  God,  fear  to  do  that  which,  instead  of  conciliating,  will 
disaffect  those  whom  we  want  to  win  to  righteousness  and  wisdom.  But  the  lear  of 
which  Solomon  writes  (3)  is  dishonourable  and  dangerous.  It  is  a  fear  which  is  born 
of  cowardice,  a  slavish  disinclination  to  encounter  the  anger  or  the  opposition  of  these 
who  are  in  the  wrong.  It  is  an  undue  concern  about  the  action  of  those  who  may  claim 
a  ri<;ht,  but  who  cannot  sustain  it,  to  keep  us  back  from  duty  or  to  compel  us  to  some 
unworthiness.  By  this  unmanly  and  unholy  fear  we  may  be  (1)  prevented  from 
entering  the  kingdom  or  the  Church  of  Christ ;  (2)  deterred  from  speaking  his  truth 
with  fulness  and  faithfulness ;  (3)  hindered  from  bearing  the  testimony  we  should 
otherwise  offer  against  some  evil  course;  (4)  led  into  actual  and  even  active  fellrw- 
ship  with  wrong.  Then,  indeed,  our  fear  is  "  a  snare,"  and  it  betrays  us  into  sin. 
2.  To  be  unduly  impelled  by  a  desire  for  man's  favour.  "Many  seek  the  ruler's 
favour."  There  is,  of  course,  nothing  wrong  in  seeking  the  interest  of  the  powerful. 
It  is  simple  wisdom,  on  the  part  of  those  who  are  struggling  and  rising,  to  do  that. 
But  it  may  easily  be  and  often  is  overdone.  Our  Lord  used  very  decisive  language  on 
this  subject  (John  v.  44).  Wheii  (1)  the  desire  is  excessive ;  (2)  language  is  used  or 
action  is  taken  which  is  untruthful  or  dishonest,  or  which  makes  a  man  fsdl  in  his  own 
regard;  (3)  there  is  so  much  solicitude  that  a  man  loses  self-reliance  as  well  as  self- 
respect,  and  forgets  the  help  which  is  to  be  had  from  above ; — then  "  seeking  the  ruler's 
favour"  is  a  mistake,  and  even  more  and  worse  than  that. 

II.  Two  80UKCE8  OF  8TRENQTH.  1.  A  Sense  of  Divine  approval.  "  Every  man's 
judgment  cometh  from  the  Lord."  Why  be  troubled  about  man's  condemnation  so 
long  as  we  have  his  acquittal?  Let  Judas  complain,  if  Jesus  excuses  aud  commends 
(John  xii.  1 — 8).  Let  the  critics  pass  their  sentence ;  it  is  a  small  thing  to  a  man 
who  is  living  under  an  abiding  sense  that  "  he  that  judgeth  him  is  the  Lord  "  (I  Cor.  . 
iv.  3,  4 ;  Bom.  ii.  29). 

"  Men  heed  thee,  love  thee,  praise  thee  not: 
The  Master  praises ; — what  are  men  ?  " 

And  it  is  not  only  the  present  judgment  and  acceptance  of  God  to  which  we  have 
recourse,  but  his  future  judgment  also,  and  the  commendation  he  will  pass  upon 
our  fidelity  (see  Rom.  xiv.  10 — 13;  1  Cor.  iv.  5).  2.  A  hope  of  Divine  succour. 
"  Whoso  putteth  his  trust  in  the  Lord  shall  be  safe."  Again  and  again,  in  tlie  Old  and 
New  Testaments,  by  psalmists  and  prophets  and  apostles,  as  well  as  by  our  Lord  him- 
self, we  are  invited  and  exhorted  to  "  put  our  trust  in  the  Lord ;  "  and  we  are  assured 
ihat,  so  doing,  we  shall  not  be  ashamed.  If  God  does  not  deliver  us  from  our  enemies, 
aud  from  the  trouble  they  occasion  us,  he  will  certainly  deliver  us  in  our  adversity;  he 
will  give  us  strength  to  endure,  grace  to  submit,  courage  to  bear  and  brave  the  worst, 
sanctity  of  spirit  as  the  result ;  he  will  turn  the  well  of  our  affliction  into  a  fountain  of 
spiritual  blessing. — C. 


OH.  XXX.  1-33.]  THE  PROVERBS. 


668 


Ver.  27.— Flow  to  hate  the  wicJced.  There  is  a  hatred  we  have  to  endure,  and  there 
SB, also  a  hatred  which  we  have  to  cherish.  The  question  of  any  difficulty  is— What 
is  the  feeling  we  should  cultivate  in  our  hearts  towards  the  guilty  ?   We  may  glance  at— 

I.  The  hatbed  of  us  by  the  wicked,  "iie  that  is  upright  in  the  way  is 
ahomination  to  the  wicted."  1.  This  is  a  well- verified /ac<,  attested  by  Scripture, 
by  history,  by  observation,  probably  by  experience.  2.  Its  explanatioa  is  at  hand'. 
(1)  Wicked  men  are  utterly  out  of  sympathy  with  the  righteous.  Their  tastes,  inclina 
tions,  habits,  are  all  at  variance  with  those  of  the  good  and  pure.  (2)  The  upright  are 
obliged  to  condemn  them,  either  in  private  or  in  public.  (3)  The  life  of  the  one  is  ,i 
standing  reflection  upon  the  conduct  of  the  other.  3.  There  is  one  right  way  to  mtft 
it;  viz.  (1)  to  endure  it  as  Jesus  Christ  endured  it  (Heb.  xii.  3;  1  Put.  ii.  23),  ami   ,3 

.seeing  the  invisible  but  present  and  approving  Lord  (Heb.  xi.  27);  (2)  to  make  ;m 
honest  efifort  to  remove  it  by  winning  those  who  indulge  it.  But  the  more  diffic.lt 
question  is  how  we  are  to  bear  ourselves  toward  those  whose  conduct  we  reprobate, 
whose  character  we  detest,  whose  persons  we  are  not  willing  to  admit  into  our  hoiiK.-i. 
How  shall  we  order — 

II.  OuK  HATBED  OF  THE  WICKED?  That  there  is  a  very  strong  feeling  agaimtt  t!,e 
wrong-doer  in  the  minds  of  the  holy  is  obvious  enough.  It  is  a  fact  that  "an  unjust 
man  is  an  abomination  to  the  just."  "  Do  not  I  hate  them  that  hate  thee  ?  .  .  .  I  hnte 
them  with  perfect  hatred :  I  count  them  mine  enemies,"  said  David  (Ps.  cxxxix.  21,  22). 
Jesus  Christ  "  looked  round  about  on  them  with  anger  "  (Mark  iii.  5).  God  is  "  angr  \/ 
with  the  wicked  every  day  "  (Ps.  vii.  11).  He  "  hateth  all  the  workers  of  iniquity  " 
(Ps.  V.  5).  Our  feeling,  therefore,  is  the  reflection  of  that  which  is  in  the  heart  of  ilie 
Holy  One  himself.  Of  what  elements  should  it  be  composed  ?  1.  One  element  that 
should  he  absent.  There  should  be  no  trace  of  personal  ill  will,  of  a  desire  for  tlm 
suffering  of  the  man  himself;  for  the  soul  of  the  sinful  we  should  wish  well,  an. I  we 
fall  into  a  mistake,  if  not  into  a  sin,  when  we  allow  ourselves  to  flnd  a  pleaauis  lu 
wituesging  or  in  dwelling  upon  the  humiliation  or  the  sorrow  of  the  wicked.  We  ot;f;lit 
onl}'  to  wish  for  that  as  a  means  of  their  purification  and  recovery.  2.  The  elemenh  tfi'it 
should  be  present.  (1)  Pure  resentment,  such  as  God  feels,  such  as  our  Lord  felt  « ii.  n 
he  lived  amongst  us  (see  Matt,  xxiii.), — a  feeling  of  strong  reprobation,  which  we  .ire 
obliged  to  direct  against  them  as  the  doers  of  unrighteousness.  (2)  Faithful  but 
measured  condemnation.  There  is,  in  this  view,  a  time  to  speak  as  well  as  a  timu  to 
keep  silence ;  and  both  publicly  and  privately  it  behoves  us  to  blame  the  blamewor  1  hy, 
and  even  to  denounce  the  shamefully  unjust  or  cruel.  But  here  we  are  bound  to  take 
care  that  we  are  well  acquainted  with  the  matter  on  which  we  speak,  and  that  our 
judgment  is  an  impartial  one.  (3)  Fearless  and  unflinching  opposition.  We  must 
actively  and  steadfastly  oppose  ourselves  to  the  iniquitous,  and  do  our  best  to  bring 
their  purposes  to  the  ground.  (4)  Sincere  and  practical  compassion.  With  all  this 
that  is  adverse,  we  may  and  should  conjoin  such  pity  as  our  Divine  Saviour  lias  felt 
for  ourselves,  and  such  honest  and  earnest  endeavour  to  win  them  to  the  truth  and  to 
the  practice  of  righteousness  as  he  put  forth  when  he  came  to  redeem  us  from  sin  and 
to  raise  us  to  the  likeness  and  restore  us  to  the  kingdom  of  God. — 0. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXX. 

Vers.  1—33.— Part  VII.  First  Appends 
TO  THE  Second  Collection,  containing 
"the  words  of  Agur."  A  short  introdnc- 
tiou,  teaching  that  the  Word  of  God  is  the 
source  of  wisdom  (vers.  1 — 6),  is  followed 
by  apothegms  on  different  subjects  (vers. 
7 — 33).   Cornelius  &  Lapide  offers  the  follow. 


no  one  can  hesitate  to  say  Is  well  fonnded, 
if  he  attempts  to  give  it  a  spiritual  inter- 
pretation, and  to  discern  mysteries  under 
the  literal  meaning:  "Quarta  hseo  pars 
elegantisSima  est  et  puloherrima,  osque  ao 
difflcillima  et  obscurissima :  priores  enim 
tres  partes  continent  Proverbla  et  Par»mia« 
claras,  ao  antithesibns  et  similitudinibus 
perspionas  et  Ulustres;   hteo  vcro  continet 


ing  opinion  concerning  this  appendix,  which   '    enigmata  et  gryphoi  insignes,  wd  ananoi 


570 


THE  PROVEEBS. 


[oh.  xxs.  1—33. 


et  peidiffioiles,  turn  ex  phrasi  quse  involuta 
cat  et  ienigmatioa,  turn  ex  sensu  et  materia, 
quae  sublimiB  est  et  profunda." 

Ver.  1.— The  words  of  Agur  the  son  of 
Jakeh,  even  the  prophecy.     This  seems  to 
be  the  correct  rendering  of  the  passage, 
though  it  has    been    made   to  bear  very 
differeut  interpretations.     It  is' plainly  the 
tide  of  the  treatise   which   follows.     Wlio 
Agur  and  Jakeh  were  is  utterly  unknown. 
Tue  Jewish    interpreters    considered  that 
"Agur  son  of  Jakeh"  was  an  allegorical 
desgnation    of    Solomon  —  Agur    meaning 
"Gatherer," or"Convener" (see  Eccles.  i.  1; 
xii    11);  Jalceh,  "Obedieut,"  or  "Pious," 
wliicli    thus    would    indicate    David.     St. 
JerDine   somewhat  countenances   the    alle- 
gorical interpretation  by  translating,  Verba 
CarKiregantis,  fil'd  Vomentis,  "  The  words  of 
the  Collector,  son  of   the  Utterer."    But 
what  follows  could  not  apply  to  Solomon ; 
he  could  not  say,  "  I  have  not  learned  wis- 
flnm"  (ver.   3),  or  ask    blindly  after    the 
Crentor  (ver.  4).    Many  have  endeavoured 
til  find  Agur's  nationality  in  the  word  that 
follows,  translated  "the  prophecy"  (N^»n, 
hamassa).      Massa,    "burden,"    is    usually 
applied  to  a  solemn  prophetical  speech  or 
araclo,  a  Divine  utterance  (Isa.  xiii.  1 ;  xv. 
1,  etc.),  and  as  this  designation  was  deemed 
inappropriate  to  the  character  of  this  ap- 
pendix, it  has  been  thought  that  allusion 
is  here  made  to  a  land  of  Massa,  so  called 
after  a  son  of  Ishmael  (Gen.  xxv.  14),  who 
dwelt  in  the  country  of  Edom  or  Seir,  and 
wliose  inliabitants  vfere  among  those  children 
of  the  East  whose  wisdom  had  become  pro- 
verbial (1  Kings  iv.  30).    Others  find  Massa 
in  the  Hauran,  or  on  the  north  of  the  Per- 
sian Gulf.    The  Venetian  Version    gives, 
A6yoi   ^Ayoiipov   vUtos   'laneoys   rov    Maffiiov. 
But  we  have  ho  satisfactory  account  of  a 
country  tlius  called,  and  its  existence  is 
quite    problematical ;    tlierefore  the   inge- 
nious explanations  founded  on  the  reality  of 
this  terra  ignota  need  not  be  specified  (see 
Introduction,  pp.  xxi.,  etc.).    Gratz  has  sug- 
gested that  in  place  of  hamassa  should  be 
read  hammoshd,  "  the  proverb-writer ;  "  but 
this  is  a  mere  conjecture,  unsupported  by  any 
ancient  authority.    If,  as  seems  necessary, 
we  are  compelled  to  resign  the  rendering, 
"  of  Massa,"  or  "  the  Massan,"  we  must  fall 
back  on  the  Authorized  Version,  and  con- 
sider the  term  "oracle"  as  applied  loosely 
and  abnormally  to  .these  utterances  of  wis- 
dom which  follow     That  tliey  are  not  of 
the  nature  of  Divine  communications  can 
be  seen  at  once  by  consideration  of  their 
contents,  which  are  mainly  of  human,  and 
not  of  the  highest  type,  and,  though  capable 
of  spiritual  interpretation,  do  not  possess 
that  uniqueness  of  purpose,  that  religiout 


character  and  elevation  of  subject,  which 
one  expects  in  the  enunciations  of  an  in- 
spired prophet.  This  view  does  not  mili- 
tate against  their  claim  to  be  regarded  as 
Holy  Scripture;  their  place  in  the  canon 
is  secured  by  other  considerations,  and  is 
not  affected  by  our  suspicion  of  the  inappro- 
priateness  of  the  term  applied  to  them ;  and, 
indeed,  it-  may  be  that  the  very  human 
element  in  these  utterances  is  meant  to  be 
unsatisfying,  and  to  lead  one  to  look  for 
the  deep  spiritual  truths  which  underlie 
the  secular  surroundings.  Agur  is  some 
poet  or  moralist,  well  known  in  Solomon's 
time,  probably  one  of  the  wise  men  referred 
to  in  oh.  xxiv.  28  (see  below).  The  rest  of 
the  paragraph  is  of  greater  obscurity  than 
the  former  portion.  The  man  spake  unto 
Ithiel,  even  unto  Ithlel  and  Uoal.  Accord- 
ing to  this  rendering,  the  man  is  Agur,  who 
is  introduced  as  uttering  what  follows  in 
ver.  2,  etc.,  to  Ithiel  and  Uoal,  two  of  his 
sons,  pupils,  or  companions.  The  name 
Uoal  occurs  nowhere  else  in  the  Old  Testa- 
ment ;  Ithiel  is  found  once,  in  Neh.  xi.  7, 
as  the  name  of  a  Benjamite.  Wordsworth 
regards  the  names  as  symbolical  of  the 
moral  character  of  those  whom  the  author 
designs  to  address,  explaining  the  former  as 
equivalent  to  "God  witli  me,"  and  the  latter 
as  denoting  "  consumed "  with  zeal,  or 
"  strong,"  "  perfect."  It  is  as  if  the  writer 
said,  "  You  must  have  God  with  you;  yea, 
you  must  have  God  with  you,  if  you  are  to 
be  strong.  You  must  be  Ithiels,  if  you  are 
to  be  Ucals."  He  refers  to  1  Cor.  xv.  10; 
2  Cor.  iii.  5;  Phil.  iv.  13.  That  the  Ma- 
sorites  regarded  these  words  as  proper  names 
is  evident;  73^,  indeed,  can  have  no  other 
application.  The  Syriac  takes  this  view  of 
the  words ;  to  the  same  opinion  lean,  more 
or  less,  the  Jewish  translators  Aquila  and 
Theodotion,  Aben  Ezra,  Vatablus,  Pagninus, 
and  others,  and  it  is  the  simplest  and  easiest 
solution  of  the  difficulties  which  have  been 
seen  in  the  clause.  But  many  modern 
commentators  have  declared  against  it; 
e.g.  Hitzig,  Zockler,  Delitzsoh,  Botteher, 
Nowack.  The  repetition  of  Ithiel  seems 
unmeaning;  one  sees  no  reason  why  it 
should  be  repeated  more  than  UcoH.  The 
second  verse  begins  with  '3,  which,  as  He- 
braists agree,  cannot  stand  abruptly  at  the 
commencement  of  a  discourse,  but  rather 
estahlishes  something  that  has  preceded. 
But  if  we  take  the  words  in  dispute  as 
proper  names,  no  statement  to  be  confirmed 
has  been  made.  We  are,  then,  constrained 
to  take  them  in  another  sense.  St.  Jerome 
translates  them,  writing,  Visio  quam  hcutui 
est  vir,  cum  quo  est  Dens,  et  qui  Deo  tecum 
morante  confortatm.  The  LXX.  (which  in- 
troduces vers.  1—14  of  this  chapter  after  ch. 
xxiv.  23)  gives, "  These  things  saith  the  man 


OH.  XXX.  1 — 33.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


671 


to  those  who  believe  God,  and  I  cease;" 
Tois  iTKrrevovari  ®e^  being  the  translation  of 
the  doubled  Ithiel,  equivalent  to  "  God  with 
me,"  and  7DN1  Qiraio/iai)  being  considered  to 
be  a  formation  from  the  root  nha.  Bwald 
talies  the  two  words  to  be  the  name  of  one 
man,  ( quivalent  to  "  God  with  me,  bo  I  am 
stioiig;"  in  his  own  language,  Mitmirgott 
— eohinich  ttark ;  but  his  idea  of  a  dialogue 
between  the  rich  mocker  (vers.  2 — t)  and 
the  humble  believer  (vers.  5 — 14)  is  not 
Well  founded,  though  a  late  editor,  Straok, 
agreeing,  considers  that  the  only  possible 
interpretation  of  these  verses  (2  —4)  is  to 
make  the  speaker  utter  them  as  the  out- 
come of  his  unbelief  and  scoffing,  to  wliioh 
Agur  answers  in  ver.  5.  Under  all  circum- 
stances, it  has  seemt'd  to  many  scholars  best 
to  surrender  tlie  notioii  of  proper  names, 
and,  altering  the  vocalization,  to  interpret, 
"The  oracle  of  the  man,  'I  have  wearied 
myself,  O  God,  I  have  wearied  myself,  O 
Gotl,'"  or,  as  others  say,  "about  God."  The 
utterance  commences  here,  and  not  at  ver.  2. 
The  repetition  forcibly  expresses  the  labori- 
ous and  painful  investigation  of  the  seeker 
aftef  truth.  The  final  word,  vocalized  h^m, 
ib  rendered,  "  And  I  have  withdrawn ;  "  or, 
as  Bickell,  quoted  by  Cheyne,  gives,  v'lo 
ukal,  "I  have  not  prevailed."  We  arrive 
thus  at  this  interpretation  :  first  comes  the 
(luperscriptlon,  "The  words  of  Agur,"  etc., 
*  the  oracle  of  the  man  ; "  then  begins  the 
utterance,  which  opens  with  the  melancholy 
avowal  that,  though  he  had  longed  and 
striven  to  know  God,  his  nature,  his  attri- 
butes, his  working,  he  had  failed  in  this 
object,  and  expended  his  labour  in  vain. 
Both  Agur,  and  Lemuel  who  is  named  in 
ch.  xzxi.  1,  seem  to  have  been  persons  not 
of  Israelitish  nationality,  but  dwulling  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  Palestine,  and  ac- 
quainted with  the  religion  and  sacred 
literature  of  the  chosen  people  (see  ver.  5). 
It  is  by  no  means  unlikely  that  they  were 
of  the  race  of  Ishmael,  fiom  which  stock 
many  wise  men  had  risen,  and  where  wis- 
dom was  BO  cultivated  as  to  have  become 
proverbial  (see  Jer.  xlix.  7 ;  Obad.  8).  In 
what  follows  Agur  sliows  hinjself  as  a 
philosopher  and  a  critic,  but  at  the  tame 
time  a  tirm  believer. 

Vers.  2  and  3  confirm  what  is  said  in 
ver.  1  concerning  the  fruitlessneas  of  the 
investigation  there  mentioned ;  the  more  he 
sought  and  studied,  the  more  conscious  he 
became  of  his  own  ignorance  and  of  God's 
incomprehensibility. 

Ver.  2. — Surely  I  am  more  brutish  than 
any  man.  "  Surely  "  (Iti)  should  be  "  for  " 
(»ee  note  on  ver.  1).  Cheyne, "  I  am  too  stupid 


for  a  man ; "  I  am  a  mere  irrational  beast 
(comp.  ch.  xii.  1 ;  Ps.  Ixxui.  22).  And  have 
not  the  understanding  of  a  man.  I  am  not 
worthy  to  be  called  a  man,  as  I  possess  not 
the  intellectual  faculty  which  a  man  ought 
to  have.  This  is  not  ironical,  as  if  lie  did 
not  desire  the  statement  to  be  taken  in  its 
full  sense,  and  meant  to  say,  "  Of  course  it 
is  my  own  stupidity  that  is  in  fault ; "  but 
it  is  a  genuine  confession  of  incompetence 
to  investigate  the  subject-matter,  which  is 
too  mysterious  for  his  mental  powers  to 
penetrate.  Thus  Solomon  aoknowleditfs 
that  he  is  but  a  little  child,  and  prays  fur 
an  understanding  heart  (1  Kings  iii.  7,  9; 
comp.  Wisd.  ix.  .■) ;  Matt.  xi.  25). 

Ver.  3. — i  neither  learned  wisdom.  With 
all  my  eager  longing  and  striving  I  did  not 
attain  to  such  wisdom,  that  I  should  have 
the  knowledge  of  the  Holy  One  (Revised 
Version  margin) ;  k'doshim,  plural  of  "  ex- 
cellence," like  elohim  (ch.  ix.  10;  Hos. 
xii.  .1  (Hebrew);  see  note  on  eh.  i.  20; 
and  comp.  Eooles.  v.  8  ;  xii.  1).  The  know- 
ledge of  the  all-holy  God  was  beyond  his 
grasp  (Job  xi.  7,  etc.).  Theology  is  a  higher 
science  than  metaphysics,  and  cannot  be 
reached  by  that  ladder.  The  LXX.  gives 
an  affirmative  sense  to  this  verse,  "God 
hath  taught  me  wisdom,  and  I  kuow  the 
knowledge  of  the  holy  (ayiay)." 

Ver.  i. — The  questions  contained  in  this 
verse  are  such  as  compelled  Agur  to 
acknowledge  his  ignorance  and  nothingness 
before  the  thought  of  the  glory  and  power 
of  the  great  Creator.  We  may  compare  Job 
xxxviii.,  etc.  Who  hath  ascended  np  into 
heaven,  or  descended?  Who  is  he  that 
hath  his  seat  in  heaven,  and  doeth  works 
on  earth?  Who  is  he  whose  universal 
providence  is  felt  and  experienced  ?  Where 
is  this  mysterious  Buing  who  hides  himself 
from  human  ken?  Christ  has  said  some- 
thing like  this,  "  No  man  hath  ascended  up 
to  heaven,  but  he  that  came  down  from 
heaven,  even  the  Son  of  man  which  is  iu 
heaven  "  (John  iii.  13) ;  and  St.  Paul  (Eph. 
iv.  9).  In  biblical  language  God  is  said  to 
come  down  from  heaven  in  order  to  punish, 
to  aid,  to  reveal  his  will,  etc.  (Gen.  xi.  7 ; 
Ps.  xviii.  9,  etc.) ;  and  he  returns  to  heaven 
when  tills  interveutiou  is  finished  (Gen. 
xvii.  22 ;  xxxv.  13).  Who  hath  gathered  the 
vrind  in  his  fists?  Who  hath  the  control  of 
the  viewless  wind,  so  as  to  restrain  it  or  re- 
lease it  at  his  pleasure  ?  (Ps.  cxxxv.  7;  Amos 
iv.  13).  Septuagint,  "Who  hath  gathered 
the  winds  in  his  bosom  ((cdA?r^)?"  Who 
hath  boimd  the  waters  in  a  garment  ?  The 
waters  are  the  clouds  which  cover  the 
vault  of  heaven,  and  are  held,  as  it  were, 
in  a  garment,  so  that,  in  spite  of  the  weight 
which  they  contain,  they  fall  not  upon  the 
earth.    As  Job  lays  (xxvi.  8),  "  Ue  bindetl/ 


BTS 


THE   PROVERBS. 


[oh.  XXX- 1—33, 


up  the  waters  in  his  thick  clouds ;  and  the 
cloud  is  not  rent  under  them."    And  again 
(xxiviii.  37),  "  Who  can  number  the  clouds 
by  wisdom  ?   or  who   can    pour   out    the 
bottles  of  heaven?"  So  the  psaimist, "  Tliou 
coveredst  it  [the  earthy  with'  the  deep  as 
with  a  vesture"  (Ps.  civ.  6).    (See  above, 
cb.  viii.  27,  etc.)    Who  hath  established  all 
the  ends  of  the  earth  1    Who  bath  con- 
solidated the  foundations,  and  defined  the 
limits,  of  the  remotest-  regions  of  the  earth  ? 
(comp.  Job  xxxviii.  4,  etc.).    The  answer  to 
these  four  questions  is  "Almighty  God." 
He  alone  can  order  and  control  the  forces  of 
nature.    What  is  his  name,  and  what  is  his 
son's  name,  if  thou  canst  telll  or,  if  thou 
knowett.    It  is  not  enough  to  acknowledge 
the  power  and  operation  and  providence  of 
this  mysterious  Being ;  Agur  longs  to  know 
more  of  his  nature,  his  essence.    He  must 
have  personality ;  he  is  not  an  abstraction, 
a  force,  a  quality ;  he  is  a  Person.    What, 
then,  is  his  name,  the  name  which  expresses 
what  he  is  in  himself?    Men  have  different 
appellations  for  this  Supreme  Being,  accord- 
ing as  they  regard  one  or  other  of   his 
attributes :    is  there  one  name  that  com- 
preliends    all,    which    gives   an    adequate 
account  of  the  incomprehensible  Creator? 
The  question  cannot  be  answered  affirma- 
tively in  this  life.     "  We  know  that  if  he 
shall  be  raaniffsted,  we  shall  be  like  him ; 
for  we  shall  see  him  even  as  he  is"  (1  John 
iii.   2).     The   further  question,  "What  is 
his  eon's  name?"  has  given  some  difficulty. 
The  LXX.   has,   "What  is  the  name  of 
his   children  (toTs   te'k(/o«   oiJtoD)?"   as   if 
there  was  reference  to  Israel,  the  special 
children  of  God.    But  the  original   does 
not  bear  out  tliis  inteipretation,  which  is 
also  opposed  to  Iho  idea  of   the  enigma 
proposed.     The   inquiry  might   mean — Are 
we  to  apply  to  the  Supreme  Being  the  same 
notion  of  natural  relationship  with  which 
we  are  familiar  in  the  human  family?    But 
tliis  seems  a  low  and  unworthy  conception. 
Or   the  "son"    might   be    primeval    man 
(Job  XV.  7)  or  the  sage ;   but  the  answer 
would  not  bo  satisfactory,  and  would  not 
tend  to  solve  the  great  question.     There 
are    two  replies   which    can    be  made  to 
Agiir's    interrogation.      Looking     to     the 
marvellous  description  of  Wisdom  in  eh. 
viii.  22,  etc.,  we  may  consider  Wisdom  to 
be  a  denotation  of  the  Son  of  God,  and  the 
inquirer  desires  to    know  the  name    and 
natuie  of  this  personage,  of  whose  existence 
he  was  certified.    Or  he  may  have  ai  rived 
at  a  knowledge  of  the  only  begotten  Son  of 
God,  as  t'js  idea  of  the  Logos  is  more  or 
less  developed  in  the  Book  of  Wisdom,  in 
Philo's  treatises,  and  in  the  Alexandrian 
school;  and  longs  for  more  perfect  know- 
ledge.  This,  indeed,  is  hidden :  "  He  hath  a 


name  written,  which  no  one  knoweth  hnt 
he  himself"  (Rev.  xix.  12).  It  is  useless 
to  put  such  question  to  a  fellow-man;  no 
human  mind  can  fathom  the  nature  of  the 
Godhead,  or  trace  out  its  operations  (Ecclus. 
zviii.  4,  etc.). 

Vers.  5,  6.— The  following  tetrastich  ia 
connected  with  what  has  preceded  in  this 
way :  As  the  light  of  nature  and  raetapliy- 
Bical  speculation  are  of  no  avail  in  obtaining 
the  perfect  knowledge  of  God  which  the 
seeker  craves,  he  must  be  all  the  more 
thankful  for  the  revealed  Word  of  God, 
which  teaches  him  as  much  as  he  is  capable 
of  learning. 

Ver.  5. — Every  word  of  God  is  pure. 
"Word"  is  here  imrali,  which  does  not 
occur  elsewhere  in  our  book,  which  is  the 
case  also  with  Eloah,  the  term  used  for 
"  God."  Every  declaration  of  God  in  the 
inspired  record,  the  Torah,  is  pure,  as  if 
refined  in  the  fire  (Ps.  xviii.  30).  Vulgate, 
Omnii  sermo  Dei  est  igidlus ;  Sepluagint, 
"All  the  words  of  God  are  tried  in  the 
fire  (ireTTuptti/icVot)."  God's  words  are  true, 
sincere,  with  no  mixture  uf  error,  certain  of 
accomplishment  (comp.  Ps.  xii.  6;  cxix. 
140).  He  is  a  shield.  He  is  perfect  pro- 
tection to  all  those  who,  relying  on  the 
word  of  revelation,  fly  to  him  for  refuge 
(see  on  oh.  ii.  7).  The  knowledge  of  God 
is  obtained  in  two  ways — by  his  revelation 
in  his  Word,  and  by  the  experience  of  those 
who  trust  in  him. 

Ver.  6. — ^Add  thou  not  unto  hill  words. 
God's  will,  as  announced  in  revelation,  is  to 
be  simply  accepted  and  acted  upon,  not 
watered  down,  not  overstrained.  This  in- 
junction had  already  been  given  in  the  old 
Law  (Deut.  iv.  2  ;  xii.  32)  ;  it  is  repeated  in 
the  New  Testament  with  awful  emphasis 
(Rev.  xxii.  18,  19).  No  human  speculations 
or  traditions  may  be  mingled  with  God's 
words;  the  glosses  and  explanations  and 
definitions,  affixed  by  rabbinical  ingenuity 
to  plain  enactments,  and  proved  to  be  false' 
in  morality  and  fatal  to  vital  religion,  are 
a  commentary  on  the  succeeding  sentence, 
lest  he  reprove  thee,  and  thou  be  found  a 
liar.  The  reproof  is  found  in  the  con- 
sequences of  such  additions ;  the  results  to 
which  they  lead  are  such  as  show  that  he 
who  asserts  that  these  things  are  contained 
in  the  Word  of  God  is  a  liar. 

Vers.  7— -9.— A  mashal  ode,  containing 
two  requests,  and  a  rationale  of  the  latter. 
The  matter  of  the  two  prayers  connects  it 
with  ver.  6,  whether  we  consider  that  the 
limitation  of  man's  desire  follows  naturally 
the  limitation  of  his  knowledge  (Plumptrei 


OH.  XXX.  1—33.] 


THE  PBOVEBBS. 


673 


or  that  the  wa«ning  against  beisjj  reproved 
as  a  liar  is  corroborated  by  the  prayer  against 
vanity  and  lies  (but  see  below,  on  ver.  9). 
It  is  the  first  of  Agur'g  numerical  proverbs. 

Ver.  7. — Two  things  have  I  required  of 
thee.  The  ptrdnual  pronoun  applies  to  God, 
who,  according  to  our  interpretation,  has 
bueu  invoked  in  ver.  1 ;  otherwise  it  stands 
without  rbfeienco  to  anything  preceding. 
Deuy  me  not  before  I  die;  i.e.  grant  me 
these  two  things  for  the  rest  of  my  life. 
S,  ptuagint,  "  Take  not  grace  (x'^C"')  &<"» 
m«  before  I  die." 

Ver.  8. — Here  ii  the  first  request:  Eo- 
move  far  from  me  vanity  and  lies.  Bhav, 
"  vanity,"  ia  inward  hoUowness  and  worth- 
le.-'sness,  and  "  lies "  are  the  expression  of 
this  in  words.  The  prayer  might  indeed  be 
taken  as  an  entreaty  against  being  polluted 
with  the  companionship  of  the  evil,  like 
"  Lead  ua  not  into  temptation,  but  deliver 
us  from  evil ; "  but  it  is  best  taken  subjec- 
tively, as  a  supplication  for  personal  truth- 
fulness and  sincerity  in  all  relations  both 
towards  God  and  man.  Give  me  neither 
poverty  nor  riches.  Both  extremes  are 
deprecated  :  the  mean  is  the  safest  and  the 
happiest.    Horace, '  Oaim.,'  iii.  16.  42 — 

"Multa  petentibuB 
Desunt  multa;  bene  est,  oui  deus  obtulit 
Paroa,  quod  satis  est,  manu." 

"The  'ever  craving'  is  Want's  slave  and 
thiall; 
Tlie  gods  most  wisely  thus    their  gifts 

a'  eord, 
Giving  '  enough,'  they  amply  give  to  all." 
(Stanley.) 

Theognis,  '  Paicen.,'  1155— 

Zpy  ivh  ray  oKlymv,  /iriSiv  ix""''^  Kaxiy. 

"I  want  not  wealth ;  I  only  ask  to  live 
On  frugal  means  without  corroding  care." 

Feed  me  with  food  convenient  for  mej 
literally,  give  me  to  eat  the  bread  of  my 
portion;  that  which  by  God's  providence  is 
determined  for  me  (comp.  Gen.  xlyii.  22, 
which  speaks  of  the  portion  assigned  for  the 
support  of  the  priests;  Job  xxiii.  14;  and 
below,  oh.  xxxi.  15).  It  is  natural  to  refer  to 
rbv  fkoTov.Til^Siv  rhy  iinovfftov  of  the  Lords 
Prayer  (Matt.  vi.  11);  but  the  idea  is  not 
the  same.  In  the  latter,  bread  for  the 
needs  of  the  coming  day  is  meant;  in  our 
passage  it  is  more  indefinite,  a  casting 
one's  self  on  the  Divine  love,  in  readiness  to 
take  what  that  love  assigns.  "  Having  food 
ind  covering,"  says  St.  Paul  (1  Tim.  vi.  8), 
«  we  shall  be  therewith  content"  Septua- 
gint,  "Appoint  for  me  what  i«  necessary 


and  what  is  suCBcient  (jii   Seovra  koI  t& 
avrdpKri)" 

Ver.  9. — The  reason  for  the  latter  prayei 
follows,  unless,  as  some  consider,  the  prayer 
is  one,  as  if  Agur  asked,  "Take  from  me 
riches  which  lead  to  vanity,  and  poverty 
which  leads  to  lying  and  deceit."  In  this 
case  the  ground  of  the  request  would  em- 
brace both  parts  of  the  petition.  Lest  I  be 
full,  and  deuy  thee,  and  say.  Who  is  the 
Lord  ^Jehovah)  ?  Great  wealtli  and  temporal 
prosperity  tempt  to  forgetfulneas  of  God, 
to  self-confidence  and  practical  unbelief 
in  Divine  providence.  Like  Pharaoh,  the 
haughty  rich'  man  asks  with  scorn,  "  Who 
is  the  Lord,  that  I  should  obey  his  voice  ?  " 
(Exod.  V.  2 ;  comp.  Deut.  viii.  12,  etc. ;  Job 
xxi.  14,  etc. ;  Ps.  xiv.  1).  Sepluagint, "  Lest 
being  filled  I  become  false,  and  say.  Who 
seeth  me  7 "  Or  lest  I  be  poor,  and  steal ; 
lest  my  necessities  lead  to  dishonesty.  And 
take  the  name  of  my  God  in  vain.  The  verb 
taphas  means  "to  grasp  at,  seize  violently, 
handle  roughly,"  and  the  sin  intended  may 
be  either  false  swearing  in  denial  of  liis 
theft  and  to  escape  puuishment,  or  the 
arraignment  of  God's  providence  which  has 
allowed  him  to  fall  into  such  distress.  Tims 
Isa.  viii.  21,  "  They  shall  pass  through  it, 
hardly  bestead  and  hungry;  and  it  shall 
come  to  pass  that,  when  they  shall  be 
hungry,  they  shall  fret  themselves,  and 
curse  their  king  and  their  God."  In  view 
of  the  proverbs  that  follow,  the  clause  seems 
to  be  best  taken  of  the  blasphemy  attending 
on  iiripatience  and  want  of  resignation  to 
God's  will  (comp.  oh.  xix.  3). 

Ver.  10. — Accuse  not  a  servant  unto  his 
master.  Calumniate,  slander  not ;  ^^  /caro- 
KaK-fiays,  Theodotion ;  f^ii  Sia^dKris,  Symma- 
'.  bus.  Do  not  secretly  bring  a  charge  against 
a  man's  slave,  and  make  his  master  suspi- 
cious of  him ;  have  a  kiud,feeling  for  those  in 
lowly  condition,  and  do  not  render  their  lot 
mere  unbearable  by  insinuating  false  or 
frivolous  accusations  against  them.  Bwald 
and  others  would  render,  "Entice  not  a 
servint  to  slander  his'master;"  but  there 
is  no  need  so  to  take  the  expression,  as  the 
hiph.  of  the  verb  ia  used  in  post-biblical 
Hebrew  in  the  sense  of  "to  calumniate." 
The  fieptuagint  has,  "  Deliver  not  a-servaut 
into  the  hands  of  his  master,"  which  seems 
to  refer  to  the  treatment  of  runaway  slaves 
(Dent,  xxiii.  15).  Lest  he  curse  thee,  and 
thou  b6  found  guilty,  and  have  to  atone  for 
it.  The  slandered  slave  imprecates  a  curse 
on  his  slanderer,  and,  as  the  latter  has  in- 
curred vengeance  by  his  word  or  actica,  the 
curse  will  not  fall  harmless  (ch.  xxvi.  2) ; 
God's  righteous  retribution  will  overtake 
him,  and  he  shall  suffer  for  it. 

ViiTs.  11 — 31  contain  sii.  group*  of  foui 


574 


THE   PEOVBRBS. 


[cH.  XXX.  1  -33. 


eentences  eaoh,  ea^ih  qnatemion  having  a 
certain  connection  in  language  and  conoin- 
nity  of  idea.  First  (vers.  11 — 14)  come 
four  generationB  that  are  evil — four  being 
taken  aa  toe  symbol  of  universality.  The 
sins  herein  specified  had  become  so  general 
that  they  affected  the  whole  generation. 

Yer.  11. — ^There  is  a  generation  that 
ourseth  their  father.  The  words,  "there 
is,"  are  not  found  in  the  Hebrew,  and  the 
four  subjects  are  without  a  predicate. 
Delitzsch  calls  the  group  "a  mutilated 
priamel,"  which  is  explained  to  be  a  kind 
of  gnomic  poetry  containing  a  series  of  ante- 
cedents or  subjects  followed  by  an  epigram- 
matic conclusion  applicable  to  all  the  ante- 
cedents. In  the  present  case  the  conclusion 
is  wanting,  so  that  we  are  left  in  doubt 
whether  the  author  meant  merely  to  de- 
scribe classes  of  men  in  his  own  time  or  to 
affirm  that  bucIi  are  abominable.  Septua- 
gint,  "A  wicked  generation  curseth  ite 
father  (iKyovov  Kaieiir)"  which  expression  is 
repeated  at  each  of  the  four  verses.  The 
first  sin  is  that  which  ofiends  against  the 
commandment  to  honour  and  obey  parents. 
This  was  judged  worthy  of  death  under  the 
old  Law  (Exod.  xxi.  17 ;  see  ch.  xx.  20,  and 
note  there).  And  doth  not  bless  their  mother. 
This  is  a  litotes,  "  not  to  bless  "  being  ei^ui- 
Talent  to  "  to  curse." 

Ver.  12. — A  generation  that  are  pure  ia 
their  own  eyes  (ch.  xx.  9).  The  second 
characteristic  is  hypocrisy  and  Pharisaical 
self-righteousness  (see  Luke  xviii.  11). 
And  yet  are  not  washed  from  their  filthi- 
ueSs ;  have  not  cleansed  their  heart  by  com- 
plete repentance,  either  because  they  have 
not  examined  themselves  and  know  nothing 
of  the  real  state  of  their  conscience,  or 
because  they  care  nothing  about  it  and  will 
not  regard  it  in  its  true  light.  There  is  a 
similar  expression  in  Isa.  iv.  4.  Septnagint, 
"  A  wicked  generation  judgeth  themselves 
to  be  just,  but  have  not  washed  themselves 
elean  (r^y  e^oSov  aiirov  oi/k  dTrcyii^e*')." 

Yer.  13. — A  generation,  oh,  how  lofty  are 
their  eyes !  The  third  sin  is  pride  and  arro- 
gance (see  on  ch.  vi.  17;  xxi.  4).  "Lord," 
said  the  psalmist,  "  my  heart  is  not  haughty, 
nor  mine"  eyes  lofty  "  (Ps.  cxxxi.  1).  The 
prophet  rebukes  "  the  stout  heart  of  the 
King  of  Assyria  and  the  glory  of  his  high 
looks  "  (Isa.  X.  12).  Their  eyelids  are  lifted 
up  ;  in  supercilious  disdain.  "  Inde  Pro- 
verbio  dioimus,"  says  Erasmus  ('Adag.'), 
"  attoUi  Buperoilium,  fastidium  iudicantes  " 
(«.».  "  Arrogantia  "). 

Yer.  14. — A  generation,  whose  teeth  are 
as  swords,  and  their  jaw  teeth  as  knives. 
The  fourth  evil  is  insatiable  cupidity,  which 
leads  to  oppression  and  injurious  treatment 
of  the  helpless  and  poor,  which  makes  mea 


as  cruel  and  remorseless  in  destroying  others 
and  despoiling  them  of  their  substance,  as 
the  very  steel  which  they  use  in  their  opera- 
tions. Similarly,  the  psalmist  speaks  of  his 
enemies  as  men  "  whose  teeth  are  spears  and 
arrows,  and  their  tongue  a  sharp  sword" 
(Ps.  Ivii.  4 ;  comp.  Isa.  ix.  12 ;  Jer.  v.  17). 
To  devonr  the  poor  from  off  the  earth ;  i.e. 
so  as  to  be  no  more  seen  in  the  world.  Amos 
viii.  4,  "Hear  this,  O  ye  that  would  swallow 
up  the  needy,  and  cause  the  poor  of  the  land 
to  fail "  (comp.  Ps.  xiv.  4). 

Yers.  15, 16. — Having  spoken  of  insatiate 
cupidity,  the  writer  now  introduces  four 
things  which  are  insatiable.  The  form  of 
the  apothegm  ia  climacteric,  mounting  from 
two  to  three,  and  thence  to  four,  like  the 
famous  passage  in  Amos  i.  3,  etc.  (comp.  ch. 
vi.  16,  though  there  is  no  special  stress  there 
laid  on  the  last  member  of  the  climax ;  Job 
V.  19 ;  xxxiii.  29 ;  Eccles.  xi.  2). 

Yer.  15. — The  horseleaoh  hath  two 
daughters,  crying.  Give,  give.  The  word 
"  crying  "  is  not  in  the  Hebrew,  wliich  says, 
"  The  aluhah  hath  two  daughters  :  Give  ( 
Give  I"  The  iasatiable  appetite  of  this 
creature  is  represented  by  two  wortls,  which 
are  personified  aa  daughters,  whom  the 
mother  has  produced  and  dearly  loves. 
This  word  alukaTtie  not  found  again  in  the 
Old  Testament;  but  in  later  Hebrow  and 
in  Aramaic  it  means  "leech"  or  "blood- 
sucker;" and  so  it  is  translated  by  the  Sep- 
tuagint,  pSeKKoy  and  by  St.  Jerome  eangui- 
tuga.  The  word  is  derived  from  a  root  wliich 
in  Arabic  means  "  to  adhere."  There  are 
several  kinds  of  leeches  common  in  Palesthie, 
and  tlieii  bloodthirsty  nature  is  well  known; 
as  Horace  says, '  Ars  Poet.,'  476 — 

"Non  nusBura  cutem,  nisi  plena  craoris,  hi- 
rudo." 

It  seems  simple  and  quite  latisfaetory  to 
accept  the  word  thus,  and  to  see  in  the 
voracity  of  the  leech  an  example  of  the 
greed  further  developed  in  the  following 
clauses;  but  commentators  have  not  been 
contented  with  this  explanation,  and  have 
offered  various  suggestions  which  are  either 
unnecessary  or  inadmissible.  Thus  the  Tal- 
mud considers  alukah  to  be  an  appellation 
of  hell,  and  the  two  daughten  to  be  the 
Power  of  the  world,  and  Heresy.  Some  of 
the  Fathers  regard  it  as  a  symbol  of  the 
devil  and  his  dominion ;  others,  as  a  personi- 
fioation  of  cupidity  with  its  two  offshoots, 
avarice  and  ambitioa  Some  modems  deem 
it  to  mean  a  vampire  or  bloodthirsty  de- 
mon,  a  ghoul,  in  accordance  with  Eastern 
myth.  But,  as  we  have  said,  such  inter- 
pretations are  unnecessary  and  unsupported 
by  suflacient  authority.    The  allusion  to  th» 


OH.  XXX.  1 — 33.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


671 


tasteg  of  the  leech  is  found  elsewhere.  Thus 
Theocritus, '  Idyll.,'  li.  55 — 

At,  at,   ^pas  ai/iape,  tI  /tev   fi,i\ay  in  xpobs 

aV;ua 
'Ejiuf>iis  Sis  \iiivaTis  airav  Ik  iSSeWa  ViTtaxas; 

And  Plautus, '  Epidio.,'  ii.  2.  5— 

"Jam  ego  me  convortam  in  hirudinem  atque 
Eorum  eisugebo  sauguinem, 
Seiiati  qui  columeu  cluent." 

Ewald  and  others  find  traces  of  mutilation 
in  this  proverb,  and  endeavour  to  supply 
what  is  lost  in  various  ways;  but  tlie  text 
as  it  stands  is  intelligible,  and  needs  no 
addition.  The  rest  of  the  verse  is  an  appli- 
cation of  the  truth  first  stated.  The  type 
of  cupidity  there  enunciated  is  instanced 
and  exemplified  in  four  special  cases.  There 
are  three  things  that  are  never  satisfied. 
And  then  a  corrective  climax  is  addressed. 
Yea,  four  things  say  not.  It  is  enough.  The 
four  in  tlie  following  verse  are  divided  Into 
two  plus  two.  Beptuagrint,  "  The  leech  had 
three  daughters  dearly  beloved,  and  these 
three  did  not  satisfy  hor,  and  the  fourth  was 
not  contented  to  say,  Enough." 

Ver.  16. — The  four  insatiable  things  are 
now  named:  first,  the  grave,  sheol  (oh. 
xxvii.  20),  which  can  never  be  filled  with 
its  victims.     Horace  talks  of  a  man  as — 

"  Victima  nil  miserantis  Orci." 

('  Carm.,'  ii.  3.  24.) 

And  Hesiod  ('  Theog.,'  456)  of  Hades  as— 

"  A  heart  possessing  that  no  pity  knows." 

The  second  thing  is  the  barren  womb ;  "  the 
closing  of  the  womb,"  as  Gen.  xx.  18 ;  Isa. 
Ixvi.  9.  The  burning  desire  for  children, 
characteristic  of  an  Israelitish  vrife,  is  here 
denoted,  like  the  passionate  cry  of  Eachel 
to  Jacob,  "Give  me  children,  or  else  1  die" 
(Gen.  XXX.  1).  The  barren  woman,  says 
Corn,  it  Lapide, "  conoubitus  magis  est  avida 
quam  ceterse,  turn  propter  desiderium 
UabendsB  prolis,  turn  quod  foecundsB  et 
gravidas  naturalite»  non  appelant  concubi- 
tum."  The  third  insatiable  thing  is  the 
earth  that  is  not  filled  {satisfied)  with  water ; 
the  parched  and  thirsty  soil  which  no  amount 
of  water  can  satisfy,  which  drinks  in  all  that 
is  poured  upon  it  and  is  not  benefited,  what 
Virgil  ('Georg.,'  i.  114)  calls  "bibula 
arena."  The  fourth  is  the  fire  that  saith 
not.  It  is  enough;  the  "  devouring  element," 
as  the  newspapers  term  it.  The  more  you 
heap  on  fire,  the  more  material  you  supply, 
the  fiercer  it  rages.  Septuagint,  "  Hades, 
and  the  love  of  woman,  and  earth  not  satis- 
fled  with  water,  and  water,  and  fire,  will  not 
say.  It  sufficeth."  Cheyne  and  others 
juute    tioia    the    Sanscrit    '  Hitopadesa,' 


"  Fire  is  never  satisfied  with  fuel ;  nor  the 
ocean  with  rivers;  nor  death  with  all  crea- 
tures ;  nor  bright-eyed  women  with  men." 

Ver.  17. — This  is  an  independent  proverb, 
only  connected  with  the  preceding  by  being 
founded  on  an  allusion  to  an  animal.  The 
eye  that  mocketh  at  his  father.  The  eye  is 
named  as  the  mind's  instrument  for  express- 
ing scorn  and  insubordination;  it  is  the 
index  to  the  inner  feeling ;  and  look  may  be 
as  sinful  as  action.  And  despiseth  to  obsy  his 
mother ;  i.e.  holds  obedience  to  his  mother 
to  be  a  thing  of  no  importance  whalever. 
The  word  translated  "  to  obey  "  (nnrih)  is 
rendered  by  St.  Jeromo  partum;  by  otlieis, 
"  weakness,"  or  "  wrinkles,"  or  "  old  age," 
as  Septuagint,  -y^paj.  But  etymology  lias 
led  most  modern  commentators  to  give  the 
sense  of  "obedience"  (see  Gen.  xlix.  10). 
The  ravens  of  the  valley  shall  pick  it  out. 
Such  an  undutiful  son  shall  die  a  violent 
death;  his  corpse  shall  lie  unburied,  and 
the  birds  of  prey  shall  feed  upon  him.  It 
is  well  known  that  ravens,  vultures,  and 
other  birds  that  live  on  carrion  first  attack 
the  eyes  of  their  prey ;  and  in  our  own 
islands  we  are  told  crows  and  birds  of  this 
sort  will  fix  on  the  eyes  of  young  or  sickly 
animals.  Com.  k  Lapide  quotes  Catullus, 
'  Carm.,'  cviii.  5 — 

"  Effossos  ooulos  voret  atro  gutture  corvus, 
,         Intostina  canes,  cetera  membra  lupi." 

"  His  eyes,  plucked  out,  let  croaking  ravens 
gorge, 
His  bowels  dogs,  his  limbs  the  greedy 
wolves." 

"  The  valley,"  or  brook,  reminds  one  of 
Elijah's  miraculous  support  (I  Kin;i:s  xviL 
4).  Young  eagles.  The  nesher  must  here 
mean  one  of  the  vulture  tribe,  as  eagles  do 
not  feed  on  carrion  (but  see  Job  xxxix.  30). 
St.  Gregory  ('  Moral.,'  xviii.  49)  applies  the 
proverb  thus :  " '  Tlie  eye  that  sneereth  at 
his  father,  and  dc-spiseth  the  travail  of  his 
mother,  lo!  the  ravens  from  the  torrents 
shall  pick  it  out.'  For  bad  men,  while  they 
find  fault  with  the  judgments  of  God,  do 
'  sneer  at  their  Fath(;r ; '  and  heretics  of  all 
sorts,  whilst  in  mocking  they  contemn  the 
preaching  of  holy  Church  and  her  fruit- 
fulness,  what  else  is  this  but  that  they 
'  despise  the  travail  of  their  mother '  ?  whom 
we  not  unjustly  call  the  mother  of  them  as 
well,  because  from  the  same  they  come  forth 
whu  speak  against  the  same." 

Vers.  18 — 20. — A  proverb  concerning  f^ur 
inscrutable  things,  connected  with  the  last 
by  mention  of  the  eagle. 

Ver.  18. — There  he  three  things  which  art 
too  wonderful  for  me,  yea,  four  which  I  know 
not.    The  great  point  is  the  fourth,  tu  which 


578 


THE  PEOVEEBS, 


[oh,  XXX.  1 — 33 


the  three  previons  things  lead  np,  all  of  thera 
being  alike  in  this,  that  they  leavo  no  trace. 
The  facta  are  marvellous ;  Agur  feels  like 
Job,  "  I  have  uttered  that  which  I  under- 
stood not,  things  too  wonderful  for  me,  which 
I  knew  not "  (Job  xlii.  3). 

Ver.  19. — The  way  of  an  eagle  in  the  air, 
Vou  cannot  by  any  outward  sigo  know  that 
an  eagle  has  passed  this  or  that  way.  Wisd. 
V.  11,  "As  when  a  bird  hath  flown  through 
the  air,  there  is  no  token  of  her  way  to  be 
tonnd,"  etc.  The  way  of  a  serpsnt  upon  a 
rock.  The  snake's  mode  of  progression  by 
the  levei-like  motion  of  its  ribs  might  well 
awake  surprise,  but  the  point  is  still  the 
tracklessness  of  its  course.  On  sand  or 
soft  .ground  its  movements  might  be  tiaoed 
by  the  impje^sion  made,  but  this  could  not 
be  done  on  hard  rock;  it  could  push  itself 
along  on  suuh  a  surface  without  leaving  any 
track.  The  way  of  a  ship  in  the  midst  (lieari) 
of  the  sea ;  i.e.  in  the  open  sea.  You  can 
liace  a  sliip's  course  while  she  is  near  land 
or  within  sight,  but  when  she  reaches  the 
f'pen  sea,  you  can  follow  her  furrow  no 
lunger.  Wisd.  v.  10,  "  As  a  ship  that 
paseeth  over  the  waves  of  the  water,  which 
when  it  is  gone  by,  the  trace  thereof  cannot 
be  fouml,  neither  tiie  pathway  of  the  keel  in 
tlie  waves."  The  way  of  a  man  (geher)  with 
a  maid  (nppga) ;  Septuagiut,  "  The  ways  of 
a  man  in  youth  {iv  veorriTi)."  So  Vulgate, 
Viam  liri  in  adoletcentia.  But  this  is  feeble, 
and  iihmih  is  without  doubt  rightly  rendered 
'•  maid,"  "  virgin."  The  proverb  says  that 
the  sinl'ul  act  to  which  it  alludes  leaves  no 
(lutward  sign  by  which  it  can  generally  be 
recognized;  it  escapes  man's  knowledge. 
This  is  exemplified  and  confirmed  in  the 
following  veise.  It  is  not  sufficient  to  refer 
the  tayingto  the  insidious  arts  of  the  seducer, 
by  which  he  saps  the  principles  and  inflames 
the  pnss-ions  of  his  victim.  The  sin  of 
uncbastity  is  siguified,  which  demands 
s.  crucy  and  affords  no  token  of  its  commis- 
sion. Two  of  the  above  parallels,  says 
Cheyne,  are  giveu  in  a  quatrain  of  a  Vedio 
hymn  to  Varuna — 

"The  path  of  ships  across  the  sea. 
The  boariug  eagle's  flight  he  knows." 

SiMiic  of  the  Fatliers  and  earlier  commenta- 
tors, and  among  moderns.  Bishop  Words- 
■nortl],  liave  not  been  content  witli  the  literal 
sense  of  this  gnome,  but  have  found  in  it, 
as  in  the  otiiers,  deep  spiritual  mysteries. 
Clirist  is  tiie  great  Eagle  (Eev.  xii.  14), 
who  oscended  beyond  human  ken ;  the  ser- 
pent is  tlie  devil,  who  works  his  wily  way  in 
Secret,  and  who  tried  to  pass  into  the  mind 
of  Clirist,  V.  ho  is  the  Rock ;  the  ship  is  the 
Church,  which  preserves  its  course  amid 
the  waves  of  this  troublesome  world,  though 
we  oaunot  mark  its  strength  or  whither  it 


is  guided;  and  the  fourth  mystery  is  the 
incarnation  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  when 
"  the  virgin  (^almah)  conceived  and  bare  a 
son  "  (Isa.  vii.  14),  when  "  a  woman  encom- 
passed a  man  (geber)  "  (Jer.  xxxi.  22).  We 
can  see  the  greater  or  less  appropriateness 
of  such  accommodation,  but  the  proverb  must 
have  been  received  by  conteihporaries  only 
in  its  literal  sense,  whatever  were  the  iimer 
mysteries  which  the  Holy  Spirit  wished  to 
communicate  thereby. 

Ver.  20. — This  verse  is  a  kind  of  gloss  or 
illustration  of  the  last  thought  of  the  pre- 
ceding Terse,  and  seems  not  to  have  formed 
an  original  part  of  the  numerical  proverb. 
It  might  well  be  placed  in  a  parenthesis. 
Many  commentators  consider  it  to  be  an 
interpolation.  Such  is  the  way  of  an 
adulterous  woman.  What  Agur  had  said 
of  a  man  above,  he  now  applies  to  the  prac- 
tised adulteress,  whose  sin  cannot  be  I  raced. 
She  eateth.  This  is  a  euphemism  for  the 
sin  which  she  commits.  *  Stolen  waters  are 
sweet,  and  bread  eaten  in  secret  is  pleasant " 
(ch.  ix.  17 ;  comp.  oh.  v.  16).  And  wip'eth 
her  month,  as  if  to  leave  no  trace  of  her 
illicit  repast.  And  saith,  I  have  done  no 
wickedness.  As  she  has  sinned  in  secret, 
and  there  is  no  outward  proof  of  her  guilt, 
she  boldly  denies  it.  Septuagint,  "  Such  ia 
the  way  of  an  adulterous  woman,  who,  when 
she  has  committed  the  act,  having  washed 
herself,  says  she  has  done  nothing  amiss." 
She  forgets  him  who  seeth  in  secret,  and  is 
quite  content  to  t  scape  detection  at  man's 
eyes,  and  to  assume  the  character  of  a  vir- 
tuous wife,  which  popular  report  assigns  to  her. 

Vers.  21 — 23. — Then  follows  a  proverb 
concerning  four  things  which  are  intoler- 
able, examples  of  incongruous  assnciationa 
or  positions— two  in  the  case  of  men,  two  in 
the  case  of  women. 

Ver.  21. — ror  three  things  the  earth  ii 
disquieted;  better,  under  three  things  tht 
earth  doth  tremble,  as  if  oppre.-sed  by  an 
overwhelming  burden.  The  form  of  expres- 
sion does  not  allow  us  to  think  of  an  earth- 
quake. "  The  earth  "  is  equivalent  to  "  the 
inhabitants  thereof."  And  for  (our  which  it 
cannot  hear;  or,  under  four  it  cannot  .'tavd 
(comp.  Amos  vii.  10).  Tliese  four  eviia 
destroy  the  comfort  of  social  life,  uproot  the 
bonds  of  society,  and  endanger  the  safely  of 
■  nation. 

Ver.  22. — Tor  a  servant  when  he  reigveth ; 
or,  wader  a  slave  when  he  becomeih  king.  This 
startling  vicissitude  was  not  uncoramim  in 
Eastern  states;  and  even  if  the  slave  was 
not  preferred  to  regal  power,  he  was  often 
advanced  by  unwise  favouritism  to  high 
position,  for  which  he  was  wholly  unfitted, 
and  which  he  used  only  to  HL-prandze  him- 
self at  the  expense  and  to  the  injury  of  others. 


OH.  XXX.  1 — 33.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


677 


TliiB  IncoTigrutty  has  been  already  noticed 
at  oh.  xis.  10  (where  see.  note).  And  a  fool 
when  he  is  filled  with  meat.  "Fool"  is 
here  ndbal,  a  low,  profligate  fellow,  who  is 
rich  and  without  care.  When  gnoh  a  one 
rises  to  high  position,  or  has  power  over 
others,  he  becomes  arrogant,  selfish,  unbear- 
able (corap.  Ter.  9;  ch.  xxviii.  12;  xxix.  2). 

Ver.  23. — For  an  odions  woman  when  she 
is  married;  or,  wider  an  unloved  woman 
when  she  is  married.  The  sentence  does  not 
refer  to  an  unbeloved  wife,  a  Leah,  becom- 
ing Ihe  favourite,  a  Bachel ;  the  expression, 
"  when  she  is  married,"  can  hardly  have 
this  sense;  but  tlie  gnome  speaks  of  a 
woman  who  lias  passed  muoh  of  her  life 
without  love,  having  nothing  about  her 
attractive  either  in  looks,  attainments,  or 
manner,  and  is  consequently  soured  and 
ill-tempered.  If  such'  a  one  does  at  last  win 
a  liusbadid,  she  uses  her  new  position  to  vex 
those  who  formerly  depreciated  her,  and  to 
make  them  as  miserable  as  she  can.  And  a 
handmaid  that  is  heir  to  her  mistress.  The 
maidservant  that  obtains  her  mistress's  pro- 
perty, either  by  supplanting  her  or  by  right 
of  inheritance,  is  supposed  to  make  a  bad 
use  of  it,  to  become  conceited,  arrogant,  an>l 
odious  to  all  around  her.  The  LXX.  trans- 
poses the  last  two  members  of  the  com- 
parison, placing  the  unloved  woman  in  the 
fourth  place  as  the  moat  intolerable  of  all : 
"  And  if  a  maidservant  should  cast  out 
(en:0d\ri,  Gen.  xxi.  10)  her  own  mistress, 
and  a  hateful  woman  should  obtain  a  good 
husband." 

Vers.  24— 28.— Four  things  imall  and 
weak,  and  yet  wise. 

Ver.  24. — There  be  four  things  which  are 
little  upon  the  earth,  in  contrast  with  the 
iiitolerable  pretensions  of  the  last  group. 
The  Vulgate  has  minima;  but  the  original 
is  not  superlative,  which  would  not  be  true 
of  some  of  the  creatures  named.  But  they 
are  exceeding  wise ;  "  quick  of  wit,  wise," 
the  participle  D'pjnp  meaning  "rendered 
wi8e,cunning"(Delitzseh).  The  Septuagint 
and  Vulgate  translate  in  the  comparative, 
"  These  are  wiser  than  the  wise,"  the  in- 
stincts of  these  animals  being  more  marvel- 
lous than  human  wisdom. 

Ver.  25. — The  ants  are  a  people  not 
strong.  The  ant  is  proposed  as  an  example 
to  the  sluggard  (ch.  vi.  6,  etc.).  He  calls 
the  ants  a  people,  am,  because  they  live  in 
a  commuuitv,  and  have  authorities  which 
they  obey,  and  their  actions  are  regulated 
by  certain  definite  laws.  So  Joel  (i.  6) 
calls  the  locusts  a  nation,  and  Homer 
('Iliad,'  ii.  87)  speaks  of  edvea  li^Kiaaauv 
aZiAaii,  "the  tribes  of  thronging  bees." 
Yet  they  prepare  their  meat  in  the  summer. 
In  countries  wliere    ants    hjberiiate,    the 

FBOYSBBS. 


object  of  this  commended  foresisbt  is  mis- 
taken ;  but  the  statement,  as  that  in  ch.  vi 
G— 8,  is  in  accordance  with  the  popular 
belief  of  the  day,  and  serves  well  to  point 
the  moral  intended.  We  know  certainly 
that  in  Europe  these  insects  fill  their  nosts 
with  heterogeneous  articles — grain,  seeds, 
husks,  etc.,  not  as  stores  to  be  cnnsumed  in 
the  winter,  but  for  warmth  and  comfort's 
sake.  Scripture  is  not  intended  to  teach 
science;  it  speaks  of  such  matters  pheno- 
menally, with  no  attempt  at  a  precision 
which  would  not  have  been  understood  or 
appreciated  by  contemporaries.  But  in  the 
present  case  more  careful  observation  has 
confirmed  the  correctness  of  the  assir 
tions  in  our  proverbs.  In  countries  where 
ants  do  not  hybemate,  they  do  make 
granaries  for  themselves  in  the  summer,  and 
use  these  supplies  as  food  in  the  wiutur 
months  (see  note  on  ch.  vi.  8). 

Ver  26. — The  oonies  are  but  a  feeble  folk. 
The  term  "coney"  (cwnicului)  is  applied  to 
the  rabbit,  but  this  is  not  the  animal  here 
intended ;  and  indeed  rabbits  are  not  found 
in  Palestine.  The  word  ihaphan  designates 
the  Hyrax  Syriacut,  called  by  some  thr 
rock-badger(seeHart, 'Animals  of  the  Bible,' 
pp.  64,  etc.).  The  coney,  says  Dr.  Geikie 
('  Holy  Land  and  Bible,'  ii.  90),  "abounds  in 
the  gorge  of  the  Kedron,  and  alone  the  foot 
of  the  mountains  west  of  the  Dead  Sea.  It 
is  of  the  size  of  the  rabbit,  but  belongs  to  a 
very  different  order  of  animals,  being  placed 
by  naturalists  between  tRe  hippopotamiia 
and  rhinoceros.  Itg  soft  fur  is  brownish- 
grey  over  the  back,  with  long  black  haiia 
rising  through  this  lighter  coat,  and  is 
almost  white  on  the  stomach;  the  tail  is 
very  short.  The  Jews,  who  were  not  scien- 
tific, deceived  by  the  motion  of  its  jaws  in 
eating,  which  is  exactly  like  that  of 
ruminant  animals,  fancied  it  chewed  the 
cud,  though  it  did  not  divide  the  hoof,  and 
BO  they  put  its  flesh  amidst  that  which  was 
forbidden.  It  lives  in  companies,  and 
chooses  a  ready-made  cleft  in  the  rocks  for 
its  home,  so  that,  though  the  conies  are  but 
a  'feeble  folk,"  their  refuge  in  the  rocks 
gives  them  a  security  beyond  that  of  stronger 
creatures.  They  are,  moreover,  '  exceeding 
wise,'  so  that  it  is  very  hard  to  capture  one. 
Inrleed,  they  are  said,  on  higli  authority,  to 
have  sentries  regularly  placed  on  the  look 
out  while  the  rest  are  feeding;  a  squeak 
ftom  the  watchman  sntficing  to  send  the 
flock  scudding  to  their  holes  like  rabbits. 
The  coney  is  found  in  many  parts  of  Pales- 
tine, from  Lebanon  to  the  Dead  Sea."  In 
the  rooks.  This  fact  is  noticed  in  Ps.  civ. 
18.  The  Septuagint  calls  them  xovoTP"''" 
\iot  here  and  Ps.  civ.  18,  also  in  Lev.  xi.  6 
and  Deut.  xiv.  7.  This  notion  of  tlie  animal 
as  a  kind  of  little  pig  is  not  more  accuruta 

2  r 


578 


THE  mOVEEBS. 


[oh.  XXX,  I — 33. 


than  that  of  St.  Jerome,  wbo  renders  the 
term  b^  lepusoulua, 

Ver.  27. — The  locusts  have  no  king  (oh. 
vi.  7),  yet  they  show  dis'^ipUne,  guidance, 
and  order.  They  go  forth  all  of  them  by 
bands ;  so  that  Joel  (ii.  7,  8)  speaks  of  them 
as  a  well-ordered  army,  as  It  were  men  of 
war,  marching  every  one  on  his  ways,  not 
entangling  their  ranks,  walking  every  one 
in  his  path.  Septuagint,  "  The  locusts  are 
without  a  king,  yet  march  at  one  command 
in  good  order." 

Ver.  28.— The  spider  taketh  hold  with  her 
hands.  Semamith  or  shemamith  is  some 
sort  of  lizard,  probably  the  gecko.  Ka\a- 
^drrjs,  Septuagint;.  etellio,  Vulgate.  The 
Authorized  Version  alludes  either  to  its  fan- 
like foot,  which  enables  it  to  run  up  walls 
and  to  cling  to  ceilings,  or  to  its  power  of 
exuding  from  its  feet  a  certain  poisonous 
humour  by  which  it  catches  flies  and  other 
insects.  But  the  above  translation,  as  well 
as  that  of  the  Septuagint  »nd  the  Vulgate 
manibus  nititur,  is  incorrect.  The  first  line, 
in  accordance  with  the  method  pursued  in 
the  three  cases  previously,  ought  to  give 
some  expression  denoting  weakness  or  little- 
ness, whereas  by  the  above  rendering  it  is 
rather  strength  and  activity  that  are  signi- 
fied. The  translation  therefore  should  run, 
as  in  the  Eevised  Version  margin,"  The  lizard 
tliou  canst  seize  with  thy  hand,"  and  yet 
it  is  in  king's  palaces.  Small  as  it  is,  and 
easy  to  catch  and  crush,  it  is  agile  and 
clever  enough  to  make  its  way  into  the  very 
palace  of  the  king,  and  to  dwell  there. 
Septuagint,  "And  the  lizard,  supporting 
itself  by  its  hands,  and  being  easy  to  catch 
(euoAtoToj),  dwelleth  in  kings'  strongholds." 
This  combines  the  two  interpretations  given 
above.  St.  Gregory  takes  the  lizard  as  the 
type  of  the  siaiple,  earnest  man,  who  often 
succeeds  better  than  the  olever.  "  Many 
that  are  quick-witted,  while  they  grow  slack 
from  carelessness,  continue  in  bad  practices, 
and  the  simple  folk,  which  have  no  wing  of 
ability  to  stand  them  in  stead,  the  excel- 
lency of  their  practice  bears  up  to  attain 
to  the  walls  of  the  eternal  kingdom. 
Whereas,  then,  'the  lizard  climbeth  with 
his  hands,'  he  '  is  in  kings'  palaces ; '  in 
that  the  plain  man,  by  earnestness  of  right 
practice,  reaches  that  point  whereanto  the 
man  of  ability  never  mounts  "  ('  Moral.,'  vi. 
12,  Oxford  transl.).  The  apcient  expositors 
see  in  these  verses  a  pnsentation  of  the 
Church  of  God,  weak  on  its  human  side  and 
.  despised  by  men,  yet  exceeding  wise  (1  Cor. 
i.  27) — like  the  ant,  laying  up  treasure  in 
heaven,  providing  for  death  and  eternity; 
Jike  the  coney,  making  the  Rook  her  refuge ; 
like  the  locusts,  moving  forward  a  mighty 
army  in  battle  array;  like  the  lizard,  active 
in  muvement,  holding  the  truth  tenaciously. 


and  dwelling  in  the  palace  of  the  great 
King. 
Vers.   29— 31.— Pour   things    of   stately 

presence. 

Ver.  29. — There  be  three  things  which  go 
well  ( tob) ;  are  of  stately  and  majeslio  car- 
riage.   Comely  in  going ;  "  stately  in  going." 

Ver.  30. — A  lion  which  is  strongest  among 
beasts.  The  word  here  used  for  "  lion,"  laish, 
occurs  elsewhere  only  in  Job  iv.  11  and 
Isa.  XXX.  6.  The  LXX.  renders  it,  "  a  lion's 
whelp."  "Strongest"  is  gibbor,&  mighty  one, 
a  hero.  Turneth  not  away  for  any;  Sep- 
tuagint, "  turneth  not  away,  nor  feareth  any 
beast."  So  Job  describes  the  war-horse, 
"  He  mocketh  at  fear,  and  is  not  dismayed, 
neither  turneth  he  back  from  the  aword  " 
(Job  xxxix.  22). 

Ver.  31. — A  greyhound;  n':nD  Tni(«orrf»' 
mothnayim),  "  girt  in  the  loins "  (irfpi- 
^cc^Lyfievos  r))v  6(r(piy,  Symmachus),  an  ex- 
pression very  vague,  and,  as  the  name  of 
an  animal,  occurring  nowhere  else  in  the 
Old  Testament.  In  post-biblical  Hebrew 
tarzir  is  found  as  the  name  of  some  pugna- 
cious bird,  and  the  Septuagint,  Vulgate,  and 
Syjiao  call  it  here  the  cock.  So  also  Aquila 
and  Theodution.  But  if  the  word  is  onoma- 
topoetio,  it  would  seem  to  apply  with  more 
propriety  to  one  of  the  raven  tribe ;  and  then 
what  is  to  be  made  of  the  allusion  to  the 
luins?  And  how  comes  it  that  amid  the 
quadrupeds  in  the  gnome  a  bird  should 
suddenly  be  introduced,  as  one  stately  in 
going?  It  seems  certain  that  some  quad- 
ruped is  here  meant,  but  what  ?  What  ani- 
mal has  as  characteristic  tight-girded  loins 
or  slender  or  active  loins  ?  'There  are,  indeed, 
many  that  might  be  so  designated,  but  non* 
that,  as  far  as  we  know,  appropriated  this 
unique  appellation.  Hence  various  opinions 
are  held  by  commentators  concerning  the 
identification.  The  zebra,  say  some,  with 
its  stripes,  which  may  be  thus  denoted ;  the 
war-horse,  say  others,  comparing  Job  xxxix. 
19,  25,  and  considering  the  trappings  with 
which,  as  we  see  in  ancient  sculptures,  he 
was  adorned;  others, again, fix  upon  the  leo- 
pard as  the  beast  intended.  But  that  of  the 
Authorized  Version  seems,  on  the  whole,  to 
be  the  most  likely  rendering,  the  slender, 
agile  make  of  the  greyhound  having  given 
cause  for  the  appropriation  of  the  terra  used 
in  the  text.  Delitzsch  compares  the  German 
word  windepiel,  which  designates  the  grey- 
hound without  the  necessity  of  using  the 
full  term,  windspielhund.  'The  only  points 
which  may  be  considered  adverse'  to  thii 
view  are  these  two,  viz.  the  ill  repute  in 
which  dogs  were    held    by  the  Hebrews, 

Scrijjture    consistently     disparaging     and 
despising  them ;  and  the  f  ct  that,  as  far  aa 

we  have  information,  the  Jews  did  not  uw 


1—33.] 


THE  PB0VEBB8. 


679 


dogB  for  hunting  purposes,  though  nowa- 
days the  Arabs  keep  a  kind  of  Persiian  grey- 
hound for  sporting,  and  Assyrian  monuments 
have  familiarized  us  with  the  appearance  of 
hounds  employed  in  the  chase  of  the  lion 
and  the  wild  ox.     Agur  may  he  referring 
to  what  he  has  seen  elsewhere,  but  what 
was  well  known  to  those  for  whom  he  wrote. 
Gt'senius  suggests  (253),  "a  warrior  girt  in 
the  loins,"  which  is  adopted  by  Wordsworth, 
and  gives  a  suitable    idea.     This    would 
correspond  with  the  king  in  the  last  line ; 
but, the  interpretation  is  quite  arbitrary,  and 
supported  by  no  ancient  authority,  resting 
on  the  fact  that  girding  the  loins  is  always 
spoken  of  human  beings.     The  cock  strut- 
ting among  hia  hens  Is,  as  we  have  hinted, 
the    idea   which  approves  itself  to  many 
ancient  translators.    Thus  the  Septuagint, 
iXixTttp  e/nrepiiraTciv  6ri\elais  ftl\fivxos.     We 
are  not  disposed  to  adopt  this  identification, 
more  especially  as  common  poultry  were 
unknown  in  Palestine  till  long  after  Solo- 
mon's time,     Certainly  what  we  call  cocks 
and  hens,  or  bam-door  fowls,  are   never 
mentioned  in  the  Old  Testament,  and  seem 
to  have  been  introduced  from  Persia  after  the 
rise  of  the  Persian  empire.    The  latest  edi- 
tors decide  for  the  war-horse ;  but  the  con- 
flicting claims  cannot  be  reconciled,  and  the 
matter  must  be  leftundetermined.  Anhe-goat 
also.    This  is  a  very  natural  comparison,  as 
the  stately  manner  in  which  the  he-goat  (tay- 
ish,  "  the  butter  ")  heads  the  flock  has  been 
always  observed.    The  LXX.  expresses  this, 
paraphrasing,  "  and  the  he-goat  leading  the 
herd."    "  Flocks  of  goats  are  very  numerous 
in  Palestine  at  this  day,  as  they  were  in 
former  ages.     We  see  them  everywhere  on 
the  mountains,  in  smaller  or  larger  numbers; 
at  times  also  along  with  sheep,  as  one  flock, 
in  ^hioh  case  it  is  usually  a  he-goat  that  is 
the  special  leader  of  the  whole,  walking 
before  it  as  gravely  as  a  sexton  before  the 
white  flock  of  a   church  choir"  (Geikie, 
•  Holy  Land,'  i.  232).    A  king,  against  whom 
there  is  no  rising  up ;  Vulgate,  neo  est  rex  qui 
resistat  ei,  which  ought  to  mean  "  and  a  king 
whom  nothing  resists,"  bat  can  scarcely  be 
compelled  to  produce  this  meaning  without 
violence.    The  difficulty  in  the  sentence 
orises  from  the  word  aph^,  which  in  the 

above  rendering  is  regarded  as  composed  of 
the  negative  al,  and  hum,  the  infinitive,  "  to 
rise  against,  oppose."  But  this  is  contrary 
to  grammatical  usage,  and  would  be  a 
solecism.  To  some  it  has  seemed  that  a 
proper  name  was  intended,  and  they  have 
invented  a  King  Alkum  or  Alkimos,  whom 
they  suppose  to  have  been  celebrated  in  or 
after  Solomon's  time.  Many  modem  com- 
mentators take  the  word  to  be  an  Arabic 
expression,  consisting  of  al,  the  definite 


article,  and  hnm,  "  people,"  and  consider  the 
meaning  to  be  "  a  king  with  whom  is  the 
people,"  i.e.  surrounded  by  his  people  or 
army.  This  is  certainly  a  stately  sight,  and 
may  well  stand  parallel  to  the  hero-lion 
among  beasts,  and  the  bold  he-goat  at  the 
head  of  the  flock.  Other  Arabic  expres- 
sions may  probably  be  found  elsewhere  in 
this  chapter ;  e.g.  vers.  15, 16, 17,  aluka,  etc. 
Septuagint,  "a  king  haranguing  before  a 
nation  (JS-i\iuiyopav  ir  ^Bvei)."  This  passage, 
again,  has  been  taken  in  a  spiiitual  sense 
as  referring  to  Christ,  the  Lion  of  1  he  tribe 
of  Judali,  the  Warrior  girt  with  tliL'  sword, 
the  Leader  of  the  flock,  the  King  of  kings. 

Vers.  32, 33. — Agnr'a  last  proverb,  oiliort- 
ing  to  discreet  demeanour. 

Ver.  82. — If  thou  hast  done  foolishly  in 
lifting  up  thyself  (Numb.  xvi.  3).     If  thou 
hast  had  the  folly  to  be  arrogant,  proud, 
and   overbearing  in  conduct.    Or  if    thou 
hast  thought  evil,  lay  thine  hand  upon  thy 
mouth.    The  verb  zamam,  though  pussibly 
used  in  a  bad  sense,  "  to  devise  evil,"   is 
more    suitably    rendered    "  to    meditate," 
"  purpose ; "  so  here  it  is  the  thought  of  lift- 
ing up  one's  self  that  is  censured,  the  rtet 
and  the  thought  being  contrasted.     Ilant 
thou  acted  arrogantly,  or  even  only  medi- 
tated   doing    BO,    restrain    yourself,    keep 
silence  (Job  xxi.  5 ;  xl.  4).    St.  Jerome  givt » 
a    different    rendering,    enforcing    anutlier 
lesson,  "  There  is  one  who  shows  hiniBclf  a 
fool  after  he  is  raised  to  high  position ;  if  he 
had  had  understanding,  he  would  have  laid 
hia  hand  on  his  mouth."    Septuagint,  "  If 
thou  give  thyself  up  to  mirth,  and  stretch 
forth  thy  hand  in  a  quarrel,  thou  wilt  bo 
dishonoured."    Insensate  mirth  and  a  qiiai- 
relaome  disposition  alike  lead  to  disgraco. 
St.  Gregory  ('  Moral.,'  xxx.  10)  applies  tlie 
Vulgate  rendering  to  antichrist,  "  I'or  he  in 
truth  will  be  lifted  up  on  high,  when  he 
will  feign  that  he  is  God.    But  he  will 
appear  a  fool  when  lilted  up  on  high,  be- 
cause he  will  fail  in  his  very  loftiness  tUrou;;h 
the  coming  of  the  true  Judge.    But  if  ha 
had  understood  this,  he  would  have  laid  hia 
hand  on  his  mouth ;  that  is,  if  he  had  fore- 
seen his  punishment,  when  he  began  to  be 
proud,  having  been  once  fashioned  aright, 
he  would  not  have  been  raised  up  to  the 
boastfulness  of  such  great  pride"  (Oxford 
transl.).  .         _      .„ 

Ver.  33.— Surely  the  churning  of  milk 
bringeth  forth  butter.  The  same  word,  mitt, 
is  used  for  "  churning,"  "  wringing,"  and 
"  forchig ; "  it  means  "  pressure "  m  all 
the  cases,  though  with  a  different  applica- 
tion. At  the  present  day  milk  is  churned 
in  the  Bast  by  enclosing  it  in  a  leathern 
bottle,  which  is  then  suspended  in  the  ail 
•ud  jerked  to  and  firo  till  the  butter  is  pro 


680 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[cH.  XXX.  1 — 33. 


(luced.  This  process  could  scarcely  be 
called  "pressure,"  tliough,  possibly,  the 
squeezing  of  the  udder  is  meant,  as  the 
Septnagint  and  Vulgate  take  it.  But  most 
probably  the  reference  is  to  cheese,  the 
term  used,  chemah,  being  applied  indiffer- 
ently to  curdled  milk  and  cheese.  To  pro- 
duce tins  substance,  the  curdled  milk  is  put 
into  little  baskets  of  rush  or  palm  leaves, 
tied  closely,  and  then  pressed  under  heavy 
stones.  What  the  proverb  says  is  that,  as 
the  pressure  applied  to  milk  produces  cheese, 
and  as  pressure  applied  to  the  nose  brings 
blood,  so  the  pressure  of  wrath  bringeth 
forth  strife ;  the  irritation  and  provocation 
of  anger  occasion  quarrels  and  contentions. 
They  say  in  Malabar,  remarks  Lane,  "  Anger 
is  a  stone  cast  into  a  wasp's  nest."  Septna- 
gint, "Press  out  milk,  and  there  shall  be 
butter;  and  if  thou  violently  squeeze  the 
nostrils,  blood  will  come  forth;  and  if  thou 
drivw  forth  words,  there  will  come  forth 
quarrels  and  strifes."  It  is  the  third  clause 
n  hich  is  important,  and  to  which  the  others 
lead  up ;  and  the  verse  must  be  taken  in  con- 
nection with  the  preceding,  as  enforcing  the 
duty  of  self-restraint  and  silence  under  cer- 


tain eircumstanceg.  Some  of  the  Fathers, 
commenting  on  the  Vul;;ate  rendering  (Qui 
fortiter  premit  ubera  ad  elidendum  lae,  ex- 
primit  butyrum ;  et  qui  reliementer  emungit, 
elicit  tanguinem),  apply  the  passage  to  the 
handling  of  the  Word  of  God.  Thus  St. 
Gregory  ('  Moral.,'  xxi.  3),  "  Divine  sentences 
require  sometimes  to  be  viewed  externally, 
sometimes  to  be  explored  internally.  For 
we  '  press  the  udder  strongly '  when  we 
weigh  with  minute  understanding  tlje  won! 
of  sacred  revelation,  by  which  way  of  press- 
ing whilst  we  seek  milk,  we  find  butter, 
because,  whilst  we  seek  to  be  fed  with  but 
a  little  insight,  we  are  anointed  with  the 
abundance  of  interior  richness.  Which, 
nevertheless,  we  ought  neither  to  do  too 
much,  nor  at  all  times,  lest,  while  milk  is 
sought  for  from  the  udder,  there  shouM 
follow  blood.  For  very  often,  persons,  whilst 
they  sift  the  words  of  sacred  revelation 
more  than  tliey  ought,  -fall  into  a  carnal 
anprehension.  For  '  he  draws  forth  blood 
who  wringeth  Tiolently.'  Since  that  is 
rendered  carnal  which  is  perceived  by  an 
overgreat  »it'ting  of  the  spirit"  (Oxford 
transl.). 


H0MILETIC8. 

Vers.  1  —4. — The  weary  search  for  God.  If  we  read  ver.  1  thus ;  "  Words  of  Agur 
the  siin  of  the  Princess  of  Massa.  The  man's  saying,  I  have  wearied  myself  about 
God,  wearied  myself  about  God — then  did  I  vsithdrawl"  we  are  led- to  the  contempla- 
tion of  one  who  has  grown  tired  and  despairing  in  a  hopeless  search  for  God. 

I.  It  is  natural  fob  man  to  seek  God.  Agur  appears  to  have  lived  far  away 
from  the  borders  of  the  favoured  land  of  Israel.  If  he  was  a  Jew,  he  was  one  in  exile, 
separaled  from  the  home  of  his  people.  If  he  was  an  Ishmaelite,  he  was  even  outside 
the  covenant  of  Israel,  and  in  that  case  we  have  the  striking  picture  of  an  Arab  of 
antiquity  anticipating  Mahomet  in  breaking  from  the  idolatry  of  his  fathers.  Like 
Balaam,  like  Job,  this  resident  in  a  heathen  land  looks  up  to  the  true  God.  St.  Paul 
spoke,  to  the  Athenians  of  those  who  could  "  seek  God,  if  haply  they  might  feel  after 
him,  and  find  him  "  (Acts  xvii.  27) ;  and  St.  Peter  could  acknowledge  God's  acceptance 
of  all  who  look  to  him  truly,  no  matter  what  race  they  might  belong  to  (Acts  x.  35). 
The  natural  search  of  the  soul  for  God  springs  from  certain  great  fundamental  facts, 
viz. :  1.  God  is  the  Father  of  all  men.  2.  All  men  need  God.  3.  All  men  are 
separated  from  God  by  sin,  and  therefore  must  feel  naturally  at  a  distance.  The  world 
needs  God.    But  the  world  has  lost  God.    Hence  the  natural  search  for  God. 

n.  Tub  natural  search  for  God  results  in  weariness.  This  is  not  the 
weariness  of  protracted  thinking,  the  reaction  from  high  mental  tension.  It  is  worse 
than  that;  it  is  the  weariness  of  a  long  and  apparently  fruitless  search.  Man  cannot 
by  searching  find  out  Gt)d.  God  does  not  appear  to  respond  to  the  inquiry  of  the 
seeking  mind.  Even  to  the  wisest  of  the  Greeks  he  was  "an  Unknown  God"  (Acts 
xvii.  23).  For  God  is  not  visible  to  the  natural  reason,  nor  is  he  ever  seen  excepting 
when  he  reveals  himself.  Now,  there  is  no  weariness  like  that  of  a  long  and  hopeless 
search.  The  sickness  of  despair  then  begins  to  tire  the  soul.  Such  weariness  drives 
nien  at  last  to  abandon  the  vain  pursuit.  Agur  said,  "Then  did  I  withdraw  1"  He 
piive  up  the  inquiry.     This  is  the  refuge  of  agnosticism. 

Hi.  The  greatness  of  God's  works  makes  the  search  for  him  a  weariness. 
lloM  vast  is  his  created  universe!  No  man  can  reach  up  to  the  starry  altitudes  of 
fa«tven,  or  dive  into  the  deep  mysteries  of  antiquity,  to  find  the  scoi^o  and  range  of 


OH.  XXX.  1— Sa  ]  THE  PROVERBS.  681 

tlie  Divine  activity.  The  tremendous  energy  of  nature  overwhelms  us.  Science  can 
investigate  its  laws,  and  in  a  measure  make  use  of  its  forces ;  but  they  come  out  of  a 
terrible  darkness,  and  they  transcend  the  control  of  so  feeble  a  creature  as  man.  Agnr 
did  not  simply  distress  himself  with  his  own  fruitless  thinking.  He  knew  something 
of  the  history  of  philosophy,  and  yet  he  had  not  been  able  to  find  one  ioquirer  who  had 
solved  the  terrible  enigma  over  which  his  own  heart  was  breaking. . 

IV.  The  BBABcn  fok  God  is  satisfird  in  the  eevelatioh  op  Chetst.  St.  Paul 
said  to  the  Athenians,  "  Whom  therefore  ye  ignorantly  worship,  him  declare  I  unto 
you  "  (Acts  xvii.  23).    This  is  not  an  authoritative  declaration  of  a  dogma  of  Divinity. 

1.  The  revelation  of  Christ  is  such  that  we  can  see  it  and  understand  it  for  ourselves. 
We  can  see  that  God  is  in  Christ  by  observing  the  stamp  of  the  Divine  on  lils  counte- 
nance— the  signs  of  God  in  his  life  and  work.  Then  in  knowing  Christ  we  know  God 
(John  xiv.  9).  2.  Moreover,  this  revelation  of  God  in  Christ  flashes  a  light  on  ilie  huge 
mystery  of  the  universe,  and  helps  us  to  find  God  in  nature.  3.  The  reconciliation 
between  man  and  God,  effected  by  the  cross  of  Christ,  removes  the  dark  barrier  of  sin, 
which  is  the  greatest  hindrance  to  the  soul  in  its  search  for  God,  and  brings  us  into 
the  presence  of  God,  where  we  can  behold  "  the  beatific  vision." 

Vers.  6,  6, — Thtpv/rity  of  God's  words.  I.  The  BBrnoB  from  vain  speculation  is 
PBAGTicAL  BBVELATioN.  The  Bcarch  for  God  in  thought  and  nature  has  ended  in 
wiariness.  But  Agur  does  not  subside  into  agnosticism,  much  less  does  he  reuounco 
nil  higher  thinking  as  "vanity  of  vanities,"  and' plunge  into  Sadducean  worldlinoss 
anl  Epicurean  materialism.  On  the  contrary,  though  he  gives  up  his  ambitious  que-t 
with  a  sigh  of  disappointment,  he  learns  to  take  a  humbler  path,  on  which  he  finds 
that  God  has  shed  light.  The  mysteries  of  pure  theology  are  wrapped  in  cloiula,  biu 
the  path  of  man's  duty  and  the  way  of  practical  religion  are  illumined  by  the  light  c.l 
God's  revealed  truth.  This  truth  consists  in  more  than  those  "  regulative  ideas,"  u  hii  !i 
are  all  that  Mansel  would  have  us  expect  to  know,  for  it  corresponds  to  the  actual ;  it 
is.  fact  and  law  of  God's  real  spiritual  world.  The  Word  of  God  is  with  us  in  tlie  liililo 
and  in  Christ.  In  this  Word  the  weary  seeker  after  light  may  not  find  a  star-sijanglud 
heaven,  but  he  will  see ,"  a  lamp  to  his  feet"  (Ps.  cxix.  105). 

II.  The  revelation  of  God  is  pdbb.  1.  It  is  free  from,  error.  This  is  not  a 
matter  of  the  language  of  the  Bible,  which  is  but  the  case  that  enshrines  the  holy 
revelation.  The  frame  is  not  the  picture.  When  we  crack  the  nut  we  find  ih;ii 
the  kernel  is  sound  and  flawless.     The  spiritual  contents  of  revelation  are  infallible. 

2.  It  is  free  from  moral  corruption.  Prurient  minds  have  afi'ected  to  be  shocked  at 
immoral  stories  in  the  Bible.  But  what  is  most  wonderful  about  the  Scripture  writers 
in  respect  to  such  matters  is  that,  though  they  are  bold  enough  to  touch  the  most 
repulsive  subjects,  they  never  soil  their  fingers,  nor  do  they  ever  soil  the  minds  of  thtir 
readers.  Only  impure  minds  draw  impure  suggestions  from  the  Bible,  and  such  mindd 
may  find  them  anywhere.  The  Bible  reveals  man  to  himself,  and  declares  God's 
estimate  of  sin.  It  cannot  cover  over  the  foulest  evil  with  a  cloak  of  social  propriuty. 
The  horrible  things  must  be  exposed  in  the  interest  of  purity,  that  they  may  be 
denounced,  and  the  doers  of  them  put  to  shame. 

III.  The  pubity  of  God's  Woed  should  inspire  trust  and  eevebexce.  1.  It 
should  inspire  trust.  For  "  he  is  a  Shield  to  them  that  put  their  trust  in  him."  We 
cannot  understand  all  mysteries;  the  deep  counsels  of  God  must  ever  lie  beneath  our 
most  searching  inquiry;  but  we  have  light  in  God's  words  for  our  help  and  f^uidance. 
The  purity  of  this  light  is  a  security  against  danger.  It  will  not  allure  us  mto  error, 
and  it  will  not  permit  us  to  live  in  sin  unrebukcd  and  unwarned.  Therefore  the 
light  is  guiding,  healing,  saving.  With  such  a  revelation  we  can  afford  to  erjdure  the 
insoluble  character  of  great  mysteries  of  theology.  When  vexed,  perplexed,  and 
wiaried  out,  we  can  turn  to  the  God  who  has  thus  made  himself  known  to  us,  and 
quietly  rest  in  his  sheltering  care.  2.  It  should  also  inspire  reverence.  "Add  not 
thou  unto  his  words."  The  truth  of  God  is  too  sacred  for  man  to  be  permitted  to 
tamper  with  it.  This  is  a  great  warning  that  men  have  rarely  heeded.  We  may 
think  and  utter  our  thoughts.  But  the  fatal  mistake  is  when  we  put  forth  our 
speculations  as  though  they  were  a  part  of  God's  revelation.  This  is  a  common  sm  of 
authoritative  theology.     Men's  opinions — harmless  enough  in  themselves,  perhaps— 


THE  PROVERBS.  [oh.  xxx.  1— Sa 


have  been  added  to  the  Scripture  truths,  and  set  before  the  world  as  unquestionable 
and  Divine.  The  interpretation  of  Scripture  has  been  made  as  sacred  as  the  text. 
Church  do<;ma  has  claimed  Divine  authority.  This  is  adding  to  God's  words,  and  the 
danger  of  it  is  (1)  Divine  disapproval — "lest  he  reprove  thee;  "and  (2)  human  dis- 
loyalty to  truth — "  and  thou  be  found  a  liar." 

Vers.  8,  9. — "  Neither  poverty  nor  riches."  A  wise  man  here  points  out  the  danger 
of  the  two  extremes  of  poverty  and  riches,  and  seeks  for  himself  the  happier  middle 
position.  In  the  present  day  the  enormous  wealth  of  one  class  and  the  hard  penury 
of  another  suggest  serious  social  questions,  and  raise  alarms  as  to  great  possible 
dangers  unless  the  terrible  anomaly  of  this  artificial  condition  is  not  remedied. 

I.  The  evil  of  povebtt.  The  thought  is  of  extreme  poverty,  of  absolute  destitu- 
tion, or,  at  least,  of  that  precarious  livelihood  that  is  always  on  the  verge  of  want,  and 
is  therefore  oppressed  with  an  ever-haunting  fear  of  the  distress  which  can  never  be 
quite  out  of  sight.  Now,  what  is  to  be  remarked  here  is  that  the  great  evil  of  excessive 
poverty  pointed  out  in  the  passage  before  us  is  moral  in  character.  The  sufferings  of 
penury  are  sad  to  contemplate.  Those  of  us  who  have  never  known  what  it  is  to  be 
really  hungry  cannot  understand  the  pangs  of  the  starving.  More  fearful  must  be  the 
trouble  of  parents  who  see  their  children  crying  for  bread  and  cannot  satisfy  them. 
Yet  the  worst  evil  is  not  this  suffering;  it  is  the  moral  degradation  that  follows  it. 
Wolf-like  hunger  assimilates  its  victims  to  the  nature  of  the  wolf.  It  is  hard  to  be 
honest  when  in  want  of  food.  The  temptations  of  the  poor  are  frightful  to  con- 
template. It  is  wonderful  that  there  is  so  little  crime,  seeing  that  there  is  so  much 
poverty.  The  grinding  cares  of  poverty  tend  to  wear  the  soul  out,  and  blind  its 
vision  to  spiritual  truth.  The  patience  and  good  behaviour  of  the  dumb,  suffering 
multitudes  of  the  distressed  is  indeed  a  sight  to  move  our  sympathy  and  excite  our 
admiration. 

II.  The  evil  or  wealth.  The  temptation  of  riches  is  not  very  unlike  that  of 
poverty  in  its  character,  but  more  deadly.  Both  extremes  tempt  to  worldliness— 
poverty  to  worldly  care,  riches  to  worldly  satisfaction.  The  "care  of  this  world  "  and 
"  the  deeeitfulness  of  riches "  stand  together  as  the  thorns  that  choke  the  good  seed 
(Matt.  xiii.  22).  But  riches  goes  fuither.  It  tempts  a  man  to  dispense  with  -God. 
Poverty  tempts  to  thelt,  often,  indeed,  with  extenuating  circumstances.  But  riches 
tempts  to  scornful  atheism.  Christ  saw  this  danger  when  he  said,  "  How  hardly  shall 
they  that  have  riches  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God ! "  (Mark  x.  23).  On  the  other 
hand,  when  we  see  rich  men  who  have  conquered  the  exceptional  temptations  of  their 
position,  and  who  live  a  humble  and  useful  Christian  life,  devoting  their  talents  to  the 
service  of  Christ,  we  should  acknowledge  that  such  victors  over  the  world  are  deserving 
of  especial  honour. 

ill.  The  choice  of  a  middle  course.  We  are  here  reminded  of  Aristotle's  doctrine 
of  "the  mean."  There  are  circumstances  in  which  the  true  mean  is  not  just  the 
middle  way  between  iwo  diverse  irolicies.  The  lowering  of  the  standard  of  right 
and  wrong  that  comes  from  the  peace-loving  tendency  to  accept  a  compromise  ia 
disastrous  to  all  cunscieutious  conduct.  But  now  we  have  to  do  with  a  middle  course 
between  two  external  ttates,  both  of  which  are  dangerous.  If  Christian  people  under- 
stood their  mission  in  the  world  aright,  in  its  breadth  and  humanity,  they  would  know 
that  the  call  to  preach  the  gospel  of  the  kingdom  includes  the  inculcation  of  those 
social  principles  which  tend  to  blot  out  the  present  ugly  pictur&  of  extreme  poverty  set 
off  by  extreme  wealth.  A  life  that  is  neither  crushed  by  care  nor  intoxicated  by 
riches  is  the  life  in  which  it  is  least  difficult  to  serve  God  and  do  right.  Therefore  we 
should  labour  to  help  on  a  state  of  society  in  which  more  of  such  lives  will  be  possible. 

Vers.  12,  13. — Self-deception.  Self-deception  in  regard  to  the  guilt  of  sin  is  the 
most  common  delusion  of  minds  that  have  not  been  spiritually  enlightened.  However 
much  men  may  know  and  acknowledge  about  themselves  in  other  respects,  on  this  vita) 
point  they  are  most  tempted  to  go  astray. 

I.  Let  us  coksipee  the  temptation  to  self-deception.  People  have  strong 
BDotiTes  to  think  well  of  themselves.  1.  Conscience  is  so  powerful  and  urgent  that  few 
men  are  able  to  brave  a  confession  of  sin  before  its  awful  bar,  and  yet  continue  in  the 


OH.  XXX.  1—33.]  THE  PROVERBS.  683 


practice  of  sin  with  equanimity.  For  the  sake  of  the  peace  of  his  mind,  everybody 
naturally  desires  to  stand  wel  I  with  his  own  conscience.  Therefore  there  is  a  strong  motive 
to  lie  to  it,  hoodwink  it,  cajole  it ;  or,  if  these  measures  fail,  to  gag  it,  drown  it,  brand,  or 
crush,  or  stamp  it  out — if  possible  to  murder  it.  2.  Pride  also  makes  a  man  desire 
his  own  self-approval.  The  "  lofty  eyes  "  are  disinclined  to  see  any  evil  within.  It  is 
inwardly  humbling  to  hear,  amidst  the  plaudits  of  a  bamboozled  world,  a  keen  inner  voice 
exclaiming,  "Thou  art  a  hypocrite,  a  liar,  a  knave  1 "  3.  Fear  of  coming  judgment 
drives  a  man  into  a  refuge  of  lies  rather  than  to  remain  out  in  the  open,  exposed  to 
the  pitiless  storm.  It  is_ absurd,  ostrich-like  to  hide  one's  head  in  the  sand ;  but  men 
are  not  always  logical  in  their  conduct.  The  feeling  of  danger  disappears  when  a 
man  persuades  himself  that  he  is  innocent. 

II.  Let  us  inquibb  into  the  oaubbs  of  this  SBLr-DECEPTioif.  1.  It  springs  from 
inclination.  The  temptation  to  flatter  one's  self  helps  to  produce  the  delusion.  Thus 
"the  wish  is  father  to  the  thought."  2.  ItiiaiAe&hy  alow  standard  of  Tnorah.  Only 
when  such  a  standard  is  prevalent  and  accepted  will  any  sinful  generation  be  capable 
of  appearing  pure  in  its  own  eyes.  The  higher  the  standard,  the  greater  the  feeling  of 
guilt.  Therefore  the  most  holy  men,  being  also  the  most  spiritually  enlightened,  have 
the  deepest  consciousness  of  sin.  3.  It  is  further  encouraged  by  the  example  of  others. 
There  is  a  whole  "generation"  of  these  self-deluded  people.  Each  man  finds  his 
neighbour, as  bad  as  himself.  A  single  black  sheep  in  the  fold  is  marked  by  contrast 
with  its  fellows,  and  cannot  but  acknowledge  its  abnormal  colour,  but  a  whole  flock  of 
black  sheep  may  readily  forget  that  it  is  not  white. 

III.  Let  us  obsebvk  the  evil  of  this  self-dbobption.  The  generation  is  pure 
in  its  own  eyes,  but  it  is  not  washed  from  its  filthiness.  1.  Self-deception  does  not 
cleanse.  It  only  asserts  what  is  false;  it  goes  no  way  to  make  its  assertion  true. 
It  rather  tends  the  other  way,  because  there  can  be  no  effectual  cleansing  of  the  soul 
without  confession  and  repentance.  2.  It  does  not  hide  sin.  It  is  not  even  a  cloak 
thrown  over  what  remains  as  foul  as  ever,  though  no  longer  visible.  The  generation 
may  wjilk  with  lofty  eyes,  but  its  pride  only  deludes  itself.  Others  can  see  the  shame 
in  spite  of  all  the  guilty  people's  loud  protestations.  Self-deception  does  not  lead  to 
a  deluding  of  God.  3.  Selt-ieception  taust  he  exposed  and  punished.  It  is  itself  sinful. 
For  the  sinner  to  walk  with  a  lofty  gait  is  for  him  to  court  his  doom.  The  safer  course 
is  to  follow  the  example  of  the  publican,  who  would  not  so  much  as  lift  up  his  eyes  to 
heaven  while  he  smote  his  breast  and  cried,  "  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner  I  "  (Luke 
xviii.  13). 

Vers.  18, 19. —  The  mystery  of  love.  Agur  sees  four  things  that  cannot  be  traced 
out.  1.  "  The  way  of  an  eagle  in  the  air."  No  track  is  followed  by  the  king  of  birds 
as  it  cleaves  the  invisible  fluid  and  takes  its  own  wild  course  from  crag  to  crag.  2. 
"  The  way  of  a  serpent  upon  a  rock."  Creeping  out  of  a  dark  cranny,  the  reptile  lies  and 
basks  on  the  hot  stone,  and  then  at  the  approach  of  an  intruder  darts  into  another 
cranny — its  course  unknown.  3.  "  The  way  of  a  ship  in  the  midst  of  the  sea."  We 
jalk  of  the  ocean  highway,  but  there  is  no  beaten  track,  no  worn  course.  The  ship 
flits  the  surface  for  a  moment,  and  then  the  waves  roll  over  its  path,  and  in  a  short  time 
every  trace  of  its  passage  is  lost  in  the  wash  of  the  waters.  So  it  is  with  the  fourth 
mystery.  The  course  of  human  love  cannot  be  predicted  or  explained.  It  cannot  be 
made  to  follow  rule  and  precedent  or  to  correspond  to  fond  parental  wishes.  Love 
will  go  its  own  way  free  as  the  eagle  in  the  air,  unsuspected  as  the  serpent  on 
the  rock,  untracked  as  the  ship  in  the  sea.  The  three  earlier  wonders  lead  on  to  the 
fourth,  and  help  to  give  colour  and  weight  to  it.  The  whole  sentence  thus  gathers  up 
its  force  into  a  climax.  Nothing  is  so  wonderful  in  the  natural  world  as  the  great 
mystery  of  love.     This  may  take  three  forms — 

I.  Thk  wild  fbbbdom  of  the  baqlb'b  flioht.  Love  can  never  be  coerced.  A 
forced  marriage  cannot  be  a  love-match.  It  is  natural  that  man  and  maid  should  learn 
to  love  one  another  of  their  own  accord,  by  the  drawing  of  mutual  sympathy.  Friends 
may  guide,  warn,  encourage,  or  hinder.  But  a  matter  which  concerns  the  lifelong 
happiness  of  two  souls  cannot  be  well  arranged  by  worldly  contrivances.  Nevertheless, 
love  that  is  untamed  and  utterly  uncontrolled  may  lead  to  frightful  mistakes,  to  folly 
and  sin  and  shame.    The  eaglo  is  a  wild  and  dangerous  bird— a  terror  to  the  helpless 


fi84  THE  PBOVERBR  [cm.  xxx.  1— Sa 

iamb.  Love  becomes  a  cursed  thing,  near  to  hatred,  when  it  is  no  better  than  a  wild, 
'iiifettered  passion. 

11.  Thb  subtle  beoret  of  the  serpent's  trail.  This  is  a  very  ugly  picture, 
from  which  we  start  back  shuddering  and  in  horror.  There  is  a  snalje-like  cunning  in 
selfish  lust  that  wickedly  usurps  the  sacred  name  of  love,  when  it  is  really  the  very 
mcarnation  of  hellish  venom,  seeking  to  allure  its  prey  to  destruction.  All  low,  carnal 
lust  is  of  the  type  of  the  serpent.  The  wild  passion  that  follows  the  eagle's  flight  may 
be  dangerous,  but  the  cold,  loveless  course  of  deliberate  vice  is  deadly  as  that  of  a  viper. 

HI.  The  uncertain  votaoe  of  the  ship.  The  ship  is  a  home  on  the  waters. 
She  carries  freight  and  passengers — wealth  and  life.  She  sails  from  one  port  and  she 
seeks  another  in  a  fai-off  land.  But  she  cannot  see  her  distant  haven ;  she  knows  not 
what  fierce  tempests  she  may  have  to  encounter;  her  way  is  uncertain  and  dangerous. 
Married  life  is  a  voyage  over  unknown  waters.  But  where  there  is  tme  love  the  vessel 
is  well  ballasted ;  she  carries  a  cargo  richer  than  untold  ingots  of  gold  ;  her  crew  work 
peacefully  without  fear  of  mutiny.  Under  such  circumstances,  though  there  is  mystery, 
hearts  that  trust  in  God  need  fear  no  shipwreck  of  love  and  happiness. 

Vers.  24 — 28.— Four  weak  things,  and  the  greatness  of  them.  The  four  little  creatures 
that  are  here  mentioned  all  illustrate  the  wonderful  way  in  which  the  disadvantages  of 
weakness  may  bo  overcome  by  some  countervailing  quality.  In  the  spiritual  world 
Christianity  teaches  us  to  look  for  the  triumph  of  weakness — the  weak  things  of  the 
world  confounding  the  things  which  are  mighty  (1  Cor.  i.  27).  Now,  we  have  illustra- 
tions from  nature  for  the  same  principle.  Each  of  the  four  creatures  teaches  us  its 
own  special  lesson,  as  each  conquers  its  weakness  by  some  separate  and  distinctive 
quality.  Tlie  ant  succeeds  by  foresight,  the  coney  by  finding  shelter,  the  locust  by 
organization,  and  the  lizard  by  quiet  persistency. 

I.  The  achievements  or  foresight.  1.  This  is  a  triumph  of  mind.  The  ant  is 
in  some  respects  the  most  wonderful  creature  in  the  world  ;  for  it  seems  to  be  about 
equal  in  intelligence  to  the  elephant,  which  is  not  only  the  greatest,  but  also  the  most 
intelligent  of  the  larger  animals.  A  bull,  so  immensely  greater  than  an  ant  in  body,  is  far 
smaller  in  mind.  Similarly,  man's  lordship  over  the  animal  world  is  a  triumph  of  mental 
power.  The  driver  is  weaker  in  body  than  the  horse  he  drives,  but  he  has  a  stronger 
mind.  We  shall  triumph  in  the  world  just  in  proportion  as  we  develop  our  inner  life. 
2.  This  is  a  triumph  of  industry.  The  ant  rebukes  the  sluggard  (ch.  vi.  6).  3.  It  is  a 
triumph  of  patience.  The  ant  toils  for  the  future.  Herein  is  its  true  strength,  lien 
who  care  only  for  the  passing  moment  are  shallow  and  weak.  We  are  strong  in  pro- 
portion as  we  live  in  the  future. 

II.  The  safety  of  a  sound  shelteb.  "  The  conies  are  but  a  feeble  folk,*'  and 
they  have  not  the  compensating  intelligence  of  the  ants.  But  their  instinct  lends 
them  to  live  among  the  rocks,  and  hide  themselves  in  dark  caves  and  inaccessible 
crevices.  Thus  the  strength  of  the  hills  is  theirs.  When  there  is  no  hope  of  holding 
our  ground  in  the  open  field,  we  may  find  shelter  in  the  Eock  of  Ages.  If  souls  have 
their  instincts  in  a  healthy  condition,  these  will  drive  them  to  tlie  true  shelter,  and 
there  weakness  will  be  safe. 

III.  The  triumph  of  oroanizatioh.  Though  the  locusts  have  no  king,  they  are 
able  to  make  successful  marches  over  miles  of  country,  and  to  completely  devastate  the 
lands  they  visit.  They  do  not  waste  their  time  by  flying  hither  and  thither,  and  by 
opposing  one  another.  They  all  move  on  in  solid  phalanx.  This  instinctive  order 
secures  success.  It  teaches  us  that  the  welfare  of  the  individual  must  bo  subordinate 
to  that  of  the  community.  Ii  a  small  stream  has  to  bo  crossed,  the  myriads  of  locusts 
who  are  so  unfortunate  as  to  be  in  the  van  of  the  mighty  army  fall  in  and  fill  up  the  bed 
till  they  make  a  causeway  that  can  be  used  by  their  lellows.  The  victory  of  man  is 
got  through  the  suffering  and  death  of  many  selt-sacrificiug  heroes.  In  the  Church  the 
cause  of  Christ  will  best  triumph  when  all  Christians  move  together  in  harmony,  all 
seeking  to  win  the  world  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 

IV.  The  success  of  persistency.  The  little  lizard  is  found  in  king's  palaces 
because  he  can  stick  to  the  walls,  and  so  run  into  nnlooked-for  places  out  of  the  way  of 
men.  It  is  a  great  thing  to  be  able  to  hold  on.  Quiet  perseverance  wins  many  a 
victory.     Patient  endurance  is  crowned  in  the  end  with   glorious  succesii.     In  the 


OH.  XXX.  1— 88.]  THl?  PROVERBS.  68S 

highest  things,  "he  th»t  endureth  unto  the  end,  the  same  shall  be  saval "  (Hark 
aiii.  13). 

Vers.  29 — 31. — Fourfold  triumph.  Ifach  of  the  four  here  brought  before  us  eicitea 
admiration  for  a  successful  course.  As  in  former  illustintions,  the  iinaotes  rise  up  to  a 
elimaz,  and  what  is  exhibited  separately  in  the  earlier  ones  is  united  and  complotcd 
Id  the  final  image. 

I.  A  iBitJMPHANT  OOTTBSB  EXOTTHS  EMULATION.  1.  True  success  it  good.  There 
are  various  forms  of  success.  Some  are  more  disgracefal  than  lailure.  A  low  end 
easily  won,  or  a  desirable  goal  reached  by  foul  means,  gives  a  worthless  and  even  a 
detestable  yictory.  But  when  both  means  and  end  are  good,  there  is  lomethin.; 
admirable  in  iuccess.  2.  Tliis  success  is  continuous.  The  most  worthy  triumph  is  not 
that  of  a  sudden  victory  snatched  at  the  end  of  a  long,  doubtful  contest,  but  the  carry- 
ing out  of  a  ooxirse  that  is  good  throughout — a  constant  series  of  small  daily  victories 
over  danger.  Thus  the  lion  is  admired,  not  merely  because  he  can  bring  dowrn  hia 
prey  by  means  of  a  long  chase,  or  after  patiently  waitin<;  for  it  in  ambush,  but  because 
"  he  tumeth  not  away  for  any,"  and  of  all  four  the  excellence  is  that  they  "  go  well." 
With  every  man  the  true  note  of  triumph  is  that  he  "  goes  well "  day  by  day  along 
the  path  of  duty.  3.  This  succesi  is  measured  by  the  difficulties  overcome.  We  gauge 
strength  by  what  it  can  do,  and  the  best  standard  may  not  give  visible  results  iu 
acquisition.  The  proof  may  be  seen  more  in  triumph  over  obstacles.  He  who  persists 
through  all  hardship  and  danger  enduring  to  the  end,  and  faithful  UQto  death,  is  the 
true  soldier  of  Christ. 

II.  A  TBIUMPHANT  COURSE  MAT  BE  'vARiousLT  EUH.  The  good  and  admirable  may 
be  of  different  forms.  Success  of  the  highest  kind  will  be  got  by  each  using  his  own 
talents,  not  by  any  vainly  imitating  those  of  another.  The  lion  cannot  copy  the  goat  s 
agility,  aor  the  greyhound  the  lion's  strength.  Four  methods  of  success  are  here 
suggested.  1.  Success  may  be  won  by  indomitable  energy.  This  is  the  characieristic 
of  the  lion.  He  is  strong,  and  he  "  tumeth  not  away  for  any."  2.  It  may  be  got  by 
swiftness.  The  greyhound  is  a  feeble  creature  compared  to  the  lion.  Its  glory  is  in 
its  speed.  There  is  a  victory  for  nimbleness  of  mind  as  well  as  of  body.  3.  It  may  be 
reached  by  agUity.  The  hound  can  fly  like  the  wind  over  the  plain ;  and  the  ne-soat 
can  pick  its  way  among  the  crags  of  the  precipice  and  climb  to  dizzy  heif;hts.  1  bey 
are  not  like  the  eagle  that  soars  on  its  wings,  for  the  quadruped  must  always  have 
some  foothold,  but  with  this  it  can  stand  without  fear  in  the  most  precarious  positions. 
Skilful  agility  will  enable  one  to  triumph  over  difficulties,  escape  snares  and  iJiUaUs, 
and  rise  to  daring  heights.  4.  It  may  be  attained  by  human  qualities  Man  is  leeble 
as  a  coney  compared  to  the  lion,  slow  as  a  tortoise  in  the  presence  of  the  grey  louna, 
lame  and  timorous  beside  that  audacious  mountaineer  the  goat,  liut  ne  cau  master 
and  outdo  all  these  creatures  by  the  use  of 'mental  and  spiritual  powers. 

III.  A    TRIUMPHANT     OOURBE   WILL     DEVELOP    UNIQUE   CHABAOTEEISTICS.        H-aCh    Ol 

the  four  is  known  by  its  success,  as  none  would  be  known  if  the  ammals  were  caged  m 
a  menagerie,  and  the  king  left  to  enjoy  empty  pageantry  .  The  t'">gly  'ac"''?  ^^'O* 
o,ily  recognised  on  a  throve.  As  the  power  to  govern,  it  »«^"°«f  ^^^■^,5^,^?  ^fm  ° 
society,  and  in  intellectual  regions.  There  are  born  kings.  We  «^«howstrring  times 
bring  such  men  to  the  front  as  the  Civil  Wars  revealed  Crumwell.  Jlf  f'o^  ^'^[^'^^ 
career  is  to  be  a  true  leader  ,.f  men.  He  who  stands  at  the  I'f.^^d /^ '^«,  ^^^A'^Xme 
family  was  and  is  a  Divine  King,  and  his  triumph  is  in  his  ruling  even  through  shame 

and  death. 

Ver.  Z2.-8elf.suppreBsion.  I.  When  belf-suppeession  is  needed.  I'  >^  °°|  "'^^^J^ 
equally  demanded  of  us.  There  are  times  for  expression,  times  who'i  we  shourf  bmiK 
reserve  and  give  forth  freely  the  thoughts  and  P^/f «??  ."^  °X  "  If  thou  hast  done 
demand  peculiar  self-suppression.  1.  -f» '"f  f .« ''/^^ llfSs  to  be  rcTucT  Toe 
foolishly  in  lifting  up  thyself."     A  l^agmfled  image  c^f  self  needs  to  be  rcclucca. 

muchp^ension  m|st  be  j--Wed      ^  ^af  ^^^^^^^^^  taugh. 

restraint  of  eml  thinking.     '  Or    f  thou  '1*!^'  t'J°"°";„;Vthe  gi„  j^  checked  tho  bettor, 


88n  THE  PB0VEEB8.  [oh.  xxx.  1— 38. 


siizes  an  evil  thought.     A  publication  of  it  makes  it  hurtful  to  others.     The  viper- 
brood  should  be  scotched  in  the  nest. 

II.  What  self-suppbession  will  effect.  1.  It  will  prevent  ''utureevil.  We  can- 
not undo  the  past ;  we  cannot  deny  our  inner'  self.  But  at  least  we  may  seek  for  grace 
that  the  sin  may  proceed  no  further.  2.  It  will  prepare  for  letter  conduct.  In  itself 
it  is  but  negative.  It  has  the  merit  of  silence.  It  is  a  "  masterly  inactivity."  We 
must  stop  before  we  can  turn  back.  There  is  therefore  a  moment  of  silence,  cessation, 
even  death,  in  the  act  of  conversion.  We  cannot  proceed  at  once  from  evil  living  to 
good  service.  St.  Paul  had  his  period  of  silence  in  Arabia.  It  would  be  an  immense 
gain  in  this  noisy  age  if  we  could  practise  more  of  the  golden  virtue. 

III.  How  SELF-SDPI'KESSION  MAT  BE  ATTAINED.  "  Lay  thine  hand  upon  thy  mouth." 
To  the  noisy  and  expiessive  this  is  no  more  easy  than  it  is  for  the  glutton  to  "  put  a 
knife  to  "  his  "  throat "  when  he  is  eating  "  with  a  ruler  "  (ch.  xxiii.  1,  2).  Frank  and 
open  natures  are  not  able  readily  to  recognize  the  merits  of  reticence,  while,  on  the 
other  hand,  reserved  and  secretive  natures  shrink  from  a  requisite  confession.  1.  There 
must  be  a  perception  of  the  evil  of  giving  unrestrained  vent  to  on^s  thoughts  and  desires. 
Many  people  do  not  perceive  the  dangers  of  speech.  They  blurt  out  the  most  unseemly 
things  where  the  sensitive  shrink  into  silence.  But  a  horror  of  the  harm  that  may  be 
done  by  heedless  words  will  assist  in  the  cultivation  of  a  habit  of  self-restraint.  2. 
There  must  be  energy  of  will.  The  unrestrained  nature  that  is  a  victim  to  every 
rousing  impression  is  no  better  than  an  uncalled  city  open  to  the  invasion  of  the  first 
chance  foe  (ch.  xxv.  28).  Now,  it  is  a  work  of  Divine  grace  to  strengthen  the  will  so 
that  the  weak  may  acquire  more  control  over  themselves.  At  the  first  blush  of  it  there 
seems  to  be  more  energy  in  noisy,  bustling"  restlessness,  while  quiet  self-restraint 
appears  inert.  But  this  results  from  a  very  superficial  view  of  MIk.  Nothing  less  than 
Heaven-sent  grace  can  make  us  strong  enough  to  keep  silent  under  great  provocation 
or  to  be  still  when  the  heart  is  boiling  over  with  passion. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — Agur's  sayings :  God's  Word  the  fountain  of  all  vHsdom.  These  are 
the  words,  probably,  of  a  believer  in  Jehovah  who  was  a  stranger  in  a  foreign  land. 
Among  the  sworn  foes  of  Israel  and  her  faith,  we  have  in  him  an  example,  of  Puritan 
rectitude,  of  unflinching  fidelity  to  conscience,  that  is  highly  instructive.  The  purity 
of  God's  eternal  truth,  and  the  safety  of  all  believers  in  him  (ver.  5), — this  is  his  simple 
and  sublime  leading  theme. 

I.  The  Beino  of  God  an  iwuttbrablb  mystery.  (Ver.  1.)  In  vain  had  he  sought 
to  explore  the  unfathomable  secret  of  his  essence,  by  searching  to  find  out  the  Almighty 

unto  perfection.    It  was  higher  than  heaven — what  could  he  do  ?  deeper  than  Hades 

what  could  he  know?  This  was  substantially  the  confession,  expressed  in  different 
forms,  of  all  the  areat  prophets.  Compare  the  accounts  of  Isaiah's  consecratiou, 
Jeremiah's  and  Ezekiel's.  True  religion  is  rooted  in  this  sense  of  the  Divine  mystery. 
All  piety  is  shallow  without  it.  In  every  conscious  feeling,  thought,  aspiration,  we 
are  but  travelling  on  the  edge  of  a  great  abyss,  moving  towards  an  horizon  which  still 
recedes.  In  our  deeper  moments  we  are  all  mystics,  and  there  are  times  when  all  talk 
about  God  seems  babble,  and  we  would  fain  take  refuge  in  the  "  sacred  silence  of  the 
mind." 

II.  The  intelligence  or  man  dull  and  inadequate  in  relation  to  Divine 
things.  (Vers.  2,  3.)  No  words  are  too  self-contemptuous  to  express  the  sense  of  the 
immense  gulf  which  separates  our  thought  from  God.  Applied  to  definable  objects,  our 
intelligence  seems  bright  and  piercing;  applied  to  the  Infinite  Might  and  Wisdom  and 
Purity,  no  better  than  the  vacant  gaze  of  the  ox  in  the  pasture.  Look  into  those 
beautiful  brown  eyes;  there  is  a  depth  of  pathos  in  them,  but  no  " speculation,"  no 
power  to  grasp  the  unity  and  law  of  things  that  print  themselves  in  pictures  oir  the 
retina.  And  what  are  we,  though  raised  above  the  "  creatures  that  lead  a  blind  life 
within  the  brain,"  but  helpless  gazers  into  infinity  ?  Well  did  Sir  Isaac  Newton  and 
all  the  great  seers  of  science  realize  this  feeling.  Their  consummate  knowledsje  was 
viewed  on  another  side,  consummate  ignorance.    They  had  not  thereby  attained  abac-' 


OH.  XXX.  1—33.]  THE   PnOVERB8.  B87 


lute  wisdom,  nor  «  wou  the  knowledge  of  the  Holy."  There  have  been,  indeed,  modem 
philosophers  who  have  proposed  an  "  absolute  philosophy ; "  but  time  has  discovered 
the  idleness  of  their  "  o'er-vaulting  ambition,"  and  made  a  fable  of  their  folly. 

III.  The  inacoessiblb  ik  nature  recognized.  (Ver.  4.)  One  of  the  first  principles 
laid  down  by  the  great  Goethe  was — Learn  to  distinguish  between  the  accessible  and 
the  inaccessible  in  nature  to  your  thought.  For  want  of  this,  theologians  on  the  one 
hand,  scientists  on  the  other,  have  rushed  into  presumption  in  seeking  to  wrest  the 
inscrutable  secrets  of  nature  from  the  hand  of  God.  The  unknowableness  of  the  first 
beginnings  of  thingswas  recognized  by  the  ancient  thinker.  The  height  of  heaven, 
the  movements  of  winds  and  waves,  the  changes  of  the  earth's  surface, — all  may  be 
brought  under  law ;  but  the  word  « law  "  conceals  the  greater  mystery — the  nature  of 
the  Lawgiver  himself.  God  is  not  identical  with  law,  any  more  than  we  are  identical 
with  speech.  Law  is  but  the  partially  understood  speech  of  God  to  our  intelligence. 
Examine  all  the  sublime  names  which  have  been  given  to  God  in  the  course  of 
revelation,  in  the  process  of  religious  thought ;  behind  them  all  lies  the  unutterable 
and  unthinkable  Somewhat. 

IV.  The  self-bevblation  of  God  reoognized.  (Ver.  5.)  1.  To  say  that  God  is 
utterly  unhnowable  is  as  great  an  error  as  to  say  that  he  is  perfectly  knowable  by  tha 
human  understanding.  Such  an  admission  must  cut  at  the  root  of  religion.  On  the 
contrary,  religion  implies  revelation.  Because  God  has  spoken  to  us,  we  may  speak  to 
him ;  because  he  has  stooped  to  us,  we  may  rise  towards  him.  In  manifold  ways — through 
nature,  through  inspired  men,  through  the  Son,  through  the  conscience — God  "  has 
spoken  to  the  world."  If  this  be  denied,  religion  is  an  entire  illusion.  2.  The  quality  oj 
hw  oral  revtHaUon.  The  writer  is  thinking  of  the  oral  and  written  Law.  Because 
definite,  articulate,  it  may  be  spoken  of  as  the  Word  of  God  par  excellence ;  but  by  no 
means  are  the  indefinable  and  inarticulate  revelations  through  nature  to  our  spirit 
excluded.  Prom  every  sight  of  beauty  and  every  sound  of  music  in  the  world  we  may 
derive  unspoken  messages  of  him  "  whose  nature  and  whose  name  is  Love."  And 
God's  Word  is  pure.  The  refined  silver  of  the  furnace  is  a  favourite  image  of  this,  its 
quality.  From  the  alloy  of  duplicity,  flattery,  hypocrisy,  it  is  free.  God  deals  sincerely 
with  us.  And,  therefore,  it  is  purifying.  We  behold  the  true  life  of  the  soul  in  its 
mirror.  3.  The  practical  hlessing  of  trust  in  him.  He  who  speaks  to  us  is  to  be 
trusted.  And  in  this  trust  in  One  who  is  eternal  and  infallible,  pure  and  true,  we 
have  security.  The  Law  or  Word  which  declares  his  will  is  like  a  broad  hand  stretched 
above  us  to  command,  and,  in  commanding,  to  protect,  reward,  and  bless.  4.  The  duty 
of  strict  reverence  and  loyalty  towards  his  words.  (Ver.  6.)  Much  they  leave  unsaid, 
which  it  is  not  for  us  to  supply.  The  general  lesson  seems  to  be  respect  for  thati 
element  of  reserve  and  mystery  which  lies  behind  all  that  is  or  may  be  known.  We 
may  "  lie  "  against  God  by  saying  more  than  he  has  actually  said  to  us  by  any  channel 
of  knowledge.  To  exceed  or  exaggerate  seems  ever  a  readier  temptation  than  to  keep 
within  the  modest  bounds  of  positive  declaration.  And  certain  penalties  await  all 
distortions  of  the  truth  of  every  kind ;  they  work  themselves  out  in  the  conscience 
and  the  course  of  history. — J. 

Vers.  7 — 9. — The  golden  mean.  I.  The  way  of  life:  truth  is  the  meah 
BETWEEN  TWO  EXTREMES.  (Ver.  8.)  Extremes  exist  in  logic  ;  life  shows  that  extremes 
meet,  and  that  the  path  of  sense  in  opinion  and  of  safety  in  conduct  lies  intermediate 
between  them. 

II.  Great  riches  are  not  in  themselves  desirable.  Not  by  the  wise  and 
religious  man.  They  bring  perils  to  the  souL  Full  of  his  gifts,  it  is  tempted  to  deny 
the  Giver.  The  deepest  atheism  springs  from  self-sufficiency.  Prospering  in  the  flesh, 
men  are  often  impoverished  in  the  spirit.  "  How  deep  a  knowledge  of  the  heart  is 
implied  in  the  petition  of  the  Litany,  'In  all  time  of  our  wealth,  good  Lord  deliver  us '  1" 
(Bridges). 

III.  Extreme  poverty  mat  be  equally  ikjubious  to  the  spiritual  life.  It 
tempts  to  dishonesty,  even  to  perjury.  "  Too  poor  to  be  honest "  is  a  cynical  saying 
which  points  out  a  real  danger.  The  old  proverb,  "It  is  hard  for  an  empty  sack  to 
•tand  on  end,"  points  the  same  way.  More  stinging  still  is  the  word,  "Poor  men  bar* 
BO  souk." 


S88  THE  PROVERBS.  [oh.  xsx.  1— S3. 


IV.  The  qolden  mean  is  therefori  to  be  desibbd  and  sottoht.  (Comp.  Phil, 
iv.  11, 12  ;  1  Tim.  vi.  6 — 10.)  Horace  says,  "  Whoever  loves  the  golden  mediocrity  is 
safe,  free, from  the  sordid  misery  of  the  tumble-down  dwelling,  free  from  the  envied  hall 
in  bia  sobriety  "  ('  Carm.,'  ii.  10).  But  let  us  be  careful  to  note  that  the  true  state  is 
to  be  found  in  the  spirit  itself — the  inward,  not  the  outward  sufficiency.  "  I  have 
learned  in  whatsoever  state  I  am,  therewith  to  be  content."  Rich  in  estate,  yet  pour  in 
spirit;  poor  in  estate,  yet  rich  ia  grace; — this  ia  the  true  solution  of  the  problem,  the 
v.-ue  object  of  pious  prayers. — J. 

Ver.  10. — Caution  in  the  use  of  th«  tongue.    I.  The  THotJGHTB  on*  fbabs  to 

EXPRESS   HIMSELF   ONB    MAT   BE   TEMPTED   TO    ELICIT   FROM   ANOTHER. 

II.  It  is  base  TO  tempt  an  honest  heart  TO  THOUGHTS  AND  WORDS  OF  DISCONTENT. 

One  of  the  most  active  forms  of  evil  consists  in  the  "  putting  into  the  head  "  of  others 
fttlings  towards  their  employers  or  superiors  which  would  not  otherwise  have  arisin. 

III.  The  bitbb  mat  thus  be  bit;  thb  temptib  thus  bbino  a  bbooil  upon 
HIMSELF.    (Comp.  ch.  iivi.  2.) — J. 

Vers.  11—14;. — Detestable  phases  of  human  character.  I.  Thosk  UNOBATEFirL  to 
PABBNT8.  (Ver.  11.)  "  Without  natural  affection."  Solon,  asked  why  he  had  made  no 
law  against  parricides,  said  that  he  could  not  conceive  of  any  one  so  impious  and  crueL 
111  the  Law  of  Moses  the  cursing  of  a  parent  was  visited  with  the  same  punishment  as 
the  blaspheming  of  God  (Lev.  ii.  9 ;  ixiv.  11 — 16 ;  comp.  Isa.  xlv.  9,  10 ;  2  Tim. 
iii.  2). 

II.  Crabs  sblf-conobit  and  pride.  (Vers.  12, 13.)  The  Pharisees  in  the  gospel 
^Matt.  xxiii.  25 — 27),  the  Laodicean  Church  (Rev.  iii.  17,  18),  are  examples.  But  the 
character  is  a  constant  one,  and  reappears  in  every  age  as  a  foil  to  genuine  Christianity. 
Compare  Mozley's  powerful  sermon  on  the  Pharisees.  But  it  was  a  noble  Pharisee 
who  Icainod,  in  the  humility  of  Christ,  to  "have  no  confidence  in  the  flesh"  (Phil, 
iii.  3). 

III.  Pitiless  criteltt  and  oppbessiok.  (Ver.  14.)  Wolves  in  human  guise  or  in 
sheep's  clothing.  Similar  pictures  are  to  be  found  in  Ps.  Ivii.  5 ;  Iviii.  7 ;  Isa.  ix.  13 ; 
Jer.  V.  17  ;  xxx.  16,  17.  These  pictures  of  the  heart,  its  exceeding  deceitfulness  and 
desperate  wickednesf,  should  lead  us  to  examine  our  own.  The  germs  of  all  the  world's 
evil  are  to  be  found  in  these  mierocosmi — these  "  little  worlds."  When  we  know 
ourselves  truly,  the  prayer  will  the  more  sincerely  arise  to  him  to  whom  all  hearts  are 
open,  that  he  will  cleanse  the  thoughts  of  our  hearts  by  the  inspiration  of  his  Holy 
Si  irit.— J. 

Vers.  15,  16. — Reflections  on  the  insatiable.  1.  The  external  life  is  the  mirbor 
or  THE  internal.  Our  spirit  finds  analogies  to  itself  in  the  objects  of  nature,  of 
history,  and  in  the  general  course  of  human  life.  And  all  that  we  observe  there,  in 
tlie  great  world,  may  serve  as  a  light  to  reveal  to  us  what  passes  A«re,  in  the  world  of 
eaoli  man's  heart. 

II.  I MAOES  OF  lnsatiablb  APPETITE.  Hades ;  the  barren  womb ;  the  thirsty  earth ; 
the  all-devouring  fire.  The  vampire,  or  bloodsucker,  seems  to  be  intended  in  the  first 
example ;  it  is  supposed  to  suck  the  blood  of  the  sleeping  by  night. 

III.  Thk  SPIRIT  or  MAN  IS  INSATIABLE.  And  whether  this  appetite  is  rightly  or 
wronf^ly  directed,  upon  this  depends  his  weal  or  woe.  It  may  be  directed  to  what  is 
perishable  or  pernicious — to  gold,  power,  pleasure,  etc.  Drunkenness  is  the  commonest 
illustiation  of  the  insatiety  of  man's  nature.  Or  it  may  be  directed  to  righteousness, 
to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth,  to  the  enjoyment  of  the  good ;  and  then  it  carries  the 
fiower  and  promise  of  the  "  endless  life,"— J. 

Ver.  17. — ITie  punishment  ofvnfilial  conduct.    I.  The  denitnoiation  is  in  fioura- 

TIVI    FORM. 

II.  Its   FULFILMENT   LITERALLY    HAD    BEEN    A    MATTEB   OF    ACTUAL   OBSERVATION. 

III.  The  gekeral  truth  must  be  carried  into  the  light  of  conscience.  On 
the  whole,  as  Bishop  Butler  soundly  taught,  the  constitution  of  things  tends  to  punish 
evil  and  reward  good  conduct. — J. 


OH.  XXX.  1—38.]  THE  PB0VEBB8.  589 


Vers.  18— 20.— The  mystery  of  acMons.    I.  There  am  aotidns  which,  like  thb 

FLIGHT  OF  THE  EAGLE,  OR  THB  PASSAGE  OF  THE   SHIP,  LEAVE  NO  VISIBLE  TRACE  BEHIND. 

What  seems  to  strike  the  mind  of  the  simple-hearted  Agur  is  the  fact  that  criminal 
deeds  may  be  committed  and,  seemingly,  leave  as  little  trace  behind. 

n.   But   THE    MYSTERY    AND   SECRECY    OF    ALL    ACTIONS   ARE    KNOWN    TO    GOD.      We 

are  naked  and  open  to  the  eyes  of  him  with  whom  we  have  to  do.  And  Q-od  shall 
bring  every  secret  work  into  judgment.  Every  act  leaves  its  trace  in  the  world  of 
spirit. — J. 

Vers.  21 — 23. — Intolerable  tMngi.  I.  The  examples.  1.  The  tlave  in  authority. 
(Yet.  22.)  The  inversion  of  objects  is  intolerable  to  the  trained  eye ;  things  standing 
upside  down,  etc.  So  in  social  relations  and  in  political.  Government  belongs  to  the 
wise  and  the  strong ;  the  feeble  in  mind  and  the  narrow  in  heart  are  emphatically  the 
wrong  men  in  the  wrong  place,  in  seats  of  power.  2.  The  self -satisfied  fool.  His  fatuous 
smile  is  a  satire  upon  himself  and  upon  the  condition  of  things  which  permits  him  to 
bask  in  so  fantastic  a  paradise.  Those  are  sights  to  make  the  "  angels  weep."  3.  The 
ill-tempered  wife,  (Ver.  23.)  She,  again,  is  emphatically  "  out  of  place."  For  home,  in 
any  sweetsense,  is  the  place  which  woman's  presence  makes  a  delight.  4.  The  ambitious 
maidservant.  The  effort  to  supplant,  to  grasp  a  place  beyond  one's  rights  and  deserts, 
hurts  our  intuitive  perceptions  of  what  is  right.  An  Oriental  proverb  says,  "  Sit  in 
your  place,  and  none  shall  make  you  rise,"  on  which  we  have  a  pointed  commentary 
frcjrii  Christ  in  Luke  xiv.  11,  "He  that  humbleth  himself  shall  be  exalted." 

11.  'I'liB  GENERAL  LESSONS.  Order  and  rank  are  Divine  institutions.  To  overturn 
this  is  no  work  of  the  true  reformer  or  friend  of  the  social  weal.  Rule  rests  ultimately 
upon  ability  to  rule ;  government,  upon  power;  authority,  upon  wisdom.  When  these 
relations  are  actually  reversed,  society  is  disturbed,  matters  are  unhappy.  When  they 
only  seem  to  be  reversed,  there  will  be  distress  and  disooiiifort  in  right  minds,  until  the 
just  order  and  the  nominal  state  of  things  shall  be  restored. — J. 

Vers.  24 — 28. — Hie  significance  of  little  things.  I.  Examples.  1.  The  ant  (ver.  25) ; 
tiny  in  frame,  yet  full  of  providence,  making  wise  provision  against  the  rainy  day.  2. 
The  hedgehog  ("  coney,"  ver.  26) ;  though  feeble,  finds  compensation  in  the  strength  of 
the  dwelling  it  selects.  3.  The  locust  (ver.  27);  a  creature,  as  an  individual,  easily 
crushed,  yet  gaining  immense  force  by  union  with  others.  Joel  (ii.)  gives  a  splendid 
description  of  the  raid  of  locusts  under  the  figure  of  an  invading  army,  with  which  the 
accounts  of  travellers  in  tropical  lands  may  be  closely  compared.  4.  The  lizard  (ver. 
28);  another  tender  and  feeble  creature,  nevertheless  penetrates  human  dwellings,  and 
makes  itself  at  home  in  the  palaces  of  kings. 

II.  Lessons.  The  lower  creatures  show  unconscious  mind.  What  they  do,  appa- 
rently with  blind  mechanical  impulse,  is  exemplary  in  many  respects  to  us  who  have 
reason  and  will.  The  profoundest  lessons  may  be  derived  from  the  lowliest  thing-^. 
Mr.  Darwin's  work  on  '  Worms '  shows  how  the  most  despised  of  creatures,  by  the  very 
law  of  its  being,  labours  for  others  and  blesses  a  world.  It  is  folly  to  seek  to  explore 
the  heights  of  wisdom  until  we  are  familiar  with  what  it  teaches  us  in  the  little  and 
the  low.  The  "  little  flower  in  the  crannied  wall "  contains  in  its  life  the  secret  and 
mystery  of  all  existence. — J, 

Vers.  "29 — 31. — Orandewr  in  natural  objects.  Our  aesthetic  as  well  as  our  teleological 
perceptions  are  appealed  to  in  the  objects  of  nature.  Certain  creatures  express  grandeur, 
sublimity,  or  beauty  in  their  form  and  carriage. 

L  Examples.  1.  The  lion.  (Ver.  30.)  He  is  In  nature  and  for  art  the  very  symbol 
of  strength  and  prowess.  Literally,  he  is  the  "hero  among  boasts,"  and  turns  his 
magnificent  front  from  the  face  of  no  foe.  2.  The  greyhound  (ver.  31),  with  its  slender 
form,  is  the  very  type  of  swiftness,  which  is  another  idea  lying  close  to  the  sublime. 
His  name  (in  German,  WindspieJ,  or  Windhund)  compares  him  with  the  wind.  3.  The 
goat ;  in  its  active  capability,  its  nimble  movement,  and  secure  footing  in  dangeroue 
places,  gives  another  variety  of  the  same  idea. 

II.  A  parallel  IN  HUMAN  LIFE.  Tho  king  in  his  majesty  should  combine  in  his 
person  and  bearing  the  fearless  brow  of  the  lion,  the  swiftness  of  decision  and  action  of 


590  THE  PBOYBBBS.  [ch.  xxx.  1—33. 

the  other  animals.  The  ideal  majesty  of  man  includes  in  itself  all  lower  perfections  in 
the  thought  of  the  Creator.  And  every  man  should  be  taught  to  realize  the  royal 
dignity  of  his  being  in  Christ.  He  is  made  a  "little  lower  than  the  angels;"  and  God's 
pui-pose  cannot  be  fulfilled  until  we  men  rise  to  claim  the  glorious  heritage  of  the  ideal 
manhood. — J. 

Vers.  32,  33. — Moral  prudence.  I.  It  teaches  the  control  of  the  tongue. 
The  folly  and  pride  of  the  heart  may  be  choked,  if  expression  is  denied  them  on  the 
tongue.  No  evil  or  foolish  thought  is  full-born  till  it  is  clothed  in  words.  Give  no 
formula  to  the  momentary  impulse  of  wrath  or  other  passion,  and  the  soul  of  evil  will 
perish  if  it  find  no  body  to  inhabit. 

II.  It  points  to  consequences.  The  quaint  illustrations  of  Agur  exhibit  the 
certainty  of  evil  consequences  to  evil  thoughts  and  desires.  As  certain  as  any  of  the 
physical  sequences  mentioned,  is  the  metaphysical  sequence,  the  moral  or  immoral 
consequences  of  passion.  Therefore,  ohsta  principUi,  resist  the  beginnings,  "  seal  up 
the  avenues  of  ill." — J. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — Beverence  and  docility.  Whoever  Agur  may  have  been,  it  is  certain 
that  he  was  a  sage  who  could  express  his  thoughts  in  strong  and  trenchant  language. 
If,  as  seems  probable,  these  opening  words  had  reference  to  the  compliments  or  the 
questions  of  his  disciples,  we  may  glean,  before  we  proceed  further,  three  lessons  by 
the  way.  1.  That  rightful  acknowledgment  too  easily  passes  into  adulation.  2.  That 
it  is  a  very  easy  thing  for  the  uninstructed  to  ask  questions  which  the  most  enlightened 
cannot  answer.  3.  That  true  genius  is  modest,  and  knows  well  the  bounds  of  its 
capacity.     The  main  lessons  are — 

I.  OUB   DUTY    TO   DISCLAIM    WHAT    IS    NOT   TRUE    CONCERNING   US.      AgUr,    Using   the 

language  of  hyperbole,  energetically  disclaims  any  such  elevation  as  he  was  imagined 
to  have  attained  (vers.  2,  3).  Men  will  sometimes  deny  us  the  virtue  or  the  wisdom 
which  we  may  claim;  but  they  will  often  offer  us  an  honour  which  is  not  our  due. 
We  may  be  taken  to  be  wealthier,  or  wiser,  or  stronger,  or  more  generous,  or  more  devout 
than  we  know  ourselves  to  be.  We  should  then  distinctly  and  determinately  decline  to 
receive  what  does  not  belong  to  us.  To  accept  it  (1)  is  dishonest,  and  any  kind  of  dis- 
honesty is  sinful ;  (2)  is  likely  to  inflate  our  minds  with  fond  and  vain  conceptions,  hurt- 
ful if  not  fatal  to  our  humility;  (3)  will  sooner  or  later  end  in  exposure  and  bumiliatinn, 

II.  The  obbat  obligation  to  eeverbncb.  (Ver.  4.)  We  may  know  many  thirgs, 
but,  when  it  is  all  told,  what  an  infinitesimal  fraction  is  this  when  compared  with  all 
that  is  unknown  1  What  vast,  what  inexhaustible  treasures  of  truth  and  wisdom  are 
hidden,  and  must  remain  hidden,  in  the  air,  in  the  earth,  in  the  sea !  How  little, 
then,  can  we  understand  of  him,  the  Eternal  and  Infinite  One,  who  reigns  in  the 
heavens !  How  unfathomable  the  depth  of  the  riches,  both  of  the  wisdom  and  know- 
ledge of  God"  (Rom.  xi.  33)!  1.  How  foolish  to  expect  to  understand  his  purpose, 
whilst  he  is  outworking  it,  either  concerning  our  individual  life  or  the  destiny  of  our 
race !  2.  How  prepared  we  should  be  to  accept  what  God  has  taught  us  respecting  our 
nature,  or  our  duty,  or  our  prospects,  or  respecting  his  own  nature  and  his  will ! 
3.  How  unwise  to  attempt  to  add  to  his  teaching  by  any  inventions  of  our  own  I 
Not,  indeed,  that  we  are  not  to  make  new  applications,  and  find  out  truer  interpre- 
tations of  his  Word ;  but  that  we  are  not  to  think  and  speak  as  if  we  had  sources  of 
wisdom  apart  from  his  Divine  communication. 

III.  The  reward  or  docility.  (Ver.  5.)  To  learn  of  God  is :  1.  To  repair  to  the 
fountain  of  purity.     Everything  God  has  said  to  us  tends  to  purity,  to  freedom  from 

a  degrading  selfishness,  from  a  corrupting  worldliness,  and  from  an  enslaving  and  a 
shameful  sensuality.  To  fill  our  minds  and  hearts  with  his  holy  truth  lifts  us  up  into 
an  atmosphere  where  our  whole  nature  is  elevated  and  refined,  where  we  are  capacitated 
lor  the  vision  and  fitted  for  the  presence  and  the  home  of  God  (Matt.  v.  8 ;  Heb.  xiL 
14).  2.  To  learn  of  God  and  to  connect  ourselves  with  him  by  I'aith  in  Jesus  Christ 
is  to  be  well  shielded  in  the  battle  of  our  life.  For  it  is  to  have  (I)  strong,  sustaining 
principles  within  us,  and  (2)  the  active  and  efiioient  guardianship  of  Ood  around  us  as 
we  pass  through  the  sorrows  of  our  life,  and  mingle  in  its  many  conflicts,  and  discharg* 
its  varied  and  weighty  duties. — C. 


OH,  XXX.  1—33.]  THE  PK0VERB3.  691 


Vers.  7—9. — A  new  year'$  prayer.  We  have  In  these  most  instructive  words  a 
wise  and  good  man — 

I.  Calmly  oonfeontino  the  fdtubb.  Whether  we  read  "before  I  die''  or  "until 
I  die  "  (VVardlaw),  we  have  a  good  man  deliberately  facing  the  future  of  his  life.  He 
realizes  that  before  him  stretches  out  a  tract  of  time  which  he  has  to  cross;  he  knows 
that  he  must  keep  steadily,  incessantly,  moving  forward;  that  he  will  meet  with  diffi- 
culties and  dangers  on  his  way ;  that  he  will  want  all  and  more  than  all  the  power  and 
the  wisdom  he  has  at  his  command ;  and  he  is  sobered  and  solemnized  by  the  thought. 
In  view  of  this  serious  aspect  of  things,  we  find  him — 

II.  Baknbstlt  addressing  himself  to  God.  "  Two  things  have  I  required  of  thee.'" 
To  whom,  thus  situated,  should  we  go  ?  Surely  unto  him  who  is :  1.  The  Lord  of  the 
future,  who  holds  all  time  in  his  sovereign  hand,  who  alone  "  can  set  new  time  upon 
our  score."  2.  The  Father  of  our  spirits,  who  is  deeply  interested  in  our  highest  wellare, 
and  cares  more  about  our  well-being  than  does  any  human  relative  or  friend.  3.  Tlu- 
Lord  of  our  life,  who  traces  the  path  our  feet  will  tread,  who  can  and  will  hedge  that 
path  with  his  protecting  care,  who  can  and  will  lead  us  along  the  road  we  travel.  And 
what  better  "  requirement "  or  request  could  he  prefer  than  that  of — 

HI.  Abkinq  FOB  DELIVBBANCE  FBOM  DELUSION?  From  "vanity  and  lies."  What- 
ever may  have  been  the  form  which  this  evil  took  in  the  land  and  time  of  Agur,  wg 
know  what  withering  and  wasting  delusions   we  need  to  he  preserved   from  now. 

1.  From  under-estimating  the  value  of  our  life.  There  are  many — are  there  not  many 
more  than  there  once  were? — that  say,  "  Who  will  show  us  any  good?"  Their  name 
is  legion  who  are  discussing  and  even  denying  the  worth  of  human  life.  Indifference, 
eni.ui,  weariness  and  dreariness  of  spirit,  disgust — ^leading  down  to  a  pessimistic  (hilo- 
sopliy  in  theory,  and  to  suicide  in  action — this  is  the  strain  and  spirit,  and  this  is  the 
current  of  our  time.  It  is  a  delusion,  both  sorrowful  and  sinful.  For  it  is  a  virtual 
abandonment  of  a  noble  heritage,  and  it  is  a  rejection  of  a  good  and  a  great  gift  from 
the  hand  of  God.  A  life  of  holy  service,  of  unselfish  devotion,  of  spiritual  growth,  of 
filial  gratitude  and  joy,  of  Christian  hopefulness,  is  a  blessing  of  simply  inestimable 
value.  2.  From  over-estimating  the  value  of  the  sensuous  and  the  material.  Always 
and  everywhere  men  have  been  in  the  gravest  danger  of  supposing  that  "a  man's  life 
does  consist  in  the  abundance  of  the  things  which  he  possesses,"  or  the  number  anc' 
sweetness  of  his  bodily  gratifications.  This  also  is  vanity ;  it  is  a  falsehood  which  sin 
sows  freely  and  which  quickly  takes  root  in  the  minds  of  men.  What  we  need  to 
know,  what  we  may  well  ask  God  to  teach  us  so  that  we  shall  not  ouly  accept  but 
realize  it,  is  that  all  the  rivers  of  earthly  good  and  of  sensuous  satisfaction  may  run 
into  the  sea  of  an  immortal  spirit,  made  for  God  and  for  goodness,  and  they  will  not 
fill  it. 

IV.  Prating  to  bb  exempt  from  the  extremes  of  oiecumstantial  trial. 
"  Give  me  neither  poverty  nor  riches."  1.  The  trial  of  poverty.  This  we  can  all  under- 
stand, and  it  takes  but  little  wisdom  or  sanctity  to  pray  for  exemption  from  its  evil. 

2.  The  trial  of  wealth.  We  think  we  could  endure  this  without  suffering.  Nearly  all 
those  who  have  not  experienced  it  are  inclined  to  slight  the  danger  of  being  rich.  Those 
who  have  never  walked  on  the  ice  imagine  that  they  could  do  so  without  slipping ; 
tliose  who  have  never  gambled  indulge  the  idea  that  they  could  stop  at  the  moment  of 
prudential  retirement.  We  do  not  know  ourselves.  He  who  "  knew  what  was  in 
man  "  knew  how  great  is  the  peril  of  worldly  wealth  (see  Mark  x.  23).  We  do  well  to 
btiive  and  to  toil  for  an  honourable  maintenance ;  but  we  do  not  well  to  sacrifice  health 
or  usefulness — how  much  less  our  self-respect  and  the  love  of  Christ  I — in  order  to  be 
rich.  We  do  wisely  to  ask  God  to  save  us  from  the  temptation — the  real,  the  strong, 
the  frequently  whelming  temptation — of  great  worldly  success. 

V.  Asking  fob  the  good  which  will  prove  to  be  a  blessing.  "  Feed  me  with  food 
convenient  for  me ; "  i.e.  which  thou  knowest  to  be  suited  to  iny  need.  God  only  knows 
what  we  want— what  we  want;  what  will  be  really  and  abidingly  food  for  us,  con- 
sidered in  all  our  relations.  God  knows  what  will  nourish  our  spiritual  nature,  what 
will  supply  us  as  citizens  of  this  life,  what  is  our  bodily  need  for  those  few  years 
which  he  is  about  to  give  us  here  belbre  he  translates  us  to  a  heavenly  sphere. 
Let  us  ask  him  to  grant  us  what  he  knows  is  best,  surely  believing  that  what  he 
gives  in  answer  to  our  prayer  »» the  best  for  u«  to  receive — that,  whatever  the  aeasuri 


692  THE   PROVERBS.  [ch.  xxx,  1— 38 

be,  and  not  somethin?;  sweeter,  or  finer,  or  more  enduring.  But  let  us,  understanding 
what  it  is  we  ask — as  they  who  first  used  the  words  did  not — say  continually,  "Lord, 
evermore  give  us  this  bread." — 0. 

Ver.  14. — Frijm  cruelty  to  kindness.  To  those  who  are  even  ordinarily  huTnane,  the 
accounts  which  are  somelimes  given  of  horrible  cruelty  seem  to  be  barely  credible  ;  it 
is  difficult  to  understand  how  a  heart  that  is  anywise  human  can  hold  such  fearful 
feelings  as  are  thus  expressed.  On  the  other  hand,  to  those  who  have  been  brutalized 
by  the  long  practice  of  cruelty,  it  is  often  found  almost  incredible  that  men  and  women 
can  be  capable  of  great  generosity  either  of  heart  or  hand.  From  the  lowest  depth  of 
cruelty  to  the  noblest  height  of  kindness  there  is  a  very  large  ascent. 

I.  The  moral  scale.  At  the  very  bottom  of  this  scale  is :  1.  An  absolute  and 
even  a  keen  delight  in  inflicting  and  in  witnessing  pain  :  this  is  nothing  short  of 
fiendish.  Tlien  comes,  perhaps:  2.  A  hard  indifference;  an  utter  unconcern  when 
suffering  is  beheld ;  a  perfect  readiness  that  it  should  be  inflicted  and  endured.  Less 
iniquitous,  perhaps,  than  this  is :  3.  The  steeling  of  the  heart  against  the  appeal  which 
is  made  by  suffering,  and  which  is  not  altogether  unfelt ;  the  prtsence  of  some  sensi- 
bility, but  the  endeavour,  for  some  reason,  to  suppress  the  emotion  that  is  excited.  4. 
The  inward  acknowledgment  that  interposition  is  due  and  should  be  rendered,  but  the 
careful  and  ingenious  avoidance  of  the  duty  ;  the  passing  by  on  the  other  side.  5.  The 
compounding  of  a  felt  obligation  to  help  by  tendering  some  almost  worthless  contribu- 
tion. Then,  moving  upward,  we  arrive  at :  6.  The  act  of  practical  kindness  to  the 
sorrowful  or  the  needy.  7.  The  act  of  generous  succour,  wherein  that  which  is  given 
is  really  felt.  8.  The  summit  of  self-sacrificing  love,  on  which  we  "  lay  down  our 
lives  for  the  brethren,"  even  as  our  Lord  laid  down  his  life  for  us  all. 

II.  Our  place  in  this  scale.  The  question  for  us  to  answer  is — Where  do  we 
stand  ?  How  far  from  the  height  ?  how  near  to  the  depth  ?  Must  we  stand  con- 
demned ?  or  may  we  hope  that  it  is  well  with  us  in  this  most  serious  feature  of  human 
character  ? 

III.  The  WAT  UPWAKD.  We  shall  probably  conclude  that,  although  our  spirit  is 
far  from  that  of  the  "  generation  whose  teeth  are  as  swords,"  etc.,  it  is  not  as  truly  and 
as  thoroughly  the  spirit  of  Christ,  the  pitiful,  the  merciful,  the  magnanimous  One,  as 
we  would  that  it  were.  And  we  want  to  know  what  we  can  do  to  leave  all  cruelty,  all 
unkindness,  and  even  all  inconsiderateness,  far  below  us,  and  to  rise  to  the  exalted 
altitude  of  pure  and  noble  beneficence.  Our  best  plan  will  be  to  make  an  earnest 
endeavour :  1.  To  realize  the  essential  br.^therhood  of  man  as  being  based  upon  that 
great  fact  of  the  Fatherhood  of  God.  2.  To  dwell  upon  the  great  and  almost  bound- 
less capacities  of  mankind,  on  the  extent  to  which  we  can  suffer  both  in  body  and  in 
spirit,  and  the  degree  of  joy  and  excell'.'ucy  to  which  we  may  be  raised.  3.  To  study 
with  devout  diligence  the  life  and  the  language,  the  spirit  and  the  will,  of  Jesus  Christ. 
4.  To  move  freely  and  frequently,  both  in  actual  life  and  in  the  paths  of  literature, 
among.st  the  gracious  and  the  genei-jus,  the  kind-hearted  and  the  noble-minded.  6. 
To  address  ourselves  seriously  to  the  work  of  showing  kin  ^ness  in  every  open  way  to 
those  whom  we  can  reach.    Whom  we  help  we  pity,  whom  we  serve  we  love. C. 

Vers.  15,  16. —  The  unsatisfied  human  heart.  There  are  many  things  in  nature 
which  are  not  satisfied ;  but  there  is  one  thing  in  that  which  is  above  nature  which  is 
much  loss  easily  satisfied — an  intelligent,  responsible,  immortal  spirit. 

I.  The  insatiable  in  natube.  Agur  specifies  four  things ;  in  these  we  find  three 
features  which  supply  a  contrast  to  the  craving  of  the  human  soul.  The  insatiable  :  1. 
Limited  ly  consciousness.  The  grave  never  says, "  It  is  enough  ; "  though  millions  have 
descended  into  its  dark  void,  and  though  many  ages  have  witnessed  its  consumption, 
it  is  as  recipient  as  ever ;  it  is,  and  it  will  remain,  unfilled.  But  it  is  unconscious  of  its 
race]  ition ;  it  is  only  in  imagination  that  it  can  be  said  to  crave  or  to  cry,  "  Give !  give ! " 
2.  Limited  by  time.  Childless  womanhood  is  not  unconscious;  its  craving  is  real  and 
Keen  enough ;  but  it  is  not  lasting ;  it  only  extends  over  a  few  years  of  life ;  there  is  a 
larj;e  proportion  of  life,  before  and  after,  when  no  such  longinjj  is  cherished.  3.  Limited 
by  luantity.  The  parched  earth  drinks  in  the  rain  hour  after  hour,  and  even  day  afiei 
day,  as  if  it  would  not  be  satisfied  with  any  quantity;    but  there  is  a  measure  of 


CH.  XXX.  1—33.]  THE  PEOVERBS.  693 


moisture  which  saturates  and  suffices;  beyond  that,  anything  that  falls  or  flows  is 
I'cdundant.. 

II.  The  unsatisfied  human  heart.  Here  thero  are  practically  no  limitations. 
The  human  heart :  1.  7s  painfully  conscious  of  its  deep  craving,  tjnlilce  the  grave, 
unlike  the  fire,  which  seems  animated  indeed,  but  is  actually  unconscious,  the  human 
soul  is  profoundly  moved  as  it  yearns  for  something  more  and  better  than  anything  it 
holds ;  down  to  its  depths  it  is  disturbed,  troubled,  agitated.  Its  voice,  crying^  "  Give  ! 
giye !  "  is  not  merely  poetical,  it  is  pathetic  and  even  passionate.  2.  Is  urdimited  by 
time.  Unlike  childless  womanhood,  its  yearning  for  what  it  has  not  is  not  onnfined  lo 
a  fi^w  years  of  its  existence ;  it  extends  through  life ;  it  reaches  on  to  old  age,  to  the 
very  hour  of  departure.  It  does  not  grow,  thrive,  fade,  and  die ;  it  lasts ;  it  is  often  found 
to  be  as  keen  and  vigorous  at  the  end  as  at  the  beginning,  in  the  near  noighbourhood 
of  death  as  in  the  prime  of  life.  3.  Is  unlirp,ited  hy  quantity.  Nothing  that  is  human 
or  earthly  does  satisfy  the  human  heart.  All  affection,  all  honour,  all  power,  all 
occupation,  all  pleasures,  run  into  it,  but  they  do  not  fill  it  (see  Eccles.  i.  7 ;  ii.  1 — 11). 
The  heart  of  man,  created  for  that  which  is  highest  and  best,  is  not  satisfied  with  any- 
thing that  falls  short  of  that.  It  is  profoundly  conscious  that  something  is  wanting  of 
which  it  is  not  possrssed.  It  says,  blindly  perhaps,  but  earnestly  and  sometimes 
passionately,  "  Qivef  give!  I  have  not  enough.  I  eat,  but  am  still  an  hungered;  I 
drink,  but  am  still  athirst." 

III.  The  satisfied  human  soui,.  There  is  one  .source  of  satisfaction ;  it  is  found 
in  God  himself.  "  0  Lord,  thou  hast  made  us  for  thyself,  and  our  heart  flndeth  no 
lest  until  it  resteth  in  tliee;"  but  in  him,  "who  is  our  home,"  we  do  find  rest  and 
peace.  To  us  to  whom  the  Son  of  God  and  Saviour  of  mankind  has  spoken,  the  voice 
of  cheir  and  hope  is  ever  calling,  " Come  unto  me  ...  I  will  give  you  rest."  In  (1) 
the  friendship,  (2)  the  service,  (3)  the  likeness,  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  in  (4)  the  good 
hope  through  his  grace  of  eternal  life,  we  find  the  supreme  and  the  lasting  satisfaction 
of  the  soul.     He  is  the  Bread  of  life,  and  eating  of  him  we  do  not  hunger  more. — 0. 

Vers.  24 — 28. — Success  within  success.  Many  things  go  to  make  a  man  successful, 
in  a  true  and  large  sense  of  that  word.  A  man  may  have  many  elements  of  success, 
and  yet,  for  want  of  one  more,  he  may  fail.  The  best  part  of  our  succeeding  is  this — 
that  if  we  are  labouring  for  some  present  and  visible  reward,  we  are,  whilst  so  doing 
and  in  the  very  act,  securing  a  deeper  and  a  larger  good,  as  the  schoolboy  seeking  the 
prize  is  really  storing  up  knowledge  and  power.  We  may  learn  from  some  of  the  least 
and  humblest  of  God's  creatures  what  are  the  elements  of  success  in  the  ordering  of  our 
life  and,  at  the  same  time,  in  the  construction  of  onr  character. 

I.  Thk  ordering  of  our  life.  If  we  would  live  such  a  life  before  men  as  is  most 
honourable  and  gratifying,  we  must  show  the  qualities  which  are  manifested  by  those 
little  creatures  of  our  text.  1.  Forethought.  (Ver.  25.)  The  man  who  does  not  look 
forward  and  prepare  for  the  day  and  the  hour  when  some  special  demand  will  be  made 
upon  him,  must  go  down.  A  wise  provision  made  in  the  time  of  leisure  or  abundance 
is  essential  to  outward  and  visible  success.  We  must  "  buy  up  the  opportunity 
['  redeem  the  time ']  "  (Col.  iv.  5)  ;  otherwise, "  when  the  occasion  comes,  we  shall  not  be 
equal  to  the  occasion ;  "  e.g.  the  apprentice,  the  student,  etc.  2.  Securing  a  retreat,  or 
having  a  reserve' (ver.  26).  To  be  able  to  run  to  the  rocks  or  fastuesses  is  necessary 
for  the  feeble.  And  in  the  ordering  of  our  life  it  is  necessary  to  count  on  our  being 
sometimes  defeated.  He  is  but  a  poor  captain  who  conducts  his  campaign  without 
"  securing  his  base;  "  and  he  does  not  know  the  practical  wisdom  of  life  who  does  noi 
provide  for  himself  a  retreat,  a  reserve,  when  fortune  goes  against  him,  as  it  sometimes 
will,  in  "  the  battle  of  life,"  3.  Co-operation,  (Ver.  27.)  It  is  an  essential  part  o/ 
personal  equipment  that  a  man  be  able  to  co-operate  with  others.  And  in  the  greaV 
majority  of  cases  this  means  readiness  to  tnkean  inferior  place,  to  obey  instructions,  to 
fall  in  with  the  suggestions  of  other  people,  to  forego  our  own  preference  and  adopt 
another  man's  method.  It  means  listening  and  learning,  conciliation  and  concession, 
punctuality  and  politeness.  4.  Aspiration  and  patience.  (Ver.  28.)  For  the  little 
and  unwelcome  spider  (or  lizard)  to  establish  itself  in  king's  palaces  there  is  demanded 
tills  twofold  virtue.  And  for  our  success  we  need  this  also — ambition  to  attempt  and 
assiduity  to  win  oui  way,  \u  spite  of  all  the  obstaclus  that  may  interven*.  He  that  has 
PKOVRnns.  2  4 


594  THE  PROVERBS.  [ch.  xxx  1—31 

no  heart  for  enterprise  will  certainly  achieve  nothing;  and  he  who  lacks  patience  to 
wait  his  time(,  perseverance  to  renew  his  efforts  as  often  as  he  is  foiled,  or  as  often  as 
one  success  opens  the  way  to  another,  will  reach  no  king's  palace,  no  place  of  honi}ur 
or  of  influence. 

II.  The  constetjction  or  our  character.  God  has  so  ordered  all  things  with  us 
and  for  us  that,  as  we  are  striving  for  one  thing,  we  do  gain  another.  As  we  seek  an 
honourahle  position  in  life,  we  are  building  up  our  character.  All  these  elements  of 
success  are  features  of  human  character,  so  that  while  we  are  "  making  our  way,"  we 
are  making  ourselves  also.  Much  that  is  most  valuable  in  our  moral  and  spiritual  con- 
stitution is' constructed  by  us  in  ways  and  at  times  when  we  think  not  of  it ;  it  is  like 
the  seed  that  grows  secretly,  night  and  day,  the  farmer  "knoweth  not  how  "(Mark 
iv.  27).  Hence  the  very  great  importance  that  we  should  be  always  and  everywhere 
acting  on  sound,  Christian  principles ;  for  it  is  not  so  much  by  the  direct  endeavours  we 
put  forth  for  the  purpose,  as  it  is  by  the  constantly  and  silently  operating  influence  of 
our  daily  and  hourly  actions,  that  we  become  what  we  do  become  in  the  sight  of  God. 
Beyond  and  within  the  success  of  which  men  take  notice,  and  on  which  they  congratu- 
late us,  is  a  success  which  is  deeper  and  truer,  for  which  we  may  well  give  to  God  our 
heartier  thanksgiving. — 0, 

Vers.  29 — 31. — Spiritual  comeliness.  Agur  mentions  four  things  which  are  "  comely  " 
(Authorized  Version)  or  are  "  stately  "  (Revised  Version)  in  their  going ;  their  move- 
ment is  regarded  with  pleasure,  with  admiration,  by  those  who  observe  it.  Such 
demeanour  on  their  part  is  suggestive  of  moral  and  spiritual  attractiveness  on  ours. 

I.  Wb  must  secure  that  which  is  necessary.  We  cannot  truly  live  without 
ths  favour  of  God,  without  entering  his  service,  without  possessing  something  of  his 
likeness,  without  cherishing  a  hope  of  future  blessedness.  To  miss  all  this  is  to  forfeit 
the  heritage  of  our  manhood.  We  can  by  no  means  do  without  it.  This  we  must  gain 
or  be  undone.    But  we  should  go  beyond  that. 

II.  Wk  should  aim  at  the  admirable.  We  ought  not  to  be  at  all  satisfied  with 
ours.elves  unless  our  "  walk  "  (1  Thess.  iv.  1 ;  1  John  ii.  6),  the  manner  of  "  our  going," 
is  such  as  to  please  God,  and  is  such  also  as  to  win  men.  Our  daily  lives  should  not 
only  be  consistent  enough  to  save  us  from  self-reproach  and  from  condemnation ;  they 
should  be  excellent  enough,  admirable  enough,  to  attract,  to  call  favourable  attention  to 
the  Divine  source  of  all  that  we  are  and  have.  We  should  not  only  worship,  but  live 
and  work  in  "  the  beauty  of  holiness ; "  we  should  aim  to  add  the  things  that  are 
"  lovely "  to  those  which  are  true,  honest,  just,  and  pure ;  we  should  endeavour  to 
"  adorn  the  doctrine  of  Christ  our  Saviour  in  ail  things  "  (see  Phil.  iv.  8 ;  Titus  ii.  10). 

III.  Three  elements  of  the  spiritually  admirable.  Beginning  with  that 
illustration  with  which  Agur  ends,  which  may  come  first  as  the  most  honourable,  we 
have :  1.  The  power  of  command.  "  A  king  against  whom  is  no  rising  up  "  (Authorized 
Version);  "  a  king  when  his  army  is  with  him"  (Revised  Version,  marginal  reading) ; 
or,  a  king  "  at  the  head  of  his  army."  Either  way,  the  idea  is  that  of  a  man  in  com- 
mand. There  is  something  very  attractive  and  even  fascinating  in  this  exercise  of 
authority ;  it  elicits  not  only  notice,  but  admiration.  There  is  one  sphere  in  which  it 
is  open  to  all  of  us  to  exercise  and  to  exhibit  command — over  our  own  spirit.  There 
is  nothing  more  worth  our  admiring  regard  than  the  sight  of  a  man  maintaining  a 
perfect  control  of  his  spirit  under  circumstances  of  great  trial  or  provocation  (ch.  xvi. 
32).  To  exercise  a  sovereign  control  over  our  fear,  or  our  anger,  or  our  affection,  or  our 
curiosity,  or  our  sorrow;  of  our  impulses,  or  our  emotions ;— this  is  excellent  and 
admirable  indeed :  then  are  we  "  comely  [or, '  stately ']  in  our  going."  2.  I7je  possession 
of  strength.  "  A  lion  which  is  strongest  among  beasts."  It  is  the  conscious  posses- 
sion of  power  which  gives  such  dignity  to  the  "  king  of  beasts."  To  this  also  we  should 
attain :  (1)  intrinsic  power,  by  the  devout  and  diligent  cultivation  of  all  our  God-given 
faculties ;  (2)  communicated  power,  by  the  indwelling  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  beiu"  of 
those  who  are  "  strong  in  the  Lord,  and  in  the  power  of  his  might."  Self-s'ufBcienoy 
and  conceit  are  indeed  ugly  enough  ;  but  conscious  power,  associated,  as  it  may  be  and 
should  be,  with  humility  and  kindness,  is  admirable  and  attractive.  It  is  well  to  walk 
on  our  way  as  those  who  know  that  they  have  no  need  to  fear,  because  God  is  for  us 
and  with  us  and  in  ug.    3.  Moral  symmetry.    The  greyhound  and  the  he-goat  are 


CH.  XXXL  1 — 31.] 


THE  PEOVEEBS. 


696 


pleasing  because  they  are  well  proportioned  throughout  their  frame.  To  be  gpiritually 
beautiful,  our  character  must  be  symmetrical.  Each  quality  must  be  balanced  by  its 
opposite  virtue— firmness  by  gentleness,  thoughtfulness  by  readiness  for  action,  courage 
by  caution,  generosity  by  conscientiousness,  etc.  Thus  will  our  character  and  (con- 
sequently) our  demeanour  be  comely  in  the  view  of  man  as  well  as  acceptable  in  the 
sight  of  God. — 0. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTEB  XXXI. 


Vers.  1—9.— Part  VIII.  Second  Appen- 
dix TO  THE  Second  Collection,  containing 
"  the  words  of  Lemuel  "  on  the  subjects  of 
impurity  and  intemperance. 

Ver.  1. — The  superscription.  The  words 
of  King  Lemuel,  the  prophecy  which  his 
mother  taught  him.  Who  is  intended  by 
"  Lemuel  king  "  is  much  disputed.  Those 
who  connect  the  following  word  massa 
("oracle")  with  the  preceding  meUJc 
("Mug  "),  translate  "  King  of  Masaa,"  as  oh. 
XXX.  1  (where  see  note).  Of  the  country,  or 
the  king,  or  his  mother,  we  have  absolutely 
no  information.  The  name  Leiuuel,  or 
Lemoel  (ver.  4),  means  "unto  God,"  i.e. 
dedicated  to  God,  like  Lael  (Numb.  iii.  21) ; 
hence  it  is  regarded  by  many  authorities, 
•noient  and  modem,  as  an  appellation  of 
Solomon,  one  from  infancy  dedicated  to  God 
And  called  by  him  Jedidiah,  "  beloved  of 
the  Lord"  (2  Sam.  xii.  25).  But  there  is 
nothing  in  the  contents  of  this  section  to 
confirm  this  idea ;  indeed,  there  are  expres- 
sions which  militate  against  it.  Possibly 
Hezekiah  may  be  meant,  and  his  remark- 
able piety  somewhat  confirms  the  opinion ; 
yet  we  see  no  reason  why  he  should  be  here 
addressed  under  a  pseudonym,  especially  if 
we  consider  that  he  himself  was  concerned 
in  making  this  collection.  On  the  whole,  it 
seems  best  to  take  Lemuel  as  a  symbolical 
nsune,  designating  an  ideal  king,  to  whom 
an  ideal  mother  addressed  the  exhortation 
which  follows.  Solomon's  own  proverbs 
contain  many  warnings  against  the  very 
sins  of  which  this  mother  speaks,  so  that 
the  section  is  conceived  in  the  spirit  of  the 
earlier  portion  of  the  book,  though  it  is 
assigned  to  a  different  author  and  another 
age.  The  prophecy  (massd) ;  the  inspired 
utterance  (see  on  ch.  xxx.  1).  This  maternal 
counsel  forms  one  compact  exhortation,  which 
might  with  more  propriety  be  so  termed 
than  the  words  of  Agur.  His  mother.  The 
mother  of  a  reigning  king  was  always  re- 
garded with  the  utmost  respect,  taking  pre- 
cedence of  the  king's  wife.  Hence  we  so 
often  find  the  names  of  kings'  mothers  in 
the  sacred  record ;  e.g.  1  Kings  ii.  19 ;  xiv. 
21;  XT.  2;  2  Kings  xii.  1.    It  is  difficult  to 


say  what  reading  was  seen  by  the  LXX., 
who  render,  "  My  words  have  been  spoken 
by  God,  the  oracle  of  a,  king  whom  his 
mother  instructed."  There  are  many  wise 
women  mentioned  in  Scripture ;  e.g.  Miriam, 
Deborah,  the  Queen  of  Sheba,  Huldah,  etc., 
so  there  is  nothing  incongruous  in  Lemuel 
being  instructed  by  his  mother  in  wisdom. 

Vers.  2 — ^9. — Here  follows  the  exhortation, 
which  seems  to  come  from  the  same  source 
as  the  "  burden "  of  Agur  above.  In  this 
section  the  connection  and  parallelism  of 
the  parts  are  exhibited  by  repetition  of 
thought  and  often  of  words  in  the  several 
clauses. 

Ver.  2.— What,  my  Bonl  Mah,  •'  what," 
is  repeated  thrice,  both  to  enforce  the  atten- 
tion of  the  son,  and  to  show  the  mother's 
anxious  care  for  his  good.  She  feels  the 
vast  importance  of  the  occasion,  and  asks  as 
in  perplexity,  "What  shall  I  say?  What 
advice  shall  I  give  thee  ?  "  "  Sou  "  is  here 
not  ben,  but  bar,  one  of  the  Aramaic  forms 
which  are  found  in  these  two  last  chapters. 
The  word  occurs  also  in  Ps.  ii.  12.  Son  of 
my  vows.  This  might  mean, "  son  who  wast 
asked  in  prayer,"  like  Samuel  (1  Sam,  i.  11), 
and  dedicated  to  God,  as  the  name  Lemuel  im- 
plies ;  or  it  may  signify,  "  thou  who  art  the 
object  of  my  daily  vows  and  prayers."  Sep- 
tuagint,  "  What,  my  son,  wilt  tliou  observe 
(Ttjp^o-eij)?  What?  the  sayings  of  God. 
My  firstborn  son,  to  thee  I  speak.  What, 
son  of  my  womb  ?    What,  son  of  my  vows  ?  " 

Ver.  3. — Exhortation  to  chastity.  Give 
not  thy  strength  unto  women  (comp.  ch.  v. 
9).  Chayil  is  "  vigour,"  the  bodily  powers, 
which  are  sapped  and  enervated  by  sensu- 
ality. The  Septuagint  has  triv  ttXovtov  ;  the 
Vulgate,  substarUiam  tuam;  but  the  prayer- 
ful, anxious  mother  would  consider  rather 
her  son's  personal  well-being  than  bis 
worldly  circumstances,  which,  indeed,  an 
Eastern  monarch's  licentiousness  would  not 
necessarily  impair.  Nor  thy  ways  to  that 
which  destroyeth  kings;  or,  with  a  slight 
alteration  in  the  punctuation  (and  an  im- 
proved parallelism),  to  them  that  destroy 
kings  ;  "  expugnatrioibus  regura,"  a*  Sohul* 
tons  terms  them.  Women  are  meant ;  and 
the  prince  is  enjoined  not  to  surrendsi'  bii 


e9« 


THE  TROVE  RB3. 


[CH.  XXXI.  1 — 31. 


lifo,  condnot,  and  actions  to  the  influence  of 
women,  who,  both  by  tho  dissipation  and 
sensuality  which  tliey  occasion,  and  the 
quarrels  which  tliey  provoke,  and  the  evil 
counsels  which  they  give,  often  ruin  kings 
and  states  (see  the  injunction,  Deut. 
xvii.  II).  Tlie  Vulgate  rendering,  ad 
deleiidoe  reget,  looks  as  if  the  warning  was 
agiiinst  making  wars  of  conquest  against 
neighbouring  kings ;  but  this  is  not  a  satis- 
factory pnrallel  to  the  former  clause.  Sep- 
luagint,  "  Give  not  tljy  wualLh  unto  women, 
nor  thy  mind,  nor  thy  life  unto  remorse 
(biTTepoPov\iav).  Do  ull  things  with  counsel; 
(Iritik  wine  with  counsel."  This  seems  to 
bolnng  to  the  next  verse. 

Vers.  4 — 7. — The  second  admonition.  A 
warning  against  inebriety,  and  concerning  • 
proper  use  of  strong  diink. 

Ver.  4. — It  is  not  for  kings ;  or,  as  others 
read, /ar  be  it  from  kings.  The  injunction 
is  repeated  to  indicate  its  vast  importance. 
Nor  for  princes  strong  drink;  literally, 
nor  for  princes  (the  word),  ITOere  is  strong 
drinli  f  (see  on  oh.  xx.  1 ;  and  comp.  Job 
XV.  23).  Tlie  evils  of  intemperance,  fla- 
grant enough  in  the  case  of  a  private  per- 
son, are  greatly  enhanced  in  the  case  of  a 
king,  whose  misdeeds  may  affect  a  whole 
community,  as  the  next  verse  intimates. 
St.  Jerome  reads  differently,  translating, 
"  Because  there  is  no  secret  where  drunken- 
ness reigns."  This  is  in  accordance  with 
the  proverb,  "  When  wine  goes  in  the  secret 
comes  out;"  and,  "Where  drink  enters, 
wisdom  departs  ;  "  and  again,  "  Quod  latet 
in  mente  sobrii,  hoc  natat  in  ore  ebrii." 
Septuagint,  "The  powerful  are  irascible,  but 
let  them  not  drink  wine."  "Drunken- 
ness," says  Jeremy  Taylor  ('Holy  Living,' 
ch.  iii.  §  2),  "  opens  all  the  sanctuaries 
of  nature,  and  discovers  the  nakednes* 
of  tlie  soul,  all  its  weaknesses  and  follies; 
it  multiplies  sins  and  discovers  them;  it 
makes  a  man  incapable  of  being  a  private 
friend  or  a  public  counsellor.  It  taketh  a 
man's  soul  into  slavery  and  imprisonment 
more  than  any  vice  whatsoever,  because 
it  difarms  a  man  of  all  his  reason  and 
his  wisdom,  wliereby  he  might  be  cured, 
and,  therefore,  conunonly  it  grows  upon  him 
witii  age;  a  drunkard  being  still  more  a  fool 
and  less  a  man." 

Vlt,  5. — This  gives  a  reason  for  the  warn- 
ing. Lest  they  drink,  and  forget  the  Law. 
Tliat  which  has  been  decreed,  and  ig  right 
and  lawfnl,  tho  appointed  ordinance,  parlicu- 
larly  as  regarils  tlie  administration  of  jus- 
tice. Septuagint,  "Lest  drinking,  they  forget 
wisdom."  And  pervert  the  judgment  of  any 
of  the  afflicted;  literally,  of  oK  the  ions  of 
affliction;  i.e.  the  whole  class  of  poorer 
people.    Intemperance  leads  to  selfish  dis- 


regard of  others'  claims,  an  inability  to  ex- 
amine questions  impartially, £ind  consequent 
perversion  of  justice.  Isaiah  (v.  23)  speaks 
of  intoxication  as  inducing  men  to  "justify 
the  wicked  for  reward,  and  take  away  tlie 
righteousness  of  the  righteous  from  him." 

Ver.  6. — There  are  cases  where  strong 
drink  may  be  properly  administered.  Give 
strong  drink  nnto  him  that  is  ready  to  perish 
(Job  xxix.  13 ;  xxxi.  19).  As  a  restorative, 
a  cordial,  or  a  medicine,  wine  may  be  advan- 
tageously used;  it  lias  a  place  in  the  provi- 
dential economy  of  God.  "  Use  a  little  wine 
for  thy  stomach's  sake  and  thine  often  in- 
firmities," was  St.  Paul's  advice  to  Timothy 
(1  Tim.v.  23).  It  is  supposed  to  have  been 
in  consideration  of  the  injunction  in  the  text 
that  the  ladies  of  Jerusalem  provided  for 
criminals  on  their  way  to  the  place  of  execu- 
tion a  drink  of  medicated  wine,  which  might 
deaden  the  pain  of  suffering.  Tliis  was  the 
draught  rejected  by  Christ,  who  willed  to 
taste  the  full  bitterness  of  death  (Matt,  xxvii. 
34 ;  Mark  xv.  23).  The  Septuagint  has,  "  to 
those  that  are  in  sorrow;"  so  the  Vulgate, 
mierentibus,  but  this  makes  the  two  clauses 
tautological.  Wine  nnto  those  that  be  of 
heavy  hearts  (Job  iii.  20)..  "Wine,"  says 
the  psalmist,  "maketh  glad  the  heart  of 
man"  (Ps.  civ.  15).  Says  Homer,  'Iliad,' 
Ti.  261— 

"  Great  is  the  strength 
Which  generous  wine  imparts  to  wearied 
men." 

"Wine,"  says  St.  Chrysostom  ('Hom.  in 
Eplies.,'  xix.),  "  has  been  given  us  for  cheer- 
fuluess,  not  for  drunkenness.  Wouldest 
thou  know  where  wine  is  good?  Hear  what 
the  Scripture  saith,  'Give  wine  to  them, 
etc.  And  justly,  because  it  can  mitigate 
asperity  and  gloominess,  and  drive  away 
clouds  from  tlie  brow  "  (comp.  Ecolus.  xxxiv 
[xxxi.]  25,  etc.). 

Ver.  7. — Let  him  drink,  and  forget  his 
poverty.     Ovid,  'Art.  Amat.,'  i.  287— 

"Vina  parant  animos,  faciuntque  caloiibus 
aptos ; 
Oura  fugit  multo  diluiturque  mero. 
Tunc  veniunt  risus;  tune  pauper  comua 
Bumit ; 
Tuno  dolor,  et   onrte,  rugaque  frontis 
abit." 

Thus  is  shown  a  way  in  which  the  rich  can 
comfort  and  encourage  their  poorer  brethren, 
which  is  a  better  method  of  using  God's 
good  gifts  than  by  expending  them  on  their 
own  selfish  enjoyment. 

Vera.  8,  9.— The  third  exhortation,  ad- 
monishing the  king  to  judge  righteously. 

Ver.  8.— Open  thy  mouth  for  the  dumb. 
The  "  dumb  "  ia  any  one  who  for  any  ruasoB 


en.  rxxi.  L — 31.] 


THE  PROVERBS. 


597 


whatever  is  onalile  to  plead  his  own  cause  ; 
he  may  be  of  tender  age,  or  of  lowly  station, 
or  ignorant,  timid,  and  boorish ;  and  the 
prince  is  enjoined  to  plead  for  him  and  de- 
fend him  (oomp.  Job  zxix.  15).  In  the 
cause  of  all  such  as  are  appointed  to  de- 
struction; literiilly,  the  $oru  of  pasiing 
away  (Isa.  ii.  18);  i.e.  not  orphans,  children 
whose  parents  have  vanished  from  the 
earth,  nor  strangers  from  a  foreign  country, 
nor,  generally,  mortals,  subjects  of  frail 
human  nature  (all  of  which  explanations 
have  been  given),  but  persons  who  are  in 
imminent  danger  of  perishing,  certain,  if 
left  unaided,  to  come  to  ruin  (comp.  Job 
xxix.  12)..  Septuagiut,  "Open  thy  mouth 
fur  tl\e  AVord  of  God,  and  judge  all  men 
soundly  (fryiSs)." 

Ver.  9. — Plead  the  cause;  rather,  minuter 
judgment,  or  do  right;  act  in  your  official 
capacity  so  that  the  effect  shall  be  sub- 
stantial justice  (comp.  Zech.  yiii.  16). 

Vers.  10— 31.-— Part  IX.  Thibd  Appen- 
dix TO  THE  Secokd  Golleotion.  This 
section  contains  an  ode  in  praiae  of  the 
virtuous  woman,  derived  from  s  different 
source  from  that  of  the  words  of  Agur,  and 
belonging  to  •  different  age  (see  Introduc- 
tion). It  is  an  acrostic;  that  is,  each  verse 
begins  with  one  of  the  twenty-two  letters  of 
the  Hehrew  alphabet,  arranged  in  tlje  usual 
order.  We  may  compare  this  maslial  with 
the  alphabetical  psalms, "  Psalmi  abcedarii," 
which  are,  more  or  less,  of  similar  structure, 
but  of  which  one  only,  the  hundred  and 
nineteenth,  is  so  marked  in  the  English  ver- 
sions. Other  examples  are  Pa.  ix.,  x.,  xiv., 
xxxiv.,  xxxvii.,  cxi.,  cxii.,  cxlv. ;  also  Lam. 
i.,  ii.,  and  iii.  One  object  of  this  artificial 
construction  was  to  render  the  matter  easier 
to  commit  to  memory.  The  spiritual  ex- 
positors see  in  this  description  of  the  vir- 
tuous woman  a  prophetic  representation  of 
the  Church  of  Christ  in  her  truth  and 
purity  and  influence.  Thus  Bede :  "  Hie 
sapientissimus  regum  Salomon  laudes 
sanctse  Ecclesiss  versibus  paucis  sed  ple- 
nissima  veritate  depingit.  .  .  .  Cujus  (car- 
minis)  ordine  perfectissimo  alphabeti  typice 
innuitur,  quam  plenissime  hie  vel  animse 
cujusque  fidelis,  vel  totius  sanctsa  Ecclesiss, 
quie  ex  omnibus  eleotis  animabus  una  per- 
ficiVur  Catholica,  virtutes  ac  prsmia 
describantur." 

Ver.  10. — Aleph.  Who  can  find  a  vir- 
tuous woman  1  The  expression,  ishshah 
tliayil,  "  woman  of  force,"  has  occurred  in 


ch.  xii.  4  (where  see  note).  Mulierem  for- 
fom,  St.  Jerome  terms  her;  ywatKa  avSptiav 
is  the  rendering  of  the  LXX.,  which  places 
this  section  as  the  end  of  the  whole  Book 
of  Proverbs.  The  expression  combines  the 
ideas  of  moral  goodness  and  bodily  vigour 
and  activity.  It  is  useless  to  try  to  fix  the 
character  upon  any  particular  person.  The 
representation  is  tliat  of  an  ideal  woman — 
the  perfect  housrwife,  the  chaste  helpmate 
of  her  husband,  upright.  God-fearing,  eco- 
nomical, wise.  See  an  anticipation  of  this 
character  (ch.  xviii.  22;  xix.  14);  and  a 
very  different  view  (Eccles.  vii.  26).  It  is 
very  remarkable  to  meet  with  such  a  de'- 
lineation  of  woman  in  the  East,  where  the 
female  generally  occupies  a  most  degraded 
position,  and  is  cut  off  from  all  sphere  of 
activity  and  administration.  To  paint  such 
a  portrait  needed  inspiration  of  some  snrt. 
Such  a  one  is  hard  to  find.  Her  price  is  far 
above  rubies ;  or,  pearls  (see  on  ch.  xx.  15 
and  iii.  15).  Septuagiut, "  Such  a  one  is  more 
valuable  than  precious  stones."  There  may 
be  allusion  to  the  custom  of  giving  treasme 
in  exchange  for  a  wife,  purchasing  her,  as 
it  were,  from  her  friends  (comp.  Hos.  iii. 
2).  At  any  rate,  few  only  are  privileged  to 
meet  with  this  excellent  wife,  and  her  worth 
cannot  be  estimated  by  any  material  object, 
however  costly.  St.  Jerome,  witli  a  slight 
difference  in  the  reading,  has,  Proeul,  et  de 
vltimia  finibus  pretium  ejus.  You  may  go 
to  the  ends  of  the  earth  to  find  hei'  equal 
in  value. 

Ver.  1 1 . — Beth.  The  heart  of  her  husband 
doth  safely  trust  in  her.  The  husband  of 
such  a  wife  goes  forth  to  his  daily  occupa- 
tions, having  full  confidence  in  her  whom 
he  leaves  at  home,  that  she  will  act  dis- 
creetly, and  promote  his  interests  whilo  he 
is  absent  (see  the  contrast  in  ch.  vii.  20). 
So  that  he  shall  have  no  need  of  spoil; 
rather,  he  shall  not  lack  gain  Qihalal).  Tlie 
wife  manages  domestic  concerns  so  well  that 
her  husband  finds  his  honest  gains  increase, 
and  sees  his  confidence  profitably  rewarded. 
Septuagiut,  "  Such  a  woman  shall  want  not 
fair  spoils."  It  is  obvious  to  see  in  this  an 
adumbration  of  the  Church  winning  souls 
from  the  power  of  the  enemy,  especially  as 
shalal  is  used  for  an  enemy's  spoils  (Ps. 
Ixviii.  12;  Isa.  liii.  12;  and  elsewhere) 

Ver.  12. — GiMEL.  She  will  do  him  good 
and  not  evil  (comp.  Ecclus.  xxvi.  1 — 3).  She 
is  consistent  in  her  conduct  towards  lier 
husband,  always  pursuing  his  best  interests. 
AU  the  days  of  her  life;  in  good  times  or 
bad,  in  the  early  spring-time  of  young  affec- 
tion, and  in  the  waning  years  of  declining 
age.  Her  love,  based  on  high  principles, 
knows  no  change  or  diminution.  The  old 
commentator  refers  to  tlie  condnct  of  St. 
Monica  to  her  unbelieving  and  nnfsithfal 


698 


THE  PBOVEBBS. 


[oh.  XXXI.  1 — 31, 


bneband,  narrtited  by  St.  Augnstine  in  his 
'  CoDfeasions,'  ix.  9  :  "  Having  been  given 
over  to  a  husband,  she  served  him  as  her 
lord ;  and  busied  herself  to  ixm  him  to  thee, 
revealing  thee  to  him  by  her  virtues,  in 
\thiah  thou  madest  her  beautiful,  and  re- 
verently amiable,  and  admirable  to  her 
husband." 

Yer.  13. — Daleth.  She  seeketh  wool,  and 
flax.  She  pays  attention  to  these  things,  aa 
materials  for  clothing  and  domestic  uses. 
Wool  has  been  used  for  clothing  from  the 
earliest  times  (see  Lev.  xiii.  17;  Job  xxxi. 
20,  etc.),  and  flax  was  largely  oultivated  for 
the  manufacture  of  linen,  the  processes  of 
drying,  peeling,  hackling,  and  spinning 
being  well  understood  (see  Josh.  ii.  6 ;  Isa. 
xix.  9 ;  Jer.  xiii.  1,  etc.).  The  proliibition 
about  mixing  wool  and  flax  in  a  garment 
(Deut.  xxii.  11)  was  probably  based  on  the 
idea  that  all  mixtures  made  by  the  art  of 
man  are  polluted,  and  that  what  is  pure 
and  simple,  such  aa  it  is  in  its  natural  state, 
is  alone  proper  for  the  use  of  the  people  of 
Ood.  Ajid  worketh  willingly  with  her 
hands;  or,  tJie  worketh  with  her  hands' 
pleasure ;  i.e.  with  willing  hands.  The 
rendering  of  the  Revised  Version  margin, 
after  Hitzig,  "  She  worketh  at  the  business 
of  her  hands,"  is  feeble,  and  does  not  say 
much.  What  is  meant  is  that  she  not  only 
labours  diligently  herself,  but  finds  pleasure 
in  doing  so,  and  this,  not  because  slie  has 
none  to  help  her,  and  is  forced  to  do  her 
own  work  (on  the  contrary,  she  ia  repre- 
sented as  rich,  and  at  the  head  of  a  large 
Jjousehold),  but  because  she  considers  that 
labour  is  a  duty  for  all,  and  that  idleness  ia 
a  transgression  of  a  universal  law.  Sep- 
tuagint,  "Weaving  (ji-iipvoiiiini)  wool  and 
flax ;  she  makes  it  useful  with  her  hands." 

Ver.  \i. — He.  She  if  like  the  merchants' 
ships.  She  is  like  them  in  that  she  ex- 
tends her  operations  beyond  her  own  im- 
mediate neighbourhood,  and  briugeth  her 
food  from  afar,  buying  in  the  best  markets 
and  on  advantageous  terms,  without  regard 
to  distance,  and  being  always  on  the  look 
out  to  make  honest  profit.  Septuagint, 
"She  is  like  a  sbip  trading  from  a  dis- 
tance, and  she  herself  gatheretli  her  liveli- 
hood." The  expressions  in  the  text  point 
to  active  commercial  operations  by  sea  as 
well  as  land,  such  as  we  know  to  have  been 
undertaken  by  Solomon,  Jehoshaphat,  and 
others  (1  Kings  ix.  26 ;  xxii.  48),  and  auch 
as  the  Hebrews  must  have  noticed  in  the 
Phoenician  cities,  Sidon  and  Tyre. 

Ver.  15. — Vav.  She  riseth  also  while  it 
is  yet  night.  Before  dawn  she  is  up  and 
stirring,  to  be  ready  for  her  daily  occupa- 
tion. A  lamp  is  always  kept  burning  at 
night  in  Eastern  houses,  and  as  it  is  of  very 
small  dimensions,  the  careful  housewife  has 


to  rise  at  midnight  to  replenish  the  oil,  and 
she  often  then  begins  her  household  work 
by  grinding  the  com  or  preparing  some- 
thing for  next  day's  meals  (comp.  ver.  18). 
Early  rising  before  any  great  undertaking 
is  continually  mentioned  in  Scripture  (see 
Gen.  xix.  2;  xxii.  3;  Ps.  Ivii.  8;  Jer.  viL 
13 ;  XXV.  4,  etc. ;  Mark  xvi.  2 ;  John  xx.  1). 
And  giveth  meat  to  her  household;  dedit- 
quai  prasdam  domedicia  $uis,  Vulgate.  The 
word  for  "meat"  is  tereph,  which  means 
*'  food  torn  in  pieces  "  with  the  teeth  (Ps. 
oxi  5),  and  hence  food  to  be  eaten.  The 
wife  thus  early  prepares  or  distributes  the 
food  which  will  be  wanted  for  the  day. 
And  a  portion  to  her  maidens.  Ghdk,  "final 
portion,"  may  apply  either  to  work  or  food. 
The  Vulgate  has  eiharia,  "meat;"  Septua- 
gint, ipya,  "tasks."  The  former,  whicli  is 
in  accordance  with  ch.  xxx,  8,  would  be 
merely  a  repetition  of  the  second  clause, 
the  meat  mentioned  there  being  here  called 
the  allotted  portion,  and  would  be  simply 
tautological.  If  we  take  it  in  the  sense  of 
"appointed  labour,"  we  get  a  new  idea, 
very  conKruoua  with  the  housewife's  activity 
(comp.  Exod.  V.  14,  where  the  same  word  ia 
used  in  the  case  of  the  enforced  labour  of 
the  Israelites). 

Ver.  16. — Zatdt.  She  considereth  a  field, 
and  buyeth  it.  She  turns  lier  attention  to  a 
certain  field,  the  possession  of  which  is  for 
some  cause  desirable;  and,  after  due  ex- 
amination and  consideration,  ahe  buys  it. 
One  is  reminded  of  Christ's  parable  of  the 
treasure  hidden  in  a  field,  which  the  finder 
sold  all  that  he  had  to  purchase  (Matt. 
xiii.  44).  With  the  fruit  of  her  hands  she 
planteth  a  vineyard.  Her  prudent  manage- 
ment and  economy  give  her  means  to  buy 
vinea  and  plant  a  vineyard,  and  thus  to 
increaae  her  produce.  Possibly  it  is  meant 
that  she  sees  the  field  she  has  gotten  is 
more  fitted  for  grapes  than  corn,  and  she 
cnltivates  it  aooordmgly.  Virgil,  '  Georg.,' 
ii.  229— 

"Altera   fmmentis  quoniam   fit  vet,  altera 
Baocho, 
Densa   magis   Cereri,  rarissima    quceque 
LysBo." 

Ver.  17.— Kheth.  She  girdeth  her  loins 
with  strength  (ver.  25).  This  seems  at 
first  sight  a  strange  assertion  to  make  con- 
cerningone  of  the  weaker  sex;  but  the 
plirase  ia  metaphorically  expressive  of  the 
energy  and  force  with  which  ahe  prepares 
herself  for  her  work.  Strength  and  vigour 
are,  as  it  were,  the  girdle  which  she  binds 
round  her  waist  to  enable  her  to  conduct 
her  operations  with  ease  and  freedom.  So 
we  have  a  similar  metaphor  boldly  applied 
to  God  (Ps.  xciii.  1) :  "The  Lord  reigneth, 
he  is  apparelled  with  majesty ;  tba  Lord  is 


CH.  XKXl.  I — 31.] 


THE   PROVEEBS. 


599 


apparelled,  he  hath  girded  himself  with 
Btrength  "  (cf.  Job  xxxviii.  3).  Strengthen- 
eth  her  arms.  By  daily  exercise  she  makes 
her  arms  firm  and  strong,  and  capable  of 
great  and  continued  exertion. 

Ver.  18. — Teth.  She  peroeiveth  that  her 
merohandise  is  good;  Vulgate,  Guetavit  et 
vidit  quia  hona  eat  negotiatio  ejus,  where 
the  paraphrase,  "she  tastes  and  sees," 
expresses  the  meaning  of  the  verb  taam 
here  used.  Her  prudence  and  economy 
leave  her  a  large  surplus  profit,  which  she 
contemplates  with  satisfaction.  There  is  no 
suspicion  of  arrogance  or  conceit.  The 
pleasure  that  is  derived  from  duty  done 
and  successfully  conducted  business  is 
legitimate  and  healthy,  a  providential 
reward  of  good  works.  Septuagint,  "She 
tastes  that  it  is  good  to  work."  This  com- 
furt  and  success  spur  her  on  to  further  and 
more  continued  exertion.  Her  caudle  Qamp') 
goeth  not  out  hy  night.  She  is  not  idle 
even  when  night  falls,  and  outdoor  occupa- 
tions are  cut  short ;  slie  finds  work  for  the 
hours  of  darkness,  such  as  is  mentioned  in 
the  next  verse.  One  recalls  Virgil's  picture 
of  the  thrifty  housewife  ('  .^neid,'  viii. 
407)— 

'  Indo  ubi  prima  quies  medio  jam  noctis 

abactsE) 
Gurriculo  expnlerat  aomnum,  cum  femina 

primum, 
Cui  tolerare  colo  vitam  tenuique  Minerva 
Impositum,  oinerem    et    sopltos    susuitat 

ignis, 
Noctem    addens    operi,    famulasque    ad 

Inmina  longo 
Exercet  penso." 

Some  take  the  lamp  here  in  an  allegorical 
sense,  as  signifying  life,  happiness,  and 
prosperity,  as  ch.  xiii.  9  and  xx.  20 ;  others, 
as  denoting  a  bright  example  of  diligence 
and  piety  (Matt.  v.  16).  But  the  simple 
meaning  seems  to  be  the  one  intended. 
Wordsworth  notes  that  the  passage  in 
jSev.  xviii.,  which  sptaks  of  the  "  merchan- 
dise" of  the  ^Ise  Church,  also  affinus  tliat 
"  the  light  of  a  candle  "  shall  shine  in  her 
no  more,  the  two  metaphors  in  our  passage 
applied  to  the  true  Church  being  there 
applied  to  Babylon. 

Ver.  19. — YoDH.  She  layeth  her  hands 
to  the  spindle,  liti^'s  (Jtishor,  a  word  not 
occurring  elsewhere)  is  probably  not  the 
spindle,  but  the  distaff,  i.e.  the  staff  to 
which  is  tied  the  bunch  of  flax  from  which 
the  spinning-wheel  draws  the  thread.  To 
this  she  applies  her  hand ;  she  deftly  per- 
forms the  work  of  spinning  her  fiax  into 
thread.  Her  hands  hold  the  distaff,  '^^o 
(pdek)  ii  the  spindle,  the  cylindrical  wood 
(aftetvrarda  the  wheel)  on  which  the  thread 


winds  itself  as  it  is  spun.  The  hands  could 
not  be  spared  to  hold  the  distaflf  as  well  as 
the  spindle,  so  the  first  clause  should  run, 
"  She  stretches  her  hand  towards  the  dis- 
taff." In  the  former  clause  hishor  occasioned 
some  difficulty  to  the  early  translators,  who 
did  not  view  the  word  as  connected  with  the 
process  of  spinning.  The  Septuagint  trans- 
lates, "  She  stretches  out  her  arms  to  useful 
works  (eirl  tA  avfitpipoina);"  Vulgate,  Ma- 
nan»  »uam  misit  ad  fortia.  So  Aquila  and 
Symmachus,  dvSpeia.  This  rather  impedes 
the  parallelism  of  the  two  clauses.  There 
was  nothing  derogatory  in  women  of  high 
rank  spinning  among  their  maidens,  just  as 
in  the  Middle  Ages  noble  ladies  worked  at 
tapestry  with  their  attendants.  "We  re- 
member how  Luoretia,  the  wife  of  CoUa- 
tinus,  was  found  sitting  in  the  midst  of 
her  handmaids,  carding  wool  and  spinning 
(Livy,  i.  57).  CatuUus,  in  his  '  Epitlial. 
Pel.  et  Thet.,'  312,  describes  the  process  of 
spinning — 

"  Lfisva  colum  molli  lana  retinebat  amiotum ; 
Bextera  turn  leviter  dedncens  fila  supiais 
Formabat  digitis;    turn  prono  in  poUice 

torquens 
Libratum  tereti  versabat  turbine  fusum." 
('  Carm.,'  Ixiv.) 

Ver.  20. — Oaph.  She  !■  not  impelled  by 
selfish  greed  to  improve  her  means  and 
enlarge  her  revenues.  She  is  sympathizing 
and  charitable,  and  loves  to  extend  to 
others  the  blessings  which  have  rewarded 
her  efforts.  She  stretcheth  out  her  hand 
to  the  poor.  "  Hand  "  is  here  caph,  "  tho 
palm,"  evidently  containing  alms.  She 
knows  the  maxim  (ch.  xix.  17),  "He  that 
hath  pity  upon  the  poor  lendeth  unto  the 
Lord,"  etc. ;  and  she  has  no  fear  of  poverty. 
Yea,  she  reacheth  forth  her  hands  to  the 
needy.  "Hand,"  is  here  yad,  with  its 
nerves  and  sinews  ready  for  exertion  (see 
on  ch.  X.  4) ;  and  the  idea  is  that  she  puts 
forth  her  hand  to  raise  and  soothe  the  poor 
man,  not  being  satisfied  with  dealing  alms 
to  him,  but  exercising  the  gentle  ministries 
of  a  tender  love.  Septungint,  "  Slie  opens 
her  hands  to  the  needy,  and  reaches  forth 
her  wrist  {Kapitbii)  to  the  poor."  Like 
Dorcas,  she  is  full  of  good  works  and  alms- 
deeds  (Acts  ix.  36).  It  is  doubtless  implied 
that  the  prosperity  which  she  experiences  is 
the  reward  of  this  benevolence  (ch.  xxii.  9). 

Ver.  21. — Lamed.  She  is  not  afraid  of 
the  snow  for  her  household.  "  Snow,"  says 
Dr.  Geikie  ('Holy  Land,'  ii.  58),  "covers 
the  streets  of  Jerusalem  two  winters  in 
three,  but  it  generally  comes  in  small 
quantities,  and  soon  disappears,  Yet  there 
are  sometimes  very  snowy  .winters.  That  ot 
1879,  for  example,  left  behind  it  seventeen 
inches  of  sniow,  even  where  there  was  uc 


•00 


THE  PROVERBS. 


fen.  JLXXL  1 — 81. 


drift,  and  the  Btrango  apectacle  of  snow 
lying  unmelted  for  two  or  three  weeks  was 
eeen  in  the  hollows  on  the  hillsides. 
Thousands  of  years  have  wrought  no 
change  in  this  aspect  of  the  winter  months, 
for  Benaiah,  one  of  David's  mighty  men, 
'slew  a  lion  in  the  midst  of  a  pit  in  the 
time  of  snow'  (2  Sam.  xiiii.  20)."  She  has 
no  fears  concerning  the  comfort  and  health 
of  her  family  eyen  in  the  severest  winter. 
Tor  all  her  household  are  olothed  with 
soarlet;  with  warm  garments.  The  word 
need  is  O'lK*  (tham'm),  derived  from  a  verb 
meaning  "to  shine,"  and  denoting  a  crimson 
or  deep  scarlet  colour.  This  colour  was 
supposed,  and  rightly,  to  absorb  and  retain 
heat,  as  white  io  repel  it ;  being  made  of 
wool,  the  garments  would  be  warm  as  well 
as  stately  in  appearance.  St.  Jerome  has 
duplicibua  {shenaini),  "with  double  gar- 
ments," i.e.  with  one  over  the  other.  Warm 
garments  were  the  more  necessary  as  the 
only  means  of  heating  rooms  was  the  intro- 
duction of  portable  chafing-dishes  containing 
burning  charcoal  (see  Jer.  xxxvi.  22,  etc  ). 
The  Septuagint  has  taken  liberties  with 
the  text,  "  Her  husband  is  not  anxious  con- 
cerning domestic  matters  when  he  tames 
anywhere  [xf""'^&  f<"'  which  Delitzsch 
suggests  x""'Kv'\'  ^°^'  *1^  ^^"^  household  are 
well  clothed.""  Spiritually,  ,  the  Church 
fears  not  the  severity  of  temptation  or  the 
chill  of  unbelief,  when  her  children  take 
refuge  in  tiie  blood  of  Christ. 

Ver.  22. — Mem.  She  maketh  herself 
coverings  of  tapestry  (marbaddim) ;  as  ch. 
vii.  16  (where  see  note).  Pillows  for  beds 
or  cushions  are  meant^  though  the  trans- 
lators are  not  of  one  mind  on  the  meaning. 
St.  Jerome  has,  stragulatam  vettem ;  Aquila 
and  Theodotion,  nipLa-Tpii/iara ;  Symma- 
chus,  dii.4>iTdiTous,  "  shaggy  on  both  sides ; " 
Septuagint,  "She  makes  for  her  husband 
double  garments  (Siairas  x^aiVos)."  Her 
clothing  is  silk  and  purple,  f^t)  (sAesA)  is  not 
"silk,"  but  "white  linen"  (fiiaros,  bytaui) 
of  very  fine  'texture,  and  costly.  Purple 
garments  were  brought  from  the  Phceui- 
cian  cities,  and  were  highly  esteemed  (see 
Cant.  iii.  10 ;  Jer.  i.  9).  The  wife  dresses 
herself  in  a  way  becoming  her  station, 
avoiding  the  extremes  of  sordid  simplicity 
and  ostentatious  luxury.  "For  my  own 
lart,"  says  St  Fran<;ois  de  Sales,  quoted 
ly  Lesfetre,  "  I  should  wish  any  devout  man 
or  woman  always  to  be  the  best-dressed 
person  in  the  company,  but  at  the  same 
time,  the  least  nne  and  affected,  and 
adorned,  as  it  is  said,  with  the  ornament 
of  a  meek  and  quiet  spirit.  St.  Louis  said 
that  every  one  ought  to  dress  according  to 
his  position,  so  that  good  and  sensible  people 
should  not  be  feble  to  say  you  are  over- 
messed,  nor  the  younger  uuder-dressed " 


t 


('Vie  Devot.,'  HI.  25).  So  the  Church  1> 
clothed  in  fine  linen,  clean  and  white,  even 
the  righteousness  which  Christ  bestows 
(Eev.  xix.  8),  and  invested  in  her  Lord's 
royal  robe,  who  hath  made  her  cliildren 
kings  and  priests  unto  Ood  (Bev.  i.  6; 
T.  10). 

Ver.  23. — NtiH.  Her  husband  is  known 
In  the  gates.  Such  a  woman  advances  her 
husband's  interests,  increases  his  influence, 
and,  by  attending  to  his  domestic  concerns, 
enables  him  to  take  his  share  in  public 
matters,  so  that  his  name  is  in  great  repute 
in  tjie  popular  assemblies  at  the  city  gates 
(ver.  31 ;  ch.  viiL  3).  She  is  indeed  "  a 
crown  to  her  husband  "  (ch.  xil.  4).  When 
he  sitteth^  among  the  elders  of  the  land. 
Homer  introduces  Naut.ikaa  speaking  to  her 
father  of  her  duty  to  see  that  he  is  honour- 
ably clad  when  he  goes  to  the  council — 

Kal  5e  troi  avT^  eotKe  fierii  irpdtToiff'iv  iopra, 
BovXas  fiov\6i€iv  Kadaph  XP°'^  flfiar*  ^xovra. 
('  Odyssey,'  vi.  60.) 
"  For  our  costly  robes, 
AH  sullied  now,  the  cleansing  stream  re- 
quire; 
And  thine  especially,'  wTien  thou  appear'st 
In  council  with  the  princes  of  the  land. 
Had  need  be  pure." 

(Cowper.) 
St.  Gregory  sres  here  an  adumbration  t>( 
the  day  of  judgment:  '•  For  the  Redeemer 
of  mankind  is  tue  '  Husband '  of  holy 
Church,  who  shows  himself  'renowned' 
(nobilie,  Vulgate)  in  the  gates.  Who  first 
came  in  sight  in  degradation  and  in  mock- 
ings,  but  shall  appear  on  high  at  the 
entering  in  of  his  kingdom  ;  and  '  he  sitteth 
among  the  ciders  of  the  land,'  for  that  he 
shall  decree  sentence  of  condemnation 
together  with  the  holy  preachers  of  that 
same  Cliurch,  as  himself  declares  in  the 
gospel  (Matt.  xix.  28)"  ('Moral.,'  vi.  9). 

Ver.  24. — Sauech.  She  maketh  fine  Unen, 
and  selleth  it  The  word  for  "fine  linen  " 
is  ladin,  not  the  same  as  in  ver.  22,  but 
equivalent  to  atrStip,  and  denoting  linen 
garments ;  Delitzsch  calls  it  "  body-linen " 
(oomp.  Judg.  xiv.  12,  18;  Isa.  iii.  23). 
Delivereth  girdles  unto  the  merchant;  lite- 
rally, unto  the  Canaanite;  i.e.  the  Phoenician 
merchant,  a  gener'o  name  for  all  traders 
(see  Isa.  xxiii.  8;  Zech.  xiv.  21).  Girdles 
were  necessary  articles  of  attire  with  the 
flowing  robes  of  Eastern  dress.  The  common 
kind  were  made  of  leather,  as  is  the  use  at 
the  present  day;  but  a  more  costly  article 
was  of  linen  curiously  worked  in  gold  and 
silver  thread,  and  studded  with  jewels  and 
gold  (see  2  Sam.  xviii.  11 ;  Dan.  x.  5). 
So  Virgil  ('jEneid,'  ix.  859)  spenks  it 
"  aurea  bullis  ciugula."  We  read  of  Queen 
Parysatia  having  certain  villages  a«si£ue(| 


cH.  rtxi.  1—81.] 


THE  PR0VERB9. 


eoi 


her  for  girdle-money,  efs  (ivnv  SedoiJiercu 
(Xen.,  'Anab.,'  i.  4.  9).  cioero  alludes  to 
the  BRme  custom  in  his  Veriine  oration  (oh. 
iii.  33) :  "  Solera  aiunt  harbaros  reges  Per- 
sarum  ao  Syroriim  plures  uxores  habere,  his 
au  tem  uioribus  civi  tates  attribuere  hoc  modo : 
hsBO  clvitaa  mulieriin  redimiculum  prcebeat, 
hsBO  in  coUum,  hseo  inorines"  (oomp.  Plato, 
'  Alcib.  I.,'  p.  123,  B).  Such  rich  and  elabo- 
rately worked  girdles  the  mistress  could 
readily  barter  with  Phoenician  merchants, 
who  would  give  in  exchange  purple  (ver. 
22)  and  other  articles  of  use  or  luxury. 
On  this  passage  St.  Gregory  thus  moralizes : 
"Wliat  is  signified  by  a  garment  of  fine 
linen,  but  the  subtle  texture  of  hrjy  preach- 
ing ?  In  which  men  rest  softly,  because  the 
mind  of  the  faithful  is  refreshed  therein  by 
heavenly  hope.  Whence  also  the  animals 
are  shown  to  Peter  in  a  linen  sheet,  because 
the  souls  of  sinners  mercifully  gathered 
logether  are  f-nclosed  in  the  gentle  quiet  of 
faith.  The  Church  therefore  made  and  sold 
this  fine  garment,  because  she  imparted  in 
words  that  faith  which  she  had  woven  by 
belief;  and  received  from  unbelievers  a  life 
of  upright  conversation.  And  she  delivered 
a  girdle  to  the  Canaanite,  because  by  the 
might  of  the  righteousness  she  displayed, 
she  constrained  the, lax  doings  of  the  Gentile 
world,  in  order  that  that  might  be  maintained 
in  their  doings  which  is  commanded,  'Let 
your  loins  be  girded  about"*  ('Moral.,' 
xxxiii.  33). 

Ver.  25. — Avra.  Strength  and  honour 
are  her  clothing  (ver.  17);  iVx^*'  nal  eli- 
irpfweiay,  Septnagint.  She  is  invested  with 
a  moral  force  and  dignity  which  aim  her 
against  care  and  worry ;  the  power  of  a 
righteous  purpose  and  strong  will  reveals 
itaelf  in  her  carriage  and  demeanour.  And 
thus  equipped,'Bhe  shall  rejoioe  in  time  to 
come ;  or,  she  laugheth  (Job  v.  22 ;  xxxix.  7) 
at  the  future  (Isa.  xxx  8).  She  is  not  dis- 
quieted by  any  fear  of  what  may  happen, 
knowing  in  whom  she  trusts,  and  liaving 
done  her  duty  to  the  utmost  of  her  ability. 
The  Greek  and  Latin  versions  seem  to  take 
the  expression  as  referring  to  the  day  of 
death;  thus  the  Vulgate,  Bidebit  in  die 
novissimo;  Septnagint,  "She  rejoices  in  the 
last  days  (if  iificpais  iaxarais)."  But  it  is 
best  interpreted  as  above.  The  true  servant 
of  God  is  not  afraid  of  any  evil  tidings, 
his  heart  being  fixed,  truiting  in  the  Lord 
(Ps.  cxii.  7). 

Ver.  26. — Pb.  She  openeth  tor  mouth 
with  wisdom.  She  is  not  merely  a  good 
housewife,  attending  diligently  to  material 
interests ;  she  guides  her  family  with  words 
of  wisdom.  When  she  speaks,  it  is  not 
gossip,  or  slander,  or  idle  talk,  that  she 
utters,  but  sentences  of  prudence  and  sound 
teujiei  such  at  may  minister  grace  to  the 


hearers.  The  Septnagint  has  this  verso 
before  ver.  2.5,  and  the  first  hemistich  again 
after  ver.  27.  So  in  Lam.  ii ,  iii.,  iv.,  the  pe 
and  aiiin  verses  change  places.  This  is  also 
the  ease  in  Ps.  xxxvii.  In  the  former 
passage  the  LXX.  renders,  "  She  openeth 
her  mouth  heedfuUy  and  lawfully  {vpoae- 
Xivrai  kbI  hv6iJLtos);"  and  in  the  other, 
"  wisely  and  in  accordance  with  law  {o-oipiSs 
KaX  voiioBia-fiMs)."  In  her  tongue  is  the  law 
of  kindness  (ftioratb  chesed);  i.e.  her  lan- 
guage to  those  around  her  is  aniraatiid  and 
regulated  by  love.  As  mistreis  of  a  family, 
•he  has  to  teach  and  direct  her  dependent*, 
and  she  performs  this  duty  with  gracious 
kindness  and  ready  sympathy.  Septnagint, 
"  She  places  order  on  her  tongue." 

Ver.  27. — Tsadb.  She  looketh  well  to  the 
ways  of  her  house ;  the  actions  and  habits 
of  the  household.  She  exercises  careful 
surveillance  over  all  that  goes  on  in  the 
family.  Eateth  not  the  bread  of  idleness ; 
but  rather  bread  won  by  active  labour  and 
conscientious  diligence.  She  is  of  the 
opinion  of  the  apostle  who  said  "that  if 
any  would  not  work,  neither  should  he  eat " 
(2  Thess.  iii.  10).  Septnagint,  "  The  ways 
of  her  house  are  confined  ((rrfyvai  SiaTpi0a\ 
otxay  auTTJy),  and  she  eats  not  idle  bread." 
The  first  of  tliese  clauses  may  mean  that 
the  proceedings  of  her  household,  being 
confined  to  a  narrow  circle,  are  readily  super- 
vised. But  the  meaning  is  very  doubtful ; 
and  Schleusner  renders,  "continuse  con- 
versationes  in  sedibus  ejus."  Pt  Gregory 
applies  our  verse  to  the  conscience,  thus; 
"  She  considers  the  ways  of  her  house,  be- 
cause she  accurately  examines  all  the 
thoughts  of  her  conscience.  She  eateth 
not  her  bread  in  idleness,  beea'  se  that 
which  she  learned  out  of  Holy  Scripture 
by  her  understanding,  she  jilaccs  before  the 
eyes  of  the  Judge  by  exhibiting  it  in  hei 
works  "  ('  Moral.,'  xxxv.  47). 

Ver.  28. — Kdph.  Her  children  arise  up, 
and  call  her  blessed.  Slie  is  a  fruitful 
mother  of  children,  who,  seeing  her  sedulity 
and  prudence,  and  experiencing  her  affection- 
ate care,  celebrate  and  praise  her,  and  own 
that  she  has  rightly  won  the  hlessing  of  the 
Lord.  Her  husband  also,  and  he  praiseth 
her ;  in  the  words  given  in  the  next  verse. 
Having  tlie  approbation  of  her  husband  and 
children,  who  know  her  best,  and  have  the 
best  opportunitieB  of  judging  her  conduct, 
she  is  contented  and  happy.  Septnagint, 
"  Her  mercy  (txe^jiuoo-i;;'!))  raises  up  her 
children,  and  they  grow  rich,  and  her 
husband  praises  her." 

Ver.  29. — Eesh.  Many  daughters  have 
done  virtuously,  but  thon  excellest  them  all. 
The  versions  and  some  commentators  take 
the  encomium  in  the  mean  and  restricted 
sense  of  praise  for  the  acquigitioD  of  richeai 


602 


THE  PROVERBS. 


[oh.  XXXI.  1 — 31, 


Thus  the  Vulgate,  Multie  fllise  congregavermit 
divitias ;  Septuagint, "  Many  daughters  have 
obtained  wealth."  But  it  adds  another 
rendering,  "Many  have  wrought  power 
{i-KoiT)iTav  Siva/itv),"  which  is  nearer  the  mean- 
ing in  this  place.  Ghayil  (as  we  have  seen, 
ver.  10)  means  "  force,"  virtus,  "  strength  of 
character"  shown  in  various  ways  (comp. 
Numb.  ixiv.  18;  Ps.  Ix.  12).  "Daughters," 
equivalent  to  "  women,"  as  Gen.  xxx.  13 ; 
Cant,  vi  9.  Roman  Oatliolic  commfintators 
have,  with  much  ingenuity,  applied  the  whole 
description  of  the  virtuous  woman,  and 
especially  the  present  verse,  to  the  Virgin 
Mary.  We  may  regard  it  as  a  representation 
of  the  truly  Christian  matron,  who  loves 
husband  and  children,  guides  the  house,  is 
discreet,  chaste,  good,  a  teacher  of  good 
things  (1  Tim.  v.  14;  Titus  ii.  3,  etc.). 

Ver.  30. — Shin.  The  writer  confirms  the 
husbaud'a  praise  by  assigning  to  it  its  just 
gr:  luiids.  Favour  is  deceitful,  and  beauty  is 
vain.  Ghen,  "favour,"  may  signify  either 
the  good  will  with  which  one  is  regarded, 
or  gracefulness,  beauty.  As  being  in  close 
parallelism  with  the  next  words,  it  is  best 
taken  as  referring  to  loveliness  of  form. 
Mere  gracefulness,  if  considered  as  a  token 
of  a  wife's  work  and  usefulness,  is  mislead- 
ing; and  beauty  is  transitory  and  often 
dangerous.  Neither  of  them  is  of  any  real 
value  unless  accompanied  by  religion.  As 
the  gnomic  poet  says — 

Mil  Kpiv,  &pS>v  fh  KiXKos,  &\A&  r)>y  rpirtov. 

"Judge  not  at  sight  of  beauty,  but  of  life." 

But  a  woman  that  fearetb  the  Lord,  she 
shall  be  praised.  So  we  come  back  to  the 
maxim  with  which  the  whole  book  began, 
that  the  foundation  of  all  excellence  is  the 


fear  of  the  Lord  (ch.  i.  7).  Such,  too,  is  the 
conclusion  of  Bcolesiastes  (xii.  13),  "Pear 
God,  and  keep  his  commandments :  for  this 
is  the  whole  duty  of  man."  Septnagiut, 
"  False  are  charms  (dp^trxciai),  and  vain  is 
the  beauty  of  woman ;  for  a  prudent  woman 
is  blessed,  and  let  her  praise  the  fear  of  the 
Lord." 

Ver.  31.— Tat.  Give  her  of  the  fruit  of 
her  hands.  So  may  she  enjoy  the  various 
blessings  which  her  zeal,  prudence,  and 
economy  have  obtained.  Ps.  cxxviii.  2, 
"  Thou  shalt  eat  the  labour  of  thine  hands ; 
happy  shalt  thou  be,  and  it  shall  be  well 
with  thee."  Septuagint,  "Give  her  of  the 
fruit  of  her  lips."  And  let  her  own  works 
praise  her  in  the  gates.  She  needs  no  far- 
fetched laudation ;  her  lifelong  actions  speak 
for  themselves.  Where  men  most  congre- 
gate, where  the  heads  of  the  people  meet  in 
solemn  assembly,  there  her  praise  is  sung, 
and  a  unanimous  verdict  assigns  to  her  the 
highest  honour.  Septuagint,  "  Let  her 
husband  be  praised  in  the  gates."  This 
frequent  introduction  of  the  husband  is 
curious.  St.  Gregory  thus  spiritualizes  the 
passage :  "  As  the  entrance  of  a  city  is  called 
the  gate,  so  is  the  day  of  judgment  the  gate 
of  the  kingdom,  since  all  the  elect  go  in 
thereby  to  the  glory  of  their  heavenly 
country.  ...  Of  these  gates  Solomon  says, 
•  Give  her  of  the  fruit  of  her  hands,  and  her 
own  works  shall  praise  her  in  the  gates.' 
For  holy  Church  then  receives  of  'the  frnit 
of  her  hands,'  when  the  recompensing  of 
her  labour  raises  her  up  to  the  possession 
of  heavenly  blessings ;  for  her  '  works  then 
praise  her  in  the  gates,'  when  in  the  very 
entrance  to  his  kingdom  the  words  are  spoken 
to  his  members, '  I  was  an  hungred,  and  ye 
gave  me  meat,'  etc."  ('  Moral.,'  vL  9). 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  1. — A  mother's  counsel.  The  last  chapter  of  the  Book  of  Proverbs  gives  ub  the 
picture  of  a  mother's  counsel  to  her  son — wise  and  good  and  eloquent  with  love  and 
yearning  anxiety.  Here  is  a  picture  to  suggest  the  inestimable  advantage  to  a  young 
man  of  a  mother's  guidance.  In  thoughtless,  high-spirited  youth  this  too  often  passes 
unheeded,  and  precious  advice  is  then  wasted  on  ungrateful  ears.  It  would  be  more 
seemly  to  consider  its  unique  merits. 

I.  It  6PKING8  FROM  A  woman's  natubb.  We  have  many  beautiful  pictures  of 
women  in  the  Bible.  Inspired  women  have  conveyed  to  us  some  parts  of  the  biblical 
teaching.  Deborah  (Judg.  v.  7),  the  mother  of  Samuel,  and  now  the  mother  of  Lemuel, 
aU  help  us  with  great  Divine  truths  or  holy  thoughts  and  influences.  It  is  the  gift  of 
women  to  see  into  truth  with  a  flash  of  sympathy.  The  wonder  is  that  we  have  so 
small  a  part  of  the  Bible  from  the  tongue  and  pen  of  women. 

II.  It  is  inspiebd  by  a  mother's  heart.  The  biblical  gallery  of  holy  women  does 
not  introduce  us  to  the  cloisters.  The  Hebrew  heroines  were  "  mothers  in  Israel,"  not 
nuns.  Maternity  completes  woman.  "  The  perfect  woman,  nobly  planned,"  is  one 
who  can  think,  love,  and  act  with  the  large  heart  of  a  mother. 

Hi.  It  u  ohakaiOIebiskd  bt  uksblfish  devotion.    There  is  nowhere  in  all  creation 


OH.  XXXI.  1—31.]  THE  PE0VERB8.  60? 


»uch  an  image  of  utterly  unselfish,  of  completely  self-sacrificing  loTe  as  that  of  a 
woman  for  her  child.  She  almost  gives  her  life  for  his  infant  existence.  All  through 
his  helpless  years  she  watches  over  him  with  untiring  care.  When  he  goes  forth  into 
the  world,  she^  follows  him  with  never-flagging  interest.  He  may  forget  her ;  she  will 
never  forget  him.  If  he  does  well,  her  joy  is  unhounded ;  if  he  does  ill,  her  heart  is 
broken.  Without  a  thought  of  self,  she  spends  herself  on  her  child,  and  finds  her  life 
or  her  death  in  his  conduct. 

IV.  It  is  aniDED  by  dekp  knowledse.  The  mother  may  not  know  much  of  the 
outer  world ;  she  may  he  quite  ignorant  of  the  most  recent  dicta  of  science ;  some  of 
her  notions  may  seem  old-fashioned  to  her  modern-minded  son.  But  foolish  Indeed 
will  he  bo  if  he  dares  to  despise  her  counsels  on  such  grounds.  She  knows  Mm — his 
strength  and  his  weakness,  his  childish  faults  and  his  early  promises.  Here  lies  the 
secret  of  her  wisdom. 

V.  It  oamnot  be  neglected  without  obttbl  ingbatitudb.  The  son  may  think 
himself  wiser  than  his  mother,  but  at  least  he  should  give  reverent  attention  to  her 
advice.  So  much  love  and  care  and  thoughtfulness  do  not  deserve  to  be  tossed  aside 
in  a  moment  of  imcatience.  The  wise  son  will  acknowledge  that  his  mother's  wishes 
deserve  his  most  earnest  consideration.  .  It  may  be,  then,  that  he  will  be  held  back  in 
the  hour  of  temptation  by  the  thought  of  the  poignant  grief  that  his  shameful  fall 
would  give  to  his  mother.  It  is  much  for  a  Ufe  to  be  worthy  of  a  good  Christian 
mother's  counseL 

Vers.  10 — 31. — The  typical  woman.  I.  Hbe  sphere.  This  is  domestic.  1.  In 
marriage.  The  typical  woman  is  a  wife  and  mother,  not  a  St.  Agnes,  the  mystical 
bride  of  Christ,  nor  even  a  Virgin  Mary.  We  see  her  in  Sarah,  in  Naomi,  in  Hanuah, 
in  Eunice.  There  is  invaluable  service  for  the  world  which  only  women  who  are  free 
from  the  ties  of  home  can  accomplish ;  there  is  a  noble  mission  for  single  women.  But 
there  is  nothing  in  Scripture,  reason,  or  conscience  to  suggest  that  virginity  is  more 
holy  than  marriage,  that  the  maiden  is  more  saintly  than  "the  matron.  2.  In  the 
work  of  the  home.  Moreover,  for  unmarried  women  household  cares  and  quiet  home 
duties  usually  have  the  first  call.  Some  women  may  be  called  to  more  public  positionrf. 
A  queen  may  adorn  a  throne.  A  Florence  Nightingale  may  live  as  an  angel  of  mercy 
to  the  suffering.  But  these  are  exceptional  persons.  Every  Jewess  was  not  a  Deborah, 
and  even  the  martial  prophetess,  unlike  her  French  counterpart,  Joan  of  Arc,  was  "  a 
mother  in  Israel."  3.  Therefore  with  domestic  responsibility.  The  typical  woman  will 
be  judged  primarily  in  regard  to  domestic  duties.  The  true  wife  is  the  helpmeet  of 
her  husband.  Her  first  aim  will  be  to  "  do  him  good  "  Cver,  12).  If  she  fails  here, 
her  public  service  is  of  little  account, 

II,  Hbb  ohabactbb.  This  is  described  in  a  graphic  picture  of  her  life — a  picture 
which  is  in  striking  contrast  to  the  ignorance,  the  indolence,  the  inanity  of  an  Oriental 
harem.  Observe  its  chief  features.  1.  Trustworthiness.  The  true  wife  is  her  hus- 
band's confidant.  She  must  be  worthy  of  confidence  by  being  (1)  faithful,  (2)  sympa- 
thetic, (3)  intelligent.  2.  Industry.  Nothing  can  be  more  foolish  than  the  notion 
that  a  "lady "should  have  no  occupation.  The  ideal  woman  rises  early  and  busies 
herself  with  many  affairs.  In  old  days,  when  the  spinning  was  done  at  home  and 
most  of  the  &mily  garments  were  made  by  the  women  of  the  house,  the  clothing  of 
husband  and  children  bore  testimony  to  the  industry  of  the  wife.  Machinery  has 
destroyed  this  antique  picture.  Yet  the  spirit  of  it  remains.  The  true  wife  still  finds 
an  abundance  of  domestic  occupations.  3.  Thrift.  The  wife  of  the  Proverbs  is 
quite  a  business  woman,  selling  the  superfluous  work  of  her  hands  to  merchants,  and 
buying  land  with  the  proceeds.  Yet  by  her  foresight  she  provides  warm  clothing  for 
the  winter,  and  therefore  she  can  afford  to  laugh  when  the  snow  oometh.  4.  Strength. 
"Shegu-deth  her  loins  with  strength."  The  physical  education  of  women  is  just  now 
receiving  especial  attention,  and  rightly  so.  It  is  a  woman's  duty  to  be  strong,  if  by 
means  of  wholesome  food  and  exercise  she  can  conquer  weakness.  No  doubt  the 
ailments  of  many  women  spring  from  lassitude,  indolence,  and  self-surrender.  But 
even  when  bodily  frailty  cannot  be  conquered,  strength  of  soul  may  be  attained. 
6.  Charity.  The  stroug  and  thrifty  wife  might  be  hard,  cold,  and  selfish.  But  the 
true  woman  "stMtoheth  out  her  hand  to  the  poor "  (ver.  20).     6.  Oracious  speech. 


604  THE  PROVERBS.  [oh.  ixxi.  1—31 


So  energetic  a  woman  might  still  be  thought  somewhat  unlovable  if  we  had  not  tl)i8 
final  trait ;  "  in  her  tongue  is  the  law  of  kindness"  (ver.  26).  How  much  may  the 
tone  of  a  woman's  conversation  do  to  keep  peace  in  a  household,  and  shed  over  it  'a 
s|iirit  of  love  and  gentleness  I  7.  True  religion.  This  is  the  root  of  the  matter.  The 
typical  woman  "  feareth  the  Lord  "  (ver.  30). 

III.  Hbb  bewabd.  1.  In  her  influence.  "Her  husband  Is  known  In  the  gates." 
She  helps  him  to  honour.  Herself  too  busy  in  the  private  sphere  to  take  her  part 
directly  in  public  life,  yet  indirectly  she  is  a  great  force  in  the  large  world  through  her 
influence  over  her  husband.  2.  In  the  success  of  her  energies.  We  have  here  a  picture 
of  a  wife  in  affluence— not  of  a  poor  domestic  drudge  in  the  squalor  of  abject  poverty. 
Nevertheless,  the  prosperity  of  the  home  largely  depends  upon  her.  Her  thoughtful- 
uess,  energy,  careful  oversight  of  others  and  kindness  of  heart  and  words,  are  the  chief 
causes  of  the  welfare  of  her  happy,  comfortable  home.  3.  In  the  honour  of  her  family. 
"  Her  children  arise  up,  and  call  her  blessed ;  her  husband  also,  and  he  praiseth  her  " 
(ver.  28).  Surely  this  is  a  better  reward  than  public  fame.  4.  Continued  influence. 
This  true  woman  deserves  to  have  "  the  fruit  of  her  hands."  If  she  is  to  be  spoken 
of  "  in  the  gates,"  it  should  be  in  praise  of  her  domestic  duties,  which  cannot  but  be 
known  to  her  neighbours,  however  modest  and  retiring  her  manners  may  be. 

Var.  30. — Bival  attractions.  Lemuel's  mother  warns  her  son  against  the  fascinations 
of  svf^icial  charms  in  his  choice  of  a  wife,  and  points  to  the  attractiveness  of  a  God- 
fearii^  woman. 

I.  Th«  vanity  of  beauty.  1.  It  is  hut  temporary.  The  bloom  of  beauty  fades 
with  youth  ;  but  a  wife  is  to  be  a  man's  helpmeet  throughout  life,  and,  if  both  are  spared, 
his  companion  in  age.  In  making  a  choice  for  life  a  man  should  consider  enduring 
traits.  2.  It  is  superficial.  Beauty  of  face  and  grace  of  form  are  only  bodily  attri- 
butes. 1  hey  may  have  no  corresponding  mental,  moral,  and  spiritual  meritg,  3.  It 
is  deceptive.  The  fascination  of  a  pretty  face  may  delude  a  man  into  neglecting  more 
important  considerations  in  the  woman  of  his  choice.  Ill  temper  may  be  taken  for 
strength  of  character,  frivolity  for  liveliness,  mere  softness  of  disposition  for  love 
But  the  great  disillnsion  of  lifelong  companionship  will  dispel  all  these  mistakes,  when 
the  discovery  is  too  late  to  be  of  any  use.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  no  need  to  take 
refuge  in  a  monkish  contempt  of  beauty.  All  beauty  is  a  work  of  Goil.  It  is  the 
duty  of  a  woman  to  make  herself  pleasing  to  others.  The  finest  beauty  is  a  product 
of  health,  good  temper,  and  the  expression  of  worthy  sentiments — all  of  them  desirable 
things.  Note :  The. vanity  of  beauty  shows  the  mistake  of  pursuing  "  art  for  art's  sake," 
to  the  neglect  of  morality,  duty,  truth,  and  charity. 

II.  The  grace  of  beligion.  The  "  woman  that  feareth  the  Lord  "  is  to  be  praised. 
Though,  perhaps;  less  bealitiful  in  form  and  countenance,  she  has  the  higher  b«iuty  of 
holiness.  The  Madonna  stands  infinitely  above  the  Venus.  The  grace  of  the  God- 
fearing woman  has  its  own  true  attraction  for  those  who  can  appreciate  it.  1.  It  is 
enduring.  Beauty  fades;  goodness  endures.  This  should  ripen  with  years  into  a 
more  rich  and  mellow  grace.  2.  It  is  deep.  The  prolonged  acquaintanceship  that 
reveals  the  utier  hoUowness  and  unreality  of  those  attractions  which  consist  only  in 
bodily  form  and  skin-complexion  only  makes  more  apparent  the  treasures  of  a  true 
and  worthy  character.  Trouble  that  ploughs  fatal  furrows  in  the  cheek  of  the  mere 
"  beauty  "  unveils  the  tender  grace  of  the  truly  godly  woman.  Tliose  scenes  wherein 
earthly  beauty  fails  open  up  wondrous  treasures  of  heavenly  grace.  3.  It  is  satisfying. 
A  feverish  excitement  accompanies  the  adoration  of  earthly  beauty ;  but  the  beauty  of 
a  sweet,  true,  generous  soul  is  restful  and  comforting.  4.  It  is  worthy  of  honour. 
Poets  give  us  their  dreams  of  fair  women.  A  higher  subject  would  be  the  praises  of 
God-fearing  women.  How  much  of  the  world's  blessedness  springs  from  the  devotion 
of  unselfish  women — the  self-sacrifices  of  true  wives,  the  toils  and  prayers  of  goad 
mothers  I 

Ver.  31. —  Woman^s  riyhts.  The  strenuous  advocacy  of  the  rights  of  women  by 
shiill  oratory  las  injured  the  true  cause  of  women  by  covering  a  serious  subject  with 
ridicule,  and  suggesting  the  unreality  of  the  grievances  urged.  When  extravagant 
demands  are  made,  people  assume  that  every  just  right  has  been  conceded ;  and  when 


OH.  XXH.  1—31.1  THE  PROVERBS.  605 


the  Belf-elected  advocates  of  women  put  forth  a  programme  wbioh  the  great  hody  of 
wives  and  daughters  repudiate,  it  is  supposed  that  there  is  no  grouad  for  considering 
any  complaint  as  to  the  legal  and  social  treatment  of  women.  But  this  is  unreasonable 
and  unjust.  There  are  women's  rights,  and  these  rights  are  by  no  means  universally 
conceded. 

I.  Women  havt?  a  right  to  work.  The  Oriental  notion,  that  women  are  but  idle 
ornaments  of  the  harem,  findti  no  place  in  the  Bible.  Here  they  appear  freely  in  the 
world,  and,  though  their  first  duties  are  in  the  home,  they  are  not  idle,  nor  are  they 
wanting  in  enterprise.  The  ideal  woman  in  the  Book  of  Proverbs  is  a  manufacturer, 
a  merchant,  ai.d  a  landowner.  Woman's  work  cannot  be  wholly  the  same  as  man's, 
because  nature  has  placed  limitations  upon  her  physical  energies.  But  she  has  spheres 
for  work,  and  it  is  cruel,  unjust,  and  selfish  to  keep  her  out  of  any  region  of  activity 
where  she  can  do  good  service,  by  law  or  by  social  displeasure.  Two  wrongs  in  par- 
ticular need  to  be  swept  away.  1.  The  notion  that  work  is  degrading  to  a  woman. 
Surely  idleness  is  more  degrading.  It  is  rightly  said  that  woman's  sphere  is  the  home. 
But  it  is  not  every  woman  who  has  a  home.  Surely  it  is  a  degrading  and  insulting 
idea  that  the  main  business  of  a  young  woman  is  to  secure  a  husband,  and  so  obtain 
a  home.  There  are  women  who  are  manifestly  cut  out  for  other  positions ;  many 
women  never  have  an  opportunity  of  obtaining  a  home  of  their  own  except  by 
sacrificing  themselves  to  men  whom  they  do  not  love.  In  early  life  young  girls  are 
not  the  better  for  being  kept  in  idleness,  waiting  for  the  chance  that  may  turn  up. 
Half  the  ailments  of  women  of  the  comfortable  classes  come  from  want  of  occupation. 
It  needs  to  be  known  and  recognized  that  it  is  a  right  and  honourable  thing  for  a 
woman  to  be  engaged  in  any  ordinary  occupation  that  is  suitable  to  her  powers. 
2.  The  fear  of  rivalry  with  men.  There  have  been  professions  the  members  of  which 
have  bitterly  resented  the  invasion  of  their  ranks  by  women.  Such  trade-unionism 
is  most  ungenerous.  It  is  an  humiliation  to,have  to  confess  that  men  could  not  hold 
their  own  unless  under  a  system  of  protection  against  the  competition  of  women. 
Certainly  no  Christian  principle  can  justify  such  selfishness. 

II.  Women  have  a  biqht  to  the  bbsults  of  theib  wobk.  1.  In  payment.  The 
wife  who  earns  wages  has  a  right  to  her  purse  as  much  as  the  husband  to  his.  Where 
there  is  a  true  marriage,  no  thought  of  separate  interests  will  rouse  any  jealousy  as  to 

,  the  several  possessions  of  the  two.  But  true  marriage  is  not  always  realized.  We  see 
brutal  husbands  living  idly  on  the  earnin'gs  of  their  wives.  It  is  not  enough  that  the 
poor  women  are  supposed  to  be  protected  by  a  Married  Woman's  Property  Act,  for 
the  husband  is  still  too  often  the  tyrant  of  the  home.  We  shall  only  see  a  more  just 
arrangement  when  Christian  principles  are  applied  to  domestic  practices.  2.  In,  honour. 
"  Let  her  own  works  praise  her  in  the  gates."  Women  who  contribute  to  the  service 
of  society  are  deserving  of  double  honour,  because  they  have  had  to  work  under  excep- 
tional disadvantages.  Women  who  have  proved  themselves  wise,  industrious,  ami 
generous  in  the  home-life  do  not  receive  their  meed  of  praise.  Too  much  is  taken  lor 
granted,  and  accepted  without  thanks,  because  the  service  is  constant  and  the  sacrifice 
habitual.  In  after-years,  when  it  is  too  late  to  give  the  due  acknowledgment,  many  a 
man  has  hail  to  feel  sharp  pangs  of  regret  at  his  heedless  treatment  of  a  wife's  patient 
toil  or  a  mother's  yearning  love.  3.  In  position.  Opportunity  should  be  proportionate 
to  capacity.  If  women  can  work,  they  should  have  scope  for  work.  ..It  is  the  duty 
of  Christian  society  to  give  to  woman  her  true  position.  If  she  be  "  the  weaker 
vessel,"  she  needs  more  consideration,  not  less  justice.  Christ  gave  high  honours  to 
women,  accepted  their  devoted  service,  and  laid  the  foundation  of  Christian  justice  in 
regard  to  them. 

HOMILIES   BY    VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  \—Zl.—The  wards  of  Lemuel.  The  fear  of  God  is  the  leading  thought  in 
these  meditations ;  and  this  in  a  twofold  relation — to  the  king  in  his  rule  in  the  state, 
and  the  woman  in  her  rule  in  the  house. 

Ver».  2 — 9. — A  mother's  maxims.  The  mother's  heart,  deep  in  emotionR  of  affection 
and  urgent  solicitude,  is  expressed  in  the  passionate  form  of  the  ■'/''^-es«. 


608  THE  PB0VERB8.  [oh.  xxxl  1--31 


I.  Oh  women,  OB  THE  DUTY  OF  oHASTiTT.  (Ver.  3.)  The  weakness  of  this  passion 
was  one  of  the  things,  Alexander  the  Great  was  wont  to  say,  which  reminded  him  that 
he  was  mortal.  David  and  Solomon  were  both  warnings  and  beacon-lights  against 
yielding  to  it  (2  Sam.  xii.  9,  10;  comp.  ch.  ii.,  v.,  vii.). 

II.  On  wine,  OB  THE  DUTY  OF  TEMPBBANCB.  (Ver.  4,  iqq.")  Here  is  a  sin  in  close 
affinity  to  the  former  (Hos.  iv.  11).  1.  A  vice  degrading  in  all,  drwnleenness  is  most 
especially  unbefitting  those  in  high  station.  Elah  (1  Kings  xvi.  8, 9),  Benhadad  (1  Kings 
XI.  16),  and  Belshazzar  (Dan.  v.  2 — 4),  were  all  dark  examples  of  the  danger  (comp. 
Hos.  vii.  6).  2.  It  may  lead  to  moral  perversion.  (Ver.  5.)  The  woman  wrongly 
condemned  by  Philip  of  Macedon  exclaimed,  "  I  appeal  from  Philip  drunk  to  Philip 
sober."  Ahasuerus  (Esth.  i.  10, 11)  and  Herod  (Mark  vi.  21 — 28)  appear  to  have  been 
guilty  of  arbitrary  conduct  under  the  same  besotting  influence.  Men  "  err  through  strong 
drink"  (Isa.  xxviiL  7).  3,  The  true  use  of  wine.  (Ver.  6.)  It  is  a  medicine  for  the 
fainting.  It  is  a  restorative  under  extreme  depression.  The  Bible  tolerates  and  admits 
the  blessing  of  wine  in  moderation  as  promotive  of  social  cheerfulness.  It  "  maketh 
glad  the  heart  of  man,"  and  is  even  said  to  "cheer  God"  (Judg.  ix.  13).  Hence 
libations  were  a  part  of  the  saciificial  feast  offered  to  the  Majesty  on  higli.  As  an 
anodyne  it  is  admitted  here  (ver.  7).  But  all  this  does  not  exempt  from  close 
circumspection  as  to  time,  place,  persons,  and  circumstances  in  its  use.  The  priests, 
when  performing  their  sacred  functions  in  the  tabernacle  and  temple,  were  to  abstain 
from  wine.  But  here,  as  in  other  matters,  there  is  large  latitude  given  to  the  exercise 
of  the  private  judgment,  the  personal  Christian  conscience.  Any  attempt  to  overrule 
the  right  of  personal  freedom  creates  a  new  class  of  evils.  Let  those  who  see  their 
duty  in  that  light  adopt  total  abstinence ;  and  others  labour  according  to  their  ability 
to  strike  at  the  indirect  and  deeper  causes  of  what  many  regard  as  a  national  vice. 
Wherever  there  ii  a  widespread  vice,  it  is  rooted  in  some  profound  misery.  The 
surest,  though  longest,  cure  is  by  the  eradication  of  the  pain  of  the  mind  which  drives 
so  many  towards  the  nepenthes,  or  draught  of  oblivion. 

III.  On  th»  fbek  and  full  administbation  of  justice.  (Vers.  8,  9.)  The 
royal  heart  and  hand  are  to  be  at  the  service  of  those  who  cannot  help  themselves^he 
widow,  the  orphan,  the  poor,  and  "  all  that  are  desolate  and  oppressed  "  (Job  xxix.  15, 
16).  He  is  to  be  both  advocate  and  judge.  He  is  to  be  an  earthly  type  of  God. 
"  Let  his  representatives  on  earth  study  the  character  of  their  King  in  heaven,  and  be 
conformed  more  fully  to  his  image  of  forgiveness  and  love." — J. 

Vers.  10 — 31. — I%e  virtuous  housewife.  I.  Hbb  influence  is  the  sphbbk  of 
home.  (Vers.  10 — 22.)  1.  Her  exceeding  worth.  (Vers.  10 — 12.)  A  costly  treasure 
not  everywhere  to  be  found ;  no  commonplace  blessing :  an  ornament  and  a  joy  above 
all  that  earth  affords  of  rare  and  beautiful.  A  treasure  on  which  the  heart  of  the 
possessor  ever  dwells  with  delight. 

**  Continual  comfort  in  a  face, 
The  liueameuts  of  gospel  books." 

Bhe  is  the  rich  source  of  revenue  to  her  husband  in  all  good  things. 

"  All  other  goods  by  fortune's  hand  are  given; 
A  wife  is  &ie  peculiar  gift  of  Heaven." 

(Pope.) 

"  If  women  be  good,"  said  Aristotle,  "  the  half  of  the  commonwealth  may  be  happy 
where  they  are."  "The  greatest  gift  of  God  is  a  pious,  amiable  spouse,  who  fears  God 
loves  his  house,  and  with  whom  one  can  live  in  perfect  confidence"  (Luther).  2.  Th/ 
picture  of  her  domestic  industry.  (Vera.  13—22.)  It  is  an  antique  picture,  the  forrj 
and  colourinn;  derived  from  ancient  custom;  hut  the  general  moral  effect  is  true  for 
all  times.  The  traits  of  the  housewifely  character  are :  (1)  The  personal  example  of 
diligence.  She  is  seen  from  day  to  day  spinning  at  her  loom,  the  chief  occupation  of 
women  in  ancient  times.  She  is  an  early  riser  (ver.  16).  (2)  Her  unrelaxing  energy. 
(Ver.  17.)  She  has  no  idle  hour ;  her  rest  is  in  change  of  occupation.  (3)  Her  personal 
attention  to  business.  (Vers.  16, 18.)  Whether  examining  land  with  a  view  to  invest 
her  savings  in  purrhafe  »nd  ciHivation,  or  inspecting  goods,  her  mind  is  in  all  she  do«a. 


OH.  xxxL  1— 81.]  THE  PBOVEEBS.  607 


She  is  not  slothful  in  business,  but  glowing  in  spirit,  and  all  that  she  does  is  done  with 
heart.  (4)  Eer  lenevolence.  Her  thrift  is  not  of  the  odious  form  which  begins  and 
ends  with  home,  and  breeds  a  sordid  miserliness  out  of  hard-won  gains.  Her  opea 
hand  outstretched  to  the  poor  (ver.  20)  is  one  of  the  most  winning  traits  in  the  picture. 
She  has  no  lack  of  good  herself,  and  always  something  over  for  the  needy.  (5),  Rer 
care  loth  for  comfort  and  for  ornament.  (Vers.  21,  22.)  Both  the  very  spheres  of 
woman's  activity.  But  she  observes  their  true  order.  Her  first  thought  is  for  the 
health  of  her  household ;  she  provides  the  warm  "  double  garments "  against  the 
winter's  snow.  Her  leisure  is  occupied  with  those  fine  works  of  artistic  needlework 
by  which  elegance  and  beauty  are  contributed  to  the  scene  of  home.  Eefinement 
adorning  comfort, — this  is  the  true  relation.  In  finery  without  solid  use  and  comfort 
there  is  no  beauty  nor  worth. 

II.  Further  tbaits  and  details  of  the  pictubb.  (Vers.  23 — 31.)  1.  She  reflects 
consideration  on  her  husband.  Her  thrift  makes  him  rich ;  her  noble  character  gives 
him  additional  title  to  respect.  His  personality  derives  weight  from  the  possession  of 
such  a  treasure,  the  devotion  of  such  a  heart.  Her  business  capacity,  her  energy,  and 
the  quiet  dignity  of  her  life  and  bearing;  the  mingled  sense  and  shrewdness,  charm 
and  grace  of  her  conversation  (vers.  24 — 27) ; — are  all  a  source  of  fame,  of  noble  self- 
complacency,  of  just  confidence  to  the  man  who  is  blessed  to  call  her  "mine."  2.  Her 
life  and  work  earn  for  her  perpetual  thanhs  and  benedictions.  (Vers.  28,  29.)  Her 
children,  as  they  grow  up,  bless  her  for  the  inestimable  boon  of  a  mother's  care  and  love. 
She  has  revealed  to  them  God ;  and  never  can  they  cease  to  believe  in  goodness  so  long 
as  they  recollect  her.  She  basks  in  the  sunshine  of  a  husband's  constant  approval.  "  Best 
of  wives! "  "Noblest  of  women ! "  is  the  thought  ever  in  his  heart,  often  on  his  lips.  3. 
It  is  religion  which  gives  enduring  worth  and  inanortality  to  character.  (Vers.  30, 31.) 
Beauty  is  a  failing  charm  or  a  deception  of  the  senses.  But  religious  principle  gives  a 
spiritual  beauty  to  the  plainest  exterior.  Being  and  doing  from  religious  motives,  to 
religious  ends, — this  is  a  sowing  for  eternal  fruits.  And  the  works  of  love  for  God'i 
sake  and  man's  fill  the  air  with  fragrance  to  the  latest  end  of  time,  and  are  found  unto 
praise,  honour,  and  glory  at  the  appearing  of  Jesus  Christ. — J. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — Motherhood.  We  have  not  many  words  from  women's  lips  in  the 
inspired  record,  and  we  may  therefore  esteem  the  more  highly  those  wa  possess.  The 
verses  bring  out — 

I.  The  strong  claims  of  motherhood.  "  The  son  of  my  womb ; "  "  the  son  of 
my  vows."  These  claims  are  based  upon:  1.  Motherhood  as  such.  Upon  all  that 
motherhood  means  to  us;  upon  the  fact  that  the  mother  has  borne  her  child,  has 
cherished  him  at  her  own  breast,  has  watched  over  his  infancy  and  childhood  with 
sedulous  care,  has  shielded  and  succoured  him,  has  fed  and  clothed  him  ;  as  we  say  in 
one  word — ^has  "  mothered "  him.  2.  Motherly  training  and  dedication.  The  early 
experiences  of  the  mother  include  much  beyond  the  physical  realm ;  they  include  the 
education  of  the  intellect,  the  training  of  the  wiU,  the  first  imparting  of  religious 
instruction,  the  solemn  dedication  of  her  child  to  the  service  of  God,  repeated  and 
earnest  jirayer  on  his  behalf.  Her  child  is  not  only  her  offspring  ;  he  is  "  the  son  of  her 
vows,"  the  one  on  whom  she  has  expended  her  most  fervent  piety.  3.  Maternal  affec- 
tion and  a/nxiety.  The  words  of  Lemuel's  mother  are  charged  with  deep  affection  and 
profound  solicitude.  And  it  is  those  who  truly  love  us,  and  who  are  unselfishly  devoted 
to  our  interest,  that  have  the  strongest  claim  upon  us.  A  claim  which  is  only  that  of 
natural  relationship,  and  is  not  crowned  and  completed  by  affection,  falls  very  short 
indeed  of  tha.t  which  is  strengthened  and  sanctified  by  sacrificial  love. 

II.  The  hope  of  motherhood.  The  mother  hopes  for  good  and  even  great  things  for 
and  from  her  child ;  he  is  to  stand  among  the  strong,  the  wise,  the  honoured,  the  useful 

III.  Its  bitter  and  cruel  disappointment.  When  the  son  of  much  sorrow  and 
prayer,  of  much  patient  training  and  earnest  entreaty,  who  had  a  noble  opportunity 
before  him — when  he  virtually  signs  away  his  inheritance, "  gives  his  strength  "  to  the 
destroyer,  takes  the  path  which  leads  to  entire  dethronement  and  ruin,  then  is  there 
such  a  bitter  and  such  a  cruel  disappointment  as  only  a  mother's  heart  can  feel  and 
know.  Then  perishes  a  fond  and  proud  and  precious  hope;  then  enters  and  take* 
possession  a  saddening,  a  crushing  sorrow. 


608  THE  PE0VBRB3.  [ch.  xxxi.  1—31. 


IV.  Its  right  to  remonstrate.  "  What,  my  son  ?  This  of  thee  ? — of  thee  whotn 
I  have  loved  and  taught  and  trained  ?  of  thee  for  whom  I  have  yearned  and  prayed  ? 
of  thee  from  whom  I  have  had  a  right  to  hope  for  such  better-  things  ?  Oh,  lose  not  thy 
fair  heritage  1  take  the  portion,  live  the  life,  wear  the  crown,  still  within  thy  reach  I  " 
A  true  and  faithful  mother  has  a  right  which  is  wholly  indisputable,  and  strong  with 
surpassing  strength,  to  speak  thus  in  affectionate  expostulation  to  one  who  owes  so 
much  to  her,  and  has  returned  her  nothing.    And  what  is — 

V.  The  filial  duty  ?  Surely  it  is  to  receive  such  remonstrance  with  deep  respect ; 
to  give  to  it  a  patient  and  dutiful  attention;  to  take  it  into  long  and  earnest  considera- 
tion; to  resolve  that,  cost  what  it  may,  the  path  of  penitence  and  renewal  shall  ba 
trodden ;  that  anything  shall  be  endured  rather  than  a  mother's  heart  be  pierced  by 
the  hand  of  her  own  child! — C 

Ver.  6. — The  allowable  at  the  exceptional.  It  is  often  the  case  that  that  which  is 
wrong  as  a  rule  is  right  as  an  exception;  what  it  would  be  unwise,  if  not  unlawful,  to 
do  under  ordinai-y  circumstances,  it  may  be  most  wise  and  even  obligatory  to  do  in 
emergencies.    This  applies  particularly,  but  not  exclusively,  to  the  subject  of  the  text 

I.  The  USB  op  stimulants.  In  a  state  of  health  and  during  the  discharge  of 
daily  duties,  shun  the  use  of  stimulants  ;  depend  upon  that  which  nourishes  and  builds 
up.  "  Give  strong  drink  unto  him  that  is  ready  to  perish ; "  to  the  man  who,  by  exposure 
or  by  some  suddenly  inflicted  wound,  or  by  starvation,  is  brought  down  to  the  brink  of 
death,  administer  the  reviving  cordial.  What  we  should  not  depend  upon  for  daily 
strength  we  do  well  to  fall  back  upon  in  the  time  of  extremity,  or  in  the  case  of  special 
need. 

II.  The  employment  of  strong  lanoixage  or  very  vivid  illustration.  It  is  a 
great  mistake  to  be  always  speaking  in  superlatives,  or  to  be  habitually  indulging  in 
expletives,  or  to  be  regularly  resorting  to  highly  coloured  illustrations.  It  is°a  sign 
and  also  a  source  of  weakness.  These  very  soon  lose  their  power  by  repetition,  and 
then  there  is  nothing  in  reserve.  And  the  man  who  has  no  power  in  reserve  is  he  who 
will  find  himself  beaten  in  the  battle.  Temperate  language,  moderation  in  the  use  of 
imagery  and  the  expression  of  disapproval,  is  the  true  and  wise  course.  Strong 
language  is  for  quite  exceptional  cases;  it  has  its  opportunity,  but  should  be  content 
to  wait  for  it. 

III.  Resort  to  violence.  There  are  occasions  when  physical  force  should  be  and 
must  be  employed.  The  magistrate  is  compelled  to  resort  to  it;  so  also  is  the  school- 
master, and  even  the  parent.  But  the  less  the  better.  Bodily  chastisement  is  always 
regrettable,  and  only  to  be  resorted  to  when  all  other  means  have  failed.  Its  constant 
exercise  only  hardens  the  object  of  it,  and  it  is  not  unlikely  to  harden  the  hand  that 
administers  it.  The  wise  teacher  and  the  wise  parent  will  do  his  best  to  reduce  it  to 
its  very  lowest  point. 

IV.  Affectionate  demonsteativbnbss.  This  has  its  time  and  place,  but  it  is  an 
exceptional  rather  than  a  constant  one  in  the  conduct  of  our  life.  When  any  one  has 
lacked  the  tenderness  and  the  affection  which  our  heart  craves,  and  is  hungry  for  human 
love,  when  the  free  and  full  manifestation  of  heartfelt  kindness  will  be  like  water  to 
the  parched  lips,  let  it  be  freely  and  fully  given.  But  the  perpetual  exhibition  of 
endearment,  whether  in  word  or  deed,  is  a  mistake. 

V.  The  appeal  to  self-interest  on  the  part  of  the  moralist  and  religious 
TEACHER.  We  should,  as  a  rule,  place  moral  obligations  and  religious  duty  on  the 
ground  of  conviction ;  we  should  continually  endeavour  to  impress  men  with  the  feeling 
that  they  are  sacredly  bound  to  respect  themselves,  to  regard  the  rights  of  their 
brethren,  to  respond  to  the  claims  of  God,  their  Father  and  their  Saviour.  Eelieion  is 
the  response  of  the  human  soul  to  the  boundless  claim  of  Infinite  Goodness  and  Love 
But  Christ  has  himself  taught  us  that  it  is  right  and  well  sometimes  to  make  our  appeal 
to  the  sense  of  self-mterest— to  say  to  men, "  If  not  for  God's  sake,  who  has  a  sovereign 
and  supreme  claim  on  your  attention  ;  if  not  for  the  sake  of  those  who  are  related  to 
you  and  dependent  on  you ;  yet  for  your  own  sake,  because  you  love  life  and  hate  death 
hearken  and  obey  "  (see  Mark  viii.  36,  37). — 0. 

Vers.  8,  9.— Tit  function  and  the  privilege  itf  powtr.     God   give,  to  ».,me  men 


OH.  nxL  1— 31.]  THE  PROVERBa  608 


place  and  power;  they  may  inherit  it,  or  they  may  win  their  way  to  it  hy  the  force 
of  their  talent  or  their  merit.  When  they  have  reached  it,  what  should  be  the  use 
they  make  of  it?    We  may  look  first  at — 

I.  What  has  been  its  habit.  Only  too  often  the  actual  use  that  has  been  made 
of  high  station  and  of  civil  or  military  power  is  that  of  (1>  indulgence ;  or  (2)  appro- 
priation ;  or  (3)  oppression.  Men  have  used  their  elevation  only  to  drink  the  sweet 
cup  of  pleasure ;  or  to  secure  to  themselves  the  spoils  of  high  office,  the  treasures 
which  lay  within  their  grasp;  or  to  find  a  mean  and  despicable  gratification  in  the 
enforcement  of  their  own  dignity  and  the  humiliation  of  those  beneath  them.  This  ia 
"human,"  if  by  human  we  understand  that  which  is  natural  to  man  as  sin  has  dwarfed 
and  spoilt  his  nature,  perverting  his  powers  and  degrading  his  delights.  But  of  man 
as  God  meant  him  to  be,  and  as  a  Divine  Redeemer  is  renewing  him,  all  this  is  utterly 
unworthy.     Let  us  see — 

II.  What  is  its  true  function.  It  is  that  of  righteousness.  A  man  is  placed  on 
high  in  order  that  he  may  "judge  righteously."  Whether  he  be  the  king,  as  in 
David's  and  Solomon's  time ;  or  whether  he  be  the  magistrate,  as  in  our  own  time  j  or 
whether  he  be  the  teacher,  or  the  manufacturer,  or  the  farmer,  or  the  master  or  father 
in  the  home ;  whatever  be  the  kind  or  measure  of  authority  enjoyed,  the  function  of 
power  is  to  judge  righteously;  it  is  to  do  justice;  it  is  to  see  that  innooency  ia 
acquitted  and  guUt  condemned ;.  it  is  to  take  pains  and  exercise  patience  in  order  that 
worth  may  be  rewarded  and  that  sin  may  be  shamed ;  it  is  to  be  a  tower  of  refuse 
to  those  who  are  conscious  of  rectitude,  and  to  be  a  source  of  fear  to  those  who  know 
that  they  have  been  "  doing  evil ; "  it  is  to  be  a  strength  to  the  righteous  and  a  terror 
to  the  guilty. 

III.  What  it  should  count  its  feocliab  peivilbge;  it  re  to  befbiend  tub 
FBiBNDLBSs.  There  are  those  who  are  too  weak  to  be  of  much  service  to  their  neigh- 
bours ;  there  are  those  who  aie  too  selfish  to  cherish  the  ambition ;  but  the  strong 
man  who  is  the  good  man,  the  man  in  power  who  has  in  him  the  spirit  of  his  Master, 
will  rejoice  in  his  power  mainly  because  it  enables  him  to  help  those  who  would  other- 
wise go  on  and  go  down  without  a  helper;  (1)  those  suflfeiing  from  physical  privation 
— the  blind,  the  deaf,  the  dumb;  (2)  those  lacking  mental  qualifications — the  weak- 
niinded,  the  timid,  the  reuerved;  (3)  those  too  poor  to  purchase  the  aid  that  is  some- 
times essential  to  justice  and  right ;  (4)  those  over  whom  some  great  disaster,  which  is 
at  the  same  time  a  cruel  wrong,  impends — "  appointed  to  destruction."  To  lift  up 
those  who  have  been  wrongfully  laid  low,  to  befriend  the  unfortunate  and  the  desolate, 
to  stand  by  the  side  of  those  who  cannot  assert  their  own  claims,  to  be  eyes  to  the  blind 
and  a  voice  to  the  dumb,  to  "  make  the  widow's  heart  to  sing  for  joy,"  to  place  the 
destitute  in  the  path  which  leads  up  to  competency  and  honour, — to  act  in  the  spirit 
and  to  promote  the  cause  of  beneficence  is  the  true  privilege,  as  it  is  the  brightest 
crown  and  the  deepest  joy,  of  power. — 0. 

Vers,  10 — 31. — Ghristian  womanhood.  If  Solomon  did  write  these  words,  we  need 
not  be  surprised  that  he  speaks  of  the  rarity  of  the  ideal  woman ;  for  she  is  hardly  to 
be  found  in  a  crowded  harem.  It  is  the  Christian  home  that  contains  her.  We 
look  at — 

L  Hee  chabaotebistics.  And  these  are  :  1.  Piety.  "  She  feareth  the  Lord  "  (ver. 
30).  She  has  within  her  the  S|)irit  of  reverence,  and  the  life  she  lives  is  one  in  which 
worship  and  the  study  of  the  wUl  of  God  have  no  small  share.  She  has  a  seat  and  is 
at  home  in  the  sanctuary ;  she  is  also  constant  and  earnest  in  the  quiet  chamber  of 
devotion ;  she  knows  well  that  the  happiness  of  her  home  and  the  well-being  of  her 
household  depend  upon  the  favour  of  the  heavenly  Father.  2.  Purity.  She  is  a 
"  virtuous  woman"  (ver.  10).  She  gives  her  whole  heart  to  her  husband,  and  enjoys 
his  full  confidence  (ver.  11).  3.  Industry.  The  writer  dwells  upon  the  labours  she 
puts  forth  for  the  sake  of  her  husband  and  her  honsehold.  4.  Wisdom.  (Ver.  26.) 
Her  conversation  is  far  removed  from  mere  idle  gossip  or  the  vanities  of  an  empty 
curiosity.  She  is  familiar  with  "  the  Law  of  the  Lord ;  "  she  knows  what  is  the  secret 
of  lasting  happiness.  She  can  guide  her  sons  and  daughters  in  the  way  of  life;  and 
she  instils  her  heaven-born  wisdom  into  minds  that  welcome  it  and  will  never  lose  it. 
5.  Kindness.  "  The  law  of  kindness  is  on  her  lips."  She  is  one  that  does  not  rule  by 
PB0VKSB8.  2   a 


tlO  THE  PBOVEBBfl.  [<m.  xrxi.  1— 31. 

■ 

the  "constant  droppings "' of  censvire,  but  by  the  never-falling  stream  of  gentleness 
and  encouragemont.  Love,  not  fear,  is  the  sceptre  which  she  holds,  and  is  the  source 
of  her  strength,    6.  Beneficence.    (Ver.  20.) 

II.  Heb  bewabd.  1.  Affection  and  honowr  on  the  part  of  those  who  are  nearest  to 
her.  Her  husband  trusts  and  praises  her  (ver.  28),  and  her  children  "  rise  up  and  call 
her  blessed."  2.  Strength  and  dignity  in  her  home.  She  is  "clothed  upon  with  "  the 
tributes  woven  by  love  and  esteem.  Her  influence  is  felt  much  oftener  than  it  is 
recognized,  and  long  after  her  face  and  her  voice  are  no  longer  seen  and  heard.  3. 
Security  against  future  want.  She  "  laugbeth  at  the  time  to  come,"  while  those  who 
lack  her  prudence  and  her  skill  have  reason  to  shrink  from  the  thought  of  it.  4.  3%e 
prosperity  of  her  relatives.  Her  husband,  relieved  of  care  and  worry  at  home,  is  able 
to  do  his  proper  work,  and  succeeds  in  his  sphere  (ver.  23). 

III.  Heb  commonness  in  the  einodou  of  Chbist.  It  might  be  difficult  to  find 
"  the  virtuous  woman  "  in  the  laud  and  the  time  when  Lemuel  dwelt  (ver.  10) ;  but 
she  may  be  found  to-day  in  any  number  of  Christian  homes.  Holding  the  faith  of 
Jesus  Christ,  governed  by  his  principles,  living  bis  life,  animated  by  his  Spirit,  fulfilling 
his  law  of  love,  the  wife  and  mother  is  to  be  seeu  taking  an  honoured  place,  filling  her 
home  with  the  sweet  fragrance  of  purity  and  affection,  exerting  her  benign  and  gracious 
influence  on  her  husband  and  her  children.  You  have  not  to  take  a  long  journey  to 
reach  her,  nor  to  take  much  pains  to  find  her ;  she  is  at  home  in  "  the  castle  of  the 
noble,  in  the  mansion  of  the  wealthy,  and  in  the  cottage  of  the  poor  and  the  lowly." 

1.  Let  us  freely  acknowledge  our  great  indebtedness  to  her.  Those  who  have  had 
the  priceless  advantage  of  a  mother  possessed  of  the  Christian  virtues  and  graces  have 
more  to  thank  Otod  for  than  if  they  had  inherited  a  titled  name  or  an  ample  fortune. 
2.  If  it  be  open  to  us,  let  us  join  her  ranks.  To  be  a  woman  living  under  the  com- 
manding influence  of  Christian  principle,  breathing  a  Christian  spirit,  and  shedding 
a  Christian  influence  in  the  home  in  which  we  live, — what  is  there,  this  side  the  gate 
of  heaven,  that  any  human  spirit  could  more  wisely  wish  to  bo  ?  To  be  such  is  to  be 
doing  a  most  azceUent  work  of  God ;  it  Ls  to  be  filling  ■  most  honourable  and  useful 
•phore. — C 


flOMILETICAL  INDEX 


THE   PROVERBS. 


OHAPTEB  L 

FAOR 

Proverbs                ...              ...             ...  17 

The  Kolntion   of  Religion  to  Know- 
ledge...            ...             ...             ...  IS 

Temptation          ...             ...             ...  19 

The  Gospel  Call  ...             ...             ...  20 

Left  to  their  Doom             ...             ...  21 

Panishmeiit  the  Natural  Fruil  of  Sin  21 

Fatal  Prosperity...             ...             ...  22 

Design  and  Character  of  Frorerbiftl 

Wisdom            ...             ...             ...  33 

Religion  the  Trae  Beginning            ...  24 

Filial  Piety          ...             ...             ...  24 

Warningg   against  the  Evils  of    the 

Time...             ...             ...             ...  25 

Warning  Cry  of  Wisdom  ...              ...  27 

The  Ideal  Teacher             ...             ...  28 

The  Fonndation-Truth      ...             ...  20 

The  Daty  and  the  Beauty  of  Filial 

Piety                90 

The  Peril  and  the  Wisilom  of  Youth ; 


a  Sermon  to  thu  Toung  ... 

.. 

30 

The  Voice  of  Wisdom         ... 

.. 

31 

The  Divine  tJltimatnm 

.. 

32 

"  The  Prosperity  of  Fools" 

.. 

33 

CHAPTER  II. 

The  Search  for  Wisdom     ... 

*• 

42 

Wisdom  a  Gift  of  God 

.. 

43 

The  Antidote  to  Temptation 

.. 

44 

Bejoioing  to  do  Evil 

*. 

45 

Crooked  Ways     ... 

.. 

45 

The  Conditions  of  Religious 

Know 

ladga  .M           •••           — 

•« 

46 

rHBHB 

The  Proflt  of  Relifjious  Knowledga ... 
The  Principle  of  Moral  Stability  ,„ 
The  Course,  the  Goal,  and  the  Priw 

of  Wisdom 
The  Course  of  Sin  and  the  Strength 

of  Righteousness  ...         '   ... 

The  Way  of  Sin :  a  Sermon  to  Young 

Men  ...  ...  ...  .,, 

Recompense  and  Retribution  .^ 

CHAPTER   III. 

Making  the  Ileai-t  a  Treasury  of  Good 

Principles         ...  ... 

Divine  Guidance ...  ...  „, 

Consecrated  Pioporty 

Chastening 

"  More  Precious  than  Rabies  " 

Dilatoriness  in  the  Payment  of  Just 

Debts 
Precepts  and  Promises  of  Wisdom  ... 
Patience  in  AESiction         ... 
Wisdom  the  Best  Investment 
Wisdom  the  Principle  of  the  Creation 
Confidence  and  the  Sense  of  Security 

in  the  Ways  of  God 
Promptitude  in  Good  Actions  ... 

Odious  Passions  ...  ...  ... 

The  Discernment  of  Jehovah  ., 

Cherishing  the  Truth 
Self-Distrust  and  Trust  in  G.d 
A  Three-linked  Chain         ...  ... 

The  Divine  Responsiveness  ... 

Wrong  Views  of  Affliction,  and  the 

Sight  Ou«        ,M  '.I  •« 


fAOB 

47 
48 

49 

50- 

61 
S2 


68 
69 
70 
70 
71 

72 
73 
74 
75 
76 

76 

76 
76 
77 
77 
78 
79 
79 

80 


ESTDBX: 


THKMB  TAOB 

Wisdom's  Inestimable  Worth  ...  80 

Four  Valuable  Virtues      ...  ...  81 

The    Height   of  Well-being   and  the 

Depth  of  Ill-being          ...  •••  82 


CHAPTER  rV. 

A  Family  Heirloom            ...  ...  92 

A  Coronation       ...             ...  ...  93 

A  Free  Conrse    ...             ...  ...  94 

Holding  Fast       ...             ...  ...  94 

Bad  Company     ...             ...  ...  95 

-"The  Path  of  the  Just"    ...  ...  96 

Tlie  Way  of  Darkness        ...  ...  97 

On  Guard             ...             ...  ...  97 

Spiritual  Drilling                ...  ...  99 

The  Tradition  of  Piety       ...  ...  99 

-The  Two  Paths    ...             ...  ...  100 

Self-Preservation                ...  ...  101 

The  "Heart  and  its  Issues  ...  ...  101 

The  Solicitude  of  the  Wise  Father  : 

a  Sermon  to  Parents  and  Children  102 

The  Prudence  of  Piety       ...  ...  103 

Darkness  and  Light            ...  ...  104 

The  Course  of  Wisdom       ...  ...  104 

Man's  Chief  Treasure         ...  ...  105 


CHAPTEB  V. 

Home  Joys             ...              ...  ...  115 

Under  the  Eyes  of  God     ...  ...  116 

Cords  of  Sin         ...             ...  ...  117 

Meretricious    Pleasures     and  their 

Results              ...             ...  ...  117 

Fidelity  and  Bliss  in  Marriage  ...  118 

God  the  All-seeing  Judge    ...  ...  119 

Vice  Suicidal        ...             ...  ...  119 

Victims  of  Vice  ...             ...  ...  119 

Mourning  at  the  Last         ...  ...  120 

Man  in  God's  View            ...  ...  120 

The  End  of  an  Evil  Oonrse  ...  121 


CHAPTER  VI. 

The  Surety           ...            ...  ...  139 

The  Ant               ...            ...  ...  140 

Sowing  Digcord   ...            ...  ,„  141 

SeTen  Hateful  Things        ...  ...  141 

Parental  Training              ...  ...  142 

1'ho  Object  of  Religions  Teaching    ...  143 


TUEUK  FAfll 

Fire  in  the  Bosom              ...  ...  143 

Motive  and  Responsibility  ...  ...  144 

The  Perils  of  Suretyship    ...  ...  145 

The  Slnggard  admonished  ...  ...  145 

A  Picture  of  Spite               ...  ...  14fi 

A  Catalogue  of  Abominations  ...  146 

Exhortation  to  Chastity     ...  ...  147 

Warning  against  Adultery  ...  147 

Answering  for  Others;    Danger  and 

Deliverance       ...             ...  ...  148 

Sloth  and  Diligence             ...  ...  148 

The  Character  and  Doom  of  the  Aban- 
doned               ...             ...  ...  149 

The  Condemnation  of  Pride  ...  150 

The  Divine  Dislike  of  Deceitfulness  151 

The  Brand  of  God               ...  ...  151 

Sin  and  Safety     ...             ...  ...  152 

God's  Word — Guide,  Guardian,  Com- 
panion               ,„              ...  ...  163 


CHAPTER  VII. 

Keeping  the  Commandments  ...  168 

Profligacy  ...  ...  ...  158 

A  Tragedy  of  Temptation  ...  ...  169 

The  Two  Ways    ...  ...  „.  160 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

Wisdom  for  the  Simple      ...  ...  168 

Plain  Words         ...  .„  ...  168 

Hatred  of  Evil     ...  ...  ...  170 

The  Blessedness  of  loving  and  seeking 

Christ  ...  ...  ...  171 

The  Primeval   Glory  of  Divine  Wis- 
dom   ...  ...  .,,  ,.,  171 

The  Decree  of  the  Sea       ...  ...  172 

The  Pre-eminent  Glory  of  Christ     ...  173 

Life  and  Favour  with  God  ...  ...  173 

Wisdom's  Proclamation      ...  ...  176 

Wisdom's  Pleadings  ...  ...  176 

Wisdom  in  Eternity  and  in  Time     ...  176 
The  Excellency  of  Divine   Wisdom  : 

No.  1 ...       "     ...  ...  ...  176 

The  Excellency   of   Dinne  Wisdom: 

No.  2...  ...  ...  ...  177 

"  Christ  the  \Vis,dom  of  God :  "  No.  1  177 

Wisdom  and  Wealth  ...  ...  178 

The  Responsiveness  of  Christ  ...  178 

The  Excellency  of  Divine  Wisdom : 

No.  3 -,  „.  178 


INDEX. 


HI 


"  Christ  the  Wiadom  of  God  !  "  No.  2  179 

The  Convincing  Argument  ...  179 

CHAPTER  IX. 

The  Banqnet  of  Wisdom    ...  ...  185 

Reproof                ...             ...  ...  185 

An  Open  Mind     ...              ...  ...  186 

True  Self-interest               ...  ...  187 

"  Stolen  Waters "                ...  ...  188 

Wisdom's  Banquet ;    or,  the  Call  to 

Salvation           ...              ...  ...  189 

Warnings  against  Refnsal ...  ...  189 

Eecurrenoe  to  First  Principles  ...  189 

The  Invitation  of  Folly      ...  ...  190 

The  Divine  Invitation        ...  ...  191 

The  Penalty  and  Promise  of  Instrao- 

tion    ...             ...             ...  ...  192 

Digging  Deep,  Rising  High,  Lasting 

Long  ...            ...             ...  ...  192 

Wisdom  and  Folly                ...  ...  193 

The  Truth  about  Sin          ...  ...  194 


CHAPTER  X. 

The  Influence  of  a  Son  over  his  Pa- 
rents' Happiness  ...  ...  199 

Diligence  ...  ...  ...  200 

Sleep  in  Harvest  ...  ...  201 

"  The  Memory  of  the  Just "  ...  202 

The  Cloak  of  Charity         ...  ...  203 

-Golden  Silence    ...  ...  ...  204 

The  Hope  of  the  Righteous  ...  205 

Righteousness  and  Wisdom  ...  205 

Early  Appearance  of  Moral  Contrast  206 
Moral   Contrast  in  Earthly   Lot  and 

Destiny  ...  ...  ...  206 

Folly  and  Wisdom  in  Manifold  Con. 

-trast  ...  ...  ...  ...  207 

A  Fourfold  Opposition       ...  ...  207 

A  Sevenfold  Strain  of  Experience  ...  208 

Life-Secrets         ...  ...  ...  209 

The  Lazy  Man  a  Nuisance  ...  210 

Impression  by  Tautology  ...  ...  210 

Our  Joy  in  our  Children :  a  Sermon 

to  Parents         ...  ...  ...  210 

Four  Conditions  of  Well-beimg         ...  211 

"  The  Memory  of  the  Just "  ...  211 

The  Service  of  Speech,  etc.  ...  212 

The  Conquest  of  Love        ...  ...  213 

Divine  Enrichment  m  ..•  213 


CHAPTER  XL 

TnzHR  PAOH 

Just  Weights       ...             ...             ...  219 

The  Shame  of  Pride  and  the  Wisdom 

of  Humility      ...             ...             ...  220 

The  Tale-bearer  ...            ...            ...  221 

The  Merciful  Man               ...             ...  222 

Meanness             ...             ...             ...  222 

The  Ways  of  Honour  and  of  Shame  ...  223 

Social  Sins  denounced        ...             ...  225 

The  True  Grace  of  Womanhood       ...  22S 

Religion  and  Self-interest                ...  226 

The  Principle  of  Recompense           ...  226 

The  Tendencies  of  Conduct              ...  227 
The  Divine  View  of  the  Oppositions 

in  Conduct        ...             ...             ...  227 

Inevitable  Doom  and  Certain  Escape  227 

Beauty  ill  set  off ...            ...            ...  227 

Wishes  and  Hopes              ...             ...  227 

The  Narrow  and  the  Large  Heart    ...  228 

Temporal  and  Eternal  Contrasts      ...  228 

The  Pricelessness  of  Integrity         ...  229 

Two  Sad  Aspects  of  Death               ...  229 
Honourable  Self-Love;  the  Effect  of 

Conduct  on  Character    ...             ...  230 

Divine  Providence              ...            ...  231 

Expensive  Economy,  etc.  ...             ...  232 

Wisdom's  Brightest  Crown  and  Hard- 
est Task            ...            ...            ...  232 


CHAPTER  XIL 

The  Instability  of  Wickednea» 

...     238 

Justice  to  Aaimals 

...     239 

Truth  and  Righteousness  ... 

...     240 

Concealing  Knowledge       ... 

...     240 

Depression            ...            ... 

...     241 

Righteousness  and  Life      ... 

...     242 

Primary  Truths  ... 

...      243 

Blessings  and  Miseries  of  Domestic 

Life 243 

Virtues  and  Vices  in  Civil  Life         ...  244 
Experimental     Ti-uths :     1.    Prudent 

Reserve  and  Foolish  Babbling      ...  245 

2.  The  Promotion  of  the  Diligent  and 

the  Subjection  of  the  Slothful      ...  246 

3.  Depression  and  Comfort  ...  246 

4.  Good    Guidance   and    Misleading 
Counsels  ...  ...  .•■  246 

5.  Laxity  and  Industry     ...  ...  246 

6.  The  Straight  Road  and  the  Bypath  246 


ir 


INDEX. 


The    Downward    and     the     Dpward 


Patha                

...     246 

Strent^h  and  Fruitfulness 

...     247. 

Bight  (Jnst)  ThonghtB       ... 

...     248 

Oonaideration  or  Comfort  ? 

...     248 

Growth  and  Sednotireness 

...     249 

Tha  On*  Way  of  Life 

...     250 

OHAPTBH   XIIl. 

"  4  Wiae  Son "    ...  J55 

Pride  and  Contention         .„  ...  25(j 

Fraudulent  Gain  ...  ...  ...  'ibS 

Hope  Deferred     ...  ...  ...  257 

A  Faithful  MoBBenger        ...  ...  258 

Sparing  the  Rod  ...  ...  ...  258 

General  Tmths  of  Health  and  Salva- 
tion    ...  ...  ...  ...  259 

The  7alne  and  Use  of  Property        ...  260 

Pnrity  and  Impniity  of  Sentiment  ...  261 
The   Ontward   Correspondence    wiili 

the  Inward       ...  ...  ...  261 

Joy  and  Gloom     ...  ...  ...  261 

Prido  and  TeaohablenesB    ...  ...  261 

The  Sickness  of  Oisappointmont  and 

the  Joy  of  Fruition         ...  ...  261 

The  Value  of  the  Divine  Word         ...  2G2 
The  Blessings  of  Obedience  and  their 

Counterpart      ...  ...  ...  202 

The  Wisdom  of  Docility,  etc. ;  a  Ser- 

mon  to  the  Tonng  ...  ...  263 

Wrong  Views  of  onrselves,  gjven  and 

received  ...  ...  ...  264 

Hope  and  Disappointment...  ...  265 

Friendship  :  a  Sermon  to  the  Young  266 

Penalty  pursuing  Sin         „.  „.  266 

Parental  Correction  ...  ...  267 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

Incommunicable  Experience  ...  277 

The  Way  that  seemeth  Right  ...  278 

The  Sadness  that  lies  behind  Laughter  279 

Credulity  ...  ...  ...  279 

A  Quiet  Spirit     ...  ...  ...  280 

National  BighteousnenB      ...  ...  281 

Traits  of  Wisdom  and  Folly  ...  282 

The  Understanding  of  Una's  Way  ...  283 

Oanses  and  Effeots  ...  ...  2S4 

Life-Contraati      ...  ...  ...  285 

Woman  as  a  BoilJer  ...  ...  286 


Daintiness  and  Usefulnesg 


286 
28(5 
287 
287 


Understanding  our  Way     ,„ 
The  Sadness  of  Sin  ... 

Loneliness  and  Laughter  ... 
The  Sin  of  Contempt  ...  ...     288 

Talking  and  Toiling  ...  ...     289 

The   Strength   and  the  Beproacb  of 
Nations  ...  „  .«     290 


CnAPTER    XV. 

A  Soft  Answer  and  a  Bitter  Word  ...  297 

"The  Eyes  of  the  Lord"  ...  ...  298 

A  Joyous  Heart  or  a  Broken  Spirit  293 

ThoBetter  Things  ...  ...  299 

The  Word  In  Season  ...  ...  300 

Character  and  Prayer       ...  ...  300 

Virtues  and  Vices  of  the  Tongue    ...  301 

The  Omnipresence  of  God  ...  302 

Contempt  and  Respect  for  Instruction  302 

True  and  False  Grains        ...  ...  302 

God's  Hatreds  and  God's  Delights  ...  302 

The  Principle  of  Judgment  ...  302 

The  Heart  open  to  God     ...  ...  303 

Sullen  Folly  and  Cheerful  Wisdom  ...  303 

Alternatives         ...  ...  ...  303 

Facets  of  Moral  Truth        ...  ...  303 

Religion  and  Common  Sense  ...  304 

The  Soft  Answer  ...  ...  305 

God's  Searching  Glance     ...  ...  306 

With  whom  God  is  pleased                ...  306 
The  Certainty  of  God's  Notice         ...  307 
The  Source  of  Satisfaction               ...  308 
God's  Distance   from  na  and   Near- 
ness to  us         ...             ...             ...  308 


CHAPTER   XVI. 

Man's  Thought  and  God's  Work  ...  816 

The  Purpose  of  Creation  ...  ...  317 

Pleasant  Words  ...             ...  ...  318 

The  Treacherous  Path       ...  ...  318 

TheGloryof  Old  Ago        ...  ...  319 

SeU-Control         ...             ...  ...  320 

The  Lottery  of  Life           ...  ...  320 

The  Rule  and  Guidance  of  Jehovah  321 

The  Administration  of  Rewards  and 

Punishments    ...             ...  ...  322 

Divine  and  Human  Authority  ...  822 
The  Divine  Justice  in  Respect  to  the 

Wise  and  Foola               ...  ...  323 


INDEX. 


The  Blessing  of  Hnnger    ,. 
Penal  Jadgments  on  Gailt 
The  Gentle  Life  ... 
Chance  and  Providence 
Thought,  Action,  Prayer  .. 


324 
324 
324 
324 
324 


The  Penitent's  Bevievr  and  Prospect  325 

Honesty  in  Bnsinesa  ...  ...  326 

-Pride  and  Humility  ...  ...  327 

The  Supreme  Mistake        ...  ...  328 

The  Crown  of  Old  Age       ...  ...  328 

The  Command  of  oui'selrei  m.  329 


CHAPTER  XVII. 

Mocking  the  Poor  ...  ...  836 

The  Wisdom  of  accepting  a  Reproof  337 

"  The  Beginning  of  Strife "  ...  338 

The  True  Friend  ...  ...  338 

The  Healing  Effects  of  Cheerfulness  339 
Traits  of  Outward  and  Inward  Happi- 
ness  ...            ...             ...             ...  340 

Dark  Phases  of  Human  Character  ...  341 
Light  in    the    Head,    Love    in    the 

Heart       '  .      ...  ...  ...  342 

Taried  Experiences  of  Good  and  Evil 

in  Life  342 

Divine  Proving  and  Purifying  ...  343 

Fatherhood  and  Sonsjiip    ...  ...  844 

Friendship;    the  Silence  that  saves 

and  the  Speech  that  separates  it  ...  844 

The  Growth  of  Strife         ...  ...  345 

Use  and  Neglect  ...  ...  346 

The  Friend  in  Need  ...  ...  847 


CHAPTER  XVin. 

-^     -'A  Strong  Tower"            ...             ...  853 

¥he  Folly  of  Hasty  Judgment         ».  854 

Strong  in  Spirit                  ...             ...  354 

Private  Judgment              ...             ...  355 

The  Blessedness  of  Tme  Marriage  ...  356 
"The  Friend  that    stioketh    Closer 

than  a  Brother"              ...             ...  356 

Unsocial  Vices    ...             ...             •..  357 

Some  Conditions  of  Weal  and  Woe  ...  358 
Jlvils    of    the  Tongue   and   of  Con- 
tention              ...              ...              •••  858 

Love  in  Different  Relations               ...  359 

The  Utterances  of  Wisdom              ...  359 

Neetlloss  Destitution          ...             ..•  3G0 

God  our  Refuge  ...             ■••             •••  361 


THEHS  PA6B 

The  Wounded  Spirit  .„  ...  361 

Hear  the  Other  Side  ...  ...  362 

Brethren  at  Strife  ...  ...  362 

The  Unfailing  Friend  ...  ...  363 


CHAPTER  XIX 

Poverty  and  Integrity        ...  ...  371 

Fretting  against  the  Lord  ...  372 

Deferred  Anger  ...  ...  ...  372 

Soul-keeping        ...  ...  ...  373 

Lending  unto  the  Lord       .„  ...  374 

Timely  Chastisement         ...  ...  375 

The  Lowly  and  Gentle  Life  ...  376 

Maxims  of  Intelligence      ...  ...  376 

The  Tme  Prudence  ...  ...  377 

Mixed  Maxims  of  Life- Wisdom         ...  377 

The  Evil  of  Ignorance       ...  ...  378 

Disquietude  and  Complaint  ...  378 

Making  the  Most  of  ourself  and  our 

Life 379 

Valuable  Kindness  ...  ...  380 

Ready  at  the  End  ...  ...  380 

The  Mind  of  Man  and  the  Mind  of 

God 381 

The  Praise  of  Piety  ...  ...  882- 


CHAPTER  XX. 

Wine  the  Mocker 

The  Honour  of  Peace  ... 

Universal  Sinfulness  ... 

A  Child  and  his  Doings  ... 

The  Buyer  ...  ... 

Revenge  and  its  Antidote ... 
Young  Men  and  Old 

Evils  to  be  avoided  ... 
The  Frailty  of  Mankind 


...  890 

...  891 

...  392 

...  892 

...  393 

...  894 

...  395 

...  395 

...  896 


Religion,    Industry,    Prudence,  and 

Honesty           ...            ...  •••  396 

Smitten  Sins       ...            ...  _  •••  397 

The  Truth  of  Life  in  Diverse' Aspects  897 

Strong  Drink  :  Four  Delusions  ...  898 

The  Blessings  of  Goodness  ...  398 

Purity  of  Heart  ...             ...  •.•  399 

Childhood :  a  Transparency,  a  Pro- 
phecy, a  Study               ...  ...  *00 

God  our  Maker    ...             ...  •••  ^^ 

Resentment  and  Forgivenega  ...  <01 

The  Inward  Light               ...  •••  *^ 

The  Glory  of  Young  Manhood  m  409 


INDEX. 


CHAPTER  XXI. 

TBKH  nai 

Patient  Industry ...             ...             i..  410 

Desiring  Evil       ...            ...            ...  410 

Ignoring  the  Cry  of  the  Poor           ...  411 

The  Lore  of  Pleasure        ...            ...  412 

National  Defence                ...             ...  413 

The  Providence  and  Government  of 

God    ...             ...             ...             ...  414 

A  Family  of  Vices              ...             ...  414 

Lessons    and   Warnings    from    Life- 
Experience        ...             ...              ...  414 

Lights  and  Shades  of  the  Earthly 

Scene                ...             ...             ...  415 

Alternatives  presented  to  Choice    ...  415 

The  Wise  and  the  Loving  Life         ...  415 

The  Process  of  Vice           ...              ...  416 

The  Just  Judgments  of  the  Eternal  416 

Human  Power  and  Divine  Direction  416 

Devotion  and  Duty             ...            ...  417 

Marks  of  Sin        ...            ...            ...  418 

Sowing  and  Beaping          ...            ...  419 

The  Successful  Search      ...            ...  419 

The  Achievements  and  Limitations  of 

Wisdom            ...            ...            ...  420 


CHAPTER  XXIL 

A  Good  Name  and  Loving  Favour  . . .  427 

Social  Distinctions              ...             ...  428 

Two  Graces,  and  their  Reward         ...  429 

The  Training  of  a  Child    ...             ...  429 

Certainty              ...             ...              ...  430 

Ancient  Landmarks  ...  431, 439 

The    General    Conditions  of  a  Good 

Name                ...            ...             ...  432 

Means  to  the  Preservation  of  a  Good 

Name                 ...              ...             ...  432 

Hindrances  to  the  Attainment  of  a 

Good  Name      ...             ...             ...  433 

The  Words  of  the  Wise  to  be  taken 

to  Heart           ...             ...             ..'.  433 

Right  in  Social  Relations  ...             ...  434 

Riches  or  Reputation  P      ...             ...  435 

"Rich  and  Poor"               ...             ...  435 

Thonghtfulness  and  Thoughtlessness  436 

The  Path  of  the  Perverse  ...              ...  437 

PBrental  Training               ...             ...  437 

Exouse*               ...             .„             ...  438 


CHAPTER  XXIII. 

THSU«  rAOI 

Sycophancy  and  Independence  ...  446 

Labouring  to  be  Rich         ,„  ...  447 

The  Mighty  Redeemer       ...  ...  448 

Envying  Sinners...              ...  ...  448 

Our  Father's  Claim            ...  ...  449 

The  Danger  of  Strong  Drink  ...  450 

Hints  and  Warnings  on  Conduct  ...  450 

Holding  aloof  from  Evil    ...  ...  451 

Discipline  in  Divine  Wisdom  ...  451 

The   Perils   of   Dissipation   and  the 

Antidote            ...             ...  ...  452 

The  Harlot's  Tme  Character  ...  452 

The  Perils  of  Drunkenness  ...  452 

The  Temptation  of  the  Table  ...  453 

The  Worthlessness  of  Wealth  ...  453 
The    Graces   of    Giving,   Receiving, 

and  Refusing   ...              ...  ...  454 

God's  Righteous  Judgment  ...  455 

The  Freedom  and  the  Price  of  Truth  4oG 

Drunkenness        ...             ...  ...  457 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 

Sin  and  Folly       ...              ...              ...  463 

Fainting  in  the  Day  of  Adversity   ...  464 

Culpable  Negligence          ...             ...  465 

The  Fall  of  a  Good  Man    ...            ...  466 

A  Needless  Trouble            ...             ...  466 

Rendering  Evil  for  Evil     ...             ...  467 

The  Field  of  the  Slothfnl  ...              ...  468 

Warning  against  Evil  Company       ...  469 

Wisdom  edifies  and  invigorates        ...  469 

Some  Traits  of  FoUy  and  Sin           ...  469 

Compassion  for  the  Wronged           ...  470 

Zeal  in  the  Pursuit  of  Wisdom         ...  470 

Violence  and  Shameful  Joy  defeated  471 
Religion  fortifies  the  Heart  against 

Envy...             ..;            ...             ...  471 

Partiality  and  Equality  in  Judgment  47l 

Jnst  Conduct  to  our  Neighbour         ..  472 

The  Prudence  and  Policy  of  Industry  472 
The  Sluggard's  Vineyard  :  a  Parable 

of  Sloth             ...             ...              ...  472 

Building  with  Wisdom        ...             ...  473 

"The  Thought  of  Foolishness"       ...  474 

The  Test  of  Adversity        ...             ...  474 

Inexcusable  Indifference  ...              ...  475 

The  Ignobler  and  the  Nobler  Spirit  476 

The  Neglected  Garden       .„             ...  477 


INDEX. 


tU 


CHAPTEB  XXV. 

TUIlll  PAGE 

Ancient  Lore       ...             ...             ...  486 

Apples  of  Gold  in  a  Framework  of 

Silver                ...             487 

'Coals  of  Fire"...             ...             ...  488 

"  Good  News  from  a  Far  Conntry  "  488 

"  A  City  that  is  broken  Down "       ...  489 

Kings :  their  Attributes  and  Duties  490 

A  Lesson  in  Oonrtly  Manners          ...  490 

Some  Social  Pests                ...              ...  491 

Similitudes    of    Moral    Beauty    and 

Goodness           ...              ...              ...  491 

Excesses  and  Errors           ...              ...  492 

Love  to  onr  Enemy            ...             ...  492 

Moral  Invectives ...              ...             ...  493 

Good  News  from  Abroad  ...             ...  493 

God's  Glory  in  Concealing                ...  493 

Modesty  and  Self-Assortion              ...  494 

The  Wise  Way  of  Settlement          ...  494 

Welcome  Words  ...             ...             ...  496 

The  Wisdom  of  Moderation              ...  495 

The  Inopportune  and  the  Acceptable  196 

The  True  Triumph             ,..              ...  497 


CHAPTER  XXn. 

The  Cnne  Causeless          ...  ...  604 

The  Wise  Treatment  of  Folly  ...  604 

Self -Conceit         ...             ...  ...  605 

"  A  Lion  in  the  Way "       ...  ...  506 

The  Fuel  of  Strife              ...  ...  506 

Caught  in  One's  own  Snare  ...  607 

Sayings  against  Folly        ...  ...  508 

Discussion  of  Folly  and   its   Treat- 
ment...             ...              ...  ...  608 

The  Vice  of  Idleness          ...  ...  509 

Wanton  Petulance              ...  ...  509 

Spit«,  Cunning,  and  Deceit  ...  509 

Hononring  the  Unworthy  ...  ...  610 

What  to  fear        ...             ...  ...  611 

The  Two  Ways  of  meeting  Folly     ...  612 

The  Condemnation  of  Sin...  ...  512 

On  Guard             ...             ...  ...  613 


OHAPTBB  XXVn. 

Roasting  of  the  Morrow    ...  m.  820 

Self- Praise  ...  ...  ...  621 

"  Tk«  Wound*  of  >  Friend  "  ...  622 


THBHB  fAOK 

A  Bird  wandering  from  her  Nest  ...  622 

Foresight  of  Evil                ...  ...  623 

The  Advantages  of  Society  . . .  624 

Boastf ulness,  Jealousy,  and  Hypocrisy  625 

The  Blessing  of  Contentment  ...  625 

The  Praises  of  Friendship  ...  626 

The  Need  of  Prudence       ...  ...  526 

Insincerity  in  Friendship  ...  ...  626 

The  Quarrelsome  Wife        ...  ...  627 

Wisdom  for  Self  and  for  Others  ...  627 

The  Man  Diligent  in  his  Business    ...  627 
Man  in  Presence  of  the  Future :  our 

Greatness  and  our  Littleness  . . .  628 

The  Praise  of  Man              ...  ...  623 

Four  Services  of  Friendship  ...  629 

Superabundance  and  Scarcity  ...  530 

The  Beward  of  Faithful  Service  ...  631 

A  Commendation  of  Diligence  ...  632 


CHAPTER  XXVIIL 

The    Cowardice    of    Guilt    and    the 

Courage  of  BighteousnesB             ...  689 

The  Prayer  that  is  an  Abomination  540 

The  Tempter       ...             ...             ...  641 

Confession            ...             ...             ...  641 

"A  Faithful  Man"            ...             ...  542 

The    Folly  of    Trusting    One's   own 

Heart                ...             ...             ...  643 

Canons  of  Moral  Truth      ...             ...  643 

The  Moral  Quality  of  Life  ...  544 
The  Inner  Conditions  of  Pence  and 

of  Misery          ...              ...              ...  646 

The  Wicked  Ruler             ...             ...  646 

Judgments  on  Transgressors            ...  646 

Faithful  Counsel                  ...              ...  647 

Sins  of  Greed       ...             ...              ...  547 

Folly  and  Wisdom  in  the    Personal 

Relation             ...              ...              ...  547 

The    Lite    that   "  breeds    Perpetual 

Benediction"   ...             ...             ...  647 

The  Source  of  Disturbance  and  the 

Secret  of  Security          ...             ...  648 

The  Practice  and  Effect  of  Sin  and 

Bighteousness ...             ...             ...  648 

Hidden  Manhood                 ...              ...  549 

Wealth  or  Faithfulness  P  a  Sermon  to 

Young  Men      ...             ...             ...  650 

Filial  Duty           ...             ...             ...  651 

In  whom  to  trait                „,            ,m  661 


T« 


INDEX. 


OHAFTBB  XXn. 

rHEm  rA«a 

Hardened  under  Beproof  ...              ...  658 

The  Religion  of  Politioe     ,.,             ...  658 

Scornful  Men       .„              ,.,              ..,  659 

No  Vision  1           ...             ...             ...  560 

The  Fear  of  Man                ...             ...  560 

The  Supreme  Arbiter        ...             ...  561 

Private  Morality  and  the  Public  Weal  562 

Dishonoarable  Passions      ...              ...  563 

QoTemment  in  Truth  and  Eqnity  ...  563 

Fatal  Defects  in  the  Social  State    ...  564 

Prudence  in  AUianoe  with  Religion  564 

The  Doom  of  Obduracy     ...             ...  565 

The  Senselessness  of  Scorn,  eto.     ...  566 

The  Time  to  be  Silent       ...             ...  666 

Spiritual  Ignorance  and  Obedience  567 

Two  Temptations  and  Two  Resources  .568 

How  to  hate  the  Wioiced   ...             ...  6C9 


CHAPTER  XXX. 


THSHI  FAU 

The  Golden  Mean  "...  ...  597 

Caution  in  the  Use  of  the  Tongue   ...  688 « 
Detestable  Phases  of  Hnmau  Charac- 
ter    ...             ...             ...             ...  .588 

Reflections  on  the  Insatiable  ...  588 

The  Punishment  of  Unfilial  Conduct  588 

The  Mystery  of  Actions    ...  ,„  589 

Intolerable  Things  ...  ...  589 

The  Significance  of  Little  Things   ...  589 

Grandeur  in  Natural  Objects  ...  589 

Moral  Prudence  ...  ...  ...  590 

Bererence  and  Docility     ...  ...  590 

A  New  Tear's  Prayer        ...  ...  691 

From  Cruelty  to  Kindness,  ...  592 

The  Unsatisfied  Human  Heart         ...  692 

Success  within  Success      ...  ...  693 

Spiritual  Comeliness  ^,  ,.,  69^ 


CHAPTEE  XXXi. 


A  Mother's  Counsel 

...              ... 

eo2 

The  Weary  Search  for  God 

••• 

580 

The  Typical  Woman 

•••             ... 

603 

The  Purity  of  God's  Words 

•«. 

581 

Rival  Attractions 

.M                            ... 

604 

"Neither  Porerty  nor  Riches" 

•*. 

582 

Woman's  Bights ... 

...                             ... 

604 

Self-Deception     ... 

... 

682 

The  Words  of  Lemuel 

*.•                             ... 

605 

The  Mystery  of  Lore 

... 

683 

A  Mother's  Maxims 

...                             *■* 

605 

Four  Weak  Things,  and    the  Great. 

The  Tirtnous  Housewife 

..•                             ... 

606 

nesB  of  them    ... 

... 

684 

Motherhood 

...                             ... 

607 

Fourfold  Triumph 

... 

685 

The  Allowable  as  the  Exceptional    ... 

608 

Self-Suppression... 

... 

685 

The   Function   and  the 

Privilege  of 

Agnr's    Sayings:    God's   Word 

the 

Power 

...               .. 

606 

Fountain  of  all  Wisdom 

... 

686 

Christian  Womanhood 

...                                 .M 

ft.'K 

[Tht  Fxpntttim  of  t\e  firtt  fix  eliupten  of  thtt  bwk  U  by  th» 
Bet  S.  T.  Taylor-TiUtcell ;  .and  Ihat  on  ih*  fainaitH°ii)| 
tkaptTi  by  the  An.  W.  J.  Dtant] 


