CORNELL 

UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 


The  original  of  this  book  is  in 
the  Cornell  University  Library. 

There  are  no  known  copyright  restrictions  in 
the  United  States  on  the  use  of  the  text. 


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924098499522 


THE. 

PULPIT    COMMENTARY, 

EDITED   BY  THE 

VERY   REV.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  D.D., 

DEAN  OF  GLOUCESTER; 
AND   BY  THE 

REV.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A. 

WITH 

INTRODUCTIONS 

BY  THE 


VEN.  ARCHDEACON  F.  W.  FARRAR,  D.D.,  F.R.S.— RT.  REV.  H.  COTTERILL,  D.D.,  F.R.S  E. 

VERY  REV.  PRINCIPAL  J.  TULLOCH,  D.D.-REV.  CANON  G.  RAWLINSON,  M.A. 

REV.  A.  PLUMMER,  M.A.,  D.D. 


FUNK    &   WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
New  Yoke  and  Toronto. 


THE 

PULPIT    COMMENTARY. 


EDITED   BT   THK 


REV.  CANON  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  M.A. 

TJOAR  AND  BUBAL   DEAN  OF  ST.  FANORAS,   AND  EXAMINING  CHAPLAIN  TO  TUB  LOBB 
BISHOP  Or  GLOUCESTER  AND  BRISTOL; 


AND   BY  TUB 

REV.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL. 


GENESIS. 


gjtUKrtJnctfons 

Bt  BEV    CANON  F.  W.  FABEAB,  D.D.;    EIGHT  REV.  H.  COTTEBILL,  DJ>. 
BEV.  T.  WHITELAW,  M.A. 

Exposition   anil   pJomUcttcs 
By  REV.  THOMAS  WHITELAW,  M.A. 

Homilies  bg  Fatious  ^utjbors: 

VEBY  BEV.  J.  F.  MONTGOMEBY.D.D.;  BEV.  PBOF.  B.  A.  BEDFOBD,  M.AnLL.B 
REV.  W.  BOBEBT8,  M.A.;  BEV.  F.  HASTINGS. 


FUNK    &   WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
Nbw  Yorjc  and  Toronto. 


GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 


THE    OLD    TESTAMENT. 


REV.  CANON  P.  W.  FARRAR,  D.D.,  P.R.S. 


It  is  clear  that  it  would  be  impossible  to  use  to  any  good  purpose  the  small  space 
at  my  command  without  the  most  rigid  limitation  of  the  object  in  view.  If  it  were 
my  duty  to  enter  into  the  masses  of  literary  and  critical  questions  which  affect 
the  date  and  authorship,  the  unity  and  special  difficulties,  of  the  books  of  the  Old 
Testament,  it  would  require  a  much  larger  space  to  furnish  an  adequate  intro- 
duction to  any  one  of  them.  In  these  few  pages  it  would,  for  instance,  be  diffi- 
cult to  treat  fully  of  the  single  question  which  meets  us  as  soon  as  we  begin  to 
study  even  the  Book  of  Genesis,  namely,  what  are  the  true  inferences  to  be  drawn 
from  the  use  of  the  difl'e rent  names  of  God — now  Jehovah,  now  Elohim,  and  now 
both  together,  or  interchangeably — which  we  find  in  the  first  chapters  of  the 
Bible.1  For  the  discussion  of  all  such  questions  the  reader  must  turn  to  the  In- 
troductions to  the  several  books,  or  to  other  sources.  My  present  task  is  directly 
limited  by  the  character  of  this  Commentary  as  essentially  Homilbtic.  I  am 
required  to  furnish  some  suggestions  respecting  the  use  to  be  made  of  the  Old 
Testament,  the  methods  to  be  followed,  and  the  principles  to  be  kept  in  view, 
in  dealing-  with  it  for  purposes  of  religious  instruction. 

Now  exegesis  is  one  thing,  and  pulpit  exhortation  is  another.  A  man  may  be 
a  most  useful  preacher — he  may  have  great  powers  of  oratory,  and  may  be  en- 
abled to  enforce  many  practical  and  religious  lessons  with  fervour  and  accept- 
ance— without  any  pretence  to  the  learning  which  is  essential  to  a  profound  and 
thorough  knowledge  of  Scripture.  And  such  men  are  sometimes  misled  into  the 
supposition  that  they  can  speak  with  authority  on  the  meaning  and  interpreta- 
tion of  particular  passages.  The  supposition  is  entirely  baseless.  Any  man  may 
gather  for  his  own  use,  and  that  of  others,  the  manna  which  lies  everywhere 
upon  the  surface  of  the  ground  ;  but  no  man  can  without  labour  become  master 
of  all  the  hidden  treasures  which  lie  beneath.  Holy  Scripture  contains  all 
things  necessary  to  salvation.  A  Christian  child,  an  ignorant  peasant,  may 
have  a  deeper  and  more  spiritual  appreciation  of  all  that  is'  most  necessary  for 
the  inner  life  of  the  regenerate  soul  than  is  possessed  by  the  greatest  master  in 
Israel.    But  this  saving  knowledge,  though  infinitely  more  important  than  any 

1  Jehovah,  for  instance,  occurs  in  twelve  consecutive  passages  in  Gen.  i. — ix.,  and  Elohim 
in  fifteen  consecutive  passages.  For  a  brief  examination  of  the  subject,  see  '  Quarry  on 
Genesis,' passim,  and  the  'Speaker's  Commentary,'  i.  pp.  21 — SO. 

GENESIS.  b 


ii  GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT. 

other  kind  of  knowledge,  does  not  entitle  any  one  to  an  opinion  of  the  smallest 
value  on  the  removal  of  exegetical  difficulties,  or  on  difficult  and  dubious  questions 
of  fact  or  doctrine.  The  remark  of  St.  Jerome,  that  in  his  day  there  was  no  old 
woman  so  ignorant  and  so  stupid  as  not  to  hold  herself  entitled  to  lay  down  the 
law  on  matters  of  theology,  is  true  in  this  day  ;  and  it  applies  also  to  Biblical  in- 
terpretation. But  he  who  would  aspire  not  only  to  found  upon  Scripture  texts  a 
moral  and  spiritual  exhortation,  but  to  ascertain  and  unfold  the  actual  meaning 
of  Scripture, — to  decipher  the  oracles  of  God  as  the  inspiring  light  gleams  over 
the  letters  of  the  jewelled  Urim, — must  have  at  his  command  a  multifarious 
knowledge.  Without  this  he  may  be  at  home  in  the  shallows  which  the  child  can 
ford,  but  not  in  the  depths  where  the  elephant  must  swim.  Piety  and  charity  are 
far  more  important  than  learning  for  the  sympathetic  appreciation  of  Divine  reve- 
lation ;  and  prayer  is  most  important  of  all.  Without  these  a  man  may  know 
the  Bible  by  heart,  and  yet  possess  no  effectual,  no  spiritual  knowledge  of  a 
single  line ;  but  even  with  these  there  are  many  passages  which,  without  study 
and  learning,  can  never  be  rightly  understood.  On  such  passages  no  unlearned 
and  untrained  person  should  profess  the  ability  to  form  an  opinion  of  any  value. 
The  discovery  of  the  true  meaning  of  many  pages  of  Scripture,  the  power  of 
looking  at  it  in  its  right  perspective,  is  only  rendered  possible  by  an  acquaintance 
with  the  original  languages,  and  with  the  historic  and  other  conditions  under 
which  the  Scriptures  were  written.  But,  in  the  last  few  years  especially,  the 
results  of  accumulated  study  on  all  questions  connected  with  sacred  literature 
have  been  placed  within  the  reach  of  even  the  humblest  students.  To  neglect 
these  sources  of  information  is  inexcusable  in  any  who  really  reverence  the  word 
of  God.  Without  holiness  and  sincerity  their  thoughts  on  Scripture  may  be 
useless  for  the  amelioration  of  mankind ;  but  even  if  they  possess  these  spiritual 
gifts,  their  teaching,  not  only  on  minor  matters,  but  even  in  matters  of  extreme 
importance,  will  be  liable  (unless  it  be  very  humble  and  very  careful)  to  be  de- 
faced by  incessant  errors  of  ignorant  misinterpretation,  which  will  be  all  the 
more  dangerous  in  proportion  as  it  is  more  dogmatic.  The  duty  of  study,  in 
order  to  ascertain  the  true  rendering  and  the  original  sense  of  Scripture,  cannot 
be  impressed  too  earnestly  on  all  who  are  to  profit  by  a  Homiletic  Commentary. 
It  is  study  alone  which  has  in  any  degree  rescued  the  Bible  from  masses  of  un- 
tenable exegesis,  traditionally  repeated  in  dull  catenas  and  biassed  commentaries. 
It  is  study  alone  which  can  keep  alive  and  increase  the  light  which  has  been 
kindled  in  recent  years. 

There  are,  says  Coleridge,  some  truths  so  true  that  they  lie  in  the  lumber-room 
of  the  memory  side  by  side  with  the  most  exploded  errors.  Now  there  are  two 
considerations,  which  are  often  overlooked  from  their  very  obviousness,  which 
are  yet  of  primary  importance  to  the  understanding  of  Scripture.  One  is,  that 
in  reading  the  Old  Testament  we  must  always  bear  in  mind  that  it  is  not  a  single 
book,  but  a  collection  of  books,  written  by  authors  very  differently  situated  dur- 
ing a  period  of  nearly  1000  years  ;  that  in  fact  we  are  dealing  not  with  a  book, 
but  with  a  library  and  a  literature.  The  other  is,  that  the  divisions  which  we 
call  texts  and  chapters  are  entirely  modern.  There  are  some  readers  who  may 
perhaps  regard  these  suggestions  as  almost  impertinently  superfluous  ;  but  they 
are  made  not  only  under  the  strong  conviction  that  their  steady  realisation 
would  save  us  from  multitudes  of  difficulties,  but  also  with  the  proof  historically 
before  us  that  it  is  the  negleot  of  these  very  considerations  which  has  caused 
many  of  the  worst  errors  which  the  misuse  and  misinterpretation  of  Scripture 
has  ever  inflicted,  and  still  continues  to  inflict,  upon  mankind. 

I.  In  the  first  place,  then,  the  Old  Testament  is  not  "a  talisman  sent  straight 
down  from  heaven,  equipollent  in  all  its  parts,"  but  contains  the  remnants  of  a 


GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.     Hi 

library,  the  inspired  fragments  of  a  national  literature,  preserved  for  us  by  God's 
providence  out  of  much  that  has  passed  away.  To  see  that  this  is  the  case  we 
need  go  no  further  than  the  Bible  itself,  which  quotes  passages  from  many  books 
now  lost,  and  in  some  instances  directly  refers  to  them  as  authorities  for  the 
facts  which  it  narrates.1  But  the  extant  books  of  Scripture,  in  which  has  been 
preserved  all  that  is  essential  for  the  salvation  and  enlightenment  of  mankind, 
are  the  diversified  record  of  a  progressive  revelation,  which  during  4000  years 
gave,  first  to  mankind,  and  then  to  the  chosen  people— by  slow  degrees,  and  as 
they  were  able  to  bear  it — a  gradually  clearer  vision  and  insight  into  the  eter- 
nal relations  between  God  and  man.2 

a.  The  diversity  of  this  record  is  a  very  important  element.  St.  Paul  calls 
special  attention  to  it  when  he  speaks  of  "  the  manifold  wisdom"  of  God.  The 
word  which  he  uses  is  extremely  picturesque  ;  it  is  tj  iroXvu-otKiXos  o-o<|>C(t — literally, 
"  the  richly-variegated  wisdom  of  God."3  The  soul  of  man  is  as  little  capable  of 
grasping  abstract  truth  as  the  eye  is  capable  of  gazing  on  the  sun.  The  sun- 
light gives  its  glory  and  beauty  to  the  world  by  being  reflected  in  a  thousand 
different  colours  from  the  objects  around  us.  And  because  we  should  be  only 
wearied  and  dazzled  by  a  continuance  of  the  intolerable  blaze  of  noon,  God's 
care  for  us  is  shown  by  the  manner  in  which  the  clouds  and  the  sunset  refresh 
us  with  the  softer  glow  of  reflected  and  refracted  light.  Indeed  this  light  is 
never  more  beautiful  than  when  its  sevenfold  perfection  and  colourless  indif- 
ference is  divided  by  falling  showers,  and  flung  in  the  colours  of  the  rainbow 
upon  the  clouds.  It  is  even  so  in  the  spiritual  world.  God  is  light.  When  that 
light  passes  in  one  direct,  unbroken  ray  we  have,  in  his  Son,  "  the  brightness 
of  his  glory,  and  the  express  image  of  his  person  ; "  *  but  even  this  revelation 
of  the  Father  passes  in  part  through  the  medium  of  human  language,  and  so 
reaches  us  in  sweet  gradations,  and  softened  by  gracious  shadows  of  mystery 
which  only  faith  can  pierce.  Much  more  is  this  the  case  in  the  Old  Testament 
revelation.  According  to  the  wise  saying  of  the  Rabbis — in  which  lies  the  germ 
of  all  right  Biblical  interpretation,  and  which,  had  it  been  duly  attended  to, 
might  have  saved  the  Rabbis  themselves,  as  well  as  generations  of  Christians, 
from  grievous  mistakes — "  the  Law  speaks  in  the  tongue  of  the  sons  of  men." 
Scripture  ought  always  to  have  been  interpreted  with  direct  primary  reference 
to  what  must  have  been  the  original  meaning  and  intention  of  those  who  wrote, 
and  of  those  who  received  it.  It  has  been  for  centuries  interpreted  with  refer- 
ence to  dogmatic  bias  and  traditional  conceptions.  Ignorance  of  the  laws  which 
govern  all  the  highest  utterances  of  human  thought  and  passion  ;  ignorance 
alike  of  the  "  syllogism  of  grammar"  and  of  the  "  syllogism  of  emotion  ; "  ne- 
glect of  the  original'languages  in  which  Scripture  was  written;  neglect  of  the 
circumstances  by  which  its  writers  were  surrounded ;  neglect  of  it  as  a  whole, 
and  of  its  books  as  separate  wholes,  and  even  of  the  context  which  alone  gives 
the  due  meaning  to  its  isolated  expressions— these,  and  many  other  forms  of 
theological  carelessness,  have  led  sometimes  to  an  unintelligent  literalism, 
sometimes  to  a  spiritualising  extravagance,  which,  while  it  could  not  indeed 
wholly  frustrate  the  purpose  of  God  by  robbing  mankind  of  the  broad,  main 

1  As,  for  instance,  the  Book  of  Jasher,  Josh.  x.  13 ;  the  Book  of  the  Acts  of  Solomon, 
1  Kings  xi.  41 ;  the  Book  of  the  Wars  of  the  Lord,  Numb.  xxi.  14 ;  and  others,  1  Chron. 
xxix.  29;   2  Chron.  ix.  29;  xii.  15;    xx.  34,  &c. 

2  The  very  name  Bible  implies  that  it  is  a  library,  for  it  is  derived  from  the  plural  Biblia, 
and  means  "  the  books."  In  Early  English  literature  it  is  called  Bibliopece,  as  being  the  great 
treasure-house  of  books.  St.  Jerome,  following  2  Mace.  ii.  18,  speaks  of  the  Bible  as  "the 
Sacred  Library."  It  is  said  that  the  collective  term  Biblia  is  first  found  in  the  writings  of 
St.  Chrysostom.  a  Ephes.  iii.  10.  4  Heb.  i.  8.     Haupt  on  1  John  iv.  8. 

0% 


iv  GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  OLD   TESTAMENT. 

truths  of  his  revelation,  has  yet  inflicted  a  twofold  injury.  This  injury  consists 
partly  in  the  perpetuation  of  the  virulent  prejudices  and  hard  errors  of  a  loveless 
religionism,  partly  in  the  reduction  of  large  portions  of  the  Bible  to  the  condition 
of  a  seven-sealed  book,  to  be  opened  and  misinterpreted  at  random  by  the  most 
incompetent  of  mankind.  Now,  by  bearing  in  mind  the  rich  diversity  of  Scrip- 
ture we  not  only  gain  elements  of  the  deepest  interest,  but  we  are  proceeding  on 
the  right  path  for  its  due  comprehension.  We  are  in  a  better  position  for  under- 
standing the  truth  of  God  when  we  have  studied  the  peculiarities  of  the  language 
in  which  it  is  embodied,  and  know  something  of  the  individuality  with  which 
the  expression  of  it  is  tinged.  To  the  variety  of  sources  from  which  the  revel- 
ation comes  is  due  both  the  inexhaustible  interest  of  the  Bible  and  its  Divine 
universality.  In  this  it  is  wholly  unlike  the  sacred  books  of  other  religions.  It 
has  something  for  all  nations.  In  reading  the  Koran  we  can  think  only  of 
Arabia ;  in  reading  Confucius  only  of  China ;  in  reading  the  Zend  Avesta  only  of 
Persia ;  in  reading  the  Vedas  only  of  Hindostan.  But  in  the  Bible  we  meet  with 
all  races,  from  Arabian  troglodytes  to  Greek  poets,  from  Galilean  fishermen  to 
Roman  consuls.  From  Nineveh  to  Babylon,  from  Babylon  to  Damascus,  from 
Damascus  to  Jerusalem,  from  Jerusalem  to  Tyre,  and  the  isles  of  the  Gentiles 
and  Athens,  and  Corinth,  and  Rome,  we  see  the  light  of  revelation  ever  stream- 
ing westwards  through  the  pages  of  the  Bible,  and 

"The  giant  forms  of  empires  on  their  way 
To  ruin. 

fling  their  colossal  shadows  across  its  pages.  The  Bible  is  at  once  a  sacred  Iliad 
and  a  sacred  Odyssey.  Now  its  pages  ring  with  the  battles  of  the  warrior,  with 
their  confused  noise  and  garments  rolled  in  blood;  now  the  sea  is  dashing  in  our 
faces  as  we  traverse  it  in  the  ship  of  Jonah,  or  toss  a  night  and  day  among  its 
breakers  with  St.  Paul.  It  has  indeed  deep  speculations  for  the  philosophic 
mind,  but  for  the  most  part  it  is  intensely  concrete.  There  is  in  it  no  stifling 
system,  no  chilling  gloom,  no  self-centred  absorption,  no  frozen  sea  of  abstrac- 
tions. The  sanctimonious  and  heresy-hunting  formalism  of  the  Pharisee,  the  sel- 
fish asceticism  of  the  Buddhist,  the  chill  uncertainty  of  the  Confucian,  find  no 
sanction  here;  nor  are  we  placed  at  the  mercy  of  the  systematising  refinements  of 
the  Schoolman,  and  the  arbitrary  tyranny  of  the  Priest.  The  Bible  shows  us  that 
religion  may  he  as  exquisite  as  music,  as  glowing  as  art,  as  rich  as  a  gifted  nature, 
as  broad  as  a  noble  life.  It  is  as  universal  as  our  race,  as  individual  as  ourselves. 
p.  Hence  to  the  Homilist  and  the  Preacher,  dulness  is  an  inexcusable  fault,  and 
one  which  should  be  most  earnestly  avoided.  If  the  preacher  is  dull — dull  to  all  his 
hearers — he  cannot  possibly  rouse  their  consciences  or  touch  their  hearts.  Dul  ness 
might  be  pardonable  if  we  had  no  better  text-book  than  the  Koran  or  the  Tripi  laka, 
but  it  is  hardly  pardonable  when  our  sacred  Book  is  so  intensely  and  widely  hu- 
manitarian. "Where  the  human,  the  concrete,  and  the  individual  element  is  in- 
troduced, there  hearers  must  find  something  to  interest  and  instruct  them  ;  for 
the  experience  of  one  heart  is  more  or  less  the  experience  of  all  hearts,  and  there 
is  no  one  who  does  not  sympathise  with  the  multitude  in  the  Roman  theatre 
who  rose  to  shout  their  delighted  applause  on  hearing  the  line  of  the  dramatist 

"  Homo  sum  :  humani  nihil  a  me  alienum  puto. 

To  the  Buddhist  the  incidents, whether  real  or  legendary.in  the  life  of  the  Buddha 
Sakya  Mouni  furnish  a  theme  of  endless  interest;  the  Chinese  is  never  tired  of  even 
the  dry  and  uneventful  records  of  the  biography  of  Kung  foo  tze;  but  the  Bible  fur- 
rushes  us  with  thousands  of  thrilling  incidents,  and  with  human  experiences  under 


GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.      ▼ 

the  most  varied  conditions.  Not  only  so,  but  it  comprises  the  writings  of  at  least 
fifty  different  writers  who  lived  in  the  most  widely  separated  spheres.  The 
voice  which  speaks  to  us  is  now  that  of  a  Gentile  sorcerer,  now  that  of  a  suffer- 
ing prisoner,  now  that  of  a  conquering  king.  Lawgivers  like  Moses,  autocrats 
like  Solomon,  warriors  like  Joshua,  historians  like  Samuel,  prophets  like  Isaiah, 
priests  like  Ezra  and  Jeremiah  and  Ezekiel,  poets  like  David,  governors  like 
Nehemiah,  exiles  like  Daniel,  peasants  like  Amos,  fishermen  like  Peter  and  John, 
tax-gatherers  like  Matthew,  rabbis  like  Paul,  have  all  contributed  their  quota  to 
the  sacred  page.  We  may  truly  say  that  it  is  like  the  great  tree  of  northern 
fable,  whose  leaves  were  the  lives  of  men.  It  is  for  this  very  reason  that  nations, 
like  birds  of  the  air,  shelter  themselves  under  the  shadow  of  it.  It  is  a  vine  of 
God's  planting,  which 

"  Reacheth  to  every  corner  under  heaven 
Deep-rooted  in  the  living  soil  of  truth  ; 
So  that  men's  hopes  and  fears  take  refuge  in 
The  fragrance  of  its  complicated  glooms, 
'And  cool  impleached  twilights." 

7.  8t.  Paul,  in  the  expression  to  which  we  have  referred,  is  not  the  only  sacred 
writer  who  bids  us  notice  this  diversity  and  progressiveness  of  Scripture.  The 
author  of  the  Kpi.slle  to  the  Hebrews  calls  most  marked  attention  to  it  in  the 
elaborately  beautiful  introduction  to  his  Epistle.  "God,"  he  says,  "  who  at  sun- 
dry times  and  in  divers  manners  spake  in  time  past  unto  the  fathers  by  the 
prophets,  hath  in  these  last  days  spoken  unto  us  by  his  Son."  Here  we  have  a 
striking  allusion  to  the  difference  between  the  Old  Testament  and  the  New.  In 
the  New  Testament  also  there  is  diversity ;  but  whereas  there  are  only  nine 
authors  for  the  twenty-seven  books  of  the  New  Testament,  and  the  great  bulk 
of  it  is  the  work  of  three,  on  the  other  hand,  for  the  thirty-nine  books  of  the  Old 
Testament  there  are  at  the  very  least  twenty-seven  chief  authors,  and  a  very 
much  larger  number  of  minor  contributors.  The  two  words  rendered  "  at  sundry 
times  and  in  divers  manners  "  are  iroXv|upus  ical  iroXvTpdiros,  which  might  perhaps 
be  rendered  "  fragmentarily  and  multifariously."  As  regards  the  latter  adverb, 
we  have  already  seen  that  it  is  illustrated  by  the  singular  differences  of  station 
and  circumstances  among  those  to  whom  God  sent  his  message  of  inspiration  • 
but  it  is  yet  further  illustrated  by  the  different  ways  in  which  that  message  came 
to  them,  and  in  which  it  is  delivered  to  us.  It  came  sometimes  in  the  facts  of 
history,  sometimes  in  isolated  promises,  sometimes  by  Urim,  sometimes  by 
dreams  and  voices  and  similitudes,  sometimes  by  types  and  sacrifices,  some- 
times by  prophets  specially  commissioned.  It  takes  the  form  now  of  annals,  now 
of  philosophic  meditation,  now  of  a  sermon,  now  of  an  idyl,  now  of  a  lyric  song. 
Sometimes  it  expands,  through  chapter  after  chapter,  the  details  of  a  single  day 
in  an  individual  life  ;  sometimes  it  crushes  into  one  single  clause  the  sweeping 
summary  of  the  records  of  twenty  generations.  At  one  time  it  will  give  the 
minutest  incidents  of  one  event  in  a  single  reign ;  at  another  it  will  heap  the 
dust  of  oblivion  over  dynasties  of  a  hundred  kings.  We  may  compare  its  course 
to  that  of  a  stream  which  sometimes  dwindles  into  a  tiny  rivulet,  and  some- 
times broadens  into  an  almost  shoreless  sea.  But  it  is  a  stream  whose  fountains 
lie  deep  in  the  everlasting  hills.  Its  sources  are  hidden  in  the  depths  of  a  past 
Eternity,  and  its  issues  in  the  depths  of  a  future  Eternity.  It  begins  with  the 
chaos  of  Genesis,  "vast  and  void  ;"  it  ends  with  a  book  which  has  been  called 
"  the  majestic  image  of  a  high  and  stately  tragedy,  shutting  up  and  interming- 
ling her  solemn  scenes  and  acts  with  a  sevenfold  chorus  of  hallelujahs  and  har 
ping  symphonies."' 

'Vlilton. 


vi  GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT. 

But  in  this  diversity,  so  important  and  so  precious,  we  are  led  also  to  recognise 
another  point  of  the  extremest  value  for  a  right  estimate  of  the  Old  Testament 
revelations — namely,  its  fragmentariness,  or  progressiveness.  It  was  given  to 
us  iro\n|iepc3s — "in  many  parts."  The  revelation  was  not  given  all  at  once  ;  it  was 
not  perfect  and  final ;  but  God  revealed  himself  to  man  part  by  part;  he  lifted 
the  veil  fold  by  fold.  It  is  grievous  to  recall  how  many  a  blood-stained  page  of 
history  might  have  been  redeemed  fromits  agony  and  desolation  if  men  had  only 
remembered  that  the  law  of  the  Old  Testament  was  as  yet  an  imperfect  law,  and 
the  morality  of  the  Old  Testament  a  not  yet  fully  enlightened  morality.  When 
the  sanguinary  maintainers  of  shibboleths  defended  their  outrages  by  the  in- 
junctions of  the  Pentateuch ;  when  the  treacherous  and  infamous  assassinations 
of  kings  by  a  Jacques  Clement  or  a  Ravaillac  were  justified  by  the  examples  of 
Ehud  and  Jael ;  when  the  Crusaders  thought  that  they  did  God  service  by  wading 
bridle-deep  in  the  blood  of  "  infidels,"  because  they  could  refer  to  the  exterminat- 
ing wars  of  the  Book  of  Judges  ;  when  the  examples  of  Samuel  and  Elijah  were 
quoted  to  sanction  the  hideous  cruelties  of  the  Inquisition  ;  when  the  ruinous 
institutions  of  polygamy  and  slavery  were  supported  by  the  records  of  the  early 
patriarchs ;  when  texts  extravagantly  strained  were  made  the  chief  buttress  of 
immoral  despotism  ;  when  thousands  of  poor  innocent  women  were  burned  as 
witches  on  the  authority  of  a  text  in  Leviticus  ;  when  atrocious  crimes  like  the 
massacre  of  St.  Bartholomew  were  hailed  by  Popes  with  acclamation,  and  paral- 
leled by  the  zeal  for  God  of  olden  heroes ;  when  many  another  error  of  darkness 
was  defended  by  "  the  devil  quoting  scripture  for  his  purpose," — all  these  follies 
and  iniquities  (of  which  many  find  their  pale  reflex  and  faint  analogy  even  in 
the  present  day)  could  never  have  occurred  if  men  had  studied  the  Bible  in  the 
light  of  the  truths  which  we  have  just  been  considering.  And  those  truths  were 
quite  distinctly  enunciated  not  only  by  St.  Paul,  the  greatest  and  wisest  of  the 
Apostles,1  but  by  our  blessed  Lord  himself.  In  many  distinct  passages — not  to 
dwell  on  the  spirit  and  the  allusions  of  many  more — he  pointed  out  that  the 
revelation  of  God  was  progressive;  that  even  the  moral  conceptions  of  the  great 
saints  and  heroes  of  the  Old  Testament  were  but  as  the  starlight  compared  to 
the  glory  of  the  risen  day.2  At  the  very  period  when  the  religious  authoritie» 
of  the  Jews  were  more  and  more  degrading  into  a  dead  fetish  the  letter  of  their 
law,  and  that  in  its  most  unessential  particulars,  our  Lord  drew  the  most  marked 
contrast  between  that  which  had  been  "said  to  them  of  old  time"  and  that  which 
he  said  to  them  then.8  At  a  period  when  the  distinction  between  clean  and  un- 
clean meats  was  becoming  the  main  badge  of  the  Jew,  and  an  impassable  barrier 
between  the  Jew  and  the  Gentile,  he  drew  the  distinction  between  real  and  un- 
real defilement,  and  "  this  he  said,  .  .  .  making  all  meats  clean."1  When  the 
washings  of  Levitic  scrupulosity  were  looked  on,  not  only  as  a  pious  and  consci- 
entious, but  as  an  absolutely  binding  development  of  the  laws  of  ceremonial  un- 
cleanness,  he  openly  neglected  them,  even  at  the  table  of  a  Pharisee.6  Though 
the  Levitical  ordinances  came  under  the  direct  sanction  of  inspired  authority,  he 
gave  his  direct  approval  to  the  terms  in  which  the  great  prophets  had  treated 
them — not  only  as  essentially  transitory,  and  already  in  part  obsolete,  but  as 
having  always  been  of  an  importance  absolutely  infinitesimal  compared  with 
the  weightier  matters  of  the  Law.6  He  declined  to  give  any  personal  sanction 
to  the  Mosaic  law  about  the  stoning  of  the  adulteress.'    He  said  in  express  terms 

1  As  in  Gal.  iv.  9,  and  pomim,  *  Matt.  v.  21—43  ;  Luke  ix.  58. 

8  Matt.  v.  21,  &c,  where  the  true  rendering  is  "  to,"  not  "by,"  them  of  old  time 
4  Mark  vii.  19  (in  the  true  rendering).  '  Matt.  xv.  1 ;  Mark  vii.  2. 

•  Matt,  xxiii.  23.  '  John  viii.  11. 


SENERAL  INTRODUCTION  TO   THE  OLD   TESTAMENT.  vii 

that  the  Mosaic  concession  of  polygamy  was  not  in  itself  good,  and  had  merely 
been  granted  to  the  Jews — as  a  boon  evil  indeed,  but  necessary — because  of  the 
hardness  of , their  hearts.1  Although  the  sabbath  had  become  to  the  Jews  the 
very  badge  of  nationality,  and  was  being  more  and  more  identified  by  them  with 
the  essence  of  all  religious  observances,  he  markedly  and  repeatedly  discouraged 
the  tendencyto  strain  its  sacredness  into  a  burden  or  a  bondage.2  Lastly,  when 
his  own  nearest  disciples,  in  the  very  region  where  Elijah  had  called  down  fire 
from  heaven,  appealed  to  the  example  of  that  splendid  prophet  to  justify  them 
in  their  appeal  to  him  to  call  down  fire  from  heaven  upon  those  who  had  insulted 
his  authority,  he  told  them  with  stern  rebuke  that  the  Elijah  spirit  is  not  the 
Christ  spirit,  and  that  he  had  come  not  to  destroy  men's  lives,  but  to  save. a  If 
this  teaching  of  Christ  be  not  reverently  borne  in  mind  we  shall  be  constantly 
tempted  to  that  treatment  of  the  Old  Testament  which  runs  through  whole  modern 
commentaries,  and  which,  by  the  straining  of  words  and  the  invention  of  hy- 
potheses, aims  at  concealing  all  semblance  of  difference  between  the  tone  of  a 
Moses  and  of  a  St.  John,  or  between  the  degree  of  enlightenment  in  the  moral 
conduct  of  a  Jael  or  a  Mary  of  Bethany.  Nothing  but  confusion,  dishonesty,  and 
retrogression  can  come  of  the  attempt  to  elevate  the  mixed  and  imperfect  con- 
ceptions of  early  Judaism  to  the  dignity  of  g-ospel  morality.  To  act  thus  is  to 
assert  that  the  stars  yield  as  much  light  whereby  to  guide  our  footsteps  as  we  re- 
ceive from  the  Sun  of  righteousness  when  it  has  dawned  into  boundless  day. 
Scripture  has  itself  made  clear  to  us,  in  words  as  plain  as  it  is  possible  to  utter, 
that  the  degree  both  of  religion  and  morality  which  was  vouchsafed  to  the 
patriarchs  was  altogether  inferior  to  that  which  has  been  granted  to  us.  "  By 
what  law  would  you  justify  the  atrocity  you  would  commit?"  asks  the  young 
soldier  in  a  great  work  of  fiction.  "If  thou  art  ignorant  of  it,"  replied  Burley, 
"  thy  companion  is  well  aware  of  the  law  which  gave  the  men  of  Jericho  to  the 
sword  of  Joshua,  the  son  of  Nun.''  "  Yes ;  but  we,"  answered  the  divine,  "  live 
under  a  better  dispensation,  which  instructeth  us  to  return  good  for  evil,  and  to 
pray  for  those  who  despitefully  use  us  and  persecute  us."  4 

S.  It  will  be  hardly  necessary  to  warn  the  Christian  homilist  that  he  must  be- 
ware of  recoiling  into  the  opposite  extreme.  He  is  not  indeed  likely  to  fall  into 
the  error  of  Marcion,  whose  famous  '  Antitheses '  dwelt  upon  and  exaggerated  the 
supposed  contradictions  between  the  Old  and  New  Testament  with  the  express 
object  of  supporting  his  heresy — that  the  old  dispensation  was  the  work  not  of 
God,  but  of  an  inferior  and  imperfect  Demiurgus ; — but  he  may  be  led  to  under- 
rate the  unspeakable  value  of  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures.  The  unity  of  the 
Old  and  New  Testaments  is  found  in  the  person  and  work  of  Christ.  Thus  it  is 
that  "  the  Old  Testament  is  not  contrary  to  the  New ;  for  both  in  the  Old  and  the 
New  Testament  everlasting  life  is  offered  to  mankind  by  Christ,  who  is  the  only 
Mediator  between  God  and  man,  being  both  God  and  man." 6  Nothing  is  more 
remarkable  in  the  Old  Testament,  nothing  is  a  more  distinct  and  irrefragable 
proof  of  its  inspired  authority,  than  this  interdependence  of  the  two  dispensations 
— "  the  Old  Testament  containing  the  germ  and  nucleus  of  the  New,  the  New 
containing  the  realisation  and  fulfilment  of  the  Old,  not  as  a  matter  of  contriv- 
ance, but  as  a  matter  of  broad  and  patent  history,  so  that  the  two  parts  corre- 
spond like  a  cloven  tally." "  We  must  avoid  alike  the  heresy  of  those  Gnostics 
who  saw  nothing  of  the  New  Testament  in  the  Old,  and  the  error  of  unwise  con- 
troversialists who  see  everything  of  the  New  Testament  in  the  Old.    But  the  old 


1  Mark  x.  4.  '  Mark  ii.  27;  Luke  xiii.  15,  &c.  8  Luke  ix.  55. 

•  Scott.  '  Old  Mortality.'  6  Article.  «  Professor  Leathes. 


viii  GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT. 

rule  is  true,  that  "In  Vetere  Testamento  Novum  latet;  in  Novo  Testamento 
Vetus  patet."  The  fact  that,  from  the  days  of  Origen  onwards,  allegory  and 
typology  have  been  exaggerated  to  a  most  artificial  extent,  and  that  many  events 
and  allusions  and  customs  have  been  made  prophetic  of  Christ  in  which  nothing 
of  prophecy  was  intended,1  must  not  blind  us  to  the  fact  that  the  Old  Testament 
is  full  of  Christ ;  for  the  very  heart  and  essence  of  the  Old  Dispensation,  as  its 
features  are  exhibited  in  the  writings  of  historians,  lawgivers,  and  prophets,  was 
the  great  and  unquenchable  Messianic  hope.  In  the  Old  Testament  Christ  is 
prefigured ;  in  the  New  he  is  revealed.  In  his  teaching  we  see  in  all  their  ful- 
ness those  constant  elements  which  all  religion  strives  more  and  more  clearly 
to  express— the  holiness  and  love  of  God,  the  dignity  and  brotherhood  of  man. 
And  so  he  stands  at  the  centre  of  all  history  as  the  fulfilment  of  all  the  yearnings 
of  the  past,  the  justification  of  all  the  hopes  of  the  future.  Apart  from  him  all 
the  deepest  elements  of  the  O.d  Testament  become  unintelligible.  The  Law  is 
but  the  slave  which  leads  us  to  his  school.8  He  is  the  bruiser  of  the  serpent's 
head  in  Genesis,8  and  the  Lamb  as  it  had  been  slain  in  the  midst  of  the  throne 
in  Revelation  ;4  he  is  the  Paschal  Lamb  of  Moses  ; 6  the  true  star  and  sceptre  of 
Balaam's  vision  ; 6  the  promised  Son  of  David ; '  Isaiah's  rod  of  the  stem  of  Jesse;8 
him  whose  testimony  is  the  spirit  of  prophecy,9  and  of  whom  bear  all  the  pro- 
phets witness,  as  many  as  have  spoken  from  Samuel  and  those  that  follow 
after.10  The  due  comprehension  of  this  vast  hope,  and  the  power  of  unfolding 
it,  will  be  one  of  the  highest  results  which  can  reward  the  study  of  the  preacher 
who  desires  to  fulfil  the  duty  of  a  wise  scribe  by  drawing  from  his  treasures 
things  old  as  well  as  new.11  By  studying  the  Bible  in  this  spirit  we  shall  make 
the  New  Testament  an  inspired  Targum  of  the  Old ;  the  Old  Testament  will  be- 
come to  us  as  the  New,  and  the  New  as  the  Old. 

H.  But,  to  turn  to  the  second  point  which  I  mentioned  as  one  of  primary  im- 
portance, every  preacher  is  certain  to  be  led  into  constant  errors  who  makes  a 
habit  of  using  texts  without  a  faithful  study  of  the  context  from  which  they  are 
taken.  Thousands  of  readers  attach  an  entirely  erroneous  meaning  to  isolated 
expressions  from  forgetting  that  their  true  bearing  can  often  only  be  understood 
in  connection  with  the  train  of  thought  to  which. they  belong.  The  sacred 
writers  never  contemplated  the  splitting  up  of  their  writings  into  these  multi- 
tudinous and  often  arbitrary  divisions.  Those  divisions  are  mere  conveniences 
for  purposes  of  reference,  and  owe  their  origin  to  the  exigencies  of  the  concord- 
ance.12 No  one  who  has  not  looked  into  the  subject  can  be  at  all  aware  of  the 
multitudes  of  "texts"  which  are  habitually  employed  in  senses  which  they 
never  originally  bore  ;  or  of  the  absolute  recklessness  with  which  they  are  con- 
stantly misapplied,  even  by  professed  divines.  Sometimes  this  misuse  is  so  far 
harmless  that  the  truth  into  the  service  of  which  the  text  is  impressed  finds 
abundant  support  from  other  passages  ;  but  even  in  that  case  the  habit  springs 
up  of  the  preacher  using  the  words  of  prophet  or  evangelist,  not  in  their  proper 
sense,  but  as  a  sort  of  mask  through  which  more  authoritatively  to  utter  thoughts 
which  are  not  those  of  the  sacred  writer,  but  are  his  own.13  1  cannot  more 
directly  illustrate  this  fact  than  by  showing  that  even  the  very  texts  which  are 

1  The  writings  of  the  Fathers — notably  of  Origen,  of  St.  Hilary  of  Poictiers,  and  even  of  St. 
Jerome  and  St.  Augustine — are  full  of  the  most  strained  and  untenable  allegories. 

2  Gal.  iii.  21.  8  Gen.  iii.  15.  "  Rev.  v.  6.  '  Exod.  xii. 
•  Numb.  xxiv.  17.        '  Mark  x.  48,  &c.       "  Isa.  xi.  1.       »  Rev.  xix.  10.       10  Acts  x.  43^ 

11  But  useful  for  this  line  of  study  we  may  recommend  the  beautiful  treatise  of  Davison 
'  On  Prophecy.'  ' 

12  See  on  this  subject  the  article  Bible  in  Smith's  '  Dictionary  of  the  Bible.' 

18  I  have  illustrated  this  danger  in  two  papers  on  '  Wresting  the  Scriptures '  in  the 
'Expositor' for  July  and  August,  1880. 


GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  TO   THE  OLD   TESTAMENT.  ix 

often  used  to  enforce  rules  of  sound  Biblical  interpretation  are  in  several  instan- 
ces misinterpreted  or  misapplied.  "We  should  attend,  it  is  said,  to  the  spirit,  not 
to  the  letter,  for  "  the  letter  killeth."  "We  should  interpret  "  according  to  the  pro- 
portion of  faith.''  "We  should  imitate  the  Divine  method  by  teaching  "precept 
upon  precept,  precept  upon  precept;  line  upon  line,  line  upon  line;  here  a  little, 
and  there  a  little."  We  should  remember  that  "  all  scripture  is  given  by  in- 
spiration of  God."  Now  these  remarks  and  suggestions  may  be  true  and  wise, 
but  in  every  one  of  these  instances  the  text  is  misapplied,  and  a  glance  at  the 
context  will  show  that  it  is  so.  The  expression  "the  letter  killeth"1  applies 
primarily  to  the  sentence  of  death  passed  upon  transgressors  by  the  Mosaic  law. 
The  use  of  the  expression  "  according  to  the  proportion  "  (or  analogy)  "  of  faith" 
as  a  rule  for  the  exposition  of  the  Scriptures,  is  only  a  secondary  and  incorrect 
application  of  it ;  for  "  the  faith,"  spoken  of  is  not  faith  in  the  sense  of  the 
system  of  religion,  but  is  subjective  faith,  and  St.  Paul  is  speaking  of  preaching 
within  the  limits  of  the  spiritual  gifts  which  we  have  received.8  "  Line  upon 
line,  precept  upon  precept,"  is  so  far  from  being  an  inspired  description  of  the 
method  of  God's  revelations,  that  it  is  a  taunting  mimicry  of  Isaiah's  manner,8 
used  to  ridicule  him  by  the  drunken  priests  of  Judah.  Lastly,  "  all  scripture  is 
given  by  inspiration  of  God"  is  a  translation  which  is  so  far  from  certain  that  it 
has  been  regarded  as  untenable  by  a  very  large  number  of  orthodox  and  learned 
commentators  from  the  days  of  Origen  down  to  our  own,  and  both  the  Syriac, 
St.  Jerome,  and  Luther  render  it  "  all  inspired  scripture  is  useful  also  for  doc- 
trine," &c.4  The  misuse  of  this  little  group  of  texts,  all  referring" to  one  subject 
— and  that  the  very  subject  of  the  right  method  of  Scriptural  interpretation, 
which  should  surely  not  be  formulated  in  terms  of  Scriptural  misinterpretation 
— will  at  least  serve  to  show  the  need  for  carefulness.  For  indeed  the  necessity 
for  such  carefulness  is  much  greater  when  important  doctrines  are  made  to  rest 
their  main  support  on  such  texts  as,  "  the  whole  head  is  sick,  and  the  whole 
heart  is  faint;"6  or,  "which  of  us  shall  dwell  with  everlasting  burnings?"  6  or, 
"  in  the  place  where  the  tree  falleth  there  it  shall  be  ; "  or,  cursed  be  Canaan  ;"  ' 
or  indeed  in  a  multitude  of  other  texts  which,  as  is  proved  by  the  context,  have 
not,  and  could  never  have  been  intended  to  have,  the  controversial  significance 
which  has  been  attached  to  them.  It  has  indeed  been  an  unauthorised  supre- 
stition,  and  one  which  has  been  prolific  of  error,  to  assert  that  "  every  passage 
of  the  Bible  looks  backward  and  forward  and  every  way,  like  lights  from  the 
sun."  It  is  a  dogma  which  does  not  find  in  Scripture  itself  the  faintest  shadow 
of  authorisation ;  it  is  due  to  that  irreverent  reverence  which  ends  in  super- 
seding in  favour  of  its  own  arbitrary  fancies  the  professed  object  of  its  devotion; 
its  final  result  is  to  hand  over  the  Bible  to  the  autocratic  manipulation  of  preju- 
dice and  fancy,  instead  of  demanding  the  toilsome  and  unbiassed  discovery  of 
its  true  meaning.  Texts  have  been  compared  to  those  flints  which,  when  struck 
open  by  the  hammer,  reveal  a  Drusio  cavity  full  of  crystals  of  the  colour  of 
amethyst,  "  purple  with  a  dawn  such  as  never  was  on  land  and  sea."  The 
comparison  is  as  true  as  it  is  beautiful ;  but  such  rich  contents  will  never  be 
found — though  they  may  be  invented  and  imagined — by  any  student  who  does 
not  study  each  text  in  its  due  place  and  under  its  proper  relations. 

III.  After  having  endeavoured  to  show  the  importance  of  these  broad  principles 
of  interpretation — and  I  have  signalled  them  out  as  the  most  neglected  and  the 
most  important  on  which  I  could  touch — it  may  now  be  useful  to  give  a  brief 

1  2  Cor.  iii.  6.  »  Bom.  xii.  6.  8  Isa.  xxviii.  10. 

4  2  Tim.  iii.  16.  It  was  so  taken  by  Origen,  Clement  Alexandrinus,  Tertullian,  and  most 
of  the  Fathers ;  and  by  the  Peshito,  Arabic,  and  Vulgate ;  by  Luther,  &c. 

5  Isa.  i.  5.  e  Isa.  xxxiii.  14.  '  Gen.  ix.  26. 


x      GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT. 

glance,  from  a  homiletio  point  of  view,  at  the  great  divisions  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment Scriptures. 

The  earliest  trace  of  a  classification  of  the  Old  Testament  books  is  found  in  the 
Prologue  to  the  Book  of  Ecclesiasticus,  where  we  are  told  that  Jesus,  the  son  of 
Sirac,  "had  much  given  himself  to  the  reading  of  the  law,  and  the  prophets,  and 
other  books  of  our  fathers."  In  3  Mace.  ii.  13  we  are  told  how  Nehemiahv. 
"  founding  a  library,  gathered  together  the  acts  of  the  kings,  and  the  prophets, 
and  of  David."  This  is  clearly  analogous  to  the  division  referred  to  by  our 
Lord  in  Luke  xxiv.  44,  "in  the  law  of  Moses,  and  in  the  prophets,  and  in  the 
Psalms."  More  frequently,  however,  the  Jews,  when  speaking  generally,  com- 
prised the  Old  Testament  Scriptures  under  the  head  of  the  Law  and  the  Prophets 
(Matt.  v.  17  ;  Luke  xxiv.  25).  When  entering  more  into  detail  they  added  "  the 
writings"  (Cethubim  or  Hagiographa).  The  Law  {Tor ah)  comprised  the  five 
books  of  the  Pentateuch,  The  Propkets  were  divided  into  two  classes — earlier 
and  later.  Under  the  head  of  Earlier  Prophets  the  Jews  placed  the  Books  of 
Joshua,  Judges,  1  and  2  Samuel,  and  1  and  2  Kings.  Under  the  Later  Prophets 
they  placed  the  three  major  prophets — Isaiah,  Jeremiah,  and  Ezekiel — and  the 
twelve  minor  prophets.  The  Cethubim,  again,  were  ranged  under  three  divisions, 
of  which  the  first,  called  Emeth  ("  truth  "),  from  the  initial  letters  of  the  three 
books,  comprised  Psalms,  Proverbs  and  Job ;  the  second,  the  Canticles,  Ruth, 
Lamentations,  Ecclesiastes,  and  Esther,  which  were  called  the  five  Megilloth, 
from  being  written  on  separate  "  Rolls  "  for  use  at  particular  festivals  j  the 
third  division  contained  Daniel,  Ezra,  Nehemiah,  and  1  and  2  Chronicles. 

If  we  were  entering  on  a  critical  introduction  to  the  books  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment, this  division — especially  the  position  occupied  in  it  by  the  Books  of  Daniel 
and  Chronicles — would  be  found  very  important  and  suggestive.  But  for  our 
present  homiletic  purpose  it  will  be  more  convenient  roughly  to  divide  the  books 
of  Scripture  into — (1)  the  Law,  (2)  the  historic  books,  (3)  the  poetic  books,  (4)tlie 
prophetic  books,  and  (5)  the  philosophic  books.  The  division  is  only  meant  to 
be  a  general  one  for  purposes  of  convenience  ;  for  some  of  the  historic  books 
contain  prophetic  passages,  and  some  of  the  prophets  contain  historical  sections  ; 
and,  again,  some  of  the  poetic  books  are  also  prophetic,  and  large  portions  of 
the  prophets  are  written  in  strains  of  the  loftiest  poetry,  as  also  are  parts  of  the 
books  which  we  may  term  philosophic.  The  general  divisions  are,  however, 
well  marked  and  easily  discernible. 

1.  The  five  books  of  the  Pentateuch  are  partly  composed  of  a  history— first  of 
the  world,  and  then  of  the  chosen  family — up  to  the  time  of  the  entrance  into 
Canaan,  and  partly  of  the  system  of  Mosaic  legislation. 

a.  We  no  sooner  open  the  Book  of  Genesis  than  we  are  met  by  whole  volumes 
of  controversy  as  to  the  relations  between  science  and  religion,  and  the  supposed 
contradictions  between  the  results  of  the  one  and  the  declarations  of  the  other. 
Do  such  c>  ntroversies  lie  within  the  ordinary  sphere  of  homiletics?  We  should 
say  decidedly  not,  and  that  for  many  reasons.  In  the  first  place,  few  are  com- 
petent really  to  deal  with  the  question,  and  nothing  is  more  irritating  to  men  of 
science  than  to  see  obvious  ignorance  assuming  the  airs  of  infallibility,  and 
demonstrating  the  impiousness  of  proved  conclusions,  the  very  elements  of  which 
it  does  not  understand.  The  clergy  in  so  many  thousands  of  instances,  in  age 
after  age,  have  so  conclusively  proved  their  entire  incompetence  to  decide  upon 
points  of  science,— they  have  been  so  repeatedly  forced  to  modify  their  interpre- 
tations of  Scripture  in  accordance  with  finally  demonstrated  and  universally 
accepted  truths,— that  it  is  best  to  rest  on  the  certainty  that  though  exegesis 
may  be  erroneous,  the  scientific  results  which  have  rewarded  centuries  of  labour 
have  not  in  a  single  instance  clashed  with  any  truth  of  religion.     How  can  they 


GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.  xi 

'  clash,  seeing  that  truth  must  be  truth,  and  that  God  reveals  himself  in  the  facts 
of  nature  no  less  surely  than  he  reveals  himself  in  his  word?  If  the  clergy 
desire  to  enter  into  scientific  controversies,  first  let  them  acquire  the  requisite 
knowledge,  and  then  let  them  urge  their  views  in  the  press,  or  in  places  where 
they  can  be  fairly  met  and  criticised.  The  pulpit  is  not  meant  to  be  a  place  for 
doubtful  disputations,  but  for  the  furtherance  of  the  ends  of  revelation,  which 
is  "profitable  for  doctrine,  for  reproof,  for  correction,  for  instruction  in  right- 
eousness ;  that  the  man  of  God  may  be  perfect,  thoroughly  furnished  unto  all 
good  works." '  The  first  nine  chapters  of  Genesis  are  singularly  rich  in  moral 
and  spiritual  lessons.  They  summarize  the  history  of  at  least  2000  years  in  the 
progress  of  mankind.  In  the  pulpit,  at  any  rate,  we  search  them  not  for  earthly 
wisdom,  but  for  heavenly  knowledge.  Of  the  physical  truths  which  the  finger 
of  God  has  written  on  the  stars  of  heaven  or  carved  upon  the  rocky  tablets  of 
the  world  J  of  the  bands  of  Jupiter,  or  the  ring  of  Saturn,  or  the  snowy  poles  of 
Mars ;  of  the  extinct  monsters  which  once  trampled  the  forests  or  tempested  the 
seas — a  child  may  now  know  more  than  was  dreamt  by  the  wisest  man  of  old. 
But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  nations  of  the  world  might  have  been  saved  from 
millenniums  of  error— not  only  from  Fetish-worship  and  Devil-worship,  but  from 
Pantheism,  and  Atheism,  and  Polytheism,  and  Manicheism,  and  Materialism, 
and  forms  of  error  compatible  with  the  most  advanced  culture—by  that  single 
verse  of  Genesis,  speaking  calmly  as  a  voice  out  of  the  depths  of  eternity  :  "In 
the  beginning  God  created  the  heavens  and  the  earth." 

p.  In  the  story  of  the  Creation  the  same  truths  are  prominent,  and  the  truths 
on  which  all  may  fix  their  thoughts  are  those  of  a  loving  Omnipotence  and  a 
glorious  world.  Similarly,  in  the  story  of  the  Fall  of  Man,  while  it  would  be 
possible  to  raise  any  number  of  perplexities  which  are  incapable  of  present  solu- 
tion, it  would  argue  a  singular  blindness  if  we  missed  the  truth  that  the  fall  of 
Adam  and  Eve  points  the  lesson  of  the  fall  of  every  man  and  woman  brought 
into  a  sinful  world.  Be  it  a  history  or  be  it  an  allegory,  we  are  in  any  case  in- 
tended to  read,  in  it  the  causes  of  the  loss  of  innocence,  the  certain  consequences 
of  retribution,  and  the  Divine  remedy  for  sin.  And  in  the  promise  to  Eve  of 
that  seed  of  the  woman  who  should  break  the  serpent's  head  we  hear  the  first 
utterance  of  prophecy,  and  catch  the  first  gleam  of  that  light  and  hope  which 
was  to  brighten  into  the  perfect  day.  Have  we  not  here  the  great  elements 
which  run  through  the  whole  Bible — "law  and  prophecy;  the  denunciation  of 
sin  and  the  promise  of  pardon ;  the  flame  which  consumes  and  the  light  which 
comforts  ;"  and  is  not  this  the  whole  of  the  covenant? 

•y.  We  find  the  same  truths  repeated,  with  striking  variations,  in  the  story  of 
Cain ;  and  then  we  see  the  origin,  on  the  one  hand,  of  polygamy  and  a  godless 
civilisation  in  the  family  of  Lamech,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  of  religious  wor- 
ship in  the  family  of  Seth.  This  salt  of  goodness  was  not,  however,  sufficient 
to  save  the  world  from  moral  corruption  ;  and  in  the  narrative  of  the  Deluge  we 
read  the  great  moral  truth  that  there  is  a  point  at  which  nations  can  fill  no 
fuller  the  cup  of  their  iniquity — at  which  God's  wrath  against  corruption  must 
express  itself  in  retributive  justice.  Yet  here  again  we  find  the  beautiful  sym- 
bols of  mercy  and  of  safety — the  saving  ark,  the  dove  with  the  branch  of  olive 
plucked  off  in  her  mouth,  the  promise  that  God  will  no  more  smite  every  living 
thing ;  above  all,  the  bow  in  the  cloud  as  a  pledge  of  mercy.  With  the  family 
of  Noah  the  story  of  man  begins  afresh,  and  begins  with  an  awful  warning 
against  the  curse  of  drunkenness ;  but  the  rainbow,  which  was  made  to  him  the 
sign  of  a  new  covenant,  flashes  and  fades  throughout  the  whole  of  Scripture, 

1  S  Tim.  iil  IS,  IT. 


xil  GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT. 


and  even  amid  the  often  terrible  visions  of  the  last  book  of  the  Bible  we  catcb 
our  last  glimpse  of  it,  spanning1  the  throne  of  God,  and  "  in  sight  like  unto  an 
emerald." ' 

8.  After  the  remarkable  genealogy  of  nations  in  the  tenth  chapter  of  Genesis, 
and  one  glance  at  the  first  colossal  empires  of  the  East,  we  are  told  of  the  ruin  of 
an  attempt  to  establish  an  universal  dominion.  That  story  of  Babel  is  the 
Divine  sanction  of  nationality.  From  that  point,  through  forty  chapters,  the 
sacred  historian  leaves  the  history  of  the  world  to  dwell  on  the  records  of  three 
biographies.  For  not  only  is  the  individual  life  sacred  to  God,  but  those  three 
patriarchs — Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob — were  the  fathers  of  the  chosen  people. 
They  lived  peaceful  and,  for  the  most  part,  uneventful  lives  in  their  pastoral 
tents ;  they  were  but  men ;  they  were  not  sinless ;  they  sometimes  fell  into  acts 
of  cruelty,  meanness,  and  deceit.  But  even  with  all  their  human  weaknesses 
they  were  men  eminently  good,  and  their  one  great  distinguishing  feature  was 
faith  in  God.  It  is  this  which,  more  than  anything  else,  differentiates  one  life 
from  another.  We  are  helped  to  grasp  the  lesson  by  the  striking  way  in  which 
each  one  of  them  is  silently  contrasted  with  another  who  has  his  good  things  in 
this  life — Abraham  with  Lot,  Isaac  with  Ishmael,  Jacob  with  Esau.  Few  lessons 
are  more  instructive  than  those  which  spring  from  drawing  out  this  contrast  in 
its  details  and  in  its  results.  But  the  author  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews 
points  out  to  us  the  great  lesson  that  it  was  faith  which  lit  up  their  characters 
with  every  virtue  and  every  grace ;  it  was  like  one  sunbeam  brightening  jewels 
of  many  colours. 

t.  It  is  needless  to  dwell  on  the  rich  symbolism  of  the  historic  narrative  which 
runs  through  the  remaining  books  of  the  Pentateuch.  The  burning  bush,  the 
plagues  of  Egypt,  the  drowning  of  Pharaoh  and  his  host  in  the  Red  Sea,  Marah 
and  Elim  and  Kibroth  Hattaavah,  the  darkness  and  splendour  of  Sinai,  the  pillar 
of  cloud  and  fire,  the  smitten  rock,  the  brazen  serpent,  the  grand  episode  of 
Balaam,  the  zeal  of  Phinehas,  the  death  of  Moses,  the  doom  to  forty  years  of 
wandering  in  the  wilderness,  the  conquest  of  Canaan — these  are  events  which 
arrest  our  attention,  and  we  can  hardly  miss  their  lessons.  It  is  different  with 
the  judicial,  ceremonial,  and  political  law  of  the  Jews,  which  occupy  so  many 
chapters  in  these  books,  and  are  too  much  neglected.  They  were  intended  to 
train  Israel,  and  through  Israel  to  train  the  world,  in  the  knowledge  of  God  as 
one  God,  as  a  Spirit,  as  eternal,  as  ever  near  us,  as  a  God  of  holiness  and  justice, 
and  above  all  as  a  God  of  love.  The  one  utterance  round  which  the  entire  law 
of  Moses  may  be  said  to  cluster  is  that  in  Exod.  xxxiv.  5 — 7,  which  is  the  great 
proclamation  of  the  name  of  God  after  the  shameful  apostacy  of  the  people. 
The  moral  law — on  the  unequalled  majesty  and  Divine  originality  of  which  we 
need  not  now  dwell — was  meant  to  reveal  his  will,  and  the  aim  of  the  ceremonial 
law  was  to  habituate  the  people  to  the  conception  that  they  must  be  holy  as  God 
is  holy,  and  pure  as  he  is  pure.  This  is  the  one  main  object  of  all  the  laws  about 
clean  and  unclean  meats,  intended  to  keep  Israel  as  a  separate  people;  and  of 
the  long  chapters  about  ceremonial  uncleanness,  which  was  meant  to  be  a  type 
of  moral,  mental,  and  spiritual  uncleanness.  This  too  was  the  meaning  of  all 
the  ordinances  of  worship,  which,  like  the  laws  of  the  fringes  and  the  phylac- 
teries, were  meant  to  teach  Israel  that  God  was  among  them,  and  that  therefore 
they  must  be  pure  in  heart  and  obedient  in  life.  If  the  student  will  carefully 
consider  the  thirteen  long  chapters  of  the  Book  of  Exodus  which  are  occupied 
with  details  about  the  tabernacle  and  the  dress  of  the  priests,  he  will  see  that 


GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.  xiii 

there  is  hardly  one  of  those  details,  whether  of  substance,  material,  or  colour, 
which  is  not  demonstrably  symbolical,  and  which  did  not  tend  to  the  one  pur- 
pose of  witnessing  to  the  presence  and  holiness  of  God.1  This  is  still  more  the 
case  with  the  whole  system  of  sacrifices,  of  which  the  meat  offerings  were 
eucharistic,  the  sin  offerings  propitiatory,  and  the  burnt  offerings  typical  of  self- 
dedication.  Although  Moses  makes  no  mention  of  prayer  as  a  part  of  public 
worship,  yet  these  sacrifices  were  preparations  for  prayer,  and  were  themselves 
"  prayers  without  words."  They  said  to  the  Israelite,  Show  thy  thankfulness  to 
God ;  make  thy  peace  with  God  ;  dedicate  thy  life  to  God.  In  the  chapter 
which  gives  the  method  of  declaring  the  purification  of  the  leper  (Levit.  xiv.)( 
and  the  magnificent  ceremonial  of  the  day  of  atonement,  the  student  will  see  in 
its  highest  development  the  rich  significance  of  the  Levitic  law  as  symbolising 
man's  relationship  to  God,  and  God's  restoration  of  fallen  man.9 

%.  But,  further  than  this,  we  see  in  many  regulations  that  in  the  Old  Testa- 
ment, as  in  the  New,  love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law.  In  spite  of  concessions  to 
rude  times  and  hard  hearts,  there  is  a  singular  tenderness  in  the  spirit  of  the 
Mosaic  code.  There  is  tenderness  to  slaves,  whom  in  every  way  it  sheltered 
from  oppression ; '  to  the  accidental  homicide,  for  whom  it  provided  the  cities 
of  refuge ; 4  to  the  poor,  whom  it  protected  from  cruel  usury  ; 6  to  the  depressed 
toilers,  whose  lands  it  restored  in  the  Sabbatic  year ;  *  to  the  destitute,  in  whose 
interest  it  forbad  the  hard  stripping  of  the  fields,  the  mean  exhaustion  of  the 
gleaned  vineyards,  or  the  niggardly  beating  of  the  topmost  olive  boughs.1  There 
is  even  tenderness  to  the  dumb  animals.  To  show  that  God  cared  even  for  the 
falling  sparrow  and  the  dumb  cattle,  the  great  legislator  was  bidden. to  lay  down 
a  rale  that  the  heedless  boy  should  not  take  the  mother-bird  when  he  took  from 
the  nest  her  callow  young ; 8  that  the  oxen  were  not  to  be  muzzled  when'  they 
trod  out  the  corn ; 9  and  that  the  ox  and  ass  were  not  to  be  yoked  together  at 
the  plough,  that  the  burden  might  not  fall  on  the  smaller  and  weaker  beast.10 
Even  the  thrice  repeated  rule,  "  Thou  shall  not  seethe  the  kid  in  its  mother's 
milk,"  "  besides  the  deep  warning  which  it  conveys  of  the  horrible  sin  of  d& 
stroying  human  beings  by  means  of  their  best  affections,  was  rightly  interpreted 
as  a  reprobation  of  unfeeling  cruelty,  because  it  looks  like  a  hard  mockery,  an 
offence  against  the  mercifulness  of  nature,  to  seethe  the  youngling  in  the  very 
milk  which  nature  had  designed  for  its  sustenance ; — for  "  God's  tender  mercies 
are  over  all  his  works." ls 

2.  Turning  from  the  Law  to  the  historical  books  of  the  Bible,  how  rich  in  all 
moral  lessons  is  the  great  narrative  which  unfolds  before  us  the  story  of  the 
chosen  people.  One  grand  lesson  runs  through  it  all — that  neither  for  men  nor 
for  nations  is  there  any  true  life  apart  from  God.  There,  as  in  no  other  books, 
shall  we  find  the  true  statesman's  manual  and  the  true  philosophy  of  history. 
It  is  related  that  when  King  Frederic  William  I.  of  Prussia  asked  one  of  his 
chaplains  to  give  him  in  one  sentence  a  proof  of  Christianity,  the  chaplain  re- 
plied, "  The  Jews,  your  Majesty."  An  entire  system  of  evidences  of  religion 
lies  in  that  answer.  The  whole  history  of  Israel  may  well  be  called  the  history 
of  a  prodigal — of  a  prodigal  terribly  punished  yet  freely  forgiven.  "  When 
Israel  was  a  child  God  loved  him,  and  out  of  Egypt  he  called  his  son.  The  son 
grew  up.     In  the  days  of  prosperity  he  did  not  choose  to  keep  God  in  his  re- 


1  See  on  this  subject '  Bahr's  '  Symbolik,'  and  Ealisch  on  Exodus.  *  Levit;  xvi. 

'  Deut.  v.  15;  xii.  18,  &o.  *  Numb.  xxxv.  18.  '  Deut.  xxiii.  19;  xxiv.  6,  &o 

•  Levit.  xxv.  4,  &c.  '  Deut  xxiv.  20.  e  Deut.  xxii.  6. 

•  Dent  xzt.  4.  ">  Deut  xxii.  10.  "  Exod.  xxiii.  19.  "  Ps.  oxlv.  8. 


xiT  GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT. 

membrance.  The  days  of  sorrow  came,  and  he  flung  himself  with  sincere 
repentance  into  his  Father'B  arms." '  But  even  over  his  repentance  crept  the 
insincerity  of  formalism.  In  the  days  of  his  idolatry  Israel  murdered  the 
prophets ;  in  the  days  Of  his  Pharisaism  he  crucified  the  Christ.  Yet  through 
all  that  long  dark  tragedy,  in  which  Jehovah  and  his  people  were  the  actors, 
God's  will  was  being  accomplished.  The  vineyard  had  been  given  to  the  hus- 
bandmen for  the  blessing  of  the  world.  They  proved  unworthy,  and  were  cast 
out ; '  but  "  if  the  casting  away  of  Israel  was  the  reconciling  of  the  world,  what 
shall  their  receiving  be  but  life  from  the  dead  ?  "  s 

a.  No  lessons  could  be  more  instructive  for  the  homilist  than  those  which  he 
may  find  abundantly  in  the  scenes  and  characters  of  the  historic  books ;  but 
among  them  the  lesson  of  the  history  as  a  whole  should  not  be  overlooked. 
"What  conceivable  explanation  is  there  of  the  history  of  the  Jews,  with  their 
inextinguishable  vitality,  and  the  fulfilment  again  and  again  of  their  unquench. 
able  hopes,  except  the  truth  that  God  had  chosen  them,  and  that  God  was  with 
them?  They  had  no  righteousness,  but  were  a  stiff-necked  people.  They  had 
no  splendid  territory,  but  a  strip  of  barren,  narrow,  ill-watered  land.  They  had 
no  grand  genealogy — a  Syrian  ready  to  perish  was  their  father.  They  were  not 
powerful  enough  of  themselves  even  to  conquer  their  own  small  land.  They 
were  not  united ;  Ephraim  envied  Judah,  and  Judah  vexed  Ephraim.  They 
were  not  free,  but  .became  the  prey  of  nation  after  nation.  They  were  not  a 
maritime  people,  for  their  strip  of  sea-coast  was  mostly  harbourless,  and  not 
their  own.  They  had  no  commercial  industry  like  Venice  or  Holland  ;  no  art 
like  Greece;  no  arms  like  Rome ;  no  colonies  like  England;  no  philosophy  like 
Germany.  They  were  constantly  starting  aside  like  a  broken  bow.  Yet  no 
power  has  ever  been  able  to  crush,  no  persecution  to  destroy  them.  They  have 
influenced,  taught,  pervaded  mankind.  Their  sacred  book  is  the  sacred  book  of 
humanity,  their  religious  ideas  are  becoming  more  and  more  the  religious  ideas 
of  the  race.  What  explains  it  all,  and  alone  explains  it?  Nothing  but  the  truth 
that  "  God  showed  his  word  unto  Jacob,  his  statutes  and  ordinances  unto  Israel. 
He  hath  not  dealt  so  with  any  nation,  neither  have  the  heathen  knowledge  of 
his  law." 

p.  The  period  of  desert  wanderings  was  to  the  Jews  a  special  training  for  their 
future  history.  It  was  meant  to  transform  them  from  a  nation  of  full-fed  slaves 
into  a  nation  of  warriors.  With  the  entrance  into  Canaan  their  proper  national 
history  begins.  In  the  Old  Testament  it  falls  into  three  epochs — that  of  the 
Judges,  that  of  the  Kings,  and  that  of  the  Exile  and  return.  The  epoch  of  the 
Judges,  so  rich  in  heroic  incidents,  was  a  period  of  apparent  anarchy,  but  of 
secret  growth.  The  lesson  which  it  was  designed  to  teach  them  was  that  apart 
from  God  the  Israelites  were  helpless  and  contemptible,  but  that  with  God  they 
were  happy  and  strong.  Amid  wild  stories  of  crime  and  repentance,  of  raids  and 
reprisals,  of  barbarity  and  generosity,  we  see,  and  not  least  in  the  exquisite  story 
of  Ruth,  that  the  nation  was  gradually  learning  its  appointed  lesson.  Then 
arose  one  of  the  greatest  men  in  Jewish  annals,  the  prophet  Samuel.  The  time 
for  political  unity  had  come,  and,  acting  under  God's  permission,  he  reluctantly 
gave  them  a  king.  After  the  first  tentative,  which  was  a  failure  owing  to  the 
character  of  the  passionate  and  unstable  Saul,  began  the  splendid  career  of 
David,  the  true  hero  of  the  monarchy  and  the  darling  of  the  people,  whose  per- 
sonal ascendancy  stamped  a  type  of  character  on  the  nation's  history.  He  gave 
them  an  army,  he  gave  them  a  temple,  he  gave  them  a  psalter,  he  gave  them  a 
capital.    The  reign  of  his  son  Solomon  was  but  the  gorgeous  commencement  of 

i  Hank.  •  Matt.  ui.  8».  *  Bom.  zL  18. 


GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.     xv 

a  real  decadence.  It  produced  the  revolt  in  the  reign  of  Rehoboam.  Israel  and 
Judah  split  asunder  for  ever.  The  ten  tribes  apostatised  into  calf  worship  and 
Baal  worship,  and  for  250  years,  through  a  list  of  six  unhappy  dynasties  and 
nineteen  unhappy  kings,  of  whom  not  one  was  good,  their  story  dragged  itself 
on,  through  revolts  and  assassinations,  through  foreign  defeats  and  civil  tu- 
mults, with  little  beyond  the  grand  missions  of  Elijah,  Elisha,  and  other  prophets 
to  shed  a  gleam  on  that  long  agony.1  Then  Assyria  carried  them  away  captive, 
and  they  disappear  among  the  nations.  Judah  had  twenty-one  king's,  but  they 
were  all  of  David's  house,  and  some  of  them,  like  Hezekiah  and  Josiah,  were 
conspicuously  faithful.  But  their  reformation  came  too  late.  The  Jews  mur- 
dered the  prophets,  and  slew  those  that  were  sent  unto  them,  and  were  carried 
captive  to  Babylon.  Then  came  the  Exile.  In  Chaldsea  they  were  cured  for 
ever  of  the  temptation  to  apostasy,  and  nothing  but  their  hopes,  their  promises, 
and  their  religion  could  have  preserved  them  from  final  obliteration.  Babylon 
fell ;  Persia  prevailed.  The  Jews  returned  to  a  land  desolated  by  war,  famine, 
and  disease ;  but  they  returned  settled  in  the  faith,  and  so  "with  the  unresist- 
ible  might  of  weakness  they  shook  the  world."  s  The  history  of  Israel  has  four 
main  heroes — Moses,  Samuel,  David,  Ezra.  Moses  gave  them  their  freedom  and 
their  law.  Samuel  their  order  and  unity ;  David  their  poetry  and  their  power ; 
Ezra  gave  them  a  collected  literature  and  a  religious  education.  If  David  was 
the  founder  of  Israel  as  a  monarchy,  Ezra  is  the  founder  of  Israel  as  a  Church. 
But  the  lesson  of  the  Old  Testament  history  is  mainly  this — that,  whether  as  a 
Kingdom  or  as  a  Church,  the  true  Israel  had  but  two  sources  of  power  and  per- 
manence— the  law  of  a  Divine  holiness,  the  grasp  of  a  Messianic  hope. 

8.  Poetry  is  found  throughout  the  Bible,  from  the  song  of  Lamech  in  Gen.  iv. 
to  the  Apocalypse.  All  who  wish  really  to  understand  it  must  of  course  make 
themselves  acquainted  with  the  general  features  of  that  parallelism  or  "bal- 
ance,"— the  rapid  stroke  as  of  alternate  wings,  "the  heaving  and  sinking  as  of 
the  human  heart,"  a — of  which  there  are  three  main  forms — cognate,  contrasted, 
or  synthetic.4  It  is  the  rhythm  both  of  thoughts  and  words.  Thought  corres- 
ponds to  thought  in  repetition,  amplification,  contrast,  or  response ;  like  wave 
answering  to  wave,  each  wave  different,  yet  each  swayed  by  the  same  setting 
tide  of  emotion.  It  is  not  easy  to  define  the  epochs  of  Hebrew  poetry,  because 
of  the  still  unsettled  date  of  certain  books,  like  the  Book  of  Job  and  the  Song  of 
Solomon.  We  can  see  that  there  was  a  great  poetic  outburst  both  at  the  Exodus 
and  during  the  period  of  the  Judges,  which  produced  in  the  song  of  Deborah 
one  of  the  most  splendid  and  impassioned  poems  in  the  world.  But  David  was 
pre-eminently  the  sweet  psalmist  of  Israel.  He  found  Hebrew  poetry  a  wild 
flower,  but  "  he  planted  it  on  Mount  Zion,  and  nurtured  it  with  kingly  care." 
It  never  quite  died  away,  and  even  the  Exile  and  return  produced  some  psalms 
of  remarkable  sweetness.  The  Bible  contains  poems  of  nearly  all  kinds.  In  the 
Book  of  Job  we  have  its  single  drama  of  unequalled  sublimity ;  in  the  songs  of 
Moses  and  of  Deborah  the  grandest  paeans  to  liberty  which  were  ever  sung  ;  in 
Proverbs  and  Ecclesiastes  didactic  and  philosophic  poems  of  great  beauty  and 
wisdom  ;  in  the  Song  of  Solomon  an  exquisite  pastoral ;  in  the  Lamentations  a 
most  pathetic  elegy.  Epic  indeed  there  is  none  ;  Init  Hebrew  history  is  itself  a 
Divine  epic,  and  in  the  intense  utterances  of  the  prophets  and  the  sweet  songs 
of  the  psalmists  we  have  as  it  were  the  ivy  and  the  passion-flowers  which  twine 

1  Hosea  ii.  4—11 ;  Amoa  Ix.  1.  »  Milton.  »  Ewald. 

*  On  this  subject  see  Lowth  '  De  Sacri  poesi  Hebraeorom,'  and  Kerdu,  '  Geist  afer  Bebr. 
Poesie.'  A  good  sketch  of  Hebrew  poetry  by  Mr.  Wright  may  be  found  in  Smith's  'Bible 
Diet* 


xvi     GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT. 

around  its  bole.  But  it  is  in  lyric  poetry  that  the  Hebrew  genius  most  charac- 
teristically displayed  itself,  and  in  its  songs  we  have,  as  Luther  said,  "  a  garden 
in  which  the  fairest  flowers  bloom,  but  over  which  there  blow  tempestuous 
winds."  And  of  all  the  characteristics  of  Hebrew  poetry,  its  fresh  simplicity, 
its  stainless  purity,  its  lofty  purpose,  its  genial  cheerfulness,  its  free  universality 
of  tone,  none  is  more  remarkable  than  the  fact  that  it  is  intensely  religious,  that 
it  is  full  of  God.  What  the  son  of  Sirac  says  of  David  is  true  of  all  the  Hebrew 
poets :  "  In  all  his  works  he  praised  the  Holy  One  most  high  with  words  of 
glory;  with  his  whole  heart  he  sung  songs,  and  loved  him  that  made  him."1 

4.  In  turning  to  the  sixteen  directly  prophetical  books  of  the  Bible  we  are 
dealing  with  its  most  distinctive  element.  They  do  not  fall  into  isolated  masses, 
but  interpenetrate  one  another,  and  form  one  organic  whole.  Prophecy — by 
which  is  mainly  intended  impassioned  moral  teaching,  which  insists  on  the  cer- 
tain vindication  of  great  principles  by  the  issue  of  events  overruled  by  God — 
runs  all  through  the  Bible.  "  As  we  watch  the  weaving  of  the  web  (of  Hebrew 
life)  we  endeavour  to  trace  through  it  the  more  conspicuous  threads.  Long 
time  the  eye  follows  the  crimson  :  it  disappears  at  length ;  but  the  golden 
thread  of  sacred  prophecy  stretches  to  the  end."'  The  constant  references  to 
the  prophets  in  the  New  Testament,8  the  marked  approval  of  their  teaching  by 
our  Lord,4  his  express  statement  that  they  prophesied  of  him,6  give  the  Books  of 
the  Prophets  an  immense  importance. 

To  foretell  was  one  of  the  functions,  but  was  not  the  main  function,  of  the 
Prophets.  A  mere  glance  at  their  writings  is  sufficient  to  show  that  they  were 
the  moral  and  spiritual  teachers  of  the  people,  the  interpreters  of  God's  will, 
the  forthtellers  of  Divine  truth,  far  more  than  the  foretellers  of  future  circum- 
stances. The  horizon  of  their  vision  indeed,  and  especially  its  Messianic  hope- 
extended  even  to  the  distant  future ;  but  it  was  not  like  the  view  of  a  plain  out, 
stretched  before  them,  but  like  that  of  a  mountain  chain,  towering  range  after 
range  and  peak  beyond  peak  to  the  crowning  glory  of  one  eternal  summit — the 
view  of  aeon  after  aeon,  all  tending  to  the  one  far-off  Divine  event — the  kingdom 
of  God  and  of  his  Christ.  The  Hebrew  Prophets  were  patriots,  statesmen,  re- 
formers, leaders  of  the  people. 

"  In  them  ia  plainest  taught  and  easiest  learnt 
What  makes  a  nation  happy  and  keeps  it  so, 
What  ruins  kingdoms  and  lays  cities  flat." ' 

Their  great  characteristics — those  which  give  them  such  an  eternal  value — are 
their  heroic  faith,  their  unquenchable  hope,  their  inflexible  righteousness,  the 
manner  in  which  they  rose  superior  to  the  petty  ritualisms  of  sacerdotal  formal- 
ism, and  made  holiness  the  test  of  sincerity  in  ■worship.'    All  who  would  escape 

the  average — all  who  would  feel  the  sacred  ness  of  enthusiasm  and  self-sacrifice 

must  learn  of  them.  In  them,  as  in  the  moral  truths  which  they  enunciated, 
they  were  the  true  forerunners  of  him  of  whom  they  prophesied ;  and  he  has 
given  his  eternal  sanction  to  the  truths  which  they  have  taught  us  :  "  to  live 
and  to  struggle ;  to  believe  with  immovable  firmness ;  to  hope  even  when  all  is 
dark  around  us  j  to  trust  the  voice  of  God  in  our  inmost  consciousness ;  to  speak 
with  boldness  and  with  power."  • 

5.  It  only  remains  to  touch  for  one  moment  on  what  may  be  called  the  phil- 
osophic books  of  Scripture.    It  has  been  a  subject  of  much  discussion  whether 

1  Ecclus.  xlvii.  8.         *  Kuenen,  '  The  Prophets.'  *  Especially  in  Matthew's  GospeL 

*  Matt  ix.  13,  &o.        «  Lnke  xxIt.  46.  •  Milton, « Paradise  Begained.' 

'  HoMft  rt  «,  ka.         »  Kuenen,  '  The  Propheti,'  ad  Jin. 


GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.  xvii 


the  Jews  could  be  said  to  hare  possessed  a  philosophy  or  not,  and  it  has  been 
differently  decided  by  different  inquirers.  But  we  may  venture  to  give  the 
name  of  philosophic  books  to  those  which  specially  discuss  the  perplexed  pro- 
blems of  human  existence.  Of  these  the  three  chief  are  the  Books  of  Job,  Pro- 
verbs, and  Ecclesiastes.  All  three  might  be  also  classed  under  the  poetic  books 
of  Scripture,  and  the  problems  with  which  they  deal  are  also  touched  on  in 
several  of  the  Psalms ; '  but  they  belong  more  directly  to  that  practical  wisdom 
which  the  Hebrews  called  chokmah. 

a.  The  Book  of  Proverbs  contains  many  of  the  most  valuable  results  of  human 
experience  put  into  a  terse,  striking,  and  often  antithetic  form.  Its  earlier  and 
more  consecutive  chapters  (i. — ix.)  are  strikingly  beautiful,  and  are  aglow  with 
the  enthusiasm  of  lofty  thought  In  the  two  next  sections  (chs.  x — xxiv.,  and 
xxv. — xxix.)  the  form  is  more  apothegmatic,  and  the  maxims,  especially  in  the 
earlier  division,  move  at  times  on  the  lower  level  of  prudential  advice.  The 
thirtieth  chapter  is  ascribed  to  the  unknown  Agur,  son  of  Jakeh,  and  the  thirty- 
first  to  King  Lemuel,  respecting  whom  we  have  nothing-  but  conjecture.  The 
book  concludes  with  the  famous  eulogy  on  the  virtuous  woman,  which,  like 
some  of  the  later  Psalms,2  is  written  in  the  form  of  an  acrostic — a  sure  sign  that, 
however  beautiful,  it  belongs  to  the  less  spontaneous  and  impassioned  order  of 
poetry.  But  the  whole  book  in  its  diversified  elements  is  a  noble  product  of 
Hebrew  thought,  and  furnishes  us  with  a  mine  of  instructive  teaching  for  all 
classes,  but  especially  for  the  young. 

p.  The  Book  of  Ecclesiastes  is  one  of  the  most  singular  books  of  the  canon, 
and  one  which  presents  us  with  problems  which  have  not  yet  been  finally  solved. 
It  is  invaluable  as  the  faithful  record  and  confession  of  a  life  which  had  been 
taught  by  evil  that  good  is  best ;  of  a  career  which  had  struggled  through  lux- 
ury, sensuality,  cynicism,  and  speculative  despair  into  a  firm  conviction  that  to 
fear  God  and  keep  his  commandments  was  the  whole  duty  of  man. 

•y.  Lastly,  in  the  Book  of  Job,  whatever  may  be  the  ultimate  conclusion  as  to 
its  date,  authorship,  and  unity,  we  have  a  drama  of  inexhaustible  interest,  and 
one  which  has  attracted  the  attention  of  many  of  the  greatest  thinkers,  ancient 
and  modern.  The  problem  of  the  sufferings  of  the  good  does  not  indeed  find 
in  this  book  its  final  solution,  for  many  of  the  best  and  noblest  of  mankind  have 
not  been  restored,  as  Job  was,  to  their  old  prosperity,  but  have  died  in  anguish, 
loneliness,  and  apparent  failure.  But  to  the  Book  of  Job  we  owe,  among  many 
other  lessons,  the  most  splendid  vindication  ever  written  of  innocence  against 
the  uncharitable  suspicion  of  those  who  see  it  overwhelmed  with  suffering,  and 
the  most  majestic  description  of  that  power  and  majesty  and  love  of  God  which 
are  displayed  in  the  works  of  his  hands,  and  which  make  us  involuntarily  ex 
claim  that  "though  he  slay  us,  yet  will  we  trust  in  him." 

In  the  celebrated  chapel  of  King's  College,  Cambridge,  the  huge  windows  0. 
stained  glass  are  filled  on  one  side  with  subjects  from  the  Old  Testament,  and 
on  the  other  with  subjects  from  the  New  ;  and  often  on  summer  days  the  stu 
dent  who  walks  on  one  side  may  see  the  windows  nearest  to  him  blazing  with 
sunlight  which  stream  through  them  from  the  other  side.  "  Whenever,"  says 
an  ingenious  writer,  "  I  thus  saw  the  g'ospel  story  shining  through  the  Old  Testa- 
ment story,  I  thought  that  it  was  a  figure  of  what  we  see  in  the  Bible."  And  so 
in  truth  it  is.  Both  in  the  Old  and  the  New  Testament  we  have  type  and  sym- 
bol, narrative  and  precept,  parable  and  miracle  ;  but  the  sunlight,  which  can 
alone  interpret  and  glorify  their  highest  meaning,  must  come  from  him  who  13 

1  Ps.  lxxiii.  3,  &c  *  S.  g.  Pa.  xxv.,  xxxiv.,  xxxvii.,  cxL,  exit,  err,  exh 

GENESIS.  « 


xvHi         GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT. 

the  light  of  the  world  and  the  Sun  of  righteousness.  It  can  only  come  from 
God  in  Christ ;  and  he  who  would  understand  and  interpret  Scripture  duly  to 
the  enlightenment  and  salvation  of  men  must  often  breathe  the  prayer  of  one 
of  the  greatest  of  earthly  thinkers :  "  To  God  the  Father,  God  the  Word,  God 
the  Spirit  we  pour  forth  most  humble  and  hearty  supplications  that  he,  remem- 
bering the  calamities  of  mankind,  and  the  pilgrimage  of  this  our  life,  in  which 
we  wear  out  days  few  and  evil,  would  please  to  open  to  us  new  refreshments 
out  of  the  fountain  of  his  goodness  for  the  alleviating  of  our  miseries.  This 
also  we  humbly  and  earnestly  beg,  that  human  things  may  not  prejudice  such 
as  are  Divine  ;  neither  that  from  the  unlocking  of  the  gates  of  sense  and  the 
kindling  of  a  greater  natural  light  anything  of  incredulity  or  intellectual 
might  may  arise  in  our  minds  towards  Divine  mysteries  ;  but  rather  that  by 
our  minds  thoroughly  cleansed  and  purged  from  fancy  and  vanities,  and  yet 
subject  and  perfectly  given  up  to  the  Divine  oracles,  there  may  be  given  unto 
faith  such  things  as  are  faith's."  ' 

>  Lord  Bacon,  '  The  Student's  Prtytr.' 


THE  LEADING  PRINCIPLES  OF  THE 


IDibitte  %ato  ag  mantfegteD  in  ttye  pentateuc^ 


BY  THE 


RIGHT  REV.  H.   COTTERILL,   D.D.,  BISHOP  OP  EDINBURGH. 


1.  The  Pbntatbttch,  or  "  Fivefold  Book,"  is  the  name,  derived  from  the  Greek 
(ij  irevTdTOJxos,  se.  pcpXos),  of  that  collection  of  the  writings  of  Moses  which  forms 
the  first  part  of  the  Scriptures  of  the  Old  Testament.  The  titles  of  the  several  books 
are  also  of  Greek  origin,  and  were  given  them  by  the  LXX.  translators.  In  the 
Hebrew  the  Pentateuch  forms  one  volume,  known  to  the  Jews  of  all  ages  as  "  the 
Law,"  (Torah);  the  separate  books  being  divisions  or  parts  of  "the  Torah,"  merely 
distinguished  by  the  first  or  some  important  word  in  the  opening  sentence  of  each 
division.  At  the  close  of  the  Pentateuch  are  the  words,  "Here  end  the  five  fifth- 
parts  of  the  Law  "  (chamishah  ehomeshe  Torah).  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  in  our 
versions  of  the  Bible  this  unity  of  "  The  Law  "  is  somewhat  obscured,  by  all  notice 
of  that  significant  name,  common  to  all  the  five  parts,  being  omitted.  If  it  were 
retained,  a  very  interesting  and  instructive  parallelism  in  the  structure  of  the  two 
Testaments  would  be  more  obvious  than  it  now  is.  It  would  be  apparent  that  the 
Book  of  "  the  Law  "  holds  the  same  relation  to  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures  as  the 
four  Gospels  bear  to  the  New.  In  each  case  the  first  portion  of  the  sacred  volume 
is  a  part  complete  in  itself,  the  basis  of  the  covenant  or  Divine  economy,  and  bear- 
ing its  characteristic  name  :  "the  Law  "  being  the  exponent  of  the  relations  between 
God  and  man  by  nature,  "the  Gospel"  of  those  which  are  constituted  in  the 
incarnate  Son.  Similarly,  the  historical  books  of  the  Old  Testament,  describing  the 
iiistory  of  the  chosen  people  from  the  giving  of  the  law  till  the  spirit  of  prophecy 
ceased,  have  their  parallel  in  the  brief  history  of  the  Church  of  Christ  in  the  Acts 
of  the  Apostles ;  while  the  prophetical  books  of  the  Old  Testament,  being  not  merely 
predictions  of  future  events,  but  also  inspired  expositions  of  the  moral  and  spiritual 
principles  of  the  Law,  correspond  to  the  Apostolic  Epistles  and  the  Apocalypse,  which 
are  in  both  cases  a  revelation  of  God  by  his  Spirit  in  the  spirit  of  man. 

2.  The  purpose  of  this  Introduction  is  to  investigate  the  distinctive  character  of 
the  Pentateuch  as  containing  what,  throughout  the  Scriptures  both  of  the  Old  and 
of  the  New  Testament,  is  called  "  the  law,"  or  the  "law  of  Jehovah."  The  profound 
importance  not  only  to  Christian  theology,  but  to  all  true  religion,  of  a  definite 
and  comprehensive  knowledge  of  this  subject  must  be  admitted  by  every  one  who 
receives  Holy  Scripture  as  the  word  of  God  and  the  rule  of  faith  and  practice.     The 

PENTATEUCH.  <i 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PENTATEUCH. 


Psalm '  with  which  the  Book  of  Psalms  commences,  and  which  appears  to  be,  as 
Jerome  says,  "  the  preface  of  the  Holy  Spirit "  to  the  whole  book,  represents  the  man 
on  whom  God  pronounces  blessings  as  one  whose  "delight  is  in  the  law  of  Jehovah, 
and  in  his  law  doth  he  meditate  day  and  night;"  In  other  psalms  the  writers  describe 
the  Torah — the  word  being  varied  by  nearly  equivalent  expressions,  rendered  "  com- 
mandments," "statutes,"  "judgments,"  "testimonies,"  and  the  like,  in  our  English 
version — as  the  source  of  all  righteousness,  truth,  and  peace.  We  are  so  accustomed 
to  read  the  Psalms  in  the  light  of  our  own  Christian  knowledge,  that  we  are  apt  to 
forget  that,  to  the  pious  Israelite,  the  law  meant  that  which  had  been  revealed 
through  Moses  and  was  contained  in  the  Pentateuch.  It  is  of  this  also  that  the 
Apostle  Paul  is  speaking  when  he  says-  that  "the  law  is  holy,  and  the  com- 
mandment holy,  and  just,  and  good ;"  and  again  (in  almost  the  very  words  of  the 
Psalmist),  "  I  delight  in  the  law  of  God  after  the  inward  man."8 

3.  That  in  this  view  of  "the  law,"  as  the  revelation  to  man  of  the  mind  of  God, 
there  is  no  difference  between  the  Christian  and  the  Israelite,  except  that  the  former 
possesses  a  key  to  its  interpretation  which  the  other  had  not,  is  sufficiently  evident 
from  Christ's  own  teaching.  The  force  of  our  Lord's  words  in  the  Sermon  on  the 
Mount4  is  hardly  appreciated  as  it  ought  to  be  in  much  of  the  popular  theology  of 
the  present  day.  "  Think  not,"  he  says,  "  that  I  am  come  to  destroy  the  law,  and 
the  prophets ;  I  am  not  come  to  destroy,  but  to  fulfil.  For  verily  I  say  unto  you, 
Till  heaven  and  earth  pass,  one  jot  or  one  tittle  "  (as  we  might  say  "  one  dotting  of  an 
i  or  crossing  of  a  t")  "shall  in  no  wise  pass  from  the  law,  until  all  be  fulfilled."5 
That  the  meaning  of  this  cannot  be  merely,  as  some  suppose,  that  Christ  came  to 
fulfil  the  law  in  his  own  person  by  his  life  and  death ;  and  that  he  was  not  speaking, 
as  others  erroneously  imagine,  only  of  the  moral  law  of  the  ten  commandments, 
but  that  the  words  comprehend  all  that  is  included  in  the  Torah,  and  that  the  fulfil- 
ment of  the  law  is  a  fulfilment  in  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  and  by  his  disciples,  as 
well  as  by  our  Lord  himself,  is  evident  from  the  words  that  follow  :  "  Whosoever 
therefore  shall  break  one  of  these  least  commandments"  (such  as  may  seem,  in 
comparison  with  "the  weightier  matters  of  the  law,  justice,  mercy,  and  faith," 6  but 
as  tcora  iv  rj  |i£a  KepaCa)  "  and  shall  teach  men  so,  he  shall  be  called  least '  in  the  king- 
dom of  heaven :  but  whosoever  shall  do  and  teach  them,  the  same  shall  be  called 
great  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  Our  Lord  clearly  indicates  by  this  language  that 
there  would  be  a  danger  in  his  Church  of  Christians  neglecting,  and  teaching  others 
to  neglect,  the  secondary  and  subordinate  parts  of  the  law.  It  is  of  course  certain, 
from  his  own  exposition  of  the  law,  that  this  fulfilment  is  not,  as  scribes  and 
Pharisees  supposed,  in  the  letter,  the  punctilious  observance  of  which,  even  in  the 
iispensation  in  which  that  letter  was  law,  often  indicated  an  ignorance  of  the  real 
substance  of  the  law.  The  exact  fulfilment  required  must  be  one  in  spirit  and  in 
;ruth,  such  as  somethnes  under  the  law,  and  much  more  under  the  gospel,  would 
supersede 8  the  letter.  But  these  words  of  our  Divine  Master,  so  solemnly  and  em- 
phatically enunciated  at  the  commencement  of  his  ministry,  undoubtedly  ought  to 
warn  us  all,  and  especially  those  whose  office  it  is  to  "teach"  in  the  kingdom  of 


■  Ps.  i.  2.  •  Rom.  vfl.  12.  «  Ibid.  ver.  22.  «  Matt.  v.  17—19. 

6  The  words  |W!  Sk  iravra  -yeiojTai  are  strictly  parallel  to  the  previous  clause,  ««  «» 
r«(x'W)j  6  oiJpai/o'i  Kai  i)  yri,  and  have  the  same  meaning;  but  the  age  which  terminates  in 
leaven  and  earth  passing  away  is  also  that  in  which  all  things  written  in  the  law  shall  be 
"ulfilled,  as  is  implied  by  the  English  version. 

•Matt  xxiii.  23.  Observe,  as  illustrating  Christ's  words  in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount 
he  concluding  words  of  this  verse :  T«5,«  «„  „0^a,  «4„t,«  ^  a$l<K(U. 

1  Hardly  lite  least,  as  in  the  English  version ;  rather  one  in  the  class  of  the  least 

8  Matt.  xii.  1—7 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PENTATEUCH. 


Christ,  that  very  serious  errors,  even  among  Chose  who  are  zealous  for  the  "  great 
things  of  God's  law,"  may  arise  from  the  habit  of  treating  the  law  given  by  Moses 
cursorily  and  superficially,  as  hardly  necessary  to  us  in  the  clearer  light  of  the  gospel. 
They  remind  us  that  much,  which  to  the  careless  student  seems  utterly  insignificant, 
may  be.  found,  if  studied  reverently  as  part  of  a  divine  revelation,  and  so  as  to  discern 
the  underlying  spirit,  to  be  profitable  to  make  the  man  of  God  perfect,  thoroughly 
furnished  unto  all  good  works.  Is  it  not  possible  that  many  of  our  theological  and 
ecclesiastical  differences  might  disappear,  if  the  law  of  the  Lord  were  more  generally, 
studied  among  Christians  in  such  a  spirit,  and  if  its  teachings  in  lesser  matters  were 
not  set  aside,  as  they  are  too  often,  by  the  feeling  that  they  must  be  unsuitable  for 
Christian  thought  and  for  the  gospel  dispensation  1  St.  Paul,  we  know,  drew  an  infer- 
ence as  to  the  will  of  God  in  respect  to  the  support  of  the  ministry  in  Christ's  Church 
from  the  spirit  of  "  one  of  these  least  commandments  :"  "  Thou  shalt  not  muzzle  the 
mouth  of  the  ox  that  treadeth  out  the  corn."  '  Might  not  the  careful  investigation  of 
other  commandments  and  ordinances '  of  the  law — if  only  we  believed,  as  our  Lord 
taught,  that  the  spirit  and  animating  principle  of  all  these  without  exception  is  for  all 
ages  and  circumstances  to  the  end  of  time — lead  to  the  solution  of  many  controverted 
questions,  and  thus  direct  Christians  to  the  fulfilment  of  that  great  intercessory  prayer 
of  our  Redeemer  for  all  that  should  believe  on  him :  "  That  they  all  may  be  one  ;  as 
thou,  Father,  art  in  me,  and  I  in  thee,  that  they  also  may  be  one  in  us :  that  the 
world  may  believe  that  thou  hast  sent  me." 8  In  the  examination  of  the  Tor  ah  in  this 
introduction  it  will  of  course  be  impossible  to  do  more  than  illustrate  the  principles 
of  interpretation,  to  which  our  Lord's  words  point,  in  some  of  the  more  obvious 
instances.  But  the  necessity  for  reverence,  patience,  and  spiritual  understanding 
which  his  warning  implies  may  well  suggest  the  prayerof  the  Psalmist :  "Open  thou 
mine  eyes,  that  I  may  behold  wondrous  things  out  of  thy  law."4 

4.  Besides  the  express  teaching  of  the  Divine  Founder  of  our  faith,  there  is  one 
very  significant  fact  in  the  history  of  Christianity  which  of  itself  is  sufficient  to 
prove  the  paramount  importance,  to  a  complete  apprehension  of  the  principles  of 
Christ's  kingdom,  of  exact  and  definite  knowledge  on  the  subject  of  "the  law."  Inad- 
dition  to  the  twelve  apostles,  who  were  associated  with  Jesus  Christ  dining  his  earthly 
ministry,  and  whose  office  it  was  to  give  testimony  as  eye-witnesses  to  those  facts 
which  are  the  objects  of  our  faith  and  the  substance  of  his  gospel,6  and  who  are  thus, 
next  to  Christ  himself,  the  very  foundation-stones  of  the  Church,  another  apostle 
was  subsequently  raised  up,  and  specially  commissioned  and  endowed  for  an  office 
supplementary  to  theirs.  The  man  selected  for  this  work  was  one  who  from  his 
youth  up  had  been  trained  in  the  knowledge  of  the  Torah,  and  of  all  the  traditions 
of  his  nation.  He  says  of  himself  that  he  had  made  progress  in  this  learning  above 
many  of  those  of  his  own  age ;  he  was  exceeding  zealous  for  the  law,  and  "touching 
the  righteousness  which  is  in  the  law,"  so  far  as  its  letter  was  concerned,  he  was 
"blameless."  It  may,  however,  seem  strange  that  such  training  should  be  any  pre- 
paration for  that  peculiar  sphere  of  thought  and  action  to  which  the  Apostle  Paul 
was  called,  namely,  to  expound  to  Jews  and  Gentiles  those  spiritual  truths  which, 
under  the  guidance  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  he  derived  from  the  life  and  death  and 
resurrection  of  the  Son  of  God  in  our  nature.  St.  Paul,  in  fact,  held  somewhat  the 
same  relation  to  the  twelve  as  in  the  Old  Testament  "the  prophets"  held  to  Moses 
and  "the  law."  But  we  are  able  to  understand  the  value  and  meaning  of  St.  Paul's 
preparation  for  his  special  work  when  we  find  that  his  reasonings  on  these  spiritual 

'  1  Cor.  ix.  9,  10;  1  Tim.  v.  18.  »  Cf.  1  Coi.  ix.  18. 

•  John  xvii.  21.  '  Pa.  cxix.  18. 

•  Of.  in  proof  of  this  1  Cor.  xv.  1—7. 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PENTATEUCH. 


truths  are  all  based  ori  thoso  profound  relations  between  the  law  and  the  gospel, 
which  he  discusses  so  fully  and  exactly  in  his  Epistles  to  the  Galatians  and  the 
Romans.  And  it  must  be  remembered  that  while  no  one  so  clearly  exhibits  the  law. 
in  its  aspect  af  law,  as  the  opposite  pole  to  the  gospel,  yet  it  is  St.  Paul,  the  assertor 
of  Christian  liberty  against  the  bondage  of  law,  who  says,  as  his  Divine  Master  said 
in  other  words,  "  Do  we  then  make  void  the  law  through  faith  1  God  forbid :  yea,  we 
establish  the  law."  1  St.  Peter  says  of  the  epistles  of  his  brother  apostle,  that  in  them 
tnere  are  many  things  "  hard  to  be  understood,  which  they  that  are  unlearned  (d|ia6eis) 
and  unstable  wrest  to  their  own  destruction."5  And  undoubtedly  much  of  the  mis- 
understanding and  imperfect  apprehension  of  these  epistles,  which  has  been  prevalent 
in  all  ages  of  the  Church,  has  been  due  to  vague  and  inexact  notions  as  to  the  Divine 
law.  Certainly,  without  distinct  conceptions  and  definite  knowledge  on  this  im. 
portant  subject,  the  foundations  not  only  of  Christian  ethics,  but  of  Christian 
doctrine,  can  be  very  insufficiently  laid. 

5.  As  the  argument  in  this  Introduction  is  purely  theological,  or,  more  strictly, 
theosophical, — if  a  much-abused  term  may  be  used  in  its  true  and  proper  sense  of 
that  which  treats  of  the  philosophy  of  religion,— it  is  neither  necessary  nor  expedient, 
to  encumber  it  with  any  critical  questions,  except  those  which  may  be  required  for 
illustration  of  the  argument.  That  the  Pentateuch  is  what  it  claims  to  be,  that  is 
of  Mosaic  origin,3  and  given  by  inspiration  of  God,  is  therefore  assumed.  It  is 
sufficient  for  our  purpose  that  it  is  recognised  as  such  in  other  writings  of  the  Old 
Testament,  and  was  so  received  by  Christ  himself  and  his  apostles,  and  is  therefore 
so  accepted  by  his  Church.  The  book  was,  according  to  the  account  it  gives  of 
itself,  in  the  first  instance  compiled  and  written  out  by  Moses  for»the  use  of  that 
nation  of  Israel,  which,  as  is  recorded  in  this  Book  of  the  Law,  God  had  chosen 
out  of  all  nations  of  the  earth  to  be  in  covenant  with  himself.  It  was  committed 
to  the  charge  of  the  priesthood,  as  the  "book  of  the  covenant,"  to  be  preserved  by 
the  side  of  the  ark  of  the  covenant ;  and  portions  of  it  were  to  be  read  publicly  to 
the  people  every  seventh  year,  at  one  of  their  most  solemn  festivals,  as  a  testimony 
of  the  covenant  between  God  and  the  nation.4  This  was  the  primary  purpose  of 
the  Torah,  to  be  the  Divine  standard  of  a  national  religion  ;  but,  as  we  have  already 
concluded  from  our  Lord's  teaching  and  from  the  office  of  St.  Paul,  it  was  written 
not  for  one  nation  only,  but  for  mankind.  Indeed  we  might  draw  the  same  con- 
clusion from  the  book  itself,  in  which  the  history  of  the  chosen  nation  is  but  an 
episode  in  the  history  of  man,  all  whose  families  were  ultimately  to  receive  the 
blessings  of  the  seed  of  Abraham.  How  far  particular  laws  given  to  the  nation  of 
Israel  were  given  as  suitable  to  their  circumstances  and  for  that  age,  and  how  far 
they  are  of  universal  obligation,  can  on.y  be  ascertained  when  the  principles  on 
which  they  were  founded  are  determined.  And,  further,  in  what  sense  any  of  these, 
which  were  law  in  the  fullest  sense  under  the  covenant  of  law,  are  law  under  a 
higher  and  better  covenant,  can  only  he  determined  through  that  knowledge  of  the 
second  covenant,  with  which  the  New  Testament  supplies  us. 

6.  For  it  must  be  observed  here  that  there  is  an  ambiguity  in  the  use  of  the  term 
"law"  which  causes  much  confusion  at  times,  and  which  it  will  be  necessary  to 
preclude  in  our  present  argument.  The  definitions  of  law  which  are  sometimes 
given  are  far  too  general  and  comprehensive  to  be  of  any  value  for  this  investi- 


1  Rom.  hi.  81.  '  2  Pet.  iii.  16. 

8  Of  course  this  does  not  imply  either  that  Moses  did  not  moke  use  of  more  ancient  docu- 
ments, or  that  the  book  was  not  revised  by  Ezra  or  others  who  had  authority. 
*  Deut  xxxi.  9—18. 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PENTATEUCH. 


gation.  For  example,  Hooker,1  in  openiDg  his  argument  on  law,  defines  it  thus : 
"That  which  doth  assign  unto  each  thing  the  kind,  that  which  doth  moderate 
the  force  and  power,  that  which  doth  appoint  the  form  and  measure,  of  working,  the 
same  we  term  a  law."  And  he  distinguishes  four  kinds  of  law :  (1)  "  The  law 
which  God  from  before  the  beginning  hath  set  for  himself;"  (2)  "the  law  which 
natural  agents  have  given  them  to  observe;''  (3)  "the  law  which  angels  do  work 
by  ;"  (4)  "  the  law  whereby  man  is  in  his  actions  directed  to  the  imitation  of  God." 
There  are  objections  both  to  the  definition  and  to  the  distinctions,  which  it  is 
unnecessary  to  discuss ;  but  for  our  argument,  the  chief  objection  is  that  the  one 
most  important  distinction  is  not  sufficiently  marked,  viz.  the  difference  between 
such  laws  as  those  which  we  call  laws  of  nature — by  which  is  meant  the  order 
in  which  certain  physical  events  succeed  one  another  as  sequences  of  cause  and 
effect — and  such  laws  as  those  of  the  State,  which  originate  in  the  authority  of 
the  lawgiver  and  are  enforced  by  the  punishment  of  the  transgressor.  The  latter 
are  laws  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  word,  as  ordinarily  understood  in  human  language. 
The  Hebrew  word  Torah  in  Holy  Scripture  seems  hardly  ever  to  be  used  in  any  other 
sense  than  as  a  direction  to  a  rational  being,2  this  involving  a  prohibition  of  the 
contrary.8  The  Greek  word  v6|iot  is  sometimes  used  in  a  wider  sense,  as  the  English 
"law  "  is ;  e.  g.  St.  Paul  speaks  of  the  "  law  of  the  spirit  of  life,"  and  the  "law  of  sin,'' 
where  he  means  not  any  external  direction,  but  a  principle  of  causation  ;  but  these 
are  exceptions  both  to  the  Scriptural  usage  of  the  word  (which  is  ordinarily  the 
equivalent  of  Torah),  and  to  the  classical  usage,  in  which  vrfpos,  when  not  law  in  its 
strict  sense,  is  the  opposite  of  <|>vcris.  As,  however,  the  argument  of  this  introduction 
will  be  analytical  and  not  synthetical,  it  is  unnecessary  to  discuss  further  at  present 
the  exact  force  of  the  term,  because  its  complete  meaning  must  be  gathered  from 
that  portion  of  Holy  Scripture  which  is  emphatically  and  distinctively  "  the  Law." 

Law  before  the  Fall. 

7.  For  the  origin  of  Divine  law,  both  as  regards  those  fundamental  principles  of 
the  religious  and  moral  duty  of  man  of  which  ' '  the  law  "  is  the  formal  exponent,  and 
in  respect  of  the  reasons  which  make  law,  in  its  strict  sense,  necessary  for  man  as 
man,  we  must  look  to  that  history  of  creation  and  of  man's  original  state  which  is 
contained  in  the  first  three  chapters  of  the  Book  of  Genesis.  That  these  principles  and 
reasons  are  to  be  found  there,  or  must  be  concluded  from  the  history,  will  very 
clearly  appear  when  we  examine  it.  Indeed,  the  fact  that  the  Torah  begins  with  this 
history  sufficiently  indicates  that  the  law  given  by  God  to  man  has  its  origin  in  and 
with  man's  own  origin.  In  the  law  itself,  the  fourth  of  the  Sinaitic  commandments 
points  expressly  to  that  beginning  of  man's  history  as  its  own  source  and  reason. 
That  the  connection  of  Divine  law  with  man's  creation-is  generally  assumed,  instead 
of  being  expressly  enunciated,  in  the  law  given  by  Moses,  is  accounted  for  when  we 
consider  (1)  that  this  law  was  primarily  a  national  covenant,  and  therefore  in  it  the 
relations  of  God  with  his  chosen  people  have  special  prominence  ;  and  (2)  that  law 
as  law  is  based  on  authority,  not  on  reasons,  and  all  that  would  be  needed  as  the 
basis  of  the  law  was  the  assertion  of  the  authority  of  Jehovah  as  God  of  the  whole 
earth,  which  truth  was  kept  continually  before  the  mind  of  the  nation  in  all  the 

1  'Eccles.  Pol.,' I.  ii.  2. 

'  The  expression  in  Prov.  xxxi.  26,  "  In  her  tongue  is  the  law  of  kindness,"  is  probably 
no  exception,  as  its  meaning  is  that  her  commands  to  her  household  are  given  with  kindness, 
even  as  God's  law  is  the  law  of  love. 

8  In  reference  to  inanimate  nature  the  word  chog  is  used  (of.  Job  xxviii.  26 ;  Ps.  cxlviii. 
6;  Prov.  xiii.  29;  Jer.  v.  22). 


vi  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PENTATEUCH. 


Mosaic  teaching.  When  we  pass  to  the  New  Testament  we  find  that  Christ  more 
than  once  refers  expressly  to  the  primal  state  of  man  as  supplying  the  standard  by 
which  the  law  itself  must  be  interpreted.  These  cases  we  shall  examine  hereafter 
St.  Paul  and  other  apostolic  writers  not  unfrequently  base  duties  which  man  owes, 
both  to  God  and  in  the  mutual  relations  of  human  life,  not  on  any  positive  law  or  on 
responsibilities  formed  by  redemption,  but  on  those  principles,  antecedent  to  all  law, 
which  are  involved  in  creation  and  its  teachings.1  But  even  without  such  authority  it 
would  be  impossible  not  to  conclude  that  a  true  history  of  man's  origin  must  include 
and  involve  the  fundamental  principles  of  his  duty  both  to  God  and  to  his  neighbour 
For  these  duties  must  be  founded  on  the  relations  between  God  and  man,  and 
between  man  and  man.  And  whatever  relations  might  be  formed,  and  responsibilities 
arise  out  of  these  relations,  during  the  subsequent  history  of  mankind,  those  which 
are  involved  in  his  origin  must  he  primary,  and  all  that  are  subsequently  developed 
must  have  their  basis  in  them. 

8.  (I.)  It  is  evident,  for  example,  that  the  first  element  in  Gods  relation  to  us, 
the  foundation  of  his  universal  and  absolute  authority,  is  that  which  the  very 
first  sentence  of  the  book  of  the  law  expresses :  "In  the  beginning  God  created  the 
heavens  and  the  earth."  The  eternity  of  God,  his  almighty  power,  his  infinite 
superiority  to  all  things  created,  are  all  revealed  in  those  few  words.  In  the  rest  of 
the  first  chapter  of  Genesis  the  process  of  the  creation  by  the  will  and  word  and 
spirit  of  God  is  described  in  language  which  is  necessarily  symbolical  and  ideal, 
because  no  other  language  could  represent  the  operations  of  the  eternal  and  infinite 
God.  It  was  not,  we  are  there  taught,  by  a  solitary  and  immediate  exercise  of 
power  that  the  universe  assumed  the  form  which  we  now  behold.  Through  suc- 
cessive periods  of  the  creative  energy  of  God,  and  of  the  expression  of  the  Divine 
mind,  gradually  from  the  dark  and  formless  void,  in  due  order  and  in  connected 
sequences,  all  the  manifold  existences  of  the  universe,  the  forms  of  dead  matter, 
living  organisms,  vegetable  and  animal,  are  evolved  after  their  several  kinds.  All 
the  truths  as  to  the  being  of  God  on  which  his  law  is  founded,  are  implied  in  this 
work  of  creation.  Nothing  in  heaven  or  earth  is  self-existent  and  eternal  but  God 
only.  All  being  and  all  personality  are  derived  from  God  and  subsist  in  God. 
Nature  is  but  the  effect  of  which  he  is  the  cause.  His  unity  is  manifested  in  the 
unity  and  continuity  of  creation  from  its  beginning  to  its  consummation  ;  his  reason 
in  its  order  and  in  the  harmony  and  mutual  adaptations  of  its  infinitely  varied  parts ; 
his  Divine  power  and  energy  in  the  causation  through  which  this  universal  order  has 
been  developed.  Another  general  conclusion  from  creation  is  specially  indicated  by 
St.  Paul  as  antecedent  to  all  law,  being  manifested  (he  says)  to  man  in  God's  visible 
works  ever  since  creation,1  viz.  that  he,  being  eternal  and  of  infinite  power,  must 
be  one  who  cannot  be  represented  by  any  material  form,  so  that  idolatry,  no  less  than 
polytheism,  is  a  contradiction  of  his  being. 

9.  (II.)  But  no  less  essential  to  the  foundation  of  man's  duty  both  to  God  and  to 
his  neighbour, — essential  indeed  as  being  the  reason  why  there  can  be  any  such  thing 
as  religion  and  morality,— is  that  relation  of  man  to  God  which  was  established  in  the 
origin  of  the  human  race.  Of  all  this  marvellous  work,  the  creation  of  man  is  the 
climax  and  consummation.  In  the  sublime  representation  given  in  the  sacred  record, 
we  ascend  from  a  state  of  chaos,  through  the  successive  stages  of  the  development  of 
the  universe,  to  man,  for  whom  this  earth  had  been  prepared  as  his  habitation.8    As 

'  Cf.  e.  g.  Acts  xiv.  15,  xvii.  24,  26;  Roni.  i.  19,  20;  1  Cor  xi.  7—9;  1  Tim.  ii.  12—14, 
iv.  3,  4 ;  James  iii.  9. 

avb  KTureuff  K&7/10V,  Koifl.  L  20. 

8  Isa.  xlv.  18. 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PENTATEUCH.  vii 


marking  distinctly  that  man,  in  his  bodily  nature,  is  related  to  the  rest  of  created 
being,  which  has  in  him  its  completion,  the  creation  of  man  has  not  a  day  to  itself; ' 
it  is  not  separated  from  the  creation  of  the  lower  animals  even  so  widely  as  that 
is  from  the  creation  of  the  vegetable  kingdom.  Man  is  reminded  that  he  has, 
in  common  with  other  animals,  a  material  frame  composed  of  the  same  con- 
stituents as  theirs ;  that  his  body  is  but  the  perfection  of  animal  organisation ; 
indeed,  that  in  some  respects  the  very  beasts  of  the  field  are  his  superiors,  if 
he  does  not  realise  his  own  true  position  as  man.  On  this  side  of  man's  nature  lie 
those  dangers  and  temptations  which  are  of  all  the  most  common,  and  to  mankind  in 
general  the  most  powerful.  But  in  the  complete  revelation  of  man's  origin,  his  physical 
relation  to  the  animal  and  material  world  is  far  less  distinctly  marked  than  his 
relation  to  God.  In  his  creation  it  is  no  longer,  "  God  said ;  and  it  was  so  ; "  or, 
"  God  said,  Let  the  earth  bring  forth;  and  it  was'so  ;"  but  "God  said,  Let  us  make 
man  in  our  image,  after  our  likeness."  "  80  God  created  man  in  his  image  ;  in  the 
image  of  God  created  he  him."  The  creation  of  man  therefore  as  one  who,  though 
possessing  an  animal  nature,  is  yet  in  his  entire  being  allied  to  the  infinite  and 
eternal  God,  is  an  act  of  a  different  order  from  that  of  calling  into  existence  the 
phenomena  of  the  visible  universe,  and  the  varied  forms  of  organic  life.  He  who 
is  ushered  on  the -stage  of  created  being  by  so  solemn  a  preparation  is  the  son  of 
God,  the  representative  upon  the  earth  of  the  Creator  himself,  who  commits  to 
him  charge  and  authority  over  all  his  works. 

10.  That  these  remarkable  words,  "  the  image  of  God,"  do  not  mean  only  a 
state  of  spiritual  and  moral  purity, — although  without  doubt  such  must  be  the  initial 
and  normal  state  of  one  thus  created, — we  must  certainly  infer  from  the  fact  that  the 
same  words  are  used  of  man,  after  his  fall  from  this  state  of  purity,  both  in  the  Old 
Testament  and  in  the  New.8  They  undoubtedly  imply  that  man  is  not  like  the  rest 
of  creation,  formed  and  determined  by  his  environments.  He  has  reason  to  judge, 
spirit  to  enlighten  him,  will  to  determine  him,  and  is  therefore  responsible  to  God  for 
his  actions.  He  has  a  personality  which  gives  every  individual  man  personal  rights ; 
he  is  an  end  in  himself,  and  cannot,  like  other  creatures,  be  used  merely  as  means  to 
an  end  ;  his  life  has  a  sacredness  almost  Divine,  and  he  has  a  dignity  and  authority 
resembling  that  of  him  whose  offspring  he  is.8  But  all  these  results  and  conse- 
quences of  man's  state  by  creation  have  been  more  or  less  obscured,  if  not  inter- 
rupted, by  his  fall.  It  is  important,  therefore,  that  we  should  look  beyond  all  the 
indications  of  the  image  of  God  in  man,  whether  in  his  reason  or  his  conscience,  to 
the  fact  itself  of  that  mysterious  relation  between  man  and  his  infinitely  holy  and 
glorious  Creator,  which  was  constituted  by  his  creation  in  the  image  and  likeness  of 
God.  This  relation  is  evidently  the  source — (a)  Of  all  the  duties  which  man  owes 
to  God  of  love,  of  belief,  of  obedience,  and  of  the  imitation  of  God,4  his  heavenly 
Father,  .(b)  Of  duties  which  he  owes  to  his  brother  man  as  being  equally  with  him- 
self, by  his  origin,  a  son  of  God.  Those  rights  of  man  which  are  called  natural,  as 
belonging  equally  to  the  whole  human  race,  and  which  are  sometimes  represented  as 
a  discovery  of  modern  philosophy,  have  no  rational  basis  whatever  except  in  that 
relation  to  God  which  all  men  of  all  nations  and  classes  possess  alike  by  their 


1  Augustin.  '  De  Geneai  Imp.  Lib.'  §  56.  Hie  animadvertenda  quaedam  et  conjunctio,  et 
diseretio  animalium.     Nam  eodem  die  factum  hominem  elicit  quo  bestias. 

8  Gen.  ix.  6 ;  1  Cor.  xi.  7 ;  cf .  James  iii.  9. 

8  Compare  Ps.  lxxxii.  6 :  "  I  have  said,  Ye  are  gods ;  and  all  of  you  are  children  of  the  Most 
High,"  and  our  Lord's  comment  on  this,  John  i.  84 — 36. 

4  Of.  'Hooker's  Fourth  Class  of  Laws,'  §  6,  supra. 


viil  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PENTATEUCH. 


nature,  a  relation,  which  "  the  law  "  given  by  God  through  Moses  first  expressly 
revealed. 

11.  (III.)  But  the  history  of  creation  supplies  the  foundation  not  only  of  the  rela- 
tions between  God  and  man,  and  of  each  man  with  every  other  individual  of  the  human 
race,  but  also  of  the  social  relations  of  the  various  members  of  the  human  family. 
For  there  is  another  peculiarity-  in  the  account  of  man's  creation  which  we  might 
have  overlooked,  had  not  Christ  himself  in  his  teaching  specially  directed  attention 
to  its  force  and  meaning.1  When  a  question  was  asked  him  on  the  subject  of  mar- 
riage, he  answered,  "  Have  ye  not  read,  that  he  who  made  them  at  the  beginning 
made  them  male  and  female?  "  *  This  expression  is  not  used,  it  must  be  observed,  in 
describing  the  creation  of  animals.  The  force  of  the  words  is  explained  in  that  full 
description  of  some  parts  of  the  work  of  creation  which  is  given  in  the  second  chapter 
of  Genesis.*  From  this  we  learn  that  "Adam  was  first  formed,  then  Eve"  ;  that  "  the 
man  is  not  of  the  woman ;  but  the  woman  of  the  man :  neither  was  the  man  created 
for  the  woman ;  but  the  woman  for  the  man  "  : 4  from  which  the  apostle  Paul  infers 
the  authority  of  man  over  woman.  The  description  given  in  Genesis, — whatever  the 
process  may  have  been  which  is  represented  by  woman  having  been  formed  by  God 
out  of  man, — explains  to  us  why  the  words  quoted  by  our  Lord  have  such  profound 
significance.  The  reality  and  the  force  of  that  relation  between  the  sexes,  of  which 
marriage  is  the  expression,  conld  not  be  taught  by  volumes  of  commandments  and 
precepts  as  they  are  by  this  mystical  but  simple  history  of  the  creation  of  man  and 
woman.  Christ  confirms  the  teaching  of  that  history,  asserting  that  this  original 
unity  is  the  basis  of  the  true  unity  of  those  whom  "  God  joins  together "  in  mar- 
riage, so  that  they  two  are  one  flesh.  Marriage,  it  will  be  observed,  is  not  the  sexual 
union  merely,  but  is  represented  by  God  bringing  the  woman  to  the  man. 6  And  our 
Lord  quotes  as  the  word  of  God  himself  the  conclusion  drawn, ' '  Therefore  shall  a  man 
leave  his  father  and  mother,  and  shall  cleave  unto  his  wife."  It  follows  from  all  this 
argument  that  marriage,  the  normal  type  of  which  is  the  indissoluble  union  of  one 
man  with  one  woman,  is  the  exponent  of  the  relation  between  the  sexes  involved  in 
their  very  origin,  and  that  this  ordinance,  being  antecedent  to  law,  is  the  basis  of  all 
those  rights  and  responsibilities  which  the  Divine  law  maintains  and  defines.  And  it 
must  be  further  observed,  that  this  ordinance  is  the  source  not  merely  of  human  life, 
as  indicated  by  the  name  given  to  the  first  woman,6  but  of  human  society.  Without 
it  there  might  have  been  a  race  of  men,  as  of  beasts,  birds,  and  fishes ;  but  the 
family,  the  unit  of  the  social  system,  and  thus  of  national  life,  could  not  have  been 
formed.  There  could  have  been  no  civilization  and  no  progress.  To  the  development 
of  man  as  a  social  being  marriage  is  essential,  and  the  more  nearly  that  the  primal 
type  of  marriage  is  preserved  in  any  nation,  the  stronger  are  all  the  social  ties,  and 
the  more  progressive  is  its  social  system.  For  from  it  all  the  duties,  not  only  of 
the  marriage  relation  itself,  but  of  all  other  social  relations,  are  derived,  The  fact 
that  God  ordained  that  mankind  should  increase  and  multiply  on  the  earth  through 
a  holy  union,  which  he  appointed  and  blessed,  determines  also  the  mutual  duties 
and  responsibilities  of  parents  and  children,  which  are  only  limited,  as  the  language 
of  the  sacred  history  indicates,  by  those  which  the  husband  and  wife  mutually  owe 
to  one  another,  and  those  which  all  owe  alike  to  God. 
12.  (TV.)  Thus  far  in  the  brief  history  of  man's  creation  and  original  state,  we 

1  Matt.  xix.  4 — 6 ;  Mark  x.  6.  »  Gen.  i.  27 ;   v.  2. 

8  Gen.  ii.  18,  20—24.  *  j  Coi.  xi  8>  9 .  'j  Tim  »   18 

5  Gen.  ii.  22.     It  must  be  remembered,  however,  that  in  one  sense  the  language  of  Genesis 
applies  even  to  unholy  unions ;  1  Cor.  vi.  16. 

6  Ohavvah. 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PENTATEUCH. 


have  found  a  basis  for  all  those  fundamental  principles  of  religion  and  morality 
which  the  universal  conscience  of  man  cannot  but  recognise.  We  trace  distinctly 
the  lines  of  a  Divine  order,  to  which  the  nature  of  man,  created  as  he  is  in  God's 
image  and  likeness,  itself  bears  witness.  But  it  is  certain,  not  only  from  the  ex- 
pei  ience  of  man  in  his  fallen  condition,  but  from  considerations  that  would  equally 
apply  if  sin  had  never  entered  the  world,  that,  for  the  maintenance  of  the  re- 
ligious life  in  man,  more  is  required  than  all  these  principles  which  may  be  inferred 
from  his  natural  relations  to  God  and  to  the  rest  of  mankind.  The  very  charge  com- 
mitted to  man  by  his  Maker,  of  subduing  the  earth  and  exercising  dominion  therein, 
in  fulfilling  which  man  imitates  the  Creator  so  far  as  his  limited  powers  enable  him, 
would  have  itself  interfered  with  the  deve;opment  of  his  spiritual  life,  even  in  his  state 
of  innocence,  unless  there  had  been  some  provision  for  the  culture  and  sustenance  of 
that  life.  This  was  made  by  the  revelation  of  God  as  an  example  to  man  in  his  rest- 
ing, as  well  as  in  his  working.  Of  course  it  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  by  the  words, 
' '  God  rested  on  the  seventh  day  from  all  his  work  that  he  had  made, "  the  idea  is  meant 
to  be  conveyed  to  our  minds,  either  that  God  needed  repose  as  we  need  it,  or  that  with 
him  "who  inhabiteth  eternity  "  there  is  succession  of  days  and  times.  He  is  indeed  in 
one  sense  ever  working, '  and  in  another  ever  resting.  But  during  the  six  days  of  crea- 
tion his  work  had  gradually  proceeded  to  its  consummation,  and  all  being  now  com- 
pleted and  set  in  order  and  pronounced  to  be  very  good,  that  exercise  of  the  Divine 
Will  and  Reason  which  distinguished  the  operation  of  God's  power  in  creating  the 
heavens  and  the  earth  and  all  that  are  therein,  from  his  providential  government  of 
them,  ceased.2  The  Genesis  was  accomplished;  nature,  which  itself  subsists  in  God, 
— for  in  him  all  things  live  and  move  and  have  their  being, — and  which  is  the  effect 
of  a  series  of  causations  which  all  centre  in  him, — had  attained  a  determined  form 
and  order  which  bore  the  same  relation  to  those  that  preceded  as  the  newborn  infant 
bears  to  the  embryo.  This  is  the  first  and  most  obvious,  meaning  of  the  rest  of  God. 
It  also  seems,  as  Augustine  suggests,8  that  God's  resting  from  the  work  of  creation 
is  intended  to  imply  that  these  created  things  were  not  such  as  he  could  rest  in.* 
However,  the  rest  of  God  is  not  merely  negative.  In  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,6 
the  apostle  reminds  those  who  were  familiar  with  the  teaching  of  the  Old  Testament, 
that  this  rest  of  God,  of  which  the  law  speaks  as  succeeding  to  the  work  of  creation. 
is  the  very  rest  promised  to  all  that  believe,  of  which  the  rest  of  the  Israelites  in  the 
land  into  which  Joshua  brought  them  was  a  figure,  of  which  David  speaks  in  the 
Psalms  as  yet  in  prospect,  into  which  we  must  still  labour  to  enter  by  faith  in  God's 
promises,  for  the  enjoyment  of  that  rest 6  is  reserved  for  the  people  of  God  when 
they  shall  have  ceased  from  their  earthly  labours.  Prom  this  argument  of  the  apostle 
we  must  conclude  that  the  seventh  day  of  God's  rest,  which  followed  the  six  days  of 
his  work  of  creation,  is  not  yet  completed.  It  must  be  noticed  indeed  that  after  the 
mention  of  the  seventh  day  the  words  do  not  recur,  which  are  used  of  all  the  preced- 
ing days,  and  which,  whatever  be  their  exact  meaning,  imply  that  each  had  its  begin- 
ning and  its  close.     This  rest  of  God,  therefore,  while  it  precludes  the  continued 

1  John  v.  IT;  cf.  Isa.  xl.  28. 

*  Of.  Thom.  Aq.  '  Summae  Prim.  Qutest.'  LXXIII.  in. :  "Dicendum  quod  requies  Dei  in  die 
septima  dupliciter  accipitur :  primo  quidem  quantum  ad  hoc  quod  cessavit  a  norig  operibus 
condendis;  ita  tamen  quod  creaturam  conditam  conservat  et  administrat.  Alio  modo 
secundum  quod  post  opera  requievit  in  seipao." 

*  '  De  Gonesi  ad  Literam,'  IV.  xv. 

*  Cf.  the  beautiful  idea  in  Zeph.  iii.  17,  "  He  trill  rest  in  his  love."  But  the  word  there  is 
not  shahath,  rest  from  labour,  but  charash,  be  at  peace  or  nlent. 

*  Chap.  iii.  11  to  It.  11.  «  nWwnwvM 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PENTATEUCH. 


exercise  of  creative  power,  includes  the  whole  of  the  work  of  redemption,  a  work 
in  a  higher  sphere  of  spiritual  power,  and  more  truly  Divine,  and  one  which,  except 
in  the  eternal  counsels  of  the  Almighty,  in  which  it  was  ordained  before  the  founda 
tions  of  the  earth  were  laid,  could  not  begin  until  the  first  Adam  had  been  created  as 
the  twos,  the  form  in  outline  as  it  were,  of  that  Divine  man  who  should  be  hereafter 
revealed. 

13.  These  considerations  fully  explain,  so  far  as  it  can  be  explained,  the  mystery 
of  the  seventh  day  and  its  sanctification.  What  the  days  of  God's  working  arjc! 
God's  rest  mean  in  relation  to  his  eternal  being  is  beyond  our  knowledge ;  but 
in  our  imitation  of  God  we  must  regard  them  as  represented  by  the  days  of  our  short 
life  on  earth.  Man  being  the  son  of  God  is  to  follow  God's  example  alike  in  his  work- 
ing aud  his  resting.  The  seventh  day  is  sanctified  for  resting  from,  those  labours 
that  belong  to  things  seen  and  temporal,  in  those  pursuits  that  pertain  to  things  un- 
seen and  eternal.  Both  the  works  of  man  and  the  rest  of  man  in  his  earthly  life  are 
intended  to  prepare  him  for  the  rest  of  God.  As  a  fundamental  principle  in  the 
natural  constitution  of  man,  this  sanctification  of  the  seventh  day  implies  that  those 
powers  of  body  and  mind,  whicn  he  exercises  in  subduing  the  earth  and  having 
dominion  over  it,  require  for  their  refreshment  and  perfection  not  only  that  cessa- 
tion from  labour  which  is  provided  by  the  succession  of  evening  and  morning,  of 
night  and  day,  but  periodical  rest  of  a  different  kind.  As  a  religious  principle  it  is 
also  as  obviously  that,  for  the  invigoration  and  development  of  the  spiritual  life 
in  man,  a  definite  portion  of  time  should  be  periodically  set  apart  and  conse- 
crated to  God  as  the  Lord  of  our  spirits,  and  devoted  to  those  things  that  belong 
to  a  spiritual  world.  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  point  out  that  this  interpretation 
of  the  sanctification  of  the  seventh  day  is  altogether  different  from  the  idea  that, 
from  the  creation,  a  particular  day,  a  certain  time  of  the  earth's  revolution  on  its 
axis,  was  holier  than  others  ;  this  is  to  make  of  an  ordinance  antecedent  to  all  law 
what  St.  Paul  calls  a  "carnal  commandment."  On  the  other  hand,  if  it  be  thoueht 
that  the  determining  of  one  day  in  seven  for  a  day  of  rest  must  be,  from  its  very 
nature,  an  artificial  and  arbitrary  appointment,  and  therefore  inconsistent  with  a 
Divine  and  universal  order,  it  must  be  remembered,  not  only  that  the  fact  of  a  seven- 
fold division  occurring  so  frequently  in  Holy  Scripture  seems  to  indicate  some  cor- 
responding reality  in  the  Divine  order  beyond  the  range  of  our  understanding,  but 
also  that  he  who  created  man  must  know,  as  we  cannot  know,  what  proportions  of 
man's  life  are  required  for  physical  rest  and  spiritual  activity,  in  order  to  preserve 
the  true  equilibrium  of  that  life.  Experience  has  abundantly  proved  of  how  great 
value  this  primeval  ordinance  is  for  the  physical,  moral,  and  religious  welfare 
of  man,  and  how  full  of  profound  truth  are  those  words  of  our  Blessed  Lord, 
when  in  regard  to  this,  question,  as  on  another  occasion  in  reference  to  marriage^ 
he  directed  those  who  were  zealous  for  the  law  to  the  original  ordinance  as  the  true 
interpretation  of  the  law  :  "  The  Sabbath  was  made  for  man,  not  man  for  the 
Sabbath."1 

As  our  argument  here  is  simply  that  the  law  (in  the  sense  of  a  Divine  order)  of 
rest  on  the  seventh  day,  after  God's  example,  is  involved  in  the  history  of  creation, 
even  as  the  true  law  of  marriage  is  in  the  union  of  the  first  man  and  the  first  woman' 
it  is  unnecessary  to  enter  into  the  question  whether  the  Sabbath  was  observed  in 


1  St.  Mark  ii.  9fr.  That  Christ  here  referred  to  the  ordinance  from  the  beginning,  and 
not  to  the  Mosaioal  law,  is  obvious  from  the  word  iytvm  which  is  used  both  of  the  Sabbath 
and  of  man.  ouX  6  «9/>iojros  [<y«v«ro],  cannot  mean  anything  else  than  "man  was  not 
created"  for  the  Sabbath,  and  would  be  no  reason  at  all  in  reference  to  a  Jewish  ordinanoe. 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PENTATEUCH. 


patriarchal  times  before  the  giving  of  the  Mosaic  law.  It  is  sufficient  to  say,  on  the 
one  hand,  that  both  in  the  Scriptural  history  of  man  during  that  period,  and  in  many 
nations  of  the  Gentile  world  even  to  the  present  day,  indications  are  found  of  a 
hebdomadal  division  of  time,1  which  cannot  easily  be  accounted  for  unless  it 
were  the  result  of  some  primeval  tradition  ;  on  the  other,  that  there  is  no  intima- 
tion in  the  sacred  history  that  this  ordinance  was  given  to  man  as  a  law,  in 
the  proper  sense  of  the  word,  and,  therefore,  we  need  not  be  surprised  that  it  was 
obscured  and  almost  forgotten,  even  as  other  fundamental  principles  of  religion 
were,  when  there  was  nothing  to  give  it  a  definite  and  permanent  form. 

14.  The  history  of  the  creation  of  man  contains  then,  we  find,  all  the  elementary 
principles  of  his  religious  and  moral  duty,  and  (what  we  may  call)  the  elementary 
prevision  for  the  order  of  his  own  life.  It  is  indeed  an  internal  evidence  of  no  small 
weight  to  the  Divine  origin  of  the  sacred  history,  that  in  this  brief  and  so  to  speak 
condensed  record,  in  which  events  of  the  largest  import  and  the  most  profound  signi- 
ficance are  described  in  a  few  simple  sentences,  without  any  attempt  to  expound  the 
mysterious  truths  hidden  in  the  story,  or  to  extract  moral  and  religious  instruction  from 
it,  much  less  to  build  up  some  system  of  religion  upon  the  facts  recorded — yet  there 
are  involved  all  the  rudimentary  truths  both  of  religion  and  of  morality.  But  it 
is  necessary  to  observe,  that  in  man's  original  state  none  of  these  were  or  could 
be  laws  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  word,  that  is,  commands  or  prohibitions  with 
promises  attached  to  obedience,  and  threats  of  punishment  for  transgression.  This 
Divine  order,  to  which  man's  own  nature  belonged,  required  no  law  to  enforce  it  on 
man.  Created  in  God's  image  and  likeness,  good  and  pure  in  body,  soul,  and  spirit, 
there  was  no  temptation  to  him  to  depart  from  that  order,  nor  any  need  for  com- 
mands and  prohibitions  to  restrain  him  from  the  sins  to  which  we  are  liable.  Not 
only  had  sin  not  entered  into  the  world,  but  there  was  no  concupiscence  or  tendency 
to  sin.8    The  lamb  requires  no  chain  to  prevent  it  from  ravening  as  the  wolf. 

15.  Yet  if  this  had  been  all ;  if  man  had  been  left  simply  in  a  state  of  innocence, 
with  no  temptation,  no  trial  of  his  submission  to  the  will  of  God,  merely  living 
according  tc  his  own  pure  nature,  without  any  necessity  to  deny  himself  and  exercise 
self-control,  how  could  he  have  rendered  reasonable  and  willing  obedience,  the  true 
service  of  the  spirit,  to  God  his  Father?  how  could  he  ever  have  become  what  God 
certainly  purposed  that  he  should  become,  when  he  created  him  in  his  own  likeness? 
We  may  affirm  without  any  hesitation,  since  this  was  the  method  actually  adopted  in 
the  wisdom  and  goodness  of  God,  that  it  was  essential  to  the  spiritual  development  of 
man  that  he  should  be  subject  to  some  law  by  which  he  might  be  educated  as  a  son 
of  God,  and  might  render  spiritual  obedience.  And,  as  far  as  we  can  judge,  the  law 
suitable  for  one  in  such  a  condition,  that  is,  for  one  in  the  infancy  of  his  moral  and 
spiritual  life,  must  take  the  form  ©f  a  prohibition  of  some  act,  not  in  itself  evil, — 
for  that  would  be  contrary  to  his  nature  and  therefore  no  trial  of  obedience, — but 
indifferent  in  itself,  yet  such  as  his  own  nature  would  incline  him  to,  with  a  penalty 
attached  to  the  transgression  of  the  law.  And  further,  if  we  consider  this  law  of 
paradise,  as  we  must  in  order  to  understand  its  reason  and  its  force,  in  the  light  of  the 
subsequent  history  of  mankind,  and  of  the  teaching  of  St.  Paul  as  to  the  purposes  and 
the  effect  of  the  law  given  by  Moses,  it  seems  impossible  not  to  conclude  that  the  law 
given  to  man  in  his  state  of  innocency  was  necessary,  not  only  for  the  development 


1  I  am  informed  by  a  learned  Chinese  friend,  that  although  amongst  them  the  hebdomadal 
division  is  not  retained,  yet,  according  to  one  of  their  sacred  books,  the  I-King,  or  '  Book  of 
Changes,'  "the  revolution  of  the  order  of  the  universe  is  completed  in  seven  days." 

»  Cf .  Gen.  ii.  26. 


xll  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

of  his  spiritual  life,  but  also  In  order  that  man,  having  a  body  by  nature  mortal, 
might  have  life  in  that  body.  There  is  nothing  to  indicate  that  man's  body,  though 
free  from  concupiscence  and  sin,  would  naturally,  without  that  righteousness  which 
is  the  result  of  obedience  to  a  law,  be  exempt  from  the  decay  and  dissolution  to 
which  all  material  creation  is  naturally  subject.  Indeed  the  sacred  history  itself 
intimates  as  much  by  the  "tree  of  life"  being  planted  in  the  midst  of  the  garden  as 
the  "  sacrament"  of  man's  preservation  from  natural  death,  of  which  tree  he  might 
eat  so  long  as  he  obeyed  the  command  not  to  eat  of  the  "tree  of  knowledge  of  good 
and  evil."1  "We  know  indeed  that  the  effect  of  the  transgression  was  that  man 
became  like  the  rest  of  the  animal  creation  in  this  respect,  losing  his  right  to  "the 
tree  of  life  ; "  and  the  converse,  viz.,  that  the  obedience  was  required  in  order  lu 
entitle  him  to  that  right,  seems  to  follow  of  necessity.  On  the  other  hand,  we  might 
infer  from  St.  Paul's  arguments,  that  while  this  law  was  necessary  for  man,  in  ordei 
that  by  obedience  he  might  attain  righteousness  and  life,8  yet  its  effect  on  human 
nature,  even  though  pure  from  sin,  must  have  been  somewhat  the  same  as  the  law 
produced  on  sinful  man  ;  that  is,  that  the  command  being  a  prohibition  of  that 
which  was  naturally  desired,  would  of  itself  provoke  transgression,  even  as  the 
strength  of  the  current  is  felt  only  when  it  is  resisted.  So  that  man  in  his  natural 
state,  though  free  from  sinful  passion,  yet  being  destitute  of  that  wisdom  which  ex- 
perience alone  can  give,  and  of  that  supernatural  grace  which  Christ's  redemption 
alone  can  supply,— being  also  spiritually  in  a  state  of  unstable  equilibrium,  in  which 
the  least  deviation  would  create  the  tendency  to  decline  further,  while  there  was  no 
power  of  recovery,  — sooner  or  later  could  not  but  fall.  Infidelity  raises  superficial  ob- 
jections against  the  sacred  history,  as  if  it  were  inconsistent  with  God's  wisdom  and 
justice  that  man  should  have  been  subjected  to  temptation,  and  again  that  the  con- 
sequences of  an  act  apparently  so  insignificant  should  have  been  so  serious.  But  on 
the  contrary,  the  difficulty  really  is  to  conceive  it  possible  that  the  original  history 
of  man,  a  reasonable  and  spiritual  being  with  a  material  nature,  could  have  been, 
consistently  with  the  goodness  and  wisdom  of  an  Almighty  Creator,  other  than  that 
which  Holy  Scripture  describes.  Such  a  being  not  created  with  a  pure  and  sinless 
nature ;  one  with  moral  and  spiritual  faculties  to  be  developed,  not  under  some  law  ; 
one  with  an  animal  nature  not  subject  to  the  natural  laws  of  decay  and  death,  unless 
freedom  from  them  should  be  gained  as  the  reward  of  obedience ;  and  one,  thug 
constituted,  not  liable  to  fall  and  lose  the  reward,  we  may  even  say  not  certain  to 
fall  sooner  or  later ;— all  such  hypothesis  present  difficulties  to  human  thought  far 
more  serious  than  any  that  can  be  raised  out  of  the  sacred  history. 

And,  it  must  be  observed,  these  questions  which  we  have  discussed  are  not  some 
curious,  but  unprofitable,  speculations.  They  touch  most  nearly,  and  practically, 
the  whole  subject  of  the  law,  and  illustrate  very  forcibly  the  necessity,  on  which 
the  Apostle  Paul  so  much  insists,  of  an  economy  not  of  law  but  of  grace,  in  order 
that  man,  even  in  his  best  state,  may  obtain  righteousness  and  life, 

Law  from  Adam  to  Moses. 

16.  No  reverent  reader  of  Holy  Scripture  can  fail  to  recognise  the  profound  insight 
into  the  moral  and  spiritual  nature  of  man  which  is  revealed  in  the  history  of 

»  S.  August  '  De  Gen.  ad  Lit.'  vi.  86 :  "  Denique  non  ait  Apostolus,  Corpus  quidem  mortale 
propter  peccatum:  sed  corpus  mortuum  propter  peccatum.  Illud  quippe,  ante  peccatum  et 
mortale  secundum  aliam  et  immortale  secundum  aliam  causam  dici  poterat-  id  est  mortale 
quia  poterat  mod,  immortale  quia  poterat  non  mori  .  .  .  quod  ci  praestabatur  de  lieno  vita' 
non  de  constitutione  naturae ;  a  quo  ligno  separatus  est  cum  peocasset,"  tie.  ' 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PENTATEUCH.  xffl 

She  Fall.  We  need  not  dwell  on  this  further  than  as  it  affects  our  argument.  The 
necessity  for  some  external  and  positive  law  in  paradise  we  have  concluded  from 
general  considerations,  as  well  as  from  some  to  which  the  teachings  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment direct  us.  The  force  and  meaning  of  the  particular  prohibition  are  apparent 
from  the  story  itself.  While  there  is  no  sufficient  reason  for  questioning  its  literal 
truth,  and  supposing  chat  it  is  only  a  myth  or  allegory,  yet  we  mu=>t  ever  bear  in 
mind  that  in  Holy  Scripture  it  is  not  the  letter  but "  the  spirit  that  profiteth,"  though 
the  letter  is  the  vase  that  holds  the  precious  ointment.  We  must  observe,  then,  in 
this  case,  that  the  prohibition  was  to  eat  of  the  "  tree  of  knowledge  of  good  and  evil." 
The  temptation,  though  acting  through  the  fleshly  appetite,  was  addressed  to  the 
Bpirit;1  "Ye  shall  be  as  gods,  knowing  good  and  evil."  And  such  was  the  result. 
Their  eyes  were  opened,  though  first  of  all  to  their  own  shame,  through  the  sense 
of  evil  in  themselves  and  the  consciousness  of  their  own  alienation  from  God  by  trans- 
gression. '  But  it  must  be  remembered  that  in  itself  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil 
ib  a  higher  spiritual  state  than  one  of  ignorance  of  the  difference  between  them. 
This  knowledge  is  indeed  an  essential  condition  to  all  spiritual  wisdom.2  "  The  man  is 
become  as  one  of  us,  to  know  good  and  evil,"  are  the  words  of  God  himself,  and  to 
suppose  that  this  is  irony  is  to  misapprehend  the  whole  philosophy  of  the  fall  of 
man.  And  it  might  be  supposed  that  now  man,  possessing  the  power  to  distinguish 
between  good  and  evil,  the  principles  also  of  all  religious  and  moral  duty  having  been 
established  in  his  creation,  would  henceforth  need  no  external  law ;  for  he  must  be  a 
law  to  himself.  But  that  very  knowledge,  as  the  sacred  record  indicates,  and  as  the 
•ubsaquent  history  of  the  world  abundantly  proves,  was  his  fall.  And  the  effect  of 
this  inward  law  was  the  same  as  that  of  the  law  given  by  Moses,  namely,  that  sin 
multiplied  and  abounded.  The  sin  of  eating  the  forbidden  tree  filled  the  earth  with 
sin  and  guilt  and  death,  not  only  by  "  the  fault  and  corruption  of  the  nature  "  of  man 
which  was  transmitted  from  Adam  by  natural  generation,3  but  through  the  necessary 
consequences  of  the  knowledge  of  evil.  Separated  from  God  by  transgression,  and 
conscious  of  the  evil  desire  in  his  fleshly  nature,  man  was  now  out  of  harmony  with  the 
Divine  order  to  which  his  own  nature,  as  a  whole,  belonged  ;  and  having  no  inherent 
ability  to  restore  himself,  the  knowledge  which  he  possessed  gave  him  no  spiritual 
power,  but  on  the  contrary  increased  his  tendency  to  evil.  It  was  equally  true  of 
this  inward  law,  as  of  the  law  from  Mount  Sinai,  that  because  by  it  was  the  know- 
ledge of  sin,4  therefore  by  it  man  could  not  obtain  righteousness  and  life.  There- 
fore, as  St.  Paul  says,6  "death  reigned  from  Adam  to  Moses,  even  over  them 
that  had  not  sinned  after  the  similitude  of  Adam's  transgression,"  that  is,  who  had 
not,  like,  our  first  parents,  transgressed  any  positive  command  of  God,  but  who 
sinned  against  "  the  law  written  in  their  hearts,"  •  and  justly  incurred  the  con- 
demnation of  God.  The  exceptional  cases  of  men  who  served  God  and  walked 
with  him  and  pleased  him7  were  the  result  of  a  supernatural  principle  superior  to 
this  natural  law  in  man,  even  of  that  faith  which  was  in  them,  as  it  is  in  all  ages, 
"  the  substance  of  things  hoped  for,  the  evidence  of  things  not  seen."  In  such  men 
the  hopes  were  founded  on  the  tokens  of  God's  goodness  and  mercy  to  fallen  man, 
and  specially  on  the  promises  of  redemption  and  deliverance  from  evil,  which  began 
in  the  assurance  given  immediately  after  the  fall,  that  "  the  seed  of  the  woman  " 
should  after  a  severe  conflict  crush  the  serpent's  head. 

17.  During  the  antediluvian  age,  as  described  in  the  sacred  history,  although  there 
are  indications  of  God's  manifesting  himself  to  man,  yet  there  are  no  traces  whatever 
of  any  law,  in  the  true  sense  of  the  word,  either  human  or  Divine.     The  sacrifices 

»  Gen.  iii.  4—8.  »  Heb.  v.  14.  »  Gen.  r.  3.  *  Rom.  Hi.  20. 

•  Rom.  v.  14.  •  Rom.  ii.  15.  'See  Heb.  xL  1—7,  to. 


tiw  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

that  were  offered  do  not  appear  to  have  originated  in  any  express  command  of  God, 
though  he  may  have  intimated  to  Adam  himself,  as  to  Abel,  his  acceptance  of  such 
offerings.  Abel's  offering  was  accepted  as  the  expression  of  his  faith  ;  but  there  is 
nothing  to  prove  that  the  offering  of  Cain,  though  rejected  in  consequence  of  his 
want  of  faith,  was  contrary  to  any  law.  The  murder  of  Abel  by  his  brother's  hand 
was  not  punished  by  death,  and  the  very  language  of  the  murderer,  in  which  he  com- 
plains of  the  severity  of  his  punishment,  points  to  a  general  state  of  lawlessness 
beyond  the  immediate  "presence  of  the  Lord."  Indeed  the  general  description  of 
the  world  from  the  Fall  to  Noah  represents  a  scene  of  unrestrained  disorder  and 
violence.  The  brief  but  very  significant  history  of  one  of  the  most  eminent  descend- 
ants of  Cain  is  representative  of  the  period.  The  primeval  ordinance  of  marriage  was 
by  him  first  forsaken.  The  personal  right  of  the  strongest  and  most  powerful  to  avenge 
himself  to  the  utmost  for  every  injury  is  asserted  as  the  only  law.1  The  industry 
and  ingenuity  and  skill  of  man  were  highly  developed ;  woman  was  famous  for  her 
beauty ;  "  there  were  giants  in  the  earth  in  those  days,"  and  "  mighty  men,  men  of 
renown ;  "  but  man  without  law  became  utterly  and  hopelessly  corrupt,  "  the  wicked- 
ness of  man  was  great  on  the  earth,"  and  the  disorganised,  godless  world  was 
destroyed.  It  was  the  age  of  all  but  universal  dominion  of  the  flesh,  ending  in  dis- 
solution and  death.  At  the  same  time  it  must  be  noticed  that  while  ungodliness  and 
irreligion  reigned  supreme,  yet  there  are  no  evidences  either  of  idolatry,  or  of  those 
sins  against  nature,  to  which,  as  the  Apostle  Paul  teaches,  God  subsequently  gave  men 
over  as  the  punishment  of  idolatry. 

18.  The  world  after  the  Flood  began  with,  what  we  may  call,  a  new  dispensation. 
Noah,  on  coming  out  of  the  ark,  offered  burnt  sacrifices  of  every  clean  beast  and 
every  clean  fowl — the  distinction  was  probably  natural  and  not  ceremonial — his  offer- 
ings were  accepted,  a  covenant  of  mercy  was  established  between  God  and  man,  and 
now  for  the  first  time  in  the  history  of  mankind  we  have  some  express  indication  of 
Divine  law  revealed  for  the  direction  of  man.  There  was  first  of  all  a  prohibition  of 
eating  flesh  "  with  the  life  thereof,  which  is  the  blood  thereof,"  which  prohibition 
(evidently,  we  may  say,  when  the  language  is  compared  with  that  of  the  Mosaical 
law  2)  had  reference  to  the  use  of  the  blood  in  those  sacrifices,  which  had  now  received 
express  and  emphatic  sanction  from  God  as  an  acceptable  method  of  worshipping 
him.3  A  second  law  was  also  given,  which  springs  from  the  very  first  duty  of  man 
to  his  brother  man — "  Whoso  sheddeth  man's  blood  by  man  shall  his  blood  be  shed : 
for  in  the  image  of  God  made  he  man."  But  although  these  two  commandments  had 
in  many  respects  the  character  of  law,  we  do  not  find  the  word  tarah  used  of  them ; 
they  ware  rather  isolated  commands,4  the  first  elements  and  germs  of  a  system  of 
Divine  law  in  which  the  whole  duty  of  man  to  God  and  his  neighbour  should  be 
comprehended. 

19.  Yet  this  beginning  of  Divine  law  on  earth  was,  without  doubt,  ot  no  small 
value  for  that  which,  the  sacred  history  informs  us,  soon  succeeded  in  this  post-dilu- 
vian world ;  namely,  the  development  of  national  life,  of  which  in  the  long  and  dreary 
age  of  lawlessness  before  the  Flood  there  are  no  signs  whatever.  The  due  protection 
of  the  person  from  violence  is  the  first  and  most  important  object  of  that  civil  law, 
which  is  the  bond  of  national  order ;  and  it  may  be  well  supposed  that  the  conscious- 
ness of  the  necessity  of  such  law,  which  the  Divine  command  awakened,  and  of  which 
the  past  history  of  the  antediluvian  world  must  have  supplied  abundant  evidence, 

1  Gen.  iv.  19—21.     The  interpretation  here  given  to  the  language  of  Lantech  ii  oertainlj 
the  most  probable. 
»  Cf.  Levit.  xvii.  11.  »  G»n.  rlli  SI. 

•  tt pwrtc.     Ot  Maine's  '  Ancient  Law,'  p.  4. 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PENTATEUCH. 


r» 


gave  that  strong  and  general  impulse  in  the  direction  of  national  organisation  which 
we  find  described  in  the  tenth  chapter  of  the  Book  of  Genesis.  Of  this  remarkable 
movement,  so  characteristic  of  this  period  of  the  world's  history,  the  ambitious  arid 
godless  attempt  to  build  a  mighty  capital  of  a  universal  empire,  which  was  frustrated 
and  turned  to  confusion  by  Divine  interposition,  is  a  signal  and  instructive  instance. 
If  the  hypothesis  suggested  is  correct — and  certainly  it  has  much  appearance  of 
probability — it  is  also  a  proof  how  soon  a  law  given  by  God  for  man's  benefit  may  be 
perverted  and  turned  to  evil  by  the  sinful  heart  of  man.  And  the  same  may  be  said 
of  the  other  law,  of  a  ceremonial  nature,  given  to  Noah  and  his  sons.  For  if  it 
referred  to  the  law  of  sacrifice,  as  can  hardly  be  doubted,  it  must  have  been  the  first 
element  of  a  definite  and  orderly  system  of  religious  worship  among  the  nations  that 
were  descended  from  Noah.  And  among  them  religion  soon  became  perverted,  and 
the  worship  of  other  gods,  and  idolatrous  practices,  of  which  before  theie  had  been  no 
mention,  appeared  in  a  few  generations  after  the  Flood.1  And  this  new  development 
of  man's  life  and  man's  ungodliness  was  also  followed  by  those  sins  which  brought  • 
God's  judgments  on  Sodom  and  Gomorrah.  It  became  sufficiently  evident,  therefore, 
that  although  even  the  first  beginnings  of  law  were  a  benefit  to  man  as  regards  his 
present  life,  yet,  to  restrain  transgressions,  a  merely  rudimentary  law  was  of  no 
avail  whatever. 

20.  The  calling  of  Abram  out  of  this  world  of  idolatry  and  sin  to  be  the  father  of 
a  chosen  nation,  with  the  promise  that  in  him  and  his  seed  all  the  families  of  the  earth 
should  be  blessed,  was  the  most  important  epoch  in  the  spiritual  history  of  man 
between  Adam  and  Moses.  The  covenant  made  with  Abram,  however,  as  St.  Paul 
has  pointed  out,2  was  a  covenant  not  of  law  but  of  promise,  and  was  established  four 
or  five  centuries  before  the  giving  of  the  law.  And  although  circumcision,  the  seal 
of  that  covenant,  was  an  ordinance  anticipating  the  law,  and  so  distinctly  embodying 
its  spirit  that  it  became  ultimately  the  most  significant  emblem  of  the  law ;  yet,  as 
the  apostle  reminds  the  Romans,3  the  father  of  the  faithful  received  the  promises, 
while  yet  in  uncircumcision,  through  faith  only.  However,  speaking  generally,  we 
may  say  that  with  the  rite  of  circumcision,  which  was  in  all  respects  a  law,  and  with 
the  restriction  of  the  covenant  to  the  seed  of  Abraham  in  the  line  of  Isaac,  the  dis- 
pensation of  the  law,  properly  so  called,  began.  And  so  far  as  our  argument  relates  ■ 
to  that  dispensation,  we  might  pass  over  the  intervening  period  between  Abraham  and 
Moses,  and  proceed  at  once  to  the. consideration  of  that  which  is  in  the  fullest  and 
strictest  sense  the  Torah,  the  law  of  God  given  by  his  chosen  servant  to  the  nation 
of  Israel. 

Development  of  Human  Law  without  Revelation. 

21.  But,  before  we  enter  on  any  discussion  of  this  important  subject,  it  will  be 
well  first  to  examine  briefly  how  far,  independently  of  any  express  revelation  from 
God  either  to  man  or  through  man,—  at  all  events  any  known  to  us, — the  Divine  order, 
which  man  being  created  in  God's  image  to  some  extent  recognises,  and  against  the 
transgression  of  which  his  knowledge  of  good  and  evil  bears  witness,  has  in  different 
ages  of  the  world  been  asserted  by  him  in  the  form  of  external  and  positive  law. 
He  discovers  indeed  by  his  own  experience  that  this  order,  so  far  as  it  affects  rela- 
tions between  man  and  man,  is  essential  to  social  and  national  life  ;  and  further  that 
the  order  cannot  be  maintained,  and  the  rights  of  these  relations  cannot  be  protected, 
sxcept  by  law.     We  need  only  investigate  this  subject  sufficiently  to  understand 

»  Josh.  xxiv.  2,  14,  15.  »  GaL  iii.  17.  •  Rom.  to.  10—14 


zrt  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

more  distinctly  on  the  one  hand  the  value,  and  indeed  the  absolute  necessity  to  raar.'a 
truest  and  highest  life,  of  a  complete  revelation  of  Divine  law,  and  on  the  other 
the  form  which  all  law  must  assume  in  order  to  be  law  indeed,  and  to  effect  tin 
purposes  for  which  the  Divine  law  itself  is  given. 

22.  Not  only  the  sacred  history,  but  also  the  evidence  afforded  by  the  science  of 
comparative  jurisprudence 1  indicates  that  the  original  constitution  of  human  society 
was  that  which  is  known  as  the  Patriarchal,  in  which  the  father  of  the  family 
possessed  absolute  authority  over  its  persons  and  its  property.  In  this  condition  at 
■ociety  the  word  of  the  parent  was  the  only  human  law,  he  being  the  representative 
of  God  to  the  family  in  religion  as  well  as  in  secular  matters.  Traces  of  this  prime- 
val government  have  survived  even  to  the  present  day  in  some  nations,  in  the  form 
known  to  Roman  law  as  the  "  Patria  Potestas."  But  as  the  family  life  developed 
itself  into  the  various  forms  of  natural  life, — a  process  which,  as  we  have  already 
observed,  began  and  indeed  was  in  active  operation  soon  after  the  Deluge, — we  find 
at  all  events  wherever  the  nation  became  large  and  powerful,  the  national  sovereign, 
succeeding  to  and  superseding  the  more  archaic  government.  His  authority,  how- 
ever, like  the  paternal,  was  not  that  of  a  mere  individual  but  of  the  representative  of 
Divinity,  and  his  judgments  were  regarded  as  not  those  of  his  own  personal  will  but 
•s  emanating  from  above :  indeed  in  the  mythical  history  of  ancient  nations  the 
original  kings  are  with  hardly  an  exception  represented  as  gods  or  demi-gods. 
In  regard  to  Egypt,  the  only  great  nation  of  the  period  preceding  the  giving  of  the 
law  by  Moses  of  which  we  have  any  description  in  the  sacred  history,  we  fortun- 
ately possess  in  the  present  day,  in  addition  to  the  notices  in  the  Holy  Scripture, 
sufficient  information  from  other  contemporaneous  records,  or  from  subsequent 
history,  to  enable  us  to  trace  with  some  certainty  the  development  of  national  law 
there.*  The  Egyptians  believed  that  the  origin  of  law  was  Divine,  the  god  Thoth 
(or  Hermes  as  he  was  called  by  the  Greeks),  who  represented  the  Divine  Reason, 
having  first  promulgated  it  for  the  benefit  of  man,  and  their  complete  code  of 
law  being  gradually  formed  by  the  wisdom  of  early  monarchs  and  sages,  and  in- 
terpreted from  the  precedents  of  the  decisions  of  learned  judges  in  noted  cases,  which 
corresponded  somewhat  to  the  Responsa  prvdentium  of  the  Romans,  and  yet  more 
,  nearly  to  the  "  case  made  '  law  of  later  times.  This  code  was  called  the  "  Eight 
Books  of  Thoth."  The  study  of  that  code  was  the  special  duty  of  those  high  priests 
who  were  called  "  prophets,"  and  of  the  king  who  also  held  that  office.  To  the 
king  it  belonged  to  legislate,  as  well  as  to  administer  the  law,  but  in  all  matters  of 
state  he  was  assisted  by  the  counsel  of  the  wisest  and  most  distinguished  mem- 
bers of  the  priestly  order.'  "We  are  acquainted  with  few  of  the  laws  of  the 
ancient  Egyptians,  but  the  superiority  of  their  legislation  has  always  been  acknow- 
ledged as  the  cause  of  the  duration  of  an  empire  which  lasted  with  the  sama 
form  of  government  for  a  much  longer  period  than  the  generality  of  ancient  states. 
Indeed  the  wisdom  of  these  people  was  proverbial,  and  was  held  in  such  considera- 
tion by  other  nations  that  we  find  it  taken  by  the  Jews  as  the  standard  to  which 
superior  learning 4  in  their  own  country  was  willingly  compared ;  and  Moses  had  pre- 
pared himself  for  the  duties  of  a  legislator  by  becoming  versed  in  all  the  wisdom  of 
the  Egyptians"  (Wilkinson). 

1  See  Maine's  '  Ancient  Law,'  p.  122. 

*  As  the  facts  to  which  I  shall  allude  are  such  as  are  mentioned  in  many  modern  works  on 
Bjrypt,  I  do  not  consider  it  necessary  to  give  references ;  hut  I  have  taken  the  statementi 
chiefly,  and  in  some  cases  verbatim,  from  Sir  J.  G.  Wilkinson's  well-known  work 

*  See  in  illustration  Gen.  xli.  28,  37,  88  ;  1.  7  ;  and  Isa.  xii.  11,  12., 
4  Of.  Solomon  ;  1  Kings  iv.  80. 


INTfiODUCTION  TO  THE  PENTATEUCH.  xrfl 

28.  The  characteristics  of  Egyptian  law,  so  far  as  they  are  known  to  us,  are  weH 
worth  noticing.  The  object  of  the  laws  was  to  preserve  life  and  reclaim  the  offender ; 
and  therefore  capital  punishment  was  not  inflicted  except  in  cases  of  murder,  and  of 
some  few  other  crimes  specially  injurious  to  the  community.  But  the  crime  of  murder 
was  considered  so  heinous,  "  that  to  be  the  accidental  witness  of  an  attempt  to  murder 
without  endeavouring  to  prevent  it  was  a  capital  ofience  which  could  only  he  pal- 
liated by  bringing  proof  of  inability  to  act."  In  the  same  spirit,  the  witness  of  any 
injury  to  the  person  of  another,  or  of  a  robbery,  was  bound,  under  the  same  penalty 
as  the  offender  himself,  to  interfere,  or,  if  that  was  impossible,  to  be  a  prosecutor. 
The  only  exception  to  the  punishment  of  death  for  murder,  at  least  when  the  royal 
prerogative  was  not  exercised,  was  in  the  case  of  infanticide  by  a  father,  in  which,  on 
the  principle  of  the  patria  potestas,  a  lesser  punishment  was  inflicted.  Of  other 
crimes,  adultery  was  severely  punished  in  both  the  offenders.  Truth  or  justice 
(personified  in  the  goddess  Thmei,  who  possessed  both  these  attributes,  and  was  often 
represented  as  a  double  form),  was  regarded  as  the  highest  of  all  virtues,  "  inasmuch 
a*  it  related  more  particularly  to  others"  while  the  other  virtues  immediately  benefit 
him  who  possesses  them.  Whenever  therefore  a  falsehood  injured  another  it  wai 
punished,  as  in  the  Jewish  law,  according  to  the  lex  talionis,  and  when  a  falsehood 
against  another  was  maintained  by  an  oath,  it  became  one  of  the  extreme  crimei 
which  were  punished  by  death.  "  For  they  considered  that  it  involved  two  distinct 
crimes — a  contempt  for  the  gods  and  a  violation  of  faith  towards  man ;  the  former 
the  direct  promoter  of  every  sin,  the  latter  destructive  of  all  those  ties  which  are  most 
essential  for  the  welfare  of  society." 

24.  The  history  and  character  of  Egyptian  law  have  been  more  particularly 
noticed,  both  because  Egypt  was  more  nearly  connected  than  any  other  nation  with 
the  early  history  of  the  people  to  whom  the  God  of  heaven  and  earth  revealed  his 
law,  and  also  because  they  supply  interesting  illustrations  of  our  preceding  argu- 
ment, both  in  regard  to  the  recognition  by  man  of  the  Divine  order,  and  also  as 
to  the  need  of  law,  in  its  true  and  proper  sense,  for  national  lifn.  The  subject  of 
man's  natural  recognition  of  this  order  has  been  largely  discussed  by  modern  writers  : 
there  is  indeed  no  nation  under  heaven,  civilised  or  savage,  a  nomadic  tribe  or 
a.  vast  empire  like  India,  from  whose  traditions  or  literature  illustrations  of  this 
truth  might  not  be  drawn.  But  there  is  one  ancient  nation  of  the  world,  which 
has  been  of  all  the  furthest  removed,  in  past  ages,  from  the  influences  of  the  re- 
ligious enlightenment  and  progressive  civilisation  of  more  favoured  regions,  whose 
witness  to  the  Divine  order,  and  to  its  recognition  by  the  spirit  of  man,  specially 
illustrates  bur  argument,  because  among  them  that  inward  witness  is  expressly  made 
the  basis  of  national  law.  According  to  Bunsen,1  "  the  actual  aboriginal  tribe  of  the 
primeval  home  has  settled  itself  in  the  extreme  east  of  Asia,  and  maintained  itself  there 
up  to  the  present  day ;  forming  the  most  numerous  nation  of  the  world,  the  oldest  in 
history."  The  Chinese  "  language  forms  an  irrefragable  testimony  to  the  autochthon- 
ous character  of  the  unique  position  which  it  occupies.  Hence  whatever  may  prove  to 
be  an  indigenous  product  of  its  religious  consciousness,  is  both  relatively  and  intrin- 
sically of  high  import  to  universal  history.  It  is  the  undivided  main  stream  of 
history  as  it  issues  from  its  parent  source,  not  a  mere  lagoon."  Without  accepting 
Bunsen's  theory,  it  is  at  all  events  certain  that  at  a  period  of  very  remote  antiquity, 
anterior  to  the  time  of  Abraham,  China  had  its  own  language,  literature,  and  polity. 
Confucius,  who  lived  at  the  close  of  the  fifth  century  before  Christ,  was  but  the  collector 
of  the  ancient  records  and  reminiscences  of  his  natior.   And  in  these  we  find  •  quits 

1  '  God  in  Hirtory,*  Book  III.  ohap.  t. 

PENTATBUOH.  , 


rvffi  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

independent  confirmation  of  that  which  in  this  argument  has  been  derived  simply 
from  the  Scripture  history  of  man,  viz.  that  human  law,  in  order  to  be  the  basis  of 
national  life,  must  be  the  assertion  of  principles  of  the  Divine  order  which  man'i 
nature,  as  a  whole,  recognises.  I  prefer  to  use  the  language  of  another  as  an  inde- 
pendent testimony  to  this  truth : 

Following  Bunsen,  as  our  latest  and  probably  most  trustworthy  guide,  "let  us 
listen  to  one  or  two  of  the  utterances  of  these  sacred  books  which  bear  most  closely 
on  the  point  which  concerns  us.     This  is  from  the  Shi- King:  _ 

" '  The  opinion  and  judgment  of  Heaven  is  learned  (reveals  itself)  through  the 
opinion  and  judgment  of  our  people.  Heaven's  approval  and  disapproval  (is  recog- 
nised) through  the  approval  and  disapproval  of  our  people.  An  intimate  relation 
subsists  between  the  upper  and  lower  world.  Oh,  how  careful  should  those  be  who 
govern  countries  1 '  " 

Apropos  of  this  remarkable  specimen  of  antediluvian  (?)  politics,  Bunsen  relates 
an  interesting  anecdote  of  our  own  day.  GutzlafE  told  him,  he  says,  that  "  when, 
after  the  peace  of  Nankin,  in  1845,  the  Emperor  of  China  felt  himself  impelled 
to  refuse  his  assent  to  the  execution  of  that  treaty  by  which  the  Tartar  city 
of  Canton  was  to  be  opened  to  foreigners,  he  justified  his  repudiation  by  this  great 
maxim  of  the  sacred  books.  And  '  the  voice  of  the  people  is  the  voice  of  God  ' 
resounded  once  more  through  the  whole  empire.  When  the  emperor's  edict  was 
published,  and  everywhere  formed  the  subject  of  discussion,  it  was  said  to  Gutzlafi 
by  patriotic  Chinese :  '  That  maxim  of  our  sacred  books  is  well  known  to  us,  it  is 
our  watchword ;'  but  this  was  a  new  thing  to  us,  that  the  Mandshee  emperor  should 
publicly  appeal  to  this  sacred  text  of  the  Scriptures,  which  testifies  against  himself." 
By  what  qualifications  our  primeval  ancestors — if  such  they  were — guarded  this  pro- 
found but  perilous  maxim  against  the  false  interpretations  which  it  has  received,  and 
still  receives,  amongst  ourselves,  we  are  not  informed.  But  it  surely  is  a  striking 
instance  of  the  consensus  of  mankind  in  their  anthropological  conceptions,  that  a 
maxim  which  embodies  so  much,  both  of  the  truth  and  all  the  falsehood  of  modern 
politics,  should  have  been  familiar  to  the  ears  of  what  there  is  reason  to  believe  was 
the  oldest  civilised  community.  *  *  *  *  In  a  subsequent  passage  he  thus 
sums  up  their  wisdom :  "  If  we  sum  up  the  whole,  we  find  one  thought  continually 
recurring  in  the  works  of  all  those  sages,  as  the  root-idea  of  the  ancient  system, 
and  we  may  express  it  thus : — There  is  a  law  which  governs  the  All  in  nature 
and  in  man,  and  this  one  law  is  reasonable.  Thus,  indeed,  it  had  been  said  by 
Meng-Zo,  the  renowned  successor  of  Confucius,  in  the  fourth  century  before 
our  era,  'He  who  knows  his  own  nature,  and  that  of  all  things,  knows  what 
heaven  is ;  for  heaven  is,  indeed,  the  inward  essence  and  the  vital  energy  of  all 
things.'  This  thought  is  the  dowry  of  the  Chinese  intellect  in  the  general  history  of 
man;  the  conception  of  a  Kosmos  in,  not  above,  the  various  objects,  which,  how- 
ever, attains  personality  only  in  the  human  mind.  Man's  life  is  to  be  orderly,  like 
that  of  nature ;  the  sphere  of  this  life  in  which  the  Chinese  recognise  something 
Divine,  is  that  of  the  family  ;  the  bond  between  parents  and  children  is  to  him 
the  most  sacred  of  all  bonds."  In  these  two  conceptions— of  the  dignity  of  the 
person  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  sacredness  of  paternal  authority  and  filial  obe- 
dience on  the  other— we  have  the  secret  of  that  marvellous  length  of  days  which, 
notwithstanding  all  their  faults,  has  been  granted  to  this  strange  people.  *  *  *  * 
Lest  it  should  be  supposed  that  the  view  which  I  have  here  presented  rests  on 
a  single  authority,  it  may  be  proper  that  I  should  mention  that  to  whatever 
extent  Baron  Bunsen's  view  of  the  autochthonous  character  of  the  Chinese  may  be 
peculiar,  his  opinion  on  the  point  with  which  we  are  concerned  is  the  common 
opinion.  All  are  agreed  that  the  history  of  Confucius  is  the  most  faithful  expres- 
sion  of  the  national  mind,  and  that  that  teaching  was  based  on  the  revelations  of 
our  common  nature.  "  I  teach  you  nothing,"  he  says,  "but  what  you  might  learn 
yourselves,  viz.  the  observance  of  the  three  fundamental  laws  of  relation  between 
iovereign  and  subject,  father  and  child,  husband  and  wife  ;  and  the  five  capital 
virtues,  universal  charity,  impartial  justice,  conformity  to  ceremonies  and  established 
usages,  rectitude  of  heart  and  mind,  and  pure  sincerity."  1 

1  Lorimer't  '  Institutes  «f  Law,'  pp.  SO,  U, 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PENTATEUCH.  xa 

25.  There  is,  however,  anotherpart  of  the  world  with  the  history  of  which  we  are 
more  familiar  than  with  those  of  Egypt,  or  China,  or  even  of  India,  aid  in  this  history 
the  actual  process  of  the  development  of  law  may  be  more  exactly  traced  from  iti 
•lementary  principles  to  its  matured  forms.  Maine,  in  his  well-known  work  on 
Ancient  Law,  has  pointed  out  that  "the  earliest  notions  connected  with  the  concep- 
tion, now  so  fully  developed,  of  a  law  or  rule  of  life,  are  those  contained  in  the 
Homeric  words,  Themis  or  Themistes."  In  the  Greek  Pantheon  Themis  is  the  god- 
dess of  justice  in  the  abstract  sense,  and,  according  to  Hesiod,1  the  mother  by  Zeus 
of  Dike,  the  goddess  of  administrative  justice.  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  name 
Is  derived  from  the  Egyptian  Thmei  (see  §  23,  supra),  and  the  idea  conveyed  by  the 
mythology  is  not  really  different2  from  that  expressed  in  Homer,  with  whom  Themis 
is  the  personification  of  the  order  established  by  custom  and  equity,  and  the  assessor 
of  Zeus.  As  such  Themis  suggested  judicial  awards  both  to  kings  and  to  gods,  the 
greatest  of  all  kings ;  and  the  judgments  themselves  were  called  Themistes  (the 
plural  of  Themis).  It  is  evident  that  the  personification  was  intended  to  represent 
the  authority  of  kings  as  the  representatives  of  God  on  earth,  and  thus  the  original 
basis  of  the  idea  is  the  truth,  which  Revelation  supplies,  of  man  being  made  in  the 
image  and  likeness  of  God.  From  these  divinely-directed  judgments  of  kings  there 
grew  up  in  course  of  time,  as  the  heroic  age  passed  away,  a  body  of  unwritten  "  custom- 
ary law,"  which  was  in  the  keeping  of  an  aristocracy,  civil  or  religious,  invested  with 
judicial  authority  and  privileges.  "  From  the  period  of  customary  law  we  come  to 
another  sharply-defined  epoch  in  the  history  of  jurisprudence..  We  arrive  at  wie 
era  of  Codes,  those  ancient  codes  of  which  the  Twelve  Tables  of  Rome  were  the 
most  famous  specimen.  In  Greece,  in  Italy,  in  the  Hellenised  sea-board  of  Western 
Asia,  these  codes  made  their  appearance  at  periods  much  the  same  everywhere,  not, 
I  mean,  at  periods  identical  in  point  of  time,  but  similar  in  point  of  the  relative 
progress  of  each  community.  Everywhere,  in  the  countries  I  have  named,  laws 
engraved  on  tablets  and  published  to  the  people  take  the  place  of  usages  deposited 
with  the  recollection  of  a  privileged  obligarchy."  *  *  *  "  Quite  enough  tor  remains 
of  these  collections,  both  in  the  East  and  West,  to  show  that  they  mingled  up  religious, 
civil,  and  merely  moral  ordinances,  without  any  regard  to  differences  in  their 
essential  character ;  and  this  is  consistent  with  all  we  know  of  early  thought  from 
other  sources,  the  severance  of  law  from  morality,  and  of  religion  from  law,  be- 
longing very  distinctly  to  the  later  stages  of  mental  progress."  3  The  real  value 
to  the  nation  of  these  codes  of  law  depended  much  on  circumstances.  When,  at 
in  India,  they  were  compiled  at  a  comparatively  late  period  by  a  religious  oligarchy 
and  remained  in  their  charge,  they  only  tended  to  perpetuate  corruptions  and  check 
further  development.  In  Rome,  being  the  result  of  the  struggles  of  the  plebeian* 
against  the  exclusive  privileges  of  the  patricians,  and  embodying  the  usages  of 
a  more  primitive  and  simple  age,  their  effect  was  in  the  highest  degree  beneficial, 
both  as  regards  the  liberty  and  the  progress  of  the  commonwealth. 

26.  Of  the  period  in  the  history  of  jurisprudence  subsequent  to  this,  during  which, 
in  the  great  commonwealth  of  Rome,  human  law  attained  a  maturity  and  perfection 
such  that  Roman  law  has  formed  a  very  large  and  powerful  element  in  the  progress 
and  consolidation  of  the  civilisation  of  modern  Europe,  it  is  unnecessary  to  speak ; 
because  the  exact  and  complete  provisions  for  the  protection  and  security  of  person 

1  At  least  to  the  author  of  the  Thcogony. 

«  Maine  supposes  (p.  4)  that  the  mythological  notion  is  "  a  modem  and  more  developed 
Idea,"  but  the  parallel  with  the  Egyptian  deity  seems  to  contradict  this.  The  personificatioi 
6i  an  attribute  soon  became  a  deity. 

•  '  Ancient  Law,'  pp.  14—16,  etc. 

•  f 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PENTATEUCH. 


and  property,  which  are  the  precious  results  or  fullyrdeveloped  human  law,  Ha 
outside  the  purposes  for  which  the  Divine  law  was  necessary.  But  it  must  be 
remembered  that  Divine  law  had  to  fulfil  these  purposes,  as  St.  Paul  teaches  us, 
by  ita  being  truly  law,  and  not  merely  a  code  of  moral  and  religious  precepts.  It  is 
therefore  of  importance  to  observe  what  conclusions  as  to  the  definite  meaning  and 
force  of  law  have  been  drawn  by  the  human  mind  with  the  aid  of  the  experience 
gained  in  the  development  of  law.  By  none  in  any  age  has  the  philosophy  of  law 
been  more  carefully  studied,  or  its  terms  more  exactly  defined,  than  by  the  ancient 
Romans.  The  Roman  mind,  above  all  others,  was  a  legal  mind.  The  iron  power 
of  the  Soman  state,  to  which  the  modern  nations  of  Europe  have  succeeded  in 
proportion  as  they  have  accepted  and  assimilated  the  principles  which  constituted 
its  strength,  was  the  power  of  the  sovereign  authority  of  law.  What,  then,  is  the 
exact  idea  of  law  which  presented  itself  to  the  Roman  mind  ?  The  Romans  used 
two  words  in  somewhat  the  same  sense,  but  by  no  means  as  perfectly  syno- 
nymous, lex  and  jus;  jus  having  the  wider  sense  of  the  two,  including  often 
that  which  is  right  according  to  the  general  principles  of  justice,  while  lex  is  law 
in  its  strict  and  proper  sense.  Cicero  ('De  Leg.'  i.  6)  defines  lex  thus:  "Quse 
scripto  sancit  quod  vult  aut  jubendo  aut  vetando."  It  has  been  thus  defined  by  a 
modern  scholar :  "A  law  is  a  rule  or  command  of  the  sovereign  power  in  a  state,  pub- 
lished in  writing,  and  addressed  to  and  enforced  upon  the  members  of  such  state ; 
and  this  is  the  proper  sense  of  law  in  Roman  writers." l  This  definition  is  singularly 
exact  and  complete.  It  includes  all  the  elements  into  which  writers 3  on  the  subject 
of  jurisprudence  have  resolved  every  law;  viz.  "a  command  of  the  lawgiver,  an 
obligation  imposed  thereby  on  the  citizen,  and  a  sanction  (or  punishment)  threatened 
in  the  event  of  disobedience;"  the  command,  which  is  the  first  element  in  law, 
being  a  rule  which  prescribes  or  forbids,  not  a  single  act  merely,  but  all  acts  of  the 
same  kind.  There  are  obviously  three  ideas,  correlative  to  these  three  elements, 
involved  in  the  complete  idea  of  law,  and  necessary  to  its  perfectneas :  the  supreme 
authority  of  the  lawgiver ;  his  right  to  claim  obedience ;  and  his  power  to  punish 
transgression.  Only  where  these  are  absolute,  can  law  have  all  its  force ;  so  that  it 
follows,  that  no  law  can  be  law  in  the  fullest  and  most  exact  sense  of  the  word 
except  Divine  law. 

It  is  important  to  bear  these  conclusions  in  mind  in  examining  the  subject  of  the 
giving  of  the  law  b  Moses,  and  also  in  reference  to  St.  Paul's  argument  respecting 
Divine  law  in  his  Epistle  to  the  Romans.  For  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  much 
of  that  argument  derives  its  force  from  the  true  meaning  of  "  law  "  as  understood 
by  the  Roman  mind.  The  character  of  that  mind  gave  a  special  direction  to  this 
exposition  of  the  gospel,  which  the  apostle  adapted  to  the  intellectual  education  of 
those  to  whom  he  was  writing ;  a  direction  which  we  find  in  no  other  epistle  except  in 
that  to  the  Galatians.  In  that  epistle,  however,  the  question  of  "  law  "  is  treated  far 
less  generally  and  philosophically,  and  rather  in  reference  to  a  particular  question, 
and  to  the  teaching  of  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures. 

Necessity  for  the  Revelation  of  Divine  Law. 
27.  It  ii  of  course  impossible  to   doubt  that  the  development  of  human  law 
has  been,  both  in  its  process  and  in  its  results,  of  inestimable  value  for  the  educa- 
tion of  man   as   a  reasonable  being,  and  specially  as  enabling  him  to  realise  the 

>  The  late  George  Long  in  article  Lex  in  Smith's  '  Dictionary  of  Antiquities  ' 
Benthamm  the  'Fragment  on  Government,'  and  Austin  in  his  •  Province  of  Jarimrn. 
daaoa  Detarmrned   (Maine  s  '  Ancient  Law,"  p.  7).  -un-jrw 


DJTBODUCTION  TO  THE  PENTATEUCH. 


xa 


mutual  duties  and  responsibilities  of  all  human  relations.  It  is  also  certain,  ai 
has  been  already  intimated,  that  human  aw  has  indirectly  aided  religion,  by 
enabling^  man  to  understand  more  clearly,  and  appreciate  more  fully,  the  relations 
between  the  Divine  law  and  the  gospel  of  Christ.  But  it  has  been  only  too  obvious 
in  the  history  of  the  world,  that  of  itself  human  law  has  been  wholly  insufficient — 
we  may  even  say  worse  than  useless — for  the  direction  of  man  in  his  responsibilities 
to  God  his  Creator,  or  for  preserving  among  men  the  true  knowledge  of  God.  The 
history  of  all  the  nations  of  antiquity  proves,  that  the  knowledge  of  God  was  much 
sooner,  and  much  more  generally,  obscured  among  them  than  that  knowledge  of  good 
and  evil,  which  is  the  basis  of  human  law ;  while  the  law,  on  the  other  hand,  often 
promoted,  or  at  least  sanctioned,  superstition  and  idolatry  rather  than  true  religion. 
In  Egypt,  for  example,  the  fundamental  and  original  idea  was  that  of  one  God,  not 
represented  by  any  form ;  but  his  attributes  were  personified  under  various  names, 
each  of  which  had  its  own  significant  form  or  representation,  to  which  Divine  honour 
and  worship  were  paid.  A  kind  of  pantheism  became  polytheism,  and  this,  recognised 
by  the  law,  filled  the  land  with  the  grossest  idolatry.  Whatever  may  have  been  the 
process  in  each  nation  through  which  the  belief  in  one  God  became  corrupted,  it  is 
notorious  both  that  the  corruption  was  universal,  and  that  human  law,  even  when  it  did 
not  foster  the  tendency,  nowhere  prevented  the  downward  movement.  St.  Paul, 
in  the  beginning  of  his  great  argument  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  describes 
how,  even  among  the  most  civilised  and  progressive  nations  of  the  whole  world, 
such  as  the  Greeks,  the  knowledge  of  God,  which  man  possesses  through  the  mani- 
festation of  God's  eternal  power  and  Divinity  in  the  visible  works  of  creation,  was 
suppressed  and  perverted.  Through  their  alienation  of  heart  from  the  living  God, 
"  though  they  knew  God  they  glorified  him  not  as  God,  neither  were  thankful ;  but 
they  became  vain  in  their  imaginations,  and  their  foolish  heart  was  darkened ;  and 
they  changed  the  truth  of  God  into  a  lie,  and  worshipped  and  served  the  creature 
more  than  the  Creator."1  And  the  result  of  this  apostasy  from  the  worship  of 
the  one  true  God  was  that  he  "gave  them  over  to  a  reprobate  mind,"  a  mind 
incapable  of  using  aright  that  knowledge  of  good  and  evil  which  it  naturally  pos- 
sessed ;  so  that  although  they  knew,  of  their  own  selves,  without  any  revelation, 
what  was  the  judgment  of  God  upon  evil  in  all  its  varied  forms,  and  that  those 
who  did  such  things  were  worthy  of  death,  yet  they  not  only  committed  these  evils 
themselves  through  the  force  of  temptation,  but  even  lost  their  consciousness  of 
the  distinctions  between  right  and  wrong,  and  approved  of  those  who  did  evil ;  a  fact 
of  which  Greek  and  Roman  literature  supplies  only  too  abundant  confirmation.  Such, 
St  Paul  argues,  was  the  necessity  for  God's  law  being  given,  or  (as  he  expresses  it) 
for  the  anger  of  God  being  "  revealed  from  heaven  against  all  ungodliness  and  un- 
righteousness of  men  who  hold  down  the  truth  in  unrighteousness."  That  "  wrath  of 
God  "  has  indeed  to  be  yet  further  revealed  against  all  impenitent  sinners,  whether 
they  have  sinned  without  law  or  under  the  law,  who  reject  the  mercy  and  goodness 
of  God.  But  in  the  first  instance,  the  revelation  of  God's  wrath  against  sin,  and  of 
his  condemnation  of  it,  was  made  in  his  law.  This  was  the  first  and  special  purpose 
of  the  law,  to  convince  man  of  sin,  and  compel  him  to  recognise  his  own  transgressions 
as  offences,  not  only  against  the  order  of  human  society,  but  against  the  authority  of 
God,  and  against  the  obligations  under  which  we  lie  to  our  Creator,  these  offences 
rendering  us  therefore  subject  to  the  penalty  of  death,  spiritual  and  eternal.  To 
produce  this  effect,  however,  it  was  necessary  that  this  revelauun  should  be  made  in 
th»  form,  not  of  religious  and  moral  precepts  meiely,  however  holy  and  good,  but 


Ll«-«k 


xxii  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

of  law  in  its  strictest  and  fullest  sense,  as  commanded  by  an  authority  which  man 
could  not  question,  imposing  obligations  of  all  the  strongest,  and  enforced  by  the 
sanctions  of  a  power  which  none  could  resist. 

28.  It  is  important  that  this  definite  idea  of  law  should  be  present  to  our  mind  in 
considering  the  history  of  the  revelation  of  Divine  law  in  the  Torah.  We  cannot 
fail  to  notice  that  in  some  of  the  characters  of  that  history  there  is  a  strong 
resemblance  to  those  of  the  development  of  human  law.  God  in  his  revelations  of 
himself  to  man  before  the  time  of  Moses  first  of  all  spoke  to  his  chosen  people  by 
separate  commands  and  special  directions.  Religious  usages,  such  as  those  of  the 
burnt  oT.  ring  and  other  "  sacrifices  for  God,"1  the  giving  of  tithes,2  the  erection  of 
altars  and  of  consecrated  pillars,*  and  perhaps  many  other  customs  not  mentioned  in 
the  history,  which  were  afterwards  embodied  in  the  law,  together  with  the  rite  of 
circumcision  which  had  been  expressly  commanded,  no  doubt  formed  an  unwritten 
"  customary  law,''  at  all  events  from  the  time  of  Abraham ;  though  probably,  during 
the  sojourning  of  the  people  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  this  traditionary  law  became  cor- 
rupted through  the  admixture  of  heathen  rites  and  superstitions.  At  the  close  of  this 
period  God  first  of  all  made  himself  known  to  them  by  Moses  as  the  God  of  Abraham 
their  father,  the  Eternal  and  Self- Existent ;  and,  by  his  judgments  upon  Egypt,  and  his 
deliverance  of  his  people  out  of  the  land  of  their  bondage,  he  established  his  supreme 
authority  and  his  special  claim  on  their  obedience.  And,  immediately  before  they 
left  the  scene  of  their  captivity,  another  step  was  taken  towards  the  revelation  of 
his  law,  by  the  institution  of  the  Passover,  and  of  the  various  rites  and  ordinances 
connected  with  it.*  And  now  the  word  Torah,  which  before  had  only  once  been 
used  in  a  general  way  with  reference  to  the  obedience  of  Abraham,6  is  introduced  as 
suitable  for  the  directions  given,  for  the  economy  of  law  was  beginning.  The  time 
had  arrived  for  forming  the  seed  of  Abraham  into  a  nation ;  God,  their  King  and 
Governor,  was  to  deal  with  them  no  longer  as  individuals,  or  merely  as  a  family 
united  among  themselves  by  the  patriarchal  ties,  but  as  his  own  chosen  nation.  This 
nation,  insignificant  as  it  might  appear  in  comparison  with  the  great  kingdoms  of 
this  world,'  was  to  be  mighty,  not  by  the  extent  of  its  territory  or  the  number  of  its 
population,  but  as  the  depositary  of  God's  revelation  and  of  his  promises  to  man, 
and  as  the  witness  on  earth  to  the  one  living  and  true  God,  and  to  his  righteousness. 
And  for  this  purpose  it  was  necessary  that  their  national  life  should  be  based  on 
his  law, — a  law  embodying  all  those  principles  of  the  Divine  order  which  human 
law  represented  but  partially  and  imperfectly, — a  law  with  the  most  absolute  au 
thority,  the  strongest  obligations,  and  the  most  tremendous  sanctions.  Of  this  law 
the  nation  was  to  be  in  its  constitution  and  organisation  the  representative  to  the 
world. 

29.  But  while  this  law  must  be  in  its  fundamental  principles  the  expression  of 
that  universal  Divine  order  which  is  necessary  to  man  as  man,  yet  it  was  not  less 
essential  t-  the  development  of  the  ational  life  of  the  chosen  people,  that  in  its 
details  the  law  should  be  s  itable  for  the  actual  circumstances  and  condition  of 
that  people  at  the  time  at  which  it  was  given,  with  such  provision  for  their  future 
condition  as  the  Divine  wisdom  might  Bee  to  be  required  and  sufficient.  Such  con- 
eiderations  point  to  the  conclusion,  that  to  fulfil  the  several  purposes  of  the  law,  both 
as  to  mankind  generally  and  to  the  particular  nation  to  whom  it  was  given,  that  law 
must  be  twofold,  the  primary  law  embodying  all  the  elements  of  that  Divine  ordei 
which  is  the  immediate  result  of  man's  creation  and  original  state  ;  the  secondary 

1  Ixod.  xviii.  12.  »  Gen.  xir.  20 ;  xxviiL  22.  »  Gen.  xxviil  22 :  xxxi.  45. 

•Eiod.xiL.xfli.  •G.n.xxrH.  « Demt  tU.T. 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PENTATEUCH.  rx& 

law  applying  the  principles  of  that  order  to  the  religious,  moral,  political,  and  social 
life  of  the  nation  in  such  manner  as  should  be  best  calculated  for  the  true  develop- 
ment of  that  life.  That  such  a  distinction  as  is  here  indicated  is  actually  found  in 
the  law  given  by  God  to  Israel  cannot  be  questioned  j  and  the  very  distinction  indi- 
cates, when  the  reasons  for  it  are  considered,  that  the  laws  of  the  first  class  are  uni- 
versal and  permanent,  those  of  the  second  special  and,  except  in  their  spirit,  variable. 
It  is.  however,  very  important  to  observe  not  only  the  broad  line  of  distinction  which 
by  the  mode  of  their  promulgation  is  drawn  between  the  primary  law  and  the 
secondary,  but  also  that  which  is  not  less  apparent  on  further  examination,  the  rela- 
tion between  the  two,  with  its  limitations. 

Thi  Primary  Law  of  thb  Two  Tables. 

30.  The  promulgation  of  the  Divine  law  from  Mount  Sinai  is  described  twice  in 
the  Torah,  first  as  part  of  the  history  in  the  nineteenth  and  twentieth  chapters  of 
Exodus,  and  a  second  time,  with  some  slight  modifications,  in  the  addresses  made  by 
Moses  to  the  people  before  his  death. '  The  event  was  one,  as  Moses  reminded  the 
Israelites,2  unparalleled  in  the  history  of  man  ever  since  the  creation  of  the  world. 
No  nation,  whatever  its  traditions  and  legends  may  be,  has  ever  even  conceived  the 
idea  of  the  God  of  heaven  and  earth  proclaiming  his  law  to  themselves  "out  of  the 
midst  of  the  fire," — the  light  unapproachable,  which  hid  his  awful  presence  from  the 
eyes  of  man, — with  his  own  voice.  At  the  creation  "  he  spake  and  it  was  done ;  he 
commanded  and  it  stood  fast."  That  was  his  decree  (Ohoq)  operative  in  nature ;  he 
now  speaks  words  of  law  {Torah)  to  man  made  in  his  image,  demanding  the 
obedience  of  a  reasonable  creature.  He  was  afterwards  to  speak  to  man  in  his 
only  begotten  Son ;  a  yet  more  perfect  and  Divine  utterance.  But  as  regards  the 
outward  manifestations  and  visible  signs  of  the  majesty,  authority,  and  power  of  God, 
che  giving  of  the  law  from  Mount  Sinai  is  an  event,  so  far  as  we  may  conclude  from 
Holy  Scripture,  such  as  will  not  again  be  witnessed  until  that  great  day  "  when  the 
Lord  Jesus  shall  be  revealed  from  heaven  with  the  angels  of  his  power  in  flaming  fire 
taking  vengeance  on  them  that  know  not  God,  and  obey  not  the  gospel  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ."  s  Of  that  terrible  day  Mount  Sinai,  as  we  inferred  from  the  language  of 
the  Apostle  Paul,4  was  the  anticipation  and  precursor.  It  is  impossible  for  us  to  con- 
ceive a  more  solemn  expression  of  the  awful  holiness  of  Almighty  God,  and  of  the 
certain  and  terrible  consequences  of  disobedience  to  his  law,  than  is  contained  in  the 
simple  but  sublime  description  of  the  whole  scene.  The  great  mountain,  before 
which  the  hosts  of  Israel  were  encamped,  itself  inspiring  awe  by  its  desolate 
grandeur  and  the  mysterious  silence  of  nature  there,6  after  a  solemn  warning  to  the 
people  from  Jehovah  to  prepare  themselves  for  this  Divine  revelation,  on  the  morn- 
ing of  the  third  day  was  covered  with  a  thick  cloud,  out  of  which  proceeded  thun- 
derings  and  lightnings,  and  the  voice  of  a  trumpet  exceeding  loud, — such  as  that 
which  at  the  second  coming  of  the  Lord  shall  awake  the  dead, — and  Israel,  trembling 
with  fear,  was  brought  by  Moses  to  the  foot  of  the  mountain,  which  itself  quaked  at 
the  presence  of  the  Lord,  its  smoke  going  up  to  heaven  like  the  smoke  of  a 
furnace.  And  Moses  spake,  and  God  answered  him  "  out  of  the  midst  of  the  fire  and 
the  cloud  and  the  darkness," — the  very  light  was  blackness  to  the  eyes  of  man,6 — witb 
a  great  voice.  And  the  voice  uttered  the  ten  words,  the  ten  brief  commandments  of 
the  law,  which  wore  afterwards  written  on  two  tables  of  stone  by  no  human  agency, 

1  Dent.  T.  2  Deut.  iv.  32,  83.  »  2  Thess.  i.  7,  I. 

*  Kom.  i.  18  (see  §  27,  supra). 

'  CI,  Stanley'!  '  Syria  and  Palestine,'  p.  18,  14.  *  Sm  Deot,  T.  21. 


iNTBODUCTION  TO  THE  PENTATEUCH. 


but  by  the  very  finger  of  God.     It  is  emphatically  said  by  Moses  of  the  law  thus 

given,  "And  he  added  no  more." 

31.  What  then  were  these  ten  solemn  words  proclaimed  to  the  chosen  nation  by 
the  voice  of  God  with  such  awful  testimonies  of  his  dreadful  presence  and  almighty 
power?  Simple  enough  they  seem  to  men  now.  They  are  indeed  nothing  else  than 
those  elementary  principles  of  religious  and  moral  duty,— which,  as  we  have  seen,  arc 
involved  in  man's  origin,  and  whicn  man,  awakened  to  the  knowledge  of  good  and 
evil,  ought  of  himself  to  recognise,— but  now  for  the  first  time  in  man's  history 
asserted  as  the  law  of  God  for  man.  Though  given  to  one  chosen  nation  in  the  first 
instance,  and  addressed  to  them  by  "  the  Lord  their  God,  who  brought  them  out  of 
the  land  of  Egypt  from  the  house  of  bondage,"  yet,  as  the  whole  scene  testifies,  the 
commands  are  those  of  the  God  of  all  the  earth,  the  Lord  of  all  nations,  the  one 
living  and  true  "  God  of  the  spirits  of  all  flesh."  And  being  his  law,  these  com- 
mandments, simple  as  they  may  seem,  cannot  be  understood  aright  unless  their 
spirit,  and  not  merely  their  letter,  is  recognised.  To  the  outward  ear,  as  to  the 
Scribes  and  Pharisees  of  old,  they  sound  merely  as  prohibitions  of  some  great  sins, 
which  the  natural  conscience  of  man  itself  condemns.  "  All  these  have  I  kept  from 
my  youth  up,"  is  the  natural  feeling  of  many  now,  as  of  the  young  ruler  in  the 
gospel.  It  is  only  when,  like  St.  Paul,1  we  are  startled  out  of  our  self-righteousness 
by  discovering  the  spiritual  force  and  infinite  comprehensiveness  of  this  Divine  law, 
that  each  commandment,  however  often  reiterated,  suggests  the  prayer,  "  Lord,  have 
mercy  upon  us,  and  incline  our  hearts  to  keep  this  law." 

32.  The  spiritual  character  of  the  Divine  law,  as  condemning  not  only  outward 
offences,  but  the  first  beginnings  of  sin  within  the  heart,  sufficiently  appears  from  th« 
last  of  the  commandments,  to  which  St.  Paul  refers  as  proof  of  this  truth.  But  there 
is  another  principle,  applicable  to  all  law  in  some  sense,  and  to  the  Divine  law 
emphatically  and  to  the  fullest  extent,  of  which  it  is  necessary  to  have  a  clear  appre- 
hension in  order  to  understand  the  scope  and  purport  of  this  law  of  God.  This 
is,  that  a  law,  when  it  is  the  expression  of  a  duty,  embraces  the  whole  sphere  of 
duties  and  responsibilities  to  any  part  of  which  it  refers ;  in  other  words,  not  only 
that  every  command  includes  the  prohibition  of  that  which  is  opposed  to  it,  which 
none  would  deny  ;  but  also  that  every  prohibition  involves  a  command  to  do 
that  which  is  the  opposite.  This  principle,  which  even  in  the  science  of  human  law 
is  of  no  small  importance,2  is  absolutely  essential  to  the  right  interpretation  of  Divine 
law,  of  which  the  Psalmist  truly  says,  "  Thy  commandment  is  exceeding  broad."  It 
means  that  justice  covers  the  whole  doma'n  of  man's  responsibility,  there  being  no 
distinction,  such  as  some  imagine,  between  perfect  and  imperfect  obligations,  but 
that  whatever  it  is  right  to  do  it  is  wrong  to  leave  undone  :  there  is  no  middle  ground 
between  good  and  evil ;  and  consequently  the  principles  of  justice  and  of  charity  or 
love  are  identical,  requiring  of  us  the  same  actions,  having  the  same  extent  and  the 
same  limits.  This  view  of  the  Divine  law  was  obscured  in  mediasval  and  later  Roman 
theology  by  the  doctrine  of  "  works  of  supererogation,"  works  which  transcend  ilw 
sphere  of  absolute  duty  and  therefore  of  law,  a  notion  founded  on  an  erroneous  con- 
ception of  justice.  Yet  even  by  such  theologians  it  was  allowed  in  theory,  that 
"  every  human  action  proceeding  from  deliberative  reason  must  be  either  good  01 
bad."  *  Whatever,  therefore,  it  is  right  to  do,  it  cannot  be  right,  and  must  be  evil, 
to  leave  undone.     If  it  be  wrong  to  do  any  injury  to  our  neighbour,  it  is  right  to 

1  Rom.  vii.  7—10. 

'  Some  thoughts  are  borrowed  from  a  very  interesting  dwensaion  of  the  question  in  a  work 
so  which  reference  has  been  already  made — Lorimer's  '  Iustitutes  of  Law,'  Book  I.  xi.   xii. 
'  Thorn.  Aijuiua*,  '  Summa  Theol  Prima  Sec.  Quest.'  xviii.  irL  iv.  s.' 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PENTATEUCH. 


love  him,  since  this  is  the  principle  which  alone  will  prevent  us  from  doing  him  any 
injury  ;  and  if  it  is  right  to  love  him,  it  is  wrong  not  to  lovo  him.  And  thus  it  follows 
that  every  commandment  of  God's  law  reveals  to  us  all  that  in  that  sphere  we  are 
either  commanded  or  forbidden  to  do.1  But  there  is  indeed  no  place  for  theological 
disputation  on  this  question,  though,  to  make  it  more  clear,  its  connection  with  th« 
general  subject  of  law  has  been  noticed.  For  not  only  do  our  Lord  and  his  apostles 
teach'  that  love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law,  and  the  only  true  fulfilment — in  other . 
words,  that  love  and  righteousness  or  justice  are  in  principle  identical — but  this 
teaching  is  that  of  the  Old  Testament  itself.  The  words  of  Moses  in  the  Torah  are 
expressly  quoted  both  by  Christ  and  by  St.  James.3  It  was  not,  therefore,  merely 
that  the  fuller  light  thrown  upon  the  law  by  the  gospel  gave  it  this  spiritual 
character;  though  no  doubt  Christ's  own  teaching,  as  in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount, 
asserted  and  expounded  this  aspect  of  the  law  in  opposition  to  the  false  glosses  and 
unspiritual  doctrines  of  Scribes  and  Pharisees ;  but  the  character  was  inherent  in 
the  law  from  the  first,  and  was  that  which  made  it  a  living  power  to  man's  con- 
science, "  perfect,  converting  the  soul,"  the  source  of  all  truth  and  all  wisdom. 

33.  It  may  be  asked,  however,  why,  if  this  be  true  of  the  law  that  every  one  of  its 
commandments  covers  so  wide  a  field  of  responsibility,  in  so  many  of  them  the 
offence  only,  and  that  in  its  extreme  form,  is  prohibited,  while  we  are  left  to  infei 
from  the  prohibition  all  the  positive  duties  ;  for  example,  from  the  command  not  to 
take  God's  name  in  vain,  the  duty  of  honouring  him  with  our  lips  ;  from  the  prohibi- 
tion of  murder,  the  duty  of  caring  for  our  neighbour,  and  aiding  him  in  sickness  and 
suffering?  The  sufficient  answer  to  this  is,  that  although  the  Divine  law  can  only  be 
fulfilled  by  love,  yet  it  is  nevertheless  law,  and  must  speak  in  the  proper  language  of 
law,  in  order  to  fulfil  its  own  stern  and  terrible  functions.  Its  purpose  is  to  detect, 
expose,  and  condemn  all  sin ;  and,  therefore,  those  sins  are  expressly  condemned  the 
evil  of  which  is  most  distinctly  recognised  by  the  conscience,  in  order  that  we  may 
learn  what  is  the  true  character  of  all  sins  of  this  class,  even  of  omissions  of  the 
duty  which  we  owe  to  God  and  our  neighbour  under  this  head.  We  are  reminded 
that  if  we  do  not  honour  God  we  do  not  love  him,  and  if  we  do  not  love  him  it  is 
because  of  the  carnal  mind  which  is  enmity  against  God.  On  the  other  hand,  we 
learn  that  "  he  that  loveth  not  bis  brother  abideth  in  death "  as  surely  as  he  that 
hateth  him ;  and  that  "  he  that  hateth  his  brother  is  a  murderer,  and  ye  know  "  from 
the  law  "  that  no  murderer  hath  eternal  life  abiding  in  him."* 

34.  Another  general  remark  as  to  the  Divine  law  is  important.  It  must  be  observed 
that  while  love — to  God  first  of  all,  and  secondly  to  our  neighbour  as  representing 
God  to  us — is  the  one  principle  from  which  all  the  duties  of  man  are  derived,  never- 
theless law  is  absolutely  essential  for  man's  direction  in  his  earthly  life,  in  order  that 
this  principle  of  spiritual  life  may  not  be  the  vague  abstract  sentiment  of  the  mystic, 

1  Calvin,  '  Instit.  Christiana?  Religionis,'  lib.  ii.  c.  viii.  9 :  Ita  vidore  est  ut  semper  nobis 
finis  pracepti  reseret  quidquid  illie  facere  aut  jubemur  aut  vetamur.  Calvin,  in  the  passage 
which  concludes  with  these  words,  expounds  with  singular  clearness  the  positive  character  ol 
the  Divine  law. 

'  Matt  xxii.  37 — 40  ;  Mark  xii.  29—34  ;  Luke  x.  25—28  ;  Rom.  xiii.  8—10  ;  James  ii  8. 

•  Deut.  vi.  6,  and  Levit.  xix.  18. 

*  1  John  iii.  14,  15.  Calvin's  exposition  of  this  is  characteristic,  but  very  true.  "  Quia 
peccatorum  fceditatem,  nisi  ubi  palpabilis  est,  diluere  et  speciosis  praetextibus  induere  semper 
earo  molitur,  (ergo)  quod  erat  in  unoquoque  transgressionis  genere  deterrimum  et  scelestissi- 
mum  exemplaris  loco  proposuit,  cujus  ad  auditum  sensus  quoque  exhorresceret,  quo  majorem 
peccati  cujuslibet  detestationem  animis  nostris  imprimeret.  Hoc  nobis  imponit  seepius  in 
aestimandis  vitiis,  quod  si  teetiora  sunt,  elevamus.  Has  preestigias  Dominus  discutit  quum 
nos  assuefacit  universam  vitiorum  multitudinem  ad  haec  capita  referre  quie  optlme  quantum 
■it  in  nno  quoque  genera  abominationis  repraesentant. "   ('  Institut'  II.  viii.  10.) 


«vi  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PENTATEUCH. 


but  may  have  a  concrete  form  and  substantial  reality,  through  the  definite  lines  of 
thought,  feeling,  and  action,  which  law  marks  out.  Or,  as  that  Apostle  said,  who  of 
all  men  spoke  most  fully  and  most  profoundly  of  love  both  to  God  and  to  man :  "  By 
this  we  know  that  we  love  the  children  of  God,  when  we  love  God  and  keep  his  com- 
mandments. For  this  is  the  love  of  God,  that  we  keep  his  commandments." '  And  so 
the  Lord  himself  said :  "  He  that  hath  my  commandments  and  keepeth  them,  he  it  is 
that  loveth  me."1  For  sublime  ideas  as  to  the  being  and  perfections  of  the  Infinite 
and  Eternal,  even  as  to  his  love,  are  in  themselves  too  often  unfruitful,  indeed  unreal ; 
the  finite  mind,  not  directed  by  God's  commandments,  soon  loses  its  hold  of  these 
ideas,  before  their  shadowy  forms  can  assume  any  substance ;  and  perhaps  at  last 
nirvana  or  absorption  into  deity, — an  escape  from  individual  human  existence  into 
indefinite,  impersonal  being, — is  the  highest  hope  of  the  bewildered  soul.  From  all 
these  profitless  and  dangerous  dreams  the  law  is  sent  to  awaken  man  to  realities,  that 
is,  to  his  own  duties  and  responsibilities  which  he  owes  to  God,  the  God  of  love,  hi» 
Creator  and  bis  Father. 

35.  The  purpose  of  our  argument  being  to  mark  out  the  leading  principles  of  the 
Divine  law  as  revealed  in  the  Pentateuch,  rather  than  to  discuss  details,  it  will  be 
unnecessary  to  enter  at  length  on  that  which  belongs  to  the  office  of  the  commentator 
or  expos/^or,  the  interpretation  of  the  several  commandments.  It  will  be  sufficient 
to  explain  briefly  the  scope  of  each,  and  its  connection  with  our  previous  investi- 
gations. That  these  commandments  were  ten  in  number  is  certain  from  Scripture 
itself,3  and  it  is  also  certain  that  the  division  must  be  such  that  in  each  command- 
ment one  distinct  principle  of  law  is  enunciated,  and  one  only.  The  question  as  to 
ihe  distribution  of  the  ten  commandments  between  the  two  tables  is  more  difficult  to 
decide  and  of  less  practical  importance.  There  is  nothing  in  the  history  to  indicate 
that  there  was  any  distinction  between  the  laws  on  each  table ;  nor  do  the  words  of 
our  Lord  which  distinguish  the  first  and  great  commandment  as  that  of  love  to  God, 
and  the  second,  "  like  unto  it,"  as  love  to  our  neighbour,  decide  the  question.  For 
the  two  classes  of  duties  so  interpenetrate  one  another,  and  the  whole  law  so  hangs 
on  that  which  man  owes  to  God,  that  the  attempt  to  draw  any  broad  line  between  th« 
commandments  that  belong  to  our  duty  to  God,  and  those  that  teach  our  duty  to  our 
neighbour,  can  never  be  quite  satisfactory.  For  example,  the  law  as  to  the  seventh 
day  is  in  express  words  connected  with  our  duty  to  man  as  well  as  with  that  which 
we  owe  to  God.  The  law  of  filial  obedience  is,  as  has  often  been  remarked,  a  kind  of 
link  between  our  duties  to  God  and  to  man,  for  it  is  as  representing  God  to  us  that 
honour  is  due  to  parents  and  others  in  authority.  The  prohibition  of  adultery  again 
cannot  but  be  interpreted  to  include  many  sins  which  are  directly  offences  against 
God's  holiness,  but  which  affect  only  remotely  and  indirectly  the  welfare  of  our  neigh- 
bour. Indeed,  all  those  interpretations  of  the  several  commandments  which  are 
suggested  by  the  general  principle  of  the  last  of  them,  ouk  iTriBviitiatis,1  introduces  the 
element  of  our  duty  to  God  as  that  which  is  primary  and  most  essential.  For  in 
ImBvitia  the  first  evil  is,  that  it  is  a  desire  for  that  which  is  not  given  us  by  God,  or 
which  is  not  in  our  path  of  duty  to  him  ;6  the  second  evil,  which  is  not  always  pre- 
sent, that  it  belongs  to  our  neighbour.  Without  then  attempting  to  classify  the  com- 
mandments under  those  which  refer  to  our  duty  to  God  and  those  which  contain  our 

1  1  John  v.  2,  8.  »  John  xiv.  21.    Cf.  also  vers.  15,  23,  24  ;  xv.  10. 

»  Exod.  xxxiv.  28  ;  Deut.  iv.  13  ;  x.  4. 

*  Cf.  Rom.  vii.  7.     It  may  be  observed  that  the  argument  of  St.  Paul  itself  is  sufficient 
to  prove  that  the  law  against  tiriBvpia  cannot  be  divided  into  two. 

•  Compare  our  Lord's  temptation  to  turn  stones  into  bread,  aud  again  to  throw  himseli 
from  the  pinnacle  "of  the  temple,  ag  illustrations  of  thi* 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PENTATEUCH.  xxvE 

duty  to  our  neighbour,  we  will  examine  them  in  order,  so  as  to  determine  the  distinct 
principle  which  each  embodies. 

36.  (I.)  The  first  commandment,  as  expressing  the  most  fui  damental  of  all  prin 
cipies,  viz.  the  unity  of  God,  is,  in  a  certain  sense,  the  basis  and  root  of  the  whole 
law.  In  it  he  who  was  in  covenant  with  his  people  Israel,  the  seed  of  Abraham  his 
servant,  asserts  his  own  eternal  and  infinite  Being,  and  that  he  is  the  only  true  and 
living  God.  The  law  proper  is  the  prohibition,  "  Thou  slialt  have  no  other  gods 
before  me."1  The  unity  of  God  is  exclusive :  he  is  one,  and  there  is  no  other:  first, 
and  there  is  no  second  :  alone  to  be  loved,  honoured,  obeyed,  and  served,  as  God. 

37.  (II.)  A  second  principle,  distinct  from  this  of  unity,  is  embodied  in  the  second 
commandment.  God  must  be  worshipped,  not  as  man  imagines  him,  but  as  he  is. 
Ever  since  the  fall,  whenever  man  has  not  either  denied  the  existence  of  God,  or  for- 
gotten him  altogether  in  fleshly  lusts,  he  has  been  prone,  being  incapable  of  appre- 
hending the  idea  of  the  personality  of  Infinite  Spirit,  to  represent  God  to  himself  by 
those  things  which  are  outward  and  visible ;  which  sin  against  the  very  being  of  God — 
in  its  grossest  form,  the  worship  of  graren  images — is  prohibited  in  this  law.  The 
language  of  the  commandment,  in  which  those  who  transgress  it  are  spoken  of  as 
"  those  who  hate  Me,"  reminds  us  that  this  tendency  in  man  is  the  result  of  "  the 
carnal  mind  which  is  enmity  against  God  ;  for  it  is  not  subject  to  the  law  of  God, 
neither  indeed  can  be."  *  This  sin,  though  closely  allied  to  that  of  serving  other 
gods,  so  that  both  are  often  classed  together  in  Holy  Scripture,  is  undoubtedly  not 
the  same.  St.  Paul,  in  the  passage  from  the  Romans  which  has  already  been  dis- 
cussed (§  25),  declares  that,  of  all  sins  committed  by  man,  this  is  the  most  direct 
insult  to  the  majesty  of  the  Creator,  and  has  most  entirely  debased  man  and 
brought  on  him  that  most  terrible  of  all  judgments,  his  being  given  over  by  God 
to  his  own  lusts ;  and  the  law  itself  threatens  that  this  sin  must  of  necessity,  in 
God' s  government  of  the  world,  bring  an  inheritance  of  evil  for  several  generations. 
When  we  regard  this  commandment  from  the  other  aspect,  and  consider  not  only 
what  it  forbids  but  what  it  commands, — that  is,  the  worship  of  him  who  is  a  Spirit  in 
spirit  and  in  truth, — we  find  that  this  subject  is  necessarily  connected,  through  this 
law,  with  the  incarnation  of  the  eternal  Son  of  God.  He  being  "  the  brightness  of 
the  glory  "  of  God,  and' "  the  express  image  of  his  person,"  was  and  is,  though  in  the 
likeness  of  man,  to  be  worshipped  as  God,  because  "in  him  dwelleth  the  fulness  of 
the  Godhead  bodily."  In  him  God,  though  the  Infinite  Spirit,  is  fully  represented  to 
man ;  and  Jesus  Christ,  the  God-man,  alone  satisfies  those  cravings  of  the  human  soul 
which  otherwise  turn  to  idolatry.  Thus  we  see  that  while  the  negative  pole  (so  to 
speak)  of  this  law  is  idolatry,  the  positive  is  the  worship  of  God  in  Christ. 

38.  (III.)  But  God  demands  of  man,  not  merely  spiritual  service  and  worship, 
but  also  that  he  should  honour  God  with  all  that  he  is,  and  specially  by  that  which 
distinguishes  man  as  a  reasonable  being  from  all  other  creatures,  and  by  which  his 
reason  expresses  itself,  that  is,  by  language.  The  tongue,  as  we  are  frequently 
reminded  by  the  psalmist  and  others  in  the  Old  Testament,  and  by  our  Lord  and  his 
apostles  in  the  New,  is  the  glory  of  man  when  it  is  used  in  the  service  of  God,  the 
condemnation  of  man  when  language,  the  overflowing  of  the  heart,  is  a  stream  of 
purposeless  or  evil  words.  The  third  commandment  prohibits  the  highest  offence 
of  this  class,  taking  God's-  name  in  vain,  of  which  the  grossest  form  is  "  swear- 
ing falsely"  And  man  is  so  little  able  to  realise  the  profound  and  mysteriom 
relation  between  our  words,  the  expressions  of  our  will  and  reason,  and  the  mind 

1  Literally  "  before  my  face  ;"  that  is,  beside  or  in  addition  to,  not  but  or  instead  ofm*. 
*  Of  Bom.  viii.  7  and  Bom.  i.  28,  with  §  30. 


xxviH  INTRODUCTION  TO  IflE  PENTATEUCH. 

of  God,  that  ho  specially  needs  to  be  reminded  that  "God  will  not  hold  him 
guiltless  that  taketh  his  name  in  vain."  On  the  other  hand,  regarding  the  law  in  it* 
positive  aspect,  we  must  observe  that  the  whole  force  and  scope  of  the  duty  whicb 
man  owes  to  God  under  this  head  can  only  be  completely  expounded  from  the  truth, 
that  not  only  has  the  Word  of  God  taken  our  nature,  but  also  the  Spirit  of  God,  who 
when  he  first  came  down  on  the  Church,  enabled  men  to  speak  in. other  tongues 
the  high  praises  of  God,  has  made  our  bodies  and  all  their  members  the  temples 
of  God.  Here  the  negative  pole  is  "  false  swearing,"  the  positive  "  praying  in  the 
Holy  Ghost." 

It  seems,  therefore,  not  without  reason  that  8.  Augustine  and  others  have  regarded 
the  first  three  commandments  of  the  law,  not  only  as  specially  representing  man's 
duty  to  God,  but  also  as  related  to  the  three  persons  of  the  Godhead. 

39.  (IV.)  In  the  preceding  commandments  all  the  fundamental  principles  of  the 
service  of  God  are  indicated  and  asserted.  But  this  service,  as  rendered  by  man  on 
earth,  must  want  definiteness  and  form  unless  Divine  law  should  determine  some  order 
and  proportion  in  respect  of  time.  The  fourth  commandment  expresses  in  the  form 
of  law  the  principles  in  regard  to  man's  use  of  time  which  are  involved  in  God's 
creation  of  man,  and  which  have  been  already  discussed  under  that  head.1  It  must 
be  noticed  that,  in  this  law,  the  duty  of  fulfilling  during  six  days  the  original  precept 
to  replenish  the  earth  and  subdue  it,  which  involves  a  very  large  and  important  class 
of  practical  duties  and  responsibilities  which  we  owe  to  God,  and  not  to  man  only,' 
is  as  distinctly  asserted  as  the  duty  of  resting  from  such  labours,  after  the  example  of 
our  Creator,  on  the  seventh  day.  The  interpretation  and  application  of  this  law  which 
was  suited  for  the  Mosaic  dispensation  we  need  not  consider,  here  at  least,  except  to 
observe  that  the  secondary  laws  on  this  subject,  by  increasing  the  proportion  of  days 
which  should  be  given  to  religious  worship  and  observed  as  "Sabbaths,"  themselvei 
prove  that  this  commandment,  as  well  as  all  others,  though  given  for  the  instruction 
and  direction  of  the  conscience,  is  to  be  observed  by  man  in  the  spirit  and  not  in  the 
letter. 

Regarding  it  in  this  light,  we  must  consider  the  fourth  commandment,  in  its  posi- 
tive aspect,  as  indicating  the  duty  of  man  to  devote  a  sufficient  portion  of  his  time  to 
the  worship  of  God  and  to  those  pursuits  which  belong  to  a  spiritual  world.  What 
the  proportion  should  be  must  be  determined  by  the  enlightened  spirit  of  the 
Christian,  directed  by  the  law  itself,  but  not  interpreting  it  in  the  literal  and  servile 
spirit  of  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  which,  by  drawing  a  hard  and  fast  line  between  day 
and  day,  would  contradict  the  law  itself.  On  the  other  hand,  in  its  negative  aspect, 
this  law  includes  duties  to  our  fellow-men,  and  even  to  the  beasts  of  the  field  which 
labour  in  the  sorvice  of  man  ;  and  the  mention  of  these  last  proves  that  the  physical 
value  of  a  periodical  day  of  rest  is  a  principle  of  this  law.  It  is  in  this  aspect  of 
the  Sabbath,  as  a  day  of  rest  for  our  fellow-men  who  serve  us,  that  Moses,  in 
reminding  the  Israelites  of  this  commandment  in  his  last  addresses  to  them,3  con- 
nects it  with  their  deliverance  from  the  land  of  their  bondage,  where  their  Egyptian 
taskmasters  allowed  them  no  rest ;  and,  in  reference  to  this,  the  particular  day  fixed 
for  the  Sabbath  under  the  Mosaic  law,  was  the  day  which  began  with  the  evening 
when  they  came  out  of  Egypt.4 

40.  (V.)  Man's  duty  to  God  leads  to  that  which  he  owes  to  his  neighbour,  and,  as 
has  been  already  observed,  the  fifth  commandment  belongs  as  much  to  one  class  of 

1  See  §  12. 

»  a  Rom.  xii.  11  and  Coloas.  iii.  28.    "  Whatsoever  j»  do,  do  it  heartily,  as  to  the  Uai 
■ad  not  onto  men. 
*  D«rt-  ».  le,  16.  «  Cf.  Kxod.  xrl. 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PENTATEUCH. 


1'itieB  as  to  the  other.  For  the  authority  of  parents  is  to  be  respected  and  their  person! 
■re  to  be  honoured,  because  they  represent  God  to  us,  from  whom  the  parental  rela» 
tion  is  derived  and  in  whom  it  is  constituted.1  And  certainly  we  may  adapt  to  this 
cage  the  argument  which  St.  John  uses  more  generally :  "  He  that  honoureth  not  his 
earthly  parents  whom  he  hath  seen,  how  can  he  honour  God,  his  heavenly  Father, 
whom  he  hath  not  seen  ? ''  And  the  family,  being  a  Divine  ordinance  involved  in 
that  of  marriage,2  is,  so  to  speak,  God's  nursery  in  which  man  may  be  trained  from 
his  infancy  in  those  habits  of  self-control,  and  in  that  respect  and  reverence  for 
authority,  without  which  all  the  bonds  both  of  social  and  of  natural  life  are  of  no 
avail.  The  duties  which  man  owes  to  duly  constituted  authority  in  all  these  spheres 
are  therefore  included  in  this  commandment ;  and  it  is  certain,  as  indicated  in  its 
language,  that,  in  what  we  understand  by  God's  providential  government  of  the  world, 
the  welfare  of  mankind  depends  on  nothing  so  much  as  on  that  due  respect  for  human 
authority,8  as  acting  for  God,  and  that  obedience  to  law,  which  are  first  taught  by 
the  parental  relation,  the  ties  of  which  are  of  all  the  tenderest,  the  strongest,  and  the 
most  eacred. 

41.  (VI.)  The  next  four  commandments  of  the  law  are  nearly  related  together, 
for  thfiy  all  refer  to  those  natural  rights  of  man,  which  either  directly  or  by  necessarv 
inf  orence  are-  derived  from  his  creation.  Of  these  the  first  of  all  is  man's  right  to  hi* 
own  existence,  as  a  being  created  by  God  in  his  image,  whose  life  therefore  cannot 
be  used  merely  as  means  to  other  ends,  for  he  must  be  an  end  in  himself.  The  sixth 
commandment  asserts  in  the  form  of  law,  as  had  been  asserted  after  the  Deluge  many 
centuries  before,  the  intrinsic  sacrednesa  of  the  life  of  man.  In  its  negative  aspect, 
(ho  prohibition,  "Thou  shalt  do  no  murder,"  forbids  all  those  feelings  which,  if  un- 
controlled and  matured,  would  end,  as  Cain's  jealousy  and  anger  ended,  in  murder, 
and  which,  even  if  checked  in  their  course,  would  tend  to  the  injury  of  another  in 
some  degroe.  Even  the  Talmud  and  other  Jewish  traditions  recognise  the  truth  that 
minor  injuries  to  our  neighbour  are,  in  the  eye  of  God's  law,  equivalent  to  murder.* 
On  the  positive  side,  this  commandment  requires  that  active  and  practical  and  loving 
concern  for  the  lives  of  our  brethren,  above  all  for  their  spiritual  being,  the  true  and 
eternal  life,  which  must  proceed  from  the  full  belief  of  the  truth  that  man  is  made  in 
the  image  of  God.5  At  the  same  time  it  must  be  remembered  that  all  the  rights  of  man 
as  regards  this  present  life,  must  from  the  very  nature  of  the  case  be  limited  by  the 
rights  of  other  men ;  in  other  words,  by  those  of  human  society.  The  principle  of  the 
sacredness  of  man's  life  is  asserted  as  the  basis  for  all  law ;  the  application  of  the 
principle,  wherever  it  is  not  determined  (as  it  was  for  Israel  under  special  circum- 
stances) by  Divine  direction,  is  left  to  that  authority  which  is  "  God's  minister  "  for 
human  society.8 

42.  (VII.)  The  seventh  commandment  guards  man's  rights  under  the  ordinance  of 
marriage,  the  mutual  duties  and  responsibilities  of  which,  as  we  have  already  found, 
the  history  of  man'B  creation  plainly  declares.  And  marriage  being  ordained  for  the 
following  reasons,7 — to  take  them  in  the  order  which  its  institution  in  man's  state  of 

1  Cf.  Ephes.  iii.  16,  'E?  oJ  iraoa  irarpid  \v  oipavois  cai  lir}  yrjg  ivoudZtTai,  and  vi  J. 
»  See  §  11.  »  Rom.  xiii.  1—7. 

*  "  He  who  makes  the  face  of  his  neighbour  pale  with  shame  is  like  a  man  that  sheda 
blood."  "  He  who  makes  his  fellow-creature  sin  commits  a  greater  crime  than  the  mur- 
derer." Quoted  by  Kaliscb  on  Exod.  xx.  13 :  but  the  modern,  rationalistic  Jewish  com 
mentator,  in  a  spirit  similar  to  that  of  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees  in  our  Lord's  time,  refuse! 
to  recognise  anything  but  the  letter  in  the  law  itself. 

*  Cf.  in  illustration  the  remarkable  passage,  Prov.  xxiv.  11,  12,  and  our  Saviour's  words 
Matt,  xvi  25,  26 

*  Bom.  xiii.  4,  "  He  beareth  not  the  sword  in  vain."  *  English  Marriage  Service. 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PENTATEUCH. 


innocence  indicates —first,  "for  the  mutual  society,  help,  and  comfort  which  one  ought 
to  have  of  the  other ; "  secondly,  "  for  the  procreation  of  children,  to  be  brought  up 
in  the  fear  and  nurture  of  the  Lord,  and  to  the  praise  of  his  holy  name : "  and  thirdly, 
to  preserve  the  purity  of  human  life  against  the  lusts  of  the  flesh  ;— the  prohibition 
of  the  breach  of  this  ordinance  by  adultery  must  involve,  on  its  negative  side,  the 
prohibition  of  all  things  inconsistent  with  these  reasons,  and  on  its  positive  side,  the 
command  to  fulfil  all  the  duties  and  responsibilities  which  those  reasons  imply. 

43.  (VIII.)  The  eighth  commandment  deals  with  another  natural  right  of  man, 
that  of  property :  not,  like  the  two  preceding,  directly  derived  from  his  creation,  yet. 
the  immediate  consequence  of  his  own  personal  right  to  existence,  and  of  the  rights 
of  the  family  relation.1  From  these  rights  of  man  we  conclude  his  right  to  acquire 
and  possess  such  things  as  pertain  to  the  maintenance  and  development  of  life,  and 
to  use  and  dispose  of  these  for  the  benefit  of  himself  and  of  those  dependent  on  him. 
This  natural  right  of  man,  and  the  duties  involved  in  it,  the  commandment  recog- 
nises and  asserts.  The  whole  sphere  of  these  duties,  both  negative  and  positive,  is 
included  in  one  of  those  comprehensive  and  profoundly  philosophical  precepts  of 
the  Apostle  Paul,  which  we  find  in  his  expositions  of  relative  duties.  "Let  him  that 
stole  steal  no  more,  but  rather  let  him  labour,  working  with  his  hands  the  thing 
which  is  good,  that  he  may  have  to  give  to  him  that  needeth."  *  The  question  of 
the  limitation  of  the  individual  right  of  property  by  the  rights  of  the  society  is  one 
that  specially  belongs  to  the  authority  of  human  law,  which  is  ordained  by  God  for 
the  protection  of  such  rights.3  The  secondary  laws  on  this  subject,  given  to  the 
nation  of  Israel  as  suitable  for  their  peculiar  circumstances,  contain  some  important 
and  suggestive  illustrations  of  the  extent  of  these  rights  and  of  the  corresponding 
duties. 

44.  (IX.)  The  right  of  man  to  receive  the  truth  from  his  neighbour,  and  the 
correlative  duty  of  man  to  speak  the  truth  of  his  neighbour  and  to  his  neighbour, 
arise,  so  far  as  human  interests  are  concerned,  from  the  order  and  constitution  of 
society,  the  mutual  relations  and  responsibilities  of  which  could  not  be  otherwise 
maintained.4  St.  Paul,  while  he  describes  the  old  man  as  corrupt  according  to  the 
lusts  of  deceit,  and  the  new  man  as  created  after  God  in  righteousness  and  holiness 
of  truth,  yet  expressly  bases  the  duty  on  the  ground  of  our  mutual  relation.  "  Where- 
fore "  (he  says),  "  putting  away  lying,  let  every  man  speak  truth  one  with  another ; 
for  we  are  members  one  of  another."  6  This  consideration  must  necessarily  to  some 
extent  govern  the  interpretation  and  application  of  the  ninth  commandment ;  for  the 
same  principle  that  forbids  us  to  bear  false  witness  against  our  neighbour,  would 
equally  require  us  to  bear  true  witness,  even  though  it  be  to  his  personal  injury,  if  the 
interests  of  man  as  a  member  of  society,  and  the  interests  of  social  order,  should  be 
thereby  benefited.  This  conclusionis  obvious  enough.  But  the  question,  which  has  been 
often  discussed  both  in  ancient  and  modern  times,  whether  veracity  is,  under  all  cir- 
cumstances and  to  all  men,  a  duty  in  itself,  and  if  not,  what  are  the  limitations  which 
the  ground  of  the  duty,  indicated  by  St.  Paul,  might  suggest,  is  one  of  much  greater 
difficulty,  into  which  we  need  not  enter  here."  It  must,  however,  be  borne  in  mind 
with  regard  to  all  the  four  commandments  that  have  reference  to  the  natural  rights 
of  man,  that  while  those  rights  mark  out  the  corresponding  duties,  there  is  for  the 

1  See  Lorimer's  'Constitution  of  Law,'  chap,  vii  8,  c — h. 

•  Ephes.  iv.  28.  a  Cf.  e.  g.  Rom.  xiii.  6,  7. 

•  In  this  aspect  of  "truth  '  it  ib  so  closely  allied  to  "justice"  that  it  is  diflwult  H 
separate  them.     See  §  23  as  to  the  personification  of  Thmei. 

•  Ephes.  iv.  22,  25. 

•  8ee  Mozley's  '  Ruling  Ideas  in  Early  Ages,'  pp.  165,  4o.  and  NotM  4— 1. 


INTBODTJCTION  TO  THE  PENTATEUCH.  xnt 


conscience  a  yet  deeper  foundation  of  these  duties  than  any  which  human  interests 
can  supply.  For  the  ethical  virtues  of  love,  purity,  honesty,  and  truth  are  in  mar. 
the  counterpart  of  God's  own  perfections,  and  all  that  is  contrary  to  these  perfections 
must  be,  in  the  nature  of  things,  sinful,  because  it  is  the  contradiction  of  his  image 
and  likeness. 

45.  (X.)  To  all  these  commandments  which  relate  to  the  natural  rights  and  duties  of 
man,  one,  the  tenth  and  last,  is  added,  which  enlarges  their  scope  beyond  that  of  all 
human  laws,  and  marks  them  as  truly  Divine ;  laws  in  which  he  who  is  the  Lord  of 
the  spirit  and  the  conscience  must  be  regarded.  Even  in  human  legislation,  indeed, 
the  intention  of  an  act  is  taken  into  account,  and  sometimes  even  the  absence  of  a 
due  sense  of  the  right  and  of  its  corresponding  duty — as,  for  example,  in  the  case  of 
manslaughter,  the  absence  of  a  sense  of  the  value  of  human  life,  and  of  the  duty  of 
caring  for  it — may  make  an  act  criminal  even  though  there  is  no  positive  intention  to 
commit  a  crime.  But  human  law  can  take  no  cognisance  whatever  of  the  inward 
thought  before  it  is  expressed  either  in  word  or  in  deed.  To  no  one  but  God  himself, 
the  Judge  of  our  spirits,  can  we  be  accountable  for  the  angry  or  malicious  feeling,  the 
impure  desire,  the  covetous  wish,  the  deceitful  thought  and  purpose,  all  which,  as  St. 
Paul  discovered  when  the  law  came  home  to  his  conscience,  are  included  under  the 
general  prohibition,  "  Thou  shalt  not  covet." '  The  desire  is  manifestly  unlawful 
when  that  which  is  desired  belongs  to  another,  because  by  this  it  is  certain  that  it  is 
contrary  to  the  will  of  God  that  we  should  possess  it ;  but  also,  and  no  less  truly, 
whenever  the  desire  is  not  regulated  by  the  Divine  order,  and  subordinate  to  God's 
will.  Such  a  desire,  like  that  of  Eve  before  she  yielded  to  the  tempter,  "  hath  of  itself 
the  nature  of  sin,"  and  is  the  harlot  mother,  as  the  apostle  James  reminds  us,  of  all 
sin  and  death.1 

46.  The  proclamation  from  Sinai  of  this  law  of  the  ten  commandments  is  one  of 
those  events,  the  vast  moral  importance  of  which,  as  compared  with  all  events  in 
secular  history,  and  indeed  with  all  in  sacred  history  from  the  Fall  to  the  Incarnation, 
is,  like  a  great  mountain  mass  the  comparative  height  of  which  is  best  distinguished 
at  a  distance,  realised  now  that  we  look  back  on  it  through  the  ages  of  the  past,  as  it 
could  not  be  understood  at  the  time  when  it  was  first  delivered.  How  little,  notwith- 
standing the  awful  manifestations  of  the  Divine  presence  and  authority,  this  law 
affected  the  minds  of  the  Israelites  at  the  time,  is  apparent  from  the  fact  that  at  the 
foot  of  Mount  Sinai  they  made  and  worshipped  the  golden  calf,  committing,  no  doubt 
unwittingly  through  the  darkness  and  blindness  of  their  hearts,  the  very  sin  of  which 
the  voice  of  God  had  pronounced  the  most  express  and  solemn  condemnation.  And 
of  the  spiritual  force  and  meaning  of  these  commandments,3  although  their  general 
conviction  that  God  who  gave  this  law  was  to  be  feared  is  commended  by  him  as  in 
itself  good,  they  evidently  had  no  conception ;  they  had  indeed  to  learn  this  through 
the  teaching  of  God's  prophets,  and  his  dealings  with  them  as  a  nation,  for  many 
generations ;  and  even  to  the  last  they  were  a  foolish  people,  having  eyes  that  could 
not  see,  and  ears  that  could  not  understand.  Now,  looking  back  on  the  majestic 
scene  from  the  distance  of  some  thirty-four  centuries,  and  interpreting  those  Divine 

1  Both  the  English  words  covet  and  lust  have,  unfortunately,  special  meanings.  In  Greek 
the  words  oiic  liriSu/MJerdc  forbid  every  elass  of  evil  desire.  In  the  Hebrew  a  different 
word  is  used  in  Deuteronomy  for  desiring  the  neighbour's  wife  from  that  employed  for  covet- 
ing his  property.  According  to  Kalisch,  the  Rabbinical  distinction  between  the  two  words 
was  that  avah  (the  word  rendered  covet  in  Deuteronomy)  means  the  first  motion  of  the 
evil  desire,  and  chamdd  that  which  is  fully  developed,  and  produces  the  sinful  deed.  Bui 
from  the  use  of  the  words  in  Deuteronomy  we  should  rather  infer  the  opposite. 

'  Be*  Alford's  note  on  James  L  14,  16.  *  Cf.  Deut.  v.  28,  28. 


Kiii  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

sentences  by  the  light  of  the  knowledge  and  experience  that  God  has  vouchsafed 
to  man  during  the  intervening  period,  we  find  in  them  a  profound  significance,  a 
completeness,  a  harmony,  and  a  due  proportion  of  moral  and  spiritual  truth,  such  as 
afford  proofs  of  their  Divine  power  and  authority,  far  clearer  and  more  convincing  to 
the  enlightened  spirit  of  man,  than  any  that  could  be  given  by  the  most  overwhelming 
outward  manifestations  of  the  Divine  presence.  Who  but  the  living  and  true  God, 
he  to  whom  is  known  all  that  is  in  the  nature  of  man,  and  who  foresees  the  end  from 
the  beginning — all  that  would  be  developed  out  of  that  nature  in  the  history  of  the 
world — could  thus  in  "  ten  words  "  have  set  forth  the  fundamental  laws  of  the  whole 
religious  and  moral  order  of  human  life,  comprehending  the  principles  necessary  for 
every  sphere  of  man's  rights  and  man's  duties,  reaching  at  the  same  time  not  only  to 
the  outward  act,  but  to  the  first  germs  of  evil  within  the  heart  ?  Well  might  Moses, 
in  his  recapitulation  of  the  Divine  law,  while  he  reminded  the  people  of  the  privileges 
which  the  nation  possessed  above  all  other  nations  in  the  tokens  of  the  Divine  favour 
which  they  had  received,  urge  on  them,  that  true  national  greatness  could  only  be 
maintained  through  obedience  to  the  law  of  their  God,  especially  that  which  was 
given  "the  day  that  thou  stoodest  before  the  Lord  thy  God  in  Horeb.'' 

47.  But  is  there  not  an  important  question  here?  We  have  examined  the  extent  ol 
the  commands  of  this  law  of  God  ;  we  recognise  without  difficulty  the  obligation* 
imposed  thereby ;  but  one  thir  g  more  is  necessary  in  order  that  it  may  be  law  indeed 
there  must  be  "a  sanction1  threatened  in  the  event  of  disobedience."  What  is  the 
punishment  which  follows  the  transgression  of  the  law  of  God  ?  There  can  be  no 
difficulty  in  answering  this  question.  The  sanction  of  the  law  of  Paradise  was,  "  In 
the  day  thou  eatest  thereof,  thou  shalt  surely  die  ;  ''  the  sentence  being  carried  out, 
as  we  have  seen  (§  15),  by  the  body  of  man  becoming  not  only  mortal,  but  "  dead 
because  of  sin,"  and  his  spirit  being  separated  and  alienated  from  God, "  dead  in 
sin."  Those  terrible  curses  denounced  on  Israel  as  a  nation,2  if  they  did  not  heaiken  to 
the  voice  of  the  Lord  their  God,  which  Moses  oalled  "  the  curses  of  the  covenant;'3 
were  the  expression  of  that  which  no  human  language  can  fully  express  or  human 
thought  conceive,  the  wrath  of  the  Infinitely  Holy  God  against  sin.  But  did  the 
Israelites  know  and  believe  that  this  condemnation  of  God  was  not  lor  this  life  only, 
but  for  a  life  after  the  death  of  the  body  ?  It  is  impossible  to  doubt  this.  The 
belief  is  inherent  in  the  very  nature  of  man,  and  only  obscured  in  proportion  as  the 
belief  in  the  existence  of  God  is  obscured.  The  Egyptians  themselves,  among  whom 
the  Israelites  had  lived  for  some  centuries,  fully  believed  in  judgment  after  death ; 
and  it  has  been  supposed,  with  some  reason,  that  the  silence  of  Moses  on  the  subject 
of  a  future  world  and  of  the  punishment  of  sin  hereafter  may  be  explained  by  the 
danger  of  the  false  and  superstitious  notions  as  to  the  future  judgment,  which  formed 
so  large  a  part  of  Egyptian  religion,  being  confirmed  in  the  minds  of  those  who  had 
been  long  familiarised  with  these  errors.  This  explanation  does,  at  all  events,  point 
to  the  true  solution  of  the  difficulty,  namely,  that  the  time  had  not  yet  come  for 
a  clear  revelation  of  the  realities  of  a  future  world,  and  therefore,  under  the  dis- 
pensation of  law,  that  world  was  hidden  in  a  mysterious  and  awful  darkness 
which  was  only  dispelled  very  gradually,  until  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  abolished 

J«X,l^'ffi>^lFarti°nl9r  f0I?e  of  this  w?rd'  wWch  is  a  ten»  from  Boman  law,  will 
fa^SWnfr  to  pSTp^  Foreelhm.  "Sanctio  legum  vmcertmpitam 
^g™™u1?*'»  ?;  •  Pafn%Sn-  "Phs  Vi^t  sanotio  permissione  \  t.  fex  quse  cogrtquam 
™fT"  TWP*  i?E  80'e™?°nfi™a«°»  °f»  law  by  the  penalty  or  punishiaent 
attached  to  it.  Thus  Cicero  ('  De  Leg.'  hb.  iii.  c  20)  says ;  "  Noxis  prena  nar  esto  it  in  iU» 

•  DS^T&c      CBP     '  ayWUi*  mUl°ta'  io"0riS  c«piditasP^o£uutncUtW. ' 

*  Dent  xxix.  21 ;  and  c£  Dent,  xxvii.  26  and  Gal.  iii  10. 


INTRODUCTION  tO  THE  PENTATEUCH,  xxxli 

death,  and  "  brought  life  and  immortality  to  light  through  the  gospel." '  At  the 
same  time  it  must  be  remembered  that  Christ  himself  teaches  us  that  the  language 
of  the  Torah  itself  implies  both  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  and  even  the  resur- 
rection of  the  body.* 

Tng  Secondary  Laws. 

48.  If  the  law  given  to  Israel  had  consisted  only  of  the  ten  commandments  spoken 
by  the  voice  of  Jehovah  from  Mount  Sinai,  this  alone  would  have  been  an  inestimable 
blessing  to  the  nation.  Regarded  also  as  a  necessary  step  in  Divine  revelation  and 
a  preparation  for  the  gospel  of  Christ,  these  primary  laws  of  religious'  and  moral  duty, 
proclaimed  with  the  fullest  sanctions  of  Divine  authority,  and  with  the  curse  and 
condemnation  of  Almighty  God  denounced  against  the  sinner,  of  themselves  were 
sufficient,  as  is  proved  by  St.  Paul's  reference  to  the  last  of  these  commandments,  to 
convince  man  of  sin,  if  only  he  would  understand  and  apply  them  to  himself,  and 
thus  to  lead  him  to  Christ  "  that  he  might  be  justified  by  faith."  Why  then  was  it 
necessary  that  to  this  grand  and  simple  law,  which  was  the  covenant  between  God 
and  the  nation,  there  should  be  Superadded  other  "statutes"  and  "judgments," 
which,  both  from  the  method  in  which  they  were  delivered,  and  from  their  very 
nature,  are  obviously  secondary  and  subordinate  ?  Might  not  Israel  have  been  now 
left,  as  other  nations  were,  to  develop  for  themselves,  with  the  immeasurable  advan- 
tage of  having  these  commandments  to  direct  them,  the  laws  that  might  be  neces- 
sary for  their  national  life  ?  One  reply  to  this  question  has  been  given  already 
(§  29,  suprd).  But  further  it  must  be  answered,  that  for  the  complete  development 
of  the  economy  of  law,  so  as  to  teach  God's  chosen  people,  and  all  nations  through 
them,  the  real  meaning  and  trerhendoUs  force  of  Divine  law,  and  the  impossibility  of 
attaining  life  through  any  law,  however  fully  it  might  provide  for  all  the  conditions 
of  man  on  earth, — very  much  more  was  required  than  this  one  solemn  and  authority 
tive  promulgation  of  its  eternal  principles.  God  therefore  in  his  wisdom  and  good- 
ness gave  to  Israel  not  only,  dire'ctly  from  himself,  these  primary  laws,  but  also, 
through  his  Bervant  Moses,  as  a  mediator  between  himself  and  the  nation,  a  Very 
large  body  of  secondary  laws,  which  were  the  application  and  adaptation  of  the  prin- 
ciples of  the  primary  law  to  the  condition  and  circumstances  of  Israel  at  that  time. 
It  was  necessary,  in  order  to  educate  them  in  God's  truth,  and  gradually  prepare  them 
for  a  better  and  more  perfect  and  enduring  covenant,  that  through  these  secondary 
laws  the  whole  religious,  social,  and  domestic  life  of  the  nation  should  be  thoroughly 
permeated  by  Divine  law ;  that  at  every  step  law  should  meet  them  with  its  impera- 
tive demands,  its  warnings,  its  threatenings,  and  its  promises ;  that  thus  the  law 
should  never  be  out  of  their  sight,  and  never  be  wanting  in  that  distinctness  and 
definiteness,  which,  as  we  well  know  to  human  legislation,  is  of  all  things  most 
essential  to  its  force.  And  further,  the  primary  laws  being  laws  for  the  conscience 
of  man,  the  penalty  of  transgressing  them  is  the  wrath  of  God,  which,  even  if  it  should 
never  be  manifested  in  this  life,  the  awakened  conscience  recognises.  But  to  bring  the 
force  of  this  home  to  the  mind  of  mah,  it  was  necessary  that  there  should  be  laws,  the 
transgressions  of  which  should  be  visited  by  Such  punishments  as  all  must  feel  and 
feaf  ever,  in  this  world.  How  this  principle  affected  the  character  of  the  secondary 
laws  we  shall  see  hereafter.  These  laws  may  be  divided,  for  the  purpose  of 
examining  them,  into  two  great  classes,  those  that  directly  concern  man's  relations  to 
God,  and  those  that  belong  to  his  duty  to  his  neighbour.     But  it  must  be  remem- 

»  2  Tim.  i.  10. 

'  See  Matt  xxii.  30 ;  Mark  xii  25 :  and  Luke  xx.  38,  where  the  remarkable  words  art 
added,  iravrtq  yap  avrif  Zuioiv. 

PENTATEUCH.  / 


sxxiv 


XNTBODUCTION  TO  THE  PENTATEUCH. 


bered  that  no  such  distinction  was  made  by  Moses  in  delivering  them ;  and,  foi 
reasons  before  explained  (§  35,  tupra),  no  division  of  this  kind  can  be  completely 
or  scientifically  exact. 

Religious  Laws. 

49.  Those  secondary  laws  which  concern  man's  relations  to  God  include  all  that 
are  ritual  or  ceremonial,  or  are  in  any  sense  religious.  In  regard  to  these  we 
must  first  of  all  recall  to  mind  some  general  principles,  affecting  and  governing 
the  whole  ritual  and  ceremonial  system,  which  explain,  what  otherwise  would  be 
unintelligible,  the  great  difference  between  the  outward  service  of  God  under  the 
law  and  that  under  the  gospel,  although  the  fundamental  principles  of  the  service 
of  God  must  be  the  same  in  all  ages. 

(1)  The  first  purpose  of  these  religious  laws  was,  without  doubt,  that  the  chosen 
nation  should  bear  witness  in  its  religion  to  the  one  living  and  true  God  against  the 
polytheism,  idolatry,  and  superstitions  of  the  other  pations  of  the  world,  from  whom 
they  were  to  be  kept  separate  as  a  holy  and  peculiar  people,  dedicated  to  the  service 
of  him  who  had  called  and  chosen  the  seed  of  Abraham  his  servant 

(2)  Their  outward  service  of  God  was  not,  however,  to  be  something  altogether 
new,  as  if  Jehovah  were  now  for  the  first  time  revealed ;  but  in  its  main  elements 
such  as  the  true  worship  of  God  had  been  from  the  beginning.  He  who  had  chosen 
them  was  the  Creator  of  all  men,  the  God  of  all  who,  ever  since  man  had  been  on  the 
earth,  had  served  him  by  faith.  Ever  since  the  Fall,  partly  from  the  teachings  of 
man's  own  conscience,  and  partly  from  the  express  monitions  of  God's  Spirit,  certain 
religious  customs  had  grown  up,1  and  one  office  of  the  Mosaic  legislation  was  un- 
doubtedly to  confirm  these  usages,  so  far  as  they  were  suitable  for  that  economy, 
by  positive  laws,  and  both  to  develop  them  yet  further  and  to  guard  them  against 
abuses  and  perversions. 

(3)  After  the  Fall,  a  new  element  in  the  relations  between  God  and  man  of  pre- 
eminent importance  had  been  revealed  ;  first,  in  the  promise  of  the  final  victory  of  the 
seed  of  the  woman  in  the  conflict  with  the  enemy  of  God  and  man ;  and  afterwards, 
more  definitely,  in  the  promises  given  to  Abraham  and  his  seed.  These  were  to  be 
ultimately  fulfilled  in  the  redemption  of  the  world  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  "born  of 
a  woman,"  "of  the  seed  of  Abraham,"  and  "born  under  the  law."  This  element  in  the 
faith  of  God's  people  could  not  but  affect  in  the  highest  degree  the  relation  to  God  of 
his  chosen  nation,  and  therefore  must  enter  very  largely  into  the  laws  which  governed 
the  service  and  worship  of  God.  To  be  a  step  forward  in  God's  revelation,  these  laws 
must  point  onwards  to  the.  work  and  offices  of  the  promised  Saviour.  But  at  the 
same  time,  even  more  distinctly  than  they  could  teach  the  future  realities,  they  must 
indicate  that  the  victory  not  being  as  yet  won,  the  redemption  had  not  yet  come, 
and  the  laws  must  therefore  bear  distinct  witness  to  their  own  imperfection  and 
insufficiency. 

(4)  And  lastly,  as  St.  Paul  argues  in  his  Epistle  to  the  Galatians,  the  dispensation 
of  the  law  being  one  of  discipline  and  education,  corresponding  with  the  training 
of  a  child  before  he  comes  to  the  discretion  and  the  rights  of  manhood, — the  children 
of  God,  until  the  time  should  come  for  their  adoption  in  Christ,  and  for  that  gift  of 
the  Spirit  whiah  is  in  the  spiritual  life  what  the  age  of  discretion  is  in  the  natural 
life,  needed  to  be  taught  by  '•  elements  of  this  world,"  outward  and  visible  ordinances, 
and  disciplined  through  restraints  and  the  fear  of  punishment,  before  the  reason*  fo> 
obedience  could  be  fully  understood  or  explained. 

1  Of.  {  28,  tupra. 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PENTATEUCH. 


These  principles  are  specially  exemplified  in  the  sacrificial  system,  which  wai  tha 
centre  of  the  ceremonial  law,  and  the  key  to  all  its  observances  and  requirements.  The 
question  of  the  typical  meaning  of  these,  that  is,  the  aspect  of  the  Mosaical  rites 
and  ceremonies,  when  viewed  in  the  full  knowledge  of  the  realities  of  the  gospel, 
as  figures  of  the  work  of  Christ,  lies  outside  our  present  argument,  the  object  of 
which  is  to  examine  the  system  simply  in  its  character  of  law,  and,  therefore,  in  the 
aspect  in  which  it  presented  itself  to  those  who  were  under  the  law.  It  is,  however 
important  to  observe,  that  in  studying  the  question  of  the  typical  and  allegorical  mean* 
ing  of  Holy  Scripture,  the  only  safeguard  against  fanciful  and  unprofitable  specu- 
lations is  to  be  found  in  the  spirit  which  underlies  the  letter ;  for  example,  in  the 
typical  interpretation  of  the  law,  by  observing  first  of  all  the  spiritual  meaning  of 
the  observance  for  those  to  whom  it  was  commanded. 

50.  In  sacrifice,  the  primary  idea,  as  represented  by  the  word  minchah, — originally 
applied  in  Scripture J  to  all  offerings  to  God,  though  limited  under  the  law  to  vegetable 
offerings, — is  that  of  a  gift  expressive  of  the  faith  and  gratitude  of  the  offerer.  Yet 
the  truth, — first  indicated  by  God's  acceptance  of  Abel's  offering  of  "the  first-fruits 
of  his  flock  and  the  fat  thereof,"  then  confirmed  in  the  covenant  of  mercy  made 
with  Noah,  and  afterwards,  yet  more  expressly,  by  the  Divine  command  given  to 
Abram  in  the  ratification  of  God's  covenant  with  him,' — that  the  most  suitable  offering 
to  God  was  that  of  a  life,  not  merely  to  be  dedicated  to  his  service,  but  to  be  poured 
out  at  his  altar,  certainly  involves,  and  cannot  but  have  conveyed  to  the  mind 
of  the  worshipper,  the  idea  of  propitiation  for  sin,  and  of  the  forgiveness  of  sin,  through 
shedding  of  blood.s  This  mystery  of  the  offering  of  life  as  the  means  of  holding 
communion  with  a  holy  God  was,  no  doubt,  at  first  dimly  apprehended ;  yet  it  could 
not  fail  to  be  associated  with  the  knowledge,  which  St.  Paul*  says  that  man  ha* 
by  nature,  that  Bin  deserves  death.  There  was,  however,  one  event  in  the  history 
of  the  chosen  family  that  must  have  greatly  intensified  the  mysterious  awe  with 
which  the  burnt  offering  was  regarded ;  I  mean  the  command  given  to  Abraham 
to  offer  up  as  a  burnt  sacrifice  his  own  son  Isaac  in  whom  the  promises  were  given, 
followed  by  the  substitution  for  Isaac  of  a  ram  divinely  provided.  It  could  not 
but  be  felt,  hereafter,  whenever  a  sacrifice  was  offered,  that  the  victim  did  in  some 
mysterious  way  represent  the  promised  seed.  There  is  also  another  idea  connected 
with  sacrifice,  that  of  fellowship  through  eating  the  flesh  of  the  victim,  which 
it  would  seem  was  recognised  before  the  giving  of  the  law,6  and  which  certainly  was 
general  in  the  later  heathen  world.  The  passover,  instituted  before  the  giving  of 
the  law,  though  anticipatory  of  it  and  afterwards  embodied  in  it,  was  specially 
such  a  feast  of  fellowship  with  God  and  his  people.  Thus  the  ideas  associated  with 
sacrifice  gradually  grew  in  the  rrrnds  of  God's  servants,  until  the  time  came  when 
the  law  should  exhibit  them  more  distinctly  and  definitely,  and  should  not  merely 
through  theBe  figures  direct  the  minds  of  the  worshippers  to  better  things  to  come, 
but  also  assert,  by  Divine  authority,  the  necessity  of  the  principles  of  worship 
thus  expressed,  to  the  service  of  the  one  true  God.  We  need  but  touch  on  tha 
several  points  in  which  the  law  affected  the  worship  of  God  through  sacrifice. 

61.  (1)   First,  it  determined  the  minister  of  sacrifice  and  of  all  religious  offices. 

1  Gen.  iv.  8—6.  Gen.  xv.  8,  &c. 

•  See  Job  i.  5 ;  xlii.  8  as  an  evidence  of  the  idea  of  atonement  for  sin  being  involved 
in  burnt  offerings,  independently  of  the  law  of  Moses. 

•  Rom  i.  32. 

•  Cf.  Exod.  xviii.  12.  The  word  lechem  which  is  translated  "bread"  is  simply  "food," 
and  the  flesh  of  the  sacrifice  u  frequently  called  God's  lechern.  Lerit.  xxii.  80.  and  «omim  •' 
MaL  i.  7. 

/a 


xxxvi  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

In  patriarchal  times,  sacrifices  were  offered  by  the  head  of  the  family,  though  th» 
case  of  Melchiiiedec  and  probably  also  that  of  Jethro1  are  instances  of  a  priest- 
hood among  the  servants  of  the  true  God ;  while  in  heathen  lands,  as  in  Egypt, 
the  priests  had  long  held  the  position  of  a  privileged  class.  At  the  time  of  the 
giving  of  the  law  from  Mount  Sinai  priests  are  mentioned,  before  the  Levitical 
priesthood  was  established,  but  these  were  probably,  aB  Jewish  interpreters  and  the 
Talmud  assert,  the  first-born  of  the  nation,  and  the  same  as  the  "  young  men  of  the 
children  of  Israel'1  (Exod.  xxiv.)  who  were  appointed  by  Moses  to  offer  those  burnt- 
offerings  and  peace-offerings  by  the  blood  of  which  the  Sinaitic  covenant  was  ratified. 
But  under  the  law,  while  the  Whole  nation  of  Israel,  if  they  kept  God's  covenant, 
was  to  be  "a  kingdom  of  priests,"*  the  sacerdotal  functions  were  restricted  hence- 
forth to  one  family,  that  of  Aaron,  the  elder  brother  of  Moses ;  the  tribe  of  Levi,  to 
which  Aaron  himself  belonged,  being  given  to  him  and  his  descendants  as  a  substi- 
tute for  the  first-born  of  the  nation,  to  assist  the  priests  in  the  service  of  the  tabernacle.1 
Thus  the  tribe  was  representative  of  the  whole  priestly  nation.  But  it  was  not  only 
that  a  priesthood  was  established  ;  the  duties  of  the  priestly  office  were  now  strictly 
defined  and  their  prerogatives  jealously  guarded  by  Divine  law.  We  know,  from 
the  teaching  of  the  New  Testament,  that  this  represented  the  imperative  necessity 
of  a  mediator  in  order  that  sinful  man  might  draw  near  to  God,  and  that  no  man 
could  take  that  office  upon  himself  but  one  called  of  God,  as  Aaron  was  ;*  and  no 
devout  Israelite  could  fail  to  apprehend  the  general  force  of  that  teaching  of  the  law. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  selection,  by  Divine  authority,  of  one  tribe, — whether  or  not 
it  was  Selected  for  its  zeal  against  the  worshippers  of  the  golden  calf,6 — and  of  a 
particular  family  out  of  that  tribe,  was  to  the  nation  a  test  of  obedience  to  law. 
There  were  those  who  were  unwilling  to  submit  to  this  law,  because  they  did  not 
fully  understand  the  reason  of  the  appointment.6  They  said  to  Moses  and  Aaron, 
"  Ye  take  too  much  upon  you,  seeing  all  the  congregation  is  holy,  every  one  of  them, 
and  the  Lord  is  among  them."  But  Israel  was  taught  by  terrible  proofs  that  the  law 
of  Jehovah  was  law  indeed,  and  that  death  was  the  certain  consequence  of  wilful 
transgression. 

Other  limitations  made  by  the  law  in  regard  to  sacrifices  were  those  of  place  and 
time.  It  was  provided  that  when  Israel  should  have  entered  into  the  possession  of 
the  promised  land,  offerings  of  every  kind  should  be  made  only  "  in  the  place  which 
the  Lord  thy  God  shall  choose  to  put  his  name  in,"7  The  practical  purpose  in  this 
was  obviously  to  secure  both  purity  of  worship  and  the  unity  of  God's  covenant 
people.  This  kind  of  limitation,  indeed,  as  well  as  that  of  times  and  seasons  as 
specially  holy,  was  a  principle  that  entered  largely  into  the  religious  provisions  of 
the  law ;  but  it  is  unnecessary  to  our  argument  to  consider  these  limitations  beyond 
observing,  that  important  as  they  were,  as  educating  the  chosen  nation  both  in  the 
knowledge  of  God's  relation  to  themselves,  and  as  a  test  of  their  obedience  to  his 
law,  they  were  indications  of  an  imperfect,  and,  to  the  same  extent,  unspiritual 
economy,  one  that  could  only  be  a  preparation  for  an  enduring  and  universal 
covenant." 

•  Exod.  Hi.  1;  xviii.  1,  12.  The  original  meaning  of  the  word  cohen  is  "chief"  or 
"prince,"  and  is  sometimes  used  in  this  sense  (see  2  Sam.  viii.  18  j  xx.  26),  but  in  tha 
Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  it  is  translated  ieptwc.. 

'  Exod.  xix.  6.  s  Num.  viii.  6,  &c.  «  Hcb.  v.  1—4. 

•  Exod.  xxxii.  25 — 29  ;  and  cf.  ver.  29  with  Deut.  xxxiii.  9. 

•  Num.  xvi.  It  must  be  observed  that  Korah  was  the  son  of  the  second-born  of  Kohath, 
and  Dathan  and  Abiram  were  sons  Of  Eliab,  a  member  of  one  of  the  leading  families  of  th« 
tribe  of  Eeuben,  cf.  Num.  xxvi.  8,  9.  It  is  evident  that  they  considered  the  selecticn  o) 
the  priesthood  arbitrary. 

1  Deut.  xii.  6— 11.  tta.  •  Cf.  St  John  ir.  21—27  ;  GaL  iv.  g,  9,  10 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PENTATEUCH.  xxxvil 

62.  (2)  Again,  the  law,  while  adopting  generally  Baerifice  as  a  suitable  method  Of 
worshipping  God,  made  very  complete  and  elaborate  provisions  both  as  to  the  ritual 
of  sacrifice,  and  as  to  the  different  kinds  of  offerings.  These  regulations,  besides 
guarding  against  abuses  of  the  rite,  were  obviously  intended,  and  were  calculated  in  a 
high  degree,  to  educate  the  minds  of  the  Israelites  through  outward  symbols,  and 
diiect  them,  as  far  as  was  possible,  till  the  redemption  should  be  accomplished,  to 
the  true  principles  of  spiritual  Worship.  Among  the  heathen,  the  fundamental 
idea  of  sacrifice  was  perverted  into  the  notion  that  the  deity  required  these  gifts  j  the 
offering  up  of  a  victim  into  the  belief  that  he  delighted  in  the  suffering  and  death  of 
his  creatures ;  and  while  sacrifice  implied  that  for  communion  of  sinful  man  With 
God  more  was  required  than  his  own  obedience,  it  was  easily  forgotten  that,  ie 
themselves,  sacrifices  were  only  of  value  as  expressing  the  faith  and  love  of  the 
offerer.  These  misapprehensions  are  so  natural  to  the  human  mind  that,  even  under 
the  provisions  of  the  law,  men  were  liable  to  them,  although  the  prophetical  writings 
of  the  Old  Testament  contain  distinct  protests  against  them.1  But  the  law  gave  no 
encouragement  to  such  errors,2  and  by  its  elaborate  distinctions  directed  the  mind  of 
the  worshipper  to  truths  inconsistent  With  them. 

The  animal  sacrifices  ordained  by  the  law  may  be  divided  into  three  classes, 
in  each  of  which  one  distinctive  idea  was  prominent.  1.  The  burnt  sacrifice  (gener* 
ally  'olah,  "that  which  goes  up"),  in  which  the  blood  was  poured  out  "round 
about  upor  the  altar,"  and  the  whole  of  the  body  of  the  victim  with  all  the  fat 
was  burnt  on  the  altar.  The  prominent  idea  in  this  was  the  free-will  offering 
to  God  of  spiritual  worship,  of  prayer,  praise,  and  adoration.  %  The  peace  of- 
fering (skelem,  "peace"),  in  which  the  blood  was  used  as  in  the  burnt  offering 
»nd  the  internal  fat  (clieleb,  which  was  considered  the  sign  of  animal  perfection 
and,  as  well  as  the  blood,  forbidden  to  be  eaten)  was  burnt  on  the  altar ;  tha 
flesh  was  eaten  partly  by  the  offerer  and  partly  by  the  priests  and  their  families. 
The  idea  here'  was  peace  with  a.  reconciled  God,  and  communion  with  him  and  his 
Church.  The  passover  may  he  considered  as  belonging  to  this  class.  3.  The  silt 
offering  (chattath)  "  sin  "),  which  was  the  special  characteristic,  as  it  was  the.crea- 
tion,  of  the  law.  In  this  not  only  was  tho  blood  poured  out  as  in  the  othet' 
sacrifices,  but  first  of  all  some  was  put  on  the  horns  of  the  altar,  and  (when  the 
offering  was  for  the  high  priest  or  the  whole  congregation)  also  taken  into  the  Sanc- 
tuary and  sprinkled  on  the  vail  and  the  altar  of  incense  j  and  once  in  the  year,  on 
the  great  day  of  atonement,  Was  taken  into  the  holy  of  holies  and  sprinkled  on  (or  be* 
fore)  the  mercy-seat.  The  cheleb  was  burnt  on  the  altar  of  burnt- off erihg,  the  flesh 
was  generally  eaten  by  the  priests  in  the  holy  place,  to  bear  the  iniquity  of  the 
congregation,  and  make  atonement  for  them  before  the  Lord.8  But  whenever 
the  blood  was  taken  into  the  sanctuary,  the  body  was  burnt  without  the  camp  as 
utterly  unclean  and  accursed.  The  idea  in  offerings  of  this  class  was  evidently 
atonement  for  sin.  But  it  must  be  observed  that  in  all  sacrifices  of  each  of  the  thre* 
classes,  atonement  was  represented  by  the  pouring  out  of  the  blood,  and  the  worship 
of  God  by  burning  the  fat  on  the  altar. 

63.  Into  further  details  either  of  the  sacrificial  system  or  of  the  ceremonial  law 
generally  it  is  unnecessary  to  enter  in  this  introduction,  because  that  which  we  have 
noticed  is  sufficient  to  explain  distinctly  how  this  branch  of  the  secondary  laM?  il 
connected  with  the  fundamental  principles  of  Divine  law,  and  with  the  purposes  for 

1  Such  as  Ps.  L  7—16  ;  li.  16,  17  ;  Micah  vi.  6—9. 

*  E.g.  The  offerings  by  fire  might  be  a  bullock,  sheep,  or  fowl,  or  even  a  handful  of  flow 
with  oil  and  frankincense,  and  yet  each  was  an  offering  "if  a  sweet  savovr  ,t>  the  Ltri." 
'  Levit  x.  17 


cxxviil  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PENTATEUCH. 


which  it  was  given  to  man.  Of  this  ceremonial  law  it  is  true  that  every  "jot  and 
tittle  "  must  be  fulfilled,  not  only  by  Christ  himself  "  as  born  under  the  law,"  or  in 
Christ  as  the  antitype  and  substance  of  these  shadows  and  figures,  but,  in  their  spirit, 
by  the  disciples  of  Christ.  For  the  principles  of  the  worship  of  God,  which  the 
ordinances  of  the  ceremonial  law  embodied  and  demanded  of  the  Israelites,  were 
the  very  same  as  those  which  are  necessary  for  ourselves.  First  of  all  this  law, 
by  its  minute  and  strict  provisions,  required  of  man  that  he  should  recognise 
and  acknowledge  himself  as  a  sinner,  both  in  his  nature  from  his  birth  to  his 
death,  and  in  his  daily  life.  It  was  not  only  as  an  inference  from  the  Sinaitic  law 
that  there  was  "  by  the  law  the  knowledge  of  sin,"  but  in  the  ceremonial  system,  the 
perpetual  and  ever-present  exponent  of  God's  law  to1  Israel,  sin  and  death  stared  man 
in  the  face,  haunted  him  day  and  night,  forced  their  presence  upon  him  even  in  his 
holiest  hours,  compelled  him  to  feel  that  all  real  and  acceptable  worship  of  a  God  of 
holiness  and  truth  must  begin  with  a  consciousness  that  we  have  transgressed  his 
commandments,  and  thus,  in  the  emphatic  language  of  St.  Paul,  "  the  Scripture,"  that 
is  the  Torak,  "  shut  up  all  things  under  sin." 1  This  law  again,  with  equal  clearness, 
continually  and  definitely  required  of  man  that  he  should  worship  God  through  faith  in 
an  atonement  for  sin.  The  author  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  reminds  those  to 
whom  he  writes  2  that  the  first  covenant  (that  of  the  law)  was  inaugurated  in  blood ;  I 
and,  he  adds,  "we  may  almost  say  that  in  blood  all  things  are  purified  according  to 
the  law,  and  without  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no  remission."  The  pouring  out  of 
the  blood  in  every  sacrifice  was  the  "outward  and  visible  sign  "  not  of  sin  merely, 
but  of  atonement  for  sin.  And  to  make  it  more  apparent,  through  these  "  elements 
of  the  world,"  what  kind  of  atonement  it  is  on  which  sinful  man  can  rely,  the  great  sin 
offerings- made  once  a  year  on  the  day  of  atonement  had  their  blood  taken  within  the 
Holy  of  Holies  to  the  very  mercy-seat  of  God,  on  which  the  Skechinah,  the  manifested 
Presence  of  Jehovah,  rested.  And  yet,  the  annual  repetition  of  this  most  significant  rite 
— the  most  solemn  by  far  of  all  the  ordinances  of  the  law — indicated  emphatically 
that  the  atonement  signified  was  not  thus  accomplished,  that  the  blood  of  the  true 
sacrifice,  which  would  take  away  sin  and  satisfy  the  conscience,  had  not  yet  been 
taken  before  the  true  mercy-seat  in  the  heavens,  of  which  that  in  the  tabernacle  was 
but  an  image  and  pattern.  The  law  therefore  demanded  by  its  ordinances  faith  in  an 
atonement-for  sin  by  a  real  sacrifice,  yet  to  be  revealed,  the  blood  of  which  must  be, 
when  offered,  taken  into  the  true  Holy  of  Holies  where  God  is  in  his  glory.  That  which 
is  required  of  us  is  the  very  same  in  every  respect,  save  that  now  the  true  sacrifice  hag 
been  finished,  and  the  blood  of  Christ  has  been  taken  by  our  true  High  Priest  within  the 
veil.  The  very  least  of  the  commandments,  which  indicated  to  Israel  these  principles 
of  acceptable  worship  to  God,  embodies  that  which  cannot  be  neglected  by  the 
Christian  without  spiritual  loss.  Lastly,  through  these  ordinances,  Israel  was  assured 
of  peace  with  a  reconciled  God,  and  of  communion  with  him  and  with  their  brethren 
through  sacrifice.  Even  the  stern  economy  of  law,  the  direct  purpose  of  which  was 
to  make  man's  Bin  and  guilt  more  distinctly  seen  and  more  keenly  felt,  yet  was  no 
reign  of  terror,  or  house  of  bondage.  The  son,  though  under  restraints  in  his  child- 
hood, is  nevertheless  a  son  ;  none  the  less  assured  of  his  Father's  love ;  assured  that 
his  own  offences,  though  they  are  severely  chastised,  do  not  alienate  his  Father'! 
heart  from  him,  if  only  he  approach  God  through  the  blood  of  the  covenant.  Perhapi 
there  is  no  aspect  of  the  law  which  is  overlooked,  or  at  least  not  sufficiently  appre- 
ciated, by  Christians  so  frequently,  and  with  so  much  loss  to  their  own  enjoyment  oi 
the  blessings  of  Christ's  kingdom,  as  that  which  the  peace  offerings  represented  to 
Israel. 

1  OaL  Ui.  S3.  •  H«b.  z.  18—21  »  8m  KxcxL  xxiv.  8— «. 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PENTATEUCH.  xxxb 


Ths  Civil  Laws  or  the  Mosaic  Codb. 

£4.  Those  secondary  laws,  given  by  Moses,  which  were  the  development  and 
application  of  the  fundamental  principles  of  man's  duty  to  his  neighbour,  are,  as 
before  observed,  intermingled  in  the  Torah  with  those  of  a  religious  and  cere- 
monial character.  The  reasons  for  this  we  have  already  considered  ;  and  it  has  been 
noticed  (§  25)  that  in  the  development  even  of  human  law,  the  mingling  together 
of  "  religious,  civil,  and  merely  moral  ordinances  without  any  regard  to  differences 
in  their  essential  character,"  is  invariably  found  in  the  early  forms  of  written  law. 
In  the  Divine  law  this  was,  we  may  say,  necessary ;  for  its  authority,  being  that  of 
God,  extended  to  all  these  spheres  of  human  life  and  conduct.  It  must  be  observed, 
also,  that  even  among  those  which  we  must  consider  as  the  civil  laws  of  the  Mosaic 
code,  there  are  many  directed  against  offences  that  are  far  more  directly  and  clearly 
sins  against  God  and  his  image  in  us,  than  against  our  neighbour.  Under  this  head 
fall  the  most  abominable  of  all  crimes,1  and  others  which  might  be  considered  very 
trivial  offences  if  our  duty  to  man  only  were  regarded.  It  is  remarkable  that  drunk- 
enness, a  sin  of  this  class,  the  evil  consequences  of  which  to  a  man  himself  are  ex- 
emplified in  the  sacred  history  by  two  most  emphatic  instances,  while  its  evil  results 
to  society  are  only  too  well  known  in  the  present  day,  was  not  the  subject  of  any  law, 
except  as  connected  with  other  sins,'  or  in  reference  to  sacerdotal  duties.'  Perhaps 
the  abstinence  from  wine  and  strong  drink  required  of  the  priests,  "that  ye  may  put 
difference  between  holy  and  unholy  and  between  clean  and  unclean,"  was  considered 
iu35cient  warning  of  the  dangers  of  excess  in  those  days,  and  under  the  circumstances 
of  Oriental  life.*  It  is  evident,  however,  both  that  drunkenness  was  accounted  as  a 
•in,*  and  that,  at  all  events  in  the  times  of  the  kings,  it  was  a  sin  common  both  among 
priests  and  people.  We  must,  however,  restrict  ourselves  in  this  examination  of  the 
civil  laws  of  Moses  to  those  which  distinctly  belong  to  man's  duty  to  his  neighbour, 
and  illustrate  +*>r  leading  principles  which  govern  them  by  some  of  the  most  luminous 
'nstances. 

55.  (1)  And  first,  regarding  these  laws  in  reference  to  the  one  purpose,  which,  St. 
Paul  teaches  us,  was  paramoant  in  the  whole  revelation  of  Divine  law,  that  is,  to  con- 
vince man  of  sin,  not  by  mere  counsels  and  precepts,  but  by  commands  which  demanded 
obedience,  and  which  had  the  sanction  of  severe  punishment, — we  must  observe  that 
this  purpose  itself  explains  the  severity  with  which  offences  against  the  rights  of 
others  and  the  order  of  society  were  visited  in  this  code.  For  example,  under  the 
head  of  honouring  parents,  the  law  affixed  the  punishment  of  death  to  smiting,  or 
oven  cursing,  either  father  or  mother.  In  regard  to  homicide,  wilful  murder  was 
punished  with  death,  which  could  not  be  commuted  into  any  other  penalty ;  against 
what  would  now  be  called  manslaughter  the  sentence  of  death  was  recorded,  but  in 
some  cases  blood-money  might  be  paid  as  a  satisfaction ;  for  accidental  homicide  the 
cities  of  refuge  were  provided,  where  the  slayer  must  remain  till  the  death  of  the 
high  priest.  There  is  some  difficulty  in  reconciling  the  laws,  but  it  seems  most  pro- 
bable that  in  all  cases  of  homicide,  whether  wilful,  or  the  result  of  carelessness,  or 
purely  accidental,  the  Goel,  or  nearest  kinsman,  to  whom  it  belonged  to  execute  the 
sentence,  had  the  right  to  kill  the  man-slayer  if  he  found  him  outside  the  city ;  and 

1  Levit.  xviii.  32-  -«0.  *  Deal  xxL  20.  »  Levit.  x.  »— 10. 

*  It  is  certain  that  the  lirac^ites  Tould  not  learn  temperance  in  Egypt,  in  which  country 
there  wea  a  large  consumption  of  wine,  with  the  usual  results  among  all  clause*,  which  an 
■atuioaCy  roreumted  in  the  aoulptarea. 

•  Ot  1  fUm.  I  IS— 14. 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PENTATEUCH. 


that  the  judges,  representing  the  congregation,  determined  respecting  one  who  had 
taken  refuge,  according  to  the  evidence  of  witnesses,1  what  the  punishment  should  be. 
Adultery,  even  when  the  woman  was  only  betrothed,  was  punished  by  the  death  of 
both  offenders.  Since  the  most  precious  possession  of  man  is  his  own  personal 
liberty,  death  was  the  punishment  for  stealing  a  man  and  either  selling  him  or  keeping 
him  in  bondage.  Thefts  generally  were  punished  by  restitution  of  either  four  or  five 
times  the  value  of  the  thing  stolen ;  but  a  burglar  breaking  into  a  house  at  n'ght 
might  be  slain  with  impunity.  False  witness  was  punished  according  to  the  lex 
talionis,  the  principle  of  which  was  also  laid  down  in  the  law  as  that  on  which  all 
oases  of  personal  injury  should  be  punished :  "  life  for  life,  eye  for  eye,  tooth  for 
tooth,  hand  for  hand,  foot  for  foot,  burning  for  burning,  wound  for  wound,  stripe  for 
•tripe."  *  This  to  us  now  may  seem  a  rude  and  barbarous  principle  of  justice ;  but 
it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  it  is  the  natural  and  original  idea  of  justice  between 
man  and  man.  The  lex  talionis  was  recognised  in  the  twelve  tables  of  Rome,  and 
it  was  expressed  in  later  Roman  law  in  almost  the  same  terms  as  in  the  law  of  Moses. 
Cicero  accepts  the  general  principle  as  the  true  basis  of  penal  law  ;  "  Noxiae  poena 
par  esto."* 

Of  the  necessity  for  the  adaptation  of  these  secondary  laws  to  the  actual  moral 
condition  of  the  people  to  whom  they  were  given  we  shall  speak  presently; 
but  there  is  another  consideration  which,  from  a  religious  point  of  view,  has  yet 
greater  weight  j  namely,  that  it  was  essential  to  the  purpose  for  which  Divine  law 
was  given,  that  the  severity,  exactness,  and  inflexible  impartiality  of  the  justice  of 
God  should  be  exhibited  in  that  law,  and  that,  under  this  economy,  his  people  should 
be  taught  this  lesson,  as  children  are,  by  a  discipline  suited  to  their  age.  We  may 
ask,  however,  can  a  law  of  this  nature  be  part  of  that  law  of  which  love  is  the  ful- 
filment ?  Did  not  Christ  expressly  reject  this  law  of  retaliation  as  unsuitable  for  his 
disciples,  anil  bid  them,  on  the  contrary,  return  good  for  evil?  Yet  he  came  "not  to 
destroy  but  to  fulfil  the  law,"  and  we  have  seen  (§  32)  that  justice  and  charity  are 
nothing  else  than  opposite  poles  of  the  same  principle,  and  Divine  law  necessarily 
involves  both.  The  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  whose  false  interpretations  of  God's  law 
Christ  condemned,  altogether  forgot,  as  many  Christians  do  to  the  present  day,  that 
the  "  sanction  "  or  penalty  of  a  law  is  not  for  the  guidance  of  out  conduct  and  feeling 
towards  others,  but  to  direct  those  who  are  the  representatives  of  God's  justice  on 
earth.  To  the  personal  conscience  it  is  nothing  more  than  a  warning  of  the  evil  and 
guilt  of  the  sin.  In  this  particular  case,  that  which  the  law  commands  us  is  that  we 
should  do  unto  others  as  we  would  that  they  should  do  unto  us  ;  the  penalty  for  dis- 
obedience, which  it  belongs  not  to  ub  to  execute,  but  to  God  by  those  to  whom  he 
commits  this  office,  exactly  corresponds  with  the  command  ;  that  is,  it  requires  that 
whatever  injury  we  do  to  others  shall  be  ''  measured  "  out  with  perfect  exactness  "  to 
us  again."  Our  Lord,  while  he  rejects  the  false  interpretation  of  the  l.iw,  asserts  the 
principle  of  equal-handed  justice  on  which  it  is  founded,  as  a  necessary  and  invio- 
lable principle  in  God's  government.'  And  without  the  distinct  recognition  of  God's 
justice,  charity  is  a  barren  sentiment.  The  soul  that  has  not  a  deep  conviction  of  the 
exact  and  inviolable  justice  of  God,  can  have  no  real,  or  at  least  no  profound  sense 
of  his  love ;  and,  therefore,  no  sufficient  foundation  for  that  love  to  his  neighbour 
which  alone  fulfils  the  law.  In  fact,  these  severe  penal  laws  are  nothing  else  than 
the  expression  of  God's  righteous  condemnation  of  him  who  does  not  love  his  neigh- 
bour as  himself. 

1  C£  Numb.  xxrv.  ML  •  Exod,  xxL  23—25  ;  Levit  Kit.  JO  j  Dent.  rts.  II 

»  8m  noU,  8  «7,  luprm.  *  d  Matt  vii  8  with  t«.  1. 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PENTATEUCH.  mil 

66.  (2)  But  to  realise  this  it  is  important  tbat  we  should  look  at  these  civil  laws 
of  Moses  from  a  different  aspect  from  that  of  their  "  sanctions."  Few  Christians, 
even  though  reverent  students  of  the  Bible,  sufficiently  appreciate  the  fact  that  these 
laws  do  embody,  and  sometimes  express  in  the  very  words,  those  principles  of  law 
which  our  Lord  taught  in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  and  elsewhere,  and  which  are  the 
Christian  rule  of  life,  though  not  enforced  on  us  by  particular  commandments  (foi 
we  are  not  under  an  economy  of  law),  but  to  be  fulfilled  in  the  freedom  of  the  spirit. 
It  will  be  sufficient  to  notice  a  few  emphatic  instances  of  this. 

(a)  The  following  general  precept  is  identical  with  the  teaching  of  the  gospel : 
"  Thou  shalt  not  hate  thy  brother  in  thine  heart :  thou  shalt  in  any  wise  rebuke  thy 
neighbour,  and  not  suffer  sin  upon  him  (or,  not  bear  sin  for  him).1  Thou  shalt 
not  avenge,  nor  bear  any  grudge  against  the  children  of  thy  people,  but  thou  shalt 
love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself:  I  am  the  Lord  "  (Levit.  xix.  17,  18). 

(o)  The  Scribes  and  Pharisees  misinterpreted  and  perverted  certain  directions  of 
the  law,  given  for  the  guidance  of  the  nation  in  their  relations  with  other  surround- 
ing nations  (such  as  Deut.  xxiii.  6)  into  the  maxim,  "Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour, 
and  hate  thine  enemy."  But  the  language  of  the  law  itself  is  the  same  as  that  of 
the  gospel.  "  If  thou  meet  thine  enemy's  ass  or  ox  going  astray,  thou  shalt  surely 
bring  it  back  to  him  again.  If  thou  see  the  ass  of  him  that  haleth  thee  lying  under 
its  burden,  and  wouldest  forbear  to  help  him,  thou  shalt  surely  help  with  him" 
(Exod.  xxiii.  4,  5).  What  is  this  but  the  very  law  of  Christ,  "  Love  your  enemies, 
do  good  to  them  that  hate  you  "  ?  *  And  it  is  the  more  emphatic  because  elsewhere,' 
when  the  commandment  is  expanded,  H  is  "  thy  brother "  whom  it  is  an  offence 
against  the  law  not  to  help.  "  Thine  enemy  "  is  in  the  eye  of  God's  law  as  certainly 
"  thy  brother,"  as  "  thy  friend  "  is. 

(c)  The  lawyer  who  asked  our  Lord,  "  Who  is  my  neighbour?  "  and  to  whom  our 
Lord  replied  by  the  parable  of  the  good  Samaritan,  had  certainly  no  excuse  from 
the  law  for  his  ignorance.  The  provisions  for  the  "  strangers  in  the  land  "  are  very 
numerous,  and  though  they  did  not  enjoy  the  same  civil  rights  and  privileges  as 
those  who  belonged  to  the  nation,  the  principle  on  which  they  were  to  be  treated  was 
the  same.  The  language  of  the  law  is  express  (Levit.  xix.  84) :  "  The  stranger  that 
dwelleth  with  you  shall  be  unto  you  as  one  born  in  the  land,  and  thou  shalt  love  him 
as  thyself;  for  ye  were  strangers  in  the  land  of  Egypt.  I  am  the  Lord  thy  God." 
The  "  stranger  "  then  is  a  "  neighbour,"  to  be  loved  as  oneself  no  less  than  the 
Israelite.  And  there  is  a  special  touch  of  compassion  in  the  reason  given :  "  Ye 
shall  not  oppress  a  stranger,  for  ye  know  the  heart  of  a  stranger,  seeing  ye  were 
strangers  in  the  land  of  Egypt." 

(d)  But,  especially,  the  provisions  made  for  the  poor  under  these  laws  breathe  the 
same  spirit  as  the  teaching  of  Christ  and  his  apostles  as  to  their  peculiar  claim  on 
the  people  of  God.  Not  only  was  it  a  purpose  in  the  primary  law  of  weekly 
Sabbaths,  "  that  thy  man-servant  and  thy  maid-servant  may  rest  as  well  as  thou,"  * 
"  that  the  son  of  thine  handmaid  and  the  stranger  may  be  refreshed ;"  but  in  the 
secondary  laws  every  seventh  year  was  made  a  year  of  rest  from  tillage  and  harvest 
expressly  for  this  purpose.  "  Six  years  shalt  thou  sow  thy  land,  and  gather  in  the 
fruits  thereof.  But  the  seventh  year  thou  shalt  let  it  rest  and  lie  still ;  that  the  poor 
of  thy  people  may  eat :  and  what  they  leave,  the  beasts  of  the  field  shall  eat.  In 
like  manner  shalt  thou  do  with  thy  vineyard  and  with  thy  oliveyard."'    In  every 

1  The  English  version  is  probably  not  exactly  accurate  ;  but  it  expresses  the  general  senst 
sufficiently. 
»  Cf.  GaL  vL  8.  •  Deut.  xxii.  1—4.  *  Dmt.  ▼.  14. 

•  Exod.  xxffl.  10,  11 ;  Lsvit.  xxv.  2-7. 


xffl  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

year,  indeed,  the  law  required  that,  for  the  benefit  of  the  poor  and  the  stranger,  ths 
whole  field  should  not  be  reaped,  and  the  gleanings  should  be  left  j  and  the  same 
rule  applied  to  the  oliveyard  and  the  vineyard — indeed,  this  law  as  to  the  yearly 
harvest  alone  could  make  the  Sabbatical  year  of  any  value  to  the  poor ;  for  a  carefully- 
harvested  field  could  have  no  natural  crop.  This  Sabbatical  year  also  was  a  year  of 
release  from  debts,1  in  the  ease  of  loans  made  to  a  brother  Israelite  in  his  distress. 
"For"  (Moses  says)  "the  poor  shall  never  cease  out  of  the  land;  therefore,  I 
command  thee,  saying,  Thou  shalt  open  thy  hand  wide  unto  thy  brother,  to  thy  poor, 
and  to  thy  needy,  in  the  land."  The  principle  in  all  this  legislation  in  regard  to 
property  is,  "  The  land  is  God's,  and  it  belongs  to  you  only  as  stewards  under  God." 
The  rights  of  personal  property  are  limited  by  God's  rights.  The  poor  of  God's 
nation  are  both  "  thy  poor  "  and  also  "  God's  poor."  We  in  these  days  have  learnt, 
indeed,  that  other  methods  of  relieving  the  poor  are  more  effectual  than  indiscriminate 
giving.  But  it  was  no  purpose  of  the  Divine  law,  any  more  than  it  was  of  Christ, 
when  he  said  to  his  disciples  "  Sell  that  ye  have,  and  give  alms,"  *  to  teach  lessons 
of  political  and  social  economy ;  the  command  simply  was  that  they  should  deny 
themselves,  and  trust  God  as  regards  earthly  things,  in  order  to  benefit  the  poor.  The 
spirit  of  the  law  (as  well  as  that  of  Christ's  teaching)  is  equally  binding  on  us  at  the 
present  day,  and,  because  it  is  binding,  it  is  also  our  duty  to  use  the  methods  which 
experience  has  proved  to  be  most  effectual  and  most  beneficial,  and  therefore  the  truest 
charity.*  But  undoubtedly  of  such  laws  as  these  of  the  Mosaic  code,  interpreted 
not  in  their  letter  but  in  their  spirit,  it  is  emphatically  true  that  "  whosoever  shall  de 
and  teach  them,  the  same  shall  be  called  great  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven." 

The  Impekfection  of  the  Secondary  Laws. 

57.  In  onr  rapid  survey  of  the  secondary  laws  of  the  Torah,  we  have  found  no 
difficulty  in  proving, — for  indeed  the  evidence  lies  (we  may  almost  say)  on  the  but- 
face  of  the  record, — that  the  principles  embodied  in  the  religious  and  ceremonial  laws 
are  none  other  than  those  which  are  necessary  to  the  Christian  under  a  better  cove- 
nant ;  and  that  the  laws  which  relate  to  the  duties  between  man  and  man  are  based 
on  that  truly  Divine  and  eternal  principle,  one  aspect  of  which  is  exact  and  absolute 
justice,  and  the  other  perfect  love.  These  conclusions  are  themselves  sufficient  to 
explain  the  words  of  Christ  in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  for  they  prove  both  the 
complete  identity  of  the  spirit  which  underlies  the  commandments  of  the  law  witb 
that  of  his  own  teaching,  and  further  that,  when  he  contrasts  that  which  was  said  to 
them  of  old  time  with  that  which  he  himself  says  to  his  disciples,  he  was  contrast- 
ing, not  the  law  of  Moses  with  a  new  law  that  he  himself  gave,  but  the  righteousness 
of  the  letter  with  the  righteousness  of  the  spirit,  which  is  the  essence  of  the  law,  and 
necessary  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  But  does  this  mean  that  the  law  of  the  Pen- 
tateuch was  perfect  ?  In  the  sense  in  which  the  Psalmist  says,  "  The  law  of  the 
Lord  is  perfect,  converting  the  soul,"  in  which  our  Lord  declares  that  it  must  be 
obeyed  and  taught,  in  which  St.  Paul  describes  it  as  holy  and  spiritual,  and  St.  James 
speaks  of  it  as  the  "  perfect  law  of  liberty,"  that  is  in  its  spirit  and  essence,  undoubt- 
edly it  is  perfect.  And  yet,  in  another  sense,  it  was  as  certainly  very  imperfect.  Not 
only  as  regards  the  shadows  and  figures  of  the  ceremonial  law  as  compared  with  the 

1  Dent.  xv.  1—11.  >  St.  Luke  xii.  88. 

1  It  should  be  observed  also,  that  the  law  discouraged  that  merely  sentimental  feeling  of 
compassion  for  the  poor  which  is  often  practical  injustice  to  others.  It  forbad  them  (Exod. 
mil.  8)  to  "  countenance  (hadar,  be  partial  to)  a  poor  man  in  his  came."  The  LXX 
is  •**  iXiqmc. 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PENTATEUCH.  aliii 

reality  which  is  Christ,  what  St.  Paul  calls  "  the  weakness  and  unprofitableness  "  of 
its  commandments  is  apparent,  so  that  when  Christ  had  accomplished  his  work,  the 
letter  disappeared  before  the  brightness  of  the  spirit,  it  disannulled  itself  that  it 
might  be  fulfilled  in  the  spirit ;  but  for  the  same  reason,  that  is  on  account  of  the  essen- 
tial imperfection  of  law  as  law,  and  its  utter  inadequacy  to  be  of  itself  a  guide  for 
the  conscience  of  man,  the  same  result  followed  with  regard  to  all  the  secondary  laws 
without  exception. 

58.  This  truth,  which  is  fully  exemplified  in  the  history  of  human  law,1  may  be 
thus  explained.* 

"  Without  definite  and  permanent  law  natural  life  cannot  make  progress,  and  law  is 
law  indeed  in  proportion  to  its  definiteness,  its  certainty,  its  rigidity.  And  yet  these 
very  qualities  in  law,  without  which  it  cannot  attain  its  perfectness  as  law, — because 
otherwise  its  results  must  jxi  part  depend  on  its  interpretation  by  a  judge,  as  is  the 
case  with  most  human  laws, — are  also  the  inherent  defect  of  law  itself,  giving  occasion 
for  the  saying,  Summum  jus  summa  injuria.  For  it  is  impossible  that  any  fixed 
rules  should  be  at  all  times  suited  to  all  the  varying  circumstances  and  conditions 
of  human  life,  in  which  the  self -same  acts  may  at  different  times  be  wholly  different 
in  their  true  character.  And  laws  may  therefore  both  allow  some  things  and  com- 
mand others,  necessary  or  expedient  in  one  stage  of  human  life,  yet  in  another 
injurious  or  very  inexpedient ;  so  that  human  laws  made  in  one  age  often  fall  into 
desuetude  in  another,  and  their  enforcement  would  lead  to  great  injustice,  and  they 
need  to  be  from  time  to  time  reformed  and  adapted  to  the  altered  circumstances  of 
men.  It  is  therefore  impossible,  in  the  nature  of  things,  that  institutions  which  are 
the  expression  of  positive  and  fixed  law,  although  that  law  be  given  by  God  himself, 
should  be  perfectly  adapted  for  man,  or  be  permanent.  And  those  who  live  under 
such  institutions  are  in  an  imperfect  state  for  two  reasons — first,  because  their  own 
judgment  is  not  exercised  in  their  obedience,  but  they  obey  merely  because.it  is  com- 
manded, which  is  the  condition  of  an  infant  or  a  slave ;  and  then  also  because  of  the 
imperfections  which  are  necessarily  inherent  in  law,  because  it  is  law." 

These  considerations  do  not  affect  the  primary  law  for  two  very  obvious  reasons  : 
first,  because  its  commandments  express  nothing  more  than  the  religious  and  moral 
principles  which  are  coeval  with  man's  origin,  and  the  necessary  results  of  man's, 
original  and  fundamental  relations  to  God  and  his  fellow-man,  which  therefore 
cannot  be  altered  by  .any  changes  in  his  circumstances  and  condition  ;  secondly, 
because  being  a  law  for  the  conscience  of  man,  it  entirely  differs  from  human 
laws  by  the  absence  from  it  of  all  fixed  rules,  for  it  leaves  to  the  enlightened  and 
informed  conscience  the  office  of  applying  its  principles  to  the  varying  conditions  of 
human  life.  But  with  the  secondary  laws  the  case  is  totally  different.  These  laws 
contain  elaborate  regulations  in  regard  to  the  whole  sphere  of  human  life,  the  very 
purpose  of  them  being,  as  we  have  seen,  to  bring  law  into  all  its  relations,  and  to 
leave  as  little  as  possible  to  the  judgment  and  conscience  of  the  individual.  They 
were  made  for  a  nation  whose  moral  knowledge  and  moral  development  were 
totally  different  from  ours,  and  who  had  to  be  educated,  like  children,  gradually  to 
apprehend  truths  which  cannot  be  learned  suddenly  or^er  saltum,  although  to  us,  in 
our  state  of  knowledge  and  development,  they  seem  self-evident.  We  need  not  be 
surprised  therefore  if  we  find  in  them  not  only  prohibitions  which  are  utterly 
unsuited  to  our  moral  condition,  but  also  many  things  allowed  and  sanctioned,  or  even 
commanded,  which  to  us  would  be  inconsistent  with  morality.  This  subject,  which, 
as  is  well  known,  has  given  rise  to  many  attacks  upon  the  morality  of  the  Pentateuch, 
has  been  discussed  at  length  in  some  of  its  aspects,  in  a  work  by  the  late  Canos 

1  See  Maine's  'Ancient  Law,'  ehap.  11. 

*  I  quote  from  my  '  Genesis  of  the  Church,'  pp.  86—88. 


jliv  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

Mozley.  *  In  regard  to  some  questions  in  the  Mosaic  law  with  which  he  deals,  pa* 
ticularly  those  of  the  law  of  retaliation  and  of  the  Goel,  he  does  not  appear  to  distin- 
guish sufficiently  between  the  law  as  representing  God's  justice,  and  the  law  as  a  gmVe 
to  man's  conscience,  or  indeed  to  give  due  weight  to  considerations  that  arise  from 
the  peculiar  characteristics  of  law.  But  the  general  principle  which  he  maintains, 
namely,  that  all  legislation,  intended  to  raise  men  from  a  lower  standard  of  morality 
to  a  higher,  must  begin  on  the  basis  of  the  imperfect  and  crude  notions  of  right  and 
wrong  which  they  already  possess,  and,  by  giving  these  ideas  a  right  direction  and 
wholesome  limitation,  elevate  them  gradually  into  a  higher  sphere,  is  beyond  all 
question  the  true  solution  of  the  difficulty,  and  it  is  a  method  not  only  consistent  with 
the  wisdom  and  the  goodness  of  God,  but  suggesting  important  lessons  to  the 
Christian  as  to  the  true  mode  of  dealing  with  those  who  are  "  ignorant  and  out  of  the 
way." 

59.  The  real  proof,  however,  of  the  law  given  through  Moses  being  consistent  with 
the  character  of  him  whose  relations  with  man  are  the  foundation  of  all  religious  and 
moral  duty,  is  to  be  found  in  the  answer  to  the  question,  whether  taken  as  a  whole, 
and  as  part  of  a  Divine  dispensation,  the  law  fulfilled  ends  worthy  of  God,  by 
training  man  to  live  for  the  purposes  for  which  he  was  created.  There  is  no  ques- 
tion as  to  this  in  regard  to  the  ceremonial  law.  In  other  words,  there  is  no  doubt  that, 
notwithstanding  its  weakness,  and  imperfection,  and  unspirituality  in  itself,  the  law 
was  a  necessary  preparation  for  Christ  and  his  gospel ;  "  our  schoolmaster  to  lead  us 
to  Christ,  that  we  might  be  justified  by  faith."  But  is  it  equally  true  of  that  part  of 
the  secondary  law  which  deals  with  what  we  understand  by  moral  duties,  that  its  tend- 
ency and  its  result  was  to  elevate  the  people  to  whom  it  was  given,  up  towards  a 
perfect  standard  of  morality,  through  the  moral  education  which  it  supplied  ?  This 
has  been  discussed  by  Canon  Mozley  in  one  of  his  Lectures  (Lect,  x.),  and  the  answer 
m  complete.  Indeed,  one  fact  is  of  itself  sufficient  proof  of  this,  namely,  that  the 
moral  standard  of  Christianity  is  nothing  else  than  the  legitimate  development  of 
those  moral  principles  of  which  the  Mosaical  law  was,  from  the  circumstances  under 
which  it  was  given,  an  imperfect  expression, 

60.  But  it  is  probable  that  many  feel  a  difficulty  here  which  lies  yet  deeper,  and 
which  this  argument  will  not  <«move.  They  may  ask,  Can  the  end,  however  good, 
justify  the  means?  Can  we  suppose  that  God  would  have  commanded  or  even  sanc- 
tioned that  which  the  true  standard  of  morality  condemns,  in  order  that  this  true  stand- 
ard might  be  ultimately  attained  by  others  ?  This  can  only  be  answered  by  another 
question,  viz.  what  is  moral  good  and  moral  evil  ?  Are  they  objective  or  subjective  ? 
or  do  both  these  elements  enter  into  the  determination  of  their  character  ?  And  is  evil 
only  a  defect  of  good,  or  a  reality  in  itself  ?  These  questions  have  occupied  the  minds 
of  moralists  and  theologians  for  many  ages,  and  a  brief  answer  cannot  be  a  complete 
one.  But  the  argument  of  this  Introduction  may  at  all  events  supply  an  answer  suffi- 
cient foj  our  present  purpose.  We  have  seen,  in  our  previous  investigations,  that  sin 
began  with  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  without  which  the  distinctions  of  good 
and  evjl  in  man  himself  did  not  exist ;  there  could  be  no  moral  good  and  no  moral 
evil.  And  in  man's  present  condition  morality,  in  the  "abstract,  considered  apart  from 
all  positive  laws,  must  consist  in  a  man's  regulating  his  nature  in  accordance  with  the 
Divine  order  constituted  in  his  creation  in  God's  image,  and  doing  unto  other  men, 
created  equally  in  the  Divine  image,  as  he  himself  would  be  done  by  j  the  whole  oir- 
oumstances  and  condition  of  these  other  men  as  also  belonging  to  the  Divine  order 
being  taken  into  account.     Moral  good  consists  in  man's  recognising  that  order,  and 

'    '  Ruling  Idea*  in  Early  Ages,  and  their  Relation  to  Old  Testament  Faith.'  1877. 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PENTATEUCH. 


of  his  own  will  submitting  to  it ;  moral  evil,  in  his  departing  from  that  order,  whether 
by  omission  or  by  positive  action,  through  the  iiriev/iia  (or  desire  for  that  which  h* 
has  not)  in  a  nature  not  regulated  in  accordance  with  that  order.  It  necessrrily 
follows  from  these  considerations,  that  moral  good  and  evil  in  man  in  its  essence 
must  be  subjective ;  that  the  true  moral  character  of  an  act,  in  the  sight  of  him  who 
judges  the  hearts  of  men,  must  be  determined  by  the  state  of  mind  of  him  who  com- 
mits it,  his  knowledge,  his  intentions,  his  motives.  "  To  him  that  knoweth  to  do 
good  and  doeth  it  not,  to  him  it  is  sin."1  The  fact  therefore  that  God  gave  laws 
suited  to  the  state  of  nioral  knowledge  in  which  those  were  to  whom  they  were 
given,  with  the  view  of  cultivating  that  knowledge,  and  restraining  the  evils  which 
might  be  caused  from  i-nQvpia,  does  not  imply  that  God  sanctioned  or  even  allowed 
mini's  doing  that  which  was  immoral. 

61.  There  are  two  questions  to  which  this  argument  specially  applies,  and  which 
will  sufficiently  illustrate  it:  namely,  the  law  of  marriage,  and  the  sanction  of  slavery. 

(1)  Our  Lord's  own  words  as  to  divorce  apply  with  equal  force  to  the  whole 
question  of  the  Mosaio  law  of  marriage.  "  He  saith  unto  them,  Moses,  because  at 
the  hardness  of  your  hearts,  suffered  you  to  put  away  your  wives:  but  from  the 
beginning  it  was  not  so."2  That  is,  a  deviation  from  the  standard  of  the  original 
institution  was  allowed  under  certain  restrictions,  because  the  absolute  prohibition 
of  the  customs  then  prevalent  in  the  world  would,  through  the  hardness  of  men's 
hearts,  which  makes  them  incapable  of  at  once  recognising  some  moral  principles 
without  previous  education,  prevent  instead  of  promoting  the  ends  for  which 
marriage  was  ordained.  But  the  law  of  Moses,  by  requiring  a  writing  of  divorce 
to  be  given,  and  by  ita  other  enactments,  protected  the  law  of  marriage  as  then 
understood,  and  restrained  transgressions,  and  thus  gradually  trained  the  mind  of 
the  people  for  a  higher  standard  and  for  the  true  ideal  of  marriage.  Indeed,  we  find 
in  the  prophetical  writings s  the  true  idea  of  the  law  of  marriage  asserted  as  if  it 
were  the  law  itself,  being  indeed  the  real  spirit  of  the  Divine  law. 

(2)  The  parallel  case  of  the  sanction  of  slavery  was  in  all  respects  similar  in 
principle.  It  is  indeed  a  striking  proof  of  the  shock  given  to  man's  moral  being 
by  the  Fall,  that  he  so  far  lost  the  consciousness  of  God's  image  in  every  individual 
of  the  human  race  as  to  consider  his  brother  man  a  mere  chattel.  It  has  been 
remarked4  that  "there  seems  to  be  somewhat  in  the  institution  of  slavery  which 
has  at  all  times  either  shocked  or  perplexed  mankind,  however  little  habituated 
to  reflection,  and  however  slightly  advanced  in  the  cultivation  of  its  moral  instincts. 
The  compunction  which  ancient  communities,  almost  unconsciously  experienced, 
appears  to  have  always  resulted  in  some  imaginary  principle  upon  which  a  defence, 
or  at  least  a  rationale,  of  slavery  could  be  plausibly  founded."  One  of  these  wai 
the  inferiority  of  certain  races  and  their  natural  aptitude  for  the  servile  condition. 
Another,  which  historically  was  the  cause  of  much  of  the  slavery  of  the  ancient 
world,  was  the  supposed  right  of  conquerors  over  a  vanquished  foe.  But  its  more 
legitimate  origin  is  to  be  found  in  the  patriarchal  system,  and  in  the  rights  of  the 
Head  of  the  family  over  all  its  members,  among  whom  the  servant  was  classed,  ai 
indicated  both  in  the  Roman  term  "  familia,"  and  by  one  of  the  Greek  words  for  slave, 
"ofinrifc,"  "one  of  the  household."'  However,  whatever  be  the  history  of  slavery, 
it  is  certain  that  it  waa  universal  in  the  ancient  world,  and  that  the  consciinc* 

1  Jamos  iv.  17  ;  c£  Rom.  xiv.  14,  20  ;  Tit.  i.  15. 

»  St.  Matt.  xix.  8.  s  Cf.  Ps.  cxxviii. ;  Prov.  v.  18  ;  Mai.  ii.  14,  16. 

*  Maine's  '  Ancient  Law,  p.  162,  &c. 

•  Cf.  also  Heb.  iii.  2 — 6  and  Gal.  iv.  1—7,  where  the  sou  during  his  minority  is  suppose 
to  be  on  the  same  level  as  a  &u'\o£  in  the  house. 


tlri  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

of  man  was  not  at  that  period  prepared  for  its  abolition,  nor  would  human  society 
have  benefited  by  such  interference.  The  Mosaic  legislation  recognised  it,  while, 
as  in  the  case  of  the  law  of  marriage,  it  greatly  ameliorated  the  condition  of  th« 
bondsman  and  bondswoman,  especially  of  those  of  the  Hebrew  nation,  who  could 
not,  except  by  their  own  will,  be  retained  in  perpetual  servitude.  How  slowly  the 
human  mind  could  be  educated  in  the  apprehension  of  the  true  rights  of  humanity 
is  evident  from  the  fact,  that  even  after  the  revelation  of  the  full  meaning  of  these 
rights  in  the  incarnation  of  the  Son  of  God,  and  of  the  truth  that  all,  bond  or  free, 
are  one  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  when  Christian  masters  were  directed  to  give  to  "  their 
slaves  that  which  is  just  and  equal"  x  a  principle  inconsistent  with  that  power 
over  the  person  which  is  implied  by  slavery;  yet  the  principle  was  left  to  work 
out  its  true  results,  and  slaves  are  cautioned  not  to  presume  on  their  equality,  as 
brethren  in  Christ,  with  their  master,  while  masters  are  not  expressly  commanded  to 
set  their  slaves  at  liberty.  The  gospel  recognised  the  fact  of  slavery  being  in  the 
world  as  the  law  also  had  done ;  the  law  by  its  regulations  modified  the  character  of 
slavery  and  lessened  its  evils,  until  the  gospel  Bhould  reveal  the  truth,  before  the 
light  of  which  not  only  the  system  itself  but  its  spirit  must  disappear  from  the 
world. 

62.  In  this  Introduction  the  Torah  has  been  examined  only  in  that  character  of 
law  which,  as  its  name  implies,  distinguishes  it  from  all  the  rest  of  Holy  Scripture 
But  it  must  be  remembered  that  Moses  was  not  only  a  lawgiver,  but  also  a  jrrophel, 
as  is  proved  by  his  teaching  in  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy,  in  which  he  expounds 
the  inner  spirit  of  the  law,  while  he  foresees  and  describes  some  of  the  future  his- 
tory of  the  chosen  nation.8  He  was,  indeed,3  the  first  of  that  line  of  prophets  which 
Jehovah  promised  to  raise  up  as  a  perpetual  witness  for  him  to  Israel,  until  the  office 
in  which  they  testified  for  God  should  have  its  complete  fulfilment  and  realisation  in 
that  Divine  Prophet  who,  raised  up  from  the  midst  of  Israel,  of  the  seed  of  Abraham, 
is  a  Mediator  between  God  and  man  in  a  sense  that  Moses  could  not  be,  and  has 
revealed  the  whole  will  of  God  to  man,  and  given  his  Spirit  to  abide  with  us  for 
■ver.  How  "the  prophets,"  by  their  inspired  teaching,  and  the  authority  they 
received  from  God,  corrected  the  defects  inherent  in  law  as  law, 4  awakening  the 
consciences  of  men  to  the  justice  and  the  love  of  God  by  arguments  independent 
of  the  law,  and  thus  placing  obedience  to  God  upon  a  higher  and  surer  foundation 
than  that  of  mere  submission  to  authority;  and  how  they  gradually  taught  the 
people  of  God  that  his  service  was  in  the  spirit,  not  in  the  letter ;  freedom,  and 
not  bondage ;  that  he  would  "  have  mercy  and  not  sacrifice  " ;  and  thus  prepared  for 
that  dispensation  of  the  Spirit  in  which  the  veil  over  the  face  of  Moses  should  be 
done  away  in  Christ,  and  "  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil,"  which  to  man  under 
the  dominion  of  imBvuia  is  death,  should  become,  through  the  presence  of  God's 
Spirit  in  man,  a  higher  law,  the  law  of  the  spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus,  which 
sets  us  free  from  the  law  of  sin  and  death — all  this  is  expounded  in  the  other  books 
of  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures.  But  to  appreciate  that  part  of  the  old  economy, 
it  is  first  of  all  necessary  to  have  a  clear  and  definite  conception  of  the  true  character 
and  force  of  the  law  itself ;  and  to  this  end  the  whole  of  the  present  argument  has 
been  directed. 

*  rijv  foorqra,  Col.  iv.  1  ;  but  it  probably  means  "equity/'  as  the  rd  avrd  in  Ephee 
ft  9,  rather  than  "equality." 

*  t.g.,  Deut.  xxxii.  and  xxxiii. 

'  Of.  Deut.  xviii  15 — 19.     The  view  of  this  passage  given  above  seems  the  only  one  that 
at  all  connects  it  with  the  context. 
«  'Genesis  of  the  Church,'  p.  38. 


THE  AUTHORSHIP  OF  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

BY   TH1 

REV.  THOMAS  WHITELAW,  M.A. 


Is  the  Pentateuch  the  work  of  Moses  ?  or  ia  it  the  production  of  a  later  age  ?  If 
%nything  were  needed  to  attest  the  supreme  importance  attaching  to  this  inquiry,  it 
night  be  found  in  the  voluminous  literature  which,  on  this  subject  alone,  since  the 
middle  of  last  century,  has  issued  from  the  English,  but  more  especially  from  the 
Continental,  press.  Prior  to  that  date,  the  claim  of  Moses  to  be  regarded  as  the 
author  of  the  Pentateuch  may  be  said  to  have  been  supported  by  the  almost  unani- 
mous consent  of  both  Hebrew  and  Christian  antiquity.  In  the  second  century,  it  is 
true,  sentiments  impugning  the  Mosaic  authorship,  either  in  whole  or  in  part,  began 
to  be  broached,  but  chiefly  by  writers  of  otherwise  heretical  tendencies.  According 
to  the  testimony  of  Epiphanius  (Hser.  xviii.)  and  Johannes  Damascenus  (de  Hteresibus, 
ch.  xix.),  an  obscure  party  among  the  Nazarenes  regarded  the  present  Pentateuch 
as  spurious.  Ptolemmus,  a  Gnostic  writer  belonging  to  the  same  period,  in  an  epistle 
(ad  Florum)  preserved  by  Epiphanius  (Hatres.  xxxiii.  4),  ascribed  only  a  portion  of 
the  work  to  Moses.  The  author  of  the  Clementine  Homilies  (ii.  38,  40 ;  iii.  47) 
considered  the  account  of  Moses'  death  (Dout.  xxxiv.  5)  conclusive  evidence  that  the 
Pentateuch  did  not  proceed  from  his  pen,  and  entertained  the  belief  that  the  Penta- 
teuch had  been  often  lost  and  re- written,  each  time  with  additions.  Jerome  is  sometimes 
quoted  as  having  been  suspicious  of  the  Mosuc  authorship  of  the  Pentateuch  (Perowne, 
Smith's  '  Diet.,'  art.  Pentateuch),  but  his  language,  Sive  Mosen  dicere  voluerU  aue- 
torem  Pentateuchi,  sive  Esdram  ejusdem  inttauralorem  operis  non,  recuso,  only  bears 
that  he  detected  no  insuperable  barrier  ia  the  way  of  believing  that  the  original 
composition  of  the  Hebrew  law-giver  may  have  been  revised  by  the  post-Exilian 
reformer.  Aben  Ezra  likewise,  though  claimed  as  an  opponent  of  the  orthodox 
opinion,  merely  expresses  doubt  of  the  Mosaic  authorship  of  certain  passages  which 
he  regarded  as  subsequent  interpolations  (vide  Bleek's  'Introd.,'  vol.  i.  §  68).  With 
the  exception  of  that  offered  by  the  second  century  heretics,  it  is  problematical  if  the 
genuineness  of  the  Mosaic  writings  encountered  serious  opposition  until  towards  the 
olose  of  the  seventeenth  century,  when  in  rapid  succession  it  was  assailed  by  Hobbes 
in  his  'Leviathan'  (1651),  Isaak  Peyrerius  in  his  'Systema  Theologieurn  ex  pr«- 
Adamitorum  Hypothesi '  (1655),  Spinoza  in  his '  Tractatus  Theologico-Politious'  (1670), 
Bichard  Simon  in  his  'Critical  History  of  the  Old  Testament'  (1678),  and  Clerious  in 
bis  'Sentiraens  '  (1685),  the  opinions  of  which,  however,  he  subsequently  retracted 

riNTATKUCH.  f 


THE  AUTHORSHIP  OF  THE  PENTATEUCH. 


Yet  it  was  not  until  the  publication  by  Astruc  (1753)  of  what  has  since  beoom* 
known  as  the  hypothesis  of  documents  that  the  contrary  belief  of  the  post-Mosaic 
origin  of  the  Pentateuch  was  able  to  make  progress ;  but  since  then  it  has  advanced 
with  gigantic  and  rapid  strides,  more  particularly  in  Germany,  where  it  has  enlisted 
in  its  propagation  and  defence  a  brilliant  array  of  talent — gifted  and  able  writers,  whc 
have  expended  on  its  demonstration  and  elucidation  research  the  most  minute  and 
painstaking,  ratiocination  the  most  elaborate  and  careful,  critical  acumen  the  most 
penetrating  and  dexterous,  eloquence  the  most  attractive  and  engaging,  not  to  speak 
of  imagination  the  most  wonderful  and  imposing.  Among  its  advocates  must  be 
reckoned  many  of  the  most  distinguished  scholars  of  the  present  century.  Nor  can 
it  be  alleged  that  it  is  absolutely  devoid  of  at  least  seemingly  weighty  consideration! 
to  advance  in  its  support.  That  an  opinion  which  has  secured  the  allegiance  of 
authorities  so  eminent  as  Tuch,  Knobel,  Hupfeld,  De  Wette,  Bohlen,  Bleek,  Delitzsch, 
Ewald,  Graf,  Kuenen,  Wellhausen,  and  others,  should  have  nothing  in  the  shape  of 
evidence  to  produce  in  its  behalf  is  simply  incredible.  Accordingly,  it  will  be  the 
aim  of  this  investigation  in  the  first  place  to  examine  the  more  important  of  those 
arguments  which  are  commonly  advanced  in  proof  of  the  post-Mosaic  or  late  author- 
ship of  the  Pentateuch,  and  in  the  second  place  to  review  the  principal  of  those 
considerations  which  by  the  advocates  of  the  popular  belief  are  still  regarded  as 
sufficient  to  establish  the  claim  of  Moses  to  the  honour  of  having  composed  the  first 
five  books  of  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures. 

I.  Considerations  which  are  commonly  regarded  as  supporting  the  post-Mosaic  or 
late  authorship  of  the  Pentateuch. 

1.  The  seeming  composite  structure  of  the  xarrative.     While  the  unity  of 
the  Pentateuch  regarded  as  a  whole  is  too  palpable  to  be  either  denied  or  ignored, 
by  critics  of  a  certain  school  that  is  usually  ascribed  not  to  the  circumstance  of  its 
having  issued  from  one  mind,  which  one  would  have  imagined  to  be  the  natural  and 
obvious  inference,  but  to  the  literary  genius  of  a  late  writer  in  the  time  of  Saul 
(Rtahelin)  or  of  Josiah  (Pe  Wette,  Knobal,  Bleek),  about  the  end  of  the  seventh 
century  B.  c.  (Kuenen),  or  at  all  events  before  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  .Ewald), 
or  even  posterior  to  the  Exile  (Hartmann,  Bohlen,  Wellhausen),  who,  having  found 
certain  ancient  records  that  had  descended  from  primitive  times,  worked  them  up 
into  the  present  Pentateuch.     The  original  hypothesis  of  Astruc  related  solely  to 
Genesis,  which  he  conjectured  had  been  put  together  from  two  principal  documents, 
with  the  assistance  of  ten  smaller  memoirs— a  speculation  in  which  he  had  been 
forestalled  by  Vitringa,  Clericus,  and  Richard  Simon,  who  all  assumed  written  sources 
for  the  first  book  of  Moses ;  but  with  greater  boldness  the  theory  which  he  adopted 
with  regard  to  Genesis  has  since  been  applied  to  the  entire  Pentateuch,  and  the  pro- 
cess of  disintegration  and  dismemberment  carried  forward  with  such  zeal  by  the 
rationalistic  criticism  of  Germany,  (hat  the  pre-existing  documents  have  now  become 
ao  numerous  and  fragmentary,  that  it  is  fairly  open  to  consideration  whether  a  greater 
miracle  is  not  involved  in  the  compilation  of  the  present  Pentateuch  out  of  such 
disjecta  membra  than  in  its  original  composition  by  the  hand  of  Moses.     Amid  the 
manifold  conflicting  theories  which  have  b«en  propounded  by  successive  advoc  .tea 
of  this  hypothesis,  one  point  can  be  detected  in  which  all  are  pretty  generally  agreed, 
*nd  indeed  it  is  the  kernel  of  the  hypoth  wis,  Viz..  that  of  the  ancient  records,  or 
source  writings,  the  principal  were  a  narrati  :e  of  primitive  history  from  the  pen  ol 
an  unknown  composer  who  has  been  styled  the  Elohist,  from  his  exclusive  employ- 
ment, at  least  in  the  earlier  portion  of  his  \i  ork,  of  that  name  for  the  Deity,  and  • 


THE  AUTHQftSHIP  OF  THE  PENTATEUCH.  « 

Jehpvistic  document,  but  whether  an  independent  writing  or  only  of  a  supplementary 
character  may  be  said  to  be  as  yet  undetermined,  touching  on  many  of  the  same 
points  as  the  former  narration,  but,  unlike  it,  using  the  name  Jehovah  for  the  Deity, 
not  altogether  to  the  exclusion  of  the  term  Elohirn,  but  apparently  as  synonymous 
with  it. 

As  to  the  grounds  on  which  this,  in  some  respepts  fascinating,  theory  rests,  attention 
is  directed  to  the  circumstance  that  in  the  earlier  portion  of  the  Pentateuch,  extending 
from  Gen.  i.  1  to  Exod.  vi.  3,  the  names  Elphijp  and  Jehovah  appear  to  have  been 
introduced  into  the  narrative  from  two  distinct  sources,,  the  firet  name  occurring  in 
sections  from  which  the  second  is  distinguished  by  its  absence,  and  the  second  finding 
a  place  in  paragraphs  or  subdivisions,  if  not  to  the  complete  excision,  at  least  to  the 
equal  companionship,  of  the  first,  Indeed  so  palpable  is  this  phenomenon,  that 
attempts  have  been  made,  though  with  indifferent  supoess,  to  reconstruct  the  two 
documents  by  bringing  together  the  different  chapters  and  verses,  clauses  and  words;, 
that  belong  to  each  respectively.  Of  this  an  example  wjll  be,  found,  so  far  as  relates 
to  Genesis,  in  the  Special  Introduction  to  that  Book  (vide  ppr  iii,  ivj.  Then  it  is  con- 
fidently alleged  that  the  two  writers  can  be  traced  throughput  almost  the  entire  course 
of  the  Pentateuch,  and  even  up  to  the  end  pf  Joshua,  whiph  by  most  critiqs  of  this 
school  is  included  in  the  original  Elphistip  writing,  or,  as  Ewald  designates  it,  the 
Great  Book  of  Origins,  When  they  refer  to  the  same  subjects,  not  only  dp  they  emplpy 
different  names  for  the  Deity,  but  they  either  give  what  are  alleged  to  be  quite  irrecon- 
cilable accounts,  as  in  the  narratives  of  the,  Creation  (of.  Gen.  i.  1 — =-ii-  3  with  H.  4 — 25) 
and  the  Flpod(cf.  Gen.  vi.  9 — 22  with  vii.  1 — 5),  the  mission  of  Moses  (cf,  Exod.  iv. 
31  with  vi.  9)  and  the  stpry  of  the  Expdus  (cf,  Exod.  iii.  18;  v.  1,  3;  vii.  16  with 
vi.  11 ;  vii.  2;  ix.  35;  xi.  10),  the  redemption  of  the  firstborn  (cf.  Exod.  xiii.  13; 
xxxiv.  20  with  Levit.  xxvii.  27 ;  Numb,  xviii.  16)  and  the  number  of  the  feasts  (cf. 
Levit.  xxiii. ;  Numb,  xxviii.,  xxix.  with  Exod,  xxiii.  14 — 16  ;  xxxiv.  18 — 23  ;  Deut.  xvi. 
1 — 7)  ;  cr  they  present  legendary  variations,  as  witness  the  stories  pf  the  abducticn  pf 
Sarah  (of.  Gen!  xii.  10—19  with  x?.  1—18)  and  the  flight  pf  Hugar  (cf.  Gen.  xvi.  4-^16 
with  xxi.  9 — 21),  the  sending  of  the  quails  (cf.  Expd.  xvi,  11  with  Numb.  xi.  31)  and 
the  murmuring  fer  water  (cf.  Expd,  xvjj.  1 — 7  with  Numb.  xx.  1 — 13) ;  or  they 
content  themselves  with  simple  repetitions,  pf  which  the  precepts  relating  tn  the 
three  great  national  festivals  (cf.  Exod.  xxiii.  17—19  with  xxxiv.  23  —  26)  and 
the  penal  statutes  for  violations  of  the  marriage  law  (cf.  Levit.  xviii.  with  xx.) 
may  be  taken  as  examples.  Then  they  have  their  different  circles  ef  ideas  in  which 
they  respectively  move,  the  Elohist  generally  giving  simpler  and  less  artificial  repre- 
sentations of  primeval  tiroes,  and  the  Jehovist  not  nnly  throwing  back  the  Mosaic 
cultus  into  the  pre-Mosaic  era,  but  ascribing  the  origin  of  arts  and  handicrafts  to  the 
first  generations  of  the  human  race.  They  are  distinguished  likewise  by  peculiarities 
of  language  and  mpdes  of  expression,  each  having  his  own  favourite  words  and 
phrases — the  Elohist  showing  a  predilection  for  the  phrases  JV"1?  D'pD  or  ]flj,  to  give 
or  establish  a  covenant;  PDp.J-l  *D{,  male  and  female;  D1X  JTB,  the  plain  of  Aram  ;  for 
whiph  the  Jehpvi?t  has  1V33  JTO,  to  out  a  covenant ;  "WE'Sl  B"8$,  a  male  and  his  female ; 
WHS  E'lS,  Aram  of  the  two  rivers ;  and  for  the  words  S02,  to  create,  HOB',  to  destroy, 
7??0^,  to  pray,  in  preference  to  the  Jehovistic  terms  "IVJ,  nnip,  and  "10^,  besides 
emp'oying  words  and  phraseB  for  which  the  Jehovist  is  alleged  tc  have  no  corre- 
sponding equivalents,  such  as  flJIJS,  possessien  ;  PD,  kind  pr  sprt ;  ntil  DVIJ  E?^,  the 
self-same  day,  literally,  the  bene  of  this  day ;  Dnijp  fHK,  land  of  spjpurnings ;  D'SISJT 
PJ,  between  the  two  evenings,  &o. ;  and  the  Jehovist,  on  the  other  hand,  being 

g\ 


Iv  THE  AUTHORSHIP  Of  THE  PEOTATEOCfl. 

*- 

characterised,  in  addition  to  the  above  idiosyncrasies,  by  the  use  of  the  infinitive  abso- 
lute for  the  sake  of  emphasis,  the  poetical  suffix  to,  the  Divine  name  flty,  and  so  on. 
And  lastly,  as  if  to  establish  this  remarkable  hypothesis  beyond  the  possibility  of 
challenge,  the  author  of  the  Elohistic  writing,  by  affirming  that  the  name  Jehovah 
was  not  revealed  until  the  time  of  Moses  (Ezod.  vi.  2),  seems  to  say  that  he  could 
not  have  written  those  delineations  of  patriarchal  history  in  which  the  name  Jehovah 
is  employed. 

Now  it  must  be  admitted  that,  if  this  were  in  all  respects  an  accurate  representation 
of  the  literary  structure  of  the  Pentateuch,  the  documentary  hypothesis  might  be 
said  to  be  established ;  but  in  point  of  fact  it  is  a  representation  which  in  almost 
every  particular  is  assailable.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  not  possible  without  the  most 
arbitrary  suppositions  and  the  most  inexplicable  lacuna)  to  reconstruct  even  the 
Elohistic  writing,  as  is  partly  indicated  in  the  Special  Introduction  to  Genesis  (vide 
pp.  iv,  v) ;  and  even  if  it  were,  its  accomplishment  may  be  regarded  as  well-nigh 
hopeless,  almost  every  critic  having  his  own  particular  views  as  to  what  sections  and 
clauses  of  the  narrative  have  been  written  by  the  Elohist,  and  what  by  the  Jehovist, 
and  what  by  the  third  narrator,  and  so  on.  In  the  second  place,  the  so-called  con- 
tradictions are  without  exception  capable  of  easy  resolution  by  the  application  of  a 
little  cultured  common  sense,  not  to  mention  critical  acumen  ;  and  the  recurrence  of 
similar  events  in  times  when  manners  were  comparatively  stereotyped  ought  not  to 
occasion  perplexity  to  minds  of  ordinary  penetration ;  while,  if  repetitions  in  a  narra- 
tive are  fatal  to  its  literary  uni'.y,  many  writings,  amongst  which  it  might  not  be 
impossible  to  detect  some  belonging  to  the  higher  criticism,  whose  authorship  can  be 
accurately  determined,  will  be  open  to  suspicion  as  being  the  production  of  several 
pens.  In  the  third  place,  "  when  we  examine  the  alleged  instances  more  closely," 
i.e.  instances  of  linguistic  peculiarities,  "  we  everywhere  discover  a  difference  in  the 
conception  which  is  demanded  by  the  sense  and  context  of  the  individual  passages,  or 
else  the  peculiar  words  ascribed  to  the  one  author  are  really  not  unknown  to  the  other, 
or  they  occur  in  a  few  solitary  places,  and  therefore  are  not  entitled  to  be  considered 
characteristic"  (vide  Keil, ' Introduction,' vol.  i.  pp.  129 — 136, Clark's  Foreign  Theo- 
logical Library).  And,  in  the  last  place,  with  reference  to  the  supposed  ignorance  of 
the  term  Jehovah  in  patriarchal  times,  it  is  now  admitted  by  competent  authorities  that 
this  cannot  be  successfully  maintained,  since  in  the  records  relating  to  those  times  it 
occurs  not  alone  in  the  historian's  account,  but  in  language  used  by  the  patriarchs  and 
others  of  the  period  (vide  Gen.  xiv.  22  ;  xv.  2 ;  xvi.  2 ;  xviii.  30 ;  xx.  4 ;  xxiv.  31,  &c), 
as  well  as  by  persons  of  the  pre-patriarchal  age  (vide  Gen.  iv.  1 ;  v.  29 ;  ix.  26)  ;  since 
the  way  in  which  it  is  referred  to  by  God  himself  in  speaking  to  Moses,  "  my  name," 
may  be  held  as  presupposing  its  previous  revelation ;  and  since  the  words  in  Exod. 
vi.  2  need  not  imply  more  than  that  now  for  the  first  time  was  the  full  significance 
of  the  name  to  be  made  known,  that  though  the  term  was  in  use  among  the  patriarchs, 
it  was  not  understood  by  them  as  it  was  thenceforth  to  be  revealed  to  their  descend- 
ants, or  even  as  they  themselves  had  comprehended  the  other  familiar  appellation  of 
the  Deity,  El-Shaddai.  Consequently  it  is  impossible  to  allow  that  the  theory  of  the 
oomposite  structure  of  the  Pentateuch  has  been  made  good. 

2.  Thb  alleged  unhistobical  character  of  its  contents.  These  are  of  such  ■ 
nature,  it  is  averred,  relate  so  many  miraculous  occurrences,  include  so  many  legend* 
ary  and  purely  mythical  compositions,  perpetrate'  so  many  historical  inaccuracies, 
and  commit  so  many  geographical  and  other  mistakes,  that  it  is  simply  incredible 
that  they  can  have  been  the  work  of  Moses.  Without  dwelling  on  what  appears  M 
be  here  tacitly  acknowledged,  that  if  Moses  could  be  proved  the  author  of  tht 


THE  AUTHORSHIP  OF  THE  PENTATEUCH. 


Pentateuch,  its  authenticity  would  be  thereby  established,  it  may  be  urged  that  th« 
first  objection  largely  insisted  on  by  Kuenen  ('  The  Religion  of  Israel,'  vol.  i.  ch.  ii. 
p.  109)  and  others  is  ex  hypothesi  out  of  court,  for  the  obvious  reason  that  it  assumes 
what  is  not  admitted  by  the  other  side  in  this  contention,  and  what  has  never  been 
demonstrated  by  those  who  advance  it,  viz.,  that  it  is  impossible  for  the  Supreme  Intel- 
ligence who  has  made  the  world  and  established  the  laws  of  nature  to  interfere  with 
the  order  of  the  first,  or  modify  the  operation  of  the  second,  whenever  to  his  infinite 
mind  an  adequate  occasion  for  such  interposition  shall  appear  to  have  arisen.  The 
second  objection,  which  sees  in  the  Biblical  cosmogony  (Gen.  L),  the  narrative  of  the 
Flood  (Gen.  vi. — ix. ),  the  story  of  the  Exodus,  &c,  &c,  only  Hebrew  counterparts  of 
Babylonian,  Persian,  Indian,  and  other  national  legends,  has  little  difficulty  in  ascrib- 
ing them  to  the  same  source,  viz.,  the  mythologic  spiiit,  which  among  all  primeval 
peoples  has  antedated  the  age  of  written  documents  and  historical  research,  and  by 
adorning  and  handing  down  through  oral  tradition  the  popular  tales  of  the  country, 
has  everywhere  given  to  the  literatures  of  the  nations  a  similar  commencement.  But 
leaving  out  of  view  meanwhile  the  story  of  the  Exodus,  which  will  fall  to  be  after- 
wards considered,  there  are  three  things  to  be  said  in  favour  of  the  credibility 
of  the  Pentateuchal  Cosmogony  and  Noachic  Deluge:  viz.,  (1)  that  while  the 
resemblances  between  the  Mosaic  narratives  and  those  of  the  popular  legends  of 
antiquity  are  so  great  as  to  show  that  they  rest  upon  a  common  basis  of  fact,  the 
dissimilarities  are  so  apparent  as  to  prove  that  they  belong  to  widely  different  cate- 
gories of  composition ;  (2)  that  so  far  from  the  Biblical  cosmogony  being  hopelessly 
unscientific,  there  is  already  established  a  gratifying  amount  of  harmony  between  it 
and  the  best  ascertained  results  of  geological  research,  which  warrants  the  belief 
that  when  modern  investigation  shall  have  announced  its  last  finding,  it  will  be  seen 
to  completely  corroborate  the  sublime  utterances  of  the  old  Hebrew  record,  while, 
with  regard  to  the  Deluge,  it  is  manifest  that,  as  Scripture  does  not  necessitate  the 
belief  in  a  universal  flood,  t.  e.  geographically  viewed,  but  only  in  a  flood  destructive 
of  the  totality  of  the  human  race,  there  is  no  irreconcilable  conflict  between  science 
and  religion  such  as  demands  either  the  negation  of  the  incontrovertible  facts  of 
science,  or  the  relegation  of  the  Mosaic  story  to  the  limbo  of  popular  fable ;  and  (3) 
that  the  Chaldean  monuments,  one  of  the  most  valuable  of  recent  archaeological 
discoveries,  have,  by  their  marvellous  correspondence  with  the  Biblical  narratives  of 
the  Creation  and  the  Flood,  not  only  completely  disposed  of  the  allegation  that  these 
narratives  were  entirely  mythical,  but  likewise  triumphantly  vindicated  their  claim 
to  be  the  composition  of  Moses  by  showing  that  they  may  have  existed  in  a  written 
form  as  early  as  the  time  of  Abraham,  and  were  probably  among  the  ancient  records 
which  Moses  consulted  in  the  preparation  of  his  great  work.  Then  the  third  objec- 
tion, which  charges  the  Pentateuchal  writing  with  historical  inaccuracies,  is  supposed 
to  have  received,  or  rather,  for  the  argument  is  now  exactly  reversed,  was  supposed  to 
receive,  a  striking  exemplification  in  the  blunders  which  its  unknown  author  had 
committed  with  reference  to  Egypt.  The  time  was  when  Bohlen  (vide  '  Introduction 
to  the  Book  of  Genesis,'  vol.  i.  ch.  vi.  p.  63)  was  believed  to  have  annihilated  the 
last  shred  of  historic  truth  which  had  previously  been  lingering  about  the  Egyptology 
of  the  Pentateuch.  "  The  blunders  and  inaccuracies  "  with  reference  to  this  country 
of  which  it  had  been  guilty  were  of  such  a  character,  that  riot  only  was  historic 
criticism  obliged  to  assign  a  later  date  than  that  of  Moses  to  its  origin,  "  but  also  to 
infer  that  its  author  was  an  absolute  stranger  to  Egypt,  and  must  have  been  indebted 
for  his  information  to  hearsay  instead  of  observation."  This  literary  person,  who 
Mit  have  lived  somewhere  between  the  reign  of  Solomon  and  the  time  of  th* 


THE  AUTHORSHIP  OF  THE  PENTATEUCH. 


Captivity,  and  who  had  never  visited  the  land  of  the  Pharaohs,  but  who  was  yet  se 
well  acquainted  with  the  country,  its  manners  and  customs,  its  laws  and  religion, 
that  in  at  least  twenty-five  different  instances  mentioned  by  Bohlen  his  information 
was  correct,  had  committed  the  unpardonable  error  of  making  the  Egyptians  in  the 
time  of  Moses  build  with  brick,  like  the  Babylonians,  instead  of  stone ;  use  "  asses 
and  camels"  in  the  days  of  Abraham,  like  the  Arabians;  "bring  the  produce  of 
Arabia  in  Ishmaelite  caravans  from  Palestine  to  Egypt "  in  the  era  of  Jacob ;  and  in 
the  time  of  Joseph  cultivate  the  vine,  "  which  was  not  adopted  in  Egypt  till  the  reign 
of  Psammetichus ; "  and  had  proved  himself  "  so  grossly  ignorant  of  the  climate  of 
the  country,  that  he  transferred  to  it  without  a  scruple  the  parching  east  wind  of 
Palestine,  and  subsequently  employed  its  agency  to  bring  about  the  ebbing  of  the  sea ; " 
of  the  social  and  religious  habits  of  the  community,  that  he  represented  Joseph  "  as 
■laying  animals  to  supply  his  entertainments — in  glaring  opposition  to  the  sacred 
character  they  are  known  to  have  enjoyed  ; "  and  of  the  language  of  the  people,  "  that 
many  Aramean  words  were  cited  at  random  as  Egyptian."  So  far,  however,  have 
these  formidable  charges  been  from  being  substantiated  on  clpser  investigation,  that 
in  every  single  instance  they  have  received  a  triumphant  refutation,  proving  that  not 
the  sacred  writer,  but  the  confident  critic,  is  in  the  wrong.  As  it  were,  a  dead  and 
buried  Egypt  of  which  neither  Psammetichus  nor  Herodotus  was  aware  has  risen  up 
to  deliver  witness  on  this  momentous  theme.  Uncovering  her  sepulchres  and  laying 
bare  her  sculptures,  the  Egypt  of  the  times  of  Abraham  and  Joseph  and  Moses  has 
added  her  testimony  to  what  was  already  known  of  the  Egypt  of  a  later  date  in 
attestation  of  the  authenticity  of  Pentateuchal  history.  In  the  department  of  Ex- 
position in  the  various  books,  the  light  reflected  upon  the  Mosaic  writings  by  the 
decipherment  of  Egyptian  hieroglyphics  and  the  study  of  the  monumental  representa- 
tions has  been  carefully  collected,  with  the  general  result  "  that  in  the  entire  Mosaic 
description  of  ancient  Egypt  there  is  not  a  single  feature  which  is  out  of  harmony 
with  what  we  know  of  the  Egypt  of  this  remote  period  from  other  sources,"  nay, 
more,  that  "  almost  svary  point  in  it  is  confirmed  either  by  the  classical  writers,  by 
the  monuments,  or  by  both  "  (vide  Kawlinson's  '  Historical  Illustrations  of  the  Old 
Testament,'  pp.  39 — 52).  And  now  the  fourth  objection  to  the  historic  credibility, 
and  therefore  by  implication  to  the  Mosaic  authorship,  of  the  Pentateuch  is  tha 
geographical  and  other  mistakes  which  have  been  allowed  to  slip  into  the  narrative, 
but  which,  if  that  narrative  had  been  composed  by  a  contemporaneous  author,  would 
as  certainly  have  been  excluded.  In  the  catalogue  of  blunders,  which  has  been 
drawn  up  in  support  of  the  thesis  that  they  never  could  have  been  committed  by 
Moses,  there  are  chronological  and  arithmetical  as  well  as  geographical  inaccuracies — 
inaccuracies  relating  to  the  very  times,  circumstances,  and  events  in  which  Moses 
lived,  as  well  as  belonging  to  a  long  antecedent  period  ;  and  inasmuch  as  those  mis- 
takes will  bear  the  heaviest  against  the  Mosaic  authorship  which  occur  in  connection 
with  the  age  or  epoch  of  the  reputed  author,  the  illustrations  to  be  now  given  will  be 
taken  from  the  history  of  the  Exodus,  in  which  Moses  himself  was  a  prominent  actor. 
Bleek  quotes  as  a  chronological  inaccuracy  Numb.  i.  1  and  ix.  1,  but  this  assumes 
what  will  be  difficult  to  establish — that  in  all  jninute  details  the  Pentateuch  wa» 
intended  to  adhere  to  strict  chronological  arrangement.  A  more  hopeful  instance 
(Vater,  Hartmann)  refers  to  the  age  of  the  Levites  in  entering  on  service,  which  in 
Numb.  iv.  3  is  mentioned  as  thirty,  and  in  Numb.  viii.  24  is  fixed  at  twenty-five ;  hut 
even  this  may  be  disposed  of  by  remembering  that  the  latter  passage  speaks  of  the, 
»ge  for  entering  on  the  duties  of  the  tabernacle  generally,  which  was  to  be  from 
twenty-five  to  fifty,  while  the  former  refers  to  the  transportation  of  the  ark  and 


THE  AUTHORSHIP  OP  THE  PENTATEUCH.  *H 

tabernacle,  for  winch  work,  as  requiring  the  strength  of  a  fiill-grown  man,  all  malei 
between  the  ages  of  thirty  and  fifty  were  to  be  enrolled  (Hengstenberg,  KeiJ)> 
Among  arithmetical  blunders,  the  exact  agreement  of  the  census  of  the  male  heads  of 
the  people  taken  in  the  second  year  of  the  Exodus  (Numb.  i.  45)  with  that  executed 
half  a  year  earlier  (Exod.  xxxviii.  25,  26),  fpr  the  purpose  of  imposing  a  poll  tax, 
viz.,  603,550,  has  long  been  regarded  as  inexplicable  on  any  ground  of  historical  truth- 
fulness (Colenso)  ;  but  a  sufficient  explanation  is  that  the  second  census  was  not 
really  a  fresh  enumeration  of  the  people,  which  was  not  necessary,  but  simply  a 
registration,  according  to  thousands,  hundreds,  fifties,  and  tens,  of  those  who  had 
been  previously  entered  on  the  public  records  (Keil).  Geographical  mistakes  have 
been  detected  somewhat  plentifully  in  the  story  of  the  Exodus,  and  in  particular 
in  the  list  of  camping  stations  preserved  in  Numb,  xxxiii.  (Bohlen,  '  Introd.,'  vol,  i. 
ch.  viii.  p,  88,  London,  1855);  but  it  is  the  less  needful  to  offer  refutation  of  what 
are  mostly  imaginary  faults,  that  critics  generally  have  felt  themselves  constrained 
to  recognise  the  chapter  in  which  they  occur  as  one  of  the  indubitable  frag- 
ments of  Mosaic  composition  contained  in  the  Pentateuch  (Havernick,  'Introd.,'  p. 
335).  Thus,  so  far  as  this  second  ground  or  reason  for  accepting  the  nqn-Mosaic 
authorship  of  the  Pentateuch  is  concerned,  it  is  far  from  being  as  conclusive  as  its 
advocates  suppose. 

3.  The  admitted  resemblance  op  its  language  to  that  of  the  later  books. 
This  objection  applies  with  special  force  to  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy,  between  which 
and  the  other  parts  of  the  Pentateuch  the  dissimilarity  is  so  palpable  as  to  demand  a 
diversity  of  authorship,  while  its  correspondence  in  both  thought  and  expression  tp 
the  prophetic  writings  of  Jeremiah  is  so  great  as  to  indicate,  if  not  that  it  proceeded 
from  that  prophet's  pen,  at  least  that  it  had  its  origin  in  his  time.  Without  attempt- 
ing to  discuss  every  minute  point  of  criticism  connected  with  the  fifth  book  of 
Moses,  which  will  doubtless  be  done  in  the  special  introduction  to  that  portion  of  the 
Pentateuch,  the  two  allegations  that  have  just  been  referred  to  appear  to  call  for 
nutiue  on  the  ground  that  they  hear  more  immediately  on  the  larger  question  of  the 
literary  unity  and  Mosaic  authorship  of  the  Pentateuch.  As  to  the  first,  the  non- 
resemblance  of  the  fifth  book  to  the  preceding  four,  it  is  alleged  that  not  only  are  its 
contents  different  from  theirs,  promulgating  as  it  does  a  legislation  containing  many 
important  variations  from,  contradictions  of,  and  even  additions  to,  that  contained 
in  the  preceding  books,  as,  e.  g.,  the  law  of  the  kingdom  (Deut.  xvii.  14),  the  law  of  the 
one  high  place  (Deut.  xii.  5),  the  law  about  the  prophetic  office  (Deut.  xviii.  15),  &c, 
of  all  which  the  earlier  legislation  was  completely  ignorant,  but  its  style  of  com- 
position is  characterised  by  a  copiousness  of  diction  altogether  foreign  to  the  other 
books  of  the  Pentateuch,  and  by  many  forms  of  expression  which  are  peculiarly  its 
own.  The  so-called  new  legislation  to  be  found  in  Deuteronomy  we  dismiss  with  the 
remark  that  only  the  exigencies  of  a  pre-conceived  theory  can  discover  in  it  anything 
at  variance  with  the  earlier  Sinaitjc  legislation  recorded  in  Exodus.  At  present  we 
confine  our  remarks  to  the  charge  of  diversity  of  language  supposed  to  be  discernible 
between  it  and  the  preceding  books.  Qolenso  mentions  forty-five  expressions  which 
he  avers  are  of  frequent  occurrence  in  Deuteronomy,  but  are  never  found  so  much 
as  once  in  the  Pentateuch  ;  but  a  careful  examination  of  the  examples  quoted  shows 
how  much  of  accuracy  this  assertion  really  contains.  The  phrase,  e.  g.,  "cleave  to 
Jehovah,"  HJ.T2  p3}  (ch.  iv.  4;  x.  20;  xi.  22;  xiii.  4;  xxx.  20),  is  claimed  as  being 
exclusively  Deuterpnomistic ;  hut  the  same  verb,  p?1!,  occurs  in  Gen.  ii.  24  ;  xix.  19  ; 
xxxiv.  3,  and  with  precisely  the  same  sense  of  attaching  oneself  to  a  person  or  thing. 
"  Work  qf  the  hands  "  (ch,  ii.  7  j  xiv.  29 ;  xyi.  1§,  4c.)  is  only  a  rhetorical  expresses 


Till  THE  AUTHORSHIP  OF  THE  PENTATEUCH, 

iuch  as  might  naturally  be  adopted  in  a  hortatory  discourse  (it  occurs  frequently 
in  the  Psalms)  instead  of  TE<i|0  (Exod.  xxiii.  12),  the  form  more  suitable  for  didactio 
composition ;  and  indeed  this  explanation  accounts  for  the  larger  number  of  the 
peculiar  phrases  cited,  such  as  "  with  all  the  heart  and  with  all  the  soul "  (ch.  iv. 
29;  vi.  5;  x.  12,  &c),  "that  they  may  learn  to  fear  Jehovah"  (ch.  iv.  10;  xiv. 
23;  xvii.  19;  xxxi.  12,  13),  "which  thou  knewest  not"  (ch.  viii.  3),  "which  thy 
fathers  knew  not "  (ch.  viii.  16),  "be  strong  and  of  a  good  courage  "  (ch.  iii.  28),  and 
bo  on.  The  admonition,  "  take  good  heed  "  (ch.  ii.  4  ;  xxiv.  8),  "  take  heed  to  thy- 
self," 1?  "HJB'n  (ch.  iv.  9 ;  vi.  12),  is  certainly  not  peculiar  to  the  Deuterpnomist,  the 
stronger  form  being  found  in  Gen.  xxiv.  6 ;  xxxi.  24,  29 ;  Exod.  x.  28 ;  xix.  12  ; 
sxxiv.  12 ;  nor  is  the  frequent  combination  of  law,  or  laws  and  statutes,  or  testi- 
monies, or  commandments,  or  judgments  (ch.  v.  28 ;  vi.  1,  17,  20;  vii.  11 ;  viii.  11 ; 
xi.  1 ;  xxvi.  17;  xxx.  16),  foreign  to  the  earlier  books  (cf.  Gen.  xxvi.  6;  Levit.  xxvi. 
15),  while  the  injunction  to  "  walk  in  the  ways  of  Jehovah  "  (ch.  v.  33  ;  viii.  6 ;  x. 
12 ;  xi.  22 ;  xix.  9,  &c.)  is  only  an  echo  of  Gen.  xviii.  19.  But  even  though  every 
one  of  the  cited  instances  could  be  made  good,  it  would  not  amount  to  a  necessary 
proof  of  diversity  of  authorship.  It  is  too  large  a- demand  upon  the  credulity  of  the 
human  mind  to  expect  instantaneous  assent  to  the  proposition  that  no  one  can  com- 
pose in  two  different  styles  (say  an  argumentative  or  didactic,  and  a  rhetorical  or 
hortatory),  and  much  more  that  it  was  impossible  for  the  great  Hebrew  lawgiver,  "  a 
prophet  in  whom  we  must  acknowledge  one  of  the  most  marvellous  of  minds  of 
original  power "  (Ewald),  to  strike  another  key,  and  with  a  flood  of  impassioned 
eloquence,  rendered  all  the  more  powerful  and  impressive  because  of  his  nearness  to 
the  better  country,  even  an  heavenly,  ere  he  closed  his  earthly  career  to  enforce  upon 
the  people's  hearts  the  statutes  and  commandments  he  had  been  honoured,  in  the 
name  of  their  covenant  Jehovah,  to  prescribe  for  their  obedience.  Then,  as  to  the 
second  part  of  this  objection,  viz.,  the  linguistic  resemblance  of  Deuteronomy  to  the 
prophetical  writings  of  Jeremiah,  it  is  easy  enough  to  show,  as  Bohlen  has  elabor- 
ately done,  that  a  number  of  "words,  favourite  terms  of  expression,  and  peculiar 
phrases"  are  common  to  both,  such  as  "the  iron  furnace,"  referring  to  the  bondage 
in  Egypt  (Deut.  iv.  20 ;  Jer.  xi.  4.  The  phrase  also  occurs  in  1  Kings  viii.  51,  and 
in  all  the  three  places  it  unquestionably  looks  back  to  the  "smoking  furnace"  of 
Gen.  xv.  17) ;  "  to  scatter  among  the  people,"  or  "  among  the  heathen,"  in  speaking  of 
the  Babylonish  exile  (Deut.  iv.  27  ;  Jer.  ix.  16);  "to  circumcise  the  heart,"  or  "the 
foreskin  of  the  heart"  (Deut.  x.  16;  xxx.  6;  Jer.  iv.  4;  ix.  26)  ;"  to  pollute  the 
land  "  by  means  of  divorce  (Deut.  xxiv.  4 ;  Jer.  iii.  1).  Both  writers  pronounce  "  a 
curse  "  upon  disobedience  (Deut.  xxvii.  26 ;  Jer.  xi.  3),  threaten  Israel,  if  rebellious, 
with  becoming  "d  proverb  and  a  byword"  among  the  nations  (Deut.  xxviii.  37  ;  Jer. 
xxiv.  9),  describe  their  destroyers  as  "  a  nation  from  afar,  whose  tongue  thou  shalt 
not  understand  "  (Deut.  xxviii.  49  ;  Jer.  v.  15),  and  whose  "  horses  are  swifter  than 
eagles"  (Deut.  xxviii.  49;  Jer.  iv.  13),  and  refer  in  like  terms  to  the  miseries  they 
should  endure  while  besieged  (Deut.  xxviii.  53  ;  Jer.  xix.  9),  while  both  predict  a 
subsequent  restoration  from  captivity  (Deut.  xxx.  3 ;  Jer.  xxix.  14).  Both  denounce 
the  worship  of  the  sun  and  moon  (Deut.  xvii.  3 ;  Jer.  viii.  2),  deliver  warnings 
against  Halse  prophets  (Deut.  xiii.  1 ;  xviii.  20  ;  Jer.  xiv.  13  ;  xxiii.  16,  17),  and 
forbid  the  practice  of  cutting  the  body  as  a  sign  of  mourning  for  the  dead  (Deut 
xiv.  1 ;  Jer.  xvi.  6 ;  xli.  5).  But  while  these  resemblances  are  undeniable,  and  while 
it  is  scarcely  likely  that  they  can  have  been  the  result  of  pure  chance,  it  is  not  quit* 
"  evident  that  father  and  son  must  have  laboured  in  common  on  this  compendium  of 
the  law"  (Bohlen),  or  that  Jeremiah,  or  Hilkiah,  or  some  member  of  the  Mosaio 


THE  AtfTHORSHlP  OP  THE  PENTATEUCH. 


party,  must  have  fabricated  "  this  book  of  the  law  "  as  a  legislative  programme 
(Kuenen,  'The  Religion  of  Israel,'  vol.  ii.  pp.  18,  19).  For  (1)  there  are  not  a  few 
resemblances  between  the  other  Pentateuchal  books  and  Jeremiah,  of  which  the 
appended  list,  collected  by  Bohlen,  may  be  studied  (cf.  Gen.  i.  22 ;  xxxv.  11  with 
Jer.  iii.  16 ;  xxiii.  3 ;  Gen.  xxii.  15,  18  with  Jer.  iv.  2  ;  Gen.  xxviii.  3  with  Jer.  1.  9; 
Levit.  xix.  28  with  Jer.  xvi.  6 ;  Numb.  xxi.  28,  29  with  Jer.  xlviii.  45,  46)  ;  so  that 
Jeremiah  may  be  as  aptly  spoken  of  as  the  author,  or  the  contemporary  of  the 
author,  of  these  earlier  compositions.  (2)  The  partial  resemblance  in  respect  of 
language  between  the  Books  of  Deuteronomy  and  Jeremiah  is  more  than  counter- 
balanced by  a  thorough-going  diversity  between  the  two,  not  alone  in  their  contents, 
but  also  in  their  literary  style,  as  has  been  shown  by  Konig  and  others  (cf.  Keil, 
'  Introd.,'  vol.  i.  p.  146).  (3)  In  so  far  as  Jeremiah  corresponds  with  Deuteronomy, 
it  admits  of  easy  explanation  if  the  book  of  the  law  found  by  Hilkiah,  the  priest 
in  the  house  of  the  Lord  (2  Kings  xxii.  8),  wa3  either  the  present  Pentateuch  or  a 
portion  of  it,  viz.,  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy.  Nothing  can  be  more  natural  than 
that  Jeremiah,  who  had  only  five  years  before  been  installed  into  the  prophetic  office 
(Jer.  i.  1),  no  less  than  Josiah,  Hilkiah,  and  others  of  the  reformers  of  the  period, 
should  have  been  profoundly  stirred  by  the  remarkable  discovery  of  the  lost  Penta- 
teuch, and  that  in  particular  his  earnest  spirit  should  have  drunk  deeply  into  the  soul- 
stirring  words  of  the  venerable  Hebrew  law-giver  in  his  last  great  oration  to  the 
people.  And  (4)  monumental  evidence  attests  that  the  languages  of  antiquity  were 
possessed  of  much  greater  fixity  than  modern  tongues,  as  witness  the  Babylonian 
language,  which  was  the  same  in  the  days  of  Khammurabi,  who  lived  B.C.  1600, 
i.  e.  before  Moses,  as  it  was  a  thousand  years  later,  in  the  time  of  Nebuchadnezzar 
{vide  '  Records  of  the  Past,'  vol.  i.  p.  6). 

4.  The  so-called  traces  op  a  lateb  date.    These,  which  may  be  called  uncon- 
scious and  unintentional  indications  of  the  age  in  which  the  author  or  authors  lived, 
may  be  grouped  under  the  following  heads  : — (1)  Passages  which  seem  to  presuppott 
the  occupation  of  the  land.     Of  these  the  most  remarkable  are — (a)  Gen.  xii.  6  and 
xiii.  7,  which  appear  to  intimate  that  when  these  words  were  penned  the  conquest  of 
the  land  had  been  completed,  and  the  Canaanites  expelled,  whereas  they  are  (or  may 
have  been)  introduced  into  the  narrative  to  inform  the  patriarch  that  the  promised 
land  was  not  any  desolate  moorland  or  unoccupied   territory,  which  might  have 
been  comparatively  easy  for  God  to  bestow,  but  a  populated  and  populous  region, 
which  made  the  promise  both  on  God's  part  hard  to  perform,  and  on  Abraham's 
part  hard  to  believe;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  to  explain  the  reason  why  Lot  and 
Abraham  found  {t  difficult  to  obtain  pasture  for  their  flocks,     (o)  Gen.  xxxvi.  31, 
which  is  believed  to  be  inexplicable,  unless  the  writer  lived  under  the  monarchy ;  but, 
notwithstanding  Bleek'B  confident  assertion,  there  is  nothing  "in  the  highest  degree 
unnatural"  in  the  assumption  that  Moses  meant  by  these  words  to  contrast  the 
promise  made  to  Abraham  and  Jacob  (ch.  xvii.  6,  16 ;  xxxv,  11),  that  kings  should 
descend  from  their  loins,  which  promise  was  at  the  time  referred  to  unfulfilled,  with 
the  political  greatness  to  which  Esau,  the  disinherited  son  of  Jacob,  but  distinguished 
ancestor  of  Edom,  had  so  early  attained,     (c)  Gen.  xl.  15,  from  which  the  inference 
appears  inevitable  that  at  the  time  of  Joseph's  sale  the  land  of  Canaan  was  possessed 
by  the  Hebrews,  which  indeed  is  correct  to  this  extent,  and  more  is  not  required  by 
the  narrative  (vide  Exposition  in  loco),  that  the  southern  part  of  Palestine,  t.  e.  tha 
district  round  Hebron,  was  even  then  recognised  as  the  land  where  the  Ibrim  lived. 
(d)  Exod.  xvi.  35,  which  implies,  according  to  this  hypothesis,  that  the  Israelites  had 
tetched  the  land  of  their  habitation,  and  were  settled  within  its  borders,  before  this 


THE  AUTHORSHIP  OF  THE  PELTATE  OUH. 


was  written  ;  but  in  point  of  fact  Moses  only  states  that  they  ate  manna  until  they 
arrived  upon  the  borders  of  Canaan,  without  saying  when  the  manna  ceased- — in  other 
words,  Moses  writes  nothing  bere  whicb  was  not  quite  within  his  own  personal  know- 
ledge and  observation.  («)  Numb.  xv.  32 — 36,  which  presupposes  that  the  children 
of  Israel  were  by  this  time  no  longer  in  the  wilderness,  i.e.  were  established  in 
Canaan ;  but  from  the  introductory  words,  "  And  the  children  of  Israel  were  in 
the  wilderness,"  all  that  can  be  gathered  is  that  the  historian,  who  consciously  wrote 
for  after  times,  wished  it  to  be  understood  that  the  occurrence  happened  while  the 
people  wore  wandering  in  the  desert  (/)  Pent.  ii.  12,  whicb  "  also  pretty  plainly 
presupposes  a  time  when  the  Israelites  were  settled  In  the,  possession  of  the  land  " 
(Bleek);  but  "the  land  of  his  possession"  in  this  case  was  the  land  to  the  east  of 
the  Jordan  (Giiead  and  Bashan),  which  was  conquered  by  the  Israelites  under  Moses, 
and  divided,  among  the  two  tribes  and  a  half,  and  which  is  also  described  in  ch. 
Hi.  20  as  "  the  possession"  which  Jehovah  had  given  to  these  tribes  (Keil).  (2) 
Passages  which  appear  to  imply  the  Palestinian  standpoint  of  the  author;  as,  e.  g., 
(a)  Gen.  xii.  8 ;  ziii.  14  ;  xxviii.  14 ;  Exod.  x.  19  ;  xxvi.  22  ;  Numb.  ii.  18  ;  iii.  23 ; 
Dent,  i,  7  ;  iii.  27,  &c,  in  which  the  term  "  sea''  is  used  for  the  west,  a  form  of 
expression  which  "  it  is  evident  neither  Moses,  nor  one  of  his  age  could  have  invented 
either  while  wandering  in  the  wilderness  or  even  when,  in  the  last  year,  according 
to  the  story,  they  had  reached  the  borders  of  the  promised  land,  and  the  Mediter- 
ranean lay  then  actually  to  the  west  0/  their  position"  (Colengo)  ;  but  how,  with  the 
Me  literranean  on  the  west,  it  should  be,  impossible  to  speak  of  "  a  wind  of  the  sea  " 
for  a  west  wind,  or  to  use  the  phrase  "  towards  the  sea  "  for  in  a  westward  direction, 
passes  comprehension.  The  expressions  might  gven  be  employed  by  a  writer  in  the 
Arabian  desert,  or  in  Northern  Egypt,  the  more  especially  as  the  term  west  includes 
all  points  of  the  compass  between  west  and  north-west  (cf.  Keil,  '  Introd.,'  vol.  i.  p. 
189).  (j3)  Gen.  1. 10, 11 ;  Numb.  xxii.  1 ;  xxxii.  19 ;  Deut.  i.  1, 4c,  in  which  the  phrase 
nnW  ">9y?,  or  the  similar  expression  \Y\lZ  *•???$,  represents  the  writer's  standpoint 
as  being  on  the  west  of  the  Jordan,  with  reference  to  which  the  Moabitish  plains  were 
the  parts  beyond  Jordan,  or  "  the  other  side  Jordan."  But  (1)  it  is  certain  that  the 
term  "I3JJ  may  mean  either  that  side  or  this  :  vide  Numb,  xxxii.  19,  in  which  it  must 
of  necessity  signify  first  the  other  side,  from  the  speaker's  standpoint  (»'.  e.  the  west  of 
Jordan),  and  second  this  side  (i.  e.  the  east  of  Jordan),  on  which  the  speaker  at  the 
time  was ;  and  Deut.  iii.  8,  in  which  it  as  clearly  denotes  the  east  of  Jordan,  which  to 
the  speaker  Moses  was  "this  side."  Or  (2)  it  is  probable  that  Moses,  who  was  con- 
sciously writing  for  posterity,  may  have  occasionally  assumed  an  ideal  position,  in 
which  he  proleptically  represented  matters  as  they  would  appear  to  the  sons  of 
Israel  after  they  hal  entered  Canaan  (cf.  '  Hengstenborg  on  the  Genuineness  of  the 
Pentateuch,' vol.  ii.  p.  25fi;  Keil's  '  Intro.1..,'  vol.  i.  p.  189).  (3)  Passages  which 
explain  archaic  usages  and  terms  by  those  of  a  later  origin,  (a)  Names  of  places : 
Gen.  xiv.  2,  8 — "  Bela,  whioh  is  Zoar ;"  ch.  xiv.  7—"  En-mishpat,  which  is  Kadesh;" 
ch.  xiv.  17 — "the  valley  of  Shaveh,  which  is  the  king's  dale;"  ch.  xxiii.  2 — 
"  Kirjath-arba,  the  same  is  Hebron;"  ch.  xxxv.  19 — "  Ephrath,  which  is  Bethle- 
hem." "  But  all  these  names  in  later  use  had  either  originated  long  before  Moses,  or 
did  so  in  his  time  "  (Reil,  '  Introd.,'  vol.  i.  p.  188 ;  cf.  '  Commentary  on  Genesis'  in 
locis).  (|3)  Names  of  measures ;  Exod.  xvi.  36.  "  Now  an  omer  is  a  tenth  part  of  an 
ephah,"  whioh  proves,  it  is  argued,  that  the  measure  here  called  an  omer  (it  ocours 
nowhere  else  in  Scripture)  had  long  fallen  into  disuse,  and  required  to  be  explained; 
but  (1)  it  is  doubtful,  as  Michaelis  ('  Suppl.,'  p.  1929)  and  Hengstenberg  ('  On  tb* 


THE  AUTHORSHIP  OF  THE  PENTATEUCH. 


Genuineness  of  the  Pentateuch,'  vol.  i.  p.  172)  have  shown,  whether  it  really 
was  a  measure,  and,  (2)  on  the  assumption  that  it  was,  it  still  requires  proof  that  it 
was  an  old  and  not  a  new  one,  the  words  omer  and  ephah  both  being  Egyptian 
('  Speaker's  Commentary ').  (4)"  Passages  which  make  citations  from  documents  oj 
recognised  antiquity.  In  Numb.  xxi.  13 — 15,  e.  g.,  the  Book  of  the  Wars  of  Jehovah 
is  introduced  in  such  a  way  as  to  convey  the  impression  that  in  the  days  of  the  author 
of  this  portion  of  the  Pentateuch  it  was  a  Writing  that  had  descended  from  ancient 
times ;  and  yet  "  it  certainly  could  not  havel  been  composed  before  the  last  period  of 
the  joumeyings  of  the  Israelites  through  the  wilderness,  and  probably  it  was  written 
at  a  still  later  time,"  so  that  "  at  all  events  this  citation  points  to  an  author  consider- 
ably latef  Who  wrote  the  history  of  the  Israelites  during  the  Mosaic  time  from  either 
written  or  oral  tradition"  (Bleek,  'Introd.,'  vol.  i.  §  82).  But  it  is  at  the  best  an 
assumption  that  this  Book  of  the  Wars  of  Jehovah  was  composed  many  centuries 
previous  to  the  other  parts  of  the  Pentateuch.  Even  Bleek  admits  {vide  supra)  that 
it  might  have  been  written  during  the  last  year  of  the  wanderings ;  and  no  valid 
reason  can  be  adduced  why  it  might  not  have  been  a  collection  of  odes  made  by 
Moses  himself  before  beginning  with  the  story  of  the  wanderings.  "Thatsuoha 
book  should  arise  in  the  last  days  of  MoseS  ...  is  so  far  from  being  a  surprising 
fact,  that  we  can  Scarcely  imagine  a  more1  suitable  time  for  its  commencement " 
(Baumgarten) ;  and  if  this  was  the  case,  "  the  allusion  to  this  collection  of  odes  can- 
not be  adduced  as  an  argument  against  the  Mosaic  authorship  of  the  Pentateuch  " 
(Keil ;  cf.  '  Hengstenberg  on  the  Genuineness  Of  the  Pentateuch,'  vol.  i.  p.  182). 
(5)  Passages  which  contain  the  formula,  "unto  this  day."  These  occur  principally 
in  Genesis  (ch.  xix.  37, 38  j  xxvl  33  ;  xxxii.  33 ;  xxxv.  20 ;  xlvii.  26)  and  Deuteronomy 
(ch.  ii.  22 ;  iii.  14  ;  x.  8  ;  xi.  4  ;  xxlx.  4;  xxxiv.  6)  ;  but  in  Genesis  the  formula  is 
used  of  events  removed  by  centuries  from  the  time  of  Moses,  while  in  Deuteronomy 
a  detailed  examination  of  the  passages  discovers  that  only  one  is  attended  With  any 
measure  of  difficulty.  In  what  appears  to  be  the  last  year  of  the  desert  maroh,  .lair 
the  son  of  Manasseh  is  represented  as  calling  the  cities  of  Bashan  after  his  own  name, 
Bashari-havoth-jair,  unto  this  day  (Deut.  iii.  14).  The  similarity  of  the  account  pre- 
served in  Judges  (ch.  x.  3,  4)  concerning  Jair,  a  Gileadite  judge,  who  had  thiity  sdns 
who  had  thirty  cities  called  "  Havoth-jair  unto  this  day,"  has  led  to  the  suggestion 
that  the  words  "  unto  this  day  "  in  Deuteronomy  may  be  an  interpolation ;  but  this  is 
not  really  necessary,  as  Hengstenberg  has  shown  that  a  considerable  period  may 
have  intervened  between  the  naming  of  the  towns  and  the  writing  of  the  record,  and 
that  frequently,  as  employed  in  the  Mosaic  compositions,  the  phrase  partakes  of  the 
nature  of  a  proverbial  expression  Which  is  designed  to  represent  an  event  or  trans- 
action as  of  a  permanent  rather  than  of  a  transitory  character  and  duration. 

It  appears  then  from  this  somewhat  lengthened  survey  of  the  arguments  commonly 
adduced  in  support  of  the  non-Mosaic  authorship  of  the  Pentateuch,  that  there  is 
really  not  one  of  them  that  can  be  fairly  said  to  have  fully  established  itself  beyond 
the  reach  of  cavil,  but  that,  on  the  contrary,  all  of  them  are  capable  of  vigorous  dis- 
putation, and  most  of  them  of  thorough-going  refutation,  so  that,  to  say  the  least  of 
it,  it  is  premature  to  claim  it  as  "  one  of  the  best  ascertained  results  of  modern 
criticism  "  that  the  Pentateuch  is  not  the  production  either  of  Moses  or  of  the  Mosaio 
•ge,  while  a  candid  and  ingenuous  inquirer,  sincerely  desirous  of  arriving  at  the 
truth  on  this  keenly  agitated  question,  may  warrantably  deliver  as  his  verdict  con- 
cerning the  non-Mosaic  authorship,  so  far  at  least  as  he  has  yet  been  conducted  by 
this  investigation,  Non  probatum  est.  And  this  being  so,  the  way  seems  cleared  fo» 
advancing  to  the  second  branch  of  this  inquiry. 


THE  AUTHORSHIP  OF  THE  PENTATEUCH. 


II.  Considerations  which  are  generally  believed  to  favour  the  Mosaic  authorship  of 
the  Pentateuch. 

1.  It  was  not  impossiblb  fob  Moses  to  pbodcce  such  a  book  as  the  preseiti 
Pentateuch.  In  the  first  place,  he  had  the  means  of  doing  so,  inasmuch  as  it  it 
capable  of  almost  perfect  demonstration  that  he  was  acquainted  with  the  art  of 
writing.  So  long  of  course  as  the  assertion  was  allowed  to  pass  current  as  an  ascer- 
tained fact  that  *'  the  earliest  date  which  can  be  assigned  to  Semitic  writing  scarcely 
reaches  to  the  tenth  century  B.  a,  and  even  this  is  not  sufficiently  accredited  " 
(Bohlen,  '  Introd.,'  vol.  i.  p.  35),  a  fatal  barrier  existed  to  the  claims  of  Moses  to  b« 
regarded  as  the  author  of  the  present  Pentateuch:  But  that  assertion  has  been  long 
since  abandoned  by  the  most  eminent  palaeographists.  Gesenius  ('  Heb.  Gram.,' 
p.  8)  admits  that  "  the  point  of  time  at  which  we  are  to  date  the  commencement  of 
Hebrew  literature  in  general  is  certainly  us  early  as  that  of  Moses,  even  if  the  Penta- 
teuch, in  its  present  shape  and  compass,  be  considered  a  work  remodelled  at  a  later 
period."  Ewald  ('  History  of  Israel,'  vol.  i.  p.  49),  while  doubting  if  written  docu- 
ments existed  in  patriarchal  times,  acknowledges  "  the  two  tables  of  the  law"  to  be 
"  an  incontrovertible  proof  that  there  was  writing  in  the  age  of  Moses."  Bleek 
('  Introd.,'  vol.  i.  p.  82)  states  that  "  the  pre-Mosaic  use,  among  the  Hebrews,  of  the 
art  of  writing  is  now  generally  acknowledged,"  and  considers  that  "written  records 
in  the  primitive  times  are  proved  by  such  passages  as  Gen.  xiv. ;  Numb.  xiii.  22 ; 
Exod.  v.  6 j  Josh.  xv.  15."  Prof.  Smith  ('Encyclopedia  Britannica,'  art.  Hebrew 
Language  and  Literature,  ninth  edition)  writes  that  "  the  Semitic  peoples  possessed 
the  art  of  writing  and  an  alphabetical  character  from  a  date  so  remote  as  to  be  lost 
in  the  mists  of  antiquity."  Indeed  the  monumental  records  of  antiquity  have  com- 
pletely disposed  of  the  allegation  that  the  art  of  writing  was  a  comparatively  recent 
invention.  The  cuneiform  inscriptions  from  Chaldea  reach  as  far  back  at  least  as  the 
days  of  Abraham.  "  Bricks  and  stone  tablets,  with  inscriptions  of  the  early  Babylonian 
monarchs,  have  been  found  at  most  of  the  sites,"  and  the  inscription  of  Khammu- 
rabi  (now  in  the  Museum  at  Paris),  written  in  the  Babylonian  language,  according  to 
George  Smith  cannot  be  placed  later  than  the  sixteenth  century  b.  c.  (vide  '  Records 
of  the  Past,'  vol.  i.  p.  6,  and  vol.  iii.  p.  5).  In  Egypt  hieroglyphics  are  found  as 
early  as  the  second  Egyptian  dynasty  ('  Records  of  the  Past,'  vol.  ii.  p.  vi) ;  and 
recent  excavations  at  Carchemish,  Hamath,  Aleppo,  and  Lycaonia  show  that  the  Hit- 
tites,  a  branch  of  which  were  settled  in  Canaan  during  the  patriarchal  period,  were  a 
literary  people  (possessing  a  peculiar  system  of  hieroglyphic  writing,  which  has 
not  yet  been  deciphered)  ;  of  which  perhaps  there  was  a  hint  in  Eirjath-sepher,  or 
"  Book  Town,"  the  early  name  of  their  capital,  Debir,  the  city  of  the  oracle  near 
Hebron  (Josh,  xv,  15).  Then,  in  the  second  place,  it  is  obvious  that  the  materials 
could  not  be  wanting  in  Moses'  time  for  the  composition  of  such  a  work  as  the 
Pentateuch.  If,  as  is  apparent,  the  art  of  writing  was  both  known  and  practised  in 
patriarchal  times,  it  should  not  be  difficult  to  credit  the  existence  of  ancient  records 
in  the  patriarchal  families.  If  the  Chaldean  monuments  show  that  at  a  date  as  early 
as  that  of  Abraham  legendary  accounts  of  the  Creation,  the  Deluge,  the  building  of 
the  tower  of  Babel,  closely  resembling  the  narrations  in  Genesis,  Were  preserved  in 
Babylonia,  the  inference  is  irresistible  that  the  true  account  of  the  primitive  history 
of  mankind  might  in  the  same  manner,  i.  e.  by  written  tablets,  have  been  handed 
down  at  least  from  the  days  of  Abraham,  if  not  indeed  from  a  much  earlier  period 
(vide  supra),  till  they  came  into  the  hands  of  Moses  in  Egypt.  Then,  as  Moses  was 
himself  the  prominent  figure  in  all  that  related  to  the  Exodus,  "  quorum  magna 
pars/ui,"  the  requisite  material  for  constructing  a  history  of  that  great  national 


THE  AUTHORSHIP  OF  THE  PENTATEUCH.  xffl 

emancipation  and  resuscitation  could  not  be  far  to  seek.  Still  further,  in  the  third 
place,  Moses  enjoyed  the  leisure  which  was  indispensable  for  the  composition  of  such 
a  work  as  the  Pentateuch.  The  forty  years'  retirement  to  the  land  of  Midian,  carry- 
ing with  him  probably  the  ancient  records  of  his  people,  must  have  afforded  him,  if  he 
desired  it,  ample  opportunity  for  the  commencement  of  his  literary  enterprise  by  the 
composition  of  Genesis  ;  while  the  forty  years  of  wandering  in  the  same  Arabian 
desert  with  which  his  career  closed  would  enable  him  to  carry  forward  at  stated 
intervals  the  work  he  had  begun,  leaving,  perhaps,  the  account  of  his  last  hours  and 
death  (Deut.  xxxiv.)  to  be  added  by  the  hand  of  Joshua.  And  lastly,  in  the  fourth 
place,  Moses  could  not  want  a  motive  for  undertaking  even  so  arduous  a  task  as  the 
composition  of  the  Pentateuch  supposes.  Bleek  ('Introd.,'  vol.  i.  J  92)  deems  it 
highly  improbable  that  Moses  should  have  left  behind  him  an  historical  work  of  such 
extent  and  purport.  While  admitting  that  ho  might  have  bequeathed  to  his  country- 
men "  a  complete  series  of  legal  precepts,  full  of  minute  details,  since  he  wished 
therh  to  be  minutely  observed  by  his  people,"  the  German  critic  cannot  understand 
why  he  should  have  wished  to  compose  an  elaborate  history  of  events  with  which 
his  people  were  as  well  acquainted,  and  were  as  little  likely  to  forget,  as  himself. 
But  not  even  Bleek,  we  imagine,  supposes  this  to  be  conclusive  reasoning.  What 
might  have  been  a  pertinont  observation,  had  Moses  written  solely  for  the  inform- 
ation of  his  contemporaries,  is  totally  doprived  of  force  when  it  is  remembered 
that  he  wrote  for  posterity.  Besides,  since  it  is  acknowledged  that  Moses  gave 
his  people  written  laws,  and  conferred  on  them  a  nationality,  "is  it  not  highly 
probable  that  he  should  have  tried  to  call  out  their  national  spirit  by  giving  them  a 
history  of  their  ancestry,  and  of  their  own  assertion  of  their  national  independence  ?  * 
('Speaker's  Commentary,'  Introduction  to  the  Pentateuch,  p.  4).  Altogether  differ- 
ent from  Bleek,  we  regard  it  as  extremely  likely  that  a  wise  and  patriotic  leader  such 
is  Moses  should  have  wished,  if  it  was  in  his  power,  to  compose  such  a  book  as  the 
Pentateuch. 

2.    AS  EXAMINATION  OK  THB   PENTATEUCH   DISCOVERS  AT  LEAST    A   PRESUMPTION  THAT 

it  was  composed  by  Moses.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  certain  that  Moses  was  commanded 
to  prepare  a  book  or  historical  writing  of  some  sort  (vide  Exod.  xvii.  14).  Now, 
whether  we  read  1SB3,  in  the  book,  i.  e.  which  thou  hast,  or  which  thou  shalt  prepare, 
or  ISC??,  in  a  book,  it  is  clearly  implied  that  M^ses  was  expected  to  prepare  a  writing 
in  which  the  account  of  Amalek's  opposition  to  Israel  and  of  Jehovah's  determination 
concerning  Amalek  should  be  recorded  for  the  benefit  of  after  generations,  and  it  is 
scarcely  likely  that  this  would  be  the  only  communication  which  such  a  writing  would 
contain.  In  the  second  place,  it  is  admitted  that  Moses  did  prepare  a  book  or  writing 
while  in  the  wilderness.  Even  Professor  Smith,  though  regarding  it  as  doubtful 
whether  anything  has  proceeded  from  the  pen  of  Moses  except  the  commandments 
on  the  tables  of  stone  ('  Ency.  Brit ,'  art.  Hebrew  Language  and  Literature),  is  con- 
strained to  recognise  that  these  did  ;  but  the  majority  of  critics  are  considerably  more 
liberal  towards  the  Hebrew  law-giver  in  this  respect,  Bleek,  for  instance,  ascribing 
to  Mosaic  authorship  the  laws  in  Leviticus  and  the  songs  in  the  Pentateuch,  with 
perhaps  the  list  of  camping  stations  in  Numbers.  The  Pentateuch  itself,  however, 
distinctly  assigns  to  Moses  the  authorship  of  certain  well-defined  portions  :  as,  «.  g., 
the  Book  of  the  Covenant  mentioned  in  Exod.  xxiv.  3 — 7,  the  contents  of  which  were 
Exod.  xx.  2 — 14 ;  xxi. — xxiii. ;  the  list  of  camping  stations  already  referred  to  in 
Numb,  xxxiii.  2 — 49 ;  and  the  Deuteronomic  law  contained  in  the  book  of  that  name 
(Deut.  xxxi.  9 — 11).  Now  even  should  we  reject  the  contention  of  Havernick,  that  the 
Book  of  the  Covenant  and  the  book  containing  the  list  of  stations  were  not  separate 


*!▼  THE  AUTHORSHIP  OF  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

documents,  but  the  existing  Pentateuch  as  far  as  it  could  be  composed  (vide  '  Intio- 
duction,'  8  4),  and  hold  with  Bleek  that  it  cannot  be  certainly  established  that  eithei 
the  book  which  Moses  was  instructed  to  compose,  or  the  law  which  Moses  finished  01 
made  an  end  of  writing,  and  committed  to  the  Levites  to  be  deposited  in  the  side  of 
the  ark  of  the  covenant,  was  "the  connected  historical  work"  of  the  Pentateuch 
"  as  we  have  it "  ('Introduction,'  vol.  i.  §  128)  ;  that  is  to  say,  if  from  each  of  the 
passages  taken  s&parately  it  might  be  perilous  to  infer  the  Mosaic  authorship  of  the 
Pentateuch,  it  is  yet  observable  that  the  cumulative  weight  of  all  four  distinctly  points 
towards  this  conclusion.  When  it  is  considered  that  almost  on  entering  the  wilderness 
the  Hebrew  Lawgiver  received  a  Divine  order  to  write  in  the  (or  a)  book,  that  on  reach- 
ing Sinai  he  is  discovered  again  writing  in  a  Book  of  the  Covenant,  that  as  the  wander- 
ings are  drawing  to  a  termination  he  is  again  stated  to  have  prepared  a  written  record  of 
the  halting-places  on  the  desert  march,  and  that  just  before  he  dies  he  is  once  more 
exhibited  as  writing  "  this  book  of  the  law,"  the  deduction  seems  obvious  and  natural 
that  here  at  least  ia&prim&faciec&sem  favour  of  the  book  in  question  being  the  present 
Pentateuch.  In  the  third  place,  this  presumption  is  strengthened  when  on  examination 
it  is  further  discovered  that  the  contents  of  the  present  Pentateuch  are  of  such  a  nature 
as  to  call  for  an  author  possessed  of  most,  if  not  all,  of  the  qualifications  that  are  seen 
to  meet  in  Moses.  The  singular  accuracy  of  the  Egyptology  of  the  Pentateuch, 
which  is  constantly  receiving  confirmation  from  every  fresh  decipherment  of  the 
monumental  remains  of  that  ancient  land,  has  already  been  commented  on.  The 
minute  acquaintance  which  it  displays  with  the  social  and  religious  customs  of  the 
people,  and  with  the  officials  and  etiquette  of  the  Egyptian  Court,  is  so  remarkable 
that  only  an  Egyptian  could  have  written  it.  Sir  Gardiner  Wilkinson  testifies 
('Ancient  Egyptians/  vol.  i.  ch.  iv.  p.  328,  ed.  1878)  that,  like  the  Chinese,  the 
ancient  inhabitants  of  the  Nile  valley  were  proverbially  jealous  of  foreigners,  whom 
they  prevented,  if  possible,  from  penetrating  into  the  interior  of  the  country,  and  to 
whom  they  imparted  as  little  information  as  possible  concerning  the  institutions  of 
their  country.  Herodotus,  it  is  true,  contrived  to  collect  a  large  amount  of  information 
concerning  Egypt ;  but  no  one  can  compare  the  pages  of  Herodotus  with  those  of  Moses 
without  discovering  that  the  Egyptology  of  the  Greek  historian  is  that  of  a  foreigner, 
as  distinguished  from  that  of  a  native;  which  is  the  Egyptology  of  the  Hebrew  law- 
giver. And  a  similar  remark  will  hold  good  concerning  the  desert  life  depicted  in 
the  Books  of  Exodus  and  Numbers,  which  Bohlen,  Colenso,  and  others  have  attempted 
to  discredit,  but  which  travellers  have  frequently  and  fully  authenticated  as,  even  in 
circumstantial  detail,  so  accurate  that  it  could  only  have  proceeded  from  a  writer  who 
had  an  intimate  acquaintance  with  the  Sinaitic  peninsula.  "  It  is  not  merely  that 
the  length  of  each  division  of  the  journey,  the  numerous  halting-places,  are  distinctly 
marked, — for  although  such  notices  could  not  possibly  have  been  invented,  or  procured 
at  any  later  period  by  a  dweller  in  Palestinej  the  fact  might  be  accounted  for  by  the 
supposition  gratuitously  made,  but  hard  to  be  rebutted,  that  some  ancient  records  of 
the  journey  had  been  preserved  by  written  or  oral  tradition, — but  the  chapters  wh'ch 
belong  either  to  the  early  sojourn  of  Mosos,  or  to  the  wanderings  of  the  Israelites, 
are  pervaded  by  a  peculiar  tone,  a  local  colouring,  an  atmosphere  so  to  speak  of  the 
desert,  which  has  made  itself  felt  by  all  those  who  have  explored  the  country,  (a 
whatever  school  of  religious  thought  they  may  h  ive  belonged  "  ('  Speaker's  Com- 
mentary,' Introduction  to  the  Book  of  Exodus  p.  244).  Hence,  if  in  Muses  are  found, 
as  confessedly  they  can  nowhere  else  be  discovered,  such  intimate  acquaintance  with 
the  Arabian  desert  and  such  familiarity  with  Egypt  as  are  manifestly  required  foi 
the  production  of  the  Pentateuch,  the  rational  conclusion  soems  to  be  that  he,  and  ha 


THE  AUTHORSHIP  OP  THE  PENTATEUCH. 


•lone,  is  its  author ;  and  the  more  so  as,  in  the  fourth  place,  there  are  certain  water- 
marks, as  it  were,  in  the  book  itself  which  not  only  vouch  for  its  antiquity,  but  appear 
to  require  it  to  have  been  composed  about  the  time  of  Moses.  It  is  doubtful  if  the 
existence  ot  archaisms  in  the  language  of  the  Pentateuch  is  a  certain  index  of  the 
antiquity  of  the  writing,  since  these  might  partake  of  the  nature  of  survivals  from 
early  times  ;  but  it  is  not  a  little  remarkable  that  a  larger  number  of  these  archaic 
forms  of  expression  are  to  be  found  in  the  Pentateuch  than  in  compositions  of  a  later 
date  than  Moses.  Then  perhaps  the  explanatory  clauses  in  Gen.  xxiii.  2;  xxxv.  6, 
&c,  &c,  should  not  be  pressed  as  indications  of  the  non-Palestinian  standpoint  of 
the  author,  since  exception  has  already  been  taken  to  Gen.  xii.  6  and  similar  passages 
as  establishing  the  author's  Palestinian  standpoint ;  but  the  one  set  of  clauses  may 
be  fairly  regarded  as  neutralising  the  other.  A  surer  mark  of  high  antiquity  is  found 
in  the  blessing  of  Jacob  upon  Levi  (Gen.  xlix.  5,  6)  as  compared  with  the  Mosaic 
benediction  of  the  tribe  (Deut.  xxxiii.  8).  It  is  apparent  that  between  these  two 
prophetic  utterances  Levi's  elevation  to  the  priesthood  has  taken  place.  Is  it  likely 
that  a  late  author,  writing,  say  in  the  eighth  or  seventh  century  B.  a,  would  have  been 
careful  to  say  nothing  in  the  earlier  benediction  about  Levi's  promotion,  and  nothing 
in  the  second  about  Levi's  sin  ?  But  if  Moses  wrote  both,  the  difficulty  disappears. 
3.  The  existence  of  the  present  Pentateuch  can  be  traced  backwards  with 

CONSIDERABLE  CLEARNESS   FROM  THE  DATS  OF  CHRIST  TO  THOSE  OF  MOSES.      That  the 

volume  which  we  now  possess  was  recognised  in  Christ's  day  as  one  book  does  not 
require  demonstration.  Even  the  interval  between  the  birth  of  Christ  and  the  return 
from  captivity  in  Babylon  may  be  overleaped  at  a  bound,  since  critics  of  the  most 
advanced  type  (Bohlen,  Kuenen)  are  prepared  to  grant  that  at  least  it  dates  from  the 
restoration  under  Ezra  and  Nehemiah.  It  is  when  we  pass  this  limit  on  our  backward 
journey  that  we  encounter  opposition  in  attempting  to  identify  the  Pentateuch.  In 
Josiah's  time,  for  instance,  which  was  in  the  seventh  century  B.  0.,  the  Book  of  the  Law 
of  the  Lord  which  Hilkiah  found  in  the  temple,  and  which  there  is  prima  facie  ground 
for  believing  was  the  whole  Pentateuch,  is  affirmed  by  modern  theorists  to  have  been 
only  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy,  which  was  first  fabricated  by  the  Mosaic  party  and 
then  put  (perhaps  by  Hilkiah  himself)  where  Hilkiah  could  find  it  (Kuenen,  '  The 
Religion  of  Israel,' vol.  ii.  ch.  vi.  pp.  18,  19).  The  arguments  on  which  this  conjecture 
is  based  are  mainly  three  :  the  difficulty  of  understanding  how,  if  ever  the  Pentateuch 
existed,  it  should  have  been  lost ;  the  impossibility  of  reading  through  the  entire 
Pentateuch  to  the  king  in  one  day,  as  is  represented  to  have  been  done ;  and  the 
apparent  fortuitousness  (which  it  is  believed  was  a  designed  fortuitousness)  of  finding 
the  lost  Pentateuch  exactly  at  the  moment  when  it  was  needed  to  assist  the  plans  of 
the  Reformers.  As  to  the  first,  the  deplorable  idolatry  that  prevailed  throughout  the 
land  during  the  preceding  reigns  of  Manasseh  and  Amon,  which  extended  over  up- 
wards of  half  a  century,  might  well  enough  occasion  the  Pentateuch,  or  Book  of  the 
Law  of  Jehovah,  to  be  neglected  and  in  a  manner  lost.  As  to  the  second,  it  is  one 
assumption  that  the  whole  of  what  was  found  was  read  in  one  day  either  to  the  king 
or  to  the  people,  and  another  that  what  was  read  was  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy.  The 
writer  of  the  account  in  2  Kings  xxii. — xxiii.  certainly  states  that  Shaphan  "  read  " 
the  book  first  to  himself,  and  then  before  the  king,  and  then  that  the  king  read  it  in 
tne  ears  of  the  people ;  but  the  chronicler  (2  Chron.  xxxiv.  18)  informs  us  more 
exactly  that  this  only  signifies  that  Shaphan  and  the  king  read  in  the  book.  As  to 
what  they  read,  it  is  styled  the  Book  of  the  Law,  and  the  Book  of  the  Covenant ;  but 
if  the  former  of  these  expressions  may  appear  to  refer  more  particularly  to  Deute- 
ronomy, the  latter  just  as  certainly  alludes  to  Exodus ;  whence  the  probability  ie  thai 


xvi         THE  AUTHORSHIP  OF  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

^ i  a 

both  were  in  the  book  which  Hilkiah  found  and  Shaphan  and  the  king  read.  Then, 
as  to  the  discovery  of  the  roll  just  at  the  moment  when  it  was  needed,  it  is  not  at  all 
surprising  that  the  wave  of  religious  enthusiasm  which  had  set  in  upon  Judah  with 
Josiah's  coming  to  the  throne  should  have  caused  the  forgotten  Pentateuch  to  be 
inquired  after,  and  if  ao,  it  is  less  surprising  still  that  Hilkiah  should  have  found  it. 
It  may  therefore  be  held  as  certain,  in  default  of  satisfactory  evidence  to  the  contrary, 
that  the  Pentateuch  existed  in  the  seventh  century  b.o.  That  the  prophets  who  laboured 
among  the  Israelites  in  the  eighth  century  B.C.,  i.  e.  Isaiah,  Micah,  Amos,  and  Hosea, 
appealed  to  the  early  history  of  the  people  as  it  is  contained  in  the  Pentateuch  might 
be  verified  by  numerous  citations  from  their  writings  containing  allusions  to  every 
one  of  the  five  books  of  the  law  ;  but  this  is  not  required,  inasmuch  as  that  is  con- 
ceded by  the  advocates  of  the  post-Mosaic  origin,  only  that  to  which  they  appealed, 
it  is  alleged,  was  not  a  formal  history  like  the  Pentateuch,  but  simply  a  traditional 
history  which  had  not  yet  be6n  reduced  to  writing  {vide  Kuenen,  '  The  Religion  of 
Israel,'  vol.  i.  ch.  ii.  p.  101),  which,  however,  is  begging  the  question  in  dispute. 
Then,  passing  to  the  times  of  David,  it  is  comparatively  easy,  in  spite  of  what  Bleek 
asserts  to  the  contrary,  to  detect  the  existence  and  influence  of  the  Mosaic  Pentateuch. 
In  that  "  Law  of  the  Lord  "  the  entire  poetical  literature  of  the  Davidic  age  may  ba 
•aid  to  have  had  its  roots.  Accepting  only  those  Psalms  which  are  confessedly  the 
work  of  the  shepherd  king,  it  would  not  be  difficult  to  show  that  they  not  only  pre- 
suppose the  entire  Levitioal  system  (vide  Ps.  xx.,  xzvii.,  xl.,  1. ,  li.),  but  also  allude 
to  the  story  of  the  Exodus  and  the  Sinaitic  legislation  (cf.  Ps.  iv.  6  with  Numb.  vi. 
26  ;  Ps.  xv.  5  with  Exod.  xxii.  25 ;  xxiii.  8 ;  Levit.  xxv.  36  ;  Deut.  xvi.  19 ;  Ps.  xvi.  4 
with  Exod.  xxiii.  13 ;  Ps.  xvi.  5,  6  with  Deut.  xxxii.  9 ;  Ps.  xvii.  8  with  Deut.  xxxii. 
10 ;  Ps.  xxiv.  1  with  Exod.  xix.  5 :  Deut.  x.  14 ;  Ps.  xxvi.  6  with  Exod.  xxx.  19,  20  ; 
Ps.  xxx.  (title)  with  Deut.  xxx.  5 ;  Ps.  xxxix.  12  with  Levit.  xxv.  23 ;  Ps.  ciii.  17, 
18  with  Exod.  xx.  6  :  Deut.  vii.  9),  and  even  refer  to  the  incidents  of  early  patriarchal- 
history  («.  g.  Ps.  i.  3  to  Gen.  xxxix.  3,  23 ;  Ps.  viii.  6,  7,  8  to  Gen.  i.  26,  28 ;  Ps.  ix. 
12  to  Gen.  ix.  5 ;  Ps.  ex.  4  to  Gen.  xiv.  18).  Indeed  the  entire  Hebrew  Psalter,  when- 
soever it  was  compiled,  is  a  precious  fruit  of  the  religious  life  of  Israel  under  the  law, 
and  everywhere  requires  for  its  full  understanding  just  such  a  national  history  and 
just  such  an  ecclesiastical  system  as  are  presented  in  the  Pentateuchal  books.  Nor 
when  we  reach  the  ages  of  Samuel  and  the  Judges  does  this  Book  of  the  Law  cease 
to  arrest  our  attention.  1  Sam.  viii.  7  and  Judges  viii.  23  are  indeed  quoted  as  con- 
clusive evidence  that  the  Deuteronomic  law  of  the  kingdom  (Deut.  xvii.  14)  was  not  at 
that  time  known.  The  toleration  of  several  high  places  at  one  time,  as  in  Shiloh 
(1  Sam.  i.  3 ;  iv.  3),  Mizpah  (Judges  xi.  11 ;  xx.  1,  18 ;  xxi.  1 ;  1  Sam.  vii.  5),  Bethel 
(1  Sam.  x.  3),  Ramah  (1  Sim.  vii.  17),  in  opposition  to  the  Mosaic  ordinance  (Deut. 
xii.  5)  commanding  worship  to  be  ofEered  at  only  one  high  place,  is  advanced  as 
implying  that  the  people  were  not  acquainted  with  any  such  legislation  as  that  con- 
tained in  the  last  book  of  the  Pentateuch ;  whence  the  inference  is  meant  to  be 
deduced  that  the  Pentateuchal  books  had  not  been  at  that  time  composed.  Bleek, 
however,  is  candid  enough  to' recognise  ('Introduction,'  vol.  i.  §  124)  that  the  mere 
fact  that  the  Mosaic  laws  were  not  observed  is  not  sufficient  proof  that  they  did  not 
exist,  or  were  not  known,  and  Keil  ('Introduction,'  vol.  i.  §34)  has  satisfactorily 
shown  that  not  only  were  Gideon's  refusal  of  the  crown  of  Israel  and  Samuel's 
unwillingness  to  elect  a  king  in  perfect  harmony  with  the  Mosaic  law  upon  the  subject 
of  their  future  monarch,  but  that  it  is  doubtful  if  even  during  those  troublous  and 
unsettled  times  between  Joshua  and  David  there  ever  was  more  than  one  national 
sanctuary,  viz.,  at  Shiloh,  the  other  instance!  specified  being  places  at  which  excep- 


THE  AUTHORSHIP  OF  THE  PENTATEUCH,  xvil 

tional  acts  of  worship  were  performed,  and  for  perfectly  adequate  reasons,  while 
abundant  evidence  exists  that,  notwithstanding  all  the  turbulent  disorder  of  the 
period,  "  the  law  of  Moses  formed  the  basis  of  the  religious,  civil,  and  political  life  of 
the  nation."  And  thug  we  are  conducted  to  the  days  of  Joshua,  in  the  history  of 
which,  as  it  lies  recorded  in  the  Book  of  Joshua,  the  references  to  the  Pentateuch, 
which  besides  it  often  styles  "  the  Book  of  the  Law  of  Moses  "  (ch.  i.  7,  8 ;  viii.  31, 
34 ;  xxiii.  6 ;  xxiv.  6),  are  so  numerous  that  the  opponents  of  the  Mosaic  authorship 
of  the  Pentateuch  have  only  been  able  to  escape  from  its  overpowering  testimony  by 
the  ingenious  device  of  first  adding  it  to  the  five  books  of  Moses,  so  as  to  form  not  a 
Pentateuch,  but  a  Hexateuch,  and  then  relegating  it  for  an  author  to  the  days  imme- 
diately before  or  after  the  Babylonish  exile. 

4.  The  Mosaic  authobship  of  thb  Pentateuch  is  expressly  cebtified  by  Chbisi 
and  his  apostles.  The  force  of  this  remark  it  has  been  usual  to  turn  aside  by 
observing  that  Christ  and  his  disciples  only  shared  in  the  popular  belief  of  their  age, 
and  not  only  made  no  pretensions  to  instruct  their  countrymen  in  Biblical  criticism, 
but  were  themselves  wholly  unacquainted  with  even  the  first  principles  of  the  science. 
But  it  is  simply  incredible  that  Christ  should  have  spoken  as  he  did  (Matt.  xix.  7  ; 
Mark  xii.  19  ;  Luke  xvi.  31 ;  John  v.  46,  47),  or  allowed  his  apostles  to  speak  and 
write  as  they  did  (John  i.  45  ;  Acts  xv.  25 ;  Rom.  x.  5  ;  Heb.  xiii.  12,  13),  if  he 
knew  that  the  Pentateuch  was  only  a  literary  fiction,  the  production  of  a  late  age,  that 
had  been  floated  into  public  acceptance  by  being  falsely  imputed  to  the  Hebrew  law- 
giver ;  while  if  he  did  not  understand  this,  though  in  reality  it  was  so,  then  it  is  cleai 
he  was  not  bo  wise  as  many  learned  critics  of  the  nineteenth  century,  and  it  will  come 
to  be  a  question  whether  one  who  could  be  imposed  upon  by  so  impudent  a  forgery 
was  entitled  to  claim  the  homage  of  mankind,  saying,  "  I  am  the  Light  of  the  world: 
he  that  f olloweth  me  shall  not  walk  in  darkness ;  "  "I  am  the  Truth ; "  "  Take  my 
yoke  upon  you,  and  learn  of  me." 

5.  A  VARIETY  OF  SUBORDINATE  CONSIDERATIONS  MAY  HERE  BE  QBOUPED  TOGETHEB 
WHICH  TEND  TO  CORROBORATE,  OR  ARE  SUPPOSED  TO  CORROBORATE,  THE    MOSAIC  AUTH0R- 

bhip  of  the  Pentateuch.  First,  the  Samaritan  Pentateuch,  which  was  known  to  Cyril 
of  Alexandria,  Eusebius,  Jerome,  and  other  early  Christian  writers,  and  which,  after 
having  been  lost  to  the  Christian  Church  for  upwards  of  1000  years,  was  in  1616 
obtained  from  the  Samaritans  in  Damascus  by  Pietro  della  Valle,  accords  in  almost 
every  point,  except  dates  with  the  Jewish  Pentateuch ;  and  since  the  Samaritans 
accepted  no  other  books  of  the  Hebrew  Scriptures  except  this,  and  since  their  hostility 
to  the  Jews  was  so  great  that  it  is  almost  certain  they  would  not  have  accepted  this 
unless  they  had  regarded  it  as  the  work  of  Moses,  and  since,  moreover,  it  is  written 
in  the  ancient  Hebrew  character,  which  is  older  than  the  Samaritan  square  character 
introduced  by  the  Jews  at  the  time  of  the  Captivity,  or  at -the  latest  by  Ezra,  it  has 
been  argued  that  it  must  have  been  in  existence  prior  to  the  division  of  the  kingdom, 
i.  t.  as  early  as  the  time  of  Solomon.  But  these  arguments  do  not  now  appear  to  the 
defenders  of  the  genuineness  of  the  Pentateuch  to  be  possessed  of  the  weight  they 
were  once  believed  to  have,  and  Hengstenberg  accordingly  ('  On  the  Genuineness 
of  the  Pentateuch,'  vol.  i.  p.  106)  has  given  them  up.  The  uncertainty,  therefore,  of 
the  date  when  this  copy  of  the  Pentateuch  was  adopted  by  the  Samaritans,  whether 
about  409  b.  c,  when  the  Jewish  priest  Manasseh  betook  himself  to  the  Samaritans 
(Neh.  xiii.  28),  or  in  the  time  of  Josiah,  whose  reformation  extended  beyond  Judah 
(2  Chron  xxxiv.  9),  or  earlier  yet,  in  the  days  of  Hoshea,  when  the  king  of  Assyria 
sent  an  Israelitish  priest  to  instruct  the  colonists  whom  he  had  settled  in  Samaria 
(2  Kings  xvii.  28),  renders  it  comparatively  UBeless  as  an  argument  either  on  one  sid< 

PKNTATEUOH.  & 


*viii  THE  ACTHORSHIP  OF  THE  PENTATEUCH. 

or  the  other.  Secondly,  of  much  greater  value  is  the  sufficiently  accredited  statement 
that  all  the  Jewish  sects  and  parties — Pharisees,  Sadducees,  and  Essenes,  Palestinian 
and  Alexandrian  Jews — have  been  unanimous  in  accepting  the  Hebrew  Pentateuch 
as  the  work  of  Moses,  while  the  chief  opposition  to  its  genuineness  has  arisen  within 
the  bosom  of  the  Christian  Church.  Then,  thirdly,  the  difficulty  of  explaining  the 
uprise,  development,  and  consummation  of  Mosaism  as  a  religious  system  without 
the  initial  impulse  that  is  implied  in  the  Mosaic  composition  of  the  Pentateuch  must 
not  be  overlooked.  The  modern  theory  of  evolution  as  applied  to  religion  will  nol 
account  for  ancient  Judaism  any  more  than  for  modern  Christianity.  As  the  New 
Testament  Church  is  inconceivable  without  the  incarnation  and  the  apostolic  Gospels, 
so  neither  was  the  Old  Testament  Church  possible  without  a  Sinaitic  revelation  and 
a  Mosaic  Pentateuch.  And  lastly,  the  advocates  of  the  Mosaic  authorship  may 
fairly  appeal  to  the  hopeless  confusion  into  which  the  supporters  of  the  opposite 
theory  are  thrown  whenever  they  are  asked  to  condescend  upon  the  individual,  or 
even  upon  the  age,  to  which  it  should  be  assigned — one  thinking  it  should  be  given 
to  the  period  immediately  after  the  Conquest,  and  another  to  the  nge  of  Solomon,  a 
third  to  the  times  of  Josiah,  and  a  fourth  to  the  era  after  the  Captivity. 

The  conclusion  then  to  which  we  are  conducted  is  that  though  the  Pentateuch  may 
have  been  partly  compiled  from  written  sources,  and  subsequently  revised  by  Ezra, 
there  is  not  sufficient  ground  for  challenging  its  substantial  Mosaic  authorship,  and 
still  less  for  the  tone  of  confident  assertion  which  is  assumed  by  the  so-called  higher 
criticism  in  proclaiming  its  late  origin ;  while  there  is  good  cause  for  such  as  belong 
to  the  conservative  side  in  this  important  controversy  adopting  a  somewhat  lem 
apologetic  style  than  they  have  hitherto  done  in  maintaining  the  ancient  faith  of 
both  the  Jewish  and  Christian  Churches,  that  the  Pentateuchal  books  proceeded  frwtj 
the  pen  of  Moses,  th»  man  of  God. 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


INTRODUCTION. 


§  1.  Its  Title  and  Contents. 

1.  Its  title.  Like  the  other  four  divisions  of  the  Pentateuch,  the  First  Book 
of  Moses  derives  its  title  in  the  Hebrew  Scriptures  from  its  initial  word,  Beresh- 
ith ;  in  the  LXX.,  which  is  followed  by  the  A.  V.,  it  is  designated  by  a  term  which 
defines  its  contents,  Vtveoic  (Genesis).  Ttvtoie  referring  to  the  source  or  primal 
cause  of  either  thing  or  person,  the  work  to  which  it  has  been  assigned  as  a 
descriptive  appellation  has  been  styled  the  Book  of  Origins  or  Beginnings 
(Ewald) ;  but  since  the  LXX.  employ  Tivtms  as  the  Greek  equivalent  of  the 
Hebrew  TdTddth,  which  signifies  not  the  causes,  but  the  effects,  not  the  ante- 
cedents, but  the  consequents  of  either  thing  or  person  (vid.  ii.  4 :  Exp.),  the 
writing  might  be  more  exactly  characterised  as  the  Book  of  Evolutions  or 
Developments. 

2.  Its  contents.  As  a  Book  of  Origins  or  Beginnings,  it  describes  the 
creation  or  absolute  origination  of  the  universe,  the  formation  or  cosmical 
arrangement  of  this  terrestrial  sphere,  the  origin  of  man  and  the  commencement 
of  the  human  race,  while  it  narrates  tbe  primeval  histories  of  mankind  in  the 
three  initial  ages  of  the  world — the  Antediluvian,  the  Postdiluvian,  and  the 
Patriarchal.  Subsidiary  to  this,  it  depicts  the  pristine  innocence  of  man  in  his 
first  or  Edenic  state ;  recites  the  story  of  his  fall  through  the  temptation  of  an 
unseen  adversary,  with  the  revelation  of  Divine  mercy  which  was  made  to  him 
in  the  promise  of  the  woman's  seed,  and  the  consequent  establishment  on  earth 
of  a  Church  of  believing  sinners,  looking  forward  to  the  consummation  of  that 
glorious  promise ;  traces  the  onward  course  of  the  divided  human  family,  in  the 
deepening  impiety  of  the  wicked,  and  the  decaying  godliness  of  the  righteous, 
till,  ripe  for  destruction,  the  entire  race,  with  the  exception  of  one  pious  house- 
hold, is  wiped  out  or  washed  off  from  the  face  of  the  ground  by  the  waters  of  a 
flood;  then,  resuming  the  thread  of  human  history,  after  first  sketching  the 
principal  features  of  that  appalling  catastrophe,  pursues  the  fortunes  of  this 
family  in  its  three  sons,  till  it  sees  their  descendants  dividing  off  into  nations, 
and  spreading  far  and  wide  across  the  surface  of  the  globe ;  when,  returning 
once  more  to  the  original  centre  of  distribution,  it  takes  up  the  story  of  one  of 

(WNKSIS.  i 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


these  collateral  branches  iDto  which  the  race  has  already  separated,  and  carries 
it  forward  through  successive  stages  till  it  connects  itself  with  the  later  history 
of  Israel.  Or,  regarding  the  work  in  the  other  mentioned  aspect,  as  a  Book  of 
Evolutions  or  Developments,  by  which  the  standpoint  of  the  writer  is  changed 
and  brought  round  from  the  historical  to  the  prophetic,  from  the  a  posteriori  to 
the  A  priori,  after  sketching  in  a  preliminary  section  the  original  creation  of  the 
universe  and  the  arrangement  of  the  present  terrestrial  cosmos,  in  ten  successive 
sections  it  relates  the  T61'd6th  or  generations,  i.  e.  the  subsequent  evolutions  or 
onward  developments  of  the  cosmos  which  lead  down  to  the  point  of  departure 
for  the  history  of  Israel  narrated  in  the  ensuing  books.  The  main  divisions  of 
the  Book,  according  to  the  principle  just  stated,  are  indicated  by  the  formula  : 
"  These  are  the  generations  of  .  .  .  ."  The  following  tabular  view  of  these 
successive  sections  will  afford  an  idea  of  the  wide  range  of  topics  comprehended 
in  the  First  Book  of  Moses  : — 

Section  1.  The  beginning ch.  i.  1 — ch.  ii.  3. 

„       2.  The  generations  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth    ch.  ii.  4 — ch.  iv.  26. 


n      •»•     »  n 


Adam       ch.  v.  1 — ch.  «.  8. 

„  4.  „  „  „  Noah        ch.  vi.  9 — ch.  ix.  29. 

„  6.  n  „  „  the  sons  of  Noah           ...  ch.  x.  1 — ch.  xi.  9. 

„  6.  „  „  „   Shem        ch.  xi.  10—26. 

„  7.  „  „  „  Terah       ch.  xi.  27— ch.  xxv.  11. 

„  8.  „  „  „  Ishmael ch.  xxv.  12 — 18. 

„  9.  „  „  „  Isaac        ch.  xxv.  19 — ch.  xxxv.  29 

p  10.  „  •       „  „  Esau         ch.  xxxvi.  1 — ch.  xxxvii.  1 

m  11.  „  „  „  Jacob        ch.  xxxvii.  2 — ch.  1.  26. 

§  2.  Its  Sources  and  Authorship. 

1.  Its  sources  of  information.  That  writings  of  an  earlier  period  may 
have  been  employed  in  the  compilation  of  the  present  narrative,  however  alarm- 
ing the  idea  was  when  first  propounded,  and  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  it  is 
still  frequently  advanced  in  a  hostile  spirit,  is  now  seen  to  be  a  comparatively 
innocuous  hypothesis,  at  least  when  considered  in  itself.  That  the  author  of 
the  Book  of  Origins  should  have  availed  himself  of  pre-existing  materials  in  the 
composition  of  his  great  historical  work  seems  no  more  an  unreasonable  sugges- 
tion than  that  the  four  evangelists  should  have  drawn  upon  already  circulating 
memoirs  of  our  Lord's  life  and  work  in  the  construction  of  their  respective 
Gospels.  Nor  does  any  sober  critic  or  intelligent  student  of  the  Bible  now 
believe  that  such  a  supposition  is  fatal  to  the  claims  either  of  the  Pentateuch 
and  the  Gospels  to  be  received  as  canonical  Scriptures,  or  of  their  writers  to  be 
regarded  as  inspired  teachers.  Accordingly,  the  documentary  hypothesis,  as  it 
is  now  familiarly  styled,  counts  among  its  supporters  not  a  few  of  those  who 
maintain  the  Mosaic  authorship  of  the  Pentateuch,  and  therefore  of  Genesis,  as 
well  as  the  vast  majority,  if  not  all,  of  those  by  whom  that  authorship  is 
assailed.  The  germ  of  the  theory  appears  to  have  suggested  itself  so  early  as  the 
seventeenth  century  to  Hobbes,  who  wrote  in  his  'Leviathan'  "that  the  Pentateuch 


THB  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  iii 

seems  to  have  been  written  rather  about  than  by  Moses  "  ("Videtur  Pentateuch  in 
potius  de  Mose  quam  a  Mose  scriptus  "),  though  doubtless  it  was  based  upon 
originals  from  bis  hand.  About  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  century  Vitringa, 
inhis'ObservationesSacrae,'  pro  pounded  the  view  that  Moses  had  employed  sketchw 
written  by  the  patriarchs  :  "  Schedas  et  scrinia  Patrum  (or  virojuf^iara  Patriar- 
charum)  apud  Israelitas  conservata  Mosen  opinamur,  collegisse,  digessisse,  ornasse, 
et  ubi  deficiebant  compila^se,  et  ex  iis  priorem  librorum  suorum  confecisse." 
Plausible  and  probable  as  this  conjecture  was,  it  seems  to  have  attracted  little 
attention  to  the  subject  of  the  composition  of  the  Book  of  Genesis  beyond 
causing  written  sources  to  be  assumed  by  one  or  two  subsequent  writers,  such  as 
Clericus  and  Eichard  Simon.  In  1753  the  well-known  theory  of  two  principal 
documents,  an  Elohistic  and  a  Jehovistic,  was  broached  by  Astruc,  a  Parisian 
doctor  and  professor  of  medicine,  who  believed  ten  additional  but  smaller 
memoirs  to  have  been  also  employed  by  Moses.  A  few  years  later  (1780) 
substantially  the  same  view  was  espoused  and  recommended  to  public  favour  by 
the  German  scholar  Eichhorn.  In  the  hands  of  Ilgen  (1798)  and  his  follower 
Hupfeld  (1853)  the  two  original  or  primary  documents  were  subdivided  into 
three,  a  first  Elohist,  a  second  Elohist,  and  a  Jehovist,  all  of  which  were 
manipulated  and  pieced  together  by  an  editor  or  redactor.  In  1815  Vater,  and 
in  1818  Hartmann,  adopted  the  idea  that  the  Pentateuch,  and  in  particular 
Genesis,  was  composed  of  a  number  of  disconnected  fragments;  but  this  was  so 
obviously  erroneous  that  in  due  time  (1830)  it  was  followed  by  the  supple- 
mentary hypothesis  of  De  Wette,  Bleek,  Stahelin,  Tuch,  Lengerke,  Knobel, 
Bunsen,  Delitzsch,  and  others,  which  recognised  two  documents,  of  which  the 
older  and  the  principal,  that  of  the  Elohist,  was  a  continuous  narrative,  extending 
from  the  creation  to  the  close  of  the  conquest  as  recorded  in  the  Book  of  Joshua ; 
while  the  other,  that  of  the  Jehovist,  was  the  work  of  a  later  writer,  who  made 
use  of  the  earlier  as  the  foundation  of  his  composition.  The  latest  form  of  the 
theory  is  that  of  Ewald,  who  claims  "for  the  Great  Book  of  Origins  at  least  seven 
different  authors  (thus  reducing  the  Pentateuch,  as  Keil  observes,  into  atoms), 
»nd  assigns  the  Book  of  Genesis,  in  its  present  state,  to  an  author  whom  he 
designates  as  "  the  fourth  or  fifth  narrator  of  original  history,"  who  must  have 
Uved  in  the  eighth  century  in  the  kingdom  of  Judah. 

The  supposed  basis  of  this  hypothesis  of  supplements  is — 1.  The  alternate 
use  of  the  Divine  names  Elohim  and  Jehovah:  e.g.  Gen.  i.  1 — ii.  3;  v.  1 — 
29a,  30—32;  vi.  9—92;  vii.  11— viii.  16a,  17—19;  ix.  1—17,  28,  29; 
i.;  xi.  10 — 32;  xii.  5,  6,8a;  xiii.  18;  xvii. ;  xix.  29;  xx.  1 — 17;  xxi 
2—32;  xxii.  1-13,  19-24;  xxiii. ;  xxv.  1—20,  24—34;  xxvi.  34,  35; 
xxvii.  46;  xxviii.  1—12,  17— 21a,  22;  xxix. ;  xxx.  1 — 13,  17— 24a;  xxxi. 
4 — 48,  50 — 54;  xxxii.  1 — 12,  -14,  33;  xxxiii. ;  xxxvi. ;  xxxvii.  2 — 36; 
xxxix.  6 — 20;  xl. — 1.,  are  distinguished  by  the  employment  of  the  first  of 
these  Divine  names,  and  are  supposed  to  belong  to  the  Elohistic  document; 

while  ii.  3—  iv.  26;  t.  296;  tL  1—8;  vii.  1—10,  166;  viii.  20—22;  ix. 

•  2 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


18—27;  xi.  1—9;  xii.  1—4,  7,  8b,  9—20;  xiii.  1—17;  xiv.—  xvi.;  xviii. 
1— xix.  28,  30—38;  xx.  18;  xxi.  1,  33,  34;  xxii.  14 — 18;  xxiv.;  xxv.  21— 
23;  xxvi.  1—38;  xxvii.  1—45;  xxviii.  13—16,  216;  xxx.  14—16,  24ft— 
48;  xxxi.  1—3,  49;  xxxii.  18,  15— 32  (!)  ;  xxxvii.  1(f);  xxxviii. ;  xxxix. 
1 — 5,  21 — 23,  are  constituent  parts  of  the  supplementary  or  Jehovistic  docu- 
ment, being  characterised  by  the  use  of  that  particular  name  for  the  Deity.  2. 
Contradictory  accounts  of  the  same  event :  as,  e.  g.,  the  narratives  of  (1)  the 
Creation  (cf.  i„  ii.  4—25)  ;  (2)  the  Flood  (cf.  vi.  9—22  with  vii.  1—10,  and 
in  particular  note  the  apparent  discrepancy  between  the  numbers  of  the  animals 
to  be  taken  into.the  ark)  ;  (3)  the  boundaries  of  the  promised  land  (cf.  xv.  18 
with  Num.  xxxiv.  1 — 12).  3.  Variations  in  the  same  legend  or  story :  as, «.  g., 
(1)  the  Abrahamic  covenant  (cf.  xv.  with  xvii.,  xviii.) ;  (2)  the  taking  of  Sarah 
(cf.  xii.  10 — 19  with  xx.  1  and  xxvi.  1 — 11);  (3)  the  story  of  Hagar  and 
Ishmael  (cf.  xvi.  9 — 21  with  xxi.  9 — 21 ;  (4)  the  covenant  with  Abimelech 
(cf.  xxi.  22 — 34  with  xxvi.  26 — 33)  ;  (5)  the  successive  consecrations  of  Bethel 
(cf.  xxviii.  18,  19;  xxxv.  14,  15) ;  (6)  the  story  of  Esau  and  his  birthright  (cf. 
xxv.  27 — 33  ;  xxvii.  I — 40).  4.  Diversity  of  language  and  ideas  in  the  two 
documents — the  Elohist  generally  depicting  the  simple  and  inartificial  manners 
of  primeval  times,  and  the  Supplementer  or  Jehovist  moving  in  a  circle  of  ideas 
that  belong  to  the  era  of  Mosaic  laws  and  Levitical  institutions.  Cf.  for  Elohis- 
tic  ideas,  the  longevity  of  the  patriarchs,  v.;  the  consecration  of  pillars,  xxviii. 
18/;  xxxv.  14/;  the  giving  or  setting  up  of  a  covenant,  vi.  18;  ix.  9,  11, 
instead  of  the  cutting  of  a  covenant,  as  in  Exod.  xxiv.  8 ;  and  for  Elohistic 
words  and  phrases — "  possession,  property,"  xvii.  8  ;  xlviii.  4 ;  "  kind,  sort,"  i. 
11,  12,  21,  24,  25;  vi.  20;  vii.  14;  "in  the  self-same  day,"  vii.  13;  xvii.  23; 
"the  land  of  wanderings,"  xvii.  8  ;  xxviii.  4  ; — for  Jehovistic  ideas,  iv.  17 — 24 
(the  arts  and  handicrafts  of  civilisation)  ;  iii.  8 — 24;  xviii.  1  (Theophanies) ; 
ir.  3,  4 ;  viii.  20 ;  xv.  9  (sacrificial  worship) ;  xii.  7 ;  xiii.  4 ;  xxi.  33  (the  erec- 
tion of  altars) ;  vii.  2,  8 ;  viii.  20  (the  distinction  between  clean  and  unclean 
animals) ;  v.  29 ;  ix.  25 — 27  (the  prophetic  element)  ;  and  Jehovistic  words 
and  phrases— 13"r  ii.  7,  instead  of  N^S  i.  1 ;  inffl!K}  la-**  vii.  2,  instead  of  i-Qpil 
*DJ  i.  27 ;  the  inf.  absol.  for  emphasis,  ii.  16,  17 ;  iii.  4,  16;  xvi.  10;  xxx.  16; 
the  suffix  in  ix.  26,  27  ;  the  Divine  name  "p"^*  xiv.  18-^20,  22.  But,  without 
replying  to  these  so-called  arguments  seriatim,  it  may  be  answered,  as  against  the 
entire  hypothesis,  that  it  is — 1.  Unnecessary,  not  being  required  for  a  perfectly 
satisfactory  elucidation  of  either  the  use  of  the  Divine  names,  or  the  so-called 
contradictions,  variations,  and  peculiarities  that  have  been  detected  by  the 
microscopic  criticism  to  which  the  Book  has  been  subjected  (vid.  the  exposition 
of  the  text  in  the  body  of  the  work).  2.  Unproved.  (I)  As  to  the  existence  of 
the  documents, — though  admitted  to  be  probable,  the  use  of  such  writings  by 
the  author  of  Genesis  is  at  the  best  inferential  and  problematical.  (2)  As  to 
the  supposed  evidence  in  support  of  this  conjecture, — it  is  impossible  to  appor- 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


Won  the  narrative  into  Elohistic  arid  Jehovistic   section*,   bo  that  even  th« 
former  shall  compose  one  continuous  narrative,  without  the  expenditure  of  a  vast 
amount  of  ingenuity,  and  the  exercise  of  a  high  degree  of  arbitrariness  in  first 
disintegrating  the  body  of  the  Book,  and  then  recombining  the  pieces,  with  the 
assistance  of  sundry  self-invented  supplements — the  so-called  contradictions  in 
event  and  legend  existing  solely  in  the  imagination  of  the  critic,  not  in  the 
work  of  the  author,  and  the  alleged  peculiarities  in  thought  and  diction  of 
each  document  having  parallels  in  the  other,  except  in  cases  which  admit  of  easy 
explanation.     3.  Incomplete ;  that  is  to  say,  not  accounting  for  all  the  facts  of 
the  case  that  require  to  be  explained,  as,  e.  g. — (1)  The  employment  of  the  name 
Jehovah  Elohim  in  iL  4;  iii.  24.     (2)  The  omission  in  the  fundamental  ox 
Elohistic  document  of  sections  that  are  indispensable  not  only  to  the  continuity 
of  the  narrative,  but  to  the  right  apprehension  of  its  meaning,  as,  e.  g.,  between 
ii.  3  and  v.  1,  the  incident  of  the  Fall,  thus  rendering  vi.  9 — 13  an  enigma; 
between  v.  32  and  vi.  9,  the  corruption  of  the  human  race,  without  which  the 
Deluge  remains  inexplicable ;    between  vi.   22  and  vii.  1 1,  the  Divine  com- 
munication which  advertised  Noah  of  the  exact  moment  when  the  Flood  should 
commence ;  between  xviL  27  and  xix.  29,  the  story  of  the  destruction  of  the 
cities  of   the   plain,  which  alone  renders   the  latter   verse   intelligible.     (3) 
Allusions  in  the  fundamental  document  to  events  and  incidents  recorded  in 
the  Supplementer,  as,  e.  g.,  v.  3  to  iv.  25 ;  v.  29  to  iii.  17 ;  xvii.  20  to  xvi.  10 ; 
xix.  29  to  xiii.  10 — 13;  xviii.  17 — 32,  and  xix.  1 — 25;  xxi.  9  to  xvi  5.    II 
these  difficulties  are  not  sufficient  in  themselves  to  discredit  the  hypothesis  of 
documents  altogether,  they  are  at  least  of  weight  enough  to  show  that,  while 
the  original  conjecture  of  Vitringa  may  be  true,  the  modern  critical  theory 
of  an  Elohistic  and  a  Jehovistic  author  of  the  Book  of  Genesis  has  not  yet 
been  placed  beyond  the  region  of  debate. 

2.  Its  authorship.  Principally  on  the  ground  of  certain  traces  of  a  later  age 
(1.  The  formula  "  unto  this  day  " — xix.  37,  38 ;  xxvi  33 ;  xxxii.  32 ;  xxxv.  20 ; 
xlvii.  26.  2.  Statements  that  seem  to  presuppose  the  occupation  of  the  land — 
xii.  6  ;  xiii  7  ;  xxxvi.  31 ;  xL  15.  3.  The  Palestinian  standpoint  of  the  writer 
— xii.  8;  1.  11.  4.  The  explanation  of  ancient  names  of  cities  by  the  introduc- 
tion of  names  of  a  later  origin — xiv.  2,  8,  7,  17 ;  xxiiL  2  ;  xxxv.  19.  5.  The 
mention  of  usages  and  customs  that  are  alleged  to  belong  to  a  later  period — 
iv.  3,  4,  14;  vii.  8;  viii.  20;  xvii.  26  ;  xxiv.  22,  30;  xxv.  22;  xxxvii.  3,  23), 
the  claims  of  Moses  to  be  regarded  as  the  author  of  the  Book  of  Genesis,  and 
indeed  of  the  Pentateuch  generally,  have  since  the  Beformation  been  vigorously 
assailed.  Prior  to  that  profound  theological  and  religious  awakening,  it  is  bri 
fair  to  acknowledge  that  certain  grave  doubts  had  been  expressed  as  to  whethei 
Iho  great  Book  of  the  Law  should  be  attributed,  either  in  whole  or  in  part,  to  the 
ilebraw  lawgiver.  Ptolemseus,  the  Valentinian,  in  the  second  century,  ascribed 
onlv  a  portion  of  the  work  to  Moses ;  the  Nazarenes,  an  ascetic  sect  spoken  oi 
by  John  Damaecenua  ('  De  Hersesibus,'  ch.  xix.),  rejected  the  entire  composition 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


as  spurious ;  while,  according  to  the  Clementine  Homilies  (iii.  47),  the  present 
Pentateuch  was  written  after  Moses'  death.  There  does  not  appear,  however,  to 
have  been  any  serious  questioning  on  the  subject  of  the  Mosaic  authorship  of  the 
Pentateuch  as  a  whole,  or  of  Genesis  as  a  part  of  that  larger  work,  until  the  six- 
teenth century,  when  it  began  to  be  insinuated  by  Masius  (1574),  Spinoza  (1670), 
and  Anton  Van  Dale  (1696),  that  not  Moses,  the  Hebrew  lawgiver,  but  Ezra,  the 
priest-prophet  of  the  Eestoration,  was  the  first  composer  of  those  parts  of  sacred 
Scripture.  The  publication  of  Astruc's  views  in  1753  gave  a  decided  impulse 
to  the  science  of  historic  criticism,  which  in  course  of  time  resulted  in  the  wide- 
spread acceptance  by  Biblical  scholars  of  the  opinion  that,  while  containing  a 
slight  substratum  of  Mosaic  legislation,  the  present  Pentateuch  is  not  the  work  of 
the  Hebrew  lawgiver,  but  of  an  unknown  writer  belonging  to  a  later  period  who 
made  use  of  pre-existing  documents,  of  which  the  principal  were  the  Elohistic 
and  Jehovistic  memoirs  already  referred  to.  At  the  present  moment  this  view 
extensively  prevails  in  both  England  and  Germany.  At  the  same  time,  consist- 
ency requires  it  to  be  stated  that,  in  the  minds  of  those  who  have  rejected  the 
Mosaic  authorship  of  the  Book  of  Origins,  the  most  hopeless  perplexity  reigns 
as  to  the  person  to  whom  that  honour  should  be  assigned.  It  is  vain  to 
look  for  anything  like  unanimity  of  sentiment  among  modern  students  of  the 
higher  historic  criticism  concerning  the  authorship  and  date  of  composition  of 
the  two  principal  documents  or  source  writings  (Quellenschriften),  as  Bleek 
designates  them,  out  of  which  the  first  fifth  of  the  Pentateuch  was  manufac- 
tured. In  the  judgment  of  Astruc  and  Eichhorn,  the  documents  referred  to 
were  pre-Mosaic,  and  the  Book  of  Genesis  was  the  handiwork  of  Moses ;  but  so 
safe  and  reasonable  a  solution  of  the  authorship  of  Genesis  has  long  been  left 
behind  by  their  scholars,  the  composition  of  the  earliest  or  fundamental  docu- 
ment being  assigned  by  Stahelin  to  an  unknown  writer  in  the  times  of  the 
Judges  (Colenso  suggests  Samuel  as  the  anonymous  Elohist),  by  Bleek  to  a  his- 
torian who  flourished  in  the  time  of  Saul,  by  Killisch  to  a  contemporary  of 
David,  by  Ewald  to  a  brilliant  Levite  in  the  age  of  Solomon,  by  De  Wette  to 
an  author  in  the  time  of  the  Kings,  and  by  Bohlen  to  a  literary  artist  who  wrote 
as  late  as  the  captivity,  or  even  later — the  Jehovist  or  Supplementer  in  each  case 
writing  at  a  period  considerably  posterior.  Accordingly,  where  such  diversity 
of  sentiment  exists,  the  Biblical  student  may  fairly  hesitate  to  reject  the  pre- 
Keformation  doctrine  of  the  Mosaic  authorship  of  Genesis,  and  all  the  more  that 
it  is  still  supported  by  such  excellent  names  as  those  of  Sack,  Hengstenberg, 
Havernick,  Banke,  Dreschler,  Baumgarten,  Kurtz,  Keil,  and  others,  and  is  not 
so  entirely  destitute  of  evidence  as  is  sometimes  alleged.  1.  Without  attaching 
that  importance  to  the  direct  testimony  of  the  Pentateuch  to  its  Mosaic  author- 
ship which  it  seems  to  possess  in  the  eyes  of  some  apologists  (Exod.  xvii.  14, 
xxiv.  3,  4,  and  Num.  xxxiii.  2  can  scarcely  be  pressed  to  mean  more  than  that 
Moses  composed  the  different  writings  of  which  they  speak  ;  while  Deut.  xvii. 
18,  19;  xxviii.  58,  61 ;  xxix.  19,  20,  27;  xxx.  10;  xxxi.  9—11,  24—26  da 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  vii 

not  appear  so  conclusively  to  assert  the  composition  by  Moses  of  the  entire  lair, 
as  understood  by  Jewish  tradition,  as  to  preclude  the  opinion  that  the  passages 
in  question  only  refer  to  the  Mosaic  legislation  proper),  it  may  be  maintained 
that  the  number  and  character  of  the  direct  references  in  the  subsequent  Hebrew 
Scriptures  to  the  Pentateuch  as  the  work  of  Moses  are  such  as  to  involve  the 
truth  of  his  claim  to  be  regarded  as  its  author  (cf.  Josh.  i.  7,  8 ;  viii.  31 ; 
xxiii.  6 ;  xxiv.  26  ;  1  Kings  ii.  3 ;  viii.  9, 53  ;  2  Kings  x.  31 ;  xi.  12  ;  1  Chron. 
xvi.  40 ;  2  Chron.  xii.  1 ;  Ezra  iii.  2 ;  vi.  18 ;  Neh.  i  7  j  viii.  1 ;  Dan.  ix.  11, 
13  for  the  historical  books ;  and  vid.  the  poetical  and  prophetic  writings  passim). 
In  every  one  of  these  Scriptures  there  is  a  clear  recognition  of  the  Pentateuch 
as  having  been  in  existence  at  a  time  prior  to  their  composition,  i.  e.  from  the 
days  of  Joshua  onward ;  in  which  case  its  only  conceivable  author  was  the 
celebrated  lawgiver  of  the  Hebrews.  2.  It  is  allied  to  this  to  say  that  the  his- 
torical development  of  the  theocratic  nation  is  inconceivable  except  upon  the 
hypothesis  of  the  Mosaic  authorship  of  the  Pentateuch,  and  therefore  of  Genesis. 
To  imagine  that  the  complicated  system  of  the  Mosaic  institute  gradually  took 
shape,  and  perpetuated  itself  through  several  centuries,  working  itself  in,  by 
slow  degrees,  to  the  national  life  and  conscience,  without  any  accredited  his- 
torical documents,  in  such  a  way  that  when  at  length  the  history  of  the  nation 
came  to  be  written,  it  should  by  every  separate  writer  be  judged  necessary  to 
misrepresent  the  facts  of  the  case,  by  promulgating  the  belief  that  their  great 
national  institutions  were  the  outcome  of  a  previously-recorded  writing  from  the 
hand  of  Moses,  rather  than  that  that  writing  (so-called  by  Moses)  was  the  free 
historic  product  of  their  institutions — to  accept  this  as  the  true  solution  of  the 
irjtcr-relation  between  Hebrew  literature  and  Hebrew  life  is  to  make  a  far 
greater  demand  upon  the  historic  faculty  than  to  believe  that  the  Pentateuch 
came  first  from  Moses,  and  the  national  character  and  life  were  framed  and 
moulded  by  the  Pentateuch.  3.  Then  there  is  the  fact  that  the  Mosaic  author- 
ship of  the  Pentateuch,  and  therefore  of  Genesis,  was  universally  recognised  bj 
Jewish  sects  and  parties — by  Pharisees,  and  Sadducees,  and  Essenes;  by  Alex- 
andrian as  well  as  by  Palestinian  Jews ;  and  by  the  Samaritans  as  well  as  by 
the  inhabitants  of  Judaea.  4.  The  testimony  of  Christ  and  his  apostles  lends  its 
weight  to  this  conclusion  (cf.  Matt.  xix.  7  ;  Mark  xii.  19 ;  Luke  xxiv.  27,  44; 
John  i.  45;  v.  46,  47 ;  Acts  xv.  21 ;  Eom.  x.  5).  Even  Bleek  with  sufficient 
candour  admits  that  this  was  the  view  entertained  at  the  time  of  Christ  and  his 
apostles,  as  Philo  and  Josephus  expressly  testify ;  and  the  force  of  this  admission 
is  not  rendered  nugatory  by  the  oft-quoted  dicta  that  neither  Christ  nor  his 
apostles  came  into  the  world  to  teach  criticism  (Clericus),  and  that  faith  in 
Christ  cannot  set  limits  to  critical  inquiries  (De  Wette) ;  for,  as  Hermann 
Witsius  justly  observes,  it  is  quite  true  that  neither  Christ  nor  his  apostles 
were  critical  scholars  (critici  doctores)  in  the  modern  acceptation  of  the  term  ; 
but  they  were  certainly  teachers  of  the  truth  {doctores  veritatit-)  who  did 
not  come  into  the  world  to  fortify  popular  errom  by  their  authority.     6.  An 


rifl  INTKODUCTION  TO 


additional  argument  may  be  derived  from  the  internal  unity  of  the  Pentateuch, 
and  in  particular  of  the  Book  of  Genesis.  It  is  true  that  in  one  sense  this  if 
the  very  question  in  dispute,  whether  Genesis  is  the  work  of  one  or  more 
authors ;  but,  as  its  (alleged)  composite  character  is  always  paraded  as  an  argu- 
ment for  its  non-Mosaic  authorship,  it  seems  both  reasonable  and  fair  to  claim 
any  traces  of  internal  unity  which  the  writing  may  possess  as  supporting 
the  opposite  conclusion.  Now  one  obvious  mark  of  unity  which  belongs  to 
Genesis  is  the  exact  chronological  thread  running  through  it  from  the  begin- 
ning to  the  end ;  and  another  is  the  interdependence  of  all  its  parts,  of  which 
no  section  of  any  length  can  be  removed  without  introducing  into  the  narrative 
an  inexplicable  lacuna ;  while  •>  third  is  the  similarity  of  language  which  per- 
vades it  throughout,  no  one,  as  Keil  observes,  having  been  able  clearly  to 
establish  a  twofold  usus  loquendi  in  its  pages.  And  this  being  the  case,  it  is 
only  a  legitimate  inference  that  such  internal  unity  is  more  likely  to  have  been 
impressed  upon  it  by  the  hand  of  Moses  than  by  that  of  a  late  redactor.  And, 
6.  in  proof  of  the  Mosaic  authorship  of  Genesis  there  is  the  insufficiency  of 
evidence  in  support  of  every  other  hypothesis. 

§  3.  Its  Method  and  Purpose. 
1.  Its  method.  On  this  point,  after  what  already  has  been  written  (vid. 
p.  L),  a  few  words  will  suffice.  The  most  cursory  reader  of  the  Book  of 
Genesis  cannot  fail  to  discern  that,  so  far  from  its  being  open  to  the  charge  of 
in  coherency  and  want  of  arrangement  which  has  been  brought  against  it  by 
some  of  its  less  scrupulous  assailants,  it  is  all  through  constructed  on  a  simple, 
perfectly  intelligible,  and  well-sustained  plan.  After  the  initial  section,  in 
which  the  sublime  programme  of  the  Divine  cosmogony  is  unfolded,  it  divides 
itself  into  ten  successive  books,  in  each  of  which  the  story  of  human  history  is 
advanced  a  stage,  till  the  period  of  the  first  captivity  is  reached.  While 
possessing  to  each  other  the  very  closest  of  relations  as  parts  of  the  same  con- 
nected composition,  it  is  observable  that  these  successive  subdivisions  have  the 
appearanqe  of  being  each  in  itself  a  complete  piece  or  monograph  on  the  subject 
to  which  it  relates.  The  cause  of  this,  however,  is  not  that  each  has  been  a 
separate  document  prepared  without  relation  to  the  others,  possibly  at  a  different 
time  and  by  a  different  hand,  as  is  so  commonly  suggested  j  it  rather  seems 
attributable  to  the  peculiar  genius  of  Hebrew  composition,  which,  being  governed 
less  by  legic  than  by  dramatic  interest,  advances  more  by  sketching  tableaux  of 
events  and  scenes  than  by  presenting  a  detailed  narration  of  each  historical 
incident  exactly  in  its  proper  time  and  place.  A  remembrance  of  this  will  go 
far  to  account  for  the  appearance  of  repetition  and  prolixity  which  in  some  parts 
the  narrative  exhibits.  Then  it  is  deserving  of  attention  that,  while  treating 
of  the  fortunes  of  the  human  race,  the  record,  almost  instantly  on  starting, 
conhnes  its  regards,  in  the  earlier  portion,  to  one  particular  section  (the  line  of 
Beth),  and,  in  the  ktei,  to  one  particular  family  (the  children  of  Abraham,  to 


THE  BOOK  Or  GENESIS. 


the  line  of  Isaac  and  Jacob),  and  deals  with,  the  other  branches  of  the  human 
family  only  in  so  far  as  they  are  needful  to  elucidate  the  story  of  the  chosen 
teed.  And  still  further  it  is  noticeable  that,  in  the  elaboration  of  his  plan,  the 
author  is  always  careful  to  keep  the  reader's  eye  fixed  upon  the  special  line 
whose  fortunes  he  has  set  himself  to  trace,  by  dismissing  at  the  outset  of  each 
section  with  a  brief  notice  those  collateral  branches,  that  nothing  may  afterwards 
arise  to  divide  the  interest  with  the  holy  seed,  and  the  narrative  may  flow  on 
uninterruptedly  in  the  recital  of  their  story.  "  The  materials  of  the  history," 
writes  Keil,  "  are  arranged  and  distributed  according  to  the  law  of  Divine  selec- 
tion ;  the  families  which  branched  off  from  the  main  line  are  noticed  first  of 
all ;  and  when  they  have  been  removed  from  the  general  scope  of  the  history, 
the  course  of  the  main  line  is  more  elaborately  described,  and  the  history  itself 
is  carried  forward.  According  to  this  plan,  which  is  strictly  adhered  to,  the 
history  of  Cain  and  his  family  precedes  that  of  Seth  and  his  posterity ;  the 
genealogies  of  Japhet  and  Ham  stand  before  that  of  Shem ;  the  histories  of 
Ishmael  and  Esau  before  those  of  Isaac  and  Jacob ;  and  the  death  of  Terah 
before  the  call  and  migration  of  Abraham  to  Canaan  ; "  and  "  in  this  regularity 
of  composition,"  he  further  adds,  "  the  Book  of  Genesis  may  be  clearly  seen  to 
be  the  careful  production  of  one  single  author,  who  looked  at  the  historical 
development  of  the  human  race  in  the  light  of  Divine  revelation,  and  thus 
exhibited  it  as  a  complete  and  well-arranged  introduction  to  the  history  of  the 
Old  Testament  kingdom  of  God." 

2.  Its  purpose.  Consideration  of  the  plan  naturally  leads  to  an  examina- 
tion of  the  purpose  of  the  Book.  And  here  it  is  at  once  obvious  that 
Genesis  was  not  designed  to  be  a  universal  history  of  mankind.  But  just  as 
little  was  it  written  (by  a  post-Mosaic  author)  with  the  special  view  of  glorify- 
ing Judaism  by  tracing  back  the  roots  of  its  institutions  to  a  hoary  antiquity. 
It  had  indeed  an  aim  which  may  be  said  to  have  been  Jewish,  but  it  had  also 
a  design  which  was  cosmopolitan.  As  an  integral  part  of  the  Pentateuch,  it  was 
intended  to  unfold  the  necessity  and  nature  of  the  new  economy  which  was 
about  to  be  established;  to  show  how  the  theocratic  institutions  of  salvation 
had  been  rendered  indispensable  in  consequence  of  the  fall  and  the  entire 
corruption  of  the  race  so' signally  punished  by  the  Deluge,  and  again  so  strikingly 
displayed  by  the  tower-builders  of  Babel ;  and  to  make  it  clear  that  they  were 
not  a  new  departure  on  the  part  of  God  in  his  efforts  at  redemption,  but 
only  a  farther  development  of  the  line  he  had  pursued  from  the  beginning. 
As  the  opening  volume  of  revelation  in  which  the  history  of  salvation  was  to  be 
recorded,  it  was  designed  to  exhibit  the  primeval  condition  of  the  human  race, 
with  its  melancholy  lapse  into  sin  which  first  of  all  rendered  salvation  necessary, 
and  to  disclose  the  initial  movements  of  that  Divine  grace  which  ever  since  had 
been  working  for  man's  restoration,  and  of  which  the  theocracy  in  Israel  was 
only  a  specific  manifestation.  Thus  while  the  Book  of  Genesis  could  not  fail  to 
be  possessed  of  undying  interest  to  every  member  of  the  Hebrew  Church  and 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


nation,  it  is  likewise  a  writing  of  transcendent  value  and  paramount  important* 
to  every  scion  of  the  human  race,  containing  as  it  does  the  only  authentio 
information  which  has  ever  yet  reached  the  world  of  the  original  dignity  of 
mankind,  and  of  the  conditions  under  which  it  commenced  its  career  on  earth ; 
the  only  satisfactory  explanation  which  has  ever  yet  been  given  of  the  estate  of 
gin  and  misery  in  which,  alas,  it  all  too  plainly  finds  itself  to-day,  and  the  only 
sufficient  gospel  of  salvation  that  has  ever  yet  been  recommended  to  its  attention 
and  acceptance. 

Literature  of  Genesis. 

Of  the  exceptionally  rich  and  varied  literature  on  Genesis,  the  principal  works  may 
be  classified  as  under  :— 

1.  Introductions.  1.  Foreign.  Bleek :  Introduction  to  the  Old  Testament,  Berlin, 
18G5 ;  London,  1875.  Bohlen  :'  Introduction  to  Genesis,  Konigsberg,  1835 ;  London, 
1855.  De  Wette:  Introduction  to  the  Old  Testament,  Berlin,  1817:  Boston,  1844. 
Ewald:  History  of  Israel,  vol.  i.,  Tubingen,  1843;  London,  18-G9.  Havernick: 
Introduction  to  the  Pentateuch,  Erlangen,  1837;  Edinburgh,  1850.  Hengstenberg: 
The  Genuineness  of  the  Pentateuch,  Berlin,  1831—1839;  Edinburgh,  1847.  Keil: 
Introduction  to  the  Old  Testament,  Dorpat,  1868  ;  Edinburgh,  1869.  Kurtz :  History 
of  the  Old  Covenant,  Berlin,  1853 ;  Edinburgh,  1859.  Oehler  :  Theology  of  the  Old 
Testament,  Tubingen,  1873 ;  Edinburgh,  1874. 

2.  English.  Colenso :  The  Pentateuch  and  the  Book  of  Joshua  critically 
examined,  London,  1862 — 1871.  Davidson  :  Introduction  to  the  Old  Testament, 
London.  1862.  Home :  Introduction  to  the  Critical  Study  of  the  Scriptures,  London, 
1856  ( tenth  edition).  Hamilton:  The  Pentateuch  and  its  Assailants,  Edinburgh, 
1852.  Macdonald-  Introduction  to  the  Pentateuch,  Edinburgh,  186L  Quarry: 
Genesis  and  its  Authorship,  London,  1873. 

II.  Commentaries.  1.  Patristic.  The  writings  of  Irenasus,  Origen,  Eusebius, 
Theodoret,  Jerome,  Chrysostom,  and  Augustine. 

2.  Rabbinical.    The  works  of  Jarchi,  Aben  Ezra,  and  David  Kimchi. 

3.  Reformation.  Luther:  Enarrationes  in  Primum  librum  Mose,  Wittemberg, 
1544;  republished  by  Hengstenberg,  Berlin,  1831.  Calvin:  Commentarii  in  Genesin, 
Geneva,  1563.  Mercerus:  Commentarius  in  Genesin,  Geneva,  1598.  Drusius:  Ad 
loca  difSciliora  Pentateuchi,  Franeker,  1617.  Grotius :  Annotationes  ad  Vetus  Testa- 
mentum,  Paris,  1641.  Clericus:  Translatio  librorum  V.  T.  cum  paraphrasi  perpetua, 
Comment,  philol.,  dissertt.  critt.,  &c,  Amsterdam,  1693 — 1731.  Venema:  Disserta- 
tiones  ad  Genesin,  1747.  Dathius:  Pentateuchus  ex  recensione  Textus  Hebrsei, 
Leipsic,  1791.  Amongst  Roman  Catholic  writers  should  be  mentioned  Pererius: 
Commentarii  et  disputationes  in  Genesin,  Lugduni,  1594.  Amongst  English  works, 
Willet's  Hexapla,  London,  1632 ;  the  Critici  Sacri,  London,  1690 ;  and  M.  Poli, 
Synopsis  Criticorum,  London,  1699,  in  which  the  opinions  of  the  Reformers  and  theil 
successors  are  collected. 

4.  Modern.  (1)  Foreign.  Exegetical: — Delitzsch:  Commentary  on  Genesis, 
third  edition,  Leipsic,  1860.  Keil  and  Delitzsch:  Commentary  on  the  Pentateuch, 
Leipsic,  1861 ;  Edinburgh,  1864.  Lange:  Commentary  on  Genesis,  Bohn,  1864; 
Edinburgh,  1868.  Rosemniiller:  Scholia  in  Genesin,  Leipsic,  1821.  Theological: — 
Baumgarten :  Commentary  on  the  Old  Testament,  Keil,  1843.  Popular: — Von 
Gerlach:  Commentary  on  the  Pentateuch,  1801 — 1849.  (2)  English :— Ainsworth : 
Annotations  on  the  Pentateuch,  Edinburgh,  1843.  Alford :  Genesis,  and  Part  of 
Exodus,  for  English  Readers,  London,  1877.  Browne  (Bishop  of  Ely)  :  Vol.  i.  of 
Speaker's  Commentary,  London,  1871.  Inglis:  Notes  on  Genesis,  Edinburgh,  1877. 
Jamieson:  Vol.  i.  of  the  Critical  and  Experimental  Commentary,  Edinburgh,  1863. 
Kalisch :  Historical  and  Critical  Commentary  on  the  Old  Testament,  London,  1858. 
Macdonald :  Creation  and  the  Fall :  a  Defence  and  Exposition,  London  and  Edinburgh, 
1856.  Murphy:  Commentary  on  Genesis,  Edinburgh,  18(13.  Patrick  (Bishop  of 
Ely):  A  Commentary  upon  the  Historical  Books  of  the  Old  Testament :  London,  1727 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


Wordsworth:  The  Holy  Bible,  with  Notes,  London,  1864.  Wright:  The  Book  of 
Genesis,  London,  1859.  (3)  American : — Bush :  Notes  on  Genesis,  New  York,  1838. 
Jacobus:  Notes,  Critical  and  Explanatory,  on  Genesis,  New  York,  1865.  Turner: 
Exegetical  Commentary  on  Genesis,  New  York,  1846. 

III.  Homiletical  and  practical  expositions.  In  addition  to  the  well-known 
Commentaries  of  A.  Clarke,  M.  Henry,  and  Thomas  Scott,  to  this  department  may  be 
assigned: — Bonar:  Earth's  Morning,  or  Thoughts  on  the  First  Six  Chapters  of 
Genesis,  London,  1875.  Candlish :  The  Book  of  Genesis  expounded  in  a  Series 
of  Discourses,  Edinburgh,  1868.  Exell :  A  Homiletical  Commentary  on  Genesis, 
London,  1875  (incomplete).  Fuller:  Expository  Discourses  on  the  Book  of  Genesis, 
London,  1836.  Gray:  The  Biblical  Museum,  London,  1876.  Hughes:  An  Analytical 
Exposition  of  the  First  Book  of  Moses,  1672.  Ness :  History  and  Mystery,  London, 
1690—1696.  Robertson,  F.  W. :  Notes  on  Genesis",  London,  1877.  White :  A. 
Commentary  upon  the  First  Three  Chapters  of  Genesis,  London,  1656. 

IV.  General  literature.  Blunt:  The  History  of  Abraham,  London,  1842. 
Bonnet:  The  Exile  from  Eden;  Meditations  on  the  Third  Chapter,  London,  1839. 
Bouchier :  The  History  of  Isaac,  London,  1864:  Dawson :  The  Origin  of  the 
World,  London,  1877.  Dykes:  Abraham  the  Friend  of  God,  London,  1877. 
Grant :  The  Bible  Record  true  in  every  Age,  London,  1877.  Hengstenberg : 
Egypt  and  the  Books  of  Moses,  Edinburgh,  1845.  Kitto:  Bible  Illustrations,  Edin- 
burgh, 1855.  Lawson :  Lectures  on  Joseph,  Edinburgh,  1807 ;  new  edition,  1878. 
Overton:  The  Life  of  Joseph,  London,  1866.  Rawlinson:  Ancient  Monarchies, 
vol.  i.,  London,  1871.  Roberts:  Oriental  Illustrations  of  the  Sacred  Scriptures, 
London,  1835.  Records  of  the  Past:  Biblical  Archaeo'ogioal  Society,  London,  1875 
(publishing).  Robinson  ;  Biblical  Researches  in  Palestine,  London,  1841.  Sandys: 
In  the  Beginning,  London,  1879.  Smith :  Assyrian  Discoveries,  London,  1875. 
Smith  :  Chaldenn  Account  of  Genesis,  London,  1876.  Smith  (Thornley):  The  Life 
of  Joseph,  Edinburgh,  1875.  Stanley:  Sinai  and  Palestine,  London,  1856;  Lectures 
on  Jewish  Church,  London,  1866.  Tristram:  The  Land  of  Israel,  London,  1865; 
The  Land  of  Moab,  London,  1873.  Thomson:  The  Land  and  the  Book,  London, 
1870.     Wilkinsun  :   Manners  of  the  Ancient  Egyptians,  London,  1847. 

For  a  more  detailed  account  of   the  literature  of  Genesis,  the  works  of  Kurt* 
Lange,  and  Rosenmiiller  may  be  consulted. 

Analysis  op  Contents. 

$  1.  The  beginning,    i.  1 — ii.  3. 

1.  The  creation  of  the  universe,     i.  1,  2. 

2.  The  six  days'  work.     i.  3—31. 

3.  The  institution  of  the  sabbath,     ii.  1 — 3. 

|  2.  The  generations  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth,   ii.  4 — iT.  24 

1.  The  paradisaical  state  of  man.     ii.  4 — 25. 

2.  The  history  of  the  fall.     iii.  1—24. 

3.  The  story  of  Cain  and  Abel.     iv.  1 — 15. 

4.  The  development  of  the  race.    iv.  16 — 26. 
f  3.  The  generations  op  Adam.    v.  1 — vi.  8. 

1.  The  first  genealogical  table,     v.  1 — 32. 

2.  The  degeneracy  of  the  antediluvians,    vi.  1— S. 
|  4.  The  generations  of  Noah.    vi.  9 — ix.  29. 

1.  The  building  of  the  ark.     vi.  9—22. 

2.  The  narrative  of  the  Flood,     vii.  1 — viii.  14. 

3.  The  Noachio  covenant,     viii.  15 — ix.  17. 

4.  The  destinies  of  Noah's  sons.     ix.  18 — 29. 

§  5.  The  generations  of  the  sons  of  Noah.    x.  1 — xi.  9. 

1.  The  ethnological  register,    x.  1 — 32. 

2.  The  confusion  of  tongues  at  Babel,     xi.  1 — 9. 
$  6.  The  generations  of  Shem.    xi.  10 — 26. 

§  7.  Tkb  generations  of  Terah.    xi.  27 — xxv.  11. 

1.  The  migration  of  the  Terachites.  xi.  27—32. 

8.  The  history  of  Abraham,  the  son  of  Terah.     xii.  1 — xxv.  It, 


xli  INTBODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 

(1)  Abram  is  called,  xii.  1 — 3  ;  (2)  enters  Canaan,  zii.  4 — 9  ;  descends 
to  Egypt,  xii.  10 — 20  ;  returns  to  Canaan,  xiii.  1 — 4 ;  separates  from 
Lot,  xiii.  S — 18 ;  pursues  the  kings,  xiv.  1 — 16 ;  meets  with  Melchise- 
deck,  xiv.  17 — 24 ;  is  justified,  xv.  1 — 6 ;  and  taken  into  covenant 
with  God,  xv.  7 — 21 ;  marries  Hagar,  xvi.  1 — 16 ;  receives  the  sign  of 
circumcision,  xvii.  1 — 27;  is  visited  by  Jehovah  at  Main  re,  xviii.  1 — 8; 
and  obtains. the  promise  of  Isaac,  xviii.  9 — 15  ;  intercedes  for  Sodom, 
xviii.  16 — 33;  which  is  soon  thereafter  destroyed,  xix.  1 — 38;  sojourns 
in  Gerar,  xx.  1 — 18  ;  rejoices  in  Isaac's  birth,  xxi.  1 — 8  ;  casts  out 
Ishmael,  xxi.  9 — 21  ;  covenants  with  Abimelech  at  Beersheba,  xxi. 
22 — 34 ;  offers  up  Isaac  on  Moriah,  xxii.  1 — 24 ;  is  bereaved  of  Sarah, 
whom  he  buries  in  Machpelah,  xxiii.  1 — 20  ;  commissions  Eliezer  to 
find  a  bride  for  Isaac,  xxiv.  1 — 67;  enters  into  a  second  marriage  with 
•       Keturah,  xxv.  1 — 6  ;  and  ultimately  dies,  xxv.  7 — 11. 

§  8.  The  generations  of  Ishmael.    xxv.  12—18. 

g  9.  The  generations  op  Isaac,    xxv.  19— xxxv.  29. 

1.  The  birth  and  early  .history  of  Isaac's  sons.     xxv.  19 — 84 

2.  The  subsequent  career  of  Isaac,     xxvi.  1 — 35. 
8.  The  blessing  of  Jacob  by  Isaac,    xxvii.  1—46. 

4.  The  fortunes  of  Isaac's  heir,     xxviii.  1 — xxxv.  26.    Jacob  departs  to 

Padan-aram,  xxviii.  1 — xxxv.  26  ;  sees  God  at  Bethel,  xxviii.  10 — 22 ; 
arrives  at  Haran,  xxix.  1 — 14 ;  marries  Leah  and  Rachel,  xxix.  15 — 
85 ;  serves  with  Laban,  xxx.  1 — 43  ;  flees  from  Laban,  xxxi.  1 — 55;  is 
met  by  angels  at  Mahanaim,  xxxii.  1 — 12  ;  sends  a  message  to  Esau, 
xxxii.  13—23 ;  wrestles  with  an  angel,  xxxii.  24—32  ;  is  reconciled  to 
Esau,  xxxiii.  1 — 20 ;  hears  of  his  daughter's  defilement,  xxxi  v.  1 — 31; 
revisits  Bethel,  xxxv.  1 — 15 ;  is  bereaved  of  Bachel,  xxxv.  16—20 ; 
returns  to  Isaac  at  Mamre,  xxxv.  27. 

5.  The  death  of  Isaac,    xxxv.  27—29. 

§  10.  The  generations  op  Esau,    xxxvi.  1 — xxxvii.  1. 

§  11.  The  generations  op  Jacob,    xxxvii.  2 — 1.  26. 

1.  The  wickedness  of  Jacob's  sons,    xxxvii.  2— xxxviii.  30. 

(1)  Joseph  hated  by  his  brethren,    xxxvii.  2 — 36. 

(2)  The  sins  of  Judah  and  Onan.    xxxviii.  1 — 30. 

2.  The  fortunes  of  Joseph  in  Egypt,     xxxix.  1 — xli.  57. 

(1)  His  imprisonment  by  Potiphar.     xxxix.  1 — 28. 

(2)  His  advancement  by  Pharaoh,     xl.  1 — xli.  57. 
8.  The  famine  in  the  land  of  Canaan,     xlii.  1 — xiv.  28. 

(1)  The  descent  of  Jacob's  sons  to  Egypt  without  Benjamin,   xlii.  1—88. 

(2)  The  second  journey  to  Egypt  with  Benjamin,     xliii.  1—34. 

(3)  The  stratagem  of  Joseph  to  detain  Benjamin,     xliv.  1 — 34. 

(4)  Joseph's  discovery  of  himself  to  his  brethren,  and  invitation  of  his 

father  to  visit  Egypt,     xiv.  1 — 28. 

4.  The  descent  of  Jacob  to  Egypt,     xlvi.  1 — xlvii.  10. 

(1)  The  departure  from  Beersheba.     xlvi.  1 — 87. 

(2)  The  arrival  at  Goshen,     xlvi.  28—34. 

(3)  The  presentation  to  Pharaoh,     xlvii.  1 — 10. 

5.  The  settlement  of  Jacob  and  his  family  in  Egypt,    xlvii.  11 86. 

6.  The  last  days  of  Jacob  in  Egypt,     xlvii.  27 — xlix.  32. 

(1)  The  charge  given  to  Joseph,     xlvii.  27 — 31. 

(2)  The  blessing  of  Joseph's  sons,     xlviii.  1—22. 

(3)  The  lust  prophetic  utterance,     xlix.  1 — 28. 

(4)  The  charge  concerning  his  burial,     xlix.  29—32. 

7.  The  death  of  Jacob  in  Egypt,     xlix.  33—1.  14. 

(1)  The  mourning  for  Jacob.     1.  1 — 7. 

(2)  The  funeral  of  Jacob.     1.  7—14. 

8.  The  last  of  Jacob's  sons.     1.  15—26. 

(1)  The  fear  of  Joseph's  brethren.     1.  15—81. 

(2)  The  death  of  Joseph.     1.  22—26. 


THE 


BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


THE    PRIMEVAL    AGE  OP    THE    WORLD   (Chs.  L— EL). 

FROM   THE  CREATION   TO  THE   DELUGE. 

$  1.  The  Beginning  (Ch.  I.  I— II.  3). 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  I. 


I.  Thai  this  initial  section  is  not  history 
ia  apparent  from  the  circumstance  that  the 
occurrences  it  describes  belong  to  a  period  of 
time  which  antedates  the  dawn  of  history. 
That  it  is  not  science  is  evinced  by  the  fact 
that,  in  some,  at  least,  of  its  particulars,  it 
refers  to  a  condition  of  our  globe  concerning 
which  even  modern  research  has  attained  to 
no  definite  conclusions,  While  in  all  of  them 
it  claims  to  he  regarded  not  as  uttering  the 
findings  of  reason,  but  as  declaring  the 
course  of  nature.  That  still  less  can  it  be 
myth  must  be  obvious  to  any  who  will  care- 
fully contrast  it  with  those  heathen  cosmo- 
gonies which  it  is  said  to  resemble.  Only 
the  most  absolute  devotion  to  preconceived 
opinion  can  render  one  oblivious  of  its 
immense  superiority  to  them  in  respect  of 
both  simplicity  of  construction  and  sub- 
limity of  conception.  The  absurdities,  pue- 
rilities, and  monstrosities  that  abound  in 
them  are  conspicuously  absent  from  it.  It 
alone  ascends  to  the  idea  of  a  creation  ex 
nihilo,  and  of  a  supreme  Intelligence  by 
wlir.ro    that    creation    ia    effected.     Unlike 

'*BNESIS. 


them,  it  is  destitute  of  either  local  colouring 
or  national  peculiarity,  being  no  more  Jewish 
than  it  is  Assyrian  or  Indian,  Persian  Or 
Egyptian.  The  inspired  original,  of  which 
heathen  creation-stories  are  the  Corrupted 
traditions,  it  may  be ;  impartial  reason  and 
honest  Criticism  alike  forbid  its  relegation  to 
a  common  category  with  them.  Since,  then, 
it  is  neither  history,  nor  science;  nor  myth- 
ology, it  must  be  revelation  ;  unless  in- 
deed it  be  regarded  as  either  "  the  recorded 
intuition  of  the  first  man,  handed  down  by 
tradition,"  a  theory  successfully  demon- 
strated by  Kurtz  to  be  altogether  inadequate, 
or  the  inductive  speculation  of  some  primi- 
tive Oosmogonist,  a  solution  of  its  genesis 
scarcely  less  satisfactory.  To  characterise 
it  as  a  pious  fraud,  of  post-Mosaic  origin, 
vri  itteu  to  uphold  the  Jewish  week  cycle  and 
the  institution  of  the  Jewish  sabbath,  is  not 
only  to  negative  its  inspiration,  but  to  in- 
validate the  Divine  authority  of  the  whole 
book,  to  which  it  serves  as  an  introduction. 
Happily  its  inspiration  is  a  much  less  violent 
supposition  than  its  invention,  and  one  which 
is  susceptible  of  almost  perfect  demonstration. 
Rightly  viewed,  ita  inspiration  ii  Involved  i 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[oh.  1.  I,  2 


the  simpler  question  of  its  truthfulness.  If 
the  Mosaic  cosmogony  is  true,  it  can  only 
have  been  given  by  inspiration  ;  and  that  it  is 
true  may  be  said  to  be,  with  rapidly  aug- 
menting emphasis,  the  verdict  of  science. 

II.  As  to  the  precise  manner  in  which  it 
was  imparted  to  its  author,  the  vision 
theory  of  Kurtz,  though  declared  by  Kalisch 
to  he  "a  complicated  tissue  of  conjectures 
»nd  assumptions  utterly  destitute  of  every, 
the  faintest  and  remotest,  Biblical  founda- 
tion," is  perhaps,  with  certain  modifications, 
the  best.  Rejecting  the  idea  of  a  series  of 
creative  tahleanx  without  any  solid  substra- 
tum of  actual  fact,  there  is  clearly  nothing 
in  the  nature  of  the  case  to  discredit  the 
hypothesis  that  the  far  past  may  have  been 
disclosed  to  the  writer  of  this  ancient  docu- 
ment in  the  same  fashion  as  we  know  the 
remote  future  was  discovered  to  the  later 
prophets.  .  On  the  contrary,  there  is  much 
in  Scripture  to  warrant  the  assumption  that, 
as  Daniel  heaid  "  the  speaking  between  the 
banks  of  the  TJlai,"  and  received  dream- 
revelations  of  the  four  great  world  monarch- 
ies, and  as  John  beheld  visions  and  heard 
voices  concerning  the  things  which  were 
shortly  to  come  to  pass,  so  the  Jewish  law- 
giver, or  the  primitive  Nabi  to  whom  this 
revelation  was  imparted,  may  have  heheld  in 
sublime  panorama  the  evolution  of  the  light, 
the  uplifting  of  the  atmosphere,  the  parting 
of  the  waters,  the  placing  of  the  orbs,  the 
filling  of  the  land,  sea,  and  sky  with  life, 
while  he  listened  with  awestruck  silence  to 
the  voices  of  Elohim,  as  they  were  uttered  at 
the  opening  of  each  creative  day.  Some- 
thing like  this,  Professor  Lewis  aptly  re- 
marks, appears  necessary  to  explain  the 
reception  by  the  prophet's  mind  of  those 
ineffable  ideas  of  which  previously  he  had  no 
types  or  conceptions. 

HI.  Though  not  poetical  in  the  sense  of 
being  composed  in  ornate  and  figurative 
language,  the  present  section  may  be  truth- 
fully described  as  rhythmical  in  structure, 
•xissessing  an  artificial  and  orderly  arrange- 
ment, tnuch  obscured  by  its  division  in  the 
English  version  into  chapters  and  verses, 
which  almost  justifies  its  designation  as  The 
Primeval  Song,  or  Hymn  of  Creation,  with 
which  may  be  compared  the  lyric  poem  in 
Pa.   dr.,  and  the  post-Exilian  ode  in  Ps. 


cxxxvL,  in  both  of  which  a  Hebrew  bard 
recites  the  story  of  creation. 

Ver.  1. — In  the  beginning,  Bereahith,  is 
neither  "from  eternity,"  as  in  John  i.  1 ;  nor 
"  in  wisdom "  (Chaldee  paraphrase),  as  if 
parallel  with  Prov.  iii.  19  and  Ps.  civ.  24 ;  nor 
"by  Christ,"  who,  in  CoL  L  18,  is  denomin- 
ated apxr);  but  "at  the  commencement  of 
time."  Without  indicating  when  the  he- 
ginning  was,  the  expression  intimates  that 
the  beginning  was.  Exod.  xx.  11  seems  to 
imply  that  this  was  the  initiation  of  the 
first  day's  work.  The  formula,  "  And  God 
said,"  with  which  each  day  opens,  rathei 
points  to  ver.  3  as  its  proper  terminus  a 
quo,  which  the  beginning  absolute  may  have 
antedated  by  an  indefinite  period.  God. 
Elohim  (either  the  highest  Being  to  be 
feared,  from  alah,  to  fear, — Hengstenberg, 
Delitzsch,  Keil,  Oehler,  4c, — or,  more 
probably,  the  strong  and  mighty  One,  from 
aul,  to  be  strong — Gesenius,  Large,  Taylei 
Lewis,  Macdonald,  Murphy,  &c.)  is  the 
most  frequent  designation  of  the  Supreme 
Being  in  the  Old  Testament,  occurring  up- 
wards of  2000  times,  and  is  exclusively  em- 
ployed in  the  present  section.  Its  plural 
form  is  to  be  explained  neither  as  a  remnant 
of  polytheism  (Gesenius),  nor  as  indicating  a 
plurality  of  beings  through  whom  the  Deity 
reveals  himself  (Baumgarten,  Lange),  nor  as 
a  plural  of  majesty  (Aben  Ezra,  Kalisdi, 
Alford),  like  the  royal  "we"  of  earthly 
potentates,  a  usage  which  the  best  Hebraists 
affirm  to  have  no  existence  in  the  Scriptures 
(Macdonald),  nor  as  a  cumulative  plural, 
answering  the  same  purpose  as  a  repetition 
of  the  Divine  name  (Hengstenberg,  Dreschler, 
and  others)  j  but  either  (1)  as  a  pluralis  in- 
tensitatis,  expressive  of  the  fulness  of  the 
Divine  nature,  and  the  multiplicity  of  the 
Divine  powers  (Delitzsch,  Murphy,  Mac- 
donald) ;  or,  (2)  notwithstanding  Calvin'8 
dread  of  Sabellianism,  as  a  pluralis  trini- 
talis,  intended  to  foreshadow  the  threefold 
personality  of  the  Godhead  (Luther,  Coceeius, 
Peter  Lombard,  Murphy,  Candlish,  &c.) ;  oi 
(3)  both.  The  suggestion  of  Tayler  Lewis, 
that  the  term  may  be  a  contraction  for  El- 
Elohim,  the  God  of  all  superhuman  powers, 
is  inconsistent  with  neither  of  the  above 
interpretations.  That  the  Divine  name  should 
adjust  itself  without  difficulty  to  all  sub- 
sequent discoveries  of  the  fulness  of  the 
Divine  personality  and  nature  is  only  what 
we  should  expect  in  a  God-given  revelation. 
Unless  where  it  refers  to  the  angels  (Ps. 
viii.  5),  or  to  -heathen  deities  (Gen.  xxxi.  32  ; 
Exod.  xx.  3  ;  Jer.  xvi.  20),  or  to  earthly 
rulers  (Exod.  xxiL  8,  9),  Elohim  is  con- 
joined with  verbs  and  adjectives  in  the 
singular,  an  anomaly  in  language  which  has 
been  explained  as  suggesting  the  unity  of 


OH.  I.  1,  S.J 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENE8I8. 


the  Godhead.  Created.  Bar  a,  one  of  throe 
terms  employed  in  this  section,  and  in 
Scripture  generally,  to  describe  the  Divine 
activity ;  the  other  two  being  yatzar, 
"  formed,"  and  asah,  "  made" — both  signi- 
fying to  construct  out  of  pre-existing  mate- 
rials (cf.  for  yatzar,  ch.  ii.  7  ;  viii.  19 ;  Pb. 
xxxiii.  15  ;  Isa.  xliv.  9  ;  for  asah,  ch.  viii.  6 ; 
Exod.  v.  16 ;  Deut.  iv.  16),  and  predicable 
equally  of  God  and  man.  Bara  is  used  ex- 
clusively of  God.  Though  not  necessarily 
involved  in  its  significance,  the  idea  of 
creation  ex  nihilo  is  acknowledged  by  the 
best  expositors  to  be  here  intended.  Its 
employment  in  vers.  21,  26,  though  seem- 
ingly against,  is  really  in  favour  of  a  dis- 
tinctively creative  act ;  in  both  of  these 
instances  something  that  did  not  previously 
exist,  i.  e.  animal  life  and  the  human  spirit, 
having  been  called  into  being.  In  the  sense 
of  producing  what  is  new  it  frequently 
occurs  in  Scripture  (cf.  Ps.  Ii  t  i ;  Jw. 
xxxi  12 ;  Isa.  lxv.  18).  Thus,  according  K 
the  teaching  of  this  venerable  document,  the 
visible  universe  neither  existed  from  eternity, 
nor  was  fashioned  out  of  pre-existing  ma- 
terials, nor  proceeded  forth  as  an  emanation 
from  the  Absolute,  but  was  summoned  into 
being  by  an  express  creative  fiat.  The  Hew 
Testament  boldly  claims  this  as  a  doctrine 
peculiar  to  revelation  (Heb.  xL  8).  Modern 
science  explicitly  disavows  it  as  a.discovery 
of  reason.  The  continuity  of  force  admits 
of  neither  creation  nor  annihilation,  but 
demands  an  unseen  universe,  out  of  which 
the  visible  has  been  produced  "by  an  in- 
telligent agency  residing  in  the  unseen,"  and 
into  which  it  must  eventually  return  ('The 
Unseen  Universe,'  pp.  167,  170).  Whether 
the  language  of  the  writer  to  the  Hebrews 
homologates  the  dogma  of  an  "unseen 
universe"  (iifi  Qaivopivov),  out  of  which  ro 
{SXliroptvov  yiyovivat,  the  last  result  of 
science,  as  expressed  by  the  authors  of  the 
above-named  work,  is  practically  an  admis- 
sion of  the  Biblical  doctrine  of  creation. 
The  heavens  and  the  earth  (i.  e.  mundus 
universus — Gesenius,  Kalisch,  &c.  Cf.  ch.  ii 
1  j  xiv.  19,  22  ;  Ps.  cxv.  15  ;  Jer.  xxiii  24. 
The  earth  and  the  heavens  always  mean  the 
terrestrial  globe  with  its  aerial  firmament. 
Of.  ch.  ii  4 ;  Ps.  cxlviii  13 ;  Zech.  v.  9).  The 
earth  here  alluded  to  is  manifestly  not  the 
.  dry  land  (ver.  10),  which  was  not  separated 
from  the  waters  till  the  third  day,  but  the 
entire  mass  of  which  our  planet  is  composed, 
including  the  superincumbent  atmosphere, 
which  was  not  uplifted  from  the  chaotic 
deep  until  the  second  day.  The  heavens 
are  the  rest  of  the  universe.  The  Hebrews 
were  aware  of  other  heavens  tnan  the  "  firma- 
ment "  or  gaseous  expanse  which  over-arches 
the  earth.  "Tim  regiones,"  says  Poole, 
"«fal  «tm    «M  stbea,  obi  dden."    But,  | 


beyond  these,  the  Shemitic  mind  conceived 
of    the    heaven    where    the    angels    dwell 
(1  Kings  xxii.  19 ;    Matt,   xviii    10),  and 
where  God  specially  resides  (Deut.  xxvi  15  j 
1  Kings  viii.  30  ;   Ps.  ii.  4),  if,  indeed,  this 
latter  was  not  distinguished  as  a  more  ex- 
alted   region   than   that   occupied  by  any 
creature — as  "the  heaven  of  heavens,"  the 
pre-eminently  sacred  abode  of  the  Supreme 
(Deut.  x.  14 ;  1  Kings  viii  27  ;  Ps.  cv.  16). 
The  fundamental  idea  associated  with  the 
term  was  that  of  height  (shamayim,  literally, 
"the  heights" — Gesenius,  Fiirst).     To  the 
Greek  mind  heaven  meant  "the  boundary" 
{pvpavoQ,  from  opoc — Arist.),  or,  "the  raised 
up"    (from  6p— to  be  prominent — Liddell 
and  Scott).     The  Latin  spoke  of  "  the  con- 
cavity "  {ccelum,  allied  to  icoUos,  hollow),  or 
"the  engraved"  (from  ccelo,  to  engrave). 
The  Saxon  thought  of  "  the  heaved-up  arch." 
The .  Hebrew  imagined  great  spaces  rising 
tier  upon  tier  above  the  earth  (which,  in 
contradistinction,  was  named  "the  flats"), 
just  as  with  regard  to  time  he  spoke  of 
olamim,  (Gr.  aluiveg ).    Though  not  anticipat- 
ing modern  astronomical  discovery,  he  had 
yet  enlarged  conceptions  of  the  dimensions 
of  the  stellar  world  (Gen.  xv.  5  ;  Isa.  xl.  26  ; 
Jer.  xxxi.  37 ;  Amos  ix.  6) ;   and,  though 
unacquainted  with  our  present  geographical 
ideas  of  the  earth's  configuration,  he  was 
able  to  represent  it  as  a  globe,  and  as  sus- 
pended upon  nothing  (Isa.  xl.  11  ;  Job  xxvi. 
7—10  ;  Prov.  viii.  27).   The  connection  of  the 
present  verse  with  those  which  follow  has 
been  much  debated.     The  proposal  of  Aben 
Ezra,  adopted  by  Calvin,  to  read,  "  In  the 
beginning  when  God  created  the  heavens 
and  the  earth,  the  earth  was  ....,"  is  gram- 
matically inadmissible.  Equally  objectionable 
on  the  ground  of  grammar  is  the  suggestion 
of  Bunsen  and  Ewald,  to  connect  the  first 
verse  with  the  third,  and  make  the  second 
parenthetical ;   while  it  is  opposed  to  that 
simplicity  of  construction   which   pervades 
the  chapter.     The  device  of  Drs.  Buckland 
and  Chalmers,  so  favourably  regarded  by 
some  harmonists  of  Scripture  and  geology, 
to  read  the  first  verse  as  a  heading  to  the 
whole  section,  is  exploded  by  the  fact  that 
no  historical  narration  can  begin  with  "and." 
To  this  Exod.  i.  1  is  no  exception,  the  second 
book  of  Moses  being  in  reality  a  continuation 
of  the  first.     Honest  exegesis  requires  that 
ver.  1  shall  be  viewed  as  descriptive  of  the 
first  of  the  series  of  Divine  acts  detailed  in 
the  chapter,  and  that  ver.  2,  while  admit- 
ting of  an  interval,  shall  be  held  as  com- 
ing in  immediate  succession — an  interpreta- 
tion, it  may  be  said,  which  is  fatal  to  the 
theory  which  discovers  the  geologic  ages  be- 
tween the  creative  beginning  and  primeval 
chaos. 
Ver.  2.—  And  the  Mitt.   OWly  the  earth 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[CH.  I.   1,  1 


referred  to  in  the  preceding  verse,  the  pre- 
gent  terrestrial  globe  with  its  atmospheric 
firmament,  and  not  simply  "the  land"  as 
opposed  to  "the  skies"  (Murphy);  cer- 
tainly not  "the  heavens ,;  of  Ter.  1  as  well 
as  the  earth  (Delitzsch) ;  and  least  of  all 
"a  section  of  tile  dry  land  in  Central  Asia" 
(Buckland,  Pye  Smith).  It  is  a  sound  prin- 
ciple of  exegesis  that  a  word  shall  retain 
the  meaning  it  at  first  possesses  till  either 
intimation  is  made  by  the  writer  of  a 
change  in  its  significimce,  or  such  change 
is  imperatively  demanded  by  the  necessities 
of  the  context,  neither  of  Which  is  the  case 
here.  Was.  Not  "  had  become. "  Without 
form  and  void.  Literally,  wastefless  and 
emptiness,  tohu  vabohu.  The  words  are 
employed  in  Isa.  Xxxiv.  11  and  Jer.  iv.  23 
to  depict  the  desolation  and  desertion  of  a 
ruined  and  depopulated  land,  and  by  many 
have  been  pressed  into  service  to  Support  the 
idea  of  a  preceding  Cosmos,  of  whieh  the 
chaotic  condition  of  our  planet  was  the 
wreck  (Murphy,  Wordsworth,  Bush,  &c ). 
Delitzsch  argues,  on  the  ground  that  tohu 
vabohu  implies  the  ruin  of  a  previous  cos- 
mos, that  ver.  2  does  hot  state  specifically 
that  God  created  the  earth  in  this  desolate 
and  waste  condition  ;  and  that  death,  which 
is  inconceivable  out  of  connection  with  sin, 
wis  in  the  world  prior  to  the  fall ;  that  ver. 
2  presupposes  the  fall  of  the  angels,  and 
adduces  in  support  of  his  view  Job  xxxviii. 
*— 7  ('  Bib.  Psychology,'  sect.  i.  p.  76  ; 
Clark's  'For.  Theol.  Lib.')— a  notion  which 
Kalisch  contemptuously  classes  anion*  "the 
aberrations  of  profound  minds,"  and  "  the 
endless  reveries"  of  "far-sighted  thihkers." 
Bush  is  confident  that  Isa.  xlv.  18,  ill  which 
Jehovah  declares  that  he  created  not  the 
earth  tohu,  is  conclusive  against  &  prime- 
val chaos.  The  parallel  clause,  however, 
shows  that  not  the  original  State,  but  the 
ultimate  design  of  the  globe,  was  contem- 
plated in  Jehovah's  language  :  "  He  created 
it  not  tohu,  he  formed  It  to  be  inhabited  ; " 
i.  e.  the  Creator  did  not  intend  the  earth  to 
be  a  desolate  region,  but  an  inhabited  planet. 
There  can  scarcely  be  a  doubt,  then,  that  the 
expression  portrays  the  condition  in  which 
the  new-created  earth  was,  not  innumerable 
ages,  but  very  shortly,  after  it  was  summoned 
into  existence.    It  was  formless  and  lifeless ; 

&  huge,  shapeless,  Objectless,  tenantlcss  mass 
of  matter,  the  gaseous  and  Solid  elements 
Commingled,  in  Which  neither  organised 
structure,  nor  animated  form,  nor  even  dis- 
tinctly-traced outline  of  any.kind  appeared. 
And  darkness  (was)  upon  the  face  Of  the 
deep.  The  "  deep,  from  a  root  signifying 
to  disturb,  is  frequently  applied  to  the  sea 
(Ps  xlii.  8),  and  here  probably  ihtithates  that 
the  primordial  matter  of  our  globe  existed 
Ik  ft  fluid,  Of  liquid,  or  molten  Ibfltt.    Dawson 


distinguishes  between  "the  deep"  and  the 
"waters,"  making  the  latter  refer  to  the 
liquid  condition  Of  the  globe,  and  the  former 
apply  to  "  the  atmospheric  waters,"  i.  e.  the 
vaporous  or  aeriform  mass  mantling  the  sur- 
face of  our  nascent  planet,  and  containing 
the  materials  out  of  which  the  atmosphere 
was  afterwards  elaborated  ('Origin  of  the 
World,'  p.  10S).  As  yet  the  whole  was 
Shrouded  in  the  thick  folds  of  Cimmerian 
gloom,  giving  not  the  slightest  promise  Of  that 
fair  world  of  light,  order,  and  life  into  whiah 
it  was  about  to  be  transformed.  Only  one 
Spark  of  hope  might  have  been  detected  in  the 
circumstance  that  the  Spirit  of  God  moved 
(literally,  brooding)  Upon  the  face  Of  the 
waters.  That  the  RuMh  Elphiitl,  or  breath  of 
God,  was  not  "a  great  wind,"  or  " a  wind  of 
God,"  is  determined  by  the  non-existence  of 
the  air  at  this  particular  6tage  in  the  earth's 
development.  In  accordance  with  Biblical 
Usage  generally,  it  must  be  regarded  as  a 
designation  not  simply  "of  the  Divine 
power,  which,  like  the  wind  and  the  breath, 
cannot  be  perceived  "  (Gesenius),  but  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  who  is  uniformly  represented  as 
the  source  Or  formative  cause  of  all  life  and 
order  in  the  World,  whether  physical,  in- 
tellectual, or  spiritual  (cf.  Job  xxvi.  13  ; 
xxvil.  3 ;  Ps.  xxxiii.  6 ;  civ.  29 ;  cxliii. 
10  ;  Isa.  xxxiv.  16 ;  lxi.  1  ;  lsiii,  11).  As 
it  Were,  the  mention  of  the  Ruach  Elohim 
is  the  first  out-blossoming  of  the  latent 
fulness  of  the  Divine  personality,  the  Initial 
movement  in  that  sublime  revelation  of  the 
nature  Of  the  Codhead,  which,  advancing 
slowly,  and  at  the  beBt  but  indistinctly, 
throughout  Old  Testament  times,  culminated 
in  the  clear  and  ample  disclosures  of  the 
gospel.  The  special  form  of  this  Divine 
agent's  activity  is  described  as  that  of ' '  brood- 
ing" (Vnetachtpheth,  from  rachaph,  to  be 
tremulous,  as  With  love ;  hence,  in  Piel,  to 
cherish  young — Deut.  xxxii.  11)  or  flutter- 
ing over  the  liquid  elements  of  the  shape- 
less and  tenantless  globe,  communicating  to 
them,  doulitless,  those  formative  powers  of 
life  and  order  which  were  to  burst  forth 
into  Operation  in  answer  to  the  six  words  of 
the  six  ensuing  days.  As  might  have  been 
anticipated,  traces  of  this  primeval  chaos  at* 
to  be  detected  in  various  heathen  Cosmo- 
gonies, as  the  following  brief  extracts  will 
show :— 1.  The  Chaldean  legend,  deciphered 
from  the  creation  tablet  discovered  in  the 
palace  of  Assurbanipal,  King  of  Assyria, 
B.C.  885,  depicts  the  desolate  and  void  con- 
dition of  the  earth  thus  i— 

"  When  above  were  not  raised  the  heavens, 
And  below  on  the  earth  a  plant  had  not 

grown  up; 
The  abyss  also  had  not  broken  up 
boundaries. 


OH.  I.  1,  2.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


The  chaos  (or  water)  tiamat  (the  sea)  was 
'  the  producing-m other  of  the  whole  of 
them,"  &c. 

('Chaldean  Genesis,'  p.  62.) 

2.  The  Babylonian  cosmogony,  according  to 
Berosus  (B.C.  330 — 260),  commences  with  a 
time  "in  which  there  existed  nothing  but 
darkness  and  an  abyss  of  waters,  wherein 
resided  most  hideous  beings,   which    were 

produced   of  a  twofold   principle 

The  person  who  presided  over  them  was  a 
woman  named  Omoroca,  which  in  tho  Chal- 
dean language  is  Thnlatth,  in  Greek  Thalassa, 
the  sea, 'hut  which  might  equally  be  inter- 
preted the  moon"  ('Chaldean  Genesis,' pp. 
40,  41).     3.  The  Egyptian  account  of  the 
origin  of  the  universe,  as  given  by  Diodorus 
Stculus,  represents  the  heaven  and  earth  as 
blended  together,  till  nfterwards  the  elements 
began   to   separate    and    the    air   to   move. 
According  to  another  idea,  there  was  a  vast 
abyss  enveloped  in  boundless  darkness,  with 
a  subtle  spirit,  intellectual  in  power,  existing 
in  the  chaos  (Macdonald,  'Creation  and  the 
Fall,'  p.  49).     i.  The  Phoenician  cosmogony 
says,  "The  first  principle  of  the  universe 
was  a  dark  windy  air  and  an  eternal  dark 
chaos.     Through  the  love  of  the  Spirit  to  its 
own  principles  a  mixture  arose,  and  a  con- 
nection  culled  desire,   the  beginning  of  all 
things.     From  this  connection  of  the  Spirit 
was  begotten  trx>t,  which,  according  to  some, 
signifies   mud,  according   to   others,    a  cor- 
ruption of  a  watery  mixture,  but  is  probably 
a  feminine  form  of  mo,  water.     From  this 
were  developed  creatures  in  the  shape  of  an 
egg,  called  zophasemin  "  (Maedonald,  p,  50). 
6.  The  Indian  mythology  is  very  striking 
in  its  resemblance  to  the  Mosaic  narrative. 
The  institutes  of  Menu  affirm  that  at  first 
all  was  dark,  the  world  still  resting  in  the 
purpose  of  the  Eternal,  whose  first  thought 
created    water,   and   in   it  the  seed  of  life. 
This   became   an    egg,    from    which    issued 
Brahma,  the  creative  power,  who  divided  his 
own  substance  and  became  male  and  female. 
The  waters  were  called  ndrd,  as  being  the 
production  of  Nara,  or  the  Spirit  of  God, 
wao,   on   aeccrnt  of  these  being  his  first 
ttyana,  or  placi  of  motion,  is  named  N^ray- 
uja,  or  movin,j  on  the  waters.     A  remark- 
able hymn  from  the  Rig  Veda,  translated  by 
Dr.  Max  Miiller,  also  closely  approximates 
to  the  Scriptural  account :  — 

"  Nor  aught  nor  nought  existed  ;  yon  bright 
sky 

Was  not,  nor  heaven's  broad  wpof  out- 
stretched above. 

The  only  one  breathed  breathless  by  itself; 

Other  than  it  there  nothing  since  hath 
been. 

Darkness  there  was,  and  all  at  first  wia 
veiled 


In    gloom    profound  —  an   ocean   without 

light." 
(Vid.  Macdonald's  'Creation,'  &c,  p.  61.) 

6.  The  description  of  chaos  given  by  Ovid  ia 
too  appropriate  to  be  overlooked  : — 

"  Ante  mare  et  tellus,  et,  quod  tegit  omnia., 
ctelum, 
Unus  erat  toto  natune  vultus  in  orbe, 
'Quern  dixere    chaos;    rudis  indigestaque 
moles 

quia  corpore  in  uno 

Frigida  pugnahnnt  cnliilis,  humentia  uiccis, 
Moflia  cum  duris,  sine  pondere  habentia 
'pondus"  ('  Metamor.,'  lib.  i.  1). 

Yet  not  more  remarkable  are  these  indirect 
confirmations  of  the  truthfulness  of  the  Bib* 
lical  cosmogony  than  the  direct  corrobora- 
tions it  derives  from  the  d  ificoveries  of 
modern  science.  U)  The  nebular  hypo- 
thesis of  Laplace,  which,  though  only  a 
hypothesis,  must  yet  be  admitted  to  pobsess 
a*  high  degree  of  probability,  strikingly 
attests  its  authenticity,  That  eminent 
astronomer  demonstrated  that  a  huge  chaotic 
mass  of  nebulous  matter,  revolving  in  space 
on  its  own  axis  with  a  sufficient  velocity, 
and  gradually  condensing  from  a  high  degree 
of  heat,  -would  eventually,  by  throwing  ofl 
successive  rings  from  the  parent  body,  de- 
velop all  the  celestial  orbs  that  presently 
compose  our  planetary  system.  Though  fot 
a  long  time  regarded  with  suspicion  by 
Biblical  scholars,  and  at  the  first  only  tenta- 
tively thrown  out  by  its  author,  Kant,  yet  so 
exactly  does  it  account  for  the  phenomena  of 
our  solar  system  as  disclosed  by  the  tele- 
scope, that  it  may  now  be  said  to  have  vindi- 
cated its  claim  to  be  accepted  as  the  best 
solution  science  has  to  give  of  the  forma- 
tion of  the  universe  ;  while  further  and 
more  dispassionate  reflection  has  convinced 
theologians  generally,  that  so  far  from  con- 
flicting with  the  utterances  of  inspiration,  it 
rather  surprisingly  endorses  them.  (2)  The 
researches  of  physical  philosophy  in  con- 
nection with  hydrodynamics  have  success 
fully  established  that  the  present  form  o' 
our  earth,  that  of  (the  solid  of  revolution 
called)  an  oblate  spheroid,  is  such  as  it  must 
necessarily  have  assumed  had  its  original 
condition  been  that  of  a  liquid  mass  revolv- 
ing round  its  own  axis.  (3)  Geologicai 
science  likewise  contributes  its  quota  to  th* 
constantly  accumulating  weight  of  evideaea 
in  support  of  the  Mosaic  narrative,  by 
announcing,  as  the  result  of  its  investigations 
in  connection  with  the  earth's  crust,  that 
below  a  certain  point,  called  "the  stratum 
of  invariable  temperature,"  the  heat  of  the 
interior  mass  becomes  greater  in  proportion 
to  the  depth  beneath  the  surface,  thus  lead, 
ing  not  unnaturally   to  the   inference  thai 


8  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  tea.  I.  1,  t 

"the  earth  has  assumed  its  present  state  by  I  gaseous,  or  fluid  state"  (Green's  'Geology 
cooling  down  from  an  intensely  heated,  or  '  p.  487). 

HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  1. — The  visible  universe.  I.  One,  yet  not  simple.  1.  One.  In  age,  origin, 
and  nature  one,  "  the  heavens  and  the  earth "  also  constitute  one  vast  system. 
Cohering  physically  through  the  force  of  gravitation,  which,  in  its  ultimate  analysis, 
is  simply  an  expression  of  the  Divine  power,  they  are  unified  spiritually  by  Christ, 
who  is  the  impersonation  of  the  Divine  wisdom  and  love  (John  i.  3,  9 ;  Col.  i.  15,  17). 
Hence,  as  constituting  one  stupendous  system,  they  are  not  independent,  but  mutually 
influential — physically  according  to  science,  spiritually  according  to  Scripture  (Luke 
"I;   EF 


xv.  7,  10;  Ephes.  iii.  10;  1  Pet.  i-.  12,  &c).  Yet — 2.  Not  simple,  but  complex, 
consisting  of  two  parts — of  this  mundane  sphere,  with  its  diversified  contents  of  men, 
animals,  and  plants ;  and  of  those  shining  heavens,  with  their  starry  hosts  and  angelic 
races.  Hence  the  histories  of  those  two  realms  may  be  widely  divergent — an  infer- 
ence which  astronomy  warrants  as  to  their  physical  developments,  and  revelation 
endorses  with  regard  to  their  spiritual  experiences.  Hence  to  argue  from  the  one  to 
the  other  is  to  reason  hypothetically ;  as,  e.  g.,  to  conclude  that  (he  planets  must  be 
inhabited  because  the  earth  is,  or  to  affirm  that  the  Divine  treatment  of  the  human 
and  angeli*  races  must  of  necessity  be  alike. 

II.  Vast,  yet  not  infinite.  1.  Vast.  Enlarged  as  were  Shemitic  notions  of 
the  dimensions  of  God's  universe,  modern  astronomy,  by  the  grandeur  and  sublimity 
of  its  revelations,  gives  definite  shape  to  what  were  then  only  vague  and  shadowy 
conceptions.  Imagination  becomes  bewildered  in  the  attempt  to  comprehend  the 
circle  of  the  universe.  Commencing  with  the  sun,  the  central  body  of  our  planetary 
system,  with  a  diameter  about  three  times  our  distance  from  the  moon,  and  passing, 
on  her  outward  journey,  no  fewer  than  seven  worlds  in  addition  to  our  own,  most  of 
them  immensely  larger,  she  only  reaches  the  outskirts  of  the  first  department  of 
creation  at  a  distance  of  2,853,800,000  miles.  Then,  when  to  this  is  added  that  the 
nearest  fixed  star  is  so  remote  that  three  years  are  required  for  Its  light  to  reach  the 
earth ;  that  from  some  of  the  more  distant  nebulee  the  light  has  been  travelling  for 
millions  of  years;  that  the  number  of  the  stars  is  practically  infinite;  and  that  each 
of  them  may  be  the  centre  of  a  system  more  resplendent  than  our  own, — even  then 
it  is  but  a  faint  conception  which  she  reaches  of  the  dimensions  of  the  universe 
(Job  xxvi.  14).  Yet — 2.  It  is  not  infinite.  Immeasurable  by  man,  it  has  already 
been  measured  by  God  (Isa.  xl.  12).  Dndiscoverable  by  science,  its  limits  are 
known  to  its  Creator  (Acts  xv.  18).  The  6tars  which  man  is  unable  to  compute 
God  calls  by  their  names  (Ps.  cxlvii.  4 ;  Isa.  xl.  26).  That  the  universe  must  have 
a  boundary  is  involved  in  its  creation.  Two  finites  cannot  make  an  infinite.  Hence 
the  measured  earth  (Hab.  iii.  6)  and  the  bounded  heavens  (Job  xxii.  14)  cannot 
compose  an  illimitable  universe.  Still  less  can  there  be  two  infinites,  one  filling  all 
space,  and  another  outside  of  it.  But  Elohim  is  such  an  infinite  (Isa.  lvii.  15;  Jer. 
xxiii.  24) ;  hence  the  universe  is  not  such  another. 

III.  Old,  yet  not  eternal.  1.  Old.  How  old  God  has  not  revealed  and  man 
has  not  discovered ;  geology  and  astronomy  both  say  millions  of  years  ;  one  hundred 
millions  at  least,  Sir  W.  Thomson  alleges  the  sun  to  have  been  burning.  Genesis 
gives  ample  scope  to  physicists  in  their  researches  by  saying  they  may  go  as  far 
back  as  "the  beginning;"  only  that  beginning  they  must  find.  For  —  2.  The 
universe  is  not  eternal,  though  its  antiquity  be  vast.  The  frequency  and  certainty 
with  which  Scripture  enunciates  the  non-eternity  of  the  material  universe  is  one  of 
its  most  distinguishing  characteristics  (Ps.  xc.  1 ;  cii.  25,  26 ;  Heb.  i.  10).  This 
may  also  now  be  regarded  as  the  last  word  of  science:  "We  have  thus  reached  the 
beginning  as  well  as  the  end  of  the  present  visible  universe,  and  have  come  to  the 
conclusion  that  it  began  in  time,  and  will  in  time  come  to  an  end"  ('The  Unseen 
Universe,'  p.  93). 

IV.  Existent,  yet  not  self-existent.  1.  Existent;  i.e.  standing  out  as  an 
entity  in  the  infinite  realm  of  space ;  standing  out  from  eternity  in  the  sphere  of 


oh.  I.  1,  2.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESI8.  I 

time ;  and  also  standing  out  from  God,  as  essentially  distinct  from  his  personality. 
Yet — 2.  Not  self-existent,  not  standing  there  in  virtue  of  its  own  inherent  energy, 
being  neither  self-produced  nor  self-sustained ;  but  standing  solely  and  always  in 
obedience  to  the  creative  flat  of  Elohim,  the  almighty  and  self -existent  God. 

Ver.  2. — Chaos  an  emblem  of  the  unrenewed  soul.  I.  Without  order  :  existing 
in  a  state  of  spiritual  ruin,  and  requiring  a  special  process  of  rearrangement  to 
evolve  symmetry  and  beauty  from  its  confusion  (2  Cor.  v.  16). 

II.  Without  life  :  being  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins  (Ephes.  ii.  1) ;  absolutely 
"void"  in  the  sense  of  being  untenanted  by  lofty  thoughts,  pure  emotions,  holy 
volitions,  spiritual  imaginations,  such  as  are  the  inmates  of  sinless  and,  in  great  part 
also,  of  renewed  souls. 

III.  Without  light  :  shrouded  in  darkness  (Ephes.  iv.  18)  ;  walking,  perhaps,  in 
the  sparks  that  its  own  fire  has  kindled  (Isa.  1.  11),  but  devoid  of  that  true  light 
which  is  from  heaven  (John  i.  9). 

IV.  Yet  not  without  God.  As  the  Spirit  brooded  over  chaos,  so  does  God's  Holy 
Spirit  hover  over  fallen  souls,  waiting,  as  it  were,  for  the  forthcoming  and  insoanding 
of  the  commanding  word  to  introduce  light,  order,  life. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  1. — "Beginning"  is  a  word  familiarly  on  our  lips  ;  but,  for  the  most  part,  w« 
mean  only  rearrangement,  or  the  commencement  of  one  link  in  the  chain  of  events. 
But  who  can  conceive  the  beginning  of  creation  ?  Who  can  travel  back  in  thought 
to  the  first  moment  of  its  existence,  and  look  into  the  eternity  beyond  ?  The  Bible 
carries  us  back  to  that  beginning,  the  first  moment  when  the  universe  existed.  How 
far  back  was  the  starting-point  of  time  we  know  not,  nor  in  what  form  the  universe 
came  into  being,  whether  completed,  or  in  germs  to  be  developed  in  the  course  of 
ages.  Only  we  are  taught  that  before  that  "  beginning  "  the  universe  was  not,  and 
that  "the  worlds  were  framed  by  the  word  of  God"  (Heb.  xi.  3) — their  substance, 
and  the  laws  by  which  they  are  governed.  With  this  the  conclusions  of  science 
agree.  They  point  out  that  the  forces  of  nature  tend  to  extinction,  and  hence  must 
have  had  a  beginning.  To  the  question  what  was  that  beginning,  the  Bible  gives 
the  answer.  1.  What  was  before  the  "beginning"?  God  was;  he  created  all  (Ps. 
xc.  2) ;  and  if  it  surpass  our  power  to  conceive  an  eternal  self-existent  Being,  still 
less  can  we  realise  life,  power,  law  coming  into  existence  without  a  cause.  And  "  in 
the  beginning  was  the  Word;"  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  through  whom  Christ  offered 
himself  (Heb.  ix.  14).  But  further,  before  the  beginning  the  Lamb  was  slain  (Rev. 
xiii.  8) — i.  e.  the  necessity  for  redemption  was  foreseen  and  the  plan  provided — and 
we  werechosen  (Ephes.  i.  4),  and  a  kingdom  prepared  for  us  (Matt.  xxv.  34).  Thus, 
redemption  was  no  afterthought,  no  repairing  of  failure;  but  God's  purpose  from 
eternity,  and  therefore  that  which  is  best.  2.  What  was  the  "  beginning "  t  The 
creation  of  a  field  on  which  God's  plans  were  to  be  carried  out  and  his  perfections 
manifested.  _  And  in  the  course  of  his  work  the  creation  of  beings  to  whom  and  in 
whom  he  might  make  himself  known,  who  might  glorify  him  here  and  enjoy  him  for 
ever.  3.  We  mark  then — At  the  beginning  God  brought  forth  what  had  been 
ordained  in  eternity — his  plan  complete  to  the  end — our  salvation — redemption  as 
well  as  creation.  "  Very  good  "  (Gen.  i.  31)  went  far  beyond  the  things  then  exist- 
ing on  the  earth.  And  if  it  be  urged,  How  is  "  very  good  "  consistent  with  sin  ? — 
An  enemy  has  sown  tares  and  marred  the  Creator's  work — the  world  is  a  ruin.  Oh, 
faithless  I  why  fearful  ?  If  God  could  give  life  to  dry  bones  (Ezek.  xxxvii.  6),  if  lie 
could  of  stones-  raise  up  children  to  Abraham,  can  he  not  out  of  seeming  ruin  raise 
up  a  more  glorious  temple  ?  But  thou  sayest,  How  can  this  be  ?  Canst  thou  solve 
one  of  the  least  mysteries  of  creation  ?  And,  is  it  strange  thou  canst  not  solve  that 
mystery  into  whicn  angels  desire  to  look  ?  Enough  to  know  "where  sin  abounded," 
Ac.  (Rom.  v.  20) ;  to  remember,  "  we  see  not  yet,"  &c.  (Heb.  ii.  8)  ;  and  humbly  to 
wait  our  Father's  time  and  way.  4.  For  personal  encouragement.  Our  state  fore- 
seen and  provided  for  from  the  beginning.     Thus  our  right  to  trust  God's  promi»ei 


$  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  [cm.  I.  1, 1 

depends  not  on  anything  in  us.  but  is  part  of  his  original  plan.  Our  Lord's  call  to 
■inners  is  in  closest  agreement  with  what  was  ordained  "  in  the  beginning. "  "  Who- 
mever will "  (Key.  zzii.  17)  but  echoes  the  word  which  called  the  universe  into 
being.  — M. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — A  true  and  firm  foundation  of  revelation  and  faith  must  be  laid  in  a 
Divine  doctrine  of  "Genesis,"  the  beginnings  out  of  which  have  come  both  the  world 
of  nature  and  the  world  of  grace.  In  this  book  we  are  taught  what  is  the  order  by 
which  all  things  must  be  tried.  Coming  forth  from  Elohim,  from  the  Infinite  Per- 
sonality ;  flowing  in  his  appointed  course.  The  genesis  of  heaven  and  earth  becomes 
the  genesis  of  the  human  family.  Out  of  the  natural  chaos  is  brought,  forth  the 
Eden  of  rest  and  beauty.  Out  of  the  moral  waste  of  a  fallen  humanity  is  formed,  by 
the  gracious  work  of  a  Divine  Spirit,  through  a  covenant  of  infinite  wisdom  and  love, 
a  seed  of  redeemed  and  sanctified  human  beings,  a  family  of  God.  The  genesis  of 
the  material  creation  leads  on  to  the  genesis  of  the  invisible  creation.  The  lower  is 
the  type  and  symbol  of  the  higher.  The  first  day  is  the  true  beginning  of  days. 
See  what  is  placed  by  the  sacred  writer  between  that  evening  and  morning. 

I.  The  coming  forth  of  the  everlasting,  unsearchable  secret  of  the  Divine 
nature  into  manifestation.  "  God  created."  The  word  employed  denotes  more 
than  the  bare  summoning  of  existence  out  of  nothingness.  The  analogy  of  human 
workmanship  ("cutting,"  "carving,"  "framing")  suggests  the  relation  between 
creation  and  the  God  of  creation.  The  heaven  and  the  earth  reflect  their  Maker. 
Works  embody  the  mind,  the  spirit,  the  will,  the  nature  of  the  workman.  Although 
the  name  Elohim,  in  the  plural  form,  cannot  be  taken  as  an  equivalent  of  the  Trinity, 
it  points  to  the  great  fundamental  fact  of  all  revelation,  the  Divine  Unity  coming 
forth  out  of  the  infinite  solitude  of  eternity,  and  declaring,  in  the  manifold  revela- 
tions of  the  visible  and  invisible  worlds,  all  that  the  creature  can  know  of  his  fathom- 
less mystery. 

•  II.  Here  is  a  glimpse  into  God's  order  and  method.  "In  the  beginning' 
the  immeasurable  fulness  of  creative  power  and  goodness.  Formless  void,  darknesb 
on  the  face  of  the  deep,  apparent  confusion  and  emptiness,  within  a  limited  sphere, 
the  earth  ;  at  a  certain  epoch,  in  preparation  for  an  appointed  future.  Chaos  is  mil 
the  first  beginning  of  things  ;  it  is  a  stage  in  their  history.  The  evening  of  the  first 
day  preceded  the  morning  in  the  recorded  annals  of  the  earth.  That  evening  was 
itself  a  veiling  of  the  light.  Science  itself  leads  back  the  thoughts  from  all  chaotic 
periods  to  previous  developments  of  power.  Order  precedes  disorder.  Disorder  is 
itself  permitted  only  as  a  temporary  state.  It  is  itself  part  of  the  genesis  of  that 
which  shall  be  ultimately  "very  good." 

HI.  The  great  vital  fact  of  the  world's  order  is  the  intimate  union  between 
the  Spirit  of  God  and  that  which  is  covered  with  parkness  until  he  makes  it 
light.  The  moving  of  the  Spirit  upon  the  face  of  the  waters  represents  the  brood- 
ing, cherishing,  vitalising  presence  of  God  in  his  creatures,  over  them,  around  them, 
at  once  the  source  and  protection  of  their  life.  " Breath;"  "wind,"  the  word  liter- 
ally means,  perhaps  as  a  symbol  at  once  of  life,  or  living  energy,  and  freedom,  and 
with  an  immediate  reference  to  the  creative  word,  which  is  henceforth  the  breath  of 
God  in  the  world.  Surely  no  candid  mind  can  fail  to  feel  the  force  of  such  a  wit- 
ness in  the  opening  sentences  of  revelation  to  the  triune  God. 

IV.  To  us  the  beginning  of  all  things  is  light.  The  word  of  God  "com- 
mands the  light  to  shine  out  of  darkness."  "  God  said,  Let  there  be  light,"  or,  Let 
light  be.  The  going  forth  of  God's  word  upon  the  universe  very  well  represents 
the  twofold  fact,  (1)  that  it  is  the  outcome  of  his  will  and  nature;  and  (2)  that  it  is 
his  language — the  expression  of  himself.  Hence  all  through  this  Mosaic  cosmogony 
God  is  represented  as  speaking  to  creation,  that  we  may  understand  that  he  speaks  in 
creation,  as  he  is  also  said  to  look  at  that  which  comes  forth  from  himself  to  behold 
it,  to  approve  it,  to  name  it,  to  appoint  its  order  and  use.  Such  intimate  blending  of 
the  personal  with  the  impersonal  is  the  teaching  of  Scripture  as  distinguished  from 
\l\  mere  human  wisdom.  God  is  in  creation  and  yet  above  it.  Man  is  thus  invited 
N>  seek  the  personal  presence  as  that  which  is  higher  than  nature,  which  his  own  per- 

mal  life  requires,  that  it  may  not  be  oppressed  with  nature's  greatness,  that  it  may 


oh.  i.  8 — 6.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


b©  light,  and  not  darkness.  There  is  darkness  in  creation,  darkness  in  the  deep 
waters  of  the  world's  history,  darkness  in  the  human  soul  itself,  until  Ood  speaks  and 
man  hears.  Light  is  not,  physically,  the  first  thing  created ;  but  it  is  the  firs'1  fact 
of  the  Divine  days — that  is,  the  beginning  of  the  new  order.  For  what  we  ha>  e  to 
do  with  is  not  the  infinite  secret  of  creation,  but  the  manifestation  of  the  visible 
world,  "  God  manifest."  The  first  day  in  the  history  of  the  earth,  as  man  can  read 
it,  must  be  the  day  when  God  removes  the  covering  of  darkness  and  says,  "  Let 
there  be  light."  The  veil  uplifted  is  itself  a  commencement.  God  said  that  it  was 
good.  His  own  appointment  confirmed  the  abiding  distinction  between  light  and 
darkness,  between  day  and  night ;  in  other  words,  the  unfolding,  progressive  inter- 
change of  work  and  rest,  of  revelation  and  concealment,  the  true  beginning  of  the 
world's  week  of  labour,  which  leads  on  to  the  everlasting  sabbath.  How  appro- 
priately this  first  day  of  the  week  of  creation  stands  at  the  threshold  of  God's  word 
of  grace  1  The  light  which  he  makes  to  shine  in  our  hearts,  which  divides  our  exist- 
ence into  the  true  order,  the  good  and  the  evil  separated  from  one  another,  which 
commences  our  life ;  and  the  Spirit  is  the'light  of  his  own  word,  the  light  which 
shines  from  the  face  of  him  who  was  "  the  Word"  "  in  the  beginning  with  God," 
' "  without  whom  nothing  was  made  that  was  made." — B. 


EXPOSITION. 


Vers.  8— B. — The  evolution  of  the  cosmos 
was  accomplished  by  a  series  of  Divine  forma- 
tive works  which  extended  over  a  period  of  six 
successive  days.  In  the  character  of  those 
cosmic  labours  a  progression  is  distinctly 
visible,  though  not  continuous  throughout 
Unless,  with  Aristotle,  the  celestial  lumin- 
aries are  regarded  as  JS«  Xoyira,  and  so 
classed  in  the  category  of  organised  and 
living  beings,  it  is  impossible  to  find  in 
their  production  an  advance  upon  the  pre- 
ceding vegetation.  Arbitrary  transpositions 
of  the  days,  as  of  the  third  and  fourth,  in 
order  to  make  the  first  half  of  the  creative 
week  an  inorganic,  and  the  second  half  an 
organic,  era,  are  inadmissible.  The  arrange- 
ment of  the  days  that  accords  most  exactly 
with  the  requirements  of  the  case,  and  most 
successfully  preserves  the  order  and  con- 
nection of  the  record,  is  that  which  divides 
them  into  two  triads  (Lange,  Kalisch,  Dana, 
*c ),  as  exhibited  underneath  : — 
1.  Light  4.  Lights. 

«    J  Air,  B    I  Fowl, 

(  Water.  '   I  Fish. 

3.  Dry  Land  and  Plants.  6.  Animals  and  Man, 

— each  triad  beginning  with  the  making  of 
light,  and  ending  with  a  double  creation, 
and  the  works  performed  on  the  second 
having  each  a  definite  relation  to  the  labours 
executed  on  the  first.  On  the  first  creative 
day  the  formative  energy  of  the  Divine 
word,  operating  through  the  agency  of  the 


Buaah  Elohim,  eliminates  the  light  from 
the  dark  chaotic  mass  of  earth,  on  the  second 
uplifts  the  atmosphere  above  the  waters,  and 
on  the  third  distinguishes  the  dry  land  from 
the  sea — at  a  later  period  in  this  same  day 
clothing  the  dry  land  with  vegetation,  as  if 
to  prophesy  some  correspondingly  higher 
advance  in  the  creation  work  at  the  dose  of 
the  second  series.  At  this  stage,  instead  of 
pressing  forward  with  its  operations,  the 
demiurgic  potency  of  the  invisible  Artificer 
appears  to  pause,  and,  reverting  to  the  point 
from  which  it  started,  enters  on  its  second 
course  of  labours.  On  the  fourth  day  the 
light  developed  on  the  first  is  concentrated 
and  permanently  fixed  in  the  celestial  lumin- 
aries ;  on  the  fifth  the  air  and  waters,  which 
were  separated  on  the  second,  are  filled  with 
fowl  and  fish,  their  respective  inhabitants  ; 
and  on  the  sixth  the  dry  land  of  the  third 
day  is  occupied  by  animals,  the  mute  pre- 
diction of  the  third  day's  vegetation  being 
fulfilled  by  the  creation  of  man. 


Ver.  3.—~Day  one.  And  Ood  said.  This 
phrase,  which  is  ten  times  repeated  in  the 
narrative  of  the  six  days'  work,  is  commonly 
regarded  as  an  instance  of  anthropomorphism, 
a  peculiarity  of  revelation,  and  of  this  chapter 
in  particular,  at  which  rationalism  affects  to 
be  offended.  But  any  other  mode  of  repre- 
senting the  Deity  would  have  failed  to  convey 
to  finite  minds  an  intelligent  idea  of  his 
nature.  "  Touching  the  Almighty,  who  can 
find  him  oat  I "  The  most  that  God  himself 
could  d"  in  communicating  to  bis  creature 


10 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[oh.  i.  3 — & 


man  a  conception  of  his  ineffable  and  un- 
approachable Godhead  was  to  supply  him 
with  an  anthropomorphic  image  of  himself — 
"  the  Word  made  flesh."  Deeper  insight, 
however,  into  this  sublime  statement  discerns 
that  "  anthropomorphism  "  does  not  exhaust 
its  significance.  God  spoke  ;  but  to  whom  ? 
"This  was  an  omnipotent  word,"  says 
Luther,  "  spoken  in  the  Divine  essence.  No 
one  heard  this  word  uttered  but  God  himself. 

The  Father  spoke  within."     It  is 

observable  too  that  every  time  the  word  goes 
forth  from  Elohim  it  is  followed  by  instant- 
aneous movement  in  the  chaos,  as  if  the 
word  itself  were  inherently  creative.  Re- 
membering, then,  that  the  doctrine  of  a 
personal  Logos  was  not  unknown  to  the  later* 
theology  of  the  Old  Testament  (cf.  Ps.  xxxiii. 
6  ;  cxlviii.  5),  and  is  clearly  revealed  in  the 
New  (John  i.  1  ;  Heb.  xi.  3),  it  is  difficult 
to  resist  the  inference  that  here  we  have  its 
roots,  and  that  a  correct  exegesis  should  find 
in  the  creative  word  of  Elohim  an  adum- 
bration of  the  Devar  Jehovah  of  the  He- 
brew Psalter,  the  Logos  of  John's  Gospel,  and 
the  Rema  Theou  of  the  writer  to  the  Hebrews. 
Let  there  be  light :  and  there  was  light. 
The  sublimity  of  these  words,  which  arrested 
the  attention  of  the  heathen  Longinus  ('  De 
Sublimitate,'  ix.),  and  which  Milton  ('  Para- 
dise Lost,'  vii.)  and  Du  Bartas,  an  elder  poet 
(vid.  Kitto  in  loco),  have  tried  to  repro- 
duce, is  in  great  measure  lost  in  our  English 
version.  TtvtjQtjru)  ^wc  teal  kyevtrw  0wc 
(LXX.)  and  sit  lux  et  fuit  lux  (Vulg.)  are 
superior  translations  of  TIN"'!V1  "I18<","IJ 
which  might  be  rendered,  "  Light  be,  and 
light  was.  With  reference  to  their  import, 
the  least  satisfactory  explanation,  notwith- 
standing the  eminent  names  that  have  lent 
it  their  support  (Bush,  Kitto,  Murphy, 
Wordsworth),  is  that  which  understands 
the  sun  to  have  been  created  a  perfectly 
finished  luminous  body  from  the  first,  though 
hitherto  its  light  had  been  intercepted  by 
the  earth's  vapours,  which  were  now  dis- 
persed by  Divine  command.  But  the  lan- 
guage of  Elohim  is  too  exalted  to  be  applied 
to  so  familiar  a  phenomenon  as  the  dis- 
sipation of  terrestrial  mists,  and,  besides, 
expressly  negatives  the  hypothesis  in  ques- 
tion by  affirming  that  the  light  was  sum- 
moned into  being,  and  not  simply  into 
appearance.  The  historian,  too,  explicitly 
asserts  that  the  light  was,  i.  e.  began  to  be, 
and  not  merely  to  be  visible.  A  modification 
of  this  view,  viz.,  that  the  sun  and  moon 
were  now  created,  but  did  not  become  visible 
until  the  fourth  day  (Inglis),  must  likewise 
be  rejected,  as  according  neither  with  ver.  1, 
which  says  that  the  heavenly  bodies  were 
created  in  the  beginning,  nor  with  vers.  16, 
17,  which  declare  that  not  until  the  fourth 
day  were  they  constituted  sources  of  light 


for  the  earth.  The  exigencies  of  the  text, 
as  well  as  the  ascertained  facts  of  physical 
science,  require  the  first  day's  work  to  be  the 
original  production  of  light  throughout  the 
universe,  and  in  particular  throughout  our 

Elanetary  system  (Kalisch,  Lange,  Delitzsch, 
lawson).  Calvin,  though  much  more  deeply 
concerned  about  the  refutation  of  Servetus, 
who  maintained  that  the  Word  only  began 
to  be  with  the  creation  of  light,  was  able  to 
perceive  that  this  light  was  independent  of 
the  sun  and  moon  ;  in  this  agreeing  with 
Augustine,  who,  however,  conjectured  it  to 
be  not  material,  but  spiritual  in  its  nature 
('De  Genesi  ad  Literam,'  lib.  i.  c.  3).  Nor 
does  it  in  the  slightest  conflict  with  ver.  1 
to  suppose  that  light  was  now  for  the  first  time 
produced,  light  being  a  mode  or  condition 
of  matter,  and  not  a  distinct  element  or  sub- 
stance, as  was  at  one  time  believed.  Lumin- 
osity is  simply  the  result  of  incandescence, 
although  what  specific  change  is  effected  on 
the  constitutions  or  adjustments  of  the  mole- 
cules of  a  body  by  the  process  of  heating 
which  renders  it  luminous  science  is  unable 
to  explain.  Any  solid  body  can  be  rendered 
incandescent  by  being  heated  up  to  between 
700°  and  800°  Fahrenheit.  Any  liquid  that 
can  absorb  as  great  a  quantity  of  heat  like- 
wise emits  light.  Gases  do  not  appear  to  be 
capable  of  incandescence,  though  the  phe- 
nomena attending  their  sudden  condensation 
discover  light-producing  properties  in  their 
composition.  As  to  how  the  light  of  incan- 
descent bodies  is  transmitted  to  the  eye,  the 
Pythagorean  and  Newtonian  theory  of  small, 
impalpable  particles  of  luminous  matter 
being  constantly  emitted  from  their  surfaces 
towards  the  eye  may  be  said  to  have  been 
successfully  displaced  by  that  of  Descartes, 
Huygens,  and  Euler,  which  accounts  for 
the  phenomena  of  vision  by  the  existence 
throughout  space,  and  in  the  interstitial 
spaces  of  bodies,  of  an  infinitely  attenuated 
ether,  which  is  thrown  into  undulations  by 
luminous  bodies  precisely  as  the  atmosphere 
is  made  to  vibrate  by  bodies  which  are 
sonorous.  But  whichever  theory  be  adopted 
to  solve  the  mystery  of  its  transmission, 
that  of  emanation  or  of  undulation,  it  is  im- 
possible to  resist  the  conclusion  that  the 
creation  of  light,  which  formed  the  opus 
operatum  of  the  first  day,  was  in  reality  the 
evolution  from  the  dark-robed,  seething  mass 
of  our  condensing  planet  (and  probably  from 
the  other  bodies  in  our  solar  system)  of  that 
luminous  matter  which  supplies  the  light. 
It  seems  unnecessary  to  add  that  it  could 
not  have  been  either  the  subterranean  fire 
which  produced  the  igneous  rocks  of  geology 
(Tayler)  or  caloric  (Clarke)  ;  though,  as  aor 
is  used  in  Scripture  for  heat  (Isa.  xliv.  16), 
fire  (Isa.  xxxi.  9 ;  Ezek.  v.  2),  the  sun  (Job 
xxxi.  26),  lightning  (Job  xxxrii    8),  and 


oh.  i.  a— 6.i 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


11 


there  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  light, 
heat,  and  electricity  are  only  modifications 
of  the  same  force,  we  may  be  warranted  in 
embracing  all  the  three  in  its  significance. 

Ver.  4. — And  God  saw  the  light,  that  it 
was  good.  The  anthropomorphism  of  this 
verse  is  suggestive,  as  teaching  that  from  the 
first  the  absolute  and  all-sufficient  Elohim 
was  an  intelligent  Spectator  of  the  operation 
of  his  own  laws  and  forces,  and  was  pro- 
foundly interested  in  the  results  which  they 
achieved — an  amount  and  degree  of  inter- 
ference with  the  vast  machine  of  nature 
which  would  satisfy  any  rational  theist  of  to- 
day. God  saw,  i.  e.  examined  and  judged 
the  newly-finished  product,  investigated  its 
nature  and  its  properties,  contemplated  its 
uses,  admired  its  excellences,  noted  its  cor- 
respondence with  his  own  Divine  idea  ;  and 
in  all  these  respects  he  pronounced  it  good. 
Afterwards  it  is  the  particular  arrangement 
effected,  or  condition  induced,  by  the  crea- 
tive word  that  evokes  the  Divine  commenda- 
tion; here  it  is  the  creature  itself — "per- 
haps as  the  one  object  in  nature  which 
forms  the  fittest  representation  of  the  Creator 
himself,  who  is  Light,  and  in  whom  is  no 
darkness  at  all  (1  John  L  5),  and  of  the  true 
Light,  which  lighteth  every  man  fJohn  i. 
9)  '  (Macdonald).  And  God  divided  between 
the  light  and  the  darkness.  The  celestial 
bodies  not  having  been  constituted  "  light- 
holders  "  for  the  earth  until  the  fourth  day 
forbids  the  supposition  that  the  luminous 
matter,  on  being  eliminated  from  the  chaotic 
mass,  was  forthwith  transported  towards  and 
concentrated  in  the  sun.  The  sun  itself,  it 
is  now  well  known,  is  "a  solid  mass  of 
highly  igneous  matter  engirt  by  a  bed  of 
dense  clouds,  on  the  top  of  which  there  lies, 
encircling  all,  a  floating  phosphorescent  or 
luminous  atmosphere,  the  lower  part  of  it 
splendid,  but  the  upper  of  lustre  altogether 
dazzling,  from  which  streams  the  flood  of 
light  that  enlivens  all  surrounding  spheres  " 
(Nichol's  '  Cyclopedia,'  art.  Sun).  "  If,  there- 
fore, with  Laplace,  we  may  assume  that  the 
physical  history  of  the  sun  was  the  archetype 
of  that  of  the  various  planetary  bodies  that 
compose  our  system,  we  must  think  of  them 
also,  in  the  process  of  condensation,  develop- 
ing luminous  atmospheres,  which  would  con- 
tinue encircling  them,  and  in  fact  making 
them  suns,  until,  through  their  further  con- 
densation, those  phosphorescent  bands  were 
broken  up,  and,  becoming  disengaged  from 
iheir  parent  globes,  were  attracted  towards, 
and  subsequently  centralised  in,  the  photo- 
sphere of  the  sun.  So  far  as  our  earth  is  con- 
cerned, that  happened  on  the  fourth  day.  On 
the  first  day  the  light  would  either  ensphere 
it  in  a  radiant  cloud,  or  exist  apart  from  it, 
like  a  sun,  though  always  in  the  plane  of  its 
orbit"  (Delitzgch).  U  the  former,  then  mani- 


festly, though  revolving  on  its  axis,  the  earth 
would  not  experience  the  vicissitude  of  day 
and  night,  which  some  conjecture  was  not  at 
this  time  established  ;  if  the  latter,  then  the 
same  succession  of  light  and  darkness  would 
be  begun  as  was  afterwards  rendered  per- 
manent by  the  fourth  day's  work.  The  chief 
reasons  for  the  latter  alternative  are  the  sup- 
posed necessity  of  understanding  the  term 
day  as  a  period  of  twenty-four  hours,  and  the 
apparent  impossibility  of  explaining  how  the 
light  could  be  divided  from  the  darkness 
otherwise  than  by  the  diurnal  revolution  oi 
the  earth.  The  Hiphil  of  713,  however, 
means  to  disjoin  what  was  previously  mixed, 
and  may  simply  refer  to  the  separation  of  the 
luminous  particles  from  the  opaque  mass. 
By  that  very  act  the  light  was  divided  from 
the  darkness.  It  was  henceforth  to  be  no 
more  commingled.  "The  light  denotes  all 
that  is  simply  illuminating  in  its  efficacy, 
all  the  luminous  element ;  the  darkness 
denotes  all  that  is  untransparent,  dark, 
shadow-casting ;  both  together  denote  the 
polarity  of  the  created  world  as  it  exists 
between  the  light-formations  and  the  night- 
formations — the  constitution  of  the  day  and 
night"  (Lange). 

Ver.  5. — And  God  called  (literally,  called 
to)  the  light  Day,  and  (literally,  to)  the 
darkness  he  called  Night.  "  None  but 
superficial  thinkers,"  says  Delitzsch,  "can 
take  offence  at  the  idea  of  created  things 
receiving  names  from  God.  The  name  of  a 
thing  is  the  expression  of  its  nature.  If  the 
name  be  given  by  man,  it  fixes  in  a  word  the 
impression  which  it  makes  upon  the  human 
mind  ;  but,  when  given  by  God,  it  expresses 
the  reality,  what  the  thing  is  in  God  s  crea- 
tion, and  the  place  assigned  it  mere  by  the 
side  of  other  things  "  The  things  named 
were  the  light  and  the  darkness  ;  not  the 
durations,  but  the  phenomena.  The  names 
called  were  day,  yom,  ond  night,  layela, 
which,  again,  were  not  time-measures,  but 
character-descriptions.  Ainsworth  suggests 
that  yom  was  intended  to  express  "  the 
tumult,  stir,  and  business  of  the  day,"  in  all 
probability  connecting  it  with  yam,  which 
depicts  the  foaming  or  the  boiling  of  the  sea  ; 
and  that  layela,  in  which  he  seems  to  detect 
the  Latin  ululare,  is  indicative  of  "  the 
yelling  or  the  howling  of  wild  beasts  at 
night.  Gesenius  derives  the  former  from  the 
unused  root  yom,  which  signifies  to  glow  with 
heat,  while  the  latter  he  associates  with  lul, 
also  unused,  to  roll  up,  the  idea  being  that  the 
night  wraps  all  things  in  obscurity.  Mac- 
donald sees  in  the  naming  of  the  creatures  an 
expression  of  sovereignty  and  lordship,  as 
when  Adam  named  the  beasts  of  the  field 
And  the  evening  and  the  morning  were  the 
first  day.     Literally,  And  evening  was,  and 


II 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  I.  8— ft. 


morning  was,  day  one.  Considerable  divers- 
ity of  sentiment  prevails  with  regard  to  the 
exact  interpretation  of  these  words.  On  the 
one  hand,  it  is  assumed  that  the  first  creative 
period  is  here  described  a*  an  ordinary  astro- 
nomical or  sidereal  day  of  twenty -four  hours' 
duration,  its  constituent  parts  being  charac- 
terised in  the  usual  way,  as  an  evening  and  a 
morning.  In  the  judgment  of  Ealisch  and 
others  the  peculiar  phrase,  "  Evening  was, 
and  morning  was,"  is  simply  equivalent  to 
the  later  Hebrew  compound  "  evening- 
morning"  (Dan.  viii.  14),  and  the  Creek 
vvxSrintpov  (2  Cor.  xi  25),  both  of  which 
denote  a  natural  or  civil  day,  though  this 
is  challenged,  in  the  case  of  the  Hebrew  cons- 
pound,  by  Macdonald.  The  language  of  the 
fourth  commandment  (Exod.  xx.  11)  is  also 
appealed  to  as  removing  it  beyond  the  sphere 
of  doubt  that  the  evening  and  the  morning 
referred  to  are  the  component  sections  of  an 
earthly  day.  As  to  the  proper  terminus  a 
quo  of  this  initial -day,  however,  the  advo- 
cates of  this  interpretation  are  at  variance 
among  themselves ;  Delitzsch  taking  the  terms 
ereb  (literally,  "  the  setting,"  from  arab,  (1) 
to  mix  ;  (2)  to  set,  to  depart,  like  the  sun) 
and  boker  (literally,  "  the  breaking  forth," 
from  bakar,  to  cleave,  to  open)  in  an  active 
wnse,  and  applying  the  former  to  the  first 
fading  of  the  light,  and  the  latter  to  the 
breaking  of  the  dawn  after  the  first  interval 
of  darkness  has  passed,  thus  reckoning  the 
creative  days  from  day hreak  to  daybreak ; 
while  Murphy  and  Kalisch,  who  agree  with 
him  in  regarding  the  days  as  ordinary  solar 
days,declarethey  must  be  reckoned,  Iiebraico 
more,  from  sunset  to  sunset.  But  if  the 
first  day  commenced  with  an  evening  or 
obscure  period  (Has  ereb  no  connection  with 
arab,  to  mix  ?  May  it  not  describe  the  con- 
dition of  things  when  light  and  darkness 
were  commingled  ?),  that  can  be  discovered 
only  in  the  chaotic  darkness  out  of  which 
the  light  sprang.  Hence,  on  the  other  hand, 
as  it  seems  improbable  that  this  was  of  no 
more  than  twelve  hours'  duration,  and  as  the 
presumption  is  that  the  light-period  would 
be  commensurate  in  length,  it  has  been 
argued  that  day  one  was  not  a  sun-measured 
day,  but  a  period  of  indefinite  extent.  Of 
course  the  length  of  day  one  practically 
determines  the  length  of  all  the  six.  If  it 
was  a  solar  day,  then  they  must  be  con- 
sidered such.  But  as  the  present  sidereal 
arrangements  for  the  measurement  of  time 
nere  not  then  established,  it  is  clearly  gra- 
tuitous to  proceed  on  the  assumption  that  it 
was.  Hence,  neither  is  it  to  be  accepted 
without  demonstration  that  they  were  not 
likewise  periods  of  prolonged  duration.  It  is 
obvious  they  were  if  it  was  ;  and  that  it  was 
appear*  to  be  suggested  by  the  terms  in 
which  it  U  described.     This  conclusion  that 


the  creation  days  were  long  periods,  and  not 
simply  solar  days,  is  confirmed  by  a  variety 
of  considerations.     1.  In  the  creation  record 
itself  (chs.  i. ,  ii.  4)  the  term  is  employed  with 
an  obvious  latitude  of  meaning  ;  standing  for 
light  us  opposed  to  darkness  (ver.  5)  ;  day 
as  distinguished  from  night ;  and  for  a  period 
of  twenty -four  hours,  as  in  the  phrase  "  for 
days  and  years  "  (ver.  14) ;  and  again  for  the 
whole  creation  period  of  six  days,  or,  as  is 
more  probable,  for  the  second  and  third  day» 
(ch.  ii.  4).     2.  General  Scripture  usage  sanc- 
tions this  interpretation  of  the  word  day  as  a 
period  of  indefinite  duration  ;  e.  g.  Zcch.  xiv. 
6,  7,  which  speaks  of  the  time  of  our  Lord'i 
loming,  and  indeed  of  the  entire  gospel  dis- 
pensation,  as  "ins  DV  unus  dies,  i.  e.  a 
day  together  unique,   the   only  day  of  its 
kind  (Delitzsch) ;  and  characterises  it  as  one 
of  God's  days,  "known  to  the  Lord,"  as  if 
to  distinguish  it  from  one  of  man's  ordinary 
civil  days  (cf.  Deut.  ix.  1  ;  Ps.  xc.  4  ;  xcr. 
8  ;  Isa.  xlix.  8  ;  John  ix.  4  ;  Heb.  xiii.  8  ; 
2  Pet.  iii.  8).     8.  The  works  ascribed  to  the 
different  days  can  with  difficulty  be  com- 
pressed within   the   limits  of  a  solar   day. 
Taking  the  third  day,  e.  g.,  if  the  events 
assigned  to  it  belong  exclusively  to  the  re- 
gion of  the  supernatural,  nothing  need  pre- 
vent the  belief  that  twenty-four  hours  were 
sufficient  for  their  accomplishment ;    but  if 
the  Divine  modus  operandi  during  the  first 
half  of  the  creative  week  wasthrough  "  exist- 
ing causes"   (even    vastly    accelerated),    as 
geology  affirms  that  it  was  during  the  second 
half,  and  as  we  know  that  it  has  been  ever 
since  its  termination,   then  a  considerably 
larger  space  of  time  than  twice  twelve  hours 
must  have  been  consumed  in  their  execution. 
And  the  same  conclusion  forces  itself  upon 
the  judgment  from  a  consideration  of  the 
works  allotted  to  the  sixth  day,  in  which 
not  only  were    the   animals  produced    and 
Adam  made,  but  the  former,  being  collected 
in  Eden,  were  passed  in  review  before  the 
latter  to  be  named,  after  which  he  was  cast 
into  a  sleep    by   Jehovah    Elohim,   a    rib 
extracted  from  his  side  and  fashioned  into  a 
woman,  and  the  woman  presented  to  him  as 
a  partner.     4.  The  duration  of  the  seventh 
day  of  necessity  determines  the  length  of  the 
other  six.     Without  anticipating  the  exposi- 
tion of  ch.  ii.  1 — 4  (q.  v.),  it  may  be  said  that 
God's  sabbatic  rest  is  understood  by  the  best 
interpreters  of  Scripture  to  have  continued 
from  creation's  close  until  the  present  hour  ; 
so  that  consistency  demands  the  previous  six 
days  to  be  considered  as  not  of  snort,  but  of 
indefinite,  duration.     6.  The  language  of  the 
fourth  commandment,  when  interpreted  in 
accordance  with  the  present  theory,  confirms 
the  probability  of  its  truth.     If  the  six  days 
in  Exod.   xx.    11   are  simply  natural  days, 
then  the  seventh  day,  in  which  God  is  repre- 


m.  i.  3—6.] 


the  book  of  genesis. 


11 


sented  as  having  rested  from  his  creative 
labours,  must  likewise  be  a  natural  or  solar 
day  ;  and  if  so,  it  is  proper  to  observe  what 
follows.  It  follows  (1)  that  the  events  re- 
corded in  the  first  five  verses  of  Genesis 
must  be  compressed  into  a  single  day  of 
twenty-four  hours,  so  that  no  gap  will  re- 
main into  which  the  short-day  advocates 
may  thrust  the  geologic  ages,  which  is  for 
them  an  imperative  necessity ;,  (2)  that  the 
world  is  only  144  hours  older  than  man, 
which  is  contrary  to  both  science  and  re  vela- 
Lion  ;  (3)  that  the  statement  is  incorrect  that 
Cod  finished  all  his  work  at  the  close  of  the 
sixth  day ;  and  (4)  that  the  fossilifurous  re- 
mains which  have  been  discovered  in  the 
earth's  crust  have  either  been  deposited  there 
since  man's  creation,  or  were  created  there 
at  the  first,  both  of  which  suppositions  are 
untenable.  But  now,  if,  on  the  contrary, 
the  language  signifies  that  God  laboured  in 
the  fashioning  of  his  cosmos  through  six 
successive  periods  of  indefinite  duration 
(olamim,  seons),  and  entered  on  the  seventh 
day  into  a  correspondingly  long  period  of 
sabbatic  rest,  wo  can  hold  the  opposite  of 
every  one  of  these  conclusions,  and.  find  a 
convincing  argument  besides  for  the  observ- 
ance of  the  sabbath  in  the  beautiful  analogy 
which  Subsists  between  God's  great  week  of 
olamim  and  man's  little  week  of  sun-mea- 
sured days.  6.  Geology  declares  that  the 
earth  must  have  been  brought  to  its  pre- 
sent condition  through  a  series  of  labours 
extending  over  indefinitely  long  epochs  ;  and, 
notwithstanding  the  confident  assertion  of 
Kalisch  and  others  that  it  is  hopeless  to 
harmonise  science  and  revelation,  the  cor- 
respondence between  the  Contents  of  these 
geologic  ages  and  those  of  the  Mosaic  days 
is  so  surprising  as  to  induce  the  belief  that 
the  latter  were,  like  the  former,  extended 
periods.  First,  according  to  geology,  travel- 
ling backward,  comes  the  Cainozoic  era,  with 
lie  remains  of  animals,  but  not  of  man  ; 
next  is  the  Mozozoic  era,  with  the  remains  of 
fish  and  fowl,  but  not  of  animals  ;  and  under- 
neath that  is  the  Pahcozoic  era,  with  its  car- 
boniferous formations,  but  still  with  traces 
of  aquatic  life  at  its  beginning  and  its  end. 


Now,  whether  the  vegetation  of  the  third 
day  is  to  be  sought  for  in  the  carboniferous 
formations  of  the  Palaeozoic  age  (Hugh  Miller), 
or,  as  is  more  probable,  in  the  age  which  saw 
the  formation  of  the  metamorphic  rocks 
(Dawson),  the  order  disclosed  is  precisely 
that  which  the  Mosaic  narrative  affirms  was 
observed — first  plants,  then  fish  and  fowl, 
and_ finally  animals  and  Man  ;  so  that  if  the 
testimony  of  the  rooks  be  admissible  at  all 
Upon  the  subject,  it  is  unmistakably  >:,i 
favour  of  the  long-period  day.  7.  The  opinion 
ot  neither  Jewish  nor  Christian  antiquity 
was  entirely  on  the  side  of  the  natural-day 
theory.  Josephus  and  Philo  lent  their  sanc- 
tion to  tho  other  view.  Origen  perceived 
the  difficulty  of  having  a  first,  second,  and 
third  day,  each  with  an  evening  and  a  morn- 
ing, without  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars,  and 
resolved  it  by  saying  that  these  celestial 
luminaries  were  appointed  "  ihin  «?c  ap\at 
rijt;  t'litS-pai;  Kai  Tt)Q  vvktuq,  dXV  tig  rf/v  , 
apx,1!*  70fi  r'uxipaQ Kal  tyiq  vvktoq  "  ('  Com.  in 
Genesin,'  i.  16).  Augustine  similarly  writes, 
"Qui  dies  cujusmodi  sint,  aut  perdifficile 
nobis,  aut  etiam  impossibile  est  cogttare, 
quanto  magis  dicero ....  Illorum  autem 
priores  tres  sine  sole  peracti  sunt,  qui  quartc 
die  factus  refertur"  (' De  Civitate  Dei,'  lib. 
xi.  6,  7).  Bede  likewise  remarks,  "  FortassiH 
hie  diei  nomen  totius  temporis  nomen  est, 
et  omnia  volumina  seculorum  hoc  vocabulo 
includit."  8.  Heathen  cosmogonies  may  also 
be  appealed  to  as  an  indirect  confirmation  of 
the  preceding  evidence.  Egyptian,  Persian, 
Indian,  and  Etruscan  legends  represent  the 
elaboration  of  the  world  as  having  been 
accomplished  in  a  series  of  ages  of  prolonged 
duration.  "  God  created  in  the  first  thou- 
sand years  heaven  and  earth  ;  in  the  second 
the  vault  of  heaven ;  in  the  third  the  sea 
and  the  other  waters  of  the  earth  ;  in  the 
fourth  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars  ;  in  the 
fifth  the  inhabitants  of  the  air,  of  the  water, 
and  of  the  land  ;  and  in  the  sixth  man,"  is 
the  creation  stoiy  of  Etruria  ;  and  although 
in  itself  it  has  no  validity,  yet,  as  a  tradi- 
tional reflection  of  the  Mosaic  narrative  it  is 
not  entirely  destitute  of  weight. 


HOM1LETICS. 

Ver.  4. — The  value  of  Uqht.  I.  A  Divine  creature.  1.  Mysteriously  fashioned. 
Philosophers  can  analyse  light,  unfold  the  seven  prismatic  hues  that  lie  concealed  in 
its  pure  bosom,  theorise  with  much  exactitude  concerning  its  transmission,  calculate 
its  incredible  velocity,  elucidate  the  laws   of   its   dispersion,  utilise  the  wondrous 

fjotencies  that  are  treasured  up  in  its  mystic  beams ;  but  they  can  neither  make 
ight  nor  explain  its  production.  Notwithstanding  all  the  restless  activity  of  modern 
noientific  discovery,  Jehovah's  two  interrogations  (Job  xxxviii.  19,  24)  remain  un- 
answered "  Where  is  the  way  where  light  dwelleth  ? "  and,  "  By  what  way  it 
the  light  parted,  which  •cattereth  the  east  wind  upon  the  ea.it*'  ?  "    2.  Exquisitely 


t«  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  [era.  I.  3— & 

beautiful.  The  first  made  of  God's  creatures,  it  is  likewise  one  of  the  most  radiantly 
fair.  Streaming  forth  direct  from  the  golden  sun,  or  reflected  in  silver  beams  from 
the  pale  moon,  painting  the  orient  dawn  with  roseate  hues,  or  bathing  the  western 
hills  in  a  sea  of  glory,  shimmering  in  whiteness  through  the  summer  air,  or  lying 
across  the  rain-cloud  in  its  many-coloured  bow,  it  fascinates  the  eye  of  every  intel 
ligent  beholder  with  its  incomparable  splendour.  3.  Essentially  immaculate.  "  Hail, 
holy  light,  offspring  of  Heaven,  first  born  !  "  sings  the  immortal  bard.  "  Bright 
effluence  of  bright  essence,"  it  could  scarce  be  other  than  stainless  in  its  purity.  It 
is  the  one  of  all  God's  mundane  creatures  that  has  carried  with  it  none  of  the  chaotic 
darkness.  Effectually  divided  from  the  darkness  at  the  first,  it  now  descends  upon 
this  lower  earth  from  celestial  realms.  And  being  pure  in  itself,  wherever  it  appears 
it  communicates  its  own  bright  nature;  it  refines,  beautifies,  and  purifies.  4.  Abso- 
lutely incorruptible.  As  it  brings  no  contamination  in  its  beams,  so  it  can  receiv« 
none.  The  atmosphere  may  be  polluted,  the  land  may  be  defiled,  the  waters  of  the 
ocean  may  be  rendered  impure,  it  can  in  no  degree  be  tainted.  Excluded  from  oui 
presence,  admitted  to  the  darkest  and  the  foulest  abodes,  captivated  and  compelled 
to  be  our  servant,  absorbed  by  the  dull  sod,  stored  away  in  coal-fields — all  these  it 
may  be,  but  not  touched  by  earth's  impurity. 

II.  A  Divine  gift.  1.  A  universal  gift.  It  belongs  to  no  one  nation,  country, 
class,  or  condition,  being  equally  the  heritage  of  all — the  wise  and  the  unwise,  the 
unthankful  and  the  grateful,  the  evil  and  the  good  (Matt.  ▼.  45).  It  was  God's  first 
gift  to  the  race.  2.  A  free  gift.  It  costs  nothing.  The  poorest  beggar  as  well  as 
the  grandest  monarch  enjoys  it  on  the  same  terms — "without  money  and  without 
price."  So  free  was  it  to  the  first  man  that  it  anticipated  his  arrival  on  the  earth ; 
and  to  this  day  the  seeing  eye  is  ever  preceded  by  the  light  wherewith  to  see.  And, 
like  the  light,  all  God's  gifts  are  free.  "He  simply  gives  unto  all  men;"  and, 
anticipative  of  man's  wants,  "he  prevents  us  with  his  goodness."  3.  A  useful  gift. 
Many  of  man's  gifts  are  worthless ;  not  so  this  of  God's.  Directly  or  indirectly,  all 
the  earth's  glory  is  dependent  on  the  light.  Without  light,  neither  would  the  loveli- 
ness of  form  be  discerned,  nor  the  beauty  of  colour  exist.  Light  is  indispensable 
for  the  production,  preservation,  and  enjoyment  of  life.  In  almost  every  department 
of  human  industry  its  aid  is  sought.  It  is  serviceable  to  the  man  of  science,  to  the 
agriculturist,  to  the  mechanic,  to  the  sailor,  to  the  traveller.  "  Upon  whom  does  not 
his  light  arise?"  inquires  Bildad.  We  may  ask,  "Unto  whom  is  not  his  light 
useful?"  4.  A  silent  gift.  It  is  ever  gentle  and  noiseless  in  its  coming;  with 
incredible  velocity  rushing  through  the  depths  of  space,  yet  with  no  appearance  of 
hurry  or  confusion.  Almost  instantaneous  in  its  swiftness,  as  if,  having  been  the 
first  to  come  in  contact  with  the  living  word  of  the  Creator,  it  had  caught  the  Divine 
property  of  annihilatirg  space.  5.  A  welcome  gift.  "  Truly  the  light  is  sweet,"  &c. 
(Eccles.  xi.  7).  Welcome  by  all,  it  is  specially  so  by  tihem  that  "wait  for  the 
morning"  (Ps.  exxx.). 

III.  A  Divine  emblem.  1.  Of  God  (1  John  i.  6),  in  respect  of  its  glorious  appear- 
ance, pure  essence,  diffusive  character,  quickening  influence.  2.  Of  Christ  (John  ix. 
3),  as  enlightening,  healing,  purifying,  directing.  3.  Of  the  Holy  Spirit  (Acts  ii.  3), 
in  reBpect  of  its  celestial  origin,  mysterious  nature,  sudden  and  unexpected  move- 
ments. 

Light  an  emblem  of  the  gospel,  I.  The  appropriateness  of  the  metaphoe, 
Light  and  the  gospel  resemble  one  another  in  respect  of — 1.  Their  source — God, 
2.  Their  purity.     3.  Their  influence.     4.  Their  gentleness. 

II.  God'b  will  respecting  light.  1.  That  the  world  should  be  filled  with  gospel 
light.  2.  That  every  man  should  have  the  light  3.  That  Christians  should  be  the 
light. 

Application  .—1.  Have  you  this  light  in  your  hearts,  in  your  familiei,  in  job 
neighbourhoods?    2.  Are  you  doing  what  you  can  to  disuse  the  light f 


m.  l  ft— 8.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


15 


EXPOSITION. 


Ver.  (J. — Day  two.  The  work  of  this  day 
consisted  in  the  formation  of  that  immense 
gaseous  ocean,  called  the  atmosphere,  by 
which  the  earth  is  encircled.  And  God  said, 
Let  there  he  a  firmament  (rakiya,  an  ex- 
panse, from  rakah,  to  beat  out ;  LXX., 
aripitofia  ;  Vulgate,  Jirmamentum)  in  the 
midst  of  the  waters.  To  affirm  with  Knobel, 
Gesenius,  and  others  that  the  Hebrews  sup- 
posed the  atmospheric  heavens  to  be  a 
metallic  substance  (Exod.  xxiv.  10),  a  vault 
fixed  on  the  water-flood  which  surrounds 
the  earth  (Prov.  viii.  27),  firm  as  a  molten 
looking-glass  (Job  xxxvii.  18),  borne  by  the 
highest  mountains,  which  are  therefore  called 
-he  pillars  and  foundations  of  heaven  (2  Sam. 
xxii.  8),  and  having  doors  and  windows 
(ch.  vii.  11 ;  xxviii.  i7 ;  Ps.  lxxviii.  23),  is 
to  confound  poetical  metaphor  with  literal 
prose,  optical  and  phenomenal  language  with 
strict  scientific  statement.  The  Vulgate  and 
English  translations  of  rakiya  may  convey 
the  idea  of  solidity,  though  it  is  doubtful  if 
aripiitiita  (LXX. )  does  not  signify  that  which 
makes  firm  as  well  as  that  which  is  made 
firm  (McCaul,  Wordsworth,  W.  Lewis),  thus 
referring  to  the  well-known  scientific  fact 
that  the  atmosphere  by  its  weight  upon  the 
waters  of  the  sea  keeps  them  down,  and  by 
its  pressure  against  our  bodies  keeps  them 
up  ;  but  it  is  certain  that  not  solidity,  but 
expansiveness,  is  the  idea  represented  by 
rakiya  (cf.  Scottish,  rax,  to  stretch ;  Job 
xxxvii  18  ;  Ps.  civ.  2 ;  Isa.  xL  22). 

'  The  firmament,  expanse  of  liquid,  pure, 
Transparent,  elemental  air,  diffused 
In  circuit  to  the  uttermost  convex 
Of  this  great  round." 

(Milton,  '  Par.  Lost,'  Bk.  vii.) 

And  let  it  divide  the  waters  from  the 
waters.  What  these  waters  were,  which 
weie  designed  to  be  parted  by  the  atmo- 
spheric firmament,  is  explained  in  the  verse 
which  follows. 

Ver.  7. — And  God  made  the  firmament. 
How  the  present  atmosphere  was  evolved 
from  the  chaotic  mass  of  waters  the  Mosaic 
narrative  does  not  reveal.  The  primary  in- 
tention of  that  record  being  not  to  teach 
science,  but  to  discover  religious  truth,  the 
thing  of  paramount  -importance  to  be  com- 
municated was  that  the  firmament  was  of 
God's  construction.  This,  of  course,  does  not 
prevent  us  from  believing  that  the  elimin- 
ation of  those  gases  (twenty-one  parts  of 
oxygen  and  seventy-nine  of  nitrogen,  with 
k  small  proportion  of  carbonic  acid  gas  and 
aqueous  vapour)  which  compose  our  atmo- 
•phen  wu  not  effected  by  natural  means  ; 


and  how  far  it  may  have  been  issisted  by 
the  action  of  the  light  upon  the  condensing 
mass  of  the  globe  is  a  problem  in  the  solu- 
tion of  which  science  may  legitimately  take 
an  interest.  And  divided  the  waters  which 
were  under  the  firmament  from  the  waters 
which  were  above  the  firmament  The 
upper  waters  are  not  the  material  of  the 
stars  (Delitzsch,  Wordsworth),  although 
Jupiter  is  of  the  same  density  as  water,  and 
Saturn  only  half  its  density ;  but  the  waters 
floating  about  in  the  higher  spaces  of  the 
air.  The  under  waters  are  not  the  lower 
atmospheric  vapours,  but  the  oceanic  and 
terrestrial  waters.  How  the  waters  are 
collected  in  the  upper  reaches  of  the  atmo- 
sphere, Scripture,  no  less  than  science,  ex- 
plains to  be  by  means  of  evaporation  (Gen. 
li  6 ;  Job  xxxvi.  27 ;  xxxvii  16).  These 
latter  passages  suggest  that  the  clouds  are 
balanced,  suspended,  upheld  by  the  buoy- 
ancy of  the  air  in  exact  accordance  with 
scientific  principles.  And  it  was  so.  Six 
times  these  words  occur  in  the  creation 
record.  Sublimely  suggestive  of  the  resist- 
less energy  of  the  Divine  word,  which  speaks, 
and  it  is  done,  commands,  and  it  standeth 
fast,  they  likewise  remind  us  of  the  sweet 
submissiveness  of  the  creature  to  the  all -wist 
Creator's  will,  and,  perhaps,  are  designed  as 
well  to  intimate  the  fixed  and  permanent 
character  of  those  arrangements  to  which 
they  are  attached. 

Ver.  8.— -And  God  called  the  firmament 
heaven.  Literally,  the  heights,  shamayim,  as 
in  ver.  1.  "This,"  says  Principal  Dawson, 
"may  be  regarded  as  an  intimation  that  no 
definite  barrier  separates  our  film  of  atmo- 
sphere from  the  boundless  abyss  of  heaven 
without ; "  and  how  appropriate  tha  desig- 
nation "heights"  is,  as  applied  to  the  atmo- 
sphere, we  are  reminded  by  science,  which 
informs  us  that,  after  rising  to  the  height  of 
forty-five  miles  above  the  earth,  it  becomes 
imperceptible,  and  loses  itself  in  the  universal 
ether  with  which  it  is  surrounded.  And  the 
evening  and  the  morning  were  the  second 
day.  For  the  literal  rendering  of  this  clause 
see  on  ver.  5.  It  is  observable  that  in  con- 
nection with  the  second  day's  work  the 
usual  formula,  "  And  God  saw  that  it  was 
good,"  is  omitted.  The  "  icai  illtv  6  9eoc  ilri 
iea\6v  "  of  the  Septuagint  is  unsupported  by 
any  ancient  version.  The  conceit  of  the 
Eabbis,  that  an  expression  of  the  Divine 
approbation  was  omitted  because  on  this 
day  the  angels  fell,  requires  no  refutation. 
Aben  Ezra  accounts  for  its  omission  by 
making  the  second  day's  work  terminate 
with  ver.  10.     Langs  asks,  "  Had  the  (N> 


1« 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[oh.  ii  6—8. 


weight,  is  probably  the  correct  one,  that  tht 
work  begun  on  the  second  day  was  not 
properly  terminated  till  the  middle  of  th« 
third,  at  which  place,  accordingly,  the  ex- 
jttession  of  Divine  approbation  is  introduced 
(see  Ver.  10). 


phetic  author  some  anticipation  that  the 
blue  vault  was  merely  an  appearance,  whilst 
the  savans  of  the  Septungint  had  no  Buch 
anticipation,  and  therefore  proceeded  to 
doctor  the  passage  ? "  The  explanation  of 
Calvin,  Delitzseh,  llacdonald,  and  Alford, 
though  declared  by  Kalisch   to  be  of  no 

HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  7.— The  atmospheric  firmament.  I.  Thb  obeatubb  of  God.  1.  From  God 
it  received  its  being  (ver.  7).  Not  bera  wone,  but  in  Other  parte,  Scripture  declares 
the  firmament  to  be  the  Divine  handiwork  (Ps.  Xix.  1 ;  civ.  2).  Whence  we  may 
note — (1)  That  not  it,  the  creature,  should  receive  our  worship,  but  he,  its  Maker, 
who  is  God  over  all,  blessed  for  ever.  (2)  That  since  the  firmament  was  madi 
by  God,  it  must  befong  to  him.  If  at  the  present  moment  it  is  *he  special  abode 
of  the  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air  (Ephes.  ii.  2),  it  must  be  a  usurped  dominion. 
The  air  with  all  its  beams  and  showers,  quite  as  much  as  the  earth  with  all  its  trees 
and  flowers,  is  God's  property  (Gen.  xiv.  22 ;  Ps.  xxiv,  1,  &c).  (3)  That  in  all  its 
movements  it  only  carries  out  the  will  of  Us  Creator.  The  air  does  nothing  of 
itself.  Under  the  reign  of  law  as  all  created  things  are,  the  law  that  reigns  is  itself 
beneath  the  rule  of  God.  The  Hebrew  mind  never  mistook  things  for  persons, 
or  creatures  for  the  Creator  (Ps.  cxlriii.  8)  ;  it  is  only  modern  science  that  degrades 
the  Creator  from  his  throne,  and  puts  the  creature  in  his  seat.  2.  From  God  it 
received  its  function  (ver.  6), — to  divide  between  the  upper  and  the  lower  waters,' — 
which  was— '(1)  Simple,  i.  e.  in  the  sense  of  not  being  complex.  Though  its  uses 
are  manifold,  they  are  all  contained  in  this,  that  It  floats  up  and  sustains  the  vapours 
rising  from  the  earth  at  a  sufficient  distance  from  the  terrestrial  waters.  (2)  Sfeces- 
tary.  Without  a  clear  body  of  atmospheric  air  between  the  waters,  human  life 
could  not  have  existed.  And  equally  without  the  watery  clouds  swimming  in  the 
atmosphere,  both  vegetable  and  animal  life  would  perish.  "  Were  the  air  absolutely 
dry,  it  would  cause  the  water  in  plants  to  evaporate  from  their  leaves  more  rapidly 
ihan  it  could  be  supplied  to  them  by  the  soil  and  the  roots.  Thus  they  would 
speedily  become  flaccid,  and  the  whole  plant  would  droop,  wither,  and  die." 
Similarly,  "  were  the  air  which  man  draws  into  his  lungs  entirely  free  from  watery 
fluid,  he  would  soon  breathe  out  the  fluids  which  fill  up  his  tissues,  and  would  dry 
up  into  a  withered  and  ghastly  mummy"  ('Chemistry  of  Common  Life,'  vol.  i. 
p.  13).  (3)  Beneficent.  Collecting  the  vapours  of  the  earth  in  the  form  of  clouds, 
it  is  thus  enabled  to  throw  them  down  again  in  the  shape  of  rain,  snow,  or  dew, 
according  as  it  is  required.  3.  From  God  it  received  its  name.  (1)  Suitable. 
"Heights,"  significant  of  the  reality.  (2)  Suggestive.  "The  love,  the  power,  the 
majesty  of  God,  his  thoughts,  his  ways,  his  puiposes  when  compared  with  man's, 
are  set  forth  to  us  by  the  height  of  the  heaven  above  the  earth." 

II.  The  servant  of  man.  1.  Indispensable.  Without  the  air  man  could  not 
live.  His  physical  being  would  perish  without  its  oxygen.  Without  its  pressure 
his  bodily  structure  would  fall  to  pieces.  2.  Valuable.  The  uses  of  the  atmosphere 
to  man  as  a  resident  on  earth  are  manifold.  It  supports  animal  and  vegetable  life 
around  him.  It  conveys,  refracts,  and  decomposes  light.  It  transmits  sound.  It 
draws  up  noxious  vapours  from  the  soil,  and  disperses  them  by  its  winds.  It  assists 
him  in  a  variety  of  his  mechanical,  chemical,  commercial,  and  scientific  enterprises. 
s     ii  ,//,,,      Great  as  are  its  powers  of  service  and  its  capacities  of  rebellion  when 


excited  with  tempest,  for  the  most  part  it  is  meek  and  docile,  ever  ready  to  tick  now 
ledge  man  as  its  master,  and  to  execute  his  slightest  wish.  4.  Unwearied.  Eve 
since  it  received  its  appointment  from  God  to  minister  to  the  nappii  ess  of  man  u 
has  unrestingly  performed  that  task,  and  betrays  no  more  signs  of  weittiness  to-day 
than  it  did  at  the  first.  5.  Gratuitous-  It  gives  its  services,  as  its  great  Creatoi 
gives  his  blessings,  without  money  and  without  prioe. 

Let  us  learn — 1.  To  be  thankful  for  the  air  we  breathe.  2.  To  admiie  God'g 
wisdom  in  the  wonderful  adjustments  of  the  air.  3.  To  make  the  best  use  we  can 
of  that  life  which  the  air  supports  and  subserves. 


ch.  i.  9—13.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


17 


EXPOSITION. 


Ver.  9. — Day  three.  The  distribution  of 
land  and  water  and  the  production  of  vegeta- 
tion on  this  day  engaged  the  formative  energy 
of  the  word  of  Elohim.  And  God  said,  Let 
the  waters  under  heaven  be  gathered  to- 
gether into  one  place,  and  let  the  dry  land 
appear.  To  explain  the  second  part  of  this 
phenomenon  as  a  consequence  of  the  first, 
the  disclosure  of  the  solid  ground  by  the 
retirement  of  the  waters  from  its  surface, 
and  not  rather  vice  versd,  is  to  reverse  the 
ordinary  processes  of  nature.  Modern  analogy 
suggests  that  the  breaking  up  of  the  hitherto 
universal  ocean  into  seas,  lakes,  and  rivers 
was  effected  by  the  upheaval  of  the  land 
through  the  action  of  subterranean  fires,  or 
the  subsidence  of  the  earth's  crust  in  con- 
sequence of  the  cooling  and  shrinking  of  the 
interior  mass.  Ps.  civ.  1  hints  at  electric 
agency  in  connection  with  the  elevation  of 
the  mountains  and  the  sinking  of  the  ocean 
beds.  "At  thy  rebuke  they  (the  waters) 
fled :  at  the  voice  of  thy  thunder  they  hasted 
away  (were  scattered).  The  mountains  rose, 
the  valleys  sank  (avafiaivovaiv  opr/  icai  Kara- 
fiuivovai  irilia — LXX. ;  ascendunt  montes, 
et  descendunt  campi — Jerome)  to  the  place 
which  thou  hadst  established  for  them" 
(Perowne).  The  gathering  of  the  waters 
into  one  place  implies  no  more  than  that 
they  were,  from  this  day  forward,  to  be  col- 
lected into  one  vast  body,  and  restrained 
within  bounds  in  a  place  by  themselves,  so 
as  to  admit  of  the  exposure  of  the  earth's 
soil.  The  "place  founded  for  them "  was,  of 
course,  the  depths  and  hollows  in  the  earth's 
crust,  into  which  they  were  immediately 
withdrawn,  not  through  direct  supernatural 
agency,  but  by  their  own  natural  gravitation. 
The  configuration  of  the  dry  land  is  not  de- 
scribed ;  but  there  is  reason  to  believe  that 
the  original  distribution  of  land  and  water 
was  the  same,  or  nearly  the  same,  as  it  is  at 
present.  Physical  geographers  have  observed 
that  the  coast  lines  of  the  great  continents 
and  the  mountain  ranges  generally  run  from 
north-east  to  south-west,  and  that  these 
lines  are  in  reality  parts  of  great  circles, 
tangent  to  the  polar  circle,  and  at  right 
angles  to  a  line  drawn  from  the  sun's  centre 
to  the  moon's,  when  these  bodies  are  either 
in  conjunction  or  in  opposition.  These 
circles,  it  has  further  been  remarked,  are 
"the  lines  on  which  the  thin  crust  of  a 
cooling  globe  would  be  most  likely  to  be 
ruptured  by  its  internal  tidal  wave. "  Hence, 
though  considerably  modified  by  the  mighty 
revolutions  through  which  at  successive 
periods  the  earth  has  passed,  "these,  with 
certain  subordinate  lines  of  fracture,  have 
determined  the  forms  of  continents  from  the 

0BNK8IB 


beginning''  (Dawson,  '0.  W.,'  p.  184  ;  cf. 
'  Green's  Geology,'  p.  612).  And  it  was  so. 
Though  the  separation  of  the  dry  land  from 
the  waters  and  the  distribution  of  both 
were  effected  by  Divine  agency,  nothing  in 
the  Mosaic  narrative  obliges  us  to  think 
that  these  works  were  instantaneously  com- 
pleted. "There  is  truly  no  difficulty  in 
supposing  that  the  formation  of  the  hills 
kept  on  through  the  succeeding  creative 
days"  (Lange).  "Generally  the  works  of 
the  single  creative  days  consist  only  in  lay- 
ing foundations ;  the  birth  process  that  is 
introduced  in  each  extends  its  efficacy  be- 
yond it"  (Delitzsch).  "Not  how  loruj,  but 
how  many  times,  God  created  is  the  thing 
intended  to  be  set  forth"  by  the  creative 
days  (Hoffman).  Scripture  habitually  repre- 
sents the  world  in  an  aspect  at  once  natural 
and  supernatural,  speaking  of  it  as  natura 
and  creatura,  <piiaiQ  and  icrctnc  (cl  Marten- 
sen's  'Dogmatics,'  §  63) ;  and  although  the 
latter  is  the  view  exhibited  with  greatest  pro- 
minence, indeed  exclusively,  in  the  Mosaic 
cosmogony,  yet  the  former  is  not  thereby 
denied.  Not  immediateness,  but  certainty 
of  execution,  is  implied  in  the  "it  was  so" 
appended  to  the  creative  fiat. 

Ver.  10. — And  God  called  the  dry  land 
Earth.  In  opposition  to  the  firmament, 
which  was  named  "the  heights"  (shamayim), 
the  dry  land  was  styled  "the  flats,"  "Aretz" 
(cf.  Sansc,  dhara;  Pehlev.,  arta;  Latin, 
terra;  Gothic,  airtha;  Scottish,  yird ; 
English,  earth;  vid.  Gesenius).  Originally 
applied  to  the  dry  ground  as  distinguished 
from  the  seas,  as  soon  as  it  was  understood 
that  the  solid  earth  was  continuous  beneath 
the  water  masses,  by  an  easy  extension  oi 
meaning  it  came  to  signify  the  whole  sur- 
face of  the  globe.  And  the  gathering  to- 
gether of  the  waters  called  he  Seas. 
Yamim,  from  yom,  to  boil  or  foam,  is  ap- 
plied in  Scripture  to  any  large  collection  of 
water  (ct  Gen.  xiv.  3 ;  Num.  xxxiv.  11  ; 
Deut.  iv.  49;  Joel  ii.  20).  "The  plural 
form  seas  shows  that  the  one  place  consists 
of  several  basins  "  (Murphy).  And  God  saw 
that  it  was  good.  The  waters  having  been 
permanently  withdrawn  to  the  place  founded 
for  them  by  the  upheaval  of  the  great  moun- 
tain ranges,  and  the  elevation  of  the  conti- 
nental areas,  the  work  thus  accomplished  is 
sealed  by  the  Divine  approval.  The  separa- 
tion of  the  land  and  water  was  good,  an  a  de- 
cided advance  towards  the  completion  of  the 
cosmos,  as  the  proper  termination  of  the  worli 
commenced  upon  the  previous  day,  as  the 
production  of  two  elements  in  themselves 
beautiful,  and  in  separation  useful  as  abodes 
of  life,  with  which  they  were  in  due  course 
o 


It 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[oh.  i.  >-  l& 


to  be  replenished,  "To  our  view,'-  says 
Dawson,  "that  primeval  dry  land  would 
scarcely  have  seemed  good.  It  was  a  world 
of  bare,  rocky  peaks  and  verdureless  valleys — 
here  active  volcanoes,  with  their  heaps  of 
scoria;,  and  scarcely  cooled  lava  currents — 
there  vast  mud-flats,  recently  upheaved  from 
the  bottom  of  the  waters — nowhere  even  a 
blade  of  grass  or  a  clinging  lichen.  Yet  it 
was  good  in  the  view  of  its  Maker,  who  could 
see  it  in  relation  to  the  uses  for  which  he 
had  made  it,  and  as  a  fit  preparatory  step  to 
the  new  wonders  he  was  soon  to  introduce. 

"    Besides,  "the  first  dry  land  may 

have  presented  crags,  and  peaks,  and  ravines, 
and  volcanic  cones  in  a  more  marvellous  and 
perfect  manner  than  any  succeeding  con- 
tinents, even  as  the  dry  and  barren  moon 
now,  in  this  respect,  far  surpasses  the  earth  " 
('0.  W./p.  181). 

Ver.  11. — And  God  said,  Let  the  earth 
bring  forth  grass,  the  herb  yielding  seed, 
and  the  fruit  tree  yielding  fruit  after  his 
kind,  whose  seed  is  in  itself,  upon  the 
earth:  and  it  was  so.  Three  terms  are 
employed  to  describe  the  vegetation  here 
summoned  into- existence.  Ealisch  regards 
the  first  as  a  generic  term,  including  the 
second  and  the  third  ;  but  they  are  better 
understood  as  distinct  classes : — (1)  grass, 
deshe,  first  sprouts  of  the  earth,  tender 
herb,  in  which  the  seed  is  not  noticed,  as  not 
being  obvious  to  the  eye ;  "  tenera  herba  sine 
semine  saltern  conspicuo "  (Rosenmiiller) ; 
probably  the  various  kinds  of  grasses  that 
supply  food  for  the  lower  animals  (cf.  Ps. 
xxm.  2) ;  (2)  "  the  herb  (eseb)  yielding 
seed,"  the  more  mature  herbage,  in  which 
the  seed  is  the  most  striking  characteristic  ; 
the  larger  description  of  plants  and  vege- 
tables (cf.  ch.  ix.  3) ;  and  (3)  "  the  fruit  tree 
yielding  fruit  after  his  kind,  whose  seed  is  in 
itself,  upon  (or  above)  the  earth."  The  first 
clause  describes  its  specific  nature — "fruit- 
bearing  ; "  the  second,  its  peculiar  charac- 
teristic— enclosing  the  seed  in  its  fruit ;  the 
third,  its  external  appearance — rising  above 
the  ground.  "  This  division  is  simple  and 
natural.  It  proceeds  upon  two  concurrent 
marks,  the  structure  and  the  seed.  In  the 
first  the  green  blade  is  prominent ;  in  the 
second,  the  stalk ;  in  the  third,  the  woody 
texture.  In  the  first  the  seed  is  not  con- 
spicuous ;  in  the  second  it  is  conspicuous  ;  in 
the  third  it  is  enclosed  in  a  fruit  which  is 
conspicuous  "  (Murphy).  The  phrase  ' '  after 
his  kind,"  appended  to  the  second  and  third, 
seems  to  indicate  that  the  different  species 
of  plants  were  already  fixed.  The  modern 
dogma  of  the  origin  of  species  by  develop- 
ment would  thus  be  declared  to  be  un- 
biblical,  as  it  has  not  yet  been  proved  to  be 
scientific.  The  utmost  that  can  be  claimed 
M  established  is  that  "species,"  qua  species, 


have  the  power  of  variation  along  the  lini 
of  certain  characteristics  belonging  to  them- 
selves, but  not  that  any  absolutely  new 
species  has  ever  been  developed  with  power 
indefinitely  to  multiply  its  kind. 

Ver.  12. — And  the  earth  brought  forth 
grass,  and  herb  yielding  seed  after  hit 
kind,  and  the  tree  yielding  fruit,  whose 
seed  was  in  itself,  after  his  kind.  It  is 
noticeable  that  the  vegetation  of  the  third 
day  sprang  from  the  soil  in  the  same  natural 
manner  in  which  all  subsequent  vegetation 
has  done,  viz.,  by  growth,  which  seems  to 
resolve  the  well-known  problem  of  whether 
the  tree  was  before  the  seed,  or  the  seed 
before  the  tree,  in  favour  of  the  latter  al- 
ternative, although  in  the  order  of  nature 
the  parent  is  always  before  the  offspring.  In 
all  probability  the  seed  forms  were  in  the  soil 
from  the  first,  only  waiting  to  be  vitalised 
by  the  Buach  Elohim — The  Spirit  of  God  ;  or 
they  may  have  been  then  created.  Certainly 
they  were  not  evolved  from  the  dead  mattei 
of  the  dry  land.  Scripture,  no  more  than 
science,  is  acquainted  with  Abiogenesis. 
Believing  that  "if  it  were  given  to  her  to 
look  beyond  the  abyss  of  geologically  recorded 
time,"  she  might  "witness  the  evolution  of 
living  protoplasm  from  not  living  matter," 
science  yet  honestly  affirms  "that  she  sees 
no  reason  for  believing  that  the  feat  (of 
vitalising  dead  matter)  has  been  performed 
yet "  (Huxley's  '  Brit.  Association  Address,' 
1871) ;  and  Scripture  is  emphatic  that,  if  it 
is  protoplasm  which  makes  organised  beings, 
the  power  which  manufactures  protoplasm  is 
the  Buach  Elohim,  acting  in  obedience  to 
the  Divine  Logos.  The  time  when  the  earth 
put  forth  its  verdure,  viz. ,  towards  the  close 
of  the  third  day,  after  light,  air,  earth,  and 
water  had  been  prepared  and  so  adjusted  as 
to  minister  to  the  life  of  plants,  was  a  signal 
proof  of  the  wisdom  of  the  Creator  and  of 
the  naturalness  of  his  working. 

Ver.  13. — And  the  evening  and  the  morn- 
ing were  the  third  day.  For  exposition  vid. 
ver.  5.  Has  modern  geological  research  any 
trace  of  this  third  day's  vegetation  ?  The 
late  Hugh  Miller  identified  the  long-con- 
tinued epoch  of  profuse  vegetation,  since 
then  unparalleled  in  rapidity  and  luxuriance, 
which  deposited  the  coal-measures  of  the 
carboniferous  system,  with  the  latter  half  of 
this  Mosaic  day.  Dana,  Dawson,  and  others, 
rejecting   this   conclusion  of   the   eminent 

feologist  on  the  ground  that  the  underlying 
>evonian,  Silurian,  and  Cambrian  systems 
yield  abundant  fbssiliferous  remains  of  aquatic 
life,  infer  that  the  third  day's  vegetation  ii 
to  be  sought  for  among  the  "unresolved 
schists"  of  the  Azoic  period.  The  meta- 
morphic  rocks,  it  is  true,  have  not  as  yet 
yielded  any  absolutely  certain  traces  of  vege- 
table life ;  and,  indeed,  it  is  an  open  question 


n.  l  9—13.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


n 


imong  geologists  whether  any  of  the  earliest 
formed  metamorphic  rocks  now  remain  (cf. 
Green's  '  Geology,'  p.  308) ;  but  still  it  is 
susceptible  of  almost  perfect  demonstration 
that  plants  preceded  animals  upon  the  earth. 
1.  Among  the  hypozoic  strata  of  this  early 
period  limestone  rocks  and  graphite  have 
been  discovered,  both  of  these  being  of 
organic  origin.  2.  In  the  process  of  cooling 
the  earth  must  have  been  fitted  for  vegetable 
life  a  long  time  before  animals  could  have 
existed.  3.  As  the  luxuriant  vegetation  of 
the  coal  period  prepared  the  way  for  the 
subsequent  introduction  of  animal  life  by 
ridding  the  atmosphere  of  carbonic  acid,  so 
by  the  presence  of  plants  must  the  ocean 
have  been  fitted  to  be  the  abode  of  aquatic 
life.  i.  Vegetation,  being  directly,  or  medi- 
ately, the  food  of  animals,  must  have  had  a 
previous  existence.  On  these  grounds  Pro- 
fessor Dana  concludes  that  the  latter  part  of 
the  Azoic  age  of  geology  corresponds  with 


the  latter  half  of  the  third  creative  day.  In 
the  Creation  Series  of  Chaldean  tablets  an 
two  fragments,  which  George  Smith  con- 
jectures have  a  reference  to  the  first  part  of 
the  third  day's  work.    The  one  is — 

1.  When  the  foundation  of  the  ground  of 
rock  (thou  didst  make) 

2.  The  foundation  of  the  ground  thoa 
didst  call  .  .  . 

3.  Thou  didst  beautify  the  heaven  .  .  . 

4.  To  the  face  of  the  heaven  .  .  . 

6.  Thou  didst  give  .  .  . 

The  other,  which  is  much  more  mutilated 
and  obscure,  describes  the  god  Sar  (or  Assur) 
as  saying — 

7.  Above  the  sea  which  is  the  sea  of  .  .  . 

8.  In  front  of  the  eiara  (firmament)  which 
1  have  made. 

9.  Below  the  place  I  strengthen  it 

10.  Let  there  be  made  also  e-lu  (earth  I) 
for  the  dwelling  of  [man  ?] 

('Chaldean  Genesis,'  p.  68.  i 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  9 — 12. — Sea,  land,  and  vegetation,  contrasted  and  compared.  I.  '.'■on- 
tbasted,  in  respect  of — 1.  Their  constitutions; — sea  being  matter  liquid  and 
mobile,  land  matter  solid  and  dry,  vegetation  matter  organised  and  living.  All 
God's  creatures  have  their  own  peculiar  natures  and  characteristic  structures.  Each 
one's  nature  is  that  which  makes  it  what  it  is.  A  change  of  constitutional  character- 
istics would  be  equivalent  to  an  alteration  of  being.  The  nature  and  structure 
of  each  are  assigned  it  by  God.  Whence  may  be  gathered — (1)  that  if  all  creatures 
are  not  the  same,  it  is  because  God  has  so  willed  it ;  (2)  that  God  has  so  willed  it, 
for  this  among  other  reasons,  that  he  delights  in  variety;  (3)  that  no  separate 
creature  can  be  other  than  its  individual  nature  will  allow ;  (4)  that  to  wish  to  be 
dfljEerent  from  what  God  has  made  us  is  to  be  guilty  of  a  foolish  as  well  as  sinful 
discontent ;  and  (5)  that  a  creature's  highest  function  is  to  act  in  accordance  with 
its  God-assigned  nature.  2.  Their  situations;  which  were  all  different,  yet  all 
adapted  to  their  respective  natures  and  uses,  and  all  wisely  appointed.  The  waters 
were  gathered  into  the  earth's  hollows,  the  lands  raised  above  the  ocean's  surface, 
the  plants  spread  upon  the  ground.  It  is  the  nature  of  water  to  seek  the  lowest 
levels ;  and,  collected  into  ocean,  lake,  and  river  beds,  it  is  of  infinitely  greater 
value  than  it  would  have  been  had  it  continued  to  overspread  the  globe.  Similarly, 
submerged  beneath  the  waters,  neither  could  the  land  have  been  arrayed  in  verdure, 
or  made  a  habitation  for  the  beasts,  much  less  a  home  for  man ;  nor  could  the  plants 
have  grown  without  a  dry  soil  to  root  in,  while  their  beauty  would  have  been  con- 
cealed and  their  utility  destroyed.  And  then  each  one  has  the  place  assigned  it  by 
God,  out  of  which  it  cannot  move,  and  against  which  it  need  not  fret.  The  place 
lounded  for  the  waters  has  received  them,  and  God  has  set  a  bound  to  them  that 
they  cannot  pass.  The  dry  land  still  maintains  its  elevation  above  the  sea;  and, 
as  if  in  obedience  to  the  Divine  Creator's  will,  the  waves  are  continually  building 
up  terraces  and  raised  beaches  in  compensation  for  those  they  are  taking  down. 
Nor  does  it  seem  possible  to  shake  off  the  vegetation  from  the  soil.  Scarcely  has 
a  square  inch  of  ground  been  recovered  from  the  waters,  than  it  begins  to  deck  itself 
in  green.  Let  us  learn  here  (1)  that  every  creature  -of  God,  man  included,  has  ita 
own  place ;  which  is  (2)  best  suited  to  its  nature,  functions,  and  uses  on  the  earth; 
and  (3)  assigned  it  by  God.  Also,  (4)  that  to  vacate  that  place  would  be  to  nm 
counter  to  God's  ordinance  and  to  God's  wisdom,  as  well  as  to  it s  own  nature  and 
usefulness  ;  and  (5)  that  it  becomes  every  one  to  abide  in  that  sphere  of  life  in  which 
he  has  been  p laced  by  God  contentedly,  cheerfully  and  diligently  seeking  to  glorify 

o  « 


10  THE    BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  £ch.  i.  9— IS 

his  Creator.  3.  Their  operation*;  which  are  as  diversified  as  are  their  natures  and 
places.  The  sea  moves,  the  land  rests,  the  plant  grows.  The  sea  fertilises  and 
beautifies  the  soil,  the  soil  sustains  and  nourishes  the  plant,  the  plant  decorates  the 
land  and  gives  food  to  man  and  beast.  The  sea  fills  the  clouds,  the  clouds  fill  the 
rivers  and  the  streams,  the  rivers  and  the  streams  slake  the  thirst  of  the  valleys, 
the  Valleys  yield  their  substance  to  the  corn  and  the  wine  and  the  oil,  and  these 
again  deliver  up  their  treasures  to  their  master — man.  The  sea  divides  the  land 
into  continents,  which,  in  turn,  are  broken  up  into  countries  by  rivers ;  and  thus 
nationalities  are  formed,  and  peace  promoted  by  division.  As  the  great  highway 
of  the  nations,  too,  the  »ea  helps  to  diffuse  abroad  the  blessings  of  civilisation,  and 
to  teach  men  their  interdependence.  So,  likewise,  the  land  has  its  specific  functions 
in  the  economy  of  nature,  being  assigned  to  support,  sustain,  enrich,  instruct,  and 
comfort  man.  And  different  from  both  are  the  uses  of  the  plants.  All  which  is 
fatted  to  suggest  wisdom.  (1)  That  each  separate  creature  has  its  own  separate  work 
to  do,  for  which  it  has  been  fitted  with  appropriate  powers — a  lesson  of  diligence. 
(2)  That  there  are  many  different  ways  of  serving  God  in  this  world — a  lesson  of 
charity.  (3)  That  God  does  not  wish  all  hiB  creatures  either  to  be  or  to  serve  alike— 
a  lesson  of  contentment.  (4)  That  the  best  way  to  serve  God  is  to  be  ourselves 
and  use  the  powers  we  possess,  without  condescending  to  imitate  our  neighbours — 
a  lesson  of  individuality.  (5)  That  though  each  separate  creature  has  its  own 
nature,  place,  and  power,  yet  each  is  subservient  to  the  other,  and  all  to  the  whole — 
a  lesson  of  co-operation. 

II.  Compared,  in  respect  of  —  1.  Their  natures,  as  being  God's  creatures. 
Land,  sea,  and  vegetation  all  owe  their  existence  to  his  Almighty  fiat,  and  all 
equally  proclaim  themselves  to  be  his  handiwork.  Hence  they  are  all  God's 
property — the  earth  with  its  fulness,  the  sea  with  its  treasures,  the  plants  with  their 
virtues.  Consequently  man  should  (1)  reverently  worship  him  who  made  the  sea 
and  formed  the  dry  land,  and  caused  the  grass  to  grow ;  (2)  thankfully  receive  those 
highly  serviceable  Creatures  at  God's  hand ;  and,  (3)  remembering  whose  they  are, 
and  that  himself  is  but  a  steward,  faithfully  employ  them  for  their  Creator's  glory. 
2.  Their  characters,  as  being  obedient  to  the  Divine  word.  "Gathered  be  the 
seas,"  said  the  word,  and  the  seas  were  gathered.  "  Let  the  dry  land  appear,"  and 
it  appeared.  "  Let  the  grass  grow,"  and  the  grass  grew.  Let  the  land,  sea,  and 
plants  be  our  teachers.  Obedience  the  first  duty  of  a  creature.  Nothing  can  com- 
pensate for  its  want  (1  Sam.  xv.  22).  And  this  obedience  must  be  prompt,  complete, 
and  continual,_  like  that  of  sea,  land,  and  vegetation.  3.  Their  varieties.  The  seas 
were  divided  into  oceans,  lakes,  rivers ;  the  land  into  mountains,  hills,  and  valleys  . 
the  plants  into  grasses,  herbs,  and  trees.  God  loves  diversity  in  unity.  As  in 
a  great  house  there  are  vessels  of  small  quantity  and  vessels  of  large  quantity 
(Isa.  xxii.  24),  so  in  the  world  are  the  creatures  divided  into  more  important  and 
less.  In  society  men  are  distributed  into  ranks  and  classes  according  to  their  great- 
ness and  ability  ;  in  the  Church  "there  are  "  babes  "  and  there  are  "  perfect  men  " 
in  Christ;  there  are  those  possessed  of  many  talents  and  much  grace,  and  those 
whose  endowments  and  acquirements  are  of  smaller  dimensions.  4.  Their  qualities, 
as  being  all  good  in  their  Creator's  estimation.  The  highest  excellence  of  a  creature 
is  to  be  approved  by  its  Maker,  rot  simply  commended  by  its  fellow-creature ;  to 
be  good  in  the  judgment  of  God,  and  not  merely  in  the  sight  of  men. 

EXPOSITION. 


Vers.  14,  16. — Day  four.  With  this  day 
oegins  the  second  half  of  the  creative  week, 
whose  works  have  a  striking  correspondence 
with  the  labours  of  the  first.  Having  per- 
fected the  main  structural  arrangements  of 
the  globe  by  the  elimination  from  primeval 
chaos  of  the  four  fundamental  elements  of 
light,  air,  water,  and  land,  the  formative 
•aergy   of  the   Divine  word  rt  verts  to  its 


initial  point  of  departure,  and,  in  a  secofci 
series  of  operations,  carries  each  of  these 
forward  to  completion — the  light  by  per- 
manently settling  it  in  the  sun,  the  air  and 
water  by  filling  them  with  fowl  and  fish,  and 
the  land  by  making  animals  and  man.  The 
first  of  these  engaged  the  Divine  Artificer's 
attention  on  the  fourth  creative  day.  And 
flod   said,    Let   there    b«   lights    (literally 


oh.  I.  14—19.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENE8I8. 


places  where  light  is,  light-holders,  Ps.  lxiv. 
16  ;  QwaTrjpif,  LXX.  ;  luminaria,  Vulgate  ; 
•Token  of  lamps  and  candlesticks,  Exod.  xxv. 
8 ;  Num.  iv.  9,  16)  in  the  firmament  (liter- 
ally, the  expanse)  of  the  heaven.  TV  in  the 
lingular  with  m&SD  in  the  plural  is  ex- 
plained by  Gesenius  on  the  ground  that  the 
predicate  precedes  the  subject  (vid.  '  Gram.,' 
§  147).  The  scientific  accuracy  of  the  language 
here  used  to  describe  the  celestial  luminaries 
relieves  the  Mosaic  cosmogony  of  at  least 
one  supposed  irreconcilable  contradiction, 
that  of  representing  light  as  having  an  exist- 
ence independent  of  the  sun.  Equally  does 
it  dispense  exegesis  from  the  necessity  of 
accounting  for  what  appears  a  threefold 
creation  of  the  heavenly  bodies — in  the  begin- 
ning (ver.  1),  on  the  first  day  (ver.  3),  and 
again  on  the  fourth  (ver.  14).  The  reference 
in  the  last  of  these  verses  is  not  to  the 
original  creation  of  the  matter  of  the  supra- 
mundane  spheres  (Gerlach),  which  was  per- 
formed in  the  beginning,  nor  to  the  first  pro- 
duction of  light,  which  was  the  specific  work  of 
iiy  one  ;  but  to  the  permanent  appointment 
jf  the  former  to  be  the  place,  or  centre  of  radia- 
tion, for  the  latter.  The  purpose  for  which 
this  arrangement  was  designed,  so  far,  at 
'east,  as  the  earth  was  concerned,  was  three- 
fold ;— 1.  To  divide  the  day  from  the  night 
Literally,  between  the  day  and  the  night ; 
or,  as  in  ver.  18,  to  divide  the  light  from 
the  darkness,  to  continue  and  render  per- 
manent the  separation  and  distinction  which 
was  effected  on  the  first  day.  2.  And  let 
them  be  for  signs,  and  for  seasons,  and  for 
days,  and  years.  The  celestial  lights  were 
to  serve — (1)  For  signs.  Othoth,  from  oth, 
anything  engraved,  hence  a  mark  (Gen.  iv. 
15  ;  2  Kings  xx.  8),  is  employed  to  designate 
a  portent,  or  sign  of  warning  or  instruction 
(Ps.  lxv.  8;  Isa.  viii.  18;  xx.  3 ;  L*XX., 
zrifiriov  ;  cf.  Luke  xxL  25 ;  Acts  ii.  19),  and 
here  probably  refers  to  the  subsequent  em- 
ployment of  the  heavenly  bodies  '  as  marks 
Dr  signs  of  important  changes  and  occur- 
rences in  the  kingdom  of  Providence " 
(Macdonald).  "  That  they  may  have  been 
designed  also  to  subserve  important  purposes 
in  the  various  economy  of  human  life,  as  in 
affording  signs  to  the  mariner  and  husband- 
man, is  not  improbable,  though  this  is  not 
so  strictly  the  import  of  the  original " 
(Bush).  Still  less,  of  course,  does  the  word 
refer  to  mediaeval  astrology  or  to  modern 
meteorology.  (2)  For  seasons.  Moradhim, 
set  times,  from  ya'ad,  to  indicate,  define, 
fix,  is  used  of  yearly  returning  periods  (Gen. 
xvii.  21  ;  xviii.  14) — the  time  of  the  migra- 
tion of  birds  (Jer.  viii.  7),  the  time  of 
festivals  (Ps.  civ.  10  ;  Zech.  viii.  19).  (3) 
For  days  and  years,  i.  e.  for  the  calculation 
of  time.  Luther,  Calvin,  Mercer,  Piscator, 
Delitzsch,  Murphy,  Macdonald,  et  alii  re- 


gard the  three  phrases  as  co-ordinate ; 
Roseniu  tiller,  Gesenius,  De  Wette,  Baum- 
garten  take  the  first  twp  as  a  hendiadyt 
for  "signs  of  the  seasons;"  Kalisch  con- 
siders the  second  to  be  in  opposition  to  the 
first ;  Turh  translates,  "  for  signs,  as  well 
for  the  times  as  also  for  the  days  and  years. " 
The  first,  which  accords  with  the  English 
version,  is  the  simplest,  and,  most  probably, 
the  correct  interpretation.  3.  And  let  them 
be  for  lights  in  the  firmament  of  the  heaven 
to  give  light  upon  the  earth.  Not  to  intro- 
duce light  for  the  first  time  to  this  lower 
world,  but  to  serve  as  a  new  and  permanent 
arrangement  for  the  distribution  of  the  light 
already  called  into  existence.  And  it  was 
so.  Like  every  other  fiat  which  Elohim 
issued,  this  was  in  due  time  followed  by 
complete  realisation.  . 

Ver.  16. — And  God  made  two  great  lights. 
Perhaps  no  part  of  the  material  universe  more 
irresistibly  demands  a  supreme  Intelligence 
as  its  only  proper  origin  and  cause.  "Ele- 
gantissima  haecee  solis,  planetarum  et  comet- 
arum  compages  non  nisi  consilio  et  dominiu 
entis  intelligentis  et  potentis  oriri  potuit  " 
(Newton,  'Principia,'  lib.  iii.  sub  fin.  Ed. 
of  Le  Seur  and  Jacquier,  vol.  ii.  p.  199). 
The  greater  light  to  rule  (literally,  to  make 
like  ;  hence  to  judge ;  then  to  rule.  Mashal ; 
cf.  fiaaiXiuui — Gesenius)  the  day,  and  the 
lesser  light  to  rule  the  night.  The  greater 
light  is  obviously  the  sun,  which  is  some- 
times denominated  chammah,  "  the  warm  " 
(Ps.  xix.  7  ;  Isa.  xxx.  26);  sometimes  cheres, 
"the  glistering"  (Job  ix.  7);  but  usually 
shemesh,  "the  minister"  (Deut.  iv.  19; 
xxxiii.  14).  Here  it  is  described  by  its  bulk 
or  magnitude,  which  is  larger  than  that  of 
the  moon,  the  second  of  the  two  luminaries, 
which  is  also  spoken  of  as  great  relatively  to 
the  stars,  which,  though  in  reality  immensely 
exceeding  it  in  size,  yet  appear  like  little 
balls  of  lie;ht  {kokhavim)  bestudding  the  blue 
canopy  of  night,  and  are  so  depicted — the 
Biblical  narrative  being  geocentric  and  phe- 
nomenal, not  heliocentric  or  scientific.  How 
the  work  of  this  day  was  effected  does  not 
fall  within  the  writer's  scope  to  declare,  the 
precise  object  of  revelation  being  to  teach 
not  astronomy,  or  any  other  merely  human 
gnosis,  but  religion.  Accepting,  Tiowever, 
the  guidance  of  physical  astronomy,  we  may 
imagine  that  the  ensmical  light  of  day  one, 
which  had  up  to  this  point  continued  either 
encompassing  our  globe  like  a  luminous 
atmosphere,  or  existing  at  a  distance  from 
it,  but  in  the  plane  of  the  earth's  orbit, 
was  now,  if  in  the  first  uf  these  positions, 
gradually  broken  up,  doubtless  through  the 
shrinking  of  the  earth's  mass  and  the  con- 
sequent lessening  of  its  power  of  attraction 
and  slowly  drawn  off  towards,  and  finally 
concentrated,   u  a  photosphere  round  Um 


22 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[CB.  I.  14—19. 


ran,  which  was  thereby  constituted  chief 
luminary  or  "light-holder"  for  the  system, 
the  moon  and  planets  becoming,  as  a  neces- 
sary consequence,  "light-holders"  in  the 
secondary  sense  of  "light-reflectors."  It  is 
interesting  to  note  that  some  such  explana- 
tion as  this  appears  to  have  suggested  itself 
to  Willet,  who  wrote  before  the  birth  of 
Newton,  and  at  a  time  when  solar  physics 
and  spectrum  analysis  were  things  of  the 
remote  future.  "  It  is  not  unlike,"  says 
he,  "but  that  this  light  (of  the  first  day), 
after  the  creation  of  the  celestial  bodies, 
might  be  drawn  upward  and  hare  his  re- 
flection upon  the  beame  of  the  sunne  and  of 
other  starres."  And  again,  "Whereas  the 
light  created  the  first  day  is  called  or,  but 
the  starres  (meaning  the  heavenly  bodies) 
are  called  meoroth,  as  of  the  light,  hence  it 
may  appear  that  these  lightsome  (i.  e.  lumin- 
ous) bodies  were  made  the  receptacles  of 
that  light  then  created,  which  was  now  in- 
creased and  united  to  these  lights"  ('Hex- 
apla,'  vers.  3,  14,  London,  1632) ;  an  explana- 
tion which,  though  certainly  hypothetical, 
must  be  regarded  as  much  more  in  accord- 
ance with  the  requirements  of  the  sacred 
text  than  that  which  discovers  in  the  making 
of  the  lights  only  a  further  dissipation  of 
terrestrial  mists  so  as  to  admit  not  the  light- 
bringing  beams  of  the  celestial  bodies  alone, 
but  the  forms  of  those  shining  orbs  them- 
selves (Speaker's  '  Commentary ').  He  made 
the  stars  also.  Though  the  stars  are  intro- 
duced solely  because  of  their  relation  to  the 
earth  as  dispensers  of  light,  and  no  account 
13  taken  of  their  constitution  as  suns  and 
planets,  it  is  admissible  to  entertain  the 
opinion  that,  in  their  case,  as  in  that  of  the 
chief  luminary  of  our  tellurian  heavens,  the 
process  of  "sun"  making  reached  its  cul- 
mination on  the  fourth  day.  Perhaps  the 
chief  reason  for  their  parenthetical  intro- 
duction in  this  place  was  to  guard  against 
the  notion  that  there  were  any  luminaries 
which  were  not  the  work  of  Elohim,  and  in 
particular  to  prevent  the  Hebrews,  for  whom 
the  work  was  written,  from  yielding  to  the 
heathen  practices  of  star-gazing  and  star- 
worship.  "  The  superstition  of  reading  the 
destiny  of  man  in  the  stars  never  took  root 
among  the  Israelites  ;  astrology  is  excluded 
by  the  first  principle  of  Mosaism — the  belief 
in  one  all-ruling  God,  who  is  subject  to  no 
necessity,  no  fate,  no  other  will.  Jeremiah 
warns  the  Hebrews  not  to  be  afraid  of  the 
'  signs  of  heaven,'  before  which  the  heathen 
tremble  in  vain  terror  (Jer.  x.  2) ;  and  Isaiah 
speaks  with  taunting  irony  against  the 
'  astrologers,  star-gazers,  and  monthly  prog- 
Bosticators,'  in  whose  counsel  it  is  folly  and 
wickedness  to  rely  (Isa.  xlvii.  13).  But  the 
Israelites  had  not  moral  strength  enough  to 
ruut  the  example  of  star- worship  in  general  ; 


they  could  not  keep  aloof  from  an  aberration 
which  formed  the  very  focus  of  the  principal 
Eastern  religions  ;  they  yielded  to  that  tempt- 
ing influence,  and  ignominious  incense  rose 
profusely  in  honour  of  the  sun  and  the  hosti 
of  heaven — Jer.  xix.  13;  Ezek.  viii.  16; 
Zeph.  i.  5  ;  Wisd.  xiii.  2  "  (Kalisch). 

Vers.  17,  18. —And  God  set  (literally, 
gave)  them  (i.  e.  sun,  moon,  and  stars)  is 
the  firmament  of  the  heaven  to  give  light 
upon  the  earth,  and  to  rule  over  the  day  and 
over  the  night,  and  to  divide  the  light  from 
the  darkness.  An  intimation  that  on  this 
day  the  astronomical  arrangements  for  the 
illumination  of  the  globe  and  the  measure- 
ment of  time  were  permanently  settled. 
And  God  saw  that  it  was  good.  Laplace 
was  inclined  to  question  the  Divine  verdict 
with  regard  at  least  to  the  moon,  which  he 
thought  might  have  been  so  placed  as  to  be 
always  full,  whereas,  at  its  present  distance 
from  the  earth,  we  are  sometimes  deprived 
of  both  its  light  and  the  sun's  together. 
But  not  to  dwell  upon  the  fact  that  to 
remove  the  moon  four  times  its  present  dis- 
tance from  the  earth,  which  it  would  require 
to  be  in  order  to  be  always  full,  would  neces- 
sitate important  changes  in  the  other  mem- 
bers of  the  solar  system  which  might  not  be 
for  the  earth's  advantage,  the  immediate 
effect  of  such  a  disposition  of  the  lunar  orb 
would  be  to  give  us  a  moon  of  only  on  e  six- 
teenth the  size  of  that  which  now  dispense! 
its  silver  beams  upon  our  darkened  globe 
(Job  xi  12). 

Ver.  19. — And  the  evening  and  the  morn- 
ing were  the  fourth  day.  The  Scripture 
references  to  this  day's  work  are  both  numer- 
ous and  instructive  (cf.  Jobix.  9  ;  xxxvii.81 ; 
Ps.  viii.  ;  xix.  ;  civ.  ;  cxlvii. ).  The  Hebrew 
writers  supply  no  information  as  to  the 
astronemical  theories  which  were  prevalent 
in  their  time  ;  yet  ' '  from  other  sources  we 
have  facts  leading  to  the  belief  that  even  in 
the  time  of  Moses  there  was  not  a  little 
practical  astronomy  in  the  East,  and  some 
good  theory.  The  Chaldeans  at  a  very  early 
period  had  ascertained  the  principal  circles 
of  the  sphere,  the  position  of  the  poles,  and 
the  nature  of  the  apparent  motions  of  the 
heavens  as  the  results  of  revolution  on  an 
inclined  axis.  The  Egyptian  astronomers, 
whom  we  know  through  Thales,  640  B.O., 
taught  the  true  nature  of  the  moon's  light, 
the  sphericity  of  the  earth,  and  the  position 
of  its  five  zones.  Pythagoras,  580  B.C.,  knew, 
in  addition,  the  obliquity  of  the  ecliptic,  the 
identity  of  the  evening  and  morning  star,  and 
the  earth's  revolution  round  the  sun"  (Daw- 
son, '0.  W.,'p.  207).  Modern  astronomy, 
though  possessed  of  highly  probable  theoriet 
as  to  the  formation  of  the  universe,  is  still 
unable  to  speak  with  absolute  precision  witb 
regard  to  this  fourth  day's  work.    Yet  than 


OB.  I.  14— IS.] 


TIIE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


Me  not  wanting  indirect  corroborations  of 
the  truth  of  the  Mosaic  narrative  from  both 
it  and  geology.  According  to  the  sacred 
writer,  the  presently  existing  atmosphere,  the 
distribution  of  land  and  water,  the  succession 
of  day  and  night,  and  the  regular  alternation 
of  the  seasons,  were  established  prior  to  the 
introduction  of  animal  life  upon  the  earth  ; 
and  Sir  Charles  Lyell  has  demonstrated 
nothing  more  successfully  than  the  dominion 
of  "existing  causes"  from  the  Eozoic  era 
downwards,  and  the  sufficiency  of.  these 
causes  to  account  for  all  the  changes  which 
have  taken  place  in  the  earth's  crust.  Again, 
geology  attests  the  prevalence  on  our  globe 
in  prehistoric  times  of  a  much  more  uniform 
and  high  temperature  than  it  now  possesses, 
so  late  as  the  Miocene  era  a  genial  tropical 
climate  having  extended  up  beyond  the 
Arctic  circle,  and  in  the  earliest  eras  of  the 
history  of  the  globe,  in  all  probability,  the 
entire  sphere  being  so  favoured  with  exces- 
sive heat.  Different  causes  have  been  sug- 
gested for  this  phenomenon  ;  as,  e.  g.,  the 
greater  heat  of  the  cooling  globe  (the  earliest 
geologists),  a  different  distribution  of  land 
and  water  (Lyell),  variations  in  the  eccen- 
tricity of  the  earth's  orbit  (Herschell  and 
Croll),  changes  in  the  earth's  axis  (Evans, 
Drayson,  Bell),  and  thegreater  intensity  of  the 
sun's  heat  (Sir  W.  Thomson,  '  Trans.  Geolog. 
Soc.,'  Glasgow,  1877).  The  Biblical  narra- 
tive, by  distinctly  teaching  that  the  sun  was 
perfected  on  the  fourth  day,  renders  it  intelli- 
gible that  his  influence  on  the  surface  of  the 
earth  was  then  at  its  greatest,  causing  tro- 


pical climates  to  prevail  and  tropical  vegeta- 
tion to  abound,  both  of  which  have  gradually 
disappeared  from  the  polar  regions  in  con- 
sequence of  the  sun's  diminished  heat.  It 
remains  only  to  note  that  the  Chaldean 
Genesis  preserves  a  striking  reminiscence  oi 
this  day  s  work  ;  the  obverse  of  the  fifth 
creation  tablet  reading — 

1.  It  was  delightful,  all  that  was  fixed  by 
the  great  gods. 

2.  Stars,  their  appearance  (in  figures)  of 
animals  he  arranged. 

3.  To  fix  the  year  through  the  observation 
of  their  constellations. 

4.  Twelve  months  (or  signs)  of  stars  in 
three  rows  he  arranged. 

5.  From  the  day  when  the  year  commences 
unto  the  close. 

6.  He  marked  the  positions  of  the  wan- 
dering stars  (planets)  to  shine  in  their  courses. 

12.  The  god  Uru  (the  moon)  he  caused  to 
rise  out,  the  night  he  overshadowed, 

13.  To  fix  it  also  for  the  light  of  the 
night,  until  the  shining  of  the  day. 

19.  When  the  god  Shamas  (the  sun)  in  th« 
horizon  of  heaven  in  the  east. 

20 formed  beautifully  and    .     . 

21.  .  .  to  the  orbit  Shamas  was  perfected. 

"  It  appears  that  the  Chaldean  record  con- 
tains the  review  and  expression  of  satisfac- 
tion at  the  head  of  each  tablet,  while  th< 
Hebrew  has  it  at  the  close  of  each  act " 
('  Chaldean  Genesis,'  pp.  69—73) 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  16.  —  The  celestial  luminaries.  I.  Display  the  Divine  wisdom.  "  The 
heavens  declare  the  glory  of  God  "  (Ps.  xix.  1).  M.  Corate  believed  they  declared  no 
other  glory  than  that  of  Hipparchus,  Kepler,  Newton,  and  their  successors.  Newton 
agreed  with  the  Hebrew  poet  (vid.  Expos,  on  ver.  16).  The  astronomical  argu- 
ment in  behalf  of  theism  has  always  been  impressive,  if  not  absolutely  conclu- 
sive. Certainly,  granting  the  Divine  existence,  nowhere  does  God's  glory  shine  out 
more  conspicuously  ;  and  perhaps  the  attribute  which  most  imperiously  arrests 
attention  is  that  of  wisdom.  This  would  seem  to  be  the  aspect  of  the  Divine  glory 
which  a  contemplation  of  the  midnight  heavens  discovered  to  the  writer  of  Ps.  civ. 
(vid.  ver.  24,  which  is  introduced  after  a  poetic  version  of  the  fourth  day's  work) 
and  of  Ps.  exxxvi.  (vid.  ver.  7  in  the  same  connection  ;  cf.  Prov.  iii.  19 ;  viii.  27  j 
Jer.  li.  15).  Many  things  about  the  orbs  of  heaven  evince  their  Creator's  wisdom: 
these  specially — 1.  Their  formation,  as  explained  by  the  highly  credible  teachings 
of  physical  astronomy.  2  Their  varieties — consisting  of  sun,  moon,  planets,  comets, 
nebulas.  3.  Their  motions :  in  elliptical  and  parabolic  orbits.  4.  Their  dispositions : 
the  suns,  moons,  and  planets  in  systems  ;  the  stars  in  constellations,  clusters,  galaxies. 

II.  Attest  the  Divine  goodness.  Displayed  chiefly  by  the  threefold  purpose  the 
celestial  orbs  were  designed  to  serve : — 1.  To  give  light  upon  the  earth.  Even  the 
ttars  could  scarcely  be  dispensed  with  without  a  sense  of  loss.  Feeble  as  their  light 
is,  owing  to  their  immense  distance  from  the  earth,  they  are  yet  invaluable  to 
voyagers  and  travellers  (Acts  xzvii.  20).  Still  less  could  the  moon's  light,  so  pale 
and  silvery  in  its  whiteness,  be  spared.    The  night  without  its  chaste  beams  would 


U  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  [oh.  i.  14—19 

bo  shrouded  in  thick  gloom,  while  -with  them  an  air  of  cheerfulness  is  imparted  to  thg 
darkened  earth.  And,  of  course,  least  of  all  could  the  sun  he  wanted  (for  'The 
Value  of  Light'  vid.  p.  13).  2.  To  distinguish  day  and  night.  The  beneficence 
of  this  arrangement  appears  by  reflecting  on  the  inconvenience  of  either  of  the  other 
two  alternatives,  peipetual  day  and  perpetual  night.  The  disadvantages  of  the  latter 
have  been  indicated ;  those  of  the  former  are  scarcely  less  numerous.  The  alterna- 
tion of  darkness — (1)  Introduces  variety  in  nature,  which  is  always  pleasing.  Con- 
tinuous day  would  be  in  danger  of  becoming  monotonous,  at  least  in  this  mundane 
world,  if  not  in  the  celestial  (Isa.  lx.  20 ;  Rev.  xxii.  5).  (2)  Meets  the  necessities  of 
creature  life,  by  supplying  constantly-recurring  periods  of  repose,  which  are  eminently 
beneficial  for  the  growth  of  plants,  animals,  and  man.  "  Vegetable  sleep  is  that 
relaxation  of  the  vital  processes  which  is  indicated  by  the  folding  together  and 
drooping  of  the  leaves  as  night  approaches"  (Leo  Grindon,  'Life  :  its  Nature,'  &c, 
p.  306).  The  animal  tribes  generally,  with  the  exception  of  the  wild  beasts  (Ps.  civ. 
20),  seek  repose  with  the  shades  of  evening.  And  man,  without  the  recuperative 
slumber  which  darkness  brings,  would  speedily  exhaust  his  energies.  (3)  Solemn- 
ises the  mind  of  man,  by  suggesting  thoughts  of  his  frailty,  of  his  end  in  the  sleep  of 
death,  but  also  of  his  resurrection  to  the  light  of  a  better  morning.  3.  To  mark 
times  and  seasons.  That  the  different  seasons  of  the  year  are  somehow  connected 
with  the  celestial  bodies  is  perhaps  all  that  the  Mosaic  narrative  can  be  made  to 
teach.  But  we  know  them  to  be  dependent  on  the  earth's  revolution  round  the  sun. 
And  the  fact  that  God  has  so  arranged  the  earth's  relation  to  the  sun  as  to  produce 
these  seasons  is  a  signal  proof  of  the  Divine  goodness.  Another  is  that  God  has  so 
fixed  and  determined  their  movements  as  to  enable  man  to  measure  time  by  their 
means.     Without  the  help  of  sun,  moon,  and  stars  chronology  would  be  impossible. 

III.  Proclaim  the  Divine  power.  More  than  any  other  science,  astronomy  enables 
us  to  realise  the  physical  omnipotence  of  the  Deity.  Imagination  becomes  bewildered 
by  the  effort  to  represent  the  quantity  of  force  required  to  propel  a  globe  like  our 
enrth  through  the  depths  of  space  at  the  immense  velocity  of  65,000  miles  an  hour. 
What,  then,  must  be  the  strength  of  that  arm  which,  in  addition,  hurls  Jupiter,  equal 
in  weight  to  1400  earths,  along  his  orbit  with  a  velocity  of  29,000  miles  an  hour  ? 
And  not  Jupiter  alone,  but  suns  immensely  greater,  at  rates  of  motion  that  transcend 
conception.  Well  said  Job  (ch.  xxvi.  14).  Yet,  perhaps,  the  Divine  power  is  as  much 
evinced  by  the  perpetuation  of  these  celestial  masses  and  movements  as  by  their  first 
production.  Not  only  has  God  made  the  sidereal  firmament,  with  its  stupendous 
globes  and  amazing  velocities,  but  he  has  so  established  them  that  since  the  begin- 
ning they  have  kept  on  their  mystic  paths  without  rebellion  and  without  confusion 
(Ps.  cxlvii.  5). 

IV.  Reflect  the  Divine  beauty.  Perhaps  glory  is  the  better  word.  The  counter- 
part of  glory  in  the  Creator  is  beauty  in  the  creature.  The  celestial  luminaries  were 
approved  as  good,  doubtless,  for  their  uses,  but  likewise  for  themselves,  as  being  of 
incomparable  splendour.  "God  hath  made  everything  beautiful  in  his  time" 
(Eccles.  iii.  11).  Nothing  that  God  does  make  can  be  otherwise  than  beautiful;  and 
by  their  splendour,  their  order,  their  unity,  they  seem  to  mirror  forth  the  majesty,, 
•nd  purity,  and  oneness  of  him  to  whom  they  owe  their  being. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORa 

Vers.  14 — 19. — The  fourth  day.    Notice — 

I.  God  prepares  heaven  and  earth  for  man.  Light  needed  for  tho  vegetable 
world.  But  when  the  higher  life  is  introduced,  then  there  is  an  order  which  implies 
intelligence  and  active  rational  existence.  The  signs  are  for  those  that  can  observe 
the  signs.  The  seasons,  days,  and  years  for  the  being  who  consciously  divides  his 
life. 

II.  Thb  luminaries  are  said  to  bulb  the  dat  and  night.  The  concentration 
of  light  is  the  appointed  method  of  its  diffusion,  and  adaptation  to  the  purposes  of 
■tan's  existence.  So  in  the  moral  world  and  in  the  spiritual  world.  There  must  be 
rule,  system,  diversities  of  gifts,  diversities  of  operations.  Distinctions  of  glory — oi 
the  sun,  moon,  stars.    As  the  light,  so  is  the  rule.    Those  possessed  cf  much  puwei 


am.  i.  20—23.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


to  enlighten  others  ought  to  be  rulere  by  their  Divinely-appointed  place  and  work. 
But  all  the  light  which  flows  from  heavenly  bodies  has  first  been  communicated  to 
them.     We  give  out  to  others  what  we  receive. 

III.  This  setting  out  of  time  reminds  us  that  the  earthly  existence  is  not 
supreme,  but  ruled  over  until  it  is  itself  lifted  up  into  the  higher  state  where  day  and 
night  and  diurnal  changes  are  no  more.  The  life  of  man  is  governed  here  largely 
by  the  order  of  the  material  universe.  But  as  he  grows  into  the  true  child  of  God 
he  rises  to  a  dominion  over  sun,  moon,  and  stars.  1.  Intellectual.  Bj'  becoming 
master  of  many  of  the  secrets  of  nature.  2.  Moral.  The  consciousness  of  fellow- 
ship with  God  is  a  sense  of  moral  superiority  to  material  things.  The  sanctified  will 
and  affections  have  a  sphere  of  rule  wider  than  the  physical  universe,  outlasting  the 
perishable  earth  and  sky.  3.  Spiritual.  Man  is  earthly  first,  and  then  heavenly. 
Human  nature  is  developed  under  the  rule  of  sun,  moon,  and  stars.  In  the  world 
where  there  shall  be  no  more  night  the  consciousness  of  man  will  be  that  of  a  spirit, 
not  unwitting  of  the  material,  but  ruling  it  with  angelic  freedom  and  power. — R. 


EXPOSITION. 


Ver.  20. — Day  five.  The  waters  and  the 
air,  separated  on  the  second  day,  are  on  this 
filled  with  their  respective  inhabitants.  And 
God  said.  Nature  never  makes  an  onward 
movement,  in  the  sense  of  an  absolutely  new 
departure,  unless  under  the  impulse  of  the 
word  of  Elohim.  These  words  distinctly 
claim  that  the  creatures  of  the  sea  and  of  the 
air,  even  if  evolved  from  material  elements, 
were  produced  in  obedience  to  Divine  com- 
mand, and  not  spontaneously  generated  by 
the  potentia  vitce  of  either  land,  sea,  or  sky. 
Let  the  waters  bring  forth  abundantly  the 
moving  creature.  Literally,  swarm  with 
swanners,  or  crawl  with  crawlers.  The  fun- 
damental signification  of  sharatz  is  to  creep 
or  swarm,  and  hence  to  multiply  (Gescnius) ; 
or,  vice  versd,  to  multiply  in  masses,  and 
hence  to  swarm  or  abound  (Fiirst ;  cf.  ch. 
viii.  17  ;  Exod.  i  7 ;  viii.  3).  The  sheretzim, 
though  including  small  aquatic  creatures  that 
have  short  or  no  legs,  are  obviously  "all 
kinds  of  living  creatures  inhabiting  cither 
land  or  water  which  are  oviparous  and  re- 
markable for  fecundity  "  (Bush).  We  may, 
therefore,  understand  the  creative  fiat  of  the 
fifth  day  as  summoning  first  into  existence 
the  insect  creation  (in  Lev.  xi.  20 — 23  de- 
fined as  flying  sheretzim),  the  fishes  of  the 
sea  (sheretzim  of  the  waters,  Lev.  xi.  9,  10), 
and  the  reptiles  and  sanrians  of  sea  and  land 
(sheretzim  of  the  land,  Lev.  xi.  41,  42). 
Dawson  concludes  that  "  the  prolific  animals 
of  the  fifth  day's  creation  belonged  to  the 
three  Cuvierian  sub-kingdoms  of  the  radiata 
wticulata,  mollusca,  and  to  the  classes  oi 
fish  and  reptiles  among  the  vertebrata. 
That  hath  life.  Nephesh  chayyah;  literally, 
i  living  breath.  Here  the  creatures  of  the  sea 
ire  distinguished  from  all  previous  creations, 
and  in  particular  from  vegetation,  as  being 
possesssd  of  a  vital  principle.  This  does 
not,  of  course,  contradict   the  well-known 


truth  that  plants  aro  living  organisms.  Only 
the  life  principle  of  the  animal  creation  h 
different  from  that  of  the  vegetable  kingdom. 
It  may  be  impossible  by  the  most  acute 
microscopic  analysis  to  differentiate  the  pro- 
toplasmic cell  of  vegetable  matter  from  that 
of  animal  organisms,  and  plants  may  appear 
to  be  possessed  of  functions  that  resemble 
those  of  animals,  yet  the  two  are  generically 
different— vegetable  protoplasm  never  weav- 
ing animal  texture,  and  plant  fibre  never  issu- 
ing from  the  loom  of  animal  protoplasm.  That 
which  constitutes  an  animal  is  the  possession 
of  respiratory  organs,  to  which,  doubtless, 
there  is  a  reference  in  the  term  nephesh 
from  naphash,  to  breathe.  And  fowl  that 
may  fly.  Literally,  let  "  winged  creatures  " 
fly.  The  fowls  include  all  tribes  covered 
with  feathers  that  can  raise  themselves  into 
the  air.  The  English  version  produces  the 
impression  that  they  were  made  from  tha 
waters,  which  is  contrary  to  ch.  ii.  19. 
The  correct  rendering  disposes  of  the  diffi- 
culty. Above  the  earth  in  the  open  firma- 
ment of  heaven.  Not  above  the  firmament 
like  the  clouds  (Von  Bohlen,  Baumgarten), 
but  in  the  concave  vaidt  (Tuch,  Delitzsch), 
or  before  the  surface  of  the  expanse  (Kalisch). 
Ver.  21. — And  God  created  (bara,  as  iD 
ver.  1,  to  indicate  the  introduction  of  an 
absolutely  new  thing,  viz.,  the  principle  of 
animal  life)  great  whales.  Tanninim,  from 
tanan;  Greek,  ra'wi ;  Latin,  tendo  ;  Sansc. , 
tan,  to  stretch.  These  were  the  first  of  the  two 
classes  into  which  the  sheretzim  of  the  pre- 
vious verse  were  divided.  The  word  is  used 
of  serpents  (Exod.  vii.  9  ;  Deut.  xxxii.  33  ; 
Ps.  xci.  13  ;  Jer.  Ii.  34),  of  the  crocodile 
(Ezek.  xxix.  3  ;  xxxii.  2),  and  may  therefor* 
here  describe  "great  sea  monsters"  in  gen- 
eral: 7-d  Kt)TT]  ra /uya\a  (LXX.);  "monstroui 
crawlers  that  wriggle  through  the  water  oi 
scud  along  the  banks  "  (Murphy) ;  whales, 


tHE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


(ch.  i.  SO-24 


crocodiles,  and  otner  sea  monsters  (Delitzsch) ; 
gigantic  aquatic  and  amphibious  reptiles 
(Kalisch,  Macdonald).  And  every  living 
creature  {nephesh  chayyah)  which  moveth. 
Literally,  the  moving,  from  ramas,  to  move 
or  creep.  This  is  the  second  class  of  she- 
retzim.  The  term  rentes  is  specially  descrip- 
tive of  creeping  animals  (ch.  ix.  2),  either 
on  land  (ch.  vii.  14)  or  in  water  (Ps.  lxix.  35), 
though  here  it  clearly  signifies  aquatic  tribes. 
Which  the  waters  brought  forth  abundantly 
after  their  kind.  The  generic  terms  are 
thus  seen  to  include  many  distinct  orders 
and  species,  created  each  after  its  kind.  And 
every  winged  fowl  after  his  kind.  Why 
fowls  and  fish  were  created  on  the  same  day 
is  not  to  be  explained  by  any  supposed  simi- 
larity between  the  air  and  the  water  (Luther, 
Lyra,  Calvin,  &c. ),  or  any  fancied  resemblance 
between  the  bodily  organisms  of  birds  and 
fishes,  but  by  the  circumstance  that  the  fir- 
mament and  the  waters  were  separated  on 
the  second  day,  to  which  it  was  designed  that 
this  day  should  have  a  correspondence.  And 
God  saw  that  it  was  good.  As  in  every 
other  instance,  the  productions  of  this  day 
approve  themselves  to  the  Divine  Creator's 
judgment  ;  but  on  this  day  he  marks  his 
complacency  by  a  step  which  he  takes  for  the 
first  time,  viz. ,  that  of  pronouncing  a  bene- 
diction on  the  newly-created  tribes.  Nothing 
could  more  evince  the  importance  which,  in 
the  Creator's  judgment,  attached  to  this 
day's  work. 

Ver.  22. — And  God  blessed  them.  To  bless 
is  to  wish  well  to  (ch.  xxvii.  4 ;  Num.  vi. 
23).  In  the  case  of  God  blessing  inanimate 
things,  it  signifies  to  make  them  to  prosper 
and  be  abundant  (Exod.   xxiii.  25  ;  Job  t 

10  ;  Ps.  lxv.  11).  The  nature  of  the  blessing 
pronounced  upon  the  animal  creation  had 
reference  to  their  propagation  and  increase. 
Be  fruitful,  and  multiply,  and  fill  the  waters 
in  the  seas,  and  let  fowl  multiply  in  the 
earth.  The  paronomastic  combination,  be 
fruitful  and  multiply,  became  a  regular  for- 
mula of  blessing  (c£  ch.   xxiv.  60  ;   xxxv. 

11  ;  xlviii.  4  ;  Ps.  exxviii.  3,  4).  The  Divine 
benediction  was  not  simply  a  wish  ;  but,  adds 
£!alvin,  "  by  the  bare  intimation  of  his  pur- 
pose he  effects  what  men  seek  by  entreaty." 
Nor  was  it  meaningless  that  the  words  of 
benediction  were  addressed  to  the  creatures  ; 
it  was  designed  to  teach  that  the  "force  of 
the  Divine  word  was  not  meant  to  be  tran- 
sient, but,  being  infused  into  their  natures, 
to  take  root  and  constantly  bear  fruit  " 
(Calvin). 

Ver.  23. — And  the  evening  and  the  morn- 
ing were  the  fifth  day.  If  of  the  previous 
creative  days  geological  science  hns  only 
doubtful  traces,  of  this  it  bears  irrefragable 
witness.  When  the  first  animal  life  was 
introduced  upon  oar  globe  may  be  said  to  be 


as  yet  sub  judict.  Principal  Dawson  in- 
clines to  claim  for  the  gigantic  foraminifer, 
eozoon  canadense,  of  the  Laurentian  rocks, 
the  honour  of  being  one  of  the  first  aquatis 
creatures  that  swarmed  in  terrestrial  waters, 
though  Professor  Huxley  believes  that  the 
earliest  life  is  not  represented  by  the  oldest 
known  fossils  ( '  Critiques  and  Addresses, '  ix. 
1873) ;  but,  whether  then  or  at  some  point 
of  time  anterior  introduced,  geology  can 
trace  it  upwards  through  the  Palaeozoic  and 
Mezozoic  eras  with  the  result  that  is  here  so 
exactly  defined.  Throughout  the  long  ages 
that  fill  the  interval  between  the  Azoic 
period  of  our  earth's  history  and  that  which 
witnessed  the  appearance  of  the  higher 
animals  she  is  able  to  detect  an  unbroken 
succession  of  aquatic  life,  rising  gradually 
from  lower  to  higher  forms — from  the  trilo- 
bites  and  molluscs  of  the  Cambrian  and 
Silurian  systems,  up  through  the  ganoid 
fishes  of  the  Devonian  and  the  amphibians 
of  the  Carboniferous  to  the  saurian  reptiles 
of  the  Permian  periods.  At  this  point  certain 
ornithic  tracks  in  the  superincumbent  Triassic 
strata  reveal  the  introduction  upon  the  scene 
of  winged  creatures,  and  with  this  accession 
to  its  strength  and  volume  the  stream  of  life 
flows  on  till  the  higher  animals  appear. 
Thus  geology  confirms  the  Scripture  record 
by  attesting  (1)  the  priority  of  marine  animals 
and  birds  to  land  animals  ;  (2)  the  existence 
of  a  period  when  the  great  sea  monsters,  with 
the  smaller  aquatic  tribes  and  winged  fowls 
of  the  air,  were  the  sole  living  creatures  on 
the  globe  ;  and  (3)  that,  precisely  as  Elohim 
designed  life  has  continued  in  unbroken 
succession  since  the  time  of  its  first  intro- 
duction. It  may  also  be  noted  that  the 
Paloeontological  history  of  the  earth's  crust 
suggests  a  number  of  considerations  that 
enable  us  to  form  a  conception  of  the  fifth 
day's  work,  which,  though  not  contravened 
by  the  Mosaic  narrative,  is  yet  by  it  not 
explicitly  disclosed.  For  example,  whereas 
it  might  seem  to  be  the  teaching  of  the 
inspired  writer  that  the  tanninim,  the 
rentes,  and  the  birds  were  created  simul- 
taneously, and  so  were  synchronous  in  their 
appearance,  the  testimony  of  the  rocks  rather 
points  to  a  series  of  creative  acts  in  which 
successive  species  of  living  creatures  were 
summoned  into  being,  as  the  necessary  con- 
ditions of  existence  were  prepared  for  their 
reception,  and  indeed  with  emphasis  asserts 
that  the  order  of  creation  was  not,  as  in  ver. 
21,  first  the  great  sea  monsters,  and  then  the 
creepers,  and  then  the  birds  ;  but  first  the 
smaller  aquatic  tribes,  and  then  the  mon- 
sters of  the  deep,  and  finally  the  winged 
creaturts  of  the  air.  This,  however,  is  not 
to  contradict,  but  to  elucidate,  the  woid  of 
God. 


oh  i.  20— -2S.]  the  Book  of  genesis. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vert.  20— 22.—  The myster-jj  of  life.  I.  Its  origin.  1.  Not  dead  matter.  Scrip- 
ture, equally  with  science,  represents  life  as  having  a  physical  basis  ;  but,  unlike 
modern  evolutionists,  never  confounds  vital  force  with  the  material  mechanise 
in  which  it  resides,  and  through  which  it  operates.  Advanced  biologists  account 
for  life  by  molecular  arrangement,  chemical  combination,  spontaneous  generation, 
or  some  such  equally  insufficient  hypothesis.  The  rigorous  necessities  of  truth 
and  logic,  however,  compel  them  to  admit  that  neither  the  action  of  material  forces 
nor  the  ingenuity  of  man  has  been  able  to  produce  a  bioplasmic  cell.  "The  chasm 
between,  the  not  living  and  the  living  the  present  state  of  knowledge  cannot 
bridge"  (Huxley).  "Most  naturalists  of  our  time  have  given  up  the  attempt  to 
account  for  the  origin  of  life  by  natural  causes  "(Haeckel).  But — 2.  The  living  God. 
Ml  existing  life  has  proceeded  from  some  antecedent  life,  is  the  latest  verdict  of 
biological  science.  Every  bioplast  has  been  produced  by  a  previous  bioplast :  omnis 
cellula  e  cellula.  Essentially  that  is  the  teaching  of  revelation.  The  Maker  of  the 
first  bioplast  was  God.  If  the  present  narrative  appears  to  recognise  the  doctrine 
of  mediate  creation  by  snyirg,  "Let  the  waters  bring  forth,"  "Let  the  earth  bring 
forth,"  it  is  careful  to  affirm  that,  in  so  far  as  material  forces  contributed  to  the  pro- 
duction of  life,  they  were  directly  impelled  thereto,  and  energized  therefor,  by  the 
creative  word.  The  hypothesis  that  matter  was  originally  possessed  of,  or  endowed 
with,  "the  potency  of  life"  (Tyndall)  is  expressly  negatived  by  ver.  21,  whicli 
represents  life  as  the  immediate  creation  of  Elohim. 

II.  Its  nature.  Scripture  vouchsafes  no  information  as  to  what  constitutes  the 
vit  viva  of  organised  beings.  Beyond  characterising  the  beings  themselves  as 
"living  creatures,"  it  leaves  the  subject  wrapped  in  profoundest  mystery.  And  the 
veil  of  that  mystery  science  has  not  been  able  to  penetrate.  The  microscope  has 
indeed  conclusively  shown  that  living  matter,  or  bioplasm,  is  that  which  weaves  tlie 
endlessly  varied  structures  of  animal  forms  ;  but  as  to  what  that  is  which  imparts  to 
the  transparent,  structureless,  albuminous  fluid,  called  bioplasm,  the  power  of  self- 
multiplication  and  organisation  it  is  silent.  "We  fail  to  detect  any  organisation  in 
the  bioplasmic  mass,  but  there  are  movements  in  it  and  life"  (Huxley).  The  utmost 
that  science  can  give  as  its  definition  of  life  is,  "that  which  originates  and  directs  the 
movements  of  bioplasm  "  (cf.  '  Beale  on  Protoplasm ; '  Cook's  '  Lectures  on  Biology '). 
Scripture  advances  a  step  beyond  science,  and  affirms  that  life  in  its  last  analysis  is 
the  power  of  God  (Ps.  civ.  30;  Isa.  xxxviii.  16). 

III.  Its  manifestation.  1.  Abundant.  The  creatures  of  the  sea  were  produced 
in  swarms,  aBd  probably  the  birds  appeared  in  flocks.  This  was — (1)  Predictive  of 
their  natures  as  gregarious  animals.  Though  afterwards  prolific,  they  might  have 
been  created  in  small  numbers  ;  but,  as  if  to  maintain  a  correspondence  between  the 
characteristic  properties  of  the  creatures  and  their  first  production,  they  were  made, 
the  fish  in  shoals,  the  fowl  in  broods.  (2)  Expressive  of  the  Creator's  joy.  God  finds 
a  part  of 'His  happiness  in  surrourding  himself  with  living  creatures.  Had  there 
been  no  other  end  to  serve  by  the  fish  and  fowl  of  the  fifth  day,  this  would  have 
been  cause  sufficient  for  their  creation.  (3)  Anticipative  of  man's  arrival  on  the 
scene.  Not  only  was  it  a  step  in  advance  on  the  work  of  the  previous  day,  and  as 
such  preliminary  to  the  advent  of  man,  but  the  aquatic  and  aerial  creatures  were 
designed  to  be  subservient  to  man's  needs  and  uses.  2.  Varied.  (1)  In  its  form. 
The  living  creatures  of  the  fifth  day  were  diverse  in  their  physical  structures. 
Though  in  the  initial  stages  of  their  embryonic  condition  fish  and  fowl  may  not  be 
widely  dissimilar,  yet  their  completed  organisms  are  not  the  same.  Each  class,  too,  - 
consists  of  an  endlessly  diversified  array  of  species.,  and  the  variations  among  indi- 
vidual members  of  the  same  species  are  practically  limitless.  (2)  In  its  functions. 
Although  all  living  creatures  have  certain  essential  characteristics  in  common, 
resembling  one  another  in  their  chemical  constituents,  in  their  living  by  respiration, 
is  their  growth  by  intersusception  of  nutriment,  in  their  capability  of  reproduction, 
yet  the  ordinary  functions  they  are  meant  to  perform  through  their  respective  organ* 


M  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  [ch.  i.  20— 2S. 

are  different  in  different  kinds  of  animals.  The  fowls,  e.  g.,  were  designed  to  fly 
through  the  atmosphere ;  the  fish  to  swim  in  water.  (3)  In  its  sphere.  The 
different  living  creatures  are  differently  located, — the  fish  in  the  sea,  the  birds  in 
the  air,— each  one's  sphere  being  adapted  to  its  nature.  3.  Progressive.  Science, 
no  less  than  Scripture,  attests  that  in  the  introduction  of  life  to  our  globe  there 
has  been  a  regular  and  continuous  gradation  from  lower  to  higher  forms  of  organ- 
isation, and  has  ventured  to  propose,  as  its  solution  of  the  problem  of  vital  pro- 
gression, external  conditions,  embryonic  phases,  use  and  disuse  of  organs,  natural 
selection,  &e.  These  theories,  however,  are  declared  by  competent  authorities  to  be 
insufficient  (vid.  Page's  '  Philosophy  of  Geology,'  p.  108).  The  solution  of  Scripture 
— special  creation, — has  at  least  the  merit  of  being  sufficient,  and  has  not  yet  been 
disproved  or  displaced  by  modern  research. 

IV.  Its  excellence.  God  saw  that  it  was  good — 1.  As  the  handiwork  of  God 
Nothing  that  God  makes  can  be  otherwise  than  beautiful  and  good  (Eccles.  iii.  11 ; 
1  Tim.  iv.  4).  2.  As  an  ornament  to  nature.  Without  the  vegetation  of  the  third 
day  the  world  would  present  an  extremely  uninteresting  and  uninviting  appearance. 
Much  more  would  it  be  devoid  of  attraction  and  cheerfulness  if  the  myriads  of 
sentient  beings  with  which  it  is  peopled  were  absent.  3.  As  the  servant  of  man. 
From  the  first  it  was  prepared  with  the  express  intention  of  being  subjected  toman's 
dominion,  and  doubtless  the  Creator's  approbation  had  regard  to  this  beneficent 
design. 

V.  Its  perpetuation.  "Of  the  causes  which  have  led  to  the  origination  of  living 
matter,"  says  Huxley,  "  we  know  absolutely  nothing ;  but,  postulating  the  existence 
of  living  matter  endowed  with  that  power  of  hereditary  transmission  and  with  that 
tendency  to  vary  which  is  found  in  all  matter,  Mr.  Darwin  has  shown  good  reason 
for  believing  that  the  interaction  between  living  matter  and  surrounding  conditions, 
which  results  in  the  survival  of  the  fittest,  is  sufficient  to  account  for  the  gradual 
evolution  of  plants  and  animals  from  their  simplest  to  their  most  complex  forms" 
('Ency.  Brit.,'  art.  Biology).  Moses  accounts  for  the  origination  of  living  creatures 
by  a  Divine  creation,  and  for  their  continuance  by  the  Divine  benediction  which  made 
it  the  law  of  their  being  to  propagate  their  kind  and  to  multiply  in  masses.  The 
remarkable  fecundity  which  by  the  blessing  of  Elohim  was  conferred  upon  both  fish 
and  fowl  is  graphically  portrayed  by  Milton  ('  Par.  Lost,'  vii.  387).  That  from 
neither  the  aquatic  nor  aerial  creatures  has  this  power  of  kind-multiplication  departed 
naturalists  attest,  "  All  organised  beings  have  enormous  powers  of  multiplication. 
Even  man,  who  increases  slower  than  all  other  animals,  could,  under  the  most  favour- 
able circumstances,  double  his  numbers  every  fifteen  years,  or  a  hundred-fold  in  a 
century.  Many  animals  and  plants  could  increase  their  numbers  from  ten  to  a 
thousand-fold  every  year "'  (Wallace  '  on  Natural  Selection,'  p.  265). 

Lessons : — 1.  Adore  him  who  is  the  Author  and  Preserver  of  all  life  in  the  creatures. 
2.  Respect  the  mystery  of  life ;  and  what  we  cannot  give  let  us  be  careful  not  to 
destroy.    3.  Appreciate  the  value  of  the  living  creatures. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  20 — 23. — The  fifth  day.  I.  Life  undeii  the  blessing  of  God.  1.  Abundance. 
Swarming  waters,  swarming  air.  preparing  for  the  swarming  earth.  "  Be  fruitful,  and 
multiply."  The  absence  of  all  restraint  because  as  yet  the  absence  of  sin.  God's  law 
is  liberty.  The  law  of  life  is  the  primary  law.  If  there  be  in  man's  world  a  contra- 
diction between  the  multiplication  of  life  and  the  happiness  of  life,  it  is  a  sign  of 
departure  from  the  original  order.  2.  Growth,  improvement,  advancement  towards 
perfection.  The  fish,  fowl,  beast,  man  exist  in  a  scheme  of  things ;  the  type  of 
animal  life  is  carried  up  higher.  The  multiplication  is  not  for  its  own  sake,  but  for 
the  future.  Generations  pass  away,  yet  there  is  an  abiding  blessing.  Death  is  not 
•real,  though  seeming,  destruction.  There  is  a  higher  nature  which  is  being  matured. 
8.  Service  of  the  lower  for  the  higher.  God  blesses  the  animal  races  for  the  sake  of 
man,  the  interpreter  of  creation,  the  voice  of  its  praise.  He  blesses  the  lower  part 
of  human  life  for  the  sake  of  the  soul. 

II.  Life   under  thi  government   of   Goo.    The  immense  productiveness  of 


ch.  i.  24—31] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


nature  would  become  a  cUrse,  not  a  blessing,  unless  restrained  by  its  own  laws.  The 
swarming  seas  and  air  represent  at  once  unbounded  activity  and  universal  control  by 
mutual  dependence  and  interaction.  So  in  the  moral  world.  It  is  not  lifp,  existence, 
alone  that  betokens  the  blessing  of  God,  but  the  disposition  of  life  to  fulfil  its 
highest  end.  We  should  not  desire  abundance  without  the  grace  which  orders  ila  use 
and  controls  its  enjoyment. — B. 


EXPOSITION. 


Ver.  24.  —  Day  six.  like  day  three, 
this  is  distinguished  by  a  double  creative 
act,  the  production  of  the  higher  or  land 
animals  and  the  creation  of  man,  of  the 
latter  of  which  it  is  perhaps  permissible  to 
aee  a  mute  prediction  in  the  vegetation 
which  closed  the  first  half  of  tne  creative 
week.  And  God  said,  Let  the  earth  bring 
forth  the  living  creature  after  his  kind. 
In  these  words  the  land  animals  are  generi- 
cally  characterised  as  nephesh  chayyah,  or 
animated  beings  ;  in  the  terms  which  follow 
they  are  subdivided  into  three  well-defined 
species  or  classes.  Cattle.  Behemah  ;  liter- 
ally, the  dumb  animal,  i.  e.  the  larger  grass- 
eating  quadrupeds.  And  creeping  thing. 
Remes  ;  the  moving  animal,  i.  e.  the  smaller 
animals  that  move  either  without  feet  or  with 
feet  that  are  scarcely  perceptible,  such  as 
worms,  insects,  reptiles.  Here  it  is  land- 
creepers  that  are  meant,  the  remes  of  the 
sea  having  been  created  on  the  previous  day. 
And  beast  of  the  earth  {chayyah  of  the 
earth)  after  his  kind.  7.  e.  wild,  roving, 
carnivorous  beasts  of  the  forest.  In  these 
three  comprehensive  orders  was  the  earth 
commanded  to  produce  its  occupants  ;  which, 
however,  no  more  implied  that  the  animals 
were  to  be  developed  from  the  soil  than  were 
the  finny  tribes  generated  by  the  sea.  Simply 
in  obedience  to  the  Divine  call,  and  as  the 
product  of  creative  energy,  they  were  to 
spring  from  the  plastic  dust  as  being  essen- 
tially earth-born  creatures.  And  it  was  so. 
Modern  evolutionists  believe  they  can  con- 
ceive— they  have  never  yet  been  able  to 
demonstrate — the  modus  operandi  of  the 
supreme  Artificer  in  the  execution  of  this 
part  of  the  sixth  day's  work.  Revelation 
has  not  deemed  it  needful  to  do  more  than 
simply  Htate  that  they  were — not,  by  an 
svolutiouary  process  carried  on  through  in- 
conceivably long  periods  of  time,  developed 
from  the  creatures  of  the  fifth  day,  but — 
produced  directly  from  the  soil  by  the  fiat  of 
Elohim. 

Ver.  25.  —  And  God  made  (asah,  not 
Sara,  the  principle  of  life  being  not  now 
introduced  for  the  first  time,  as  in  ver.  21) 
the  beast  of  the  earth  (the  chayyah)  after 
his  kind,  and  eattle  {behemah)  after  their 
kind,  and  every  thing  that  creepeth  on 
th»    »arth   (literally,    every  remes   of  the 


ground)  after  his  kind.  The  order  rf  creation 
(ver.  25)  differs  from  that  in  which  they  were 
summoned  into  existence  (ver.  24).  The  latter 
may  be  the  order  of  time,  the  former  the  order 
of  rank  ;  or  there  may  have  been  two  divisions 
of  the  work,  in  the  former  of  which  the 
herbivora  took  the  lead,  and  in  the  latter 
the  carnivora.  According  to  the  witness  of 
geology,  "  the  quadrupeds  did  not  all  come 
forth  together.  Large  and  powerful  hirbi- 
vora  first  take  the  field,  with  only  a  few 
carnivora.  These  pass  away.  Other  her- 
bivora, with  a  larger  proportion  of  carnivora, 
next  appear.  These  also  are  exterminated, 
and  so  with  others.  Then  the  carnivora 
appear  in  vast  numbers  and  power,  and  the 
herbivora  also  abound.  Moreover,  these  races 
attain  a  magnitude  and  number  far  surpass- 
ing all  that  now  exist.  As  the  mammalian 
age  draws  to  a  close,  the  ancient  carnivora 
and  herbivora  of  that  era  all  pass  away, 
excepting,  it  is  believed,  a  few  that  are  useful 
to  man.  New  creations  of  smaller  size  people 
the  groves"  (Dana.  Quoted  by  Damon 
'  0.  W.'  p.  224).  And  God  saw  that  it  »a« 
good.  As  in  the  third  day's  work  each 
branch  is  sealed  by  the  Divine  approbation, 
so  in  this.  The  creation  of  the  higher  ani- 
mals completed  the  earth's  preparation  for 
the  advent  of  man  ;  to  which,  doubtless,  the 
Creator's  commendation  of  his  finished  work 
had  a  special  reference.  Everything  was  in 
readiness  for  the  magnum  opus  which  was 
to  close  his  creative  labour  and  crown  his 
completed  cosmos. 

Ver.  26. — The  importance  assigned  in  the 
Biblical  record  to  the  creation  of  man  is 
indicated  by  the  manner  in  which  it  is  intro- 
duced. And  God  said,  Let  ns  make  man. 
Having  already  explained  the  significance  of 
the  term  Elohim,,  as  suggesting  the  fulness  of 
the  Divine  personality,  and  foreshadowing 
the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  (ver.  1),  other 
interpretations,  such  as  that  God  takes  coun- 
sel with  the  angels  (Philo,  Aben  Ezra, 
Delitzsch),  or  with  the  earth  (Maimonides, 
M.  Gerundius),  or  with  himself  (Kalisch), 
must  be  set  aside  in  favour  of  that  which 
detects  in  the  peculiar  phraseology  an  allu- 
sion to  a  sublime  concilium  a  mong  the  persons 
of  the  Godhead  (Calvin,  Macdonald,  Murphy). 
The  object  which  this  concilium  contem- 
plated was  the  construction  of  a  .new  creature 


BO 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  1.  24—81 


to  be  named  Adam;  descriptive  of  either 
his  colour,  from  adam,  to  be  red,  (Josephus, 
Gesenius,  Tuch,  Hupfeld) ;  or  his  appear- 
ance, from  a  root  in  Arabic  which  signifies 
"to  shine, "  thus  making  Adam  "the  bril- 
liant one  ; "  or  his  compactness,  both  as  an 
individual  and  as  a  race,  from  another  Arabic 
root  which  means  "  to  bring  or  hold  toge- 
ther" (Meier,  Fiirst) ;  or  his  nature  as 
God's  image,  from  dam,  likeness  (Eichorn, 
Richers) ;  or,  and  most  probably,  his  origin, 
from  adamah,  the  ground  (Kimchi,  Rosen- 
miiller,  Kalisch).  In  our  image,  after  our 
likeness.  The  precise  relationship  in  which 
the  nature  of  the  Adam  about  to  be  pro- 
duced should  stand  to  Elohim  was  to  be 
that  of  a  tselem  (shadow — vid.  Vs.  xxxix. 
7 ;  Greek,  axia,  oKiaopa)  and  a  damuih 
(likeness,  from  damah,  to  bring  together, 
to  compare— Isa.  xl.  8).  As  nearly  as  pos- 
sible the  terms  are  synonymous.  If  any 
distinction  does  exist  between  them,  perhaps 
tselem  (image)  denotes  the  shadow  outline 
of  a  figure,  and  damuth  (likeness)  the  cor- 
respondence or  resemblance  of  that  shadow 
to  the  figure.  The  early  Fathers  were  of 
opinion  that  the  words  were  expressive  of 
separate  ideas :  image,  of  the  body,  which 
by.  reason  of  its  beauty,  intelligent  aspect, 
md  erect  stature  was  an  adumbration  of 
God  ;  likeness,  of  the  soul,  or  the  intellectual 
and  moral  nature.  According  to  Augustine 
image  had  reference  to  the  cognitio  veritatis  ; 
likeness  to  amor  virtutis.  Irenseus,  Clement, 
and  Origen  saw  in  the  first  man  nature  as 
originally  created,  and  in  the  second  what 
that  nature  might  become  through  personal 
ethical  conflict,  or  through  the  influence  of 
grace.  Bellarmine  thought  "imaginem  in 
natura,  similitudinem  in  probitate  et  justitia 
sitam  esse,"  and  conceived  that  "  Adamum 
peccando  non  imaginem  Dei,  sed  similitudi- 
nem perdidisse."  Havernick  suggests  that 
image  is  the  concrete,  and  likeness  the 
abstract  designation  of  the  idea.  Modern 
expositors  generally  discover  no  distinction 
whatever  between  the  words  ;  in  this  re- 
spect following  Luther,  who  renders  an 
image  that  is  like,  and  Calvin,  who  denies 
that  any  diS'erence  exists  between  the  two. 
As  to  what  in  man  constituted  the  imago 
Dei,  the  reformed  theologians  commonly 
held  it  to  have  consisted  (1)  in  the  spirit- 
uality of  his  being,  as  an  intelligent  and 
free  agent ;  (2)  in  the  moral  integrity  and 
holiness  of  his  nature ;  and  (3)  in  his  do- 
minion over  the  creatures  (cf.  West.  Conf. , 
ch.  iv.  2).  In  this  connection  the  profound 
thought  of  Maimoniles,  elaborated  by 
Tayler  Lewis  (vid.  Lange,  in  loco),  should 
not  be  overlooked,  that  tselem  is  the  specific, 
as  opposed  to  the  architectural,  form  of  a 
thing;  that  which  inwardly  makes  a  thing 
what  it  is,   as  opposed   to   that    external 


configuration,  which  it  actually  possesses.  If 
corresponds  to  the  min,  or  kind,  whi.-.h 
determines  species  among  animals.  It  is 
that  which  constitutes  the  genus  homo. 
And  let  them  have  dominion.  The  relation- 
ship of  man  to  the  rest  of  creation  is  now 
defined  to  be  one  of  rule  and  supremacy 
The  employment  of  the  plural  is  the  first 
indication  that  not  simply  an  individual  was 
about  to  be  called  into  existence,  but  a  race, 
comprising  many  individuals.  The  range  of 
man's  authority  is  further  specified,  and  the 
sphere  of  his  lordship  traced  by  an  enumera- 
tion in  ascending  order,  from  the  lowest  to 
the  highest,  of  the  subjects  placed  beneath 
his  sway.  His  dominion  should  extend  over 
the  fish  of  the  sea,  and  over  the  fowl  of  the 
air  (literally,  the  heavens),  and  over  the 
cattle  (the  behemah),  and  over  all  the  eai  th, 
and  over  every  creeping  thing  (remes)  that 
creepeth  upon  the  earth. 

Ver.  27. — So  (or  and)  God  created  (bara, 
as  in  vers.  1,  21,  q.  v.)  man  (literally,  the 
Adam  referred  to  in  ver.  26)  in  his  own 
image,  in  the  image  of  God  created  he  him; 
male  and  female  created  he  them.  The 
threefold  repetition  of  the  term  "  created  " 
should  be  observed  as  a  significant  negation 
of  modern  evolution  theories  as  to  the  descent 
of  man,  and  an  emphatic  proclamation  of  his 
Divine  original.  The  threefold  parallelism 
of  the  members  of  this  verse  is  likewise  sug- 
gestive, as  Umbreit,  Ewald,  and  Delitzsch 
remark,  of  the  jubilation  with  which  the 
writer  contemplates  the  crowning  work  of 
Elohim's  creative  word.  Murphy  notices  two 
stages  in  man's  creation,  the  general  fact 
being  stated  in  the  first  clause  of  this  tri- 
umphal song,'  and  the  two  particulars—  first 
his  relation  to  his  Maker,  and  second  his 
sexual  distinction — in  its  other  members.  In 
the  third  clause  Luther  sees  an  intimation 
"  that  the  woman  also  was  created  by  God, 
and  made  a  partaker  of  the  Divine  image,  and 
of  dominion  over  all." 

Ver.  28. — And  God  blessed  them.  Not  him, 
as  LXX.  As  on  the  introduction  of  animal 
life  the  Divine  Creator  conferred  on  the 
creatures  his  blessing,  so  when  the  first  pair 
of  human  beings  are  formed  they  are  likewise 
enriched  by  their  Creator's  benediction.  And 
God  said  unto  them,  Be  fruitful,  and  multi- 
ply. As  in  the  case  of  the  lower  creatures 
the  Divine  blessing  had  respect  in  the  first 
instance  to  tho  propagation  and  perpetuation 
of  the  species,  "which  blessing,"  says  Cal- 
vin, "may  be  regarded  as  the  source  from 
which  the  human  race  has  flowed,"  a  thought 
in  full  accord  with  Scripture  teaching  gener- 
ally (cf.  Ps.  exxvii.  3) ;  yet  by  making  one 
man  and  one  woman  an  important  distinc- 
tion was  drawn  between  men  and  beasts  ai 
regards  the  development  of  their  races  and 
the  multiplication  of  their  kind  (Mai.  ii.  7 J 


oa.  I.  84-81.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


31 


"  Certe  frasnnm  viris  et  mulieribus  non  laxa- 
vit,  ut  in  vagas  libidines  ruerent,  absque 
delecta  et  pudore ;  sed  a  sancto  castoque  con- 
jugio  incipiens,  desoendit  ad  generation  em  " 
(Calvin).  And  replenish  the  earth.  The 
new-created  race  was  intended  to  occupy  the 
earth.  How  far  during  the  first  age  of  the 
world  this  Divine  purpose  was  realised  con- 
tinues matter  of  debate  (ch.  x. ).  After  the 
Flood  the  confusion  of  tongues  effected  a  dis- 
persion of  the  nations  over  the  three  great 
continents  of  the  old  world.  At  the  present 
day  man  hasv  wandered  to  the  ends  of  the 
earth.  Yet  vast  realms  lie  unexplored,  wait- 
ing his  arrival.  This  clause  may  be  described 
as  the  colonists  charter.  And  subdue  it. 
The  commission  thus  received  was  to  utilise 
for  his  necessities  the  vast  resources  of  the 
earth ,  by  agricultural  and  mining  operations, 
by  geographical  research,  scientific  discovery, 
snd  mechanical  invention.  And  have  do- 
minion over  the  fish  of  the  sea,  &c.  /.  e. 
over  the  inhabitants  of  all  the  elements.  The 
Divine  intention  with  regard  to  his  creation 
was  thus  minutely  fulfilled  by  his  investiture 
with  supremacy  over  all  the  other  worksof  the 
Divine  hand.  Ps.  viii.  is  the  "  lyric  echo  "  of 
this  original  sovereignty  bestowed  on  man. 

Ver.  29. — Provision  for  the  sustenance  of 
the  newly-appointed  monarch  and  his  sub- 
jects is  next  made.  And  God  said,  leliold,  I 
have  given  you  every  herb  bearing  seed, 
which  is  upon  the  face  of  all  the  earth,  and 
every  tree,  in  the  which  is  the  fruit  of  a  tree 
yielding  seed  ;  to  you  it  shall  he  for  meat 
Of  the  three  classes  into  which  the  vegetable 
creation  was  divided,  grass,  herbs,  and  trees 
(ver.  12),  the  two  last  were  assigned  to  man 
for  food.  Macdonald  thinks  that  without 
this  express  conveyance  man  would  have  been 
warranted  to  partake  of  them  for  nourish- 
ment, warranted  by  the  necessities  of  his 
nature.  The  same  reasoning,  however,  would 
have  entitled  him  to  kill  the  lower  animals 
if  he  judged  them  useful  for  his  support 
Murphy  with  more  truth  remarks,  "Of  two 
things  proceeding  from  the  same  creative 
hand,  neither  has  any  original  or  inherent 
right  to  interfere  in  any  way  with  the  other. 
The  absolute  right  to  each  lies  in  the  Creator 
alone.  The  one,  it  is  true,  may  need  the 
other  to  support  its  life,  as  fruit  is  needful  to 
man ;  and,  therefore,  the  just  Creator  can- 
not make  one  creature  dependent  for  subsist- 
ence on  another  without  granting  to  it  the 
use  of  that  other.  But  this  is  a  matter  be- 
tween Creator  and  creature,  and  not  by  any 
means  between  creature  and  creature."  The 
primitive  charter  of  man's  common  property 
in  the  earth,  and  all  that  it  contains,  is  the 
present  section  of  this  ancient  document. 
Among  other  reasons  for  the  formal  convey- 
ance to  man  of  the  herbs  and  trees  may  be 
eot«d  a  desire  to  keep  him  mindful  of  his 


dependent  condition.  Though  lord  of  the 
creation,  he  was  yet  to  draw  the  means  of  his 
subsistence  from  the  creature  which  he  ruled. 
Whether  man  was  a  vegetarian  prior  to  the 
fall  is  debated.  On  the  one  hand  it  is  con- 
tended that  the  original  grant  does  not  form- 
ally exclude  the  animals,  and,  in  fact,  says 
nothing  about  man's  relation  to  the  animals 
(Macdonald) ;  that  we  cannot  positively 
affirm  that  man's  dominion  over  the  animals 
did  not  involve  the  use  of  them  for  food 
(Murphy) ;  and  that  as  men  offered  sacrifices 
from  their  flocks,  it  is  probable  they  ate  the 
flesh  of  the  victims  (Calvin).  On  the  other 
hand  it  is  argued  that  the  Divine  language 
cannot  be  held  as  importing  more  than  it 
really  says,  and  that  ch.  ix.  3  distinctly 
teaches  that  man's  right  to  the  animal  crea 
tion  dates  from  the  time  of  Noah  (Kalisch, 
Knobel,  Alford,  &c).  Almost  all  nations 
have  traditions  of  a  golden  age  of  innocence, 
when  men  abstained  from  killing  animals  (cf. 
Ovid,  '  Met.,'  i.  103—106).  Scripture  alone 
anticipates  a  time  when  such  shall  again  be 
a  characteristic  of  earth's  inhabitants  (Isa. 
xi.  7  ;  lxv.  25). 

Ver.  30. — And  to  every  least  of  the  earth, 
and  to  every  fowl  of  the  air,  and  to  every 
thing  that  oreepeth  upon  the  earth,  wherein 
there  is  life,  I  have  given  every  green  herb 
for  meat  The  first  of  the  three  classes  of 
plants,  grass,  was  assigned  to  the  animals  for 
food.  From  this  Delitzsch  infers  that  prior 
to  the  introduction  of  sin  the  animals  were 
not  predaceous.  The  geological  evidence  of 
the  existence  of  death  in  prehistoric  times  is, 
however,  too  powerful  to  be  resisted ;  and  the 
Biblical  record  itself  enumerates  among  the 
pre-adamic  animals  the  chayyah  of  the  field, 
which  clearly  belonged  to  the  carnivbra. 
Perhaps  the  most  that  can  be  safely  concluded 
from  the  language  is  "  that  it  indicates 
merely  the  general  fact  that  the  support  of 
the  whole  animal  kingdom  is  based  on  vege- 
tation "  (Dawson). 

Ver.  31.— And  God  saw  every  thing  that 
he  had  made,  and,  behold,  it  was  very  good. 
Literally,  lo !  good  very !  Not  simply  good, 
but  good  exceedingly.  It  is  not  man  alone 
that  God  surveys,  but  the  completed  cosmos, 
with  man  as  its  crown  and  glory,  decus  et 
tutamen.  "  It  is  not  merely  a  benediction 
which  he  utters,  but  an  expression  of  ad- 
miration, as  we  may  say  without  any  fear  of 
the  anthropomorphism  — Euge,  bene  pre- 
dare!"  (T.  Lewis).  And  the  evening  and 
the  morning  were  the  sixth  day.  It  seems 
unnecessary  to  add  that  this  day  corresponds 
to  the  Cainozoic  or  tertiary  era  of  geology, 
the  Palseontological  remains  of  which  suffi- 
ciently attest  the  truth  of  the  Divine  record 
in  asserting  that  animals  were  anterior  to 
man  in  their  appearance  on  the  earth,  and 
that  mnn  u  of  comparatively  recent  origi*. 


82 


TIIE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[oh.  i.  24— St 


The  alleged  evidence  of  prehistoric  man  is 
too  fragmentary  and  hypothetical  to  be  ac- 
cepted as  conclusive  ;  and  yet,  so  far  as  the 
cosmogonyof  the  present  chapteris  concerned, 
there  is  nothing  to  prevent  the  belief  that 
man  is  of  a  much  more  remote  antiquity  than 
6000  years.  As  of  the  other  days,  so  of  this 
the  Chaldean  tablets  preserve  an  interesting 
monument.  The  seventh  in  the  creation 
series,  of  which  a  fragment  was  discovered  in 
one  of  the  trenchw  at  Kouyunjik,  runs : — 

1.  When  the  gods  in  their  assembly  had 
created    .     .    .    , 


2.  Were  delightful  the  strong  monsters .  , 
8.  They  caused  to  be  living  creatures    .     . 

4.  Cattle  of  the  field,  beasts  of  the  field, 
and  creeping  things  of  the  field    .... 

5.  They  fixed  for  the  living  creatures    .    . 
6 Cattle  and  creeping  things 

of  the  city  they  fixed    .... 

9 And  the  god  Nin-si-ku  (the 

lord  of  noble  face)  caused  to  be  two  .  .  . 
in  which  it  is  not  difficult  to  trace  an  account 
of  the  creation  of  the  animal  kingdom,  and 
of  the  first  pair  of  hmnan  beings. 


HOMI1.ETICS. 

Ver.  27.— The  greatness  of  man.  I.  The  time  of  his  appiuiunce.  The  latest  of 
God's  works,  he  was  produced  towards  the  close  of  the  era  that  witnessed  the  intro- 
duction upon  our  globe  of  the  higher  animals.  -Tak:ng  either  view  of  the  length  of 
the  creative  day,  it  may  be  supposed  that  in  the  evening  the  animals  went  forth  "to 
roar  after  their  prey,  and  seek  their  meat  from  God,"  and  that  in  the  morning  man 
arose  upon  the  variegated  scene,  "  goin,^  forth  to  his  work  and  to  nis  labour  until  the 
evening"  (Ps.  civ.  20 — 23).  In  this  there  was  a  special  fitnett,  each  being  created 
at  the  time  most  appropriate  to  its  nature.  Man's  works  are  often  mistimed  ;  God'b 
never.  Likewise  in  man's  being  ushered  last  upon  the  scene  t.h*r«  was  peculiar  sig- 
nificance; it  was  a  virtual  proclamation  of  his  greatness. 

II.  The  solemnity  of  his  making,  which  was  preceded  by  a  Divine  consultation : 
"  Let  us  make  man,"  &c.  The  language  of — 1.  Resolution.  Ao  if ,  in  the  produc- 
tion of  the  other  creatures,  the  all- wise  Artificer  had  been  scarcely  conscious  of  an 
effort,  but  must  now  bestir  himself  to  the  performance  of  his  laot  aVid  greatest  work. 
i.  Forethought.  As  if  his  previous  makings  had  been,  in  comparison  wiLh  this,  oi 
so  subordinate  importance  that  they  might  be  executrd  instantaneously  and,  as  it 
were,  without  premeditation,  whereas  this  required  intelligent  arrangement  and  wise 
consideration  beforehand.  3.  Solicitude.  As  if  the  insignificance  of  these  othei 
labours  made  no  special  call  upon  his  personal  care  and  attention,  whereas  the  vast- 
nesB  of  the  present  undertaking  demanded  the  utmost  possible  watchfulness  and 
caution.  4.  Delight.  As  if  the  fashioning  and  beautifying  of  the  globe  and  its 
replenishing  with'sentient  beings,  unspeakably  glorious  as  these  achievements  were 
avoided  hitn  no  satisfaction  in  comparison  with  this  which  he  contemplated,  the 
creating  of  man  in  his  own  image  (cf.  Prov.  viii.  31). 

III.  The  dignity  of  his  nature.     "Created  after  God's  image  and  likeness," 
suggesting  ideas  of — 1.  Affinity,  or  kinship.     The  resplendent  universe,  with  its  suns 
and  systems,  its  aerial  canopy  and  green-mantled  ground,  its  Alps  and  Himalayas,  its 
oceans,  rivers,  streams,  was  only  as  plastic  clay  in  the  hands  of  a  skilful  potter. 
Even  the  innumerable  tribes  of  living  creatures  that  had  been  let  loose  to  swarm  the 
deep,  to  cleave  the  eky,  to  roam  the  earth,  were  animated  by  a  principle  of  being  that 
had  no  closer  connection  with  the  Deity  than  that  which  effect  has  with  cause  ;  but 
the  life  which  inspired  man  was  a  veritable  outcome  from  the  personality  of  God 
(Gen.  ii.  7).     Hence  man  was  something  higher  than  a  creature.     As  imago  Dei  be 
was  God's  eon  (Mai.  ii.  10;   Acts  xvii.  281.     %  Resemblance.    A  distinct  advance 
upon  the  previous  thought,  although  implied  in  it.     This  likeness  or  similitude  con- 
sisted in— (1)  Personality.      Light,  air,  land,  sea,  sun,  moon,  stars  were  "things." 
Plants,  fishes,  fowls,  animals  were  "lives,"  although  the  first  are  never  so  charac- 
terised in  Scripture.     Man  was  a  "person."     (2)  Purity.     The  image  of  absolute 
holiness  must  itself  be  immaculate.     In  this  sense  Christ  was  "  the  express  image  of 
God's  person  "  (Hcb.  i.  3) ;  and  though  man  is  not  now  a  complete  likeness  of  his 
Maker  fn  the  moral  purity  of  his  nature,  when  he  came  from  the  Creator's  hand  he 
wns.     Tt  is  the  object  of  Christ's  work  to  renew  in  man  the  image  of  his  Maker 
(Ephes  iv.  24).     (3)    Power.     That  man's  Creator  wan  »  God  of  power  was  implied 


CH.  I.  24-81.]  THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS.  »3 

in  his  name,  Elohim,  and  demonstrated  by  his  works.  Even  fallen  man  we  can 
perceive  to  be  possessed  of  many  elements  of  power  that  are  the  shadows  of  that 
which  resided  in  Elohim — the  power  of  self-government,  and  of  lordship  over  the 
creatures,  of  language  and  of  thought,  of  volition  and  of  action,  of  originating, 
at  least  in  a  secondary  sense,  and  of  combining  and  arranging.  In  the  first  man 
they  resided  in  perfection.  8.  Representation.  Man  was  created  in  God's 
image  that  he  might  be  a  visible  embodiment  of  the  Supreme  to  surrounding 
creatures.  "The  material  world,  with  its  objects  sublimely  great  or  meanly 
little,  as  we  judge  them  ;  its  atoms  of  dust,  its  orbs  of  fire ;  the  rock  that  stands 
by  the  seashore,  the  water  that  wears  it  away;  the  worm,  a  birth  of  yesterday, 
which  we  trample  underfoot ;  the  sheets  of  the  constellations  tli at  gleam  per- 
ennial overhead ;  the  aspiring  palm  tree  fixed  to  one  spot;  and  the  lions  that 
are  sent  out  free — these  incarnate  and  make  visible  all  of  God  their  natures  will 
admit.'1  Man  in  his  nature  was  intended  as  the  highest  representation  of  God 
that  was  possible  short  of  the  incarnation  of  the  Word  himself. 

IV.  The  grandeur  of  his  dominion.  Man  was  designed  to  be  God's  imaye  in 
respect  of  royalty  and  lordship ;  and  as  no  one  can  play  the  monarch  without  a 
kingdom  and  without  subjects,  God  gave  him  both  an  empire  and  a  people.  1. 
An  empire.  (1)  Of  wide  extent.  In  the  regal  charter  reaching  to  the  utmost 
bounds  of  this  terrestrial  sphere  (ver.  26).  (2)  Of  available  character.  Not  a 
region  that  was  practically  unconquerable,  but  every  square  inch  of  it  capable 
of  subjugation  and  occupation.  (8)  Of  vast  resources.  Everything  in  heaven, 
earth,  and  sea  was  placed  at  his  command.  (4)  Of  incalculable  value.  Nothing 
was  absolutely  useless,  and  many  things  were  precious  beyond  compare.  (5)  Of 
perfect  security.  God  had  given  it  to  him.  The  grant  was  absolute,  the  gift  was 
sure.  2.  A  people.  (1)  Numerous.  "Every  living  thing"  was  subjected  to  his 
sway.  (2).  Varied.  The  fishes,  fowls,  and  beasts  were  his  servants.  (3)  Sub- 
missive. As  yet  they  had  not  broken  loose  against  their  master.  (4)  Given. 
They  were  not  acquired  by  the  sword,  but  donated  by  their  Maker, 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  24 — 31. — The  sixth  day.  We  pass  from  the  sea  and  air  to  the  earth.  We 
are  being  led  to  man.    Notice — 

I.  The  preparation  is  complete.  Before  the  earth  receives  the  human 
being,  it  brings  forth  all  the  other  creatures,  and  God  sees  that  they  are  good — 
good  in  his  sight,  good  for  man. 

II.  The  purpose  of  the  work  is  benevolent.  Cattle,  creeping  thing,  beast 
of  the  earth.  So  man  would  see  them  distinguished — the  wild  from  the  domes- 
tic, the  creeping  from  the  roaming,  the  clean  from  the  unclean.  The  division 
itself  suggests  the  immense  variety  of  the  Divine  provision  for  man's  wants. 

ni.  The  incompleteness  of  the  earth  when  filled  with  the  lower  creatures  is  A 
testimony  TO  the  greatness  of  man's  spiritual  NATURE;  for  in  comparison 
with  the  animal  races  he  is  in  many  respects  inferior — in  strength,  swiftness, 
and  generally  in  the  powers  which  we  call  instinct.  Yet  his  appearance  is  the 
climax  of  the  earth's  creation.  "  Man  is  one  world,  and  hath  another  to  attend 
him."  Vegetable,  marine,  animal  life  generally,  the  whole  earth  filled  with 
what  God  "  saw  to  be  good,"  waits  for  the  rational  and  spiritual  creature  who 
shall  be  able  to  recognise  their  order  and  wield  dominion  over  them.  Steps  and 
stages  in  creation  lead  up  to  the  climax,  the  "  paragon  of  animals,"  the  god-like 
creature,  made  to  be  king  on  the  earth. — R. 

Vers.  26,  27.— The  creation  of  man.  Take  it— I.  As  a  revelation  of  God  in  his 
relation  to  man.    II.  As  a  revelation  of  man  to  himself. 

I.  God  in  relation  to  man.  1.  As  the  Father  as  well  as  Creator.  As  to  the  rest 
of  creation,  it  is  said,  "  Let  be,"  and  "  it  was."  As  to  man,  "  Let  us  make  in  our 
image."  Closely  kin  by  original  nature,  man  is  invited  to  Intercourse  with  the 
Divine.  2.  The  spirituality  of  God's  highest  creature  is  the  bond  of  union  and  fel- 
lowship-    The  language,  "  Let  us  make,"  suggests  the  conception  of  a  heavenly 

GENKSI3.  D 


84  THE  BOOK  OF  OENESia  [cm.  i.  24-31 

council  or  conference  preparatory  to  the  creation  of  man ;  and  the  new  descrip- 
tion of  the  being  to  be  created  points  to  the  introduction  of  a  new  order  of  life — 
the  spiritual  life,  as  above  the  vegetable  and  animal.  8.  God  intrusts  dominion 
and  authority  to  man  in  the  earth.  Man  holds  from  the  first  the  position  of  a 
vicegerent  for  God.  There  is  trust,  obedience,  responsibility,  recognition  of 
Divine  supremacy,  therefore  all  the  essential  elements  of  religion,  in  the  origi- 
nal constitution  and  appointment  of  our  nature  and  position  among  the  crea- 
tures. 4.  The  ultimate  destiny  of  man  is  included  in  the  account  of  his  begin- 
ning. He  who  made  him  in  his  image,  "one  of  us,"  will  call  him  upward  to  be 
among  the  super-earthly  beings  surrounding  the  throne  of  the  Highest.  The 
possession  of  a  Divine  image  is  the  pledge  of  eternal  approximation  to  the  Di- 
vine presence.     The  Father  calls  the  children  about  himself. 

II.  Man  revealed  to  himself.  "  The  image  and  likeness  of  God."  "What 
does  that  contain?  There  is  the  ideal  humanity.  1.  There  is  an  affinity  in  the 
intellectual  nature  between  the  human  and  the  Divine.  In  every  rational  being, 
though  feeble  in  amount  of  mental  capacity,  there  is  a  sense  of  eternal  necessary 
truth.  On  some  lines  the  creature  and  the  Creator  think  under  the  same  laws 
of  thought,  though  the  distance  be  immeasurable.  2.  Man  is  by  original  crea- 
tion absolutely  free  from  moral  taint.  He  is  therefore  a  fallen  being  in  so  far 
as  he  is  a  morally  imperfect  being.  He  was  made  like  God  in  purity,  innocence, 
goodness.  3.  The  resemblance  must  be  in  spirit  as  well  as  in  intellect  and  moral 
nature.  Man  was  made  to  be  the  companion  of  God  and  angels,  therefore  there 
is  in  his  earthly  existence,  a  super-earthly,  spiritual  nature  which  must  be  ulti- 
mately revealed.  4.  Place  and  vocation  are  assigned  to  man  on  earth,  and  that 
in  immediate  connection  with  his  likeness  to  God.  He  is  ruler  here  that  he 
may  be  prepared  for  higher  rule  elsewhere.  He  is  put  in  his  rank  among  God's 
creatures  that  he  may  see  himself  on  the  ascent  to  God.  Man  bel  ongs  to  two 
worlds.  He  is  like  God,  and  yet  he  is  male  and  female,  like  the  lower  animals. 
He  is  blessed  as  other  creatures  with  productive  power  to  fill  the  earth,  but  he 
is  blessed  for  the  sake  of  his  special  vocation,  to  subdue  the  earth,  not  for  him- 
self, but  for  God.  5.  Here  is  the  end  of  all  our  endeavour  and  desire — to  be 
perfect  men  by  being  like  God.  Let  us  be  thankful  that  there  is  a  God-man  in 
whom  we  are  able  to  find  our  ideal  realised.  We  grow  up  into  him  who  is  our 
Head.  We  see  Jesus  crowned  with  glory  and  honour.  When  all  things  are  put 
under  him,  man  will  see  the  original  perfection  of  his  creation  restored.  6. 
Man  is  taught  that  he  need  not  leave  the  earthly  sphere  to  be  like  God.  There 
has  been  a  grand  preparation  of  his  habitation.  From  a  mere  chaotic  mass  the 
earth  has  by  progressive  stages  reached  a  state  when  it  can  become  the  scene 
of  a  great  moral  experiment  for  man's  instruction.  The  god-like  is  to  rule  over 
all  other  creatures,  that  he  may  learn  the  superiority  of  the  spiritual.  Heavenly 
life,  communion,  society,  and  all  that  is  included  in  the  fellowship  of  man  with 
God,  may  be  developed  in  the  condition  of  earth.  Grievous  error  in  early 
Church  and  Eastern  philosophy — confusion  of.  the  material  and  evil.  Purity 
does  not  require  an  immaterial  mode  of  existence.  Perfection  of  man  is  perfec- 
tion of  his  dominion  over  earthly  conditions,  matter  in  subjection  to  spirit.  Ab- 
normal methods,  asceticism,  self-crucifixion,  mere  violence  to  original  consti- 
tution of  man.  The  "second  Adam"  overcame  the  world  not  by  forsaking  it, 
but  by  being  in  it,  and  yet  not  of  it.  7.  God's  commandments  to  man  are  com- 
mandments  of  Fatherly  love.  "Behold,  I  have  given  you,"  &c.  He  not  only 
appoints  the  service,  but  he  provides  the  sustenance.  "  Seek  ye  first  the  king- 
dom of'  God,"  &c.  Here  is  the  union  of  creative  power  and  providential  good- 
ness. We  are  blessed  in  an  earthly  life  just  as  we  take  it  from  the  hand  of  God 
as  a  trust  to  be  fulfilled  for  him.  And  in  that  obedience  and  dependence  we 
shall  best  be  able  to  reach  the  ideal  humanity.  The  fallen  world  has  been  de- 
grading man,  physically,  morally,  spiritually ;  he  has  been  less  and  less  what 
God  made  him  to  be.  But  he  who  has  come  to  restore  the  kingdom  of  God  has 
come  to  uplift  man  and  fill  the  earth  with  blessedness. — R. 

Ter.  31. — Perfection.  The  first  chapter  closes  with  a  review  of  the  whole 
work  of  the  six  days.    God  saw  it.    Behold,  it  was  very  good  1 

L  The  satisfaction  was  in  the  completion  of  the  earthly  order  in  man,  the  high- 
est earthly  being.  For  God's  "  good"  is  not,  like  man's  "  good,"  a  compromise,  too 


ch.  n.  1—8.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


86 


often,  between  the  really  good  and  the  really  evil,  but  the  attainment  of  the 
highest — the  fulfilment  of  his  Divine  idea,  the  top-stone  placed  upon  the  temple 
with  shoutings :  "  Grace,  grace  unto  it." 
II.  "  The  evening  and  the  morning  were  the  sixth  day."    Out  of  the  night  op 

THE  INFINITE  PAST  CAME  FORTH  THE  DAWN  OF  THE  INTELLECTUAL  AND  SPIRITUAL 

world.  And  when  God  saw  that,  then  he  said,  It  is  very  good.  So  let  us  set 
our  faces  towards  that  light  of  heaven  on  earth,  the  day  of  Divine  revelation, 
Divine  intercourse  with  man,  the  pure  and  perfect  bliss  of  an  everlasting  para- 
dise, in  which  God  and  man  shall  find  unbroken  rest  and  joy  in  one  another. — R. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  n. 


Ver.  1. — Thus  the  heavens  and  the  earth 
were  finished.  Literally,  And  finished  were 
the  heavens  and  the  earth,  the  emphatic 
position  being  occupied  by  the  verb.  With 
the  creation  of  man  upon  the  sixth  day  the 
Divine  Artificer's  labours  were  brought  to  a 
termination,  and  his  work  to  a  completion. 
The  two  ideas  of  cessation  and  perfection 
are  embraced  in  the  import  of  calah.  Not 
simply  had  Elohim  paused  in  his  activity, 
but  the  Divine  idea  of  his  universe  had  been 
realised.  The  finished  world  was  a  cosmos, 
arranged,  ornamented,  and  filled  with  organ- 
ised, sentient,  and  rational  beings,  with 
plants,  animals,  and  man ;  and  now  the  re- 
spendent  fabric  shone  before  him  a  mag- 
nificent success — "  lo !  very  good."  This 
appears  to  be  by  no  means  obscurely  hinted 
at  in  the  appended  clause,  and  all  the  host 
of  them,  which  suggests  the  picture  of  a 
military  armament  arranged  in  marching 
order.  Tsebaam,  derived  from  tsaba,  to  go 
forth  as  a  soldier  (Gesenius),  to  join  together 
for  service  (Fiirst),  and  applied  to  the  angels 
(c-TpctTia  ovpdvios,  Luke  ii.  13.  1  Kings  xxii. 
19;  2  Chron.  xviii.  18;  Ps.  cxlviii.  2)  and 
to  the  celestial  bodies  ( Suvapeis  t<ov  o  vpav  wv, 
Matt.  xxiv.  29.  Isa.  xxxiv.  4 ;  xl.  26 ; 
Dan.  viii.  10),  here  includes,  by  Zeugnui, 
the  material  heavens  and  earth  with  the 
angelic  and  human  races  (ef.  Neh.  ix.  6).  If 
the  primary  signification  of  the  root  be  splen- 
dour, glory,  like  tsavah,  to  come  forth  or 
shine  out  as  a  star  (T.  Lewis),  then  will  the 
LXX.  and  the  Vulgate  be  correct  in  translat- 
ing irds  o  k6ct|ios  cujtojv  and  omnis  ornatus 
eorum,  the  conception  being  that  when  the 
heavens  and  the  earth  were  completed  they 
were  a  brilliant  array. 

Ver.  2. — And  on  the  seventh  day  God 
(Elohim)  ended  his  work  which  he  had 
made.  To  avert  the  possibility  of  imagining 
that  any  portion  of  the  seventh  day  was 
consumed  in  working,  which  the  English 
version  seems  to  favour,  the  LXX.,  the 
Samaritan,  and  Syriac  versions  insert  the 
sixth  day  in  the  text  instead  of  the  seventh. 
Calvin,  Drusius,  Le  Clerc,  Rosenmuller,  and 


Kalisch  translate  had  finished.  Others  un- 
derstand the  sense  to  be  declared  the  work  to 
be  finished,  while  Baumgarten  and  Delitzsch 
regard  the  resting  as  included  in  the  com- 
pletion of  the  work,  and  Von  Bohlen  thinks 
"  the  language  is  not  quite  precise."  But 
calah  followed  by  min  signifies  to  cease 
from  prosecuting  any  work  (Exod.  xxxiv.  33  ; 
1  Sam.  x.  13  ;  Ezek.  xliii.  23),  and  this  was, 
negatively,  the  aspect  of  that  sabbatic  rest 
into  which  the  Creator  entered.  And  he 
resteth  on  the  seventh  day  from  all  his  work 
which  he  had  made.  Shavath,  the  primary 
idea  of  which  is  to  sit  still,  depicts  Elohim 
as  desisting  from  his  creative  labours,  and 
assuming  a  posture  of  quiescent  repose.  The 
expression  is  a  pure  anthropomorphism.  "  He 
who  f ainteth  not,  neither  is  weary  "  (Isa.  xl. 
28),  can  be  conceived  of  neither  as  resting 
nor  as  needing  rest  through  either  exhaustion 
or  fatigue.  Cessation  from  previous  occupa- 
tion is  all  that  is  implied  in  the  figure,  and 
is  quite  compatible  with  continuous  activity 
in  other  directions.  John  v.  17  represents  the 
Father  as  working  from  that  period  onward 
in  the  preservation  and  redemption  of  that 
world  which  by  his  preceding  labours  he  had 
created  and  made. 

Ver.  3. — And  God  blessed  the  seventh  day. 
The  blessing  (cf.  ch.  i.  22,  28)  of  the  seventh 
day  implied — 1.  That  it  was  thereby  declared 
to  be  the  special  object  of  the  Divine  favour. 
2.  That  it  was  thenceforth  to  be  a  day  or 
epoch  of  blessing  for  his  creation.  And — 3. 
That  it  was  to  be  invested  with  a  permanence 
which  did  not  belong  to  the  other  six  days — 
every  one  of  which  passed  away  and  gave 
place  to  a  successor.  And  sanctified  it.  Liter- 
ally, declared  it  holy,  or  set  it  apart  for  holy 
purposes.  As  afterwards  Mount  Sinai  was 
sanctified  (Exod.  xix.  23),  or,  for  the  time 
being,  invested  with  a  sacred  character  as  the 
residence  of  God;  and  Aaron  and  his  sons 
were  sanctified,  or  consecrated  to  the  priestly 
office  (Exod.  xxix.  44) ;  and  the  year  of  Jubilee 
was  sanctified,  or  devoted  to  the  purposes  of 
religion  (Levit.  xxv.  10),  so  here  was  the 
seventh  day  sanctified,  or  instituted  in  the 
interests  of  holiness,  and  as  such  proclaimed 
to  be  a  holy  day.  Because  that  in  it  he  had 
P  2 


86 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[CH.  n.  1—8. 


rested  from  all  Ms  work  which  Go3  had 
created  and  made.  Literally,  created  to  make, 
the  exact  import  of  which  has  been  variously 
explained.  The  "  <Sv  r[p£aTO  o,  8e6s  iroi/rjerai" 
of  the  LXX.  is  obviously  incorrect.  Calvin, 
Ainsworth,  Bush,  et  alii  take  the  second  verb 
emphatice,  as  intensifying  the  action  of  the 
first,  and  conveying  the  idea  of  a  perfect 
creation.  Ealisch,  Alforrl,  and  others  explain 
the  second  as  epexegetic  of  the  first,  as  in 
the  similar  phrases,  "  spoke,  saying,  literally, 
spoke  to  speak"  (Exod.  vi.  10),  and  "la- 
boured to  do"  (Eccles.  ii.  11).  Onkelos,  the 
Vulgate  (quod  Deus  creavit  ut  faceret), 
Calvin,  Tayler  Lewis,  &c,  understand  the 
infinitive  in  a  telic  sense,  as  expressive  of 
the  purpose  for  which  the  heavens  and  the 
earth  were  at  first  created,  viz.,  that  by  the 
six  days'  work  they  might  be  fashioned  into 
a  cosmos.  It  has  been  observed  that  the 
usual  concluding  formula  is  not  appended  to 
the  record  of  the  seventh  day,  and  the  reason 
has  perhaps  been  declared  by  Augustine: 
"  Dies  autem  Septimus  sine  vespera  est,  nee 
habet  oeeasum,  quia  sanctificasti  eum  ad 
permansionem  sempiternam "  ('  Confess.,' 
xili.  86).  But  now  what  was  this  seventh 
day  which  received  Elohim's  benediction? 
On  the  principle  of  interpretation  applied 
to  the  creative  days,  this  must  be  regarded 
as  a  period  of  indefinite  duration,  corre- 
sponding to  the  human  era  of  both  Scrip- 
ture and  geology.  But  other  Scriptures 
(Exod.  xx.  8;  xxiii.  12;  Deut.  v.  12,  &c.) 
show  that  the  Hebrews  were  enjoined  by  God 
to  observe  a  seventh  day  rest  in  imitation  of 
himself.  There  are  also  indications  that 
sabbatic  observance  was  not  unknown  to  the 
patriarchs  (ch.  xxix.  27,  28),  to  the  ante- 
diluvians (ch.  viii.  6 — 12),  and  to  Cain  and 
Abel  (ch.  iv.  3).  Profane  history  likewise 
vouches  for  the  veracity  of  the  statement  of 
Josephus,  that  "  there  is  not  any  city  of  the 
Grecians,  nor  any  of  the  barbarians,  nor  any 
nation  whatsoever,  whither  our  custom  of  rest- 
ing on  the  seventh  day  hath  not  come  "  ('  Con- 
tra Apionem,'  ii.  40).  The  ancient  Persians, 
Indians,  and  Germans  esteemed  the  number 
eeven  as  sacred.  By  the  Greeks  and  Phenicians 
a  sacred  character  was  ascribed  to  the  seventh 
day.  The  Assyrians,  Babylonians,  Egyptians, 
and  other  nations  of  antiquity  were  ac- 
quainted with  the  hebdomadal  division  of 
time.  Travellers  have  detected  traces  of  it 
among  the  African  and  American  aborigines. 
To  account  for  its  existence  among  nations  so 
widely  apart,  both  chronologically  and  geo- 
graphically, recourse  has  been  had  to  some 
violent  hypotheses ;  as,  e.  g.,  to  the  number 
of  the  primary  planets  known  to  the  ancients 
(Humboldt),  the  division  of  a  lunar  month 
into  four  nearly  equal  periods  of  seven  days 
(Ideler,  Baden  Powell,  &c),  Jewish  example 
(Josephus).     Its  true  genesis,  however,  must 


be  sought  for  in  the  primitive  observance  of  a 
seventh  day  rest  in  accordance  with  Divine 
appointment.  Precisely  as  we  reason  that 
the  early  and  widespead  prevalence  of  sacri- 
fice can  only  be  explained  by  an  authoritative 
revelation  to  the  first  parents  of  the  human 
family  of  such  a  mode  of  worship,  so  do  we 
conclude  that  a  seventh  day  sabbath  must 
have  been  prescribed  to  man  in  Eden.  The 
question  then  arises,  Is  this  sabbath  also  re- 
ferred to  in  the  Mosaic  record  of  the  seventh 
day?  The  popular  belief  is  that  the  institu- 
tion of  the  weekly  sabbath  alone  is  the  sub- 
ject spoken  of  in  the  opening  verses  of  the 
present  chapter ;  and  the  language  of  Exod. 
xx.  11  may  at  first  sight  appear  to  warrant 
this  conclusion.  A  more  careful  consideration 
of  the  phraseology  employed  by  Moses,  how- 
ever, shows  that  in  the  mind  of  the  Hebrew 
lawgiver  there  existed  a  distinction  between 
God's  seventh  day  and  man's  sabbath,  and 
that,  instead  of  identifying  the  two,  he  meant 
to  teach  that  the  first  was  the  reason  of  the 
second ;  as  thus — "  In  six  days  God  made 
....  and  rested  on  the  seventh  day ;  where- 
fore God  blessed  the  (weekly)  sabbath  day, 
and  hallowed  it."  Here  it  is  commonly  as- 
sumed that  the  words  are  exactly  parallel  to 
those  in  ch.  ii.  3,  and  that  the  sabbath  in 
Exodus  corresponds  to  the  seventh  day  of 
Genesis.  But  this  is  open  to  debate.  The 
seventh  day  which  God  blessed  in  Eden  was 
the  first  day  of  human  life,  and  not  the 
seventh  day ;  and  it  is  certain  that  God  did 
not  rest  from  his  labours  on  man's  seventh 
day,  but  on  man's  first.  We  feel  inclined 
then  to  hold  with  Luther  that  in  Gen.  ii.  3 
Moses  says  nothing  about  man's  day,  and 
that  the  seventh  day  which  received  the 
Divine  benediction  was  God's  own  great 
asonian  period  of  sabbatic  rest.  At  the 
-  same  time,  for  the  reasons  above  specified, 
believing  that  a  weekly  sabbath  was  pre- 
scribed to  man  from  the  beginning,  we  have 
no  difficulty  in  assenting  to  the  words  of 
Tayler  Lewis :  "  '  And  God  blessed  the  seventh 
day.'  Which  seventh  day,  the  greater  or 
the  less,  the  Divine  or  the  human,  the  Eeonian 
or  the  astronomical  ?  Both,  is  the  easy  an- 
swer ;  both,  as  commencing  at  the  same  time, 
so  far  as  the  one  connects  with  astrono- 
mical time ;  both,  as  the  greater  including  the 
less ;  both,  as  being  (the  one  as  represented, 
the  other  as  typically  representing)  the  same 
in  essence  and  idea."  It  does  not  appear 
necessary  to  refute  the  idea  that  the  weekly 
sabbath  had  no  existence  till  the  giving  of 
the  law,  and  that  it  is  only  here  proleptically 
referred  to  by  Moses. 

In  addition  to  the  above-mentioned  his- 
torical testimonies  to  the  antiquity  of  the 
Sabbath,  the  Fifth  Tablet  in  the  Chaldean 
Creation  Series,  after  referring  to  the  fourth 
day's  work,  proceeds : — 


CH.  II.    1—3.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


87 


"  On  the  seventh  day  he  appointed  a  holy  day, 
And  to  cease  from  all  business  he  com- 
manded. 
Then  arose  the  sun  in  the  horizon  of  heaven 
in  (glory)." 


thus  apparently  affirming  that,  in  the  opinion 
of  the  early  Babylonians,  the  institution  of 
the  sabbath  was  coeval  with  the  creation. 
(Vid.  'Records  of  the  Past,'  vol.  ix.  p. 
117.) 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  8.  The  two  sabbaths :  the  Divine  and  the  human.  I.  The  sabbath  of 
God.  A  period  of — 1.  Cessation  from,  toil,  or  discontinuance  of  those  world- 
making  operations  which  had  occupied  the  six  preceding-  days  (Heb.  iv.  4). 
Never  since  the  close  of  the  creative  week  has  God  interfered  to  fundamentally 
rearrange  the  material  structure  of  the  globe.  The  Deluge  produced  no  altera- 
tion on  the  constitution  of  nature.  Nor  is  there  evidence  that  any  new  species 
have  been  added  to  its  living  creatures.  2.  Holy  delight.  On  the  seventh  day 
Elohim  rested  and  was  "  refreshed  "  (Exod.  xxxi.  17);  which  refreshment  con- 
sisted partly  in  the  satisfaction  he  experienced  in  beholding,  the  cosmos — a  satis- 
faction prefigured  and  anticipated  by  the  solemn  pauses  intervening  at  the  end 
of  each  creative  day,  accompanied  by  the  "good,"  "lot  verygood,"  of  Divine 
approbation ;  and  partly  in  the  pleasure  with  which  he  contemplated  the  peculiar 
work  of  blessing  his  creation  which  lay  before  him,  a  work  which  also  had  its 
foreshadowings  in  the  benedictions  pronounced  on  the  living  creatures  of  the 
fifth  day,  and  on  man  on  the  sixth.  3.  Beneficent  activity.  Even  man,  unless 
where  his  intellectual  and  moral  faculties  are  dormant,  finds  it  difficult  to  rest  in 
indolence  and  inactivity.  Absence  of  motion,  with  complete  negation  of  effort, 
may  constitute  the  refreshment  of  the  physical  system.  The  mind  seeks  its  rest 
in  change  of  occupation.  Still  less  can  the  supreme  Intelligence,  who  is  pure 
Spirit,  rest  in  absolute  inaction  ;  only  the  Divine  energy  is  now  directed  towards 
the  happiness  of  his  creatures  (Ps.  cxlv.  9).  Having  finished  his  creative  la- 
bours, what  else  could  Elohim  do  but  outpour  his  own  blessedness  upon  his 
creatures,  in  proportion  to  their  capacities  to  receive  it?  His  nature  as  God 
necessitated  such  communication  of  good  to  his  creatures  (Ps.  xxxiv.  8 ;  James 
i.  5,  17).  The  capacities  of  his  creatures  for  such  blessing  required  it.  Hence 
God's  rest  may  be  said  to  have  been  man's  birthright.  He  was  created  in  that 
rest,  as  the  sphere  of  his  existence.  4.  Continuous  duration.  That  which  se- 
cures its  perpetuity  is  the  Divine  resolution  to  bless  it,  i.  e.  constitute  it  an  era 
of  blessing  for  man,  and  in  particular  to  sanctify  it,  or  devote  it  to  the  interests 
of  holiness.  And  in  this  Divine  determination  lies  the  pledge  of  man's  salva- 
tion. Without  it  God's  rest  might  have  been  broken  into  by  man's  sin,  and  the 
era  of  blessing  ended.  But,  because  of  it,  man's  sin  could  not  change  the  charac- 
ter of  God's  seventh  day,  so  as  to  prevent  it  from  dropping  down  gifts  and  exer- 
cising holy  influences  on  the  creature  for  whose  sake  it  was  appointed.  The 
security  of  the  world  as  a  cosmos  may  also  be  said  to  be  involved  in  the  perma- 
nence of  God's  sabbath.  So  long  as  it  continues  nothing  shall  occur  to  resolve 
the  present  goodly  framework  of  this  globe  into  another  lightless,  formless, 
lifeless  chaos,  at  least  until  the  Divine  purpose  with  the  human  race  has  been 
fulfilled. 

II.  The  sabbath  op  man.  1.  Of  Divine  institution  (Exod.  xx.  8 ;  Levit.  xix. 
30 ;  Ps.  cxviii.  24).  That  God  had  a  right  to  enact  a  weekly  sabbath  for  man  is 
implied  in  his  relation  to  man  as  Creator  and  Lawgiver.  For  man,  there- 
fore, to  withhold  the  seventh  portion  of  his  time  is  to  be  guilty  of  disobedi- 
ence against  God  as  a  moral  Governor,  ingratitude  towards  God  as  Creator 
and  Preserver,  robbery  of  God  as  the  original  Proprietor  of  both  man's  powers 
and  time's  days.  As  an  institution  of  God's  appointing,  the  sabbath  deserves 
our  honour  and  esteem.  To  neglect  to  render  this  God  counts  a  sin  (Isa.  lviii. 
13).  2.  Of  sacred  character.  Among  the  Israelites  its  sanctity  was  to  be  recog- 
nised by  abstinence  from  bodily  labour  (Exod.  xx.  10 ;  xxxiv.  21,  &c.)  and  holy 
convocations  (Levit.  xxiii.  3.)  That  this  was  the  manner  of  its  observance  prior 
to  the  giving  of  the  law  may  be  judged  from  the  regulations  concerning  the 
manna  (Exod.  xvi.  22).  That  from  the  beginning  it  was  a  day  of  rest  and  re- 
ligions worship  may  be  reasonably  inferred.  That  it  was  so  used  by  Christ  and 
his  apostles  the  Gospels  attest  (Luke  iv.  16).    That  the  same  character  was  held 


88  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  [CH.  n.  1—3. 

to  attach  to  the  first  day  of  the  week  after  Christ's  resurrection  may  be  deduced 
from  the  practice  of  the  apostolic  Church  (Acts  xx.  7).  The  sanctity  of  the  sab- 
bath may  be  profaned,  positively,  "by  prosecuting  one's  ordinary  labours  in  its 
hours  (Isa.  Iviii.  13 ;  Jer.  xvii.  24) ;  negatively,  by  neglecting-  to  devote  them  to  Di- 
vine worship  and  spiritual  improvement  (Ezek.  xliv.  24).  Christianity  has  not 
obliterated  the  distinction  between  the  sabbath  and  the  other  days  of  the  week  j 
not  even  by  elevating  them  to  the  position  of  holy  days.  An  attempt  to  equal- 
ise the  seven  days  always  results  in  the  degradation  of  the  seventh,  never  in  the 
elevation  of  the  other  six.  3.  Of  beneficent  design  (Mark  ii.  27).  The  sabbath  is 
adapted  to  the  wants  of  man  physically,  intellectually,  socially,  politically.  In- 
numerable facts  and  testimonies  establish  the  beneficial  influence  of  a  seventh 
day's  rest  from  toil  upon  the  manual  labourer,  the  professional  thinker,  the 
social  fabric,  the  body  politic,  in  respect  of  health,  wealth,  strength,  happiness. 
It  is,  however,  chiefly  man's  elevation  as  a  religious  being  at  which  it  aims.  In 
the  paradisaiacal  state  it  was  designed  to  hedge  him  round  and,  if  possible,  pre- 
vent his  fall ;  since  the  tragedy  in  Eden  it  has  been  seeking1  his  reinstatement  in 
that  purity  from  which  he  fell.  4.  Of  permanent  obligation.  Implied  in  the 
terms  of  its  institution,  its  permanence  would  not  be  affected  by  the  abolition  of 
the  Decalogue.  The  Decalogue  presupposed  its  previous  appointment.  Chris- 
tianity takes  it  up,  just  as  Judaism  took  it  up,  as  one  of  God's  existing  ordi- 
nances for  the  good  of  man,  and  seeks  through  it  to  bring  its  higher  influences 
to  bear  on  man,  just  as  Judaism  sought,  through  it,  to  operate  with  its  inferior 
agency.  Till  it  merges  in  the  rest  of  which  it  is  a  shadow  by  the  accomplish- 
ment of  its  grand  design,  it  must  abide. 

in.  The  connection  of  the  two.  God's  rest  is — 1.  The  reason  of  man's  sab- 
bath. The  Almighty  could  have  no  higher  reason  for  enjoining  a  seventh  day's 
rest  upon  his  creature  than  that  by  so  resting  that  creature  would  be  like  him- 
self. 2.  The  pattern  of  man's  sabbath.  As  God  worked  through  six  of  his  days 
and  rested  on  the  seventh,  so  should  man  toil  through  six  of  his  days  and  rest 
on  the  seventh.  As  God  did  all  his  work  in  the  six  creative  days,  so  should  all 
man's  labour  be  performed  in  the  six  days  of  the  week.  As  God  employs  his  rest 
in  contemplation  of  his  finished  work  and  in  blessing  his  creature  man,  so 
should  man  devote  his  sabbath  to  pious  meditation  on  his  past  life  and  to  a  be- 
lieving reception  of  God's  gifts  of  grace  and  salvation.  3.  The  life  of  man's 
sabbath.  Whatever  blessing  comes  to  man  on  his  weekly  day  of  rest  has  its 
primal  fountain  in  the  rest  of  God.  As  man  himself  is  God's  image,  so  is  man's 
sabbath  the  image  of  God's  rest ;  and  as  man  lives  and  moves  and  has  his  being 
in  God,  so  does  man's  sabbath  live  and  move  and  have  its  being  in  God's  rest. 
4.  The  end  of  man's  sabbath.  The  reinstatement  of  man  in  God's  rest  is  the 
purpose  at  which  man's  sabbath  aims,  the  goal  towards  which  it  is  tending. 
God's  rest  remains  on  high  (Heb.  iv.  9),  drawing  men  towards  it.  Man's  weekly- 
sabbath  will  ultimately  lose  itself  in  God's  eternal  rest. 

HOMILEES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — Rest  and  Light.  The  finished  heavens  and  earth  and  their  host  pre- 
pare the  day  of  rest.   God  ended  his  work  as  an  interchange  of  darkness  and  light. 

I.  The  rest  of  the  Sabbath  is  not  inaction,  but  the  cessation  from  the 
lower  order  of  work  for  thk  hiqher.  The  idea  of  the  first  proclamation  seems 
to  be  that  creation  was  perfectly  adjusted  through  the  six  days  into  a  settled 
harmony  which  puts  heaven  and  earth  in  their  abiding  relation  to  one  another. 

II.  Then  there  is  no  more  said  of  evening  and  morning.  The  seventh  day  is 
only  light.  God's  rest  is  complacency  in  his  works.  The  blessing  on  the  seventh 
day  which  hallowed  it  is  the  blessing  on  that  which  the  day  represents — perfect  peace 
between  heaven  and  earth,  God  satisfied  in  his  creation,  and  inviting  his  intelligent 
creatures  to  "  enter  into  his  rest,"  by  communion  with  him.  It  seems  quite  unneces- 
sary to  vindicate  such  a  sanctification  of  the  seventh  day  from  the  insinuations  of 
critics  that  it  was  a  late  edition  made  by  the  Jewish  legislator  to  support  the  fourth 
commandment.  In  that  case  the  whole  cosmogony  must  be  renounced.  Such  an 
observance  of  a  day  of  rest  seems  a  natural  antecedent  to  the  patriarchal  as  well  as 
the  Mosaic  economy.    We  have  already  intimated  that  the  whole  account  of  creation 


OH.  n.  4—^7. 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


89 


is  placed  at  the  commencement  of  revelation  because  it  has  a  bearing  upon  the 
positive  ordinances  of  religion.  It  is  not  either  a  scientific  or  poetic  sketch  of  the 
universe  ;  it  is  the  broad,  fundamental  outline  of  a  system  of  religious  truth  con- 
nected with  a  body  of  Divine  commandments.  The  sabbath  is  thus  described  in  its 
original  breadth.  The  sanctification  of  it  is — 1.  Negative.  It  is  separation  from  the 
lower  conditions  of  work,  which  in  the  case  of  man  are  the  characteristics  of  days 
which  are  sinful  days — days  of  toil  and  conflict,  of  darkness  and  light  mingled. 
2.  Positive.  It  is  the  restful  enjoyment  of  a  higher  life,  a  life  which  is  not  labour- 
ing after  emancipation  from  bondage,  but  perfect  with  a  glorious  liberty  ;  the  true 
day,  "sacred,  high,  eternal,  noon,"  God  and  man  rejoicing  in  one  another,  the 
creature  reflecting  the  glory  of  the  Creator. — R. 

§  2.  The  Generations  of  the  Heavens  and  op  the  Earth  (ch.  u.  4 — rv.  26). 

EXPOSITION. 


The  subject  handled  in  the  present  section  is 
the  primeval  history  of  man  in  his  paradisa- 
ical state  of  innocence,  his  temptation  and 
fall,  and  his  subsequent  development,  in  two 
diverging  lines,  of  faith  and  unbelief,  holi- 
ness and  sin.  On  the  ground  of  certain 
obvious,  well-defined,  and  readily-explained 
characteristics  which  distinguish  this  from 
the  preceding  portion  of  the  narrative,  it  is 
usual  with  the  higher  criticism  to  allege 
diversity  of  authorship  ;  and,  indeed,  these 
same  characteristics,  magnified  by  misapplied 
ingenuity  into  insoluble  contradictions,  are 
the  chief  buttress  of  the  documentary  hypo- 
thesis of  Astruc,  Hupfeld,  Tuch,  Ewald,  and 
others.  Now  the  hypothesis  that  Moses,  in 
the  composition  of  the  Pentateuch,  and  of 
this  Book  of  Origins  in  particular,  made  use 
of  existing  documents  that  may  have  de- 
scended from  a  remote  antiquity  is,  *  priori, 
neither  incredible  nor  impossible ;  but,  on 
the  contrary,  is  extremely  probable,  and  may 
be  held  as  admitted ;  only  the  alleged  pecu- 
liarities of  the  different  portions  of  the  narra- 
tive do  not  justify  the  reckless  confidence 
with  which  it  has  been  resolved  by  Stahelin, 
Bleek,  De  Wette,  Knobel,  Ewald,  and  David- 
son into  its  so-called  original  fragments ; 
and,  in  the  case  of  Ewald,  primordial  atoms 
(vid.  Introd.  p.  ii).  The  occurrence  of  the 
name  Jehovah  JSlohim,  instead  of  simply 
Elohim,  as  in  the  preceding  section,  is  the 
chief  peculiarity  of  the  present  portion  of 
the  narrative,  so  far  as  style  and  language 
are  concerned ;  its  alleged  irreconcilable 
differences  in  subject-matter  are  skilfully 
and  succinctly  put  by-  Kalisch.  "In  the 
first  cosmogony  vegetation   is  immediately 


produced  by  the  will  of  God ;  in  the  second 
its  existence  is  made  dependent  on  rain  and 
mists  and  the  agricultural  labours :  in  the 
first  the  earth  emerges  from  the  waters,  and 
is,  therefore,  saturated  with  moisture ;  in  the 
second  it  appears  dry,  sterile,  and  sandy: 
in  the  first  man  and  his  wife  are  created 
together ;  in  the  second  the  wife  is  formed 
later,  and  from  a  part  of  man ;  in  tho  former 
man  bears  the  image  of  God,  and  is  made 
ruler  of  the  whole  earth ;  in  the  latter  his 
earth-formed  body  is  only  animated  by  the 
breath  of  life,  and  he  is  placed  in  Eden  to 
cultivate  and  to  guard  it:  in  the  former 
the  birds  and  beasts  are  created  before  man; 
in  the  latter  man  before  birds  and  beasts." 
For  a  reply  to  these  "  insoluble  contra- 
dictions," which,  though  "  too  obvious  to 
be  overlooked  or  denied,"  are  mostly,  if  not 
solely,  due  to  a  false  exegesis  and  a  mis- 
apprehension of  the  guiding  purpose  of  the 
writer,  see  the  Exposition  following,  which 
attempts  no  "artificial  solution"  such  as 
Kalisch  deprecates,  and  proposes  no  ingenious 
reconciliation  of  essentially  opposing  state- 
ments, but  simply  shows  that,  when  naturally 
and  literally  interpreted,  the  narrative  is  free 
from  those  internal  antagonisms  which  a 
microscopic  criticism  imagines  it  has  detected 
in  it.  The  internal  unity  of  the  present 
writing,  or  second  document,  as  it  is  called,  is 
apparent.  The  internecine  struggle  between 
the  seed  of  the  woman  and  the  seed  of  the 
serpent,  which  the  fratricidal  act  of  Cain 
inaugurated  (oh.  iv.),  is  the  legitimate  and 
necessary  outcome  of  the  sin  and  the  grace 
revealed  in  Eden  (ch.  iii.),  while  the  melan- 
choly story  of  the  temptation  and  the  fall 


40 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  n.  4 — 7 


presupposes  the  paradisaical  innocence  of 
the  first  pair  (ch.  ii.).  Thus  homogeneous  in 
itself,  it  likewise  connects  with  the  preceding 
section  through  ch.  ii.,  which,  as  a  monograph 
on  man,  supplies  a  more  detailed  account  of 
his  creation  than  is  given  in  the  narrative  of 
the  six  days'  work,  and,  by  depicting  man's 
settlement  in  Eden  as  a  place  of  trial,  pre- 
pares the  way  for  the  subsequent  recital  of 
his  seduction  and  sin,  and  of  his  consequent 
expulsion  from  the  garden. 

Ver.  4. — These  are  the  generations  is  the 
usual  heading  for  the  different  sections  into 
which  the  Book  of  Genesis  is  divided  (vid. 
ch.  v.  1;  vi.  9;  x.  ]  ;  xi.  10,  27;  xxv.  12, 
19;  xxxvi.  1;  xxxvii.  2).  Misled  by  the 
LXX.,  who  render  toldoth  by  ij  |3(fSXos 
vevtaews,  Ranke,  Tiele,  Havernick,  Tuch, 
Ewald,  and  Stahelin  disconnect  the  entire 
verse  from  the  second  section,  which  says 
nothing  about  the  origination  of  the  heavens 
and  the  earth,  and  append  it  to  the  preceding, 
in  which  their  creation  is  described.  Ilgen 
improves  on  their  suggestion  by  transferring 
it  to  the  commencement  of  ch.  i.,  as  an  ap- 
propriate superscription.  Dreschler,  Vaihin- 
ger,  Bohlen,  Oehler,  Maedonald,  et  alii  divide 
the  verse  into  two  clauses,  and  annex  the 
former  to  what  precedes,  commencing  the 
ensuing  narrative  with  the  latter.  All  of 
these  proposals  are,  however,  rendered  un- 
necessary by  simply  observing  that  toldoth 
(from  yaladh,  to  bear,  to  beget;  hence  be- 
gettings,  procreations,  evolutions,  develop- 
ments) does  not  describe  the  antecedents,  but 
the  consequents,  of  either  thing  or  person 
(Rosen.,  Keil,  Kalisch).  The  toldoth  of 
Noah  are  not  the  genealogical  list  of  the 
patriarch's  ancestry,  but  the  tabulated  re- 
gister of  his  posterity;  and  so  the  genera- 
tions of  the  heavens  and  the  earth  refer  not 
to  their  original  production  (Gesenius),  but  to 
their  on  ward  movements  from  creation  down- 
wards (Keil).  Hence  with  no  incongruity,  but 
with  singular  propriety,  the  first  half  of  the 
present  verse,  ending  with  the  words  when 
they  were  created,  literally,  in  their  creation, 
stands  at  the  commencement  of  the  section 
in  which  the  forward  progression  of  the  uni- 
rerse  is  traced.  The  point  of  departure  in 
this  subsequent  evolution  of  the  material 
heavens  and  earth  is  further  specified  as 
being  in  the  day  that  the  Lord  God  (Jehovah 
Elohim)  made  the  earth  and  the  heavens; 
not  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  which  would 
have  signified  the  universe  Ivid.  on  ch.  i.  1), 
and  carried  back  the  writer's  thought  to  the 
initial  act  of  creation ;  but  the  earth  and  the 
atmospheric  firmament,  which  indicates  the 
period  embracing  the  second  and  (possibly) 
the  third  creative  days  as  the  terminus  a  quo 


of  the  generations  to  be  forthwith  recorded. 
Then  it  was  that  the  heavens  and  the  earth 
in  their  development  took  a  clear  and  decided 
step  forward  in  the  direction  of  man  and  the 
human  family  (was  it  in  the  appearance  of 
vegetation?);  and  in  this  thought  perhaps 
will  be  found  the  key  to  the  significance  of 
the  new  name  for  the  Divine  Be'ng  which  is 
used  exclusively  throughout  the  present 
section — Jehovah  Elohim.  From  the  fre- 
quency of  its  use,  and  the  circumstance  that 
it  never  has  the  article,  Jehovah  may  be 
regarded  as  the  proper  personal  name  of  God. 
Either  falsely  interpreting  Exod.  xx.  7  and 
Levit.  xxiv.  11,  or  following  some  ancient 
superstition  (mysterious  names  of  deities 
were  used  generally  in  the  East ;  the  Egyptian 
Hermes  had  a  name  which  (Cic.  '  de  Natura 
Deorum,'  8,  16)  durst  not  be  uttered:  Fiirst), 
the  later  Hebrews  invested  this  nomen  tetra- 
gramma'ion  with  such  sanctity  that  it  mighi 
not  be  pronounced  (Philo,  'Vit.  Mosis,'  iii.  519, 
629).  Accordingly,  it  was  their  custom  to  write 
it  in  the  sacred  text  with  the  vowel  points  of 
Adonai,  or,  if  that  preceded,  Elohim.  Hence 
considerable  doubt  now  exists  as  to  its  cor- 
rect pronunciation.  Etymologically  viewed 
it  is  a  future  form  of  havah,  an  old  form 
of  hayah ;  uncertainty  as  to  what  future 
has  occasioned  many  different  suggestions  as 
to  what  constituted  its  primitive  vocalisation. 
According  to  the  evidence  which  scholars 
have  collected,  the  choice  lies  between  (1) 
Jahveh  (Gesenius,  Ewald,  Reland,  Oehler, 
Maedonald,  the  Samaritan),  (2)  Yehveh  or 
Yeheveh  (Fiirst,  W.  L.  Alexander,  in  Kitto's 
'  Cyclopedia '),  and  (3)  Jehovah  (Michaelis, 
Meyer,  Stier,  Hoelmann,  Tregelles,  Murphy). 
Perhaps  the  preponderance  of  authority  in- 
clines to  the  first ;  but  the  common  punctu- 
ation is  not  so  indefensible  as  some  writers 
allege.  Gesenius  admits  that  it  more  satis- 
factorily accounts  for  the  abbreviated  sylla- 
bles TT1.  and  v  than  the  pronunciation  which 
he  himself  favours.  Murphy  thinks  that  the 
substitution  of  Adonai  for  Jehovah  was 
facilitated  by  the  agreement  of  their  vowel 
points.  The  locus  dassicus  for  its  significa- 
tion is  Exod.  iii.  14,  in  which  God  defines 
himself  as  "  I  am  that  I  am,"  and  commands 
Moses  to  tell  the  children  of  Israel  that 
Ehyeh  had  sent  him.  Hengstenberg  and 
Keil  conclude  that  absolute  self-existence  is 
the  essential  idea  represented  by  the  name 
(cf.  Exod.  iii.  14;d  wv,  LXX. ;  Rev.  i.  4,  8  ;  d 
wv  xal  d  rjv  xal  o  ep^ontvos,  "id.  Fiirst,  'Lex. 
sub  non.').  Baumgarteu  and  Delitaseh,  lay- 
ing stress  on  its  future  form,  regard  it  as  = 
the  Becoming  One,  with  reference  to  the 
revelation,  rather  than  the  essence,  of  the 
Divine  nature.  Maedonald,  from  the  cir- 
cumstance that  it  was  not  used  till  after  the 
fall,  discovers  a  pointing  forward  to  Jehovah 
as  o  eo\6(ievos  in  connection  with  redemption. 


an.  u,  4—7.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


41 


Others,  deriving  from  a  hiphil  future,  take  it' 
as  denoting  "he  who  causes  to  be;  the  Ful- 
filler,"  and  find  in  this  an  explanation  of 
Exod.  vi.  3  (Exell).  May  not  all  these  ideas 
be  more  or  less  involved  in  the  fulness  of  the 
Divine  name  ?  As  distinguished  from  Elohim, 
Deus  omnipotens,  the  mighty  One,  Jehovah 
is  the  absolute,  self-existent  One,  who  mani- 
fests himself  to  man,  and,  in  particular,  en- 
ters into  distinct  covenant  engagements  for 
his  redemption,  which  he  in  due  time  fulfils. 
In  the  present  section  the  names  are  con- 
joined partly  to  identify  Jehovah  with  Elo- 
him, and  partly  because  the  subject  of  which 
it  treats  is  the  history  of  man. 

Ver.  5. — And  every  plant  »f  the  field 
before  it  was  (literally,  not  yet)  in  the  earth 
and  every  herb  of  the  field  before  it  grew 
(literally,  had  not  yet  sprouted).  Following 
the  LXX.,  the  English  Version  suggests  an 
intention  on  the  writer's  part  to  emphasise 
the  fact  that  the  vegetation  of  the  globe — 
here  comprehended  under  the  general  terms, 
shiah,  shrub,  and  eseb,  herb  —  was  not  a 
natural  production,  but,  equally  with  the 
great  earth  and  heavens,  was  the  creation  of 
Jehovah  Elohim — a  rendering  which  has  the 
sanction  of  Tayler  Lewis ;  whereas  the  writer's 
object  clearly  is  to  depict  the  appearance  of  the 
earth  at  the  time  when  the  man-ward  deve- 
lopment of  the  heavens  and  the  earth  began. 
Then  not  a  single  plant  was  in  the  ground, 
not  a  green  blade  was  visible.  The  land, 
newly  sprung  from  the  waters,  was  one  de- 
solate region  of  bleak,  bare  lava-hills  and 
extensive  mud-flats.  Up  to  that  point  the 
absence  of  vegetation  is  accounted  for  by  the 
circumstance  that  the  presently  existing  at- 
mospheric conditions  of  the  globe  had  not 
then  been  established,  for  the  Lord  God  had 
not  caused  it  to  rain  upon  the  earth,  and 
the  ordinary  agricultural  operations  on  which 
its  production  was  afterwards  to  depend  had 
not  then  been  begun,  and  there  was  not  a 
man  to  till  the  ground. 

Ver.  6. — But  there  went  up  a  mist  from 
the  earth,  and  watered  the  whole  face  of  the 
ground.  The  dry  land  having  been  separated 
from  the  waters,  and  the  atmospheric  ocean 
uplifted  above  then,  both,  vaporous  exhala- 
tions began  to  ascend  to  the  aerial  regions, 
and  to  return  again  in  the  shape  of  rain  upon 
the  ground.  Jehovah  thus  caused  it  to  rain 
upon  the  ground,  and  so  prepared  it  for  the 
vegetation  which,  in  obedience  to  the  Al- 
mighty fiat,  sprung  up  at  the  close  of  the 
third  day,  although  the  writer  does  not 
mention  its  appearance,  but  leaves  it  to  be 
inferred  from  the  preceding  section.  That 
soon  after  its  emergence  from  the  waters  the 
land  should  be  "dry,  sterile,  and  sandy" 
will  not  be  thought  remarkable  if  we  re- 
member the  highly  igneous  condition  of  our 
planet  at  the  time  when  the  dry  land  was 


upheaved  and  the  waters  gathered  into  the 
subsiding  valleys.  Nothing  would  more 
naturally  follow  that  event  than  the  steaming 
up  of  vapours  to  float  in  the  aerial  sea.  In 
fact,  the  rapidity  with  which  evaporation 
would  be  carried  on  would  very  speedily 
leave  the  newly-formed  land  hard  and  dry, 
baked  and  caked  into  a  crust,  till  the  atmo- 
sphere, becoming  overcharged  with  aqueous 
vapour,  returned  it  in  the  shape  of  rain.  To 
talk  of  insuperable  difficulty  and  manifest 
dissonance  where  everything  is  clear,  natural, 
and  harmonious  is  to  speak  at  random,  and 
betrays  an  anxiety  to  create  contradictions 
rather  than  to  solve  them. 

Ver.  V. — And  the  Lord  God  (Jehovah  Elo- 
him) formed  man  of  the  dust  of  the  ground. 
Literally,  dust  from  the  ground.  Here, 
again,  Bleek,  Kalisch,  and  the  theologians  of 
their  school  discover  contrariety  between  this 
account  of  man's  creation  and  that  which  has 
been  given  in  the  preceding  chapter.  In 
that  man  is  represented  as  having  been  created 
by  the  Divine  word,  in  the  Divine  image, 
and  male  and  female  simultaneously;  whereas 
in  this  his  creation  is  exhibited  as  a  painful 
process  of  .elaboration  from  the  clay  by  the 
hand  of  God,  who  works  it  like  a  potter 
(asah;  LXX.,  irXdorirw),  and,  after  having 
first  constructed  man,  by  a  subsequent  opera- 
tion forms  woman.  But  the  first  account 
does  not  assert  that  Adam  and  Eve  were 
created  together,  and  gives  no  details  of  the 
formation  of  either.  These  are  supplied  by 
the  present  narrative,  which,  beginning  with 
the  construction  of  his  body  from  the  fine 
dust  of  the  ground,  designedly  represents  it 
as  an  evolution  or  development  of  the  ma- 
terial universe,  and  ends  by  setting  it  before 
us  as  animated  by  the  breath  of  God,  reserv- 
ing for  later  treatment  the  mode  of  Eve's 
production,  when  the  circumstances  that  led 
to  it  have  been  described.  And  (the  Lord 
God)  breathed  into  his  nostrils  the  breath 
of  life.  Literally,  the  breath  of  lives.  "  The 
formation  of  man  from  the  dust  and  the 
breathing  of  the  breath  of  life  must  not 
be  understood  in  a  mechanical  sense,  as  if 
God  first  of  all  constructed  a  human  figure 
from  the  dust"  (still  less  does  it  admit  of 
the  idea  that  man's  physical  nature  was 
evolved  from  the  lower  animals),  "and 
then,  by  breathing  his  breath  of  life  into 
the  clod  of  earth  which  he  had  shaped  into 
the  form  of  a  man,  made  it  into  a  living 
being.  The  words  are  to  be  understood 
Beoirpeirus.  By  an  act  of  Divine  omnipotence 
man  arose  from  the  dust ;  and  in  the  same 
moment  in  which  the  dust,  by  virtue  of 
creative  omnipotence,  shaped  itself  into  a 
human  form,  it  was  pervaded  by  the  Divine 
breath  of  life,  and  created  a  living  being,  so 
that  we  cannot  say  the  body  was  earlier  than 
the  soul"  (Delitzsch).     And  man  became  a 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  [CH.  n.  4—7. 


living  soul.  Nephesh  chayyah,  in  ch.  i. 
21,  30,  is  employed  to  designate  the  lower 
animals.     Describing  a  being  animated  by  a 


Man  received  his  life  from  a  distinct  act  of 
Divine  inbreathing;  certainly  not  an  in- 
breathing of  atmospheric  air,  but  an  inflatus 


<|n>x^i  or  life  principle,  it  does  not  necessarily  '  from  the  Ruaeh  Elohim,  or  Spirit  of  God,  a 
imply  that  the  basis  of  the  life  principle  in  communication  from  the  whole  personality 
man  and  the  inferior  animals  is  the  same,  of  the  Godhead.  In  effect  man  was  thereby 
The  distinction  between  the  two  appears  from  '  constituted  a  nephesh  chayyah,  like  the 
the  difference  in  the  mode  of  their  creations,      lower  animals ;   but  in  him  the  life  principle 


The  beasts  arose  sA  the  almighty  fiat  com 
pleted  beings,  every  one  a  nephesh  chayyah 
"  The  origin  of  their  soul  was  coincident  with 
that  of  their  corporeality,  and  their  life  was 
merely  the  individualisation  of  the  universal 
life  with  which  all  matter  was  filled  at  the 
beginning  by  the  spirit  of  God  "  (Delitzsch). 


conferred1  a  personality  which  was  wanting 
in  them.  Thus  there  is  no  real  contradiction, 
scarcely  even  an  "apparent  dissonance,"  be 
tween  the  two  accounts  of  man's  creation 
The  second  exhibits  the  foundation  of  thai 
likeness  to  God  and  world-dominion  ascribed 
to  him  in  the  first. 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  7. — 77ie  first  man.  I.  Made  from  the  dust  This  does  not  Imply  that  in  the 
composition  of  humanity  there  is  nothing  but  particles  of  dust,  or  "molecules  of 
matter."  Simply  it  designs  to  state  that  the  point  of  departure  in  man's  creation  was 
the  soil  out  of  which  all  other  living  creatures  were  produced ;  that,  so  to  speak,  man 
was  constructed  from  beneath  upwards,  the  Divine  Artificer  proceeding  with  his 
creation  in  the  same  ascending  scale  of  activity  that  had  been  observed  in  the  pro. 
duction  of  the  rest  of  the  universe — first  the  material  body,  and  then  the  immaterial 
soul ;  and  that,  so  far  as  the  former  is  concerned,  man  is  wholly  and  solely  of  the  earth, 
earthy, — an  assertion  which  the  researches  of  chemistry  and  physiology  abundantly 
confirm, — the  elements  of  organised  bodies  being  the  same  as  those  which  constitute 
the  inorganic  world,  viz.,  carbon,  hydrogen,  oxygen,  nitrogen,  lime,  iron,  sulphur,  and 
phosphorus.  The  statement  is  fitted  to  impress  man  with  thoughts — 1.  Of  his  lowly 
origin.  While  the  Scripture  in  general  labours  to  imbue  his  mind  with  correct  ideas 
of  his  obscure  nativity,  comparing  him  to  a  wind,  to  a  vapour,  to  a  flower,  to  the 
beasts,  to  a  worm,  the  sentiment  of  Moses  takes  him  lower  yet  for  his  birthplace — 
to  the  dust  of  the  ground,  above  which  the  wind  blows,  from  which  the  vapours  rise, 
on  which  the  flowers  bloom,  across  which  the  beasts  roam,  out  of  which  the  worm 
creeps.  2.  Of  his  essential  frailty.  Being  composed  of  little  particles  of  dust, 
held,  together  by  what  science  calls  "organisation,"  but  Holy  Writ  designates  the 
power  of  God,  it  requires  but  the  loosening  of  God's  hand,  as  it  were,  for  the  frame- 
work of  his  body,  so  wondrously  fashioned,  so  delicately  carved,  so  finely  articulated, 
so  firmly  knit,  to  resolve  itself  into  a  heap  of  dust.  3.  Of  his  final  destiny.  Every 
mundane  thing  returns  to  the  place  whence  it  proceeded  (Eccles.  i.  5,  7).  The 
vapours  climb  into  the  sky,  but  descend  again  upon  the  hills,  and  seek  the  plains. 
The  flowers  bloom,  but,  after  dispensing  their  fragrance,  shed  their  leaves  upon  the 
earth.  The  young  lions,  that,  as  it  were,  are  sprung  from  the  soil,  find  a  grave  at 
last  within  their  forest  dens.  As  it  is  with  the  flowers  and  the  beasts,  so  is  it  also 
with  man.  ' '  All  are  of  the  dust,  and  all  turn  to  dust  again  "  (Eccles.  iii.  18,  20 ;  Job 
X.  9 ;  Ps.  ciii.  14). 

Lessons: — 1.  Humility  of  spirit  (Job  iv.  19;  Ps.  cxliv.  3,  4;  Isa.  li.  1).  "Holy 
living  "  (Taylor,  §  iv.  9).  2.  Care  for  the  body — protecting  its  frailty  from  injury 
(Levit.  xix.  28)  and  its  materiality  from  mastery  (Rom.  xii.  1 ;  1  Cor.  vi.  13;  1  Thess. 
iv.  4).     3.  Preparation  for  death  (Ps.  xxxix.  4  ;  xc.  12). 

II.  Fashioned  by  the  hand  of  God.  Made  from  the  dust,  the  first  man  neither 
sprung  from  the  slime  of  matter,  according  to  naturalism  (ot  avT<5x.8oves),  nor  was 
evolved  from  the  to  irdv  of  pantheism,  but  was  specifically  formed  by  Divine 
creative  power.  This  marked  the  first  degree  of  man's  superiority  over  other 
living  creatures.  Deriving  existence,  equally  with  man,  from  the  creative  power 
of  God,  it  is  not  said  of  them  that  they  were  "  formed  "  by  God.  Let  this  remind 
man — 1.  Of  the  Divine  origin  of  the  body.  If  the  physical  structures  of  the  lower 
organisms  display  such  admirable  proportions  and  striking  adaptations  as  to  evince 
the  action  of  Divine  intelligence,  much  more  may  a  Creator's  hand  be  recognised 


CH.  ii.  4—7.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


43 


in  the  form  and  symmetry,  proportion  and  adjustment  of  the  human  body.  An 
examination  of  the  hand,  eye,  or  brain,  of  the  muscular  or  nervous  systems,  in- 
stinctively awakens  the  devout  feelings  of  the  Psalmist  :  "I  will  praise  Thee,  O  Lord; 
for  I  am  fearfully  and  wonderfully  made "  (Ps.  cxxxix.  14).  2.  Of  the  Divine 
estimate  of  the  body.  Shown  by  the  personal  care  and  attention  which  God  devoted 
to  its  construction,  since  he  designed  it  to  be  the  noblest  of  his  works,  the  shrine 
of  an  immortal  spirit,  a  prophecy  and  type  of  the  body  of  his  Son,  in  the  fulness 
of  the  times  to  be  prepared  by  another  special  act  of  creation  (Ps.  xl.  6 ;  Heb.  x.  8). 
This  estimate  he  has  in  many  ways  confirmed  :  by  abundantly  and  generously 
sustaining  it,  although  a  partner  in  the  spirit's  sin  (Gen.  i.  29 ;  ix.  3) ;  guarding  its 
life  with  the  strictest  and  severest  penalties  (Gen.  ix.  5,  6) ;  taking  it  into  union 
with  himself,  in  the  person  of  his  Son  (Heb.  ii.  6) ;  redeeming  it,  as  well  as  the 
soul  it  enshrines,  through  his  Son's  blood  (Rom.  viii.  21,  23) ;  and  constituting  it, 
as  well  as  the  immaterial  spirit,  a  partaker  of  resurrection  glory  (1  Cor.  xv.  42). 

Learn — 1.  The  true  nobility  of  man's  descent,  and  the  duty  of  walking  worthy 
of  it.  2.  The  high  value  of  the  body,  and  the  consequent  obligation  of  neither 
dishonouring  nor  abusing  it. 

III.  Animated  by  the  bbeath  or  life.  The  second  degree  of  man's  superiority 
to  the  lower  animals.     Like  them.'a  living  soul,  his  life  is  different  from  theirs — 

1.  In  its  nature.  Theirs  was  a  portion  of  that  common  life  principle  which  God  has 
been  pleased  to  communicate  to  matter ;  his  a  direct  afflatus  from  the  personality  of 
God.  2.  In  its  impartaiion.  Theirs  was  bestowed  directly  and  immediately  by  the 
fiat  of  omnipotence  ;  his  conveyed  into  his  material  framework  by  a  special  Divine 
operation.  3.  In  its  effect.  Theirs  constituted  them  "  living  souls ;"  his  conferred 
on  him  personality.  Theirs  made  them  creatures  having  life ;  his  caused  him  to 
become  a  spirit  having  life.  Theirs  left  them  wholly  mortal ;  his  transformed  him 
into  an  immortal  (Eccles  iii.  21). 

Let  man  consider — 1 .  That  his  body  is  a  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost  (1  Cor.  vi.  19). 

2.  That  his  spirit  is  the  creation  and  the  gift  of  God  (Eccles.  xii.  7 ;  Isa  lvii. 
16 ;  Zech.  xii.  1).  3.  That  with  both  it  becomes  him  to  glorify  his  Divine  Creator 
(1  Cor.  vi.  20). 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  4 — 7. — Man  the  living  soul.  1.  Life  is  a  Divine  bestowment.  2.  Dust 
which  is  Divinely  inspired  is  no  longer  mere  dust ;  the  true  life  is  neither  grovelling 
on  the  earth,  nor  so  much  away  from  the  earth  as  to  be  no  longer  the  life  of  a  living 
soul.  3.  The  creature  who  is  last  formed,  and  for  whom  all  other  things  wait  and 
are  prepared,  is  made  to  be  the  interpreter  of  all,  and  the  glory  of  God  in  them. — R. 


EXPOSITION. 


Ver.  8. — In  accordance  with  a  well-known 
characteristic  of  Hebrew  composition,  the 
writer,  having  carried  his  subject  forward  to 
a  convenient  place  of  rest,  now  reverts  to  a 
point  of  time  in  the  six  days  antecedent  to 
man's  appearance  on  the  earth.  In  anticipa- 
tion of  his  arrival,  it  was  needful  that  a 
suitable  abode  should  be  prepared  for  his 
reception.  Accordingly,  having  already  men- 
tioned the  creation  of  plants,  trees,  and 
flowers,  the  narrative  proceeds  to  describe  the 
construction  of  Adam's  early  home.  And  the 
Lord  God  (Jehovah  Elohim)  planted — i.  e. 
specially  prepared — a  garden  (gan,  »  place 
protected  by  a  fence,  from  ganan,  to  cover ; 
hence  a  garden:  cf.  Deut.  ii.  10;  1  Kings 
x*i.  2 ;  Isa.  Ii.  3 ;  LXX.,  irapdScio-os ;  Vuj- 
gate,  paradi*u» ;  whence  English,  paradise, 


Luke  xxiii.  48)  eastward  (mekedem,  liter- 
ally,  from  the  front  quarter,  not  from  th( 
beginning, — airo  apxijs,  Aquila;  iv  irpuyrois, 
Tlieodotion ;  a  principio,  Vulgate,  —  but 
in  the  region  lying  towards  the  east  oi 
Palestine — LXX.,  ko,t'  dvaroX&s)  in  (not 
of,  as  Murphy,  who  renders  "  in  the  east 
of  Eden")  Eden  (delight;  Greek,  tJSovtj  ; 
cf.  Hedenesh,  or  Heden,  the  birthplace  of 
Zoroaster — Kalisch).  The  word  is  not  merely 
descriptive  of  the  beauty  and  fertility  of  the 
garden  (paradisus  voluptatis,  Vulg.,  cf. 
■n-apdSeio-os  ttvs  Tpvt|>T|s,  LXX.  (Joel  ii.  3). 
On  the  ground  of  possessing  similar  qualities, 
other  districts  and  places  were  subsequently 
termed  Edens:  cf.  2  Kings  xix.  12;  Isa. 
xxxvii.  12;  li.  3;  Ezek.  xxvii.  23;  Amos  i. 
6),  but  likewise  indicates  its  locality,  which 


44 


THE  BOOK  OP  OENESib. 


[gh.  n.  8—17. 


is  afterwards  more  exactly  defined  (vers.  10. 
14).  In  the  mean  time  it  is  simply  noted 
that,  this  enchanting  paradise  having  been 
specially  prepared  by  Jehovah,  there  he  put 
the  man  (Adam)  whom  he  had  formed. 

Ver.  9. — -And  out  of  the  ground  made  the 
Lord  God  (Jehovah  Elohim)  to  grow  every 
tree  that  is  pleasant  to  the  sight  -literally, 
lovely  to  see ;  i.  e.  beautiful  in  form  and 
colour — and  good  for  food.  In  the  preparation 
of  man's  pristine  abode  respect  was  had  to 
ornamentation  as  well  as  utility.  Every 
species  of  vegetation  that  could  minister 
to  his  corporeal  necessities  was  provided. 
Flowers,  trees,  and  shrubs  regaled  his  senses 
with  their  fragrance,  pleased  his  eye  with 
their  exquisite  forms  and  enchanting  colours, 
and  gratified  his  palate  with  their  luscious 
fruits.  Hence  the  garden  of  the  Lord  became 
the  highest  ideal  of  earthly  excellence  (Isa. 
li.  3).  In  particular  it  was  distinguished  by 
the  presence  of  two  trees,  which  occupied  a 
central  position  among  its  multifarious  pro- 
ductions. The  tree  of  life  also  in  the  midst 
of  the  garden,  and  the  tree  of  knowledge 
of  good  and  evil.  That  these  were  not  two 
separate  trees,  but  only  one  tree  distinguished 
by  different  names,  has  been  maintained, 
though  with  no  weightier  reason  than  the 
statement  of  Eve  in  ch.  iil.  3.  The  opinion 
of  Witsius,  Luther,  Kennicott,  and  Heng- 
stenberg,  that  classes  of  trees,  and  not  indi- 
vidual trees,  are-meant  by  the  phrases  "  tree 
of  life  "  and  "  tree  of  knowledge,"  is  pre- 
cluded by  the  language  of.  Jehovah  Elohim 
in  ch.  ii.  1 7  and  ch.  iii.  24.  As  regards  their 
significance,  consistency  requires  that  they 
should  both  be  explained  on  the  same  prin- 
ciple. This,  accordingly,  disposes  of  the  idea 
that  the  tree  of  life  (literally,  the  tree  of  the 
lives:  cf.  fuXov  ttjs  £o«js,  Rev.  ii.  7 ;  xx.  19) 
is  simply  a  Hebraism  for  a  living  tree,  as  by 
no  sort  of  ingenuity  can  the  tree  of  knowl- 
edge be  transformed  into  a  knowing  tree. 
It  likewise  militates  against  the  notion  that 
the  two  trees  were  styled  from  the  peculiar 
effects  of  their  fruits,  the  one  conferring 
physical  immortality  on  Adam's  body  (Scotus, 
Aquinas,  Fairbairn,  Kalisch,  Luther),  and 
the  other  imparting  moral  and  intellectual 
intuitions  to  his  soul  (Josephus,  Kalisch). 
But  even  if  the  life-giving  properties  of  the 
one  tree  could  be  demonstrated  from  ch.  iii. 
24,  proof  would  still  be  required  with  regard 
to  the  other,  that  the  mere  physical  processes 
of  manducation  and  digestion  could  be  fol- 
lowed by  results  so  immaterial  as  those  of 
"  rousing  the  slumbering  intellect,  teaching 
reason  to  reflect,  and  enabling  the  judgment 
to  distinguish  between  moral  good  and  moral 
evil "  (Kalisch).  Besides,  if  this  was  the  im- 
mediate effect  of  eating  the  forbidden  fruit,  it 
is  difficult  to  perceive  either  why  it  should 
have  been  prohibited  to  our  first  parents  at 


all;  it  being  "  for  their  good  to  have  their 
wits,  sharpened"  (Willet);  or  in  what  re- 
spect they  suffered  loss  through  listening 
to  the  tempter,  and  did  not  rather  gain 
(Rabbi  Moses) ;  or  wherein,  being  desti- 
tute of  both  intellectual  and  moral  discern- 
ment, they  could  be  regarded  as  either  guilty 
of  transgression  or  responsible  for  obedience. 
Incapacity  to  know  good  and  evil  may  be 
a  characteristic  of  unconscious  childhood  and 
unreflecting  youth  (Deut.  i.  39 ;  Isa.  vii.  15 ; 
Jonah  iv.'ll),  or  of  debilitated  age  (2  Sam. 
xix.  36),  but  is  not  conceivable  in  the  case  of 
one  who  was  created  in  God's  image,  invested 
with  world-dominion,  and  himself  constituted 
the  subject  of  moral  government.  Unless, 
therefore,  with  ancient  Gnostics  'and  modern 
Hegelians,  we  view  the  entire  story  of  the 
probation  as  an  allegorical  representation  of 
&e  necessary  intellectual  and  ethical  devel- 
opment of  human  nature,  we  must  believe 
that  Adam  was  acquainted  with  the  idea  of 
moral  distinctions  from  the  first.  Hence  the 
conclusion  seems  to  force  itself  upon  our 
minds  that  the  first  man  was  possessed  of 
both  immortality  and  knowledge  irrespective 
altogether  of  the  trees,  and  that  the  true 
character  which  belonged  to  these  trees  was 
symbolical  or  sacramental,  suggestive  of  the 
conditions  under  which  he  was  placed  in 
Eden.  "Arbori  autem  vitae  nomen  indidit, 
non  quod  vitam  homini  conferret,  qua  jam 
ante  praeditus  erat ;  sed  ut  symbolum  ac 
memoriale  esset  vitae  divinitus  acceptae " 
(Calvin).  For  a  further  exposition  of  the 
exact  significance  of  these  trees  see  below 
on  vers.  16,  17. 

Ver.  10. — The  precise  locality  of  Eden  is 
indicated  by  its  relation  to  the  great  water- 
courses of  the  region.  And  a  river  (literally, 
a  flowing  water,  applicable  to  large  oceanic 
floods — Job  xxii.  16;  Ps.  xxiv.  2;  xlvi.  5; 
Jonah  ii.  4 — as  well  as  to  narrow  streams) 
went  out  (literally,  going  out)  of  Eden  to 
water  the  garden.  To  conclude  from  this 
that  the  river  had  its  source  within  the  limits 
of  the  garden  is  to  infer  more  than  the  pre- 
mises will  warrant.  Nothing  more  is  implied 
in  the  language  than  that  a  great  water- 
course proceeded  through  the  district  of 
Eden,  and  served  to  irrigate  the  soil.  Pro- 
bably it  intersected  the  garden,  thus  occa- 
sioning its  remarkable  fecundity  and  beauty. 
And  from  thence  (i.  e.  either  on  emerging 
from  which,  or,  taking  ",)2  in  its  secondary 
sense,  outside  of,  or  at  a  distance  from  which) 
it  was  parted  (literally,  divided  itself),  and 
became  into  four  heads.  Roshim,  from  rosh, 
that  which  is  highest ;  either  principal  waters, 
arms  or  branches  (Tayler  Lewis,  Alford),  or 
beginnings  of  rivers,  indicating  the  sources 
of  the  streams  (Gesenius,  Keil,  Macdonald, 
Murphy).  If  the  second  of  these  interpreta- 
tions be  adoDted,  Eden  must  be  looked  for 


ch.  n.  8—17.] 


THE   BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


45 


in  a  spot  where  some  great  flowing  water  is 
subdivided  into  four  separate  streams ;  if 
the  former  be  regarded  as  the  proper  exegesis, 
then  any  great  river  which  is  first  formed  by 
the  junction  of  two  streams,  and  afterwards 
disperses  its  waters  in  two  different  directions, 
will  meet  the  requirements  of  the  case. 

Vers.  11,  12. — The  name  of  the  first  (river 
is)  Fishon,  or  "  the  full-flowing."  This  is  the 
first  of  those  marks  by  which  the  river,  when 
discovered,  must  be  identified.  It  was  palpably 
a  broad-bosomed  Btream.  A  second  is  de- 
rived from  the  region  through  which  it  flows. 
That  is  it  which  compasseth  (not  neces- 
sarily surrounding,  but  skirting  in  a  circular 
or  circuitous  fashion — Num.  xxi.  4 ;  Judges 
xi.  8)  the  whole  land  of  Havilah.  Havilah 
itself  is  described  by  three  of  its  productions. 
Where  there  is  gold.  /.  e.  it  is  a  gold-pro- 
ducing country.  And  the  gold  of  that  land  is 
good.  Of  the  purest  quality  and  largest  quan- 
tity. There  also  is  bdellium.  Literally  bedo- 
lach,  which  the  manna  was  declared  to  re- 
semble (Exod.  xvii.,  14 ;  Num.  xj.  7).  The 
LXX.,  supposing  it  to  be  a  precious  stone, 
translate  it  by  avBpag  in  the  present  passage, 
and  by  Kpuo-rdWos  in  Num.  xi.  1 — a  view 
supported  by  the  Jewish  Rabbis  and  Gese- 
nius.  The  majority  of  modern  interpreters 
espouse  the  opinion  of  Josephus,  that  it  was 
an  odorous  and  costly  gum  indigenous  to 
India,  Arabia,  Babylonia,  and  Bactriana. 
The  third  production  is  the  onyx  (shoharn, 
from  a  root  signifying  to  be  pale  or  delicate 
in  colour,  like  the  finger-nails),  variously  con- 
jectured to  be  the  beryl,  onyx,  sardonyx, 
sardius,  or  emerald.  From  this  description 
it  appears  that  Havilah  must  be  sought  for 
among  the  gold-producing  countries  of  Asia. 
Now  among  the  sons  of  Joktan  or  primitive 
Arabs  (Gen.  x.  29) — "  whose  dwelling  was 
from  Mesha,  as  thou  goest,  unto  Sephar,  a 
mount  of  the  east " — are  Ophir  and  Havilah, 
whence  Gesenius  concludes  that  India,  in- 
cluding Arabia,  is  meant.  Other  countries 
have  their  advocates  such  as  Arabia  Felix, 
Susiana,  Colchis,  &c. ;  and  other  rivers,  such 
as  the  Ganges  (Josephus,  Eusebius),  the 
Phasis  (Reland,  Jahn,  Itosemuller,  Winer), 
the  Indus  (Schulthess,  Kalisch). 

Ver.  13. — And  the  name  of  the  second  is 
the  Gihon,  or  "the  bursting,"  from  XP-\, 
to  break  forth.  "  Deep-flowing,"  T.  Lewis 
renders  it,  connecting  it  with  liiceavos,  and 
identifying  it  with  Homer's  |3a8upp6os  'ftice- 
avds.  The  same  is  it  that  compasseth  the 
whole  land  of  Ethiopia  (Cush.)  Under  the 
impression  that  the  African  Cush  was  meant, 
the  Alexandrine  Jews  discovered  the  Gihon 
in  the  Nile — an  opinion  in  which  they 
have  been  followed  by  Schulthess,  Gesenius, 
Filrst,  Bertheau,  Kalisch,  and  others.  But 
Cush,  it  is  now  known,  describes  the  entire 
region  between  Arabia  and  the  Nile,  and  in 


particular  the  southern  district  of  the  former 
lying  between  the  Persian  Gulf  and  the  Red 
Sea.  Hence  Taylor  Lewis  finds  the  Gihon  in 
the  ocean  water  sweeping  round  the  south 
coast  of  Arabia.  Murphy  detects  the  name 
Kush  in  the  words  Caucasus  and  Caspian, 
and,  looking  for  the  site  of  Eden  about  the 
sources  of  the  Euphrates  and  the  Tigris  in 
Armenia,  thinks  the  Gihon  may  have  been 
the  leading  stream  flowing  into  the  Caspian. 
Delitzsch  advocates  the  claim  of  the  Araxia 
to  be  this  river. 

Ver.  14. — And  the  name  of  the  third  river 
is  the  Hiddekel,  or  "the  darting,"  f rom  "in 
and,  ']?.'!'  a  sharp  and  swift  arrow,  referring 
to  its  rapidity.  It  is  unanimously  agreed 
that  this  must  be  identified  with  the  Tigris : 
in  the  present  language  of  the  Persians  de- 
signated tir,  which  signifies  an  arrow.  It 
is  styled  in  Aramaic  diglath  or  diglah. 
That  is  it  which  goeth  towards  the  east  of 
Assyria.  Its  identity  is  thus  placed  beyond 
a  question.  And  the  fourth  river  is  Euphra- 
tes, or  "the  sweet,"  front  an  unused  root, 
parath,  signifying  to  be  sweet,  referring  to 
the  sweet  and  pleasant  taste  of  it3  waters 
(Jer.  ii.  18).  Further  description  of  this 
great  water  was  unnecessary,  being  univers- 
ally known  to  the  Hebrews  as  "the  great 
river"  (Deut.  i.  7;  Dan.  x.  4),  and  "the 
river"  par  excellence  (Exod.  xxiii.  81;  Isa. 
vii.  20).  The  river  still  bears  its  early  name. 
In  the  cuniform  inscriptions  deciphered  by 
Rawlinson  it  is  called  "D"f rata."  Recurring 
now  to  the  site  of  Eden,  it  must  be  admitted 
that,  notwithstanding  this  description,  the 
whole  question  is  involved  in  uncertainty 
The  two  solutions  of  the  problem  that  have 
the  greatest  claim  on  our  attention  are,  (1) 
that  which  places  Eden  near  the  head  of  the 
Persian  Gulf,  and  (2)  that  which  looks  for  it 
in  Armenia.  The  latter  is  favoured  by  the 
close  proximity  to  that  region  of  the  sources 
of  both  the  Euphrates  and  the  Tigris ;  but, 
on  the  other  hand,  it  is  hampered  by  the 
difficulty  of  discovering  other  two  rivers  that 
will  correspond  with  the  Gihon  and  the 
Pison,  and  the  almost  certainty  that  Cush 
and  Havilah  are  to  be  sought  for  in  the 
vicinity  of  the  Persian  Gulf.  The  former 
(Calvin,  Kalisch,  T.  Lewis)  is  supported  by 
this  last  consideration,  that  Cush  and  Havi- 
lah are  not  remote  from  the  locality,  though 
it  too  has  its  incumbrances.  It  seems  to 
reverse  the  idea  of  &?.*,  which' according  to 
Le  Clerc  indicates  the  direction  of  the  stream. 
Then  its  advocates,  no  more  than  the  sup- 
porters of  the  alternate  theory,  are  agreed 
upon  the  Gihon  and  the  Pison :  Calvin  find- 
ing them  in  the  twoprincipal  mouths  of  the 
Euphrates  and  the  Tigris,  which  Sir  Charles 
Lyell  declares  to  be  of  comparatively  recent 
formation;    Kalisch  identifying  them   with 


4fl 


THE  BOOK  OF   GENESIS. 


[CH.  n.  8—17. 


the  Indus  and  the  Nile;  and  Tayler  Lewis 
regarding  them  as  the  two  sides  of  the  Per- 
sian Gulf.  Sir  H.  Rawlinson,  from  a  study 
of  the  Assyrian  texts,  has  pointed  out  the 
coincidence  of  the  Babylonian  region  of  Kar- 
duniyas  or  Garduniyas  with  the  Eden  of  the 
Bible ;  and  the  late  George  Smith  finds  in  i  ts 
four  dyers,  Euphrates,  Tigris,  Surappi,  and 
Ukui,  its  known  fertility,  and  its  name, 
Gandunu,  so  similar  to  Gen-eden  (the  garden 
of  Eden),  "considerations  all  tending  to- 
wards the  view  that  it  is  the  paradise  of 
Genesis"  ('Chald.  Gen.,'  pp.  3—305). 

Ver.  15. — Having  prepared  the  garden  for 
man's  reception,  the  Lord  God  took  the  man. 
"  Not  physicially  lifting  him  up  and  putting 
him  down  in  the  garden,  but  simply  exerting 
an  influence  upon  him  which  induced  him,  in 
the  exercise  of  his  free  agency,  to  go.  He 
went  in  consequence  of  a  secret  impulse  or  an 
open  command  of  his  Maker  "  (Bush).  And 
put  him  into  the  garden;  literally,  caused 
him  to  rest  in  it  as  an  abode  of  happiness 
and  peace.  To  dress  it.  /.  e.  to  till,  culti- 
vate, and  work  it.  This  would  almost  seem 
to  hint  that  the  aurea  cetas  of  classical  poetry 
was  but  a  dream — a  reminiscence  of  Eden, 
perhaps,  but  idealised.  Even  the  plants, 
flowers,  and  trees  of  Eden  stood  in  need  of 
cultivation  from  the  hand  of  man,  and  would 
speedily  have  degenerated  without  his  atten- 
tion. And  to  keep  it.  Neither  were  the 
animals  all  so  peaceful  and  domesticated  that 
Adam  did  not  need  to  fence  his  garden  against 
their  depredations.  Doubtless  there  is  here 
too  an  ominous  hint  of  the  existence  of  that 
greater  adversary  against  whom  he  was  ap- 
pointed to  watch. 

Vers.  16,  17. — And  Jehovah  Elohim  com- 
manded the  man  (Adam),  saying.  Whether 
or  not  these  were  the  first  words  listened  to  by 
man  (Murphy),  they  clearly  presuppose  the 
person  to  whom  they  were  addressed  to  have 
had  the  power  of  understanding  language,  i.  e. 
of  interpreting  vocal  sounds,  and  representing 
to  his  own  mind  the  conceptions  or  ideas  of 
whicli  they  were  the  Bigns,  a  degree  of  in- 
tellectual development  altogether  incompa- 
tible with  modern  evolution  theories.  They 
likewise  assume  the  pre-existence  of  a  moral 
nature  which  could  recognise  the  distinction 
between  "thou  shalt"  and  "thou  shalt  not." 
Of  every  tree  of  the  garden  thou  mayest 
freely  eat;  literally,  eating,  thou  shalt  eat. 
Adam,  it  thus  appears,  was  permitted  to  par- 
take of  the  tree  of  life ;  not,  however,  as  a 
means  of  either  conferring  or  preserving  im- 
mortality, which  was  already  his  by  Divine 
gift,  and  the  only  method  of  conserving 
which  recognised  by  the  narrative  was  ab- 
staining from  the  tree  of  knowledge ;  but  as  a 
symbol  and  guarantee  of  that  immortality  with 
which  he  had  been  endowed,  and  which  would 
continue  to  be  his  so  long  M  ha  maintained 
his  personal  integrity.     Tab,  ef  eonrre,  by 


the  very  terms  of  his  existence,  he  was  under 
obligation  to  do,  apart  altogether  from  any 
specific  enactment  which  God  might  enjoin. 
As  a  moral  being,  he  had  the  law  written  on 
his  conscience.  But,  as  if  to  give  a  visible 
embodiment  to  that  law,  and  at  the  same 
time  to  test  his-  allegiance  to  his  Maker's  will 
which  is  the  kernel  of  all  true  obedience,  an 
injunction  was  laid  upon  him  of  a  positive 
description — But  of  the  tree  of  the  know- 
ledge of  good  and  evil,  thou  shall  not  eat  oi 
it.  Speculations  as  to  what  kind  of  tree  it 
was,  whether  a  vine,  a  fig,  or  an  apple  tree, 
are  more  curious  than  profitable.  There  is 
no  reason  to  suppose  that  any  noxious  or 
lethiferous  properties  resided  in  its  fruit. 
The  death  that  was  to  follow  on  transgression 
was  to  spring  from  the  eating,  and  not  from 
the  fruit;  from  the  sinful  act,  and  not  from 
the  creature,  which  in  itself  was  good.  The 
prohibition  laid  on  Adam  was  for  the  time 
being  a  summary  of  the  Divine  law.  Hence 
the  tree  was  a  sign  and  symbol  of  what  that 
law  required.  And  in  this,  doubtless,  lies  the 
explanation  of  its  name.  It  was  a  concrete 
representation  of  that  fundamental  distinc- 
tion between  right  and  wrong,  duty  and  sin, 
which  lies  at  the  basis  of  all  responsibilty. 
It  interpreted  for  the  first  pair  those  great 
moral  intuitions  which  had  been  implanted 
in  their  natures,  and  by  which  it  was  intended 
they  should  regulate  their  lives.  Thus  it 
was  for  them  a  tree  of  the  knowledge  of  good 
and  evil.  It  brought  out  that  knowledge 
which  they  already  possessed  into  the  clear 
light  of  definite  conviction  and  precept,  con- 
necting it  at  the  same  time  with  the  Divine 
will  as  its  source  and  with  themselves  as  its 
end.  Further,  it  was  an  intelligible  declara- 
tion of  the  duty  which  that  knowledge  of  good 
and  evil  imposed  upon  them.  Through  its 
penalty  it  likewise  indicated  both  the  good 
which  would  be  reaped  by  obedience  and  the 
evil  which  would  follow  on  transgression. 
For  in  the  day  that  thou  eatest  thereof  thou 
shalt  surely  die ;  literally,  dying,  thou  shalt 
die.  That  this  involved  death  physical,  or 
the  dissolution  of  the  body,  is  indicated  by 
the  sentence  pronounced  on  Adam  after  he 
had  fallen  (ch.  iii.  19).  That  the  sentence 
was  not  immediately  executed  does  not  dis- 
prove its  reality.  It  only  suggests  that  its 
suspension  may  have  been  due  to  some  Divine 
interposition.  Tet  universal  experience  at- 
tests that  permanent  escape  from  its  execu- 
tion is  impossible.  In  the  case  of  Adam  it 
was  thus  far  put  in  force  on  the  instant,  that 
henceforth  he  ceased  to  be  immortal.  As 
prior  to  his  fall  his  immortality  was  sure, 
being  authenticated  for  him  by  the  tree  of 
life,  so  now,  subsequent  to  that  catastrophe, 
his  mortality  was  certain.  This,  more  than 
immediatcness,  is  what  the  language  implies. 
For  the  complete  theologies!  significance  of 
this  penalty  see  eh.  Hi.  19. 


CH.  n.  8—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  *l 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  8. — The  garden  of  Eden.  I.  A  scene  op  beauty.  Whether  situated  in 
Armenia  or  Babylonia  (see  Exposition),  it  was  a  fair  spot  in  a  sunny  region  of 
delights  (Eden).  This  beauty  was — 1.  Luxuriant.  Milton  has  lavished  all  the 
wealth  of  his  creative  genius  in  an  attempt  to  depict  "  the  happy  rural  seat  of  the 
first  pair  "  ('  Par.  Lost, '  bk.  iv.).  Yet  it  is  questionable  if  even  he  has  succeeded  in  re- 
producing the  gorgeous  spectacle,  the  endlessly  diversified  assortment  of  lovely  forms 
and  radiant  colours  that  seemed  to  compress  "  in  narrow  room  nature's  whole 
wealth,"  entitling  Eden  to  be  characterised  as  "a  heaven  on  earth."  2.  Divinely 
prepared.  Jehovah  Elohim  caused  it  to  spring  up  and  bloom  before  the  wondering 
eye  of  man.  All  the  world's  beauty  is  of  God.  The  flowers  and  the  herbs  and  the 
trees  have  all  their  symmetry  and  loveliness  from  him.  God  clothes  the  lilies  of 
the  field;  the  raiment,  outshining  the  glory  of  royal  Solomon,  in  which  they  are 
decked  is  of  his  making.  If  nature  be  the  loom  in  which  it  is  woven,  he  is  the 
all -wise  »<|>dvT'r]s  or  Weaver  by  whom  its  wondrous  mechanism  is  guided  and  energised. 
Let  us  rejoice  in  the  earth's  beauty,  and  thank  God  for  it.  8.  Exceptional.  We  are 
scarcely  warranted,  even  by  ch.  iii.  17,  to  suppose  that,  prior  to  the  fall,  the  whole 
world  was  a  paradise.  Rather,  geologic  revelations  give  us  reason  to  believe  that 
from  the  first  the  earth  was  prepared  for  the  reception  of  a  sinful  race,  death  aad 
deformity  having  been  in  the  world  anterior  to  man's  arrival  upon  the  scene  (cf . 
Bushnell,  'Nat.  and  Super.,'  ch.  vii.),  and  that  the  Edenic  home  was  what  the  Bible 
says  it  was — a  fair  spot,  specially  planted  and  fenced  about,  for  the  temporary  resi- 
dence of  the  innocent  pair,  who  were  ultimately,  as  transgessors,  to  be  driven  forth 
to  dwell  upon  a  soil  which  was  cursed  because  of  sin.  Let  it  humble  us  to  think 
that  the  earth  is  not  a  paradise  solely  because  of  human  sin.  4.  Prophetic.  Besides 
being  a  picture  of  what  the  world  would  have  been,  had  it  been  prepared  for  a 
sinless  race,  it  was  also  a  foreshadowing  of  the  renovated  earth  when  sin  shall  be 
no  more,  when  "this  land  that  was  desolate  shall  have  become  like  the  garden  of 
Eden."  Let  it  stimulate  our  hope  and  assist  our  faith  to  anticipate  the  palingenesia 
of  the  future,  when  this  sterile  and  disordered  world  shall  be  refitted  with  bloom 
and  beauty. 

II.  A  spiceeb  of  work.  Adam's  work  was— 1.  God-assigned.  So  in  a  very  real 
sense  is  every  man's  life  occupation  appointed  by  God.  "  To  every  man  his  work  " 
is  the  law  of  God's  world  as  well  as  of  Christ's  kingdom.  This  thought  should 
dignify  "the  trivial  round,  the  common  task,"  and  enab.e  us,  "whether  we  eat  or 
drmk,  or  whatsoever  we  do,  to  do  all  to  the  glory  of  God."  2.  Pleasant.  And  so 
should  all  work  be,  whether  arduous  or  easy,  especially  to  a  Christian.  To  be  sure, 
Adam's  work  was  light  and  easy  in  comparison  with  that  which  afterwards  became 
his  lot,  and  that  which  now  constitutes  ours.  But  even  these  would  be  joyous  and 
exhilarating  if  performed  by  the  free  spirit  of  love,  instead  of,  as  they  often  are, 
by  the  unwilling  hands  of  bondmen.  3.  Necessary.  Even  in  a  state  of  innocence 
it  was  impossible  that  man  could  be  suffered  to  live  in  indolence ;  his  endowments 
and  capacities  were  fitted  for  activity.  His  happiness  and  safety  (against  tempta- 
tion) required  him  to  be  employed.  And  if  God  who  made  him  was  ever  working, 
why  should  he  be  idle  ?  The  same  arguments  forbid  idleness  to-day.  Christianity 
with  emphasis  condemns  it.     "If  a  man  will  not  work,  neither  shall  he  eat." 

III.  An  abode  op  innocence.  This  abode  was — 1.  Suitable.  It  was  not  suitable 
for  sinners,  just  as  the  world  outside  would  not  have  been  adapted  for  a  pair  who 
were  sinless ;  but  it  was  peculiarly  appropriate  for  their  innocence.  He  who 
appointeth  to  all  men  the  bounds  of  their  habitation  always  locates  men  in  spheres 
that  are  exactly  suited  to  their  natures  and  needs  2.  Provisional.  Their  possession 
of  it  was  contingent  on  their  remaining  sinless.  If  their  souls  continued  pure,  their 
homes  would  continue  fair.  It  is  man's  own  sin  that  defaces  the  beauty  and  mars  the 
happiness  of  man's  home.  When  men  find  themselves  in  positions  that  are  not 
compatible  with  their  happiness  and  usefulness,  it  is  sin  that  has  placed  them  there. 
3.  Quickly  lost.  How  long  they  continued  innocent  is  useless  to  conjecture,  though 
probably  it  waa  not  long.    More  important  is  it  to  observe  that  not  much  was 


48  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  [CH.  n.  8—17 

required  to  deprive  them  of  their  lovely  home — one  act  of  disobedience  I  See  th« 
danger  of  even  one  sin.  4.  Ultimately  recoverable.  This  truth  was  taught  by  thi 
stationing  of  the  cherubim  at  its  gate  (q.  v.)  Rev.  xxii.  1  tells  us  it  has  beei 
regained  for  us  by  Christ,  and  will  in  the  end  be  bestowed  on  us. 

IV.  A  home  op  happiness.  1.  Everything  was  absent  that  might  mar  nian'i 
felicity.  No  sin,  no  error,  no  sorrow.  2.  Everything  was  present  that  could  ministei 
t  )  his  enjoyment.  There  was  ample  gratification  for  all  the  different  parts  of  his 
(  implex  nature.  (1)  For  his  bodily  senses,  the  fair  scenes,  melodious  sounds, 
crystal  streams,  and  luscious  fruits  of  the  garden.  (2)  For  his  mental  powers,  the 
study  of  the  works  of  God.  (3)  For  his  social  affections,  a  loving  and  lovely 
partner.  (4)  For  his  spiritual  nature,  God.  To  reproduce  the  happiness  of  Eden, 
so  far  as  that  is  possible  in  a  sinful  world,  there  is  needed  (a)  communion  with  a 
gracious  God ;  (o)  the  felicity  of  a  loving  and  a  pious  home  ;  (c)  the  joy  of  life — 
physical,  intellectual,  moral. 

V.  A  place  of  probation.  This  probation  was— 1.  Necessary.  Virtue  that  stands 
only  because  it  has  never  been  assaulted  is,  to  say  the  least  of  it,  not  of  the  highest 
kind.  Unless  man  had  been  subjected  to  trial  it  might  have  remained  dubious 
whether  he  obeyed  of  free  choice  or  from  mechanical  necessity.  3.  Easy.  The 
specific  commandment  which  Adam  was  required  to  observe  was  not  severe  in  its 
terms.  The  limitations  it  prescribed  were  of  the  smallest  possible  description — 
abstinence  from  only  one  tree.  3.  Gracious.  Instead  of  perilling  the  immortality 
of  Adam  and  his  posterity  upon  every  single  act  of  their  lives,  he  suspended  it  upon 
the  observance,  doubtless  for  only  a  short  space  of  time,  of  one  easily-obeyed 
precept,  which  he  had  the  strongest  possible  inducement  to  obey.  If  he  maintained 
his  integrity,  not  only  would  his  own  holiness  and  happiness  be  confirmed,  but  those 
of  his  descendants  would  be  secured  ;  while  if  he  failed,  he  would  involve  not  himself 
alone,  but  all  succeeding  generations  in  the  sweep  of  a  terrific  penalty.  The  clear 
ness  with  which  that  penalty  was  made  known,  the  certainty  of  its  execution,  and 
the  severity  of  its  inflictions,  were  proofs  of  the  grace  of  God  towards  Ms  creature 
man. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  8 — 17. — Man's  first  dwelling-place.  The  description  of  Eden  commences 
an  entirely  new  stage  in  the  record.  We  are  now  entering  upon  the  history  of 
humanity  as  such. 

I.  The  first  fact  in  that  history  is  a  state  of  "pleasantness."  The  garden  is 
planted  by  God.  The  trees  are  adapted  to  human  life,  to  support  it,  to  gratify  it ; 
and  in  the  midst  of  the  garden  the  two  trees  which  represent  the  two  most  important 
facts  with  which  revelation  is  about  to  deal,  viz.,  immortality  and  sin. 

II.  Outspread  blessing.  The  river  breaks  into  four  fountains,  whose  description 
carries  us  over  enormous  regions  of  the  world.  It  is  the  river  which  went  out  of 
Eden  to  water  the  garden ;  so  that  the  conception  before  us  is  that  of  an  abode  of 
man  specially  prepared  of  God,  not  identical  with  Eden  in  extent,  but  in  character ; 
and  the  pkture  is  carried  out,  as  it  were,  by  the  channels  of  the  outflowing  streams, 
which  bear  the  Eden  life  with  them  over  the  surface  of  the  earth,  so  that  the  general 
effect  of  the  whole  is  a  prophecy  of  blessing,  Eden-like  beauty,  and  pleasantness, 
over  the  whole  extent  of  th*  world. 

III.  The  prepared  garden  waited  for  its  inhabitant.  "And  the  Lord  God 
took  the  man,  and  put  him  into  the  garden  of  Eden"  (literally,  made  him  to  rest  in  the 
garden)  "  to  dress  it  and  to  keep  it."  Perhaps  the  simplest  view  of  these  words  is  the 
most  significant.  Man  is  led  into  a  life  of  pleasantness,  with  only  such  demands 
upon  him  as  it  will  be  no  burden  to  meet ;  and  in  that  life  of  pure  happiness  and  free 
activity  he  is  made  conscious,  not  of  mere  dependence  upon  his  Creator  for  existence, 
not  of  laws,  hanging  over  him  like  threatening  swords,  but  of  a  Divine  command- 
ment which  at  once  gave  liberty  and  restrained  it,  which  surrounded  the  one  tree  of 
knowledge  of  good  and  evil  with  its  circle  of  prohibition,  not  as  an  arbitrary  test  of 
obedience,  bat  as  a  Divine  proclamation  of  eternal  righteousness.     "Evil  is"  death." 


OH.  ii.  8- -17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  4& 

"  Thou  shalt  not  eat  of  it,"  for  this  reason,  that  "  in  the  day  that  thou  eatest  thereof 
thou  shalt  surely  die."  It  is  not  a  subjection  of  a  new-made  creature  to  a  test.  It 
would  be  a  harsh  demand  to  make  of  Adam,  unless  he  understood  that  it  was  founded 
on  the  nature  of  things. 

IV.  The  tree  of  life  and  the  tree  of  death  stand  together  in  the  midst  of 
the  garden.  They  hold  the  same  position  still  in  every  sphere  of  human  existence. 
But  the  book  of  Divine  grace,  as  it  teaches  us  how  the  sin-stricken,  dying  world  is 
restored  to  a  paradise  of  Divine  blessedness,  reveals  at  the  last,  in  the  vision  of  the 
Christian  seer,  only  the  tree  of  life  beside  the  water  of  life  ;  the  evil  cast  out,  and  the 
death  which  it  brought  with  it,  and  the  new-made  inhabitants  "  taking  freely"  of 
"  the  pleasures  which  are  for  evermore." — B. 

Vers.  9,  10. — The  tree  of  life  and  the  water  of  life.  These  two  features  of  Eden 
claim  special  attention. 

I.  Their  recurrence  in  Scripture.  They  link  the  paradise  of  unfallen  man  to 
that  of  redeemed  man.  Actual  channels  of  life  and  blessing,  they  were  also  figures 
of  that  salvation  which  the  history  of  the  world  was  gradually  to  unfold.  But  sin 
came,  and  death  ;  present  possession  was  lost.  What  remained  was  the  promise  of 
a  Saviour.  We  pass  over  much  of  preparation  for  his  coming:  the  selection  of  a 
people  ;  the  care  of  God  for  his  vineyard  ;  the  ordinances  and  services  foreshadow- 
ing the  gospel.  Then  a  time  of  trouble:  Jerusalem  a  desolation;  the  people  in 
captivity  ;  the  temple  destroyed ;  the  ark  gone ;  sacrifices  at  an  end.  "  Where 
is  now  thy  God  ?  "  Where  thy  hope  ?  Such  the  state  of  the  world  when  a  vision 
given  to  Ezekiel  (Bzek.  xlvii.  1 — 12),  reproducing  the  imagery  of  Eden,  but  adapted 
to  the  need  of  fallen  man.  Again  we  have  the  stream  ;  now  specially  to  heal.  Its 
source  the  mercy-seat  (comp.  Ezek.  xliii.  1 — 7 ;  xlvii.  1 ;  Bev.  xxii.  1).  And  the 
trees;  not  different  from  the  tree  of  life  (Ezek.  xlvii.  12:  "It  shall  bring  forth  new 
fruit");  varied  manifestations  of  grace;  forfood  and  for  medicine.  But  observe, 
the  vision  is  of  a  coming  dispensation.  Again  a  space.  Our  Saviour's  earthly 
ministry  over.  The  Church  is  struggling  on.  The  work  committed  to  weak  hands  ; 
the  treasure  in  earthen  vessels.  But  before  the  volume  of  revelation  closed,  the 
same  symbols  are  shown  in  vision  to  St.  John  (Bev.  xxii.  1,  2).  The  "  river  of 
water  of  life "  (cf.  "  living  water,"  John  iv.  10),  and  the  tree  whose  fruit  and 
leaves  are  for  food  and  healing.  Meanwhile  our  Lord  had  said,  "  Blessed  are  they 
which  do  hunger  and  thirst  after  righteousness."  A  link  to  connect  this  with  Gen. 
ii.  is  Bev.  ii.  7  (cf.  also  Bev.  xii.  11).  And  again,  the  word  used  for  "tree"  in  all 
these  passages  is  that  used  for  the  cross  in  Gal.  iii.  13  and  1  Pet.  ii.  24. 

II.  Their  spiritual  significance.  The  tree  with  its  fruit  and  leaves  are  the 
manifestation  of  Christ  to  the  soul — to  sinners  pardon,  to  the  weak  support  and 
guidance,  to  saints  communion.  And  the  stream  is  the  gospel  (the  four-parted  river 
in  Eden  has  been  likened  to  the  four  Gospels),  spreading  throughout  the  world, 
bringing  healing,  light,  and  life ;  enab'ing  men  to  rejoice  in  hope.  But  mark,  the 
drops  of  which  that  stream  is  composed  are  living  men.  The  gospel  spreads  from 
heart  to  heart,  and  from  lip  to  lip  (cf.  John  vii.  38).  Forming  part  of  that  healing 
flood  are  preachers  of  the  gospel  in  every  place  and  way  ;  and  thinkers  contending 
for  the  faith ;  and  men  mighty  in  prayer ;  and  those  whose  loving,  useful  lives  sel 
forth  Christ;  and  the  sick  silently  preaching  patience;  and  the  child  in  his  littla 
ministry.  There  is  helping  work  for  all.  The  Lord  hath  need  of  all.  To  each  one 
the  question  comes,  Art  thou  part  of  that  stream?  Hast  thou  realised  the  stream 
of  mercy,  the  gift  of  salvation  for  thine  own  need?  And  canst  thou  look  at  the 
many  still  unhealed  and  be  content  to  do  nothing?  Thou  couldst  not  cause  the 
stream  to  flow;  but  it  is  thine  to  press  the  " living  water "  upon  others,  to  help  to 
save  others  Art  thou  doing  this  ?  Is  there  not  within  the  circle  of  thy  daily  life 
some  one  in  grief  whom  Christian  sympathy  may  help,  some  anxious  one  whom 
a  word  of  faith  may  strengthen,  some  undecided  one  who  may  be  influenced  ? 
There  is  thy  work.  Let  the  reality  of  Christ's  gift  and  his  charge  to  thee  so  fill 
thy  heart  that  real  longing  may  lead  to  earnest  prayer ;  then  a  way  will  b» 
opened. — M. 

GENESIS.  IS 


60 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[oh.  n.  18—25 


EXPOSITION. 


Ver.  18. — In  anticipation  of  the  ensuing 
narrative  of  the  temptation  and  the  fall, 
the  historian,  having  depicted  man's  settle- 
ment in  Eden,  advances  to  complete  his 
dramatis  personce  by  the  introduction  upon 
the  scene  of  the  animals  and  woman.  In 
the  preliminary  creation  record  (l.  27)  it  is 
simply  stated  that  God  created  man,  male 
and  female  ;  there  is  a  complete  absence  of 
details  as  to  the  Divine  modvs  operandi  in 
the  execution  of  these,  his  last  and  greatest 
works.  It  is  one  object,  among  others,  of  the 
second  portion  of  the  history  to  supply  those 
details.  With  regard  to  man  (Adam),  an 
account  of  his  formation,  at  once  minute  and 
exhaustive,  has  been  given  in  the  preceding 
verses  (7 — 17) ;  now,  with  like  attention  to 
antecedent  and  concomitant  circumstances 
and  events,  the  sacred  penman  adds  a  de- 
scription of  the  time,  reason,  manner,  and 
result  of  the  formation  of  woman.  And 
the  Lord  God  said,  It  is  not  good  for  man  to 
be  alone.  While  the  animals  were  produced 
sither  in  swarms  (as  the  fishes)  or  in  pairs 
(as  the  birds  and  beasts),  man  was  created  as 
in  individual ;  his  partner,  by  a  subsequent 
aperation  of  creative  power,  being  produced 
from  himself.  With  the  wild  phantasies  and 
gross  speculations  of  some  theosophists,  as  to 
whether,  prior  to  the  creation  of  Eve,  Adam 
was  androgynic  (Bohme),  or  simply  vir  in 
potentia,  out  of  which  state  he  passed  the 
moment  the  woman  stood  by  his  side  (Ziegler), 
a  devout  exegesis  is  not  required  to  inter- 
meddle. Neither  is  it  needful  to  wonder  how 
God  should  pronounce  that  to  be  not  good 
which  he  had  previously  (i.  31)  affirmed 
was  good.  The  Divine  judgment  of  which 
the  preceding  chapter  speaks  was  expressed 
at  the  completion  of  man's  creation ;  this, 
while  that  creation  was  in  progress.  For 
the  new-made  man  to  have  been  left  with- 
out a  partner  would,  in  the  estimation  of 
Jehovah  Elohim,  have  been  for  him  a  con- 
dition of  being  which,  if  not  necessarily 
bad  in  itself,  yet,  considering  his  intellect- 
ual and  social  nature,  "  would  eventually 
have  passed  over  from  the  negative  not  good, 
or  a  manifest  want,  into  the  positive  not  good, 
or  a  hurtful  impropriety"  (Lange).  "  It  was 
not  good  for  man  to  be  alone ;  not,  as  certain 
foolish  Rabbis  conceited,  lest  he  should 
imagine  himself  to  he  the  lord  of  the  world, 
or  as  though  no  man  could  live  without  a 
woman,  which  is  contrary  to  Scripture  ;  but 
in  respect  of  (1)  mutual  society  and  comfort, 
(2)  the  propagation  of  the  race,  (3)  the 
increase  and  generation  of  the  Church  of 
God,  and  (4)  the  promised  seed  of  the  wo- 
man (Willet).   Accordingly,  Jehovah  Elohim, 


for  whom  (seeing  that  his  nature  la  to  dis- 
pense happiness  to  his  creatures)  no  more 
than  for  Adam  would  it  have  been  good  that 
man,  being  what  he  was,  should  remain  alone, 
said,  I  will  provide  a  help  meet  for  him ; 
literally,  an  helper,  as  over  against  him,  i.  e. 
corresponding  to  him,- fior)96v  tear'  civtov; 
ver.  20,  n/ioioc  aiirif,  LXX.  The  expres- 
sion indicates  that  the  forthcoming  helper 
was  to  be  of  similar  nature  to  the  man  him- 
self, corresponding  by  way  of  supplement  to 
the  incompleteness  of  his  lonely  being,  and 
in  every  way  adapted  to  be  his  co-partner  and 
companion.  All  that  Adam's  nature  de- 
manded for  its  completion,  ph jsically,  intel- 
lectually, socially,  was  to  be  included  in  this 
altera  ego  who  was  soon  to  stand  by  his  side. 
Thus  in  man's  need,  and  woman's  power  to 
satisfy  that  need,  is  laid  the  foundation  for 
the  Divine  institution  of  marriage,  which 
was  afterwards  prescribed  not  for  the  first 
pair  alone,  but  for  all  their  posterity. 

Ver.  19.  —And  out  of  the  gronnd  the  lord 
God  formed  every  beast  of  the  field,  and 
every  fowl  of  the  air.  To  allege  that  the 
Creator's  purpose  to  provide  a  helpmeet  foi 
Adam  seeks  realisation  through  the  produc- 
tion of  the  animals  (Kalisch,  Alford)  pro- 
ceeds upon  a  misapprehension  of  the  proper 
nexus  which  binds  the  thoughts  of  the 
historian,  and  a  want  of  attention  to  the 
peculiar  structure  of  Hebrew  composition, 
besides  exhibiting  Jehovah  Elohim  in  the 
character  of  an  empiric  who  only  tentatively 
discovers  the  sort  of  partner  that  is  suitable 
for  man.  It  is  not  the  time,  but  simply  the 
fact,  of  the  creation  of  the  animals  that  the 
historian  records.  The  Vav.  consec.  does 
not  necessarily  involve  time-succession,  but 
is  frequently  employed  to  indicate  thought- 
sequence  (cf.  ii.  8;  1  Kings  ii.  13,  &c). 
The  verb  (pret. )  may  also  quite  legitimately 
be  rendered  "  had  formed  '  (Bush).  "  Our 
modern  style  of  expressing  the  Semitic 
writer's  thought  would  be  this — 'And  God 
brought  to  Adam  the  beasts  which  he  had 
formed  ' "  (Dolitzsch).  It  is  thus  unnecessary 
to  defend  the  record  from  a  charge  of  incon- 
sistency with  the  previous  section,  by  suppos- 
ing this  to  be  the  account  of  a  second  creation 
of  animals  in  the  district  of  Eden.  Anothci 
so-called  contradiction,  that  the  presen! 
narrative  takes  no  account  of  the  creation  ol 
aquatic  animals,  is  disposed  of  by  obseiving 
that  the  writer  only  Dotices  that  those  ani- 
mals which  were  brought  to  Adam  had  been 
previously  formed  by  God  from  the  ground, 
and  were  thus  in  the  line  of  the  on  war  J 
evolutions  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth 
which  led  up  to  man.     As  to  why  the  fishej 


ch.  ii.  18—25.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


51 


were  not  brought  into  the  garden,  if  other 
reason  is  required  besides  that  of  physical 
impossibility,  the  ingenuity  of  Keil  suggests 
that  these  were  not  so  nearly  related  to  Adam 
us  the  fowls  and  the  beasts,  which,  besides, 
were  the  animals- specially  ordained  for  hi* 
service.  And  brought  them  (literally, 
brought ;  not  necessarily  all  the  animals 
in  Eden,  but  specimens  of  them)  unto 
Adam.  We  agree  with  Willet  in  believing 
that  "  neither  did  Adam  gather  together  the 
cattle  as  a  shepherd  doth  his  sheep,  nor  did 
the  angels  muster  them,  nor  the  animals 
come  themselves,  and,  passing  by,  while  he 
sat  on  some  elevation,  bow  their  heads  at  his 
resplendent  appearance ;  nor  were  Adam's 
eyes  so  illuminate  that  he  beheld  them  all  in 
their  places — all  which,"  says  he,  "  are  but 
men's  conceits  ; "  but  that  through  the  secret 
influence  of  God  upon  their  natures  they  were 
assembled  round  the  inmate  of  paradise,  as 
afterwards  they  were  collected  in  the  ark.  The 
reasons  for  this  particular  action  on  the  part 
of  God  were  manifold ;  one  of  them  being 
stated  in  the  words  which  follow — to  see 
what  he  would  call  them  j  literally,  to  them. 
Already  man  had  received  from  God  his  first 
lesson  in  the  exercise  of  speech,  in  the  naming 
of  the  trees  and  the  imposition  of  the  pro- 
hibition. This  was  his  second — the  oppor- 
tunity afforded  him  of  using  for  himself  that 
gift  of  language  and  reason  with  which  he 
had  been  endowed.  In  this  it  is  implied  that 
man  was  created  with  the  faculty  of  speech, 
the  distinct  gift  of  articulate  and  rational 
utterance,  and  the  capacity  of  attaching 
words  to  ideas,  though  it  also  seems  to  infer 
that  the  evolution  of  a  language  was  for  him, 
as  it  is  for  the  individual  yet,  a  matter  of 
gradual  development.  Another  reason  was 
to  manifest  his  sovereignty  or  lordship  over 
the  inferior  creation.  And  whatsoever  Adam 
(literally,  the  man)  called  every  living  crea- 
ture (i.  e.  that  was  brought  to  him),  that  was 
the  name  thereof.  That  is  to  say,  it  not  only 
met  the  Divine  approbation  as  exactly  suit- 
able to  the  nature  of  the  creature,  and  thus 
was  a  striking  attestation  of  the  intelligence 
and  wisdom  of  the  first  man,  but  it  likewise 
adhered  to  the  creature  as  a  name  which 
had  been  assigned  by  its  master. 

Ver.  20. — Aid  Adam  gave  names  to  all 
cattle,  and  to  he  fowl  of  the  air,  and  to 
every  beast  of  the  field.  The  portrait  here 
delineated  of  the  first  man  is  something 
widely  different  from  that  of  an  infantile 
Mivage  slowly  groping  his  way  towards  the 
possession  of  articulate  speech  and  intel- 
ligible language  by  imitatior  of  the  sounds  of 
animals.  Speech  and  language  both  spring 
full-formed,  though  not  completely  matured, 
from  the  primus  homo  of  the  Bible.  As  to 
the  names  that  Adam  gave  the  animals,  with 
Calvin  we  need  not  doubt  that  they  were 


founded  on  the  best  of  reasons,  though  what 
they  were  it  is  impossible  to  discover,  as  it  k 
not  absolutely  certain  that  Adam  spoke  in 
Hebrew.  But  for  Adam  there  was  not  found 
an  help  meet  for  him.  This  was  the  chief 
reason  for  assembling  the  creatures.  It  was 
meant  to  reveal  his  loneliness.  The  longing 
for  a  partner  was  already  deeply  seated  in  his 
nature,  and  the  survey  of  the  animals,  coming 
to  him  probably  in  pairs,  could  not  fail  to 
intensify  that  secret  hunger  of  his  soul,  and 
perhaps  evoke  it  into  conscious  operation. 

Ver.  21.  -And  the  Lord  God  caused  a  deep 
sleep  to  fall  upon  Adam,  and  he  slept.  This 
was  clearly  not  a  sleep  of  weariness  or  fatigue, 
in  consequence  of  arduous  labours  undergone, 
but  a  supernatural  slumber,  which,  however, 
may  have  been  superinduced  upon  the  natural 
condition  of  repose.  Lightfoot,  following  the 
LXX. ,  who  translate  tardemah  (deep  sleep) 
by  ecstasy,  ixuTaaiq,  imagines  that  the 
whole  scene  of  Eve's  creation  was  presented 
to  Adam's  imagination  in  a  Divinely -inspired 
dream,  which  has  at  least  the  countenance 
of  Job  iv.  13  Such  a  supposition,  however, 
is  not  required  to  account  for  Adam's  recog- 
nition of  his  bride.  There  is  more  of  aptness 
in  the  observation  of  Lange,  that  in  the  deep 
sleep  of  Adam  we  have  an  echo  of  the  crea- 
tive evenings  that  preceded  the  Divine 
activity.  "Everything  out  of  which  some 
new  thing  is  to  come  sinks  down  before  the 
event  into  such  a  deep  sleep,"  is  the  far- 
seeing  and  comprehensive  remark  of  Ziegler. 
And  he  took  one  of  his  ribs  (tsela  —  some- 
thing bent,  from  tsala,  to  incline  ;  hence  a 
rib),  and  closed  up  the  flesh  (literally,  flesh) 
instead  thereof.  Whether  Adam  was  created 
with  a  superfluous  rib,  or  his  body  was  muti- 
lated by  the  abstraction  of  a  rib,  is  a  question 
for  the  curious.  In  the  first,  Calvin  finds 
nothing  "which  is  not  in  accordance  with 
Divine  providence,"  while  he  favours  the 
latter  conjecture,  and  thinks  that  Adam  got 
a  rich  compensation — "  quum  se  integrum 
vidit  in  uxore,  qui  prius  tantum  dimidius 
erat."  Luther  inclines  to  think  that  Adam's 
language  in  ver.  23  implies  that  not  the  bare 
rib,  but  the  rib  with  the  accompanying  fleth, 
was  extracted. 

Ver.  22.— And  the  rib,  which  the  Lord  God 
had  taken  from  man,  made  he  (literally, 
buildedinto;  oedificavit,  Vulgate;  wtcotiintiaw, 
LXX.)  a  woman.  The  peculiar  phraseology 
employed  to  describe  the  formation  of  Adam  » 
partner  has  been  understood  as  referring  to 
the  physical  configuration  of  woman's  body, 
which  is  broadest  towards  the  middle  (Lyra) ; 
to  the  incompleteness  of  Adam's  being,  which 
was  like  an  unfinished  building  until  Eve 
was  formed  (Calvin) ;  to  the  part  of  the 
female  in  building  up  the  family  (Delitzsrh, 
Macdonald),  to  the  building  up  cf  th* 
Church,  of  which  she  was  designed  to  U» 
I  -1 


52 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  ii.  18—26 


a  type  (Bouar) ; — yet  it  may  be  doubted  if 
there  ia  not  as  much  truth  in  the  remark 
that  "by  the  many  words  used  in  the  genei'a- 
tion  of  mankind,  as  creating  (ch.  i.  27), 
making  (ch.  i.  26),  forming  and  inspiring 
(ch.  ii  7),  and  now  building,  Moses  would 
uet  forth  this  wondrous  workmanship  for 
whijh  the  Psalmist  so  laudeth  God,"  Ps. 
cxxxix.  14  (Ainsworth).  And  brought  her 
unto  the  man.  /.  e.  led,  conducted,  and  pre- 
sented her  to  Adam.  "  The  word  implies 
the  solemn  bestowment  of  her  in  the  bonds 
of  the  marriage  covenant,  which  is  hence 
called  the  covenant  of  God  (Prov.  ii.  17)  ; 
implying  that  he  is  the  Author  of  this  sacred 
institution  "  (Bush).  On  awaking  from  his 
slumber  Adam  at  once  recognised  the  Divine 
intention,  and  joyfully  welcomed  his  bride. 

Ver.  23.  — And  Adam  said.  Either  as  being 
possessed,  while  in  a  sinless  state,  of  a  power 
of  intuitive  perception  which  has  been  lost 
through  the  fall,  or  as  speaking  under  Divine 
inspiration  (vide  Matt.  xix.  4 — 6).  This  now. 
Literally,  this  tread,  step,  or  stroke,  meaning 
either  this  time,  looking  back  to  the  previous 
review  of  the  animal  creation,  as  if  he  wished 
to  say,  At  last  one  has  come  who  is  suitable 
to  be  my  partner  (Calvin) ;  or,  less  probably, 
looking  forward  to  the  ordinary  mode  of 
woman's  production,  this  time  she  is  super- 
nativrally  formed  (Bush).  "  The  thrice  re- 
peated this  is  characteristic.  It  vividly 
points  to  the  woman  on  whom,  in  joyful 
astonishment,  the  man's  eye  now  rests  with 
the  full  power  of  first  love"  (Delitzsch). 
Instinctively  he  recognises  her  relation  to 
himself.  Bone  of  my  bone,  and  flesh  of  my 
flesh.  The  language  is  exprossive  at  once  of 
woman's  derivation  from  man  (yvin)  iiandpog, 
1  Cor.  xi.  8,  12)  and  likeness  to  man.  The 
first  of  these  implies  her  subordination  or 
subjection  to  man,  or  man's  headship  over 
iroman  (1  Cor.  xi.  3),  which  Adam  immedi- 
ately proceeds  to  assert  by  assigning  to  her 
a  name  ;  the  second  is  embodied  in  the  name 
which  she  receives.  She  (literally,  to  this) 
shall  be  called  Woman  (isha,  i.  e.  maness, 
from  ish,  man.  Cf.  Greek,  <ii/fyn'c  (Symma- 
chus),  from  avrip  ;  Latin,  vir-ago,  vine  (old 
Latin),  from  vir ;  English,  woman  (womb- 
man,  Anglo-Saxon),  from  man ;  German, 
miinninn,  from  mann  ;  Sanscrit,  nari,  from 
nara  ;  Ethiopic,  beesith,  from  beesi),  because 
she  (this)  was  taken  from  Man.  Ish,  the 
name  given  by  Adam  to  himself  in  contra- 
distinction to  his  spouse,  is  interpreted  as 
significant  of  man's  authority  (Gesenius),  or 
of  his  social  nature  (Meier) ;  but  its  exact 
etymology  is  involved  in  obscurity.  Its  re- 
lation to  Adham  is  the  same  as  that  of  vir 
to  homo  and  iviip  to  avBpMiroQ. 

Ver.  24. — Therefore  Bhall  a  man  leave  his 
father  and  mother,  and  shall  cleave  unto  his 
wife.     There  i»  nothing  in  the  use  of  such 


terms  as  father  and  mother,  or  in  the  fad 
that  the  sentiment  is  prophetic,  to  prevent 
the  words  from  being  regarded  as  a  continu- 
ation of  Adam's  speech,  although,  on  the 
other  hand,  the  statement  of  Christ  (Matt, 
xix.  5)  does  not  preclude  the  possibility  of 
Moses  being  their  author ;  but  whethei 
uttered  by  the  first  husband  (Delitzsch, 
Macdonald)  or  by  the  historian  (Calvin, 
Murphy),  they  must  be  viewed  as  an  in- 
spired declaration  of  the  law  of  marriage. 
Its  basis  (fundamental  reason  and  predispos- 
ing cause)  they  affirm  to  be  (1)  the  original 
relationship  of  man  and  woman,  on  the  plat- 
form of  creation ;  and  (2)  the  marriage  union 
effected  between  the  first  pair.  Its  nature 
they  explain  fo  be  (1)  a  forsaking  (on  the 
part  of  the  woman  as  well  as  the  man)  of 
father  and  mother — not  filially,  in  respect  of 
duty,  but  locally,  in  respect  of  habitation, 
and  comparatively,  in  respect  of  affection  ; 
and  (2)  a  cleaving  unto  his  wife,  in  a  con- 
jugium  corporis  atque  animae.  Its  resilt 
is  stated  in  the  words  which  follow :  and 
they  shall  be  one  flesh  (literally,  into  one 
flesh  ;  tic  aapxa  n'tav,  Matt.  xix.  5,  LXX. ). 
The  language  points  to  a  unity  of  persons, 
and  not  simply  to  a  conjunction  of  bodies, 
or  a  community  of  interests,  or  even  a  reci- 
procity of  auctions.  Malachi  (ch.  ii.  15) 
and  Christ  (Matt.  xix.  5)  explain  this  veise 
as  teaching  the  indissoluble  character  of 
marriage  and  condemning  the  practice  of 
polygamy. 

Ver.  25.-  -And  they  were  both  naked.  Not 
partially  (Pye  Smith),  but  completely  lesti- 
tute  of  clothing.  Diodorus  Siculus  and  l'lato 
both  mention  nakedness  as  a  feature  of  the 
golden  age  and  a  characteristic  of  the  first 
men  (viae  Bosenmiiller,  Scholia  in  loco). 
The  man  and  his  wife.  The  first  pair  of 
human  beings  are  henceforth  lecognised  in 
their  relationship  to  one  another  <is  husband 
and  wife.  And  they  were  not  ashamed.  Not 
because  they  were  wholly  uncultivated  and 
their  moral  insight  undeveloped  (Knobel, 
Kalisch) ;  but  because  their  souls  were  arrayed 
in  purity,  and  "their  bodies  were  made  holy 
through  the  spirit  which  animated  them" 
(Keil).  "They  were  naked,  but  yet  they 
were  not  so.  Their  bodies  were  the  clothing 
of  their  internal  glory ;  and  their  internal 
glory  was  the  clothing  of  their  nakedness  " 
(Delitzsch). 

It  is  not  surprising  that  the  primeval 
history  of  mankind  should  have  left  its  im- 
press upon  the  current  of  tradition.  The 
Assyrian  tablets  that  relate  to  man  are  so 
fragmentary  and  mut  dated  that  they  can 
scarcely  bo  rendered  intelligible.  So  far  aa 
they  have  been  deciphered,  the  first  appears 
on  its  obverse  side  '  to  give  the  speech  of 
the  Deity  to  the  newly-created  pair  (man 
and    woman),    instructing    them    in    theii 


[OH.  II. 


18—25. 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


53 


duties, "  In  which  can  be  detected  a  reference 
to  something  which  is  eaten  by  the  stomach , 
to  the  duty  of  daily  invocation  of  the  Deity, 
to  the  danger  of  leaving  God's  fear,  in  which 
•lone  they  can  be  holy,  and  to  the  propriety 
of  trusting  only  a  friend  ;  and  on  its  reverse 
What  resembles  a  discourse  to  the  first  woman 
on  her  duties,  in  which  occur  the  words, 
"With  the  lord  of  thy  beauty  thou  shalt  be 
faithful :  to  do  evil  thou  shalt  not  approach 
him"  ('Chaldean  Genesis,'  pp.  78  —  80). 
The  Persian  legend  describes  Meschia  and 
Meschiane,  the  first  parents  of  our  race,  as 
living  in  purity  and  innocence,  and  in  the 
enjoyment  of  happiness  which  Ormuzd  pro- 
mised to  render  perpetual  if  they  persevered 
in  virtue.  But  Anriman,  an  evil  demon 
(Dev),  suddenly  appeared  in  the  form  of  a 
serpent,  and  gave  them  of  the  fruit  of  a 
wonderful  tree.  The  literature  of  the  Hin- 
doos distinguishes  four  ages  of  the  world, 
in  the  first  of  which  Justice,  in  the  form  of 
a  bull,  kept  herself  firm  on  her  four  feet ; 
when  Virtue  reigned,  no  good  which  the 
mortals  possessed  was  mixed  with  baseness, 
and  man,  free  from  disease,  saw  all  his 
wishes  accomplished,  and  attained  an  age 
of  400  years.  The  Chinese  also  have  their 
age  of  happy  men,  living  in  abundance 
of  food,  and  surrounded  by  the  peaceful 
beasts  ('  Kalisch  on  Genesis,'  p.  87).  In  the 
Zendavesta,  Yima,  the  first  Iranic  king,  lives 
in  a  secluded  spot,  where  he  and  his  people 


enjoy  uninterrupted  happiness,  in  a  regioj 
free  from  sin,  folly,  violence,  poverty,  deform- 
ity. The  Teutonic  Eddas  have  a  glimpse 
of  the  same  truth  in  their  magnificent  drink- 
ing halls,  glittering  with  burnished  gold, 
where  the  primeval  race  enjoyed  a  life  of 
perpetual  festivity.  Traces  of  a  similar  belief 
are  found  among  the  Thibetans,  Mongolians, 
Cingalese,  and  others  (Rawlinson's  'Hist. 
Illustrations  of  Scripture,'  p.  10).  The 
Western  traditions  are  familiar  to  scholars 
in  the  pages  of  Hesiod,  who  speaks  of  the 
golden  age  when  men  were  like  the  gods, 
free  from  labours,  troubles,  cares,  and  all 
evils  in  general ;  when  the  earth  yielded  her 
fruits  spontaneously,  and  when  men  were 
beloved  by  the  gods,  with  whom  they  held 
uninterrupted  communion  (Hesiod,  Opera 
et  Dies,'  90).  And  of  Ovid,  who  adds  to  this 
picture  the  element  of  moral  goodness  as  a 
characteristic  of  the  aurea  eetas  ('  Metam.,'  i 
89).  Macrobius  ('Somn.  Scipionis,' ii.  10) 
also  depicts  this  period  as  one  in  which 
reigned  simplicitas  mail  nescia  et  adhuc 
astutim  inexperta  (Mncdonald,  '  Creation 
and  the  Fall,'  p.  147).  "These  coincidences 
affect  the  originality  of  the  Hebrew  writings 
as  little  as  the  frequent  resemblance  of  Mosaic 
and  heathen  laws.  They  teach  us  that  all 
such  narratives  have  a  common  source  ;  that 
they  are  reminiscences  of  primeval  traditions 
modified  by  the  different  nations  in  accord- 
ance with  their  individual  culture"  (Kalisch^ 


HOMILETIC8. 

Ver.  22.— The  first  marriage.  I.  The  lonely  man.  1.  Nobly  born.  8prung 
from  the  soil,  yet  descended  from  above.  Fashioned  of  the  dust,  yet  inspired  by  a 
celestial  breath.  Allied  to  the  beasts,  yet  the  offspring  of  God.  2.  Comfortably 
placed-  His  native  country  a  sunny  region  of  delights  (Eden,  ch.  ii.  8)  ;  hig  home 
a  beautiful  and  fertile  garden  (ch.  iii.  6);  his  supplies  of  the  amplest  possible 
description  (ch.  i.  30;  ii.  16);  his  occupation  light  and  pleasant  (ch.  ii.  15);  his 
restrictions  slight  and  trivial  (ch.  ii.  17) ;_  his  privileges  large  (ch.  ii.  16).  3.  Richly 
endowed.  With  immortality  (ch.  ii.  17),  intelligence  (ch.  ii.  19),  social  capacities  and 
instincts  (ch.  ii.  18),  the  faculty  of  speech  (ch.ii.  20).  4.  Highly  exalted.  As  God's 
offspring,  he  was  invested  with  world-dominion  (ch.  i.  28 ;  Ps.  viii.  6),  symbolised 
in  his  naming  of  the  creatures  (ch.  ii.  20).  Yet — 5.  Essentially  alone.  Not  as  entirely 
bereft  of  companionship,  having  on  the  one  hand  the  society  of  Jehovah  Elohim, 
and  on  the  other  the  presence  of  the  animals ;  but  in  neither  the  Creator  nor  the 
creatures  could  he  find  his  other  self — his  counterpart  and  complement,  his  consort 
and  companion.  On  the  one  hand  Jehovah  Elohim  was  too  high,  while  on  the  other 
the  creatures  were  too  low,  for  such  partnership  as  Adam's  nature  craved.  And  so 
Adam  dwelt  in  solitude  apart  from  both.  "  But  for  Adam  there  wag  not  found  an 
help  meet  for  him." 

II.  The  peuvided  partner.  1.  Divinely  fashioned  (yet.  22).  (1)  Woman  was 
the  last  of  God's  creative  works;  presumably,  therefore,  she  was  the  best.  "  Eve's 
being  made  after  Adam  puts  an  honour  upon  that  sex  as  the  glory  of  the  man  (1  Cor. 
xi.  7).  If  man  is  the  head,  she  is  the  crown — a  crown  to  her  husband,  the  crown 
o£  the  visible  creation  "  (M.  Henry).  (2)  Woman  was  not  made  till  everything  wag 
in  the  highest  state  of  readiness  for  her  reception.  Before  her  creation,  not  only 
must  there  be  a  home  for  her  reception,  provision  for  her  maintenance,  and  gervanti 


54  THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS.  [ch.  u.  18—26 

to  attend  upon  her  bidding ;  there  must  likewise  be  a  husband  that  feels  the  need  of 
her  sweet  society,  that  longs  for  her  coming,  and  that  can  appreciate  her  worth. 
Hence  he  who  seeks  a  partner  should  first  find  a  house  in  which  to  lodge  her,  th« 
means  to  support  her,  but  specially  the  love  wherewith  to  cherish  her.  (3)  Woman 
was  formed  out  of  finer  and  more  precious  material  than  man,  being  constructed  of 
a  rib  taken  from  his  side.  "The  man  was  dust  refined,  but  the  woman  was  dust 
double  refined,  one  remove  further  from  the  earth  "  (M.  Henry).  This  was  not 
because  of  any  supposed  excellence  residing  in  the  matter  of  a  human  body.  It 
was  designed  to  indicate  woman's  unity  with  man  as  part  of  himself,  and  woman's 
claim  upon  man  for  affection  and  protection.  She  was  made  of  a  rib  taken  from 
his  side — "  not  made  out  of  his  head,  to  rule  over  him ;  nor  out  of  his  feet,  to  be 
trampled  on  by  him  ;  but  out  of  his  side,  to  be  equal  with  him  ;  under  his  arm,  to  be 
protected  ;  and  near  his  heart,  to  be  beloved  "  (Henry).  (4)  Woman  was  constructed 
with  the  greatest  possible  care.  The  entire  operation  was  carried  through,  not  only 
under  God's  immediate  superintendence,  but  exclusively  by  God's  own  hand.  Adam 
neither  saw,  knew,  nor  took  part  in  the  work.  God  cast  him  into  a  deep  sleep, 
"  that  no  room  might  be  left  to  imagine  that  he  had  herein  directed  the  Spirit  of  the 
Lord,  or  been  his  counsellor"  (Henry).  Then  by  God's  own  hand  Adam's  side  was 
opened,  a  rib  extracted,  the  flesh  closed  in  its  stead,  and  finally,  the  rib  thus  removed 
from  Adam's  side — 

*'  Under  his  forming  hands  a  creature  grew, 
Man  like,  but  different  sex ;  so  lovely  fair, 
That  what  seemed  fair  in  all  the  world,  seemed  now 
Mean,  or  in  her  summed  up,  in  her  contained, 

And  in  her  looks  ; 

Grace  was  in  all  her  steps,  heaven  in  her  eye, 

In  every  gesture  dignity  and  love"  (Milton,  '  Par.  Lost,'  Bk.  viii.  469). 

2.  Divinely  presented  (ver.  22).  "The  Lord  brought  her  unto  the  man." 
"  Wherein  we  nave  exemplified  the  three  great  causes  of  marriage.  (1)  The  father's 
consent,  in  God's  giving.  (2)  The  woman's  consent,  in  Eve's  coming.  This  wag 
no  forced  marriage ;  the  woman  comes  freely.  (3)  The  man's  consent,  in  Adam's 
receiving.  '  And  Adam  said,  This  is  at  last  bone  of  my  bone ' "  (Hughes).  And 
without  these  human  marriages  are  sinfully  contracted.  Love  for  the  bride  is  one 
of  the  signs  which  God  vouchsafes  of  his  approval  of  a  marriage ;  the  bride's  affec- 
tion for  the  bridegroom  is  another ;  while  a  third  is  the  approbation  and  the  blessing 
of  the  parents  of  both. 

III.  The  wedded  pair.  1.  Married  by  God.  "God  is  the  best  maker  of  mar- 
riages ''  (Shakespeare).  Nay,  unless  God  unites  there  is  no  real  marriage,  but  only 
an  unhallowed  connection,  legitimised  by  man's  laws,  it  may  be,  but  not  sanctioned 
by  God's.  As  this  wedding  was  of  God's  arranging,  so  likewise  was  it  of  his  cele- 
brating. What  celestial  benedictions  were  outbreathed  upon  the  young  and  innocent 
pair,  as  they  stood  there  before  their  Maker,  radiant  in  beauty,  tremulous  with  joy, 
full  of  adoration,  we  are  left  to  imagine.  Happy  they  whose  nuptials  are  first  sanc- 
tioned and  then  celebrated  by  the  living  God  I  2.  United  in  love.  This  first 
marriage  was  certainly  something  more  than  a  social  or  a  civil  contract ;  something 
other  than  a  union  of  convenience  or  a  diplomatic  alliance ;  something  vastly 
different  from  a  legalised  connubium.  It  was  the  realisation  of  what  our  Laureate 
pictures  as  the  ideal  marriage  : — 

"Each  fulfils 
Defect  in  each,  and  always  thought  in  thought, 
Purpose  in  purpose,  will  in  will,  they  grow, 
The  single,  pure,  and  perfect  animal ; 
The  two-cell  d  heart  beating,  with  one  foil  stroke, 
Life"  ('Princess,'  vii.). 

8.  Clothed  in  innocence.  Never  had  bridal  pair  so  beautiful  and  radiant  apparel. 
The  unclothed  bodies  of  our  first  parents  we  can  imagine  were  enswathed  in  ethereal 
and  transfiguring  light ;  in  their  case  the  outshining  of  their  hoiy  souls,  which,  as  yet. 


OB.  ii.  18—26.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  U 

were  the  undimmed  and  unmarred  image  of  their  Maker,  capable  of  receiving  and 
reflecting  his  glory.  Alas,  never  bridal  pair  1ms  stood  in  robes  so  fair  1  The  beauty 
of  holiness,  the  lustre  of  innocence,  the  radiance  of  purity  have  departed  from  the 
souls  of  men.  Never  till  we  stand  in  the  celestial  Eden,  where  they  neither  marry 
nor  are  given  in  marriage,  will  garments  of  such  incomparable  splendour  be  ours. 
Meantime,  let  us  thank  God  there  is  a  spotless  raiment  in  which  our  guilty  souls  may 
be  arrayed,  and  in  which  it  were  well  that  every  bridal  pair  were  decked.  Happy 
they  who,  when  they  enter  into  married  life,  can  say,  "  I  will  greatly  rejoice  in  the 
Lord,  my  soul  stall  be  joyful  in  my  God;  for  he  hath  clothed  me  with  the  garments 
of  salvation,  he  hath  covered  me  with  the  robe  of  righteousness,  as  a  bridegroom 
.iecketh  himself  with  ornaments,  and  as  a  bride  adorneth  herself  with  jewels."  4. 
Hrmsed  in  paradise.  United  by  the  hand  of  God,  they  began  their  married  life  in 
Rd.in. 

"And  there  these  twain  upon  the  skirts  of  time 

Sat  side  by  side,  full  summ'd  in  all  their  powers, 

Dispensing  harvest,  sowing  the  to-be. 

Self-reverent  each,  and  reverencing  each  ; 

Distinct  in  individualities, 

But  like  each  other,  ev"n  as  those  who  lovo  "  (Tennyson's  '  Princess,'  vil.). 

And  so  may  any  wedded  pair  be  boused  in  Eden  who,  putting  on  the  Lord  Jesut 
Christ,  fill  their  home,  however  humble,  with  the  light  of  love. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  18 — 25. — The  true  life  of  man.  The  commencement  of  human  society. 
First  we  see  man  surrounded  by  cattle,  fowl,  and  beast  of  the  field,  which  were 
brought  to  him  by  God  as  to  their  lord  and  ruler,  that  he  might  name  them  as  from 
himself.  "  What  he  called  every  living  creature  was  the  name  thereof."  Nothing 
could  better  represent  the  organisation  of  the  earthly  life  upon  the  basis  of  man's 
supremacy.  But  there  is  no  helpmeet  for  man  ("  as  before  him"  the  reflection  of 
himself)  in  all  the  lower  creation. 

I.  HUMAK   SOCIETY  MUST  SPRING  OUT  OF  SOMETHING  HIGHER  THAN  ANIMAL  LIFE  ANB 

man's  mere  earthly  position.  The  deep  sleep,  the  Divine  manipulation  of  man's 
fleshly  frame,  the  formation  of  the  new  creature,  not  out  of  the  ground,  but  out  of 
man,  the  exclamation  of  Adam,  This  is  another  self,  my  bone  and  my  flesh,  therefore 
6he  shall  be  called  woman,  because  so  closely  akin  to  man — all  this,  whatever  physical 
interpretation  we  give  to  it,  represents  the  fact  that  companionship,  family  life,  man's 
intercourse  with  his  fellow,  all  the  relations  which  spring  from  the  fleshly  unity  of 
the  race,  are  of  the  most  sacred  character.  As  they  are  from  God,  and  specially  of 
God's  appointment,  so  they  should  be  for  God. 

II.  There,  in  home  life,  torn  off,  as  it  were,  from  the  larger  sphere,  that  it  may  be 
the  new  beginning  of  the  new  world  to  us,  should  be  the  special  recognition  of 
God,  the  family  altar,  the  house  of  man  a  house  of  God. 

III.  The  Divine  beginning  of  human  life  is  the  foundation  on  which  we  build  up 
society.  The  relations  of  the  sexes  will  be  purest  and  noblest  the  more  the 
heart  of  man  unfolds  itself  in  the  element  of  the  heavenly  love. R. 


EXPOSITION 
CHAPTER  III. 


Vers.  1—7.— How  long  the  paradisiacal 
Btate  of  innocence  and  f  slicity  continued  the 
historian  does  not  declare,  probably  as  not 
falling  within  the  scope  of  his  immediate 
design.  Ps.  xlix.  12  has  been  thought,  though 
without  sufficient  reason,  to  hint  that  man's 


Eden  life  was  of  comparatively  short  dura. 
tion.  The  present  chapter  relates  the  tragic 
incident  which  brought  it  to  a  termination. 
Into  the  question  of  the  origin  of  moral  evil 
in  the  universe  it  does  not  enter.  The  meta- 
physical problem  of  how  the  first  thought  of 
sin  could  arise  in  innocent  beings  it  does  not 
attempt  to  resolve     It  seeks  to  explain  tut 


M 


TIIE  BOOK  OF  OENESIS. 


[oh.  n.  1—1 


genesis  of  evil  with  reference  to  man.     Nor 
even  with  regard  to  this  does  it  aim  at  an 
exhaustive  dissertation,  but  only  at  such  a 
statement  of  its  beginnings  as  shall  demon- 
strate that  God  is  not  the  author  of  sin,  but 
that  man,  by  his  own  free  volition,  brought 
his  pristine  state  of  purity  and  happiness  to 
an  end.     A  due  regard  to  this,  the  specific 
object  of  the  Mosaic  narrative,  will  go  far  to 
answer  not  a  few  of  the  objections  which 
have  been  taken  to  its  historic  credibility. 
Like  the  Mosaic  record  of  creation,  the  Bib- 
lical  story  of  the  fall  has  been  impugned 
on   a  variety  of  grounds.     1.  The  doctrine 
of  a  fall,  which  this  chapter  clearly  teaches, 
hus  been  assailed  as  inconsistent  with  the 
dictates  of  a  speculative  philosophy,  if  not 
also  with  the  tenets  of  a  Scriptural  theology. 
While  in  the  present  narrative  the  origin  of 
sin  is  distinctly  traced  back  to  the  free  voli- 
tion of  man  acting  without  constraint,  though 
not  without  temptation,  in  opposition  to  the 
Divine  will,  a  more  exact  psychological  ana- 
lysis, it  is  alleged,  declares  it  to  have  been 
from  the  first  a  necessity,  either  (^'meta- 
physically, as  being  involved  in  the  very 
conception  of  a  finite  will  (Spinoza,  Leib- 
nitz, Baur)  ;  or  (2)  historically,  "  as  the  ex- 
pression of  the  necessary  transition  of  the 
human  race  from   the  state  of  nature   to 
that  of  culture "  (Fichte,   Kant,  Schiller), 
or  as  developing   itself    in    obedience    to 
the  law  of  antagonism  and  conflict  (John 
Scotns     Erigena,     Hegel,     Schleiermacher, 
Sctielling) ;   or  (3)  theologically,  as  prede- 
termined by  a  Divine   decree   (supralapsa- 
rianism).     Without    offering    any  separate 
refutation  of  these  anti-Scriptural  theories,  it 
may  suffice  to  say  that  in  all  questions  affect- 
ing man's  responsibility,  the  testimony  of  the 
individual  consciousness,  the  ultimate  ground 
of   appeal,   apart    from  revelation,    affirms 
moral  evil  to  be  no  all-controlling  necessity, 
but  the  free  product  of  the  will  of  the  crea- 
ture.    2.  The  narrative  of  the  fall  has  been 
impugned — (1)  On  the  ground  of  its  miracul- 
ous character.     But  unless  we  are  prepared 
to  equate   the   supernatural  with   the   im- 
possible  and   incredible,   we   must  decline 
to  admit  the  force  of  such  objections.    (2)  On 
the  ground  of  its  mythical  form,  resembling 
tn  it  does,  in  some  slight  degree,  Oriental  tra- 
ditioua,  and  in  particular  the  Persian  legend 


of  Ormuzd  and  Ahriman  (vide  infra,  '  Tradi- 
tions of  the  Fall').  But  here  the  same  remark 
will  apply  as  was  made  in  connection  with  the 
similarity  alleged  to  exist  between  the  Mosaic 
and  heathen  cosmogonies  :  it  is  immeasura- 
bly easier  and  more  natural  to  account  for  the 
resemblance  of  Oriental  legend  to  Biblical 
history,  by  supposing  the  former  to  be  a  tra- 
ditional reflection  of  the  latter,  than  it  is  to 
explain  the  unchallengeable  superiority  of  the 
latter  to  the  former,  even  in  a  literary  point 
of  view,  not  to  mention  ethical  aspects  at  all, 
by  tracing  both  to  a  common  source — the  phi- 
losophic or  theologic  consciousness  of  man. 
(3)  There  are  also  those  who,  while  neither 
repudiating  it  on  the  ground  of  miracle,  nor 
discrediting  it  as  a  heathen  myth,  yet  decline 
to  accept  it  as  other  than  a  parabolic  or 
allegorical  narration  of  what  transpired  in 
the  spiritual  experience  of  the  first  pair. 
History  is  often  a  parable  of  truth. 

Ver.  1. — Now  (literally,  and)  the  serpent. 
Nachash,  from  nachash  —  (1)  in  Kal,  to 
hiss  (unused),  with  allusion  to  the  hissing 
sound  emitted  by  the  reptile  (Gesenius,Fiirst), 
though  it  has  been  objected  that  prior  to  the 
fall  the  serpent  could  hardly  have  been  called 
by  a  name  derived  from  its  present  constitu- 
tion (Delitzsch)  ;  (2)  in  Piel,  to  whisper,  use 
sorcery,  find  out  by  divination  (ch.  xxx.  27), 
suggestive  of  the  creature's  wisdom  (Bush), 
which,however,isregardedasdoubtful(Furst); 
(3)  to  shine  (unused,  though  supplying  the 
noun  nechsheth,  brass,  ch.  iv.  22),  referring 
to  its  glossy  shining  appearance,  and  in  par- 
ticular its  bright  glistening  eye:  cf.  Spatuv 
from  fifpKUfxai,  and  6<ptg  from  onrofiai  (T. 
Lewis)  ;  (4)  from  an  Arabic  root  signifying 
to  pierce,  to  move,  to  creep,  so  that  nachash 
would  be  Latin  serpens  (Furst).  The  presence 
of  the  article  before  nachash  has  been  thought 
to  mean  a  certain  serpent,  but  "  by  eminent 
authorities  this  is  pronounced  to  be  unwar- 
ranted"  (Maedonald).  Was  more  subtil. 
'Arum—(1)  Crafty  (cf.  Job  v.  12;  xv.  5);  (2) 
prudent,  in  a  good  sense  (cf.  Trov.  xii.  16),  from 
'aram — (a)  1  o  make  naked  ;  whence  arom, 
plural  arumim,  naked  (ch.  ii.  25).  (6)  To 
be  crafty  (1  Sam.  xxiii.  22).  If  applied  to 
the  serpent  in  the  sense  of  iraioiipyoc  (Aquila, 
Keil,  Lange,  Maedonald),  it  can  only  be  either 
(1)  metaphorically  for  the  devil,  whose  in- 
strument it  was ;  or  (2)  proleptically,  with 
reference  to  the  results  of  the  temptation; 
for  in  itself,  as  one  of  God's  creatures,  it 
must  have,  been  originally  good.  It  seems 
more  correct  to  regard  the  epithet  as  equiva- 
lent to  ippnvifim;  (LXXA  and  to  hold  that 
Moses,  in  referring  to  the  subtlety  of  this 


OH.  HI.  1—7.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


87 


creature,  "does  not  so  much  point  out  a  fault 
as  attribute  praise  to  nature"  (Calvin),  and 
describes  qualities  which  iu  themselves  were 
good,  such  as  quickness  of  sight,  swiftness 
of  motion,  activity  of  the  self-preserving 
instinct,  seemingly  intelligent  adaptation  of 
means  to  end,  with  perhaps  a  glance,  in  the 
use  of  'arum,  at  the  sleekness  of  its  glossy 
skin  ;  but  which  were  capable  of  being  per- 
verted to  an  unnatural  use  by  the  power  and 
craft  of  a  superior  intelligence  (cf.  Matt.  x. 
16:  yivioQt  ovv  0pnvifioi  w(  ot  oipus).  Than  any 
(literally,  was  subtil  more  than  any)  beast 
of  the  field  which  the  Lord  God  had  made. 
The  comparison  here  instituted  is  commonly 
regarded  as  a  proof  that  the  ter  jpter  was  a 
literal  serpent,  though  Macdonald  finds  in 
the  contrast  between  it  and  all  other  crea- 
tures, as  well  as  in  the  ascription  to  it  of 
pre-eminent  subtlety,  which   'j  not  now  a 
characteristic  of  serpents,    "  an  intimation 
that  the  reptile  was  no  creature  of  earth,  or 
one  that  received  its  form  from  God,"  an 
opinion  scarcely, different  from  that  of  Cyril 
(c.  Julian.,  lib.  3),  that  it  was  only  the  simu- 
lacrum of  a  serpent.     But  (1)  the  curse  pro- 
nounced upon  the  serpent  (ch,  iii.  14)  would 
seem  to  be  deprived  of  all  force  if  the  subject 
of  it  had  been  only  an  apparition  or  an  unreal 
creature  ;  and  (2)  the  language  of  the  New 
Testament  in  referring  to  man's  temptation 
implies  its  literality  (cf.  2  Cor.  xi.  3).     "  We 
are  perfectly  justified  in  concluding,  from 
this  mention  of  the  fall,  that  Paul  spoke  of  it 
as  an  actual  occurrence"  (Olshausen).   Adam 
Clarke  contends  with  much  enthusiasm  that 
the  tempter  was  not  a  serpent,  but  an  ape  or 
ourang  outang.     And  he  said.     Not  as  ori- 
ginally   endowed    with    speech    (Josephus, 
Clarke),  or  gifted  at  this  particular  time  with 
the  power  of   articulation  ('Ephrem.,  lib. 
de  paradiso,'  c.  27,  quoted  by  Willet),  but 
simply  as  used  by  the  devil  (Augustine, 
Calvin,  Rosenmiiller,  et  alii),  who  from  this 
circumstance  is  commonly  styled  in  Scrip- 
ture  "the  serpent,"   "the  old  serpent," 
"that  old  serpent"  (cf.  Rev.  xii.  9;   xx. 
2).     Nor  is  it  more  difficult  to  understand 
the  speaking  of  the  serpent  when  possessed 
by  Satan,  than  the  talking  of  Balaam's  ass 
when  the  Lord  opened  its  mouth  (Num.  xxii. 
28—30).      Equally  with  the  idea  that  the 
devil  was  the  only  agent  in  man's  tempta- 
tion, and  that  the  serpent  is  purely  the  alle- 
gorical dress  in  which  the  historian  clothes 
him  (Eusebius,  Cajetan,  Quarry,Alford),  must 
the  notion  be  rejected  that  there  was  nothing 
but  a  serpent  (Aben  Ezra,  Kalisch,  Knohel). 
Why,  if  there  was  an  evil  spirit  manipulating 
the  reptile,  the  historian  did  not  say  so  has 
been  explained  (1)  on  the  ground  that  the 
belief  in  the  devil  was  then  foreign  to  the 
Hebrews  (Kuobel) ;  (2)  that  up  to  this  point 
in  the  narrative  there  ii  no  mention  of  the 


devil  (White  of  Dorchester)-;  (3)  that  Mose« 
simply    wished    to    be   rei  gestae    scriptot 
non  interpres  (Pererius) ;   (4)  that  it  was 
unnecessary,  those  for  whom  he  wrote  being 
sufficiently  capable  of  discerning  that  the  sr  r- 
pent  was  not  the  prime  mover  in  the  tran  ?• 
action  (Candlish);  (5)  that  "by  a  homely 
and  uncultivated  style  he  accommodates  what 
he  delivers  to  the  capacity  of  the  people  " 
(Calvin)  ;  (6)  that  his  object  being  merely  to 
show  that  God  had  no  hand  in  man's  tempta- 
tion, but  that  Adam  sinned  of  himself,  it 
was  not  needful  to  do  more  than  recite  the 
incident  as  it  appeared  to  the  senses  (White); 
(7)  that  he  wished  "  to  avoid  encouraging 
the  disposition  to  transfer  the  blame  to  the 
evil  spirit  which  tempted  man,  and  thus 
reduce  sin  to  a  mere  act  of  weakness  "  (Keil). 
Unto  the  woman.    As  the  weaker  of  the  two, 
and  more  likely  to  be  easily  persuaded  (1 
Tim.  ii  14 ;  1  Pet.  iii.  7).     Cf.  Satan's  as- 
sault on  Job  through  his  wife  (Job  ii.  9). 
Milton's  idea  that  Eve  desired  to  be  inde- 
pendent, and  had  withdrawn  herself  out  o! 
Adam's  sight,  it  has  been  well  remarked, 
"sets  up  a  beginning  of  the  fall  before  the 
fall  itself"  (Lange).  Yea.  *3  *]N.   Is  it  even  so 
that?  (Gesenius).  Is  it  really  so  that  ?  (Ewald, 
Fiirst,  Keil).    Etiamne,  vel  Itane  (Calvin). 
A  question  either  (1)  spoken  in  irony,  as  if 
the  meaning  were,  "  Very  like  it  is  that  God 
careth  what  you  eat  1 "  or  (2)  inquiring  the 
reason  of  the  prohibition  (LXX.,  H  on  ilirt* 
i  6«Ae  ;  Vulgate,  cur  praicepit  vobis  Deus) ; 
or  (3)  simply  soliciting  information  (Chaldee 
Paraphrase) ;  but  (4)  most  likely  expressing 
surprise  and  astonishment,  with  the  view  of 
suggesting  distrust  of  the  Divine  goodness 
and  disbelief  in  the  Divine  veracity  (Ewald, 
Rosenmiiller,    Kalisch,     Keil,     Macdonald, 
Lange).     The  conversation  may  have  been 
commenced  by  the  tempter,  and  the  ques- 
tion "thrown  out  as  a  feeler  for  some  weak 
point  where  the  fidelity  of  the  woman  might 
be  shaken  "  (Murphy) ;  but  it  is  more  likely 
that  the  devil  spoke  in  continuation  of  a 
colloquy   which'  is  not  reported   (Kalisch, 
Macdonald),  which  has  led  some,  on  the  sup- 
position that  already  many  arguments  had 
been  adduced   to   substantiate  the  Divine 
severity,    to    render    "yea"    by    "quanta 
magis,"   as  if  the   meaning  were,    "  How 
much  more  is  this  a  proof  of  God's  unkind- 
ness!"   (Aben  Ezra,  Kimchi).      Hath  God 
said.  '   "The  tempter  felt  it  necessa/y  to 
change  the  living  personal  God  into  a  merely 
general  numen  divinum "  (Keil) ;   but  the 
Elohim  of  ch.  i.  I  was  not  a  mere  numen 
divinum.     As  much  astray  is  the  observa- 
tion that  Satan  wished  to  avoid  profaning 
the  name  of  Jehovah  (Knobel).      Better  is 
the  remark  that  the  serpent  could  not  uttei 
the  name  Jehovah,  as  his  assault  was  directed 
against  the  paradisiacal    covenant  of  God 


b8 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


[ch.  I.I.  1 — 7 


with  man  (Lange).  By  using  the  name 
Elohim  instead  of  Jehovah  the  covenant  re- 
lationship of  God  towards  man  was  obscured, 
and  man^  position  in  the  garden  represented 
as  that  of  a  subject  rather  than  a  son.  As  it 
were,  Eve  was  first  placed  at  the  furthest 
distance  possible  from  the  supreme,  and 
then  assailed.  Ye  shall  not  eat  of  every 
tree  of  the  garden.  /.  e.  either  accepting 
the  present  rendering  as  correct,  which  the 
Hebrew  will  bear, — "  Are  there  any  trees  in 
the  garden  of  which  you  may  not  eat  ? " 
"Is  it  really  so  that  God  hath  prohibited 
you  from  some  ? "  (Calvin), — or,  translating 
lo-kol  as  not  any — Latin,  nullus  (Gesenius, 
§  152,  1)—"  Hath  God  said  ye  shall  not  eat 
of  any  ? "  (Macdonald,  Keil).  According  to 
the  first  the  devil  simply  seeks  to  impeach 
the  Divine  goodness  ;  according  to  the 
second  he  also  aims  at  intensifying  the 
Divine  prohibition.  The  second  rendering 
appears  to  be  supported  by  the  fitness  of 
Eve's  reply. 

Vers.  2,  3. — And  the  woman  said  nnto  the 
serjmt.  Neither  afraid  of  the  reptile,  there 
being  not  yet  any  enmity  among  the  crea- 
tures ;  nor  astonished  at  his  speaking,  per- 
haps as  being  not  yet  fully  acquainted  with 
the  capabilities  of  the  lower  animals ;  nor 
suspicious  of  his  designs,  her  innocence  and 
inexperience  not  predisposing  her  to  appre- 
hend danger.  Yet  the  tenor  of  the  reptile's 
interrogation  was  fitted  to  excite  alarm  ;  and 
if,  as  some  conjecture,  she  understood  that 
Satan  was  the  speaker,  she  should  at  once 
have  taken  flight ;  while,  if  she  knew 
nothing  of  him  or  his  disposition,  she  should 
not  have  opened  herself  so  freely  to  a  person 
unknown.  "  The  woman  certainly  discovers 
some  unadvisedness  in  entertaining  conference 
with  the  serpent,  in  matters  of  so  great  im- 
portance, in  so  familiar  a  manner  "  (White). 
We  may  eat  of  the  fruit  of  the  trees  of 
the  garden.  (1)  Omitting  the  Divine  name 
when  recording  his  liberality,  though  she 
remembers  it  when  reciting  his  restraint ; 
(2)  failing  to  do  justice  to  the  largeness  and 
freeness  of  the  Divine  grant  (cf.  with  ch.  ii. 
16) ; — which,  however,  charity  would  do  well 
not  to  press  against  the  woman  as  symptoms 
of  incipient  rebellion.  But  of  the  fruit  of 
the  tree  which  is  in  the  midst  of  the  garden, 
God  hath  said,  Ye  shall  not  eat  of  it,  neither 
shall  ye  touch  it.  An  addition  to  the  pro- 
hibitory enactment,  which  may  have  been 
simply  an  inaccuracy  in  her  understanding 
of  Adam's  report  of  its  exact  terms  (Kalisch); 
or  the  result  of  a  rising  feeling  of  dissatisfac- 
tion with  the  too  great  strictness  of  the  pro- 
hibition (Delitzsch),  and  so  an  indication 
"  that  her  love  and  confidence  towards  God 
were  already  beginning  to  waver  "  (Keil) ;  or 
a  proof  of  her  anxiety  to  observe  the  Divine 
precept  (0»lvin) ;  or  a  statement  of  her  un- 


derstanding "  that  they  were  not  to  meddla 
with  it  as  a  forbidden  thing"  (Murphy). 
Lest  ye  die.  Even  Calvin  here  admits  that 
Eve  begins  to  give  way,  reading  "|3  as  forte, 
with  which  Macdonald  appears  to  agree, 
discovering  "  doubt  and  hesitancy "  in  her 
language ;  but — (1 )  the  conjunction  may  point 
to  a  consequence  which  is  certain — indeed 
this  is  its  usual  meaning  (cf.  ch.  xi.  4  ;  xix. 
5  ;  Ps.  ii.  12)  ;  (2)  "  Where  there  are  so 
many  real  grounds  for  condemning  Eve's 
conduct,  it  is  our  duty  to  be  cautious  in 
giving  those  which  are  problematical"  (Bush); 
and,  (3)  "  she  would  have  represented  the 
penalty  in  a  worse  rather  than  a  softened 
form  had  she  begun  to  think  it  unjust " 
(Inglis). 

Ver.  4. — And  the  serpent  said  unto  the 
woman.     "  As  God  had  preached  to  Adam, 

so  Satan  now  also  preaches  to  Eve 

The  object  of  Satan  was  to  draw  away  Eve 
by  his  word  or  saying  from  that  which  God 
Sad  said"  (Luther).  Ye  shall  not  surely 
die.  Lo-moth  Umuthun  (the  negative  16 
preceding  the  infinitive  absolute,  as  in  Ps. 
xlix.  8  and  Amos  ix.  8 ;  its  position  here 
being  determined  by  the  form  of  the  penalty, 
ch.  ii.  17,  to  which  the  devil's  language 
gives  the  direct  negative.  Vide  Ewald, 
'  Heb.  Synt.,'  §  312).  Thus  the  second  stej 
in  his  assault  is  to  challenge  the  Divine 
veracity,  in  allusion  to  which  it  has  beer 
thought  our  Saviour  calls  Satan  a  liar  (c£ 
John  viii.  44  :  orav  AaAp  to  ^tvSoi;,  bk  rw» 
idiup  XaXfT-  on  i//eu(rrjj<;  tariv  Kal  o  ffari)p 
aliTou).  "  Here,  as  far  as  we  know,  is.  hii 
first  begottten  lie  "  (Bush). 

Ver.  5. — For  ('3 — nam,  yap,  for,  because  ; 
assigning  the  reason  (1)  for  the  devil's  state- 
ment, and  so,  (2)  by  implication,  for  the 
Divine  prohibition)  God  doth  know.  Thus 
the  serpent  practically  charges  the  Deity  with 
with  (1)  envy  of  his  creatures'  happiness,  as 
if  he  meant  to  say,  Depend  upon  it,  it  is 
not  through  any  fear  of  your  dying  from  its 
fruit  that  the  tree  has  been  interdicted,  but 
through  fear  of  your  becoming  rivals  to  yom 
Master  himself;  and  (2)  with  falsehood-  (a) 
in  affirming  that  to  be  true  which  he  knew  to 
be  false ;  (6)  in  doing  this  while  delivering  his 
law ;  (c)  in  pretending  to  be  careful  of  man's 
safety  while  in  reality  he  was  only  jealous 
of  his  own  honour.  That  in  the  day  ye  eat 
thereof.  Cf.  the  Divine  prohibition  (ch.  ii 
17),  the  exact  terms  of  which  are  again  used 
— a  mark  of  growing  aggressiveness  towards 
the  woman,  and  of  special  audacity  towards 
God.  The  prohibition  employs  the  singular 
number,  being  addressed  to  Adam  only  ;  the 
devil  employs  the  plural,  as  his  words  were 
meant  not  for  Eve  alone,  but  for  her  husband 
with  her.  Your  eyes  shall  he  opened.  '■'  To 
open  the  eyes,"  the  isuul  Biblical  phracf  ft» 


oh.  m.  1—7.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


81 


restoring  sight  to  the  blind  (2  Kings  vi. 
17,  20  ;  Ps.  cxlvi.  8 ;  Isa.  xlii.  7),  is  also 
used  to  denote  the  impartation  of  power  to 
perceive  (physically,  mentally,  spiritually) 
objects  not  otherwise  discernible  (cf.  oh.  xxi. 
19;  Isa.  xxxv.  5).  Here  it  was  designed  to 
be  ambiguous ;  like  all  Satan's  oracles,  sug- 
gesting to  the  hearer  the  attainment  of  higher 
wisdom,  but  meaning  in  the  intention  of  the 
speaker  only  a  discovery  of  their  nakedness. 
The  same  ambiguity  attaches  to  the  devil's 
exposition  of  his  own  text.  And  ye  shall 
be  as  gods.  Literally,  as  Mlohim ;  not  &s 
9eol  (LXX),  sicut  dii  (Vulgate),  as  gods 
(A.  V. ),  as  the'angels  (R.  Jonathan),  as  the 
devils  (Ainsworth)*,  dcemonibusqm,  diisve 
similes  (Rosenmiiller),  as  princes  (White) ; 
but  as  the  supreme  Deity  (Calvin,  Keil, 
Kalisch,  et  a?ii)— ostensibly  a  promise  of 
divinity.  Knowing  good  and  evil.  As  they 
knew  this  already  from  the  prohibition,  the 
language  must  imply  a  fulneBS  and  accuracy 
of  understanding  such  as  was  competent  only 
to  Elohim  {vide  on  ver.  22) 

Ver.  6. — And  (when)  the  woman  saw. 
"  An  impure  look,  infected  with  the  poison 
of  concupiscence  "  (Calvin) ;  cf.  Joshua  vii. 
21.  That  the  tree  was  good  for  food.  "  The 
fruit  of  this  tree  may  have  been  neither  poi- 
sonous nor  beautiful,  or  it  may  have  been 
both  ;  but  sin  has  the  strange  power  of  in- 
vesting the  object  of  desire  for  the  time  being, 
whatever  its  true  character,  with  a  wonderful 
attraction"  (Inglis).  And  that  it  (was)  plea- 
sant. Literally,  a  desire  (Ps.  x.  17),  a  lust 
(Num.  xl  4).  To  the  eyes.  'Apiarbv  role 
i(j>9ti\)iolQ  (LXX.)  ;  pulchrum  oculis  (Vul- 
gite) ;  lustye  unto  the  eyes  (Coverdale) ;  i.  e. 
stimulating  desire  through  the  eyes  (cf.  1 
John  ii.  16).     And  a  tree  to  be  desired  to 

make  (one)  wise.  T^S^n?  (from  73B' — (1)  to 
look  at,  to  behold  ;  hence  (2)  to  be  prudent, 
1  Sam.  xviii.  30.  Hiph.,  (1)  to  look  at ;  (2) 
to  turn  the  mind  to ;  (3)  to  be  or  become 
understanding,  Pa.  ii.  10)  being  suscept- 
ible of  two  renderings,  the  clause  has  been 
taken  to  mean  "  a  tree  desirable  to  look  at " 
(Syriac,  Onkelos,  Vulgate,  Gescnius,  Kalisch, 
Wordsworth),  or,  more  correctly,  as  it  stands 
in  the  English  Version,  the  external  loveli- 
ness of  the  tree  having  been  already  stated 
in  the  preceding  clause  (LXX.,  Aben  Ezra, 
Calvin,  Hengstenberg,  Macdonald).  This  is 
the  third  time  the  charms  of  the  tree  are 
discerned  and  expressed  by  the  woman — a 
significant  intimation  of  how  far  the  Divine 
interdict  had  receded  from  her  consciousness. 
She  took  of  the  fruit  thereof,  and  did  eat. 
Thus  consummating  the  sin  (James  i.  15).  And 
gave  also  to  her  husband.  Being  desirous, 
doubtless,  of  making  him  a  sharer  in  her 
supposed  felicity.  Ths  first  time  Adam  is 
ityled  Eve's  husband,  or  man ;  perhaps  de- 


signed to  indicate  the  complete  perversion 
by  Eve  of  the  Divine  purpose  of  her  mar- 
riage with  Adam,  which  was  to  be  a  help- 
meet for  him,  and  not  his  destroyer.  With 
her.  An  indication  that  Adam  was  present 
throughout  the  whole  preceding  scene  (De- 
litzsch,  Wordsworth),  which  is  not  likely, 
else  why  did  he  not  restrain  Eve  ?  or  that  he 
arrived  just  as  the  temptation  closed  (Calvin), 
which  is  only  a  conjecture  ;  better  regarded 
as  a  reference  to  their  conjugal  oneness 
(Macdonald).  And  he  did  eat.  And  so  in- 
volved himself  in  the  criminality  of  his 
already  guilty  partner ;  not  simply  as  being 
"  captivated  with  her  allurements  "  ("  fondly 
overcome  with  female  charms" — Milton, '  Par. 
Lost,'  Bookx.),  which  1  Tim.  ii.  14  is  sup- 
posed to  justify  ;  but  likewise  as  being  "  per- 
suaded by  Satan's  impostures,"  which  doubt- 
less Eve  had  related  to  him.  This  much  is 
distinctly  implied  in  those  Scriptures  which 
speak  of  Adam  as  the  chief  transgressor 
(vide  Rom.  v.  12 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  21,  22). 

Ver.  7. — And  the  eyes  of  them  both  wer« 
opened.  The  fatal  deed  committed,  the 
promised  results  ensued,  but  not  the  anti- 
cipated blessings.  (1)  The  eyes  of  their 
minds  were  opened  to  perceive  that  they 
were  no  longer  innocent,  and  (2)  the  eyes 
of  their  bodies  to  behold  that  they  were  not 
precisely  as  they  had  been.  And  they  knew 
that  they  were  naked.  (1)  Spiritually  (cf. 
Exod.  xxxii.  25 ;  Ezek.  xvi.  22 ;  Rev.  Hi. 
17),  and  (2)  corporeally,  having  lost  that 
enswathing  light  of  purity  which  previously 
engirt  their  bodies  (vide  ch.  ii.  25).  And 
they  sewed.  Literally,  fastened  or  tied  by 
twisting.  Fig  leaves.  Not  the  pisang  tree 
(Musa  Paradisiaca),  whose  leaves  attain  the 
length  of  twelve  feet  and  the  breadth  of  two 
(Knobel  Bohlen) ;  but  the  common  fig  tree 
(Ficus  Carica),  which  is  aboriginal  in  West- 
ern Asia,  especially  in  Persia,  Syria,  and  Asia 
Minor  (Kalisch,  Keil,  Macdonald).  Together, 
and  made  themselves  aprons.  Literally, 
girdles,  TrepiZiiiiaTa  (LXX.),  i.  e.  to  wrap 
about  their  loins.  This  sense  of  shame  which 
caused  them  to  seek  a  covering  for  their 
nudity  was  not  due  to  any.  physical  corrup- 
tion of  the  body  (Baumgarten),  but  to  the 
consciousness  of  guilt  with  which  their  souls 
were  laden,  and  which  impelled  them  to  flee 
from  the  presence  of  their  offended  Sovereign. 

TRADITIONS  OF  THE  FALL. 

I.  Oriental.  1.  Babylonian.  "  There 
is  nothing  in  the  Chaldean  fragments  indi- 
cating a  belief  in  the  garden  of  Eden  or  the 
tree  of  knowledge  ;  there  is  only  an  obscure 
allusion  to  a  thirst  for  knowledge  having 
been  a  cause  of  mau's  fall."  .  .  .  The  details 
of  the  temptation  are  lost  in  the  cuneiforci 


so 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


e».  m.  1—7, 


text,  which  "  opens  where  the  gods  are  curs- 
ing the  dragon  and  the  Adam  or  man  for 
his  transgression." .  .  .  "The  dragon,  which, 
in  the  Chaldean  acconnt,  leads  man  to  sin, 
is  the  creature  of  Tiamat,  the  living  prin- 
ciple of  the  sea  and  of  chaos,  and  he  n  an 
embodiment  of  the  spirit  of  chaos  or  disorder 
which  was  opposed  to  the  deities  at  the 
creation  of  the  world."    The  dragon  is  in- 
cluded in  the  curse  for  the  fall ;  and  the  gods 
invoice  on  the  human  race  all  the  evils  which 
afflict  humanity — family  quarrels,  tyranny, 
the    anger   of    the    gods,   disappointment, 
famine,  useless  prayers,  trouble  of  mind  and 
body,  a  tendency  to  sin  ('Chaldoan  Genesis,' 
pp.  87 — 91).     2.  Persian.     For  a  time  the 
first  pair,  Meschin  and  Meschiane,  were  holy 
and  happy,  pure  in  word  and  deed,  dwelling 
in  a  garden  wherein  was  »  tree  whose  fruit 
conferred   life  and  immortality ;  hut  even- 
tually Ahriman  deceived   them,  and  drew 
them  away  from  Ormuzd.     Emboldened  by 
his  success,  the  enemy  again  appeared,  and 
gave  them  a  fruit,  of  which  they  ate,  with 
the  result   that,  of  the  hundred  blessings 
which  they  enjoyed,  all  disappeared  save  one. 
Falling  beneath  the  power  of  the  evil  one, 
they  practised  the  mechanical  arts,  and  sub- 
sequently built  themselves  houses  and  clothed 
themselves  with  skins.    Another  form  of  the 
legend  represents  Ahriman  as  a  serpent.     So 
close  is  the  resemblance  of  this  legend  to  the 
Scriptural  account,  that  Rawlinson  regards 
it  not  as  a  primitive  tradition,  hut  rather  as 
"  an  infiltration  into  the  Persian  system  of 
religious  ideas    belonging  properly  to  the 
Hebrews"  ('Hist.  Illns.  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment,' p.  13).     3.  Indian.     In  the  Hindoo 
mythology  the  king  of  the  evil  demons,  "the 
king  of  the  serpents,"  is  named  Naga,  the 
prince  of  the  Nagis  or  Nacigs,  "in  which 
Sanscrit   appellation   we  plainly  trace  the 
Hebrew  Nachash."    In  the  Vishnu  Purana 
the  first  beings  created  by  Brama  are  repre- 
sented as  endowed  with  righteousness  and 
perfect  faith,  as  free  from  guilt  and  filled 
with  perfect  wisdom,  wherowith  they  con- 
templated the  glory  of  Vishnu,  till  after  a 
time  they  are  seduced.     In  the  legends  of 
India  the  triumph  of  Krishna  over  the  great 
•arpent  Kali  Naga,  who  had  poisoned  the 


waters  of  the  river,  but  who  himself  wat 
ultimately  destroyed  by  Krishna  trampling 
on  his  head,  hears  a  striking  analogy  to  the 
Mosaic  story  (Kitto's  '  Daily  Bible  Illustra- 
tions '). 

II.   Occidental.     1.  The  story  of  Pan- 
dora.   According  to  Hesiod  the  first  men 
lived  wifeless  and  ignorant,  but  innocent  and 
happy.  Prometheus  ("Forethought")  having 
stolen  fire  from  heaven,  taught   its  use  to 
mankind.     To  punish  the  aspiring  mortals, 
Zeus  sent  among  them  Pandora,  a  beautiful 
woman,  whom  he  had  instructed  Hephaestus 
to  make,  and  Aphrodite,  A"thena,  and  Hermes 
had  endowed  with  all    seductive    charms. 
Epimetheus  ("Afterthought"),  the  brothei 
of  Prometheus,  to  whom  she  was  presented, 
accepted  her,  and  made  her  his  wife.  Brought 
into  his  houso,  curiosity  prevailed  on  her  to 
lift  the  lid  of  a  closed  jar  in  which  the  elder 
brother  had  with  prudent  foresight  shut  up 
all  kinds  of  ills  and  diseases.     Forthwith 
they  escaped  to  torment  mankind,  which 
they    have    done    ever    since    (Seemann's 
'  Mythology,'  p.  163).     2.  The  apples  of  the 
Hesperides.     These  golden   apples,   which 
were  under  the  guardianship  of  the  nymphs 
of  the  West,  were  closely  watched  by  a  ter- 
rible dragon  named  Ladon,  on  account  of  an 
ancient  oracle  that  a  son  of  the  deity  would 
at  a  certain  time  arrive,  open  a  way  of  access 
thither,   and    carry    them    off.      Hercules, 
having  inquired  his  way  to  the  garden  in 
which  they  grew,  destroyed  the  monster  and 
fulfilled  the  oracle  (ibid.,  p.  204).    3.  Apollo 
and  the  Python.     "This  Python,  ancient 
legends  affirm,  was  a  serpent  bred  out  of  the 
slime  that  remained  after  Deucalion's  deluge, 
and  was  worshipped  as  a  god  at  Delphi 
Eminent  authorities  derive  the  name  of  the 
monster  from  a  Hebrew  root  signifying  to 
deceive."    As  the  bright  god  of  heaven,  to 
whom  everything   impure    and    unholy  is 
hateful,  Apollo,  four  days  after  his  birth, 
slow  this  monster  with  his  arrows. 

"What  shall  we  say  then  to  these  things ! 
This — that  the  nations  embodied  in  these 
traditions  their  remembrances  of  paradise,  of 
the  fall,  and  of  the  promised  salvation  ' 
(Kitto,  '  Daily  Bible  Illustrations  '  p.  671 


«.  xi.  1—7.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  «1 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  6. — The first  sin. — I.  The  temptation.  1.  The  fact.  That  sin  is  possible  even 
in  pure  beings  without  the  intervention  of  solicitation,  at  least  ab  extra,  must  be  held 
to  be  the  doctrine  of  Scripture  (vide  James  i.  14  and  Jude  6).  Hence  man  might 
have  fallen,  even  had  he  not  been  tempted.  The  fact,  however,  that  he  was  tempted 
is  explicitly  revealed  ;  a  circumstance  which  notes  an  important  distinction  between 
his  sin  and  that  of  the  angels.  Does  this  explain  Heb.  ii.  16  and  2  Pet.  ii.  4?  2. 
The  author.  Though  ostensibly  a  serpent,  in  reality  the  devil.  Besides  being  expressly 
stated  in  the  inspired  word,  it  is  involved  in  the  very  terms  of  the  Mosaic  narrative. 
If  the  reptile  possessed  the  malice  to  conceive  and  the  skill  to  manage  such  an 
assault  upon  the  first  pair  as  this  book  describes,  then  clearly  it  was  not  a  serpent,  but 
a  devil.  It  is  doubtful  if  all  man's  temptations  come  from  the  devil,  but  many,  per- 
haps most,  do.  He  is  pre-eminently  styled  "the  tempter"  (Matt.  iv.  3;  1  Thess. 
iii.  5).  Prom  the  days  of  Adam  downward  he  has  been  engaged  in  attempting  to 
seduce  the  saints ;  e.  g.  David  (1  Chron.  xxi.  1) ;  Job  (ch.  ii.  7)  ;  Christ  (Luke  iv.  13) ; 
Ananias  and  Sapphira  (Acts  v.  3).  At  the  present  moment  he  is  labouring  to 
deceive  the  whole  world  (Rev.  xii.  9).  3.  The  instrument.  The  serpent,  which  was 
•  proof  of  Satan's  skill,  that  particular  reptile  being  specially  adapted  for  his  pur- 
pose (N.B. — The  devil  can  always  find  a  tool  adapted  to  the  work  he  has  in  hand); 
and  is  an  indication  of  our  danger,  it  being  only  a  reptile,  and  therefore  little  likely  to 
be  suspected  as  a  source  of  peril ;  whence  we  may  gather  that  there  is  no  quarter  so 
unexpected,  and  no  instrument  so  feeble,  that  out  of  the  one  and  through  the  other 
temptation  may  not  leap  upon  us.  4.  The  nature.  This  was  threefold.  A  tempta- 
tion (1)  to  suspect  the  Divine  goodness  (ver.  1)  j  (2)  to  disbelieve  the  Divine  word 
(ver.  4)  ;  (3)  to  emulate  the  Divine  greatness  (ver.  5).  (Of.  the  three  assaults  upon 
the  Second  Adam  (Matt.  iv.  1 ;  Luke  iv.  1),  which  were  essentially  the  same.)  The 
first  aimed  a  death-blow  at  their  filial  confidence  in  God  ;  the  second  removed  the 
fear  of  punishment  from  their  path ;  the  third  fired  their  souls  with  the  lust  of 
ambition.  Separation  from  God,  disobedience  of  God,  opposition  to  or  rivalry  with 
God — the  devil's  scala  cceli.  5.  The  subtlety.  That  great  art  should  have  been  dis- 
played in  the  conduct  of  this  campaign  against  the  citadel  of  human  holiness  is  what 
might  have  been  expected  from  such  a  general.  In  these  respects  it  was  evinced. 
(1)  The  assault  was  commenced  before  use  and  practice  had  confirmed  the  first  paii 
in  obedience.  (2)  He  began  with  the  woman,  who  was  the  weaker  of  the  two.  (3) 
He  attacked  her  when  alone — the  best  time  for  temptation.  Beware  of  solitude.  (4) 
H<j  selected  the  best  ground  for  delivering  his  first  blow — when  the  woman  was  in  full 
sight  of  the  tree.  (5)  He  was  extremely  cautious  so  to  moderate  his  onset  as  not  to 
excite  alarm — beginning  with  a  casual  inquiry.  (6)  He  advanced  by  degrees  as  he 
ebtained  a  footing  in  the  woman's  heart.  (7)  He  never  revealed  the  proper  scope 
and  drift  of  his  observations,  but  always  couched  them  in  obscure  and  ambiguous 
language.  (8)  He  never  seemed  to  lead,  but  always  to  be  following  the  woman's 
thought.  (9)  In  all  he  said  and  did  he  pretended  to  be  seeking  his  victim's  good. 
(10)  He  chose  the  best  of  all  possible  baits  to  captivate  the  woman's  fancy  and  ex- 
cite her  cupidity — the  hope  of  gaining  knowledge. 

II.  The  tbansgbession.  1.  Its  guilty  perpetrators.  Not  the  serpent  or  the  devil, 
but  the  first  pair.  The  devil  may  tempt  man  to  sin,  but  he  cannot  sin  for  man.  A 
creature  may  be  the  unconscious  instrument  of  leading  man  aside  from  the  path  of 
virtue,  but  it  cannot  possibly  compel  man  to  go  astray.  Men  are  prone  to  blamo 
other  things  and  persons  for  their  sins,  when  the  true  criminals  are  themselves.  2. 
Its  impelling  motive.  No  temptation,  however  skilfully  planned  or  powerfully 
applied,  can  succeed  until  it  finds  a  footing  in  the  nature  that  is  tempted.  Unless 
the  devil's  logic  and  chicanery  had  produced  the  effect  described  in  ver.  6,  it  is 
more  than  probable  that  Eve  would  have  stood.  But  first  it  wrought  a  change  upon 
horself,  and  then  it  transformed  the  tree.  First  it  created  the  need  for  sinful 
motives,  and  then  it  supplied  them.  So  works  temptation  still.  As  with  Eve,  so  with 
cs.  Sinful  motives  are  (1)  demanded  by  the  heart ;  (2)  supplied  by  the  evil  whicl 
the  heart  contemplates  ;  and  (3)  are  generally  as  weak  and  insufficient  as  Eve's.    3. 


«  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  [ch.  m.  1—7. 


Its  essential  wickedness,  as  consisting  of  (1)  unbelief,  revealing  itself  in  disobedience  ■ 
(2)  selfishness,  making  self  the  centre  of  all  things ;  (3)  desire,  love  of  the  world), 
gratification  of  the  senses,  the  fundamental  elements  in  all  sin,  corresponding  to  tha 
three  fundamental  elements  of  man's  being  and  consciousness— spirit,  soul,  body 
(cf.  Auberlen's  '  Divine  Revelation,'  Part  I.,  §  3,  ch.  ix.).  4.  Its  sad  results.  (1)  A 
discovery  of  sin.  "  Their  eyes  were  opened,"  as  the  devil  said,  and  as  he  meant. 
They  felt  that  thev  had  fallen,  and  that  they  had  lost  their  purity.  It  is  impossible 
to  sin  and  not  to  have  this  knowledge  and  feel  this  loss.  (2)  A  consciousness  of  guilt. 
"They  knew  that  they  were  naked."  Sin  reports  itself  quickly  to  the  conscience, 
and  conscience  quickly  discovers  to  the  guilty  soul  its  true  position  as  an  unpro- 
tected culprit  before  the  barxjf  God.  (3)  A  sense  of  shame,  which  impelled  them  to 
seek  a  covering  for  their  persons.  "  They  sewed  fig  leaves  together,  and  made  them- 
selves girdles."  A  picture  of  men's  fruitless  efforts  to  find  a  coveringfor  their  guilty 
souls.  ° 

Lessons:—!.  The  responsibility  of  man.  2.  The  duty  of  guarding  against  tempt- 
ation. 3.  The  contagious  character  of  moral  evil.  4.  The  havoc  wrought  by  a 
single  sin. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  1. — The  tempter.  I.  Who  tempts?  1.  Not  the  mere  serpent.  2.  A  higher 
power  of  evil.     3.  This  higher  power  a  person.    4.  The  leader  of  the  fallen  angels. 

II.  Why  permitted?  Easy  to  see  why  moved;  why  permitted,  a  mystery.  But 
we  may  note — 1.  That  the  intercourse  of  mind  with  mind  is  a  general  law  of  nature. 
To  exclude  the  devil,  therefore,  from  gaining  access  to  man  might  have  involved 
as  great  a  miracle  as  preventing  one  mind  from  influencing  another.  2.  That  the 
good  as  well  as  the  evil  angels  have  access  to  us.  Can  we  estimate  their  influence, 
or  be  sure  that  Adam's  position  or  the  world's  would  have  been  better  if  both  had 
been  excluded  ?  3.  That  possibly  by  this  sin  under  temptation  we  were  saved  from 
•  worse  sin  apart  from  temptation.  4.  That  God  magnifies  his  grace  and  vindicates 
his  power  against  the  devil's  in  raising  fallen  man  above  his  first  place  of  creature- 
ship  into  that  of  sonship. 

III.  Why  employ  the  serpent?  1.  Because  not  permitted  to  assume  a  higher 
form — his  masterpiece  of  craft,  "  an  angel  of  light "  (2  Cor.  xi.  14),  or  his  master- 
piece of  power,  a  mighty  prince  (Matt.  iv.  1).  2.  Because  of  all  animals  the 
serpent  seemed  the  fittest  for  his  purpose. — W. 

Vers:  1 — 7. — The  moral  chaos  before  the  moral  restoration.  Hitherto  the  moral 
nature  of  man  may  be  said  to  be  absorbed  in  his  religious  nature.  He  has  held  inter- 
course with  his  Creator.  He  has  ruled  earth  as  "  the  paragon  of  animals."  The  intro- 
duction of  a  helpmeet  was  the  commencement  of  society,  therefore  of  distinctly 
moral  relations.  It  is  in  the  moral  sphere  that  sin  takes  its  origin,  through  the  help- 
meet, and  as  a  violation  at  the  same  time  of  a  direct  Divine  commandment,  and  of 
that  social  compact  of  obedience  to  God  and  dependence  upon  one  another  which  is 
the  root  of  all  true  moral  life.  The  woman  was  away  from  the  man  when  she  sinned. 
Her  sin  was  more  than  a  sin  against  God  ;  it  was  an  offence  against  the  law  of  her 
being"  as  one  with  her  husband.  There  are  many  suggestive  points  in  the  verses  (1 — 
7)  which  we  may  call  the  return  of  man's  moral  state  into  chaos,  that  out  of  it  may 
come  forth,  by  Divine  grace,  the  new  creation  of  a  redeemed  humanity. 

I.  As  it  is  only  in  the  moral  sphere  that  sin  is  possible,  so  it  is  by  the  contact 
of  A  former  corruption  with  man  that  the  evil  principle  is  ititroduced  into  the  world. 
The  serpent's  subtlety  represents  that  evil  principle  already  in  operation. 

II.  While  the  whole  transaction  is  on  the  line  of  moral  and  religiors  responsibility 
rr  is  impossible  to  disconnect  the  animal  nature  from  the  first  temptation. 
The  serpent,  the  woman,  the  tree,  the  eating  of  fruit,  the  pleasantness  to  taste  and 
Bight,  the  effect  upon  the  fleshly  feelings,  all  point  to  the  close  relation  of  the  animal 
and  the  moral.  There  is  nothing  implied  as  to  the  nature  of  matter,  but  it  is  plainly 
taught  that  the  effect  of  a  loss  of  moral  and  spiritual  dignity  is  a  sinking  back  into 
the  lower  grade  of  life ;  as  man  is  less  a  child  of  God  he  is  more  akin  to  the  beast* 
th»t  p«rish. 


in.  1—7.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


III.  The  temptation  is  based  on  a  lie  ;  first  soliciting  the  mind  through  • 
question,  a  perplexity,  then  passing  to  a  direct  contradiction  of  God's  word,  and 
blasphemous  suggestion  of  his  ill-will  towards  man,  together  with  an  excitement  of 
pride  and  overweening  deRire  in  man's  heart.  The  serpent  did  not  directly  open  the 
door  of  disobedience.  He  led  the  woman  up  to  it,  and  stirred  in  her  the  evil  thought 
of  passing  through  it.  The  first  temptation  is  the  type  of  all  temptation.  Notion 
the  three  points: — (I)  falsification  of  fact  and-  confusion  of  mind ;  (2)  alienation 
from  God  as  the  Source  of  all  good  and  the  only  wise  Ruler  of  our  life ;  (3)  desire 
selfishly  exalting  itself  above  the  recognised  and  appointed  limits.  Another  sug- 
gestion is — 

IV.  The  impossibility  that  sin  should  not  fructify  immediately  that  it 
becomes  A  fact  of  the  life.  Temptation  is  not  sin.  Temptation  resisted  is  moral 
strength.  Temptation  yielded  to  is  an  evil  principle  admitted  into  the  sphere  of  its 
operation,  and  beginning  its  work  at  once.  The  woman  violated  her  true  position 
by  her  sin ;  it  was  the  consequence  of  that  position  that  she  became  a  tempter  herself 
to  Adam,  so  that  the  helpmeet  became  to  Adam  what  the  serpent  was  to  her.  His 
eating  with  her  was,  as  Milton  so  powerfully  describes  it,  at  once^l)  a  testimony 
to  their  oneness,  and  therefore  to  the  power  of  that  love  which  might  have  been  only 
a  blessing ;  and  (2)  a  condemnation  of  both  alike.  The  woman  was  first  in  the  con- 
demnation, but  the  man  was  first  in  the  knowledge  of  the  commandment  and  in  the 
privilege  of  his  position ;  therefore  the  man  was  first  in  degree  of  condemnation, 
while  the  woman  was  first  in  the  order  of  time. 

V.  The  work  of  sin  upon  the  whole  natube  is  immediate.  The  knowledge 
of  good  and  evil  is  the  commencement  of  a  conflict  between  the  laws  of  nature  and 
the  laws  of  the  human  spirit  in  its  connection  with  nature,  which  nothing  but  the 
grace  of  God  can  bring  to  an  end  in  the  "peace  which  passeth  understanding." 
That  springing  up  of  shame  in  the  knowledge  of  natural  facts  is  a  testimony  to  a 
violation  of  God's  order  which  he  alone  can  set  right.  "  Who  told  thee,"  God  said, 
"  that  thou  wast  naked  ?  "  God  might  have  raised  his  creature  to  a  position  in  which 
shame  would  have  been  impossible.  He  will  do  so  by  his  grace.  Meanwhile  the 
fall  was  what  the  word  represents  —  a  forfeiture  of  that  superiority  to  the  mere 
animal  nature  which  was  man's  birthright.  And  the  results  of  the  fall  are  seen  in 
the  perpetual  warfare  between  the  natural  world  and  the  spiritual  world  in  thai  being 
who  was  made  at  once  a  being  of  earth  and  a  child  of  God.  "  They  sewed  fig-leaves 
together,  and  made  themselves  aprons."  In  the  sense  of  humiliation  and  defeat 
man  turns  to  the  mere  material  protection  of  surrounding  objects,  forgetting  that  a 
spiritual  evil  can  only  be  remedied  by  a  spiritual  good ;  but  the  shameful  helpless- 
ness of  the  creature  is  the  opportunity  for  the  gracious  interposition  of  God. — R. 

Ver.  4. — The  tempter's  chief  weapon.  Narrative  of  the  fall  is  of  interest  not  only 
as  the  record  of  how  mankind  became  sinful,  but  as  showing  the  working  of  that 
"lie"  (2  Thess.  ii.  11)  by  which  the  tempter  continually  seeks  to  draw  men  away 
(2  Cor.  xi.  3).  Eve's  temptation  is  in  substance  our  temptation ;  Eve's  fall  illus- 
trates our  danger,  and  gives  us  matter  whereby  to  try  ourselves  and  mark  how 
far  we  "  walk  by  faith." 

The  substance  of  the  temptation  was  suggesting  doubts — (1)  As  to  God's  love. 
(2)  As  to  God's  truth.  The  former  led  to  self-willed  desire ;  the  latter  gave  force 
to  the  temptation  by  removing  the  restraining  power.  We  are  tempted  by  the 
same  suggestions.  The  will  and  unbelief  act  and  react  upon  each  other.  Where  the 
will  turns  away  from  God's  will  doubt  more  easily  finds  an  entrance,  and  having 
entered,  it  strengthens  self-will  (Rom.  i.  28).  Unbelief  is  often  a  refuge  to  escape 
from  the  voice  of  conscience.  But  mark — the  suggestion  was  not,  "God  has  not 
said,"  but,  It  will  not  be  so ;  You  have  misunderstood  him ;  There  will  be  some  way 
of  avoiding  the  danger.  Excuses  are  easy  to  find :  human  infirmity,  peculiar  circum- 
stances, strength  of  temptation,  promises  not  to  do  so  again.  And  a  man  may  live, 
knowing  God's  word,  habitually  breaking  it,  yet  persuading  himself  that  all  is  well. 
Note  two  chief  lines  in  which  this  temptation  assails : — 1.  As  to  the  necessity  for 
Christian  earnestness.  We  are  warned  (1  John  ii.  15 ;  v.  12 ;  Rom.  viii.  6 — 13). 
What  is  the  life  thus  spoken  of?    Nothing  strange.     A  life  of  seeking  the  world '■ 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


[ch.  in.  8 — \ 


prizes,  gains,  pleasures.  A  life  whose  guide  is  what  others  do ;  in  which  the  example 
of  Christ  ana  guidance  of  the  Holy  Spirit  are  not  regarded;  in  which  religion  is 
kept  apart,  and  confined  to*certain  times  and  services.  Of  this  God  says  it  is  living 
death  (cf.  1  Tim.  v.  6)  ;  life's  work  neglected ;  Christ's  banner  deserted.  Yet  the 
tempter  persuades — times  have  changed,  the  Bible  must  not  be  taken  literally,  ye 
shall  not  die.  2.  As  to  acceptance  of  the  gift  of  salvation.  God's  word  is  (Mark  xvi 
15 ;  Luke  xiv.  21 ;  John  iv.  10)  the  record  to  be  believed  (Isa.  liii.  5,  6 ;  1  John  v. 
11).  Yet  speak  to  men  of  the  free  gift,  tell  them  of  present  salvation ;  the  tempter 
persuades — true ;  but  you  must  do  something,  or  feel  something,  before  it  can  be 
safe  to  believe ; — God  has  said  ;  but  it  will  not  be  so.  In  conclusion,  mark  how  the 
way  of  salvation  just  reverses  the  process  of  the  fall.  Man  fell  away  from  God. 
from  peace,  from  holiness  through  doubting  God's  love  and  truth.  We  are  restored 
to  peace  through  believing  these  (John  iii.  16 ;  1  John  i.  9),  and  it  ia  this  belief 
which  binds  us  to  God  in  loving  service  (2  Cor.  v.  14). — M. 


EXPOSITION. 


Ver.  8, — And  they  heard  the  voice  of  the 
Lord  God.  Either  (1)  the  noise  of  his  foot- 
steps (cf.  Levit.  xxvi.  33 ;  Num.  xvi.  34  ;  2 
Sam.  v.  24 ;  Knobel,  Delitzsch,  Keil,  Ealisch, 
Macdonald) ;  or  (2)  the  thunder  that  accom- 
panied his  approach  (cf.  Exod.  ix.  23  ;  Job 
xxxvii.  4,  5 :  Ps.  xxix.  3,  9 ;  Murphy,  Bush) ; 
or  (3)  the  sound  of  his  voice  (Calvin,  Lange, 
Wordsworth) ;  or  (4)  probably  all  four.  'Walk- 
ing in  the  garden.  If  the  voice,  then  in- 
creasing in  intensity  (cf.  Exod.  xix.  19 ; 
Bush)  ;  if  Jehovah,  which  is  better,  then 
"  wandering  or  walking  about  in  a  circle  " 
within  the  garden  bounds  (Macdonald).  In 
the  cool  (literally,  the  wind)  of  the  day.  The 
morning  breeze  (Calvin) ;  the  evening  breeze 
(Ealisch,  Macdonald);  to  SiiKivov  (LXX. ); 
auram  post  meridiem  (Vulgate) ;  cf.  hdm  ha' 
yom,  "  the  heat  of  the  day  "  (Gen.  xviii.  1). 
And  Adam  and  his  wife  hid  themselves.  Not 
in  humility,  as  unworthy  to  come  into  God's 
presence  (Irenseus) ;  or  in  amazement,  as  not 
knowing  which  way  to  turn  (Augustine) ;  or 
through  modesty,  (Knobel  Bohlen) ;  but  from 
a  sense  of  guilt.  From  the  presence  of  the 
Lord.  From  which  it  is  apparent  they  ex- 
pected a  visible  manifestation. 

Vers.  9, 10. — And  the  lord  God  called  unto 
Adam.  Adam's  absence  was  a  clear  proof 
that  something  was  wrong.  Hitherto  he  had 
always  welcomed  the  Divine  approach.  And 
said  unto  him,  Where  art  thou  1  Not  as  if 
ignorant  of  Adam's  hiding-place,  but  to  bring 
him  to  confession  (cf.  ch.  iv.  9).  And  I  was 
afraid,  because  I  was  naked.  Attributing 
his  fear  to  the  wrong  cause — the  voice  of  God 
or  his  insufficient  clothing  ;  a  sign  of  special 
obduracy  (Calvin),  which,  however,  admits 
of  a  psychological  explanation,  viz.,  that "  his 
consciousness  of  the  effects  of  sin  was  keoner 
than  his  sense  of  the  sin  itself"  (Eeil),  "  al- 
though all  that  ho  says  is  purely  involuntary 
self-uceusation"  (Delitzsch),  and  "the  first 
instanco  of  that  mingling  and  confusion  of 
sin  and  punishment  which  is  the  peculiar 


characteristic  of  our  redemption-needing  hu- 
manity "  (Lange).     And  I  hid  myself. 

Vers.  11,  12. — And  he  said.  "  To  reprove 
the  sottislmess  of  Adam"  (Calvin);  "to 
awaken  in  him  a  sense  of  sin  "  (Keil).  Who 
told  thee  that  thou  wast  naked  t  Delitzsch 
finds  in  'D  an  indication  that  a  personal 
power  was  the  prime  cause  of  man's  disobedi- 
ence ;  but,  as  Lange  rightly  observes,  it  is  the 
occasion  not  of  sin,  but  of  the  consciousness  ol 
nakedness  that  is  here  inquired  after.  Hast 
thou  eaten  of  the  tree  (at  once  pointing  Adam 
to  the  true  cause  of  his  nakedness,  and  inti- 
mating the  Divine  cognisance  of  his  trann- 
gression)  whereof  I  commanded  thee  that 
thou  shouldest  not  eat  ?  "  Added  to  remove 
the  pretext  of  ignorance  "  (Calvin),  and  also 
to  aggravate  the  guilt  of  his  offence,  as  having 
been  done  in  direct  violation  of  the  Divine 
prohibition.  The  question  was  fitted  to  carry 
conviction  to  Adam's  conscience,  and  had  the 
instantaneous  effect  of  eliciting  a  confession, 
though  neither  a  frank  one  nor  a  generous. 
And  the  man  said  (beginning  with  apology  and 
ending  with  confession,—  thus  reversing  the 
natural  order,  and  practically  rolling  Dack 
the  blame  on  God),  The  woman  whom  thou 
gavest  to  he  with  me  (accusing  the  gift  and 
the  Giver  in  one),  she  gave  me  of  the  tree. 
Cf.  with  the  cold  and  unfeeling  terms  in  which 
Adam  speaks  of  Eve  the  similar  language  in 
Gen.  xxxvii.  32  ;  Luke  xv.  30  ;  John  ix.  12. 
"  Without  natural  affection  "  is  one  of  the 
bitter  fruits  of  sin  (cf.  Rom.  i.  31).  Equally 
with  the  blasphemy,  ingratitude,  unkindness, 
and  meanness  of  this  excuse,  its  frivolity  is 
apparent ;  as  if,  though  Eve  gave,  that  was 
any  reason  why  Adam  should  have  eaten. 
And  I  did  eat.  Reluctantly  elicited,  the 
confession  of  his  sin  is  very  mildly  stated. 
"A  cold  expression,  manifesting  neither  any 

frief  nor  shame  at  so  foul  an  act,  but  rather  a 
esire  to  cover  his  sin  "  (White). 
Ver.   13. — And   the  lord  said  unto  the 
woman— without  noticing  the  excuses,  but 


OH.  HI.  8—19.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


66 


simply  accepting  the  admission,  and  passing 
on,  "  following  up  the  transgression  even  to 
the  root — not  the  psychological  merely,  hut 
the  historical "  (Lange) :  What  is  this  that 
thou  hast  done  1  Or,  "  Why  hast. thou  done 
this  ? "  (LXX. ,  Vulgate,  Luther,  De  Wette). 
"  But  the  Hebrew  phrase  has  more  vehe- 
mence ;  it  is  the  language  of  one  who  won- 
ders af  at  something  prodigious,  .and  ought 
rather  to  be  rendered, "'  How  hast  thou  done 
this  ? '  "  (Calvin).  And  the  woman  said 
(following  the  example  of  her  guilty  hus- 
band, omitting  any  notice  of  her  sin  in 
tempting  Adam,  and  transferring  the  blame 
of  her  own  disobedience  to  the  reptile),  The 
serpent  beguiled  me.  Literally,  caused  me 
to  forget,  hence  beguiled,  from  fiBO,  to  forget 
a  thing  (Lam.  iii.  17),  or  person  (Jer.  xxiii. 
39;  Stanley  Leathes,' Gram.,' App.  197) ;  or, 
caused  me  to  go  astray,  from  KC3  (unused 
in  Kal),  kindred  to  i"!EG,  perhaps  to  err,  to 
go  astray  (Gesenius,  Fiirst) ;  ijirarij'trs  (LXX.), 
i%airaTr)Otv  (2  Cor.  xi.  8).  And  I  did  eat. 
"  A  forced  confession,  but  no  appearance  of 
sontrition.  '  It's  true  I  did  eat,  but  it  was 
not  my  fault ' "  (Hughes). 

Ver.  14. — Confession  having  thus  been 
made  by  both  delinquents,  and  the  arch-con- 
triver of  the  whole  mischief  discovered,  the 
Divine  Judge  proceeds  to  deliver  sentence. 
And  the  lord  God  said  unto  the  serpent. 
Which  he  does  not  interrogate  as  he  did  the 
man  and  woman,  "  because  (1)  in  the  ani- 
mal itself  there  was  no  sense  of  sin,  and  (2) 
to  the  devil  he  would  hold  out  no  hope  of 
pardon"  (Calvin) ;  "  because  the  trial  has  now 
reached  the  fountain-head  of  sin,  the  purely 
evil  purpose  (the  demoniacal)  having  no 
deeper  ground,  and  requiring  no  further  in- 
vestigation "  (Lange).  Becaus*  thou  hast 
lone  this.  I.  e.  beguiled  the  woman.  The 
incidence  of  this  curse  has  been  explained  as 
—1.  The  serpent  only  (Kalisch).  2.  The 
devil  only  (Macdonald).  3.  Partly  on  the 
serpent  and  partly  on  Satan  (Calvin).  4. 
Wholly  upon  both  (Murphy,  Bush,  Cand- 
lish).  The  difficulties  attending  these  dif- 
ferent interpretations  have  thus  been  con- 
cisely expressed  :  —  "1.  Quidam  statuunt 
ma)edictionem  latam  in  serpentera  solum, 
qui;\  hie  confertur  cum  aliis  bestiis,  non  in 
diauolum,  quia  is  antea  maledictus  erat.  2. 
Alii  in  diabolum  solum,  quia  brutus  serpens 
non  poterat  juste"  puniri.  3.  Alii  applicant 
ver.  14  ad  serpentem,  ver.  15  in  diabolum. 
At  vero  tu  et  te  idem  sunt  in  utroque  versu. 
4.  Ait  existimant  earn  in  utrumque  latam  " 
(Medus  in  'Poli  Commentar.,'  quoted  by 
Lange).  The  fourth  opinion  seems  most 
accordant  with  the  language  of  the  maledic- 
tion. Then  art  cursed.  The  cursing  of  the 
Irrational  creature  should  occ»sion  no  morf  I 
egsraia 


difficulty  than  the  cursing  of  the  earth  (vet 
17),  or  of  the  fig  tree  (Matt.  xi.  21).  Creatures 
can  be  cursed  or  blessed  only  in  accordance 
with  their  natures.     Thu  reptile,  therefore, 
being  neither  a  moral  nor  responsible  crea- 
ture, could  not  be  cursed  in  the  sense  of  being 
made  susceptible  of  misery.     But  it  might 
be  cursed  in  the  sense  of  being  deteriorated 
in  its  nature,  and,  as  it  were,  consigned  to 
a  lower  position  in  the  scale  of  being.     And 
as  the  Creator  has  a  perfect  right  to  assign 
to  his  creature  the  specific  place  it  shall 
occupy,  and  function  it  shall  subserve,  in 
creation,  the  remanding  of  the  reptile  to  an 
inferior  position  could  not  justly  be  construed 
into  a  violation  of  the  principles  of  right, 
while  it  might  serve  to  God's  intelligent 
creatures  as  a  visible  symbol  of  his  displeasure 
against  sin  (cf.  ch.  ix.  5  ;  Exod.  xxL  28 — 36). 
Above.     Literally,  from,  i.  e.  separate  and 
apart  from  all  cattle  (Le  Clerc,  Voe  Bohlen, 
Tuch,  Knobel,  Keil) ;  and  neither  by  (Gese- 
nius,  De  Wette,   Baumgarten)   nor   above 
(Luther,  A.  V. ,  Rosenmiiller,  Delitzsch),  as  if 
the  other  creatures  were  either  participators 
in  or  the  instruments  of  the  serpent's  male- 
diction.    All  cattle,  and  above  (apart  from) 
every  beast  of  the  field.  The  words  imply  the 
materiality  of  the  reptile  and  the  reality  of 
the  curse,  so  far  as  it  was  concerned.    Upon 
thy  belly.     'Eiri  rt$  uTrjdet  aov  Kal  ry  KotXitp 
(LXX. ) ;  "  meaning  with  great  pain  and  diffi- 
culty."   "  As  Adam's  labour  and  Eve's  con- 
ception had  pain  and  sorrow  added  to  them 
(vers.  16,  17),  so  the  serpent's  gait"  (Ains- 
worth).      Shalt  thou  go.     "  As  the  worm 
steals  over  the  earth  with  its  length  of  body," 
"  as  a  mean  and  despised  crawler  in  the  dust," 
having  previously  gone  erect  (Luther),  and 
been  possessed  of  bone  (Josephus),  and  ca- 
pable of  standing  upright  and  twining  itself 
round  the  trees  (Lange),  or  at  least  having 
undergone  some  transformation  as  to  external 
form  (Delitzsch,  Keil) ;  though  the  language 
may  import  nothing  more  than  that  whereas 
the  reptile  had  exalted  itself  against  man, 
it  was  henceforth  "  to  be  thrust  back  into  its 
proper  rank, ""  recalled  from  its  insolent 
motions  to  its  accustomed  mode  of  going," 
and  "  at  the  same  time  condemned  to  per- 
petual infamy"   (Calvin).      As  applied  to 
Satan  this  part  of  the  curse  proclaimed  his 
further  degradation  in  the  scale  of  being  in 
consequence  of  having  tempted  man.    "Than 
the  serpent  trailing  along  the  ground,  no 
emblem  can  more  aptly  illustrate  the  charac- 
ter and  condition  of  the  apostate  spirit  who 
once  occupied  a  place  among  the  angels  of 
God,  but  has  been  cast  down  to  the  earth, 
preparatory  to  his  deeper  plunge  into  the 
fiery  lake  (Eev.  xx.  10 ;  Macdonald).     And 
dust   shalt  thou  eat     /.  e.  mingling  dust 
with  all  it  should  eat.     "  The  great  scanti- 
ness of  food  on  which  serpents  can  subsist 


M 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[oh.  m.  8 — It 


five  rise  to  the  belief  entertained  by  many 
astern  nations,  and  referred  to  in  several 
Biblical  allusions  (Isa.  lxv.  25  ;  Micah  vii. 
17) — that  they  eat  dust"  (Kalisch).  More 
probably  it  originated  in  a  too  literal  inter- 
pretation of  the  Mosaic  narrative.  Applied 
to  the  devil,  this  part  of  the  curse  was  an 
additional  intimation  of  his  degradation.  To 
"lick  the  dust"  or  "eat  the  dust",  "is 
equivalent  to  being  reduced  to  a  condition  of 
meanness,  shame,  and  contempt "  (Bush) ; 
"is  indicative  of  disappointment  in  all  the 
aims  of  being"  (Murphy);  "denotes  the 
highest  intensity  of  a  moral  condition,  of 
which  the  feelings  of  the  prodigal  (Luke  xv. 
16)  may  be  considered  a  type  "  (Macdonald  ; 
cf.  Ps.  lxxii.  9).  All  the  days  of  thy  life. 
The  degradation  should  be  perpetual  as  well 
as  complete. 

Ver.  15. — And  I  will  put  enmity  between 
thee  and  the  woman.  Referring — 1.  To  the 
fixed  and  inveterate  antipathy  between  the 
serpent  and  the  human  race  (Bush,  Lange)  ; 
to  that  alone  (Knobel).  2.  To  the  antago- 
nism henceforth  to  be  established  between 
the  tempter  and  mankind  (Murphy) ;  to 
that  alone  (Calvin,  Bonar,  Wordsworth, 
Macdonald).  And  between  thy  seed  and 
her  Beed.  Here  the  curse  manifestly  out- 
grows the  literal  serpent,  and  refers  almost 
exclusively  to  the  invisible  tempter.  The 
hostility  commenced  between  the  woman 
and  her  destroyer  was  to  be  continued  by 
their  descendants — the  seed  of  the  serpent 
being  those  of  Eve's  posterity  who  should 
imbibe  the  devil's  spirit  and  obey  the  devil's 
rule  (cf.  Matt,  xxiii.  33 ;  1  John  iii.  10)  ; 
and  the  seed  of  the  woman  signifying  those 
whose  character  and  life  should  be  of  an 
opposite  description,  and  in  particular  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  styled  by  pre- 
eminence "  the  Seed  "  (Gal.  iii.  16,  19),  and 
who  came  "  to  destroy  the  works  of  the 
devil "  (Heb.  ii.  4  ;  1  John  iii.  8).  This  we 
learn  from  the  words  which  follow,  and 
which,  not  obscurely,  point  to  a  seed  which 
should  be  individual  and  personal.  It— or  he; 
a6roc(LXX.);  not  ipsa  (Vulgate,  Augustine, 
Ambrose,  Gregory  the  Great ;  later  Romish 
interpretersunderstanding  the  Virgin) — shall 
bruise.  1.  Shall  crush,  trample  down — ren- 
dsring  SI-IK*  by  terere  or  conterere  (Vulgate, 
Svriac,  Samaritan,  Tuch,  Baumgarten,  Keil, 
Kalisch).  2.  Shall  pierce,  wound,  bite — 
taking  the  verb  as  :=  ^BE/,  to  bite  (Fiirst, 
Calvin).  3.  Shall  watch,  lie  in  wait  =  ^KB* 
(LXX. ,  Ttjpfiau — Wordsworth  suggests  as  the 
correct  reading  r£p»;<m,  from  rfpsw,  perforo, 
vulnero  —  Gesenius,  Knobel).  The  word 
occurs  only  in  two  other  places  in  Scrip- 
ture— Job  ix.  17  ;  Ps.  cxxxix.  11 — and  in 
the  latter  of  these  the  reading  is  doubtful 
(of-  Parowne  on   Pa.  in  loco).     Hence  the 


difficulty  of  deciding  with  absolute  certainty 
between  these  rival  interpretations.  Ps.  xci. 
13  and  Rom.  xvi.  20  appear  to  sanction  the 
first;  the  second  is  favoured  by  the  application 
of  the  same  word  to  the  hostile  action  of  tha 
serpent,  which  is  not  treading,  but  biting;  the 
feebleness  of  the  third  is  its  chief  objection 
Thy  head.  /.  e.  the  superior  part  of  then 
(Calvin),  meaning  that  the  serpent  would  b* 
completely  destroyed,  the  head  of  the  repti? 
being  that  part  of  its  body  in  which  a  wouni 
was  most  dangerous,  and  which  the  creature 
itself  instinctively  protects  ;  or  the  import 
of  the  expression  may  be,  He  shall  attack 
thee  in  a  bold  and  manly  way  (T.  Lewis). 
And  thou  shalt  bruise  his  heel.  /.  e.  the 
inferior  part  (Calvin),  implying  that  in  the 
conflict  he  would  be  wounded,  but  not  de- 
stroyed; or  "the  biting  of  the  heel  may 
denote  the  mean,  insidious  character  of  the 
devil's  warfare  "  (T.  Lewis). 

Ver.  16. — Unto  the  woman  he  said.  Pass- 
ing judgment  on  her  first  who  had  sinned 
first,  but  cursing  neither  her  nor  her  hus- 
band, as  "being  candidates  for  restoration" 
(Tertullian).  The  sentence  pronounced  on 
Eve  was  twofold.  I  will  greatly  multiply 
thy  sorrow  and  thy  conception.  A  hendiadys 
for  ' '  the  sorrow  of  thy  conception  "  (Gese- 
nius, Bush),  though  this  is  not  necessary. 
The  womanly  and  wifely  sorrow  of  Eve  wag 
to  be  intensified,  and  in  particular  the  pains 
of  parturition  were  to  be  multiplied  (cf.  Jer. 
xxxi.  8).  The  second  idea  is  more  fully 
explained  in  the  next  clause.  In  sorrow 
shalt  thou  bring  forth  children.  Literally, 
sons,  daughters  Deing  included.  The  pains 
of  childbirth  are  in  Scripture  emblematic  of 
the  severest  anguish  both  of  body  and  mind 
(cf.  Ps.  xlviii.  7  ;  Micah  iv.  9,  10  ;  1  Thess. 
v.  3  ;  John  xvi.  21;  Rev.  xii.  2).  The  gospel 
gives  a  special  promise  to  mothers  (1  Tim.  ii. 
15).  "By  bringing  forth  is  also  meant 
bringing  up  after  the  birth,  as  in  ch.  1.  23  " 
(Ainsworth).  And  thy  desire  shall  be  to 
thy  husband.  njMK'FI,  from  pW  to  run,  te 
have  a  vehement  longing  for  a  thing,  may 
have  the  same  meaning  here  as  in  Cant 
vii.  10  (Dathe,  Rosenmuller,  Delitzsch,  Keil, 
Bohlen,  Kalisch,  Afford) ;  but  is  better  taken 
as  expressive  of  deferential  submissiveness, 
as  in  eh.  iv.  7  (Luther,  Calvin,  Le  Clero, 
Lange,  Macdonald,  Speaker's  '  Commentary".) 
Following  the  LXX.  (cnroaTpotpr)),  Murphy 
explains  it  as  meaning,  "The  determination 
of  thy  will  shall  be  yielded  to  thy  husband." 
According  to  the  analogy  of  the  two  previous 
clauses,  the  precise  import  of  this  is  expressed 
in  the  next,  though  by  many  it  is  regarded 
as  a  distinct  item  in  the  curse  (Kalisch, 
Alford,  Clarke,  Wordsworth).  And  he  shall 
rule  over  thee.  Not  merely  a  prophecy  of 
woman's  subjection    bat  an  investiture  of 


oh.  i.  S-19.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


man  with  supremacy  oyer  the  woman  j  or 
rather  a  confirmation  and  perpetuation  of 
that  authority  which  had  been  assigned  to 
the  man  at  the  creation.  Woman  had  been 
given  him,  as  an  helpmeet  (ch.  ii.  18),  and 
her  relation  to  the  man  from  the  first  was 
constituted  one  of  dependence.  It  was  the 
reversal  of  this  Divinely-established  order 
that  had  led  to  the  fall  (ch.  iii.  17).  Hence- 
forth, therefore,  woman  was  to  be  relegated 
to,  and  fixed  in,  her  proper  sphere  of  sub- 
ordination. On  account  of  her  subjection  to 
man's  authority  a  wife  is  described  as  the 
possessed  or  subjected  one  of  a  lord  (ch.  xx. 
3  ;  Deut.  xx.  22),  and  a  husband  as  the  lord 
of  i  woman  (Exod.  xxi.  3).  Among  the 
Hebrews  the  condition  of  the  female  sex  was 
one  of  distinct  subordination,  though  not  of 
oppression,  and  certainly  not  of  slavery,  as  it 
it  too  often  has  been  in  heathen  and  Moham- 
medan countries.  Christianity,  while  placing 
woman  on  the  same  platform  with  man  as 
regards  the  blessings  of  the  gospel  (Gal.  iii. 
28),  explicitly  inculcates  her  subordination 
to  the  man  in  the  relationship  of  marriage 
(Ephes.  v.  22 ;  Col.  iii.  18  ;  1  Pet.  iii.  1). 

Ver.  17. — And  unto  Adam  he  said.  The 
noun  here  used  for  the  first  time  without  the 
article  is  explained  as  a  proper  name  (Eeil, 
Lange,  Speaker's  '  Commentary '),  though 
perhaps  it  is  rather  designed  to  express  the 
man's  representative  character  (Macdonald). 
Because  thou  hast  hearkened  unto  the  voice 
of  thy  wife.  Preceding  his  sentence  with  a 
declaration  of  his  guilt,  which  culminated  in 
this,  that  instead  of  acting  as  his  wife's  pro- 
tector prior  to  her  disobedience,  or  as  her 
mentor  subsequent  to  that  act,  in  the  hope 
of  bringing  her  to  repentance,  he  became  her 
guilty  coadjutor  through  yielding  himself  to 
her  persuasions.  And  hast  eaten  of  the  tree 
of  which  I  commanded  thee,  saying,  Thou 
shalt  not  eat  of  it.  For  which  a  twofold 
judgment  is  likewise  pronounced  upon  Adam. 
Cursed  is  the  ground.  Ha'  adamah,  out  of 
which  man  was  taken  (ch.  ii.  7) ;  i.  e.  the 
•oil  outside  of  the  garden.  The  language 
does  not  necessarily  imply  that  now,  for  the 
first  time,  in  consequence  of  the  fall,  the 
physical  globe  underwent  a  change,  "be- 
coming from  that  point  onward  a  realm  of 
deformity  and  discord,  as  before  it  was  not, 
and  displaying  in  all  its  sceneries  and  com- 
binations the  tokens  of  a  broken  consti- 
tution "  (vide  Bushnell,  '  Nature  and  the 
Supernatural,'  ch.  vii. ) ;  simply  it  announces 
the  fact  that,  because  of  the  transgression  of 
which  he  had  been  guilty,  he  would  find 
the  land  beyond  the  confines  of  Eden  lying 


under  a  doom  of  sterility  (cf.  Kom.  viii.  20). 
For  thy  sake.  IJ-'Ofiji.  1.  Because  of  thy 
sin  it  required  to  be  such  a  world.  2.  Foi 
thy  good  it  was  better  that  such  a  curse 
should  lie  upon  the  ground.  Reading  T 
instead  of  "I,  the  LXX.  translate  Iv  rote 
epyotc;  and  the  Vulgate,  In  opere  tuo.  In 
sorrow.  Literally,  painful  labour  (cf.  ver. 
16 ;  Prov.  v.  10).  Shalt  thou  eat  of  it. 
/.  e.  of  its  fruits  (cf.  Isa.  i.  7  ;  xxxvi.  16  ; 
xxxvii.  30).  "  Bread  of  sorrow"  (Ps.  exxvii. 
2)  is  bread  procured  and  eaten  amidst  hard 
labour.     All  the  days  of  thy  life. 

Ver.  18. — Thorns  also  and' thistles.  Terms 
occurring  only  here  and  in  Hosea  x.  8  =  the 
similar  expressions  in  Isa.  v.  6 ;  vii.  23  (Ka- 
lisch,  Eeil,  Macdonald).  Shall  it  bring  forth 
to  thee.  /.  e.  these  shall  be  its  spontaneous 
productions  ;  if  thou  desirest  anything  else 
thou  must  labour  for  it.  And  thou  shalt  eat 
the  herb  of  the  field.  "  Not  the  fruit  of 
paradise"  (Wordsworth),  but  "the  lesser 
growths  sown  by  his  own  toil "  (Alford) — an 
intimation  that  henceforth  man  was  "to  be 
deprived  of  his  former  delicacies  to  such  an 
extent  as  to  be  compelled  to  use,  in  addition, 
the  herbs  which  had  been  designed  only  for 
brute  animals;"  and  perhaps  also  "a  con- 
solation," as  if  promising  that,  notwith- 
standing the  thorns  and  thistles,  "  it  should 
still  yield  him  sustenance  "  (Calvin). 

Ver.  19. — In  the  sweat  of  thy  face  (so 
called,  as  having  there  its  source  and  being 
there  visible)  shalt  thou  eat  bread.  J.  e. 
all  food  (vide  Job  xxviii.  5 ;  Ps.  civ.  14  ; 
Matt,  xiv.15;  Markvi.36).  "Toeat  bread" 
is  to  possess  the  means  of  sustaining  life 
(Eccles,  v.  16 ;  Amos  vii.  12).  Till  thou 
return  unto  the  ground  (the  mortality  of 
man  is  thus  assumed  as  certain) ;  for  out  of 
it  thou  wast  taken.  Not  declaring  the 
reason  of  man's  dissolution,  as  if  it  were 
involved  in  his  original  material  constitution, 
but  reminding  him  that  in  consequence  of 
his  transgression  he  bad  forfeited  the  privi- 
lege of  immunity  from  death,  and  must 
now  return  to  the  soil  whence  he  sprung. 
'E£  >}c  iXrifBrit:  (LXX.) ;  de  qua  sumptus  es 
(Vulgate)  ;  "  out  of  which  thou  wast  taken  " 
(Macdonald,  Gesenius).  On  the  use  of  '3  as 
a  relative  pronoun  =  ")K>S<  cf.  Gesenius, 
'Lex.  sub  nom.,'  who  quotes  this  and  ch. 
iv.  25  as  examples.  Vide  also  Stanley 
Leathes,  '  Heb.  Gram.,'  p.  202  ;  and  '  Glassii 
Philologise,'  lib.  iii.  tr.  2,  c.xv.  p.  335.  This 
use  of  'S,  however,  appears  to  be  doubtful, 
and  is  not  necessary  in  any  of  the  example! 
quoted. 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENE8IS.  [oh.  hi.  8— 1» 


HOMILETIOS. 

Vers.  8 — 19. — The  first  judgment  scene.  L  The  flight  of  the  criminals.  1. 
It  is  the  instinct  of  sinful  men  to  flee  front  God.  "Adam  and  his  wife  hid  themselves 
from  the  presence  of  the  Lord  God "  (ver.  8).  So  "  Jonah  rose  up  to  flee  unto 
Tarshish  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord  "  (Jonah  i.  3).  (1)  Through  a  consciousness 
of  guilt.  A  perception  of  their  nakedness  caused  our  first  parents  to  seek  the  shelter 
of  the  garden  trees  (ver.  10).  Doubtless  it  was  the  burden  lying  on  Jonah's  con- 
science that  sent  him  down  into  the  ship's  hold  (Jonah  i.  5).  So  awakened  sinners 
ever  feel  themselves  constrained  to  get  away  from  God.  (2)  From  a  dread  of  pun- 
ishment. Not  perhaps  so  long  as  they  imagine  God  to  be  either  unacquainted  with 
or  indifferent  to  their  offence,  but  immediately  they  apprehend  that  their  wickedness 
is  discovered  (cf.  Exod.  ii.  15).  The  sound  of  Jehovah's  voice  as  he  caine  towards 
our  first  parents  filled  them  with  alarm.  How  much  more  will  the  full  revelation  of 
his  glorious  presence  in  flaming  fire  affright  the  ungodly  1  2.  It  is  God's  habit  to 
pursue  transgressors.  As  he  pursued  Adam  and  Eve  in  the  garden  by  his  voice  (ver.  9), 
and  Jonah  on  the  deep  by  a  wind  (Jonah  i.  4),  and  David  by  his  prophet  (2  Sam.  xii.  1), 
so  does  he  still  in  his  providence,  and  through  the  ministry  of  his  word,  and  by  his 
Spirit,  follow  after  fleeing  sinners — (1)  to  apprehend  them  (cf.  Phil.  iii.  12) ;  (2)  to 
forgive  and  save  them  (Luke  xix.  10) ;  (3)  if  they  will  not  be  forgiven,  to  punish 
them  (2  Thess.  i.  8).  3.  It  is  ilie  certain  fate  of  all  fugitives  to  be  eventually 
arrested.  Witness  Adam  and  Eve  (ver.  9),  Cain  (ch.  iv.  9),  David  (2  Sam.  xii.  1), 
Ahab  (1  Kings  xxi.  20),  Jonah  (ch.  i.  6).  Distance  will  not  prevent  (Ps.  cxxxix,  7). 
Darkness  will  not  hinder  (Ps.  cxxxix.  11).  Secrecy  will  not  avail  (Heb.  iv.  13). 
Material  defences  will  not  ward  off  the  coming  doom  (Amos  ix.  2,  3).  The  lapse  of 
time  will  not  make  it  less  certain  (Num.  xxxii.  23). 

IT.  The  examination  of  the  criminals.  1.  God's  questions  are  always  pain- 
fully direct  and  searching.  "Adam,  where  art  thou?"  (ver.  9).  "Who  told  thee 
thou  wast  naked?  Hast  thou  eaten  of  the  tree?"  (ver.  11).  "What  hast  thou 
done?"  (ver.  13).  (1)  Because  he  knows  the  fact  of  the  sinner's  guilt.  The  nature 
and  aggravation,  the  time,  circumstances,  manner,  and  reason  of  the  sinner's  trans- 
gression are  perfectly  understood.  (2)  Because  he  aims  at  the  sinner's  conviction ; 
i.  e.  he  desires  to  bring  sinners  to  a  realisation  of  the  sinfulness  of  their  behaviour 
corresponding  to  that  which  he  himself  possesses.  (3)  Because  he  wishes  to  elicit  a 
confession  from  the  sinner's  mouth.  Without  this  there  can  be  no  forgiveness  or  sal- 
vation (Prov.  xxviii.  13  ;  1  John  i.  9).  2.  Man's  apologies  are  always  extremely  weak 
and  trifling.  (1)  As  attempting  to  excuse  that  which  must  for  ever  be  inexcusable, 
viz.,  disobedience  to  God's  commandment.  Nothing  can  justify  sin.  God's  authority 
over  man  being  supreme,  no  one  can  relieve  man  from  his  responsibility  to  yield  im- 
plicit submission  to  the  Divine  precepts.  Jehovah's  question  rests  special  emphasis  on 
the  fact  that  Adam's  sin  was  a  transgression  of  his  commandment  (ver.  11).  (2)  As 
seeking  to  transfer  the  burden  of  guilt  from  himself  to  another.  Adam  blames  his 
wife ;  Eve  blames  the  serpent ;  and  ever  since,  sinners  have  been  trying  to  blame  any- 
thing and  everything  except  themselves — the  companions  God  has  given  them ;  the  cir- 
cumstances in  which  God  has  placed  them ;  the  peculiar  temperaments  and  disposi- 
tions with  which  God  has  endowed  them.  (3)  As  failing  to  obliterate  the  fact  of 
transgression.  Even  Adam  and  Eve  both  discern  as  much  as  this.  Beginning  with 
apologies,  they  were  obliged  to  end  with  avowal  of  their  guilt.  And  if  man  can 
Jetect  the  worthlessness  of  his  own  hastily-invented  pleas,  much  more,  we  may  be 
sure,  can  God  pierce  through  all  the  flimsy  and  trifling  arguments  that  sinners  offer 
to  extenuate  their  faults.  (4)  As  not  requiring  to  be  answered.  It  is  remarkable  that 
Jehovah  does  not  condescend  to  answer  either  Adam  or  his  wife  ;  the  reason  being, 
doubtless,  that  any  reply  to  their  foolish  Bpeeches  was  unnecessary.  3.  The  Divine 
verdict  is  always  clear  and  convincing.  (1)  Though  in  this  case  unspoken,  it  was 
jret  implied.  Adam  and  Eve  did  not  require  to  be  informed  of  their  culpability. 
And  neither  will  sinners  need  to  be  informed  of  their  guilt  and  condemnation  when 
they  stand  before  the  great  white  throne.  It  is  a  special  mark  of  mercy  that  God 
informs  sinners  in  the  gospel  of  the  nature  of  the  verdict  urbich  has  been  pronounced 


m.  m.  8—19,]  THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS.  69 


•gainst  them  (John  ili.  18,  19).  (2)  It  was  so  convincing  that  it  was  not  denied. 
Adam  and  Eve  we  can  suppose  were  speechless.  So  was  the  disobedient  wedding 
guest  (Matt.  xxii.  12).  So  will  all  the  condemned  be  in  the  day  of  judgment 
(ftsv.  Ti.  17). 

III.  The  sentence  op  the  criminals.  I.  On  the  serpent — judgment  without 
mercy.  (1)  Degradation  on  both  the  reptile  and  the  tempter.  (2)  Hostility  between 
the  serpent's  brood  and  the  woman's  seed.  (3)  Ultimate  destruction  of  the  tempter 
by  the  incarnation  and  death  of  the  woman's  seed.  2.  On  the  sinning  pair — mercy, 
and  then  judgment.  (1)  Mercy  for  both.  Great  meroy—  the  restitution  of  themselves 
and  of  their  seed  (or  at  least  a  portion  of  it)  by  the  complete  annihilation  of  theii 
adversary  through  the  sufferings  of  a  distinguished  woman's  seed.  Certain,  meroy — 
the  entire  scheme  for  their  recovery  was  to  depend  on  God,  who  here  says,  "  I  will 
put  .  .  ."  Free  mercy—neither  solicited  nor  deserved  by  Adam  or  his  wife.  (2) 
Judgment  for  each.  For  the  woman,  sorrow  in  accomplishing  her  womanly  and 
wifely  destiny,  combined  with  a  position  of  dependence  on  and  submission  to  her 
husband.     For  the  man,  a  life  of  sorrowful  labour,  a  doom  of  certain  death. 

Learn — 1.  The  folly  of  attempting  to  hide  from  God.  It  is  better  to  flee  to  God 
than  to  run  from  God,  even  when  we  sin  (Ps.  cxliii.  9).  2.  The  expediency  of 
confessing  to  God.  It  is  always  the  shortest  path  to  meroy  and  forgiveness  (Ps. 
xxxii.  5).  3.  The  gentle  treatment  which  men  receive  from  God.  Like  David,  we 
have  all  reason  to  sing  of  meroy  as  well  as,  and  even  rather  than,  judgment 
(Ps.  ci  1). 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  8. — The  working  of  the  sinrstrichen  conscience.  I.  God  the  Judgb  reveal- 
ing iiijself.  The  voice  of  the  Lord  God  represents  to  men  the  knowledge  of  them- 
selves, which,  like  light,  would  be  intolerable  to  the  shamefaced. 

II.  Man  hiding  from  the  Judge  because  unable  to  meet  him.  While  the 
darkness  of  the  thick  foliage  was  regarded  as  a  covering,  hiding  nakedness,  it  is  yet 
from  the  presence  of  the  Lord  God  that  the  guilty  seek  refuge. 

III.  Man's  self  against  himself.  The  instinctive  action  of  shame  is  a  testimony 
to  the  moral  nature  and  position  of  man.     So  it  may  be  said — 

IV.  Guilt  is  itself  God's  witness,  comprehending  the  sense  of  righteousness  and 
Hie  sense  of  transgression  in  the  same  being.  (Perhaps  there  is  a  reference  to  the 
working  of  the  conscience  in  the  description  of  the  voioe  of  God  as  mingling  in  the 
facts  of  the  natural  world  ;  "  the  cool  of  the  day  "  being  literally  the  "  evening  breeze," 
whose  whispering  sound  became  articulate  to  the  ears  of  those  who  feared  the  per- 
sonal presence  of  their  Judge.)— ^R. 

Ver.  9. — The  searching  question.  We  can  picture  the  dread  of  this  question. 
Have  you  considered  its  love— that  it  is  really  the  first  word  of  the  gospel  ?  Already 
the  Shepherd  goes  forth  to  seek  the  lost  sheep.  The  Bible  shows  us  —  1.  Tlie 
original  state  of  man  ;  what  God  intended  his  lot  to  be.  2.  The  entry  of  sin,  and  fall 
from  happineuB.     3.  The  announcement  and  carrying  out  God's  plan  of  restoration. 

The  gospel  begins  not  with  the  promise  of  a  Saviour,  but  with  showing  man 
His  need.  Thus  (John  iv.  15—18)  our  Saviour's  answer  to  "Give  me  this  water'' 
was  to  convince  of  sin:  "Go,  call  thy  husband."  That  first  loving  oall  has  never 
ceased.  Men  are  still  straying,  still  must  come  to  themselves  (Luke  xv.  17).  We 
hear  it  in  the  Baptist's  teaching;  in  the  preaching  of  St.  Peter  at  Pentecost;  and 
daily  in  his  life-giving  work  the  Holy  Spirit's  first  step  is  to  convince  of  sin.  And 
not  merely  in  conversion,  but  at  every  stage  he  repeats,  "  Where  art  thou  ?  "  To 
welcome  God's  gift  we  must  feel  our  own  need  ;  and  the  inexhaustible  treasures  in 
Christ  are  discerned  as  we  mark  duily  the  defects  of  our  service,  and  how  far  we  are 
from  the  goal  of  our  striving  (Phil.  iii.  13,  14).  Hence,  even  in  a  Christian  con- 
gregation, it  is  needful  to  press  'Where  art  thou?"  to  lead  men  nearer  to  Christ 
We  want  to  stir  up  easy->guing  disoiples,  to  make  Christians  consider  their  calling, 
to  rouse  to  higher  life  and  work.  Our  Saviour's  call  is,  "Follow  me."  How  ara 
you  doing  this  ?    You  are  pledged  to  be  his  soldiers ;  what  reality  is  there  in  youi 


70  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  [<m.  r.  8— !«. 

fighting?  How  many  are  content  merely  to  do  as  others  do  I  What  do  ye  for 
Christ  ?  You  have  your  Bible ;  is  it  studied,  prayed  over  ?  What  do  ye  to 
spread  its  truth  ?  Ye  think  not  how  much  harm  is  done  by  apathy,  how  much  silent 
teaching  of  unbelief  there  is  in  the  want  of  open  confession  of  Christ.  Many  are 
zealous  for  their  own  views.  Where  is  the  self-denying  mind  of  Christ,  the  spirit 
of  love?  Many  count  themselves  spiritual,  consider  that  they  have  turned  to  the 
Lord,  and  are  certainly  in  his  fold.  Where  is  St.  Paul's  spirit  of  watchfulness? 
(1  Cor.  ix.  26,  27).  "  Where  art  thou  ?  "  May  the  answer  of  each  be,  Not  shut 
up  in  myself,  not  following  the  multitude,  but  "  looking  unto  Jesus." — M. 

Vers.  14, 15. — The  doom  of  Satan  and  the  hope  of  man.  I.  The  doom  of  degrad- 
ation (ver.  14). 

II.  The  doom  of  HOSTILITY  (ver.  15).  Three  stages: — 1.  The  enmity.  2.  The 
conflict.     3.  The  victory. 

Lessons: — 1.  See  the  wondrous  mercy  of  God  in  proclaiming  from  the  first  day 
of  sin,  and  putting  into"  the  forefront,  a  purpose  of  salvation.  2.  Have  we  re- 
cognised it  to  the  overcoming  of  the  devil  ? — W. 

Vers.  9 — 24. — The  word  of  God  in  the  moral  chaos.  These  verses  bring  before  us 
very  distinctly  the  elements  of  man's  sinful  state,  and  of  the  redemptive  dispensa- 
tion of  God  which  came  out  of  it  by  the  action  of  his  brooding  Spirit  of  life  upon  the 
chaos. 

I.  The  word  of  God  addressed  to  the  personal  consciousness  is  the  beginning 
of  the  new  world.  "  The  Lord  God  called  unto  Adam,  and  said  unto  him,  Where 
art  thou  !  "  Before  that  direct  intercourse  between  the  Spirit  of  God  and  the  spirit 
of  man  there  is  no  distinct  recognition  of  the  evil  of  sin,  and  no  spparation  of  its 
moral  and  physical  consequences.  The  "  Where  art  thou?"  begins  the  spiritual 
work. 

II.  The  pbocess  of  the  work  of  God  in  the  conscience  is  one  that  leads  ds 

FROM  THE  OUTSIDE  CIRCLE  OF  RESPONSIBILITY  TO  THE  INNERMOST  CENTRE  OF  CONVICTION 

and  confession.  "  I  was  naked,"  "  I  was  afraid,"  "  I  hid  myself,"  "  The  woman  gave 
me  of  the  tree,"  "  I  did  eat ; "  so  at  last  we  get  to  the  central  fact — I  broke  the  com- 
mandment, I  am  guilty  towards  God.  Each  lays  the  blame  on  another — the  man  on 
the  woman,  the  woman  on  the  serpent.  But  the  main  fact  is  this,  that  when  once 
the  voice  of  God  deals  with  us,  when  once  the  Spirit  of  light  and  life  broods  over 
the  chaos,  there  will  be  truth  brought  out,  and  the  beginning  of  all  new  creation  is 
confession  of  sin.  After  all,  both  the  transgressors  admitted  the  fact :  "  1  did  eat" 
Nor  do  they  dare  to  state  what  is  untrue,  although  they  attempt  to  excuse  themselves ; 
for  there  may  be  a  true  confession  of  sin  before  there  is  a  sense  of  its  greatness  and 
inexcusableness. 

III.  The  transgression  being  clearly  revealed,  next  comes  the  Divine  condemna- 
tion. It  is  upon  the  background  of  judgment  that  redemption  must  be  placed,  that 
it  may  be  clearly  seen  to  be  of  God's  free  grace.  The  judgment  upon  the  serpent 
must  be  viewed  as  a  fact  in  the  sphere  of  man's  world,  not  in  the  larger  sphere  of 
the  superhuman  suggested  by  the  later  use  of  the  term  "  serpent."  God's  condemna- 
tion of  Satan  is  only  shadowed  forth  here,  not  actually  described..  The  cursed  animal 
simply  represents  the  cursed  agent  or  instrument,  and  therefore  was  intended  to 
embody  the  curse  of  sin  to  the  eyes  of  man.  At  the  same  time,  the  fifteenth  verse 
must  not  be  shorn  of  its  spiritual  application  by  a  merely  naturalistic  interpretation. 
Man's  inborn  detestation  of  the  serpent  brood,  and  the  serpent's  lurking  enmity 
against  man,  as  it  waits  at  his  heel,  is  rightly  taken  as  symbolically  representing  (1) 
the  antagonism  between  good  and  evil  introduced  into  the  world  by  man's  fall  ;  (2) 
the  necessity  that  that  antagonism  should  be  maintained  ;  and  (3)  the  purpose  of  God 
that  it  should  be  brought  to  an  end  by  the  destruction  of  the  serpent,  the  removing 
out  of  the  way  both  of  the  evil  principle  and  of  the  besetments  of  man's  life  which 
have  arisen  out  of  it.  This  "first  promise"  as  it  is  called,  was  not  given  in  the  form 
of  a  promise,  but  of  a  sentence.  Are  we  not  reminded  of  the  cross,  which  itself  was 
the  carrying  out  of  a  sentence,  but  in  which  was  included  the  redeeming  mercy  of 
God?     Life  in  death  i»  "he  mystery  of  Christ's  sacrifice.     *'  It  pleased  the  Lord  U 


oh.  hi.  &— 19.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  71 

bruise  him  "  (Isa.  liii.  10).  "  Through  death  he  destroyed  him  that  had  the  power  q 
death"  &c.  (Heb.  ii.  14).  It  must  nave  been  itself  like  a  revelation  of  redeeming 
love  that  God  pronounced  sentence  first  upon  the  serpent,  not  upon  man,  thereby 
teaching  him  that  he  was  in  the  sight  of  God  a  victim  of  the  evil  power,  to  be 
delivered  by  the  victorious  seed  of  the  woman,  rather  than  an  enemy  to  be  crushed 
and  destroyed.  The  sentence  seemed  to  say,  Thou,  the  serpent,  art  the  evil  thing  to 
be  annihilated ;  man  shall  be  saved,  though  wounded  and  bruised  in  the  heel ;  the 
"  woman's  seed "  shall  be  the  conqueror, — which  was  the  prediction  of  a  renovation 
of  humanity  in  a  second  Adam,  a  dim  forecasting  of  the  future,  indeed,  but  a  certain 
and  unmistakable  proclamation  of  the  continuance  of  the  race,  notwithstanding  sin 
and  death ;  and  in  that  continuance  it  was  declared  there  should  be  a  realisation  of 
entire  deliverance.  The  sentence  upun  the  woman,  which  follows  that  upon  the  ser- 
pent, as  she  was  the  first  in  the  transgression,  is  a  sentence  which,  while  it  clearly 
demonstrates  the  evil  of  sin,  at  the  same  time  reveals  the  mercy  of  God.  The 
woman's  sorrow  is  that  which  she  can  and  does  forget,  for  "  joy  that  a  man  is  bom 
into  the  world."  Her  desire  to  her  husband  and  her  submission  to  his  rule  do  come 
out  of  that  fall  of  her  nature  in  which  she  is  made  subject  to  the  conditions  of  a 
fleshly  life ;  but  from  the  same  earthly  soil  spring  up  the  hallowed  blossoms  and 
fruits  of  the  affections,  filling  the  world  with  beauty  and  blessing.  So  have  the  law 
of  righteousness  and  the  law  of  love  from  the  beginning  blended  together  in  the 
government  of  God.  In  like  manner,  the  sentence  upon  the  man  is  the  same  revela- 
tion of  Divine  goodness  in  the  midst  of  condemnation.  The  ground  is  cursed  for 
man's  sake.  To  thee  it  shall  bring  forth  thorns  and  thistleB,  i.e.  thy  labour  shall 
not  be  the  productive  labour  it  would  have  been — thou  shalt  put  it  forth  among 
difficulties  and  obstacles.  Thou  shalt  see  thine  own  moral  perversity  reflected  in 
the  stubborn  barrenness,  the  wilderness  growth  of  nature.  Yet  thou  shalt  eat  the 
herb  of  the  field,  and  depend  upon  it.  With  sweat  of  thy  face  all  through  thy  life 
thou  shalt  win  thy  bread  from  an  unwilling  earth.  And  at  last  the  dust  beneath  thy 
feet  shall  claim  thee  as  its  own ;  thy  toil-worn  frame  shall  crumble  down  into  the 
grave.  It  was  (1)  a  sentence  of  death,  of  death  in  life ;  but  at  the  same  time  it  was 
(2)  a  merciful  appointment  of  man's  most  peaceful  and  healthy  occupation — to  till 
the  ground,  to  grow  the  corn,  to  eat  the  bread ;  and  it  was  (3)  a  proclamation  of 
welcome  release  from  the  burden  "  when  the  dust  shall  return  to  the  earth  as  it  was, 
and  the  spirit  shall  return  to  God  who  gave  it."  There  is  no  allusion  in  any  of  these 
sentences  to  spiritual  results  of  transgression,  but  that  is  only  because  the  whole  is 
a  representation  of  the  fall,  objectively  regarded.  Just  as  the  serpent  is  spoken  of 
as  though  it  were  only  an  animal  on  the  earth,  so  man's  sin  is  spoken  of  as  though  it 
were  only  his  life's  error,'  to  be  paid  for  in  his  life's  suffering ;  but  as  in  the  former 
case  the  deeper  spiritual  meaning  lies  behind  the  form  of  the  serpent,  so  in  the  latter 
the  condemnation  which  brings  toil  and  suffering  and  death  upon  man's  bodily 
frame  brings  upon  his  whole  nature  that  which  the  external  infliction  symbolises  and 
sets  forth.  The  life  goes  down  into  the  dust,  but  it  is  the  life  which  by  sin  had  be- 
come a  smitten,  cursed  thing ;  that  hiding  of  it  in  the  dust  is  the  end,  so  far  as  the  mere 
sentence  is  concerned.  We  must,  however,  wait  for  the  revelation  which  is  to  be 
made  in  the  new  man, — the  life  coming  forth  again, — which,  though  but  dimly  pro- 
mised, is  yet  suggested  in  the  story  of  paradise.  Adam  gave  a  new  name  to  his  wife 
when  she  became  to  him  something  more  than  "a  help-meet  for  him."  He  called 
her,  first,  woman,  because  she  was  taken  out  of  man.  He  called  her,  afterwards, 
"  Eve"  as  the  life-producing,  "  because  she  was  the  mother  of  all  living."  The  coats 
of  skin — which  were  not,  like  the  fig-leaves  sewn  together,  man's  own  device  for 
hiding  shame,  but  God's  preparation  for  preserving  that  reverence  between  the  sexes 
so  vital  to  the  very  continuance  of  the  race  itself — betokened  again  the  mingling  of 
mercy  with  judgment ;  for,  apart  altogether  from  any  theory  as  to  the  slain  animals 
whose  skins  were  employed,  the  Divine  origin  of  clothing  is  a  most  significant  fact. 
When  we  are  told  that  "  the  Lord  God  made  them  coats  of  skins,  and  clothed  them," 
we  must  interpret  the  language  from  the  standpoint  of  the  whole  narrative,  which  is 
that  ol  an  objective  representation  of  the  mysteries  of  man's  primeval  life.  It  would 
not  be  in  harmony  with  the  tone  of  the  whole  booK  to  say  in  what  method  such 
Divine  interposition  was  brought  about.    To  the  Biblical  writers  a  spiritual  guidaoMj 


7t 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[oh.  hi.  20—24 


«  work  of  God  in  the  miad  of  man,  ib  just  as  truly  God's  own  act  as  though  it  were 
altogether  apart  from  any  human  agency.  The  origin  of  clothing  was  an  inspiration. 
Perhaps  it  is  not  putting  too  much  into  the  language  to  see  in  such  a  fact  an  allusion 
to  other  facts.  Man  is  direoted  to  use  skins ;  might  he  not  have  been  directed  to  slay 
animals  ?  If  so,  might  not  such  slaughter  of  animals  have  been  first  connected  with 
religious  observances,  for  as  yet  there  is  no  allusion  to  the  use  of  animal  food,  save 
in  the  indirect  form  of  dominion  over  the  lower  creation  ?  In  the  fourth  chapter,  in 
the  extra  paradisaic  life,  the  keeping  of  herds  and  flocks  is  mentioned  as  a  natural 
sequel.  Doubtless  from  the  time  of  the  fall  the  mode  of  life  was  entirely  changed, 
as  was  its  sphere.  Before  sin  man  was  an  animal  indeed,  but  with  his  animal  nature 
in  entire  subordination ;  after  his  fall  he  was  under  the  laws  of  animal  life,  both  as 
to  its  support  and  propagation.  Death  became  the  ruling  fact  of  life,  as  it  is  in  the 
mere  animal  races.  Man  is  delivered  from  it  only  as  he  is  lifted  out  of  the  animal 
sphere  and  becomes  a  child  of  God.  The  expulsion  from  Eden  was  part  of  the 
Divine  sentence,  but  it  was  part  of  the  redemptive  work  which  commenced  imme- 
diately upon  the  fall.  The  creature  knowing  good  and  evil  by  disobedience  must 
not  live  for  ever  in  that  disobedience.  He  must  die  that  he  may  be  released  from 
the  burden  of  his  corruption.  An  immortality  of  sin  is  not  God's  purpose  for  his 
creature.     There/ore  the  Lord  God  shut  up  Eden. — B. 


EXPOSITION. 


Ver.  20. — Arraigned,  convicted,  judged, 
the  guilty  but  pardoned  pair  prepare  to  leave 
their  garden  home— the  woman  to  begin  her 
experience  of  sorrow,  dependence,  and  sub- 
jection ;  the  man  to  enter  upon  his  life  career 
of  hardship  and  toil,  and  both  to  meet  their 
doom  of  certain,  though  it  might  be  of  long- 
delayed,  death.  The  impression  made  upon 
their  hearts  by  the  Divine  clemency,  though 
not  directly  stated  by  the  historian,  may  be 
inferred  from  what  is  next  recorded  as  hav- 
ing happened  within  the  precincts  of  Eden 
ere  they  entered  on  their  exile.  And  Adam 
called  (not  prior  to  the  fall,  reading  the 
verb  as  a  pluperfect  (Calvin),  nor  after  the 
birth  of  Cain,  transferring  the  present  verse 
to  ch.  iv.  2  (Knobel),  but  subsequent  to  the 
promise  of  the  woman's  seed,  and  preceding 
their  ejection  from  the  garden)  his  wife's 
name  Eve.  Chavvah,  from  chavvah  =  chay- 
yah,  to  live  (cf.  with  the  organic  root  chvi 
the  Sanscrit,  glv  ;  Gothic,  quiv ;  Latin, 
vivo,  gigno,  vigeo ;  Greek,  ?dw,  &c. ,  the 
fundamental  idea  being  to  breathe,  to  respire 
-F'iirst),  is  correctly  rendered  life — Jwi)  by 
tl.e  LXX.,  Josephus,  Philo,  Gesenius,  De- 
litzsch,  Macdonald,  &c.  Lange,  regarding  it 
as  an  abbreviated  form  of  the  participle 
mechavvah,  understands  it  to  signify  "  the 
sustenance,  i.  e.  the  propagation  of  life ; " 
while  Knobel,  viewing  it  as  an  adjective, 
hints  at  woman's  peculiar  function — B~\\  fljlj 

— to  quicken  seed  (ch.  xix.  32)  as  supplying 
the  explanation.  Whether  appended  by  the 
narrator  (Delitzsch,  Lange)  or  uttered  by 
Adam  (Kalisch,  Macdonald),  the  words  which 
follow  give  its  true  import  and  exegesis. 
Eecause  she  was  the  mother  (am — Greek, 
na/tfia  ;   Welsh,  mani;  Copt,  man;  Ger- 


man and  English,  mama  ; — Gesenius)  of  all 
living.  (1)  Of  Adam's  children,  though  in 
this  respect  she  might  have  been  so  styled 
from  the  beginning ;  and  (2)  of  all  who 
should  truly  live  in  the  sense  of  being  the 
woman's  seed,  as  distinguished  from  the  seed 
of  the  serpent.  In  Adam's  giving  a  second 
name  to  his  wife  has  been  discerned  the  first 
assertion  of  his  sovereignty  or  lordship  over 
woman  to  which  he  was  promoted  subsequent 
to  the  fall  (Luther),  though  this  seems  to  be 
negatived  by  the  fact  that  Adam  exercised 
the  same  prerogative  immediately  on  her 
creation  ;  an  act  of  thoughtlessness  on  the 
part  of  Adam,  in  that,  "  being  himself  im- 
mersed in  death,  he  should  have  called  his 
wife  by  so  proud  a  name  "  (Calvin) ;  a  proof 
of  his  incredulity  (Eupertus).  With  a  juster 
appreciation  of  the  spirit  of  the  narrative, 
modern  expositors  generally  regard  it  as  a 
striking  testimony  to  his  faith. 

Ver.  21. — TJntoAdam  also  and  to  his  wife 
did  the  Lord  God  make  coats  (cathnoth,  from 
cathan,  to  cover ;  cf.  xirwv;  Sanscrit,  katam; 
English,  cotton)  of  skin  ('or,  the  skin  of  * 
man,  from  ur,  to  be  naked,  hence  a  hide). 
Neither  their  bodies  (Origen),  nor  garments 
of  the  bark  of  trees  (Gregory  Nazianzeu), 
nor  miraculously -fashioned  apparel  (Grotius), 
nor  clothing  made  from  the  serpent's  skin 
(R.  Jonathan),  but  tunics  prepared  from  the 
skins  of  animals,  slaughtered  possibly  for 
food,  as  it  is  not  certain  that  the  Edenic 
man  was  a  vegetarian  (ch.  i.  29),  though 
more  probably  slain  in  sacrifice.  Though 
said  to  have  been  made  by  God,  "it  is  not 
proper  so  to  understand  the  words,  as  if  Onrj 
had  been  a  furrier,  or  a  servant  to  sew 
clothes  "  (Calvin) ;  God  being  said  to  roak"  ni 


CH.  m.  20— 34. J 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


73 


do  what  he  gives  orders  or  instructions  to  he 
made  or  done.  Willet  and  Maodonald,  how- 
ever, prefer  to  think  that  the  garments  were 
actually  fashioned  by  God.  Bush  finds  in 
the  mention  of  Adam  and  his  wife  an  inti- 
mation that  they  were  furnished  with  differ- 
ent kinds  of  apparel,  and  suggests  that  on 
this  fact  is  based  the  prohibition  in  Deut. 
xxii.  5  against  the  interchange  of  raiment 
between  the  sexes.  And  clothed  them.  "  1. 
To  show  them  how  their  mortal  bodies  might 
be  defended  from  cold  and  other  injuries. 
2.  To  cover  their  nakedness  for  comeliness' 
sake ;  vestimenta  honoris  (Chaldee  Para- 
phrase). 3.  To  teach  them  the  lawfulness 
of  using  the  beasts  of  the  field,  as  for  food, 
so  for  clothing.  4.  To  give  a  rule  that 
modest  and  decent,  not  costly  or  sumptuous, 
apparel  should  be  used.  5.  That  they  might 
know  the  difference  between  God's  works  and 
man's  invention — between  coats  of  leather 
and  aprons  of  leaves  ;  and,  6.  To  put  them 
in  mind  of  their  mortality  by  their  raiment 
of  dead  beasts'  skins — talibus  indici  oporte- 
bat  peceatorem  ut  essent  mortalitatis  indi- 
cium :  Origen"  ("Willet).  7.  "That  they 
might  feel  their  degradation — quia  vestes  ex 
ea  materia  confecta,  belluinum  quiddam 
magis  saperent,  quam  line8e  vel  laneae — and 
be  reminded  of  their  sin  "  (Calvin).  ' '  As  the 
prisoner,  looking  on  his  irons,  tliinketh  on 
his  theft,  so  we,  looking  on  our  garments, 
should  think  on  our  sins  "  (Trapp).  8.  A 
foreshadowing  of  the  robe  of  Christ's  right- 
eousness (Deiitzsch,  Maodonald,  Murphy, 
Wordsworth,  Candlish ;  cf.  Ps.  exxxii.  9, 
16  ;  Isa.  lxi.  10  ;  Rom.  xiii.  14  ;  Ephes.  iv. 
24  s  Col.  iii.  10).  Bonar  recognises  in  Jeho- 
vah Elohim  at  the  gate  of  Eden,  clothing  the 
first  transgressors,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
who,  as  the  High  Priest  of  our  salvation, 
had  a  right  to  the  skins  of  the  burnt  offer- 
ings (Levjt.  vii,  8),  and  who,  to  prefigure  his 
own  work,  appropriated  them  for  covering 
the  pardoned  pair. 

Ver.  22.— And  the  Lord  God  said-  Verba 
insvMantis  (Augustine) ;  vronica  reprobatio 
(Calvin).  But  '*  irony  at  the  expense  of  a 
wretched,  tempted  soul  might  well  befit 
Satan,  but  not  the  Lord  "  (Deiitzsch),  and  is 
altogether  inconsistent  with  the  footing  of 
grace  on  which  man  was  plaoed  immediately 
upon  his  fall.  Behold,  the  man  is  become  as 
one  of  us.  Not  the  angels  (Kalisch),  but  the 
Divine  Person?  (cf,  ch.  L  26).  It  is  scarcely 
likely  that  Jehovah  alludes  to  the  words  of 
the  tempter  (ch.  iii,  5).  To  know  good  and 
evil,  Implying  an  acquaintance  with  good 
and  evil  which  did  not  belong  to  him  in  the 
State  of  innocence.  The  language  seems  to 
bint  that  a  one-sided  acquaintance  with  good 
and  evil,  such  as  that  possessed  by  the  first 

Eair  in  the  garden  and  the  unfallen  angels 
l  heaven,  is  not  so  complete  a  knowledge  of  | 


the  inherent  beauty  of  the  one  and  essentia] 
turpitude  of  the  other  as  is  acquired  by 
beings  who  pass  through  the  experience  of  a 
fall,  and  that  the  only  way  in  which  a  finite 
being  can  approximate  to  such  a  comprehen- 
sive knowledge  of  evil  as  the  Deity  possesses 
without  personal  contact — can  see  it  ag  H 
lies  everlastingly  spread  out  before  his  infinite 
mind— is  by  going  down  into  it  and  learning 
what  it  is  through  personal  experience  (cf. 
Candlish,  in  loco).  And  now,  lest  he  put 
forth  his  hand,  and  take  also  of  the  tree  of 
life,  and  eat,  and  live  for  ever.  On  the  mean- 
ing of  the  tree  of  life  vide  ch.  ii.  9.  Neither 
(1)  lest  by  eating  of  the  fruit  he  should  re- 
cover that  immortal  life  which  he  no  longer 
possessed  (Kalisch),  as  "it  is  certain  that 
man  would  not  have  been  able,  had  he  even 
devoured  the  whole  tree,  to  enjoy  life  against 
the  will  of  God"  (Calvin) ;  nor  (2)  lest  the 
first  pair,  through  participation  of  the  tree, 
should  confer  upon  themselves  the  attribute 
of  undyingness,  which  would  not  be  the  Swij 
aliivioc  of  salvation,  but  its  opposite,  the 
oXiOpev  aiiivwv  of  the  accursed  (Keil,  Lange, 
T.  Lewis,  Wordsworth) ;  but  either  (3)  lest 
man  should  conceive  the  idea  that  immortal- 
ity might  still  be  secured  by  eating  of  the 
tree,  instead  of  trusting  in  the  promised  seed, 
and  under  this  false  impression  attempt  to 
take  its  fruit,  which,  in  his  case,  would  have 
been  equivalent  to  an  attempt  to  justify  him- 
self by  works  instead  of  faith  (Calvin,  Mao- 
donald) ;  or  (4)  lest  he  should  endeavour  to 
partake  of  the  symbol  of  immortality,  which 
he  could  not  again  do  until  his  sin  was  ex- 
piated and  himself  purified  (cf.  Rev.  xxii 
14  ;  Candlish).  The  remaining  portion  of 
the  sentence  is  omitted,  anakoloutha  or 
aposiopesis  being  not  infrequent  in  im- 
passioned speech  (cf,  Exod,  xxxii.  32 ;  Job 
xxxii,  13 ;  Isa.  xxxviii  18).  The  force  of  the 
ellipsis  or  expressive  silence  may  be  gathered 
from  the  succeeding  words  of  the  historian. 
Vers;  23, 24.— Therefore  (literally,  and)  the 
Lord  God  sent  (or  cast,  shalach  in  the  Plel 
conveying  the  ideas  of  force  and  displeasure  ; 
cf.  Deut.  xxi.  14 ;  1  Kings  ix.  7)  him  forth 
from  the  garden  of  Eden  to  till  the  ground 
(i.  e.  the  soil  outside  of  paradise,  which  "lad 
been  cursed  for  his  sake)  whence  he  was 
taken.  Vide  ver.  19.  So  (and)  he  drove 
out  the  man  (along  with  his  guilty  partner) ; 
and  he  placed  (literally,  caused  to  dwell)  at 
the  east  of  the  garden  Of  Eden  Cherubim. 
1.  Griffins,  like  those  of  Persian  and  Egyp- 
tian mythology,  which  protected  gold-pro- 
ducing countries  like  Eden  ;  from  carav,  to 
tear  in  pieces  ;  Sanscrit,  grivh  ;  Persian, 
giriften;  Greek,  ypvn,  ypv<p  ;  German,  grip, 
Icrip,  greif  (Eichhorn,  Furst).  2.  Divint 
steeds;  by  metathesis  for  rechubim,  from 
rachab,  to  ride  (Ps.  xviii.  11  j  Geseniug 
Lange).     $    "  Beings  who  approach  to  Go« 


74 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[oh.  hi.  20—24, 


»nd  minister  to  him,"  taking  cerub  =  kwrov, 
to  come  near,  to  serve  (Hyde).  4.  The  engrav- 
ings or  carved  figures;  from  carav  (Syriac), 
to  engrave  (Tayler  Lewis) ;  from  an  Egyptian 
root  (Cook,  vide  Speaker's  Commentary). 
Biblical  notices  describe  them  as  living  crea- 
tures (Ezek.  i.  5 ;  Rev.  iv.  6)  in  the  form 
of  a  man  (Ezek.  i.  5),  with  four  (Ezek.  i. 
8;  ii.  23;  x.  7,  8  —  21)  or  with  six  wings 
(Rev.  iv.  8),  and  full  of  eyes  (Ezek.  i.  18  ; 
i.  12;  Rev.  iv.  8)  ;  having  each  four  faces, 
viz.,  of  a  man,  of  a  lion,  of  an  ox,  of  an 
eagle  (Ezek.  i.  10;  x.  16) ;  or  with  one  face 
each — of  a  man,  of  a  lion,  of  a  calf,  and  of 
an  eagle  respectively  (Rev.  iv.  7).  Repre- 
sentations of  these  chay'ath — LXX.,  ?iua — 
were  by  Divine  directions  placed  upon  the  Cap- 
poreth  (Exod.  xxv.  17)  and  curtains  of  the 
tabernacle  (Exod.  xxvi.  1,  31;  xxxvi.  8,  35), 
and  afterwards  engraved  upon  the  walls  and 
doors  of  the  temple  (1  Kiugs  vi.  29,  32,  35). 
In  the  Apocalypse  they  are  depicted  as  stand- 
ing in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  the 
throne  (Rev.iv.  6;v.  6;vii.  11),  and  as  taking 
part  in  the  acts  of  adoration  and  praise  in 
which  the  heavenly  hosts  engage  {ibid.  v.  11), 
and  that  on  the  express  ground  of  their  re- 
demption {ibid.  v.  8,  9).  Whence  the  opinion 
that  most  exactly  answers  all  the  facts  of  the 
case  is,  that  these  mysterious  creatures  were 


symbolic  not  of  the  fulness  of  the  Deity 
(Bahr),  nor  of  the  sum  of  earthly  life  (Heng- 
stenberg),  nor  of  the  angelic  nature  (Calvin), 
nor  of  the  Divine  manhood  of  Jesus  Christ 
(Wordsworth),  but  of  redeemed  and  glorified 
humanity  (Jamieson,  Fairbairn,  Macdonald, 
Candlish).  Combining  with  the  intelligence 
of  human  nature  the  highest  qualities  of  the 
animal  world,  as  exhibited  in  the  lion,  the 
ox,  and  the  eagle,  they  were  emblematic  of 
creature  life  in  its  most  absolutely  perfect 
form.  As  such  they  were  caused  to  dwell  at 
the  gate  of  Eden  to  intimate  that  only  when 
perfected  and  purified  could  fallen  human 
nature  return  to  paradise.  Meantime  man 
was  utterly  unfit  to  dwell  within  Its  fair 
abode.  And  a  flaming  sword,  which  turned 
every  way.  Literally,  the  flame  of  a  sword 
turning  itself;  not  brandished  by  the  che- 
rubim, but  existing  separately,  and  flashing 
out  from  among  them  (cf.  Ezek.  i.  4).  An 
emblem  of  the  Divine  glory  in  its  attitude 
towards  sin  (Macdonald).  To  keep  (to  watch 
over  or  guard  ;  cf.  eh.  ii.  15)  the  way  of 
the  tree  of  life.  "  To  keep  the  tree  of  life 
might  imply  that  all  access  to  it  was  to  be 
precluded  ;  but  to  keep  the  way  signifies  to 
keep  the  way  open  as  well  as  to  keep  il 
shut"  (Macdonald). 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  20 — 24. — First  fruits  of  the  promise.  I.  Faith  (ver.  20).  The  special 
significance  of  Adam's  renaming  his  wife  at  this  particular  juncture  in  his  history 
is  best  discerned  when  the  action  is  regarded  as  the  response  of  his  faith  to  the 
antecedent  promise  of  the  woman's  seed.  1.  It  is  the  place  of  faith  to  succeed, 
and  not  to  precede,  the  promise.  Faith  being,  in  its  simplest  conception,  belief  in 
a  testimony,  the  testimony  must  ever  take  precedence  of  the  faith.  "In  whom 
ye  also  trusted  after  that  ye  heard  the  word  of  truth,  the  gospel  of  your  salva- 
tion "  (Ephes.  i.  13).  2.  As  to  the  genesis  of  faith,  it  is  always  evoked  by  the 
promise,  not  the  promise  by  the  faith.  Adam's  faith  was  the  creation  of  God's 
promise ;  so  is  that  of  every  true  believer.  "  Faith  cometh  by  hearing,  and  hearing  ry 
the  word  of  God  "  (Rom.  x.  17).  3.  With  regard  to  the  function  of  faith,  it  is  not 
that  of  certifying  or  making  sure  the  promise,  but  simply  of  attesting  its  certainty, 
which  it  does  by  reposing  trust  in  its  veracity.  "  He  that  receiveth  his  testimony 
hath  set  to  his  seal  that  God  is  true  "  (John  iii.  33).  And  this  was  practically  what 
«'as  done  by  Adam  when  he  called  his  wife's  name  Eve.  4.  The  power  of  faith  is 
seen  in  this,  that  while  it  cannot  implement,  it  is  able  to  anticipate  the  promise,  and, 
as  if  were,  to  enjoy  it  beforehand,  in  earnest  at  least,  as  Adam  did  when  he  realised 
that  his  spouse  should  be  the  mother  of  all  living.  Even  so  "  faith  is  the  substance 
of  things  hoped  for  "  (Heb.  xi.  1). 

II.  Acceptance  (ver.  21).  1.  In  the  Divine  scheme  of  salvation  acceptance  ever 
follows  on  the  exercise  of  faith.  See  the  language  of  the  New  Testament  generally 
on  the  subject  of  a  sinner's  justification.  The  covering  of  our  first  parents  with  coats  of 
skin,  apart  altogether  from  any  symbolical  significance  in  the  act,  could  scarcely  be 
regarded  as  other  than  a  token  of  Jehovah's  favour.  2.  According  to  the  same  schems 
the  clothing  of  a  sinner  ever  accompanies  the  act  of  his  acceptance.  In  New  Testalnent 
theology  the  Divine  act  of  justification  is  always  represented  as  proceeding  on  the 
ground  that  in  the  eye  of  God  the  sinner  stands  invested  with  a  complete  covering 
(the  righteousness  of  Christ)  which  renders  him  both  legally  and  morally  acceptable. 


m.  hi.  20—24.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENMsIS.  75 

That  all  this  was  comprehended  with  perfect  fulness  and  clearness  hy  the  pardoned 
pair  it  would  be  foolish  to  assert ;  but,  in  a  fashion  accommodated  to  their  simple 
intelligences,  the  germ  of  this  doctrine  was  exhibited  by  the  coats  of  skin  with  which 
they  were  arrayed,  and  it  is  at  least  possible  that  they  had  a  deeper  insight  into  the 
significance  of  the  Divine  action  than  we  are  always  prepared  to  allow.  3.  In  the 
teaching  of  the  gospel  scheme  the  providing  of  a  sinner  with  such  a  covering  as  he 
require!  must  ever  be  the  work  of  God.  Though  not  improbable  that  the  coats  of 
skin  were  furnished  by  the  hides  of  animals,  now  for  the  first  time  offered  in  sacrifice 
by  Divine  appointment,  the  simple  circumstance  that  they  were  God-provided,  apart 
from  any  other  consideration,  was  sufficient  to  suggest  the  thought  that  only  God 
could  supply  the  covering  which  was  needed  for  their  sin. 

III.  Discipline  (vers.  22—24).  Rightly  interpreted,  neither  the  language  of 
Jehovah  nor  that  of  Moses  warrants  the  idea  that  the  expulsion  was  designed  as  a 
penal  infliction ;  but  rather  as  a  measure  mercifully  intended  and  wisely  adapted  for 
the  spiritual  edification  of  the  pardoned  pair.  Three  elements  were  present  in  it  that 
are  seldom  absent  from  the  discipline  of  saints.  1.  Renunal  of  comforts.  The 
initial  act  in  the  discipline  of  Adam  and  his  wife  was  to  eject  them  from  the  precincts 
of  Eden.  And  so  oftentimes  does  God  begin  the  work  of  sanctification  in  his  people's 
hearts  by  the  infliction  of  loss.  In  the  case  of  Adam  and  his  spouse  there  were 
special  reasons  demanding  their  removal  from  the  garden,  as,  e.  g.,  (1)  its  non-suita- 
bility as  a  home  for  them  now  that  their  pure  natures  were  defiled  by  sin  ;  and  (2) 
the  danger  of  their  continuing  longer  in  the  vicinity  of  the  tree  of  life.  And  the 
same  two  reasons  will  frequently  be  found  to  explain  God's  dealings  with  his  people 
when  he  inflicts  upon  them  loss  of  creature  comforts ;  the  non-suitability  of  those  com- 
forts to  their  wantB  as  spiritual  beings ;  and  the  presence  of  some  special  danger  in  the 
things  removed.  2.  Increase  of  sorrow.  Besides  being  ejected  from  the  garden,  the  first 
pair  were  henceforth  to  be  subjected  to  toil  and  trouble.  Adam  in  tilling  the  ground, 
and  Eve  in  bearing  children.  And  this,  too,  was  a  part  of  God's  educational  process 
with  our  first  parents  ;  as,  indeed,  the  sufferings  of  this  present  life  inflicted  on  his 
people  generally  are  all  commissioned  on  a  like  errand,  viz.,  to  bring  forth  within 
them  the  peaceable  fruits  of  righteousness,  and  to  make  them  partakers  of  his 
holiness.  3.  Sentence  of  death.  The  words  "whence  he  was  taken"  have  an 
echo  in  them  of  "  dust  thou  art,"  &c,  and  must  h.tve  extinguished  within  the  breasts 
of  Adam  and  his  wife  all  hope  of  returning  to  Eden  on  this  side  the  grave ;  perhaps, 
too,  would  assist  them  in  seeking  for  a  better  country,  even  an  heavenly.  To 
prevent  saints  from  seeking  Edens  on  the  earth  seems  to  be  one  of  the  main  designs 
of  death. 

IV.  Hope  (ver.  24).  Though  excluded  from  the  garden,  man  was  not  without 
cheering  ingredients  of  hope  in  his  condition.  1.  The  Divine  presence  was  still 
with  him:  The  cherubim  and  flaming  sword  were  symbols  of  the  ineffable  majesty 
of  Jehovah,  and  tokens  of  his  presence.  And  never  since  has  the  world  been 
abandoned  by  the  God  of  mercy  and  salvation.  2.  Paradise  was  still  reserved  for 
him.  The  cherubim  and  flaming  sword  were  appointed  "  to  keep  the  way  of  the  tree 
of  life ; "  not  simply  to  guard  the  entrance,  but  to  protect  the  place.  So  is  heaven  a 
reserved  inheritance  (1  Pet.  i.  4).  3.  The  prospect  of  readmission  to  the  tree  of  life 
was  yet  before  him.  As  much  as  this  was  implied  in  the  jealous  guarding  of  the 
gate  so  long  as  Adam  was  defiled  by  sin.  It  could  not  fai!  to  suggest  the  idea  that 
when  purified  by  life's  discipline  he  would  no  longer  be  excluded  (cf.  Rev.  xxii.  14). 
4.  The  gate  of  heaven  was  still  near  him.  He  was  still  permitted  to  reside  in  the 
vicinity  of  Eden,  and  to  commune  with  him  who  dwelt  between  the  cherubim,  though 
denied  the  privilege  as  yet  of  dwelling  with  him  in  the  interior  of  his  abode.  If 
debarred  from  the  full  inheritance,  he  had  at  least  its  earnest.  And  exactly  this  is 
the  situation  of  saints  on  earth,  who,  unlike  those  within  the  veil,  who  see  the  Lord 
of  the  heavenly  paradise  face  to  face,  can  only  commune  with  him,  as  it  were,  at  the 
gate  of  his  celestial  palace. 

Learn — 1.  To  believe  God's  promise  of  salvation.  2.  To  be  grateful  for  God's  gift 
of  righteousness.  3.  To  submit  with  oTieerfulness  to  God's  paternal  discipline.  4, 
To  live  in  hope  of  entering  God's  heaven. 


7fl  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  [oh.  hi.  20-24. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  21. — Covering.  God's  chief  promises  generally  accompanied  by  visible  signi 
•jr  symbolical  acts  ;  e.  g.,  bow  in  the  cloud,  furnace  and  lamp  (Gen.  xv.  17),  passover, 
&<•.  The  time  here  spoken  of  speciilly  called  for  such  a  sign.  Man  had  fallen  ;  a 
Deliverer  was  promised ;  it  was  the  beginning  of  a  state  of  grace  for  sinners.  Notioe 
four  facts:—!.  Man  unf alien  required  no  covering.  2.  Man  fallen  became  con- 
scious of  need,  especially  towards  God.  3.  He  attempted  himself  to  pro  ride 
clothing.  4.  God  provided  it.  Spiritual  meaning  of  clothing  (Rev,  iii.  18  ;  vii.  14; 
2  Cor.  v.  3).  And  note  that  the  root  of  "atonement"  in  Hebrew  is  "to  cover." 
Thus  the  covering  is  a  type  of  justification ;  God's  gift  to  convicted  sinners  (cf. 
Zech,  iii.  4,  5;  Luke  xv.  22;  and  the  want  of  this  covering,  Matt.  xxli.  11).  With 
Adam's  attempt  and  God's  gift  compare  the  sacrifices  of  Cain  and  Abel.  Abel's 
sacrifice  of  life  accepted  through  faith  (Heb.  xi.  4),  t.  e.  because  he  believed  and 
acted  upon  God's  direction.  Thus  atonement,  covering,  through  the  sacrifice  of  life 
(cf.  Levit.  xvii.  11),  typical  of  Christ's  sacrifice,  must  have  been  ordained  of  God. 
And  thus,  though  not  expressly  stated,  we  may  conclude  that  Adam  was  instructed 
to  sacrifice,  and  that  the  skins  from  the  animals  thus  slain  were  a  type  of  the  cover- 
ing of  sin  through  the  one  great  sacrifice  (Rom.  iv.  7).     We  mark  then— 

I.  The  helplessness  op  man  to  save  himself  from  sin.  The  natural  thought 
of  a  heart  convicted  is,  "  Have  patience  with  me,  and  I  will  pay  thee  all."  Vain 
endeavour.  The  "law  of  sin"  (Rom.  vii,  21,  24)  is  too  strong;  earnest  striving 
only  makes  this  more  clear  (cf.  Job  ix.  30 ;  Isa.  Ixiv.  6).  History  is  full  of  man's 
efforts  to  cover  sins.  Hence  have  come  sacrifices,  austerities,  pilgrimages,  &c.  But 
on  all  merely  human  effort  is  stamped  failure  (Rom.  iii.  20). 

II.  The;  love  of  God  fob  sinners  (Rom.  v.  8).  A  common  mistake  that  if  we 
love  God  he  will  love  us.  Whereas  the  truth  is,  1  John  iv.  10 — 19,  We  must 
believe  his  free  gift  before  we  can  serve  him  truly.  The  want  of  this  belief  leads 
to  service  in  the  spirit  of  bondage. 

III.  The  provision  made  by  God  (John  iii.  14 — 17).  That  we  might  be  not 
merely  forgiven,  but  renewed  (2  Cor.  v.  21).  Tlie  consciousness  that  "  Christ  hath 
redeemed  us  "  is  the  power  that  constrains  to  willing  service  (1  John  iii.  3), — M. 

Ver.  24. — The  dispensation  of  redemption-     Notice — 

I.  The  meroy  with  judgment.  He  did  not  destroy  the  garden  ;  he  did  not  root 
up  its  trees  and  flowers. 

II.  He  "  DROVE  OUT  THE  MAN  "  into  his  curse  that  he  might  pray  for  and  seek  for 
and,  at  last,  by  Divine  grace,  obtain  once  more  his  forfeited  blessing. 

III.  At  the  east  of  the  garden  he  placed  the  oherhbims  and  the  flaming 
sword  turning  every  way,  emblems  of  his  natural  and  moral  governments,  which, 
as  they  execute  his  righteous  will  ampngst  men,  do  both  debar  them  from  perfect 
happiness  and  yet  at  the  same  time  testify  to  the  fact  that  there  is  such  happiness 
for  tbose  who  are  prepared  for  it.  Man  outside  Eden  is  man  under  law,  but  man 
undei  law  is  man  preserved  by  Divine  mercy. 

IV.  The  preserving  meroy  is  the  redeeming  mercy.  The  redemption  is  mora 
than  Jeliverance  from  condemnation  and  death;  it  is  restoration  to  eternal  life- 
"  Paradise  lost "  is  not  paradise  destroyed,  but  shall  be  hereafter    "paradise 


V.  There  is  a  speoial  significance  in  the  description  of  "the  way  of  the  tree  o» 
life  "  as  closed  and  guarded,  and  therefore  a  way  which  can  be  afterwards  opened 
and  made  free- 

VI.  Without  pressing  too  closely  figurative  language,  it  is  impossible,  surely,  to 
ignore  in  such  a  representation  the  reference  to  a  positive  revelation  as  the  medium 
of  human  deliverance  and  restoration.  The  whole  of  the  Scripture  teaohing  rests 
upon  that  foundation,  that  there  is  "a  way,  a  truth,  and  a  life  which  is  Divinely 
distinguished  from  all  others.  Gradually  that  eastward  gate  of  Eden  has  boen 
opened,  that  road  leading  into  the  centre  of  bliss  has  been  made  clear  in  "  the  maa 
Christ  Jesus. '' — R. 


OH.  IT.  1—1«.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTEB  IV. 


Ver.  L  —Exiled  from  Eden,  o'er-canopied 
by  grace,  animated  by  hope,  assured  of  the 
Divine  forgiveness,  and  filled  with  a  sweet 
peace,  the  first  pair  enter  on  their  life  expe- 
rience of  labour  and  sorrow,  and  the  human 
race  begins  its  onward  course  of  development 
in  sight  of  the  mystic  cherubim  and  flaming 
■word.  And  Adam  knew  Eve,  his  Wife.  I.  e. 
" recognised  her  nature  and  uses"  (Alford; 
cf.  Num.  xxxi.  17).  The  act  here  men- 
tioned is  recorded  not  to  indicate  that  para- 
dise was  "  non  nuptiis,  sed  virginitate  desti- 
natum  "  (Jerome),  but  to  show  that  while 
Adam  was  formed  from  the  soil,  and  Eve 
from  a  rib  taken  from  his  side,  the  other 
members  of  the  race  were  to  be  produced 
"neque  ex  terra  neque  quovis  alio  modo, 
sed  ex  conjunctione  maris  et  foeminse"  (Run- 

fius).  And  she  fconceived.  The  Divine 
lessing  (ch.  i.  28),  which  in  its  operation 
had  been  suspended  during  the  period  of 
innocence,  while  yet  it  was  Undetermined 
whether  the  race  should  dovelope  as  a  holy 
or  a  fallen  seed,  now  begins  to  take  effect 
(cf.  ch.  xviii.  14  ;  Ruth  iy.  13  ;  Heb.  xi.  11). 
And  bare  Cain.  Acquisition  or  Possession, 
from  kanah,  to  acquire  (Gesenius).  Cf. 
Eve's  exclamation.  Kalisch,  connecting  it 
with  kun  or  kin,  to  strike,  sees  an  allusion 
to  his  character  and  subsequent  history  as  a 
nurderer,  and  supposes  it  was  not  given  to 
rim  at  birth,  but  at  a  later  period.  Tayler 
Lewis  falls  back  upon  the  primitive  idea  of 
the  root,  to  create,  to  procreate,  generate, 
of  which  he  cites  as  examples  ch.  xiv.  19, 
22  ;  Deut.  xxxii.  6,  and  takes  the  derivative 
to  signify  the  seed,  explaining  Eve's  exclam- 
ation kanithi  kain  as  equivalent  to  riroKa 
tokov,  genui  gentium,  or  generationem.  And 
said,  I  have  gotten  a  man  from  the  Lord. 
The  popular  interpretation,  regarding  kani- 
thl as  the  emphatic  word  in  the  sentence, 
understands  Eve  to  say  that  her  child  was  a 
thing  achieved,  an  acquisition  gained ,  either 
from  the  Lord  (Onkelos,  Calvin)  or  by  means 
of,  with  the  help  of,  the  Lord  (LXX.,  Vul- 
gate, Jerome,  Dathe,  Keil),  or  for  the  Lord 
(Syriac).  If,  however,  the  emphatic  term  is 
Jehovah,  then  eth  with  Makkeph  following 
Will  be  the  sign  of  the  accusative,  and  the 
sense  will  be,  "I  have  gotten  a  man — Jeho- 
vah" (Jonathan,  Luther,  Baumgarten,  Lewis); 
to  which,  perhaps,  the  chief  objections  are— 
(1 )  that  it  appears  to  anticipate  the  develop- 
ment of  the  Messianic  idea,  and  credits  Eve 
with  too  mature  Christological  conceptions 
(Lange),  though  if  Enoch  in  the  seventh 
generation  recognised  Jehovah  as  the  coming 


One,  why  might  not  Eve  hare  done  so  in  the 
first  ?  (Bonar) ;  (2)  that  if  the  thoughts  ol 
Eve  had  been  running  so  closely  On  the  iden- 
tity of  the  coming  Deliverer  with  Jehovah,' 
the  child  would  have  been  called  Jehovah,  or 
at  least  some  compound  of  Jehovah,  such  as 
Ishiah— K"N  and  nW— or  Coniah— }sp  and 
mri*  (Murphy) ;  (3)  si  scivit  Messiam  esse 
debet  Jovam.  quomodo  existimare  potuit 
Cainam  esse  Messiam,  quem  sciebat  esse  ab 
Adamo  genitum  1  (Dathe)  ;  and  (4)  that, 
while  it  might  not  be  difficult  to  account  for 
the  mistake  of  a  joyful  mother  in  supposing 
that  the  fruit  of  her  womb  was  the  promised 
seed,  though,  "  if  she  did  believe  so,  it  is  a 
caution  to  interpreters  of  prophecy  "  (Inglis), 
it  is  not  so  easy  to  explain  her  belief  that  the 
promised  seed  was  to  be  Jehovah,  since  no 
such  announcement  was  made  in  the  Prot- 
evangel.  But  whichever  view  be  adopted 
of  the  construction  of  the  language,  it  is 
obvious  that  Eve's  utterance  was  the  dictate 
of  faith.  In  Cain's  birth  she  recognised  the 
earnest  and  guarantee  of  the  promised  seed, 
and  in  token  of  her  faith  gave  her  child  a 
name  (cf.  ch.  iii.  20),  which  may  also  explain 
her  use  of  the  Divine  name  Jehovah  instead 
of  Elohim,  which  she  employed  when  con- 
versing with  the  serpent.  That  Eve  denomi- 
nates her  infant  a  man  has  been  thought  to 
indicate  that  she  had  previously  borne  daugh- 
ters who  had  grown  to  womanhood,  and  that 
she  expected  her  young  arid  tender  babe  to 
reach  maturity.  Murphy  thiuks  this  opinion 
probable ;  but  the  impression  conveyed  by 
the  narrative  is  that  Cain  was  the  first-born 
of  the  human  family. 

Ver.  2. — And  she  again  bare  (literally, 
added  to  bear,  a  Hebiaism  adopted  in  the 
New  Testament ;  vide  Luke  xx.  11)  his  bro- 
ther Abel.  Habel  (vanity),  supposed  to  hint 
either  that  a  mother's  eager  hopes  had  already 
begun  to  be  disappointed  in  her  elder  son, 
or  that,  having  in  her  first  child's  name  given 
expression  to  her  faith,  in  this  she  desired 
to  preserve  a  monument  of  the  miseries  of 
human  life,  of  which,  perhaps,  she  had  bcou 
forcibly  reminded  by  her  own  maternal  Bur- 
rows. Perhaps  also,  though  unconsciously, 
a  melancholy  prophecy  of  his  pn  mature  re- 
moval by  the  hand  of  fratricidal  rage,  to 
which  it  has  been  thought  there  is  an  outlook 
by  the  historian  in  the  frequent  (seven  times 
repeated)  and  almost  pathetic  mention  of 
the  fact  that  Abel  was  Cain's  brother.  The 
absence  of  the  usual  expression  "1HFI1,  as  well 
as  the  peculiar  phraseology  et  addidit  parere 
has  suggested  that  Abel  was  Cain's  twin  bro- 
ther (Calvin,  Rimchi,  Candlish),  though  this 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[oh.  it.  1 — lft 


ii  not  necessarily  implied  in  the  text.    And 

Abel  was  a  keeper  of  sheep  (voipr/v  irpofiaruiv, 
LXX. ;  the  latter  terra  includes  goats — Levit. 
L  10),  but  Cain  was  a  tiller  of  the  ground. 
These  occupations,  indirectly  suggested  by 
God  in  the  command  to  till  the  ground  and 
the  gift  of  the  clothes  of  skin  (Keil),  were 
doubtless  both  practised  by  the  first  man, 
who  would  teach  them  to  his  sons.  It  is 
neither  justifiable  nor  necessary  to  trace  a 
difference  of  moral  character  in  the  different 
callings  which  the  young  men  selected,  though 
probably  their  choices  were  determined  by 
their  talents  and  their  tastes.  Ainsworth  sees 
in  Abel  a  figure  of  Christ  "in  shepherdy  as 
in  sacrificing  and  martyrdom." 

Ver.  3. — And  in  process  of  time.  Liter- 
ally, at  the  end  of  the  days,  i.  e. — 1.  Of  the 
year  (Aben  Ezra,  Dathe,  De  Wette,  Rosen- 
mtiller,  Bohlen),  at  which  season  the  feast  of 
the  ingathering  was  afterwards  kept — Exod. 
xxiii.  16  (Bush).  Aristotle,  '  Ethics,'  viii.  2, 
notes  that  anciently  sacrifices  were  offered 
after  the  gathering  of  the  fruits  of  the  earth 
(Ainsworth).  2.  Of  the  week  (Candlish).  3. 
Of  an  indefinite  time,  years  or  days  (Luther, 
Kalisch).  4.  Of  some  set  time,  as  the  be- 
ginning of  their  occupations  (Knobel).  It 
came  to  pass  (literally,  it  was)  that  Cain 
brought  of  the  fruit  of  the  ground  an 
offering.  Qvaia,  LXX. ;  oMatio,  Vulgate  ; 
speis-opfer,  Luther.  The  mincha  of  Hebrew 
worship  was  a  bloodless  sacrifice,  consisting 
of  flour  and  oil,  or  flour  prepared  with  frank- 
incense (Levit.  ii.  1).  All  tree  fruits  and 
garden  produce  were  excluded;  it  was  limited 
to  the  productions  of  agriculture  and  vine 
growing  (cf.  Kurtz,  'Sacrificial  Worship,' 
§  140).  Here  it  includes  both  meat  offerings 
and  animal  sacrifices  (cf.  ver.  4).  TJnto  the 
Lord.  Probably  to  the  gate  of  the  garden, 
where  the  cherubim  and  flaming  sword  were 
established  as  the  visible  monuments  of  the 
Divine  presence. 

Ver.  4. — And  Abel,  he  also  brought  of  the 
firstlings  of  his  flock.  Either  the  firstborn, 
which  God  afterwards  demanded  (Exod.  xiii. 
12),  or  the  choicest  and  best  (Job  xi  iii.  13  ; 
Jer.  xxxi.  19  ;  Heb.  xii.  23).  And  the  fat 
thereof.  Literally,  the  fatness  oj  them, 
L  e.  the  fattest  of  the  firstlings,  "  the  best 
he  had,  and  the  best  of  those  best "  (Inglis  ; 
cf.  Gen.  xlv.  18  ;  Num.  xviii.  2  ;  Ps.  clxvii. 
14) ;  a  proof  that  flesh  was  eaten  before  the 
Flood,  since  "  it  had  been  no  praise  to  Abel 
to  offer  the  fatlings  if  he  used  not  to  eat  of 
them  "  (Willet),  and  "  si  anteposuit  Abel 
utilitate  sua;  Deum,  non  dubium  quia  soli- 
tus  sit  ex  labnre  suo  utilitatem  percipere  " 
(Justin).  And  the  Lord  had  respect.  Liter- 
ally, looked  upon;  tniittv,  LXX.  (cf.  Num. 
xvi.  15)  ;  probably  consuming  it  by  fire  from 
heaven,  f>r  from  the  flaming  sword  (cf.  Levit. 
iz.  34  ;      flbron.  xxi.  26  ;  2  Chron.  vii  1  ; 


1  Kings  xviii  38 ;  Jerome,  Chrysostom, 
Cyril).  Theodoticn  renders  Iviirvputiv,  in- 
flammant ;  and  Heb.  xi.  4,  uaprvpovvrot 
kiri  Toig  Stbpoic,  is  supposed  to  lend  consider- 
able weight  to  the  opinion.  TJnto  Abel  and 
his  offering.  Accepting  first  his  person  and 
then  his  gift  (cf.  Prov.  xii.  2  ;  xv.  8 ;  2  Cor. 
viii.  12).  "  The  sacrifice  was  accepted  foi 
the  man,  and  not  the  man  for  the  sacrifice  " 
(Ainsworth) ;  but  still  "  without  a  doubt  the 
words  of  Moses  imply  that  the  matter  of 
Abel's  offering  was  more  excellent  and  suit- 
able than  that  of  Cain's,"  and  one  can  hardly 
entertain  a  doubt  that  this  was  the  idea  of 
the  author  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews " 
(Prof. •Lindsay,  'Lectures  on  Hebrews/ 
Edin.  1867).  Abel's  sacrifice  was  ir\tiova, 
fuller  than  Cain's ;  it  had  more  in  it ;  it 
had  faith,  which  was  wanting  in  the  other. 
It  was  also  offered  in  obedience  to  Divine 
prescription.  The  universal  prevalence  of 
sacrifice  rather  points  to  Divine  prescription 
than  to  man's  invention  as  its  proper  source. 
Had  Divine  worship  been  of  purely  human 
origin,  it  is  almost  certain  that  greater 
diversity  would  have  prevailed  in  its  forms 
Besides,  the  fact  that  the  mode  of  worship 
was  not  left  to  human  ingenuity  under  the 
law,  and  that  will-worship  is  specifically 
condemned  under  the  Christian  dispensation 
(Col.  ii.  23),  favours  the  presumption  that 
it  was  Divinely  appointed  from  the  first. 

Ver.  5. — But  unto  Cain  and  to  his  offering 
he  had  not  respect.  Because  of  the  absence 
of  those  qualities  which  distinguished  Abel 
and  his  offering ;  not  because  the  heart  of 
Cain  was  "no  more  pure,"  but  "imbued 
with  a  criminal  propensity  "  (Kalisch),  which 
it  was  not  until  his  offering  was  rejected. 
The  visible  sign,  whatever  it  was,  being 
awanting  in  the  case  of  Cain's  oblation,  its 
absence  left  the  offerer  in  no  dubiety  as  tc 
the  Divine  displeasure  with  both  himself  and 
his  offering.  In  the  rejection  of  Cain'i 
offering  Bohlen  sees  the  animus  of  a  Levitical 
narrator,  who  looks  down  slightingly  on 
offerings  of  the  fruits  and  flowers  of  earth , 
but,  as  Havernick  well  remarks,  the  theo- 
cracy was  essentially  based  on  agriculture, 
while  the  Mosaic  institute  distinctly  recog- 
nised the  legality  and  value  of  bloodless 
offerings.  And  Cain  was  very  wroth  (liter- 
ally, it  burned  with  Oain  exceedingly),  anil 
his  countenance  fell.  In  fierce  resentment 
against  his  brother,  possibly  in  disappointed 
rage  against  himself,  almost  certainly  in 
anger  against  God  (cf.  Neh.  vi.  16 ;  Jobxxix. 
24  ;  Jer.  iii.  12,  and  contrast  Job  xi  15). 
There  was  apparently  no  sorrow  for  sin,  "  no 
spirit  of  inquiry,  self-examination,  prayer  to 
God  for  light  or  pardon,  clearly  showing  that 
Cain  was  far  from  a  right  state  of  mind* 
(Murphy).  Yet  the  Lord  does  not  forthwith 
abandon  the   contumacious  and   insensate 


OH.  IV.  i — IS.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


79 


transgressor,  but  patiently  expostulates  with 
and  instructs  him  as  to  how  he  too  might 
obtain  the  same  blessing  of  acceptance  which 
his  younger  brother  enjoyed. 

Vers.  6,  7 — And  the  Lord  (Jehovah)  said 
unto  Cain.  Speaking  either  mediately  by 
Adam  (Luther),  or  more  probably  directly  by 
his  own  voice  from  between  the  cherubim 
where  the  flaming  sword,  the  visible  symbol 
of  the  Divine  presence,  had  been  established 
(cf.  Exod.  xx.  24).  Why  art  thou  wroth? 
and  why  is  thy  countenance  fallen  ?  The 
ensuing  verse  is  a  veritable  crux  interpretum , 
concerning  which  the  greatest  diversity  of 
sentiment  exists.  Passing  by  the  manifest 
mistranslation  of  the  LXX.,  "If  thou  hast 
offered  rightly,  but  hast  not  divided  rightly, 
hast  thou  not  sinned  ?  Rest  quiet ;  toward 
thee  is  his  (or  its)  resort,  and  thou  shalt  rale 
over  him  (or  it),"  which  Augustine,  Ambrose, 
and  Chrysostom  followed,  at  the  same  time 
"  wearying  themselves  with  many  interpret- 
ations, ana  being  divided  among  themselves 
as  to  how  Cain  divided  not  rightly"  (Willet), 
the  different  opinions  that  have  been  enter- 
tained as  to  the  meaning  of  its  several 
clauses,  their  connection,  and  precise  import 
when  united,  may  be  thus  exhibited.  If 
thou  doest  well.  Either  (1)  if  thou  wert 
innocent  and  sinless  (Candlish,  Jamieson), 
or  (2)  if  thou,  like  Abel,  presentest  a  right 
offering  in  a  right  spirit  (Vulgate,  Luther, 
Calvin),  or  (3)  if  thou  retrace  thy  steps 
and  amend  thine  offering  and  intention 
(Willet,  Murphy).  Shalt  thou  not  he  ac- 
cepted 1  Literally,  Is  there  not  liftimj  up  ? 
(seath,  from  nasa,  to  raise  up).  Either — 1. 
Of  the  countenance  (Gesenius,  Fiirst,  Dathe, 
Rosenmiiller,  Knobel,  Lange,  Delitzsch).  2. 
Of  the  sacrifice,  viz.,  by  acceptance  of  it 
(Calvin) ;  akin  to  which  are  the  interpreta- 
tions— Is  there  not  a  lifting  up  of  the  burden 
of  guilt  ?  Is  there  not  forgiveness  1  (Luther) ; 
Is  there  not  acceptance  with  God?  (Speaker's 
Commentary) ;  Is  there  not  a  bearing  away 
of  blessing  ?  (Ainsworth).  Vulgate,  Shalt 
thou  not  receive  1  (sc  the  Divine  favour). 
'  Verum  quamvis  |1B  KBO  peccatum  con- 
djnare  signified,  nusquam  tamen  ntffi' 
Teniam  sonat"  (Rosen.).  3.  Of  the  person, 
L  e.  by  establishing  Cain's  pre-eminency 
as  the  elder  brother,  to  which  reference  is 
clearly  made  in  the  concluding  clause  of 
the  verse  (Bush).  And  if  thou  doest  not 
well,  sin — chattath,  from  chata,  to  miss  the 
mark  like  an  archer,  properly  signifies  a  sin 
(Exod.  xxviii.  9 ;  Isa.  vi.  27 ;  cf.  Greek, 
ot-ij)  ;  also  a  sin  offering  (Levit.  vi  18,  23) ; 
also  penalty  (Zech.  xiv.  19),  though  this 
is  doubtful.  Hence  it  has  been  taken  to 
mean  in  this  place — 1.  Sin  (Dathe,  Rosen- 
mailer,  Keil,  Kaliseh,  Wordsworth,  Speaker's 
Commentary,  Murphy).    2.  The  punishment 


of  sin  (Onkelos,  Grotius,  Cornelius  h,  Lapide, 
Ainsworth),  the  guilt  of  sin,  the  sense  of 
unpardoned  transgression  ;  "  interius  con- 
scientise  judicium,  quod  hominem  convictum 
sui  peccati  undique  obsessum  premit "  (Cal- 
vin). 3.  A  sin  offering  (Lightfoot,  Poole, 
Magee,  Candlish,  Exell) — lieth  (literally, 
lying;  robets,  from  rabats,  to  couch  as  a 
beast  of  prey ;  cf.  ch.  xxix.  2 ;  xlix.  9)  at 
the  door.  Literally,  at  the  opening  =  at 
the  door  of  the  conscience,  expressive  of  thi> 
nearness  and  severity  of  the  Divine  retribu- 
tion (Calvin) ;  of  the  soul,  indicating  the 
close  contiguity  of  the  devouring  monster 
sin  to  the  evil-doer  (Kaliseh) ;  of  paradise 
(Bonar) ;  of  Abel's  fold  (Exell),  suggesting 
the  locality  where  a  sacrificial  victim  might 
be  obtained;  of  the  house,  conveying  'the 
ideas  of  publicity  and  certainty  of  detec- 
tion for  the  transgressor  whose  sin,  though 
lying  asleep,  was  only  sleeping  at  the  door, 
i.  e.  "in  a  place  where  it  will  surely  be 
disturbed ;  and,  therefore,  it  is  impossible  but 
that  it  must  be  awoke  and  roused  up,  when 
as  a  furious  beast  it  will  lay  hold  on  thee  " 
(Luther) ;  h.  e.  "  statim  se  prodet,  peccatum 
tuum  non  magis  celari  potest,  quam  id  quod 
pro  foribus  jacet "  (Rosenmulier).  And  unto 
thee  shall  be  his—  i.  e.  (1)  Abel's  (LXX.  (?), 
Chrysostom,  Ambrose,  Grotius,  Calvin,  Ains- 
worth, Bush,  Speaker's,  Bonar,  Exell) ;  or  (2) 
sin's  (Vulgate  (?),  Luther,  Rosenmiiller,  Von 
Bohlen,  Kaliseh,  Keil,  Delitzsch,  Murphy) ; 
or  (3)  the  sin  offering's  (Faber,  Candlish) — 
desire  {vide  ch.  iii.  16),  and  thou  shalt  rule 
over  him.  /.  e. ,  according  to  the  interpreta- 
tion adopted  of  the  preceding  words — (1) 
thou  shalt  maintain  thy  rights  of  primogeni- 
ture over  Abel,  who,  as  younger  son,  shall  be 
obsequious  and  deferential  towards  thee  ;  or, 
(2)  "the  entire  submission  and  service  of  sin 
will  be  yielded  to  thee,  and  thou  shalt  make 
thyself  master  of  it,"  sc.  by  yielding  to  it 
and  being  hurried  on  to  greater  wickedness — 
a  warning  against  the  downward  course  of 
sin  (Murphy) ;  or,  while  sin  lurks  for  thee 
like  a  beast  of  prey,  and  "the  demon  of 
allurement"  thirsts  for  thee  to  gratify  thy 
passion,  thou  shalt  (or  mayst)  rule  over  it, 
sc.  by  giving  up  thy  wrath  and  restraining 
thine  evil  propensities — a  word  of  hopeful 
encouragement  to  draw  the  sinner  back  to 
holy  paths  (Keil);  or,  "peccatum  tanquam 
mulier  impudica  sistitur,  quse  hominem  ad 
libidinem  suam  explendam  tentet,  cui  igitur 
resistere  debeat "  (Rosenmulier) ;  or,  (3)  the 
sacrificial  victim  is  not  far  to  seek,  it  is 
already  courting  thine  acceptance,  and  thou 
mayst  at  once  avail  thyself  of  it  (Candlish). 
Of  the  various  solutions  of  this  "difncilli- 
mus  locus,"  all  of  which  are  plausible,  and 
none  of  which  are  entirely  destitute  of  sup- 
port, that  appears  the  most  entitled  to  ac- 
ceptance   which,    excluding    any    reference 


80 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  nr.  1 — 16 


either  to  Abel  or  to  a  sin  offering,  regards 
the  language  as  warning  Cain  against  the 
dangers  of  yielding  t»  sin. 

Ver.  8.— And  Cain  talked  with  (literally, 
said  to)  hiB  brother.  .WAttw/icv  tie  *b 
irtZLov  (LXX.) ;  egrediainur  foras  (Vulgate). 
The  Samaritan  and  Syriac  versions  interpolate 
to  the  same  effect.  The  Jerusalem  Targum 
expUins — "Cainum  cum  Abele  contendisse 
de  vita  sterna,  de  extremo  judicio,  et  provi- 
dentia  divina,"  inserting  a  long  conversation 
commencing,  "  Veni,  egrediamur  ad  super- 
ficiem  agri  ;  "  but  the  obvious  supplement  is 
to  be  found  in  the  subject  matter  of  the  pre- 
vious verse  (Hieroiiymus,  Aben  Ezra,  Geseni- 
us).  It  is  not  against  this  that  it  argues  too 
much  moral  goodness  in  Cain  to  suppose  that 
he  would  tell  his  younger  brother  of  Jehovah's 
admonition  (Knobel) ;  and  it  certainly  re- 
lieves us  from  the  necessity  of  adding '  to  the 
moral  turpitude  of  the  unhappy  fratricide  by 
depicting  him  as  deliberately  planning  his 
favoured  brother's  murder,  carrying  the  fell 
purpose  within  his  guilty  bosom,  watching 
his  opportunity  (Bottcher  and  Knobel,  who 
substi  tu  te  IDS',  he  watched,  for  1CK,  he  said), 
and  at  last  accomplishing  his  unhallowed 
purpose  by  means  of  treachery.  Beyond  all 
question  the  historian  designs  to  describe  not 
an  act  of  culpable  homicide,  but  a  deed  of 
red-handed  murder ;  yet  the  impression 
which  his  language  conveys  is  that  of  a 
crime  rather  suddenly  conceived  and  hurried- 
ly performed  than  deliberately  planned  and 
treacherously  executed.  And  it  came  to  pass, 
when  they  were  in  the  field,  that  Cain  rose 
up  against  Abel  his  brother,  and  slew  him. 

Ver.  9. — And  the  lord  said  unto  Cain. 
'  Probably  soon  after  the  event,  at  the  next 
time  of  sacrifice,  and  at  the  usual  place  of 
offering"  (Bonar).  Where  is  Abel  thy  bro- 
ther? "A  question  fitted  to  go  straight  to 
the  murderer's  conscience,  and  no  less  fitted 
to  rouse  his  wrathful  jealousy,  as  showing 
how  truly  Abel  was  the  beloved  one  "  (ibid). 
Whether  spoken  by  Adam  (Luther),  or  whis- 
pered within  his  breast  by  the  still  small 
voice  of  conscience,  or,  as  is  most  probable, 
uttered  from  between  the  cherubim,  Cain  felt 
that  he  was  being  examined  by  a  Divine  voice 
(Calvin).  And  (in  reply)  he  said  (adding  false- 
hood, effrontery,  and  even  profanity  to  mur- 
der), I  know  not :  am  I  my  brother's  keeper  ? 
The  inquiry  neither  of  ignorance  nor  of  in- 
nocence, but  the  desperate  resort  of  one  who 
felt  himself  closely  tracked  by  avenging 
justice  and  about  to  be  convicted  of  his  crime. 
"•He  showeth  himself  a  Iyer  in  saying,  'I 
Know  not ; '  wicked  and  profane  in  thinking 
he  could  hide  his  sin  from  God ;  unjust  in 
denying  himself  to  be  his  brother's  keeper ; 
obstinate  and  desperate  in  not  confessing 
his  sin  "  (Willet ;  cf.  Pa.  x. ). 


ver.  10. — Satisfied  that  the  guilty  fratri- 
cide is  resolved  to  make  no  acknowledgment 
of  his  deed,  the  omniscient  Judge  proceeds 
to  charge  him  with  his  sin.  And  he — i.  e. 
Jehovah — said,  What  hast  thou  done!  Tbus 
intimating  his  perfect  cognisance  of  the  fact 
which  his  prisoner  was  attempting  to  deny. 
What  a  revelation  it  must  have  been  to  the 
inwardly  trembling  culprit  of  the  impossi- 
bility of  eluding  the  besetting  God !  (Ps. 
exxxix.  5).  The  voice  of  thy  brother's  blood 
(literally,  bloods,  i.  e.  of  this  and  all  sub- 
sequent martyrs — Chald.  Par.)  crieth  unto 
me.  A  common  Scriptural  expression  con- 
cerning murder  and  other  crimes  (ch.  xviii. 
20,  21  ;  xix.  13  ;  Exod.  iii.  9  ;  Heb.  xii.  24  ; 
James  v.  4).  The  blood  crying  is  a  symbol 
of  the  soul  crying  for  its  right  to  live 
(Lange).  In  this  instance  the  cry  was  a 
demand  for  the  punishment  of  the  murderer ; 
and  that  cry  has  reverberated  through  all 
lands  and  down  through  all  ages,  proclaiming 
vengeance  against  the  shedder  of  innocent 
blood  (ef.  ch.  ix.  5).  "  Hence  the  prayer 
that  the  earth  may  not  drink  in  the  blood 
shed  upon  it,  in  order  that  it  may  not  thereby 
become  invisible  and  inaudible"  (Knobel). 
Cf.  Job  xvi.  18  ;  Isa.  xxvi.  21  ;  Ezek.  x.riv. 
7;  also  Eschylus,  '  Chcephoree, '  310,  398 
(quoted  by  T.  Lewis  in  Lange).  From  the 
ground.  Into  which  it  had  disappeared  but 
not,  as  the  murderer  hoped,  to  become  for- 
gotten. 

Vers.  11,  12. — Convicted,  if  not  humbled, 
the  culprit  is  speechless,  and  can  only  listen 
in  consternation  to  the  threefold  judgment 
which  pronounced  him  "cursed  in  his  soul, 
vagabond  in  his  body,  and  unprosperous  in 
his  labours"  (Willet).  And  now-  either  at 
this  time,  already  (cf.  Josh.  xiv.  11 ;  Hosea 
ii.  10),  or  for  this  cause,  because  thou  hast 
done  this  (ch.  iii.  14  ;  cf.  ch.  xix  9  ;  Exod. 
xviii.  19) — art  thou  cursed.  The  first  curse 
pronounced  against  a  human  being.  Adam 
and  Eve  were  not  cursed,  though  the  serpent 
and  the  devil  were.  If  we  may  not  con- 
clude that  Cain  was  thereby  for  ever  excluded 
from  the  hope  of  salvation  if  he  should 
repent,  still  less  must  we  explain  the  Divine 
judgment  down  to  a  simple  sentence  of 
banishment  from  Eden.  The  fratricide  was 
henceforth  to  bear  the  displeasure  and  in- 
dignation of  his  Maker,  whose  image  in  Abel 
he  had  slain  ;  of  which  indignation  and  dis- 
pleasure his  expatriation  was  to  be  a  symboL 
Different  explanations  have  been  offered  oi 
the  clause,  from  the  earth,  or  ground,  Ad- 
hamah,  which,  however,  cannot  mean  more 
than  the  ground,  which  already  had  been 
cursed  (ch.  iii.  17  ;  Lange),  since  "the  ft  raj 
of  the  soil  and  the  misery  of  man  cannot  well 
be  compared  with  each  other"  (Kalisch) ;  or 
simply  awav  from  the  district,  the  scene  of 
his  crime  inadisch,  Speaker's,  Rosenmiiller, 


OH.  17.  1— 16.J 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


81 


Tuch,  Gerlach,  Delitzsch),  as  if  all  that  the 
sentence  implied  was  banishment  from  Eden  ; 
but  must  involve  in  addition  the  idea  that 
the  curse  was  to  leap  upon  him  from  the 
earth,  or  ground,  in  general  (Aben   Ezra, 
Kimchi,  Knobel,  Alford,  Murphy).     Which 
hath   opened    her   mouth   to    receive   thy 
brother's  blood  from  thy  hand.     The  terrible 
significance  of  this  curse  is  further  opened  in 
the  words  which  follow.     The  earth  was  to 
be  against  him  —  1.   In  refusing  him  its 
substance.      When    thou    tillest   (literally, 
shalt  till)  the  ground,  it  shall  not  hence- 
forth yield  (literally,  add  to  give)  unto  thee 
her  strength.     Neither  a  double  curse  upon 
the  entire  earth  for  man's  sake  (Alford),  nor 
a  doom  of  sterility  inflicted  only  on  the 
district  of  Eden. (Kalisch,) ;  but  a  judgment 
on  Gain  and  his  descendants  with  respect  to 
-  their  labours.    Their  tillage  of  the  ground 
was  not  to  prosper,  which  ultimately,  Bonar 
thinks,  drove  the  Cainites  to  city-building 
and  mechanical  invention.     2.  In  denying 
him  a  home.    A  fugitive  and  a  vagabond — 
literally,  moving  and  wandering;  "groan- 
ing and  trembling"   (LXX.,   erroneously), 
"  banished  and  homeless"  (Keil) — shalt  thon 
be  in  the  earth.     "  As  robbers  are  wont  to 
be  who  have  no  quiet  and  secure  resting- 
place  "  (Calvin) ;  driven  on  by  the  agonising 
tortures  of  a  remorseful  and  alarmed  con- 
science, and  not  simply  by  "  the  earth  deny- 
iny  to  Mm  the  expected  fruits  of  his  labour  " 
(Delitzsch).     The  ban  of  wandering,  which 
David  pronounced  upon  his  enemies  (Ps.  lix. 
12 ;  cix.  10),  in  later  years  fell  upon  the 
Jews,  who  "for  shedding  the  blood  of  Christ, 
the  most  innocent  Lamb  of  God,  are  vagabonds 
to  this  day  over  the  face  of  the  earth " 
(Willet).      Thus   the  earth  was  made  the 
minister  of  God's  curse,  not  a  partaker  of  it, 
as  some  have  strangely  imagined,  as  if  by 
drinking  up  the  blood  of  Abel  it  had  become 
a  participant  of  Cain's  crime  (Delitzsch). 

v  ers.  13, 14. — And  Cain  said  unto  the  Lord, 
My  punishment  (or  my  sin)  is  greater  than 
I  can  bear.  Or,  than  can  be  borne  away. 
Interpreted  in  either  way,  this  is  scarcely 
the  language  of  confession,  "sufficiens  con- 
fessio,  sed  intempestiva"  (Chrysostom) ;  but, 
as  the  majority  of  interpreters  are  agreed, 
of  desperation  (Calvin).  According  to  the 
first  rendering  Cain  is  understood  as  deplor- 
ing not  the  enormity  of  his  sin,  but  the 
severity  of  his  punishment,  under  which  he 
reels  and  staggers  as  one  amazed  (Aben  Ezra, 
Kimchi,  Calvin,  Eeil,  Delitzsch,  Murphy, 
Alford,  Speaker's,  Kalisch).  According  to 
the  second,  from  the  terrific  nature  of  the 
blow  which  had  descended  on  him  Cain 
awakens  to  the  conviction  that  his  sin  was 
too  heinous  to  be  forgiven  (margin,  Septua- 

S'nt,  Vulgate,  Theodotion,  Arabic,   Syriac, 
ikelos,  Samaritan,  Gesenius,  Wordsworth). 

GENESIS. 


The  first  of  these  is  favoured  by  the  re. 
maining  portion  of  his  address,  which  shows 
that  that  which  had  paralysed  his  guilty 
spirit  was  not  tho  wickedness  of  his  deed, 
but  the  overwhelming  retribution  which 
had  leapt  so  unexpectedly  from  its  bosom. 
The  real  cause  of  his  despair  was  the  sen  • 
tence  which  had  gone  forth  against  him, 
and  the  articles  of  which  he  now  reca- 
pitulates. Behold,  thon  hast  driven  me 
this  day — "Out  of  the  sentonce  of  his  own 
conscience  Cain  makes  a  clear,  positive, 
Divine  decree  of  banishment"  (Lange) — 
from  the  face  of  the  earth.  Literally,  tht 
ground,  i.  e.  the  land  of  Eden.  "  Adam's 
sin  brought  expulsion  from  the  inner  circle, 
Cain's  from  the  outer"  (Bonar).  And  from 
thy  face  shall  I  be  hid.  Either  (1)  from 
the  place  where  the  Divine  presence  was 
specially  manifested,  i.  e.  at  the  gate  of 
Eden,  which  does  not  contradict  (Kalisch) 
the  great  Biblical  truth  of  the  Divine  omni- 
presence (cf.  Exod.  xx.  24) ;  or,  (2)  more 
generally,  from  the  enjoyment  of  the  Divine 
favour  (cf.  Deut.  xxxi.  18).  _  "  To  be  hidden 
from  the  face  of  God  is  to  be  not  regarded 
by  God,  or  not  protected  by  his  guardian 
care"  (Calvin).  And  I  shall  be  a  fugitive 
and  a  vagabond.  "  A  vagabond  and  a  runa- 
gate" (Tyndale,  Coverdale,  'Bishops'  Bible'). 
Vagus  et  profugus  (Vulgate; ;  vagus  et  m- 
festus  agitationibus  (Tremellius  and  Junius). 
In  the  earth.  The  contemplation  of  his 
miserable  doom,  acting  on  his  guilty  con- 
science, inspired  him  with  a  fearful  appre- 
hension, to  which  in  closing  lie  gives 
expression  in  the  hearing  of  his  Judge.  And 
it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  every  one — not 
beast  {Josephus,  Kimchi,  Michaelis),  but 
person — that  findeth  me  shall  slay  me. 
"Amongst  the  ancient  Romans  a  man  cursed 
for  any  wickedness  might  be  freely  killed 
(Dionysius  Halicarnass. ,  1.  2).  Amongst 
the  Gauls  the  excommunicated  were  deprived 
of  any  benefit  of  law  (Csesar.  '  de  Bello 
Gallico,'  1.  6  ;  cf.  also  Sophocles,  '  CEdip. 
Tyrannus')"  (Ainsworth).  The  apprehen- 
sion which  Cain  cherished  has  been  explained 
as  an  oversight  on  tho  part  of  the  narrator 
(Schumann  and  Tuch)  ;  as  a  mistake  on  the 
part  of  Cain,  who  had  no  reason  to  know 
that  the  world  was  not  populated  (T.  Lewis) ; 
as  referring  to  the  blood  avengers  of  the 
future  who  might  arise  from  his  father's 
family  (Eosenmiiller,  Delitzsch)  j  and  also, 
and  perhaps  with  as  much  probabilit.v,  as 
indicating  that  already,  in  the  130  years 
that  had  gone,  Adam's  descendants  were  not 
limited  to  the  two  brothers  and  their  wives 
(Havernick). 

"Ver.  15. — The  condemned  fratricide's  ap- 
prehensions were  allayed  by  a  special   aet 
of  grace.     And   the  lord   said  unto  him, 
Therefore  (the  LXX.,  Symm.,  Theodotim. 
a 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENE8I8. 


Tot.  it.  1— IK 


Valgate,  Syriac,  Dathius,  translate  Not 
•»X  eSrwc>  nequaquam,  reading  13  iO  in- 
■tead  of  pj)  whosoever  slayeth  Cain,  ven- 
geance shall  be  taken  on  him  sevenfold. 
/.  e.  fully,  sevenfold  vengeance — complete 
vengeance  (cf.  Levit.  xxvi.  28).  In  the  case 
of  Cain's  murderer  there  was  to  be  no  such 
mitigation  of  the  penalty  as  in  the  case  of 
Cain  himself ;  on  the  contrary,  he  would  be 
visited  more  severely  than  Cain,  as  being 
guilty  not  alone  of  homicide,  but  of  trans- 
gressing the  Divine  commandment  which 
■aid  that  Cain  was  to  live  (Willet).  As  to 
why  this  special  privilege  was  granted  to 
Cain,  it  was  not  because  "the  early  death 
of  the  pious  Abel  was  in  reality  no  punish- 
ment, bet  the  highest  boon  "  (Kalisch),  nor 
because  banishment  from  God's  presence  was 
the  greatest  possible  punishment,  "  having 
in  itself  the  significance  of  a  social  human 
death  "  (Lange),  nor  because  it  was  needful 
to  spare  life  for  the  increase  of  posterity 
(Rosenmiiller) ;  but  perhaps  —  1.  To  show 
that  "  Vengeance  is  mine  ;  I  will  repay, 
saith  the  Lord."  2.  To  prove  the  riches 
of  the  Divine  clemency  to  sinful  men.  3. 
To  serve  as  a  warning  against  the  crime 
of  murder.  To  this  probably  there  is  a 
reference  in  the  concluding  clause.  And 
the  Lord  set  a  mark  upon — gave  a  sign 
to  (LXX. ) — Cain,  lest  any  finding  him 
should  kill  him.  Commentators  are  divided 
as  to  whether  this  was  a  visible  sign  to 
repress  avengers  (the  Rabbis,  Luther,  Cal- 
vin, Piscator,  &c),  or  an  inward  assurance 
to  Cain  himself   that    he  should   not    be 


destroyed  (Aben  Ezra,  Dathe,  Rosenmiiller, 
Gesenius,  Tuch,  Kalisch,  Delitzsch).  Is 
support  of  the  former  it  is  urged  that  an 
external  badge  would  be  more  likely  to  repel 
assailants  ;  while  in  favour  of  the  latter  it  is 
pleaded  that  of  seventy-six  times  in  which 
6th  occurs  in  the  Old  Testament,  in  seventy- 
five  it  is  translated  sign.  If  there  was  s 
visible  mark  upon  the  fugitive,  it  is  impos- 
sible to  say  what  it  was ;  that  it  was  a 
shaking  (LXX. ),  or  a  continual  fleeing  from 
place  to  place  (Lyra),  or  a  horn  in  the  head 
(Rabbis),  a  peculiar  kind  of  dress  (Clericus), 
are  mere  conceits.  But,  whatever  it  was,  it 
was  not  a  sign  of  Cain's  forgiveness  (Jose- 

ghus),  only  a  pledge  of  God's  protection. 
■f.  the  Divine  prophetic  sentence  against  the 
Jewish  Cain  (Ps.  lix.  11). 

Ver.  16. — And  Cain  went  out  from  the 
presence  of  the  Lord.  Hot  simply  ended 
his  interview  and  prepared  to  emigrate  from 
the  abode  of  his  youth  (Kalisch) ;  but,  more 
especially,  withdrew  from  the  neighbourhood 
of  the  cherubim  [vide  on  ver.  14).  And 
dwelt  in  the  land  of  Hod.  The  geographical 
situation  of  Nod  (Knobel,  China  ?)  cannot  be 
determined  further  than  that  it  was  on  the 
east  of  Eden,  and  its  name,  Nod,  or  wander- 
ing (cf.  vers.  12,  14 ;  Ps.  lvi.  8),  was  clearly 
derived  from  Cain's  fugitive  and  vagabond 
life  (vide  Michaelis,  'SuppL,'  p.  1612;  and 
cf.  Fiirst,  'Lex.,'  sub  voce),  "which  show- 
eth,  as  Josephus  well  conjectureth,  that 
Cain  was  not  amended  by  his  punishment, 
but  waxed  worse  and  worse,  giving  himself 
to  rapine,  robbery,  oppression,  deceit " 
(Willet). 


H0MILET1CS. 

Vers.  1 — 15. — The  first  brotliers.  I.  The  brothers  at  home.  1.  The  first  homa 
Of  Divine  appointment,  and  among  the  choicest  blessings  that  have  survived  the 
fall,  homes  are  designed  for — (1)  The  increase  of  the  human  family.  Of  all  animals, 
the  offspring  of  man  is  least  fitted  to  provide  for  itself  in  infancy.  Without  the 
shelter  of  a  home  man  would  be  born  only  to  die.  (2)  The  happiness  of  the 
race.  Considering  man's  weakness  and  wants,  miseries  and  dangers,  as  a  fallen 
being  existing  in  a  sin-cursed  world,  the  family  constitution,  which  secures  the 
interdependence  of  individuals,  largely  enhances  his  comfort.  Whether  the  same 
amount  of  happiness  would  have  been  attainable  had  the  race  been  created,  like 
the  angelic,  as  a  multitude  of  separate  individuals  may  be  difficult  to  determine. 
(3)  The  training  of  children.  Being  God's  gift,  they  should  be  highly  prized, 
tenderly  cherished,  carefully  nurtured,  intelligently  counselled  by  the  father, 
anxiously  cared  for  by  the  mother,  lovingly,  perseveringly,  prayerfully  reared  by 
both  ;  educated  not  for  themselves,  or  the  world,  or  even  for  their  parents,  but  for 
God  ;  trained  to  work,  as  indolence  is  a  sin,  and  to  worship,  as  piety  is  a  duty.  2. 
A  pious  home.  Its  locality,  though  outside  the  garden,  was  still  in  Eden,  which 
was  a  mercy,  and  probably  not  far  from  the  cherubim,  Adam's  gate  of  heaven,  which 
was  hopeful.  When  man  founds  a  home  it  should  never  be  far  removed  from  God, 
heaven,  or  the  Church.  Its  structure,  mayhap,  was  humble, — another  garden  likely, 
but.  this  time  man-made,  and  not  so  fair  as  that  which  God  had  planted, — but  its 
precincts  were  hallowed  by  the  rites  of  religion.  It  is  one  mark  of  a  pious  home 
men  God  has  an  altar  in  it  (Ps.  cxviii.  15).     Its  inmates  were  fallen  creatures,  but 


oh.  IT.  1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


still  pardoned  sinners,  who,  having  believed  the  Divine  promise,  had  become  partakers 
of  the  Divine  mercy.  There  is  no  true  pietywhere  there  is  no  humble  faith  in  ths 
gospel.  3.  A  happy  home.  At  least  it  had  all  the  elements  that  were  needful  to 
surround  them  with  earthly  felicity :  the  only  true  foundation  on  which  a  happy 
home  can  rest — religion  (Ps.  cxii.  1;  Prov.  xv.  25;  xxiv.  3);  the  best  blessing  a 
home  can  receive — the  Divine  favour  (Prov.  iii.  33)  ;  the  best  ornaments  a  home 
can  possess — children  (Ps.  cxxviii.  3). 

II.  The  brothers  at  work.  These  works  were — 1.  Necessary.  God's  commands, 
man's  powers  and  needs,  the  earth's  condition,  render  toil  indispensable.  No  one  ia 
bom  to  sloth.  Every  one  should  have  a  calling.  Those  whom  God's  bounty  re- 
lieves from  the  necessity  of  toiling  for  daily  bread  should  still  labour  in  some  specific 
occupation  for  God's  glory  and  man's  good.  2.  Various.  The  first  instance  of 
division  of  labour.  "Diversity  of  employments,  rendered  necessary  by  individual 
capacities  and  tastes,  promotes  excellence  of  workmanship,  facility  of  production, 
and  rapidity  of  distribution  ;  contributes  to  the  unity  and  stability  of  the  social  fabric 
by  teaching  the  interdependence  of  its  several  parts  ;  multiplies  the  comforts,  sti- 
mulates the  energies,  and  generally  advances  the  civilisation  of  mankind.  3.  Useful. 
Most  trades  and  professions  are  useful;  but  some  more  so  than  others.  Parents 
should  select  for  their  children,  and  young  persons  for  themselves,  occupations  that 
contribute  to  the  good  of  man  rather  than  those  which  enhance  their  own  profit.  A 
calling  that  flourishes  on  the  world's  luxuries  is  less  remunerative,  besides  being  less 
honourable,  than  one  which  supplies  men's  necessities.  4.  Healthful.  These 
brothers  both  worked  in  the  open  air.  Out-of-door  employment  more  conducive  to 
physical  vigour  and  mental  activity  than  toiling  in  mines,  factories,  warehouses,  and 
shops.     Men  should  study  health  in  their  secular  pursuits. 

III.  The  brothers  at  worship.  Born  in  the  same  home,  educated  by  the  same 
parents,  trained  to  the  same  duty  of  devotion,  the  first  brothers  became  worshippers 
of  the  same  God,  at  the  same  time,  and  in  the  same  place,  at  the  same  altar,  and  in 
the  same  way,  viz.,  by  the  presentation  of  oblations,  yet  their  service  was  essentially 
diverse.  1.  Their  offerings.  These  were  not  the  same — (1)  In  matter.  Cain 
brought  of  the  fruit  of  the  ground ;  Abel  of  the  firstlings  of  his  flock,  and  of  the  fat 
thereof.  The  one  was  bloodless,  the  other  bloody.  Each  one's  offering  was  con 
nected  with,  perhaps  suggested  by,  his  daily  calling.  So  the  trades,  temperaments, 
abilities  of  men  determine  the  kinds  of  their  religious  service  and  devotion.  This 
diversity  in  men's  oblations  is  natural,  appropriate,  beautiful,  right.  God  requires 
the  consecration  to  himself  of  the  first-fruits  of  men's  powers  and  callings  (Prov.  iii.  9). 
(2)  In  measure.  Abel  offered  unto  God  a  more  excellent  (literally,  a  greater)  sacrifice 
than  Cain  (Heb.  xi.  4).  Cain  brought  of  the  fruit,  not  fruits,  of  the  earth— offering 
with  a  penurious  hand,  as  many  of  God's  worshippers  do  still.  Abel  brought  of  tho 
fattest  and  the  best  of  his  flocks ;  so  should  all  God's  worshippers  reserve  for  him 
the  first-fruits  of  their  years,  powers,  labours,  increase.  (3)  In  meaning.  The  elder 
brother's  offering  was  an  acknowledgment  of  dependence  upon  God,  an  expression, 
probably  (?),  of  gratitude  to  God,  possibly  also  a  recognition  of  God's  claim  to  be 
worshipped ;  the  younger  son's  declared  consciousness  of  sin,  faith  in  atoning  blood, 
hope  in  Divine  mercy.  2.  Their  worship.  The  state  of  the  heart  is  the  essential 
thing  in  worship.  If  the  offering  of  the  hand  be  the  husk,  the  devotion  of  the  sou] 
is  the  kernel  of  true  religion.  Not  only  was  Abel's  offering  better  than  Cain's ;  it  was 
offered  in  «  better  way.  (1)  In  faith,  trusting  in  the  promise,  having  an  outlook 
towards  the  woman's  seed  (Heb.  xi.  4).  Without  faith  in  the  Lamb  of  God  who 
died  for  sin  no  worship  can  be  accepted.  (2)  In  obedience.  Abel's  worship  was 
offered  in  the  way  prescribed.  God  does  not  leave  men  to  invent  forms  of  religion. 
ClWstianity  condemns  will-worship  (Col.  ii.  18).  The  most  costly  offerings  will  not 
suffice  for  obedience  to  Divine  prescription  (1  Sam.  xv.  22).  (3)  In  sincerity.  Cain 
was  a  formalist;  Abel  a  worshipper  of  God  in  spirit  and  in  truth.  Only  such  can 
worship  God  (John  iv.  24).  Hypocrisy  and  formalism,  though  accompanied  with 
splendid  ritual,  God  rejects  (Prov.  xxi.  27  ;  Isa.  i.  13—15  ;  Matt.  vi.  5).  3.  Theif 
receptions.  These  were— (1)  Diametrically  opposite.  Abel  was  accepted  by  God, 
received  into  Divine  favour,  regarded  as  righteous,  considered  as  a  justified  person. 
Cain  was  not  accepted;   not  because  the  fruits  of  the  earth  were  in  themselves 

o  '2 


M  THE  BOOK  OF  GENEMR.  [ch.  it.  1— 1«. 

unworthy  of  God's  acceptance,  but  because,  in  presenting  them,  he  virtually  pro- 
claimed his  disbelief  in  God's  promise  and  repudiation  of  God's  way  of  salvation. 
(2)  Visibly  proclaimed.  By  some  outward  sign  God  expressed  in  the  one  case  his 
approbation,  and  in  the  other  his  displeasure.  By  the  gospel  he  now  solemnly 
declares  his  reception  of  the  true  and  rejection  of  the  false  worshipper  (John  iii. 
36).  More  reliable  are  the  announcements  which  God  now  makes  through  his  word 
than  those  which  he  then  delivered  through  the  medium  of  signs.  (3)  Distinctly 
understood.  Neither  Cain  nor  Abel  was  in  any  dubiety  as  to  his  position.  The  mind 
of  God  had  been  explicitly  revealed.  The  one  was  assured  that  he  was  righteous  ; 
the  other  knew  that  he  was  reprobate.  So  may  every  one  ascertain  his  standing  in 
God's  sight  who  listens  to  the  inspired  declarations  of  the  Divine  word  (John  iii. 
18 ;  Rom.  iii.  20 ;  iv.  6). 

IV.  The  brothers  at  variance.  Divided  in  daily  toils,  religious  worship,  Divine 
acceptance,  they  were  now  also  divided  in  fraternal  regards.  This  estrangement 
was — (1)  Unseemly  in  its  character,  existing,  as  it  did,  between  brothers.  Where,  if 
not  within  the  hallowed  circle  of  home,  should  mutual  love  prevail?  Who,  if 
not  brothers,  should  preserve  the  unity  of  the  Spirit  in  the  bonds  of  peace?  (Ps. 
cxxxiii.  1).  Brothers  were  meant  for  friendship  and  helpfulness,  not  for  envy 
and  destruction.  Let  us  thank  God  there  is  a  Friend  that  sticketh  closer  than  a 
brother  (Prov.  xviii.  24).  (2)  Unjustifiable  in  its  cause.  It  sprang  from  religion- 
Alas,  that  which  was  heralded  as  the  bringer  of  peace  on  earth  and  good-will  among 
men  has  often  been  the  cause  of  strife  and  contention,  separatism  and  estrange- 
ment, as  Christ  foretold  (Matt.  x.  34—36).  What  a  signal  proof  of  the  corruption 
of  the  human  heart  1  It  was  occasioned  through  envy.  Cain  was  wroth  because 
his  brother  was  accepted.  Unbelievers  often  take  offence  at  believers  because  of 
blessings  they  -affect  to  despise.  (3)  Wrathful  in  its  manifestation.  Because 
his  brother's  person  and  service  were  approved  Cain  grew  enraged  ;  because  himself 
and  his  offerings  were  refused  he  was  angry  with  God.  Hypocrites  and  sinners  are 
always  displeased  with  those  who  are  better  than  themselves.  (4)  Murderous  in  its 
termination.  Envy,  wrath,  murder — the  beginning,  middle,  end  of  a  wicked  man'6 
life.  The  last  act  lies  enfolded  in  the  second,  and  the  second  in  the  first,  as  the  fruit 
in  the  tree,  and  the  tree  in  the  seed.  Hence  wrath  is  murder  in  the  thought  (1  John 
iii.  16);  and  "who  is  able  to  stand  before  envy?"  (Prov.  xxvii.  4).  Therefore 
obsta  principiis.  Cultivate  fraternal  affection.  Let  brotherly  love  continue.  Follow 
younger  brothers  in  their  piety  rather  than  hate  them  for  their  prayers. 

V.  The  brothers  at  the  judgment  bab.  1.  Both  went  there.  The  spirit  of  the 
first  martyr  ascended  to  God,  and  God  came  to  arraign  the  red-handed  murderer. 
So  must  wo  all  appear  before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ.  2.  Both  were  judged 
there.  The  righteous  Abel's  character  and  conduct  were  approved  ;  for  God  espoused 
his  cause,  and  heard  the  cry  of  his  innocent  blood.  The  guilty  Cain  was  condemned. 
So  will  all  before  the  great  white  throne  be  judged  according  to  their  works  ;  of  every 
one  of  which  God  is  now  a  witness,  as  he  was  of  the  fratricidal  act  of  Cain.  3.  Both 
were  sentenced  there.  Abel  was  received  into  glory,  and  his  blood  avenged ;  Cain 
banished  from  God's  presence,  transformed  into  a  wandering  fugitive,  in  mercy 
spared  from  immediate  destruction,  but  in  reality,  with  his  scarred  brow,  doomed 
to  a  lifetime  of  woe — fit  emblem  of  the  doom  of  the  ungodly ;  as  the  award  of 
righteous  Abel  was  of  the  honour  of  the  righteous  (Matt.  xxv.  46). 

Lessons: — 1.  Value  the  Divine  gift  of  home.  2.  Provide  things  honest  in  the 
sight  of  all  men.  3.  Serve  the  Lord  with  gladness.  Present  your  bodies  a  living 
sacrifice.  Come  into  his  courts,  and  bring  an  offering  with  you.  4.  Follow  peace 
with  all  men,  and  holiness,  without  which  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord.  5.  Live  in 
anticipation  of,  and  preparation  for,  the  judgment-duy.  6.  Learn  that  nothing  will 
keep  a  man  right  in  life  and  safe  in  death  except  faith  in  atoning  blood.  Cain  had 
pious  parents,  a  good  home,  an  honourable  calling,  a  religious  profession,  and  yet 
was  lost.  Abel  had  a  short  life  and  a  sad  death,  but  he  was  safe.  Faith  in  Christ 
(the  woman's  seed)  made  the  difference. 

Ver.  9. — Am  I  my  brother1!  keeper  t  I.  The  world  says,  No  I  1.  Every  man'i 
brother  ought  to  keep  himself.    2.   If  a  man'i  brother  cannot  keep  himself,  b* 


ch.  it.  1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  85 


deserves  to  perish.  8.  No  man's  brother  will  be  at  the  trouble  to  keep  him.  4, 
Every  man  has  enough  to  do  to  keep  himself.  Such  is  the  gospel  of  selfishness  pro- 
claimed and  practised  by  the  world. 

II.  God  says,  Yes  1  1.  Because  he  is  your  brother.  Affection  should  prompt 
you.  2.  Because  he  may  get  lost  without  your  keeping.  Humanity  should  incline 
you.  3.  Because  I  expect  you.  Religion  commands  you.  Such  is  the  gospel  oj 
love  which  God  preaches  and  charges  us  to  practise. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 8. — The  kingdom  of  God.  Another  "  genesis  "  is  now  described,  that  of 
sinful  society,  whiph  prepares  the  way  for  the  description  of  the  rising  kingdom  of 
God. 

I.  The  development  of  moral  evil  is  contemporaneous  with  human  society. 
We  must  still  bear  in  mind  that  the  aim  of  the  narrative  is  not  scientific,  but  religious 
and  didactic.  The  sketch  of  the  first  family  in  vers.  1  and  2  is  plainly  an  outline  to 
be  filled  in.  The  keeper  of  sheep  and  the  tiller  of  the  ground  are  out  in  the  broad 
world.  We  are  not  told  that  there  were  no  other  human  beings  when  they  were 
crown  up.  Probably  from  their  employment  it  is  meant  to  be  inferred  that  the 
human  family  had  already  grown  into  something  like  a  community,  when  there 
could  be  a  division  of  labour.  The  production  of  animal  and  vegetable  food  in 
quantities  can  only  be  explained  on  the  presupposition  that  man  had  increased  on 
the  earth.     Then,  in  ver.  3,  we  are  led  on  still  further  by  "the  process  of  time." 

II.  The  community  of  men,  thus  early,  has  some  provision  for  religious 
worship.  The  two  men,  Cain  and  Abel,  "brought"  their  offerings  apparently  to 
one  place.  The  difference  was  not  the  mere  difference  of  their  occupations.  Abel 
brought  not  only  "the  firstlings  of  the  flock,"  but  "the  fat  thereof"  an  evident 
allusion  to  the  appointment  of  some  sacrificial  rites.  The  Lord's  respect  to  Abel's 
offering  was  not  merely  a  recognition  of  Abel's  state  of  mind,  though  that  is  implied 
in  the  reference  to  the  person,  as  distinct  from  the  offering,  but  it  was  approval  of 
Abel's  obedience  to  the  religious  prescription  which  is  in  the  background.  The  Lord 
remonstrates  with  Cain  when  his  countenance  fell  and  he  was  wroth.  "  If  thou 
doest  well,  shalt  thou  not  be  accepted  ?  and  if  thou  doest  not  well,  sin  lieth  at  the 
door"  (croucheth  like  a  beast  of  prey  ready  to  be  upon  thee).  This  may  be  taken 
either  (1)  retrospectively  or  (2)  prospectively — sin  as  guilt,  or  sin  as  temptation ;  in 
either  case  it  is  at  the  door — not' necessarily  a  welcome  guest,  but  ready  to  take 
possession.  Sin  forgiven,  temptation  resisted,  are  placed  in  apposition  to  acceptance. 
"  Unto  thee  shall  be  his  desire," — i.  e.  Abel's,  as  the  younger, — "  and  thou  shalt  rule 
over  him,"  i.  e.  the  natural  order  shall  be  preserved.  Notice — 1.  Divine  love  pro- 
viding acceptance  in  the  Divine  order,  in  which  religion  is  preserved,  and  natural 
life,  with  its  appointments.  2.  Divine  mercy  rescuing  a  fallen  creature  from  the 
results  of  his  own  blind  disobedience.  3.  The  righteousness  of  God  maintained  in 
the  disorder  and  passion  which  spring  out  of  human  error  and  corruption.  Sin  is  at 
the  door ;  judgment  close  upon  it.  Yet  God  is  justified  though  man  is  condemned. 
There  is  no  great  sin  committed  but  it  has  been  seen  at  the  door  first.  4.  Doing  not 
well  precedes  the  direct  presumptuous  sin.  "  Cleanse  thou  me  from  secret  faults." 
Cain  was  warned  by  God  himself  before  his  fallen  countenance  darkened  his  heart 
with  crime  and  stained  his  hand  with  a  brother's  blood.  What  a  picture  of  the 
gradual  degradation  of  the  conscience.  Notice — (1)  The  disobedience  of  a  Divine 
commandment  in  some  minor  point.  (2)  Sense  of  estrangement  from  God — loss 
of  his  "respect  unto  us."  (3)  Sullen,  brooding  enmity  against  God  and  man.  (4) 
All  these  culminating  in  the  violent  outbreak  of  self-assertion,  his  own  works  evil, 
his  brother's  righteous,  therefore  he  hated  him.  Ver.  8  is  again  an  epitome.  The 
talk  of  the  two  men  with  one  another  may  represent  a  long  period  of  angry 
debate.  "It  came  to  pass,"  on  some  occasion,  in  the  field,  the  angry  thoughts 
found  their  vent  in  angry  words.  "  Cain  rose  up  against  Abel  his  brother,  and  slew 
him."  The  first  blood  shed  had  a  religious  occasion  for  its  origin.  The  proto- 
martyr  was  slain  as  a  testimony  to  the  truth.  Mark  the  significant  omen  for  ths 
tubsoquent  human  hist  iry.     Marvel  not  if  the  world  hate  those  to  whom  God  •howl 


•ft  THE    BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  foH.  it.  1—16. 

■pecial  respect.  The  type  is  here  of  all  religious  wars.  The  Cain  spirit  is  not  mere 
bloody-mindedness,  but  all  defiance  of  God,  and  self-assertion,  as  against  his  will 
and  word.  Infidelity  has  been  as  bloody  as  superstition.  Both  meet  in  the  same 
perverted  worship  of  self. — B. 

Ver.  9. — Care  for  our  brethren.  How  ternble  this  question  to  the  murderer  1 
He  thought,  perhaps,  his  act  was  hidden,  and  strove  to  put  it  out  of  mind.  Perhaps 
did  not  anticipate  effect  of  his  stroke ;  but  now  brought  face  to  face  with  his  sin. 
"  Where  is  Abel  ? "  He  knew  not.  He  knew  where  the  body  lay ;  but  that  was  not 
Abel.  Had  sent  him  whence  he  could  not  call  him  back.  "  Where  is  thy  brother?" 
is  God's  word  to  each  of  us.  It  expresses  the  great  law  that  we  are  responsible  for 
each  other's  welfare.  "Am  I  my  brother's  keeper?"  some  would  ask.  Assuredly 
yes.  God  has  knit  men  together  so  that  all  our  life  through  we  require  each  other's 
help ;  and  we  cannot  avoid  influencing  each  other.  And  has  created  a  bond  of 
brotherhood  (cf.  Acts  xvii.  26),  which  follows  from  our  calling  him  "  Father." 
What  doing  for  good  of  mankind  ?  Not  to  do  good  is  to  do  harm ;  not  to  save  is  to 
kill.     Love  of  Christ  works  (Rom.  x.  1 ;  2  Cor.  v.  14). 

L  We  are  called  to  care  fob  those  afar  off.  "Who  is  my  neighbour?" 
We  might  answer,  Who  is  not  thy  neighbour  ?  Everywhere  our  brethren.  Thou- 
sands passing  awa}'  daily.  Abel,  a  vapour,  the  character  of  human  life  (Ps.  ciii.  15). 
Whither  are  they  going  ?  And  we  know  the  way  of  salvation.  Light  is  given  to  no 
one  for  himself  only  (Matt.  v.  13,  14).  We  are  to  hold  it  forth  ;  to  be  as  lights  in 
the  world  (Phil.  ii.  15).  It  is  God's  will  thus  to  spread  his  kingdom.  Are  we 
answering  the  call?  Test  yourselves  (cf.  1  John  iii.  17).  Deliver  us  from  blood- 
guiltiness,  0  God.  Thank  God,  the  question  speaks  to  us  of  living  men.  There  are 
fields  still  to  be  reaped.  The  heathen,  our  brethren,  claim  a  brother's  help.  How 
many  varieties  of  Cain's  answer : — You  cannot  reclaim  savages  ;  you  just  make  them 
hypocrites ;  we  must  look  at  home  first.  And  the  lost  masses  at  home  are  our 
brethren.  Oh,  it  is  in  vain  to  help  them  ;  they  will  drink  ;  they  hate  religion  ;  they 
only  think  what  they  can  get  from  those  who  visit  them.  Test  these  objections. 
Single  out  in  thought  one  soul ;  compare  his  case  with  yours.  You  have  instruction, 
ordinances,  influences ;  and  he  the  darkness  of  heathenism,  or  surroundings  of  vice. 
Yet  Christ  died  for  that  soul.  Can  you  let  it  depart  without  some  effort,  or  even 
earnest  prayer? 

II.  We  are  called  to  care  for  those  around  us.  For  their  sake,  watchful- 
ness and  self-restraint  (cf.  Bom.  xiv.  15).  We  teach  more  by  what  we  do  than  by 
what  we  say.  The  loving  life  teaches  love  ;  the  selfish,  ungodliness.  Inconsistencies 
of  Christians  hinder  Christ's  cause.  What  art  thou  at  home?  Is  thy  life  pointing 
heavenward  ?    "  None  of  us  liveth  to  himself."    "  Where  is  thy  brother  ?  " — M. 

Vers.  9 — 15. — The  condemnation  and  judgment  of  the  first  murderer.    Notice — 

I.  The  Divine  appeal  to  conscience,  affording  opportunity  to  repentance  and 
confession,  and  therefore  to  the  exercise  of  mercy. 

II.  The  blinding  effect  of  a  great  sin.  The  man  who  Knew  that  God  knew 
all  persisting  in  a  lie,  and  insulting  the  Divine  majesty  at  the  very  throne  of  judg- 
ment, i.e.  defying  God  by  the  monstrous  extravagance  of  self-assertion,  which  is 
the  effect  of  indulged  sin,  not  only  hardening  the  heart,  but  filling  it  with  a  mad 
desperation.  So  we  find  great  criminals  still,  to  the  very  last,  adding  sin  to  sin,  as 
though  they  had  come  to  think  that  the  deeper  they  sunk  into  it  the  more  chance 
they  had  of  escaping  its  punishment,  or  by  daring  the  whole  extremity  might  the 
sooner  know  the  worst. 

III.  There  is  great  significance  in  the  intimate  connection  set  forth  between 
the  crime  and  punishment  of  Cain  and  the  earth  and  the  ground.  The  blood 
speaks  from  the  ground,  crying  to  God.  Cain  is  cursed  from  the  ground.  The 
ground  opened  her  mouth  to  receive  the  brother's  blood.  The  ground  refuses  to 
serve  the  murderer.  On  the  earth  he  shall  be  a  fugitive  and  vagabond.  From  the 
face  of  the  earth  he  is  driven.  His  punishment  is  greater  than  he  can  bear.  Surely 
all  that  is  intended  to  place  in  vivid  contrast  the  righteousness  of  God  and  the  un- 
tighteousneBS  of  man ;  the  one  witnessed  by  the  steadfast  earth,  with  its  unbroken 


oB.  nr.  17—26.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


laws,  its  pure,  unf alien,  peaceful  state,  with  its  communities  of  creatures  innocent  of 
all  sin;  the  other  witnessed  by  the  cursed,  wandering,  suffering,  hunger-pinched, 
miserable  man,  flying  from  his  neighbour,  flying  from  himself. 

IV.  As  in  the  expulsion  of  man  from  Eden,  so  in  the  expulsion  of  Cain  from 
society,  there  is  mercy  mingled  with  judgment.  The  mark  set  upon  Cain  by  the 
Lord  was  at  once  the  mark  of  rejection  and  the  mark  of  protection ;  it  threatened 
sevenfold  vengeance  on  the  murderer  of  the  murderer;  it  was  an  excommunication 
for  the  sake  of  the  sinner  as  well  as  for  the  sake  of  the  community.  We  must 
not  expect  to  find  in  these  primeval  records  more  than  a  dim  intimation  of  the 
Divine  mind.  But  here,  at  the  outset  of  the  human  race,  there  is  the  germ  of 
that  distinction  and  separation  among  mankind  on  the  moral  and  spiritual  ground 
which  really  is  the  essential  fact  of  the  kingdom  of  God.  "The  blood  of 
sprinkling  speaketh  better  things  than  that  of  Abel."  Yet  it  is  a  good  thing 
that  God  should  say  to  us,  in  however  fearful  a  manner,  that  that  which  is 
destructive  of  human  society,  which  rises  up  against  a  brother's  life,  which  hates 
and  works  out  its  hatred  in  cruel  act,  shall  be,  can  be,  separated  from  the  world 
into. which  it  has  come,  and  cast  out.  We  must  look  at  the  whole  narrative  from 
the  side  of  the  Abel  element,  not  from  the  side  of  the  Cain  element;  and  the 
blessed  truth  contained  in  it  is  that  God  purges  society  of  its  evil  men  and  evil 
principles,  and  makes  its  very  martyrs'  blood  to  be  a  consecration  of  the  earth  to 
proclaim  his  righteousness.  We  have  not  to  answer  the  question,  How  about  Cain? 
He  is  protected  from  violence.  He  is  permitted  to  repent  and  return,  though  for 
a  time  an  outcast.  Out  of  the  conflict  of  the  two  worlds  will  come  forth  the 
purpose  of  God — evil  separated,  good  eternally  triumphant. — R. 


EXPOSITION. 


Var.  17. — Domiciled  in  Nod,  whither,  im- 

palled  by  woman's  love,  his  wife  had  accom- 
panied him,  the  unhappy  fugitive  began  to 
seek,  if  not  to  find,  relief  from  the  gnawing 
agonies  of  remorse  in  the  endearments  of 
conjugal  felicity  and  the  occupations  of  se- 
cular industry.  And  Cain  knew  his  wife. 
Who  must  have  been  his  sister,  and  married 
before  the  death  of  Abel,  as  "  after  that  event 
it  can  scarcely  be  supposed  that  any  woman 
would  be  willing  to  connect  herself  with  such 
a  miserable  fratricide  "  (Bush).  Though  after- 
wards forbidden,  the  tendency  of  Divine  legis- 
lation on  the  subject  of  marriage  being  always 
in  the  direction  of  enlarging  rather  than 
restricting  the  circle  of  prohibited  relation- 
ships, the  union  of  brothers  and  sisters  at 
the  first  was  clearly  indispensable,  if  the  race 
was  to  multiply  outwards  from  a  common 
stock.  "  Even  in  much  later  times,  and 
among  very  civilised  nations,  such  alliances 
were  not  considered  incestuous.  The  Athenian 
law  made  it  .compulsory  to  marry  the  sister 
if  she  had  not  found  a  husband  at  a  certain 
age.  Abraham  married  his  half-sister,  Sarah; 
and  the  legislator  Moses  himself  was  the  off- 
spring of  a  matrimony  which  he  later  inter- 
dicted as  unholy  "  (Kalisch).  And  she  con- 
ceived. For  even  from  the  unbelieving  and 
unthankful,  the  disobedient  and  the  repro- 
bate, God's  providential  mercies  are  not 
entirely  withheld  (Ps.  cxlv.  9  ;  Matt.  v.  45). 
fad  bare  Enoch.  Chanooh,  "dedicated," 
'  initiated,"  from  chanooh,  to  instruct  (Prov. 


xxii.  6)  and  to  consecrate  (Deut  xx.  5  ;  1 
Kings  viii.  63).  Candlish  detects  in  the 
name  the  impious  pride  of  the  first  murderer; 
with  more  charity,  Keil  and  Ealisch  see  a 
promise  of  the  renovation  of  his  life.  The 
latter  thinks  that  Cain  called  his  son  "Ini- 
tiated "or  "  Instructed  "  to  intimate  that  he 
intended  to  instruct  him  from  his  early  years 
in  the  duties  of  virtue,  and  his  city  "  Dedi- 
cated "  to  signify  that  he  now  recognised  that 
"  the  firstling  of  his  social  prosperity  belongs 
to  God."  If  Luther's  conjecture  he  correct, 
that  the  child  received  its  name  from  its 
mother,  it  will  touchingly  express  that  young 
mother's  hope  that  the  child  whom  God  had 
sent  might  be  an  augury  of  blessing  for  their 
saddened  home,  and  her  resolution  both  to 
consecrate  him  from  his  youth  to  God  and 
to  instruct  him  in  God's  fear  and  worship. 
And  he  bnilded.  Literally,  was  building, 
L  e.  began  to  build,  "  but  never  finished, 
leading  still  a  runagate  life,  and  so  often  con- 
strained to  leave  the  work,  as  the  giants  did 
who  built  the  tower  of  Babel "  ( Willet).  A 
city.  Vater,  Hartmann,  and  Bohlen  discover 
in  the  city-building  of  Cain  "  a  main  proof 
of  the  mythical  contents  of  the  narrative," 
an  advanced  state  of  civilisation  "utterly 
unsuitable  to  so  early  a  period  ; "  but  ancient 
tradition  (Phoenician,  Egyptian,  and  Hellenic) 
is  unanimous  in  ascribing  to  the  first  men 
the  invention  of  agriculture  and  th°  arts, 
with  the  dissovery  of  metals,  the  origin  ol 
music,  &c  (vid*  Havernick'a  'Intro.,'  g  18^ 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[oh.  iv.  17— 2& 


Of  course  the  "VJJ  which  Cain  erected  was 
not  a  city  according  to  modern  ideas,  but  a 
keep  or  fort,  enclosed  with  a  wall  for  the 
defence  of  those  who  dwelt  within  (Murphy). 
It.  was  the  first  step  in  the  direction  of  civil- 
isation, and  Kalisch  notes  it  as  a  deep  trait 
in  the  Biblical  account  that  the  origin  of 
cities  is  ascribed  not  to  the  nomad,  but  to 
the  agriculturist.  Impelled  by  the  necessities 
of  his  occupation  to  have  a  fixed  residence, 
he  would  likewise  in  course  of  time  be  con- 
strained by  the  multiplication  of  his  house- 
hold to  insure  their  protection  and  comfort. 
It  is  possible  also  that  his  attempt  to  found 
a  city  may  have  been  dictated  by  a  desire  to 
bid  defiance  to  the  curse  which  doomed  him 
to  a  wandering  life  ;  to  create  for  his  family 
and  himself  a  new  point  of  interest  outside 
the  holy  circle  of  Eden,  and  to  find  an  outlet 
for  those  energies  and  powers  of  which,  as  an 
early  progenitor  of  the  race,  he  must  have 
been  conscious,  and  in  the  restless  activity 
of  which  oblivion  for  his  misery  could  alone 
be  found.  If  so,  it  explains  the  action  which 
■  is  next  recorded  of  him,  that  he  called  the 
name  of  the  city  after  the  name  of  his  son, 
Enoch.  /.  e.  he  consecrated  it  to  the  realis- 
ation of  these  his  sinful  hopes  and  schemes. 
Ver.  18. — Years  passed  away,  the  family 
of  Cain  grew  to  manhood,  and,  in  imitation 
of  their  parents,  founded  homes  for  them- 
selves. And  unto  Enoch  (whose  wife  pro- 
bably would  also  be  his  sister,  few  caring  at 
this  early  stage  to  intermarry  with  the  ac- 
cursed race)  was  born  Irad.  Townsman, 
citizen,  urbanus  civilis  (Keil,  Lange);  fleet 
as  a  wild  ass  (Murphy);  ornament  of  a  city, 
from  Ir,  a  city  (Wordsworth).  And  Irad 
begat  Mehujael.  Smitten  of  God  (Keil, 
Gesenius,  Murphy),  the  purified  or  formed 
of  God  (Lange).  And  Mehujael  begat 
Methusael.  Man  of  God  (Gesenius,  Lange), 
man  asked  or  man  of  El  (Murphy),  man  of 
prayer  (Keil).  And  Methusael  begat  Lamech. 
Strong  youth  (Gesenius,  Lange)  ;  man  of 
prayer,  youth  (Murphy);  king,  by  metathesis 
for  melech  (Wordsworth).  The  resemblance 
between  these  names  and  those  in  the  line  of 
Seth  has  been  accounted  for  by  supposing  a 
commingling  of  the  two  genealogies,  or  one 
common  primitive  legend  in  two  forms 
(Ewald,  Knobel).  But— 1.  The  similarity 
of  the  names  does  not  necessarily  imply  the 
identity  of  the  persons.  Cf.  Korah  in  the 
families  of  Levi  (Exod.  vi.  21)  and  Esau 
(ch.  xxx vi.  5);  Barwch  in  those  of  Beuben 
(ch.  xlvi.  9)  and  Midian  (ch.  xxv.  4) ;  Keaaz 
in  those  of  Esau  (ch.  xxxvi  11)  and  Judah 
(Num.  xxxii.  12).  2.  The  similarity  of  the 
names  onlj  proves  that  the  two  collateral 
branches  of  the  same  family  did  not  keep 
entirely  apart.  8.  The  paucity  of  names  at 
that  early  period  may  have  led  to  their  repe- 
tition     4.  The  names  in  the  two  lines  are 


only  similar,  not  identical  (cf.  with  Irad, 
.Tared,  descent ;  with  Mehujael,  Mahalaleel, 
praise  of  God  ;  with  Methusael?  Methuselah, 
man  of  the  sword).  5.  The  particulars  related 
of  Enoch  and  Lamech  in  the  line  of  Seth 
forbid  their  identification  with  those  of  the 
same  name  in  the  line  of  Cain. 

Ver.  19.  —  And  Lamech  took  nnto  him 
two  wives.  Being  the  first  polygamist  of 
whom  mention  is  made,  the  first  by  whom 
"the  ethical  aspect  of  marriage,  as  ordained 
by  God,  was  turned  into  the  lust  of  the  eye 
and  lust  of  the  flesh  "  (Keil).  Though  after- 
wards permitted  because  of  the  hardness  of 
men's  hearts,  it  was  not  so  from  the  begin- 
ning. This  was  "  a  new  evil,  without  even 
the  pretext  that  the  first  wife  had  no  chil- 
dren, which  held  its  ground  until  Christianity 
restored  the  original  law — Matt.  xix.  4-^-6  ' 
(Inglis).  The  names  of  Lamech's  wives  were 
suggestive  of  sensual  attractions.  The  name 
of  the  one  Adah,  the  Adorned  (Gesenius), 
and  the  name  of  the  other  Zillah,  the  shady 
or  the  tinkling  (Keil),  the  musical  player 
(Lange),  the  shadow  (Wordsworth).  "  Did 
Lamech  choose  a  wife  to  gratify  the  eye  with 
loveliness  1  and  was  he  soon  sated  with  tha*. 
which  is  so  short-lived  as  beauty,  and  ther. 
chose  another  wife  in  addition  to  Adah  s 
But  a  second  wife  is  hardly  a  wife;  she  it 
only  the  shadow  of  a  wife"  (ibid.). 

Ver.  20. — And  Adah  bare  Jabal.  Either 
the  Traveller  or  the  Producer,  from  yabhal,  to 
flow;  poetically,  to  go  to  walk ;  hiphil,  to 
produce  ;  descriptive,  in  the  one  case,  of  his 
nomadic  life,  in  the  other  of  his  occupation 
or  his  wealth.  He  was  the  father — av, 
father ;  used  of  the  founder  of  a  family  or 
nation  (ch.  x.  21),  of  the  author  or  maker  of 
anything,  especially  of  the  Creator  (Job 
xxxviii.  28),  of  the  master  or  teacher  of  any 
art  or  science  (ch.  iv.  21) — of  such  as  dwell 
in  tents,  and  of  such  as  have  cattle.  Mikneh, 
literally,  possession,  from  kanah,  to  acquire, 
as  in  ver.  1 ;  hence  cattle,  as  that  was  the 
primitive  form  of  wealth  (cf.  pecus,  pecunia) ; 
by  which  may  be  meant  that  Jabal  was  the 
first  nomad  who  introduced  the  custom  of 
living  in  tents,  and  pasturing  and  breeding 
not  sheep  merely,  but  larger  quadrupeds  as 
well,  for  the  sake  of  wealth. 

Ver.  21. — And  his  brother's  name  was 
JubaL  Flayer  on  an  instrument,  the  musi- 
cian. Cf.  jobel,  an  onomatopoetio  word  signi- 
fying jubilum,  a  joyful  sound.  Cf.  Greek, 
iXoXiiav,  d\a\a£civ;  Latin,  ululare;  Swed- 
ish, iolen;  Dutch,  ioelen;  German,  juohen 
(Gesenius).  He  was  the  father  of  all  such 
as  ha  idle  the  harp.  The  kinnor,  a  stringed 
instrument,  played  on  by  the  plectrum  ac- 
cording to  Josephus  ('  Ant,'  7, 12, 3),  but  in 
David's  time  by  the  hand  (1  Sam.  xvi.  23; 
xviii.  10;  xix.  9),  corresponding  to  the  moderB 
lyre.   Cf.  mvbpa,  Ktvvipa,  cithara  ;  Genua, 


OH.  IT.  17- 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


89 


hnarren  ;  so  named  either  from  its  tremulous, 
•tridulous  sound  (Gesenius),  or  from  its  bent, 
arched  form  (Fiirst).  And  the  organ.  '  Ugabh, 
from  a  root  signifying  to  breathe  or  blow 
(Gesenius),  or  to  make  a  lovely  sound  (Fiirst); 
hence  generally  a  wind  instrument— tibia, 
fistula,  syrinx;  the  shepherd's  reed  or  bag- 
pipe (Keil);  the  pipe  or  flute  (Onkelos);  the 
organon,  i.  e.  an  instrument  composed  of 
many  pipes  (Jerome).  Kalisch  discovers  a 
fitness  in  the  invention  of  musical  instru- 
ments by  the  brother  of  a  nomadic  herds- 
man, as  it  is  "  in  the  happy  leisure  of  this 
occupation  that  music  is  generally  first  ex- 
ercised and  appreciated."  Murphy  sees  an 
indication  of  the  easy  circumstances  of  the 
line  of  Cain  ;  Candlish,  "  an  instance  of  the 
high  cultivation  which  a  people  may  often 
possess  who  are  altogether  irreligious  and 
ungodly  ; "  Bonar,  a  token  of  their  deepening 
depravity — *'  it  is  to  shut  God  put  that  these 
Cainites  devise  the  harp  and  the  organ. " 

Yer.  22.  —And  Zillah,  she  also  hare  Tubal- 
oain.  Worker  in  brass  or  iron  ;  related  to 
Persian,  til/pal,  iron  dross  (Gesenius,  RSdiger, 
Delitzsch).  Keil  and  Fiirst  think  this  Persian 
root  cannot  be  regarded  as  the  proper  explan- 
ation of  the  name.  Fiirst  suggests  that  the 
tribe  may  have  been  originally  named  Tubal, 
and  known  as  inventors  of  smith-work  and 
agricultural  implements,  and  that  Cain  may 
have  been  afterwards  added  to  them  to  iden- 
tify them  as  Cainites  {vide  '  Lex.  sub  nom.'). 
The  name  Tubal,  like  the  previous  names 
Jabal  and  Jubal,  is  connected  with  the  root 
yabal,  to  flow,  and  probably  was  indicative 
of  the  general  prosperity  of  the  race.  Their 
ancestor  was  specially  distinguished  as  an 
instructor  (literally,  a  whetter),  of  every 
artificer  (instrument,  LXX. ,  Vulgate,  Kalisch) 
in   brass  (more  correctly  copper)  and  iron. 

'D3.  according  to  Gesenius  a  quadrilateral 
from  the  ch.  J"]3,  to  transfix,  with  ?  appended ; 
according  to  Fiirst  out  of  ?J3,  from  7t3,  to  be 
hard,  by  resolving  the  dagesh  into  r.  And 
the  sister  of  Tubal-cain  was  Naamah — the 
lovely.  Considering  the  general  significance 
of  names,  we  shall  scarcely  go  astray  if  with 
Kalisch  we  find  in  the  name  of  the  sister  of 
Tubal-cain,  "the  beautiful,"  as  compared 
with  that  of  Adam's  wife,  "the  living,"  a 
growing  symptom  of  the  degeneracy  of  the 
times.  Beauty,  rather  than  helpfulness, 
was  now  become  the  chief  attraction  in 
woman.  Men  selected  wives  for  their  lovely 
forms  and  faces  rather  than  for  their  loving 
and  pious  hearts.  The  reason  for  the  intro- 
duction of  Naamah's  name  into  the  narrative 
commentators  generally  are  at  a  loss  to  dis- 
cover. Inglis  with  much  ingenuity  connects 
It  with  the  tragedy  which  some  see  in  the 
Hues  that  follow. 
Vers.  23,  21. — And  Lamecr  said  unto  his 


wives.  The  words  have  an  archaic  simplicity 
which  bespeak  a  high  antiquity  (vide  Haver- 
nick's  '  Introd. ,'  p.  105),  naturally  fall  into 
that  peculiar  form  of  parallelism  which  is 
a  well-known  characteristic  of  Hebrew  po 
etry,  and  on  this  account,  as  well  as  from 
the  subject,  have  been  aptly  denominated 
The  Song  of  the  Sword  (Ewald,  p.  2"67). 

Adah  and  Zillah,  Hear  my  voice ; 

Ye  wives   of  Lamech,   hearken   unto    my 

speech : 
For  I  have  slain  a  man  to  my  wounding  (foi 

my  wound), 
And  a  young  man  to  my  hurt  (because  ol 

my  strife). 
If  (for)  Cain  shall  be  avenged  sevenfold, 
Truly  (and)  Lamech  seventy  and  sevenfold. 

Origen  wrote  two  whole  books  of  his  com- 
mentary on  Genesis  on  this  song,  and  at 
last  pronounced  it  inexplicable.  The  chief 
difficulty  in  its  exegesis  concerns  the  sense 
in  which  the  words  'Jiljnn  'S  are  to  be  taken. 

1.  If  the  verb  be  rendered  as  a  preterite 
(LXX.,  Vulgate,  Syriac,  Kalisch,  Murphy, 
Alford,  Jamieson,  Luther),  then  Lamech  is 
represented  as  informing  his  wives  that  in 
self-defence  he  ha3  slain  a  young  man  who 
wounded  him  (not  two  men,  as  some  read), 
but  that  there  is  no  reason  to  apprehend 
danger  on  that  account ;  for  if  God  had 
promised  to  avenge  Cain  sevenfold,  should 
any  one  kill  him,  he,  being  not  a  wilful 
murderer,  but  at  worst  a  culpable  homicide, 
would   be  avenged    seventy  and   sevenfold. 

2.  If  the  verb  be  regarded  as  a  future  (Aben 
Ezra,  Calvin,  Kiel,  Speaker's.  "The  pre- 
terite stands  for  the  future  ...  (4)  In 
protestations  and  assurances  in  which  the 
mind  of  the  speaker  views  the  action  as 
already  accomplished,  being  as  good  as 
done" — Gesenius,  *Heb.  Gram.,'  §  126), 
then  the  father  of  Tubal-cain  is  depicted 
as  exulting  in  the  weapons  which  his  son's 
genius  had  invented,  and  with  boastful  arro- 
gance threatening  death  to  the  first  man 
that  should  injure  him,  impiously  asserting 
that  by  means  of  these  same  weapons  he 
would  exact  upon  his  adversary  a  vengeance 
ten  times  greater  than  that  which  had  been 
threatened  against  the  murderer  of  Cain. 
Considering  the  character  of  the  speaker  and 
the  spirit  of  the  times,  it  is  probable  that 
this  is  the  correct  interpretation.  3.  A  third 
interpretation  proposes  to  understand  the 
words  of  Lamech  hypothetically,  as  thus  : — 
"  If  I  should  slay  a  man,  then,"  &c.  (Lans;e, 
Bush) ;  but  this  does  not  materially  diifei 
from  the  first,  only  putting  the  case  con- 
ditionally, which  the  first  asserts  categori- 
cally. 4.  A  fourth  gives  to  ''S  the  force  of  t 
question  (vide  Stanley  Leathes, '  Heb.  Gram.,' 
p.  202),  and  imagines  Lamech  to  be  assuring 
his  wives,  who  are  supposed  to  h»r»  bee* 


10 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  iv.  17—26 


tpprehensive  of  some  evil  befalling  their 
husband  through  the  use  of  Tubal-eain's 
dangerous  weapons,  that  there  was  no  cause 
for  their  anxieties  and  alarms,  as  he  had  not 
slain  a  man,  that  he  should  be  wounded,  or 
a  young  man,  that  he  should  be  hurt ;  but 
this  interpretation,  it  may  be  fairly  urged, 
is  too  strained  to  be  even  probably  correct. 

Vers.  25,  26. — The  narrative  now  reverts 
to  the  fortunes  of  the  doubly  saddened  pair. 
And  Adam  knew  his  wife  again.  Having 
mournfully  abstained  for  a  season  d  thoro 
conjugali  (Calvin) ;  not  necessarily  implying 
that  Adam  and  Eve  had  not  other  children 
who  had  grown  to  man's  estate  prior  to  the 
death  of  Abel  (cf.  ch.  v.  4).  And  she  bare  a 
son,  and  called  his  name  Seth.  Sheth,  from 
shith,  to  put  or  place  ;  hence  appointed,  put, 
compensation.  For  God,  said  she,  hath  ap- 
pointed ine  another  seed — semen  singulare 
(Calvin)  \filinm,  Eve  having  borne  daughters 
previously  (Onkelos,  Jonathon,  Dathe,  Ro- 
senmuller) — instead  of  Abel.  Her  other  child- 
ren probably  had  gone  in  the  way  of  Cain, 
leaving  none  to  carry  on  the  holy  line,  till 
this  son  was  bom,  w  horn  in  faith  she  expects 
to  be  another  Abel  in  respect  of  piety,  but, 
unlike  him,  the  head  of  a  godly  family 
(Calvin).  Whom  Cain  slew.  Literally,  for 
Cairn,  killed  him  (Kalisch).  The  A.  V. 
follows  the  LXX. ,  &i>  airixTuvi  xa'iv,  and 
has  the.  support  of  Gesenius,  who  renders 
'3  =  ")K>X  (see  '  Lex.  sub  nom.') ;  of  Rosen- 
uriiller,  who  says,  "  Conjunctio  enirn  causalis 
'3  saepius  pro  relativo  pronomine  usnrpatur," 
quoting,  though  without  much  aptness,  Ps. 
lxxi.  15  (com.  in  loco) ;  and  of  Sal.  Glass,  who 
supplies  several  so-called  examples  of  the 
relative  force  of  '3,  every  one  of  which  is 
perfectly  intelligible  by  translating  the  par- 
ticle as  quia  ('Sac.  Phil.,'  iii.  2,  xv.) ;  and 
of  Stanley  Leathes  ('Heb.  Gram.,'  ch.  xii. 
16).  There  seems,  however,  no  sufficient 
reason  for  departing  from  the  ordinary  casual 
signification  of  the  particle.  Fiirst  does 
not  recognise  the  meaning  which  Gesenius 


attaches  to  '3  (cf.  Ewald's  'Heb.  Syntax,' 
§  353).  And  to  Seth,  to  him  also  there  wai 
born  a  son.  Thus  the  expectations  of  Eve 
concerning  her  God-given  son  were  not  dis- 
appointed, but  realised  in  the  commence- 
ment and  continuance  of  a  godly  line.  The 
pious  father  of  this  succeeding  child,  how- 
ever, had  either  begun  to  realise  the  feeble- 
ness and  weakness  of  human  life,  or  perhaps 
to  be  conscious  of  the  sickly  and  infirm  state 
in  which  religion  then  was.  And  he  called 
his  (son's)  name  Enos.  Enosh,  "man" 
(Gesenius) ;  ' '  mortal,  decaying  man  "  (Fiirst) ; 
"man,  sickly"  (Murphy).  Then  began 
men.  Literally,  it  was  begun.  Huchal 
third  preterite  hophal  of-  chalal  (Greek, 
yaXaw,  Xuu),  to  open  a  way.  Hence  "  the 
literal  sense  of  the  word  is,  a  way  was  now . 
opened  up,  and  an  access  afforded,  to  the 
worship  of  God,  in  the  particular  manner 
here  described"  (Wordsworth).  To  call 
upon  the  name  of  the  Lord.  Either  (1)  to 
invoke  by  prayer  the  name  of  Jehovah, 
i.  e.  Jehovah  himself  as  he  had  been  pleased 
to  discover  his  attributes  and  character  to 
men,  referring  to  the  formal  institution  of 
public  worship.  "The  expression  is  else- 
where used  to  denote  all  the  appropriate  acts 
and  exercises  of  the  stated  worship  of  God— 
ch.  xii.  8 ;  xiii.  4  ;  xxi.  33  ;  1  Chron.  xvi.  8  ; 
Ps.  cv.  1 "  (Bush).  Or  (2)  to  call  themselves 
by  the  name  of  Jehovah — cf.  Num.  xxxii.  42; 
Judges  xviii.  29  ;  Ps.  xlix.  12  ;  Isa.  xliv.  6 
(margin).  Other  renderings  need  only  be 
mentioned  to  bo  set  aside,  (a)  Then  began 
men  profanely  to  call  upon  the  name  of  God 
(Onkelos,  Jonathan,  Josephus),  referring  to 
the  institution  of  idolatry.  (o)  Then  men 
became  so  profane  as  to  cease  to  call  (Chaldee 
Targum).  (c)  Then  he  hoped  to  call  upon 
the  name  of  the  Lord  ;  oiroe  rjX-irtotv  limca- 
XtiaBni  rd  ovopa  Kvpiov  rov  Qtov  (LXX). 
(d)  Then  the  name  Jehovah  was  for  the 
first  time  invoked  (Cajetan),  which  is  dia- 
proved  by  ch.  iv.  3. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  17— 26. — The  progress  of  the  race.  I.  Its  increase  in  population.  Starting 
from  a  single  pair  in  Eden,  in  the  course  of  seven  generations  the  human  family 
must  have  attained  to  very  considerable  dimensions.  At  the  birth  of  Seth,  Adam 
was  130  years  old,  and  in  all  probability  had  other  sons  and  daughters  besides  Cain 
and  liia  wife.  If  Lamech,  the  seventh  from  Adam  in  the  line  of  Cain,  was  contem- 
poraneous with  Enoch,  the  seventh  from  Adam  in  the  line  of  Seth,  at  least  600  years 
had  passed  away  since  the  race  began  to  multiply ;  and  "  if  Abraham's  stock  in  lesse 
than  400  yeares  amounted  to  600,000,.  Cain's  posterity  in  the  like  time  might  arise  to 
the  like  multitude  "  (Willet).  If  to  these  the  descendants  of  Seth  be  added,  it  will 
et  once  appear  that  the  earth's  population  in  the  lime  of  Lamech  was  considerably 
over  1 .000,000  of  inhabitants.  Let  it  remind  us  of  the  reality  and  power  of  God's 
Messing  (ch.  i.  28). 

il.  Its  advancement  in  INTELLIOEN^.     "It  is  a  curious  fact  that  while  *fl 


on.  vi  17—26.]  THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS.  M 

modem  writers  admit  the  great  antiquity  of  man,  most  of  them  maintain  the  verj 
recent  development  of  his  intellect,  and  will  hardly  contemplate  the  possibility  of 
men  equal  in  mental  capacity  to  ourselves  having  existed  in  prehistoric  (?)  times ' 
(Wallace,  Brit.  Assoc.  Address,  1876).  For  prehistoric  write  antediluvian,  and  th« 
sentiment  is  exactly  true.  The  circumstance  that  we  have  no  remains  of  antediluviau 
civilisation  is  no  sufficient  evidence  that  such  did  not  exist.  Speaking  of  certain 
earthworks  of  great  antiquity  that  have  been  discovered  in  the  Mississippi  valley,— 
camps,  or  works  of  defence,  sacred  enclosures,  with  their  connected  groups  of  circles, 
octagons,  squares,  ellipses,  polished  and  ornamented  pottery,  &c, — the  same  distin- 
guished writer  says.  "  The  important  thing  for  us  is,  that  when  North  America  was 
first  settled  by  Europeans,  the  Indian  tribes  inhabiting  it  had  no  kno  pledge  or  tradition 
of  any  races  preceding  themselves  of  higher  civilisation.  Yet  we  find  that  such  races 
existed  ;  that  they  must  have  been  populous,  and  have  lived  under  some  established 
government ;  while  there  are  signs  that  they  practised  agriculture  greatly,  •  as 
indeed  they  must  have  done  to  have  supported  a  population  capable  of  executing 
6iich  gigantic  works  in  such  vast  profusion."  The  exhumation  by  Dr.  Schliemann 
on  the  plains  of  Troy  of  three  successive  civilisations,  of  which  two  were  not  known 
to  have  previously  existed,  and  the  third  (the  Ilium  of  Homer)  had  been  almost 
regarded  by  archaeologists  as  fabulous,  is  conclusive  demonstration  that  the  absence 
of  all  traces  of  primeval  civilisation  is  no  more  a  proof  that  such  civilisation  did 
not  exist,  than  is  the  absence  of  all  traces  of  the  third  day's  vegetation  a  proof 
that  it  did  not  exist..  The  passage  under  consideration  unmistakably  reveals  that 
the  human  intellect  in  those  early  times  was  not  asleep.  Within  the  compass  of 
ten  verses  we  read  of  the  building  of  cities,  of  the  laying  out  of  farms  and  the 
acquisition  of  property,  of  the  beginning  of  the  mechanical  arts  and  the  manu- 
facture of  metallic  weapons,  of  the  rise  of  music  and  the  cultivation  of  poetry.  It 
may  strike  one  as  peculiar  that  this  great  intellectual  development  is  represented 
as  taking  place  exclusively  in  the  line  of  Cain.  From  this  some  have  inferred 
that  the  Bible  means  to  throw  disparagement  upon  human  industry,  commercial 
and  agricultural  enterprise,  and  all  kinds  of  mechanical  and  inventive  genius, 
and  even  sanctions  the  idea  that  religion  is  incompatible  with  business  talent, 
poetical  genius,  and  intellectual  greatness.  .  There  is.  however,  no  reason  to  suppose 
that  this  advancement  in  intelligence  was  confined  to  the  Cainitic  branch  of  the 
Adamic  race.  The  prophecy  of  Enoch  (vide  Expos.)  and  the  incidental  allusion  to 
metallic  weapons  in  the  name  of  Methuselah  (man  of  the  dart)  suggest  that  the 
Sethitic  line  kept  pace  with  their  ungodly  contemporaries  in  the  onward  march  of 
civilisation,  though  that  was  not  their  chief  distinction.  Let  us  learn — 1.  That  there 
is  no  essential  antagonism  between  intelligence  and  piety.  2.  That  in  God's  estimation 
righteousness  is  of  much  higher  value  than  material  prosperity.  3.  That  where, 
as  in  the  Cainitic  line,  there  is  no  true  godliness  there  is  apt  to  be  too  intense  devotion 
to  culture  or  business. 

III.  Its  declension  in  wickedness.  1.  We  can  trace  it  in  their  names.  Enoch, 
Irad,  Mehujael,  Lamech  being  suggestive  of  qualities,  principles,  characteristics 
such  as  are  approved  by  the  spirit  of  worldliness;  and  Adah  and  Zillah  (vide 
Expos.)  being  indicative  of  sensual  attractions.  2.  Their  worlcs  proclaim  it.  It 
would  be  wrong  to  say  that  cities  are  necessarily  evil  things.  On  the  contrary,  they 
are  magnificent  monuments  of  man's  constructive  genius,  and  immensely  productive 
of  man's  comfort.  A  city  too  is  a  type  of  heaven's  gathering  of  redeemed  humanity. 
Still  it  cannot  be  doubted  that  the  need  for  cities  was  a  proof  of  sin,  as  the  building 
of  the  first  city  was  an  act  of  sin.  The  acquisition  of  property,  and  the  uprise  of 
such  ideas  as  the  rights  of  property,  are  likewise  indications  of  a  state  of  life 
that  is  not  purely  innocent  (cf.  Acts  iv.  32).  And  though  certainly  it  cannot  be 
sinful  either  to  make  or  to  handle  a  harp,  or  to  cultivate  poetry,  yet  when  we  put 
all  these  things_  together — beautiful  wives,  iron  weapons,  musical  instruments,  and 
warlike  ballads,  if  not  bacchanalian  songs — it  is  not  difficult  to  perceive  a  deepening  of 
that  devotion  to  the  things  of  this  life  which  invariably  proclaims  a  departure  from 
the  life  of  God.  3.  Their  immoral  lives  attest  it.  A  growing  disregard  for  the 
marriage  law  is  evinced  by  the  polygamy  of  Lamech  ;  in  the  manufacture  a«d  use 
of  offensive  weapons  we  see  the  rising  of  a  turbulent  and  lawless  spirit;  ana  these 


92  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  [oh.  it.  17—26. 

two  things,  licentiousness  and  lawlessness,  always  mark  the  downward  progress  of  an 
age  or  people. 

IV.  Its  progress  in  religion  ;  at  least  in  a  section  of  its  population,  the  godly 
line  of  Seth,  in  whom  the  piety  of  Abel  was  revived.  Yet  the  narrative  would  seem 
to  indicate  that  even  they  were  not  entirely  free  from  the  prevailing  wickedness  of 
the  times.  In  the  third  generation  the  pressure  of  the  worldly  spirit  upon  the  com- 
pany of  the  faithful  was  so  great  tiiat  they  felt  obliged,  as  it  were,  in  self-defence, 
to  buttress  their  piety  by  a  double  wall  of  protection ;  viz.,  separation  from  their 
ungodly  associates  in  the  world  by  the  formation  of  a  distinct  religious  community, 
and  by  the  institution  of  stated  social  worship  (ch.  iv.  26).  And  without  these  declen- 
sion in  true  religion  is  as  certain  as  with  them  advancement  is  secure.  They  are  the 
New  Testament  rules  for  the  cultivation  of  piety  (2  Cor.  vi.  14 — 18  j  Ephes.  iv. 
11—13  j  Heb.  x.  25). 

Lessons: — 1.  The  downward  progress  of  sin.  2.  The  danger  of  intellect  and 
civilisation  when  divorced  from  piety.  3.  The  only  right  use  of  earth  and  earthly 
things  is  to  make  all  subservient  to  the  life  of  grace.  4.  The  danger  of  conformity 
to  the  world.  6.  The  only  safety  for  the  people  of  God,  and  especially  in  these  times 
of  great  intellectual  activity  and  mechanical  and  scientific  skill,  is  to  make  deep  and 
wide  the  line  of  distinction  between  them  and  the  world,  and  steadfastly  to  maintain 
the  public  as  well  as  private  ordinances  of  religion. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  16—24. — The  kingdom  of  God  contrasted  with  the  kingdom  of  this  world. 

Society  without  the  Lord.    The  banished  Cain  and  his  descendants. 

I.  Multiplication  apart  from  Divine  order  is  no  blessing. 

IL  Civilisation  without  religion  is  a  chaos  of  conflicting  forces,  producing 
violence,  bloodshed,  working  out  its  own  ruin.  Compare  France  in  the  seventeenth 
and  eighteenth  centuries.  Arts  of  life  may  grow  from  a  mere  natural  root.  Music, 
mechanical  skill,  scientific  discovery,  and  invention,  in  themselves  contain  no  moral 
life.     Luxury  turns  to  corruption,  and  so  to  misery. 

III.  Religion  is  the  basis  of  social. prosperity.  It  is  the  true  defence  against 
the  "  inhumanity  of  man."  Lamech,  with  his  artificial  protection  against  violent 
revenge,  suggests  the  true  safety  in  the  presence  of  the  Lord  and  observance  of  hia 
c  ommandments.  — B. 

Ver.  25,  26. — Revelation  in  history.  The  reappearance  of  the  redeeming  pur- 
pose. The  consecrated  family  of  Adam.  The  Divinely  blessed  line  of  descent  pre- 
served leading  onward  to  the  fulfilment  of  the  first  promise.  "  Then  began  men 
to  call  upon  the  name  of  Jehovah." 

I.  The  commencement  of  regular  worship,  possibly  of  distinct  Church  life.  1. 
The  name  of  the  Lord  is  the  true  centre  of  fellowship — including  revelation,  redemp- 
tion, promise.  2.  The  pressure  of  outward  calamity  and  danger,  the  multiplication  of 
the  unbelievers,  the  necessary  separation  from  an  evil  world,  motives  to  call  upon  God. 

II.  Renovation  and  re-establishment  of  religious  life  works  out  God'b 
blessing  ON  the  race.  The  separated  seed  bears  the  promise  of  the  future.  See 
the  repetition  of  the  message  of  grace  in  the  names  of  the  descendants  of  Seth,  "thd 
appointed." 

III.  The  worship  which  was  maintained  by  men  was  encouraged  and  developed 
by  revelations  and  special  communications  from  Jehovah.  Probably  there  were 
prophets  sent.  Methuselah,  taking  up  the  ministry  of  Enoch,  and  himself  delivering 
the'  message  to  Noah,  the  preacher  of  righteousness.  It  is  the  method  of  God 
throughout  all  the  dispensations  to  meet  men's  call  upon  his  name  with  gra'uous 
manifestations  to  them. 

IV.  The  period  of  awakened  religious  life  and  of  special  messengers,  culminat- 
ing in  the  long  testimony  and  warning  of  Noah,  preceded  the  period  of  outpoured 
judgment.  So  it  is  universally.  There  is  no  manifestation  of  wrath  which  does  not 
vindicate  righteousness.  He  is  long-suffering,  and  waits.  He  sends  the  spirit  of  lift 
first'    Then  the  angel  of  death.— R. 


ch.  v.  1—38.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


95 


\  3.  The  Generations  of  Adam  (ch.  v.  1 — ti.  8). 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  T. 
The  present  section  carries  forward  the 
inspired  narrative  another  stage,  in  which 
the  onward  progress  or  development  of  the 
human  race  is  traced,  in  the  holy  line  of 
Seth,  from  the  day  of  Adam's  creation, 
through  ten  successive  generations,  till  the 
point  is  reached  when  the  first  great  experi- 
ment of  attempting  to  save  man  by  clemency 
rather  than  by  punishment  is  brought  to  a 
termination,  and  Jehovah,  whose  mercy  has 
been  spurned  and  abused,  determines  to 
destroy  the  impenitent  transgressors.  First, 
in  brief  and  somewhat  monotonous  outline, 
the  lives  of  the  ten  patriarchs  are  sketched, 
scarcely  more  being  recorded  of  them  than 
simply  that  they  were  born,  grew  to  man- 
hood, married  wives,  begat  children,  and 
then  died.  In  only  two  instances  does  the 
history  diverge  from  this  severely  simple  style 
of  biographical  narration,  namely,  in  the 
cases  of  Enoch,  who,  as  he  eclipsed  his 
predecessors,  contemporaries,  and  successors 
in  the  elevation  of  his  piety  during  life,  was 
honoured  above  them  in  the  mode  of  his 
departure  from  the  earth ;  and  of  Noah, 
whose  birth  was  welcomed  by  his  parents 
as  a  happy  omen  in  a  time  of  social  degener- 
acy and  religious  declension,  but  wno  lived 
to  see  the  hopes  of  reform  which  his  pious 
parents  cherished  disappointed,  and  the 
world  for  its  wickedness  overwhelmed  by 
a  flood.  Then,  after  sketching  the  unevent- 
ful lives  of  the  patriarchs  in  a  few  bold 
strokes,  the  sacred  penman  sets  before  us 
a  vividly  arresting  and  profoundly  impressive 
picture  of  the  wickedness  of  the  human  race 
on  the  eve  of  that  appalling  catastrophe,  at 
once  indicating  the  cause  of  the  earth's 
degeneracy  in  morals,  and  representing  that 
degeneracy  as  a  sufficient  justification  for 
the  threatened  judgment.  Throughout  the 
genealogical  register  the  name  Elohim  is 
employed  to  designate  the  Deity,  the  subject 
being  the  evolutions  of  the  Adam  who  was 
created  in  the  image  of  Elohim.  In  the 
paragraph  depicting  the  growth  of  immoral- 


ity among  men,  and  recording  the  Divina 
resolution  to  destroy  man,  the  name  Jehovah 
is  used,  the  reason  being  that  in  his  sin  and 
in  his  punishment  man  is  viewed  in  his  rela- 
tions to  the  God  of  redemption  and  grace. 

Vers.  1,  2.— This  is  the  book.  Sepher, 
a  register,  a  complete  writing  of  any  kind, 
a  book,  whether  consisting  of  a  pair  of  leaves 
or  of  only  a  single  leaf  (Deut.  xxiv.  1,3;  "a 
bill  of  divorcement;"  LXX.,  f3i(3\oc;  cf. 
Matt.  i.  1  ;  Luke  iii.  36,  38).  The  expres- 
sion presupposes  the  invention  of  the  art 
of  writing.  If,  therefore,  we  may  conjecture 
that  the  original  compiler  of  this  ancient 
document  was  Noah,  than  whom  no  one 
would  be  more  likely  or  better  qualified 
than  he  to  preserve  some  memorial  of  the 
lost  race  of  which  he  and  his  family  were  the . 
sole  survivors,  it  affords  an  additional  corro- 
boration of  the  intelligence  and  culture  of 
the  antediluvian  men.  It  is  too  frequently 
taken  for  granted  that  the  people  who  couLl 
build  cities,  invent  musical  instruments,  and 
make  sengs  were  unacquainted  with  the 
art  of  writing ;  and  though  certainly  we 
cannot  affirm  that  the  transmission  of  such 
a  family  register  as  is  here  recorded  was 
beyond  the  capabilities  of  oral  tradition,  it 
is  obvious  that  its  preservation  would  be 
much  more  readily  secured  by  some  kind  of 
documentary  notation.  Of  the  generations 
— i.  e.  evolutions  (tol'doth ;  cf.  ch.  ii.  i) — of 
Adam.  In  the  preceding  section  the  tol'doth 
of  the  heavens  and  the  earth  were  exhibited, 
and  accordingly  the  narrative  commenced 
with  the  creative  labours  of  the  third  day. 
Here  the  historian  designs  to  trace  the 
fortunes  of  the  holy  seed,  and  finds  the  point 
of  his  departure  in  the  day  that  God 
(Elohim)  created  man  (Adam),  i.  e.  the 
sixth  of  the  creative  days.  More  particularly 
he  calls  attention  to  the  great  truths  which 
had  been  previously  included  in  his  teaching 
concerning  man ;  viz. ,  the  dignity  of  his 
nature,  implied  in  the  fact  that  in  the  like- 
ness of  Elohim  made  he  him ;  his  sexual 
distinction — male  and  female  created  he 
them ;  their  Divine  benediction  -  and  blessed 
them  (cf.  ch.  i.  27,  28) ;  at  the  same  time 
adding  a  fourth  circumstance,  which  in  the 
first  document  was  not  narrated,  that  their 
Maker  gave  to  them  a  wi'able  and  specific 
appellation— tad.  called  their  name  Adam 
(vide  ch.  L  26),  in  the  Jay  when  they  wars 
oreaUd. 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  v.  1—38. 


Vera.  8 — 5. — At  the  head  of  the  Adamic 
race  stands  the  first  man,  whose  career  is 
summarised  in  three  short  verses,  which 
serve  as  a  model  for  the  subsequent  bio- 
graphies. And  Adam  lived  an  hundred  and 
thirty  years.  Shanah,  a  repetition,  a 
return  of  the  sun's  circuit,  or  of  similar 
natural  phenomena ;  from  shanah,  to  fold 
together,  to  repeat ;  hence  a  year  (Gesenius, 
Fiirst).  Cf. 'Latin,  annus ;  Greek,  iviavroc  ; 
Gothic,  iar,jar,jer;  German,  jahr;  English, 
year — all  of  which  "  seem  to  carry  the  same 
thought,  viz. ,  that  which  comes  again  "  (T. 
Lewis).  "Shanah  never  means  month" 
(Kalisch).  And  begat  a  son  in  his  own 
likeness, — darnuth  (cf.  ch.  i.  26)— after  his 
image  —  tselem  (cf.  ch.  i.  26)  ;  not  the 
Divine  image  in  which  he  was  himself 
created  (Kalisch,  Knobel,  Alford),  but  the 
image  or  likeness  of  his  own  fallen  nature, 
i.  e.  the  image  of  God  modified  and  corrupted 
by  sin  (Keil,  Murphy,  Wordsworth).  "A 
supernatural  remedy  does  not  prevent  gener- 
ation from  participating  in  the  corruption 
of  sin.  Therefore,  according  to  the  flesh 
Seth  was  born  a  sinner,  though  he  was 
afterwards  renewed  by  the  Spirit  of  grace" 
(Calvin).  The  doctrine  of  inherited  deprav- 
ity or  transmitted  sin  has  been  commonly 
held  to  favour  the  theory  which  accounts  for 
the  origin  of  the  human  soul  per  traducem 
(Tertullian,  Luther,  Delitzsch),  in  opposition 
to  that  which  holds  it  to  be  due  to  the 
creative  power  of  God  (Jerome,  Augustine, 
Calvin,  Beza,  Turretin).  Kalisch  thinks 
the  statement  "Adam  begat  Seth  in  his 
own  image  "  decisive  in  favour  of  Traducian- 
ism,  while  Hodge  affirms  "it  only  asserts 
that  Seth  was  like  his  father,  and  sheds  no 
light  on  the  mysterious  process  of  genera- 
tion" ('Syst.  Theol.,'  Part  I.  ch.  iii.  §  2). 
The  truth  is  that  Scripture  seems  to  recognise 
both  sides  of  this  question.  Vide  Ps.  li.  6 
in  favour  of  Traducianism,  and  Ps.  cxxxix. 
14 — 16  ;  Jer.  i  5  in  support  of  Creationism 
(cf.  Martensen's  '  Dogmatics,'  §  74),  though 
there  is  much  force  in  the  words  of  Augus- 
tine— "  De  re  obscurissima  disnutatur,  non 
adjuvantibus  divinarum  scripturarum  certis 
clarisque  documentis."  And  called  bis 
name — probably  concurring  in  the  name 
selected  by  Eve  (ch.  iv.  25) — Seth.— Ap- 
pointed, placed,  substituted ;  hence  com- 
pensation (ch.  iv.  25).  And  the  days  of 
Adam  after  he  had  begotten  —  literally, 
his  begetting — Seth  were  eight  hundred 
years:  and  he  begat  sons  and  daughters. 
"  In  that  primitive  time  the  births  did  not 
rapidly  follow  each  other — a  fact  which  had 
not  a  physical,  but  only  an  ethical  ground  " 
(Delitzsch).  The  comparatively  mature  age 
»i  which  the  parent  begat  the  son  (in  most 
instances  probably  the  firstborn)  through 
whom  the  promise  was  transmitted  seems 


to  indicate  that  his  having  a  posterity  at  all 
was  conditioned  by  the  ripeness  of  his  faith. 
At  the  same  time  the  lateness  of  paternity 
among  these  primeval  men  may  have  been 
partly  due  to  a  physical  cause  as  well,  "  since 
in  exact  accordance  with  the  increasing 
degeneracy  and  rankness  of  human  life  is 
there,  in  a  literal  sense,  the  increase  of  a 
numerous  and  wretched  offspring"  (Lange). 
And  all  the  days  that  Adam — not  the  whole 
tribe  (Gatterer,  vide  Bohlen  ;  cf.  Balgarnie, 
'Expositor,'  vol.  viii. ),  "as  in  this  case 
Enoch  must  have  been  taken  to  heaven 
with  his  whole  family "  (Kalisch) ;  but 
the  individual  bearing  that  name  —  lived 
were  nine  hundred  and  thirty  years.  The 
remarkable  longevity  of  the  Macrobii  has 
been  explained  —  1.  On  the  supposition 
of  its  non-authenticity.  (1)  As  a  purely 
mythical  conception  (Knobel,  Bauer,  Hart- 
mann,  Bohlen);  which,  however,  may  be 
safely  rejected  as  an  altogether  inadequate 
hypothesis.  (2)  As  due  to  an  error  in  the 
traditional  transmission  of  the  genealogical 
registers,  several  names  having  fallen  out, 
leaving  their  years  to  be  reckoned  to  those 
that  remained  (Rosenmuller) ;  but  against 
this  conjecture  stands  the  orderly  succession 
of  father  and  son  through  ten  generations. 
(3)  As  representing  not  the  lifetimes  of  indi- 
viduals, but  dynastic  epochs  (vide  supra) ; 
and  (4)  as  signifying  lesser  spaces  of  time — 
e.g.  three  months  (Hensler),  or  one  month 
(Raske) — than  solar  years  ;  but  even  Knobel 
admits  that  "  no  shorter  year  have  the  He- 
brews ever  had  than  the  period  of  a  year's 
time. "  2.  On  the  basis  of  its  historic  credi- 
bility ;  as  attributable  to — (1)  The  original 
immortality  with  which  man  was  endowed 
and  which  was  now  being  frayed  away  by 
the  inroads  of  sin  (Kalisch).  (2)  The  supe- 
rior piety  and  intelligence  of  these  early 
fathers  of  the  race  (Josephus,  'Antiq.,'  I. 
iii.  9).  (3)  The  influence  of  the  fruit  of  the 
tree  of  life  which,  while  in  the  garden, 
Adam  ate  (Whately,  'Ency.  Brit.,'  eighth 
ed.,  Art.  Christianity).  (4)  The  original 
vigour  of  their  physical  constitutions,  and 
the  greater  excellence  of  the  food  on  which 
they  lived  (Willet).  But  if  the  first  and 
second  opinions  are  correct,  then  the  Cainites 
should  have  died  earlier  than  the  Sethites, 
which  there  is  no  reason  to  believe  they 
did ;  while  the  third  is  a  pure  conjecture 
(vide  ch.  ii  9),  and  the  fourth  may  contain 
some  degree  of  truth.  We  prefer  to  ascribe 
the  longevity  of  these  antediluvian  men  to  a 
distinct  exercise  of  grace  on  the  part  of  God, 
who  designed  it  to  be  (!)  a  proof  of  the 
Divine  clemency  in  suspending  the  penalty 
of  sin ;  (2)  a  symbol  of  that  immortality 
which  had  been  recovered  for  men  by  th« 
promise  of  the  woman's  seed ;  and  (3)  a 
medium  of  transmission  for  the  faith,  fei 


m.  r.  1—32.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


91 


the  benefit  of  both  the  Church  and  the  world. 
And  he  died.  "The  solemn  toll  of  the 
patriarchal  funeral  bell "  (Bonar).  Its  con- 
stant rscurrence  at  the  close  of  each  biography 
proves  the  dominion  of  death  from  Adam 
onward,  as  an  immutable  law  (Rom.  ▼.  11 ; 
Baumgarten,  Keil,  Lange) ;  _"  warns  us  that 
death  was  not  denounced  in  vain  against 
men"  (Calvin);  "is  a  standing  demonstra- 
tion of  the  effect  of  disobedience"  (Murphy) ; 
"was  intended  to  show  what  the  condition 
of  all  mankind  was  after  Adam's  fall " 
CWillet).  The  expression  is  not  appended 
to  the  genealogical  list  of  the  Fathers  after 
the  Flood,  doubtless  as  being  then  sufficiently 
understood ;  and  it  is  not  said  of  the  descend- 
ants of  Cain  that  they  died,  "as  if  the  in- 
heritance of  the  sons  of  God  were  not  here 
on  earth,  but  in  death,  as  the  days  of  the 
deaths  of  martyrs  are  held  in  honour  by  the 
Church  as  their  birthdays  "  (Wordsworth). 

Vers.  6 — 20. — The  lives  of  the  succeeding 
patriarchs  are  framed  upon  the  model  of  this 
Adamic  biography,  and  do  not  call  for 
separate  notice.  The  names  of  the  next  six 
were  Seth  (ver.  6 ;  vide  ch.  iv.  25)  ;  Enos  (ver. 
9;  vide  ch.  iv.  26) ;  Cainan,  possession  (Gese- 
nius)  ;  a  child,  one  begotten  (Fiirst);  a  created 
thing,  a  creature,  a  young  man  (Ewald)  ; 
possessor,  or  spoarsman  (Murphy ;  ver.  12)  ; 
Mahalaleel,  praise  of  God  (Gesenius,  Fiirst, 
Murphy  ;  ver.  15) ;  Jared,  descent  (Gesenius); 
low  ground,  water,  or  marching  down  (Fiirst) ; 
going  down  (Murphy;  ver.  18);  Enoch,  dedi- 
cated, initiated  (ver.  19 ;  cf.  ch.  iv.  17) 

Ver.  21.  —  The  dedicated  and  initiated 
child  grew  up,  like  an  Old  Testament  Timothy 
let  us  hope,  to  possess,  illustrate,  and  pro- 
claim the  piety  which  was  the  distinguishing 
characteristic  of  the  holy  line.  At  the  compar- 
atively early  age  of  sixty-five  he  begat  ("  for- 
bidding to  many "  being  unknown  then) 
Methuselah.  Man  of  a  dart  (Gesenius),  man 
of  military  arms  (Fiirst),  man  of  the  missile 
(Murphy),  man  of  the  sending  forth — sc.  of 
water  (Wordsworth),  man  of  growth  (De- 
litzsch).  And  Enoch  walked  with  God 
(Elohim).  The  phrase,  used  also  of  Noah, 
(ch.  vi  9),  and  by  Micah  (ch.  vi.  8.  Cf.  the 
similar  expressions,  "to  walk  before  God," 
ch.  xvii.  1 ;  Ps.  cxvl  9,  and  "  to  walk  after 
God,"  Deut.  xiii.  4 ;  Ephes.  v.  1),  portrays 
a  life  of  singularly  elevated  piety;  not  merely 
a  constant  realisation  of  the  Divine  presence, 
or  even  a  perpetual  effort  at  hply  obedience, 
but  also  "a  maintenance  of  the  most  con- 
fidential intercourse  with  the  personal  God  " 
(Keil).  It  implies  a  situation  of  nearness  to 
God,  if  not  in  place  at  least  in  spirit ;  a 
character  of  likeness  to  God  (Amos  iii.  3), 
end  a  life  of  converse  with  God.  Following 
the  LXX.  (fitipiarrioi  Si  'Ev&x  Tip  Se^j"),  the 
writer  to  the  Hebrews  describes  it  as  a  life 
that  was  "jleasing  to  God,"  as  springing 


from  the  root  of  faith  (Hob.  xi.  5).  Yet 
though  pre-eminently  spiritual  and  contem- 
plative, Jude  tells  us  (vers.  14, 15)  the  patri- 
arch's life  had  its  active  and  aggressive  out- 
look towards  the  evil  times  in  which  he  lived. 
After  he  begat  Methuselah.  "  Which  inti 
mates  that  he  did  not  begin  to  be  eminent 
for  piety  till  about  that  time  ;  at  first  he 
walked  as  other  men  "  (Henry).  Procopius 
Gazeus  goes  beyond  this,  and  thinks  that 
before  his  son's  birth  Enoch  was  "a  wicked 
liver,"  but  then  repented.  The  historian's 
language,  however,  does  not  necessarily  im- 
ply that  his  piety  was  so  late  in  commencing, 
and  it  is  more  pleasing  to  think  that  from 
his  youth  upwards  he  was  "as  a  shining 
star  for  virtue  and  holiness  "  (Willet).  Three 
hundred  years.  As  his  piety  began  early,  so 
likewise  did  it  continue  long ;  it  was  not 
intermittent  and  fluctuating,  but  steadfast 
and  persevering  (cf.  Job  xvii.  9  ;  Prov.  iv. 
18  ;  1  Cor.  xv.  58).  And  begat  sons  and 
daughters.  "  Hence  it  is  undeniably  evident 
that  the  state  and  use  of  matrimony  doth 
very  well  agree  with  the  severest  course  of 
holiness,  and  with  the  office  of  a  prophet  or 
preacher"  (Poole).  And  all  the  days  ol 
Enoch  were  three  hundred  and  Bixty-five 
years.  "  Ayear  of  years"  (Henry)  ;  "the 
same  period  as  that  of  the  revolution  of  the 
earth  round  the  sun.  After  he  had  finished 
his  course,  revolving  round  him  who  is  the 
true  light,  which  is  God,  in  the  orbit  of  durj, 
he  was  approved  by  God,  and  taken  to  him  " 
(Wordsworth).  Modern  critics  have  dis- 
covered in  the  age  of  Enoch  traces  of  a 
mythical  origin.  They  conclude  the  entire 
list  of  names  to  be  not  older  than  the  time 
of  the  Babylonian  Nabonassar,  and  believe 
it  to  be  not  improbable  that  "the  Babylo- 
nians regulated  the  calendar  with  the  assist- 
ance of  an  Indian  astrologer  or  qanaka 
(arithmetician)  of  the  town  of  Chanoge"  (Von 
Bbhlen).  But  "  it  would  be  strange  indeed 
if  just  in  the  life  of  Enoch,  which  represents 
the  purest  and  sublimest  unity  with  God,  a 
heathen  and  astrological  element  were  inten- 
tionally introduced;"  and,  besides,  "it  is 
almost  generally  admitted  that  our  list  con- 
tains no  astronomical  numbers  ;  that  the 
years  which  it  specifies  refer  to  the  lives  of 
individuals,  not  to  periods  of  the  world ;  and 
that  none  of  all  these  figures  is  in  any  way 
reducible  to  a  chronological  system "  (Ka- 
lisch).  And  Enoch  walked  with  God.  "  Non 
otiosa  ravToXoyla,"  but  an  emphatic  repeti- 
tion, indicative  of  the  ground  of  what  follows. 
And  he  was  not.  Literally,  and  not  he  (cf. 
ch.  xii.  36  ;  Jer.  xxxi  15  ;  cat  o«x  liipia- 
«ro,  LXX.).  "Not  absolutely  he  was  not. 
but  relatively  he  was  not  extant  in  the  spher» 
of  sense."  "  Non  ampliiw  inter  niortalej 
apparuit"(Roseamiiller).  "If  tt  is  phrase  doe* 
not  denote  annihilation,  much  less  does  th* 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[oh.  t.  1— Si 


pbrase  'and  he  died.'  The  one  denotes 
tbsence  from  the  world  of  sense,  and  the 
other  indicates  the  ordinary  way  in  which 
the  soul  departs  from  this  world"  (Murphy). 
For  God  (Elohim)  took  him.     Cf.  2  Kings 

ii.  8,  5,  9,  10,  where  the  same  word  n|2J  is 
nsed  of  Elijah's  translation  ;  on  iiiTeSrjKiv 
avrbv  b  0eoc,  LXX.).  Though  the  writer  to 
the  Hebrews  (ch.  xi.  5)  adopts  the  paraphrase 
of  the  LXX.,  yet  his  language  must  be  ac- 
cepted as  conveying  the  exact  sense  of  the 
words  of  Moses.  Analysed,  it  teaches  (1) 
chat  the  patriarch  Enoch  did  not  see  death, 
as  did  all  the  other  worthies  in  the  catalogue; 
and  (2)  that  in  some  mysterious  way  "  he 
was  taken  up  from  thi3  temporal  life  and 
transfigured  into  life  eternal,  as  those  of  the 
faithful  will  be  who  shall  be  alive  at  the 
coming  of  Christ  to  judgment"  (Keil).  The 
case  of  Elijah,  who  was  also  taken  up,  and 
who  afterwards  appeared  in  glory  on  the 
mount  of  transfiguration  (Matt.  xvii. ;  Mark 
ix.  ;  Luke  ix.),  appears  to  determine  the  local- 
ity into  which  Enoch  was  translated  (which 
Kalisch  willingly  leaves  to  antiquaries  to 
decide)  to  be  neither  the  terrestrial  Eden 
(certain  Popish  writers)  nor  the  heavenly 
paradise  where  the  pious  dead  are  now  as- 
sembled— sheol  (Delitzsch  and  Lange),  but 
.  the  realm  of  celestial  glory  (Keil).  That  the 
departure  of  the  good  man  was  witnessed  by 
his  contemporaries  we  may  infer  from  what 
occurred  in  the  case  of  Elijah  ;  and,  indeed, 
unless  it  had  been  so  it  is  difficult  to  see  how 
it  could  have  served  the  end  for  which 
apparently  it  was  designed,  which  was  not 
solely  to  reward  Enoch's  piety,  but  to  de- 
monstrate the  certainty  and  to  stimulate 
the  hope  of  immortality.  That  the  memory 
of  an  event  so  remarkable  should  have  sur- 
vived not  merely  in  Jewish  (Ecclus.  xliv.  16) 
and  Christian  tradition  (Jude  15),  but  also 
in  heathen  fable,  is  nothing  marvellous. 
The  Book  of  Enoch,  compiled  probably  by  a 
Jew  in  the  days  of  Herod  the  Great,  describes 
the  patriarch  as  exhorting  his  son  Methuselah 
and  all  his  contemporaries  to  reform  their 
»vil  ways  ;  as  penetrating  with  his  prophetic 
bye  into  the  remote  future,  and  exploring  all 
mysteries  in  earth  and  heaven;  as  passing  a 
retired  life  after  the  birth  of  his  eldest  son 
in  intercourse  with  the  angels  and  in  medi- 
tation on  Divine  matters;  and  as  at  length 
jeing  translated  to  heaven  in  order  to  re- 
appear in  the  time  of  the  Messiah,  leaving 
behind  him  a  number  of  writings  on  religion 
and  morality.  "  The  Book  of  Jubilees  relates 
that  he  was  carried  into  paradise,  where  he 
writes  down  the  judgment  of  all  men,  their 
wickedness  and  eternal  punishment "  (Ka- 
lisch). Arabic  legend  declares  him  to  have 
been  the  inventor  of  writing  and  arithmetic. 
The  Phrygian  sage  Annaous  (  Aiokoc:  "nomen 
detortum  ab  Chanoch  ")  is  said  by  Stephanus 


Byzantinus,  and  Suidas,  who  corrupts  th* 
name  into  Nannacus,  to  have  lived  before 
the  flood  of  Deucalion,  to  have  attained  an 
age  of  more  than  300  years,  to  have  foreseen 
the  flood,  gathered  all  the  people  into  a 
temple  and  made  supplication  to  God,  and 
finally  to  have  been  translated  into  heaven. 
"  Classical  writers  also  mention  such  trans- 
lations into  heaven ;  they  assign  this  dis- 
tinction among  others  to  Hercules,  to  Gany- 
mede, and  to  Romulus  (liv.  L  16  :  "nee deinde 
in  terris  fuit  ").  But  it  was  awarded  to  them 
either  for  their  valour  or  their  physical 
beauty,  and  not,  as  the  translation  of  Enoch, 
for  "a  pious  and  religious  life."  Nor  is 
"  the  idea  of  a  translation  to  heaven  limited 
to  the  old  world ;  it  was  familiar  to  the 
tribes  of  Central  America  ;  the  chronicles  of 
Guatemala  record  four  progenitors  of  mankind 
who  were  suddenly  raised  to  heaven  ;  and  the 
documents  add  that  those  first  men  came  to 
Guatemala  from  the  other  side  of  the  sea, 
from  the  East "  (cf.  Rosenmiiller  and  Kalisch, 
in  loco). 

Vers.  25— 32.— The  shortest  life  was  fol- 
lowed by  the  longest,  Metlmselah  begetting, 
at  the  advanced  age  of  187,  Lameon,— strong 
or  young  man  (Gesenius) ;  overthrower,  wild 
man  (Fiirst);  man  of  prayer  (Murphy),— con- 
tinuing after  his  son's  birth  782  years,  and  at 
last  succumbing  to  the  stroke  of  death  in  the 
969th  year  of  his  age,  the  year  of  the  Flood. 
Lamech,  by  whom  the  line  was  carried  for- 
ward, was  similarly  far  advanced  when  hs 
begat  a  son,  at  tlie  age  of  182,  and  called 
his  name  Noah, — "  rest,"  from  -nuach,  to 
rest  (cf.  ch.  viii.  4), —  not  "The  Sailor," 
from  the  Latin  no,  and  the  Greek  »af'{ 
(Bohlen),  but  at  the  same  time  explaining 
it  by  saying,  This  same  shall  comfort — na- 
cham,  to  pant,  groan,  Piel  to  comfort 
"  Nuach  and  nacham  are  stems  not  imme- 
diately connected,  but  they  both  point  back 
to  a  common  root,  nch,  signifying  to  sigh, 
breathe,  rest,  lie  down  "  (Murphy) — us  con- 
cerning our  work  and  toil  of  our  hands. 
To  say  that  Lamech  anticipated  nothing 
more  than  that  the  youthful  Noah  would 
assist  him  in  the  cultivation  of  the  soil 
(Murphy)  is  to  put  too  little  into,  and  to 
allege  that  "  this  prophecy  his  father  uttered 
of  him,  as  he  that  should  be  a  figure  of 
Christ  in  his  building  of  the  ark,  and  offer- 
ing of  sacrifice,  whereby  God  smelled  a  sweet 
savour  of  rest,  and  said  he  would  not  curse 
the  ground  any  more  for  man's  sake,  ch.  viii. 
21  "  (Ainsworth),  is  to  extract  too  much  from 
his  language.  Possibly  he  had  nothing  but 
a  dim,  vague  expectation  of  some  good  thing — 
the  destruction  of  sinners  in  the  Flood  (Cnry- 
sostom),  the  use  of  the  plough  (R.  Solomon ), 
the  grant  of  animal  food  (Kalisch),  the  inven- 
tion of  the  arts  and  implements  of  husbandry 
(Sherlock,  Bush) — that   God   was   about   to 


ch.  v.  1—32.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


91 


bestow  upon  his  weary  heritage  ;  or  at  most 
a  hope  that  the  promise  would  be  fulfilled  in 
his  son's  day  (Bonar),  if  not  in  his  son  him- 
self (Calovius).  The  fulfilment  of  that  pro- 
mise he  connects  with  a  retail  of  the  penal 
curse  which  Jehovah  had  pronounced  upon 
the  soil.  Because  of  the  ground  which  the 
Lord — Jehovah,  by  whom  the  curse  had 
been  pronounced  (ch.  iii.  17)—  hath  cursed. 
The  clause  is  not  a  Jehovistic  interpolation 
(Bleek,  Davidson,  Colenso),  but  a  proof 
"  that  the  Elohistic  theory  is  unfounded  " 
('  Speaker's  Commentary '). 

Ver.  32. — And  Noah  was  five  hundred 
years  old.  Literally,  a  son  of  500  years, 
i.  e.  going  in  his  500th  year  (cf.  ch.  vii.  6  ; 
xvii.  1).  The  "son  of  a  year"  (Exod.  xii. 
5)  means  "strictly  within  the  first  year  of 
"  the  life  "  (Ainsworth).  And  Noah  hegat — 
i.  e.  began  to  beget  (cf.  ch.  xi.  2ff)— Shem, 
—  name  (Gesenius),  fame  (Furst) — Ham, 
—cham;  hot  (Gesenius,  Murphy),  dark- 
coloured  (Furst)  ^-  and  Japheth— spreading 
(Gesenius,  Murphy) ;  beautiful,  denoting  the 
white-coloured  race  (Furst).  That  the  sons 
are  mentioned  in  the  order  of  their  ages 
(Knobel,  Kalisch,  Keil,  Colenso)  may  seem 
to  he  deducible  (1)  from  the  fact  that  they 
usually  stand  in  this  order  (cf.  ch.  vi.  10  ; 
vii.  13  ;  ix.  18 ;  x.  1 ;  1  Chron.  i.  4)  ;  (2) 
from  the  circumstance  that  it  is  commonly 
the  eldest  son's  birth  which  is  stated  in  the 
preceding  list,  though  this  is  open  to  doubt ; 
(3)  from  ch.  x.  21,  which,  according  to  Cal- 
vin, Knobel,  Keil,  and  others,  describes  Shem 
as  Japheth's  elder  brother ;  and  ch.  ix.  24, 
which,  according  to  Keil,  affirms  Ham  to  be 


the  younger  son  of  Noah ;  (4)  from  ch.  x. 
2 — 31,  in  which  the  order  is  reversed,  but 
not  otherwise  altered.  But  there  is  reason 
to  believe  that  Japheth  was  the  eldest  and 
Ham  the  youngest  of  the  patriarch's  children 
(Michaelis,  Clarke,  Murphy,  Wordsworth, 
Quarry).  According  to  ch.  xi.  10  Shem  was 
born  97  years  hefore  the  Flood,  while  (ch.  vi. 
11)  Noah  was  600  years  old  xt  the  time  of 
the  Flood.  Hence,  if  Noah  began  to  beget 
children  in  his  500th  year,  and  Shem  was  born 
in  Noah's  503rd  year,  the  probability  is  that 
the  firstborn  son  was  Japheth.  In  accord- 
ance with  this  ch.  x.  21  is  understood  by 
LXX.,  Vulgate,  Michaelis,  Lange,  Quarry, 
and  others  to  assert  the  priority  in  respect 
of  age  of  Japheth.  In  the  narrative  Shem 
is  placed  first  as  being  spiritually,  though 
not  physically,  the  firstborn.  Ranke  per- 
ceives in  the  mention  of  the  three  sons  an 
indication  that  each  was  subsequently  "to 
lay  the  foundation  of  a  new  beginning. " 

The  antiquity  of  man. — The  chronology 
of  the  present  chapter  represents  -man  as 
having  been  in  existence  at  the  time  of  the 
Deluge  exactly  1656  years.  According  to 
the  Septuagint,  which  Josephus  follows  ex- 
cept m  one  particular  (the  age  of  Lamech): 
and  which  proceeds,  again  with  two  excep- 
tions (the  age  of  Jared,  which  it  leaves  un- 
touched, and  that  of  Lamech,  which  it  in- 
creases by  six),  upon  the  principle  of  adding 
100  to  the  Hebrew  numbers,  the  age  of  c.au 
at  the  date  of  that  catastrophe  was  2262  (vidt 


Hebrew. 

Samaritan. 

Septu 

AOINT. 

Josephus. 

Age.  at 

Ago 

Age  at 

Age 

Age  at 

Age 

Age  at 

Age 

son's 

at 

sou's 

at 

son's 

at 

son's 

a*. 

birth. 

death. 

birth. 

death. 

birth. 

death. 

birth. 

death 

Adam 

130 

930 

130 

9:J0 

230 

930 

230 

930 

Seth 

105 

912 

105 

912 

205 

912 

205 

912 

Enos 

90 

905 

90 

905 

190 

905 

190 

905 

Cainan 

70 

910 

70 

910 

170 

910 

170 

910 

Maiialaleel 

65 

895 

65 

895 

165 

895 

165 

895 

J  a  tied 

162 

962 

62 

847 

162 

962 

162 

362 

Enoch 

65 

365 

65 

365 

165 

365 

165 

365 

Methuselah 

187 

969 

67 

720 

187 

969 

187 

969 

Lamech 

182 

777 

53 

653 

188 

753 

182 

777 

Noah 

500 

950 

500 

950 

500 

950 

500 

950 

Shem 

100 

100 

100 

100 

Deluge 

1656 

1307 

2262 

2256 

Chronological  Table).  The  dates  of  the 
Samaritan  Pentateuch,  being  manifestly  in- 
correct, need  not  be  considered.  Adding  to 
Ike  ahove  dates  the  subsequent  chronological 
periods  from  the  Deluge  to  the  call  of  Abram 
(Hebrew,  367;  LXX.,  1017),  from  the  call 
OBHBSIB. 


of  Ahram  to  the  exodus  from  Egypt  ^430 
years  according  to  one  calculation,  LXX.  ; 
730  according  to  another,  Kalisch),  from 
the  exodus  to  the  birth  of  Christ  (1648, 
Hales;  1593,  Jackson  ;  1491,  Ussher;  1531, 
Petavius ;  1820,  Bunsen),  the  antiquity  «* 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


[oh.  v.  1—32. 


man,  according  to  the  Biblical  account,  is 
aot  less  than  5652  and  not  more  than  7536 
years.  The  conclusion  thus  reached,  how- 
ever, is  somewhat  scornfully  repudiated  by 
modern  science,  as  affording,  on  either  alter- 
native, an  altogether  inadequate  term  of 
existence  for  the  human  race.  1.  The  evi- 
dence of  geology  is  supposed  irrefragably  to 
attest  that  man  must  have  been  upon  the 
earth  at  least  1000  centuries,  and  probably 
ten  times  as  long  (Wallace  on  'Natural 
Selection,'  p.  303).  The  data  for  this  deduc- 
tion, as  stated  by  Sir  Charles  Lyell,  are 
chiefly  the  discovery,  in  recent  and  post- 
pliocene  formations  of  alleged  great  antiquity, 
of  fossil  human  remains  and  flint  implements 
along  with  bones  of  the  mammoth  and  other 
animals  long  since  extinct  ('Antiquity  of 
Man,'  chs.  i. — xix.).  But  (1)  "  So  far  as 
research  has  been  prosecuted  in  the  different 
quarters  of  the  globe,  no  remains  of  man  or 
of  his  works  have  been  discovered  till  we 
eome  to  the  lake-silts,  the  peat-mosses,  the 
river-gravels,  and  the  cave-earths  of  the  post- 
tortiary  period,"  which  seems  at  least  an 
indirect  confirmation  of  the  Biblical  record. 
(2)  "The  tree  canoes,  stone  hatchets,  flint 
implements,  and  occasional  fragments  of  the 
human  skeleton,"  upon  which  so  much  is 
based,  "  have  been  chiefly  discovered  within 
the  limited  area  of  Southern  and  Western 
Europe,"  while  "  we  have  scarcely  any  in- 


formation from  the  corresponding  deposits  ol 
other  regions  ; "  consequently,  ' '  till  these 
other  regions  shall  have  been  examined — and 
especially  Asia,  where  man  flourished  long 
prior  to  his  civilisation  in  Europe— it  were 
premature  to  hazard  any  opinion  as  to  man'i 
first  appearance  on  the  globe."  (3)  "It  ii 
true  that  the  antiquity  of  some  of  the  de- 
taining deposits,  especially  the  river  drifts, 
is  open  to  question,  and  it  is  also  quite 
possible  that  the  remains  of  the  extinct 
quadrupeds  may  in  some  instances  have  been 
reassorted  from  older  accumulations."  (4) 
"  Historically  we  have  no  means  of  arriving 
at  the  age  of  these  deposits ;  geologically 
we  can  only  approximate  the  time  by  com- 
parison with  existing  operations ;  while 
palaeontologically — the  differences  between 
these  extinct  pachyderms  and  those  stil. 
existing  are  not  greater  than  that  which 
appears  between  the  several  living  species 
and  would  therefore  indicate  no  great  pakeon- 
tological  antiquity — nothing  that  may  not 
have  taken  place  within  a  few  thousand  years 
of  the  ordinarily  received  chronology  "  (Page 
on  '  The  Philosophy  of  Geology,'  ch.  xii.  pp. 
114 — 117),  With  these  undesigned  replies 
from  a  late  eminent  authority  in  geologicil 
science,  the  Bible  student  will  do  well  to 
pause  before  displacing  the  currently-received 
age  of  man  by  the  fabulous  duration  claimed 
for  him  by  the  first-named  writers. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vere.  1 — 32. — The  antediluvian  saints.  I.  Descendants  op  Adam.  As  such  they 
were — 1.  A  sinful  race.  Adam's  son  Seth  was  begotten  in  his  father's  image.  Though 
still  retaining  the  Divine  image  (1  Cor.  xi.  7)  as  to  nature,  in  respect  of  purity  man 
has  lost  it.  Inexplicable  as  the  mystery  is  of  inherited  corruption,  it  is  still  a  fact 
that  the  moral  deterioration  of  the  head  of  the  human  family  has  transmitted  itself 
to  all  the  members.  The  doctrine  of  human  depravity,  however  unpleasant  and 
humbling,  to  carnal  pride,  is  asserted  in  Scripture  (Gen.  vi.  5,  12  ;  viii.  21 ;  Job  xv. 
14 ;  xxv.  4  ;  Ps.  xiv.  2,  3  ;  li.  5 ;  Isa.  liii.  6  ;  Rom.  iii.  23),  implied  in  the  universal' 
prevalence  of  sin  and  death  (Bom.  v.  12 — 21),  assumed  in  the  doctrines  of  regener- 
ation, which  is  declared  to  be  necessary  absolutely  and  universally  (John  iii.  3),  and 
redemption,  of  which  one  part  of  the  design  was  to  deliver  men  from  the  power  as 
well  as  guilt  of  sin  (Ephes.  v.  25 — 27  ;  Titus  ii.  14  ;  Heb.  ix.  12—14  ;  xiii.  12),  and 
abundantly  confirmed  by  experience,  which  testifies  that  "  the  wicked  are  estranged 
from  the  womb,  and  go  astray  as  soon  as  they  be  born,  speaking  lies  "  (Ps.  lviii.  3). 
2.  A  long-lived  race.  Whether  their  remarkable  longevity  was  due  to  the  original 
vigour  of  the  primus  homo,  or  to  the  influence  of  the  tree  of  life,  or  to  the  eminency 
of  the  Sethites'  piety,  it  was — (1)  A  great  privilege,  affording  to  themselves  ample 
opportunity  for  self-cultivation  and  family  training  ;  to  the  world  enlarged  facilities 
for  advancement  in  intelligence  and  civilisation ;  and  to  the  Church  the  means  of 
transmitting  truth  from  age  to  age,  and  of  drawing  more  closely  together  the  bonds 
of  religious  communion.   (2)  An  unexpected  privilege.    Upon  the  mind  and  heart  of 


ch.  t.  1—32.]  THE  BOOK  OE  GENESIS. 


Adam  in  particular  it  must  have  come  with  much  surprise  to  find  that  life,  which  had 
been  forfeited  by  sin,  prolonged  to  well-nigh  a  millennium  of  years ;  and  this  impres- 
sion, though  perhaps  it  might  become  less  as  patriarch  succeeded  patriarch,  would 
not,  we  think,  entirely  disappear.  And  so  let  us  hope  they  came  to  recognise  it  as 
(3)  a  gracious  privilege,  due  not  to  any  secondary  cause  whatsoever,  but  primarily 
and  solely  to  the  infinite  mercy  of  God,  who  had  given  them  the  promise  of  a  woman's 
seed  to  sustain  their  faith  and  hope.  And  as  such  also  (4)  a  suggestive  privilege, 
emblematic  of  the  immortality  they  had  lost  by  sin,  but  received  again  through 
grace.  3.  A  dying  race.  Though  a  sinful,  they  were  yet  a  pardoned  race  ;  but 
though  a  pardoned,  they  were  yet  a  mortal  race.  A  portion  of  the  original  penalty 
remains  to  remind  man  of  his  past  history  and  present  condition  ;  and  so  although 
the  Sethites  "  lived  many  hundred  yeares,  yet  none  of  them  filled  up  a  thousand, 
lest  they  should  have  too  much  flattered  themselves  in  long  life ;  and  seeing  a 
thousand  is  a  number  of  perfection,  God  would  have  none  of  them  to  attain  to  a 
thousand,  that  we  might  know  that  nothing  is  perfect  here  "  (Willet). 

II.  Membees  of  the  Church  of  God.  Great  as  was  the  former  distinction,  it  is 
completely  eclipsed  by  this.  It  is  a  great  thing  to  be  born,  but  a  greater  to  be  born 
again.  To  be  in  God  s  world  is  much,  to  be  in  God's  Church  is  more.  To  be  of  the 
line  of  Adam  by  nature  is  questionable  honour,  to  be  of  Adam's  line  by  grace  is  un- 
questionable glory.  These  ten  names  from  Adam  to  Noah  represent  the  leaders 
of  the  Church  of  God  in  the  primeval  age  of  the  world.  Whether  distinguished  by 
rare  talent,  great  wealth,  or  high  position,  whether  they  invented  arts,  built  cities, 
and  composed  hymns  like  the  Cainites;  is  not  said.  Their  chief  distinction  lay  in — 
1,  Their  possession  of  faith  in  God.  Not  perhaps  all  with  the  same  tenacity,  but 
all  with  the  same  reality,  they  clung  to  the  promise  of  the  woman's  seed.  This  it 
was  which  made  them  members  of  the  antediluvian  Church.  Without  faith  it 
is  impossible  to  please  God  (Heb.  xi.  6).  2.  Their  observance  of  religious  wor- 
ship. Prom  the  beginning  of  the  world  the  practice  of  sacrificial  worship  was 
maintained  by  believers.  For  two  generations  it  appears  to  have  been  private 
rather  than  public  in  its  character.  In  the  days  of  Enos,  according  to  one  of  the 
interpretations  of  ch.  iv.  26,  the  Sethites  began  to  worship  God  in  social  assemblies, 
as  a  means  at  once  of  fostering  their  own  piety  and  of  defending  themselves 
against  the  rising  tide  of  ungodliness ;  and  we  cannot  doubt  the  godly  practice 
would  continue  till  the  number  of  believers  became  so  small  that  Noah  could 
discover  no  one  of  like  heart  and  spirit  with  himself  to  participate  in  his  devo- 
tions. 3.  Their  nonconformity  to  the  world.  According  to  another  reading  of  ch. 
iv.  26,  in  the  third  generation  the  holy  seed  began  to  make  clearer  and  more  distinct 
the  lines  of  demarcation  between  themselves  and  the  Cainites  by  calling  themselves 
by  the  name  of  Jehovah,  t._e.  by  adopting  to  themselves  the  appellation  of  the  wor- 
shippers of  the  Lord.  The  fact  that  "the  sons  of  God  "  are  mentioned  in  ch.  vi.  1 
lends  a  sanction  to  this  view.  If  it  was  so,  doubtless  the  assumption  of  this  par- 
ticular title  was  only  a  sign  or  symptom  of  a  great  religious  movement  that  began  to 
effect  the  age, — a  movement  of  separation  in  heart  and  life  from  the  unbelievers  of 
the  time, — and  that  with  a  greater  or  lesser  intensity  perpetuated  itself  through 
each  successive  generation,  not  even  dying  away  when  there  was  only  one  man  to 
be  affected  by  it.  4.  Their  witness-bearing  against  the  wickedness  of  the  ungodly 
world.  This  comes  out  not  indeed  here,  but  in  other  Scriptures,  in  connection  with 
two  patriarchs,  Enoch  and  Noah  ;  the  first  of  whom  prophesied  of  the  coming  of  the 
Lord  (Jude  14),  and  the  second  of  whom  was  a  preacher  of  righteousness  to  the  men 
of  his  generation  (2  Pet.  ii.  5) ;  and  what  was  true  of  them  was  doubtless  charac- 
teristic in  a  measure  of  them  all.  They  were  unquestionably  prophets,  priests,  and 
kings  in  their  fnmilies  and  in  relation  to  their  contemporaries.  6.  Their  eminently 
godly  lives.  As  much  as  this  is  implied  in  what  has  been  already  said.  But  of  two 
of  them  it  is  distinctly  stated  that  they  walked  with  God :  of  Enoch,  that  before  his 
translation  he  had  this  testimony,  that  he  pleased  God ;  and  of  Noah,  that  he  was  a 
perfect  man  and  an  upright ;  and  though  not  perhaps  entitled  to  say  that  all  of  them 
lived  at  the  same  spiritual  elevation  as  did  those  two  fathers,  yet  we  are  fairly  war- 
ranted to  conclude  that  all  of  them  maintained  a  holy  walk  and  conversation  in  a 
rapidly  degenerating  age. 

Hi 


100  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  [oh.  t.  I— Si. 

III.  Progenitors  of  the  promised  seid.  This  was  the  chief  distinction  of  thew 
saintly  men,  and  the  real  reason  why  their  names  and  ages  have  been  so  carefully 
preserved  to  the  Church  of  God.  They  were  all  links  in  the  chain  leading  on  to  the 
woman's  seed.  So  to  speak,  they  were  the  ten  first  heralds  sent  out  to  proclaim  the 
approach  of  the  king ;  the  ten  first  shadows  or  adumbrations  of  the  great  Prophet, 
Priest,  and  King  to  whom  the  faith  of  the  Church  was  looking  forward.  True,  it  it 
not  much  that  we  know  about  them  beyond  their  names,  and  certainly  there  is  consider- 
able vagueness  and  uncertainty  about  their  import ;  but  still,  accepting  those  mean- 
ings which  have  the  greatest  probability  in  their  favour  it  is  interesting  to  note  how 
they  all  indicate  points  of  character  or  features  of  history  which  met  in  Christ. 
Adam  we  know  was  a  prophecy  of  Christ,  the  second  Adam,  in  more  than  his  name 
(1  Cor.  xv.  45).  Abel,  the  first  martyr,  prefigured  him  jn  dying  by  a  brother's  hand. 
Seth,  the  Substituted  One,  was  a  shadow  of  him  who  took  our  room  and  stead  (Bom. 
v.  8) ;  Enos,  the  Frail  One,  of  him  who,  as  to  his  human  nature,  was  as  "  a  tender 
plant,  and  a  root  out  of  a  dry  ground  "  (Isa.  liii.  2) ;  Cainan,  Possession,  of  him  who 
was  the  gift  of  God  (2  Cor.  ix.  15).  Mahalaleel,  Praise  of  God,  of  him  who  "  was 
not  ashamed  to  call  us  brethren,  saying,  I  will  declare  thy  name  unto  my  brethren, 
in  the  midst  of  the  church  will  I  sing  praise  unto  thee  "  (Heb.  ii.  11,  12)  ;  Jared, 
Descent,  of  him  who  came  down  from  heaven  (John  vi.  38) ;  Enoch,  the  dedicated 
and  instructed  child  who  walked  with  God,  and  was  translated  that  he  should  not  see 
death,  of  him  who  for  his  people  "sanctified  himself"  (John  xvii.  19),  "in  whom 
were  hid  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge  "  (Col.  ii.  3),  who  with  regard 
to  his  Father  could  say,  "  I  do  always  those  things  that  please  him  "  (John  viji.  29), 
and  who,  after  accomplishing  his  Divine  mission  on  the  earth,  was  received  up  into 
glory  (Acts  i.  11)  ;  Methuselah,  Man  of  the  Dart,  of  him  of  whom  the  royal  psalmist 
sang,  "Thine  arrows  are  sharp  in  the  heart  of  the  king's  enemies  "  (Ps.  xlv.  5); 
Lamech,  Strong  Youth,  of  the  strong  One  whom  David  saw  in  vision  raised  up  for 
Israel's  help  (Ps.  lxxrix.  19)  ;  Noah,  Rest,  of  him  in  whose  sacrifice  God  smelted  a 
sweet  savour  of  rest  (Ephes.  v.  2). 

Lessons: — 1.  As  descendants  of  Adam,  let  us  remember  we  are  sinners,  and,  repent- 
ing, believe  the  gospel ;  let  us  measure  our  days,  and,  observing  their  shortness, 
apply  our  hearts  unto  wisdom ;  let  us  think  of  our  mortality,  and  prepare  for  the 
narrow  house  appointed  for  all  the  living.  2.  As  members  of  the  Church  of  Christ, 
have  we  the  marks  that  distinguished  these  antediluvian  saints?  3.  As  the  spiritual 
posterity  of  Jesus  Christ,  do  wo  reflect  liim  as  his  progenitors  foreshadowed  him? 

Vers.  22 — 24. — Enoch.  I.  The  character  of  his  piety.  1.  Walking  with  God.  2. 
Witnessing  for  God. 

II.  The  excellence  of  his  piety.  1.  It  began  in  early  boyhood.  2.  It  flourished 
in  evil  times.  3.  It  grew  in  spite  of  scanty  privileges.  4.  It  continued  to  the 
close  of  life. 

III.  The  reward  of  Enoch's  piety.  He  was  translated  that  he  should  not  see 
death.  1.  A  visible  proof  of  immortality.  2.  A  solemn  confirmation  of  the  gospel. 
3.  A  striking  prophecy  of  Christ's  ascension. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  24. —  Walking  with  God.  Whole  chapter  a  reproof  of  the  restless  ambitiom 
of  men.  Of  these  long  lives  the  only  record  is  a  name,  and  the  fact,  "he  died." 
Moral  of  the  whole,  "  Dust  thou  art  "  (cf.  1  Cor.  xv.  50).  Yet  a  link  between  life 
here  and  life  above.  Enoch  translated  (Heb.  xi.  5).  The  living  man  passed  into 
the  presence  of  God.  How,  we  need  not  care  to  know.  But  we  know  why.  He 
"walked  with  God."  Who  would  not  covet  this?  Yet  it  may  be  ours.  What 
then  was  that  life?  Of  its  outward  form  we  know  nothing.  But  same  expression 
tch.  vi.  9)  tells  us  that  Noah's  was  such.  Also  Abraham's,  "  the  friend  of  God  "  (ch. 
xvii.  1) ;  and  St.  Paul's  (Phil.  i.  21) ;  and  St.  John  (1  John  i.  3)  claims  "  fellowship 
with  the  Father  "  not  for  himself  only  (cf.  John  xiv.  23). 

I.  Essential  features  op  a  walk  with  God.  Not  a  life  of  austerity  or  of  con. 
teraplation,  removed  from  interests  or  cares  of  world.     Noah's  was  not;  nor  Abrar 


oh.  v.  1—32.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  1M 

ham's.  Nor  a  life  without  fault.  Elijah  was  "  of  like  passions  as  we  are ; "  and 
David  ;  and  St.  John  declares,  1  John  i.  8 — 10.  1.  It  is  a  life  of  faith,  i.  «.  a  life  in 
which  the  word  of  God  is  a  real  power.  Mark  in  Heb.  xi.  how  faith  worked  in 
different  circumstances.  To  walk  with  God  is  to  trust  him  as  a  child  trusts ;  from 
belief  of  his  fatherhood,  and  that  he  is  true.  With  texts  before  us  such  as  John  iii. 
16 ;  1  John  i.  9  ;  ii.  2,  why  are  any  not  rejoicing  ?  Or  with  such  as  John  iv.  10 ; 
Luke  xi.  13,  why  are  any  not  asking  and  receiving  to  the  full  ?  God  puts  no  hin- 
drance (Rev.  iii.  20).  But  (1)  too  often  men  do  not  care.  To  walk  with  God  is  of 
less  importance  than  to  be  admired  of  men.  (2)  If  they  do  care,  they  often  will  not 
take  God's  way.  The  simple  message  (2  Cor.  v.  20;  1  John  v.  11)  seems  too 
simple.  They  look  for  feelings,  instead  of  setting  God's  message  before  them  and 
grasping  it.  2.  To  walk  with  God  implies  desire  and  effort  for  the  good  of  men.  In 
an  ungodly  world  Enoch  proclaimed  the  coming  judgment  ( Jude  14 ;  cf.  Acts 
xxiv.  25).  Spiritual  selfishness  often  a  snare  to  those  who  have  escaped  the  snare  oi 
the  world.  It  is  not  the  mind  of  Christ.  It  springs  from  weakness  of  faith. 
Knowing  the  gift  so  dearly  purchased,  so  freely  offered  to  all,  our  calling  is  to  per- 
suade men.  Not  necessarily  as  teachers  (James  i.  19),  but  by  intercession  and  by 
loving  influence. 

III.  Enoch  was  translated.  But  apostles  and  saints  died.  Yet  think  not  that 
their  walk  with  God  was  less  blessed.  Hear  our  Lord's  words  (John  xi.  2G),  and  St. 
Paul  (2  Tim.  i.  10).  Hear  the  apostle's  desire  (Phil.  i.  23).  Enoch  walked  with 
God  on  earth,  and  the  communion  was  carried  on  above.  Is  not  this  our  Saviour's 
promise  ?  (John  xiv.  21 — 23 ;  xvii.  24).  Death  is  not  the  putting  off  that  which  is 
corruptible  ;  it  is  separation  from  the  Lord.  Assured  that  we  are  his  for  ever,  we 
may  say,  "  O  death,  where  is  thy  sting  ?  " — M. 

Ver.  24. — A  great  example  and  a  great  reward.  Notice  the  three  distinctions  in 
this  patriarchal  prophet. 

I.  His  distinguished  piety — walking  with  God ;  faith  giving  him  knowledge,  con- 
fidence in  God,  enjoyment  of  God. 

II.  His  comparatively  shout  life,  and  therefore  speedy  deliverance  from  the  im- 
perfection and  suffering  of  this  world,  though  his  son  lived  the  longest  antediluvian 
life,  and  perhaps  was  a  disciple  of  his  father,  teaching  his  doctrine.  Those  who 
"  initiate"  (Enoch)  great  moral  movements  are  seldom  long-lived  mon. 

III.  His  distinguished  end— translation.  God  took  him  because  he  loved  him. 
The  anticipation  of  the  resurrection  was  itself  a  prophecy.  The  seventh  from  Adam 
is  taken  to  heaven  without  death,  though  all  the  rest  died,  however  long  they  lived, 
as  though  to  vivify  the  promise  of  the  redeeming  seed.  It  seems  better  to  supply 
the  word  "died"  rather  than  "was."  "And  he  died  not;  for  God  took  him" 
—referring  to  the  common  formula  of  the  patriarchal  history,  "  and  he  died."  Walk- 
ing with  God  is  walking  to  God.  Those  who  are  like  Enoch  in  their  life  will  not  be 
very  different  from  him  in  their  end ;  for  the  peace  and  triumph  of  a  good  man's  end 
is  little  short  of  translation.  The  first  of  the  prophets  is  thus  gloriously  signalised. 
Was  it  not  like  a  special  blessing  from  the  beginning  of  the  world  on  the  life  of  con- 
secrated ministration  to  God  ?  Walking  with  God  may  be  the  description  of  any 
kind  of  service,  but  especially  of  the  prophets'. — B. 

EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  VI. 
Ven.  1,  2.— And  it  came  to  pass.  Literally, 
it  wax;  not  in  immediate  sequence  to  the 
preceding  chapter,  but  at  some  earlier  point 
in  the  antediluvian  period ;  perhaps  about, 
the  time  of  Enoch  (corresponding  to  that  of 
Lamech  the  Cainite),  if  not  in  the  days  of 
E«os.  Havernick  joins  the  passage  with  ch. 
Iv.   26.      When  men  —  iia'adham,  i.  e.  the 


human  race  in  general,  and  not  the  posterity 
of  Cain  in  particular  (Ainsworth,  Rosenmul- 
ler,  Bush)— began  to  multiply— in  virtue  of 
the  Divine  blessing  (ch.  i.  28)— on  (or  over) 
the  face  of  the  earth.  "Alluding  to  th« 
population  spreading  itself  out  as  well  ai 
increasing  "  (Bonar).  And  daughters  wsr« 
born  unto  them.  Not  referring  to  any 
special  increase  of  the  female  sox  (Lange), 
but  simply  indicating  the  quarter  whence  the 


102 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[oh.  ti.  1—8, 


danger  to  the  pious  Sethites  rose:  "who 
became  snares  to  the  race  of  Seth  "  (Words- 
worth). That  the  sons  of  God.  Bene-ha 
Elohim.  1.  Not  young  men  of  the  upper 
ranks,  as  distinguished  from  maidens  of 
humble  birth  (Onk.,  Jon.,  Sym.,  Aben  Ezra) ; 
an  opinion  which  "  may  now  be  regarded  as 
exploded  "  (Lange).  2.  Still  less  the  angels 
(LXX., — some  MSS.  having  ayytXoi  tov 
Btov, — Philo,  Josephus,  Justin  Martyr,  Cle- 
ment, Tertullian,  Luther,  Gesenius,  Rosen- 
miiller,  Von  Bohlen,  Ewald,  Baumgarten, 
Delitzsch,  Kurtz,  Hengstenberg,  Alford) ;  for 
(1)  they  are  either  good  angels,  in  which 
ease  they  might  be  rightly  styled  sons  of 
God  (Ps.  xxix.  1  ;  lxxxix.  7  ;  Job  i.  6  ;  ii. 
1  ;  xxxviii.  7  ;  Dan.  iii.  25),  though  it  is 
doubtful  if  this  expression  does  not  denote 
their  official  rather  than  natural  relationship 
to  God,  but  it  is  certain  they  would  not 
be  guilty  of  the  sin  here  referred  to  ;  or  they 
are  bad  angels,  in  which  case  they  might 
readily  enough  commit  the  sin,  if  it  were 
possible,  but  certainly  they  would  not  be 
called  "the  sons  of  God."  (2)  The  state- 
ment of  Jude  (vers.  6,  7),  though  seemingly 
iu  favour  of  this  interpretation,  does  not 
necessarily  require  it ;  since  (a)  it  is  uncer- 
tain whether  the  phrase  "  tov  op.oiov  tovtoiq 
Tpoircv  kKiropvtv  aaaai  teal  dntXOoiiaat  oTriatu 
crapKoc  iripac"  refers  to  the  angels  or  to  "  ai 
irtpi  abrag  irdXtic,"  in  which  case  the  antece- 
dent of  tovtoiq  will  not  be  the  ayyeXoi  of  ver. 
6,  but  26do/ia  xai  Tojioppa  of  ver.  7 ;  (/3)  if  even 
it  refers  to  the  angels  it  does  not  follow  that 
the  parallel  between  the  cities  and  the  angels 
consisted  in  the  "going  after  strange  flesh," 
and  not  rather  in  the  fact  that  both  departed 
from  God,  "the  sin  of  the  apostate  angels 
being  in  God's  view  a  sin  of  like  kind  spirit- 
ually with  Sodom's  going  away  from  God's 
order  of  nature  after  strange  flesh  "  (Fausset) ; 
(y)  again,  granting  that  Jude's  language  de- 
scribes the  sin  of  the  angels  as  one  of  car- 
nal fornication  with  the  daughters  of  men, 
the  sin  of  which  the  sons  of  Elohim  are 
represented  as  guilty  is  not  Tropvtia,  but  the 
forming  of  unhallowed  matrimonial  alliances. 
Hence  (3)  the  assertion  of  our  Lord  in  Luke 
xx.  35  is  inconsistent  with  the  hypothesis 
that  by  the  sons  of  God  are  meant  the  angels ; 
and  (4)  consistent  exegesis  requires  that  only 
extremo  urgency,  in  fact  absolute  necessity 
(neither  of  which  can  be  alleged  here),  should 
cause  the  sons  of  God  to  be  looked  for  else- 
where than  among  the  members  of  the  human 
race.  3.  The  third  interpretation,  therefore, 
which  regards  the  sons  of  God  as  the  pious 
Sethites  (Cyril  of  Alexandria,  Theodoret, 
Augustine,  Jerome,  Calvin,  Keil,  Haver- 
nick,  Lange,  Murphy,  Wordsworth,  Quarry, 
'  Speaker's  Commentary '),  though  not  with- 
out its  difficulties,  has  the  most  to  re- 
sommend  it     (1)   It  is   natural,   and   not 


monstrous.  (2)  It  is  Scriptural,  and  not 
mythical  (cf.  Numbers  xxv.  ;  Judges  iii.  ; 
1  Kings  -xi.,  xvi.  ;  Rev.  ii.,  for  sins  of  a 
similar  description).  (3)  It  accords  with  the 
designation  subsequently  given  to  the  pious 
followers  of  God  (ef.  Deut.  xiv.  1  ;  xxxii. 
5  ;  Ps.  lxxiii.  15  ;  Prov.  xiv.  26  ;  Luke  iii. 
38  ;  Rom.  viii.  14  ;  Gal.  Iii.  26).  (4)  It. has 
a  historical  basis  in  the  fact  that  Seth  was 
regarded  by  his  mother  as  a  son  from  God 
(ch.  iv.  25),  and  in  the  circumstance  that 
already  the  Sethites  had  begun  to  call  them- 
selves by  the  name  of  Jehovah  (ch.  iv.  26). 
Dathius  translates,  "  qui  de  nomine  Dei  voca- 
bantur. "  (5)  It  is  sufficient  as  an  hypothesis, 
and  therefore  is  entitled  to  the  preference. 
Saw  the  daughters  of  men  (not  of  the  Cain- 
itic  race  exclusively,  but  of  men  generally) 
that  they  were  fair,  and  had  regard  to  this 
alone  in  contracting  marriages.  "Instead 
of  looking  at  the  spiritual  kinsmanship,  they 
had  an  eye  only  to  the  pleasure  of  sense 
(Lange).  "  What  the  historian  condemns  is 
not  that  regard  was  had  to  beauty,  but  that 
mera  libido  regnaverit  in  the  choice  of 
wives  "  (Calvin).  And  they  took.them  wives. 
Lakachisha,  "a  standing  expression  through- 
out the  Old  Testament  for  the  marriage  re- 
lationship established  by  God  at  the  creation, 
is  never  applied  to  iropvtia,  or  the  simple 
act  of  physical  connection,  which  is  sufficient 
of  itself  to  exclude  any  reference  to  angels  " 
(Keil;  cf. ch.  iv.  19;  xii.  19;  xix.  14;  Exod. 
vi.  25  ;  1  Sam.  xxv.  43).  ,  Of  all  whom  they 
chose.  The  emphasis  on  ?3t?  (of  all)  signi- 
fies that,  guided  by  a  love  of  merely  sensual 
attractions,  they  did  not  confine  themselves 
to  the  beautiful  daughters  of  the  Sethite  race, 
hut  selected  their  brides  from  the  fair  women 
of  the  Cainites,  and  perhaps  with  a  preference 
for  these.  The  opinion  that  they  selected 
' '  both  virgins  and  wives,  they  cared  not 
whom,';  and  "took  them  by  violence" 
(Willet), .  is  not  warranted  by  the  language 
of  the  historian.  The  sons  of  God  were 
neither  the  Nephilim  nor  the  Gibborim 
afterwards  described,  but  the  parents  of  the 
latter.  The  evil  indicated  is  simply  that  of 
promiscuous  marriages  without  regard  to 
spiritual  character. 

Ver.  3. — And  the  Lord — Jehovah  ;  not 
because  due  to  the  Jehovist  (Tuch,  Bleek, 
Colenso),  but  because  the  sin  above  specified 
was  a  direct  violation  of  the  footing  of  grace 
on  which  the  Sethites  stood  —  said,  —  to 
himself,  i.  e.  purposed,— My  spirit — neither 
' '  ira,  seu  rigida  Dei  justitia "  ( Venema), 
nor  "  the  Divine  spirit  of  life  bestowed  upon 
man,  the  principle  of  physical  and  ethical, 
natural  and  spiritual  life "  (Keil) ;  but  the 
Holy  Ghost,  the  Ruach  Elohim  of  ch.  i.  3 
—shall  not  always  strive.  Lo-yadon  : — 1. 
Shall  not  dwell  (LXX,  oil  /u)  cara/itivy ; 
Vulgate,  non  permanebit ;  Syriac,  Onkelo*) 


OB.  TI.  1— «.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS, 


MM 


2.  Shall  not  be  humbled,  i.  e.  by  dwelling 
in  men  (Gesenius,  Tuch).  3.  More  probably, 
shall  not  rule  (De  Wotte,  Delitzseh,  Kalisch, 
Fiirst),  or  shall  not  judge  (ou  icpii/ei),  as  the 
consequence  of  ruling  (Symmachus,  Rosen- 
miiller,  Keil),  or  shall  not  contend  in  judg- 
ment (arguere,  reprehendere  ;  cf.  Eccles. 
vi.  10),  t.  e.  strive  with  a  man  by  moral 
force  (Calvin,  Michaelis,  Dathe,  '  Speaker's 
■  Commentary,'  Murphy,  Bush).  With  man, 
for  that  he  also— beshaggam.  Either  be, 
shaggam,  inf.  of  shagag,  to  wander,  with 
pron.  suff.  =  "in  their  wandering"  (Gese- 
nius, Tuch,  Keil) — the  meaning  being  that 
men  by  their  straying  had  proved  them- 
selves to  be  flesh,  though  a  plural  suffix 
wkh  a  singular  pronoun  following  is  inad- 
missible in  Hebrew  (Kalisch)  ;  or  be,  sh 
(contracted  from  asher),  and  gam  (also) 
=  quoniarn.  Cf.  Judges  v.  7  ;  vi.  17  ; 
Song  of  Sol.  i.  7  (A.  V.).  Though  an 
Aramaic  particle,  ' '  it  must  never  be  for- 
gotten that  Aramaisms  are  to  be  expected 
either  in  the  most  modern  or  in  the  most 
ancient  portions  of  Scripture  "  ('  Speaker's 
Commentary') — is  flesh.  Not  "  transitory 
beings"  (Gesenius,  Rosenmuller,  Tuch),  or 
corporeal  beings  (Kalisch),  but  sinful  beings; 
bashar  being  already  employed  in  its  ethical 
signification,  like  onp5  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment, to  denote  "  man's  materiality  as 
rendered  ungodly  by  sin"  (Keil).  "The 
doctrine  of  the  carnal  mind  (Rom.  viii.)  is 
merely  the  outgrowth  of  the  thought  ex- 
pressed in  this  passage  "  (Murphy).  Yet  his 
days — not  the  individual's  (Kalisch),  which 
were  not  immediately  curtailed  to  the  limit 
mentioned,  and,  even  after  the  Flood,  ex- 
tended far  beyond  it  (vide  ch.  xi. )  ;  but  the 
races,  which  were  only  to  be  prolonged  in 
gracious  respite  (Calvin) — shall  be  an  hun- 
dred and  twenty  years.  Tuch,  Colenso,  and 
others,  supposing  this  to  have  been  said  by 
God  in  Noah's  500th  year,  find  a  respite 
only  of  100  years,  instead  of  120  j  but  the 
historian  does  not  assert  that  it  was  then 
God  either  formed  or  announced  this  deter- 
mination. 

Ver.  4.  —  There  were.  Not  became,  or 
arose,  as  if  the  giants  were  the  fruit  of 
the  previously-mentioned  mesalliances  ;  but 
already  existed  contemporaneously  with  the 
sons  of  God  (cf.  Keil,  Havernick,  and  Lange). 
Giants.  Nephilim,  from  naphal,  to  fall ; 
hence  supposed  to  describe  the  offspring  of 
the  daughters  of  men  and  the  fallen  angels 
(Hoffman,  Delitzseh).  The  LXX.  translate 
by  yiyavng  ;  whence  the  "giants"  of  the 
A.  V.  and  Vulgate,  which  Luther  rejects  as 
fabulous  j,  but  Kalisch,  on  the  strength  of 
Num.  xiii.  33,  accepts  as  the  certain  import 
of  the  term.  More  probable  is  the  interpret- 
ation which  understands  them  as  men  of 
violence,  roving,  lawless  gallants,  "  who  fall 


on  others ; ''  robbers,  or  tyrants  (Aquila 
Rosenmuller,  Gesenius,  Luther,  Calvin,  Kurtz, 
Keil,  Murphy,  '  Speaker's  Commentary '). 
That  they  were  "  monsters,  prodigies " 
(Tuch,  Knobel),  may  be  rejected,  though  it  is 
not  unlikely  they  were  men  of  large  physical 
stature,  like  the  Anakim,  Rephaim,  and 
others  (cf.  Num.  xiii.  33).  In  the  earth. 
Not  merely  on  it,  but  largely  occupying  the 
populated  region.  In  those  days.  Pre- 
viously referred  to,  i.  e.  of  the  mixed  mar- 
riages. And  also—  i.  e.  in  addition  to  these 
nephilim— after  that, — i.  e.  after  their  up- 
rising—when  the  sons  of  God  came  in  unto 
the  daughters  of  men,  and  they  bare  children 
to  them,  the  same  became  mighty  men. 
Ha'gibborim,  literally,  the  strong,  impetu- 
ous, heroes  (cf.  ch.  x.  8).  "  They  were  pro- 
bably more  refined  in  manners  and  exalted 
in  thought  than  their  predecessors  of  pure 
Cainite  descent "  (Murphy).  Which  were 
of  old.  Not  "of  the  world,"  as  a  note  of 
character,  taking  olam  as  equivalent  to  aii>v, 
but  a  note  of  time,  the  narrator  reporting 
from  his  own  standpoint.  Men  of  renown. 
Literally,  men  of  the  name ;  "  the  first 
nobility  of  the  world,  honourable  robbers, 
who  boasted  of  their  wickedness  "  (Calvin)  • 
or  gallants,  whose  names  were  often  in  men's 
mouths  (Murphy).  For  contrary  phrase, 
"men  of  no  name,"  see  Job  xxx.  8. 

Ver.  5. — And  God  (Jehovah,  which  should 
have  been  rendered  'the  Lord')  saw— indi- 
cative of  the  long-continued  patience  (Calvin) , 
of  the  Deity,  under  whose  immediate  cog- 
nizance the  great  experiment  of  the  primeval 
age  of  the  world  was  wrought  out  —  that 
the  wickedness  (ra'ath;  from  the  root 
raa,  to  make  a  loud  noise,  to  rage,  hence 
to  be  wicked)  of  man  (literally,  of  the 
Adam:  this  was  the  first  aggravation  of 
the  wickedness  which  God  beheld  ;  it  was 
the  tumultuous  rebellion  of  the  being  whom 
he  had  created  in  his  own  image)  was  great 
(it  was  no  slight  iniquity,  but  a  wide-spread, 
firmly  -  rooted,  and  deeply  -  staining  corrup- 
tion, the  second  aggravation)  in  the  earth. 
This  was  the  third  aggravation  ;  it  was  in  the 
world  which  he  had  made,  and  not  only  in  it, 
but  pervading  it  so  "that  integrity  possessed 
no  longer  a  single  corner"  (Calvin).  And 
that  every  imagination— yetzer,  a  device, 
like  pottery  ware,  from  yatza,  to  fashion  as 
a  potter  (ch.  ii.  7. ;  viii.  19).  Cf.  yotzer,  a 
potter,  used  of  God  (Ps.  xciv.  9,  20).  Hence 
the  fashioned  purpose  (lvBb)it\oiQ)  as  dis- 
tinguished from  the  thought  out  of  which 
it  springs — "a  distinction  not  generally  or 
constantly  recognised  by  the  mental  philo- 
sopher, though  of  essential  importance  in 
the  theory  of  the  mind"  (Murphy)— of  thi 
thoughts  —  mahshevoth;  from  hashed,  t? 
think,  to  meditate  =  Ivvma  ;  cf.  Heb.  ix 
(T.  Lewis)— of  his  heart — lev,  the  heart  i* 


1M 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESia 


[ch.  »L  1— ft 


•eat  of  the  affections  and  emotions  of  the 
mind.  C£  Judges  xvi.  15  (love) ;  Prov.  xxxi. 
11  (confidence) ;  Prov.  v.  12  (contempt)  ; 
Ps.  civ.  15  (joy).  Here  "  the  feeling,  or  deep 
mother  heart,  the  state  of  soul,  lying  below 
all,  and  giving  moral  character  to  all  ( Lewis). 
Cf.  the  psychological  division  of  Heb.  iv.  12 — 
was  only  evil  continually.  Literally,  every 
day.  "  If  this  is  not  total  depravity,  how 
can  language  express  it?"  Though  the  ' 
phrase  does  not  mean  "from  infancy,"  yet 
"the  general  doctrine"  (of  man's  total  and 
universal  depravity)  "is  properly  and  con- 
sistently elicited  hence"  (Calvin). 

Ver.  6. — And  it  repented  the  Lord.  Yin- 
nahem;  from  nakam,  to  pant,  to  groan  ; 
Niph.,  to  lament,  to  grieve  because  of  the 
misery  of  others,  also  because  of  one's  own 
actions ;  whence  to  repent  (cf.  German, 
reuen;  English,  rue:  Gesenius) ;  =  "it 
grieved  him  at  his  heart."  "  Verbum 
nostra  pravitatffi  accommodatum "  (Chry- 
sostom) ;  "non  est  perturhatio,  sed  judi- 
cium, quo  irrogatur  poena ; "  and  again, 
"  pcenitudo  Dei  est  mutandorum  immuta- 
Nilis ratio"  (Augustine).  " Deus  est  immu- 
,abilis ;  sed  cum  ii,  quos  curat,  mutantur, 
mutat  ipse  res,  prout  iis  expedit  quos  curat " 
(Justin  Martyr :  Latin  Version).  "  The  re- 
pentance here  ascribed  to  God  does  not  pro- 
perly belong  to  him,  but  has  reference  to  our 
understanding  of  him  "  (Calvin).  "  The  re- 
pentance of  God  does  not  presuppose  any 
variableness  in  his  nature  or  purposes  "  Keil). 
"  A  peculiarly  strong  anthropopathic  expres- 
sion, which,  however,  presents  the  truth  that 
God,  in  consistency  with  his  immutability, 
assumes  a  changed  position  in  respect  to 
changed  man  "  (Lange).  That  he  had  made 
man  on  the  earth.  /.  e.  that  he  had  created 
man  at  all,  and  in  particular  that  he  had 
settled  him  on  the  earth.  And  it  grieved 
him  at  his  heart   A  touching  indication  that 


God  did  not  hate  man,  and  a  clear  proof  that, 
though  the  Divine  purpose  is  immutable, 
the  Divine  nature  is  not  impassible. 

Ver.  7.— And  the  Lord  said,— "  Before 
weird  (doom)  there's  word :  Northern  Pro- 
verb" (Bonar) — I  will  destroy— literally, 
blot  or  wipe  out  by  washing  (cf.  Num.  v.  23 ; 
2  Kings  xxi.  13 ;  Prov.  xxx.  20  ;  Isa.  xxv. 
8).  "  The  idea  of  destroying  by  washing 
away  is  peculiarly  appropriate  to  the  Deluge,  • 
and  the  word  is  chosen  on  account  of  its 
significance"  (Quarry) — man  whom  I  have 
created  from  the  face  of  the  earth.  An 
indirect  refutation  of  the  angel  hypothesis 
(Keil,  Lange).  If  the  angels  were  the. real 
authors  of  the  moral  corruption  of  the  race, 
why  are  they  not  sentenced  as  the  serpent 
was  in  ch.  iii.  14  ?  Both  man,  and  beast,  and 
the  creeping  thing.  Literally,  from  man 
unto  beaut,  &c.  The  lower  creatures  were 
involved  in  the  punishment  of  man  neither 
because  of  any  moral  corruption  which  had 
entered  into  them,  nor  as  sharing  in  the 
atonement  for  human  sins  (Knobel) ;  but 
rather  on  the  ground  of  man's  sovereignty 
over  the  animal  world,  and  its  dependence 
on  him  (Keil,  Lange),  and  in  exemplification 
of  that  great  principle  of  Divine  government 
by  which  the  penal  consequences  of  moral 
evil  are  allowed  to  extend  beyond  the  imme- 
diate actor  (cf.  Rom.  viii.  20).  For  it 
repenteth  me  that  I  have  made  them. 
Vide  supra  on  ver.  6. 

Ver.  8.— But  Noah  found  grace.  Hen; 
the  same  letters  as  in  Noah,  but  reversed 
(cf.  ch.  xviii.  3  ;  xxxix.  i  ;  1  Kings  xi.  19) 
The  present  is  the  first  occurrence  of  the 
word  in  Scripture.  "  Now  for  the  first  time 
grace  finds  a  tongue  to  express  its  name" 
(Murphy) ;  and  it  clearly  signifies  the  same 
thing  as  in  Rom.  iv.,  v.,  Ephes.  ii.,  Gal. 
ii.,  the  gratuitous  favour  of  God  to  sinful 
men. 


HOMILETICS. 

Ven.  1—8.—"  The  days  that  were  before  the  flood "  (Matt.  xxiv.  38).  I.  Sin 
increasing.  1.  Licentiousness  raging.  The  special  form  it  assumed  was  that  of 
sensuous  gratification,  leading  to  a  violation  of  the  law  of  marriage.  In  the  seventh 
age  Lamech  the  Cainite  became  a  polygamist.  By  and  by  the  sons  of  God,  cap- 
tivated by  the  charms  of  beauty,  caBt  aside  the  bonds  of  self-restraint,  and  took  them 
wives  of  all  whom  they  chose.  (1)  They  married  with  ungodly  women, — beautiful, 
perhaps  talented  and  accomplished,  like  the  Adahs,  Naamahs,  and  Zillahs  of  the  race 
of  Cam,  but  unbelieving  and  ungodly, — which,  as  the  professing  followers  of  Jehovah, 
they  should  not  have  done.  Holy  Scripture  forbids  the  union  of  believers  with 
unbelievers  (2  Cor.  yi.  14).  (2)  They  married  to  please  their  fancies,  leaving  alto- 
gether out  of  reckoning,  as  necessary  qualifications  in  their  partners,  spiritual  affinity, 
intellectual  compatibility,  and  even  general  suitability,  and  fixing  their  eyes  only  on 
what  charmed  the  senses,  physical  loveliness.  (3)  They  married  as  many  wives  as 
they  desired.  Lamech,  the  first  polygamist,  was  satisfied  with  two ;  the  degenerate 
•ons  of  Seth,  having  yielded  to  self-indulgence,  only  limited  their  wives  by  the  demands 
of  their  passion.    2.  Violence  prevailing.    Those  who  begin  by  Nffiaking  the  law*  of 


cm.  *i.  1— «.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  101 

God  are  not  likely  to  end  by  keeping  those  of  man.  From  the  beginning  a  charac- 
teristic of  the  wicked  line  (witness  Cain  and  Lamech);  lawlessness  at  length  passed 
over  to  the  holy  seed.  What  with  the  Nephilim  on  the  one  hand  (probably  belong- 
ing to  the  line  of  Cain)  and  the  Gibborim  on  the  other  (the  offspring  of  the  degener- 
ate Sethites),  the  world  was  overrun  with  tyrants.  Sheer  brute  force  was  the  ruler, 
and  the  only  code  of  morals  was  "  Be  strong."  Moral  purity  alone  has  a  God-given 
right  to  occupy  the  supreme  seat  of  influence  and  power  upon  the  earth.  After  that, 
intellectual  ability.  Mere  physical  strength,  colossal  stature,  immense  bulk,  were 
designed  for  subjection  and  subordination.  The  subversion  of  this  Divinely-appointed 
order  results  in  tyranny ;  and,  of  al1  tyrannies,  that  of  strong,  coarse,  passion-driven 
animalism  is  the  worst.  And  thL  was  the  condition  of  mankind  in  these  ante- 
diluvian ages.  And  what  was  even  a  worse  symptom  of  the  times,  the  people  loved 
to  have  it  so.  Those  lawless  robbers  and  tyrants  and  these  reckless,  roving  gallants 
were  men  of  name  and  fame,  in  everybody's  mouth,  as  the  popular  heroes  of  the  day. 
As  mere  physical  beauty  was  woman's  pathway  to  marriage,  so  was  sheer  brute  force, 
displaying  itself  in  feats  of  daring  and  of  blood,  man's  road  to  renown.  3.  Corrup- 
tion deepening.  Most  appalling  is  the  picture  sketched  by  the  historian  of  the  condi- 
tion of  the  Adam  whom  God  at  first  created  in  his  own  image,  implying — (1)  Complete 
extinction  of  the  higher  nature.  Through  persistence  in  the  downward  path  of  sin 
it  had  at  length  become  lost,  swallowed  up,  in  the  low,  carnal  portion  of  his  being 
called  the  "  flesh."  (2)  Complete  supremacy  of  evil — evil  in  the  imaginations,  evil 
in  the  thoughts,  evil  in  the  heart,  nothing  but  evil ;  and  that  not  temporarily,  but 
always ;  nor  in  the  case  of  one  or  two  individuals  merely,  but  in  tlhe  case  of  all,  with 
one  solitary  exception.  (3)  Complete  insensibility  to  Divine  influences.  Hence  the 
withdrawal  of  God's  Spirit.  There  was  no  use  for  further  striving  to  restrain  or 
improve  them  ;  they  were '  'past  feeling"  (Ephes.  iv.  19). 

II.  God  repenting.  1.  A  mysterious  fact.  "  We  do  not  gain  much  by  attempt- 
ing to  explain  philosophically  such  states  or  movements  of  the  Divine  mind.  They 
are  strictly  apptjra — ineffable.  So  the  Scripture  itself  represents  them — Isa.  Iv.  9" 
(Tayler  Lewis).  What  is  here  asserted  of  the  Divine  thoughts  is  likewise  true  of 
the  Divine  emotions ;  like  the  Deity  himself,  they  are  past  finding  out.  2.  A  real 
fact.  The  language  describes  something  real  on  the  part  of  God.  If  it  is  figurative, 
then  there  must  be  something  of  which  it  is  the  figure  ;  and  that  something  is  the 
Divine  grief  and  repentance.  These,  however,  are  realities  that  belong  to  a  realm 
which  the  human  intellect  cannot  traverse.  As  of  the  Divine  personality  man's  per- 
sonality is  but  an  image  or  reflection,  so  of  the  Divine  affections  and  emotions  are 
man's  affections  and  emotions  only  shadows.  Man  repents  whr-n  he  changes  his  mind, 
or  his  attitude,  or  his  actions.  God  repents  when  his  thoughts*  are  changed,  when  his 
feelings  are  turned,  when  his  acts  are  reversed.  But  God  is  "  of  one  mind,  and  who 
can  turn  him  V  "  He  is  "  without  variableness  and  shadow  of  turning ;  "  "  the  same 
yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever."  Hence  we  rather  try  to  picture  to  ourselves  the 
Divine  penitence  as  expressive  of  the  changed  attitude  which  the  immutable  Deity 
maintains  towards  things  that  are  opposite,  such  as  holiness  and  sin.  3.  An  instruct- 
ive fact,  telling  us  (1)  that  the  Divine  nature  is  not  impassible ;  (2)  that  sin  is  not 
the  end  of  man'i  creation ;  and  (3)  that  a  sinful  man  is  a  disappointment  to  God. 
4.  An  ominous  fact.  As  thus  explained,  the  grief  and  penitence  of  God  describe 
the  effect  which  human  sin  ever  have  upon  the  Divine  nature.  It  fills  him  with 
heart-felt  grief  and  pity.  It  excites  all  the  fathomless  ocean  of  sympathy  for 
sinning  men  with  which  his  infinite  bosom  is  filled.  But  at  the  same  time,  and  not- 
withstanding this,  it  moves  him  to  inflict  judicial  retribution.  "And  the  Lord  said, 
I  will  destroy  man." 

III.  Grace  operating.  1.  In  restraining  sinners.  It  was  impossible  that  God 
could  leave  men  to  rush  headlong  to  their  own  destruction  without  interposing 
obstacles  in  their  path.  In  the  way  of  these  apostates  of  the  human  race  he  erected 
quite  a  series  of  barriers  to  keep  them  back  from  perdition.  He  gave  them  (1)  a 
gospel  of  mercy  in  the  promise  of  the  woman's  seed ;  (2)  a  ministry  of  mercy,  raising 
up  and  maintaining  a  succession  of  pious  men  to  preach  the  gospel,  and  warn  them 
•gainst  the  ways  of  sin ;  (3)  a  Spirit  of  mercy  to  strive  wfthin  them;  (4)  a  pro- 
vidence of  mercy,  (a)  measuring  out  to  them  a  long  term  of  years,  yet  (6)  solemnly 


108  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  [c«.  n.  1—8. 

reminding  them  of  their  mortality,  and  finally  (c)_  giving  them  a  reprieve,  even  aftei 
they  were  sentenced  to  destruction.  2.  In  saving  believers.  (1)  Accepting  them 
as  he  accepted  Noah ;  (2)  preserving  them  amid  the  general  defection  of  the  times, 
as  he  did  Noah,  who  without  Divine  assistance  must  have  been  inevitably  swept 
away  in  the  general  current  of  ungodliness ;  (3)  providing  for  their  safety  against 
the  coming  judgment.  They  were  all  removed  by  death  before  the  flood  came,  and 
Noah  was  delivered  by  the  ark. 

Lessons : — 1.  The  terrible  degeneracy  of  human  nature.  2.  The  danger  of  mixed 
marriages.  3.  God  may  pity,  but  he  must  likewise  punish,  the  evil-doer.  4.  The 
day  of  grace  has  its  limits.  5.  If  a  soul  will  go  to  perdition,  it  must  do  so  over  many 
mercies.     6.  God  never  leaves  himself  without  a  witness,  even  in  the  worst  of  times. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 8. — The  work  of  sin.  The  moral  chaos  out  of  which  the  new  order  is 
about  to  be  evolved.     We  find  these  features  in  the  corrupt  state  depicted. 

I.  Ill-assorted  marriages.  The  sons  of  God — »'.  «.  the  seed  of  the  righteous, 
such  men  as  the  patriarchs  described  in  ch.  v.,  men  who  walked  with  God,  and  were 
his  prophets — fell  away  from  their  allegiance  to  the  Divine  order,  and  went  after 
the  daughters  of  the  Cainites.  The  self-will  and  mere  carnal  affections  are  denoted 
by  the  expression  "  all  whom  they  chose." 

II.  Violence  and  military  ambition.  The  giants  were  the  "nephilim,"  those 
who  assaulted  and  fell  upon  their  neighbours.  The  increase  of  such  men  is  dis- 
tinctly traced  to  the  corrupt  alliances. 

III.  The  withdrawal  by  judgment  of  the  Divine  Spirit  from  man,  by  which 
may  be  meant  not  only  the  individual  degeneracy  which  we  see  exemplified  in  such 
a  case  as  Cain,  driven  out  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  given  up  to  a  reprobate 
mind,  and  afterwards  in  Pharaoh  ;  but  the  withdrawal  of  prophecy  and  such  special 
spiritual  communications  as  had  been  given  by  such  men  as  Enoch. 

IV.  The  shortening  of  human  life.  Since  the  higher  moral  influence  of 
Christianity  has  been  felt  in  society  during  the  last  three  centuries,  it  is  calculated 
that  the  average  length  of  human  life  has  been  increased  twofold.  The  anthro- 
pomorphism of  these  verses  is  in.  perfect  accordance  with  the  tone  of  the  whole 
Book  of  Genesis,  and  is  not  in  the  least  a  perversion  of  truth.  It  is  rather  a  reve- 
lation of  truth,  as  anticipating  the  great  central  fact  of  revelation,  God  manifest  in 
the  flesh.  But  why  is  God  said  to  have  determined  to  destroy  the  face  of  the  earth, 
the  animal  creation  with  the  sinful  man  ?  Because  the  life  of  man  involved  that 
of  the  creatures  round  him.  "The  earth  is  filled  with  violence."  To  a  large  extent 
the  beasts,  creeping  things,  and  fowls  of  the  air  participate  in  the  disorder  of  the 
human  race,  being  rendered  unnaturally  savage  and  degenerate  in  their  condition 
by  man's  disorderly  ways.  Moreover,  any  destruction  which  should  sweep  away 
a  whole  race  of  men  must  involve  the  lower  creation.  The  defeat  of  a  king  is  the 
defeat  of  his  subjects.  In  all  this  corruption  and  misery  there  is  yet,  by  the  grace 
of  God,  one  oasis  of  spiritual  life,  the  family  of  Noah.  He  found  grace  not  because 
he  earned  it,  but  because  he  kept  what  had  been  given  him,  both  through  hip 
ancestors  and  by  the  work  of  the  Spirit  in  his  own  heart. — R. 

Vers.  1 — 5. — The  demoralisation  of  the  race.    This  was  due  to — 

I.  The  long  lives  of  the  antediluvians.  Long  life,  if  he'pful  to  the  good,  is 
much  more  injurious  to  the  wicked.  Giants  in  health  and  life  are  often  giants  in 
wickedness. 

II.  The  unholy  alliances  of  the  Sethites  and  Cainites.  Nothing  so  demoral- 
ising as  marriage  with  an  evil  woman.  Its  bad  effects  are  commonly  transmitted 
to,  and  intensified  in,  posterity. 

III.  The  depravity  induced  by  the  fall,  which  waa  universal  in  its  extent,  and 
gradually  deepening  in  its  intensity. 

Lessons: — 1.  The  inherent  evil  of  our  natures.  2.  The  curse  clinging  to  un. 
godliness.  3.  The  true  function  of  worldly  sorrows  and  of  frequent  and  earlj 
death.— W.  R. 


OH.  VI.  1—8.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


lfl 


Ver.  3. — Probation,  approbation,  and  reprobation.  "  And  the  Lord  said,  My  spirit 
shall  not  always  strive  with  man,"  &c.  The  life  of  man,  whether  "onger  or  shorter, 
is  a  time  during  which  the  Spirit  of  God  strives  with  him.  It  is  at  once  in  judgment 
and  in  mercy  that  the  strife  is  not  prolonged ;  for  where  there  is  continued  opposition 
to  the  will  of  God  there  is  continual  laying  up  of  judgment  against  the  day  of  wrath. 
The  allotted  time  of  man  upon  the  earth  is  sufficient  for  the  required  probation, 
clearly  manifesting  the  direction  of  the  will,  the  decided  choice  of  the  heart.  Here 
is — 

I.  The  great  moral  pact  op  man's  condition  in  his  fleshly  state.  The  striving 
of  God's  Spirit  with  him.  1.  In  the  order  of  the  world  and  of  human  life.  2.  In 
the  revelation  of  truth  and  positive  appeals  of  the  Divine  word.  3.  In  the  oonstant 
nearness  and  influence  of  spiritual  society.  4.  In  the  working  of  conscience  and  the 
moral  instincts  generally. 

II.  The  Divine  appointment  op  spiritual  privilege  at  once  a  righteous  limitation 
and  a  gracious  concentration.  That  which  is  unlimited  is  apt  to  be  undervalued. 
Not  always  shall  the  Spirit  strive.  1.  Individually  this  is  testified.  A  heart  which 
knows  not  the  day  of  its  visitation  becomes  hardened.  2.  In  the  history  of  spiritual 
work  in  communities.  Times  of  refreshing  generally  followed  by  withdrawments  of 
power.  The  limit  of  life  itself  is  before  us  all.  Not  always  can  we  hear  the  voice 
and  see  the  open  door. 

III.  The  natural  and  the  spiritual  are  intimately  related  to  one  another  in 
the  life  of  man.  He  who  decreed  the  length  of  days  to  his  creature  did  also 
strive  with  the  evil  of  his  fallen  nature  that  he  might  cast  it  out.  The  hundred  and 
tw,enty  years  are  seldom  reached ;  but  is  it  not  because  the  evil  is  so  obstinately 
'etained  ?  Those  whose  spirit  is  most  in  fellowship  with  the  Spirit  of  God  are  least 
Weighed  down  with  the  burden  of  the  flesh,  are  strongest  to  resist  the  wearing,  wast- 
ing influence  of  the  world. 

IV.  The  striving  of  God's  Spirit  with  us  may  cease.  What  follows?  To  fall 
on  the  Btone  is  to  be  broken,  to  be  undor  it  is  to  be  crushed.  The  alternative  is 
before  every  human  life — to  be  dealt  with  as  with  God  or  against  him.  "  Woe  unto 
him  that  striveth  with  his  Maker  1 "  The  progressive  revelations  of  the  Bible  point 
to  the  winding  up  of  all  earthly  history.  Not  always  strife.  Be  ye  reconciled  to 
God— B. 

Ver.  3. — The  striving  of  the  Spirit  implies — 

I.  The  doctrine  of  human  depravity. 

II.  The  granting  of  God's  Spirit  to  our  fallen  world. 

III.  That  God's  Spirit  is  opposed  by  man. 

IV.  That  the  effort  of  God's  Spirit  for  man's  salvation,  even  though  not  successful, 
COMES  to  an  end. 

V.  That  the  striving  of  God's  Spirit  comes  to  an  end  not  because  God's  willingness 
to  nelp  corner  to  an  end,  but  because  human  nature  sinks  beyond  the  possibility 
of  help. 

VI.  That  it  belongs  to  God  as  Sovereign  to  fix  the  day  of  grace. 

Learn — 1.  The  richness  of  Divine  mercy.  2.  The  possibility  of  falling  away 
beyond  the  h«pe  of  repentance.  3.  The  fact  that  our  day  of  grace  is  limited. 
4.  The  certainty  that,  however  short,  the  day  of  grace  which  we  enjoy  is  available 
for  salvation. — W.  B. 


§  4.  The  Generations  of  Noah  (oh.  vi.  9 — ix.  29). 
EXPOSITION. 


Yer.   9.— These   are  the    generations  of 

Koah.  "  NoVi  capitis  initium  "  =  "  haec  est 
hisloiia  Noachi"  (Kosenmiiller  ;  cf.  ch.  v.  1). 
Noah  (vide  ch.  v.  29)  was  a  just  man.  p'lVs 
not  of  spotless  innocence  (Knobel)  ;  but  up- 
right, honest,  virtuous,  pious  (vir  probus); 


from  p\)S,  to  be  straight,  hence  to  be  jnst ; 
Piel  to  render  just  or  righteous  (EccL  Lat., 
justificars),  to  declare  any  one  just  or  inno- 
cent (Gesenius);  better  "justified"  or  declared 
righteous,  being  derived  from  the  Piel  form 
of  the  verb  (Fiirst).     "  Evidently  the  right- 


108 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS 


[ch   vi.  »— 28. 


eonsness  here  meant  is  that  which  represents 
him  as  justified  in  view  of  tho  judgment 
of  the  Flood,  hy  reason  of  his  faith,  Heb. 
xi.  7  "  (Lange).  "  To  be  just  is  to  be  right 
in  point  of  law,  and  thereby  entitled  to  all 
the  blessings  of  the  acquitted  and  justified. 
When  applied  to  the  guilty  this  epithet 
implies  pardon  of  sin  among  other  benefits 
of  grace  "  (Murphy).  And  perfect.  O'DR  : 
complete,  whole  (rtXttoc,  integer) ;  i.  e.  por- 
feet  in  the  sense  not  of  sinlessness,  but  of 
moral  integrity  (Gcsonius,  Calvin).  It  de- 
scribes "  completeness  of  parts  rather  than 
of  degrees  in  the  renewed  character"  (Bush). 
"  The  just  is  the  right  in  law,  the  perfect  is 
the  tested  in  holiness  "  (Murphy).  If,  how- 
ever, the  term  is  equivalent  to  the  rtXeiwffic 
of  the  Christian  system  (1  Cor.  ii.  6  ;  Heb. 
vii.  11),  it  denotes  that  complete  readjust- 
ment of  the  being  of  a  sinful  man  to  the 
law  of  God,  both  legally  and  morally,  which 
is  effected  by  the  whole  work  of  Christ  for 
man  and  in  man  ;  it  is  "  the  establishment  of 
complete,  unclouded,  and  enduring  commu- 
nion with  God,  and  the  full  realisation  of  a 
state  of  peace  with  him  which,  founded  on 
a  true  and  ever  valid  remission  of  sins,  has 
for  its  consummation  eternal  glory"  (Delitzsch 
on  ,  Heb.  vii.  11).  In  his  generations. 
Vrn"j3,  from  "111,  to  go  in  a  circle  ;  hence  a 
circuit  of  years  ;  an  age  or  generation  (gene- 
ratio,  seculum)  of  men.  The  clause  marks 
not  simply  the  sphere  of  Noah's  virtue, 
among  his  contemporaries,  or  only  the  dura- 
tion of  his  piety,  throughout  his  lifetime,  but 
likewise  the  constancy  of  his  religion,  which, 
when  surrounded  by  the  filth  of  iniquity  on 
every  side,  contracted  no  contagion  (Calvin). 
"It  is  probable,  moreover,  that  he  was  of 
pure  descent,  and  in  that  respect  also  dis- 
tinguished from  his  contemporaries,  who  were 
the  offspring  of  promiscuous  marriages  be- 
tween the  godly  and  the  ungodly"  (Murphy). 
And  Noah  walked  with  God.  The  special 
form  in  which  his  just  and  perfect  character 
revealed  itself  amongst  his  sinful  contem- 
poraries. For  the  import  of  the  phrase  see 
on  ch.  v.  22.  Noah  was  also  a  preacher  of 
righteousness  (2  Pet.  ii.  5),  and  probably 
announced  to  the  wicked  age  in  which  he 
lived  the  coming  of  the  Flood  (Heb.  xi.  7). 

Ver.  10. — And  Noah  begat  three  sons, 
Shem,  Ham,  and  Japheth  (cf.  ch.  v.  32). 
Here  (in  the  story  of  the  Flood)  if  anywhere, 
observes  Rosenmiiller,  can  traces  be  detected 
of  two  distinct  documents  (duorum  monu- 
mentomm),  in  the  alternate  use  of  the  names 
of  the  Deity,  the  frequent  repetitions  of  the 
same  things,  and  the  use  of  peculiar  forms 
of  expression;  and  in  vers.  9 — 13,  compared 
with  ch.  vi.  5 — 8,  Bleek,  Tuch,  Colenso, 
and  others  find  the  first  instance  of  need- 
less repetition,  on  the  supposition  of  the' 
unity  of  thi  narrative,    but  a  sure   index 


of  the  Elohistic  pen,  on  the  hypothesii 
of  different  authors  ;  but  the  so-called  "  re- 
petition "  is  explained  by  remembering  that 
ch.  vi.  6 — 8  forms  the  close  of  a  section 
"  bringing  down  the  history  to  the  point  at 
which  the  degeneracy  of  mankind  causes 
God  to  resolve  on  the  destruction  of  the 
world,"  while  the  new  section,  which  other- 
wise would  begin  too  abruptly,  introduces 
the  account  of  the  Deluge  by  a  brief  de- 
scription of  its  cause  (ef.  Quarry,  p.  367). 
The  structure  of  the  narrative  here  is  not 
different  from  what  it  appears  elsewhere  (ct 
ch.  ii.  4  ;  v.  1). 

Ver.  11. — The  earth — (1)  its  inhabitants, 
as  in  ver.  11  (cf.  Gen.  xi.  1) — mankind  being 
denominated  earth  because  wholly  earthly 
(Chrysostom) ;  (2)  the  land,  which  had  become 
defiled  through  their  wickedness  (vers.  12, 13 ; 
cf.  Ps.  cvii.  34) — also  (literally,  and  the  earth) 
was  corrupt — in  a  moral  sense,  the  causes  and 
forms  of  which  corruption  have  already  been 
detailed  in  the  preceding  paragraph.  The  term 
is  elsewhere  applied  to  idolatry,  or  the  sin  of 
perverting  and  depraving  the  worship  of 
God  (Exod.  xxxii.  7  ;  Deut.  xxxii.  5  ;  Judjjss 
ii.  19  ;  2  Chron.  xxvii.  2) ;  but  the  special 
sins  of  the  antediluvians  were  rather  licen- 
tiousness and  lawlessness— before  God — i.  e. 
openly,  publicly,  flagrantly,  and  presnnip- 
tously  (cf.  ch.  x.  9) ;  noting  the  intensity  of 
\heir  wickedness,  or  intimating  the  fact  that 
God  had  seen  their  corruption,  and  so  com 
mending  the  Divine  long-suffering  (Calvin) 
— and  the.  earth  was  filled  with  violence. 
"  The  outward  exhibition  of  inward  car- 
nality"  (Murphy);  "injurious  and  cruel 
dealing,  the  violating  of  duties  towards  men, 
'  rapines  or  robberies  (Chaldee) ' "  (Ains- 
worth).   Cf.  ch.  xlix.  5;  Joel  iii.  19  ;  Obad.  x. 

Ver.  12. — And  God  looked  upon  the  earth. 
"God  knows  at  all  times  what  is  doing  in 
our  world,  but  his  looking  upon  the  earth 
denotes  a  special  observance  of  it,  as  though 
he  had  instituted  an  inquiry  into  its  real 
condition"  (Bush  ;  cf.  Ps.  xiv.  2  ;  xxxiii.  13, 
14  ;  liii.  2,  3).  And,  behold,  it  was  corrupt 
"  Everything  stood  in  sharpest  contradiction 
with  that  good  state  which  G6d  tho  Creator 
had  established "  (Delitzsch,  quoted  by 
Lange).  The  nature  of  this  corruption  is 
further  indicated.  For  all  flesh  —  t.  e.  the 
human  race,  who  are  so  characterised  here 
not  so  much  for  their  frailty  (Isa.  xl.  5, 
6)  as  for  their  moral  and  spiritual  degen- 
eracy (Gen.  vi.  3,  q.  v.)  —  had  corrupted— 
shacluith  [KaTafBiipio,  LXX. ) ;  literally,  had 
destroyed,  wrecked,  and  ruined,  wholly  sub- 
verted and  overthrown  —  his  way  —  derech 
(from  darach,  to  tread  with  the  feet),  a  going; 
hence  a  journey,  a  way  ;  e.  g.  (1)  of  living  oi 
acting  (Prov.  xii.  15  ;  1  Sam.  xviii.  44)  ;  (2) 
of  worshipping  God— oMc,  Acts  xix.  9,  23 
(Pi.  exxxix.  24  ;  Amos  viii   14).  Here  it  iig 


OB.  vi.  9—12.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


109 


nines  the  entire  plan  and  coarse  of  life  in  all 
its  ethical  and  religious  aspects  as  designed 
for  man  by  God  (cf.  Ps.  cxix.  9  ;  and  con- 
trast "the  way  of  Cain,"  Jude  11  j  "the 
way  of  Balaam,"  2  Pet.  ii.  16)— upon  the 
earth. 

Ver.  13.— And  God  said  unto  Noah,  The 
end.  ft?,  (from  Hophal  of  fViJ,  to  cut  off) : 
that  which  is  cut  off,  the  end  of  a  time  (Gen. 
iv.  3)  or  of  a  spaco  (Isa.  xxxvii.  24) ;  specially 
the  end  or  destruction  of  a  people  (Ezek.  viu 
2  ;  Amos  viii.  2),  in  which  sense  it  is  to  be 
here  understood  (Gesenius,  Rosenmiiller). 
The  rendering  which  regards  ketz  as,  like 
rsXoc  =  the  completion,  consummation,  ful- 
ness of  a  thing  (here  of  human  lleshliness  or 
wickedness),  and  the  following  clause  as 
epexegetic  of  the  present  (Bush),  though 
admissible  in  respect  of  Scriptural  usage 
(cf.  Jer.  Ii.  13 ;  Ecclcs.  xii.  13  ;  Rom.  x.  4) 
and  contextual  harmony,  is  scarcely  so 
obvious  ;  while  a  third,  that  the  end  spoken 
of  is  the  issue  to  which  the  moral  corruption 
of  the  world  was  inevitably  tending  (Keil, 
Lange),  does  not  materially  differ  from  the 
first.  Of  all  flesh.  /.  e.  of  the  human  race, 
of  course  with  the  exception  of  Noah  and  his 
family,  which  ' '  teaches  us  to  beware  of 
applying  an  inflexible  literality  to  such  terms 
as  all,  when  used  in  the  sense  of  ordinary 
conversation  "  (Murphy).  Is  come  before  me. 
Literally,  before  my  face.  Not  "a  me  con- 
stitutes est  (Gesenius),  "is  decreed  before 
my  throne"  (Kalisch)  ;  but,  "  is  in  the  con- 
templation of  my  mind  as  an  event  soon  to 
be  realised"  (Murphy),  with  perhaps  a  glance 
at  the  circumstance  that  man's  ruin  had  not 
been  sought  by  God,  but,  as  it  were,  had 
thrust  itself  upon  his  notice  as  a  thing  that 

could  no  longer  be  delayed.  If  'J|ip  K3  = 
the  similar  expression  J#  N2,  winch,  when 
applied  to  rumours,  signifies  to  reach  the  ear 
(cf.  ch.  xviii.  21 ;  Fxod.  iii.  9  ;  1  Kings  ii. 
28  ;  Esther  ix.  11),  it  may  likewise  indicate 
the  closeness  or  near  approach  of  the  im- 
pending calamity.  For  the  earth  is  filled 
with  violence  through  them.  More  correctly, 
"from  their  faces  ;  "  "a  facie  eorum  "  (Vul- 
gate). That  is,  "the  flood  of  wickedness 
which  comes  up  before  God's  face  goes  out 
from  their  face  in  the  sense  of  being  perpe- 
trated openly  (Lange),  and  "by  their  con- 
scious agency  "  (Alford).  And,  behold,  I  will 
destroy  them.  Literally,  and  behold  me 
destroying  them.  The  verb  is  the  same  as 
is  translated  "corrupt"  in  ver.  12,  q.  v.,  as 
if  to  convey  the  idea  of  fitting  retribution 
(cf.  1  Cor.  iii  17 :  tine  rbv  vaiv  rob  Slav 
ipQiipn,  <p6tpii  toZtov  6  8i6g ;  Rev.  xi.  18  : 
<coi  iia<p9tlpai  rojlc  lia<p9iipovTag  rf/v  yrjv). 
Whether  this  destruction  whioh  was  threat- 
ened against  the  antediluvian  sinners  ex- 
tended to  the  loss  of  their  souls  throughout 


eternity  may  be  reasoned  {pro  and  con)  fxw 
other  Scriptures,  but  cannot  be  determined 
from  this  place,  which  refers  solely  to  the 
extinction  of  their  bodily  lives.  With  the 
earth.  Not  from  the  earth  (Samaritan),  or 
on  the  earth  (Syriac,  Rosenmiiller),  or  even 
the  earth,  "thus  identifying  the  earth  with 
its  inhabitants"  (Bush),  but,  together  with 
the  earth  (Kalisch,  Keil,  Alford;  cf.  ch.  ix. 
11  ;  Kai  rrjv  yjjv,  LXX.).  The  universality 
of  representation  which  characterises  this 
section  (vers.  9  — 13)  is  regarded  by  Davidson, 
Colenso,  and  others  as  contradictory  of  ch. 
vi.  6,  which  depicts  the  corruption  as  only 
human,  and  limits  the  destruction  to  the 
race  of  man.  But  as  the  two  accounts  belong 
to  different  subdivisions  of  the  book,  they 
cannot  properly  be  viewed  as  contradictory 
(cf.  '  Quarry  on  Genesis,'  pp.  370,  371). 

Ver.  1 4.  —  Make  thee  an  ark.  T\  2fi,  constr. 
of  POP),  etymology  unknown  (Gesenius);  of 
Shemitic  origin,  from  n31J,  to  be  hollow 
(Fttrst) ;  of  Egyptian  derivation,  a  boat  being 
called  tept  (Keil,  Kalisch,  Knobel) ;  from  the 
Sanscrit  pota,  a  pot  or  boat  (Bohlen)  ;  "  a 
peculiar  archaic  term   for  *  very   unusual 

thing,  like  >130,  the  term  for  the  Flood 
itself"  (T.  Lewis)  ;  translated  Kifiu>r6q,  C£/3jj 
(LXX.),  area  (Vulgate),  \apvat,  (Nicolas 
Damascenus),  lrXoiov  (Berosus) ;  not  a  ship 
in  the  ordinary  acceptation  of  the  word,  but 
a  box  or  chest  (cf.  Exod.  ii.  3)  capable  of 
floating  on  the  waters.  ' '  Similar  vessels, 
generally,  however,  drawn  by  horses  or  men, 
were  and  are  still  used  in  some  parts  of 
Europe  and  Asia"  (Kalisch).  Of  gopher 
wood.  Literally,  woods  of  gopher  (laj  : 
&TraZ  Xsy.,  the  root  of  which,  like  "IS3,  seems 
to  signify  to  cover  (Kalisch)  ;  lii/na  bitu- 
minata  (Vulgate);  pitch  trees,  resinous  trees 
such  as  are  used  in  ship-building  (Gesenius) ; 
most  likely  cypress,  Kvwupwaot  (Bochart, 
Celsius,.  Keil),  which  was  used  "in  some 
parts  of  Asia  exclusively  as  the  material  for 
ships,  in  Athens  for  coffins,  and  in  Egypt 
for  mummy  cases"  (Kalisch).  "It  is  said 
too  that  the  gates  of  St.  Peter's  Church  at 
Rome  (made  of  this  wood),  which  lasted 
from  the  time  of  Constantine  to  that  of 
Eugene  IV.,  t.  e.  1100  years,  had  in  that 
period  suffered  no  decay  "  (Bush).  Rooms  — 
fcinnim,  nests,  applied  metaphorically  to  the 
chambers  of  the  ark — shalt  thou  make  in  the 
ark,  and  shalt  pitch  it  within  and  without 
with  pitch.  1§3a  IJHSpi :  literally,  shalt 
cover  it  with  a  covering.  The  substance 
to  be  employed  was  probably  bitumen  or 
asphalt  (afl-^aXroc,  LXX.  ;  bitumen,  Vul- 
gate). The  root  (cl  English,  cover)  signifies 
also  to  pardon  sin,  i.  e.  to  cover  them  from 
God's  sight  (Ps.  lxv.  3  ;  lxxviii.  38 ;  2  Chron 
xxx  18),  sad  to  make  expiation  for  gin,  i.  ± 


110 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  vi.  9—22 


to  obtain  covering  for  them  (ch.  xxxii.  20  ; 
Dun.  ix.  24)  ;  whence  copher  is  used  for  a 
random  (Exod.  xxi.  30  ;  xxx.  12),  and  cap- 
poreth,  the  covering  of  the  ark  (Exod.  xxv. 
17),  for  the  mercy-seat  (iXaorijpioi/,  LXX.  ; 
propitiatorium,  Vulgate). 

Ver.  15. — And  this  is  the  fashion  which 
thou  shalt  make  it  of.  The  shape  of  it 
is  not  described,  but  only  its  dimensions 
given.  The  length  of  the  ark  shall  be  three 
hundred  cubits,— a  cubit  =  the  length  from 
the  elbow  to  the  middle  finger  (Deut.  iii.  11) ; 
nearly  twenty -two  inches,  if  the  sacred 
cubit ;  if  the  common,  eighteen  inches, — the 
breadth  of  it  fifty  cubits,  and  the  height  of 
it  thirty  cubits.  With  a  cubit  of  twenty- 
one  inches,  the  length  would  be  525  feet, 
the  breadth  87  feet  6  inches,  dimensions 
not  dissimilar  to  those  of  the  Great  Eastern 
which  is  680  feet  long,  83  feet  broad,  and 
58  feet  deep.  The  cubic  contents  of  the  ark 
with  these  dimensions  would  be  2,411, 718-75 
feet,  which,  allowing  forty  cubic  feet  per  ton, 
would  give  a  carrying  capacity  equal  to 
32,800  tons.  P.  Jansen  of  Holland,  in 
1609,  proved  by  actual  experiment  that  a 
ship  constructed  after  the  pattern  of  the  ark, 
though  not  adapted  for  sailing,  would  in 
reality  carry  a  cargo  greater  by  one-third 
than  any  other  form  of  like  cubical  content. 
The  difficulty  of  building  a  vessel  of  such 
enormous  magnitude,  T.  Lewis  thinks,  may 
be  got  over  by  remembering  the  extreme 
simplicity  of  its  structure,  the  length  of 
time  allowed  for  its  erection,  the  physical 
constitution  of  the  builders,  and  the  facilities 
for  obtaining  materials  which  may  have 
existed'  in  abundance  in  their  vicinity. 
Bishop  Wilkins  ('Essay  towards  a  Philoso- 
phical Character  ami  Language'),  Dr.  A. 
Clarke,  and  Bush  are  satisfied  that  the  ark 
was  large  enough  to  contain  all  the  animals 
directed  to  be  taken  into  it,  along  with  pro- 
vision for  a  twelvemonth  ;  but  computations 
founded  on  the  number  of  the  species  pre- 
sently existing  must  of  necessity  be  precari- 
ous ;  and  besides,  it  is  at  least  doubtful 
whether  the  Deluge  was  universal,  or  only 
partial  and  local,  in  which  case  the  difficulty 
(so  called)  completely  vanishes. 

Ver.  16.— A  window— "inty.  from  "irjtf,  to 
shine,  hence  light  (DJ'ini?,  double  light,  or 
light  of  midday— ch.  xliii.  16 ;  Jer.  vi.  4). 
Not  the  window  which  Noah  afterwards 
npened  to  let  out  the  dove,  which  is  called 

1190  (ch.  viii.  6),  but  obviously  a  lighting 
apparatus,  which  may  have  been  a  series  of 
«-indows  (Gesenius),  scarcely  one  (Thcodotion, 
Qipav ;  Symmachus,  Siatpavig ;  Vulgate, 
fenestram;  Kimchi,  Luther,  Calvin) ;  or  an 
opening  running  along  the  top  of  the  sides 
of  the  ark,  occupied  by  some  translucent 
mbstance,  and  sheltered  by  the  eaves  of  the 


roof  (Knobel) ;  or,  what  appears  more  pro* 
bable,  a  light  opening  in  the  upper  deck, 
stretching  along  the  entire  length,  and  cor 
tinued  down  through  the  different  stories 
(Baumgarten,  Lfinge) ;  or,  if  the  roof  sloped, 
as  is  most  likely,  an  aperture  along  the 
ridge,  which  would  admit  the  clear  light  of 
heaven  (tsohar),  and  serve  as  a  meridional 
line  enabling  Noah  and  the  inmates  of  the 
ark  to  ascertain  the  hour  of  noon  (Tayler 
Lewis).  Keil  and  Murphy  think  we  can  form 
no  proper  conception  of  the  light  arrange- 
ment of  the  ark.  The  conjecture  of  Schultens, 
which  is  followed  by  Dathius,  Michaelis, 
Rosenmiiller,  and  others,  that  the  tsohar 
meant  the  covering  (tectum,  dorsum),  "  quo 
sane  hoc  aedifieium  carere  non  potuit,  propter 
pluviam  tot  dierum  continuum, "  is  obviously 
incorrect — shalt  thou  make  to  the  ark,  and 
in  a  cubit — to  a  cubit,  i.  e.  all  but  a  cubit 
(T.  Lewis) ;  into  a  cubit,  i.  e.  to  the  extent 
of  a  cubit  (Ainsworth)  ;  by  the  cubit,  i.  e. 
by  a  just  measure  ( Kalisch) — shalt  thou  finish 
it— not  the  window  (Gesenius,  Ewald,  Tuch), 
the  feminine  suffix  agreeing  with  tebah, 
which  is  feminine,  and  not  with  tsohar,  which 
is  masculine ;  but  the  ark — above.  Literally, 
from  above  to  above ;  i.  e. ,  according  to  the 
above  interpretations  of  the  preposition, 
either  the  roof,  after  the  construction  of  the 
windows,  should  be  regularly  finished  "by 
the  just  measure "  (Kalisch)  ;  or  the  roof 
should  be  arched  but  a  cubit,  that  it  might 
be  almost  flat  (Ainsworth)  ;  or  from  the 
eaves  up  toward  the  ridge  it  should  be  com- 
pleted, leaving  a  cubit  open  or  unfinished 
(T.  Lewis).  And  the  door  of  the  ark — the 
opening  which  should  admit  its  inmates — 
shalt  thou  set  in  the  side  thereof;  with 
lower,  second,  and  third  stories.  The  word 
stories  is  not  in  the  original,  but  some  such 
word  must  be  supplied.  Lange  thinks  that 
each  flat  or  story  had  an  entrance  or  door 
in  the  side. 

Ver.  17.— And,  behold,  I,  even  I.  More 
correctly,  "And  I,  behold,  I,"  an  emphatic 
assertion  that  what  was  coming  was  a  Divine 
visitation,  and  not  simply  a  natural  occur- 
rence. Do  bring.  Literally,,  bringing,  the 
participle  standing  in  place  of  the  finite 
verb  to  indicate  the  certainty  of  the  future 
action  (vide  Gesenius,  'Gram.,'  §  134).     A 

flood  of  waters  upon  the  earth.  7-13D,  pro- 
nounced by  Bohlen  "far-fetched,"  "is  an 
archaic  word  coined  expressly  for  the  waters 
of  Noah  (Isa.  xliv.  9),  and  is  used  nowhere 
else  except  Psalm  xxix.  10  —  waters  upon 
the  earth"  (Keil).  The  first  intimation 
of  the  means  to  be  employed  in  inflicting 
judgment  on  the  morally,  corrupted  world 
To  destroy  all  flesh,  wherein  is  the  breat 
of  life,  from  under  heaven  :  and  every  thing 
that  is  in  the  earth  shall  die.     The  ftshe> 


ch.  vi.  9—22.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


HI 


only  being  excepted,  "  either  (1)  because 
tney  did  not  live  in  the  same  element 
wherein  man  lived  and  sinned ;  or  (2) 
because  they  were  not  so  instrumental  in 
man's  sins  as  the  beasts  might  be  ;  or  (3) 
because  man  had  a  greater  command  over 
the  beasts  than  over  the  fishes,  and  greater 
service  and  benefit  from  them  "  (Poole). 

Ver.  18. — But  with  thee  will  I  establish 
my  covenant.  JVfi  (fliafljjicij,  LXX.  ;  foe- 
dus,  Vulgate ;  testamenium,  N.  T. ),  from 
X~\%,  to  cut  or  carve ;  hence  a  covenant,  from 
the  custom  of  passing  between  the  divided 
pieces  of  the  victims  slain  on  the  occasion 
of  making  such  solemn  compacts  (cf.  ch. 
iv.  9 ;  Gesenius) ;  from  iTlS,  to  eat,  hence 
an  eating  together,  a  banquet  (cf.  ch.  xxxi. 
64 ;  Lee).  On  the  Bible  idea  of  covenant  see 
ch.  xv.  9.  My  covenant  =  the  already  well- 
known  covenant  which  I  have  made  with 
man.  And  thou  shalt  come  into  the  ark, 
thou,  and  thy  sons,  and  thy  wife,  and  thy 
sons'  wives  with  thee.  This, was  the  sub- 
stance of  the  covenant  agreement  so  far  as 
Noah  was  concerned.  The  next  three  verses 
describe  the  arrangements  about  the  animals. 

Vers.  19— 21.— And  of  every  living  thing 


of  all  flesh,  two  of  every  sort  (literally,  ftj 
twos,  i.  e.  in  pairs)  shalt  thou  bring  into 
— or  cause  to  enter,  i.  e.  receive  them  when 
they  come  (ver.  20) — the  ark,  to  keep  them 
alive — literally,  to  cause  to  live  ;  'iva  rpi^tjc 
(LXX.) ;  in  order  to  preserve  alive-  (sc.  the 
animals) — with  thee ;  they  shall  he  male 
and  female.  Of  fowls  after  their  kind 
(literally,  of  the  fowl  after  its  kind),  and 
of  cattle  after  their  kind  (literally,  of  the 
cattle  after  its  kind),  of  every  creeping  thing 
of  the  earth  after  its  kind,  two  of  every  sort 
shall  come  unto  thee.  "  Non  hominis  actu, 
sed  Dei  nutu"  (Augustine).  Perhaps  through 
an  instinctive  presentiment  of  the  impending 
calamity  (Lange,  '  Speaker's  Commentary '). 
And  take  thou  unto  thee  of  all  food  that  is 
eaten,  and  thou  shalt  gather  it  to  thee 
(collecting  sufficient  for  a  twelvemonth's 
sustenance) ;  and  it  shall  be  for  food  for 
thee,  and  for  them. 

Ver.  22.— Thus  did  Noah;  according  to 
all  that  God  (Elohim ;  in  ch.  vii.  5  it  is 
Jehovah)  commanded  (with  respect  to  the 
building  of  the  ark,  the  receiving  of  the 
animals,  the  collecting  of  provisions)  hu», 
so  did  he. 


HOMILETICa 

Vera.  9— 22.— The  building  of  the  ark.  I.  The  man  and  his  oontempo&abies. 
A  common  saying,  and  one  possessed  of  a  show  of  wisdom,  that  a  person  seldom 
rises  far  above  the  average  goodness,  or  sinks  far  below  the  average  wickedness,  of 
the  age  in  which  he  lives.  Yet  it  is  precisely  in  proportion  as  individuals  either 
excel  or  fall  beneath  their  generation  that  they  are  able  to  affect  it  for  good  or 
evil.  All  epoch-making  men  are  of  this  stamp.  Noah,  it  is  obvious,  was  not  a  man 
whose  character  was  shaped  by  his  contemporaries.  In  respect  of  three  things,  the 
contrast  between  him  and  them  was  as  great  and  decided  as  could  well  be  imagined. 
1.  Legal  standing-  Noah  was  a  just  man,  i.e.  a  sinner  justified  by  his  believing 
acceptance  of  the  gospel  promise  of  the  woman's  seed ;  while  they  were  corrupt,  or 
had  declined  into  infidelity.  2.  Spiritual  character.  Noah  was  perfect  in  the 
sense  that  his  heart  was  right  with  God,  and  his  nature  was  renewed  by  Divine 
grace ;  they  were  wanting  in  all  the  essential  characteristics  of  true  being,  "  alienated 
from  the  life  of  God  through  the  ignorance  that  was  in  them,  because  of  the  hard- 
ness of  their  hearts."  3.  Outer  walk.  As  a  consequence  the  daily  life  of  Noah  was 
one  of  eminent  piety— a  walking  with  God,  like  that  of  Enoch ;  while  theirs  was  one 
of  impious  defiance  of  the  laws  of  God,  and  ruthless  oppression  of  the  rights  of  men. 
Learn  (1)  that  it  is  quite  possible  to  be  pious  in  the  midst  of  evil  times ;  and  (2) 
that  only  a  life  of  close  communion  with  God  will  prevent  one  from  being  overborne 
by  the  wickedness  of  his  age.  ... 

II.  The  event  and  its  occasioh.  The  event  was — 1.  Appalling  m  its  form 
The  destruction  of  a  world  by  a  flood  of  waters.  "  In  the  beginning,'  at  God's  com- 
mand, the  goodly  fabric  had  risen  from  the  waters  (ch.  i.  2 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  5),  radiant 
in  beauty,  swimming  in  a  sea  of  light,  rejoicing  its  Creator's  heart  (ch.  i.  31)  ;  now 
it  was  about  to  return  to  the  dark  and  formless  matrix  whence  it  sprang.  If  the 
world's  birth  woke  music  among  the  morning  stars  (Job  xxxviii.  7^),  surely  its  destruc- 
tion was  enough  to  make  the  angels  weep  1  2.  Universal  in  its  sweep.  Without 
engaging  at  present  in  any  controversy  as  to  the  actual  extent  of  the  Deluge,  we 
may  notice  that  Elohim  represents  it  as  destructive  of  the  entire  human  raco  (Noah 
and  his  family  excepted).     Considering  the  impression  made  upon  our  heart*  by  the 


US  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  [oh.  vi.  9—22. 


report  of  some  sudden  accident  (the  explosion  of  a  mine,  the  sinking  of  a  ship,  the 
collision  of  a  train),  in  which  a  number  of  lives  are  lost,  it  is  not  wonderful  that  the 
echo  of  this  stupendous  catastrophe  should  have  vibrated  through  the  world  (see 
'Traditions  of  the  Deluge').  3.  Supernatural  in  its  origin.  It  was  not  an 
ordinary  occurrence,  but  a  distinctly  miraculous  phenomenon.  "Behold,  I,  even  I, 
do  bring  a  flood  of  waters  upon  the  earth."  4.  Punitive  in  its  purpose.  It* 
retributive  character  was  distinctly  implied  in  the  form  of  its  announcement— 
"  I  will  destroy."  All  temporal  calamities  are  not  of  this  description.  That  a!] 
suffering  is  penal  was  the  mistake  of  Job's  friends  (Job  iv.  7,  et  passim),  though 
not  of  Job  himself,  and  certainly  it  is  not  the  teaching  of  the  Bible  (cf.  Job 
xxxiii.  29;  Ps.  xciv.  12;  Bom.  viii.  28;  2  Cor.  iy.  17).  But  this  was  — 5. 
Melancholy  in  its  occasion — the  total,  absolute,  and  radical  corruption  of  the  earth's 
inhabitants.  Through  unbelief  and  disobedience  they  had  ruined  the  moral  nature 
which  God  had  given  them  ;  and  now  there  was  no  help  for  it  but  that  they  should 
be  swept  away.  6.  Inevitable  in  its  coming.  Implied  in  one  interpretation  of  the 
words  "the  end  of  all  flesh"  (vide  Expos.).  Sin  ever  carries  its  own  retribution  in 
its  bosom ;  not  merely,  however,  in  recoiling  upon  itself  with  inward  misery,  sense 
of  loss,  weakness,  depravation ;  but  likewise  in  necessitating  the  infliction  on  the 
part  of  Elohim  of  positive  retribution.  7.  Near  in  its  approach.  "  Behold,  I  am 
bringing  I"  as  if  it  were  already  at  hand.  See  here  (1)  the  danger  of  sin;  (2) 
the  certainty  of  retribution ;  (3)  the  righteousness  of  the  wrath  of  God ;  (4)  the 
mercy  of  God  in  making  this  known  to  sinners,  as  ,he  foretold  the  Flood  to  the 
antediluvians. 

III.  Thb  commission  and  its  execution.  1.  It  related  to  the  safety  of  the  Church 
(ver.  18).  At  that  time  the  antediluvian  Church  was  small,  consisting  only  of  Noah 
and  his  family  (ch.  vii.  1),  and  in  all  probability  uninfluential  and  despised,  by  the 
Gibborim  and  Nephilim  of  the  day  ridiculed  and  oppressed.  Endangered  by  the 
immorality  and  violence  of  the  times,  it  was  likewise  imperilled  by  the  impending 
Deluge.  Yet  God  never  leaves  his  people  unprotected  or  unprovided  for  (Deut. 
xxxiii.  12  ;  Ps.  xxxiv.  15 ;  xlvi.  5 ;  Zech.  ii.  5 ;  2  Pet.  ii.  9).  The  Church  of  God 
and  Christ  is  imperishable  (Isa.  liv.  17  ;  Matt.  xvi.  18 ;  xviii.  14).  That  was  sym- 
bolised to  Israel  by  the  burning  bush  (Exod.  iii.  2),  and  to  all  postdiluvian  time  by 
the  ark.  It  was  impossible  that  God  could  be  unconcerned  about  the  safety  of  the 
believing  remnant  in  antediluvian  times.  The  commission  which  came  to  Noah  con- 
cerned the  rescue  of  himself  and  children.  2.  It  was  Divinely  given  (vers.  13,  14). 
Salvation  is  of  the  Lord  (Ps.  iii.  8;  Jonah  ii.  9).  Manifestly  only.  God  could  have 
provided  for  the  safety  of  Noah  and  his  family.  Directions  from  any  other  quarter, 
or  even  expedients  devised  by  himself,  must  have  proved  both  futile  and  presump- 
tuous. So,  whatever  instructions  may  be  given  to  man  with  a  view  to  salvation 
must  come  from  God,  if  they  are  to  be  successful.  Schemes  of  redemption  may  be 
beautiful,  ingenious,  attractive,  hopeful ;  if  they  are  not  God's  schemes  they  are 
worthless  (Isa.  xliii.  11 ;  Hosea  xiii.  4).  3.  It  was  minutely  detailed  (vers.  14—16). 
The  plan  which  God  proposed  to  Noah  for  the  salvation  of  himself  and  house  was 
building  of  an  ark  according  to  Divinely-prepared  specifications.  In  its  construction 
there  was  no  room  left  for  the  exercise  of  inventive  genius.  Like  the  tabernacle  in 
the  wilderness,  it  was  fashioned  according  to  a  God-given  pattern.  And  so,  in  all  that 
concerns  the  salvation  of  sinful  men,  from  first  to  last  the  plan  is  God's,  admitting 
neither  of  addition  nor  subtraction,  correction  nor  improvement,  at  the  hands  of  the 
men  themselves .  4.  It  teas  believingly  received  (Heb.  xi.  7).  Perhaps  the  last  device 
that  would  ever  have  suggested  itself  to  the  mind  of  Noah,  very  likely  ridiculed  by 
his  contemporaries  as  an  act  of  folly,  probably  at  times  regarded  with  considerable 
misgivings  by  the  patriarch  himself,  and  certainly  an  undertaking  that  would  involve 
immense  labour,  patient  endurance,  heroic  self-sacrifice,  it  was  yet  accepted  in  a 
spirit  of  meek  and  unquestioning  faith.  And  so  should  it  be  with  us.  When  God 
speaks  we  should  hear.  When  he  directs  we  should  obey.  5.  It  was  obediently 
carried  through  (ver.  22).  This  was  the  best  tost  of  his  faith.  Where  obedience  is 
absent,  faith  is  not  present.  Faith  always  discovers  its  existence  by  obedience 
(Heb.  xi.  8).  Learn — (1)  God's  care  of  his  people.  (2)  The  sufficiency  of  God't 
plan  of  Mlvation.     (3)  The  wisdom  of  implicitly  following  God's  directions. 


oh.  vi.  9—22.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  Ill 

Ver.  22. — The  obedience  of  Nook.  I.  Pious  in  its  principle.  II  Prompt  in 
its  operation.  III.  Laborious  in  its  exercise.  IV.  Universal  in  its  extent 
V.  Persevering  in  its  course.    VI.  Successful  in  its  end. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  9 — 22. — Mighteomness  and  peace;  The  description  of  Noah  is  very  "similar 
to  that  of  Enoch,  just  and  perfect  in  his  generation,  that  is,  blameless  in  his  walk 
before  men,  which  is  saying  much  of  one  who  lived  in  a  time  of  universal  corruption. 
And  he  walked  with  God,  i.  e.  devout  and  religious,  and,  from  the  analogy  of  the 
preceding  use  of  the  words,  we  may  say,  a  prophet.  He  preached  righteousness 
both  with  lip  and  life.  To  this  good  and  great  prophet  the  announcement  is  made 
of  the  coming  judgment.  "  The  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  him,  and 
he  will  show  them  his  covenant."  The  earth  is  filled  with  violence  through  men, 
•  and  therefore  with  man  must  be  destroyed.  With  the  message  of  judgment  there 
is  also  the  message  of  mercy,  as  at  the  first. 

The  ark,  an  emblem  op  salvation  by  grace,  as  afterwards  (cf.  1  Pet.  iii. 
19 — 22).  The  ofier  of  salvation  was  a  trial  of  faith.  God  did  not  himself  provide 
the  ark ;  it  was  made  by  the  hands  of  men,  of  earthly  materials,  with  ordinary  earthly 
measurements  and  appointments,  and  prepared  as  for  an  ordinary  occasion.  There 
was  nothing  in  the  visible  ark  to  stumble  faith ;  but,  as  it  was  connected  with  a 
positive  commandment  and  prophecy,  it  was  a  demand  on  the  simple  faith  of  the 
true  child  of  God,  which  is  of  the  nature  of  obedience.  We  cannot  doubt  that  this 
Divine  message  to  Noah  was  the  Bible  of  that  time.  It  appealed  to  faith  as  the 
word  of  God.  And,  as  in  all  times,  with  the  written  or  spoken  word  there  was  the 
unwritten  law,  the  lex  non  scripta;  for  we  are  told  that  "Noah  did  according  to  .all 
that  God  commanded  him,  so  did  he."  In  this  primitive  dispensation  notice  these 
things : — 1.  The  righteousness  of  God  is  the  foundation.  2.  The  accordance  of  the 
world  with  God's  heart,  as  at  once  commanding  righteousness  and  hating  violence, 
is  the  condition  of  its  preservation.  3.  The  mercy  of  God  is  connected  with  his 
special  revelations  in  and  by  the  men  who  have  found  grace  in  his  sight.  4.  The 
provisions  of  redemption  are  embodied  in  an  ark,  which  is  the  symbol  of  Divine 
ordinances  and  the  associated  life  of  believers.  5.  The  salvation  of  man  is  the 
real  end  and  aim  of  all  judgments.  6.  With  the  redeemed  human  race  there  is  a 
redeemed  earth — creatures  kept  alive  in  the  ark  to  commeuae,  with  the  family  of  God, 
a  new  life.  7.  While  we  must  not  push  the  symbology  of  the  Flood  too  far,  still  it 
is  impossible  to  overlook  the  figure  which  the  Apostle  Peter  saw  in  the  ark  floating 
on  the  waters — the  Church  of  Christ  as  washed  by  the  Holy  Ghost  in  those  waters, 
which  represent  not  the  putting  away  of  the  filth  of  the  flesh,  but  the  answer  of 
a  good  conscience  toward  God. — R. 

Ver.  14.— The  way  of  safety.  Prediction  of  deluge  and  way  of  escape  were  alike 
trials  of  faith  ;  beyond  reach  of  foresight ;  rejected  or  neglected  by  the  world.  Key 
to  the  typical  meaning,  1  Pet.  iii.  20,  21.  •  Baptism  the  initial  seal  of  the  Christian 
covenant.     Text  therefore  sets  forth  salvation  through  Christ. 

I.  "  Make  thee  an  ark."  Why  ?  Because  sentence  of  death  rests  upon  all 
men  (Rom.  v.  12).  As  in  the  destruction  of  first-born  (Exod.  xi.  5).  No  exceptions. 
Covenant  people  saved  only  by  the  blood  ;  so  here  (cf.  Job  ix.  30).  Men,  even  now, 
are  slow  to  believe  this.  Maxims  of  society  contradict  it.  From  childhood  trained 
to  live  as  if  no  danger,  as  if  many  things  more  important  than  salvation.  And  when 
preacher  proclaims  (Acts  ii.  40),  men  listen  and  approve  and  go  on  as  before.  Yet 
this  is  the  first  step  towards  salvation,  the  first  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit — to  convince 
careless  (Matt.  xvi.  26)  and  well-living  people  that  they  cannot  save  themselves. 
Until  this  is  done  Christ  has  no  attractiveness  (Isa.  liii.  2)'.  Who  would  shut  himself 
up  in  the  ark  if  no  deluge  coming?  Who  would  trust  it  if  another  way  would 
afford  safety^ 

II.  "  Make  thee  an  ark."  It  is  God's  appointed  way  of  safety.  "  The  Lord  hath 
made  known  his  salvation."  As  surely  as  the  deluge  is  according  to  his  word,  so 
•urely  is  the  way  of  deliverance  (Rom.  v.  20).     But  mark  the  way.     Can  you  trmrt 

QENiCaiS.  I 


114 


THIS  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[CH,  VII.  1—10. 


that  which  seems  so  frail?  At  the  root  of  sin  lies  unbelief  of  God's  truth.  Tliii 
caused  the  fall.  God  says,  Will  you  trust  me  ?  One  will  say,  I  live  a  good  life ;  is 
not  that  the  main  thing  ?  (cf.  1  Cor.  iii.  11).  Another,  I  pray  that  God  would  love 
me,  and  be  reconciled  to  me.  Does  he  not  love  thee  ?  (Titus  iii.  4).  Is  he  not  longing 
for  thee?  (Isa.  i.  18).  And  is  not  this  unbelief  of  what  God  says?  Thou 
needest  indeed  to  pray  that  the  Holy  Spirit  should  open  thine  eyes  to  what  God  has 
done.  But  that  thy  prayer  may  be  answered  there  must  be  the  will  to  be  taught 
(Ps.  lxxxv.  8). 

III.  "Make  thee  an  ark."  The  test  of  faith.  There  is  a  faith  which  does 
nothing,  which  merely  accepts  a  doctrine.  Such  was  not  that  of  Noah.  His  life's 
work  was  to  act  on  what  he  believed.  The  object  of  our  faith  is  Jesus  Christ,  the 
personal,  living,  loving  Saviour ;  not  merely  the  doctrine  that  he  died  and  rose  again. 
"Make  thee  an  ark  "  is  more  than  knowledge  that  he  is  the  Deliverer.  It  is  taking 
refuge  in  him,  and  walking  in  his  steps. — M. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  VII. 


Ver.  1. — And  the  Lord.  Jehovah,  since 
Elohim  now  appears  as  the  covenant  God, 
though  this  change  in  the  Divine  name  is 
commonly  regarded  by  modern  critics  as  be- 
trayi»g  the  hand  of  a  Jehovist  snpplementer 
of  the  fundamental  document  of  the  Elohist 
(Bleek,  Vaihinger,  Davidson,  Kalisch,  Co- 
lenso,  Alford) ;  but  "  that  the  variations  in 
the  name  of  God  furnish  no  criterion  by 
which  to  detect  different  documents  is  evi- 
dent enough  from  the  fact  that  in  ver.  5 
Noah  does  as  Jehovah  commands  him,  while 
in  ver.  16  Elohim  alternates  with  Jehovah  " 
(Eeil).  Said  unto  Noah.  At  the  end  of 
the  120  years,  when  the  building  of  the  ark 
had  been  completed,  and  only  seven  days 
before  the  Flood — doubtless  by  an  audible 
voice  still  speaking  to  him  from  between 
the  cherubim,  which  we  can  suppose  had 
not  yet  vanished  from  the  earth.  Come 
thou  and  all  thy  house  into  the  ark.  /.  e. 
prepare  for  entering ;  the  actual  entry  taking 
place  seven  days  later.  So  God  ever  hides 
hi3  people  before  the  storm  bursts  (cf.  Isa. 
xxvi.  20).  For  thee  have  I  seen  righteous 
(vide  ch.  vi.  9)  before  me.  Literally,  before 
my  face;  not  merely  notifying  the  Divine 
observance  of  Noah's  piety,  but  announcing 
the  fact  of  his  justification  in  God's  sight. 
"To  be  righteous  before  God,"  the  usual 
Scriptural  phrase  for  justification  (cf.  Pa. 
cxliii.  2).  In  this  generation.  Vide  ch. 
vi.  9.  indicating  not  alone  the  sphere  of 
Noah's  godly  life,  but  its  exceptional  cha- 
racter; "involving  an  opposing  sentence  of 
condemnation  against  his  contemporaries" 
(Lange). 

Ver.  2. — Of  every  clean  beast.  That  the 
distinction  between  clean  and  unclean  ani- 
mals was  at  this  time  ui  derstood  is  easier  to 
believe  than  that  the  writer  would  perpetrate 
the  glaring  anachronism  of  introducing  in 
prediluvian   times  what  only  took  its  rise 


several  centuries  later  (Kalisch).  That  this 
distinction  was  founded  on  nature,  "every 
tribe  of  mankind  being  able  to  distinguish 
between  the  sheep  and  the  hyena,  the  dove 
and  the  vulture  "  ('  Speaker's  Commentary '), 
oi  "  on  an  immediate  conscious  feeling  of 
the  human  spirit,  not  yet  clouded  by  any 
ungodly  and  unnatural  culture,  which  leads 
it  to  see  in  many  beasts  pictures  of  sin  and 
corruption  "  (KeU),  has  been  supposed  ;  but 
with  greater  probability  it  was  of  Divine 
institution,  with  reference  to  the  necessities 
of  sacrifice  (Ainsworth,  Bush,  Wordsworth  ; 
cf.  ch.  viii.  20).  To  this  was  appended  in 
the  Levitical  system  a  distinction  between 
clean  and  unclean  in  respect  of  man's  food 
(Levit.  xL  8).  Shalt  thou  take — inconsist- 
ent with  ch.  vi.  20,  which  says  the  animals 
were  to  come  to  Noah  (Colenso) ;  but  ch. 
vi  19,  which  says  that  Noah  was  to  bring 
them,  t.  e.  make  them  go  (at  least  nearly 
equivalent  to  take),  clearly  recognises  Noah's 
agency  (Quarry) — to  thee  by  sevens.  Liter- 
ally, seven,  seven ;  either  seven  pairs  (Vul- 
gate, LXX. ,  Aben  Ezra,  Clericus,  Michaelis, 
De  Wettc,  Knobel,  Kalisch,  Murphy,  Alford, 
Wordsworth,  'Speaker's  Commentary'),  or 
seven  individuals  (Chrysostom,  Augustine, 
Theodoret,  Calvin,  Pererius,  Willet,  De- 
litzsch,  Eosenmiiller,  Keil,  Lange,  Bush) ; 
both  parties  quoting  the  next  clause  in 
support  of  their  particular  interpretation. 
Davidson,  Colenso,  and  Kalisch  challenge 
both  interpretations  as  "  irreconcilable  with 
the  preceding  narrative "  (ch.  vi.  19)  ;  but 
the  obvious  answer  is,  that  while  in  the  first 
communication,  which  was  given  120  years 
before,  when  minute  instructions  were  not 
required,  it  is  simply  stated  that  the  animals 
should  be  preserved  by  pairs  ;  in  the  second, 
when  the  ark  was  finished  and  the  animali 
were  about  to  be  collected,  it  is  added  that, 
in  the  case  of  the  few  clean  beasts  used  fai 
sacrifice,  an  exception  should  be  made  to  th« 
general  rule,  and  not  one  pair,  but  eithel 


OH.  VII    I — 10.] 


THIS  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


1M 


three  pairs  with  one  over,  or  seven  pairs, 
should  be  preserved.  The  male  and  his 
female.  This  seems  to  be  most  in  favour  of 
the  first  interpretation,  that  pairs,  and  not 
individuals,  are  meant.  And  of  beasts  that 
are  not  clean  by  two,  the  male  and  his 
female.  Ish  veishto.  Of.  ch.  ii.  25,  where 
the  phrase  denotes  the  ethical  personality  of 
human  beings,  to  which  there  is  here  an 
approximation,  as  the  preserved  animals  were 
designed  to  be  the  parents  of  subsequent 
races.  The  usual  phrase  for  male  and  female, 
which  is  employed  in  ch.  i.  28  (a  so-called 
Elohistic)  and  ch.  vii.  3  (a  so-called  Jeho- 
vistic  section),  refers  to  the  physical  distinc- 
tion of  sex  in  human  beings. 

Ver.  8. — Of  fowls  also  of  the  air  by  sevens, 
the  male  and  the  female.  /.  e.  of  clean 
fowls,  "which  he  leaves  to  be  understood 
out  of  the  foTegoing  verse"  (Poole).  The 
Samaritan,  Syriac,  and  LXX.  (not  so  Vul- 
gate, Onkelos,  Arabic)  insert  the  word 
"clean"  unnecessarily,  and  also  add,  " Kai 
atrb  iravrw  ruiv  -KiTtiv'Siv  rwv  nrj  Ka9apuiv 
Svo  Sito  dpaev  Kai  6rj\v,"  manifestly  to  "make 
the  verse  resemble  the  preceding.  To  keep 
seed  alive  upon  the  face  of  all  the  earth. 

Vers,  i,  5. — For  yet  seven  days.  Literally, 
for  to  days  yet  seven — after  seven  days ; 
thus  giving  Noah  time  to  complete  his  pre- 
parations, and  the  world  one  more  oppor- 
tunity to  repent,  which  Poole  thinks  many 
may  have  done,  though  their  bodies  were 
drowned  for  their  former  impenitency.  And 
I  will  cause  it  to  rain — literally,  /  causing 
it,  the  participle  indicating  the  certainty 
of  the  future  action  (cf.  ch.  vi  17  ;  Prov. 
xxv.  22  ;  cf.  Ewald's  *  Heb.  Synt.,'  §  306)— 
upon  the  earth  forty  days  and  forty  nights. 
The  importance  assigned  in  subsequent 
Scripture  to  the  number  forty,  probably  from 
the  circumstance  here  recorded,  is  too  obvious 
to  be  overlooked.  Israel  wandered  forty 
years  in  the  wilderness  (Num.  xiv.  33).  The 
scouts  remained  forty  days  in  Canaan  (Num. 
xiii.  26).  Moses  was  forty  days  in  the 
mount  (Exod.  xxiv.  18).  Elijah  fasted  forty 
days  and  forty  nights  in  the  wilderness  of 
Beersheba  (1  Kings  xix.  8).  A  respite  of 
forty  days  was  given  to  the  Ninevites  (Jonah 
iii.  4).  Christ  fasted  forty  days  before  the 
temptation  (Matt.  iv.  2),  and  sojourned 
forty  days  on  earth  after  his  resurrection 
(Acts  i.  3).  It  thus  appears  to  have  been 
regarded  as  symbolical  of  a  period  of  trial, 
ending  in  victory  to  the  good  and  in  ruin  to 
the  evil.     And   every  living  substance — 


yeh&m;  literally,  standing  thing,  omnequod 
subsistit,  i.  e.  "whatever  is  capable  by  a  prin- 
ciple of  life  of  maintaining  an  erect  posture  " 
(Bush) ;  ivaoTt/fia  (LXX. ;  cf.  Deut.  xi.  6  ; 
Job  xxii.  20) — that  I  have  made  will  I 
destroy — literally,  blot  out  (cf.  ch.  vi.  7)  — 
from  off  the  face  of  the  earth.  And  Noah 
did  according  to  all  that  the  Lord  (Jehovah, 
the  God  of  salvation,  who  now  interposed  for 
the  patriarch's  safety ;  in  ch.  vi.  22,  where 
God  is  exhibited  in  his  relations  to  all  flesh, 
it  is  Elohim)  had  commanded  him. 

Ver.  6. — And  Noah  was  six  hundred  years 
old.  Literally,  a  son  of  six  hundred  years, 
i.  e.  in  his  600th  year  (cf.  ver.  11).  The 
number  six  "  is  generally  a  Scriptural  sym- 
bol of  suffering.  Christ  suffered  on  the  sixth 
day.  In  the  Apocalypse  the  sixth  seal,  the 
sixth  trumpet,  the  sixth  vial  introduce 
critical  periods  of  affliction  "  (Wordsworth). 
When  the  flood  of  waters  was  upon  the 
earth. 

Ver.  7. — And  Noah  went  in.  J.  e.  began 
to  go  in  a  full  week  before  the  waters  came 
{vide  ver.  10).  "A  proof  of  faith  and  a 
warning  to  the  world."  And  his  sons,  and 
his  wife,  and  his  sons'  wives  with  him.  In 
all  eight  persons  (1  Pet.  iii.  20) ;  whence  it 
-is  obvious  that  "  each  had  but  one  wife,  and 
that  polygamy,  as  it  began  among  the  Cain- 
ites,  was  most  probably  confined  to  them" 
(Poole).  Into  the  ark,  because  of  the  waters 
of  the  flood.  Literally,  from  the  face  of  the 
waters,  being  moved  with  fear  and  impelled 
by  faith  (Heb.  xi.  7). 

Vers.  8,  9.— Of  clean  beasts,  and  of  beasts 
that  are  not  clean,  and  of  fowls,  and  of  every 
thing  that  creepeth  upon  the  earth,  there 
went  in  two  and  two  into  the  ark,  the  male 
and  the  female.  In  obedience  to  a  Divine 
impulse.  Nothing  short  of  Divine  power 
could  have  effected  such  a  timely  and  orderly 
entrance  of  the  creatures  into  the  huge  vessel 
(cf.  their  mode  of  exit,  ch.  viii.  18).  The 
seeming  inconsistency  of  this  verse  with  ver. 
2,  which  says  that  the  clean  animals  entered 
the  ark  by  sevens,  will  be  at  once  removed  by 
connecting  vers.  7  and  8  instead  of  8  and  9, 
and  commencing  a  new  sentence  with  ver.  9. 
It  favours  this,  that  "of"  is  a  wanting  before 
"  everything  that  creepeth,1  and  that  the 
LXX.  begin  ver.  8  with  "and"  (cf.  Quarry, 
p.  373).     As  God  had  commanded  Noah. 

Ver.  10.  —And  it  came  to  pass  after  sevea 
days  (literally,  at  the  seventh  of  the  days), 
that  the  waters  of  the  flood  were  upon  the 
earth. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 9. — The  ark  entered.  I.  The  invitation  of  Jehovah.  "Come  tho« 
and  all  thy  house  into  the  ark."  This  invitation  was — 1.  Timely.  It  was  given  on 
the  finishing  of  the  ark,  and  therefore  not  too  soon  ;  also  seven  days  before  the  FlooA 

12 


116  THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS.  [ch.  vii.  1—10 

and  therefore  not  too  late.  God's  interventions  in  his  people's  behalf  are  always 
opportune  :  witness  the  exodus  from  Egypt,  the  deliverance  at  the  Red  Sea,  the 
destruction  of  Sennacherib's  army  ;  Christ's  walking  on  the  sea,  sleeping  in  Ihe  boat, 
rising  from  the  dead.  2.  S]>ecial.  It  was  addressed  in  particular  to  Noah.  "  Come 
thou."  "The  Lord  knowetli  them  that  are  his."  "The  Good  Shepherd  calleth  his 
own  sheep  byname,  and  leadeth  them  out."  So  is  the  invitation  of  the  gospel  of  the 
same  personal  and  individual  description  (Matt.  xiii.  9;  Rev.  iii.  6).  Men  are  not 
summoned  to  believe  in  masses,  but  as  individuals.  3.  Comprehensive.  "  And  all  thy 
house."  Whether  Sliem,  Ham,  and  Japheth  were  at  this  time  believers  is  not  known. 
The  noticeable  circumstance  is  that  the  invitation  was  not  addressed  immediately  to 
them,  tut  mediately  through  their  father.  If  Noah  stood  alone  in  his  piety,  their 
summons  to  enter  the  ark  reminds  us  of  the  advantage  of  belonging  to  a  pious  family, 
and  being  even  only  externally  connected  with  the  Church  (cf.  Luke  xix.  9;  Acts 
xvi.  32).  4.  Gracious.  Given  to  Noah  certainly,  in  one  sense,  because  of  his  piety, 
(ch.  vii.  1).  But  since  his  godliness  was  the  fruit  of  faith,  and  his  faith  nothing  more 
than  a  resting  on  the  Divine  covenant  or  promise,  it  was  thus  purely  of  grace.  So 
is  God's  invitation  in  the  gospel  all  of  grace  (Gal.  i.  6;  Ephes.  iii.  8).  5.  Urgent. 
Only  seven  days,  and  the  Flood  would  begin.  There  was  clearly  not  much  time  to 
lose.  Only  a  seventh  of  the  time  given  to  the  men  of  Nineveh  (Jonah  iii.  4).  But 
not  even  seven  days  are  promised  in  the  gospel  call  (Matt.  xxiv.  36  ;  Rom.  xiii.  12  j 
Phil.  iv.  5 ;  James  v.  9). 

II.  The  obedience  of  Noah.  "And  Noah  did  according  unto  all  that  the  Lord 
commanded  him."  This  obedience  was — 1.  Immediate-  It  does  not  appear  that 
Noah  trifled  with  the  Divine  summons,  or  in  any  way  interposed  delay ;  and  neither 
should  sinful  men  with  the  invitation  of  the  gospel  (2  Cor.  vi.  2 ;  Heb.  iii.  7).  2. 
Believing.  It  had  its  inspiration  in  a  simple  credence  of  the  Divine  word  that  safety 
could  be  secured  only  within  the  ark  ;  and  not  until  the  soul  is  prepared  to  accord  a 
hearty  trust  to  the  statement  that  Christ  is  the  heaven-provided  ark  of  salvation  for 
a  lost  world  does  it  yield  to  the  gospel  call,  and  enter  into  the  safe  shelter  of  his 
Church  by  believing  on  his  name  (Ephes.  i.  13).  3.  Personal.  Noah  himself  entered 
in.  Had  he  not  done  so,  not  only  would  his  own  salvation  have  been  missed,  but  his 
efforts  to  induce  others  to  seek  the  shelter  of  the  ark  would  have  been  fruitless.  So 
the  first  duty  of  a  herald  of  the  gospel  or  minister  of  salvation  is  to  make  his  own 
calling  and  election  sure,  after  which  his  labours  in  behalf  of  others  are  more  likely 
to  be  efficacious  (1  Cor.  ii.  27  ;  1  Tim.  iv.  16).  4.  Influential.  The  entire  house- 
hold of  the  patriarch  followed  his  example.  It  is  doubtful  if  at  this  time  any  of  them 
were  possessors  of  his  faith.  Yet  all  of  them  complied  with  the  heavenly  invitation, 
probably  impelled  thereto  by  the  example  and  exhortation  of  their  parent.  When 
the  head  of  a  household  becomes  a  Christian  he  in  effect  brings  salvation  to  the  house. 
He  brings  all  its  inmates  into  at  least  a  nominal  connection  with  the  Church,  encircle* 
them  with  an  atmosphere  of  religion  emanating  from  his  own  character  and  conduct, 
and  frequently  through  Divine  grace  is  honoured  to  be  the  instrument  of  their 
salvation  (Luke  xix.  9;  Acts  xi.  14;  xvi.  31).  5.  Minute.  Noah's  entry  into  the 
ark  in  all  particulars  corresponded  with  the  Divine  invitation.  The  animals  went  in 
two  and  two,  as  God  commanded.  Men  are  not  expected  or  allowed  to  deviate  from 
the  plain  prescriptions  of  the  word  of  God  concerning  the  way  of  faith  and  salvation 
(Acts  x.  33). 

Learn — 1.  The  unwearied  diligence  of  God  in  saving  men.  2.  The  personal  nature 
of  God's  dealings  with  men.  3.  The  extreme  solicitude  with  which  he  watches 
over  them,  who  are  his.  4.  The  indispensable  necessity  of  obedience  in  order  to 
salvation. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — God  the  Saviour  inviting  faith.  "  Come  thou  and  all  thy  house  into 
the  ark,"  &c.  Covenant  mercy.  A  type  of  the  Christian  Church,  with  its  special 
privilege  and  defence,  surrounded  with  the  saving  strength  of  God. 

I.  Divine  preparation.  Providence.  The  ark.  1.  Human  agency  under  inspired 
direction.     The  word  of  God.     The  institutions   of  religion.     The  fellowship  of 


oh.  vii  11—24.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


in 


gaints.  .  2.  A  preparation  made  in  the  face  of  and  in  8pite  of  an  opposing  world. 
The  history  of  the  Church  from  the  beginning.  3.  The  preparation  is  safety  and 
peace  to  those  who  trust  in  it,  notwithstanding  the  outpoured  judgment. 

II.  Divine  faithfulness.  "  Come  thou;  for  thee  have  I  seen  righteous."  Not  the 
merit  of  man  is  the  ground  of  confidence,  but  the  Lord's  grace.  I  have  seen  thee 
righteous  because  I  have  looked  upon  thee  as  an  obedient  servant,  and  have  counted 
thy  faith  for  righteousness.  Faithfulness  in  God  is  an  object  of  man's  trust  as  con- 
nected with  his  spoken  word  and  the  preparation  of  his  mercy. 

III.  Divine  sufficiency.  The  weak  creatures  in  the  ark  surrounded  by  the  de- 
stroying waters.  A  refuge  opened  in  God.  His  blessing  on  the  household.  His 
redemption  succouring  the  individual  soul,  the  life  and  its  treasures,  family  peace  and 
prosperity,  &c.  The  ark  a  type  of  the  prepared  salvation,  carrying  the  believer 
through  the  flood  of  earthly  cares  and  troubles,  through  the  deep  waters  of  death, 
to  the  new  world  of  the  purified  heaven  and  earth,  wherein  dwelleth  righteous* 
ness. — R. 

Vers.  7 — 16. — Realised  talvation.  "  And  Noah  went  in,"  &c.  "  And  the  Lord 
shut  him  in"  (vers.  7,  10,  16). 

I.  The  contrast  between  the  position  of  the  believer  and  that  of  the  unbe- 
liever. The  difference  between  a  true  freedom  and  a  false.  "  Shtit  in "  by  the 
Lord  to  obedience,  but  also  to  peace  and  safety.  The  world's  judgment  shut  out. 
The  restraints  and  privations  of  a  religious  life  only  temporary.  The  ark  will  be 
opened  hereafter. 

II.  The  method  of  grace  illustrated.  He  that  opens  the  ark  for  salvation 
shuts  in  his  people  for  the  completion  of  his  work.  We  cannot  shut  ourselves  in. 
Our  temptation  to  break  forth  into  the  world  and  be  involved  in  its  ruin.  The 
misery  of  fear.  Are  we  safe  ?  Perseverance  not  dependent  upon  our  self-made  reso- 
lutions or  provisions.  By  various  means  we  are  shut  in  to  the  spiritual  life.  Provi- 
dentially ;  by  ordinances ;  by  bonds  of  fellowship.  We  should  look  for  the  Divina 
seal. — B. 


EXPOSITION. 


Vers.  11,  12.— In  the  six  hundredth  year 
•f  Noah's  life,  in  the  second  month.  Not  (1) 
of  Noah's  600th  year  (Knobel) ;  but  either 
(2)  of  the  theocratic  year,  which  began  with 
Nisan  or  Abib  (Exod.  xii.  2;  xiii.  4;  xxiii. 
15  ;  xxxiv.  18 ;  Deut.  xvi,  1 ;  Neh.  ii.  1), 
jither  in  March  or  April  (Babbi  Joshua, 
Ambrose,  Luther,  Calvin,  Mercerus,  Haver- 
nick,  Kalisch,  Alford,  Wordsworth) ;  or  (3) 
of  tfia  civil  year,  which  commenced  with 
the  autumnal  equinox  in  the  month  Tisri, 
"  called  of  old  the  first  month,  but  now  the 
seventh  "  (Chaldee  Paraphrase  ;  Exod.  xxiii. 
16 ;  xxxiv.  22),  corresponding  to  September 
or  October  (Josephus,  Babbi  Jonathan, 
Kimchi,  Rosenmuller,  Keil,  Murphy,  Bush, 
Ainsworth,  'Speaker's  Commentary').  In 
support  of  the  former  maybe  alleged  the  usual 
Biblical  mode  of  reckoning  the  sacred  year  by 
numbers,  and  in  defence  of  the  latter  that  the 
ecclesiastical  year  did  not  begin  till  the  time 
of  the  Exodus.  In  the  seventeenth  day  of 
the  month.  "  The  careful  statement  of  the 
chronology,  which  marks  with  such  exactness 
day  and  month  in  the  course  of  this  occur- 
rence, puts  all  suspicion  of  the  history  to 
shame  '  (Haverniek).  The  same  day  were 
•11  the  fountains  of  the  great  deep — i.  e.  the 


waters  of  the  ocean  (Job  xxxviii.  16,  30  j 
xli.  31  ;  Ps.  cvi.  9)  and  of  subterranean 
reservoirs  (Job  xxviii .  4,  10  ;  Ps.  xxxiii.  7  ; 
Deut.  viii.  7) — broken  up.  "  By  a  metynomy, 
because  the  earth  and  other  obstructions  were 
broken  up,  and  so  a  passage  opened  for  the 
fountains  "  (Poole).  "  The  niphal  or  passive 
form  of  l?j2^  denotes  violent  changes  in  the 
depths  of  the  sea,  or  in  the  action  of  the 
earth — at  all  events  in  the  atmosphere " 
(Lange).  And  the  windows  of  heaven  were 
opened.  Arubboth,  from  arabh,  to  twine — 
network  or  lattices  ;  hence  a  window,  as 
being  closed  with  lattice-work  instead  of 
glass  (Eccles.  xii.  3)  ;  here  the  flood-gates  of 
heaven,  which  are  opened  when  it  rains  (cf. 
ch.  viii.  2 ;  2  Kings  vii.  19  ;  Isa.  xxiv.  18  ; 
Mai.  iii.  10).  And  the  rain  was— literally, 
and  there  was  (happened,  came)  violent  rain; 
D^,  different  from  "1DD,  which  denotes 
any  rain,  and  is  applied  to  other  things 
which  God  pours  down  from  heaven  (Exod. 
ix.  18  ;  xvi.  4) — upon  the  earth  forty  days 
and  forty  nights  (cf.  ch.  vii.  4).  Though 
the  language  is  metaphorical  and  optical,  it 
clearly  points  to  a  change  in  the  land  lovel 
by  which  the  ocean  waters  overflowed  tht 


118 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


Loh.  vu.  11—24 


depressed  continent,  accompanied  with  heavy 
and  continuous  rain,  as  the  cause  of  the 
Deluge  (contrast  with  this  the  works  of  the 
third  and  fourth  creative  days) ;  yet  "  the 
exact  statement  of  the  natural  causes  that 
concurred  in  the  Deluge  is  a  circumstance 
which  certainly  in  no  wise  removes  the 
miraculous  nature  of  the  whole  fact— who  has 
unveiled  the  mysteries  of  nature  ?  —  but 
which  certainly  shows  how  exact  was  the 
attention  paid  to  the  external  phenomena  of 
the  Deluge  "  (Havernick). 

Vera.  13,  14. — In  the  selfsame  day — liter- 
ally, m  the  bone,  or  strength,  or  essence  (ch. 
ii.  23)  of  that  day— in  that  very  day  (cf,  ch. 
xvii.  23,  26);  "about  noonday,  i.  e.  in  the 
public  view  of  the  world"  (Poole) ;  "aphrase 
intended  to  convey  the  idea  of  the  utmost 
precision  of  time"  (Bush)  —  entered  Noah, 
and  Shorn,  and  Ham,  and  Japheth,  the  sons 
of  Noah,  and  Noah's  wife,  and  the  wives  of 
his  three  sons  with  them,  into  the  ark. 
Not  inconsistent  with  vers.  4,  5,  which  do 
not  necessarily  imply  that  the  actual  entry 
was  made  seven  days  before  the  Flood  ;  but 
merely  that  Noah  then  began  to  carry  out 
the  Divine  instructions.  The  threefold  re- 
cital of  the  entry— first  in  connection  with 
the  invitation  or  command  (ver.  5),  and 
again  in  the  actual  process  during  the  seven 
days  (ver.  7),  and  finally  on  the  day  when 
the  Flood  began  (ver.  15), — besides  lending 
emphasis  to  the  narrative,  heightens  its 
dramatic  effect.  They,  and  every  beast  after 
his  kind,  and  all  the  cattle  after  their  kind, 
and  every  creeping  thing  that  creepeth  upon 
the  earth  after  his  kind,  and  every  fowl 
after  his  kind,  every  bird  of  every  sort  (liter- 
ally, wing).  The  creatures  here  specified  cor- 
respond with  the  enumeration — viz.,  chay- 
yah,  behemah,  remes — in  ch.  i.  25,  q.  v.  The 
last  clause,  kol-canaph,  Kalisch,  following 
Clericus,  translates,  though,  according  to 
Rosenmiiller,  without  satisfactory  reasons, 
' '  every  winged  creature,"  and  so  makes  "  three 
classes  of  winged  beings — the  eatable  species 
WW,  the  birds  which  people  the  air  and 
enliven  it  by  the  sounds  of  their  melodies 
(liSI?),   and  the  endless  swarms  of  insects 

(f|J3),  the  greatest   part  of  which  possess 

neither  the  utility  of  the  former  nor  the 
beauty  of  the  latter."  Gesenius,  however, 
translates  it  "birds  of  all  kinds,"  and  Knobel 
regards  it  as  synonymous  with  "every  bird." 
The  LXX.  give  the  sense  of  the  two  clauses : 
sai  irav  vpvtov  TTtruvov  icard  y'svoQ  avrov. 

Ver.  15. — And  they  went  in  unto  Noah 
into  the  ark  (cf.  ch.  vi.  20,  which  affirmed 
they  should  come),  two  and  two  of  all  flesh, 
wherein  is  the  breath  of  life.  Cf.  the  three 
expressions  for  an  animated  creature— njQ 
W§1  (ch.  i.  30),  MP!  (ch.  vii.  4),   D\»n  rjn 


Ver.  16. — And  they  that  went  in,  went 
in  male  and  female  of  all  flesh,  as  God 
(Elohim)  had  commanded  him.  This  evi- 
dently closed  an  Elohistic  passage,  according 
to  Colenso,  as  the  ensuing  clause  as  mani- 
festly belongs  to  the  Jehovistic  interpolator  ; 
but  the  close  connection  subsisting  between 
the  two  clauses  forbids  any  such  dislocation 
of  the  narrative  as  that  suggested.  "  On  the 
supposition  of  an  independent  Jehovistic 
narrative,  Bishop  Colenso  feels  it  necessary 
to  interpolate  before  the  next  statement  the 
words,  'And  Noah  and  all  his  house  went 
into  the  ark ' "  (Quarry,  p.  379).  And  the 
Lord  (Jehovah)  shut  him  in.  Literally,  shut 
behind  him,  i.  e.  closed  up  the  door  of  the 
ark  after  him  (eicXckk  rrjv  Ktfftarov  l^mOiv 
aiiTov,  LXX.);  doubtless  miraculously,  to 
preserve  him  both  from  the  violence  of  the 
waters  and  the  rage  of  men.  The  contrast 
between  the  two  names  of  the  Deity  is  here 
most  vividly  presented.  It  is  Elohim  who 
commands  him  about  the  beasts  ;  it  is  Jeho- 
vah, the  covenant  God,  who  insures  his 
safety  by  closing  the  ark  behind  him. 

Vers.  17 — 19. — And  the  flood  was  forty  days 
upon  the  earth.  Referring  to  the  forty  days' 
and  nights'  rain  of  ver.  4  (j-erro-aposovra 
fl/if pat:  Kat  TiaaapaKOVTa  vvktoq,  LXX.), 
during  which  the  augmentation  of  the  waters 
is  described  in  a  threefold  degree.  And  the 
waters  increased.  Literally,  grew  great. 
The  first  degree  of  increase,  marked  by  the 
floating  of  the  ark.  And  bare  up  the  ark, 
and  it  was  lift  up  above  the  earth.  Literally, 
it  was  high  from  upon  the  earth,  i.  e.  it 
rose  above  it.  And  the  waters  prevailed. 
Literally,  were  strong ;  from  ~QS,  to  be 
strong ;  whence  the  Gibborim  of  ch.  vi.  4. 
And  were  increased  greatly  on  the  earth. 
Literally,  became  great,  greatly.  The  second 
degree  of  increase,  marked  by  the  going  of 
the  ark.  And  the  ark  went — i.  e.  floated 
along ;  icai  iirttyipiTo,  LXX.  (Ps.  civ.  26) — 
npon  the  face  of  the  waters.  And  the 
waters  prevailed  exceedingly.  Literally, 
and  the  waters  became  strong,  exceedingly. 
The  third  degree  of  increase,  marked  by  the 
submergence  of  the  mountains.  And  all  the 
high  hills,  that  were  under  the  whole 
heaven,  were  covered.  A  clear  assertion  of 
the  universality  of  the  Flood  (Keil,  Kalisch, 
Alford,  Bush,  Wordsworth) ;  but  the  lan- 
guage does  not  necessarily  imply  more  than 
that  all  the  high  hills  beneath  the  specta- 
tor's heaven  were  submerged  (cf.  ch.  xli. 
57  ;  Exod.  ix.  25  ;  x.  15  ;  Deut.  ii.  25  ;  1 
Kings  x.  24 ;  Acts  ii.  5  ;  Col.  i.  25,  for  in- 
stances in  which  the  universal  terms  all  and 
every  must  be  taken  with  a  limited  significa- 
tion) ;  while  it  is  almost  certain  that,  had 
the  narrator  even  designed  to  record  only 
the  fact  that  all  the  heights  within  th« 
visible  horizon  had  disappeared  beneath  th* 


m.  to.  11—24.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


lit 


rising  waters,  he  would  have  done  so  hy 
saying  that  "  all  the  high  hills  under  the 
whole  heaven  were  covered."  While,  then, 
it  is  admitted  that  the  words  may  depict  a 
complete  submergence  of  the  globe,  it  is 
maintained  by  many  competent  scholars  that 
the  necessities  of  exegesis  only  demand  a 
partial  inundation  (Poole,  Murphy,  Tayler 
Lewis,  'Speaker's  Commentary,'  Inglis). 

Ver.  20. — Fifteen  cubits  upward  —  half 
the  height  of  the  ark— did  the  waters  pre- 
vail. Literally,  become  strong ;  above  the 
highest  mountains  obviously,  and  not  above 
the  ground  simply  ;  as,  on  the  latter  alterna- 
tive, it  could  scarcely  have  been  added,  and 
the  mountains  were  covered. 

Vers.  21,  22  describe  the  effect  of  the 
Deluge  in  its  destruction  of  all  animal  and 
human  life.  And  all  flesh  died  that  moved 
upon  the  earth.  A  general  expression  for  the 
animal  creation,  of  which  the  particulars  are 
then  specified.  Both  of  fowl,  and  of  cattle, 
and  of  beast,  and  of  every  creeping  thing 
that  creepeth  on  the  earth.  Literally,  in 
fowl,  and  in  cattle,  &c.  (cf.  ver.  14).  And 
every  man.  I.  e.  all  the  human  race  (with 
the  exception  of  the  inmates  of  the  ark), 
which  is  further  characterised  as  all  in 
whose  nostrils  was  the  breath  of  life. 
Literally,  the  breath  of  the  spirit  of  lives, 
i.  k.  all  mankind.  A  clear  pointing  back- 
wards to  ch.  ii.  7,  which  leads  Davidson  to 
ascribe  vers.  22,  23  to  the  Jehovist,  although 
Eichhorn,  Tuch,  Bleek,  Vaihinger,  and  others 
leave  them  in  the  fundamental  document, 
but  which  is  rather  to  be  regarded  as  a 
proof  of  the  internal  unity  of  the  book. 
Of  all  that  was  in  the  dry  land, — a  further 
specification  of  the  creatures  that  perished 
in  the  Flood, — died.  It  is  obvious  the  con- 
struction of  vers.  21,  22  may  be  differently 
understood.  Each  verse  may  be  taken  as  a 
separate  sentence,  as  in  the  A.  V.,  or  the 
second  sentence  may  commence  with  the 


words,  "  And  every  man,"  as  in  the  present 
exposition.  Thus  far  the  calamity  is  simply 
viewed  in  its  objective  result.  In  the  words 
which  follow,  which  wear  the  aspect  of  an 
unnecessary  repetition,  it  is  regarded  in  its 
relation  to  the  Divine  threatening. 

Ver.  23.  — And  every  living  substance 
was  destroyed— literally,  wiped  out  (at  ch. 
vi.  7 ;  vii.  4) — which  was  upon  the  -face  of 
the  ground,  both  man,  and —literally,  from 
mom  unto — cattle,  and  the  creeping  things, 
and  the  fowl  of  the  heaven ;  and  they  were 
destroyed— wiped  out  by  washing  (cf.  ch.  vi. 
7)— from  the  earth  :  and  Noah  only  re- 
mained alive,  and  they  that  were  with  him 
in  the  ark.  The  straits  to  which  the  advo- 
cates of  the  documentary  hypothesis  are 
sometimes  reduced  are  remarkably  exem- 
plified by  the  fortunes  of  these  verses  (21 — 
23)  in  the  attempt  to  assign  them  to  their 
respective  authors.  Astruc  conjectures  that 
ver.  21  was  taken  from  what  he  calls  monu- 
mentum  B,  ver.  22  from  "monument" 
A,  and  ver.  23  from  monument  C.  Eichhorn 
ascribes  vers.  21,  22  to  an  Elohistic  author, 
and  ver.  23  to  a  Jehovistic.  Ilgen  assigns 
vers.  21,  22  to  the  first,  and  ver.  23  to  the 
second  Elohist.  Bleek,  all  three  to  the  Elo- 
hist ;  and  Davidson  ver.  21  to  the  Elohist, 
vers.  22,  23  to  the  Jehovist.  Amid  such 
uncertainty  it  will  be  reasonable  to  cling  to 
the  belief  that  Moses  wrote  all  the  three 
verses,  at  least  till  the  higher  criticism  knows 
its  own  mind. 

Ver.  24.  — And  the  waters  prevailed  upon 
the  earth  an  hundred  and  fifty  days.  Addi- 
tional to  the  forty  days  of  rain  (Murphy), 
making  190  since  the  commencement  of  the 
Flood ;  or  more  probably  inclusive  of  the 
forty  days  ( Knobel,  Lange,  Bush,  Wordsworth, 
'  Speaker's  Comment. ,'  Inglis),  which,  reckon- 
ing thirty  days  to  the  month,  would  bring  the 
landing  of  the  ark  to  the  seventeenth  day  of 
the  seventh  month,  as  stated  in  ch.  viii.  4. 


HOMILETIC8. 

Ver.  19. — Was  the  Flood  universal?  I.  The  Biblical  account.  Unquestionably 
the  language  of  the  historian  appears  to  describe  a  complete  submergence  of  the 
globe  beneath  a  flood  of  waters,  and  is  capable  of  being  so  understood,  so  far  as 
exegesis  can  determine.  Unquestionably  also  that  this  was  the  writer's  meaning 
would  never  have  been  challenged  had  it  not  been  for  certain  difficulties  of  a 
scientific  nature,  as  well  as  of  other  kinds,  which  were  gradually  seen  to  attach  to 
such  hypothesis.  But  these  difficulties  having  arisen  in  men's  minds  led  to  a  closer 
and  more  careful  investigation  of  the  Scripture  narrative,  when  it  was  found — 1.  That 
the  language  of  the  historian  did  not  necessarily  imply  that  the  catastrophe  described 
was  of  universal  extent  {vide  Exposition).  2.  That,  if  it  had  been  only  partial  and 
local  in  its  operation,  in  all  probability  the  same,  or  at  least  closely  similar,  terms 
would  have  been  selected  to  depict  its  appearance,  as  observed  by  a  spectator. 
3.  That  the  purpose  for  which,  according  to  the  inspired  record,  the  Deluge  was  sent 

could  have  been  completely  effected  without  the  submergence  of  the  entire  globe 

that  purpose  being  the  destruction  of  the  human  race,  which,  it  is  believed,  had  not 


120  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  feu.  vn.  11— 11 

it  that  time  overspread  the  earth,  hut  was  confined  to  a  limited  region  contiguous  to 
the  valley  of  the  Euphrates.  That  this  last  conjecture  is  not  of  recent  origin,  but 
was  early  entertained  by  theologians,  is  proved  by  the  facts  that  Aben  Ezra  "  con- 
futeth  the  opinion  of  some  who  in  his  days  held  the  Deluge  not  to  have  been  uni- 
versal "  (Willet) ;  that  Bishop  Patrick  notes  (ch.  vii.  19)  that  "  there  were  those 
anciently,  and  they  have  their  successors  now,  who  imagined  the  Flood  was  not 
universal, — AM  ev  <f  ol  rore  av0pci»7ro<  ipicovv, — but  only  there  where  men  then  dwelt ; " 
that  Matt.  Poole  writes,  "  Peradventure  this  Flood  might  not  be  universal  over  the 
whole  earth,  but  only  over  all  the  habitable  world,  where  either  men  or  beasts 
lived,  which  was  as  much  as  either  the  meritorious  cause  of  the  Flood,  men's  sins, 
or  the  end  of  it,  the  destruction  of  all  men  and  beasts,  required  "  (Synopsis,  ch.  vii. 
19)  ;  and  that  Bishop  Stillingfleet  in  his  '  Origines  Sacra '  remarks,  "  I  cannot  see 
any  necessity,  from  the  Scriptures,  to  assert  that  the  Flood  did  spread  itself  over 
all  the  surface  of  the  earth.  That  all  mankind  (those  in  the  ark  excepted)  were 
destroyed  by  it  is  most  certain,  according  to  the  Scriptures ;  but  from  thence 
follows  no  necessity  at  all  of  asserting  the  universality  of  it  as  to  the  globe  of  the 
earth,  unless  it  be  sufficiently  proved  that  the  earth  was  peopled  before  the  Flood, 
which  I  despair  of  ever  seeing  proved"  (vide  'Quarry  on  Genesis,'  p.  184).  .This 
opinion,  it  is  almost  needless  to  observe,  has  been  adopted  by  the  majority  of 
modern  scholars.  4.  That  subsequent  Scriptural  references  to  this  primeval  catas- 
trophe are  at  least  not  decidedly  at  variance  with  the  notion  of  a  limited  Deluge. 
Gen.  ix.  15  places  emphasis  on  the  fact  that  the  waters  will  no  more  become  a 
flood  to  destroy  all  flesh,  i.  e.  all  mankind.  Isa.  liv.  9,  pointing  back  to  Gen.  ix.  15. 
says  that  as  God  swore  in  the  days  of  Noah  that  the  earth  would  be  no  more  inun- 
dated as  to  carry  off  the  entire  population,  so  did  he  swear  then  that  he  would  not 
rebuke  Israel.  The  language  does  not,  as  Wordsworth  thinks,  imply  the  uiiiversality 
of  the  Deluge.  2  Pet.  ii.  5 ;  iii.  6  refers  to  the  destruction  of  the  apxaiog  Koa/iog, 
i.  e.  tine  world  of  men,  the  Koapoc  &<si$wv  specially  mentioned  in  the  former  of  these 
passages.  So  far  then  as  Scripture  is  concerned  we  are  not  shut  up  to  the  necessity 
o*  regarding  the  Deluge  as  universal. 

II.  Scientific  difficulties.  1.  Astronomical.  It  is  urged  that,  as  there  ii  no 
sufficient  evidence  of  any  general  subsidence  of  the  earth's  crust,  the  theory  proposed 
by  gome  harmonists,  that  the  land  and  water  virtually  exchanged  places  (this  was 
supposed  to  be  borne  out  by  the  existence  of  shells  and  corals  at  the  top  of  high 
mountains),  having  now  been  completely  abandoned  (that  the  outlines  of  the  great 
continental  seas  have  been  substantially  the  same  from  the  beginning — vide  fh.  i. 
ver.  9,  Expos.),  the  entire  surface  of  the  globe  could  be  covered  only  by  a  large 
increase  of  water  being  added  to  the  earth's  mass.  Kalisch  supposes  eight  times 
the  aggregate  of  water  contained  in  all  the  seas  and  oceans  of  the  earth  ;  that 
this  must  have  produced  such  a  shock  to  the  solar  system  as  to  have  caused  a  very 
considerable  aberration  in  the  earth's  orbit,  of  which,  however,  no  trace  can  be 
detected  ;  and  that,  consequently,  it  is  unphilosophical  to  imagine  that  such  a  disturb- 
ance of  the  entire  stellar  world  as  would  necessarily  follow  on  that  event  would  be 
resorted  to  in  order  to  destroy  a  race  of  sinful  beings  in  one  of  the  smallest  planets 
of  the  system.  But — (1)  Biblical  science,' which  recognises  an  incarnation  of  the 
Word  of  God  in  order  to  save  man,  will  always  hesitate  to  pronounce  anything  too 
great  for  the  Almighty  to  permit  or  do  in  connection  with  man.  (2)  It  is  gratuitous 
to  infer  that  because  a  general  subsidence  of  the  earth's  crust  cannot  now  be  traced, 
there  was  none.  Absence  of  evidence  that  a  thing  was  is  not  equivalent  to  presence 
of  proof  that  a  tiling  was  not.  Witness  the  third  day's  vegetation  and  antedi- 
luvian civilisation.  (3)  If  even  the  earth's  surface  were  covered  with  water,  it  u> 
doubtful  if  it  would  be  much  more  in  effect  than  the  breaking  out  of  a  profuse 
sweat  upon  the  human  body,  or  the  filling  up  with  water  of  the  indentures  on  the 
rough  skin  of  an  orange,  in  which  case  it  is  more  than  probable  that  the  apprehended 
disturbance  of  the  solar  system  would  prove  in  great  part  imaginary.  2.  Geo- 
logical. At  one  time  believed  to  afford  incontestable  evidence  of  a  universal 
deluge  in  the  drift  formations,  the  diluvium  of  the  earlier  geologists  (of  late,  with 
better  reason,  ascribed  to  the  influence  of  a  glacial  period  which  prevailed  over  the 
greater  part  of  Central  and  Northern  Europe  in  prehistoric  times),   geological 


OH.  TO  11—24.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  Ill 

science  is  now  held  to  teach  exactly  the  opposite.  The  extinct  volcanoes  of  ljangue- 
doc  and  Auvergne  are  believed  to  have  been  in  operation  long  anterior  to  the  tim» 
of  man's  appearance  on  the  earth,  the  remains  of  extinct  animals  being  found  among 
their  scoriaB  ;  and  yet  the  lava  cones  are  in  many  instances  as  perfect  as  when  first 
thrown  up,  while  the  dross  lies  loose  upon  their  sides,  which  it  is  scarcely  supposable 
would  be  the  case  had  they  been  subjected  to  any  cataclysmal  immersion  such  a« 
is  presupposed  in  the  Deluge.  But  here  the  mistake  is  that  of  imagining  the 
Noachic  Flood  to  have  been  of  any  such  violent  torrential  character.  On  the  con- 
trary, the  Scripture  narrative  represents  the  waters  as  having  risen  and  subsided 
slowly,  and  the  whole  phenomenon  to  have  been  of  such  a  kind  as,  while  destroying 
human  life,  to  effect  comparatively  little  change  upon  the  face  of  nature;  and,  besides, 
careful  scientific  observers  have  declared  that  the  volcanic  scorias  in  question  is  not 
so  loose  as  is  sometimes  alleged  (Smith's  '  Bib.  Diet. '  art.  Noah).  3.  Zoological. 
This  refers  to  the  difficulty  of  accommodating  all  the  animals  that  were  then  alive. 
So  long  of  course  as  Raleigh's  computation  of  eighty-nine  distinct  species  of  animals 
was  accepted  as  correct,  the  task  imposed  upon  apologists  was  not  of  a  very  formid- 
able character.  But  of  mammalia  alone  there  are  now  known  to  exist  1658  different 
species,  thus  making  about  4000  and  upwards  of  individuals  (the  clean  beasts  being 
taken  in  sevens  or  seven  pairs)  that  required  to  be  stalled  in  the  ark ;  and  when  to 
these  are  added  the  pairs  of  the  6000  birds,  650  reptiles,  and  550,000  insects  that 
are  now  recognised  by  zoologists,  the  difficulty  is  seen  to  be  immensely  increased. 
An  obvious  remark,  however,  in  connection  with  this  is  that  there  is  a  tendency 
among  modern  zoologists  unnecessarily  to  multiply  the  number  of  species.  But 
in  truth  a  prior  difficulty  relates  to  the  collection  of  these  multitudinous  creatures 
from  their  respective  habitats.  If  the  entire  surface  of  the  globe  was  submerged, 
then  must  the  fauna  belonging  to  the  different  continents  have  been  conveyed  across 
the  seas  and  lands  towards  the  ark,  and  reconducted  thence  again  to  their  appro- 
priate settlements  in  some  way  not  described  and  impossible  to  imagine ;  whereas 
if  the  inundated  region  extended  (through  the  subsidence  of  the  earth's  crust)  to 
the  Mediterranean  on  the  west,  and  the  Indian  Ocean  on  the  south  and  east,  it  is 
apparent  that  neither  would  this  difficulty  have  proved  insuperable,  nor  would  flie 
collection  of  the  animals  have  been  rendered  unnecessary,  the  devastated  country 
being  so  wide  that  only  by  preservation  of  the  species  could  it  have  been  speedily 
replenished. 

III.  The  conclusion,  therefore,  seems  to  be  that,  while  Scripture  does  not  impera- 
tively forbid  the  idea  of  a  partial  Deluge,  science  appears  to  require  it,  and,  with- 
out ascribing  to  all  the  scientific  objections  that  are  urged  against  the  universality  of 
the  Flood  that  importance  which  their  authors  assign  to  them,  it  may  be  safely 
affirmed  that  there  is  considerable  reason  for  believing  that  the  mabbul  which 
swept  away  the  antediluvian  men  was  confined  to  the  region  which  they  inhabited. 

Ver.  23. — The  Deluge.  I.  A  striking  testimony  to  the  Divine  faithfulness.  1. 
In  respect  of  threatenings  against  the  wicked.  Whether  the  faith  of  Noah  ever 
betrayed  symptoms  of  wavering  during  the  long  interval  of  waiting  for  the  coming 
of  the  Flood  it  is  impossible  to  say  ;  it  can  scarcely  be  doubted  that  the  men  who  for 
six  score  years  had  seen  the  sun  rise  and  set  with  unwearied  regularity,  that  had 
watched  the  steady  and  continuous  movement  of  nature's  laws  and  forces  through- 
out the  passing  century,  oftentimes  exclaimed,  "Where  is  the  promise  of  his  com- 
ing, for  all  things  continue  as  they  were  from  the  beginning?"  And  yet  God  kept 
his  word,  and  fulfilled  his  threatening.  "  The  flood  came,  and  took  them  all  away" 
(Matt.  xxiv.  39).  Cf.  the  Divine  threatenings  against  Babylon  (Jer.  li.  33),  against 
Tyre  (Isa.  xxiii.  12),  against  Jerusalem  (2  Kings  xxi.  13  ;  Jer.  xxvi.  18),  against  the 
Jews  (Deut.  xxviii.  49).  Let  impenitent  sinnera  thereby  be  reminded  that  there  is 
one  more  word  of  doom  which  he  will.yet  cause  to  come  to  pass  (Ps.  ix.  17  ;  2  Thess. 
i.  8  ;  2  Pet.  iii.  10).  2.  In  respect  of  promises  to  the  saints.  At  the  same  time  that 
he  foretold  to  Noah  the  destruction  of  his  licentious  and  violent  contemporaries,  he 
distinctly  promised  that  he  would  establish  his  covenant  with  Noah,  and  preserve 
both  him  and  his  amid  the  general  overthrow.  And  that  too  he  implemented  in  dua 
time  and  to  the  letter.    Let  the  saints  then  learn  to  trust  the  precious  promises  of  God 


12S  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  [ch.  vn.  11-  -24 

(2  Pet.  i.  4)  which  have  been  given  to  enable  them  to  escape  the  corruption  that  is 
in  the  world  through  lust  (rijc  Iv  icoo/iip  iv  lm9v)iiQ  00op5f,  i.  e.  the  destruction  that  is 
already  operating  in  the  world  and  coming  out  of,  as  it  is  carried  in,  the  world'* 
lust). 

II.  A  signal  display  op  thb  Divine  power.  1.  In  controlling  his  creatures. 
(1)  In  collecting  the  animals,  which  he  did,  doubtless,  by  making  ubo  of  their 
instincts  which  led  them  to  apprehend  the  coming  danger.  Vide  Job  xxxix. — xli.  for 
God's  power  over  the  animal  creation.  (2)  In  using  the  powers  of  nature — breaking 
up  the  flood-gates  of  the  deep,  and  opening  the  windows  of  heaven.  The  pheno- 
menon was  distinctly  miraculous ;  but  if  God  made  the  world,  causing  it  to  stand 
together  out  of  the  water  and  through  the  water,  the  supernatural  character  of  the 
Deluge  should  not  occasion  difficulty.  Nor  should  the  power  of  God  be  overlooked 
in  the  ordinary  phenomena  of  nature.  "  Nature  is  but  another  name  for  an  effect 
whose  cause  is  God."  In  the  miracle  God  reveals  what  he  is  always  silently  and 
imperceptibly  doing  in  the  natural  event.  Nothing  happens  in  the  realm  of  pro- 
vidence without  the  concurrence  of  Almighty  power  (Amos  iii.  6;  Matt.  x.  29). 
Let  God's  power  exhibited  over  nature  s  forces  remind  us  of  his  ability  to  bring  the 
present  terrestrial  economy  to  an  end  as  he  has  promised  (2  Pet.  iii.  10, 11).  (3)  In 
destroying  the  lives  of  men.  In  every  case  life  is  a  gift  of  God,  and  can  only  be 
recalled  by  him  (Deut.  xxxii.  39 ;  2  Sam.  ii.  6).  Yet,  unless  when  God  interposes  to 
destroy  on  a  large  scale, — e.  g.  by  famine,  pestilence,  war,  accident, — his  absolute  and 
unchallengeable  control  over  men's  lives  (Ps.  xxxi.  15)  is  apt  to  bo  forgotten.  And 
with  what  infinite  ease  he  can  depopulate  the  fairest  and  most  crowded  regions  he 
has  often  shown  ;  witness,  in  addition  to  the  Flood,  the  destruction  of  the  cities  of 
the  plain  (ch.  xix.  24,  25),  of  the  first-born  in  Egypt  (Bxod.  xii.  29),  of  the  army  of 
Pharaoh  (Exod.  xiv.  27),  of  the  host  of  Sennacherib  (2  Kings  xix.  35).  2.  In 
punishing  his  enemies.  That  appalling  visitation  is  fitted  to  remind  us  that  God  is 
able  to  execute  vengeance — ( 1)  On  the  greatest  sinners.  Having  cast  down  the  sinning 
angels,  and  drowned  the  world  of  the  ungodly,  and  burnt  up  the  filthy  Sodomites,  it 
is  scarcely  likely  that  any  criminal  will  be  beyond  his  power  to  apprehend  and 
chastise  (2  Pet.  ii.  9 ;  Jude  15).  (2)  In  the  severest  forms.  Having  all  the 
resources  of  nature  at  his  command, — the  gleaming  thunderbolt,  the  sweeping  flood, 
the  sleeping  volcano,  the  tempestuous  hurric*ane,  all  the  several  and  combined 
potencies  of  fire,  air,  earth,  and  water, — he  can  never  want  a  weapon  wherewith  to 
inflict  upon  his  adversaries  "  the  tribulation  and  wrath,  indignation  and  anguish,"  he 
has  decreed  for  their  portion  (Rom.  ii.  8,  9 ;  2  Thess.  i.  8,  9  ;  Eev.  xx.  15 ;  xxi.  8). 
(3)  At  the  most  unexpected  times.  Few  things  connected  with  the  Noachic  Deluge 
are  more  impressive  and  paralysing  to  the  mind  than  the  suddenness  of  the  surprisal 
with  which  it  sprang  upon  the  wicked  generation  that  for  120  years  had  been 
disbelieving  its  reality  and  ridiculing  the  warnings  of  the  patriarch.  "So  also 
shall  the  coming  op  the  Son  of  man  be."  (4)  With  the  most  inevitable  certainty. 
Tempted  by  their  long  lives  to  imagine  that  the  penalty  of  death  was  cancelled  or 
had  become  inoperative,  or  at  least  would  not  really  be  put  in  force  against  them, 
these  men  "of  the  first  age  were  recalled  from  their  delusive  reasonings.  The  Deluge 
was  God's  proclamation  that  the  penalty  was  still  in  force  against  sinners,  God's 
explanation  of  what  that  penalty  meant,  God's  certification  that  that  penalty  was 
sure.  3.  In  protecting  his  people.  The  ark  floating  on  the  waters  was  a  visible 
sermon  to  all  time  coming  of  God's  ability  to  save  them  who  believe  and  obey 
him.  And,  like  the  shelter  enjoyed  by  Noah,  the  salvation  which  God  bestows 
upon  his  people  is  (1)  gracious— flowing  from  the  Divine  mercy;  (2)  free— with 
no  condition  attached  except  that  men  shall,  like  Noah,  believe  and  obey;  (3) 
adequate — containing  all  that  is  required  for  their  spiritual  necessities,  as  the  ark 
held  abundant  provision  for  the  voyage ;  (4)  secure— "  the  Lord  shut  him  in." 
So  says  Christ,  "  I  give  unto  them  eternal-  life,  and  they  shall  never  perish  ,; 
(John  x.  28). 

III.  A  solemn  attestation  op  the  Divine  holiness.  Proclaiming— 1.  That  iht 
Divine,  character  was  holy.  A  deity  who  is  himself  subject  to  imperfection  is  incon- 
ceivable. But  sinful  men  are  prone  to  forget  that  God  is  of  purer  eyes  than  to 
look  upon  iniquity.     In  this  last  age  of  the  world  God  has  discovered  that  to  men  by 


ob.  vn.  11—24.]  THE  BOOK  OP  GENESI9.  ltt 

Bending  forth  an  image  or  likeness  of  himself  in  the  person  of  his  Son,  who  was  holy, 
harmless,  undefined,  and  separate  from  sinners  (cf.  John  ziv.  9).  In  the  first  age  he 
announced  the  same  great  truth  by  the  water-flood.  2.  That  the  Divine  law  via* 
holy.  That,  besides  being  himself  personally  pure,  he  requires  sinless  obedience  at 
the  hands  of  his  creatures,  the  Almighty  has  in  every  separate  era  or  epoch  of  human 
history  taken  pains  to  inform  men  ;  in  Edenic  times  by  the  forbidden  tree  ;  in  ante- 
diluvian by  the  Deluge ;  in  Mosaic  by  Mount  Sinai ;  in  Christian  by  the  cross  of  Cal- 
vary. 3.  That  the  Divine  government  was  holy.  That  from  the  first  the  world  has 
been  governed  in  the  interests  of  holiness  is  unmistakably  the  doctrine  of  Scripture 
If  any  in  Noah's  time  believed  either  that  God  was  indifferent  to  righteousness,  oi 
that  it  was  possible  for  "the  throne  of  iniquity  to  have  fellowship"  with  him,  they 
must  have  been  terribly  undeceived  when  the  crack  of  doom  waB  heard  above  their 
heads.  So  will  it  be  when  the  righteous  Judge  reveals  himself  a  second  time  in 
flaming  fire  to  render  unto  every  man  according  to  his  deeds. 

Lessons:— I.  "It  is  impossible  for  God  to  lie"  (Heb.  vi.  18).  2.  "There  is 
nothing  too  hard  for  the  Lord"  (Gen.  xviii.  14).  3.  "  It  is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall 
into  the  hands  of  the  living  God  "  (Heb.  x.  31). 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  16. — The  believer's  safety.  Parable  of  the  ten  virgins  speaks  of  a  final  separa- 
tion. "The  door  was  shut."  There  our  thoughts  are  turned  to  those  without ;  here, 
to  those  within.  The  time  was  come  when  the  choice  must  be  made.  "  Come  thou 
and  all  thy  house  into  the  ark."  The  broad  and  narrow  way.  The  confinement 
of  the  ark  or  the  freedom  of  home  ;  and,  in  view  of  the  flood,  the  frail  vessel  or  the 
mountains.  Trust  in  Christ  or  trust  in  self  (cf.  Rom.  x.  3).  He  chose  the  way  of 
faith.  God  shut  him  in  (cf.  Isa.  xxvi.  3).  He  knew  he  was  safe.  The  world  saw 
no  good  in  it.  The  pause  of  seven  days  (ver.  10)  illustrates  the  present  state. 
Believers  rejoicing  in  their  safety;  the  world  unconvinced  of  danger. 

I.  Christ  offers  safety  to  all.  The  ark  was  prepared  that  all  might  be  saved. 
The  condemnation  was  because  they  did  not  care  (John  iii.  19).  There  was  room 
and  welcome  for  all  who  would  come  (cf.  Luke  xiv.  22).  Noah  did  not  preach  im- 
possible things.  When  Jericho  was  destroyed  Rahab  was  saved.  When  Sodom, 
Lot.     God  bids  all  seek  and  find  refuge  in  Christ  (Rom.  iii.  22). 

II.  Christ  is  a  refuge  from  the  conviction  of  sin.  How  many  are  living 
without  serious  concern.  Not  rejecting  the  gospel ;  they  hear  it,  and  approve,  and 
think  that  all  is  well.  Like  St.  Paul,  "  alive  without  the  law."  God'e  command- 
ments not  understood  ;  his  holiness  not  known.  Let  such  a  one  be  led  to  see  how 
God's  law  reaches  to  the  springs  of  life  and  feeling,  and  to  feel  the  working  of  the 
"  law  of  sin  "  in  his  members ;  then  what  a  flood.  "  Who  will  show  us  any  good  ?" 
Good  deeds  cannot  give  peace.  Worldly  good  as  wormwood.  Conscience  repeats, 
He  has  been  knocking,  and  I  have  not  opened  (Prov.  i.  26).  Yet,  Imrk  I  his  voice 
again:  "Come  unto  me."  It  is  not  too  late.  Even  now,  if  thou  wilt,  the  Lord  will 
shut  thee  in. 

III.  The  safety  or  those  who  believe,  whom  God  shuts  in.  Who  shall  lay 
anything  to  their  charge  ?  Who  shall  condemn  ?  Who  shall  separate '?  (Rom.  viii. 
33 — 35).  The  flood  is  without.  Noah  is  weak  and  helpless  as  the  world.  His 
safety  is  God's  refuge.  The  Christian  is  surrounded  by  evil  influences,  messengers  of 
Satan.  Temptations  to  worldliness  or  to  spiritual  pride ;  cares  and  anxieties  hinder- 
<ng  prayer;  suggestions  of  unbelief,  and  hard  thoughts  of  God;  the  fainting  of 
nature  because  so  little  progress  made.  But  in  Christ  is  safety.  Coming  to  him 
daily  as  we  are ;  with  weak  faith,  with  many  perplexities,  with  the  marks  of  many 
falls.  His  word  is,  "  I  wilFnever  leave  thee  nor  forsake  thee  "  In  the  trials  of  li£t 
"  we  are  more  than  conquerors  through  him  that  loved  us." — M. 


124 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


[ch.  vrn.  1 — 14 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  Till. 


Ver.  1. — And  God.  Elohim,  L  e.  God  in 
his  most  universal  relation  to  his  creatures. 
The  supposition  of  two  different  accounts  or 
histories  being  intermingled  in  the  narrative 
of  the  Flood  (Bleek,  Eiehhorn,  Hupfeld, 
Kalisch,  Alford,  Colenso)  is  not  required  for 
a  sufficient  explanation  of  the  varying  use 
of  the  Divine  names.  Remembered.  From 
a  root  signifying  to  prick,  pierce,  or  print, 
e.  g.,  upon  the  memory ;  hence  to  remember. 
"  Not  that  there  is  oblivion  or  forgetfulness 
with  God,  but  then  God  is  said  to  remember 
when  he  showeth  by  the  effects  that  he  hath 
taken  care  of  man"  (Willet).  He  remembers 
man's  sins  when  he  punishes  them  (Ps.  xxv. 
7  ;  cf .  1  Kings  xvii.  20),  and  his  people's 
needs  when  he  supplies  them  (cf.  Neh.  v.  19). 
The  expression  is  an  anthropopathism  de- 
signed to  indicate  the  Divine  compassion  as 
well  as  grace.  Calvin  thinks  the  remem- 
brance of  which  Moses  speaks  "ought  to 
be  referred  not  only  to  the  external  aspect 
of  things  (i.  e.  the  coming  deliverance),  but 
also  to  the  inward  feeling  of  the  holy  man," 
who,  through  grace,  was  privileged  to  enjoy 
"  some  sensible  experience  of  the  Divine 
presence"  while  immured  in  the  ark.  Noah, 
— cf.  the  Divine  remembrance  of  Abraham 
and  Lot  (ch.  xix.  29),  the  request  of  the 
Hebrew  psalmist  (Ps.  exxxii.  1)— and  every 
living  thing,  -chayyah,  or  wild  beast  (vide 
ch.  i.  25 ;  vii.  14) — and  all  the  cattle  that 
was  with  him  in  the  ark.  A  touching 
indication  of  the  tenderness  of  God  towards 
his  creatures  (cf.  Deut.  xxv.  4 ;  Ps.  xxxvi. 
6 ;  cxlv.  9,  15,  16  ;  Jonah  iv.  11).  As  a 
proof  that  God  remembered  the  lonely  in- 
mates of  the  ark,  he  at  once  takes  steps  to 
accomplish  their  deliverance,  which  steps 
sre  next  enumerated.  And  God  made  a 
wind—  ruach.  Not  the  Holy  Ghost,  as 
in  ch.  i.  2  (Theodoret,  Ambrose,  LXX. — 
irvtviia),  nor  tile  heat  of  the  sun  (Rupertus) ; 
but  a  current  of  air  (dve/xoc),  which  "  would 
promote  evaporation  and  aid  the  retreat  of 
the  waters"  (Murphy) : — the  ordinary  method 
of  driving  away  rain  and  drying  the  ground 
(vide  Prov.  xxv.  23) ;  the  special  instrument- ' 
ality  employed  to  divide  the  waters  of  the 
Bed  Sea  (Exod.  xiv.  21) — to  pass  over  the 
«arth,  and  the  waters  assuaged,  or  began 
to  grow  calm,  after  a  period  of  commotion 
(cf.  Esther  ii.  1 ;  vii.  10) — the  first  stage  in 
the  returning  of  the  waters.  Kai  litoVaat 
to  Hup,  and  the  water  grew  tried  (LXX.). 
Cf.  tKniraatv  6  dwjuoc,  Matt.  xiv.  32  ;  Mark 
iv.  39  ;  vi.  51. 

Ver.  2. — The  fountains  also  of  the  deep, 
and  the  windows  of  heaven  were  stopped. 


n?S.'l,  from  13D=n?p,  to  surround,  t» 
enclose;  literally,  were  shut  up;  iTwca\i<p- 
Sijuav  (LXX.).  Their  opening  was  described 
in  ch.  vii.   11.     And  the  rain  from  heaven 

was  restrained.  K?3'l,  literally,  was  shut 
up,  from  K73,  to  close.  Cf.  kXci'u,  kioMid, 
koXovio,  celo,  occulo  (Gesenins,  Fiirst),  irvvi- 
axiBij  (LXX.).  At  the  end  of  the  forty 
days  (ch.  vii.  12 ;  Augustine,  Willet) ;  at 
the  end  of  the  150  days  (Aben  Ezra, 
Murphy). 

Ver.  3. — And  the  waters  returned  from 
off  the  earth  continually.  Literally,  going 
and  returning.  "More  and  more"  (Gese- 
nius).  The  first  verb  expresses  the  con- 
tinuance and  self-increasing  state  of  the 
action  involved  in  the  second ;  cf.  ch. 
xxvi.  13 ;  1  Sam.  vi.  12 ;  2  Kings  ii.  1] 
(Fiirst).  Gradually  (Murphy,  Ewald).  The 
expression  "  denotes  the  turning-point  after 
the  waters  had  become  calm "  (T.  Lewis). 
May  it  not  be  an  attempt  to  represent  the 
undulatory  motion  of  the  waves  in  an  ebbing 
tide,  in  which  the  water  seems  first  to 
advance,  but  only  to  retire  with  greater 
vehemence,  reversing  the  movement  of  a 
flowing  tide,  in  which  it  first  retires  and 
then  advances — in  the  one  case  returning 
to  go,  in  the  other  going  to  return  ?  The 
LXX.,  as  usual,  indicates  the  visible  effect 
rather  than  the  actual  phenomenon :  icai 
h'toiSov  to  vSwo  Tropevofisvov  and  rfjc  yije. 
And  after  the  end  of  the  hundred  and  fifty 
days  the  waters  were  abated.  Literally', 
were  cut  off,  hence  diminished ;  imminu- 
tO!  sunt  (Vulgate)  ;  ?i\«rrovo5ro  ro  vSvp 
(LXX.).  The  first  stage  was  the  quieting 
of  the  waters ;  the  second  was  the  com- 
mencement of  an  ebbing  or  backward 
motion ;  the  third  was  a  perceptible  dimi- 
nution of  the  waters. 

Ver.  4. — And  the  ark  rested.  Not  stopped 
sailing  or ,  floating,  got  becalmed,  and  re- 
mained suspended  over  (Kitto's  'Cyclop.,' 
art.  Ararat),  but  actually  grounded  and 
settled  on  (Tayler  Lewis)  the  place  in- 
dicated by  ?g  (cf.  ver.  9  ;  also  Exod.  x.  14  ; 
Numb.  x.  36  ;  xi.  25,  26  ;  Isa.  xi.  2).  Is 
the  seventh  month,  on  the  seventeenth  day 
of  the  month.  /. «.  exactly  150  days  from 
the  commencement  of  the  forty  days'  rain, 
reckoning  thirty  days  to  a  month,  which 
seems  to  confirm  the  opinion  expressed  (ch. 
vii.  24)  that  the  forty  days  were  included 
in  the  150.  Supposing  the  Flood  to  have 
begun  in  Marchesvan,  the  second  month 
of  the  civil  year  (about  the  beginning  of 
November),  "  we  have  then  the  remarkable 
coincidences  that  on  the  17th  day  of  Abib 


3H.  VIII.  I— 14.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


121 


|about    the    beginning   of   April)   the  ark 
rested  on  Mount  Ararat,  the  Israelites  passed 
over  the  Red  Sea,  and  our  Lord  rose  again 
from  the  dead"  ('Speaker's  Commentary '). 
Upon  the  mountains.    I.  e.  one  of  the  moun- 
tains. "  Pluralis  numerus  pro  singulari  poni- 
tur  "  (cf.  ch.  xxi.  7  ;  xlvi.  7  ;  Judges  xii.  7  ; 
vide  Glass.,  'Philol.   Sacr.  Tract.,'  i.    cap. 
xiv.   t>.  866).     Of  Ararat.     l.'It  is  agreed 
by  all  that  the  term  Ararat  describes  a 
region.    2.  This  region  has  been  supposed  to 
be  the  island  of  Ceylon  (Samaritan),  Arya- 
varta,  the  sacred  land  to  the  north  of  India 
(Von  Bohlen,  arguing  from  Gen.  xi.  2) ;  but 
"  it  is  evident  that  these  and  such  like  theories 
have  been  framed  in  forgetfulness  of  what 
the  Bible  has  recorded  respecting  the  local- 
ity "    (Kitto's    '  Cyclopedia,'    art.    Ararat). 
3.  The  locality  which  appears  to  have  the 
countenance  of  Scripture  is  the  region  of 
Armenia  (cf.  2  Kings  xix.  37  ;  Isa;  xxxvii. 
38  ;  Jeremiah  li.  27  ;  Aquila,  Symmachus, 
Theodotion,  Vulgate),     4.  In  Armenia  three 
different  mountains  have  been  selected  as 
the  site  on  which  the  ark  grounded.     (1) 
The  modern  Ararat,  which  rises  in  Northern 
Armenia,  about  twelve  miles  south  of  Erivan, 
in  the  form  of  two  majestic  cones,  the  one 
16,254,  and  the  other  12,284  feet  (Parisian)  in 
height  above  the  level  of  the  sea  (Hierouy- 
mus,  Ftirst,   Kalisch,   Keil,  Delitzsch,  and 
Lange).      All    but  universal   tradition   has 
decided  that  the  loftiest  of  these  two  peaks 
(called  Macis  in  Armenian ;    Aghri-Dagh, 
i.  e.  the  difficult  or  steep  mountain,  by  the 
Turks ;  Kuchi  Nuch,  i.  e.  the  mountain  of 
Noah,  by  the  Persians)  was  the  spot  where 
the  sacred  vessel  first  felt  the  solid  land. 
Travellers  describe  the  appearance  of  this 
amazing  elevation  as  of  incomparable  and 
overpowering  splendour      "It  appeared  as 
if  the  highest  mountains  in  the  world  had 
been  piled  upon  each  other  to  form  tbis  one 
sublime  immensity  of  earth  and  rocks  and 
snow.     The  icy  peaks  of  its  double  head 
rose  majestically  into  the  clear  and  cloudless 
heavens  ;  the  sun  blazed  bright  upon  them, 
and  the  reflection  sent  forth  a  radiance  equal 
to  other  suns"  (Ker  Porter's  'Travels,    i. 
132 ;    ii.    636).      "  Nothing  can   be  more 
beautiful  than  its  shape,  more  awful  than 
its  height.     All  the  surrounding  mountains 
sink  into  insignificance  when  compared  to 
it.     It  is  perfect  in  all  its  parts ;  no  hard, 
rugged  feature,  no  unnatural  prominences ; 
everything  is  in  harmony,  and  all  combines 
to  render  it  one  of  the  sublimest  objects  in 
nature  "  (MorieT's  '  Journey,'  i.  16  ;  ii.  312, 
345).      The  ascent  of   the  Kara  Dagh,  or 
Greater  Ararat,  which  the  Armenians  believe 
to  be  guarded  by  angels  from  the  profane  foot 
of  man,  after  two  unsuccessful  attempts,  was 
accomplished  in   1829  by  ProfessoT  Parrot, 
i  German,  and  five  years  later,  in  1834,  by 


the  Russian  traveller  Automonoff.  In  1858 
five  English  travellers,  Majors  Stewart  and 
Frazer,  Rev.  Walter  Thursby,  Messrs.  Theo- 
bald and  Evans,  performed  the  herculean 
task.  The  latest  successful  attempt  was 
that  of  Prof.  Bryce  of  Oxford  in  1876  (vide 
'Transcaucasia  and  Ararat:'  London:  Macmil- 
lan  and  Co.,  1877).  (2)  An  unknown  moun- 
tain in  Central  Armenia  between  the  Araxes 
and  lakes  Van  and  Urumiah  (Vulgate,  super 
montes  Armenice ;  Gesenius,  Murphy,  Vfonls- 
worth,  Bush,  '  Speaker's  Commentary ').  (3) 
A  peak  in  the  Gordytean  mountains,  or 
Carduchian  range,  separating  Armenia  on  the 
south  from  Kurdistan  (Chaldee  Paraphrase, 
Onkelos,  Syriac,  Calvin),  near  which  is  a  town 
called  Naxuana,  the  city  of  Noah  (Ptolemy), 
Idshenan  (Moses  Chorenensis),  and  Nachid- 
shenan,  the  first  place  of  descent  (the  Arme- 
nians), which  Josephus  translates  by  aitofta- 
rijpiov,  or  the  place  of  descent.  Against  the 
first  is  the  inaccessible  heightof  themountain; 
in  favour  of  the  third  is  the  proximity  of 
the  region  to  the  starting-place  of  the  ark. 

Ver.  5. — And  the  waters  decreased  con- 
tinually— literally,  were  going  and  decreas- 
ing— until  the  tenth  month :  in  the  tenth 
month,  on  the  first  day  of  the  month,— 
chodesh,  a  lunar  month,  beginning  at  the  new 
moon,  from  chdddsh,  to  be  new;  vto/uijv/a, 
LXX.  (cf.  Exod.  xiii.  5).  Chodesh  yamim, 
the  period  of  a  month  (cf.  ch.  xxix.  14  ; 
Num.  xi  20,  21)^were  the  tops  of  the 
mountains  seen.  "  Became  distinctly  vis- 
ible" (Tayler  Lewis,  who  thinks  they  may 
have  previously  projected  above  the  waters). 
Apparuerunt  cacumina  montium  (Vulgate). 
The  waters  had  now  been  subsiding  ten 
weeks,  and  as  the  height  of  the  water  above 
the  highest  hills'  was  probably  determined 
by  the  draught  of  the  ark,  we  may  naturally 
reason  that  the  subsidence  which  had  taken 
place  since  the  seventeenth  day  of  the  seventh 
month  was  not  less  than  three  hundred  and 
fifteen  inches,  at  twenty-one  inches  to  the  cu- 
bit, or  about  four  and  one-third  inches  a  day. 
Vers.  6, 7. — And  it  came  to  pass — literally, 
it  was — at  the  end  of  forty  days.  Delaying 
through  combined  fear  and  sorrow  on  account 
of  the  Divine  judgment  (Calvin) ;  to  allow 
sufficient  space  to  undo  the  effect  of  the 
forty  days'  rain  (Murphy) ;  probably  just  to 
be  assured  that  the  Deluge  would  not  return. 
That  Noah  opened  the  window  —  chaldn, 
a  window,  "so  called  from  being  perforated, 
from  chalal,  to  bore  or  pierce "  (Gesenius) ; 
used  of  the  window  of  Rahab's  house  (Josh. 
ii.  18) ;  not  the  window  (tsohar)  of  ch.  vi 
16,  q.  v. — of  the  ark  which  he  had  made  : 
and  he  sent  forth  a  raven.  Literally,  the 
orev,  "  so  called  from  its  black  colour ' 
(Gesenius;  cf.  Cant  T.  11),  Latin,  corvus, 
a  raven  or  crow ;  the  article  being  used 
either   (1)  because   the   species   of    bird  ii 


126 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  vin.  1 — 14 


Intended  to  be  indicated  (Kalisch),  or  (2) 
because  there  was  only  one  male  raven  in 
the  ark,  the  raven  being  among  the  unclean 
birds  (Levit.  xi.  15 ;  Deut.  xiv.  14 ;  Lange) ; 
but  against  this  is  "  the  dove"  (ver.  8) ;  or 
(3)  because  it  had  come  to  be  well  known 
from  this  particular  circumstance  (Keil). 
Its  peculiar  fitness  for  the  mission  imposed 
on  it  lay  in  its  being  a  bird  of  prey,  and 
therefore  able  to  sustain  itself  by  feeding  on 
carrion  (Prov.  xxx.  17).  To  the  incident 
here  recorded  is  doubtless  to  be  traced  the 
prophetic  character  which  in  the  ancient 
heathen  world,  and  among  the  Arabians  in 
particular,  was  supposed  to  attach  to  this 
ominous  bird.  Which  went  to  and  fro. 
Literally,  and  it  went  forth  going  and 
returning,  i  e.  flying  backwards  and  for- 
wards, from  the  ark  and  to  the  ark,  perhaps 
resting  on  it,  but  not  entering  into  it  (Calvin, 
Willet,  Ainsworth,  Keil,  Kalisch,  Lange,  Bush, 
'Speaker's  Commentary ') ;  though  some  have 
conceived  that  it  no  more  returned  to  the  ark, 
but  kept  flying  to  and  fro  throughout  the  earth 
(LXX,  "  Ktti  tEfX0wi/  oiiK  avearpt^tv ;" 
Vulgate,  "qui  egrediebatur  et  non  reverte- 
batur  ; "  Alford,  "  it  is  hardly  probable  that 
it  returned;"  Murphy,  "it  did  not  need  to 
return").  Until  the  waters  were  dried  up 
from  off  the  earth.  When  of  course  its 
return  was  unnecessary.  Cf.  for  a  similar 
form  of  expression  2  Sam.  vi.  23.  Whether 
it  entirely  disappeared  at  the  first,  or  con- 
tinued hovering  round  the  ark,  Noah  was 
unable  from  its  movements  to  arrive  at  any 
certain  conclusion  as  to  the  condition  of  the 
earth,  and  accordingly  required  to  adopt 
another  expedient,  which  he  did  in  the 
mission  of  the  dove. 

Vers.  8,  9. — Also  he  sent  forth — ver.  10 
jeems  to  warrant  the  inference  that  this  was 
after  an  interval  of  seven  days  (Baumgarten, 
Knobel,  Keil,  Lange) — a  dove.  Literally, 
the  dove.  The  Scriptural  references  to  the 
dove  are  very  numerous :  cf.  Ps.  Ixviii.  14 
(its  beautiful  plumage) ;  Levit.  v.  7  ;  xii.  6 
(its  sacrificial  use) ;  Isa.  xxxviii.  14  ;  lix.  11 
(its  plaintive  notes) ;  Ps.  lv.  6  (its  power  of 
flight) ;  Matt.  x.  16  (its  gentleness) ;  vide 
also  the  metaphorical  usage  of  the  term  in 
Cant.  i.  15  ;  v.  12  (beautiful  eyes)  ;  Cant.  v. 
2  ;  vi.  9  (a  term  of  endearment).  From  him. 
I.  e.  from  himself,  from  the  ark ;  not  6irixa> 
airov  (LXX. ),  post  eum  (Vulgate) ;  i.  e.  after 
the  raven.  Lange  thinks  the  expression  in- 
dicates that  the  gentle  creature  had  to  be 
driven  from  its  shelter  out  upon  the  wide 
waste  of  water.  To  see  if  the  waters  were 
abated — literally,  lightened,  i.  e.  decreased 
(ver.  11) — from  off  the  face  of  the  ground; 
but  the  dove  found  no  rest  for  the  sole  of 
her  foot.  The  earth  being  not  yet  dry,  but 
wet  and  muddy,  and  doves  delighting  to 
•ettie  only  on  such  p'aces  as  are  dry  and 


clean  ;  or  the  mountain  tops,  though  visible, 
being  either  too  distant  or  too  nigh,  and 
doves  delighting  in  valleys  and  level  plains, 
whence  they  are  called  doves  of  the  valleys 
(Ezek.  vii.  16).  And  she  returned  unto 
him  into  the  ark,  for  the  waters  were 
upon  (literally,  waters  upon;  a  much  more 
graphic  statement  than  appears  in  the  A.  V. ) 
the  face  of  Ijae  whole  earth :  then  (literally, 
and)  he  put  forth  his  hand,  and  took  her, 
and  pulled  her  in  (literally,  caused  her  to 
come  in)  unto  him  into  the  ark.  . 
Ver.    10.  —  And  he  stayed.      ?riTsJ,   fut 

apoc,  Hif.  of  Tin,  to  turn,  to  twist,  to  be 
afraid,  to  tremble,  to  wait  (Fiirst)  ;  fut. 
apoc.  Kal  (Gesenius).  Yet  other  seven  days. 
1)1),  prop,  the  inf.  absol.  of  the  verb  1W,  to 
go  over  again,  to  repeat ;  hence,  as  an 
adverb,  conveying  the  idea  of  doing  over 
again  the  action  expressed  in  the  verb  (cf. 
ch.  xlvi.  29 ;  Ps.  lxxxiv.  6).  And  again  he 
sent  forth — literally,  he  added  to  send  (cf. 
vers.  12,  21) — the  dove  out  of  the  ark. 

Ver.  11. — And  the  dove  came  in  unto  him. 
Literally,  to  him.  As  the  manner  of  doves 
is,  partly  for  better  accommodation  both  for 
food  and  lodging  than  yet  he  could  meet  with 
abroad,  and  partly  from  love  to  his  mate 
(Poole).  In  the  evening'  (of  the  seventh 
day).  And,  lo,  in  her  mouth  was  an  olive 
leaf  plucked  off.  Not  as  if  "  Deo  jubente, 
uno  die  germinavit  terra"  (Ambrose),  but 
because  the  olive  leaves  kept  green  under 
water  (Chrysostom).  Rosenmiiller,  Lange, 
and  Kalisch  quote  Pliny  (xiii.  50)  and 
Theophrastus  ('  Hist.  Plant.,'  iv.  8)  to 
this  effect.  That  the  olive  tree  grows  in 
Armenia  is  proved  by  the  testimony  of 
Strabo  (xi.  575),  Horace  (Od.  I.  vii  7), 
Virgil  (Georg.  ii.  3),  Diodorus  Siculus 
(i  17),  &c.  On  this  point  vide  Kalisch. 
The  leaf  which  the  dove  carried  towards 
the  ark  was  "  taraf,"  freshly  plucked  ; 
hence  rightly  translated  by  "viride"  (Mi- 
chaelis,  Rosenmiiller)  rather  than  by  "de- 
cerptum"  (Chaldee,  Arabic)  or  "raptum" 
(Calvin).  Kdppoc  (LXX. )  is  just  the  oppo- 
site of  "fresh,",  viz.,  withered.  So  Noah 
knew  that  the  waters  were  abated  from  off 

Ver.  12.— And  he  stayed.    ^n»l ;  Niph. 

fut    of  ^>nj  (Gesenius) ;  cf.  i?n;i  (ver.  10), 

Hiph.  fut.  of  ^in  (Fiirst,  Delitzsch).  Tayler 
Lewis,  following  Jewish  authorities,  would 

derive  both  from  ?0J ;  with  Aben  Ezra 
making  the  first  a  regular  Niphal,  and  with 
Rashi  the  second  a  contracted  Piel  {vide 
Lange,  p.  308  ;  Clark's  '  For.  TheoL  Lib.'). 
Yet  other  seven  days.  The  frequent  repeti- 
tion ot"the  number  seven  clearly  points  to 
the  hebdomadal  division  of  the  week,  and 
the  institution  of  Sabbatic  raat  (vide  ch.  ii 


am.  tui.  1 — 14.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


in 


2 — 3,  Expos.).  And  sent  forth  the  dove. 
"  The  more  we  examine  these  acts  of  Noah, 
the  more  it  will  strike  us  that  they  must 
have  been  of  a  religious  nature.  He  did  not 
take  such  observations,  and  so  send  out  the 
birds,  as  mere  arbitrary  acts,  prompted  simply 
by  his  curiosity  or  his  impatience  ;  but  as  a 
man  of  faith  and  prayer  he  impaired  of  the 
Lord.  What  more  likely  then  that  such 
inquiry  should  have  its  basis  in  solemn  re- 
ligious exercises,  not  arbitrarily  entered  into, 
but  on  days  held  sacred  for  prayer  and 
religious  rest?"  (T.  Lewis).  Which  re- 
turned not  again  (literally,  and  it  added 
not  to  return)  unto  him  any  more. 

Ver.  13. — And  it  came  to  pass  (literally, 
it  was)  in  the  six  hundredth  and  first  year 
(of  Noah's  life ;  so  LXX.),  in  the  first  month, 
—  rou  irpcirov  /itivoc,  (LXX ) ;  the  word 
for  month  (expressed  in  vers.  4,  14)  being 
omitted  in  the  Hebrew  text  for  brevity, — the 
first  day  of  the  month,  the  waters  were 
dried  up — the  root  signifies  to  burn  up  or 
become  dry  in  consequence  of  heat  (Fiirst)  ; 
"it  merely  denotes  the  absence  of  water" 
(Gesenius)— from  off  the  earth  :  and  Noah 
removed  the  covering  of  the  ark — miksek, 
from  kasah,  to  cover  ;  used  of  the  covering  of 
the  ark  (Exod.  xxvi.  14)  and  of  the  holy 
vessels  (Num.  iv.  8,  12),  and  hence  supposed 
to  be  made  of  skins  (Knobel,  Bush)  ;  but 
"the  deck  of  an  ark  on  which  the  rain-storms 
spent  their  force  must  surely  have  been  of 
is  great  stability  as  the  ark  itself  (Lange)  — 
and  looked,  and,  behold,  the  face  of  the 
ground  was  dry. 

Ver.  14. — And  in  the  second  month,  on 
the  seven  and  twentieth  day  of  the  month, 
was  the  earth  dried.  i"IK>3\  The  three 
Hebrew  verbs  employed  to  depict  the  gradual 
cessation  of  the  floods  express  a  regular  gra- 
dation ;  77\>  (ver.  11),  to  be  lightened,  sig- 
nifying their  abatement  or  diminution  (/cs«d- 
waxi  ro  Mwp,  LXX.) ;  1"Vi  (ver.  13),  to  be 
izied  up,  indicating  the  disappearance  of  the 


water  (UsXitre  to  vlwp,  LXX.);  E>3}  (ver. 
14),  to  be  dry,  denoting  the  desiccation  ol 
the  ground  (fcSiipdi/Sji  i)  yj),  LXX.).  Cf.  Isa. 
xix.  5,  where  there  is  a  similar  gradation  : 
&2\\  3nrpv  "in?],  and  the  river  shall  be 
wasted  and  dried  up. 


CHRONOLOGY  OF  THE  FLOOD. 


(Beckoning  from  the  first  day  of  the 

mos.  days 


II. 
III. 


IV. 
V. 


Beginning  of  the  Flood     1     17  = 
Continuance  of  Rain  = 

Prevalence  of  Waters  = 

The  Ark  touches  Ararat     6    17  = 
The  Mountains  seen  9  = 

Raven  sent  after  40  days 
Dove  sent     ,,      7    ,, 
Dove  sent     „      7    „ 
Dove  sent      „      7     ,, 
The  Waters  dried  up     12 
The  Earth  dry  13    27 


year.) 

days 

47 

40 

110 

197 

=  270 

=  310 

=  317 

=  324 

—  331 

=  360 

=  417 


The  data  are  insufficient  to  enable  us  to 
determine  whether  the  Noachic  year  was 
solar  or  lunar.  It  has  been  conjectured  that 
the  year  consisted  of  twelve  months  of  thirty 
days,  with  five  intercalated  days  at  the  end 
to  make  up  the  solar  year  of  three  hundred 
and  sixty-five  days  (Ewald) ;  of  seven  months 
of  thirty  days  and  five  of  thirty-one  (Bohlen) ; 
of  five  of  thirty  and  seven  of  twenty-nine 
(Knobel) ;  but  the  circumstance  that  the 
period  from  the  commencement  of  the  Deluge 
to  the  touching  of  Ararat  extended  over  five 
months  exactly,  and  that  the  waters  are  said 
to  have  previously  prevailed  for  one  hundred 
and  fifty  days,  naturally  leads  to  the  conclu- 
sion that  the  months  of  Noah's  year  were 
equal  periods  of  thirty  days. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  4,  18.— Mount  Ararat,  or  the  landing  of  the  ark.  That  disembarkment 
on  the  mountain  heights  of  Ararat  was  an  emblem  of  another  landing  which  shall 
yet  take  place,  when  the  great  gospel  ship  of  the  Christian  Church  shall  plant  its 
living  freight  of  redeemed  souls  upon  the  hills  of  heaven.  Everything  that  Mount 
Ararat  witnessed  on  that  eventful  day  will  yet  be  more  conspicuously  displayed  in 
the  sight  of  God's  believing  people  who  shall  be  counted  worthy  of  eternal  life. 

I.  Sin  punished.  Mount  Ararat  was  a  solemn  witness  to  the  severity  of  God's 
judgments  upon  a  guilty  world.  Never  had  the  world  looked  on  such  a  vindication 
of  the  insulted  holiness  and  offended  justice  of  Almighty  God,  and  never  will  it  look 
upon  another  till  the  hour  strikes  when  "  the  heavens,  being  on  fire,  shall  dissolve  " 
(2  Pet.  iii.  10),  and  "  the  Lord  himself  shall  be  revealed  in  flaming  fire  "  (2  Thess.  i.  7). 

II.  Grace  revealed.  Mount  Ararat  saw  Divine  grace  displayed  to  sinful  men. 
Pre-eminently  Noah  and  his  family  were  debtors  to  Divine  grace  that  day  when  th«j 


128  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS  [ch.  vm.  1—14 

stepped  forth  from  the  ark ;  and  who  can  doubt  that  a  sense  of  the  richness  of 
Divine  grace  in  saving  them  will  be  one  of  the  first  feelings  to  take  possession  of  the 
souls  of  the  ransomed  on  reaching  heaven  ? 

III.  Salvation  enjoyed.  Mount  Ararat  beheld  salvation  enjoyed  by  believing 
sinners.  The  deliverance  of  Noah  and  his  family  was  a  type  of  the  salvation  of  the 
saints,  which,  however,  is  immeasurably  grander  than  that  of  Noah.  1.  In  kind,  as 
being  a  spiritual,  and  not  merely  a  temporal,  deliverance.  2.  In  degree,  as  being 
complete ;  whereas  Noah's  was  at  the  best  an  imperfect  deliverance — a  deliverance 
from  the  Flood,  but  not  from  that  which  caused  the  Flood — sin.  3.  In  duration. 
Noah's  deliverance  was  only  for  a  time — in  the  end  he  descended  to  the  grave ;  the 
deliverance  of  the  saints  is  for  ever  (Luke  xx.  36). 

IV.  Gratitude  expressed.  Mount  Ararat  heard  the  adorations  and  thanksgiv- 
ings of  a  redeemed  family.  In  Noah's  sacrifice  was  a  wonderful  commingling  of 
ideas  and  emotions, — (1)  faith,  (2)  penitence,  (3)  thanksgiving,  (4)  consecration, — 
all  of  which  will  have  a  place  within  the  bosoms  of  the  ransomed  host  who  yet  shall 
sit  upon  the  sea  of  glass.  If  not  the  oifering  up  of  sacrificial  victims,  as  the  expres- 
sion of  the  soul's  faith,  there  will  be  (1)  in  the  midst  of  the  throne  a  Lamb  as  it 
had  been  slain ;  (2)  the  continual  oifering  up  of  broken  and  of  contrite  hearts ;  (3) 
the  chanting  of  perpetual  hosannas  and  hallelujahs ;  and  (4)  the  eternal  consecration 
of  our  redeemed  hearts  to  God. 

V.  Safety  confirmed.  Mount  Ararat  listened  to  the  voice  of  God  confirming  the 
salvation  of  his  people.  In  two  ways  was  it  confirmed.  (1)  By  a  voice,  and  (2)  by 
a  sign — the  rainbow.  And  so  is  the  eternal  happiness  of  God's  believing  people 
secured  (1)  by  the  sure  word  of  promise  (Rev.  xxi.  3)  and  (2)  by  the  covenant  of 
grace  (Rev.  iv.  3). 

Vers.  10 — 12. — Hoping  and  waiting.  I.  The  patience  of  Noah's  hope.  1. 
Patience  a  characteristic  of  all  true  hope  (Rom.  viii.  25).  2.  Faith  in  the  Divine 
covenant  is  the  secret  of  hope's  patience  (Heb.  xi.  1).  3.  The  patience  cf  hope  is 
always  proportioned  to  the  brightness  of  faith's  vision. 

II.  The  eagerness  of  Noah's  hope.  1.  While  waiting  God's  time  he  kept  a  steady 
outlook  for  the  coming  of  the  promise.  2.  He  employed  different  methods  tc 
discover  its  approach — the  raven  and  the  dove.  3.  He  sanctified  the  means  he  use< 
by  devotion. 

III.  The  reward  of  Noah's  hope.  In  due  time  the  dove  returned  with  an  oliv 
leaf,  which  was — 1.  A  timely  answer.  2.  An  intelligible  answer.  3.  A  joyou 
answer ;  and — 4.  A  sufficient  answer. 

Ver.  14.— The  returning  of  the  waters,  or  the  recall  of  Divine  judgments.  I.  God'b 
judgments  have  their  specific  purposes.  1.  Separation — the  elimination  of  the 
righteous  from  the  wicked.  Under  the  present  condition  of  the  world  there  is  a 
strange  intermingling  of  the  good  and  the  evil.  The  lares  and  the  wheat,  the  draw- 
net  with  good  and  bad  fish  (Matt,  xiii.)  a  "  suggestive  eiujlems  of  this  mixed  state  of 
society.  The  grand  object  contemplated  y  Christianity  is  the  elimination  of  the 
saintly  element  from  that  which  is  corrupt.  *"or  this  end  it  lays  a  special  injunction 
on  the  former  to  withdraw  themselves  from  uie  company  and  contagion  of  the  latter 
(2  Cor.  vi.  17 ;  2  Theso.  iii.  6  ;  1  Tim.  vi.  5).  Only  it  forbids  men,  under  cover  ol 
real  or  pretended  zea!  for  righteousness,  to  attempt  any  forcible  separation  of  the 
commingled  elements  (Matt.  xiii.  30).  Yet  wh«t  the  hand  of  man  cannot  do  the 
hand  of  God  can — winnow  the  chaff  from  the  wheat.  He  did  so  by  the  Flood.  Ha 
did  so  by  the  incarnation  (Matt.  iii.  12).  He  will  do  so  at  the  second  advent  (Matt. 
xiii.  30  ;  xxv.  32).  2.  Condemnation — the  infliction  of  retribution  on  the  finally  im- 
penitent. Undisguisedly  was  this  the  design  of  the  fell  catastrophe  which  overtook 
"  the  world  of  the  ungodly  "  in  the  time  of  Noah.  It  was  sent  for  the  specific  pur- 
pose of  punishing  their  evil  deeds.  And  so  have  all  Divine  judgments  of  a  like  kind, 
what  we  misnam  e  accidents, — catastrophes,  floods,  famines,  pestilences,  &c, — a  terrible 
ou  look  of  wrath  and  judicial  retribution  to  them  who  forget  to  humble  themselve« 
beneath  the  mighty  hand  of  God.  So  certainly  will  the  last  great  judgment,  oJ 
which  Noah's  flood  was  a  prophetic  symbol  and  warning,  have  as  its  specific  pnrpoBt 
the  complete  destruction  of  the  finally  impenitent  (Rom.  ii.  6;  2  Thess.  i.  1 ;  He 


tH.  vni.  1—14.  J  THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS.  129 

£.  27  ;  2  Pet.  iii.  7).  8.  Preservation — the  salvation  of  the  faithful.  This  may  be 
said  to  be  the  aim  of  all  those  minor  troubles  and  afflictions  that  befall  God's  people 
em  foe  earth  (Rom.  viii.  28 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  Yl).  It  is  specially  so  when  on  a  larger  scale 
ne  interposes  to  inflict  his  judgments  on  the  world  (Isa.  xxvi.  9).  When  he  over- 
throws the  wicked  (whether  nation  or  individual)  suddenly  as  in  a  moment,  it  is  with 
an  eye  to  the  deliverance  of  his  people.  Examples — Pharaoh,  Goliath,  Ham?n, 
Herod,  Belshazzar.  It  was  so  with  Noah.  The  destruction  of  the  antediluvian 
sinners  was  necessary,  if  the  remnant  of  the  primitive  Church  was  to  be  saved.  So 
may  it  be  said  that  the  future  overthrow  of  the  wicked  is  indispensable,  if  the 
eternal  happiness  of  the  redeemed  is  to  be  secured. 

II.  God's  judgments  have  their  appointed  times.  1.  Their  times  of  coming. 
Tne  hour  of  the  commencement  of  the  Flood  was  both  fixed  and  announced  120 
years  before  the  event.  Though  not  revealed,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Noachic  Deluge, 
tne  date  of  every  event  is  as  truly  predetermined  (of.  Gen.  xviii.  14 ;  Exod.  ix.  6 ; 
Job  vii.  1  ;  Eccles.  iii.  1  ;  Jer.  viii.  7  j  Acts  xvri.  26).  And  God's  judgments 
always  keep  their  set  times  of  coming,  as  the  Flood  came  in  the  predicted  hour  for  its 
arrival.  2.  Their  times  of  continuance.  The  flood  of  waters  lingered  on  the  earth 
for  a  season,  but  not  for  ever.  From  the  moment  when  the  first  rain-drop  fell  from 
the  leaden  sky,  after  the  Lord  had  shut  the  patriarch  with  his  family  and  living 
creatures  into  the  ark,  till  it  could  be  said  the  earth  was  dry,  one  year  and  ten  days 
passed  away.  So  have  all  God's  judgments,  at  least  here,  their  limits.  Upon  sinful 
men  his  wrath  is  not  poured  out  without  measure.  3.  Their  limes  of  recall.  In  the 
future  world  we  do  not  read  that  there  will  be  any  recall  of  the  Divine  judgments ; 
everlasting  punishment  (Matt.  xxv.  46),  fire  that  never  shall  be  quenched  (Mark 
ix.  43),  everlasting  destruction  (2  Thess.  i.  9)  are  some  of  the  expressions  employed 
to  depict  the  fire-deluge  of  eternity.  But  here  on  earth  God's  judgments,  being 
only  for  a  set  time,  are  subject  to  recall ;  and  as  they  cannot  anticipate  the  hour 
appointed  for  their  coming,  so  neither  can  they  linger  beyond  the  moment  assigned 
for  their  departure.  Their  recall  too  is,  as  in  the  case  of  Noah's  flood — (1)  An 
act  of  grace  (Gen.  viii.  1).  "God  remembered  Noah."  "It  is  of  the  Lord's 
mercies  we  are  not  consumed"  (Lam.  iii.  22;  cf.  2  Kings  xiii.  23  ;  Mark  i.  41).  (2) 
An  act  of  power  (vers.  2, 3).  As  in  order  to  roll  back  the  tide  of  waters  he  sent  forth 
a  wind  ana  stopped  up  the  flood-gates  of  the  deep  and  the  windows  of  heaven,  so  is 
he  able  to  lay  his  hand  upon  all  the  powers  and  forces  of  the  material  universe,  and 
make  them  cease  their  working  as  easily  as  he  set  them  in  operation. 

III.  God's  judgments  have  their  appropriate  signs.  1.  Signs  of  their  approach, 
which  are  commonly — (1)  The  growing  wickedness  of  man,  as  in  the  days  of  Noah 
(ch.  vi.  11,  12).  When  an  individual  or  a  nation  is  becoming  mature  in  sin,  then 
.  that  individual  or  that  nation  is  becoming  ripe  for  judgment.  So  it  was  with 
Pharaoh,  and  afterwards  with  Israel,  with  Babylon,  Nineveh,  Greece,  Rome.  So  will  it 
oe  in  the  end  of  the  world  (cf.  Rev.  xiv.  15).  (2)  Prelusive  chastisements  from  God, 
again  as  in  the  days  of  Noah  (ch.  vii.  10).  The  Deluge  began  with  a  rain-shower, 
which  gradually  became  more  violent  as  the  days  passed,  and  with  the  bursting  forth  oi 
subterranean  floods,  which  swelled  the  rivers,  lakes,  and  oceans ;  all  whicli  must  have 
been  ominous  indications  that  the  long-threatened  judgment  was  at  last  approaching. 
So  the  full  outpouring  of  God's  wrath  is  commonly  heralded  by  anticipatory  inflic 
tions.  2.  Signs  of  their  departure,  which  are  usually — (1)  The  accomplishment  of  their 
mission.  Immediately  it  could  be  said,  "All  in  whose  nostrils  was  the  breath  of  life 
died  "  (ch.  vii.  22),  it  was  added,  "And  God  made  a  wind  to  pass  over  the  earth, 
and  the  waters  asswaged  "  (ver.  1).  (2)  The  mitigation,  of  their  violence.  The 
quieting  of  the  waters  (ver.  1)  was  the  first  symptom  of  the  passing  of  the  storm  to 
Noah;  and  so,  when  God's  retributive  judgments  are  about  to  be  withdrawn,  their 
severity  begins  to  relax.  (3)  The  removal  of  their  causes.  The  second  sign  to 
Noah  was  the  cessation  of  the  rain  and  the  retirement  of  the  floods  (ver.  2).  8o, 
when  God's  judgments  are  about  to  disappear,  the  agencies  that  brought  them  are 
visibly  recalled.  (4)  The  arrival  of  little  foretastes  of  deliverance.  Such  was  the 
grounding  of  the  ark  to  Noah  and  his  imprisoned  family  (ver.  4).  (6)  The  per- 
ceptible return  of  the  premout  condition  of  ojfairs.  ThiB  was  symbolised  by  the 
reappearance  of  the  mountain-tops  (ver.  5). 

GBNESIS.  ( 


180  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  [cm.  viii.  1—14 


IV.  God's  judgments  have  theib  intebested  observers.  Possibly  the  wicked  are 
indifferent  to  the  Divine  judgments  when  they  happen  to  be  abroad  upon  the  earth ; 
but  not  so  the  righteous,  to  whom  everything  connected  with  them  is  of  the  utmost 
importance.  Observers  of  God's  judgments  should  be  like  Noah — 1.  Hopeful- 
expecting  them  to  pass.  Had  Noah  not  anticipated  the  complete  removal  of  the 
waters,  he  had  not  made  a  single  experiment  to  discover  how  that  removal  was  pro- 
gressing. Let  the  saints  learn  from  Noah  to  cherish  hope  in  God.  2.  Prayerful. 
There  is  good  reason  for  believing  that  Noah,  sent  forth  the  raven  and  the  dove 
on  the  day  of  weekly  rest,  and  after  solemn  religious  exercises  (vide  Expos.). 
The  saint's  inquiries  into  God's  judgments  should  always  be  conducted  in  a  spirit  of 
devotion.  3.  Intelligent — i.  e.  capable  of  reading  the  signs  of  the  times.  When 
the  dove  came  home  to,  Noah  with  the  fresh-gathered  olive  leaf,  "  he  knew  that  the 
waters  were  abated  from  off  the  earth"  (ver.  11).  So  God  ever  vouchsafes  to 
devout  souls,  who  seek  them  by  faith,  appropriate  and  adequate  signs  of  his  move- 
ments, which  it  becomes  them  to  study  and  interpret.  4.  Patient— seeking  neither 
to  outrun  God's  leading  nor  to  anticipate  God's  directing,  but,  like  Noah,  calmly 
waiting  the  Divine  order  to  advance  to  the  new  sphere  and  the  new  duty  which  the 
passing  of  his  judgments  may  reveal.  Noah  waited  fifty-seven  days  after  the  drying 
up  of  the  waters  before  he  left  the  ark,  and  then  he  only  did  so  at  God's  command ; 
wherefore,  "  be  ye  not  unwise  "  by  being  over-hasty,  "  but  understanding  what  the 
will  of  the  Lord  is  "  (Ephes.  v.  17). 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  1. — God's  infinite  care.  In  the  experience  of  Christians  the  joy  of  first 
believing  is  often  followed  by  a  time  of  discouragement.  Freshness  of  feeling 
seems  to  fade.  The  "  law  of  sin  "  makes  itself  felt.  Yet  it  is  just  the  training 
by  which  firmer  faith  and  fuller  joy  are  to  be  reached.  Deep  must  have  been  the 
thankfulness  of  those  in  the  ark ;  safe  in  the  midst  of  the  flood.  But  their  faith  was 
tried.  Five  months,  and  still  no  abatement.  Noah  may  well  have  had  misgivings 
(cf.  Matt.  xi.  3).  But  God  had  not  forgotten  him  (cf.  Mark  vi.  48 ;  John  x.  14). 
He  remembered  not  Noah  only,  but  every  creature  in  the  ark  (cf.  Luke  xii.  6).  He 
saves  to  the  uttermost  (Heb.  vii.  25).  The  time  of  trial  was  a  prelude  to  complete 
deliverance  (cf.  Acts  xiv.  22). 

I.  There  are  times  when  believers  are  tempted  to  feel  forgotten.  When 
troubles  gather,  and  prayers  seem  unanswered,  it  is  hard  to  keep  faith  firm.  The 
warning  Heb.  xii.  6,  7  often  needfuL  Christians  would  fain  be  led  in  smooth 
ways.  And  when  their  course  is  irksome  and  discouraging  they  sometimes  see  the 
wind  boisterous,  and  begin  to  sink.  Still  more  surely  does  the  feeling  follow  sin.. 
The  disciple  has  forgotten  to  watch  ;  has  trusted  to  his  own  strength ;  has  ventured 
into  temptation,  and  fallen.  Then  God  is  felt  to  be  afar  off  (cf.  Exod.  xxxiii.  7). 
And  there  are  times  of  discipline,  when  spiritual  freedom  seems  denied,  and  the  soul 
cannot  cry  Abba,  and  prayer  seems  choked  (cf.  Isa.  xlix.  14).  Perhaps  it  is  to  teach 
humility ;  perhaps  to  show  some  root  of  evil ;  perhaps  to  excite  more  hunger  for 
communion  with  God. 

II.  But  God  does  not  forget.  A  creature's  love  may  fail  (Isa.  xlix.  15),  a  crea- 
ture's watchfulness  may  faint,  but  npt  God's.  He  made  us ;  can  he  forget  our 
wants  ?  His  purpose  is  our  salvation ;  will  he  neglect  any  step  ?  He  gave  his  own 
Son  for  us ;  is  anything  else  too  great  for  his  goodness  ?  Not  even  thy  coldness  and 
unbelief  can  make  him  cease  to  care. 

III.  God's  care  extends  to  the  least.  Our  Lord  welcomed  (1)  those  of 
small  account  (Matt.  xxi.  16 ;  Mark  x.  49  ;  Luke  xviii.  16),  and  (2)  the  undeserving 
(Luke  vii.  39 ;  xv.  10 ;  xix.  7).  He  cares  also  for  small  matters  (of.  Luke  xii. 
28 — 30).  What  treasures  of  wisdom  and  love  surround  us  on  every  side  I  These  are 
eoI  beneath  his  care.     Will  he  not  fulfil  ?  (Eom.  viii.  28). 

IV.  Freedom  through  the  work  of  the  Holt  Spirit.  God's  time  not  always 
what  we  should  choose  (cf.  John  vii.  6).  Noah  a  prisoner  of  hope.  God  showed 
that  the  hope  was  well  founded.  The  agent  of  deliverance  "  a  wind  " — the  samt 
-▼ord,  both  in  Hebrew  and  in  the  LXX.,  as  is  used  in  Gen.  i,  2  for  the  Spirit  of  God 


ch.  vin.  1—14.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  Ill 

Doubtless  the  agent  in  drying  up  the  water  was  a  wind.  But  in  the  spiritual  lesson 
we  are  reminded  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  His  work  at  first  brought  life  on  the  earth ;  and 
his  work  prepared  for  repeopling  it,  and  completed  the  work  of  Noah's  deliverance. 
And  his  work  gives  us  freedom,  showing  us  the  work  of  Christ,  and  our  position  as 
children  of  God. — M. 

Vers.  1 — 5. — Grace  and  providence.  The  powers  of  material  nature  are  obedient 
servants  of  God,  and  those  who  are  the  objects  of  his  regard,  remembered  by  him, 
are  safely  kept  in  the  midst  of  the  world's  changes.  "All  things  work  together 
for  their  good."  There  is  an  inner  circle  of  special  providence  in  which  the 
family  of  God,  with  those  whose  existence  is  bound  up  in  it,  is  under  the  eye  of  the 
heavenly  Father,  and  in  the  hollow  of  his  hand.  "And  the  ark  rested  "  (ver.  4).  We 
•peak  of  the  cradle  of  the  human  race  being  set  on  Mount  Ararat ;  is  it  not  well  to 
remember — 1,  The  new  world  came  out  of  an  ark  of  Divine  grace.  Religion  is  the 
real  foundation  of  society.    2.  The  waves  of  the  flood  bore  the  ark  to  its  resting- 

Elace.  So  the  waters  of  affliction,  though  they  heave  our  vessel  and  trouble  our 
earts  with  fear,  carry  us  onward  to  a  new  and  often  higher  standpoint  of  know- 
ledge and  faith.  3.  While  the  flood  bore  the  ark,  God  himself  chose  out  the  spot 
where  it  should  end  its  awful  journey.  The  Ararat  of  the  new  world  was  like  the 
paradise  of  the  first  man — the  nursery  of  a  rising  humanity ;  but  whereas  in  the  state 
of  innocence  it  is  a  garden,  in  the  case  of  the  redeemed  man  it  is  a  mountain,  with  its 
steep,  rough  places,  its  heights  and  depths,  its  trials  and  dangers.  The  humanity 
which  started  from  Ararat  carried  with  it  at  once  the  good  and  the  evil  of  the  old 
world  which  had  passed  away,  and  the  mountain  symbolised  the  complex  treasury  of 
possibilities,  mingled  with  liabilities,  which  were  laid  up  in  the  rescued  race. — B. 

Vers.  6 — 12. — The  dispensations  of  righteousness  and  love.  The  raven  and  the  dove. 
While  this  passage  has  its  natural,  historical  fitness,  we  cannot  overlook  its  symbolical 
significance.  It  seems  to  set  forth  the  two  administrations  of  God,  both  of  them  going 
forth  from  the  same  centre  of  his  righteousness  in  which  his  people  are  kept  safe. 
The  one  represented  by  the  carrion  bird,  the  raven,  is  the  administration  op  judg- 
ment, which  goes  forth  toand  fro  until  the  waters  are  dried  up  from  off  the  earth — 
finding  a  resting-place  in  the  waters  of  destruction,  though  not  a  permanent  rest; 
returning  to  the  ark,  as  the  beginning  and  the  end  of  judgment  is  the  righteousness 
of  God.  The  dove  is  the  emblem  of  Divine  grace,  spiritual  life  and  peace.  It  can- 
not find  rest  in  the  waters  of  judgment  until  another  seven  days,  another  period 
of  gracious  manifestation,  has.  prepared  the  world  for  it ;  then  it  brings  with  it  the 
plucked-of£  olive  leaf,  emblem  of  retiring  judgment  and  revealed  mercy ;  and  when 
yet  another  period  of  gracious  manifestation  has  passed  by,  the  dove  shall  return  no 
more  to  the  ark,  for  the  ark  itself  is  no  more  needed — the  waters  are  abated  from  off 
the  face  of  the  earth.  So  we  may  say  the  raven  dispensation  was  that  which  pre- 
ceded Noah.  Then  followed  the  first  sending  forth  of  the  dove  unto  the  time  of 
Moses,  leading  to  a  seven  days'  period  of  the  ark  life,  waiting  for  another  mission  of 
grace.  The  dove  brought  back  the  olive  leaf  when  the  prophetic  period  of  the  old 
dispensation  gave  fuller  promise  of  Divine  mercy.  But  yet  anoth  r  period  of  seven 
days  must  transpire  before  the  dove  is  sent  forth  and  returns  no  more  to  the  ark,  but 
abides  in  the  earth.  After  the  two  sacred  intervals,  the  period  of  the  law  and  the 
period  of  the  prophets,  which  were  both  immediately  connected  with  a  special  limited 
covenant  such  as  is  represented  in  the  ark,  there  followed  the  world-wide  mission 
of  the  Comforter.  The  waters  were  abated.  The  "  Grace  and  Truth  "  took  posses- 
sion of  man  s  world,  cursed  by  sin,  redeemed  by  grace. — R. 

EXPOSITION. 


Vers.  16— 17.— And  God  spake  unto  Noah, 
laying,  Go  forth  of  the  ark.  For  which 
command  doubtless  the  patriarch  waited,  as 
he  had  done  for  instructions  to  enter  in  (ch. 
yii    .1),  "being  restrained  by  a  hallowed 


modesty  from  allowing  himself  to  enjoy  the 
bounty  of  nature  till  he  should  hear  the 
voice  of  God  directing  him  to  do  so"  (Calvin). 
Thou,  and  thy  wife,  and  thy  sons,  and  thy 
sons'  wives  with  thee.  The  order  is  diffa* 
K2 


132 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


[oh.  vm.  16—22, 


•nt  in  eh.  vii.  7,  whence  Ambrose  noteth, 
"non  conimiscetnr  sexus  in  introitn,  sed 
jommiscetur  in  ingressu."  Bring  forth  with 
thee — God  having  preserved  alive  the  crea- 
tures that  •>.  twelvemonth  before  had  been 
taken  into  the  ark,  and  were  now  to  be 
restored  to  their  appropriate  habitations  on 
the  earth — every  living  thing  that  is  with 
thee,  of  all  flesh,  both  of  fowl,  and  of  cattle, 
and  of  every  creeping  thing  that  creepeth 
upon  the  earth  (of.  ch.  vii.  21  ;  ix.  10)  ; 
that  they  may  breed  abundantly — sharati, 
to  creep  or  crawl,  used  of  reptiles  and  small 
water  animals  (ch.  i.  20  ;  vii.  21) ;  hence  to 
swarm,  or  multiply  (ch.  ix.  7) — in  the  earth, 
and  be  fruitful  (ch.  i.  22),  and  multiply- 
literally,  become  numerous — upon  the  earth. 

Vers.  18,  19. — And  Noah  went  forth, — in 
obedience  to  the  Divine  command, — and  his 
sens,  and  his  wife,  and  his  sons'  wives  with 
him, — in  obedience  to  Noah,  to  whom  alone 
the  Divine  instructions  were  communicated ; 
— an  early  instance  of  filial  subjection  to 
parents.  Every  beast,  every  creeping  thing, 
and  every  fowl,  and  whatsoever  creepeth 
upon  the  earth.  I.  e.  the  chayyah,  the 
remes,  the  'oph,  all  creepers  upon  the 
ground  (cf.  ch.  i.  26 ;  vii.  8,  14),  all  of 
Which  had  previously  entered  in.  After 
their  kinds.  Hebrew,  families,  tribes  (ch. 
x.  18) ;  i.  e.  not  confusedly,  but  in  an  orderly 
fashion,  as  they  had  come  in,  each  one  sort- 
ing to  its  kind.    Went  forth  ont  of  the  ark. 

Ver.  20. — And  Noah  builded  an  altar. 
Mizb'iach,  a  place  for  slaying  sacrifices,  from 
zabach,  to  slaughter  animals  (ch.  xxxi.  54), 
to  slay  in  sacrifice  (Levit.  ix.  4 ;  1  Sam.  i.  4), 
as  Bvaiaoriipiov,  from  Qitiv,  is  the  first  altar 
mentioned  in  history.  The  English  term 
(from  altus,  high)  signifies  a  high  place, 
because  the  altar  was  commonly  a  raised 
itructure  or  mound  of  earth  or  stones  (Exod. 
xx.  24).  Keil  thinks  that  altars  were  not 
required  prior  to  the  Flood,  the  Divine 
presence  being  still  visibly  among  men  at 
the  gate  of  Eden,  "  so  that  they  could  turn 
their  offerings  and  their  hearts  towards  that 
abode."  Poole,  Clarke,  Bush,  and  Inglis 
hold  that  the  antediluvian  sacrifices  pre- 
supposed an  altar.  Unto  the  Lord.  Jehovah, 
the  God  of  salvation.  And  took  of  every 
clean  beast,  and  of  every  clean  fowl.  Vide 
*h.  vii.  2.  "  Seldom  has  there  been  a  more 
liberal  offering  in  proportion  to  the  means 
of  the  giver.  His  whole  stock  of  clean 
animals,  wherewith  to  fill  the  world,  was 
seven  pairs  of  each  "  (Inglis).  And  offered. 
By  Divine  appointment,  since  his  service 
was  accepted;  and  "all  religious  services 
which  are  not  perfumed  with  the  odour  of 
faith  are  of  an  ill  savour  before  God" 
(Calvin) ;  but  "God  is  peculiarly  well  pleased 
with  free-will  offerings,  and  surely  if  ever  an 
•ccasion  existed  for  the  exercise  of  grateful 


and  adoring  sentiments,  the  present  was 
one''  (Bush).  Burnt  offerings.  'Sloth, 
literally,  things  that  ascend,  from  'alah, 
to  go  up,  alluding  not  to  the  elevation  of  the 
victims  on  the  altar,  but  to  the  ascension  of 
the  smoke  of  the  burnt  offerings  to  heaven 
(cf.  Judges  xx.  40  ;  Jer.  xlviii  15 ;  Amos 
iv.  10).     On  the  altar. 

Ver.  21 — And  the  lord  (Jehovah)  smelled 
— as  is  done  by  drawing  the  air  in  and  out 
through  the  nostrils  ;  from  the  root  ruach,  to 
breathe  ;  hiph. ,  to  smell — a  sweet  savour. 
Reach  hannichoach,  literally,  an  odour  of  sa- 
tisfaction, acquiescence,  or  rest ;  from  nuach, 
to  rest,  with  an  allusion  to  Noah's  name 
(vide  ch.  V.  29);  Sopjv  tvailias  (LXX.)j 
(cf.  Levit  ii.  12 ;  xxvi.  31  ;  Num.  xv.  3 ; 
Ezek.  vi.  13).  The  meaning  is  that  the 
sacrifice  of  the  patriarch  was  as  acceptablo 
to  God  as  refreshing  odours  are  to  the  senses 
of  a  man ;  and  that  which  rendered  it 
acceptable  was  (1)  the  feeling  from  which  it 
sprang,  whether  gratitude  or  obedience  ;  (2) 
the  truths  which  it  expressed— it  was  tanta- 
mount to  an  acknowledgment  of  personal 
guilt,  a  devout  recognition  of  the  Divine 
mercy,  an  explicit  declaration  that  he  had 
been  saved  or  could  only  be  saved  through 
the  offering  up  of  the  life  of  another,  and 
a  cheerful  consecration  of  his  redeemed  life 
to  God ;  (3)  the  great  sacrifice  of  which  it 
was  a  type.  Paul,  by  using  the  language 
of  the  LXX.  (Ephes.  v.  2),  shows  that  he 
regarded  the  two  as  connected.  And  the 
Lord  said  in  his  heart.  I.  e.  resolved  within 
himself.  It  is  not  certain  that  this  deter- 
mination on  the  part  of  Jehovah  was  at  this 
time  communicated  to  the  patriarch  (cf.  ch. 
vi.  3,  7  for  Divine  inward  resolves  which 
were  not  at  the  moment  made  known), 
unless  the  correct  reading  be  to  his  (Noah's) 
heart,  meaning  the  Lord  comforted  him 
(cf.  Judges  xix.  3 ;  Ruth  ii.  13  ;  Isa.  xl.  2 ; 
Hosea  ii.  14),  which  is  barely  probable. 
I  will  not  again  curse  the  ground  any  more 
for  man's  sake.  Literally,  I  will  not  add 
to  curse.  Not  a  revocation  of  the  curse  of 
Gen.  iii.  17,  nor  a  pledge  that  such  curse 
would  not  be  duplicated.  The  language 
refers  solely  to  the  visitation  of  the  Deluge, 
and  promises  not  that  God  may  not  some- 
times visit  particular  localities  with  a  flood, 
but  that  another  such  world-wide  catastrophe 
should  never  overtake  the  human  race. 
For  the  imagination  of  man's  heart  is  evil 
from  his  youth.  Ch.  vi.  5  assigns  this  as 
the  reason  for  man's  destruction  ;  a  proof 
of  inconsistency  between  the  Elohistic  author 
and  his  Jehovistic  editor  (Bleek).  "Hie 
inconstantise  videtur  Deus  accusari  posse" 
(Luther).  "God  seems  to  contradict  him- 
self by  having  previously  declared  that  the 
world  must  be  destroyed  because  its  iniquity 
was  desperate"  (Calvin).     Some   endeavoni 


cb.  viii.  16—22.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


181 


to  remove  the  incongruity  by  translating  *? 
M  although  (Bush,  Inglis),  but  "there  are 
ff-w  (if  any)  places  were  *3  can  be  rendered 
although"  (T.  Lewis).  Others  connect  it 
with  "for  man's  sake,"  as  explanatory  not 
of  the  promise,  but  of  the  past  judgment 
(Murphy),  or  as  stating  that  any  future 
cursing  of  the  ground  would  not  be  for 
man's  sake  (Jacobus).  The  true  solution  of 
the  difficulty  appears  to  lie  in  the  clause 
"from  his  youth,"  as  if  God  meant  to  say 
that  whereas  formerly  he  had  visited  man 
with  judicial  extermination  on  account  of  his 
absolute  moral  corruption,  he  would  now 
have  regard  to  the  circumstance  that  man 
inherited  his  depravity  through  his  birth, 
and,  instead  of  smiting  man  with  punitive 
destruction,  would  visit  him  with  compas- 
sionate forbearance  (Keil,  _' Speaker's  Com- 
mentary ').  Tayler  Lewis  regards  the  expres- 
sion as  strongly  anthropopathic,  like  ch.  vi. 
6,  and  indicative  of  the  Divine  regret  at  so 
calamitous  an  act  as  the  Deluge,  although 
that  act  was  absolutely  just  and. necessary. 
Neither  will  I  again  smite  any  more  every 
living  thing,  as  I  have  done.  There  should 
be  no  more  deluge,  but — 

Ver.  22.  — While  the  earth  remaineth. 
laterally,  as  yet,  all  the  days  of  the  earth, 
L  e.  henceforth,  so  long  as  the  earth  con- 
tinues, "fy  expressing  the  ideas  of  repetition 
and  continuance  {vide  ver.  12).  Seed-time 
and  harvest, — from  roots  signifying  to  scatter, 
e.  g.  seed,  and  to  cut  off,  specially  grain  ; 
airipiia  rai  flspia-juoc  (LXX.) — and  cold  and 
heat,— <//ux0CKa'  KaiJjua(LXX.) — andsummer 
and  winter.  Properly  the  cutting  off  of 
fruits,  from  a  root  meaning  to  cut  off,  hence 
summer ;  and  the  time  when  fruits  are 
plucked,  hence  autumn  (including  winter)  ; 
the  import  of  the  root  being  to  gather,  to 
pluck  off;  0£poC  nai  lap  (LXX.).  The  first 
term  of  each  pair  denotes  the  first  half  of 
the  year,  and  the  second  term  of  each  pair 
the  second  half.  And  day  and  night  (cf. 
ch.  i.  5)  shall  not  cease.  Hebrew,  lo  yish- 
hothu,  shall  not  sabbatise,  or  keep  a  day  of 
rest ;  i..e.  they  shall  continue  ever  in  opera- 
tion and  succession.  This  Divine  promise 
to  conserve  the  orderly  constitution  and 
course  of  nature  is  elsewhere  styled  "God's 
covenant  of  the  day  and  of  the  night "  (cf. 
Jer.  xxxiii.  20,  25). 

TRADITIONS  OF  THE  DELUGE. 
1.  The  Babylonian.  (1)  From  the  Chal- 
dean monuments.  As  deciphered  from  the 
eleventh  tablet  of  the  Izdubar  series,  the 
«tory  of  the  Flood  is  briefly  this:— I/dubar, 
whom  George  Smith  identifies  with  Ninirod, 
the  founder  of  Babylonia,  is  informed  by 
Hasisadra,  whom  the  same  authority  believes 


to  represent  Noah,  of  a  Divine  command- 
ment which  he  had  received  to  construct  a 
ship  after  a  specified  pattern,  in  which  to 
save  himself  and   "the  seed  of  all  life," 
because  the  city  Surippak  wherein  he  dwelt 
was  to  be  destroyed.    After  first  attempting 
to  excuse  himself,  as  he  explains  to  Izdubar, 
on  the  ground   that  "  young  and  old  will 
deride  him,"  Hasisadra  builds  the  ship,  and 
causes  to  go  up  into  it  "all  my  male  servants 
and  my  female  servants,  the  beast  of  the 
field,  the  animal  of  the  field,  the  sons  of  the 
people,  all  of  them,"  while  the  god  Shamas 
makes  a  flood,  causing  it  to  rain  heavily. 
The  flood  destroys  all  life  from  the  face  o! 
the  earth.     Six  days  and  nights  the  storm 
rages  ;  on  the  seventh  it  grows  calm.    Twelve 
measures  above  the  sea  rises  the  land.     The 
ship  is  stopped  by  a  mountain  in  the  country 
of  Nizir.     After  seven  days  Hasisadra  sends 
forth  a  dove,  "  which  went  and  turned,  and 
a  resting-place  it  did  not  find,  and  it  re- 
turned ; "    then  a  swallow,    and   finally  a 
raven.     On   the  decrease  of  the  waters  he 
sends  forth  the  animals,  and  builds  an  altar 
on  the  peak  .rf  the  mountain,  and  pours  out 
a   libation  ,    Chaldean   Genesis,'  ch.  xvi.  ; 
'Records  ot  ine  Past,'  vol.  vii.  133—141). 
(2)  From  Berosus.    The  god  Kronos  appeared 
to  Xisuthrus,  the  tenth  king  of  Babylon,  in 
a  vision,  and  warned  him  of  an  approaching 
deluge  upon  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  month 
Desius,  by  which  mankind  would  be  de- 
stroyed.   Among  other  things  the  god  in- 
structed   him    to   build    a   vessel    for   the 
preservation   of   himself   and    friends,    and 
specimens  of  the  different  animals.    Obey- 
ing the  Divine  admonition,  he  built  a  vessel 
five  stadia  in  length  and  two  in  breadth, 
and  conveyed  into  it  his  wife,  children,  and 
friends.     After  the  flood  had  been  upon  the 
earth  he  three  times  sent  out  birds  from  the 
vessel,  which  returned   to  him  the  second 
time  with  mud   upon   their  feet,  and  the 
third  time  returned  to  him  no  more.     Find- 
ing  that    the   vessel    had   grounded    ou   a 
mountain,  Xisuthrus  disembarked  with  his 
wife  and  children,  and,  having  constructed 
an  altar,  offered  sacrifices  to  the  gods,  in 
reward  for  which  he  was  raised  immediately  " 
to    heaven   ('  Chaldean  Genesis,'   ch.    iii  ; 
Kalisch,  p.  202  ;  '  Encyclopedia  Britannica," 
art.  Deluge,  ninth  edition). 
2.    The  Egyptian.      Though  commoulj 


1*4 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[oh.  viii.  16—22. 


alleged  to  be  entirely  unknown  in  the  Nile 
valley,'  it  is  certain  that  the  germs  of  the 
Deluge  story  are  to  be  discovered  even  there. 
According  to  the  Egyptian  historian  Mane- 
tho,  quoted  by  Eusebius,  Thoth,  the  first 
Hermes,  erected  certain  pillars  with  inscrip- 
tions, which,  after  the  Deluge,  were  transcribed 
into  books.  Plato  also  states  in  the  Timseus 
(chap,  v.)  that  a  certain  Egyptian  priest 
informed  Solon  that  the  gods,  when  wishing 
to  purify  the  earth,  were  accustomed  to  over- 
whelm it  by  a  deluge,  from  which  the  herds- 
men and  shepherds  saved  themselves  on  the 
tops  of  the  mountains.  Joseph  us  ('Ant.,'  I. 
iii.  9)  certifies  that  Hieronymus  the  Egyptian 
refers  to  the  Flood.  A  conception  altogether 
analogous  to  that  of  Genesis  is  likewise  to  be 
found  in  a  myth  belonging  to  the  archaic 
period  of  Seti  I.,  which  represents  Ra,  the 
Creator,  as  being  disgusted  with  the  insolence 
of  mankind,  and  resolving  to  exterminate 
them  (vide  Inscription  of  the  Destruction 
of  Mankind,  '  Records  of  the  Past,'  vol.  vi. 
p.  103).  In  short,  the  Egyptians  believed  not 
that  there  was  no  deluge,  but  that  there  had 
been  several.  The  absence  of  any  indications 
of  thit  belief  in  the  recovered  literature  of 
ancient  Egypt  is  not  sufficient  to  set  aside 
the  above  concurrent  testimonies  to  its  exist- 
once  (Kitto,  'Bible  Illustrations,'  vol.  i.  p. 
150 ;  Rawlinson's  '  Historical  Illustrations 
of  0.  T.  ;'  'Encycl.  Britan.,'  art.  Deluge, 
ninth  edition). 

3.  The  Indian.  Through  the  theft  of  the 
sacred  Vedas  by  the  giant  Hayagrivah,  the 
human  race  became  fearfully  degenerate,  with 
the  exception  of  seven  saints  and  the  good 
King  Satyavrata,  to  whom  the  Divine  spirit 
Vishnu  appeared  in  the  form  of  a  fish,  in- 
forming him  of  his  purpose  to  destroy  the 
earth  by  a  flood,  and  at  the  same  time  to 
■end  a  ship  miraculously  constructed  for  the 
preservation  of  himself  and  the  seven  holy 
ones,  along  with  their  wives,  and  one  pair  of 
each  of  all  the  irrational  animals.  After 
seven  days  the  rain  descended,  when  Satya- 
vrata, confiding  in  the  promises  of  the  god, 
saw  a  huge  ship  drawing  near,  into  which  he 
entered  as  directed.  Then  the  god  appeared 
in  the  form  of  a  fish  a  million  miles  long, 
with  an  immense  horn,  to  which  the  king 
made  the  ship  fast,  and,  drawing  it  for 
many  years  (a  night  of  Brahma),  at  length 
landed  It  upon  the  highest  peak  of  Mount 


Himavau.  When  the  flood  abated  the  goj 
arose,  struck  the  demon  Hayagrivah,recovere« 
tho  sacred  books,  instructed  Satyavrata  in 
all  heavenly  sciences,  and  appointed  him  the 
seventh  Manu,  from  whom  the  second  popu- 
lation of  the  earth  descended  in  a  super- 
natural manner,  whence  man  is  styled  Manu- 
dsha  (born  of  Manu).  Vide  Kalisch,  p.  203  j 
Auberlen's  '  Divine  Revelation,'  p.  169 
(Clark's  '  For.  Theol.  Lib.' ). 

i.  The  Grecian.  It  is  sufficient  here  tc 
refer  to  the  well-known  story  of  Deucalion 
and  Pyrrha,  first  given  in  Pindar,  and  after- 
wards related  by  Apollodorus,  Plutarch, 
Lucian,  and  Ovid',  whose  account  bears  so 
close  a  resemblance  to  the  Biblical  narrative 
as  to  suggest  the  probability  of  access  to 
Hebrew  or  Syrian  sources  of  information. 
The  previous  corruption  of  manners  and 
morals,  the  eminent  piety  of  Deucalion,  the 
determination  "genus  mortale  sub  undis 
perdere,"  the  construction  of  a  boat  by  Divine 
direction,  the  bursting  of  the  storm,  the 
rising  of  the  waters,  the  universal  ocean  in 
which  "jamque  mare  et  tellus  nullum  dis- 
crimen  habebant,"  the  subsidence  of  the 
flood,  the  landing  of  the  boat  on  Parnassus 
with  its  double  peak,  the  consultation  of  the 
Deity  "  per-  sacras  sortes,"  and  the  answer 
of  the  god  as  to  how  the  earth  was  to  be  re- 
peopled  "ossaque  post  tergum  magnae  jac- 
tate  parentis,"  are  detailed  with  such  graphic 
power  as  nukes  them  read  "like  amplified 
reports  of  the  record  in  Genesis."  Indeed, 
by  Philo,  Deucalion  was  distinctly  regarded 
as  Noah.  Cf.  Ovid,  '  Metamorph.,'  lib.  i. 
f.  vii.  ;  '  Kalisch  on  Genesis,'  p.  203  ;  Kitto't 
'  Bible  Illustrations,'  p.  150  (Porter's  edi- 
tion); 'Lange  on  Genesis,'  p.  294,  note  by 
Tayler  Lewis ;  Smith's  '  Dictionary  of  the 
Bible,'  art.  Noah. 

6.  The  American.  Traditions  of  the  Flood 
appear  to  be  even  more  numerous  in  the 
New  World  than  the  Old.  The  Esquimaux 
in  the  North,  the  Red  Indians,  the  Mexicans 
and  the  Brazilians  in  the  central  parts  of 
America,  and  the  Peruvians  in  the  South 
have  all  their  peculiar  versions  of  the  Deluge 
story.  Chasewee,  the  ancestor  of  the  Dog- 
rib  Indians,  on  the  Mackensie  river,  accord- 
ing to  Franklin,  escaped  in  a  canoe  from  I 
flood  which  overflowed  the  earth,  taking 
with  him  all  manner  of  four-footed  beast* 
and  birds.      The  Astecs,  the  Mixtees,  tru 


nil.  15—22.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  8BNESIS. 


133 


Zapotees,  and  other  nations  inhabiting 
Mexico  all  have,  according  to  Humboldt, 
their  Noahs,  Xisuthrus,  or  Manus  (called 
Coxcox,  Teocipactli,  or  Tezpi),  who  saves  him- 
self by  a  raft,  or  in  a  ship,  which  lands  upon 
the  summit  of  Colhuacan,  the  Ararat  of  the 
Mexicans.  The  legends  of  the  Tamanacks 
relate  that  a  man  and  woman  saved  them- 
selves from  the  Deluge,  and  repeopled  the 
earth  by  casting  behind  them  the  fruits  of 
the  Mauritia  palm  tree  (Kalisch,  p.  205 ; 
Auberlen's  '  Divine  Revelation,'  p.  171 ; 
Smith's  'Dictionary,'  art.  Noah). 

What,  then,  is  the  conclusion  to  be  drawn 
from  this  universal  diffusion  of  the  Deluge 
story  f  The  theory  of  Schirren  and  Gerland, 


as  stated  by  the  writer  of  the  article  Deluge 
in  the  '  Encyclopedia  Britannica,'  is  that  thi 
Deluge  stories  were  originally  ether-myths, 
descriptive  of  the  phenomena  of  the  sky, 
which  have  been  transferred  from  the  celestial 
regions  to  the  earth  ;  but,  an  Kalisch  justly 
observes,  "  the  harmony  between  all  these  ac- 
counts is  an  undeniable  guarantee  that  the  tra- 
dition is  no  idle  invention  ; "  or,  as  is  forcibly 
stated  by  Eawlinson,  of  a  tradition  existing 
among  all  the  great  races  into  which  ethno- 
logists have  divided  mankind,  — the  Shemites, 
the  Hamites,  the  Aryans,  the  Turanians, — 
"  but  one  rational  account  can  be  given,  viz., 
that  it  embodies  the  recollection  of  a  fact  in 
which  all  mankind  was  concerned," 


HOMILETICS. 

Vera.  16 — 22. — The  saint  and  the  Saviour.  I.  The  Saviour's  injunction  to  thb 
saint  (ver.  15).  The  command  which  God  addressed  to  Noah  and  the  other  inmates 
of  the  ark  to  go  forth  and  take  possession  of  the  renovated  earth  may  be  regarded  as 
emblematic  of  that  Divine  instruction  which  shall  yet  be  given  to  the  saints  to  go 
forth  and  take  possession  of  the  new  heavens  and  the  new  earth,  when  the  great 
gospel  ship  of  the  Christian  Church,  now  floating  on  the  troubled  sea  of  life,  shall 
have  landed  with  its  living  freight  upon  the  coasts  of  bliss.  The  Divine  command  to 
Noah  was  an  order  to  pass — 1.  From  a  situation  of  comparative  peril  to  a  position 
of  perfect  safety.  Though,  certainly,  before  the  bursting  of  the  storm  the  only 
available  shelter  was  that  afforded  by  the  ark,  "  all  flesh  and  all  in  whose  nostrils 
was  the  breath  of  life  "  that  remained  without  having  perished,  yet  even  inside  the 
ark  must  have  seemed  to  the  inexperienced  voyagers  to  be  at  the  best  of  only  doubt- 
ful security.  But  now  whatever  danger  had  been  connected  with  their  twelve  months' 
drifting  across  a  trackless  sea  was  at  an  end.  And  so,  though  only  within  the  shelter 
of  the  Christian  Church  can  safety  be  enjoyed,  yet  at  the  best  it  is  not  entirely  free  from 
peril.  What  with  temptations  and  afflictions,  "  fears  within  and  foes  without,"  there 
always  is  a  risk  of  making  shipwreck  of  the  soul  (1  Tim.  i.  19) ;  but  when  life's  voyage 
has  been  finished,  and  the  new  heavens  and  the  new  earth  have  been  revealed,  the  sal- 
vation of  the  saints  will  be  complete.  2.  From  a  period  of  patient  hoping  to  a  season 
of  delightful  enjoying.  It  is  doubtful  if  we  always  sufficiently  realise  the  greatness 
"of  the  strain  to  which  the  faith  of  the  patriarch  was  subjected  when  he  was  shut  up 
within  the  ark  and  left  there  for  over  a  twelvemonth  without  any  direct  communica- 
tion from  God,  with  nothing  for  his  faith  to  rest  upon  but  the  simple  promise  that 
he  and  his  should  be  saved.  At  the  best  it  was  only  little  foretastes  or  earnests  of 
God's  complete  salvation  which  he  enjoyed  :  first  in  being  sheltered  from  the  storm  ; 
next  in  being  floated  above  the  waters  ;  then  in  touching  land  upon  Ararat ;  and 
again  in  getting  signs  of  the  approaching  deliverance.  Throughout  the  entire  period 
he  could  only  live  in  hope  and  patiently  endure.  But  here  at  length  was  the  time  of 
full  fruition  come.  Go  forth  from  the  ark.  And  so  it  is  with  Christ's  saints  univers- 
ally. Here  are  only  earnests  of  the  inheritance  (Ephes.  i.  14)  ;  there  alone  is  the 
inheritance  itself  (Col.  i.  12).  Now  is  the  time  for  hoping  and  waiting  (Bom.  viii. 
25) ;  then  is  the  season  for  seeing  and  enjoying  (1  John  iii.  2).  Here  the  saints  rest 
jpon  the  promise  as  their  guarantee  (2  Tim.  i.  1 ;  Heb.  iv.  1)  ;  there  the  saints 
'>ehoId  and  experience  its  realisation  (Heb.  vi.  12).  3.  From  a  condition  of  re- 
strained activity  to  a  sphere  of  higher  and  freer  sendee.  Not  that  Noah's  life  within 
the  ark  could  in  any  sense  have  been  one  of  idleness,  and  neither  are  the  lives  of 
Christians  on  the  earth  and  in  the  Church  below ;  but  Noah  entered  on  another  and 
a  nobler  kind  of  work' when  he  left  the  ark  than  that  which  had  engaged  his  powers 
within  its  precincts,  and  so  do  they  who  are  counted  worthy  of  attaining  to  Christ'* 


1««  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  [c«.  vm.  16- 2» 

Kingdom  and  glory.  Here,  like  Noah's,  the  saint's  powers  of  service  are  limited  and 
confined  ;  there  they  shall  attain  to  greater  freedom  and  fuller  scope  (1  Cor.  xiii.  9 
—12  ;  Rev.  iv.  8). 

II.  The  saint  s  response  to  the  Saviour  (ver.  18).  The  command  to  leave  the 
»rk  which  God  addressed  to  Noah  was  obeyed — 1.  Immediately.  We  can  imagine 
that  everything  was  in  a  state  of  readiness  for  departure  when  the  marching  orders 
came,  so  that  there  was  no  need  to  interpose  delay.  So  was  it  with  the  Hebrews 
when  the  Lord  led  them  forth  from  Egypt  (Exod.  xii.  11);  so  should  Christians  bo 
always  ready  for  their  Master's  summons,  whether  to  pass  from  affliction  (Isa.  Hi. 
11)  or  into  it  (ch.  xxii.  1  ;  Acts  xxi.  13),  to  enter  upon  a  new  sphere  of  work  (Isa. 
vi.  8)  or  retire  from  an  old  one  into  silence  (1  Kings  xvii.  3)  ;  to  go  down  into  the 
grave  (2  Tim.  iv.  6)  and  wait  for  the  apocalypse  of  the  saints  (Job  xiv.  14),  or  to  go 
up  into  glory  and  partake  of  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light  (Matt.  xxiv.  44). 
2.  Universally.  Not  the  patriarch  alone,  but  all  his  family  and  all  the  creatures 
came  forth  ;  so  did  all  God's  people  come  forth  from  the  house  of  bondage  (Exod. 
x.  26)  ;  and  so  will  all  Christ's  redeemed  ones  who  have  entered  into  the  salvation 
ark  of  his  Church  emerge  at  last  into  the  light  and  felicity  of  heaven  (Isa.  li.  11  ; 
Luke  xii.  32  ;  1  Cor.  xv.  22 ;  1  Thess.  iv.  14).  3.  Joyfully.  This  we  may  infer. 
A-fter  the  twelve  months'  isolation,  and  confinement,  and  comparative  peril  we  need 
not  doubt  that  Noah  and  his  family  exulted  with  delight,  and  that  even  the  lower 
creatures  were  not  strangers  to  agreeable  sensations.  It  was  a  picture  of  the  happi- 
ness which  even  here  the  saints  enjoy  in  the  Divine  interpositions  on  their  behalf  ; 
but  especially  of  the  universal  thrill  of  gladness  which  God's  redeemed  family,  and 
even  "  the  creature  itself,"  shall  experience  in  the  palingenesia  of  the  heavens  and 
the  earth  (Isa.  xxxv.  10 ;  Bom.  viii.  19 — 23).  4.  Finally.  They  were  never  more 
to  return  to  the  ark,  because  never  again  should  there  be  a  flood.  It  was  a  delightful 
oyaibol  of  the  completeness  and  finality  of  God's  salvation  when  the  saints  shall  have 
l*en  landed  on  the  heights  of  bliss  (Rev.  xxi.  4  ;  xxii.  3 — 5). 

III.  The  saint's  worship  op  the  Saviour  (ver.  20).  As  Noah's  first  act  on  step- 
ping forth  from  the  ark  was  to  build  an  altar  unto  the  Lord,  so  the  saint's  first  work 
en  reaching  heaven  will  be  to  worship ;  and  this  worship  will  be — 1.  Believing. 
This  was  implied  in  the  very  thought  of  offering  up  a  sacrifice  to  Jehovah,  but 
specially  so  in  the  circumstances  in  which  the  patriarch  was  then  placed.  The  visible 
symbol  of  the  Divine  presence  had  retired  to  its  original  dwelling-place  in  the 
heavens,  and  yet  Noah  had  as  little  doubt  as  ever  he  had  that  there  was  a  God  to 
worship.  The  building  of  an  altar,  therefore,  just  then  and  there  was  an  explicit 
declaration  of  his  faith.  Without  faith  there  can  be  no  worship  of  God  either  here 
or  there,  on  earth  or  in  heaven  (Heb.  xi.  6).  2  Thankful.  The  offering  of  Noah 
was  designed  as  an  expression  of  his  gratitude  for  the  Lord's  mercy,  and  so  should 
the  worship  of  the  saints  on  earth  be  characterised  by  the  same  spirit  (Phil.  iv.  6), 
is  we  know  the  adorations  of  the  saints  before  the  throne  are  (Rev.  vii.  12).  3. 
Generous.  Noah  took  of  every  clean  beast  and  every  clean  fowl,  t.  «.  one  of  seven  or 
one  of  fourteen  {vide  Expos.),  in  either  case  a  munificent  tribute  to  the  God  of  his 
salvation.  How  seldom  is  the  like  liberality  exhibited  by  Christ's  worshippers  on 
earth  I  What  a  blessed  thought  it  is  that  among  the  saints  above  there  will  be  no 
temptation  to  such  meanness  as  is  often  practised  by  the  saints  below  I  4.  Sincere. 
It  was  no  merely  formal  service  that  the  patriarch  presented.  The  burnt  offering 
was  a  symbolic  declaration  of  his  self-consecration — body,  soul,  and  spirit — to  the 
God  who  had  redeemed  him.  Of  this  sort  is  the  service  which  Christ  expects  and  be- 
lievers should  render  on  the  earth  (Matt.  xvi.  24 ;  Luke  xiv.  26 ;  Rom.  xii.  1  ;  1  Cor. 
vi.  20).     Of  such  kind  will  be  the  worship  of  the  saints  in  heaven  (Rev.  xxii.  3). 

IV.  The  Saviour's  response  to  the  saint  (vers.  21,  22).  As  the  sacrifice  of  Noab 
was  well-pleasing  unto  God,  so  will  the  worship  of  the  saints  find  acceptance  in  his 
sight.  And  this  acceptance  of  the  sacrifices  of  the  glorified,  like  the  reception  of 
Noah's  offering — 1.  Will  consist  in  the  cherishing  by  God  of  a  feeling  of  sweet 
complacency  towards  the  worshippers.  As  from  the  burning  victims  upon  Noah> 
»ltar  there  came  up  into  the  Divine  nostrils  a  savour  of  rest,  so  from  the  spiritual 
•acrifices  of  Christians  even  here  there  ascends  an  odour  of  a  sweet  smell  unto  Goo 
(Phil.  iv.  18),  while  in  the  upper  sanctuary  the  services  of  the  redeemed  go  up  oo»- 


OIL  vin.  lft— 22.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  137 

tinually  before  God  like  the  smoke  of  incense  (Rev.  viii.  4).  2.  Will  be  based  upon 
the  odour  of  the  sacrifice  of  Christ,  of  which  Noah's  was  the  type,  ll  was  not  the 
actual  service  of  Noah,  considered  as  an  opus  operatum,  that  produced  the  feeling  of 
complacency  in  God  (Micah  vi.  7),  but  the  sacrificial  work  of  Christ,  to  which  the 
faith  of  the  patriarch  had  an  outlook  (Ephes.  v.  2).  For  the  sake  of  that  offering  up 
of  himself  once  for  all  in  the  end  of  the  world  that  was  to  be  accomplished  by  the 
woman's  seed,  and  which  Noah's  faith  truly,  however  dimly,  embraced,  God  accepted 
him  and  his.  That  same  offering  is  the  ground  or  basis  on  which  all  the  saints' 
sacrifices  are  accepted  either  on  earth  (1  Pet.  ii.  5)  or  in  heaven  (Rev.  v.  6).  3. 
Will  express  itself  through  the  perpetuation  of  the  worshipper's  safety.  (1)  By 
averting  all  evil.  "  There  shall  be  no  more  curse  "  (Rev.  xxii.  3),  as  God  determined 
in  his  heart  (ver.  21),  and  afterwards  expressed  to  Noah  (ch.  ix.  15),  never  more  to 
curse  the  ground  or  flood  the  earth.  (2)  By  securing  all  good,  which  was  symbol- 
ised by  the  confirmation  of  the  covenant  of  day  and  night. 

Lessons : — 1.  Live  in  a  state  of  readiness  for  the  glorious  appearing  of  the  Son  uf 
man  (Titus  i.  13).  2.  Expectantly  wait  for  the  manifestation  of  the  sons  of  God 
(Rom.  viii.  19).  3.  Learn  the  nature  of  the  saint's  service  in  the  heavenly  world 
(Rev.  v.  8).  4.  Note  the  security  for  the  perpetuity  of  heaven'a  blessedness — 
Christ's  sacrifice  and  God's  covenant. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  13 — 19. — Rest  and  restoration.  Noah  (Rest)  comes  forth  from  the  ark  in 
the  sabbath  century  of  his  life,  the  six  huiidied  and  first  year.  He  lived  after 
the  Flood  350  years,  the  half  week  of  centuries  j  his  life  represented  a  rest,  but  not 
the  rest,  a  half  sabbath,  promise  of  the  rest  which  remains  to  the  people  of  God. 

I.  An  example  of  faith.  1.  Not  until  God  spake  did  Noah  dure  to  do  more  than 
lift  off  the  covering  and  look.  2.  At  the  heavenly  word  the  family,  redeemed  by 
grace,~takes  possession  of  the  redeemed  habitation. 

II.  The  redeemed  life  in  its  new  appointment.  Go  forth  of  the  ark  into  the 
new  world.  There  is  the  keynote  of  the  Bible.  Man  redeemed  is  man  living  by 
every  word  of  God.     1.   By  Divine  commandment  going  into  the  prepared  refuge. 

2.  By  Divine  commandment  taking  down  old  bounds  and  occupying  new  places. 

3.  Going  forth  into  a  promised  land  rejoicing  in  a  pledged  future.  4.  Carrying  with 
him  all  lower  creatures  into  a  new,  progressive,  God-blessed  inheritance.  The  whole 
creation  groaning  and  travailing,  the  whole  creation  participating  in  the  Divine 
deliverance. — R. 

Vers.  20— 22.— The  sanctification  of  the  earth.  The  sweet  savour  of  man  s  ournt 
offerings— (1)  not  the  offerings  of  caprice,  tut  the  fulfilment  of  Virine  commands, 
(2)  the  reciprocation  of  Heaven's  communications— (3)  ascends  from  the  earth-built 
altar  and  fills  the  Lord  with' satisfaction.  In  return  for  that  obedience  and  devotion 
the  curse  is  removed,  the  earth  is  sealed  with  the  saving  strength  of  God  in  a 
covenant  of  peace. 

I.  Religious  life  is  acceptable  to  God  when  it  is  (1)  grateful  acknowledg- 
ment of  his  mercy ;  (2)  humble  obedience  to  his  own  revealed  will ;  (3)  consecration 
of  place,  time,  life,  possessions  to  him. 

II.  Union  and  communion  between  God  and  man  is  the  foundation  on  which  all 
earthly  happiness  and  security  rest 

III.  The  forbearance  and  mercy  of  God  in  his  relation  to  those  whose  hearts  are 
yet  full  of  evil  is  at  once  probation  and  grace.  The  ground  is  not  cursed  any  more  for 
man's  sake,  but,  the  more  evidently,  that  which  falls  upon  the  ground  may  fall  upon 
man  himself.  The  higher  revelations  of  God  in  the  post-Noachic  period  were  certainly 
larger  bestowments  of  grace,  but  at  the  same  time  they  involved  a  larger  responsi- 
bility. So  the  writer  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  reasons  as  to  the  punishment 
of  those  who  trample  underfoot  the  covenant  of  the  gospel.  The  progressive 
covenants  which  make  up  the  history  of  God's  grace  recorded  in  the  Scriptures  are 
progressive  separations  of  the  evil  and  the  good,  therefore  they  point  to  that 
complete  and  final  separation  in  which  God's  right""usr>'<ss  shall  be  eternally 
(rlorified. — R. 


tst 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


[oh.  d.  1—7. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  IX. 


Ver.  1. — And  God — Elohim,  not  because 
belonging  to  the  Elohistie  document  (Bleak, 
Tuch,  Colenso) ;  but  rather  because  through- 
out this  section  the  Deity  is  exhibited  in  his 
relations  to  his  creatures — blessed — a  repe- 
tition of  the  primal  blessing  rendered  neces- 
sary by  the  devastation  of  the  Flood  (cf.  ch. 
i.  28) — Noah  and  his  sons, — as  the  new 
heads  of  the  race, — and  said  unto  them, — 
audibly,  in  contrast  to  ch.  viii.  21,  22,  which 
was  not  addressed  to  the  patriarch,  but 
spoken  by  God  to  himself  in  his  heart,  as  if 
internally  resolving  on  his  subsequent  course 
of  action,— Be  fruitful,  and  multiply.  A 
favourite  expression  of  the  Elohist  (cf.  ch.  i. 
28  ;  viii.  17  ;  ix.  1,  7  ;  xvii.  20  ;  xxviii.  3  ; 
xxiv.  11 ;  xlvii.  27 ;  xlviii.  14),  (Tuch);  but  (1) 
the  apparently  great  number  of  passages  melts 
away  when  we  observe  the  verbally  exact 
reference  of  ch.  viii.  17  ;  ix.  1,  7  to  i.  28  ; 
and  of  ch.  xlviii.  4  to  xxxv.  11 ;  (2)  the 
Elohist  does  not  always  employ  his  "  favourite 
expression  "  where  he  might  have  done  so, 
as,  e.  g.,  not  in  ch.  i.  22  ;  xvii.  6  ;  xxviii.  14  ; 
(3)  the  Jehovist  does  not  avoid  it  where 
the  course  of  thought  necessarily  calls  for  it 
(vide  Levit.  xxvi.  9),  (Keil).  And  replenish 
the  earth.  The  words,  "  and  subdue  it," 
which  had  a  place  in  the  Adamic  blessing, 
tnd  which  the  LXX.  insert  here  in  the 
Noachic  (icai  KaraKvpaioaTt  avrrjc),  are 
omitted  for  the  obvious  reason  that  the 
world  dominion  originally  assigned  to  man 
in  Adam  had  been  forfeited  by  sin,  and  could 
only  be  restored  through  the  ideal  Man,  the 
woman's  seed,  to  whom  it  had  been  trans- 
ferred at  the  fall.  Hence  says  Paul,  speak- 
ing of  Christ  :  "  kcli  Travra  vrrkra^tv  virb 
nig  jroflae  abrov  (Ephes.  i.  22) ;  and  the 
writer  to  the  Hebrews :  vvv  St  ovttw  bputfitv 
aiiriji  (i.  e.  man)  rd  Travra  VTrorerayp'iva, 
rbv  St  (3pa\v  Tt  Trap'  'ayykXovc  r)\arroptvov 
^Kt-nofitv  'Iritrovv,  Sid  rb  TrdGrjfia  tov  Oava- 
row,  S6£ri  icai  rifiy  Etrrttpavwp.evov  (i.  e.  the 
world  dominion  which  David,  Ps.  viii.  6, 
recognised  as  belonging  to  God's  ideal  man) 
o'lrwc  x^9tTl  &eov  virep  iravrbq  yevrTtjTai 
Oavarov  (ch.  ii.  8,  9).  The  original  relation- 
ship which  God  had  established  between 
man  and  the  lower  creatures  having  been 
disturbed  by  sin,  the  inferior  animals,  as  it 
were,  gradually  brokn  loose  from  their  con- 
dition of  subjection.  As  corruption  deep- 
ened in  the  human  race  it  was  only  natural 
to  anticipate  that  man's  lordship  over  the 
animal  creation  would  become  feebler  and 
feebler.  Nor,  perhaps,  is  it  an  altogether 
violent  hypothesis   that,   had    the  Deluge 


not  intervened,  in  the  course  of  time  the 
beast  would  have  become  the  master  and 
man  the  slave.  To  prevent  any  such  ap- 
prehensions in  the  future,  as  there  was  to 
be  no  second  deluge,  the  relations  of  man 
and  the  lower  creatures  were  to  be  placed  on 
a  new  footing.  Ultimately,  in  the  palin- 
genesia,  they  would  be  completely  restored 
(cf.  Isa.  xL  6) ;  in  the  mean  time,  till  that 
glorious  consummation  should  arrive,  the 
otherwise  inevitable  encroachments  of  the 
creatures  upon  the  human  family  in  its  sin- 
created  weakness  should  be  restrained  by  a 
principle  of  fear.  That  was  the  first  import- 
ant modification  made  upon  the  original 
Adamic  blessing. 

Ver.  2. — And  the  fear  of  you  and  the 
dread  of  you.  Not  simply  of  Noah  and  his 
sons,  but  of  man  in  general.  Shall  be.  Not 
for  the  first  time,  as  it  could  not  fail  to  be 
evoked  by  the  sin  of  man  during  the  pre- 
vious generations,  but,  having  already  been 
developed,  it  was  henceforth  to  be  turned 
back  upon  the  creature  rather  than  directed 
against  man.      TJpon.      The  verb  to  be  is 

first  construed  with  ;V,  and  afterwards  with 
5-  The  LXX.  render  both  by  liri,  though 
perhaps  the  latter  should  be  taken  as  equi- 
valent to  iv,  in  which  case  the  three  clauses 
of  the  verse  will  express  a  gradation.  The 
dread  of  man  shall  first  overhang  the  beasts, 
then  it  shall  enter  into  and  take  possession 
of  them,  and  finally  under  its  influence  they 
shall  fall  into  man's  hand.  Every  beast  of  the 
earth,  and  upon  every  fowl  of  the  air,  upon 
(literally,  in;  vide  supra.  Murphy  trans- 
lates with)  all  that  moveth  upon  the  earth, 
and  upon  (literally,  in)  all  the  fishes  of  the 
sea.  This  does  not  imply  that  the  animals 
may  not  sometimes  rise  against  man  and 
destroy  him  (cf.  Exod.  viii.  6,  17,  24  ;  Levit. 
xxvi.  22 ;  1  Kings  xiii  24,  25  ;  xx.  36  ;  2 
Kings  ii  24  ;  Ezek.-  xiv.  15  ;  Acts  xii.  23, 
for  instances  in  which  the  creatures  were 
made  ministers  of  Divine  justice),  but  simply 
that  the  normal  condition  of  the  lower  crea- 
tures will  be  one  of  instinctive  dread  of  man, 
causing  them  rather  to  avoid  than  to  seek  hi3 

Eresenco — a  statement  sufficiently  confirmed 
y.the  facts  that  wherever  human  civilisation 
penetrates,  there  the  dominion  of  the  beasts 
retires  j  that  even  ferocious  animals,  such  aa 
lions,  tigers,  and  other  beasts  ol  prey,  unless 
provoked,  usually  flee  from  luaii  rather 
than  assail  him.  Into  your  hand  are  thsy 
delivered.  Attested  by  (1)  man's  actual 
dominion  over  such  of  the  creatures  as  are 
either  immediately  needful  for  or  helpful  to 
him,  such  ag  the  horse,  the  jx  the  sheep,  he.  j 


n.  n.  1—7.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


ISt 


knd  (2)  by  man's  capability  of  taming  and 
■o  reducing  to  subjection  every  kind  of  wild 
beast— lions,  tigers,  &c. 

Ver.  3. — Every — obviously  admitting  of 
"exceptions  to  be  gathered  both  from  the 
nature  of  the  case  and  from  the  distinction 
of  clean  and  unclean  beasts  mentioned  be- 
fore and  afterwards  "  (Poole) — moving  thing 
that  liveth —clearly  excluding  such  as  had 
died  of  themselves  or  been  slain  by  other 
beasts  (cf.  Exod.  xxii.  31 ;  Levit.  xxii.  8) 
—shall  be  meat  for  you.     Literally,  to  you 
it  shall  be  for  meat.    Though  the  distinction 
between  unclean  and  clean  animals  as  to 
food,  afterwards  laid  down  in  the  Mosaic 
code  (Levit.  xi.  1 — 81),  is  not  mentioned  here, 
it  does  not  follow  that  it  was  either  unknown 
to  the  writer  or  unpractised  by  the  men 
before  the  Flood.    Even  as  the  green  herb 
have  I  given  you  all  things.     An  allusion 
to  ch.  i.  29  (Rosenmtiller,  Bush) ;  but  vide 
infra.     The  relation  of  this  verse  to  the 
former  has  been  understood  as  signifying — 
1.  That  animal  food  was  expressly  prohibited 
before  the  Flood,  and  now  for  the  first  time 
permitted  (Mercerus,  Rosenmiiller,  Candlish, 
Clarke,   Murphy,    Jamieson,    Wordsworth, 
Kalisch) — the  ground  being  that  such  appears 
the  obvious  import  of  the  sacred  writer's 
language.     2.  That,  though  permitted  from 
the  first,    it  was  not  used  till  postdiluvian 
times,  when  men  were  explicitly  directed  to 
partake  of  it  by  God  (Theodoret,  Chrysostom, 
Aquinas,  Luther,  Pererius)— the  reason  being 
that  prior  to  the  Flood  the  fruits  of  the  earth 
were  more  nutritious  and  better  adapted  for 
the  sustenance  of  man's  physical  frame,  prop- 
ter excellentem  terra?  bonitatem  prsestantem- 
que  vim  alimenti  quod  fructus  terra?  suppedi- 
tabant  homini,  while  after  it  such  a  change 
passed  upon  the  vegetable  productions  of  the 
ground  as  to  render  them  less  capable  of  sup- 
porting the  growing  feebleness  of  the  body, 
lnvalidam  ad  bene  alendum  hominem  (Pere- 
rius). 3.  That  whether  permitted  or  not  prior 
to  the  Flood,  it  was  used,  and  is  here  for 
the  first  time  formally  allowed  (Keil,  Alford, 
'Speaker's  Commentary');  in  support  of  which 
opinion  it  may  be  urged  that  the  general 
tendency  of  subsequent  Divine  legislation, 
until  the  fulness  of  the  times,  was  ever  in  the 
direction  of  concession  to  the  infirmities  or 
necessities  of  human  nature  (cf.  Matt.  xix. 
8).     The  opinion,  however,  which  appears  to 
be  the  best  supported  is — 4.  That  animal  food 
was  permitted  before  the  fall,  and  that  the 
grant  ishere  expressly  renewed  ( Justin  Martyr, 
Calvin,    Willet,    Bush,  Macdonald,   Lange, 
Quarry).     The  grounds  for  this  opinion  are 
— (1)  That  the  language  of  ch.  i.  29  does  not 
explicitly  rorbid  the  use  of  animal  food.     (2) 
That  science  demonstrates  the  existence  of 
earnivorous  animals  prior  to  the  appearance 
•t  man,  and  yet  vegetable  products  alone 


were  assigned  for  their  food.  (3)  That  shortly 
after  the  fall  animals  were  slain  by  Divine 
direction  for  sacrifice,  and  probably  also  for 
food — at  least  this  latter  supposition  is  by 
no  means  an  unwarrantable  inference  from 
ch.  iv.  4  (g.  v.).  (4)  That  the  words,  "as 
the  green  herb,"  even  if  they  implied  the 
existence  of  a  previous  restriction,  do  not 
refer  to  ch.  L  29,  but  to  ch.  i.  30,  the  green 
herb  in  the  latter  verse  being  contrasted 
with  the  food  of  man  in  ch.  i.  29.  Solomon 
Glass  thus  correctly  indicates  the  connection 
and  the  sense  :  "  ut  viridem  herbam  (illis),  sic 
ilia  omnia  dedi  vobis  "  ( '  Sacr.  PhiL ,'  lib.  iii. 
tr.  2,  c.  xxii.  2).  (5)  That  a  sufficient  reason 
for  mentioning  the  grant  of  animal  food  in 
this  connection  may  be  found  in  the  sub- 
joined restriction,  without  assuming  the 
existence  of  any  previous  limitation. 

Ver.  4. — But — Tf&,  an  adverb  of  limitation 
or  exception,  as  in  Levit.  xi.  4,  introducing  a 
restriction  on  the  foregoing  precept — flesh 
with  the  life  thereof,  which  is  the  blood 
thereof.  Literally,  with  its  soul,  its  blood  ; 
the  blood  being  regarded  as  the  seat  of  the 
soul,  or  life  principle  (Levit.  xvii.  11),  and 
even  as  the  soul  itself  (Levit.  xvii.  14).  The 
idea  of  the  unity  of  the  soul  and  the  blood, 
on  which  the  prohibition  of  blood  is  based, 
comes  to  light  everywhere  in  Scripture.  In 
the  blood  of  one  mortally  wounded  his  soul 
flows  forth  (Lam.  ii.  12),  and  he  who  volun- 
tarily sacrifices  himself  pours  out  his  soul 
unto  death  (Isa.  liii.  12).  The  murderer  of 
the  innocent  slays  the  soul  of  the  blood  of 
the  innocent  (i/wOT"  a'i/iaros  aB&ov,  Deut. 
xxvii.  25),  which  also  cleaves  to  his  (the 
murderer's)  skirts  (Jer.  ii.  34  ;  cf.  Prov. 
xxviii.  17,  blood  of  a  soul ;  cf.  Gen.  iv.  19 
with  Heb.  xii.  24 ;  Job  xxiv.  12  with  Eev. 
vi.  9 ;  vide  also  Ps.  xciv.  21  ;  Matt,  xxiii. 
35).  Nor  can  it  be  said  to  be  exclusively 
peculiar  to  Holy  Scripture.  In  ancient 
Egyptian  hieroglyphics  the  hawk,  which 
feeds  on  bloods,  represents  the  soul.  Virgil 
says  of  a  dying  person,  "  purpuream  vomit 
illeanimam"  ('  ifcneid,'  ix.  349).  The  Greek 
philosophers  taught  that  the  blood  was  either 
the  soul  (Critias),  or  the  soul's  food  (Pytha- 
goras), or  the  soul's  seat  (Empedocles),  oi 
the  soul's  producing  cause  (the  Stoics) ;  but 
only  Scripture  revoals  the  true  relation  be- 
tween them  both  when  it  declares  the  blood 
to  be  not  the  soul  absolutely,  but  the  means 
of  its  self-attestation  (vide  Delitzsch's  '  Bib. 
Psychology,'  div.  iv.  sec.  xi.).  Shall  ye  not 
eat.  Not  referring  to,  although  certainly 
forbidding,  the  eating  of  flesh  taken  from  a 
living  animal  (Raschi,  Cajetan,  Delitzsch, 
Luther,  Poole,  Jamieson) — a  fiendish  custom 
which  may  have  been  practised  among  the 
antediluvians,  as,  according  to  travellers,  it 
is,  or  was,  among  modern  Abyssinians , 
rather  interdicting  the  flesh  of  slaughtered 


140 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  a.  1 — 7 


animals  from  which  the  blood  has  not  been 
properly  drained  (Calvin,  Keil,  Kalisch, 
Murphy,  Wordsworth).  The  same  prohibi- 
tion (commonly  regarded  by  the  Hebrew 
doctors  as  the  seventh  of  the  Noachic  pre- 
cepts which  were  enjoined  upon  all  nations  ; 
vide  infra,  ver.  6)  was  afterwards  incor- 
porated in  the  Mosaic  legislation  (cf.  Levit. 
lii.  17  ;  vii.  26,  27  ;  xvii  10—14 ;  xix.  26  ; 
Deut.  xii.  16,  23,  24 ;  xv.  23),  and  subse- 
quently imposed  upon  the  Gentile  converts 
in  the  Christian  Church  by  the  authority  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  and  the  apostles  (Acts  xv. 
28,  29).  Among  other  reasons,  doubtless, 
for  the  original  promulgation  of  this  law  were 
rtiese :  —  1.  A  desire  to  guard  against  the 
practice  of  cruelty  to  animals  (Chrysostom, 
Oaivin,  'Speaker's  Commentary').  2.  A  de- 
sign to  hedge  about  human  life  by  showing 
the  inviolability  which  in  God's  eye  attached 
to  even  the  lives  of  the  lower  creatures(Calvin, 
Willet,  Poole,  Kalisch,  Murphy).  3.  The  in- 
timate connection  which  even  in  the  animal 
creation  subsisted  between  the  blood  and  the 
life  (Kurtz,  '  Sacr.  Worship,'  I.  A.  5).  4.  Its 
symbolic  use  as  an  atonement  for  sin  (Poole, 
Delitzsch,  'Bib.  Psy.'  iv.  11;  Keil,  Words- 
worth, Murphy).  That  the  restriction  con- 
tinues to  the  present  day  may  perhaps  be 
argued  from  its  having  been  given  to  Noah, 
but  cannot  legitimately  be  inferred  from 
having  been  imposed  on  the  Gentile  converts 
to  Christianity  as  one  tG>v  inavayKit;  rovrtuv, 
from  the  burden  of  which  they  could  not 
be  excused  (Clarke),  as  then,  by  parity  of 
reasoning,  meat  offered  to  idols  would  be 
equally  forbidden,  which  it  is  not,  except 
when  the  consciences  of  the  weak  and 
ignorant  are  endangered  (Calvin). 

Ver.  5.  —  And  surely.  Again  the  con- 
junction 1]X  introduces  a  restriction.  The 
blood  of  beasts  might  without  fear  be  shed 
for  necessary  uses,  but  the  blood  of  man  was 
holy  and  inviolable.  Following  the  LXX. 
(rai  ydp),  Jerome,  Pererius,  Morcerus,  Calvin, 
Poole,  Willet  give  a  causal  seme  to  the 
conjunction,  as  if  it  supplied  the  reason  of 
the  foregoing  restriction — a  sense  which, 
according  to  Fiirst  ('  Heb.  Lex.,'  sub  nom.) 
it  sometimes,  though  rarely,  has ;  as  in  2 
Kings  xxiv.  3  ;  Ps.  xxxix.  12 ;  lxviii.  22  ; 
but  in  each  case  "!]N!  is  better  rendered 
"surely."  Your  blood  of  your  lives.  (1) 
For  your  souls,  i.  e.  in  requital  for  them— 
lex  talionis,  blood  for  blood,  life  for  life 
(Kalisch,  Wordsworth,  Bush) ;  (2)  for  your 
souls,  i.  e.  for  their  protection  (Gesenius, 
Michaelis,  Schumann,  Tuch) ;  (3)  from,  your 
nouls — a  prohibition  against  suicide  (Samari- 
tan); (4)  with  reference  to  your  souls, — ? 
—quoad  (Ewald,  '  Heb.  Syn.,'  310  a), — as  if 
specifying  the  particular  blood  for  which 
exaction  would  be  made  (Keil)  j  (5)  of  your 
souls,    belonging  to  them,   or   residing  in 


them  (LXX.,  Syriac,  Vulgate,  A.  V.,  Calvin, 
Bosenmiiller  (qui  ad  animaa  vestras  perti- 
net),  Murphy,  'Speaker's  Commentary')— 
although,  according  to  Kalisch,  ?  cannot  hav« 
the  force  of  a  genitive  after  DpDI,  a  substan- 
tive with  a  suffix ;  but  vide  Levit.  xviii.  20, 
23 ;  cf.  Ewald,  '  Heb.  Syn.,'  p.  113.     Perhaps 

the  force  of  ?  may  be  brought  out  by  ren- 
dering "  your  blood  to  the  extent,  of  youi 
lives  ;"  i.  e.  not  all  blood-letting,  but  that 
which  proceeds  to  the  extent  of  taking  life 
(cf.  ver.  15  :  "  There  shall  no  more  be  waters 
to  the  extent  of  a  flood  ").  Will  I  require. 
Literally,  search  after,  with  a  view  to  punish- 
ment ;  hence  avenge  (cf.  ch.  xlii.  22  ;  Ezek. 
xxxiii.  6  ;  Ps.  ix.  13).  At  (literally,  from) 
the  hand  of  every  beast  will  I  require  it 
Not  "an  awful  warning  against  cruelty  to 
the  brute  creation  ! "  (Clarke),  but  a  solemn 
proclamation  of  the  sanctity  of  human  life, 
since  it  enacted  that  that  beast  should  be 
destroyed  which  slew  a  man — a  statute  after- 
wards incorporated  in  the  Mosaic  legislation 
(Exod.  xxi.  28 — 32),  and  practised  even  in 
Christian  times;  "not  for  any  punishment 
to  the  beast,  which,  being  under  no  law,  is 
capable  of  neither  sin  nor  punishment,  but 
for  caution  to  men  "  (Poole).  If  this  prac- 
tice appears  absurd  to  some  moderns  (Dr.  H. 
Oort,  '  The  Bible  for  Young  People,'  p.  103), 
it  was  not  so  to  Solon  and  Draco,  in  whose 
enactments  there  was  a  similar  provision 
(Delitzsch,  Lange).  And  at  (from)  the 
hand  of  man;  at  (or  from)  the  hand  of 
every  man's  brother.  Either  (1)  two  per- 
sons are  here  described — (a)  the  individual 
man  himself,  and  (6)  his  brother,  i.  e.  the 
suicide  and  the  murderer  (Maimonides, 
Wordsworth,  Murphy),  or  the  murderer 
and  his  brother  man,  i.  e.  kinsman,  or  go'tl 
(Michaelis,  Bohlen,  Baumgarten,  Kalisch 
Bush),  or  the  ordinary  civil  authorities  (Ka- 
lisch, Candlish,  Jamieson) — or  (2)  one,  viz., 
the  murderer,  who  is  first  generically  distin- 
guished from  the  beast,  and  then  character- 
ised as  his  victim's  brother  ;  as  thus — "  at " 
or  from  "the  hand  of  man,"  as  well  as 
beast;  "from  the  hand  of  the  individual 
man,  or  every  man  (cf.  ch.  xlii.  25  ;  Num. 
xvii.  17  for  this  distributive  use  of  tJ"^)  hio 
brother,"  supplying. a  new  argument  against 
homicide  (Calvin,  Knobel,  Delitzsch,  Keil, 
Lange).  The  principal  objection  to  discover- 
ing Goelism  in  the  phraseology  is  that  it 
requires  "IJJP  to  be  understood  in  two  dif- 
ferent senses,  and  the  circumstance,  that  the 
institution  of  the  magistracy  appears  to  be 
hinted  at  in  the  next  verse,  renders  it  un- 
necessary to  detect  it  in  this.  Will  I  re 
quire  the  life  (or  soul)  of  man.  The  specific 
manner  in  which  this  inquisition  after  blood 
should  be  carried  out  is  indicated  in  tht 
words  that  follow 


oh.  a.  1—7.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


141 


Ver.  6. — Whoso  sheddeth.  Literally,  he 
shedding,  1.  e.  wilfully  and  unwarrantably  ; 
and  not  simply  accidentally,  for  which  kind 
of  manslaughter  the  law  afterwards  pro- 
Tided  {vide  Num.  xxxv.  11)  ;  or  judicially, 
for  that  is  commanded  by  the  present  statute. 
Man's  blood.  Literally,  blood  of  the  man, 
human  blood.  By  man.  Not  openly  and 
directly  by  God,  but  by  man  himself,  acting 
of  course  as  God's  instrument  and  agent — an 
instruction  which  involved  the  setting  up  of 
the  magisterial  office,  by  whom  the  sword 
might  be  borne  ("  Hie  igitur  fons  est,  ex 
quo  manat  totum  jus  civile  et  jus  gentium." 
— Luther.  Cf.  Num.  xxxv.  29—31 ;  Rom. 
xiii.  4),  and  equally  laid  a  basis  for  the 
law  of  the  goel  subsequently  established  in 
Israel  (Deut.  xix.  6  ;  Josh.  "Xx.  3).  The 
Chaldee  paraphrases,  "  with  witnesses  by 
sentence  of  the  judges."  The  LXX.  sub- 
stitutes for  "  by"  man  "  avri  rov  ai'/iaroc 
avrov — an  interpretation  followed  by  Pro- 


fessor Lewis,  who  quotes  Jona  ben  Gannach 
in  its  support.  Shall.  Not  merely  a  per- 
mission legalising,  but  an  imperative  com- 
mand enjoining,  capital  punishment,  the 
reason  for  which  follows.  For  in  the  image 
of  God  made  he  man.  To  apply  this  to 
the  magistracy  (Bush,  Murphy,  Keil),  who 
are  sometimes  m  Scripture  styled  Elohim 
(Ps.  lxxxii.  6),  and  the  ministers  of  God 
(Rom.  xiii.  4),  and  who  may  be  said  to 
have  been  made  in  the  Divine  imago  in  the 
sense  of  being  endowed  with  the  capacity  of 
ruling  and  judging,  seems  forced  and  un- 
natural ;  the  clause  obviously  assigns  the 
original  dignity  of  man  (cf.  ch.  i.  28)  as  the 
reason  why  the  murderer  cannot  be  suffered 
to  escape  (Calvin,  Poole,  Alford,  'Speaker's 
Commentary,'  Candlish,  Lange) 

Ver.  7. — And  you,  be  ye  fruitful,  and 
multiply ;  bring  forth  abundantly  in  the 
earth,  and  multiply  therein.  Vide  on 
ver.  1. 


HOMILETICa 

Vers.  1—7. — New  arrangements  for  a  new  era.  I.  Provision  fob  the_  increase 
of  the  human  familt.  1.  The  proximate  instrumentality  —  the  ordinance  of 
marriage  (vers.  1,  7),  which  was  —  (1)  A  Divine  institution  appointed  by  God  in 
Eden  (cf.  ch.  ii.  22,  and  Matt.  xix.  5).  (2)  A  sacred  institution.  Every  ordinance 
of  God's  appointment,  it  may  be  said,  is  in  a  manner  holy;  but  a  special  sanctity 
attaches  to  that  of  marriage.  God  attested  the  estimation  in  which  he  held  it 
by  visiting  the  world's  corruption,  which  had  principally  come  through  its  desecra- 
tion, with  the  waters  of  a  flood.  (3)  A  permanent  institution,  being  the  same  in  its 
nature,  uses,  and  ends  that  it  had  been  from  the  beginning,  only  modified  to  suit 
the  changing  circumstances  of  man's  condition.  Prior  to  the  fall  it  was  exempt 
from  any  of  those  imperfections  which  in  human  experience  have  clung  to  it  ever 
since.  Subsequent  to  the  melancholy  entrance  of  sin,  there  was  superadded  to  the 
lot  of  woman  an  element  of  pain  and  sorrow  from  which  she  had  been  previously 
free ;  and  though  anterior  to  the  Flood  it  had  been  grossly  abused  by  man's  licentious- 
ness, after  it,  we  cannot  doubt,  it  was  restored  in  all  its  original  purity,  though  still 
with  the  curse  of  sorrow  unremoved.  2.  The  originating  cause — the  Divine  bless- 
ing (vers.  1,  7),  without  which — (1)  The  marriage  bed  would  not  be  fruitful  (Ps. 
exxvii.  3).  Cf.  the  casr>  of  Rachel  (ch.  xxx.  2),  of  Hannah  (1  Sam.  i.  11),  of  Ruth 
(Ruth  iv.  13).  (2)  The  married  life  would  not  be  holy.  What  marriage  is  and  leads 
to  when  dissociated  from  the  fear  of  God  had  already  been  significantly  displayed 
upon  the  theatre  of  the  antediluvian  world,  and  is  abundantly  declared  in  Scripture, 
both  by  precept  (ch.  xxiv.  3 ;  xxviii.  1 ;  Exod.  xxxiv.  16 ;  Deut.  vii.  3,  4 ;  Josh, 
xxiii.  12,  13;  2  Cor.  vi.  14)  and  example;  e. g.,  the  Israelites  (Judges  iii.  6,  7),  Sam- 
son (Judges  xiv.  1 — 16),  Solomon  (1  Kings  iii.  1),  Jews  (Ezra  ix.  1 — 12).  (3)  The 
marriage  tie  would  not  be  sure.  As  ungodliness  tends  to  violate  the  marriage  law 
by  sins  of  polygamy,  so,  without  the  fear  of  God,  there  is  no  absolute  security  that 
the  bond  may  not  be  broken  by  adultery  and  divorce  (cf .  ch.  xix.  6,  8 ;  xxxv.  22 ; 
2  Sam.  xi.  1—5 ;  Mark  vi.  17,  18). 

II.  Provision  for  the  protection  of  the  human  family.  1.  Against  the  world 
of  animals.  (1)  In  Eden  such  protection  was  not  required,  man  having  been  con- 
stituted lord  of  the  inferior  creation,  and  the  beasts  of  the  field  never  rising  to  dis- 
pute his  authority,  his  rule  being  characterised  by  gentleness,  and  love  (ch.  ii.  20). 
(2)  After  the  fall  such  protection  was  incomplete.  A  change  having  passed  upon 
the  master,  there  is  reason  to  suppose  that  a  corresponding  change  transpired  upon 
the  servant.  The  moral  order  of  the  world  having  been  dislocated,  a  like  instability 
would  doubtless  invade  those  economical  arrangements  that  depended  on  man  fan 


142  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  [oh.  a.  1—7 

their  successful  administration.  Ab  man  sank  deeper  Vnto  the  mire  of  corruption, 
his  supremacy  over  the  beasts  of  the  field  would  appear  to  have  been  more  frequently 
and  fiercely  disputed  (ch.  vi.  11).  But  now,  the  Flood  having  washed  away  the 
sinning  race,  (3)  such  protection  was  henceforth  to  be  rendered  secure  by  imbuing 
the  brute  nature  with  an  instinctive  dread  of  man  which  would  lead  the  animals  V 
acknowledge  his  supremacy,  and  rather  flee  from  his  presence  than  assail  his 
dominion.  The  operation  of  this  law  is  proved  to-day  by  the  facts  that  man  retains 
unquestioned  his  lordship  over  all  those  domesticated  animals  that  are  useful  to  him  ; 
that  there  is  no  creature,  however  wild  and  ferocious,  that  he  cannot  tame ;  and 
that  wherever  man  appears  with  his  civilising  agencies  the  wild  beast  instinctively 
retires.  2.  Against  the  world  of  men.  Ever  since  the  fall  man  has  required  to  be 
protected  against  himself.  Prior  to  the  Flood  it  does  not  appear  that  even  crimes 
of  murder  and  bloodshed  were  publicly  avenged.  Now,  however,  the  previous 
laxness,  if  it  was  such,  and  not  rather  Divine  clemency,  was  to  cease,  and  an 
entirely  new  arrangement  to  come  into  operation.  (1)  The  law  was  henceforth  to 
inflict  capital  punishment  on  its  murderers ;  not  the  law  of  man  simply,  but  the 
law  of  God.  Given  to  Noah,  this  statute  was  designed  for  the  universal  family  of 
man  until  repealed  by  the  Authority  that  imposed  it.  Not  having  been  exclusively 
a  Jewish  statute,  the  abrogation  of  the  Mosaic  economy  does  not  affect  its  stability. 
Christ,  having  come  not  to  destroy  the  fundamental  laws  of  Heaven,  may  be  fairly 
presumed  to  have  left  this  standing.  Inferences  from  the  spirit  of  Christianity  have 
no  validity  as  against  an  express  Divine  commandment.  (2)  The  reasons  for  the 
law  were  to  be  the  essential  dignity  of  man's  nature  (ver.  6 ;  cf.  homily  on  the 
greatness  of  man,  ch.  i.  26)  and  the  fundamental  brotherhood  of  the  race  (ver.  5),  a 
point  which  appears  not  to  have  received  sufficient  prominence  in  prediluvian  times 
(cf .  Acts  xvii.  26).  (3)  The  execution  of  the  law  was  neither  to  be  retained  in  the 
Divine  hand  for  miraculous  administration,  nor  to  be  left  in  that  of  the  private 
individual  (the  kinsman)  to  gratify  revenge,  but  to  be  intrusted  to  society  for 
enforcement  by  means  of  a  properly-constituted  tribunal.  This  was  the  commence- 
ment of  social  government  among  men",  and  the  institution  of  the  magisterial  office, 
or  the  power  of  the  sword  (vide  Bom.  xiii.  1 — 5). 

III.  Provision  foe  the  sustenance  op  the  human  family.  1.  The  rule.  It  is 
not  certain  that  animal  food  was  interdicted  in  Eden ;  it  is  almost  certain  that  it  was 
in  use  between  the  fall  and  the  Flood.  At  the  commencement  of  the  new  era  it 
was  expressly  sanctioned.  2.  The  restriction.  While  the  flesh  of  animals  might 
be  used  as  food,  they  were  not  to  be  mutilated  while  alive,  nor  was  the  blood  to 
be  eaten  with  the  flesh.  Note  the  bearing  of  the  first  of  these  on  the  question 
of  vivisection,  which  the  Divine  law  appears  explicitly  to  forbid,  except  it  can  be 
proved  to  be  indispensable  for  the  advancement  of  medical  knowledge  with  a  view 
to  the  healing  of  disease,  and,  in  the  case  of  extending  a  permission,  imperatively 
requires  to  be  carried  on  with  the  least  possible  infliction  of  pain  upon  the  unresist- 
ing creature  whose  life  is  thus  sacrificed  for  the  good  of  man ;  and  of  the  second 
of  these,  on  the  lawfulness  of  eating  blood  under  the  Christian  dispensation,  see 
Expos,  on  ver.  4.  3.  The  reason.  (1)  For  the  rule,  which,  though  not  stated,  may 
be  judged  to  have  been  (a)  a  concession  to  the  moral  weakness  of  man's  soul,  and 
(6)  a  provision  for  the  physical  infirmity  of  man's  body.  (2)  For  the  restriction — 
(a)  to  prevent  crueity  to  animals ;  (6)  to  fence  about  man's  life  by  showing  the 
criminality  of  destroying  that  of  the  beast ;  (c)  to  assert  God's  lordship  over  all  life ; 
(d)  because  of  its  symbolic  value  as  the  sign  of  atoning  blood. 

Lessons: — 1.  God's  clemency  towards  man.  2.  God's  care  for  man.  3.  God's 
goodness  to  man.     4.  God's  estimate  of  man. 

HOMILIES  BY  VAR100S  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 7. — The  new  life  of  man  on  the  earth  under  a  new  revelation  of  the 
Divine  favour.    The  chief  points  are — 

I.  Unlimited  possession  of  the  earth,  and  use  of  its  inhabitants  andproducts, 
whether  for  food  or  otherwise;  thus  supplying — 1.  The  scope  of  life.  i.  The  enjoy- 
ment of  life.    3.  The  development  of  life. 


oh.  a.  «— 17.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


141 


II.  Absolute  respect  fob  human  life,  and  preservation  of  the  gentler  feelings 
(the  blood  being  forbidden  as  injurious  to  man  in  this  case),  promoting — 1.  The 
supremacy  of  the  higher  nature  over  the  lower.  2.  The  revelation  of  the  ethical 
law.     3.  The  preparation  of  the  heart  for  Divine  communications. 

III.  Man  living  in  brotherhood,  (1)  revealing  the  image  of  God,  (2)  observing 
God's  law,  (3)  rejoicing  in  his  blessing,  he  shall  multiply  and  fill  the  earth.  The 
earth  waits  for  such  inhabitants ;  already  by  Divine  judgments  prepared  for  them. — R. 


EXPOSITION. 


Ver.  8. — And  God  spake — in  continuation 
of  the  preceding  discourse — unto  Noah,  and 
to  his  sons  with  him,  saying. 

Ver.  9. — And  I,  behold,  I  establish — liter- 
ally, am  causing  to  rise  up  or  stand;  avia- 
rtj/u  (LXX.) — my  covenant  (cf.  ch.  vi.  18) 
with  yon,  and  with  your  seed  after  yon, 
/.  e.  the  covenant  contemplated  all  subse- 
quent posterity  in  its  provisions,  and,  along 
with  the  human  family,  the  entire  animal 
creation. 

Ver.  10. — And  with  every  living  creature 
— literally,  every  soul  (or  breathing  thing) 
that  liveth,  a  generic  designation  of  which 
tho  particulars  are  now  specified — that  is 
with  you,  of  the  fowl,  of  the  cattle,  and  of 
every  beast  of  the  earth — literally,  im  fowl, 
fcc.  ;  i.  e.  belonging  to  these  classes  of 
animals  (cf.  ch.  i.  25,  30  ;  vi.  20  ;  viii.  17) — 
with  you ;  from  all  that  go  out  of  the  ark, 
— not  necessarily  implying  ('  Speaker's  Com- 
mentary,' Murphy),  though  in  all  probability 
it  was  the  case,  that  there  were  animals  which 
had  nevei;  been  in  the  ark ;  but  simply  an 
idiomatic  phrase  expressive  of  the  totality  of 
the  animal  creation  (Alford) — to  every  beast 
of  the  earth.  I.  e.  wild  heast  (ch.  "i.  25), 
the  chayyah  of  the  land,  which  was  not 
included  among  the  animals  that  entered 
the  ark  (Murphy) ;  or  living  creature  (ch.  ii. 
19),  referring  here  to  the  fishes  of  the  sea, 
which  were  not  included  in  the  ark  (Kalisch). 
That  the  entire  brute  creation  was  designed 
to  be  embraced  in  the  Noachic  covenant 
seems  apparent  from  the  use  of  the  preposi- 
tions—? describing  the  classes  to  which  the 
animals  belong,  as  in  ch.  vii.  21 ;  JO  in- 
dicating one  portion  of  the  whole,  the  ter- 
minus a  quo,  and  ?  the  terminus  ad  quern — 
in  their  enumeration  (vide  Fiirst,  '  Hebrew 
W.,'  sub  ?,  p.  716  ;  cf.  Keil  in  loco). 
Kalisch  thinks  the  language  applies  only  to 
the  animals  of  Noah's  time,  and  not  to  those 
of  a  later  age,  on  the  ground  that  "the 
destiny  of  the  animals  is  everywhere  con- 
nected with  that  of  the  human  race ; "  but 
this  is  equivalent  to  their  being  included  in 
the  covenant. 

Ver.  11. — And  I  will  establish  my  cove- 
eant  with  you.  Not  form  it  for  the  first 
time,  as  if  no  such  covenant  had  existed  in 


antediluvian  times  (Knobel) ;  but  cause  it 
to  stand  or  permanently  establish  it,  so  that 
it  shall  no  more  be  in  danger  of  being  over- 
thrown, as  it  recently  has  been.  The  word 
"  my "  points  to  a  covenant  already  in 
existence,  though  not  formally  mentioned 
until  the  time  of  Noah  (ch.  vi.  18).  The 
promise  of  the  woman's  seed,  which  formed 
the  substance  of  the  covenant  during  the 
interval  from  Adam  to  Noah,  was  from 
Noah's  time  downwards  to  be  enlarged  by 
a  specific  pledge  of  the  stability  of  the  earth 
and  the  safety  of  man  (cf.  ch.  viii.  22). 
Neither  shall  all  flesh — including  the  human 

race  and  the  animal  creation.  Cf.  "1B'|1"73, 
mankind  (ch.  vi  12),  the  lower  creatures 
(ch.  vii.  21)— be  cut  off  any  more  by  the 
waters  of  a  flood.  Literally,  the  flood  just 
passed,  which  would  no  more  return.  Neither 
shall  there  any  more  be  a  flood  (of  any  kind) 
to  destroy  the  earth.  Regions  might  be 
devastated  and  tribes  of  animals  and  men 
swept  away,  but  never  again  would  there 
be  a  universal  destruction  of  the  earth  or 
of  man. 

Ver.  12.— And  God  said,  This  is  the  token 
— niK  (vide  ch.  i.  14  ;  iv.  15) — of  the  cove- 
nant which  I  make —literally,  am  giving 
(cf.  ch.  xvii.  2) — between  me  and  you  and 
every  living  creature  that  is  with  you,  for 
perpetual  generations.  Le'd6r6th  (vide  ch. 
vi.  9) ;  ' Slam  (from  'alam ,  to  hide,  to  conceal), 
pr.  that  which  is  hidden ;  hence,  specially, 
time  of  which  either  the  beginning  or  the 
end  is  uncertain  or  undefined,  the  duration 
being  usually  determined  by  the  nature  of 
the  case  (vide  Gesenius,  'Heb.  Lex.,'  sub 
voce).  Here  the  meaning  is,  that  so  long  as 
there  were  circuits  or  generations  of  men 
upon  the  earth,  so  long  would  this  covenant 
endure. 

Ver.  13.— I  do  set  Literally,  /  have 
given,  or  placed,  an  indication  that  the 
atmospheric  phenomenon  referred  to  had 
already  frequently  appeared  (Syriac,  Arabic, 
Aben  Ezra,  Chrysostom,  Calvin,  Willet, 
Murphy,  Wordsworth,  Kalisch.  Lange). 
The  contrary  opinion  has  been  maintained 
that  it  now  for  the  first  time  appeared  (Bush, 
Keil,  Delitzsch),  or  at  least  that  the  historian 
thought  so  (Knobel) ;  but  unless  there  had 
been  no  rain,  or  the  laws  of  light  and  the 


144 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[oh.  re.  8—17. 


atmospheric  condition?  of  the  earth  had  been 
different  from  what  they  are  at  present,  it 
must  have  been  a  frequent  spectacle  in  the 
primeval  heaven3.  My  bow.  /.  e.  the  rain- 
bow, toKov  (LXX.),  (cf.  Ezek.  i.  28).  The 
ordinary  rainbow  consists  of  a  series  of  suc- 
cessive zones  or  bands  of  polarised  light, 
forming  little  concentric  circles  in  the  sky, 
and  having  a  common  centre  almost  always 
below  the  horizon,  and  diametrically  opposite 
to  the  sun.  It  is  produced  by  the  refraction 
and  reflection  of  the  sun's  light  through  the 
spherical  raindrops  on  which  the  rays  fall, 
and,  accordingly,  must  always  appear,  with 
a  greater  or  a  lesser  degree  of  visibility, 
when  the  two  material  agencies  come  in 
contact.  The  part  of  the  sky  on  which  the 
rainbow  is  thrown  is  much  more  bright 
within  than  without  the  bow.  The  outer 
space  is  dark,  almost  black ;  and  the  inner 
space,  on  the  contrary,  melts  into  the  violet 
almost  insensibly  (Nichol's  'Cyclopedia  of 
the  Sciences,'  art.  Rainbow).  It  is  here 
styled  God'3  bow,  as  being  his  workman- 
ship (cf.  Ecclus.  xliii.  12),  and  his  seal  ap- 
pended to  his  covenant  (ch.  ix.  17).  In  the 
cloud.  \}V,  that  which  veils  the  heavens, 
from  a  root  signifying  to  cover  (Gesenius). 
And  it  shall  be  for  a  token.  Jl'lS?  =  tic 
arititiov  (LXX.).  In  Greek  mythology  the 
rainbow  is  designated  by  a  name  (Iris)  which 
is  at  least  connected  with  cipw,  to  speak,  and 
eipjji'ij,  peace  ;  is  represented  as  the  daughter 
of  Thaumas  (wonder),  and  Electra  (bright- 
ness) the  daughter  of  Oceanus  ;  is  assigned 
the  office  of  messenger  to  the  king  and  queen 
of  Olympus ;  and  is  depicted  as  set  in  heaven 
for  a  sign  (Homer,  'II.,'  xi.  27  ;  xvii.  647, 
548;  xxiv.  144,  159;  Virgil,  'Mn.,'  iv. 
694  ;  v.  606;  Ovid,  'Met.,'  i.  270;  xi.  585). 
The  Persians  seem  to  have  associated  the 
rainbow  with  similar  ideas.  An  old  picture, 
mentioned  by  Stolberg,  represents  a  winged 
boy  on  a  rainbow  with  an  old  man  kneeling 
in  a  posture  of  worship.  The  Hindoos  de- 
scribe the  rainbow  as  a  warlike  weapon  in 
the  hands  of  Indras  their  god,  "  with  which 
he  hurls  flashing  darts  upon  the  impious 
giants ; "  but  also  as  a  symbol  of  peace  ex- 
hibited to  man  "when  the  combat  of  the 
heavens  is  silenced."  By  the  Chinese  it  is 
regarded  as  the  harbinger  of  troubles  and 
misfortunes  on  earth,  and  by  the  old  Scandi- 
navians as  a  bridge  uniting  earth  and  heaven 
('  Kalisch  on  Genesis,'  pp.  223,  224).  Tradi- 
tional reflections  of  the  Biblical  narrative, 
they  do  not  "  account  for  the  application 
in  the  Pentateuch  of  the  rainbow  to  a  very 
remarkable  purpose,"  or  "explain  why  the 
New  Testament  represents  the  rainbow  as 
an  attribute  of  the  Divine  throne,"  or  "why 
angels  are  sent  as  messengers  on  earth " 
(Kalisch) ;  but  are  themselves  accounted  for 


and  explained  by  it.  The  institution  of  the 
rainbow  as  a  sign  clearly  negatives  the  idea 
(Aquinas,  Cajetan)  that  it  was  originally 
and  naturally  a  sign  ;  which,  if  it  was,  "  it 
was  a  lying  sign,"  since  the  Flood  came  not- 
withstanding its  prognostications  (Willet). 
Of  a  covenant.  "  The  bow  in  the  hands  of 
man  was  an  instrument  of  battle  (ch.  xlviii. 
22 ;  Ps.  vii.  12  ;  Prov.  vi  2  ;  Zech.  ix.  10) ; 
but  the  bow  bent  by  the  hand  of  God  has 
become  a  symbol  of  oeace"  (Wordsworth). 
Between  me  and  the  earth. 

Ver.  14. — And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  when 
I  bring  a  cloud  over  the  earth.  Literally, 
in  my  clouding  a  cloud,  i.  e.  gathering 
clouds,  which  naturally  signify  store  of 
rain  (1  Kings  xviii.  44,  45).  Clouds  are 
often  used  to  denote  afflictions  and  dangers 
(cf.  Ezek.  xxx.  3,  18  ;  xxxii.  7  ;  xxxiv.  12  ; 
Joel  ii.  2).  That  the  bow  shall  be  seen  in 
the  cloud.  Literally,  and  the  bow  is  seen, 
which  it  always  is  when  the  sun's  rays  fall 
upon  it,  if  the  spectator's  back  is  towards 
the  light,  and  his  face  towards  the  cloud. 
Thus  at  the  moment  when  danger  seems 
to  threaten  most,  the  many-coloured  arch 
arrests  the  gaze. 

Ver.  15. — And  I  will  remember  (cf.  ch. 
viii.  1).  An  anthropomorphism  introduced 
to  remind  man  that  God  is  ever  faithful  to 
his  covenant  engagements  (Calvin).  "God 
is  said  to  remember,  because  he  maketh  ub 
to  know  and  to  remember "  (Chrysostom). 
My  covenant  {vide  on  ver.  11),  which  is 
between  me  and  you  and  every  living 
creature  of  all  flesh ;  and  the  waters  shall 
no  more  become  a  flood — hayah  with  le  =  to 
become  (cf.  ch.  ii.  7) ;  literally,  shall  no 
more  be  {i.  e.  grow)  to  a  flood ;  or,  "and  there 
shall  no  more  be  the  waters  to  the  extent  of 
a  flood  " — to  destroy  all  flesh. 

Ver.  16. — And  the  bow  shall  be  in  the 
cloud ;  and  I  will  look  upon  it,  that  I  may 
rometuber  the  everlasting  covenant.  Liter- 
ally, the  covenant  of  eternity.  One  of  those 
pregnant  Scripture  sayings  that  have  in 
them  an  almost  inexhaustible  fulness  of 
meaning,  which  does  not  at  first  sight  dis- 
close itself  to  the  eye  of  the  unreflecting 
reader.  In  so  far  as  the  Noachic  covenant 
was  simply  a  promise  that  there  should  be 
no  recurrence  of  a  flood,  the  covenant  of 
eternity  had  a  corresponding  limit  in  its 
duration  to  the  period  of  this  present  terres- 
trial economy.  But,  rightly  viewed,  the 
Noachic  covenant  was  the  original  Adamic 
covenant  set  up  again  in  a  different  form ; 
and  hence,  when  applied  to  it,  the  phrase 
covenant  of  eternity  is  entitled  to  retain 
its  highest  and  fullest  significance,  as  a 
covenant  reaching  from  eternity  to  eternity. 
Between  God  and  every  living  creature  of 
all  flesh  that  is  upon  the  earth. 

Ver.  17.— And  God  said  unto  Noah,  Tail 


DH  IX.  8— 17-1 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


140 


is  the  token  of  the  covenant.  Murphy 
thinks  that  God  here  directed  the  patriarch^ 
attention  to  an  aotual  rainbow  j  it  seems 
more  natural  to  conolude  that  from  the 
beginning  of  the  interview  (ch.  viii.  20)  the 
ark,  altar,  and  worshippers  were  encircled 
by  its  variegated  arch.  Kalisch  compares 
with  the  rainbow  the  other  signs  which  God 
subsequently  appended  to  his  covenants ; 
as,  e.  g.,  circumcision  (ch.  xvii.  11),  the 
passover  (Exod.  xii.  13),  the  sabbath  (ibid. 
xxxi.  13).  The  Noachic  covenant  being  uni- 
,  versal,  the  sign  was  also  universal — "jspag 
Iiip6rr<i)v  &v9pdiirt»v"  (II.,  xi.  27),  a  sign  to 
men  of  many  tongues.  The  later  covenants 
being  limited  to  Israel,  their  signs  were  local 
and  provisional,  and  have  now  been  sup- 
planted, by  the  higher  symbolism  of  the  Chris- 
tian Church,  viz. ,  baptism ,  the  Lord's  Supper, 


and  the  Christian  sabbath.  Which  I  hav« 
established.  The  different  verbs  used  in  thii 
passage  in  connection  with  JT1")?  may  be 
here  brought  together.  1.  \r\)  (ver.  12)  re- 
presenting the  covenant  as  a  gift  of  Divine 
grace.  2.  D-ip  (Hiph.  ;  vers.  9,  11,  17)  ex- 
hibiting the  covenant  as  something  which 
God  has  both  caused  to  stand  and  raised  up 
when  fallen.  8.  n?J  (ver.  15)  depicting  the 
covenant  as  always  present  to  the  Divine 
mind.  Tuch,  Stahelin,  and  Delitzsch  detect 
an  idiosyncrasy  of  the  Elohist  in  using  the 
first  and  second  of  these  verbs  instead_  of 
r03,  the  favourite  expression  of  the  Jehovist 
But  JT33  is  used  by  the  Elohist  in  oh.  xxi. 
27,  32,  while  in  Dout.  iv.  18  the  Jehovist 
uses  D^n.  Between  me  and  all  flesh  that 
is  upon  the  earth. 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  16.— The  covenant  renewed.  I.  The  Author  of  the  covenant.  God._  This 
is  evident  from  the  nature  of  the  case.  In  ordinary  language  a  covenant  signifies 
11  a  mutual  contract  between  two  (or  more)  parties  "  (Hodge,  '  Syst.  Theol.,'  vol.  ii. 
p.  355) ;  cf .  ch.  xxi.  27  (Abraham  and  Abimelech) ;  Josh.  xxiv.  25  (Joshua  and  Israel) ; 
1  Sam.  xviii.  3  (Jonathan  and  David)  ;  1  Kings  xx.  34  (Ahab  and  Benhadad) ;  "  com- 
prehending a  promise  made  by  the  one  to  the  other,  accompanied  with  a  condition, 
upon  the  performance  of  which  the  accepter  becomes  entitled  to  the  fulfilment  of 
the  promise"  (Dick's  'Theol.  Lect.,'  xlv.).  Applied,  however,  to  those  transactions 
between  God  and  man  which  took  their  rise  subsequent  to  the  fall,  a  covenant  is 
an  arrangement  or  disposition  originated  by  God  under  which  certain  free  and 
gracious  promises  are  made  over  to  man,  which  promises  are  ratified  by  sacrifice 
and  impose  certain  obligations  on  their  recipients,  while  they  are  usually  connected 
with  institutions  illustrative  of  their  nature  (cf.  '.Kelly  on  the  Covenants,'  lect.  i.  p. 
12).  But,  taking  either  definition  of  the  term,  it  is  obvious  that  the  initial  move- 
ment in  any  such  transaction  must  belong  to  God  ;  and  with  special  emphasis 
does  God  claim  to  be  the  sole  Author  of  the  covenant  established  with  Noah  and 
his  descendants  (vers.  9,  11,  12,  17). 

II.  The  pabties  to  the  covenant,  i.  e.  the  persons  interested  in  the  covenant  ,- 
viz.,  Noah  and  his  posterity.  But  Noah  and  his  sons  at  that, time  were — 1.  The 
heads  of  the  race.  Hence  the  covenant  may  be  said  to  have  possessed  a  world- 
wide aspect.  Because  of  their  connection  with  Noah  the  entire  family  of  man  had 
an  interest  in  its  provisions.  2.  The  fathers  of  the  Church.  As  believers  Noah 
and  his  family  had  been  saved  ;  and  with  them,  in  the  character  of  believers, 
the  covenant  was  made.  Hence  it  had  also  a  special  outlook  to  the  Church,  for 
whom  it  hal  a  blessing  quite  distinct  from  that  which  it  conferred  upon  the  world  as 
such. 

IH.  The  substance  or  the  covenant.  Calling  it  so  frequently  as  he  does  "  my 
covenant"  (ch.  vi.  18;  vii.  9,  11),  the  Author  of  it  seems  desirous  to  connect  it  in 
our  thoughts  with  that  old  covenant  which,  more  than  sixteen  centuries  earlier,  he 
had  established  with  mankind  immediately  after  the  fall.  Now  that  covenant  was 
in  substance  an  arrangement,  disposition,  proposal,  or  promise  of  mercy  and  salva- 
tion ;  and  that  has  been  the  essential  element  in  every  covenant  that  God  has  made 
with  man.  So  to  speak,  God's  covenant  is  just  another  name  for  his  formal  convey- 
ance to  mankind  sinners  of  the  free  gift  of  Christ  and  his  salvation. 

IV.  The  form  of  the  covenant.  While  in  every  age  essentially  the  same,  the 
form  of  the  covenant  has  been  changing  with  the  changing  eras  of  human  history. 
When  we  speak  of  a  change  of  dispensation,  the  thing  meant  is  a  change  upon  the 
outward  form  or  mode  of  representing  the  covenant — a  dispensation  being  a  Divine 

GENESIS.  \, 


146  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESI8.  [oh.  a.  8—17. 

arrangement  for  communicating  blessing.  In  prediluvian  times  the  form  which  the 
covenant  assumed  was  the  promise  of  the  woman's  seed.  From  the  Deluge  onwards 
it  was  a  promise  of  forbearance — "  Neither  shall  all  flesh  be  cut  off  any  more  by  the 
waters  of  a  flood ;  neither  shall  there  be  any  more  a  flood  to  destroy  the  earth.  In 
the  patriarchal  era  it  became  the  promise  of  a  son  "  in  whom  all  the  families  of  the 
earth  should  be  blessed "  (ch.  xii.  3 ;  xviii.  18 ;  xxii.  18).  Under  the  Mosaic  dis- 
pensation the  promise  of  a  prophet  like  unto  Moses  (Deut.  xviii.  16);  during  the 
monarchy  the  promise  of  a  king  to  sit  upon  David's  throne  (2  Sam.  vii.  12) ;  in 
the  time  of  Isaiah  the  promise  of  a  suffering  servant  of  the  Lord  (Isa.  xlii.,  liii.)  ; 
in  the  fulness  of  the  times  it  assumed  its  permanent  form,  viz.,  that  of  the  incar- 
nation of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  the  woman's  seed,  as  Abraham's  child,  as  David's 
■on,  as  Jehovah's  servant. 

V.  The  seal  of  the  covenant.    Covenant  transactions  under  the  old  or  Levitical 
■  dispensation  were  invariably  accompanied  with  the  offering  up  of  sacrificial  victims, 

as  a  public  attestation  of  the  binding  character  of  the  arrangement.  The  covenant 
which  God  made  with  Noah  had  also  its  sacrificial  seal.  1.  The  meritorious  sacrifice. 
The  propitiatory  offering  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  on  the  sole  ground  of  which  he  is 
well  pleased  with  and  mercifully  disposed  tow-ards  the  race  of  sinful  man.  2. 
The  typical  sacrifice.  The  offering  of  Noah  upon  Ararat  after  emerging  from  the 
ark. 

VI.  The  sign  of  the  covenant.  The  rainbow,  which  was — 1.  A  universal  sign. 
The  covenant  having  been  made  with  the  entire  family  of  man,  it  was  in  a  manner 
requisite  that  the  sign  should  be  one  which  was  patent  to  the  race ;  not  limited  and 
local  and  national,  like  circumcision,  afterwards  given  to  the  Hebrews  or  Abrahamidse, 
but  universal,  ubiquitous,  cosmopolitan  ;  and  such  was  the  rainbow.  This  was  a 
first  mark  of  kindness  on  the  part  of  God  towards  the  family  which  he  had  taken 
into  covenant  with  himself.  2.  An  attractive  sign.  Such  as  could  not  fail  to  arrest 
the  gaze  of  those  whose  special  interest  it  was  to  behold  it.  Nothing  is  more 
remarkable  than  the  quickness  with  which  it  attracts  the  eye,  and  the  pleasurable 
feelings  which  its  sight  enkindles.  In  its  selection,  then,  to  be  a  sign  and  symbol 
of  his  covenant,  instead  of  something  in  itself  repulsive  or  even  indifferent,  we  can 
detect  another  proof  of  kindness  on  the  part  of  God.  3.  A  seasonable  sign.  At 
the  very  moment,  as  it  were,  when  nature's  elements  are  threatening  another  deluge, 
the  signal  of  heaven's  clemency  is,  hung  out  upon  the  watery  sky  to  rebuke  the  fears 
of  men.  Another  token  of  special  kindness  on  the  part  of  God.  4.  A  suggestive 
sign — suggestive  of  the  covenant  of  grace.  Possibly  this  was  the  chief  reason  why 
the  rainbow  was  selected  as  the  sign  of  the  covenant ;  a  further  display  of  kindness 
on  the  part  of  God. 

VII.  The  perpetuity  of  the  covenant.  1.  To  eternity  (ver.  16).  In  so  far  as 
it  was  a  spiritual  covenant  with  the  believing  Church,  it  was  designed  to  be  unto, 
as  it  had  actually  been  from,  everlasting.  2.  For  perpetual  generations  (ver.  12). 
In  so  far  as  it  was  a  providential  covenant  with  the  race,  it  was  designed  to  continue 
to  the  end  of  time. 

Lessons: — 1.  The  exceeding  riches  of  Divine  grace  in  dealing  with  men  by  way 
of  a  covenant.  2.  The  exceeding  faithfulness  of  God  in  adhering  to  his  covenant, 
notwithstanding  man's  sinfulness  and  provocation.  3.  The  exceeding  hopefulness 
of  man's  position  in  being  placed  beneath  a  covenant  of  mercy. 

HOMILIES  BY  VABIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  8 — 17.  —  The  new  Noachic  covenant  established.  I.  It  is  a  covenant  of 
life.  It  embraces  all  the  posterity  of  Noah,  ».  e.  it  is— 1.  The  new  foundation  on 
which  humanity  rests.  2.  It  passes  through  man  to  all  flesh,  to  all  living  creatures. 
8.  The  sign  of  it,  the  rainbow  in  the  cloud,  is  also  the  emblem  of  the  salvation  which 
may  be  said  to  be  typified  in  the  deliverance  of  Noah  and  his  family.  4.  The  back- 
ground is  the  same  element  wherewith  the  world  was  destroyed,  representing  the 
righteousness  of  God  as  against  the  sin  of  man.  On  that  righteousness  God  sets  the 
tign  of  love,  which  is  produced  by  the  rays  of  light — the  sun  being  the  emblem  of 
Divine  goodness  —  radiating  from  the  infinite  centre  in  the  glorious  Father  of  alL 


oh.  nc.  8—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  14T 


"  And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  when  I  bring  a  cloud  over  the  earth,  that  the  bow  shall 
be  teen  in  the  cloud." 

II.  God's  revelation  set  before  our  faith.  1.  It  is  waiting  to  be  recognised. 
When  we  place  ourselves  in  right  relation  to  the  revelations  and  promises  of 
Jehovah  we  can  always  see  the  bow  on  the  cloud  of  sense,  on  events — bright  com- 
passion on  the  darkest  providence.  2.  There  is  an  interdependence  between  the 
objective  and  subjective.  The  rainbow  is  the  natural  result  of  an  adjustment  between 
the  sun,  the  earth,  the  cloud  falling  in  rain,  and  man,  the  beholder.  Take  the  earth 
to  represent  the  abiding  laws  of  man's  nature  and  God's  righteousness,  the  falling 
stoud  to  represent  the  condemnation  and  punishment  of  human  sin,  the  sun  the. 
revealed  love  and  mercy  of  God  sending  forth  its  beams  in  the  midst  of  the  dis- 
pensation of  judgment ;  then  let  there  be  faith  in  man  to  look  up  and  rejoice  in  that 
which  is  set  before  him,  and  he  will  behold  the  rainbow  of  the  covenant  even  on  the 
very  background  of  the  condemnation. 

III.  Transfigured  righteousness  in  redemption.  The  cross  at  once  condemna- 
tion and  life.  The  same  righteousness  which  once  destroyed  the  earth  is  manifested 
in  Christ  Jesus — "  righteousness  unto  all  and  upon  all  them  that  believe." 

IV.  Union  of  God  and  man.  God  himself  is  said  to  look  upon  the  sign  of  the 
covenant  that  he  may  remember.  So  man  looking  and  God  looking  to  the  same 
pledge  of  salvation.  "  God  was  in  Christ  reconciled,"  &c.  Their  reconciliation  is 
complete  and  established. — B. 

Ver.  13.  —  The  bow  in  the  cloud.  With  deep  joy  and  yet  with  awe  must 
Noah  have  looked  around  him  on  leaving  the  ark.  On  every  side  signs  of  the 
mighty  destruction ;  the  earth  scarcely  dried,  and  the  busy  throng  of  men  (Luke 
xvii.  27)  all  gone.  Yet  signs  of  new  life ;  the  earth  putting  forth  verdure,  as 
though  preparing  for  a  new  and  happier  chapter  of  history.  His  first  recorded  act 
was  sacrifice — an  acknowledgment  that  his  preserved  life  was  God's  gift{  a  new 
profession  of  faith  in  him.  Then  God  gave  the  promise  that  no  such  destruction 
should  again  befall  the  earth,  and  so  ordered  the  sign  that  the  rain-cloud  which 
might  excite  the  fear  should  bring  with  it  the  rainbow,  the  pledge  of  the  covenant. 
But  as  ch.  vi.  18  foreshadowed  the  Christian  covenant  (1  Pet.  iii.  21)  in  its  aspect 
of  deliverance  from  destruction,  the  text  points  to  the  same  in  its  bearing  on  daily 
life  and  service.  The  God  ward  life  and  lenewal  of  the  will  which  the  law  could  not 
produce  (Rom.  viii.  3)  is  made  sure  to  believers  through  the  constraining  power  of 
the  love  of  Christ  (cf.  1  John  iii.  3  ;  Rev.  xii.  11).  And  if  clouds  should  cause  fear, 
and  God's  face  be  hidden,  and  the  energy  of  dedication  grow  languid,  we  are 
reminded  (Rom.  vi.  14;  Gal.  v.  24).  And  in  the  vision  of  the  glorified  Church 
(Rev.  iv.  3)  the  rainbow  again  appears,  pointing  back  to  the  early  sign,  connecting 
them  as  parts  of  one  scheme,  and  visibly  setting  forth  the  glory  of  God  in  his  mercy 
and  grace  (cf.  Exod.  xxxiii.  19  ;  xxxiv.  6 ;  John  i.  14). 

I.  The  covenant  was  made  with  N  jah  and  his  seed  as  children  of  faith. 
They  had  believed  in  God's  revealed  way  of  salvation  and  entered  the  ark  (cf.  Num. 
xxi.  8).  The  root  of  a  Christian  life  is  belief  in  a  finished  redemption  (2  Cor.  v.  14; 
1  John  v.  11);  not  belief  that  the  doctrine  is  true,  but  trust  in  the  fact  as  the  one 
ground  of  hope.  Hast  thou  acted  on  God's  call ;  entered  the  ark  ;  trusted  Christ ; 
none  else,  nothing  else?  Waitest  thou  for  something  in  thyself?  Noah  did  not 
think  of  fitness  when  told  to  enter.  God  calleth  thee  as  unfit  (cf.  1  Tim.  i.  15). 
Try  to  believe  ;  make  a  real  effort  (cf.  Matt.  xv.  28  ;  Mark  ix.  23). 

II.  The  power  of  a  Christian  life  ;  faith  as  a  habit  of  the  mind.  Look  to 
the  bow.  "  Looking  unto  Jesus."  The  world  is  the  field  on  which  God's  grace 
is  shown ;  we  are  the  actors  by  whom  his  work  is  done.  How  shall  we  do  this  ? 
Beset  by  hindrances— love  of  the  world,  love  of  self,  love  of  ease.  We  cannot 
of  ourselves  (cf.  Luke  xxii.  33,  34 ;  Rom.  xi.  20).  We  are  strong  only  in  trusting 
to  the  power  of  the  Lord  (cf.  2  Cor.  xii.  10 ;  Phil.  iv.  13). 

III.  In  this  the  Holy  Spirit  is  our  helper.  His  office  is  to  reveal  Christ  to  the 
©wL     His  help  is  promised  if  sought  for. — M. 

Lfl 


148 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[oh.  ix.  18—29 


EXPOSITION. 


Ver.  18.— And  the  sons  of  Noah,  that  went 
forth  of  the  ark,  were  Shem,  and  Ham,  and 
Japheth,  who  are  here  again  mentioned  as  the 
heads  of  the  nations  into  which  the  family 
of  man  developed,  the  writer  having  described 
the  important  modifications  made  upon  the 
law  of  nature  and  the  covenant  of  grace,  and 
being  now  about  to  proceed  with  the  onward 
course  of  human  Listory.  The  present  sec- 
tion, extending  to  ver.  27,  is  usually  assigned 
to  the  Jehovistic  author  (Tuch,  Bleek,  Ka- 
lisch, Colenso,  Kuenen),  though  by  David- 
Bon  it  is  ascribed  to  a  so-called  redactor,  with 
the  exception  of  the  present  clause,  which  is 
recognised  as  the  Jehevist's  contribution  to 
the  story.  The  ground  of  this  apportionment 
is  the  introduction  of  the  name  Jehovah  in 
ver.  26  (q.  v.),  and  certain  traces  throughout 
the  paragraph  of  the  style  of  writing  sup- 
posed to  be  peculiar  to  the  supplementer. 
And  Ham  is  the  father  of  Canaan.  Kena'an, 
the  depressed  or  low  one  ;  either  the  Low- 
lander  or  inhabitant  of  a  low  coast  country, 
as  opposed  to  the  loftier  regions  (Aram) ; 
from  kana',  to  be  low,  depressed,  in  situation, 
as  of  land  (Gesenius) ;  or  more  probably  the 
servile  one  in  spirit  (Ftirst,  Murphy,  Keil, 
Lange).  The  reason  for  the  insertion  of  this 
notice  here,  and  of  the  similar  one  in  ver. 
22,  was  obviously  to  draw  attention  to  the 
circumstance,  not  "  that  the  origin  of  Israel's 
nscendancy  and  of  Canaan's  degradation  dates 
so  far  back  as  the  family  of  the  second 
founder  of  •the  human  race,"  as  if  the 
writer's  standpoint  were  long  subsequent  to 
the  conquest  (Kalisch),  but  that,  "as  Israel 
was  now  going  to  possess  the  land  of  Canaan, 
they  might  know  that  now  was  the  time 
when  the  curse  of  Canaan  and  his  posterity 
should  take  place"  (Willet). 

Ver.  19.— These  are  the  three  sons  of 
Noah;  and  of  them  was  the  whole  earth 
— i.  e.  the  earth's  population  (cf.  ch.  xi.  1  ; 
xix.  31)— overspread.  More  correctly,  dis- 
persed themselves  abroad,  bteoiraptioav  tiri 
iraaav  tiji>  yijv  (LXX.) ;  disseminatum -est 
omne  genus  hominum  (Vulgate). 

Ver.  20. — And  Noah  began  to  be  an  hus- 
bandman. Literally,  a  man  of  the  ground. 
Vir  terras  (Vulgato) ;  avBpoiiros  ytuipyot  yijt 

(LXX.)  ;  Chald.,  Nin.N?  rbp  t^  —  vireo- 
lens  terram ;  agriculturce  dediturus.  Cf. 
Josh.  v.  4,  "a  man  of  war;"  2  Sam.  xvi. 
7,  "a  man  of  blood;"  Gen.  xlvi.  32,  "a 
man  of  cattle;"  Exod.  iv.  10,  "a  man 
"f  words."  And  he  planted  a  vineyard. 
So  Murphy,  Wordsworth,  Kalisch.  Keil, 
Delitzsch,  and  Lange  regard  ish'ha'  Adamah, 
with  the  art.,  as  in  apposition  to  Noah, 
and  read,   "  And  Noah,  the  husbandman. 


began  and  planted  a  vineyard,"  L  e.  ceepit 
planiare  (cf.  Gesenius,  'Gram.,'  }  142,  3; 
Glass,' Sacrse  Philoloj;iiB,' lib.  iii.  tr  iii.  can. 
34).  Neither  interpretation  presupposes  that 
husbandry  and  vine  cultivation  were  now 
practised  for  the  first  time.  That  Armenia  is  a 
wine-growing  country  is  testified  by  Xenophon 
('Anab.,'  iv.  4,  9).  That  the  vine  was  abund- 
antly cultivated  in  Egypt  is  evident  from 
representations  on  the  monuments,  as  well 
as  from  Scriptural  allusions.  The  Egyptians 
say  that  Osiris,  the  Greeks  that  Dionysus, 
the  Romans  that  Saturn,  first  taught  men 
the  cultivation  of  the  tree  and  the  Usf  of  its 
fruit. 

Ver.  21.  —  And  he  drank  of  the  wine. 
IV-i  "perhaps  so  called  from  bubbling  up 
and  fermenting  ;"  connected  with  |1J  (Gese- 
nius). Though  the  first  mention  of  wine  in 
Sciipture,  it  is  scarcely  probable  that  the 
natural  process  of  fermentation  for  so  many 
centuries  escaped  the  notice  of  the  enterpris- 
ing Cainites,  or  even  of  the  Sethites  ;  that, 
"though  grapes  had  been  in  use  before  this, 
wine  had  not  been  extracted  from  them" 
(Murphy)  ;  or  that  Noah  was  unacquainted 
with  the  nature  and  effects  of  this  intoxicat- 
ing liquor  (Chrysostom,  Theodoret,  Keil, 
Lange).  The  article  before  \)\  indicates  that 
the  patriarch  was  "familiar  with  th*  use 
and  treatment "  of  the  grape  (Kalisch) ;  and 
Moses  does  not  say  this  was  the  first  occasion 
on  which  the  patriarch  tasted  the  fermented 
liquor  (Calvin,  Wordsworth).  And  was 
drunken.  The  verb  "13  B*  (whence  shechar, 
strong  drink,  Num.  xxviii.  7),  to  drink  to 
the  full,  very  often  signifies  to  make  oneself 
drunken,  or  simply  to  be  intoxicated  as  the 
result  of  drinking  ;  and  that  which  the  Holy 
Spirit  here  reprobates  is  not  the  partaking  of 
the  fruit  of  the  vine,  but  the  drinking  so  as 
to  be  intoxicated  thereby.  Since  the  sin  of 
Noah  cannot  be  ascribed  to  ignorance,  it  is 
perhaps  right,  as  Well  as  charitable,  to  at- 
tribute it  to  age  and  inadvertence.'  Six 
hundred  years  old  at  the  time  of  the  Flood,  he 
must  have  been  considerably  beyondthis  when 
Ham  saw  him  overtaken  in  his  fault,  since 
Canaan  was  Ham's  fourth  son  (ch.  x.  6),  and 
the  first  was  not  born  till  alter  the  exit  from 
the  ark  (ch.  viii.  18).  But  from  whatever 
cause  induced,  the  drunkenness  of  Noah  wa» 
not  entirely  guiltless  ;  it  was  sinful  in  itself 
and  led  to  further  shame.  And  he  was  un- 
covered.    Literally,  he  uncovered  himself. 

Hithpael  of  n?£,  to  make  naked,  which  more 
correctly  indicates  the  personal  guilt  of  th« 
patriarch  than  the  A.  V.,  or  the  LXX,  iyyp- 
vul)  i).    That  intoxication  tends  to  sensuality 


oh,  ix.  18—29.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS 


141 


rf.  the  cases  of  Lot  (ch.  six.  33),  Ahasuertu 
(Esther  i.  10,  11),  BelshazzarJDan.  v.  1 — 
6).  Within  hit  tent.  'Ev  rip  olxii  avrov 
'.LXX.). 

Ver.  22.— And  Ham,  the  father  of  Canaan, 
saw  the  nakedness  Pudenda,  from  a  root 
(frnj/)  signifying  to  make  nakod,  from  a 
kindred  root  to  which  (D"TJ?)  comes  the  term 
expressive  of  the  nakedness  of  Adam  and 
Eve  after  eating  the  forbidden  fruit  (ch. 
iii.  7).  The  sin  of  Ham — not  a  "trifling 
and  unintentional  transgression  "  (Von  Boh- 
len)— obviously  lay  not  in  seeing  what  per- 
haps he  may  have  come  upon  unexpectedly, 
but  (1)  in  wickedly  rejoicing  in  what  he 
saw,  which,  considering  who  he  was  that 
was  overcome  with  wine, — "the  minister  of 
salvation  to  men,  and  the  chief  restorer  of 
•the  world," — the  relation  in  which  he  stood 
to  Ham, — that  of  father,— the  advanced  age 
to  which  he  had  now  come,  and  the  compara- 
tively mature  years  of  Ham  himself,  who  was 
"  already  more  than  a  hundred  years  old," 
should  have  filled  him  with  sincere  sorrow  ; 
"sed  nunquam  vino  victum  patrem  Alius 
risisset,  nisi  prius  ejecisset  animo  illam  re- 
verentiam  et  opinionem,  quae  in  liberis  de 
parentibus  ex  mandato  Dei  existere  debet" 
(Luther) ;  and  (2)  in  reporting  it,  doubtless 
with  a  malicious  purpose,  to  his  brethren. 
And  told  his  two  brethren  without.  Pos- 
sibly inviting  them  to  come  and  look  upon 
their  father's  shame. 

Ver.  23. — And  Shem  and  Japheth  took  a 
garment.  Literally,  the  robe,  i.  e.  which 
was  at  hand  (Keil,  Lange);  the  simlah,  which 
was  an  outer  cloak  (Deut.  x.  18 ;  1  Sam.  xxi. 
10 ;  Isa.  iii.  6,  7),  in  which,  at  night,  per- 
sons wrapped  themselves  (Deut.  xxii.  17). 
Sometimes  the  letters  are  transposed,  and 
the  word  becomes  salmah  (cf.  Exod.  xxii.  8 ; 
Micah  ii.  8).  And  laid  it  upon  both  their 
shoulders,  and  went  backwards,  and  covered 
the  nakedness  of  their  father  ;  and  their 
faces  were  backward,  and  they  saw  not  the 
nakedness  of  their  father  ;  thereby  evincing 
"the  regard  they  paid  to  their  father's 
honour  and  their  own  modesty  "  (Calvin). 

Ver.  24.  —  And  Noah  awoke  from  his 
wine.  I.e.  the  effects  of  his  wine  (cf.  1  Sam. 
L14;  xxv.  87);  Hiv^i  (LXX.);  "be- 
came  fully  conscious  of  his  condition  "  (T. 
Lewis).  And  knew.  By  inspiration  (Alford)j 
more  probably  by  making  inquiries  as  to 
the  reason  of  tbe  simlah  covering  hira. 
What  his  younger  son.  Literally,  his  son, 
the  little  one,  i.  e.  the  youngest  son  (Willet, 
Murphy,  Wordsworth,  T.  Lewis,  Alford, 
Candlish),  or  the  younger  son  (Keil,  Bush, 
Kaiisch)  ;  cf.  ch.  v.  32.  Generally  believed 
to  have  been  Ham,  though  by  many  Can tin 
■a  understood  (Aben  Ezra,  Theodoret,  Pro- 
oopiui,  Scaliger,    Poole,    Jamieson,   Inglis, 


Lewis).  Origen  mentions  a  tradition  that 
Canaan  first  saw  the  shame  of  Noah,  and 
told  it  to  his  father.  Wordsworth,  following 
Ohrysostom,  believes  Canaan  may  have  been 
an  accomplice.  '  The  Speaker's  Commentary' 
thinks  it  would  solve  the  difficulty  which 
attaches  to  the  cursing  of  Canaan. 

Ver,  25.  —And  he  said.  Not  in  personal 
resentment,  since  "the  fall  of  Jfoah  is  not  at 
all  connected  with  his  prophecy,  except  as 
serving  to  bring  out  the  real  character  of  his 
children,  and  to  reconcile  him  to  the  differ- 
ent destinies  which  he  was  to  announce  aa 
awaiting  their  respective  races  "  (Candlish) ; 
but  under  the  impulse  of  a  prophetic  spirit 
(Poole,  Keil,  Lange,  Candlish,  Murphy,  and 
expositors  generally),  which,  however,  had 
its  historical  occasion  in  the  foregoing  inci- 
dent. The  structure  of  the  prophecy  is 
perfectly  symmetrical,  introducing,  in  three 
poetical  verses,  (1)  the  curse  of  Canaan,  (2) 
the  blessing  of  Shem,  and  (3)  the  enlarge- 
ment^ Japheth,  and  in  all  three  giving 
prominence  to  the  doom  of  servitude  pro- 
nounced upon  the  son  of  Ham.  Cursed.  The 
second  curse  pronounced  upon  a  human 
being,  the  first  having  been  on  Cain  (ch.  iv. 
11).  Colenso  notices  that  all  the  curses 
belong  to  the  Jehovistic  writer ;  but  vide 
ch.  xlix.  6,  7,  which  Tuch  and  Bleek  ascribed 
to  the  Elohist,  though,  doubtless  in  conse- 
quence of  the.  "curse,"  by  Davidson  and 
others  it  is  now  assigned  to  the  .Tehovist 
That  this  curse  was  not  an  imprecation,  but 
a  prediction  of  the  future  subjection  of  the 
Canaanites,  has  been  maintained  (Theodoret, 
Venema;  Willet),  chiefly  in  consequence  of 
its  falling  upon  Canaan  ;  but  (1)  as  the 
contrary  "  blessing"  implies  the  inheritance 
of  good  in  virtue  of  a  Divine  disposition  to 
that  effect,  so  does  "cursing"  import  subjec- 
tion to  evil  by  the  same  Divine  power  ;  and 
(2)  if  we  eliminate  the  moral  element  from 
the  doom  of  Canaan,  which  clearly  referred 
to  a  condition  of  temporal  servitude,  there 
seems  no  reason  why  the  language  of  Noah 
should  not  be  regarded  as  a  solemnly  pro- 
nounced and  Divinely  guaranteed  infliction  ; 
while  (3)  as  the  curse  is  obviously  aimed  at 
the  nations  and  peoples  descending  from  the 
execrated  person,  it  is  not  inconsistent  to 
suppose  that  many  individuals  amongst  those 
nations  and  peoples  might  attain  to  a  high 
degree  of  temporal  and  spiritual  prosperity. 
Be  Canaan.  (1)  Not  Ham,  the  father  oi 
Canaan  (Arabic  Version) ;  nor  (2)  all  the 
sons  of  Ham,  though  concentrated  in  Canaan 
(Havernick,  Keil,  Murphy);  but  (3)  Canaan 
alone,  though  indirectly,  through  him,  Ham 
also  (Calvin,  Bush,  Kalisch,  Lange,  et  alii). 
For  the  formal  omission  of  Ham  many  dif- 
ferent reasons  have  been  assigned.  (1)  Be- 
cause God  had  preserved  him  in  the  ark  (Jew- 
ish commentators).    (2)  Because  if  Ham  had 


160 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


[ch.  k.  18— » 


been  mentioned  all  his  other  sons  would 
have  been  implicated  (Pererius,  Lange).  (3) 
Because  the  sin  of  Ham  was  comparatively 
trifling  (Bohlen).  For  the  cursing  of  Canaan 
instead  of  Ham,  it  has  been  urged  —  (1) 
That  he  was  Ham's  youngest  son,  as  Ham 
was  Noah's  (Hoffman  and  Delitzsch) ;  surely 
a  very  insufficient  reason  for  God  cursing 
any  one  !  (2)  That  he  was  the  real  per- 
petrator of  the  crime  (Aben  Ezra,  Procopius, 
Poole,  Jamieson,  Lewis,  &c).  (3)  That 
thereby  the  greatness  of  Ham's  sin  was 
evinced  (Calvin).  (4)  That  Canaan  was 
already  walking  in  the  steps  of  his  father's 
impiety  (Ambrose,  Mercerus,  Keil).  (5)  That 
Noah  foresaw  that  the  Canaanites  would 
abundantly  deserve  this  visitation  (Calvin, 
Wordsworth,  Murphy,  Kalisch,  Lange).  We 
incline  to  think  the  truth  lies  in  the  last 
three  reasons.  A  servant  of  servants.  A 
Hebraism  for  the  superlative  degree  ;  cf. 
"  King  of  kings,"  "holy  of  holies,"  "the 
song  of  songs  "  (vide  Gesenius,  §  119).  I.  e. 
"the  last  even  among  servants"  (Calvin); 
"  a  servant  reduced  to  the  lowest  degree  of 
bondage  and  degradation  "  (Bush) ;  "  vilis- 
sima  servitute  pressus"  (Sol.  Glass);  "a 
most  base  and  vile  servant "  (Ainsworth) ; 
"a  working  servant"  (Chaldee);  "the lowest 
of  slaves  (Keil)  ;  7raic  oi'mdjc  (LXX.), 
which  ' '  conveys  the  notion  of  permanent 
hereditary  servitude "  (Kalisch).  Keil, 
Hengstenberg,  and  Wordsworth  see  an  allu- 
sion to  this  condition  in  the  name  Canaan 
(q.  v. ,  supra),  which,  however,  Lange  doubts. 
Shall  ho  be  to  his  brethren.  A  prophecy 
which  was  afterwards  abundantly  fulfilled, 
the  Canaanites  in  the  time  of  Joshua  having 
been  partly  exterminated  and  partly  reduced 
to  the  lowest  form  of  slavery  by  the  Israel- 
ites who  belonged  to  the  family  of  Shem 
(Josh.  ix.  23),  those  that  remained  being 
subsequently  reduced  by  Solomon  (1  Kings 
ix  20,  21) ;  while  the  Phenicians,  along 
with  the  Carthaginians  and  Egyptians,  who 
all  belonged  to  the  family  of  Canaan,  were 
subjected  by  the  Japhetic  Persians,  Mace- 
donians, and  Romans  (Keil). 

Ver.  26. — And  he  said — not  "Blessed  of 
Jehovah,  my  God,  be  Shem "  (Jamieson),  as 
might  have  been  anticipated  (this,  equally 
with  the  omission  of  Ham's  name,  lifts  the 
entire  patriarchal  utterance  out  of  the  region 
of  mere  personal  feeling),  but — Blessed — 
T|-1"l3  when  applied  to  God  signifies  an 
ascription  of  praise  (cf.  Ps.  cxliv.  15 ;  Ephes. 
i.  3) ;  when  applied  to  man,  an  invocation  of 
good  (cf.  ch.  xiv.  19,  20  ;  Ps.  cixviii.  1 ; 
Heb.  vii.  6) — be  the  Lord  God — literally, 
Jehovah,  Elohim  of  Shem  (cf.  ch.  xxiv. 
27) ;  Jehovah  being  the  proper  personal 
name  of  God,  of  whom  it  is  predicated  that 
he  is  the  Elohim  of  Shem  ;  equivalent  to  a 
statement  not  limply  that   Shem   should 


enjoy  "a  rare  and  trans  indent,"  "Divint 
or  heavenly,"  blessing  (Calvin),  or  "  a  most 
abundant  blessing,  reaching  its  highest  point 
in  the  promised  Seed "  (Luther) ;  but  that 
Jehovah,  the  one  living  and  true  God,  should 
be  his  God,  and  that  the  knowledge  and 
practice  of  the  true  religion  should  continue 
among  his  descendants,  with,  perhaps,  a 
hint  that  the  promised  Seed  should  spring 
from  his  loins  ((Ecolampadius,  Willet,  Mur- 
phy, Keil,  &c.)— of  Shem.  In  the  name 
Shem  (name,  renown)  there  may  lie  an  allu- 
sion to  the  spiritual  exaltation  and  advance- 
ment of  the  Semitic  nations  (vide  ch.  v.  32). 

And  Canaan  shall  be  his  servant  \uj  =» 
DiJ^  (Chaldee,  Syriac,  Arabic),  i.  e.  the 
two  brothers  (Delitzsch),  their  descendants 
(Knobel,  Keil);  Shem  and  Jehovah  (Bush) ;  « 

or  more  probably  =  '!?,  as  a  collective  sin- 
gular (cf.  Gesenius,  §  103,  2),  i.  e.  Shem, 
including  his  descendants  (LXX.,  airov ; 
Kalisch,  Lange,  Murphy). 

Ver.  27.— God.  Elohim.  If  vers.  18—27 
are  Jehovistic  (Tuch,  Bleek,  Colenso,  et  alii), 
why  Elohim  ?  Is  this  a  proof  that  the 
Jehovistic  document  was  revised  by  the 
Elohistic  author,  as  the  presence  of  Jehovah 
in  any  so-called  Elohistic  section  is  regarded 
as  an  interpolation  by  the  supplementer ! 
To  obviate  this  inference  Davidson  assigns 
vers.  20  —  27  to  his  redactor.  But  the 
change  of  name  is  sufficiently  explained 
when  we  remember  that  "Jehovah,  as  such, 
never  was  the  God  of  Japheth's  descendants, 
and  that  the  expression  would  have  been  as 
manifestly  improper  if  applied  to  him  as  it 
is  in  its  proper  place  applied  to  Shem" 
(Quarry,  p.  39?).     Shall  enlarge  Japheth. 

riS,.7  P&\  ;  literally,  shall  enlarge  or  make 
room  for  the  one  that  spreads  abroad ;  or, 
"may  God  concede  an  ample  space  to  Ja- 
pheth  "  (Gesenius).  "  Wide  let  God  make 
it  for  Japheth  "  (Keil).  "  God  give  enlarge- 
ment to  Japheth"  (Lange).  So  LXX.,  Vul- 
gate, Chaldee,  Syriac,  Arabic.  The  words 
form  a  paronomasia,  —  both  the  verb  and 
the  noun  being  connected  with  the  root 
nr)S,  to  spread  abroad ;  Hiph.,  to  cause  to 
lie  open,  hence  to  make  room  for, — and  refer 
to  the  widespread  diffusion  and  remarkable 
prosperity  of  the  Japhetic  nations.  The 
familiar  interpretation  which  renders  "  God 
will  persuade  Japheth,  the  persuadible,"  i.  e. 
incline  his  heart  by  the  gospel  so  that  ha 
may  dwell  in  the  tents  of  Shem  (Junius, 
Vatablus,  Calvin,  Willet,  Ainsworth),  is  dis- 
credited by  the  facts  (1)  that  the  verb  never 
means  to  persuade,  except  in  a  bad  sense  (cf. 
1  Kings  xxii.  20),  and  (2)  that  in  this  sense 

it  is  never  followed  by  ?,  but  always  by  tht 
accusative  (vide  Gesenius,  rub.   nom. }  et 


oh.  ix.  18— 2d.] 


THE  BOOS  OF  GENESIS. 


181 


Bush,  p.  109).  The  fulfilment  of  the  pro- 
phecy 18  apparent  from  the  circumstance 
that  "  prater  Europam "  (f vpt&irti  =  wide, 
extensive)  "maximam  Asise  partem,  totum 
demique  novum  orbem,  veluti  immensse 
magnitudinis  auctarium,  Japheto  posterique 
ejus  in  perpetuam  possessionem  obtigisse" 
(Fuller,  'Sac.  Miscel.,'lib.  ii.  c.  4,  quoted  by 
Glass) ;  cf.  ch.  x.  2 — 5,  in  which  Japheth  is 
given  as  the  progenitor  of  fourteen  peoples, 
to  which  are  added  the  inhabitants  of  the 
lands  washed  by  the  sea.  The  expansive 
power  of  Japheth  "refers  not  only  to  the 
territory  and  the  multitude  of  the  Japheth- 
ites,  but  also  to  their  intellectual  and  active 
faculties.  The  metaphysics  of  the  Hindoos, 
the  philosophy,  of  the  Greeks,  the  military 
prowess  of  the  Romans,  and  the  modern 
science  and  civilisation  of  the  world  are  due 
to  the  race  of  Japheth  "  (Murphy).  And  he 
— not  Elohim  (Philo.,  Theodoret,  Onkelos, 
Dathe,  Baumgarten,  et  alii),  which  (1)  sub- 
stantially repeats  the  blessing  already  given 
to  Shem,  and  (2)  would  introduce  an  allusion 
to  the  superiority  of  Shem's  blessing  in  what 
the  context  requires  should  be  an  unrestricted 
benediction  of  Japheth  ;  but  Japheth  (Cal- 
vin, Eosenmiiller,  Delitzsch,  Keil,  Lange, 
Kalisch,  Murphy,  Wordsworth,  'Speaker's 

Commentary')  —  shall  dwell.  tDB»,  from 
J3t^,  to  dwell ;  used  of  God  inhabiting  the 
heavens  (lsa.  lvii.  15),  dwelling  in  the  bush 


(Deut.  xxx.  16),  residing,  w  causing  hii 
name  to  dwell,  in  the  tabernacle  (Deut.  xii. 
11) ;  hence  supposed  to  favour  the  idea  that 
Elohim  is  the  subject ;  but  it  was  as  Jehovah 
(not  Elohim)  that  God  abode  between  the 
cherubim  (Exod.  xL  34).  In  the  tents  of 
Shem.  Not  the  tents  of  celebrity  (Gesenius, 
Vater,  Michaelis,  Do  Wette,  Knobel),  but 
the  tents  of  the  Shemitic  races,  with  allusion 
not  to  their  subjugation  by  the  Japheth- 
ites  (Clericus,  Von  Bohlen,  Boehart),  which 
would  not  be  in  keeping  with  the  former 
blessing  pronounced  upon  them  (Murphy), 
but  to  their  subsequent  contiguity  to,  and 
even  commingling  with,  but  especially  to 
their  participation  in  the  religious  privileges 
of,  the  Shemites  (the  Fathers,  Targum  Jo- 
nathan, Hieronymus,  Calvin,  Keil,  Lange, 
'Speaker's  Commentary,'  Murphy,  Candlish). 
The  fulfilment  of  the  prophecy  is  too  obvious 
to  call  for  illustration.  And  Canaan  shall 
be  his  servant- 

Vers.  -28,  29.— And  Noah  lived  after  the 
flood  three  hundred  and  fifty  years.  /.  «. 
to  the  fifty-eighth  year  of  the  life  of  Abram, 
and  was  thus  in  all  probability  a  witness  of 
the  building  of  the  tower  of  Babel,  and  of  the 
consequent  dispersion  of  mankind.  And  all 
the  days  of  Noah  were  nine  hundred  and 
fifty  years  :  and  he  died.  Tuch,  Bleek,  and 
Colenso  connect  these  verses  with  ver.  17, 
as  the  proper  continuation  of  the  Elohist's 
work. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  20 — 29. — The  future  unveiled.  I.  A  page  from  human  history.  The 
prominent  figure  an  old  man  (of  620  years  or  upwards) — always  an  object  of 
interest,  as  one  who  has  passed  through  life's  vicissitudes,  and  worthy  of  peculiar 
honour,  especially  if  found  walking  in  the  paths  of  righteousness  and  peace ;  an  old 
saint  who  had  long  been  distinguished  for  the  elevation  of  his  piety,  who  had  long 
maintained  his  fidelity  to  God  in  the  midst  of  evil  times,  who  had  just  enjoyed  a 
special  deliverance  at  the  hand  of  God,  and  who  up  to  the  period  referred  to  in  our 
text  had  brought  neither  stain  upon  his  piety  nor  cloud  upon  his  name  ;  the  second 
head  of  the  human  family,  and  in  a  manner  also  the  second  head  of  the  Church 
of  God ;  an  old  disciple,  who  probably  had  seen  Seth,  the  son  of  Adam,  and  walked 
with  Enoch,  and  spoken  with  Methuselah,  and  who  lived,  as  the  Scripture  tells  us, 
to  the  days  of  Abram;  clearly  one  of  the  most  distinguished  figures  that,  looking 
back,  one  is  able  to  detect  upon  the  canvas  of  time.  Well,  in  connection  with  this 
venerable  patriarch  we  learn— 1.  That  he  engaged  in  a  highly  honourable  occupation. 
(1)  It  was  to  his  credit  that  he  had  an  occupation.  Being  an  old  man,  he  might 
have  reasoned  that  his  working  days  were  done,  and  that  the  evening  of  life  might 
as  well  be  spent  in  leisure  and  meditation.  Having  three  stalwart  sons,  he  might 
have  deemed  it  proper  to  look  to  them  for  aid  in  his  declining  years.  And  knowing 
himself  to  be  an  object  of  Heaven's  peculiar  care,  he  might  have  trusted  God, would 
feed  him  without  his  working,  since  he  had  saved  him  without  his  asking.  But  from 
all  these  temptations— to  idleness,  to  dependence,  to  presumption — Noah  was  delivered, 
and  preferred,  as  all  good  Christians  should  do,  to  labour  to  thp  last,  working  while 
it  is  called  to-day,  to  depend  upon  themselves  rather  than  their  f  rieuds  and  neighbours, 
and  to  expect  God's  assistance  rather  when  they  try  to  help  themselves  than  when 
they  leare  it  all  to  him.    Then,  (2)  The  calling  he  engaged  in  uxu  an  honest  one. 


152  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  [cm.  nr.  18—29. 

Ha  wag  a  man  of  the  soil,  and  he  planted  a  vineyard  (vide  Exposition  on  vine  culti- 
ration).  God's  people  should  be  careful  in  selecting  honest  trades  and  professions 
for  themselves  and  their  children  (Rom.  xii.  17).  No  social  status,  or  public  estima- 
tion, or  profitable  returns  can  render  that  employment  honourable  which,  either  in  its 
nature  or  in  the  manner  of  its  carrying  on,  violates  the  law  of  God;  while  that  calling 
has  a  special  g'.ory  in  itself  and  a  special  value  in  the  sight  of  Heaven  which,  however 
humble  and  unremunerative,  respects  the  rights  of  men  and  the  rules  of  God.  2.  That 
\e  indulged  in  a  perfectly  legitimate  gratification.  "  He  drank  of  the  wine."  The  m 
was  nothing  wrong  in  Noah  eating  of  the  ripe  grapes  which  grew  upon  his  vines, 
or  drinking  of  their  juice  when  transformed  into  wine  (cf .  Deut.  xxv.  4 ;  1  Cor.  ix 
7).  The  sinfulness  of  making  fermented  liquors  cannot  be  established  so  long  as 
fermentation  is  a  natural  process  for  the  preservation  of  the  produce  of  the  grape, 
and  Scripture,  in  one  set  of  passages,  speaks  of  its  beneficial  influence  upon  man's 
physical  system  (Judges  ix.  13;  Ps.  civ.  15;  Prov.  xxxi.  6;  1  Tim.  v.  23),  and 
God  himself  employs  it  as  a  symbol  of  the  highest  and  choicest  blessings,  both 
temporal  and  spiritual  (Gen.  xxvii.  28,  37 ;  Prov.  ix.  2 ;  Isa.  xxv.  6 ;  Matt.  xxvi. 
28,  29),  and  Christ  made  it  at  the  marriage  feast  of  Cana  (John  ii.  9,  10).  Nor  is 
the  drinking  of  wines  and  other  fermented  liquors  condemned  in  Scripture  as  a 
violation  of  the  law  of  God.  That  there  are  special  seasons  when  abstinence  from 
this  as  well  as  other  gratifications  of  a  physical  kind  is  a  duty  (of.  Levit.  x.  9 ; 
Judges  xiii.  4,  14 ;  Ezek.  xliv.  21 ;  Dan.  i.  5,  8,  16 ;  Rom.  xiv.  21 ;  1  Cor.  x.  28), 
and  that  it  is  competent  to  any  Christian,  for  the  sake  of  his  weaker  brethren,  or  as 
a  means  of  advancing  his  own  spiritual  life,  or  for  the  glory  of  God,  to  renounce  his 
liberty  in  respect  of  drinks,  no  intelligent  person  will  doubt.  But  that  total  abstin- 
ence is  imperatively  required  of  every  one  is  neither  asserted  in  Scripture  nor  was 
it  taught  by  the  example  of  Christ  (Matt.  xi.  19),  and  to  enforce  it  upon  Christian 
men  as  a  term  of  communion  is  to  impose  on  them  a  yoke  of  bondage  which  Christ 
has  not  sanctioned,  and  to  supplant  Christian  liberty  by  bodily  asceticism.  3.  That 
he  fell  beneath  a  pitifully  sad  humiliation.  (1)  He  drank  to  the  extent  of  intoxi- 
sation.  Whatever  extenuations  may  be  offered  for  the  action  of  the  patriarch,  it 
cannot  be  regarded  in  any  other  light  than  a  sin.'  Considering  the  age  he  had  come 
to,  the  experience  he  had  passed  through,  the  position  which  he  occupied  as  the 
head  of  the  race  and  the  father  of  the  Church,  he  ought  to  have  been  "specially  upon 
his  guard.  While  permitting  man  a  moderate  indulgence  in  the  fruit  of  the  vine, 
the  word  of  God  especially  condemns  the  sin  of  drunkenness  (cf.  Prov.  xxiii.  20 ; 
Isa.  v.  11,  22;  Luke  xxi;  34;  Rom.  xiii.  13;  1  Cor.  v.  11;  vi.  10;  Gal.  v.  21; 
Ephes.  v.  18 ;  i  Thess.  v.  8).  (2)  His  immodesty.  The  veil  of  modesty  in  which 
God  designs  that  every  sinful  human  being  should  be  wrapt  should  be  jealously 
guarded  from  infringement  by  any  action  either  of  ourselves  or  others. 

Lessons: — 1.  "Let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth  take  heed  lest  he  fall"  (1  Cor. 
x.  12).  Remember  Adam,  Noah,  Abraham,  David,  Peter.  2.  "  Be  not  drunk  with 
wine,  wherein  is  excess ;  but  be  filled  with  the  Spirit"  (Ephes.  v.  18).  There  is 
scarcely  a  sin  to  which  intoxication  may  not  lead ;  there  is  no  infallible  cure  for 
drunkenness  but  being  filled  with  the  Spirit.  3.  "  Be  sure  thy  sin  will  find  thee  out" 
(Num.  xxxii.  23).  "  There  is  nothing  covered  that  shall  not  be  revealed ;  neither 
hid  that  shall  not  be  known." 

II.  A  revelation  of  HUMAN  character.  On  the  threshold  of  thfl  new  world, 
like  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  the  opening  of  the  gospel  dispensatioi  (takeii.  35), 
the  patriarch  Noah  appears  to  have  been  set  for  the  fall  and  rising  again  of  many, 
snd  for  a  sign  to  be  spoken  against  that  the  thoughts  of  many  hearts  might  b« 
revealed.  All  unconsciously  to  him  his  vine-planting  and  wine-drinking  become  the 
occasion  of  unveiling  the  different  characters  of  his  sons  in  respect  of — 1.  Filial 
piety,  which  Shem  and  Japheth  remarkably  displayed,  but  of  which  Ham,  the 
youngest  son,  appears  to  have  been  destitute.  There  was  nothing  sinful  in  Ham's 
having  witnessed  what  should  never  have  been  exposed  to  view,  and  there  is  no 
reason  to  credit  any  of  the  idle  rabbinical  legends  which  allege  that  Ham  perpe- 
trated a  particular  outrage  upon  his  father;  but  Ham  was  manifestly  wanting  in 
that  filial  reverence  and  honour  which  were  due  to  his  aged  parent,  in  that  he  gazed 
with  delight  upon  the  melancholy  spectacle  of  his  fathers  shame  —  in  singulai 
contrast  to  the  respectful  and  modest  behaviour  of  Shem  and  Japheth,  who  "  went 


o«.  ii.  18—29.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENE8I8.  16f 

with  their  faces  backward,"  so  that  "they  saw  not  their  father's  nakedness." 
2.  Tender  charity*  In  addition  to  the  mocking  eye  which  gloated  over  the 
patriarch's  infirmity,  there  was  present  in  the  heart  of  Ham  an  evil  and  malicious 
spirit,  which  led  him  to  inflict  another  and  a  severer  indignity  upon  his  father's  fame. 
The  faults  of  even  bad  men  are  required  by  religion  to  be  covered  up  rather  than 
paraded  in  public  view.  Much  more  the  indiscretions,  failings,  and  sins  of  good 
men.  Most  of  all  the  faults  of  a  father.  But,  alas,  instead  of  sorrowing  for  his 
father's  overthrow,  Ham  obviously  took  pleasure  in  it ;  instead  of  charitably  trying 
to  excuse  the  old  man,  nay,  without  even  waiting  to  ascertain  whether  an  explanation 
of  his  conduct  might  be  possible,  he  appears  to  have  put  the  worst  construction  on  it ; 
instead  of  doing  what  he  could  to  hide  his  father's  sin  and  shame,  he  rushes  forth 
and  makes  it  known  to  his  brothers.  But  these  brothers,  with  another  spirit,  without 
offering  any  apology  for  their  father's  error,  perhaps  instinctively  perceiving  it  to  be 
altogether  unjustifiable,  take  the  first  loose  garment  they  can  find,  and,  with  a  beau- 
tiful modesty  as  well  as  a  becoming  piety,  casting  it  around  their  shoulders,  enter 
their  father's  presence  with  their  faces  backward,  and  cover  up  his  prostrate  form. 
Let  the  incident  remind  us — (1)  That  if  nothing  can  extenuate  a  father's  falling  into 
sin,  much  more  can  nothing  justify  a  son  for  failing  in  respect  towards  his  father. 
(2)  That  it  is  a  sure  sign  of  depravity  in  a  child  when  he  mocks  at  a  parent's  infirm 
itieB  and  publishes  a  parent's  faults.  (3)  That  filial  piety  ever  seeks  to  extenuate 
and  to  hide  rather  than  to  aggravate  and  blaze  abroad  a  parent's  weaknesses  and 
sins.  (4)  That  children  in  the  same  family  may  be  distinguished  by  widely 
different  dispositions.  (5)  That  a  son  may  have  pious  parents  and  experience  many 
providential  mercies  for  their  sakes,  and  yet  be  at  heart  a  child  of  the  devil.  (6) 
That  that  which  makes  one  son  differ  from  another  in  the  same  family  is  Divine 
grace  ;  and  (7)  that  the  characters  of  children,  and  of  men  in  general,  are  oftentimes 
revealed  at  the  most  unexpected  times,  and  by  the  most  improbable  events. 

III.  A  disclosure  of  human  destiny.  Awaking  from  his  wine,  the  patriarch 
became  aware  of  what  had  taken  place.  Discerning  in  the  conduct  of  his  sons  an 
indication  of  divergence  in  their  characters,  recognising  in  their  different  characters 
a  repetition  of  what  had  taken  place  at  the  commencement  of  the  first  era  of  the 
world's  history,  viz.,  the  division  of  mankind  into  a  holy  and  a  wicked  line,  foreseeing 
also,  through  the  help  of  inspiration,  the  development  of  the  world's  population  into 
three  different  tribes  or  races,  he  foretells,  acting  in  all  under  the  Spirit's  guidance, 
the  future  destinies  that  should  await  them.  His  utterance  takes  the  form  of  a  pre- 
diction, in  which  he  declares — 1.  The  degradation  of  Canaan.  "  Cursed  be  Canaan; 
a  servant  of  servants  shall  he  be  to  his  brethren."  (1)  So  far  as  Ham  was  con- 
cerned this  judgment  was  severe,  as  being  imposed  upon  his  youngest  and  probably 
his  best  beloved  son;  appropriate — he  for  whose  sake  it  had  been  inflicted  having 
been  his  father's  youngest  son ;  merciful,  as  falling  not  on  all  his  race,  but  only  upon 
one  son  and  his  descendants.  N.B. — God's  judgments  upon  sinful  men  are  iilways 
proportioned  in  severity  to  the  guilt  which  brings  them,  adjusted  to  the  natures  of 
the  sins  for  which  they  come,  and  mixed  with  mercy  in  the  experience  of  the  persons 
on  whom  they  fall.  (2)  So  far  as  Canaan  was  concerned  the  doom  of  servitude  was 
sovereignly  imposed.  There  is  no  evidence  that  Canaan  was  at  all  connected  with 
the  incident  that  happened  in  his  grandfather's  tent.  That  the  penalty  of  his 
father's  offence  was  made  to  fall  on  him  of  all  his  father's  sons  was  in  virtue  of  that 
high  prerogative  which  belongs  to  God  alone  of  assigning  to  men  and  nations  their 
lots  on  earth  (cf.  Ps.  lxxv.  7  ;  Isa.  xli.  2 ;  Dan.  v.  19  ;  iv.  35  ;  Acts  xvii.  26).  Richlg 
merited.  Whether  Canaan  had  begun  by  this  time  to  display  any  of  the  dispositions 
of  his  father  cannot  certainly  be  known  ;  but  in  after  years,  when  the  prophecy  was 
nearing  its  accomplishment,  it  is  well  known  that  the  peculiar  sins  for  which  the 
Canaanites  were  destroyed  or  subjected  to  bondage  were  allied  to  those  which  are 
referred  to  in  the  text  (vide  Levit.  xviii  27).  JZxactly  fulfilled  by  the  subjugation 
of  the  land/of  Canaan  under  Joshua  and  David,  though  here  it  should  be  noted  that 
the  enslavement  of  the  African  negro,  who,  though  a  Hamite,  is  not  a  Canaanite, 
was  a  daring  defiance  of  those  limits  within  which  the  supreme  Judge  had  confined 
the  sentence  pronounced 'upon  the  Humite  race.  Mercifully  cancelled  by  the  later 
promise  which  was  given  to  Abraham,  and  is  now  fulfilled  in  the  incarnation  of 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ — of  a  seed  in  whom  all  the  families  of  the  earth  should  be 


184  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESia  [ch.  a.  18—29. 


blessed  (Gen.  xxii.  18).  2.  The  exaltation,  of  Shem.  "  Blessed  be  Jehovah,  the 
Elohim  of  Shem,"  &c,  in  which  description  was  the  promise  of  a  threefold  exaltation. 
(1)  To  supremacy  in  the  Church,  as  being  possessed  of  the  knowledge  of  the  true 
religion,  as  being  enriched  with  the  fulness  of  blessing  that  is  in  Jehovah  Elohim, 
as  being  the  Divinely-appointed  medium  through  which  the  first  promise  of  the 
woman's  seed  was  to  be  fulfilled,  and  he  was  to  come  whose  name  should  be  above 
every  name.  (2)  To  dominion  in  the  world.  In  virtue  of  the  religious  ascendancy 
conferred  upon  him,  Shem  was  to  be  possessed  of  power  to  influence  other  nations 
for  good,  and  in  particular  to  receive  into  his  service,  for  education  as  well  as  for 
assistance,  the  descendants  of  Canaan.  (3)  To  renown  throughout  all  time.  As 
much  as  this  perhaps  is  hinted  at  in  the  name  Shem  ;  and  to  this  day  the  glory  which 
encircled  the  Shemitic  nations  of  antiquity  has  not  faded,  but  continues  to  shine  down 
the  centuries  with  undiminished  lustre.  3.  The  enlargement  of  Japheth.  "  God 
shall  enlarge  Japheth,  and  he  shall  dwell  in  the  tents  of  Shem,  and  Canaan  shall  be 
his  servant."  A  promise  of— 1.  Territorial  expansion.  While  the  Shemite  tribes 
should  remain  in  a  manner  concentrated  in  the  valley  of  the  Tigris  and  Euphrates, 
the  Japhethites  should  spread  themselves  abroad  westward  as  the  pioneers  of  civilisa- 
tion. 2.  Spiritual  enrichment,  by  being  brought  ultimately  to  share  in  the  religious 
privileges  and  blessings  of  the  Shemites — a  prediction  which  has  been  abundantly 
fulfilled  by  the  admission  of  the  Gentiles  to  the  Christian  Church.  3.  Civilising 
influence.  As  Canaan  was  subjected  to  Shem  in  order,  while  he  served,  to  be 
instructed  in  the  faith  of  his  master,  so  does  he  seem  to  have  been  placed  beneath  the 
sway  of  Javheth,  that  Japheth  might  lead  him  forth  to  a  participation  of  the  peculiar 
blessings  which  he  has  been  commissioned  to  bestow  upon  the  other  nations  of  the 
t art  h. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  18 — 29. — The  threefold  distribution  of  the  human  race — into  the  Shemitic, 
Hamitic,  and  Japhetic  families.  The  fall  of  Noah  was  through  wine :  not,  indeed,  a 
forbidden  product  of  the  earth,  but,  like  the  fruit  of  the  tree  of  knowledge  of  good 
and  evil,  representing  a  tremendous  responsibility. 

I.  The  fertility  of  sin.  It  was  out  of  drunkenness  that  the  widespread  curse 
of  the  Hamitic  nations  came  forth.  And  the  drunkenness  is  closely  connected  with 
other  sins  —  (1)  shameful  degradation  both  of  father  and  son,  (2)  alienation  of 
brethren,  and  (3)  human  slavery.  What  a  picture  of  the  forthcoming  results  of 
intemperance  and  self-ind  ulgence  1 

II.  The  contrast  between  the  blessing  and  the  curse  in  their  working  out. 
Noah's  prediction  of  the  blessing  on  Shem  and  Japheth  and  the  curse  upon  Ham  may 
be  taken  as  an  outline  of  the  religious  history  of  the  world.  1.  The  Shemitic  races 
are  the  source  of  religious  light  to  the  rest.  "Blessed  be  the  Lord  God  of  Shem." 
"Jehovah,"  the  Shemitic  revelation,  is  the  foundation  of  all  other.  2.  The  Japhetic 
races  are  the  great  colonisers  and  populators  of  the  world,  overflowing  their  own 
boundaries,  dwelling  in  the  tents  of  Shem,  both  as  inquirers  after  Shemitic  light  and 
in  fiiendly  co-operation  with  Shemitic  civilisation.  3,  The  Hamitic  races  are  serv- 
ants of  servants  unto  their  brethren,  partly  by  their  degradation,  but  partly  also  by 
their  achievements.  The  Phoenician,  Assyrian,  Egyptian,  Ethiopian,  and  Canaanitish 
races,  although  by  no  means  always  in  a  lower  political  state  than  the  rest  of  the 
world,  have  yet  been  subdued  by  Japhetic  and  Shemitic  conquerors,  and  handed 
down  their  wealth  and  acquirements  to  the  Northern,  Western,  and  Eastern  world. 

III.  The  renovation  of  the  earth  under  the  new  covenant.  After  the  Flood 
Noah  lived  the  half  week  of  centuries,  and  thus  laid  firmly  the  foundations  of  a  new 
earth.  Yet,  prolonged  as  was  that  life  of  him  who  had  "found  grace  in  the  eyes  of 
the  Lord,"  it  came  to  an  end  at  last.  He  died.  The  one  became  the  three.  1.  The 
blessing  handed  on.  The  type  of  rest  and  comfort  was  spread  through  the  redeemed 
earth.  And  from  henceforth  we  have  to  deal  not  with  the  small  beginnings  of  the 
rescued  race,  but  with  the  vast  multitude  of  human  beings.  2.  New  sphere  of  trial. 
Under  the  light  of  the  new  covenant  again  the  new  race  were  placed  upon  their  trial, 
that  again  the  redeeming  mercy  of  him  who  willeth  not  the  death  of  his  creatures 
may  be  made  manifest  in  the  midst  of  the  teeming  earth,  with  its  threefold  humanity, 
spreading  eastward,  westward,  northward,  and  southward. — R. 


m.  x.  1—32.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


155 


PART    IL 


THE  POST-DILUVIAN  AGE  OP  THE  WOELD.    Oh.  X.  1— XI  26. 


FROM  THE  DELUGE  TO  THE  CALL  OF  ABRAM. 


§  5.  The  Generations  of  the  Sons  of  Noah  (Cn.  X.  1 — XI.  9). 


L  The  historical  credibility  of  the  present 
section  has  been  challenged.  1.  On  account 
of  a  fancied  resemblance  to  the  ethnographic 
mythologies  of  Greece,  the  genealogical  table 
of  the  nations  has  been  relegated  to  the 
category  of  fictitious  invention.  It  has  been 
assigned  by  many  critics  to  a  post-Mosaic 
period,  to  the  days  of  Joshua  (Delitzsch), 
to  the  age  of  Hebrew  intercourse  with  the 
Phenician  Canaanites  (Knobel),  to  the  era 
of  the  exile  (Bohlen) ;  and  the  specific  pur- 
pose of  its  composition  has  been  declared  to 
be  a  desire  to  gratify  the  .national  pride  of 
the  Hebrews  by  tracing  their  descent  to  the 
first  born  son  of  Noah,  that  their  rights  might 
appear  to  have  a  superior  foundation  to 
those  of  other  nations  (Hartmann).  But 
the  primogeniture  of  Shem  is  at  least  doubt- 
ful, if  not  entirely  incorrect,  Japheth  being 
the  oldest  of  Noah's  sons  (vide  ch.  v.  32  ;  x. 
21) ;  while  it  is  a  gratuitous  assumption  that 
not  until  the  days  of  the  monarchy,  or  the 
exile,  did  the  Israelites  become  acquainted 
with  foreign  nations.  The  authenticity  and 
genuineness  of  the  present  register,  it  is 
justly  remarked  by  Havernick,  are  guaranteed 
by  the  chronicler  (ch.  i.  1).  "In  the  time 
of  the  chronicler  nothing  more  was  known 
from  antiquity  concerning  the  origin  of 
nations  than  what  Genesis  supplied.  Sup- 
posing, then,  that  some  inquiring  mind 
composed  this  table  of  nations  from  merely 
reflecting  on  the  nations  that  happened  to 
exist  at  the  same  period,  and  attempting  to 
give  them  a  systematic  arrangement,  how 
could  it  possibly  happen  that  his  turn  of 
mind  should  be  in  such  complete  harmony 
with  that  of  the  other?  This  could  only 
■aim  from  the  one  recognising  the  decided 


superiority  of  the  other's  account,  which  here 
lies  in  nothing  else  than  the  historical  truth 
itself  belonging  to  it"  (Intro.,  §  17).  And 
the  historical  truthfulness  of  the  Mosaic 
document  is  further  strikingly  authenticated 
by  the  accredited  results  of  modern  ethno- 
logical science,  which,  having  undertaken 
by  a  careful  analysis  of  facts  to  establish  a 
classification  of  races,  has  divided  mankind 
into  three  primitive  groups  (Shemitic,  Aryan, 
Turanian  or  Allophylian),  corresponding  not 
obscurely  to  the  threefold  arrangement  of 
the  present  table,  and  presenting  in  each 
group  the  leading  races  that  Genesis  assigns 
to  the  several  sons  of  Noah  ;  as,  e.  g. ,  allo- 
cating to  the  Indo-European  family,  aB  M  Mses 
has  done  to  the  sons  of  Japheth,  the  principal 
races  of  Europe,  with  the  great  Asiatic  race 
known  as  Aryan  ;  to  the  Shemitic,  the  Assy- 
rians, Syrians,  Hebrews,  and  Joktanite  Arabs, 
which  appear  among  the  sons  of  Shem  in 
the  present  table  ;  and  to  the  Allophylian, 
the  Egyptians,  Ethiopians,  Southern  Arabs, 
and  early  Babylonians,  which  the  primitive 
ethnologist  of  Genesis  also  writes  among  the 
sons  of  Ham  (cf.  Rawlinson's  'Hist.  II  his. 
of  0.  T.,'  p.  23).  2.  The  narrative  of  the 
building  of  the  tower  of  Babel  has  also  been 
impugned,  and  that  chiefly  on  two  grounds : 
viz.,  (1)  an  incorrect  derivation  of  the  term 
Babel,  which  is  now  said  to  have  no  con- 
nection whatever  with  the  confusion  of 
tongues,  but  to  be  the  word  "Bab-il,"  the 
house  or  gate  of  God,  or  "  Bab-Bel,"  the 
gate  or  court  of  Belus ;  and  (2)  an  incorrect 
explanation  of  the  present  diversity  of 
tongues  among  mankind,  which  modern 
philology  has  now  shown  to  be  due  to  local 
separation,  and  not  at  all  to  a  miiaculow 


1M 


THE  BOOK  OF  GEWESI8. 


[ch.  x.  1— M. 


Interference  with  the  organs  or  the  faculty 
of  speech.  To  each  of  these  objections  a 
specific  reply  will  be  returned  in  the  expo- 
sition of  the  text  {g.  v.);  in  the  mean  time 
it  may  he  stated  that  there  are  not  wanting 
sufficiently  numerous  testimonies  fron,  an- 
cient history,  archaeological  research,  and 
philological  inquiry  to  authenticate  this 
most  interesting  portion  of  the  Divine  record. 
II.  The  literary  unity  of  the  present 
section  has  been  assailed.  Tuch  ascribes  ch. 
x.  to  the  Elohist  and  ch.  xi.  1 — 9  to  the 
Jehovist ;  and  with  this  Bleek  and  Vaihinger 
agree,  except  that  they  apportion  ch.  x.  8— 
12  to  the  Jehovist.  Davidson  assigns  to 
him  the  whole  of  ch.  x.,  with  the  exception 


of  the  expression  ' '  every  one  after  his  tongue  * 
(ver.  6),  the  similar  expressions  (vers.  20, 
31),  the  story  of  Nimrod  commencing  at 
"  he  began  "  (ver.  8),  ver.  21,  and  the  state- 
ment beginning  "for"  (ver.  25),  all  of  which, 
with  ch.  xi.  1—9,  he  places  to  the  credit 
of  his  redactor.  But  the  literary  unity  of 
the  entire  section  is  so  apparent  that  Colensc 
believes  both  passages,  "the  table  of  nations' 
and  "  the  confusion  of  tongues,"  to  be  the 
work  of  the  Jehovist ;  aDd  certainly  the 
latter  narrative  is  represented  in  so  intimate 
a  connection  with  the  former  that  it  is  much 
more  likely  to  have  been  composed  by  the 
original  historian  than  inserted  later  as  a 
happy  afterthought  by  a  post-exilian  editor. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  X 
It  is  impossible  to  exaggerate  the  import- 
ance of  this  ethnological  table.  Whether 
regarded  from  a  geographical,  a  political,  or 
a  theocratical  standpoint,  "  this  unparalleled 
list,  the  combined  result  of  reflection  and 
deep  research,"  is  "no  less  valuable  as  a 
historical  document  than  as  a  lasting  proof 
of  the  brilliant  capacity  of  the  Hebrew 
mind."  Undoubtedly  the  earliest  effort  of 
the  human  intellect  to  exhibit  in  a  tabulated 
form  the  geographical  distribution  of  the 
human  race,  it  bears  unmistakable  witness 
in  its  own  structure  to  its  high  antiquity, 
occupying  itself  least  with  the  Japhetic 
tribes  which  wore  furthest  from  the  theo- 
cratic centre,  and  were  latest  in  attaining 
to  historic  eminence,  and  enlarging  with 
much  greater  minuteness  of  detail  on  those 
Hamitic  nations,  the  Egyptian,  Canaanite, 
and  Arabian,  which  were  soonest  developed, 
and  with  which  the  Hebrews  came  most 
into  contact  in  the  initial  stages  of  their 
career.  It  describes  the  rise  of  states,  and, 
consistently  with  all  subsequent  historical 
and  archaeological  testimony,  gives  the  promi- 
nence to  the  Egyptian  or  Arabian  Hamites, 
as  the  first  founders  of  empires.  It  exhibits 
th$  soparation  of  the  Shemites  from  the 
other  sons  of  Noah,  and  the  budding  forth 
of  the  line  of  promise  in  the  family  of 
Arphaxad.  While  thus  useful  to  the  geo- 
grapher, the  historian,  the  politician,  it  is 
specially  serviceable  to  the  theologian,  as 


enabling  him  to  trace  the  descent  of  the 
woman's  seed,  and  to  mark  the  fulfilments  ol 
Scripture  prophecies  concerning  the  nations 
of  the  earth.  In  the  interpretation  of  the 
names  which  are  here  recorded,  it  is  obviously 
impossible  in  every  instance  to  arrive  at 
certainty,  in  some  cases  the  names  of  indi- 
viduals being  mentioned,  while  in  others 
it  is  as  conspicuously  those  of  peoples. 

Ver.  1.  -Now  these  are  the  generations 
of  the  sons  of  Noah  (cf.  ch.  v.  1 ;  vi.  9),  Shem, 
Ham,  and  Japheth.  Not  the  order  of  age, 
but  of  theocratic  importance  (vide  ch.  v.  32). 
And  unto  them  were  sons  horn  (cf.  ch.  ix. 
1,  7,  19,  22)  after  the  flood.  An  indication 
of  the  punctum  temporis  whence  the  period 
embraced  in  the  present  section  takes  its 
departure. 

Ver.  2. — The  sons  of  Japheth  arc  first 
mentioned  not  because  Japheth  was  the 
eldest  of  the  three  brothers,  although  that 
was  true,  but  because  of  the  greater  distance 
of  the  Japhetic  tribes  from  the  theocratic 
centre,  the  Hamites  having  always  been  much 
more  nearly  situated  to  and  closely  connected 
with  the  Shemites  than  they.  The  imme- 
diate descendants  of  Japheth,  whose  name, 
'ldirtrog,  occurs  again  in  the  mythology  of 
a  Japhetic  race,  were  fourteen  in  number, 
seven  sons  and  seven  grandsons,  each  of 
which  became  the  progcuitor  of  one  of  the 
primitive  nations.  Goirer.  A  people  in- 
habiting "the  sides  of  the  north"  (Ezek. 
xxxviii.  6) ;  the  Galatse  of  the  Greeks  (Jose- 
phus,  '  Ant. ,'  i.  6) ;  the  Chomarii,  a  nation  in 
Bactriana  on  the  Oxus  (Shulthess,  Kalisch) ; 
but  more  generally  the  Cimmerians  of 
Homer  ('Odyss.,'  xi.  13—19),  whose  abodes 
were  the  shores  of  the  Caspian  and  Euxine, 


oh.  x.  1—32.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


151 


whence  they  seem  to  have  spread  themselves 
over  Europe  as  far  west  as  the  Atlantic, 
leaving  traces  of  their  presence  in  the  Cimbri 
of  North  Germany  and  the  Cymri  in  Wales 
(Keil,  Lange,  Murphy,  Wordsworth, '  Speak- 
er's Commentary').  And  Magog.  A  fierce 
and  warlike  people  presided  over  by  Gog  (an 
appellative  name,  like  the  titles  Pharaoh  and 
Csesar,  and  corresponding  with  the  Turkish 
Chak,  the  Tartarian  Kak,  and  the  Mongo- 
lian Gog:  Kalisqh),  whose  complete  destruc- 
tion was  predicted  by  Ezekiel  (chs.  xxxviii. 
xxxix.) ;  generally  understood  to  be  the  Scy- 
thians, whose  territory  lay  upon  the  borders  of 
the  sea  of  Asoph,  and  in  the  Caucasus.  In  the 
Apocalypse  (ch.  xx.  8 — 10)  Gog  and  Magog 
appear  as  two  distinct  nations  combined 
against  the  Church  of  God.  And  Madai. 
The  inhabitants  of  Media  (Mada  in  the  cunei- 
form inscriptions),  so  called  because  believed 
to  be  situated  iripi  fitatfv  rffv  'Aaiav  (Polyb. 
v.  44)  on  the  south-west  shore  of  the  Caspian. 
And  Javan.  Identical  with  'lawv  (Greek), 
Javana  (Sanscrit),  Juna  (Old  Persian),  Jou- 
nan  (Rosetta  Stone) ;  allowed  to  be  the 
father  of  the  Greeks,  who  in  Scripture  aie 
9tyled  Javan  (vide  Isa.  lxvi.  19  ;  Ezek. 
xxvii.  13  ;  Dan.  viii.  21  ;  x.  20 ;  Joel  iii.  6). 
And  Tubal,  and  Meshech.  Generally  asso- 
ciated in  Scripture  as  tributaries  of  Magog 
(Ezek.  xxxviii.  2,  3  ;  xxxix.  .1)  ;  recognised 
as  the  Iberians  and  Moschi  in  the  north  of 
ATmenia,  between  the  sources  of  the  Tigris 
and  Euphrates,  and  the  Black  Sea  (Josephus, 
Knobel,  Lange,  Kalisch).  And  Tiras.  The 
ancestor  of  the  Thracians  (Josephus),  of  the 
Tyrrheni,  a  branch  of  the  Pelasgians  (Tuch), 
of  the  Asiatic  tribes  round  the  Taurus 
(Kalisch),  in  support  of  which  last  is  a  cir- 
cumstance mentioned  by  Rawlinson,  that  on 
the  old  Egyptian  monuments  Mashuash 
and  Tuirash,  and  upon  the  Assyrian  Tubal 
and  Misek,  stand  together  as  here.  Tiras 
occurs  nowhere  else  in  Scripture. 

Ver.  3. — And  the  sons  of  Gomer ;  Ash- 
kenaz.  Axenus,  the  ancient  name  of  the 
Euxine,  is  supposed  to  favour  Phrygia  and 
Bithynia  as  the  locality  possessed  by  Aske- 
naz  (Bochart) ;  Iskus,  equivalent  to  Ask, 
Ascanios,  the  oldest  son  of  the  Germanic 
Maunus,  to  point  out  Germany  as  his  abode 
(Jewish  commentators)  ;  but  Jer.  li.  27 
seems  to  indicate  the  region  between  the 
Euxine  and  the  Caspian .  Kalisch,  following 
Josephus,  identifies  the  name  with  the  ancient 
town  Rhagse,  one  day's  journey  to  the  south 
of  tho  Caspian.  Murphy  and  Poole,  on  the 
authority  of  Diodorus  Siculus,  believe  the 
Germans  may  have  been  a  colony  of  the 
Ashkenians.  And  Biphath.  Diphath  (1 
Chron.  i.  6) — the  Paphlagonians  (Josephus) ; 
more  generally  the  tribes  about  the  Riphasan 
mountains,  on  the  north  of  the  Caspian 
(Enobel,    Kalisch,    Clericus     Rosenmuller, 


Murphy, '  Speaker's  Commentary ') ;  but  boti. 
are  uncertain  (Keil).  AndTogarmah.  Men- 
tioned again  in  Ezek.  xxvii.  1 4  ;  xxxviii.  6  j 
the  Phrygians  (Josephus),  tho  Cappadocians 
(Bochart),  the  Armenians  (Michaelis,  Gese- 
nius,  Rosenmuller),  the  Taurians,  inhabiting 
the  Crimea  (Kalisch).  The  tradition  preserved 
by  Moses  Chorensis,  that  the  ancestor  of  tho 
Armenians  was  the  son  of  Thorgom,  the  son 
of  Gomer,  is  commonly  regarded  as  deciding 
the  question. 

Ver.  4.— And  the  sons  of  Javan  ;  Elishah 
The  isles  of  Elishah  are  praised  by  Ezekie 
(xxvii.  7)  for  their  blue  and  purple  ;  sup 
posed  to  have  been  Elis  in  the  Peloponnesus, 
famous  for  its  purple  dyes  (Bochart) ;  Moiii 
(Josephus,  Knobel) ;  Hellas  (Michaelis,  Ro- 
senmuller, Kalisch)  ;  without  doubt  a  mari- 
time people  of  Grecian  stock  ('Speaker's  Com- 
mentary ).  And  Tarshish.  Tarsus  in  Cilicia 
(Josephus)  ;  but  rather  Tartessus  in  Spain 
(Eusebius,  Michaelis,  Bochart,  Kalisch).  Bib- 
lical notices  represent  Tarshish  as  a  wealthy 
and  flourishing  seaport  town  towards  the  west 
(vide  1  Kings  x.  22  ;  Ps.  xlviii.  7  ;  lxxii.  10 ; 
Isa.  lx.  9  ;  lxvi.  19  ;  Jer.  x.  9  ;  Ezek.  xxvii. 
12).  Kittim.  Chittim  (Num.  xxiv.  24) ; 
Citium  in  Cyprus  (Josephus),  though  latterly 
tho  name  appears  to  have  been  extended  to 
Citium  in  Macedonia  (Alexander  the  Great 
is  called  the  king  of  Chittim,  1  Mace,  i  1  ; 
viii.  5),  and  the  colonies  Which  settled  on 
the  shores  of  Italy  and  Greece  (Bochart, 
Keil,  Kalisch).  Isa.  xxiii.  1,  12  ;  Dan.  xi. 
30  describe  it  as  a  maritime  people.  And 
Dodanim.  Dordona  in  Epirus  (Michielis, 
Rosenmiiller) ;  tho  Dardanians,  or  Trojans 
(Gesenius) ;  the  Dauiiians  of  South  Italy 
(Kalisch) ;  the  Rhodani  in  Gaul,  reading 
as  in  1  Chron.  i  7  (Bochart).  Josephus 
omits  the  name,  and  Scripture  does  not 
again  mention  it. 

Ver.  5. — By  these  were  the  isles  of  the 
Gentiles.  Sea -washed  coasts  as  well  as 
islands  proper  (of.  Isa.  xlii.  4  with  Matt, 
xii.  21).  Isaiah  (ch.  xx.  6)  styles  Canaan 
an  isle  (cf.  Peloponnesus).  The  expression' 
signifies  maritime  countries.  Divided  in 
their  lands;  every  one  after  his  tongue. 
Indicating  a  time  posterior  to  the  building 
of  Babel  (ch.  xi.  1).  After  their  families. 
'Bv  mie  0uXaIc  abruiv  (LXX.) ;  in  their  tribes 
or  clans,  a  lesser  subdivision  than  the  next. 
In  their  nations.  The  division  here  ex- 
hibited is  fourfold :  (1)  geographical,  (2)  dia- 
lectical, (3)  tribal,  and  (4)  national.  The  first 
defines  the  territory  occupied,  and  the  second 
the  language  spoken  by  the  Japhethites  ;  the 
third  their  immediate  descent,  and  the  fourth 
the  national  group  to  which  they  severally 
belonged. 

Ver.  6.- -And  the  sons  of  Ham.  Theso, 
who  occupy  the  second  place,  that  the  lirt 
might  conclude  with  the  Shemiteg  as  thp 


168 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


Lch.  x.  1— 82. 


line  of  promise,  number  thirty,  of  whom 
only  four  were  immediate  descendants.  Their 
territory  generally  embraced  the  southern 
portions  of  the  globe.  Hence  the  name 
Ham  has  been  connected  with  DDPI,  to  be 
warm,  though  Kalisch  declares  it  to  be  not 
of  Hebrew,  but  Egyptian  origin,  appearing 
in  the  Chme  of  the  Rosetta  Stone.  The  most 
usual  ancient  name  of  the  country  was  Kem, 
the  black  land.  Scripture  speaks  of  Egypt  as 
the  land  of  Ham  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  51  ;  cv.  23  ;  cvi. 
22).  Cush.  Ethiopia,  including  Arabia  "  quae 
mater  est,"  and  Abyssinia  "quse  colonia" 
(Michaelis,  Rosenmuller).  The  original  settle- 
ment of  Cush,  however,  is  believed  to  have 
been  on  the  Upper  Nile,  whence  he  afterwards 
spread  to  Arabia,  Babylonia,  India  (Enobel, 
Kalisch,  Lange,  Rawlinson).  Murphy  thinks 
he  may  have  started  from  the  Caucasus,  the 
Caspian,  and  the  Cossaei  of  Khusistan,  and 
migrated  south  (to  Egypt)  and  east  (to  India). 
Josephus  mentions  that  in  his  day  Ethiopia 
was  called  Cush  ;  the  Syriac  translates  avrjp 
'AiWoi//  (Acts  viii.  27)  by  Cuschaeos  ;  the 
ancient  Egyptian  name  of  Ethiopia  was 
Keesh,  Kish,  or  Kush  ('  Records  of  the  Past,' 
iv.  7).  The  Cushites  are  described  as  of  a 
black  colour  (Jer.  xiii.  23)  and  of  great  stature 
(Isa.  xlv.  14).  And  Mizraim.  A  dual  form 
probably  designed  to  represent  the  two 
Egypts,  upper  and  lower  (Gesenius,  Keil, 
Kalisch),  though  it  has  been  discovered  in 
ancient  Egyptian  as  the  name  of  a  Hittite 
chief  (circa  b.c.  1300,  contemporary  with 
Rcuneses  II.),  written  in  hieroglyphics 
M'azrima,  Ma  being  the  sign  for  the  dual. 
The  old  Egyptian  name  is  Kemi,  Chemi, 
with  obvious  reference  to  Ham  ;  the  name 
Egypt  being  probably  derived  from  Kaphtah, 
the  land  of  Ptah.  The  singular  form  Mazor 
is  found  in  later  books  (2  Kings  xix.  24  ; 
Isa.  xix.  6  ;  xxxv.  25),  and  usually  denotes 
Lower  Egypt.  And  Phut  Phet  (Old  Egyp- 
tian), Phaiat  (Coptic) ;  the  Libyans  in  the 
north  of  Africa  (Josephus,  LXX,  Gesenius, 
Bochart).  Kalisch  suggests  Buto'  or  Butos, 
the  capital  of  the  delta  of  the  Nile.  And 
Canaan.  Hebrew,  Kenaan  {vide  on  ch.  ix. 
25).  The  extent  of  the  territory  occupied 
by  the  fourth  son  of  Ham  is  denned  in  vers. 
15—19. 

Ver.  7. — And  the  sons  of  Cush;  Seba. 
Meroe,  in  Nubia,  north  of  Ethiopia  (Josephus, 
'Ant./ii.  10).  AndHavilah.  EuVXd(LXX.); 
may  refer  to  an  African  tribe,  the  Avalitae, 
south  of  Babelmandeb  (Keil,  Lange,  Murphy), 
or  the  district  of  Chaulan  in  Arabia  Felix 
(Rosenmiiller,  Kalisch,  Wordsworth).  Verse 
29  mentions  Havilah  as  a  Shemite  territory. 
Kalisch  regards  them  as  "the  same  country, 
extending  from  the  Arabian  to  the  Persian 
Gulf,  and,  on  account  of  its  vast  extent,  easily 
divided  into  two  distinct  parts  "  (cf.  ch.  ii.  11). 
And  Sabtafc      The  Astaborans  of  Ethiopia 


(Josephus,  Gesenius,  Kalisch) ;  the  Ethio- 
pians of  Arabia,  whose  chief  city  was  Sabota 
(Knobel,  Rosenmuller,  Lange,  Keil).  And 
Raamah.  'Pt'y/ia  (LXX. ) ;  Ragma  on  the 
Persian  Gulf,  in  Oman  (Bochart,  Rosen- 
miiller,  Kalisch,  Lange).  And  Sabtechah. 
Nigritia  (Targum,  Jonathan),  which  the  name 
Svbatok,  discovered  on  Egyptian  monuments, 
seems  to  favour  (Kalisch) ;  on  the  east  of  the 
Persian  Gulf  at  Samydace  of  Carmania  (Bo- 
chart, Knobel,  Rosenmuller,  Lange).  And 
the  sons  of  Raamah ;  Sheba.  The  principal 
city  of  Arabia  Felix  (1  Kings  x.  1 ;  Job  L 
15  ;  vi.  19 ;  Ps.  lxxii.  10,  15 ;  Isa.  Ix.  6 ; 
Jer.  vi.  20  ;  Ezek.  xxvii.  22 ;  Joel  iii  8) ; 
occurs  again  (ch.  v.  28)  as  a  son  of  Joktan  ; 
probably  was  peopled  both  by  Hamites  and 
Shemites.  And  Sedan.  Daden  on  the 
Persian  Gulf  (vide  Isa.  xxi.  13 ;  Jer.  xlix. 
8  ;  Ezek.  xxv.  13  ;  xxvii.  12 — 15). 

Ver.  8. — And  Cush  begat — not  necessarily 
as  immediate  progenitor,  any  ancestor  being 
in  Hebrew  styled  a  father — Kimrod  ;  the 
rebel,  from  maradh,  to  rebel  ;  the  name  of 
a  person,  not  of  a  people ; — Namwret  in 
ancient  Egyptian.  Though  not  one  of  the 
great  ethnic  heads,  he  is  introduced  into  the 
register  of  nations  as  the  founder  of  imperi- 
alism. Under  him  society  passed  from  the 
patriarchal  condition,  in  which  each  separate 
clan  or  tribe  .owns  the  sway  of  its  natural 
head,  into  that  (more  abject  or  more  civilised 
according  as  it  is  viewed)  in  which  many 
different  clans  or  tribes  recognise  the  sway 
of  one  who  is  not  their  natural  head,  but 
has  acquired  his  ascendancy  and  dominion 
by  conquest.  This  is  the  principle  of 
monarchism.  Eastern  tradition  has  painted 
Nimrod  as  a  gigantic  oppressor  of  the 
people's  liberties  and  an  impious  rebel  against 
the  Divine  authority.  Josephus  credits  him 
with  having  instigated  the  building  of  the 
tower  of  Babel.  He  has  been  identified  with 
the  Orion  of  the  Greeks.  Scripture  may 
seem  to  convey  a  bad  impression  of  Nimrod, 
but  it  does  not  sanction  the  absurdities  of 
Oriental  legend.  He  began  to  be  a  mighty 
one — Gibbor  (vide  ch.  vi.  4)  ;  what  he  had 
been  previously  being  expressed  in  ver.  5 — 
in  the  earth.  Not  hiri  rijc  yqe  (LXX.), 
as  if  pointing  to  his  gigantic  stature,  but 
either  among  men  generally,  with  refer- 
ence to  his  widespread  fame,  or  perhaps 
better  "in  the  land"  where  he  dwelt,  which 
was  not  Babel,  but  Arabia  (vide  ver.  6). 

Ver.  9.  —  He  was  a  mighty  hunter 
Originally  doubtless  of  wild  beasts,  which, 
according  to  Bochart,  was  the  first  step  to 
usurping  dominion  over  men  and  using  them 
for  battle.  "  Nempe  venationum  prsetextu 
collegit  juvenum  robustam  manum,  quam 
talibus  exercitus  ad  belli  labores  induravit " 
('Phaleg.,*  liv.  12).  Before  the  lord.  1. 
'Hvayriov  jcvpiov  (LXX.),  in  a  spirit  of  d» 


oh.  x.  1---S2.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


in 


fiance  (Augustine,  Keil,  Murphy,  Bush).  2. 
Coram  Deo,  in  God'is  sight,  as  an  aggravation 
of  his  sin— cf.  ch.  xiii.  3  (Cajetan).  3.  As 
a  superlative,  declaring  his  excellence — cf. 
ch.  xiii.  10  ;  xxx.  8  ;  xxxv.  5  ;  1  Sam.  xi.  7  ; 
John  iii.  3  ;  Acts  vii.  20  (Aben  Ezra,  Kimchi, 
Kalisch,  '  Speaker's  Commentary ').  i.  With 
the  Divine  approbation  as  one  who  broke  the 
way  through  rude,  uncultivated  nature  for 
the  institutions  of  Jehovah  (Lange).  Cf.  ch. 
xvii.  18  ;  xxiv.  40 ;  1  Sam.  xi.  15 ;  Ps.  xli. 
12.  Probably  the  first  or  the  third  conveys 
the  sense  of  the  expression.  Wherefore  it 
is  said,  Even  as  Nimrod  the  (a)  mighty 
hunter  before  the  Lord.  The  precise  import 
of  this  is  usually  determined  by  the  view 
taken  of  the  previous  phrase. 

Vot.  10.  —  And  the  beginning  of  his 
kingdom.  Either  his  first  kingdom,  as  con- 
trasted with  his  second  (Knobel),  or  the 
commencement  of  his  sovereignty  (Keil,  Ka- 
lisch), or  the  principal  city  of  his  empire 
(Rosenmiiller)  ;  or  all  three  may  be  legiti- 
mately embraced  in  the  term  reshith,  only 
it  does  not  necessarily  imply  that  Nimrod 
built  any  of  the  cities  mentioned.  Was 
Babel.  Babylon,  "  the  land  of  Nimrod " 
(Micah  v.  6),  the  origin  of  which  is  described 
in  ch.  xi.  1,  grew  to  be  a  great  city  covering 
an  area  of  225  square  miles,  reached  its 
highest  glory  under  Nebuchadnezzar  (Dan. 
iv.  30),  and  succumbed  to  the  Medo-Persian 
power  under  Belshazzar  (Dan.  v.  31).  The 
remains  of  this  great  city  have  been  dis- 
covered on  the  east  bank  of  the  Euphrates 
near  Hillah,  where  there  is  a  square  mound 
called  "Babil"  by  the  Arabs  (Rawlinson's 
'  Ancient  Monarchies,'  vol.  i.  ch.  1).  And 
Erech.  The  Orchoe  of  Ptolemy,  identified 
by  Rawlinson  as  Wurka,  about  eighty  miles 
south  of  Babylon.  And  Accad.  'Apx&S 
(LXX.) ;  the  city  Sittace  on  the  river  Argade 
(Bochart) ;  Sakada,  a  town  planted  by  Pto- 
lemy below  Ninus  (Clericus) ;  Accete,  north 
of  Babylon  (Knobel,  Lange) ;  identified  with 
the  ruins  of  Niffer,  to  the  south  of  Hillah 
(Keil)  ;  with  those  of  Akkerkoof,  north  of 
Hillah  (Kalisch).  Rawlinson  does  not  identify 
'he  site;  George  Smith  regards  it  as  "the 
capital  of  Sargon,  the  great  city  Agadi,  near 
the  city  of  Sippara  on  the  Euphrates,  and 
north  of  Babylon"  ('Assyrian  Discoveries," 
ch.  xii. ).  And  Calneh.  Calno  (Isa.  x.  9) ; 
Canneh  (Ezek,  xxvii.  23) ;  Ctesiphon,  east  of 
the  Tigris,  north-east  of  Babylon  (Jerome, 
Eusebius,  Bochart,  Michaelis,  Kalisch) ;  iden- 
tified with  the  ruins  of  Nitfer  on  the  east  of 
the  Euphrates  (Rawlinson).  In  the  land  of 
Shinar.  Babylonia,  as  distinguished  from 
Assyria  (Isa.  xi.  11),  the  lower  part  of 
Mesopotamia,  or  Chaldsea. 

Ver.  11.— Out  of  that  land  went  forth 
Asshur,  the  can  of  Shem  (ver.  22 ;  LXX., 
Vulgate,  Syriac,  Luther,  Calvin,  Michaelis, 


Dathe,  Rosenmiiller,  Bohlen) ;  i.  e.  the  early 
Assyrians  retired  from  Babylon  before  theii 
Cushite  invaders,  and,  proceeding  noHhward, 
founded  the  cities  after  mentioned  ;  but  the 
marginal  rendering  seems  preferable:  "Out 
of  that  land  went  (Nimrod)  into  Asshur," 
or  Assyria,  the  country  north-east  of  Babylon, 
through  which  flows  the  Tigris,  and  which 
had  already  received  its  name  from  the  son 
of  Shem  (the  Targums,  Drusius,  Bochart, 
Le  Clerc,  De  Wette,  Delitzsch,  Keil,  Kalisch, 
Lange,  et  alii).  And  builded  Nineveh.  The 
capital  of  Assyria,  opposite  Mosul  on  the 
Tigris,  afterwards  became  the  largest  and 
most  flourishing  city  of  the  ancient  world 
(Jonah  iii.  3 ;  iv.  11),  being  fifty-five  milei 
in  circumference  (Diod.,  ii.  3),  and  is  now 
identified,  with  the  ruins  of  Nebbi-yunus  and 
Kouyunjik  (Layard' s '  Nineveh,'  vol  ii.  pp.  136 
ff.).  And  the  city  Rehoboth.  Rehoboth-vr, 
literally,  the  streets  of  the  city  (cf.  Platsea, 
a  city  in  Boeotia),  a  town  of  which  the  site 
is  unknown.  And  Calah.  The  mounds  of 
Nimroud  (Layard  and  Smith),  though  Ka- 
lisch and  Murphy  prefer  Kalah  Shergat 
(about  fifty  miles  south  of  Nineveh),  which 
the  former  authorities  identify  with  Asshur, 
the  original  capital  of  the  country. 

Ver.  12. — And  Resen,  i.  e.  Nimroud,  be- 
tween Kalah  Shergat  and  Kouyunjik  (Ka- 
lisch) ;  but  if  Calah  be  Nimroud,  then  Resen 
may  be  Selamiyeh,  a  village  about  half  way, 
between  Nineveh  and  Calah,  i.  e.  Kouyunjik 
and  Nimroud,  wt  supra  (Layard).  The 
same.  Resen  (Kalisch),  which  will  suit  if 
it  was  Nimroud,  whose  remains  cover  a  paral- 
lelogram about  1800  feet  in  length  and  900 
feet  in  breadth  ;  but  others  apply  it  to 
Nineveh  with  the  other  towns  as  forming 
one  large  composite  city  (Knobel,  Keil, 
Lange,  Wordsworth).  Is  a  great  city. 
With  this  the  record  of  Nimrod's  achieve- 
ments closes.  It  is  generally  supposed  that 
Nimrod  flourished  either  before  or  about  the 
time  of  the  building  of  the  tower  of  Babel ; 
but  Prof.  Chwolsen  of  St.  Petersburg,  in 
his  'Ueber  die  Ueberreste  der  Altbabylon- 
ischen  Literatur,'  brings  the  dynasty  of 
Nimrod  down  as  late  as  1500  B.O.,  relying 
principally  on  the  evidence  of  an  original 
work  composed  by  Qut'ami,  a  native  Baby- 
lonian, and  translated  by  Ibn-wa'hschijjah, 
a  descendant  of  the  Chaldaians,  and  assigned 
by  Chwolsen  to  one  of  the  earlier  periods  of 
Babylonian  history,  in  which  is  mentioned 
the  name  of  Nemrod,  or  Nemroda,  as  the 
founder  of  a  Canaanite  dynasty  which  ruled 
at  Babylon  (vide  an  excellent  paper  on  thii 
subject  in  Turner's  '  Biblical  and  Oriental 
Studies,'  Edin.,  A.  and  C.  Black,  1876). 
Perhaps  the  hardest  difficulty  to  explain  in 
connection  with  the  ordinary  date  assigned 
to  Nimrod  is  the  fact  that  in  ch.  xiv. ,  which 
speaks    of   the  reigning  monarch*  U>    %'m 


160 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[oh.  x.  1—32. 


Euphrates  valley,  there  is  no  account  taken 
of  Nineveh  and  its  king — a  circumstance 
which  has  hecn  supposed  to  import  that  the 
founding  of  the  capital  of  Assyria  could  not 
have  been  anterior  to  the  days  of  Abraham. 
But  early  Babylonian  texts  confirm  what  c-h. 
xiv.  seems  to  imply — the  fact  of  an  Elamite 
conquest  of  Babylonia,  B.o.  2280,  by  Kudur- 
nanhundi  (Kudurlagamar,  the  Chederlaomer 
of  Genesis),  who  carried  off  an  image  of  the 
goddess  Nana  from  the  city  Erech  {vide 
Assyrian  Discoveries,'  ch.  xii.  ;  'Records 
of  the  Past,'  vol.  iii. ),  so  that  this  difficulty 
may  be  held  to  have  disappeared  before  the 
light  of  archaeological  discovery.  But  at 
whatever  period  Nimrod  flourished,  the  Bib- 
lical narrative  would  lead  us  to  anticipate 
a  commingling  of  Hamitic  and  Sheniitic 
tongues  in  the  Euphrates  valley,  which 
existing  monuments  confirm  (cf.  '  Records 
of  the  Past,'  vol.  iii.  p.  3). 

Ver.  13. — And  Mizraim  begat  Iiudim.  An 
African  tribe,  a  colony  of  the  Egyptians,  like 
the  next  seven,  which  are  "  nominn  non 
singulorum  hominum  sed  populorum"  (Aben 
Ezra,  Michaelis,  Rosenmuller,  Kalisch,  Mur- 
phy) ;  probably  referred  to  in  connection 
with  Tarshish  and  Put  (Isa.  lxvi.  19),  with 
Kush  and  Put  (Jer.  xlvi.  9),  and  in  connection 
with  Put  (Ezek.  xxvii.  10  ;  xxx.  5).  Lud 
(ver.  22)  was  Shemitic.  And  Anamim.  Not 
elsewhere  mentioned  ;  the  inhabitants  of  the 
Delta  (Knobel).  And  Lehabim.  Lubim 
(2  Chron.  xii.  3 ;  Dan.  ii.  43  ;  Nahum  iii.  9) ; 
Libyans  (Dan.  xi.  43) ;  probably  the  Libyans 
west  of  Egypt  (Michaelis,  Kaliseli,  Murphy). 
And  Haphtuhim.  Nephthys,  near  Pelusium, 
on  the  Lake  Sirbonis  (Bochart) ;  the  Libyan 
town  Napata  (Kalisch) ;  the  people  of  Middle 
Egypt  (Knobel). 

Ver.  14. — And  Pathrusim.  Pathros  in 
Upper  Egypt.  And  Casluhim.  The  Colchi- 
ans,  of  Egyptian  origin  (Bochart,  Gesenius) ; 
the  inhabitants  of  the  primitive  Egyptian 
town  Chemnis,  later  Panoplis  (Kalisch).  Out 
of  whom  came  Philistim.  The  Philistines  on 
the  Mediterranean  from  Egypt  to  Joppa,  who 
had  five  principal  cities  —  Gaza,  Ashdod, 
Ashkelon,  Gath,  and  Ekron.  They  are  here 
described  as  an  offshoot  from  Casluhim.  The 
name  has  been  derived  from  an  Ethiopic 
root  falasti,,  to  emigrate  ;  hence  ' '  immi- 
grants" or  "emigrants."  Jer.  xlvii.  4  and 
Amos  ix.  7  trace  the  Philistines  to  the 
Caphtorim.  Michaelis  solves  the  difficulty 
by  transposing  the  clause  to  the  end  of  the 
verse ;  Bochart  by  holding  the  Casluhim 
and  Caphtorim  to  have  intermingled  ;  Keil 
and  Lange  by  the  conjecture  that  the  original 
tribe  the  Casluhim  was  subsequently  strength- 
ened by  an  immigration  from  Caphtor. 
Against  the  Egyptian  origin  of  the  Philis- 
tines the  possession  of  a  Shemitic  tongue 
and  the  non-observance  of  circumcision  have 
been  urged  ;   but  the  Bret  may  have  been 


acquired  from  the  conquered  Avim  whose 
land  they  occupied  (Dent.  ii.  23),  -^nd  the 
exodus  from  Egypt  may  have  taken  place 
prior  to  the  ii.stitution  of  the  rite  in  question. 
And  Caphtorim.  Cappadocia  (Bochart),  Syrtis 
Major  (Clerieus),  Crete  (Calrdet,  Ewald), 
Cyprus  (Michaelis,  Rosenmuller),  Coptos, 
Kouft  or  Kcft,  a  few  miles  north  of  Thebes 
(Kalisch). 

Ver.  15. — And  Canaan  begat  Sidon  his 
firstborn.  A  famous  commercial  and  mari- 
time town  on  the  coast  of  Syria  (1  Kings 
v.  6  ;  1  Chron.  xxii.  4  ;  Isa.  xxiii.  2,  4,  12  ; 
Ezek.  xxvii.  8) ;  here  including  Tyre.  From 
the  mention  of  the  circumstance  that  Sidon 
was  Canaan's  firstborn,  we  may  infer  that 
in  the  rest  of  the  table  the  order  of  seniority 
is  not  followed.  And  Heth.  The  father  of 
the  Hittites  (ch.  xxiii.  3,  5),  identified  by 
Egyptologers  with  the  Kheta,  a  powerful 
Syrian  tribe. 

Ver.  16.  —And  the  Jebusite.  Settled  at 
and  around  Jerusalem  (Josh.  xv.  8  ;  Judges 
xix.  10,  11  ;  1  Chron.  xi.  4,  5).  And  the 
Amorite.  On  both  sides  of  the  Jordan, 
though  dwelling  chiefly  in  the  Judaean 
mountains  (ch.  xiv.  7;  Josh.  x.  5),  to  wliiib 
the  name  "mountaineer,"  from  "Amor,'' 
elevation  (Gesenius),  is  supposed  to  refer. 
And  the  Girgasite.  The  1 1  me  nly  ii 
preserved  (Josh.  xxiv.  11). 

Ver.  17.— And  the  Hivite.  "Villagers" 
(Gesenius);  "settlers  in  cities"  (Ewald); 
their  localities  are  mentioned  in  ch.  xxxiv. 
2  ;  Josh.  ix.  1,  7  :  xi.  3  ;  Judges  vi.  8.  And 
the  Arkite.  Inhabitants  of  Arka,  a  city 
of  Phoenicia  (Josephus)  afterwards  called 
Csesarea  Libani ;  its  ruins  still  exist  at  Tel 
Arka,  at  the  foot  of  Lebanon.  And  the  Sinite. 
The  inhabitants  of  Sin.  Near  Arka  are  a 
fortress  named  Senna,  ruins  called  S:n,  and 
a  village  designated  Syn. 

Ver.  18. —And  the  Arvadite, — dwelt  in 
Arvad,  Aradus,  now  Ruad  (Josephus)— and 
the  Zemarite, — Simyra,  a  city  of  Phoenicia 
(Bochart,  M  ichaelis,  Gesenius,  Kalisch)  whose 
ruins  are  still  called  Sumrah— and  the  Hama- 
thite.  The  inhabitants  of  Hamath,  called 
Hammath  Rabbah  (Amos  vi.  2) ;  Epiphaneia 
by  the  Greeks ;  now  Hamah.  And  after- 
wards— i.  e.  subsequent  to  the  formation  of 
these  distinct  tribes  by  the  confusion  ol 
tongues — were  the  families  of  the  Canaanitea 
spread  abroad. 

Ver.  19. — And  the  border  cf  the  Canaan- 
ites  was  from  Sidon  (its  northern  boundary), 
as  thou  oomest — i-  e.  as  thou  goest,  in  the 
direction  of — to  Gerar, — between  Kadesh  and 
Shur  (ch.  xx.  1) — unto  Gaza  (now  called 
Guzzeh,  at  the  south-west  corner  of  Pales- 
tine) ;  as  thou  goest,  unto  Sodom,  and  Go- 
morrah, and  Admah,  and  Zeboim  {vide  ch. 
xix.  24),  even  unto  Lasha  -CaDJirhoe  (Hie- 
ronyinus,  Jerusalem  Taigum,  Josephue, 
Rosenmuller,  Keil,  Kalisch) ;  possibtj  »  rwi- 


oh.  k.  1— 32. J 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


101 


ation  of  Laish  and  Leshem,  a  Sidonian  city 
near  the  sources  of  the  Jordan  (Murphy). 

Ver.  20. — These  are  the  sons  of  Ham,  after 
their  families,  after  thaJr  tongues,  in  their 
countries,  and  in  their  nations  (vide  ver.  5). 

Ver.  21.— TJnto  Shem  also,  the  father  of 
all  the  children  of  Eber,  —as  Ham  of  Canaan 
(ch.  ix.  22;  vide  ver.  24)— the  brother  of 
Japheth  She  elder.  Either  the  eldest  brother 
of  Japheth  (Syriac,  Arabic,  Vulgate,  Gese- 
nius,  Rosenmiiller,  Kalisch) ;  or  the  brother 
of  Japheth  who  was  older  (LXX.,  Symma- 
chus,  Onkelos,  Raschi,  Aben  Ezra,  Luther, 
Clerieus,  Michaelis,  Dathe) ;  or  the  elder  of 
Japheth's  brothers,  as  distinguished  from 
Ham  the  younger,  i.  e.  the  son  who  was  older 
tlian  Ham,  but  younger  than  Japheth 
(Murphy,  Quarry  ;  vide  ch.  v.  32).  Even  to 
him  were  children  born. 

Ver.  22.  —  The  children  of  Shem  were 
twenty-six  in  number,  of  whom  five  were 
eons.  Elam.  Elymais,  a  region  adjoining 
Susiana  and  Media,  stretching  from  the  Per- 
sian Gulf  to  the  Red  Sea ;  the  people  first 
mot  with  as  Persians.  And  Asshur.  The 
ancestor  of  the  Assyrians  (vide  ver.  11). 
And  Arphaxad.  A  region  in  the  north  of 
Assyria ;  the  Arrhapacitis  of  Ptolemy  (Rosen- 
miiller, Keil,  Kalisch).  The  explanation  of 
tha  name  is  "fortress  of  the  Chajdaeans" 
(Ewald);  "highland  of  the  Chaldseans". 
(Knobel).  And  Lud.  The  Lydians  of  Asia 
M  inor,  to  which  they  appear  to  have  migrated 
from  the  land  of  Shem  (Josephus,  Bochart, 
Keil,  Kalisch).  And  Aram.  "The  high 
.  land  ;"  Mesopotamia  being  the  Aram  of  the 
two  rivers,  and  Syria  the  Aram  of  Damascus. 

Ver.  23. — And  the  children  of  Aram ;  Hz, 
from  whom  was  named  the  land  of  Uz  (Job 
i.  1),  south-east  of  Palestine,  a  tract  of  the 
Arabia  Deserta.  And'Hul.  In  Armenia 
(Josephus) ;  that  part  called  Cholobetene,  or 
house  of  Hul  (Bochart)  ;  the  Hylatoe  of 
Syria,  near  the  Emesenes  (Delitzsch) ;  Cosle- 
iyria  (Michaelis) ;  Huleh,  near  the  sources 
of  the  Jordan  (Murphy).  And  Gether— of 
uncertain  situation — and  Mash  —traced  in 
Mons  Masius  of  Armenia  (Bochart). 

Ver.  24.  —  And  Arphaxad  begat  Salah. 
The  nation  descended  from  him  has  not  been 
identified,  though  their  name,  "  Extension," 
msv  imply  that  they  were  early  colonists. 
And  Salah  begat  Eber.  The  father  of  the 
Hebrews  or  "  Emigrants"  (vide  ver.  21). 

Yer.  25. — And  unto  Eber  were  born  two 
sons :  the  name  of  one  was  Peleg.  "  Division," 
(torn  pqlag,  to  divide  ;  cf.  vi\ayog  and  pela- 
jus,  a  division  of  the  sea,     For  in  his  days 


was  the  earth  divided.  At  the  confusion  of 
tongues  (Bochart,  Rosenmiillcr,  Keil,  Lange, 
Murphy) ;  at  an  earlier  separation  of  the 
earth's  population  (Delitzsch),  of  which 
there  is  no  record  or  trace.  And  his  brother's 
name  was  Joktan.  Father  of  the  Arabians, 
by  whom  he  is  called  Kachtan. 

Vers.  26 — 30. — And  Joktan  begat  Almo- 
dad.  Usually  said  to  be  Yemen.  And  She- 
leph.  The  Salapenoi  of  Ptolemy,  belonging 
to  the  interior  of  Arabia.  And  Hazarmaveth. 
Hadramaut,  south-east  of  Arabia,  (Bochart, 
Michaelis).  And  Jerah.  Contiguous  to  Ha- 
dramaut. And  Hadoram.  Adramitae  of 
Ptolemy,  or  the  Atramitae  of  Pliny  (Bochart). 
And  Uzal.  Awzal,  the  capital  of  Yemen 
(Bochart).  And  Diklah.  The  palm-bearing 
region  of  Arabia  Felix  (Bochart) ;  a  tribe 
between  tl.o  mouth  of  the  Tiber  and  the 
Persian  Gulf  (Michaelis).  And  Obal,  and 
Ahimasl,  whose  settlements  are  not  known. 
And  Sheba.  Vide  supra,  ver.  7.  And 
Ophir.  In  Arabia ;  probably  in  Oman,  on 
the  Persian  Gulf  (Michaelis,  Rosenmiiller; 
Kalisch,  Keil),  though  it  has  also  been 
located  in  India  (Josephus,  Vitringa,  Gese- 
nius,  Delitzsch).  The  gold  of  Ophir  cele- 
brated (1  Kings  ix.  27,  28  ;  2  Chron.  ix.  10 
13,  21).  And  Havilah.  The  Chaulan  in 
Arabia  Felix,  but  vide  supra,  ver.  7.  And 
Jobab.  The  Jobabitae  of  Ptolemy,  near  the 
Indian  Sea  (Michaelis,  Rosenmiiller) ;  but 
more  probably  a  tribe  in  Arabia  Deserta  ii 
Jobab  =  Arabic  iebab,  a  desert  (Bochart, 
Gesenins,  Kalisch).  All  these  were  the  sons 
of  Joktan.  And  their  dwelling  was  from 
Mcsha.  The  seaport  of  Muza  (Bochart) ; 
Messene,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Tigris  (Mi- 
chaelis, Rjsenmiiller,  Kalisch).  As  thou 
gaest  into  Zephar.  Zafar  or  Dhafari,  on  the 
coast  of  the  Hadramut.  The  difficulty  of 
identifying  a  seaport  town  with  a  mountain 
is  got  over  (Kalisch)  by  reading  "to  the" 
instead  of  a  mount  of  the  east— the  thu- 
riferous  range  of  hills  in  the  vicinity. 

Vers.  81,  32. — These  are  the  sons  of  Shem, 
after  their  families,  after  their  tongues,  in 
their  lands,  after  their  nations.  The  pedi- 
gree of  tho  Sliemite  tribes  is  closed  with  the 
customary  formula  (videver.  6) ;  that  which 
follows  being  the  concluding  formula  for  the 
entire  table  of  nations.  These  are  the  fami- 
lies of  the  sons  of  Noah,  after  their  gener- 
ations (literally,  according  to  their  ThMd6th, 
or  historical  developments),  in  their  nations : 
and  by  these  (literally,  from  these)  were  the 
nations  divided  (or,  did  the  nations  scatter 
themselves)  in  the  earth  after  the  flood. 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  32. — The  ethnological  register.  I.  Proclaims  tee  unity  of  thb  bace. 
1.  Tt  declares  all  the  successive  families  of  mankind  to  have  sprung  from  a  common 
sloi-k.    Diverse  as  they  now  are  in  their  geographical  situations,  ethnic  relalions. 

QTCNESIS.  M 


162  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  [oh.  x.  1— 8S 

physical  capabilities,  national  peculiarities,  according  to  the  doctrine  of  this  genea- 
logical table  they  all  trace  their  origin  to  Noah  and  his  sons.  2.  It  condemns  all 
those  theories  which  derive,  man  from  several  pairs.  Equally  the  heathen  super> 
stition  which  assigned  to  each  particular  region  its  own  Autochthones,  and  the  modern 
scientific  dogma  of  varieties  of  species  and  distinct  centres  of  propagation  is  here 
condemned.  Even  now  ethnologists,  archaeologists,  and  philologists  of  the  highest 
repute  lend  their  sanction  to  the  sublime  sentiment  of  the  great  Mars'  hill  preacher, 
that  "  God  hath  made  of  one  blood  all  nations  of  men  for  to  dwell  upon  all  the  face 
of  the  earth."  The  anatomical  structure  of  the  human  frame,  especially  of  the  brain 
and  skull,  the  physiological  properties  and  functions  possessed  by  the  body,  the 
psychological  nature  of  man,  and  the  power  of  indefinite  propagation,  which  are 
the  same  in  all  nations,  with  the  ascertained  results  of  comparative  grammar,  which 
have  already  traced  back  all  existing  languages  to  three  primitive  branches,  tend  in 
a  powerful  degree  to  confirm  the  doctrine  which  this  table  teaches.  3.  It  implies 
certain  other  truths  on  which  Scripture  with  equal  emphasis  insists,  such  as  the 
brotherhood  of  man,  the  universal  corruption  of  the  race,  and  the  necessity  and 
universality  of  Christ's  redemption. 

II.  Attests  the  division  of  the  race.  1.  It  asserts  the  fact  of  the  division.  It 
states  that  in  the  days  of  Peleg  the  earth's  population  was  divided.  The  means 
employed  are  described  in  the  succeeding  chapter.  2.  It  confirms  the  truth  of  this 
division.  Had  the  confusion  at  Babel  not  occurred,  and  the  subsequent  dispersion 
not  followed,  this  table  could  not  have  been  written.  Its  existence  as  a  literary 
document  in  the  time  of  Moses  authenticates  the  fact  which  it  reports.  3.  It  defines 
the  extent  of  this  division.  It  shows  thai  the  scattered  race  were  to  be  split  up  into 
nations,  families,  tongues. 

III.  Illustrates  the  distribution  op  the  race.  The  geographical  distribution 
of  the  earth's  population  was — 1.  Effected  in  an  orderly  manner.  They  were  neither 
scattered  promiscuously  nor  suffered  to  wander  ajid  settle  at  hazard.  Divided  into 
tribes  and  nations  according  to  their  tongues  and  dialects  of  speech,  they  were  allo- 
cated to  distinct  portions  of  the  earth's  surface.  2.  Specially  adapted  to  the 
characters  and  destinies  of  the  several  nations.  The  operation  of  purely  natural 
principles  makes  it  impossible  that  tribes  can  permanently  settle  in  countries  that  are 
either  incapable  of  yielding  to  them  a  maintenance  or  affording  an  outlet  to  their 
powers.  More  extensive  information  would  doubtless  enable  the  suitability  of 
each  locality  in  this  table  to  the  occupying  people  to  be  exhibited ;  but  in  broad 
outline  it  is  perceptible  even  here — Japheth,  whose  destiny  it  was  to  spread  abroad, 
being  established  on  the  coasts  of  the  Euxine,  the  Caspian,  and  the  Mediterranean; 
Ham  finding  rest  in  the  warmer  climates,  whose  enervating  influences  tended  largely 
to  develop  his  peculiar  character,  and  ultimately  to  lay  him  open  to  subjection  by 
the  more  vigorous  races  of  the  North ;  and  Shem,  whose  function  in  the  Divine 
economy  it  was  to  conserve  religion  and  religious  truth,  being  concentrated  mainly  in 
the  Tigris  and  Euphrates  valley.  3.  The  result  of  Divine  appointment.  Moses  (Deut. 
xxxii.  8)  and  Paul  (Acts  xvii.  26)  conspire  to  represent  the  allocation  of  territory 
to  the  different  races  of  mankind  as  the  handiwork  of  God  (the  special  means 
employed  for  the  breaking  up  of  the  originally  united  family  of  Noah's  sons  is 
detailed  in  the  ensuing  chapter)  ;  the  import  of  which  is,  that  nations  have  a  God- 
assigned  title  to  the  countries  which  they  occupy.  4.  The  Divinely-ordered  distribu- 
tion of  the  earth's  population  is  capable  of  being  disturbed  by  the  sinful  interference 
of  man.  Instances  of  this  appear  in  the  present  table,  e-  g.  the  intrusion  of  the 
Cushite  into  Shinar,  and  of  the  Canaar.ite  into  what  originally  belonged  to 
Shern. 

IV.  Predicts  the  future  of  the  race.  As  it  were,  the  separation  of  the  earth's 
population  into  races  and  the  moving  of  them  outward  to  their  respective  habitation! 
was  the  starting  of  them  on  the  lines  along  which  it  was  designed  they  should  accom- 
plish their  respective  destinies  and  common  work.  They  were  meant  to  overspread 
the  globe ;  and  this  was  the  initiation  of  a  great  movement  which  would  only 
terminate  in  the  complete  occupation  of  their  God-given  heritage. 

Lessons: — 1.  The  equal  rights  of  men.  2.  The  sinfulness  of  wars  of  aggression 
%.  The  hopefulness  of  emigration. 


OH.  XI    1 — 9.j 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENBBI8. 


1«S 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOliS. 

Ver.  8.— Nimrod.  1.  His  ancestral  pedigree— a  Cushite.  2.  His  early  occupation 
—»  hunter  of  wild  beasts,  a  pioneer  of  civilisation.  3.  His  rising  ambition— he 
began  to  be  a  "Gibbor,"  or  mighty  one.  4.  His  regal  authority— the  beginning  of 
his  kingdom  was  Babel.  5.  His  extending  empire— out  of  that  land  went  he  f  c-rth  into 
Asshur.     6.  His  posthumous  renown:  "Wherefore  it  is  said,  Even  as  Nimrod." — W. 

Vers.  16— 19.— The  Ganaanites.  I.  Descendants  of  a  wicked  father.  II.  In- 
heritors of  an  awful  cdrse.  III.  Possessors  of  a  fair  domain.  IV.  Usurpers 
of  another's  land. 

Lessons  .—1.  Wicked  men  and  nations  may  greatly  prosper.  2.  Prosperity  some- 
times leads  to  greater  wickedness.  3.  The  greatest  prosperity  cannot  turn  aside  the 
punishment  of  sin. — W. 

Ver.  Zh.—Peleg,  or  the  division  of  the  people.  I.  When  it  took  place.  In  th« 
fourth  generation  after  the  Flood. 

II.  How  it  was  effected.  1.  By  the  Divine  interposition.  2.  By  the  confusion 
of  tongues. 

III.  For  what  it  was  designed.  1.  To  punish  sin.  2.  To  separate  the  Church. 
3.  To  occupy  the  earth. 

IV.  By  what  it  was  remembered.     The  naming  of  Eber's  son. 
Learn — 1.  To  read  well  the  signs  of  the  times.     2.  To  understand  well  the  cause 
:  God's  judgments.     3.  To  remember  well  the  gift  of  God's  mercies. — W. 


of 


Ver.  32. — Rations.    I.  Their  roots.     Individuals. 

II.  Their  rise.     1.  As  to  time,  after  the  Flood.     2. 
3.  As  to  instrumentality,  variation  of  speech. 

III.  Their  characteristics.     1.  A  common  head, 
common  land. 

IV.  Their  destinies.     To  overspread  the  earth. — W, 


As  to  cause,  Divine  impulse. 
2.  A  common  tongue.    3.  A 


EXPOSITION. 


CHATTER  XI. 


Vor.  1.— And  the  whole  earth.     /.  _«.  the 

entire  population  of  the  globe,  and  not  simply 
the  inhabitants  of  the  land  of  Shinar  (Inglis  ; 
cf.  ch.  ix.  29).  Was.  Prior  to  the  dis- 
persion spoken  of  in  the  preceding  chapter, 
though  obviously  it  may  have  been  subse- 
quent to  that  event,  if,  as  the  above-named 
author  believes,  the  present  paragraph  refers 
to  the  Shemitcs  alone.  Of  one  language. 
Literally,  of  one  lip,  i.  e.  one  articulation, 
or  one  way  of  pronouncing  their  vocables. 
And  of  one  speech.  Literally,  one  (kind  of) 
words,  i.  e.  the  matter  as  well  as  the  form 
of  human  speech  was  the  same.  The  primi- 
tive language  was  believed  by  the  Rabbins, 
the  Fathers,  and  the  older  theologians  to  be 
Hebrew ;  but  Keil  declares  this  view  to  be 
utterly  untenable.  Bleek  shows  that  the 
family  of  Ahraham  spoke  in  Aramaic  (cf. 
Jegar-sahadutha,  ch.  xxxi.  47),  and  that 
the  patriarch  himself  acquired  Hebrew  from 
the  Canaanites,  who  may  themselves  have 
adopted  it  from  the  early  Semites  whom 
they  displaced.  While  regarding  neither 
the  Aramaic,   Hebrew,   nor  Arabic  as  tk* 


original  tongue  of  mankind,  he  thinks  the 
Hebrew  approaches  nearest  the  primitive 
Semite  language  out  of  which  all  three  were 
developed. 

Ver.  2. — And  it  came  to  pass,  as  they 
journeyed.  Literally,  in  their  jov/rneyinys. 
The  root  Q!pi,  to  pull  up,  as,  e.  g.,  the  stakea 
of  a  tent  when  a  camp  moves,  Isa.  xxxiii 
20)  suggests  the  idea  of  the  migration  ol 
nomadic  hordes  (cf.  ch.  xii.  9 ;  xxxiii  17). 
From  the  east  •  Ab  oriente  (Ancient  Versions, 
Calvin,  et  alii),  meaning  either  that  they 
started  from  Armenia,  which  was  in  the  east 
respectu  terroe  Canaan  (Luther),  or  from 
that  portion  of  the  Assyrian  empire  which 
was  east  of  the  Tigris,  and  called  Orientalis, 
as  distinguished  from  the  Occidentalis  on 
the  west  (Bochart) ;  or  that  they  first  tra- 
velled westwards,  following  the  direction  of 
the  Euphrates  in  one  of  its  upper  branches 
(Bush) ;  or  that,  having  roamed  to  the  east 
of  Shinar,  they  ultimately  returned  ocei- 
dentem  versus  (Junius).  The  phrase,  how- 
ever, is  admitted  to  be  more  correctly  rendered 
ad  orientem  (Drusius,  Lange,  Keil,  Murphy), 
as  in  ch.  xiii.  11.  Kalisch  interprets  gener- 
ally in  oriente,  agreeing  with  Luther  that 
v  2 


164 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  zi.  l— a 


the  migrations  are  viewed  by  the  writer  as 
taking  place  in  the  east ;  while  T.  Lewis 
prefers  to  read  from  one  front  part  (the 
original  meaning  of  kedem)  to  another — 
onwards.  That  they  found  a  plain.  !"iyj?3; 
not  a  valley  between  mountain  ranges,  as  in 
Deut.  viiL  7  J  xL  11 ;  Pa.  civ.  8,  but  a  widely- 
extended  plain  (irillov,  LXX),  like  that  in 
which  Babylon  was  situated  (Herod.,  lib.  L 
178,  icsfj-oi  iv  ir($t<fl  luyaktp  ;  cf.  Strabo, 
lib.  il  109).  In  the  land  of  Shinar.  Baby- 
lonia (cf.  ch.  x.  10).  The  derivation  of  the 
term  is  unknown  (Gesenius),  though  it  pro- 
bably meant  the  land  of  the  two  rivers  (Al- 
ford).  Its  absence  from  ancient  monuments 
(Eawlinson)  suggests  that  it  was  the  Jewish 
name  for  Chaldasa.     And  they  dwelt  there. 

Ver.  3. — And  they  said  one  to  another. 
Literally,  a  man  to  his neighbour  ;  avQpmiroc 
rif  7rX>/<7ioi>  aiiTou  (LXX.).  Goto.  A  horta- 
tory expletive  =  come  on  (Anglice).  Let  us 
make  brick.  NUbenah  lebenim;  literally, 
let  us  brick  bricks  ;  irXivQibatupiv  irXivBovc 
(LXX ) ;  laterifecimus  lateres  (Calvin) ; 
lebenah  (from  laban,  to  be  white),  being  so 
called  from  the  white  and  chalky  clay  of 
which  bricks  were  made.  And  burn  them 
thoroughly.  Literally,  burn  them  to  a 
burning;  venisrephah  Ksrephah,  a  second 
alliteration,  which,  however,  the  LXX.  fails 
to  reproduce.  Bricks  were  usually  sun-dried  ; 
these,  being  designed  to  be  more  durable, 
were  to  be  calcined  through  the  agency  of 
fire,  a  proof  that  the  tower-builders  were 
acquainted  with  the  art  of  brick-making. 
And  they  had — literally,  and  there  was  to 
therm — brick  for  stone.  Chiefly  because  of 
the  necessities  of  the  place,  the  alluvial  plain 
of  Babylon  being  void  of  stones  and  full  of 
clay  ;  a  proof  of  the  greatness  of  their  crime, 
seeing  they  were  induced  to  undertake  the 
work  non  facilitate  operis,  nee  aliis  commo- 
dis,  quce  se  ad  manum  offerrent  (Calvin) ; 
scarcely  because  bricks  would  better  endure 
fire  than  would  stones,  the  second  destruction 
of  the  world  by  fire  rather  than  water  being 
by  this  time  a  common  expectation  (Corn. 
a  Lapide).  Joscphus,  'Ant.,' lib.  i.  cp.  4; 
Herod.,  lib.  i.  cp.  179;  Justin,  lib.  i.  cp. 
2  ;  Ovid,  '  Metam.,'  iv.  4  ;  and  Aristoph.  in 
Avibus  (mpircvx'?*'*  fieyaXaie  ir\iv9otq  oir- 
rnic,  uiffTTfp  T&«fiv\uva),  all  attest  that  the 
walls  of  Babylon  were  built  of  brick.  The 
mention  of  the  circumstance  that  brick  was 
used  instead  of  stone  "indicates  a  writer 
belonging  to  a  country  and  an  age  in  which 
stone  buildings  were  familiar,  and  therefore 
not  to  Babylonia"  (Murphy).  And  slims. 
Chemer,  from  chamar,  to  boil  np ;  aoipnXroe 
(LXX.) ;  the  bitumen  which  boils  up  from 
subterranean  fountains  like  oil  or  hot  pitch 
in  the  vicinity  of  Babylon,  and  also  near 
the  Dead  Sea  (locus  ■asphallites).  Tacitus, 
•Hist,'  v.  «  ;  Strabo,  xvi.  p.  743  ;  Herod., 
lib.  i.  c  17i  ;  Josephus,  'Autiq.,'  lib.  i.  c.  4; 


Pliny,  lib.  xxxv.  c.  15  ;  Vitruvius,  lib.  viii.  c. 
3,  are  unanimous  in  declaring  that  the  brick 
walls  of  Babylon  were  cemented  with  bitu- 
men. Layard  testifies  that  so  firmly  hart 
the  bricks  been  united  that  it  is  almost 
impossible  to  detach  one  from  the  mass 
('  Nineveh  and  Babylon,'  p.  499).  Had 
they.  Literally,  was  to  them.  For  mortar. 
Chomer.  The  third  instance  of  alliteration 
in  the  present  verse  ;  possibly  designed  by 
the  writer  to  represent  the  enthusiasm  of 
the  builders. 

Ver.  4. — And  they  said.  Being  impelled 
by  their  success  in  making  bricks  for  their 
dwellings  (Lange),  though  the  resolution 
to  be  mentioned,  may  have  been  the  cause 
of  their  brick-making  (Bush).  Go  to,  let 
us  build  us  a  city.  Cf.  ch.  iv.  17,  which 
represents  Cain  as  the  first  city  builder. 
And  a  tower.  Not  as  a  distinct  erection, 
but  as  forming  a  part,  as  it  were  the  Acro- 
polis, of  the  city  (Rochajt).  Whose  top 
may  reach  unto  heaves .  Literally,  and  his 
head  in  the  heavens,  a.  hyperbolical  expres- 
sion for  a  tower  of  great  height,  as  in  Deut 
i.  28;  ix.  1  (cf.  Homer,  'Odys.,'v.  239, 
ikaTt]  r'  riv  oipavoiitiKije).  This  tower  is 
commonly  identified  with  the  temple  of 
Behis,  which  Herodotus  describes  (L  181)  as 
being  quad-angular  (two  stadia  each  way>, 
and  having  gates  of  brass,  with  a  solid  tower 
in  the  middle,  consisting  of  eight  sections, 
each  a  stadium  in  height,  placed  one  above 
another,  ascended  by  a  spiral  staircase,  and 
having  in  the  top  section  a  spacious  temple 
with  a  golden  table  and  a  well-furnished  bed. 
Partially  destroyed  by  Xerxes  (B.O.  490),  it 
was  attempted  unsuccessfully  to  be  rebuilt 
by  Alexander  the  Great ;  but  the  remaining 
portion  of  the  edifice  was  known  to  be  in 
existence  five  centuries  later,  and  was  suffi- 
ciently imposing  to  be  recognised  -as  the 
temple  of  13elus  (Pliny,  vi.  30).  The  site  of 
this  ancient  tower  is  supposed  by  George 
Smith  to  be  covered  by  the  ruin  "  Babil,"  a 
square  mound  about  200  yards  each  way,  in 
the  north  of  the  city  ;  and  that  of  the  tower 
of  Babel  to  be  occupied  by  the  ruin  Birs- 
Nimrud  (situated  six  miles  south-west  of 
llillah,  which  is  about  forty  miles  west  of 
Bagdad),  a.  tower  consisting  of  seven  stages, 
sail  by  inscriptions  on  cylinders  extracted 
from  the  ruin  to  have  been  "the  Temple  of 
the  Seven  Planets,  which  had  been  paitially 
built  by  a  former  king  of  Babylon,  and, 
having  fallen  into  decay,  was  restored  and 
completed  by  Nebuchadnezzrr  "  ('Assyrian 
Discoveries,'  xii.  p.  59  ;  '  Chaldsan  Gei.esis,' 
p.  163 ;  cf.  Layard's  'Nineveh  and  Babylon,' 
chap.  xxii.  p.  496).  It  is,  however,  primd 
facte,  unlikely  that  either  Babil  or  Birs- 
Mmrod  is  the  exact  site  of  Babel.  The 
original  building  was  never  fin'shed,  and 
may  not  have  attained  any  great  dimensions. 
Perhaps  the  most  that  can  be  said  is  that 


OH.  XI.  1—9.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


161 


these  existing  mounds  enable  us  to  picture 
what  sort  of  erection  the  tower  of  Babel  was 
to  be.  And  let  us  make  us  a  name.  Dti' : 
neither  an  idol  temple,  DK>  being  =  God, 
which  it  never  is  without  the  article,  DK'n 
— ef.  Levit.  xxiv.  11  (Jewish  writers) ;  nor 
a  monument,  as  in  2  Sam.  viii.  13  (Glericus) ; 
nor  a  metropolis,  reading  DX  instead  of 
Dl*?,  as  in  2  Sam.  xx.  19  (Clericus) ;  nor  a 
tower  that  might  serve  as  a  sign  to  guide 
the  wandering  nomads  and  guard  them 
against  getting  lost  when  spread  abroad 
with  their  flocks,  as  in  2  Sam.  viii.  13 ; 
Isa.  lv.  13  (Perizonius,  Dathe,  Ilgen);  but 
a  name,  a  reputation,  as  in  2  Sam.  viii. 
13  ;  Isa.  lxiii.  12,  14  ;  Jer.  xxxii.  20  ;  Dan. 
ix.  15  (Luther,  Calvin,  Rosenmtiller,  Keil, 
Lange,  Murphy,  Wordsworth,  Kaliseh).  This 
was  the  first  impelling  motive  to  the  erec- 
tion of  the  city  and  tower.  The  offspring 
of  ambition,  it  was  designed  to  spread 
abroad  their  fame  usque  ad  ultimos  terrarum 
fines  (Calvin).  According  to  Philo,  each 
man  wrote  his  name  upon  a  brick  before  he/ 
built  it  in.  The  second  was  to  establish  a 
rallying  point  that  might  serve  to  maintain 
their  unity.  Lest  we  be  scattered  abroad. 
Lest  ==  anteq  uam,  npb,  before  that,  as  if  an- 
ticipating that  the  continuous  increase  of 
population  would  necessitate  their  dispersion 
(LXX.,  Vulgate),  or  as  if  determined  to  distin- 
guish themsolves  before  surrendering  to  the 
Divine  command  to  spread  themselves  abroad 
(Luther)  j  but  the  more  exact  rendering  of 
|S  is  pi},  tie,  lest,  introducing  an  apodosis 
expressive  of  something  to  be  avoided  by  a 
preceding  action  (cf.  Gesenius,  'Heb.  Gram.,' 
§  152,  and  Fiirst,  'Lex.,'  sub  voce.  What  the 
builders  dreaded  was  not  the  recurrence  of  a 
flood  (Josephus,  Lyra),  but  the  execution  of  the 
Divine  purpose  intimated  in  ch.  ix.  1,  and  per- 
haps recalled  to  their  remembrance  by  Noah 
(Usher),  or  by  Shem  (Wordsworth),  or  bv 
Eber  (Candlish);  and  what  the  builders 
aimed  at  was  resistance  to  the  Divine  will. 
Upon  the  face  of  the  whole  earth.  Over 
the  entire  surface  of  the  globe,  and  not 
simply  over  the  land  of  Shinar  (Inglis),  or 
over  the  immediate  region  in  which  they 
dwelt  (Clericus,  Dathe,  et  alii,  ut  supra). 

_  Ver.  5.— And  the  Lord  came  down.  Not  in 
visible  form,  as  in  Exod.  xix.  20  ;  xxxiv.  5 
(Onkelos),  but  "  effectu  ostendens  se  propin- 
quiorem  quern  absentem  esse  judicabant " 
(Poole),  an  anthropomorphism  (cf.  ch.  xviii.  21; 
Ps.  cxliv.  5).  "  It  is  measure  for  measure 
(par  pari).  Let  us  build  up,  say  they,  and 
scale  the  heavens.  Let  us  go  down,  says 
God,  and  defeat  their  impious  thought" 
(Rabbi  Schelomo,  quoted  by  T.  Lewis).  To  see 
(with  a  view  to  judicial  action)  the  city  and 
the  tower  which  the  children  of  men — 
ions  of  Adam;  neither  the  posterity  of  Cain, 


t.  e.  the  Hamites  exclusively,  as  tho  S.ilhitei 
were  called  sons  of  God,  ch.  vi .  2  (Augustine), 
nor  wicked  men  in  general  (Junius,  Piscator), 
imitators  of  Adam,  i.  e.  rebellantes  Dee 
(Mede,  Lyra),  since  then  tho  Shemites  would 
not  have  been  participators  in  the  undertak- 
ing (Drusius),  which  some  think  to  have 
been  their  work  exclusively  (Inglis);  but 
the  members  of  the  human  race,  or  at  least 
their  leaders — builded. 

Ver.  6. — And  the  Lord  said — within  him- 
self, and  to  himself  (vide  ver.  8) ;  expressive 
of  the  formation  of  a  Divine  resolution  (cf. 
ch.  vi.  7) — Behold,  the  people — DJJ.  from  root 
signifying  to  bind  together,  expresses  tho  idea 
of  association  ;  '1JI>  from  a  root  signifying  to 
swell  (Lange),  to  flow  together  (Gesenius),  to 
gather  together  (Fiirst),  conveys  the  notion 
of  a  confluxus  hominum.  T.  Lewis  con- 
nects it  with  the  sense  of  interiority,  or 
exclusion,  which  is  common  in  the  Chaldee 
and  Syriac — is  one,  and  they  have  all  one 
language ;  and  this  they  begin  to  do.  One 
race,  one  tongue,  one  purpose.  The  words 
indicate  unity  of  effort,  as  well  as  concentra- 
tion of  design,  on  the  part  of  the  builders,  and 
a  certain  measure  of  success  in  the  achieve- 
ment of  their  work.  And  now  nothing  will 
be  restrained  from  them.  Literally,  there 
will  not  be  cut  off  from  them  anything; 
oi'K  U\ti\p(i  aw'  abriov  wavra  (LXX.) ;  non 
desistent  a  cogitationibus  suis  (Vulgate, 
Luther) ;  i.  e.  nothing  will  prove  too  hard 
for  their  daring.  It  can  hardly  imply  that 
their  impious  design  was  on  the  eve  of  com- 
pletion.    Which  they  have  imagined  to  do. 

Ver.  7. — Go  to.  An  ironical  contrast  to  the 
"  Go  to  "  of  the  builders  (Lange).  Let  us  (cf. 
ch.  i.  26)  go  down,  and  there  confound  their 
language  (vide  infra,  ver.  9),  that  they  may 
not  understand  (literally,  hear;  so  ch.  xlii. 
23 ;  Isa.  xxxvi.  1 1 ;  1  Cor.  xiv.  2)  one  another'« 
speech.  Not  referring  to  individuals  (singuli 
homines),- since  then  society  were  impossible, 
but  to  families  or  nations  (singula!  cogna- 
tiones),  which  each  had  its  own  toncua 
(Poole).  h 

Ver.  8.— So  (literally,  and)  the  Lord  scat- 
tered  them  abroad  (as  the  result  of  the  con- 
fusion of  their  speech)  upon  the  face  of  al] 
the  earth  :  and  they  left  off  to  build  the 
eity.  /.  e.  as  a  united  community,  which 
does  not  preclude  the  idea  of  the  Babylo- 
nians subsequently  finishing  tho  structure. 

Ver.  9. — Therefore  is  the  name  of  it  called 
Babel.  For  Battel,  confusion  (<riyx'""<;, 
LXX.,  Josephus),  from  Balal,  to  confound  ; 
the  derivation  given  by  the  sacred  writer  in 
the  following  clause  (cf.  for  the  elision  of  tin 
letter  I,  totaphah  for  tophtaphah,  Exod. 
xiii.  16,  and  cochav  for  covcav,  Gen.  xxxvii. 
9).  Other  derivations  suggested  are  Bab-Bd 
the  gate  or  court  of  Belus  (Eichhorn,  Langs) 
an  explanation  of  the  term  which  Fiirti 
thinks -not  impossible,  and  Kaliseh  declare! 


lfi« 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[oh.  xi.  1 — 9. 


"  can  scarcely  be  overlooked  ;"  and  Bab-il, 
the    gate  of   God  (Eosenmuller,  Gesenius, 
Colenso)  ;    but  the  first  is  based   upon  a 
purely  mythical  personage,  Bel,  the  imagin- 
ary founder  of  the  city  ;  and  the  second,  if 
even  it  were  supported  by  evidence,  which  it 
is  not,  is  not  so  likely  as  that  given  by 
Moses.    Because  the  Lord  did  there  confound 
—how  is  not  explained,  but  has  been  conjec- 
tured to  be  by  an  entirely  inward  process, 
viz.,  changing  the  ideas  associated  with  words 
(Koppen) ;  by  a  process  wholly  outward,  viz. , 
an  alteration  of  the  mode  of  pronouncing 
words  (Hoffman),  though  more  probably  by 
both  (Keil),  or  pDssibly  by  the  first  insensibly 
leading  t>-  the  second — the  language  of  all 
the  earth :  and  from  thence  did  the  Lord 
scatter  them.     As  the  result  not  simply  of 
their  growing  discord,  dissensio  animorum, 
per  quam  factum  sit}  ut  qui  turrem  strue- 
bant  distracti  lint  in  contraria  studio,  et 
consilia    (Vitringa) ;    but  chiefly  of   their 
diverging  tongues — a  statement  which  is  sup- 
posed to  conflict  with  the  findings  of  modern 
philology,  that  the  existing  differences  of 
language  among  mankind  are  the  result  of 
slow  and  gradual  changes  brought  about  by 
the  operation  of  natural  causes,  such  as  the 
influence  of  locality  in  changing  and  of  time 
in  corrupting  human  speech.     But  (1)  mo- 
dem philology  has   as  yet  only  succeeded 
in   explaining  the  growth  of  what  might 
b»  called    the   sub-modifications  of  human 
speech,  and  is  confessedly  unable  to  account 
for  what  appears  to  be  its  main  division  into 
a    Shemitic,    an    Aryan,   and    a    Turanian 
tongue,  which  may  have  been  produced  in 
the  sudden  and  miraculous  way  described  ; 
and  (2)  nothing  prevents  us  from  regarding 
the  two  events,  the  confusion  of  tongues  and 
the  dispersion  of  the  nations,  as  occurring 
simultaneously,  and  even  acting  and  reacting 
on  each  other.     As  the  tribes  parted,  their 
speech  would  diverge,  and,  on  the  other  hand, 
as  the  tongues  differed,  those  who  spoke  the 
same  or  cognate  dialects  would  draw  together 
and  draw  apart  from  the  rest.     We  may 
even  suppose  that,  prior  to  the  building  of 
Babel,  if  any  of  the  human  family  had  begun 
to  spread  themselves  abroad  upon  the  sur- 
face of  the  globe,  a  slight  diversity  in  human 
speech  had  begun  to  show  itself;  and  the 
truthfulness  of  the  narrative  will  in  no  wise 
be  endangered  by  admitting  that  the  Divine 
interposition  at  Babel  may  have  consisted  in 
quickening  a    natural    process  which    had 
already  commenced  to  operate  ;  nay,  we  are 
rather  warranted  to  conclude  that  the  whole 
work  of  subdividing  human  speech  was  not 


compressed  into  a  moment  of  time,  but,  after 
receiving  this  special  impulse,  was  left  to 
develop  and  complete  itself  as  the  nationi 
wandered  farther  and  ever  farther  from  the 
plains  of  Shinar  (cf.  Kurtz,  '  Hist,  of  the  Old 
Covenant,'  vol.  i.  pp.  108—117  (Clark'» 
For.  Theol.  Lib.),  and  'Quarry  on  Genesis,' 
pp.  195—206). 

Chaldean  leoend  of  the  tower  or 
Babel. — Berosus,  indeed,  does  not  refer  to  it. 
and  early  writers  are  obliged  to  have  recourse 
to  somewhat  doubtful  authorities  to  confirm 
it.  Eusebius,  e.  g. ,  quotes  Abydenus  as  saying 
that  "not  long  after  the  Flood,  the  ancient 
race  of  men  were  so  puffed  up  with  their 
strength  and  tallness  of  stature  that  they 
began  to  despise  and  contemn  the  gods,  and 
laboured  to  erect  that  very  lofty  tower  which 
is  now  called  Babylon,  intending  thereby  to 
scale  the  heavens.  But  when  the  building 
approached  the  sky,  behold,  the  gods  called 
in  the  aid  of  the  winds,  and  by  their  help 
overturned  the  tower,  and  cast  it  to  the 
ground  !  The  name  of  the  ruin  is  still  called 
Babel,  because  until  this  time  all  men  had 
used  the  same  speech';  but  now  there  was 
sent  upon  them  a  confusion  of  many  and 
diverse  tongues  "  ('  Praep.  Ev.,'  ix.  14).  But 
the  diligence  of  the  late  George  Smith  has 
been  rewarded  by  discovering  the  fragment 
of  an  Assyrian  tablet  (marked  K.  3657  in 
British  Museum)  containing  an  account  of 
the  building  of  the  tower,  in  which  the  gods 
are  represented  as  being  angry  at  the  work 
and  confounding  the  speech  of  the  builders. 
In  col.  L,  lines  5  and  6  (according  to  W.  St 
C.  Boscawen's  translation)  run — 

"  Babylon  corruptly  to  sin  went,  and 
Small  and  great  mingled  on  the  mound ;" 

while  in  col.  ii.,  lines  12,  13,  14,  15,  are — 

"  In  his  anger  also  the  secret  counsel  he 
poured  out 
To  scatter  abroad  his  face  he  set 
He  gave  a  command  to  make  strange 

their  speech 
,     .     .    their  progress  he  impeded." 

('  Records  of  the  Past,'  vol.  vi*.  p.  131  ;  rf 
'  Chaldajan  Genesis,'  p.  160.) 


HOM1LETICS. 

Ver.  4. — Tlie  tower-builders  of  Babel.  I.  The  impiety  op  their  design.  1 
Ambition.  They  were  desirous  of  achieving  fame,  or  "a  name"  for  themselves 
Whether  in  this  there  was  a  covert  sneer  at  the  exaltation  promised  to  the  Shemires 


OH.  XI.  1—  9. J  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  l«l 

or  simply  a  display  of  that  lust  of  glory  which  natively  resides  within  the  fallen 
heart,  it  was  essentially  a  guilty  purpose  hy  which  they  were  impelled.  In  only  on* 
direction  is  ambition  perfectly  legitimate,  viz.,  in  the  direction  of  moral  and  spiritual 
goodness,  as  distinguished  from  temporal  and  material  greatness  (cf.  1  Cor.  xii.  31). 
Only  then  may  the  passion  for  glory  be  exuberantly  gratified,  when  its  object  is  the 
living  God  instead  of  puny  and  unworthy  self  (cf.  Jer.  ix.  23,  24 ;  1  Cor.  i.  29,  31). 
2.  Rebellion.  Setting  its  head  among  the  clouds,  "  exalting  its  throne  above  the 
stars," it  was  designed  to  be  an  act  of  insolent  defiance  to  the  will  of  Heaven.  The 
city  and  the  tower  of  Babel  had  their  origin  in  deliberate,  determined,  enthusiastic, 
exulting  hostility  to  the  Divine  purpose  that  they  should  spread  themselves  abroad 
over  the  face  of  the  whole  earth.  And  herein  lies  the  essence  of  all  impiety:  what- 
ever thought,  counsel,  word,, or  work  derives  its  inspiration,  be  it  only  in  an  infini- 
tesimal degree,  from  antagonism  to  the  mind  of  God  is  sin.  Holiness  is  but  another 
name  fdr  obedience. 

II.  The  magnitude  op  their  enterprise.  The  undertaking  of  the  tower-builders 
was — 1.  Sublimely  conceived.  The  city  was  to  ward  off  invasion  from  without,  and 
to  counteract  disruption  from  within.  Gathering  men  of  a  common  tongue  into  a 
common  residence,  engaging  them  in  common  pursuits,  and  providing  them  with 
common  interests  was  the  sure  way  to  make  them  strong.  If  this  was  the  creative 
idea  out  of  which  cities  sprung,  the  Cainites,  if  not  pious,  must  at  least  have  been 
possessed  of  genius.  Then  the  tower  was  to  touch  the  skies.  Unscientific  perhaps, 
but  scarcely  irrational ;  "  an  undertaking  not  of  savages,  but  of  men  possessed  with 
the  idea  of  somehow  getting  above  nature."  And  though  certainly  to  aspire  after 
such  supremacy  over  nature  in  the  spirit  of  a  godless  science  which  recognises  no 
power  or  authority  superior  to  itself  was  the  very  sin  of  these  Babelites,  yet  nothing 
more  convincingly  attests  the  essential  greatness  of  man  than  the  ever-widening 
control  which  science  is  enabling  him  to  assert  over  the  forces  of  matter.  2.  Hope- 
fully begun.  The  builders  were  united  in  their  language  and  purpose.  The  place 
was  convenient  for  the  proposed  erection.  The  most  complete  preparations  were 
made  for  the  structure.  The  work  was  commenced  with  determination  and  amid 
universal  enthusiasm.  It  had  all  the  conditions  of  success,  humanly  speaking — one 
mind,  one  heart,  one  hand.  3.  Suddenly  abandoned.  "They  left  off  to  build  the 
city."  So  the  most  prosperous  undertakings  often  terminate  »in  miserable  failure. 
The  mighty  enterprise  was  mysteriously  frustrated.  So  have  all  such  wicked  com- 
binations in  times  past  been  overthrown.  Witness  the  great  world  empires  of 
Babylon,  Persia,  Greece,  Borne.  So  in  the  end  will  the  great  mystery  of  iniquity,  of 
which  that  early  Babel  was  the  first  type. 

III.  The  inspection  of  their  work.  1.  No  work  of  man  can  hope  to  escape  the 
eye  of  God.  Even  now  he  ia  minutely  acquainted  with  the  thoughts,  and  words,  and 
works,  and  ways  of  every  individual  on  the  earth  (Prov.  xv.  3  ;  Heb.  iv.  13),  while 
there  is  a  day  coming  when  "  there  is  nothing  covered  that  shall  not  be  revealed  " 
(Matt.  x.  26).  2.  Every  work  of  man  shall  be  judged  at  the  bar  of  God  (Eccles.  xii. 
14 ;  1  Cor.  iii.  13).  The  Divine  verdict  upon  human  undertakings  will  often  strangely 
conflict  with  the  judgments  of  men. 

IV.  The  confusion  op  their  tongues.  1.  As  a  fact  in  the  experience  of  the 
builders,  it  was — (1)  Unchallengeable.  They  could  not  understand  one  another,  so  that 
they  could  not  doubt  that  a  change  of  some  kind  had  passed  upon  their  speech  ;  and 
observation  convinces  us  that  as  men  have  now  a  variety  of  tongues,  something  must 
have  broken  up  the  original  unity  of  speech.  (2)  Mysterious.  It  is  not  likely  that 
these  primitive  builders  understood  how  their  language  had  been  transmuted.  Modern 
philology  has  no  certain  word  to  utter  upon  the  subject  yet.  (3)  Supernatural.  It 
was  effected  by  the  immediate  agency  of  God.  If  even  natural  causes  had  begun  to 
operate,  they  were  quickened  by  the  Divine  action.  Believers  in  a  God  who  made 
the  tongue  of  man  should  have  no  difficulty  in  believing  in  a  God  who  changed  the 
tongue  of  man.  2.  As  a  judgment  on  the  persons  of  the  builders,  it  was — (1)  Un- 
expected in  its  coming,  as  are  all  God's  judgments,  like  the  Flood  and  like  the  coming 
of  the  Son  of  man.  (2)  Deserved  by  its  subjects.  Caught,  as  it  were,  in  the  very  act 
of  insubordination,  guilty  of  nothing  short  of  treason  against  the  King  of  heaven, 
they  were  visited  with  summary  and  condign  chastisement.  So  are  all  God's  punish- 
ments richly  merited  by  those  on  whom  they  fall.   (3)  Appropriate  in  its  character 


1*8  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESI8.  [oh.  w.  1— ft 

It  was  fitting  that  they  who  had  abused  their  oneness  of  speech,  which  was  designed 
for  their  good,  to  Keep  them  in  the  Church,  should  be  punished  with  variety  of 
tongues.  (4)  Effectual  in  its  design.  Sent  to  scatter  them  abroad,  it  succeeded  in 
its  aim.     Man's  designs  often  fail ;  God's  never. 

V.  The  dispersion  of  their  ranks.  1.  Judicial  in  its  character.  In  its  inci- 
dence on  the  builders  it  wore  a  punitive  aspect.  Providences  that  are  full  of  bless- 
ings for  the  good  are  always  laden  with  curses  to  the  wicked.  2.  Beneficial  in  it* 
purpose.  The  scattering  of  the  earth's  population  over  the  surface  of  the  globe  wag 
originally  intended  for  what  it  has  eventually  turned  out  to  be,  a  blessing  for  the 
race.  3.  Unlimited  in  its  extent.  Though  the  original  dispersion  could  not  have 
carried  the  tribes  to  any  remote  distances  from  Shinar,  the  process  then  begun  was 
intended  not  to  rest  until  the  earth  was  fully  occupied  by  the  children  of  men. 

VI.  The  memorial  of  their  folly.  This  was — 1.  Exceedingly  expressive.  The 
unfinished  tower  was  designated  Babel,  or  Confusion.  It  is  well  that  things  should 
be  called  by  their  right  names.  The  name  of  Babel  was  an  epitome  of  the  foolish 
aim  and  end  of  the  builders.  The  world  is  full  of  such  monuments  of  folly.  2. 
Self-affixed.  So  God  often  compels  "  men  of  corrupt  minds"  and  "  reprobate  con- 
cerning the  faith  "  not  only  to  manifest,  but  also  to  publish,  their  own  folly.  3.  Long- 
enduring.  It  continued,  to  be  known  as  Babel  in  .the  days  of  Moses  and  long  after — 
an  emblem  of  that  shame  which  shall  eventually  be  the  portion  of  all  the  wicked. 

Learn — 1.  The  sinfulness  of  ambition.  2.  The  folly  of  attempting  to  resist  God. 
3.  The  power  of  God  in  carrying  out  his  purposes.  4.  The  mercy  of  God  in  dividing 
the  nations.    5.  The  ability  of  God  to  regather  the  divided  nations  of  the  earth. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vera.  1 — 9. — Order  brought  forth.  We  are  now  to  trace  the  rise  of  the  kingdom 
of  God  among  the  nations.  Already  in  the  case  of  Nimrod,  the  mighty  hunter 
before  the  Lord,  that  is,  by  permission  of  Divine  providence,  the  antagonism 
between  the  kingdom  of  God  and  the  kingdoms  of  this  world  has  been  sym- 
bolised. Now  we  find  the  concentration  of  the  world's  rebellion  and  ungodliness 
in  the  false  city,  type  of  the  worldly  power  throughout  the  Scriptures.  It  is  on  the 
plain  of  Shinar  to  which  the  early  migration  from  the  East  directed  the  course  of 
mankind.  We  are  not  told  at  what  time  the  settlement  in  Shinar  took  place.  As 
the  account  of  the  confusion  of  tongues  is  intioduced  between  the  larger  genealogy 
and  the  lesser,  we  may  infer  that  its  object  is  to  account  for  the  spread  of  nations. 
Whether  we  take  this  Babel  to  be  Nimrod's  Babel  or  an  earlier  one  is  of  very  little 
consequence.     The  whole  narrative  is  full  of  Divine  significance.     Notice — 

I.  Man's  Babel  is  a  lying  pretension.  It  rests  on  an  attempt  to  substitute  his 
own  foundation  of  society  for  God's  ;  it  is — 1.  False  safety — the  high  tower  to  keep 
above  the  flood.  2.  False  ambition — reaching  unto  heaven,  making  a  name  with 
bricks  and  mortar.  3.  False  unity — "  lest  we  be  scattered  abroad."  These  are  the 
characteristics  of  all  Babel  despotisms.  Material  foundations  to  rest  upon ;  lying 
itructures  built  upon  them. 

II.  God's  kingdom  is  not  really  hindered  by  man's  rebellion.  He  suffers  the 
Babel  structure  to  be  reared,  but  by  his  judgments  scatters  both  the  men  and  their 
projects,  making  the  rebellious  conspiracy  against  himself  prepare  the  way  for  his 
ultimate  universal  triumph.  So  it  has  been  all  through  the  history  of  the  world,  and 
especially  immediately  before  the  coming  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The  confusion 
of  tongues  was  a  judgment  and  at  the  same  time  a  mercy.  Those  that  are  filled 
with  such  ambitions  and  build  upon  suoh  foundations  are  not  fit  to  dwell  together  in 
one  place.  It  is  better  they  should  be  divided.  The  investigations  into  comparative 
grammar  and  the  genesis  of  human  language  point  to  some  primitive  seat  of  the 
earliest  form  of  speech  in  the  neighbourhood  indicated.  It  was  certainly  the  result 
of  the  false  form  of  society  with  which  men  began,  the  Nimrod  empire,  that  they 
could  not  remain  gathered  in  one  community;  and  as  they  spread  they  lost  their 
knowledge  of  their  original  language,  and  were  confounded  because  they  understood 
not  one  another's  speech.  It  is  remarkable  that  in  the  beginning  of  the  kingdom  of 
Christ,  the  true  city  of  God  which  shall  overspread  tho  world,  the  Spirit  bestow  sd 
the  gift  of  tongues,  as  if  to  signify  that  the  Babel  of  man's  lying  ambitions  was  u» 


OH.  XI.  1—9.]  THE  BOOK  Oif  GENESIS.  169 

cease,  and  in  the  truth  of  the  gospel  men  would  be  united  as  one  family,  "  under 

standing  one  another's  speeoh."— rK. 

Vor.  1. — Unity  of  language.  1.  The  original  birthright  of  the  human  race.  2. 
The  lost  inheritance  of  sinful  men.  3.  The  ultimate  goal  of  the  Christian  dispensa- 
tion.   4.  The  recovered  heritage  of  redeemed  humanity. — W. 

Ver.  2. — Note — 1.  The  benefit  of  a  wandering  condition.  It  sometimes  prevents 
the  rise  of  sinful  thoughts  and  wicked  deeds.  So  long  as  the  primitive  nomads 
were  travelling  from  station  to  station  they  did  not  think  of  either  rebellion  or  ambi- 
tion. So  Israel  followed  God  fully  in  the  wilderness.  2.  The  danger  of  a  settled 
state.  Established  in  the  fat  plain  of  Shinar,  they  wanted  a  city  and  a  tower.  So 
Israel  in  Canaan  waxed  fat  and  kicked.  So  Moab,  having  been  at  ease  from  his 
youth,  retained  his  scent  unchanged.  So  comfortable  surroundings  often  lead  men 
from  God.— W. 

Ver.  3.— Ancient  brichnakers.  I.  In  Shinab.  Examples  of  (1)  ingenuity,  (2) 
earnestness,  (3)  perseverance,  (4)  unity  in  sin. 

II,  In  Egypt  (Exod.  v.  7).  Illustrations  of  (1)  the  bondage,  (2)  the  degradation, 
(3)  the  misery,  (4)  hopelessness,  of  sin. — W. 

Ver.  4. — The  tower  of  Babel.  I.  A  monument  op  man's — 1.  Sinful  ambition.  2. 
Laborious  ingenuity.     3.  Demonstrated  feebleness.     4.  Stupendous  folly. 

II.  A  memorial  of  God's — 1.  Overruling  providence.  2.  Eesistless  power.  3. 
Retributive  justice.    4.  Beneficent  purpose. — W. 

Ver.  4. — God's  city  or  man's  city.  "And  they  said,  Go  to,  let  us  build  us  a 
city  and  a  tower,  whose  top  may  reach  unto  heaven ;  and  let  us  make  us  a  name,  lest 
we  be  scattered  abroad  upon  the  face  of  the  whole  earth."  In  the  world  after  the 
Flood  we  trace  the  outlines  of  the  gospel  dispensation.  To  Noah  was  revealed  "good 
will  toward  men ;"  the  acceptance  of  sacrifice  ;  faith  as  the  condition  and  channel  of 
blessing ;  and  work,  to  spread  the  knowledge  of  and  trust  in  his  name,  t.  «.  what  he 
is  pleased  to  reveal  concerning  himself.  But  "  the  carnal  mind  "  was  there  resisting 
the  Spirit.  Noah  and  his  seed  were  to  replenish  the  earth  (ch.  ix.  1 ;  cf.  Mark 
xvi.  15).  They  were  promised  safety  from  beasts,  of  whom,  if  separated,  they  might 
be  afraid  (ch.  ix.  2 ;  cf.  Matt.  x.  29,  31 ;  Luke  x.  19).  Here  was  a  trial  of  faith 
and  obedience  (cf.  Exod.  xxxiv.  24).  But  men  had  not  faith,  would  not  trust,  would 
not  go  forth  at  his  word.  Their  calling  was  to  seek  God's  city  (Heb.  xi.  10 — 16) ,  to 
live  as  citizens  of  it  (Phil.  iii.  20).  They  chose  a  city  for  themselves  ;  earthly 
security,  comforts,  luxuries.  Called  to  glorify  God's  name,  their  thought  was  to 
make  a  name  for  themselves.  Self  was  the  moving  power.  The  name  of  God  is 
the  trust  of  his  people  (Ps.  xx.  7 ;  Prov.  xviii.  10) ;  a  centre  of  unity  to  all  his 
children  in  every  place.  They  trusted  in  themselves ;  would  be  like  God  to  them- 
selves. The  tower,  the  work  of  their  own  hands,  was  to  be  their  centre  of  unity ; 
and  the  name  of  it  came  to  be  Babel,  i.  e.  confusion  (cf.  Matt.  xv.  13).  Love  draws 
mankind  together.  Self-seeking  tends  to  separation.  God  bade  them  spread  that 
they  might  be  united  in  faith  and  in  work.  They  chose  their  own  way  of  union,  and 
it  led  to  dispersion  with  no  bond  of  unity. 

I.  We  are  called  to  build  the  city  of  God  (Heb.  xii.  22).  To  prepare  the  way 
for  Bev.  xxil  3.  The  gifts  of  Christ  are  made  effectual  by  the  work  of  men.  That 
city,  built  of  living  stones  (1  Pet.  ii.  5),  cemented  not  with  slime,  but  by  unity  of 
faith  (Ephes.  iv.  3).  And  a  tower,  a  centre  of  unity,  the  "  good  confession  "  (Bom. 
xiv.  11  ;  Phil.  ii.  11).  And  to  obtain  a  name,  to  be  confessed  by  the  Lord  before  the 
angels,  to  be  acknowledged  as  his  "  brethren,"  and  stamped  with  the  "new  name."  And 
•  promise  given,  as  if  pointing  to  Babel :  "  Your  labour  is  not  in  vain  in  the  Lord." 

II.  Many  have  no  mind  to  build.  They  love  ease  and  have  no  earnestness, 
triflers  with  time,  or  direct  their  earnestness  to  earthly  prizes — a  name  among  men. 

III.  Even  believers  are  often  thus  hindered.  There  may  be  spiritual  selfish- 
ness along  with  really  spiritual  aims.  The  multitude  of  cares  may  distract  the  soul. 
Temptations  may  wear  the  garb  of  zeal,  or  of  charity,  or  of  prudence.  Watch  and 
pray.     God's  faithfulness  wiil  not  fail  (1  Cor.  x.  13).— M. 


170 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


[OH.  XL  10—28 


Ver.  5. — The  cities  of  men  and  the  city  of  God  (Gen.  xi.  5 ;  Heb.  xi.  16).  I. 
Their  buiujers.  Of  the  first,  men — mostly  wicked  men  ;  of  the  second,  the  Architect 
of  the  universe. 

II.  Their  origin.  Of  the  first  (Enoch,  ch.  iv.  17;  and  Babel,  ch.  xi.  5),  hostility 
to  God  ;  of  the  second,  love  to  man. 

III.  Their  design.  Of  the  first,  to  be  a  bond  of  union  among  sinners;  of  tht 
second,  to  be  a  residence  for  God's  children. 

IV.  Their  appearance.  Of  the  first,  that  of  slime,  mud,  bricks,  or  at  best  stones ; 
of  the  second,  that  of  gold  and  pearls. 

V.  Their  duration.  Of  the  first,  it  is  written  that  with  all  the  other  works  of 
man,  they  shall  be  burnt  up ;  of  the  second,  that  it  shall  be  everlasting. — W. 

Ver.  6. —  Vain  imaginings — 1.  Commonly  spring  from  misused  blessings.  A 
united  people,  with  a  common  language,  and  enjoying  a  measure  of  success  in  their 
buildings,  the  Babelites  became  vain  in  their  imaginings.  So  do  wicked  men  gener- 
ally misinterpret  the  Divine  beneficence  and  leniency  which  suffers  them  to  proceed 
a  certain  length  with  their  wickedness  (cf.  Bom.  i.  21 ;  2  Tim.  iii.  9).  2.  Are  never 
unobserved  by  him  against  whom  they  are  directed  (Deut.  xxxi.  21 ;  1  Chron.  xxviii. 
9).  3.  Are  doomed  to  certain  and  complete  frustration  (Ps.  ii.  1 ;  Luke  i.  51  ;  2 
Cor.  x.  6).— W. 

Ver.  7. — Babel  and  Zion.     1.  Confusion,  division,  dispersion.    2.  Gathering  the 

dispersed,  uniting  the  divided,  restoring  order  to  the  confused. — W. 


\  6.     The  Generations  op  Shem  (ch.  xi.  10 — 26). 
EXPOSITION. 


Ver.  10. — These  are  the  generations  of 
Shem.  The  new  section,  opening  with  the 
usual  formula  (cf.  ch.  ii.  4  ;  v.  1  ;  vi.  9  ;  x. 
1 ),  reverts  to  the  main  purpose  of  the  inspired 
narrative,  which  is  to  trace  the  onward  deve- 
lopment of  the  line  of  promise  ;  and  this  it 
does  by  carrying  forward  the  genealogical 
history  of  the  holy  seed  through  ten  genera- 
tions till  it  reaches  Abram.  Taken  along  with 
ch.  v.,  with  which  it  corresponds,  the  present 
table  completes  the  chronological  outline, 
from  Adam  to  the  Hebrew  patriarch.  Shem 
was  an  hundred  years  old  (literally,  the  son 
of  an  hundred  years,  i.  e.  in  his  hundredth 
year),  and  begat  Arphaxad.  The  English 
term  is  borrowed  from  the  LXX. ,  the  Hebrew 
being  Arpachsliadh,  a  compound  of  which 
the  principal  part  is  "1E>3,  giving  rise  to  the 
Chashdim  or  Chaldseans  ;  whence  Professor 
Lewis  regards  it  as  originally  the  name  of  a 
people  transferred  to  their  ancestor  (cf.  ch.  x. 
?2).  Two  years  after  the  flood.  So  that  in 
Noah's  603rd  year  Shem  was  100,  and  must 
accordingly  have  been  bom  in  Noah's  503rd 
year,  i.  e.  two  years  after  Japheth  (cf.  ch.  v. 
32  ;  x.  21).  The  mention  of  the  Flood  indi- 
cates the  point  of  time  from  which  the  present 
section  is  designed  to  be  reckoned. 

Ver.  11.— And  Shem  lived  after  he  begat 
Arphaxad  five  hundred  years  (making  his 
life  in  all  600  years),  and  begat  sons  and 
daughters  (concerning  whom  Scripture  is 
silent,  as  not  being  included  in  the  holy  line). 

Vers.  12,  13. — And  Arphaxad  lived   five 


and  thirty  years  (the  first  indication  of  a 
change  having  transpired  upon  human  life 
after  the  Flood,  the  average  age  of  paternity 
prior  to  that  event  being  117,  the  earliest 
65,  and  the  latest  187),  and  begat  Salah. 
Shalach,  literally,  emission,  or  the  sending 
forth,  of  water,  a  memorial  of  the  Flood 
(Bochart) ;  or  of  an  arrow  or  dart  {vide  ch. 
x.  24).  And  Arphaxad  lived  after  he  begat 
Salah  four  hundred  and  three  years  (making 
a  total  of  438,  i.  e.  339  years  less  than  the 
youngest  complete  life  in  the  prediluvian 
table, — Enoch's,  of  course,  being  excepted, — 
and  162  less  than  Shem's :  a  seccad  indica- 
tion of  the  shortening  of  the  period  cf  exist- 
ence), and  begat  sons  and  daughters. 

Vers.  14,  15. — And  Salah  lived  thirty 
years,  and  begat  Eber.  Literally,  the  region 
on  the  other  side  (iripav);  from  'IS}?,  to  pass 
over  (cf.  imp,  Greek ;  iiber,  German ;  over, 
Saxon).  The  ancestor  of  the  Hebrews  (ch.  x 
21),  so  called  from  his  descendants  having 
crossed  the  Euphrates  and  commenced  a 
southward  emigration,  or  from  the  circum- 
stance that  he  or  another  portion  of  his 
posterity  remained  on  the  other  side.  Prof. 
Lewis  thinks  that  this  branch  of  the  Shem- 
ites,  having  lingered  so  long  in  the  upper 
country,  had  not  much  to  do  with  the  tower 
building  on  the  plain  of  Shinar.  And  Salah 
lived  after  he  begat  Eber  four  hundred  and 
three  years  (in  all  433  years,  or  five  years 
less  than  Arphaxad),  and  hegat  sons  mi 
daughters. 


oh.  XI  10— 26. J 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


171 


Vers.  16,  17. — And  Eber  lived  four  and 
thirty  years,  and  begat  Peleg.  Division; 
from  palag,  to  divide.  For  the  reason  of 
this  cognomen  vide  ch.  x.  25.  And  Eber 
lived  after  he  begat  Peleg  four  hundred  and 
thirty  years  (thus  reaching  the  age  of  464, 
the  longest-lived  of  the  postdiluvian  fathers), 
and  begat  sons  and  daughters. 

Vers.  18,  19.— And  Peleg  lived  thirty 
years,  and  begat  Reu.  Friend  (sc.  of  God, 
or  of  men),  ox  friendship  ;  from  a  root  signi- 
fying to  pasture,  to  tend,  to  care  for.  Bo- 
chart  traces  his  descendants  in  the  great 
Nisaean  plain  Ragau  (Judith  i.  6),  situated 
on  the  confines  of  Armenia  and  Media,  and 
having,  according  to  Strabo,  a  city  named 
Ragse  or  Ragiae.  And  Peleg  lived  after  he 
begat  Ken  two  hundred  and  nine  years  (thus 
making  his  entire  age  239  years),  and  begat 
sons  and  daughters. 

Vers.  20,  21. — And  Eeu  lived  two  and 
thirty  years,  and  begat  Serug.  Vine-shoot, 
from  sarag,  to  wind  (Gesenius,  Lange,  Lewis, 
Murphy) ;  strength,  firmness,  from  the 
sense  of  twisting  which  the  root  bears 
(Fiirst).  And  Reu  lived  after  he  begat  Serug 
two  hundred  and  seven  years  (in  all  239), 
and  begat  sons  and  daughters. 

Vers.  22,  23.— And  Serug  lived  thirty 
years,  and  begat  Nahor.  Panting  (Gese- 
nius) ;  from  nachar,  to  breathe  hard,  to 
snort.  Piercer,  slayer  (Fiirst) ;  from  an  un- 
used root  signifying  to  bore  through.  And 
Serug  lived  after  he  begat  Nahor  two 
hundred  years  (or  230  in  all),  and  begat 
sons  and  daughters. 

Vers.  24,  25. — And  Nahor  lived  nine  and 
twenty  years,  and  bejat  Terah.  Terach,  or 
turning,  tarrying ;  from  tarach,  an  unused 
Cbaldsean  root  meaning  to  delay  (Gesenius) ; 


singularly  appropriate  to  his  future  charactci 
and  history,  from  which  probably  the  name 
reverted  to  him.  Ewald  renders  Terach  by 
"migration,"  considering  Tarach  =  arach, 
to  stretch  out.  And  Nahor  lived  after  he 
begat  Terah  an  nundred  and  nineteen  years 
(148  in  all,  the  shortest  liver  among  the 
postdiluvian  patriart  as),  and  begat  sons  and 
daughters. 

Ver.  26. — And  Terah  lived  seventy  years, 
and  begat  Abram.  First  named  on  account 
of  his  spiritual  pre-eminence.  If  Abram  was 
Tenth's  eldest  son,  then,  as  Abram  was 
seventy-five  years  of  age  when  Terah  died 
(ch.  xii.  4),  Terah's  whole  life  could  only 
have  been  145  years.  But  Terah  lived  to  the 
age  of  205  years  (ch.  xi.  32)  ;  therefore 
Abram  was  born  in  Terah's  130th  year. 
This,  however,  makes  it  surprising  that 
Abraham  should  have  reckoned  it  impossible 
for  him  to  have  a  son  at  100  years  (ch.  xvii. 
17) ;  only,  after  having  lived  so  long  in 
childless  wedlock,  it  was  not  strange  that  he' 
should  feel  somewhat  doubtful  of  any  issue 
by  Sarai.  Kalisch  believes  that  Stephen 
(Acts  vii.  4)  made  a  mistake  in  saying  Terah 
died  before  his  son's  migration  from  Charran, 
and  that  he  really  survived  that  event  by 
sixty  years  ;  while  the  Samaritan  text  escapes 
the  difficulty  by  shortening  the  life  of  Terah 
to  145  years.  And  Nahor,  who  must  have 
been  younger  than  Haran,  since  he  married 
Haran's  daughter.  And  Haran,  who,  as  the 
eldest,  must  have  been  born  in  Terah's 
seventieth  year.  Thus  the  second  family 
register,  like  the  first,  concludes  after  ten 
generations  with  the  birth  of  three  sons, 
who,  like  Noah's,  are  mentioned  not  in  the 
order  of  their  ages,  but  of  their  spiritual 
pre-eminenee. 


Chronological  Tablb. 


Names 

of 

Patriarchs. 


He 

Age  at 

3EEW  T 

EXT. 
Total 

Si 
Age  at 

JHARITJ 

jr. 

Total 

Se 

Age  at 

PTUAOIH 

Best 

Rest 

Best 

Total 

son's 

of 

no.  of 

son's 

of 

no.  of 

son's 

of 

birth. 

life. 

years. 

birth. 

life. 

years. 

birth. 

life. 

yeai-s. 

100 

500 

600 

100 

500 

600 

100 

500 

600 

35 

403 

438 

135 

303 

438 

135 
130 

400 
330 

535 
460 

30 

403 

433 

130 

303 

433 

130 

330 

460 

34 

430 

464 

134 

270 

404 

134 

270 

404 

30 

209 

239 

130 

109 

239 

130 

209 

339 

32 

207 

239 

132 

107 

239 

132 

207 

339 

30 

200 

230 

130 

100 

230 

130 

200 

330 

29 

119 

148 

79 

69 

148 

179 

125 

304 

70 

135 

205 

70 

75 

145 

70 

135 

205 

390 

1040 

1270 

Shem 

AttPHAXAD 
( Ka'ivav) 

Salah 

Eber 

Peleo 

Reu 

Serug 

Nahor 

Terah 


From  this  table  it  appears  that  292  years, 
according  to  the  Hebrew  text,  passed  away 
between  the  Flood  and  the  birth,  or  292  + 


75  =  367  between  the  Flood  and  the  call  ol 
Abraham.  Reckoning,  however,  the  age  of 
Terah  at  Abram's  birth  as  130  (vide  Ex 


172 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  XI.  10— 2& 


position),  the  full  period  between  the  Deluge 
and  the  patriarch's  departure  from  Haran 
will  be  367  +  60  =  427  years,  which,  allowing 
Qve  pairs  to  each  family,  Murphy  computes, 
would  in  the  course  of  ten  generations  yield 
a  population  of  15,625,000  souls;  or,  sup- 
posing a  rate  of  increase  equal  to  that  of 
Abraham's  posterity  in  Egypt  during  the 
400  years  that  elapsed  from  the  call  to  the 
exodus,  the  inhabitants  of  the  world  in  the 
time  of  Abraham  would  be  between  seven  and 
eight  millions.  It  must,  however,  be  remem- 
bered that  an  element  of  uncertainty  enters 
into  all  computations  based  upon  even  the 
Hebrew  text.  The  age  of  Terah  at  the  birth 
(apparently)  of  Abram  is  put  down  at  seventy. 
But  it  admits  of  demonstration  that  Abram 
was  born  in  the  130th  year  of  Terah.  What 
guarantee  then  do  we  possess  that  in  every 
instance  the  registered  son  was  the  firstborn  ? 
In  the  case  of  Arphaxad  this  is  almost  im- 
plied in  the  stntoment  that  he  was  born  two 
years  after  the  Flood.  But  if  the  case  of 
Eber  were  parallel  with  that  of  Terah,  and 
Joktan  were  the  son  that  he  begat  in  his 
thirty-fourth  year,  then  obviously  the  birth  of 
Peleg,  li'jf  that  of  Abram,  may  have  happened 
sixty  years  later ;  in  which  case  it  is  apparent 
that  any  reckoning  which  proceeded  on  the 
minute  verbal  accuracy  of   the   registered 


numbers  would  be  entirely  at  fault  This  col 
sideration  might  have  gone  far  to  explain  th« 
wide  divergence  between  the  numbers  of  the 
Samaritan  and  Septuagint  as  compared  with 
the  Hebrew  text,  had  it  not  been  that  they 
both  agree  with  it  in  setting  down  seventy  as 
the  age  of  Terah  at  the  date  of  Abram's 
birth.  The  palpable  artificiality  also  of 
these  later  tables  renders  them  even  less 
worthy  of  credit  than  the  Hebrew.  The 
introduction  by  the  LXX.  of  Cainan  as 
the  son  of  Arphaxad,  though  seemingly 
confirmed  by  Luke  (Luke  iii.  35,  36),  is 
clearly  an  interpolation.  It  i-es  not  occur 
in  the  LXX.  version  of  1  Chron.  i.  24, 
and  is  not  found  in  either  the  Samaritan 
Pentateuch,  the  Targums  or  the  ancient  ver- 
sions, in  Josephus  or  Philo,  or  in  the  Codex 
Beza  of  the  Gospel  of  Luke.  Its  appearance 
in  Luke  (and  probably  also  in  the  LXX.)  can 
only  be  explained  as  an  interpolation.  Words- 
worth is  inclined  to  regard  it  as  authentic  in 
Luke,  and  to  suppose  that  Cainaan  was  ex- 
cluded from  the  Mosaic  table  either  to  render 
it  symmetrical,  as  Luke's  table  is  rendered 
symmetrical  by  its  insertion,  or  because  of 
some  moral  offence,  which,  though  necessi- 
tating his  expulsion  from  a  Hebrew  register, 
would  not  prevent  his  reappearance  in  hi* 
proper  place  under  the  gospel. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  10 — 2fi. — From  Shem  to  Abram.  1.  The  separation  of  the  godly  sped. 
The  m. nls  tli.-ii  constitute  the  Church  of  God  upon  the  earth  are  always,  as  these 
Hebrew  patriarchs — 1.  Known  to  God  ;  and  that  not  merely  in  the  mass,  but  as  indi- 
viduals, or  units;  nor  simply  superficially  and  slightly, but  minutely  and  thoroughly. 
He  knows  the  fathers  they  descend  from,  the  families  they  belong  to,  the  names 
by  which  they  are  designated,  the  number  of  years  they  live,  and  the  children  they 
leave  behind  them  on  the  earth  (cf.  Ps.  i.  6  ;  2  Tim.  ii.  19).  2.  Separated  by  God. 
This  was  one  of  the  great  ends  contemplated  by  the  division  of  me  people  which 
happened  in  the  days  of  Peleg,  which  was  designed  to  eliminate  the  Shemites  from 
the  rest  of  mankind.  Then  the  migration  of  the  sons  of  Eber  contributed  further 
to  the  isolation  of  the  children  of  the  promise.  And,  lastly,  the  selection  of  the 
son,  not  always  the  firstborn,  through  whom  the  hope  of  the  gospel  was  to  be  carried 
on  tended  in  the  same  direction.  So  God  afterwards  separated  Israel  from  the  na- 
tions. So  he  still  by  his  providence  and  his  word  calls  out  and  separates  his  people 
from  the  world  (cf.  1  Kings  viii.  53;  2  Cor.  vi.  17).  3.  Honoured  before  God;  by 
being  selected  as  the  vessels  of  his  grace,  the  channels  of  his  promise,  the  ministers 
of  his  gospel,  and  the  messengers  of  his  covenant,  whi'e  others  are  passed  by ;  and 
by  being  written  in  God's  book  of  remembrance,  whilst  others  are  forgotten  (cf.  1 
8am.  ii.  30;  Ps.  xci.  15  ;  Mai.  iii.  16  ;  Matt.  x.  32 ;  2  1  tCJ.  ii.  20;  Rev.  iii.  o). 

II.  The  shortening  of  human  life.  A  second  characteristic  of  the  postdiluvian 
era.  1.  A  patent/act.  Even  Shem,  the  longest  liver  of  the  men  of  this  period,  did 
not  continue  on  the  earth  so  long  as  Lamech,  the  shortest  liver  of  the  previous  age, 


oh.  xi.  10— 2«.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS  1TI 

by  177  years;  while  the  life  of  Arphaxad  was  shorter  than  that  of  his  father  by  162 
years,  and  the  days  of  Terah  at  the  close  dwindled  down  to  205  years.  2.  A  potent 
sermon.  Whether  the  comparative  brevity  of  life  immediately  after  the  Flood  was 
due  to  any  change  in  the  physical  constitution  of  man,  or  to  the  altered  conditions 
of  existence  under  the  Noachic  covenant,  or  to  the  gradual  deterioration  of  the  race 
through  the  lapse  of  time,  or  to  the  direct  appointment  of  Heaven,  it  was  admirably 
fitted  to  remind  them  of — (1)  The  reality  of  sin-  With  its  penalty  descending  so 
palpably  and  frequently  it  would  seem  impossible  to  challenge  the  fact  of  their  being 
•  guilty  and  condemned  race.  (2)  The  necessity  of  repentance.  Every  death  that 
happened  would  sound  like  a  trumpet-call  to  sinful  men  to  turn  to  God.  (3)  The 
vanity  of  life.  The  long  terms  of-  existence  that  were  meted  out  to  men  before  the 
Flood  might  tempt  them  to  forget  the  better  country,  even  an  heavenly,  and  to  seek  a 
permanent  inheritance  on  earth ;  it  would  almost  seem  apparent  to  these  short  livers 
that  no  such  inheritance  could  be  obtained  below.  Alas  that  the  shortness  of  man's 
career  beneath  the  sun  is  now  so  familiar  that  it  has  well  nigh  ceased  to  impress  the 
mind  with  anything!  (4)  The  certainty  of  death.  When  men's  lives  were  counted 
by  centuries  it  might  be  easy  to  evade  the  thought  of  death.  When  decades  came  to 
_  be  enough  to  reckon  up  the  longest  term  of  existence,  it  could  scarcely  fail  to  remind 
them  that  "  it  was  appointed  unto  all  men  once  to  die  " 

III.  The  nearinq  of  this  gospel  promise.  Ten  generations  further  down  the 
stream  of  time  do  we  see  the  promise  carried  in  this  second  genealogical  table.  It 
was — 1.  A  vindication  of  the  Divine  faithfulness  in  adhering  to  his  promise.  Already 
twenty  generations  had  come  and  gone,  and  neither  was  the  promise  forgotten  nor 
had  the  holy  line  been  allowed  to  become  extinct.  Ever  since  Adam's  day  in  Eden 
the  covenant-keeping  Jehovah  had  found  a  seed  to  serve  him,  even  in  the  darkest 
times,  and  had  been  careful  to  raise  up  saints  who  would  transmit  the  hope  of  the 
gospel  to  future  times.  It  was  a  proof  to  the  passing  generations  that  God  was  still 
remembering  his  promise,  and  was  intending  to  make  it  good  in  the  fulness  of  the 
times.  2.  A  demonstration  of  God's  ability  to  keep  his  promise.  Not  once  through 
all  the  bygone  centuries  had  a  link  been  found  wanting  in  the  chain  of  saintly  men 
through  whom  the  promise  was  to  be  transmitted.  It  was  a  clear  pledge  that  God 
would  still  be  able  to  supply  the  necessary  links  that  might  be  required  to  carry  it 
forward  to  its  ultimate  fulfilment. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  10 — 26. — The  order  of  grace  is — 1.  Determined  by  God,  and  not  by  man. 
4.  Arranged  after  the  Spirit,  and  not  according  to  the  flesh.  3.  Appointed  for  the 
world's  good  as  well  as  for  the  Church's  safety. — W. 

Vers.  10 — 32. —  Divine  traditions.  A  genealogy  of  Shem  and  of  Terah,  in 
order  to  set  forth  clearly  the  position  of  Abraham  and  that  of  his  nephew  Lot,  and 
their  connection  with  Ur  of  the  Chaldees  and  Canaan.  The  chosen  family  is  about, 
to  be  separated  from  their  country,  but  we  are  not  told  that  there  was  no  light  of 
God  shining  in  Ur  of  the  Chaldees.  Probably  there  was  the  tradition  of  Shem's 
knowledge  handed  down  through  the  generations.  Arphaxad  was  horn  two  vears 
after  the  Flood;  Salah,  thirty-seven  years;  Eber,  sixty-seven  years;  Peleg,"  one 
hundred  and  one  years  ;  Reu,  one  hundred  and  thirty-one  years  ;  Serug,  one  hundred 
and  sixty-three  years;  Nahor,  one  hundred  and  ninety-three  years;  Terah,  the 
father  of  Abraham,  two  hundred  and  twenty-two  years — no  great  length  of  time 
for  traditions  to  be  preserved.  The  call  of  Abraui  was  not  merely  his  separation 
from  idolatry,  but  his  consecration  to  the  special  vocation  of  founding  the  religiou 
laaiitutions  which  were  to  be  connected  with  his  family. — B. 


174 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xi.  87—32. 


PAET    III. 

THE  PATRIARCHAL  AGE  OF  THE  WORLD.    Ch.  XI.  27— L.  26 


|  7.     The  Generations  of  Terah  (Ch.  XI.  27— XXV.  11). 


Ver.  27. — How  (literally,  and,  intimating 
the  close  connection  of  the  present  with  the 
preceding  section)  these  are  the  generations 
— the  commencement  of  a  new  subdivision 
of  the  history  (Keil),  and  neither  the  wind- 
ing-up of  the  foregoing  genealogy  ('  Speaker's 
Commentary ')  nor  the  heading  only  of  the 
brief  paragraph  in  vers.  27 — 32  (Lange  ;  vide 
ch.  ii.  4) — of  Terah.  Not  of  Abram  ;  partly 
because  mainly  occupied  with  the  career  not 
of  Abram's  son,  in  which  case  "  the  genera- 
tions of  Abram"  would  have  been  appro- 
priate, but  of  Abram  himself,  Terah's  son ; 
and  partly  owing  to  the  subsidiary  design  to 
indicate  Nahor's  connection,  through  Re- 
bekah,  with  the  promised  seed  (cf.  Quarry, 
p.  415).  Terah  begat  Abram,  "  Father 
of  Elevation,"  who  is  mentioned  first  not 
because  he  happened  to  be  Terah's  eldest  son 
(Keil),  which  he  was  not  (vide  ch.  xi.  26),  or 
because  Moses  was  indifferent  to  the  order  in 
which  the  sons  of  Terah  were  introduced 
(Calvin),  but  because  of  his  spiritual  pre- 
eminence as  the  head  of  the  theocratic  line 
(Wordsworth).  Nahor,  "Panting,"  not  to 
be  confounded  with  his  grandfather  of  the 
same  name  (ver.  25).  Haran,  "Tarrying," 
the  eldest  eon  of  Terah  (ver.  26),  and,  along 
with  Abram  and  Nahor,  reintroduced  into 
the  narrative  on  account  of  his  relationship 
to  Lot  and  Milcah.  That  Terah  had  othur 
sons  (Calvin)  does  not  appear  probable.  And 
Haran  begat  Lot.  OP  ;  of  uncertain  ety- 
mology, but  may  be  =  DP,  a  concealed,  i.  e. 
obscure,  low  one,  or  perhaps  a  dark-coloured 
one  (Fiirst). 

"Ver.  28. — And  Haran  died  before  his 
father.  Literally,  upon  the  face  of  his 
father;  tvhtirtop  tov  Trarptu;  abrov  (LXX)  ; 
while'  his  father  was  alive  (Munster,  Luther, 
Calvin,  Rosenmiiller) ;  perhaps  also  in  his 
father's  presence  (Keil,  Lange),  though  the 
Jewish  fable  may  be  discarded  that  Terah, 
at  this  time  an  idolater,  accused  his  sons 
to  Nimrod,  who  cast  them  into  a  furnace 
for  refusing  to  worship  the  fire-god,  and 
that  Haran  perished  in  the  flames  in  his 
father's  sight.  The  decease  of  Haran  is  the 
first  recorded  instance  rf  the  natural  death 


of  a  son  hefbre  his  father.  In  the  land 
of  his  nativity.  'Ev  ry  yy  y  iyevvy9ii 
(LXX.).  In  Ur  of  theChaldees.  Ur  Kasdim 
(ch.  xi.  31  ;  xv.  7 ;  Neh.  ix.  7).  The  Kasdim 
— formerly  believed  to  have  been  Shemites  on 
account  of  (1)  Abram's  settlement  among 
them,  (2)  the  preservation  of  the  name 
Kesed  among  his  kindred  (ch.  xxii.  22),  (3) 
the  close  affinity  to  a  Shemite  tongue  of  the 
language  known  to  modern  philologists  as 
Chaldve,  an  Aramaean  dialect  differing  but 
slightly  from  the  Syriac  (Heeren),  and  (4) 
the  supposed  identity  or  intimate  connectior 
of  the  Babylonians  with  the  Assyrians  (Nie 
buhr) — are  now,  with  greater  probability 
and  certainly  with  closer  adherence  to  Bib- 
lical history  (eh.  x.  8 — 12),  regarded  as  having 
been  a  Hamite  race  (Bawlinson,  Smith) ;  an 
opinion  which  receives  confirmation  from  (1) 
the  statement  of  Homer  ('  Odyss.,'  i.  23,  24), 
that  the  Ethiopians  were  divided  and  dwelt 
at  the  ends  of  the  earth,  towards  the  setting 
and  the  rising  sun,  i.  e. ,  according  to  Strabo, 
on  both  sides  of  the  Arabian  Gulf;  (2)  the 
primitive  traditions  (a)  of  the  Greeks,  who 
regarded  Memnon,  King  of  Ethiopia,  as  the 
founder  of  Susa  (Herod.,  v.  54),  and  the  son 
of  a  Cissian  woman  (Strabo,  xv.  3,  §  2  ;  (b) 
of  the  Nilotic  Ethiopians,  who  claimed  him 
as  one  of  their  monarchs ;  and-  (c)  of  the 
Egyptians,  who  identified  him  with  their 
King  Amunoph  III.,  whose  statue  became 
known  as  the  vocal  Memnon  (vide  Rawlin- 
son's  'Ancient  Monarchies,'  vol.  i.  p.  48) ;  (3) 
the  testimony  of  Hoses  of  Chorene  ('  Histon 
of  Armenia,'  i.  6),  who  connects  in  thr 
closest  way  Babylonia,  Egypt,  and  Ethiopia 
Proper,  identifying  Belus,  King  of  Babylon, 
with  Nimrod,  and  making  him  the  son  o! 
Mizraim,  or  the  grandson  of  Cush  ;  and  (4) 
the  monumental  history  of  Babylonia,  which 
shows  the  language  of  the  earliest  inscrip- 
tions, according  to  Rawlinson  "  differing 
greatly  from  the  later  Babylonian,"  to  have 
been  that  of  a  Turanian  people  (cf.  '  Record* 
of  the  Past,'  vol.  iii.  p.  3).  The  term  Ur 
has  been  explained  to  oo  identical  with  'Ir, 
a  city  (Rawlinson) ;  the  Zend  Vare,  a  fortress 
(Geseriius) ;  Ur,  the  light  country,  i.  e.  th« 
land  of  the  sun-rising  (Fiirst);  and  even  Ur 


oh.  xi.  27—32.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


178 


fire,  with  special  reference  to  the  legendary 
furnace  already  referred  to  (Talmudists). 
Whether  a  district  (LXX.,  Lange,  Kalisch) 
or  a  city  (Josephus,  Eusobius,  Onkelos, 
Drusius,  Keil,  Murphy,  'Speaker's  Com- 
mentary '),  its  exact  site  is  uncertain.  Rival 
claimants  for  the  honour  of  representing 
it  havo  appeared  in  (1)  a  Persian  fortress 
(Persicum  Castellum)  of  the  name  of  Ur, 
mentioned  by  Amniianus  Marcellinus  (lxxv. 
c.  8)  as  lying  between  Nfeibis  and  the 
Tigris  (Bochart,  Micliaelis,  Kosenmiiller, 
Delitzsch) ;  (2)  the  modern  Orfah,  the 
Edessa  of  the  Greeks,  situated  "on  one  of 
the  bare,  rugged  spurs  which  descend  from 
the  mountains  of  Armenia  into  the  Assyrian 
plains"  (Stanley's  'Jewish  Church,'  i.  7); 
and  (3)  Hur,  the  most  important  of  the 
early  capitals  of  Chaldsea,  now  the  ruins  of 
Mugheir, '  at  no  great  distance  from  the 
mouth,  and  six  miles  to  the  west,  of  the 
Euphrates  (Rawlinson's  '  Ancient  Monarch- 
ies, L  15,  16 ;  Smith's  'Assyrian  Dis- 
coveries,' xii.  233  ;  '  Records  of  the  Past,' 
vol.  iii.  p.  9).  Yet  none  of  them  is  quite 
exempt  from  difficulty.  A  military  fort,  to 
take  the  first-named  location,  does  not 
appear  a  suitable  or  likely  place  for  a 
nomade  horde  to  settle  in  ;  while  the  second 
has  been  reckoned  too  near  Charran,  the 
first  place  of  encampment  of  the  emigrants  ; 
and  the  third,  besides  being  exceedingly 
remote  from  Charran,  scarcely  harmonises 
with  Stephen's  speech  before  the  Sanhedrim 
(Acts  vii.  2).  Unless,  therefore,  Stephen 
meant  Chaldsea  when  he  said  Mesopotamia 
(Dykes),  and  Abraham  could  speak  of 
Northern  Mesopotamia  as  his  country  (ch. 
xxiv.  4),  when  in  reality  he  belonged  to 
Southern  Babylonia,  the  identification  of 
Ur  of  the  Chaldees  with  the  Mugheir  ruin 
though  regarded  with  most  favour  by  archas- 
ologists,  will  continue  to  be  doubtful ;  while, 
if  the  clan  march  commenced  at  Edessa,  it 
will  always  require  an  effort  to  account  for 
their  coming  to  a  halt  so  soon  after  starting 
and  so  near  home  ;  and  the  Nisilns  station, 
though  apparently  more  suitable  than  either 
in  respect  of  distance,  will  remain  encum- 
bered with  its  own  peculiar  difficulties.  It 
would  seem,  therefore,  as  if  the  exact  situa- 
tion of  the  patriarchal  town  or  country  must 
be  left  undetermined  until  further  light  can 
be  obtained. 

Ver.  29.— And  Abram  and  Nahor  took 
them  wives  (cf.  ch.  vi.  2)  :  the  name  of 
Abram's  wife  was  Sarai.  "  My  princess," 
from  mrah,  to  rule  (Gesenius,  Lange) ; 
"Strife"  (Kalisch,  Murphy):  "Jah  is 
ruler"  (Fiirst).  The  LXX.  write  Zapa, 
changing  afterwards  to  'S.tippa  to  corre- 
nd  with  Sarah.     That  Sarai  was  Iscah 

Eiephus,    Augustine,    Jerome,   Jonathan) 
mm  inferred  from  ch.   xx.  12 ;  but, 


though  receiving  apparent  sanction  from 
ver.  31,  this  opinion  "  is  not  supported  by 
any  solid  argument"  (Roscnmiiller).  And 
the  name  of  Nahor's  wife,  Milcah  (Queen,  or 
Counsel),  the  daughter  of  Haran,  i.  e. 
Nahor's  niece.  Marriage  with  a  half-sister 
or  a  niece  was  afterwards  forbidden  by  the 
Mosaic  code  (Lcvit  xviii.  9,  14).  The  father 
of  Milcah,  and  the  father  of  Iscah,  whose 
name  "  Seer  "  may  have  been  introduced  into 
the  narrative  like  that  of  Naamah  (ch.  iv.  22), 
as  that  of  an  eminent  lady  connected  with  the 
family  (Murphy).  Ewald's  hypothesis,  that 
Iscah  was  Lot's  wife,  is  pure  conjecture. 

Ver.  30.  —  But  Sarai  was  barren ;  she 
had  no  child.  Perhaps  in  contrast  to  Mil- 
cah, who  by  this  time  had  begun  to  have  a 
family  (Murphy). 

Ver.  31.— And  Terah  took — an  act  of 
pure  human  volition  on  the  part  of  Terah 
(Kalisch)  ;  under  the  guidance  of  God's 
ordinary  providence  (Keil) ;  but  more  pro- 
bably, as  Abram  was  called  in  Ur  (vide 
infra),  prompted  by  a  knowledge  of  his  son's 
call,  and  a  desire  to  participate  in  his  son's 
inheritance  (Lange) — Abram  his  son,  and 
Lot  the  son  of  Haran  his  son's  son,  and 
Sarai  his  daughter-in-law,  his  son  Abram's 
wife.  The  Samaritan  reads,  "  and  Milcah  his 
daughter-in-law,  the  wives  of  Abram  and 
Nahor  his  sons,"  with  an  obvious  intention 
to  account  for  the  appearance  of  Nahor  as  a 
settler  in  Charran  (ch.  xxiv.  10)  ;  but  it  is 
better  to  understand  the  migration  of  Nahor 
and  his  family  as  having  taken  place  subse- 
quent to  Terah's  departure.  And  they  went 
forth  with  them.  I.  e.  Lot  and  Sarai  with 
Terah  and  Abram  (Keil) ;  or,  better,  Terah 
and  Abram  with  Lot  and  Sarai  (Jarchi,  Rosen- 
miiller, Murphy,  'Speaker's  Commentary'); 
though  best  is  the  interpretation,  "and  they 
went  forth  with  each  other"  (Lange,  Kalisch). 
For  the  reflexive  use  of  the  personal  pronoun 
vide  ch.  iii.  7  ;  xxii.  3,  and  cf.  Gesenius, 
'Gram.,' §  124.  Other  readings  are,  "and 
he  led  them  forth"  (Samaritan,  LXX.,  Vul- 
gate, Dathius),  and  "and  they  (the  unnamed 
members  of  the  family)  went  forth  with 
those  named  "  (Delitzsch).  From  Ur  of  the 
Chaldees,  to  go  into  the  land  of  Canaan. 
Expressive  of  the  Divine  destination,  rather 
than  of  the  conscious  intention  of  the  tra- 
vellers (Heb.  xi.  8),  though  Canaan  was  not 
at  this  time  unknown  to  the  inhabitants  of 
the  Tigris  and  Euphrates  valley  (vide  ch. 
xiv.  1—12).  And  they  came  into  Haran. 
Charran,  Kapf'at,  Carrae,  in  north-west  Me- 
sopotamia, about  twenty-five  miles  from 
Edessa,  one  of  the  supposed  sites  of  Ur,  and 
celebrated  as  the  scene  of  the  overthrow  of 
Crassus  by  the  Parthians  (b.c.  53).  And 
dwelt  there.  Probably  in  consequence  of 
the  growing  infirmity  of  Terah,  the  period 
of  their  sojourn  being  differently  computed 


176 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[oh.  «.  97—32. 


according  as  Abram  is  regarded  as  having 
been  born  in  Terah's  70th  or  130th  year. 

Ver.  32. — And  the  days  of  Terah  were 
two  hundred  and  five  years.  So  that  if 
Ahram  was  born  in  Terah's  70th  year,  Terah 
must  have  been  145  when  Abram  left  Ilaran, 


and  must  have  survived  that  departure  sixty 
years  (Kalisch,  Dykes)  ;  whereas  if  Abram 
was  born  in  his  father's  130th  year,  then 
Terah  must  have  died  before  his  son's  de- 
parture from  Ilaran,  which  agrees  with  Acts 
vii.  4.     And  Terah  died  in  Haran. 


HOMILET1CS. 

Ver.  31.— The  migration  of  the  Terachiles.  I.  The  departure  of  the  emigrants. 
The  attendant  circumstances  of  this  migration — the  guthering  of  the  clan,  the  mus- 
tering of  the  flocks,  the  farewells  and  benedictions  exchanged  with  relatives  and 
friends,  the  hopes  and  fears  of  the  adveTiturous  pilgrims — imagination  may  depict ; 
the  reasons  which  prompted  it  may  be  conjectured  to  have  been — 1.  The  spirit  oj 
emigration,  which  since  the  dispersion  at  Babol  had  been  abroad  among  the  primitive 
populations  of  mankind.  The  arms  of  a  Trans-Euphratean  state  had  already  pene- 
trated as  far  west  as  the  circle  of  the  Jordan,  and  it  has  been  surmised  that  this 
Terachitc  removal  from  Chaldjea  may  have  been  connected  with  some  larger  movement 
in  the  same  direction.  2.  The  oppression  of  the  Hamites,  who,  besides  being  the  most 
powerful  and  enterprising  of  the  early  tribes,  and  having  seized  upon  the  fattest 
settlements,  such  as  Egypt,  Canaan,  and  Chaldaea,  had  wandered  farthest  from  the 
pure  Noachiu  faith,  and  abandoned  themselves  to  a  degraded  polytheism,  based  for 
the  most  part  upon  a  study  of  the  heavenly  bodies.  That  the  Cushite  conquerors  of 
Southern  Babylonia  were  not  only  idolaters,  but,  like  Nhnrod,  their  leader,  destroyers 
of  the  liberties  of  the  subject  populations,  has  at  least  the  sanction  of  tradition.  3. 
The  awakening  of  religious  life  in  the  breasts  of  the  pilgrims.  That  Abram  had  by 
this  time  been  called  we  are  warranted  on  the  authority  of  Stephen  to  hold,  and 
though  Terah  is  expressly  said  to  have  been  an  idolater  in  Ur,  it  is  by  no  means 
improbable  that  he  became  a  sharer  in  the  pure  faith  of  his  distinguished  son.  At 
least  it  lends  a  special  interest  to  this  primitive  migration  to  connect  it  with  the  call 
of  Abram. 

II.  The  journey  of  the  emigrants.  Though  upon  the  incidents  and  experiences 
of  the  way,  as  upon  the  circumstances  and  reasons  of  the  departure,  the  inspired 
record  is  completely  silent,  yet  the  pilgrimage  of  the  Chaldasan  wanderers  was — 1. 
From  an  idolatrous  land,  which  could  not  fail  to  secure,  even  had  it  not  already 
received,  the  Divine  approbation.  Not  that  flight  from  heathen  countries  is  always 
the  clear  path  of  duty,  else  how  shall  the  world  be  converted  ?  But  where,  as  was 
probably  the  case  with  the  Terachites,  the  likelihood  of  doing  good  to  is  less  than 
that  of  receiving  hurt  from  the  inhabitants,  it  is  plainly  incumbent  to  withdraw  from 
polluted  and  polluting  lands.  2.  By  an  unknown  way.  Almost  certainly  the  road 
to  Canaan  was  but  little  understood  by  the  exiles,  if  even  Canaan  itself  was  not 
entirely  a  terra  incognita.  Yet  in  setting  forth  upon  a  path  so  uncertain  they  were 
only  doing  what  mankind  in  general,  and  God's  people  in  particular,  have  always  to 
do  in  life's  journey,  viz.,  travel  by  a  way  that  they  know  not ;  while  for  comfort  they 
had  the  sweet  assurance  that  their  path  was  steadily  conducting  them  from  idols  and 
oppression,  and  the  certain  knowledge  that  they  were  journeying  beneath  the 
watchful  and  loving  superintendence  of  the  invisible  Supreme.  Happy  they  whose 
path  in  life,  though  compassed  by  clouds  and  darkness,  ever  tends  away  from  sin  and 
•lavery,  and  never  lacks  the  guidance  of  Abram's  God  I  3.  To  a  better  country.  In 
comparison  with  the  rich  alluvial  soil  of  Southern  Babylonia,  the  land  of  Canaan  might 
be  only  a  bleak  succession  of  barren  hills ;  but,  in  respect  of  liberty  to  worship  God, 
anywhere,  in  the  eyes  of  men  whose  hearts  were  throbbing  with  new-found  faith, 
would  seem  superior  to  idolatrous  Chaldasa.  Without  endorsing  Luther's  fancy,  that 
Shem  and  his  followers  had  already  withdrawn  to  Palestine,  and  that  Terah  and  his 
family  were  setting  forth  to  place  themselves  beneath  the  patriarch's  rule,  we  may 
reasonably  suppose  that,  like  the  Pilgrim  Fathers  of  a  later  age,  they  were  seeking  a 
new  land  where  they  might  worship  God  in  peace. 

IIL  The  halting  of  the  emigrants.  In  the  absence  of  definite  information  as  to 
Mm  motives  which  induced  it,  this  sudden  stoppage  of  their  'oiiniey  at  Haran  U 


w.  xi.  27—82.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  177 

usually  ascribed  to  either — I.  The  irresolution  of  Terah,  who, having  become  wearied 
by  the  fatigues  and  perils  of  the  way,  and  having  found  a  comfortable  location  for 
himself  and  flocks,  preferred  to  bring  his  wanderings  to  a  close,  as  many  a  noble 
enterprise  is  wrecked  through  weak-kneed  vacillation,  and  many  a  Christian  pil- 
grimage broken  short  by  faint-hearted  indecision  ;  or — 2.  The  unbelief  of  Terah, 
who,  in  the  first  flush  of  excitement  produced  by  Abram's  call,  had  started  on  the 
outward  journey  with  strong  faith  and  great  zeal,  but,  as  enthusiasm  subsided  and 
faith  declined,  was  easily  persuaded  to  halt  at  Haran — an  emblem  of  other  pilgrims 
who  begin  their  heavenward  journey  well,  but  pause  in  mid  career  through  the 
cooling  of  their  ardour  and  declining  of  their  piety ;  or — 3.  The  infirmity  of  Terah, 
who  was  now  an  old  man,  and  unable  further  to  prosecute  his  journey  to  the  pro.nised 
land,  thus  making  the  dolay  at  Haran  a  beautiful  act  of  filial  piety  on  the  part  of 
Abram,  and  on  that  of  Terah  an  imperious  necessity. 

See  in  this  migration  of  the  Terachites — 1.  An  emblem  of  the  changefulness  of  life. 
1.  An  illustration  of  God's  method  of  distributing  mankind.  3.  An  example  of  the 
w»y  in  which  an  overruling  Providence  disseminates  the  truth.  4.  A  picture  of 
many  broken  journeys  on  the  face  of  earth. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  29,  30. — Two  weddings-     I.  The  two  bridegrooms — Abram  and  Nahor. 

1.  Younger  sons  in  Terah's  family.  2.  Eminent  men  in  Ur  of  the  Chaldees. 
3.  Favoured  saints  in  the  Church  of  God.     Marriage  is  honourable  in  all. 

II.  The  two  brides — Sarai  and  Milcah.  1.  Near  relations  of  their  husbands. 
Though  permissible  at  that  early  stage  of  the  world's  history,  the  intermarriage  of 
relatives  so  close  as  half-sister  and  niece  is  not  now  sanctioned  by  the  law  of  God. 

2.  Attractive  ladies  in  themselves.  As  much  as  this  may  be  inferred  from  their 
names.  It  is  both  allowable  and  desirable  to  seek  as  wives  women  distinguished  for 
beauty  and  intelligence,  provided  also  they  are  noted  for  goodness  and  piety.  3. 
Descendants  of  the  holy  line.  Doubtless  this  was  one  cause  which  led  to  the  choice 
of  A  brain  and  Nahor.  So  Christians  should  not  be  unequally  yoked  with  unbe- 
lievers. 

III.  The  two  homes.  Formed  it  might  be  at  the  same  time,  and  under  similar 
benignant  auspices,  they  were  yet  divided.  1.  And  from  the  first  in  their  constitu- 
tions. This  was  of  necessity.  2.  And  afterwards  in  their  fortunes.  Sarai  had  no 
child  ;  Milcah  was  the  mother  of  a  family.  "  Lo,  children  are  the  heritage  of  the 
Lord."  3.  And  eventually  in  their  locations.  Nahor  and  Milcah  remained  in  Ur, 
and  ultimately  moved  to  Hnrnn  ;  Abram  and  Sarai  pitched  their  lent  and  established 
their  home  in  Canaan.     So  Uod  parts  the  families  of  earth. — W. 

EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XII. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — Designed  to  trace  the  out- 
ward development  of  God's  kingdom  on  the 
earth,  the  narrative  now  concentrates  iu 
attention  on  one  of  the  foregoing  Terachites, 
whose  remarkable  career  it  sketches  with 
considerable  minuteness  of  detail,  from  the 
period  of  his  emigration  from  Chaldsea  to  his 


chiefly  as  his  life  and  fortunes  connect  with 
the  Divine  purpose  of  salvation  that  they 
find  a  place  in  the  inspired  record.  The 
progress  of  infidelity  during  the  four  cen- 
turies that  had  elapsed  since  the  Flood,  tne 
almost  universal  corruption  of  even  the 
Sheruite  portion  of  the  human  family,  had 
conclusively  demonstrated  the  necessity  of  a 
second  Divine  interposition,   if  the  know- 


death  »t    Hebron   in  the  land  of  Canaan.  ledge  of  salvation  were  not  to  be  o-mpletely 

Distinguished  as  a  man  of  undoubted  superi-  '  banished  from  the  earth.     Accordingly,  the 

xity  both  of  character  and  mind,  the  head  son  of  Terah  was  selected  to  be  the  founlor 

of  at  least  two  powerful  and  important  races,  of  a  new  nation,  in  which  the  light  of  gospel 

and  standing,   as  one  might  say,   on   the  truth  might  be  deposited  for  "preservation 

Hiroshold  of   the  historical  era,   it  i.   v.t  until  the  fulueas  of  the  times,  aud  throuiA 


GENESIS. 


H 


IT* 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[CH.  XII.  1—  & 


which  the  promise  of  the  gospel  might  he 
•xnducted  forward  10  its  ultimate  realisitiun 
in  the  manifestation  of  the  woman's  sued. 
partlyto  prepare  him  for  the  high  destiny  of 
■ring  the  progenitor  of  the  chosen  nation, 
ami  partly  to  illustrate  the  character  of  that 
gospel  with  which  he  was  to  be  intrusted, 
ie  was  summoned  to  renounce  his  native 
country  and  kinsmen  in  Chaldsea,  and  ven- 
ture forth  upon  an  untried  journey  in  obe- 
dience to  the  call  of  Heaven,  to  a  land  which 
he  should  afterward  receive  for  an  inherit- 
ance. In  a  series  of  successive  theophanies 
or  Divine  manifestations,  around  which  the 
various  incidents  of  his  life  are  grouped — in 
Ur  of  the  Chaldees  (Acts  vii.  2),  at  Morch 
in  Canaan  (Gen.  xii.  7),  near  Bethel  (ib.d. 
xiii.),  at  Mamre  (ibid,  xv.,  xvii.),  anil  on 
Moriah(z'6irf.  xxii. ) — he  is  distinctly  promised 
three  things — a  land,  a  seed,  ami  a  blessing 
— as  the  reward  of  his  compliance  with  tho 
_  heavenly  invitation  ;  ami  the  confident  per- 
suasion both  of  the  reality  of  these  gracious 
promises  and  of  the  Divine  ability  and  will- 
ingness to  fulfil  tliem  forms  the  animating 
spirit  and  guiding  principle  of  his  being  in 
every  situation  of  life,  whether  of  trial  or 
of  difficulty,  in  which  he  is  subsequently 
placed.  The  miraculous  character  of  these 
theophanies  indeed  has  been  made  a  ground 
on  which  to  assail  the  entire  patriarchal 
history  as  unhistorieal.  By  certain  writers 
they  have  been  represented  as  nothing  more 
than  natural  occurrences  embellished  by  the 
genius  of  the  author  of  Genesis  (Eichhorn, 
Bauer,  Winer),  as  belonging  to  the  domain 
of  poetical  fiction  (De  Wette),  and  tlieivfuro 
as  undeserving  of  anything  like  serious  con- 
sideration. Rut  unless  the  supernatural  is 
to  be  in  toto  eliminated  from  the  record,  a 
concession  which  cannot  possibly  be  granted 
by  an  enlightened  theism,  the  Divine  appear- 
ances to  Abraham  cannot  bo  regarded  as  in 
any  degree  militating  against  the  historical 
veracity  of  the  story  of  his  life,  which,  it 
may  be  said,  is  amply  vouched  for  oy  the 
harmony  of  its  details  with  tho  character- 
istics of  the  period  to  which  it  belongs  (cf. 
Havernick'8  '  Introduction,'  §  18).  Nor 
does  the  employmeut  of  the  name  Jehovah 
in  connection  with  these  theophanies  war- 
rant the  conclusion  that  the  passages  con- 
taining them  are  interpolations  of  a  post 
Uosak  or  JehovUti«    tditu  (Tuch,  Bleek, 


Colenso,  Davidson).  "Such  a  hypothesis," 
says  Keil,  "can  only  be  maintained  by  those 
who  misunderstand  the  distinctive  meaning 
of  the  two  names,  Elohim  and  Jehovah  {q.  v. 
■m  ch.  ii.  4),  and  arbitrarily  set  aside  the 
Jehovah  in  ch.  xvii.  1,  on  account  of  an 
erroneous  determination  of  the  relation  in 
which  El  Shaddai  stands  to  Jehovah."  In- 
dications of  the  literary  unity  of  the  patri- 
archal history  will  be  noted,  and  replies  to 
objections  given,  in  the  progress  of  the  Ex- 
position. 

Ver.  1. — Now  the  Lord.  Jehovah  =  the 
God  of  salvation,  an  indication  that  the 
narrative  is  now  to  specially  concern  itself 
with  the  chosen  seed,  and  the  Deity  to  dis- 
cover himself  as  the  God  of  redemption. 
The  hypothesis  that  vers.  1 — 4  were  inserted 
in  the  fundamental  document  by  the  Jeho- 
vist  editor  is  not  required  for  a  satisfactory 
explanation  of  the  change  of  the  Divino 
name  at  this  particular  stage  of  the  narra- 
tive. Had  said.  Literally,  said.  In  Ur  of 
the  Chaldees,  according  to  Stephen  (Acts  vii. 
2),  reverting,  after  the  usual  manner  of  the 
writer,  to  the  original  point  of  departure  in 
the  Abrahamic  history  (Aben  Ezra,  Mede, 
l'iscator,  Pererius,  Calvin,  Willet,  Rosen- 
miiller,  Dathius,  Alford,  Murphy,  'Speaker's 
Commentary ') ;  or  in  Haran,  after  Tenth's 
death,  as  the  first  call  given  to  the  patriarch 
(LXX. ,  CI i al dee,  Syriac,  Raschi,  Lyra,  Keil, 
Kalisch,  Dykes),  or  as  a  repetition  of  the 
call  addressed  to  him  in  Ur  (Clarke,  Words- 
worth, Inglis).  Luther  conjectures  that  the 
call  in  Ur  was  given  "fortasse  per  patri- 
arcliam  Shem ; '  but  if  the  authority  of 
Stephen  bo  recognised,  this  was  the  occasion 
of  the  first  theopliany  vouchsafed  to  Abram. 
Get  thee  out  Literally,  go  for  thyself, 
a  frequent  Hebraism,  expressive  of  the  way 
in  which  the  action  of  the  verb  returns  upon 
itself,  is  terminated  and  completed  (cf.  ch. 
xxi.  16 ;  xxii.  2  ;  Isa,  xxxi.  8  ;  Cant  ii.  11  ; 
vide  Ewald's  '  Hebrew  Syntax,'  §  314)  ; 
hence,  though  not  necessarily  emphatic,  it 
may  be  equivalent  to  "  Go  thou,  whoever 
else  remains  behind  (Jarchi,  Ainsworth, 
Bush).  Of  thy  country.  A  proof  that  the 
date  of  the  call  was  while  Abram  was  in  Ur 
(Calvin),  though  if  Ur  was  at  Edessa  (vide 
supra)  the  patriarch  could  scarcely  have 
been  said  to  be  from  home.  And  from  thy 
kindred.  At  Ur  in  all  probability  Nahor 
and  Milcah  were  left  behind  ;  at  Haran, 
Nahor  and  his  family,  if  they  had  already 
arrived  thither,  and  according  to  some 
(Kalisch,  Dykes)  Terah  also.  And  from 
thy  father's  house.  /.  e.  if  they  will  not 
accompany  thee.  No  Divine  interdict  for- 
bade the  other  members  of  the  family  oi 
Terah  joining  in  the  Abrahamic  emigration 


BH.  XIL  1 — 5.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


lTf 


Unto  a  (literally,  the)  land  that  I  will  show 
tliee.  Through  a  revelation  (Lange),  or 
simply  by  the  guidance  of  providence.  The 
laiid  itself  is  left  unnamed  for  the  trial  of 
I  he  patriarch's  faith,  which,  if  it  sustained 
I  he  proof,  was  to  he  rewarded  hy  the  exceed- 
ing great  and  precious  promises  which  follow : 
— according. to  one  arrangement,  seven  in 
aumber,  one  for  each  clause  of  the  next 
two  verses  (Cajetan,  Willet) ;  according  to 
another,  four,  corresponding  to  the  clauses 
of  the  second  verse,  the  last  of  which  is  ex- 
panded in  the  third  (Keil) ;  according  to  a 
third,  six,  forming  three  pairs  of  parallels 
( Al  ford) ;  according  to  a  fourth,  and  perhaps 
the  best,  two,  a  lower  or  personal  blessing, 
comprising  the  first  three  particulars,  and 
a  higher  or  public  blessing,  embracing, the 
last  three  (Murphy). 

Vers.  2,  3.— And  I  will  make  of  thee  a 
great  nation.  A  compensation  for  leaving 
his  small  kindred.  The  nation  should  be 
great  (1)  numerically  (Keil,  Rosenmiiller), 
(2)  influentially  (Kalisch,  Inglis),  (3)  spirit- 
ually (Luther,  Wordsworth).  And  I  will 
bless  thee.  Temporally  (Pererius,  Murphy), 
with  every  kind  of  good  (Rosenmiiller),  in 
particular  with  offspring(Vatablus) ;  but  also 
spiritually  (Rupertus,  Bush),  in  the  sense, 
s.  g.,  of  being  justified  by  faith,  as  in  GaL 
lit  8  (Candlish).  The  blessing  was  a  recom- 
pense for  the  deprivations  entailed  upon  him 
by  forsaking  the  place  of  his  birth  and 
kindred  (Murphy).  And  make  thy  name 
great.  Render  thee  illustrious  and  renowned 
(Rosenmiiller) ;  not  so  much  in  the  annals  of 
the  world  as  in  the  history  of  the  Church 
(Bush) ;  in  return  for  leaving  thy  father's 
house  (Murphy).  So  God  made  David  a 
great  name  (2  Sam.  vii.  9  ;  cf.  Prov.  xxii  1  ; 
Eccles.  vii  3).  And  thou  Shalt  be  a  bless- 
ing. J.  e.  "  blessed,"  as  in  Zech.  viii.  12 
(Chaldee,  Syriac,  LXX.,  Dathe,  Rosenmiil- 
ler, Gesenius) ;  or  "  a  type  or  example  of 
blessing,"  so  that  men  shall  introduce  thy 
name  into  their  formularies  of  blessing 
(Kimchi,  Clericus,  Enobel,  Calvin) ;  but, 
best,  "  a  source  of  blessing  (spiritui«,l)  to 
others"  (Tuch,  Delitzsch,  Keil,  Kalisch, 
Murphy).  The  sense  in  which  Abram  was 
to  be  a  source  of  blessing  to  others  is  ex- 
plained in  the  next  verse.  First,  men  were 
to  be  either  blessed  or  cursed  of  God  accord- 
ing as  their  attitude  to  Abram  was  pro- 
pitious or  hostile.  And  I  will  bless  them 
— grace  expecting  there  will  be  many  to 
bless  (Delitzsch) — that  bless  thee,  and  curse 
(with  a  judicial  curse,  the  word  being  the 
same  as  in  ch.  iii.  14  ;  iv.  11)  him— only  an 
individual  here  and  there,  in  the  judgment 
of  the  Deity,  being  likely  to  inherit  this 
malediction  (DeliUsch)— that  cnrseth  (liter- 
ally, treateth  liglttly,  or  despiseth.  The  verb 
i  applied  in  ch.  nil.  11  to  the  diminution  of 


the  waters  of  the  flood)  thee.  The  Divine 
Being  thus  identifies  himself  with  Abram, 
and  solemnly  engages  to  regard  Abram'i 
friends  and  enemies  as  his,  as  Christ  does 
with  his  Church  (cf.  Acts  i  4).  And  in 
thee  shall  all  the  families  of  the  earth  be 
blessed.  Not  bless  themselves  by  thee  or  in 
thy  name  (Jarchi,  Clericus) ;  but  in  thee,  as 
the  progenitor  of  the  promised  seed,  shall 
all  the  families  of  the  ground  (which  was 
cursed  on  account  of  sin,  ch.  iii  17)  be 
spiritually  blessed — cf.  GaL  iii  8  (Calvin, 
Luther,  Rosenmiiller,  Keil,  Wordsworth, 
Murphy, 'Speaker's  Commentary').  Thus  the 
second  sense  in  which  Abram  was  consti- 
tuted a  blessing  lay  in  this,  that  the  whole 
fulness  of  the  Divine  promise  of  salvation 
for  the  world  was  narrowed  np  to  his  line, 
by  which  it  was  in  future  to  be  carried  for- 
ward, and  at  the  appointed  season,  when  the 
woman's  seed  was  born,  distributed  among 
mankind. 

Ver.  4. — So  (literally,  and)  Abram  de- 
parted— from  TJr  of  the  Chaldees,  or  from 
Haran  {vide  supra)  —  as  the  Lord  had 
spoken  unto  him;  and  Lot  went  with 
him.  Lot's  name  being  repeated  here  be- 
cause of  his  connection  with  the  ensning 
narrative.  And  Abram  was  seventy  and 
five  years  old — literally,  a  son  of  five  years 
and  severity  years  (cf.  ch.  vii  6)— when  he 
departed — literally,  in  his  going  forth  upon 
the  second  stage  of  his  journey — from  Haran. 
Ver.  S. — And  Abram  took  (an  important 
addition  to  the  foregoing  statement,  intimat- 
ing that  Abram  did  not  go  forth  as  a  lonely 
wanderer,  but  accompanied  by)  Sarai  his 
wife,  and  Lot  his  brother's  son,  and  all  the 
substance  —  recush,  acquired  wealth,  from 
.  racash,  to  gain  (cf.  ch.  xiv.  11,  16,  21  ;  xv. 
14),  which  consisted  chiefly  in  cattle,  Lot 
and  Abram  being  nomads — that  they  had 
gathered  (not  necessarily  implying  a  pro- 
tracted stay,  as  some  allege),  and  the  souls 
— here  slaves  and  their  children  (cf.  Ezek. 
xxvii  13) — that  they  had  gotten—"  not  only 
as  secular  property  for  themselves,  but  as 
brethren  to  themselves,  and  as  children  of  the 
one  heavenly  Father  "  (Wordsworth) ;  that 
they  had  converted  to  the  law  (Onkelos) ;  that 
they  had  proselyted  (Raschi,  Targum  Jona- 
than, and  Jerusalem Targum) — in  Haran;  and 
they  went  forth  to  go  into  the  land  of  Canaan ; 
— a  prolepsis  (cf.  ch.  xi  31,  q.  v.) — and  into 
the  land  of  Canaan  they  came — a  distance  of 
300  miles  from  Haran,  from  which  their  course 
must  have  been  across  the  Euphrates  in  one  of 
its  higher  affluents,  over  the  Syrian  desert, 
southwards  to  Lebanon  and  Damascus  (cf. 
ch.  xv.  2),  where,  according  to  Josephus,  the 
patriarch  reigned  for  some  considerable  time, 
"  teing  come  with  an  army  from  the  land  of 
thi  Chaldasans"  ('Ant,'  L  7),  and  a  village 
survived    to    bis   day    sailed   "  Abraham1* 


180 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[OH.  XII.  1 — & 


habitation."  According  to  the  partitionists 
(Tuch,  Bleek,  Cblenso,  Davidson)  this  verse 
belongs  to  the  Elohist  or  fundamental  docu- 
ment ;  but  if  to,  then  the  Jehovist  represents 


Abram  (ver.  6)  as  journeying  through  th« 
land  without  having  previously  mentioned 
what  land  (cf.  Quarry,  p.  420). 


HOMILETICa 

Ver.  4. — The  Chaldaean  emigrant.  I.  The  call  of  God.  Whether  spoken  in  k 
dream  or  distinctly  articulated  by  a  human  form,  the  voice  which  summoned  Abram 
to  emigrate  from  Ur  was  recognised  by  the  patriarch  to  be  Divine ;  and  so  is  the 
gospel  invitation,  which  through  the  medium  of  a  written  word  has  been  conveyed 
to  men,  essentially  a  message  from  the  lips  of  God.  The  call  which  Abram  received 
was — 1.  Distinguishing  and  selecting — coming  to  him  alone  of  all  the  members  of 
Terah's  family,  of  all  the  descendants  of  the  line  of  Shem,  of  all  the  citizens  of  Ur, 
of  all  the  inhabitants  of  earth ;  and  the  gospel  invitation  which  men  now  receive,  in 
its  widest  no  less  than  in  its  narrowest  acceptation,  is  differentiating  and  elective, 
passing  by  one  nation  and  falling  on  another,  addressing  itself  to  one  individual  and 
allowing  another  to  remain  uncheered  by  its  joyful  sound  (Rom.  ix.  16).  2.  Separat- 
ing and  dividing — summoning  the  patriarch  to  disentangle  himself  from  the  idolatries 
of  his  native  land,  and  even  sever  his  connection  with  the  nearest  and  the  dearest, 
rather  than  imperil  his  salvation  by  remaining  in  Chaldaea ;  and  in  a  like  spirit  does 
the  voice  of  Jesus  in  the  gospel  direct  men  to  forsake  the  world  (spiritually  regarded 
the  land  of  their  nativity),  to  relinquish  its  infidelities,  iniquities,  frivolities ;  to 
renounce  its  possessions,  occupations,  amusements  ;  yea,  to  dissolve  its  friendships 
and  endearing  relationships,  if  they  would  now  be  numbered  among  his  disciples,  and 
eventually  enter  into  life  (Luke  xiv.  26).  3.  Commanding  and  directing — enjoining 
on  the  patriarch  a  long  and  arduous  pilgrimage,  that  must  necessarily  be  attended 
with  many  difficulties  and  dangers,  and  perhaps  with  not  a  few  sorrows  and  privations 
that  would  require  the  most  heroic  fortitude  and  the  most  enduring  patience,  and 
that  could  only  be  accomplished  by  minutely  following  the  Divine  instructions,  and 
taking  each  successive  step  in  faith ;  and  of  a  like  character  is  the  journey  to  which 
the  follower  of  Christ  is  invited  in  the  gospel — a  journey  as  painful  and  laborious  in 
its  nature,  as  much  demanding  self-sacrifice  and  heroic  resolution,  as  repugnant  to 
the  carnal  heart,  and  as  unprofitable  to  the  eye  of  sense,  as  uncertain  in  its  various 
steps,  and  as  much  dependent  on  the  principle  of  faith  (2  Cor.  v.  7).  4.  Cheering 
and  encouraging — assigning  to  the  patriarch  a  number  of  exceeding  great  and  precious 
promises  which  should  abundantly  compensate  for  the  sacrifices  and  deprivations 
that  should  be  entailed  upon  him  by  compliance  with  the  heavenly  invitation — a  great 
inheritance,  a  great  posterity,  a  great  salvation,  a  great  renown,  a  great  influence ; 
and  in  the  gospel,  too,  are  held  forth  to  stimulate  and  comfort  heaven's  pilgrims,  a 
variety  of  rich  rewards  that  shall  more  than  recompense  them  for  all  that  they  may 
do  or  suffer  in  yielding  to  the  call  of  Christ. 

II.  The  faith  of  Abram.  As  the  heavenly  invitation  which  the  patriarch  received 
was  designed  to  be  symbolic  of  the  gospel  call  which  is  addressed  to  us,  so  the  faith  of 
the  patriarch,  which  responded  to  the  voice  of  God,  was  intended  for  a  pattern  of 
that  hearty  trust  with  which  by  us  the  gospel  message  should  bo  embraced.  The 
faith  of  Abram  was — 1.  Submissive  and  obedient.  Summoning  his  household, 
gathering  his  flocks,  and  taking  with  him  his  aged  father  Terah,  he  departed.  With- 
out this  indeed  he  could  not  have  been  possessed  of  faith.  Whenever  the  Divine 
testimony  contains  a  precept  and  a  promise,  the  faith  that  is  sincere  must  yield 
obedience  to  the  precept  as  well  as  cling  to  the  promise.  In  the  gospel  message 
both  are  present :  a  promise  of  salvation,  a  full,  free,  and  generous  offer  of  eternal 
life ;  and  along  with  this  a  precept  of  separation  from  the  world,  of  consecration  to 
a  life  of  faith,  holiness,  and  love ;  and  the  second  must  be  obeyed,  while  the  first  i» 
embraced  to  render  faith  complete.  2.  Prompt  and  unhesitating.  Without  question 
or  complaint,  without  the  slightest  shadow  of  reluctance,  so  far  at  least  as  the 
narrative  reveals,  the  Chaldaean  flock-master  puts  Jehovah's  order  into  execution ; 
»nd  in  this  respect  again  he  is  worthy  of  imitation.  The  same  promptitude  which 
>e  displayed  should  bo  exhibited  by  us  in  responding  to  the  gospel  call,  and  all  tha 


OH.  xii.  l-«.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  WI 

more  that  in  our  case  there  is  less  room  than  there  was  in  his  te  doubt  that  the  voir* 
which  calls  is  Divine.  3.  Intelligent  and  reasonable.  Even  if  Abram  had  departeo. 
from  Chaldsea  purely  sua  sponte,  in  order  to  escape  contamination  from  its  idolatries, 
instead  of  being  opei.  to  a  charge  of  folly  because  he  had  gone  forth,  "  not  knowing 
whither  he  went,"  he  would  have  been  entitled  to  be  regarded  as  having  performed 
an  act  of  highest  prudence.  Much  more  then  was  his  conduct  wise  and  commend- 
able when  he  was  acting  in  obedience  to  Heaven's  express  command — going  forth 
beneath  the  guidance  and  protection  of  Almighty  strength  and  Omniscient  love. 
And  just  as  little  can  Christian  faith  be  challenged  as  fanatical  and  rash,  possessing 
»8  it  does  the  same  sanction  and  supervision  as  that  of  the  father  of  the  faithful. 
4.  Patient  and  persevering.  Delayed  at  Haran,  the  traveller  was  not  diverted  from 
his  path.  Undaunted  by  prospective  perils,  he  had  left  Chaldsea  to  go  to  a  land  which 
God  was  to  show  him  ;  unconquered  by  actual  hardships  and  trials,  he  halted  not  till 
he  set  his  foot  within  the  promised  land.  And  so  we  learn  that  faith  to  begin  the 
Christian  life  is  not  enough ;  not  he  who  commences  the  heavenward  pilgrimage,  but 
lie  who  enduretb.  to  the  end,  shall  be  saved. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 5. — The  preparations  of  grace.  We  may  call  this  the  genesis  of  the 
kingdom  of  God. 

I.  It  is  founded  in  the  word  of  the  Divine  covenant,  the  faith  given  by  Divine 
grace  to  individuals,  the  separation  unto  newness  of  life. 

II.  The  one  man  Abram  gathers  round  him  a  small  society,  kindred  with  him  by 
the  flesh,  but  bound  to  him  doubtless  by  spiritual  bonds  as  well.  Thus  God  has 
sanctified  the  family  life  by  making  it  as  the  nidus  of  the  spiritual  genesis.  When 
the  new  kingdom  began  its  course  in  the  Messiah,  he  drew  to  himself  those  who 
were  previously  associated  by  neighbourhood,  relationship,  and  familiar  intercourse 
in  Galilee.     The  Divine  does  not  work  apart  from  the  human,  but  with  it  and  by  it. 

III.  The  promise  was  that  of  Abram  should  be  made  a  great  nation,  that  he 
should  be  blessed  and  a  blessing,  and  his  blessing  should  be  spread  through  all 
families  of  the  earth.  The  structure  which  Divine  grace  rears  on  the  foundation 
which  itself  lays  is  a  structure  of  blessed  family  and  national  life. 

IV.  The  land  of  Canaan  may  not  have  been  indicated  with  positive  certainty  to 
the  migrating  children  of  God,  but  it  was  enough  that  he  promised  them  a  land 
which  he  would  hereafter  show  them.  "A  land  that  I  will  show  thee."  There  was 
the  certainty  that  it  was  a  better  land :  Get  thee  out  of  thy  country,  because  I 
have  another  for  thee.  The  day-by-day  journey  under  Divine  direction  was  itself 
a  help  to  faith  to  make  the  promise  definite.  The  Btay  at  Haran,  from  whence  the 
pilgrimage  might  be  said  to  make  a  true  start,  was  itself  a  gathering  of  "  souls  "  and 
"  substance"  which  predicted  a  large  blessing  in  the  future.  When  once  we  have 
followed  the  word  of  God's  grace  and  set  our  face  towards  Canaan  we  soon  begin 
to  get  pledges  of  the  future  blessings,  laid-up  riches  of  soul  and  substance,  which 
assure  us  of  the  full  glory  of  the  life  to  come. 

V.  Even  in  that  first  beginning  of  the  kingdom,  that  small  Church  out  of  Ur 
of  the  Chaldees,  there  is  the  evidence  of  that  individual  variety  of  character  and 
attainment  and  history  which  marks  the  whole  way  of  the  people  of  God.  Lot  was 
a  very  different  man  from  Abram.  As  the  story  of  this  little  company  of  travellers 
develops  itself  we  soon  begin  to  see  that  the  grace  of  God  does  not  obliterate  the 
specialities  of  human  character.  Out  of  the  varieties  of  men's  lives,  which  to  us  may 
seem  incapable  of  reconciliation,  there  may  yet  be  brought  the  onward  progress  of  a 
Divine  order  and  a  redeeming  purpose. — R. 

Ver.  1. — The  voices  of  God  at  the  opening  of  the  world's  eras.  I.  At  the  opening 
or  creation.     "  And  God  said,  Let  there  be  light." 

II.  At  the  opening  of  redemption.  "  And  God  said,  I  wjll  plat  enmity  between 
thee  and  the  woman,"  &c. 

III.  At  thb  opening  of  the  old  dispensation.  "  And  God  said  to  Abram,  Get 
«h««  out  of  thj  country." 


182  THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS.  [cH.  xn.  1—6 

IV.  At  the  opening  of  the  Christian  era.  "  And  God  said,  This  is  my  beloved 
Son." 

V.  At  the  opening  or  the  eternal  state  God  will  say,  "  Come,  ye  blessed  oi 
my  Father."— W. 

Ver.  1. — Abraham  called.  "  Now  the  Lord  God  had  said  unto  Abraham,  Get  thee 
out  of  thy  country,"  &c.  The  record  of  Abraham's  life  is  second  only  in  beautiful 
simplicity  to  that  of  Christ.     There  are  certain  correspondences  between  the  two. 

I.  A  summons  was  given  to  Abeaham.  It  was  from  the  Lord.  We  know  not  the 
form.  It  was  explicit.  He  was  to  leave  all.  It  was  an  unmistakable  summons, 
and  it  was  repeated.  Such  calls  are  generally  opposed  to  carnal  inclinations. 
Dangers  beset  the  one  who  should  respond  to  the  call,  for  "the  Canaanite  was  then 
in  the  land." 

II.  The  summons  was  sustained  by  a  promise  of  guidance  to  the  land.  The  first 
call  was  to  a  land,  the  second  to  a  definite  place.  God  did  not  at  first  tell  Abraham 
that  he  would  give  him  the  land,  but  only  "  show  "  it.  God  docs  not  reveal  all  the 
riches  of  his  grace  at  once.  The  promise  was  sufficient.  Abraham  went  forth  from 
the  plain  of  Chaldea  to  the  land  which  God  would  make  through  him  and  his  de- 
scendants the  most  renowned  in  the  world.  Ever  listening  to  a  voice  unheard  by 
others  Abraham  was  led.  Sublime  faith  of  the  patriarch ;  he  looked  for  "  a  city  that 
had  foundations." — H. 

Ver.  2. — Abraham  useful.  "And  thou  shalt  be  a  blessing."  This  is  part  of  the 
sixfold  promise  given  to  Abraham.  He  was  to  be  a  blessing  to  all  nations.  It  is 
a  very  great  joy  to  a  devout  soul  to  become  a  blessing  temporally  or  spiritually  to 
others. 

I.  Every  man  of  faith  is  a  centre  of  blessing.  Men  who  yield  U,  uieir  carnal 
natures  cannot  bless  others.  The  Christian  should  not  incidentally,  but  intentionally, 
bless  others.  Where  a  man  is  corrupt  his  working  will  be  injurious  ;  purity  is  a 
benediction  to  mankind. 

II.  A  devout  and  faithful  man  is  a  blessing  chiefly  to  those  who  can  receive 
his  influence.  The  light  of  the  sun  causes  one  substance  to  decay,  another  to 
fructify.  The  life  of  a  servant  of  God  may  only  provoke  a  sneer  and  opposition  in 
•ome  souls ;  but  in  others  joy,  thankfulness,  love,  and  effort  at  imitation.  To  some 
an  apostle  was  "  a  savour  of  death  unto  death." 

III.  The  measure  of  our  faith  is  the  measure  of  the  blessing  we  shali 
transmit  to  others.  We  sometimes  hinder  the  operation  of  God's  promise  by  our 
self-righteous  humility,  which  ignores  the  fact  that  God  often  uses  the  "  weak  things 
of  the  world  to  confound  the  things  that  are  mighty."  There  must  be  faith  in  God's 
continued  working.  He  can  make  the  future  fruitful  in  proportion  to  our  faith 
Look  at  what  he  made  of  Paul,  Luther,  Wesley,  and  Whitfield  because  they  were 
all  men  of  strong  faith. 

IV.  To  be  a  blessing  through  the  power  and  favour  of  God  is  thb  highest 
honour  in  the  world.  It  was  God  who  "  made  "  Abraham  a  blessing ;  he  gave  him 
the  power,  fostered  his  faith,  and  perpetuated  his  influence.  What  honour  could 
Abraham  have  comparable  with  this  ?  It  is  probable  that  Abraham  thought  little  of 
the  honour  which  would  come  to  him  ;  but  God  adapted  his  promise  to  that  which  he 
knew  to  be  the  desire  of  the  secret  soul  of  Abraham.  Seeing  a  longing  in  tfie  heart 
to  lift  men  to  a  higher  level,  he  gratifies  it  by  making  Abraham  a  blessing.  All 
6liould  cherish  such  desires.  The  help  we  can  give  to  others  morally  is  far  greater 
than  that  we  can  bestow  materially.  To  live  an  aimless  life  is  a  disgrace  and  sin, but 
to  live  to  bless  others  is  Divine. — H. 

Vers.  2,  3. — Sevenfold  promises.  I.  Of  the  pre-incarnate  Jehovah  to  Abram. 
1.  A  great  inheritance.  2.  A  great  posterity.  3.  A  great  name.  4.  A  great  blessing. 
6.  A  great  alliance.     6".  A  great  defence.     7.  A  great  influence. 

II.  Of  the  incarnate  Word  to  his  disciples.  1.  The  kingdom  of  heaven.  2. 
Divine  consolation.  3.  Inheritance  of  the  earth.  4.  Divine  satisfaction.  5.  Divii'« 
mercy.     6.  The  vision  of  God.     7.  A  place  in  God's  family  (see  Matt.  y.  1 — 9). 


rat.  «i.  6—9.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESI9. 


163 


III.  Of  the  glorified  Christ  to  his  CHtjRcn.  1.  The  tree  of  life.  2.  A  crown 
of  life.  3.  Hidden  manna,  the  white  stone,  find  a  new  name.  4.  Power  over  the 
nations,  and  the  morning  star.  5.  White  raiment.  6.  The  distinction  of  being  made 
a  pillar  in  God's  temple.     7.  A  seat  on  Christ's  throne  (see  Rev.  ii.,  iii.). — W. 


EXPOSITION. 


Ver.  6. — And  Abrara  passed  through — 
Jilerally,  paused  over,  or  travelled  about  as 
•  pugrim  (cf.  Heb.  xi.  9)  in — the  land  unto 
(or  as  far  as)  the  place  of.  Sichem.  A  pro- 
lepsis  for  the  place  where  the  city  Shechem 
(either  built  by  or  named  after  the  Hivite 
prince,  ch.  xxxiv.  2)  was  afterwards  situated, 
viz.,  between  Ebal  and  Gerizim,  in  the  middle 
of  the  land;  "the  most  beautiful,  perhaps 
the  only  very  beautiful,  spot  in  Central  Pales- 
tine" (Stanley's  'Sinai  and  Palestine,' v. 
234).  The  modern  name  of  Sichem  is 
Nablus,  a  corruption  of  Neapolis.  TJnto  the 
plain.  ji?8,  from  >1K  or  ?'&  to  be  strong, 
■  strong,  hardy  tree :  the  terebinth,as  opposed 
to  the  oak,  ]1?K,  from 7>X  (Celsius,  Michaelis, 
Rosenmiiller,  Keil) ;  the  oak,  as  distinguished 
from  irJfcS,  the  turpentine  tree,  or  terebinth 
(Gesenius,  Kalisch,  Murphy).  But  it  seems  de- 
monstrable that  these  and  the  other  cognate 
terms,  7%,  H^X,  are  frequently  used  as-syno- 
nymous for  any  large,  strong  tree  (cf.  ch. 
xxxv.-  5  ;  Judges  ix.  9  ;  xxiv.  26  ;  Josh.  xix. 
33  with  Judges  iv.  11),  though  commonly 
]i^S,  oak,  is  opposed  to  n?$,  terebinth,  as  in 
Isa.  vi.  13  ;  Hosea  iv.  13.  The  translation 
of  ]1?8  by  plain  (Targums,  A.  V.)  is  inaccu- 
rate, though  "the  truth  is  it  was  both  a 
Elain  and  set  with  oaks  "  (Willet).  Of  Moreh. 
like  Mamro  (ch.  xiii.  18),  the  name  of  the 
owner  of  the  oak-grove  (Murphy,  Kalisch, 
Alford) ;  probably  a  priestly  character  ( Moreh 
signifying  a  teacher,  Judges  vii.  1  ;  2  Kings 
xvii.  28 ;  Isa.  ix.  15)  who  instituted  the  Divine 
cultus  in  the  locality  (Luther) ;  though  it  has 
also  been  regarded  as  the  name  of  the  place 
(Calvin),  which  maybe  here  given  to  it  by  anti- 
cipation (Wordsworth),  being  derived  from 
raah,  to  see,  and  equivalent  to  the  place  of 
vision  (Samaritan),  because  God  there  ap- 
peared to  the  patriarch  (Fagins),  and  showed 
him  the  land  of  Canaan  (Masius,  Lyra). 
Knobel  renders  "the  oak  of  the  teacher," 
comparing  it  with  "  the  oak  of  the  witches  " 
(Judges  ix,  37).  The  LXX.  translate  by 
id/rjXijv,  lofty,  and  the  Vulgate  by  illustrer,*. 
And  the  Canaanite  was  then  in  the  land 
A  sign  of  post-Mosaic  authorship  (Tuch, 
Bleek,  Colenso) ;  an  interpolation  (Aben 
Ezra ;  rather  (1)  a  proclamatio.  of  the 
miserable  exile  in  which  the  patriarch  lived 
(Luther) ;  or  (2)  a  reminder  to  Abram  of  his 
heavenly  oountry,  seeing  he  was  a  stranger 


in  his  earthly  one  (Calvin);  or,  better, 
(3)  an  intimation  of  the  fact  that  a/ready 
the  Canaanites  were  in  possession  of  the  land 
which  bore  their  name  (Kalisch),  or  perhaps 
simply  (4)  a  declaration  that  the  land  was 
not  a  stretch  of  unoccupied  territory,  but 
a  populated  region  (Hengstenherg),  thus 
making  the  fulfilment  of  the  ensuing  promisi 
all  the  more  difficult,  and  all  the  greater 
a  trial  to  the  faith  of  the  patriarch  (Keil, 
Murphy,  Wordsworth,  Alfonl)  ;  or  (5),  but 
not  so  good,  an  explanation  of  the  previous 
selection  of  the  oak  of  Moreh  as  his  habita 
tion  (Lange,  Havernick,  vide  Introduction, 
§18). 

Ver.  7. — And  the  Lord  appeared.  The 
first  mention  of  a  theophany,  though  Acts 
vii.  2  alleges  that  snch  a  Divine  manifesta- 
tion had  previously  occurred  in  Ur  of  the 
Chaldees.  Though  not  a  direct  vision  of 
Jehovah  (John  i.  18),  that  there  was  some 
kind  of  outward  appearance  may  be  inferred 
from  the  subsequent  Divine  manifestations 
to  the  patriarch  (ch.  xviii.  2,  17,  33 ;  xxii. 
11—18),  to  Hagar  (ch.  xvi.  7—14  ;  xxi.  17, 
18),  and  to  Jacob  (ch.  xxxi.  11 — 13  ;  xxxii. 
24-30).  On  the  relation  of  the  angel  of 
Jehovah  to  Jehovah  vide  ch.  xvi.  17.  Unto 
Abram.  "  Jam  pseno  fatigato  Abraha  isto 
duro  exsilio  et  perpetuis  migrationibus " 
(Luther).  And  said,  Unto  thy  seed — to  him- 
self God  gave  "  none  inheritance  in  it,  no,  not 
so  much  as  to  set  his  foot  on  "  (Acts  vii.  5) ; 
the  land  was  promised  to  his  seed  "  when  as 
yet  he  had  no  child  " — will  I  give  this  land 
Now  occupied  by  the  Canaanites.  Undoubt- 
edly a  great  promise,  that  the  Canaanites 
should  he  dispossessed,  and  their  oountry 
given  to  the  offspring  of  a  childless  old  man 
already  over  seventy-five  years.  The  apparent 
improbability  of  its  ever  being  accomplished 
rendered  it  a  strong  trial  to  the  patriarch's 
faith.  And  there  builded  he  an  altar.  "Con- 
stituit  certurn  locum,  in  quo  conveniat  ercle- 
sia,  auditura  verbum  Dei,  factura  preces, 
laudatura  Deum,  sacrificatura  Deo '  (Luther). 
"Altare  forma  est  Divini  cultus  ;  invocatio 
autem  substantia  et  Veritas  "  (Calvin).  "The 
rearing  of  an  altar  in  the  land  was,  in  fact,  a 
form  of  taking  possession  of  it  on  the  ground 
of  a  right  secured  to  the  exercise  of  his 
faith  "  'Bush).  "  It  is  often  said  of  Abra- 
ham xi  d  the  patriarchs,  that  they  built  altan 
to  tie  Lord;  it  is  never  said  they  built 
houses  for  themselves  "  (AVbrdsworth).  Unto 
tie  Lord  who  had  appeared  to  Mm. 


1S4 


THE  BOOK  Of  tfENESIS. 


[ch.  xii.  6 — 9 


Ver.  8.  — An8  lie  removed  —  literally, 
caused  (i.  e.  his  tent)  to  be  broken  up  (of. 
ch.  xxvi  22 — from  thenoe — no  cause  for 
which  being  assigned,  the  hostility  of  his 
neighbours  (Luther,  Calvin)  and  the  com- 
mencement of  the  famine  (Alford,  Keil)  have 
been  conjectured  as  the  probable  reasons — 
unto  a  (literally,  the)  mountain  east  of 
Bethel.  Here  proleptically  named  "house of 
'Joil,"  being  called  in  the  time  of  AbramLuz 
cli.  xxviii.  19).  Its  present  name  is  Beitin. 
And  pitched  his  tent  (cf.  ch.  ix.  21),  having 
8ethel  on  the  west — literally,  sea-ward,  the 
Mediterranean  being  the  western  boundary 
oi  Palestine  (cf.  ch.  xxviii.  14  ;  Exod.  x.  19  ; 
xxvi.  22 ;  Ezek.  xlviii.  1,  2)— and  Hai — Ai 
CV  ;  KJJ?,  Neh.  xi.  31 ;  T\%  Isa,  x.  28) ; 
with  the  article,  because  signifying  "  the  heap 
of  ruins,"  near  which  it  was  no  doubt  built; 


the  scene  of  the  first  Israelitish  defeat  under 
Joshua  (ch.  vii.  2) :  its  ruins  still  exist  under 
the  name  of  Medinet  Gai — on  the  east 
(about  five  miles  from  Bethel) :  and  there  he 
builded  an  altar  unto  the  lord  (vide  supra), 
and  called  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord  (vide 
ch.  iv.  26). 

Ver.  9.— And  Abram  journeyed  (literally, 
broke  up,  e.  g.,  his  encampment),  going  on 
still — literally,  going  on  and  breaking  up 
(cf.  ch.  viii.  3);  "going  and  returning"— 
towards  the  south.  Negeb,  the  dry  reginn, 
from  nagabh,  to  be  dried,  the  southern  dis- 
trict of  Palestine  (ch.  xiii.  3  ;  xx.  1  ;  xxi». 
62).  The  LXX.  render,  ioTpaToir'tttvofv  iv 
r-g  ipii/iip. 

Of  this  section  vers.  5,  6,  8a  are  commonly 
assigned  to  the  Elohist ;  and  7,  86,  and  0  to 
the  Jehovist. 


IIOMII.ETICS. 

Vers.  6 — 10. —  The  promised  land..  I.  Wanderings.  Entering  Canaan  from  th« 
north,  the  Cliuldauan  emigrant  directs  his  progress  steadily  towards  the  south,  re- 
moving from  station  to  station  till  he  reaches  the  furthest  limit  of  the  land.  This 
wandering  life  to  the  patriarch  must  have  been  (1)  unexpected.  Leaving  TJt 
at  the  Divine  command,  and  journeying  many  hundreds  of  miles,  he  must  have 
eagerly  anticipatec"  rest  in  Canaan ;  but  instead  he  finds  that  he  must  journey 
still.  So  is  life  to  God's  people  always  full  of  disappointments.  Yet  was  it  also 
(2)  inevitable.  The  land  was  in  possession  of  the  Canaanites,  and,  even  though  it 
had  been  free  and  untenanted,  it  was  famine-stricken,  both  of  which  circumstances 
necessitated  frequent  removal.  And  for  causes  not  dissimilar  must  the  saints-ever 
wander,  the  world  for  the  most  part  belonging  to  their  enemies,  and  the  produce  of 
earth  being  insufficient  to  meet  their  souls'  needs.  Then  to  the  patriarch  himself  it 
was  meant  to  be  (3)  prophetic.  The  promised  land  being  designed  not  bo  much  for 
a  possession  in  itself-  as  for  an  emblem  of  the  better  country  towards  which  his  spirit 
with  its  new-found  faith  was  travelling,  it  was  not  intended  that  life  in  Canaan  for 
the  father  of  the  faithful  should  be  one  of  absolute  repose,  but  rather  one  of  wander- 
ing and  unrest;  and  of  that  he  had  a  foretaste,  or  earnest,  immediately  he  stepped 
across  the  borders  of  the  land.  And  still  further  was  it  purposed  to  be  (4)  emblematic. 
In  the  fortunes  of  Abram  it  was  contemplated  that  God's  believing  people  in  every 
age  should  behold,  in  main  characteristic  at  least,  an  outline  or  shadow  of  their  own. 
As  to  him  the  land  of  Canaan  was  not  the  better  country,  but  only  its  anticipation,  so 
to  them  is  it  not  so  much  a  type  of  heaven  as  of  the  visible  Church,  and  the  patri- 
archal wanderings  an  emblem  not  of  the  beatific  life  of  the  redeemed  in  glory,  but 
of  the  experiences  of  the  saints  on  earth. 

II.  Tbials.  Along  with  ceaseless  peregrinations,  more  or  less  exacting  in  their 
nature,  trials  of  another  and  severer  sort  entered  into  the  texture  of  the  patriarch's 
experience  in  the  promised  land.  The  peculiar  circumstances  in  which  he  found 
himself  were  such  as  to  make  a  vehement  assault  upon  his  faith.  1.  His  childless 
condition  seemed  to  render  all  but  impossible  belief  in  the  mighty  nation  of  which 
Jehovah  talked.  And  so  are  saints  sometimes  tempted  to  indulge  a  suspicion  of  the 
Divine  goodness  and  veracity,  because  of  the  absence  of  certain  creatine  comforts 
which  they  see  God  bestowing  upon  others.  2.  The  occupation  of  the  land  appeared 
to  negative  the  idea  of  its  ever  becoming  his;. and  not  unt'requently  because  a  saint 
cannot  discern  how  a  promise  is  to  be  fulfilled,  he  begins  to  challmge  the  Divine 
resources,  and  ends  by  impeaching  the  Divine  faithfulness.  3.  The  prevalence  of 
famine  was  calculated  to  excite  doubts  in  his  mind  as  to  whether  after  all  the  land 
was  worth  either  having  or  desiring  ;  and  in  this  life  the  saints  are  not  unacquainted 
with  temptations,  arising  from  the  pressure  of  outward  circumstances,  such  as  extrem* 


ch.  xii.  6—9.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  1M 


poverty  or  long-continued  affliction,  to  admit  the  apprehension  that  after  all  the 
blessings  of  religion  and  the  glories  of  the  future  life  may  not  be  worth  the  sacrifices 
made  to  secure  them. 

III.  Consolations.  If  a  field  of  wanderings  and  a  scene  of  trials,  the  promised 
land  was  likewise  a  place  of  consolation.  Abram  enjoyed — 1.  The  comfort  of  thr 
Divine  presence.  Though  unseen,  the  companionship  of  Jehovah  wag  understood" 
by  the  patriarch  to  be  a  grand  reality  on  which  he  might  depend ;  and  so  says  Christ 
to  his  believing  people,  "  Lo,  I  am  with  you  always,  even  unto  the  end  of  the 
world."  2.  The  joy  of  Divine  manifestations.  As  Jehovah  appeared  to  Abram, 
probably  in  the  form  of  a  man,  so  already  has  God  appeared  to  his  Church  in  the 
person  of  the  man  Christ'  Jesus ;  and  so  does  Christ  promise  still  to  appear  spiritually 
to  his  people,  and  to  disclose  to  them  the  treasures  of  his  grace  and  love  (John  xiv. 
21).  3.  The  consolation  of  Divine  worship.  Wherever  Abram  wandered  he  built 
an  altar  and  called  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord  who  had'  appeared  unto  him ;  and 
without  any  altar  may  the  saint  at  any  moment  enter  into  closest  communion  with 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  in  the  fulness  of  the  times  was  manifested  to  take  away 
our  sins,  and  who  is  ever  ready,  through  the  medium  of  his  Holy  Spirit,  to  interpose 
for  his  people's  aid. 

Learn — 1.  That  a  saint's  wanderings  are  of  God's  appointing.  2.  That  a  saint's 
trials  are  of  God's  permitting.     3.  That  a  saint's  consolations  are  of  God's  sending. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  6 — 9. — Revelations.  We  here  enter  upon  the  more  special  history  of  Divine 
appearances.  Hitherto  the  word  is  described  simply  as  a  word — "The  Lord 
said;"  now  we  connect  with  the  word  distinct  appearances.  The  plain  of  Moreh 
will  be  ever  memorable  as  the  first  scene  of  such  revelations.  The  altar  which 
Abram  erected  was  to  the  Lord  who  appeared  unto  him,  i.  e.  in  commemoration 
of  the  vision.  Thus  the  long  line  of  theophanies  commences.  The- great  lesson 
of  this  record  is  the  worship  of  man  proceeding  from  the  gracious  revelation  of  God. 
True  religion  is  not  a  spontaneous  product  of  man's  nature,  but  rather  a  response  to 
God's  grace.  He  appears ;  the  believer  to  whom  the  vision  is  vouchsafed  raises  an 
altar  not  "  to  the  unknown  God,"  but  to  the  God  who  has  appeared  to  him.  Another 
point  in  the  record  is  the  connection  of  the  promise  with  the  revelation.  The  Lord 
appeared,  and  when  he  appeared  he  gave  his  word  of  promise  :  "  Unto  thy  seed  will 
I  give  this  land."  Are  we  not  reminded  thus  early  in  the  history  of  religion  that 
for  its  maintenance  there  is  required  not  only  a  revelation  to  the  mind  and  heart  by 
the  Spirit,  but  also  a  seat  of  its  institutions  and  community?  Religion  without  a 
people  oi  God  dwelling  in  the  land  of  privilege,  and  bound  together  by  the  sacred 
bonds  of  a  Divine  fellowship,  is  no  true  religion  at  all.  Abiam  builds  altars  at  the 
various  stages  of  his  pilgrimage,  still  going  south.  Although  we  are  not  told  of  a 
distinct  vouchsafement  of  God  in  connection  with  every  altar,  we  may  well  suppose, 
especially  as  the  "  mountain  "  is  specified,  that  the  altars  marked  out  not  rnero 
resting-places,  but  the  scenes  of  special  communion  with  Jehovah. — B. 

Ver.  6. — The  first  wanderer  and  the  second,  or  Cain  and  Abram  compared  and 

contrasted.     I.  Compared.     Each  wandered — 1.  From  the  place  of  his  nativity 

Cain  from  Eden,  Abram  from  Ur.  2.  Accompanied  by  his  wife,  who  in  each  instance 
was  his  sister.  3.  In  obedience  to  the  word  of  Jehovah.  He  who  called  Abram  had 
previously  banished  Cain.  4.  Beneath  the  protection  of  Heaven— Cain  defended  by 
his  scarred  brow,  Abram  shielded  by  the  arm  of  God.  5.  To  the  close  of  life  • 
neither  finding  a  permanent  habitation  on  the  earth.  ' 

II.  Contrasted.  While  both  wandered— 1.  The  one,  Cain,  travelled  from  God  : 
the  other,  Abram,  journeyed  with  God..  2.  The  one  roamed  across  the  face  of  earth ; 
the  other  walked  within  the  borders  of  the  promised  land.  3.  The  one  fled  beneath 
the  curse  of  Heaven ;  the  other  was  o'ercanopierl  by  Heaven's  favour.  4.  The  one 
wae  an  emblem  of  the  sinner  seeking  rest  and  finding  none ;  the  other  waa  a  picture 
>f  the  saint,  who  must  travel  through  the  world  to  his  home. 


I8«  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS,  [ch.  hi.  «-■  9. 

Lessons:— \.  There  are  wanderings  and  wanderings  among  men  upon  the  earth. 
2.  He  who  would  not  become  a  fugitive  like  Cain  must,  like  Abram,  become  « 
pilgrim.   3.  They  who  choose  the  lot  of  Abram  need  never  fear  the  doom  of  Cain. — W. 

Vers.  6 — 20. — The  strength  and  weakness  of  Abram.  I.  A  threefold  source  oi 
strength.  1.  His  enjoyment  of  gracious  visits  from  God.  2.  His  exercise  of  faith 
in  God.     8.  His  cultivation  of  communion  with  God. 

II.  A  threefold  source  of  weakness.  1.  An  unwarrantable  fear  of  man.  2. 
A  heedless  reliance  on  worldly  policy  and  craft.  3.  A  sinful  preference  of  self- 
interest  1o  the  happiness  and  welfare  of  others. — W. 

Ver.  7. — Abraham  worshipping.  "And  there  he  builded  an  altar  unto  the  Lord, 
who  appeared  unto  him."  Abraham  js  at  length  Divinely  informed  that  he  is  in,  the 
land  hereafter  to  be  his.  He  was  at  the  spot  where  the  great  temple,  to  be  set  up  by 
his  descendants,  would  stand.  Here  he  builds  an  altar.  It  was  doubtless  a  very 
plain  altar  of  rough  stones,  but  large  enough  for  the  sacrifices  to  be  offered.  It 
would  have  little  attraction  in  the  eyes  of  many,  but  it  would  be  approved  of  by  God. 

I.  It  was  reared  entirely  in  the  honour  of  God.  There  was  no  self-glori- 
fying in  it.  It  was  erected  as  a  spontaneous  act  of  gratitude.  The  men  of  Babel 
by  the  tower-building  sought  to  get  themselves  a  name ;  Abraham  by  his  altar- 
building  seeks  to  honour  God's  name.  His  act  was  a  prote.st  against  the  prevalent 
and  surrounding  idolatry.  This  was  the  first  alta-  reared  in  Canaan  to  the  great 
I  AM. 

IL  It  was  an  expression  of  Abraham's  desire  to  acknowledge  the  Divine 
guidance  in  his  past  life.  He  found  it  a  joy  to  be  under  the  leadership  of  God. 
"  Wherever  Abraham  had  his  tent  God  had  his  altar."  In  how  many  families  is  the 
altar  in  need  of  repair  I     In  many  it  has  not  even  been  set  up. 

III.  It  expressed  Abraham's  dependence  on  the  mercy  revealed  through  a 
propitiatory  sacrifice.  He  evidently  believed  in  an  atonement.  He  offered  an 
heifer,  goat,  ram,  turtle-dove,  and  pigeon.  After  the  rude  manner  of  that  day  he 
offered  sacrifices  for  his  own  sins  and  for  those  of  his  household.  He  found  that 
God  was  brought  nearer  through  the  sacrifice,  even  as  we  discover  that  fact  through 
the  Christ  of  Calvary. 

IV.  It  expressed  also  Abraham's  readiness  to  consecrate  himself  entirely  to 
God.  An  altar  that  failed  to  express  this  would  have  been  a  mockery.  God  is  not 
flattered  by  an  outward  show  of  reverence.  He  must  have  inner  and  absolute  con- 
secration if  we  are  to  know  the  heights  of  spiritual  power. 

V.  It  expressed  the  patriarch's  faith  in  the  fulfilment  of  the  Divine  pro- 
mises. Abraham  was  already  in  the  land  of  promise,  and  could  leave  the  future  to 
his  God.  He  was,  by  rearing  that  altar,  taking  possession  of  the  land  for  himself,  and 
of  the  world  for  God,  even  as  Columbus,  with  befitting  pomp,  planted  in  the  newly- 
discovered  continent  a  cross,  and  named  the  land  San  Salvador,  thus  consecrating  it 
to  the  holy  Saviour. — H. 

Ver.  8. — Abraham's  altar.  "  And  there  he  builded  an  altar  unto  the  Lord,  and 
called  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord."  There  is  a  solemn  word  (Matt.  x.  32,  33). 
The  distinction  is  not  between  Christians  und  heathen  ;  it  is  within  the  visible 
Church.  To  confess  Christ  is  more  than  professing  Christianity.  It  must  be  in 
the  life,  not  merely  in  religious  services.  No  doubt  these  have  their  use ;  without 
them  spiritual  life  would  wither  and  die,  like  a  light  under  a  vessel.  They  are  as 
food;  but  "the  life  is  more  than  meat."  The  world  acquiesces  in  such  services  as 
respectable  and  proper.  But  it  is  a  poor  Christianity  that  raises  no  opposition.  A 
Christian  life  may  constrain  respect,  but  it  must  differ  from  worldly  (1)  as  to  its 
object— -first  the  kingdom  of  God ;  (2)  as  to  its  means — God's  promises  and  help 
trusted  to  as  real.  Mark  Abraham's  example :  dwelt  among  Canaanites  on  sufferance ; 
they  idolaters.  Prudence  w  did  suggest  keeping  his  religion  secret.  Many  try  to 
keep  their  faith  secret ;  afraid  to  confess  it,  but  unwilling  to  give  it  up.  In  vain ; 
faith  ashamed  of  brings  no  comfort  or  strength.  Abram  did  not  hide  his  faith. 
Wherever  he  sojonrned  lie  built  an  altar;  confessed  whom  he  trusted.     We  are  told 


OH.  XII.  10— zu.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


1ST 


— 1.  He  built  an  altar,  i.e.  made  open  confession  of  his  faith.  2.  "Called  on  th« 
name,"  &c,  i.e.  spoke  to  God  as  a  living  person,  a  real  helper. 

I.  What  is  it  to  confess  God  ?  1.  In  the  heart ;  firmly  to  believe  what  he 
has  revealed.  His  promises  were  given  to  be  trusted.  The  fool  puts  away  belief 
(Ps.  xiv.  1).  It  may  be  from  dislike  of  truth  (of.  Rom.  i.  28)  ;  it  may  be  despond- 
ingly  (of.  Gen.  xlii.  36),  afraid  to  take  God  at  his  word.  The  voice  of  true  wisdom, 
Ps.  lxii.  1,  2.  2.  In  the  life;  acting  upon  "ye  are  not  your  own."  We  cannot 
go  far  without  being  tried :  in  business,  in  companionship,  in  bearing  what  we  do 
not  like,  in  resisting  self-will  and  self-seeking,  in  standing  firm  against  the  world's 
scorn  or  well-meant  persuasions.  Passing  events  constantly  put  the  question  whom 
we  serve  (cf.  Dan.  iii.  15 ;  Acts  v.  28,  29).  And  not  merely  in  matters  that  seem 
great.     Little  things  show  whom  we  have  first  in  our  hearts 

IL  Closely  connected  with  this  is  calling  on  the  name  of  the  Lord.  We 
must  look  below  the  surface.  Among  professing  Chriatians  some  prayer  is  a  matter 
of  course;  but  is  it  used  as  a  real  means  to  obtain?  It  is  one  thing  to  believe  the 
doctrine  of  God's  providence,  and  of  the  use  of  prayer,  and  another  to  pray  as  a 
practical  power  and  to  feel  our  Father's  care.  Yet  St.  Paul  connects  prayer  and 
peace  (Phil.  iv."6,  7).  When  Hannah  had  prayed  she  was  no  more  sad  (1  Sam.  L  18). 
The  Bible  has  many  encouragements  to  pray,  but  not  one  warning  against  asking  too 
much. 

III.  Effect  of  this  on  the  character.  Abraham's  character  as  eminently 
faithful  was  built  up  by  exercising  faith.  He  walked  with  God  not  by  any  con- 
straining power,  nor  by  reason  of  special  manifestations ;  then  he  would  be  no 
example  for  us.  Each  acknowledgment  of  God  increased  his  communion.  Each 
altar  marked  a  step  in  his  own  life,  and  a  work  in  the  world.  He  who  is  faithful  in 
little  gains  more  power  (cf.  Matt.  xiii.  12). — M. 


EXPOSITION. 


Ver.  10. — And  there  was  a  famine.  3JJ}, 
from  a  root  signifying  to  hunger,  the  primary 
idea  appearing  to  lie  in  that  of  an  ample, 
i.  e.  empty,  stomach  (Gesenius,  Fiirst).  The 
term  is  used  of  individuals,  men  or  ani- 
mals (Ps.  xxxiv.  11 ;  1.  12) ;  or  of  regions 
(Ps.  xli.  55).  In  the  land.  Of  Canaan, 
which,  though  naturally  fertile,  was,  on  ac- 
count of  its  imperfect  cultivation,  subject  to 
visitations  of  dearth  (cf.  ch.  xxvi.  1 ;  xli. 
56),  especially  in  dry  seasons,  when  the  No- 
vember and  December  rains,  on  which  Pales- 
tine depended,  either  failed  or  were  scanty. 
The  occurrence  of  this  famine  just  at  the 
lime  of  Abram's  entering  the  land  was  an 
additional  trial  to  his  faith.  And  Abram 
went  down  to  Egypt.  Mizraim  (vide  ch. 
x.  6)  was  lower  than  Palestine,  and  cele- 
brated then,  as  later,  as  a  rich  and  fruitful 
country,  though  sometimes  even  Egypt  suf- 
fered from  a  scarcity  of  com,  owing  to  a 
Cilure  in  the  annual  inundation  of  the  Nile. 
Eichhorn  notes  it  as  an  authentication  of 
this  portion  of  the  Abrahamic  history  that 
the  patriarch  proposed  to  take  himself  and 
his  household  to  Egypt,  since  at  that  time 
no  corn  trade  existed  between  the  two 
countries  such  as  prevailed  in  the  days  of 
Jacob  (vide  Havernick's  Introduction,  §  18). 
The  writer  to  the  Hebrews  remarks  it  as  an 
instance  of  the  patriarch's  faith  that  he  did 
sot  return  to  either  Haran  or  Ur  (Heb.'xi. 


15,  16).  To  sojourn  there.  To  tarry  as  a 
stranger,  but  not  to  dwell.  Whether  this 
journey  was  undertaken  with  the  Divine 
sanction  and  ought  to  be  regarded  as  an  act 
of  faith,  or  in  obedience  to  his  own  fears  and 
should  be  reckoned  as  a  sign  of  unbelief, 
does  not  appear.  Whichever  way  the  patri- 
arch elected  to  act  in  his  perplexity,  to  leave 
Canaan  or  reside  in  it,  there  was  clearly  a 
strain  intended  to  be  put  upon  his  faith. 
For  the  famine  was  grievous  (literally, 
haavy)  in  the  land. 

Vers.  11 — 13. — And  it  came  to  pass  (liter- 
ally, it  was),  when  he  was  come  near  to  enter 
into  Egypt  (that  he  had  his  misgivings, 
arising  probably  from  his  own  eminence, 
which  could  scarcely  fail  to  attract  attention 
among  strangers,  but  chiefly  from  the  beauty 
of  his  wife,  which  was  calculated  to  inflame 
the  cupidity  and,  it  might  be,  the  violence  of 
the  warm-blooded  Southrons,  and)  that  he  said 
unto  Sarai  his  wife.  The  arrangement  here 
referred  to  appears  (ch.  xx.  13)  to  have  been 
preconcerted  on  first  setting  out  from  Ur  or 
Haran,  so  that  Abram's  address  to  his  wife 
on  approaching  Egypt  may  be  viewed  aj 
simply  a  reminder  of  their  previous  compact 
Behold  now,  I  know  that  thou  art  a  fail' 
woman  to  look  upon.  Literally,  fair  o,' 
aspect  (cf.  1  Sam.  xvii.  42).  Though  now 
upwards  of  sixty-five  years  of  age,  she  was 
still  in  middle  life  (ch.  xxiii.  1),  and  hat 


188 


TUB  COOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[en.  xii.  10—20, 


constitution  had  not  been  impair jd  by  bear- 
ing children.  Besides,  the  clear  complexion 
of  Sarah  would  render  her  specially  attractive 
in  the  eyes  of  the  Egyptians,  whose  women, 
though  not  so  dark  as  the  Nubians  and  Ethi- 
opians, were  yet  of  a  browner  tinge  than  the 
Syrians  and  Arabians.  Monumental  evidence 
confirms  the  assertion  of  Scripture  that  a  fair 
complexion  was  deemed  a  high  recommenda- 
tion in  the  age  of  the  Pharaohs  (vide  Heng- 
stenborg's  '  Egypt  and  the  Books  of  Hoses,' 
p.  200).  Therefor*  (literally,  and)  it  shall 
come  to  pass,  when  (literally,  that)  the 
Egyptians —notorious  fortheir  licentiousness 
{vide  P.  Smith's  '  History  of  the,  World,'  vol. 
>  jh.  vl.  p.  71) — shall  see  thee,  that  (liter- 
iy,  and)  they  shall  say,  This  is  his-  wife : 
^d  they  will  kill  me  —in  order  to  possess 
chee,  counting  murder  a  less  crime  than 
adultery  (Lyra).  An  unreasonable  anxiety, 
considering  that  he  had  hitherto  enjoyed  the 
.Mvine  protection,  however  natural  it  might 
«eem  in  view  of  the  voluptuous  character  of 
<;he  people.  But  (literally,  and)  they  will 
save  thee  alive — for  either  compulsory  mar- 
riage or  dishonourable  use.  Say,  I  pray  thee, 
— translated  in  ver.  11  as  "  now ; "  "  veibum 
obsecrantis  vel  adhortantis  "  (Masius) — thou 
art  my  sister.  A  half  trutli  (ch.  xx.  12), 
but  a  whole  falsehood.  The  usual  apologies, 
ihat  he  did  not  fabricate,  but  "  cautiously 
conceal  the  truth  "  (Lyra),  that  perhaps  he 
acted  in  obedience  to  a  Divine  impulse 
(Mede),  that  he  dissembled  in  order  to  pro- 
tect his  wife's  chastity  (Rosenmiiller),  are  not 
satisfactory.  On  the  other  hand,  Abram  must 
not  be  judged  by  the  light  of  New  Testamen  t 
revelation.  It  is  not  necessary  for  a  Christian 
in  every  situation  of  life  to  tell  all  the  truth, 
especially  when  its  part  suppression  involves 
no  deception,  and  is  indispensable  for  self- 
preservation  ;  and  Abram  may  have  deemed 
it  legitimate  us  a  means  of  securing  both  his 
»wn  life  afid  K,i  rail's  honour,  though  how 
ae  was  to  shield  his  wife  in  the  peculiar  cir- 
cumstances it  is  difficult  to  see.  liosenmiiller 
suggests  that  he  knew  the  preliminary  cere- 
monies to  marriage  required  a  considerable 
time,  and  counted  upon  being  able  to  leave 
Egypt  before  any  injury  was  done  to  Sarah. 
The  only  objection  to  this  is  that  the  his- 
torian represents  him  as  being  less  solicitous 
about  the  preservation  of  his  wife's  chastity 
than  about  the  conservation  of  his  own  life. 
That  it  may  be  well  (not  with  thee,  though 
doubtless  this  is  implied,  but)  with  me  for  thy 
■ake  (the  import  of  which  is  declared  in  the 
words  which  follow) ;  and  ray  soul  shall  live 
because  of  thee.  "  No  defence  can  be  offered 
for  a  man  who,  merely  through  dread  of 
danger  to  himself,  tells  a  lie,  risks  his  wife's 
chastity,  puts  temptation  in  the  way  of  his 
neighbours,  and  betrays  thecharge  to  which  the 
Divine  favour  had  summoned  him  "  (Dykes). 


Vers.  14,  15. — Aul  it  came  to  pass  that, 
when  Abram   was   come  into   Egypt,   the 
Egyptians  beheld  the  woman  that  she  was 
very  fair.     The  princes  also — literally,  and 
the  princes  (HK',  mas.  of  Sarah),  chief  men 
or  courtiers,  who,  in  accordance  with   the 
ancient  custom  of  Egypt  that  no  slave  should 
approach   the   priestly  person   of  Pharaoh, 
were  sons  of  the  principal  priests  (vide  Haver- 
nick,  §  18)— of  Pharaoh.    The  official  title  of 
the  kings  of  Egypt  (cf.  C*sar,  the  designation 
of  the  Roman  emperors,  and  Czar,  that  oi 
the  Emperor  of  Russia),  who  are  never  intro- 
duced in  the  Pentateuch,  as  in  later  books 
by  their  individual  names  (1   Kings  iii.  1 ; 
ix.  40) ;  an  indirect  evidence  that  the  author 
of  Genesis  must  at  least  have  been  acquainted 
with  the  manners  of  the  Egyptian  Court. 
The  term  Pharaoh,  which  continued  in  use 
till  after  the   Persian  invasion — under  the 
Greek  empire  the  Egyptian  rulers  were  styled 
Ptolemies — is  declared  by  Josephus  to  signify 
"  king"  ('Ant.,'  viii.  6,  2),  which  agrees  with 
the  K optic  Pouro  (Pi-ouro;  from  ouro,  to 
rule,  whence  touro,  queen),  which  also  meani 
king.     Modern   Egyptologers,  however,  in. 
cline  to  regard   it  as  corresponding  to  the 
Phra  of  the  inscriptions  (Rosellini,  Lepsius, 
Wilkinson),  or  to  the  hieroglyphic  Peraa,  oi 
Perao,   "the  great  house     (M.  de  Rouge, 
Brugsch,  Ebers),  an  appellation  which   be- 
longed to  the  Egyptian  monarchs,  and  with 
which    may    be    compared    "  the    Sublime 
Porte,"  as  applied   to  the  Turkish  sultans 
(cf.  Canon  Cook  in  '  Speaker's  Commentary,' 
vol.   i.    p.    477).     The   particular  monarch 
who  occupied   the  Egyptian  throne  at   the 
time  of  Abram's  arrival  has  been  conjectured 
to  be  Necao  (Josephus,  '  Bell.  Jud.,'  v.  ix.  4), 
Ramessemones   (Syncellus,   p.    101),    Phare- 
thones  (Euseb.,  '.Praep.  Ev.,  ix.  8),  Apappm 
(Wilkinson,  '  Anc.  Egypt.,' vol.  i.  p.  13,  note 
5,  Dr.  Birch's  edition),  Achthoes,  the  sixth 
king  of  the  eleventh  dynasty  (Osburn,  'Mon 
Hist,   of  Egypt,'   vol.   i.  ch.   vii.  p.   375), 
Salatis  or  Saitas,  the  first  king  of  the  fifteenth 
dynasty,  whose  reign  commenced  B.C.  2080 
(Stuart  Poole  in  'Smith's Diet, 'art. Pharaoh), 
a  monarch  belonging  to  the  sixteenth  dynasty 
of  shepherd  kings  (Kalisch),  and  a  Pharaoh 
who  nourished  between  the  middle  of  the 
eleventh  and  thirteenth  dynasties,  most  pro- 
bably one  of  the  earliest  Pharaohs  of  the 
twelfth  (Canon  Cook  in  '  Speaker's  Comment- 
ary,' vol.  i.  p.  447).     Amid  such  conflicting 
testimony  from  erudite  archaeologists  it  is 
apparent  that  nothing  can  be  ascertained  with 
exactitude  as  to  the  date  of  Abram's  sojourn 
in  Egypt ;  though  the  last-named  writer,  who 
exhibits  the  latest  results  of  scholarship  on  the 
question,  mentions  in  support  of  his  conclu- 
sion a  variety  of  considerations  that  may  be 
profitably  studied.     Saw  her.     So  that  she 
must  have  been  unveiled,  which  agrees  witk 


oh.  xii.  10—20.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


I8» 


monumental  evidence  that  in  the  reign  of 
the  Pharaohs  the  Egyptian  ladiea  exposed 
their  faces,  though  the  custom  was  discon- 
tinued after  ttie  Persian  conquest  (vwL\  Heng- 
itenberg's  '  Egypt  and  the  Books  of  Moses,' 
p.  199).  And  commended  her  before  Pha- 
raoh: and  the  woman  was  taken.  Capta 
(Targum  of  Jonathan),  rapta  (Arab.),  ab- 
ducta  (Pagnini),  capta  et  deducta  (Rosen- 
miiller) ;  all  implying  more  or  less  the  idea 
of  violence,  which,  however,  besides  being 
»ot  warranted  by  the  text,  was  scarcely  likely 
in  the  circumstances,  the  king  being  perfectly 
honourable  in  his  proposals,  and  Abram  and 
Sarai  by  their  deception  having  rendered  it 
impossible  to  object  without  divulging  their 
secret.  Into  Pharaoh's  house.  Or  harem, 
with  a  view  to  marriage  as  a  secondary  wife. 
Cf.  the  Papyrus  D'Orbiney,  now  in  the 
British  Museum,  but  belonging  to  the  age  of 
Rameses  II.,  in  which  the  Pharaoh  of  the 
time,  acting  on  the  advice  of  his  counsellors, 
sends  two  armies  to  fetch  a  beautiful  woman 
by  force,  and  then  to  murder  her  husband. 
A  translation  by  M.  Eenouf  will  be  found 
in  The  Tale  of  the  Two  Brothers,  in  'Records 
of  the  Past,'  vol.  ii.  p.  138. 

Ver.  16. — And  he  entreated  Abram  well — 
literally,  did  good  to  Abram  ;  ei  ixprioavra 
(TjXXi,  Hieronymus,  Poole)  supposes  that 
the  court  of  Pharaoh  or  the  Egyptian  people 
generally  conferred  favours  on  the  patriarch, 
which  is  not  at  all  so  probable  as  that  Pha- 
raoh did — for  her  sake.  Marriage  negotia- 
tions in  Oriental  countries  are  usually  accom- 
panied by  presents  to  the  relatives  of  the 
bride  as  a  sort  of  payment.  "  The  marriage 
price  is  distinctly  mentioned  in  Scripture 
(Exod.  xxii.  15,  16;  Ruth  iv.  10;  1  Sam. 
iviii.  23,  25 ;  Hosea  iii.  2) ;  was  commonly 
demanded  by  the  nations  of  antiquity,  as  by 
the  Babylonians  (Herod.,  i.  196),  Assyrians 
(JUian  V,  H.,  iv.  1 ;  Strabo,  xvi.  745),  the 
undent  Greeks  ('Odyss.,' viii.  318  ff.),  and  the 
Germans  (Tacit., '  German. ,'  xviii. ) ;  and  still 
obtains  in  the  East  to  the  present  day  "  (vide 
Kitto's  '  Cyclopedia,'  art.  Marriage,  by  Dr. 
Ginsburg).  And  he  had — literally,  there  was 
(given)  to  him — sheep,  and  oxen.  Flocks  of 
small  cattle  and  herds  of  larger  quadrupeds, 
together  constituted  the  chief  wealth  of 
nomada  (cf.  ch.  xiii.  5 ;  Job  i.  3).  And  he 
asses.  Chamor,  so  named  from  the  reddish 
colour  which  in  southern  countries  belongs 
not  only  to  the  wild,  but  also  to  the  common 
or  domestic,  ass  (Gesenius).  The  mention  of 
asses  among  Pharaoh's  presents  has  been 
regarded  as  an  "  inaccuracy  "  and  a  "  blun- 
der," at  once  a  sign  of  the  late  origin  of 
Genesis  and  a  proof  its  author's  ignorance  of 
Egypt  (Bohlen,  Introd.,  ch.  vi.);  but  (1) 
asses  were  among  the  most  common  of  Egyp- 
tian animals,  a  single  individual,  according 
to  Wilkinson  (vol.   iii   p.  84),   possessing 


sometimes  as  many  as  700  or  80C  ,  and  (2 
it  is  certain  that  asses  appear  on  the  early 
monuments  (cf.  '  Records  of  the  Past,"  vol.  it 
p.  26).     And  men-servants,  and  maid-serv- 
ants, and  she  asses.    Athdn;  from  athan,  U 
walk  with  short  steps ;  so  named  from  its 
slowness  (ch.  xxxii.  16),  though  "the  ass  in 
Egypt  is  of  a  very  superior  kind,  tall,  hand 
some,  docile,  swift"  (Kitto's   'Cyclopedia,' 
art.   Egypt).     And   camels.      Garndl  (from 
g&mal,  to  repay,  because  the  camel  is  an  ani 
mal  that  remembers  past  injuries  (Bo(hart) , 
or  from  a  cognato  Aratric  root  hamala,  mean- 
ing he  or  it  carried,  with  reference  to  its 
being  a  beast  of  burden  (Gesenius) ;  both  of 
which  derivations  Stuart  Poole  declares  far- 
fetched, and  proposes  to  connect  the  tenr 
with  the  Sanskrit  kramila,  from  kram,  to 
walk  or  step,  which  would  then  signify  the 
walking  animal  [vide  Kitto,  art.  Camel).    Cf. 
with  the  Hebrew  the  Sanskrit  as  above,  the 
Arab  jemel  or  gemel,  the  Egyptian  sjamoul, 
Greek  capqXoc,  Latin  camelus)  is  the  well- 
known  strong  animal  belonging  to  Palestine 
(Ezra  ii.  67),  Arabia  (Judges  vii.  12),  Egypt 
(Exod.  ix.  8),  Syria  (2  Kings  viii.  9),  which 
serves  the  inhabitants  of  the  desert  for  travel- 
ling (ch.  xxiv.  10  ;  xxxi.  17)  as  well  as  fir. 
carrying  burdens  (Isa.  xxx.  6),  and  for  war- 
like operations  (clT.  xxi.  7),  and  in  which  their 
riches  consisted  (Jobi.  3  ;  xlii.  21).    Though 
the  camel  does  not  thrive  well  in  Egypt,  and 
seldom  appears  on  the  monuments,  the  his- 
torian has  not  necessarily  been  guilty  of  an 
"inaccuracy  and  a  blunder"  in  assigning  it 
to   Abram    as    one  of   Pharaoh's    presents 
(Bohlen) ;  for  (1)  the  camel  thrives  better 
in  Egypt  than  it  does  anywhere  else  out  of 
its  own  proper  habitat ;  (2)  if  camels  were  not 
generally  kept  in  Egypt,  this  Tharaoh  may 
have  been  "  one  of  the  shepherd  kings  who 
partly  lived  at  Avaris,  the  Zoan  of  Scripture," 
a  region  much  inhabited  by  strangers  (Poole 
in  Kitto,  art.  Camel) ;  and  (3)  if  camels  have 
not  been  discovered  among  the  delineations 
on  the  monuments,  this  may  have  been  be- 
cause of  its  connection  with  the  foreign  con- 
queror of  Egypt,  which  caused  it  to  be  re- 
garded as  a  beast  of  ill  omen ;  though  (4) 
according  to  Heeren  they  do  appear  on  the 
monuments  (Havernick,  §  18,  p.  142).    That 
horses,  though  the  glory  of  Egypt,  were  noi 
included   among   the   monarch's    gifts  war 
doubtless  owing  to  the  fact  that  they  could 
not  have  been  of  much  service  to  the  patriarch. 
Ver.  17.— And  the  Lord  plagued  (literally, 
struck)  Pharaoh  and  his  house  with  great 
plagues  (or  strokes,  either  of  disease  or  death, 
or  some  other  calamity — an  indication  that 
Pharaoh  was  not  entirely  innocent)  becaust 
of  Sarai  Abram's  wife.     The  effect  of  thii 
was  to  lead  to  the  discovery,  not  through  tht 
aid  of  the  Egyptian  priests  (Josephus),  bu 
either  through  a  special  revelation  grantee 


190 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[oh.  xii.  10—20. 


to  him,  as  afterwards  (eh.  xx.  6)  to  Abimelech 
in  a  dream  (Chrysostom),  or  through  the  con- 
fession of  Sarai  herself  (A  Lapide),  or  through 
the  servants  of  Abraham  (Kurtz). 

Vers.  18,  19. — And  Pharaoh  called  Abram 
and  said,  What  is  this  that  thou  hast  done 
onto  me?  why  didst  thou  not  tell  me  she 
was  thy  wife  S  In  which  case  we  are  bound 
to  believe  the  monarch  that  he  would  not 
have  taken  her.  Why  saidst  thou,  She  is 
my  sister  ?  so  I  might  have  taken  her  to  me 
to  wife  (which  as  yet  he  had  not  done  ;  an 
indirect  proof  both  of  the  monarch's  honour- 


able purpose  towards  Sarai  and  of  Sarai's 
unsullied  purity) :  now  therefore  behold  thy 
wife,  take  her,  and  go  thy  way.  According 
to  Josephus  ('  Bell.  Jud.'  v.  ix.  4)  Sarah  was 
only  one  night  in  Pharaoh's  house ;  but  this 
is  obviously  incorrect. 

Ver.  20.— And  Pharaoh  commanded  his 
men  (;'.  «.  certain  officers  designated  for  the 
purpose)  concerning  him  (to  see  to  his  de- 
parture) :  and  they  sent  him  away,  and  hit 
wife,  and  all  that  he  had. 

The  partitionists  assign  this  entire  section 
to  the  J  eh  ovist 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  10. — The  descent  into  Egypt.    I.  The  story  of  a  good  man's  fall.    1. 
Experiencing  disappointment.     Arrived  in  Canaan,  the  patriarch  must  have  felt  his 
heart  sink  as  he  surveyed  its  famine-stricken  fields  and  heathen  population  ;   in 
respect  of  which  it  was  so  utterly  unlike  the  fair  realm  of  his  imaginings.     So  God 
educates  his  children,  destroying  their  hopes,  blighting  their  expectations,  breaking 
their  ideals,  "  having  provided  some  better  thing  for  them,"  some  loftier  and  more 
beautiful  ideal  than  they  have  ever  ventured  to  conceive.     2.  Declining  in  faith- 
In  presence  of  the  famine  the  patriarch  must  have  found  himself  transfixed  upon 
the  horns  of  a  terrible  dilemma.     The  promised  land,  to  all  appearance,  was  only  fit 
to  be  his  grave,  like  the  wildernees,  in  later  years,  to  his  descendants.     To  return  to 
Ur  or  Haran  was  impossible  without  abandoning  his  faith  and  renouncing  Jehovah's 
promise.     The  only  harbour  of  refuge  that  loomed  before  his  anxious  -vision  Was  the 
rich  corn-land  of  Egypt,  and  yet  going  into  Egypt  was,  if  not  exhibiting  a  want  of 
trust  in  God,  voluntarily  running  into  danger.   So  situated,  unless  the  spiritual  vision 
of  the  patriarch  had  suffered  a  temporary  obscuration  he  would  not  have  quitted 
Canaan.    A  calm,  steady,  unwavering  faith  would  have  perceived  that  the  God  who 
had  brought  him  from  Chaldsea  could  support  him  in  Palestine,  even  should  his 
flocks  be  unable  to  obtain  pasture  in  its  fields  ;  and,  besides,  would  have  remembered 
that  God  had  promised  Canaan  only  to  himself,  and  not  at  all  to  his  herds.    3.  Going 
into  danger.     The  descent  into  Egypt  was  attended  by  special  hazard,  being  cal- 
culated not  only  to  endanger  the  life  of  Abram  himself,  but  also  to  jeopardise  the 
chastity  of  Sarai,  and,  as  a  consequence,  to  imperil  the  fulfilment  of  God's  promise. 
Yet  this  very  course  of  action  was  adopted,  notwithstanding  its  peculiar  risks ; 
another  sign  that  Abram  was  going  down  the  gradient  of  sin.     Besides  being  in 
itself  wrong  to  court  injury  to  our  own  persons,  to  expose  to  hurt  those  we  should 
protect,  or  occupy  positions  that  render  the  fulfilment  of  God's  promises  dubious,  no 
one  who  acts  in  either  of  these  ways  need  anticipate  the  Divine  favour  or  protection. 
S  lints  who  rush  with  open  eyes  into  peril  need  hardly  look  for  God  to  lift  them  out. 
4.  Resorting  to  worldly  policy.     Had  Abram  and  Sarai  felt  persuaded  in  their  own 
minds  that  the  proposed  journey  southwards  entirely  met  the  Divine  approval,  they 
would  simply  have  committed  their  way  to  God  without  so  much  as  thinking  of 
"crooked  ways."     But  instead  they  have  recourse  to  a  miserable  little  subterfuge  of 
their  own,  in  the  shape  of  a  specious  equivocation,  forgetting  that  he  who  trusts  in 
his  own  heart  is  a  fool,  and  that  only  they  whom  God  keeps  are  perfectly  secure.    5. 
Practising  deception.     Cunningly  concocted,  the  little  scheme  was  set  in  operation. 
Crossing  into  Egypt,  the  Mesopotamian  sheik  and  his  beautiful  partner  represented 
themselves  as  brother  and  sister.     It  is  a  melancholy  indication  of  spiritual  declen- 
sion when  a  saint  condescends  to  equivocate,  and  a  deplorable  proof  of  obliquity  of 
mora)  vision  when  he  trusts  to  a  lie  for  protection.    6.  Looking  after  self.     Anxious 
■bout  his  wife's  chastity,  the  patriarch,  it  would  appear,  was  much  more  solicitous 
about  his  own  safety.     The  tendency  of  sin  is  to  render  selfish ;  the  spirit  of  religion 
ever  loads  men  to  prefer  the  interests  of  others  to  their  own,  and  m  particular  to 
esteem  a  wife'i  happiness  and  comfort  dearer  than  life.    7.  Caught  in^his  own  toil* 


um.  xii.  10-20.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS  19« 


The  thing  which  Abram  feared  actually  came  upon  him.  Sarai's  beauty  was  admired 
ami  coveted,  and  Sarai's  person  was  conducted  to  the  royal  harem.  So  God  fre- 
quency "disappoints  the  devices  of  the  crafty,"  allocs  transgressors  to  be  taken  ii 
thfir  own  net,  and  causes  worldly  policy  to  outwit  itself. 

II.  Thb  story  of  a  good  man's  protection.  1.  God  went  down  with  Abram 
info  Egypt.  Considering  the  patriarch's  behaviour,  it  would  not  have  been  surpris- 
ing had  he  been  suffered  to  go  alone.  But  God  is  always  better  to  his  people  than 
their  deserts,  and,  in  particular,  does  not  abandon  them  even  when  they  grieve  him 
by  their  sins  and  involve  themselves  in  trouble  by  their  folly.  On  the  contrary,  it  is 
at  such  times  they  most  require  his  presence,  and  so  he  never  leaves  them  nor 
forsakes  them.  2.  God  protected  Sarai  in  Pharaoh's  house.  Not  perhaps  for 
Sarai's  or  Abram's  sake,  who  scarcely  deserved  consideration  for  the  plight  into  which 
they  had  fallen,  but  for  his  own  name's  sake.  The  fulfilment  of  his  own  promise 
and  the  credit,  as  it  were,  of  his  own  character  necessitated  measures  for  securing 
Sarai's  honour.  Accordingly,  the  house  of  Pharaoh  was  subjected  to  heavy  strokes  of 
affliction.  So  God  can  protect  his  people  in  every  time  and  place  of  danger,  and 
always  finds  a  reason  in  himself,  when  he  is  able  to  discover  none  in  them,  for  inter- 
posing on  their  behalf.  3.  God  delivered  both  in  his  own  time  and  way.  To  all 
God's  afflicted  ones  deliverance  sooner  or  later  comes.  "  The  Lord  knoweth  how  to 
deliver  the  godly  out  of  temptations,"  and  how  to  make  a  way  of  escape  when  his 
time  arrives. 

III.  Thb  story  of  a  good  man's  repromf.  1.  By  his  own  conscience.  Pro- 
foundly ashamed  must  the  patriarch  have  been  when  he  reflected  on  Sarai's  p{<ril  in 
the  house  of  Pharaoh,  and  on  his  own  craven  sp'rit  which  had  bartered  her  good 
name  for  the  sake  of  saving  his  own  skin.  It  is  difficult  to  harmonise  with  conscien- 
tious qualms  his  acceptance  of  the  monarch's  gif*-->.  But  if  Abram  had  any  manhood 
left  after  parting  with  Sarai,  besides  being  humiliated  before  God  for  his  wickedness, 
he  must  have  been  dishonoured  in  his  own  eyes  for  what  looked  like  selling  a  wife's 
purity  for  flocks  and  herds.  No  doubt  conscience  exacted  vengeance  from  the  guilty 
soul  of  the  patriarch,  as  it  does  from  that  of  every  sinner.  2.  By  his  unbelieving 
neighbour.  Though  not  entirely  guiltless,  Pharaoh  was  unquestionably  less  blame- 
worthy than  Abram.  And  yet  Abram  was  a  saint  who  had  been  favoured  with 
Divine  manifestations  and  enriched  with  Divine  promises ;  whereas  Pharaoh  was  a 
heathen,  a  consideration  which  must  have  added  keenness  to  the  pan^  of  shame  with 
which  the  patriarch  listened  to  the  monarch's  righteous  rebuke.  Sj  Christians  by 
their  worldly  craft,  mean  duplicity,  and  gross  selfishness,  if  not  by  their  open 
wickedness,  occasionally  expose  themselves  to  the  merited  censures  of  irreligious 
neighbours. 

Learn — 1.  That  the  best  of  men  may  fall  into  the  greatest  of  sins.  2.  That  the 
worst  of  sins  committed  by  a  saint  will  not  repel  the  grace"  of  God.  S.  That  the 
severest  of  the  world's  censures  are  sometimes  deserved  by  the  Church. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  10— 20.— The  Church  and  the  world.  The  genesis  of  intercourse  and  con- 
troversy between  the  kingdom  of  God  and  the  world  power,  as  represented  in  the 
great  southern  kingdom  of  Egypt. 

I.  The  pressure  of  earthly  necessities  forms  the  occasion  of  the  sojourn  in 
Egypt.  _  We  are  not  told  that  Abram  was  sent  by  Divine  direction  amongst  the 
temptations  of  the  South ;  still  there  is  providential  protection  even  where  there 
Is  not  entire  Divine  approval.  The  Lord  suffers  his  peop'e  to  mingle  with  the  world 
.or  their  trial,  and  out  of  the  evil  brings  ultimate  good.  Abram  went  for  corn  but 
obtained  much  more— the  wealth  and  civilisation  of  Egypt. 

II.  Sojourn  in  the  midst  of  worldly  power  generally  involves  some  compromise 
o#  spiritual  liberty,  some  lowering  of  spiritual  principle.  Jehovah's  servant 
condescends  to  prevarication  and  dissembling  not  for  protection  only,  but  "that  it 
may  be  well  with  urn."  The  danger  to  Sarai  and  to  Abram  was  irr'eat.  All  com- 
promise is  danger. 


m  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  [oh.  xii.  10— ». 

Ill  In  the  subordinate  sphere  of  social  morality  there  have  been  many 

INSTANCES  OF  CONSCIENCE  ACTING  MORE   POWERFULLY   WHERE  THE  LIGHT  OP  TRUTH  HAH 

shone  less  clearly.  Pharaoh  was  a  heathen,  but  he  compares  to  advantage  with 
Abram.  Notice  that  these  early  plagues  of  Egypt  mentioned  in  ver.  17  were  very 
different  from  the  later,  although  they  illustrate  the  same  truth,  that  by  means  of 
judgments  God  preserves  his  people  and  carries  forward  his  kingdom,  which  is  the 
truth  exhibited  in  every  apocalypse. 

IV.  The  dismission  of  the  little  company  ol  believers  from  Egypt  was  at  th^ 
same  time  judgment  and  mercy.  The  beginning  of  that  sojourn  was  wrong,  tba 
end  of  it  was  disgraceful.  A  short  stay  among  the  world's  temptations  will  leave 
its  results  among  the  people  of  God,  as  the  subsequent  history  testifies.  Abram 
became  very  rich,  but  his  riches  had  been  wrongly  obtained.  There  was  trouble  in 
store  for  him.  God's  method  is  to  perfect  his  people  not  apart  from  their  own 
character  and  ways,  but  by  the  gracious  ordering  of  their  history,  so  that  while  good 
and  evil  are  mingled  together,  good  shall  yet  ultimately  be  triumphant. — B. 

Ver.  10. — Famines.  1.  Not  even  the  Iloly  Land  is  exempt  from  famine.  Neither 
is  the  saint's  condition  free  from  suffering,  nor  the  believer's  portion  on  earth  from 
defects.  2.  Lands  naturally  fertile  can  be  rendered  barren  by  a  word  from  God.  So 
circumstances  that  might  conduce  to  the  Church's  comfort  can  be  made  to  disappear 
when  God  wills.  3.  The  drought  was  sent  on  Canaan  just  as  Abram  arrived.  So 
God  often  sends  his  judgments  on  the  world  for  the  sake  of  his  people,  and  can 
always  time  them  to  meet  their  spiritual  necessities.  4.  Famines  never  come  in  all 
lands  together,  for  that  were  a  violation  of  the  covenant;  and  so  neither  do  God's 
judgments  fall  on  all  men  or  all  saints  at  once,  for  that  too  were  to  gainsay  his 
promise. — VV. 

Ver.  13. — Abraham  and  carnal  policy.  "  Say,  I  pray  thee,  that  thou  art  my 
sister:  that  it  may  be  well  with  me."  These  words  were  partially  true  (ch.  xi.  20) 
Abraham  had  real  ground  for  saying  that  Sarah  was  his  sister,  but  he  hid  the  fact 
that  she  was  his  wife.  He  asked  her  to  consent  to  an  equivocal  statement  and  to 
repeat  it. 

I.  Contemplate  the  nature  of  carnal  policy.  A  truth  which  is  part  it  lie  is  ever 
a  dangerous  lie.  The  temptation  to  this  carnal  policy  came  (1)  from  his  mingling 
with  the  worldly  Egyptians  on  equal  terms,  (2)  from  his  very  prosperous  state,  and 
(3)  from  his  having  lately  come  from  a  religious  observance  in  which  he  had  had 
nigh  spiritual  revelations.  Possibly  he  presumed  upon  his  visions  and  the  Divine 
promises.  David  fell  also  shortly  after  he  had  attained  the  kingdom  and  been 
delivered  from  great  dangers. 

II.  See  how  all  carnal  policy  is  sure  in  the  long  run  to  fail.  Abraham  did 
not  foresee  all  the  consequences  of  his  equivocations.  He  even  made  the  path  clear 
for  Pharaoh  to  ask  for  Sarah.  He  had  afterwards  to  know  that  his  name  was  a  by- 
word among  the  Egyptians.  (1)  He  lost  self-respect ;  (2)  lie  had  to  be  rebuked 
by  a  Pharaoh,  and  (3)  to  feel  that  God  was  dishonoured  by  his  act.  Abraham 
repeated  his  sin.  That  God  delivered  Abraham  should  teach  us  that  we  are  not  to 
reject  others,  who  have  committed  a  special  sin,  as  past  hope.  God  does  not  cast  us 
off  for  one  sinful  action.  Still  Divine  forbearance  and  love  should  never  lead  to 
presumption  and  to  a  tampering  with  carnal  policy. — H. 

Ver.  20. — Abram,  and  Israel ;  a  parallel.  1.  Both  woie  driven  into  Egypt  by  a 
famine.  2.  Tu  both  the  land  of  Egypt  proved  a  house  of  bondage.  3.  In  each  case 
the  Pharaoh  of  the  time  was  suhjected  to  plagues.  4.  Both  were  sent  away  by  the 
alarmed  monarchs  who  were  made  to  suffer  for  their  sakes.  5.  Both  went  up  from 
Egypt  bulen  with  the  spoils  of  those  among  whom  they  had  sojourned.  6.  On  leaving 
Egypt  both  directed  their  steps  to  Canaan. —  \y. 


CM.  Iffl.  1—9.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


193 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  -XIII. 


Ver.  1. — And  Abram  went  up  out  of  Egypt, 
he  and  his  wife  A  special  mercy  that 
either  of  them  returned,  considering  the  sin 
they  had  committed  and  the  peril  in  which 
they  had  been  placed.  And  all  that  he  had. 
Referring  principally  to  the  souls,  "do- 
mestici"  (Poole),  acquired  in  Haran  (ch. 
xii.  5,  16),  his  material  wealth  being  men- 
tioned afterwards.  And  Lot  (who  does  not 
appear  in  the  preceding  paragraph,  no  part 
of  which  relates  to  him,  but  is  now  reintro- 
duced into  the  narrative,  the  present  portion 
of  the  story  being  connected  with  his  for- 
tunes) with  him  into  the  south  (so.  of 
Canaan,  vide  ch.  xii.  9). 

Ver.  2.  —  And  Abram  was  very  rich. 
Literally,  weighty;  used  in  the  sense  of 
abundance  (Exod.  xii.  38 ;  1  Kings  x.  2 ; 
2  Kings  vi.  14).  In  cattle.  Mikneh,  from 
kana,  to  acquire  by  purchase,  may  apply  to 
slaves  as  well  as  cattle  (cf.  ch.  xvii.  12,  13, 
23).  In  silver  and  gold.  Mentioned  for  the 
first  time  in  Scripture  ;  implying  an  ac- 
piaintance  among  the  Egyptians  with  the 
operations  of  mining  and  the  processes  of 
refining  the  precious  metals.  Cf.  the  instruc- 
tions of  Amenemliat  I.,  which  speak  of  that 
monarch,  belonging  to  the  twelfth  dynasty, 
as  having  built  for  himself  a  palace  adorned 
with  gold  (vide  'Records  of  the  Past,' 
voL  ii-  p.  14) 

Vers.  3,  4.—  And  he  went  on  his  journeys. 
Literally,  in  his  jowrneyings  or  stations  (cf. 
ch,  xi.  2  ;  Exod.  xvii.  1 ;  Num.  x.  6, 12).  The 
renderings  cai  iiroptvQri  '69tv  y\9tv  (LXX.) 
and  reversus  est  per  iter  quo  venerat  (Vulgate) 
imply  without  warrant  that  he  used  the 
same  camping  grounds  in  his  ascent  which 
he  had  previously  occupied  in  his  descent. 
From  the  south  even  to  Bethel  (vide  ch.  xii. 
8),  nnto  the  place  where  his  tent  had  been 
at  the  beginning.  Before  his  demigration 
into  Egypt,  i.  e.  not  to  Shechem,  the  site 
of  his  first  altar,  where  probably  he  had  not 
encamped  for  any  length  of  time,  if  at  all, 
but  to  a  spot  between  Bethel  and  Ai  (the 
exact  situation  being  more  minutely  de- 
scribed as)  unto  the  place  of  the  altar,  which 
ha  had  made  there  at  the  first  After 
entering  the  promised  land.  In  reality,  it 
was  th«  Becond  altar  he  had  erected  (vide  ch. 
•m.  7,  8).  And  there  Abram  called  on  the 
name  of  the  Lord.  Professed  the  true  and 
pure  worship  of  God  (Calvin) ;  preached  and 
tiuglit  his  family  and  Canaanitish  neigh- 
bours the  true  religion  (Luther).  Vide  ch. 
xii.  8  j  iv.  26. 

Vers.  6,  6. — And  Lot  also  (literally,  and 
tdto  to  7.nt),  who  went  with  Abram  (iiter- 


ally,  going  with  Abram),  had  (were)  flocfct 
and  herds  and  tents.  The  uncle's  pros- 
perity overflowed  upon  the  nephew.  Rosen- 
miiller  includes  in  the  tents  the  domestic! 
and  servants,  qui  in  tentoriit  dagebant 
(cf.  1  Chron  iv.  41).  And  the  land  was  not 
able  to  bear  them.  Literally,  did  not  bear 
i.  e.  support  their  households  and  flocks. 
That  they  should  dwell  together.  In  conse- 
quence partly  of  the  scarce  pasturage,  the 
land  probably  having  not  yet  sufficiently 
recovered  from  the  drought,  but  chiefly 
because  of  their  increasing  wealth.  Foi 
their  substance  (vide  ch.  xii  5)  was  great, 
so  that  they  could  not  (literally,  and  they 
were  not  able  to)  dwell  together. 

Ver.  7. — And  there  was  a  strife  (originat- 
ing doubtless  in  the  scarcity  of  pasture,  and 
having  for  its  object  the  possession  of  the 
best  wells  and  most  fertile  grounds)  between 
the  herdmen  of  Abram' s  cattle  and  the 
herdmen  of  Lot's  cattle :  and  the  Canaanite 
— the  lowlander  (vide  ch.  ix.  22  ;  xii.  6) — 
and  the  Perizzite — the  highlander,  or  dweller 
in  the  hills  and  woods  of  Palestine  (Josephus, 
Bochart)  ;  in  the  open  country  and  in  vil- 
lage's, as  opj'osed  to  the  Canaanites,  who 
occupied  walled  towns  (Kalisch,  Words- 
worth ;  a  tribe  of  wandering  nomads  (Mur- 
phy), the  origin  of  whose  name  is  lost  in 
obscurity  (Keil),  who,  though  not  mentioned 
in  ch.  x. ,  are  commonly  introduced  with  the 
Canaanites  (Gen.  xv.  20  ;  xxxiv.  30  ;  Exod. 
iii.  8,  17),  as  dividing  the  land  between 
them,  and  are  probably  to  be  regarded  as 
the  remnant  of  an  early  Shemite  race  dis- 
placed by  the  Hamite  invaders  of  Palestine. 
Their  introduction  here  is  neither  a  sign  of 
post-Mosaic  authorship  nor  an  interpola- 
tion, but  an  explanation  of  the  difficulty  of 
finding  pasture  —  the  land  was  occupied 
(vide  ch.  xii.  6) — dwelt  then  in  the  land. 

Ver.  8. — And  Abram  said  unto  Lot.  Per- 
ceiving probably  that  Lot's  face  was  not 
towards  him  as  usual,  and  being  desirous  to 
avert  the  danger  of  collision  between  his 
nephew  and  himself.  Let  there  be  no  strife 
I  pray  thee,  between  me  and  thee,  and  (i.  a. 
either  identifying  himself  and  his  nephew 
with  their  subordinates,  or  fearing  that  the 
strife  of  their  subordinates  might  spread  to 
themselves,  hence,  as)  between  my  herd 
men  and  thy  herdmen;  for  we  be  breth- 
ren. Literally,  men  brethren  (cf.  ch.  xi. 
27,  31 ;  Exod.  ii.  13  ;  Ps.  cxxxiii.  1).  Abram 
and  Lot  were  kinsmen  by  nature,  by  rela- 
tionship, and  by  faith  (vide  ch.  xi.  31 :  2 
Pet  ii.  7). 

Ver.  9.— Is  not  the  whole  land  before 
thee  I  The  Bethel  plateau  commands  an 
extensive  view  of  Palestine  (vide  on  ver.  10). 


184 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xrn.  1—0. 


Separate  thyself,  I  pray  thee,  from  me. 
Thus  giving  Lot  the  choice  of  the  country. 
If  thou  wilt  take  the  left  hand  (literally,  if 
to  the  left  hand  (sc.  thou  wilt  go),   the 


Hebrew  term  being  in  the  accusative  after 
a  verb  of  motion  (Kalisch,  p.  344)— then  I 
will  go  to  the  right;  or  if  thou  depart  to 
the  right  hand,  then  I  will  go  to  the  left. 


HOMILETIC8. 


Ver.  9. — The  magnanimity  of  Air am.  I.  "When  it  was  evoked.  1.  On  return- 
ing to  the  land  of  Canaan.  Departing  into  Egypt,'  the  better  nature  of  the  patriarch 
became  obscured-  and  enfeebled,  and  he  himself  became  the  subject  of  timorous 
emotions,  the  deviser  of  guileful  machinations,  and  the  perpetrator  of  unworthy 
actions ;  retracing  his  erring  footsteps  to  the  holy  soil,  he  seems  as  it  were  immedi- 
ately to  have  recovered  the  nobility  and  grandeur  of  soul  which  be  had  lost  in  the 
land  of  Ham.  When  saints  wander  into  sinful  ways  they  inflict  a  hurt  upon  their 
spirits  from  which  they  cannot  recover  till  they  seek  the  good  old  paths.  Sublime 
deeds  of  spiritual  heroism  are  not  to  be  expected  at  the  hands  of  believers  who  con- 
form to  the  world.  The  true  champions  of  the  faith,  who  by  their  personal  behaviour 
can  illustrate  its  godlike  character,  are  only  to  be  found  among  those  who  walk  as 
strangers  and  pilgrims  on  the  earth,  and  do  not  stray  from  Grod's  commandments. 
2.  After  having  committed  a  great  sin.  The  recoil  which  Abraham's  spirit  must  have 
experienced  when,  in  the  light  of  God's  merciful  interposition,  he  came  to  perceive 
the  heinous  nature  of  the  transgression  into  which  his  fears  had  betrayed  him  in 
Egypt,  had  doubtless  something  to  do  with  the  lofty  elevation  of  soul  to  which  he 
soon  afterwards  climbed  upon  the  heights  of  Bethel.  So  oftentimes  a  saint,  through 
grace,  is  profited  by  his  backslidings.  The  memory  of  the  matter  of  Uriah  had  its 
influence  in  ripening  the  piety  of  David,  and  the  recollection  of  the  judgment-hall  of 
Pilate  assisted  Peter  to  a  height  of  spiritual  fortitude  he  might  not  otherwise  have 
attained.  3.  After  an  experience  of  rich  mercy.  After  all,  God's  kindnesses  to  Abram 
and  Sarai  were  the  principal  instrumentalities  that  quickened  the  better  nature  of  the 
patriarch  ;  and  so  it  is  generally  in  proportion  as  we  meditate  upon  and  partake  of 
Divine  mercy  that  our  hearts  are  ennobled  and  enabled.  It  is  the  love  of  God  in 
Christ  that  constrains  a  saint  to  holy  and  unselfish  deeds. 

II.  How  it  was  occasioned.  1.  By  the  danger  of  collision  between  himself  and 
Lot.  The  strife  which  had  arisen  between  his  nephew's  herdsmen  and  his  own  was 
liable,  unless  promptly  extinguished,  to  communicate  its  bad  contagion  to  himself 
and  Lot.  But  the  patriarch,  with  that  insight  which  belongs  to  simple  minds,  dis- 
cerned a  method  of  avoiding  so  unseemly  a  calamity,  and,  with  that  self-forgetful 
heroism  which  «ver  characterises  noble  souls,  had  the  fortitude  and  magnanimity  to 
put  it  into  execution.  It  indicates  an  advanced  stage  of  Christian  maturity  when 
what  might  prove  temptations  to  sin  are,  by  spiritual  discernment  and  unshrinking 
self-sacrifice,  transformed  into  occasions  for  holy  acting  and  suffering.  2.  By  the 
necessity  of  separation  which  had  come  on  him  and  Lot,  which  necessity  was  owing — 

(1)  To  their  increasing  wealth.  If  the  present  history  shows  that  good  men  may 
become  rich,  and  sometimes  in  dubious  ways,  it  also  reveals  that  wealth  has  its 
dangers,  The  character  of  Lot  was  demonstrably  injured  by  prosperity ;  while  if 
Abram  escaped  corruption  through  weallh,  that  wealth  was  indirectly  the  power 
which  deprived  him  of  his  kinsman.  It  is  a  poor  bargain  when  one  grows  rich  at 
the  expense  of  his  better  nature,  as  did  Lot ;  or  even,  like  Abram,  at  the  expense  of 
affection.      Better  remain  poor  and  keep  friends  than  become  rich  and  lose  friends  I 

(2)  To  the  quarrels  of  their  servants.  Though  possibly  occasioned  by  devotion  to 
their  masters'  interests,  the  contention  of  the  herdsmen  was  wrong.  Not  even  for 
the  sake  of  employers  should  workmen  and  dependents  become  involved  in  strife. 
And  still  less  should  masters  and  mistresses  become  entangled  in  the  wranglings  of 
employes  and  domestics.     Better  part  than  fight  I 

III.  By  what  it  was  pbeoeded.  1.  By  a  solemn  act  of  devotion.  Suitable  at  all 
seasons,  prayer  is  specially  needful  and  becoming  in  times  of  danger  and  trial  like 
those  In  which  the  patriarch  was  situated.  Nothing  is  better  calculated  to  soothe 
the  troubled  heart,  to  allay  irritation,  to  prevent  strife,  to  enable  the  assaulted  spirit 


CH.  xin.  1—9.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  195 

to  resist  temptation,  to  brace  the  soul  for  arduous  duty  and  magnanimous  self-renun- 
ciation, than  communion  with  God.  Had  Abrnm's  discernment  of  the  growing 
clanger  to  which  he  and  Lot  were  exposed,  and  Abram's  contemplation  of  the  neces- 
sity of  yielding  Lot  the  choice  of  the  land  their  influence  in  taking  him  back  to 
Bethel  with  its  altar?  2.  By  an  earnest  deprecation  of  the  rising  strife.  If  the 
Spirit's  fruits  will  not  flourish  in  the  stagnant  marsh  of  a  dead  soul,  neither  will  they 
in  the  breast  of  an  angry  Christian.  A  peaceful  mind  and  a  quiet  heart  are  indispens- 
able pre-requisites  to  grace's  motions.  Heaventy  virtue  cannot  prosper  in  an  atmos- 
phere of  wrath  and  contention.  But  where  saints  cultivate  a  gentle  and  forgiving 
spirit  it  is  not  uncommon  to  find  them  strengthened  to  perform  deeds  of  holy  valour. 
The  conciliatory  disposition  of  the  elder  of  the  two  travellers  was  an  admirable 
preparation  for,  almost  a  foreshadowing  of,  the  magnanimous  act  that  followed  ;  as 
the  perpetuation  of  the  strife  or  the  indulgence  of  anger  on  the  part  of  Abram  would 
have  rendered  it  impossible. 

IV.  In  what  it  was  displayed.  1.  A  sublime  act  of  self-renunciation.  (1)  In 
preferring  Lot's  interests  to  his  own,  though  Lot  was  the  younger,  and  a  depeudeut 
on  himself,  and  in  a  manner  only  in  the  land  by  sufferance  ;  in  this  exemplifying  the 
very  spirit  which  Christ  and  his  apostles  afterwards  enjoined  upon  New  Testament 
•  believers  (Matt.  xx.  26 ;  Rom.  xii.  10 ;  Phil.  ii.  3) ;  and  (3)  in  renouncing  Canaan 
for  the  sake  of  peace,  which  was  practically  what  he  did  when  he  gave  Lot  the 
choice  of  the  land,  the  greatness  of  which  act  of  self-abnegation  appears  when  it  is 
remembered  that  already  God  had  given  him  the  land,  so  that  he,  and  not  Lot,  was 
entitled  to  elect  to  what  quarter  he  should  turn,  and  that  this  concession  of  his  rights 
was  intended  to  disarm  Lot's  hostility,  and  preserve  the  unity  of  the  Spirit  in  the 
bonds  of  peace.  2.  A  signal  illustration  of  self-resignation,  in  which,  when  he  beheld 
the  meanness  of  Lot,  and  saw  the  best  portion  of  the  soil  abstracted  from  him,  there 
was  neither  a  display  of  feeling  towards  his  nephew  nor  the  uprising  of  a  pang  of 
discontentment  and  regret  at  the  result,  but  the  most  humble  and  self-satisfied  acqui- 
escence in  what  he  knew  to  be  the  allotment  of  Heaven. 

Learn — 1.  That  soul-wealth  is  greater  than  material  prosperity.  2.  That  a  man 
becomes  spiritually  rich  in  proportion  as  he  practises  self-renunciation.  3.  That  the 
higher  one  rises  in  true  spiritual  greatness,  the  less  is  he  affected  by  the  loss  of 
earth's  goods. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — IS.— The  separation  between  Abram  and  Lot.  [Return  to  Bethel — to  the 
altar.  The  circumstances  of  the  patriarch  were  very  different.  He  was  very  rich. 
Lot  is  with  him,  and  the  sojourn  in  Egypt  had  far  more  depraving  effect  upon  his 
weaker  character  than  upon  that  of  his  uncle.  We  should  remember  when  we 
take  the  young  into  temptation  that  what  may  be  comparatively  harmless  to  us 
may  be  ruinous  to  them.  The  subsequent  misery  of  Lot's  career  may  be  all  traced 
to  the  sojourn  in  Egypt.] 

I.  The  root  of  it  lay  in  worldly  wealth  leasing  to  contention.  "  They  could 
not  dwell  together." 

II.  The  divergence  of  character  is  brought  out  in  the  complication  of 
external  circumstances.  Lot  is  simply  selfish,  wilful,  regardless  of  consequences, 
utterly  worldly.  Abram  is  a  lover  of  peace,  a  hater  of  strife,  still  cherishes  the 
family  feeling  and  reverences  the  bond  of  brotherhood,  is  ready  to  subordinate  his 
own  interests  to  the  preservation  of  the  Divine  order,  has  faith  to  see  that  Canaan 
with  the  blessing  of  God  is  much  to  be  preferred  to  the  plain  of  Jordan  with  Divine 
judgments  hanging  over  those  who  were  wicked  and  sinners  before  the  Lord  exceed- 
ingly. 

III.  Lessons  of  Providence  are  not  lost  on  those  who  wait  upon  God  and 
can  be  learnt  in  spite  of  infirmities  and  errors.  Abram  could  not  forget  what  Eevpt 
had  taught  him  ;  rich  as  he  was,  he  did  not  put  riches  first.  He  had  seen  that  that 
whichseems  like  a  garden  of  the  Lord  in  external  beauty  may  be  a  cursed  land  after 
all.  1  here  are  people  of  God  who  pitch  their  tents  towards  Sodom  still,  and  they 
will  reap  evil  fruits,  aa  Lot  did.    It  is  a  most  terrible  danger  to  separate  ourselves 

o2 


108 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xm.  10 — 13. 


from  old  religious  associations, 
pitch  our  tent. — R. 


In  doing  so  we  cannot  be  too  careful  where  we 


Ver.  8. — Abraham,  the  peaceable  man.  "Let  there  he  no  strife,  I  pray  thee,  be- 
tween me  and  thee."  Abraham  had  a  nephew  who  attached  himself  to  his  fortunes 
aud  shared  bis  fate.  Food,  fodder,  and  water  became  scarce.  The  flocks  of  Lot  and 
of  Abraham  are  more  than  the  land  can  sustain  ;  the  herdsmen  of  each  strive  to- 
gether. Servants  will  often  be  more  bitter  towards  the  servants  of  a  rival  of  their 
master,  than  those  immediately  concerned.  Pathetic  is  the  appeal  of  the  patriarch 
for  the  maintenance  of  peace. 

I     IT  IS  A   MOST   DESIRABLE    THING    TO    LIVE  IN   PEACE  WITH  OTHERS.      We  are 

commanded  to  do  so  :  "As  much  as  lieth  in  you  live  peaceably  with  all  men."  We 
may  not  sacrifice  any  good  principle  for  the  sake  of  ease,  but  we  are  to  strive  to 
maintain  peace.  In  matters  of  faith  a  man  may  have  to  lake  up  at  times  such  a 
position  that  others  will  speak  ill  of  bim,  but  in  regard  to  the  neighbourly  life  he 
must  by  all  means  cultivate  amity  and  concord.  Little  is  ever  gained  by  standing 
on  " our  rights. "  Scandal  is  always  the  fruit  of  quirrelling.  The  worldly-minded 
are  sure  to  plume  themselves  on  their  superior  goodness  when  the  spiritually-minded 
contend.  In  many  homes  there  is  jangling,  sneering,  and  s'rife  ;  scathing  remarks 
like  hot  cinders  from  Vesuvius  fall  carelessly  around,  Tyrannous  tempers  become 
like  tornadoes,  and  moodiness  kills  like  the  choke-damp  of  an  ill-ventilated  mine. 
Among  nations  there  should  be  maintenance  of  peace.  The  common  sense  of  most 
should  "hold  the  fretful  realm  in  awe."  In  the  Church  strife  should  cease.  It  will 
when  each  sect  seeks  to  make  men  Christlike  and  not  uniform  bigots. 

II.  There  are  always  means  op  maintaining  peace  when  it  is  desired. 
Abraham  acted  most  unselfishly  with  this  view  ;  he  yielded  his  claim  to  a  choice. 
Lot  owed  much  to  Abraham,  yet  he  seized  an  advantage.  Lot  looks  towards  Sodom; 
the  strip  of  green  beside  the  lake  and  reaching  to  Jordan  reminds  him  of  the  land 
of  Nile.  The  spirit  of  Egypt,  whence  he  had  lately  come,  is  in  him  ;  he  chooses 
Sodom,  but  With  its  green  pastures  he  has  to  take  its  awful  corruption.  Abraham 
turns  away  in  the  direction  alone  left  to  him.  He  has  his  tent,  his  altar,  the 
promises,  and  his  God  ;  he  will  live  in  peaces  His  Father  will  not  forsake  him  ; 
indeed  God  very  speedily  renews  his  piomises  to  Abraham,  and  thus  the  unselfish- 
ness of  a  peaceful  man  met  with  an  appropriate  reward. — H. 


EXPOSITION. 


Ver.  10. — And  Lot  lifted  up  his  eyes. 
Circumspexit ;  with  a  look  of  eager, lustful 
greed(cf.  ch.  iii.  ti).  The  same  expression  is 
afterwards  used  of  Abram  (ver.  14),  where 
perhaps  also  the  element  of  satisfaction, 
though  in  a  good  sense,  is  designed  to  be  in- 
cluded. And  beheld  all  the  plain.  Literally, 
all  the  circle,  or  surrounding  region  (^33, 

from  *T"Q,  to  move  in  a  circle ;  cf .  arron- 

—  r  '  ' 

dismment,  Fr. ;  kreis  or  beevrk,  Ger.)  ; 
ireptx«jpo9  (LXX.,  Matt.  iii.  5);  now  called 
El  UliSr,  the  low  country  (Gesenius).  Of 
Jordan.  Compounded  of  Jor-Dan.thenames 
of  thetwo  river  sources(Josephus,  Jerome); 
but,  according  to  modern  etymologists,  de- 
rived from  TV,  to  go  down,  and  signifying 

the  Descender,  likethe  German  Rhine.from 
rinnen,  to  run.  The  largest  river  of  Pales- 
tine, rising  at  the  foot  of  Antilibanus,  and 
passing,  in  its courseof  200 rniles.overtwen- 
ty-seven  rapids,  it  pours  its  waters  first  into 
the  lake  of  Merom,  and  then  into  the  sea  of 
Galilee,  653  feet,  and  finally  into  the  Lacus 


Asphaltites,  1316  feet  belowthe  levelof  the 
Mediterranean  (cf.  Stanley's '  Sinai  andPal- 
estine,'  ch.  vii.  p.  282).  It  is  now  called  Esh- 
Sheri'ah.i.  e.  the  ford,  as  having  been  of  old 
crossed  by  thelsraelites(Gesenius).  That  it 
was  well,  watered  everywhere.  Not  by  canals 
and  trenches,  as  old  interpreters  imagined, 
but  by  copious  streams  along  its  course, 
descending  chiefly  from  the  mountains  of 
Moab.  Before  the  Lord  destroyed — the  same 
wo  rd  is  used  for  thedestructionof  all  flesh  in 
what  is  styled  the  Elohistic  account  of  the 
Deluge(ch.  vi.  13, 17;  ix.  11, 15;  cf.  'Quarry 
on  Genesis,'  p.  423) — Sodom  and  Gomorrha 
(vide  oh.  xiv.  2).  Even  as  the  garden  of  the 
Lord.  Paradisein  Eden.withitsfourstreams 
(ch.  ii.  10;  Calvin,  Lange,  Keil);  though  by 
some  tb  is  i  sdeemed  unsatisfactory  (Quarry ), 
and  the  phrase  taken  as  =  hortus  amcenis- 
simus  (Roseninuller),  and  in  particular 
Mesopotamia,  which  was  a  land  of  rare  fe- 
cundity (Grotius,  Junius).  Like  the  land  of 
Egypt— which  was  irrigated  by  the  Nile 
and  by  canals  from  it  as  well  as  by  machines 


eft.  xm.  10—18.] 


the  boos;  of  genesis. 


197 


(Deut.  xi.  10,  11)—  ai  thou  comest  unto 
Zoar — at  the  south-east  corner  of  the  Dead 
Sea  (vide  ch.  xiv.  8). 

Ver.  11. — Then  Lot  chose  him  all  the 
plain  of  Jordan.  Allured  by  its  beauty  and 
fertility,  and  heedless  of  other  or  higher 
considerations.  And  Lot  journeyed  east, 
D*!i?P=  versus  orientem  (cf.  ch.  xi.  2).  And 
they  separated  themselves  the  one  from  the 
other.     Literally,  a  man  from  his  brother. 

Ver.  12. — Abram  dwelled  in  the  land  of 
Canaan.  Strictly  so  called ;  in  its  larger 
sense  Canaan  included  the  circle  of  the 
Jordan.  And  Lot  dwelled  in  the  cities  of 
the  plain.  Being  desirous  of  a  permanent 
settlement  within  the  gates,  or  at  least  in 
the    immediate    neighborhood,     of     the 


wealthy  cities  of  the  land  ;  in  contrast  to 
his  uncle,  who  remained  a  wanderer 
throughout  its  borders,  sojourning  as  in  a 
strange  country  (Heb.  xi.  9).  And  (with 
this  purpose  in  contemplation,  he)  pitched 
his  tent  toward  (i.  e.  in  the  direction  of, 
and  as  far  as  to)  Sodom. 

Ver.  13. — But  (literally,  and)  the  men 
of  Sodom  were  wicked  and  sinners — their 
wickedness  is  more  specifically  detailed  in 
ch.  xix.,  q.  v.) — before  the  Lord — literally, 
to  Jehovah=i>efore  the  face  of  Jehovah  ; 
tvav-rtov  tov  8«o8(LXX.),  vide  ch.  x.  9  ;  an 
aggravation  of  the  wickedness  of  the  So- 
domites— exceedingly.  Their  vileness  was 
restrained  neither  in  quantity  nor  quality. 
As  it  passed  all  height  in  arrogance,  so  it 
burst  all  bounds  in  prevalence. 


HOMILETICS. 


Ver.  10. — The  choice  of  Lot.  I.  Tee  excellence  of  Lot'b  choice.  1.  Beautiful. 
Viewed  from  the  Bethel  plateau,  at  the  moment  perhaps  gilded  with  the  shimmering 
radiance  of  the  morning  sun,  the  Jordan  circle  was  a  scene  of  enchanting  loveliness; 
and  iu  yielding  to  the  fascinations  of  the  gorgeous  panorama  that  spread  itself  out 
on  the  distant  horizon  it  cannot  be  affirmed  that  Lot  committed  sin.  The  Almighty 
Maker  of  the  universe  loves  beauty,  as  his  works  attest  (Eccles.  iii.  11),  and  hath 
implanted  the  like  instinct  in  the  soul  of  man.  Hence,  so  far  from  being  a  signal 
of  depravity,  the  capacity  of  admiring  and  appreciating  mere  physical  and  external 
grace  and  symmetry  betokens  a  nature  not  yet  completely  disempowered  by  sin  ; 
and  so  far  from  its  being  wrong  to  surround  oneself  with  objects  that  are  pleasing  to 
the  eye,  it  is  rather  incumbent  so  to  do,  provided  always  it  can  be  Accomplished  with- 
out sin.  2.  Productive.  As  there  is  no  sin  In  having  elegant  mansions,  fair  gardens, 
and  fine  pictures  to  look  upon,  so  neither  is  there  evil  in  desiring  fertile  fields  instead 
of  barren  rocks  to  cultivate.  Sentenced  to  eat  bread  in  the  sweat  of  his  brow,  the 
Christian  is  not  thereby  required  to  prefer  a  tract  of  moorland  to  a  farm  of  rich 
alluvial  soil.  Monkish  asceticism  may  enjoin  such  self-mortification  on  its  devotees; 
Christianity  invites  men  to  enjoy  the  good  things  which  have  been  freely  given  to 
them  by  God.  The  well-watered  fields  of  the  Jordan  circle  were  as  open  to  the 
choice  of  Lot  as  were  the  bleak  Judaean  hills.  3.  Suggestive.  Already  it  had 
recalled  to  his  memory  the  luxuriant  plains  of  Egypt  which  he  had  lately  visited, 
and  to  his  imagination  the  resplendent  Eden  of  man's  primeval  days  ;  and  doubtless 
it  was  such  a  region  as  could  scarcely  fail  to  inspire  a  devout  mind  with  lofty  thoughts, 
pure  emotions,  and  holy  aspirations,  so  leading  the  entranced  worshipper  from  nature 
up  to  nature's  God.  Since  the  human  soul  cannot  choose  but  be  insensibly  affected 
for  good  or  evil  by  its  material  as  well  as  moral  environment,  it  is  well,  when  Divine 
providence  gives  us  the  election,  that  we  select  for  our  abodes  scenes  and  places  that 
shall  elevate  and  refine  rather  than  deteriorate  and  depress. 

II.  The  drawbacks  op  Lot's  choice.  1.  Bad  neighbours.  The  inhabitants  of 
the  Jordan  ic  Peutapolis  were  sinners  of  an  aggravated  type.  And  while  it  may  not 
be  possible  to  avoid  all  contact  with  wicked  men  (1  Cor.  v.  10),  it  becomes  God's 
people  to  keep  as  far  aloof  as  possible  from  the  ungodly,  and  espc  cially  from  trans- 
gressors like  the  Sodomites.  Mingling  with  and  marrying  into  the  families  of  the 
ungodly  ruined  the  antediluvian  world.  The  chief  injury  done  to  the  Church  of 
Christ  arises  from  a  throwing  down  of  the  wall  of  separation  between  it  and  the 
world.  Separation  from  and  nonconformity  to  the  world,  and  much  more  the 
wicked  portion  of  it,  is  the  duty  of  believers  (Rom.  xii.  2  ;  1  Cor.  vi.  17).  2.  Moral 
contamination.  Though  Lot  was  a  good  man,  his  piety  would  not  prevent  the  gradual 
deterioration  of  his  nature  through  the  evil  influence  of  his  neighbors.  There  is  a 
contagion,  for  good  or  evil,  in  example  which  is  well  nigh  irresistible.     '*  He  that 


198  THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS.  [oh.  nn.  10—18, 

walketh  with  wise  men  shall  be  wise  ;  but  the  companion  of  fools  shall  be  destroyed." 
3.  Bitter  sorrow  Precisely  in  proportion  to  the  eminence  of  his  rel;gious  character 
would  this  be  inevitable.  The  immoralities  and  infidelities  of  the  Sodomites  would 
plunge  him  into  grief,  if  they  did  not  cause  "  rivers  of  water  "  to  run  down  his  eyes. 
And  so  it  eventually  came  to  pass  (2  Pet.  ii.  8). 

III.  The  sinfulness  of  Lot's  choice.  1.  Avaricious  in  its  origin.  Thus  it  was 
a  sin  against  God.  Had  no  drawbacks  attended  it,  had  it  in  all  other  respects  been 
commendable  and  prudent,  the  lust  of  cupidity  out  of  which  it  sprang  would  have 
condemned  it.  Few  things  are  more  frequently  and  emphatically  reprehended  in  the 
word  of  God  than  the  inordinate  desire  of  possession  (Luke  xii  15  ;  Ephes.  v.  3 ;  Col. 
iii.  5 ;  Heb.  xiii.  5).  2.  Selfish  in  its  character.  Thus,  besides  being  a  sin  against 
God,  it  was  an  offence  against  his  uncle.  Had  Abram  and  Lot  stood  upon  a  platform 
of  equality,  religious  principle  should  have  dictated  to  Lot  the  propriety  of  either 
returning  the  right  of  choice  to  Abram,  or  himself  selecting  what  he  believed  to  he 
the  inferior  quarter  (Rom.  xii.  10 ;  Phil.  ii.  3) ;  but  Abram  was  Lot's  superior  in  age, 
and  therefore  entitled  to  take  precedence  of  one  who  was  younger  ;  Lot's  uncle,  and, 
in  virtue  of  that  relationship,  deserving  of  bis  nephew's  honour:.  Lot's  guardian  and 
benefactor,  and,  as  a  consequence,  worthy  of  acknowledgment  and  gratitude  at  the 
hauds  of  one  whom  he  had  enriched  ;  ana,  what  was  more  important  for  the  settle- 
ment of  the  question,  the  actual  heir  and  owner  of  the  land,  to  whom  accordingly 
belonged  the  prerogative  of  claiming  not  its  fattest  portion  only,  but  its  entire 
domain.  All  these  considerations  rendered  Lot's  choice  offensive  in  the  extreme.  3. 
Dangerous  in  its  issues.  As  such  it  was  a  sin  against  himself  as  well  as  against 
God.  Even  though  evil  should  not  come  of  it,  it  was  not  open  to  Lot,  as  a  good  man, 
to  establish  himself  where  injury  to  his  spiritual  interests  was  possible.  That  he  did 
not  reckon  the  moral  bearings  of  his  choice  was  an  aggravation  rather  than  an  ex- 
tenuation of  his  sin.  He  had  time  to  calculate  the  chances  of  material  prosperity  ; 
he  should  also  have  counted  up  the  moral  hazards  before  he  elected  to  drive  his  flocks 
and  herds  to  Sodom. 

Lessons : — 1.  All  is  not  gold  that  glitters  ;  hence  the  supreme  unwisdom  of  judging 
either  things  or  persons  according  to  appearance.  2.  In  every  man's  lot  there  is  a 
crook  ;  hence  the  propriety  of  moderating  our  desires  concerning  everything.  3.  It 
is  possible  to  pay  too  dear  a  price  for  material  prosperity.  "  What  shall  it  profit  a 
man  if  he  shall  gain  the  whole  world  and  lose  his  own  soul  ?  "  4.  It  is  a  poor  out- 
come of  piety  which  prefers  self-interest  to  the  claims  either  of  affection  or  religion  ; 
the  man  who  loves  himself  better  than  his  neighbor  is  still  devoid  of  the  spirit  of 
Christ.  5.  In  the  long  run  the  spirit  of  selfishness  is  certain  to  overreach  itself  and 
accomplish  its  own  ruin. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  10—13. — The  clioice  of  Lot.  I.  What  Lot  took  into  account.  1.  His  own 
worldly  circumstances ;  and,  2.  The  suitability  of  the  Jordan  circle  to  advance  them. 

II.  What  Lot  did  not  take  into  account.  1.  The  reverence  due  to  his  uncle. 
2.  The  greater  right  which  Abram  had  to  the  soil  of  Canaan.  3.  The  danger,  in  part- 
ing with  Abram,  of  separating  himself  from  Abram's  God.  4.  The  risk  of  damage 
to  his  spiritual  interests  in  settling  in  the  Jordan  circle. 

Learn — 1.  That  while  it  may  be  right,  in  life's  actions,  to  take  our  worldly  interests 
into  account,  it  is  wrong  and  dangerous  to  take  nothing  else.  2.  That  no  amount  of 
purely  worldly  advantage  can  either  justify  or  recompense  the  disregard  of  the 
higher  interests  of  the  soul.  3.  That  though  good  men  may  oftentimes  find.reasons 
for  neglecting  the  soul's  interests,  they  cannot  do  so  with  impunity. — W. 

Vers.  10,  13. — Sodom  and  the  Sodomites,  or  the  place  and  the  people.  1.  The 
physical  beauty  of  the  Jordan  valley.     2.  The  moral  corruption  of  its  inhabitants. 

Lessons  .•— 1.  The  weakness  of  nature  as  a  moral  educator.  2.  The  true  design  of 
nature  as  a  moral  educator. — W. 

Ver.  11.— The  parting  of  the  friends.    I.  The  sadness  of  this  parting.     It  was  a 


oh.  xm.  10—18.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  199 

parting — 1.  Of  kinsmen  (men,  brethren).     2.  Of  kinsmen  in  a  foreign  land.     8.  01 
kinsmen  by  their  own  hand. 

II.  The  cause  of  this  parting.  1.  The  difficulty  of  finding  sustenance  together. 
2.  The  danger  of  collision  if  they  kept  together. 

III.  The  manner  of  this  parting.  1.  After  prayer.  2.  In  peace.  3.  With  mag- 
nanimity on  the  part  of  Abram.     4.  "With  meanness  on  that  of  Lot. 

Lessons: — 1.  It  is  sad  when  brethren  cannot  dwell  together  in  unity.  2.  It  is 
better  that  brethren  should  separate  than  quarrel. — W. 

Ver.  11. — Lot's  unwise  choice.  "  Then  Lot  chose  him  all  the  plain  of  Jordan." 
To  Lot  no  doubt  this  seemed  but  a  matter  of  prudence,  a  choice  of  pastures, 
yet  it  stamped  his  after  life.  He  was  a  godly  man.  We  miss  the  point  if  we 
think  of  him  as  careless.  The  lesson  is  for  God's  people.  At  first  guided  by  his 
uncle,  but  time  came  when  he  must  act  alone.  Pastures  of  Bethel  not  sufficient. 
Strife  between  the  herdsmen.  God  uses  little  things  to  work  his  will.  In  every  life 
times  when  choice  must  be  made.  Perhaps  definite  and  distinct,  e.  g.  leaving  home, 
or  choice  of  a  profession;  perhaps  less  marked,  as  in  the  choice  of  friends  and  asso- 
ciates, or  the  habits  imperceptibly  formed.  We  must  be  thus  tried;  needful  for 
our  training  (James  i.  12).  A  sevenfold  blessing  "to  him  that  overcometh" 
(Rev.  ii.,  iii.). 

I.  Evil  op  Lot's  choice.  He  chose  the  best  pasture.  Why  should  he  not?  The 
fault  lay  in  the  motive,  the  want  of  spiritual  thought  in  a  secular  matter.  He  broke 
no  positive  law,  but  looked  only  to  worldly  good.     The  evil  of  Sodom  was  disre- 

farded.    No  prayer  for  guidance;  no. thought  how  he  could  best  serve  God  (cf. 
ames  i.  14). 

II.  Effect  ov  Lot's  choice.  1.  No  real  happiness.  His  soul  vexed  (2  Pet.  ii.  8). 
His  life;  fretting  at  evil  which  he  nad  not  resolution  to  escape  from.  2.  Real 
in  jury.  His  character  enervated.  From  dwelling  in  plain  came  into  the  city;  formed 
connections  there.  Irresolute  and  lingering  when  warned  to  flee.  His  prayer  for 
himself  only.  Was  saved  "as  by  fire"  (1  Cor.  iii.  15).  We  are  tried  daily,  in  the 
valley  or  on  the  mountain.-  We  cannot  avoid  trials;  not  good  for  us  if  we  could. 
The  one  way  of  safety:  "Seek  first  the  kingdom  of  God."  There  is  an  evil  terribly 
widespread — of  seeking  first  the  world;  thinking  not  to  neglect  God,  but  putting 
Christianity  into  corners  of  the  life.  What  saith  the  world  ?  Haste  to  be  rich,  or 
great;  take  thine  ease;  assert  thyself;  be  high-spirited.  And  the  customs  of  society 
and  much  of  education  repeat  the  lesson.  But  what  saith  Christ?  Look  unto  me. 
Not  at  stated  times,  but  always.  The  cause  of  much  dispeace,  of  many  spiritual 
sorrows  (1  Tim.  vi.  10),  is  want  of  thoroughness  in  taking  Christ  as  our  guide.  Lot 
was  preserved.  Will  any  say,  "I  ask  no  more"?  "  Remember  Lot's  wife."  How 
narrow  the  line  between  his  hesitation  and  her  looking  back  1  The  grain  may  sprout 
through  thorns  (Matt.  xiii.  22),  but  the  thorns  are  ever  growing. — M. 

Ver.  12. — Qoing  to  Sodom.  How  it  mat  hate  loosed  to  Lot.  1.  As  a  matter 
of  business  it  was  good.  2.  In  its  moral  aspects  the  step  was  dangerous.  But— 3. 
Doubtless  at  first  Lot  did  not  intend  entering  the  city.  And  perhaps — 4.  Lot  may 
have  justified  his  doubtful  conduct  by  hoping  that  he  would  have  opportunities  of 
doing  good  to  the  Sodomites. 

II.  How  it  must  have  looked  to  the  Sodomites.  It  must  have — 1.  Surprised 
them  to  see  a  good  man  like  Lot  coming  to  a  neighbourhood  so  bad.  2.  Led  them  to 
think  adversely  of  a  religion  that  preferred  worldly  advantage  to  spiritual  interest. 
3.  Rendered  them  impervious  to  any  influence  for  good  from  Lot's  example. 

Lessons:—!.  It  is  perilous  to  go  towards  Sodom  if  one  wants  to  keep  out  of 
Sodom.-  2.  It  is  useless  preaching  to  Sodomites  while  gathering  wealth  in  Sodom. 
— W. 

Going  towards  Sodom.  1.  An  inviting  journey.  9.  A  gradual  journey.  8.  A 
•iuful  journey.     4.  A  dangerous  journey.— W. 


300 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[CH.  xiii.  14 — i&. 


EXPOSITION. 


Vers.  14,15. — And  the  Lord  said — speak- 
ing probably  with  an  articulate  voice;  the 
third  occasion  on  which  the  patriarch  was 
directly  addressed  by  God.  The  narrative, 
however,  does  not  affirm  that  there  was 
any  actual  theophany — unto  Abram — who 
could  readily  recognise  the  voice  which 
had  twice  already  spoken  to  him.  After 
that  Lot  was  separated  from  him.  Thus 
God  approved  that  separation  (Poole),  and 
administered  consolation  to  the  troubled 
heart  of  the  patriarch  (Calvin),  though 
Divine  revelations  are  rather  wont  to  be 
made  to  minds  already  quiet  and  sedate 
(Lyra).  Lift  up  now  thine  eyes.  Perhaps  a 
studied  reference  to  the  act  of  Lot,  which 
Moses  describes  in  similar  language  (ver. 
10),  and  possibly  designed  to  suggest  the 
greater  satisfaction  which  would  be  im- 
parted to  the  soul  of  Abram  by  the  survey 
about  to  be  made.  And  look  from  the  place 
where  thou  art.  Between  Bethel  and  Ai,  on 
one  of  the  mountain  peaks  (cf.  ch.  xii.  8; 
xiii.  3),  from  which  a  commanding  view 
of  almost  the  entire  country  could  be  ob- 
tained. Northward— towards  ' '  the  hills 
which  divide  Judaea  from  the  rich  plains 
of  Samaria" — and  southward — as  far  as 
to  the  Hebron  range — and  eastward — in 
the  direction  of  the  dark  mountain  wall 
of  Moab,  down  through  the  rich  ravine 
which  leads  from  the  central  hills  of 
Palestine  to  the  valley  of  the  Jordan,  and 
across  that  very  "circle"  into  which  Lot 
has  already  departed  with  his  flocks — and 
westward — literally,  towards  the  sea.  Cf. 
on  the  view  from  the  stony  but  fertile 
plateau  between  Bethel  and  Ai,  Stanley's 
'Sinai  and  Palestine,'  ch.  iv.  p.  218.  For 
all  the  land  which  thou  seest — i.  e.  the  en- 
tire country,  a  part  being  put  for  the 
whole — to  thee  will  I  give  it.  To  avoid 
an  apparent  conflict  between  this  Divine 
declaration  and  the  words  of  Stephen 
(Acts  vii.  5),  it  is  proposed  by  some  to 
read  the  nest  clause  as  epexegetic  of  the 
prosent  (Ainsworth,  Bush);  but  the  land 
was  really  given  to  Abram  as  a  nomade 
chief,  in  the  sense  that  he  peacefully 
lived  for  many  years,  grew  old,  and  died 
within  its  borders  (Clericus,  Rosenmilller, 
'Speaker's  Commentary'),  while  it  was 
assigned  to  his  descendants  only  because 
it  had  been  first  donated  to  him.  And  to 
thy  seed  Not  his  bodily  posterity  alone, 
to  whom  the  terrestrial  Canaan  was  given, 
but  also  and  chiefly  his  spiritual  family, 
to  whom  was  made  over  that  better 
country,  even  an  heavenly,  of  which  the 
land  of  promise  was  a  type.  For  ever. 
'A.dh  'olam  (vide  on  ch.  ii.  16  —  in  per- 


petuity; i.e.  (1)  to  the  close  of  that  'olam 
or  period  which  was  already  measured 
out  in  the  secret  counsels  of  Jehovah  for 
the  duration  of  the  seed  of  Abraham  as  a 
people,  "quum  terra  in  seculum  promit- 
titur,  non  simpliciter  notatur  perpetuitas, 
sed  qnse  finem  accepit  in  Christe  "  (Cal- 
vin); and  (2)  unto  eternity,  in  so  far  as  it 
was  a  promise  of  a  spiritual  inheritance 
to  Abraham's  believing  children.  Thus 
as  the  promise  did  not  preclude  the  ex- 
pulsion of  unbelieving  Israel  from  the 
land,  so  neither  does  it  guarantee  to  ex- 
isting Jews  a  return  to  the  earthly  Para- 
dise (Keil). 

Ver.  16. — And  I  will  make  thy  seed  as  the 
dust  of  the  earth.  "  As  the  land  shall  be 
great  for  thy  people,  thy  posterity,  so  thy 
people  shall  be  great  or  innumerable  for 
the  land  "  (Lange).  Afterwards  the  seed 
of  Abram  is  likened  to  the  stars  of  heaven 
for  multitude  (ch  xv.  5).  So  that  if  a  man 
can  number  the  dust  of  the  earth,  then 
shall  thy  seed  also  be  numbered. 

Ver.  17. — Arise.  According  to  a  com- 
mon mode  of  Oriental  speech,  pleonastic- 
ally  affixed  to  verbs  of  going,  going  for- 
ward, and  of  setting  about  anything  with 
impulse  (Gesenius,  p.  727;  cf  ch.  xxii.  3; 
Job  i.  20).  Walk  through  the  land  in  the 
length  of  it  and  in  the  breadth  of  it.  To 
be  understood  not  as  a  literal  direction, 
but  as  anintimation  that  he  might  leisure- 
ly survey  his  inheritance  with  the  calm 
assurance  that  it  was  his.  For  I  will  give 
it  unto  thee. 

Ver.  18. — Then — literally,  and,  acting 
immediately  as  the  heavenly  voice  directed 
— Abram  removed — or  rather  pitched  (cf. 
ver.  12)  —  his  tent,  and  dwelt — settled 
down,  made  the  central  point  of  his  sub- 
sequent abode  in  Canaan  (Wordsworth) — 
in  the  plain — ^bbsa  =  oaks  (Gesenius)  or 

terebinths  (Celsius);  vide  ch.  xii.  6 — of 
Mamre — an  Amorite  chieftain  who  after- 
wards became  the  friend  and  ally  of 
Abram  (ch.  xiv.  13,  24),  and  to  whom 
probably  the  grove  belonged — which  is  in 
Hebron — twenty-two  miles  south  of  Jeru- 
salem on  the  way  to  Beersheba,  a  town 
of  great  antiquity,  having  been  built  seven 
years  before  Zoan,  in  Egypt  (Numb.  xiii. 
22).  As  it  is  elsewhere  styled  Kirjath- 
arba,  or  the  city  of  Arba  (ch.  xxiii.  2; 
xxxv.  27),  and  appears  to  have  been  so 
called  until  the  conquest  (Josh.  xiv.  15), 
the  occurrence  of  the  name  Hebron  is  re- 
garded as  a  trace  of  post-Mosaic  author- 
ship (Clericus,  et  alii);  but  it  is  more 
probable  that  Hebron  was   the  original 


ob.  xni.  14—18.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  OENESI8. 


201 


name  of  the  city,  and  that  it  received  the 
appellation  Kirjath-arba  on  the  arrival  in 
the  country  of  Arba  the  Auakite,  perhaps 
during  the  sojourn  of  Jacob's  descendants 
in    Egypt   (Rosenmuller,     Baumgarten, 


Hengstenberg,  Keil,  Kurtz).  The  place 
is  called  by  modern  Arabs  El  Khalil,  the 
friend  of  God.  And  built  there  an  altar 
unto  the  L»rd. 


HOMILETIC8. 

Vers.  14 — 18. — Magnanimity  rewarded,  or  Divine  compensations.  I.  A  revelation 
given.  Immediately  on  Lot's  departure  Jehovah  approaches,  the  appearance  of  the 
heavenly  Friend  compensating  for  the  loss  of  the  earthly  kinsman,  as  often  happens 
in  the  Divine  dealings  with  men  and  saints.  The  revelation  now  afforded  to  the 
patriarch  was — 1.  Personal.  Essentially  a  self-revealing  God,  only  through  the 
medium  of  a  person  can  Jehovah  give  a  full  and  clear  unveilment  of  himself.  Of 
this  description  was  the  theophany  accorded  to  the  solitary  flock-master  on  the  Bethel 
plateau  ;  and  in  the  man  Christ  Jesus  have  the  saints  a  like  disclosure  of  the  person 
and  character  of  the  unapproachable  Supreme.  2.  Gracious.  The  dignity  of  him 
who  thus  appeared  to  the  patriarch,  the  all-sufficient  and  self-existent  Deity,  and  the 
character  of  him  to  whom  such  revelation  was  vouchsafed,  the  father  of  the  faithful, 
but  still  a  mere  creature,  and,  apart  from  Divine  grace,  exposed  to  just  condemnation, 
attest  its  stupendous  condescension.  Yet  "such  honour  have  all  the  saints  "  to  whom, 
notwithstanding  their  personal  insignificance  and  deep  unworthiness,  the  supreme 
Deity  has  approached  and  unveiled  himself  in  Christ.  3.  Opportune.  At  the  time 
when  it  was  made  the  patriarch's  heart,  we  can  imagine,  was  the  seat  of  mingled 
emotions.  Saddened  by  the  loss  of  a  kinsman  who  had  been  long  his  companion, 
and  perhaps  pained  by  the  recollection  of  that  kinsman's  avarice,  dejected  as  he  real- 
ised his  solitude  among  hostile  neighbours  and  in  a  foreign  laud,  though,  doubtless, 
also  sustained  by  a  consciousness  of  having  acted  well  in  parting  with  his  nephew, 
the  patriarch  was  much  in  need  of  Divine  consolation  and  succour.  And  so  are 
Christ's  visits  to  his  people  ever  seasonable  (Luke  xxiv.  15  ;  John  vi.  20)  and  suitable 
to  their  wants.  4.  Comforting.  This  was  proved  by  his  subsequent  behaviour. 
Plucking  up  the  stakes  of  his  tent,  he  resumed  his  travels,  and  at  his  next  encamp- 
ment built  an  altar  for  the  worship  of  the  Lord.  It  is  a  good  sigu  that  gracious  visits 
to  needy  souls  are  having  their  desired  effect  when  those  souls  are  able  to  attend  to 
the  ordinary  but  necessary  duties  of  life,  and  to  preserve  their  relish  for  the  public 
and  private  rites  of  religion. 

II.  A  land  granted.  For  the  loss  of  the  Jordan  circle  the  patriarch  receives  an 
express  donation  of  the  entire  territory  of  Canaan.  So  Christ  promises  to  reward  his 
self-sacrificing  followers  in  kind  as  well  as  quantity,  and  in  the  life  that  now  is  as 
well  as  in  that  which  is  to  come  (Matt.  xix.  29).  The  grant  made  to  Abram  was— 
1.  Magnificent.  The  grant  of  a  laud  ;  of  the  land  of  Palestine  in  (tie  first  instance, 
and  in  the  second  of  the  better  country,  even  an  heavenly,  of  which  the  earthly 
Oauaan  was  a  type  (Heb.  xi.  8—10).  The  like  grant  is  made  to  believers  in  the  gospel 
(Matt.  v.  5  ;  1  Cor.  iii.  22  ;  2  Tim.  ii.  12).  2.  Certain.  The  complete  isolation  of  the 
patriarch,  the  occupation  of  the  land,  and  especially  the  barrenness  of  Sarai,  were  all 
calculated  to  make  the  Divine  donation  of  the  country  before  him  but  a  doubtful  gift 
after  all.  And  so  sometimes  to  Christians  may  the  heavenly  inheritance  appear 
highly  problematical.  But  the  ground  of  certainty  for  them  is  precisely  what  it  was 
to  Abram,  the  word  of  the  living  God  ;  and  as  Abram  staggered  not  at  the  promise 
of  God  through  unbelief,  so  neither  should  they.  3.  Perpetual.  To  thee,  and  to  thy 
seed  for  ever,  were  the  terms  in  which  the  earthly  Canaan  was  conveyed  to  the 
patriarch.  That  is,  so  long  as  the  seed  of  Abram  according  to  the  flesh  existed  as  a 
separate  nation  they  should  occupy  the  land  of  Canaan  ;  while  for  his  spiritual  pos- 
terity the  heavenly  Canaan  should  continue  an  inalienable  possession.  So  earth  to 
the  believer  is  a  perpetual  inheritance  in  the  sense  that  "the  world  is  his,"  while 
heaven  is  an  eternal  country  from  which  he  shall  go  no  more  out. 

III.  A  sebd  promised.  The  magnanimity  of  the  patriarch  had  deprived  him  of 
a  brothel's  son  ;  the  grace  of  God  rewarded  him  by  promising  a  child  of  his  own. 
No  man  ever  conies  off  a  loser  who  makes  sacrifices  for  God.  The  seed  promised 
was  to  be— 1.  Numerous.  A  multitude  instead  of  one;  exemplified  in  the  untold 
millions  of  Abram's  natural  descendants.  So  God  delights  to  reward  his  people,  re- 
turning to  them  a  hundredfold  for  what  they  give  to  him  (Matt.  xix.  20 ;  Ephes!  iii. 


202 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  XIY.  1—12. 


20).  2.  Spiritual.  An  offspring  united  to  him  by  bonds  of  grace  in  lieu  of  a  kins- 
man connected  with  him  bv  ties  of  blood;  a  prediction  realised  in  the  myriads  of  his 
believing  children.  Another  principle  which  regulates  the  Divine  compensations 
bestowed  on  saints  is  to  take  the  less  and  give  the  greater,  to  remove  the  material  and 
impart  the  spiritual  (John  xvi.  7  ;  xix.  26).  3.  Eminent.  If  Lot  was  renowned  for 
wealth  and  worldly  prudence,  the  unborn  seed  of  Abram  should  be  distinguished  in 
the  annals  of  both  Church  and  world  for  riches  of  a  more  enduring  character  and 
wisdom  of  a  nobler  kind ;  a  prophecy  fulfilled  in  Israel  after  the  flesh,  which  as  a 
nation  has  always  been  more  distinguished  for  intelligence  and  capacity;  than  for 
numbers  ;  in  Israel  after  the  spirit,  or  the  Church  of  God,  whose  characteristics  have 
ever  been  rare  spiritual  illumination  and  high  moral  potency ;  and  in  Israel's  Saviour, 
"in  whom  are  hid  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge,"  and  "in  whom 
dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily." 

Learn — 1.  That  God  is  the  ever-present  though  unseen  Spectator  of  noble  deeds. 
2.  That  every  act  of  self-sacrifice  performed  for  his  sake  elicits  his  approbation.  3. 
That  while  he  who  keeps  his  life  shall  lose  it,  he  who,  for  Christ's  sake  and  the  gos- 
pel's, loses  it  shall  ultimately  find  it. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 


Ver.  1. — And  it  came  to  pass.  After  the 
separation  of  Abram  and  Lot,  the  latter  of 
whom  now  appears  as  a  citizen  of  Sodom, 
and  not  merely  a  settler  in  the  Jordan 
circle;  perhaps  about  the  eighty-fourth 
year  of  Abram's  life(Hughes).  The  present 
chapter,  "the  oldest  extant  record  respect- 
ing Abraham"  (Ewald),  but  introduced 
into  the  Mosaic  narrative  by  the  Jeho vistic 
editor  (Knobel,  Tuch,  Bleek,  Davidson), 
possesses  traces  of  authenticity,  of  which 
not  the  least  is  the  chronological  definition 
with  which  it  commences  (Havernick).  In 
the  days  of  Amraphel.  Sanscrit,  Amra- 
pdla,  keeper  of  the  gods  (Gesenius) ;  Ar- 
phaxad  (Fiirst) ;  powerful  people  (Young, 
'Analytical  Concordance');  root  unknown 
(Murphy,  Kalisch).  King  of  Shinar.  Babel 
(Onkelos);  Bagdad  (Arabic  version  of 
Erpenius);  Pontics  (Jonathan);  the  suc- 
cessor of  Nimrod  (vide  ch.  x.  10).  Arioch. 
Sanscrit,  Arjaka,  venerated  (Bohlen, 
Gesenius,  Ftirst) ;  probably  from  the  root 
"l'TN,  a  lion,  hence  leonine  (Gesenius, 
Murphy).  The  name,  which  reappears 
in  Dan.  ii.  14,  has  been  compared,  though 
doubtfully,  with  the  Urukh  of  the  inscrip- 
tions (vide  'Records  of  the  Past,'  vol.  iii.  p. 
9).  King  of  Ellasar.  Pontus  (Symmachus, 
Vulgate) ;  the  region  between  Babylon  and 
Elymais  (Gesenius);  identified  with  Larsa 
or  Laranka,  the  Adpio-o-a  or  Aapdy  »v  of 
theGreeks,  now  Senkereh,  a  town  of  Lower 
Babylonia,  between  Mugheir  (TJr)  and 
Warka  (Erech),  on  the  left  bank  of  the 
Euphrates  (Rawlinson).  Chedorlaomer.  A 
"handful  of  sheaves,"if  the  word  be  Phce- 
nicio-Shemitic,  though  probably  its  true 
etymology  should  be  sought  in  ancient 
Persian  (Gesenius,  Fiirst).  The  name  has 
been  detected  by  archoeologists  in  Kudwr- 
mapula,  the  Ravager  of  the  West,  whom 


monumental  evidence  declares  to  have 
reigned  over  Babylon  in  the  twentieth  cen- 
tury B.C. ;  and ' ' jtudurnanhundi  the  Elam- 
ite,  the  worship  of  the  great  gods  who  did 
not  fear,"  and  the  conqueror  of  Chaldaea, 
B.  c.  2280;  but  in  both  instancestheidentifi- 
cations  are  problematical.  The  name  Che- 
dorlaomer in  Babylonian  would  h^Kudur- 
lagamer;  but  as  yet  this  name  has  not  been 
found  on  the  inscriptions  (vide  'Records  of 
the  Past, '  vol.  iii.  pp.  7, 19).  King  of  Elam. 
East  of  Babylonia,  on  the  north  of  the  Per- 
sian Gulf  (cf.ch.  x.  22).  AndTidal.  "Fear, 
veneration  "  (Gesenius) ;  terror  (Murphy); 
"splendour,  renown"  (Fiirst);  though  the 
name  may  not  be  Shemitic.  Kingof  nations. 
The  Scythians  (Symmachus);  the  Galilean 
heathen  (Clericus.Rosenmiiller.Delitzsch), 
which  are  inappropriate  in  this  connec- 
tion; ncmadic  races  (Rawlinson);  probably 
some  smaller  tribes  so  gradually  sub- 
jugated by  Tidal  as  to  render  it  "impos- 
sible to  describe  him  briefly  with  any 
degree  of  accuracy"  (Kalisch). 

Ver.  2. — That  these  made  war.  The 
LXX.  connect  the  present  with  the  pre- 
ceding verse  by  reading"that  Arioch,"&c. 
Ewald  interpolates  "of  Abram"  before 
"that  Amraphel."  With  Bera.  "Gift"  = 
yV"j3  (Gesenius).  Kingof  Sodom.  "Burn- 
ing, conflagration,"  as  being  built  on  bi- 
tuminous soil,  and  therefore  subject  to 
volcanic  eruptions;  from  D"lD,  conjectured 

to  mean  to  burn(Genesius).  "Lime  place," 
or  "enclosed  place;"  from  tTlD,  to  sur- 
round (Fiirst).  A  mountain  with  fossil  salt 
at  the  present  day  is  called  Hagv  Usdfim; 
and  Galen  also  knew  of  a  Sodom  moun- 
tain. And  with  Birsha  =  yiZ3'l"')a  "  son 
of  wickedness"  (Gesenius);  "long  and 
thick  "  (Murphy ); ' ' strong,  thick " (Fttrst). 
King  of  Gomorrah,  roadppa  (LXX.);  per- 
haps "culture,  habitation"  (Gesenius) | 


OH.  XIV.   1— 12.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


208 


"rent,  fissure"  (Fiirst).  Shinab.  "Father's 
tooth"  (Gesenius) ;  "splendour  of  Ab" 
(Fiirst);  "coolness"  (Murphy).  King  of 
Admah.  Fruit  region,  farm  city  (Fiirst). 
And  Shemeber.  "  Soaring  aloft "  (Gesenius). 
King  of  Zeboiim.  Place  of  hyenas  (Gese- 
nius) ;  gazelles  (Murphy) ;  a  wild  place 
(Fiirst).  And  the  king  of  Bela.  "  Devoured," 
or  "devouring"  (Gesenius).  Which  is  Zoaj. 
"  The  small,"  a  name  afterwards  given  t» 
the  city  (ch.  xix.  22),  and  here  introduced 
as  being  better  known  than  the  more  ancient 
one. 

Ver.  3. — All  these — the,  last-named  princes 
— were  joined  together — i.  e.  as  confeder- 
ates (sc.  and  came  with  their  forces) — in 
(literally,  to)  the  vale  of  Siddim.  The  salt 
valley  (LXX);  a  wooded  vale  (Vulgate); 
a  plain  filled  with  rocky  hollows  (jGesenius) 
with  which  ver.  10  agrees;  the  valley  oi 
plains  or  fields  (Onkelos,  Raschi,  Keil,  Mur- 
phy). Which  is  the  salt  sea.  /.  e.  where 
the  salt  sea  afterwards  arose,  on  the  de- 
struction of  the  cities  of  the  plain — ch.  xix. 
24,  25  (Keil,  Havernick ;  cf .  Josephus, '  Bell. 
Jud.,'  iv.  3,  4);  but  the  text  scarcely  implies 
that  the  cities  were  submerged — only  the 
valley  (cf.  Quarry,  p.  207).  The  extreme 
depression  of  the  Dead  Sea,  being  1300  feet 
below  the  level  of  the  Mediterranean  ("  the 
most  depressed  sheet  of  water  in  the  world : " 
Stanley's  'Sinai  and  Palestine,'  ch.  vii.), 
conjoined  with  its  excessive  saltness  (con- 
taining 26  %  per  cent,  of  saline  particles), 
renders  it  one  of  the  most  remarkable  of  in- 
land lakes.  Its  shores  are  clothed  with 
gloom  and  desolation.  Within  a  mile  from 
its  northern  embouchure  the  verdure  of  the 
rich  Jordan  valley  dies  away.  Strewn  along 
its  desolate  margin  lie  broken  canes  and 
willow  branches,  with  trunks  of  palms,  pop- 
lars, and  other  trees,  half  embedded  in 
slimy  mud,  and  all  covered  with  incrustations 
of  salt.  At  its  south-western  corner  stands 
the  mountain  of  rock  salt,  with  its  columnar 
fragments,  which  Josephus  says  in  his  day 
was  regarded  as  the  pillar  of  Lot's  wife, 

Ver.  4. — Twelve  years — dating  from  the 
commencement  of  his  reign  (Murphy)  — 
they  served — and  paid  tribute  (cf.  2  Kings 
xviii.  7) —  Chedorlaomer.  If  the  king  of 
Elam  was  a  Shemite  prince,  this  was  in 
accordance  with  the  Noachic  prophecy  (ch. 
ix.  26) ;  but  according  to  the  monuments  the 
Elamite  dynasty  was  Turanian.  And  in 
the  thirteenth  year  —  during  the  whole  of 
the  thirteenth  year  (vide  Ewald's  '  Heb. 
Synt.,'  §  300,  a.;  cf.  ver.  6)— they  rebelled, 
or  had  rebelled. 

Ver.  5. — And  in  (or  during)  the  four- 
teenth year  came  Chedorlaomer,  and  the 
kings  that  were  with  him,  and  smote  (be- 
cause of  actual  or  probable  rebellion)  the 
Rephaims.      rfryavTas    (LXX.)    a   tribe  of 


gigantic  stature  (  from  an  Arabic  root,  to  be 
high),  the  iron  bed  of  whose  last  king,  Og, 
measured  nine  yards  in  length  and  four  in 
breadth  (Deut.  ill .  11);  forming  a  portion  of 
the  aboriginal  inhabitants  of  Palestine  prior 
to  the  invasion  of  the  Canaanites,  though 
existing  as  a  remnant  as  late  as  the  con- 
quest (ch.  ii.  20 ;  iii.  11,  13).  In  Ashte- 
roth  Karnaim.  Literally,  Ashteroth  of  the 
Two  Horns  ;  so  called  either  from  its  situa- 
tion between  two  horn-shaped  hills  (Jewish 
interpreters),  or  because  of  the  homed  cattle 
with  which  it  abounded  (Hillery),  or  in 
honour  of  the  goddess  Ashtaroth,  Astarte, 
or  Venus,  whose  image  was  such  as  to  sug- 
gest the  idea  of  a  horned  figure  (A  Lapide, 
Gesenius,  Kalisch) ;  identified  by  some  with 
the  capital  of  Og  (Keil),  but  by  others  dis- 
tinguished from  it  (Wetstein);  of  uncertain 
site,  though  claimed  to  survive  in  the  ruins 
of  Tell  Ashtereh,  near  the  ancient  Edrei 
(Ritter);  in  those  of  'Affoieh,  eight  miles 
from  Buzrah  (Porter);  in  the  modern  village 
Mesarib  (Burckhardt);  or  in  Ml  Kurnem  or 
Ophein  in  Ledsha  (Robinson).  And  the 
Zuzims.  Probably  the  Zamzummims  be- 
tween the  Arnon  and  the  Jabbok  (Deut.  ii. 
20).  In  Ham.  "  Possibly  the  ancient  name 
of  Rabba  of  the  Ammonites  (Deut.  iii.  11) 
the  remains  being  still  preserved  in  the 
ruins  of  Amman  "  (Keil).  And  the  Emims. 
Fearful  and  terrible  men,  the  primitive 
inhabitants  of  Moab  (Deut.  ii.  10,  11);  called 
'also  Rephaims,  as  being  of  colossal  stature. 
In  Shaveh  Kiriath'aim.  Literally,  the  plain 
of  Kiriathaim,  or  the  plain  of  the  two  cities, 
situated  in  the  district  afterwards  assigned 
to  Reuben  (Numb,  xxxii.  37) ;  identified 
with  Ooraiatha,  the  modern  Koerriath  or 
Kereyat,  ten  miles  west  of  Medebah  (Euse- 
bius,  Jerome,  Kalisch),  which,  however, 
rather  corresponds  with  Eerioth,  in  Jer. 
xlviii.  24  (Keil). 

Ver.  6. — And  the  Horites.  Literally,  dwell- 
ers in  caves  ;  from  c/tor,  a  cave.  In  their 
mount  Seir.  Literally,  wooded  (Gesenius); 
hairy  (Fiirst) ;  rugged  (Lange) ;  probably 
with  reference  to  the  thick  brushwood  and 
forests  that  grew  upon  its  sides.  The  cave 
men  of  Seir  were  the  earlier  inhabitants  of 
the  region  lying  between  the  Dead  Sea  and 
the  Gulf  of  Elam,  afterwards  taken  posses- 
sion of  by  the  Edomites  (Deut.  ii.  12;  Jer. 
xlix.  16  ;  Obad.  3,  4).  Unto  El-paran.  I.  e. 
the  oak  or  terebinth  of  Paran.  Which  is  by 
the  wilderness.  Between  the  land  of  Edom 
■and  the  fertile  country  of  Egypt,  and  to  the 
southward  of  Palestine,  identified  as  the 
plateau  of  the  Tih,  across  which  the  Israel- 
itish  march  lay  from  Sinai  (Stanley,  '  Sinai 
and  Palestine,'  p.  92). 

Ver.  7.— And  they  returned — from  the 
oak  of  Paran,  the  southernmost  point 
reached  by  the  invaders — and  came  to  En- 


204 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xnr.  1—12. 


mishpat-— the  Well  of  Judgment,  regarded 
as  a  prolepsis  by  those  who  derive  the  name 
from  the  judgment  pronounced  on  Moses 
and  Aaron  (A  Lapide);  but  more  probably 
the  ancient  designation  of  the  town,  which 
was  so'  styled  because  the  townsmen  and 
villagers  settled  their  disputes  at  the  well  in 
its  neighbourhood  (Kalisch) — which  is  Ka- 
desh,  of  which  (Numb.  xx.  14)  the  exact 
site  cannot  now  be  ascertained,  though  the 
spring  Ain  Kades,  on  the  heights  of  Jebel 
Halal,  twelve  miles  east-south-east  of  Moyle, 
the  halting-place  of  caravans  (Rowland, 
Keil,  Kalisch),  and  Petra  (Josephus,  Stan- 
ley), have  been  suggested  as  marking  the 
locality.  And  smote  all  the  country  of  the 
Amalekites.  I.  e.  afterwards  possessed  by 
them,  to  the  west  of  Edom.  Amalek  was  a 
grandson  of  Esau  (vide  ch.  xxxvi.  12).  And 
also  the  Amorites.  The  mountaineers,  as 
distinguished  from  the  Canaanites  or  low- 
landerB  (cf.  ch.  x.  16).  That  dwelt  in  Haze- 
zon-tamar.  "  The  pruning  of  the  palm ;  " 
afterwards  Engedi,  "  the  fountain  of  the 
wild  goat,"  situated  midway  up  the  western 
shore  of  the  Dead  Sea,  and  now  called  Ain- 
jidy  (cf.  Josh.  xv.  62 ;  1  Sam.  xxiv.  1,  2 ; 
2  Chron.  xx.  2 ;  Ezek.  xlvii.  10). 

Vers.  8,  9. — And  there  went  out  (to 
resist  the  onslaught  of  the  victorious  Asia- 
tics (the  king  of  Sodom,  and  the  king  of 
Gomorrah,  and  the  King  of  Admah,  and  the 
king  of  Zeboiim,  and  the  king  of  Belah  (the 
same  is  Zoar);  (i.  e.  the  five  revolted  mon- 
archs  of  the  Pentapolis)  and  they  joined 
battle  with  them  in   the    vale    of   Siddim 


(vide  ver.  3);  with  Chedorlaomer  the  king 
of  Elam,  and  with  Tidal  king  of  nations, 
and  Amraphel  king  of  Shinar,  and  Arioch 
king  of  Ellasar;  four  kings  with  five. 

Ver.  10.— And  the  vale  of  Siddim  was  full 
of  slime-pits.  'Literally,  was  pits,  pits  (cf. 
2  Kings  iii.  16;  Ezek.  xlii.  12  for  examples 
of  repeated  nouns)  of  slime,  bitumen  or 
asphalte,  and  therefore  unfavourable  for 
flight.  "  Some  of  the  wells  near  the  Dead 
Sea  are  116  feet  deep,  with  a  stratum  of 
bitumen  fifteen  feet  in  depth,  and  as  black  as 
jet  "  (Inglis).  And  the  kings  of  Sodom  and 
Gomorrah  fled  and  fell  there.  Stumbled 
into  the  pits  and  perished  (Keil,  Lange, 
Murphy),  though  if  the  king  of  Sodom 
escaped  (ver.  17),  the  language  may  only 
mean  that  they  were  overthrown  there 
(Knobel,  . Rosenmuller,  Bush,  'Speaker's 
Commentary').  And  they  that  remained 
fled  to  the  mountain,  of  Moab,  with  its  nu- 
merous defiles. 

Ver.  11.  —  And  they  (the  conquering 
kings)  took  all  the  goods  of  Sodom  and 
Gomorrah,  and  all  their  victuals,  and  went 
their  way,  ascending  up  the  valley  of  the 
Jordan  en  route  for  Damascus. 

Ver.  12. — And  they  took  lot,  Abram's 
brother's  son,  who  dwelt  in  Sodom.  The 
last  view  of  Lot  saw  him  driving  off  his 
flocks  and  herds  from  Bethel.  It  betokens 
a  cons' derable  declension  in  spiritual  life  to 
behold  hira  a  citizen  of  Sodom.  And  his 
goods  (all  the  propertv  he  had  acquired 
tlnough  his  selfish  choice  of  the  Jordan 
circle),  and  departed. 


HOMILETIC8. 


Ver.  12. — The  capture  of  Lot,  or  Nemesis  pursuing  sin.  I.  An  example  of  the 
bitter  fruits  of  war.  1.  War  is  sometimes  justifiable  in  its  origin  and  objects. 
When  undertaken  to  achieve  or  preserve  national  independence,  to  vindicate  the 
liberties  and  secure  the  rights  of  men,  or  to  repel  the  aggressions  of  ambitious 
despots,  even  war  with  all  its  bloody  horrors  may  become  an  imperious  and  lierce 
necessity.  It  is  difficult  to  determine  whether  on  either  side  the  campaign  in  the 
vale  of  Siddim  was  entitled  to  be  so  characterised.  The  kings  of  the  Pentapolis 
were  fighting  for  emancipation  from  a  foreign  yoke,  and  so  far  perhaps  were  entitled 
to  be  regarded  as  having  right  upon  their  side  ;  yet  they  had  themselves  been  invaders 
of  a  land  which  had  originally  been  assigned  to  the  tribes  of  Shem.  But  however 
the  question  of  right  may  he  settled  as  between  these  ancient  warriors,  it  is  certain 
their  successors  on  the  battle-fields  of  earth  have  much  more  frequently  had  the 
wrong  upon  their  sides  than  the  right.  2.  Victory  does  not  always  favour  those  who 
seem  to  have  the  best  cause.  The  maxim  of  the  great  Napoleon,  that  God  is  always 
on  the  side  of  the  strongest  battalions,  is  as  wide  astray  from  the  exact  truth  on  this 
important  subject  as  is  the  prevailing  sentiment  that  God  always  defends  the  right. 
The  doctrine  of  Scripture  is  that  the  Lord  of  Hosts  is  independent  of  both  regiments 
and  rifles,  can  save  by  many  or  by  few,  and  giveth  the  victory  to  whomsoever  he  will ; 
and  that  not  always  does  he  choose  to  render  those  arms  triumphant  which  are 
striking  for  the  holiest  cause,  but  sometimes,  for  reasons  of  his  own  (it  may  be  to 
chastise  a  nation  for  its  sins,  or  to  move  them  to  faith  and  prayer,  or  to  teach  them 
some  important  lesson),  permits  the  wrong  to  trample  down  the  righk.    The  history 


CH.  xiv.  1— 12.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  205 


of  Israel  and  the  records  of  modern  warfare  supply  numerous  examples.  3.  Dis- 
astrous and  terrible  are  the  ysual  concomitants  of  war.  Not  that  God  does  not' 
frequently  overrule  the  hostilities  of  contending  nations,  and  evolve  from  the  mur- 
derous designs  of  monarchs  results  the  most  beneficial,  making  war  the  pioneer  of 
civilisation,  and  even  of  religion;  but  the  immediate  effects  of  international  strife 
are  ever  ruinous  and  appalling — fruitful  fields  devastated,  fair  cities  sacked,  valuable 
property  destroyed,  lives  of  men  wasted,  a  nation's  blood  and  treasure  poured  out 
like  water,  lamentation,  mourning,  and  woe  commissioned  to  11111113  homes,  and  a 
burden  of  care  aud  sorrow  laid  on  all.  All  this  was  exemplified  in  the  present 
instance.  4.  When  war  arises  the  innocent  largely  suffer  with  the  guilty.  Had  the 
campaign  against  the  kings  of  the  Pentapolis  not  been  prepared,  it  is  probable  that 
the  Rephaims,  Zuzims,  Emims,  Hbrites,  Amalekites,  aud  Amorites  would  not  have 
suffered  at  the  hands  of  Chedorlaomer,  and  it  is  certain  that  Lot  would  not  have  been 
made  a  prisoner  by  the  victorious  monarch.  Now,  so  far  as  the  primal  reason  of  this 
invasion  was  concerned  all  these  were  innocent  of  any  offence  agaiusl  the  Asiatic 
king,  and  yet  they  were  amongst  the  victims  of  his  wrath  against  the  rebels  of  the 
Jordan  circle. 

II.  An  instance  of  Divine  retribution.  1.  Deserved.  Although  Lot  was  a 
righteous  man,  he  had  egregiously  sinned,  (1)  in  choosing  the  Jordan  circle  as  his 
portion,  (2)  in  making  his  abode  in  Sodom,  (3)  in  continuing  amongst  the  inhabitants 
when  he  ascertained  their  ungodly  character.  Consequently  God  avenged  himself 
upon  his  erring  servant  by  allowing  him  to  lose  his  property,  and  to  come  near  the 
losing  of  his  life  as  well  in  the  sacking  of  the  city.  So  "  the  face  of  the  Lord  is  set 
against  them  that  do  evil."  2.  Unexpected  probably  as  to  its  cause,  Lot  thinking  he 
had  committed  nothing  worthy  of  chastisement,  for  sin  has  a  strange  power  of 
obscuring  the  moral  vision  and  deadening  the  voice  of  conscience  ;  almost  certainly 
as  to  its  time,  God's  judgments  for  the  most  part  taking  men  unawares  (cf.  Ps.  lxxiii. 
18,  19),  and  evil-doers  being  commonly  snared  in  an  evil  time,  like  the  fishes  of  the 
sea  (Eccles.  ix.  12),  walking  like  bliud  men  because  they  have  sinned  against  the 
Lord  (Zeph.  i.  17);  and  more  than  likely  as  to  its  form,  those  who  anticipate  the  out- 
pouring of  Divine  indignation  being  seldom  able  to  discern  beforehand  the  special 
character  it  will  assume.  3.  Appropriate.  Lot  had  chosen  the  Jordan  circle  as  the 
most  advantageous  locality  for  thriving  in  his  flocks  and  herds,  and  Chedorlaomer's 
armies  swept  his  folds  and  stalls  entirely  clean.  He  had  elected  to  live  among  the 
filthy  Sodomites,  and  so  he  is  compelled  to  fare  as  they.  God's  recompenses  to 
evil-doers  (whether  saints  or  sinners)  are  never  unsuitable,  though  man's  often  are. 
4.  Merciful.  He  might  have  lost  his  life  in  the  general  massacre  of  the  city's  inhab- 
itants, but  he  only  lost  his  property,  or  rather  it  was  not  yet  lost,  although,  doubth  ms, 
Lot  imagined  that  it  was  ;  only  pillaged  and  carried  off  along  with  himself,  his  wife, 
and  daughters.  So  God  ever  mingles  mercy  with  judgment  when  dealing  with  his 
people.  5.  Premonitory.  Though  all  retribution  is  not  designed  to  admonish  and 
reprove,  this  was.  The  veugeauce  taken  on  the  wicked  at  the  day  of  judgment  will 
'  be  purely  punitive ;  that  which  falls  upon  transgressors  while  on  earth  is  aimed  at 
their  amendment.  Unhappily,  however,  as  in  the  case  of  Lot,  it  is  sometimes  ineffi- 
cacious. Instead  of  taking  warning;  at  what  might  have  proved  his  ruin,  Lot  was 
no  sooner  rescued  than  he  returned  to  Sodom.  So  great  providential  judgments  and 
great  providential  mercies  are  often  equally  despised. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ch.  xiv. — The  kingdom  of  Ood  in  its  relation  to  the  contending  powers  of  this  world. 
I.  God's  judgments  are  already  beginning:  to  fall.  War  is  made  by  con- 
federate kings  or  princes  against  the  people  of  the  wicked  cities  of  the  plain,  who 
by  their  propinquity  would  naturally  be  leagued  together,  but  by  their  common 
rebellion  against  Chedorlaomer  were  involved  in  a  common  danger.  Notice  the 
indication.of  the  future  judgment  given  in  the  course  of  the  narrative — "the  vale  of 
Siddim  was  full  of  slime-pits."  God's  vengeance  underlies  the  wicked,  ready  to 
burst  forth  on  them  in  due  time. 

II.  The  unfaithful  Lot  is  involved  in  the  judgment.  He  and  his  goods 
are  taken.  For  while  before  if  is  said  he  pitched  his  tent  near  to  Sodom,  now  we 
find  that  he  is  in  Sodom. 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xiv.  18-16. 


III.  The  mediation  of  Abram,  representative  of  that  of  God's  people  in  the 
world,  procures  the  deliverance  of  the  backsliding.  He  has  already  succeeded  in 
drawing  strength  to  himself ;  and  doubtless  Abram  the  Hebrew  represented  a 
nucleus  of  higher  life  even  in  that  land  of  the  idolatrous  and  degenerate  which  was 
recognised  as  in  some  sense  a  refuge  to  which  men  could  appeal. 

IV.  The  victory  of  the  child  of  God,  with  his  small  company,  over  the  great 
army  of  heathen  is  typical.  It  represents,  like  the  victory  of  David  over  Goliath, 
&c,  the  superior  might  of  the  spiritual  world  (cf.  1  Cor.  i.  27 — 31). 

V.  The  homage  paid  to  Abram  as  the  conqueror  both  by  the  heathen  king  of 
Sodom  and  the  priest-king  of  Salem  is  typical  of  the  superior  position  of  the  cove- 
nant people.  Abram  gave  tithes  to  Melchizedek  (cf.  Heb.  vii.  1 — 7)  as  an  acknow- 
ledgment of  the  superiority  of  the  position  of  Melchizedek,  but  Melchizedek  blessed 
Abram  as  the  possessor  of  the  promise.  The  idea  is  that  Melchizedek  was  the  priest 
of  a  departing  dispensation,  Abram  the  recipient  of  the  old  and  the  beginning  of 
the  new. 

VI.  Abram's  strict  separation  from  the  worldly  power,  which  he  rested  on 
an  oath  of  faithfulness  to  God,  shows  that  he  is  decidedly  advancing  in  spiritual 
character.  The  contrast  is  very  striking  between  his  conduct  and  that  of  Lot.  He 
at  the  same  time  does  not  attempt  to  enforce  his  own  high  principle  upon  others. 
The  Church  of  God  has  suffered  much  from  its  attempts  to  apply  its  own  high  rules 
to  the  world  instead  of  leaving  the  world  to  find  out  for  itself  their  superiority  and 
adopt  them. — R. 


EXPOSITION. 


Ver.  13. — And  there  came  one  'that  had 
escaped.  Literally,  the  fugitive  party,  the 
article  denoting  the  genus,  as  in  "  the  Ca- 
naanite,"  ch.  xii.  6  (vide  Ewald's  'Hebrew 
Syntax,'  §  277.  a.).  And  told  Abram  the 
Hebrew.  "  The  immigrant "  transfluvialU, 
o  ir6pd.TT|s,  from  beyond  the  Euphrates,  if 
applied  to  the  patriarch  by  the  inhabitants 
of  Palestine  (LXX.,  Aquila,  Origen,  Vul- 
gate,Keil,Lange,Kalisch);  but  more  prob- 
ably, if  simply  inserted  by  the  historian  to 
distinguish  Abram  from  Mamre  the  Am- 
orite,  "the  descendant  of  Eber"  (Lyra, 
Drusius,  Calvin,  Bush, Candlish, Murphy, 
'  Speaker's  Commentary  ; '  vide  on  ch.  x. 
21).  For  he  dwelt — literally,  and  (sc.  at 
that  time)  he  was  dwelling— in  the  plain — 
rather  "oak  groves"  (vide  ch.  xiii.  18)— of 
Mamre  the  Amorite,  the  brother  of  Eshcol, 
and  brother  of  Aner,  concerning  whom 
nothing  is  certainly  known  beyond  the 
fact  that  they  were  Canaanitish  chieftains 
(probably  possessing  some  remnant  of  the 
true  faith,  like  Melchisedeck)  with  whom 
the  patriarch  entered  into  an  offensive 
and  defensive  alliance.  And  these  were 
confederate — literally,  lords  of  covenant, 
i.  e.  masters  or  possessors  of  a  treaty  (cf. 
"  lord  or  possessor  of  dreams,"  ch.  xxxvii. 
19;  "  lords  or  masters  of  arrows,"  2  Kings 
i.  8);  rendered  <rwu>(jidTai  (LXX.)  =  lords 
of  the  oath,  as  in  Neh.  vi,  18,  evopKoi 
(LXX.)— with  Abram. 

Ver.  14.  — And  when  Abram  heard  that  his 
brother — so  called  as  his  brother's  son,  or 


simply  as  his  relative  (ch.  xiii.  8) — was 
taken  captive,  he — literally,  and  he — armed 
— literally,  caused  to  pour  forth,  i.  e.  drew 
out  in  a  body,  from  a  root  signifying  "to 
pour  out "  (Gesenius,  Fiirst);  from  a  root 
meaning  to  unsheath  or  draw  out  any- 
thing as  from  a  scabbard,  and  hence  equiv- 
alent to  expedivit,  he-got  ready  (Onkelos, 
Saadias,  Rosenmtiller,  Bush,  '  Speaker's 
Commentary').  Kalisch  connects  both 
senses  with  the  root.  The  LXX., Vulgate, 
and  others  translate ' '  numbered, "  reading 
"p~V  for  p'T)  Ms  trained — literally, initiated, 

instructed,  but  not  necessarily  practised  in 
arms  (Keil) ;  perhaps  only  familiar  with 
domestic  duties  (Kalisch),  since  it  is  the 
intention  of  the  writer  to  show  that  Abram 
conquered  not  by  arms,  but  by  faith — ser- 
vants, born  in  his  own  house — i.  e.  the  chil- 
dren of  his  own  patriarchal  family,  and 
neither  purchased  nor  taken  in  war — three 
hundred  and  eighteen — which  implied  a 
household  of  probably  more  than  a  thou- 
sand souls — and — along  with  these  and 
his  allies  (vide  ver.  24) — pursued  them — 
the  victorious  Asiatics — unto  San — which 
is  here  substituted  for  its  older  nameLaish, 
for  which  vide  Josh.  xix.  47  (Ewald), 
though  regarded  by  some  as  not  the  Laish 
Dan  conquered  by  the  Danites,  but  proba- 
bly Dan-jaan,  mentioned  in  2  Sam.  xxiv.  6 
(Havernick,Keil,Kalisch);  against  which, 
however,  is  the  statement  of  Josephus 
( '  Ant. ,  H.  10),  that  this  Dan  was  one  of  the 
sources  of  the  Jordan.    Murphy  regards 


ch.  xrv.  1ft— 16.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


207 


Dan  asthe  original  designation  of  the  town, 
which  was  changed  under  the  Sidonians  to 
Laish  (lion),  and  restored  at  the  conquest. 
Clericus  suggests  that  the  Jordan  fountain 
may  have  been  styled  Dan,  "Judge,"  and 
the  neighbouring  town  Laish,  and  that  the 
Danites,  observing  the  coincidence  of  the 
former  with  the  name  of  their  own  tribe, 
gave"  it  to  the  city  they  had  conquered. 
Alford  is  doubtful  whether  Dan-jaan  was 
really  different  from  Laish. 

Yer.  15. — And  he  divided  himself  (i.  e. 
his  forces)  against  them,  he  and  his  serv- 
ants (along  with  the  troops  of  his  allies), 
by  night,  and  (falling  on  them  unexpect- 
edly from  different  quarters)  smote  them, 
and  pursued  them  unto  Hobah.  A  place 
Ghoba  is  mentioned  in  Judith  xv.  5  as  that 
to  which  the  Assyrians  were  pursued  by 
the  victorious  Israelites.  A  village  of  the 
same  name  existed  near  Damascus  in  the 
time  of  Eusebius,  and  is  "probably  pre- 


served in  the  village  Hoba,  mentioned  by 
Troilo,  a  quarter  of  a  mile  to  the  north  of 
Damascus"  (Keil);  or  in  that  of  Hobah,  two 
miles  outside  the  walls  (Stanley,  'Syria  and 
Palestine,'  414,  k.),  or  in  Burzeh,  where 
there  is  a  Moslem  wely,  or  saint's  tomb, 
called  the  sanctuary  of  Abraham  (Porter's 
'Handbook,' p.  492).  Which  is  to  the  left  of 
(i.  e.  to  the  north  of,  the  spectator  being 
supposed  to  look  eastward )  Damascus.  The 
metropolis  of  Syria,  on  the  river  Chrysor- 
rhoas,  in  a  large  and  fertile  plain  at  the 
foot  of  Antilibanus,  the  oldest  existing 
city  in  the  world,  being  possessed  at  the 
present  day  of  150,000  inhabitants. 

Ver.  16.— And  he  brought  back  all  the 
goods.  Col-harecush.  The  LXX.  translate 
rrjv  I'inrov,  as  if  they  read  TBD1!  for  123"?. 

And  also  brought  again  his  brother  Lot,  and 
his  goods.  Kal  irdvTa  tol  JirapxovTa  auToO 
(LXX.).  And  the  women  also  and  the 
people. 


HOMILETIOS. 

Vers.  13 — 16. — Tlie  kinsman  deliverer,  or  Abram's  military  expedition.  I.  Abram's 
elevated  piety.  1.  Self -forgetful  magnanimity.  Had  the  patriarch  possessed  a  less 
noble  soul,  the  tiding  of  his  nephew's  capture  would  almost  certainly  have  kindled 
in  his  breast  a  secret  feeling  of  complacency.  But  not  only  in  his  behaviour  on  the 
occasion  was  there  the  complete  absence  of  any  such  revengeful  disposition  as  gloats 
with  satisfaction  over  the  punishment  of  a  wrong-doer,  there  was  something  like  a 
manifest  unconsciousness  of  having  ever  suffered  injury  at  Lot's  hands  at  all.  2. 
Brotherly  compassion.  If  he  did  sometimes  admit  to  himself  that  bis  nephew  had 
scarcely  acted  handsomely  towards  him,  any  feeling  of  resentment  with  which  that 
reflection  may  have  been  associated  was  completely  swallowed  up  by  the  sorrow 
which  he  felt  for  that  nephew's  fate.  After  all  Lot  was  his  dead  brother's  son,  and 
was  a  child  of  God  as  well,  and  he  could  not  choose  but  be  affected  by  the  melan- 
choly news.  Besides  being  self-forgetful,  the  piety  of  Abram  was  sympathetic.  3. 
Active  benevolence.  Meekly  patient  of  injuries  when  inflicted  on  himself,  the 
patriarch  was  ever  ready  to  redress  the  wrongs  of  others,  even  of  the  undeserving. 
Nor  was  his  philanthropy  of  that  weakly  benevolent  sort  which  is  always  going  to 
do  some  act  of  kindness  to  others,  but  never  does  it,  or  is  so  unaccountably  slow  in 
doing  it  that  it  conies  to  be  practically  of  little  use,  or  that  would  willingly  extend  a 
helping  hand  to  the  unfortunate  if  it  could  only  be  done  without  much  trouble;  on 
the  contrary,  it  was  prompt,  decisive,  energetic,  and  carried  through  with  much 
labour,  and  at  considerable  risk  to  his  own  personal  safety. 

II.  Abram's  military  genius.  1.  Unexpectedly  evoked.  The  last  thing  which 
ordinary  minds  would  anticipate  as  an  element  in  the  character  of  one  so  good,  pious, 
benevolent,  and  magnanimous  as  Abram  the  Hebrew,  there  is  yet  no  essential  incon- 
gruity between  the  talents  of  a  soldier  and  the  graces  of  a  Christian;  while  as  for  the 
patriarch  suddenly  discovering  all  the  qualities  of  a  great  commander,  it  is  perhaps 
sufficient  to  reply  that  hitherto  the  crisis  had  not  arrived  to  call  them  forth.  The 
annals  of  warfare,  both  ancient  and  modern,  attest  that  true  military  genius  has 
not  always  been  confined  to  professors  of  the  soldier's  art,  but-has  oftentimes  been 
discovered,  of  the  rarest  kind,  in  persons  who,  till  summoaed  forth  by  Providence, 
have  been  engaged  in  peaceful  callings.  2.  Brilliantly  displayed.  Iu  the  gallant 
exploit  of  the  patriarch  are  exhibited  the  tactics  that  from  time  immemorial  have 
been  adopted  by  all  great  generals— by  Miltiades  and  Themistocles  of. Greece,  by 
Julius  Caesar,  by  Belisarius,  the  general  of  Justinian,  by  Oliver  Cromwell,  by 
Napoleon,  by  Stonewall  Jackson  and  Sherman  of  America,  and  again  by  Von  Moltke 
of  Prussia— celerity  of  movement,  suddenness  of  attack,  skilful  division  of  forces. 


308  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  [ch.  jliv.  13—16 

outflanking  and  outmarching  of  the  enemy  (cf.  Lange,  p.  405).  3.  Completely  success- 
ful. The  foe  was  defeated,  the  prisoners  and  spoil  were  recaptured,  and  it  does  not 
appear  that  Abram  or  his  allies  lost  a  man.  That  generalship  is  the  best  which 
accomplishes  its  object  at  the  least  expense  of  soldiers'  blood  and  subjects'  treasure. 

III.  Abram's  wonder-working  faith.  It  afforded — 1.  A  sufficient  ground  on 
which  to  go  to  war.  The  question  as  to  Abram's  right  to  mingle  in  this  contest  in 
the  Sodom  valley  is  fairly  answered  by  replying  that  Abram  had  the  right  (1)  of 
natural  affection  to  attempt  the  rescue  of  his  relative,  (2)  of  a  sacred  humanity  to 
liberate  the  captive  aud  punish  the  oppressor,  and  (3)  of  faith.  Already  God  had 
given  him  the  land,  and  we  are  fully  warranted  in  regarding  him  as  acting  in  this 
heroic  expedition  in  the  capacity  of  (under  God)  lord-paramount  of  the  soil.  2.  1'he 
necessary  power  with  which  to  prosecute  the  war.  Possessed  of  military  genius 
though  the  patriarch  was,  it  is  not  supposable  that  he  entered  upon  this  campaign 
agaiust  the  trained  armies  of  the  conquering  kings,  pursuing  them  along  a  difficult 
and  dangerous  track,  without  first  casting  himself  on  the  Almighty  arm  as  his 
strength.  And  if  that  Almighty  arm,  in  order  to  succour  him,  took  the  way  of 
developing  the  capabilities  for  warfare  which  had  hitherto  been  lying  dormant  in  his 
soul,  it  was  none  the  less  true  that  the  help  which  he  received  was  Divine.  3.  The 
splendid  victory  which  resulted  from  the  war.  Whether  the  writer  to  the  Hebrews 
(ch.  xi  34)  thought  of  Abram  when  he  spoke  of  faith's  heroes  subduing  kingdoms 
and  waxing  valiant  in  the  fight,  it  is  apparent  that  I*aiah  (ch.  xli.  2,  3)  ascribed  the 
triumph  of  the  Son  of  Terah  to  the  grace  of  God,  which  thus  rewarded  the  faith 
which,  in  obedience  to  a  Divine  impulse,  sprang  to  the  relief  of  Lot. 

IV.  Abram's  typical  character.  The  symbolic  foreshadowing  of  the  great 
kinsman  Deliverer  is  too  obvious  to  be  overlooked.  1.  In  his  person  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  like  Abram,  was  the  kinsman  of  those  whom  he  delivered.  2.  The  work  he 
undertook,  like  that  of  Abram,  was  the  emancipation  of  his  brethren.  3.  As  in  the 
case  of  Abram,  that  work  consisted  in  despoiling  the  principalities  and  powers  of 
evil.  4.  The  motive  by  which  he  was  impelled  on  this  arduous  warfare  was,  like 
that  which  inspired  the  patriarch,  love  for  his  kinsmen.  5.  The  promptitude  of 
Christ  in  coming  to  the  aid  of  men  was  typified  by  Abram's  celerity  in  hastening  to 
the  rescue  of  Lot.  6.  As  the  campaign  of  Abram,  so  the  warfare  of  Christ  was 
carried  through  at  great  expense  of  toil  aud  suffering  to  himself.  7.  In  the  faith  of 
Abram  was  shadowed  forth  the  calm  reliance  of  the  Saviour  that  all  he  did  was  in 
obedience  to  his  Father's  will.  8.  The  success  with  which  the  patriarch  was  rewarded 
was  emblematic  of  the  higher  victory  of  Christ. 

Learn — 1.  To  imitate  the  piety  of  Abram.  2.  To  admire  in  him,  if  we  cannot  in 
ourselves,  the  possession  of  superior  abilities.  3.  To  covet  earnestly  the  wonder- 
working faith  which  he  displayed.  4.  To  trust  in  the  great  kinsman  Deliverer  of 
which  he  was  the  type. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  13 — 16. — Abram's  expedition  a  sermon  for  the  New  Testament  Ohurch.  I. 
The  little  army;  emblematic  of  the  handful  of  Christ's  disciples  at  the  first,  and 
of  the  comparative  feebleness  of  the  Church  still ;  yet  "God's  strength  is  ever  made 
perfect  in  weakness,"  and  so  "the  weakness  of  God  becomes  stronger  than  men." 

II.  The  trusty  confederates  ;  regarding  the  Amorite  chieftains  as  possessors 
of  the  true  faith,  suggestive  of  the  united  purpose  and  action  by  which  the  Church 
of  Christ  in  all  its  parts  should  be  governed,  and  of  the  weakness  that  springs  from 
divided  counsels. 

Ill  The  rapid  march  ;  a  picture  of  the  holy  celerity  and  earnest  zeal  with  which 
the  Church  should  set  about  her  enterprise  of  conquering  the  world  for  Christ;  a 
reminder  of  how  much  may  be  lost  by  delay. 

IV.  The  skilful  tactics  ;  proclaiming  the  same  doctrine  as  Christ — that  his 
people  should  be  wise  as  serpents;  revealing  the  necessity  for  the  Church  making  use 
of  the  most  brilliant  abilities  she  can  command  on  all  her  different  fields  of  action. 

V.  The  splendid  victory;  a  foreshadowing  of  the  final  triumph  which  awaits 
the  Church,  aud  of  the  blessing  which,  through  its  instrumentality,  will  eventually 
descend  upon  the  world.  —  W 


ch.  xiv.  17—24.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


309 


EXPOSITION. 


Ver  17. — And  the  king  of  Sodom — Bera, 
or  bis  successor  (vide  ver.  10) — went  out  to 
meet  Mm  (».  e.  Abram)  after  Ms  return  from 
the  slaughter  (perhaps  too  forcible  an  ex- 
pression for  mere  defeat)  of  Chedorlaomer, 
and  the  kings  that  were  with  him  (the  entire 
clause  from  "after"is  parenthetical),  attho 
valley  of  Shaven.  A  valley  about  two  stadia 
north  of  Jerusalem  (Josephus,  'Ant.,'  viii. 
10),  supposed  to  be  the  valley  of  the  Upper 
Kedron,  where  Absalom's  pillar  was  after- 
wards erected  (2  Sam.  iviii.  10);  which 
may  be  correct  if  the  Salem  afterwards 
mentioned  was  Jerusalem(ei<2e  infra) ;  but 
if  it  was  not,  then  the  exact  site  of Shaveh 
must  be  left  undetermined.  Which  is  the 
king's  dale.  Or  valley(e?rce&) ;  so  styled  be- 
cause suitable  for  kingly  sports  or  military 
exercises  (Onkelos) ;  because  of  its  beauty 
(Poole);  because  Melchisedeck  had  his 
camp  and  palace  there  (Mai venda);  ormost 
likely  because  of  the  interview  between 
him  and  Abram  whichthere  occurred  (Keil. , 
Lange),  with  which  agrees  the  rendering 
to  ircSCov  tbv  Pao-iX&»v  (LXX.). 

Ver.  18. — And  Melchisedeck.  "  King  of 
righteousness"  (Heb.  vii.2);  an  indication 
that  the  Canaanitish  language  was  Shemi- 
tic,  havingbeen  probably adoptedfrom  the 
original  Shemiteinhabitants  of  the  country. 
Not  a  titular  designation,  like  Augustus, 
Pharaoh, orMalek-oi-adel (reos/«si«zs)  of  the 
Mohamrnedankings(Cajetan),butthename 
of  a  person  ;  neither  an  angel  (Origen), 
nor  the' Holy  Ghost  (Hieracas),  nor  some 
great  Divine  power  (theMelchisedecians), 
all  of  which  interpretations  are  baseless 
conjectures  ;  nor  Christ  (Ambrose),  which 
is  contrary  to  Heb.  vi.  20  ;  norShem  (Tar- 
gums,  Lyra,  Willet,  Luther,  Ainsworth), 
which  Heb.  vii.  3  sufficiently  negatives ;  but 
mostprobablyaCanaanitish  prince  bywhom 
the  true  faith  was  retained  amid  the  gloom 
of  surroundingheathenism  (Josephus,  lre- 
nseus,Eusebius,Calvin,ALapide,  Delitzsch, 
Keil,Rosenmuller,Candlish,Bush),though 
it  has  been  suggested  that  "the  enlighten- 
ment of  thekingofSalem  was  but  aray  of  the 
sun  of  Abram's  faith  "(Kalisch).an  opinion 
difficulttoharmonisewithHeb.vii.4.  King 
of  Salem="king  of  peace"  (Heb.  vii.  1). 
The  capital  of  Melchised  eck  was  either  Jeru- 
salem, of  which  the  ancient  name  wasSalem, 
asinPs.  lxxvi.  2  (Josephus,  Onkelos,  Aben 
Ezra,  Kimchi,  Knobel,  Delitzsch,  Keil,  Ka- 
lisch,  Murphy, Bush);  oracity  ontheother 
side  Jordan  en  route  from  Damascus  to  So- 
dom (Ewald) ;  or,  though  less  likely,  as 
being  too  remote  from  Sodom  and  the  king's 
dale,  Salem  in  the  tribe  of  Ephraim,  a  city 


near  Scythopolis,  where  the  ruins  of  Mel- 
chisedeck's  palace  were  said  to  exist  (Jer- 
ome) ,  and  nearto  which  John  bap  t  ized(Boch  - 
art).  Brought  forth  bread  and  wine.  As  a  re- 
freshment to  the  patriarch  and  his  soldiers 
(Josephus,  Calvin,  Clark,  Rosenmllller), 
which,however,wasthelessnecessarysince 
thespoilsoftheconqueredfoewereinposses- 
sion  of  Abram  andhismen(Kalisch) ;  hence 
mainlyasa  symbol,  not  of  his  transference  of 
the  soil  of  Canaan  to  the  patriarch,  bread 
and  wine  being  thechief  productions  of  the 
ground  (Lightfoot),  or  of  his  gratitude  to 
Abram,  who  had  recovered  for  the  land 
peace,  freedom,  andprosperity  (Delitzsch), 
oroftheinstitutionofthesupperbytheLord 
JesusChrist(Bush);butof  the  priestly  bene- 
diction which  followed  and  of  the  spiritual 
refreshment  which  it  conferred  upon  the 
soul  of  Abram(Kalisch,  Murphy).  TheRom- 
ishidea.thattheactofMelchisedeck  was  sac- 
rificial, is  precluded  by  the  statementthathe 
brought  forth  the  bread  and  wine  before  the 
people,  and  notbefore'God.  And  he  was  the 
priest.  Cohen;  one  who  undertakes  another's 
cause,  hence  one  who  acts  as  mediator  be- 
tween God  andman,  though  theprimary  sig- 
nification of  the  root  is  doubtful  and  dis- 
puted. The  necessity  for  this  office  has  its 
ground  in  the  sinfulness  of  man ,  which  dis- 
qualifies him  for  direct  intercourse  with  a 
holyBeing(cf.Kurtz, '  Sacrificial  Worship,' 
ch.  i.  6.).  The  occurrence  of  this  term,  here 
mentioned  forthe  first  time,  implies  theex- 
istence  of- a  regularly-constituted  form  of 
worshipbymeans  of  priests  and  sacrifices. 
HencetheMosaiccultusafterwardsinstitut- 
ed  may  only  have  been  a  resuscitation  and 
further  development  of  what  had  existed 
fromthebeginning.  Of  the  most  high  God. 
Literally,  El-Mion,  a  proper  name  for  the 
Supreme  Deity  (occurring  only  here,  in  the 
narrative  of  Abram's  interview  with  the 
kings);  of  which  thefirstterm,  El,  from  the 
samerootasElohim(ch.  i. l,q.®.),  signifies 
the  Strong  One,  and  is  seldom  applied  to 
God  without  some  qualifying  attribute  or 
cognomen,  as  El-Shaddai,  or  El,  theGodof 
Israel  ;  and  the  second,  'Elion  (occurring 
frequentlyafterwards,  asinNum.xxiv.  16; 
Deut.  xxxii.  18;  Ps.  vii.  18;ix.  2),  describes 
God  as  the  High,  the  Highest,  theExalted, 
the  Supreme,  and  is  sometimes  used  in  con- 
junction with  Jehovah(Ps.  vii.  18),and  with 
Elohim  (Ps.  lvii.  3),  while  sometimes  it 
standsalone(Ps.  xxi.8).  Most  probablythe 
designation  here  describes  the  name  under 
whichtheSupremeDeitywasworshippedby 
Melchisedeckandtheking  of  Sodom,  whom 
Abram  recognises  as  followers  of  the  true 


210 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xiv.  17—24 


God  by  identifying,  as  in  ver.  22,  El-Elion 
with  Jehovah  (cf.  Quarry,  p.  426). 

Ver.  19. — And  he  blessed  him  (in  which 
actappears  his  distinctively  sacerdotal  cha- 
racter),and  said(the  form  of  the  benediction 
is  poetical,  consisting  of  two  parallel  stan- 
zas), Blessed  be  Abram — so  Isaac  blessed  Ja- 
cob (ch.  xxvii.  27),  and  Jacob  Joseph  (ch. 
xlviii.  15),  conveying  in  each  case  a  Divine 
benediction — of themosthigh  God — b  after 

a  passive  verb  indicating  theefficientcause 
(w'deGeseniiis,§143,2,andcf.Gen.xxxi.l5; 
Prov.  xiv.  20) — possessor— so  Onkelos  and 
Calvin ;  but  koneh,  from  kanah,  to  erect,  set 
up,  hence  found  or  create,  means  founder 
and  creator  (Gesenius),  combines  themean- 
ings  of  ktC£eiv  and  KToo-Bai  (Keil),  contains 
no  indistinct  allusion  to  the  doctrine  of  ch. 
i.  1  (Murphy),  and  is  rendered  os  !ktut« 
(LXX. )  and  qui  ereamit  (Vulgate)  —  of 
heaven  and  earth. 

Ver.  20. — And  blessed  be  the  most  high 
God  (cf.  ch.  ix.  26),  who  hath  delivered — 
miggen,s.  word  peculiar  to  poetry =nathan 
(cf.  Prov.  iv.9;  Hoseaxi.8) — thineenemies 
— tsarecha,  alsoapoeticalexpression='oye& 
(cf .  Deut.  xxxii.  27 ;  Job  xvi.  9 ;  Ps.  lxxxi. 
15) — into  thy  hand.  Andhe — not  Melchise- 
deck Jewishinterpreters)  ,  but  Abram(  Jose- 
phus,  LXX.,  Jonathan,  Heb.  vii.  6) — gave 
him  (not  Abram.but  Melchisedeck)  tithes — 
"tenths."  These, beingthecustomaryoffer- 
ings  tothe Deity,  were  an  acknowledgment 
of  the  Divine  priesthoodof  Melchisedeck. 
The  practice  of  paying  tithes,  primarily  a 
voluntary taxfortheservantsof  the  sanctu- 
ary, appears  tohaveobtainedamongdiffer- 
ent  nations  from  theremotest  an  t  i  q  ui  ty  (vide 
Dr.  Ginsburg  in  'Kitto's  Cyclopedia,'  art. 
Tithes).  The  tithallaw  was  afterwards  in- 
corporatedamongtheMosaicstatutes(Levit. 
xxvii.  30—33  ;  Numb,  xviii.  21— 32— of  all 
— thespoils  which  he  had  taken(Heb.vii.4). 

Ver.  21. — And  the  king  of  Sodom  (who, 
though  first  coming,  appears  to  have  retired 
inf avour  of  the  greater  personage,  Melchise- 
deck, and  to  have  witnessed  the  interview 
between  him  and  Abram,  but  whonow,  on 
itstermination,advances — saidunto  Abram, 
— perhaps  anticipating  that  like  donations 
from  the  spoils  might  be  made  to  him  as 
to  Melchisedeck,  in  which  case  he  evinced 
a  remarkable  degree  of  generosity — Give 


me  the  persons — literally,  the  souls,  i.  e. 
those  of  my  rjeople  whom  you  have  re- 
covered (cf.  ch.  xii.  5,  in  which  the  term 
is  employed  to  describe  domestic  slaves) — 
and  take  the  goods  to  thyself  (which,  Mi- 
chaelis  observes,  he  was  justly  entitled  to 
do  by  right  of  conquest). 

Ver.  22. — And  Abram  said  onto  the  king 
of  Sodom,  I  have  lift  up  mine  hand — a  common 
form  of  swearing  (Deut.  xxxii.  40 ;  Ezek. 
xx.  5,  6 ;  Dan. xii.  7;  Rev.  x.  5, 6 ;  cf .  Virg., 
'./En.,'  xii.  195) — unto  the  Lord  (Jehovah; 
which,  occurring  in  the  present  document, 
proves  the  antiquity  of  its  use  as  a  desig- 
nation of  the  Deity),  the  most  high  God, — 
M-EKon  ;  thus  identifying  Jehovah  with 
the  God  of  Melchisedeck,  and  perhaps  of 
the  ki  ng  of  Sodom  (vide  supra) — the  posses- 
sor of  heaven  and  earth. 

Ver.23.— That  I  will  not  take— literally, 
if  (sc.  I  shall  take) ;  an  abbreviation  for 
"MayGoddo  so  to  me,  if.  .  .  i"(cf.l  Sam. 
iii.  17;  2  Sam.  iii.  35).  The  particle  DN  has 

the  force  of  a  negative  in  adjuration — 
from  a  thread  even  to  a  shoe-latchet,  and 
that  I  will  not  take  anything  (literally,  and 
if  1  shall  take  anything)  that  is  thine, — lit- 
erally, of  all  that  (sc.  belongs)  to  thee — lest 
thou  shouldest  say  (literally,  and  thou 
shcdt  not  say),  I  have  made  Abram  rich. 
Though  not  averse  to  acceptpresents  from 
heathen  monarchs  (ch.  xii.  18),  the  patri- 
arch could  not  consent  to  share  in  the 
wealth  of  the  impious  Sodomites  ;  in  this 
a  striking  contrast  to  Lot. 

Ver.  24. — Save — "*vhs,  compounded  of 
ba,  not,  and  IS,  unto  =  not  unto  ;  a  par- 
ticle of  deprecation,  meaning,  "  nothing 
shall  come  unto  me"  (cf.  ch.  xii.  16) — 
only  that  which  the   young  men — 13?3,   » 

primitive  word  (cf .  Sanscrit,  nara,  man  ; 
nari,  n&ri,  woman  ;  Zend.,  noire  ;  Greek, 
dvif|p),  applied  to  a  new-born  child  (Exod. 
ii.  26  ;  1  Sam.  iv.  21),  a  youth  of  about 
twenty  (ch.  xxxiv.  19  ;  xii.  12),  a  servant, 
like  irats  (ch.  xxxvii.  2  ;  2  Kings  v.  20), 
a  common  soldier  (1  Kings  xx.  15,  17,  19; 
2  Kings  xix.  6) — have  eaten,  and  the  por- 
tion of  the  men  who  went  with  me,  Aner, 
Eshcol,  and  Mamre  ;  let  them  take  their 
portion. 


HOMILETICB. 


Vers.  17 — 24. —  Visited  by  kings.  I.  The  king  op  Salem.  Sis  exalted  person. 
Neither  a  supramundane  being,  an  angel,  the  Holy  Ghost,  or  Christ;  nor  one  of  the 
early  patiiarchs,  such  as  Enoch  or  Shem ;  but  a  Canaanitish  (Shemite  ?)  prince, 
whose  capital  was  Salem  (Jerusalem),  and  who  united  in  his  person  the  double 
function  of  priest  and  monarch  of  his  people ;  probably  the  last  official  represen- 


OH.  XIV.  17—24.]  THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS.  311 

tative  of  the  primitive  religion,  who  here  advances  to  meet  and  welcome  the  new  faith 
in  the  person  of  Abram,  as  at  a  later  period  John  Baptist  recognised  and  saluted 
Christ,      2.    .Hits   twofold  designation.     Melchisedeck,  king  of  Salem,  t.  e.  king  of 
righteousness  and  king  of  peace  (Heb.  vii.  2) ;  descriptive  of — (1)  Personal  excellence. 
Pious  in  spirit  and  peace-loving  in  disposition,  he  was  not  only  fitted  to  be  a  type 
of  the  Meek  and  Holy  One,  but  admirably  qualified  to  be  a  governor  of  men  and  a 
minister  of  religion.     Happy  the  land  whose  throne  is  filled  by  purity  and  love,  and 
the  Church  whose  teachers  illustrate  by  their  lives  the  religion  they  profess  I    (2) 
Regal  sway.    Righteous  in  principle,  as  a  consequence  his  kingly  rule  was  peaceful 
in  administration  ;  thus  again  constituting  him  an  eminent  foreshadowing  of  the 
righteous  King  and  Prince  of  peace,  as  well  as  an  instructive  pattern  and  guide  to 
earth's  rulers.     When  righteousness  and  peace  occupy  the  throne  they  seldom  fail 
to  reign  throughout  the  land.     (3)  Priestly  work.    The   specific  function   of  his 
sacerdotal  office  being  to  make  peace  between  God  and  sinful  men,  probably  by 
means  of  sacrifice,  and  thus  to  cover  with  righteousness  as  with  a  garment  those  who 
were  exposed  to  condemnation,  he  a  third  time  symbolised  the  great  King-Priest  of 
the  New  Testament  Church  ;  while  at  the  same  time  he  seemed  to  proclaim  this 
important  truth,  that  they  who  labour  in  the  priest's  office  should  diligently  strivefor 
the  salvation  of  souls.     3.  Mis  mysterious  appearance.     Of  unknown  parentage,  of 
unrecorded  genealogy,  of  unchrouicled  existence,  the  unique  personality  of  this  grand 
old  king-priest  flashes  meteor-like  across  the  path  of  the  conquering  patriarch, 
emerging  from  the  gloom  of  historical  obscurity,  and  almost  instantaneously  vanish- 
ing into  inscrutable  seclusiou.     Spirit-taught  writers  of  later  times  discerned  in  this 
ancient  figure,  so  enigmatical  and  mysterious,  a  Divinely-appointed  type  of  the  ever- 
living  High  Priest,  "  the  Son  who  is  consecrated  for  evermore."    4.  Sis  regal  hos- 
pitality.    Whatever  additional  significance  attached  to  the  banquet  on  the  plain  of 
Shaven,  it  was  clearly  designed  as  a  refreshment' for  the  victorious  patriarch  and  his 
wearied  soldiers.     So  should  earthly  mouarchs  gratefully  and  sumptuously  reward 
those  who  at  the  risk  of  their  lives  maintain  the  cause  and  vindicate  the  rights  of  the 
oppressed  within  their  borders.     So  does  heaven's  King  provide   for  his  toiling 
followers.     5.  His  priestly  benediction.    (1)  The  blessing  conferred  on  Abram  was 
not  simply  the  expression  of  a  wish,  but  the  actual  conveyance  by  Divine  authority 
of  the  good  which  it  proclaimed  ;  and  so  is  Christ  invested  with  supreme  power  to 
bless  and  save.     (2)  The  ascription  of  praise  to  Cod  was  a  sincere  declaration  of  the 
patriarch's  gratitude  for  the  heavenly  succour  vouchsafed  in  connection  with  his 
military  expedition  ;  and  so  should  God's  redeemed  ones,  whom  he  has  delivered  out 
of  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  cherish  a  lively  recollection  of  Divine  mercies,  and  offer 
heartfelt  thanksgivings  through  the  one  Mediator.     6.  His  public  recognition.     In 
presence  of  the  king  of  Sodom  and  his  people,  his  confederates  and  their  forces,  as 
well  as  of  his  own  domestics,  the  patriarch  delivered  into  the  hands  of  Melchisedeck 
a  tenth  part  of  the  spoils.     Designed  as  a  solemn  act  of  worship  to  Jehovah,  it  was 
both  an  acknowledgment  of  the  claim  which  God's  minister  had  upon  his  countenance 
and  support,  and  a  symbol  of  the  service, — the  voluntary  devotement  of  a  liberal 
portion  of  their  substance, — which  should  by  all  saints  be  yielded  to  him  who  has 
been  constituted  a  Priest  for  ever  after  the  order  of  Melchisedeck 

II.  The  king  op  Sodom.  1.  His  courteous  behaviour.  Displayed  In  retiring 
before  Melchisedeck's  advance,  and  deferring  the  prosecution  of  his  suit  till  the 
termination  of  the  king-priest's  interview  with  the  patriarch,  it  may  be  regarded  as 
suggesting  (1)  the  politeness  which  in  all  ranks  of  society,  but  especially  in  intelli- 
gent and  educated  circles,  should  regulate  the  intercourse  of  man  with  man  ;  (2) 
the  deference  which  should  be  paid,  by  even  kings  and  those  in  authority,  to  the 
ministers  of  religion  ;  (3)  the  homage  which,  though  unwillingly,  the  world  some- 
times is  obliged  to  render  to  the  Church  ;  and  (4)  the  preference  which  should  ever 
be  assigned  to  heaven's  business  over  that  of  earth.  2.  His  generous  proposal. 
Made  to  Abram,  this  evinced— (1)  Lively  gratitude  towards  the  patriarch  for  his 
distinguished  services.  Persons  of  known  profligacy  of  character  and  life  at  times 
discover  sparks  of  true  nobility  which  proclaim  them  not  entirely  lost ;  and  not 
^infrequently  individuals  not  professing  to  be  pious  outshine  the  followers  of  Christ 
in  acts  of  self-renunciation,  and  in  thankful  acknowledgment  of  benefits  (Luke  xvii. 
17).  (2)  Peaceful  disposition  in  himself,  which,  while  it  might  have  claimed  the 
entire  spoil,  and  perhaps  vindicated  the  justness  of  such  claim  by  an  appeal  to  arms, 
was  forward  to  avoid  strife  by  asking  only  the  persons.      Even  the  world  may 

r  2 


212  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  [ch.  xiv.  17—24 

occasionally  instruct  tbe  Church  how  to  follow  peace  with  all  men.  (3)  Remarkable 
discernment  as  to  the  respective  values  of  men  and  things,  being  prepared  to  forego 
the  goods  and  chattels  tf  only  the  persons  were  restored  to  his  dominion.  3.  His 
rejected  liberality.  Generous  as  from  the  king  of  Sodom's  standpoint  the  proposal 
was,  it  was  repudiated  by  the  patriarch — (1)  In  absolute  entirety,  without  the 
reservation  of  so  much  as  a  thread  or  shoe-latchet ;  another  proof  of  the  wholly 
unworldly  character  of  the  patriarch,  another  instance  of  self-sacrificing  magnanimity, 
of  a  piece  with  his  surrender  of  the  land  to  Lot.  (2)  With  shuddering  apprehension, 
lest  his  fair  name  should  be  contaminated  by  participation  in  the  wealth  of  Sodom. 
So  should  God's  people  not  let  their  good  be  evil  spoken  of,  and  in  particular  look 
well  to  the  channels  through  which  the  treasures  that  enrich  them  come.  There  is 
ever  an  important  difference  between  the  wealth  which  proceeds  from  the  devil  and 
that  which  is  bestowed  by  the  hand  of  Christ.  (3j  With  unmistakable  sincerity, 
as  revealed  by  his  solemn  adjuration.  God's  name,  while  to  be  taken  in  vain  by  none, 
may  on  appropriate  occasions  be  appealed  to  by  his  servants  to  vindicate  their  truth- 
fulness. (4)  After  equitable  reservation  of  the  just  claims  of  others,  of  the  rations 
of  his  soldiers,  which  were  not  to  be  repaid,  and  the  portions  of  his  allies,  which  were 
not  to  be  appropriated  unless  with  their  consent.  The  sacrifices  made  by  God's 
people  should  be  composed  of  their  own,  and  not  of  their  neighbour's  property. 

Learn — 1.  That  God's  faithful  servants  are  sure  to  win  the  approbation  of  good 
men  and  the  benediction  of  Heaven.  2.  That  the  friendship  of  wicked  men  and  the 
congratulations  of  the  world  should  never  be  desired  by  the  saints. 


HOMILIES   BY   VARIOUS   AUTHORS. 

Vers.  18 — 20. — A  king-priest.  "And  Melchizedek  king  of  Salem  brought  forth 
bread  and  wine :  and  he  was  the  priest  of  the  most  high  God.  And  he  blessed 
Abraham,"  &c.  When  the  king  of  Sodom  was  beaten  in  a  war  with  Chedorlaomer, 
Lot  was  involved  in  the  overthrow.  Chedorlaomer  was  a  warrior  of  great  power, 
and  his  very  name  was  terrible.  Five  confederate  kings  had  in  vain  resisted  him 
with  his  three  auxiliaries.  He  whom  kings  could  not  oppose  the  simple  patriarch 
Abraham,  with  armed  herdsmen,  will  attack  and  conquer.  His  kinsman  Lot  is  in 
captivity  ;  Abraham  will  deliver  him  or  die  in  the  attempt.  How  nobly  shines  the 
character  of  Abraham  in  this  determination.  Lot  had  separated  from  him  through 
a  misunderstanding,  and  had  choseu  the  most  fertile  district,  and  left  Abraham  the 
least  promising,  yet  Abraham  forgets  all,  when  his  relative  is  in  danger.  At  great 
risk  he  undertakes  his  deliverance.  He  armed  his  "  trained  servants,"  pursues  the 
enemy,  comes  upon  them  "by  night,"  divides  his  small  band  into  three  companies, 
and  makes  an  assault  at  once  on  the  right,  the  centre,  and  flank  of  the  enemy.  He 
routs  and  pursues  them,  smiting  many  and  taking  much  spoil.  He  accomplishes 
above  all  his  one  desire,  the  restoration  of  Lot  to  liberty.  As  Abraham  returns, 
flushed  with  conquest,  he  is  met  at  the  gates  of  Salem  by  Melchizedek,  bringing  to 
him  bread,  wine,  and  the  Divine  benediction. 

I.  The  designation  and  chakactkb  of  Melchizedek.  He  is  king  and  priest. 
His  name  means,  king  of  righteousness.  He  dwells  in  Salem,  the  place  of  peace.  He 
did  not  go  out  to  war,  and  had  no  part  in  the  quarrel  between  Chedorlaomer  and  the 
king  of  Sodom.  He  had  lost  no  relatives,  and  had  no  reason  for  fighting.  Had 
cunning  foes  atiacked  his  ciiy  of  peace,  he  would  doubtless  have  driven  them  off 
if  possible.  A  king  of  righteousness,  he  would  not  think  it  his  duty  to  submit  to 
unrighteousness.  He  was,  however,  left  unattacked  by  the  fierce  Chedorlaomer,  and 
took  care  to  provoke  no  quarrel.  Perhaps  he  was  not  assailed  because  universally 
respected  as  a  man  of  peace  and  a  priest  of  God.  This  reason  may  have  availed 
in  that  early  age,  and  in  respect  to  the  first  war  of  which  we  have  any  account,  but 
it  is  not  certain  that  it  would  b<  accounted  a  sufficient  reason  now.  Various  have 
been  the  speculations  as  to  who  Melchizedek  was.  Some  believed  that  he  was 
Enoch  come  back  to  earth,  or  Job,  the  tried  one;  others,  that  he  wns  Shem,  the  best 
son  of  Noah.  This  is  possible,  as,  according  to  calculations  made,  Shem  survived 
Abraham  forty  years  ;  but  it  is  improbable,'  because  Moses  would  have  spoken  of 


ch.  xit.  17—24.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  218 

Bhem  by  his  proper  Dame,  and  because  that  would  not  apply  which  is  said  of  Mel- 
chizedek, in  Heb.  vii.  S— that  he  was  "without  father,  without  mother,  without 
descent,  having  neither  beginning  of  days,  nor  end  of  life."  We  know  the  ancestry 
of  Shem,  but  not  that  of  Melchizedek.  The  difficult  passage,  the  third  of  the  seventh 
chapter  of  Hebrews,  means,  probably,  merely  this— that  his  descent  was  not  known, 
and  that  his  priesthood  was  not  inherited  or  derived  from  others,  but  one  resting 
in  his  individual  character.  Thus  Noah,  Job.  Hobab  or  Jethro,  and  Balaam  acted 
as  independent  priests,  and  their  offerings  were  recognised  by  God.  Melchizedek, 
in  his  maintenance  of  the  worship  of  God,  came  to  be  accepted  as  a  priest,  and  his 
life  was  like  a  star  shining  amid  the  general  heathenism  of  Canaan.  He  also  came 
like  a  streak  of  light,  neither  the  coining  nor  the  going  of  which  could  easily  be 
discerned.  We  are  told  of  him  that  he  was  "  without  beginning  of  days  or  end  of 
life."  Some  have  therefore  thought  that  Melchizedek  was  an  angel-or  a  pre-incarna- 
tion  of  Christ ;  if  so,  Christ  would  have  been  the  type  and  the  antitype.  But  that 
which  is  thought  to  be  spoken  of  the  man  refers  to  his  office ;  it  was  without  definite 
beginning  or  ending.  The  Levitical  priesthood  had  a  definite  beginning  and  ending  ; 
that  of  Melchizedek  is  never  ended.  The  one  stood  in  carnal  ceremonies,  the  other 
in  the  power  of  a  hqly  character.  The  Levitical  was  introduced  because  of  the 
unfitness  of  all  to  become  "kings  and  priests  unto  God  ;"  but  that  of  Melchizedek, 
being  according  to  character,  has  no"  end  of  days."  It  foreshadowed  the  priest- 
hood of  Christ,  whose  work  never  passeth  away,  but  who  abidetli  a  priest  continually. 
Melchizedek  was  a  type  of  Christ,  the  one  great  High  Priest,  the  holiest  of  all  on 
earth,  and  who  enters  for  us  into  the  holiest  place.  The  omissions  concerning 
parentage  or  the  beginning  of  his  priesthood  were  probably  designed  by  God,  that 
in  Melchizedek — the  most  prominent  of  patriarchal  priests — there  might  be  a  more 
significant  type  of  him  who  is  a  Priest  for  ever  after  the  order  of  Melchizedek.  This 
would  explain  the  force  of  the  prophecy  in  Ps.  ex.,  and  the  words  in  Heb.  vii. 
Indeed  the  Levitical  priesthood  could  not  supply  a  perfect  type,  for  it  had  no  one 
who  was  at  once  a  priest  and  king.  Moses  claimed  not  to  be  priest  or  king.  David 
ventured  not  to  intrude  into  the  priestly  office.  Solomon,  at  the  dedication  of  the 
temple,  when  he  blessed  the  people,  gave  sacrifices  for  the  priests  to  offer,  but  he 
slew  them  not.  Uzziah  attempted  to  intrude  into  the  priestly  office,  but  was  stricken 
with  leprosy.  Under  the  Jewish  dispensation  there  was  no  one  who  in  his  person 
could  represent  the  twofold  character  of  Christ  as  the  only  High  Priest  and  universal 
King.  Under  the  patriarchal  dispensation,  and  in  Melchizedek,  there  is  this  very 
plain  type  of  Christ  in  Ids  priestly  and  regal  character.  Melchizedek  may  never 
have  imagined  how  great  was  the  dignity  put  upon  him  as  a  type  of  Christ.  Living 
a  quiet,  pure,  and  devoted  life,  he  becomes  accepted  by  his  fellows  as  a  priest  of  the 
Most  High,  and  becomes  the  type  of  him  who  was  the  Saviour  of  the  world 

II.  The  significance  in  the  recorded  acts  of  Melchizedek.  1.  Refreshing 
the  weary.  "Brqught  forth  bread  and  wine,"  that  Abraham  might  eat  and  be 
strengthened.  Possibly  part  of  the  wine  was  poured  out  as  an  oblation.  When 
those  who  met  wished  lo  seal  a  friendship,  they  brake  bread  or  partook  of  a  meal 
together.  Thus  the  Lord's  Supper  is  the  indication  of  our  union  with  Christ — of  a 
friendship  on  his  part  for  us  sinners,  cemented  by  his  suffering.  He  gave  himself 
to  be  the  Bread  of  Life  for  us.  We  are  in  a  spiritual  sense  to  eat  of  his  flesh  and 
drink  of  his  blood,  or  we  have  no  life  in  us.  Christ  oft  thus  comes  forth  to  meet 
the  weary  pilgrims  and  soldiers  of  the  cross.  We  must  remember  that  it  is  the 
previous  weary  march,  the  confusion  and  the  conflict,  that  fits  us  for  the  enjoyment 
of  the  sacred  ordinance  of  the  Lord's  Supper.  We  have  had  to  battle  with  tempta- 
tions of  various  kinds,  and  come  staiued  with  the  dust  and  blood  of  battle  to  the 
table  of  our  Lord,  and  here  he  meets  us  and  refreshes  us.  We  begin  here  to  see  the 
meaning  of  all  the  conflict  and  burden  of  life  His  word  acquires  more  meaning, 
and  his  Spirit  rests  upon  us  with  greater  power,  as,  just  outside  the  gates  of  the 
heavenly  Jerusalem,  we  sit  and  rest  awhile  ere  pursuing  our  way  and  battling  again 
with  sin.  What  thoughlfulncss  there  was  in  this  act  of  Melchizedek  I  Single  "acts 
like  these  tell  what  is  the  character  of  a  man.  How  it  hints  at  the  thoughtfulness 
of  Christ  for  us  in  all  our  spiritual  struggles  I  2.  Melchizedek  also  "blessed" 
Abraham.  He  pronounced  upon  him  the  blessing  which  belongs  to  an  unselfish 
performance  of  duty.  God's  blessing  is  Abraham's  great  reward,  and  a  man  was  its 
mouthpiece.  Because  God's  approval  was  his  reward  he  would  not  retain  the  spoil, 
although  urged  by  the  king  of  Sodom  to  keep  the  goods,  and  simply  hand  over  the 


914  THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS.  [ch.  xn.  17—24. 

persons  of  his  captive  subjects.  The  approval  of  God  expressed  through  conscience 
or  the  words  of  the  good  should  be  the  Christian's  one  desired  reward.  The  bless- 
ing will  always  come  in  the  way  of  duty.  3.  Melchizedek  claimed  the  honour  of 
the  victory  for  God.  *•  Blessed  be  the  most  high  God,  who  hath  delivered  thine 
enemies  into  thine  hand.''  Before  the  king  of  Sodom  Abraham  is  reminded  of  his 
dependence  on  God;  thus  before  the  world  the  Christian  shows  forth  his  dependence 
on  the  Spirit's  help  and  "  on  the  Lord's  death  till  he  come."  We  may  never  be 
ashamed  to  confess  Christ.  Abraham  readily  recognized  the  claim  of  God.  He 
gave  as  a  thank  offering  a  tenth  part  of  all  he  had  taken.  That  which  he  gave  was 
his  by  custom  and  right.  He  gives  it  to  God.  God  would  not  accept  that  which 
is  wrung,  by  force,  from  another.  He  would  say,  "  Who  hath  required  this  at  your 
hand?"  "I  hate  robbery  for  burnt  offering."  God  only  accepts  that  which  is 
righteously  and  willingly  offered.  If  taxes  are  imposed,  men  pay  them,  but  often 
when  it  is  left  to  their  conscience  they  neglect  their  duly.  Better,  however,  that 
no  tenth  or  tithings,  no  ratings  and  taxings,  should  be  paid  lhan  that  God's  cause 
should  be  sustained  unwillingly.  As  God  gives  us  all  we  possess  in  love,  as  he 
sustains  and  pardons  us  in  love,  the  least  we  can  do  is  to  love  him  and  readily  serve 
in  return.  We  should  devote  all  we  are  and  have  to  Christ.  Talents  and  pos- 
sessions are  his,  and  should  be  held  in  stewardship  as  from  him.  Let  us  not,  how- 
ever, make  the  mistake  of  thinking  that  it  is  by  our  gifts  or  good  works  we  are 
saved.  Many  err  here.  It  is  only  through  Christ  that  our  doings  or  persons  can 
be  iiccepted,  even  as  Abraham's  gifts  were  through  Melchizedek.  Christ  is  our 
Priest  and  Sacrifice.  Do  not  attempt  to  slight  him.  Trust  in  his  merits,  work,  and 
iutercession.  Let  him  have  the  pre-eminence.  Christ  must  rule  in  our  hearts  and 
lives.  The  will  must  be  given  into  his  hands.  Life  must  be  held  as  a  gift  from 
him,  and  eternal  life  will  be  his  certaiu  bestowal  hereiifter.  4.  Melchizedek  gave 
to  Abraham  cheering  words  and  stimulus.  This  was  more  almost  than  the  refresh- 
ment. Here,  as  we  meet  in  communion  with  one  another  and  with  Christ,  we  have 
great  joy.  Christ  cheers  us  We  feel  we  can  go  forth  boldly,  and  that  when  sin 
meets  us  we  can,  in  Christ's  strength,  say,  "  Stand  aside  ;  "  when  hopes  are  cut  off,  as 
Lot  was  from  his  home,  we  can  recover  them  through  the  cross.  Thus  our  arms  are 
nerved  and  hearts  made  strong  for  the  future  conflict.  All  the  joy,  however,  is  only 
a  foretaste  of  that  which  will  be  ours  when  Christ  shall  meet  us  at  the  gate  of  the 
New  Jerusalem,  and  shall  lead  us  in  to  sit  down  with  Abraham,  Isaac,  Jacob, 
Melchisedek,  and  all  those  who  hnve  been  faithful  to  him.  What  will  be  our  joy 
when  we  shall  enter  to  abide  in  the  "  city  of  peace  "  with  the  "  King  of  righteous- 
ness "  for  ever  1  May  none  of  us  know  what  will  be  the  bitter  pain  of  those  who 
shall  vainly  call  from  without,  because  the  door  is  shut,  and  the  Master  has  entered 
in  with  those  who  were  ready. — H. 

Ver.  19. — Melchizedek  blessing  Abraham.  "  And  he  blessed  him,  and  said, 
Blessed  be  Abram  of  the  most  high  God,  possessor  of  heaven  and  earth."  Wher- 
ever in  Scripture  Melchizedek  is  spoken  of,  it  is  as  a  type  of  Christ  (Ps.  ex.  4  ;  Heb. 
v.,  vi.,  vii.).  We  may  so  regard  him  here,  and  consider  his  act  in  its  typical  light. 
Outwardly  the  transaction  was  of  little  mark.  A  band  of  men  under  Chedorlaomer 
carried  off  Lot,  along  with  other  spoil,  from  Sodom.  Abram,  on  learning  this,  armed 
his  household,  pursued  the  invaders,  routed  them,  and  set  the  captives  free  On  his 
return  Melchizedek,  the  head  of  a  tribe  near  the  line  of  march,  came  out  to  offer 
refreshment  to  his  men  ;  and  as  priest  of  his  tribe  he  blessed  Abram.  Whether 
the  type  was  understood  by  Abram  or  Melchizedek  matters  not.  These  things  are 
written  for  our  learning.    We  see  in  them  Christ  bestowing  his  blessing. 

I.  The  occasion  or  the  blessing.  After  conflict.  Our  Lord  the  antitype  of 
Melchizedek,  as  King  of  peace  (Isa.  ix.  6  ;  cf.  Luke  ii.  14  ;  John  xiv  27).  Yet  the 
Christian  life  is  emphatically  one  of  warfare  (Ephes.  vi.  11—18  ;  2  Tim.  ii.  3  ;  cf.  Gen. 
xxxii.  24;  1  Pet.  v.  8;  also  Pev.  ii.,  iii.— "  to  him  that  overcometh,"  &c.).  The 
nature  of  that  fight  is  against  temptations  to  unbelief.  The  fight  of  faith  (1  Tim 
vi.  12).  The  renewal  under  Christ  of  the  battle  lost  in  Eden  (2  Tim.  iv.  7  ;  1  John 
v.  4).  Circumstances  may  vary  The  trial  may  be  apparent  or  not.  There  may  be 
no  outward  suffering,  no  visible  hindrance.  But  what  a  struggle  is  implied  in  2  Cor. 
x.  5.  It  is  the  struggle  against  unbelief ;  to  resist  the  power  of  things  seen ;  to 
overcome  "  How  can  these  things  be  ? "  to  realise  habitually  the  "  city  which  hath 
foundations"  (cf.  Phil.  iii.  20) ;  to  rest  on  God's  promises  in  simplicity  (Phil.  iii.  7). 


eft.  xrv.  17—84.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  SIB 

As  of  len  as  this  struggle  is  honestly,  waged  a  blessing  is  bestowed  (James  i.  2  ;  cf. 
Matt.  vii.  13 ;  xvi.  24 ;  Acts  xiv.  22).  We  naturally  love  spiritual  ease,  but  trial  is 
better  (Pa/cxix.  71). 

II.  The  source  op  the  blessing.  "  The  most  high  God,  possessor,"  &c.  1.  All 
blessing  is  from  God.  We  acknowledge  this  ;  but  Isa.  x.  13  is  a  natural  feeling.  We 
instinctively  look  to  second  causes  ;  yet  without  this  "  looking  upward  "  we  cannot 
truly  pray,  "Thy  will  be  done  ;"  we  cannot  really  live  a  God  ward  life.  Compare 
Melchizedek's  words  with  our  Lord's  (John  xiv.  13 — 16 ;  xvi.  23),  and  their  fulfil- 
ment in  his  receiving  for  men  (Ps.  lxviii.  18)  all  needful  gifts — forgiveness,  sonship, 
right  to  pray,  means  of  grace,  opportunities  of  work.  2.  All  creation  used  by  him 
as  means  of  bestowing  his  blessing  (cf.  Bom.  viii.  28).  Sorrows  (Rom.  v.  3 ; 
Heb.  xii.  11)  and  joys  (Rom.  ii.  4)  are  alike  instruments  of  good  (cf.  Ps.  cxvi.  12  ; 
cxix.  67). 

III.  Tim  pruit  of  the  blessing.  Closer  walk  with  God.  The  events  of  this 
chapter  were  followed  by  more  vivid  spiritual  manifestations  to  Abram.  And  thus 
our  spiritual  life  advances  The  blessing  is  God's  free  gift ;  but  through  conflict 
with  evil  the  soul  is  prepared  to  receive  it  (cf.  Ps.  xcvii.  10).  As  in  natural  life 
powers  are  increased  by  exercise,  or  rather  by  God's  gift  on  this  condition,  so  in  the 
spiritual  the  conflict  of  self-denial,  our  Saviour's  blessing,  and  the  "spirit  of  adop- 
tion "  are  inseparably  linked  together.  "  Grace  for  grace  "  should  be  the  Christian's 
motto  i  ever  pressing  onwards.  And  as  we  can  assign  no  limits  to  God's  blessing,  so 
neither  is  there  any  limit  to  our  nearness  to  him. — M. 

Ver.  20. — The  Church  militant.  1.  The  enemies  op  the  Church.  Like  Abram's 
— 1.  Numerous.     2.  Formidable.     3.  Exulting. 

II.  The  triumph  op  the  Church.  Like  Abram's — 1.  Certain.  2.  Complete. 
3.  Final. 

III.  The  thanksgiving  of  the  Church.  Like  Abram's — 1.  Due  to  God  most 
high.  2.  Offered  through  the  priest  of  the  most  high  God.  8.  Expressed  in  self- 
consecration  to  the  service  of  God. — W. 

Vers.  22,  23. — Abraham's  independent  spirit.  "  And  Abraham  said  to  the  king  of 
Sodom,  I  have  lift  up  my  hand  uuta  the  Lord,  the  most  high  God,  the  possessor  of 
heaven  and  earth,  that  I  will  not  take  from  a  thread  even  to  a  sboelatchet,"  &c. 
When  Lot  chose  the  plains  of  Sodom  he  knew  not  what  trials  awaited  him  there. 
The  king  of  Sodom  was  attacked  and  defeated.  He  escaped,  but  many  of  his  sub- 
jects were  either  slaughtered  or  made  captive.  Lot  was  carried  away  by  the  invading 
host.  Abraham  delivers  him.  On  his  return,  flushed  with  victory,  he  is  met  by  two 
persons — Melchizedek  and  the  king  of  Sodom.  To  the  first  he  gives  tithes,  as  a 
thank  offering  ;  from  the  second  he  will  not  receive  anything  for  all  the  risk  he  had 
run  in  the  conflict.  If  Abraham  had  taken  all  the  spoil,  it  would  only  have  been  in 
accordance  with  the  general  practice  of  that  age ;  but  a  principle,  and  not  a  custom, 
is  his  guide. 

I.    Abraham  wished  to  avoid  placing  himself  under  obligation  to  a 

WORLDLY    MAN. 

n.    Abraham  wished  to  avoid  the  appearance  of  too  great  intimacy 

WITH  AN   UNRIGHTEOUS  MAN. 

III.  Abraham  wished  to  show  that  the  servant  of  the  most  high  God 
can  do  good  without  hope  of  reward. 

IV.  Abraham  wished  to  show  how  undesirable  a  practice  it  was,  to 

GAIN  BY  THE  MISFORTUNES   OF  OTHERS. 

V.  Abraham  wished  to  show  that  God,  and  a  spirit  of  contentedness, 

WERE   A   GOOD  MAN'S   TRUE  RICHES. 

How  much  better  to  act  thus  than  to  permit  the  ungodly  to  point  the  finger  of 
scorn  and  say,  with  respect  to  professedly  religious  men,  that  they  are  just  as  greedy 

and  wor!<Hy  as  Ihe  most  irreligious. — H. 


816 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  rv.  1 — 6. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XV. 


Ver.  1. — After  these  things — the  events 
just  recorded — the  word  of  the  Lord — Deb- 
ar Jehovah  ;  the  first  occurrence  of  this 
remarkable  phrase.afterwardsso  common 
in  the  Hebrew  Scriptures  (Exod.  ix.  20; 
Numb.  iii.  16;  Deut.  xxxiv.  5;  1  Sam.  iii. 
1  ;  Ps.  xxxiii.  6,  et  passim).  That  this  was 
a  personal  designation  of  the  pre- incar- 
nate Logos,  if  not  susceptible  of  complete 
demonstration,  yet  receives  not  a  little 
sanction  from  the  language  employed 
throughout  this  narrative  (cf.  vers.  5,  7, 
9,  13,  14,  &c.).  At  least  the  expression 
denotes  "the  Lord  manifesting  himself  by 
speech  to  his  servant  "  (Murphy;  vide  ch. 
i.  3) — came  (literally, was)  unto  Abram  in  a 
vision— a  night  vision,  but  no  dream 
(vide  ver.  5).  Biblically  viewed,  the  vision, 
as  distinguished  from  the  ordinary  dream, 
defines  the  presentation  to  the  bodily 
senses  or  to  the  mental  consciousness  of 
objects  usually  beyond  the  sphere  of  their 
natural  activities  ;  hence  visions  might  be 
imparted  in  dreams  (Numb.  xii.  6),  or  in 
trances  (Numb.  xxiv.  4,  16,  17).  Saying, 
Fear  not,  Abram.  With  allusion, doubtless, 
to  the  patriarch's  mental  dejection,  which 
was  probably  occasioned  by  the  natural 
reaction  consequent  upon  his  late  high- 
pitched  excitement  (cf.  1  Kings  xix.  4), 
which  might  lead  him  to  anticipate  either 
a  war  of  revenge  from  the  Asiatic  mon- 
archs  (Jonathan),  or  an  assault  from  the 
heathen  Canaanites,  already  jealous  of  his 
growing  power,  or  perhaps  both.  Words- 
worth observes  that  the  words  here  ad- 
dressed to  Abram  are  commonly  employed 
in  Scripture  to  introduce  announcements 
of  Christ  (Luke  i.  13,  30  ;  ii.  10;  John 
xii.  15  ;  cf.  St.  John's  vision,  Rev.  iv.  1). 
I  am  thy  shield,  and  thy  exceeding  great 
reward.  Literally,  thy  reward,  exceeding 
abundantly,  the  hiphil  inf.   abs.    rain 

being  always  used  adverbially  (cf.  Neh. 
ii.  2  ;  iii.  33).  The  other  rendering,  "thy 
reward  is  exceeding  great"  (LXX.,  Rosen- 
mttller,  Delitzsch,  Bwald),  fails  to  give 
prominence  to  the  thought  that  the 
patriarch's  reward  was  to  be  the  all-suf- 
ficient Jehovah  himself.  It  is  not  need- 
ful to  suppose  with  Langean  actual  vision 
of  a  shield  and  treasure. 

Ver.  2. — And  Abram  said,  Lord  God. 
Adonai  Jehovah  ;  the  first  use  of  these 
terms  in  combination,  the  second,  which 
usually  has  the  vowel-points  of  the  first, 


being  here  written  with  the  vocalisation  of 
Elohim.  Adonai,  an  older  plural  form  of 
Adonim,  piuralis  exceUentim  (Gesenius), 
though  by  some  the  termination  is  regard- 
ed as  a  suffix  (Ewald,  Fiirst),  is  a  term 
descriptive  of  the  divine  sovereignty, 
from  adan  =  dun,  or  din,  to  rule  or  judge; 
connected  with  which  is  the  Phoenician 
adon,  an  honorary  epithet  of  deity,  and 
recognised  as  such  in  Deut.  x.  17  (vide 
Fiirst,  'Hebrew  Lexicon,'  sub  voce).  What 
wilt  thou  give  me,  seeing  I  go— literally, 
and  I  going  =  ryeo  Se  diroXvopai  (LXX., 
Jonathan);  ex  hoc  vita  discedam  (Rosen- 
muller);  but  this,  though  the  word  "go" 
is  sometimes  used  in  the  sense  of  "die" 
(Ps.  xxxix.  14),  does  not  seem  necessary 
— childless — solitary,  desolate,  hence  de- 
void of  offspring,  as  in  Levit.  ch.  xx.  20, 
21 ;  Jer.  xxii.  30 — and  the  steward — Ben- 
Meshek ;  either  (1)  the  son  of  running 
(from  shakak,  to  T\m)=jilius  discursitatis, 
i.  e.  the  steward  who  attends  to  my  do- 
mestic affairs  (Onkelos,  Drusius) ;  or,  and 
with  greater  probability,  (2)  the  son  of 
possession  (from  mashak,  to  hold),  i.  e. 
the  possessor  of  my  house,  or  heir  of  my 
property  (Gesenius, Fiirst,  Delitzsch,  Keil, 
Kalisch) — of  my  house  is  this  Eliezer  of 
Damascus.  Literally,  Dammesek  Eliezer. 
The  paronomasia  of  this  utterance  is 
apparent,  and  was  obviously  designed  to 
impart  a  touch  of  pathos  to  the  patriarch's 
grief  by  pointing  out  the  coincidence  that 
the  Ben-Meshek  of  his  house  was  either 
Dammesek  (Damascus)  in  the  person  of 
Eliezer  (Delitzsch,  Keil),  or  the  Damas- 
cene Eliezer  (Onkelos,  Syriac,  Aben  Ezra, 
Calvin,  Lange,  Murphy),  or  Dammesek- 
Eliezer  as  one  word  (Kalisch). 

Ver.  3. — And  Abram  said,  Behold,  tome 
thou  hast  given  no  seed:  and,  lo.one  born  in 
my  house  (literally,  the  son  of  my  house, 
i.  e.  Eliezer)  is  mine  heir.  The  language 
of  the  patriarch  discovers  three  things : 
(1)  a  natural  desire  to  have  a  child  of  his 
own;  (2)  a  struggle  to  hold  on  by  the 
promise  in  face  of  almost  insuperable 
difficulties ;  and  (3)  an  obvious  unwilling- 
ness to  part  with  the  hope  that  the  prom- 
ise, however  seemingly  impossible,  would 
eventually  be  realised.  This  unwilling- 
ness it  was  which  caused  him,  as  it  were, 
so  pathetically  to  call  the  Divine  attention 
to  his  childless  condition  ;  in  response  to 
which  he  received  an  assurance  that  must 
have  thrilled  his  anxious  heart  with  joy. 

Ver.  4. — And,  behold,  the  word  of  the 
Lord  came  unto  him,  saying,  This  shall  not 


CH.  IV.  1—6.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


317 


be  thine  heir ;  but  be  that  shall  come  forth 
oat  of  thine  own  bowels  shaH  be  thine  heir. 

Ver.  5. — And  he  (Jehovah,or  "the  Word 
of  the  Lord")  brought  him  forth  abroad, 
and  said,  Look  now  toward  heaven,  and  tell 
the  stars,  if  thou  be  able  to  number  them  (a 
proof  that  Abram's  vision  was  not  a  dream): 
and  he  said  unto  him,  So  shall  thy  seed  be. 
Hence  it  has  been  inferred  that  Abram's 
vision  was  miraculously  quickened  to  pen- 
etrate the  depths  of  space  and  gaze  upon 
the  vastness  of  the  stellar  world,  since  the 
stars  visibleto  the  naked  eye  wouldnot  rep- 
resent an  innumerable  multitude  (Cand- 
lish). 

Ver.  6. — And  he  believed  in  the  Lord. 
The  hiphil  of  the  verb  aman,  to  prop  or 
stay,  signifies  to  build  upon,  hence  to  rest 
one's  faith  upon;  and  this  describes  exact- 
ly the  mental  act  of  the  patriarch,  who  re- 
posed his  confidence  in  the  Divine  charac- 
ter.and  based  his  hope  of  a  future  seed  on 
the  Divine  Word.  And  he  counted  it  to  him. 
'E\o7kr8n  avrw  (LXX.),  which  is  followed 
by  nearly  all  the  ancient  versions,  and  by 
Paulin  Rom.  iv.  3;  but  the  suffix  tj(afeminine 


for  a  neuter.as  in  Job  v.  9;  Ps.  xii.  4;  xxvii. 
4;  wZeGlass.'Phil.'lib.  iii.cp.  i.  19), clearly 
indicates  the  object  of  the  action  expressed 
by  the  verb  Sffifl,  to  think,  to  meditate, 
and  then  to  impute  (Xoy(£o|i.ai),  followed  by 
h  of  pers.  and  ace.  of  the  thing  (cf.  2  Sam. 

xix.  20;  Ps.  xxxi.  2).  The  thing  in  this 
case  was  his  faith  in  the  Divine  promise. 
For  righteousness.  flp"l5E=  tts  Sdcaioo-ivriv 

(LXX.);  neither  for  merit  and  justice 
(Rabbi  Solomon,  Jarchi,  Kalisch),  nor  as 
a  proof  of  his  probity  (Gesenius,  Rosen- 
milller);  but  unto  and  with  a  view  to 
justification  (Rom.  iv.  3),  so  that  God 
treated  him  as  a  righteous  person  (A  Lap- 
ide),  not,  however,  in  the  sense  that  he 
was  now  ' '  correspondent  to  the  will  of 
God  both  in  character  and  conduct " 
(Keil),  but  in  the  sense  that  he  was  now 
before  God  accepted  and  forgiven  (Luther, 
Calvin,  Murphy,  Candlish),  which  "  pas 
sive  righteousness,"  however,  ultimately 
wrought  in  him  an  "  active  righteousness 
of  complete  conformity  to  the  Divine 
will "  ('  Speaker's  Commentary '). 


HOMILETIC8. 


Vers.  1 — Q.-^Dnder  the  stars  with  Qod.  I.  Dejected  before  God.  1.  Appre- 
hensive of  danger.  Victorious  over  the  Asiatic  monarchs,  Abram  nevertheless  dreaded 
their  return.  Signal  deliverances  are  not  seldom  followed  by  depressing  fears;  e.  g. 
David  (1  Sam.  xxvii.  1)  and  Elijah  (1  Kings  xix.  10).  Having  emancipated  the 
people  of  the  land  by  breaking  "the  yoke  of  their  burden,  and  the  staff  of  their 
shoulder,  the  rod  of  their  oppressor,"  he  yet  feared  an  outbreak  of  their  hostility. 
The  enmity  of  those  they  serve  is  not  an  infrequent  reward  of  patriots:  witness 
Moses  (Exod.  xvii.  4)  and  Christ  (John  x.  31).  2.  Disappointed  in  hope.  Notwith- 
standing repeated  assurances  that  he  would  one  day  become  a  mighty  nation,  the 
long-continued  barrenness  of  Sarai  appears  to  have  lain  upon  his  heart  like  a  heavy 
burden.  Partaking  to  all  more  or  less  of  the  nature  of  a  deprivation,  the  lack  of  off- 
spring was  to  Abram  an  acute  grief  and  serious  affliction.  The  pent-up  yearning  of 
his  nature,  rendered  the  more  intense  by  reason  of  the  promise,  could  not  longer  be 
restrained.  In  language  full  of  pathos  he  complains  to  God  about  his  childless  con- 
dition. So  "hope  deferred  maketh  the  heart  sick"(Prov.  xiii.  12).  3.  Anxious 
about  the  promise.  He  could  not  discern  the  possibility  of  its  fulfilment,  with  years 
rapidly  advancing  on  himself  and  Sarai.  It  is  doubtful  if  any  saints,  more  than 
Abram,  can  predict  beforehand  how  the  Divine  promises  shall  be  accomplished.  Yet 
a  recollection  of  whose  promises  they  are  should  enable  them,  as  it  might  have  assisted 
him,  to  perceive  that  not  a  single  word  of  God's  can  fall  to  the  ground.  But,  owing 
partly  to  limitations  in  the  human  mind  and  imperfections  in  the  human  heart,  doubts 
insensibly  insinuate  themselves  against  even  the  clearest  and  the  strongest  evidence. 
And  when  danger,  disappointment,  and  doubt  conjoin  to  invade  the  soul,  dejection 
must  inevitably  follow. 

II.  Comported  by  God.  1.  A  shield  for  his  peril.  Divinely  given,  all  sufficient, 
ever  present.  "  I,"  Jehovah,  "  am,"  now  and  always,  '*  thy  shield  " — i.  e.  thine  im- 
pregnable defense.  And  the  like  protection  is  vouchsafed  to  Abram's  children  when 
imperilled  :  as  to  character,  Divine  (Prov.  xxx.  5) ;  as  to  extent,  complete,  universal, 
defending  from  all  forms  of  evil,  warding  off  assaults  from  all  quarters  (Ps.  v.  12) ; 
as  to  duration,  perpetual  (Ps.  exxi.  8).  2.  A  solace  for  his  sorrow.  Happy  as  the 
birth  of  an  heir  in  Sarai's  tent  would  make  him,  Jehovah  gives  him  to  understand 


218  THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS.  [ch.  xv.  1-  6 

that  not  that  was  to  be  his  recompense  for  the  trials  he  had  passed  through,  the  sac- 
rifices he  had  made,  and  the  feats  he  had  performed  since  leaving  Ur,  but  himself. 
God's  saints  are  prone  to  seek  their  happiness  in  God's  gifts,  rather  than  in  the  Giver. 
Here  they  are  recalled  along  with  Abram  to  the  sublime  thought  that  God  himself  is 
his  people's  best  reward,  and  that  the  possession  and  enjoyment  of  his  friendship 
should  abundantly  compensate  for  the  absence  of  creature  comforts,  however  dearly 
prized  and  ardently  desired.  3.  A  son  for  his  heir.  Instead  of  Eliezer,  whom  in  his 
perplexity  he  thought  of  adopting  as  his  son,  a  veritable  child  of  his  own  is  promised. 
Let  saints  learn  how  blind  is  human  reason,  and  how  feeble  faith  becomes  when  it 
tries  to  walk  by  sight ;  let  them  also  notice  and  consider  how  sure  are  God's  promises, 
and  how  inexhaustible  are  God's  resources. 

III.  Believing  in  God.  1.  The  object  of  A-bram's  faith.  That  at  this  stage  of 
the  patriarch's  history  attention  is  so  markedly  directed  to  his  faith  can  only  be  ex- 
plained on  the  supposition  that  he  now  for  the  first  time  clearly  and  implicitly 
received,  embraced,  and  rested  in  the  promise  of  a  seed,  and  consequently  of  a 
Saviour.  And  the  faith  which  justifies  and  saves  under  the  gospel  dispensation  has 
an  outlook  nothing  different  from  that  of  Abram.  The  object  which  it  contemplates 
and  appropriates  is  not  simply  the  Divine  promise  of  salvation,  but  the  specific  offer 
of  a  Saviour.  God  is  the  Justifier  of  him  who  believes  in  Jesus  (Bom.  iii.  26).  2. 
The  ground  of  Abram's  faith.  Neither  reason  nor  sense,  but  the  solemnly  given , 
clearly  stated,  perfectly  sufficient,  wholly  unsupported  word  of  God.  And  of  a  like 
description  is  the  basis  of  a  Christian's  faith — God's  promise  in  its  naked  simplicity, 
which  promise  (of  a  Saviour,  or  of  salvation  through  Jesus  Christ)  has,  like  that  de- 
livered to  Abram,  been  solemnly  announced,  clearly  exhibited,  declared  to  be  perfectly 
sufficient,  but  left  wholly  unsupported  in  the  gospel  (John  iii.  36).  3.  The  acting  of 
Abram's  faith.  It  was  instantaneous,  accepting  and  resting  on  the  Divine  promise 
the  moment  it  was  explicitly  made  known ;  full-hearted,  without  reservation  of  doubt 
or  uncertainty,  implicitly  reposing  on  the  naked  word  of  God  ;  and  conclusive,  not 
admitting  of  further  opening  of  the  question,  "  being  fully  persuaded  that  God  was 
able  also  to  perform  that  which  he  had  promised  "  (Rom.  iv.  21). 

IV.  Accepted  with  God.  Whatever  exegesis  be  adopted  of  the  clause  "  it  was 
counted  unto  him  for  righteousness,"  the  transaction  which  took  place  beneath  the 
starry  firmament  is  regarded  in  the  New  Testament  as  the  pattern  or  model  of  a 
sinner's  justification,  and  employed  to  teach — 1.  The  nature  of  justification,  which  is 
the  reckoning  of  righteousness  to  one  in  himself  destitute  of  such  excellence,  and,  on 
the  ground  of  such  imputed  righteousness,  the  acquittal  in  the  eye  of  the  Divine  law 
of  one  otherwise  obnoxious  to  just  condemnation.  Possessing  no  inherent  righteous- 
ness of  his  own,  Abram  had  the  righteousness  of  another  (not  at  that  time  revealed 
to  him)  set  to  his  account,  and  was  accordingly  justified  or  declared  righteous  before 
God.  2.  The  condition  of  justification,  which  is  not  works,  but  faith,  Abram  having 
been  accepted  solely  on  the  ground  of  belief  in  the  Divine  promise  (Rom.  iv.  2 — 5) ; 
not,  however,  faith  as  an  opus  operatum  or  meritorious  act,  but  as  a  subjective  condi- 
tion, without  which  the  act  of  imputation  cannot  proceed  upon  the  person.  3.  The 
time  of  justification,  which  is  the  instant  a  soul  believes,  whether  that  soul  be  cog- 
nizant of  the  act  or  not,  Abram  again  being  justified,  according  to  the  Scripture,  from 
the  moment  he  accepted  the  Divine  promise,  though  it  is  not  said  that  Abram  at  the 
time  was  aware  of  the  indemnatory  act  passed  in  his  favour  in  the  court  of  heaven. 

Lessons: — 1.  God's  saints  may  sometimes  be  cast  down  in  God's  presence  (Ps. 
xliii.  5).  2.  It  is  God's  special  character  and  care  to  comfort  those  who  are  cast 
down  (2  Cor.  vii.  6).  3.  God's  promises  are  the  wells  of  comfort  which  he  has 
opened  for  the  solace  of  dejected  saints. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ch.  xv. — Faith.  The  substance  of  this  chapter  is  the  special  intercourse  between 
Jehovah  and  Abram.  On  that  foundation  faith  rests.  It  is  not  feeling  after  God, 
if  haply  he  be  found  ;  it  is  a  living  confidence  and  obedience,  based  upon  revelation, 
promise,  covenant,  solemn  ratification  by  signs,  detailed  prediction  of  the  future.  God 


ch.  xt.  1—6.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  »9 

said,  "  I  am  thy  shield  and  thy  exceeding  great  reward" — i.  e.  I  am  with  thee  day 
by  day  as  the  God  of  providence  ;  I  will  abundantly  bless  thee  hereafter.  The  pro- 
mise of  a  numerous  offspring,  of  descendants  like  the  stars  for  multitude,  was  not  a 
merely  temporal  promise,  it  was  a  spiritual  blessing  set  in  the  framework  of  national 
prosperity.  "  Abram  believed  in  the  Lord  ;  and  he  counted  it  to  him  for  righteous- 
ness "  (ver.  6  ;  cf .  Rom.  iv. ;  Gal.  iii. ;  Heb.  xi.). 

.  I.  It  was  a  faith  in  the  febsonal,  revealed,  covenant  Jehovah ;  not  merely  in  a 
word,  or  in  a  sign,  or  in  a  prospect,  but  "in  the  Lord." 

II.  The  gracious  bond  of  relationship  and  of  covenant.  Faith  on  the  one 
side,  God  dealing  with  a  sinful  creature  as  righteous  on  the  other.  The  elements  of 
that  bond  are  (1)  gracious  acceptance,  (2)  gracious  revelation,  (3)  gracious  reward  of 
obedience — in  each  case  vouchsafed  to  faith.  Thus  the  faith  which  justifies  is  the 
faith  which  sanctifies,  for  the  sanctification,  as  the  Apostle  Paul  shows  iu  Rom.  viii., 
is  as  truly  the  outcome  of  the  grace  which  accepts  as  the  acceptance  itself. — R. 

Ver.  1. —  What  the  Lord  is  to  his  people.  I.  A  shield  against — 1.  The  charges 
of  the  law  (Isa.  xlv.  24).  2.  The  accusations  of  conscience  (Rom.  xv.  13).  3.  The 
force  of  temptation  (Rev.  iii.  10).  4.  The  opposition  of  the  world  (Rom.  viii.  31). 
5.  The  fear  of  death  (Heb.  ii.  15). 

II.  A  reward — 1.  For  sufferings  patiently  endured  (2  Tim.  ii.  12).  2.  For  sacri- 
fices cheerfully  made  (Matt,  xix,  28).  3.  For  service  faithfully  accomplished  (Rev. 
ii.  28). 

Lessons: — 1.  Admire  the  exceeding  richness  of  Divine  grace.  2.  Appreciate  the 
fulness  of  Divine  salvation.  3.  Realise  the  height  of  Divine  privilege  accorded  to 
the  saint. — W. 

Ver.  6.— Faith  and  Righteousness.  "  And  he  believed  in  the  Lord  ;  and  he 
counted  it  to  him  for  righteousness."  Even  by  itself  this  passage  claims  attention. 
How  does  the  idea  of  righteousness  come  into  it  at  all  ?  What  is  meant  by 
"counting''  or  " irnputalion "  1  And  what  is  the  connection  between  belief  and 
imputed  righteousness?  But  it  does  not  stand  alone.  (1)  In  Ps.  cvi.  30  (cf.  Num. 
xxv.  7)  the  same  "  counting"  takes  place  on  an  act  of  an  entirely  different  character  ; 
and  (2)  it  is  thrice  quoted  in  the  New  Testament  as  an  example  of  the  action  of 
faith  in  the  spiritual  life.  Irnputalion  must  not  be  explained  away.  Its  meaning  is 
seen  in  Levit.  vii.  18;  xvii.  4;  2  Sam.  xix.  19.  There  is  here  the  germ  of  "the 
Lord  our  righteousness."  In  Rom.  iv.  3 — 5,  23—25,  St.  Paul  refers  to  it  as  an 
instance  of  justification  by  faith,  connecting  it  with  "  the  reward  ;  "  and  this  again 
with  forgiveness  and  acceptance  (Ps.  xxxii.  2),  the  psalm  almost  repeating  the  words 
of  the  text  (see  also  Gal.  iii.  6).  We  need  not  suppose  that  now  for  the  first  time 
Abram  was  accepted  of  God,  or  that  he  alone  was  counted  righteous.  Mark,  Abram 
believed  not  merely  the  particular  promise,  but  "  in  the  Lord."  This  instance  is 
specially  noticed  by  St.  Paul  as  an  instance  of  faith,  because  from  the  nature  of  the 
case  there  was  no  opportunity  of  action. 

I.  The  working  of  faith — simple  belief  of  what  God  has  said,  because  he  is 
true;  casting  ah  care  upon  him.  No  merit  in  this.  Faith  is  the  channel,  not  the 
source  of  justification.  By  the  look  of  faith  the  dying  Israelites  lived  (Num.  xxi.  9), 
but  the  healing  was  from  God.  God  offers  salvation  freely  (John  vii.  37 ;  Rev. 
xxii.  17),  because  he  loves  us  even  while  in  our  sins  (Ephes.  ii.  4).  What  hinders 
that  love  from  being  effectual  is  unbelief.  Many  "  believe  a  lie "—e.  g.  that  they 
must  become  better  ere  they  can  believe  (cf.  Acts  xv.  1).  Primary  lesson  of  prac- 
tical Christianity  is  that  we  must  begin  by  receiving,  not  by  giving  ;  must  learn  to 
believe  his  word  because  it  is  his  word.  This  delivers  from  the  spirit  of  bondage 
(Rom.  viii.  15),  and  enables  to  ask  with  confidence  (Rom.  viii.  32).  And  this  faith 
is  counted  for  righteousness. 

II.  Faith  grows  by  use.  It  is  the  gift  of  God  (Ephes.  ii.  8),  but  it  is  given 
according  to  laws.  Sometimes  it  springs  up  suddenly— e.  g.  Nathanael,  St.  Paul,  the 
Philippian  jailer ;  but  usually  it  is  like  the  growth  of  the  seed,  hardly  to  be  traced— 
a  gradual  growth  from  efforts  to  live,  by  faith.  Let  none  think,  I  can  believe  when  1 
will.  The  endeavour  delayed  will  meet  with  many  difficulties,  suggestions  of  doubt, 
or  habits  of  indecision.    And  let  none  despise  the  training  which  prepares  the  soul 


830 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  rv.  7—21. 


to  believe.     It  may  seem  to  be  labour  in  vain,  yet  the  Holy  Spirit  may  be  working 
unseen  to  prepare  the  soul  for  life  and  peace. 

III.  Faith  leads  to  holiness.  It  renders  possible  a  service  which  cannot  other- 
wise be  given.  The  faith  which  was  counted  to  Abram  for  righteousness  formed 
the  character  which  enabled  him  afterwards  to  offer  up  Isaac  (cf.  James  ii.  21 — 23). 
Thus  growth  in  holiness  is  the  test  of  real  faith.  There  is  a  faith  which  has  no 
power  (cf.  James  ii.  19;  1  Cor.  xiii.  2  ;  2  Tim.  iv.  10).  It  is  with  the  heart  that 
man  believes  unto  righteousness  (cf.  Ps.  lxxxiv.  6,  7  ;  Prov.  iv.  23). — M. 

EXPOSITION. 


Ver.  7. — And  he  (Jehovah,  or  the  Word 
of  the  Lord)  said  onto  him  (after  the  act  of 
faith  on  the  part  of  the  patriarch,  and  the 
act  of  imputation  or  justification  on  the 
part  of  God,  and  in  explication  of  the  exact 
nature  of  that  relationship  which  had  been 
constituted  between  them  by  the  spiritual 
transaction  so  described),  I  am  the  Lord 
that  brought  thee  out  of  TJr  of  the  Chaldees 
(vide  ch.  xi.  28),  to  give  thee  this  land  to 
inherit  (or,  to  possess)  it. 

Ver.  8.— And  he  said,  Lord  God  (Adonai 
Jehovah ;  vide  ver.  2),  whereby  shall  I 
know  that  I  shall  inherit  it  %  Not  the 
language  of  doubt,  though  slight  mis- 
givings are  not  incompatible  with  faith 
(cf.  Judges  vi.  17  ;  2  Kings  xi.  8  ;  Luke  i. 
34),  and  questioning  with  God  ' '  is  rather 
a  proof  of  faith  than  a  sign  of  incredulity  " 
(Calvin) ;  but  of  desire  for  a  sign  in  con- 
firmation of  the  grant  (Luther),  either  for 
the  strengthening  of  his  own  faith  (Chrys- 
ostom  Augustine,  Eeil,  '  Speaker's  Com- 
mentary '),  or  for  the  sake  of  his  posterity 
(Jarchi,  Michaelis),  or  for  some  intimation 
as  to  the  time  and  mode  of  taking  possession 
(Murphy).  Rosenmuller  conceives  the 
question  put  in  Abram's  mouth  to  be  only 
a  device  of  the  narrator's  to  lead  up  to  the 
subject  following. 

Ver.  9. — And  he  said  unto  him,  Take  me 
(literally,  for  me,  i.  e.  for  my  use  in  sacri- 
fice) an  heifer  of  three  years  old.  So  rightly 
(LXX.,  Syriac,  Samaritan,  Arabic,  Jose- 
phus,  Bochart,  Rosenmuller,  Keil) ;  not 
three  heifers  (Onkelos,  Jarchi,  Kimchi,  el 
alii).  And  a  she  goat  of  three  years  old, 
and  a  ram  of  three  years  old.  These  offer- 
ings, afterwards  prescribed  by  the'  law 
(Exod.  xxix.  15  ;  Num.  xv.  27  ;  xix.  2 ; 
Deut.  xxi.  3),  were  three  in  number,  and 
of  three  years  each,  to  symbolise  him  who 
was,  and  is,  and  is  to  come  (Wordsworth); 
perhaps  rather  to  indicate  the  perfection 
of  the  victim  in  respect  of  maturity  (Mur- 
phy). Cf.  Ganymede's  offering  (in  '  Lu- 
cian's  Dialogues ')  of  a  three  years  old  ram 
for  a  ransom.  And  a  turtle-dove,  and  a 
young  pigeon — also  prescribed  by  the  law 
(Levit.  i.  14  ;  Luke  ii.  24). 

Ver.  10. — And  he  took  unto  him  all  these, 
and  divided  (a  word  occurring  only  here  in 


Genesis,  and  supposed  by  Michaelis  to 
have  been  taken  by  Moses  from  the  an- 
cient document  from  which  he  transcribed 
this  portion  of  his  work.  The  word  is 
afterwards  found  in  Cant.  ii.  17,  and  Jer. 
xxxiv.  18)  them  in  the  midst, — (ic'o-a 
(LXX.) ;  in  equal  parts  (Onkelos) — and 
laid  each  piece  one  against  another:  but 
the  birds  divided  he  not.  So  afterwards 
in  the  Mosaic  legislation  (Levit.  i.  7). 
Wordsworth  detects  in  the  non-dividing 
of  the  birds  an  emblem  of  "the  Holy 
Spirit,  the  Spirit  of  peace  and  love,  which 
is  a  Spirit  of  unity,"  and  of  "  Christ's 
human  spirit,  which  was  not  divisible." 
Kalisch,  with  more  probability,  recogn  isses 
as  the  reason  of  their  not  being  di  vided 
the  fact  that  such  division  was  not  re- 
quired, both  fowls  being  regarded  as  one 
part  of  the  sacrifice  only,  and  each,  as  the 
half,  being  placed  opposite  the  other. 
Wordsworth  numbers  seven  parts  in  the 
sacrifice,  and  sees  a  symbol  of  com- 
pleteness and  finality,  the  number  seven 
being  the  rootof  s7taba,to  swear(Gesenius, 
p.  802)  ;  Kalisch  reckons  four,  which  he 
regards  as  "denoting  perfection,  but 
rather  the  external  perfection  of  form 
than  the  internal  one  of  tbe  mind,"  and 
pointing  ' '  to  the  perfect  possession  of 
the  Holy  Land."  The  ritual  here  described 
is  the  same  which  was  afterwardsobserved 
among  the  Hebrews  in  the  formation  of 
covenants  (cf.  ch.  xxxiv.  18),  and  appears 
to  -have  extensively  prevailed  among 
heathen  nations  (cf.  '  Iliad,'  b.  124, 
' '  opKia  mo-rd  to.jj,6vt€s  ;  "  and  the  Latin 
phrase,   "  foedus  icere  "). 

Ver.  11. — And  when  the  fowls — literally, 
and  the  bird  of  prey,  a  collective  singular 
with  the  article,  as  in  ch.  xiv.  13,  symbolis- 
ing the  Egyptians  and  other  adversaries  of 
Israel,  as  in  Ezek.  xvii.  3,  7,  12;  xxxix.  4, 
17;  Rev.  xix.  17, 18  (Knobel,  Rosenmuller, 
Lange,  Keil,  Kalisch),  which  may  be  re- 
garded as  probable  if  the  divided  victims 
represented  Israel  in  affliction,  which  is 
doubtful  (vide  supra).  It  does  not  appear 
necessary  to  attach  any  special  signifi- 
cance to  thedescent  of  the  vultures,  which 
are  always  attracted  towards  carrion,  and 
the    Introduction    of    which  here   com- 


CH.  XY.  7—21.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


231 


pletes  the  naturalness  of  the  scene — 
came  down  upon  the  carcases  (the  LXX. 
interpolates,  eirl  to.  SixoTO|iJ)paTa),  Abram 
drove  them  away.  Literally,  caused 
them  to  be  blown  away,  i.  e.  by  blowing. 
' '  Though  Abram  is  here  represented  as  the 
instrument,  yet  the  eflect  is  to  be  ascribed 
primarily  to  the  tutelar  agency  of  omnip- 
otence" (Bush;  cf.  Exod.  xv.  10;  Ezek. 
xxi.  81).  The  act  of  scaring  the  voracious 
birds  has  been  taken  to  represent  the  ease 
withwhichAbramor  Israel  would  ward  off 
his  enemies  (Jonathan,  Targums,  Kosen- 
mttller,  Bush);  the  averting  of  destruction 
from  the  Israelites  through  Abram's  merit 
(Kalisch,  Keil);  Abram's  religious  regard 
for  and  observance  of  God's  treaty  (Words- 
worth) ;  the  patriarch's  expectation  that 
God  was  about  to  employ  the  sacrificial 
victims  for  some  holy  purpose  (Alford) ; 
simply  his  anxiety  to  preserve  the  victims 
pure  and  unmutilated  for  whatever  end 
they  might  have  to  serve  (Murphy). 

Ver.  12. — And  when  the  sun  was  going 
down.  Literally,  was  about  to  go  down,  (cf . 
Gesenius,  §  132).  The  vision  having  com- 
menced the  previous  evening,  an  entire  day 
has  already  passed,  the  interval  being  de- 
signed to  typify  the  time  between  the  pro- 
mise and  its  fulfilment  (Kalisch).  A  deep 
sleep — tardemah  (cf.  Adam's  sleep,  ch.  ii. 
21 ;  e  Ko-Ttto-is  (LXX. ) ;  a  supernatural  slum- 
ber,asthedarknessfollowingwasnotsolely 
due  to  natural  causes — fell  upon  Abram ; 
and,  lo,  an  horror  of  great  darkness — liter- 
ally, an  horror,  a  great  darkness,  i.  e.  an 
overwhelming  dread  occasioned  by  the 
dense  gloom  with  which  he  was  encircled, 
and  which,  besides  being  designed  to  con- 
ceal the  working  of  the  Deity  from  mortal 
vision  (Knobel),  was  meant  to  symbolise 
the  Egyptian  bondage  (Grotius,  Calvin, 
Rosenmtlller,  Keil,  Kalisch),  and  perhaps 
also,  since  Abram's  faith  embraced  a  larger 
sphere  than  Canaan  (Heb.  xi.  10,  14,  16), 
and  a  nobler  seed  than  Sarah's  son  (John 
viii.  56),  the  sufferings  of  Christ  (Words- 
worth, Inglis) — fell  upon  him. 

Ver.  13. — And  he  said  unto  Abram,  Enow  - 
of  a  surety — literally,  knowing,  know  (cf. 
ch.  ii.  17;  Di'deEwald's  'Hebrew  Syntax,'  § 
312) — that  thy  seed  shall  be  a  stranger  in  a 
land  which  is  not  theirs  (literally,  not  to 
them,  viz.,  Egypt,  or  Egypt  and  Canaan, 
according  to  the  view  which  is  taken  of 
the  point  of  departure  for  the  reckoning 
of  the  400  years,  and  shall  serve  them  (i.  e. 
the  inhabitants  of  that  alien  country);  and 
they  (j.  e.  these  foreigners)  shall  afflict  them 
— three  different  stages  of  adverse  fortune 
are  described: — (1)  exile;  (2)  bondage;  (3) 
affliction  (Murphy);  or  the  two  last  clauses 
depict  the  contents  of  the  first  (Kalisch) — 


four  hundred  years.  The  duration  not  of 
their  affliction  merely,  but  either  of  their 
bondage  and  affliction,  or  more  probably  of 
their  exile,  bondage,  and  affliction ;  either  a 
round  number  for  430  (Calvin,  Kosen- 
mtiller,  Keil,  Alford),  to  be  reckoned  from 
the  date  of  the  descent  into  Egypt(Kalisch, 
Lange),  as  Moses  (Exod.  xii.  39)  and  Stephen 
(Acts  vii.  6)  seem  to  say,  and  to  be  recon- 
ciled with  the  statement  of  Paul  (Gal.  iii. 
17)  by  regarding  the  death  of  Jacob  as  the 
closing  of  the  time  of  promise  (Lange, 
Inglis) ;  or  an  exact  number  dating  from 
the  birth  of  Isaac  (Willet,  Murphy,  Words- 
worth), which  was  thirty  years  after  the 
call  in  Ur,  thus  making  the  entire  interval 
correspond  with  the  430  years  of  Paul,  or 
from  the  persecution  of  Ishmael  (Ains- 
worth,  Clarke,  Bush),  which  occurred 
thirty  years  after  the  promise  in  ch.  xii.  3. 
.  Ver.  14. — And  also  that  nation  (the  name 
of  which hedoesnot  reveal,  in  case  of  seem- 
ing to  interfere  with  the  free  volition  of 
his  creatures,  who,  while  accomplishinghis 
high  designs  and  secret  purposes,  are  ever 
conscious  of  their  moral  freedom),  whom 
they  shall  serve,  will  I  judge : — i.  e.  punish 
after  judging,  which  prediction  was  in  due 
course  fulfilled  (Exod.  vi.  11) — and  after  - 
wardshall  they  come  out  withgreatsubstance 
— recush  (cf.  ch.  xiii.  6;  vide  Exod.  xii.  36). 
Ver.  15. — And  thou  shalt  go  to  thyfathers 
in  peace  (cf.  ch.  xxv.  8;  xxxv.  29;  xlix.  33). 
Not  a  periphrasis  for  going  to  the  grave 
(Rosenmvlller),  since  Abram's  ancestors 
were  not  entombed  in  Canaan ;  but  a  proof 
of  the  survival  of  departed  spirits  in  a  state 
of  conscious  existence  after  death  (Knobel, 
Murp  hy,  Wordsworth, '  Speaker'sCommen- 
tary,'  Inglis),  to  the  company  of  which  the 
patriarch  was  in  due  time  to  be  gathered. 
The  disposal  of  his  remains  is  provided  for 
in  what  follows.  Thou  shalt  be  buried  in 
a  good  old  age. 

Ver.  16. — But  in  the  fourth  generation — 
TtToprrj  8«  -y£ve<j(LXX.);  but,  more  correct- 
ly, the  fourth  generation,  calculating  100 
years  to  a  generation .  "Caleb  was1  the  fourth 
from  Judah,  and  Moses  from  Levi,  and  so 
doubtless  many  others"  (Bush).  Drs.  Oort 
and  Kuenen,  reckoning  four  generations 
as  a  far  shorter  space  of  time  than  fourcen- 
turies,  detect  a  contradiction  between  this 
verseandver,13,andanevidenceof  thefree 
use  which  the  ancient  and  uncritical  Iarael- 
itishauthormadeof  hismaterials(  'Biblefor 
YoungPeople,  'vol.  i.  p.  158).  On  theimport 
of  lilvide  ch.  vi.  9 — they  shall  come  hither 
again  (literally,  shall  return  hither):  for  the 
iniquity  of  the  Amorites  isnotyetfull.  Liter- 
ally, for  not  completed  the  iniquity  of  the 
-4TOWtes(videch.xiv.7;hereputfortheen- 
tirepopulation)iMiJ»Zfte?j(the  same  word  as 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xv.  7—21. 


"hither,"  which  is  its  usual  significa- 
tion). 

Ver.  17. — And  it  came  to  pass,  that, when 
the  sun  went  down, — literally,  and  it  was 
(i.  e.  this  took  place),  the  sun  went  down: 
less  accurately,  eirel  8e  o  rfXios  eyivero  irpo- 
8w|ios(LXX. ),  which  was  the  state  of  mat- 
ters in  ver.  12.  Here  the  sun,  which  was 
then  setting,  is  described  as  having  set — 
and  it  was  dark, — literally,  and  darkness 
was,  i.e. a,  darkness  that  might  be  felt,  as  in 
ver.  12;  certainly  not  <|>\o|  kylvtro  (LXX.), 
as  if  there  were  another  name  besides  the 
one  specified  in  the  description — behold  a 
smoking  furnace, — the  TBF1,  or  Oriental 

furnace,  had  the  form  of  a  cylindrical  fire- 
pot  (cf.  Gesenius,  p.  869;  Keil  in  loco) — 
and  a  burning  lamp — a  lamp  of  fire,or  fiery 
torch,  emerging  from  the  smoking  stove; 
an  emblem  of  the  Divine  presence  (cf. 
Exod.  six.  18) — that  passed  between  those 
pieces — in  ratification  of  the  covenant. 

Vers.  18 — 21. — In  that  day  the  Lord  made 
a  covenant — literally,  cut  a  covenant  (cf. 
opiaa  Wnveiv,  fcedus  icere).  On  the  import 
of  rfHSl  «'cfoch.ix.9) — with Abram, saying, 

Unto  thy  seed  have  I  given  this  land,  from 
the  river  of  Egypt — the  Nile  (Keil,  Kurtz, 
Hengstenberg,  Kalisch)  rather  than  the 
WadyelArish,  or  Brook  of  Egypt  (Knobel, 
Lange,  Clarke),  at  the  southern  limits  of 
the  country  (Numb,  xxxiv.  5;  Josh.  xv.  4; 
Isa.  xxvii.  12) — unto  the  great  river,  the 
river  Euphrates.  The  ideal  limits  of  the 
Holy  Land,  which  were  practically  reached 
under  David  and  Solomon  (vide  1  Kings 
iv.  21;  2  Chron.  ix.  26),  and  which  em- 
braced the  following  subject  populations, 
ten  in  number,  "to  convey  the  impression 
of  universality  without  exception,  of  un- 
qualified completeness"  (Delitzsch).  The 
Kenites, — inhabiting  the  mountainous 
tracts  in  the  south-west  of  Palestine,  near 
theAmalekites  (Numb.  xxiv.  21 ;  1  Sam.  xv. 
6;  xxvii.  10);  a  people  of  uncertain  origin, 
though  (Judges  i.  16;  iv.  11)  Hobab,  the 
bjother-in-law  of  Moses,  was  a  Kenite — 
and  the  Kenizzites, — mentioned  onlyin  this 
passage;  a  people  dwelling  apparently  in 
the  same  region  with  th  eKenites(Murphy), 
who  probably  became  extinct  between  the 
times  of  Abraham  andMoses  (Bochart),  and 
cannot  now  be  identified  (Keil,  Kalisch), 
though  they  have  been  connected  with 


Kenaz  the  Edomite,  ch.  xxxvi.  15, 42  (Kno- 
bel)— and  the  Kadmonites, — never  again 
referred  to,  but,  as  their  name  implies,  an 
Eastern  people,  whose  settlements  extend- 
ed towards  the  Euphrates  (Kalisch) — and 
the  Hittites, — the  descendants  of  Heth  (vide 
ch.  x.  15);  identified  with  the  Kheta  and 
Katti  of  the  Egyptian  and  Assyrian  monu- 
ments, and  supposed  by  Mr.  Gladstone  to 
be  the  Kheteians  of  the'Odyssey ;'  a  power- 
ful Asiatic  tribe  who  must  have  early  es- 
tablished themselveson  theEuphrates,  and 
spread  from  thence  southward  to  Canaan 
and  Egypt,  and  westward  to  Lydia  and 
Greece,  carrying  with  them,  towards  the 
shores  of  the  ^Egean  Sea,  the  art  and  cul- 
ture of  Assyria  andBabylon,  already  modi- 
fied by  the  forms  and  conceptions  of  Egypt. 
The  northern  capital  of  their  empire  was 
Carchemish,  about  sixteen  miles  south  of 
the  modern  Birejik ;  and  the  southern 
Kadesh,  on  an  island  of  the  Orontes  (Prof, 
Sayce  in'Frazer'sMagazine.'August,  1880, 
art.  'A  forgotten  Empire  in  Asia  Minor') 
— and  the  Ferizzites,  and  the  Rephaims  (c  ide 
ch.  xiii.  7;  xiv.  5;  and  the  Amorites,  and 
the  Ganaanites,  and  the  Girgashites,  and 
the  Jebusites  (vide  ch.  x.  15 — 19).  The 
boundaries  of  the  Holy  Land  as  here  de- 
fined are  regarded  by  some(Bohlen)as  con- 
tradictory of  those  designated  in  Numb, 
xxxiv.  1 — 12.  But  (1)  the  former  may  be 
viewed  as  the  ideal  (or  poetical),  and  the 
latter  as  the  actual  (and  prosaic),  limits  of  • 
the  country  assigned  to  Israel  (Hengsten- 
breg,  Keil);  or  (2)  the  former  may  repre- 
sent the  maxima,  and  the  latter theminima, 
of  the  promise,  which  admitted  of  a  larger 
or  a  smaller  fulfilment,  according  as  Israel 
should  in  the  sequel  prove  fit  for  its  occu- 
pation (Augustine,  Pererius,  Willet,  Poole, 
Gerlach,  Kalisch,  and  others);  or,  (3)  ac- 
cording to  a  certain  school  of  interpreters, 
the  former  may  point  to  the  wide  extent 
of  country  to  be  occupied  by  the  Jews  on 
occasion  of  their  restoration  to  their  own 
land,  as  distinguished  from  their  first  occu- 
pation on  coming  up  out  of  Egypt,  or  their 
second  on  returning  from  Babylon;  or  (4) 
the  rivers  maybe  put  for  thecountrieswith 
which  the  promised  land  was  coterminous 
(Kurtz,  Murphy) ;  or  (5)  strict  geographical 
accuracy  may  not  have  been  intended  in 
defining  the  limits  of  the  land  of  promise 
('Speaker's  Commentary,'  Inglis). 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  18. — Taken  into  covenant.  I.  The  blessing  op  the  covenant.  1.  The  ulU 
mate  blessing,  to  which,  in  both  the  commencement  and  close  of  the  present  section, 
the  prominence  is  assigned,  was  a  splendid  inheritance — the  land  of  Canaan  for  his 
descendants,  and  for  himself  the  better  country,  of  which  that  earthly  possession 
was  a  type.    2.  The  mediate  blessing,  through  which  alone  the  last  could  be  reached, 


OH.  XT.  7—21.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  223 

was  a  distinguished  seed — a  numerous  posterity  to  occupy  the  land,  and  a  living 
Saviour  to  secure  for  himself  the  better  country.  3.  The  proximate  blessing,  to  be 
enjoyed  while  as  yet  the  second  and  the  third  were  unfulfilled,  was  a  celestial 
alliance  by  which  Jehovah  himself  engaged  to  be  his  shield  and  exceeding  great 
reward.  It  is  obvious  that  these  are  the  blessings  which  the  gospel  confers  on 
believers — a  heavenly  Friend,  an  all-sufficient  Saviour,  a  future  inheritance  ;  whence 
the  Abrahamic  covenant  was  nothing  different  from  the  covenant  of  grace. 

II.  The  reason  of  the  covenant.  The  essential  idea  in  a  covenant  being  a  visible 
pledge  for  the  fulfilment  of  a  promise,  the  necessity  for  such  a  guarantee  on  the 
present  occasion,  it  is  apparent,  could  not  lie  with  God.  On  the  contrary,  the  proposal 
on  the  part  of  God  to  bind  himself  by  a  superadded  engagement  to  implement  his 
own  gracious  and  spontaneous  promise  was  an  explicit  condescension,  if  not  to  the 
feebleness  of  the  patriarch's  faiLh,  at  least  to  the  weakness  of  his  human  nature. 
Perhaps  the  recollection  of  who  Jehovah  was,  and  what  he  had  already  accomplished 
in  bringing  Abram  from  Ur,  should  have  proved  sufficient  to  authenticate  the 
promise  ;  but  it  would  almost  seem  as  if  human  nature,  in  its  innocent  no  less  than 
in  its  fallen  state,  instinctively  craved  the  assistance  of  external  symbols  to  enable 
it  to  clearly  apprehend  and  firmly  grasp  the  unseen  and  spiritual  blessings  that  are 
wrapt  up  in  God's  promises.  In  the  garden  of  Eden  the  tree  of  life  was  Adam's 
sacramental  pledge  of  immortality  ;  after  the  Flood  the  many-coloured  rainbow  was 
a  sign  to  Noah  ;  in  the  Hebrew  Church  material  symbols  of  unseen  verities  were  not 
awanting  ;  while  in  the  Christian  Church  the  passover  and  circumcision  have  been 
replaced  by  the  Lord's  Supper  and  baptism.  The  reasons  that  required  the  institu- 
tion of  these  external  signs  may  be  held  as  having  necessitated  the  solemn  ritual 
which  was  exhibited  to  Abram. 

III.  The  symbols  op  the  covenant.  1.  The  sacrificial  victims.  Seeing  that  these 
were  afterwards  prescribed  in  the  Mosaic  legislation,  which  itself  was  a  shadow  of 
the  good  things  to  come,  to  be  employed  as  propitiatory  offerings,  it  is  impossible  not 
to  regard  them,  though  not  necessarily  understood  as  such  by  Abram,  as  types  (not 
of  Israel,  Abram's  seed  after  the  flesh  simply,  nor  of  the  Church  of  God  generally, 
i.  e.  Abram's  seed  according  to  the  spirit,  though  perhaps  neither  of  these  should  be 
excluded,  but)  of  Abram's  greater  Seed,  whose  perfect,  Divinely-appointed,  and  sub- 
stitutionary sacrifice  alone  constitutes  the  basis  of  the  everlasting  covenant.  2.  The 
smoking  furnace  and  the  burning  lamp.  Compared  with  the  smoke  and  fire  that 
afterwards  appeared  on  Sinai  when  Jehovah  descended  to  covenant  with  Israel,  and 
the  pillar  of  cloud  and  fire  that  led  the  march  of  Israel  from  Egypt,  these  at  once 
suggest  their  own  interpretation.  They  were  emblems  of  God's  presence,  and  may 
be  viewed  as  suggesting  (1)  the  combination  of  justice  and  mercy  in  the  Divine 
character,  and  (2)  the  twofold  attitude  in  which  the  Deity  exhibits  himself  to  men 
according  as  they  are  his  enemies  or  friends. 

IV.  The  import  op  the  covenant.  Partly  through  visible  sign,  partly  in  spiritual 
vision,  partly  by  audible  words,  the  patriarch  was  instructed  as  to — 1.  The  objective 
basis  of  his  own  justification,  which  was  neither  personal  merit  nor  faith  considered 
as  an  opus  operatum,  but  the  Divinely-appointed  sacrifice  which  God  was  graciously 
pleased  to  accept  in  propitiation  for  human  sin.  2.  The  true  security  for  God's  ful- 
filment of  the  promise,  which  was  not  any  outward  sign  or  token,  but  the  everlasting 
covenant  which  in  mysterious  symbol  had  been  unfolded  to  him.  3.  The  interval  of 
discipline  allotted  to  the  heirs  of  the  land ;  for  his  descendants  three  generations  of 
exile,  servitude,  and  affliction,  to  prepare  them  for  receiving  Canaan  in  the  fourth ; 
and  for  himself  a  continual  sojourning,  without  a  final  settling  within  its  borders  ;  in 
both  cases  emblematic  of  the  saint's  experience  after  justification  and  before  glorifica- 
tion. 4.  The  ultimate  assumption  of  the  inheritance  by  his  seed — a  Divine  voice 
solemnly  foretelling  their  return  from  captivity,  as  it  afterwards  declared  that  his 
spiritual  descendants  should  be  emancipated  and  brought  back  to  their  celestial 
abode,  and  a  Divine  vision  unfolding  to  his  gaze  the  wide  extent  of  territory  they 
should  eventually  possess — perhaps  the  limits  of  the  earthly  land  melting  away, 
as  his  spirit  stood  entranced  before  the  gorgeous  panorama,  into  the  confines  of  the 
better  country.  5.  Bis  own  certain  passage  to  the  heavenly  Canaan,  for  which  he 
was  even  at  that  time  looking — a  promise  which  belongs  individually  to  all  who  are 
the  children  of  Abram  by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ. 


424  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  [ch.  xv.  7—21. 

See  from  this  subject — 1.  The  fulness  of  Divine  blessing  which  the  covenant  con- 
tains. 2.  The  depth  of  Divine  condescension  which  the  covenant  reveals.  3.  The 
glorious  securities  which  the  covenant  affords. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  7,  8. — The  strength  and  weakness  of  faith.  1.  Faith's  source  op  strbngth. 
1.  Looking  up  to  the  Divine  character — "I  am  the  Lord."  2.  Looking  back  to  the 
Divine  grace — "  that  brought  thee  out  of  Ur  of  the  Chaldees."  3.  Looking  out  to 
the  Divine  promise — "to  give  thee  this  land  to  inherit  it." 

II.  Faith's  occasion  of  weakness.  1.  Looking  forward — the  fulfilment  of  the 
promise  seeming  far  away.  2.  Looking  in — discovering  nothing  either  in  or  about 
itself  to  guarantee  its  ultimate  realisation.— W. 

Ver.  11. — Tlie  silent  worshipper.  1.  The  nature  of  Abram's  worship.  1.  Divine 
in  its  appointment.  2.  Simple  in  its  ritual.  3.  Sacrificial  in  its  character.  4.  Be- 
lieving in  its  spirit.     5.  Patient  in  its  continuance.     6.  Expectant  in  its  attitude. 

II.  The  interruptions  of  Abram's  worship.  1.  What  they  were.  The  descent 
of  the  fowls  may  be  regarded  as  emblematic  of  those  obstructions  to  communion 
with  God  which  arise  from — (1)  The  principalities  and  powers  of  the  air.  (2)  The 
persecutions  and  oppressions  (or,  where  these  are  absent,  the  pleasures  aud  ««gage- 
ments)  of  the  world.  (3)  The  disturbances  and  distractions  of  vain  thoughts  and 
sinful  motions  in  the  heart.  2.  How  they  were  removed.  (1)  By  watchfulness.  (2) 
By  opposition.  (3)  By  perseverance.  (4)  By  Divine  help— the  breath  of  Abram's 
mouth  being  probably  accompanied  by  a  wind  from  God. 

III.  The  acceptance  of  Abram's  worship.  This  was  proved— 1.  By  the  approach 
of  God  at  night-fall  towards  the  scene.  2.  By  the  supernatural  revelation  accorded 
to  the  patriarch.  8.  By  the  passage  of  the  symbol  of  Jehovah's  presence  between 
the  divided  victims.  4.  By  the  announcement  that  God  had  taken  him  into  cove- 
nant with  himself.     5.  By  the  vision  of  the  land  which  was  granted  to  him. 

Learn — 1.  The  sinfulness  and  worthlessness  of  all  forms  of  worship  except  that 
which  God  has  appointed.  2.  The  need  for  self-examination  and  Divine  assistance 
when  engaged  in  serving  God.  3.  The  certain  acceptance  and  spiritual  enrichment 
of  those  who  worship  God  in  spirit  aud  in  truth. — W. 

Vers.  12 — 17. — Abraham's  watch  and  vision.  "  And  when  the  sun  was  going 
down,  a  deep  sleep,"  &c.  The  great  blessings  promised  are  still  afar  off.  As  yet 
Abraham  has  no  son  to  hand  down  his  name  to  posterity.  By  means  of  a  vision  God 
strengthened  his  faith.  Weird  is  the  picture  in  this  fifteenth  chapter.  See  the 
solitary  sheik  in  tbe  desert  offering  his  varied  sacrifice,  then  watching  until  the  sun 
goes  down  to  drive  off  the  vultures  from  the  slain  offerings  His  arms  become 
weary  with  waving  and  his  eyes  with  their  vigils.  As  the  sun  sinks  below  the  wide- 
spread horizon,  and  night  quickly  steals  over  the  desert,  a  horror  of  great  darkness 
creeps  over  his  spirit.  Then  a  deep  sleep  falls  upon  him,  and  in  that  sleep  come 
visions  and  a  voice.  The  vision  was  of  a  furnace  and  a  shining  lamp  moving 
steadily  between  the  divided  emblems.     Look  at  the  meaning  of  that  vision. 

I  It  indicated  the  acceptance  of  the  offerings.  Fire  in  the  East  is  generally 
understood  to  be  a  solemn  witness  to  any  engagement.  To  confirm  an  oath  some 
Orientals  will  point  to  the  lamp  and  say,  "It  is  witness."  Nuptial  ceremonies  are 
sometimes  solemnised  by  walking  round  a  fire  three  times,  and  the  parties  uttering 
certain  words  meanwhile. 

II.  The  furnace  may  have  referred  to  the  need  for  purification,  and  the 
lamp  TO  the  certaintt  of  Divine  guidance.  1.  Both  the  Israel  after  the  flesh 
and  that  after  the  spiiit  had  to  pass  through  the  fire  of  persecution  ;  but  the  lamp  of 
truth  had  always  been  kept  alight  by  the  prophets,  apostles,  martyrs,  and  confessors 
of  the  Church.  2.  The  life  and  work  of  Christ  may  also  have  been  shadowed  forth 
In  that  furnace  and  lamp.  Christ  knew  the  bitterness  of  betrayal,  denial,  and  death  ; 
but  he  knew  also  the  joy  of  conscious  sinlessness,  complete  self-sacrifice,  and  unend- 
ing power  of  salvation.  3.  They  illustrated  the  character  of  the  life  of  many 
believers.  Trial  and  joy  must  be  intermingled.  As  Abraham  saw  the  vision  in 
connection  with  sacrifice,  so  on  Calvary  shall  we  best  learn  the  meaning  of  tfcr 
smoking  furnace  and  burning  lamp. — H. 


CH.  XVI.  1—6.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


225 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XVI. 


Ver.  1. — Now  Sarai  Abram's  wife  bare  him 
no  children  (literally,  bare  not  to  him,  not- 
withstanding the  promise ;  the  barrenness 
of  Sarai  being  introduced  as  the  point  of 
departure  for  the  ensuing  narrative,  and 
emphasised  as  the  cause  or  occasion  of  the 
aubsequenttransaction):  andshehad— liter- 
ally,  to  her  (there  was) — an  handmaid,  an 
Egyptian  (obtained  probably  while  in  the 
house  of  Pharaoh  (ch.  xii.  16) — whose  name 
was  Hagar — "flight,"  from  hagar,  to  flee. 
Cf.  Hegirah,  the  flight  of  Mahomet.    Not 
her  original  designation,  but  given  to  her 
afterwards.eiiherbecauseof  herflightfrom 
Egypt  (Ambrose,  Wordsworth),  or  because 
of  her  escape  from  her  mistress  (Michaelis, 
Bush,  'Speaker's  Commentary').    Though 
not  the  imaginary  or  mythical  (Bohlen),  it 
is  doubtful  if  she  was  the  real  (Ainsworth, 
Bush),  ancestor  of  the  Hagarenes  (1  Chron. 
v.  10,  19,  20;  xxvii.  31;  Ps.  lxxxiii.  6,  8). 
Yer.  2. — And  Sarai  said  unto  Abram,  Be- 
hold now,  the  Lord  hath  restrained  me  from 
bearing.     Literally,  hath  shut  me  up  (i.  e. 
my  womb,  ch.  xx.  18;  onv€KX.ei<r«  |u,  LXX.) 
from  bearing.    Her  advancing  age  was 
rendering  this  every  day  more  and  more 
apparent.    I  pray  thee  go  in  unto  my  maid 
(cf .  ch.  xxx.  3,  9).    It  is  so  far  satisfactory 
that  the  proposal  to  make  a  secondary  wife 
of  Hagar  did  not  originate  with  Abram ; 
though,  as  Sarai's  guilt  in  making  it  can- 
not altogether  be  excused,  so  neither  can 
Abram  be  entirely  freed  from  fault  in 
yielding  to  her  solicitations.  It  may  be  that 
I  may  obtain  children  by  her.    Literally,  be 
built  up  by  her ;   from  banah,  to  build, 
Whence  ben,  a  son  (Deut.  xxv.  9;  Ruth  iv. 
11).  Calvin  notes  that  Sarai's  desire  of  off- 
spring was  not  prompted  by  natural  im- 
•  pulse,  but  by  the  zeal  of  faith  which  made 
her  wish  tosecurethepromised  benediction. 
As  yet  it  had  not  been  clearly  intimated 
that  Sarai  was  to  be  the  mother  of  Abram's 
Child;  and  hence  her  recourse  to  what  was 
a  prevalent  practice  of  the  times,  while  un- 
justifiable in  itself,  was  a  signal  proof  of 
her  humility,  of  her  devotion  to  her  hus- 
band, and  perhaps  also  of  her  faith  in  God. 
And  Abram  hearkened  to  the  voice  of  Sarai. 
"  The  faith  of  both  was  defective;  not  in- 
deed with  regard  to  the  substance  of  the 
promise,  but  with  regard  to  the  method 
in  which  they  proceeded  "  (Calvin). 

Ver.  3. — And  Sarai  Abram's  wife  took 
Hagar  her  maid  the  Egyptian,  after  Abram 
had  dwelt  ten  years  in  the  land  of  Canaan 
(i.  e.  in  his  eighty-fifth,  and  her  seventy- 
fifth  year;  a  note  of  time  introduced,  pro- 
•EHxan, 


bably,  to  account  for  their  impatience  in 
waiting  for  the  promised  seed),  and  gave 
her  to  her  husband  Abram  to  be  his  wife. 
Afterwards  styled  a  pilgash  or  concubine 
(ch.  xxv.  6),  she  is  here  improperly  called 
a  wife  gucepr  alter  Dei  legem  in  alisnum  tho- 
rum  inducitur  (Calvin),  from  whom  the 
pilgash  or  concubine  differed  (1)  in  power 
over  the  family,  which  belonged  solely  to 
the  true  wife,  not  to  the  secondary;  (2)  in 
the  manner  of  espousal,  which  in  the  case 
of  the  former  was  accompanied  with  solemn 
rites  of  espousal  and  liberal  gifts  of  dowry; 
and  (3)  in  privilege  of  issue,  the  offspring 
of  the  secondary  wife  having  no  title  to 
inherit.  The  act  of  Sarai  (cf.  the  similar 
behaviour  of  Stratonice,  the  wife  of  King 
Deiotarus,  who,  according  to  Plutarch, gave 
her  maid  Electra  to  her  husband,  and  so 
obtained  an  heir  to  the  crown)  is  as  little  to 
be  imitated  as  the  conduct  of  Abram.  The 
apparent  repetitions  in  vers.  1 — 3  do  not 
require  the  hypothesis  of  different  author- 
ship (Tuch,  Colenso,  Bleek,  Davidson)  for 
their  explanation,  but  are  characteristic  of 
the  genius  of  Hebrew  composition  (cf.  ch. 
vii.  1 — 10),  and  may  even  be  considerably 
removed  by  connecting  vers.  1,  2  with  ch. 
xv..  and  commencing  the  new  sub-section 
with  ch.  xvi.  3  (Quarry,  p.  331). 

Ver.  4. — And  he  went  in  unto  Hagar. 
"bN  N13,  a  linguistic  peculiarity  of  the 

Jehovist,  occurring  ch.  xxix.  21,  30;  xxx. 
3,  4  ;  xxxviii.  2,  9,  16  (Vaihinger,  David- 
son) ;  but  by  some  partitionists  chs.  xxix. 
and  xxx.  are  assigned  to  the  Elohist  (Tuch, 
Bleek,  De  Wette).  And  she  conceived:  and 
when  she  saw  that  she  had  conceived,  her 
mistress  was  despised  in  her  eyes.  As 
Hannah  by  Peninnah  (1  Sam.  i.  6)  ;  bar- 
renness among  the  Hebrews  having  been 
regarded  as  a  dishonour  and  reproach  (ch. 
xix.  31;  xxx.  1,  23;  Levit.  xx.  20),  and  fe- 
cundity as  a  special  mark  of  the  Divine 
favour  (ch.  xxi.  6;  xxiv.  60;  Exod.  xxiii. 
26;  Deut.  vii.  14).  Whether  Hagar  imag- 
ined Sarai  to  be  through  her  barrenness 
' '  tanquam  a  Divino  promisso  repudiatam  " 
(Lyra),  or  anticipated  Sarai's  displacement 
from  her  position  as  Abram's  wife  (Inglis), 
she,  immediately  on  perceiving  her  con- 
dition, became  insolent  (cf.  Prov.  xxx.  23). 
Ver.  5. — And  Sarai  said  unto  Abram, 
My  wrong  be  upon  thee.  'ASiKovy.o.1  in  rot 
(LXX.);  inique  agis  contra  me  (Vulgate); 
My  injury  is  upon  thee,  i.  e,  thou  art  the 
cause  of  it  (Jonathan,  Rosenmiiller,  Ains- 
worth, Clarke,  'Speaker's  Commentary'); 
or,  it  belongs  to  thee  as  well  as  to  ma 
(Clericus,  Bush,  Alford);  or,  perhapsbetter, 
May  the  injury  done  to  me  return  upon 


226 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[CH.  XVI.  1 — 6 


thee  I  cf.  xxvii.  13  (Keil,  Kaliscb,  LaDge, 
Wordsworth) — the  language  of  passionate 
irritatioD ,  indicating  repentance  of  her  pre- 
vious action  and  a  desire  to  both  impute 
its  guilt  to,  and  lay  its  bitter  consequences 
on,  her  husband,  who  in  the  entire  trans- 
action was  more  innocent  than  she.  I  have 
given  my  maid  into  thy  bosom  (very  im- 
prudent, even  had  it  not  been  sinful ;  the 
result  was  only  what  might  have  been  ex- 
pected);— and  when  she  saw  that  she  had 
conceived,  I  was  despised  in  her  eyes:  the 
Lord  judge  between  me  and  thee  (cf.  1  Sam. 
xxiv.  15;  Judges  xi.  27).  An  irreverent 
use  of  the  Divine  name  on  the  part  of 
Sarai  (Calvin),  and  a  speech  arguing  great 
passion  (Ainsworth). 

Ver.  6. — But  Abram  said  unto  Sarai,  Be- 
hold, thy  maid  is  in  thy  hand  (regarding 
her  still  as  one  of  Sarai's  servants,  though 
elevated  to  the  rank  of  secondary  wife  to 


himself) ;  do  to  her  as  it  pleaseth'  thee. 
Literally,  the  good  in  thine  eyes;  in  which 
conduct  of  the  patriarch  may  be  seen  per- 
haps (1)  an  evidence  of  his  peaceful  dispo- 
sition in  doing  violence  to  his  feelings  as  a 
husband  in  order  to  restore  harmony  to  his 
disquieted  household  (Calvin),  and  (2)  a 
proof  that  he  had  already  found  out  his 
mistake  in  expecting  the  promised  seed 
through Hagar  (Calvin);  but  also  (3)  an  in- 
dication of  weakness  in  yielding  to  Sarai's 
passionate  invective  (Willet,  Bush),  and 
(4)  an  unjustifiable  wrong  inflicted  on  the 
future  mother  of  his  child  (Candlish).  And 
when  Sarai  dealt  hardly  withher — (literally, 
afflicted  her,  by  thrusting  her  back  into 
the  condition  of  a  slave  (Lange,  Candlish); 
though  probably  by  stripes  or  maltreat- 
,ment  of  some  sort  in  addition  (Ainsworth, 
Bush) — she  fled  from  her  face. 


HOMILETICB. 

Ver.  8. — Crooked  ways,  or  marrying  with  Hagar.  I.  The  specious  proposal. 
1.  The  author  of  it ;  Sarai,  the  wife  of  Abram,  a  daughter  of  the  faith,  the  mistress 
of  a  household.  To  the  first,  the  suggestion  referred  to  in  the  narrative  should  have 
been  impossible;  in  the  second,  it  was  inconsistent;  while,  proceeding  from  the  third, 
it  was  calculated  to  be  harmful.  2.  The  wickedness  of  it.  It  was  (1)  a  clear  viola- 
tion of  the  law  of  God  (cf.  ch.  ii.  24;  Matt.  xir.  5;  1  Cor.  vi.  16;  Ephes.  v.  28,  31); 
(2)  a  direct  offence  against  the  soul  of  Abram,  being  ia  reality  the  placing  of  a 
dangerous  temptation  in  his  way  (Deut.  xiii.  6;  Rom.  xiv.  13);  and  (3)  an  unjustifiable 
invasion  of  the  liberties  of  Hagar.  Though  permitted  in  the  providence  of  God  to 
be  a  bondmaid  in  the  house  of  Sarai,  she  was  not  in  the  power  of  her  mistress  to  be 
disposed  of  in  the  way  proposed,  without  consent  either  asked  or  obtaiued.  3.  The 
extenuations  of  it.  (I)  The  practice  was  common.  Secondary  wives  being  then  in 
vogue,  the  scheme  recommended  by  Sarai  may  not  have  been  regarded  by  her  as  sin- 
ful. (2)  The  motive  was  good.  It  had  its  origin  undoubtedly  in  a  firm  belief  in  the 
promise,  and  a  strong  desire  that  her  husband  should  no  longer  be  debarred  from  its 
realisation  through  her  apparently  permanent  sterility.  (3)  The  self-denial  was  great. 
The  entire  conduct  of  Sarai,  in  giving  Hagar  to  her  husband,  evinced  certain  truly 
engaging  features  in  her  personal  and  wifely  character,  which  must  not  be  over- 
looked in  forming  an  estimate  of  her  peculiar  action  ;  such  as  genuine  humility  in 
yielding  to  another  the  honour  of  being  the  mother  of  Abram's  seed,  and  intense* 
devotion  to  her  husband  in  submitting  for  his  sake  to  a  displacement  which  must 
have  carried  anguish  to  her  breast. 

II.  The  sinful  compliance.  "Abram  hearkened  unto  the  voice  of  Sarai."  1. 
Deliberately.  He  was  not  surprised  into  this  secondary  marriage  with  the  Egyptian 
maiden.  The  scheme  of  Sarai  appears  to  have  been  talked  over  between  them  ;  and 
if  at  first  he  had  scruples  in  complying  with  her  proposition,  they  were  eventually 
overcome.  2.  Inconsiderately.  That  is,  the  ulterior  consequences  were  not  taken  into 
account  in  assenting  to  this  device  for  the  anticipation  of  the  promised  seed  ;  only 
its  immediate  feasibility  and  superficial  recommendations.  So  men  are  morally  short- 
sighted, and  cannot  see  afar  off  when  confronted  by  some  sweet  temptation.  Had 
Abram  only  dimly  discerned  the  outcome  of  Sarai's  counsel,  he  would  have  seen 
that  the  thing  was  not  of  God.  A  perception  of  the  coming  whirlwind  would  often 
hinder  the  sowing  of  the  wind.  3.  Inexcusably.  Though  not  dictated  by  carnal 
desire,  Abram's  acquiescence  in  Sarai's  scheme  was  far  from  being  faultless.  It 
evinced  a  want  of  faith,  and,  indeed,  a  want  of  true  spiritual  discernment  in  supposing 
that  what  God  had  promised  as  a  gift  of  grace  could  be  surreptitiously  snatched 
from  his  Divine  hand  in  the  way  proposed,  or  even  by  any  purely  human  stratagem; 


ch.  xvi.  1—6.]  THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS.  221 

»nd  a  want  of  patience  in  not  calmly  waiting  for  the  accomplishment  of  God's  word 
in  God's  own  time  and  way. 

III.  The  sorrowful  result.  1.  Humiliation  to  Sarai.  Elated  by  the  prospect 
of  maternity,  the  young  Egyptian  stare-girl  despised  her  mistress ;  by  haughtiness 
of  carriage,  perhaps  silently  cftocevering  contempt  for  Sarai's  sterility,  and  possibly 
assuming  airs  of  superiority,  as  if,  in  consequence  of  approaching  motherhood,  antici- 
pating her  displacement  from  the  throne  of  Abram's  love  (Prov.  xxx.  23).  2. 
Misery  to  Abram.  The  womanly  nature  of  Sarai,  stung  to  jealousy  by  the  success 
of  her  own  plan,  and  incapable  of  longer  enduring  the  scornful  triumph  of  a  maiden 
whom  her  owh  hands  had  transformed  into  a  favoured  rival,  with  something  like 
viudictive  heat  turned  upon  her  meek,  submissive,  and  in  this  matter  wholly  innocent 
lord,  reproaching  him  as,  if  not  the  cause  of  her  barrenness,  at  least  the  patient  and 
half-satisfied  witness  of  her  humiliation  ;  she  almost  called  down  upon  him  the 
judgment  of  Heaven.  Te  a  noble  spirit  Mke  that  of  Abram  the  anguish  of  Sarai  must 
have  been  distressing  to  beh«ld  ;  and  the  pain  which  it  occasioned  must  have  been 
intensified  when  he  came  to  realise  the  painful  dilemma  in  which  he  stood  between 
her  and  Hagar.  3.  Oppression,  te  Hagar.  Reminding  Sarai  that  Hagar,  though  a 
wife  to  him,  was  still  a  maid  to  her,  the  patriarch  unwisely  extended  sanction  to 
whatever  remedy  the  heated  breast  of  Sarai  might  devise.  The  result  was  that  the 
favoured  maiden  was  at  once  thrust  back  into  her  original  condition  of  servitude, 
deprived  of  whatever  tokeas  of  honour  aad  affection  she  had  received  as  Abram's 
wife,  and  subjected  to  injurious  treatmest  at  the  hands  of  her  incensed  mistress  and 
rival,  from  which  she  ultimately  sought  refuge  in  flight. 

Learn — 1.  That  eminent  saints  may  lapse  into  grievous  sins.  2.  That  a  child  of 
God  is  specially  liable  to  temptation  after  seasons  of  high  religious  privilege.  3. 
That  the  strongest  temptations  sometimes  proceed  from  the  least  expected  quarters. 
4.  That  trying  to  anticipate  the  Divine  promise  is  not  an  uncommon  form  of  tempta- 
tion. 5.  That  when  God's  people  take  to  crooked  ways,  nothing  but  evil  can  come 
of  it. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ch.  xvi. — Hagar.  The  history  of  Hagar  has  its  two  sides — that  which  is  turned 
towards  God  and  illustrates  Divine  grace,  that  which  is  turned  towards  man  and  illus- 
trates human  infirmity  and  sinfulness.  Jehovah  brought  forth  compassionate  beslow- 
ments  of  revelation  and  promise  out  of  his  people's  errors.  Abram  and  Sarah  both 
sinned.  Hagar  sinned.  The  angel  of  the  Lord,  representative  of  the  continuous 
gracious  revelation  of  Jehovah  as  a  covenant  God,  appeared  in  the  cloud  of  family 
sorrow,  drawing  once  more  upon  it  the  rainbow  of  promise.  Until  the  heir  came 
there  was  a  eall  for  patience.  Unbelief  appeared  at  work — in  the  patriarch's  weak- 
ness, m  Sarah's  harshness,  in  Hagar's  pride  and  rebellion,  for  she  was,  as  a  member 
of  the  household,  partaker  of  the  covenant.  In  the  wilderness  appeared  the  messen- 
ger of  grace. 

I.  The  name  of  the  Lord  was  the  testimony.  Thou  God  seest  me  ;  or,  Thou 
God  of  vision.  The  idea  is  that  the  sight  of  God  was  deliverance.  Hagar's  seeing 
God  was  God  seeing  her.  The  vision  was  both  objective  and  subjective.  So  the 
world  has  wearied  itself  in  the  wilderness  of  its  own  ignorance  and  moral  helpless- 
ness (cf.  Gal.  iv.  22 — 31).  The  unspiritual,  carnal  mind  is  the  bond  slave,  which 
must  give  way  to  the  true  heir.  All  true  religious  life  is  a  response  to  revelation.  In 
his  light  we  see  light. 

II.  The  revelation  to  Hagar  may  be  connected  with  her  personal  histoby. 
She  turned  back  with  a  new  light  in  her  heart.  Submission  and  obedience  are  com- 
manded, but  abundant  reward  is  promised.  Our  life  is  under  the  eye  of  Jehovah 
and  in  his  hand.  "  Thou  God  seest  me  "  is  the  cry  of  a  grateful  memory,  the  note  of 
a  bright  future  The  nearness  of  God,  his  knowledge,  may  be  not  terror,  but  bless- 
ing, angels  round  about  us,  gracious  sunshine  of  love  in  which  we  are  invited  to  walk 
as  children  of  light. — R. 

Vers.  1—6. — The  maid,  the  mistress,  and  the  master.  I.  Haqar's  sinb.  1.  Pride. 
%.  Contempt.     3.  Insubordination.    4.  Flight. 

<*3 


328 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[c*.  xvi.  7—18. 


II.  Sahai's  faults.    1.  Tempting  her  husband.    2.  Excusing  herself.     8.  Ap- 
pealing to  God.     4.  Afflicting  her  servant. 

III.  Abram's  infirmity.    1.  Yielding  to  temptation.    3.  Perpetrating  injustice. 
3.  Acquiescing  in  oppression.— W. 


EXPOSITION. 


Ver.  7. — And  the  angel  of  the  lord.  Ma- 
leach  Jehovah,  elsewhere  styled  Maleach 
EloMm  (ch.  xxi.  17  ;  xxxi.  11)  ;  supposed 
but  wrongly  to  be  a  creature  angel  (Augus- 
tine, Origen,  Jerome,  Hofmann,  Baum- 
garten,  Tholuck,  Delitzsch,  Kurtz),  for  the 
reasons  chiefly  (1 )  that  th  e  term  angel  com- 
monly designates  aclass  of  spiritual  beings 
(ch.  six.  1 ;  xxxii.  1 ;  Job  iv.  18 ;  Ps.  xci.  11 ; 
Matt.  xiii.  41 ;  John  xx.  12,  et passim);  (2) 
that  the  ayyeXos  KvpUm  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment (Matt.  i.  20 ;  Luke  ii.  9 ;  Acts  xii.  7)  is 
always  a  created  angel;  (3)  that  the  mean- 
ing of  the  term  Ijisbn,  onesent,fromTji?b,to 

depute(Gesenius),onethrough  whom  work 
is  executed,  from  'TjNb,  to  work  (Keil),jim- 
plies  a  certain  degree  of  subordination, 
which  is  afterwards  more  distinctly  recog- 
nised (1  Chron.  xxi.  27;  Eech.  i.  12);  (4)  that 
the  distinction  between  the  unrevealed  and 
the  revealed  God  was  not  then  developed 
as  in  later  times,  and  particularly  since  the 
advent  of  Christ — to  every  oneof  whichar- 
guments,  ho  wever,  it  is  comparatively  easy 
to  reply  (cf.  Keil  andLange  in  loco).  With 
more  force  of  reason  believed  to  have  been 
theDivineBeinghimself.wboalreadyasJe- 
hovah  hadappeared  to  Abram  (the  Fathers, 
the  Reformers,  Hengstenberg,  Keil.  Lange, 
Havernick,Nitzsch,Ebrard,Steir,Kalisch,  ■ 
Ainsworth,  Bush,  Wordsworth,  Candlish), 
since — 1.  The  Maleach  Jehovah  explicitly 
identifies  himself  with  Jehovah  (ver.  10) 
andElohim(ch.  xxii.  12).  2.  Thosetowhom 
hemakeshispresenceknownrecognisehim 
as  Divine  (ch.  xvi.  13;  xviii.  23 — 33 ;  xxviii. 
16—22;  Exod.  iii.6;  Judges vi.  15,  20—23; 
xiii.  22).  3.  The  Biblical  writers  constantly 
speak  of  himasDivine,callinghim  Jehovah 
without  the  least  reserve(ch.  xvi.  13;  xviii. 
1;  xxii.  16;  Exod.  iii.  2;  Judges  vi.  12).  4. 
The  doctrine  here  implied  of  a  plurality  of 
persons  in  the  Godhead  is  in  complete  ac- 
cordance with  earlierforeshadowings(ch.i. 
26;  xi.  7)  and  later  revelations  of  the  same 
truth.  5.  The  organic  unity  of  Scripture 
would  be  broken  if  it  could  be  proved  that 
the  central  point  in  the  Old  Testament  rev- 
elation was  a  creature  angel,  while  that  of 
the  New  istheincarnation  of  theGod-Man. 
Found  her  by  a  fountain  of  water  in  the  wil- 
derness. Properly  an  uninhabited  district 
suitable  for  pasturing  flocks,  from  a  root 
signifyingtoleadtopasture;henceasterile, 
sandy  country,  like  that  here  referred  to, 


Arabia  Deserta,  bordering  on  Egypt  (ch. 
xiv.  6;  Exod.  iii.  1).  By  the  fountain.  The 
article  indicating  a  particular  and  well- 
known  spring.  In  the  way  to  Shur.  "  Be 
fore  Egypt,  as  thou  goest  toward  Assyria" 
(ch.  xxv.  18);  hence  not  Pelusium  on  the 
Nile  (Jos.,  'Ant.,'  vi.  7,  3),  but  probably 
the  modern  Dschifar  in  the  north-west  of 
Arabia  Deserta  (Michaelis,  Rosenmtlller, 
Keil,  Lange).  Hagar  was  clearly  directing 
her  flight  to  Egypt. 

Ver.  8. — And  he  said,  Hagar,  Sarai's 
maid.  Declining  to  recognise  her  marriage 
with  the  patriarch.theangelremindsherof 
heroriginal  position  as  abondwoman,  from 
which  liberty  was  not  to  be  obtained  by 
flight,  but  by  manumission.  Whence  earnest 
thou?  and  whither  wilt  thon  go?  And  she 
said,  I  flee  from  the  face  of  my  mistress  Sarai. 
"  Her  answer  testifies  to  the  oppression 
she  had  experienced,  but  also  to  the 
voice  of  her  own  conscience  "  (Lange). 

Ver.  9. — And  the  angel  of  the  Lord  said 
unto  her — as  Paul  afterwards  practically 
said  to  Onesimus,  the  runaway  slave  of 
Philemon  (vide  Phil.  12) — return  to  thy 
mistress,  and  submit  thyself — the  verb  here 
employed  is  the  same  as  that  which  the 
historian  uses  to  describe  Sarah's  conduct 
towards. her  (ver.  6);  ite  meaning  ob- 
viously is  that  she  should  meekly  resign 
"herself  to  the  ungracious  and  oppressive 
treatment  of  hermi  stress — under  her  hands. 

Ver.  10. — And  the  angel  of  the  Lord  said 
unto  her  (after  duty,  promise),  I  will  mul- 
tiply thy  seed  exceedingly  (literally,  multi- 
plying I  trill  multiply  thy  seed;  language 
altogether  inappropriate  in  the  lips  of  a 
creature),  that  (literally,  and)  it  shall  not 
be  numbered  for  multitude. 

Ver.  11. — And  the  angel  of  the  Lord  said 
unto  her,  Behold,  thou  art  with  child,  and 
thou  shalt  bear  a  son,  and  shalt  call  his 
name  Ishmael.  "God  shall  hear,"  or 
"  Whom  God  hears,"  the  first  instance  of 
the  naming  of  a  child  before  its  birth  (cf . 
afterwards  ch.  xvii.  19;  1  Kings  xiii.  2 ; 
1  Chron.  xxii.  9;  Matt.  i.  21;  Luke  i.  13). 
Because  the  Lord  hath  heard  thy  affliction. 
Tfi  TO/irEivtSo-ei  o-ov  (LXX.),  "thy  prayer" 
(Chaldee),  of  which  there  is  no  mention, 
though  men's  miseries  are  said  to  cry 
when  men  themselves  are  mute  (Calvin; 
cf.  Exod.  i.  24;  iii.  7). 

Ver.  12. — And  he  will  be  a  wild  man. 
Literally,  a  wild  ass  (e/a)  mans  the  N.pf, 


ch.  xvi.  7 — 16.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


229 


onager,  being  so  called  from  its  swiftness  of 
foot  (cf .  Job  xxxix.  5 — 8),  and  aptly  depict- 
ing "the  Bedouin's  boundless  love  of  free- 
dom as  he  rides  about  in  the  desert,  spear  in 
hand,  upon  his  camel  or  his  horse,  hardy, 
frugal,  revelling  in  the  varied  beauty  of 
nature,  and  despising  town  life  in  every 
form  "  (Keil).  As  Ishmael  and  his  offspring 
are  here  called  "wild  ass  men,"  so  Israel  is 
designated  by  the  prophet  "  sheep  men  " 
(Ezek.  xxxvi.  37,  38).     His  hand  will  be 
against  every  man,  and  every  man's  hand 
against  him.  Exemplified  in  the  turbulent 
and  lawless  characterof  the  Bedouin  Arabs 
and  Saracens  for  upwards  of  thirty  centu- 
ries. "TheBedouinsaretheoutlawsamong 
the  nations.   Plunder  is  legitimate  gain, 
and  daring  robbery  is  praised  as  valour  " 
(Ealisch).  And  he  shall  dwell  in  the  presence 
of— literally,  hef ore  the  face  of,  i.  e.  to  the 
eastof  (Rosenm&ller,  Gesenius,  Tuch,  Kno- 
bel,  Delitzsch);  or,  "  every wherebef ore  the 
eyes  of"  (Ealisch,  Wordsworth);  or,  inde- 
pendentlyof  (Calvin,  Keil,  Lange,  Murphy) 
— all  his  brethren.     The  Arabs  of  to-day 
are  '  'just  as  they  were  described  by  the 
spirit  of  prophecy  nearly  4000  years  ago" 
(Porter's  'Giant  Cities  of  Basban,'  pp. 
28,  31,  324). 

Ver.  IS. — And  she  called  the  name — not 
in vokedthe  name  (Ch  aldee,  Lapide),  though 
occasionally  Dp  N*Tp  has  the  same  import 

as  DIBS  N^ft  (ride  Deut.  xxxii.  3)— of  the 
Lord — Jehovah,  thus  identifying  the  Ma- 
leach  Jehovah  with  Jehovah  himself — that 
spake  unto  her,  ThouGodseestme.  Literally, 
Thou  (art)  El-Roi,  a  Qod  of  seeing,  mean- 
ing either  the  God  of  my  vision,  i.  e.  the 
God  who  revealest  thyself  in  vision  (Gese- 
nius. Ftlrst,  Le  Clerc,  Dathe,  Rosenmtlller, 


Keil,  Kalisch,  Murphy),  or,  though  less 
correctly,  the  God  who  sees  all  things, 
and  therefore  me  (LXX.,  Vulgate,  Calvin, 
Ainsworth,  Candlish,  Hofmann,  Baumgai- 
ten,  Delitzsch,  Wordsworth).  For  she  said, 
Have  I  also  here  looked  after  him  that  seeth 
mel  Literally,  Have  I  also  hitherto  seen? 
i.  e.  Do  I  also  still  live  after  the  vision  1 
(Onkelos,  Gesenius,  Fiirst,  Keil,  Kalisch, 
Rosenmttller,  Murphy). 

Ver.  14. — Wherefore  the  well  was  called 
—in  all  likelihood  first  by  Hagar— Beer- 
lahai-roi.orthe  well  of  him  that  liveth  and 
seeth  me  (A.  V.);  but  either  (1)  the  well  of 
the  living  one  of  vision,  i.  e.  of  God,  who 
appeared  there  (Onkelos,  Rosenmiiller, 
Lange);  or  (2)  the  well  of  the  life  of  vision, 
i.  e.  where  after  seeing  God  life  was  pre- 
served (Gesenius,  Keil,  Kalisch,  Murphy), 
or  where  in  consequence  of  seeing  God  a 
new  life  was  imparted  (Inglis).  Behold,  it 
is  between  Kadesh  (vide  ch.  xiv.  7)  and 
Bered.  Of  uncertain  situation;  but  the  well 
has  probably  been  discovered  in  AinKades 
(called  by  the  Arabs  Motiahi  Hagar),  to 
the  south  of  Beersheba,  and  about  twelve 
miles  from  Kadesh  (cf.  Keil  in  loco). 

Ver.  15. — And  Hagar  bare  Abram  a  son: 
and  Abram  called  his  son's  name — a  pecu- 
liarity of  the  Elohist  to  assign  the  naming 
of  a  child  to  the  father  (Knobel),  but  the 
present  chapter  is  usually  ascribed  to  the 
Jehovist,  while  the  instances  in  which 
the  name  is  given  by  the  mother  do  not 
always  occur  in  Jehovistic  sections  (cf. 
ch.  xxx.  6,  which  Tuch  imputes  to  the  Elo- 
hist)—which  Hagar  bare,  Ishmael — thus  ac- 
knowledging the  truth  of  Hagar's  vision. 

Ver.  16. — And  Abram  was  fourscore  and 
six  years  old,  when  Hagar  bare  Ishmael  to 
I  Abram. 


HOMILETIC8 

Ver.  7. — TJie  capture  of  the  runaway,  or  Hagar  and  the  angel  of  the  Lord.  I.  The 
fugitive  areestbd.  1.  The  agent  of  her  capture.  The  angel  of  Jehovah  (vide 
Exposition),  whose  appearance  to  Hagar  at  this  particular  juncture  was  doubtless — (1) 
Unexpected.  Those  who  flee  from  duty  seldom  anticipate  the  encountering  of  God 
in  their  career  (Jonah  i.  3).  (2)  Instantaneous.  The  Invisible  Supreme,  who  ever 
compasses  our  paths,  only  requires  to  either  open  his  creatures'  eyes,  or  veil  his  un- 
created glory  in  a  finite  form,  to  make  his  presence  known  (Ps.  cxxxix.  7;  Luke 
xxiv.  15).  (3)  Familiar.  Though  here  mentioned,  angelic  visitation  need  not  now 
have  occurred  for  the  first  time.  Hagar  probably  had  learnt  something  in  the  patriarch's 
household  of  the  character,  existence,  and  form  of  this  celestial  vistitant.  (4)  Oppor- 
tune. "Whether  regarded  in  this  light  or  not,  the  present  Divine  manifestation  to 
Hagar  was  highly  seasonable,  as  God's  visits  to  ma,n  ever  are,  in  both  the  world  and 
the  Church.  2.  The  place  of  her  capture.  (1)  In  the  wilderness,  a  very  different 
locality  from  Abram's  tent.  But  all  regions  are  equally  accessible  to  God's  providence 
and  grace ;  and  God's  angel  of  mercy  and  salvation  can  find  his  way  to  disconsolate 
wanderers  across  the  wilderness  of  a  barren  world  as  easily  as  to  eminent  saints 
within  the  sacred  precincts  of  the  Church.    (2)  On  the  way  to  8hur,  L  e.  going  back 


830  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  [ch.  xn.  7-16. 

to  Egyptian  worldliness  and  idolatry.  Her  chances  of  reaching  the  land  of  Ham  were 
indeed  small,  considering  her  bodily  condition;  but  thither  was  her  destination,  and 
hence  her  arrestment  by  the  angel  of  the  Lord  was  a  special  mercy.  So  Divine  grace 
interposes  to  prevent  those  who  have  been  once  enlightened  from  relapsing  to  their  old 
natural  condition  of  worldliness  and  sin.  (3)  By  a  fountain  of  water,  beside  which 
it  may  be  imagined  she  had  cast  herself  in  sheer  exhaustion  ;  an  emblem  of  those 
springs  of  refreshment,  or  wells  of  Baca,  which  God  has  provided  for  the  spiritually 
disconsolate,  and  one  of  which  was  being  opened  by  Jehovah's  visit  for  the  comfort 
of  the  unhappy  bondmaid. 

II.  The  foundling  interrogated.  1.  The  question  of  the  angel.  (1)  The  design- 
ations used,  Hagar,  Sarai's  maid,  reveal  the  minuteness  of  the  Divine  knowledge. 
God  is  acquainted  with  the  names  and  the  homes,  the  conditions  in  life,  and  the  con- 
stituent elements  in  the  history  of  all  men  (Ps.  cxxxix.  1 — 5).  (2)  The  reference  to 
Hagar's  original  condition  of  servitude  implies  disapprobation  of  her  union  with 
Abram.  No  transaction  can  be  safely  passed  as  blameless  until  it  has  been  reviewed 
and  judged  by  God.  (3)  The  inquiries  addressed  to  Hagar  were  designed  to  convict 
her  of  sin.  Whence  had  she  come  ?  From  Abram's  house,  where  the  name  of  God 
was  worshipped  ;  from  the  presence  of  Sarai,  who  had  a  lawful  claim  upon  her  ser- 
vice ;  from  the  land  of  Canaan,  the  inheritance  of  Abram's  seed,  of  which,  as  she 
fondly  hoped,  she  was  about  to  become  a  mother — in  all  which  she  was  clearly  com- 
mitting wrong.  Then  whither  was  she  going  ?  Back  again  to  Egypt,  as  the  ultimate 
goal  of  her  flight,  while  in  the  meantime  she  was  exposing  herself  and  her  unborn 
child  to  serious  peril.  Doubtless  these  and  other  considerations  of  a  similar  sort  arose 
within  the  breast  of  Hagar  as  she  listened  to  Johovah's  questionings.  When  God  ex- 
amines souls  they  are  truly,  minutely,  and  completely  searched.  2.  The  answer  of 
Hagar.  (1)  Promptly  given.  There  was  no  sign  of  hesitancy  or  reluctance.  The 
utmost  frankness  and  cordiality  should  characterise  a  sinner's  dealings  with  God. 
(2)  Briefly  expressed.  "  She  was  fleeing  from  the  face  of  Sarai  her  mistress." 
Comprehensive  brevity  should  signalise  our  responses  to  God's  interrogations.  (3) 
Honestly  declared.  She  had  run  away.  If  it  was  wrong,  she  made  no  attempt  at 
concealment.     Guileless  acknowledgment  of  sin  is  a  true  mark  of  contrition. 

III.  The  wanderer  directed.  1.  To  return  to  Abram's  house.  The  tent  of 
Sarai,  though  to  Hagar's  quick  Southron  blood  a  place  of  humiliation,  was  neverthe- 
less for  her  the  true  place  of  safety,  both  physically  and  spiritually.  The  first 
counsel  that  God's  word  and  spirit  give  to  those  who  flee  from  duty,  forsake  the  com- 
pany of  saints,  and  venture  out  upon  perilous  and  sinful  courses  is  "to  stand  in  the 
ways,  and  ask  for  the  old  paths "  (Jer.  vi.  16).  2.  To  submit  to  Sarais  yoke.  Her 
alliance  with  the  patriarch  could  not  in  God's  sight  alter  her  original  position  as  a 
slave.  Though  soon  to  be  the  mother  of  Abram's  seed,  she  was  still  a  bondwoman, 
whose  duty  was  submission,  however  galling  to  her  hot  blood,  and  however  unrea- 
sonable it  might  seem  in  the  case  of  one  whose  child  might  yet  inherit  Canaan. 
God's  people  are  required  to  abide  in  those  stations  in  life  in  which  they  have  been 
called,  until  they  can  be  honourably  released  from  them  (1  Cor.  vii.  20 — 22),  and  to 
endure  those  afflictions  which  Gud  in  his  providence  may  impose,  rather  than  im- 
petuously and  sinfully  endeavour  to  escape  from  them  (Matt.  xvi.  24). 

TV.  The  disconsolate  comported.     1.  The  richness  of  the  offered  consolation. 

(1)  A  gracious  assurance — that  she  was  an  object  of  the  Divine  regard,  as  this  very 
visit  proved  ;  of  the  Divine  observation,  since  the  Lord  knew  her  condition  ;  and  of 
the  Divine  compassion,  for  already  he  had  heard  her  affliction— than  which  no 
sweeter  consolation  can  be  offered  to  either  penitent  backslider  or  dejected  sufferer. 

(2)  A  comfortable  promise — that  she  should  live  to  be  the  mother  of  Abram's  seed, 
that  her  unborn  babe  should  be  a  son,  and  that  her  son  should  develop  into  a  bold, 
courageous,  and  prosperous  man,  and  that  through  him  she  herself,  an  Egyptian 
slave-girl,  should  become  the  ancestress  of  a  numerous  and  mighty  people.  God  is 
able,  even  in  respect  of  material  and  temporal  benefits,  to  compensate  for  life's 
sorrows  and  tribulations,  and  to  make  up  in  one  direction  for  what  he  takes  away 
in  another.  (3)  An  important  instruction— to  name  her  child  "  Isbmael "  when  it 
should  be  born  ;  partly  as  a  memorial  to  herself  of  the  Divine  mercy,  and  partly  as  a 
reminder  to  her  child  of  the  sure  Source  of  prosperity,  both  personal  and  national, 
temporal  and  spiritual.    God's  people  should  remember  the  right  hand  of  the  Most 


ch.  xvi.  7—16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  flBNBWS.  Ml 

High  (Ps.  lxxvii.  10),  and  seek  advancement  from  him  alone  (Ps.  lxxv.  6,  7).  2. 
The  efficacy  of  the  offered  consolation.  (1)  Adoring  gratitude.  Hagar  was  amazed 
at  the  Divine  condescension  in  permitting  her  to  see  God  and  yet  live— a  mercy 
denied  to  Moses  on  the  Mount  (Exod.  xxxiii.  20) ;  and  the  Divine  grace  which  had 
imparted  life  and  hope  to  her  soul  through  this  celestial  visitation.  (2)  Mercy 
remembered.  Hagar  called  the  well  Beer-lahai-roi,  i.  e.  the  well  of  seeing  and 
living.  The  Divine  loving-kindness  is  worthy  of  memorials,  which  also  should  be 
written  on  the  tablets  of  the  heart  when  they  cannot  be  expressed  in  words  or 
enshrined  in  deeds.  (8)  Cheerful  submission.  Hagar  returned  to  Abram's  house, 
submitted  to  Sarai's  hand,  and  in  due  time  gave  birth  to  Ishmael.  The  best  evidence 
that  grace  has  comforted  the  human  heart  is  prompt  compliance  with  the  will  of  God. 
See  in  the  angel's  appearance  to  Hagar — 1.  An  adumbration  of  the  incarnation  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  2.  An  illustration  of  God's  care  of  those  who  are  within  his 
Church.  3.  An  indication  of  the  kind  of  people  that  most  attract  the  Divine  notice 
and  compassion.  4.  A  revelation  of  the  tenderness  with  which  he  deals  with  sin- 
ners.    5.  A  proclamation  of  God's  gracious  readiness  to  forgive  the  erring. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  7. — Wells  in  the  wilderness.  1.  God  provides  them  for  the  rest  and  refresh- 
ment of  pilgrims.  2.  God  visits  them  to  meet  with  weary  and  afflicted  pilgrims. 
3.  God  dispenses  from  them  life  and  hope  to  all  repenting  and  believing  pilgrims. 
Compare  with  the  angel  of  Jehovah  and  Hagar  at  the  fountain  of  Shur,  Christ  and 
the  woman  of  Samaria  at  Jacob's  well  (John  iv.  6). — W. 

Vers.  7 — 13. — Glimpses  of  the  Godhead.  1.  Divine  condescension.  God  visits 
men  as  the  angel  visited  Hagar.  2.  Divine  omniscience.  God  knows  men  as  the  angel 
knew  Hagar.  3.  Divine  compassion.  God  pities  and  comforts  men  as  the  angel 
did.  Hagar.  4.  Divine  wisdom.  God  instructs  men  as  the  angel  directed  Hagar. 
5.  Divine  grace.     God  pardons  and  accepts  men  as  the  angel  did  Hagar. — "W. 

Ver.  8. — God  pleading  with  wanderers.  "Hagar,  Sarai's  maid,  whence  earnest 
thou  ?  and  whither  wilt  thou  go  1 "  She  knew  not,  cared  not.  Undisciplined, 
smarting  under  effects  of  her  own  wilfulness  (ver.  4),  she  thought  only  of  escaping 
pain— a  type  of  those  weary,  yet  unconverted  (cf .  Jer.  ii.  13  ;  v.  3).  But  God 
saw  her.  The  Shepherd  sought  her  (cf .  Gen.  iii.  9  ;  Luke  xv.  9).  Though  not  of 
the  chosen  race,  and  having  no  claim  upon  his  care,  of  his  own  mercy  he  calls 
her  (cf .  Ps.  cxlv.  9  ;  Ephes.  ii.  4  ;  Titus  iii.  5).  The  angel  of  the  Lord  ;  in  ver.  13 
called  the  Lord  ;  the  messenger  of  the  covenant  (Mai.  iii.  1) — sent  to  carry  out  the 
Father's  purpose  (cf.  John  iii.  17  ;  Luke  iv.  18).  The  same  who  speaks  in  the  voice 
of  awakened  conscience,  that  he  may  give  peace  (cf.  Matt.  xi.  28).  "  Hagar,  Sarai's 
maid,"  expresses  God's  full  knowledge  of  her  (cf.  Exod.  xxxiii.  12  ;  John  x,  3). 
The  name  distinguishes  the  individual.  She  a  stranger,  a  slave,  a  fugitive  ;  yet 
God's  eye  upon  her ;  all  her  life  before  him  (cf.  Ps.  exxxix.  1—4).  A  word  for 
those  following  their  own  ways,  feeling  as  if  hidden  in  the  multitude.  Nothing 
glaring  in  their  lives  ;  men  see  nothing  to  find  fault  with  ;  will  God  ?  (cf.  Ps.  xciv.  7). 
Be  knows  thee  altogether  ;  thy  whole  life,  the  selfishness  underlying  a  fair  profession, 
the  unconfessed  motives,  the  little  duplicities,  the  love  of  worldly  things  ;  or  it  may 
be  thy  spiritual  pride  and  self -trusting.  He  sees  thee  through.  But  wilt  thou  seek 
to  escape  the  thought  of  him  ?  For  what  does  he  search  thee  .out  ?  Is  it  not  to 
bring  thee  to  peace  ?  A  word  of  comfort  to  him  who  is  cast  down  because  of  weak- 
ness in  faith,  little  progress,  want  of  spirituality.  He  sees  all  (cf.  Luke  xix.  5). 
Not  as  man— men  see  the  failures ;  God  sees  the  battle,  the  longing  desire  for  better 
things,  the  prayers  (Ps.  xxviii.  1  ;  exxx.  1),  the  searching  of  heart,  the  sorrow 
because  of  failure.     Even  in  the  wilderness  he  is  present  to  help  (Gal.  vi.  9). 

I.  "Whence  cambst  thou?"  Is  the  wildernesss  better  than  the  home  thou  hast 
left  ?  (cf.  Isa.  v.  4).  Thou  hast  left  safety  and  plenty  (cf.  Num.  xxi.  5),  impatient 
of  God's  discipline.  A  goodly  possession  was  thine — the  place  of  a  child  (1  John 
iii.  1),  the  right  always  to  pray  (Luke  xviii.  1  j  John  xv.  7  ;  Heb.  iv.  16  ;  James  iv. 
2),  the  promise  of  guidance  (Ps.  xxxii.  8  ;  Isa.  xxx.  21).    For  what  hast  thou  given 


aaa 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[oh.  xra.  1 — 14. 


up  all  this  ?  Is  thy  present  lot  better  ?  In  deepest  love  these  questions  are  asked. 
God  pleads  by  providence  (Ps.  cxix.  67),  by  the  entering  of  the  word  (Ps.  cxix.  180 ; 
Heb.  iv.  12),  by  the  "  still  small  voice  "  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 

II.  "  Whither  wilt  thou  go  f "  How  many  have  never  really  considered. 
Hast  thou  renounced  thy  heavenly  portion  ?  God  forbid.  Then  is  thy  life  heaven- 
ward ?  Are  thy  sins  blotted  out  ?  Hast  thou  accepted  the  free  gift  of  salvation  T 
I  am  not  sure  of  that.  And  why  not?  Is  it  not  that  thou  hast  not  cared  enough 
to  entertain  the  question  as  a  practical  one  f  (cf.  Ezek.  xx.  49  ;  xxxiii.  32).  Mean- 
while thou  art  not  standing  still.  The  day  of  grace  is  passing  away  (cf .  Jer.  viii. 
20).  Still  Christ  pleads  (Rev.  iii.  20).  But  day  by  day  the  ear  becomes  more  dull, 
and  the  aims  and  habits  of  life  more  hard  to  change.  "  Return,"  was  the  Lord's 
word  to  Hagar.  Take  again  thy  place  in  God's  family  (cf.  Luke  xv.  20).  Fear 
not  to  bear  thy  cross.  There  is  a  welcome  and  joy  in  heaven  over  every  returning 
wanderer. — M. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER   XVII. 


Ver.  1. — And  when  Abram  was  ninety 
years  old  and  nine — consequently  an  in- 
terval of  thirteen  years  had  elapsed  since 
the  birth  of  Ishmael ;  the  long  delay  on  the 
part  of  God  being  probably  designed  as 
chastisement  for  Abram's  second  nnptials 
(Calvin),  and  at  least  corresponding  with 
Abram's  undue  haste  (Lange) — the  Lord 
appeared  to  Abram — lest  he  should  regard 
Ishmael's  birth  as  a  complete  fulfilment  of 
the  promise  (Menochius),  and  be  satisfied 
with  Hagar's  child  as  the  expected  seed 
(Calvin) — and  said  to  Mm,  I  am  the  Al- 
mighty God — El  Shaddai,  found  six  times 
in  Genesis  and  thirty-one  times  in  Job, 
composed  of  En,  God,  and  Shaddai  ;  not  a 
nomen  compositum  (.from  125  =  "IICN  and  ^) 
signifying  qui sufficiens  est  (Aquinas,  Synr 
machus,  Theodoret,  Saadias,  Maimonides, 
Calvin),  but  either  a  pluralis  exeeUentim, 
from  the  singular  1123,  powerful — root 
TTIB,  to  be  strong  (Gesenius,  Rosenmtiller, 
Wordsworth),  or  a  singular  from  the  same 
root  with  the  substantive  termination  J, 
as  in  i&j,  the  festal,  ■'©"HIT,  the  old 
man,  "O^D,  the  thorn-grown  (Keil,  Ochler, 

Lange)  ;  descriptive  of  God  as  revealing 
himself  violently  in  his  might,  hence  cor- 
rectly rendered  iravroKp&rup  by  the  LXX. 
in  Job  (Oehler) ;  distinguishing  Jehovah, 
the  God  of  salvation,  from  Elohim,  the 
God  who  creates  nature  so  that  it  is  and 
supports  it  that  it  may  stand,  as  ' '  the  God 
who  compels  nature  to  do  what  is  contrary 
to  itself,  and  subdues  it  to  bow  and  min- 
ister to  grace  "  (Delitzsch) ;  characterising 
Jehovah  the  covenantQod,  "as  possessing 
the  power  to  realise  his  promises,  even 
when  the  order  of  nature  presented  no 
prospect  of  their  fulfilment,  and  the  pow- 
ers of  nature  were  insufficient  to  secure 
It "   (Keil) ;   perhaps,   like  Elohim  and 


Adonai,  one  of  the  world-wide  titles  of 
the  Most  High  since  it  was  known  to 
Balaam  (Numb.  xxiv.  4,  16),  and  is  con- 
stantly used  in  Job  ('  Speaker's  Com- 
mentary ').  Said  in  Exod.  vi.  2,  3  to  have 
been  the  name  by  which  God  was  known 
to  the  patriarchs,  it  is  regarded  by  the 
partitionists  as  characteristicof  the Elohist 
(Tuch,  Bleek,  Colenso,  Davidson, Ewald), 
and  accordingly  to  that  writer  the  present 
chapter  is  assigned,  and  the  Jehovah  of 
this  verse  explained  as  an  alteration  of 
the  original  Elohist's  narrative  ;  but  the 
irpwrov  x|«0Sos  of  this  criticism  lurks  in  the 
identification  of  El-Shaddai  with  Elohim, 
whereas  it  is  not  Elohim,  but  Jehovah, 
who  reveals  himself  as  El  Shaddai.  not 
alone  in  the  Pentateuch,  but  in  the  histori- 
cal and  prophetical  books  as  well  (cf.  Ruth 
i.  20,  21  ;  vide  Keil's  Introduction,  pt.  i.  § 
2;  div.  i.  §  25).  Walk  before  me.  Literally, 
set  thyself  to  walk,  as  in  ch.  xiii.  17,  inmy 
presence,  as  if  conscious  of  my  inspection 
and  solicitous  of  my  approval ;  not  behind 
me,  as  if  sensible  of  shortcomings,  and 
desirous  to  elude  observation.  The  phrase 
intimates  a  less  exalted  piety  than  the 
corresponding  phrase  used  of  Enoch  (v. 
24)  and  Noah  (ch.  vi.  9).  And  be  thon  per- 
fect. Tamim,  oVcpirros  (LXX.),  used  of 
Noah  in  ch.  vi.  9,  and  rendered  r&eios 
(LXX),  while  perhaps  retrospectively 
glancing  at  Abram's  sin  in  marrying 
Hagar,  indicates  that  absolute  standard 
of  moral  attainment,  viz.,  completeness 
of  being  in  respect  of  purity,  which  the 
supreme  Lawgiver  sets  before  his  intelli- 
gent creatures  (cf.  Matt.  v.  8). 

Ver.  2. — And  I  will  make  my  covenant 
between  me  and  thee.  Literally,  IwiU  gvt» 
(cf.  ch.  ix.  9,  11,  12).  Neither  an  additional 
covenant  to  that  described  in  ch.  xv. 
(Rosenmuller),  nor  a  different  traditional 
account  of  the  transaction  contained  in  ch. 
xv.  (Tuch , Bleek),  northeoriginal  Elohistic 
narrative  of  which  that  in  ch.  xv.  was  a 
later  imitation  (Knobel);  but  an  intimation 


oh.  XVn.  1—14.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  (HSXESIS. 


988 


that  the  co tenant  already  concluded  was 
about  to  be  carried  into  execution,  and 
tlie  promise  of  a  son  to  be  more  specifically 
determined  as  the  offspring  of  Sarai(Keil). 
And  will  multiply  thee  exceedingly  (vide 
ch.  Hi.  2 ;  xiii.  16 ;  xv.  5). 

Ver.  3.  And  Abram  fell  on  his  face— in 
reverential  awe  and  worship  (vide  ver.  17 ; 
cf.  ch.  xxiv.  52  ;  Numb.  xvi.  22 ;  Mark 
xiv.  35).  Other  attitudes  of  devotion  are 
mentioned  (1  Kings  viii.  54 ;  Mark  xi.  25; 
1  Tim.  ii.  8).  And  God— Elohim,  the 
third  name  for  the  Deity  within  the  com- 
pass of  as  many  verses,  thus  indicating 
identity  of  being — talked  with  him, 
saying — 

Ver.  4. — As  for  me.  Literally,  I,  stand- 
ing alone  at  the  beginning  of  the  sentence 
by  way  of  emphasis  (cf.  2  Kings  x.  29; 
Ps.  xi.  4  ;  xlvi.  5  ;  vide  Ewald's  '  Hebrew 
Syntax,' §309).  Equivalent  to  "  So  far 
as  I  am  concerned,"  or,  "  I  for  my  part," 
or,  "So  far  as  relates  to  me."  Behold, 
my  covenant  is  with  thee,  and  thon  shalt 
be — literally,  shalt  become  (cf.  ch.  ii.  7), 
or  grow  to  (cf.  ch.  ix.  15)— a  father  of 
many  (or  of  a  multitude  of)  nations. 

Ver.  5. — Neither  shall  thy  name  any 
more  be  called  Abram, — Ab  ram,  i.  e. 
high  father  (vide  ch.  xi.  26);  but  Abraham 
— Ab-raham  (in  Arabic  signifying  a  multi- 
tude) ;  hence  "  the  father  of  a  multitude," 
as  the  next  clause  explains — for  a  father 
of  many  (or  a  multitude  of)  nations  have 
I  made  thee. 

Ver.  6. — And  I  will  make  thee  exceed- 
ing fruitful,  and  I  will  make  nations  of 
thee, — a  promise  fulfilled  in  the  Ishmae- 
lites,  the  descendants  of  Keturah,  the 
Edomites,  and  the  Israelites — and  kings 
(e  g.  David  and  Solomon)  shall  come  out 
of  thee. 

Ver.  7.-^And  will  I  establish  my  cove- 
nant between  me  and  thee  and  thy  seed 
after  thee  in  their  generations  for  an  ever- 
lasting covenant, — literally,  for  a  covenant 
of  eternity  (vide  ch.  ix.  16) — to  be  a  God 
unto  thee,  and  to  thy  seed  after  thee. 
Literally,  to  be  for  Blohim  ;  »  formula 
comprehending  all  saving  benefits ;  a 
clear  indication  of  the  spiritual  character 
of  the  Abrahamic  covenant  (cf.  ch,  xxvi. 
U ;  xxviii.  13 ;  Heb.  xi.  16). 

Ver.  8. — And  I  will  give  unto  thee,  and 
co  thy  seed  after  thee,  the  land  wherein 
thou  art  a  stranger,— literally,  of  thy  so- 
journings  (ch.  xii.  9 ;  Acts  vii.  5 ;  Heb. 
xi.  9 — all  the  land  of  Canaan  (vide  ch.  x. 
19), — for  an  everlasting  possession.  Liter- 
ally, for  a  possession  of  eternity  ;  i.  e.  the 
earthly  Canaan  should  be  retained  by  them 
so  long  as  the  arrangement  then  instituted 
ihould  continue,  provided  always  they 
wmplied  with  the  conditions  of  the  cove- 


nant ;  and  the  heavenly  Canaan  should  be 
the  inheritance  of  Abraham's  spiritual 
children  for  ever  (vide  ch.  ix.  16 ;  xiii.  15). 
And  I  will  be  their  God.  Literally,  to 
them  for  Elohirn  (vide  supra). 

Ver.  9. — And  God  said  unto  Abraham, 
Thou — literally,  and  thou,  the  other  party 
to  the  covenant,  the  antithesis  to  J  (ver. 
4)— shalt  keep  my  covenant— literally, 
my  covenant  thou  shalt  keep — therefore, 
thou,  and  thy  seed  after  thee  in  their  gener- 
ations. 

Ver.  10. — This  is  my  covenant  (i.  e.  the 
sign  of  it,  as  in  ch.  ix.  12),  which  ye  shall 
keep  (i.  e.  observe  to  do),  between  me  and 
you  and  thy  seed  after  thee ;  Every  man 
child  among  you  shall  be  circumcised. 
Literally,  circumcise  among  (or  of)  you 
every  male,  the  inf.  abs.  bilarr,  when  it 

stands  abruptly  at  the  commencement  of 
a  sentence,  having  the  force  of  a  command 
(cf.  Ewald's  'Hebrew  Syntax,'  §  328; 
Gesenius,   'Grammar,' §  130). 

Ver.  11. — And  ye  shall  circumcise  the 
flesh  of  your  foreskin.     !"lb"13>,  aKpofivirrCa 

membrum  prceputiatum,  fromb'ny,  to  be 

naked,  bare,  hence  to  be  odious,  unclean, 
impure,  was  regarded  afterwards  as  un- 
clean (Deut.  x.  16 ;  Isa.  lii.  3  ;  Jer.  iv.  4), 
and  is  here  directed  to  be  deprived  of  the 
skin  covering  its  extremity,  not  because 
through  it  sin  first  discovered  its  effects 
(Poole),  and  original  corruption  is  still 
transmitted  (Lapide,  Augustine),  or  to 
promote  cleanliness  (Philo),  or  to  express 
detestation  of  certain  idolatrous  rites 
which  were  paid  to  it  by  the  Egyptians 
and  other  heathen  nations  (Lyra,  Kalisch), 
but  (1)  as  a  sign  of  the  faith  that  Christ 
should  be  descended  from  him  (Lapide)  ; 
(2)  as  a  symbolic  representation  of  the 
putting  away  of  the  filth  of  the  flesh  and 
of  sin  in  general  (Calvin).  Hence  it 
served  a  variety  of  uses  :  (1)  to  distinguish 
the  seed  of  Abraham  from  the  Gentiles,  (2)  to 
perpetuate  the  memory  of  Jehovah's  cove- 
nant, (3)  to  foster  in  the  nation  the  hope 
of  the  Messiah,  (4)  to  remind  them  of 
the  duty  of  cultivating  moral  purity 
(Deut.  x.  16),  (5)  to  preach  to  them  the 
gospel  of  a  righteousness  by  faith  (Rom. 
iv.  11),  (6)  to  suggest  the  idea  of  a  holy 
or  a  spiritual  seed  of  Abram  (Rom.  ii. 
29),  and  (7)  to  foreshadow  the  Christian 
rite  of  baptism  (Col.  ii.  11,  12).  And  it 
shall  be  a  token  of  the  covenant — literally, 
for  a  token  of  covenant  (cf.  ch.  ix.  12  ; 
Acts  viii.  8;  Rom.  iv.  11) — betwixt  me 
and  yon. 

Ver.  12. — And  he  that  is  eight  days  old — 
literally,  and  the  son  of  eight  days  (cf.  ch. 
xvii.  1) — shall  be  circumcised  among  yon 
(Levit.  xii.  3 ;  Luke  ii.  21 ;  Phil.  iii.  5),  every 


384 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[oh.  xrn.  1—14. 


man  child—"  The  fact  that  several  times 
the  circumcision  of  the  males  only  is  en- 
joined may  point  to  the  legislator's  inten- 
tion to  exclude  that  rite  in  the  other  sex, 
though  it  was  customary  among  many 
ancient  nations,  but  not  universal  among 
the  Egyptians  "  (Kalisch).  Though  not 
administered  to  both,  the  symbol  was 
ordained  for  the  sake  of  both  sexes 
(Calvin) — in  your  generations,  he  that  is 
born  in  the  house,  or  bought  with  money 
of  any  stranger,  which  is  not  of  thy  seed. 
Not  only  a  proof  of  the  Divine  benignity 
to  Abraham  in  embracing  all  the  mem- 
bers of  his  household  within  the  pale  of 
the  visible  Church  now  constituted,  but 
likewise  a  hint  of  the  world-wide  aspect 
of  the  Abrabamic  covenant,  a  first-fruits 
as  it  were  of  the  "  all  the  families  of  the 
earth  "  that  should  be  blessed  in  Abram. 

Ver.  13. — He  that  is  born  in  thy  house, 
and  he  that  is  bought  with  thy  money, 
must  needs  be  circumcised.  Literally,  cir- 
cumcised, must  be  circumcised,  he  that  is 
born,  &c,  the  niph.  inf.  abs.  with  the 
finite  verb  occupying  the  place  of  em- 
phasis at  the  beginning  of  the  sentence 
(vide  Gesenius,  '  Grammar,'  §  131).  And 
my  covenant  shall  be  in  your  flesh  for  an 
everlasting  covenant. 

Ver.  14.— And  the  uncircumcised  man 
child  whose  flesh  of  his  foreskin  is  not  cir- 
cumcised, that  soul  shall  be  cut  off  from 


his  people.  'E|oXo6pEvS^o-crai  Ik  toO 
Y&ovs  aiTfjs  (LXX.),  i.  e.  shall  be  de- 
stroyed from  amongst  his  nation,  from 
among  his  people  (Levit.  xvii.  4,  10 ; 
Numb.  rv.  30),  from  Israel  (Exod.  xii. 
15 ;  Numb.  xix.  13),  from  the  congrega- 
tion of  Israel  (Exod.  xii.  19),  by  the  in- 
fliction of  death  at  the  hands  of  the  con- 
gregation, the  civil  magistrate,  or  of  God 
(Abarbanel,  Gesenius,  Clericus,  Michaelis, 
Rosenmiiller,  Keil,  Wordsworth,  Alford); 
or  shall  be  excommunicated  from  the 
Church,  and  no  longer  reckoned  among 
the  people  of  God  (Augustine,  Vatablus, 
Piscator,  Willet,  Calvin,  Knobel,  Mur- 
phy, Kalisch,  Inglis).  That  excision  from 
one's  people  was  in  certain  cases  followed 
by  the  death  penalty  (Exod.  xxxi.  14 ; 
Levit.  xviii.  29;  Numb.  xv.  30)  does  not 
prove  that  the  capital  infliction  was  an 
invariableaccompamment  of  such  sentence 
(vide  Exod.  xii.  19  ;  Levit.  vii.  20,  21  ; 
Numb.  xix.  13).  Besides,  to  suppose 
that  such  was  its  meaning  here  necessi- 
tates the  restriction  of  the  punishment 
to  adults,  whereas  with  the  alternative 
signification  no  such  restriction  requires 
to  be  imposed  on  the  statute.  The  un- 
circumcised Hebrew,  whether  child  or 
adult,  forfeited  his  standing  in  the  con- 
gregation, i.  e.  ceased  to  be  a  member  of 
the  Hebrew  Church.  He  hath  broken  my 
covenant 


HOMILETICS. 


Vers.  1 — 14. — TJie  covenant  renewed.  I.  The  covenant  confirmed.  1.  The 
time.  "When  Abram  was  ninety  years  old  and  nine,''  i.  e.  thirteen  years  after 
Ishmael's  birth.  Mark  the  penalty  of  striving  to  anticipate  Divine  promises. 
Human  ingenuity,  even  when  not  directly  sinful,  can  only  retard,  not  accelerate, 
Jehovah's  purpose.  2.  The  Author.  "El  Shaddai,"  i.  e.  the  Being  who,  though 
ordinarily  operating  silently  and  invisibly  in  nature,  is  able  to  break  through  nature 
in  order  to  accomplish  bis  designs.  Nature  is  not  superior  to  God,  but  vice  versd — 
the  Almighty  transcends  his  own  handiwork  ;  and  much  as  Nature  discloses  of  God's 
eternal  power  and  Godhead  in  her  ordinary  workings,  she  does  not  by  means  of 
these  reveal  the  infinite  fulness  of  his  Divine  resources.  3.  The  condition.  "Walk 
before  me,  and  be  thou  perfect,"  i.  e.  follow  holiness  as  well  as  trust  my  word. 
Though  grace  is  the  prime  mover  in  all  heaven's  bargains  or  contracts  with  sinful 
men,  they  are  invariably  conditioned  by  man's  obedience  to  and  trust  in  the  Divine 
Covenanter.  The  meaning  briefly  is,  that  if  God's  grace  does  not  conquer  man's 
unbelief  and  sin,  man's  unbelief  and  sin  will  ultimately  cancel  God's  grace. 

II.  The  covenant  explained.  1.  The  promise  of  a  seed.  An  old  promise 
recapitulated,  since  God  gives  "line  upon  line,"  "precept  upon  precept"  (Isa. 
xxviii.  10) ;  with  little  additional  clearness  of  definition,  beyond  the  hint,  conveyed 
by  the  words  "nations"  and  "kings,"  that  something  more  than  Ishmael  and  his 
descendants  was  to  be  expected,  since  the  Revealer  of  the  Father  (the  Word  of 
Jehovah,  Christ,  the  Word  of  God)  only  discovers  truth  to  the  human  mind  as  it 
can  bear  (Mark  iv.  33).  2.  The  promise  of  a  land.  This  too  was  an  old  promise  re- 
delivered, with  the  old  particularity  of  description  and  the  old  solemnity  of  donation; 
partly  to  inform  the  hearer's  mind,  partly  to  allay  whatever  anxious  thoughts  might 


CH.  xvn.  1—14.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  885 

remain,  but  chiefly  to  prepare  for  the  imposition  of  the  obligations  that  were  about  to 
be  declared.  Covenant  mercies,  at  least  in  God's  contracts,  always  go  before  covenant 
duties.  3.  The  promise  of  a  blessing.  This  too  had  been  included  in  the  gracious  pro- 
visions of  the  covenant  from  the  first;  but  now  a  slight  advance  is  made  in  the  elucida- 
tion of  its  nature.  The  blessing  is  to  be  distinctly  spiritual.  Jehovah  is  to  be  a  God  to 
Abram  and  his  seed.  Hence  the  inference  which  Paul  draws  (Gal.  iii.  14—18)  was 
designed  to  be  deduced  by  the  patriarch — that  the  true  and  proper  recipients  of  the 
covenanted  mercies  were  not  to  be  his  natural,  but  spiritual  descendants.  See  the  pro- 
minence in  respect  of  clearness  of  revelation  which  God  assigns  to  things  spiritual. 


III.  The  covenant  attested.  1.  The  imposition  of  a  new  name.  (1)  Its  j 
cance.  Instead  of  high-father,  a  personal  appellation  descriptive  of  the  elevation  of 
his  rank  as  a  chieftain,  or  of  his  character  as  a  man,  he  was  henceforth  to  be  styled 
father  of  a  multitude,  a  federal  or  representative  designation,  defining  his  relation  to 
both  his  natural  and  spiritual  descendants.  It  were  well  if  names  always  were  thus 
suggestive  and  symbolic ;  but  only  names  assigned  by  God,  directly  or  indirectly,  can 
be  relied  on  as  expressive  of  reality.  (2)  Its  intention.  This  was  to  indicate  that 
God's  covenant  was  made  not  with  Abram  the  Chaldsean  chieftain,  but  with  Abraham 
the  believer.  It  was  thus  a  symbol  of  the  new  position  before  God  which  Abraham 
occupied,  and  the  new  nature  which  as  a  believer  in  God  Abraham  possessed  ;  t'.  e.  of 
Abraham's  justification  and  regeneration.  It  was  also  a  reminder  that  God's  covenant 
was  made  not  with  the  offspring  of  Abram  as  a  man,  i.  e.  with  his  natural  descend- 
ants, except,  indeed,  provisionally  and  typically ;  but  with  the  children  of  Abraham 
the  believer,  i.  e.  with  his  spiritual  posterity,  all  of  whom,  like  himself,  must  have 
new  names,  i.  e.  occupy  new  positions  and  possess  new  natures,  in  other  words,  be 
justified  and  regenerated  children  of  God  by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ.  2.  The  attachment 
of  a  new  sign.  (1)  Its  nature.  Circumcision.  On  the  origin  of  the  rite  of  circum- 
cision see  Exposition.  (2")  Its  import.  As  regarding  the  grand  blessing  of  the  cove- 
nant, the  promise  of  a  seed,  it  was  designed  for  a  sign  that  that  seed  was  to  be  not  a 
child  of  the  flesh,  but  a  child  of  the  promise ;  not  the  offspring  of  nature,  but  the  gift 
of  grace.  Hence  it  served  as  an  adumbration  of  the  sinless  humanity  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  and  an  intimation  of  the  holy  character  of  his  seed.  Then,  as  adminis- 
tered to  the  patriarch,  it  was  intended  as  a  practical  declaration  of  his  faith  in  the 
coming  seed,  and  a  symbolic  representation  of  his  personal  devotement  to  holiness. 
In  every  one  of  these  respects  its  place  has  been  supplied  by  the  Christian  rite  of 
baptism,  with  only  this  difference,  that  baptism  is  a  visible  token  of  faith  not  in  a 
coming,  but  a  crucified  and  risen,  Saviour.  (3)  Its  incidence.  The  ceremony  was 
appointed  to  be  administered  first  to  Abraham,  and  then  to  all  his  household,  includ- 
ing Ishmael  and  his  male  domestics,  and  subsequently  to  all  his  posterity  through 
the  promised  son.  So  the  obligations  of  the  covenant  rest  on  all  within  the  Church, 
and  descend  from  age  to  age  upon  believers. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  1. — Ood's  call  to  believers.  "And  when  Abram  was  ninety  years  old  and  nine, 
the  Lord  appeared  to  Abram,  and  said  unto  him,  I  am  the  Almighty  God  ;  walk  be- 
fore me,  and  be  thou  perfect."  In  what  sense  are  we  to  take  this  ?  None  can  keep 
God's  law  perfectly  (Rom.  vii.  23)  And  why  at  this  point  in  Abram's  history  the 
emphatic  "  I  am  ?  "  &c.  The  character  of  his  life  was  faith  (cf .  Heb.  xi.  6)  resting  on 
the  promises  made  him  (Gen.  xii.  7  ;  xiii.  16  ;  xv.  5).  The  last  of  these  was  a  special 
instance  of  faith.  But  the  triumph  was  followed  by  a  fall — impatience,  would  not 
wait  God's  time  (cf .  Ps.  xxvii.  14 ;  xxxi.  1 5).  An  instance  of  a  common  fault — partial 
faith  (cf.  Matt.  iv.  4 ;  xiv.  28 — 31).  The  result  was  disappointment.  Thirteen  years 
passed.  Must  we  not  connect  this  with  his  fault  ?  Want  of  faith  delayed  the  blessing 
(cf.  Num.  xiv.  33).  Then  came  the  word  of  the  Lord— a  gentle  rebuke  (cf.  Matt, 
viii.  26),  and  a  precept :  ""Walk  before  me,"  &c.  Return  to  thy  first  faith  ;  let  it  be 
perfect,  not  partial  (cf.  Prov.  iii.  5 ;  Matt.  xvii.  20). 

I.  A  lesson  fob  believekb.  "Watch  lest  faith  grow  cold.  Some  like  not  to  retain 
God  in  their  thoughts.  They  hide  themselves  from  him  amid  the  vanities  of  the 
world.  But  his  people,  who  have  known  his  love  (1  John  iii.  1),  why  should  they 
ever  shrink  from  opening  their  whole  heart  to  him  ?  Yet,  imperceptibly  perhaps, 
there  is  a  change.     The  faith  is  held,  but  the  sunshine  is  gone.    The  desire  to  tell  all 


836 


T&E  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xvii.  1 — 14. 


to  God  is  not  there.  Why  ?  The  man  has  set  his  heart  upon  something,  and  cannot 
trust  God's  love  ;  or  he  is  drawn  to  something  he  cannot  approve,  and  listens  to  what 
can  be  said  for  it  (cf.  Rom.  xiv.  4) ;  or  he  has  fallen  into  self-sufficiency.  Then  reserve 
towards  God.  The  hidden  life  becomes  disordered.  No  longer  the  desire  that  he 
should  know  all  and  guide  all.  And  thus  uneasiness,  reserve,  distance.  Then  follow 
plans  to  quiet  the  uneasiness — business,  ceremony,  theology,  or  work  in  some  other 
direction.     But  no  real  communion  with  God  in  all  this. 

II.  The  remedy.  "Walk  before  me."  Recognise  the  evil.  Believe  the  cause. 
Be  not  faithless.  Bear  in  mind  God's  presence  (cf.  Ps.  lxii.  1—7).  Seek  not  to  hide 
from  him,  or  to  justify  self.  And  "be  perfect,"  i.  e.  matured  ;  not  in  any  high  or 
strange  attainment,  but  in  that  which  a  child  may  learn — in  trusting  God's  truth  and 
love ;  in  bringing  thoughts,  wants,  and  wishes  before  him.  Towards  this  active 
obedience  and  following  Christ  are  means ;  and,  above  all,  sincerity,  and  a  real 
definite  dedication  of  the  life  to  God. 

m.  Encouragement.  "I  am  the  Almighty  God" — all-powerful  (Isa.  lix.  1; 
Luke  i.  37)  and  all-loving  (Ps.  xxxvii.  5 ;  Rom.  viii.  32).  This,  really  believed,  would 
remove  anxious  care.  What  is  it  that  leads  thee  to  seek  another  way  f  The  con- 
sciousness of  having  wandered.  Has  he  not  made  provision  for  this?  (1  Tim.  i.  15  ; 
1  John  ii.  1).  Or  is  it  that  the  blessing  long  desired  is  not  given  ?  Some  power, 
some  opportunity  for  God's  work,  and  still  the  door  is  closed ;  or  it  may  be  some 
spiritual  gift,  some  token  of  growth  in  grace,  and  still  the  evil  of  thy  nature  is  un- 
subdued. Be  patient  (James  i.  4).  Thy  Father  in  heaven  will  not  fail  thee  (Rom.  vi. 
14).  Walk  before  him.  Tell  him  all  that  is  in  thy  mind.  In  his  time  thou  shalt 
find  peace  (Phil.  iv.  6 ;  1  John  v.  4 ;  Rev.  xxi.  7). — M. 

Vers.  1,  2. — 27t<  true  life  of  faith  set  forth.  I.  Commencing  with  gracious  ap- 
pearance of  God  to  his  creature.  1.  The  revelation  one  in  a  continued  series  of 
progressive  manifestations.  2.  Accompanied  with  direct  promise,  which  in  the  form 
of  covenant  appeals  to  reciprocal  fellowship  and  confidence.  3.  Embracing  both 
present  and  future  blessedness.  The  blessing  upon  the  earthly  lot,  as  preparatory  to 
the  higher  blessedness,  a  foundation  on  which  the  higher  life  is  built  up. 

II.  The  method  of  the  life  of  faith.  Walk  before  me  ;  be  perfect,  &c.  1.  Con- 
stant reference  to  God — his  will,  his  truth,  his  covenant.  2.  Distinction  from  the 
world.  Abram  the  pilgrim.  Walk  among  the  heathen,  and  yet  before  me.  The 
consciousness  of  a  chosen  aim  a  great  preservative.  The  sustaining  favour  of  God. 
Development  of  the  Divine  in  the  human.  3.  A  life  which  is  worked  out  as  a  trust 
for  oViers.  The  representative  man  holds  a  special  position  towards  God  not  for  his 
own  sake  alone,  but  as  the  depositary  of  the  blessing.  Great  help  to  walk  before 
God  and  be  perfect,  that  we  are  called  to  be  the  channel  through  which  blessings 
flow.  Confirmation  of  the  covenant  will  be  sent  to  us  in  the  way,  when  there  is  lack 
of  promise  in  appearances,  notwithstanding  the  evidence  of  our  own  infirmity.  We 
walk  in  the  light  towards  a  future  which  shall  abundantly  reward  patient  continuance 
in  well-doing. — R. 

EXPOSITION. 


Ver.  15. — And  God  said  unto  Abraham, 
As  for  Sarai  thy  wife, — who,  not  having 
hitherto  been  mentioned  in  any  of  the 
promises,  is  now  expressly  taken  into 
covenant,  and  accordingly  receives  a  new 
name  (cf.  ver.  5  ;  ch.  xxxii.  28  ;  Rev.  iii. 
12) — thou  shalt  not  call  her  name  Sarai, — 
"my  princess"  (Gesenius) ;  "princely, 
noble"  (Ikenius,  Bosenmuller,  Keil  De- 
litzsch);  "the  heroine"  (Knobel).;  "strife, 
contention"  (Ewald,  Murphy),  with  spe- 
cial reference  to  her  struggle  against  ste- 
rility (Kalisch) — but  Sarah — "princess" 
(Gesenius),  the  meaning  being  that, 
whereas  formerly  she  was  Abram's  prin- 
cess only,  she  was  henceforth  to  be  recog- 
nised as  a  princess  generally,  i.  e.  as  the 


mother  of  the  Church  (Jerome,  Augus- 
tine), or  as  princess  to  the  Lord,  the  letter 
h  being  taken  from  the  name  Jehovah,  as 
in  the  change  of  Abram  into  Abraham 
(the  Rabbis);  though  Ikenius  and  Rosen- 
mtiller  derive  from  an  Arabic  root,  sara, 
to  have  a  numerous  progeny — shall  her 
name  be. 

Ver.  16. — And  I  will  bless  her,  and  give 
thee  a  son  also  of  her  (the  first  intimation 
that  the  promised  seed  was  to  be  Sarai's 
child),  and  she  shall  be  a  mother  of  nations, 
— literally,  she  shall  become  nations  (cf. 
ver.  4) — kings  of  people  shall  be  of  her. 

Ver.  17. — Then  Abraham  fell  upon  his  face 
(vide  ver.  3),  and  laughed.     prtitT  from 


ch.  rra.  16—27.] 


THE   BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


937 


Jjnit,  to  laugh.  Cf.  xax^u  Ka.Yx<i?>, 
eachinnor,  German,  kichern;  ko.1  lyiXao-e 
(LXX.);  rejoiced  (Onkelos);  marvelled 
(Jerome,  Targums) ;  laughed  for  joy  (Ara- 
bic version,  Augustine,  Calvin,  Delitzsch, 
Keil,  Murphy,  et  alii) ;  not  a  smile  of  in- 
credulity (Jerome,  Chrysostom)  or  of  diffi- 
dence (Kalisch),  as  partitionists  assert  in 
order  to  produce  a  contradiction  between 
the  Elohist  and  Jehovist  of  ch.  xv.  And 
said  in  his  heart,  Shall  a  child  be  born 
unto  him  that  is  (literally,  to  the  son  of)  an 
hundred  years  old!  A  suggestion  of  na- 
tural reason  which  was  overruled  by  faith 
(Calvin,  Wordsworth),  though  better  re- 
garded as  the  exclamation  of  holy  wonder, 
or  as  an  illustration  of  believing  not  for  joy 
(Inglis;  cf.  Luke  xxiv  41).  And  shall 
Sarah,  that  is  ninety  years  old,  heart  Yes. 
What  reason  declared  impossible  was 
possible  to  faith.  "He  considered  not  the 
deadness  of  Sarah's  womb"  (Rom.  iv.  19). 

Yer.  IS. — And  Abraham  said  unto  God,  0 
that  Ishmael  might  live  before  thee !  Not 
implying  that  Abraham  was  content  with 
Hagar's  child  as  the  promised  seed  without 
waiting  for  Sarai!s  son  (Jerome,  Calvin,  Ka- 
lisch) ;  scarcely  that  he  feared  lest  God 
might  remove  Ishmael  by  death  now  that 
Isaac  had  been  promised  (Wordsworth) ; 
but  probably  that  he  desired  that  Ishmael 
might  not  only  live  and  prosper  (Bush),  but 
share  with  Sarah's  son  in  the  blessings  of 
the  covenant  (Keil,  Lange,  Rosenmttller, 
Murphy, '  Speaker's  Commentary, '  Inglis). 

Ver.  19. — And  God  said.  Sarah  thy  wife 
shall  bear  thee  a  son  indeed;  and  thou  shalt 
call  his  name  Isaac.  "Laughter,"  or  "he 
laughs"  (the  third  person  future  (yitsak) 
being  frequently  employed  in  personal  de- 
signations; cf .  Jacob,  Jair,  Jabin,  &c. ),  with 
obvious  reference  to  Abraham's  laughter 
(vide  ver.  17).  Cf .  on  naming  before  birth 
ch.  xvi.  11.  And  I  will  establish  my  cove- 
nant with  him  for  an  everlasting  covenant, 
and  with  his  seed  after  him. 

Ver.  20. — And  asfor  Ishmael,  Ihaveheard 
thee  (meaning,  also,  "  and  will  grant  thy 
prayer;"  an  allusion  to  the  significance  of 
the  name  Ishmael,  "God  hears"):  Behold, I 
have  blessed  him,  and  will  make  him  fruitful, 
and  will  multiply  him  exceedingly ;  twelve 
princes  shall  he  beget  {vide  ch.  xxv.  12 — 
16).  and  I  will  make  him  a  great  nation. 

Ver.  21. — But  my  covenant  will  I  estab- 
lish with  Isaac,  whom  Sarah  shall  bear 
unto  thee  at  this  set  time  in  the  next  year 
(cf.  ch.  xxi.  2). 

Ver.  22.— And  he  (i.  e.  God)  left  off  talk- 
ing with  him  (Abraham),  and  God  went  up 
— into  heaven  (vide  ch.  xxxv.  13)— from 
Abraham. 

Ver.  23  —  And  Abraham  took  Ishmael  his 


son,  and  all  that  were  born  in  his  house,  and 
all  that  were  bought  with  his  money,  every 
male  amongthemenof  Abraham's  house;  and 
circumcised  the  flesh  of  their  foreskin  in  the 
selfsame  day.  Literally, inthetroneoftliat 
day,  an  expression  occurring  hi  ch.  vii.  13, 
which  is  commonly  regarded  as  Jehovistic, 
while  this  is  Elohistic;  though  Quarry  sug- 
gests that  the  ensuing  section  should  com- 
mence with  this  verse,  in  which  case  the 
presentparagraphwouldalsobeJehovistic, 
and  the  appearance  of  unnecessary  repeti- 
tion in  its  statements  avoided  by  viewing 
them  as  the  customary  recapitulations  that 
mark  the  opening  of  a  new  division  of  the 
history  (vide  'Genesis,'  p.  440);  against 
which,  however,  is  the  name  of  God  which 
continues  to  be  here  employed.  As  Sod 
(Elohim)  had  said  unto  him. 

Ver.  24. — And  Abraham  was  ninety  years 
old  andnine, — literally ,  asonofnineiy  years 
and  nine  'cf.  ch.  vii.  6;  xvi.  16) — when  he 
was  circumcised  in  the  flesh  of  his  foreskin. 

Ver.  25. — And  Ishmael  his  son  was  thir- 
teen years  old  (the  same  form  of  expres- 
sion as  above),  when  he  was  circumcised. 
Hence  among  the  Arabs  the  ceremony  is 
usually  delayed  till  the  thirteenth  year 
(cf.  Josephus,  'Ant.,'  i.  13). 

Ver.  26,  27. — In  the  selfsame  day  wai 
Abraham  circumcised,  and  Ishmael  his  son. 
Andallthemen  of  his  house,  born  in  thehouse, 
andbought  with  money  of  the  stranger,  were 
circumcised withhim.  The  usual  charges  of 
needless  repetition  which  are  preferred 
against  the  closing  verses  of  this  chapter 
may  be  disposed  of  by  observing  that  ver. 
23  intimates  that  the  sacrament  of  circum- 
cision was  administered  to  the  patriarch 
and  his  household  on  the  very  day  thatGod 
had  enjoined  it,  i.  e.  without  delay  ;  that 
vers.  24,  25  declare  the  respective  ages  of 
Abraham  and  Ishmael  when  they  received 
the  Divinely-appointed  rite ;  and  that 
vers.  26,  27  state  the  fact  that  the  entire 
household  of  the  patriarch  wai  circum- 
cised simultaneously  with  himself. 

The  origin  of  circumcision.  The  de- 
termination of  this  question  doesnot  appear 
of  paramount  importance,  yet  the  ascer- 
tained results  maybe  briefly  indicated.  (1) 
According  to  Herodotus  (ii.  104)  circum- 
cision was  observed  as  a  custom  of  primi- 
tive antiquity  among  the  Colchians,  Ethi- 
opians, and  Egyptians,  by  the  last  of  whom 
it  was  communicated  to  the  Syrians  of  Pal- 
estine and  the  Phoenicians.  It  is,  however, 
uncertain  whether  among  the  Egyptians 
the  practice  was  universal,  as  Philo  and 
Herodotus  assert,  or  limited  to  the  priest- 
hood, as  Origen   believed ;   and  equally 


238 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  rvn.  15—87 


doubtful  whether  the  Egyptians  them- 
selves may  not  have  adopted  it  from  the 
Hebrews  in  the  time  of  Joseph,  instead  of 
from  the  Ethiopians,  as  appears  to  be  the 
judgment  of  Kalisch.  Against  the  idea  that 
circumcision  wis  a  national  and  universal 
observance  among  the  Egyptians  in  the 
time  of  Abraham,  it  has  been  urged  that 
the  male  servants  of  the  patriarch,  some  of 
whom  were  Egyptians  (ch.  xii.  16),  were  not 
circumcised  till  Abraham  was  commanded 
to  perform  the  rite ;  that  Ishmnel,  the  son  of 
an  Egyptian  mother,  remained  uncircum- 
cised  till  the  same  time ;  and  that  the 
daughter  of  Pharaoh  recognised  Moses  as 
a  Hebrew  child,  which,  it  is  supposed,  she 
could  not  have  done  had  circumcision  been 
generally  practised  among  her  ownpeople. 
On  the  other  hand,  it  is  contended  that  the 
absence  of  details  as  to  how  the  rite  should 
be  performed  seems  to  imply  that  already 
circumcision  was  familiar  to  Abraham ;  and 
bysome  modern  Egyptologists  itis asserted 
that  an  examination  of  ancient  mummies 
and  sculptures,  in  which  circumcision  is  a 
distinctive  mark  between  the  Egyptians 
and  their  enemies, shows thattheceremony 
must  have  been  in  use  not  amongthe  priests 
only,  but  throughout  the  nation  generally 
So  early  as  the  time  of  the  fourth  dynasty, 
i.e.  2400  B.C.,  or  considerably  earlier  than 
the  time  of  Abraham.  Still  (2)  though  it 
should  be  held  as  indubitably  established 
that  circumcision  was  a  prevalent  custom 
among  the  Egyptians  in  the  time  of  Abra- 
ham, it  would  not  follow  that  the  Hebrews 


adopted  it  from  them.  On  the  contrary, 
the  Biblical  narrative  expressly  mentions 
that  its  observance  by  the  patriarch  and  his 
household  was  due  to  a  Divine  command, 
and  was  connected  with  a  religious  signi- 
ficance which  was  altogether  foreign  to  the 
Egyptians  and  others  by  whom  that  rite 
was  practised.  Among  the  reasons  for  its 
adoption  by  theheathen  nations  of  antiquity 
have  been  assigned,  among  the  Ethiopians, 
a  prophylactic  design  to  ward  off  certain 
painful,  and  often  incurable,  disorders; 
among  the  Egyptians,  a  regard  to  cleanli- 
ness ;  and  perhaps  among  the  priesthood 
of  the  latter  country  a  semi-religious  idea 
(the  deification  of  the  generative  powers) 
was  associated  with  a  practice  which  was 
commonly  regarded  as  enhancing  produc- 
tivity ;  but  the  import  of  the  ceremony  as 
enjoined  upon  the  father  of  the  faithful 
was  as  widely  as  possible  removed  from 
every  one  of  these  ideas,  being  connected 
with  spiritual  conceptions  of  which  the 
heathen  world  was  entirely  ignorant.  That 
a  heathen  custom  should  have  been  adopt- 
ed by  Jehovah  and  elevated  to  the  rank  and 
connected  with  the  spiritual  significance  of  ■ 
a  religious  sign  will  not  occur  as  a  difficulty 
to  those  who  remember  that  the  rainbow,  a 
well-known  natural  phenomenon,  was  se- 
lected as  the  sign  for  Noah's  covenant,  and 
that  Christian  baptism  is  a  similar  trans- 
formation of  a  previously  existing  cere- 
mony by  which  Gentile  proselytes  were 
admitted  to  the  Hebrew  Church. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  15 — 27.  The  covenant  completed.  I.  The  admission  of  Sarai.  1.  J7ie 
changed  name.  As  on  entering  within  the  covenant  the  name  of  Abram  was  changed 
to  Abraham,  so,  to  signalise  the  reception  of  his  spouse,  Sarai  was  transformed  into 
Sarah  (vide  Exposition),  the  transformation  having  in  her  case  the  same  significance  as 
it  had  in  Abraham's.  In  particular  it  proclaimed  that,  like  Abraham,  Sarah  was  now 
a  justified  and  regenerated  believer  in  the  Divine  promise.  N.  B.  There  is  only  one 
gate  of  entrance  to  Christ's  Church,  viz.,  faith  or  conversion.  2.  The  guaranteed 
blessing.  What  is  here  affirmed  of  Sarai  is  that  she  should  not  only  be  received  into 
the  Church,  but  made  a  sharer  of  Abraham's  blessing,  i.  e.  become  entitled  to  all  the 
gracious  provisions  of  the  covenant.  The  blessing  of  Abraham  belongs  to  all  who 
are  possessed  of  Abraham's  faith.  Christ's  salvation  is  the  common  property  of  be- 
lievers. And  to  all  it  is  certain,  as  it  was  to  Sarai.  The  "yea"  concerning  Sarai 
has  now  become  for  Christ's  people  "yea  and  amen."  3.  The  promised  son.  This 
was  the  first  intimation  that  Sarai  was  to  be  the  mother  of  the  seed.  The  Eternal 
never  hastens.  God's  disclosures  of  his  own  plans  are  ever  slow,  gradual,  progress- 
ive, and  mostly  regulated  by  the  faith  of  the'recipients.  When  the  fulness  of  the  time 
arrives  he  is  able  to  be  minute,  explicit,  emphatic,  as  he  was  in  intimating  Isaac's 


CH.  mi.  16—87.]  THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS.  280 

birth :  (1)  by  the  time— a  year  hence,  and  (2)  by  the  name— Isaac.  4.  The  rejoicing 
husband.  The  laugh  of  gladness  which  escaped  the  patriarch,  though  partly  owing 
to  the  reiterated  promise  of  a  son,  was  chiefly  due  to  the  announcement  that  Sarah 
was  to  be  its  mother.  It  was  the  joy  of  a  husband  in  the  happiness  of  a  beloved  wife, 
long  tried,  but  at  length  about  to  be  rewarded;  it  was  also  the  joy  of  "a  believing 
husband  in  the  well-founded  assurance  of  his  wife's  interest  in  the  covenant  of  grace. 

II.  The  exclusion  of  Ishmael.  1.  The  prayer  of  Abraham — (1)  Reveals  a  note  of 
sorrow.  The  displacement  of  Hagar's  child  by  the  son  of  Sarah,  though  for  Sarah's 
sake  thrilling  him  with  joy,  appears  to  have  raised  a  tender  sympathy  in  his  breast 
for  the  disappointment  which  was  to  fall  upon  the  lad  and  his  mother.  For  years 
he  had  himself  no  other  thought  than  that  Ishmael  might  be  the  seed,  and  now  he 
cannot  put  aside  the  cherished  hope  without  regret.  Let  fathers  learn  that  though  it 
is  beautiful  to  feel  for  children's  griefs,  it  is  dangerous  to  construct  plans  for  children's 
greatness.  (2)  Breathes  an  earnest  spirit.  Deeply  concerned  for  the  welfare  of  his 
son,  Abraham  was  also  filled  with  longing  that  God  would  listen  to  his  prayer.  If 
there  is  anything  about  which  a  parent's  heart  should  be  sincerely  passionate,  it  is 
the  happiness  and  prosperity  of  his  offspring;  and  if  there  is  one  reason  more  than 
another  in  which  a  parent's  heart  should  be  possessed  by  strong  emotion,  it  is  when 
pleading  for  his  children  at  a  throne  of  grace  (Ps.  lxxviii.  2).  (3)  Cranes  a  heavenly 
Messing.  Though  Ishmael  was  to  be  denied  the  honour  of  serving  as  a  medium  for 
the  transmission  of  the  blessings  of  the  covenant  to  future  ages,  his  father  supplicated 
for  him  a  personal  participation  in  those  blessings.  The  chief  ambition  of  a  parent 
should  be  the  conversion  and  spiritual  advancement  of  his  children  (3  John  4).  2. 
The  answer  of  God — (1)  Assures  the  praying  father  of  acceptance.  Ishmael,  though 
not  admitted  to  the  succession  of  the  holy  seed,  should  not  be  excluded  from  the 
gifts  of  grace.  If  Hagar's  child,  though  born  of  the  flesh,  should  become  possessed 
of  faith,  he  too  would  share  in  the  spiritual  benediction  of  the  covenant.  Let  parents 
be  encouraged  to  pray  for  their  children.  (2)  Promises  great  temporal  prosperity  to 
the  son.  Abraham  had  sought  spiritual  life  for  Ishmael;  God  bestowed  in  addition 
temporal  renown.  So  God  did  with  Solomon  (1  Kings  iii.  11),  and  still  does  with 
saints  (Ephes.  iii.  20). 

III.  The  acquiescence  op  Abraham.  This  was  signified  by  the  patriarch's  ob- 
servance of  the  rite  of  circumcision,  in  regard  to  which  his  obedience  was — 1.  Im- 
mediate. There  was  no  delay,  no  reluctance,  no  considering  the  question,  but 
instantaneous  compliance  with  the  Divine  directions.  On  the  self-same  day  as  God 
explained  to  him  the  provisions  and  conditions  of  the  covenant,  he  declared  his  con- 
sent before  God  by  the  acceptance  of  the  suggested  sign.  His  behaviour  in|this 
respect  should  be  taken  as  a  model  by  believers.  2.  Cheerful.  The  rite  of  circum- 
cision was  of  course  attended  with  pain  and  something  approaching  to  personal 
humiliation,  and  yet  silf -abasement  and  suffering  were  joyously  assented  to  in  view 
of  the  coming  gift  of  the  covenant.  So  should  Christians  delightedly  accept  tribu- 
lation and  any  sort  of  bndily  indignity  that  God  may  impose,  considering  them  as 
nothing  in  comparison  with  the  eternal  weight  of  glory.  3.  Thorough-going.  Prompt 
as  to  its  time,  willing  in  its  spirit,  the  obedience  of  Abraham  was  also  minute  in  its  per- 
formance. The  appointed  ordinance  was  administered  to  himself,  his  son  Ishmael, 
and  every  male  domestic  in  his  house,  as  God  had  said  unto  him.  So  God's  people 
are  required  to  observe  all  things  written  in  the  book  of  the  covenant 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  15. — "  Thou  shalt  not  call  her  name  Sarai,  but  Sarah  shall  her  name  be,"  <fec. 
"  Mother  of  nations  ; "  "  kings  of  peoples  shall  be  of  her." 

I.  Exaltation  op  the  lowly.  A  pilgrim  and  stranger,  made  a  princess.  A 
mother  of  nations,  though  once  desolate,  mourning,  ready  to  murmur.  The  lamenta- 
tion turned  into  laughter. 

II.  The  freedom  of  Divine  grace.  The  blessing  unexpected,  apart  from  creature 
strength,  notwithstanding  blind  and  foolish  attempts  to  obtain  blessing  in  our  own 
■way — the  Ishmael,  not  the  Isaac.  Though  many  things  "said  in  our  heart,"  the  one 
thing  Divinely  purposed  the  only  true  fulfilment  of  that  heart's  desire. 

III.  Foregleamb  of  the  coming  glory.  The  seed  of  the  woman,  specially  repre- 
senting the  promise  of  God,  supernaturally  given,  coming  as  the  royal  seed,  son  of  • 


340 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[oh.  ran.  1— IS. 


princess  and  forerunner  of  kings  of  peoples.  God-given  heir,  God-given  inheritance. 
The  birth  of  the  child  of  promise,  so  manifestly  Divine,  points  to  the  yet  greatei 
glory:  "Unto  us  a  Son  is  born." — R, 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XVIII. 

Ver.  1. — And  the  Lord — Jehovah,  the 
Divine  name  employed  throughout  the  pre- 
sent and  succeeding  chapters,  which  are  ac- 
cordingly assigned  to  the  Jehovist  (Tuch, 
Bleek,  Davidson,  Colenso),  with  the  excep- 
tionofch.xix.29,whichiscommonlyregard- 
ed  as  a  fragment  of  the  original  Elohist's 
narration  (vide  infra) — appeared  unto  him. 
The  absence  of  Abraham's  name  has  been 
thought  to  favour  the  idea  that  the  present 
chapter  should  have  begun  at  ch.  xvii.  23 
(Quarry).  That  thetimeof  this  renewed  Di- 
vine manifestation  was  shortly  after  the  in- 
cidents recorded  in  the  preceding  chapter  is 
apparent,  as  also  that  its  object  wastbereas- 
suranceofthepatriarchconcerningthebirth 
of  Isaac.  In  the  plains  of  Mamre.  Literally, 
171  the  oaks  of  Mamre  (vide  eh.  xiii.  18).  And 
he  sat  in  the  tent  door.  Literally,  inthe  open- 
ing of  the  tent,  a  fold  of  which  was  fastened 
to  a  post  near  by  to  admit  any  airthat  might 
bestirring.  Intheheatoftheday.  I.e. noon- 
tide (cf.  1  Sam.  xi.  ll),as  the  cool  of  the  day, 
orthewindoftheday(ch.iii.8),meanseven- 
tide.  "The  usual  term  for  noon  is  Tsoha- 
rim  (ch.  xliii.  16),  that  is,  the  time  of 
'double  or  greatest  light,'  while  a  more 
poetical  expression  is  '  the  height  of  the 
day'  (Prov.  iv.  18),  either  because  then 
the  sun  has  reached  its  most  exalted  po- 
sition, or  because  it  appears  to  stand  still 
in  the  zenith"  (Kalisch).  Among  the  Ori- 
entals the  hour  of  noon  is  the  time  of  rest 
(cf .  Cant.  i.  7)  and  the  time  of  dinner  (ch. 
xliii.  16,  25).  In  this  case  the  patriarch 
had  probably  dined  and  was  resting  after 
dinner,  since,  on  the  arrival  of  his  visi- 
tors, preparations  had  to  be  commenced 
for  their  entertainment. 

Ver.  2. — And  he  lift  up  his  eyes  and 
looked,  and,  lo,  three  men  stood  by  him.  Not 
in  addition  to(Kalisch),butincluding(Keil), 
Jehovah,  whose  appearance  to  the  patri- 
arch.having  in  the  previous  verse  been  first 
generally  stated.isnowminutelydescribed 
That  these  three  men  were  not  manifesta 
tions  of  the  three  persons  of  the  Godhead 
(Justin  Martyr,  Ambrose,  Cyril),  but  Jeho- 
vah accompanied  by  two  created  angels 
(Keil ,  et  alii),  may  be  inferred  from  ch.  xix. 
1.  When  first  perceived  by  the  patriarch 
they  were  believed  to  be  men,  strangers, 
who  were  approaching  his  tent,  and  indeed 
were  already  close  to  it,  or  standing  by  him 


And  when  he  saw  them  (i.  e.  understood  that 
one  of  them  was  Jehovah,  Jarchi  rightly 
explaining  that  the  word  translated  above 
"  looked,"  i.  e.  with  the  bodily  vision.now 
implies  an  act  of  mental  perception), he  ran 
to  meet  them  from  the  tent  door,  and  bowed 
himself  toward  the  ground.  The  expression 
denotes  the  complete  prostration  of  the 
body  by  first  falling  on  the  knees,  and  then 
inclining  the  head  forwards  till  it  touches 
the  ground.  As  this  was  a  mode  of  saluta- 
tion practised  by  Orientals  towards  supe- 
riors generally,  such  as  kings  and  princes 
(2  Sam.  ix.  8),  but  also  towards  equals  (ch. 
xxiii.  7;  xxxiii. 6, 7;  xiii.  6;  xliii.  26), as  well 
as  towardstheDeity(ch.xxii.5;  1  Sam.i.3), 
it  is  impossible  to  affirm  with  certainty 
(Keil,  Lange)  that  an  act  of  worship  was 
intended  by  the  patriarch,  and  not  simply 
the  presentation  of  human  and  civil  honour 
(Calvin).  If  Heb.  xiii.  2  inclines  to 
countenance  the  latter  interpretation,  the 
language  in  which  Abraham  immediately 
addresses  one  of  the  three  men  almost 
leads  to  the  conclusion  that  already  the 
patriarch  had  recognised  Jehovah. 

Ver.  3. — And  said,  My  Lord — Adongi, 
literally,  Lord,  as  in  ch.  xv.  2,  q.  ■».  (LXX., 
Kvpie;  Vulgate,  Domine;  Syriac,  Onkelos, 
Kalisch,  Alford,  Lange),  though  the  term 
mayhaveindicatednothingmorethanAbra- 
ham'srecognition  of  the  superior  authority 
of theBeingaddressed (Murphy).  Theread- 
ingsAdoni,myLord(A.V.,Dathius,  Rosen- 
miiller),  and  AdonSi,  my  lords  (Qesenius), 
are  incorrect — if  now  I  have  found  favour  in 
thy  sight — not  implying  dubiety  on  Abra- 
ham's part  as  to  his  acceptance  before  God 
(Knobel),  but  rather  postulating  his  al- 
ready conscious  enjoyment  of  the  Divine 
favour  as  the  ground  of  the  request  about 
to  be  preferred  (Delitzsch,  Lange).  Those 
who  regard  Abraham  as  unconseious  of  the 
Divinity  of  himto  whomhe  spake  see  in  his 
languagenothingbutthecustomaryformu- 
laof  Oriental  address(Rosenmtiller;  cf.  ch. 
xxx.  27;  1  Sam. xx.  29;  Esther  vii.  3) — pass 
not  away,  I  pray  thee, from  thy  servant.  The 
hospitality  of  the  Eastern,  and  even  of  the 
Arab,  has  been  frequently  remarked  by 
travellers.  Volney  describes  the  Arab  as 
dining  at  his  tent  door  in  order  to  invite 
passers  by  ('Trav.,'i.  p.  314).  "The  virtue 
of  hospitality  is  one  of  the  great  redeem- 
ing virtues  in  the  characteroftheBedouins" 


oh.  rvm   1 — 16.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


241 


(Kalisch).  "  Whenever  our  path  led  us  near 
mi  encampment,  as  was  frequently  the  case, 
we  always  found  some  active  sheikh  or 
venerable  patriarch  sitting  'in  his  tent 
ioor,"  and  as  soon  as  we  were  within  hail 
we  heard  the  earnest  words  of  welcome  and 
invitation  which  the  Old  Testament  Scrip- 
tures had  rendered  long  ago  familiar  to  us : 
'  Stay,  my  lord,  stay.  Pass  not  on  till  thou 
hast  eaten  bread,  and  rested  under  thy  serv- 
ant's tent.  .Alight  and  remain  until  thy 
servant  kills  »  kid  and  prepares  a  feast ' ". 
(Porter's  '  Giant  Cities  of  Bashan,'  p.  326 ; 
of.  ibid.  p.  87). 

Ver.  4. — Let  a  little  water,  I  pray  you, 
be  fetched,  and  wash  your  feet.  Feet  wash- 
ing was  a  necessary  part  of  Oriental  hos- 
pitality (cf.  ch.  xix.  2 ;  xxiv.  32 ;  xliii.  24). 
"  Among  the  ancient  Egyptians  the  basins 
kept  in  the  houses  of  the  rich  for  this  pur- 
pose were  sometimes  of  gold"  (Freeman, 
Bible  Manners,  'Homiletic  Quarterly,'  vol. 
L  p.  78).  "  In  India  it  is  considered  a 
necessary  part  of  hospitality  to  wash  the 
feet  and  ankles  of  the  weary  traveller,  and 
even  in  Palestine  this  interesting  custom 
u  not  extinct.  Dr.  Robinson  and  party  on 
arriving  at  Ramleh  repaired  to  the  abode 
of  a  wealthy  Arab,  where  the  ceremony  was 
performed  in  the  genuine  style  of  ancient 
Oriental  hospitality"  (vide  Kitto's  'Bible 
Illustrations,'  vol.  i.  p.  230).  And  rest  your- 
selves (literally,  recline  by  resting  on  the 
elbow)  under  the  tree. 

Ver.  5.— And  I  will  fetch  a  morsel  of 
bread, — a  modest  description  of  what  proved 
a  sumptuous  repast  (vide  vers.  6,  8) — and 
comfort  ye  your  hearts ; — literally,  strengthen 
or  support  them,  i.  e.  by  eating  and  drinking 
(Judges  xix.  5  ;  1  Kings  xxi.  7) — after  that 
ye  shall  pass  on:  for  therefore— )3"?JP3 
introduces  the  ground  of  what  has  already 
been  stated,  something  like  quando  quidem, 
forasmuch  as  (Ewald,  '  Heb.  Synt.,'  §  353), 

since,  or  because  (Kalisch),  and  not = ^"p"?!?, 
for  this  cause  that  (Gesenius,  '  Gram.,'  §  155), 
or  "because  for  this  purpose"  (Keil) — are 
ye  come  to  (literally,  have  ye  passed  before) 
thy  servant.  The  patriarch's  meaning  is 
not  tuat  they  had  come  with  the  design  of 
receiving  his  gifts  (LXX.,  A.  V.),  but  either 
that,  unconsciously  to  them,  God  had  ordered 
their  journey  so  as  to  give  him  this  oppor- 
tunity(Calvin,  Bush,  Wordsworth, ' Speaker's 
Commentary,'  Keil),  or  perhaps  simply  that 
since  they  had  passed  by  his  tent  they  should 
suffer  him  to  accord  them  entertainment 
(Kalisch,  Kosenmuller).  And  they  said,  So 
do,  as  thou  hast  said.  Therefore  we  must 
believe  that  Abraham  washed  the  men's  feet, 
and  they  did  eat  (ver.  8).  Here  is  a  mystery 
(Wordsworth). 
Ver.  6. — And  Abraham  hastened  into  the 

OSMESIS. 


tent  unto  Sarah,  and  said,  Make  ready 
quickly  three  measures  —  Hebrew,  three 
seahs,  a  seah  being  a  third  of  an  ephah,  and 
containing  374  cubic  inches  each  (Keil) ;  a 
third  of  a  bushel  (Kalisch) — of  fine  meal, 
— literally,  of  flour,  fine  flour;  otiiiSaXic 
(LXX. ) ;  the  first  term  when  alone  denoting 
flour  of  ordinary  quality  (cf.  Lovit.  ii.  1  ;  v. 
11 ;  Num.  vii.  13) — knead  it,  and  make  cakes 
upon  the  hearth — i.  e.  "round  unleavened 
cakes  baked  upon  hot  stones  "  (Keil). 

Ver.  7.  — And  Abraham  ran  unto  the  herd, 
and  fetcht  a  calf  tender  and  good, — the 
greatness  of  the  honour  done  to  the  strangers 
was  evinced  by  the  personal  activity  of  the 
patriarch,  and  the  offering  of  animal  food, 
which  was  not  a  common  article  of  con- 
sumption among  Orientals  —  and  gave  it 
unto  a  young  man; — i.  e.  the  servant  in 
attendance  (cf.  ch.  xiv.  24) — and  he  hasted 
to  dress  it. 

Ver.  8.— And  he  took  butter, — ilKDri,  from 
the  root  SDPI,  to  curdle  or  become  thick, 
signifies  curdled  milk,  not  butter  (lioirvpov, 
LXX. ;  butyrum,  Vulgate),  which  was  not 
used  among  Orientals  except  medicinally. 
The  word  occurs  seven  times  in  Scripture 
with  four  letters  (Deut.  xxxii.  14  ;  Judges 
v.  25 ;  2  Sam.  xvii.  29  ;  Isa.  vii.  15,  22 ; 
Prov.  xxx.  33  ;  Job  xx.  17),  and  once  with- 
out K  (Job  xxix.  6;  vide  Michaelis,  'Supple- 
ment,' p.  807) — and  milk, — 3J0,  milk  whilst 
still  fresh,  or  containing  its  fatness,  from  a 
root  signifying  to  be  fat  (cf.  ch.  xlix.  12  ; 
Prov.  xxvii.  27) — and  the  calf  which  he — 
i.  e.  the  young  man — had  dressed,  and  set 
it  before  them ;  and  he  stood  by  them  under 
the  tree, — a  custom  still  observed  among  the 
Arabs,  who  honour  their  guests  not  by  sitting 
to  eat  with,  but  by  standing  to  wait  upon, 
them  —and  they  did  eat.  Not  seemed  to  eat 
(Josephus,  Philo,  Jonathan),  nor  simply 
ate  after  an  allegorical  fashion,  as  fire  con- 
sumes the  materials  put  into  it  (Justin 
Martyr),  but  did  so  in  reality  (Tertullian, 
Delitzsch,  Keil,  Kurtz,  Lange).  Though  the 
angel  who  appeared  to  Manoah  (Judges  xiiL 
16)  refused  to  partake  of  food,  the  risen 
Saviour  ate  with  his  disciples  (Luke  xxiv. 
43).  Physiologically  inexplicable,  this  latter 
action  on  the  part  of  Christ  was  not  a  mere 
tyaivoptvov  or  simulation,  but  a  veritable 
manducation  of  material  food,  to  which 
Christ  appealed  in  confirmation  of  the  reality 
of  hi3  resurrection ;  and  the  acceptance  of 
Abraham's  hospitality  on  the  part  of  Jehovah 
and  his  angels  may  in  like  manner  have  been 
designed  to  prove  that  their  visit  to  his  tent 
at  Mamre  was  not  a  dream  or  a  vision,  bat 
a  genuine  external  manifestation. 

Ver.  9.— And  they  said  unto  him  (i.e. 
the  Principal  One  of  the  three,  speaking  for 
the  others,  interrogated  Abraham  during  th< 


142 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[oh.  xviii.  1—15 


progress,  or  perhaps  at  the  close  of,  the  meal 
saying),  Where  is  Sarah  thy  wife  1  (thus  in- 
dicating that  their  visit  had  a  special  reference 
to  her).  And  he  said,  Behold,  in  the  tent. 
It  is  obvious  that  if  at  first  Abraham  re- 
garded his  visitors  only  as  men,  by  this  time 
a  suspicion  of  their  true  character  must  have 
begun  to  dawn  upon  his  mind.  How  should 
ordinary  travellers  be  aware  of  his  wife's 
name  ?  and  why  should  they  do  so  unusual 
a  thing,  according  to  Oriental  manners,  as 
to  inquire  after  her  ?  If  thus  far  their 
behaviour  could  not  fail  to  surprise  the 
patriarch,  what  must  have  been  his  astonish- 
ment at  the  subsequent  communication  ? 

Ver.  10.  —  And  he  said  (the  Principal 
Guest,  as  above,  who,  by  the  very  nature 
and  terms  of  his  announcement,  identifies 
himself  with  Jehovah),  I  will  certainly  re- 
turn unto  thee  according  to  the  time  of  life. 
Literally,  at  the  time  reviving ;  i.  e.  when 
the  year  shall  have  been  renewed,  in  the  next 
year,  or  rather  spring  {vide  Ewald,  '  Heb. 
Synt.,'  §  337;  Rosenmiiller,  Drusius,  Keil, 
Kalisch,  Lange,  Ainsworth,  '  Speaker's  Com- 
mentary ') ;  though  other  interpretations  of 
the  phrase  have  been  suggested,  as,  e  g., 
"according  to  the  time  of  that  which  is 
born,"  i.  e.  at  the  end  of  nine  months 
(Willet,  Calvin,  Bush,  Murphy).  And,  lo, 
Sarah  thy  wife  shall  have  a  son.  /.  «. 
at  the  time  specified.  And  Sarah  heard  it 
in  the  tent  door,  which  was  behind  him. 

Ver.  11. — Now  Abraham  and  Sarah  were 
old  and  well  stricken  in  age.  Literally,  gone 
into  days,  i.  e.  into  years.  This  was  the 
first  natural  impediment  to  the  accomplish- 
ment of  Jehovah's  promise  ;  the  second  was 
peculiar  to  Sarah.  And  it  ceased  to  be  with 
Sarah  after  the  manner  of  women  (vide 
Levit.  xv.  19,  25). 

Ver.  12. — Therefore  (literally,  and)  Sarah 
laughed  within  herself  —  Abraham  had 
«aughed  in  joyful  amazement  (ch.  xvii.  17) 
at  the  first  mention  of  Sarah's  son ;  Sarah 
laughs,  if  not  in  unbelief  (Calvin,  Keil, 
•Speaker's  Commentary,'  Wordsworth),  at 
least  with  a  mingled  feeling  of  doubt  and 
delight  (Lange,  Murphy)  at  the  announce- 
ment of  her  approaching  maternity — saying, 
After  I  am  waxed  old  shall  I  have  pleasure, 
my  lord  being  old  also  1 — literally,  and  my 
lord,  i.  e.  my  husband,  is  old.  The  reve- 
rential submission  to  Abraham  which  Sarah 
here  displays  is  in  the  New  Testament  com- 


mended as  a  pattern  to  Christian  wives  (1 
Pet.  iii.  6). 

Ver.  13. — And  the  Lord  said  unto  Abra- 
ham, Wherefore  did  Sarah  laugh, — a  questim 
which  must  have  convinced  Abraham  of  the 
Speaker's  omniscience.  Not  only  had  ho 
heard  the  silent,  inaudible,  inward  cachin- 
nation  of  Sarah's  spirit,  but  he  knew  the 
tenor  of  her  thoughts,  and  the  purport  of 
her  dubitations — saying,  Shall  I  of  a  surety 
bear  a  child,  which  (literally,  ar.d  I)  am 
old  1  Sarah's  mental  cogitations  clearly 
showed  that  the  temporary  obscuration  of 
her  faith  proceeded  from  a  strong  realisation 
of  the  weakness  of  nature,  which  made  con- 
ception and  pregnancy  impossible  to  one 
like  her,  who  was  advanced  in  years ;  and 
accordingly  her  attention,  as  well  as  that 
of  her  husband,  was  directed  to  the  Divine 
omnipotence  as  the  all-sufficient  guarantee 
for  the  accomplishment  of  the  promise. 

Ver.  14. — Is  any  thing  too  hard  for  the 
Lord  1  Literally,  Is  any  word  too  wonderful, 
i.  e.  impossible,  for  Jehovah?  /xi;  advvarfiau 
irapd  7o>  6i<ji  prj/ia  (LXX.),  with  which  may 
be  compared  Luke  i.  37.  At  the  time  ap- 
pointed I  will  return  unto  thee,  according 
to  the  time  of  life  (vide  supra,  ver.  10),  and 
Sarah  shall  have  a  son. 

Ver.  15. — Then  Sarah  (who  had  overheard 
the  conversation,  and  the  charge  preferred 
against  her,  and  who  probably  now  appeared 
before  the  stranger)  denied,  saying,  I  laughed 
not.  Sarah's  conduct  will  admit  of  no  other 
explanation  than  that  which  the  sacred  nar- 
rative itself  gives.  For  she  was  afraid.  The 
knowledge  that  her  secret  thoughts  had  been 
deciphered  must  have  kindled  in  her  breast 
the  suspicion  that  her  visitor  was  none  other 
than  Jehovah.  With  this  a  sense  of  guilt 
would  immediately  assail  her  conscience  for 
having  cherished  even  a  moment  any  doubt 
of  the  Divine  word.  In  the  consequent  con- 
fusion of  soul  she  tries  what  ever  seems  to  be 
the  first  impulse  of  detected  transgressions, 
viz.,  deception  (cf.  ch.  iii.  12,  13).  And  he 
laid,  Nay;  but  thon  didst  laugh.  With  a 
directness  similar  to  that  which  he  employed 
in  dealing  with  the  first  culprits  in  the 
garden,  not  contending  in  a  multiplicity  of 
words,  but  solemnly  announcing  that  what 
she  said  was  false.  The  silence  of  Sarah  was 
an  evidence  of  her  conviction ;  her  subsequent 
conception  was  a  proof  of  her  repentance  and 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 16. — Noontide  at  Mamre,  or  angels'  visits.  I.  Th«  arrival  o»  thb 
strangers.  1.  The  appearance  they  presented.  Seemingly  three  men,  they  were  in 
reality  three  angels,  or,  more  correctly,  Jehovah  accompanied  by  two  celestial  attend- 
ants, who,  at  an  unexpected  moment,  were  making  for  Abraham's  tent.  So  are  th« 
homes  of  saints  ofttimes  visited  by  angels  unawares  (Heb.  i.  14),  and,  greater  honotu 


on,  xvm.  1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GEHESIS.  249 

still,  by  him  who  claims  the  angels  as  his  ministers  (Ps.  viii.  4;  Isa.  lvii.  17).  2. 
The  reception  they  obtained.  Immediately  that  Abraham  discerned  their  approach, 
he  hastened  to  accord  them  most  respectful  and  courteous  salutation,  in  true  Oriental 
fashion,  falling  on  his  knees  and  bowing  till  his  head  touched  the  ground ;  an  illustra- 
tion of  that  beautiful  politeness  towards  one's  fellow-men  (if  as  yet  he  only  regarded 
his  visitors  as  men),  or  of  that  reverential  self-abasement  before  God  (if  already  he 
had  recognised  the  superior  dignity  of  the  principal  figure  of  the  three)  which  ought 
especially  to  characterise  God's  believing  and  covenanted  people  (see  Ps.  xcv.  6  ;  1 
Pet.  iii.  8).  3.  The  invitation  they  received.  Probably  oppressed  by  the  sultry  beams 
of  the  noonday  sun,  if  not  otherwise  travel-stained  and  weary,  they  were,  with 
genuine  Arab-like  hospitality,  entreated  by  the  patriarch  to  avail  themselves  of  such 
refreshment  and  repose  as  his  cool-shaded,  well-furnished  tent  might  be  able  to  afford. 
And  this  invitation  of  the  patriarch  was — (1)  Humbly  proffered,  as  if  their  accept- 
ance of  it  would  be  more  an  act  of  grace  conferred  on  him  than  a  benefit  enjoyed  by 
themselves.  (2)  Modestly  described,  as  if  it  were  only  a  trifle  after  all  that  he  was 
asking  them  to  accept,  while  all  the  time  his  liberal  heart  was  devising  liberal  things. 
(3)  Piously  enforced,  by  the  consideration  that  he  recognised  in  their  arrival  at  his 
tent  a  special  call  to  the  discharge  of  the  duty  of  hospitality.  (4)  Promptly 
accepted,  without  apologies  or  deprecations  of  any  sort,  but  with  the  same  generous 
simplicity  as  it  was  offered.     "  So  do  as  thou  hast  said." 

II.  The  entertainment  ov  the  strangers.  In  the  banquet  which  Abraham 
extemporised  for  his  celestial  guests  beneath  the  umbrageous  oak  at  Mamre  were 
three  things  which  should  be  studied  by  all  who  would  use  hospitality.  1.  Joyous 
alacrity.  That  the  patriarch's  invitation  was  no  mere  conventional  remark  which 
was  meant  to  pass  unheeded  by  those  to  whom  it  was  addressed  was  proved  by  the 
expeditious  cordiality  "with  which  he  set  about  the  preparations  needed  for  the  prof- 
fered repast,  enlisting  Sarah's  practised  hands  in  baking  cakes,  and  commissioning 
a  trusty  servant  of  the  house  to  kill  and  dress  a  young  and  tender  calf  selected  by 
himself  from  the  flocks.  Here  was  no  reluctance  or  half-heartedness  with  Abraham 
in  the  work  of  kindness  to  which  Providence  had  called  him.  So  ought  Christians 
to  manifest  a  spirit  of  cheerfulness  and  a  habit  of  promptitude  in  doing  good  (Eom. 
xii.  8,  13  ;  2  Cor.  ix.  7).  2.  Unstinted  liberality.  Modestly  characterised  as  a  little 
repast,  it  was  in  reality  a  sumptuous  banquet  which  was  set  before  the  strangers. 
Abraham  entertained  his  guests  with  princely  munificence.  The  modern  virtue  of 
stinginess,  or  niggardliness,  supposed  by  many  to  be  a  Christian  grace,  had  not  been 
acquired  by  the  patriarch,  and  should  with  as  much  speed  as  possible  be  unlearned  by 
Christ's  disciples.  Hospitality  towards  the  saints  and  beneficence  towards  all  men, 
but  especially  towards  the  poor,  should  be  practised  with  diligence,  and  even  with  a 
holy  prodigality,  by  all  who  are  of  Abraham's  seed  (Luke  xiv.  12 — 14 ;  Bom.  xii.  13 ; 
1  Tim.  iii.  2 ;  Heb.  xiii.  2).  3.  Personal  activity.  Though  the  master  of  a  large 
household,  with  300  trained  domestics,  and  the  noble  Eliezer  at  their  head,  the  patri- 
arch does  not  think  of  relegating  the  important  work  of  preparing  the  entertainment 
to  his  subordinates,  but  himself  attends  to  its' immediate  execution.  Indeed,  in  all 
the  bustling  activity  which  forthwith  pervades  the  tent  his  figure  is  always  and 
everywhere  conspicuous.  And  when  the  meal  is  ready  he  reverently  serves  it  with 
his  own  hand  ;  again  a  true  pattern  of  humility,  as  if  he  had  caught  up  by  anticipa- 
tion the  spirit  of  our  Saviour's  words  (Matt.  xx.  26) ;  and  a  true  preacher  of  Christian 
duty,  say  lug  that  in  God's  work  personal  service  is  ever  better  than  labouring  by  proxy. 

III.  The  communication  of  the  strangers.  The  noonday  meal  over,  or  per- 
haps while  it  was  advancing,  the  principal  of  the  three  guests,  who  certainly  by  this 
time  was  recognised  as  Jehovah,  made  an  important  announcement  to  the  patriarch, 
which,  however,  was  specially  intended  for  Sarah,  who  was  listening  behind  the  dark 
fold  of  the  camel's-hair  tent,  viz.,  that  next  year  the  promised  seed  should  be  born. 
That  announcement  was — 1.  Authoritatively  made.  It  was  made  by  him  who  is  the 
faithful  and  true  Witness,  with  whotn  it  is  impossible  to  lie,  and  who  is  able  also  to 
perform  that  which  he  has  promised.  2.  Unbelievingly  received.  The  laugh  of  Sarah 
was  altogether  different  from  that  of  Abraham  (ch.  xvii.  17).  While  Abraham's  was 
the  nulcome  of  faith,  hers  was  the  fruit  of  latent  doubt  and  incredulity.  There  are 
ilways  two  ways  of  receiving  God's  promises ;  the  one  of  which  secures,  but  the 

a  2 


144  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  [ch.  xvih.  1—16. 

other  of  which  imperils,  their  fulfilment  (Mark  ix.  23 ;  xi.  23).  3.  Solemnly  con- 
firmed. (1)  By  an  appeal  to  the  Divine  omnipotence.  The  thing  promised  was  not 
oeyond  the  resources  of  Jehovah  to  accomplish.  (2)  By  a  further  certification  of  the 
event.  As  it  were  a  second  time  the  Divine  faithfulness  was  pledged  for  its  fulfilment 
(3)  By  an  impressive  display  of  miraculous  power,  first  in  searching  Sarah's  heart, 
and  second  in  arresting  Sarah's  conscience.  The  result  was  that  Sarah's  unbelief  wns 
transformed  into  faith. 

Learn — 1.  The  duty  and  profit  of  entertaining  strangers  (Heb.  xiii.  2).  2.  The 
beauty  and  nobility  of  Christian  hospitality  (Rom.  xii.  13).  3.  The  excellence  and 
acceptability  of  personal  service  in  God's  work.  4.  The  condescension  and  kind- 
ness of  God  in  visiting  the  sons  of  men.  5.  The  admirable  grace  of  Jehovah  in 
repeating  and  confirming  his  promises  to  man.  6.  The  right  way  and  the  wrong 
way  of  listening  to  God's  words  of  grace  and  truth. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 15.— The  theophany  at  Mamrt.  I.  The  Divine  visit  to  the  patriarch. 
1.  A  remarkable  proof  of  the  Divine  condescension.  2.  A  striking  adumbration  of 
the  incarnation  of  Christ.  3.  An  instructive  emblem  of  God's  gracious  visits  to  his 
saints. 

II.  The  Divine  feast  with  the  patriarch.  1.  The  courteous  invitation.  2. 
The  sumptuous  provision.     3.  The  ready  attention. 

III.  The  Divine  message  for  the  patriarch.  1.  Its  delivery  to  Abraham.  %. 
Its  reception  by  Sarah.    3.  Its  authentication  by  Jehovah. — W. 

Vers.  1 — 15. — The  theophany  at  Mamre.    "  The  Lord  appeared  unto  him  "  (ver.  1). 

I.  The  preparation  for  Divine  manifestation.  1.  Abraham  stands  on  a  higher 
plane  of  spiritual  life.  He  is  endeavouring  to  fulfil  the  commandment  given  (ch. 
xvii.  1):  "Walk  before  me,"  &c.  The  appearances  and  communications  are  more 
frequent  and  more  full.  2.  The  concentration  of  the  believer's  thought  at  a  par- 
ticular crisis.  His  place  at  the  tent  door,  looking  forth  over  the  plains  of  Mamre, 
representing  his  mental  attitude,  as  he  dwelt  on  the  promises  and  gazed  into  the 
future.  3.  There  was  a  coincidence  between  the  conjuncture  in  the  history  of  the 
neighbouring  cities  and  the  crisis  in  the  history  of  the  individual  believer.  So  in  the 
purposes  of  God  there  is  preparation  for  his  manifestation  both  in  external  provi- 
dence and  in  the  events  of  the  world  on  the  one  hand,  and  on  the  other  in  the  more 
personal  and  private  history  of  his  people. 

II.  The  manifestation  itself.  1.  It  was  very  gracious  and  condescending.  The 
angels  did  not  appear  in  angelic  glory,  but  in  human  likeness.  They  came  as  guests, 
«nd,  in  the  fragrant  atmosphere  of  a  genial  hospitality,  at  once  quickened  confidence 
and  led  forward  the  mind  to  expect  a  higher  communication.  The  household  activity 
of  Abraham  and  Sarah  on  behalf  of  the  three  visitors,  while  it  calmed  and  strength- 
ened, did  also  give  time  for  thought  and  observation  of  the  signs  of  approaching 
opportunity.  2.  There  was  from  the  first  an  appeal  to  faith.  Three  persons,  yet  one 
having  the  pre-eminence.  The  reverential  feeling  of  the  patriarch  called'  out  at  the 
manner  of  their  approach  to  his  tent.  The  coincidence  possibly  between  the  work  of 
the  Spirit  in  the  mind  of  the  believer  and  the  bestowment  of  outward  opportunity. 
3.  The  communication  of  the  Divine  promise  in  immediate  connection  with  the  facts 
of  human  life.  The  great  trial  of  faith  is  not  the  appeal  to  accept  the  word  of 
God  in  its  larger  aspect  as  his  truth,  but  the  application  of  it  to  our  own  case.  We 
may  believe  that  the  promise  will  be  fulfilled,  and  yet  we  may  not  take  it  to  heart. 
"  I  will  return  unto  thee."  "  Sarah  shall  have  a  son."  The  strength  made  perfect 
in  weakness,  not  merely  for  weakness.  The  Divine  in  the  Scripture  revelation  does 
not  overwhelm  and  absorb  the  human ;  the  human  is  taken  up  into  the  Divine  and 
glorified.  Taking  the  narrative  as  a  whole,  it  may  be  treated — (1)  Historically — as 
it  holds  a  place  in  the  history  of  the  man  Abraham  and  in  the  progressive  develop- 
ment of  revelation.  (2)  Morally — suggesting  lessons  of  patience,  reverence,  humility, 
truthfulness,  faith.     (3)  Spiritually — as   pointing  to  the  Messiah,  intimating  th« 


oh.  xtiii.  16—22.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


24 


incarnation,  the  atonement,  the  prophetic,  priestly,  and  kingly  offices  of  the  pro- 
mised Redeemer ;  the  freedom  and  simplicity  of  the  fellowship  of  God  with  man  ;  the 
great  Christian  entertainment — man  spreading  the  meal  hefore  God,  God  accepting  it 
uniting  with  man  in  its  participation,  elevating  it  into  that  which  is  heavenly  Dy  his 
manifested  presence. — R. 

Ver.  12. — "  Sarah  laughed  within  herself."  1.  The  incongruity  between  a  Divine 
promise  and  the  sphere  of  its  fulfilment  is  temptation  to  unbelief.  2.  A  disposition 
to  measure  the  reality  and  certainty  of  the  Divine  by  a  human  or  earthly  standard  iB 
sure  to  lead  us  to  irreverence  and  sinful  doubt.  3.  There  may  be  an  inward  ard  con- 
cealed working,  known  to  God  though  not  outwardly  expressed,  which  is  still  both 
an  insult  to  him  and  an  injury  to  us.  4.  The  root  of  unbelief  is  in  the  ground  of  the 
soul.  Sarah  laughed  because  she  was  not  prepared  for  the  gracious  promise.  She 
was  afraid  of  her  own  thoughts  because  they  were  not  such  as  became  her,  and  did 
dishonour  to  God's  sufficiency  and  love.  "She  denied,  saying,  I  laughed  not."  A 
more  receptive  and  spiritual  mind  would  have  both  risen  above  the  incongruity  and 
been  incapable  of  the  dissimulation. — R. 

Ver.  14. — "  Is  anything  too  hard  for  the  Lord?"  I.  Take  it  AS  the  question 
which  God  asks  of  man.  1.  Remonstrance.  The  history  of  Divine  manifestations 
proves  that  nothing  is  demanded  of  faith  which  is  not  justified  by  the  bestowments  of 
tlie  past.  2.  Invitation.  We  connect  the  question  with  the  promise.  He  opens  the 
gate  of  life ;  is  it  too  hard  for  him  to  give  us  the  victory  ?  "At  the  time  appointed  " 
his  word  will  be  fulfilled.  He  would  have  u«  rest  on  himself.  "  Believe  that  he  is, 
and  that  he  is  the  rewarder,"  &c.  What  he  is,  what  he  says,  are  blended  into  one  in 
the  true  faith  of  his  waiting  children. 

II.  Take  the  question  as  one  which  men  ask  of  one  another.  1.  When  they  set. 
forth  the  goodness  of  Divine  truth.  The  possibility  of  miracles.  The  hardness  of 
the  world's  problems  no  justification  of  unbelief.  2.  When  they  proclaim  a  gospel 
of  supernatural  gifts,  a  salvation  not  of  man,  but  of  God.  Why  should  we  doubt 
conversion?  Why  should  a  regenerated,  renewed  nature  be  so  often  mocked  at? 
3.  When  they  would  encourage  one  another  to  persevere  in  Christian  enterprise. 
The  methods  may  be  old,  but  the  grace  is  ever  new.  The  world  may  laugh,  but  the 
true  believer  should  see  all  things  possible.  The  times  are  our  measures.  Eternity 
is  God's. — R. 


EXPOSITION. 


Ver.  16.  — And  the  men  rose  up  from 
thence,— Mamre  (vide  supra,  ver.  1) — and 
looked  towards  Sodom.  Literally,  toward 
the  face  (Rosenmiiller),  or  towards  the  plain 
(Keil),  of  Sodom,  as  if  intending  to  proceed 
thither.  And  Abraham  went  with  them — 
across  the  mountains  on  the  east  of  Hebron, 
as  far  as  Caphar-barucha,  according  to  tra- 
dition, whence  a  view  can  be  obtained  of  the 
Dead  Sea — solitudinem  ae  terras  Sodomce 
(vide  Keil,  in  loco) — to  bring  them  on  tL  a 
way.  Literally,  to  send  them  away,  or  accord 
them  a.  friendly  convoy  over  a  portion  of 
their  journey. 

Ver.  17. — And  tne  Lord  said  (to  himself), 
Shall  I  hide  from  Abraham— the  LXX.  in- 
terpolate, rov  Trailog  /low ;  but,  as  Philo  ob- 
serves, tov  tpi\ov  /iov  would  have  been  a  more 
appropriate  designation  for  the  patriarch  (cf. 
2  Chrou.  xx.  7  ;  Isa.  xli.  8  ;  James  ii.  23)— 
that  thing  which  I  do.  I.  e.  propose  to  do, 
the  present  being  used  for  the  future,  where, 
a»  in  the  utterances  of  God,  whose  will  is 


equivalent  to  his  deed,  the  action  la  iegarded 
by  the  Speaker  as  being  already  as  good  as 
finished  {vide  Ewald,  'Heb.  Synt,'  §  135; 
Gesenius,  §  126). 

Ver.  18.  —  Seeing  that  Abraham  shall 
surely  become  (literally,  becoming  shall  be- 
come) a  great  and  mighty  nation  (cf.  ch.  xii. 
2 ;  xvii.  4—6),  and  all  the  nations  of  the 
earth  shall  be  blessed  in  him  ?  The  import 
of  Jehovah's  self-interrogation  was,  that 
since  Abraham  had  already  been  promoted 
to  so  distinguished  a  position,  not  only  was 
there  no  sufficient  reason  why  the  Divine 
purpose  concerning  Sodom  should  be  con- 
cealed from  him,  but,  on  the  contrary,  the 
gracious  footing  of  intimacy  which  subsisted 
between  himself  and  his  humble  friend 
almost  -  necessitated  some  sort  of  friendly 
communication  on  the  subject,  and  all  the 
more  for  the  reason  next  appended. 

Ver.  19.— For  I  know  him,  that— literally, 
for  I  have  known  (or  chosen,  J}"]  J  being  = 
dilexi,  as  in  Amos  iii.  2)  him  to  the  end  thai 


m 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


[oh.  xvm.  16 — 21 


mi 


conveying  the  idea  of  purpose  ;  vide 
Ewald,  §  357),  the  language  expressing  the 
idea  that  Abraham  had  been  the  object  of 
Divine  foreknowledge  and  election  (Gesenius, 
Rosenmiiller,  Delitzsch,  Keil,  Oehler,  Ka- 
lisch,  Lange),  although  the  reading  of  the 
text  is  substantially  adopted  by  many  (LXX., 
Vulgate,  Targums,  Luther,  Calvin,  Dathe,  et 
alii).  The  latter  interpretation  assigns  as  the 
reason  of  the  Divine  communication  the  know- 
ledge which  Jehovah  then  possessed  of  Abra- 
ham's piety ;  the  former  grounds  the  Divine 
resolution  on  the  prior  fact  that  Divine  grace 
had  elected  him  to  the  high  destiny  described 
in  the  language  following.  .  It  is  generally 
agreed  that  this  clause  connects  with  ver.  17  ; 
Bush  regards  it  as  exhibiting  the  means  by 
which  the  future  promised  to  Abraham  in  ver. 
18  should  be  realised— he  will  (rather,  may) 
command  his  children  and  his  household 
after  him  (by  parental  authority  as  well  as 
by  personal  example),  and  they  shall  keep 
(rather,  that  they  may  keep)  the  way  of  the 
Lord,  —  i.  e.  the  religion  of  Jehovah  (cf. 
Judges  ii.  22  ;  2  Kings  xxi.  22  ;  Ps.  cxix.  1 ; 
Acts  xviii.  25),  of  which  the  practical  out- 
come is — to  do  justice  and  j  udgment ; — or 
.  righteousness  and  judgment,  that  which  ac- 
cords with  right  or  the  sense  of  oughtness  in 
intelligent  and  moral  beings,  and  that  which 
harmonises  with  the  Divine  law  (cf.  Ezek. 
xviii.  5) — that  (literally,  to  the  end  that,  in 

order  that,  J5?y?,  lit  supra)  the  lord  may 
bring  upon  Abraham  that  which  he  hath 
spoken  of  him. 

Ver.  20. — And  the  lord  said,  Because  the 
•ry  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  is  great.  Lit- 
erally, the  cry  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  (cf. 
ch.  iv.  10),  because  it  is  (not,  it  is  indeed, 
Baumgarten,  Keil)  multiplied ;  the  place  of 
emphasis  being  conceded  to  the  subject  of 
discourse,  viz.,  the  cry  of  Sodom's  wicked- 
ness.   And  because  their  sin  is  very  great. 


Literally,  and  their  sin,  because  it  is  heavy 
i.  e.  abundant  and  heinous. 

Ver.  21.— I  will  go  down  now  (cf.  ch.  xt 
5),  and  see  (judicial  investigation  ever  pre- 
cedes judicial  infliction  at  the  Divine  tri- 
bunal) whether  they  have  done  altogether— 
literally,  whether  they  have  made  complete- 
ness, i.  e.  carried  their  iniquity  to  perfection, 
to  the  highest  pitch  of  wickedness  (Calvin, 
Delitzsch,  Keil) ;  or  consummated  their 
wickedness,  by  carrying  it  to  that  pitch  of 
fulness  which  works  death  (Ainsworth,  Ka- 
lisch,  Rosenmiiller).  The  received  rendering, 
which  regards  H73  as  an  adverb,  has  the 
authority  of  Luther  and  Gesenius— accord- 
ing to  the  cry  of  it,  which  has  come  unto 
me ;  and  if  not,  I  will  know.  The  LXX. 
render  'iva  yvd,  moaning,  "should  it  not 
be  so,  I  will  still  go  down,  that  I  may  ascer- 
tain the  exact  truth ; "  the  Chaldee  para- 
phrases, "and  if  they  repent,  I  will  not 
exact  punishment."  The  entire  verse  is 
anthropomorphic,  and  designed  to  express 
the  Divine  solicitude  that  the  strictest  jus- 
tice should  characterise  all  his  dealings  both 
with  men  and  nations. 

Ver.  22. — And  the  men  turned  their  face* 
from  thence,  and  went  toward  Sodom  {i.  e. 
two  of.  the  three  proceeded  on  their  way 
towards  the  Jordan  valley,  while  the  third 
was  detained  by  the  patriarch,  probably  on  the 
heights  overlooking  the  plain,  for  a  sublime 
act  of  intercession  which  is  thus  briefly  but 
suggestively  described) :  but  Abraham  stood 
yet  before  the  Lord.  According  to  the 
Mssorites  the  text  originally  read,  "And 
the  Lord  stood  before  Abraham,"  and  was 
changed  because  it  did  not  seem  becoming 
to  speak  of  God  standing  in  the  presence  o( 
a  creature.  This,  however,  is  a  mere  Rab- 
binical conceit.  As  Abraham  is  not  said  to 
have  stood  before  the  three  men,  the  expres- 
sion points  to  spiritual  rather  than  to  local 
contiguity. 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  17.  —  Sodom's  doom  revealed.  I.  The  reason  of  the  revelation.  1. 
Abraham's  new  position.  Having  been  lately  taken  into  covenant  with  God,  allied 
by  the  holy  tie  of  a  celestial  friendship  to  Jehovah,  the  patriarch  seemed  in  the 
Li*ro  '  j  6yeS  *°  0CCUPy  a  footing  of  intimacy  before  him  that  demanded  the  disclosure 
*of  Sodom's  impending  doom.  That  footing  the  patriarch  no  doubt  owed  to  Divine 
grace— sovereign,  unmerited,  free ;  but  still,  having  been  accorded  to  him,  it  is,  by  a 
further  act  of  grace,  represented  as  laying  God  himself  under  certain  obligations  to- 
wards his  servant.  So  "  the  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  him,  and  he  will 
•how  them  his  covenant  "  (Ps.  xxv.  14).  2.  Abraham's  new  prospects.  About  to 
fcecome  the  head  of  a  great  nation,  it  was  natural  to  suppose  that  Abraham  would  be 
prof  snndly  interested  in  all  that  concerned  mankind.  As  the  head  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment Church  too,  which  had  just  been  constituted  (ch.  xvii.),  there  existed  a  special 
reason  for  his  being  properly  instructed  as  fo  the  impending  judgment  of  Sodom. 
Upon  him  would  devolve  the  interpretation  to  the  men  of  Ids  day  of  the  significant 
of  that  event.     Rightly  viewed,  this  is  one  of  the  proper  functions  of  the  Church  on 


cm.  xvm.  16—52.3  TIIE  BOOK  Of  GEttRSiS.  Oft 

earth — to  explain  God's  judgments  to  the  unbelieving  world.  Hence  "the  Loid  God 
doeth  nothing  but  he  revealeth  his  secret  unto  his  servants  the  prophets"  (Amos 
Hi.  7).  3.  Abraham's  new  responsibilities.  These  were  the  cultivation  of  personal 
and  family  religion,  which  devolved  upon  him  with  a  new  force  and  a  heavier  degree 
of  obligation  than  they  did  before  in  consequence  of  his  new  standing  as  a  Church 
member.  God  having  graciously  assigned  this  position  within  the  Church  in  order 
that  he  might  command  his  children  and  his  household  after  him,  by  means  of 
religious  instruction  as  well  as  through  the  influence  of  personal  example,  to  fear 
God,  it  was  needful  that  he  should  be  informed  as  to  the  ground,  at  least,  of  the 
coming  judgment  on  the  cities  of  the  plain. 

II.  The  reason  of  the  retribution.  This  was  the  wickedness  of  Sodom,  which 
was — 1.  Exceedingly  heinous  as  to  its  character.  Minutely  detailed  in  the  ensuing 
chapter,  it  is  here  only  ir  directly  mentioned  as  something  grievous  in  the  sight  of 
God.  All  sin  is  inherently  offensive  in  the  eyes  of  the  Almighty ;  but  some  forms 
of  wickedness  are  more  presumptuously  daring  or  more  intrinsically  loathsome  than 
others,  and  of  such  sort  were  the  sins  of  Sodom  (ch.  six.  1).  2.  Exceedingly 
abundant  as  to  its  measure.  It  was  "  multiplied  "  iniquity  of  which  the  Sodomites 
were  guilty ;  and  this  not  simply  in  the  sense  in  which  the  sins  of  all  may  be  charac- 
terised as  beyond  computation  (Ps.  xix.  12  ;  xl.  12),  but  in  the  sense  that  their  hearts 
were  set  in  them  to  do  evil  (Eccles.  viii.  11),  so  that  they  worked  all  manner  of 
uncleanness  with  greediness  (Ephes.  iv.  19).  3.  Exceedingly  clear  as  to  its  com- 
mission. Though  God  speaks  of  making  investigation  into  the  sing  of  Sodom,  this 
was  really  unnecessary.  The  moral  degeneracy  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  Jordan 
valley  was  one  of  the  "  all  things  "  that  are  ever  "  naked  and  manifest "  unto  his 
eye.  So  nothing' can  hide  sin  from  God  (2  Chron.  xvi.  9 ;  Prov.  xv.  3 ;  Amos  ix.  8). 
4.  Exceedingly  patent  as  to  its  ill  desert.  This  was  the  reason  why  God  employed 
the  language  of  ver.  21.  He  meant  that  though  the  guilt  of  Sodom  was  great,-he 
would  not  let  loose  his  vengeance  until  it  should  be  seen  to  be  perfectly  just. 
Nothing  would  be  done  in  haste,  but  all  with  judicial  calmness. 

Lessons: — 1.  The  impotence  of  anything  but  true  religion  to  purify  the  heart  or 
refine  a  people.  2.  God  is  specially  observant  of  the  wickedness  of  great  cities.  3. 
When  great  cities  sink  to  a  certain  depth  in  their  wickedness  they  are  doomed  to 
perish.  4.  When  God's  judgments  overtake  a  nation  they  are  ever  characterised  by 
justice. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  16-33.— Abraham's  intercession  for  Sodom.  The  who.e  wonderful  scene 
springs  out  o£  the  theophany.  Abraham  s  faith  has  given  him  a  special  position 
with  the  Lord.  "  Shall  I  hide  from  Abraham  that  thing  which  I  do  ?  "  &c.  The 
true  priesthood  and  mediatorship  is  friendship  with  God.  The  grace  of  God  first 
gives  the  likeness  and  then  exalts  it.  The  Lord  knew  Abraham  because  Abraham 
knew  the  Lord.  The  superior  angel,  the  Lord,  remains  behind  his  companions  that 
Abraham  might  have  the  opportunity  of  intercession;  so  the  Lord  lingers  in  his 
providence  that  he  may  reveal  his  righteousness  and  mercy.  As  to  the  pleading  of 
the  patriarch  and  the  answers  of  the  Lord  to  it,  we  may  take  it — 

I.  As  it  bears  on  the  character  of  God.  1.  He  is  open,  to  entreaty.  2.  He  is 
unwilling  to  destroy.  3.  He  spares  for  the  sake  of  righteousness.  4.  He  "does 
right"  as  "Judge  of  the  earth,"  even  though  to  the  eyes  of  the  best  men  there 
is  awful  mystery  in  his  doings. 

II.  As  it  reveals  the  characteristics  of  patriarchal  piety.  1.  It  was  bold  with 
the  boldness  of  simplicity  and  faith.  2.  It  was  full  of  true  humanity  while  deeply 
reverential  towards  God.  Abraham  was  no  fanatic.  3.  It  waited  for  and  humbly 
accepted  Divine  judgments  and  appointments  not  without  reason,  not  without  the 
exercise  of  thought  and  feeling,  but  all  the  more  so  as  it  prayed  and  talked  with 
God.  4.  The  one_  living  principle  of  the  patriarchal  religion  was  that  entire  con- 
fidence in  God's  righteousness  and  love,  in  separating  the  wicked  and  the  good,  in 
both  his  judgments  and  his  mercy,  which  is  the  essence  of  Christianity  as  veil. 
"  The  right "  which  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  will  do  is  not  the  right  of  mer*  biind 


Mi  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  [ch.  xviii.  16—22, 

law,  or  rough  human  administration  of  law,  but  the  right  of  him  who  discerneth 
between  the  evil  and  the  good,  "  too  wise  to  err,  too  good  to  be  unkind." — K. 

Ver.  19. — God's  rule  in,  the  family.  "  For  I  know  him,  that  he  will  command 
his  children  and  his  household  after  him,  and  they  shall  keep  the  way  of  the  Lord." 
The  promise  to  Abraham  included — (1)  understanding  of  God's  acts;  (2)  that  he 
should  become  a  mighty  nation;  (3)  that  he  should  be  ancestor  of  the  promised 
Seed  ;  (4)  that  he  himself  should  be  a  blessing  to  others.  Of  these  points  two  at 
least  are  not  confined  to  him  personally,  but  belong  to  all  who  will.  To  know  what 
God  doeth  a  man  must  be  taught  of  the  Spirit  (1  Cor.  ii.  14;  cf.  Isa.  vii.  12).  There 
is  a  wide  difference  between  seeing  an  event,  or  even  foreseeing  it,  and  understanding 
God's  lessons  therein.  To  be  able  in  everything  to  mark  the  love,  and  care,  and 
wisdom  of  God ;  to  walk  with  him  as  a  child,  accepting  what  he  sends  not  merely 
as  inevitable,  but  as  loving ;  to  learn  lessons  from  all  that  happens,  and  through  the 
works  of  his  hands  to  see  our  Father's  face — this  is  peace,  and  this  is  what  the 
wisdom  of  this  world  cannot  teach  (Matt.  xi.  25 ;  1  Cor.  i.  20,  21).  Again,  Abraham 
was  to  be  not  merely  the  ancestor  of  a  nation,  but  the  father  of  a  spiritual  family 
by  influence  and  example  (Matt.  iii.  9;-  Gal.  iii.  7).  In  this  his  calling  is  that  of 
every  Christian  (Dan.  xii.  3 ;  Matt.  v.  13,  14).  Text  connects  the  godly  rule  of  a 
family  with  both  these  blessings.  Christianity  is  not  to  be  a  selfish,  but  a  diffusive 
thing  (Matt.  v.  15;  xiii.  33);  and  the  influence  must  needs  begin  at  home  (cf. 
Num.  x.  29  ;  Acts  i.  8),  among  those  whom  God  has  placed  with  us. 

I.  Things  needful  for  this  work.  1.  Care  for  his  own  soul.  If  that  is  not 
cared  for  a  man  cannot  desire  the  spiritual  good  of  others.  He  may  desire  and  try 
to  train  his  children  and  household  in  honesty  and  prudence;  to  make  them  good 
members  of  society,  successful,  respected;  and  may  cultivate  all  kindly  feelings ; 
but;  not  till  he  realises  eternity  will  he  really  aim  at  training  others  for  eternity. 
Might  say  that  only  one  who  has  found  peace  can  fully  perform  this  work.  A  man 
aroused  with  desire  that  his  family  should  be  saved.  But  he  cannot  press  the  full 
truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.  2.  Love  for  the  souls  of  others.  Christians  are  sometimee 
so  wrapped  up  in  care  for  their  own  souls  as  to  have  few  thoughts  for  the  state  of 
others.  Perhaps  from  a  lengthened  conflict  the  mind  has  been  too  much  turned 
upon  its  own  state.  But  this  is  not  the  mind  of  Christ  (1  Cor.  x.  24).  It  is  not  a 
close  following  of  him.  It  tells  of  a  halting  in  the  "  work  of  f;iitVi  "  (2  Cor.  v.  13, 14 ; 
cf.  Bom.  x.  1).  3.  Desire  to  advance  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  When  a  man  has  this 
he  sees  in  every  one  a  soul  for  which  Christ  died  (cf.  John  iv.  35),  and  those  with 
whom  he  is  closely  connected  must  chiefly  call  forth  "this  feeling. 

II.  The  manner  of  the  work.  Family  worship ;  acknowledgment  of  God  as 
ruling  in  the  household  ;  his  will  a  regulating  principle  and  bond  of  union.  Let  this 
bo  a  reality,  not  a  form.  Let  the  sacrificial  work  of  Christ  be  ever  put  forward  in 
instruction  and  in  prayer.  Personal  example — constantly  aiming  at  a  holy  life.  To 
pray  in  the  family  and  yet  to  be  evidently  making  no  effort  to  live  in  the  spirit  of 
the  prayer  is  to  do  positive  evil ;  encouraging  the  belief  that  God  may  be  worshipped 
with  words,  without  deeds ;  and  tending  to  separate  religion  from  daily  life.  Prayer 
in  private  for  each  member— children,  servants,  &c.  ;  and  watchfulness  to  deal  with 
each  as  God  shall  give  opportunity  (Prov.  xv.  23).  Let  prayer  always  accompany 
such  efforts. — M. 

Ver.  19. — Abraham,  and  family,  training.  "For  I  know  him,  that  he  will  com- 
mand his  children  and  his  household  after  him,"  &c.  Under  the  shady  terebinth 
celestial  visitants  partake,  or  appear  to  do  so,  of  a  meal  hastily  provided  by  the 
patriarch.  The  whole  narrative  is  given  in  such  a  way  that, — after  the  manner  of 
the  time, — to  God  are  ascribed  human  passions,  desires,  hesitancy,  and  resolve. 
Tlence  God  is  described  as  resolving,  on  two  grounds,  to  reveal  to  Abraham  that 
A'hich  he  is  about  to  do  in  the  destruction  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah:  (1)  that  h« 
A-ould  become  a  great  and  mighty  nation  ;  (2)  that  he  would  direct  his  household  to 
follow  in  the  ways  of  righteousness  and  truth.     Notice — 

I.  The  value  God  places  on  early  spiritual  training.  Children  and  servant* 
»re  both  to  be  brought  under  spiritual  influence.    The  heart  will  not  become  pur* 


ob.  xtiii.  23—33.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


S4t 


naturally,  any  more  than  the  boat  left  to  itself  would  make  headway  against  a  strong 
current.  The  set  of  the  world-tide  is  in  an  evil  direction.  Abraham  had  no  written 
book  to  aid  him  in  his  work.  His  unwritten  Bible  was  the  tradition  of  God's  deal- 
ings with  the  race  and  with  himself.  He  could  tell  of  the  promises  of  God  and  of 
the  way  of  approach  to  him  by  sacrifice.  Evidently  there  had  been  careful  training  in 
this  respect ;  for  when  Isaac  was  going  with  his  father  to  the  mount  of  sacrifice  he  no- 
ticed that,  although  the  fire  and  wood  were  carried,  they  had  no  lamb  for  a  burnt  offering. 

II.  God  notices  how  spiritual  training  is  carried  on.  "I  know  him."  He 
could  trust  Abraham,  for  he  would  "command,"  &c,  not  in  the  dictatorial  tones  of 
a  tyrant,  but  by  the  power  of  a  consistent  life.  Many  children  of  religious  parents 
go  back  to  the  world  because  of  the  imperious  style  of  training  they  have  received. 
In  training,  every  word,  look,  and  act  tells.  In  many  homes  there  is,  alas,  no  train- 
ing given  and  no  holy  example  set.  Parents  are  held  accountable  for  failure,  and 
should  therefore  be  firm  and  loving  in  training.  They  should  not  readily  delegate  to 
others  the  work  of  training,  either  in  secular  or  religious  knowledge.  Sunday-school 
teaching  should  supplement,  not  supplant,  home  training. 

III.  God  made  the  bestowment  op  intended  blessings  contingent  on  the 
faith  if  ul  discharge  of  duty.  "  That  the  Lord  may  bring  upon  Abraham  that  which 
he  hath  spoken  of  him."  If  Abraham  had  not  been  faithful  his  name  would  have 
died  out,  and  there  would  have  been  no  handing  on  of  the  narrative  of  his  devoted 
life  and  tenacious  hold  of  the  Divine  promises.  Isaac  followed  in  his  father's  steps 
and  was  a  meditative  man.  Jacob  cherished  the  promises  and  handed  them  on  to 
his  sons.  The  Jews  preserved  a  knowledge  of  God  when  all  other  races  were  sunk 
in  polytheism.  From  them  came  the  One  who  was  the  Saviour  of  the  world.  All, 
however,  depended  on  the  right  training  of  Isaac.     The  rill  flowed  to  the  streamlet," 

he  streamlet  to  the  creek,  the  creek  to  the  river,  the  river  to  the  ocean.  Influence 
ever  widened,  and  God's  aim  with  respect  to  Abraham  was  carried  out.  Let  all  strive 
so  to  act  that  the  character  of  the  life  may  not  undo  the  teachings  of  the  lip. — n. 


EXPOSITION. 


Ver.  23. — And  Abraham  drew  near.  /.  e. 
to  Jehovah  ;  not  simply  locally,  but  also 
spiritually.  The  religious  use  of  S5>|}  as  a 
performing  religious  services  to  God,  or  a 
pious  turning  of  the  mind  to  God,  is  found 
in  Exod.  xxx.  20 ;  Isa.  xxix.  13_;  Jer.  xxx.  21 ; 
and  in  a  similar  sense  lyyiZv  is  employed  in 
the  New  Testament  (cf.  Heb.  iv.  16  ;  x.  22  ; 
J  ames  iv.  8 ).  The  Jonathan  Targum  explains,' 
"  and  Abraham  prayed. "  And  said.  Com- 
mencing the  "sublimest  act  of  human  in- 
tercession of  which  Scripture  preserves  a 
record,  being  moved  thereto,  if  not  by  an 
immediate  regard  for  Lot  (Lange),  at  least 
by  a  sense  of  compassion  towards  the  in- 
habitants of  Sodom,  "communis  erga 
quinque  populos  misericordia"  (Calvin), 
which  was  heightened  and  intensified  by  his 
own  previous  experience  of  forgiving  grace 
( Kcil ).  Wilt  thou  also  destroy  the  righteous 
with  the  wicked  1  The  question  presupposes 
that  God  had,  according  to  the  resolution  of 
ver.  17,  explained  to  the  patriarch  his  inten- 
tion to  destroy  the  cities  of  the  plain.  The 
object  the  patriarch  contemplated  in  his 
intercession  was  not  simply  the  preservation 
of  any  godly  remnant  that  might  be  found 
within  the  doomed  towns,  but  the  rescue  of 
their  entire  populations  from  the  impending 
Judgment, — only  he  does  not  at  first  discover 


his  complete  design,  perhaps  regarding  such 
an  absolute  reversal  of  the  Divine  purpose  as 
exceeding  the  legitimate  bounds  of  creature 
supplication  ;  but  with  what  might  be  cha- 
racterised as  holy  adroitness  he  veils  his 
ulterior  aim,  and  commences  his  petition  at 
a  point  somewhat  removed  from  that  to 
which  ho  hopes  to  come.  Assuming  it  as 
settled  that  the  fair  Pentapolis  is  to  be 
destroyed,  he  practically  asks,  with  a  strange 
mixture  of  humility  and  boldness,  if  Je- 
hovah has  considered  that  this  will  involve 
a  sad  commingling  in  one  gigantic  overthrow 
of  both  the  righteous  and  the  wicked. 

Ver.  24.  —  Peradventure  there  be  fifty 
righteous  within  the  city.  A  charitable 
supposition,  as  the  event  showed,  though  at 
first  sight  it  might  not  appear  so  to  Abraham ; 
and  the  bare  possibility  of  Sodom's  —  not 
Sodom  alone  (Kalisch),  but  the  Pentapolis — 
containing  so  many  good  men  was  enough 
to  afford  a  basis  for  the  argument  which 
followed.  Wilt  thou  also  destroy  and  not 
spare— literally,  take  away  (sc.  the  iniquity) 
i.  e.  remove  the  punishment  from  —  th« 
place  (not  tli3  godly  portion  of  the  city 
merely,  but  the  entire  population  ;  a  com 
plete  discovery  of  Abraham's  design)  for  tht 
fifty  righteous  that  are  therein  t 

Yer.  25.— That  be  far  from  thee — literally 


ISO 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xvin.  S5 — 3& 


te  profane  things  (be  it)  to  thee  —  nefas  sit 
tibi  =  absit  a  te  I  an  exclamation  of 
ibhorrence,  too  feebly  rendered  by  /ujfln/twe 
(LXX. )— to  do  after  this  manner  (literally, 
according  to  this  word),  to  slay  the  righteous 
with  the  wicked :  and  that  the  righteous 
should  be  as  the  wicked  (literally,  and  that 
it  should  be — as  the  righteous,  so  the  wicked), 
that  be  far  from  thee  :  Shall  not  the  Judge 
of  all  the  earth  do  right?  The  patriarch 
appeals  not  to  Jehovah's  covenant  grace 
(Kurtz),  but  to  his  absolute  judicial  equity 
(Keil).  It  does  not,  however,  follow  that 
the  Divine  righteousness  would  have  been 
compromised  by  consigning  pious  and  wicked 
to  the  same  temporal  destruction.  This 
must  have  been  a  spectacle  not  unfrequeutly 
observed  in  Abraham's  day  as  well  as  ours. 
Yet  the  mind  of  Abraham  appears  to  have 
been  perplexed,  as  men's  minds  often  are 
still,  by  the  magnitude  of  the  proposed  illus- 
tration of  a  common  principle  in  Providence. 
Though  prepared  to  admit  the  principle 
when  its  application  is  confined  to  solitary 
:ases,  or  cases  of  no  great  amplitude,  yet 
instinctively  the  human  mind  feels  that 
there  must  be  a  limit  to  the  commingling 
of  the  righteous  and  the  wicked  in  calamity, 
though  it  should  be  only  of  a  temporal 
description.  That  limit  Abraham  conceived, 
or  perhaps  feared  that  others  might  conceive, 
would  be  passed  if  good  and  bad  in  Sodom 
should  be  overwhelmed  in  a  common  ruin  ; 
and  in  this  spirit  the  closing  utterance  of 
his  first  supplication  may  bo  regarded  as 
giving  expression  to  the  hope  that  Jehovah 
would  do  nothing  that  would  even  seem  to 
tarnish  his  Divine  rigbteousness.  Abraham 
of  course  regarded  this  as  impossible,  con- 
sequently he  believed  that  Sodom  might  be 


Ver.  26. — And  the  Lord  said,  If  I  find  in 
Sodom  fifty  righteous  within  the  city  (thus 
accepting  the  test  proposed  by  Abraham, 
but  not  necessarily  thereby  acquiescing  in 
the  absolute  soundness  of  his  logic),  then  I 
will  spare  (not  as  an  act  of  justice,  but  as 
an  exercise  of  mercy,  and  not  because  of  any 
suspicions  that  might  otherwise  attach  to 
my  rectitude,  but  solely  in  vindication  of 
my  clemency)  all  the  place  (not  the  righteous 
merely,  which  was  all  that  justice  could  have 
legitimately  demanded)  for  their  sakes,  i.  e. 
because  of  the  claims  upon  my  mercy  which 
grace  admits  the  righteous  to  prefer. 

Yer.  27. — And  Abraham  answered  and 
said  (being  emboldened  by  the  success  of  his 


first  petition),  Behold  now,  I  have  taken  upon 
me— literally,  /  have  begun,  though  here 
perhaps  used  in  a  more  emphatic  sense :  I 
have  undertaken  or  ventui  ed  (vide  Gesenius, 
p.  326) — to  speak  unto  the  Lord — Adonai 
(eh.  xv.  2) — which  am  but  dust  and  ashes. 
"  Dust  in  his  origin  and  ashes  in  his  end  " 
(Delitzsch  ;  vide  ch.  iii.  19). 

Ver.  28. — Peradventure  there  shall  lack 
five  of  the  fifty  righteous  :  wilt  thou  destroy 
all  the  city  for  lack  of  five  %  Literally,  m. 
account  of  five,  i.  e.  because  they  are  want- 
ing. A  rare  example  o'  holy  ingenuity  in 
prayer.  Abraham,  instead  of  pleading  for 
the  city's  safety  on  account  of  forty -five, 
deprecates  its  destruction  on  account  of  five. 
And  he  said,  If  I  find  there  forty  and  five,  I 
will  not  destroy  it. 

Ver.  29.  —  And  he  spake  unto  him  yet 
again— literally,  and  he  added  yet  to  speak 
to  him  (cf.  ch.  iv.  2  ;  viii.  10,  12  ;  xxv.  1) — 
and  said  (increasing  in  his  boldness  as  God 
abounded  in  his  grace),  Peradventure  there 
shall  be  forty  found  there.  Does  Abraham 
hesitate  to  add  the  query,  "  Wilt  thou  also  ?" 
&c. ,  as  if  fearing  he  had  at  last  touched  the 
limit  of  the  Divine  condescension.  If  so,  he 
must  have  been  surprised  by  the  continued 
gracious  response  which  his  supplication  re- 
ceived. And  lie  said,  I  will  not  do  it  for 
forty's  sake. 

Ver.  30. — And  he  said  unto  him,  Oh  let 
not  the  Lord  be  an^ry, — literally,  let  there 
not  be  burning  with  anger  to  the  Lord 
(Adonai)— and  I  will  speak  :  Peradventure 
there  shall  thirty  be  found  there.  And  he 
said,  I  will  not  do  it,  if  I  find  thirty-there. 

Ver.  81.— And  he  said,  Behold  now,  I  have 
taken  upon  me  {vide  ver.  27)  to  speak  unto 
the  Lord  (Adonai) :  Peradventure  there 
shall  be  twenty  found  there.  And  he  said, 
I  Will  not  destroy  it  for  twenty's  sake. 

Ver.  32.— And  he  said,  Oh  let  not  the 
Lord  be  angry  (vide  supra),  and  I  will  speak 
hut  this  once  (literally,  only  this  time  more, 
as  in  Exod.  x.  17) :  Peradventure  ten  shall 
be  found  there.  And  he  said,  I  will  not 
destroy  it  for  ten's  sake. 

Ver.  33. — And  the  Lord  (Jehovah)  went 
his  way, — i.  e.  vanished  (Keil) ;  not  to  avoid 
further  entreaties  on  the  part  of  Abraham 
(Delitzsch),  but  for  the  reason  specified  in 
the  next  words — as  soon  as  he  had  left  com^ 
mulling  with  Abraham  (because  Abraham's 
supplications  were  ended) :  and  Abraham 
returned  unto  his  place  (viz.,  Mamie  near 
Hebron). 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  23 — 33. — Abraham's  intercession.  I.  The  object  of  his  intercession.  Not 
simply  the  rescue  of  Lot  from  the  doomed  cities,  but  the  salvation  of  the  cities  them- 
selves, with  their  miserable  inhabitants.    A  request  evincing — 1.  Tender  sympathy- 


cb.  xvm.  23—33.]  THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS.  til 

Though  doubtless  _  the  righteous  character  of  the  impending  retribution  had  been 
explained  to  him,  its  appalling  severity  was  such  as  to  thrill  his  feeling  heart  with 
anguish,  which  would  certainly  not  be  lessened,  but  intensified,  if  he  allowed  hif 
thoughts  to  dwell  upon  the  future  into  which  that  overwhelming  calamity  would 
forthwith  launch  its  unhappy  victims.  2.  Unselfish  charity.  Not  blindly  shutting 
his  eyes  to  the  miseries  of  the  Sodomites,  as  many  would  have  done,  on  the  plea  that 
they  were  richly  merited,  ©r  that  they  were  no  concern  of  his,  or  that  it  was  little  he 
could  do  to  avert  them,  he  actively  bestirs  himself,  if  possible,  to  prevent  them. 
Nor  does  he  say  that,  having  delivered  them  once  from  the  devouring  sword  of  war, 
vrithout  their  having  profited  by  either  the  judgment  or  the  mercy  that  had  then  been 
measured  out  to  them,  lie  will  now  leave  them  to  be  engulfed  by  the  approaching 
storm  of  Almighty  wrath ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  he  rather  seeks  a  second  time  to 
effect  their  rescue.  3.  Amazing  catholicity.  Not  content  with  asking  Lot's  deliver- 
ance, or  the  rescue  of  the  righteous,  he  aims  at  nothing  short  of  the  complete  pre- 
servation of  the  cities.  He  solicits  not  a  few  of  their  inhabitants  only,  but  theii 
entire  population.  One  wonders  whether  to  admire  most  the  greatness  of  the  love 
or  the  grandeur  of  the  faith  herein  displayed. 

II.  The  spirit  of  his  intercession.  1.  Holy  boldness.  Abraham  "drew  near." 
The  expression  intimates  confidential  familiarity,  earnestness  of  entreaty,  unrestrained 
freedom  of  discourse,  almost  venturesome  audacity  in  prayer;  all  of  which  charac- 
teristics should  be  found  in  a  believer's  prayers,  especially  when  interceding  in  behalf 
of  others  (Heb.  x.  22).  2.  Reverent  humility.  Three  times  he  deprecates  Jehovah's 
anger,  and  acknowledges  personal  unworthiness  ;  and  that  this  self-abasement  was 
not  affected,  but.real,  is  apparent  from  the  circumstance  that  the  more  his  supplication 
prospers,  the  deeper  does  he  sink  in  self -prostration.  Gracious  souls  are  ever  humble 
under  a  sense  of  God's  mercies :  Jacob  (ch.  xxxii.  10),  David  (2  Sam.  vii.  18 ;  cf. 
Luke  vii.  6).  3.  Fervent  importunity.  With  a.  sanctified  dexterity  he,  as  it  were, 
endeavours  to  shut  up  the  heart  of  God  to  grant  the  deliverance  he  solicits.  Nor 
does  lie  rest  contented  with  the  first  response  to  his  entreaty,  but  with  greater 
vehemence  returns  to  the  charge,  increasing  his  demands  as  God  enlarges  his  coa- 
cessions  (cf.  Matt.  xv.  22). 

III.  The  logic  of  his  intercession.  1.  The  argument.  The  principle  on  which 
the  patriarch  stands  is  not  the  grace  of  the  covenant,  but  the  righteousness  of  the 
Judge.  His  meaning  is  that  in  moral  goodness  there  is  a  certain  dynamic  force 
which  operates  towards  the  preservation  of  the  wicked,  and  which  the  Divine 
righteousness  itself  is  bound  to  take  into  its  ohlculations.  Where  this  force  reaches 
a  certain  limit  in  intensity,  a  regard  to  judicial  equity  seems  to  require  that  it  shall 
be  allowed  to  exercise  its  legitimate  sway — a  principle  which  God  admitted  to  the 
patriarch  when  he  said  that  the  Amorites  were  spared  because  their  iniquity  was  not 
full  ^ch.  xv.  16),  and  which  he  here  endorses  by  consenting  to  spare  Sodom  if  even 
ten  righteous  men  can  be  found  within  its  gates.  2.  The  application.  The  patriarch 
conducts  his  case  with  singular  directness,  going  straight  to  the  logical  issues  of  the 
principle  with  which  he  starts ;  with  marvellous  ingenuity  pitching  the  hypothe- 
tical number  of  pious  Sodomites  so  high  as  to  insure  a  favourable  response,  and 
gradually  diminishing  as  grace  enlarges,  and  with  unwearied  assiduity  refusing  to 
discontinue  his  holy  argument  so  long  as  a  chance  remains  of  saving  Sodom. 

IV.  The  success  of  his  intercession.  1.  He  got  all  he  ashed.  He  did  not  crave  the 
unconditional  sparing  of  the  city,  but  only  its  preservation  on  certain  suggested  con- 
ditions. Those  conditions  too  were  of  his  own  framing ;  and  yet  against  them  not 
so  much  as  one  single  caveat  was  entered  by  God.  2.  He  ceased  asking  before  God 
stopped  giving.  It  may  be  rash  to  speculate  as  to  what  would  have  happened  had  Abra- 
ham  continued  to  reduce  the  number  on  which  he  perilled  the  salvation  of  Sodom ;  but 
for  God's  glory  it  is  only  just  to  observe  that  it  was  not  he  who  discontinued  answering 
the  patriarch's  petitions,  so  much  as  the  patriarch  himself,  who  felt  that  he  had  reached 
the  limit  of  that  liberty  which  God  accords  to  believing  suppliants  at  his  throne. 

Lessons: — 1.  The  liberty  which  saints  have  to  approach  God  in  prayer.  2.  The 
Divinely-taught  art  of  wrestling  with  God  in  prayer.  3.  The  great  encouragement 
which  saints  have  to  pray  without  ceasing.  4.  The  profound  interest  which  saint* 
should  ever  take  in  the  welfare  of  their  fellow-men. 


SM 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


['jr.  in.  1—11 


EXPOSITION. 


CRAfTER  XIX. 


Vcr.  1. — And  there  came  two  an  pels — 
literally,  the  two  angels,  i.  e.  the  two  men 
of  the  preceding  chnpter  who  accompanied 
Jehovah  to  Mainre ;  oi  lio  ayytWoi  (LXX.) 
— to  Sodom  at  even  (having  left  the  tent 
of  Abraham  shortly  after  noon) ;  and  lot — 
last  heard  of  in  the  narrative  as  captured  by 
the  Asiatic  kings,  and  delivered  by  his  unele 
(ch.xiv.  12,  16) — sat  in  the  gate  of  Sodom. 
iyB',  from  the  idea  of  opening,  signified  the 
gateway  or  entrance  of  a  camp  (Exod.  xxxii. 
26,  27),  of  a  palace  (Esther  it  19),  of  a 
temple  (Ezek.  viii.  5),  of  a  land  (Jer.  xv.  7), 
or  of  a  city  (Josh.  ii.  7).  Corresponding  to 
the  ancient  forum  of  the  Romans,  or  agora  of 
the  Greeks,  the  city  gate  among  the  Hebrews 
was  the  customary  place  of  resort  for  the 
settlement  of  disputes,  the  transaction  of 
business,  or  the  enjoyment  of  ordinary  social 
intercourse  (cf.  ch.  xxxiv.  20 ;  Deut.  xxi. 
19;xxii.  15;  Ruth  iv.  1;  Prov.  xxxL  23). 
It  was  probably  an  arch  with  deep  recesses, 
in  which  were  placed  chairs  for  the  judges 
or  city  magistrates,  and  seats  or  benches  for 
the  citizens  who  had  business  to  transact. 
So  Homer  describes  the  Trojan  elders  as 
sitting  at  the  Scajan  gate  (iii.  148).  In 
what  capacity  Lot  was  sitting  in  the  gate 
is  not  narrated.  That  he  was  on  the  outlook 
for  travellers  on  whom  to  practise  the  hos- 
pitality he  had  learned  from  his  uncle  (Poole, 
Calvin,  Willet,  Lange)  is  perhaps  to  form 
too  high  an  ideal  of  his  piety  (Kalisch) ; 
while  the  explanation  that  he  had  been  pro- 
moted to  the  dignity  of  one  of  the  city 
judges,  though  not  perhaps  justified  as  an 
inference  from  ver.  9,  is  not  at  all  unlikely, 
considering  his  relationship  to  Abraham. 
And  Lot  seeing  them  (and  recognising  them 
to  be  strangers  by  their  dress  and  looks) 
rose  np  to  meet  them ; — having  not  yet 
abandoned  the  practice  of  hospitality,  or  for- 
gotten, through  mingling  with  the  Sodom- 
ites, the  respectful  courtesy  which  was  due 
to  strangers,  since  the  writer  adds — and  he 
bowed  himself  with  his  face  toward  the 
ground  (cf.  ch.  xviii.  2). 

Ver.  2. — And  he  said,  Behold  now,  my 
lords, — Adonai  (vide  ch.  xviii.  3).  As  yet 
Lot  only  recognised  them  as  men — turn  in, 
I  pray  you,  into  your  servant's  house,  and 
tarry  all  night,  and  wash  your  feet  (cf.  ch. 
xviii.  4),  and  ye  shall  rise  up  early,  and  go 
on  your  ways.  Though  an  act  of  kindness 
on  the  part  of  Lot,  his  invitation  was  not 
accepted  by  the  angels  obviously  with  a 
view  to  trj  his  character  (cf.  Luke  xxiv.  28). 
And  they  said,  Nay ;  but  we  will  abide  in 
the  street  all  night     Literally,  for  in  the 


broad  open  spaces  (I.  e.  the  streets  of  the 
town)  we  will  pass  the  night;  no  great 
hardship  in  that  climate. 

Ver.  8.  —  And  he  pressed  upon  them 
greatly.  Bein£  himself  sincerely  desirous 
to  extend  to  them  hospitality,  and  knowing 
well  the  danger  to  which  they  would  be 
exposed  from  the  violence  andlicentiousness 
of  the  townsmen.  And  they  turned  in  unto 
him,  and  entered  into  his  house;  and  he 
made  them  a  feast,— mishteh,  from  shathah, 
to  drink,  is  rightly  rendered  wotov  (LXX.), 
a  drink,  or  refreshing  beverage  (cf.  Esther 
v.  6  ;  vii.  7)— and  did  bake  nnleavened 
bread  — literally,  bread  of  sweetness,  that  is, 
bread  not  soured  by  leaven.  The  banquet 
was  thus  of  the  simplest  kind,  chiefly,  it 
may  be  hoped,  for  the  sake  of  dispatch.  And 
they  did  eat. 

Ver.  4.— But  before  they  lay  down,  the 
men  of  the  city,  even  the  men  of  Sodom, 
compassed  the  house  round,  both  old  and 
young,  all  the  people  from  every  qnarter. 
/.  e.  of  the  town,  as  in  Jer.  Ii.  31  (Lange) ; 
from  the  extremity,  or  extremities,  of  the 
town  (Kalisch) ;  from  the  extremities,  i.  e. 
all  the  population  contained  within  the 
extremities  (Rosenmttller) ;  all  the  citizens 
to  the  last  man  (Keil).  The  text  probably 
con  veys  the  writer's  idea. 

Ver.  5. — And  they  called  unto  Lot,  and 
said  unto  him,  Where  are  the  men  which 
came  in  to  thee  this  night?  Josephus  sup- 
poses them  to  have  been  of  beautiful  coun- 
tenances ('Ant.,'  i.  11,  3),  which  excited  the 
lust  of  the  Sodomites,  and  caused  them  to 
assault  Lot's  house  with  shameful  cries. 
Bring  them  out  unto  us,  that  we  may  know 
them.  The  sin  here  euphemistically  referred 
to  (cf.  Judges  xix.  22)  was  exceedingly  pre 
valent  among  the  Canaanites  (Levit.  xviii. 
22)  and  other  heathen  nations  (Rom.  i.  27). 
Under  the  law  of  Moses  it  was  punishable  by 
death. 

Vers.  6 — 8. — And  Lot  went  out  at  the 
door  unto  them,— literally,  at  the  doorway, 
or  opening  (pethach,  from  pathach,  to  open ; 
cf.  pateo,  Latin  ;  irpoGupov,  LXX. ) ;  in  which 
the  gate  or  hanging  door  {dilith,  from  dalal, 
to  be  pendulous)  swings,  and  which  it  closes 
[vide  Gesenius,  p.  201)— and  shut  the  door 
{deleth,  ut  supra  ;  9iga,  LXX.)  after  him, — 
to  protect  his  visitors,  which  he  also  sought 
to  accomplish  by  personal  exhortation — and 
said,  I  pray  you,  brethren,  do  not  so 
wickedly  —  and  also  by  an  infamous  pro- 
posal which  nothing  can  extenuate  and  the 
utmost  charity  finds  difficult  to  reconcile 
with  any  pretence  of  piety  on  the  part  of 
Lot.  Behold  now,  I  have  two  daughters 
which  have  not  known  man ; — i.  e.  unmanned 


CH.  XIX    1—11.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


S68 


(cf.  ch.  iv.  1),  though,  according  to  some, 
already  betrothed  to  two  Sodomites  (ver.  14) 
—let  me,  I  pray  you,  bring  them  out  unto 
you,  and  do  ye  to  them  as  is  good  in  your 
eyes.  The  usual  apologies —that  in  sacrificing 
his  daughters  to  the  Sodomites  instead  of 
giving  up  his  guests  to  their  unnatural  lust 
Lot  (1)  selected  the  lesser  of  two  sins 
(Ambrose) ;  (2)  thereby  protected  his  guests 
and  discharged  the  duties  of  hospitality  in- 
cumbent on  him  (Chrysostom) ;  (3)  believed 
his  daughters  would  not  be  desired  by  the 
Sodomites,  either  because  of  their  well-known 
betrothal  (Rosenmuller),  or  because  of  the 
unnatural  lust  of  the  Sodomites  (Lange) ;  (4) 
acted  through  mental  perturbation  (Augus- 
tine)— are  insufficient  to  excuse  the  wicked- 
ness of  one  who  in  attempting  to  prevent  one 
sin  was  himself  guilty  of  another  (Delitzsch), 
who  in  seeking  to  be  a  faithful  friend  forgot 
to  be  an  affectionate  father  (Kalisch),  and 
who,  though  bound  to  defend  his  guests  at 
the  risk  of  his  own  life,  was  not  at  liberty 
to  purchase  their  safety  by  the  sacrifice  of 
his   daughters   ('Speaker's   Commentary'). 

Only  unto  these  men — v$n,  an  archaic  form 
of  n^n,  a  proof  of  the  antiquity  of  the 
Pentateuch  (cf.  ver.  25 ;  xxvi  3,  4 ;  Levit. 
xviii.  27  ;  Deut.  iv.  42  ;  vii.  22  ;  xix.  11)— 
do  nothing  (i.  e.  offer  to  them  neither  vio- 
lence nor  dishonour) ;  for  therefore  {vide 
ch.  xviii.  5)  came  they  under  the  shadow 
of  my  roof — in  order  to  find  protection. 

Ver.  9.  — And  they  said,  Stand  back. 
'hiroara  luil  (LXX. ) ;  recede  iliac  (Vulgate) ; 
"  Make  way,"   i.  e.   for  us  to  enter  (Keil, 


Knobel,  Gesenius);  Approach  hither  (B*nm- 
garten,  Kalisch)  ;  Come  near,  farther  of! 
('  Speaker's  Commentary ').  And  they  said 
again,  This  one  fellow  (literally,  the  one,  an 
expression  of  the  Sodomites'  contempt)  came 
in  to  sojourn,  and  he  will  needs  be  a  judge : 
— literally,  and  shall  he  judge,  judging ; 
shall  he  continually  play  the  judge,  referring 
doubtless  to  Lot's  daily  remonstrances  against 
their  wickedness  (of.  2  Pet.  ii.  7,  8) — now 
will  we  deal  worse  with  thee,  than  with 
them.  And  they  pressed  sore  upon  the 
man,  even  lot  (literally,  upon  Lot,  who 
appears  to  have  offered  a  sturdy  resistance  to 
their  violence  no  less  than  to  their  clamours), 
and  came  near  to  break  03^',  to  break  to 
pieces,  to  shiver)  the  door. 

Ver.  10. — But  the  men  (i.  e.  the  angels) 
put  forth  their  hand,  and  pulled  Lot  into  the 
house  to  them,  and  shut  to  the  door — deleth 
(vide  ver.  6). 

Ver.  11. — And  they  smote  the  men  that 
were  at  the  door — the  pethach,  or  opening 
(vide  ver.  6)— of  the  honse  with  blindness, 
— D""Y)3D  (sanverim),  from  an  unused  quadri- 
lateral signifying  to  dazzle,  is  perhaps  here 
intended  not  for  natural  blindness,  but  for 
confused  or  bewildered  vision,  involving  for 
the  time  being  loss  of  sight,  and  accom- 
panied by  mental  aberration ;  what  Aben 
Ezra  calls  "  blindness  of  eye  and  mind"  (cf. 
2  Kings  vi.  18) — both  small  and  great :  so 
that  they  wearied  themselves  to  find  the  door 
— which  they  would  hardly  have  done  had  i  I 
been  natural  blindness  only  (Augustine). 


HOMILET1CS 

Vers.  1 — 11. — Warning  lights  in  Sodom.  I.  The  flickering  light  of  Lot's 
piety.  1.  That  the  light  of  Lot's  piety  was  still  burning,  though  he  had  long  been 
subjected  to  the  moral  contamination  of  the  licentious  Pentapolis,  is  apparent  from — 
(1)  The  practice  of  hospitality  which  he  appears  to  have  maintained,  having  pro- 
bably learnt  it  while  in  his  uncle's  tent.  So  men  often  cling  to  the  outward  forms  of 
religion  when  its  living  power  is  ceasing  to  exert  an  influence  upon  the  heart;  and 
though  adherence  to  the  former  is  not  to  be  mistaken  for  the  latter,  yet  it  renders  the 
decline  of  the  latter  less  rapid  and  disastrous  than  it  would  otherwise  be.  (2)  The 
kindly  reception  which  he  extended  to  his  celestial  visitors.  If  scarcely  so  elaborate 
as  the  sumptuous  entertainment  of  Abraham  at  Mamre,  the  banquet  of  Lot  was  at 
least  as  outwardly  reverential  and  as  unaffectedly  sincere  and  earnest.  It  clearly 
testified  that  Lot  had  not  yet  become  insensible  to  the  practical  duties  of  religion,  as 
at  that  time  understood.  Early  religious  training  is  exceedingly  difficult  to  eradicate. 
(3)  The  courageous  defence  which  he  made  of  his  threatened  guests.  At  the  risk  of 
his  peiHonal  safety  he  endeavoured  to  repel  the  violence  with  which  the  citizens 
assailed  them  ;  and '  by  the  proffer  of  a  sacrifice,  the  greatest  surely  that  a  parent 
could  make,  he  sought  to  beguile  the  infamous  designs  which  the  townsmen  cherished. 
Whatever  may  be  said  of  Lot's  conduct  in  this  latter  action,  his  behaviour  throughout 
towards  the  angels  proved  that  the  life  of  grace  within  his  soul  was  not  quite  extinct 
2.  That  the  light  of  Lot's  piety,  though  still  burning,  was  fast  fading,  may  be 
gathered  from  the  circumstances— (1)  That  he  had  remained  so  long  among  At 


t84  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  [ch.  xrx.  1— 11 

Sodomites.  Unless  a  process  of  moral  deterioration  had  been  going  on  within  the 
soul  of  Lot,  residence  among  a  people  so  depraved  would  eventually  have  become 
impossible.  Instead  of  being  merely  vexed  in  his  righteous  soul  while  in  Sodom,  he 
would  have  taken  the  earliest  opportunity  to  escape  from  Sodom.  (2)  That  he  had 
betrothed  his  daughters  to  two  of  Sodom's  citizens.  That  his  prospective  sons-in-law 
were  infected  by  the  bad  taint  of  the  city  may  be  inferred  from  their  subsequent 
behaviour,  as  well  as  from  the  preceding  judgment  of  God  on  the  universal  corruption 
of  the  city's  inhabitants.  Hence  Lot  should  rather  have  kept  his  daughters  virgins 
than  have  suffered  them  to  enter  into  matrimonial  engagements  with  ungodly  suitors. 
(3)  That  he  actually  offered  to  sacrifice  his  daughters'  purity  to  the  lust  of  the 
Sodomites.  Whatever  apology  may  be  offered  for  so  extraordinary  a  proposal  on  the 
part  of  Lot,  nothing  can  be  plainer  than  that  it  implied  a  strange  obliquity  of  moral 
vision,  and  a  serious  deadening  of  fine  moral  feeling.  It  was  a  clear  proof  that  the 
immoral  contagion  had  begun  to  affect  Lot,  and  that  it  was  high  time  for  him  to  leave 
Sodom. 

II.  The  lurid  light  of  Sodom's  impiety.  Already  well  enough  known  as  to  its 
character,  the  wickedness  of  Sodom  is  at  length  unveiled  in  all  its  revolting  features 
and  frightful  dimensions.  The  history  of  that  last  night  in  the  doomed  city  pro- 
claimed the  sin  of  Sodom  to  be — 1.  Unnatural.  In  the  unbridled  licence  of  their  appe- 
tites they  had  far  outstripped  common  sinners ;  even  the  natural  brute  beasts  they 
had  left  behind  ;  they  had  sunk  to  a  monstrosity  of  wickedness  of  which  shame  for- 
bids to  speak.  Paul  enumerates  their  sin  amongst  the  forms  of  impurity  by  which 
the  heathen  world  has  at  times  defiled  itself  (Rom.  i.  26,  27).  2  Shameless.  Dis- 
gusting and  repulsive  as  their  wickedness  was,  instead  of  shrinking  into  darkness  and 
doing  it  in  secret,  they  openly  proclaimed  their  filthiness,  and  would  have  gratified 
their  lusts  in  public.  It  is  a  lower  deep  in  moral  degradation  when  one  not  only  does 
"those  things  which  are  not  convenient,"  but  glories  in  his  shame  (Phil.  iii.  19).  3. 
Violent.  This  marked  a  third  degree  in- the  wickedness  of  Sodom,  that,  rather  than 
be  baulked  of  their  lewd  design,  the  citizens  were  prepared  to  set  at  nought  the  laws 
of  hospitality,  which  insured  the  safety  of  strangers  within  their  city,  and,  if  need 
were,  the  rights  of  property,  by  breaking  into  Lot's  house,  and,  still  further,  the 
liberties  of  the  person,  by  laying  hands  on  the  objects  of  their  unhallowed  lusts. 
Ordinary  sinners  are  satisfied  if  they  can  gratify  an  unholy  impulse  without  an  undue 
expenditure  of  crime ;  these  were  ready  to  trample  on  all  laws  of  God  and  man  to 
accomplish  their  desire,  "  adding  sin  to  sin "  (Isa.  xxx.  1).  4.  Obdurate.  Ever, 
when  struck  with  blindness  they  did  not  discontinue  their  impious  attempt.  They 
wearied  themselves  groping  about  in  the  darkness,  but  it  was  still  in  an  endeavour 
"  to  find  thedoor."  Common  sinners  pause  when  confronted  with  the  just  judgments 
of  Heaven  ;  these  were  only  maddened  into  greater  fury  (Ps.  lxxiii.  7).  And,  to 
complete  the  picture,  this  appalling  wickedness  was — 5.  Universal.  From  all  quar- 
ters and  of  all  ages  they  clustered  and  clamoured  round  the  door  of  Lot's  house. 
There  does  not  seem  to  have  been  any  dissension  in  the  multitude.  They  were  all  of 
one  mind.     Could  anything  more  signally  attest  Sodom's  ripeness  for  destruction? 

Learn — 1.  How  rapidly  a  good  man  can  deteriorate  in  evil  company.  2.  How 
completely  a  nation  can  resist  the  ameliorating  influences  of  its  good  men.  3 
How  disgustingly  repulsive  sin  is  when  fully  developed.    ' 

EXPOSITION. 


Vers.  12,  13. — And  the  men  said  unto 
Lot,— after  the  incident  recorded  in  the 
preceding  verses.  Lot  by  this  time  had 
doubtless  recognised  their  celestial  character ; 
accordingly,  the  Codex  Samaritanus  reads 
"angels" —  Hast  thou  here  any  besides? 
(i.  e.  any  other  relatives  or  friends  in  the 
city  in  addition  to  the  daughters  then  present 
in  the  house)  son  in  law,  and  thy  sons, 
and  thy  daughters,  and  whatsoever  (not  of 


things,  but  of  persons)  thou  hast  In  the  city, 
bring  them  out  of  this  place :  for  we  will 
destroy  this  place  (literally,  for  destroying 
this  place  are  we,  i  e.  we  are  here  for  that 
purpose),  because  the  cry  of  them  —  not 
"the  outcry  on  account  of  them,"  i.  e.  which 
the  men  of  Sodom  extort  from  others  (Gese- 
nius),  but  the  cry  against  tliem  which  ascends 
to  heaven,  the  cry  for  vengeance  on  their 
iniquities  (cf.  ch.  iv.  10;  xviii  20— is  waxen 


cb.  xix.  12—28] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


261 


great  before  the  face  of  the  Lord  (cf.  ch.  vi. 
11 ;  x.  9) ;  and  the  Lord  (Jehovah)  hath 
sent  us  (language  never  employed  by  the 
Maleach  Jehovah)  to  destroy  it. 

Ver.  14. — And  Lot  went  out  (obviously 
that  same  evening),  and  spake  unto  his  sons 
in  law,  which  married  his  daughters, — 
literally,  those  taking  his  daughters,  mean- 
ing either  those  who  had  taken  them  (LXX., 
Targums,  Knobel,  Delitzsch),  or  more  pro- 
bably ■  those  intending  to  take  them,  their 
affianced  husbands  (Josephus,  Vulgate,  Cleri- 
cus,  Rosenmuller,  Ewald,  Keil,  Kalisch) — 
and  said,  Up,  get  you  out  of  this  place; 
for  the  Lord  (Jehovah)  will  destroy  this 
(literally,  the)  city.  But  (literally,  and)  he 
seemed  as  one  that  mocked — as  one  that 
made  laughter ;  from  the  same  root  as  the 
word  Isaac  (ch.  xvii.  19  ;  cf.  JudgeB  xvi  25) 
— unto  his  sons  in  law. 

Vers.  15,  16. — And  when  the  morning 
arose, — literally,  as  soon  as  the  dawn  (from 
~\TW,  to  break  forth  as  the  light)  went  up, 
i.  e.  on  the  first  appearance  of  the  morning 
twilight  —  then  the  angels  hastened  Lot, 
saying,  Arise,  take  thy  wife,  and  thy  two 
daughters,  which  are  here ; — literally,  which 
are  found ;  not  implying  the  existence  of 
other  daughters  (Knobel),  but  contrasting 
with  the  sons  in  law  (Keil,  Kalisch)  -  lest 
thou  be  consumed  in  the  iniquity  (or  punish- 
ment, as  in  Isa.  v.  18)  of  the  city.  And 
while  he  lingered, — Lot's  irresolution  would 
have  been  his  ruin  but  for  his  attendants. 
His  heart  manifestly  clung  to  the  earthly 
possessions  he  was  leaving.  The  angels 
made  no  mention  of  his  attempting  to  save 
a  portion  of  his  greath  wealth — the  men  laid 
hold  upon  his  hand,  and  upon  the  hand  of 
his  wife,  and  upon  the  hand  of  his  two 
daughters;  the  Lord  being  merciful  to  him: 
— literally,  in  the  mercy,  or  gentleness,  of 
Jehovah  to  him;  the  primary  idea  of  the 
verb  from  which  the  noun  is  derived  being 
that  of  softness  (cf.  Isa.  lxiii.  9) — and  they 
brought  him  forth,  and  set  him  without  the 
city. 

Ver.  17.  —And  it  came  to  pass,  when  they 
had  brought  them  (i.  e.  Lot  and  his  family) 
forth  abroad  (literally,  without;  sc.  the  city), 
that  he— one  of  the  angels  (Rabbi  Solomon, 
Jarchi,  Rosenmuller,  Lange,  '  Speaker's 
Commentary') ;  the  one  that  had  taken  Lot's 
hand  (Inglis) ;  Jehovah  speaking  through 
the  angel  (Delitzsch)  ;  the  angel  speaking  in 
the  same  of  God  (Keil,  Kalisch)  ;  Jehovah 
himself,  who,  though  not  mentioned,  had 
now  appeared  upon  the  scene  (Ainsworth, 
Candlish)— said,  Escape  for  thy  life  (liter- 
ally, for  thy  soul ;  and  clearly  in  this  case 
the  loss  of  the  soul  in  the  higher  sense  must 
have  been  involved  in  the  destruction  of  the 
life) ;  look  not  behind  thee.  From  the  event 
it  guy  be  inferred  that  this  injunction  was 


also  given  to  Lot's  wife  and  daughters  ;  per- 
haps to  hide  God's  working  in  the  fiery 
judgment  from  mortal  vision  (Knobel),  but 
more  likely  to  express  detestation  of  the 
abhorred  city  (Bush),  to  guard  against  th« 
incipience  of- any  desire  to  return  (Lange), 
and  to  stimulate  their  zeal  to  escape  destruc- 
tion. Neither  stay  thou  in  all  the  plain— 
or  "circle"  (vide  ch.  xiii.  10).  Once  st 
attractive  for  its  beauty,  it  must  now  be 
abandoned  for  its  danger.  Escape  to  the 
mountain  (the  mountain  of  Moab,  on  the 
east  of  the  Dead  Sea),  lest  thou  be  consumed. 

Ver.  18. — And  Lot  said  unto  them,  Oh, 
not  so,  my  Lord.  Adonai,  which  should 
rather  be  translated  Lord  ;  whence  it  would 
almost  seem  as  if  Lot  knew  that  his  inter- 
locutor was  Jehovah.  Keil  admits  that  Lot 
recognised  a  manifestation  of  God  in  the 
angels,  and  Lange  speaks  of  a  miraculous 
report  of  the  voice  of  God  coming  to  him 
along  with  the  miraculous  vision  of  the 
angels.  That  the  historian  uses  "them" 
instead  of  "him"  only  proves  that  at  the 
time  Jehovah  was  accompanied  by  the  angels, 
as  he  had  previously  been  at  Mamre  (vide 
ch.  xviii.  1). 

Ver.  19. — Behold  now,  thy  servant  hath 
found  grace  in  thy  sisrht  (cf.  ch.  xviii.  3), 
and  thou  hast  magnified  thy  mercy  (lan- 
guage inappropriate  to  be  addressed  to  the 
angels,  though  exactly  suitable  if  applied 
by  Lot  to  Jehovah),  which  thou  hast  showed 
unto  me  in  saving  my  life ;  and  I  cannot 
escape  to  the  mountain,  lest  some  evil  (more 
correctly,  the  evil,  L  e.  the  destruction 
.  threatened  upon  Sodom)  take  me,  and  I  die. 

Ver.  20. — Behold  now,  this  city  is  near 
to  flee  unto  (literally,  thither),  and  it  is  a 
little  one :  Oh,  let  me  escape  thither,  (is  it 
not  a  little  one  ?)  and  my  soul  shall  live. 
Lot's  meaning  was  that  since  Zoar  was  the 
smallest  of  the  cities  of  the  Pentapolis,  it 
would  not  be  a  great  demand  on  God's  mercy 
to  spare  it,  and  it  would  save  him  from 
further  exertions  for  his  safety.  A  singular 
display  of  moral  obtuseness  and  indolent 
selfishness  on  the  part  of  Lot. 

Ver.  21. — And  he  said  unto  him,  See,  I 
have  accepted  thee  (literally,  J  have  lifted 
up  thy  face,  the  petitioner  usually  supplicat- 
ing with  his  face  toward  the  ground,  so  that 
the  elevation  of  his  countenance  expressed 
the  granting  of  his  request)  concerning  this 
thing  also,  that  I  will  not  overthrow  this 
city,  for  the  which  thou  hast  spoken. 

Ver.  22.  —  Haste  thee,  escape  thither ; 
for  I  cannot  do  anything  till  thou  be  come 
thither.  Therefore  the  name  of  the  city 
was  called  Zoar.  /.  e.  "The  Little  ;"  obvi- 
ously from  Lot's  remark  concerning  it  (ver. 
20);  2ijywp  (LXX.).  The  original  name  of 
the  city  was  Bela  (ch.  xiv.  2,  </.  v.).  It  haj 
been  sought  for  in  the  Wady  Zn  weirah,  a  past 


U6 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[oh.  xix.  12 — 28. 


leading  down  from  Hebron  to  the  Dead  Sea, 
on  the  west  side  of  the  lake  (De  Sancey) ;  in 
the  Ohor-el-Mezraa,  i.  e.  upon  the  southern 
peninsula,  which  projects  a  long  way  into 
the  Dead  Sea  (Robinson) ;  and  in  the  Ghor-el- 
Szaphia,  at  the  south-eastern  end  of  the  sea, 
at  theopeningof  the  Wady-el-JRaumer(Kei\): 
but  has  now  been  identified  with  Zi'ara,  at  the 
northern  extremity  of  the  lake  (Tristram, 
'Land  of  Moab.'p.  330  ;  vide  infra,  ver.  28, 
on  the  site  of  cities  of  the  plain). 

Ver.  23. — The  sun  was  risen  upon  the 
earth— literally,  the  sun  went  forth,  L  e. 
it  was  now  above  the  horizon.  Lot  had  left 
Sodom  with  the  first  streak  of  dawn ;  but, 
having  lingered,  it  was  clear  morning — when 
Lot  entered  into  Zoar— or  "went  towards 
Zoar,"  i.  e.  when  the  angel  left  him  (Keil). 

Ver.  24. — Then  the  lord  rained — literally, 
and  Jehovah  caused  it  to  rain;  tai  ifi'pioc 
iPpiZc  (LXX. ),  which  latter  term  is  adopted 
by  Luke  in  describing  this  event  (ch.  xvii.  29) 
— upon  Sodom  and  upon  Gomorrah — and  also 
upon  Adro-ih  and  Zeboim  (Deut.  xxix.  23; 
Hosea  xi.  K),  Bela,  or  Zoar,  of  the  five  cities 
of  the  Jordan  circle  (ch.  xiv.  2,  8)  being  ex- 
empted— brimstone  and  fire — TVISJi ;  pro- 
perly pitch,  though  the  name  was  afterwards 
transferred  to  other  inflammable  materials 
(Gesenius) ;  E>1<},  and  fire,  which,  though 
sometimes  used  of  lightning,  as  in  1  Kings 
xviii.  38  ;  2  Kings  i.  10,  12,  14  ;  Job  i.  16, 
may  here  describe  a  different  sort  of  igneous 
agency.  Whether  this  Divinely-sent  rain 
was  "burning  pitch"  (Keil),  or  lightning 
which  ignited  the  bituminous  soil  (Clericus), 
'  or  a  volcanic  eruption  which  overwhelmecT 
all  the  region  (Lynch,  Kitto),  it  was  clearly 
miraculous  in  its  nature,  and  designed  as 
a  solemn  punitive  infliction  on  the  cities 
of  the  plain — from  the  lord — i.  e.  Jehovah 
(the  Son)  rained  down  from  Jehovah  (the 
Father),  as  if  suggesting  a  distinction  of 
persons  in  the  Godhead  (Justin  Martyr, 
Tertullian,  Athanasius,  et  alii,  DelitzscH, 
Lange,  Wordsworth) ;  otherwise  the  phrase  is 
regarded  as  "an  elegancy  of  speech"  (Aben 
Ezra),  "  an  emphatic  repetition  "  (Calvin),  a 
more  exact  characterisation  of  the  storm  (Cle- 
ricus, Rosenmiiller)  as  being  out  of  heaven. 

Ver.  25. —And  he  overthrew  —  literally, 
turned  over,  as  a  cake  ;  whence  utterly 
destroyed  (cf.  Deut.  xxix.  23  ;  Kariarpt^t, 
LXX.;  subvertit,  Vulgate).  In  Arabic  "the 
overthrown"  is  a  title  applied,  kolt1  i^o\rjv, 
to  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  (Gesenius).  From 
the  use  of  the  expression  KaraoTpoQri  (2  Pet. 
u.  6),  Wordsworth  thinks  an  earthquake 
may  have  accompanied  the  burning — those 
cities, — that  they  were  submerged  as  well  as 
overthrown  (Josephus)  is  a  doubtful  infer- 
ence from  ch.  xiv.  3  {vide  infra,  ver.  28,  on 
the  site  of  cities  of  the  plain).    The  archaic 


7NH  is  again  employed  (cf.  ch.  xix.  8)— and 
all  the  plain, — kikhar,  circle  or  district  (ch. 
xiii.  10)  —  and  all  the  inhabitants  of  the 
cities, — a  proof  of  their  entire  corruption  (ch. 
xviii.  32) — and  that  which  grew  upon  the 
ground — literally,  that  which  sprouts  forth 
from  the  ground,  the  produce  of  the  soil ; 
thus  converting  "a  fruitful  land  into  barren- 
ness for  the  wickedness  of  them  that  dwell 
therein  "  (Ps.  cvii.  34). 

•Ver.  26.— But  his  wife  looked  back  from 
behind  him,  —  i.  e.  went  behind  him  and 
looked  back ;  ««-f/3\  ji//«v  (LXX ),  implying 
wistful  regard  ;  respiciens  (Vulgate) ;  an  act 
expressly  forbidden  by  the  angel  (ver  17) — 
and  she  became  (literally,  she  was,  convey- 
ing an  idea  of  complete  and  instantaneous 

judgment)  a  pillar  of  salt  rplp  2'W  ;  crrijXfj 
dXoc  (LXX.);  a  statue  or  column  of  fossil 
salt,  such  as  exists  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
the  Dead  Sea.  That  she  was  literally  trans- 
formed into  a  pillar  of  salt  (Josephus,  Calvin, 
Eosenmuller,  Kalisch,  Wordsworth),  though 
not  impossible,  is  scarcely  likely.  A  more 
probable  interpretation  is  that  she  was  killed 
by  the  fiery  and  sulphurous  vapour  with 
which  the  atmosphere  was  impregnated,  and 
afterwards  became  encrusted  with  salt  (Aben 
Ezra,  Keil,  Lange,  Murphy,  Quarry),  though 
against  this  it  has  been  urged  (1)  that  the 
air  was  not  filled  with  "salt  sulphurous 
rain,"  but  with  fire  and  brimstone  ;  and 
(2)  that  the  heaven-sent  tempest  did  not 
operate  in  the  way  described  on  the  other 
inhabitants  of  Sodom  (Inglis).  A  third 
explanation  regards  the  expression  as  alle- 
gorical, and  intimating  that  the  fate  of 
Lot's  wife  was  an  everlasting  monument  of 
the  danger  of  disregarding  the  word  of  the 
Lord,  either  as  a  covenant  of  salt  signifies  a 
perpetual  covenant  (Clark),  or  with-  refer- 
ence to  the  salt  pillars  which,  in  a  similar 
manner,  attest  the  destruction  of  the  cities 
(Inglis).  The  notion  that  Lot's  wife,  return- 
ing to  the  city,  stuck  fast  in  terra  salsu- 
ginosa,  like  a  salt  pillar  (Dathius),  and  that 
she  perished  in  the  flames,  having  afterwards 
erected  to  her  memory  a  monument  of  the 
salt  stone  of  the  region  (Michaelis),  may  bo 
disregarded. 

Ver.  27. — And  Abraham  eat  up  early  in 
the  morning  (of  the  catastrophe)  to  the  place 
(•/.  e.  and  weut  to  the  place)  where  he  stood 
before  the  Lord  (vide  on  ch.  xviii.  22). 

Ver.  28. — And  he  looked  toward— liter- 
ally, towards  the  face,  or  visible  side  (cl  ch. 
xviii.  16  where  the  same  phrase  is  employed 
1  o  describe  the  act  of  the  angels  on  leaving 
Mam  re)-  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  and  toward 
all  the  land  of  the  plain,  or  Jordan  circl* 
The  cities  of  the  plain  are  commonly  believed 
to  have  been  situated  at  the  southern  ex- 
tremity  of  the   Dead   Sea.      The   principal 


;n.  m.  12 — -JR. 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


25? 


reasons  assigned  for  this  conclusion  may  be 
stated.     1.  Josephus  and  Jerome,  the   one 
representing  Jewish,  and  the  other  Christian, 
tradition,  both  speak  of  a  Zoar  as  existing 
in  that  locality.     2.  The  difference  of  level 
between  the  northern  and  southern  ends  of 
the  lake,  the  one  according  to  Lynch  being 
1300  feet,  and  the  other  not  more  than  16 
feet,  seems  to  favour  £he  idea  that  the  latter 
is  of  recent  formation,  having  been,  in  fact, 
submerged  at  the  time  of  the  overthrow  of 
the  cities.     3.  A  ridge  of  rock-salt  on  the 
west  of  the  Vale  of  Salt  is  called  by  the  name 
Jebel  Usdum,  in  which  a  trace  of  the  word 
Sodom  is  by  some  detected  ;  and  the  pillars 
•f  salt  that  in  that  region  have  from  time 
to  time  been  detached  from  the  salt  cliffs 
have  been  designated  by  the  name  of  Lot's 
wife  (Bint  Sheikh  Jot).     4.  The  statement 
of  ch.  xiv.  3  appears  to  imply  that  the  Salt 
Sea  now  covers  what  was  originally  the  vale 
of  Siddim.     5.    The  expression   "like  the 
land  of  Egypt  as  thou  comest  to  Zoar  "  (ch. 
xiii.  10)  is  suggestive  rather  of  the  southern 
than  of  the  northern  extremity  of  the  lake 
as  the  site  of  the  Pentapolis.     It  may  be 
added  that  this  opinion  has  received  the 
sanction  of  Robinson,  Stanley,  Porter,  Thom- 
son ('The  Land  and  the  Book'),  and  other 
eminent  geographers.     On  the  other  hand, 
there  are  reasons  for  believing  that  the  true 
site  of  the  cities  was  at  the  north,  and  not 
the  south,  of  the  Dead  Sea.     1.  The  circle 
of  the  Jordan  was  visible  from  the  Bethel 
plateau  (ch.  xiii.  10) ;  the  southern  extremity 
of  the  Dead  Sea  is  not.    2.  From  the  heights 
above  Hebron  or  Mamre,  though  the  actual 
circle  is  not  visible,   "yet  the  depression 
between  the  nearer  hills  and  those  of  Gilead 
can  be  perceived,  and  Abraham  could  at 
once  identify  the  locality  whence  the  smoke 
arose,"  after  Sodom's  burning.     3.  Chedor- 
laomer's  route  (ch.    xiv.    7 — 14)  was  from 
Kadesh  to  Hazezon-tamar,  midway  up  (he 
western  shore  of  tbe  Dead  Sea,  from  Haze- 


zon-tamar to  the  vale  of  Siddim,  and  from 
Siddim  to  Dan,  the  natural  conclusion  being 
that  on  reaching  Hazezon-tamar  he  did  not 
turn  southward,  but  continued  marching 
northwards,  4.  Moses  from  Mount  Nebo 
(Deut.  xxxiv.  3)  beheld  "the  south,  and  the 
plain  of  the  valley  of  Jericho,  the  city  of 
palm  trees,  unto  Zoar,"  which  was  certainly 
possible  if  Zoar  was  in  the  line  of  vision  with 
the  plain  and  the  city  of  Jericho,  but  as 
certainly  impossible  if  it  was  at  the  southern 
extremity  of  the  lake.  This  view  has  been 
advocated  by  Grove  (Smith's  '  Biblical  Dic- 
tionary,' art.  Zoar)  and  by  Tristram  ('  Land 
of  Israel,'  pp.  354—358,  and  'Land of  Moab,' 
pp.  330 — 334),  and  has  been  adopted  by 
Drew  ('Imp.  Bible  Diet.,'  art.  Sodom), 
Dykes  ('Abraham,  the  Friend  of  God,'  p. 
185),  and  Inglis  ('Genesis,'  p.  168).  And 
beheld,  and,  lo,  the  smoke  of  the  country 
went  up  as  the  smoke  of  a  (literally,  of  the) 
furnace.  Thus  the  appalling  catastrophe 
proclaimed  its  reality  to  Abraham ;  to  sub- 
sequent ages  it  stamped  a  witness  of  its 
severity  (1)  upon  the  region  itself,  in  the 
bleak  and  desolate  aspect  it  has  ever  since 
possessed ;  (2)  upon  the  page  of  inspiration, 
being  by  subsequent  Scripture  writers  con- 
stantly referred  to  as  a  standing  warning 
against  incurring  the  Almighty's  wrath 
(Deut.  xxix.  22 ;  Isa.  xiii.  19 ;  Jer.  xlix. 
18  ;  1.  40  ;  Lam.  iv.  6  ;  Amos  iv.  11 ;  2  Pet. 
ii.  6  ;  Jude  7) ;  and  (3)  upon  the  course 
of  ancient  tradition,  which  it  powerfully 
affected.  Cf.  Tacitus,  'Hist.,' v.  7:  "Haiid 
procul  inde  campi,  quos  ferunt  olim  uberes, 
magnisque  urbibus  habitatos,  fulminum 
jactu  arsisse  ;  et  manere  vestigia  ;  terramque 
ipsam  specie  torridam  vim  frugiferam  per- 
didisse  ;  nam  cuncta  atra  et  inania  velut  in 
cinerem  vanescunt.  Ego,  sicut  inclitas  quon- 
dam urbes  igne  celesti  flagrasse  concesserim." 
For  traditional  notices  of  this  event  by 
Diodorus  Siculus,  Strabo,  Pliny,  Ovid,  &c. 
vide  Rosenmuller  (Scholia  I-  ch.  xix.  25). 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  24.— The  judgment  of  fire.  I.  The  deliverance  of  Lot.  1.  Mercifully 
warned.  The  intimation  conveyed  by  the  angels  was — (1)  Explicit;  the  city  was  to 
be  destroyed.  The  cry  for  vengeance  could  no  longer  be  resisted.  The  cup  of  its 
iniquity  was  full.  (2)  Emphatic ;  there  was  no  dubiety  about  the  announcement. 
Already  the  doom  had  been  decreed,  and  they  had  come  to  be  the  ministers  of  its  exe- 
cution. (3)  Merciful ;  it  was  designed  to  secure  the  escape  of  himself  and  friends 
from  the  impending  overthrow.  "  Whatsoever  thou  hast,  bring  them  out  of  this 
place."  (4)  Timely;  there  was  still  ample  opportunity  for  not  only  getting  clear 
out  of  the  perilous  region  himself,  but  for  alarming  his  daughters'  intended  husbands. 
So  are  sinners  warned  clearly,  'expressly,  graciously,  and  opportunely  in  the  gospel 
to  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come,  to  escape  from  the  city  of  destruction.  2.  Urgently 
hastened.  Notwithstanding  the  angel's  warning,  it  is  obvious  that  Lot  trifled,  pro- 
bably from  a  latent  apprehension  that  there  was  plenty  of  time,  if  not  from  any 
secret  dubiety  as  to  the  need  for  the  celestial  exhortation ;  and  so  do  sinners  dally  yet 
GENESIS.  S 


158  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  [ch.  xix.  12— 2R 

ivith  the  solemn  announcement  of  the  gospel,  which  necessitates  that  they  be  vehe- 
mently pressed,  like  Lot,  with — (1)  Earnest  admonition.  "  Arise  !  "  "  Up  I "  J'  Gel 
thee  out  of  this  place  I  "  (2)  Serious  caution.  "  Lest  thou  be  consumed  in  the 
iniquity  of  the  city."  3.  Graciously  assisted.  Even  the  urgency  displayed  by  the 
angels  would  not  have  sufficed  to  rescue  Lot,  had  they  not  extended  to  him  and  his 
worldly-minded  partner  a  helping  hand.  Hankering  after  Sodom,  perhaps  thinking 
.of  the  wealth  they  had  to  leave,  the  good  man  and  his  wife  still  lingered,  and  were 
at  last  only  dragged  forth  by  main  force  beyond  the  precincts  of  the  doomed  city. 
It  reminds  us  that  few,  probably  none,  would  ever  escape  from  the  city  of  destruction 
if  Divine  grace  were  not  practically  to  lay  hold  of  them  and'  drag  them  forth ;  and 
even  this  Divine  grace  would  not  do  unless  the  Lord  were  specially  merciful  to  them, 
as  he  was  to  Lot.  4.  Minutely  directed.  To  the  further  prosecution  of  their  journey 
they  were  not  left  without  most  careful  instructions  as  to  how  they  might  secure 
their  safety  ;  and  neither  are  awakened  sinners,  who  have  been  aroused  to  see  their 
peril  and  to  start  upon  the  way  of  life,  permitted  to  struggle  on  without  celestial 
guidance  as  to  how  to  make  their  calling  and  election  sure.  Like  the  fleeing  Lot  and 
his  wife,  they  are  counselled  (1)  to  be  in  earnest,  seeing  it  is  their  life  for  which  they 
flee  ;  (2)  to  beware  of  backsliding,  since  he  who  looketh  back  is  not  fit  for  the  king- 
dom of  God ;  (3)  to  indulge  in  no  delay,  since  so  long  as  one  continues  in  the  plain 
of  his  natural  condition  he  stands  in  imminent  peril ;  and  (4)  to  persevere  until  he 
reaches  the  mount  of  salvation  in  Jesus  Christ. 

II.  The  overthrow  op  Sodom.  1.  Supernatural.  Whatever  the  natural  forces 
employed  in  the  destruction  of  the  fair  cities  of  the  Jordan  circle,  their  employment 
with  such  severity  and  at  such  a  time,  viz.,  precisely  at  the  moment  when  the  moral 
degradation  of  the  people  showed  them  to  be  ripe  for  judgment,  was  a  signal 
demonstration  of  the  miraculous  character  of  the  catastrophe ;  as  indeed  the  narrative 
alleges  it  to  have  been  a  phenomenon  altogether  out  of  the  common  course  of  events: 
"  Jehovah  rained  down  fire  from  Jehovah."  2.  Unexpected.  It  does  not  appear  that 
the  inhabitants  of  Sodom  generally  were  warned  of  the  approaching  fire-storm, 
though,  if  Lot's  sons-in-law  may  be  accepted  as  an  indication  of  the  temper  in  which 
the  people  at  that  time  were,  any  such  announcement  would  only  have  been  listened 
to  with  mocking  incredulity.  So  was  it  in  the  days  of  Noah  (Matt.  xxiv.  38)  ;  so  will 
it  be  in  the  end  of  the  world  (2  Pet.  iii,  3,  4).  3.  Complete.  The  cities  with  their 
inhabitants,  the  fields  with  their  vegetation,  were  engulfed  in  the  sulphureous  baptism 
and  "  turned  into  ashes."  As  overwhelming  in  its  kind,  though  not  as  sweeping  in 
its  extent,  as  had  been  the  previous  submergence  of  the  world  by  a  flood  of  water, 
the  devastation  sent  upon  the  fair  Pentapolis  of  the  Jordan  circle  was  a  ghastly 
shadow  and  premonition  of  that  vengeance  of  eternal  fire  which  shall  yet  devour  the 
ungodly  (2  Thess.  i.  8).  4.  Righteous.  It  was  a  just  judgment  which  had  been 
richly  merited,  as  the  visit  of  the  angels  had  convincingly  demonstrated.  Indeed 
that  previous  unveiling  of  the  filthiness  of  Sodom  which  had  taken  place  may  be 
viewed  as  having  been  designed  to  supply  a  visible  justification  of  the  righteousness 
of  the  great  Judge  in  consigning  them  to  so  disastrous  an  overthrow.  And  so  before 
the  infliction  of  the  great  day  of  wrath  upon  the  impenitent  and  the  ungodly  there 
will  be  a  revelation  of  the  secret  characters  of  all  hearts  and  lives,  that  "  thou  mightest 
be  justified  when  thou  speakest,  and  be  clear  when  thou  judgest "  (Ps.  li.  3).  6. 
Public.  In  particular,  besides  being  experienced  by  the  unhappy  sufferers  and 
observed  by  the  trembling  fugitives  who  had  sought  refuge  in  Zoar,  it  was  witnessed 
by  Abraham,  who  gat  him  up  early,  and,  looking  towards  Sodom,  saw  the  smoke  of 
the  country  ascending  like  the  smoke  of  a  furnace  to  heaven — a  fit  emblem  of  the 
terrible  publicity  which  will  invest  the  final  judgment  of  a  sinful  world  (Matt.  xxr. 
31—46  ;  2  Thess.  i.  7—10  ;   Rev.  xviii.  9). 

III.  The  fate  of  Lot's  wife.  1.  Intensely  melancholy.  Overtaken  by  titt 
sulphureous  storm,  she  was  transfixed  where  she  stood,  and  in  a  moment  after  wrapt 
in  a  sheet  of  saline  incrustation.  Affecting  in  itself,  her  doom  was  rendered  all  the 
more  impressive  from  the  circumstance  that  she  had  so  nearly  escaped.  Alas, 
nearly  saved  means  wholly  lost  I  2.  Truly  deserved.  Contrary  to  the  angel's 
instructions,  she  had  looked  behind.  Thus  she  had  brought  her  tragic  fate  upon 
herself.     Obedience  would  have  saved  her;  disobedience  proved  her  ruin.    Whethei 


OB  xnc.  12—29.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  289 

she  was  lost  eternally  it  is  not  safe  to  say,  but  her  temporal  destruction  had  been 
righteously  incurred.  3.  Solemnly  suggestive.  It  was  doubtless  designed  to  teach 
many  lessons,  such  as  the  danger  of  disobedience,  the  folly  of  delay,  the  severity 
of  the  Divine  judgments,'  and  the  intensity  of  the  Divine  displeasure  against  sin. 

Lessons : — 1.  The  difficulty  of  saving  a  good  man  (1  Pet.  iv.  18):  2.  The  ability 
of  God  to  punish  sin  (Heb.  x.  31).  3.  The  danger  of  looking  back  (Heb.  x.  26, 27, 
B8).     4.  The  possibility  of  being  nearly  saved,  yet  wholly  lost  (Mark  xii.  34). 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  23 — 25. — The  righteousness  of  God  revealed.  The  judgment  of  God  upon 
Sodom  and  the  cities  of  the  plain.-  The  deliverance  of  Lot.  The  reception  of  the  two 
angels  by  Lot  was  a  great  contrast  to  that  of  the  three  by  Abraham.  The  scene 
"of  the  Divine  judgment  is  suggestive.  The  plain  of  the  Jordan  was  well  watered, 
attracted  Lot  by  its  beauty  and  promise.  Early  civilisation  gathered  about  such 
spots,  but  civilisation  without  religion  is  a  blasting  influence.  There  are  hidden 
fountains  of  judgment  ready  to  burst  forth  and  pour  the  fire  of  Divine  wrath  upon 
the  sinners.  The  man  who  "  pitched  his  tent  towards  Sodom  "  became  at  last  a 
townsman,  "  vexed  with  the  filthy  conversation,"  yet,  but  for  Divine  mercy,  involved 
in  its  punishment.  The  whole  narrative  teaches  important  lessons,  especially  on 
the  following  points : — 

I.  A  truly  religious  lifb  is  not  a  mere  secret  of  the  soul,  but  has  its  appropeiatb 

PLACE  AND  SURROUNDINGS. 

II.  The  household  of  the  true  believer  is  a  large  enough  circle  in  which  .to 
manifest  sincerity  and  faithfulness,  yet  must  we  take  heed  that  our  house  is  well 
defended  against  the  invasions  of  the  corrupt  world. 

III.  HOW  GREAT   A  RESULT  COMES  OUT  OFTEN   FROM  A  SMALL  BEGINNING  OF  ERROR ! 

The  selfishness  of  Lot's  first  choice  of  his  residence  was  the  seed  of  evil  which  multi- 
plied into  all  the  subsequent  suffering  and  wrong. 

IV.  "  Behold  the  goodness  and  severity  of  God  '' — mingled  judgment  and  mercy, 
but  not  mingled  in  a  confused  manner,  with  perfect  order.  The  man  who  had 
joined  with  Abraham  in  the  covenant  with  Jehovah,  who  with  all  his  faults  was  yet 
a  believer,  is  warned,  rescued  by  angels  ;  able  by  his  intercession  to  obtain  mercy 
for  others. 

V.  The  Divine  justice  which  is  manifested  on  the  large  scale  as  between  the 
Church  and  the  world  is  also  revealed  in  the  smaller  sphere  of  households  and 
families.  Lot's  wife  is  an  apostate,  and  becomes  involved  in  the  destruction  of 
the  wicked.  His  sons-in-law  mock  at  the  Divine  warning.  His  daughters  become 
the  incestuous  originators  of  nations  which  afterwards  greatly  trouble  the  history 
of  the  people  of  God. 

VI.  The  same  steadfastness  of  God  has  two  sides  or  aspects  of  it.  "  The  sun 
was  risen  upon  the  earth  when  Lot  entered  Zoar."  The  same  day,  while  the  sun 
was  serenely  smiling  on  the  city  of  refuge,  the  storm  of  fire  and  destruction  from 
heaven  was  gathering  over  the  doomed  people  and  ready  to  burst  upon  them. 
"  When  God  destroyed  the  cities  of  the  plain,  God  remembered  Abraham,  and  sent 
Lot  out  of  the  midst  of  the  overthrow." — B. 

Ver.  26.— The  danger  of [falling  bach  "But  his  wife  looked  back  from  behind 
him,  and  she  became  a  pillar  of  salt."  Every  part  of  this  narrative  suggestive  of 
lessons.  Reminded  how  "  the  righteous  scarcely  saved,"  and  of  the  danger  of  an 
amiable  weakness.  In  Lot's  sons-in-law  we  see  how  the  world  receives  the  gospel 
(cf.  Ezek.  xx.  49 ;  James  i.  24).  In  his  wife,  one  convinced,  but  not  converted ; 
seeking  safety,  but  with  a  divided  aim  (James  i.  8).  In  the  angel's  help,  God's 
watchful  care,  even  where  the  need  is  unknown.  Text  teaches  the  responsibility 
of  those  who  hear  the  gospel.  Dangers  surrounding  us,  but  a  way  of  safety  (Ps.  ci. 
1  j  2  Cor.  ii.  16).  But  not  enough  to  be  roused  (Matt.  x.  22  ;  Heb.  xii.  1).  Many 'are 
•wakened  to  flee,  yet  look  back  (Luke  ix,  62).  Lot's  wife  not  deaf  to  the  call ;  did 
not  think  it  fancy ;  really  believed ;   felt  the  danger,  and  fled  (2  Cor  vi.  17 ;  Ber. 

•  2 


KO 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xix.  29 -3a 


iviii.  4).     But  the  sun  rose ;   the  valley  beautiful ;   home  attractive  ;  no  signs  of 
danger.     Must  she  leave  all ;  and  at  once?     She  paused.     That  pause  was  death. 

I.  May  be  roused  by  alarm  of  conscience  and  yet  look  back  (cf.  Matt.  xii.  43 — 
45).  Some,  intent  on  the  world,  think  not  of  the  future*.  Preaching  seems  only  a 
venerable  form ;  prayer  a  proper  homage  to  God.  But  as  to  anything  more,  no 
hurry.  But  a  time  of  anxiety  comes.  Perhaps  a  wave  of  revival,  or  some  special 
occurrence — illness,  bereavement,  care.  Eternity  is  brought  near,  false  confidence 
dispelled  (Isa.  xxviii.  17).  Then  in  earnest  to  seek  the  true  refuge  (Heb.  vi.  18). 
The  Bible  read ;  prayer  a  real  pleading.  But  the  sun  arises.  The  immediate  cause 
passes  away.  Fears  fade  away.  Then  a  looking  back.  Surely  some  of  you  can 
remember  times  of  earnestness.  Perhaps  in  hours  of  anxious  watching,  or  in  pre- 
paration for  communion,  or  God  has  spoken  directly  to  the  soul  and  made  you 
feel  his  presence  (Gen.  xxviii.  16,  17).  Then  the  blessedness  of  accepted  salvation 
was  felt.  The  message  was  not  a  parable  then.  The  Bible  and  prayer  were  precious 
then.  But  time  went  on.  The  immediate  influence  gone.  All  as  before.  Old 
ways  asserted  their  power ;  hard  to  give  them  up.  In  mercy  the  call  once  more. 
Awake  ;  the  storm  is  at  hand,  though  thou,  seest  it  not.  Pray  that  the  Holy  Spirit 
may  transform  thy  heart. 

II.  May  be  moved  by  example  of  others,  yet  turn  back.  She  felt  her  husband's 
earnestness,  and  went  with  him,  but  so  far  only.  We  know  the  power  of  example. 
When  we  see  those  we  love  affected,  we  are  moved  to  be  as  they.  So  at  the  preach- 
ing of  John  the  Baptist.  So  at  times  of  missions.  Have  any  felt  this  influence ; 
been  stirred  to  read  and  pray  ?  It  is  well.  But  lias  it  lasted  ?  For  a  real  saving 
change  there  must  be  a  personal  transaction  with  the  Lord  as  a  living  Saviour;  a 
laying  hold  of  him,  a  real  desire  and  effort  that  the  will  and  whole  nature  be  sub- 
mitted to  him. 

III.  A  mightier  power  still  may  ACT  UPON  the  soul.  While  Lot  lingered  angels 
laid  hold  of  hands.  There  are  times  when  God  pleads  urgently.  One  refuge  after 
another  swept  away.  Call  upon  call,  sign  upon  sign,  till  the  will  seems  conquered. 
But  all  is  not  done  (Phil.  iii.  13).  Such  pleadings  neglected,  cease.  Observe,  God 
led  Lot  out  of  Sodom,  not  to  Zoar.  There  is  work  still  to  be  done  (2  Pet.  i.  10).  The 
question  is  not  as  to  the  past,  but  as  to  the  present.  It  will  not  save  a  man  that  he 
was  once  anxious.  Look  not  back.  Look  to  Jesus  (Heb.  xii.  2).  Let  earnestness  , 
in  every  part  of  Christian  life  testify  that  you  are  not  looking  back  (Heb.  x.  39), — M. 


EXPOSITION. 


Ver.  29. — And  it  came  to  pass— not  a  plu- 
perfect ('Kosenmiillcr),  as  if  a  direct  con- 
tinuation of  the  preceding  narrative,  but  a 
preterite,  being  the  commencement  of  a  new 
subdivision  of  the  history  in  which  the  writer 
treats  of  Lot's  residence  in  Zoar  —when  God 
—  Elohim.  Hence,  as  a  fragment  of  the 
original  Elohist's  composition,  the  present 
verse  is  by  the  pseudo-criticism  connected 
with  ch.  xvii.  27  (Ilgen,  Tuch,  Bleek);  but 
''a  greater  abruptness  of  style  and  a  more 
fragmentary  mode  of  composition  "  than  this 
would  indicate  "  could  not  easily  be  ima- 
gined "  (Kalisch).  The  change  in  the  Divino 
name  is  sufficiently  explained  by  the  suppos- 
ition that  the  destruction  of  the  cities  of 
the  plain  was  not  at  the  moment  viewed  by 
the  writer  In  its  connection  with  the  Abra- 
hamic  covenant  and  witercession,  but  as  a 
iublimo  vindication  of  Divino  justice  (cf. 
Quarry,  p.  444) — destroyed  (literally,  in 
\t  destroying  by  Elohim,  or  in  Elohim's 
destroying)  the  citiee  of  the  plain,  that  God 


remembered  Abraham.  If  the  narrative  coa- 
taiiiing  the  intercession  of  Abraham  and  the 
overthrow  of  Sodom  was  due  to  the  Jehovist, 
how  came  the  earlier  author  to  know  any- 
thing about  those  events  ?  The  obvious  allu- 
sions to  them  in  the  presentverse  could  only 
have  been  made  by  one  acquainted  with  them. 
Either,  therefore,  the  present  verse  proceeded 
from  the  hand  of  the  so-called  Jehovist,  or  it 
requires  explanation  how  in  the  original  docu- 
ment this  should  be  the  first  and  only  occasion 
on  which  they  are  referred  to  (cf.  Quarry,  p. 
445).  And— in  answer  to  Abraham's  prayer 
(ch.  xviii.  23) — sent  Lot  out  of  the  midst  ot 
the  overthrow  (there  is  no  reason  to  suppose 
that  Abraham  was  aware  of  his  nephew's 
escape),  when  he  overthrew— literally,  in  the 
overthrowing  of  the  cities,  the  inf.  being  con- 
strued with  the  case  of  its  verb  [vide  Gese- 
nius,  §  133)— the  cities  in  the  which — one  of 
which  (cf.  Judges  xv.  7) — lot  dwelt. 

Ver.  30.— And  Lot  went  up  out  of  Zoar 
(probably  soon  after),  and  dwelt  in  the  mona- 


c*.  xix.  2§— 38.] 


THE  BOOK  OS"  GENESIS. 


261 


tain  (i.  e.  of  Moab,  on  the  east  of  the  Dead 
Sea),  and  his  two  daughters — step-daughters, 
it  has  been  suggested,  if  Lot  married  a  widow 
who  was  the  mother  of  the  two  girls  (Starke) 
—with  him ;  for  he  feared  to  dwell  in  Zoar 
— from  which  the  panic-stricken  inhabitants 
may  have  fled  towards  the  mountains 
(Murphy),  either  because  at  that  time  it  was 
shaken  by  an  earthquake  (Jerome,  Rosen- 
miiller) ;  or  because  he  dreaded  the  conflagra- 
tion which  devoured  the  other  cities  might 
spread  thither  (Poole,  Kalisch,  Wordsworth), 
or  the  rising  waters  of  the  Dead  Sea  which 
engulfed  them  might  reach  to  it  (Bush) 
— apprehensions  which  were  groundless  and 
unbelieving,  since  God  had  granted  Zoar 
for  an  asylum  (Lange) ;  or  because  he  saw 
the  wickedness  of  the  inhabitants,  who  had 
not  been  improved  by  Sodom's  doom  ( Vata- 
blus,  Inglis) ;  or  simply  because  he  was  driven 
by  "a  blind  anxiety  of  mind"  (Calvin). 
And  he  dwelt  in  a  cave, — i.  e.  in  one  of  those 
cavernous  recesses  with  which  the  Moabitish 
mountains  abound,  and  which  already  had 
been  converted  into  dwelling-places  by  the 
primitive  inhabitants  of  the  region  (cf.  ch. 
xiv.  6) — he  and  his  two  daughters. 

Ver.  31.— And  the  firstborn  said  nnto  the 
younger,— showing  that  she  had  not  escaped 
the  pollution,  if  she  had  the  destruction,  of 
Sodom.  "  It  was  time  that  Lot  had  left  the 
cities  of  the  plain.  No  wealth  could  com- 
pensate for  the  mora\  degradation  into  which 
his  family  had  sunk  "  (Inglis) — Our  father  is 
old, — an  indirect  confirmation  of  the  infer- 
ence (vide  ch.  xi.  26)  that  Abram  was  younger 
than  Haran,  since  Lot,  Haran's  son,  is  now 
an  old  man — and  there  is  not  a  man  in  the 
earth  —  not  in  the  entire  world  (Origen, 
Irenseus,  Chrysostom,  Kalisch),  which  is 
scarcely  probable,  since  they  knew  that  Zoar 
had  been  spared  ;  but  either  in  the  district 
whither  they  had  fled  (Calvin,  Willet),  being 
under  the  impression  that,  living  in  so  deso- 
late a  region,  they  could  have  no  more  inter- 
course with  mankind ;  or  in  the  land  of 
Canaan  (Ainsworth,  Bush),  meaning  that 
there  were  no  more  godly  men  with  whom 
they  might  marry  _;  or  perhaps  they  meant 
that  no  man  would  now  care  to  unite  himself 
with  them,  the  remnant  of  a  curse-stricken 
region  (Knobel,  Keil)— to  come  in  unto  Ul 
after  the  manner  of  all  the  earth. 

Ver.  32. — Come,  let  us  make  our  father 
drink  wine, — either,  therefore,  Lot  had'  not 
left  Sodom  totally  unprovided  (Inglis),  or 
some  little  time  had  elapsed  after  his  escaping 
to  the  mountain  cave,  since  his  daughters  are 
provided  with  this  intoxicating  beverage — 
and  we  will  lie  with  him.  Considering  the 
town  in  which  the  daughters  of  Lot  had  been 
reared,  the  mother  of  whom  they  were  the 
offspring,  and  the  example  they  had  received 
from  their  father  (ver.  8),  ' '  we  can  under- 


stand, though  we  cannot  cease  to  abhor,  theii 
incestuous  conduct"  (Kalisch).  Their  pro- 
posal was  revolting  and  unnatural  in  the  ex- 
treme. By  subsequent  Mosaic  legislation  a 
transgression  of  such  enormity  was  rendered 
punishable  by  death.  Even  in  the  present 
instance  the  perpetrators  were  not  wholly 
unconscious  of  the  wickedness  of  their  con- 
duct. The  fact  that  they  required  a  strata- 
gem for  the  attainment  of  their  purpose  shows 
that  at  least  they  could  not  calculate  on  their 
father's  approbation.  The  entire  story  has 
been  regarded  as  the  invention  of  later  Jewish 
hatred  to  the  Moabites  and  Ammonites  (De 
Wette),  a  conjecture  believed  by  some  to  be 
"not improbable"  (Rosenmiillcr) ;  but  if  so, 
how  should  the  same  writer  exhibit  Abraham 
(ch.  xviii.  23)  as  filled  with  compassionate 
tenderness  towards  the  cities  of  the  plain? 
(Havernick).  That  we  may  preserve  seed  of 
our  father.  Literally,  quicken  or  vivify  seed 
(cf.  ver.  34).  Lot's  daughters  may  be  credited 
with  whatever  virtue  may  be  supposed  to 
reside  in  this  motive  for  their  conduct. 

Ver.  33.— And  they  made  their  father  drink 
wine  that  night— which  was  sinful  botb  in 
them  and  him  (vide  Isa.  v.  11  ;  Prov.  xx.  1 ; 
Hab.  ii.  15)  -and  the  firstborn  went  in,  and 
lay  with  her  father ;  and  he  perceived  not 
when  she  lay  down,  nor  when  she  arose. 
That  it  was  his  own  daughter  quacum  con- 
cumberet  (Rosenmiiller),  being  so  intoxicated 
that  he  could  not  discern  who  it  was  to  whom 
he  had  approached,  or  even  what  he  was  doing 
(Keil).  The  reading  "  when  he  lay  down 
and  when  he  arose"  (LXX.)  is  incorrect, 
and  the  explanations  that  Lot  was  a  mere 
unconscious  instrument  in  this  disgraceful 
transaction  (Kalisch),  that  he  was  entirely 
ignorant  of  all  that  had  taken  place  (Chry- 
sostom,  Cajetan),  that  he  was  struck  on  ac- 
count of  his  intemperance  with  a  spirit  of 
stupor  (Calvin),  are  not  warranted  by  the  text. 

Ver.  34. —And  it  came  to  pass  on  the 
morrow,  that  the  firstborn  said  unto  the 
younger,  Behold,  I  lay  yesternight  with  my 
father :  let  us  make  him  drink  wine  this 
night  also ;  and  go  thou  in,  and  lie  with 
him,  that  we  may  preserve  seed  of  our  father. 

Ver.  35. — And  they  made  their  father 
drink  wine  that  night  also.  The  facility 
with  which  Lot  allowed  himself  to  be  ine- 
briated by  his  daughters  Clericus  regards  as 
a  sign  that  before  this  the  old  man  had  been 
accustomed  to  over-indulgence  in  wine.  The 
inference,  however,  of  Kalisch,  that  because 
"  Lot's  excess  in  the  enjoyment  of  wine  is  no 
more  blamed  than  it  was  in  Noah,"  "the 
narrative  exempts  him  from  all  serious  re- 
proach," can  scarcely  be  admitted.  And  the 
younger  arose,  and  lay  with  him  (following 
the  bad  example  of  her  sister) ;  and  he  per- 
ceived not  when  she  lay  down,  nor  when 
she  arose  (vide  supra,  ver.  83), 


262 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[oh.  xra.  29—88. 


Ver.  36. — Thus  were  both  the  daughters 
of  Lot  (who  after  this  disappears  from  sacred 
history,  not  even  his  death  being  recorded) 
with  child  by  their  father. 

Ver.  37. — And  the  firstborn  bare  a  son, 
and  called  his  name  Moab  =  Meab,  from 
the  father,  alluding  to  his  incestuous  origin 
(LXX.,  which  adds  Xiyovaa  in  too  itarpoQ 
pov  ;  Augustine,  Jerome,  Delitzsch,  Keil)  ; 
though  Mo  (=  water,  ,an  Arabic  euphemism 
for  the  semenvirile)  and  ah  has  been  advanced 
as  a  more  correct  derivation  (Rosenmuller). 
The  same  is  the  father  of  the  Moabites  -  who 
originally  inhabited  the  country  north-east 
of  the  Dead  Sea,  between  the  Jabbok  and 
the  Arnon  (Deut.  ii.  20),  but  were  afterwards 
driven  by  the  Amorites  south  of  the  Arnon — 
unto  this  day.  This  phrase,  indicating  a 
variable  period  from  a  few  years  to  a  few 
centuries  (ef.  ch.  xlviii  13  ;  Exod.  x.  6 ; 
Numb.  xxii.  39  ;  Josh.  xxii.  3),  cannot  be 
regarded  as  a  trace  of  post-Mosaic  authorship 
(Da  Wette,  el  alii),  since  in  Genesis  it  is 


always  used  of  events  which  had  taken  place 
several  centuries  before  the  time  of  Moses,  at 
in  ch.  xxvi.  33 ;  xxxv.  20  ;  xlvii  26  (cf. 
Keil,  '  Introduction,'  part  i  §  2,  div.  1,  §  38). 
Ver.  38. — And  the  younger,  she  also  bar* 
a  son,  and  called  his  name  Ben-amml  /.  & 
son  of  my  people  (LXX. ,  Jerome,  Augustine), 
meaning  that  her  child  was  the  offspring  ol 
her  own  kind  and  blood  (Rosenmuller),  0! 
the  son  of  her  relative  (Kalisch),  or  of  an 
unmixed  race  ('  Speaker's  Commentary '). 
The  same  is  the  father  of  the  children  of 
Amnion — an  unsettled  people  who  occupied 
the  territory  between  the  Jabbok  and  the 
Arnon,  from  which  they  had  ejected  the 
Rephaims  or  Zarazummims  (Deut.  ii  22), 
and  in  which  they  possessed  a  strong  city, 
Rabbah  (2  Sam.  xi.  1) ;  in  their  habits  more 
migratory  and  marauding  than  the  Moabites 
(Isa.  xv.,  xvi. ;  Jer.  xlviii.),  and  in  their 
religion  worshippers  of  Molech,  "  the  abomin- 
ation of  the  Ammonites  "  (1  Kings  si  1)— 
unto  this  day. 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  29.—  The  last  days  of  Lot.  I.  Haunted  by  terror.  1.  The  terror  oj 
Divine  judgment.  The  appalling  spectacle  of  Sodom's  overthrow  had  no  doubt  filled, 
him  with  alarm.  And  so  are  God's  judgments  in  the  earth  designed  to  put  the  souls 
of  men  in  fear  (Ps.  is.  20 ;  xlvi.  8—10 ;  cxix.  120).  2.  The  terror  of  men.  Dwelling 
in  Zoar,  he  apprehended  an  outburst  of  wrath  from  the  citizens,  who  probably  re- 
garded him  as  the  cause  of  the  ruin  which  had  invaded  Sodom.  So  are  better  men 
than  Lot  sometimes  overtaken  by  the  fear  of  man  (2  Sam.  xxii.  5 ;  Ps.  xviii.  4), 
though  they  should  not  (Isa.  Ii.  12).  3.  The  terror  of  conscience.  That  Lot  enjoyed 
while  in  Zoar  a  calm  and  undisturbed  repose  of  heart  and  mind  is  scarcely  supposable. 
Rather  it  may  be  safely  conjectured  that  after  the  storm  and  the  fire  and  the  earth- 
quake through  which  he  had  lately  passed,  the  still  small  voice  of  conscience  spoke  to 
him  in  awe-inspiring  accents,  unveiling  his  past  life,  reproving-  him  of  sin,  and  piercing 
him  through  with  many  sorrows ;  and  that  under  the  agitations  produced  by  its 
accusations  and  reproaches  he  became  afraid,  and  withdrew  to  the  mountains.  "  Thus 
conscience  doth  make  cowards  of  us  all." 

II.  Sounding  the  lower  deeps.  1.  Descending  into  unbelief.  God  had  promised 
to  spare  Zoar  for  him,  and  him  in  Zoar,  and  one  would  have  thought  Lot  had  been 
sufficiently  warned  of  the  sin  of  distrusting  God.  Yet  he  is  scarcely  established  in 
the  city  which  God  had  granted  in  response  to  his  own  prayer  than  he  begins  to  think 
it  hardly  safe  to  remain  within  its  precincts.  How  inveterate  is  unbelief  1  2.  Plung- 
ing into  sin.  The  details  of  the  present  story  clearly  show  that  Lot,  when  he  went 
to  the  mountain  cave,  endeavoured  to  escape  from  his  terrors  not  by  carrying  them 
to  God's  throne,  but  by  drowning  them  in  dissipation.  The  wretched  man,  who  had 
once  been  a  saint  in  God's  Church,  must  have  been  in  the  habit  of  drinking  to  excess, 
else  his  daughters  would  never  have  thought  of  their  abominable  stratagem.  Only 
one  little  gleam  of  virtue  can  bo  detected  as  entitled  to  be  laid  to  Lot's  account,  viz., 
that  his  daughters  apparently  believed  that  unless  their  father  was  drunk  he  would 
never  be  brought  to  assent  to  their  lewd  proposal.  3.  Sinking  into  shame.  Twice 
overcome  by  wine,  he  is  twice  in  succession  dishonoured  by  his  daughters ;  and  twice 
over,  while  in  his  drink  stupor, he  allows  himself  to  commit  an  act  which  almost  ont- 
Sodoms  Sodom.    To  what  depths  a  saint  may  fall  when  once  he  turns  his  back  on  God  I 

III.  Disappearing  into  oblivion.  Nothing  could  more  distinctly  mark  the  Divine 
disapprobation  with  I  ot's  conduct  than  the  fact  that  after  this  he  was  suffered — 1.  To 
live  an  unrecorded  life  being   never  heard  of  again  in  the  pages  of  Holy  Scripture 


CH.  XX.  1—18.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


m 


2.  To  die  an  unnoticed  death.  Where  and  how  he  met  his  end  the  historian  does 
not  condescend  to  state.  3.  To  sink  into  an  unknown  grave.  Whether  buried  in 
his  mountain  cave  or  entombed  in  the  Jordan  valley  no  man  knoweth  unto  this  day. 
See — 1.  The  danger  of  turning  aside  from  God  and  good  men  (Heb.  iii.  12 ;  x. 
25).  2.  The  melancholy  end  of  a  worldly  life  (1  Cor.  x.  6  ;  Phil.  iii.  19 ;  2  Tim.  iv. 
10).    3.  The  bitter  fruits  of  parental  neglect  (1  Sam.  ii.  27—36 ;  Prov.  xxix.  15 — 17). 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  29. — The  destruction  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah.  I.  The  visible  judgment. 
u  God  overthrew  the  cities  in  the  which  Lot  dwelt."  1.  The  reason.  2.  The  instru- 
mentality.    3.  The  reality,     4.  The  lessons  of  the  overthrow. 

II.  The  unknown  mercy.  "  He  sent  Lot  out  of  the  midst  of  the  overthrow."  To 
Abraham  this  was — 1.  A  great  mercy.  2.  A  mercy  granted  in  answer  to  prayer. 
But — 3.  An  unknown  mercy,  there  being  no  reason  to  believe  that  Abraham  ever 
saw  Lot  again,  or  knew  of  his  deliverance. 

Learn — 1.  That  God  always  mixes  mercy  with  his  judgments.  2.  That  his  mer- 
cies are  not  always  so  perceptible  to  the  eye  of  sense  and  reason  as  his  judgments. 
8.  That  God's  people  get  more  mercies  poured  into  their  cups  than  they  are  at  all 
times  cognisant  of. — W. 

EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XX. 

Ver.  1. — And  Abraham  journeyed 
ch.  xii.  9)  from  thence.  Mamre  (ch.  xviii. 
1).  In  search  of  pasture,  as  on  a  previous 
occasion  (Keil) ;  or  in  consequence  of  the 
hostility  of  his  neighbours  (Calvin) ;  or  be- 
cause he  longed  to  escape  from  the  scene  of 
so  terrible  a  calamity  as  he  had  witnessed 
(Calvin,  Willet,  Ifcpliy) ;  or  in  order  to 
benefit  as  many  places  and  peoples  as  possi- 
ble by  his  residence  among  them  (A  Lapide) ; 
or  perhaps  being  impelled  by  God,  who  de- 
signed thereby  to  remind  him  that  Canaan 
was  not  intended  for  a  permanent  habita- 
tion, but  for  a  constant  pilgrimage  (Poole, 
Kalisch).  Toward  the  south  country.  Ne- 
geb,  the  southern  district  of  Palestine  (ch. 
xii.  9  ;  xiii,  1) ;  the  central  region  of  Jud:ea 
being  called  Hahor,  or  the  Highlands  ;  the 
eastern,  towards  the  Dead  Sea,  Midhbar ; 
and  the  western  Shephelah  (Lange).  And 
dwelled  between  Kadesh  and  Shur  (vide  ch. 
xvi.  14  and  xvi  7),  and  sojourned  in  Gerar 
(vide  ch.  x.  19). 

Ver.  2. — And  Abraham  said  of  Sarah  his 
wife,  She  is  my  sister.  As  formerly  he  had 
done  on  descending  into  Egypt  (ch.  xii.  13). 
That  Abraham  should  a  second  time  have 
resorted  to  this  ignoble  expedient  after  the 
hazardous  experience  of  Egypt  and  the  richly- 
merited  rebuke  of  Pharaoh,  but  more  especi- 
illy  after  the  assurance  he  had  lately  received 
of  his  own  acceptance  before  God  (ch.  xv.  6), 
and  of  Sarah's,  destiny  to  be  the  mother  of 
the  promised  seed  (ch.  xvii.  16),  is  well  nigh 
unaccountable,  and  almost  irreconcilable 
with  any  degree  of  faith  and  piety.     Yet  the 


lapse  of  upwards  of  twenty  years  since  that 
former  mistake  may  have  deadened  the  im- 
pression of  sinfulness  which  Pharaoh's  rebuke 
must  have  left  upon  his  conscience;  while 
altogether  the  result  of  that  experiment 
may,  through  a  common  misinterpretation 
of  Divine  providence,  have  encouraged  him 
to  think  that  God  would  watch  over  the 
purity  of  his  house  as  he  had  done  before. 
Thus,  though  in  reality  a  tempting  of  God, 
the  patriarch's  repetition  of  his  early  venture 
may  have  had  a  secret  connection  with  his 
deeply -grounded  faith  in  the  Divine  promise 
(cf.  Kalisch  in  loco).  And  Abimelech — i.  e. 
Father-king,  a  title  of  the  Philistine  kings 
(ch.  xxi.  22 ;  xxvi.  1  ;  Psalm  xxxiv.  1),  as 
Pharaoh  was  of  the  Egyptian  (ch.  xii.  15), 
and  Hamor  of  the  Shechemite  (ch.  xxxiv.  4) 
monarchs ;  cf.  Padishah  (father-king),  a  title 
of  the  Persian  kings,  and  Atalik  (father, 
properly  paternity),  of  the  Khans  of  Bokhara 
(Gesenius,  p.  6) — king  of  Gerar  sent,  and 
took  Sarah.  /.  e.  into  his  harem,  as  Pharaoh 
previously  had  done  (ch.  xii  15),  either 
having  been  fascinated  by  her  beauty,  which, 
although  she  was  twenty  years  older  than 
when  she  entered  Egypt,  need  not  have  been 
much  faded  (vide  ch.  xii.  11 ;  Calvin),  or 
may  have  been  miraculously  rejuvenated 
when  she  received  strength  to  conceive  seed 
(Kurtz) ;  or,  what  is  as  probable,  having 
sought  through  her  an  alliance  with  the  rich 
and  powerful  nomade  prince  who  had  entered 
his  dominions  (Delitzsch). 

Ver.  3. — But  God — Elohim;  whence  the 
present  chapter,  with  the  exception  of  ver. 
18,  is  assigned  to  the  Elohist  (Tuch,  De 
Wette,  lileek,  Davidson),  and  the  incident 


864 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[CH.  XX.  1—18 


at  Gerar  explained  as  the  original  legend,  of 
which  the  story  of  Sarah's  abduction  by 
Pharaoh  is  the  Jehovistic  imitation.  But 
(1)  the  use  of  Elohim  throughout  the  present 
chapter  is  sufficiently  accounted  for  by  observ- 
ing that  it  describes  the  intercourse  of  Deity 
with  a  heathen  monarch,  to  whom  the  name 
of  Jehovah  was  unknown,  while  the  employ- 
ment of  the  latter  term  in  ver.  18  may  be 
ascribed  to  the  fact  that  it  is  the  covenant 
God  of  Sarah  who  there  interposes  for  her 
protection ;  and  (2)  the  apparent  resemblance 
between  the  two  incidents  is  more  than 
counterbalanced  by  the  points  of  diversity 
which  subsist  between  them — came  to  Abime  ■ 
lech  in  a  dream  — the  usual  mode  of  self- 
revelation  employed  by  Elohim  towards 
heathen.  Cf.  Pharaoh's  dreams  (ch.  xli.  1) 
and  Nebuchadnezzar's  (Dan.  iv.  5),  as  dis- 
tinguished from  the  visions  in  which  Jehovah 
manifests  his  presence  to  his  people.  Cf. 
the  theophanies  vouchsafed  to  Abraham  (ch. 
xii.  7  ;  xv.  1 ;  xviii.  1)  and  to  Jacob  (ch. 
xxviii.  13  ;  xxxii.  24),  and  the  visions 
granted  to  Daniel  (Dan.  vii.  1—28 ;  x.  5—9) 
and  the  prophets  generally,  which,  though 
sometimes  occurring  in  dreams,  were  yet  a 
higher  form  of  Divine  manifestation  than  the 
dreams — by  night,  and  said  to  him,  Behold, 
thou  art  but  a  dead  man,— literally,  behold 
thyself  dying,  or  about  to  die~  oi>  airo9vt]<r- 
rfic  (LXX).  Abimelech,  it  is  probable,  was 
by  this  time  suffering  from  the  malady  which 
had  fallen  on  his  house  (vide  ver.  17)— for 
(i.  e.  on  account  of)  the  woman  which  thou 
hast  taken ;  for  she  is  a  man's  wife — liter- 
ally, married  to  a  husband,  or  under  lord- 
ship to  a  lord  (cf.  Deut.  xxii.  22). 

Ver.  4. — But  Abimelech  had  not  come 
near  her.  Apparently  withheld  by  the 
peculiar  disease  which  had  overtaken  him. 
The  statement  of  the  present  verse  (a  similar 
one  to  which  is  not  made  with  reference  to 
Pharaoh)  was  clearly  rendered  necessary  by 
the  approaching  birth  of  Isaac,  who  might 
otherwise  have  been  said  to  be  the  child  not 
of  Abraham,  but  of  the  Philistine  king.  And 
he  said,  Lord, — Adonai  {vide  ch.  xv.  2) — 
wilt  thou  slay  also  a  righteous  nation  1 
Anticipating  that  the  stroke  of  Divine  judg- 
ment was  about  to  fall  upon  his  people  as 
well  as  on  himself,  with  allusion  to  the  fate 
of  Sodom  (Knobel),  which  he  deprecates  for 
his  people  at  least  on  the  ground  that  they 
are  innocent  of  the  offence  charged  against 
him  (cf.  2  Sam.  xxiv.  17).  That  Abimelech 
and  his  people,  like  Melchise'leck  and  his 
subjects,  had  some  knowledge  of  the  true 
God,  and  that  the  Canaanites  generally  at 
this  period  had  not  reached  the  depth  of 
moral  degradation  into  which  the  cities  of 
the  Jordan  circle  had  sunk  before  their 
overthrow,  is  apparent  from  the  narrative. 
The  comparative  virtue,  therefore,  of  these 


tribes  was  a  proof  that  the  hour  had  not 
arrived  for  the  infliction  on  them  of  the 
doom  of  extermination. 

Ver.  5.— Said  he  not  unto  me,  She  is  my 
sister?  and  she,  even  she  herself  said,  He 
is  my  brother.  From  which  it  is  clear  that 
the  Philistine  monarch,  equally  with  the 
Egyptian  Pharaoh,  shrank  from  the  sin  of 
adultery.  In  the  integrity  of  my  heart  and 
innocenoy  of  my  hands  have  I  done  this. 
/.  e.  he  assumes  the  right-  of  kings  to  take 
unmarried  persons  into  their  harems. 

Ver.  6.— And  God  said  unto  him  in  a 
dream, — "It  is  in  full  agreement  with  the 
nature  of  dreams  that  the  communication 
should  be  made  in  several,  and  not  in  one 
single  act;  cf.  chs.  xxxvii.  and- xli. ;  Matt,  ii." 
(Lange) — Yea,  I  know  that  thou  didst  thig 
in  the  integrity  of  thy  heart — i.  e.  judged 
from  thy  moral  standpoint.  The  words  do 
not  imply  a  Divine  acquittal  as  to  the  essen- 
tial guiltiness  of  the  act,  which  is  clearly 
involved  in  the  instruction  to  seek  the  medi- 
ation of  God's  prophet  (ver.  7).  For  I  also 
withheld  thee  from  sinning  against  me  : 
therefore  suffered  I  thee  not  to  touch  her 
(vide  on  ver.  4). 

Ver.  7. — Now  therefore  restore  the  man 
his  wife.     Literally,  the  wife  of  the  man, 
God  now  speaking  of  Abraham  non  tanquam 
de  homine  quolibet,   sed  peculiariter  sibi 
charum  (Calvin).      For  he  is  a   prophet. 
Nabi,  from  naba,  to  cause  to  bubble  up ; 
hence  to  pour  forth,  applied  to  one  who 
speaks  by  a  Divine  afflatus  (Deut.  xiii.  2 ; 
Judges  vi.  8 ;  1  Sam.  ix.  9 ;  1  Kings  xxii 
7).     The  office  of  the  Nabi  was  twofold — to 
announce  the  will  of  God  to  men  (Exod.  iv. 
15 ;  vii.  1),  and  also  to  intercede  with  God 
for  men  (ver.  7  ;  Jer.  vii.  16  ;  xi.  14  t  xiv. 
11).     The  use  of  the  term  Nabi  in  this  place 
neither  proves  that  the  spirit  of  prophecy 
had  not  existed  from  the  beginning  (cf.  ch. 
ix.  25 — 27),  nor  shows  that  the  Pentateuch, 
which  always  uses  this  term,  cannot  be  of 
greater  antiquity  than  the  time  of  Samuel, 
before  which,  according  to  1  Sam.  ix.  9,  the 
prophet  was  called  a  seer  (Bohlen,  Hart- 
mann).     As  used  in  the  Pentateuch  the  term 
describes  the  recipient  of  Divine  revelations, 
and  as  such  it  was  incorporated  in  the  Mosaic 
legislation.    During  the  period  of  the  Judges 
the  term  Boeh  appears  to  have  come  into 
use,  and  to  have  held  its  ground  until  the 
reformation  of  Samuel,  when  the  older  theo- 
cratic   term  was  again    reverted    to  (vide 
Havernick,  §  19).     And  he  shall  pray  fo' 
thee  (vide  supra),    and    thou   shaft   live 
Literally,  live  thou,   the  imperative  being 
used    for  the    future   in  strong   prophetw 
assurances  (cf.  Ps.  exxviii.  5  ;  vide  Geseniue, 
§  130).    And  if  thou  restore  her  not.  know 
thou  that  thou  shalt  surely  die, —literally, 


oh.  xx.  1—18.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


26S 


dying  thou  shalt  die  (cf.  eh.  It  17) — thou, 
and  all  that  are  thine. 

Ver.  8. — Therefore  Abimelech  rose  early 
in  the  morning, — an  evidence  of  the  terror 
into  which  he  had  been  cast  by  the  Divine 
communication,  and  of  his  earnest  desire 
to  carry  out  the  Divine  instructions — and 
called  all  his  servants,  and  told  all  these 
things  in  their  ears: — confessed  his  fault, 
explained  his  danger,  and  affirmed  his  in- 
tention to  repair  his  error ;  a  proof  of  the 
humility  of  this  God-fearing  king  (Lange) — 
and  the  man  were  sore  afraid.  It  spoke 
well  for  the  king's  household  that  they  re- 
ceived the  communication  with  seriousness. 

Ver.  9. — Then  Abimelech  called  Abraham, 
and  said  nnto  him  (in  the  presence  of  his 
people),  What  hast  thou  done  unto  nsl 
— identifying  himself  once  more  with  his 
people,  as  he  had  already  done  in  responding 
to  God  (ver.  4) — ?  d  what  have  I  offended 
thee  (thus  modestly  allowing  that  he  may 
himself  have  unwittingly  occasioned  the  sin 
of  Abraham),  that  thou  hast  brought  on  me 
and  on  my  kingdom  a  great  sin?  The 
gravamen  of  Abimelech's  accusation  was  that 
Abraham  had  led  him  and  his  to  offend 
against  God,  and  so  to  lay  themselves  open 
to  the  penalties  of  wrong-doing.  Thou  hast 
done  deeds  unto  me  that  ought  not  to  be 
done.  Literally,  deeds  which  ought  not  to 
be  dom  thou  hast  done  with  me  (cf.  ch. 
xxxiv.  7  ;  LeviK  iv.  2,  13 ;  vide  Glass, 
'Philol.  Tract.,  L  iii.  t.  iit  c  vt).  The 
king's  words  were  unquestionably  designed 
to  convey  a  set  ere  reproach. 

Ver.  10. — And  Abimelech  said  unto  Abra- 
ham, What  sawest  thou, — either,  What  hadst 
thou  in  view  ?  (Knobel,  Delitzsch,  Keil, 
Murphy,  et  alii),  or,  What  didst  thou  see? 
Didst  thou  see  any  of  my  people  taking 
the  wives  of  strangers  and  murdering  their 
husbands  ?  (Rosenmiiller,  '  Speaker's  Com- 
mentary ')— that  thou  hast  done  this  thing  1 

Ver.  11. — And  Abraham  said  (offering  as 
his  first  apology  for  his  sinful  behaviour  the 
fear  which  he  entertained  of  the  depravity  of 
the  people),  Because  I  thought,— literally, 
said  (sc  in  my  heart)— Surely  the  fear  of 
God  is  not  in  this  place; — otherwise,  there 
is  not  any  fear  of  God,  p~l  having  usually  a 
confirming  sense  with  reference  to  what 
follows  (cf.  Deut.  iv.  6 ;  1  Kings  xiv.  8 ;  vide 
Gesenius,  p.  779) — and  they  will  slay  me  for 
my  wife's  sake. 

Ver.  12. — And  yet  indeed  she  is  my  sister. 
This  was  the  second  of  the  patriarch's  ex- 
tenuating pleas,  that  he  had  not  exactly  lied, 
having  uttered  at  least  a  half-truth,  She  is 
the  daughter  of  my  father  (Terah),  but  not 
the  daughter  of  my  mother.  That-  Sarah 
was  the  grand-daughter  of  Terah,  i.  e.  the 
daughter  of  Haran,  and  sister  of  Lot,  in 
other   words,   Iacah,   has    been  maintained 


(Josephus,  Augustine,  Jerome,  Jonathan). 
That  she  was  Terah's  niece,  being  a  brothers 
daughter  adopted  by  him,  has  received  somj 
support  (Calvin) ;  but  there  seems  no  reason 
for  departing  from  the  statement  of  the  text, 
that  she  was  her  husband's  half-sister,  i.  t. 
Terah's  daughter  by  another  wife  than  Abra- 
ham's mother  (Rosenmiiller,  Kalisch,  Keil, 
Knobel).     And  she  became  my  wife. 

Ver.  13. — And  it  came  to  pass,  w)"m  God 
caused  me  to  wander  (or  to  go  on  pilgrim- 
ages) from  my  father's  house,  —  Elohim,, 
usually  construed  with  a  singular  verb,  ia 
here  joined  with  a  verb  in  the  plural,  as  an 
accommodation  to  the  polytheistic  stand- 
point of  Abimelech  (Keil),  as  a  proof  that 
Elohim  is  to  be  viewed  as  a  Pluralis  Majes 
taticus  (Kalisch),  as  referring  to  the  plurality 
of  Divine  manifestations  which  Abraham  had 
received  (Lange),  as  showing  that  Elohim 
here  signifies  angels  (Calvin),  or,  most  likely, 
as  an  instance  of  the  literal  meaning  of  the 
term  as  the  supernatural  powers  (Murphy). 
Cf.  ch.  xxxv.  7  ;  Exod .  xxii.  8  ;  2  Sam.  vii. 
23  ;  Ps.  lviii.  12— that  I  said  unto  her, 
This  is  thy  kindness  which  thou  shalt  show 
unto  me.  The  third  plea  which  the  patriarch 
presented  for  his  conduct,  it  had  no  special 
reference  to  Abimelech,  but  was  the  result 
of  an  old  compact  formed  between  himself 
and  Sarah.  At  every  place  whither  we  shall 
come,  say  of  me,  He  is  my  brother  (cf.  ch. 
xit  13). 

Ver.  14. — And  Abimelech — as  Pharaoh  did 
(ch.  xit  16),  but  with  a  different  motive — 
took  sheep,  and  oxen,  and  men-servants,  and 
women-servants.  The  LXX.  and  Samaritan 
insert  "a  thousand didrachmas"  after  "took," 
in  order  to  include  Sarah's  present  mentioned 
in  ver.  16  ;  but  the  two  donations  are  separ- 
ated in  order  to  distinguish  them  as  Abra- 
ham's gift  and  Sarah's  respectively  (Rosen- 
miiller, Delitzsch),  or  the  sum  of  money  may 
indicate  the  value  of  the  sheep  and  oxen, 
&c.  which  Abraham  received  (Keil,  Knobel, 
Lange,  'Speaker's  Commentary').  And  gave 
them  unto  Abraham.  To  propitiate  his 
favour  for  the  wrong  he  had  suffered. 
Pharaoh's  gifts  were  "for  the  sake  of  Sarah" 
(ch.  xit  16).  And  restored  him  Sarah  hie 
wife. 

Ver.  15. — And  Abimelech  said,  Behold, 
my  land  is  before  thee  :  dwell  where  it 
pleaseth  thee.  Literally,  in  the  good  in 
thine  eyes;  the  generous  Philistine  offering 
him  a  settlement  within  his  borders,  whereas 
the  Egyptian  monarch  hastened  his  departure 
from  the  country  (ch.  xii.  20). 

Ver.  16. — And  unto  Sarah  he  said,  Behold, 
I  have  given  thy  brother  a  thousand  pieces 
of  silver.  Literally,  a  thousand  of  silver, 
the  exact  weight  of  each  piece  being  uncertain. 
If  sacred  shekels  (Gesenius,  KeS,  Kalisch) 
their  value  would  be  over  £130,  if  shekels 


266 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xx.  1—18. 


ordinary  somewhat  less.  Behold,  he— i.  e. 
thy  brother ;  or  it,  i.  e.  the  present  (LXX., 
Vulgate,  Targums,  Syriac)— is  to  thee  a 
covering-  of  the  eyes.  Q^'J?  JVID3  (from  a 
root  signifying  to  cover  over)  has  been  under- 
stood as  (1)  a  propitiatory  gift  =  7-ip>)  (LXX.), 
or  (2)  a  veil  for  the  protection  of  the  face ; 
and,  according  as  the  subject  of  the  sentence 
has  been  regarded  as  Abraham  or  the  sum 
of  money,  the  sense  of  the  clause  has  been 
given  as  either  (1)  he,  i.  e.  thy  brother,  will 
be  to  thee  a  protection,  hiding  thee  like  a 
veil,  from  the  voluptuous  desires  of  others 
(Aben  Ezra,  Cajetan,  Calvin,  Ealisch) ;  or 
(2)  it,  i.  e.  this  present  of  mine,  will  be  to 
thee  a  propitiatory  offering  to  make  thee 
overlook  my  offence  (Chrysostom,  Gesenius, 
Fiirst,  Knobel,  Delitzsch,  Keil,  Murphy) ; 
or  (3)  a  declaration  of  thy  purity,  and  so  a 
defence  to  thee  against  any  calumnious 
aspersions  (Castalio) ;  or  (4)  the  purchase- 
money  of  a  veil  to  hide  thy  beauty,  lest 
others  be  ensnared  (Vulgate,  Arabic,  Kitto, 
Clark) ;  or  (6)  the  means  of  procuring  that 
bridal  veil  which  married  females  should 
never  lay  aside  (cf.  ch.  xxiv.  65 ;  Dathe, 
Vitringa,  Michaelis,  Baumgarten,  Rosen- 
miiller).     The  exact  sense  of  this  difficult 

Sassage  can  scarcely  be  said  to  have  been 
etermined,  though  of  the  above  interpreta- 
tions the  choice  seems  to  lie  between  the 
first  and  second.  Unto  all  that  are  with 
thee,  and  with  all  other.  I,  e.  in  presence 
of  thy  domestics  and  of  all  with  whom  thou 
mayest  yet  mingle,  either  Abraham  will  be 
thy  best  defence,  or  let  my  gift  be  an  atone- 
ment, or  a  veil,  &c.  Thus  she  waB  reproved. 
nn3JV  If  a  third  person  singular  niph.  of 
PD'  (Onkelos,  Arabic,  Kimchi,  Gesenius, 
Rosenmiiller,  Fiirst),  then  it  is  the  histori- 
an's statement  signifying  that  Sarah  had 
been  convicted,  admonished,  and  left  de- 
fenceless   (Gesenius) ;    or,    connecting    the 


preceding  words  73V)£),  that,  with  regard 
to  all,  right  had  been  obtained  (Fiirst), 
or  that  all  had  been  done  that  she  might 
be  righted  (Murphy) ;  but  if  a  second  person 
singular  niph.  (LXX.,  Vulgate,  Delitzsch, 
KeO,  Lange,  Murphy,  Kalisch),  then  it  is  a 
continuation  of  Abimelech's  address,  mean- 
ing neither  km  iravra  ahr/Qtvaov  (LXX.), 
nor  memento  te  deprehensam  (Vulgate),  but 
either,  "and  thou  art  reproved"  (Words- 
worth), or,  "and  thou  wilt  be  recognised" 
(Kalisch),  or,  again  connecting  with  the 
preceding  words,  "and  with  all,  so  thou 
art  justified  or  set  right"  (Delitzsch,  Keil, 
Lange),  or,  "and  all  this  that  thou  mayest 
be  righted"  (Murphy)  or  "  reproved"  (Ains- 
worth). 

Ver.  17. —So  Abraham  prayed  unto  God. 
Literally,  the  Elohim,  the  personal  and 
true  God,  and  not  Elohim,  or  Deity  in 
general,  to  whom  belonged  the  cure  of 
Abimelech  and  his  household-  (Keil),  as  the 
next  clause  shows.  And  God  (Elohim,  with- 
out the  art.)  healed  Abimelech,  and  his  wife, 
and  his  maid-servants ; — i  e.  his  concubines, 
as  distinguished  from  the  women  servants 
(ver.  14)  —  and  they  bare  children.  The 
verb  may  apply  to  both  sexes,  and  the 
malady  under  which  they  suffered  may  be 
here  described  as  one  which  prevented  pro- 
creation, as  the  next  verse  explains. 

Ver.  18. — For  the  lord  {Jehovah;  vide 
supra  on  ver.  3)  had  fast  closed  up  all  the 
wombs — i.  e.  prevented  conception,  or  pro- 
duced barrenness  (cf.  ch.  xvi.  2 ;  Isa.  lxvi. 
9 ;  1  Sam.  i.  5,  6 ;  for  the  opposite,  ch.  xxix. 
31;  xxx.  22);  "poena  convenientissima ; 
quid  enim  convenientius  esse  poterat,  quam 
ut  amittat,  qui  ad  se  rapit  aliena"  (Mus- 
culus).  Vide  Havernick,  §  19 — of  the  house 
of  Abimelech,  because  of  Sarah  Abraham's 
wife — the  motive  obviously  being  to  protect 
the  purity  of  the  promised  seed. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 18. — Abraham  in  Gerar,  or  two  royal  sinners.  I.  The  bin  of  th* 
IIebeew  patriarch.  1.  An  old  sin  repeated.  "Abraham  said  of  Sarah  his  wife, 
She  is  my  sister."  Twenty  years  before  the  same  miserable  equivocation  had  been 
circulated  in  Egypt.  A  sin  once  committed  is  not  difficult  to  repeat,  especially  if  its 
legitimate  consequences,  as  in  the  case  of  Abraham  and  Sarah,  have  been  mercifully 
averted.  One  is  apt  to  fancy  that  a  like  immunity  will  attend  its  repetition.  2.  A 
worthless  lie  propagated.  "  Abimelech,  king  of  Gerar,  sent  and  took  Sarah." 
Designed  for  protection  in  both  Egypt  and  Gerar,  the  ignoble  expedient  of  the  patri- 
arch was  in  both  places  equally  ineffectual.  So  does  all  sin  tend  to  outwit  itself,  and 
in  the  end  generally  proves  abortive  in  its  designs.  3.  A  deliberate  fraud  practised. 
As  Abraham  explained  to  Abimelech,  it  was  no  sudden  impulse  on  which  he  acted, 
but  a  preconcerted  scheme  -which  he  had  put  in  operation.  Intended  for  the  extenu- 
ation of  his  fault,  this  was  in  reality  an  aggravation.  Sin  leisurely  and  knowingly 
gone  about  is  ever  more  heinous  than  that  into  which  the  heart  and  will  are  surprised. 
4.  An  unjustifiable  susvicion  entertained.     All  the  preceding  sins  had  their  ongiu  is 


oh.  xx.  1— 1«.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  867 

what  the  event  proved  to  be  an  altogether  unwarranted  estimate  of  Abimelech  and 
his  people.  The  patriarch  said  to  himself,  "  Surely  the  fear  of  God  is  not  in  this 
place,  and  they  will  slay  me  for  my  wife's  sake,"  without  reflecting  that  he  was  not 
only  deciding  without  evidence,  but  doing  an  injustice  to  the  monarch  and  the  people 
into  whose  land  he  was  crossing. 

Learn — 1.  How  hard  it  is  to  lay  aside  one's  besetting  sin.  The  character  of  the 
patriarch,  otherwise  so  noble,  appears  to  have  had  a  natural  bias  towards  deception. 
2.  How  difficult  it  is  to  lead  a  life  of  faith.  One  would  have  thought  that  by  this 
time  every  vestige  of  carnal  policy  would  have  been  eliminated  from  the  walk  of 
Abraham.  3.  How  possible  it  is  for  an  eminent  saint  to  relapse  into  great  sin.  If 
Abraham  illustrated  the  virtues,  he  likewise  remarkably  exemplified  the  weaknesses 
of  God's  believing  people.  4.  How  wrong  it  is  to  cherish  and  act  upon  uncharitable 
views  of  others.  True  religion  always  leans  to  the  side  of  charity  in  judging  of  the 
characters  of  men. 

II.  The  sin  of  the  heathen  teincb.  1.  A  common  sin.  The  popularity  of  an 
action,  though  not  sufficient  to  make  it  good,  may  serve,  in  some  degree,  to  extenu- 
ate its  guilt  where  it  is  wrong.  2.  An  unconscious  sin.  The  narrative  distinctly 
represents  Abimelech  as  a  prince  who  feared  God  and  shrank  from  incurring  his 
displeasure — a  character  which  all  kings  should  study  to  possess.  Abimelech  him- 
self claimed  to  have  perpetrated  no  offence  against  the  law  of  God  in  acting  as  he 
did,  which  shows  that  the  voice  of  conscience  always  speaks  according  to  its  light. 
The  avowal  which  he  makes  of  his  integrity  is  admitted  by  Jehovah  as  correct — a 
proof  that  God  judges  men  according  to  their  privileges.  Yet  it  was — 3.  A  great 
sin.  Implied  in  the  Divine  direction  to  seek  the  friendly  intercession  of  the  patriarch, 
it  was  admitted  by  Abimelech  when  once  his  mind  was  enlightened  as  to  the  true 
character  of  the  deed  he  had  committed. 

See  here — 1.  A  lesson  of  charity  concerning  peoples  and  individuals  outside  the 
visible  Church.  ,  2.  A  proof  that  men  are  not  necessarily  free  from  g^ilt  because 
their  consciences  fail  to  accuse  them,  3.  A  good  sign  of  true  contrition,  viz.,  the 
acknowledgment  of  sin  when  it  is  pointed  out. 

III.  God's  dealings  with  the  prince  and  with  the  patriarch.  1.  With  the 
prince.  (1)  Restraining  grace.  God  withheld  him  from  proceeding  to  further  sin 
by  doing  injury  to  Sarah,  the  means  employed  being  disease  which  was  sent  upon 
both  the  monarch  and  his  house.  So  God  frequently  interposes  by  afflictive  dispensa- 
tions to  prevent  those  who  fear  him  from  running  into  sins  of  which  perhaps  they 
are  not  aware.  (2)  Illuminating  grace.  Appearing  in  a  dream,  Elohim  disclosed 
the  true  character  of  his  offence,  and  quickened  his  conscience  to  apprehend  the  guilt 
and  danger  which  had  been  incurred.  Sincere  souls  who  fear  God  and  are  faithful  to 
the  light  they  have  are  never  left  to  wander  in  darkness,  but  in  God's  time  and  way 
are  mysteriously  guided  to  the  path  of  safety  and  duty  (Ps.  xxv.  12 — 14).  (3)  Direct- 
ing grace.  Finding  the  heathen  monarch's  heart  susceptible  of  good  impressions, 
God  further  counselled  him  how  to  act  in  order  to  obtain  forgiveness,  viz.,  to  solicit 
the  mediating  services  of  Abraham,  who  in  thic  matter  was  a  type  of  heaven's  great 
High  Priest  and  Intercessor  (Heb.  vii.  25).  Cf.  God's  way  of  dealing  with  errin ; 
men  (Job  xxxii.  14 — 33).  2.  With  the  patriarch.  (1)  Protection.  A  second  tim1 
he  shielded  his  erring  servant  from  the  consequences  of  his  own  folly.  A  mark  o' 
God's  tender  pity  towards  sinful  men.  (2)  Reproof.  Besides  being  much  needed 
it  was  exceedingly  severe,  and  must  have  been  deeply  humiliating.  God  often  per 
mits  his  people  to  be  rebuked  by  the  world  for  their  good.  (3)  Honour.  God  i< 
ever  better  to  his  people  than  their  deserts.  Not  only  did  he  direct  Abimelech  to  ask 
the  help  of  Abraham,  but  he  constituted  Abraham  the  medium  of  bestowing  blessings 
on  Abimelech.  So  does  God  honour  Abraham's  seed,  Christ,  by  exalting  him  in  the 
world's  sight  as  the  one  Mediator  between  God  and  man;  and  Abraham's  children, 
the  Church,  by  making  them  the  instruments  (f  drawing  down  blessings  on  the 
world . 

Learn — 1.  That  God's  dealings  with  sinning  men  ar  always  adapted  to  the  peculiar 
characters  of  their  respective  sins.  2,  That  God  never  chastises  men,  either  by 
affliction  or  rebuke,  for  his  pleasure,  but  for  their  profit.  3.  That  God  never  pordona 
sin  without  bestowing  blessing  on  the  sinner. 


868  THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS.  [ch.  xx.  1—18 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  2. — Falsehood  the  fruit  of  unbelief.  "  Abraham  said  of  Sarah  his  wife, 
She  is  my  sister."  Notice  how  imperfectly  the  obligation  of  truth  recognised 
in  Old  Testament  times.  Not  only  among  heathen,  or  those  who  knew  little  cf 
God  (Josh.  ii.  5  ;  2  Kings  x.  18),  buf  godly  men  among  God's  own  people  (ch.  xxv) 
7 ;  1  Sam.  xxvii.  10).  Yet  the  excellence  of  truth  was  known,  and  its  connection 
with  the  fear  of  God  (Exod.  xviii,  21 ;  Ps.  xv.  2).  Not  until  manifested  in  Chrisf 
does  truth  seem  to  be  fully  understood  (cf.  John  viii.  44 ;  1  John  iii.  8).-  This  gives 
force  to  "  I  am  the  truth."  Some  see  in  text  an  act  of  faith  ;  trust  that  God  would 
make  the  plan  (ver.  13)  successful.  But  faith  must  rest  on  God's  word.  Trust  in 
what  God  gives  no  warrant  for  believing  is  not  faith,  but  fancy,  e.  a.  to  attempt 
what  we  have  no  reason  to  believe  we  can  accomplish,  or  to  incur  liabilities  without 
reasonable  prospect  of  meeting  them.  More  natural  and  better  to  look  on  it  as  a 
breach  of  truth  under  temptation  ;  the  failure  of  a  godly  man  under  trial.  His 
words  were  true  in  letter  (ver.  12),  but  were  spoken  to  deceive,  and  did  deceive. 

I  Boot  of  his  fault — unbelief  ;  want  of  all-embracing  trust.  His  faith  was 
real  and  vigorous  (cf.  1  Cor.  x.  12),  but  partial  (cf.  ch.  xxvii.  19 ;  Matt  xiv.  28). 
Shrank  from  trusting  God  fully.  Turned  to  human  devices,  and  thus  turned  out  of 
the  way  (Prov.  iii.  5).  Partial  distrust  may  be  found  even  where  real  faith.  A  very 
common  instance  is  trusting  in  God  for  spiritual  blessings  only.  A  large  part  of  our 
actions,  especially  in  little  things,  springs  not  from  conscious  decision,  but  from 
habitual  modes  of  thought  and  feeling.  We  act  instinctively,  according  to  what  is 
the  natural  drift  of  thought.  Abraham  had  so  dwelt  on  the  danger  that  he  forgot 
tfie  help  at  hand  (Ps.  xxxiv.  7 ;  Rom.  viii.  28).  Bold  in  action,  his  faith  failed  when 
danger  threatened.  To  endure  is  a  greater  trial  of  faith  than  to  do.  To  stand  firm 
amid  secularising  influences,  ridicule,  misconstruction  is  harder  than  to  do  some 
great  tiling.  St.  Peter  was  ready  to  fight  for  his  Master,  but  failed  to  endure  (Mark 
xiv.  50—71 ;  Gal.  ii.  12).  So  to  St.  Paul's  "  What  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do  ?  " 
the  Lord's  word  was,  "  I  will  show  him  how  great  things  he  must  suffer." 

II.  Fobm  of  His  fault — untruth.  Contrary  to  the,  mind  of  Christ.  May  be 
without  direct  statement  of  untruth.  May  be  by  true  words  so  used  as  to  convey  a 
wrong  idea ;  by  pretences,  e.  g.  taking  credit  unduly  for  any  possession  or  power ;  by 
being  ashamed  to  admit  our  motives ;  or  by  untruth  in  the  spiritual  life,  making 
unreal  professions  in  prayer,  or  self-deceiving.  Every  day  brings  numberless  trials. 
These  can  be  resisted  only  by  the  habit  of  truthfulness,  gained  by  cultivating  "truth 
in  the  inward  parts,"  aiming  at  entire  truthfulness.  Nothing  unpractical  in  this. 
May  be  said,  Must  I  tell  all  my  thoughts  to  every  one  ?  Not  so.  Many  things  we 
have  no  right  to  speak ;  e.  g.  things  told  in  confidence,  or  what  would  give  unneces- 
sary pain.  Concealment  when  it  is  right  is  not  untruth.  No  doubt  questions  of 
difficulty  may  arise.  Hence  rules  of  casuistry.  But  a  Christian  should  be  guided 
by  principles  rather  than  by  rules  (Gal.  v.  1) ;  and  wisdom  to  apply  these  rightly  is 
to  be  gained  by  studying  the  character  of  Christ,  and  prayer  for  the  Holy  Spirit's 
guidance  (Luke  xi.  13  j  John  xvi.  14). — M. 

Vers.  15, 16—  Abraham  and  Abimelech  at  Gerar.  I.  The  universality  of  Divine 
gbace.  The  varieties  in  moral  state  of  nations  a  testimony  to  God's  forbearing 
mercy.  There  was  evidently  a  great  contrast  between  such  people  as  dwelt  under 
Abimelech's  rule  and  the  cities  of  the  plain,  which  helps  us  to  see  the  extreme 
wickedness  of  the  latter.  It  was  probably  no  vain  boast  which  the  king  uttered 
when  he  spoke  of  "  the  integrity  of  his  heart  and  innocency  of  his  hands."  Moreover, 
G'od  appeared  to  him  by  dreams,  and  it  is  implied  that  he  would  have  the  greatest 
reverence  for  Jehovah's  prophet.  Abraham  testified  the  same  ;  although  he  declared 
that  the  fear  of  God  was  not  in  the  place,  still  he  sojourned  in  Gerar,  and  after  Lot's 
experience  he  would  not  have  done  so  unless  he  had  believed  it  to  be  very  different 
from  Sodom. 

II.  The  character  of  God's  children  is  not  the  ground  of  their  AccErTANCK 
wits  hut.    It  is  strange  that  the  Egyptian  experience  should  not  have  taught  th« 


OH.  XXI.  1—8.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


26t 


patriarch  simply  to  trust  in  God.  But  the  imperfect  faith  justifies;  the  grace  of  God 
alone  sanctifies.  The  conduct  of  Abimelech  is  throughout  honourable  and  straight- 
forward. Abraham's  equivocation  is  not  excusable.  It  sprang  from  fear,  and  it 
was  no  sudden  error,  but  a  deliberate  policy  which  betokened  weakness,  to  say 
the  least. 

III.  The  Lord  beings  good  out  op  evil.  Abimelech's  character  is  a  bright  spot 
in  the  terrible  picture  of  evil  and  its  consequences.  By  the  discipline  of  Providence 
the  errors  and  follies  of  men  are  made  the  opportunities  for  learning  God's  purposes 
and  character.  The  contact  of  the  less  enlightened  with  the  more  enlightened, 
though  it  may  humble  both,  gives  room  for  Divine  teaching  and  gracious  bestow- 
ments.  Again  we  are  reminded  "the  prayer  of  a  righteous  man  availeth  much" 
not  because  he  is  himself  righteous,*  but  because  he  is  the  channel  of  blessing  to 
others,  chosen  of  God's  free  grace. — R 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXI. 


Ver.  1.— And  the  Lord — Jehovah;  not 
because  the  verse  is  Jehovistic  (Knobel, 
Bleek,  et  alii),  but  because  the  promise 
naturally  falls  to  be  implemented  by  him 
who  gave  it  {vide  ch.  xviii.  10) — visited— 
remembered  with  love  (Onkelos),  ljn<ricei|/a7-o 
(LXX.  j  cf.  ch.  1.  24  ;  Exod.  iv.  31 ;  1  Sam. 
ii.  21  ;  Isa.  xxiii.  17) ;  though  it  sometimes 
means  to  approach  in  judgment  {vide  Exod. 
xx.  5  ;  xxxii.  34).  Alleged  to  bo  peculiar  to 
the  Jehovist  (the  term  used  by  the  Elohist 
being  "13  J:  ch.  viii.  1 ;  xix.  29 ;  xxx.  20),  the 
word  occurs  in  ch.  1. 24,  which  Tuch  and  Bleek 
ascribe  to  the  Elohist — Sarah  as  he  had  said 
(ch.  xvii.  21;  xviii.  10,  14),— God's  word  of 
promise  being  ever  the  rule  of  his  performance 
(cf.  Exod.  xii.  25  ;  Luke  i.  72)— and  the  Lord 
did  unto  Sarah  as  he  had  spoken — i.  e.  imple- 
mented his  promise  ;  the  proof  of  which  is 
next  given  (cf.  Numb,  xxiii.  19;  Heb.  vi.  18). 

Ver.  2. — For  Sarah  conceived, — through 
faith  receiving  strength  from  God  for  that' 
purpose  (Heb.xi.  11);  the  fruit  of  the  womb, 
in  every  instance  God's  handiwork  (Isa.  xliv. 
2),  being  in  her  case  a  special  gift  of  grace 
and  product  of  Divine  power — and  bare — the 
usual  construction  (ch.  xxix.  32 ;  xxx.  5)  is 
here  somewhat  modified  by  the  Jehovist 
(Kalisch) ;  but  the  clause  may  be  compared 
with  ch.  xxx.  22,  23,  commonly  assigned  to 
the  Elohist — Abraham  (literally,  to  Abra- 
ham) a  son  in  his  old  age, —literally,  to  his 
old  age;  tic  to  yfipag  (LXX. )— at  the  set  time 
{vide  ch.  xvii.  21 ;  xviii.  10,  14)  of  which 
God  had  spoken  to  him.  God's  word  gave 
Abraham  strength  to  beget,  Sarah  to  con- 
ceive, and  Isaac  to  come  forth.  Three  times 
repeated  in  two  verses,  the  clause  points  to 
tha  supernatural  character  of  Isaac's  birth. 

"Ver.  3.— And  Abraham  called  the  name  of 
bis  son — the  naming  of  a  child  by  its  father 
i»,  according  to  partitionists,  a  peculiarity  of 
the  Elohist  as  distinguished  from  the  Jehovist, 


who  assigns  that  function  to  the  mother ;  but 
vide  ch.  xvi.  15 — that  was  born  unto  him, 
whom  Sarah  bare  to  him  (the  latter  clause 
being  added  to  distinguish  him  from  Hagar's 
child),  Isaac  —  laughter;  the  name  ap- 
pointed for  him  by  God  before  his  birth  (ch. 
xvii.  19), 

Ver.  4. — And  Abraham  circumcised  {vide 
on  ch.  xvii.  11,  and  note  at  the  end  cf  that 
chapter)  his  son  Isaac  being  eight  days  old 
(literally,  a  son  of  eight  days),  as  (not  only 
because,  but  in  the  manner  in  whiah)  God 
had  commanded  him. 

Ver.  5. — And  Abraham  was  an  hundred 
years  old  (cf.  ch.  xvii.  1,  17),  when  his  son 
Isaac  was  born  unto  him.  Literally,  at  the 
time  of  bearing  to  him  {iv  rif  tikuv)  Isaac 
{vide  Gesenius,  '  Gram.,'  §  143).  Thus 
Abraham  had  waited  twenty-five  years  for 
the  fulfilment  of  the  promise — a  remarkable 
instance  of  faith  and  patience  (Rom.  iv.  20), 
as  Isaac's  birth  was  a  signal  display  of  Divine 
power  (Rom.  iv.  17 ;  Heb.  xi.  12).  Whether 
Isaac  was  born  at  Gerar  or  at  Beersheba  can- 
not with  certitude  be  inferred. 

Ver.  6. — And  Sarah  said,— the  spiritual 
elevation  of  her  soul  being  indicated  by  the 
poetical  form  of  her  speech.  Differing  from 
Mary'smagnificat  in  having  been utteredafter, 
and  not  before,  the  birth  of  the  promised  seed, 
the  anthem  of  Sarah  was  obviously  designed 
as  a  prelude  to  that  loftier  song  of  the  Vir- 
gin (cf.  Luke  i.  46).  It  cousists  of  two 
sentences,  the  first  containing  two,  and  the 
second  three  lines— God  hath  made  me  t* 
laugh.  Or,  retaining  the  order  of  the  Hebrew, 
To  laugh  hath  made  me  Elohim;  the  em- 
phatic position  of  pnjt,  containing  an  allusion 
to  the  name  Isaac,  probably  indicating  that 
Sarah's  laughter  was  of  a  different  character 
now  from  what  it  had  previously  been  (eh. 
xyiii._  12) ;  and  her  ascription  of  it  to  Elo- 
him intimating  that  him  whom  she  formerly 
mistook  for  a  traveller  she  now  recognised  to 
be  Divine  ('  Speaker's  Commentary ').  So  that 


270 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xxi.  1 — 8. 


•11  that  hear  me  will  laugh  with  me.  Not, 
will  laugh  at  me,  deridebit  me  (Poole),  a 
sense  the  words  will  bear  (Rosenmxiller, 
'  Speaker's  Commentary '),  though  in  the 
instances  adduced  (Job  v.  22  ;  xxxix.  7,  18, 
22)  ?  pny  rather  conveys  the  idea  of  despising 
difficulties  (Kalisch) ;  but,  will  laugh  with  me, 
<"7Xapeir<u  /lot,  congaudebit  mihi  (LXX., 
Vulgate,  Targums,  Calvin,  Dathe,  Keil). 

Vir.  7.— And  she  said,  Who  would  have 
said  unto  Abraham, — ?gD,  the  poetic  word 
for  "Ijipl,  is  introduced  by  'D  in  order  to  ex- 
press astonishment ;  the  meaning  being  that 
what  had  happened  was  altogether  out  of  the 
ordinary  course  of  nature,  was,  in  fact,  God's 
work  alone  (Vatablus,  Calvin,  Rosenmiiller, 
Keil,  Kalisch,  '  Speaker's  Commentary '). 
Less  happy  are  We  ivayyt\ei  Tip  'A/SpaA/i 
(LXX.) ;  quis  auditurum  credent  Abraham 
quod  (Vulgate) ;  quam  fidelis  est  ille  qui 
dixit  Abrahamo  (Onkelos) — that  Sarah 
should  have  given  children  suck  f  Literally, 
Sarah  sucMeth  sons.  ' '  Many  of  the  greatest 
saints  in  Holy  Scripture,  and  even  our  Lord 
himself,  were  nursed  by  their  own  mothers  " 
(Wordsworth).  For  I  have  born  him  a  son 
in  his  old  age.  Literally,  /  have  born,  a 
ton  to  his  old  age.  The  LXX  incorrectly 
render  iv  ri  yi'ipQ  pov. 


Ver.  8. — And  the  child  grew, — nal  i}i>£ij0i) 
ro  iratSiov  (LXX.) :  imitated  by  Luke  con 
cerning  Christ:  rb  iraiBlov  tjiZave  (Luke  ii. 
40) — and  was  weaned.  The  verb  gamal 
originally  signifies  to  do  good  to  any  one,  to 
do  completely ;  hence  to  finish,  or  make  com- 
pletely ready,  as  an  infant ;  hence  to  wean, 
since  either  at  that  time  the  period  of  infancy 
is  regarded  as  complete,  or  the  child's  inde- 
pendent existence  is  then  fully  reached.  The 
time  of  weaning  is  commonly  believed  to 
have  been  at  the  end  of  the  second  or  third 
year  (cf.  1  Sam.  i.  22—24  j  2  Chron,  xxxi. 
16  ;  2  Mace  vii.  27 ;  Josephus,  '  Ant.,'  ii.  9, 
6).  And  Abraham  made  a  great  feast  th« 
same  day  that  Isaac  was  weaned.  Literally, 
in  the  day  of  the  weaning  of  Isaac  ;  pro- 
bably, therefore,  when  Isaac  was  three  years 
old  and  Ishmael  seventeen.  "It  is  still 
customary  in  the  East  to  have  a  festive 
gathering  at  the  time  a  child  is^  weaned. 
Among  the  Hindoos,  when  the  tine  for 
weaning  has  come,  the  event  is  accompanied 
with  feasting  and  religious  ceremonies,  during 
which  rice  is  formally  presented  to  the  child 
('Bible  Manners  and  Customs,'  by  Rev.  J. 
A.  Freeman,  M.A.,  'Homiletical  Quarterly,' 
voL  i.  p.  78 ;  cf.  Roberts'  '  Oriental  Illustra- 
tions,'  p.  24). 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 8. — The  son  of  promise,  or  a  young  child's  biography.  I.  The  birth 
of  Isaac.  1.  A  surprising  phenomenon.  "Who  would  have  said  that  Sarah 
should  have  suckled  sons  ?  "  Motherhood  at  ninety  was  certainly  unusual,  especially 
when  conjoined  with  paternity  at  a  hundred.  In  a  world  presided  over  by  a  per- 
sonal Deity  there  must  always  be  room  for  sur-prises.  2.  A  miraculous  production. 
That  the  conception  and  birth  of  Isaac  were  due  to  Divine  interposition — that,  in 
fact,  the  child  of  promise  was  a  special  supernatural  creation — is  asserted  by  Paul 
as  well  as  Moses  (Rom.  iv.  17).  3.  An  accomplished  prediction.  Not  only  the  fact 
of  Isaac's  birth,  but  the  exact  time  was  specified  beforehand.  And  now  the  long- 
looked-for  child  had  arrived.  A  signal  proof  of  the  Divine  veracity,  it  was  another 
pledge  to  God's  people  in  every  age  of  the  Divine  fidelity  in  implementing  his 
gracious  word  of  promise.  4.  A  joyous  inspiration.  Isaac's  birth  not  simply  woke 
laughing  echoes  in  Sarah's  tent,  but  opened  founts  of  song  in  Sarah's  breast ;  which 
was  not  wonderful,  considering  that  the  tender  infant  over  which  she  exulted  was 
the  child  of  her  own  and  Abraham's  old  age,  the  child  of  promise,  the  fruit  of  faith 
and  the  gift  of  grace,  and  the  Heaven-appointed  heir  of  the  covenant  blessing.  5. 
A  prophetic  intimation.  Sarah's  anthem  contained  a  higher  note  of  melody  than 
that  occasioned  by  a  mother's  joy  ;  there  was  in  it  too  the  gladness  of  a  faith  that  saw 
in  Isaac  the  harbinger  and  pledge  of  another  and  greater  Seed.  Like  the  birth  of 
Isaac,  that  of  Christ  was  fore-announced  by  God,  waited  for  in  faith,  .accomplished 
through  Divine  power,  and  welcomed  with  bursts  of  joy. 

II.  The  circumcision  of  Isaac.  1.  The  import  of  the  rite  (see  on  ch.  xvii.  10). 
It  implied  the  formal  reception  of  the  party  upon  whom  it  was  imposed  within  the 
pale  of  the  Old  Testament  Church  ;  it  signified  the  putting  away  of  the  filth  of  the 
flesh  ;  it  took  the  subject  of  it  bound  to  a  holy  life.  Of  a  like  import  is  the  Christian 
sacrament  of  baptism,  which,  however,  differs  from  the  Hebrew  rite  in  looking  back 
upon  a  Christ  already  manifested,  instead  of  forward  to  a  Christ  that  was  atill  to 


oh.  xxi.  1—8.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  871 


come.  2.  The  authority  for  the  rite.  This  was  exclusively  the  Divine  command- 
ment—  the  sole  reason  that  can  be  assigned  for  the  observance  of  the  Christian 
sacraments,  which  in  themselves  are  o'nly  symbols  of  spiritual  transactions,  and  have 
no  validity  apart  from  the  appointment  of  Christ.  3.  The  index  to  the  rite.  This 
was  contained  in  the  name  generally  given  on  the  occasion  of  its  observance :  cf . 
Abraham  (ch.  xvii.  5),  John  the  Baptist  (Luke  i.  60),  Jesus  (Luke  ii.  21).  With  this 
ancient  custom  must  be  connected  the  Christian  practice  of  naming  children  at 
baptism. 

III.  The  weaning  of  Isaac.  1.  A  mother's  duty  fulfilled.  The  first  duty  of  a 
mother  is  to  her  babe,  and  to  withhold  the  sustenance  God  has  provided  for  her 
babe's  necessities  is  both  to  violate  Divine  law  and  to  perpetrate  a  fraud  upon  her 
helpless  offspring.  Sarah,  though  a  princess,  was  not  above  discharging  the  duties 
of  a  nurse — an  example  which  Sarah's  daughters  should  diligently  follow.  2.  A 
child's  independence  begun.  From  the  moment  of  weaning  a  child  may  be  said  to 
enter  on  a  separate  and  as  it  were  independent  existence,  attaining  then  for  the  first 
time  to  a  distinct  individuality  of  being.  3.  A  father  s  joy  expressed.  The  interest- 
ing event  was  celebrated  by  a  festal  entertainment,  at  which,  if  not  Shem,  Mel- 
chisedek,  and  Selah,  according  to  the  Rabbis,  the  inmates  of  Abraham's  household  - 
were  doubtless  present.  "God's  blessing  upon  the  nursing  of  children,  and  his  pre- 
servation of  them  during  the  perils  of  infant  age,  are  signal  instances  of  the  care  and 
tenderness  of  Divine  providence,  which  ought  to  be  acknowledged  to  its  praise  " 
(Henry). 

Lessons: — 1.  The  right  of  parents  to  rejoice  in  their  children.  2.  The  duty  of 
parents  to  introduce  their  children  to  the  Church  of  God.  3.  The  propriety  of 
parents  recognising  the  separate  individualities  of  children. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 8. — Birth,  circumcision,  and  weaning  of  Isaac.    Here  is — 

I.  The  faithfulness  of  Jehovah.  "As  he  had  spoken."  "At  the  set  time." 
"  God  hath  made  me  to  laugh." 

II.  The  faith  of  his  servant,  which  was  evidenced  in  waiting,  hoping,  naming 
the  son  born  unto  him,  obeying  the  commandment. 

III.  The  gift  of  God  was  thb  revelation  of  God:  his  love,  his  power,  his 
purpose,  his  patience. 

IV.  Taken  typically,  the  foreshadowing  of  the  miraculous  conception,  the  kingdom 
of  God,  as  originating  in  the  sphere  of  human  infirmity  and  helplessness  :  as  being 
the  introduction  of  bright  hope  and  cheerful  promise  into  the  gloomy  barrenness  of 
human  life ;  as  the  lifting  up  of  man's  state  into  the  covenant  of  God,  sealed  with 
his  appointed  ordinance,  surrounded  with  the  promised  blessings.  Isaac  was  the 
type  of  Christ,  Sarah  of  Mary,  Abraham  of  the  people  and  Church  of  God 

V.  Sarah's  song,  the  first  cradle  hymn  of  a  mother's  thankful  joy,  representing 
the  Divine  delight  in  the  pure  and  simple  happiness  of  those  who  are  children  of 
God.     Abraham  rejoiced  to  see  the  brightness  of  the  future  (John  viii.  56). 

VI.  The  weaning  feast.  All  called  in  to  share  in  the  joy.  Household  joy  should 
be  widespread.  We  may  suppose  that  such  a  banquet  was  religious  in  its  character. 
If  so,  not  only  is  it  a  sanction  of  religious  festivals,  but  it  reminds  us  that  we  should 
connect  the  events  of  the  family  life  immediately  with  the  word  and  ordinances  of 
God. — R. 

Vers.  8— 21.— The  separation  of  the  bondwoman's  son  from  the  promised  seed.  It 
was  necessary  that  this  should  take  place  for  the  accomplishment  of  the  Divine  plan, 
tinman  conduct  is  employed,  as  in  so  many  other  cases,  as  the  instrument  or  occasion 
There  was  mockery  or  unbelief  In  Ishmael.  It  was  not  personal  merely  but  a 
mockery  of  Jehovah  and  of  his  Church.  Sarah  saw  it.  The  mother's  keen  affectiona 
were  sharpened  to  detect  the  scorn  of  her  joy.  Abraham  and  Sarah  were  both 
•everely  tried.  Their  lack  of  faith  must  yield  fruit  of  sorrow.  The  separation  was 
pain  to  the  father,  but  it  was  part  of  the  gracious  work  of  God  for  Isaac     Abraham 


179 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xxi.  9 — 14. 


was  being  prepared  by  such  discipline  for  bis  great  climax  of  trial.  There  is  beau- 
tiful tenderness  and  simplicity  in  Abraham's  conduct  (ver.  14).  It  is — 1.  Entire 
obedience.  2.  Kind  and  gentle  consideration' for  Sarah  and  Hagar.  3.  Strong  faith  : 
he  committed  her  to  God  according  to  his  word.  4.  The  master  and  the  servant  at 
the  door  of  the  house  in  the  early  morning ;  the  master  himself  placing  the  bottle 
of  water  on  the  bondwoman's  shoulder  as  a  sign  of  continued  affinity.  God  com- 
mands separations.  In  obedience  to  him  they  may  involve  severe  struggle  with 
self.  Should  still  be  carried  out  with  as  little  wounding  of  human  affections  as 
possible. — R 


EXPOSITION. 


Ver.  9. — And  Sarah  saw — at  the  feast 
"already  mentioned  (Knobel,  Keil) ;  probably 
also  on  different  occasions  since  the  birth  of 
Isaac—  the  son  of  Hagar  the  Egyptian, 
which  she  had  born  nnto  Abraham,  mock- 
ing. UaiZovTa  ptrd  liyaaic  tov  viov  avrijc 
(LXX.),  ludentem  cum  Isaaco  filio  suo 
(Vulgate),  playing  like  a  child  (Aben  Ezra, 
Knobel,  Tuch,  Ilgen),  playing  and  dancing 
gracefully  (Gesenius) ;  but  the  stronger  sense 
of  the  word,  implying  mockery,  scoffing, 
irritating  and  deriding  laughter  (Kimchi, 
Vatablus,  Grotius,  Calvin,  Rosenmiiller,  Keil, 
Kali9ch,  '  Speaker's  Commentary,'  Murphy), 
besides  being  admissible  (cf.  ch.  xix.  14 ; 
xxvi.  8 ;  xxxix.  14,  17 ;  Exod.  xxxii.  6), 
seems  involved  in  the  Piel  form  of  the  parti- 
ciple pnVD  (Kurtz),  and  is  demanded  by  Gal. 
iv.  29.  That  Ishmael  ridiculed  the  banquet 
on  the  occasion  of  Isaac's  weaning  (Mal- 
venda),  quarrelled  with  him  about  the  heir- 
ship (Fagius,  Piscator),  and  perhaps  made 
sport  of  him  as  a  father  of  nations  (Heng- 
stenberg),  though  plausible  conjectures,  are 
not  stated  in  the  text.  Ainsworth  dates 
from  this  event  the  400  years  of  Israel's 
oppression  (vide  ch.  xv.  13). 

Ver.  10. — Wherefore  she  said  —  though 
with  an  admixture  of  sinful  feelings,  non 
dubito  arcano  Spiritus  instinctu  gubernatam 
fuisse  ejus  linguam  et  mentem  (Calvin) ;  vide 
Gal.  iv.  30 — unto  Abraham,  Cast  out— by  some 
kind  of  legal  act  (as  divorce  :  cf.  Levit.  xxi. 
7,  14  ;  xxii.  13 ;  Isa.  lvii.  20),  which  should 
insure  the  disinheriting  of  Ishmael  (Bush) ; 
though  probably  this  is  to  import  later  Mosaic 
legislation  into  the  records  of  primitive  times 
—  this  bondwoman  — »  term  ill  befitting 
Sarah,  who  had  given  Hagar  to  her  husband 
as  a  wife  (ch.  xvi.  3) — and  her  son  (who  was 
Abraham's  offspring,  though  not  the  promised 
seed ;  a  consideration  which  should  have 
mitigated  Sarah's  anger) :  for  the  son  of  this 
bondwoman  (a  repetition  evincing  the  bitter- 
ness of  her  contempt  and  the  intensity  of  her 
choler)  shall  not  be  heir  with  my  son,  even 
with  Isaac.  Notwithstanding  the  assurance 
(ch.  xvii.  21)  that  the  covenant  was  made 
with  Isaac,  Sarah  was  apprehensive  lest 
Ishmael  should  contrive  to  disinherit  him ; 
an  act  of  unbelief  into  which  ihe  was  mani- 


festly betrayed  by  her  maternal  fears  and 
womanly  jealousy. 

Ver.  11. — And  the  thing  (literally,  (he 
word,  i.  e.  Sarah's  proposal)  was  very 
grievous  (literally,  evil  exceedingly ;  for  the 
contrary  phrase  vide  ch.  xx.  15)  in  Abra- 
ham's sight  (literally,  in  the  eyes  of  Abra- 
ham) because  of  his  son  —  who,  besides 
being  bound  to  him  by  the  ties  of  natural 
affection,  had  for  years  been  regarded  as  the 
Heaven-appointed  heir  of  the  promise  (vide 
ch.  xvii.  18). 

Ver.  12. — And  God  said  unto  Abraham, — 
probably  in  a  dream,  or  night  vision  (vide 
ver.  14) — Let  it  not  be  grievous  in  thy  sight 
because  of  the  lad,  and  because  of  thy  bond- 
woman J — who  was  never  recognised  by  God 
as  Abraham's  wife  (cf.  ch.  xvi.  8)— in  all  that 
Sarah  hath  said  unto  thee,  hearken  onto 
her  voice.  Though  Sarah's  counsel  was  ap- 
proved by  God,  it  does  not  follow  that  her 
conduct  was.  On  a  former  occasion  Abra- 
ham's hearkening  unto  Sarah's  voice  had  led 
to  sin  (ch.  xvi.  2) ;  this  time  it  would  lie 
exactly  in  the  line  of  duty.  For  in  Isaac 
shall  thy  seed  be  called.  Literally,  in  Isaac 
shall  seed  (i.  e.  posterity)  be  called  to  thee; 
meaning  neither,  "  by  Isaac  shall  thy  seed 
be  called,  or  named "  (Hofmann,  Kalisch, 
Ainsworth),  nor,  "  in  Isaac  shall  thy  seed  be 
called  into  existence  "  (Dreschler) ;  but,  "in 
Isaac  shall  there  be  posterity  to  thee  which 
shall  pass  as  such,"  i.  e.  be  called  or  recog- 
nised as  such  (Keil) ;  or,-more  simply,  "  in 
Isaac,"  i.  e.  in  the  line  of  Isaac,  "  shall  be 
called  to  thee  a  seed,"  i.  e.  a  seed  par  ex- 
cellence, the  seed  already  promised  (Bleek, 
Delitzsch,  Rosenmiiller,  Alford,  Murphy). 

Ver.  13.  — And  also  of  the  son  of  the  bond- 
woman will  I  make  a  nation.  Literally,  to  a 
nation  I  will  set  or  put  him;  a  promisi 
already  given  (ch.  xvii.  20),  but  here  repeated 
to  render  Ishmael' s  dismissal  easier.  Because 
he  is  thy  seed.  "  Thy  son  according  to  the 
flesh,  though  not  after  the  promise,  as  Isaac 
was"  (Ainsworth);  a  proof  that  men  may 
sometimes  receive  mercies  for  their  fathers' 
sakes. 

Ver.  14. — And  Abraham  rose  up  early  in 
the  morning, — hastening  to  put  in  force  the 
Divine  instructions  (cf.  ch.  xix.  27 ;  xxii  », 


oh.  xxi.  9—14.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


273 


Abraham  ;  ch.  xx.  8,  Abimolech ;  ch.  xxviii. 
18,  Jacob) — and  took  bread,  and  a  bottle  of 
water,— the  bottle,  from  a  root  signifying  to 
enclose  (Fiirst)  j  iaieov  (LXX.),  was  com- 
posed of  skin,  the  material  of  which  the 
earliest  carrying  vessels  were  constructed  (of. 
Josh.  ix.  4,  13  ;  Judges  iv.  19 ;  1  Sam.  xvi. 
20;  Matt.  ix.  17).  "The  monuments  of 
Egypt,  the  sculptures  of  Mesopotamia,  and 
the  relics  of  Heruulaneum  and  Pompeii  afford 
ample  opportunities  to  learn  the  shape  and 
use  of  every  variety  of  bottles,  often  surpris- 
ing us  both  by  their  elegance  and  costliness  " 
(Kalisch) — and  gave  it  unto  Hagar,  putting 
it  on  her  shoulder,  —  the  usual  place  for 
carrying  such  vessels  among  Oriental  women. 
According  to  Herodotus  (ii.  35),  Egyptian 
women  carried  burdens  on  their  shoulders, 
Egyptian  men  upon  their  heads — and  the 
child, — not  placing  the  child,  now  a  youth 


of  over  seventeen  years,  upon  her  shouldei 
(LXX,  Schumann,  Bohlen);  but  giving  him, 
along  with  the  bottle  (Havernick,  Kalisoh, 
A  Lapide,  Ainsworth),  or,  as  well  as  the  bread 
(Keil,  Murphy),  to  Hagar,  not  to  be  carried 
as  a  burden,  but  led  as  a  companion — and 
sent  her  away : — divorced  her  by  the  com- 
mand of  God  (A  Lapide) ;  but  as  Hagar  wm 
never  recognised  by  God  as  Abraham's  wife, 
her  sending  away  was  not  a  case  .of  divorce 
(Wordsworth)— and  she  departed  (from  Beer- 
sheba,  whither  Abraham  had  by  this  time 
removed,  and  where,  in  all  probability,  Isaac 
had  been  born),  and  wandered— i.  e.  lost  her 
way  (cf.  ch.  xxxvii.  15")— in  the  wilderness 
(the  uncultivated  waste  between  Palestine 
and  Egypt)  of  Beer-sheba — introduced  hero 
by  anticipation,  unless  the  incident  in  vers. 
22 — 33  had  previously  taken  place  (vide  on 
ver.  81). 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  9—14. — The  expulsion  of  Iskmael.  I.  The  cause.  1.  The  persecution  of 
Isaac-  "  Sarah  saw  the  son  of  Hagar  the  Egyptian  mocking."  That  this  was  no 
mere  sportive  pleasantry  may  be  inferred  from  the  deep  feeling  it  aroused  in  Sarah, 
the  summary  chastisement  it  brought  on  Ishmael,  and  the  severe  language  in  which 
it  is  characterised  by  Paul.  The  emphasis  laid  by  Sarah  on  the  heirship  suggests 
the  probability  that  Ishmael' s  offence  partook  of  the  nature  of  wicked,  irritating 
laughter  at  the  position  and  prospects  of  Sarah's  son,  springing  partly  from  envy  and 
partly  from  unbelief.  2.  The  apprehensions  of  Sarah.  That  Sarah  was  actuated 
by  personal  dislike  of  Hagar's  boy,  or  inspired  solely  by  maternal  jealousy,  is  a 
gratuitous  assumption.  It  is  more  satisfactory  to  ascribe  her  seemingly  harsh  coun- 
sel to  the  clearness  with  which  she  recognised  that  Isaac  alone  was  the  Heaven- 
appointed  heir,  and  that  nothing  must  be  allowed  to  either  damage  his  position  or 
endanger  his  prospects,  3.  The  commandment  of  God.  Considering  the  patriarch's 
former  experience  of  "  hearkening  to  Sarah,"  his  acquiescence  in  her  counsel  on  this 
occasion  would  in  all  probability  have  been  problematical,  had  not  God  interposed  to 
recommend  its  adoption.  It  would  both  secure  the  happiness  of  Isaac  and  remove 
temptation  from  the  path  of  Ishmael ;  while  it  would  serve  to  educate  the  patriarch 
himself  for  the  coming  sacrifice  on  Mount  Moriah.  To  facilitate  the  patriarch's  com- 
pliance with  the  Divine  injunction,  the  promise  of  future  greatness  to  Ishmael  is 
renewed,  and  in  the  end  Hagar  and  her  boy  are  dismissed. 

II.  The  manner.  1.  With  pain  to  himself.  "  The  thing  was  very  grievous  in 
Abraham's  sight  because  of  his  son."  Parental  affection  must  have  urged  him  to 
retain  his  first-born  son.  Conjugal  love  must  have  interceded  for  her  who  had  been 
to  him  as  a  wife.  Self-interest  may  have  represented  the  advisability  of  still  cling 
ing  to  Ishmael  for  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise,  in  case  the  line  of  Isaac  should  fail. 
Yet  grace  and  faith  triumphed.  "All  things  are  possible  to  him  that  believeth." 
2.  With  tenderness  towards  the  outcasts.  Making  provision  for  their  immediate 
necessities,  and  either  then  or  afterwards  adding  gifts  (ch.  xxv.  6),  he  sends  them 
away,  doubtless  with  many  prayers  and  tears.  Nature  and  grace  both  enjoin  tender- 
ness in  dealing  with  those  whom  God  in  his  providence  calls  to  suffer.  3.  With 
submission  to  the  will  of  God.  The  moment  the  mind  of  God  was  ascertained 
internal  controversy  ceased  and  determined.  The  patriarch  was  never  irresolute  in 
following  when  God  led.     Obedience  is  the  first  duty  of  faith. 

III.  The  typical  significance.  1.  Ishmael  and  Isaac  representatives  of  Abra- 
ham's natural  descendants  and  Abraham's  spiritual  posterity;  Israel  after  the  flesh 
and  Israel  after  the  spirit ;  souls  in  legal  bondage  and  souls  enjoying-  spiritual  free- 
dom.     2.  IshmaeTs  mockery  of  Isaac  foreshadowed  the  Derseouting  spirit  of  the 


274 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xxi.  15 — 21 


unbelieving  Jews,  who  adhered  to  the  system  of  Moses,  towards  the  disciples  of  the 
New  Testament  faith,  who  sought  salvation  through  Christ ;  hence  also  the  antago- 
nism of  the  sinful  principle  in  man  to  the  renewed  life  of  grace.  3.  Ishmael's  separa- 
tion from  Isaac  prefigured  the  ultimate  removal  of  unbelievers  from  believers,  of 
the  world  from  the  Church,  of  those  in  a  state  of  nature  or  of  legal  bondage  from 
those  who  are  children  of  the  promise  and  of  the  heavenly  Jerusalem. 

Learn — 1.  The  wickedness  and  danger  of  mocking  at  sacred  persons  8nd  things. 
2.  The  superior  spiritual  insight  not  unfrequently  exhibited  by  woman.  3.  The 
necessity  of  trying  all  human  opinions  by  God's  revealed  will.  4.  The  care  God 
takes  to  guide  sincere  souls  as  to  the  path  of  duty.  5.  The  proper  function  of  faith, 
which  is  to  hear  and  obey.  6.  The  impossibility  of  any  compromise  existing  I  eiween 
the  world  and  the  Church.  7.  The  final  casting  out  of  the  wicked  from  the  con- 
gregation of  the  righteous. 


EXPOSITION. 


Ver.  15. — And  the  water  was  spent  in 
(literally,  from)  the  bottle,  —  so  that  the 
wanderers  became  exhausted,  and  were  in 
danger  of  fainting  through  thirst — and  she 
cast  the  child — a  translation  which  certainly 
conveys  an  erroneous  impression,  first  of 
Ishmael,  who  was  not  an  infant,  but  a  grown 
lad  {vide  supra,  ver.  14),  and  secondly  of 
Ishmael's  mother,  whom  it  represents  as 
acting  with  violence,  if  not  with  inhumanity ; 
whereas  the  sense  probably  is  that,  having, 
as  long  as  her  rapidly  diminishing  strength 
permitted,  supported  her  fainting  son,  she 
at  length  suddenly,  through  feebleness,  re- 
leased his  nerveless  hand  as  he  fell,  and  in 
despair,  finding  herself  unable  to  give  him 
further  assistance,  left  him,  as  she  believed, 
to  die  where  he  had  flung  himself  in  his 
intolerable  anguish — under  one  of  the  shrubs. 

Ver.  16. — And  she  went,  and  sat  her 
down — HJ  SE'Rl,  the  pronoun  being  added 
to  the  verb,  as  an  ethical  dative,  to  indicate 
that  the  action  was  of  special  importance  to 
her,  meaning,  "she,  for  herself,  or  for  her 
part,  sat  down  "  (vide  Ewald's  '  Heb.  Synt. ,' 
§315,  a.;  and  Glass,  'PhiL  Tract,'  1.  iii.  tr. 
ii.  c.  6  ;  and  cf.  Gen.  xii  1 ;  xxii.  5) — over 
against  him  a  good  way  oft  The  hiph.  inf. 
of  prn,  to  go  far  away,  to  recede  from  any 
one,  is  here  used  adverbially,  as  in  Josh.  iii. 
16  (Gesenius,  Fiirst,  Kalisch),  though  by 
others  it  is  understood  as  explaining  the 
action  of  the  previous  verbs,  and  as  equiva- 
lent to  a  gerund  in  do,  or  a  participle,  elon- 
gando  se  (Rosenmiiller),  or  simply  "removing 
to  a  distance"  (Ewald  ;  vide  'Heb.  Synt.,'  § 
280  a. ).  As  it  were  a  bowshot  Literally, 
as  those  who  draw  the  bow,  i.  e.  as  far  off 
as  archers  are  accustomed  to  place  the  target 
(Keil).  The  sense  is  correctly  given  by  the 
LXX. :  iiaKpoBtv,  iiatt  rojou  /3o\ijv.  For  she 
said,  Let  me  not  see — i.  e.  look  upon  with 
anguish  (cf.  Num.  xL  15) — the  death  of  the 
child — roii  iraiSiov  fiov  (LXX.).  And  she 
Mt  over  against  him,  and  lift  up  her  voice, 


and  wept  The  verbs,  being  feminine,  indi- 
cate that  it  is  Hagar's  grief  which  is  here 
described,  and  that  the  rendering,  "  and  the 
child  lifted  up  his  voice  and  wept "  (LXX. ), 
is  incorrect ;  although  the  next  verse  may 
suggest  that  Ishmael,  like  his  mother,  was 
also  dissolved  in  tears. 

Ver.  17. — And  God — Elohim  ;  Hagar  and 
Ishmael  having  now  been  removed  from  the 
care  and  superintendence  of  the  covenant 
God  to  the  guidance  and  providence  of  God 
the  ruler  of  all  nations  (Keil) — heard  the 
voice  of  the  lad; — praying  (Inglis),  or 
weeping,  ut  supra — and  the  angel  of  God — 
Maleaeh  Elohim;  not  Maleach  Jehovah,  as 
in  ch.  xvi.  7 — 13,  for  the  reason  above  specified 
(Hengstenberg,  Quarry) — called  to  Hagar  out 
of  heaven, — it  may  be  inferred  there  was  no 
external  appearance  or  theophaneia,  such  as 
was  vouchsafed  to  her  when  wandering  in  the 
wilderness  of  Shur  (ch.  xvi  7) — and  said  unto 
her,  What  aileth  thee  (literally,  What  to 
thee  ?)  Hagar  ?  fear  not ; — so  the  word  of  Je- 
hovah addressed  Abram  (ch.  xv.  1),  Isaac  (ch. 
xxvi.  4),  Daniel  (Dan.  x  12),  and  John  (Rev. 
i.  17) — for  God  hath  heard  the  voice  of  the 
lad— i.  e.  the  voice  (perhaps  the  mute  cry)  of 
the  lad's  misery,  and  in  that  also  the  audible 
sob  of  Hagar's  weeping.  It  is  not  said  that 
either  Ishmael  or  his  mother  prayed  to  God 
in  their  distress.  Hence  the  Divine  inter- 
position on  their  behalf  rum  quid  a  se 
peterent,  sed  quid  servo  suo  Abrahae  de 
IsmUele  pollicitus  foret,  respexii  (Calvin) — 
where  he  is — an  ellipsis  for  from,  or  in,  the 
place  where  he  is ;  U  rou  roirov  oil  lanv 
(LXX.) ;  ex  loco  ubi  est  (Calvin) ;  meaning 
either  "in  his  helpless  condition"  (Keil), 
or  out  in  the  desolate  wilderness,  as  contrasted 
with  the  house  of  Abraham  (Calvin). 

Ver.  18. — Arise,  lift  up  the  lad,  and  hold 
him  in  thine  hand.  Literally,  bind  fast  th% 
hand  to  him,  i.  e.  give  him  thy  support  now, 
and  take  care  of  him  till  he  reaches  man 
hood.     Cf.  God's  promise  to  Israel  (Isa.  sin. 


oh.  ni.  15—21.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


27« 


«).  For  I  will  make  Mm  (literally,  to)  a 
great  nation  (vide  ver.  13  ;  and  cf.  ch.  xvi 
10  ;  xvii.  20). 

Ver.  19. — And  God  opened  her  eyes.  Not 
necessarily  by  miraculous  operation ;  perhaps 
simply  by  providentially  guiding  her  search 
for  water,  after  the  administered  consolation 
had  revived  her  spirit  and  roused  her  ener- 
gies. And  she  saw  a  well  of  water.  DV? 
183,  as  distinguished  from  "113,  a  pit  or 
cistern,  meant  a  fountain  or  spring  of  living 
water  (cf.  ch.  xxiv.  11,  20 ;  xxvi.  19,  20,  21). 
It  had  not-  been  previously  observed  by 
Hagar,  either  because  of  her  mental  agitation 
(dolwe  quasi  cceca,  Eosenmiiller),  or  because, 
as  was  customary,  the  mouth  of  the  well  was 
covered — and  she  went,  and  filled  the  bcttle 
with  water,  and  gave  the  lad  drink — which 
was  certainly  the  first  of  the  youth's  neces- 
sities, being  needful  to  the  preservation  of 
his  life  and  the  reviving  of  his  spirits. 

Vers.  20,  21. — And  God  was  with  the  lad. 
Not  simply  in  the  ordinary  sense  in  which 
he  is  with  all  men  (Ps.  exxxix.  3 — 9  ;  Acts 
xvii.  27,  28) ;  not,  certainly,  in  the  spiritual 
sense  in  which  he  had  promised  to  be  with 
Isaac  (ch.  xvii.  21),  and  in  which  he  is  with 
believers  (ch.  xxvi.  24  ;  Isa.  xli.  10  ;  Matt. 
xxviii.  20) ;  but  in  the  particular  sense  of 
oxercising  towards  him  a  special  providence, 
with  a  view  to  implementing  the  promise 


made  concerning  him  to  Abraham  and  Hagar 
And  he  grew  (literally,  became  great,  l.  e. 
progressed  towards  manhood),  and  dwelt  in 
the  wilderness  (i.  e.  led  a  roving  and  un- 
settled life),  and  became  an  archer.  Liter- 
ally, and  he  was  n^jj  HT1  ;  i.  e.  deriving 
rDh  from  rD^,  to  grow  great  or  multiply, 
either  (1)  when  he  grew  up,  an  archer,  or 
man  using  the  bow  (Gesenius,  Keil) ;  (2) 
growing  an  archer,  or  acquiring  skill  as  a 
bowman  (Kalisch,  Wordsworth) ;  or  (3)  grow- 
ing, or  multiplying  into,  a  tribe  of  archers 
(Murphy).  With  the  first  of  these  sub- 
stantially agree  the  renderings  tcai  lykviro 
Tolortie  (LXX.),  and  foetus  est  juvenis 
sayittarius  (Vulgate).  Others,  connecting 
itin  with  33"l,  in  the  sense  of  to  cast  arrows 
(cf.  ch.  xlix.  23),  read,  (1)  "and  he  was  a 
shooter  of  arrows  from  the  bow"  (Jarchi, 
Kimchi,  Rosenmuller),  though  in  this  case 
JIB^  would  have  to  be  read  for  n^j?  (Fiirst) ; 
(2)  a  marksman,  archer,  i.  e.  a  marksman 
skilled  in  using  the  bow  (Ewald,  vide  '  Heb. 
Synt.,'  §  287).  Baumgarten  translates,  a  hero 
(or  great  one),  an  archer.  And  he  dwelt  in 
the  wilderness  of  Faran  : — the  desert  of  El- 
Tih,  on  the  south  of  Canaan  (cf.  ch.  xiv.  6) — 
and  his  mother  took  him  a  wife  out  of  the 
land  of  Egypt  (cf.  ch.  xxiv.  4,  55  ;  Exod. 
xxi.  10). 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  15 — 21. — Hagar  and  Ishmael,  or  the  fortunes  of  the  outcasts.  I.  Tttb 
L  >nely  wanderers.  1.  Banished  f rom,  home.  Hitherto  the  household  of  Abraham 
had  been  to  Hagar  and  her  boy  such  a  pleasant  and  doubtless  much-prized  abode ; 
henceforth  their  connection  with  the  patriarch's  encampment  was  to  be  completely 
severed.  So  Ood  in  his  mysterious  providence  and  in  many  different  way  s  frequently 
bereaves  men  of  the  shelter  and  society  of  home.  2.  Separated  from  the  Church. 
Practically  the  expulsion  of  this  Egyptian  slave-mother  and  her  son  from  the  house- 
hold of  Abraham,  if  it  did  not  involve  a  casting  off  from  God's  mercy,  amounted  to 
extrusion  from  the  patriarchal  Church.  3.  Lost  in  the  wilderness.  Whether  because 
the  region  through  which  they  travelled  was  unfamiliar,  or  because,  impelle  !  by 
indignation  and  excitement,  they  simply  drifted  on  with  aimless  feet,  the  narrative 
depicts  the  unhappy  pair  as  having  "wandered,"  turned  aside  into  unfrequented 
paths,  and  become  lost;  in  that  touchingly  portraying  the  sad  condition  of  thou- 
sands of  homeless  and  churchless  wanderers  to-day,  roaming  purposeless  and  perplexed 
across  the  trackless  waste  of  life. 

II.  The  fainting  youth.  1.  Perishing  thrmigh  thirst.  Extreme  thirst  one  of 
the  most  excruciating  torments  to  which  the  physical  frame  can  be  subjected,  and  a 
fellow-creature  dying  for  lack  of  water,  one  of  the  commonest  of  God's  mercies  aa 
sad  a  spectacle  as  any  on  which  the  eye  of  man  can  gaze.  2.  Sobbing  in  anguish. 
Too  exhausted  to  weep  aloud,  the  poor  disheartened  lad  moans  out  his  misery. 
Happy  they  who,  if  they  cannot  relieve,  can  at  least  understand  and  be  affected  by 
their  necessities.  To  recognise  and  make  complaint  of  one's  spiritual  destitution  is 
better  than  to  be  callous  and  indifferent  to  one's  dying  condition.  3.  Prayvn.fi  to 
God.  Though  not  certain  that  the  "  voice  "  of  the  lad  meant  more  than  the  rude"ory 
of  his  distress,  chanty  may  hope  that  in  the  day  of  his  calamity  1  e  directed  hi* 
prayw  to  God.     Prayer  gene?  ally  precedes  deliverance. 

T  2 


tn  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  [oh.  xxi.  15—21. 

III.  The  weeping  mother.  1.  The  voice  of  heathen  superstition.  "  Let  me  not 
see  the  death  of  the  lad."  To  a  Christian  mother  Hagar  s  behaviour  is  simply  in- 
explicable.  It  is  doubtful  if  Sarah  would  have  been  a  bow-shot  removed  from  Isaac 
had  he  been  expiring.  But  then  Hagar,  though  she  had  been  Abraham's  wife,  was 
still  a  poor  untutored  slave-girl.  It  may  assist  us  to  understand  our  indebtedness  to 
the  humanising  influences  of  Christ's  religion.  2.  The  cry  of  maternal  affection. 
"  She  sat  over  against  her  boy,  and  lifted  up  her  voice  and  wept."  Even  in  the 
breast  of  this  Egyptian  bondmaid  nature  asserted  her  supremacy.  Everywhere 
beautiful  and  sacred  is  a  mother's  love,  worthy  of  being  cherished  and  reciprocated 
by  those  who  know  its  sweetness  and  strength,  never  failing  to  bring  down  retribu- 
tion on  those  by  whom  it  is  rejected  and  despised. 

IV.  The  comforting  God.  1.  /Sympathising  with  the  sorrowful-  "What  aileth 
thee,  Hagar?"  What  a  glimpse  into  the  infinite  pitifulness  of  the  Divine  nature  1 
Only  when  Christ  came  was  it  surpassed  in  clearness  and  fulness.  2.  Listening  to 
the  suppliant.  As  the  prayer  of  Ishmael  came  up  into  the  wakeful  ear  of  God,  so 
the  cries  of  dying  men  and  perishing  souls  never  fail  to  do.  3.  Consoling  the 
dejected.  As  to  Hagar  the  angel  spoke  words  of  encouragement,  and  renewed  the 
formerly-given  assurance  concerning  the  future  greatness  of  her  son,  so  God  revives 
the  drooping  spirits  of  his  people  by  directing  them  to  his  exceeding  great  and  pre- 
cious promises.  4.  Providing  for  the  destitute.  "  God  opened  her  eyes,  and  she 
saw  a  well  of  water."  And  so  by  the  leadings  of  his  providence,  the  teachings  of 
his  word,  and  the  illumination  of  his  Spirit  does  God  guide  tlie  meek  to  the  wells  of 
salvation.  5.  Abiding  with  the  homeless.  "God  was  with  the  lad."  Ejected  from 
Abraham's  house,  he  was  not  deserted  by  Abraham's  God.  Happy  they  who  amid 
life's  wandering's  can  count  on  God's  companionship.  For  desertions  of  friends 
and  deprivations  of  goods  it  will  prove  ample  compensation. 

Learn— 1.  To  prize  the  blessing  of  a  home  and  the  privilege  of  a  Church.  2.  To 
commiserate  and  succour  those  who  have  neither.  3.  To  use  God  in  all  the  revealed 
aspects  of  his  gracious  character. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  17. — Hagar,  a  weary  outcast.  "  What  aileth  thee,  Hagar  ?  "  Hagar  is 
sent  away  from  Abraham's  tents.  In  the  wilderness  wandering  she  is  lost.  In  despair 
she  sinks  down  and  weeps.  An  angel's  voice  is  heard  inquiring,  "What  aileth  thee, 
Hagar?" 

I.  Hagar  may  be  taken  as  representing  the  sottls  still  Christless.   They  are— 

1.  Weary.     2.  Thirsty.    3.  Apparently  man-forsaken  and  God-forsaken.     4.  Their 
dearest  comforts  slipping  from  them,  as  Hagar's  child,  by  death.    5.  Death  expecting. 

II.  Hagar's  act  indicates  how  such  souls  should  act  in  trouble.     1.  Iiealise  it. 

2.  Seek  deliverance  from  above.     God  nearer  to  us  than  we  imagine.     He  feels  for 
us,  hears  us,  helps  us.     He  gives  sustenance,  cheer,  guidance. — H. 

Vers.  17 — 19. — God's  appearance  to  Hagar.  The  greatest  truths  in  the  Bible  put 
before  us  in  a  setting  of  human  interest  and  feeling.  Our  hearts  strangely  touched 
by  the  picture  of  the  desolate  woman  and  the  helpless  child.  The  fatherly  character 
of  God  exhibited.  He  heard  the  voice  of  the  lad.  All  such  facts  point  to  the 
greatest  fact,  the  union  of  God  and  man  in  the  man  Christ  Jesus.     We  see  here — 

I.  God'p  notice  of  and  compassion  for  human  suffering  :  our  example.  The 
object  of  pity  apart  from  antecedents. 

II.  The  working  out  of  Divine  purposes  notwithstanding,  and  to  some  extent  by 
means  of,  human  infirmities,  errors,  and  sins.  Ishmael  must  be  preserved,  and  has  his 
part  to  play  in  the  future. 

III.  Taken  typically,  Hagar  and  Ishmael  represent  the  life  of  man  apart  from 
the  covenant  of  God,  outside  the  circle  of  special  privilege.  There  is  God  in  the 
wilderness.  The  eyes  which  are  darkened  with  ignorance  and  self-will  may  yet  be 
mercifully  opened  to  see  the  well  of  water.  The  angel  of  deliverance  follows  even 
the  bondwoman  and  her  son.  But  the  way  to  God  through  the  wilderness  is  a  hard 
way,  a  way  of  suffering,  a  way  of  dinger.     God  was  with  Ishmael.     He  wag  with 


oh.  xxi.  15-21.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  271 


bim  through  Abraham,  for  Abraham's  sake.  The  course  of  Ishmael's  life  illustrate! 
the  contrast  between  a  truly  religious  career  and  one  given  up  to  natural  impulse.  Cf . 
Esau  and  Joseph's  brethren.— R. 

Ver.  19.— Hagar  in  the  wilderness.  "And  God  opened  her  eyes,  and  she  saw  a 
well  of  water."  Hagar  in  the  wilderness.  Why?  She  had  no  pleasure  in  hei 
home ;  would  not  accept  her  position  there.  Hence  Ishmael's  mocking.  Compare 
working  of  pride  in  Eden—"  Ye  shall  be  as  gods  ; "  and  its  result— Adam  and  Eve 
driven  out.  Observe— a  bouI  despising  the  position  of  a  child  of  God  is  driven  into 
the  wilderness  by  its  own  act.  Pride  rebels  against  terms  of  salvation  (Rom.  x.  3>— 
a  free  gift  to  sinners  seeking  it  as  such  (Mark  ii.  17).  Hagar  felt  her  misery,  like 
many  who  find  no  peace.  "  All  is  vanity."  She  sat  down  and  wept.  Did  she  cry  to 
God  ?  He  had  met  her  there  before.  Past  mercies  should  move  to  trust  (Ps.  xlii.  6). 
But  pride  and  unbelief  hinder  prayer  (Exod.  xvii.  3—6).  But  God  had  not  forgotten 
her  (cf.  Matt,  xviii.  11).  "Whataileth  thee?"  Compare  our  Lord's  dealing  with 
those  he  helped.  1.  Himself  taking  the  first  step.  2.  Requiring  a  confession  of 
their  want.    8.  Rousing  expectation  (John  iv.  14  ;  vii.  37]}. 

I.  The  well  was  near  heb,  but  she  saw  it  not.  So  iB  it  with  the  water  of  life. 
Why  are  so  many  without  peace  ?  The  well  is  beside  them  ;  the  Bound  of  the  gospel 
is  familiar  to  them.  The  Bible  is  read  in  their  hearing,  but  it  speaks  nothing  to 
them  (2  Cor.  iii.  15).  Christ  died  for  all  (2  Cor.  v,  14).  His  blood  the  ransom  for 
all  (1  John  i.  7).  We  have  not  to  go  to  seek  a  Saviour  (Rom.  x.  6—8).  No  sin  too 
deep  for  cleansing,  no  sorrow  too  great  for  comfort ;  nothing  required  to  give  a  right 
to  trust  him  (Isa.  Iv.  1 ;  Luke  xv.  2).  Why  without  peace?  The  eyes  are  closed 
to  the  truth  (1  Cor.  ii.  14).  Human  teaching  cannot  give  life  (Ezek.  xxxvii.  8). 
What  is  wanted  is  not  a  new  fountain,  but  opened  eyes.  And  it  is  disbelief  of  this 
that  keeps  so  many  in  anxiety.  To  them  the-  well  is  not  there ;  they  want  God  to 
give  it.  They  look  for  something  they  are  to  do  to  find  a  Saviour.  Important  to 
know  what  is  wanted — spiritual  discernment.  To  many  this  seems  a  mere  fancy ; 
but  they  whose  eyes  are  opened  know  it  to  be  a  passing  from  darkness  to  light  (cf. 
2  Tim.  i.  10).     Words  often  read  become  full  of  new  meaning. 

II.  God  opened  her  eyes.  It  is  blindness  that  causes  trouble ;  but  as  blind  can- 
not see  by  his  own  will,  so  neither  can  the  unspiritual.  The  way  of  salvation  is 
before  him,  but  while  it  commends  itself  to  his  reason  it  brings  him  no  joy.  Aie  we 
then  without  effort  to  sit  still  ?  No  ;  all  is  ready  on  God's  part.  "  Wilt  thou  be 
made  whole  ?  "  Want  of  will  alone  hinders.  Often  men  would  like  to  drink,  but  not 
at  God's  fountain.     Make  an  effort  to  believe,  and  power  will  be  given. 

III.  What  she  saw.  The  well  of  life  ;  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ  to  the  soul 
— this  is  peace.  Not  our  own  powers  or  wisdom,  not  our  own  holiness  or  advance  in 
grace ;  but  trust  in  him.  No  more  fears.  True,  the  wilderness  is  there ;  the  work 
has  to  be  done,  temptations  overcome,  sorrows  borne,  graces  cultivated ;  but  we  can 
do  all  through  Christ.  Now  troubles  become  helps  (Ps.  lxxxiv.  6),  for  they  make  us 
flee  to  Christ  (2  Cor.  xii.  9).  And  who  can  count  the  blessings  revealed  to  him 
whose  eyes  are  opened  ?  A  Father  in  everything — protection,  teaching,  guidance. 
Everything  surrounding  him,  every  event  that  happens  to  him,  are  inlets  of  ever- 
increasing  knowledge  of  God,  whom  to  know  is  life  eternal. — M. 

Ver.  20. — God's  care  for  Ishmael.  "  And  God  was  with  the  lad."  The  encamp- 
ment of  Abraham  was  the  scene  of  joy  and  festivity  on  the  occasion  of  the  recog- 
nition of  Isaac  publicly  as  his  heir.  It  is  said  in  Jewish  lore  that  Abraham  called  a 
number  of  the  patriarchs  to  the  feast,  and  that  Melchizedek,  Nahor,  and  even  Noah 
were  present.  Ishmael  had  been  heir-presumptive  up  to  that  time.  He  was  then 
put  in  the  position  of  a  subject  to  the  son  of  Sarah.  He  and  his  mo  her  despised 
the  weakling  and  nursling.  They  "  mocked."  This  roused  the  indignation  of  Sarah, 
.and  she  insisted  on  the  banishment  of  both.  Abraham  was  very  unwilling  to  con- 
sent to  the  proposal,  for  he  had  great  affection  for  Ishmael.  No  wonder  that  he  loved 
'.Am,  for  he  was,  if  not  the  child  of  promise,  at  least  the  son  who  first  roused  in  his 
breast  the  pride  and  joy  of  paternity.  He  seems  to  have  hoped  that  Ishmael  would 
be  the  one  through  whom  the  great  blessings  promised  to  him  would  be  bestowed. 


S?8  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  [<*•  «i.  16-21 

Hence  he  had  prayed,  "0  that  Ishmael  might  live  before  thee"  (ch.  xvii.  18). 
Perhaps  unbelief  had  much  to  do  with  the  expression  of  the  hope.  He  indicated 
his  own  contentment  with  that  mode  of  fulfilment  of  the  promises ;  God,  however, 
has  another.  Abraham  evidently  loved  the  lad,  and  now  that  he  is  grown  to  be  a 
stalwart  youth  of  about  sixteen,  it  is  strongly  against  his  inclination  to  send  him 
away.  Sarah  insists.  She  in  her  indignation  will  not  even  speak  of  him  by  his 
name,  but  calls  him  contemptuously  "  the  eon  of  this  bondwoman  "  (ch.  xxi.  10). 
Abraham  was  very  grieved  (ver.  11),  but  he  can  see  that  there  is  no  prospect  of  any 
peace  in  his  encampment  unless  he  should  do  as  Sarah  wishes.  Two  jealous  women 
are  enough  to  embitter  his  life,  and  bring  discord  eventually  among  his  retainers. 
For  typical  reasons  the  banishment  was  permitted  by  God  (ver.  12),  and  Abraham 
sends  both  away,  laden  probably  not  only  with  trinkets,  which  shall  suffice  for  barter, 
but  with  a  flask  of  water  and  strings  of  small  loaves.  Abraham  had  thus  to  sacrifice 
his  own  inclinations  in  Ishmael,  his  son  after  the  flesh,  as  afterwards  his  will  in 
offering  up  Isaac,  his  child  of  promise.  Away  towards  Egypt  Hagar  and  Ishrnael 
travel.  They  enter  the  wilderness  of  Beersheba.  Happiness  and  home  is  behind  ; 
desolateness,  dreariness,  lonely  journeyings,  imminent  dangers  from  the  wild  beasts 
and  fierce  hordes  of  men,  with  Egypt,  before  them.  Hagar,  with  bread  dry  and 
water  spent,  losing  her  way,  waits  for  some  one  to  guide.  Unable  to  proceed,  she 
and  her  son  sink  down  to  die,  to  perish  in  the  scorching  heat  from  that  most  fearful 
of  all  deprivations,  water.  Hagar,  with  bitter  memories  of  lost  happiness  and 
unjust  treatment  crowding,  cannot  bear  the  sight  of  her  son's  woe  and  sound  of  his 
moaning,  therefore  removes  to  a  slight  distance,  that  she  might  not  see  his  death  nor 
disturb  it  as  she  sought  to  ease  her  poor  heart  with  tears.  Oh,  what  moral  beauty 
blossoms  in  the  desert  in  the  maternal  love  of  this  outcast  bondwoman.  No  human 
eye  detects  it,  but  God  notices  and  hears  her  voice,  and  that  of  the  child.  Then 
comes  the  direction  from  heaven,  and  the  promise,  "  1  will  make  of  him  a  great 
nation."  We  are  told  immediately  afterwards  in  the  brief  record  concerning  Ishmael 
that  "  God  was  with  the  lad,"  and  so  the  promise  was  fulfilled.  We  notice  God's 
care  even  for  an  Ishmael,  for  one  who  would  appear  to  be  outside  all  covenant  bless- 
ings. He  was  one  whose  "hand  was  to  be  against  every  man,  and  every  man's 
against  him  "  (ch.  xvi.  12).     God  manifested  care,  however,  to  this  Ishmael — 

L  B?  preserving  His  life.  He  heard  his  cry  in  distress.  He  knew  his  needs. 
God  always  knows  our  needs ;  whence  to  supply  them,  and  where  to  find  us  even  in 
the  wilderness.  A  well  of  water  is  unexpectedly  pointed  out  to  the  mother.  Her 
eyes  were  opened  to  see  its  whereabouts.  So  God  teaches  many  a  mother,  that  she 
may  lead  her  children  to  the  well  of  living  water.  Every  life  preserved  is  only 
through  the  mercy  of  God.  "  In  his  hand  our  breath  is  "  (Dan.  v.  23).  Thereis  a 
well  for  bondsmen  as  well  as  free.  God's  living  well  is  to  be  reached  in  any  position 
of  life.  It  is  near  to  us  when  we  think  it  far  off.  "  The  word  is  nigh  thee,  in  thine 
heart,"  &c.  (Eom.  x.  8).  If  we  are  to  see  the  treasure,  our  spiritual  understanding 
must  be  quickened,  our  "  eyes  opened  "  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  If  we  desire  to  know 
the  way  and  well  of  life,  we  can  pray  for  that  opening.  Only  as  we  have  this 
spiritual  sight  and  life  can  we  rejoice  in  the  present  existence,  in  our  preservation. 
God  preserved  Ishmael  that  he  might  know  him. 

II.  God  advanced  him  in  life.  He  was  with  him  as  he  grew  up,  and  gave  him 
favour  in  the  sight  of  others.  God  is  ever  seeking  by  his  Holy  Spirit  to  mould  the 
character  of  the  worst  for  good.  If  we  have  any  prosperity  and  grow  up  to  influence, 
we  should  remember  that  it  is  from  God.  The  darkest  hour  for  Ishmael  had  ushered 
in  the  dawning  of  the  brightest  day.  God  knew  what  he  would  do  with  Ishmael. 
Ishmael  is  to  found  a  nation.  It  is  remarkable  that  he  was  the  ancestor  of  the  same 
number  of  tribes  as  was  Israel  (ch.  xxv.  16).  He  found  various  scattered  people  in 
the  Arabian  desert,  but  the  tribes  descended  from  him  seem  to  have  absorbed  all 
others.  What  an  honour  to  be  the  founder  of  a  house,  a  dynasty;  how  much  more 
of  a  nation !    This  God  granted  to  an  Ishmael. 

III.  God  gave  him  skill.  "  He  became  an  archer."  He  had  to  learn  to  defend 
himself,  and  secure  for  himself,  by  God's  help,  a  position.  The  fighting  power  is  not 
the  highest,  but  man  has  always  had  to  protect  himself  before  he  could  make  pro- 
gress in  civilisation.    Alas,  when  he  supposes  himself  to  be  civilised  ne  often  clings 


oh.  xxi.  15— 2i.]  THE  BOOk  OF  GENESIS.  «t» 

to  the  old  habit,  and  still  loves  the  fighting.  The  archers,  like  Ishmael,  have  their 
sphere  as  well  as  the  shepherds,  like  Isaacs.  The  fiery  defenders  of  faith  and  the 
controversial  champions  of  the  truth  have  their  sphere  as  well  aB  the  pious,  plod'ding 
pastors  of  Christ's  flock.  If  men  have  skill  for  the  one  thing,  let  them  not  despise 
the  powers  of  others.  We  have  all  to  learn  to  appreciate  diversity  of  talents,  and 
to  remember  that  skill  in  any  work  is  the  outcome  of  independence,  resolution,  and 
energy.     Ishmael  had  been  endowed  with  these  by  God. 

IV.  God  furnished  Ishmael  with  a  place  of  habitation.  He  gave  to  him  the 
desert  for  his  domain.  Here  he  might  roam  and  pitch  his  tent  at  his  own  suggestion. 
God  knew  that  the  hot  blood  of  his  Egyptian  mother,  which  coursed  in  his  veins, 
would  find  its  most  fitting  sphere  in  the  desert;  Instead  of  mingling  with  gentle 
herdsmen,  he  had  to  dwell  among  the  fierce  and  untrained  spirits  of  the  desert.  He 
became  an  ancestor  of  those  who  despised  town  life,  and  who  were  hardy  and  frugal 
enough  to  exist  where  others  would  have  perished.  Thus  to  Ishmael,  the  desert,  with 
its  widespread,  sun-scorched  sands,  its  scant  herbage,  its  infrequent  wells  and  scat- 
tered oases,  became  a  fitting  home.  God  chose  for  him  his  dwelling-place,  and 
defined  for  him  the  bounds  of  his  habitation.  And  is  it  not  best  for  us  to  leave 
ourselves  in  God's  hands?  He  knows  best  where  to  place  any  of  us,  and  what  work 
to  give  us  to  do,  what  sphere  to  fill.  We  might  prefer  the  green  pasture  and  hills 
flowing  with  milk  and  honey  of  the  Canaan  of  prosperity,  but  the  desert  of  trial 
and  loneliness  may  be  the  best  for  training  our  spirits.  We  may  have  losses  to 
endure  outwardly,  but  if  we  can  acquire  a  spirit  of  content  and  faith,  that  is  great 
gain.     That  spirit  will  lead  us  to  say,  "  He  shall  choose  our  inheritance  for  us." 

V.  God  also  insured  Ishmael's  honour  among  his  brethren.  He  was  to  "  dwell 
in  the  presence  of  his  brethren "  (ch.  xvi.  12).  Though  cast  out  by  Abraham,  he 
was  not  cast  off  by  God  or  cut  off  from  all  interchange  with  others.  We  find  (ch. 
xxv.  6)  that  Abraham  gave  portions  to  the  sons  of  his  second  wife,  Keturah,  and 
sent  them  away.  Doubtless  he  gave  a  portion  to  Ishmael,  for  we  find  him  uniting 
with  Isaac  in  the  funeral  obsequies  of  his  father  (ch.  xxv.  9).  The  two  sons  were 
not  at  enmity  now.  Further,  he  seems  to  have  kept  up  his  union  with  his  brother, 
for  his  daughter  Bashemath  (ch.  xxxvi.  3)  married  Esau,  Isaac's  son.  Thus  two 
families  in  the  line  of  promise,  but  who  had  cast  themselves  out — Esau  by  his  in- 
difference, and  Ishmael  by  his  mocking — were  united.  Thus,  although  of  fierce  and 
fiery  nature,  Ishmael  "  dwelt  in  the  presence  of  his  brethren."  God  was  with  him. 
He  had  a  shorter  life  than  Isaac.  Ishmael  died  at  130  years  old,  Isaao  at  180. 
Evidently  the  active,  restless,  wandering,  hazardous  life  was  more  wearing  and  con- 
suming than  the  calm  and  meditative  life  of  the  pastoral  Isaac.  But  when  he  died 
God  cared  for  him  as  well  as  for  Isaac,  only  his  purposes  with  respect  to  Isaao  were 
different.  Isaac  was  an  ancestor  after  the  flesh  of  the  Messiah,  but  Ishmael  had  not 
that  honour.  Still  we  must  not  think  that  God  had  cast  off  Ishmael,  and  left  him 
utterly  and  everlastingly  to  perish.  Our  God  cares  for  those  outside  the  pale  of  the 
Church,  even  as  for  those  within.  The  former  have  not  taken  up  their  privileges, 
nor  seen  how  Christ  loves  them.  They  are  suffering  great  loss,  and  are  in  danger  of 
further  loss,  but  God  cares  for  and  pities  them.  He  wills  not  the  death  of  a  sinner. 
He  pitied  the  people  of  Nineveh,  sent  them  a  warning,  and  gave  them  space  for 
repentance.  He  healed  a  Naaman;  sent  his  prophet  to  dwell  with  a  woman  of 
Sarepta,  and  so  conferred  honour  upon  her ;  and  he  brought  a  Nebuchadnezzar  to  his 
right  mind  by  a  judicious  infliction.  All  this  was  mercy  shown  outside  the  pale  of 
Israel  to  those  who  would  be  accounted  as  Ishmaelites.  Oh,  how  much  more  widely 
flows  the  channel  of  Divine  mercy  and  love  than  we  imagine  1  How  little  we  con- 
ceive the  depth  of  the  Father's  love  to  all  his  creatures  I  In  every  heart  he  is  seeking 
to  find  a  reflection  of  his  image.  By  the  side  of  every  soul,  however  much  of  an 
Ishmaelite,  he  is  seeking  by  his  Holy  Spirit  to  walk,  that  he  may  win  back  to  the 
fold  of  love  and  mercy.  Oh,  ye  who  think  yourselves  too  sinful  to  have  a  share  in 
the  Divine  compassion,  see  God's  treatment  of  an  Ishmael.  Remember  that  Christ 
came  "  not  to  call  the  righteous,  but  sinners  to  repentance."  God  is  merciful  even 
to  thoughtless  sinners,  and  gives  streams  in  the  desert.  If  this  he  the  spirit  of  ouf 
God  and  Saviour,  should  it  not  teach  us  to  take  an  interest  in  all  ?  As  the  sun  when 
getting  in  the  west  throws  his  golden  and  purple  rays  not  only  over  the  broad  ocean, 


m 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xxl  82-  A4 


but  on  the  dank  ditches  of  the  meadows  and  the  puddles  of  the  street,  so  should  we 
remember  that  there  is  no  heart  so  depraved  but  the  love  of  God  in  Christ  may  light 
it  up.  If  only  we  looked  at  our  fellows  thus,  with  deeper  sympathy,  we  should  see 
them  won  to  Christ. — H. 


EXPOSITION. 


Yer.  22. — And  it  came  to  pass  at  that  time, 
— possibly  in  immediate  sequence  to  the  in- 
cident of  the  preceding  chapter,  but,  "ac- 
cording to  the  common  law  of  Hebrew  nar- 
rative, probably  not  long  after  the  birth  of 
Isaac"  (Murphy) — that  Abimeleoh — the  king 
of  Gerar  (ch.  xx,  2  ;  xxvi.  1,  16) — and  Phi- 
chol — if  the  name  be  Shemitic,  "mouth  of 
all,"  i.  e.  spokesman  of  all  (Murphy),  ruler 
of  all  (Gesenius);  or  "the  distinguished" 
(Fiirst) ;  believed  to  have  been  a  titular 
designation  of  the  Philistine  monarch's 
grand  vizier  or  prime  minister  (Lange, 
'  Speaker's  Commentary  '),  who  was  also — 
the  chief  captain  of  his  host  (i.  e.  the  com- 
mander-in-chief of  his  forces)  spake  unto 
Abraham  (having  come  from  Gerar  for  the 
purpose),  saying,  God  is  with  thee  in  all  that 
thou  doest — a  conviction  derived  from  his 
former  acquaintance  with  the  patriarch  (ch. 
xx.),  his  knowledge  of  Isaac's  birth,  and  his 
general  observation  of  the  patriarch's  pros- 
perity. 

Ver.  23.— Now  therefore  swear  unto  me 
here  by  God — the  verb  to  swear  is  derived 
from  the  Hebrew  numeral  seven,  inasmuch 
as  the  septennary  number  was  sacred,  and 
oaths  were  confirmed  either  by  seven  sacri- 
fices (ch.  xxi.  28)  or  by  seven  witnesses  and 
pledges — that  thou  wilt  not  deal  falsely  with 
me, — literally,  if  thou  shalt  lie  unto  me  ;  a 
common  form  of  oath  in  Hebrew,  in  which 
the  other  member  of  the  sentence  is  for 
emphasis  left  unexpressed  (cf.  Ruth  i.  17, 
and  vide  ch.  xiv.  23).  As  a  prince,  Abime- 
lech  was  afraid  of  Abraham's  growing  power; 
as  a  good  man,  he  insures  the  safety  of  him- 
self and  his  dominions  not  by  resorting  to 
war,  but  by  forming  an  amicable  treaty  with 
his  neighbour— nor  with  my  son,  nor  with 
my  son's  son: — OTrippa  xai  ovo/ia  (LXX. ); 
posteri  et  stirps  (Vulgate)  ;  offspring  and 
progeny  (Kalisch) ;  kith  and  kin  (Murphy)— 
but  according  to  the  kindness  that  I  have 
done  unto  thee  {vide  ch.  xx.  16),  thon  shalt 
do  unto  me,  and  to  the  land  wherein  thou 
hast  sojourned — the  land  being  put  for  the 
people  (cf.  Numb.  xiv.  13). 

Ver.  24.  —And  Abraham  said,  I  will  swear. 
Only  before  concluding  the  agreement  thore 
was  a  matter  of  a  more  personal  character 
that  required  settlement. 

Ver.  26. — And  Abraham  reproved  (liter- 
ally, reasoned  with,  and  proved  to  the  satisfac- 
tion of)  Abimelech  (who  was,  until  informed, 
•ntlrely  unacquainted  with  the  action  of  his 


servants)  because  of  a  well  of  water,  which 
Abimelech's  servants  had  violently  taken 
away.  The  greatest  possible  injury  of  a 
material,  kind  that  could  be  done  to  a  nomade 
chief  was  the  abstraction  of  his  water  sup- 
plies. Hence  "  the  ownership  of  wells  in 
Palestine  was  as  jealously  guarded  as  the 
possession  of  a  mine  in  our  own  "  (Inglis). 
Contests  for  wells  "are  now  very  common 
all  over  the  country,  but  more  especially  in 
the  southern  deserts  "  (Thomson,  '  Land  and 
Book,'  p.  559). 

Ver.  26. — And  Abimelech  said.  I  wot  not 
who  hath  done  this  thing.  There  is  no 
reason  to  question  the  sincerity  of  the  Philis- 
tine monarch  in  disclaiming  all  knowledge  of 
the  act  of  robbery  committed  by  his  servants. 
Neither  didst  thou  tell  me,  neither  yet  heard 
I  of  it,  but  to  day.  The  prince  rather  com- 
plains that  Abraham  had  done  him  an  in- 
justice, 

Ver.  27. — And  Abraham  took  sheep  and 
oxen,  and  gave  them  unto  Abimelech.  As 
the  usual  covenant  presents  (cf.  1  Kings  xv. 
19 ;  Isa.  xxx.  6 ;  xxxix.  1).  And  both  of 
them  made  a  covenant.  As  already  Mamre,  0 
Auer,  and  Eshcol  had  formed  a  league  with  *» 
the  patriarch  {vide  ch.  xiv.  13). 

Vers.  28—30. — And  Abraham  set  seven 
ewe  lambs  of  the  flock  by  themselves  (de- 
signing by  another  covenant  to  secure  him- 
self against  future  invasion  of  his  rights). 
And  Abimelech  said  unto  Abraham,  What 
mean  these  seven  ewe  lambs  which  thou 
hast  set  by  themselves  1  And  he  said,  For 
these  seven  ewe  Iambs  shalt  thou  take  of 
my  hand,  that  they  may  be  a  witness  unto 
me,— that  this  peculiar  kind  of  oath  never 
occurs  again  in  Old  Testament  history  is  no 
proof  of  the  mythical  character  of  the  narra- 
tive (Bohlen) ;  on  the  contrary,  "  that  the 
custom  existed  in  primitive  Hebrew  times  is 
shown  by  the  word  5'3I<5>3,  which  had  early 
passed  into  the  language,  and  which  would 
be  inexplicable  without  the  existence  of  such 
a  custom"  (Havernick)— that  I  have  digged 
this  well. 

Ver.  31. — Wherefore  he  called  that  place 
Beer-sheba.  I.e.  "the  well  of  the  oath," 
<j>pkap  opiuo/iov  (LXX.,  Gesenius,  Fiirst, 
Rosenmiiller),  or  the  well  of  the  seven  (Keil), 
rather  than  the  seven  wells  (Lange) ;  dis- 
covered by  Robinson  in  Bir-es-seba,  in  the 
Wady-es-seba,  twelve  miles  to  the  south  of 
Hebron,  with  two  deep  wells  of  excelled 


oh.  xxi.  22—84.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


281 


water.  "The  great  well  has  an  internal 
diameter  at  the  mouth  of  twelve  feet  six 
Inches,  or  a  circumference  of  nea-dy  forty 
feet.  The  shaft  is  formed  of  excellent 
masonry  to  a  great  depth  until  it  reaches  the 
rock,  and  at  this  juncture  a  spring  trickles 
perpetually.  Around  the  mouth  of  the  well 
is  a  circular  course  of  masonry,  topped  by  a 
circular  parapet  of  about  a  foot  high ;  and 
at  a  distance  of  ten  or  twelve  feet  are  stone 
troughs  placed  in  a  concentric  circle  with  the 
well,  the  sides  of  which  have  deep  indentions 
made  by  the  wear  of  ropes  on  the  upper 
edges.  The  second  well,  about.  200  yards 
farther  south,  is  not  more  than  five  feet  in 
diameter,  but  is  formed  of  equally  good 
masonry,  and  furnishes  equally  good  water" 
{vide  'Byeways  in  Palestine,  by  James 
Finn,  M.R.A.S.,  p.  190).  Because  there 
they  sware  both  of  them. 

Ver.  33.  —  And  Abraham  planted — as  a 
sign  of  his  peaceful  occupation  of  the  soil 
(Calvin) ;  as  a  memorial  of  the  transaction 
about  the  well  ('  Speaker's  Commentary') ;  or 
simply  as  a  shade  for  his  tent  (Rosenmuller) ; 
scarcely  as  an  oratory  (Bush,  Kalisch)  — a 
grove— the  b&it— wood,  plantation  (Targums, 
Vulgate,  Samaritan,  Kimchi) ;  a  field,  apovpav 


(LXX.)— was  probably  the  Tamarix  Afri- 
canoe  (Gesenius,  Fiirst,  Delitzsch,  Kosen 
muller,  Kalisch),  which,  besides  being  com- 
mon in  Egypt  and  Petrsea,  is  said  to  have  been 
found  growing  near  the  ancient  Beer-sheba — 
in  Beer-sheba,  and  called  there  (not  beneath 
the  tree  or  in  the  grove,  but  in  the  place)  on 
the  name  of  the  Lord, —Jehovah  (vide  eh. 
xii.  8  ;  xiii.  i) — the  everlasting  God— liter- 
ally, the  God  of  eternity  (LXX.,  Vulgate, 
Onkelos) ;  not  in  contrast  to  heathen  deities, 
who  are  born  and  die  (Clericus),  but  "  as  the 
everlasting  Vindicator  of  the  faith  of  treaties, 
and  as  the  infallible  Source  of  the  believer's 
rest  and  peace  "  (Murphy). 

Ver.  34.  — And  Abraham  sojourned  in  the 
Philistines'  land  many  days.  The  apparent 
contradiction  between  the  statement  of  this 
verse  and  that  of  ver.  32  may  be  removed  by 
supposing  either,  (1)  that  as  the  land  of  the 
Philistines  had  no  fixed  boundary  toward  the 
desert,  Beer-sheba  may  at  this  time  have  been 
claimed  for  the  kingdom  of  Gerar  (Keil) ;  or, 
(2)  that  as  Beer-sheba  was  situated  on  the 
confines  of  the  Philistines'  territory,  Abraham 
must  frequently_  have  sojourned  in  their 
country  while  pasturing  his  flocks  (Rosen - 
mtiller). 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  22 — 34.  —  Abimelech  and  Abraham,  or  ancient  covenanters.  L  Ths 
political  alliance.  1.  The  contemplated  object.  Peace.  What  modern  monarch* 
mostly  desire  at  the  close  of  exhausting  campaigns  is  here  sought  before  campaigns 
begin.  2.  The  covenanting  parties.  Two  powerful  princes,  in  their  conduct  exem- 
plifying the  spirit  of  unity  and  peace  which  should  bind  together  private  persons  in 
their  daily  intercourse,  as  well  as  kings  and  nations  in  their  political  alliance.  3 
The  impelling  motives.  Worldly  policy  may  have  urged  Abimelech  to  cement  a 
league  with  the  powerful  chieftain  in  his  neighbourhood,  but  religious  affinity  would 
also  seem  to  have  exercised  an  influence  in  drawing  him  to  seek  the  friendship  of 
one  who  appeared  to  enjoy  celestial  protection.  Good  men  mostly  desire  to  have  the 
saints  as  fi-iends,  and  even  the  wicked  can  perceive  an  advantage  in  being  allied  to 
the  righteous.  Abraham's  acquiescence  in  the  king's  proposal  was  no  doubt  dictated 
oy  a  peaceable  disposition,  a  sense  of  equity,  a  spirit  of  contentment,  and  an  unwaver- 
ing confidence  in  God.  4.  The  public  ceremonial.  The  alliance  was  contracted  (1) 
by  means  of  amicable  conference,  and  (2)  with  the  sanctions  of  religion. 

II.  The  friendly  remonstrance.  1.  The  palpable  injury.  The  herdsmen  of 
the  king  had  appropriated  Abraham's  well.  God's  people,  though  expected  meekly 
to  suffer  wrong,  cannot  always  help  seeing  that  it  is  wrong  they  suffer.  Nor  are 
they  called  upon  to  bear  what  by  lawful  means  they  are  able  to  redress.  A  good 
man  is  entitled  to  be  careful  of  his  property,  to  preserve  it  from  damage,  protect  it 
from  theft,  and  recover  it  when  stolen  or  lost.  2.  The  mistaken  charge.  Abraham, 
thinking  the  herdsmen  had  aoted  on  their  master's  orders,  reproved  Abimelech.  This, 
however,  was  an  error,  which  shows  (1)  that  a  person  cannot  always  be  held  respon- 
sible for  what  his  servants  do,  (2)  that  it  is  wrong  to  judge  on  insufficient  evidence 
with  reference  to  the  characters  and  conduct  of  others,  and  (3)  that  in  making 
charges  or  preferring  complaints  it  is  well  to  avoid  both  heat  of  temper  and  severity 
of  language.  3.  The  satisfactory  explanation.  Abimelech  declared  himself  per- 
fectly unacquainted  with  the  wrong  which  had  been  done  to  Abraham,  and  imme- 
diately returned  th«  wall,  which  discovers  how  easily  misunderstandings  might  b« 


M2 


The  Boot  of  genesis. 


[ch.  xmi.  1— 1&. 


removed  if,  instead  of  harbouring  enmity,  men  would  resort  to  friendly  conference. 
It  is  as  much  the  duty  of  him  who  has  a  grievance  to  reveal  it,  as  it  is  the  duty  of 
him  who  has  caused  the  grievance  to  remove  it.  4.  The  prudent  measure  Abra- 
ham gave  Abimelech  seven  ewe  lambs  as  a  witness  that  he  had  digged  the  well,  and 
consequently  had  a  right  to  its  possession.  Seemingly  betraying  a  secret  suspicion  of 
the  prince's  veracity,  the  act  aimed  at  preventing  any  recurrence  of  the  grievance, 
and  in  this  light  it  appears  to  have  been  regarded  by  Abimelech.  Good  men  should 
not  only  rectify  the  wrongs  they  do  to  one  another,  but  adopt  all  wise  precautions 
against  their  repetition. 

III.  The  pleasing  result.  1.  Peace  established,  Abimelech  and  Phiehol,  having 
accomplished  their  mission,  returned  to  Philistia.  "  Blessed  are  the  peace-makers," 
and  "  beautiful  upon  the  mountains  are  the  feet  of  him  that  publisheth  peace."  2. 
Peace  commemorated.  Abraham  instituted  two  memorials  of  the  important  trans- 
actions, naming  the  well  Beersheba,  and  planting  a  tamarisk  beside  his  tent.  It  is 
good  to  remember  God's  mercies,  of  which  national  and  civil  quietude  is  one  of  the 
greatest,  and  it  is  becoming  to  erect  memorials  of  both  privileges  and  obligations. 
3.  Peace  enjoyed.  Abraham  called  on  the  name  of  the  everlasting  God.  As  a 
planter  of  tamarisks,  the  patriarch  has  been  styled  the  father  of  civilisation ;  it  is 
more  important  to  remark  that  he  never  neglected  to  worship  God  himself  and 
publish  his  salvation  to  others.    Happy  they  who  can  do  both  in  peace  I 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  22 — 34. — A  covenant  between  the  patriarch  and  the  Philistine  king.  Abra- 
ham a  sojourner  in  that  land,  afterwards  the  troubler  of  Israel ;  for  his  sake  as  disci- 
pline, for  their  sakes  as  opportunity.  1.  God's  care  for  those  beyond  the  covenant. 
A  Beersheba  in  a  heathen  land.  2.  The  things  of  this  world  made  a  channel  of  higher 
blessings.  The  covenant  arising  out  of  bodily  wants  a  civil  agreement.  The  oath 
a  testimony  to  God  where  reverently  made.  3.  He  is  not  far  from  every  one  of  us. 
The  neighbourhood  of  Beersheba,  the  revelation  of  Jehovah,  the  little  company  of 
believers.  4.  The  blessing  made  manifest.  The  days  spent  in  Philistia  left  behind 
them  some  enlightenment.  5.  Adaptation  of  Divine  truth  to  those  to  whom  it  is 
sent.  Abraham's  name  of  God,  Jehovah  El  Olam ;  the  two  revelations,  the  God  of 
nature  and  the  God  of  grace.  The  name  of  the  Lord  itself  an  invitation  to  believe 
and  live.  Paul  at  Athens  adapted  himself  in  preaching  to  the  people's  knowledge 
while  leading  them  to  faith. — R. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXII. 


Ver.  1. — And  it  came  to  pass — the  alleged 
mythical  character  of  the  present  narrative 
(De  Wette,  Bohlen)  is  discredited  not  more 
by  express  Scripture  statement  (Heb.  xi.  17 
— 19)  than  by  its  own  inherent  difficulties — 
after — how  long  after  may  be  conjectured 
from  the  circumstance  that  Isaac  was  now 
a  grown  lad,  capable  of  undertaking  a  three 
days'  journey  of  upwards  of  sixty  miles — these 
things  (literally,  words,  of  benediction,  pro- 
mise, trial  that  had  gone  before — that  God — 
literally,  the  Elohim,  i.  e.  neither  Satan,  as 
in  1  Chron.  xxi.  1,  compared  with  2  Sam. 
zxiv.  1  (Schelling,  Stanley),  nor  Abraham 
himself,  in  the  sense  that  a  subjective  im- 
pulse on  the  part  of  the  patriarch  supplied 
the  formal  basis  of  the  subsequent  transac- 
tion (Kurtz,  Oehler) ;  but  the  El-Olam  of  ch. 
xxi  82,  tha  term  Elohim  being  employed 


by  the  historian  not  because  vers.  1 — M 
are  Elohistic  (Tuch,  Bleek,  Davidson,) — a 
hypothesis  inconsistent  with  the  internal 
unity  of  the  chapter, "  which  is  joined  together 
like  cast-iron"  (Oehler),  and  in  particular 
with  the  use  of  Moriah  in  ver.  2  (Hengsten- 
berg), — but  to  indicate  the  true  origin  of 
the  after-mentioned  trial,  which  proceeded 
neither  from  Satanic  instigation  nor  from 
subjective  impulse,  but  from  God  (Keil) — 
did  tempt— not  solicit  to  sin  (James  i.  18), 
but  test  or  prove  (Exod.  xvi  4  ;  Deut.  vii» 
2  j  xiii.  3  ;  2  Chron.  xxxii.  31 ;  Pg.  xxvi  2) 
— Abraham,  and  said  unto  him, — in  a  dream- 
vision  of  the  night  (Eich-horn,  Lange),  but 
certainly  in  an  audible  voice  which  previoui 
experience  enabled  him  to  recognise — Abra- 
ham: and  he  said,  Behold,  here  I  am. 
"These  brief  introductions  of  the  con  vera, 
ation  express  the  great  tension  and  anpli- 
cation  of  the  human  mind  in  those  moment* 


ofl.  xxn.  t— 19.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESI8. 


SIS 


in  a  striking  way,  and  serve  at  the  same 
time  to  prepare  lis  for  the  importance  of  the 
xmversation  "  (Lange). 

Ver.  2. — And  he  said,  Take  now — "the 
KJ  modifies  the  command,  and  seems  to 
express  that  Elohim  wished  to  receive  the 
sacrifice  as  a  free-will  offering"  (Lange} — thy 
son  (not  a  lamb,  but  thy  child),  thine  only 
son — not  ayatrtjTov  (LXX.),  but  unigenitum 
(Vulgate),  meaning  the  only  son  of  Sarah, 
the  only  legitimate  offspring  he  possessed,  the 
only  heir  of  the  promise,  the  only  child  that 
remained  to  him  after  Ishmael  s  departure 
(cf.  6  novoyiviiQ,  John  i.  18) — Isaac,  whom 
thou  lovest, — or,  whom  thou  lovest,  Isaac ; 
the  order  and  accumulation  of  the  terms 
being  calculated  to  excite  the  parental  affec- 
tion of  the  patriarch  to  the  highest  pitch, 
and  to  render  compliance  with  the  Divine 
demand  a  trial  of  the  utmost  severity — and 
get  thee — literally,  go  for  thyself  (cf.  ch. 
xii.  1  ;  xxi  16) — into  the  land  of  Moriah. 
Moriah  =  vision  (Vulgate,  Symmachus,  Sa- 
maritan), worship  (Onkelos,  Jonathan),  high 
(LXX. ),  rebellious  (Murphy) ;  but  rather 
a  compound  of  il*  and  ^b,  meaning  God  is 
my  instructor,  alluding  to  the  temple  from 
which  the  law  should  afterwards  proceed 
(Kaliseh),  or,  better,  of  !"P  and  !"1N"1,  and 
tignifying  "the  shown  of  Jehovah,"  i.e. 
the  revelation  or  manifestation  of  Jehovah 
(Hengstonberg,  Kurtz,  Keil,  &e.) ;  or  "the 
chosen,"  i.  e.  "pointed  out  of  God,"  with 
reference  to  its  selection  as  the  site  of  the 
Divine  sanctuary  (Gesenius),  or  rather  because 
there  God  provided  and  pointed  out  the 
sacrifice  which  he  elected  to  accept  (Lange). 
And  offer  him  there  for  a  burnt  offering*^- 
not  make  a  spiritual  surrender  of  him  in 
and  through  a  burnt  offering  (Hengstenberg, 
Lange),  but  actually  present  him  as  a  holo- 
caust. That  Abraham  did  not  stagger  on 
receiving  this  astounding  injunction  may 
be  accounted  for  by  remembering  that  the 
practice  of  offering  human  sacrifices  prevailed 
among  the  early  Chaldieaus  and  Canaanites, 
and  that  as  yet  no  formal  prohibition,  like 
that  of  the  Mosaic  code,  had  been  issued 
against  them — upon  one  of  the  mountains — 
not  Moreh  in  Sichem  (Tuch,  MichaeliB, 
Stanley,  Grove,  et  alii),  which  was  too  dis- 
tant, but  Moriah  at  Jerusalem  (Hengstenberg, 
Kurtz,  Keil,  Kaliseh),  where  subsequently 
God  appeared  to  David  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  16), 
and  the  temple  of  Solomon  was  built  (2 
Chron.  iii.  1)— which  I  will  tell  thee  of — 
i.  e.  point  out  (probably  by  secret  inspiration) 
as  thou  pioceedest. 

Ver.  3. — And  Abraham  rose  up  early  in 
the  morning,  —  a  habit  of  the  patriarch's 
after  receiving  a  Divine  communication  (cf. 
ch.  xix.  27  ;  xx.  8  ;  xxi.  14) — and  saddled 
lis  ass,  and  took  two  of  his  young  mei 


with  him  (the  ass  for  the  wood,  and  th« 
young  men  for  the  ass),  and  Isaac  his  son 
(explaining  to  him  as  yet  only  his  intention 
to  offer  sacrifice  upon  a  distant  mountain), 
and  clave  the  wood  for  the  burnt  offering 
(obviously  with  his  own  hands),  and  rose  up 
(expressive  of  resolute  deti?**nination),  and 
went  unto  (or  towards)  tne  place  of  which 
God  had  told  him — literally,  the  Elohim  had 
spoken  to  him.  The  accumulation  of  brief, 
sententious  clauses  in  this  verse  admirably 
represents  the  calm  deliberation  and  unflinch- 
ing heroism  with  which  the  patriarch  pro- 
ceeded to  execute  the  Divine  command. 

Ver.  4. — Then  on  the  third  day — Jeru- 
salem, being  distant  from  Beersheba  about 
twenty  and  a  half  hours'  journey  according  to 
Robinson,  could  easily  be  within  sight  on  the 
third  day — Abraham  lifted  up  his  eyes, — 
not  implying  that  the  object  of  vision  was 
above  him  (cf.  ch.  xiii.  10) — and  saw  the 
place  (which  Calvin  conjectures  he  had  pre- 
viously beheld  in  vision)  afar  off.  Though 
Mount  Moriah  cannot  be  seen  by  the  traveller 
from  Beersheba  till  within  a  distance  of  three 
miles  (Stanley,  'Sinai  anil  Palestine,' p.  251), 
the  place  or  region  where  it  is  can  be  detected 
(Kaliseh). 

Ver.  5.  —  And  Abraham  said  unto  his 
young  men,  Abide  ye  (for  similar  forms  of 
expression  cf.  ch.  xii.  1  ;  xxi.  6 ;  xxii.  2) 
here  with  the  ass ;  —  partly  because  the 
beast  required  watching,  though  chiefly  be- 
cause .the  contemplated  sacrifice  was  too 
solemn  for  any  eyes  but  God's  to  witness — 
and  I  and  the  lad  will  go  yonder  and 
worship,  and  come  again  to  you.  An  act 
of  dissimulation  on  the  part  of  Abraham 
(Knobel,  Kaliseh,  Murphy) ;  an  unconscious 
prophecy  (Lyra,  Junius,  Kashi) ;  the  expres- 
sion of  a  hopeful  wish  (Lange) ;  a  somewhat 
confused  utterance  (Calvin,  Keil) ;  the  voice 
of  his  all-conquering  faith  (Augustine,  Calvin, 
Wordsworth,  Bush,  'Speaker's  Commentary,' 
Inglis),  which  last  seems  the  teaching  of 
Heb.  xi.  19. 

Ver.  6. — And  Abraham  took  the  wood  of 
the  burnt  offering,  and  laid  it  upon  Isaac 
his  son; — instinctively  the  mind  reverts  to 
the  cross-bearing  of  Abraham's  greater  Son 
(John  xix.  17) — and  he  took  the  fire  in 
his  hand,  and  a  knife  (to  him  terribly  sug- 
gestive weapons) ;  and  they  went  both  of 
them  together.  Doubtless  in  silence  on 
Abraham's  part  and  wonder  on  Isaac's,  since 
as  yet  no  declaration  had  been  made  of  the 
true  purpose  of  their  journey. 

Ver.  7. — And  Isaac  spoke  to  Abraham  hit 
father, — during  the  progress  of  the  journey, 
after  leaving  the  young  men,  solitude  inviting 
him  to  give  expression  to  thoughts  which 
had  been  rising  in  his  bosom,  but  which  the 
presence  of  companions  had  constrained  him 
to  suppress — and  said,  My  father : — s  tens 


tu 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESI8. 


[oh.  xxii.  1 — 19 


of  filial  reverence  and  endearment  that  must 
have  lacerated  Abraham's  heart.  As  used 
by  Isaac  it  signified  a  desire  to  interrogate 
his  parent — and  he  said,  Here  am  I,  my  son 
(literally,  Behold  me,  my  son  =  Well,  my 
son,  what  is  it?  in  colloquial  English).  And 
he  said,  Behold  the  fire  and  the  wood ;  but 
where  is  the  lamb  for  a  burnt  offering. 
Another  hint  that  the  sacrificial  system  did 
not  originate  with  Moses. 

Ver.  8.  —  And  Abraham  said,  My  son, 
God  will  provide  himself  a  lamb  for  a 
burnt  offering :— the  utterance  of  heroic 
faith  rather  than  the  language  of  pious 
dissimulation  (vide  on  ver.  6} — so  they  went 
both  of  them  together.  To  see  in  this  twice- 
repeated  expression  a  type  of  the  concurrence 
of  the  Father  and  the  Son  in  the  work  of 
redemption  (Wordsworth)  is  not  exegesis. 

Ter.  9. — And  they  came  to  the  place 
which  God  had  told  him  of;  and  Abraham 
built  an  altar  there, — i.  e.  upon  the  mountain 
summit  or  slope  (ver.  2)— and  laid  the  wood 
in  order  (it  is  scarcely  likely  that  Isaac 
was  permitted  to  assist  _  in  these  affecting 
preparations),  and  bound  Isaac  his  son, — 
who  must  have  acquiesced  in  his  father's 
purpose,  and  thereby  evinced  his  faith  in  the 
Divine  commandment.  The  term  "bound," 
though  seeming  to  convey  the  idea  of  violence, 
derives  its  significance  from  the  binding  of 
tho  sacrificial  victim — and  laid  him  on  the 
altar  on  the  wood.  The  feelings  of  the 
patriarch  throughout  this  transaction  are 
simply  inconceivable. 

Ver.  10.— And  Abraham  stretched  forth 
his  hand,  and  took  the  knife  to  slay  his  son 
— who  even  in  the  last  moment  offers  no 
resistance,  but  behaves  like  a  type  of  him 
who  was  led  like  »  lamb  to  the  slaughter 
(Isa.  Hit  7). 

Ver.  11.— And  the  angel  of  the  Lord — 
Maleach  Jehovah  (vide  ch.  xvi.  7) ;  intro- 
duced into  the  narrative  at  this  point  not 
as  a  Jehovistic  alteration  (Bleek,  Kalisch, 
et  alii),  but  because  the  God  of  redemption 
now  interposes  for  the  deliverance  of  both 
Isaac  and  Abraham  (Hengstenberg)— called 
unto  him  out  of  heaven,  and  said,  Abraham, 
Abraham  (the  repetition  denotes  urgency, 
as  contrasted  with  ver.  1):  and  he  said, 
Here  am  I. 

Ver.  12.— And  he  said,  Lay  not  thine 
hand  upon  the  lad,  neither  do  thon  any 
thing  unto  him.  Abraham's  surrender  of 
the  son  of  his  affections  having  been  com- 
plete, there  was  no  need  to  push  the  trial 
further.  The  voice  from  heaven  has  been 
accepted  as  evidence  of  God's  rejection  of 
human  sacrifices  (Lange,  Murphy),  only  that 
is  not  assigned  as  the  reason  for  Isaac's 
deliverance.  For  now  I  know — literally, 
have  known;  not  caused  thee  to  know 
(Augustine),  but   causad   others   to  know 


(Lange) ;  or  the  words  are  used  aathropomor- 
phically  (Calvin) — that  thou  fearest  God, — 
Elohim;  the  Divine  intention  being  to 
characterise  the  patriarch  as  a  God-fearing 
man,  and  not  simply  as  a  worshipper  of 
Jehovah  (cf.  Quarry  '  on  Genesis,'  p.  460) — 
seeing — literally,  and  (sc.  in  proof  thereof) — 
thou  hast  not  withheld  thy  son,  thine  only 
son  from  me.  Kai  obt  ttpiirrw  tov  t'noD  gov 
ayawtiroii  cV  Ipe  (LXX. ).  Cf.  8c  y*  Tov  iStov 
tnoB  ovk  iQtiaaro  (Rom.  viii.  82),  as  applied 
to  the  sacrifice  of  Christ.  In  this  verse  the 
angel  of  Jehovah  identifies  himself  with 
Elohim. 

Ver.  13. — And  Abraham  lifted  up  his  eyes 
(in  the  direction  of  the  voice),  and  looked, 
and  behold  behind  him — cither  at  his  back 
(Fiirst,  Keil,  Lange,  Murphy),  or  in  the 
background  of  the  altar,  i.  e.  in  front  of  him 
(Gcsenius,  Kalisch).  The  LXX.,  Samaritan, 
Syriac,  mistaking  "TIN!  for  "1I1X,  read  "one," 
which  adds  nothing  to  the  sense  or  pictur. 
esqueness  of  the  composition — a  ram — b%  ; 
in  the  component  letters  of  which  cabalistic 
writers  find  the  initial  letters  of  Ip-n^y, 
D'iTJS,  God  will  provide  for  himself  (ver.  8  ; 
vide  Glass,  'PhiL  Tract.,'  p.  196).  Tn  the 
animal  itself  the  Fathers  (Augustine,  Ter- 
tullian,  Origen,  Chrysostom,  Theodoret, 
Ambrose)  rightly  discerned  a  type  of  Christ, 
though  it  is  fanciful  to  detect  a  shadow  of 
the  crown  of  thorns  in  the  words  that  follow 
— caught  in  a  thicket  by  his  horns  (the 
tebach  being  the  intertwined  branches  of 
trees  or  brushwood) :  and  Abraham  went 
and  took  the  ram,  and  (though  not  directed 
what  to  do,  yet  with  a  fine  spiritual  instinct 
discerning  the  Divine  purpose)  offered  him 
up  for  a  burnt  offering  in  the  stead  of  his 
son — whom  he  thus  received  from  the  dead 
as  in  a  figure  (Heb.  xi.  19). 

Ver.  14. — And  Abraham  called  the  name 
of  that  place  Jehovah-jireh  : — t.  e.  the  Lord 
will  provide  (Jonathan,  Calvin,  Rosenmuller, 
Keil,  &c),  rather  than  the  Lord  selects,  or 
looks  out,  i.  e.  the  sacrifices  to  be  afterwards 
offered  in  the  temple  worship  on  Moriah 
(Kalisch) ;  or,  the  Lord  shall  appear  (Oort, 
Kuenen),  which  overlooks  the  manifest  allu- 
sion to  ver.  8— as  it  is  said  to  this  day, — or, 
so  that  it  is  said  ;  cf.  ch.  xiii.  16  (Keil) — In 
the  mount  of  the  Lord  it  shall  be  seen — or 
"it  shall  be  provided"  (Gesenius,  Rosen- 
miiller,  Dathe,  '  Speaker's  Commentary '), 
though  by  competent  authorities  it  has  been 
otherwise  rendered.  "  In  the  mount  the  Lord 
shall  appear,  or  be  seen"  (LXX.) ;  "in  the 
mount  the  Lord  will  see,  or  provide"  (Vulgate 
Syriac,  Samaritan);  "in  the  mount  of  the 
Lord  he  will  be  seen"  (Murphy);  "in  the 
mount  of  the  Lord  one  shall  be  seen,"  oi 
"people  appear,"  i.  e.  the  people  of  God 
shall  gather  on  this  mountain  Mr  worship 


ch.  xxii.  1 — 19.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


281 


(Xalisch) ;  "on  the  mountain  where  Jehovah 
appeara  "  (Keil).  Amidst  such  a  conflict  of 
interpretations  absolute  certainty  is  perhaps 
unattainable ;  but  the  sense  of  the  proverb 
will  probably  be  expressed  by  understanding 
it  to  mean  that  on  the  mount  of  Abraham's 
sacrifice  Jehovah  would  afterwards  reveal 
himself  for  the  salvation  of  his  people,  as  he 
then  interposed  for  the  help  of  Abraham — 
a  prophecy  which  was  afterwards  fulfilled  in 
the  manifestations  of  the  Divine  glory  given 
in  the  Solomonic  temple  and  in  the  incar- 
nation of  Jesus  Christ. 

Vers.  15—18.  —And  the  angel  of  the  Lord 
called  unto  Abraham  out  of  heaven  the 
second  time, — the  object  of  the  first  call 
having  been  to  arrest  the  consummation  of 
the  fatal  deed  which  threatened  Isaac's  life, 
and  to  declare  the  Divine  satisfaction  with 
-the  patriarch's  complete  spiritual  surrender 
of  his  son,  the  purpose  of  the  second  was  to 
renew  the  promise  in  reward  for  his  fidelity 
and  obedience — and  said,  By  myself  have  I 
sworn,  —  by  my  word  (Onkelos) ;  by  my 
name  (Arabic) ;  equivalent  to  by  himself,  by 
his  soul  (Jer.  li.  14),  or  by  his  holiness  (Amos 
iv.  2)— an  anthropomorphism  by  which  God 
in  the  most  solemn  manner  pledges  the  per- 
fection of  his  Divine  personality  for  the 
fulfilment  of  his  promise ;  an  act  which  he 
never  again  repeats  in  his  intercourse  with 
the  patriarchs.  The  oath  here  given  to 
Abraham  (frequently  referred  to  in  later 
Scripture :  ch.  xxiv.  7 ;  xxvi.  3 ;  1.  24 ;  Exod. 
xiii  5,  11  ;  xxxii.  13  ;  xxxiii.  1 ;  Isa.  xlv. 
23 ;  Heb.  vi.  13)  is  confirmed  by  the  addition 
of — saith  the  lord, — literally,  the  utterance 
of  Jehovah ;  like  the  Latin  ait,  inquit 
Dominus,  the  usual  prophetic  phrase  accom- 


panying Divine  oracles  (cf.  Isa.  Hi.  16  j 
Ezek.  v.  11  ;  Amos  vi.  8),  thuugh  occurring 
in  the  Pentateuch  only  here  and  in  Num. 
xiv.  28— for  because  thou  hast  done  this 
thing,  and  hast  not  withheld  thy  eon,  thine 
only  son  (vide  supra,  ver.  12  ;  from  which 
the  LXX,  Syriac,  and  Samaritan  insert  here 
the  words  ''from  me"):  that  in  blessing 
I  will  bless  thee,  and,  multiplying,  I  will 
multiply  thy  seed  as  the  stars  of  heaven, 
and  as  the  sand  which  is  upon  the  sea  shore; 
— literally,  upon  the  lip  of  the  sea;  a  repe- 
tition and  accumulation  of  the  promises  pre- 
viously made  to  the  patriarch  concerning  his 
seed  (cf.  ch.  xii.  2,  3 ;  xiii.  14 — 16  ;  xv.  5 ; 
xvii.  1—8),  with  the  special  amplification 
following — and  thy  seed  shall  possess  (i.  e. 
occupy  by  force)  the  gate  of  his  enemies ; — 
shall  conquer  their  armies  and  capture  their 
cities  (Keil,  Murphy) ;  though  that  the 
spiritual  sense  of  entering  in  through  the 
doorway  of  their  susceptibilities  in  conversion 
(Lange)  is  not  to  be  overlooked  may  be  inferred 
from  the  appended  prediction— and  in  thy 
seed  shall  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  be 
blessed  (vide  ch.  xii.  3,  where  "families  of 
the  ground"  occur  as  the  equivalent  of 
"nations  of  the  earth") ;  because  tho'i  hast 
obeyed  my  voice.  Originally  unconditional 
in  its  grant,  the  promise  is  here  distinctly 
declared  to  be  renewed  to  him  as  one  who, 
besides  being  justified  and  taken  into  cove- 
nant with  Jehovah,  had  through  trial  and 
obedience  attained  to  the  spiritual  patri- 
archate of  a  numerous  posterity. 

Ver.  19. — So  Abraham  returned  unto  his 
young  men,  and  they  rose  up  and  went 
together  to  Eeer-sheba ,  and  Abraham  i  welt 
at  Beer-sheba. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1—19. — Mount  Moriah,  or  the  mount  of  sacrifice.  I.  Abraham's  trial. 
1.  Divine  in  its  origin.  However  explained,  the  appalling  ordeal  through  which 
the  patriarch  at  this  time  passed  was  expressly  created  for  him  by  Elohirn.  Only  he 
who  made  the  human  heart  can  adequately  search  it ;  and  he  alone  who  has  a  perfect 
understanding  of  the  standard  of  moral  excellence  can  pronounce  upon  the  intrinsic 
worth  of  his  creatures.  2.  Unexpected  in  its  coming.  After  all  that  had  preceded, 
it  might  nave  been  anticipated  that  not  only  were  the  patriarch's  trials  over,  but  that 
the  need  for  such  discipline  in  his  case  no  longer  existed.  It  shows  that  neither 
length  of  years  nor  ripeness  of  grace,  neither  conscious  enjoyment  of  Divine  favour 
nor  previous  experience  of  suffering,  can  exempt  from  trial  or  place  beyond  the  need 
of  testing;  and  that  mostly  "temptations"  come  at  unexpected  times,  and  in 
unlooked-for  ways.  3.  Severe  in  its  form.  Trials  to  be  efficient  must  be  graduated 
to  the  strength  of  those  they  design  to  test.  Only  a  temptation  of  great  force  could 
be  of  service  in  the  case  of  moral  heroism  like  Abraham's.  The  intensity  of  the 
strain  put  upon  his  soul  by  the  astounding  order  to  make  a  holocaust  of  Isaac 
Bimply  baffles  description.  Even  on  the  supposition  that  Abraham  was  not  un- 
familiar with  the  practice  of  offering  human  victims,  as  it  prevailed  among  the 
Canaanites  and  early  Chaldasans,  painful  doubt  must  have  insinuated  itself  into  his 
mind  (1)  as  to  the  character  of  Jehovah,  who  in  making  such  a  barbarous  and 
inhuman  demand  might  seem  little  superior  to  the  heathen  deities  around  ;  (2)  m  to 


Mft  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS,  [ch.  xul  1—19, 

his  own  enjoyment  of  the  Divine  favour,  which  could  scarcely  fail  to  be  staggered 
by  suoh  an  excruciating  stab  to  his  natural  affection ;  but,  (3)  and  chiefly,  as  to  the 
stability  of  the  promise,  which  reason  could  not  but  pronounce  impossible  of  fulfil- 
ment if  Isaac  must  be  put  to  death.  Yet,  overwhelming  as  the  trial  was,  it  was — i. 
Needful  in  its  design.  The  great  covenant  blessing  was  still  conditioned  on  the 
exercise  by  the  patriarch  of  full-hearted  trust  in  the  naked  word  of  God.  Not  until 
that  standpoint  had  been  reached  by  Abraham  in  his  spiritual  development  was  he 
able  to  become  the  parent  of  Isaac ;  and  now  that  Isaac  was  born  there  was  still  the 
danger  lest  Isaac,  and  not  the  naked  word  of  God,  should  be  the  ground  of  the 
patriarch's  confidence.  Hence  the  necessity  arose  for  testing  whether  Abraham 
could  resign  Isaac  and  yet  cling  to  the  promise. 

II.  Abraham's  victory.  1.  The  splendour  of  it.  The  tremendous  act  of  self- 
immolation  was  performed  not  without  pain,  else  Abraham  must  have  been  either 
more  or  less  than  human,  but  (1)  with  unhesitating  promptitude — "  Abraham  rose  up 
earfy  in  the  morning,"  and  "  went  unto  the  place  of  which  God  had  told  him ;  "  (2) 
with  literal  exactness — "  Abraham  laid  the  wood  in  order,  and  bound  Isaac  his  son,  and 
laid  him  upon  the  altar  on  the  wood  : "  (3)  in  perfect  sincerity — "  Abraham  stretched 
forth  his  hand  to  slay  his  son ; "  yet  (4)  without  ostentation — Abraham  went  alone 
with  his  son  to  the  mount  of  sacrifice.  2.  The  secret  of  it.  This  was  faith.  He 
accounted  that,  though  Isaac  should  be  slain,  God  was  able  to  raise  him  up  again 
from  the  dead.  Hence,  though  prepared  to  plunge  the  knife  into  his  son's  breast, 
and  to  reduce  his  beloved  form  to  ashes,  he  "  staggered  not  at  the  promise." 

III.  Abraham's  reward.  1.  The  deliverance  of  Isaac.  (1)  The  time  of  it  At 
the  moment  when  the  sacrifice  was  about  to  be  consummated,  neither  too  soon  for 
evincing  the  completeness  of  Abraham's  obedience,  nor  too  late  for  effecting  Isaac'* 
preservation.  (2)  The  reason  of  it.  Because  the  piety  and  faith  of  the  patriarch 
were  sufficiently  demonstrated.  God  often  accepts  the  will  for  the  deed.  (3)  The 
manner  of  it.  By  the  substitution  of  a  ram,  a  type  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  through 
whose  atoning  death  the  Isaac  of  the  Church  is  delivered  from  condemnation.  (4) 
The  teaching  of  it.  If  Abraham's  surrender  of  Isaac  was  a  shadow  of  the  sacrificing 
love  of  the  eternal  Father  in  sparing  not  his  only  Son,  and  the  bound  Isaac  typical 
of  the  Church's  condemned  condition  before  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  on  Calvary,  and 
the  substituted  ram  was  emblematic  of  him  who,  though  he  knew  no  sin,  was  made  a 
sin  offering  for  us,  the  deliverance  of  Isaac  was  symbolic  both  of  the  resurrection  life 
of  Christ  and  of  the  new  life  of  his  redeemed  people.  2.  The  confirmation  of  the 
blessing.  (1)  A  renewal  of  the  promises — of  a  numerically  great,  territorially  pros- 
perous, and  spiritually  influential  posterity,  and  more  particularly  of  that  distinguished 
seed  in  whom  all  the  families  of  the  earth  should  be  blessed ;  (2)  a  specification  of 
the  ground  on  which  they  were  held,  viz.,  the  patriarch's  believing  obedience  to 
the  Divine  commandment ;  and  (3)  a  solemn  oath  in  guarantee  of  their  fulfilment. 

Lessons : — 1.  The  certainty  of  trial  2.  The  omnipotence  of  faith.  3.  The 
blessedness  of  obedience. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  12. — Abraham's  perfect  faith.  "  Now  I  know  that  thou  fearest  God,  seeing 
thou  hast  not  withheld  thy  son,  thine  only  son  from  me."  "  The  word  of  God,"  says 
Coleridge,  "  speaks  to  man,  and  therefore  it  speaks  the  language  of  the  children  of 
men.  This  has  to  be  kept  in  mind  in  studying  the  remarkable  incident  recorded  in 
this  chapter.  When  God  is  represented  as  "  tempting  "  Abraham,  it  only  means  that 
he  tried  or  tested  him. 

I.  The  testing  of  faith.  Abraham  was  to  be  the  head  of  the  faithful  and  type 
of  the  justified,  therefore  it  was  essential  he  should  be  tested.  Entire  obedience  is 
the  test  of  perfect  faith.  Abraham  had  shown  his  faith  when  he  left  his  own  land, 
and  when  he  waited  patiently  for  a  son  ;  now  he  has  to  show  it  in  a  different  way. 
In  the  two  former  testings  he  had  a  promise  to  rest  on ;  now  he  must  go  far  without 
any  piomise  to  buoy  him  up  in  the  perplexing  sea  of  trial.  "  Take  now  thy  son,"  &o. 
Surely  there  is  some  mistake  I     Must  Abraham  offer  a  human  sacrifice  ?    This  event 


oh.  xxn.  1—19.]  THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS.  2W 

has  perplexed  many,  and  they  have  only  escaped  from  the  difficulties  presented  by 
regarding  the  event— (1)  As  exceptional  for  the  purpose  of  securing  a  unique  type  of 
the  future  sacrifice  of  Christ.  (2)  As  never  intended  to  be  actually  carried  out,  God 
having  foreseen  the  faith  of  his  servant,  and  having  determined  at  the  right  moment 
to  interfere  and  prevent  any  disaster.  There  is  also  a  miraculous  element  in  the 
narrative,  both  in  the  special  voice  and  the  ram  caught  in  the  thicket.  Some  have 
thought  that  the  impulse  was  from  Abraham's  own  mind — that,  seeing  human  sacri- 
fices around,  he  wished  to  rise  above  all  others  in  devotion  to  the  one  God.  Had  this 
been  the  case,  the  Scriptures  would  not  have  represented  the  testing  as  from  God.  In 
that  age  a  father's  right  to  do  as  he  would  with  his  son  was  as  unquestioned  as  his 
right  to  do  what  he  would  with  his  slave.  The  command  of  God  was  not  out  of 
harmony  with  this  idea,  but  it  helped  to  correct  the  mistake.  A  single  act  of  such  self- 
sacrifice  becomes  of  the  highest  value  ;  it  is  even  a  means  of  education  to  the  world. 
God  elicited  the  highest  exercise  of  faith,  but  not  the  blood  of  Isaac.  What  it  must 
have  cost  the  patriarch  to  submit  to  the  Divine  command  1  With  one  blow  he  must 
slay  his  boy  and  his  own  ardent  hopes.  The  only  gleam  of  light  was  in  the  thought 
that  God  who  first  gave  Isaac  could  also  restore  him  from  death.  This  is  indicated 
in  the  words  he  uttered  to  the  young  man,  "  We  will  come  again  to  you."  Tradi- 
tion says  that  the  mount  was  the  same  on  which  Adam,  Abel,  and  Noah  had  offered 
sacrifice.  Here  possibly  Abraham  found  an  altar  to  repair  or  rebuild.  Isaac  helps 
in  rebuilding  the  altar  and  in  arranging  the  wood.  Silent  prayers  ascend  from  father 
and  son.  Isaac  wonders  where  $he  lamb  is  to  come  from.  He  finds  out  when  his 
father  has  bound  him  and  laid  him  on  the  altar.  The  knife  gleams  aloft,  and,  but  for 
the  arresting  voice,  would  have  been  plunged  in  Isaac.     The  test  was  satisfactory. 

II.  God's  manifest  approval  of  the  patriarch's  faith  and  perfect  obedience. 
1.  It  was  by  a  voice  from  heaven.  2.  It  was  manifested  also  by  the  way  in  which 
God  took  away  any  pain  consequent  on  obedience  to  his  command.  It  is  remarkable 
how  those  who  appear  to  have  little  faith  can  become,  when  trial  falls,  perfectly 
submissive  to  the  Divine  will.  3.  The  approval  was  seen  also  in  the  way  in  which 
God  provided  a  sacrifice.  4.  And  God  repeated  his  promise  of  blessing,  confirming 
it  by  a  solemn  covenant.  "  By  myself  have  I  sworn,"  &c.  No  such  voice  comes 
to  us,  and  no  such  promise  is  audibly  given ;  still  we  can  have,  in  the  inner  calm  of 
the  soul,  an  evidence  of  the  Divine  approval.  When  our  faith  is  strongest,  after 
passing  through  some  trial,  we  get  a  clearer  view  of  the  glory  of  God's  working,  both 
in  our  lives  and  in  the  world.  What  approval  have  we  won  ?  Does  not  Abraham 
put  us  to  shame  ?  Too  many  will  laud  the  obedience  of  Abraham  who  will  never 
try  to  emulate  it.  Abraham  was  glad  to  have  his  Isaac  spared  ;  so  would  the  Father 
have  been,  but  he  gave  up  his  "only-begotten,  well-beloved  Son"  for  us.  Our 
readiness  to  accept  and  follow  the  Saviour  given  is  only  another  way  of  showing  how 
we  bear  the  testing  of  faith.  "  Thy  will  be  done  "  should  be  the  utterance  of  each 
believer.  Perfect  faith  in  the  heart  should  be  exhibited  by  perfect  obedience  in 
life.— H. 

Ver.  14. — The  Lamb  of  God.  "And  Abraham  called  the  name  of  that  place 
Jehovah- jireh."  -  The  key  to  this  narrative  is  John  i.  29.  It  sets  forth  in  type 
the  way  of  salvation.  Whether  Abraham  understood  this  we  need  not  inquire. 
The  lesson  is  for  us.  Isaac,  i.  «.  laughter  (cf.  Luke  ii.  10),  the  child  of  promise 
(Bom.  ix.  7),  type  of  "  the  children  of  the  kingdom,"  is  yet  condemned  to  die  (cf. 
Bom.  v.  12).  So  in  Egypt  the  Israelites  were  not  exempted ;  God's  gift  to  them 
was  a  way  of  escape.  What  is  that  way  ?  (cf.  Micah  vi.  6).  Every  age  of  the  world 
has  asked  this  question.  A  sense  of  separation  from  God  has  led  to  many  efforts  for 
its  removal.  Hence  sacrifices,  offerings,  austerities,  &c,  but  all  in  vain  (Heb.  x.  4). 
Still  the  soul  asked,  "Where  is  the  Lamb?"  the  effectual  sacrifice  for  sin.  The 
answer  of  prophecy,  i.  e.  God's  answer,  "  God  will  provide  himself  a  lamb  "  (cf 

plea 
j  he  t 

, ,  ,,,..—..  ..  „  hope  „.,,..     .,„., 

would  in  gome  way  preserve  or  restore  his  son  (cf.  fleb.  xi.  19).  There  are  many 
instances  of  prophecy  unconsciously  uttered  (cf.  John  xi.  50).    Isaac  was  bound— 


£88  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  [oh.  xxh.  1-  1ft 


type  of  man's  helplessness  to  escape  from  the  curse  (cf.  Luke  iv.  18),  or  from  the  law 
of  sin  in  the  members.  The  law  of  God  of  itself  can  only  condemn.  It  can  only  b« 
fulfilled  by  one  who  loves  God  ;  but  he  who  is  not  at  peace  with  God  cannot  love 
him.  The  sacrifice  was  now  complete  as  far  as  Abraham  could  offer  it.  He  had 
cast  down  self-will  (cf.  Matt.  xxvi.  89)  ;  he  had  sacrificed  himself  (Rom.  xii.  1). 
This  is  the  state  of  mind  of  all  others  most  prepared  to  receive  blessings  (of. 
2  Kings  iv.  3 — 6).  "Lay  not  thine  hand  upon  the  lad."  God's  purpose  our  deli- 
verance (Rom.  viii.  1).  The  work  of  the  law,  bringing  home  the  conviction  of  sin,  is 
the  prelude  to  the  knowledge  of  life  (cf.  Rom.  vii.  10 — 13) — life  through  death. 
God's  way  of  deliverance  (Isa.  liii.  6).  The  type,  the  ram  caught  in  the  thicket;  the 
antitype,  Christ  fulfilling  the  Father's  will  (Matt.  xxvi.  54 ;  Mark  xv.  31).  The 
practical  application  of  this  shown  in  brazen  serpent  (John  iii.  14).  Marvellous  love 
of  God  (Rom.  v.  8).  We  had  no  claim  on  him,  yet  he  would  not  that  we  should 
perish  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  11).  He  wanted,  for  the  fulness  of  his  blessedness,  that  we 
should  partake  of  it,  and  therefore  Christ  came  that  he  might  die  in  our  stead  ;  and 
now  in  him  we  are  dead  (2  Cor.  v.  4).  Do  not  dilute  the  truth  by  saying  he  died 
for  believers  only.  This  is  to  miss  the  constraining  power  of  his  love.  If  there  is 
any  doubt  of  his  death  being  for  each  and  all,  the  gospel  is  no  longer  felt  to  be  "who- 
soever will  "  (Rev.  xxii.  17).  Behold  the  Lamb.  We  need  not  now  to  say,  "  God  will 
provide ;  "  he  has  provided  (1  John  ii.  2).  The  universe  could  not  purchase  that  pro- 
pitiation. No  efforts  could  make  thee  worthy  of  it,  yet  it  is  freely  offered  to  thee  to- 
day. And  mark  what  that  gift  includes  (Rom.  viii.  32) — the  help  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
(Luke  xi.  13),  wisdom  (James  i.  5),  help  in  trials  (1  Cor.  x.  13),  peace  (Rom.  viii.  33), 
needs  of  this  life  (Luke  xii.  30).  Bring  all  thy  sins,  thy  wants,  thy  hindrances  to 
the  mercy-seat  (Heb.  iv.  16).  The  Lord  will  see,  will  look  upon  thy  need ;  and  ere 
thy  prayer  is  offered  he  has  provided  what  that  need  requires. — M. 

Vers.  15 — 19. — The  great  trial  and  the  great  revelation.  In  such  a  history  the 
representative  character  of  Abraham  must  be  remembered.  He  was  tried  not  only 
for  his  own  sake,  but  that  in  him  all  the  families  of  the  earth  might  be  blessed. 

I.  The  PBEFAEATION  for  this  great  grace  God  and  Abraham  recognising  earh 
other ;  the  servant  called  by  name,  responding  with  the  profession  of  readiness  for 
obedience. 

II.  The  commandment  is  itself  a  secret  communication,  a  covenant.  Do  this,  and  I 
will  bless  thee ;  follow  me  in  this  journey  "  as  I  tell  thee,"  and  thou  shalt  see  my 
salvation. 

III.  The  simple,  childlike  obedience  of  the  patriarch  is  reflected  in  the  quiet  de- 
meanour of  Isaac  bearing  the  wood  of  the  burnt  offering,  type  of  Jesus  bearing  hi* 
cross,  inquiring  for  the  lamb  with  lamb-like  innocence  and  patience.  "  They  went 
both  of  them  together  "  (vers.  6  and  8) — "  together  "  in  the  beginning  of  the  journey, 
"together"  in  the  end,  in  the  trial  and  in  the  blessing. 

IV.  Faith  which  accepts  the  will  of  God  and  takes  up  the  Divine  mission  will 

COMMIT  THE   FUTURE  TO  THE  GRACIOUS  PROVISION   ON  WHICH  IT  DEPENDS.      "  My  son, 

God  will  provide  himself  a  lamb  for  a  burnt  offering"  (ver.  8).  Already  Abraham 
was  saying,  "The  Lord  will  provide."  We  say  it  sometimes  with  a  fearful  burden 
upon  our  heart ;  but  when  we  go  steadfastly  and  hopefully  forward  we  say  it  at  last 
with  the  remembrance  of  a  great  deliverance  sending  its  glory  along  the  way  of  our 
future. 

V.  THS  TRIAL  OF  THE  TRUE  HEABT  IS  OFTEN  STRETCHED  OUT  TO  ITS  LAST  EX- 
TREMITY, that  the  revelation  which  rewards  faithfulness  may  be  the  more  abundant 
and  wonderful  (vers.  9,  10).  We  must  take  God  at  his  word,  otherwise  we  shall  not 
experience  the  promised  deliverance.  "Take  thy  son,  and  offer  him  there"  (ver.  2). 
"And  Abraham  stretched  forth  his  hand  and  took  the  knife  to  slay  his  son."  What 
else  could  he  do  ?  The  commandment  must  be  obeyed.  The  obedience  must  be 
"  good  and  perfect  and  acceptable  "  as  the  will  of  God. 

VI.  At  the  point  of  entire  surrender  appears  the  angel,  is  heard  the  voic« 
of  relief,  the  assurance  of  acceptance,  the  change  in  the  method  of  obedience,  the 
opened  eyes,  the  provided  sacrifice,  the  returning  joy  of  salvation  (vers.  11 — 13^ 
There  is  a  blindness  of  self-sacrifice  which  leads  to  a  sight  of  immeasurable  joy. 


oh.  xxii.  20-  -24.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


286 


Abraham  saw  nothing  before  him  but  the  plain  path  of  obedience  ;  he  went  on,  and  ai 
last  "lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  looked,  and  behold"  the  self-sacrifice  changed  into 
peaceful  offering  of  an  appointed  substitute  (ver.  13)  "  in  the  stead  of  his  son." 

VII.  The  climax  of  our  experience  and  of  Divine  mercy  becomes  to  ub  a 
new  name  of  Jehovah.  We  know  him  henceforth  by  that  knowledge  of  fact. 
"  Jehovah-jireh  (the  Lord  will  provide)  :  as  it  is  said  to  this  day,  In  the  mount  of 
the  Lord  it  shall  be  provided  "  (or  seen)  (ver.  14).  1.  Not  before  the  mount,  but  in  the 
mount ;  therefor*  go  to  the  summit  and  wait.  2.  What  the  Lord  will  provide  will 
bo  better  every  way  than  what  we  could  provide-  3.  The  offering  on  the  mount  is 
the  great  provision,  the  whole  burnt  offering  for  the  sins  of  the  world,  by  which  the 
true  humanity  is  redeemed  and  the  true  "  joy  "("  Isaac,"  laughter)  is  retained.  4. 
The  last  name  of  Jehovah  which  Abraham  gave  him  was  Jehovah  the  Everlasting  ; 
now  he  adds  to  that  name  that  which  brings  the  Everlasting  into  the  sphere  of  daily 
iife — "Jehovah-jireh,  the  Lord  will  provide."  We  name  that  name  when  we  reach 
.Ike  mount  where  the  great  sacrifice  was  provided—  Mount  Moriah,  Mount  Calvary. 
5.  The  end  of  the  great  trial  and  obedience  was  a  renewal,  a  solemn  republication,  of 
tlie  covenant.  "  God  could  swear  by  no  greater ;  he  sware  by  himself '  (Heb.  vi.  13). 
On  the  foundation  of  practical  faith  is  built  up  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  which  the 
Lord  swears  shall  include  all  nations,  and  be  supreme  in  all  the  earth.  The  notes  of 
that  kingdom  are  here  in  the  history  of  the  patriarch — (I)  acceptance  of  the  word  of 
God,  (2)  self-sacrifice,  (3)  faith  instead  of  sight,  (4)  withholding  nothing,  (5)  per- 
severance to  the  end-  Beersheba  became  now  a  new  place  to  Abraham,  for  he 
carried  to  the  well  and  grove  which  he  had  named  after  the  oaths  of  himself  and 
Abimelech  the  remembrance  of  the  Divine  oath,  on  which  henceforth  he  rested  all  his 
expectations.  After  this  the  man  in  whom  all  nations  shall  be  blessed  looks  round 
and  finds  the  promise  being  already  fulfilled,  and  his  kindred  spreading  widely  in  the 
earth. — It, 


EXPOSITION. 


Ver.  20.— And  it  came  to  pass  after  these 
things  (probably  not  long  after  his  return  to 
Beersheba),  that  it  was  told  (by  some  un- 
known messenger  or  accidental  traveller  from 
Mesopotamia)  Abraham,  saying,  Behold, 
Milcah  {vide  ch.  xi.  29),  she  hath  also  born 
children  unto  thy  brother  Nahor— as  Sarah 
has  born  a  son  to  thee.  From  this  it  would 
almost  seem  as  if  Milcahi  had  not  begun  to 
have  her  family  at  the  tiraeJtbram  left  Ur  of 
the  Chaldees ;  but  vide  ch.  xi.  30.  The 
present  brief  table  of  Nahor's  descendants 
is  iutroduced  for  the  sake  of  showing  the 
descent  of  Rebekah,  who  is  soon  to  become 
Isaac's  wife. 

Ver.  21.— Huz  his  firstborn, — {vide  ch.  x. 
KS,  where  Uz  appears  as  a  son  of  Aram  ;  and 
ch.  xxxvL  28,  where  he  recurs  as  a  descend- 
ant of  Esau.  That  he  was  a  progenitor  of 
Job  (Jerome)  has  no  better  foundation  than 
Jobi.  1 — and  Buz  his  brother,— mentioned 
along  with  Dedan  and  Tema  as  an  Arabian 
tribe  (Jer.  xxv.  23),  and  may  have  been  an 
ancestor  of  Elihu  (Job  xxxii.  2)— and  Kemuel 
the  father  of  Aram.  "  Not  the  founder  of 
the  Arameans,  hut  the  forefather  of  the 
family  of  Ram,  to  which  the  Buzite  Elihu 
belonged ;  Aram  being  written  for  Ram,  like 
Arammim,  in  2  Kings  viii.  29,  for  Rammim, 
i*  2  Chrnn.  xxii.  5  ,P(KeilY 
BKNEillS. 


Ver.  22. — And  Chesed, — according  to  Je- 
rome the  father  of  the  Chasdim  or  Chaldees 
(ch.  xi.  28) ;  but  more  generally  regarded  as 
the  head  of  a  younger  branch  or  offshoot  of 
that  race  (Keil,  Murphy,  Lange;  cf.  Job  i. 
17) — and  Hazo,  and  Pildash,  and  Jidlaph 
(concerning  whom  nothing  is  known),  and 
Bethnel — "man  of  God  "  (Gesenius) ;  dwell- 
ing of  God  (Fiirst) ;  an  indication  probably 
of  his  piety. 

Ver.  23.— And  Bethnel  begat  Rebekah— 
Ribkah;  captivating,  ensnaring  (Fiirst) ;  "a 
rope  with  a  noose,"  not  unfit  as  the  name  of 
a  girl  who  ensnares  men  by  her  beauty  (Ge- 
senius). Rebekah  was  the  child  of  Isaac'3 
cousin,  and  being  the  daughter  of  Nahor's 
youngest  son,  was  probably  about  the  same 
age  as  her  future  husband.  These  eight 
Milcah  did  bear  to  Nahor,  Abraham's  bro 
ther. 

Ver.  24.— And  his  concubine  {vide  on  ch. 
xvi.  3),  whose  name  was  Reumah, — raised; 
elevated  (Gesenius) ;  pean  or  coral  (Fiirst)— 
she  bare  also  Tebah,  and  Gaham,  and  Tha- 
hash,  and  Maachah — whence  probably  the 
Maachathites  (Deut.  iii.  14;  Josh.  xlii.  5). 
That  three  of  Terah's  descendants  (Nahor, 
Ishmael,  and  Jacob)  should  each  have  twelve 
sons  has  been  pronounced  "  a  contrived  sym- 
metry, the  intentional  character  of  whicn 
B 


too 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xxm.  1 — 20. 


cannot  be  mistaken  "  (Bohlen) ;  but  "  what 
Intention  the  narrator  should  have  connected 
with  it  remains  inconceivable,  unless  it  was  to 
it  ate  the  fact  as  it  was,  or  (on  the  supposition 


that  some  of  them  had  more  than  twelve  sons) 
to  supply  a  round  number  easily  retainable  by 
the  memory  "  (Havemick). 


HOMILETICS. 

Vera.  20—24. — Good  news  from  a  far  country.  I.  Thk  joyful  budget.  1. 
Tidings  from  home.  For  nearly  half  a  century  Abraham  had  been  a  wanderer  in 
Palestine,  and  with  something  like  an  emigrant's  emotion  on  receiving  letters  from 
tlie  old  country  would  the  patriarch  listen  to  the  message  come  from  Haran  beyond 
the  river.  2.  News  concerning  Nahor.  It  demands  no  violent  exercise  of  fancy  to 
believe  that  Abraham  regarded  his  distant  brother  with  intense  fraternal  affection, 
and  that  the  unexpected  report  of  that  distant  brother's  prosperity  struck  a  chord  of 
joy  within  his  aged  bosom.  3.  A  message  about  Milcah.  When  the  two  brothers 
parted  it  would  seem  that  neither  of  their  spouses  had  begun  to  have  a  family.  Now 
information  reaches  the  patriarchal  tent  that  the  union  of  Nahor  and  Milcah,  like  that 
of  himself  and  Sarai,  has  been  blessed  with  offspring ;  arfli,  in  particular,  that  the 
second  generation  had  begun  to  appear  in  Nahor's  house,  the  queenly  grace  of 
Milcah  being  reproduced  in  her  captivating  grandchild  Eebekah. 

II.  The  welcome  messenger.  1.  His  unknown  name.  One  is  curious  to  know 
who  it  was  that  brought  the  tidings  from  the  old  home.  Some  spirited  adventurer 
who  at  the  distance  of  half  a  century  sought  to  emulate  the  Chaldasan  chief- 
tain who  left  the  valley  of  the  Euphrates  for  the  bleak  hills  of  Palestine ;  some 
Mesopotamian  Stanley  whom  Nahor,  now  a  wealthy  Emir,  had  despatched  upon  a 
mission  of  inquiry  after  his  long-lost  brother ;  or  some  chance  traveller  who  had 
come  across  the  patriarch's  tent.  2.  His  timely  arrival.  Whoever  he  was,  his 
appearance  at  this  particular  juncture  was  exceedingly  opportune,  when,  the  great 
trial  having  passed,  Isaac's  marriage  must  have  loomed  in  the  prospect  as  a  near 
possibility.  To  Abraham  it  must  have  seemed  not  a  fortuitous  occurrence,  but  a 
providential  arrangement. 

Learn — 1.  That  no  passage  of  Scripture  can  be  said  to  be  entirely  useless.  2. 
That  joy  and  sorrow  mostly  lie  in  close  contiguity  in  human  life.  3.  That  it 
becomes  good  men  and  women  to  be  interested  in  each  other's  welfare.  4.  That  in 
God's  government  of  th9  world  there  are  no  such  things  as  accidents.  5.  That 
it  becomes  good  men  to  keep  an  outlook  upon  the  leadings  of  Divine  providence. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXIII. 


Ver.  1. — And  Sarah  was  an  hundred  a\i 
seven  and  twenty  years  old  (literally,  and 
the  lives  of  Sarah  were  an  hundred  and 
twenty  and  seven  years) ;  so  that  Isaac  must 
have  been  thirty-seven,  having  been  born  in 
his  mother's  ninetieth  year.  Sarah,  as  the 
wife  of  Abraham  and  the  mother  of  believers 
(Isa.  li  2  ;  1  Pet.  iii.  6),  is  the  only  woman 
whose  age  is  mentioned  in  Scripture.  These 
were  the  years  of  the  life  of  Sarah  —  an 
emphatic  repetition  designed  to  impress  the 
[siaelitish  mind  with  the  importance  of  re- 
membering the  age  of  their  ancestress. 

Tsr.  2. — And  Sarah  d;ed  in  Kirjath-arba 
— or  city  of  Arba,  Abraham  having  again 
removed  thither  after  an  absence  of  nearly 
forty  years,  during  which  interval  Murphy 
thinks  the  reign  of  Arba  the  Anakite  may 
bare  commenced,  though  Keil  postpones  it 


to  a  later  pwibd"  (cf.  Josh.  xiv.  15).  rh» 
same  is  Hebron — the  original  name  of  the 
city,  which  was  supplanted  by  that  of  Kir- 
jath-arba, but  restored  at  the  conquest  (Keil. 
fferjgstenberg,  Murphy  ;  vide  ch.  xiii.  18) — 
in  tie  land  of  Canaan— indicating  that  the 
writer  was  not  then  in  Palestine  ('  Speaker's 
Commentary ') ;  perhaps  rather  designed  to 
emphasise  the  circumstance  that  Sarah's 
death  occurred  not  in  the  Philistines'  country, 
but  in  the  promised  land  (Rosenmiiller,  Keil, 
Murphy).  And  Abraham  came — or  went; 
rj\6e  (LXX. ),  venit  (Vulgate);  not  as  if  he 
had  been  absent  at  her  death  (Calvin),  oithei 
in  Beersheba,  where  he  retained  a  location 
(Clarke),  or  in  Gerar,  whither  he  had  gone 
to  sell  the  lands  and  other  properties  he 
held  there  (Luther),  or  in  the  pasture  gioundi 
adjoming  Hebron  (Keil,  Murphy) ;  but  M 
addressing  himself  to  the  work  of  mourn- 
ing  for  hia  deceased  wife  (Vatablus,  Boaen- 


ch.  xxni.  1 — 20.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


291 


miiller),  or  perhaps  as  going  into  Sarah's 
lent  (Maimonides,  Ains worth,  Words- 
worth, '  Speaker's  Commentary  ') — to 
mourn  for  Sarah,  and  to  weep  for  her.  "To 
arrange  for  the  customary  mourning  cer. 
mony "  (Keil) ;  the  first  verb,  "I?0  (cf. 
o-<)>aSat;<i>),  referring  to  the  beating  of  the 
breast  as  a  sign  of  grief  (cf.  1  Kings  xiv. 
13) ;  and  the  second,  •"'?5>  *°  fl°w  by 
drops,  intimating  a  quieter  and  more 
moderate  sorrow.  Beyond  sitting  on  the 
ground  and  weeping  in  presence  of  (or 
upon  the  face  of)  the  dead,  no  other  rites 
are  mentioned  as  having  been  observed 
by  Abraham ;  though  afterwards,  as 
practised  among  the  Hebrews,  Egyptians, 
and  other  nations  of  antiquity,  mourning 
for  the  dead  developed  into  an  elaborate 
ritual,  including  such  ceremonies  as  rend- 
ing the  garments,  shaving  the  head, 
wearing  sackcloth,  covering  the  head 
with  dust  and  ashes  {vide  2  Sam.  iii.  31, 
35 ;  xxi.  10 ;  Job.  i.  20  ;  ii.  12  ;  xvi.  15, 
16).  Cf .  the  mourning  for  Patroclus  ('  II.,' 
xix.  211—213). 

Ver.  3. — And  Abraham  stood  up — during 
the  days  of  mourning  he  had  been  sitting 
on  the  ground  ;  and  now,  his  grief  having 
moderated  (Calvin),  he  goes  out  to  the 
city  gate — from  before  (literally,  from  over 
the  face  of)  his  dead, — "Sarah,  though 
dead,  was  still  his"  (Wordsworth) — and 
spake  unto  the  sons  of  Heth. — the,  Hittites 
were  descendants  of  Heth,  the  son  of 
Canaan  (vide  ch.  x.  15).  Cf.  "  daughters 
of  Heth"  (ch.  xxvii.  46)  and  "daughters 
of  Canaan"  (ch.  xxviii.  1)— saying. 

Ver.  4. — I  am  a  stranger  and  a  sojourner 
with  you.  Qer,  one  living  out  of  his  own 
country,  and  Thoshabh,  one  dwelling  in  a 
land  in  which  he  is  not  naturalised ; 
advena  et  peregrinus  (Vulgate) ;  irdpoiKos 
Kal  irap'  EirCSi||ios  (LXX.).  This  confession 
of  the  heir  of  Canaan  was  a  proof  that  he 
sought,  as  his  real  inheritance,  a  better 
country,  even  an  heavenly  (Heb.  xi.  13). 
Give  me  a  possession  of  a  burying  place 
With  you.  The  first  mention  of  a  grave 
in  Scripture,  the  word  in  Hebrew  signify- 
ing a  hole  in  the  earth,  or  a  mound,  ac- 
cording as  the  root  is  taken  to  mean  to 
dig  (Filrst)  or  to  heap  up  (Gesenius). 
Abraham's  desire  for  a  grave  in  which  to 
deposit  Sarah's  lifeless  remains  was 
dictated  by  that  Divinely  planted  and 
among  civilised  nations,  universally  pre- 
vailing reverence  for  the  body  which 
prompts  men  to  decently  dispose  of  their 
dead  by  rites  of  honourable  sepulture. 
The  burning  of  corpses  was  a  practice 
common  to  the  nations  of  antiquity  ;  but 
Tacitus  notes  it  as  characteristic  of  the 
Jews  that  they  preferred  interment  to 


cremation  ('Hist.,'  v.  5).  The  wish  to 
make  Sarah's  burying-place  his  own 
possession  has  been  traced  to  the  in- 
stinctive desire  that  most  nations  have 
evinced  to  lie  in  ground  belonging  to 
themselves  (Rosenmiiller),  to  an  inten- 
tion on  the  part  of  the  patriarch  to  give  a 
sign  of  his  right  and  title  to  the  land  of 
Canaan  by  purchasing  a  grave  in  its  soil — 
cf.  Isa.  xxii.16  (Bush),  or  simply  to  anxiety 
that  his  dead  might  not  lie  unburied  (Cal- 
vin) ;  but  it  was  more  probably  due  to  his 
strong  faith  that  the  land  would  yet  belong 
to  his  descendants,  which  naturally  led 
him  to  crave  a  resting-place  in  the  soil  with 
which  the  hopes  of  both  himself  and  peo- 
ple were  identified  (Ainsworth,  Bash. 
Kalisch).  That  I  may  bury  my  dead  out  of 
my  sight — decay  not  suffering  the  lifeless 
corpse  to  remain  a  fit  spectacle  for  grief 
or  love  to  gaze  on. 

Vers.  5,  6. — And  the  children  of  Heth 
answered  Abraham,  saying  unto  him, 
Hear  us,  my  lord.  My  lord  (Adoni)  =  sir, 
monsieur  or  mem  7ierr.  One  acts  as  the 
spokesman  of  all ;  the  number  changing 
from  plural  to  singular.  The  LXX. ,  read- 
ing Nb  instead  of  ft,  after  the  Samaritan 
Codex,  render  pf  Ktipie,  Not  so,  my  lord  ; 
but  hear  us.  Thou  art  a  mighty  Prince 
among  us.  Literally,  a  prince  of  Elohim  ; 
not  of  Jehovah,  since  the  speakers  were 
heathen  whose  ideas  of  Deity  did  not  trans- 
cend those  expressed  in  the  term  Elohim. 
According  to  a  familiar  Hebrew  idiom,  the 
phrase  might  be  legitimately  translated  as 
intheA.V. — cf.  "  mountains  of  God,"  i.  e. 
great  mountains,  Ps.  xxxvi.  6  ;  "  cedars  of 
God."  i.  e.  goodly  cedars,  Ps.  lxxx.  10.  . 
(Calvin,  Kimchi,  Rosenmiiller,  '  Speaker's 
Commentary  ')  ;  but,  as  employed  by  the 
Hittite  chieftains,  it  probably  expressed 
that  they  regarded  him  as  a  prince  or  phy- 
larch,  not  to  whom  God  had  given  an  ele- 
vated aspect  (Lange),  but  either  whomGod 
had  appointed  (Gesenius),  or  whom  God 
manifestly  favoured  (Kalisch,  Murphy). 
This  estimate  of  Abraham  strikingly  con- 
trasts with  that  which  the  patriarch  had 
formed  (ver.  4)  of  himself.  In  the  choice 
of  our  sepulchres  bury  thy  dead  ;  none  of  us 
will  withhold  from  thee  his  sepulchre,  but 
that  thou  mayest  bury  thy  dead.  This  re- 
markable offer  on  the  part  of  Hittites 
Thomson  ('LandandBook,'  p.  578)  regards 
as  having  been  merely  compliment,  which 
Abraham  was  too  experienced  an  Oriental 
not  to  understand.  But,  even  if  dictated  by 
true  kindness  and  generosity,  the  proposal 
was  one  to  which  for  many  reasons — faith 
in  God,  love  for  the  dead,  and  respect  for 
himself  being  among  the  strongest — the 
patriarch  could  not  accede.    With  perfect 


292 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


fen.  xxiii.  1  —  20. 


courtesy,  therefore,  though  likewise  with 
respectful  firmness,  he  declines  their  offer. 

Ver.  7. — And  Abraham  stood  np  (the 
customaryposture  amongOrientalsin  buy- 
ing and  selling  being  that  of  sitting),  and 
bowed  himneli'  to  the  people  of  the  land,  even 
to  the  children  of  Heth — an  act  of  respect 
quite  accordant  with  modern  Oriental 
manners  (side  Thomson,  'Land  and  Book,' 
p.  579). 

Vers. 8,  9. — And  he  communed  with  them, 
saying,  If  it  be  your  mind — literally,  if  it 
be  with  your  souls,  the  word  nephesh  being 
used  in  this  sense  in  Ps.  xxvii.  12  ;  xli.  3  ; 
cv.  22 — that  I  shonld  bury  my  dead  out  of 
icy  sight ;  hear  me.  and  intreat  for  me  to 
Ephron  the  son  of  Zohar.  The  ruler  of  the 
city  (Keil)  ;  but  this  is  doubtful  (Lange). 
"  There  is  scarcely  anything  in  the  habits 
of  Orientals  more  annoying  to  us  Occiden- 
tals than  this  universal  custom  of  employ- 
ing mediators  to  pass  between  you  and 
those  with  whom  you  wish  to  do  business. 
Nothing  can  be  done  without  them.  A 
merchant  cannot  sell  a  piece  of  print,  nor 
a  farmer  a  yoke  of  oxen,  nor  any  one  rent  a 
house,  buy  a  horse,  or  get  a  wife,  without 
a  succession  of  go-betweena.  Of  course 
Abraham  knew  that  this  matter  of  the  field 
could  not  be  brought  about  without  the 
intervention  of  the  neighbours  of  Ephron, 
and  therefore  he  applies  to  them  first " 
('Land  and  Book,'  p.  579).  That  he  may 
givemethecaveof  Machpelah, — Machpelah 
is  regarded  as  a  proper  noun  (Gesenius, 
Keil,  Kalisch,  Eosenmiiller),  as  in  ch.  xlix. 
30,  though  by  others  it  is  considered  as  an 
appellative,  signifying  that  the  cave  was 
double  (LXX.,  Vulgate),  either  as  consist- 
ing of  acave  withina  cave(Hamerus),  or  of 
one  cave  exterior  aud  another  interior 
(Aben  Ezra),  or  as  having  room  for  two 
bodies  (Calvin),  or  as  possessing  two  en- 
trances (Jewish interpreters).  Itisprobable 
the  cave  received  its  name  from  its  peculiar 
forni,— whichhe  hath  (Ephron's  ownership 
of  the  cave  is  expressly  recognized,  and  its 
situation  is  next  described),  which  is  in  the 
end  of  his  field —  "  so  that  the  cessation  of  it 
will  not  injure  his  property  "  (Words- 
worth). At  the  same  time  Abraham  makes 
it  clear  that  an  honest  purchase  is  what  he 
contemplates.  For  as  much  money  as  it  is 
worth — literally,  for  full  silver  (1  Chron. 
xxi.  22).  Cf.  siller  (Scotch)  for  money. 
This  is  the  first  mention  of  the  use  of  the 
precious  metals  as  a  medium  of  exchange, 
though  they  must  have  been  so  employed 
at  a  very  early  period  (vide  ch.  xiii.  2) — 
he  shall  give  it  me  for  a  possession  of  a 
btirying-place  amongst  you.  The  early 
Chaldeans  were  accustomed  to  bury  their 
dead  in  strongly-constructed  brick  vaults. 
Those  f  oundat  Mugheir  are  seven  feet  long, 


three  feet  seven  inches  broad,  and  five 
feethigh,  arecomposed  of  sun-driedbricks 
embedded  in  mud,  and  exhibit  a  remark- 
able form  and  construction  of  arch  resem- 
blingthat  occurring  inEgyptian  buildings 
and  Scythian  tombs,  in  which  the  success- 
ive layers  of  brick  are  made  to  overlap 
until  they  come  so  close  that  the  aperture 
may  be  covered  by  a  single  brick  (Raw- 
linson's  '  AncientMonarchies,'  vol.  i.  p.  86). 
In  the  absence  of  such  artificial  receptacles 
for  the  dead,  the  nearest  substitute  the 
patriarch  could  obtain  was  one  of  those 
natural  grottoes  which  the  limestone  hills 
of  Canaan  so  readily  afforded. 

Ver.  10. — And' Ephron  dwelt  among  the 
children  of  Heth.  Not  habitabat  (Vulgate), 
in  tliesenseof  resided  amongst,  hutsedebat, 
IkAStito  (LXX.);  was  then  present  sitting 
amongst  the  townspeople  (Eosenmiiller), 
but  whether  inthecapacityof  a  magistrate 
or  councillor  is  not  stated.  And  Ephron 
the  Hittite  answered  Abraham  in  the  audi- 
ence of  the  children  of  Heth,  even  of  all 
that  went  in  at  the  gate  of  his  city, — this 
does  not  imply  that  he  was  the  chief 
magistrate  (Keil),  but  only  that  he  was  a 
prominent  citizen  (Murphy).  On  the  gate 
of  the  city  as  a  place  for  transacting  busi- 
ness vide  ch.  xix.  1 — saying — 

Ver.  11. — Nay,  my  lord,  hear  me  :  the 
field  give  I  thee, and  the  cave  thatis  therein, 
I  give  it  thee — an  Oriental  mode  of  ex- 
pressing willingness  to  sell.  Ephron 
would  make  a  present  of  cave  and  field  to 
the  patriarch, — "and  just  so  have  I  had  a 
hundred  houses,  and  fields,  and  horses 
given  to  me  "  ('  Land  and  Book,'  p.  578), 
the  design  being  either  to  obtain  a  valu- 
able compensation  in  return,  or  to  preclude 
any  abatement  in  the  price  (Keil),  though 
possibly  the  offer  to  sell  the  entire  field 
when  he  might  have  secured  a  good  price 
for  the  cave  alone  was  an  indication  of 
Ephron's  good  intention  (Lange).  At 
least  it  seems  questionable  to  conclude  that 
Ephron's  generous  phrases,  which  have 
now  become  formal  and  hollow  courtesies 
indeed,  meant  no  more  in  that  simpler  age 
when  the  ceremonies  of  intercourse  were 
newer,  and  more  truly  reflected  its  spirit 
(Dykes,  '  Abraham,  the  Friend  of  God,' 
p.  287).  In  the  presence  of  the  sons  of  my 
people  I  give  it  thee  (literally,  have  I  given, 
the  transaction  being  viewed  as  finished): 
bury  thy  dead. 

Vers.  12,  13. — And  Abraham  bowed 
down  himself  before  the  people  of  the  land. 
To  express  his  sense  of  their  kindness, 
and  appreciation  of  Ephron's  offer  in 
particular,  after  which  he  courteously  but 
firmly  urged  forward  the  contemplated 
purchase.  And  he  spake  unto  Ephron 
in  the  audience  of  the  people  of  the  land, 


CH.  XXIII.  1— SO.] 


THE  BOOK  OB'  GENESIS. 


298 


•aying,  But  if  thou  wilt  give  it,  I  pray 
thee  hear  me.  Literally,  if  thou,  I  would 
that  thou  wouidst  hear  me,  the  two  par- 
ticles DN  and  <fc  being  conjoined  to  ex- 
press the'  intensity  of  the  speaker's  desire. 
I  will  give  thee  money  for  the  field. 
Literally,  money  of  the  field,  i.  e.  the 
value  of  the  field  in  money.  This  seems 
to  indicate  that  Abraham  at  least  imagined 
Ephron's  offer  of  the  field  and  cave  as  a 
gift  to  be  not  wholly  formal.  Had  he  re- 
garded Ephron  as  all  the  while  desirous 
of  a  sale,  he  would  not  have  employed 
the  language  of  entreaty.  Take  it  of  me, 
and  I  will  bury  my  dead  there. 

Vers.  14, 15.— AndEphr'onanswered  Abra- 
ham, saying  into  him,  My  lord,  hearken  unto 
me :  the  land  is  worth  four  hundred  shekels  of 
silver.  The  word ' '  shekel, "  from  shakal,  to 
weigh,  here  used  for  the  first  time,  was  not  a 
stamped  coin ,  but  a  piece  of  metal  of  definite 
weight,  according  to  Exod.  xxx.  13,  equal  to 
twenty  geTahs,  or  beans,  from  ga/rar,  to  roll. 
Coineamoney  was  unknown  to  the  Hebrews 
until  after  the  captivity.  In  the  time  of  the 
Maccabees  (1  Mace.  xv.  6)  silver  coins  were 
struck  bearing  the  inscription  bNlia1  bplB. 
According  to  Josephus  ('Ant.,'  iii.  8, 2)  the 
shekel  in  use  in  his  day  was  equal  to  four 
Athenian  drachmae;  and  if,  as  is  believed, 
these  were  one-fifth  larger  than  the  old 
shekels  coined  by  Simon  Maccabeus,  the 
weight  of  the  latter  would  be  equal  to  three 
and  one-third  drachms,  or  two  hundred 
grains,  reckoning  sixty  grains  to  a  drachm. 
It  is  impossible  to  ascertain  the  weight  of 
the  shekel  current  with  the  merchant  in  the 
time  of  Abraham;  but  reckoning  it  at  a 
little  less  than  2s.  6d.  sterling,  the  price  of 
Ephron's  field  must  have  been  somewhat 
under  £50;  a  very  considerable  sum  of 
money,  which  the  Hittite  merchant  begins 
to  depreciate  by  representing  as  a  trifle, 
saying,  What  is  that  betwixt  me  and  theel 
— words  which  are  still  heard  in  the  East 
on  similar  occasions  (vide  'Land  and  Book,' 
p.  578) — bury  therefore  thy  dead. 

Ver.  16. — And  Abraham  hearkened  unto 
Ephron  (either  as  knowing  that  the  price 
he  asked  was  reasonable,  or  as  being  in  no 
humourto  bargain  withhim  on  thesubject); 
and  Abraham  weighed  to  Ephron  the  silver, 
— "  Eventhisis  still  common;  for  although 
coins  have  now  a  definite  name,  size  and 
value,  yet  every  merchant  carries  a  small 
apparatus  by  which  he  weighs  each  coin  to 
see  that  it  has  not  been  tampered  with  by 
Jewish  Clippers"  ('Land  and  Book,'  p.  578) 
— which  he  had  named  in  the  audience  of  the 
sons  of  Heth  (the  stipulation  and  the  pay- 
ment of  the  money  were  both  made  in  the 
presence  of  witnesses),  four  hundred  shekels 
of  silver,  current  money  with  the  merchant 
—literally,  silver  passing  with  the  mer- 


chant,or  goer  about,  i.  e.  with  merchandise ; 
from  saehar,  to  go  about  (cf.  tpiropos, 
^|iirope«o(iai).  TheCanaanites,  of whomthe 
Hittites  were  a  branch,  were  among  the  ear- 
liesttradersof  antiquity  (cf.Jobxl.S0;Prov. 
xxxi.  24);  and  the  silver  bars  employed  as 
the  medium  of  exchange  in  their  mercan- 
tile transactions  were  probably  stamped  in 
some  rude  fashion  to  indicate  their  weight. 
Vers.  17,  18.— And  the  field  of  Ephron, 
which  was  in  Machpelah, — here  the  word  is 
used  as  a  proper  name  (vide  supra) — which 
was  before  Manure, — "\3pb  =  over  against 
(Lange),  to  the  east  of  (Keil),  the  oak  grove 
'—the  field,  and  the  cave  which  was  therein , 
and  all  the  trees  that  were  in  the  field,  that 
were  in  all  the  borders  around  about, — "In 
like  manner  the  specifications  in  the  con- 
tract are  just  such  as  are  found  in  modern 
deeds.  It  is  not  enough  that  you  purchase  a 
well-known  lot;  the  contract  must  mention 
everything  that  belongs  to  it,  and  certify 
that  fountains  or  wells  in  it,  trees  upon  it, 
&c,  are  sold  with  the  field"  ('Land  and 
Book,'  p.  578)— were  made  sure— literally 
stood  up  or  arose,  i.  e.  were  confirmed  (cf. 
Levit.  xxvii.  14,  19| — unto  Abraham  for  a 
possession  in  the  presence  of  the  children  of 
Heth,  before  all  that  went  in  at  the  gate  of 
hiscity.  "Thisalsoistruetolife.  Whenany 
saleisnow  to  be  effected  inatown  or  village, 
the  whole  population  gather  about  the  par- 
ties at  the  usual  place  of  concourse,  around 
or  near  the  gate  where  there  is  one.  There 
all  take  part  and  enter  into  the  pros  and 
cons  with  as  much  earnestness  as  if  it  were 
their  own  indi  vidualaff  air.  By  these  means 
the  operation,  in  all  its  circumstances  and 
details,  is  known  to  many  witnesses,  and 
the  thing  is  made  sure  without  any  written 
contract"  ('Land  and  Book,'  p.  579). 

Ver.  19. — And  after  this,  Abraham  buried 
Sarah  his  wife — with  what  funeral  rites 
can  only  be  conjectured.  Monumental  evi- 
dence attests  that  the  practice  of  embalm- 
ing the  dead  existed  in  Egypt  in  the  reign 
of  Amunophth  I.  (B.C.  1500),  though  prob- 
ably originating  earlier  (Sharpe's  'Egypt,' 
vol.  i.  p.  31);  and  an  examination  of  the 
Mugheir  vaults  for  burying  the  dead  shows 
that  among  the  early  Chalsedans  it  was 
customary  to  place  the  corpse  upon  a  mat- 
ting of  reed  spread  upon  a  brick  floor,  the 
head  being  pillowed  on  a  single  sun-dried 
brick,  and  the  body  turned  on  its  left  side, 
the  right  arm  falling  towards  the  left,  and 
the  fingers  resting  on  the  edge  of  a  copper 
bowl,  usually  placed  on  the  palm  of  the 
left  hand  (vide  Rawlinson's  'Ancient  Mon- 
archies,' vol.  i.  p.  87) — in  the  cave  of  the 
field  of  Machpelah  before  Mamre.  In  which 
also  in  succession  his  own  remains  and 
those  of  Isaac,  Eebekah,  Jacob,  and  Leah 
were  deposited,  Rachel  alone  of  the  great 


294 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xxm.  1—20. 


patriarchal  family  being  absent.  This  last 
resting-place  of  Abraham  and  his  sons, 
as  of  Sarah  and  her  daughters,  has  been 
identified  with  Ramet-el-KalU,  an  hour's 
journey  to  the  north  of  Hebron  (which  is 
too  distant),  where  the  foundations  of  an 
ancient  heathen  temple  are  still  pointed 
out  as  Abraham's  house ;  but  is  more  prob- 
ably to  be  sought  for  in  the  Mohammedan 
mosque  Hara/m,  built  of  colossal  blocks, 
and  situated  on  the  mountain  slope  of  He- 
bron towards  the  east  (Robinson,  Thom- 
son, Stanley,  Tristram),  which,  after  hav- 
ing been  for  600  years  hermetically  sealed 
against  Europeans, — only  three  during 
that  period  having  gained  access  to  it  in  dis- 
guise,— was  visited  in  1862  by  the  Prince  of 
Wales  and  party  (vide  Stanley,  '  Lectures 
on  Jewish  Church,'  App.  ii.).  The  same  is 
Hebron  in  the  land  of  Canaan  (vide  ver.  2). 
Ver.  20. — And  the  field,  and  the  cave  that 
is  therein  were  made  sure  unto  Abraham 
for  a  possession  of  a  burying-place  by  the 
sons  of  Heth.  The  palpable  discrepancy 
between  the  statements  of  the  Hebrew 
historian  in  this  chapter  concerning  the 
patriarchal  sepulchre  and  those  of  the 
Christian  orator  when  addressing  the  Jew- 
ish Sanhedrim  (Acts  vii.  16)  has  been  well 
characterised  as  pragravis  qumdam  etper- 
ardua,  et  quorundam  judicio  inextricabilis 
qwnstio  (Pererius).  Of  course  the  Gordian 
knot  of  difficulty  may  be  very  readily  cut 
by  boldly  asserting  that  a  mistake  has  been 
committed  somewhere ;  either  by  Stephen, 
the  original  speaker,  under  the  impulse 
of  emotion  confounding  the  two  entirely 
different  stories  of  Abraham's  purchase 
of  Machpelah  and  Jacob's  buying  of  the 
field  near  Shechem  (Bede,  Clarke,  Lange, 
Kalisch,  Alford,  and  others) ;  or  by  Luke, 
the  first  recorder  of  the  Martyr's  Apology, 
who  wrote  not  the  ipsissima  verba  of  the 
speech,  but  simply  his  own  recollection 


of  them  (Jerome) ;  or  by  some  subsequent 
transcriber  who  had  tampered  with  the 
original  test,  as,  «.  g.,  inserting  A(3paa|i, 
which  Lnke  and  Stephen  both  had  omit- 
ted, at  the  nominative  to  wirijo-aro  (Beza, 
Calvin,  Bishop  Pearce).  The  last  of  these 
hypotheses  would  not  indeed  be  fatal  to 
the  inspiration  of  the  record;  but  the 
claims  of  either  Luke  or  Stephen  to  be 
authoritative  teachers  on  the  subject  of 
religion  would  be  somewhat  hard  to  main- 
tain if  it  once  were  admitted  that  they  had 
blundered  on  a  plain  point  in  their  own 
national  history.  And  yet  it  is  doubtful 
if  any  of  the  proposed  solutions  of  the 
problem  is  perfectly  satisfactory ;  such  as 
(1)  that  the  two  purchases  of  Abraham 
and  Jacob  are  here  intentionally,  for  the 
sake  of  brevity,  compressed  into  one  ac- 
count (Bengel,  Pererius,  Willet,  Hughes); 
or  (2)  that  Abraham  bought  two  graves, 
one  at  Hebron  of  Ephron  the  Hittite,  as 
recorded  by  Moses,  and  another  at  Shechem 
of  the  sons  of  Hamor  the  father  of  She- 
chem (Wordsworth) ;  or  (3)  tnat  the  words 
"which  Abraham  bought  for  a  sum  of 
money"  should  be  regarded  as  a  paren- 
thesis, and  the  sentence  read  as  intimating 
that  Jacob  and  the  fathers  were  carried 
over  into  Shechem,  and  (afterwards)  by 
the  sons  of  Hamor  the  father  of  Shechem 
interred  in  Abraham's  sepulchre  at  Hebron 
(Cajetan).  Obvious  difficulties  attach  to 
each,  of  them ;  but  the  facts  shine  out  clear 
enough  in  spite  of  the  encompassing  ob- 
scurity,  viz.,  that  Abraham  bought  a  tomb 
at  Hebron,  in  which  first  the  dust  of  Sarah 
was  deposited,  and  to  which  afterwards 
the  bodies  of  himself,  Isaac  and  Bebekah, 
Jacob  and  Leah  were  consigned,  while 
Joseph  and  the  twelve  patriarchs,  who 
all  died  in  Egypt,  were  brought  over  to 
the  promised  land  and  buried  in  Jacob's 
field  at  Shechem. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 20. — Tlie  death  and  burial  of  Sarah.  I.  The  death  op  Sibah.  1.  The 
mournful  event.  The  death  of — (1)  An  aged  woman.  "Sarah  was  an  hundred  and 
tweDty-seven  years  old."  (2)  A  distinguished  princess.  As  the  wife  of  Abraham 
and  the  mother  of  the  promised  seed,  Sarah  was  doubly  enobled.  (3)  An  eminent 
saint.  Sarah,  like  her  husband,  was  renowned  for  faith  and  piety  ;  indeed  in  these 
respects  only  second  to  the  mother  of  our  Lord,  whom  she  conspicuously  typified, 
and  proposed  by  the  Holy  Spirit  as  a  pattern  for  Christian  women.  (4)  A  beloved 
wife.  Sarah's  married  life  extended  over  the  greater  part  of  a  century,  and  the  tender 
and  constant  love  which  gilded  it  with  happiness  through  all  the  passing  years  shines 
on  every  page  of  the  inspired  narrative.  (5)  A  revered  parent.  In  the  death  of 
Sarah  Isaac  lost  a  loving  and  a  much-loved  mother.  2.  The  attendant  circumstances. 
Sarah  died— (1)  In  the  land  of  Canaan.  If  not  the  place  of  her  birth,  Canaan  had 
become  the  country  of  her  adoption,  and  the  scene  of  her  spiritual  nativity.  A  spe- 
cial sadness  attaches  to  death  upon  a  foreign  shore,  and  among  heathen  peoples. 
Sarah  may  be  said  to  have  expired  upon  her  own  inheritance,  and  in  Jehovah's  land. 
(2)  In  the  bosom  of  her  family.    If  Sarah  was  not  spared  the  anguish  of  dying  in  the 


ch.  xxm.  1—20.]  THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS.  895 

absence  of  her  noble  husband,  her  latest  moments,  we  may  be  sure,  were  soothed  by 
the  tender  ministries  of  her  gentle  son.  (3)  In  the  exercise  of  faith.  Sarah  was  one 
of  those  "all "  who  "  died  in  faith,"  looking  for  a  better  country,  even  an  heavenly. 
Hence  the  last  enemy,  we  cannot  doubt,  was  encountered  with  quiet  fortitude  and 
cheerful  resignation. 

II.  The  burial  of  Sarah.  1.  The  days  of  mourning.  "Abraham  came  to 
mourn  and  to  weep  for  Sarah."  The  sorrow  of  the  patriarch  was — (1)  Appropriate  and 
becoming.  Lamentation  for  the  dead  agreeable  to  the  instincts  of  nature  and  the 
dictates  of  religion.  Witness  Joseph  (ch.  1.  1),  David  (2  Sam.  xii.  16),  Job  (ch.  i. 
30),  the  devout  men  of  Jerusalem  (Acts  viii.  2),  Christ  (John  xi.  85).  (2)  Intense 
and  sincere.  Though  partaking  of  the  nature  of  a  public  ceremonial,  the  patriarch's 
grief  was  none  the  less  real  and  profound.  Simulated  sorrow  is  no  less  offensive  than 
sinful.  (8)  Limited  and  restrained.  If  there  is  a  time  to  mourn  and  a  time  to  weep, 
there  is  also  a  time  to  cast  aside  the  symbols  of  sorrow,  and  a  time  to  refrain  from 
tears.  Nature  and  religion  both  require  a  moderate  indulgence  in  the  grief  occasioned 
by  bereavement.  2.  The  purchase  of  a  grave.  Here  may  be  noted — (1>  The  polite 
request.  Its  object — a  grave  for  a  possession;  its  purpose — to  bury  his  dead;  its  plea — 
his  wandering  and  unsettled  condition  in  the  land.  (2)  The  generous  proposal;  pre- 
faced with  respect,  proffered  with  magnanimity ;  teaching  us  the  respect  owing 
neighbours,  the  honour  due  superiors,,  and  the  kindness  which  should  be  shown 
strangers.  (3)  The  courteous  refusal.  Unwilling  to  acquiesce  in  the  proposed 
arrangement,  Abraham  declines  with  much  respectfulness  (ver.  12),  expresses  his 
desire  with  greater  clearness  (ver.  13),  and  urgently  requests  the  friendly  intercession 
of  the  people  of  the  land  (ver.  8).  Abraham's  politeness  a  pattern  for  all.  (4)  The 
liberal  donation.  Ephron  indicates  his  wish  to  bestow  the  cave  upon  the  patriarch 
as  a  gift.  Liberality  a  Christian  virtue  which  may  sometimes  be  learnt  from  the 
men  of  the  world.  (5)  The  completed  purchase.  Abraham  weighs  out  the  stipu- 
lated sum,  neither  depreciating  Ephron's  property  nor  asking  an  abatement  in  the 
price;  an  example  for  merchants  and  traders.  (6)  The  acquired  possession.  The 
field  and  cave  were  made  sure  to  Abraham  for  ever.  The  only  thing  on  earth  a  man 
can  really  call  his  own  is  his  grave.  8.  The  last  rites  of  sepulture.  "After  this 
Abraham  buried  Sarah  his  wife  in  the  cave  of  the  field  of  Machpelah  ; "  with  unknown 
funeral  rites,  but  certainly  with  reverence,  with  sadness,  with  hope. 

Learn — 1.  The  duty  of  preparing  for  death.  2.  The  propriety  of  moderate  in- 
dulgence in  grief.  3.  The  obligation  resting  on  surviving  relatives  to  carefully  dis- 
pose of  the  lifeless  bodies  of  the  dead.  4.  The  wisdom  of  good  men  acquiring  as 
soon  as  possible  for  themselves  and  their  families  a  burial-place  for  a  possession. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  19,  20. — The  death  and  burial  of  Sarah.  I.  Trtjb  religion  sanctifies 
natural  relationships.  Those  who  know  themselves  blessed  of  God  do  not  only 
feel  that  their  human  affections  are  precious  and  true,  but  do,  in  obedience  to  his 
will,  preserve  the  greatest  respect  for  their  bodily  frame,  and  for  their  dead  who  died 
in  the  Lord,  and  whose  dust  is  committed  tenderly  to  his  keeping. 

II.  The  people  of  God  were  upheld  by  faith  in  their  care  for  the  dead. 
They  looked  .beyond  the  grave.  Some  say  there  is  no  evidence  of  the  doctrine  of 
immortality  in  the  Old  Testament  until  after  the  captivity.  Surely  Abraham's  feel- 
ings were  not  those  of  one  who  sorrowed  without  hope.  The  purchase  of  the  field, 
the  securing  possession  for  all  time  of  the  burying-place,  pointed  to  faith,  not  the  lack 
of  it.    Where  there  is  no  sense  of  immortality  there  is  no  reverence  for  the  dead. 

IIL  The  purchase  of  the  field  was  not  only  its  security,  but  a  testimony  to  the 
heathen  that  the  people  of  God  held  in  reverence  both  the  memory  of  the  dead  and 
the  rights  of  the  living.     All  social  prosperity  has  its  root  in  religious  life. — R. 

Ver.  20. — Lessons  from  the  sepulchre.  "And  the  field,  and  the  cave  that  is  therein, 
were  made  sure  unto  Abraham  for  a  possession  of  a  burying-place."  Abraham's 
first  and  only  possession  in  Canaan,  a  sepulchre.  The  importance  of  the  purchase 
appears  in  the  careful  narrative  of  the  transaction.  For  himself  he  was  content  to 
live  as  a  stranger  and  pilgrim  (cf.  1  Pet.  v.  7);  but  Sarah's  death  led  him  to  acquire 
a  burying-place.  Declining  the  offer  to  use  any  of  the  sepulchres  of  the  people  of  the 
land  (cf.  the  separation  at  death  between  God's  people  and  aliens),  he  bought  the  field 


290 


THE  BOOK  OF   GENESIS. 


[oh.  xxrr.  1 — 8. 


and  the  cave,  and  carefully  prepared  the  evidence  of  the  purchase.  The  purchase 
showed  his  faith  in  God's  truth;  one  of  the  branches  of  Adam's  temptation  (Gen.  iii. 
4).  It  had  been  promised  that  his  seed,  after  dwelling  in  a  land  not  theirs,  should 
return  and  possess  that  whereon  he  stood  (cf.  Jer.  xxxii.  14,  15).  Type  of  entrance 
into  rest  after  pilgrimage  (cf.  2  Cor.  v.  1).  It  showed  also  his  faith  in  a  resurrection 
(cf.  Ps.  xvi.  10).  The  desire  that  he  and  his  family  should  lie  in  the  same  sepulchre 
speaks  of  a  life  beyond  the  present.  Parted  by  death,  they  were  one  family  still. 
Sarah  was  to  him  "my  dead."  There  was  a  link  between  them  still.  The  living 
and  dead  still  one  family.  Doctrine  of  communion  of  saints  (cf.  Matt.  xxii.  82). 
Death  was  the  gate  of  life  (cf.  1  Thess.  iv.  16).'  Canaan  a  type  of  the  rest  which 
remaiueth  ;  Abraham  of  the  "children  of  the  kingdom,"  pilgrims  with  a  promise, 
No  rest  here.     Life  full  of  uncertainties.     One  thing  sure,  we  must  die.     But — 

I.  We  enter  the  heavenly  rest  through  death;  the  city  op  God  through 
the  valley  of  Baca.  Here  we  wa!k  by  faith.  Great  and  glorious  promises  for 
our  encouragement,  that  we  may  not  make  our  home  here;  yet  we  know  not  what  we 
shall  be.  Sight  cannot  penetrate  the  curtain  that  separates  time  from  eternity.  Thus 
there  is  the  trial,  do  we  walk  by  faith  or  by  sight?  We  instinctively  shrink  from 
death.  It  is  connected  in  our  mind  with  sorrow,  with  interruption  of  plans,  with 
breaking  up  of  loving  companionship;  but  faith  bids  us  sorrow  not  as  those  without 
hope.  It  reminds  that  it  is  the  passing  from  what  is  defective  and  transitory  to 
what  is  immortal.  Here  we  are  trained  for  the  better  things  beyond,  and  our 
thoughts  are  turned  to  that  sepulchre  in  which  the  victory  over  death  was  won ; 
thence  we  see  the  Lord  arising,  the  pledge  of  eternal  life  to  all  who  will  have  it. 

II.  The  sepulchre  was  made  sure  to  Abraham.  In  time  he  should  enter  it  as 
one  of  the  company  gathered  there  to  await  the  resurrection  day;  but  meanwhile  it 
was  bis.  And  if  we  look  upon  this  as  typical  of  our  interest  in  the  death  of  Christ, 
it  speaks  of  comfort  and  trust.  He  took  our  nature  that  he  might  "  taste  death  for 
every  man."  His  grave  is  ours  (2  Cor.  v.  14).  We  are  "buried  wilh  him,"  "  planted 
together  in  the  likeness  of  his  death."  The  fact  of  his  death  is  a  possession  that 
cannot  be  taken  from  us  (Col.  iii.  3,  4).  He  died  that  we  might  live.  If  frail  man 
clings  to  the  tomb  of  some  dear  one;  if  the  heart  is  conscious  of  the  link  still  endur- 
ing, shall  we  not  rejoice  in  our  union  with  him  whose  triumph  makes  us  also  more 
than  conquerors  ? 

III.  The  field  and  cave.  How  small  a  part  did  Abraham  possess  in  his  life- 
time, but  it  was  an  earnest  of  the  whole;  he  felt  it  so,  and  in  faith  buried  his  dead 
(cf.  Gen.  1.  25;  Heb.  xi.  22).  An  earnest  is  all  we  possess  here,  but  still  we  have  an 
earnest.  In  the  presence  of  the  Lord  (John  xiv.  23),  in  the  peace  which  he  gives, 
in  the  spirit  of  adoption,  we  have  the  "  substance  of  things  hoped  for,"  a  real  frag- 
ment and  sample  of  the  blessedness  of  heaven. — M. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 

Ver.  1. — And  Abraham  was  old,  and  well 
stricken  in  age: — literally,  gone  into  days 
(cf.  ch.  xviii.  11),  being  now  about  140 
(vide  ch.  xxv.  20)— and  the  Lord — Jehovah; 
not  because  the  chapter  is  the  exclusive 
composition  of  the  Jehovist  (Tuch,  Bleek, 
Kalisch),  but  because  the  writer  aims  at 
showing  how  the  God  of'redemption  pro- 
vided a  bride  for  the  heir  of  the  promise 
(Hengstenberg) — had  blessed  Abraham  in 
all  things. 

Vers.  2 — 4. — And  Abraham  said  unto  his 
eldest  servant  of  his  house,  that  ruled  over 
all  that  he  had, — literally,  to  his  servant, 
the  old  man,  ancient  or  elder,  of  Ids  house, 
the  ruler  over  all  which  (sc.  belonged)  to 
\im.  The  term  "jpj  (an  old  man)  is  in  most 


languages  employed  as  a  title  of  honour — 
cf .  sheikh,  senatns,  yipav,  presbyter,  signor, 
seigneur,  sefior,  sir  (Gesenius,  p.  252), — and 
is  probablytobe  so  understood  here.  Eliezer 
of  Damascus,  upwards  of  half  a  century 
previous  regarded  as  heir  presumptive  to 
Abraham's  bouse  (ch.  xv.  2),  is  commonly 
considered  the  official  meant,  though  the 
point  is  of  no  importance — Put,  I  pray 
thee,  thy  hand  under  my  thigh:  and  I  will 
make  thee  swear.  This  ancient  form  of  ad- 
juration, which  is  mentioned  again  only  in 
chap,  xlvii.  39,  and  to  which  nothing  anal- 
ogous can  elsewhere  be  discovered, — the 
practice  alleged  to  exist  among  the  modern 
Egyptian  Bedouins  of  placingthehandupon 
the  membrum  virile  in  solemn  forms  of  as- 
severation not  forming  an  exact  parallel, — 
was  probably  originated  by  the  patriarch. 


cm.  xxrv.  1—9.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


297 


The  thigh,  as  the  source  of  posterity  (cf. 
ch.  xxxv.  11;  xlvi.  36;  Bxod.  i.  5),  has  been 
regarded  as  pointing  to  Abraham's  future 
descendants  (Keil,  Kalisch,  Lange),  and 
io  particular  to  Christ,  the  promised  seed 
(Theodoret,  Jerome,  Augustine,  Luther, 
Ainsworth,  Bush,  Wordsworth),  and  the 
oath  to  be  equivalent  to  a  swearing  by  him 
that  was  to  come.  By  others  the  thigh  has 
been  viewed  as  euphemistically  put  for 
the  generative  organ,  upon  which  the  sign 
of  circumcision  was  placed,  and  the  oath 
as  an  adjuration  by  the  sign  of  the  cove- 
nant (Jonathan,  Jarchi,  Tuch).  A  third 
interpretation  considers  the  thigh  as  sym- 
bolising lordship  or  authority,  and  the 
placingof  the  hand  under  it  as  tantamount 
to  an  oath  of  fealty  and  allegiance  to  a 
superior  (Aben,  Ezra,  Rosenmuller,  Cal- 
vin, Murphy).  Other  explanations  are 
modifications  of  the  above.  By  the  Lord 
(Jehovah;  since  the  marriage  to  which  this 
solemn  adjuration  was  preliminary  was 
not  an  ordinary  alliance,  such  as  might 
have  taken  place  under  the  providence  of 
Elohim,  but  the  wedding  of  the  heir  of  the 
promise),  the  God  of  heaven,  and  the  God  of 
the  earth  (a  clause  defining  Jehovah  as  the 
supreme  Lord  of  the  universe,  and  there- 
fore as  the  sole  Arbiter  of  human  destiny), 
that  thou  shalt  not  take  a  wife  unto  my  son 
— not  investing  him  with  authority  to 
provide  a  wife  for  Isaac  in  the  event  of 
death  carrying  him  (Abraham)  off  before 
his  son's  marriage,  but  simply  explaining 
the  negative  side  of  the  commission  with 
which  he  was  about  to  be  intrusted.  If 
it  evinced  Isaac's  gentle  disposition  and 
submissive  piety,  that  though  forty  years 
of  age  he  neither  thought  of  marriage, 
but  mourned  in  devout  contemplation  for 
his  mother  (Lange),  nor  offered  resistance 
to  his  father's  proposal,  but  suffered  him- 
self to  be  governed  by  a  servant  (Calvin), 
it  was  also  quite  in  accordance  with  ancient 
practice  that  parents  should  dispose  of 
their  children  in  marriage  (cf.  ch.  xxviii. 
2) — of  the  daughters  of  the  Canaanites, 
among  whom  I  dwell.  Being  prompted  to 
this  partly  by  that  jealousy  which  all 
pastoral  tribes  of  Shemitic  origin  have 
been  accustomed  to  guard  the  purity  of 
their  race  by  intermarriage  (Dykes;  cf. 
Thomson,  'Land  and  Book,' p.  591),  and 
partly  no  doubt  by  his  perception  of  the 
growing  licentiousness  of  the  Canaanites, 
as  well  as  his  knowledge  of  their  predict- 
ed doom,  though  chiefly,  it  is  probable, 
by  a  desire  to  preserve  the  purity  of  the 
promised  seed.  Intermarriage  with  the 
Canaanites  was  afterwards  forbidden  by 
the  Mosaic  legislation  (Exod.  xxxiv.  16 ; 
Deut.  vii.  3).  But  (literally,  for,  i.  o.  the 
former  thing  must  not  be  done  because 


this  must  be  done)  thou  shalt  go  unto  my 
country  (not  Ur  of  the  Chaldees,  but  the 
region  beyond  the  Euphrates  generally), 
and  to  my  kindred,  and  take  a  wife  unto  my 
son  Isaac.  Though  enforced  by  religious 
considerations,  this  injunction  to  bring 
none  but  a  relative  for  Isaac's  bride  "  was 
in  no  sense  a  departure  from  established 
usages  and  social  laws  in  regard  to  mar- 
riage "  ('  Land  and  Book,'  p.  591). 

Ver.  5  — And  the  servant  said  onto  him 
(not  having  the  same  faith  as  his  master): 
Peradventure  (with  perhaps  a  secret  con- 
viction that  he  oughtto  say,  "Of  a  surety  ") 
the  woman  will  not  be  willing  to  follow  m* 
unto  this  land.  .Prima  facie  it  was  anatural 
and  reasonable  hypothesis  that  the  bride 
elect  should  demur  to  undertake  a  long 
and  arduous  journey  to  marry  a  husband 
she  had  never  seen;  accordingly,  the  an- 
cient messenger  desires  to  understand 
whether  he  might  not  be  at  liberty  to  act 
upon  the  other  alternative.  Must  I  needs 
bring  thy  son  again  unto  the  land  from 
whence  thou  earnest?  In  reply  to  which  the 
patriarch  solemnly  interdicts  him  from  at- 
tempting to  seduce  his  son,  under  any  pre- 
text whatever,  to  leave  the  land  of  promise. 

Vers.  6 — 8. — And  Abraham  said,  beware 
thou — literally,  beware  for  thyself,  the 
pleonastic  pronoun  being  added  by  way  of 
emphasis  (cf.  ch.  xii.  1;  xxi.  16;  xxii.  5) — 
that  thou  bring  not  my  son  thither  again. 
Literally,  lest  thou  cause  my  son  to  return 
thither;  Abraham  speaking  of  Isaac's  go- 
ing to  Mesopotamia  as  a  return,  either  be- 
cause he  regarded  Isaac,  though  then  un- 
born, as  having  come  out  with  him  from 
Mesopotamia,  cf.  Heb.  xii.  10  (Words- 
worth), or  because  he  viewed  himself  and 
his  descendants  as  a  whole,  as  in  ch.  xv. 
16  (Rosenmuller).  The  Lord  God  of  heaven, 
who  took  me  from  my  father's  house,  and 
from  the  house  of  my  kindred, — vide  ch.  xii. 
1.  This  was  the  first  consideration  that 
prevented  the  return  of  either  himself  or 
his  son.  Having  emigrated  from  Mesopo- 
tamia in  obedience  to  a  call  of  heaven, 
not  without  a  like  instruction  were  they 
at  liberty  to  return — and  who  spake  unto 
me, — t.  «.  honoured  me  with  Divine  com- 
munications (vide  supra) — and  (in  partic- 
ular) that  sware  unto  me,—  vide  ch.  xv.  17, 
18;  the  covenant  transaction  therein  re- 
corded having  all  the  force  of  an  oath  (cf . 
ch.  xxii.  16)— saying,  Unto  thy  seed  will  I 
give  this  land.  Here  was  a  second  con- 
sideration that  negatived  the  ideaof  Isaac's 
return, — he  was  the  God-appointed  heir  of 
the  soil, — and  from  this,  in  conjunction 
with  the  former,  he  argued  that  the  Divine 
promise  was  certain  of  fulfilment,  and 
that  accordingly  the  mission  for  a  bride 
would  be  successful.     He  shall  send  Mi 


298 


THE  BOOK  OP  ©ENESIS. 


[oh.  xxtv.  1 — 9. 


angel  before  thee, — i.  e.  to  lead  and  protect, 
as  was  afterwards  promised  to  Israel(Exod. 
xxiii.  20),  and  to  the  Christian  Church 
(Heb.  i.  14) — and  thou  shalt  take  a  wife 
unto  my  son  from  thence  (meaning,  thy 
mission  shall  be  successful).  And  if  the 
woman  will  not  be  willing  to  follow  thee, 
then  shalt  thou  be  clear  of  this  my  oath 
(*'.  e.  at  liberty  to  hold  thyself  as  no  longer 
under  obligation  in  the  matter;  thy  re- 
sponsibility will  at  that  point  ceiise  and 
determine):  only  bring  not  my  son  thither 
again — or,  observing  the  order  of  the 
Hebrew  words,  only  my  son  bring  not 


again  to  that  place;  with  almost  feverish 
entreaty  harping  on  the  solemn  refrain 
that  on  no  account  must  Isaac  leave  the 
promised  land,  since  in  that  would  be  the 
culmination  of  unbelief  and  disobedience. 
Ver.  9. — And  the  servant  (understand- 
ing the  nature  of  his  mission,  and  feeling 
satisfied  on  the  points  that  impinged  upon 
his  conscience)  put  his  hand  under  the 
thigh  of  Abraham  his  master,  and  sware  to 
him  concerning  that  matter — to  be  true  to 
his  master  and  his  mission,  and  to  the 
hope  and  promise  of  the  covenant 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 9. — A  bride  for  the  heir. — 1.  Abraham  and  Bliezer,  or  the  mission  for  the 
bride.  I.  The  trusty  messenger.  1.  Bis  designation.  (1)  From  official  position, 
a  servant.  (2)  From  venerable  age,  the  old  man  or  ancient  of  the  house.  (3)  From 
superior  dignity,  the  steward  or  ruler  over  Abraham's  property.  2.  His  qualification. 
(1)  Obedient,  as  became  a  slave  or  servant.  (2)  Faithful,  as  was  required  of  a  steward. 
(3)  Prudent,  as  might  have  been  expected  of  age. 

II.  The  important  commission.  1.  The  purport  of  it.  "To  take  a  wife  for  Isaac." 
A  step  of  greatest  moment  for  the  happiness  of  Isaac,  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise, 
and  the  onward  development  of  the  Church.  2.  The  reason  of  it.  (1)  Abraham's 
advancing  years.  The  patriarch  was  "  gone  into  days,"  and  had  no  time  to  waste  if 
he  desired  to  see  Isaac  well  married  before  he  followed  Sarah  to  Machpelah.  (2) 
Abraham's  prosperous  estate.  "The  Lord  had  blessed  him  in  all  things,"  left 
nothing  that  his  soul  could  desire  to  complete  the  cup  of  his  terrestrial  happiness, 
except  the  wedding  of  his  son  to  a  godly  partner.  (3)  Isaac's  obvious  disinclination 
to  seek  a  wife  for  himself,  his  placid  and  pensive  temperament  disposing  him  rather 
to  cling  with  mournful  tenderness  to  the  memory  of  a  beloved  mother  than  to  antici- 
pate the  felicities  of  conjugal  affection.  (4)  Eliezer's  admirable  fitness  for  the 
contemplated  mission. 

III.  The  solemn  adjuration.  1.  The  form  of  the  oath.  "  Put,  I  pray  thee,  thy 
hand  under  my  thigh."  For  the  significance  of  this  ancient  ceremony  consult 
Exposition.  2.  The  power  of  the  oath.  This  was  derived  from  the  character  of  the 
Divine  Being — the  Lord  God  of  heaven  and  of  earth — in  whose  presence  it  was  taken, 
to  whose  witness  it  appealed,  and  whose  wrath  it  invoked  in  case  of  failure  to  per- 
form what  was  vowed.  3.  The  tenor  of  the  oath.  (1)  Negative — not  to  marry  Isaac 
to  a  daughter  of  the  Canaanites,  an  already  doomed  race;  and  (2)  positive — to  seek  a 
wife  for  Sarah's  son  among  his  kinsmen  in  Padan-aram,  amongst  whom  as  yet  the 
knowledge  of  the  true  God  was  retained. 

IV.  The  reasonable  apprehension.  1.  Natural.  A  priori  there  was  little  prob- 
ability that  a  modest  girl  would  consent  on  the  invitation  of  a  stranger  to  leave  her 
home  and  kiudred,  accompany  him  into  a  distant  land,  and  wed  a  man  (even  though 
a  relative)  whom  she  had  never  seen;  and  in  similar  way  reason  can  make  out  a  case 
against  almost  every  step  in  the  distinctly  Christian  life  as  being  unlikely,  improbable, 
imprudent.  2.  Unbelieving.  The  aged  ambassador's  anxiety  was  not  shared  in  by  the 
patriarch,  whose  faith  had  already  reasoned  out  the  successful  termination  of  the 
contemplated  expedition.  And  so  again  in  the  Christian  life,  difficulties  which  to 
sagacious  reason  appear  insurmountable,  to  simple-minded  faith  cease  to  exist.  3. 
Unnecessary.  When  discovered  and  interrogated,  the  maiden  was  quite  willing  to 
become  Isaac's  bride.  Many  of  the  saint's  fears  are  of  his  own  making,  like  this  of 
Abraham's  servant,  and  in  the  end  are  found  to  have  been  superfluous, 

V.  The  resolute  prohibition.  "Beware  that  thou  bring  not  my  son  thither 
again."  To  do  so  would  be — 1.  To  reverse  the  Divine  call  which  had  brought  the 
patriarch  from  Mesopotamia.  2.  To  endanger  the  inheritance  by  exposing  Isaac  to  the 
temptation  of  remaining  in  Mesopotamia,  should  his  wife  prove  unwilling  to  return. 


OH.  mv.  1—0.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  H» 

Learn — 1.  The  interest  whieh  should  be  taken  by  pious  parents  in  the  marriage  of 
their  children.  2.  The  care  which  should  be  exercised  by  those  who  marry  to  secure 
pious  partners.  8.  The  lawfulness  of  imposing  and  taking  oaths  on  important 
occasions,  and  for  sufficient  reasons.  4.  The  clearer  sight  'which  belongs  to  faith 
than  to  sense  and  reason.  5.  The  folly  of  anticipating  difficulties  that  may  never 
arise.  6.  The  danger  of  taking  any  step  in  life  without  Divine  guidance  or  instruc- 
tion.   7.  The  sin  of  renouncing  one's  religion  for  the  sake  of  a  wife. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ch.  xxiv. — The  unfolding  of  the  Divine  purpose.  I.  Tub  expanded  blessing. 
The  first  line  of  the  web  of  sacred  history  stretches  itself  out  to  Mesopotamia.  The 
aged  patriarch,  blessed  of  Jehovah  in  all  things,  is  fading  from  our  sight.  We  must 
look  on  a  new  generation  and  see  the  blessing  expanded. 

II.  The  Divine  guidance.  The  angel  shall  be  sent  before  Isaac,  and  he  will 
overrule  the  events  and  wills  which  seem  to  stand  in  the  way.  The  marriage  of 
Isaac  was  a  matter  of  most  solemn  momi  nt.  The  earthly  bonds  are  blessed  only 
when  they  are  held  up  by  the  Divine  covenant. 

IIL  Man's  faith  rewarded  by  special  direction.  The  servant  prayed  for 
good  speed,  because  it  was  in  the  spirit  of  dependence  upon  Jehovah  that  the  whole 
errand  was  undertaken.  We  have  no  ground  for  expecting  supernatural  indications 
of  the  future,  but  when  we  commit  our  way  unto  the  Lord  we  may  ask  him  to  show 
it.  If  it  be  well  for  us  to  see  it  beforehand,  which  it  sometimes  is  not,  he  will  send 
us  "  kindness  "  both  in  the  occurrences  and  persons  we  meet. 

IV.  Earthly  relationships  are  under  Heaven's  superintendence.  The 
fair  Mesopotamian  is  a  suitable  companion  for  the  heir  of  the  patriarch.  She  is  full 
of  graciousness  and  activity,  free  from  pride,  gentle,  unsuspicious,  generous,  patient, 
self-sacrificing,  benevolent.  Such  characteristics  are  what  the  children  of  God 
desire  to  transmit  to  their  descendants.  In  the  sight  of  so  much  that  was  lovely 
both  in  person  and  character,  the  servant  held  his  peace  with  wondering  thoughtful- 
ness,  waiting  for  and  already  anticipating  the  blessing  of  the  Lord. 

V.  The  true  piety  watches  por  God  and  worships.  On  receiving  the  simple 
answer  to  his  inquiry,  and  perceiving  how  the  hand  of  the  Lord  had  been  guiding 
him,  he  bowed  his  head  and  worshipped  (vers.  26,  27).  Those  who  wait  for  ' '  the 
mercy  and  the  truth  "  will  not  be  left  destitute  of  it.  Oh  to  be  able  at  every  step 
and  stage  of  life  to  say,  "Blessed  be  the  Lord  I "  to  hear  the  salutation  rendered  us, 
"  Gome  in,thou  blessed  of  the  Lord  I " 

VI.  God  in  history.  The  kingdom  of  God  had  its  points  of  connection  from  this 
moment  with  the  thread  of  human  affection,  sanctified  by  the  grace  of  God,  uniting 
them  together.  The  house  of  Abraham,  the  house  of  Bethel,  are  widely  separated 
from  one  another  in  the  measurement  of  space,  but  closely  bound  together  hence- 
forth by  the  spiritual  ties  of  a  common  faith  and  obedience  in  the  name  of  Jehovah. 
The  same  Divine  purpose  which  directed  the  servant's  way  moved  the  heart  of  the 
damsel.  "  She  said,  I  will  go."  She  went  out  of  the  midst  of  pure  family  affections  ; 
she  was  welcomed  by  one  who  saw  her  coming  when  he  was  "  meditating  in  the  field 
at  eventide,"  doubtless  in  the  spirit  of  prayerful  expectation  ;  and  who  took  her  to 
his  mother  Sarah's  tent,  where  she  might  be  sure  one  who  so  tenderly  mourned  the 
loss  of  a  mother  would  know  how  to  cherish  a  wife  sent  of  God  to  comfort  him. 
"  He  loved  her."  Religion  is  the  only  true  guardian  of  domestic  happiness,  the  only 
deep  soil  in  which  the  affections  flourish. — R. 

Ver.  6.— No  turning  back.  "  And  Abraham  said  unto  him,  Beware  thou  that 
thou  bring  not  my  son  thither  again."  Abraham's  care  to  prevent  the  leaven 
of  idolatry  entering  his  family  (cf.  Exod.  xxxiv.  16  ;  1  Cor.  xv.  33  ;  James  i. 
27).  Worldly  wisdom  would  have  led  him  to  seek  a  wife  for  his  son  among 
the  families  of  Canaan,  so  as  to  give  him  a  firmer  footing  in  the  land ;  but  he 
solemnly  charged  his  steward,  in  sending  him  on  a  marriage  embassy,  not  to  do  this 
(cf.  1  Kings  xi.  3  ;  2  Cor.  vi.  14).  A  wife  was  to  be  sought  from  his  brother's 
family.     Out  of  the  earnestness  of  this  godly  desire  came  the  trial  of  his  faith. 


800 


THB  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[CH.  XXIT.  10— 8& 


All  obvious  difficulty  ;  what  if  the  damsel  should  not  be  willing  to  follow  a  stranger? 
There  had  been  little  intercourse  between  the  families.  The  news  in  ch.  xxii.  20  was 
plainly  the  first  for  many  years.  Must  Isaac  go  in  person  to  take  a  wife  from  her 
father's  house  ?  Much  might  be  urged  in  favour  of  this.  If  the  presence  of  Isaac 
were  of  importance,  might  he  not  return  for  a  little,  though  Canaan  was  his  appointed 
home  ?  Was  it  not  hindering  the  very  thing  Abraham  desired,  to  refuse  to  do  so  ? 
Was  it  not  unreasonable  to  look  for  a  blessing  and  yet  to  neglect  obvious  means  for 
obtaining  it  ?  Hot  for  a  moment  would  Abraham  listen  to  the  suggestion.  At  God's 
call  he  had  left  Mesopotamia  for  ever.  To  send  his  son  back  would  be  contrary  to 
the  principle  of  his  whole  life.  It  would  be  to  put  expediency  above  faith,  to  dis- 
trust God's  promise,  to  think  his  will  changeable  (cf.  1  Kings  xiii.  19).  Contrast  the 
faithlessness  of  the  Israelites  in  their  wilderness  journeys.  Abraham  would  not  allow 
even  a  temporary  return.  They  "  in  their  .hear  is  turned  back  again  into  Egypt"  (cf. 
Luke  ix,  62). 

I.  In  a  godly  life  there  is  often  a  temptation  to  turn  back  fob  a  mttle. 
With  a  laudnble  aim,  some  step  which  seems  likely  to  lead  to  it  is  not  quite  what  in 
itself  we  know  to  be  right.  To  gain  the  means  of  doing  good,  some  little  departure 
from  truth  may  seem  almost  necessary.  In  the  eagerness  of  some  plan  of  usefulness 
the  time  for  prayer  can  hardly  be  found,  or  the  ordinary  daily  duties  of  life  seem  to 
interrupt  the  greater  and  higher  work  ;  or,  to  gain  an  influence  over  the  gay  and 
worldly,  it  may  seem  the  course  of  wisdom  to  go,  a  little  way  at  least,  with  them. 
And  is  not  a  Christian,  under  the  law  of  liberty,  freed  from  strict  observance  of  the 
letter?  Does  not  that  savour  of  the  spirit  bondage  ?  Nay,  "  to  obey  is  better  than 
sacrifice."  Always  danger  when  men  seek  to  be  wiser  than  God  (Prov.  xiv.  12). 
We  cannot  foresee  the  difficulties  of  returning. 

II.  Tkue  faith  points  to  implicit  obedience.  Can  we  not  trust  God  to  order 
all — not  only  the  ends  towards  which  he  would  have  us  strive,  .but  the  means  to  be 
used?  We  are  to  live  by  every  word  of  God,  not  by  some  special  saying  only. 
Piomse  and  precept,  instruction  and  direction,  are  alike  his  words,  by  which  every 
step  should  be  guided.  It  is  want  of  faith  which  leads  to  departure  from  obedience  ; 
waut  of  full  trust  in  God  which  leads  to  ways  of  fancied  wisdom.  We  have  to  do 
with  efforts,  not  with  results  ;  these  are  in  God's  hand.  Where  obedience  is  not  in 
question  we  rightly  use  our  judgment ;  reason  was  given  us  to  be  our  guide,  but  not 
to  take  the  guidance  out  of  God's  hands. — M. 


EXPOSITION. 


Ver..l0. — And  the  servant  took  ten  camels 
of  th»  camels  of  his  master, — to  bear  the 
presents  for  the  bride,  to  enhance  the 
dignity  of  his  mission,  and  to  serve  as  a 
means  of  transport  for  the  bride  and  her 
companions  on  the  return  journey.  On 
the  word  Gamal  vide  ch.  xii.  16 — and  de- 
parted. Either  from  Hebron  (ch.  xxiii. 
19),  or  from  the  south  country,  near  Beer- 
lahai-roi  (ch.  xxiv.  62).  For  all  the  goods 
of  his  master  were  in  his  hand.  Literally, 
and  every  good  thing  of  his  master  in  his 
hand ;  meaning  that  he  selected  (sc.  as 
presents  for  the  bride)  every  best  thing 
that  belonged  to  his  master — cf.  2  Kings 
viii.  9  (LXX.,  Vulgate,  Murphy,  Ka- 
lisch),  though  some  regard  it  as  explain- 
ing how  he,  the  servant,  was  able  to  start 
upon  his  journey  with  such  an  equipage, 
viz.,  because,  or  for,  he  had  supreme  com- 
mand over  his  master's  household  (Calvin, 
Eosenmi'iller,  '  Speaker's  Commentary  '). 
And  he  arose,  and  went — if  along  the  direct 
route,  then  "  through  Palestine  along  the 
west  side  of  the  Jordan  and  the  lakes,  into 


the  Buk'ah,  and  out  through  the  land  of 
Hamath  to  the  Euphrates,  and  thence " 
("Land  and  Book, 'p.  591) — to  Mesopotamia, 
— Aram  Naharaim,  i.  e.  the  Aram  of  the 
two  rivers;  Aram  meaning  the  high  re- 
gion, from  arum,  to  be  high — an  ancient 
and  domestic  name  for  Syria,  not  altogether 
unknown  to  the  Greeks;  vide  Horn.,  'II.,' 
ii.  783  ;  Hes.,  'Theog.,'  304;  Strabo,  xiii. 
4  (Gesenius).  Standing  alone  it  signi- 
fies Western  Syria  (Judges  iii.  10  ;  1 
Kings  x.  29  ;  xi.  25  ;  xv.  18),  and  espe- 
cially Syria  of  Damascus  (2  Sam.  viii.  6  ; 
Isa.  vii.  1,8;  Amos  i.  5)  ;  when  Mesopo- 
tamia is  intended  it  is  conjoined  with 
Naharaim  (upon  Egyptian  monuments 
Naharina ;  vide  '  Records  of  the  Past,'  vol. 
fl.  pp.  32,  61,  67),  the  two  rivers  being  the 
Tigris  and  the  Euphrates,  or  Padan,  the 
field  or  plain,  as  in  ch.  xxv.  20.  The  lat- 
ter is  not  an  Elohistic  expression  as  dis- 
tinguished from  the  former,  which  some 
ascribe  to  the  Jehovist(Knobel,  et  alii),but 
a  more  exact  description  of  a  portion  of 
Mesopotamia,  viz..  of  that  where  Laban 


CH.  XXIY.  10—28.] 


THE   BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


801 


dwelt.  TTnto  the  city  of  Nahor — i.  e.  Haran, 
or  Charran  (eh.  xxviii.  10 ;  vide  ch.  xi.  31). 
Nalior  must  have  migrated  thither  either 
along  with  or  shortly  after  Terah. 

Ver.  11. — And  he  made  his  camels  to  kneel 
down — "a  mode  of  expression  taken  from 
actual  life.  The  action  is  literally  kneel- 
ing ;  not  stooping,  sitting,  or  lying  down 
on  the  side  like  a  horse,  but  kneeling  on 
his  knees;  and  this  the  camel  is  taught  to 
do  from  his  youth"  (Thomson,  'Land  and 
Book,'  p.  592; — without  the  city  by  a  well 
of  water.  "In  the  East,  where  wells  are 
scarce  and  water  indispensable,  the  exist- 
ence of  a  well  or  fountain  determines  the 
site  of  the  village.  The  people  build  near 
it,  but  prefer  to  have  it  outside  the  city,  to 
avoid  the  noise,  dust.and  confusion  always 
occurring  at  it,  especially  if  the  place  is 
on  the  highway"  (Ibid.).  At  the  time  of  the 
evening,  even  the  time  that  women  go  out 
to  draw  water.  Literally,  thai  women  that 
draw  go  forth.  "It  is  the  work  of  females 
in  the  East  to  draw  water  both  morning 
and  evening;  and  they  may  be  seen  going 
in  groups  to  the  wells,  with  their  vessels 
on  the  hip  or  on  the  shoulder  "  (Roberts' 
'Oriental  Illustrations,'  p.  27).  "About 
great  cities  men  often  carry  water,  both  on 
donkeys  and  on  their  own  backs;  but  in 
the  country,  among  the  unsophisticated 
natives,  women  only  go  to  the  well  or  the 
fountain;  and  often,  when  travelling,  have 
I  seen  long  files  of  them  going  and  return- 
ing with  their  pitchers  "at  the  time  when 
women  go  out  to  draw  water"  (Thomson, 
'Land  and  Book,'  p.  592). 

Vers.  12 — 14. — And  he  said, — commenc- 
ing his  search  for  the  maiden  by  prayer, 
as  he  closes  it  with  thanksgiving  (ver.  26) 
— a  beautiful  example  of  piety  and  of  the 
fruits  of  Abraham's  care  for  the  souls  of 
his  household,  ch.  xviii.  19  (Wordsworth) 
— 0  Lord  God  of  my  master  Abraham,  I  pray 
thee,  send  me  good  speed  this  day.  Literally, 
cause  to  meet  (or  come  before)  me,  i.  e.  what 
I  wish, the  maiden  of  whom  I  am  inquest; 
hence  tioSuxrov  IvavrCov  «|xov,  make  the 
way  prosperous  before  me  (LXX. ) ;  less 
accurately,  occurre  dbsecro  mihi  (Vulgate). 
And  show  kindness  unto  my  master  Abra- 
ham. The  personal  humility  and  fidelity 
displayed  by  this  aged  servant  are  only 
less  remarkable  than  the  fervent  piety  and 
childlike  faith  which  discover  themselves 
in  the  method  he  adopts  for  finding  the 
bride.  Having  cast  the  matter  upon  God 
by  prayer,  as  a  concern  which  specially 
belonged  to  him,  he  fixes  upon  a  sign  by 
which  God  should  enable  him  to  detect  the 
bride  designed  for  Isaac.  Behold,  I  stand 
here  by  the  well  of  water ;— literally,  Behold 
me  standing  (cf .  ver.  43) — and  the  daughters 
of  the  men  of  the  city  come  out  to  draw  water 


on  ver  11,  and  cf.  ch.  xxix.  9;  Exod. 
ii.  1 6) ;  and  let  it  come  to  pass  that  the  damsel 
— "7??-5.  with  the  vowels  of  the  Keri ;  the 
word  used  for  Abraham's  young  men  (cf. 
ch.  xiv  24 ;  xviii.  7 ;  q.  v.).  In  the  Penta- 
teuch it  occurs  twenty-two  times,  without 
the  feminine  termination,  meaning  a  girl 
(vide  ch.  -xxiv.  16,  28,  55 ;  xxxiv.  3,  12  ; 
Deut.  xx.  15,  &<\);  a  proof  of  the  antiquity 
of  the  Pentateuch,  and  of  this  so-called 
Jehovistic  section  in  particular,  since  in 
the  latter  books  the  distinction  of  sex  is 
indicated  by  the  affix  Ji  being  appended 
when  a  girl  is  intended  ('Speaker's  Com- 
mentary'); but  this  happens  at  least  once 
in  thePentateuch(Deut.xxii.  19) — to  whom 
I  shall  say,  Let  down  thy  pitcher,  I  pray  thee , 
that  I  may  drink;  and  she  shall  Bay,  Drink, 
and  I  will  give  thy  camels  drink  also : — the 
sign  fixed  upon  was  the  kindly  disposition 
of  the  maiden,  which  was  to  be  evinced 
in  a  particular  way,  viz. ,  by  her  not  only 
acceding  with  promptitude  to,  but  gener- 
ously exceeding,  his  request.  It  is  prob- 
able that  the  servant  was  led  to  choose 
this  sign-  not  by  his  own  natural  tact  and 
prudence,  but  by  that  Divine  inspiration 
and  guidance  of  which  he  had  been  assured 
(ver.  7)  before  setting  out  on  his  important 
mission — let  the  same  be  she  that  thou  hast 
appointed  for  thy  servant  Isaac.  '  'The  three 
qualifications  in  the  mind  of  this  venerable 
domestic  for  a  bride  for  his  master's  son 
are  a  pleasing  exterior,  a  kindly  disposi- 
tion, and  the  approval  of  God"  (Murphy). 
And  thereby— iv  rovr<p  (LXX.),  per  hoc 
(Vulgate)  ;  but  rather,  by  her,  i.  e.  the 
damsel — shall  I  know  that  thou  hast  showed 
kindness  unto  my  master. 

Ver.  15. — And  it  came  to  pass  (not  cer- 
tainly by  accident,  but  by  Divine  arrange- 
ment), before  he  had  done  speaking,  that, — 
his  prayer  was  answered  (cf.  Isa.  lxv.  24; 
Dan.  ix.  20,  21).  From  ver.  45  it  appears 
that  the  servant's  prayer  was  not  articu- 
lately spoken,  but  offered  "in  his  heart;" 
whence  the  LXX.  add  ev  tq  Siavo£<j  airoS 
— behold,  Kebekah  came  out,  who  was  born 
to  Bethuel,  son  of  Milcah,  the  wife  of  Nah or, 
Abraham's  brother  (vide  ch.  xxii.  23),  with 
her  pitcher — the  cad  (cf.  kcLSos,  cadus)  was 
a  pail  for  drawing  water,  which  women 
were  accustomed  to  carry  on  their  shoul- 
ders; it  was  this  sort  of  vessel  Gideon's 
men  employed  (Judges  vii.  20) — upon  her 
shoulder — in  exact  correspondence  with 
Oriental  custom — the  Egyptian  and  the 
negro  carrying  on  the  head,  the  Syrian  on 
the  shoulder  or  the  hip  (vide  Thomson, 
'Land  and  Book,'  p.  592). 

Ver.  16. — And  the  damsel  was  very  fair 
to  look  upon.  Literally,  good  of  counten- 
ance, like  Sarah  (ch.  xii.  1 1 )  and  Rachel  (ch. 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xxrr.  10^-28. 


xxix.  17 ;  cf .  ch.  xxvi.  7  of  Rebekah).  A 
virgin.  Bethulah,  i.  e.  one  separated  and 
secluded  from  intercourse  with  men ;  from 
bathal,  to  seclude  (cf.  Deut.  xxii.  23,  28; 
2  Sam.  xiii.  2,  18).  Neither  had  any  man 
known  her.  A  repetition  for  the  sake  of 
emphasis,  rather  than  because  iethulah 
sometimes  applies  to  a  married  woman 
(Joel  i.  8).  And  she  went  down  to  the  well, 
— "nearly  all  wells  in  the  East  are  in 
wadys,  and  have  steps  down  to  the  water" 
(Thomson,  'Land  and  Book,'  p.  592) — and 
filled  her  pitcher,  and  came  up — probably 
wholly  unconscious  of  the  old  man's  ad- 
miration, though  by  no  means  unprepared 
for  his  request,  which  immediately  fol- 
lowed. 

Vers.  17 — 19. — And  the  servant  ran  to 
meet  her,  and  said,  Let  me,  I  pray  thee, 
drink  a  little  water  of  thy  pitcher  (a  request 
which  was  at  once  complied  with).  And 
she  said,  Drink  (and  with  the  utmost  po- 
liteness), my  lord  (and  with  cheerful  ani- 
mation) :  and  she  hasted,  and  let  down  her 
pitcher  upon  her  hand,  and  gave  him  drink. 
"Rebekah's  address  to  the  servant  will  be 
given  you  in  the  exact  idiom  by  the  first 
gentle  Rebekah  you  ask  water  from ;  but 
I  have  never  found  any  young  lady  so 
generous  as  this  fair  daughter  of  Bethuel" 
(Thomson,  'Land  and  Book,' p.  592).  And 
when  she  had  done  giving  him  drink,  she 
said,  1  will  draw  water  for  thy  camels  also, 
until  they  have  done  drinking — thus  prov- 
ing that  the  kindly  disposition  within 
her  bosom  was  "not  simply  the  reflex  of 
national  customs,  but  the  invisible  sun 
beaming  through  her  mind,  and  freely 
bringing  forward  the  blossoms  of  sterling 
goodness"  (Kalisch). 

Ver.  20. — And  she  hasted,  and  emptied 
her  pitcher  into  the  trough  (or  gutter 
made  of  stone,  with  which  wells  were 
usually  provided,  and  which  were  filled 
with  water  when  animals  required  to 
drink),  and  ran  again  unto  the  well  to 
draw  water,  and  drew  for  all  his  camels. 
"At  one  point  we  came  upon  a  large  vil- 
lage of  nomade  Bedouins  dwelling  in  their 
black  tents.  For  the  first  time  we  en- 
countered a  shepherd  playing  on  his 
reeden  pipe,  and  followed  by  his  flock. 
He  was  leading  them  to  a  fountain,  from 
which  a  maiden  was  meanwhile  drawing 
water  with  a  rope,  and  pouring  it  into  a 
large  stone  trough.  She  was  not  so 
beautiful  as  Rebekah"  (*In  the  Holy 
Land,'  by  Rev.  A.  Thomson,  D.D.  p.  198). 

Ver.  21. — And  the  man  wondering  at  her 
— gazing  with  attention  on  her  (LXX., 
Vulgate,  Gesenius,  Furst) ;  amazed  and 
astonished  at  her  (Rosenmuller,  Delitzsch, 
Keil,  Lange,  Calvin) — held  his  peace,  to 
wit — ».  e.  that  he  might  know — silence 


being  the  customary  attitude  for  the  soul 
in  either  expecting  or  receiving  a  Divine 
communication  (cf .  Levit.  x.  3 ;  Ps.  xxxix. 
2 ;  Acts  xi.  18) — whether  the  Lord  had  made 
his  journey  prosperous  or  not.  This  inward 
rumination  obviously  took  place  while  the 
whole  scene  was  being  enacted  before  his 
eyes — the  beautiful  young  girl  filling  the 
water-troughs,  and  the  thirsty  camels 
sucking  up  the  cooling  drink.  The  loveli- 
ness of  mind  and  body,  both  which  he, 
desired  in  Isaac's  bride,  was  manifestly 
present  in  Rebekah ;  but  still  the  questions 
remained  to  be  determined,  Was  she  one 
of  Abraham's  kindred?  was  she  single? 
and  would  she  follow  him  to  Canaan? — 
points  of  moment  to  the  solution  of  which 
he  now  proceeds. 

Vers.  22 — 27. — And  it  came  to  pass  ai 
the  camels  had  done  drinking, — "If  it  is  re- 
membered that  camels,  though  endowed 
in  an  almost  marvellous  degree  with  the 
power  of  enduring  thirst,  drink,  when  an 
opportunity  offers,  an  enormous  quantity 
of  water,  it  will  be  acknowledged  that  the 
trouble  to  which  the  maiden  cheerfully 
submitted  required  more  than  ordinary 
patience"  (Kalisch) — that  the  man  took  a 
golden  earring  of  half  a  shekel  weight, — 
the  DTD  was  neither  a  pendant  for  the  ear 

(LXX.,  Vulgate)  nor  a  jewel  for  the  fore- 
head (A.  V.,  margin),  but  a  ring  for  the 
nose  (ver.  47),  the  side  cartilage,  and 
sometimes  the  central  wall,  of  which  was 
pierced  for  the  purpose  of  admitting  jt  (cf . 
Ezek.  xvi.  11,  12).  Such  rings  are  still 
worn  by  Oriental  women,  and  in  particular 
"the  nose-ring  is  now  the  usual  engage- 
ment present  among  the  Bedouins "  (De- 
litzsch). The  weight  of  that  presented  to 
Rebekah  was  one  5)53,  or  half  (sc.  shekel), 

from  3>  j?S,  to  divide — and  two  bracelets  for 

her  hands  of  ten  shekels  weight  of  gold; — 
the  T»3>,  from  1BJ£,  to  bind  or  fasten, 

meant  a  circle  of  gold  for  the  wrist  or 
arm.  So  favourite  an  ornament  is  this  of 
Oriental  ladies,  that  sometimes  the  whole 
arm  from  wrist  to  elbow  is  covered  with 
them;  sometimes  two  or  more  are  worn 
one  above  the  other;  and  not  unfrequent- 
ly  are  they  so  numerous  and  heavy  as 
almost  to  appear  burdensome  to  the  fair 
owners  (Kalisch) — and  said,  Whose  daugh- 
ter art  thou?  tell  me,  I  pray  thee :  is  there 
room  in  thy  father's  house  for  us  to  lodge 
in?  The  production  of  the  bridal  pres- 
ents, and  the  tenor  of  the  old  man's  in- 
quiries, indicate  that  already  he  enter- 
tained the  belief  that  he  looked  upon  the 
object  of  his  search.  All  dubiety  was 
dispelled  by  Rebekah's  answer.  And 
she  said  unto  'him,  I  am  the  daughter  of 


ch.  xxrv.  10—28.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


808 


Bethuel,  the  ion  of  Miloah,—  to  show 
that  she  was  not  descended  from  Nahor's 
concubine  (cf .  ver.  15} — which  she  bare  unto 
Naaor.  This  appears  to  have  been  the 
stage  at  which  the  jewels  were  presented 
(ver.  47).  She  said  moreover  unto  him,  We 
have  both  straw  and  provender  enough,  and 
room  to  lodge  in.  It  was  now  conclusively 
determined,  by  her  answering  all  the  pre- 
arranged criteria,  that  the  Lord  had  heard 
his  prayer  and  prospered  his  way,  and 
that  the  heaven-appointed  bride  stood  be- 
fore him.  And  the  man boweddownhis  head, 
and  worshipped  the  Lord.  The  first  verb  ex- 
pressing reverent  inclination  of  the  head, 
and  the  second  complete  prostration  of  the 
body,  and  both  combining  "to  indicate 
the  aged  servant's  deep  thankfulness  for 
the  guidance  of  the  Lord. "  And  he  said, 
Blessed  be  the  Lord  God  of  my  master  Abra- 
ham (on  the  import  of  ^1*13  vide  ch.  ix.  26), 
who  hath  not  left  destitute  my  master  of  his 
mercy  and  his  truth : — literally,  who  hat h  not 


taken  away  his  grace  (i.  e.  the  free  favour 
which  bestows)  and  his  truth  (i.  e.  the 
faithfulness  which  implements  promises) 
from{=  from  the  house  of,  as  in  Exod. 
viii.  8,  25,  26;  Gesenius)  my  master  (cf. 
Ps.  Ivii.  3;  cxv.  1;  Prov.  xx.  28)— I  being 
in  the  way,  the  Lord  led  (or,  hath  led)  me 
to  the  house  of  my  master's  brethren. 

Ver.  28.— And  the  damsel— 'TS'IO  (vide 
on  ver.  16) — ran  (leaving  the  venerable 
stranger  in  the  act  of  devotion),  and  told 
them  of  her  mother's  house — a  true  touch 
of  nature.  With  womanly  instinct,  dis- 
cerning the  possibility  of  a  love-suit,  she 
imparts  the  joyful  intelligence  neither  to 
her  brother  nor  to  her  father,  but  to  her 
mother  and  the  other  females  of  the  house- 
hold, who  lived  separately  from  the  men 
of  the  establishment — these  things — in 
particular  of  the  arrival  of  a  messenger 
from  Abraham.  Perhaps  also  the  nose- 
jewel  would  tell  its  own  tale. 


HOMILETICS, 

Vers.  10 — 28. — A  bride  for  the  heir. — 2.  Eliezer  and  Uebckah,  or  ilie finding  of  the 
bride.  I.  The  matbimottial  embassy.  1.  The  departure  from  Hebron.  With 
promptitude  and  alacrity,  as  became  a  servant  executing  the  instructions  of  a  master 
— attended  by  a  cavalcade  of  ten  camels  and  their  drivers,  as  ambassadors  of  princes 
are  wont  to  signalise  their  dignity  by  ample  retinues;  and  laden  with  the  choicest 
of  his  master's  goods  as  presents  for  the  bride,  since  they  who  go  to  woo  must  not 
neglect  to  carry  gifts — the  venerable  steward  issued  forth  upon  his  mission.  2.  The 
journey  northwards.  Up  the  Jordan  valley  towards  "the  Eye  of  the  East "  would 
probably  be  the  route  followed  by  Eliezer  of  Damascus  ;  thence  closely  skirting  the 
spot  where  in  after  years  Tadmor  in  the  wilderness  arose  with  its  palaces  and  tem- 
ples, now  magnificent  in  their  ruins,  till  at  length,  crossing  the  Euphrates,  he  would 
reach  Aram  of  the  Two  Rivers.  3.  The  arrival  at  Saran.  If  the  time  at  which  the 
patriarchal  envoy  reached  the  city  of  Nahor,  viz.,  at  sunset,  when  the  maidens  sally 
forth  to  draw,  was  an  indication  of  the  guiding  hand  of  Providence,  perhaps  the 
spot  at  which  he  halted  and  partially  unloaded  his  weary  camels,  viz.,  at  the  well, 
was  a  testimonial  to  his  own  shrewd  sagacity,  which  discerned  that  for  meeting  with 
the  virgins  of  the  district,  and  in  particular  the  females  of  Nahor's  family,  no  better 
place  could  be  selected  than  the  city  well,  which  was  besides  the  customary  resting- 
place  for  travellers. 

II.  The  frayeb  at  the  well.  1.  Its  reverent  humility.  Not  only  does  he  adore 
the  Divine  greatness,  but,  leaving  himself  altogether  out  of  account,  he  bespeaks  an 
interest  in  the  Divine  favour  entirely  as  an  act  of  kindness  to  his  master.  2.  Its  child- 
like simplicity.  He  proposes  a  test  by  which  he  may  be  able  to  recognise  the  bride 
whom  God  has  selected  for  his  master's  son.  In  doing  so  he  practically  casts  the 
matter  over  upon  God,  asking  him  in  the  fashion  indicated  to  point  out  the  object 
of  his  search,  thus  exemplifying  the  very  spirit  of  the  Christian  rule,  "  In  everything 
by  prayer  and  supplication  let  your  requests  be  made  known  unto  God."  3.  Its  im- 
mediate answer.  "Before  he  had  done  speaking,  Rebekah  came  out "  to  tile  well, 
and  acted  precisely  as  he  had  desired  that  the  bride  should  do.  It  was  a  striking 
illustration  of  the  promise,  "  Whiles  they  are  yet  speaking  I  will  hear." 

III.  The  meeting  with  Rebekah.  1.  A  description  of  her  person.  As  to  parent- 
age, the  daughter  of  Bethuel ;  in  respect  of  condition,  of  virgin  purity;  with  regard 
to  appearance,  very  fair  to  look  upon;  concerning  education,  trained  to  domestic 
duties.    2.  An  account  of  her  kindness.    Coming  up  from  the  well,  she  graciously 


304  THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS.  [ch.  xxiv.  10—28 

complies  with  the  servant's  request  to  be  allowed  to  take  a  draft  from  her  pitcher. 
Then  with  winning  sweetness  she  promptly  offers  to  fill  the  stone  troughs  for  his 
wearied  animals  And  finally,  when  asked  her  name,  she  with  ingenuous  frankness 
tells  it,  adding,  in  reply  to  a  request  for  lodging,  that  in  BelhuePs  house  there  was 
not  only  room  for  himself  and  camels,  but  sumptuous  hospitality  for  both.  Such 
spontaneous  acts  of  kindness  to  an  unknown  and  aged  stranger  bespoke  a  tender  and 
susceptible  heart  within  the  breast  of  the  fair  Rebekak.  3.  The  impression  which  she 
made  on  Eliezer.  (1)  Her  appearance  arrested  him  and  made  him  run  to  meet  her 
(ver.  17)  with  his  pre-arranged  request.  Clearly  this  old  man  had  a  singular  dis- 
cernment of  character  as  well  as  a  quick  eye  for  beauty.  (2)  Her  kindness  touched 
him,  and  made  him  silent  in  wonder  (ver.  21),  struck  dumb  with  amazement  at  her 
minute  fulfilment  of  every  one  of  his  stipulated  conditions.  (3)  Her  invitation  over- 
powered him,  causing  him  to  bow  his  head  and  worship  (ver.  26),  acknowledging 
God's  goodness  in  so  quickly  leading  him  to  the  house  of  his  master's  brethren,  and 
so  unmistakably  pointing  out  the  bride. 

Learn— 1.  The  fidelity  and  devotion  to  the  interests  of  masters  and  mistresses 
which  should  be  evinced  by  servants.  2.  The  spirit  of  prayer  and  supplication 
which  Christians  should  display  in  all  the  perplexing  and  difficult  paths  of  life.  3. 
The  kind  of  brides  which  young  men  should  select,  viz.,  maidens  distinguished  by 
Rebekah's  amiable  and  obliging  disposition,  even  should  they  not  be  gifted  with 
Rebekah's  grace  of  form. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  21. — Eliezer,  or  a  wife-seeker.  "And  the  man  wondering  at  her  held  his 
peace,  to  wit  whether  the  Lord  had  made  his  way  prosperous  or  not."  "The  man  " 
spoken  of  was  pirbably  the  Eliezer  of  Damascus  mentioned  in-ch.  xv.  2.  He  had 
been  selected  by  Abraham  to  be  his  heir,  but  of  course  when  Isaac  was  born  he  could 
not  hold  that  position.  He  became  honoured  and  trusted  as  "the  eldest  servant  of 
(Abraham's)  house,  who  ruled  over  all  that  he  had"  (ch.  xxiv.  2).  To  him  was 
committed  the  delicate  business  recorded  in  this  chapter;  and  the  way  in  which  it 
was  executed  was  just  that  which  would  be  expected  from  one  who  had  so  won  the 
confidence  of  Abraham  as  to  be  selected  as  heir.  We  cannot  but  admire  the  thought- 
fulness  of  Abraham  for  his  son.  He  sought  to  prevent  Isaac  from  being  brought 
under  the  polluting  influence  of  the  Canaanitish  people  in  the  midst  of  whom  he 
dwelt.  He  also  desired  to  prevent  Isaac  from  going  back  to  the  country  from  which 
he  had  himself  been  Divinely  led.  Hence  he  sends  his  steward  to  select  from  among 
his  kindred  one  who  shall  be  a  suitable  life. companion  for  his  son.  He  takes  an  oath 
of  his  steward  that  he  will  in  no  wise  permit  a  wife  to  be  taken  from  among  the 
Canaanites,  or  lead  Isaac  to  Mesopotamia  again.  The  mission  of  Eliezer  was  indeed 
difficult  and  delicate.  "VVe  must  not  think  of  it  according  to  the  customs  of  our  land. 
In  Oriental  nations  to  this  day  it  is  the  practice  to  employ  a  third  person  to  negotiate 
a  marriage  between  those  who  seem  by  report  to  be  suitable  for  such  relationship. 
Eliezer  undertook  the  affair  with  every  desire  to  gratify  his  master,  and  to  serve  well 
even  the  one  who  had  supplanted  him  in  heirship.  We  cannot  too  highly  praise 
"  the  man  "  for  his  unselfishness,  or  too  warmly  admire  the  devoutness  which  charac- 
terised his  whole  conduct. 

I.  He  seeks  by  prayer  success  prom  God.  The  prayer  recorded  here  was  pro- 
bably not  the  first  offered  with  respect  to  the  subject.  His  mission  was  not  only 
delicate,  but  rather  indefinite.  He  is  sent  to  the  relations  of  his  master  to  choose 
from  among  them  a  wife  for  Isaac.  He  knows  that  much  of  the  satisfaction  of 
Abraham  and  welfare  of  Isaac  will  depend  on  his  right  performance  of  the  duty. 
He  feels  the  responsibility  resting  upon  him,  and  makes  every  needful  preparation 
for  discharging  it.  He  starts  on  the  camels  prepared,  and  carries  with  him  presents 
suitable.  After  a  long  journey  he  arrives  at  a  city  in  Mesopotamia  where  dwelt 
Nahor,  his  master's  brotber.  It  is  eventide  when  he  reaches  the  well  outside  the 
city.  The  graceful  daughters  of  the  city,  with  pitchers  poised  on  their  shoulders,  are- 
just  coming  forth  to  draw  water  for  their  households.  The  camels  turn  their  long 
necks  and  weary  eyes  in  the  direction  of  the  approaching  maidens.  They  know  that 
on  their  arrival  the  dry  troughs,  which  only  tantalised  thirst,  will  be  filled.     Th« 


ch.  xxrv.  10—28.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  805 

shade  from  the  palms  avails  not  now  to  break  the  fierce  rajs  of  the  sun  setting  so 
rapidly  in  the  west.  Long  shadows  are  over  the  landscape.  Eliezer  stands  with 
the  golden  light  about  him.  He  feels  that  this  may  be  the  moment  of  great  import. 
Clasping  firmly  his  hands,  and  lifting  fervently  his  face  heavenward,  he  breathes  the 
beavitiful  prayer,  "  P  Lord  God  of  my  master  Abraham,  I  pray  thee,  send  me  good 
speed  this  day,  and  show  kindness  unto  my  master  Abraham."  It  was — 1.  Brief 
prayer,  because  there  was  not  time  to  say  much  more,  but  it  was  most  appropriate. 
He  asked  for -what  he  felt  he  needed.  He  did. not  use  prayer  as  a  mere  mystical 
method  of  pleasing  God,  but  as  the  expression  of  a  felt  need.  This  is  true  prayer. 
God  does  not  want  fine  words,  long  sentences,  and  wearing  repetitions.  None  are 
heard  for  their  much  speaking.  That  is  a  heathenish  notion.  God  is  not  glorified 
by  the  length  of-  time  we  remain  on  our  knees,  or  the  number  of  things  we  can  crowd 
into  a  certain  time.  The  longest  prayers  are  often  the  most  unmeaning.  This  is 
true  of  prayers  in  the  home  and  in  the  Church.  Brief,  earnest,  sincere  prayer  is 
that  which  wings  its  way  to  heaven.  "When  Peter  was  sinking  in  the  waters  his  cry 
was  brief  and  pointed  enough  :  "Lord,  save  ;  I  perish."  2.  Eliezer  did  not  hesitate 
to  ask  God's  guidance  in  respect  to  a  subject  which  many  would  have  accounted  as 
quite  withiu  the  scope  of  their  own  judgment  to  decide.  Many  also  would  have 
thought  it  beneath  the  notice  of  God.  Many  would  have  made  their  way  direct  into 
the  city  to  Nahor's  house  to  choose  for  themselves.  And  many  would  have  left  the 
matter  to  be  decided  by  chance  ;  but  Eliezer  seeks  guidance  from  God.  Only  those 
who  are  ignorant  of  the  value  of  trifles,  of  their  relative  power,  or  who  are  ignorant 
of  the  fact  that  there  are  no  trifles  but  which  may  become  all-important  circum- 
stances, would  think  of  such  an  affair  as  that  Eliezer  had  in  hand,  as  beneath  God's 
notice.  If  not  beneath  God's  notice,  it  may  be  the  subject  of  prayer.  Many  who 
contemplate  formiug  relationships  might  with  the  greatest  advantage  imitate  the 
example  of  Eliezer  in  this  case,  and  seek  direction  from  God.  Were  this  the  prac- 
tice there  would  be  fewer  unhappy  marriages.  Eliezer,  in  carrying  out  his  master's 
wish,  seeks  success  from  God. 

II.  Notice  how  God  overtakes  otjk  prayers.  At  the  most  opportune  time  the 
steward  prays.  He  committed  his  way  unto  the  Lord  at  the  juncture  when  he  felt 
he  needed  the  guidance.  God  honours  the  man's  trust.  "It  came  to  pass  that  before 
he  had  done  speaking  Rebekah  came  out."  She  was  the  very  one  whom  God  had 
appointed.  She  knew  not  that  she  was  moving  to  fulfil  the  intention  of  God.  In 
her  acts  and  in  her  words  she  was  doing  that  which  was  in  harmony  with  the  sign 
the  man  had  asked.  Courteously,  on  being  asked  for  a  draught  from  her  vessel,  she 
had  offered  even  to  draw  for  the  camels  also.  In  the  first  one  addressed  Eliezer  had 
the  answer  to  his  prayer.  Cf.  Isa.  lx.  54:  "Before  ye  call  I  will  answer,"  &c.  ; 
and  Dan.  ix.  23  :  "  At  the  beginning  of  thy  supplication  the  commandment  came 
forth."  We  lose  much  of  the  comfort  of  prayer  because,  after  having  put  up  a 
petition,  we  either  forget  to  look  for  the  answer,  or  because  we  have  but  a  semi- 
belief  in  the  power  of  prayer.  If  prayer  be  a  reality  to  us,  it  is  no  less  so  in  God's 
sight.  Some  put  up  prayers  in  the  spirit  which  seems  to  say,  "Now  I  will  see 
whether  God  will  answer  that."  God  is  not  to  be  subject  to  mere  testings.  Christ 
showed  that,  when  on  earth  he  refused  to  gratify  the  curiosity  or  submit  to  the  test- 
ings the  Pharisees  prepared  for  him.  Where  God  is  perfectly  trusted  the  answer 
will,  in  some  way  or  other,  overtake,  or  even  anticipate,  the  prayer. 

III.  See  how  the  rapidity  op  the  answer  staggers  belief.  "  He,  wondering 
at  her,  held  his  peace,"  waiting  to  know  whether  the  "  Lord  had  made  his  journey 
prosperous  ot  not."  God  had  not  only  answered  speedily,  but  in  the  manner  desired. 
Sometimes  he  sends  the  answer,  but  in  a  way  so  different  from  that  we  expected,  that 
we  discern  not  the  fact  that  we  have  an  answer.  But  what  heavenly  telegraphy  is 
here  1  No  sooner  the  petition  sent  than  the  answer  is  given.  The  very  correspondence 
between  the  sign  desired  and  its  rapid  fulfilment  only  sets  Eliezer  speculating  as  to 
whether  it  may  not  have  been  simply  a  very  remarkable  coincidence  rather  than 
a  Divine  response.  Meanwhile  he  acts  as  though  he  believed.  He  offers  to  Rebekah 
the  gifts  which  indicated  already  his  business.  He  offers  such  as  shall  become  the 
character  of  his  master,  who  was  princely  in  his  possessions  as  well  as  position.  He 
offers  and  waits.  The  man  "  held  his  peace."  He  knows  that  if  God  has  answered 
in  part  he  will  also  answer  fully.  God's  dealings  should  always  induce  awe  and 
patient  waiting.    He  will  often  surprise  us  with  the  blessings  of  goodness.    In  our 

GENESIS.  T 


806 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xxiv.  29—60. 


lives  we  have  probably  known  like  surprising  rapid  answers  to  prayer.  We  have 
even  disbelieved  in  the  answer.  What  if  God  had  withdrawn  the  help  or  blessing 
given  because  received  in  such  unbelief  I  There  are  times  when  we,  like  Eliezer, 
and  like  the  Israelites  on  the  shores  of  the  Red  Sea,  have  to  be  still  and  know  that 
the  Lord  is  God.     Then  God's  action  staggers  belief. 

IV.  See  how  graciously  God  confirms  his  servant's  wondering  hope. 
Eliezer  inquires  of  tlie  maiden  whether  there  is  room  in  her  father's  house  for  him 
to  lodge.  After  the  manner  of  the  Orientals,  she  readily  replies,  "We  have  both 
straw  and  provender  enough,  and  room  to  lodge  in."  He  follows  Rebekah.  Laban 
acts  as  host  in  place  of  his  father  Bethuel.  He  welcomes  Eliezer  heartily.  "  Come 
in,  thou  blessed  of  the  Lord,"  &c.  Eliezer  enters  and  attends  to  the  wants  of  his  men 
and  camels,  but  will  not  attend  to  his  own  until  he  has  unburdened  his  mind.  He 
tells  of  his  errand,  of  the  meeting  with  Rebekah  at  the  well,  of  his  praying,  of  the 
speedy  answer  and  of  the  sign  fulfilled.  Laban  and  Bethuel  are  surprised,  and  see  in 
it  God's  hand.  They  say,  "  The  thing  proceedeth  from  the  Lord  ;  we  cannot  speak 
unto  thee  good  or  ill."  Then  the  man  "  bowed  his  head  and  worshipped."  Rebekah 
consented  to  accompany  him  and  become  the  wife  of  Isaac,  his  master's  son.  Every- 
thing fell  out  better  than  the  steward  could  have  expected  ;  he  could  only  see  in  it 
God's  hand,  God's  mercy  in  guiding  him  and  in  confirming  his  hope. 

1.  God  is  as  willing  to  answer  us  as  to  answer  Eliezer  of  Damascus.  2.  Prayer 
can  overcome  difficulties  that  seem  insurmountable.  When  the  cup  of  sorrow  is  not 
removed  the  strength  is  given  to  bear  it,  and  so  prayer  is  answered.  If  the  way  we 
expected  does  not  open  up  in  answer  to  our  supplication,  another  and  better  is  sure 
to  be  made  plain.  Prayer  also  "makes  the  darkened  cloud  withdraw."  3.  When 
in  the  other  world  we  look  at  our  past  life,  we  shall  all  see  that  God  had  auswered 
all  prayers  that  it  would  have  been  for  our  good  to  have  answered,  and  that  in  others 
the  withholdment  has  been  kindliest  response.  There  we  shall  "  bow  our  heads  and 
worship  "  him  who  made  earthly  journey  prosperous,  and  who  had  brought  us  to 
the  "city  which  hath  foundations."  Whatever,  then,  our  anxiety,  trial,  perplexity, 
let  us  lay  all  before  God.  If  we  are  earnestly  trying  for  the  salvation  of  members 
of  our  own  family,  or  for  the  advancement  of  God's  kingdom,  let  us  by  prayer  and 
supplication  make  our  request  known  to  God,  and  he  will  send  us  an  answer  of 
peace,  even  as  he  did  to  Eliezer. — H. 


EXPOSITION. 


Ver.  29.— And  Rebekah  had  a  brother, 
and  his  name  was  Laban.  "  White," 
whose  character  has  been  considerably 
traduced,  the  Biblical  narrative  not  repre- 
senting him  as  "a  monster  of  moral  de- 
pravity," but  rather  as  actuated  by  gen- 
erous impulses  and  hospitable  dispositions 
(Kalisch).  And  Laban  ran  out  onto  the 
man,  unto  the  well.  That  Laban,  and  not 
Bethuel,  should  have  the  prominence  in 
all  the  subsequent  transactions  concerning 
Rebekah  has  been  explained  by  the  sup- 
position that  Bethuel  was  now  dead  (Jose- 
phus),  but  vide  ver  50;  that  he  was  alto- 
gether an  insignificant  character  (Lange, 
Wordsworth) ;  that  firstborn  sons  enjoyed 
during  their  father's  lifetime  a  portion  of 
his  authority,  and  even  on  important  occa- 
sions represented  him  (Kalisch);  but  in 
those  times  it  was  usual  for  brothers  to 
take  a  special  interest  in  sisters'  mar- 
riages— cf.  ch.  xxxiv.  13  ;  Judges  xxi.  22; 
2  Sam.  xiii.  22  (Rosenmuller,  Michaelis). 

Ver.  30. — And  it  came  to  pass,  when  he 
saw  the  earring  and  bracelets  upon  his 
lister's  hands  (vide  ver.  22),  and  when  he 


heard  the  words  of  Rebekah  his  sister,  say- 
ing, Thus  spake  the  man  unto  me;  that  he 
came  unto  the  man  (this  explains  the  cause 
of  the  action  mentioned  in  the  previous 
verse) ;  and,  behold,  he  stood  by  the  camels 
at  the  well. 

Ver.  31. — And  he  said,  Come  in,  thou 
blessed  of  the  Lord,  frirr  "^"Ma  (cf.  ch. 
xxvi.  29;  Numb.  xxiv.  9);  the  usual  form 
being  •"l$T12  (vide  ch.  xiv.  19  ;  Ruth  ii. 
20;  1  Sam.  xv.  13).  Though  Laban 
was  an  idolater  (ch.  xxxi.  30),  it  seems 
more  satisfactory  to  regard  him  as  be- 
longing to  a  family  in  which  the  worship 
of  Jehovah  had  originated,  and  by  which 
it  was  still  retained  (Murphy,  Words- 
worth), than  to  suppose  that  he  first 
learnt  the  name  Jehovah  from  the  serv- 
ant's address  (Keil,  Lange,  Hengstenberg). 
Wherefore  standest  thou  without  1  (as  if 
his  not  accepting  Rebekah's  invitation 
were  almost  a  reflection  on  the  hospitality 
of  thehouse  of  Abraham 'skinsmen)  for  (lit- 
erally, and,  in  expectation  of  thine  arrival) 
I  have  prepared  the  house, — or,  put  the 


ch.  xxrv.  29—60.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


807 


house  in  order,  by  clearing  it  from  things 
in  confusion  (cf.  Levit.  xiv.  36)— and  room 
i.  e.  place)  for  the  camels. 

Ver.  32. — And  the  man  came  into  the 
house:  and  he  (i.  e.  Laban)  ungirded  his 
(literally,  the)  camels,  and  gave  straw — cut 
up  by  threshing  for  fodder  (cf.  Job  xxi.  18 ; 
Isa.  xi.  7  ;  lxv.  25)— and  provender  for  the 
camels,  and  water  to  wash  his  feet  (cf.  cb. 
xviii.  4;  six.  2),  and  the  men's  feet  that 
were  with  him — the  first  intimation  that 
any  one  accompanied  the  messenger, 
tbough  that  assistants  were  necessary  is 
obvious  from  the  narrative. 

Ver.  33  — And  there  was  set — appositus 
est  (Vulgate);  i.e.  if  the  first  word  be  taken, 
as  in  the  Keri,  as  the  hophal  of  DTD ;  but 
if  the  Kethib  be  preferred,  then  DlB^T  is 
the  fut.  Kal  of  DU5J,  signifying,  "and  he 
set;  "wap^0T)K£v  (XiXX.) — meat  before  him  to 
eat  (the  crowning  act  of  an  Oriental  recep- 
tion): but  he  said,  I  will  not,  eat  until  I  have 
told  mine  errand.  Oriental  politeness  de- 
ferred the  interrogation  of  a  guest  until 
after  he  had  supped  ('Odyss.'  iii.  69) ;  but 
Abraham's  servant  hastened  to  communi- 
cate the  nature  of  his  message  before  par- 
taking of  the  offered  hospitality — an  in- 
stance of  self-forgetful  zeal  of  which 
Christ  was  the  highest  example  (vide  Mark 
vi.  81;  John  iy.  34).  And  he  (i.  e.  Laban) 
said,  Speak  on. 

Vers.  34— 49.— Availing  himself  of  the 
privilege  thus  accorded,  the  faithful  am- 
bassador recounted  the  story  of  his  mas- 
ter's prosperity,  and  of  the  birth  of  Isaac 
when  Sarah  his  mother  was  old  (literally, 
after  her  old  age) ;  of  the  oath  which  be 
had  taken  to  seek  a  wife  for  his  master's 
son  among  his  master's  kindred,  and  of  the 
singularly  providential  manner  in  which 
he  had  been  led  to  the  discovery  of  the 
chosen  bride.  Then  with  solemn  earnest- 
ness he  asked  for  a  decision.  And  now  if 
ye  will  deal  kindly  and  truly— literally,  if 
ye  are  doing,  i.  e.  are  ready  or  willing  to 

extend  kindness  and  truth  (cf.  ver.  27) 

with  (or,  to)  my  master,  tell  me;  and  if  not, 
tell  me;  that  I  may  turn  (literally,  and  I 
will  turn)  to  the  right  hand,  or  to  the  left— 
in  further  prosecution  of  my  mission,  to 
seek  in  some  other  family  a  bride  for  my 
master's  son. 

Vers.  50— 52.— Then  laban  and  Bethuel 
[vide  on  ver.  29)  answered  and  said,  The 
thing,  proceedeth  from  the  Lord  -.—Jehovah 
(vide  on  ver.  31)— we  cannot  speak  unto 
thee  bad  or  good— i.  e.  they  could  not  de- 
mur to  a  proposal  so  clearly  indicated  by 
Divine  providence;  a  proof  of  the  under- 
lying piety  of  those  descendants  of  Nahor. 
Behold,  Bebekah  is  before  thee,  take  her,  and 


go, — that  the  consent  of  Ihe  maiden  is  not 
asked  was  not  owing  to  the  fact  that,  ac- 
cording to  ancient  custom,  Oriental  women 
were  at  the  absolute  disposal,  in  respect  of 
marriage,  of  their  parents  and  elder 
brothers  (Bush),  but  to  the  circumstance 
that  already  it  had  been  tacitly  given  by 
her  acceptance  of  the  bridal  presents 
(Kalisch),  or,  from  her  amiable  and  pious 
disposition,  might  be  taken  for  granted, 
since  she,  no  more  than  they,  would  re- 
sist the  clearly- revealed  will  of  Jehovah 
(Lange,  Wordsworth) — and  let  her  be  thy 
master's  son's  wife,  as  the  Lord  hath  spoken. 
Words  which  again  kindled  the  flame  of 
reverential  piety  in  the  old  man's  heart,  so 
that  he  worshipped  the  Lord,  bowing  him- 
self to  the  earth — literally,  he  prostrated 
himself  to  the  earth  to  Jehovah  (cf .  ver.  26). 
Vers.  53,  54. — And  the  servant  brought 
forth  jewels — literally,  vessels  (o-k€i5t|, 
LXX.),  the  idea  being  that  of  things  fin- 
ished or  completed ;  from  Jibs,  to  finish 

(cf.  ch.  xxxi.  37;  xlv.  20) — of  silver  and 
jewels  (or  vessels)  of  gold,  and  raiment, — 
covering  garments,  e.  g.  the  outer  robes  of 
Orientals  (ch.  xxxix.  12,  13,  15;  xli.  42) ; 
especially  precious  ones  (1  Kings  xxii.  10) 
— and  gave  them  to  Kebekah — as  betrothal 
presents,  which  are  absolutely  essential, 
and  usually  given  with  much  ceremony 
before  witnesses  (vide  '  Land  and  Book,'  p. 
593).  He  gave  also  to  her  brother  and  to 
her  mother  (here  mentioned  for  the  first 
time)  precious  things.    rOTiE)— from  "\M, 

precious,  occurring  only  elsewhere  in  2 
Chron.  xxi.  3  and  Ezek.  i.  6  ;  both  times, 
as  here,  in  connection  with  gold  and  sil- 
ver— probably  describes  valuable  articles 
in  general.  And  (having  thus  formally 
concluded  the  engagement)  they  did  eat 
and  drink, — i.  e.  partook  of  the  victuals 
which  had  been  set  before  them  at  an 
earlier  stage  (ver.  33) — he  and  the  men 
that  were  with  him,  and  tarried  all  night ; 
— literally,  and  passed  the  night  (cf.  ch. 
xix.  2;  xxiv.  25) — and  they  rose  up  in  the 
morning  (indicative  of  alacrity  and  zeal), 
and  he  said,  Send  me  away  unto  my  master 
— being  impatient  to  report  to  Abraham 
the  success  of  his  expedition. 

Ver.  55. — And  her  brother  and  her  mother 
— Laban  as  usual  (ver.  50)  having  the  first 
place ;  probably  because  of  the  prominence 
which  from  this  time  he  assumes  in  the 
theocratic  history— said,  Let  the  damsel 
abide  with  us  a  few  days,  at  least  ten.  Lit- 
erally, days,  at  least  (Vulgate,  saltern);  as 
it  were  LXX.,  uo-A;  perhaps  (Murphy); 
or  (Fiirst,  Ewald,  Kalisch) ;  if  she  wish, 
with  the  idea  of  choice  (Gesenius);  a  ten, 
or  decade  of  days;  the  1iiB3>  being  used 

X3 


308 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xxiY.  29—60. 


as  a  measure  of  time  analogous   to  the 
""OttJ  or  hebdomad.     That  ten  months  are 

T 

meant   (Chaldee,   Arabic,   Ainsworth)   is 
probably  incorrect.   After  that  she  shall  go. 

Vers.  56 — 60. — Still  urging  his  suit  for 
permission  to  depart,  Laban  and  the 
mother  of  Rebekah  proposed  that  the 
maiden  should  be  left  to  decide  a  matter 
so  important  for  her  by  her  own  inclina- 
tions. When  consulted  she  expressed  her 
readiness  at  once  to  accompany  the  ven- 


erable messenger  to  his  distant  home;  and 
accordingly,  without  more  delay,  she  was 
dismissed  from  her  mother's  tent,  attended 
by  a  faithful  nurie  (ch.  xxxv.  8)  and  en- 
riched by  the  blessing  of  her  pious  rela- 
tives, who  said  unto  her,  Thou  art  our  sis- 
ter, be  thou  the  mother  of  thousands  of 
millions  (literally  our  sister  thou,  become 
to  thousands  of  myriads,  i.  e.  let  thy  de- 
scendants be  very  numerous),  and  let  thy 
seed  possess  the  gate  (tide  ch.  xxii.  17 )  of 
those  which  hate  them. 


HOMILETICS. 


Vers.  29 — 60. — A  bride  for  the  heir. — 3.  Eliezer  and  Laban,  or  proposals  for  the 
bride.  I.  The  hospitable  brotheh.  1.  The  eager  invitation,  "Come  in,  thou 
blessed  of  the  Lord!"  (1)  The  speaker  was  Laban,  Eebekah's  brother,  who  on  hear- 
ing his  sister's  call  bad  hurried  to  the  well.  The  motive  which  impelled  him  was  not 
unlikely  a  little  greed  of  filthy  lucre,  the  appetite  for  which  a  sight  of  Rebekah's 
jewels  may  have  whetted ;  a  little  feeling  of  friendship,  since  lie  would  learn  from 
Rebekah  that  the  stranger  had  come  from  Abraham  ;  and  a  little  sense  of  religion,  as 
the  family  of  Nahor  appear  still  to  have  retained  the  knowledge  of  Jehovah.  Most 
people's  motives  are  mixed,  and  so  probably  were  Laban's.  2.  The  kindly  reception. 
(1)  Eliezer's  camels  were  unpacked,  stalled,  and  fed — a  proof  of  Laban's  humanity 
(Prov.  xii.  10).  (2)  His  men's  feet  and  his  own  were  refreshed  by  washing — a  neces- 
sary part  of  Oriental  hospitality — evincing  Laban's  thoughtfulness  (cf.  Luke  vii.  44). 
(3)  Meat  and  drink  were  set  before  himself  and  his  companions — the  crowning  act  of 
an  Eastern  reception,  showing  that  Laban  and  the  other  members  of  the  household 
were  accustomed  to  "use  hospitality  without  grudging." 

II.  The  aged  wooer.  1.  Impatient.  The  nature  of  his  mission  urged  him  to 
despatch,  as  knowing  well  that  his  master  was  old,  that  Isaac  was  needful  of  a  bride, 
that  coy  maidens  are  soonest  caught  by  fervent  suitors,  and  that  successful  wooing 
brooks  no  delay.  2.  Skilful.  The  first  recorded  speech  in  the  Bible,  Eliezer's  bride- 
wooing  cannot  fail  to  be  admired  for  its  wisdom.  (1)  He  secures  the  sympathy  of 
his  auditors  by  declaring  himself  to  be  the  servaut  of  Abraham  ;  (2)  he  details  to  them 
the  wealth  of  his  master,  reasoning  probably  that  no  mother  would  ever  think  of 
sending  away  her  daughter  into  a  foreign  country  to  be  a  poor  man's  bride ;  (3)  he 
advances  to  the  great  religious  consideration  that  Isaac's  wife  must  be  a  worshipper 
of  God;  and  (4)  he  narrates  the  singular  providence  that  had  pointed  out  Rebekah 
as  the  destined  bride.  3.  Pious.  The  religious  character  of  this  wooing  is  apparent 
from  the  reverent  use  of  the  Divine  name  throughout  the  old  man's  speech,  the 
imporlauce  assigned  to  piety  as  one  of  the  bride's  qualifications,  the  devout  recogni- 
tion of  God's  hand  in  prospering  his  journey,  and  the  impression  he  conveys  that 
Jehovah  has  himself  selected  Rebekah. 

.  III.  The  consenting  relatives.  The  acquiescence  of  Laban,  Bethuel,  and  the 
mother  of  Rebekah  was — 1.  Unhesitatingly  given.  "Behold,  Rebekah  is  before  thee, 
take  her,  and  go,  and  let  her  be  thy  master's  son's  wife."  A  little  reluctance  on  their 
part  would  not  have  been  surprising.  2.  Piously  dictated.  'The  thing  proceedeth 
from  the  Lord  I"  Not  the  eligibility  of  the  match,  but  the  approbation  of  Heaven 
secured  their  consent  8.  Thankfully  acknowledged.  "Abraham's  servant  wor- 
shipped the  Lord,  bowing  himself  to  the  earth."  How  eminent  the  piety  which  traces 
every  blessing  to  its  primal  source;  how  beautiful  the  religion  which,  the  more  it 
gets,  the  more  it  stoops  !  4  BieMy  rewarded.  "  The  servant  brought  forth  jewels 
of  silver,"  <fcc.  (ver.  58).  While  adoring  the  original  Giver,  he  did  not  neglect  the 
second  cause.  Young  men  who  receive  fair  Rebekahs  in  marriage  should  not  forget 
to  recompense  with  love  and  gifts  the  faihers  and  mothers  who  have  given  them  up. 

IV.  The  willing  majdbn.     1.  The  proposed  delay.     "  Let  the  damsel  abide  with 


ch.  xxiy.  29—60.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  809 

us  a  few  days,  at  least  ten."  This  was  natural,  and  would  be  convenient  both  for 
the  preparation  of  the  bride's  trousseau  and  for  the  gratification  of  friends  who  might 
wish  to  bid  her  farewell.  2.  The  urgent  request.  "  Hinder  me  not;  send  me  away." 
The  old  man  accepted  his  prosperity  in  wooing  as  an  indication  that  God  intended 
his  immediate  return.  3.  The  important  question.  "  Wilt  thou  go  with  this  man  ?  " 
No  maiden,  however  urged  by  relatives  and  friends,  should  contract  a  forced  and  un- 
willing marriage.  4.  the  decisive  answer.  "I  will  go."  After  this  there  could  be 
no  mistaking  how  Rebekah's  heart  inclined.  It  augured  well  for  the  coming  marriage 
that  it  would  prove  a  union  of  love,  and  not  simply  of  convenience.  5.  The  fraternal 
benediction.     "  Thou  art  our  sister,  be  thou  the  mother  of  thousands  of  millions." 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver,  SO. — Laban' s  eye  of  greed.  "And  when  he  saw  the  bracelets,"  &c.  _  One 
thing  moved  Labau  to  offer  hospitality  to  a  stranger — the  vision  of  gold  on  his  sister's 
form. 

I.  COVETOUSNESS  MAKES  A  MAN  CALCULATING  WHEN  APPEARING  TO  BE  GENEROUS. 

Laban  had  not  been  so  pressingly  urgent  in  his  invitation  if  he  had  not  cherished  a 
hope  of  further  advantages.  He  was  a  churlish  man.  He  said,  "Come  in,  thou 
blessed  of  the  Lord,"  &c,  because  he  saw  that  which  was  to  him  the  greatest  sign  of 
blessing— wealth.  Laban  helped  the  more  readily  to  ungird  Eliezer's  camels  because 
he  hoped  thereby  to  loosen  the  girdle-purse  of  his  visitor.  He  had  the  eye  of  greed. 
He  could  not  see  anything  valuable  belonging  to  another  without  wishing  to  possess  it. 

II.  COVETOUSNESS  MAKES  A   MAN,  GENERALLY,  SHORT-SIGHTED  WITH  RESPECT  TO 

his  own  best  interests.  Laban  gave  Eliezer  a  bad  impression  of  himself.  The 
latter  would  soon  see  through  such  a  man  as  Laban.  He  showed  this  when  he  gave 
presents  not  only  to  the  sister  and  mother,  but  to  the  brother  (ver.  53).  He  knew 
that  it  would  not  be  advisable  to  overlook  Laban.  Eliezer  knew  he  could  be  bought. 
Laban,  when  treating  with  Jacob,  was  just  as  short-sighted.  He  gave  Lea  and  Rachel 
to  Jacob  as  wives  only  after  years  of  service  for  which  he  stipulated.  He  changed 
Jacob's  wages  ten  times.  Through  his  greed  he  at  last  lost  Jacob.  He  confessed 
how  great  a  helper  Jacob  had  been.  "The  Lord  hath  blessed  me  for  thy  sake"  (ch. 
xxx.  27).  Jacob  would  not  tarry  with  him,  and  even  the  daughters  were  glad  enough 
to  get  away  from  such  a  father.  Covetousness  is  opposed  to  our  temporal  and  eternal 
interests.     We  lose  by  it  the  respect  of  others  here  and  of  God  hereafter. 

III.  Covetousness  is  ever  indifferent  to  the  rightful  claims  of  others. 
It  will  ignore  those  claims  altogether,  if  possible.  1.  We  find  Laban  thus  ignored 
the  influence  of  his  father  throughout  the  whole  transaction.  Perhaps  Bethuel  was 
infirm  or  aged,  but  he  is,  consistently  with  the  character  of  Laban,  thrust  into  the 
background.  .  Laban  also  takes  all  presents,  and  there  is  no  mention  of  aDy  being 
given  to  his  father.  2.  We  find  also  he  was  in  great  measure  indifferent  to  the 
happiness  of  his  sister.  He  was  subtle  in  tongue,  and  spoke  of  the  Lord  arranging 
things,  but  he  believed  in  the  arrangement  because  his  family  was  the  gainer.  A 
good  chance  is  offered  by  the  Damascene  stranger,  and  Rebekan  soon  saw  that  it  was 
a  foregone  conclusion  that  she  should  go  with  him.  Covetousness  will  make  parents 
careless  as  to  the  physical,  mental,  and  moral  well-being  of  their  children,  and  em- 
ployers careless  of  the  state  of  their  servants.  It  is  covetousness  also  that  leads  many 
to  spread  temptations,  too  strong  to  be  resisted,  before  others,  and  one  nation  to  get 
rich  out  of  that  which  is  sapping  the  life-blood  of  another. 

IV.  Covetousness  never  satisfies,  and  oft  makes  men  most  miserable. 
"He  that  is  greedy  of  gain  troubleth  his  house."  "Envy  is  rottenness  to  the  bones." 
Misers  perish  in  the  midst  of  plenty.  Riches  possessed,  the  desire  for  more  is 
generally  intensified.  The  desire  is  no  more  checked  than  a  lamp  is  extinguished  by 
added  oil. 

V.  Covetocsness  is  sure,  sooner  or  later,  to  be  rebuked.  The  greed 
*n  Laban'g  eye  which  glistened  at  the  sight  of  the  golden  ornaments  on  his 
•ister's  form  deepened  with  the  passage  of  years.    At  last,  in  his  pursuit  of  Jacob,  he 


310 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xxlv.  61— 67. 


was  rebuked  by  God  in  a  vision,  and  afterwards  by  the  man  he  had  wronged.  Learn, 
therefore,  that  medium  prosperity  is  better  than  great  riches  pained  by  greed.  De- 
spise not  the  comforts  of  life,  but  live  for  something  higher.  What  is  gaintd  in  the 
world  is  speedily  gone.  If  we  gain  much  and  ruin  our  souls,  we  shall  not  only  be 
rejected  by  God,  but  shall  bitterly  condemn  ourselves. — H. 

Ver.  31. — Laban,  the  solicitous  host.  "Wherefore  standest  thou  without?"  The 
character  of  Laban  has  been  well  explained  by  Blunt  in  his  'Coincidences.'  It  is  one 
of  consistent  greed.  He  was  sincere  in  inviting  Eliezer  because  he  saw  the  bracelets 
on  his  sister's  arm,  and  expected  still  further  favours  from  a  guest  who  can  so  lav- 
ishly bestow  gifts.  Christ  asks  us  to  enter  his  kingdom,  but  he  expects  nothing  from 
us  in  return  but  love.  We  may  adapt  this  inquiry  of  Laban  to  souls  as  yet  outside 
the  Church. 

I.  The  position  occupied.  "Without."  Probably  they  have  no  realised  pardon, 
no  enjoyment  in  religion,  no  future  prospects  of  joy.  Life  is  a  dread  mystery  to 
them.  They  are  saying,  "Who  will  show  us  any  good  ?  "  They  may  be  just  awakened 
spiritually,  like  the  Philippian  jailor.  They  may  be  under  the  condemnings  of  law 
and  conscience,  and  in  dread  of  the  consequences  of  sin.  Those  within  the  true 
Church  know  in  whom  they  have  believed,  and  rejoice  in  forgiveness  and  the  prospect 
of  heaven.  They  are  no  longer  outside  the  gates  of  mercy.  We  may  be  in  a  visible 
Church  without  being  of  Christ's  fold.  It  is  penitence,  faith,  and  character  that  de- 
termine our  position,  and  not  birth,  rank,  or  ceremonial  observances. 

II.  The  reasons  wherefore  many  retain  a  position  outside  the  Church. 

1.  Accustomed  to  the  state,  and  unwilling  to  change.  Tliey  are  like  the  prisoner 
who,  after  many  years'  imprisonment  in  the  Bastile,  was  liberated,  and  went  forth 
only  to  find  all  his  friends  gone  and  himself  a  mere  burden  to  society.  He  went  back 
and  entreated  to  be  allowed  to  retain  his  cell  until  he  should  pass  out  of  the  world. 

2.  Many,  because  they  are  ignorant  of  the  fulness  of  Divine  mercy.  3.  Others, 
because  they  think  there  is  so  much  to  be  done  ere  .they  can  be  fitted  to  be  received 
within,  and  are  looking  to  their  own  efforts  to  prepare  themselves.  4.  Many,  because 
they  fear  their  opportunity  of  admittance  is  past.  5.  Others,  because  undecided  as 
to  whether  they  shall  give  up  the  pleasures  of  the  world  for  the  privileges  of  Christian 
fellowship.  6.  Others,  because  they  lack  faith  in  their  faitb  and  its  puwer  to  justify. 
7.  Many  stand  outside  because  they  think  themselves  as  secure  outside  as  within. 
They  forget  that  Christ  demands  open  confession,  and  that  to  be  united  openly  to  his 
Church  is  one  way  of  confessing  his  name  before  men.  Let  there  he  a  personal  and 
searching  inquiry,  "Wherefore  standest  thou  without?"  The  invited  guest  passed 
within,  and  found  his  highest  expectations  more  than  realised,  because  God  "had 
prospered  his  journey." — H. 

EXPOSITION. 


Ver.  61. — And  Eebekah  arose  (expressive 
of  the  promptitude,  celerity,  and  decision 
of  her  departure),  and  her  damsels, — prob- 
ably a,  company,  at  least  two,  though 
Laban  afterwards  only  gave  each  of  his 
daughters  one  (ch.  xxix.  24,  29) — and  they 
rode  upon  camels  (most  likely  those  which 
Abraham's  servant  had  brought),  and  fol- 
lowed the  man  (not  in  fear,  but  in  hope) : 
and  the  servant  took  (in  the  sense  of  under- 
took the  charge  of)  Bebekah  (who,  in  his 
eyes,  would  now  be  invested  with  addi- 
tional charms,  as  his  young  master's  in- 
tended bride),  and  went  his  way — return- 
ing by  the  road  he  came. 

Ver.  62. — And  (when  the  bridal  train 
was  nearing  home)  Isaac  came  from  the 
way  of  the  well  Lahai-roi; — Hagar's  well 
(ch.  xvi.  7,  14)— for  he  dwelt  in  the  south 


country — on  the  Negeb  (vide  ch.  xii.  9). 
Abraham  may  by  this  time  have  removed 
from  Hebron;  or,  if  Hebron  be  included 
in  the  south  country,  Isaac  may  have  been 
only  on  a  visit  to  Hagar's  well  (Lange). 

Ver.  63  — And  Isaac  went  out  to  medi. 
tate— nibb  ;   to  think  (LXX.,   Vulgate, 

Murphy,  Kalisch);  to  pray  (Onkelos,  Sa- 
maritan, Kimchi,  Luther,  Keil) ;  to  lament 
(Knobel,  Lange) ;  doubtless  to  do  all 
three,  to  commune  with  his  heart  and 
before  God;  not,  however,  about  agri- 
cultural affairs,  or  the  improvement  of 
his  property  (Knobel),  but  concerning  his 
deceased  mother,  whom  he  still  mourned 
(ver.  67),  though  chiefly,  it  is  probable, 
anent  the  marriage  he  contemplated  (Keil) 
—in  the  field   at    the   eventide.    Liter- 


CJi.  xxiv.  61— 67.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


311 


ally,  at  the  turning  of  tlie  evening  (cf. 
Dput.  xxiii.  12 ;  and  for  corresponding 
phrase,  "when  the  morning  draws  on," 
Exod.  xiv.  27;  Judges  xix.  26;  Ps.  xlvi. 
6).  And  he  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  saw,  and, 
behold,  the  camels  were  coming.  The 
bride's  first  glimpse  of  her  intended  sp  use 
being,  with  artless  simplicity  though  with 
dramatic  pictures  queness,  described  in 
similar  terms. 

Ver.  64. — And  Rebekah  lifted  up  her 
eyes,  and  when  she  saw  (literally,  and  she 
saw,  though  as  yet  she  did  not  know  that 
it  was)  Isaac,  she  lighted — literally,  fell; 
the  word  signifying  a  hasty  descent  (cf. 
1  Sam.  xxv. 23;  2 Kings v.21);  KaT«Wj8i)<rEV 
(LXX.);  descendit  (Vulgate)— off  the  camel. 
"  The  behaviour  of  Rebekah  was  such  as 
modern  etiquette  requires"  {vide  Thomson, 
'  Land  and  Book,'  p.  593). 

Ver.  65.— For  she  had  said  (literally,  and 
slie  said  ;  not  before,  but  after  alighting) 
unto  the  servant  (of  Abraham),  What  man 
is  this  that  walketh  in  the  field  to  meet  us  1 
— Isaac  having  obviously  hastened  for- 
ward to  give  a  welcome  to  his  bride.  Oj 
learning  who  it  was  she  took  a  veil — "the 
cloak-like  veil  of  Arabia"  (Keil),  which 
covers  not  merely  the  face,  but,  ' '  like  a 
kind  of  large  wrapper,  nearly  the  whole 
form,  rendering  it  impossible  to  recognise 
the  person  "  (Kalisch)— and  covered  her- 
self.    That  married  ladies  did  not  always 


use  the  veil  when  travelling  appears  from 
the  case  of  Sarah  (ch  xx.  16) ;  but  that 
brides  did  not  discover  their  faces  to 
their  intended  husbsnds  until  after  mar- 
riage may  be  inferred  from  the  case  of 
Leah  (ch.  xxix.  23,  25).  Thus  modestly 
attired,  she  meek  y  yields  herself  to  one 
whom  she  had  never  before  seen,  in  the 
confident  persuasion  that  so  Jehovah 
willed. 

Ver.  67. — And  Isaac— re  eiving  an  ac- 
count (ver.  66)  from  his  father's  faithful 
ambassador  of  all  things  thut  he  had  done 
— brought  her  into  his  mothe  Sarah's  tent 
(which  must  have  been  removed  from 
Hebron  as  a  precious  relic  of  the  family, 
if  by  this  time  they  had  changed  their 
abode),  and  took  Rebekah,  and  she  became 
his  wife— the  primitive  man  iage  ceremony 
consisting  solely  of  a  taking  before  wit- 
nesses (vide  Ruth  iv.  13).  And  he  loved 
her.  And  he  had  every  reason;  for,  besides 
beinsr  beautiful  and  kindly  aud  pious,  she 
had  for  his  sake  performed  a  heroic  act  of 
self-sacrifice,  and,  better  still,  had  been 
both  selected  for  and  bestowed  upon  him 
by  his  own  and  his  father's  God.  And 
Isaac  was  comforted  a.ter  his  mother's 
death.  Literally,  after  his  mother;  the 
word  death  not  being  in  the  original,  "as 
if  the  Holy  Spirit  would  not  conclude  this 
beautiful  and  joyful  narrative  with  a  note 
of  sorrow  "  (Wordsworth). 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  61— 67.— A  bride  for  the  heir. — i.  Rebekah  and  Isaac,  or  the  wedding  of  the 
bride.  I.  The  pensive  bridegroom.  1.  Mourning  for  his  mother.  Isaac's  medita- 
tion clearly  includes  this.  Good  mothers,  when  they  die,  should  be  deeply  and 
affectionately  sorrowed  for  by  grateful  and  loving  sons.  A  son  who  loves  his  mother 
living  forgets  not  to  lament  her  dead.  The  best  testimonial  of  filial  piety  is  to  know 
that  a  son  tenderly  regards  his  mother  while  she  lives,  and  cherishes  her  memory 
when  she  is  gone.  2.  Musing  on  his  bride.  This  too  the  language  will  admit. 
Scarcely  could  the  thought  of  Eliezer's  mission  be  excluded  from  Isaac's  mind. 
Doubtless  he  would  often,  during  the  interval  of  his  absence,  have  his  silent  wonder- 
ings  about  its  return  with  the  God-provided  spouse.  Almost  certainly  too  his  prayers 
would  ascend  to  heaven  on  her  behalf.  He  who  asks  a  wife  from  God  is  most  likely 
to  receive  one,  and  he  who  frequently  prays  for  the  wife  of  his  youth  is  most  likely 
to  love  her  when  she  comes.  Note  that  Isaac's  mournings  and  musings  were  in  the 
field  at  eventide.  While  any  place  and  time  will  suffice  for  heart  exercises,  some 
places  and  times  are  more  suitable  than  others,  and  none  more  so  than  the  solitude 
of  nature  and  the  darkening  of  eve. 

II.  The  veiled  bride.  Springing  from  her  camel  at  the  sight  of  her  intended 
husband,  "she  took  a  veil  and  covered  herself."  The  actions  indicated— 1  22s- 
bekahs  politeness.  Etiquette  required  both.  It  was  satisfactory  at  least  that  Isaac 
was  about  to  receive  as  his  wife  a  lady,  one  acquainted  with  the  gentle  manners  of 
the  day.  Refinement,  while  desirable  in  all,  is  specially  beautiful  in  woman.  Ele- 
gance of  manners  are  only  second  to  beauty  of  form  in  a  bride.  2.  Bebekah's  modesty 
Nothing  can  palliate  immodesty  in  any,  least  of  all  in  the  gentler  sex.  Hence  not 
only  should  maidens  be  educated  with  the  greatest  possible  attention  to  the  cultiva- 
tion of  pure  and  delicate  emotions,  but  nothing  should  ever  tempt  them  to  cast  aside 
that  shield  of  maidenly  reserve  which  is  one  of  their  surest  protections  in  the  midst 
of  life  s  dangers  and  seductions. 


112  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  [ch.  xxiv.  01  -67. 

III.  The  primitive  wedding.  1 .  The  giving  of  the  bride.  This  we  can  suppose 
■was  performed  byEliezer,  who,  by  his  recital  of  "all  things  that  he  had  done,"  prac- 
tically certified  that  Rebekah  was  the  maiden  whom  Jehovah  had  provided,  and  now 
in  formal  act  handed  over  to  him  to  be  his  wife.  2.  The  taking  of  the  bride.  "Isaac 
took  Rebekah,"  i.  e.  publicly  and  solemnly  accepted  her  in  the  presence  of  witnesses 
as  his  bride.  Thus,  without  elaborate  or  expensive  ceremonial,  Rebekah  "became 
his  wife."  3.  The  home- coming  of  the  bride.  "Isaac  brought  her  into  his  mother 
Sarah's  tent,"  and  thus  installed  her  in  the  honours  as  well  as  invested  her  with  the 
privileges  of  matron  of  his  house. 

IV.  Ita;  happy  home.     1.  Isaac  loved  Rebekah.     "  So  ought  husbands  to  love 
their  wives  as  their  own  bodies"  (Ephes.  v.  28).    It  is  their  duty;  it  ought  to  be  their 
happiness ;  it  certainly  will  prove  their  interest.    2.  Rebekah  comforted  Isaac.     So 
ought  wives  not  merely  "  to  reverence  their  husbands  "  (Ephes.  v.  38),  but  to  soothe ' 
their  sorrows,  cure  their  cares,  and  dispel  their  despondencies. 

Learn — 1.  That  the  sou  who  sorrows  for  a  mother  will  likely  prove  a  husband  that 
can  love  a  wife.  2.  That  maidens'  charms  are  most  attractive  when  seen  through  a 
veil  of  modesty.  3.  That  those  marriages  are  most  auspicious  which  are  made  by 
God.  4.  That  those  homes  are  happiest  where  husband  and  wife  love  and  comfort 
one  another. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  63. — Isaac  in  the  field.  ''And  Isaac  went  out  to  meditate  in  the  field  at 
eventide. "  Isaac  was  one  of  the  less  prominent  among  the  patriarchs.  He  seems 
to  have  lacked  energy  of  character,  but  there  was  great  devoutness.  His  life  was 
like  a  toned  picture,  lacking  garish  colouring,  but  having  a  depth  of  interest.  Pos- 
sibly the  fact  that  an  uplifted  knife  had  once  gleamed  death  upon  him,  and  that  he 
had  so  narrowly  escaped,  may  have  had  great  influence  in  giving  a  sober  tinge  to  his 
life.  Not  only  so,  but  training  by  such  a  father  as  Abraham  must  have  inculcated 
a  ready  obedience  to  God's  will,  and  a  constant  desire  to  know  that  will.  In  the 
passage  above  we  have — 

I.  A  godly  habit  indicated.  "Went  out  to  meditate"— to  pray.  There  is  a 
great  difference  between  reverie  and  meditation.  The  one  is  aimless  dreaming,  the 
other,  thought  tending  to  an  object.  Prayer  is  the  thought  expressed.  Meditation 
is  the  "nurse  of  prayer.'1  Meditation  stirs  up  the  spiritual  fire  within.  It  brings  us 
nearer  to  the  Divine.  It  should  be  cultivated  as  a  habit  rather  than  be  left  to 
spasmodic  impulses. 

II.  A  place  well  adapted  to  prater  selected.  The  field  or  open  country, 
where  we  can  get  away  from  men,  is  the  place  for  fellowship  with  God.  A  free 
prospect  lets  God's  power  be  more  plainly  seen.  It  is  an  advantage  to  get  out  to  sea, 
and,  leaning  over  the  bulwark  of  a  vessel,  to  realise  the  width  of  the  world,  the  vast- 
ness  of  the  universe  and  greatness  of  God.  We  should  seek  some  place  where  we 
can  specially  realise  the  presence  and  power  of  God.  "Enter  into  thy  closet"  is  a 
command  which  many  find  it  difficult  to  obey.  At  school,  in  business  houses,  there 
is  little  or  no  provision  for  solitary  meditation;  but  with  a  book  in  hand  the  believer 
may  in  spirit  get  alone  with  God. 

III.  The  time  chosen  for  prater  was  most  fitting.  Isaac  went  into  the 
field  at  eventide.  When  the  fret  and  toil  of  the  day  were  over  ;  when  the  sun  was 
setting,  glorified  by  crimson  clouds,  or  shaded  by  the  purplish  haze  ;  when  the 
blossoms  were  closing,  and  flocks  were  being  folded;  when  the  moon  was  just  show- 
ing, and  the  stars  beginning  to  shine  out;  when  a  hush  was  over  nature  and  entering 
into  the  soul — then  Isaac  sought  to  pray  ;  then  he  sought  to  realise  the  certainty  of 
the  Divine  promises  and  the  faithfulness  of  the  Divine  performance.  The  time 
accorded  well  with  his  own  feelings.  He  still  mourned  for  his  mother  (ver.  67). 
Sorrow  makes  solitude  congenial.  Moreover,  he  was  anticipating  a  change  of  state. 
He  knew  his  father  had  sent  Eliezer  to  seek  for  him  a  wife  from  among  his  own 
kindred,  and  he  may  have  been  praying  that  God  would  send  him  a  suitable  partner 
for  life.  While  he  was  praying  the  answer  was  approaching.  By  prayer  Isaac  was 
prepared  also  to  bear  with  the  selfishness  and  wrong-doing  of  others.  In  ch.  xxvi. 
we  see  how  he  avoided  quarrelling  with  the  Philistines.  Gentleness  made  him  great, 
and  that  gentleness  was  intensified  by  prayer. — H. 


OH.  XXV.  1—11.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


313 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXV. 


Ver.  1. — Then  again]  Abraham  took  a 
wife, — literally,  and  Abraham  added  and 
took  a  wife  (i.  e.  a  secondary  wife,  or  con- 
cubine, pilgash;  vide  ver.  6  and  1  Chron. 
i.  28,  33);  but  whether  after  (Kalisch, 
Lange,  Murphy)  or  before  (Calvin,  Keil, 
Alfprd,  Bush)  Sarah's  death  it  is  impossi- 
ble to  decide — and  her  name  was  Keturah 
— "Incense"  (Gesenius);  probably  a  ser- 
rant  in  the  family,  as  Hagar  bad  been, 
though  not  Hagar  herself  (Targums), 
whom  Abraham  had  recalled  after  Sarah's 
death  (Lyra),  since  ver.  6  speaks  of  concu- 
bines. 

Ver.  2. — And  she  bare  him  (since  the  pa- 
triarch's body  at  100  years  was  practically 
dead,  it  is  almost  certain  that  his  marriage 
with  Keturah  took  place  after  the  renewal 
of  his  powers ;  and  it  is  easier  to  suppose 
that  his  physical  vigour  remained  for 
some  years  after  Sarah's  death  than  that, 
with  his  former  experience  of  concubin- 
age, and  his  parental  joy  in  the  birth  of 
Isaac,  he  should  add  a  second  wife  while 
Sarah  lived)  Zimran, — identified  with  Za- 
bram,  west  of  Mecca,  on  the  Red  Sea 
(Knobel,  Keil);  or  the  Zimareni,  in  the 
interior  of  Arabia  (Delitzsch,  Kalisch) — 
and  Jokshan, — the  Kasmmitm,  on  the  Red 
Sea  (Knobel);  or  the  Himarytish  tribe  Ja- 
kish,  in  Southern  Arabia  (Keil) — and 
Medan,  and  Midian, — Modiana,  on  the 
east  of  the  Elamitic  Gulf,  and  Modiana, 
north  of  this  (Ros.-nmilller,  Keil,  Knobel) 
— and  Ishbak, — perhaps  preserved  in 
Schobeck,  in  the  land  of  the  Edomites 
(Knobel,  Keil) — and  Shnah — for  which  the 
epithet  Shuhite  (Job  ii.  11)  may  point  to 
Northern  Idumaea  (Keil ,  Knobel ,  Kalisch). 

Ver.  3  — And  Jokshan  begat  Sheba, — 
probablyfche  Sabeans:  Jobi.15;  vi.l9(Keil) 
— and  Dedan — probablythe  trading  people 
mentioned  in  Jer.  xxv.  23  (Keil).  And  the 
sons  of  Dedan  were  Asshurim, — who  have 
been  associated  with  the  warlike  tribe  of 
the  Asvr,  to  the  south  of  Hejas  (Keil)— 
and  Letushim, — the  Bann  Letts  in  Hejas 
(Keil) — and  Leummim — the  tribe  Bann 
Ldm,  which  extended  even  to  Babylon 
and  Mesopotamia  (Keil). 

Ver.  4. — And  the  sons  of  Midian  ;  Ephah 
{vide  Isa.  lx.  6),  and  Epher  (Beni  Ghifar  in 
Hejas),  and  Hanooh  (Hanakye,  three  days 
north  of  Medinah),  and  Abidah,  and  El- 
daah— the  tribes  of  Abide  and  Vadaa  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  Asir.  Keil  adds  that 
all  these  identifications  are  uncertain.  All 
these  were  the  children  of  Keturah — six 


sons,  seven  grandsons,  three  great-grand- 
sons; in  all  sixteen  descendants. 

Vers.  5,  6— And  Abraham  gave  all  that 
he  had  unto  Isaac.  1.  e.  constituted  him 
his  chief  heir,  according  to  previous  Di- 
vine appointment  (ch.  xv.  4),  and  made 
over  to  him  the  bulk  of  his  possessions 
(ch.  xxiv.  36).  But  unto  the  sons  of  the 
concubines  (Hagar  and  Keturah),  which 
Abraham  had,  Abraham  gave  gifts, — 
"  doubtless  established  them  as  youthful 
nomads  "  (Lange) — and  sent  them  away 
from  Isaac  his  son, — Ishmael's  dismissal 
took  place  long  before  (ch.  xxi.  14);  prob- 
ably he  then  received  his  portion — while 
he  yet  lived  (i.  e.  during  Abraham's  life- 
time), eastward,  unto  the  east  country  (or 
Arabia  in  the  widest  sense;  to  the  east  and 
southeast  of  Palestine). 

Ver.  7. — And  these  are  the  days  of  the 
years  of  Abraham's  life  which  he  lived, — 
an  impressive  and  appropriate  expression 
for  the  computation  of  life  (cf.  ch.  xlvii. 
9) — an  hundred  and  threescore  and  fifteen 
years — i.  e.  175  years;  so  that  he  must 
have  lived  seventy-five  years  after  Isaac's 
birth  and  thirty-eight  years  after  Sarah's 
death.  "  His  grandfather  lived  148  years, 
his  father  205,  his  son  180,  and  his  grand- 
son 147;  so  that  his  years  were  the  full 
average  of  that  period  '  (Murphy). 

Vers.  8 — 10. — Then  Abaham  gave  up  thi 
ghost  (literally,  breathed  out,  sc.  the  breath 
of  life),  and  died  in  a  good  old  age, — liter- 
ally, in  a  good  hoary  age,  i.  e.  "  with  a 
crown  of  righteousness  upon  his  hoary 
head  "  (Hughes) — an  old  man,  and  full  of 
years.  Literally,  and  satiated,  i.  e.  satis- 
fied not  merely  with  life  and  all  its  bless- 
ings, but,  with  living.  The  three  clauses 
give  an  elevated  conception  of  the  patri- 
arch's life  as  that  of  one  who  had  tasted 
all  the  sweets  and  realised  all  the  ends  of 
a  mundane  existence,  and  who  accordingly 
was  ripe  and  ready  for  transition  to  a 
higher  sphere.  And  was  gathered  to  his 
people.  An  expression  similar  to  "  going 
to  his  fathers  '  (ch.  xv.  15,  q.  «.),  and  to 
' '  being  gathered  to  one's  fathers  "  (J  udges 
ii.  10).  "The  phrase  is  constantly  distin- 
guished from  departing  this  life  and  being 
buried, denotes  the  reunion  in  Sheol  with 
friends  who  have  gone  before,  and  there- 
fore presupposes  faith  in  the  personal  con- 
tinuanceofamanafterdeath"(Keil).  Abra- 
ham died  in  the  hope  of  a  better  country, 
even  an  heavenly(Heb.  xi.  13 — 16).  And  his 
sons  Isaac  and  Ishmael — Isaac  as  the  heir 
takes  precedence;  but  Ishmael.rathertlian 
the  sons  of  Keturah,  is  associated  with 


814 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xxv.  1—11 


him  at  his  father's  funeral;  probably  be- 
cause he  was  not  so  distant  as  they  from 
Hebron  (Lange),  or  because  he  was  the 
subject  of  a  special  blessing,  which  they 
werenot(Keil.Murphy);  orperhaps  simply 
Ishmael  and  Isaac  united  as  the  eldest 
sons  to  perform  the  last  rites  to  a  parent 
they  revered  (Kalisch).  "Funerals  of  pa- 
rents are  reconciliations  of  children  (ch. 
xxxv.  29),  and  differences  of  contending 
religionists  are  often  softened  at  the  side 
of  a  grave  "  (Wordsworth) — buried  him 
(vide  on  ch.  xxiii.  19)  in  the  cave  of  Mach- 
pelah,  in  the  field  of  Ephron  the  son  of  Zohar 
the  Hittite,  which  is  before  Manure  (vide 
on  ch.  xxiii.  3 — 20);  the  field  which  Abra- 
ham purchased  of  the  sons  of  Heth  (a  repe- 
tition which  augments  the  importance  of 
the  statement  that  Abraham  did  not  sleep 


in  a  borrowed  tomb):  there  was  Abraham 
buried,  and  Sarah  his  wife. 

Ver.  11. — And  it  came  to  pass  after  the 
death  of  Abraham,  that  God — Elohim: 
whence  the  preceding  section  is  ascribed 
to  the  Elohist;  but  trie  general  name  of 
God  is  here  employed  because  the  state- 
ment partakes  merely  of  the  nature  of  an 
intimation  that  the  Divine  blessing"  de- 
scended upon  Isaac  by  inheritance 
(Hengstenberg),  and  the  particular  bless- 
ing of  which  the  historian  speaks  is  not 
so  much  the  spiritual  and  eternal  bless- 
ings of  the  covenant,  as  the  material  and 
temporal  prosperity  with  which  Isaac,  in 
comparison  with  other  men,  was  enriched 
(Murphy) — blessed  his  son  Isaac;  and  Isaac 
dwelt  by  the  well  Lahai-roi  (vide  ch.  xvi. 
14;  xxiv.  62). 


HOMILETICS. 


Vers.  1 — 11.  The  last  days  of  Abraham.  I.  Abraham's  old  age.  1.  The  taking 
of  a  second  wife.  (1)  Her  name:  Keturah,  recorded  because  of  her  relationship  to 
Abraham.  Connection  with  God's  people  confers  honours  as  well  as  privileges.  (2) 
Her  marriage :  of  the  second  degree.  Succeeding  to  Sarah's  marriage  bed,  Keturah 
did  not  succeed  to  her  social  status.  Neither  did  her  issue  possess  legal  claim  to 
Abraham's  inheritance.  Concubinage,  though  permitted,  was  not  necessarily 
approved  by  God.  (3)  Her  children  :  numerous  and  (in  some  instances)  distinguished. 
The  common  seed  of  the  flesh  may  often  be  more  enlarged  than  the  special  seed  of 
grace  ;  but  the  descendants  of  good  men,  other  things  being  equal,  are  likelier  to 
come  to  honour  than  the  families  of  the  wicked.  2.  Tlie  making  of  his  will.  (1) 
Isaac,  the  son  of  Sarah,  he  constitutes  his  heir,  in  accordance  with  the  Divine  counsel, 
not  attempting  to  interpose  on  behalf  of  Ishmael,  his  first-born.  Primogeniture 
may  involve  certain  rights  in  the  world  ;  it  has  no  superiority  in  grace,  or  in  the 
Church.  (2)  The  sons  of  Hagar  and  Keturah  he  endows  with  portions  from  his 
ample  pastoral  wealth  before  he  dies,  and  sends  away  to  settle  as  independent 
nomads  in  the  unoccupied  territory  lying  on  the  east  of  Palestine,  thus  providing  for 
the  prosperity  of  his  children  and  the  peace  of  his  family  after  he  is  gone — two 
things  which  pious  parents  should  as  far  as  possible  secure  before  they  die. 

II.  Abraham's  death.  1.  Before  death.  The  age  to  which  the  patriarch  had 
attained  was — (1)  Numerically  great,  viz.,  175  years.  Mark  the  tendency  of  piety  to 
prolong  life  (Ps.  xxxiv.  12).  (2)  Morally  good.  Neither  beautiful  nor  desirable  in 
itself,  when  associated  with  corresponding  ripeness  in  grace  old  age  is  both  delight- 
ful to  look  upon  and  pleasant  to  enjoy  (Prov.  xvi.  31).  (3)  Completely  satisfying. 
He  had  experienced  the  Divine  goodness  and  mercy  for  175  years,  had  God's  cove- 
nant established  with  himself  and  family,  beheld  Isaac  born,  married,  and,  the 
father  of  two  promising  sons,  and  seen  Sarah  away  before  him  to  the  better  land ; 
now  he  had  no  desire  leffunfulfllled  but  one,  viz.,  to  depart.  2.  At  death.  His  end 
was  peaceful;  he  "breathed  out  his  spirit"  into  the  hands  of  Jehovah.  So  did 
Isaac  (ch.  xxxv.  29),  Jacob  (ch.  xlix.  33),  David  (Ps.  xxxi.  5),  Christ  (Luke  xxiii.  46). 
"Mark  the  perfect,  and  behold  the  upright  "  (Ps.  xxxvii.  37).  3.  After  death.  He 
was  gathered  to  his  people — a  significant  intimation  of  (1)  the  immateriality  of  the 
soul  ;  (2)  the  conscious  existence  of  the  soul  after  death ;  (3)  the  gathering  of  pious 
souls  into  one  society  beyond  the  grave  ;  (4)  the  mutual  recognition  of  the  glorified  ; 
(5)  the  complete  separation  of  the  righteous  from  the  wicked. 

III.  Abraham's  funeral.  1.  The  chief  mourners.  Whether  Keturah's  boys 
were  present  at  the  affecting  ceremonial  is  not  stated,  but  the  prominent  positions 
were  occupied  by  Ishmael  and  Isaac.  It  is  a  duty  which  surviving  children  owe 
deceased  parents  to  see  their  remains  deposited  with  reverence  in  the  grave,  and  it  is 
beautiful  when  fraternal  estrangements  are  removed  round  a  father's  tomb.  2. 
The  place  of  sepulture.    The  cave  of  Machpelah  had  three  attractions  for  the 


ca.  xxv.  13—18.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


815 


patriarch  :  it  was  in  the  promised  land,  it  was  his  own  tomb,  and  it  contained  the 
dust  of  Sarah.  <8.  The  bereaved  son.  Isaac,  from  his  sensitive  disposition  and  the 
unexciting  character  of  his  occupation,  would  feel  his  father's  loss  more  keenly  tlian 
Ishmael.  Perhaps  this  explains  the  statement  of  ver.  11.  It  is  God's  special  care 
» to  comfort  orphans  (Ps.  xxvii.  10). 

Learn — 1.  That  though  secondary  wives  are  not  agreeable  to  the  word  of  God, 
second  marriages  are  not  against  the  will  of  God.  2.  That  good  men  ought  to  make 
a  just  disposition  of  their  temporal  affairs  before  they  die.  3.  That  whether  God's 
saints  die  soon  or  late,  they  are  always  satisfied  with  living.  4.  That  in  whatever 
sort  of  tomb  a  saint's  dust  may  lie,  his  immortal  spirit  goes  to  join  the  company  of 
just  men  made  perfect.  5.  That  the  loss  of  earthly  parents  is  more  than  com- 
pensation by  the  blessing  of  a  father's  God. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1—18. — The  line  of  Messing.  Although  Abraham  has  many  descendants, 
he  carefully  distinguishes  the  line  of  the  Divine  blessing.  His  peaceful  end  at  175 
years  set  the  seal  upon  a  long  life  of  faith  and  fellowship  with  God.  His  two 
sons,  Isaac  and  Ishmael,  met  at  their  father's  grave,  although  living  apart.  The 
influence  of  such  a  character  as  Abraham's  is  very  elevating  and  healing,  even  in 
the  sphere  of  the  world.  Ishmael  is  not  entirely  forgotten,  but  Isaac,  as  the  true 
heir  of  Abraham,  hands  on  the  blessing  of  the  covenant. — R. 


§  8.  Thb  Generations  op  Ishmael  (ch.  xxt.  12 — 18). 
EXPOSITION. 


Ver.  12. — Now  these  are  the  generations 
of  Ishmael, — the  opening  of  a  new  section 
(cf.  ch.  ii.  4),  in  which  the  fortunes  of 
Abraham's  eldest  son  are  briefly  traced 
before  proceeding  with  the  main  current 
of  the  history  in  the  line  of  Isaac  (cf.  1 
Chron.  i.  29 — 31) — Abraham's  son, — be- 
cause of  his  relation  to  Abraham  it  was 
thatlshmaelattained subsequent  historical 
development  and  importance  (vide  ch.  xxi. 
13) — whom  Hagar  the  Egyptian,  Sarah's 
handmaid,  bare  unto  Abraham  (vide  ch. 
xvi.  1,  15). 

Ver.  13. — And  these  are  the  names  of  the 
sons  of  Ishmael,  by  their  names,  according 
to  their  generations :  the  firstborn  of 
Ishmael,  Nebajoth  ; — "  Heights  ;"  the  Na- 
bathceans,  a  people  of  Northern  Arabia, 
possessed  of  abundant  flocks  (Isa.  lx.  7), 
and,  according  to  Diodorus,  living  by 
merchandise  and  rapine  (Gesenius).  From 
Petraea  they  subsequently  extended  as  far 
as  Babylon  (Keil) — and  Kedar—  "Black 
Skin;"  the  Cedrei  of  Pliny  (Gesenius, 
Keil,  Eosenmuller);  characterised  as  good 
bowmen  (Isa.  xxi.  17),  and  dwelling  be- 
tween Arabia  Petrsea  and  Babylon — and 
Adbeel, — "Miracle  of  God"  (Gesenius); 
of  whom  nothing  is  known — and  Mibsam, 
— "Sweet  Odour  "  (Gesenius)  ;  equally 
uncertain. 

Ver.  14. — And  Mishma, — "Hearing" 
(Gesenius) ;  Masma(LXX.,  Vulgate);  con- 
nected with  the  Maisaimeneis,  north-east 


of  Medina  (Knobel) — and  Dumah, — "Si- 
lence ;"  same  as  Stony  Dumah,  or  Syrian 
Dumah,  in  Arabia,  on  the  edge  of  the 
Syrian  desert  (Gesenius);  mentioned  ic 
Isa.  xxi.  11 — and  Massa,—  "  Burden;' 
north-east  of  Dumah  are  the  Massanoi. 

Ver.  15. — Hadar — "  Chamber  "  (Gese- 
nius) ;  Hadad  (1  Chron.  i.  30,  LXX., 
Samaritan,  and  most  MSS.) ;  though  Gese- 
nius regards  Hadar  as  probably  the  true 
reading  in  both  places  ;  identified  with  a 
tribe  in  Yemen  (Gesenius);  between  Oman 
and  Bahrein,  a  district  renowned  for  its 
lancers  (Keil) — and  Tenia — "Desert"  (Ge- 
senius) ;  Qaijidv  (LXX.) ;  the  QeftoC,  on 
the  Persian  Gulf,  or  the  tribe  Bann  Teim, 
in  Hamasa  (Knobel) ;  a  trading  people 
(Job  vi.  19  ;  Isa.  xxi.  14  ;  Jer.  xxv.  23) — 
Jetur,— "Enclosure"  (Gesenius);  the 
Itureans  (Gesenius,  Kalisch,  Keil) — Wap- 
hish,— "Breathing"  (Murphy);  "Re- 
freshment "  (Gesenius) ;  not  yet  identified 
—and  Kedemah— "  Eastward  "  (Gese- 
nius) ;  unknown. 

Ver.  16. — These  are  the  sons  of  Ishmael, 
and  these  are  their  names,  hy  their  towns 
— un walled  encampments,  from  hatzar,  to 
surround  ;  used  of  the  movable  villages 
of  nomadic  tribes  (cf.  Isa.  xlii.  11)  and  by 
their  castles  ;— fortified  keeps  (Murphy) ; 
tent  villages  (Keil);  nomadic  camps  (Ka- 
lisch). Cf.  Num.  xxxi.  10 ;  1  Chron.  vi. 
39;  Ps.  Ixix.  26;  Ezek.  xxv.  4)— twelve 
princes— this  does  not  imply  that  Ishmael 


816 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xxr.  12—18. 


had  only  twelve  sons,  like  Israel — a  very 
suspicious  circumstances  (De  Wette) ;  but 
only  that  these  twelve  became  phylarchs 
(Haveraick).  The  Egyptian  dodecarchy 
rested  on  a  like  earlier  division  of  names. 
Homor  mentions  a  similar  case  among  the 
Phoenicians  ('  Odyss. , '  viii.  390) ;  Thucy- 
dides  another  in  ancient  Attica  (ii.  15) ; 
vide  Havernick's  'Introd.,' §18 — according 
to  their  nations  (or  tribe  divisions). 

Vers.  17,  18. — And  these  are  the  years 
of  the  life  of  Ishmael,  an  hundred  and  thirty 
and  seven  years  : — a  life  shorter  by  nearly 


half  a  century  than  that  of  Isaac  (ch. 
xxxv.  21 ) ;  does  this  provejlie  life-prolong- 
ing influence  of  piety  ? — and  he  gave  up 
the  ghost  and  died  ;  and  was  gathered  unto 
his  p.  ople  (vide  on  ver.  8).  And  they  dwelt 
from  Havilah  unto  Shur,  that  is  before 
Egypt,  as  thou  goest  toward  Assyria  (rule 
ch.  x.  29  ;  xvi.  7) :  and  he  died — literally, 
fell  down  ;  not  expired  (Vulgate,  a  Lapide, 
Aben  Ezra,  et  alii),  but  settled  down, 
had  his  lot  cast  (Calvin,  Keil,  Kalisch); 
KaTu)'xT|cr«  (LXX.) — in  the  presence  of  all 
his  brethren  (a  fulfilment  of  ch.  xvi.  12). 


HOMILET1CS. 


Vers.  12 — 18.. — Tlie  generation)  of  Ishmael,  or  the  biography  of  a  prince.  I.  The 
prince's  name.  Ishmael.  1.  The  significance  of  his  name.  "  God  hears."  It 
was  thus  a  perpetual  reminder  to  its  beaver  of  a  grand  religious  truth,  that  God  is 
essentially  a  hearer  of  prayer,  and  that  he  is  never  far  from  any  of  his  intelligent  and 
needy  cieatints.  2.  The  oca  sion  of  his  getting  it.  (1)  Before  his  birth,  because 
the  Lord  had  heard  the  affliction  of  his  mother.  (2)  At  his  birth,  because  his  father 
believed  the  report  of  Hagar  concerning  the  instruction  of  the  angel.  3.  The  veri- 
fication of  his  name.  When  he  lay  beneath  the  shrub  God  heard  the  voice  of  his 
distressed  cry  (ch.  xxi.  17). 

II.  The  prince's  lineage.  Abraham's  son.  That— (1)  Proclaimed  Ms  dignity. 
Though  not  a  prince  in  the  Church,  he  was  a  prince  in  the  world,  being  Abraham's 
immediate  descendant.  Grace  runs  not  in  the  blood,  earthly  rauk  does.  (2)  Bespoke 
his  privilege.  Jehovah  reckoned  it  a  great  thing  for  Ishmael  that  he  was  Abraham's 
seed.  To  be  the  offspring  of  those  who  are  exalted  in  earthly  station  is  a  special 
honour,  though  not  so  great  an  honour  as  to  be  descended  from  those  who  are  emi- 
nent in  grace.  (3)  Implied  his  responsibility.  Degrees  of  rank  in  society  are  of  God's 
ordaining,  and  involve  the  recipients  thereof  in  corresponding  obligations  (Luke 
xii.  48). 

III.  The  prince's  family.  1.  Princely  in  rank.  This  quality  they  received  by 
birth,  being  Ishmfiel's  sons.  2.  Many  in  number.  They  were  twelve  princes,  and 
as  such  they  developed  into  large  and  flourishing  tribes  and  nations.  This  charac- 
teristic was  due  to  grace,  God  having  promised  that  kings  and  nations  should  spring 
from  Hagar's  son.  3.  Influential  in  power.  The  twelve  princes  mentioned  were 
powerful  chieftains  of  as  many  clans. 

IV.  The  prince's  death.  The  time.  At  137  years.  The  days  of  all,  even  of 
princes,  in  this  life  are  numbered.  2.  The  manner.  "  He  expired."  "  There  is  no 
man  that  hath  power  over  the  spirit  to  retain  the  spirit"  in  the  day  of  his  death. 
3.  The  result.  "  He  was  gathered  unto  his  people,"  passing  to  the  company  of  those 
who  were  like-minded  with  himself  in  the  unseen  world,  as  Abraham  went  to  enjoy 
the  society  of  those  who  were  of  kindred  spirit  with  him. 

V.  The  prince'b  dominions.  "His  lot  was  cast  in  the  presence  of  all  his 
brethren,"  i.  e.  his  empire  was — 1.  Outside  of  Canaan.  He  had  no  part  or  lot  in  the 
inheritance  of  Isaac.  Neither  have  the  world's  princes  as  such  any  share  in  the 
heritage  of  heaven's  peers.  2.  Among  the  tribes  of  earth.  And  so  the  worldly  man's 
portion  is  of  the  earth,  earthy. 

See— 1.  How  comparatively  unimportant  the  world's  biographies  are  in  the  judg- 
ment of  the  Spirit.  2.  How  the  children  of  the  wicked  often  outnumber  the  off- 
spring of  the  pious.  3.  How  it  is  appointed  unto  all  men  once  to  die,  though  not  to 
all  to  die  alike.  4.  How  certain  it  is  that  the  wicked  and  the  good  shall  be  separated 
after  death,  since  at  death  both  are  gathered  unto  their  respective  peoples.  5.  How 
clearly  and  minutely  God  fulfils  the  promises  he  makes  to  wicked  men  no  less  than 
to  good. 


ch.  xxv.  19  -26.] 


THE   BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


317 


§  9.  The  Generations  op  Isaac  (ch.  xxv.  19— xxxv.  29). 


EXPOSITION. 


Ver.  19.— And  these  are  the  generations 
of  Isaac,  Abraham's  son.  The  usual  formula 
for  the  opening  of  a  new  section  (cf.  ch.  ii. 
4).  Abraham  begat  Isaac.  A  reiteration 
in'  perfect  harmony  not  only  with  the  style 
of  the  present  narrative,  but  of  ancient 
historiography  in  general ;  in  this  instance 
specially  designed  to  connect  the  subse- 
quent streams  of  Isaac's  posterity  with 
their  original  fountain-head  in  Abraham. 
Ver.  20.— And  Isaac  was  forty  years  old 
when  he  took  Kebekah  to  wife, — the  valu- 
able chronological  fact  here  stated  for  the 
first  time  proves  that  Isaac  was  married 
three  years  after  his  mother's  death  (cf. 
oh  xxiii.  1)— the  daughter  of  Bethuel  the 
Syrian  of  Padan-aram,  the  sister  to  laban 
the  Syrian  {vide  on  ch.  xxii.  23;  xxiv.  29). 
Though  a  descendant  of  Arphaxad  (ch.  x. 
24),  Bethuel  is  styled  a  Syrian,  or  Ara- 
maean, from  the  country  of  his  adoption. 
On  Padan-aram  vide  ch.  xxiv.  10. 

Ver.  21. — And  Isaac  entreated— from  a 
root  signifying  to  burn  incense,  hence  to 
pray,  implying,  as  some  think  (Words- 
worth, 'Speaker's  Commentary'),  the  use 
of   incense  in  patriarchal  worship  ;   but 
perhaps  only  pointing  to  the  fact  that  the 
prayers  of  the  godly  ascend  like  incense 
(fiesenius):  cf.  Tobit  xii.  12;  Acts  x.  4. 
The  word  is  commonly  regarded  as  noting 
precum  multiplicationem,  et  vehemeittiam 
etpersererantiam  (Poole);  cf.  Ezek.xxxv. 
13 — the  Lord — Jehovah;  not  because  vers. 
21 — 23  are  the  composition  of  the  Jehovist 
(Tuch,  Bleek,  Davidson,  et  alii),  but  be- 
cause the  desired  son  was  to  be  the  heir 
of  promise  (Hengstenberg).    The  less  fre- 
quent occurrence,  of  the  Divine  name  in 
the  Thol'doth  of  Isaac  than  in  those  of 
Terah  has  been  explained  by  the  fact  that 
the  historical  matter  of  the  later  portion 
furnishes  less  occasion  for  its  introduction 
than  that  of  the  earlier  ;  and  the  predom- 
inance of  the  name  Elohim  over  that  of 
Jehovah  in  the  second  stage  of  the  patri- 
archal history  has  been  partly  ascribed  to 
the  employment  after  Abraham's  time  of 
s-uch  like  equivalent  expressions  as  "God 
of   Abraham"  and  "God  of  my  father" 
(Eeil) — for  his  wife, — literally,  opposite  to 
his  wife,  i.  e.  beside  his  wife,  placing  him- 
self opposite  her,  and  conjoining  his  sup 
plications  with  hers  (Ainsworth,  Bush); 
or,  better  in  behalf  of  his  wife  (LXX., 
Vulgate,  Calvin,  Keil,  Kalisch),  i.  e.  setting 
her  over  against  him  as  the  sole  object  to 
which  he  had  regard  in  his  intercessions 
(Luther) — because    she  was   barren  ; — as 


Sarah  had  been  before  her  (vide  ch.  xi. 
30) ;  the  long-continued  sterility  of  both 
having  been  designed  to  show  partly  that 
"  children  are  the  heritage  of  the  Lord" 
(Ps.  cxxvii.  3),  but  chiefly  that  the  chil- 
dren of  the  promise  were  to  be  not  simply 
the  fruit  of  nature,  but  the  gift  of  grace — 
and  the  Lord  was  entreated'  of  him,  and 
Kebekah  his  wife  conceived  (cf.  Rom.  ix. 
10). 

Ver.  22. — And  the  children  struggled 
together  within  her.  The  verb  is  express- 
ive of  a  violent  internal  commotion,  as  if 
the  unborn  children  had  been  dashing 
against  one  another  in  her  womb.  Cf.  the 
story  of  Acrisius  and  Prcetus,  who  quar- 
relled before  birth  about  their  subsequent 
dominion  (Apollod. ,  II.  ii.  1).  Vide  Rosen- 
muller,  Scholia,  in  loco.  And  she  said,  If 
it  be  so,  why  am  I  thus  ?  Literally,  If  so, 
why  thus  (am)  If  Ot  obscure  import,  but 
probably  meaning,  "If  so,"  i.  e.  if  it  is 
the  case  that  I  have  conceived,  "for  what 
am  I  thus?"  what  is  the  reason  of  these 
unwonted  sensations  that  accompany  my 
pregnancy?  (Aben  Ezra,  Calvin,  Lange, 
Murphy)  ;  rather  than,  ' '  If  such  be  the 
sufferings  of  pregnancy,  why  did  I  seek 
to  conceive?"  (Rashi,  Rosenmuller),  or 
why  have  I  conceived  ?  (Vulgate,  Onkelos, 
Bush,  Ainsworth),  or,  why  do  I  yet  live  ? 
(Syriac,  Keil,  Kalisch,  Delitzsch).  And 
she  went  to  inquire  of  the  lord.  Not  by 
JJrim  (Bohlen),  since  this  method  of  in- 
quiring at  the  Deity  did  not  then  exist 
(Numb,  xxvii.  21) ;  but  either  through  a 
prophet, — Shem  (Luther),  Melchisedeck 
(Jewish  interpreters),  Heber  (Lyra) ;  more 
likely  Abraham  (Grotius,  Ainsworth, 
Wordsworth.  Kalisch-,  'Speaker's  Com- 
mentary'), or  Isaac,  the  prophet  nearest 
her  (Lange), — or  through  herself  by 
prayer,  as  in  Ps.  xxxiv.  5  (Calvin,  Rosen- 
muller, Lange,  Murphy,  Inglis).  The 
language  seems  to  implv  that  by  this  time 
there  was  a  regularly-appointed  place  for 
the  worship  of  God  by  prayer  and  sacri- 
fice— Theodoret  suggests  the  family  altar; 
Delitzsch,  Hagar's  well. 

Ver.  23. — And  the  Lord  said  unto  her, — 
in  a  dream  (Havernick),  a  form  of  revela 
tion  peculiar  to  primitive  times  (ch.  xv.  1 ; 
xx.  6;  xxviii.  12;  xxxvii.  5;  xl.  5;  xli.  1 ; 
xlvi.  2;  cf.  Job.  iv.  13;  xxxiii.  15);  but 
whether  communicated  directly  to  her.- 
self,  or  spoken  through  the  medium  of  a 
prophet,  the  Divine  response  to  her  inter- 
rogation assumed  an  antistrophic  and 
poetical  form,  in  which  she  was  informed 


3  8 


THE   BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xxv.  19—26. 


that  her  uuborn  sons  were  to  be  the 
founders  of  two  mighty  nations,  who, 
"unequal  in  power,  should  be  divided  in 
rivalry  and  antagonism  from  their  youth" 
— Two  nations  are  in  thy  womb  (i.  e.  the 
ancestors  and  founders  of  two  nations, 
viz. ,  the  Israelites  and  Idumeans,  and  two 
manner  of  people  shall  be  separated  from 
thy  bowels; — literally,  and  two  peoples 
from  thy  bowels  (or  womb)  are  separated, 
i.  e.  proceeding  from  thy  womb,  they  shall 
be  divided  from  and  against  each  other — 
and  the  one  people  shall  be  stronger  than 
the  other  people  (literally,  and  people  shall 
he  stronger  than  people,  i.  e.  the  one  shall 
prevail  over  the  other) ;  and  the  elder  shall 
serve  the  younger— i.  e.  the  descendants  of 
the  elder  shall  be  subject  to  those  of  the 
younger.  Vide  inspired  comments  on  this 
oracle  in  Mai.  i,  2,  3  and  Rom.  ix.  12—33. 

Ver.  24.— And  when  her  days  to  be  de- 
livered were  fulfilled, — literally,  and  were 
fulfilled  her  days  to  bring  forth;  lirVnpw- 
6i)o-av  at  ljpe'pai  toO  tskciv  avTi)V  (LXX.  ; 
ct.  Lake  i.  57  ;  ii.  6).  Jarchi  accounts  for 
the  different  phrase  used  of  Thamar  (ch. 
xxxviii.  27),  who  also  bore  twins,  by  sup- 
posing that  she  had  not  completed  her 
days,  but  gave  birth  to  Pharez  and  Zarah 
in  the  seventh  month  (vide  Rosenmiiller, 
in  loco) — behold,  there  were  twins  in  her 
womb  (cf.  ch.  xxxviii.  27,  where  the  full 
fprm  of  the  word  for  twins  is  given). 

Ver.  25. — And  the  first  came  out  red, — 
Adhmoni,  iruppdmis  (LXX.),  rufus  (Vul- 
gate), red-haired  (Gesenius),  of  a  reddish 
colour  (Lange),  containing  an  allusion  to 
Adham,  the  red  earth — all  over  like  an 
hairy  garment.  Literally,  all  of  him  as 
a  cloak  of  hair  (not,  as  the  LXX. ,  Vulgate, 
et  alii,  all  of  him  hairy,  like  a  cloak) ;  the 
fur  cloak,  or  hair  mantle,  forming  one 
notion  (Gesei.ius).  The  appearance  of  the 
child's  body,  covered  with  an  unusual 
quantity  of  red  hair,  was  "  a  sign  of  excess- 
ive sensual  vigour  and  wildness"  (Keil), 
' '  a  foreboding  of  the  animal  violence  of 
his  character"  (Kalisch),  "the  indication 
of  a  passionate  and  precocious  nature" 


(Murphy).  And  they  called  his  name  Esau— 
"the hairy  one,"  from  an  unused  root  sig- 
nifying to  be  covered  with  hair  (Gesenius). 
Ver.  26. — And  after  that  came  his  brother 
out,  and  his  hand  took  hold  on  Esau's  heel. 
The  inf.  constr.  standing  for  the  finite 
verb  (Ewald's  'Heb.  Synt.,'  §  304).  Not 
simply  followed  close  upon  the  heels  of 
Esau  (Kalisch),  but  seized  Esau's  heel,  as 
if  he  would  trip  him  up  (Keil,  Murphy). 
It  has  been  contended  (De  Wette,  Schu- 
mann, Knobel)  that  such  an  act  was  im- 
possible, a  work  on  obstetrics  by  Busch 
maintaining  that  an  hour  commonly  inter- 
venes between  the  birth  of  twins ;  but 
practitioners  of  eminence  who  have  been 
consulted  declare  the  act  to  be  distinctly 
possible,  and  indeed  it  is  well  known  that 
"a  multitude  of  surprising  phenomena 
are  connected  with  births"  (Havernick), 
some  of  which  are  not  greatly  dissimilar 
to  that  which  is  here  recorded.  Delitzsch 
interprets  the  language  as  meaning  only 
that  the  hand  of  Jacob  reached  out  in  the 
direction  of  his  brother's  heel,  as  if  to 
grasp  it ;  but  Hosea  xii.  3  explicitly  asserts 
that  he  had  his  brother's  heel  by  the  hand 
while  yet  in  his  mother's  womb.  And  his 
name  was  called — literally,  and  he  (i.  e. 
one)  called  his  name;  ko.1  iicdXco-e  to  ovo^a 
aiToO  (LXX.) ;  id  circo  appellant  eum 
(Vulgate;  cf.  ch.  xvi.  14;  xxvii.  36) — Jacob. 
Net  "Successor, " like  the  Latin  secundus, 
from  sequor  (Knobel,  Kalisch) ;  but ' '  Heel- 
catcher"  (Rosenmiiller,  Gesenius,  Keil, 
Lange,  Murphy),  hence  Supplanter  (cf. 
ch.  xxxvii.  36).  And  Isaac  was  threescore 
years  old  when  she  bare  them.  Literally, 
in  the  bearing  of  them,  the  inf.  constr.  tak- 
ing the  case  of  its  verb  (vide  Gesenius,  § 
1 33)  =  when  she  (the  mother)  bare  them ; 
ore  6TeKev  auroSs  'PeP^KKO  (LXX.);  quum 
nati  sunt  parvuli  (Vulgate) ;  though,  as 
Eebekah's  name  does  not  occur  in  the 
immediate  context,  and  lb"1  is  applied  to 
the  father  (ch.  iv.  18;  x.  8,  13)  as  well  as 
to  the  mother,  the  clause  may  be  rendered 
when  lie  (Isaac)  begat  theni  (Kalisch,  Al- 
ford). 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  19 — 26. — The  childless  pair.  I.  The  disappointed  husband.  1.  The  grievous 
affliction.  Rebekab,  the  wife  of  Isaac,  was  barren.  Though  neither  uncommon 
nor  unjust,  this  was  to  Isaac  (1)  a  specially  severe  affliction,  from  its  long  contin- 
uance, from  his  love  for  Rebekah,  from  his  own  natural  desire  of  offspring,  but 
chiefly  from  his  faith  in  the  promise  ;  (2)  a  highly  beneficial  affliction,  serving  to  in- 
struct and  discipline  his  faith  as  to  the  true  character  of  the  children  of  the  promise, 
to  refine  and  intensify  his  affection  for  Rebekah,  to  purify  and  elevate  his  own 
spiritual  life,  and  to  enable  him  to  realise  his  complete  dependence  on  the  grace  of 
God.  2.  The  earnest  intercession.  "Isaac  entreated  the  Lord  for  his  wife."  Isaac's 
supplication  was  (1)  directed  to  the  right  quaiter,  since  "children  are  the  heritage 
of  the  Lord;"  (2)  conceived  in  the  right  spirit,  the  word  "entreated"  implying 


en.  xxv.  27—34.] 


THE  BOOK   OP  GENESIS. 


819 


earnest  and  repeated  application  to  the  heavenly  throne  ;  (3)  stated  in  the  right  way, 
with  plainness  and  simplicity  of  speech ;  and  (4)  seconded  by  the  right  he]pers 
Rebekah,  according  to  one  reading  of  the  text,  joining  her  entreaties  with  her 
husband's.  Husbands  and  wives  should  be  helpers,  not  hmderers,  of  each  other's 
prayers.  3.  Tlie  gracious  response.  "The  Lord  was  entreated  of  Isaac,  and 
Rebekah  conceived."  Note  the  character  of  God  as  the  Hearer  of  prayer,  the  habitual 
practice  of  God,  which  is  to  listen  to  his  people's  supplications,  the  power  which 
belongs  to  prayer  of  being  able  to  prevail  with  God,  and  the  special  virtue  which 
resides  in  uuited  prayer.     (Matt,  xviii.  19). 

II.  The  anxious  wife.  1.  The  unwonted  experience.  In  two  respects  the  preg- 
nancy of  Rebekah  was  unusual.  First,  she  had  never  conceived  before ;  and 
secondly,  the  attendant  sensations  were  uncommon.  Great  mercies  are  often  accom- 
panied by  great  discomforts  to  prevent  gracious  souls  from  resting  in  the  gifts  and 
neglecting  the  Giver.  2.  The,  remarkable  interrogation.  "Rebekah  went  to  inquire 
of  the  Lord."  Her  conduct  was  remarkable  for  the  impatience  it  displayed,  the 
piety  it  evinced,  the  faith  it  implied.  If  in  her  querulous  exclamation  there  was  sin, 
in  her  seeking  to  God  with  her  anxiety  there  were  grace  and  faith.  3.  The  mys- 
terious oracle.  This  contained  three  distinct  announcements :  the  first  hopeful,  that 
Rebekah  should  be  the  mother  of  twins  ;  the  second  painful,  that,  besides  being 
mutually  antagonistic  from  their  birth,  her  two  sons  should  develop  into  hostile 
nations;  the  third  unusual,  that  the  elder  should  serve  the  younger. 

III.  The  happy  mother.  1.  Her  days  were  fulfilled.  A  special  mercy  which 
pregnant  mothers  can  appreciate.  2.  Her  sons  were  born.  Another  cause  of 
rejoicing  to  a  mother  (John  xvi.  21).  (1)  Their  names.  "Esau  and  Jacob." 
Names  of  men  are  sometimes  prophetic  of  both  character  and  condition.  (2)  Their 
birth :  remarkable  for  the  singular  phenomenon  by  which  it  was  accompanied. 
Jacob's  holding  of  Esau's  heel  was  intended  to  foreshadow  the  early  character  of 
Jacob,  his  future  over-reaching  of  Esau,  and  his  ultimate  precedence  in  grace.   N.B. 

,  The  first  in  nature  is  often  last  in  grace.  Between  nature  and  grace  there  is  per- 
petual antagonism.  The  great  achievements  of  gracious  souls  have  sometimes  fore- 
shadowings  in  nature.  (3)  Their  appearance.  Esau  red  like  a  hairy  cloak  ;  Jacob 
catching  Esau's  heel.  The  boy  is  oft  the  father  of  the  man.  3.  Her  husband  was 
spared.  "  Isaac  was  threescore  years  old  when  she  bare  them."  A  third  mercy  not 
always  granted  to  mothers,  to  retain  their  husbands  to  participate  in  their  maternal 
joys  (1  Sam.  iv.  19). 

Learu — 1.  That  children  in  a  home  are  a  special  mark  of  Divine  favour.  2.  That 
anxious  wives  and  mothers  should  carry  their  troubles  to  God's  throne.  3.  That  the 
future  histories  and  destinies  of  children  are  known  to  God,  if  not  to  their  parents. 
4.  Thg,t  mothers  of  families  have  peculiar  joys  as  well  as  special  sorrows. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  19— 34.—  Divine  purposes  unfolded.  We  are  now  entering  a  new  stage  of 
the  sacred  history,  where  we  are  looking  less  upon  the  development  of  one  man's 
character  than  upon  the  unfolding  purposes  of  Jehovah  in  the  family  with  which  he 
has  made  his  covenant.  Again  we  are  in  the  region  of— 1.  Gracious  interposition. 
2.  Supernatural  assistance  of  human  infirmity.  3.  Prophetic  announcements.  The 
atmosphere  is  that  of  the  covenant.  The  children  in  the  womb  are  two  nations 
The  history  of  great  peoples  isanticipated.— R. 


EXPOSITION. 


Ver.  27. — And  the  boys  grew:  and  Esau 
was  a  cunning  hunter, — literally,  skilled 
in  hunting  ;  etSois  Kwrwetv  (LXX. ) ;  gnarus 
venandi  (Vulgate);  a  sportsman— a  man 
ofthe  field;— not  a  husbandman,  homo 
agrieola  (Vulgate),  who  is  differently  de- 
nominated— ish  haadhamah  (ch.  ix.  20); 
but  one  addicted  to  roaming  through  the 
fields  in  search  of  sport— 07poiKos  (LXX.); 
an  indication  of  the  rough,  fiery  nature  and 
wild,  adventurous  life  of  the  elder  of  the 


two  brothers — and  Jacob  was  aplain  man, 

Qn  =  owrXao-Tos  (LXX. )  simplex  { Vulgate); 
integer,  i.  e.  mitis,  of  mild  and  gentle  man- 
ners (Rosenmuller) ;  blameless  as  a  shep- 
herd(Knobel);  pious  (Luther);  righteous 
(Kalisch);  obviously  intended  to  describe 
Jacob  as,  both  in  character  and  life,  the 

antithesis  of  Esau — dwelling  in  tents 

i.  e.  loving  to  stay  at  home,  as  opposed  to 
Esau,  who  loved  to  wander  afield;  pre- 
ferring a  quiet,  peaceable,  domestic,  and 


320 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xxv.  27-34. 


pious  manner  of  existence  to  a  life  of  "ex- 
citement, adventure,  and  danger,"  such  as 
captivated  Esau. 

Ver.  28.— And  Isaac  loved  Esau,  because 
lie  did  eat  of  bis  venison: — literally,  because 
7iis  hunting  (i.  e.  its  produce)  was  in  his 
mouth;  oti  i]  8T|pa  avrov  Bpu><ris  aino 
(LXX.);  not  perhaps,  tbe  sole  reason  for 
Isaac's  preference  of  Esau,  though  men- 
tioned here  because  of  its  connection  with 
the  ensuing  narrative.  Persons  of  quiet 
and  retiring  disposition,  like  Isaac,  are 
often  fascinated  by  those  of  more  spark- 
ling and  energetic  temperament,  such  as 
Esau;  mothers,  on  the  other  hand,  are 
mostly  drawn  towards  children  that  are 
gentle  in  disposition  and  home-keeping  in 
habit.  Accordingly  it  is  added — but  Ee- 
bekah  loved  Jacob. 

Ver.  29. — And  Jacob  sod  pottage : — liter- 
ally, cooked  something  cooked;  (ty^cre  8e 
IaKoip  exl/tina  (LXX.);  prepared  boiled 
food,  of  lentiles  (vide  on  ver.  34)— and 
Esau  came  from  the  field,  and  he  was  faint 
— exhausted,  the  term  being  used  of  one 
whois  both  wearied  and  languishing  (cf, 
Job  xxii.  7;  Ps.  lxiii.  2;  Prov.  xxv.  25). 

Ver.  30. — And  Esau  said  unto  Jacob, Feed 
me  (literally,  let  me  swallow,  an  expression 
for  eating  greedily),  I  pray  thee,  with  that 
same  red  pottage  ; — literally,  of  that  red, 
red  (sc.  pottage),  or  thing,  in  his  excite- 
ment forgetting  the  name  of  the  dish 
(Knobel),  or  indicative  of  the  haste  pro- 
duced by  his  voracious  appetite  (Words- 
worth, Luther),  though  the  duplication  of 
the  term  red  has  been  explained  as  a. 
witty  play  upon  the  resemblance  of  the 
lentil  broth  to  his  own  red  skin,  as  thus: 
"Feed  with  that  red  me  the  red  one" 
(Lange) — for  I  am  faint  {vide  supra,  ver.  29) : 
therefore  was  his  name  called  Edom — i.  e. 
red.  ' '  Thereis  no  discrepancy  in  ascribing 
his  name  both  to  his  complexion  and  the 
color  of  the  lentil  broth.  The  propriety 
of  a  name  may  surely  be  marked  by  dif- 
ferent circumstances"  (A.  G.  in  Lange). 
The  Arabians  are  fond  of  giving  surnames 
of  that  kind  to  famous  persons.  Cf.  Akil- 
al  Murar,  which  was  given  to  Hodjr,  king 
of  the  Kendites,  owing  to  his  wife  saying 
in  a  passion,  "He  is  like  a  camel  that  de- 
vours bushes"  (vide  HHvernick,  'Intro- 
duction,' §  18). 

Ver.  31. — And  Jacob  said,  Sell  me  this 
day— literally,  as  the  day  ;  as  clearly  as 
the  day  (Jarchi,  Kimchi,  Drusius) ;  im- 
mediately, siatim  (Bosenmiiller) ;  perhaps 
simply  to-day,  tHj|«pov  (LXX.,  Glassius, 
Gesenius,  Kalisch;cf.  1  Sam.  ix.  13,  27; 
1  Kings  i.  49)— thy  birthright.  The  right 
of  primogeniture  in  the  family  of  Abra- 
ham implied  (1)  succession  to  the  earthly 


inheritance  of  Canaan;  (2)  possession  of 
the  covenant  blessing  transmitted  through 
the  paternal  benediction;  and  (3)  progeni- 
torship  of  the  promised  seed.  Under  the 
Mosaic  institute  the  privileges  of  the  first- 
born were  clearly  defined.  They  involved 
succession  to  (1)  the  official  authority  of 
the  father;  (2)  a  double  portion  of  the 
father's  property ;  and  (3)  the  functions  of 
the  domestic  priesthood  (vide  ch.  xxvii.  4, 
19,  27-29;  xliv.  3;  Exod.  xxii.  29;  Numb, 
viii.  14 — 17;  Deut.  xxi.  17). 

Ver.  32. — And  Esau  said,  Behold,  I  am 
at  the  point  to  die: — literally,  going  to 
die ;  meaning,  "  on  the  eve  of  expiring," 
through  hunger;  "ex  animo  tesletur  se 
mortis  sensu  urgeri  "  (Calvin) ;  or,  "  liable 
to  death,"  through  the  dangerous  pur- 
suits of  his  daily  calling  (Ainsworth, 
Bush,  Rosenmuller);  or,  what  is  most 
probable,  "on  the  way  to  meet  death" 
— uttered  in  a  spirit  of  Epicurean  levity, 
"  Let  us  eat  and  drink,  for  to-morrow  we 
die  "  (Keil,  Kalisch) — and  what  profit  shall 
this  birthright  do  to  me? — literally,  of 
what  (use)£7m(thing)  to  me,  (called)  a  birth- 
right? signifying,  according  to  thesense  at- 
tached to  the  foregoing  expression,  either, 
Of  what  use  can  a  birthright  be  to  a  man 
dying  of  starvation?  or,  the  birthright  is 
not  likely  ever  to  be  of  service  to  me,  who 
am  almost  certain  to  be  cut  off  soon  by  a 
violent  and  sudden  death  ;  or,  What  sig- 
nifies a  birthright  whose  enjoyment  i£  all 
in  the  future  to  a  man  who  has  only  a 
short  time  to  live?  I  prefer  present  grat- 
ifications to  deferred  felicities. 

Ver.  33. — And  Jacob  said,  Swear  to  me 
this  day.  On  the  expression."  this  day" 
vide  supra,  ver.  81.  The  conduct  of 
Jacob  in  this  transaction  is  difficult  to  de- 
fend. Though  aware  of  the  heavenly 
oracle  that  assigned  to  him  the  precedence 
in  his  father's  house,  he  was  far  from 
being  justified  in  endeavouring,  by  "cau- 
tious, prudent,  and  conciliatory  pro- 
posals "  (Murphy),  but  rather  by  unbeliev- 
ing impatience,  despicable  meanness,  and 
miserable  craft,  to  anticipate  Divine  provi- 
dence, which  in  due  time  without  his 
assistance  would  have  implemented  its 
own  designs.  And  h '  sware  unto  him.  If 
Jacob's  demand  of  an  oath  evinced  ungen- 
erous suspicion,  Esau's  giving  of  an  oath 
showed  a  low  sense  of  honor  (Lange). 
And  he  sold  his  birthright  unto  Jacob — 
thus  meriting  the  appellation  of  BIBnXos 
(Heb.  xii.  16). 

Ver.  34. — Then  Jaoob  gave  Esau  bread 
and  pottage  of  lentiles.    ' '  Lentiles  (D"1,J3'1S > 

Ervum  lens)  wpre  and  are  extensively 
and    carefully  grown   in    Egypt,   Syria, 


ch.  xxv.  27—34.] 


THE  BOOK   OF  GENESIS. 


321 


and  Palestine  (2  Sain.  xvii.  28;  xxiii. 
11);  those  of  Egypt  were,  at  a  later 
period,  particularly  famous;  and  tlie  man- 
ner of  cooking  them  is  even  immortalised 
on  monuments"  (Kalisch).  "The  lentil 
does  not  grow  more  than  six  or  eight 
inches  high,  and  is  pulled  like  flax,  not  cut 
with  the  sickle.  When  green  it  resembles 
an  incipient  pea-vine  only  the  lsaves  are 
differently  arranged    smaller  and  m.re 


delicate — somewhat  like  those  of  the  mi- 
mosa,  or  sensit  ve  plant "  (Thomson, 
'Land  and  Book,'  p,  596).  And  lie  did  eat 
and  drink,  and  rcse  up,  and  went  his  way. 
A  graphic  pnrirait  of  an  utterly  carnal 
mind,  which  lives  solely  in  and  for  the 
immediate  gratification  of  appetite.  Thus 
Esau  despised  his  birthright— and  thus 
Scripture  both  proclaims  his  guilt  and 
describes  his  offence. 


*       HOMILETIOS. 

Vera.  27 — 34.—  The  twin  'brothers.  I.  The  growing  lads.  1.  Diverse  in  daily 
calling.  Esau  elected  to  follow  the  adventurous  and  roving  life  of  a  hunter  ;  Jacob, 
the  simpler  and  less  exciting  occupation  of  keeping  sheep.  The  principles  that 
guided  their  respective  choices  are  not  explained  ;  but,  like  the  selection  of  trades 
by  other  inexperienced  youths,  these  were  doubtless  due  to  physical  constitution, 
mental  temperament,  the  influence  of  example,  the  effect  of  parental  counsel,  and 
above  all  the  over-ruling  providence  of  God  Of  Cain  and  Abel  (ch.  iv.  2).  2. 
Unlike  in  personal  diameter.  Esau  was  a  wild  man  in  disposition  no  less  than  in 
action,  a  youth  of  strong  animal  propensities  anr-  essentially  mundane  proclivities. 
Jacob,  without  being  religious,  was  quiet,  sedate,  fond  of  home  life,  and  studious  of 
peace,  though  not  without  a  vein  of  duplicity  in  his  soul's  texture.  This  diversity 
in  character,  not  due  to  parentage,  birth,  o  education,  which  in  both  were  alike, 
modern  science  would  explain  by  molecular  arrangement.  Biblical  theology  goes  a 
step  behind,  and  traces  it  to  God  (Rom.  ix.  11).  3.  Divided  in  parental  favour. 
Esau  was  loved  by  Isaac,  Jacob  by  Rebekah.  Besides  being  sinful  in  itself — scarcely 
anything  can  justify  partiality  in  parental  affection — the  conduct  of  Isaac  and  Rebe- 
kah was  more  than  likely  hurtful  to  the  lads,  leaving  on  their  consciences  a  sense  of 
injustice,  estranging  them  from  each  other  in  fraternal  regard,  and  helping  them 
unconsciously  to  fulfilthe  untoward  destiny  of  mutual  rivalry  and  jealousy  already 
predicted. for  them. 

II.  The  tibed  hunteb.  1.  His  famishing^  condition.  If  Esau  was  really  faint, 
it  indicated  too  great  eagermss  in  fol  owing  his  sports.  Even  in  lionorable  cal  iugs 
and  profitable  pursuits  moderation  is  a  duty.  Roin.  xii.  11  will  assist  traders  and 
merchants  to  preserve  the  golden  mean  between  slothfulness  and  slavishness  in 
business.  V  Esau  was  not  really  faint,  but  only  fatigued  and  hungry,  it  was  an 
instance  of  exaggerated  talking  which  wi:h  some  is  common,  but  by  all  should  be 
avoided.  2.  His  ravenous  request.  This  indicated  an  impatient  spirit,  which  the 
words  attempt  to  r.  produce— a  spirit  characteristic  of  il'-balanced  natures,  resulting 

•in  most  instances  from  unsubdued  selfishness,  betraying  frequently  into  sins  and 
faults  that  might  otherwise  be  avoided,  and  at  all  times  ill-befitting  noble  souls  and 
renewed  hearts.  It  also  discovered  a  gluttonous  appetite.  The  glutton's  god  is  his 
belly,  the  glutton's  temple  his  ki  chen,  the  glutton '«  high  priest  his  cook,  the  glut- 
ton's ritual,  Let  us  eat  and  drink.     Let  saints  beware  of  gluttony  (Prov.  xxiii.  2). 

III.  The  despised  birthright.  1.  The  base  proposal.  "Sell  me  this  day  thy 
birthright."  Jacob's  desire  to  deprive  Esau  of  his  right  of  primogeniture  was 
envious,  unbrotherly,  and,  in  the  light  of  the  pre-natal  oracle,  impatient  and  un- 
believing. The  conditions  of  sale  were  mean,  exacting,  and  selfish.  Tha>  Jacob's 
conduct  was  the  fruit  of  grace  or  faitli  is  difficult  to  credit,  though  God,  who  often 
works  with  despicable  instruments,  over-ruled  it  for  the  accomplishment  of  his  own 
designs.  2.  Thefooish  answer.  "Behold,  I  am  at  the  point  to  die:  and  what  profit 
shall  this  birthright  do  to  me?"  An  ejaculation  discovering  both  contempt  for 
spiritual  and  doubt  of  future  things;  the  very  essence  of  epicureanism,  whether 
ancient  or  modern.  3.  The  unholy  oath.  "  Swear  to  me  this  day;  and  he  sware  unto 
him."  On  the  part  of  both  giver  and  receiver  this  was  wrong.  Neither  had  Esau 
right  to  part  with  his  birthright  until  God  in  his  providence  took  it  from  him  •  nor 
hadJacob  the  right  to  accept  that  birthright  until  God  transferred  it  to  his  hands. 
4.  The  unequal  exchange.  Jacob  got  the  birthright ;  Esau  got  the  pottage.  Esnu 
the  type  of  many  who  accept  the  devil's  bargain  of  the  world  (mostly  an  infinitesimal 
f  I  agment  or  it)  for  a  soul. 

GENESIS.  ,, 


322  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  fail.  xxv.  37—34. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  27. — The  "  cunning  hunter  "  is  set  over  against  the  "plain  man  dwelling  in 
tents."  I.  The  two  kingdoms,  that  of  material  force  and  th.t  of  n.ortal  power,  are 
thus  represented  in  contrast  and  rivalry. 

II.  God's  ways  and  man's  ways  contrasted.  The  partialities  of  the  parents 
foster  the  special  faults  of  the  children.  Esau  is  more  the  man  of  fleshly  impulse 
because  Isaac  loved  him  for  his  venison.  Jacob  is  more  the  crafty  supplanter  because 
Rebekah  by  her  favouritism  eucouraged  him  to  take  advantage  of  his  brother. 

III.  The  impobtance  of  home  life  in  the  development  of  character.  The 
sins  of  parents  are  generally  in  some  form  transmitted  to  children.  Esau's  new  name 
was  Edom,  memento  of  his  selfish  succumbing  to  appetite.  J  cob's  new  name  was 
Israel,  memento  of  the  victory  which  by  the  grace  of  God -he  obtained.  "Esau 
despised  h  s  birthright."  It  was  the  natural  working  of  a  sensuai  nature.  We  begin 
by  yielding  to  the  lower  impulses  without  thinking  how  they  bind  their  cords  round 
us.  At  last  we  lose  the  power  of  distinguishing  a  mere  passing  evil  from  an  over- 
whelming clanger,  and  when  we  ought  to  fight,  cry,  /  am  at  the  point  to  die;  then  in 
wretched  collapse  all  goes.  What  is  this  birthright,  what  profit?  1.  The  loss  of  the 
sense  of  responsibility.  2.  The  absorbing  hunger  after  present  gratification.  3.  The 
blindness  to  all  proportion  in  life.  4.  The  dulness  and  stupidity  of  the  animalism 
which  does  not  even  care  for  the  very  birthright  itself,  though  it  is  an  earthly  ad- 
vantage. These  are  the  fearful  payments  which  they  have  to  render  who,  like  Esau, 
give  themselves  up  to  a  mere  life  of  the  flesh. — R. 

Ver.  32. — Esau,  the  spiritually  indifferent.  "What  profit  shall  the  birthright  do 
to  me  ? '  There  was  very  much  in  Esau  which  would  be  greatly  admired.  He  was 
of  good  humour,  off-handed,  manly,  open,  dining,  and  fond  of  field  sports  He,  and 
not  Jacob,  would  in  society  have  carried  off  the  palm.  He  was  a  fair  sample  of  a 
worldling.  He  knew  nothing  of  the  consecration  of  heart  to  God,  or  of  spiritual 
aspirations.  In  the  narrative  we  see  how  he  showed  indifference  to  the  birthright, 
which  carried  with  it  certain  epiritual  advantages.  He  came  in  faint  from  the  field, 
and  the  wafted  odour  of  Jacob's  savoury  lentils  filled  him  with  longing.  For  a  share 
in  a  mess  of  pottage  he  parttd  with  his  birthright. 

I.  The  unrenewed  heart  always  undervalues  material,  natural,  and 
spiritual  blessings.  We  may  enjoy  all  the  blessings  God  may  shower  upon  us  and 
not  think  of  them  as  coming  from  God.  We  undervalue  the  gift  of  life,  and  the 
various  means  by  which  God  has  arranged  that  life  shall  be  sustained.  Then  we 
forget  that  God  preserves  to  us  reason  and  the  power  of  acquiring  knowledge.  But 
there  are  spiritual  advantages  analogous  to  those  which  Esau  despised  which  we  may 
treat  indifferently.  1.  Authority  and  honour  as  the  firstborn.  2.  A  double  portion 
of  his  father's  possessions.  3.  Tue  privilege  of  the  priesthood.  Evidently  the  eldest 
son  acted  as  the  piie4  of  the  family  in  offering  the  sacrifices,  and  the  priestly  garb 
was  kept  for  him.  It  was  this  thatReb  kah  had  by  her.  and  which  she  put  on  Jacob 
to  deceive  Isaac.  4.  The  peculiar  blessing  of  his  father,  which  was  bestowed  with 
solemnity.  A  covenant  was  ratified  by  eating,  and  hence  Isaac  sent  out  Esau  to 
prepare  venison;  but  Rebekah  forestalled  him.  5.  Included  in  that  blessing  of  Isaac 
was  the  promise  made  by  God  to  Abraham,  and  which  was  to  be  handed  on  from 
one  generation  to  an  ther.  It  was  for  this  Jacob  longed.  He  rightly  appraised  the 
spiritual  advantages  connected  with  it.  Though  there  was  much  that  was  mean  in 
his  character  at  first,  he  had  these  spiritual  desires  and  faith  in  God  not  possessed  by 
his  brother.  These  brothers  were  twins,  yet  how  diverse  their  character.  It  may 
have  been  that  Jncob,  knowing  he  was  of  equnl  age,  felt  he  had  an  equal  right  to  be 
accounted  the  firstborn.  This  may  be  said  by  way  of  excuse  for  that  which  other- 
wise would  appear  outrageous  and  mean.  Probably  when  Esau  said  he  was  ' '  at  the 
point  of  death"  he  only  meant  it  in  the  same  way  that  we  say  "we  are  dying  of 
hunger."  Jacob  asked  the  transfer  because  he  knew  his  brother  cared  little  about 
it,  and  because  he  may  have  heard  him  express  his  indifference  to  it.  Jacob  could 
not  have  taken  it  by  violence,  and  Esau  should  have  refused  the  suggestion  with  an 


ch.  xxv.  27 — 34.J  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  883 

emphatic  "no  ;"  say,  "  I  will  rather  die  than  part  with  that."  Esau  may  have  even 
smiled  at  Jacob  for  caring  so  much  about  that  which  was  of  such  little  worth  to  him. 
A  depraved  heart  made  him  profane,  indifferent,  ungrateful,  and  rash. 

II.    A  TIME   IS   SURE   TO  COMB  WHEN   THE    GOOD  WE   UNDERVALUED  BECOMES   Ol1 
GREATEST  WORTH,  AND  WHEN  IT  MAT  BE  BEYOND  OUR  REACH.      It  Was  probably  about 

twenty  years  after  Esau  had  parted  with  his  birthright  that  Isaac  felt  one  day  that 
his  end  was  approaching,  and  desired  to  bless  his  son  before  he  died.  He  was  ignorant 
of  the  transfer  which  had  been  made.  Esau  deceived  his  father.  He  ignored  a 
solemn  compact.  He  would  now  rob  his  brother.  He  comes  back  perspiring  and 
exhausted  from  the  field,  thinking  that  anyhow  he  has  earned  his  father's  blessing. 
He  finds  that  Jacob  has  acted  in  his  right  and  obtained  the  blessing.  His  own  mother 
frustrates  him,  believing  that  she  was  acting  rightly  for  her  son  Jacob.  "We  can  see 
how  questionable  were  her  doings,  but  we  must  not  measure  her  nor  Jacob  by  present 
moral  standards.  Esau  weeps,  "What,  no  blessing  for  thy  firstborn  ?"  He  gets  a 
blessiug,  but  not  the  best.  Deep  his  regret.  He  sees  now  his  folly  in  its  true  light. 
"No  place  for  repeutance,"  &c.  means  no  chance  of  repairing  the  mischief  Thus 
things  done  thoughtlessly  in  youth  may  have  fearful  after-consequences.  Neglect 
of  educational  advantages,  incurring  of  debt,  acquirement  of  habits,  rejection  of 
appeals,  and  withstanding  religious  impressions.  As  the  icicle  freezes  one  drop  at  a 
time,  so  character  is  gradually  formed.  It  depends  on  the  water  as  to  What  the 
icicle  will  be.  If  muddy  and  tinged,  the  frozen  mass  will  not  be  transparent  ;  clear 
or  thick,  it  is  frozen  and  fixed,  and  will  never  be  altered  until  dissolved  altogether. 
Where  are  the  warm  rays  that  are  to  change  our  character?  Esau  sought  to  change 
his  father's  miud,  but  it  was  useless,  Our  heavenly  Father  is  always  willing  to  forgive 
if  there  be  true  repentance,  but  his  forgiveness  way  not  conquer  the  fixed  evil  habit. 
So  long  as  there  is  life  none  should  despair.  See  how  David  sinned,  but  he  repented 
too.  Esau  lacked  contrition.  His  sorrow  was  only  remorse.  What  if  we  are  risking 
the  loss  of  some  great  spiritual  advantage  like  to  Esau's  !  We  shall  discover  it  on 
the  death-bed  or  at  the  judgment  bar.  There  is  then  a  serious  warning — 1.  To  those 
who  are  trifling  with  religion.  Can  you  push  the  cross  aside,  and  laugh  on  Calvary's 
mount?  2.  To  those  hardening  their  hearts  in  neglect.  An  old  man  once  said  to 
me,  "  It  is  no  use  talking  of  religion  to  me  now  ;  I  am  past  it.  There  was  a  time 
once  when  I  felt,  but  now  I  cannot."  3.  To  those  who  think  it  will  be  easier  to 
repent  and  do  the  right  later  in  life.  God  promises  pardon  when  we  repent,  but  he 
does  not  promise  to  prolong  life.  Probably  there  is  not  one  present  who  has  not 
heard  this  warning  before,  therefore  it  is  to  be  feared  it  will  be  as  unavailing  as  the 
.  preceding.     Oh,  Holy  Spirit,  forbid  that  it  should.— H. 

/  Ver.  34. — Neglect  of  heavenly  things.  "Thus  Esau  despised  his  birthright." 
Strange  and  sad  that  truths  so  important  as  those  bearing  on  eternal  life,  even 
where  believed,  often  exercise  so  slight  influence.  Yet  so  it  is.  How  many  like 
to  hear  the  gospel  in  its  fulness,  and  to  be  warned  against  neglecting  it,  yet  in 
their  lives  show  little  of  its  power  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  32).  How  many  live  content  to 
know  truth,  forgetting  that  all  our  daily  life  tells  for  good  or  ill  on  our  eternal  life, 
and  that  opportunities  are  passing  away.  How  many,  believing  that  in  every  being 
there  is  a  soul  to  be  saved  or  lost,  can  yet  see  multitudes  living  in  ungodliness  with- 
out effort  or  even  prayer  for  their  recovery  (cf.  Luke  xix.  41).  Is  not  the  spirit  of 
Esau  in  these  ?  He  is  called  (Heb.  xii.  16)  a  "profane  person."  Yet  no  crime  or 
great  fault  is  laid  to  his  charge.  There  is  an  attractiveness  in  his  character.  We 
see  in  him  an  impulsive,,  thoughtess  man  ;  not  what  would  be  called  a  bad  son  ;  his 
father's  favourite  ;  having  some  regard  to  his  parent's  wishes  (ch.  xxviii  8,  9)  ;'  but 
swayed  by  passing  things  and  without  self-denial.  Hungry  and  weary  with  the 
chase,  he  craved  the  food-  he-saw  (cf.  Matt.  iv.  3).  But  the  price  ?  His  birthright, 
the  claim  to  a  special  benediction,  the  domestic  priesthood  (cf.  Exod.  xxii.  29),  were 
as  nothing.  He  did  not  realise  their  value  (cf .  Heb.  xi.  1).  The  present  was  every- 
thing (cf.  1  Cor.  xv.  32).  The  pleasant,  genial,  headlong  man  is  pronounced  "  pro- 
fane."   Observe — 

1.  The  gradual  effect  of  self-indulgence  (cf.  Matt.  xix.  24).  The  birthright 
despised  not  through  sudden  temptation  or  any  marked  step  of  sin,  but  by  worldly 
interests  taking  up  the  thoughts.  Customs  and  maxims  of  the  world  tend  to  neglect- 
ing the  birthright  (cf.  Matt.  vi.  33).  This  is  no  ideal  danger.  No  sharp  line  to  tell 
when  danger    begins.     Things  perfectly   allowable,    even    laudable,    may   choke 

y2 


824 


THE   BOOK   OF   GENESIS. 


[ch.  xxvi.  1 — 6. 


spiritual  life.  Even  iu  good  work  the  mind  may  be  so  engrossed  in  the  work  itself 
that  communion  with  God  fades.  There  is  need  of  habitual  self-denial  (John  vi. 
38)  ;  of  keeping  guard  over  the  tendencies  of  daily  life;  of  definite  aims,  not  pass- 
ing wishes  ;  of  making  personal  communion  with  God  an  essential  part  of  each 
day's  work. 

II.  THE  DEADENING  EFFECT  IN  RELATION  TO  REPENTANCE.       "  TimeenOUgh  "  is  a 

fatal  mistake  (Acts  xxiv.  25  ;  2  Cor.  vi.  2).  So  far  as  we  know  Esau  never  repented. 
Even  when  Jacob  received  the  blessing  he  was  sorry,  but  there  was  no  real  change, 
no  confession  of  error.     Self  was  still  the  ruling  power. 

III.  The  call  to  consider  our  birthright  (Kom.  viii.  17 ;  I  John  iii.  2).  Not 
merely  a  future  blessing.  Thinking  of  it  thus  leads  to  its  being  left  out  of  view. 
Now  there  is  reconciliation,  peace,  spirit  of  adoption,  the  Spirit's  witness  in  our 
hearts,  freedom  of  access  in  prayer,  and  promises  to  be  realised  in  growing  likeness 
to  Christ  and  communion  with  him.  Few  would  deliberately  poslpone  to  the  end 
of  life  the  claiming  their  birthright  and  making  sure  of  it,  the  work  of  repentance 
and  faith,  and  the  casting  away  what  has  hindered.  But  many  without  set  purpose 
do  delay.    Each  time  the  call  is  put  away  is  a  victory  for  the  tempter.— M. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXVI. 


Ver.  1. — And  there  was  a  famine  in  the 
land  (of  Canaan),  beside  the  first  (i.  e.  first 
recorded)  famine  that  was  in  the  days  of 
Abraham — at  least  acentury  previous  (vide 
ch.  xii.  10).  And  Isaac — who  since  his 
father's  death ,  had  been  residi  ngat  Hagar's 
well  in  the  wilderness  of  Beersheba  (ch. 
xxv.  11) — went  unto  Abimelech  king  of  t  e 
Philistines  untoGerar  (cf.  ch.  xx.  1,  2;xxi. 
22).  Seventy  or  eighty  years  having 
elapsed  since  Abraham's  sojourn  in  Gerar, 
it  is  scarcely  probable  that  this  was  the 
monarch  who  then  reigned. 

Ver.  2. — And  the  Lord  (Jehovah,  i.  e. 
the  God  of  the  covenant  and  of  the  prom- 
ise) appeared  unto  him, — only  two  Divine 
manifestations  are  mentioned  as  having 
been  granted  to  the  patriarch.  Either  the 
peaceful  tenor  of  Isaac's  life  rendered 
more  theophanies  in  his  case  unnecessary  ; 
or,  if  others  were  enjoyed  by  him,  the  brief 
space  allotted  by  the  historian  to  the  record 
of  his  life  may  account  for  their  omission 
from  the  narrative.  Though  commonly 
understood  as  having  occurred  in  Gerar 
(Keil,  Lange,  Murphy),  this  appearance 
is  perhaps  better  regarded  as  h  aving  taken 
place  at  Lahai-roi,  and  as  having  been  the 
cause  of  Isaac's  turning  aside  into  the  land 
si  the  Philistines  (Calvin) — and  said,  Go 
not  down  into  Egypt — whither  manifestly 
he  had  been  purposing  to  migrate,  as  his 
father  had  done  on  the  occasion  of  the 
earlier  dearth  (ch.  xii.  10).  Jacob  in  the 
later  famine  was  instructed  to  go  down  to 
Egypt  (ch.  xlvi.  3,  4) ;  Abraham  in  the 
first  scarcity  was  left  at  liberty  to  think 
and  act  for  himself.  Dwell  in  the  land 
which  I  will  tell  thee  of  (i.  e.  Pbilistia,  as 
appears  from  the  preceding  verse). 

Ver.  3. — Sojournin  this  land, — viz.,  Phi- 


listia  (Murphy,  Alford),  though  otherwise 
regarded  as  Canaan  (Lange,  Keil,  Calvin) 
— and  I  will  be  with  thee,  and  will  bless 
thee.  Of  this  comprehensive  promise, 
the  first  part  was  enjoyed  by,  while  the 
second  was  distinctly  stated  to,  Abraham 
(cf.  ch.  xii.  2).  God's  presence  with  Isaac 
of  higher  significance  than  his  presence 
with  Ishmael  (ch.  xxi.  20).  For  unto  thee, 
and  unto  thy  seed,  will  I  give  all  these 
bfrSri,  an  archaism  for  rf?Ntl  (cf.  ch.  xix. 
8.  25) — countries  (i.  e  Canaan  and  the 
surrounding  lands),  and  I  will  perform  the 
oath  (tide  ch.  xxii.  16)  which  I  sware  unto 
Abraham  thy  father. 

Ver.  4. — And  I  will  make  thy  seed  to 
multiply  as  the  stars  of  heaven  (vide  ch: 
xv.  1 — 6),  and  will  give  unto  thy  seed  all 
these  countries  (i.  e.  the  territories  occu- 
pied by  the  Canaanitish  tribes);  and  in  thy 
seed  shall  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  be 
blessed  (cf.  ch.  xii.  3  :  xxii.  18'. 

Ver.  5. — Because  that  Abraham  obeyed 
(literally,  hearkened  to)  my  voice  !a  general 
description  of  the  patriarch's  obedience, 
which  the  next  clause  further  particular- 
ises) and  kept  my  charge, — custodierit  ens- 
todiam  (Calvin)  ;  observed  by  observances 
(Kalisch)  ;  the  charge  being  that  which  is 
intended  to  be  kept — my  commandments, — 
i.  e.  particular  injunctions,  specific  enact- 
ments, express  or  occasional  orders  (cf.  2 
Chron.  xxxv.  16)— my  statutes, — or  per- 
manent ordinances,  such  as  the  passover; 
literally,  that  which  is  graven  on  tables  or 
monuments  (compare  Exod.  xii.  14) — and 
my  laws — which  refer  to  the  great  doc- 
trines of  moral  obligation.  The  three 
terms  express  the  contents  of  the  Divine 
observances  which  Abraham  observed. 

Ver.  6. — And  Isaac  dwelt  in  Gerar — as 
God  had  shown  and  enjoined  him. 


en.  xxvi.  1—6.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  825 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — Agood  man's  perplexity.  I.  The  contemplated  journey.  1.  Its 
projec  ed  destination.  Egypt.  Renowned  for  fertility,  the  land  of  the  Pharaohs  was 
yet  no  proper  resort  for  the  son  of  Abraham,  the  heir  of  Canaun,  and  the  friend  of 
God.  It  was  outside  the  land  of  promise  ;  it  had  been  to  Abraham  a  scene  of  peril, 
and  it  was  not  a  place  to  which  he  was  directed  to  turn.  Considerations  such  as  these 
should  have  operated  to  deter  Isaac  from  even  entertaining  the  idea  of  a  pilgrimage 
to  Egypt.  But  the  behaviour  of  this  Hebrew  patriarch  is  sometimes  outdone  by  that 
of  modern  saints,  who  not  simply  project,  but  actually  perform,  journeys,  of  pleasure 
or  of  business,  across  the  boundary  line  which  separates  the  Church  from  the  world, 
into  places  where  their  spiritual  interests  are  endangered,  and  that  too  not  only  with- 
out the  Divine  sanction,  but  sometimes  in  express  violation  of  that  authority.  2.  Its 
ostensible  occasion.  The  famine.  A  severe  trial,  especially  to  a  flock-master.  It 
was  yet  by  no  means  an  exceptional  trial,  but  one  which  had  occurred  before  in  the 
experience  of  the  inhabitants  of  Canaan,  and  in  particular  of  his  father,  and  might 
possibly  recur  to  himself,  just  as  life's  afflictions  generally  bear  a  singular  resemblauce 
to  one  another  (].  Cor.  x.  13 ;  1  Pet.  iv.  12).  It  was  not  an  accidental  trial,  but  had 
been  appointed  and  permitted  by  that  Divine  wisdom  without  whose  sanction  no 
calamity  can  fall  on  either  nation  or  individual,  saint  or  sinner  (Deut.  xxxii.  39  ; 
Ps.  lxvi.  11;  Amos  iii.  6).  Anil  just  as  little  was  it  purposeless,  being  designed  to 
initiate  Isaac  in  that  life  discipline  from  which  no  child  of  God  can  escape  (Acts  xiv. 
22;  Heb.  xii.  11;  James  i.  2,  3).  3  Its  secret  inspiration.  Unbelief.  Jehovah,  who 
had  given  the  land  to  Isaac,  could  easily  have  maintained  him  in  it  notwithstanding 
the  dearth,  had  it  been  his  pleasure  not  to  provide  a  way  of  escape.  Had  Isaac  not 
at  this  time  been  walking  somewhat  by  sight,  it  is  probable  his  thoughts  would  not 
have  turned  to  Egypt.  Most  of  the  saint's  doubtful  transactions  and  dangerous  pro- 
jects have  a  secret  connection  with  the  spirit  of  unbelief  which  causes  to  err. 

II.  The  Divine  interposition.  1.  Prohibiting.  "Go  not  down  into  Egypt." 
That  Jacob  subsequently  went  down  to  Egypt  in  obedience  to  Divine  instructions  is 
no  proof  that  Isaac  would  have  been  blameless  had  he  gone  down  without  them. 
Abraham  did  so,  but  it  is  not  certain  that  God  approved  of  his  conduct  in  that 
matter.  Besides,  though  it  could  be  shown  tbat  Abraham  incurred  no  guilt  and  con- 
tracted no  hurt  by  residence  in  Egypt,  it  would  not  follow  that  his  son  might  venture 
tiiither  with  impunity  and  without  sin.  Hence  the  proposed  journey  was  interdicted. 
So  God  in  hi3  word  debars  saints  from  going  down  to  the  unspiritual  and  unbelieving 
world  to  eudamage  or  imperil  their  souls'  higher  interests.  2.  Prescribing.  "Dwell 
in  the  land  which  I  shall  tell  thee  of :  sojourn  in  this  land."  It  is  always  safest  for 
the  saint  in  seasons  of  perplexity  to  wait  for  an'd  to  follow  the  light  from  heaven. 
Sufficient  guidance  God  has  promised,  through  his  Spirit,  by  his  word,  and  in  his 
providence,  to  enable  gracious  ones  who  wait  upon  his  teaching  to  detect  the  path 
of  duty  and  the  place  of  safety,  3  Promising.  For  Isaac's  encouragement  the 
various  promises  of  the  Abrahamic  covenant  are  repealed,  renewed,  and  confirmed 
to  himself  for  his  father's  sake;  embracing  promises  of  the  Divine  presence— "I 
will  be  with  thee  "—and  the  Divine  blessing— "  and  will  bless  thee  ; "  in  which  latter 
are  comprehended  the  inheritance,—"  all  these  countries,"— the  seed,—"  I  will  make 
thy  seed  to  multiply,"— and  the  universal  salvation— "  in  thy  seed  shall  all  the 
nations  of  the  earth  be  blessed,"  which  had  been  promised  and  guaranteed  to 
Abraham  by  oath.  So  has  God  given  to  believers  "exceeding  great  and  precious 
promises"  for  Christ's  sake,  because  of  the  covenant  made  with  him,  on  the  ground 
of  the  obedience  rendered,  and  for  the  merit  of  the  sacrifice  presented,  by  him. 

III.  The  filial  obedience.     "Isaac  dwelt  in  Gerar,"  having  removed  thither  in 

compliance  with  the  Divine  instructions.     Like  Abraham's,  Isaac's  obedience  was 

1.  Minute,  exactly  following  the'Divine  prescription.  2.  Prompt,  putting  into  im- 
mediate execution  the  Divine  commandment.  3.  Patient,  remaining  in  the  land  of 
the  Philistines  till  God  in  his  providence  indicated  it  was  time  to  remove.  So  should 
Christ's  followers  obey.. 


326 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[CH.  XXVI.  7 — 11. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ch.  xxvi. — Lineupon  line,  in  God's  teaching.  Isaac,  like  his  father,  has  his  time 
of  sojouru  among  the  Philistines.  The  events  of  his  intercourse  with  the  Abimelech 
of  his  day  resemble  those  of  the  former  patriarch,  though  there  are  differences  which 
show  that  the  recurrence  is  historical. 

I.  God  repeats  his  lessons  that  they  may  make  a  deeper  impression.  The  in- 
tention of  the  record  is  to  preserve  a  certain  line  of  Divine  guidance,  Isaac  trod  in 
the  footsteps  of  Abraham.  We  have  Isaac's  wells,  oaths,  feast,  Bhebah—aXl  follow- 
ing close  upon  those  of  the  preceding  generation. 

II.  The  same  preservation  of  the  covenant  race  in  the  midst  of  heathens 
confirms  that  covenant.  The  same  lesson  of  special  providential  protection  and  bless- 
ing is  thus  repeated  and  enforced.  Again  the  same  contrast  of  man's  infirmity  with 
God's  unchangeableness  The  perversity  of  the  fleshly-minded  man  forming  a  mar- 
riage connection  with  heathen  people,  and  bringing  grief  of  mind  to  his  parents, 
reveals  the  distinctness  of  the  world  from  the  kingdom  of  God. — R. 


EXPOSITION. 


Ver.  7. — And  the  men  of  the  place  (i.  e. 
the  inhabitants  of  Gerar)  asked  him  (liter- 
ally asked,  or  made  inquiries;  probably 
first  at  each  other,  though  ultimately  the 
interrogations  might  reach  Isaac  himself) 
of  his  wife  (being  in  all  likelihood  fasci- 
nated by  her  beauty);  and  he  said, — fall- 
ing into  the  same  infirmity  as  Abraham 
(ch.  xii.  13;  xx.  2) — She  is  my  sister: — 
which  was  certainly  an  equivocation, 
since,  although  sometimes  used  to  desig- 
nate a  female  relative  generally  (vide  ch. 
xxiv.  60),  the  term  "  sister  "  was  here  de- 
signed to  suggest  that  Bebekali  was  his 
own  sister,  born  of  the  same  parents.  In 
propagating  this  deception  Isaac  appears 
to  have  been  actuated  by  a  similar  motive 
to  that  which  impelled  his  father — for  he 
feared  to  say,  She  is  my  wife;  lest,  said  he 
(sc.  to  himself,  the  words  describing  the 
good  man's  secret  apprehensions),  the  men 
of  the  place  should  kill  me  for  Rebekah  ; — 
the  historian  adding,  as  the  explanation 
of  his  fears — because  she  was  fair  to  look 
upon  {vide  ch.  xxiv.  16). 

Ver.  8. — And  it  came  to  pass,  when  he 
had  been  there  a  long  time  (literally,  when 
were  prolonged  to  him  there  the  days),  that 
Abimelech  king  of  the  Philistines  looked  out 
at  a  window,  and  saw,  and,  behold,  Isaac 
was  sporting  with  Eebekah  his  wife — i.  e. 
caressing  and  using  playful  liberties  with 
her,  which  showed  she  was  not  a  sister,  but 
a  wife — iraCiJovTO.  (LXX.),  jocantem  (Vul- 
gate). 

Ver.  9. — And  Abimelech  called  Isaac,  and 
said,  Behold,  of  a  surety,  she  is  thy  wife: 
and  how  saidest  thou,  She  is  my  sister  f  And 
Isaac  said  unto  him,  Because  I  said  (sc.  in 
my  heart,  or  to  myself),  Lest  I  die  for  her. 


Ver.  10. — And  Abimelech  said,  What  is 
this  thou  hast  done  unto  us *  one  of  the 
people  might  lightly  have  lien  with  thy 
wife, — literally,  within  a  little  (cf.  Ps. 
lxxiii.  2;  cxix.  87)  one  of  the  people  might 
have  lain  with  thy  wife — and  thou  should- 
est — i.  e.  (within  a  little)  thou  mightest 
— have  brought  (or  caused  to  come)  guilti- 
ress  upon  us  (cf.  ch.  xx.  9,  where  !"!NHn 
is  used  instead  of  DffiN). 

Ver.  11 ; — And  Abimelech  charged  all  his 
(literally,  the)  people,  saying,  Hethattouch- 
eth — in  the  sense  of  injureth  (cf.  Josh.  ix. 
19;  Ps.  cv.  15) — this  man  or  his  wife  shall 
surely  be  put  to  death.  The  similarity  »f 
this  incident  to  that  related  in  ch.  xx.  con- 
cerning Abraham  in  Gerar  may  be  ex- 
plained without  resorting  to  the  hypotke- 
sis  of  different  authors.  The  stereotyped 
character  of  the  manners  of  antiquity, 
especially  in  the  East,  is  sufficient  to  ac- 
count for  the  danger  to  which  Sarah  was 
exposed  recurring  in  the  case  of  Rebekah 
three  quarters  of  a  century  later.  That 
Isaac  should  have  resorted  to  the  miserable 
expedient  of  his  father  may  have  been  due 
simply  to  a  lack  of  originality  on  the  part 
of  Isaac ;  or  perhaps  the  recollection  of 
the  success  which  had  attended  his  fa- 
ther's adoptionof  this  wretched  subterfuge 
may  have  blinded  him  to  its  true  charac- 
ter. But  from  whatever  cause  resulting, 
the  resemblance  between  the  two  narra- 
tives cannot  be  held  as  destroying  the 
credibility  of  either,  and  all  the  more  that 
a  careful  scrutiny  will  detect  sufficient 
dissimilarity  between  them  to  establish 
tire  authenticity  sf  the  incidents  which 
they  relate. 


CH.  xxvi.  12—22.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


327 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  7 — 11. — A  good  man's  transgression.  I.  A  lib  told.  1.  An  unmiti 
lie.  It  was  scarcely  entitled  to  claim  the  apology  of  being  what  Abraham's  false- 
hood was,  an  equivocation,  Rebekah  not  being  Isaac's  half-sister,  but  cousin.  2.  A 
deliberate  lie.  Asked  about  his  relations  to  Rebekah,  he  coolly  Replies  that  they  are 
sister  and  brother.  He  had  no  right  to  suppose  his  interrogators  had  ulterior  designs 
against  Rebekah's  honour.,  3.  A  cowardly  lie.  All  falsehoods  spring  from  craven 
fear — fear  of  the  consequences  that  may  flow  from  telling  the  honest  truth.  4.  A 
dangerous  lie.  By  his  wicked  suppression  of  the  truth  he  was  guilty  of  imperilling 
the  chastity  of  her  whom  he  sought  to  protect.  Almost  all  falsehoods  are  perilous, 
and  most  of  them  are  mistakes.  5.  An  unnecessary  lie.  No  lie  ever  can  be  neces- 
sary ;  but  least  of  all  could  this  have  been,  when  God  had  already  promised  to  be 
with  him  in  the  land  of  the  Philistines  6.  An  unbelieving  lie  Had  Isaac's  faith 
been  active,  he  would  hardly  have  deemed  it  needful  to  disown  his  wife.  7.  A  wholly 
worthless  lie.  Isaac  might  have  remembered  that  twice  over  his  father  had  resorted 
to  this  miserable  stratagem,  and  that  in  neither  instance  had  it  sufficed  to  avert  the 
danger  which  he  dreaded,  But  lies  generally  are  wretched  hiding-places  for  endan- 
gered bodies  or  anxious  souls. 

II.  A  lib  detected.  1.  God  by  his  providence  assists  in  the  detection  of  liars. 
By  the  merest  accident,  as  it  might  seem,  Abimelech  discovered  the  true  relationship 
of  Isaac  and  Rebekah;  but  both  the  time,  place,  and  manner  of  that  discovery  were 
arranged  by  God.  J3o  the  face  of  God  is  set  agaiust  them  that  do  evil,  even  though 
they  .should  be  his  own  people.  2.  Liars  commonly  assist  in  their  own  detection. 
Truth  alone  is  sure-footed,  and  never  slips  ;  error  is  liable  to  stumble  at  every  step. 
It  is  difficult  to-  maintain  a  disguise  for  any  lengthened  period.  The  best  fitting 
mask  is  sure  in  time  to  fall  off.  Actions  good  in  themselves  often  lead  to  the 
detection  of  crimes 

III.  A  lie  reproved.  The  conduct  of  Isaac  Abimelech  rebukes— 1.  With  prompti- 
tude. Sending  for  Isaac,  he  charges  him  with  his  sin.  It  is  the  part  of  a  true  friend 
to  expose  deception  whenever  it  is  practised,  and,  provided  it  be  done  in  a  proper 
spirit,  the  sooner  it  is  done  the  better.  Sin  that  long  eludes  detecti  >n  is  apt  to  harden 
the  sinning  heart  aud  sear  the  guilty  conscience.  2.  With  fidelity.  Characterising 
it  as  (1)  a  surprising  inconsistency  on  the  part  of  a  good  mau  like  Isaac  ;  (2)  a 
reckless  Exposure  of  his  wife's  person,  which  was  far  from  becoming  in  a  kindly 
husband ;  and  (3)  an  unjustifiable  offence  against  the  people  of  the  land,  who,  by 
his  carelessness  and  cowardice,  might  have  been  led  into  grievous  wickedness.  3 
With  forgiveness.  That  Abimelech  did  not  intend  to  exact  punisliment  from 
Isaac,  or  even  cherish  reseutmeut  against  him  in  consequence  of  his  behaviour  he 
proved  by  charging  his  people  to  beware  of  injuring  in  any  way  either  Isaac  or 
Rebekah.  It  is  good  ana  beautiful  when  mercy  seasons  judgment,  and  the  reproofs 
of  friendship  are  accompanied  by  the  messages  of  love. 


EXPOSITION. 


Ver.  12. — Then  Isaac  sowed  in  that  land, 
— viz.,  Philistia.  Though  a  distinct  ad- 
vance on  the  purely  nomadic  life  pursued 
by  Abraham,  this  did  not  imply  fixed  prop- 
erty in,  or  even  permanent  settlement  on, 
the  soil,  "but  only  annual  tenancy"  there- 
of. Robinson  (i.  77)  mentions  a  colony  of 
the  Tawarah  Arabs,  about  fifty  families, 
living  near  Abu  Zabel,  in  Egypt,  who  cul- 
tivated the  soil  and  yet  dwelt  in  tents. 
"The  Biblical  patriarchs  were  not  mere 
Bedawin  wanderers,  like  those  who  now 
occupy  the  Eastern  deserts.  They  had 
large  herds  of  cattle,  which  genuine  Beda- 
wins  have  not ;  they  tilled  the  ground, 
which  these  robbers  never  do  ;  and  they 


accommodated  themselves,  without  diffi- 
culty or  reluctance,  to  town  and  city  when 
necessary,  which  wild  Arabs  cannot  en- 
dure" ('Land  and  Book,' p.  296)— and  re- 
ceived in  the  same  year  an  hundred-fold — 
literally,  an  hundred  measures,  i.  e.  for 
each  measure  of  that  which  he  sowed ;  an 
exceptional  return  even  for  Philistia, 
though  ' '  the  country  is  no  less  fertile  than 
the  very  best  of  the  Mississippi  Valley" 
('Land  and  Book,'  p.  557) ;  and  Arab 
grain  stores  at  HTuttdr-abu-Sumdr,  in  the 
vicinity  of  Gaza,  still  proclaim  the  remu- 
nerative yield  of  its  harvests  (Robinson 
vol.  i.  p.  292).  Herodotusfi.  193)speaksof 
two  and  three  hundred-fold  as  having  been 


THE  BOOK   OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xxvi.  12—22. 


reaped  on  the  plain  of  Babylonia  ;  but  in 
Palestine  the  usual  rate  of  increase  was 
from  thirty  to  a  hundred-fold  (vide  Matt, 
xiii.  23).  The  reading  "an  hundred  of 
barley"  (LXX.,  Syriac,  Miohaelis)  is  not 
to  be  preferred  .to  that  in  the  Textus  Re- 
ceptus.  And  the  Lord  b  essed  him — as  he 
had  promised  (ver.  3). 

Ver.  13. — And  the  man  waxed  great, — 
like  his  father  before  him  (cf.  ch.  xxiv.  1, 
35) — and  went  forwardj — literally,  went 
going,  the  verb  followed  by  the  infinitive 
expressing  constant  growth  or  progressive 
increase  (cf.  ch.  viii.  3  ;  xii.  9  ;  Judges  iv. 
24) — and  grew  until  he  became  very  great 
— "  as  any  other  farmer  would  who  reaped 
such  harvests"  ('Land  and  Book'). 

Ver.  14. — For  he  had  (literal. y,  there  was 
to  him)  possession  of  floe'  s,  and  possession 
of  herds,  and  great  store  of  servants  : — 
■yec&PYia  irpMd  (LXX.),  i.  e.  much  hus- 
bandry, the  abstract  being  put  for  the  con- 
crete, '  implying  all  manLer  of  work  and 
service  belonging  to  a  family,  and  so  ser- 
vants and  tillage  of  all  sorts  "  (Ainsworth); 
but  the  reference  rather  seems  to  be  to  the 
number  of  h's  household,  or  domestic 
slaves,  plurimum  familim  (Vulgate) — and 
the  Philistines  envied  him.  lhe  patri- 
arch's possessions  (mikneh,  from  kanah, 
to  acquire)  excited  jealous  feeling  (from 
root  kana,  to  burn)  in  the  breasts  of  his 
neighbours  (cf.  Eccles.  iv.  4). 

Ver.  15.- —  For  all  the  wel  s  which  his 
father's  servants  had  digged  in  the  days  of 
Abraham  his  !ather  (vide  ch.  xxi.  30),  the 
Philistines  had  stopped  them,  and  fi  led 
them  with  earth.  This  act,  commonly 
regarded  as  legitimate  in  ancient  warfare, 
was  practically  to  Isaac  an  act  of  expulsion, 
it  being  impossible  for  flocks  and  herds  to 
exist  without  access  to  water  supplies.  It 
was  probably,  as  the  text  indicates,  the 
outcome  of  envy,  rather  than  inspired  by 
fear  that  Isaac  in  digging  and  possess'ng 
wells  was  tacitly  claiming  the  ownership 
of  the  land. 

Ver.  16. — And  Abimelech  said  unto  "saac 
(almost  leading  to  the  suspicion  that  the 
Philistine  monarch  had  instigated  the  out- 
break of  hostilities  amongst  his  people), 
Go  from  us  (a  royal  command  rather  than 
a  friendly  advice);  for  thou  art  much 
mightier  than  we.  The  same  apprehen- 
sion of  the  growing  numbers  and  strength 
of  Isaac's  descendants  in  Egypt  took  pos- 
sion  of  the  heart  of  Pharaoh,  and  led  to 
their  enslavement  (vide  Exod.  i.  9). 

Ver.  17. — And  Isaac — perhaps  not  with- 
out remonstrance,  but  without  offering  re- 
sistance, as  became  a  saint  (Matt.  v.  5 ; 
Rom.  xii.  17,  18  ;  Heb.  xii.  14  ;  1  Pet.  iii. 
9) — departed  thence  (i.  e.  from  Gerar),  and 


pitched  his  tent  in  the  valley  of  Gerar, — 
a  valley  or  nahal  meant  a  low,  flat  region 
watered  by  a  mountain  stream.  The  Wady 
Gerar  has  been  identified  with  the  Joorf- 
el-Oerar,  the  rush  or  rapid  of  Gerar,three 
hours  south-  east  of  Gaza — and  dwelt  there. 

Ver.  18. — And  Isaac  digged  again — 
literally,  returned  and  digged,  i.  e.  re-dug 
(cf.  2  Kings  xx.  5) — the  wells  of  water, 
which  they  (the  servants  of  Abraham)  had 
digged  in  the  days  of  Abraham  his  father ; 
— from  which  it  appears  that  Abraham 
had  digged  other  wells  besides  that  of 
Beersheba  (ch.  xxi.  31) — for  the  Philistines 
had  stopped  them  after  the  death  of  Abra- 
ham : — which  was  a  violation  of  the  league 
into  which  Abimelech  had  entered  with 
the  patriarch  (vide  ch.  xxi.  23) — and  he 
called  their  names  after  the  names  by  which 
his  father  had  called  them — and  with  which 
Isaac  was  sufficiently  acquainted. 

Ver.  19. — And  Isaac's  servants  digged 
in  the  valley,  and  found  there  a  well  of 
springing  water.  Literally,  liiing  water 
(cf.  Levit.  xiv.  5,  6  ;  Zech.  xiv.  8 ;  Rev. 
xxi.  6). 

Ver.  20. — And  the  herdmen  of  Gerar — 
i.  e.  Abimelech's  servants  (ch.  xxi.  25) 
— did  strive  with  Isaac's  herdmen, — as  Lot's 
with  those  those  of  Abraham  (ch.  xiii.  7)— 
saying,  The  water  is  ours : — literally,  to  us 
(belong)  the  waters—  aid  he  called  the  name 
of  the  well  Esek  ("  Strife  ") ;  because  they 
strove  with  him — the  verb  being  pU53>,  to 

strive  about  anything. 

Ver.  21 . — And  they  digged  another  well 
(Isaac  having  yielded  up  the  first),  and 
strove  for  that  also: — "  The  beginning  of 
strife  is  as  when  one  letteth  out  water  " 
(Prov.  xvii.  14) — and  he  callel  the  name  of 
it  Sitnah — "  Contention  "   (from  "jEatO,  to 

lie  in  wait  as  an  adversary ;  whence 
Satan)  ;  probably  in  Wady  es-Shuiein, 
near  Rehoboth  (vide  infra). 

Ver.  22. — And  he  removed  from  thence 
(yielding  that  too),  and  digged  another 
well ;  and  for  that  they  strove  not  (perh-  ps 
as  being  beyond  the  boundaries  of  Gerar) : 
and  he  called  the  name  of  it  Rehoboth  ;  — 
i.  e.  "Wide  spaces "  (hence  "streets," 
ch.  xix.  2) ;  from  in*!,  to  be  or  become 

broad  ;  conjectured  to  have  been  situated 
in  the  Wady  Ruhaibgh,  about  eight  and  a 
half  hours  to  the  south  of  Beersheba, 
where  are  still  found  a  well  named  Bir- 
Rohebeh  and  ruins  of  a  city  of  the  same 
name  (Robinson,  vol.  i.  p.  289  ;  Thomson, 
'  Land  and  Book,'  p.  558)— and  he  said, 
For  now  the  Lord  hath  made  room  (literally, 
hath  made  a  broad  space)  for  us,  and  we 
shall  be  fruitful  in  the  land. 


ch.  xxvi.  12— 22,  J  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  329 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  12— 22.— A  good  man's  prosperity.  I,  Whence  it  proceeded.  1.  The 
industry  of  Isaac.  "  Isaac  sowed  in  tbat  land,  aud  received  in  the  same  year  an 
hundredfold."  Au  intimate  connection  subsists  between  diligence  and  prosperity. 
(1)  As  there  is  no  harvest  without  a  seed-time,  so  there  is  no  increase  of  wealth 
without  the  putting  forth  of  personal  labour  in  its  acquisition  (cf.  Prov.  x.  4 ;  xiii. 
4  ;  xxviii.  19).  (2)  As  by  God's  appointment  harvest  follows  seed-time,  so  com- 
monly "  the  hand  of  the  diligent  maketh  rich  "  (cf.  Prov,  xiii.  4  ;  xxi.  5  ;  xxviii.  19). 
2.  The  Messing  of  God.  "And  the  Lord  blessed  him."  As  without  Divine  assist- 
ance the  best  contrived  and  most  laboriously  applied  means  may  fail  in  the  accumu- 
lation of  material  goods,  so  with  heavenly  succour  the  least  likely  instruments  can 
achieve  success.  The  harvests  of  the  farmer  depend  more  upon  the  goodness  of 
God  than  upon  the  excellence  of  the  plough  (cf.  Ps.  cxxvii.  1,  tf). 

II.  In  what  it  resulted.  1.  The  envy  of  the  Philistines.  Envy,  one  of  the 
works  of  the  fl  sh  (Gal.  v.  19  ;  Ja'nes  iv  5),  a  fr  quent  <hari.clerislic  of  evil  men  (1 
Cor.  iii.  3;-Titus  Hi.  3),  au  Otcasionar  infirmity  of  pious  souls  (1  Cor.  iii.  3;  Phil, 
i.  15;  1  Pet  ii.  1),  and  stiaitly  forbidden  by  the  'aw  of  God  (Exod.  xx.  17;  Ps. 
xxxvii.  1 ;  James  v.  9),  is  commonly  excited  by  observii  g  tbe  prosper .ty  of  others 
(Ps.  xxxvii.  7;  lxxi.i.  7;  Eccles.  iv.  4 ;  cf.  Kacbel  and  Leah,  ch.  xxx  1,  15; 
J  iseph  s  brtthien,  ch.  xxxvii.  4 — 11,  19,  20  ;  Acts  vii.  9  ;  Miriam  aud  Aaron,  Num 
xii.  1 — 10  ;  the  princes  of  Darius,  Dan.  vi.  4),  is  usually  accompanied  with  some 
decree  of  haired  (Cain,  ch  iv.  4 — 8;  Sar;ib,  ch.  xvi.  5,6;  Laban,  ch.  xxxi.  5),  and 
inevi  ably  tends,  as  in  tue  case  of  tl.e  Philistines,  to  hostility,  secret  or  op  n.  2. 
T/ie  suspicion  of  Abimelech.  The  growing  power  of  the  patriarch  had  filled  the 
monarch  s  mind  with  alarm.  Interpreting  the  character  of  Isaac  by  his  own  he 
conceived  it  impossi  le  to  possess  large  resources  without  usijg  them  to  acquire 
d  minion  over  others.  Modern  kings  and  statesmen  are  scare Jy  further  advanced, 
Ihu  prosper' ty  o  neighbouring  empires  being  communl  regarded  as  a  menacj  to  the 
libertie-  of  their  own.  It  is  the  mission  of  Christianity,  as  regards  both  nat.ons  and 
individuals,  to  show  how  |  ower  of  every  kind  can  be  possessed  with  ut  injury,  and 
wie  ded  with  advantage,  to  the  highest  interests  of  others. 

III.  How  it  was  maintained.  By— 1.  Patience,  or  the  exhibition  of  a  meek  and 
unresisting  spirit  in  submitting  to  injury.  When  Abimelech  requested  him  to 
leave  the  town  of  Gerar,  he  left.  When  the  Philistines  tilled  up  his  father's 
welis,  he  quietly  dug  them  out  again.  When  the  h<  rdmen  of  Gerar  wran  .led  with 
his  shepherds  about  a  spring,  he  simply  gave  it  up,  and  sought  another  ;  and  when 
this  too  was  disputed,  he  reti  ed  and  sank  a  third.  And  all  the  while  his  flocks  and 
herds  kept  on  multiply  ng.  A  beautifu'  example  of  the  spirit  which  Christ  has 
enjoined  (Matt.  v.  39—42),  and  of  the  promise  which  Christ  has  made  (Matt.  v.  5) 
to  his  followers.  2.  Perseverance,  or  the  diligent  exercise  of  means  in  selecting 
pasture  grounds  and  digging  wells ;  not  p  rmitting  himself  to  be  discouraged  by 
the  opposition  of  his  neighbours,  but,  while  peacefully  allowing  himself  to  be 
despoiled,  steadily  attending  to  his  businc-ss.  An  illustration  of  that  quiet,  deter- 
mined, and  unwearied  applicntion  which  ofteu  contributes  moid  to  success  in  life 
than  brilliant  abilities.  3.  Piety,  or  the  grateful  recognition  of  God's  hand  in 
putting  an  end  to  the  irritation  aud  annoyance  of  his  i  eighbours,  aud  giving  him  at 
last  a  comfortable  se  t.ement  at  Iiehoboth.  It  is  g  ace  in  God  which  affords  quiet 
neighbourhoods  to  reside  in,  easy  circumstances  to  live  in,  and  hopeful  futures  to 
trust  in  ;  and  it  is  piety  in  us  to  acknowledge   hat  grace. 

Learn — 1.  That  there  is  only  one  royal  road  to  material  prosperity,  viz.,  dilig  nee 
and  devotion.  2.  That  ,f  material  prosperity  can  procure  comforts,  it  is  also 
attended  by  drawbacks.  3  Tha  m  terial  prosperity  is  often  thrown  away  in  litiga- 
tion when  it  might  be  preserved  by  submission.  4.  That  material  prosperity  should 
stir  the  heart's  gratitude  to  God. 


330  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  [oh.  xxvi.  23-35. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  22. — Digging  wells  of  salvation  "And  he  removed  from  thence,  and 
digged  another  well."  Historically,  an  instaiice  of  a  meek  and  quiet  spirit  in  con- 
tact with  the  world.  Wells  precious.  Often  formed  with  much  labour.  Herds- 
meu  of  Gerar  took  what  Isaac  had  digged.  Twice  he  yielded  for  the  sake  of  peace. 
Then  he  digged  another,  and  for  it  they  strove  not.  His  example  cf.  Matt.  v.  39  ;  1 
Cor.  vi.  7).  But  we  may  also  observe  a  typical  significance.  Wells,  fountains,  sources 
of  "living  water"  (Isa.  xii.  3;  Zech.  xiii.  1)  connected  with  spiritual  blessings  (cf. 
1  Cor.  x.  4  with  John  iv.  14,  and  vii.  39). 

I.  Isaac  digged,  to  find  "the  gift  of  God"  (common  Eastern  name  for  water). 
The  gift  is  from  God  alone  (Isa.  xliv.  3 ;  Zech.  xii.  10).  His  will  to  bless  appears 
through  the  whole  Bible — in  the  first  formation  of  man,  and  in  care  for  the  salvation 
of  sinners  (Luke  xix.  10).  But  many,  though  thirsty,  do  not  seek  living  water. 
They  have  not  peace.  Separation  from  God  brings  unrest  (Isa.  Ivii.  20).  But  the 
cause  is  not  believed,  and  the  way  of  comfort  not  loved.  Many  try  all  ways  to  find 
peace  except  the  right  one.  They  will  follow  preachers,  or  take  up  systems,  or  join 
a  sociations.  But  i  hrist's  word  is  "Come  unto  me"  Again,  many  will  not  dig; 
content  merely  to  wish.  God  who  bestows  the  gift  has  appointed  means  (Matt,  xi 
12).  These  do  not  really  desire  a  work  of  grace  in  their  souls.  Want  to  be  made 
safe,  not  to  be  renewed;  to  be  delivered  from  fear,  but  not  disturbed  just  now. 
Hence  do  not  search  their  Bibles  (Ps.  cxix.  130),  or  pray  for  the  Holy  Spirit  (Ezek. 
xxxvii.  9),  or  care  for  the  salvation  <  f  others  (1  John  iii.  17).  It  is  God's  will  we 
should  dig.  He  may  send  a  blessing  unsought.  Bui  usually  he  works  through  means. 
The  Bible,  prayer,  the  Lord's  table,  Christian  converse,  Christian  work  (Prov.  xi.  25), 
all  are  as  wells,  means  for  getting  the  water  of  life ;  nothing  in  themselves,  yet 
made  effectual  where  the  blessing  is  desired. 

II.  Hindrances.  L'  t  none  expect  to  possess  wells  of  salvation  without.  They 
form  the  trial  of  faith  (1  Pet.  i.  7).  From  those  who  love  not  God.  A  Christian 
member  of  a  worthy  family,  or  cast  among  careless  associates,  meets  many  hin- 
drances. They  may  be  open  or  veiled  ;  in  opposition  i  r  in  mist  ken  kindness.  And 
time  for  prayer  is  intruded  on  and  work  for  God  hindered,  and  a  constant  opposing 
influence  is  felt  to  chi  1  the  love  of  God.  Or  the  hindrance  may  be  from  within.  In 
prayer  the  mind  overpowered  by  intrusive  thoughts  ;  besetting  sins  constantly  gaining 
ihe  vicl'.ry ;  our  spirits  not  in  harmony  with  the  "still  small  voice."  Remember  it 
is  God's  will  through  trial  to  give  victory  (1  Cor.  x.  13  .  Amu  ek  fought  against 
Israel  (Exod.  xvii.)  as  the  herdsmen  strove  against  Isaac,  but  1he  way  of  victory  was 
the  same  in  both  instances —  rust  and  perseverance. 

III.  Digged  another  well  (Gal.  vi.  9).  Will  the  Lord  fail  his  people  though 
surrounded  by  hindrances  '  Is  some  mea>  s  of  grace  debarred  ?  Is  some  line  of 
Christian  work,  some  way  of  Christian  progress,  closed  against  thee?  Dig  andher 
well.  Seek  and  pray  for  other  channels  in  which  to  consecrate  thy  life.  Perhaps 
the  real  foe  hindering  thee  was  self-will,  and  God  has  helped  thee  to  put  down  self. 
Jesus  cried,  "  Come  unto  me  and  drink."  Whatever  be  the  wc  11,  he  is  the  source  of 
its  spring.  Make  it  clear  to  your  own  heart  lhal  you  are  pressing  to  him.  Tell  God 
that  it  is  indeed  so.  Then  in  some  form  or  other  the  prayer,  "  S.  ring  up,  O  well," 
shall  have  an  abundant  answer. — M. 

EXPOSITION. 


Ver.  23. — And  he  (viz.,  Isaac)  went  up 
from  thence  (Rehoboth,  where  latterly 
he  had  been  encamped)  to  Beer-sheba — a 
former  residence  of  Abraham  (ch.  xxi.  33), 
situated  "near  the  water-shed  between 
the  Mediterranean  and  the  Salt  Sea " 
(Murphy),  hence  approached  from  the 
low-lying  wady  by  an  ascent. 


Ver.  24. — And  the  Lord  appeared  unto 
him  the  same  night  (i  e.  the  night  of  his 
arrival  at  Beersheba),  and  said  (in  a  dream 
or  vision),  I  (the  pronoun  is  emphatic)  am 
the  God  (the  Elohim)  of  Abraham  thy  father 
(the  language  is  expressive  not  alone  of  the 
covenant  relationship  which  subsisted  be- 
tween Jehovah  and  the  patriarch  while  the 


ch.  xxvi.  33—35.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


331 


latter  lived,  but  also  of  the  present  con- 
tinuance of  that  relationship,  since  Abra- 
ham, though  dead,  had  not  ceased  to  be): 
fear  not  (cf.  ch.  xv.  1,  in  which  the  same 
encouraging  admonition  is  addressed  to 
Abraham  after  his  battle  with  the  kings), 
for  I  am  with  thee,  and  will  bless  thee,  and 
multiply  thy  seed — a  repetition  of  promises 
already  given  to  himself  (vide  vers  3,  4) — 
for  my  servant  Abraham's  sake — a  reason 
declaring  God's  gracious  covenant,  and  not 
pergonal  merit,  to  be  the  true  source  of 
blessing  for  Isaac. 

Ver.  25. — And  he  (i.  e.  Isaac,  in  grateful 
response  to  the  Divine  Promiser  who  had 
appeared  to  him)  builded  an  altar  there, — 
the  first  instance  of  altar  building  ascribed 
to  Isaac  ;  ' '  those  erected  by  his  father  no 
doubt  still  remaining  in  the  other  places 
where  he  sojourned  "  (Inglis) — and  called 
upon  the  name  of  the  Lord, — i.  e.  publicly 
celebrated  his  worship  in  the  midst  of  his 
household  (vide  on  ch.  xii.  7,  8) — and 
pitched  his  tent  there  (the  place  being  now 
to  him  doubly  hallowed  by  the  appearance 
of  the  Lord  to  himself  as  well  as  to  his 
father):  and  there  Isaac's  servants  digged 
a  well — a  necessary  appendage  to  a  flock- 
master's  settlement. 

Ver.  26. —  Then  (literally,  and)  Abime- 
lech  went  to  him  from  Gerar, — the  object 
of  this  visit  was  to  resuscitate  the  alliance 
which  had  formerly  existed  between  the 
predecessor  of  Abimelech  and  Abraham 
(ch.  xxi.  22 — 3'3)  ;  yet  the  dissimilarity 
between  the  two  accounts  is  so  great  as  to 
discredit  the  hypothesis  that  the  present 
is  only  another  version  of  the  earlier  trans- 
action— andAhuzzath  one  of  his  friends, — 
!i'"l??b1'3 ;  neither  o  vv|ji<|>a<y<i>Yo's  auTov 
(LXX.),  nor  a  suite  or  number  of  his 
friends  (Onkelos),  nor  one  of  his  friends 
(A.  V.)  ;  but  his  friend,  and  probably  his 
privy  councillor  (Keil,  Kalisch,  Murphy), 
whose  presence  along  with  the  monarch 
and  his  general  marks  the  first  point  of 
difference  between  the  present  and  the 
former  incident — and  Phichol  (vide  ch. 
xxi.  22)  the  chief  captain  of  his  army. 

Ver.  27. — And  Isaac  said  unto  them( 
Wherefore— STW,  contr.    from  ?1*P  STO 

what  is  taught  1  =  for  what  reason  (cf . 
t£  (j.o8<5v) — come  ye  to  me  seeing  (literally, 
ancfi  ye  hate  me,  and  have  sent  me  away 
from  you  %  While  animadverting  to  the 
personal  hostility  to  which  he  had  been 
subjected,  Isaac  says  nothing  about  the 
wells  of  which  he  had  been  deprived  :  a 
second  point  of  difference,  between  this 
and  the  preceding  narrative  of  Abraham's 
covenant  with  the  Philistine  king. 

Ver.  28. — And  they  said,  We  saw  cer- 
tainly— literally,  seeing  we  saw,  i.  e.  we 


assuredly  perceived,  or,  we  have  indeed 
discovered  (vide  Ewald's  '  Heb.  Synt.'  § 
312).  Abimelech  and  his  ministers  first 
explain  the  motive  which  has  impelled 
them  to  solicit  a  renewal  of  the  old  alliance 
— that  the  Lord  was  with  thee  : — the  use 
of  Jehovah  instead  of  Elohim,  as  in  ch. 
xxi.  22,  does  not  prove  that  this  is  a 
Jehovistic  elaboration  of  the  earlier 
legend.  Neither  is  it  necessary  to  sup- 
pose that  the  term  Jehovah  is  a  Mosaic 
translation  of  the  epithet  employed  by 
Abimelech  (Rosenmuller).  The  long- 
continued  residence  of  Abraham  in  Gerar 
and  Beersheba  afforded  ample  opportunity 
for  Abimelech  becoming  acquainted  with 
the  patriarch's  God.  The  introduction  of 
Jehovah  into  the  narrative  may  be  noted 
as  a  third  point  of  dissimilarity  between 
this  and  the  previousaccount — and  we  said, 
Let  there  be  now  an  oath — i.  e.  a  treaty 
secured  by  an  oath  or  self-imprecation 
on  the  transgressor  (cf.  ch.  xxiv.  41; 
Deut.  xxix.  11, 13) — betwixt  us,  even  be- 
twixt us  and  thee, — a  farther  particular- 
isation  of  the  parties  to  the  covenant  for 
the  sake  of  emphasis — and  let  us  make  a 
covenant  with  thee.  The  phrase  "  to  cut 
a  covenant, "  here  used  in  a  so-called  Jeho- 
vistic portion  of  the  history,  occurs  in  ch. 
xxi.  27,  32,  which  confessedly  belongs  to 
the  fundamental  document. 

Ver.  29. — That  thou  wilt  do  us  no  hurt, 
—  literally,  if  thou  wilt  do  us  evil  (sc.  thy 
curse  come  upon  thee  !);  the  force  being 
to  negative  in  the  strongest  way  possible 
any  intention  of  injury  (cf.  ch.  xxi.  23) — 
as  we  have  not  touched  thee, — i.  e.  injured 
thee  ;  which  is  not  true,  as  they,  through 
their  servants,  had  robbed  Isaac  of  at 
least  two  wells — and  as  we  have  done  unto 
thee  .  nothing  but  good, — Abimelech's 
estimate  of  his  own  behaviour,  if  exceed- 
ingly favourable  to  himself,  is  at  least 
natural  (vide  Prov.  xvi.  2) — and  have  sent 
thee  away  in  peace  (without  open  violence 
certainly,  because  of  Isaac's  yielding,  but 
scarcely  without  hostility  :  thou  art  now 
the  blessed  of  the  Lord.  Regarded  by  some 
as  an  instance  of  adroit  and  pious  flattery, 
these  words  are  perhaps  better  understood 
as  explaining  either  why  Isaac  should 
overlook  the  injuries  which  they  had  done 
to  him  (Calvin,  Bush),  or  why  he  should 
grant  them  the  oath  which  they  desired 
(Ainsworth), — he  requiring  no  guarantee 
of  safety  from  them,  since  Jehovah  was 
on  his  side  (Murphy),— or  why  they  had 
been  stirred  up  to  seek  his  favour  and 
alliance  (Rosenmuller). 

Ver.  30. — And  he  made  them  a  feast, — so 
Lot  did  to  the  angels  (ch.  xix.  3).  There 
is  no  mention  of  any  banquet  in  the  case 
of  Abraham's  covenant,   which  may  be 


332 


THE   BOOK   OF   GENESIS. 


[ch.  xxyi.  23—35. 


noted  as  another  point  of  difference  be- 
tween the  two  transactions.  A  similar 
entertainment  accompanied  Jacob's  cove- 
nant with  Laban  (ch.  xxxi.  54|  ;  while  in 
the  Mosaic  system  the  sacrificial  meal 
formed  an  integral  part  of  the  regularly- 
appointed  sacrificial  worship  (Levit.  vii. 
15,  31  ;  Deut.  xii.  7,  17  ;  vide  Kurtz. 
'  Sacrificial  Worship,'  §  79; — and  they  did 
eat  and  drink. 

Ver.  31. — And  they  rose  up  be  imes  in 
the  morning,  and  sware  one  to  another  : — 
literally,  a  man  to  his  brother.  On  the 
derivation  of  the  verb  to  swear  from  the 
word  for  seven,  see  ch.  xxi.  23 — and  Isaac 
sent  them  away,  and  they  departed  from 
him  in  peace. 

Ver.  32. — And  it  came  to  pass  the  same 
day  (i.  e.  the  day  of  the  treaty),  that  Isaac's 
servants  came  and  told  him  concerning  the 
well  which  they  had  digged,— the  opera- 
tion of  sinking  this  well  had  probably 
commenced  on  the  day  of  Abimelech's 
arrival  at  Beersheba  (vide  ver.  25).  Almost 
immediately  on  the  king's  departure  the 
well-diggers  returned  to  the  patriarch's 
encampment  to  report  the  success  of  their 
operations— and  said  unto  him, We  have 
found  vcater.  The  LXX.,  mistaking  ^, 
to  him,  for  jfo,  not,  read,  "  We  have  not 
found  water  ;"  the  incorrectness  of  which 
is  sufficiently  declared  by  what  follows. 

Ver.  33.— And  he  called  it  Sheba 
"Oath;"  which  he  would  certain  y  not 
have  done  had  it  not  been  a  well):  there- 
fore the  name  of  the  city  (which  ultimately 
gathered  round  the  well)  is  Beersheba — 
i,  e.  the  well  of  the  oath  (tide  ch.  xxi.  31). 
Isaac  must  have  perfectly  understood  that 
the  place  had  been  so  named  by  his  father 
three  quarters  of  a  century  previous  ;  but 


either  the  name  had  been  forgotten  by 
others,  or  had  not  come  into  general  use 
amongst  the  inhabitants,  or,  observing  the 
coincidence  between  his  finding  a  well 
j  ust  at  the  time  of  covenanting  with  Abim- 
elech  and  the  fact  that  his  father's 
treaty  was  also  connected  with  a  well,  he 
wished  to  confirm  and  perpetuate  the  early 
name  which  had  been  assigned  to  the 
town.  It  is  not  certain  that  this  was 
Abraham's  well  which  had  been  redis- 
covered; the  probability  is  that  it  was 
another,  since  at  Bir  es-Sheba  two  wells 
are  still  in  existence  (vide  ch.  xxi.  31) — 
unto  this  day — an  expression  used  through- 
out Genesis  to  describe  events  separated 
from  the  age  of  Moses  by  several  centuries 
(vide  ch.  xix.  37,  38  ;  xxii.  14  ;  xxxii.  32.) 

Ver.  34. — And  Esau  was  forty  years  old — 
literally,  a  son  of  forty  years  ;  the  age  of 
Isaac  when  he  married  Rebekah  (ch.  xxv. 
20) — when  he  took  to  wife  Judith  (Jehu- 
dith,  "Celebrated,"  "Praised,"  if  She- 
mitic  ;  but  the  name  is  probably  Phoeni- 
cian) the  daughter  of  Beeri — ( "  of  a  well'? 
"The  Well-finder,"  vide  ch.  xxxvi.  24) — 
the  Hittite,  and  Bashemath  ("  Sweet- 
smelling,"  "Fragrant"?)  the  daughter  of 
Elon  the  Hittite) — adding  to  them  after- 
wards Mahalath  ihe  daughter  of  Ishmael, 
and  sister  of  Nebajoth  (ch.  xxviii.  9;.  On 
Esau's  wives  vide  ch.  xxxvi   2,  3. 

Ver.  35. — Which  were  a  grief  of  mind 
(literally,  bitterness  of  spirit)  unto  Isaac 
and  to  Rebekah — possible  because  of  their 
personal  characters,  but  chiefly  because  of 
their  Canaanitish  descent,  and  because  in 
marrying  tb  em  Esau  had  not  only  violated 
the  Divine  law  which  forbade  polygamy, 
but  also  evinced  an  utterly  irreligious 
and  unspiritual  disposition. 


HOMILETICS. 


Vers.  23 — 35. — A  good  man's env'ronment.  I.  Isaac  and  Jbhovah.  1.  Jehovah's 
grace  to  Isaac.  (1)  Revealing  his  presence.  "The  Lord  appeared  unto  him." 
Similar  discoveries  are  now  made  to  saints  in  "  night "  seasons,  and  at  localities  like 
Beersheba,  previously  consecrated  by  gracious  revelations  of  himself.  (2)  Pro- 
claiming his  character.  "lam  the  God  of  thy  fnlher  ;"  an  appellation  that  must 
have  sounded  dear  to  Abraham's  sou,  but  not  more  than  the  God  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  is  to  Christians.  (3)  Comforting  his  servant.  "Fear  not,  for  I  am  with 
thee."  So  a  Christian  has  the  best  right  to  preserve  equanimity  amid  life's  vicissi- 
tudes aud  tribulations,  Christ's  command  (Matt.  x.  31  ;  Luke  xii.  32) ;  and  the  best 
reasou,  Christ's  presence  (Matt,  xviii.  20  ;  xxviii.  20).  (4)  Renewing  his  promises. 
"I  will  bless  thee  and  multiply  thy  seed."  God  renews  his  promises  when  he 
revive?  their  impressions  on  the  heart,  which  he  does  for  his  own  glory  as  the 
faithful  Promiser,  and  for  his  people's  comfort  as  necessity  requires.  2.  Isaac's 
gratitude  to  Jehovah  (1)  Building  an  altar  ;  an  act  expressive  of  Isaac's  personal 
devotion  (1  Thess.  v.  18).  (2)  Invoking  God's  name  ;  referring  to  the  public  recital 
of  God's  gooduess  vide  ch.  xii.  8).  It  becomes  saints  to  remember  God's  mercies 
(Ps  xlviii.  9  ;  ciii.  1,  2,  and  to  speak  of  them  to  others  (Ps.  lxvi.  16  ;  lxxviii.  4). 
(3)  Pitching  a  tent  and  digging  a  well  ;  indicative  of  Isaac's  confidence  in  God. 
Grateful  acknowledgment  of  past  mercies,  public  celebration  of  present  mercies. 


CH.  XXVII.  1 — 14.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


333 


hopeful  expectation  of  future  mercies,  are  duties  incumbentupon  all,  but  especially 
on  saints, 

II.  Isaac  and  Abimelech.  1.  Abimelech'a  request  of  Isaac.  (1)  The  nature  of  it : 
a  demand  for  a  formal  alliance  confirmed  by  the  sanctions  of  religion.  "Let  there  be 
now  an  oath  betwixt  us,  and  let  us  make  a  covenant  with  thee."  (2)  The  object  of 
it:  his  own  rather  than  Isaac's  protection.  "That  thou  wilt  do  us  no  hurt." 
Most  men  suspect  their  neighbours  sooner  than  themselves.  Christianity  requires 
saints  to  be  as  careful  of  their  neighbour's  interests  as  of  their  own  (Phil.  ii.  4).  (3) 
The  motive  of  it :  partly  selfish  fear,  and  partly  a  recognition  of  Isaac's  goodness. 
"Thou  art  now  the  blessed  of  the  Lord."  2.  Isaac's  reception  of  Abimelech.  (1) 
Cautious  inquiry.  "Wherefore  come  ye  tome?"  It  is  prudent  to  try  injurious 
men  before  we  trust  them.  (2)  Generous  entertainment.  "  He  made  them  a  feast." 
Overlooking,  as  became  a  good  mau,  their  too  favourable  account  of  themselves,  he 
gave  them  welcome  to  his  hospitable  board.  God's  people  should  not  be  censorious 
even  in  judging  enemies  ;  when  obliged  to  suffer,  they  should  forget  as  well  as 
forgive  injuries,  and  never  should  they  disdain  overtures  for  peace,  though,  made  by 
those  who  have  done  them  wrong.  3.  Solemn  adjuration.  "And  they  sware  one 
to  another."  Though  religion  does  not  lie  wilhin  the  sphere  of  politics,  politics  lie 
within  the  sphere  of  religion.  Nothing  should  be  done  by  a  good  man  that  he  can- 
not sanctify  by  the  word  of  God  and  prayer  (Col.  iii.  17,  2-i).  Peaceful  dismissal. 
"  Isaac  sent  them  away,  and  they  departed  from  him  in  peace."  Those  who  come 
for  peace  should  never  go  without  peace.  It  is  the  saint's  interest  as  well  as  duly  to 
follow  after  peace  (Matt.  v.  9).  No  sooner  had  Isaac  dismissed  Abimelech  and  his 
ministers,  than  his  servants  came  with  tidings  of  their  successful  operations  in 
sinking  a  well.     Peace-makers  seldom  fail  to  find  a  recompense  (James  iii.  18). 

III.  Isaac  and  Esau.  1.  Esau's  sinful  marriage.  (1)  He  took  more  wives  than 
one,  which  was  against  the  fundamental  law  of  marriage  (ch.  ii.  24;  Matt.  xix.  5); 
(2)  he  married  Canaanitish  women,  which  was  against  the  will  of  God,  as  expressed 
by  Abraham  in  regard  to  Isaac's  marriage,  and  doubtless  also  by  Isaac  with  reference 
to  Esau's ;  and  (3)  he  acted  contrary  to  his  parents'  counsel  in  the  matter,  which 
was  a  violation  of  that  filial  duty  which  he  owed  his  aged  parents.  2.  Isaac's  bitter 
grief.  (1)  Deeply  seated  as  to  its  intensity,  being  bitterness  of  spirit  (Prov.  xviii. 
14)  ;  (2)  truly  religious  as  to  its  character,  being  occasioned  chiefly  by  the  circum- 
stance that  Esau's  ill-assorted  marriages  were  not  such  as  Heaven  could  approve  ; 
and  (8)  sympathisingly  shared  by  Rebekah,  whose  motherly  bosom  was  also  stricken 
with  sorrow  at  her  son's  impiety. 

Learn— 1.  That  God's  gracious  visits  to  his  people  are  always  admirably  suited  to 
their  needs  in  respect  of  time,  place,  and  manner.  2.  That  when  a  man's  ways 
please  God  he  maketh  even  his  enemies  be  at  peace  with  him.  That  while  a  wise 
sou  maketh  a  glad  father,  a  foolish  son  U  the  heaviness  of  his  mother. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXVII. 
Ver.  1. — And  it  came  to  pass,  that  when 
Isaac  was  old, — according  to  the  generally- 
accepted  calculation,  in  his  one  hun- 
dred and  thirty-seventh  year.  Joseph, 
having  been  introduced  to  Pharaoh  in 
his  thirtieth  year  (ch.  xli.  46),  and  having 
been  thirty-nine  years  of  age  (ch.  xlv.  6) 
when  his  father,  aged  one  hundred  and 
thirty  (ch.  xlvii.  9),  came  down  to  Egypt, 
must  have  been  born  before  Jacob  was 
ninety-one ;  consequently,  as  his  birth 
occurred  in  the  fourteenth  year  of  Jacob's 
sojourn  in  Mesopotamia  (cf.  ch.  xxx.  25 
with  xxix.  18,  21,  27),  Jacob's  flight 
must  have  taken  place  when  he  was 
seventy-seven.  But  Jacob  was  born  in 
Isaac's  sixtieth  year  (ch.  xxv.  26) ;  hence 
Isaac  was   now  one   hundred  and  thirty- 


seven.  There  are,  however,  difficulties 
connected  with  this  reckoning  which 
lay  it  open  to  suspicion.  For  one  thing, 
it  postpones  Jacob's  marriage  to  an  ex- 
tremely late  period.  Then  it  takes  for 
granted  that  the  term  of  Jacob's  service 
in  Padan-aram  was  only  twenty  years 
(ch.  xxxi.  41),  whereas  it  is  not  certain 
whether  it  was  not  forty,  made  up,  accord 
ing  to  the  computation  of  Kennicott,  of 
fourteen  years'  service,  twenty  years' 
assistance  as  a  neighbour,  and  six  years 
of  work  for  wages.  And,  lastly,  it  ne- 
cessitates the  birth  of  Jacob's  eleven 
children  in  the  short  space  of  six  years, 
a  thing  which  appears  to  some,  if  not 
impossible,  highly  improbable.  Adopt- 
ing the  larger"  n  umber  as  the  term  of 
Jacob's  sojourn  in    Mesopotamia,   Isaac 


384 


THE   BOOK   OF  GENESIS. 


[CH.  XXVII.  1 — 14. 


would  at  this  time  be  only  one  hundred 
and  seventeen  (vide  '  Chronology  of  Jacob's 
Life  "  xxxi.  41)  and  his  eyes  were  oim, — 
literally,  were  failing  in  strength,  hence 
becoming  dim  (1  Sam.  iii.  2).  In  de- 
scribing Jacob's  decaying  vision  a  differ- 
ent verb  is  employed  (ch.  xlviii.  10) — 
so  that  he  could  not  see, — literally,  from 
seeing  ;  "{12  with  the  inf.  constr.  conveying 
the  idea  of  receding  from  the  state  of 
perfect  vision  (cf.  ch.  xvi.  2  ;  xxxi.  29  ; 
vide  Gesenius,  'Hebrew  Grammar,'  §  1552) 
— he  called  Esau  his  eldest  son, — Esau  was 
born  before  his  twin  brother  Jacob  (ch. 
xxv.  25) — and  said  unto  him,  My  son  : — 
i.  e.  my  special  son,  my  beloved  son,  the 
language  indicating  fondness  and  par- 
tiality (ch.  xxv.  28) — and  he  (Esau)  sail 
unto  him,  Behold,  here  am  I. 

Ver.  2. — And  he  (i.  e.  Isaac)  said,  Behold 
now,  I  am  old,  and  know  not  the  day  of 
my  death.  Isaac  had  manifestly  become 
apprehensive  of  the  near  approach  of 
dissolution.  His  failing  sight,  and  prob- 
ably the  recollection  that  Ishmael,  his 
half-brother,  had  died  at  137  (if  that  was 
Isaac's  age  at  this  time ;  vide  supra), 
occasioned  the  suspicion  that  his  own  end 
could  not  be  remote,  though  he  lived 
forty-three  or  sixty-three  years  longer, 
according  to  the  calculation  adopted,  ex- 
piring at  the  ripe  age  of  180  (vide  ch. 
xxx.  28). 

Ver.  3. — Now  th' refore  take,  I  pray  thee, 
thy  weapons,— the  word  "  weapon  "  signi- 
fying a  utensil,  vessel,  or  finished  instru- 
ment of  any  sort  (cf  ch.  xxiv.  53 ;  xxxi. 
37  ;  xlv.  20).  Here  it  manifestly  denotes 
weapons  employed  in  hunting,  and  in 
particular  those  next  specified — lhy  quiver 
— the   airag  \eyd|uvov,  "^Fl  from   TOF\  to 

hang,  properly  is  "that  which  is  sus- 
pended ;  hence  a  quiver,  fyapirpav  (LXX.), 
pharetram^  (Vulgate),  which  commonly  de- 
pends from  the  shoulders  or  girdle  (Aben 
Ezra,  Rosenmiiller,  Keil,  Kalisch,  et  alii  , 
though  by  fome  it  is  rendered  "sword" 
(Onkelos,  Syriac) — and  thy  bow  (vide  ch. 
xxi.  16),  and  go  out  to  f  e  field, — i.  e.  the 
open  country  inhabited  by  wild  beasts, 
as  opposed  to  cities,  villages  or  camps  (cf. 
ch.  xxv.  27) — and  take  me  some  venison— 
literally,  hunt  for  me  hunting,  i.  e.  the 
produce  of  hunting,  as  in  ch.  xxv.  28 
Ver.  4. — And  make  me  savoury  meat, — 
"delicious  food,"  from  a  root  whose 
primary  idea  is  to  taste,  or  try  the  flavour, 
of  a  thing.  Schultens  observes  that  the 
corresponding  Arabic  term  is  specially 
applied  to  dishes  made  of  flesh  taken  in 
hunting,  and  highly  esteemed  by  nomade 
tribes  (vide  Gesenius.  p.  467) — such  as  I 
love  (cf.  cli.  xxv.  28,  the  greund  of  his 


partiality  for  Esau),  and  bring  it  to  me, 
that  I  may  eat ; — Though  Isaac  was  blind 
and  weak  in  his  eyes,  yet  it  seemeth  his 
body  was  of  a  strong  constitution,  seeing 
he  was  able  to  eat  of  wild  flesh,  which  is 
of  harder  digestion"  (Willet) — that— the 
conjunction  'TO?  2  followed  by  a  future 

commonly  expresses  a  purpose  (cf .  Exod. 
ix.  14) — my  soul  may  bless  thee — notwith- 
standing the  oracle  (ch.  xxv.  23)  uttered 
so  many  (fifty-seven  or  seventy-seven) 
years  ago,  Isaac  appears  to  have  clung  to 
the  belief  that  Etau  was  the  destined  heir 
of  the  covenant  blessing  ;  quozdam  fuit 
ccecitatis  species,  guce  illi  magis  dbstititquam 
externa  oculorum  cnligo  (Calvin) — before 
I  die. 

Ver.  5. — And  Rebekah  (who,  though 
younger  than  Isaac,  must  also  have 
been  old)  heard  when  Isaac  spake — liter- 
ally,  in  the  speaking  of  Isaac's  3  with 

the  inf.  forming  a  periphrasis  for  the 
gerund,  and  being  commonly  rendered  by 
when  (ch.  xxiv.  30 ;  xxxiii.  18),  the 
subordinated  noun  being  changed  in 
translation  into  the  subject  of  the  sen- 
tence (vide  '  Ewald,  •  Heb. ,  Synt.,'  §  304)— 
to  Esau  his  son  (to  which  the  "her  son" 
of  ver.  6  stands  in  contrast).  And  Esau 
went  to  the  fie:d  to  hunt  for  venison, — 
literally  to  hunt  hunting  (vide  on  ver.  3) 
and  to  bring  it — i.  e.  ' '  the  savoury  meat " 
or  "delicious  fn<d,"  as  directed  (ver.  4). 
Vers  6.  7. — And  Rebekah  (having  al- 
ready formed  a  plan  for  diverting  the 
patriarchal  blessing  from  Esau,  whose 
habit  of  life  and  utterly  unspiritual 
character  may  perhaps  have  recalled-  to. 
her  mind  and  confirmed  the  declaration 
of  the  oracle  concerning  Jacob's  prece- 
dence) spake  unto  Jacob  her  son, — i.  e.  her 
favourite,  in  contrast  to  Esau,  Isaac's  son 
(ver.  5)— saying.  Behold,  I  heard  thy 
father  speak  unto  Esau  thy  brother,  saying, 
Bring  me  venison  ( ride  on  ver.  3),  and  make 
me  savoury  meat,  that  I  may  eat  (literally, 
and  I  shall  eat),  and  bless  thee — the 
lengthened  form  of  the  future  in  this  and 
the  preceding  verb  (cf.  irtobO  in  ver.  4) 

is  expressive  of  Isaac's  self-excitement 
and  emphatic  determination — before  the 
Lord.  The  word  Jehovah,  by  modern 
criticism  regarded  as  a  sign  of  divided 
authorship,  is  satisfactorily  explained  by 
remembering  that  Rebekah  is  speaking 
not  of  the  blessing  of  God's  general 
providence,  but  of  the  higher  benediction 
of  the  covenant  (Hengstenberg).  The 
phrase,  though  not  included  in  Isaac's 
address  to  Esau,  need  not  be  regarded  as 
due  to  Rebekah's  invention.  She  may 
have     understood    it    to  be    implied    in 


CH.  XXVII.  1 — 1 1.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


335 


her  husband's  language,  though  it  was 
not  expressed  (cf.  ch.  xxiv.  20).  That 
it  was  designedly  omitted  by  Isaac  in 
censequence  of  the  worldly  character  of 
Esau  appears  as  little  likely  as  that 
it  was  deliberately  inserted  by  Rebekah 
to  whet  her  favourite's  ambition  (Kalisch). 
As  to  meaning,  the  sense  may  be  that  this 
patriarchal  benediction  was  to  be  bestowed 
sincerely  (Menochius),  in  presence  and 
by  the  authority  of  God  (Ainsworth, 
Bush,  Clericus) ;  but  the  use  of  the  term 
Jehovah  rather  points  to  the  idea  that  Re- 
bekah regadedlsaacsimply"  as  the  instru- 
ment of  the  living  and  personal  (iod,  who 
directed  the  concerns  of  thi  cho  en  racd" 
(Henffstenberg).  Before  my  death.  Since 
Rebekah  makes  no  remark  as  to  the 
groundlessne-  s  of  Isaac's  fear,  it  is  not 
improbable  that  she  too  shared  in  her  bed- 
ridden husband's  expectations  that  a'ready 
he  was  'in  the  presence  of  "  his  end. 

Ver.  8. — Now  therefore,  my  son, — Jacob 
at  this  time  was  notalad,  uut  a  gr.>i\  n  man 
of  mature  years  (if  Isa  c  vra,i  137  he  must 
have  beeu  77),  which  shows  that  in  the 
following  transac  ion  he  was  rather  an  ac- 
complice than  a  tool — obey  my  voice  accord 
ing  to  that  whic'i  I  command  thee.  We  an 
scarcely  here  think  o.  a  mother  laying  her 
imperative  instruct'ons  on  a  docile  ani 
unquestioning  child;  but  o  a  wi  y  woman 
det  iilin<r  her  well-concocted  scheme  to  a 
son  whom  she  discerns  to  be  possessed  of  a 
like  crafty  dispos  tion  with  herself,  and 
whom  she  seeks  to  gain  over  to  her  strat- 
agem by  reminding  bin  of  the  cl  >se  and 
endearing  relationship  in  which  they 
stand  to  one  another. 

Vers  9,  10. — Go  now  to  the  flock,  and 
fetch  me — literally,  take  for  me,  i.e  formy 
purposes  (cf.  ch.  xv.  9) — from  thence  two 
good  kids  of  the  goits.  According  to  Jarchi 
kids  were  selected  as  b  ing  the  nearest 
approach  to  the  fles'a  of  wild  ani  nals 
Two  were  specified,  it  has  been  thought, 
either  to  extract  from  both  the  choicest 
morsels  (Menochius),  or  to  have  the  ap- 
pearance of  animals  takm  in  hunting 
(Rosenmuller  ,  or  to  make  an  ample  pro- 
vision as  of  venison  (Lange),  or  to  make 
a  second  experiment,  if  the  first  f  iled 
(Willet).  And  I  will  make  them— probably 
c  needing  any  difference  in  taste  by  means 
of  condiments,  though  Isaac's  palate  would 
not  be  sensitive  in  consequence  of  age  and 
debility— savoury  meat  for  thy  father,  such 
as  he  loveth  (vide  ver.  4):  and  thou  shalt 
iring  it  to  thy  father,  that  he  may  eat  (liter- 
ally, andhe  shall  eat),  and  that  he  may  bless 
thee—  *WNL  ^3%  in  order  that,  from  the 
idea  of  passing  over  to  that  whic'i  one  de- 
sires to  attain;  less  fully  in  ver.  4— before 


his  death.  Clearly  Rebekah  was  anticipat- 
ing Isaac's  early  dissolution,  eke  why  this 
indecent  haste  to  fore  tall  Esau  ?  There  is 
no  reason  to  surmise  that  she  believed  any 
connection  to  subsist  between  the  eating 
and  the  benediction,  though  she  probably 
imagined  that"  he  supposed  prompt  obe- 
di  nee  of  Isaacs  son  would  stimulate  his 
feeble  heart  to  speak  (Rosenmuller). 

Ver.  11. — And  Jacob  (who  was  not  yet 
such  an  adept  at  trickery  as  he  afterwards 
became,  and  who,  if  he  had  no  scruples  of 
cons  ience  in  either  imposing  on  a  senile 
parent  or  despoiling  an  open-hearted 
brother,  was  yet  averse  to  being  detected 
in  his  frauds,  as  deceivers  usually  are) 
said  to  Rebekah  his  mother  Behold,  Esau 
my  brother  is  a  hairy  mm  (vide  ch.  xxv. 
25)  and  I  am  a  smooth  man — pbtl,  smooth 
(opposed  to  TSfe,  hi.iry  ;  the  primary  idea 
of  which  is  to  cut  off  the  hair.  Cf .  xo.\k6s, 
X&\i£,  Ko\a£.  ■yXvK'Js.  7X0105.  'yMo'Xpos ; 
glacies,  glaber,  glaaius,  glisco ;  gluten, 
glatt,  gletten,  gtas — all  of  which  convey 
tie  notion  of  moothness  (vide  Gesenius, 
p.  283). 

Ver.  12. — My  father  peradventure  will 
feel  me ,  and  I  shall  seem  to  him  as  a  dec  -iver ; 
— literall  -,  shall  be  in  his  eyes  as  a  scoffer 
(Keil,  Lange),  with  the  idea  of  mocking 
at  his  aged  sire's  infirmities — ws  kcito.- 
4>pov<5v  LXX  );  or  as  a  deceiver,  an  im- 
postor, one  who  goes  astray  (Vulgate,  Ro- 
senmuller, Ainsworth,  Murphy);  though 
perhaps  both  senses  should  be  included, 
the  verb  JJa,  to  scoff,  meaning  priina- 
lily  to  stammer,  and  hence  to  mislead  by 
imperfect  speech,  and  thus  to  cause  to 
wander  or  lead  astray,  rWn  (vide  Gesenius, 

p.  870,  and  Kalisch,  p  506)— and  I  shall 
bring  a  curse— !"ibbp  (from  bbpr,  to  be 
light,  hence  to  be  despised)  signifies  first 
an  expression  of  coDtempt,  and  then  a 
more  solemn  imprecation — upon  me,  and 
not  a  blessing. 

Ver.  13  — And  his  mother  said  unto  him, 
Upon  me  be  thy  curse,  my  son  (cf .  ch.  xliii. 
9 ;  1  Sam.  xxv.  24 ;  2  Sam.  xiv.  9  ;  Matt, 
xxvii.  25).  Tempted  to  regard  Rebekah's 
words  as  the  utterance  of  a  bold  and  un- 
scrupulous woman  (Aben  Ezra),  we  ought 
perhaps  to  view  them  as  inspired  by 
faith  in  the  Divine  pro  nise,  which  had 
already  indicated  that  of  her  two  sons 
Jacob  should  have  the  precedence  (Willet, 
Calvin,  Lange),  and  that  accordingly 
there  was  every  reason  to  anticipate  not 
a  malediction,  but  a  benediction.  Only 
obey  my  voice  (i.  e.  do  as  I  direct  you, 
follow  my  instructions),  an4  go  fetch  me 
them — or,  go  and  take  for  me  (sc.  the  two 
kids  I  spoke  of). 


S36 


THE   BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xxvii.  1  —  14. 


Ver.  14. — And  he  went  (sc.  to  tlie  flock), 
and  fetche', — or,  rather,  took  (sc.  the  two 
kids  as  directed)  and  brought  them  (after 
slaughter,  of  course)  to  his  mother:  and 
his  mother  made  savoury  meat,  such  as  Lis 


father  loved.  All  this  implies  that  Rebekah 
reckoned  on  Esau's  absence  for  a  consider- 
able time,  perhaps  throughout  the  entire 
day. 


HOM1LETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 14. — The  stolen  blessing:  a  domestic  drama. — 1.  Isaac  and  Rebekah,  or 
plotting  and  counterplotting.  I.  The  scheme  of  Isaac.  1.  Its  sinful  object.  The 
heavenly  oracle  having  with  no  uncertain  sound  proclaimed  Jacob  the  theocratic 
heir,  the  bestowment  of  the  patriarchal  benediction  on  Esau  was  clearly  an  unholy 
design.  That  Isaac,  who  on  Mount  Moriah  had  evinced  such  meek  and  ready  acqui- 
escence in  Jehovah's  will,  should  in  old  age,  from  partiality  towards  his  firstborn,  or 
for  getfulness  of  Jehovah's  declaration,  endeavour  to  thwart  the  Divine  purpose 
according  to  election  affords  a  melancholy  illustration  of  the  deceitfulness  of  sin  even 
'  in  renewed  hearts,  aud  of  the  deep-seated  antagonism  between  the  instincts  of  nature 
and  the  designs  of  grace.  2.  Its  secret  character.  The  commission  assigned  to 
Esau  does  not  appear  to  have  been  dictated  by  any  supposed  connection  between  the 
gratification  of  the  palate,  the  reiuvigorntion  of  the  body,  or  the  refreshment  of  the 
spirit  and  the  exercise  of  the  prophetic  gift,  but  rather  by, a  desire  to  divert  the 
attention  of  Rebekah  from  supposing  that  anything  unusual  was  going  on,  and  so  to 
secure  the  necessary  privacy  for  currying  out  the  scheme  which  he  had  formed. 
Had  Isaac  not  been  doubtful  of  the  righteousness  of  what  he  had  in  contemplation, 
he  would  never  have  resorted  to  manoeuvring  and  secrecy,  but  would  have  courted 
unveiled  publicity.  Crooked  ways  love  the  dark  (John  iii.  20,  21).  3.  Its  urgent 
motive.  Isaac  felt  impelled  to  relieve  his  soul  of  the  theocratic  blessing  by  a  sense 
of  approaching  dissolution.  If  it  be  the  weakness  of  old  men  'to  imagine  death 
nearer,  it  is  the  folly  of  young  men  to  suppose  it  farther  distant  than  it  is.  To 
young  and  old  alike  the  failure  of  the  senses  should  be  a  premonition  of  the  end, 
and  good  men  should  set  their  houses  in  order  ere  they  leave  the  world  (ch.  xxv.  6 ; 
2  Kings  xx.  1  ;  Isa.  xxxviii.  1).  4.  Its  inherent  weakness.  That  Isaac  reckoned  on 
Rebekah's  opposition  to  his  scheme  seems  apparent ;  it  is  not  so  obvious  that  he  cal- 
culated on  God's  being  against  him.  Those  who  meditate  unholy  deeds  should  first 
arrange  that  God  will  not  be  able  to  discover  their  intentions. 

II.  The  stratagem  op  Rebekah.  1.  The  design  was  legitimate.  Instead  of  her 
behaviour  being  represented  as  an  attempt  to  outwit  her  aged,  blind,  and  bed-ridden 
husband  (for  which  surely  no  great  cleverness  was  required),  and  to  stealthily  secure 
the  blessing  for  her  favourite,  regard  for  truth  demands  that  it  should  rather  be 
characterised  as  an  endeavour  to  prevent  its  surreptitious  appropriation  for  Esau. 
2.  The  inspiration  was  religious.  Displaying  a  considerable  amount  of  woman's 
wit  in  its  conception  and  execution,  and  perhaps  largely  tainted  by  maternal  jealousy, 
Rebekah's  stratagem  ought  in  fairness  to  be  traced  to  her  belief  in  the  pre-natal 
oracle,  which  had  pointed  to  Jacob  as  the  theocratic  heir.  That  her  faith,  however 
mixed  with  unspiritual  alloy,  was  strong  seems  a  just  conclusion  from  her  almost 
reckless  boldness  (ver.  13).  3.  The  wickedness  was  inexcusable.  Good  as  were  its 
end  and  motive,  the  sliutagem  of  Rebekah  was  deplorably  wicked.  It  was  an  act  of 
cruel  imposition  on  a  husband  who  had  loved  her  for  well-nigh  a  century;  it  was  a 
base  deed  of  temptation  and  se  luction,  viewed  in  its  relations  to  Jacob — the  prompt- 
ing of  a  son  to  sin  against  a  father  ;  it  was  a  signal  of  offense  against  God  in  many 
ways,  but  chiefly  in  the  sinful  impatience  it  displayed,  and  in  the  foolish  supposition 
that  his  sovereign  designs  needed  the  assistance  of,  or  could  be  helped  by,  human 
craft  in  the  shape  of  female  cunning. 

III.  The  rival  accomplices.  1.  The  confederate  of  Isaac.  The  guilt  of  Esau 
consisted  in  seeking  to  obtain  the  birthright  when  he  knew  (1)  that  it  belonged  to 
Ja"ob  by  Heaven's  gift,  (2)  that  he  had  parted  with  any  imaginary"  title  he  ever 
had  to  expect  it,  (3)  that  he  was  utterly  unqualified  to  possess  it,  aud  (4)  that  he  was 
endeavouring  to  obtain  it  by  improper  means.  2.  The  tool  of  Rebekah.  That  Jacob 
in  acting  one  his  mother's  counsel  was  not  sinless  is  evinced  by  the  fact  that  he  (1) 
perceived  its  hazardous  nature  (vers.  11,  12),  (2j  discerned  its  criminality,  and  yet  (3) 
allowed  himself  to  carry  it  through. 

Lessons: — 1.  The  wickedness  of  trying  lo  subvert  the  wi.l  of  Heaven — exemplified 
in  Isaac.    2.  The  sinfulness  of  doing  evil  that  good  may  come — illustrated  by  the 


ch.  xxvii.  15—29.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


337 


conduct  of  Rebekah.  3.  The  criminality  of  following  evil  counsel,  in  opposition  to 
the  light  of  conscience  and  the  restraints  of  Providence— shown  by  the  conduct  of 
both  Esau  and  Jacob. 

EXPOSITION. 


Ver.  15. — And  Bebekah  took  goodly  rai- 
ment of  her  eldest^i  Esau, — literally,  the 
robes  of  Esau  her  son  tlie  elder — the  desir- 
able, i.  e.  the  handsome  ones.     The  "US 

was  an  outer  garment  worn  by  the  Ori- 
ental (ch.  xxxix.  13,  13,  15 ;  xli.  42),— 
o-toXtJ,  LXX., — and  was  often  made  of 
beautiful  and  costly  materials'  (cf .  1  Kings 
xxii.  10).  That  the  clothes  mentioned  as 
belonging  to  Esau  were  sacerdotal  robes 
possessed  by  him  as  heir  of  the  patriarchal 
priesthood  (Jewish  Rabbis),  though  re- 
garded by  many  as  a  probable  conjec- 
ture (Ainsworth,  Bush,  Candlish,  Clarke, 
Wordsworth;  '  Speaker's  Commentary,' 
Inglis),  is  devoid  of  proof,  and  may  be 
pronounced  unlikely,  since  the  firstborn 
did  not  serve  in  the  priesthood  while  his 
father  lived  (Willet,  Alford).  They  were 
probably  festive  garments  of  the  princely 
hunter  (Kalisch)  —which  were  with  her  in 
the  house, — not  because  Esau  saw  that  his 
wives  were  displeasing  to  his  parents 
(Mercerus,  Willet),  or  because  they  were 
sacred  garments  (Ainsworth,  Poole),  but 
probably  because  Esau,  though  married, 
had  not  yet  quitted  the  patriarchal  house- 
hold (Kalisch) — and  put  them  upon  Jacob 
her  younger  son.  The  verb,  being  in  the 
hiphil,  conveys  the  sense  of  causing  Jacob 
to  clothe  himself,  which  entirely  removes 
the  impression  that  Jacob  was  a  purely 
involuntary  agent  in  this  deceitful  and 
deeply  dishonourable  affair. 

Ver.  16. — And  she  put  the  skins  of  the 
kids  of  the  goats — not  European,  but  Ori- 
ental camel-goats,  whose  wool  is  black, 
silky,  of  a  much  finer  texture  than  that 
of  the  former,  and  sometimes  used  as  a 
substitute  for  human  hair  (cf.  Cant.  iv. 
1);  vide  on  this  subject  Rosenrnuller's 
'Scholia,'  and  commentaries  generally — 
upon  his  hands,  and  upon  the  smooth  of  his 
neck — thus  cautiously  providing  against 
detection,  in  case,  anything  occurring  to 
arouse  the  old  man's  suspicions,  he  should 
seek,  as  in  reality  he  did,  to  test  the  ac- 
curacy of  his  now  dim  sight  and  dull 
hearing  by  the  sense  of  touch. 

Ver.  17. — And  she  gave  the  savoury 
meat  and  the  bread,  which  she  had  pre- 
pared, into  the  hand  of  her  son  Jacob — who 
forthwith  proceeded  on  his  unholy  errand. 

Ver.  18. — And  he  came  unto  his  father, 
by  this  time  a  bed- ridden  invalid  (vide  ver. 
19)— and  said,  My  father.  If  he  attempted 
to  imitate  the  voice  of  Esau,  he  was  man- 
ifestly unsuccessful;  the  dull  ear  of  the 

GEIfESIS. 


aged  patient  was  yet  acute  enough  to  de- 
tect a  strangeness  in  the  speaker's  tone. 
And  he  said,  Here  am  I ;  who  art  thou,  my 
ton'  "He  thought  he  recognised  the 
voice  of  Jacob;  his  suspicion",  were 
aroused;  he  knew  the  crafty  disposition 
of  his  younger  son  too  well ;  and  lie  felt 
the  dutyof  extremecarefulness "(Kalisch). 

Ver.  19.— And  Jacob  (either  not  observ- 
ing or  not  regarding  the  trepidation  which 
his  voice  caused,  but  being  well  schooled 
by  his  crafty  mother,  and  determined  to 
go  through  with  what  perhaps  he  es- 
teemed a  perfectly  justifiable  transaction) 
said  unto  his  father,  I  am  Esau  thy  first- 
born. A  reply  for  which  laborious  ex- 
cuses have  been  invented ;  as  that  Jacob 
spoke  mystically,  meaning  not  that  he  in- 
dividually, but  that  his  descendants,  the 
Church,  were  Isaac'sfirstborn  (Augustine) ; 
or  figuratively,  as  importing  that  since  he 
had  already  bought  Esau's  birthright,  he 
might  justly  regard  himself  as  standing  in 
Esau's  place  (Theodoret,  Aquinas).  It  is 
better  not  to  attempt  vindication  of  con- 
duct which  to  ordinary  minds  must  ever 
appear  questionable,  but  rather  to  hold 
that  "Jacob  told  an  officious  lie  to  his 
father"  (Willet).  I  have  done  according  as 
thou  badest  me.  If  the  former  assertion 
might  be  cleared  of  mendacity,  it  is  diffi- 
cult to  see  how  this  can.  By  no  conceiv- 
able sophistry  could  he  convince  his  con- 
science that  he  was  acting  in  obedience  to 
his  father,  while  he  was  knowingly  im- 
plementing the  instructions  of  his  mother. 
This  was  Jacob's  second  lie.  Arise,  I  pray 
the  ,  sit  and  eat  of  my  venison.  Lie  three. 
One  lie  commonly  requires  another  to 
support  or  conceal  it.  Pew  who  enter  on 
a  course  of  deception  stop  at  one  falsehood. 
That  thy  soul  way  bless  me.  It  was  the 
blessing  of  the  Abrahamic  covenant  he 
craved. 

Vers.  20,  21.— And  Isaac  (still  dissatis- 
fied, but  still  resolving  to  proceed  with 
caution)  said  unto  his  son,  How  is  it  that 
thou  hast  found  it  so  quickly,  my  son? 
Giving  expression  to  a  natural  surprise  at 
the  speedy  success  which  had  attended 
Esau's  hunting  expedition;  an  interroga- 
tion to  which  Jacob  replied  with  daring 
boldness  (Murphy),  with  consummate  ef- 
frontery (Bush),  not  without  perjury  (Cal- 
vin), and  even  with  reckless  blasphemy 
(Kalisch,  Alford).  And  he  said,  Because  the 
Lord  thy  God  brought  it  to  me.  Literally, 
caused  it  to  come  before  me;  by  the  con- 
currence, of  course,  of  his  providence; 


338 


THE   BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xxvn.  15—29. 


which,  though  in  one  sense  true,  yet  as 
used  by  Jacob  was  an  impious  falsehood. 
Solemn  as  this  declaration  was,  it  failed 
to  lull  the  suspicions  or  allay  the  disquiet 
of  the  aged  invalid.  And  Isaac  said  unto 
Jacob,  Come  near,  I  pray  thee,  that  I  may 
feel  thee,  my  son, — the  very  thing  which 
Jacob  had  suggested  as  likely  to  happen 
(ver.  12) — whether  thou  be  my  very  son 
Esau  (lilerally,  this,  my  son  Esau)  or  not. 
Vers.  22,  23—  And  Jacob  (with  a  bold- 
ness worthy  of  a  better  cause)  went  near 
unto  Isaac  his  father;  and  he  (i.  e.  Isaac) 
felt  him  (i.  e.  Jacob),  and  said,  The  voice  is 
Jacob's  voice,  but  (literally,  and)  the  hands 
are  the  hands  of  Esau.  And  he  discerned 
him  not,  because  his  hands  were  hairy,  as 
his  brother  Esau's  hands:  so  he  blessed  him. 
Isaac  must  either  have  forgotten  the 
heavenly  oracle  which  announced  the  des- 
tinies of  his  sons  at  their  birth,  and  dis- 
tinctly accorded  the  precedence  to  Jacob, 
or  he  must  not  have  attached  the  same 
importance  to  it  as  Rebekah,  or  he  may 
have  thought  that  it  did  not  affect  the 
transmission  of  the  covenant  blessing,  or 
that  it  did  not  concern  his  sons  so  much 
as  their  descendants.  It  is  hard  to  credit 
that  Isaac  either  did  not  believe  in  the 
Divine  announcement  which  had  indi- 
cated Jacob  as  the  heir  of  the  promise,  or 
that,  believing  it,  he  deliberately  allowed 
paternal  partiality  to  interfere  with,  and 
even  endeavor  to  reverse,  the  will  of 
Heaven. 

Vers.  24—26. — And  he  said  (showing 
that  a  feeling  of  uneasy  suspicion  yet  lin- 
gered in  his  mind),  Art  thou  my  very  son 
Esau?  Luther  wonders  how  Jacob  was 
able  to  brazen  it  out;  adding,  "I  should 
probably  have  run  away  in  terror,  and  let 
the  dish  fall;"  but,  instead  of  that,  he 
added  one  more  lie  to  those  which  had 
preceded,  saying  with  undisturbed  com- 
posure, I  am — equivalent  to  an  English 
yes;  upon  which  the  blind  old  patriarch 
requested  that  theproffered  dainties  might 
be  set  before  him.  Having  partaken  of 
the  carefully-disguised  kid's  flesh,  and 
drunk  an  exhilarating  cup  of  wine,  he 
further  desired  that  his  favourite  son 
should  approach  his  bed,  saying,  Come 
near  now,  and  kiss  me,  my  son — -a  request 
dictated  more  by  paternal  affection  (Keil, 
Kalisch)  than  by  lingering  doubt  which 
required  reassurance  (Lange). 

Ver.  27. — And  he  came  near,  and  kissed 
him.  Originally  the  act  of  kissing  had  a 
symbolical  character.  Here  it  is  a  sign  of 
affection  between  a  parent  and  a  child; 
in  ch.  xxix.  13  between  relatives.  It  was 
also  a  token  of  friendship  (Tobit  vii.  6; 
x.  12;  2  Sam.  xx.  9;  Matt.  xxvi.  48;  Luke 
vii.  45;  xv.  20;  Acts  xx.  3^).    The  kissing 


of  princes  was  a  symbol  of  homage  (1  Sam. 
x.  1;  Ps.  ii.  12;  Xenoph.,  'Cyrop.,'  vii.  5, 
32).     With  the  Persians  it  was  a  mark 
of  honour  (Xenoph.,  '  A'gesil,'  v.  4).     The 
Rabbins   permitted  only  three  kinds   of 
kisses — the  kiss  of  reverence,  of  reception, 
and  of  dismissal,     flhe  kiss  of  charity 
was  practised  among  disciples  in  the  early 
Christian  Church  (Rom.  xvi.  16;  1  Cor. 
xvi.  20;  2  Cor.  xiii.  12;  1  Thess.  v.  26; 
1  Pet.  v.   14    vide  Kitto's' Cyclopedia,' 
art.  Kissing).    And  he  smelled  the  smell  of 
his  raiment, — not  deliberately,  in  order  to 
detect  whether  they  belonged  to  a  shep- 
herd or  huntsman  (Tuch),  but  accidentally 
while  in  the  act  of  kissing.     The  odour  of 
Esau's  garments,  impregnated  with  the 
fragrance  of  the  aromatic  herbs  of  Pales- 
tine, excited  the  dull  sensibilities  of  the 
aged  prophet,  suggesting  to  his  mind  pic- 
tures of  freshness  and  fertility,  and  in- 
spiring him  to  pour  forth  his  promised 
benediction— and  blessed  him  (not  a  sec- 
ond time,  the  statement  in  ver.  23  being 
only  inserted  by  anticipation),  and  said, — 
the  blessing,  as  is  usual  in  elevated  pro- 
phetic utterances,  assumes  a  poetic  and 
antistrophical  form  (cf.  Esau's  blessing, 
vers.  39,  40) — See,  the  smell  of  my  son 
is  as  the  smell  of  a  field — the  first  clause  of 
the  poetic  stanza  clearly  connects  with  the 
odour  of  Esau's  raiment  as  that  which 
had  opened  the  fount  of  prophetic  song  in 
Isaac's  breast,  so  far  at  least  as  its  peculiar 
form  was  concerned;  its  secret  inspiration 
we  know  was  the  Holy  Ghost  operating 
through  Isaac's  faith  in  the  promise  (vide 
Heb.  xi.  20) — which  the  Lord  hath  blessed. 
The  introduction  of  the  name  Jehovah  in- 
stead of  Elohim   in  this  second  clause 
proves  that  Isaac  did  not  mean  to  liken 
his  son  to  an   ordinary  well-cultivated 
field,  but  to  "a  field  like  that  of  Paradise, 
resplendent  with  traces  of  the  Deity — an 
ideal  field,  bearing  the  same  relation  to  an 
ordinary  one  as  Israel  did  to  the  heathen 
— a  kind  •  of  enchanted  garden,  such  as 
would   be  realised   at  a  later  period  in 
Canaan,  as  far  as  the  fidelity  of  the  people 
permitted  it"  (Hengstenberg). 

Ver.  28. — Therefore  God  give  thee  of  the 
dew  of  heaven, — literally,  and  tlie  Elohim 
will  give  thee,  with  an  optative  sense;  i.  e. 
and  may  the  Elohim  give  thee!  The  oc- 
currence of  D^ilbsti  in  what  is  usually 

assigned  to  the  Jehovist  (Tuch,  Bleek, 
Davidson)  is  not  to  be  explained  as  a 
special  Jehovistic  formula  (Colenso),  or  as 
a  remnant  of  the  fundamental  Elohistic 
writing  (Kalisch),  or  as  indicating  that  the 
personal  God,  and  not  Jehovah,  the  God 
of  the  covenant,  was  the  source  of  the 
blessing  (Keil,    Gosman    in    Lange),   or 


ch.  xrvn.  15—29.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


339 


as  intimating  a  remaining  doubt  as  to 
whether  Esau  was  the  chosen  one  of 
Jehovah  (Lange) ;  but  as  identifying 
Jehovah  with  Elohim,  the  art.  being 
the  art.  of  reference,  as  in  ch.  xxii. 
1  (Hengstenberg;  cf.  Quarry  on  'Gene- 
sis,' p.  483).  The  blessing  craved  was 
substantially  that  of  a  fertile  soil,  in 
Oriental  countries  the  copious  dew  de- 
posited by  the  atmosphere  supplying  the 
place  of  rain.  Hence  dew  is  employed  in 
Scripture  as  a  symbol  of  material  pros- 
perity (Deut.  xxxiii.  13,  28 ;  Zech.  viii. 
12),  and  the  absence  of  dew  and  rain  rep- 
resented as  a  signal  of  Divine  displeasure 
(2  Sam.  1,  21 ;  1  Kings  xvii.  1 ;  Haggai  i. 
10,  11)— and  the  fatness  of  the  earth, — lit- 
erally, of  the  fatnesses,  or  choicest  parts, 
of  the  earth  (ch.  xlv.  18) — and  plenty  of 
corn  and  wine— *.  e.  abundance  of  the 
produce  of  the  soil  (cf.  Deut.  xxxiii.  28). 
Ver.  29. — Let  people  serve  thee  (literally, 
and  will  serve  thee,  peoples;  at  once  a 
prayer  and  a  prophecy  ;  fulfilled  in  the 
political  subjection  of  the  Moabites,  Am- 
monites, Syrians,  Philistines,  and  Edom- 
ites  by  David  ;  the  thought  being  repeat- 


ed in  the  next  clause),  and  nations  bow 
down  to  thee  (in  expression  of  their  hom- 
age) :  be  lord  over  thy  brethren, — literally, 
be  a  lord  (from  the  idea  of  power  ;  found 
only  here  and  in  ver.  37)  to  thy  brethren. 
Pre-eminence  among  his  kindred  as  well 
as  dominion  in  the  world  is  thus  promised 
— and  let  thy  mother's  sons  bow  down  to 
thee(a  repetition  of  the  preceding  thought, 
with  perhaps  a  hint  of  his  desire  to  humble 
Jacob,  the  favourite  of  Rebekah) :  cursed 
be  every  one  that  curseth  thee,  and  blessed 
be  he  that  blesseth  thee — framed  on  the 
model  of  the  Abrahamic  benediction  (ch. 
xii.  3)f  but  not  so  full  as  that,  either  be- 
cause Isaac  felt  that  after  all  Esau  was 
not  to  be  the  progenitor  of  the  holy  seed 
(Murphy),  or  because,  not  being  actuated 
by  proper  feelings  towards  Jehovah  and 
his  promises,  the  patriarch  could  not  rise 
to  that  height  of  spiritual  benediction  to 
which  he  afterwards  attained — ch.  xxviii. 
3,  4  (Keil),  or  because  the  prerogative  of 
pronouncing  the  Abrahamic  blessing  in 
all  its  fulness  Jehovah  may  have  reserved 
to  himself,  as  in  ch.  xxviii.  14  ('  Speaker's 
Commentary '). 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  15—  29.— The  stolen  blessing:  a  domestic  drama.— %.  Isaac  and  Jacob,  or 
tlie  successful  stratagem.  I.  Jacob's  deception  on  Isaac.  Jacob's  personation  of 
Esau  was— 1.  Deftly  prepared.  The  ingenious  Rebekah,  having  dressed  him  in 
the  fragrant  festal  robes  of  the  princely  hunter,  covered  his  smooth  skin  with  the 
soft,  silky  hide  of  the  camel-goat,  and  put  into  his  hand  the  simulated  dainty  dish 
which  she  had  cooked.  It  is  a  melancholy  thing  when  either  woman's  wit  or  man's 
sagacity  is  prostituted  to  unholy  ends.  2.  Boldly  avowed.  Entering  his  father's 
tent,  and  approaching  within  easy  reach  of  the  invalid's  couch,  at  the  same  time 
imitating  Esau's  intonations,  the  heartless  impostor  calls  upon  his  aged  parent  to 
arise  and  eat  of  his  son's  venison,  in  response  to  his  father's  inquiry  also  openly 
declaring  himself  to  be  Esau  ;  in  which  was  a  fourfold  offence— against  his  venerable 
father,  against  his  absent  brother,  against  himself,  and  against  God.  Never  is  a  lie, 
and  seldom  is  a  sin  of  any  kind,  single  or  simple  in  its  criminality.  That  scheme 
cannot  be  a  good  one  of  which  the  first  act  is  a  lie.  3.  Persistently  maintained. 
In  the  face  of  his  father's  searching  interrogation,  careful  examination,  and  manifest 
trepidation,  Jacob  brazens  out  the  imposture  he  had  begun,  covering  his  first  false- 
hood by  a  second,  and  his  second  by  a  third,  in  which  he  verges  on  the  limits  of 
blasphemy,  allowing  himself  to  be  handled  by  his  aged  parent  without  betraying  by 
a  word  or  sign  the  base  deception  he  was  practising,  and  at  length  capping  his 
extraordinary  wickedness  by  a  solemn  asseveration  of  his  identity  with  Esau  that 
carried  with  it  in  the  hearing  of  Isaap  much  of  the  impressiveness  and  weight  of  an 
oath,— "I  am  thy  very  son  Esau  ! "  It  is  amazing  to  what  depths  of  criminality 
those  may  fall  who  once  step  aside  from  the  straight  paths  of  virtue.  4.  Completely 
successful.  Critical  as  the  ordeal  was  through  which  he  passed,  he  was  not  detected 
So  God  sometimes  allows  wicked  schemes  to  prosper,  accomplishing  his  own  designs 
thereby,  though  neither  approving  of  the  schemes  nor  holding  the  schemers  guiltless. 
II.  Isaac's  benediction  of  Jacob.  The  patriarchal  blessing  which  Isaac  uttered 
was— 1.  Divinely  inspired  as  to  its  origin.  It  was  not  within  the  power  of  Isaac 
to  either  conceive  or  express  it  in  any  arbitrarily  selected  moment,  or  in  any  par- 
ticular way  or  place  that  he  might  determine.  Least  of  all  was  it  the  production  of 
Isaac's  ordinary  faculties  under  the  physical  or  mental  impulse  of  delicious  viands 
or  paternal  affection.     It  was  the  outcome  of  an  unseen  afflatus  of  the  Divine  Spirit 

z2 


840 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xxvii.  30—40. 


upon  the  venerable  patriarch's  soul  (Heb.  xi.  20>.  2.  Providentially  directed  as  to 
its  destination.  Intended  for  ihe  firstborn,  it  was  pronounced  upon  the  younger  of 
his  sons.  Had  Rebekah  and  Jacob  not  interposed  with  their  miserable  trick,  there  is 
reason  to  suppose  that  God  would  have  discovered  means  of  defeating  the  misguided 
patriarch's  design  ;  perhaps  by  laying  an  embargo  upon  his  lips,  as  he  did  on  Balaam 
(Num.  xxii.  38) ;  perhaps  by  miraculously  guiding  his  speech,  as  afterwards  he 
guided  Jacob's  hands  (ch.  xlvii.  14).  But  none  the  less  is  the  Divine  finger  dis- 
cernable  in  carrying  the  heavenly  blessing  to  its  predestined  recipient,  that  he  does 
not  interfere  with  Rebekah's  craft,  but  allows  it,  beneath  the  guidance  of  his  ordinary 
providence,  to  work  out  its  appropriate  result.  3.  Richly  laden  as  to  Us  (ontents. 
It  embraced — (1)  Material  enrichment,  represented  by  the  dew,  corn  and  wine, 
which  may  also  be  regarded  as  symbolic  of  spiritual  treasures;  (2)  personal  ad- 
vancement in  the  world  and  in  the  Church,  foreshadowing  both  the  political  supremacy 
and  ecclesiastical  importance  to  which  Israel  should  afterwards  attain  ;  (3)  spiritual 
influence,  emblematic  of  the  religious  priesthood  enjoyed  first  by  the  Hebrew  people 
as  a  nation,  and  latterly  by  Clirist,  the  true  Seed  of  Abraham,  and  Isaac  and  Jacob. 
4.  Absolutely  permanent  as  to  its  duration.  Though  Isaac  subsequently  learnt  of 
the  deception  which  had  been  practised  toward  him,  he  felt  that  the  words  he  had 
spoken  were  beyond  recall.  This  was  proof  decisive  that  Isaac  spake  not  of  himself, 
but  as  he  was  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  His  own  benediction,  uttered  purely  by 
and  from  himself,  might,  and,  in  the  circumstances,  probably  would,  have  been- 
revoked  ;  the  blessing  of  Jehovah  transmitted  through  his  undesigned  act  he  had  no 
power  to  cancel. 

Learn — 1.  That  those  who  attempt  to  deceive  others  are  not  unfrequently  them- 
selves deceived.  2.  That  those  who  enter  on  a  sinful  course  may  speedily  siuk 
deeper  into  siu  than  they  iutended.  3.  That  deception  practised  by  a  son  against  a 
father,  at  a  mother's  instigation,  is  a  monstrous  and  unnatural  display  of  wickedness. 
4.  That  God  can  accomplish  his  own  designs  by  means  of  man's  crimes,  without 
either  relieving  them  of  guilt  or  himself  being  the  aulhor  of  sin.  5.  That  the  bless- 
ing of  God  maketh  rich  and  added  no  sorrow  therewith.  6.  That  the  gifts  and 
calling  of  God  are  without  repentance. 


EXPOSITION. 


Ver.  30. — And  it  came  to  pass  (literally, 
and  it  was),  as  soon  as  Isaac  had  made  an 
end  of  blessing  Jacob,  and  Jacob  was  yet 
scarce  gone  out — literally,  and  it  was  (sc. 
as  soon  as,  or  when)  Jacob  only  going  forth 
had  gone  ;  i.  e.  had  just  gone  out  (Ewald, 
Keil),' rather  than  was  in  the  act  of  coming 
out  (Murphy),  since  the  narrative  implies 
that  the  brothers  did  not  meet  on  this  oc- 
casion— from  the  presenceof  Isaac  bis  fa- 
ther, that  (literally,  and)  Esau  his  brother 
came  in  from  his  hunting. 

Ver.  31. — And  he  also  had  made  savoury 
meat  (vide  ver.  4),  and  brought  it  unto 
his  father  and  said  unto  him,  Let  my 
father  arise,  and  eat  of  his  son's  venison — 
compared  with  Jacob's  exhortation  to  his 
aged  parent  (ver.  19),  the  language  of  Esau 
has,  if  anything,  more  affection  in  its 
tones — that  thy  soul  may  bless  me.  Esau 
was  at  this  time  a  man  of  mature  age, 
being  either  fifty-seven  or  seventy-seven 
years  old,  and  must  have  been  acquainted 
with  the  heavenly  oracle  (ch.  xxv.  23)  that 
assigned  the  precedence  in  the  theocratic 
line  to  Jacob.  Either,  therefore,  he  must 
have  supposed  that  his  claim  to  the  bless- 
ing was  not  thereby  affected,  or  he  was 
guilty  of  conniving  at  Isaac's  scheme  for 


resisting  the  divine  will.  Indignatidn  at 
Jacob's  duplicity  and  baseness,  combined 
with  sympathy  for  Esau  in  his  supposed 
wrongs,  sometimes  prevents  a  just  appre- 
ciation of  the  exact  position  occupied  by 
the  latter  in  this  extraordinary  transaction. 
Instead  of  branding  Jacob  as  a  shamejess 
deceiver,  and  hurling  against  his  fairfame 
the  most  opprobrious  epithets,  may  it  not 
be  that,  remembering  tbe  previously-ex- 
pressed will  of  heaven,  the  real  supplanter 
was  Esau,  who  as  an  accomplice  of  his 
father  was  seeking  secretly,  unlawfully, 
and  feloniously  to  appro  i  riate  to  himself 
a  blessing  which  had  air,  ady  been,  not 
obscurely,  designated  as  Jacob's?  On 
this  hypothesis  the  miserable  craft  of 
Jacob  and  Rebekah  was  a  lighter  crime 
than  that  of  Isaac  and  Esau. 

Ver.  32. — And  Isaac  his  father  said  unto 
him,  Who  art  thou  1  The  language  indi- 
cates the  patriarch's  surprise.  And  he 
said,  I  am  thy  son,  thy  firitborn  Esau.  The 
emphatic  tone  of  Esau's  answer  may  have 
been  dictated  by  »  suspicion,  already 
awakened  by  Isaac's  question,  that  all  was 
not  right  (Inglis).  Esau's  claim  to  be  re- 
garded as  Isaac's  firstborn,  after  having 
bartered  away  his  birthright,  is  considered 


CH.  xxvii  30    40.  J 


THE   BOOK   OF   GENESIS. 


341 


by  some  to  be  unwarranted  (Words worth); 
but  it  is  doubtful  if  Esau  attached  the 
importance  to  the  term  "  firstborn"  which 
this  objection  presupposes. 

Ver.  33. — And  Isaac  trembled  very  ex- 
ceedingly,— literally,  feared  a  great  fear, 
to  a  great  degree ;  shuddered  in  great 
-  terror  above  measure  (Lange).  The  ren- 
derings £jj&rn)  Se'IcroaK  tKirrairiv  [i.(ya\ii\v 
<r<t>oSpa  LXX.),  Expaeit  stupore,  et  ultra 
quam  credi  potest  admirans  (Vulgate), 
"wondered  with (  an  exceedingly  great 
admiration "  (Onkelos),  emphasise  the 
patriarch's  astonishment,  the  first  even 
suggesting  the  idea  of  a  trance  or  super- 
natural elevation  of  the  ]  rophetic  con- 
sciousness (Augustine) ;  whereas  that 
which  is  depicted  is  rather  the  alarm  pro- 
duced within  the  patriarch's  breast,  not  so 
much  by  the  discovery  that  his  plan  had 
been  defeated  by  a  woman's  wit  and  a 
son's  craft — these  would  have  kindled  in- 
dignation rather  than  fear — as  by  the 
awakenin  >■  conviction  not  that  he  had 
blessed,  but  that  he  had  been  seeking  to 
bless,  the  wrong  person  (Calvin,  Willet) — - 
and  said,  Who  T  where  is  he — qiiis  est  et  ubi 
est  ?  (Jarchi) ;  but  rather,  who  then  is  he  ? 
(Rosenmuller,  Kalisch,  Lange) — that  hath 
taken  ven'son, — literally,  the  one  hunting 
prey  =  that  hunted,  or  has  hunted,  the 
part  having  the  force  of  a  perfect  ivide 
Ewald's  'Heb.  Syn.,'  §  335J— and  brought 
it  me,  and  I  have  eaten  of  all  before  thou 
earnest,  and  have  blessed  him?  yea,  and  he 
shall  be  blessed — thus  before  Jacob  is 
named  he  pronounces  the  Divine  sentence 
that  the  blessing  is  irrevocable  (Lange). 

Ver.  34. — And  when  Esiu  heard  the 
words  of  his  father,  he  cried  with  a  great 
and  exceeding  bitter  cry — literally,  he  cried 
aery,  great  rinJ  bitter  exceedingly ;  ex- 
pressive of  the  poignant  anguish  of  his 
soul  (Kalisch,  Bush),  if  not  also  of  his 
rage  against  his  brother  (Philo,  Eusebius), 
of  his  envy  of  the  blessing  (Menochius, 
Lapide),  and  of  the  desperation  of  his 
spirit  (Calvin).  Cf .  Heb.  xii.  17 — and  said 
unto  his  father,  Bless  me,  even  me  also,  0 
my  father.  A  proof  of  Esau's  blind  in- 
credulity in  imagining  it  to  be  within  his 
father's  power  to  impart  benedictions 
promiscuously  without  and  beyond  the 
Divine  sanction  (Calvin)  ;  a  sign  that  he 
supposed  the  theocratic  blessing  capable 
of  division,  and  as  dependent  upon  his 
lamentations  and  prayers  as  upon  the 
caprice  of  his  father  (Lange)  ;  an  evidence 
that  ' '  now  at  last  he  had  learned  in  some 
measure  adequately  to  value "  the  birth- 
right (Candlish)  ;  but  if  so  it  was  post 
horam. 

Ver.  35.— And  he  (i  e.  Isaac)  said,  Thy 
brother  oame  with  subtilty, — with  wis- 


dom (Onkelos)  ;  rather  with  fraud,  furd 
SdXov  (LXX.) — and  hath  taken  away  thy 
blessing — i.  e.  the  blessing  which  I 
thought  was  thine,  since  Isaac  now  under- 
stood that  from  the  first  it  had  been  de- 
signed for  Jacob. 

Ver.  36. — And  he  (Esau)  said,  Is  he  not 
rightly  named  Jacob  1 — literally,  is  it  that' 
one  has  called  his  name  Jacob  ?  ""Pl}  being; 
employed  when  the  reason  is  unknown 
(vide  Ewald,  '  Heb.  Synt.'  §324).  On  the 
meaning  of  Jacob  cf.  ch.  xxv.  26— for 
(literally,  and)  he  hath  supplanted  me  (a 
paronomasia  on  the  word  Jacob)  these  two 
times— or  already  twice  ;  t"IT  being  used 
adverbially  in  the  sense  of  now  (Gesenius, 
'Grammar,' §  122).  The  precise  import 
of  Esau's  exclamation  has  been  rendered, 
"  Has  he  not  been  justly  (SikoUos,  LXX.  ; 
juste,  Vulgate ;  rightly,  A.  V.)  named 
Supplanter  from  supplanting?"  (Rosen- 
miiller).  "Is  it  because  he  was  named 
Jacob  that  he  hath  now  twice  supplanted 
me  t"  (Ainswonh,  Bush).  "  Has  he  re- 
ceived the  name  Jacob  from  the  fact  that 
he  has  twice  outwitted  me?"  (Keil). 
"  Shall  he  get  the  advantage  of  me  be- 
cause he  was  thus  inadvertently  named 
Jacob?"  (Lange).  "Has  in  truth  his 
name  been  called  Jacob  1"  (Kalisch).  All 
agree  in  bringing  out  that  Esau  designed 
to  indicate  a  correspondence  between 
Jacob's  name  and  Jacob's  practice.  He 
took  away  my  birthright  ; — this  was 
scarcely  correct,  since  Esau  voluntarily 
sold  it  (ch.  xxv.  33) — and,  behold,  now  he 
hath  taken  away  my  blessing.  Neither 
was  this  exactly  accurate,  since  the  bless- 
ing did  not  originally  belong  to  Esau, 
however  he  mayhave  imaginedtbat  it  did. 
And  he  said,  Hast  thou  not  reserved  a  bless- 
ing for  me  ?  The  question  indicates  that 
Esau  had  no  proper  conception  of  the 
spiritual  character  of  the  blessing  which 
his  brother  had  obtained. 

Ver.  37.— And  Isaac  answered  and  said 
unto  Esau  (repeating  the  substance  of  the 
blessing  already  conferred  on  Jacob), 
Behold,  Ihave  made  him  thy  lord, — literally. 
behold,  a  lord  (vide  on  ver.  29)  have  Icon- 
stituted  him  to  thee  ;  Isaac  hereby  intimat- 
ing that  in  pronouncing  the  words  of 
blessing  he  had  been  speaking  under  a 
celestial  impulse,  and  therefore  with  abso- 
lute authority — and  all  his  brethren  have 
I  given  to  him  for  servants  (for  the  fulfil- 
ment vide  2  Sam.  viii.  14),  and  with  corn 
and  wine  have  I  sustained  him  :  i.  e.  de- 
clared that  by  these  he  shall  be  sustained 
or  supported  (cf .  ver.  28)— and  what  shall 
I  do  now  unto  thee,  my  son  t 

Ver  38.— And  Esau  said  unto  his  father, 
Hast  thou  but  one  blessing,  my  father  i 


342 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


[ch.  sxvii.  30—40. 


Not  as  desiring  either  the  reversal  of  the 
patriarchal  sentence  upon  Jacob,  which 
he  appears  to  have  understood  to  be  irre- 
vocable, or  an  extension  of  its  gracious 
provisions,  so  as  to  include  him  as  well  as 
Jacob ;  but  as  soliciting  such  a  benedic- 
tion as  would  place  him,  at  least  in  respect 
of  temporalities,  on  a  level  with  the 
favourite  of  Rebekah,  either  because  he 
did  not  recognize  the  spiritual  character 
of  the  covenant  blessing,  or  because, 
though  recognizing  it,  he  was  willing  to 
let  it  go.  Bless  me,  even  me  also,  0  my 
father.  And  Esau  lifted  up  his  voice,  and 
wept  (cf.  Heb.  xii.  17).  "  Those  tearsex- 
pressed,  indeed,  sorrow  for  his  forfeiture, 
but  not  for  the  sinful  levity  by  which  it 
had  been  incurred.  They  were  ineffectual 
(i.  e.  they  did  not  lead  to  genuine  repent- 
ance) because  Esau  was  incapable  of  true 
repentance  "  (vide  Delitzsch  on  Heb.  xii. 
17). 

Ver.  39. — And  Isaac  his  father  (moved 
by  the  tearful  earnestness  of  Esau  an- 
swered and  said  unto  him, — still  speaking 
under  inspiration,  though  it  is  doubtful 
whether  what  he  spoke  was  a  real,  or  only 
an  apparent  blessing — (vide  infra) — Be- 
hold, thy  dwelling  shall  be  the  fatness  oft  e 
earth,  and  of  the  dew  of  heaven  from  above. 
Literally,  from  (T?)  the  fatnesses  (or 
fat  places)  of  the  earth,  and  from  the  dew 
of  lieamn  ;  a  substantial  repetition  of  the 
temporal  blessing  bestowed  on  Jacob  (ver. 
28),  with  certain  important  variations, 
such  as  the  omission  of  plenty  corn  and 
wine  at  the  close,  and  of  the  name  of 
Elohim  at  the  commencement,  of  the 
benediction  (Vulgate,  Luther,  Calvin, 
Ainsworth,  Roseninaller,  '  Speaker's 
Commentary ') ;  though,  by  assigning  to 
the  preposition  a  privative  rather  than  a 
partitive  sense,  it  is  readily  transformed 
into  a  "modified  curse"- — behold,  away 
from  the  fatnesses  of  the  earth,  &c,  shall 
thy  dwelling  he,  meaning  that,  in  contrast 
to  the  land  of  Canaan,  the  descendants  of 
Esau  should  be  located  in  a  sterile  region 
(Tuch,  Knobel,  Kurtz,  Delitzsch,  Keil, 
Kalisch,  Murphy).  In  support  of  this 
latter  rendering  it  is  urged  (1)  that  it  is 
grammatically  admissible  ;  (2)  that  it  cor- 
responds with  the  present  aspect  of 
Idumaea,  which  "  is  on  the  whole  a  dreary 


and  unproductiveiand  ;"  (3)  that  it  agrees 
with  the  preceding  statement  that  every 
blessing  had  already  been  bestowed  upon 
Jacob  ;  and  (4)  that  it  explains  the  play 
upon  the  words  "fatness"  and  "dew," 
which  are  here  chosen  to  describe  a  state 
of  matters  exactly  the  opposite  to  that 
which  was  declared  to  be  the  lot  of  Jacob. 
On  the  other  hand,  it  is  felt  to  be  some- 
what arbitrary  to  assign  to  the  preposition 
a  partitive  sense  in  ver.  28  and  a  privative 
in  ver.  39.  Though  called  in  later  times 
(Mai.  i.  3)  a  waste  and  desolate  region,  it 
may  not  have  been  originally  so,  or  only 
in  comparison  with  Canaan  ;  while  accord- 
ing to  modern  travellers  the  glens  and 
mountain  terraces  of  Edom,  covered  with 
rich  soil,  only  want  an  industrious  popula- 
tion to  convert  the  entire  region  into 
"  one  of  the  wealthiest,  as  it  is  one  of  the 
most  picturesque,  countries  in  the  world." 
Ter.  40. — And  by  thy  sword  shalt  thou 
live,— literally,  upon  thy  sword  shalt  tlwu 
be,  i.  e.  thy  njaintenance  shall  depend  on 
thy  sword ;  a  prediction  that  Esau's  de- 
scendants should  be  a  warlike  and 
tumultuous  people  of  predatory  habits 
(cf.  Joseph  us,  B.  I.,  iv.  4) — and  shalt 
serve  thy  brother;— a  prediction  after- 
wards fulfilled  (cf.  1  Sam.  xiv.  47  ;  2  Sam. 
viii.  14  ;  1  Kings  xi.  16  ;  2  Kings  xiv.  7 
—10  ;  2  Cbron.  xx.  22— 25)— and  it  shall 
come  to  pass  when  thou  shalt  have  the 
dominion  that  thou  shalt  break  his  yoke 
from  off  thy  neck.  The  verb  -jifj,  used  of 
beasts  which  have  broken  the  yoke  and 
wander  freely  about  (Gesenius,  Fiirst), 
appears  to  hint  at  an  incessant  restless- 
ness on  the  part  of  Edom  while  under 
Israel's  yoke  which  should  eventually 
terminate  in  regaining  their  independence. 
The  exact  rendering  of  the  clause  is  ob- 
scure, but  perhaps  means  that  when  Edom 
should  roam  about  as  a  freebooter  (Lange) , 
or  should  revolt  (Alford),  or  should  toss, 
shake,  or  struggle  against  the  yoke  (Vul- 
gate, Keil,  Hengstenberg,  '  Speaker's  Com- 
mentary '),  he  should  succeed.  Other  ren- 
derings are,  when  thou  shalt  bear  rule 
(Kimchi),  when  thou  shalt  repent ;Jarchi), 
when  thou  shalt  be  strong  (Samaritan), 
when  thou  prevailest  (Murphy),  when 
thou  shalt  truly  desire  it  (Kalisch),  when 
thou  shalt  pull  down  (LXX.) ;  because 
thou  art  restless  (Havernick). 


HOMILETICS. 
Verc  30— 40 >.— The  stolen  blessing;  a  domestic  drama  —3.  Isaac  and  Esau  or 
the  hunUrs  lamentation.  I  Isaac's  startling  discovery.  1.  Unexpectedly 
made.  The  return  of  Esau  from,  the  hunting. field  with  a  dish  of  venison  was  i 
sudden  and  most  unpleasant  revelation  to  the  aged  patriarch,  showing  that  in  some 
inexplicable  manner  he  had  been  out-manoeuvred,  and,  as  it  were,  constrained  against 
his  will  to  bestow  the  blessing  upon  Jacob.     So  in  common  life  it  is  not  unfreqiiently 


(M.  xxvii.  30-40.]  THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS.  M 

seen  that  the  unexpected  is  that  which  happens,  that  wicked  schemes'prove  abortive, 
that  the  deceiver  is  himself  deceived — "  the  engineer  hoist  on  his  own  petard," — and 
that  men  are  often  made  the  involuntary  and  unconscious  instruments  of  furthering 
the  will  of  Heaven.  2.  Tremblingly  received.  Apprehending  what  had  taken  place, 
the  blind  old  invalid  "feared  a  great  fear  exceedingly,"  saddened  with  an  inward 
horror,  not  through  disappointment  at  the  failure  of  his  scheme,  or  indignation  at 
the  wicked  craft  and  heartless  duplicity  of  Rebekah's  favourite,  but  alarm  at  his  own 
sinful  intention  which  God  had  thus  manifestly  seen  and  thwarted.  It  is  well  when 
the  soul  trembles  at  a  discovery  of  its  own  wickedness.  Gracious  souls  dread  noth- 
ing more  than  standing  on  the  verge  of  sin  3.  Pathetically  acknowledged.  "  Thy 
brother  came  with  subtilty,  and  hath  taken  away  thy  blessing;"  and,  "I  have 
blessed  him:  yea,  and  he  shall  be  blessed."  It  becomes  parents  to  commiserate 
their  children's  misfortunes,  and  especially  to  sorrow  if  they  miss  the  blessings  of 
salvation.  They  who  lack  these,  even  when  they  do  not  wish  to  obtain  them,  are 
objects  of  profoundest  pity.  4.  Meekly  acquiesced  in.  Recognizing  the  hand  of 
God  in  the  remarkable  transaction  in  which  he  had  been  an  actor,  with  true  humility 
and  faith  the  venerable  patriarch  bowed  before  the  will  of  the  Supreme.  Neither 
Esau's  prayers  and  tears,  nor  his  own  paternal  affections,  could  stimulate  so  much 
as  a  wiish  to  undo  what  had  hem  done.  To  a  truly  pious  heart  the  will  of  God  is 
final.    "  Thy  will  be  done  '  is  the  language  of  faith. 

II.  Esau's  singular  behaviour.  1.  His  bitter  lamentation  for  himself.  Esau's 
"  great  and  exceeding  bitter  cry  "  was  expressive  not  of  heartfelt  grief  for  his  sinful 
levity  in  parting  with  the  birthright,  or  guileful  behaviour  in  attempting  to  secure 
the  blessing ;  but  (1)  of  deep  mortification  at  being  over-reached  by  his  crafty 
brother ;  (2)  of  remorseful  chagrin  at  not  recovering  the  blessing  he  had  practically 
surrendered  in  the  sale  of  the  birthiight;  (3)  of  earnest  desire  to  induce  Isaac  to 


;  rightly  i 

Jacob  ?  for  he  hath  supplanted  me  these  two  times."  A  statement  not  quite  accurate  ; 
but  angry  men  are  seldom  remarkable  for  accuracy  of  statement ;  a  statement  also 
expressive  of  hatred  against  Jacob,  and  incensed  brothers  often  call  each  other  bad 
names.  Good  men  should  be  angry  and  sin  not.  Indignation,  even  when  righteous, 
should  be  restrained.  3.  His  tearful  request  to  his  father.  "  Bless  me,  me  also,  6 
my  father! "  Having  lost  the  blessing  of  the  covenant,  he  was  still  desirous  of  pos- 
sessing some  sort  of  blessing.  Wicked  men  often  covet  the  material  advantages  of 
religion  who  have  no  desire  to  share  in  its  spiritual  enrichments. 

III.  Isaac's  solemn  declaration.  1.  Of  Esau's  subjection  to  Jacob.  "Behold,  I 
have  made  him  thy  lord. '  A  prediction  of  (1)  political  subordination,  afterwards 
fulfilled  in  the  conquests  of  Israel ;  and  (2)  of  possible  salvation  to  Esau  and  his 
descendants  through  believing  recognition  of  the  spiritual  ascendency  of  Jacob  and 
his  seed.  2.  Of  Esau's  portion  from  God.  (1)  A  fat  soil.  God  appoints  to  all  men, 
individuals  and  nations,  the  bounds  of  their  habitation.  Inhabitants  of  fertile 
regions  have  a  special  call  to  thankfulness.  (2)  A  roving  life.  Though  the  warlike 
character  of  Esau's  descendants  was  of  God's  appointment  and  permission,  it  is  no 
just  inference  that  savage  tribes  a  e  as  useful  as  those  of  settled  and  improved  habits, 
or  that  God  does  not  desire  the  diffusion  of  civilisation  and  the  elevation  of  the  race! 
(3)  Ultimate  independence.  Though  some  nations  have  been  placed  in  subjection' 
it  is  God  s  will  that  all  should  aspire  to  freedom.  Revolt,  rebellion,  insurrection  are 
sometimes  a  people's  highest  duty. 

Lessons :— I.  The  blessing  of  the  covenant  is  not  of  him  that  willeth  or  of  him 
that  runneth,  but  of  God  that  showeth  mercy.  2.  Those  who  despise  God's  salvation 
in  youth  cannot  always  obtain  it  in  manhood  or  age.  3.  Those  who  finally  come 
short  of  eternal  life  will  have  no  one  to  blame  but  themselves.  4.  No  one  need  sue 
in  vain  for  Heaven's  favour,  since  the  blessing  is  not  now  for  one,  but  for  all.  5. 
There  is  a  difference  between  penitence  and  remorse.  6.  Though  no  man  can  hope 
to  change  the  mind  of  God,  it  is  within  the  power  of  all  men  to  desire  and  to  effect  a 
change  upon  their  own  hearts.  7.  The  prediction  of  a  nation's  or  a  person's  future 
does  not  interfere  with  the  free  operation  of  the  human  will, 


"U4  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  [ch.  xxvu.  30—40. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  33. — Jacob's  deceit.  Esau  supplanted.  In,  this  familiar  narrative  the  follow- 
ing points  may  be  distinguished  : — 

I.  Isaac's  error— connecting  a  solemn  blessing  with  mere  gratification  of  the 
senses,  neglect  of  the  Divine  word,  favouritism  towards  the  son  less  worthy. 

II.  Jacob's  stjbtilty  and  selfishness.  The  birthright  had  been  sold  to  him  ;  he 
might  have  obtained  the  blessing  by  fair  agreement.  His  fear  of  Esau  lay  at  the 
root  of  his  deceit.  One  sin  leads  on  to  another.  Those  who  entangle  themselves 
with  the  world  are  involved  more  and  more  in  moral  evil. 

III.  Rebekah's  affection  was  perverted  into  unmotherly  partiality  and  unwifely 
treachery  to  Isaac.     The  son's  guilt  rested  much  on  the  mother's  shoulders,  for  she 
laid  the  plot  and  prepared  the  execution  of  it.    All  were  sad  examples  of  self-  ■ 
assertion  destroying  the  simplicity  of  failh.     And  yet — 

IV.  The  covenant  God  over-rules  the  weakness  and  error  of  his  people.  The 
blessing  was  appointed  for  Jacob.  Although  pronounced  by  an  instrument  blind, 
foolis.i,  sinful,  deceived,  it  yet  is  the  blessing,  which,  having  been  lodged  in  Isaac, 
must  pass  on  to  the  true  heir  of  Isaac,  who,  according  to  the  promise  and  prediction, 
is  Jacob 

V.  The  lower  character  and  standing  of  Esau  and  his  inferior  blessing  i  epresents 
the  distinction  between  the  chosiiN  people  and  those  who,  whilb  not  included 
in  the  commonwealth  of  Israel,  may  yet  by  connection  and  intercourse  with  it 
derive  some  portion  of  the  Divine  benediction  from  it.  Both  in  pre-Christian  and 
Christian  times  there  have  been  nations  thus  situated. 

VI.  The  late  repentance  of  the  supplanted  Esau.  He  found  no  pofsibili  j  of 
averting  the  consequences  of  his  own  error  (Heb.  xii.  17).  no  place  where  repentance 
would  avail  to  re(  over  that  v,  hich  was  lost.  The  "  great  and  exceeding  bitter  cry  " 
only  reveals  the  shame,  the  bles  ing  taken  away.  Those  who,  lik  Esau,  despise 
their  place  in  the  family  of  God  are  driven  out  into  the  fierce  oppoit'on  of  the  world ; 
"  by  iheir  sword  "  they  mu  t  live  and  "  serve  their  brethren." 

VII.  The  end  of  deceit  is  hatred,  passion,  fear,  flight,  individual  and  amily 
disorder  and  suffering.  Yet  fignin  the  merciful  baud  interposes  to  over-rule  the 
errors  of  man.  Jacob's  flight  from  Esau's  hatred  is  his  preservation  from  ungodly 
alliance  with  heathen  neighbours,  and  the  commencement  of  a  wholesome  course  of 
discipline  by  which  his  character  was  purged  of  much  of  its  evil,  and  his  faith  deep- 
ened and  developed.— R. 

Ver.  36. —  Unfaithfulness  in  believers.  " Is  not  he  rightly  named  Jacob ?  "  Jacob, 
Isael— how  widely  different  the  thoughts  suggested  by  the  two  names.  Both 
tell  of  success.  But  one  is  the  man  of  craft,  who  takes  by  the  heel  lo  trip  up. 
The  other,  as  a  prince  of  God  (cf.  Luke  i.  15),  prevails  through  believing  prayer. 
Yet  Jacob  became  Israel,  and  Israel  had  once  been  Jacob.  1  he  plant  of  faith 
has  often  to  struggle  t'  rough  a  hard  soil.  To  understand  the  lessons  of  his  life, 
remember — 1.  In  contrast  to  Esnu,  he  was  a  man  of  faith.  His  desire  was  for  a 
future  and  spiritual  blessing  He  believed  that  it  was  to  be  his,  and  that  belief 
infiueured  his  life.  But— 2.  His  faith  was  imperfect  atd  partial  in  its  operation, 
and  this  led  to  inconsistencies  (cf.  Matt.  xiv.  29,  30  ;  Gal.  ii.  1;).  Naturally  quiet, 
his  life  was  passed  chiefly  at  home.  Godly  influence-  undisturbed  by  oulwird  life 
tnuglithim  to  worship  God,  and  to  prize  his  promise.  But  he  had  not  proved  his 
arm  ur  (cf.  1  Cor.  x.  121 ;  and,  as  often  happens  th  •  object  of  his  faith  was  the 
means  of  his  trial.  His  fatt.er's  purpose  in  favor  of  Esau  shook  Irs  faith  (cf.  1  Pit. 
iv.  18).  He  yielded  to  the  suggestion  to  obtain  by  deceit  what  God  had  p  omised 
to  give  (Isa.  lix.  1)  and  earned  his  brother's  taunt,  "Is  not  he  rightly  named 
Jacob  ?  "  Yet  it  does  not  appear  that  he  was  conscious  of  having  failed  in  faith. 
Consider — 

I.  The  danger  of  self-deceiving  (cf.  Ezek.  xiii.  10)  One  brought  up  among 
godly  influenc  s  may  seem  to  possess  fa:th.  Ways  of  faith,  hopes  of  faith  may  be 
familiar  t •>  him.  He  may  really  embrace  them,  really  desire  a  spiritual  prize  But 
not  without  cause  are  we  warned  (1  Cor.  x.  12)  Some  plan  of  worldly  wisdom 
some  point  of  self -seeking  or  self-indulgence,  attracts  him;  only  a  little  way;  not  into 


ch.  xxtii.  41 — 46.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


345 


anything  distinc  ly  wrong  Or  he  falls  into  indolent  self-sufficiency.  Then  there  is 
a  shrinking  from  close  walk  with  God.  Formality  takes  t:;e  place  of  coutidence. 
All  may  seem  outwardly  well  ;  but  other  powers  than  God's  will  are  at  work  within. 
Aiid  if  now  som"  more  searching  trial  is  sent,  some  more  distinct  choice  between 
God  and  the  world,  a  self-satisfying  plea  is  easiy  found.  And  tha  self-deceit  which 
led  to  the  fall  makes  it  unfelt.  And  the  path  is  lighted,  but  not  from  God  (Isa.  1. 
11). 

II.  The  harm  done  to  others  by  unfaithfulness  op  christians  (cf.  Rom. 
ii.  24 ;  xiv.  16).  The  world  is  quick  to  mark  inconsistencies  of  believers.  They 
form  an  excuse  for  the  careless,  a  plea  for  disbelieving  the  reality  of  holiness.  And 
for  weak  Christians  they  throw  the  influence  of  example  on  the  wrong  side  (cf.  1 
Cor.  viii.  9).  Deeds  have  more  power  than  words  ;  and  the  course  of  a  life  may  be 
turned  by  some  thoughtless  yielding.  Nor  can  the  harm  be  undone  even  by  repent- 
ance. The  failure  is  visible,  the  contrition  and  seeking  pardon  arc  secret.  The  sins 
of  good  men  are  eagerly  retailed.  The  earnest  supplication  for  pardon  and  restoration 
are  known  to  few,  and  little  cared  for.  The  man  himself  may  be  forgiven,  and  rise 
stronger  from  his  fall  ;  but  the  poison  in  the  soul  of  another  is  still  doing  its  deadly 
work. 

III.  The  way  of  safety.  Realise  the  living  Christ  (Ephes.  iii.  17).  Rules  of 
themselves  can  do  little  ;  but  to  know  the  love  of  Christ,  to  bear  it  in  mind,  is 
power. — M. 


EXPOSITION. 


Ver.  41. — AndEsauhated  Jacob — a  proof 
that'he  was  not  penitent,  however  disap- 
pointed and  remorseful  (cf.  Obad.  10,  11; 
1  John  iii.  12, 15) — because  of  the  blessing 
wherewith  his  father  ble  sed  him  : — not- 
withstanding the  fact  that  he  too  had  re- 
ceivedanappropriatebenediction~;adisplay 
of  envy  as  well  as  wrath,  another  proof  of 
his  ungracious  character  (Gal.  v.  31 ;  James 
iv.  5)— and  Esau  said  in  his  heart, — i.  e. 
secretly  resolved,  though  afterwards  he 
nausthavecomniunicatedhisintention(OT<2e 
ver  42)— Thedays  ofmcurning  for  my  father 
are  at  hand.  The  LXX.  interpret  as  a  wish 
onthepartof  Esau  that  Isaac mightspeedily 
die,  in  order  that  the  fratricidal  act  he  con- 
templated might  not  pain  the  old  man's 
heart;  another  rendering  (Kalisch)  under- 
stands him  to  say  that  days  of  grief  werein 
store  for  his  father;  as  he  meant  to  slay  his 
brother;  but  the  ordinary  translation  seems 
preferable  (Rosenmtlller,  Keil,  Murphy,  et 
alii),  that  Esau  only  deferred  the  execution 
of  his  unholy  purpose  because  of  the  near 
approach,  as  he  imagined,  of  his  father's 
death.  Isaac,  however,  lived  upwards  of 
forty  years  after  this.  Then  will  I  slay  my 
brother  Jacob.  That  which  reconciledlsaac 
and  Ishmael  (ch.  xxv.  9),  the  death  of  a 
father,  is  herementionedasthe  event  which 
would  decisively  and  finally  part  Esau  and 
Jacob.  Esau's  murderous  intention  Calvin 
regards  as  a  clear  proof  of  the  non -reality  of 
his  repentance  for  his  sin.theinsincerityof 
his  sorrow  for  his  father,  and  the  intense 
malignity  of  his  hate  against  his  brother. 

Ver.  4*2. — And  these  (literally,  the)  words 
of  Esau  her  elder  son  were  to  d  to  Rebekah: 
— not  likely  byrevelation(Augustine),  but 
by  some  one  to  whom  he  had  made  known 


hissecretpurpose(Prov.  xxix.  11) — andshe 
sent  and  called  Jacob  her  younger  son  (to 
advise  him  of  his  danger,  being  apprehen- 
sive lest  the  passionate  soul  of  the  enraged 
hunter  should  find  it  difficult  to  delay  till 
Isaac's  death),  and  said  unto  him,  Behold, 
thy  brother  Esau,  as  touching  thee  doth  com- 
fort himself,  purposing  to  kill  thee.  Liter- 
ally, behold  thy  brother  Esau  taking  venge- 
ance upon  thee  (the  hithpael  of  ETO  mean- 
ing properly  to  comfort  oneself,  hence  to 
satisfy  one's  feeling  of  revenge)  by  killing 
thee.  The  translations  onrciXel  (LXX.)  and 
minatur  (Vulgate),  besides  being  inaccu- 
rate, are  too  feeble  to  express  the  fratri- 
cidal purpose  of  Esau. 

Vers.  43—45 — N.w  therefore,  my  son, 
obsy  my  voice  ; — i.e.  be  guided  by  my 
counsel;  a  request  Rebekah  might  perhaps 
feel  herself  justified  in  making,  not  only 
by  her  maternal  solicitude  for  Jacob's  wel- 
fare, but  also  from  the  successful  issue  of 
her  previous  strategem  (vide  on  ver.  8) — 
and  arise,  flee  thou — literally,  flee  for  thy- 
self (cf.  ch.xii.  1;  Numb.  xxiv.  11;  Amos 
vii.  12) — to  Laban  my  brother  toHaran  {vide 
ch.  xi.  31;  xxiv.  29);  and  tarry  with  him 
a  few  days, — literally,  days  some.  The 
few  days  eventually  proved  to  be  at  least 
twenty  years  (vide  ch.  xxxi.  38).  It  is  not 
probable  that  Rebekah  ever  again  beheld 
herfavourite  son ,  which  was  a  signal  chas- 
tisement for  her  sinful  ambition,  for  and 
partiality  towards,  Jacob — until  thy  broth- 
er's fury  turn  away;  until  thy  brother's  anger 
turn  away  from  thee.  The  rage  of  Esau  is 
here  described  by  two  different  words,  the 
first  of  which,  *""jD,  from  a  root  signify- 
ing to  be  warm,  suggests  the  heatedand  is 


346 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xXvti  4!— 46. 


flamed  condition  of  Esau's  soul,  while  the 
second,  S]S,  from^??,  to  breathe  through 
the  nostrils,  depicts  the  visible  manifes- 
tations of  that  internal  fire  in  hard  and 
quick  breathing — and  he  forget  that  which 
thou  hast  done  to  him.  Rebekah  appar- 
ently had  conveniently  become  oblivious 
of  her  own  share  in  the  transaction  by 
which  Esau  had  been  wronged.  Then 
will  I  send  and  fetch  the  i  from  thence — 
which  she  never  did — Man  proposes,  but 
God  disposes.  Why  should  I  be  deprived  also 
of  you  both  in  one  day  T  I.e.  of  Jacob  by 
the  hand  of  Esau,  and  of  Esau  by  the  hand 
of  the  avenger  of  blood  (ch.  ix.  6;  cf  2 
Sam.  xiv.  6,  7;Calvin,  Keil,  Eosenmiiller, 
Kalisch),  rather  than  by  his  own  fratrici- 
dal act,  which  would  for  ever  part  him 
from  Rebekah  (Lange). 

Yer.  46. — And   Rebekah   said  to  Isaac 
(perhaps  already  discerning  in  the  contem- 


plated flight  to  Haran  the  prospect  of  a 
suitable  matrimonial  alliance  for  the  heir 
of  the  promise,  and  secretly  desiring  to 
suggest  such  a  thought  to  her  aged  hus- 
band), I  am  weary  of  my  life  because  of  the 
daughters  of  Heth: — referring  doubtless  to 
Esau's  wives  (cf,.  ch.  xxvi.  35) — if  Jacob 
take  ajwife  of  the  daughters  of  Heth,  such  as 
these  which  are  of  the  daughters  of  the  land, 
what  good  shall  my  life  do  me  ?  Literally, 
for  what  to  me  life,  i.  e.  what  happiness 
can  I  have  in  living  f  It  is  impossible  to 
exonerate  Rebekah  altogether  from  a, 
charge  of  duplictty  even  in  this.  Unques- 
tionably Esau  s  wives  may  have  vexed  her, 
and  her  faith  may  have  perceived  that 
Jacob's  wife  must  be  sought  for  amongst 
their  own  kindred  ;  but  her  secret  reason 
for  sending  Jacob  to  Haran  was  not  to 
seek  a  wife,  as  she  seems  to  have  desired 
Isaac  to  believe,  but  to  elude  the  fury  of 
his  incensed  brother. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  41 — 46. — The  stolen  blessing :  a  domestic  drama. — Rebekah  and  Esau,  or 
fratricide  frustrated.  I.  The  murderous  design  of  Esau.  1.  The  ostensible  reason. 
"  Because  of  the  blessing  wherewith  his  father  had  blessed  Jacob."  No  argument 
cau  justify  wilful  and  deliberate  homicide  ;  least  of  all  an  excuse  so  lame  and  feeble 
as  that  of  Esau.  The  blessing  Jacob  had  obtained  was  one  which  he  himself  had 
formerly  despised  and  practically  sold.  If  Jacob  had  been  guilty  of  stealing  it  from 
him ,  as  he  imagined,  it  was  only  what  he  had  been  attempting  to  do  with  reference 
to  Jncob.  Besides,  iu  so'  far  as  the  blessing  was  an  object  of  desire  to  Esau,  viz., 
for  its  material  advantages,  he  had  himself  received  a  blessing  not  greatly  dissimilar. 
There  was  therefore  no  sufficient  cause  for  Esau's  hostility  towards  his  brother. 

2.  The  impelling  motive.  "Hate" — the  essential  spirit  of  murder  (Matt.  v.  22; 
1  John  iii.  15).  Esau's  causeless  hatred  of  Jacob  was  typical  of  the  world's  enmity 
against  the  Church  :  in  its  ground,  the  Church's  enjoyment  of  the  blessing  ;  in  its 
spirit,  bitter  and  implacable  ;  in  its  manifestation,  persecution  and  oppression 
(1  John  iii.  13).  3.  The  decorous,  restraint.  "The  days  of  mourniug  for  my 
father  are  at  hand  ;  then  will  I  slay  my  brother."  Wicked  men  who  resist  all 
the  influences  of  piety  are  not  always  able  to  surmount  the  barriers  of  public 
opinion.  Though  Esau  had  no  scruples  on  the  score  of  conscience  as  to  killing 
Jacob,  he  had  some  scruples  on  the  ground  of  decency  as  to  doing  it  while  his 
father  liv«d.  Persons  who  have  no  religion  not  unfrequently  do  homage  to  the  ap- 
pearance of  religion.  4.  The  providential  discovery.  Though  Esau  originally  resolved 
on  Jacob's  murder  in  secret,  he  appears  to  have  inadvertently  disclosed  his  purpose 
to  another,  who  forthwith  communicated  his  intention  to  Rebekah.  Those  who  have 
secrets  to  keep  should  tell  them  to  no  one  ;  but  Divine  providence  has  wisely  and 
mercifully  arranged  that  guilty  secrets  should  be  ill  to  keep.  "  Murder  will  out." 
5.  The  inglorious  defeat.  The  information  brought  to  Rebekah  enabled  her  to 
counterwork  Esau's  design,  and  thus  a  second  time  was  Esau  outwitted  by  a  woman. 
It  is  obvious  that  some  some  sons  are  not  so  clever  as  their  mothers. 

II.  The  prudent  council'op  Rebekah.  1.  Easlily  formed.  The  shrewd  sagacity 
of  Isaac's  wife  at  once  perceived  an  outlet  from  the  snare.  The  woman's  wit  that 
had  cheated  Isaac  was  not  likely  to  be  baffled  with  blustering  Esau.  Calling  Jacob 
from  the  herds,  she  told  him  of  his  brother's  murderous  design,  and  detailed  her  own 
scheme  for  bis  protection.  2.  Clearly  explained.  He  should  immediately  betake 
himself  to  Haran,  and  seek  shelter  for  a  season  beside  his  Uncle  Laban  and  his 
cousins.  Though  Rebekah  does  not  mention  the  propriety  of  looking  for  a  wife,  it 
is  apparent  that  the  possibility  of  Jacob's  finding  one  was  present  to  her  thoughts. 

3.  Skilfully  urged.  Arguments  were  not  long  in  coming  to  Rebekah's  aid.  (1) 
His  brother's  anger  would  soon  burn  out.    (9)  His  absence  accordingly  would  not 


ch.  xxnti.  1—9.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


34? 


require  to  be  long.  (3)  If  he  did  not  go  he  was  certain  to  he  killed,  in  which  case 
Esau  would  fall  a  vicJm  to  judicial  retribution,  and  she,  a  heart-broken  mother, 
wou  d  be  deprived  of  both  her  sons  in  one  day.  (4)  She  was  his  mother,  and  her 
advice  should  be  received  with  filial  reverence  and  submission.  4.  Adroitly  carried 
through.  Securing  her  son's  compliance,  there  was  still  the  difficulty  how  to  obtain 
the  assent  of  Isaac.  This  she  does  by  leading  Isaac  himself  to  suggest  the  propriety 
of  Jacob's  going  north  to  Padan-aram  iu  search  of  a  wife  ;  and  to  this  she  turns 
the  thoughts  of  Is  iac  by  expressing  the  hope  that  Jacob  will  not  imitate  his  brother 
by  marying  daughters  of  the  land,  a  calamity,  she  informs  her  husband,  which 
would  render  her  already  miserable  life  scarcely  worth  retaining.  It  was  prudent 
in  Rebekah  to  direct  the  mind  of  Isaac  lo  the  propriety  of  getting  Jacob  married, 
but  there  is  not  wanting  a  trace  of  that  craftiness  which  was  Rebekah's  peculiar 
infirmity. 

Lea  u— 1.  That  the  world's  hostility  to  the  Church  is  wholly  unreasonable  and 
unjustifiable.  2.  That  wicked  devices  against  God's  people  are  sure  eventually  to 
be  overturned.  3.  That  bad  men  sometimes  wear  a  semblance  of  religion.  4.  That 
good  mothers  grieve  for  the  wickedness  of  bad,  and  work  for  the  safety  of  good, 
sons.  5.  That  while  wicked  matches  in  their  children  are  a  burden  to  gracious 
parents,  it  should  be  a  parent's  aim  to  secure  pious  wives  for  their  sons,  and  Chris- 
tian husbands  for  their  daughters. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  48.— Rebekah,  the  disappointed.  ' '  What  good  shall  my  life  do  me  ?  "  Rebekah 
as  a  mother  doubtless  promised  herself  much  joy  in  her  children.  They  grew  up. 
Esau  becomes  wayward,  Jacob  becomes  a  wanderer.  Rebekah  yielded  to  favourit- 
ism (ver.  13),  and  sehemed  to  carry  her  point.  She  cherished  a  treacherous  spirit, 
and  led  Jacob  to  sin.  She  was  ambitious  not  for  herseif,  but  for  Jacob.  Th's  is 
like  woman  ;  she  lives  in  others  She  was  reckless  as  to  results,  but  when  they  came 
she  found  them  bitter.  "  She  loved  Jacob  more  thin  truth,  more  than  God."  This 
was  idolatry.  No  wonder  she  utters  the  exclamation,  "What  good  shall  my  life  do 
me?"  She  was  a  disappointed  woman.  Her  favourite  son  was  in  hiding  from  the 
wrath  of  a  wronged  brother,  and  Esau  was  indifferent  towaids  her  and  angry.  If 
life  is  not  to  be  a  disappointment  we  must  beware  of — 

I.  Unscrupulous  scheming. 

II.  Affections  that  care  moke  for  happiness  than  honour. 

III.  Of  idolatry,  covetousness,  and  neglect  of  God's  claims. 

IV.  Of  ignoring  the  rights  of  others. 

V.  Of  ignorance  as  to  the  true  elements  of  success. 

Rebekah  began  well.  Her  advent  unto  the  encampment  was  a  "comfort"  to 
Isaac.  She  seems  to  have  been  "weary  of  life,"  and  asks  "  what  good  it  shall  do 
her."  Some  who  ask  at  this  day  "whether  life  is  worth  living"  may  find  a  sugges- 
tion in  Rebekah's  conduct  as  to  the  reason  wherefore  they  ask  the  question. — H. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXVIII. 


Ver.  1. — And  Isaac  (recognising  the  wis- 
dom and  propriety  of  Rebekah's  sugges- 
tion that  a  bride  should  now  be  sought  for 
him  whom  God  had  so  unmistakably  de- 
clared to  be  the  heir  of  the  theocraticprom- 
ise)  called  Jacob  (to  his  bed-  side),  and  blessed 
him, — in  enlarged  form,  renewingthe  ben- 
ediction previously  given  (ch.  xxvii.  27) — 
and  said  unto  him,  Thou  shalt  not  take  a 
wife  of  the  daughters- of  Canaan  (cf.  ch. 
xxiv.  3).  Intermarriage  with  the  women 
of  the  land  was  expressly  forbidden  to  the 
theocratic  heir,  while  his  attention  was 
directed  to  his  mother's  kindred. 

Ver.  2. —  Arise,  go  to  Padan-aram 


ch.  xxiv.  10;  xxv.  20;  xxvii.  43),  to  the 
house  of  Bethuel  thy  mother's  father ; — 
(vide  ch.  xxiv  24).  If  yet  alive,  Bethuel 
must  have  been  very  old,  since  he  was 
Isaac's  cousin,  and  probably  born  many 
years  before  the  son  of  Abraham — and  take 
thee  a  wife  from  thence — though  Isaac's 
wife  was  found  for  him,  he  does  not  think 
of  imitating  Abraham  and  despatching 
another  Eliezer  in  search  of  a  spouse  for 
Rebekah's  son.  Probably  he  saw  that 
Jacob  could  attend  to  that  business  suffi- 
ciently without  assistance  from  others — of 
the  daughters  of  Laban  thy  moth'  r's  broth- 
er (vide  ch.  xxiv.  29).  "  Isaac  appears  to 
entertain  no  doubt  of  Jacob's  success, 
which  might  be  the  more  probable  since 


S48 


THE   BOOK   OF   GENESIS. 


[CH.  XXVIII.  1 — 9. 


the  same  reason  which  kept  Jacob  from 
marryinginCanaanmight  prevent  Laban's 
daughters  from  being  married  in  Haran, 
the  worshippers  of  the  Lord  being  few  " 
(Inglis). 

Ver  3.— And  God  Almighty— El  Shaddai 
(vide  cb.  xvii.  1) — bless  thee, — the  Abra- 
hamic  benediction  in  its  fullest  form  was 
given  by  El  Shaddai  (vide  ch.  xvii.  1—8) — 
and  make  thee  fruitful,  and  multiply  thee, 
that  thou  mayest  be — literally,  and  thou 
shalt  become  (or  grow  to) — a  multitude — an 
assembly,  or  congregation,  or  crowd  called 
together,  from  a  root  signifying  to  call 
together  (Gesenius)  or  to  sweep  up  to- 
gether  (Filrst) ;  corresponding  toeKKArjo-Ca 
in  Greek — of  people. 

Ver.  4. — And  give  thee  the  blessing  of 
Abraham, — i.  e.  promised  to  Abraham  (vide 
ch.  xii.  2  ;  xxii.  17,  18).  The  additions  of 
toO  iro/rpos  (i.ov  (LXX.),  bT,5N  =  toB  n-arpds 
o-ou  (Samaritan)  are  unwarranted — to  Ihee, 
and  to  thy  seed  with  thee  ;  that  thou  mayest 
inheritthe  land  whereinthou  art  a  stranger, 
—literally,  tlielanu  of  thy  sojournings (ch. 
xvii.  8) — which  God  gave  unto  Abraham — 
by  promise  (cf.  ch  xii.  7;  xiii.  15  ;  xv.  7, 
18 ;  xvii.  8) 

Ver.  5. — And  Isaac  sent  away  Jacob 
(Rebekah  only  counselled,  Isaac  command- 
ed); andhe  went  to  Fadan  aram  untoLaban, 


son  of  Bethuel  the  Syrian  (vide  Hosea  xii. 
12),  the  brother  of  Rebekah.  Jacob's  and 
Esau's  mother.  The  historian  here  perhaps 
intentionally  gives  the  first  place  to  Jacob. 
Vers.  6 — 9. — When  (literally,  and)  Esau 
saw  that  Isaac  had  blessed  Jacob  and  sent 
him  away  to  Fadan-aram,  to  take  him  a 
wife  Irom  thence  ;  and  that  as  he  blessed 
him  he  gave  him  a  charge, — literally,  in 
his  blessing  Mm  (forming  a  parenthesis), 
and  he  commanded  him — saying,  Thou 
shalt  not  take  a  wi'e  of  the  daughters  of 
Canaan;  and  that  (literally,  and)  Jacob 
obeyed  his  father  and  his  mother  and  was 
gone  (or  went)  to  Fadan  aram;  and  Esau 
seeing  that  (more  correctly,  saw  that)  the 
daughters  of  Canaan  pleased  not  (literally, 
wei  e  evil  in  the  eyes  of)  Isaac  his  father  ; 
then  (literally,  and)  went  Esau  unto  Ish- 
mael  (i.  e.  the  family  or  tribe  of  Ishmael, 
aiming  in  this  likely  to  please  his  father), 
and  took  unto  the  wives  which  he  had  (so 
that  they  were  neither  dead  nor  divorced) 
Mahalath  (called  Bashemath  in  ch.  xxxvi. 
3)  the  daughter  of  Ishmael  (and  therefore 
Esau's  half-cousin  by  the  father's  side, 
Ishmael,  who  was  now  dead  thirteen 
years,  having  been  Isaac's  half-brother) 
Abraham's  son,  the  sister  of  Nebajoth, — 
Ishmael's  firstborn  (vide  ch.  xxv.  13)— to 
be  his  wife. 


HOMILETICS. 


Vers.  1 — 9  — Jacob  and  Esau,  or  div  rging  paths.  I.  Jacob's  journey  to  Padan- 
AiiAM.  1.  1  lie  path  of  duly.  Entered  on  in  obedience  10  his  mother's  wish  and  his 
father's  commandment,  it  was  an  evidence  of  filial  piety.  It  is  the  token  of  a  good 
son  that  he  "hears  the  instruction  of  his  father,  nnd  forsakes  not  the  law  of  his 
mother  "  (Prov.  .  8).  Sons  come  to  mature  age  should  respect  and,  where  not  in- 
consistent with  allegiance  to  God,  yield  submission  to  parental  authority  (Prov.  vi. 
20 ;  Mai.  i.  6 ;  Ephes.  vi.  1—3).  2.  The  path  of  blessing.  The  benediction  already 
bestowed  upon  Jacob  was  repeated  with  greater  amplitude  and  tenderness  befo  e  he 
left  the  patriarchal  tent.  Happy  the  y<  nth  who  enters  upon  life's  journey  carrying 
on  his  head  and  in  his  heart  a  father's  blessing  !  much  more  who  goes  forth  beneath 
the  canopy  of  Heaven's  benediction  !  and  this  is  ever  the  experience  of  him  who 
travels  by  the  way  of  filial  obedienc,  Pious  children  seldom  fail  to  come  to  houour, 
and  never  want  the  favour  of  the  Lord  (Ps.  xxxvii.  26  ;  Prov.  iv.  iO — 22  ;  viii.  32). 
3.  The  path  of  promise.  In  addition  to  his  father's  blessing  and  the  Almighty's 
benedicti  n,  Jacob  carried  with  him  as  he  left  Beersheba  the  promise  of  a  seed  and 
an  inheritance  to  be  in  due  time  acquired  ;  and  hi  like  manner  now  has  the  saint 
exceeding  great  and  precious  promises  to  cheer  him  in  his  heavenward  pilgrimage, 
promises  the  full  realisation  of  which  is  attainable  only  in  the  future  (John  xiv.  2  ; 
1  Pet.  i.  4>.  4.  The  path  of  hope.  Sad  and  sorrowful  as  Jacob's  heart  must  have 
been. as  he  kissed  his  mother  and  bade  farewell  to  Isaac,  it  was  at  least  sustained  by 
pleasant  expectation.  Gilding  the  horizon  of  his  future  was  the  prospect  of  a  wife 
to  love  as  Isaac  had  loved  Rebekah,  and  to  be  the  mother  of  the  seed  of  promise. 
So  the  pathway  of  the  children  of  promise,  though  ofieu  painful,  arduous,  and  pro- 
tracted, is  always  lighted  by  the  star  of  hope,  and  always  points  to  a  bright  and 
beautiful  beyond. 

II.  Esau's  mabri age  with  Mahalath.     1.     The  way  of  sin.    His  former  wiTes 


ch.  xxvin.  10—22.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


349 


being  neither  dead  nor  divorced,  the  conduct  of  Esau  in  adding  to  them  a  third  was 
wrong.  2.  The  way  of  shame.  In  the  selection  of  Islimael's  daughter  he  hoped  to 
please  his  father,  but  was  apparently  indifferent  about  the  judgment  of  either 
Rebekah  or  Jehovah.  Daring  transgressors,  like  Esau,  rather  glory  in  their  shame 
than  feel  abashed  at  their  wickedness.  3.  The  way  of  sorrow.  If  not  to  himself,  at 
least  to  his  pious  parents,  this  fresh  matrimonial  alliance  could  not  fail  to  be  a  grief. 
The  daughter  of  Ishmael  was  <  ertainly  better  than  a  daughter  of  the  Hittites,  being 
almost  as  near  a  relative  on  Isaac's  side  as  Rachel  and  Leah  were  on  Rebekah's  ;  but, 
unlike  Rachel  and  Leah,  who  belonged  to  the  old  family  stock  (.he  Terachites)  in 
Mesopotamia,  Mahalatu  descended  from  a  branch  wLich  lad  b.en  removed  from  the 
Abrahamic  tree. 

Learn — 1.  The  care  whi  h  pious  parents  should  take  to  see  their  sous  wel  married. 
2.  The  piety  which  children  should  delight  to  show  to  their  parents.  3.  The  con- 
nection which  subsists  leUeen  true  religion  and  prosperity.  4.  The  inevitable 
tendency  of  sin  to  produce  shame  .  nd  sorrow.  5.  The  wickedness  of  violating  God's 
law  of  marriage. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1—9.— Life  with,  and  life  without,  God.  The  divergence  of  the  two  repre- 
sentative men  is  seen  in  this  short  statement  of  their  marriage  relations.  1. 
Domestic  life  under  the  blessing  of  God  and  apnrt  from  that  blessing.  2.  The 
true  blessing  is  the  blessing  of  Abraham,  the  bles  iug  which  God  has  already  pro- 
vided, promised,  and  secured.  3.  The  heir  of  the  blessing  must  be  sent  away  and 
ienrn'by  experience  how  to  use  it.  4.  The  disinherited  man,  who  has  scorned  h  s 
opportunit  ,  cannot  recover  it  by  his  own  devices.  Esau  is  still  Esau.  Polygamy 
was  suffered,  but  never  had  the  ble  sing  of  God  upon  it.— R. 


EXPOSITION. 


Ver.  10  — And  Jacob  went  out  from  Beer- 
sheba, — in  obedience  to  his  father's  com- 
mandment to  seek  a  wife  (ver.  2),  but  also 
in  compliance  with  his  mother's  counsel 
to  evade  the  wrath  of  Esau  (ch.  xxvii.  43; 
cf.  Hosea  xii.  12.  On  Beersheba  vide  ch. 
xxi.  31  j  xxvi.  33  —  and  went  towards 
Haran— probably  along  the  route  trav- 
ersed by  Abraham's  servant  (cf.  ch.  xxiv. 
10). 

Ver.  11. — And  he  lighted  upon  a  certain 
place, — literally,  he  struck  upon  the  place; 
i.  e.  either  the  place  best  suited  for  him 
to  rest  in  (Inglis),  or  the  place  appointed 
for  him  by  God  (Ainsworth,  Bush),  or 
more  probably  the  well-known  place  after- 
wards mentioned  (Keil,  Wordsworth, 
'  Speaker's  Commentary  ').  Situated  in 
the  mountains  of  Ephraim,  about  three 
hours  north  of  Jerusalem,  it  was  not 
reached  after  one,  but  after  several  days' 
journey  (cf.  ch.  xxii.  4) — and  tsrried there 
all  night,  because  the  sun  was  set ; — being 
either  remote  from  the  city  Luz  when 
overtaken  by  darkness^  or  unwilling  to 
enter  the  town  ;  not  because  he  hated  the 
inhabi  ants  (Josephus),  but  because  he 
was  a  stranger — and  he  took  of  the  stones 
of  that  place, — i.  e.  one  of  the  stones  (vide 
ver.  18).  "The  track  (of  pilgrims)  winds 
through  an  uneven  valley,  covered,  as 
with  gravestones,  by  large  sheets  of  bare 
rock  ;  some  few  here  and  there  standing 
up  like  the  cromlechs  of  Druidical  monu- 


ments "  (Stanley's  '  Sinai  and  Palestine,' 
p.  219  ;  cf .  '  L  ctures  on  Jewish  Church,' 
p.  59)— -and  put  them  for  his  pillows, — ■ 
literally,  and  put  for  Ms  head-bolster,  the 
word  signifying  that  which  is  at  the  head 
of  aDy  one  (cf.  1  Sam.  xix.  13 ;  xxvi.  7, 
11,  16  ;  1  Kings  xix.  6)— and  lay  down  in 
that  place  to  sleep  (cf .  ch.  xix.  4 ;  1  Sam. 
iii.  5,  6,  9). 

Ver.  12. — And  he  dreamed.  This  dream, 
which  has  been  pronounced  "  beautifully 
ingenious,"  "clever,"  and  "philosophi- 
cal "  the  work  of  a  later  Hebrew  poet, 
and  not  of  Jacob  (De  Wette),  was  not 
wonderful  considering  the  state  of  mind 
and  body  in  which  he  must  have  been — 
fatigued  by  travel,  eaddened  by  thoughts 
of  home,  doubtless  meditating  on  his 
mother,  and  more  than  likely  pondering 
the  great  benediction  of  his  aged  and,  to 
all  appearance,  dying  father.  Yet  while 
these  circumstances  may  account  for  the 
mental  framework  of  the  dream,  the 
dream  itself  was  Divinely  sent.  And  be- 
hold a  ladder — the  rough  stones  of  the 
mountain  appearing  to  form  themselves 
into  a  vast  staircase  (Stanley,  Bush) — set 
up  on  the  earth,  and  the  top  of  it  reached 
to  heaven  : — symbolically  intimating  the 
f  ct  of  a  real,  uninterrupted,  and  close 
communication  between  !  eavenand  earth, 
and  in  particular  between  God  in  his 
glory  and  man  in  his  solitude  and  sin— 
—and  behold  the  angels  of  God — literally. 


350 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xxviii.  10—83. 


the  messengers  of  Elohim,  i.  e.  the  angels 
(Ps.  ciii.  20,  21  ;  civ.  4  ;  Heb.  i.  14)— 
ascending  and  descending  on  it — vide  John 
i.  51,  which  shows  that  Christ  regarded 
either  the  ladder  in  Jacob's  vision  as  an 
emblem  of  himself,  the  one  Mediator 
between  God  and  man  (Calvin,  Lu- 
ther, Ains  worth, '  Speaker's  Commentary , ' 
Murphy),  or,  what  is  more  probable, 
Jacob  himself  as  a  type  of  him,  the  Son 
of  man,  in  whom  the  living  intercourse 
between  earth  and  heaven  depicted  in 
the  vision  of  the  angel-trodden  staircase 
was  completely  fulfilled  (Hengstenberg, 
Baumgarten,  Lange,  Bush). 

Ver.  13. — And,  behold, — "the  dream- 
vision  is  so  glorious  that  the  narrator  rep- 
resents it  by  a  threefold  •">???"  (Lange) — 
the  Lord  stood  atove  it, — the  change  in 
the  Divine  name  is  not  to  be  explained  by 
assigning  vers.  13 — 16  to  the  Jehovistic 
editor  (Tuch,  Bleek)  or  to  a  subsequent 
redactor  (Davidson),  since  without  it  the 
Elohistic  document  would  be  abrupt,  if 
not  incomplete  (Kalisch),  but  by  recalling 
the  fact  that  it  is  not  the  general  provi- 
dence of  the  Deity  over  his  creature  man, 
but  the  special  superintendence  of  the 
God  of  Abraham  and  of  Isaac  over  his 
chosen  people,  that  the  symbolic  ladder 
was  intended  to  depict  (Hengstenberg) — 
and  said,  I  am  the  Lord  God  of  Abraham 
thy  father,  and  the  Godof  Isaac: — thus  not 
simply  proclaiming  his  personal  name  Je- 
hovah, but  announcing  himself  as  the 
Elohim  who  had  solemnly  entered  into 
covenant  with  his  ancestors,  and  who  had 
now  come,  in  virtue  of  that  covenant,  to 
renew  to  him  the  promises  he  had  pre- 
viously given  them — the  land  whereon 
thou  liest,  to  thee  will  I  give  it,  and  to  thy 
seed- — given  to  Abraham,  ch.  xiii.  15;  to 
Isaac,  ch.  xxvi.  3. 

Ver.  14.— And  thy  seed  shall  be  as  the 
dust  of  the  earth, — promised  to  Abraham, 
ch.  xiii.  16  ;  to  Isaac,  under  a  different 
emblem,  ch.  xxvi.  4  —  and  thou  shalt 
spread  abroad  (literally,  oreah  forth)  to  the 
west,  and  to  the  east,  to  the  north,  and  to 
the  south :— (cf .  ch.  xiii.  14 ;  Dent.  xii. 
20).  In  its  ultimate  significance  this 
points  to  the  world-wide  universality  of 
the  kingdom  of  Christ  (Murphy) — and  in 
thee  and  in  thy  seed  shall  all  the  families 
of  the  earth  be  blessed  (vide  ch.  xii.  3  ; 
xviii.  18;  xxii.  18  (Abraham);  xxvi.  4 
(Isaac). 

Ver.  15. — And,  behold,  I  am  with  thee, 
— spoken  to  Isaac  (ch.  xxvi.  24) ;  again  to 
Jacob  (ch.  xxxi.  3);  afterw  rds  to  Christ's 
disciples  (Matt,  xxviii.  20)  and  will  keep 
thee  in  all  places  whither  thou  goest, — 
literally,  in  all  thou  'goest='m  all  thy  go- 


ings (cf .  ch.  xlviii.  16  ;  Ps.  cxxi.  5,  7,  8) 
— and  wilUring  thee  again  into  this  land; 
— equivalent  to  an  intimation  that  his 
present  journey  to  Padan-aram  was  not 
without  the  Divine  sanction,  though  ap- 
parently it  had  been  against  the  will  of 
God  that  Isaac  should  leave  the  promised 
land  (vide  ch.  xx.v.  6,  8) — for  I  will  not 
leave  thee, — a  promise  afterwards  repeated 
to  Israel  (Deut.  xxxi.  6,  8),  to  Joshua  (ch. 
i.  5),  to  Solomon  (1  Chron.  xxviii.  20),  to 
the  poor  and  needy  (Isa.  xii.  17),  to  Chris- 
tians (Heb.  xiii.  7) — until  I  have  done 
that  which  I  have  spoken  to  thee  of — cf . 
Balaam's  testimony  to  the  Divine  faithful- 
ness (Numb,  xxiii.  19),  and  Joshua's  (ch. 
xxi.  45),  and  Solomon's  (1  Kings  viii.  56). 
It  is  impossible,  in  connection  with  this 
sublime  theophany  granted  to  Jacob  at 
Bethel,  not  to  recall  the  similar  Divine 
manifestation  vouchsafed  to  Abraham  be- 
neath the  starry  firmament  at  Hebron 
(vide  ch.  xv.  1). 

Ver.  16.— And  Jacob  awaked  out  of  his 
sleep  (during  which  he  had  seen  and  talked 
with  Jehovah),  and  he  said,  -Surely  the 
Lord  is  in  this  place  ;  and  I  knew  it  not. 
Jacob  does  not  here  learn  the  doctrine  of 
the  Divine  omnipresence  for -the  first  time 
(Knobel),  but  now  discovers  that  the  cove- 
nant God  of  Abraham  revealed  himself  at 
other  than  consecrated  places  (Rosen- 
mtiller,  Keil,  Lange,  Murphy)  ;  or  per- 
haps simply  gives  expression  "to  his  as- 
tonishment at  finding  that  whereas  he 
fancied  himself  alone,  he  was  in  reality 
in  the  companj  of  God — se  plus  rideptum 
esse  guam  sperare  aususfuisset  (Calvin). 

Ver.  17. — And  he  was  afraid, — so  were 
Moses  (Exod.  xx.  18,  19),  Job  (ch.  xiii.  5, 
6),  Isaiah  (ch.  vi.  5),  Peter  (Luke  v.  8), 
John  (Rev.  i.  17,  18),  at  similar  discover- 
ies of  the  Divine  presence — and  said, 
How  dreadful  is  this  place! — i.  e.  how 
to  be  feared  !  how  awe-inspirina  !  <t>opepo's 
(LXX.),  terribilis  (Vulgate) — this  is  none 
other  but  the  house  of  God,  and  this  is  the 
gate  of  heaven.  Not  literally,  but  figura- 
tively, the  place  where  God  dwells,  and 
the  entrance  to  his  glorious  abode  (Keil) ; 
the  idea  that  Jacob  was  ' '  made  aware  by 
the  dream  that  he  had  slept  on  one  of 
those  favoured  spots  singled  out  for  a  fu- 
ture sanctuary,  and  was  fearful  that  he 
had  sinned  by  employing  it  for  a  profane 
purpose"  (Kalisch),  being  fanciful. 

Ver.  18. — And  Jacob  rose  up  early  in 
the  morning  (cf.  ch.  xix.  27;  xxii.  3), 
and  took  the  stone  that  he  had  put  for  his 
pillows  (vide  supra),  and  set  it  up  for  a 
pillar— literally,  set  it  up,  a  pillar  (or 
something  set  upright,  hence  a  statute 
or  monument)  ;  not  as  an  object  of  wor- 
ship, a  sort  of  fetish,  but  as  a  memorial 


ch.  xxvm.  10—22.] 


THE  BOOK   OF  GENESIS. 


351 


of  the  vision  (Calvin,  Keil,  Murphy ;  cf . 
ch.  xxxi.  45  ;  xxxv.  14 ;  Josh.,  iv.  9,  20; 
xxiv.  26  ;  1  Sam.  vii.  12)  —  and  poured 
oil  upon  the  top  of  it.  Quasi  signum  con- 
secrationis  (Calvin),  and  not  because  he 
regarded  it  as  in  itself  invested  with 
any  degree  of  sanctity.  The  worship  of 
sacred  stones  (Bsetylia),  afterwards  pre- 
valent among  the  Greeks,  Romans,  Hin- 
doos, Arabs,  and  Germans,  though  by 
some  (Kuenen,  Oort ;  vide  '  The  Bible  for 
Young  People,'  vol.  i.  p.  231)  regarded 
as  one  of  the  primeval  forms  of  worship 
among  the  Hebrews,  was  expressly  inter- 
dicted by  the  law  of  Moses  (cf.  Exod. 
xxiii.  24 ;  xxxiv.  13 ;  Levit.  xxvi.  1 ; 
Deut.  xii.  3;  xvi.  22).  It  was  probably 
a  heathen  imitation  of  the  rite  here  re- 
corded, though  by  some  authorities  (Keil, 
Knobel,  Lange)  the  Bsetylian  worship  is 
said  to  have  been  connected  chiefly  with 
meteoric  stones  which  were  supposed  to 
have  descended  from  some  divinity; 
as,  e.  g.,  the  stone  in  Delphi  sacred  to 
Apollo ;  that  in  Emesa,  on  the  Orontes, 
consecrated  to  the  sun  ;  the  angular  rock 
at  Pessinus  in  Phrygia  worshipped  as 
hallowed  by  Cybele  ;  the  black  stone  in 
the  Kaaba  at  Mecca  believed  to  have  been 
brought  from  heaven  by  the  angel  Gabriel 
(vide  Kalisch  in  loco).  That  the  present 
narrative  was  a  late  invention,  "  called 
into  existence  by  a  desire  "  on  the  part  of 
the  priests  and  pTophets  of  Yahweh 
(Jehovah)  ' '  to  proclaim  the  high  anti- 
quity of  the  sanctuary  at  Bethel,  and  to 
make  a  sacred  stone  harmless  "  ('  The 
Bible  for  Young  People,'  vol.  i.  p.  231), 
is  pure  assumption.  The  circumstance 
that  the  usage  here  mentioned  is  no- 
where else  in  Scripture  countenanced 
(except  in  ch.  xxxv.  14,  with  reference 
to  this  same  pillar)  forms  a  sufficient 
pledge  of  the  high  antiquity  of  the  nar- 
rative (vide  Havernick's  'Introd.,'§  20). 
Ver.  19. — And  he  called  the  name  of 
that  place  Bethel — i.  e.  house  of  God. 
Rosenniiiller  and  Kalisch  find  a  connection 
between  Bethel  and  Bsetylia,  the  former 
regarding  Bsetylia  as  a  corruption  of 
Bethel,  and  the  latter  viewing  Bethel  as 
the  Hebraised  form  of  Bsetylion.  Keil 
objects  to  both  that  the  interchange  of 
t  in  PaiTvXiov  and  0  in  (3cu8t|X  would  be 
perfectly  inexplicable.  On  the  site  of 
Bethel  (Beitin)  vide  ch.  xii.  8.  But  the 
name  of  that  city  was  called  Euz  at  the 
first.  Originally  the  Canaanitish  town, 
built  according  to  Calvin  after  this  event, 
was  called  Luz,  or  "almond  tree,"  a 
name  it  continued  to  bear  until  the  con- 
quest (Judges  i.  23).  From  the  circum- 
stances recorded  in  the  narrative,  Jacob 
called  the  spot  where  he  slept  (in  the 


vicinity  of  Luz)  Bethel — the  designation 
afterwards  extending  to  the  town  (ch. 
xxxv.  6).  Until  the  conquest  both  titles 
appear  to  have  been  used — Luz  by  the 
Canaanites,  Bethel  by  the  Israelites.  When 
the  conquest  was  completed  the  Hebrew 
name  was  substituted  for  the  Hittite,  the 
sole  survivor  of  the  captured  city  building 
another  Luz  in  another  part  of  the  country 
(vide  Judges  i.  26). 

Vers.  20,  21. — And  Jacob  vowed  a  vow, 
— not  in  any  mercenary  or  doubtful 
spirit,  but  as  an  expression  of  gratitude 
for  the  Divine  mercy  (Calvin),  as  the 
soul's  full  and  free  acceptance  ot  f he 
Lord  to  be  its  own  God  (Murphy),  as  the 
instinctive  impulse  of  the  new  creature 
(Candlish) — saying,  If  (not  the  language 
of  uncertainty,  but  equivalent  to  "since," 
or  "  forasmuch  as  ;  "  Jacob  by  faith  both 
appropriating  and  anticipating  the  fulfil- 
ment of  the  preceding  promise)  God  (Elo- 
him  ;  for  the  reason  of  which  vide  infra) 
will  be  With  me, — as  he  has  promised  (ver. 
15),  and  as  I  believe  he  will — and  will 
keep  me  in  this  way  that  I  go,  —  a 
particular  appropriation  of  the  general 
promise  (ver.  15) — and  will  give  me 
bread  to  eat  and  raiment  to  put  on  i.  e.  all 
the  necessaries  of  life,  included,  though 
not  specially  mentioned,  in  the  preceding 
promise),  so  that  I  come  again  to  my 
father's  house — also  guaranteed  by  God 
(ver.  15),  and  here  accepted  by  the 
patriarch — in  peace  (i.  e.  especially  free 
from  Esau's  avenging  threats);  then  shall 
the  lord  be  my  God — literally,  and  Jehovah 
will  be  to  me  for  Elohim  (Rosenmiiller, 
Hengstenberg,  Keil,  Kalisch,  '  Speaker's 
Commentary'),  though  the  received  trans- 
lation is  not  without  support  (LXX., 
Vulgate,  Syriac,  Calvin,  Michaelis,  Lange, 
Murphy,  Wordsworth);  but  to  have  bar- 
gained and  bartered  with  God  in  the  way 
which  this  suggests  before  assenting  to 
accept  him  as  an  object  of  trust  and  wor- 
ship would  have  been  little  less  than 
criminal.  Accordingly,  the  clause  is  best 
placed  in  the  protasis  of  the  sentence, 
which  then  practically  reads,  "if  Elohim 
will  be  Jehovah  to  me,  and  if  Jehovah 
will  be  to  me  Elohim"  (vide  Hengsten- 
berg, 'Introduction,'  vol.  i.  p.  358). 

Ver.  22. — And  (or  then,  the  apodosis 
now  commencing)  this  stone  which  I  have 
set  for  a  pillar  (vide  on  ver.  18)  shall  be 
God's  house— Bethel,  meaning  that  he 
would  afterwards  erect  there  an  altar  for 
the  celebration  of  Divine  worship — a 
resolution  which  was  subsequently  carried 
out  (vide  ch.  xxxv.  1,  15).  "  The  pillar 
or  cairn  or  cromlech  of  Bethel  must  have 
been  looked  upon  by  the  Israelites,  and 
may  be  still  looked  upon  in  thought  by 


353 


THE   BOOK   OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xxviii.  10—22. 


us,  as  the  precursor  of  every  "house  of 
Uod"  that  has  since  arisen  iu  the  Jewish 
and  Christian  world — the  temple,  the 
cathedral,  the  church,  the  chapel ;  nay 
more,  of  those  secret  places  of  worship 
that  are  marked  by  no  natural  beauty 
and  seen  by  no  human  eye — the  closet, 
the  catacomb,  the  thoroughfare  of  the 
true     worshipper "     (Stanley's    '  Jewish 


Church,'  lect.  iii.  p.  60).  And  of  all  that 
thou  shalt  give  me  I  will  surely  give  the 
tenth  unto  thee.  Literally,  giving  I  will 
give  the  tenth  (cf.  ch.  xiv.  20).  The  case 
of  Jacob  affords  another  proof  that  the 
practice  of  voluntary  tithing  was  known 
and  observed  antecedent  to  the  time  of 
Moses. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  10 — 22. — Jacob  at  Bethel,  or  heaven  opened.  I.  The  lonely  sleeper.  1. 
His  desolate  condition.  Exiled  from  home,  fleeing  from  the  murderous  resent- 
ment of  a  brother,  o'er-cauopied   by  the  star-lit  firmament,  remote  from  human 

■  habitation,  and  encompassed  by  a  heathen  population,  on  the  bleak  summit  of  ihe 
Bethel  plateau,  upwards  of  sixty  miles  from  Beersheba,  the  wandering  son  of  Isaac 
makes  his  evening  couch  with  a  stone  slab  for  his  pillow,  an  emblem  of  many 
another  footsore  aud  dejected  traveller  upon  life's  journey.  2.  His  inward  cogita- 
tions. The  current  of  his  thoughts  needs  not  be  difficult  to  imagine.  Mingling  with 
the  sadness  of  leaving  home,  and  the  apprehension  with  which  he  regarded  the 
uncertain  future,  there  could  not  fail  to  be  a  sense  of  security,  if  not  a  gleiim  of  hope, 
arising  from  the  consciousness  that  he  carried  with  him  his  father's  blessing;  in  this 
again  affording  a  reflex  of  most  men's  lives,  in  which  joy  and  sorrow,  hope  and  fear, 
continually  meet  and  strangely  blend.  3.  His  heavenly  visitation.  If  the  dream  by 
which  Jacob's  slumber  was  disturbed  was  occasioned  by  unusual  cerebral  excitement, 
if  its  psychological  framework  was  supplied  by  the  peculiar  colour  of  his  medi- 
tations, it  is  still  true  that  it  was  made  the  medium  of  a  Divine  theophany  and  revela- 
tion. So  God,  who  is  "never  far  from  any  one  of  us,"  is  specially  near  to  his 
children  iu  solitude  and  sorrow,  "  in  dreams,  in  visions  of  the  night,  when  deep 
sleep  falleth  upon  men,  in  slumberings  upon  the  bed,  opening  the  ears  of  men,  and 
sealing  their  instruction"  (Job  xxxiii.  15,  16). 

II.  The  midnight  dream.     1.   Tlie  celestial  vision.    (1)  A  ladder  reaching  from 
•  earth  to  heaven  ;  suggesting  the  thought  of  an  open  pathway  of  communication 

between  God  and  man,  and  in  particular  between  the  heirs  of  the  promise  and  their 
covenant  God.  (2)  The  augels  of  God  ascending  and  descending  upon  it ;  symbol- 
ising God's  providential  government  of  the  world  by  means  of  the  celestial  hosts 
(Ps.  ciii.  20,  21 ;  civ.  4),  but  especially  the  ministry  of  angels  towards  the  heirs  of 
salvation  (Ps.  xci.  11  ;  Heb.  i.  14).    A  truth  henceforward  to  he  exemplified  in  the 

■  experience  of  Jacob,  and  afterwards  more  fully,  indeed  completely  and  ideally, 
realised  in  Christ.  (3)  Jehovah  standing  above  it.  The  situation  occupied  by  the 
symbolic  presence  of  Jehovah  was  designed  to  indicate  two  things:  first,  that 
Jehovah  was  the  true  and  only  source  whence  blessing  could  descend  to  man  ;  and, 
second,  that  the  pathway  which  had  been  opened  up  for  sinful  man  conducted 
straight  into  God's  immediate  presence.  Thus  it  was  a  visible  unveiling  of  the  grace 
and  glory  comprehended  in  the  covenant,  and  now  fully  revealed  by  the  gospel.  2. 
The  accompanying  voice.  (1)  Proclaiming  the  Divine  name,  as  the  covenant  God  of 
Abraham  and  of  Isaac,  of  which  the  New  Testament  interpretation  is  the  God  and 
Father  of  our  Lord  aud  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  Ihe  true  seed  of  Abraham.  (2)  Renew- 
ing the  covenant  promises — of  a  land,  of  a  seed,  of  a  blessing:  (3)  Personally 
engaging  to  extend  to  Jacob  continual  attendance, — "Behold,  I  am  with  thee," — 
constant  protection, — "and  will  keep  thee  in  all  thy  goings," — complete  fidelity, — 
"I  will  not  leave  lhee,"&c.  ;  in  all 'which  again  the  voice  was  but  an  anticipatory 
echo  of  the  heavenly  voice  that  sounds  in  the  gospel. 

III.  The  awe-btkuck  awakening.  1.  Devout  impression.  The  night  having 
passed  in  contemplation  of  the  unseen  world,  the  morning  found  the  startled  sleeper 
with  a  strong  sense  of  the  supernatural  upon  his  soul,  which  filled  him  with  alarm. 
Even  to  God's  reconciled  children  awe-inspiring  (cf.  Job  xlii.  6  ;  Isa.  vi.  5  ;  Luke 
v.  8  ;  Rev.  i.  17),  a  vivid  realisation  of  the  Divine  presence  is  to  the  sinful  heart 
overwhelmingly  terrible.  2  Reverent  adoration.  "  This  isnone  other  but  the  house 
of  God  "—implying  ideas  of  Divine  residence,— "  Surely  the  Lord  is  in  this  place  I  "— 
Divine  provision,— the  thoughts  of  "  bread  to  eat  and  rainiest  to  put  on  "  appear  to 
have  been  suggested  to  Jacob's  mind, — and  Divine  Communion— Jacob  realises  as 


ch.  xxvm.  10—23.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  353 

never  before  the  conception  of  personal  intercourse  between  Jehovah  and  bis  people  ; 
— "and  the  gate  of  heaven" — in  which  lie  embedded  the  fundamental  notions  of 
nearness,  vision,  entrance.  3.  Grateful  commemoration,  (1)  He  sets  up  the  stone 
slab  on  which  his  head  had  rested  as  a  visible  memorial  of  the  sublime  transaction 
which  had  there  occurred,  and  in  token  of  his  gratitude  pours  the  only  gift  he  carried 
with  him  on  it,  Tiz.,  oil.  Sincere  piely  demands  lhai  God's  merciful  visitations  should 
be  remembered  and  thankfully  acknowledged  by  offerings  of  the  choicest  and  best  of 
our  possessions.  (2)  He  calls  the  name  of  the  place  Bethel:  in  the  mean  time  with  a 
view  to  his  own  comfort  and  satisfactiou.  but  also,  there  is  little  doubt,  with  an  eye 
to  the  instruction  and  encouragement  of  his  descendants.  It  is  dutiful  in  saints  not 
only  to  rejoice  their  own  hearts  by  the  recollection  of  Divine  mercies,  but  also  to 
take  measures  for  transmitting  the  knowledge  of  them  to  future  generations. 

,  IV.  The  solemn  vow.  1.  Faith's  expectation.  In  a  spirit  not  of  mercenary 
stipulation,  but  of  believiug  anticipation,  Jacob  expresses  confidence  in  henceforth 
enjoying  (1)  Divine  compauionship — "If,"  or  since,  "God  will  be  with  me;"  (2) 
Divine  protection— "and  will  keep  me  in  this  way  that  I  go  ; "  (3)  Divine  sustenance 
—"and  will  give  me  bread  to  eat,  and  raiment  to  put  on  ;  "  (4)  Divine  favour — "so 
that  I  come  again  to  my  father's  house  in  peace ; "  and  (5)  Divine  salvation — "then," 
or  rather,  and  since,  "Jehovah  shall  be  my  God  ;  "—five  things  promised  to  the 
poorest  and  most  desolate  of  heaven's  pilgrims.  2.  Faith's  resolution.  Confidently 
anticipating  the  fulfilment  of  G  id's  promises,  Jacob  resolves — (1)  To  erect  an  altar  at 
Bethel  on  returning  to  the  Holy  Laud,  a  vow  which  he  afterwards  fulfilled.  What- 
ever vows  God's  people  make  should  be  paid,  and  no  vows  are  more  agreeable  to 
God's  will  than  those  which  have  for  their  objects  the  cultivation  of  personal  piety 
and  the  perpetuation  and  spread  of  his  religion  among  men.  (3)  To  consecrate  the 
tenth  part  of  his  increase  to  Godt«.  e.  to  the  maintenance  of  God's  worship — an 
example  of  pious  liberality  which  has  seldom  been  approached  by  Christ's  followers, 
though,  considering  their  higher  privileges  and  obligations,  it  ought  to  have  been 
frequently  surpassed. 

HOMILIES   BY  "VARIOUS   AUTHORS. 

Vers.  10—22. — Jacob's  dream.  Where  revelations  had  been  vouchsafed  it  was 
supposed  that  they  would  be  repeated.  The  stony  pillow  on  which  the  weary  head 
rested  may  be  changed  by  the  visitation  of  Divine  grace  into  the  meeting-place  of 
heaven  and  earth.  The  morning  beams  breaking  in  upon  the  shadowy  refuge  of  the 
night  are  transfigured  into  a  dream  of  covenant  blessing.  The  ladder  set  up  on  the 
earth,  the  top  of  it  reached  to  heaven.  Angels  of  God  on  the  way  of  mediation, 
ascending,  .descending,  carrying  up  the  wants  aud  services  of  the  man  of  God, 
bringing  down  the  messages  of  consolation,  the  vouchsafements  of  help  and  de- 
liverance. "Behold,  the  Lord  stood  above  it,"  as  the  source  of  all  the  blessing, 
standing  ready  to  work  for  his  chosen.  This  is  the  first  direct  communication  of 
Jehovah  to  Jacob,  the  first  in  a  long  line  of  revelations  of  which  he  was  the  recipient. 
It  is  a  renewal  of  the  covenant  made  to  his  fathers,  it  is  a  republication  of  the  pro- 
mises. But  we  require  to  hear  the  Lord  say  to  us,  ' '  I  am  with  thee,  I  will  not  leave 
thee,"  especially  when  we  are  already  on  the  journey  of  faith,  when  we  are  obeying 
the  commandment  of  God,  and  of  the  father  and  mother  speaking  in  his  name.  Such 
a  place  as  Jacob  found  may  be  made  known  to  us — 

I.  In  providential  interpositions.  We  journey  on  through  the  wilderness  and 
light  upon  a  certain  place  where  we  think  we  are  only  among  stony  facts,  where  we 
cm  find  but  a  harsh  welcome ;  but  the  Lord  is  in  the  place,"though  we  know  it  not 
till  he  reveals  himself.  Then  we  cry  with  trembling  gratitude,  This  is  the  house  of 
God,  &c. 

II.  In  seasons  of  religious  oppoktdnity.  The  ordinary  and  customary  is  lifted 
up  by  special  gift  of  the  Spirit  into  the  opened  heaven,  the  visiting  angels,  the  vision 
of  the  throne  of  God.  "The  house  of  God,  the  gate  of  heaven."  Such  may  be  the 
awaking  of  our  soul  in  the  sanctuary  of  our  own  private  devotions  or  of  our  public 
worship. 

III.  JaCOl)  is  A  TYPE  OF  TBTE  LORD'S  PEOPLE  REGARDED  AS  A  WHOLE      The  Church 

has  often  laid  itself  down  upon  the  stones  and  slept  with  weariness  in  its  passage 
through  the  desert,  and  the  Lord  has  revealed  the  ladder  of  his  covenant,  connecting 

GENESIS.  A  A 


854  THE  BOOK   OF  GENESIS,  [ch.  xxviii.  10-22. 

together  that  very  place  and  time  of  hardship  with  the  throne  of  grace  and  glory, 
und  the  ascending  and  descending  angels. 

IV.  Jesus  himself  employed  this  dream  of  the  patriarch  as  a  typical  prophecy  op 
the  kingdom  op  God.  "Heaven  open,  and  the  angels  of  God  ascending  and  de- 
scending upon  the  Son  of  man,"  the  true  Jacob,  the  Prince  prevailing  with  God  and 
with  men  (John  i.  51).  The  cross  is  the  ladder  of  mediation.  It  was  set  up  on  the 
earth.  It  was  not  of  earthly  origin  as  a  means  of  atonement,  but  its  foot  was  od  the 
earth  as  it  came  forth  out  of  the  method  aud  course  of  earthly  history  in  connection 
with  Divine  counsels.  Its  top  reached  to  heaven,  for  it  was  a  Divine  Mediator  whose 
sacrifice  was  offered  upon  it.  Angels  of  God  ascended  and  descended  upon  the 
ladder,  for  only  through  the  atoning  merit  of  Christ  is  angelic  ministration  main- 
tained. It  is  for  them  "who  shall  be  heirs  of  salvation."  At' the  summit  of  the 
cross,  representing  the  whole  mediatorial  work  of  Christ,  is  the  Lord  standing,  speak- 
ing his  word  of  covenant,  and  stretching  forth  his  right  hand  on  behalf  of  his 
people.  Resting  at  the  foot  of  the  cross  we  hear  the  voice  of  a  faithful  Guide, 
saying,  "I  will  not  leave  thee,"  &c.  In  every  place  one  who  is  conscious  of  sur- 
rounding covenant  mercy  can  say,  "  This  is  none  other  but  the  house  of  God,"  &c. 
— R. 

Ver.  12. — A  stairway  to  heaven.  "And  he  dreamed,  and  behold  a  ladder  set  up 
on  the  earth,  and  the  top  of  it  reached  to  heaven."  Jacob  in  fear  of  his  life  leaves 
home.  The  last  kiss  of  his  mother  is  taken.  During  the  day  Jacob  goes  forward 
cheerfully.  Night  comes  on  at  length.  The  path  is  no  longer  distinct.  The  wind 
moans  sadly.  A  sense  of  loneliness  creeps  over  him.  Fear  of  Esau  haunts  him. 
He  sees  the  figure  of  his  brother  behind  this  shrub  and  that  rock.  Had  Esau  outrun 
to  murder  him  in  that  lonely  spot?  He  trembles  at  every  shadow,  and  shudders  at 
every  sound.  He  thinks  of  the  God  of  his  father  and  mother,  and  prays.  He  lies 
down  in  the  desert ;  a  furze-bush  is  his  only  shelter,  and  a  stone  his  hard  pillow. 
He  looks  up  into  the  dark  vault  all  glittering  with  the  silent  stars.  More  intense 
becomes  his  loneliness,  for  the  stars  have  no  voice  for  him.  Plotting  and  far-seeing 
Jacob  had  deep  home-longings,  mystic  inquirings,  and  a  wealth  of  affection  in  his 
nature.  Of  such  God  can  make  something;  to  such  God  can  reveal  something.  To 
idolatrous,  carnal  Esaus  how  little  can  God  make  known.  Selfishness  hinders.  Here 
in  the  desert  Jacob  draws  his  camel-hair  robe  more  tightly  over  his  feet,  and  dreams 
of  parents  and  home,  and  heaven  and  God.  It  might  surprise  us  that  he  could  have 
such  sweet  dreams  when  he  was  fleeing  from  the  one  whom  he  had  undoubtedly 
wronged.    God  would  over-rule  the  wrong,  and  therefoie  sent  him  this  vision. 

I.  All  have  dreams  of  a  heaven.  A  heaven  is  that  for  which  all  men  are 
seeking,  whether  sought  in  the  way  of  business,  or  pleasure,  or  politics,  or  literature. 
Even  sceptics  have  their  heaven  in  their  doubt  and  intellectual  pride.  That  which 
is  our  highest  object  is  our  heaven.  As  water  cannot  rise  above  its  level,  so  the 
heaven  of  some  cannot  be  above  their  thoughts.  There  will  be  a  future  state  answer- 
ing to  the  highest  longings  of  the  believer,  a  place  of  existence  in  glory  far  beyond 
anything  here. 

II.  Actual  communication  with  heaven  is  possible.  One  author  (Hazlitt)  says, 
"In  the  days  of  Jacob  there  was  a  ladder  between  heaven  aud  earth,  but  now  the 
heavens  are  gone  further  and  become  astronomical."  True  science  opens  up  an 
infinite  number  of  worlds  and  densely-peopled  spaces.  Material  discoveries  lessen 
the  sense  of  spiritual  realities.  It  need  not  be  so.  If  the  universe  is  great,  how  great 
also  is  the  soul,  which  ran  embrace  in  its  thoughts  the  universe !  And  it  is  in  the  soul 
that  God  can  and  does  reveal  heaven.  Peace,  hope,  love  is  the  spirit  of  heaven,  and 
that  is  revealed  by  Christ.     Purify  the  spirit  and  heaven  comes  near. 

III.  Earnest  effort  is  needed  to  maintain  communication  with  heaven. 
In  the  dream  of  Jacob  he  saw  a  picture  of  his  own  struggling  ascent  in  life.  Angels 
might  flit  up  and  down,  but  man  had  to  struggle  and  put  forth  earnest  effort  to  main- 
tain the  union.  Early  in  life  the  ascent  seems  easy.  A  mountain  never  appears  so 
far  to  its  summit  as  it  is  in  reality.  As  we  go  on  we  become  more  conscious  of  the 
difficulties  in  the  way  of  maintaining  the  open  communications.  Often  we  find  our- 
selves with  heads  between  our  hands,  pondering  whether  we  shall  ever  overcome  the 
evil  and  attain  to  the  good. 


ch.  xxvm.  10— 22.  J  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  355 

IV.  There  is  always  help  from  the  heavens  in  the  effort  to  maintain 
the  communication.  A  voice  comes  to  Jacob.  A  promise  of  guidance  and  support 
was  given.  Christ  in  his  conversation  with  Nathaniel  shows  us  how  all  good  comes 
through  him.  In  Christ  all  goodness  centres.  All  heaven  rays  out  from  him  in  the 
pardon  and  reconciliation  he  has  brought.  He  is  ihe  Word  made  flesh.  He  is  the 
Divine  voice  from  above.  Through  him  the  Holy  Spirit  is  given,  and  that  Holy 
Spirit  shows  us  things  to  come,  makes  heaven  plain,  and  the  way  direct.  One  day 
we  shall  be  called  to  follow  the  way  the  angels  go,  and  after  death  shall  ascend  that 
stairway  which  "slopes  through  darkness  up  to  God." — H. 

Ver.  15. — God's  providential  care.  "Behold,  I  am  with  thee,  and  will  keep  thee 
in  all  places  whither  thou  goest."  Among  things  believed,  but  not  sufficiently 
realised,  is  the  truth  of  God's  constant  overruling  care.  We  can  trace  cause  and 
effect  a  little  way,  then  lose  the  chain,  aad  feel  as  if  it  went  no  further,  as  if 
events  had  no  special  cause.  This  a  common  evil  in  the  life  of  Christians.  Its  root, 
walking  by  sight  more  than  by  faith.  Jacob— what  made  him  try  craft?  Did  not 
trust  God  fully.  Had  no  habit  of  faith.  But  God  had  not  forgotten  him.  And  as 
he  slept  on  the  stone  at  Bethel  the  reality  of  God's  presence  was  made  known  to  him 
(Isa.  xliii.  2  ;  Matt,  xxviii.  20)  and  recorded  for  our  learning. 

I.  God  does  always  watch  over  and  guide.  The  ladder  was  not  a  new  thing; 
it  had  existed  always.  The  vision  showed  what  exists  everywhere  (2  Kings  vi.  17). 
The  ladder  shows  the  truth  which  should  stamp  our  lives.  God  is  love,  and  love 
means  care.  This  is  for  all.  Not  our  love  that  causes  it.  Our  love,  trust,  life 
spring  from  that  truth.  The  living  God  is  close  to  us.  His  hand  touches  our  life 
at  every  point.     How  is  it  that  we  are  unconscious  of  this? 

II.  God's  working  is  hidden  and  silent.  Jacob  was  startled  to  find  him  near. 
Because  year  by  year  the  world  goes  on  as  before,  unbelievers  deuy  God's  active 
presence,  worldly  men  think  not  of  it,  and  even  godly  men  sometimes  forget ;  for 
we  cannot  see  the  top  of  the  ladder.     But  God,  there,  directs  all. 

III.  His  purposes  are  accomplished  by  many  agents.  Many  angels,  messen- 
gers (Ps.  civ.  4  ;  Heb.  i.  14);  natural  agents,  the  elements,  &c  ;  human  agents,  men 
good  and  bad  alike  carrying  out  his  will ;  spiritual  beings  (Ps.  xci.  11).  How  often 
those  who  pray  for  spiritual  blessings  forget  that  common  things  also  are  ruled  by 
God.     Thus  a  great  door  of  communion  is  closed. 

IV.  But  there  is  so  much  confusion  in  the  world.  We  often  cannot  trace 
God's  hand.  Ho\v  often  is  trust  confounded,  wise  schemes  frustrated,  earnest  self- 
denial  in  vain;  prayers,  real  and  intense,  without  apparent  answer.  Nay,  these  are 
but  seeming  confusions,  to  teach  the  lesson  of  faith.  Through  all  i  hese,  by  all  these, 
God's  purposes  are  surely  carried  out.  One  great  truth  is  the  key  of  all — the  love  of 
God  revealed  in  Christ.  This  is  the  ladder  from  which  he  proclaims,  "Lo,  I  am 
with  thee  "  (cf.  Rom.  viii.  32).     He  who  wrought  out  redemption,  can  he  fail  ? 

V.  God's  governance  is  for  our  salvation,  in  the  fullest  sense  of  the  word, 
giving  us  the  victory  over  evil.  God  was  with  Jacob.  He  had  been  from  the  first, 
though  not  recognised.  He  was  so  to  the  end.  Not  giving  uninterrupted  prosperity. 
Many  a  fault  and  many  a  painful  page  in  Ills  history;  but  through  all  these  he  was 
led  on.  The  word  to  each  who  will  receive  it — "Behold,  I  am  with  thee."  Not 
because  of  thy  faith,  still  less  of  thy  goodness.  Oh  thai  every  Christian  would  prac- 
tise trust  (Ps.  v.  3);  hearing  our  Father's  voice,  " Commit  thy  way  unto  the  Lord," 
and  gladly  believing  "  the  Lord  is  my  Shepherd." — M. 

Vers.  18—22. — The  grateful  retrospect  and  the  consecrated  prospect!  I  The  true 
life  is  that  which  starts  from  the  place  of  fellowship  with  God  and  commits  the 
future  to  him.  We  can  always  find  a  pillar  of  blessed  memorial  and  consecration. 
The  Bethel.  1.  Providential  care.  2.  Religious  privilege.  3.  Special  communica- 
tions of  the  Spirit.     God  with  us  as  a  fact.     Our  pilgrimage  a  Bethel  all  through. 

II.  The  true  testimony  that  which  erects  a  stone  of  witness,  a  Bethel,  where 
others  can  find  God.  1.  Personal.  The  ,pilIow  of  rest  the  pillar  of  praise-  2. 
Practical.     The  testimony  which  speaks  of  Ihe  journey  and  the  traveller. 

III.  The  true  covenant.  1.  Coming  out  of  fellowship.  2  Pledging  the  future 
at  the  house  of  God,  and  in  sight  of  Divine  revelation.    3.  Blessed  exchange  of  gifts, 

a  a    2 


356 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[CH.  XXIX.   1 — 14. 


confirmation  of  love.  Jehovah  keeping  and  guiding  and  feeding;  his  servant  serv- 
ing him  and  giving  him  a  tenth  of  all  he  received.  The  patriarch's  vow  was  the 
result  of  a  distinct  advance  in  his  religious  life.  The  hope  of  blessing  became  the 
covenant  of  engagement,  service,  worship,  sacrifice.  The  higliest  forms  of  religious 
life  is  that  which  rests  on  a  solemn  vow  of  grateful  dedication  at  Bethel.  The  end 
before  us  is  "our  Fa  Tier's  house  in  peace." — R. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXIX. 
Ver.  1. — Then  Jacob  went  en  h's  journey 

(literally,  lifted  up  his  feet — a  graphic  de- 
scription of  travelling.  Inspired  by  new 
hopes,  and  conscious  of  loftier  aims  than 
when  he  fled  from  Beersheba,  the  lonely 
fugitive  departed  from  Bethel),  and  came 
into  the  land  of  the  peo;  le  of  the  east — lit- 
e'  ally,  the  land  of  the  sons  of  the  east,  i.  e. 
Mesopotamia,  about  450  miles  distant 
from  Beersheba. 

Ver.  2. — And helooked (eitherto discover 
where  he  was,  or  in  search  of  water),  "and 
behold  a  well  in  the  field, — not  the  well  at 
which  Eliezer  s  caravan  halted,  which  was 
a  well  for  the  village  maidens,  situated 
in  front  of  the  town,  and  approached  by 
steps  (vide  ch.  xxiv.),  but  a  well  in  the 
open  field  for  the  use  of  flocks,  and  cov- 
ered at  the  t  me  of  Jaci  b's  arrival  with  a 
huge  stone — and,  lo,  there  were  three 
flocks  of  sheep  lying  by  it.  A  frequent  Ori- 
ental scene  (cf.  ch.  xxiv.  11;  Exod.  ii.  16). 
"Who  that  has  travelled  much  in  this 
country  has  not  often  arrived  at  a  well  in 
the  heat  of  the  day  which  was  surrounded 
with  numerous  flocks  of  sheep  waiting  to 
bs  watered  ?  I  once  saw  such  a  scene  in 
the  burning  plains  of  Northern  Syria. 
Half-naked, fierce-looking  men  were  draw- 
ing up  water  in  leather  buckets;  flock 
after  flock  was  brought  up,  watered,  and 
sent  away;  and  after  all  the  mei  had 
ended  their  work,  then  several  women 
and  girls  brought  up  their  flocks,  .and 
drew  water  for  them.  Thus  it  was  with 
Jetbro's  daughters  ;  and  thus,  no  doubt, 
it  would  have  been  with  Rachel  if  Jacob 
had  not  rolled  away  the  stone  and  watered 
her  sheep''  ('Land  and  Book,' p.  589).  For 
out  of  that  well  they  wateri  d  the  flocks  : 
and  a  great  stone  was  upon  the  well's  mouth 
"  Most  of  the  cisterns  are  covered  with  a 
large  thick,  flat  stone,  in  the  centre  of 
which  a  hole  is  cut,  wh  ch  forms  the 
mouth  of  the  cistern.  This  hole,  in  msmy 
instances,  we  found  covered  with  a  heavy 
stone,  to  the  removal  <  f  which  two  or 
three  men  were  requisite  "  (Robinson,  ii 
p.  180). 

Ver.  3. — And  thither  were  all  the  flocks 
gathered.  "  Fifteen  minutes  latei  we  came 
to  a  large  well  in  a  valley  among  the 
swells,  fitted  up  with  troughs  and  r  ser- 
voirs,  with  flocks  "wait  ng  around  ''  (Rob- 


inson, iii.  p.  21).  And  they  rolled  the  stone 
from  the  well's  mouth,  and  watered  the 
sheep,  and  put  the  s  one  again  upon  the 
well's  mouth  in  his  place.  From  the  middle 
of  ver.  2  the  words  are  parenthetical,  the 
watering  of  the  flocks  not  having  taken 
place  till  Rachel  had  ai  rived  (ver.  9)  and 
Jacob  had  uncovered  the  well  (ver.  10). 

Ver.  4. — And  Jacob  said  unto  them  (the 
shepherds  of  t.  e  threi  flocks),  My  breth- 
ren (a  friendly  salutation  from  one  who 
was  himself  a  shepherd),  whence  be  ye? 
Anticipating  that  their  reply  v  ould  reveal 
his  whereabouts.  And  they  said,  Of  Haran 
are  we.  This  could  scarctly  lail  to  tern  nd 
Jacob  of  God's  promise  to  guide  him  in 
his  journey. 

V  er.  5.  — And  he  said  unto  them  (with  the 
view  of  discovering  his  kinsmen),  Enow 
ye  Laban  the  son  of  NahorT — i.  e.  the 
grandson,  Laban's  father  having  been 
Betluel,  who,  however,  lit  re,  as  in  ch. 
xxiv.,  retires  into  the  background.  And 
they  said,  We  know  him.  The  language 
of  the  shepherds  being  Cbaldaean  (vide  ch. 
xxxi.  47),  Jacob,  who  spoke  Hebrew,  was 
aide  to  converse  with  thtrn  either  because 
he  had  learnt  Chaldee  irom  his  mother 
(Clericus),  or,  as  is  more  probable,  because 
the  dialects  were  not  then  greatly  dissim- 
ilar (Gosmau  in  Lange). 

Ver.  6. — And  he  said  unto  them,  Is  he 
wein  Literally,  is  there  peace  to  him  f 
meaning  not  simply  bodily  htalth,  but  all 
manner  of  felici  y  ;  iS-yiatvei  (LXX.);  sa- 
nusne  est?  (Vulgate>.  Cf.  the  Christian 
salutation,  Pax  voliscum.  And  they  said, 
He  is  well  diterally,  peace):  and,  behold, 
Rachel — "  Ewe"  (Gesenius) — his  daughter 
cometh  with  the  sheep. 

Ver.  7. — Andhe  said,  Lo,  it  isyet  high  day 
(literally,  the  day  is  yet  great,  i.  e.  much  of 
it  still  remains),  neither  is  it  time  that  the 
cattle  should  be  gathered  together  (i.  e.  to 
shut  them  up  for  th?  night):  water  ye  the 
sheep  and  go  anH  feed  them — being  desirous 
to  get  the  shepherds  away  from  the  well 
that  he  might  meet  Rachel  alone  (Keil, 
Lange,Murphy),thougb  perhaps  hiswords 
with  as  much  correctness  may  be  traced  to 
that  prudent  and  industrious  habit  of  mind 
which  afterwards  shone  forth  so  conspic- 
uously in  himself,  and  which  instinctively 
caused  him  to  frown  upon  laziness  and 
inactivity  (Starke,  Kalisch,  Bush). 


CH.  XXIX.  1—14.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


357 


Ver.  8. — And  they  said,  We  cannot, — not 
because  of  any  physical  difficulty  (Ka- 
lisch),  since  three  men  could  easily  have 
accomplished  what  Jacob  by  himself  did, 
but  because  they  had  agreed  not  to  do  so 
(Rosenmilller,  Murphy),  but  to  wait — 
until  all  the  flocks  be  gathered  together 
(when  the  watering  was  done  at  once,  in- 
stead of  at  so  many  different  times),  and 
till  they  roll  the  stone  from  the  well's 
mouth; — more  correctly  rendered,  and  (so. 
then,  i.  e.  when  the  flocks  are  assembled) 
they  i.  e.  the  shepherds)  roll  away  the 
stone— then  (or,  and)  we  water  the  sheep 
The  object  of  watering  the  flocks  collec- 
tively may  have  been,  as  above  stated, 
for  convenience,  or  to  prevent  the  well 
from  being  opened  too  frequently,  in 
which  case  dust  might  rapidly  accumu- 
late within  it  (Kalisch),  or  perhaps  to  se- 
cure an  equal  distributioa  of  the  water 
(Murphy). 

Ver.  9.— And  while  he  yet  spake  with 
them  (literally,  he  yet-speaking  witli  them), 
Rachel  came  with  her  father's  sheep:  for 
she  kept  them — or,  she  was  a  shepherdess, 
the  part.  flSH  being  used  as  a  substan- 
tive (Gesenius,  'Let.,'  sub.  nom.). 

Ver.  10. — And  it  oame  to  pass,  when 
Jacob  saw  Rachel  the  daughter  of  Laban 
his  mother's  brother,—"  the  term  mother's 
brother  is  not  unintentionally  repeated 
three  times  in  this  verse  to  describe  with 
the  greatest  possible  stress  that  Jacob  had 
met  with  his  own  relations,  with  "his 
bone  and  his  flesh"  (Kalisch)— and  the 
sheep  of  Laban  his  mother's  brother  (Jacob 
from  the  first  takes  particular  notice  of 
Laban's  flock,  perhaps  regarding  them  as 
a  sign  of  Laban's  wealth.  If  Laban's 
daughter  had  her  attractions  for  the  son 
of  Isaac,  so  also  had  Laban's  sheep),  that 
Jacob  went  near,  and  rolled  the  stone  from 
the  well's  mouth  (probably  disregarding 
the  shepherds'  rule  to  wait  for  the  gath- 
ering of  all  the  flocks,  unless,  indeed, 
Rachel's  was  the  last),  and  watered  the 
flock  of  Laban  his  mother's  brother.  The 
threefold  repetition  of  this  phrase  does 
not  prove  that  Jacob  acted  in^  all  this 
purely  as  a  cousin  (Lange).  The  phrase 
is  the  historian's,  and  Jacob  had  not  yet 
informed  Rachel  of  his  name. 

Ver.  11. — And  Jacob  kissed  Rachel, — in 
demonstration  of  his  cousinly  affection. 
If  Jacob  had  not  yet  discovered  who  he 
was  to  the  fair  shepherdess,  his  behaviour 
must  have  filled  her  with  surprise,  even 
allowing  for  the  unaffected  simplicity  of 


the  times;  but  the  fact  that  she  does  not 
resent  his  conduct  as  an  undue  liberty 
perhaps  suggests  that  he  had  first  in- 
formed her  of  his  relationship  to  the  in- 
mates of  Laban's  house  (Calvin).  On 
kissing  vide  ch.  xxvii.  26 — and  lifted  up 
his  voice,  and  wept — partly  for  joy  at  find- 
ing his  relatives  (cf.  ch.  xliii.  30;  xlv.  2, 
14,  15);  partly  in  grateful  acknowledg- 
ment of  God's  kindness  in  conducting  him 
to  his  mother's  brother's  house. 

Ver.  12. — And  Jacob  told  (or,  had  told, 
ut  supra)  Rachel  that  he  was  her  father's 
brother, — as  Lot  is  called  Abraham's 
brother,  though  in  reality  his  nephew  (ch. 
xiii.  8;  xiv.  14,  16)— and  that  he  was  Re- 
bekah's  son  (this  clause  would  explain,the 
meaning  of  the  term  "brother''  in  the 
former):  and  she  ran  and  told  her  father. 
Like  Rebekah,  believing  the  stranger's 
words  and  running  to  report  them,  though, 
unlike  Rebekah,  first  relating  them  to  her 
father)  cf.  ch.  xxiv.  28). 

Ver.  13. — And  it  came  to  pass,  when 
Laban  heard  the  tidings  (literally,  heard 
the  hearing,  or  thing  heard,  i.  e.  the  re- 
port of  the  arrival)  of  Jacob  his  sister's 
son, — he  acted  very  much  as  he  did 
ninety-seven  years  before,  when  Abra- 
ham's servant  came  to  woo  his  sister  (ch. 
xxiv.  20,  30)  that  (literally,  and)  he  ran 
to  meet  him  and  embraced  him, — so  after- 
wards Esau  did  Jacob  (ch.  xxxiii.  4),  and 
Jacob  the  two  sons  of  Joseph  (ch.  xlviii. 
10) — and  kissed  him,  and  brought  him  to 
his  house — thus  evincing  the  same  kind- 
ness and  hospitality  that  had  character- 
ised him  on  the  previous  occasion.  And 
he  (Jacob)  told  Laban  all  these  things — 
what  his  mother  had  instructed  him  to 
say  to  attest  his  kinship  (Calvin) ;  the 
things  related  in  the  immediate  context 
(Keil),  more  likely  the  entire  story  of  his 
life,  and  in  particular  of  his  exile  from 
home,  with  its  cause  and  object  (Rosen- 
milller, Kalisch,  Lange). 

Ver.  14. — And  Laban  said  unto  him 
(giving  utterance  to  the  impression  Jacob's 
recital  had  produced  upon  his  mind), 
Surely  thou  art  my  bone  and  my  flesh — 
i.  e.  my  blood  relation  (cf.  Judges  ix.  2;  2 
Sam.  v.  1).  Laban  meant  that  Jacob  had 
satisfactorily  proved  himself  Rebekah's 
son.  And  he  abode  with  him  the  space 
of  a  month — literally,  a  month  of  days 
(cf.  ch.  xli.  1;  Numb.  xi.  20),  or  a  month 
as  regards  time,  "the  second  substantive 
describing  the  general  notion  of  which 
the  first  is  a  specification  "  (Kalisch). 


358  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  [CH.  xxix.  1—14. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 14. — Jacob  at  the  well  of  Haran :  a  romantic  adventure.  I.  Jacob's 
meeting  with  the  shephebds.  1.  The  providential  discovery.  The  well  in  the 
field  with  the  three  flocks  of  sheep  lying  by  it  enabled  Jacob  to  ascertain  his  where- 
abouts, and  ultimately  led  to  his  finding  Rachel.  God  guides  the  steps  of  his 
people  without  interfering  with  the  ordinary  course  of  nature,  simply  directing  them 
in  the  exercise  of  sense  and  intelligence;  and  doubtless  Jacob  recognised  in  his 
lighting  on  the  Harau  well  a  first  instalment  of  that  celestial  guidance  he  had  been 
lately  promised.  Saints  should  practise  the  art  of  discerning  the  movement  of  God's 
finger  in  the  minutest  and  commonest  events  of  life.  2.  The  friendly  conversation. 
Saluting  the  shepherds  as  his  brethren,  i.  e.  as  masters  of  a  common  craft,  Jacob 
gathers  from  their  frank  communications  that  he  was  on  the  outskirts  of  Haran,  in 
which  his  uncle  Laban  was  a  prosperous  and  wealthy  citizen,  and  that  his  cousin 
Rachel  was  on  the  road  to  that  very  well  beside  which  he  stood  with  a  flock  of  her 
father's  sheep.  Great  is  the  virtue  of  asking  questions,  especially  when  they  are 
prefaced  with  politeness.  Seldom  anything  is  lost,  but  frequently  much  is  gained, 
by  courteous  inquiries  3.  The  prudent  counsel.  Observing  his  friends  disposed  to 
indolence,  and  perhaps  desirous  of  meeting  Rachel  alone,  Jacob  recommends  them 
to  uncover  the  well,  water  their  flocks,  and  drive  them  off  again  to  pasture,  since 
much  of  the  day  yet  remained.  If  it  was  their  advantage  he  sought,  his  advice  was 
good;  if  it  was  his  own  interest  he  served,  the  stratagem  was  ingenious.  God's 
people  should  be  wise  as  serpents,  but  harmless  as  doves. 

II.  Jacob's  first  sight  of  rachel.  1.  The  gallant  action.  The  lovely  shep- 
herdess arriving  made  a  deep  impression  on  her  cousin's  heart.  Springing  to  his 
feet,  he  rolls  the  stone  from  the  well's  mouth,  fills  the  troughs,  and  waters  Laban's 
sheep— impelled  thereto,  shall  we  say,  as  much  by  consideration  for  the  fair  girl 
who  attended  them  as  for  the  rich  flock-master  who  possessed  them..  Kindly  acts 
proceeding  from  loving  hearts  are  sometimes  largely  assisted  by  the  attractions  of 
their  recipients.  2.  The  loving  salutation.  "And  Jacob  kissed  Rachel."  If  before 
explaining  who  he  was,  it  must  have  taken  her  by  surprise  even  in  those  unconven- 
tional times;  but  it  is  probable  he  may  have  first  announced  his  name,  in  which  case 
his  behaviour  was  only  in  accordance  with  the  manners  of  the  age.  Suitable 
expressions  of  affections  to  friends  beseem  both  grace  and  nature.  3.  The  irrepressible 
emotion.  "And  Jacob  lifted  up  his  voice  and  wept" — expressive  both  of  joy  at 
finding  his  relatives,  and  of  gratitude  for  God's  goodness  in  guiding  him  to  the  house 
of  his  mother's  brother.  Unexpected  good  and  eminent  providences  kindle  trans- 
ports of  delight  in  gracious  souls.  4.  The  important  communication.  "Jacob  told 
Rachel  that  he  was  her  father's  brother,  and  that  he  was  Rebekah's  son:  and  she  ran 
and  told  her  father.  Friends,  and  much  more  Christians,  meeting  on  life's  journey, 
should  with  frankness  discover  themselves  to  each  other,  and  give  each  other  hearty 
welcome. 

III.  Jacob's  introduction  to  Laban.  1.  The  uncle's  reception  of  Ms  nepJiew. 
"Laban  ran  to  meet  his  sister's  son,  and  embraced  him,  and  kissed  him,  and  brought 
him  to  his  bouse. "  Kinship  and  kindness  should  ever  be  allied.  Laban's  hospitality 
to  Jacob  was  grounded  on  the  fact  of  their  relationship.  So  is  Christ's  entertain- 
ment of  his  people  based  upon  the  circumstance  that  they  aie  "  members  of  his  body, 
of  his  flesh,  and'  of  his  bones."  2.  Tlie  nephew's  return  to  his  uncle.  Ingenuous 
confidence — "Jacob  told  Laban  all  these  things  " — and  faithful  service.  It  is  implied 
in  ver.  15  that  during  the  month  Jacob  abode  with  Laban  he  served  in  keeping 
Laban's  sheep.  God's  people  should  endeavour  as  far  as  in  them  lies  to  requite  the 
kindness  of  relatives  and  friends. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ch.  xxix. — Jacob  among  his  mother's  kindred.  Taught  by  experience  to  be 
patient.     His  own  craft  reflected  in  Laban.     Lessons  to  be  learned. 

I.  The  connection  between  the  teaching  of  God  in  the  inner  man  and 
his  leadings  in  providence.  Jacob  learned  what  he  needed  to  learn— dependence, 
self-humiliation.     Saw  the  evil  of  selfishness;  understood  that  the  Divine  purposes 


ch.  xxix.  15—30.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  •BNBill 


must  not  be  identified  in  our  thought  with  our  personal  feelings  and  desires.     We 
must  wait  on  God  to  know  what  his  will  is. 

II.  The  independence  of  God's  grace.  The  chosen  instruments  not  chosen  for 
their  own  sake.  Often  that  which  displeases  us  is  our  special  help  Leah,  not  chosen 
by  Jacob,  bore  him  sous.  Rachel,  whom  he  loved,  was  barren.  Even  in  such  mixed 
soil  as  these  characters  the  seed  of  Divine  life  will  grow.  Leah  gave  names  to  her 
children  which  betokened  an  increasing  fafth.  Jacob's  willingness  to  serve  was  a 
gracious  victory  over  self,  preparing  him  for  higher  things.  Thwarted  man  is  taught 
to  wait  upon  God. 

III.  Practical  lessons  on  the  relations  op  the  sexes  and  married  life,  &c. 
The  misery  of  a'l  that  interferes  with  the  sanctity  of  affection  and  its  supremacy. 
The  certainty  that  lack  of  candour  and  truthfulness  will  be  fruitful  in  evil  results. 
The  importance  of  right  feeling  in  sustaining  religious  character ;  how  difficult, 
where  the  relationship  is  not  founded  on  affection,  to  maintain  truth,  purity,  and  a 
lofty  standard  of  life.  We  must  try  to  see  disappointments  from  a  higher  point  of 
view.  God  may  withhold  what  we  desire,  but  only  to  give  afterwards  a  fuller 
blessing. — R. 

EXPOSITION. 


Ver.  15. — And  Laban  said  unto  Jacob 
(probably  at  the  month's  end),  Because 
thou  art — literally,  is  it  not  that  thou  art 
(cf.  cli.  xxvii.  36 ;  2  Sam.  xxiii.  19) — my 
brother, — my  kinsman  (vide  on  ver.  12) 
— shouldest  thou  therefore  serve  me  for 
nought?  (literally,  and  thou  servest  me 
gratuitously)  tell  me,  what  shall  thy  wagas 
be  ?  A  proof  of  Laban 's  generosity  an  1 
justice  (Kalisch) ;  of  his  selfishness  and 
greed  (Keil) ;  of  his  prudence  and  sagacity 
in  opening  up  the  way  for  a,  love-suit 
(Lange). 

Ver.  16. — And  Laban  had  two  daughters 
(the  wife  of  Laban  is  not  mentioned  in 
the  story):  the  name  of  the  elder  was 
Ltah, — "Wearied"  vGesenius)  ;  "Dull," 
"Stupid"  (Fiirst) ;  "Pining,"  "Yearn- 
ing" (Lange) — and  the  name  of  the 
younger  was  Bachel — "Ewe"  (Gesenius). 

Ver.  17. — Leah  was  tender  eyed.  Liter- 
ally, the  eyes  of  Leah  were  tender,  i.  e. 
weak,  dull ;  do-Scvtls  (LXX.),  lippi  (Vul- 
gate) ;  cf.  1  Sam.  xvi.  12.  Leah's  face  was 
not  ugly  (Bohlen),  only  her  eyes  were  not 
clear  and  lustrous,  dark  and  sparkling, 
as  in  all  probability  Rachel's  were  (Kno- 
bel).  But  Bachel  was  beautiful  and  well 
favoured.  Literally,  beautiful  in  form 
(i.  e.  in  outline  and  make  of  body  ;  cf.  ch. 
xxxix.  6;  also  1  Sam.  xvi.  18 — "a  man  of 
form,"  i.  e.  formosus,  well  made)  and 
beautiful  in  appearance  (i.  e.  of  a  lovely 
countenance).  "If  authentic  history  was 
not  in  the  way,  Leah,  as  the  mother  of 
Judah,  and  of  the  Davidic  Messianic  line, 
ought  to  have  carried  off  the  prize  of 
beauty  after  Sarah  and  Eebekah"  (Lange). 

Ver.  18.— And  Jacob  loved  Bachel  (it  is 
more  than  probable  that  this  was  an  illus- 
tration of  what  is  known  as  "love  at  first 
sight "  on  the  part  of  Rachel  as  well  as 
Jacob);  and  said,  I  will  serve  thee  seven 
years  for  Bachel  thy  younger  daughter. 


Having  no  property  with  which  to  buy 
his  wife,  according  to  Oriental  custom 
(Kalisch),  or  to  give  the  usual  dowry  for 
her  to  her  father  (Keil), — cf.  ch.  xxiv.  53; 
xxxiv.  12;  1  Sam.  xviii.  25,— Jacob's  offer 
was  at  once  accepted  by  his  grasping 
uncle,  though  he  was  that  uncle's 
"brother"  (ver.  15). 

Ver.  19. — And  Laban  said,  It  is  better 
that  I  give  her  to  thee,  than  that  I  should 
give  her  to  another  man.  Orientals  com- 
monly prefer  alliances  within  the  circle 
of  their  own  relatives.  Burckhardt,  Vol- 
ney,  Layard,  and  Lane  testify  that  this  is 
still  the  case  among  the  Bedouins,  the 
Druses,  and  other  Eastern  tribes.  Abide 
with  me  —a  formal  ratification  of  the  com- 
pact on  the  part  of  Laban. 

Ver.  20. — And  Jacob  served — hard  ser- 
vice (ch.  xxxi.  40,  41),  in  keeping  sheep 
(Hosea  xii.  12)— seven  years  for  Bachel. 
The  purity  and  intensity  of  Jacob's  affec- 
tion was  declared  not  alone  by  the  pro- 
posal of  a  seven  years'  term  of  servitude, 
— a  long  period  of  waiting  for  a-man  of 
fifty-seven,  if  not  seventy-seven,  years  of 
age,— but  also  by  the  spirit  in  which  he 
served  his  avaricious  relative.  Many  as 
the  days  were  that  required  to  intervene 
before  he  obtained  possession  of  his  bride, 
they  were  rendered  happy  by  the  sweet 
society  of  Rachel.  And  they  seemed  unto 
him  but  a  Uw  days,  for  the  love  he  had  to 
her.  "  Words  breathing  the  purest  tender- 
ness and  expressing  more  emphatically 
than  the  flowery  hyperboles  of  romantic 
phraseology  the  deep  attachment  of  an 
affectionate  heart"  (Kalisch);  words  too 
which  show  the  lofty  appreciation  Jacob 
had  of  the  personal  worth  of  his  future 
bride. 

Ver.  21. — And  Jacob  said  unto  Laban 
(who,  though  the  term  of  servitude  had 
expired,  appeared  to  be  in  no  haste  to 


360 


THE  BOOK  OF  «BNESI&. 


[ch.  xxix.  15—89. 


implement  his  part  of  the  bargain),  Give 
me  my  wife  (i.  e.  my  affianced  wife,  as  in 
Deut.  xxii.  23,  24  ;  Matt.  i.  20),  for  my 
days  are  fulfilled  (i.  e.  my  term  of  service 
is  completed),  that  I  may  go  in  into  her — 
quo  significat  intacta/m  adhuc  esse  virginem 
(Calvin) ;  a  proof  that  Jacob's  love  was 
pure  and  true. 

Ver.  22. — And  Laban  (unable  to  evade 
or  delay  the  fulfilment  of  his  agreement 
with  Jacob)  gathered  together  all  the  men 
of  the  place  (not  the  entire  population,  but 
the  principal  inhabitants),  and  made  a  feast 
— a  "mishteh,"  or  drinking  (cf.  ch.  xix. 
3),  i.  e.  a  wedding  banquet  (cf.  bride-ale  = 
bridal),  which  commonly  lasted  seven 
days  (judges  xi v.  10;  Tobitxi.  18),  though 
it  appears  to  have  varied  according  to  the 
circumstances  of  the  bridegroom. 

Ver.  23. — And  it  came  to  pass  in  the 
evening,  that  he  took  Leah  his  daughter, 
and  brought  her  to  him.  The  deception 
practised  on  Jacob  was  rendered  possible 
by  the  fact  that  the  bride  was  usually 
conducted  into  the  marriage  chamber 
veiled  ;  the  veil  being  so  long  and  close 
as  to  conceal  not  only  the  face,  but  much 
of  the  person  {vide  ch.  xxiv.  65).  And  lie 
went  1b  unto  her.  The  conduct  of  Laban 
is  perfectly  intelligible  as  the  outcome  of 
his  sordid  avarice  ;  but  it  is  difficult  to 
understand  how  Leah  could  acquiesce  in 
a  proposal  so  base  as  to  wrong  her  sister 
by  marrying  one  who  neither  sought  nor 
loved  her.  She  must  herself  have  been 
attached  to  Jacob ;  and  it  is  probable  that 
Laban  had  explained  to  her  his  plan  for 
bringing  about  a  double  wedding. 

Ver.  24. — And  Laban  gave  unto  his 
daughter  Leah  Zilpah — "  the  Dropping  "  ? 
(Gesenius),  "Myrrh-juice"  (Pilrst)— his 
maid  (according  to  Gesenius  the  word  is 
closely  connected  with  an  unused  root 
signifying  to  spread  out.  hence  a  maid- 
servant) for  an  handmaid.  This  was  in 
accordance  with  Oriental  custom  {vide  ch. 
xxiv.  61).  That  Leah  obtained  only  one 
damsel  need  not  be  ascr.bed  to  Laban's 
parsimonious  character,  but  to  his  already, 
formed  intention  to  bestow  a  second  on 
Rachel. 

Ver.  25. — And  it  came  to  pass,  that  in 
the  morning,  behold,  it  was  Lea.  If  Ja 
cob's  deception,  even  with  the  veiled 
bride,  may  still  be  difficult  to  understand, 
it  is  easy  to  perceive  in  Leah's  substitu- 
tion for  Rachel  a  clear  instance  of  Divine 
retribution  for  the  imposition  he  had 
practised  on  his  father.  So  the  Lord 
oftentimes  rewards  evil-doers  according 
to  their  wickedness  (cf.  2  Sam.  xii.  10-12). 
And  he  said  to  Laban  (who,  Calvin  con- 
jectures, had  given  Jacob  a  splendid  enter- 
tainment the  night  before  to  make  him 


pay  nothiug  about  the  fraud),  What  is 
this  thou  hast  dene  unto  met  did  not  I  serve 
with  thte  for  Rachel!  wheiefore  then  hast 
thou  beguiled  met  It  says  much  for  Jacob 
that  he  did  not  seek  to  repudiate  the 
marriage.  Perhaps  he  saw  the  hand  of 
God  in  what  had  happened,  and  probably 
considered  that,  though  he  had  chosen 
Rachel,  God  bad  selected  Lea  as  his  wife. 
If  so,  it  must  be  set  to  Jacob's  credit  that 
at  the  call  of  God,  thus  providentially 
addressed  to  him,  he  was  prepared  to 
sacrifice  his  best  affections  to  the  claims 
of  religion  and  duty.  It  is  not  Jacob,  but 
Laban,  who  proposes  that  he  should  also 
marry  Rachel. 

Ver.  26.— And  Laban  said,  It  must  not 
be  so  done— the  future  expresses  the 
thought  that  the  custom  has  grown  into 
a  strong  moral  obligation  (Kalisch) — in 
our  country  (Hebrew,  plant),  to  give  the 
younger  before  the  first-born.  The  same 
custom  exists  among  the  Indians  (Rosen- 
mtiller ;  cf.  Roberts,  'Oriental  Illustra- 
tions,'!). 34),  Egyptians  (Lane),  and  other 
Oriental  countries  (Delitzsch). 

Ver.  27.— Fulfil  her  week, — literally, 
make  full  the  week  oft  is  one,  i.  e.  of  Leah, 
if  Leah  was  given  to  Jacob  on  the  first 
night  of  the  festivities  (Calmet,  Rosen- 
miiller,  Keil,  Kalisch, Lange,  Ainsworth) ; 
but  if  Leah  was  married  at  the  close  of 
the  seven  days,  then  it  must  refer  to 
Rachel's  week  (Bush,  Murphy)— and  we 
(including  Laban's  wife  and  eldest  son, 
as  in  ch.  xxiv,  50,  55,  will  give  thee  this 
also  (i.  e.  Eacliel)  for  the  service  which  thou 
shalt  serve  with  me  yet  seven  other  ytars. 
Almost  every  motive  that  is  mean,  base, 
and  despicable  appears  in  this  behaviour 
of  Laban's  ;  if  he  attached  little  value  to 
bis  daughter's  affections,  he  had  a  keen 
appreciation  of  Jacob's  qualities  as  a  shep- 
herd. 

Ver.  28.— And  Jacob  did  so,  and  fulfilled 
her  week.  Literally,  the  week  of  this  one, 
either  of  Leah  or  of  Rachel  as  above. 
Rosenmtiller,  assigning  the  first  week 
(ver.  2?)  to  Leah,  refers  this  to  Rachel ; 
but  the  expression  can  scarcely  have  two 
different  meanings  within  the  crmpass  of 
two  verses.  And  he  gave  him  Rachel  his 
daughter  to  wife  also.  The  polygamy  of 
Jacob,  though  contrary  to  the  law  of  na- 
ture (ch.  ii.  21 — 25),  admits  of  some  pal- 
liation, since  Rachel  was  the  choice  of 
his  affections.  The  marriage  of  sisters 
was  afterwards  declared  incestuous(Levit. 
xviii.  18). 

Ver.  29. — And  Laban  gave  to  Rachel  his 
daughter  Bilhah— "Bashful,"  "Modest" 
(Gesenius)— his  handmaid  to  be  her  maid. 
Ver.  30.— And  he  went  in  also  un'.o  Ba- 
chel, and  he  loved  also  Rachel  more  than 


ch.  xxix   15-30.] 


THE   BOOK   OF  GENESIS. 


861 


Leah  (implying,  however,  tbat  Leah  had 
a  place  in  his  affections)  and  served  with 
him  yet  seven  other  years.  The  seven 
years  cunningly  exacted  for  Leah  was 


thus  the  second  fraud  practised  upon 
Jacob  (ch.  xxx.  26  ;  xxxi.  41 ;  Hosea  xii. 
12). 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  15 — 30. — Jacob  and  Laban,  or  the  deceiver  deceived.  I.  Jacob's  contract 
with  Laban.  1.  The  promised  service — seven  years  of  pastoral  assistauce.  (1) 
Freely  offered.  "  I  will  serve  thee  seven  years.'"  Contracts  are  legally  and  morally 
invalid  where  freedom  in  the  promiser  does  not  exist.  (2)  Faithfully  rendered. 
Jacob  "  served  seven  years,"  as  he  had  stipulated.  Voluntary  engagements  should 
be  deemed  sacred.  (3)  Readily  accepted.  Laban  both  appreciated  Jacob's  merits 
as  a  shepherd  and  regarded  Jacob's  terms  as  easy.  If  Labau's  words  in  closing  with 
Jacob's  offer  did  not  indicate  his  guile,  they  were  at  lea-t  evidence  of  his  greed. 
(4)  Harshly  exacted.  Jacob  teslifies  as  much  on  leaving  Labau.  Covetous  souls  do 
not  shrink  from  making  hard  bargains  even  with  relatives  and  friends.  2.  The 
stipulated  wages — Uacliel  iu  marriage  as  a  wife.  This  part  of  the  contract  was — (1) 
Eagerly  desired  by  Jacob.  "Jacob  loved  Rachel,"  who  was  beautiful  both  in  face 
and  form.  It  is  not  sinful  to  appreciate  or  desire  personal  symmetry  and  grace  iu 
those  to  whom  we  yield  our  affuctious.  Female  loveliness,  though  it  may  enkindle 
love,  need  not  render  the  heart  that  loves  less  pure.  (2)  Patiently  waited  for  by 
Jacob.  This  was  a  testimony  to  the  purity,  tenderness  and  strength  of  Jacob's 
affection.  Besides  transforming  seven  years  into  a  few  dajs,  and  making  plcasaut 
and  lightsome  labor  of  what  would  otherwise  have  been  galling  bondage,  it  en- 
abled him  to  wait  God's  time  for  receiving  his  bride.  (3)  Cheerfully  assented  to  by 
Laban.  "  It  is  better  that  I  give  her  to  thee  than  that  I  should  give  her  to  another 
man."  Yet — (4)  Guilefully  withheld  by  Laban.  Avaricious  men  seldom  scruple  at 
deceiving  others  for  the  sake  of  profit.  Greed  of  gain  is  commonly  accompanied  by 
guile  of  men. 

II.  Laban's  deception  of  Jacob.  1.  The  just  request.  "  Give  me  my  wife.'' 
"  The  labourer  is  worthy  of  his  hire,"  and  the  servant  is  entitled  to  his  wages.  (2) 
The  marriage  festival.  "  Laban  made  a  feast."  Seemingly  assenting  to  bis  nephew's 
request,  the  crafty  uncle  prepares  a  wedding  banquet  Feasting  and- rejoicing  are 
both  becoming  and  allowable  in  connection  with  marriage  celebrations.  3.  The  sub- 
stituted bride.  Either  at  the  end  of  the  first  day  or  at  the  close  of  the  festivities, 
"Laban  took  Leah  and  brought  her,"  veiled  and  in  silence  to  the  bridal  chamber. 
For  the  wickedness  of  Laban  iu  breaking  his  promise,  defrauding  his  nephew, 
wronging  his  younger  daughter,  and  practically  prostituting  his  elder,  excuse  is  im- 
possible; for  Lean's  acquiescence  in  her  father's  plot  explanation,  though  not 
apology,  may  be  found  in  her  manifest  love  for  Jacob,  and  perhaps  iu  her  belief  tbat 
Laban  had  secured  Jacob's  consent  to  the  arrangement.  The  man  who  could  sell 
one  daughter's  affections  and  sacrifice  another's  would  not  stick  at  deceiving  both, 
if  he  could.  4.  The  discovered  fraud.  "In  the  morning,  behold,  it  was  Leah." 
The  day  manifests  what  the  night  hides— the  sins  of  men  ;  and  the  light  of  the  great 
day  will  disclose  what  the  darkness  of  time  conceals.  5.  The  lame  excuse.  Inter- 
rogated by  Jacob,  Laban  offers  in  extenuation  of  his  heartless  deception  that  popular 
custom  demanded  the  marriage  of  an  elder  sister  before  a  younger  So  public  opin- 
ion, prevailing  habit,  universal  practice,  are  often  pled  in  apology  for  offences 
against  the. law  of  God.  But  the  conventional  maxims  of  society  are  of  no  weight 
when  set  against  Divine  commandments.  6.  The  righteous  retribution.  Though  inde- 
fensible on  the  part  of  Laban,  the  substitution  of  Leah  for  Rachel  was  a  deserved 
punishment  of  Jacob.  Having  wronged  Esau  his  brother,  he  is  in  turn  wronged  by 
"a  brother  " — Laban.  Having  substituted  the  younger  (himself)  for  the  older  (Esau), 
he  is  recompensed  by  having  the  older  put  into  the  place  of  the  younger.  As  Isaac 
knew  not  when  he  blessed  Jacob,  so  Jacob  knows  not  when  he  marries  Leah.  As 
Jacob  acted  at  the  instigation  of  his  mother,  Leah  yields  to  the  suggestion  of  her 
father.  7.  The  amicable  settlement.  Jacob  celebrates  the  week  of  festival  for  Leah, 
and  then  receives  Rachel  as  a  wife,  engaging  to  serve  another  term  of  seven  years 
for  her  who  had  lightened  the  labour  of  the  previous  seven.  If  Jacob's  conduct 
evinced  sincere  attachment  to  Rachel  and  peaceful  disposition  towards  Laban,  it  dis- 
played doubtful  regard  for  the  law  of  God. 


862  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  [ch.  xxix.  15-80. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  20  — The  power  of  true  affection.  "  And  Jacob  served  served  seven  years  for 
Rachel,"  &c.  1.  The  inward  spring  of  the  outward  life.  Power  of  the  heart 
over  the  will,  over  the  circumstances,  over  flesh.  Time  measured  by  the  motions  of 
our  thought.     The  world  needs  to  be  taught  that  the  material  rests  on  the  immaterial. 

II.  The  service  of  love  the  consecration  and  consummation  of  human 
energy.  Christ  the  highest  object  of  affection.  The  life  of  his  servant  compared 
with  the  life  of  selfish  caprice. 

HI.  The  great  example  of  love  suggested.  Jacob  a  type  of  Christ ;  Rachel, 
of  his  Church.  He  served  for  her.  His  love  made  obedience,  even  unto  death,  his 
delight. 

VI.  Special  trial  has  its  special  reward  Jacob  served  doubly  for  Rachel ; 
but  his  service  was  amply  paid  afterwards,  although  for  a  time  the  veil  of  disappoint- 
ment hid  the  purpose  of  God.  While,  Leah,  as  the  mother  of  Judau,  was  the  true 
ancestress  of  Messiah,  still  it  was  iu  Joseph,  the  son  of  Rachel,  that  Jacob's  heart 
was  satisfied,  and  that  the  history  of  the  kingdom  of  God  was  most  manifestly  car- 
ried on  and  its  glory  set  forth.  As  in  the  case  of  Sarah  and  Rebeknh,  so  in  that  of 
Rachel,  the  birth  of  the  representative  seed  is  connected  with  special  bestowments 
of  grace. — R. 

Ver.  20. — Christ's  love  for  the  Church.  "  And  Jacob  served  seven  years  for 
Rachel."  On  the  surface  this  is  a  step  in  Jacob's  training,  iu  the  fulfilment  of  God's 
promise  at  Bethel.  It  shows  a  new  feature  in  his  character.  We  see  not  the  man  of 
cunning  devices,  but  one  of  pure,  self-sacrificing  love.  Fourteen  years  of  service 
willingly  given  to  purchase,  according  to  Eastern  custom,  his  bride.  But  Jacob's 
love  suggests  the  deefer  and  purer  love  of  Christ  for  the  Church.  Rachel  a  type  of 
the  Bride  ;  a  shepherdess  and  "  fairest  among  women  "  (Cant.  i.  7,  8);  sharer  of  the 
sufferings  of  the  Church  (Jer.  xxxi.  15  ;  Matt.  ii.  18  ;  Rev.  xii.  17)  For  the  Church's 
sake  (Ephes.  v.  25)  Christ  "  served  (Phil.  ii.  7) ;  became  a  Shepherd  (John  x.  11)  ; 
with  his  service  and  life-blood,  "  obedient  unto  death,"  he  purchased  her  (Acts  xx. 
28),  to  unite  her  to  himself  .for  ever. 

I.  The  Lord  "  served"  because  he  loved  his  Church.  In  condescending 
to  unite  himself  with  human  nature';  in  bearing  the  infirmities  of  childhood  and 
state  of  subjection  ;  in  bearing  the  contradiction  of  sinners  and  the  wrath  of  God. 
And  still  in  standing  and  knocking  (Rev.  iii.  20) ;  in  bearing  with  half-hearted  be- 
lisvers  (2  Pet.  iii.  9)  ;  in  pleading  with  and  for  the  wayward  (1  John  ii.  1  ;  2  Cor.  v. 
20)  ;  in  seeking  and  following  individual  sheep.  The  love  which  led  to  this  was 
free,  not  deserved  or  purchased.  Rachel  brought  no  dowry  to  Jacob.  The  Church 
has  of  its  own  no  spiritual  wealth  (Isa.  lxiv.  6  ;.Rom.  iii.  23).  The  Bridegroom  has 
to  sanctify  and  cleanse  it.  By  nature  unholy,  at  variance  with  God's  will  ;  yet 
knowing  this,  he  loved  it  (cf.  Rom.  viii.  35).  For  love  to  Rachel  Jacob  gave  the 
labour  of  fourteen  years.  For  the  Church  Christ  grudged  nothing — gave  himself. 
Sacrifice  a  mark  of  true  love:  How  many  will  not  sacrifice  anything— will  not  leave 
a  gain,  a  companion,  an  amusement —  to  "win  Christ."  In  the  garden  his  human 
nature  shrank  from  the  bitterness  of  the  cup,  but  he  persevered.     Why  ? 

II.  The  Lord  "served"  that  he  might  unite  us  to  himself.  Marriage, 
the  closest  earthly  tie,  used  as  a  type.  No  mere  removal  of  condemnation  satisfied 
that  love,  nor  even  our  being  made  happy ;  he  became  such  as  we  are,  that  we  might 
become  such  a<  he  is.  The  Church  is  his  Bride  (Ephes.  v.  27  ;  Rev.  xxi.  9),  sharer 
of  his  kingdom  (Rev.  iii.  21 ;  xx.  4),  of  his  blessedness  and  glory  (John  xvii.  22 — 24). 
And  this  belongs  to  its  humblest  and  weakest  member.  A  union  in  this  life  (Cant, 
ii.  16  ;  John  xv.  4)  ;  peace  in  committing  all  cares  to  him,  even  our  own  steadfast- 
ness (John  x.  28 ;  Rom.  viii.  35  ;  Heb.  xiii.  6).  A  union  after  our  departure  more 
close  (Phil.  i.  23).  Here  we  see  dimly  (1  Cor.  xiii.  12).  The  conditions  of  mortal 
life  hinder  clear  visions  (Exod.  xxxiii.  20).  The  law  of  sin  in  our  members  hinders 
perfect  union.  Then  no  impediment  (Luke  xxiii.  43).  Union  perfectsd  after  the 
resurrection  (1  Thess.  iv.  7).     The  body,  which  now  limits  conscious  union,  shall 


ch.  xxix.  31 — 35.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


363 


then  minister  to  its  completeness.  Not  till  then  shall  we  be  perfectly  like  him  in 
his  human  nature. 

III.    HE  "  SBKVBD  "  THAT  WB  MIGHT  HAVE  CONFIDENCE  IN  HIS  LOVE.     Jacob's  love 

not  shaken  by  time,  or  by  the  deceit  practised  upon  him,  a  type  of  Christ's.  Often 
forgetful,  often  faithless,  we  might  well  think,  How  dare  I  trust  to,  a  love  so  often 
neglecled  ?  But  his  love  is  not  wearied  out  (Isa.  xlix.  15).  He  has  graven  us  with 
the  nail-prints  on  his  hands.  His  word  is  still,  "Look  unto  me;"  trust  my  love  (Ps. 
xxxvii.  5). — M. 


EXPOSITION. 


Ver  31 — And  when  the  Lord  saw — liter- 
ally, and  Jehovah  saw.  As  Eve's  son  was 
obtained  from  Jehovah  (ch.  iv.  1),  and 
Jehovah  visited  Sarah  (ch.  xxi.  1),  and 
was  entreated  for  Rebekah  (ch.  xxv.  21), 
so  here  he  again  interposes  in  connection 
with  the  onward  development  of  the  holy 
seed  by  giving  children  to  Jacob's  wives. 
The  present  section  (vers.  31 — 35)  is  by 
Davidson,  Kalisch,  and  others  assigned  to 
the  Jehovist,  by  Tuch  left  undetermined, 
and  by  Colenso  in  several  parts  ascribed 
to  the  Elohist.  Kalisch  thinks  the  con- 
tents of -this  section  must  have  found  a 
place  in  the  earlier  of  the  two  documents 
— that  Leah  was  hated, — i.  e.  less  loved 
(cf.  Mai.  i.  3)— he  opened  her  womb  (cf.  1 
Sam.  i.  5,  6 ;  Ps.  cxxvii.  3) :  but  Rachel 
was  barren — as  Sarai  (ch.  xi.  30)  and  Re- 
bekah (ch.  xxv.  31)  had  been.  The  fruit- 
fulness  of  Leah  and  the  sterility  of  Rachel 
were  designed  not.so  much  to  equalise  the 
conditions  of  the  sisters,  the  one  having 
beauty  and  the  other  children  (Lange),  or 
to  punish  Jacob  for  his  partiality  (Keil), 
or  to  discourage  the  admiration  of  mere 
beauty  (Kalisch),  but  to  prove  that  "the 
origin  of  Israel  was  to  be  a  work  not  of 
nature,  but  of  grace"  (Keil). 

Ver.  32. — And  Leah  conceived,  and  bare 
a  son,  and  she  called  his  name  Reuben 
(literally,  Ben-ben,  Behold  a  Son !  an  ex- 
pression of  joyful  surprise  at  the  Divine 
compassion) :  for  she  said,  Surely  the  Lord 
hath  looked  upon  my  affliction.  Though 
not  directly  contained  in  the  term  Reuben, 
the  sense  of  these  words  is  implied 
(Kalisch).  As  Leah's  child  was  an  intima- 
tion that  she  had  been  an  object  of  Je- 
hovah's compassion,  so  did  she  expect  it 
to  be  a  means  of  drawing  towards  herself 
Jacob's  affection.  Now  therefore  (literally, 
for  now)  my  husband  will  love  me.  She 
was  confident  in  the  first  flush  of  maternal 
joy  that  Jacob's  heart  would  turn  towards 
her ;  she  believed  that  God  had  sent  her 


child  to  effect  this  conversion  of  her  hus- 
band's affections ;  and  she  regarded  the 
birth  of  Reuben  as  a  signal  proof  of  the 
Divine  pity. 

Ver.  33. — And  she  conceived  again,  and 
bare  a  son  (probably  the  following  year) ; 
and  said,  Because  the  Lord  hath  heard  that 
I  was  hated  (the  birth  of  Reuben  had  ob- 
viously not  answered  Leah's  expectations 
in  increasing  Jacob's  love),  he  hath  there- 
fore given  me  this  son  also  (the  faith  and 
piety  of  Leah  are  as  conspicuous  as  her 
affection  for  Jacob) :  and  she  called  his  name 
Simeon— i.  e.  Hearing,  because  God  had 
heard  that  she  was  hated  (ut  supra). 

Ver.  34. — And  she  conceived  again  (say, 
in  the  third  year  of  her  marriage),  and 
bare  a  son  ;  and  said,  Now  this  time  will 
my  husband  be  joined  unto  me,— !"ilb,  to 

join,  is  the  root  from  which  comes  i"b 

(Levi),  her  son's  name — because  I  have 
born  him  three  sons:  therefore  was  his  name 
ca'led  Levi — Associated,  or  Joined. 

Ver.  35. — And  she  conceived  again,  and 
bare  a  son  (possibly  in  the  fourth  year  of 
marriage,  and  in  Jacob's  eighty-eighth 
year  of  age,  he  having  been  seventy-seven 
when  he  arrived  in  Haran,  and  eighty- 
four  when  he  was  married  to  Laban's 
daughters):  and  she  said,  Now  will  I  praise 
the  Lord.  Well  she  nrght ;  for  this  was 
the  ancestorof  thepromisedseed(Murphy). 
There  cannot  be  a  doubt  that  her  excel- 
lence of  character  as  well  as  eminence  of 
piety  eventually  wrought  a  change  upon 
her  husband  (vide  ch.  xxxi.  4,  14  ;  xlix. 
31).  Therefore  she  called  his  name  Judah 
(i.  e.  Praise) ;  and  left  bearing.  Literally, 
stood  still,  i.  e.  ceased,  from  bearing.  Not 
altogether  (ch.  xxx.  16) ;  onlv-  for  a  time 
"that  she  might  not  be  unduly  lifted  up 
by  her  good  fortune,  or  attribute  to  the 
fruitfulness  of  her  own  womb  what  the 
faithfulness  of  Jehovah,  the  covenant 
God,  had  bestowed  upon  her  "  (Keil. ) 


HOMILETIC8. 

Vers.  31 — 35. — Leah  and  Rachel,  or  the  two  wives.  I.  Rachel,  the  beloved 
"Jacob  loved  Rachel  more  than  Leah."  That  Leah  was  not  hated  in  the  sense  of 
being  regarded  with  aversion,  the  numerous  familv  she  bore  to  Jacob  proves ;  that 


864 


THE   BOOK   OF  UENESIS. 


[ch.  xxx.  1 — 13. 


she  occupied  a  lower  place  tliau  Rachel  in  her  husband's  affections  is  explicitly 
declared.  This  preference  of  Rachel  to  Leah  was — 1.  Natural  in  Jacob.  Rachel 
had  been  his  heart's  choice  from  the  first,  while  Leah  had  been  thrust  upon  him 
against  his  inclination.  But  even  had  this  been  otherwise,  as  no  man  can  serve  two 
masters,  so  can  no  husband  love  two  wives  equally — an  argument  against  polygamy. 
2.  Painful  to  Leah.  Had  Leah  loved  Jacob  less  than  she  manifestly  did,  it  is  doubt- 
ful if  the  undue  regard  shown  to  Rachel  would  not  have  inflicted  a  grievous  wound 
upon  her  wifely  heart;  but,  entertaining  towards  him  an  affection  strong  and  tender, 
she  yearned  for  a  larger  share  of  his  esteem,  and  at  each  successive  child  s  birth  gave 
utterance  to  a  hope  that  he  would  yet  be  joined  to  her.  No  heavier  blow  can  be 
dealt  by  a  husband  to  the  tender  heart  of  a  loving  wife  than  lo  withdraw  from  her 
his  love,  or  even  to  be  cold  and  indifferent  in  its  expression.  3.  Sinful  in  the  sight  of 
God.  Though  not  so  beautiful  as  Rachel,  Leah  was  yet  entitled  to  an  equal  share 
with  her  in  Jacob's  affection.  Equally  with  Rachel  she  was  Jacob's  wife.  It  was 
Jacob's  sin  that  he  had  married  her  at  nil  when  he  did  not  either  love  or  desire  her. 
On  detecting  the  fraud  he  should  have  instantly  repudiated  the  engagement.  But 
having  publicly  ratified  the  contract  with  Leah  by  fulfilling  her  week,  he  owed  to 
Leah  a  full  share  of  his  affection  as  a  husband.  Nay,  though  not  the  wife  his  inclina- 
tion had  selected,  there  is  reason  for  believing  that  Leah,  rather  than  Rachel,  was 
the  bride  God  had  chosen  (Leah  was  the  ancestress  of  the  Saviour) ;  hence  doubly 
was  Jacob  bound  to  love  Leah  equally  with  Rachel. 

II.  Leah  the  fruitful.  While  Rachel  enjoyed  the  highest  place  in  Jacob's 
affection,  she  was  "barren  " — a  grievous  affliction  to  one  who  might  possibly  be  the 
mother  of  the  promised  Seed.  The  fruit  fulness  of  Leah  was — 1.  Expressly  caused  by 
God.  The  Lord,  who  had  decreed  temporary  barrenness  for  Rachel  the  fair,  opened 
the  womb  of  Leah  the  despised  ;  neither  to  compensate  Leah  for  the  loss  of  Jacob's 
love,  nor  to  punish  Jacob  for  his  sinful  partiality ;  but  to  manifest  his  power,  to 
show  that  children  are  the  heritage  of  ihe  Lord,  to  vindicate  his  sovereignty,  to  attest 
that  God  giveth  families  to  whomsoever  he  will,  and  to  suggest  that  the  line  of 
promise  was  designed  to  be  not  the  fruit  of  nature,  but  the  gift  of  grace.  2.  Thank- 
fully acknowledged  by  Leah.  While  cherishing  the  hope  that  her  children  would 
eventually  unite  Jacob's  heart  to  her  own,  she  delightedly  recognised  her  exceptional 
fruitfulness  as  a  special  mark  of  Jehovah's  favour,  and  gave  expression  to  her  grati- 
tude in  the  miming  of  her  sons:  Reuben,  see,  a  son  I  Simon,  hearing;  Levi,  joined; 
Judah,  praise.  3.  Enviously  beheld  by  Rachel.  This  appears  from  the  opening 
statement  in  the  ensuing  chapter  ;  and  this,  though  perhaps  as  natural  as  Leah's 
sense  of  pain  at  Rachel's  preference  by  Jacob,  was  yet  as  sinful  as  Jacob's  excessive 
partiality  towards  herself. 

Learn — 1.  The  sinfulness  and  sorrow  of  having  more  wives  at  once  than  one.  3. 
The  wickedness  of  wedding  where  one  does  not  love.  3.  The  sovereignty  of  God  in 
giving  and  withholding  children.  4.  The  cruelty  and  criminality  of  snowing  par- 
tiality towards  thos  ■  who  possess  an  equal  claim  on  our  affections.  3.  The  "duty  and 
profit  of  remembering  and  acknowledging  family  mercies. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXX. 
Ver.  1. — And  when  Kachel  saw  (appar- 
ently after,  though  probably  before,  the 
birth  of  Leah's  fourth  son)  that  she  bare 
Jacob  no  children  (literally,  that  she  bare 
not  to  Jacob),  Kachel  envied  her  sister  (was 
jealous  of  her,  the  root  referring  to  the 
reilness  with  which  the  face  of  an  angry 
woman  is  suffused)  ;  and  said  unto  Jacob, 
Give  me  children  (sous),  or  else  I  die — liter- 
ally, and  if  not,!  am  a  dead  woman;  i.  e. 
for  shame  at  her  sterility.  Rachel  had 
three  stroHg  reasons  for  desiring  children 
— that  she  might  emulate  her  sister,  be- 
come mere  dear  to  her  husband,  and  above 


all  share  the  hope  of  being  a  progenitrix 
of  the  promised  Seed.  If  not  warranted 
to  infer  that  Rachel's  barrenness  was  due 
to  lack  of  prayer  on  her  part  and  Jacob's 
(Keil),  we  are  at  least  justified  in  assert'ng 
that  her  conduct  in  breaking  forth  kto 
angry  reproaches  against  her  husband  was 
unlike  that  of  Jacob's  mother,  Rebekah, 
who,  in  similar  circumstances,  sought  re- 
lief in  prayer  and  oracles  (Kalisch).  The 
brief  period  that  had  elapsed  since 
Rachel's  marriage,  in  comparison  with 
the  twenty  years  of  Rebekah's  barrenness, 
signally  discovered  Rachel's  sinful  im- 
patience. 


en.  xxx.  1 — 13 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


365 


Ver.  2. — And  Jacob's  anger  was  kindled 
against  Rachel  (not  without  j  ust  cause,  since 
she  not  only  evinced  a  want  of  faith  and 
resignation,  but  wrongfully  imputed  blame 
to  him) : — and  he  said,  Am  I  in  God's  stead, 
i.  e.  am  I  omnipotent  like  him  ?  This  you 
yourself  will  surely  not  presume  to  be- 
lieve. The  interrogative  particle  conveys 
the  force  of  a  spirited  denial  {vide  Ewald, 
'  Hebrew  Syntax,'  §  334)— Who  hath  with- 
b.  Id  from  me  the  fruit  of  the  womb  %  Ra- 
chel herself  understood  that  God  alone 
could  remove  sterility  (ver.  6) ;  but  to  this 
fact  jealousy  of  Leah  appears  for  the  mo- 
ment to  have  blinded  her. 

Ver.  3  — And  she  said,— resorting  to  the 
sinful  expedient  of  Sarah  (ch.  xvi.  2), 
though  without  Sarah's  excuse,  since 
there  was  no  question  whatever  about  an 
heir  for  Jacob;  which  even  if  there  had 
been,  would  not  have  justified  a  practice 
which,  in  the  case  of  her  distinguished 
relative,  had  been  so  palpably  condemned 
— Behold  my 'maid  Bilhah  (vide  ch  xxix. 
29),  go  in  unto  her  ;  and  she  shall  bear  upon 
my  knees, — i.  e.  children  that  I  may  place 
upon  my  knees,  as  mothers  do  (Piscator, 
a  Lapide,  Calvin,  Rosenmiiller,  Lange, 
Ainsworth);  the  literal  sense  of  the  words 
being  too  absurd  to  require  refutation — 
that  I  may  also  have  children— literally, 
be  builded  up  (cf .  ch.  xvi.  2)  by  her. 

Ver.  4. — And  she  gave  him  Bilhah  her 
handmaid  to  wi  e  :  and  Jacob  went  in  unto 
her  "  Whence  we  gather  that  there  is  no 
end  of  sin  where  once  the  Divine  insti- 
tution of  narriage  is  neglected  "  (Calvin). 
Jacob  began  with  polygamy,  and  is  now 
drawn  into  concubinage.  Though  God 
overruled  this  for  the  development  of  the 
seed  of  Israel,  he  did  not  thereby  condone 
the  offence  of  eithrr  Jacob  or  Rachel. 

Ver.  5 — And  Bilhah  conceived,  and  bare 
Jacob  a  son.  "  Conception  and  birth  may 
be  granted  to  irregular  marriages" 
(Hughes).  "  So  God  often  strives  to  over- 
come men's  wickedness  through  kindness, 
and  pursues  the  unworthy  with  h  s  grace" 
(Calvin). 

Ver.  6. — And  Rachel  said,  God  hath 
judged  me, — "hath chastened  me."  asinch. 
xv.  14  (Ainswortn,  Wordsworth);  bettt-r, 
"hath  procured  for  me  justice,  as  if  reck- 
oning her  sterility  an  injustice  bv  the  side 
of  Leah  s  fecundity  (Keii,  Langej;  or,  hath 
carried  through  my  cause  like  a  patron, 
i.  e.  hath  vindicated  me  from  the  reproach 
of  barrenness (Munster,  Rosenmuller);  or, 
hath  dealt  with  me  according  to  his  sov 
ereign  justice,  withholding  from  me  the 
fruit  of  the  womb  while  I  was  forgetful 
of  my  dependence  <  n  him,  and  granting 
me  posterity  when  I  approached  him  in 
.humble  supplication  (Murphy),  which  it  is 


obvious  from  the  next  clause  that  Rachel 
did — and  hath  also  heard  my  voice,  and 
hath  given  me  a  son.  With  undue  severity 
older  interpreters  regard  Rachel  as  using 
the  Divine  name  more  hypoeritarum, 
who,  when  their  schemes  prosper,  think 
that  God  favours  them  (Vatablus,  Cal- 
vin). The  employment  of  Elohim  by  Jacob 
and  Rachel,  supposed  to  mark  the  first 
thirteen  verses  as  belonging  to  the  primi- 
tive document  (Tuch,  Bleek,  Kalisch), 
though  by  others(Davidson.  Colenso)  they 
are  ascribed  to  the  Jehovist,  is  sufficiently 
explained  by  Rachel's  consciousness  that 
in  a  large  measure  her  handmaid's  son  was 
rather  the  fruit  of  her  own  impious  de- 
vice than  the  gift  of  Jehovah  (Hengsten- 
berg).  Therefore  called  she  his  name  Dan — 
i.  e.  "Judge,  one  decreeing  justice,  vin- 
■dex,  from  vn  to  judge  (Gesenius,  Keil, 
Lange,  etalii),  though,  as  in  other  proper 
names,  e.  g.  Joseph,  Zebulun,  in  which 
two  verbs  are  alluded  to,  Michaelis  thinks 
non  ajudicando  solum,  sed  et  ab  audiendo 
nomen  accepisse  Danem,  and  connects  it 
with  another  verb,  a  denominative  from 
an  Arabic  root,  signifying  to  hear  (vide 
•Suppl.,'  p.  425). 

Vers.  7,  8. — And  Bilhah  Rachel's  maid 
conceived  again,  and  bare  Jacob  a  se:ond 
son.  And  Ra  hel  said,  Wi  h  great  wrest- 
lings have  I  wrestled  with  my  -sister,— 
literally,  wrestlings  of  God  have  I  wrestled 
with  my  sister'  meaning,  by  ' '  wrestlings  of 
Elohim  ; "  not  great  wrestlings  in  rivalry 
with  Leah  (A.  V.,  Vatablus,  Ainsworth, 
Rosenmilller,  Calvin),  nor  wrestlings  in 
the  cause  of  God,  as  being  unwilling  to 
leave  the  founding  of  the  nation  to  her 
sister  alone  (Knobel),  but  wrestlings  with 
God  in  prayer  (Delitzsch,  Lange,  Murphy, 
Kalisch),  wrestlings  regarding  Elohim 
and  his  grace  (Hengstenberg,  Keil),  in 
which  she  at  the  same  time  contended 
with  her  sister,  to  whom  apparently  that 
grace  had  been  hitherto  restricted — acd 
I  have  prevailed  (scarcely  in  the  sense  of 
achieving  a,  victory  over  Leah,  who  had 
already  borne  four  sons,  but  in  the  sense 
of  drawing  the  Divine  favour,  though  only 
indirectly  towards  herself) ;  and  she  called 
his  name  Naphtali — i.  e.J'  My  Wrestling." 

Ver.  9.  —When  Leah  saw  that  she  had 
left  bearing  (literally,  stood  from  bearing, 
as  in  ch.  xxix.  35),  Bhe  took  Zilpah  her 
maid  and  gave  her  to  Jacob  to  wife — being 
in  this  led  astray  by  Rachel's  sinful  ex- 
ample, both  as  to  the  spirit  of  unhrly 
rivalry  she  cherished,  and  the  questionable 
means  she  employed  for  its  gratification. 

Vers.  10,  11.— And  Zilpah  Leah's  maid 
bare  Jacob  a  son.  And  Leah  said,  A  troop 
cometh.     "It3,  for  1;3,  in  or  with  good 


THE   BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[CH.  XXX.  1- 


fortune  ;  kv  ri\i\  (LXX.)  ;  feliciter,  sc. 
this  happens  to  nie  (Vulgate),  a  transla- 
tion which  has  the  sanction  of  Gesenius, 
Piirst,  Rosemnttller,  Keil,  Kalisch,  and 
other  competent  authorities — the  Keri, 
which  is  followed  by  Onkelos  and  Syriac, 
reading  *U  N3,  fortune  cometh.  The  Au- 
thorised rendering,  supported  by  the  Sa- 
maritan, and  supposed  to  accord  better 
with  ch.  xlix.  19,  is  approved  by  Calvin, 


Ainsworth,   Bush,  and  others.     And  she 
called  his  name  Gad — i.  e.  Good  Fortune. 

Vers.  12,  13. — And  Zilpah  Leah's  maid 
bare  Jacob  a  second  son.  And  Leah  said, 
Happy  am  I, — literally,  in  my  happiness, 
sc.  aml('  Speaker's  Commentary  ');  or,  for 
or  to  my  happiness  (Keil,  Kalisch — for 
the  daughters  will  call  me  blessed  ;  (or, 
happy) :  and  she  called  his  name  Asher — 
i.  e.  Happy. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 13. — Rachel  and  Leah,  or  unholy  rivalry.  I.  Rachel's  envy  of  Leah. 
1.  The  insufficient  cause.  "  She  saw  that  she  bare  Jacob  no  children,"  while  Leah 
had  begun  to  have  a  family.  Though  commonly  regarded  by  Hebrew  wives  as  a 
peculiarly  severe  affliction,  childlessness  was  not  without  its  compensations,  which 
Rachel  should  have  reckoned.  Then  the  motherhood  of  Leah  was  the  good  fortune 
of  a  sister,  In  which  Rachel  should  have  lovingly  rejoiced  ;  and  both  the  barrenness 
and  the  fruitfulness  were  of  God's  appointment,  in  which  Rachel  should  have  piously 
acquiesced.  2.  The  querulous  complaint.  "Give  me  children,  or  else  I  die."  To 
inordinately  long  for  children  was,  on  Rachel's  part,  a  great  sin  ;  to  depreciate  the 
gift  of  life  with  its  manifold  blessings  because  of  their  absence  was  a  greater  sin  ; 
to  express  her  bitter  smd  despondent  feeling  n  reproachful  language  against  her 
husband  was  a  sin  still  greater ;  but  the  greatest  sin  of  all  w;is  to  overlook  the  hand 
of  God  in  her  affliction.  3.  The  merited  rebuke.  "Am  I  in  God's  stead?"  If 
Jacob  sinned  in  being  angry  with  Rachel,  evincing  want  ■  f  sympathy  and  patience 
with  her  womanly  distress,  if  even  he  erred  in  infusing  a  too  great  degree  of  heat 
into  his  words,  he  yet  acted  with  propriety  in  censuring  her  fault.  It  is  the  province 
of  a  husband  to  reprove  grievious  misdemeanors  in  a  wife,  only  not  with  severity,  as 
Jacob,  yet  with  Jacob's  fidelity.  4.  The  sinful  expedient.  "Behold  my  maid 
Bilhah."  Sanctioned  by  popular  custom,  the  plan  adopted  by  Rachel  for  obtaining 
children  might  almost  seem  to  have  been  sanctified  by  the  conduct  of  Sarah.  But 
the  circumstances  in  which  the  two  wives  were  placed  were  widely  different.  Yet, 
even  though  they  had  been  the  same  Rachel  was  not  at  liberty,  anymore  than  Sarah, 
to  tempt  her  husband  to  a  violation  of  the  marriage  law.  The  bad  example  of  a 
saint  no  more  than  the  evil  practice  of  the  world  can  justify  a  sin.  5.  The  ap- 
parent success.  "Rachel's  maid  conceived."  God  often  allows  wicked  schemes  to 
prosper,  without  approving  of  either  the  schemes  or  the  schemers.  Sometimes  their 
success  is  needful,  as  in  this  case,  to  manifest  their  wickedness  and  folly.  6.  The 
mistaken  inference.  "  God  hath  judged  me."  Rachel  is  not  the  only  person  who  has 
reckoned  God  upon  his  side  because  of  outward  prosperity.  The  world's  standard 
of  morality  is  success.  But  moral  triumphs  are  frequently  achieved  through  material 
defeats. 

II.  Leah's  imitation  of  Rachel.  1.  Of  Rachel's  bad  feeling.  She  might  have 
borne  with  her  taster's  exultation  over  the  happiness  of  reaching  motherhood  by 
proxy,  might  have  allowed  Rachel  to  have  her  little  triumph,  but  she  could  not. 
Immediately  foreseeing  the  possibility  of  being  out-distanced  by  her  favoured  rival, 
she  became  a  victim  of  green-eyed  jealousy.  The  envy  stirring  in  the  heart  of 
Rachel  had  at  length  spread  its  contagion  to  her.  2.  Of  Rachel's  sinful  conduct. 
"  Leah  took  Zilpah  her  maid,  and  gave  her  Jacob  to  wife."  One  never  knows  where 
the  influence  of  a  bad  example  is  to  end.  When  one  saint  steps  aside  from  the 
straight  path  others  are  sure  to  follow.  The  more  eminent  the  first  transgressor  is, 
the  easier  sinning  is  to  his  successors.  3  Of  Rachel's  wrong  reasoning.  "The 
daughters  will  call  me  blessed."  Faulty  logic  (at  least  in  morals)  seems  as  easy  to 
copy  as  improper  feelings  or  wicked  deeds.  The  connection  between  much  happiness 
and  mauy  children  is  not  absolute  and  inevitable.  The  hopes  of  rejoicing  mothers 
are  sometimes  sadly  blighted,  and  their  expectations  of  felicity  strangely  dis- 
appoin  ed.  She  is  truly  happy  whom  not  the  daughters,  but  Jehovah,  pronounces 
blessed. 

Lessons : — 1.  The  bitterness  of  envy.  2.  The  wickedness  of  polygamy.  3.  The 
contagiousness  of  sin. 


ch.  xxx.  14—24.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


367 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  1. — Envy  working  in  God's  people.     "Rachel  envied  her  sister.''    Jacob's 

love  for  Rachel  a  type  of  Christ's  love  for  his  Church.     "We  cannot  doubt  that 

his  love  was  returned.     There  was  thus  the  chief  element  of  conjugal  happiness. 

But  her  sister,  less  favoured  in  this,  had  a  blessing  which  was  denied  her,  and 

"Rachel  envied  her  sister."    It  was  not  that  she  feared  to  lose  her  husband's  love. 

Of  that  she  had  abundant  proof.    It  was  a  selfish  sorrow.     Her  husband's  children 

were  growing  up,  but  they  were  not  hers.     Rachel's  envy  has  its  counterpart  among 

Christians.     Love  for  Christ  may  take  the  form  of  selfish  zeal  ;  unwillingness  to 

acknowledge  or  rejoice  in  work  for  God  in  which  we  take  no  part.     In  the  spiritual 

history  of  the  world  a  blessing  often  seems  to  rest  upon  means  irregular  or  unlikely. 

Where  efforts  that  promised  well  have  failed,  God  makes  his  own  power  felt  ;  and 

many  think  this  cannot  be  right  (cf.  Johu  ix.  16),  and  would  rather  have  the  work 

not  doue  than  done  thus  (cf.  Numb.  xi.  38;  Mark  ix.  88).     Contrast  the  spirit  of 

St.  Paul  (Phil.  i.  18).    Examples  of  this :  unwillingness  to  rejoice  in  good  done  by 

some  other  communion ,  or  some  other  party  than  our  own;  inclination  to  look  at 

points  of   difference  rather  than  at  those  held   in   common  ;  the  work  of  others 

doubted,  criticised,  or  ignored  ;  eagerness  to  warn  against  ihis  or  that.     Self  lies  at 

the  root  of  this.     Perhaps  the  harvest  of  another  seems  to  diminish  ours.     Perhaps 

our  own  thoughts  are  to  us  the  measure  of  God's  plans  (cf.  Mark  xiv.  4).     Men  see 

the  outside  of  others'  work,  and  judge  as  if  they  knew  both  the  motives  and  the  full 

results.     Yet  with  this  there  may  be  much  real  zeal  and  love  for  the  Lord.     The 

failure  lies  in  the  want  of  complete  acceptance  of  his  will.     To  rejoige  in  work  for 

Christ,  by  whomsoever  doue,  is  not  inconsistent  with  decided  views  as  to  the  objects 

to  be  aimed  at,  and  the  means  to  be  used  (1  Thess.  v.  21).     1.  We  are  called  to 

enlarge  the  household  of  God  ;  to  be  the  means  of  making  enemies  into  children 

(cf.  Ps.  lxxxvii.  4,  5)  through  producing  faith  (cf.  John  i.  12).     Each  responsible  for 

the  faithful  use  of  the  powers  given  to  us,  and  bidden  to  examine  ourselves  as  to 

sincerity.     But  the  visible  results  are  as  God  pleases.     Here  a  test  of  singleness 

of  mind.     Can  we  rejoice  in  success  of  a  work  in  which  we  have  no  share,  or  when 

another's  success  appears  greater  than  ours?  (Gal.   v.  26).      2.  As  an  exercise  of 

unselfishness,  be  careful  not  to  provoke  envy  by  parading  distinctive  peculiarities 

<Rom.  xii.  18)  or  exalting  our  own  work.     3.  Be  not  discouraged  that  work  of  others 

seems  more  blessed  (John  iv.  36,  37).     Faithfulness  is  within  the  power  of  all.     It 

is  that  which  God   regards  (Matt.  xxv.  21).     The  result  we  cannot  judge  of  here. 

The  fruit  delayed  may  prove  a  greater  blessing. — M. 


EXPOSITION. 


Ver.  14. — And  Reuben  (at  this  time  four 
or  five  years  old)  went  (probab'y  accom- 
panyi  g  the  reapers  in  the  days  of  wheat 
harvest  (in  the  beginni  g  of  May),  and 
found  mandrakes— E^Tl'l,  fLj\\a  pavSpa- 
■yopwv  (LXX.,  Jose;ihus),  a  pies  of  the 
u.andrago  a,  an  herb  resembling  bella- 
donna, w.th  a  root  like  a  carrot,  having 
white  and  reddish  bio  so  ns  of  a  sweet 
smell,  an  i  with  yellow  odoriferus  apples, 
ripening  n  May  and  June,  and  supposed, 
according  to  Oriental  superstition,  to 
possess  the  virtue  of  conciliating  1  ve  and 
promoting  fruitfulness  (vide  Gesenius,  p. 
191,  and  cf.  Rosen  mill  ler's  '  Scholia,'  and 
Kalisch  in  loco) — in  tve  field  (when  at  his 
child  sh  play),  and  brought  them  unto  his 
mother  Leah  (which  a  son  of  more  n  attire 
years  would  not  have  done).  Then  Rachel 
(not  exempt  from  the  pre  ;  i'ing  supersti- 
tion) sai-1  to  Leah,  Give  me,  I  pray  thee,  of 
thy  son's  mandrakes  (in  the  hop  s  that 
they  w  ould  remove  her  sterility). 


Ver.  15. — And  she  (Leah)  said  unto  her, 
— stomacJiose  (Calvin)  —Is  it  a  small  matter 
that  thou  hast  taken  my  husband?— lit- 
erally, Is  it  little  thy  taking  away  my 
husband?  meaning  that  Rachel  bad  been 
fie  cause  of  Jacob's  forsaking  hpr  (Leah's) 
society — and  wouldest  thou  take  away 
(literally,  and  to  take  also  =  wouldst  thou 
take?  expressive  of  strong  surprise)  my 
son's  mandrakes  also  1  Calvin  thinks  it 
unlikely  that  Jacob's  wives  were  naturally 
quarrelsom->  ;  sed  Deus  confligere  ens  in- 
ter se  passus  est  ut  polyqamim  pmna  ad 
posteras  extaret.  And  Rachel  said  (in 
order  to  induce  Leah's  compliance  with 
her  request),  Therefore  he  shall  lie  with 
thee  to-night  for  thy  son's  mandrakes. 

Ver.  16. — And  Jacob  came  out  of  the  field 
in  the  evening,—?,  e.  the  harvest  field 
(ver.  14) — and  Leah  w  nt  out  to  meet  him, 
and  said,  Thou  must  come  in  unto  me  (the 
Samaritan  codex  adds  "this  night,''  and 
the  LXX.   "to-day  ");  for  surely  I  have 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xxx.  14—24. 


hired  thee  (literally,  hiring,  I  have  hired 
thee)  with  my  sou's  mandrakes.  And 
(assentingto  the  arrangement  of  his  wives) 
he  lay  with  her  that  night. 

Ver.  17. — And  God  hearkened  unto  Leah, 
— i.  e.  unto  Leah's  prayers  (Onkelos,  Je- 
rome, Rosenmtiller,  Murphy),  which  Cal- 
vin thinks  doubtful — quia  enim  putaret, 
dum  odiose  sorori  suae  negat  Lea  fructus 
a  puero  colleatos,  et  hoc  pretio  noctem 
mariti  mercatur ,ullum  esseprecibus  locum. 
The  historian  employs  the  term  Elohim 
to  show  that  Leah's  pregnancy  was  not 
owing  to  her  son'smandrakes,but  to  Divine 
power  (Keil,  Lange) — and  she  conceived, 
and  bare  Jacob  the  fifth  son — or.  counting 
Zilpah's,  the  seventh  ;  while,  reckoning 
Bilhah's,  this  was  Jacob's  ninth  child. 

Ver.  18. — And  Leah  said,  God — Elohim  ; 
a  proof  of  the  lower  religious  consciousness 
into  which  Leah  had  fallen  (Hengsten- 
berg),  though  perhaps  on  the  above  hy- 
pothesis an  evidence  of  her  piety  and  faith 
(Keil,  Lange)— hath  given  me  my  hire,  be- 
cause I  have  given  my  maiden  to  my  hus- 
band— i.  e.  as  a  reward  for  my  self-deni  1 
(Keil,  Murphy);  an  exclamation  in  which 
appears  Leah's  love  for  Jacob  (Lange),  if 
not  also  a  tacit  acknowledgment  that  she 
had  her  fears  lest  she  may  have  sinned  in 
a  kinghim  to  wed  Zilpah  (Rosenmilller) — 
and  she  called  his nau.e Issachar — "There 
i>  Rewar.l,"  or  ' '  There  U  Hire  ;  "  conta  n- 
ing  a  double  allusion  to  her  hire  of  Jacob 
and  her  reward  for  Z.lpah. 

Vers.  19,  20.— -And  Leah  conceived  again, 
and  bare  Jacob  the  sixth  son.  And  Leah 
sa  d,  God  (Elohim;  vide  supra)  hath  endued 
me  with  a  good  dowry.  Ae8uipi}T<u  |toi  Supov 
KaXov  (LXX. )  dotavit  me  dote  bona  (V  ul- 
gate),  hath  presented  me  with  a  goodly 
present.  The  word  IS*  is  a  anu£  \ey6|uvov. 

Now  will  my  husband  dwell  with  me.   iSJ. 

also  a  airafj  \ty.,  signifies  to  be  or  make 
roun  i  (Gesenius),  to  limit  round  or  en- 
compass (Ffirst);  hence,  according  to  both, 
to  cohabit  or  dwell  together  as  husband 
and  wife.  The  LXX.  render  alpeTwi,  the 
meaning  being  that  Leah's  six  sons  would, 
in  her  judgment,  be  an  inducement  suffi- 


ciently powerful  to  cause  Jacob  to  select 
her  society  instead  of  that  of  her  barren 
sister.  And  she  called  his  name  Zebulun — 
i.  e.  Dwelling;  from  eaoal,  to  dwell  with, 
with  a  play  upon  the  word  ?3J,  to  hire, 

which,  commencing  with  the  same  letter, 
was  regarded  as  similar  in  sound  to  ^ST, 

the  1  and  the  ^  being  sometimes  inter- 
changeable (Keil,  Kalisch). 

Ver.  21. — And  afterwards  she  bare  a 
daughter,  and  called  her  name  Dinah — i.  e. 
Judgment.  Dinah  (the  female  Dan)  may 
not,  have  been  Jacob's  only  daughter  (vide 
ch.'xxxv  i.  35;  xlvi.  7).  Her  name  is  here 
recorded  probably  because  of  the  incident 
in  her  history  afterwards  related  (ch. 
xxxiv.  1). 

Vers  22 — 24. — And  God  remembered  Ha- 
ehel  (cf  ch.  viii.  1;  1  Sam.  i.  19),  and  God 
hearkened  to  her, — as  to  Leah  (ver.  17) — 
and  opened  her  womb — ashehad  previously 
done  to  Leah  (ch.  xxix.  31).  Rachel's  bar- 
renness harl  not  continued  so  long  as 
either  Sarah's  or  Rebekah's.  And  she  con- 
ceived, and  bare  a  son  ;  and  said,  God  b  ath 
taken  away  my  reproach — i.  e.  of  sterility 
The  mandrakes  of  Leah  having  proved 
inefficacious,  Rachel  at  length  realises  that 
children  are  God's  tuft,  and  this  thought 
sufficiently  explains  the  use  of  the  term 
Elohim.  And  she  called  his  name  Joseph;— 
t]Di\  either,  "  he  takes  away,"  with  allu- 
sion to  the  removal  of  her  repreach,  or, 
"he  shall  add,"  with  reference  to  her 
hope  of  another  son.  Perhaps  the  first 
thought  is  not  obscurely  hinted  at,  though 
the  second  appears  from  the  ensuing 
clause  to  have  occupied  the  greater  prom- 
inence in  Rachel's  mind — and  said,  The 
Lord — Jehovah;  a  trace  of  the  Jehovistic 
pen  (Tuch,  Bleek,  et  alii);  rather  an  out-' 
come  'of  the  higher  spiritual  life  of  Ra- 
chel, who  had  now  got  emancipated  from 
all  such  merely  hun  an  devices  as  resort- 
ing to  mandrakes,  and  was  able  to  recog- 
nise her  complete  dependence  for  offspring 
on  the  sovereign  gruce  of  the  covenant 
God  of  Abraham  and  Isaac  and  Jacob 
(Hengstenberg,  Keil) — shall  add  to  me 
another  son. 


HOMILETICS. 


Vers.  14—24  —  The  story  of  the  mandrakes.  1.  A  young  child's  innocence. 
"  Reuben  found  mandrakes  in  the  field,  and  brought  them  to  his  mother."  Nature, 
wiih  its  beautiful  sights  and  harmonious  sounds,  possesses  a  wonderful  fascination 
for  the  infant  mind.  In  proportion  as  man  sinks  beneath  the  power  of  sin  does  he 
fall  out  of  sympathy  with  God's  fair  world.  Stroua  and  tender  is  the  bond  of  love 
which  unites  a  child  to  its  mother.  The  true  depositary  for  a  child's  treasures  is  the 
mother's  lap,  for  a  child's  joys  and  sorrows  the  mother's  heart.  Yet  a  child's  in- 
experience and  simplicity  may  sometimes  cause  a  parent  tj  err,  though  the  true 


CH.  xxx.  14—24.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  369 

source  of  temptation  lies  in  the  parent,  and  not  in  the  child.   "  To  the  pure  all  things 
are  pure  ;  but  to  them  that  are  denied  is  nothing  pure." 

II.  A  grown  woman's  superstition.  "  Give  me  of  thy  son's  mandrakes.''  Rachel 
obviously  shared  the  popular  belief  that  Reuben's  fragrant  herbs  would  have  an 
influence  in  removing  her  sterility.  It  is  useless  inquiring  how  such  a  notion 
originated.  Superstitions  commonly  arise  from  mistaking  as  cause  and  effect  what 
are  only  coincident  occurrences.  Of  more  importance  it  is  to  note  that  Rachel  was 
of  mature  years,  had  been  bora  and  nurtured  in  what  may  be  regarded  as  a  religious 
home,  was  now  the  wife  of  an  intelligent  and  pious  (if  also  encompassed  with  in- 
firmities) man,  and  yet  she  was  the  victim  of  delusive  beliefs.  In  this  Rachel  was 
perhaps  scarcely  to  be  charged  with  blame.  Superstition  is  essentially  a  fault  of  the 
intellect  resulting  from  defective  information.  But  Rachel  erred  in  calling  supersti- 
tion to  her  aid  in  her  unholy  rivalry  with  Leah  ;  all  the  more  when  she  knew  that 
God  a'.one  could  remove  her  reproach. 

III.  A  jealous  wife's  BARGAIN.  On  the  part  both  of  Rachel  and  Leah  it  was  a 
miserable  compact ;  and  a  pitiable  spectacle  it  surely  was,  that  of  two  rival  wives 
contracting  with  one  another  about  their  husband's  society.  Rachel  disposes  of  Jacob 
for  a  night  in  consideration  of  a  handful  of  mandrakes,  and  Leah  counts  herself 
entitled  to  Jacob's  favours  as  a  boon  which  she  had  purchased  with  Reuben's  yellow 
apples.  Not  to  speak  of  the  humiliation  in  all  this,  to  Jacob,  and  the  continual 
misery  to  which  he  must  have  been  subjected  between  his  ardent  sister-wives,  think 
of  the  wretchedness  it  must  have  entailed  upon  the  women  themselves,  and  the 
dispeace  it  must  brought  into  the  rival  homes.  A  more  powerful  condemnation  of 
polygamy  it  will  be  difficult  to  find,  or  a  more  signal  illustration  of  the  retribution 
which  sooner  or  later  follows  on  the  heels  of  transgression. 

IV.  A  sovereign  God's  decision.  The  two  wives  were  seemingly  uncertain 
whether  to  ascribe  virtue  to  the  mandrakes  or  not.  God  determined  the  problem  in 
a  way  that  must  have  fully  convinced  them.  1.  That  the  mandrakes  could  not 
remove  sterility  he  demonstrated  by  allowing.  Rachel's  barrenness  to  continue  at  least 
two  years  longer,  though  she  had  made  use  of  Reuben's  apples,  and  by  opening 
Leah's  womb  without  them.  2.  That  he  alone  could  bestow  offspring  on  married 
people  he  showed  by  remembering  Rachel  in  his  own  time,  and  causing  her  reproach 
to  depart.  . 

Learn — 1.  That  things  and  persons  innocent  and  pleasant  in  themselves  may  lead 
astray.  2.  That  out  of  small  occasions  great  events  may  spring.  3.  That  much  in- 
firmity may  cling  to  good  men  aud  women.  4.  That  things  desirable  in  themselves 
may  be  sought  in  wrong  ways.  5.  That  God's  hand  should  be  recognised  in  the 
giving  or  withholding  children. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  22— 34.— The  life  of  faith  and  its  reward.  The  Scripture  teaches  us  to  put 
the  facts  of  common  life  in  the  light  of  God's  countenance.  The  true  foundation  on 
which  family  welfare  rests  is  God's  faithfuluess-and  favour.  The  intense  desire  of 
the  Hebrew  women  for  children,  especially  sons,  a  testimony  to  the  Divine  covenant; 
the  original  promise  pervading  all  the  national  life. 

I.  The  birth  of  Joseph  a  reward  of  faith  and  answer  to  prayer.  God  remem- 
bers, though  we  think  he  forgets.  Reproach  may  lie  awhile  on  the  true  believer,  but 
is  taken  away  at  last.  Syrophenician  woman  ;  seeming  neglect  calls  out  stronger 
expression  of  faith.     Pray  without  ceasing. 

II.  Blessings  waited  for  are  the  more  appreciated  and  the  richer  when  they 
come.  "  Josepli "  a  type  of  him  who,  though  he  was  sent  after  many  prophets  and 
long  tarrying,  was  greater  than  all  his  brethren.  The  Rachel,  the  true  beloved,  the 
chosen  bride,  the  Church  in  whom  the  true  Jacob  finds  special  delight,  waits  aud 
prays.  When  God  shall  show  that  he  has  remembered  and  hearkened,  the  elect  one 
shall  be  abundantly  satisfied.     "  God  hath  taken  away  my  reproach." 

III.  All  experience  of  Divine  faithfulness  is  a  great  help,  in  looking  forward,  to 
cherish  expectation.  "  The  Lord  shall  udd  to  me  another  son."  We  ask  for  more 
when  we  know  that  our  prayer  is  heard. — R. 

genesis.  '  B  B 


370 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xxx.  25—43. 


EXPOSITION. 


Ver.  25. — And  it  came  to  pass,  when 
Rachel  had  born  Joseph, — either  at  or  about 
the  expiry  of  the  second  term  of  seven 
years.  Jacob's  family  now  consisted  in  all 
of  eleven  sons  and  one  daughter,  unless 
Dinah's  birth  occurred  later  in  the  next 
term  of  service  (Keil).  Since  these  were 
all  born  within  seven  years,  the  chrono- 
logical cannot  be  the  order  observed  by 
the  historian  in  recording  the  events  of 
the  preceding  paragraphs.  Rather  the 
births  of  the  children  are  arranged  in  con- 
nection with  the  mothers  from  whom  they 
sprang.  Hence  the  possibility  of  acquir- 
ing so  large  a  family  in  so  short  a  time. 
The  six  sons  of  Leah  might  be  born  in 
the  seven  years,  allowing  one  year's  com- 
plete cessation  from  pregnancy,  viz. ,  the 
fifth;  Bilhah's  in  the  third  and  fourth 
years;  Zilpah's  in  the  beginning  of  the 
sixth  and  seventh  ;  and  Rachel's  toward 
the  end  of  the  seventh,  leaving  Dinah  to 
be  born  later  (cf .  Keil  in  loco)—  that  Jacob 
said  unto  Laban  (if  not  immediately,  cer- 
tainly soon,  after  Joseph's  birth),  Send  me 
away  (meaning  that  Laban  should  permit 
him  to  depart),  that  I  may  go  (literally, 
and  I  will  go)  unto  mine  own  place,  and  to 
my  country — to  Canaan  in  general,  and  to 
that  part  of  it  in  particular  where  he  had 
formerly  resided  (cf.  ch.  xviii.  33  ;  xxxi. 
55). 

Ver.  26. — Give  me  (suffer  me  to  take) 
my  wives  and  my  children,  for  whom  I  have 
served  thee,  and  let  me  go  (literally,  and  I 
will  go) :  for  thou  knowest  my  service  which 
I  have  done  thee — implying  that  he  had 
faithfully  implemented  his  engagement, 
and  that  Laban  was  aware  of  the  justness 
of  his  demand  to  be  released  from  further 
servitude. 

Ver.  27. — And  Laban  said  unto  him 
(having  learnt  by  fourteen  years'  acquaint- 
ance with  Jacob  to  know  the  value  of  a 
good  shepherd),  I  pray  thee,  if  I  have  found 
favourin thine  eyes  (the  clause  is  elliptical, 
the  A.  V.  rightly  supplying),  tarry  :  for 
(this  word  also  is  not  in  the  original),  I 
have  learned  by  experience — literally,  / 
ham  divined  frvaJriS,  from  113)15,  to  hiss  as 

aserpent,  hence  to  augur);  not  necessarily 
by  means  of  serpents  (Gesenius,  Words- 
worth, '  Speaker's  Commentary  ')  or  even 
by  consulting  hisgods  (Delitzsch.Kalisch), 
but  perhaps  by  close  observation  and 
minute  inspection  (Murphy,  Bush).  The 
LXX.  render  ola>vi<r<l|j.>ny  ;  the  Vulgate  by 
experimento  didici — that  the  Lord — Jeho- 
vah. Nominally  a  worshipper  of  the  true 
God,  Laban  was  in  practice  addicted  to 
heathen  superstitions  (cf.  ch.  xxxi.  19,  3'2) 


— hath  blessed  me  (with  material  prosper- 
ity) for  thy  sake. 

Ver.  28. — And  he  said,  Appoint  me  thy 
wages.  Literally,  distinctly  specify  (from 
a  root  signifying  to  bore,  hence  to  declare 
accurately)  thy  hire  upon  me,  i.  e.  which  I 
will  take  upon  me  as  binding.  Laban's 
caution  to  be  clear  and  specific  in  defining 
the  terms  of  any  engagement  he  might 
enter  into  was  much  needed,  and  would 
doubtless  not  be  neglected  by  Jacob, 
whose  past  experience  must  have  taught 
him  he  was  dealing  with  one  who,  in  re- 
spect of  covenants  and  contracts,  was 
eminently  treacherous.  And  I  will'give  it. 

Ver.  29. — And  he  (Jacob)  said  unto  him 
(Laban)  Thou  knov  est  how  (literally,  what) 
I  have  served  thee,  and  how  thy  cattle  was 
with  me — literally,  and  what  thy  cattle  lias 
been  (or  become)  with  me,  i.  e.  to  what  a 
number  they  have  grown. 

Ver.  30. — For  it  was  little  which  thou 
hadst  before  I  came, — literally,  for  little 
(it  was)  which  wns  to  thee  before  me ;  i.  e. 
not  in  place,  IvavrCov  4(jioS  (LXX. ),  but  in 
time,  i.  e  before  my  arrival — and  it  is  now 
increased — literally,  broken  forth  (cf.  ver. 
43) — unto  a  multitude ;  and  the  Lord  (Je- 
hovah) hath  blessed  thee  since  my  coming 
(literally,  at  my  foot,  i.e.  wherever  I  have 
gone  among  your  flocks) :  and  now  when 
shall  I  provide  (literally,  do)  for  mine  own 
house  also  1 

Ver.  31. — And  he  (Lai  an,  unwilling  to 
part  with  so  profitable  an  assistant)  said, 
What  shall  I  give  thee  ?  He  was  apparently 
prepared  to  detain  Jacob  at  his  own  terms. 
And  Jacob  said,  Thou  shalt  not  give  me  any- 
thing. Jacob  did  not  design  to  serve  Laban 
gratuitously,  but  chose  rather  to  trust  Goi" 
than  Laban  for  recompense  (Wordsworth, 
Gosman  in  Lange);  or  he  may  have  meant 
that  he  would  have  no  wages  of  Laban's 
setting,  but  only  of  his  own  proposing 
(Hughes).  If  thou  wilt  do  this  thing  for  me 
(accede  to  this  stipulation),  I  will  again 
feed  and  keep  thy  flock — literally,  1  will 
turn,  I  will  tend  thy  flock,  1  will  keep 
(sc.  it). 

-  Ver.  32.— I  will  pass  through  all  thy  flock 
to  day — wrongly  rendered  irapc\0era>7rdvra 
rairpipdra  <rov  (LXX.),  gyra  per  omnes 
greges  tuos(\  ulgate)  as  if  Jacob  proposed 
that  the  separation  of  the  flock  should  be 
effected  by  Laban,  and  not  by  himself — re- 
moving from  thence — not  "remove  thou," 
asiftheverbwereimperative(Rosenmuller, 
Murphy,  Kalisch),  but  to  "remove,"  the 
verb  being  in  the  inf.  (Keil;  cf.Ewald, 'Heb. 
Synt.,'§  279)— all  the  speckled  and  spotted 
cattle,  and  all  the  brown  calk  among  the 


ch.  xxx  25-48.] 


THE   BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


371 


sheep,  and  the  spotted  and  speckled  among 
the  goats.  Since  in  Oriental  countries 
sheep  are  commonly  white  and  goats 
black,  the  number  of  speckled  and  spotted 
animals  U.  e.  sheep  with  little  spots  and 
large  patches  of  black,  and  goats  with 
little  or  large  points  of  white,  in  their 
hair)  would  be  unusually  small.  And  of 
such  shall  be  my  hire — i.  e.  the  dark- 
spotted  or  entirely  black  sheep  and  white 
or  white-speckled  goats  were  to  be  Jacob's 
reward  (Knobel,  Delitzsch,  Keil,  Lange), 
which  was  to  be  subsequently  increased 
by  whatever  speckled  animals  might  ap- 
pear among  the  one-coloured  flocks;  but 
it  seems  more  probable  that  Jacob  only 
claimed  the  latter,  and,  both  to  make  the 
bargain  more  attractive  to  Laban  and  to 
show  that  he  wanted  nothing  from  Laban 
but  only  what  God  might  be  pleased  in 
accordance  with  this  arrangement  to  be- 
stow, he  suggested  that  the  flocks  and 
herds  should  be  purged  of  all  such 
speckled  and  spotted  animals  to  begin 
with  (Tuch,  Baumgarten,  Kurtz,  Rosen- 
muller,  Kalisch,  Candlish,  Murphy, 
'Speaker's  Commentary,'  Clarke,  Bush), 
Ver.  33. — So  shall  my  righteousness 
(literally,  and  my  righteousness)  answer  for 
me  (or  bear  testimony  in  my  behalf)  in 
time  to  come, — literally,  in  the  day,  to-mor- 
row ;  meaning  in  the  future  (Gesenius) 
rather  than  the  day  following  (Delitzsch) 
when  it  shall  come  for  my  hire  before  thy 
face.  Either,  (1)  for  it  (my  righteous- 
ness shall  come,  concerning  my  wages, 
before  thy  face,  so.  for  consideration  (Cal- 
vin); or,  (2)  when  thou  shalt  come  to  my 
reward,  connecting  "before  thy  face" 
with  the  previous  clause  (Chaldee,  Rosen- 
niiiller,  Ainsworth,  Lange) ;  or,  (8)  when 
thou  shalt  come  to  my  wages  before  thee 
(Murphy),  or  to  inspect  it  (Kalisch). 
Every  one  that  is  not  speckled  and  spotted 
among  the  goats,  and  brown  among  the 
sheep,  that  shall  be  counted  stolen  with  me 
— and  therefore  to  be  delivered  up  to  thee. 

Ver.  34. — And  laban  said,  behold  I 
would  it  might  be  according  to  thy  word. 
Jacob's  chances  of  obtaining  speckled  ani- 
mals by  this  arrangement  were  so  small 
that  Laban,  with  his  customary  selfish- 
ness, had  no  difficulty  in  closing  with  the 
offered  bargain.  As  Originally  proposed 
by  Jacob  it  seems  to  have  been  an  honest 
desire  on  his  part  to  commit  the  question 
of  wages  to  the  decision  rather  of  God's 
providence  than  of  his  kinsman's  greed. 
That  at  this  time  Jacob's  mind  ' '  had  al- 
ready formed  the  whole  fraudulent  pro- 
cedure by  which  he  acquired  his  wealth  " 
(Kalisch)  does  not  accord  with  the  state- 
ment subsequently  made. 

Ver.  SS. — And  he — Laban  (Rosenmttl- 


ler,  Keil,  Delitzsch,  Kalisch,  Murphy,  et 
alii);  Jacob  (Lange)  removed  that  day 
(that  the  smallest  possible  chance  of  suc- 
cess might  remain  to  his  nephew  (the  he- 
goats  that  were  ringstraked  (striped  or 
banded)  and  spotted,  and  all  the  she-goats 
that  were  speckled  and  spotted,  and  every 
one  that  had  some  white  in  it,  and  all  the 
brown  among  the  sheep, — four  sorts  of  ani- 
mals were  to  be  removed:  (1)  the  dotted, 
(2)  the  patched,  (3)  the  ring-marked  or 
striped,  and  (4)  the  black  or  brown — and 
gave  them  into  the  hand  of  his  (Laban's  or 
Jacob's,  ut  supra)  sons. 

Ver.  36. — And  (as  if  to  insure  the  im- 
possibility of  the  two  flocks  mingling  and 
breeding)  he  set  three  days'  journey  be- 
twixt himself  (with  his  sons  and  the  parti- 
coloured animals)  and  Jacob :  and  Jacob  fed 
the  rest  of  Laban's  flocks — out  of  which  he 
was  to  pay  himself  as  best  he  could  in-ac- 
cordance  with  the  contract. 

Ver.  37. — And  Jacob  took  him  rods  of 
green  poplar — literally,  a  rod  (the  singular 
being  used  collectively  for  rods)  of  !H5Sb 
(from  'Jlab,  to  be  white,  meaning  either 

the)  poplar  (LXX.,  in  Hosea  iv.  13;  Vul- 
gate, Kalisch)  or  the  storax  (LXX.  in  loco, 
Keil;  cf.  Michaelis,  'Suppl.,'  p.  1404) 
fresh  or  green — and  of  the  hazel — Tib, 
the  hazel  tree  (Raschi,  Kimchi,  Arabic, 
Luther,  Fiirst,  Kalisch)  or  the  almond 
tree  (Vulgate,  Saadias,  Calvin,  Gesenius, 
'  Speaker's  Commentary ') — and  chestnut 
tree  ;— ■jiB'1?,  the  plane  tree  (LXX.,  Vul- 
gate, et  alii),  so  called  from  its  height — 
and  pilled  white  strakes  in  them  (literally, 
peeled  off  in  them  peeled  places  white),  and 
made  the  white  appear  (literally,  making 
naked  the  white)  which  was  in  the  rods. 

Ver.  38. — And  he  set  the  rods  which  he 
had  pilled  before  the  flocks  in  the  gutters 
(■Q"lLpri'"l;  literally,  the  canals  or  channels 

through  which  the  water  ran,  from  a 
root  signifying  to  run)  in  the  watering 
troughs  (rnnpp,  i.  e.  the  troughs  which 
contained  the  water,  to  which  the  animals 
approached)  when  the  flocks  came  to  drink, 
that  they  should  conceive  (literally,  and 
they  became  warm,  in  the  sense  expressed 
in  the  A.  V.)  when  they  came  to  drink— 
this  was  Jacob's  first  artifice  to  overreach 
Laban. 

Ver.  39.— And  the  flocks  conceived  (ut 
supra)  before  the  rods,  and  brought  forth 
cattle  ringstraked,  speckled  and  spotted. 
The  fact  is  said  to  have  been  frequently 
observed  tbat,  particularly 'in  the  case  of 
sheep,  whatever  fixes  their  attention  in 
copulation  is  marked  upon  the  young. 
That  Jacob  believed  in  the  efficacy  of  the 
bb  2 


872 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xxx.  25—43. 


artifice  lie  adopted  is  apparent ;  but  the 
multiplication  of  parti-coloured  animals 
it  will  be  safer  to  ascribe  to  Divine  bless- 
ing than  to  human  craft. 

Ver.  40. — And  Jacob  did  separate  the 
Jambs  (i.  e.  the  speckled  lambs  procured  by 
the  foregoing  artifice  he  removed  from 
the  main  body  of  the  flock),  and  set  the 
faces  of  the  flocks  toward  the  ringstraked, 
and  all  the  brown  in  the  flock  of  Laban 
(this  was  Jacob's  second  artifice,  to  make 
the  speckled  lambs  serve  the  same  pur- 
pose as  the  pilled  rods);  and  he  put  his 
own  flocks  by  themselves,  and  put  them 
not  unto  Laban's  cattle — so  that  tliey  were 
not  exposed  to  the  risk  of  producing  off- 
spring of  uniform  colour. 

Ver.  41. — And  it  came  to  pass,  whenso- 
ever the  stronger  cattle  did  conceive.— 
literally,  in  every  heating  of  the  cattle,  the 
bound  ones,  i.  e.  the  firm,  compact  sheep, 
"the  spring  flock"  (Luther),  which,  be- 
ing conceived  in  spring  and  dropped  in 
autumn,  are  supposed  to  be  stronger  than 
those  conceived  in  autumn  and  dropped 
in  spring;  but  this  is  doubtful — that 
Jacob  laid  the  rods  before  the  eyes  of  the 
cattle  in  the  gutters,  that  they  might  con- 


ceive among  the  rods.  Jacob's  third  arti- 
fice aimed  at  securing  for  himself  a  vig- 
orous breed  of  sheep. 

Ver.  42. — Butwhenthe  cattle  were  feeble, 
— literally,  in  the  covering  (sc.  with  wool; 
hence  weakening)  of  the  flock,  which  took 
place  in  autumn — he  put  them  not  in 
(partly  to  prevent  the  introduction  of 
feeble  animals  amongst  his  parti-coloured 
flocks,  but  partly  also,  it  is  thought,  to 
avoid  prematurely  exciting  Laban's  sus- 
picion) :  so  the  feebler  were  Laban's,  and 
the  stronger  Jacob's. 

Ver.  43. — And — as  the  apparent  result 
of  the  triple  stratagem,  though  vide  supra, 
ver.  38,  and  cf.  ch.  xxxi.  12— the  man  in- 
creased exceedingly, — literally,  broke  forth 
greatly  (vide  vf  r.  30) — and  had  much  cattle, 
and  maid-servants,  and  men-servants,  and 
camels,  and  asses — like  Abraham  (ch.  xiii. 
2).and  Isaac  (ch.  xxvi.  13,  14).  Thus  far 
the  historian  simply  narrates  the  fact  of 
the  patriarch's  prosperity,  and  the  steps 
which  led  to  it,  "without  expressing  ap- 
probation of  his  conduct  or  describing  his 
increasing  wealth  as  a  blessing  from  God. 
The  verdict  is  contained  in  what  follows  " 
(Keil). 


HOMILETICS. 
Vers.  25— 43.—  Jacob  and  Laban,  or  craft  versus  greed.  I.  Jacob's  respectful 
bequest  or  Laban.  At  the  close  of  fourteen  years'  harsh  and  exacting  service, 
Jacob  desires  permission  to  take  his  wives  and  children  and  return  to  Canaan.  The 
motives  which  induced  him  were  probably — 1.  The  termination  of  his  contract,  which 
released  him  from  a  servitude  both  galling  and  oppressive.  2.  The  remembrance  of 
God's  covenant,  which  had  Assigned  him  the  land  of  promise  as  his  true  inheritance. 
3.  The  joy  occasioned  by  the  birth  of  Rachel's  child,  which  he  seems  to  have  regarded 
as  the  theocratic  heir.  4.  A  desire  to  provide  for  his  now  rapidly-increasing  house- 
hold. 

II.  Jacob's  selfish  hindrance  by  Laban.  Tliat  Jacob's  uncle  and  father-in-law 
was  unwilling  to  acquiesce  in  his  departure  and  solicitous  to  retain  him  was  due  to — 

1.  His  appreciation  of  Jacob's  qualities  as  a  flock-master.  Jacob  felt  he  could  appeal 
to  "  tbe  service  he  had  done"  for  the  past  fourteen  years.  2.  His  discovery  of  a 
latent  connection  between  Jacob's  presence  and  his  own  augmenting  prosperity. 
Laban,  poor  enough  before  his  nephew's  arrival,  had  shrewdly  noted  that  the  day  of 
Jacob's  coming  had  been  the  day  of  fortune's  turning  in  his  favour,  and  that,  wher- 
ever his  clever  "  brother  "  went,  flocks  and  herds  broke  out  beside  him.  3.  His  secret 
hope  of  effecting  easy  terms  with  Jacob.  Though  ostensibly  willing  to  take  him  at 
his  own  price,  he  was  clearly  calculating  that  he  would  not  have  much  difficulty  in 
over-reaching  the  man  whom  already  he  had  cheated  in  the  matter  of  his  daughters. 

III.  Jacob's  remarkable  contract  with  Laban.  He  agrees  to  serve  a  third 
time  with  Laban  on  condition  of  receiving  all  the  speckled  and  spotted,  ringstraked 
and  brown,  animals  that  Laban's  flocks  might  produce,  after  all  of  those  sorts  had 
been  previously  removed.  1.  The  proposal  of  such  a  singular  condition  on  the  part 
of  Jacob  was  an  act  not  of  folly,  but  of  faith,  being  tantamount  to  a  committal  of 
his  cause  to  God  instead  of  Laban.  2  The  acceptance  of  it  on  the  part  of  Laban 
was  a  pitiful  display  of  greed,  and  a  proof  that  the  bygone  years  of  prosperity  had 
both  awakened  in  his  soul  the  insatiable  demon  of  avarice  and  extinguished  any 
spark  of  kindly  feeling  towards  Jncob  that  may  have  once  existed  in  his  breast. 

III.  Jacob's  cunning  stratagem  against  Laban.  1.  The  nature  of  it.  This 
was  the  employment  of  a  triple  artifice:  (1)  by  means  of  pilled  rods  to  produce  parti- 
coloured animals  in  Laban's  flock ;  (2)  on  securing  these,  so  to  use  them  as  to 
increase  their  number;  and  (3)  to  direct  the  animals  in  such  a  fashion  that  the 
stronger  and  healtbier  portion  of  the  flock  should  be  his,  and  the  feebler  Laban's. 

2.  The  success  of  it.     That  Jacob's  stratagem  did  not  fail  is  apparent ;  but  how  far 


CH.  XXXI.  1—21.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


373 


it  was  due  to  the  particular  expedient  employed  cannot  be  so  easily  determined. 
That  impressions  made  upon  the  minds  of  sheep  at  rutting  time  affect  the  foetus 
seems  a  well-established  fact ;  but  the  extraordinary  rapidity  with  which  brown  and 
speckled  animals  were  produced  appears  to  point  to  the  intervention  of  a  special  prov- 
idence in  Jacob's  behalf.  3.  The  riglitness  of  it.  That  in  what- Jacob  did  there  was 
nothing  fraudulent  may  be  inferred  from  the  fact  that  he  acted  under  the  Divine 
approval  (ch.  xxxi.  12),  and  made  use  of  nothing  but  the  superior  knowledge  of  the 
habits  of  animals  which  he  had  acquired  through  his  long  experience  in  keeping  sheep. 

V.  Jacob's  ultimate  advancement  over  Laban.  This  comes  out  with  greater 
prominence  in  the  ensuing  chapter ;  the  present  notices  his  amazing  prosperity. 
"  The  man  increased  exceedingly ;  "  and,  in  spite  of  Laban's  craft  and  avarice  com- 
bined, eventually  eclipsed  him  in  the  possession  of  flocks  and  herds. 

Learn — 1.  The  attractive  influence  of  home,  both  temporal  and  spiritual.  2.  The 
danger  of  material  prosperity — exemplified  in'  Laban.  3.  The  wisdom  of  trusting  God 
in  all  tuiugs,  even  in  secular  callings.  4.  The  value  of  all  kinds  of  knowledge,  but 
especially  of  the  best.  5.  The  advantage  of  having  God  upon  our  side  in  all  our 
bargains— notably  when  dealing  with  the  selfish  and  mean.  '6.  The  right  to  use  all 
lawful  means  to  preserve  our  interests — particularly  against  such  as  would  invade 
them.  7.  The  possibility  of  the  last  outstripping  the  first — in  the  Church  as  well  as 
in  the  world. 

HOMILIES  BY  VAKIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  43. — Jacob's  history  an  illustration  of  the  blending  together  of  the  natural  and 
the  supernatural  in  God's  dealings.     "  And  the  man  increased  exceedingly,"  &c. 

I.  The  promise  to  guide,  protect,  and  bless  fulfilled  in  connection  with  the  em- 
ployment of  ordinary  faculties  and  instrumentalities.  Jacob's  craft  partly  natural, 
but  in  this  instance  specially  assisted  that  he  might  be  helped  in  an  emergency.  The 
"  supplanter  "  in  this  case  represented  the  better  cause. 

II  Human  devices  only  apparently,  and  not  really,  thwart  the  purposes  of  God. 
Jacob  represents  the  people  of  God.  The  victory  is  appointed  them.  Their  interests 
must  be  served  by  the  kingdoms  of  this  world,  though  for  a  season  the  advantage 
appears  on  the  side  of  the  mere  calculating,  selfish  policy.  The  true  wisdom  is  that 
which  cometh  from  above. 

III.  Increase  in  the  best  sense  is  God's  promise.  It  will  be  sent  as  he  wills  and 
when  he  wills,  but  will  be  found  the  true  answer  to  prayer  and  the  true  manifesta- 
tion of  love.  On  all  that  belongs  to  us  the  blessing  rests.  Spiritual  prosperity  carries 
with  it  all  other.  Though  the  individual  may  be  called  to  suffer  for  the  sake  of  the 
community,  the  promise  to  the  Church  must  be  fulfilled.  "It  is  our  Father's  good 
pleasure  to  give  us  the  kingdom."     "The  meek  shall  inherit  the  earth." — R. 

EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXXI. 
Ver.l. — And  he — Jacob  had  now  served 
twenty  years  with  Laban,  and  must  ac- 
cordingly have  been  in  his  ninety-seventh 
or  seventy-seventh  year  (videcli.  xxvii.  1) 
— heard  the  word's  of  laban's  sons, — who 
were  not  at  this  time  only  small  youths 
about  fourteen  years  of  age  (Delitzsch), 
since  they  were  capable  of  being  entrusted 
with  their  father's  flocks  (ch.  xxx.  35) — 
saying  (probably  in  a  conversation  which 
had  been  overheard  by  Jacob),  Jacob  hath 
taken  away  (by  fraud  is  what  they  meant, 
an  opinion  in  which  Kalisch  agrees  ;  but 
it  is  not  quite  certain  that  Jacob  was 
guilty  of  dishonesty  in  acting  as  he  did) 
all  that  was  our  father's ; — this  was  a 
manifest  exaggeration  ;  sed  hoe  morbo  la- 
bor ant  sordidi  et  nimium  tenaces,  ut  sibi 
ereptum  esse  putent  quicquid  non  ingur- 
gitant  (Calvin) — and  of  that  which  was  our 
father's  hath  he  gotten  (literally,  made,  in 
the  sense  of  acquiring,  as  in  ch.  xii.  5  ;  1 
Sam.  xiv.  48)  all  this  glory.    "IDS  (from 


153,  to  be  heavy,  hence  to  be  great  in  the 
sense  of  honoured,  and  also  to  be  abund- 
ant) signifies  either  glory,  splendour,  re- 
nown, 86{;a  (LXX.),  as  in  Job  xiv.  21 ;  or, 
what  seems  the  preferable  meaning  here, 
wealth,  riches,  facultates  (Vulgate),  as  in 
Ps.  xlix.  13 ;  Nahum  ii.  10.  The  two 
ideas  appear  to  be  combined  in  2  Cor.  iv. 
17;  papos  8o£t]s  (cf.  Wordsworth,  in  loco). 
Ver.  2. — And  Jacob  beheld  the  counten- 
ance of  Laban,  and,  behold,  it  (i.  e.  ^either 
Laban  or  his  countenance)  was  not  toward 
him  (literally,  with  him)  as  before— liter- 
ally, as  yesterday  and  the  day  before.  The 
evident  change  in  Laban's  disposition, 
which  had  previously  been  friendly,  was 
obviously  employed  by  God  to  direct  Ja- 
cob's mind  to  the  propriety  of  returning 
to  the'  land  of  his  inheritance;  and  the 
inclination  thus  started  in  his  soul  was 
further  strengthened  and  confirmed  by  a 
revelation  which  probably  soon  after,  if 
not  the  night  following,  was  sent  for  his. 
direction, 


374 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xxxi.  1—21. 


Ver.  3. — And  the  Lord — Jehovah;  since 
the  entire  journey  to  Padan-aram  had 
been  conducted  under  his  special  care, 
vide  ch.  xxviii.  15  (Hengstenberg),  and 
not  because  the  first  three  verses  of  this 
chapter  have  been  inserted  or  modified 
by  the  Jehovist  (Tuch,  Bleek,  et  alii) — 
Baid  unto  Jacob, — probably  in  a  dream  (cf. 
vers.  5,  10,  11) — Return  unto  the  land  of 
thy  fathers  (i.  e.  Canaan),  and  to  thy  kin- 
dred; and  I  will  be  with  thee.  So  Jehovah 
had  promised  at  Bethel  twenty  years  be- 
fore (ch.  xxviii.  15). 

Ver.  4. — And  Jacob  sent — being  unwil- 
ling to  approach  the  house  lest  Laban 
should  discover  his  design  (Rosenmuller) 
— and  called  Rachel  and  Leah — Bathe]  may 
be  placed  first  as  the  beloved  wife  of 
Jacob  (Wordsworth,  Lange),  scarcely  as 
the  principal  wife  in  comparison  with 
Leah,  who  was  adventitia  ( Rosenmuller. ; 
cf.  ver.  14) — to  the  field  unto  his  flock. 
The  expression  "  his  flock"  indicates  that 
Jacob  had  abandoned  Laban 's  sheep  and 
taken  possession  of  those  which  belonged 
to  himself — probably  in  preparation  for 
his  departure. 

Ver.  5. — And  said  unto  them,  I  see  your 
father's  countenance,  that  it  is  not  toward 
me  as  before  (vide  supra) ;  but  the  God  of 
my  father — literally,  and  the  Elohim  of 
my  father,  the  term  Elohim  employed  by 
Jacob  not  being  due  to  "the  vagueness  of 
the  religious  knowledge "  possessed  by 
his  wives  (Hengstenberg),  but  to  a  desire 
on  his  own  part  either  to  distinguish  the 
God  of  his  father  from  the  gods  of  the 
nations,  or  the  idols  which  Laban  wor- 
shipped ('Speaker's  Commentary'),  or 
perhaps,  while  using  an  expression  ex- 
actly equivalent  to  Jehovah,  to  bring  out 
a  contrast  between  the  Divine  favour  and 
that  of  Laban  (Quarry) — hath  been  with 
me — literally,  was  with  me;  not  the  night 
before  simply,  but  during  the  past  six 
years,  as  he  explains  in  ver.  7. 

Ver.  6. — And  ye  know  that  with  all  my 
power  I  have  served  your  father.  The  term 
Jacob  here  uses  for  power  is  derived  from 
an  unused  onomatopoetic  root,  signifying 
to  pant,  and  hence  to  exert  one's  strength. 
If,  therefore,  the  assertion  now  made  to 
his  wives  was  not  an  unblushing  false- 
hood, Jacob  could  not  have  been,  the 
monster  of  craft  and  deception  depicted 
by  some  (Kalisch) ;  while,  if  it  was,  it 
must  have  required  considerable  effrontery 
to  appeal  to  his  wives'  knowledge  for  a 
confirmation  of  what  they  knew  to  be  a 
deliberate  untruth.  The  hypothesis  that 
Jacob  first  acquired  his  great  wealth  by 
"consummate  cunning,"  and  then  piously 
"abused  the  authority  of  God  in  covering 
orjustifyingtbem"  (Kalisch),  presupposes 
ojl  the  part  of  Jacob  a  degree  of  wicked- 


ness inconceivable  in  one  who  had  enjoyed 
the  sublime  theophany  of  Bethel. 

Ver.  7. — And  your  father  hath  deceived 
me, — SrrtT  the  hiph.  of  bbri,  means  to  rob 
or  plunder  (Filrst),  or  to  cause  to  fall,  as 
in  the  cognate  languages,  whence  to  de- 
ceive (Gesenius) — and  changed  my  wages 
ten  times ; — i.  e.  many  times,  as  in  Numb, 
xiv.  22  ;  Job  xix.  3  (Rosenmuller,  Bush, 
Kalisch,  Lange) ;  as  often  as  possible,  the 
number  ten  expressing  the  idea  of  com- 
pleteness (Keil,  Murphy)-^but  God  (Elo- 
him, Jacob  purposing  to  say  that  he  had 
been  protected,  not  by  human  stratagem, 
but  by  Divine  interposition)  suffered  him 
not  to  hurt  me — literally,  to  do  evil  to  me. 
The  verb  here  construed  with  TH3>  —  D5> 

is  sometimes  followed  by  bv  (1  Kings  xvii. 
20),  and  sometimes  by  Si  (1  Chron.  xvi.22). 

Ver.  8. — If  he  (i.  e.  Laban)  said  thus, 
The  speckled  shall  be  thy  wages; — by  the 
original  contract  Jacob  had  been  prom- 
ised all  the  parti-coloured  animals  (ch. 
xxx.  32) ;  here  it  seems  as  if  Laban,  struck 
with  the  remarkable  increase  of  these, 
took  the  earliest  opportunity  of  so  modi- 
fying the  original  stipulation  as  to  limit 
Jacob's  portion  to  one  sort  only,  viz.  the 
speckled.  Yet  this  dishonourable  breach 
of  faith  on  the  part  of  Laban  was  of  no 
avail ;  for,  when  the  next  lambing  season 
came — then  (it  was  discovered  that)  all  the 
cattle  bare  speckled:  and  if  he  said  thus 
(changing  the  sort  of  animals  assigned  to 
his  son-in-law),  The  ringstraked  shall  be 
thy  hire  (the  result  was  as  before) ;  then 
bare  all  the  cattle  ringstraked. 

Ver.  9. — Thus — literally,  and  (as  the 
result  of  this) — God  hath  taken  away  the 
cattle  of  your  father,  and  given  them  to 
me.  In  ascribing  to  God  what  he  had 
himself  effected  by  (so-called)  fraud ,  this 
language  of  Jacob  appears  to  some  in- 
excusable (Kalisch) ;  in  passing  over  his 
own  stratagem  in  silence  Jacob  has  been 
charged  with  not  telling  the  whole  truth 
to  his  wives  (Keil).  A  more  charitable 
consideration  of  Jacob's  statement,  how- 
ever, discerns  in  it  an  evidence  of  his 
piety,  which  recognised  and  gratefully 
acknowledged  that  not  his  own  "  con- 
summate cunning,"  but  Jehovah's  watch- 
ful care  had  enabled  him  to  outwit  the 
dishonest  craft  of  Laban  (Rosenmuller, 
Ainsworth,  Bush,  Candlish,  Murphy). 

Ver.  10.  — And  it  came  to  pass  at  the 
time  that  the  cattle  conceived  (this  ob- 
viously goes  back  to  the  commencement 
of  the  six  years'  service),  that  I  lifted  up 
mine  eyes,  and  saw  in  a  dream,  and,  be- 
hold, the  rams — Qi-inS ,  he-goats,  from  an 

unused  root,  to  be  ready,  perhaps  because 
ready  and  prompt  for  fighting  (Gesenius, 


CH.  XXXt.  1—21.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


875 


sub  voce) — which  leaped  (literally, going  up) 
upon  the  cattle  were  ringstraked,  speckled, 
and  grisled.  The  grisled  (beruddim, 
from  barad,  to  scatter  hail)  were  spotted 
animals,  as  if  they  had  been  sprinkled 
with  hail,  not  a  fifth  sort  in  addition  to 
the  four  already  mentioned  (Rosenmilller), 
but  the  same  as  the  teluirn  of  ch.  xxx. 
35  (Kalisch).  Wordsworth  observes  that 
the  English  term  grisled,  from  the  French 
word  grele,  hail,  is  a  literal  translation  of 
the  Hebrew.  Gesenius  connects  with 
the  Hebrew  root  the  words  irdpSos,  pardus, 
leopard  (so  called  from  its  spots),  and  the 
French  broder,  to  embroider.  The  LXX. 
understand  the  D"HP1?  to   include  both 

sheep  and  goats,  and  translate  ot  rpd-yoi 
ko.1  ot  xpiol  avapVtvovTes  eirl  rd  irpdpa/ra 
K<xl  rds  atyas 

Ver.  11. — And  the  angel  of  God — liter- 
ally, the  angel  (or  Maleach)  of  Mohim, 
i.e.  of  the  God  who  was  with  me  and  pro- 
tecting me,  though  himself  continuing 
unseen — spake  unto  me  in  a  dream,  say- 
ing, Jacob  :  And  I  said,  Here  am  I  (vide 
ch.  xx.  1,  11). 

Ver.  12.  —  And  lie  Baid,  Lift  up  now  thine 
eyes,  and  see,  all  the  rams  which  leap  upon 
the  cattle  are  ringstraked,  speckled,  and 
grisled.  Since  all  the  parti-coloured  ani- 
mals had  already  been  removed  (ch. 
xxx.  35),  this  vision  must  have  been  in- 
tended to  assure  him  that  the  flocks  would 
produce  speckled  and  spotted  progeny  all 
the  same  as  if  the  ringstraked  and  grisled 
rams  and  he-gdats  had  not  been  removed 
from  their  midst  (cf.  Kurtz,  §  78).  To 
insist  upon  a  contradiction  between  this 
account  of  the  increase  of  Jacob's  flocks 
and  that  mentioned  in  ch.  xxx.  37  is  to 
forget  that  both  may  be  true.  Equally 
arbitrary  does  it  seem  to  be  to  accuse 
Jacob  of  fraud  in  adopting  the  artifice  of 
the  pilled  rods  (Kalisch).  Without  re- 
sorting to  the  supposition  that  he  acted 
under  God's  guidance  (Wordsworth),  we 
may  bel  eve  that  the  dream  suggested 
the  expedient  referred  to,  in  which  some 
see  Jacob's  unbelief  and  impatience 
(Kurtz,  Gosman  in  Lange),  and  others  a 
praiseworthy  instance  of  self-help  (Keil). 
For  I  have  seen  all  that  Laban  doeth  unto 
thee.  If  the  receding  clause  appears  to 
imply  that  the  vision  was  sent  to  Jacob 
at  the  beginning  of  the  six  years'  service, 
the  present  clause  seems  to  point  to  the 
end  of  that  period  as  the  date  of  its  oc- 
currence ;  in  which  case  it  would  require 
to  be  understood  as  a  Divine  intimation 
to  Jacob  that  his  immense  wealth  was  not 
to  be  ascribed  ito  the  success  of  his  own 
stratagem,  but  to  the  blessing  of  God 
(Deljtzsch).  The  difficulty  of  harmonis- 
ing the  two  views  has  led  to  the  sugges- 
tion that  Jacob  here  mixes  the  accounts  of 


two  different  visions  accorded  to  him,  at 
the  commencement  and  at  the  close  of  the 
period  of  servitude  (Nachmanides,  Rosen- 
mtiller,  Kurtz,  '  Speaker's  Commentary, 
Murphy,  Candlish). 

Ver.  13. — I  am  the  God  of  Beth-el, — the 
angej  here  identifies  himself  with  Jehovah 
(vide  ch.,xxviii.  13).  Contrary  to  usual 
custom,    58CT,  though   in  the  construct. 

state,  hasthe  art.  (vide  Ewald, '  Heb.  Synt. ,' 
§  290) — where  thou  anointedst  the  pillar, 
and  where  thou  vowedst  a  vow  unto  me  : 
now  arise,  get  thee  out  from  this  land,  and 
return  unto  the  land  of  thy  kindred  — 
i.  e.  to  the  land  of  Canaan,  which  was 
Jacob's  true  inheritance. 

Vers.  14. — 16. — And  Kachel  and  Leah 
(vide  on  ver.  4)  answered  and  said  unto 
him  (Kalisch  overdoes  his  attempt  to 
blacken  Jacob's  character  and  whitewash 
Laban's  when  he  says  that  Rachel  and 
Leah  were  so  entirely  under  their  hus- 
band's influence  that  they  spoke  about 
their  father  "  with  severity  and  boldness 
bordering  on  disrespect. ' '  It  rather  seems 
to  speak  badly  for  Laban  that  his 
daughters  eventually  rose  in  protest 
against  his  heartless  cruelty  and  insatia- 
ble greed),  Is  there  yet  any  portion  or  in- 
heritance for  us  in  our  father's  house  % 
The  interrogative  particle  indicates  a 
spirited  inquiry,  to  which  a  negative  re- 
sponse is  anticipated  (cf .  ch.  xxx.  2  ;  vide- 
Ewald,  'Heb.  Synt.,' §  324).  Kalisch 
obviously  iegards  it  as  preposterous  that 
Rachel  and  Leah  should  have  expected 
anything,  since  "married  daughters  in 
the  East  never  had  any  such  claim  where 
there  were  sons."  But  Laban  had  not 
treated  Jacob's  wives  even  as  daughters. 
Are  we  not  counted  of  him  strangers  t  for 
he  hath  sold  us  (however  much  they  loved 
Jacob  they  could  not  but  resent  the  mer- 
cenary meanness  of.  Laban,  by  which 
they,  the  free-born  daughters  of  a  chief- 
tain, had  been  sold  as  common  serfs),  and 
hath  quite  devoured  also  our  money — liter- 
ally, and  hath  eaten  up,  yes,  even  eating 
up,  our  money,  the  inf.  abs.,  bias,  after 

the  finite  verb,  expressing  the  contin- 
uance (Keil)  and  intensity  (Kalisch)  of  the 
action  (vide  Ewald,  'Heb.  Synt.,'  §  280). 
For — ^3  is  by  some  interpreters  rendered 

but  (Jarchi),  so  that  (Keil),  indeed  (Kal- 
isch), though  there  is  no  sufficient  reason 
for  departing  from  the  usual  meaning 
'  'for  "  (Rosenmttller)— all  the  riches  which 
God  hath  taken  from  our  father, — thus 
Rachel  and  Leah  al  o  recognise  the  hand 
of  God  (Elohim)  in  Jacob's  unusual  pros- 
perity— that  is  ours,  and  our  children's 
(Rachel  and  Leah  mean  to  say  that  what 
Jacob  had  acquired  by  his  six  years  of 
service  with  their  father  was  no  mora 


376 


THE  BOOK  OF   GENESIS. 


[ch.  xxxi.  " — 21. 


than  would  have  naturally  belonged  to 
him  had  they  obtained  their  portions  at 
the  first)  :  now  then,  whatsoever  God  hath 
saidunto  thee,  do.  It  is  clear  that,  equally 
with  himself,  they  were  preparedforbreak- 
ing  off  connection  with  their  father  Laban. 
Vers.  17, 18.—  Then  (literally,)  anu  Jacob 
rose  up  (expressive  of  the  vigour  and 
alacrity  with  which,  having  obtained  the 
concurrence  of  his  wives,  Jacob  set  t bout 
fulfilling  the  Divine  instruction),  and  set 
his  sons — his  children,  as  in  ch.  xxxi.  1  ; 
xxxii.  12,  including  Dinah,  if  by  this  time 
she  had  been  born  (vide  ch.  xxx.  21 — and 
his  wives  upon  camels.  Since  neither 
were  able  to  undertake  a  journey  to 
Canaan  on  foot,  his  oldest  son  being  not 
more  than  thirteen  years  of  age,  and  his 
youngest  not  more  than  six.  On  the 
camel,  vide  ch.  xii.  16.  And  he  carried 
away — the  verb  3ij5,  to  pant,  which  is 

specially  used  of  those  who  are  exhausted 
by  running  (Gesenius,  sub  voce),  may  per- 
haps indicate  the  haste  with  which  Jacob 
acted — all  his  cattle, — Mikneh,  literally, 
possession,  fro.n  kanah,  to  procure, 
always  used  of  cattle,  the  chief  wealth  of 
a  nomad  (cf.  ch.  xiii.  2;  xxvi.  14) — and 
all  his  goods  which  he  had.  gotten,  — 
Mecush,  literally,  acquisition,  hence  sub- 
stance, wealth  in  general,  from  raeash,  to 
acquire  (vide  ch.  xiv.  11.  16,  21  ;  xv.  14), 
which,  however,  is  more  specifically  de- 
scribed as — the  cattle  of  his  getting,  which 
he  had  gotten  (both  of  the  above  verbs, 
kanah  and  raeash,  being  now  eruployfd) 
in  (('.  e.  during  his  stay  in)  Padan  aram, 
for  to  go  to  Isaac  his  father  in  the  land  of 
Canaan. 

Ver.  19. — And  Laban  went  —  or,  Now 
Laban  had  gone,  probably  to  the  other 
station,  which  was  three  days'  journey 
from  Jacob's  flocks  (vide  ch.  xxx.  36  ; 
and  cf .  ch.  xxxi.  22) — to  shear  his  sheep. 
In  tl:iB  work  he  would  probably  be  de- 
tained several  days,  the  time  of  shearing 
being  commonly  regarded  as  a  festal  sea- 
son (cf.  ch.  xxxviii.  12  ;  1  Sam.  xxv.  4  ;  2 
Sam.  xiii.  23),  at  which  friendly  enter- 
tainments were  given.  Wktther  Jacob's 
absence  from  the  festivities  is  to  bs  ex- 
plained by  the  dissension  existing  be- 
tween him  and  Laban,  which  either 
caused  him  to  be  uninvited  or  led  him  to 
decline  the  invitation  (Kurtz),  or  by  the 
supposition  that  he  had  first  gone  and 
subsequently  left  the  banquet  (Lange),  the 
fact  that  Laban  was  so  engaged  afforded 
Jacob  the  opportunity  he  desired  for  mak- 
his  es  ape.  And  Rachel  had  stolen  (or, 
"and  Rachel  stole,"  availing  herself  like- 
wise of  the  opportunity  presented  by  her 
father's  absence)  the  images  that  were 
her  father's,     The  teraphim,  from  an  un- 


used root,  taraph,  signifying  to  live  com- 
fortably, like  the  Sanscrit  trip,  Greek 
Tpecjmy,  Arabic  tarafa  (Gesenius,  Pilrst, 
sub  voce),  appear  to  have  been  sma.l 
human  figures  (cf.  ch.  xxxi.  34),  though 
the  image  in  1  Sam.  xix.  13  must  have 
been  nearly  life-size,  or  at  least  a  full- 
sized  bust,  sometimes  made  of  silver 
(Judges  xvii.  4),  though  commonly  con- 
strutted  of  wood  (1  Sam.  xix.  13 — 16); 
they  were  worshipped  as  gods  (el8w\a, 
LXX.  ;  idola,  Vulgate,  cf.  ch.  xxxi.  30), 
c  nsulted  for  oracles  (Ezek.  xxi.  26 ; 
Zech.  x.  2),  and  believed  to  be  the  cus- 
todians and  promoters  of  human  happi- 
ness (Judges  xviii.  24).  Probably  derived 
from  the  Aramaeans  (Fiirst,  Kurtz),  or 
the  Chaldeans  (Ezek.  xxi.  21,  Kaliscli, 
Wordsworth),  the  worship  of  teraphim 
was  subsequently  denounced  as  idolatrous 
(1  Sam.  xv.  23  ;  2  Kings  xiii.  24).  Cf.  with 
Rachel's  act  that  ascribed  to  JEneas  : — 
"  Effigies  sacrse  divum,  Phrygiique  Pen- 
ates, 

Quos  mecum  a  Troja,   mediisque    ex 
ignibus  urbis, 

Extuleram"  ( Virg. ,  '^En. ,  *  iii.  148—150). 
Rachel's  motive  for  abstracting  her 
father's  teraphim  has  been  variously  as- 
cribed to  a  desire  to  prevent  her  father 
from  discovering,  by  inquiring  at  his 
gods,  the  direction  of  their  flight  (Aben 
Ezra,  Rosenmuller,)  to  protect  herself, 
in  case  of  being  overtaken,  by  an  appeal 
to  her  father's  gods  (Josephus},  to  draw 
her  father  from  the  practice  of  idolatry 
(Bazil,  Gregory,  Nazianzen,  Theodoret), 
to  obtain  children  for  herself  through 
their  assistance  (Lengerke,  Gerlach),  to 
preserve  a  memorial  of  her  ancesti  rs, 
whose  pictures  these  teraphim  were 
(Lightfoot)  ;  but  was  probably  due  to 
avarice,  if  the  images  were  made  of  pre- 
cious metals  (Pererius),  or  to  a  taint  of 
superstition  which  still  adhered  to  her 
otherwise  religious  nature  (Chrysostom, 
Calvin,  '  Speaker's  Commentary '),  caus- 
ing her  to  look  to  these  idols  for  protec- 
tion (Kalisch,  Murphy)  or  consultati  n 
(Wordsworth)  on  her  journey. 

Ver.  20.  —  And  Jacob  stole  away  un- 
awares to  Laban  the  Syrian, — literally, 
stole  the  heart  of  Laban  the  Syrian,  i.  e. 
deceived  his  mind  and  intelligence,  like 
k\£iitciv  v<Sov,  Horn.,  'II..'  xiv.  227  (cf. 
vers.  26,  27)  ;  hence  =  eKpu+e  (LXX.) ; 
so  Calvin,  Rosenmuller,  Keil,  Gesenius, 
and  others.  Lange  fancifully  under- 
sta1  ds  by  the  heart  of  Laban  which  Jacob 
stole  either  Laban's  daughters  or  his  fa- 
vourite Rachel.  Gerlach  contrasts  Jacob's 
stealing  with  that  of  Rachel,  in  which 
Jacob  had  r.o  part.  The  exact  import  of 
Jacob's  stealing  is  declared  by  the  words 


CH.  XXXI.  1 — 21.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


377 


that  fbllow^-in  that  he  told  him  not  (Lange 
and  Bush  interpret  TJH  impersonally,  as 
signifying  in  that  or  because  it  was  not  told ; 
but  in  this  among  expositors  they  stand 
alone)  that  he  fled. 

Ver.  21.— So  (literally,  and)  he  fled  with 
(literally,  and)  all  that  he  had;  and  he 
rose  up,  and  passed  over  the  river, — i.  e. 
the  Euphrates,  which  was  called  by  pre- 
eminence the  river  (cf.  1  Kings  iv.  21  ;  Ezra 
iv.  10,  16)— and  set  his  face  toward  the 

mount  Gilead.    1J>?$,  according  to  Gesenius, 
'  the  hard,  stony  region,"  from  an  unused 


quadrilateral  root,  signifying  to  be  hard, 
though,  according  to  the  historian  (by  • 
slight  change  in  the  punctuation),  "Tin 
hill,  or  heap  of  witness,"  from  the  transaction 
recorded  in  verses  45 — 47,  which  name  il 
here  proleptically  receives,  was  not  the 
mountain-range  to  the  south  of  the  Jabbok. 
now  styled  Jebel  Jilad  (Gesenius),  Jebel-es- 
Ssalt  (Robinson),  Jebel  osha  (Tristram), 
since  Jacob  had  not  yet  crossed  the  river, 
but  that  upon  its  northern  bank,  called 
Jebel  Ajlun,  and  situated  near  Mahanaim 
(Delitzsch,  Keil,  Kalisch,  Porter). 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 21. — Jacob's  flight  from  Laban.     I.  The  homeward  desire.    The  long- 
ing to  revisit  Canaan,  which  six  years  previously  Laban's  exactions  and  Joseph's 
birth  (ch.  xxx.  25)  had  combined  to  inspire  within  the  heart  of  Jacob,  returned  upon 
him  with  an  intensity  that  could  no  longer  be  resisted.     Accelerated  in  its  vehemence 
partly  by  the  interposed  delay  to  which  it  had  been  subjected,  partly  by  his  further 
acquaintance  with  the  meanness  and  craft  of  his  uncle,  and  partly  by  his  own  rapidly- 
accumulating  wealth,  it  was  now  brought  to  a  head  by — 1.  The  calumnious  remarks  of 
Laban's  sons.    Inheriting  the  sordid  and  avaricious  nature  of  their  parent,  they  were 
filled  with  envy  at  the  remarkable  prosperity  which  had  attended  Jacob  during  the 
past  six  years.     If  good  men  are  sometimes  "  envious  at  the  foolish,"  it  is  not  sur- 
prising that  wicked  men  should  occasionally  begrudge  the  success  of  saints.     Then 
from  sinful  desires  they  passed  to  wicked  thoughts,  accusing  Jacob  of  having  by 
superior  craft  out-manoeuvred  their  designing  father,  and  appropriated  the  flocks  and 
herds  that  ought  to  have  been  his ;  which,  however,  was  a  manifest  exaggeration, 
since   Jacob  had  not  taken  away  all  their  father's  "glory,"  and  an  unjustifiable 
calumny,  since  it  was  not  Jacob's  stratagem,  but  God's  blessing,  that  had  multiplied 
the  parti-coloured  flocks.     And  lastly,  from  wicked  thoughts  they  advanced  to  evil 
words,  not  only  accusing  Jacob  in  their  minds,  but  openly  vilifying  him  with  their 
tongues,  adding  to  the  sin  of  private  slander  that  of  public  defamation — conduct 
which  the  word  of  God  severely  reprehends  (Prov.  xxx.  10 ;  1  Cor.  vi.  10 ;  Titus  iii. 
2;   James  iv.  11).     2.  The  manifest  displeasure  of  Laban.     During  the  fourteen 
years  that  Jacob  kept  the  flocks  for  Rachel  and  Leah,  Laban  regarded  him  with 
evident  satisfaction  ;  not  perhaps  for  his  own  sake,  but  for  the  unprecedented  increase 
in  his  (Laban's)  pastoral  wealth  which  had  taken  place  under  Jacob's  fostering  care. 
He  was  even  disposed  to  be  somewhat  pious  so  long  as  the  flocks  and  herds  con- 
tinued multiplying  (ch.  xxx.  27).     But  now,  when  at  the  end  of  six  years  the  relative 
positions  of  himself  and  Jacob  are  reversed, — when  Jacob  is  the  rich  man  and  be, 
comparatively  speaking  at  least,  the  poor  one, — not  only  does  his  piety  towards  God 
disappear,  but  his  civility  towards  man  does  not  remain.    There  are  many  Labans  in 
the  Church,  whose  religion  is  but  the  shadow  that  waits  upon  the  sun  of  their  pros- 
perity, and  many  Labans  in  the  world,  whose  amiability  towards  others  is  only  the 
reflection  of  their  complacent  feeling  towards  themselves.    3.  The  explicit  command 
of  God.     Twenty  years  before,  at  Bethel,  God  had  promised  to  bring  Jacob  back 
again  to  Canaan,  and  now  he  issues  formal  instructions  to  his  servant  to  return.     As 
really,  though  not  as  visibly  and  directly,  God  orders  the  footsteps  of  all  his  children 
(Ps.  xxxii.  8;  xxxvii.  23).     If  it  is  well  not  to  run  before  God's  providence,  as  Jacob 
would  have  done  had  he  returned  to  Canaan  at  the  end  of  the  fourteenth  year,  it  is 
also  well  not  to  lag  behind  when  that  providence  has  been  clearly  made  known. 
The  assurance  given  to  Jacob  of  guidance  on  his  homeward  journey  is  extended  to 
all  who,  in  their  daily  goings  forth,  obey  the  Divine  instructions  and  follow  the 
Divine  leadings. 

II.  The  conference  in  the  field.     1.  The  explanation  of  Jacob.     Three  con- 
trasts comrjlete  the  sum  of  Jacob's  announcements  to  his  wives.     First,  between  tin 


m  THE  BOOK  Of  GENESIS,  [en.  Jtlii  1—21 

■ 

growing  displeasure  of  Laban  their  father  and  the  manifest  favour  of  the  Elohim  oi 
his  father  (ver.  5) ;  second,  between  the  unwearied  duplicity  of  their  father,  not- 
withstanding Jacob's  arduous  service,  and  the  ever-watchful  protection  of  God 
against  his  injurious  designs  (vers.  6,  7) ;  and  third,  between  the  diminishing  herds 
of  Laban  and  the  multiplying  flocks  of  himself,  Jacob,  both  of  which  were  traceable 
to  Divine  interposition  (vers.  8,  10,  12).  After  enlarging  on  these  contrasts,  he  in- 
forms them  of  the  Divinely-given  order  to  return  (ver.  13).  2.  The  answer  of  .Rachel 
and  Leah.  Acknowledging  the  mean  and  a\  aricious  spirit  of  their  father,  who  had 
not  only  sold  them  as  slaves,  but  unjustly  deprived  them  of  the  portions  to  which,  as 
the  daughters  of  a  chieftain,  they  were  entitled  (vers.  14,  15),  they  first  confess  that 
Jacob's  wealth  was  nothing  more  than  it  would  have  been  had  they  been  honourably 
dowered  at  the  first;  second,  recognise  the  hand  of  God  in  thus  punishing  theii 
father  and  restoring  to  their  husband  what  was  practically  his  ;  and,  third,  encourage 
him  to  yield  complete  and  prompt  obedience  to  the  Divine  commandment  (ver.  16). 

III.  The  hasty  departure.  In  this  there  were  four  things  discernible.  1. 
Faith.  In  setting  his  face  towards  Canaan  he  was  acting  in  obedience  to  Divine 
instructions ;  and  respect  unto  God's  commandments  is  an  essential  characteristic  of 
living  faith.  2.  Love.  In  determining  "  to  go  to  Isaac  his  father  "  he  was  actuated 
by  a  true  spirit  of  filial  piety.  3.  Wisdom.  In  stealing  away  unawares  to  Laban, 
while  Laban  was  providentially  detained  at  the  sheep-shearing,  there  was  commend- 
able prudence,  which,  if  possible,  a  good  man  should  never  lack.  4.  Sin.  Not 
indeed  on  Jacob's  part,  but  on  that  of  Rachel,  who,  taking  advantage  af  her  father's 
absence,  carried  off  his  Penates  or  household  images. 

Learn — 1.  That  the  love  of  country  and  friends  is  deeply  implanted  in  the  human 
breast.  2.  That  it  is  a  great  trial  for  worldly  men  to  see  good  fortune  go  past  their 
doors.  3.  That  the  love  of  money,  or  the  greed  of  gain,  is  the  root  of  every  kind 
of  evil.  4.  That  the  promises  of  God,  however  long  delayed,  are  certain  of  fulfil- 
ment. 5.  That  loving  husbands  should  consult  their  wives  in  all  important  steps  in 
life.  6.  That  daughters  should  avoid  speaking  ill  of  parents,  even  should  those 
parents  deserve  it.  7.  That  wives  should  always  study  to  encourage  their  husbands 
in  doing  God's  will.  8.  That  those  who  flee  from  oppression  should  seek  for  safety 
in  paths  of  God's  appointing.  9.  That  thriving  and  prosperous  sons  should  not  for- 
get their  parents  in  old  age.  10.  That  daughters  should  not  steal  from  their  fathers, 
even  to  the  extent  of  pilfering  worthless  images. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  19. — Teraphim..  "  Rachel  had  stolen  the  images  that  were  her  father's." 
This  the  first  direct  mention  of  images  in  connection  with  worship,  though  tradition 
speaks  of  Nimrod  as  an  idolater  (cf.  Josh.  xxiv.  2).  Laban  calls  them  his  gods  (ver. 
30) ;  yet  he  and  his  family  knew  the  Lord.  His  use  of  them  was  a  corruption  of 
worship. 

I.  The  images.  Teraphim.  Had  some  resemblance  to  the  human  form  (1  Sam. 
xix.  13).  Of  different  sizes  and  materials.  The  manner  of  their  use  not  very  clear, 
but  used  in  some  way  for  worship.  Apparently  not  as  intentional  rebellion  against 
God.  Rather  as  a  help  to  worship  him,  but  a  help  chosen  in  self-will.  It  was  the 
error  forbidden  in  the  second  commandment ;  a  departure  from  the  way  of  Abel, 
Noah,  Abraham ;  the  device  of  a  soul  out  of  harmony  with  spiritual  things,  and 
unable  to  realise  God's  presence  in  worship  (cf.  Exod.  xxxii.  4;  Judges  viii.  27; 
xvii.  3  ;  1  Kings  xii.  28).  We  live  in  midst  of  things  claiming  attention.  Neces 
sities  of  life  compel  it.  And  the  good  effect  of  diligence  is  quickly  felt.  This  rot 
evil,  but  becomes  a  snare  unless  spiritual  life  vigorous  (Matt.  xiii.  22  ;  1  Cor.  vii 
29 — 31).  The  habit  of  looking  earthward  grows.  The- walk  with  God  becomes  less 
close.  Then  unreality  in  worship.  Then  the  attempt  by  material  aids  to  reconcil* 
worship  with  an  unchanged  life.  Hence,  in  the  old  time,  teraphim  ;  in  our  days, 
will  worship. 

II.  The  effect  of  this  on  the  moral  character  and  on  TnE  spiritual  life  ; 
exemplified  in  Laban.     Compare  him  as  presented  in  oh.  xxiv.  with  what  he  now 


oh.  xxxi.  22—44.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


am 


appears.  There  he  is  hospitable,  frank,  and  liberal ;  here  he  is  sordid,  ungenerous, 
deceitful  even  tc  his  own  nephew.  There  he  acknowledges  the  Lord  as  the  Guide  ol 
actions  (ch.  xxiv.  50,  51)  ;  here  he  speaks  of  "  the  God  of  your  father,"  and  ol 
"my  gods."  The  love  of  wealth  had  made  God  no  longer  first  in  his  thoughts  (cf. 
Ps.  x.  4 ;  Phil.  iii.  19).  Thus  worship  became  a  thing  of  times  and  seasons,  a  thing 
separate  from  daily  life,  and  therefore  possessing  no  influence  on  daily  life.  So  in 
the  Christian  Church  great  attention  to  external  aids  and  extravagant  symbolism 
were  the  resources  of  a  pervading  spirit  less  spiritual  than  in  times  before  ;  and  these 
too  often  were  as  clouds  hiding  the  face  of  God. 

III.  Rachel's  act.  Stole  teraphim.  Why?  Some  have  thought  to  wean  her 
father  from  them.  More  probably  wished  to  make  use  of  them.  Had  not  escaped 
her  father's  influence.  Hence  the  want  of  a  submissive  spirit  (cf.  ch.  xxx.  1  with  1 
Sam.  i.  11).  The  evil  spread  in  Jacob's  household  (ch.  xxxv.  2).  The  necessity  for 
making  a  stand  against  it  (Josh.  xxiv.  23). 

IV.  The  lesson  for  oue  times.  The  second  commandment  meets  a  real  danger 
in  every  age — of  leaning  upon  secondary  means  in  religious  service.  Teraphim  no 
longer  tempt  us.  But  amid  whirl  of  active  life,  danger  of  leaning  too  much  on  out- 
ward impressions  for  spiritual  life  ;  of  cultivating-  the  emotions  in  place  of  spiritual 
earnestness  (Ps.  cxxx.  6  ;  Matt.  xi.  12) ;  of  putting  religious  services  (1  Sam.  xv.  22) 
or  work  (Matt.  vii.  22)  in  place  of  walk  with  God.  Amid  much  apparent  religious 
activity  the  striving  against  self  (Luke  ix.  23)  and  growth  in  grace  may  become 
languid  (1  John  v.  21).— M. 

Vers,  20,  21. — The  separation  from  Laban.  "And  Jacob  stole  away  unawares  to 
Laban  the  Syrian,"  &c.     A  great  lesson  on — 

L  The  evil  of  dissimulation.  Hatred  and  wrong  the  fruits  of  crafty  ways. 
Family  dissensions  where  the  things  of  this  world  uppermost.  Separations  which 
are  made  in  the  spirit  of  dependence  on  God  rend  no  true  bond  but  rather  strengthen 
affection. 

II.  The  forbearance  of  God.  No  justification  of  L^oan,  much  imperfection  in 
Jacob  ;  yet  the  shield  of  Divine  patience  and  mercy  thrown  over  the  man  who  vowed 
the  vow  of  service,  in  whom  his  grace  would  yet  be  abundantly  revealed.  Laban' s 
action  controlled  by  God.  He  forbad  the  evil  design.  He  stilleth  the  enemy  and 
the  avenger.  "Take  thou  heed  that  thou  speak  not  to  Jacob  either  good  or  bad  " 
(ver.  29).  "Touch  not  mine  anointed,"  &c.  When  we  are  doing  God's  work  and 
walking  towards  his  chosen  end  we  may  leave  it  with  him  to  speak  with  those  who 
would  hinder  or  harm  us. — B. 


EXPOSITION. 


Vers.  22,  23. — And  it  was  told  laban  on 
the  third  day — i.  e.  the  third  after  Jacob's 
departure,  the  distance  between  the  two 
sheep-stations  being  a-  three  days'  journey 
(vide  ch.  xxx.  36) —  that  Jacob  was  fled. 
And  he  took  his  brethren — i.  e.  his  kins- 
men, or  nearest  relations  (cf.  ch.  xiii.  8  ; 
xxix,  16)  —  with  him,  and  pursued  after 
him  (Jacob)  seven  days'  journey  (literally, 
a  way  of  seven  days) ;  and  they  overtook 
iim  in  the  mount  Gilead.  The  distance 
between  Padan-aram  and  mount  Gilead  was 
a  little  over  300  miles,  to  perform  which 
Jacob  must  at  least  have  taken  ten  days, 
though  Laban,  who  was  less  encumbered 
than  his  son-in-law,  accomplished  it  in  seven, 
which  might  easily  be  done  by  travelling 
from  forty  to  forty-five  miles  a  day,  by  no 
means  a  great  feat  for  a  camel. 

Vers.  24,  25. — And  God— Elohim  is  here 


employed,  neither  because  the  section  belongs 
to  the  fundamental  document  (Tuch,  Bleek, 
Colcnso,  et  alii),  nor  because,  though  Laban 
had  an  outward  acquaintance  with  Jehovah 
(vide  ver.  49),  his  real  religious  knowledge 
did  not  extend  beyond  Elohim  (Hengsten- 
berg),  but  simply  because  the  historian 
wished  to  characterise  the  interposition  which 
arrested  Laban  in  his  wrath  as  supernatural 
(Quarry) — came  to  Laban  the  Syrian  in  a 
dream  by  night, — (cf.  ch.  xx.  3  ;  Job  xxxiii. 
15  ;  Matt.  i.  20).  This  celestial  visitation 
occurred  the  night  before  the  fugitives  were 
overtaken  (vide  ver.  29).  Its  intention  wai 
to  guard  Jacob,  according  to  the  promise  ol 
ch.  xxviii.  15,  against  Laban's  resentment — 
and  (accordingly  God)  said  unto  him,  Taka 
heed— literally,  take  heed  for  thyself,  the 
verb  being  followed  by  an  ethical  dative,  aj 
in  ch.    xii.   1 ;  xxi    16,   q.  v. — that  thot 


380 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  sxx:   24—44. 


•peak  not  to  Jacob — literally,  lest  thou  speak 
with  Jacob;  /tr)  iron  AnXijoyc  /itri  'lanu/3 
(LXX.)  —  either  good  or  bad.  Literally, 
from  good  to  bad,  meaning  that  on  meeting 
with  Jacob  he  should  not  pasa  from  peaceful 
greetings  to  bitter  reproaches  (Bush,  Iange), 
or  say  anything  emphatic  and  decisive  for 
the  purpose  of  reversing  what  had  occurred. 
(Keil) ;  or,  perhaps  more  simply,  say  any- 
thing acrimonious  or  violent  against  Jacob 
(Rosenmiiller,  Murphy),  the  expression  being 
a  proverbial  phrase  for  opposition  or  inter- 
ference (Kalisch).  (Cf.  ch.  xxiv.  50  ;  2  Sam. 
xiii.  23).  Then  (literally,  and)  Laban  over- 
took Jacob.  Now  (literally,  and)  Jacob  had 
pitched  his  tent— this  was  done  by  means 
of  pins  driven  into  the  ground,  the  verb 
y|5R  signifying  to  fasten,  or  fix  anything  by 
driving  (cf.  Judges  iv.  21  ;  Isa.  xxii.  23,  25) 
— in  the  mount  {vide  supra,  ver.  21) :  and 
Laban  with  his  brethren  (kinsmen,  ut  supra) 
pitched — his  tent ;  not  larrjni  roi'i;  aSi\$ois 
(LXX.)— in  the  mount  of  Gilead  (vide  supra, 
ver.  21). 

Vers.  26—30. — And  Laban  (assuming  a 
tone  of  injured  innocence)  said  to  Jacob, 
What  hast  thon  done,  that  thou  hast  stolen 
away  unawares  to  me,  —  literally,  and 
(meaning,  in  that)  thou  hast  stolen  my  heart 
{vide  supra,  ver.  20  ;  and  cf.  ver.  27)— and 
carried  away  (vide  ver.  18)  my  daughters, 
as  captives  taken  with  the  sword?  Liter- 
ally, as  captives  of  the  sword,  i.  e.  invitis 
parentibus  (Rosenmiiller) ;  language  which, 
if  not  hypocritical  on  Laban's  part,  was 
certainly  hyperbolical,  since  he  had  already 
evinced  the  strength  of  his  parental  affection 
by  selling  his  daughters  to  Jacob ;  and  be- 
sides, so  far  as  it  concerned  either  Jacob  or 
his  wives,  it  was  quite  untrue,  Rachel  and 
Leah  having  voluntarily  accompanied  their 
husband  in  his  flight.  Wherefore  didst  thou 
flee  away  secretly, — literally,  wherefore  didst 
thou  hide  thyself  to  flee  away;  ton  (niph.), 
with  an  inf.  following,  corresponding  to  the 
similar  construction  in  Greek  of  \av8avav 
with  a  part.,  and  being  correctly  rendered 
in  English  by  an  adverb  (vide  Gesenius, 
'Gram.,'  §  142)— and  steal  away  from  me 
(literally,  and  steal  me,  ut  supra);  and  didst 
not  tell  me,  that  I  might  (literally,  and  I 
would)  have  sent  thee  away  with  mirth, 
and  with  songs, — in  Oriental  countries 
those  about  to  make  a  long  journey  are  still 
Bent  away  cantionibus  et  musicorum  instru- 
mentorum  concentu  (Rosenmiiller)  —  with 
tabret, — the  toph  was  a  drum  or  timbrel, 
consisting  of  a  wooden  circle  covered  with 
membrane,  and  furnished  with  brass  bells 
(like  the  modern  tambourine),  which  Oriental 
women  beat  when  dancing  (cf.  Exod.  xv.  20 ; 
Judges  xL  34  ;  Jer.  xxxi.  4) — and  with 
kaxp  1    For  a  description  of  the  kinnor  see 


ch.  iv.  21.  And  hast  not  suffered  me  t« 
kiss  my  sons  (i.  e.  the  children  of  Leah  and 
Rachel)  and  my  daughters?  It  is  perhaps 
judging  Laban  too  severely  to  pronounce 
this  complete  hypocrisy  and  cant  (Alford, 
Bush,  Candlish,  Gerlaeh),  but  equally  wide 
of  the  truth  is  it  to  see  in  Laban's  conduct 
nothing  but  generosity  of  feeling  (Kalisch) ; 
probably  there  was  a  mixture  of  both  pater- 
nal affection  and  crafty  dissimulation  (De- 
litzsch).  Thou  hast  now  done  foolishly  in 
so  doing.  -  The  charge  of  folly  in  Old  Testa- 
ment Scriptures  commonly  carries  with  it 
an  imputation  of  wrong-doing  (cf.  1  Sam. 
xiii.  13  ;  2  Sam.  xxiv.  10).  It  is  in  the 
power  of  my  hand -so  the  phrase  ?N?"^ 
'T  (cf.  Deut.  xxviii.  32 ;  Neh.  v.  5 ;  Mieah 
ii.  1)  is  rendered  by  competent  authorities 
(Gesenius,  Fiirst,  Rosenmiiller,  Kalisch, 
Murphy,  et  alii),  with  which  agree  la\im 
i)  xe'P  fov  (LXX.),  and  valet  manus  mea 
(Vulgate),  though  the  translation  "My  hand 
is  for  God,"  i.  e.  my  hand  serves  me  as  God 
(cf.  Job  xii.  6  ;  Hab.  i.  11),  is  by  some  pre- 
ferred (Keil,  Knobel,  Jacobus) — to  do  you 
hurt :  but  the  God  of  yonr  father — the  use 
of  this  expression  can  be  rightly  regarded 
neither  as  a  proof  of  Elohistic  authorship 
(Tuch,  Bleek,  Colenso,  Davidson)  nor  as  a 
sign  of  Laban's  spiritual  degeneracy  (Heng- 
stenberg,  Wordsworth),  since  it  is  practically 
equivalent  to  Jehovah  (vide  ch.  xxviii.  13), 
but  is  probably  to  be  viewed  as  a  play  upon 
the  sound  and  sense  of  the  preceding  clause, 
as  thus  : — "  It  is  in  the  El  of  my  hand  to  do 
you  evil,  but  the  Elohim  of  your  father  spake 
to  me."  Another  instance  of  this  play  upon 
the  sound  and  sense  is  to  be  found  in  vers. 
19,  20 — "Rachel  stole  the  teraphim  that 
were  her  father's  ;  and  Jacob  stole  the  heart 
of  Laban  the  Syrian"  (cf.  Quarry  on  Genesis, 
p,  498)  — spake  unto  me  yesternight,  saying, 
Take  thou  heed  that  thou  speak  not  to  Jacob 
—literally,  guard  or  keep  thee  for  thyself  (the 
pleon.  pron.  being  added  ut  supra,  ver.  24) 
from  speaking  with  Jacob— either  good  oi 
bad  (vide  on  ver.  24).  And  now,  though 
thou  wouldest  needs  be  gone  (literally,  going 
thou  didst  go  =  thou  hast  indeed  gone), 
because  thou  sore  Iongedst  after  thy  father') 
house  (literally,  because  desiring  thou  didst 
desire.  The  verb  *1D3,  to  be  pale  (whence 
S]D3,  silver,  so  called  from  its  pale  colour), 
expresses  the  ide?  of  pining  away  and  lan- 
guishing througn  strong  inward  longing),  yet 
wherefore  hast  thou  stolen  my  gods  ?  Laban 
had  probably  gone  to  consult  his  teraphim 
and  so  discovered  their  loss.  Augustine  calls 
attention  to  this  as  the  first  Scripture  refer- 
ence to  heathen  gods,  and  Calvin  probably 
supplies  the  right  explanation  of  the  sense 
in  which  they  were  so  styled  by  Laban,  non 
quia  deitatem  Ulic  putaret  esse  inclusam, 


oh.  xxxi.  22 — 44.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


381 


ted  quia  in  honorem  deorum  imagines  illas 
colebat;  vel potius  quod  Deo  sacra  facturus, 
vertebat  se  ad  illas  imagines  (cf.  Exod. 
xxxii.  4 ;  1  Kings  xii.  28).  "  This  complaint 
of  Laban,  that  nis  'gods  were  stolen,'  show- 
eth  the  vanity  of  such  idolatry"  (Ainsworth). 
Cf.  Judges  vi  31 ;  xvi.  24  ;  Jer.  x.  5,  11, 15. 

Vers.  31,  32. — And  Jacob  answered  -"in 
an  able  and  powerful  speech"  (Kalisch) — 
-  and  said  to  Laban  (replying  to  his  first 
interrogation  as  to  why  Jacob  had  stolen' 
away  unawares),  Because  I  was  afraid  :  for 
I  said  (so.  to  myself),  Peradventure  (literally, 
lest,  i.  e.  I  must  depart  without  informing 
thee  lest)  thou  wouldest  (or  shouldest)  take 
by  force — the  verb  signifies  to  strip  off  as 
skin  from  flesh  (vide  Mic.  iii.  2),  and  hence 
to  forcibly  remove — thy  daughters  from  me 
(after  which,  in  response  to  Laban's  question 
about  his  stolen  gods,  he  proceeds).  With 
whomsoever  thou  findest  thy  gods,  let  him 
not  live.  If  Jacob  meant  he  shall  not  live, 
but  I  will  slay  h;m  with  mine  own  hand 
(Aben  Ezra),  let  God  destroy  him  (Abarbanel), 
I  givo  him  up  to  theo  to  put  to  death  (Rosen- 
miiller),  let  him  instantly  die  (Drusius),  he 
was  guilty  of  great  unadvisedness  in  speech. 
Accordingly,  the  import  of  his  words  has  been 
mollified  by  regarding  them  simply  as  a  pre- 
diction, "  he  will  not  live,"  i.  e.  he  will  die 
before  his  time  (Jonathan), a  prediction  which, 
the  Rabbins  note,  was  fulfilled  in  Rachel 
(vide  ch.  xxxv.  16,  18) ;  or  by  connecting 
them  with  clause  following,  "he  will  not 
live  before  our  brethren,"  i.  e.  let  him  be 
henceforth  cut  off  from  the  society  of  his 
kinsmen  (LXX.,  Bush).  Yet,  even  as  thus 
explained,  the  language  of  Jacob  was  precipi- 
tate, since  he  ought  first  to  have  inquired 
Rt  his  wives  and  children  before  pronouncing 
so  emphatically  on  a  matter  of  which  he 
was  entirely  ignorant  (Calvin).  Before  our 
brethren  —  not  Jacob's  sons,  but  Laban's 
kinsmen  (ver.  23)— discern  thou — literally, 
examine  closely  for  thyself,  the  hiph.  of  "OJ 
(to  be  strange^  meaning  to  press  strongly 
into  a  thing,  %.  e.  to  perceive  it  by  finding 
out  Its  distinguishing  characteristics  (vide 
Fiirst,  sub  voce) —what  is  thine  with  me, 
and  take  it  to  thee.  For  (literally,  and) 
Jacob  knew  not  that  Rachel  had  stolen 
them— otherwise  he  would  have  spoken  with 
less  heat  and  more  caution. 

Ver.  33. — And  Laban  went  into  Jacob's 
tent,  and  into  Leah's  tent,  and  into  the  two 
maid -servants'  tents ; — the  clause  affords  an 
interesting  glimpse  into  the  manners  of  the 
times,  showing  that  not  only  husbands  and 
wives,  but  also  wives  among  themselves, 
possessed  separate  establishments) — but  he 
'ound  them  not.  Then  went  he  out  of 
Leah's  tent  (he  probably  commenced  with 
'aeob'e  and  those  nf  the  ha  ml -maids,  and 


afterwards  passed  into  Leah's),  and  entered 
into  Rachel's  tent — last,  because  she  was  the 
favourite.  Cf.  ch.  xxxiii  2,  in  which  a  simi- 
lar partiality  towards  Rachel  is  exhibited  by 
Jacob  (vide  Thomson's  'Land  and  Book," 
i  370). 

Ver.  34.  —  Now  Rachel  had  taken  the 
images  (teraphim),  and  put  them  in  the 
camel's  furniture,  —  the  camel's  furniture 
was  not  stramenta  cameli  (Vulgate),  "the 
camel's  straw"  (Luther),  but  the  camel's 
saddle  (LXX.,  Onkelos,  Syriac,  Calvin, 
Rosenmiiller,  Keil,  and  others),  here  called 
13,  from  "113,  an  unused  root  signifying 
either  to  go  round  in  a  circle,  hence  to  run 
(Gesenius),  or  to  be  firmly  wound  together, 
hence  to  be  puffed  up  as  a  bolster  (Fiirst). 
The  woman's  riding-saddle  was  commonly 
made  of  wicker-work  and  had  the  appearance 
of  a  basket  or  cradle.  It  was  usually  covered 
with  carpet,  and  protected  against  wind,  rain, 
and  sun  by  means  of  a  canopy  and  curtains, 
while  light  was  admitted  by  openings  in  the 
side  (cf.  Gesenius,  sub  voce;  Kalisch  in  loco). 
"  That  which  is  now  customary  among  the 
Arabs  consists  of  a  large  closed  basket-work, 
with  a  place  for  sitting  and  reclining,  and 
a  window  at  the  side  ;  one  of  this  kind  hangs 
on  each  side  of  the  camel"  (Gerlach) — and 
sat  upon  them.  "To  us  the  picture  of 
Rachel  seated  upon  .the  camel  furniture  is 
true  to  life,  for  we  have  often  seen  its  counter- 
part. The  saddle-bags  and  cushions  which 
were  to  be  set  upon  the  camel  lay  piled  on 
the  floor,  while  she  sat  upon  them"  (Van 
Lennep,  quoted  by  Inglis,  p.  254).  And 
Laban  searched— the  word  means  to  feel  out 
or  explore  with  the  hands  (cf.  ch.  xxvii.  12  ; 
Job  xii.  25) — all  the  tent,  but  found  them 
not. 

Ver.  35. — And  she  said  to  her  father, — 
"covering  theft  by  subtlety  and  untruth" 
(Kalisch),  and  thus  proving  herself  a  true 
daughter  of  Laban,  as  well  as  showing  with 
how  much  imperfection  her  religious  character 
was  tainted — Let  it  not  displease  my  lord — 
literally,  let  it  not  bum  with  anger  (irp, 
from  nin,  to  glow,  to  burn)  in  the  eyes  of 
my  lord  (Adoni) — that  I  cannot  rise  up  before 
thee; — Oriental  politeness  required  children 
to  rise  up  in  the  presence  of  their  parents 
(vide  Levit.  xix.  32  ;  and  cf.  1  Kings  ii.  19). 
Hence  Rachel's  apology  was  not  unnecessary 
— for  the  custom  of  women— (literally,  the 
way  of  women ;  a  periphrasis  for  menstru- 
ation (cf.  ch.  xviii.  11)  which,  under  the 
law,  required  females,  as  ceremonially  unclean, 
to  be  put  apart  (Levit.  xv.  19).  That,  prior 
to  the  law,  this  particular  statute  concerning 
women  was  in  force  among  the  Aramaeans 
appears  from  the  present  instance  ;  and  thai 
it  was  not  exclusively  Jewish,  but  shared  in 
by  other  nations  of  antiquity,  is  the  opiuioA 


982 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xxxi.  32 — 44 


of  the  best  authorities  [vide  Kurtz,  '  History 
of  the  Ola  Covenant,'  §  79 ;  '  Sacrificial 
Worship  of  the  Old  Testament,'  §  213  ;  Keil 
in  loco;  both  of  whom  quote  Bahr's  'Sym- 
bolik  of  the  Mosaic  Cultus,'  ii.  466).  Roberts 
mentions  that  under  similar  circumstances 
with  Rachel  no  one  in  India  goes  to  the 
temple  or  any  religious  ceremony  ('Oriental 
Illustrations,  p.  37)  —is  upon  me.  It  is  just 
possiblo  Rachel  may  have  been  speaking  the 
exact  truth,  though  the  probability  is  she 
was  guilty  of  fabrication.  And  he  searched 
(everywhere  except  among  the  camel's  furni- 
ture, partly  from  fear  of  defilement,  but 
chiefly  as  regarding  it  impossible  that  Rachel 
in  her  then  state  would  sit  upon  his  gods), 
but  found  not  the  images  (teraphim).  The 
three  times  repeated  phrase  "he  found  not," 
emphasises  the  completeness  of  Laban's  de- 
ception. 

Vers.  36 — 42.— And  Jacob  was  wroth,— 
literally,  and  it  burned,  sc.  with  indignation 
(same  word  as  used  by  Rachel,  ver.  35), 
to  Jacob,  i.  e.  he  was  infuriated  at  what  he 
believed  to  be  Laban's  unjustifiable  insinua- 
tion about  hi3  lost  teraphim — and  chode— or 
contended  ;  the  fundamental  signification  of 
the  root,  2-1T  or  3H,  being  to  seize  or  tear, 
e.  g.  the  hair,  hence  to  strive  with  the  hands 
(Dent,  xxxiii.  7),  or  with  words  (Ps.  ciii.  9). 
The  two  verbs,  Sn\\  and  S'Tjl,  give  a  vivid 
representation  of  the  exasperation  which 
Jacob  felt — with  laban :  and  Jacob  answered 
and  said  to  Laban, — in  words  characterised 
by  "verbosity  and  self-glorification"  (Ka- 
lisch),  or  "acute  sensibility  and  elevated 
self-consciousness  "  (Delitzsch,  Keil),  accord- 
ing as  one  inclines  to  an  unfavourable  or 
favourable  view  of  Jacob's  character — What 
is  my  trespass  ?  what  is  my  sin,  that  thou 
hast  so  hotly  pursued  after  mel  The  in- 
tensity of  Jacob's  feeling  imparts  to  his 
language  a  rythmical  movement,  and  leads 
to  the  selection  of  poetical  forms  of  expres- 
sion, such  as  *"7inyt  \>i%,  to  burn  after,  in  the 
sense  of  fiercely  persecuting,  which  occurs  again 
only  in  1  Sam.  xvii.  53  (vide  Gesenius  and 
Fvirst,  sub  voce;  and  cf.  Keil,  in  loco),  causing 
the  reader  at  times  to  catch  "the  dance  and 
music  of  actual  verse  "  (Ewald).  Whereas 
thou  hast  searched  all  my  stuff, — literally 
(sc.  What  is  my  sin)  that  thou  hast  felt  all 
my  articles  (LXX. ,  Kalisch)  ?  the  clause 
being  co-ordinate  with  the  preceding  ;  though 
by  others  '3  is  taken  as  equivalent  to  "lt£*S$3, 
quando  guidem,  since  (A.  V. ,  Ainsworth),  or 
f/uando,  when  (Calvin,  Murphy) — what  hast 
thou  found  of  all  thy  household  stuff?  set  it 
here  before  my  brethren  and  thy  brethren 
(«.  e.  Laban's  kinsmen  who  accompanied  him, 
who  were  also  of  necessity  kinsmen  to  Jacob), 
that  they  may  judge  betwixt  us  both  -  which 


of  us  has  injured  the  other.  This  twentj 
years  have  I  been  with  thee  (vide  infra,  ver. 
41) ;  thy  ewes  (?0"3>  a  ewe>  whence  Rachel) 
and  thy  she  goats— %  a  she-goat ;  cf.  San- 
scrit, adsha,  a  he-goat ;  adshd,  a  she-goat ; 
Goth. ,  gditsa ;  Anglo-Saxon,  (jdt ;  German, 
geis  ;  Greek,  a!£ ;  Turkish,  gieik  (Gesenius, 
sub  voce) — have  not  cast  their  young,  and 
the  rams  of  thy  flock  have  I  not  eaten. 
Roberts  says  that  the  people  of  the  East  do 
not  eat  female  sheep  except  when  sterile,  and 
that  it  would  be  considered  folly  and  prodi- 
gality in  the  extreme  to  eat  that  which  haj 
the  power  of  producing  more  (vide  '  Oriental 
Illustrations,'  p.  37).  That  which  was  torn 
of  beasts  (ilS'lta,  a  colL  fem.,  from  S|!tp,  to 
tear  in  pieces,  meaning  that  which  is  torn  in 
pieces,  hence  cattle  destroyed  by  wild  beasts) 
I  brought  not  unto  thee ;  I  bare  the  loss  of 
it; — HStSnX,  literally,  I  made  expiation  for 
it,  the  piel  of  Kt3PI,  signifying  to  make 
atonement  for  a  thing  by  sacrifice  (Levit.  ix. 
15),  or  by  compensation,  as  here ;  hence 
equivalent  to  "  I  bare  the  loss  of  it "  (Rashi, 
Fiirst),  or  lyat  airtrivvvov  (LXX.),  or,  per- 
haps, "  I  will  beaT  the  loss  of  it,  or  pay  it 
back"  (Kalisch)— of  my  hand-  didst  thou 
require  it, — otherwise,  "  of  my  hand  require 
it"  (Kalisch) — whether  stolen  by  day,  or 
stolen  by  night.  Without  adhering  literally 
to  the  text,  the  LXX.  give  the  sense  of  this 
and  the  preceding  clause  as  being,  "  From  my 
own  I  paid  back  the  stolen  by  day  and  the 
stolen  by  night."  Thus  I  was;  (i.  e.  I  was  in 
this  condition  that)  in  the  day  the  drought 
consumed  me,  and  the  frost  by  night,  nig, 
ice,  so  called  from  its  smoothness,  hence  cold. 
The  alternation  of  heat  and  cold  in  many 
eastern  countries  is  very  great  and  severely 
felt  by  shepherds,  travellers,  and  watchmen, 
who  require  to  pass  the  night  in  the  open  air, 
and  who  in  consequence  are  often  obliged  to 
wear  clothes  lined  with  skins  (cf.  Ps.  cxxi.  6 ; 
Jer.  xxxvi.  30).  "The  thermometer  at  24* 
Fahr.  at  night,  a  lump  of  solid  ice  in  our 
basins  in  the  morning,  and  then  the  scorch- 
ing heat  of  the  day  drawing  up  the  moisture, 
made  the  neighbourhood,  convenient  as  it  was, 
rathera  fever-trap,  and  premonitory  symptoms 
warned  us  to  move "  (Tristram,  '  The  Land 
of  Moab,'  p.  217).  "  The  night  air  at  Joaiza 
was  keen  and  cold  ;  indeed  there  was  a  sharp 
frost,  and  ice  appeared  on  all  the  little  pools 
about  the  camp  "  (Thomson,  '  The  Land  and 
the  Book,'  p.  364).  "  Does  a  master  reprove 
his  servant  for  being  idle,  he  will  ask,  '  What 
can  I  do !  the  heat  eats  me  up  by  day,  and  the 
cold  eats  me  up  by  night ' "  (Roberts' '  Oriental 
Illustrations,'  p.  37  ;  cf.  Paxton's  '  Illustra- 
tions,' vol.  i.  p.  30).  And  my  sleep  departed 
from  mine  eyes.  "Syrian  shepherdswere  com- 
pelled to  watch  their  flocks  often  both  night, 


oh.  xxxi.  22—44.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


SM 


and  day,  and  for  a  whole  month  together, 
and  repair  into  long  plains  and  deserts  with- 
out any  shelter  ;  and  when  reduced  to  this 
incessant  labour,  they  were  besides  chilled  by 
the  piercing  cold  of  the  morning,  and  scorched 
by  the  succeeding  heats  of  a  flaming  sun, 
the  opposite  action  of  which  often  swells  and 
chafes  their  lips  and  face  "  (Paxton's  '  Illus- 
trations of  Scripture,'  voL  i.  p.  80).  Thus 
have  I  been— literally,  this  to  me  (or  for  my- 
self, vide  infra) — twenty  years  in  thy  house; 
I  served  thee  fourteen  years  for  thy  two 
daughters,  and  six  years  for  thy  cattle. 
The  majority  of  expositors  understand  the 
twenty  years  referred  to  in  ver.  38  to  be  the 
same  as  the  twenty  spoken  of  here  as  con- 
sisting of  fourteen  and  six.  Dr.  Kennicott, 
regarding  the  twenty  years  of  ver.  38  as 
having  intervened  between  the  fourteen  and 
the  six  of  ver.  41,  makes  the  entire  period  of 
Jacob's  sojourn  in  Padan-aram  to  have  been 
forty  years.  In  support  of  this  he  contends 
— (1)  that  the  particle  !t.J,  twice  repeated  (in 
ver.  38  and  in  ver.  41),  may  be  legitimately 
rendered,  "  This  (one)  twenty  years  I  was 
with  thee  "  (ver.  38),  i.  e.  taking  care  of  thy 
flocks ;  and  "  this  for  myself  (another)  twenty 
years  in  thy  house,"  i.  e.  serving  for  thy 
daughters  and  thy  cattle  (c£  Exod.  xiv.  20  ; 
Job  xxi.  23,  25  ;  Eccles.  vi.  5) ;  (2)  that  on 
this  hypothesis  more  time  is  afforded  for  the 
birth  of  Jacob's  family,  viz.  twenty-seven 
years  instead  of  seven  ;  and  (3)  that  it  re- 
lieves the  narrative  of  certain  grave  chrono- 
logical difficulties  in  connection  with  Judah 
and  his  family,  which,  on  the  supposition  of 
the  shorter  period,  subsequently  emerge,  such 
as  that  Judah  and  his  sons  must  have  been 
quite  children  when  they  married  [vide  ch. 
xxxviii.  1 — 11).  But,  on  the  other  hand,  in 
favour  of  the  accepted  chronology  it  may  be 
urged — (1)  that  the  interposition  of  a  second 
twenty  years  in  the  middle  of  the  first  is  un- 
natural ;  (2)  that,  though  legitimate,  the 
proposed  rendering  of  i"IJ  does  not  at  first 
sight  suggest  itself  as  that  which  Jacob  in- 
tended ;  (3)  that  it  is  not  impossible  for 
Jacob's  family  to  have  been  born  in  the  short 
space  of  seven  years  (vide  ch.  xxvii.  1 ;  xxx. 
35) ;  (4)  that  in  reality  the  difficulties  con- 
nected with  Judah  and  his  sons  are  not  re- 
moved by  the  hypothesis  of  a  forty  years' 
sojourn  in  Padan-aram  any  more  than  by  a 
sojourn  of  only  twenty  years,  since  Judah  must 
have  married  either  after  the  sale  of  Joseph, 
in  which  case  only  twenty-two  years  remain 
for  the  birth  and  marriage  of  Er  and  Onan, 
for  Pharez  and  Zarah,  Judah's  children  by 
Tamar,  to  grow  to  manhood,  and  for  Pharez 
to  have  two  sons,  Hezron  and  Hamul,  before 
descending  to  Egypt,  unless  indeed,  as  Kurtz 
supposes,  Judah's  grandchildren  wore  born  in 
Egypt ;  or  before  the  sale  of  Joseph — indeed, 


if  Hezron  and  Hamul  were  born  in  Canaan, 
before  the  birth  of  Joseph,  i.  e.  while  Judah 
was  yet  in  Padan-aram,  which  is  contrary  to 
the  narrative  (vide  ch.  xxxviii.  1,  2).  For 
these  reasons,  though  adopted  by  some  excel- 
lent authorities  (Bishop  Horsley,  Adam 
Clarke,  '  Speaker's  Commentary,'  Inglis),  tht 
computation  of  Dr.  Kennicott  does  not  appear 
of  sufficient  weight  to  set  .aside  the  ordinary 
reckoning,  which  is  followed  by  interpreters 
of  equal  credit  (Keil,  Kalisch,  Kurtz,  Lange, 
Murphy,  Wordsworth).  And  thou  hast 
changed  my  wages  ten  times  (vide  ver.  7). 

Except  (  y-v,  if  not,  t.  e.  unless,  introducing 
the  protasis  of  the  sentence)  the  God  of  my 
father,  the  God  of  Abraham,  and  the  fear  of 
Isaac, — i.  e.  the  object  of  Isaac's  fear,  not 
"  terror  "  (Oort  and  Kuenen,  vide  '  The  Bible 
for  Young  People,'  vol.  i.  p.  243),  viz.  God ; 
irjB  being  used  metonymically  of  that  which 
inspires  reverence  or  fear,  like  <re/3ac  and 
erifiaaiia.  The  entire  clause  is  a  periphrasis 
for  Jehovah  of  ver.  3,  which  is  Usually  ascribed 
to  the  Jehovist,  while  the  present  verse  be- 
longs, it  is  alleged,  to  the  fundamental  docu- 
ment— had  been  with — or,  for  (cf.  Ps.  cxxiv. 
1,  2) — me  (during  the  whole  period  of  my 
sojurn  in  Padan-aram,  but  especially  during 
the  last  six  years),  surely  ('3,  then,  com- 
mencing the  apodosis)  thou  hadst  sent  ma 
away  now  empty  (as  by  thy  stratagem  in 
changing  my  wages  thou  didst  design  ;  but) 
God  hath  seen  mine  affliction,  (cf.  ch.  xxix. 
32  ;  Exod.  iii.  7)  and  the  labour — especially 
that  which  is  wearisome,  from  a  root  sig- 
nifying to  toil  with  effort  so  as  to  become 
fatiguing  (cf.  Job  xxxix.  11) — of  my  hands, 
and  rebuked— i.  e.  reproved,  se.  thee,  as  in 
ch.  xxi.  25  (LXX.,  Vulgate,  A.  V.,  Calvin, 
Ainsworth,  Lange,  Kalisch,  and  others) ;  or 
judged,  so.  it,  i.  e.  mine  affliction,  in  the 
sense  of  pronouncing  an  opinion  or  verdict 
on  it,  as  in  1  Chron.  xii.  17  (Keil,  Murphy); 
or  proved,  sc.  it,  viz.  that  he  had  seen  my 
affliction  (Dathius,  Poole) ;  or  decided,  sc. 
betwixt  us,  as  in  ver.  37  (lihst,  Gesenius) 
thee  yesternight 

Vers.  43,  44. — And  Laban  answered  and 
said  unto  Jacob, — neither  receiving  Jacob's 
torrent  of  invective  with  affected  meekness 
(Candlish),  nor  proving  himself  to  be  com- 
pletely reformed  by  the  angry  recriminations 
of  his  "  callous  and  hardened "  son-in-law 
(Kalisch) ;  but  perhaps  simply  owning  the 
truth  of  Jacob's  words,  and  recognising  that 
he  had  no  just  ground  of  complaint  (Calvin), 
as  well  as  touched  u>  his  paternal  affections 
by  the  sight  of  his  daughters,  from  whom  he 
felt  that  he  Was  about  to  part  for  ever — These 
daughters— literally,  the  daughters  (there) — 
are  my  daughters,  and  these  (literally,  the) 
children  are  my  children,  and  these  (literally, 


M4 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xxxi.  28 — 44 


the)  cattle  are  my  cattle  ;  and  all  that  thou 
seest  is  mine.  Not  as  reminding  Jacob  that 
he  had  still  a  legal  claim  to  his  (Jacob's) 
wives  and  possessions  (Candlish),  or  at  least 
possessions  (Kalisch),  though  prepared  to 
waive  it,  but  rather  as  acknowledging  that 
in  doing  injury  to  Jacob  he  would  only  be 
proceeding  against  his  own  flesh  and  blood 
(Calvin,  Rosenmiiller,  Gerlach,  Alford).  And 
what  can  I  do  this  day  unto  these  my  daugh- 
ters,—literally,  and  as  for  (or  to)  my  daugh- 
ters, what  can  I  do  to  these  this  day  ?  The 
LXX.,  connecting  "and  to  my  daughters" 
with  what  precedes,  reads,  icai  vuvra  'iaa  ai> 
opo7?,  kfia  sari,  tcai  rwv  Bvyareptitv  fiov — or 
unto  their  children  which  they  have  born  1 


— i.  e.  why  should  I  do  anything  unto  them  I 
An  ego  in  viscera  mea  sanrirem?  (Calvin)  — 
Now  therefore  —literally,  and  now,  vvv  iuv 

(LXX) — come  thou, — il^?,  imper.  of  l\2l  = 

age,  go  to,  come  now  (cf.  ch.  xix.  32)— let  us 
make  a  covenant,— literally,  let  lis  cut  a 
covenant,  an  expression  which,  according  to 
partitionists  (Tuch,  S^ahelin,  Delitzsch,  et 
alii),  is  not  used  by  the  Elohist  until  after 
Exod.  xxiv.  8 ;  and  yet  by  all  such  authorities 
the  present  verse  is  assigned  to  the  Elohist 
(cf.  Keil's  '  Introduction,'  part  I.  §  ii.,  div. 
i.  §  27)— I  and  thou ;  and  let  it  be  for  a  wit- 
ness between  me  and  thee. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  22 — 44. — Laban's  pursuit  of  Jacob.  I.  The  hostile  preparation.  Learn- 
'ng  of  his  son-in-law's  dep  irture,  Laban  at  once  determines  on  pursuit ;  not  alone  for 
tne  purpose  of  recovering  his  household  gods,  but  chiefly  with  the  view  of  wreaking 
his  pent-up  vengeance  on  Jacob,  whom  he  now  regarded  as  the  spoiler  of  his  for- 
tunes, and  if  possible  to  capture  and  detain  the  much-coveted  flocks  and  herds  which 
he  considered  had  been  practically  stolen  by  his  nephew.  Mustering  his  kinsmen  by 
either  force  or  fraud, — by  command  enjoining  those  belonging  to  his  household,  and 
by  misrepresentation  probably  beguiling  such  as  were  independent  of  his  authority, — 
he  loses  not  a  moment,  but  starts  upon  the  trail  of  the  fugitives.  Worldly  men  are 
seldom  slow  in  seeking  to  repair  their  lost  fortunes,  and  angry  men  are  seldom 
laggard  in  exacting  revenge.     It  is  only  God's  vengeance  that  is  slow-footed. 

II.  The  Divine  interposition.  Six  days  the  wrathful  Laban  follows  in  pursuit  of 
Jacob,  and  now  the  distance  of  one  day  is  all  that  parts  him  from  the  fugitives.  In 
%  dream  by  night  he  is  warned  by  Elohim  to  Bpeak  neither  good  nor  bad  to  Jacob. 
The  incident  reminds  us  of  the  Divine  superintendence  of  mundane  affairs  in  general, 
and  of  God's  care  for  his  people  in  particular;  of  the  access  which  God  ever  has  to 
the  minds  of  his  dependent  creatures,  and  of  the  many  different  ways  in  which  he 
can  communicate  his  will ;  of  his  ability  at  all  times  to  restrain  the  wrath  of  wicked 
men,  and  check  the  hands  of  evil-doers,  who  meditate  the  spoiling  of  his  Church  or 
the  persecution  of  his  saints. 

IIL  The  stormy  interview.  I.  The  pompous  harangue  of  Laban.  Laban  gives 
way  to — (1)  Passionate  reproach ;  charging  Jacob  with  having  clandestinely  departed 
from  his  service  and  violently  carried  off  his  daughters,  in  the  first  of  which  Jacob 
did  nothing  wrong,  while  the  second  was  a  pure  exaggeration  (vide  ver.  16).  (2) 
Hypocritical  affection  ;  declaring  that  Jacob,  had  he,  Laban,  only -known,  might  have 
been  sent  away  with  public-  demonstrations  of  rejoicing,  while  Rachel  and  Leah 
might  have  carried  with  them  a  parent's  kiss,  if  not  a  father's  blessing.  But  if 
Jacob's  leave-taking  would  in  any  way  have  excited  Laban's  jubilation,  it  is  doubtful 
if  this  would  not  have  been  traceable  less  to  Laban's  regard  for  his  son-in-law  than 
to  Laban's  anxiety  about  his  flocks,  which,  in  the  absence  of  the  spoiler,  he  might 
hope  would  become  prolific  as  before ;  while  as  for  Laban's  love  for  his  daughters, 
one  might  fairly  claim  indemnity  for  suspecting  an  affection  so  recent  in  its  origin, 
and  so  pa'pably  contradicted  by  his  previous  behaviour.  (3)  Boastful  assertion  ,• 
passing  on,  like  all  weak  natures  who  love  to  be  considered  formidable,  to  brag  about 
his  power  to  inflict  injury  on  Jacob  (ver.  29),  and  to  hint  that  he  only  forbears  to  do 
so  out  of  respect  for  God,  who  had  appeared  to  him  on  the  previous  night  (4) 
Direct  accusation  ;  ere  he  closes  his  oration,  deliberately  impeaching  Jacob  with 
having  abstracted  his  teraphim.  2.  The  ingenuous  response  of  Jacob.  In  this  are 
discernible  virtues  worthy  of  imitation,  if  also  infirmities  deserving  reprobation.  If 
Jacob's  candour  in  declaring  the  reasons  of  his  flight  (ver.  31)  and  willingness  to 
restore  to  Laban  whatever  property  belonged  to  him  (ver.  32)  are  examples  to  b» 


ch.  xxn.  22—44.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  88J 

copied,  on  the  other  hand,  the  over-confident  assertion  that  no  one  had  Laban's  gods, 
and  the  over-hasty  imprecation  on  any  who  should  be  found  possessing  them,  are  not 
to  be  commended. 

IV.  The  fruitless  search.  1.  The  missing  gods.  On  the  nature,  probable 
origin,  and  uses  of  the  teraphim  see  Exposition,  ver.  19.  The  existence  of  these 
silver  or  wooden  images  in  Laban's  tent  was  a  proof  of  the  religions  declension,  if 
not  complete  apostasy,  of  this  branch  of  the  family  of  Terah.  Scripture  never 
represents  idolatry  as  an  upward  effort  of  the  human  heart,  as  a  further  development 
in  the  onward  evolution  of  the  soul  (Sir  J.  Lubbock  on  the'  Origin  of  Civilisation,'  p» 
256)  ;  but  always  as  a  deterioration,  or  a  retrogression,  or  a  fulling  away  of  the  human 
spirit  from  its  rightful  allegiance.  The  loss  of  Laban's  manufactured  deities  was 
a  ridiculous  commentary  on  the  folly  of  worshipping  or  trusting  in  a  god  that  could 
be  stolen — a  complete  reductio  ad  absurdum  of  the  whole  superstructure  of  idolatry 
(cf.  1  Kings  xviii.  27 ;  Ps.  cxv.  4,  8  ;  Isa.  xliv.  19 ;  xlvi.  6,  7  ;  Jer.  i.  5).  2.  The 
anxious  devotee.  Invited  by  Jacob  to  make  a  search  for  his  lost  teraphim,  Laban 
begins  with  Jacob's  tent,  then  with  the  tents  of  Bilhah  and  Zilpah,  after  which  he 
passes  into  Leah's,  and  finally  comes  to  Rachel's  ;  but  everywhere  his  efforts  to 
recover  his  gods  are  defeated.  What  a  spectacle  of  infinite  humour,  if  it  were  not 
rather  of  ineffable  sadness — a  man  seeking  for  his  lost  gods  1  The  gospel  presents 
us  with  the  opposite  picture — the  ever-present  God  seeking  for  his  lost  children.  3. 
The  lying  daughter.  If  the  conduct  of  Rachel  in  carrying  off  the  images  of  her 
father  was  open  to  serious  question  (vide  Exposition,  ver.  19),  her  behaviour 
towards  her  father  in  the  tent  was  utterly  inexcusable.  Even  if  she  spoke  the  truth 
in  describing  her  condition,  she  was  guilty  of  bare-faced  deception.  This  particular 
passage  in  Rachel's  history  is  painfully  suggestive  of  the  disastrous  results  of 
worldliness  and  irreligion  in  the  training  of  children.  Laban's  craft  and  Laban'B 
superstition  had  both  been  factors  in  Rachel's  education.  4.  The  deceived  parent. 
Worse  than  being  disappointed  in  his  gods,  Laban  was  dishonoured  by  his  daughter. 
But  what  else  could  he  expect  ?  Laban  was  only  reaping  as  he  had  sowed.  Marvel- 
lous and  appropriate  are  God's  providential  retributions. 

V.  The  passionate  invective.  It  was  now  Jacob's  turn  to  pour  out  the  vials  of 
his  wrath  upon  Laban,  and  certainly  it  burned  all  the  hotter  because  of  its  previous 
suppression.  1.  He  upbraids  Laban  with  the  unreasonnbleness  of  his  persecution 
(ver.  36).  2.  He  taunts  Laban  with  the  fruillessness  of  his  search  (ver.  37).  3.  He 
reminds  Laban  of  the  faithful  service  he  had  given  for  twenty  years  (vers.  38 — 41). 
4.  He  recalls  the  crafty  attempts  to  defraud  him  of  which  Laban  had  been  guilty 
(ver.  41).  5.  He  assures  Laban  that  it  was  Ood's  gracious  care,  and  neither  his 
honesty  nor  affection,  that  had  prevented  him  from  being  that  day  a  poor  man  instead 
of  a  rich  emir  (ver.  42).  6.  He  somewhat  fiercely  bids  Laban  accept  the  rebuke 
which  God  had  addressed  to  lr'm  the  previous  night. 

VI.  The  amicable  settlement.  Doubtless  much  to  Jacob's  surprise,  the  wrath  of 
Laban  all  at  once  subsided,  and  a  proposal  came  from  him  to  bury  past  animosities, 
to  strike  a  covenant  of  friendship  with  one  another,  and  to  part  in  peace.  The 
seven  days'  journey,  affording  time  for  reflection  ;  the  Divine  interposition,  inspiring 
him  with  fear;  the  mortification  resulting  from  his  fruitless  search,  convincing  him 
that  he  had  really  overstepped  the  bounds  of  moderation  in  accusing  Jacob;  the 
voice  of  conscience  within  his  breast  re-echoing  the  words  of  Jacob,  and  declaring 
them  to  be  true  ;-  and  perhaps  the  sight  of  his  dnughters  at  last  touching  a  chord  in 
the  old  man's  heart;— all  these  may  have  contributed  to  this  unexpected  collapse 
in  Laban ;  but  whether  or  not,  Jacob,  as  became  him,  cordially  assented  to  the 
proposition. 

Lessons  • — 1.  The  reality  of  God's  care  for  his  people— illustrated  by  the  appearances 
of  Elohim  to  Jacob  and  to  Labnn.  2.  The  miserable  outcome  of  a  worldly  life- 
exemplified  in  Laban.  3.  The  efficacy  of  a  soft  answer  in  turning  away  wrath — 
proved  by  Jacob's  first  response.  4.  The  difficulty  of  restraining  angry  speech 
within  just  bounds— exemplified  by  both.  5.  The  folly  of  idolatry,  as  seen  in  Laban's 
lost  teraphim.  6.  The  evil  fruits  of  bad  parental  training,  as  they  appear  in  Rachel. 
7.  The  proper  way  of  ending  quarrels— exhibited  by  Laban  and  Jacob  in  theii 
•ovenant  agreement. 

8BNK8I8,  QQ 


186 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[oh.  xxxi.  46—  6& 


EXPOSITION. 


Ver.  45. — And  Jacob  took  a  Btone,  and 
get  it  up  for  a  pillar — or  Matzebuh,  as  a 
memorial  or  witness  of  the  covenant  about 
to  be  formed  (ver.  52) ;  a  different  trans- 
action from  the  piling  of  the  stone-hcnp  next 
referred  to  (cf.  ch.  xxviii.  18  ;  Josh.  xxiv. 
27). 

Ver.  46.  —  And  Jacob  said  unto  his 
brethren, — Laban's  kinsmen  and  Ms  own 
{vide  ver.  37)  —  Gather  stones;  and  they 
took  stones,  and  made  an  heap  : — Gal,  from 
Galal,  to  roll,  to  move  in  a  circle,  probably 
signified  a  circular  cairn,  to  be  used  not  as  a 
seat  (Gerlaeh),  but  as  an  altar  (ver.  54),  a 
witness  (ver.  48),  and  a  table  (ver.  54),  since 
it  is  added— and  they  did  eat  there  not 
immediately  (Lange),  but  afterwards,  on  the 
conclusion  of  the  covenant  (ver.  54) — upon 
the  heap. 

Ver.  47.  —  And  Laban  called  it  Jegar- 
sahadutha  :  —  A  Chaldaic  term  signifying 
"  Heap  of  testimony,"  jiovvoQ  tfjc  finprvpinq 
(LXX.)  ;.  tumulum  testis  (Vulgate)  —  but 
Jicob  called  it  Galeed— compounded  of  Gal 
and  'ed  and  meaning,  like  the  corresponding 
Aramaic  term  used  by  Laban,  "  Heap  of 
witness,"  fiowbQ  /laprvt;  (LXX) ;  acervum 
testimonii  (Vulgate).  "  It  is  scarcely  pos- 
sible to  doubt,"  says  Kalisch,  "that  an  im- 
portant historical  fact,"  relating  to  the  primi- 
tive language  of  the  patriarchs,  "  is  concealed 
in  this  part  of  the  narrative  ;"  but  whether 
that  fact  was  that  Aramaic,  Syriac,  or  Chn!- 
dee  was  the  mother- tongue  of  the  family  of 
Nahor,  while  Hebrew  was  acquired  by  Abra- 
ham in  Canaan  (Bleek,  Delitzsch,  Keil),  or  that 
Laban  had  deviated  from  the  original  speech 
of  his  ancestors  (Jerome,  Augustine),  or  that 
Laban  and  Jacob  both  used  the  same  lan- 
guage with  some  growing  dialectic  differences 
(Gosman  in  Lange,  Inglis),  Laban  simply  on 
this  occasion  giving  the  heap  a  name  which 
would  be  known  to  the  inhabitants  of  the 
district  (Wordsworth),  seems  impossible  to 
determine  with  certainty.  The  most  that 
:an  be  reasonably  inferred  from  the  term 
Jegar-sahadutha  is  that  Aramaic  was  the 
language  of  Mesopotamia  (Rosenmuller)  ; 
besides  this  expression  there  is  no  other 
evidence  that  Laban  and  Jacob  conversed  in 
different  dialects ;  while  it  is  certain  that 
the  word  Mizpah,  which  was  probably  also 
spoken  by  Laban,  is  not  Chaldee  or  Aramaic 
but  Hebrew. 

Vers.  48 — 50. — And  Laban  said,  This  heap 
is  a  witness  between  me  and  thee  this  day. 
The  historian  adding  —  Therefore  was  the 
aame  of  it  called  (originally  by  Jacob,  and 
afterwards  by  the  Israelites  from  this  trans- 
action) Galeed  (vide  on  ver.  21 ).  The  stony 
character  of  the  region  may  have  suggested 


the  designation.  And  Mizpah;  —  watch- 
tower,  from  Tsaphah,  to  watch.  Mizpah1 
afterwards  became  the  site  of  a  town  in  the 
district  of  Gilead  (Judges  x.  17  ;  xi.  11,  19, 
34) ;  which  received  its  name,  as  the  his- 
torian intimates,  from  the  pile  of  witness 
erected  by  Laban  and  his  kinsmen,  and  was 
later  celebrated  as  the  residence  of  Jephthah 
(Judges  xi.  34)  and  the  seat  of  the  sanctuary 
(Judges  xi.  11).  Ewald  supposes  that  the 
mound  (Galeed)  and  the  watch  tower  (Miz- 
pah) were  different  objects,  and  that  the 
meaning  of  the  (so-called)  legend  is  that, 
while  the  former  (the  mountain)  was  piled 
up  by  Jacob  and  his  people,  the  latter  (now 
the  city  and  fortress  of  Mizpah  on  one  of  the 
heights  of  Gilead)  was  constructed  by  Laban 
and  his  followers  (vide  'History  of  Israel,' 
vol.  i.  p.  347)  ;  but  the  "  grotesqueness "  of 
this  interpretation  of  the  Hebrew  story  is  its 
best  refutation — for  he  (i.  e.  Laban)  said, 
Tho  Lord — Jehovah  ;  a  proof  that  vers.  4?, 
50  are  a  Jehovistic  interpolation  (Tuch, 
Bleek,  Colenso,  Kalisch)  ;  an  indication  of 
their  being  a  subsequent  insertion,  though 
not  warranting  the  inference  that  the  entire 
history  is  a  complication  (Keil) ;  a  sign  that 
henceforth  Laban  regarded  Jehovah  as  the 
representative  of  his  rights  (Lange) ;  but 
probably  only  a  token  that  Laban,  recog- 
nising Jehovah  as  the  only  name  that  would 
bind  the  conscience  of  Jacob  (Hengstenberg, 
Quarry),  had  for  the  moment  adopted  Jacob  s 
theology  ('Speaker's  Commentary'),  but 
only  in  self-defence  (Wordsworth)  —  watch 
between  me  and  thee,  when  we  are  absent 
one  from  another  —  literally,  a  man  from 
his  companion.  If  thou  shalt  afflict  my 
daughters,  or  if  thou  shalt  take  other  wives 
beside  my  daughters  (Laban's  concern  for  his 
daughters,  though  hitherto  not  conspicuous, 
may,  in  the  hour  of  parting  from  them,  have 
been  real :  his  language  shows  that  he  was  not 
quite  at  ease  as  to  Jacob's  integrity.  Per- 
haps the  remembrance  that  he  had  been  the 
cause  of  Jacob's  taking  two  wives  made  him 
anxious  to  secure  that  Jacob  should  not  im- 
prove upon  his  evil  instructions),  no  man  is 
with  us ; — either  then  they  stood  apart  from 
Laban's  clan  followers  (Inglis) ;  or  his  mean- 
ing was  that  when  widely  separated  there 
would  be  no  one  to  judge  betwixt  them,  o» 
perhaps  even  to  observe  them  (Rosenmuller), 
but—  see,  God  (Elohim  in  contrast  to  man) 
is  witness  betwixt  me  and  thee. 

Ver.  51—53. — And  Laban  said  to  Jacob, 
— according  to  Ewald  the  last  narrator  hai 
transposed  the  names  of  Laban  and  Jacob 
(vide  'History  of  Israel,'  vol.  i.  p.  346)— 
Behold  this  heap,  and  behold  this  pillar, 
wtoich  I  have  cast  (same  word  as  in  ver.  4£ 


oh.  xxxi.  45—55.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


387 


The  Arabic  version  and  Samaritan  text  read 
yaritha,  thou  hast  erected,  instead  of  yarithi, 
I  have  erected  or  cast  up)  betwixt  'me  and 
thee ;  this  heap  be  witness,  and  this  pillar 
be  witness,  that  (literally,  if  here  =  that)  I 
will  not  pass  over  this  heap  to  thee,  and 
that  thou  shalt  not  pass  over  this  heap  and 
this  pillar  (Laban  bound  himself  never  to 
pass  over  the  heap  which  he  had  erected  as 
his  witness  ;  whereas  Jacob  was  required  to 
swear  that  he  would  never  cross  the  pillar 
and  the  pile,  both  of  which  were  witnesses 
for  him)  unto  me,  for  harm.  The  emphatic 
word  closes  the  sentence.  The  God  of  Abra- 
ham, and  the  God  of  Nahor,  the  God  of  their 
father,  judge— the  verb  is  plural,  either  be- 
cause Laban  regarded  the  Elohim  of  Nahor  as 
different  from  the  Elohim  of  Abraham  (Rosen- 
miiller,  Keil,  Kalisch,  Wordsworth,  '  Speak- 
er's Commentary'),  or  because,  though  ac- 
knowledging only  one  Elohim,  he  viewed 
him  as  maintaining  several  and  distinct  rela- 
tions to  the  persons  named  (cf.  Quarry,  p. 
499) — betwixt  us.  Laban  here  invokes  his 
own  hereditary  Elohim,  the  Elohim  of  Abra- 
ham's father,  to  guard  his  rights  and  inter- 


ests under  the  newly-formed  covenant ;  whfto 
Jacob  in  his  adjuration  appeals  to  the  Elohim 
of  Abraham's  son.  And  Jacob  sware  by  the 
fear  of  his  father  Isaac  {vide  supra,  ver. 
42). 

Ver.  54. — Then  Jacob  offered  sacrifice — 
literally,  slew  a  slaying,  in  ratification  of 
the  covenant — upon  the  mount,  and  called 
his  brethren  (Laban's  followers,  who  may 
have  withdrawn  to  a  distance  during  the 
interview)  to  eat  bread.  The  sacrificial 
meal  afterwards  became  an  integral  part  of 
the  Hebrew  ritual  (Exod.  xxiv.  3 — 8  ;  xxix. 
27,  28  ;  Lcvit.  x.  14,  15).  And  they  did  eat 
bread,  and  tarried  all  night  in  the  mount. 

Vers.  55.  —  And  early  in  the  morning 
Laban  rose  up,  and  kissed  his  sons  and  his 
daughters, — i.  e.  Rachel  and  Leah  and  their 
children.  It  does  not  appear  that  Laban 
kissed  Jacob  6n  taking  final  leave  of  him  as 
he  did  on  first  meeting  him  (ch.  xxix.  39) — 
and  blessed  them  (cf.  ch.  xxiv.  60 ;  xxviii. 
1) :  and  Laban  departed,  and  returned  unto 
his  place  —  Padan-aram  (cf.  ch.  xviii.  33  ; 
xxx.  25). 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  45 — 55. — Galeed  and  Mizpah,  or  the  covenant  of  peace.  I.  The  covenant 
memorials.  1.  The  pillar  of  remembrance.  The  erection  of  the  stone  slab  appears 
to  have  been  the  act  of  Jacob  alone,  and  to  have  been  designed  to  commemorate  the 
important  transaction  about  to  be  entered  into  with  Laban.  It  is  well  to  keep  note 
of  those  engagements  we  make  with  our  fellow-men  in  order  to  their  punctual  fulfil- 
ment ;  much  more  of  those  we  make  with  God.  It  does  not  appear  that  any  name 
was  given  to  the  column,  and  this  may  have  been  because  it  was  intended  chiefly 
for  himself.  2.  The  pile  of  witness.  This  was  the  work  both  of  Laban  and  Jacob, 
which  they  conjointly  performed  through  the  instrumentality  of  their  brethren  ;  and 
being  of  the  nature  of  a  public-  monument,  it  was  further  characterised  by  a  name — 
Laban  calling  it  Jegar-sahadutha,  and  Jacob  styling  it  Galeed,  both  expressions 
signifying  heap  of  witness,  and  perhaps  both  of  them  naming  it  Mizpah,  or  watch- 
tower,  from  the  nature  of  the  oath  which  they  both  took  on  the  occasion.  Men  who 
are  truly  sincere  in  their  covenant  engagements  are  never  afraid  to  bind  themselves 
by  public  attestations  of  their  good  faith,  though  it  is  certain  that  of  all  men  these 
least  require  to  be  so  bound. 

II.  The  covenant  words.  1.  The  solemn  engagements.  On  the  one  hand  Laban 
undertakes  never  to  pass  the  stone  heap  on  Gilead  to  do  injury  to  Jacob— not  mention- 
ing the  pillar,  which  was  purely  of  Jacob's  construction,  and  therefore  supposed  to 
have  a  religious  significance  solely  for  Jacob  ;  and  on  the  other  hand  Jacob  records 
his  vow  never  to  cross  the  pillar  and  the  pile  to  inflict  wrong  on  Laban,  and  in  addition 
as  Laban  might  be  injured  in  his  daughters  without  crossing  the  forbidden  line  nevei 
to  afflict  Rachel  and  Leah  by  taking  other  wives  besides  them.  The  engagement  on 
both  sides  is  to  abstain  from  doing  injury  of  any  sort  to  each  other  ;  and  to  this  all 
men  are  bound  by  both  natural  and  revealed  religion  without  the  formality  of  an 
oath ;  and  much  more  than  other  men.  are  Christians  taken  bound  by  God's  grace  and 
Christ's  blood  to  live  peaceably  with  all  men  and  be  at  peace  amongst  themselves. 
2.  The  impressive  oaths.  If  it  is  dubious  whether  Laban  appealed  to  God  or  only  to 
the  stone-heap  to  witness  his  sincerity  in  promising  not  to  harm  Jacob,  it  is  certa;n 
that  he  appealed  to  God  to  keep  a  strict  eye  on  Jacob  (ver.  49),  and  in  n  sem:-super- 
•titious  way  united  the  God  of  Abraham  and  the  God  of  Nahor,  the  God  of  then 

oc2 


388  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  [oh.  xxai.  46—65 

fathers,  to  judge  between  them.     Jacob  does  not  mention  either  pile  or  pillar,  but 
swears  by  the  fear  of  his  father  Isaac. 

III.  The  covenant  actions.  1.  The  sacrifice.  The  offering  of  sacrifice  was 
essential  to  the  formation  of  a  covenant.  As  between  God  and  man,  it  virtually  pro- 
claimed that  God  could  enter  into  amicable  relations  with  sinful  man  only  on  the 
basis  of  an  atonement.  As  between  man  and  man,  it  was  equivalent  to  an  acknow- 
ledgment by  the  covenanting  parties  that  both  required  to  be  covered  with  the  blood 
of  propitiation.  That  Jacob,  and  not  Laban,  offered  sacrifice  intimates  that  these 
truths  were  already  in  some  degree  appreciated  by  Jacob,  though  possibly  they  were 
not  understood  by  Laban.  2.  The  feast.  In  making  this  feast  Jacob  may  only- 
have  been  following  the  example  of  his  father  Isaac,  who  similarly  entertained 
Abimelech  and  his  statesmen  at  Beersheba  on  the  occasion  of  the  treaty  which  was 
there  formed  between  them ;  but  the  sacrificial  feast  afterwards  became  an  important 
element  in  the  Mosaic  cultus,  and  was  designed  to  express  the  idea  of  house  anil 
table  fellowship  between  the  covenanting  parties. 

IV.  The  covenant  results.  1.  The  kiss  of  reconciliation.  It  is  not  certain  that 
Laban  kisse'd  Jacob  when  he  prepared  for  his  departure  in  the  morning ;  perhaps 
that  was  too  much  to  expect;  but  he  kissed  Rachel  and  Leah  and  their  children. 
It  was  a  sign  of  forgiveness  not  alone  to  them,  but  through  them  also  to  Jacob.  2. 
The  paternal  benediction.  Laban,  whose  better  nature  appears  to  have  returned  as 
the  result  of  the  covenant,  or  of  the  feast,  or  of  the  contemplated  parting  with  his 
daughters,  poured  out  his  feelings  in  a  farewell  blessing  on  their  heads.  It  is  the 
last  we  hear  or  see  of  Laban  in  the  Scripture  narrative.  Let  us  hope  it  was  the 
revival  of  early  kindness  and  piety  in  the  old  man's  heart. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  51 — 55. — Final  covenant  between  Jacob  and  Laban.  I.  Entire  separation 
from  temptation  is  THE  only  sapett.  Very  imperfect  knowledge  in  the  Mesopo- 
tamian  family.  Rachel's  theft  of  the  household  gods  a  sign  of  both  moral  and 
spiritual  deficiency.  The  religion  of  Jacob  and  his  descendants  must  be  preserved 
from  contamination.  Intercourse  with  the  unenlightened  and  unsanctified,  though 
necessary  for  a  time  and  in  some  degree,  must  not  be  suffered  to  obscure  the  higher 
light,  or  surround  us  with  practical  entanglements  which  hinder  our  faithfulness  to 
God. 

II.  Wherever  the  spiritual  life  is  feeble  it  is  well  that  there  should  be 
solemn  public  acts  of  covenant  and  testimony.  We  want  the  Galeed  and  the  Mizpah, 
the  heap  of  witness  and  the  watch-tower  of  faith.  Many  united  together  in  the 
covenant,  and  thus  became  witnesses  in  whose  presence  the  oath  was  taken.  We  are 
helped  to  faithfulness  by  the  publicity  of  our  vows.  But  the  higher  the  spiritual  life, 
the  less  we  shall  call  in  material  things  to  support  it.  Jacob  with  Laban  is  not  the 
true  Jacob.     All  dependence  upon  the  symbol  and  rite  is  more  or  less  compromise. 

III.  The  contact  of  the  higher  form  of  religion  with  the  lower  one,  of  the 
means  of  preparing  the  world  for  the  truth.  Laban  and  his  family  types  of 
the  lowor  order  of  religious  knowledge  and  life.  The  covenant  between  the  father- 
in-law  and  son-in-law  in  the  name  of  the  God  of  Abraham  and  the  God  of  Nahor 
points  to  a  rising  light  in  the  Mesopotamian  family.  We  may  be  Bure  that  the 
influence  of  Christianity  will  be  supreme  wherever  it  is  brought  face  to  face  with 
men's  religions.  That  influence  may  be  embodied  in  matters  of  common  life,  in 
covenants  between  man  and  man,  in  laws  and  commercial  regulations  and  social 
arrangements. 

IV.  The  seed  of  the  Divine  life  is  planted  in  the  soil  of  nature,  but  reveai.b 
its  superiority  to  nature  by  bringing  all  things  and  men  into  subjection  'JO 
itself.  Jacob,  Rachel,  and  afterwards  Joseph,  present  to  the  Spirit  of  God  elements 
of  character  which  require  both  elevation  and  renovation.  The  grace  is  given.  On  i 
natural  foundation  inherited  from  others  God  rears  by  his  grace  a  lofty  structure. 
The  crafty  and  the  thoughtful  are  often  nearly  allied.  It  is  one  of  the  spiriiual 
dangers  to  which  specially  energetic  and  subtle  minds  are  exposed,  that  they  may  bo 
easily  fall  into  an  abuse  of  their  superior  mental  quickness  m  the  injury  of  th&ii 


oh.  xxxn.  1 — 23.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


8M 


moral  purity  and  simplicity.  Jacob  and  Laban  making  their  covenant  together,  and 
electing  their  -witnessing  monuments,  are  another  illustration  of  the  homage  which 
even  very  imperfect  characters  pay  to  the  God  of  truth.  They  appeal  to  him,  and 
they  do  so  in  the  presence  of  a  world  which  they  know  will  justify  God,  and  not  th« 
sinner.  The  God  of  Abraham,  the  God  of  Nahor,  the  God  of  Isaac,  judged  between 
them.  Jacob  offered  sacrifice  upon  the  mount,  and  invited  his  brethren  to  a  sacrificial 
banquet ;  and  it  was  in  that  atmosphere  of  mingled  reverence  for  God  and  human 
affection  that  the  heir  of  the  covenant  bade  farewell  to  all  that  held  him  in  restraint 
and  set  his  face  once  more  towards  the  land  of  promise. — B. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXXII. 


Ver.    1.  —  And  Jacob  (after  Laban's  de- 
parture) went  on  his  way  (from  Galeed  and 
Mizpah,  in  a  southerly  direction  towards  the 
Jabbok),  and  the  angels  of  God — literally, 
the  messengers  of  Elohim,  not  chance  travel- 
lers who  informed  him  of  Esau's  being  in 
the  vicinity  (Abarbanel),  but  angels  (cf.  Ps. 
civ.  4) — met  Mm.     Mot  necessarily  came  in 
an  opposite  direction,  fuerunt  ei  obviam 
(Vulgate),  but  simply  fell    in  with  him, 
lighted  on  him  as  in  ch.  xxviii.  11,  <svvi\v- 
TTj(rav  airi  (LXX.),  forgathered  with  him 
(Scottish) ;  but  whether  this  was  in  awaking 
vision  (Kurtz,  Keil,  Inglis)  or  a  midnight 
dream  (Herigstenberg)  is  uncertain,  though 
the  two  former  visions  enjoyed  by  Jacob 
were  at  night  (cf.  ch.  xxviii.  12  ;   xxxi.  10). 
Cajetan,  approved  by  Pererius,  translating 
12  as  "  in  him,"  makes  it  appear  that  the 
vision  was  purely  subjective,   non  fuisse 
visionem  eorporalem,   sed   intemam:  the 
clause  interpolated  by  the  LXX.,  icoi  dvajSAI- 
ifiaff,  tlit  jrapt/i/?oX^j'  Beov  irapptfitfS\i)Kvlav, 
seems  rather  to  point  to  an  objective  mani- 
festation.    The  appearance  of  this  invisible 
host  may  have  been  designed  to  celebrate 
Jacob's  triumph  over  Laban,  as  after  Christ's 
victory  over  Satan  in  the  wilderness  angels 
came  and  ministered  unto  him  (Rupertus, 
Wordsworth),   or  to  remind   him  that  he 
owed  his  deliverance  to  Divine  interposition 
(Calvin,  Bush,  Lange),  but  was  more  pro- 
bably intended  to  assure  him  of  protection 
in  his  approaching  interview  with  Esau  (Jo- 
sephus,    Chrysostom,    Rosenmiiller,     Keil, 
Murphy,     'Speaker's    Commentary'),    and 
perhaps  also  to  give  him  welcome  in  return- 
ing home  again  to  Canaan  (Kurtz),  if  not  in 
addition  to  suggest   that  his   descendants 
would  require  to  fight  for  their  inheritance 
(Kalisch). 

Ver.  2. — And  when  Jacob  saw  them,  he 
said,  This  is  God's  host: — Mahanch  Elo- 
him ;  i.  e.  the  army  (cf.  ch.  1.  9 ;  Exod. 
xiv.  24)  or  camp  (1  Sam.  xiv.  15  ;  Ps.  xxvii. 
8)  of  God,  as  opposed  to  the  Mahanoth,  or 
bands  of  Jacob  himself  {vide  ver.  7, 10) — 
and  he  called  the  name  of  that  place  Maha- 
-i.  s.  Two  armies  or  camps,  from  the 


root  iljn,  to  decline  or  bend,  and  hence  te 
fix  oneself  down  or  encamp  ;  meaning  either 
a  multitudinous  host,  reading  the  dual  for  a 
plural  (Malvenda),  or  two  bands  of  angels, 
one  before,  welcoming  him  to  Canaan,  and 
another  behind,  conducting  him  from  Meso- 
potamia (Jarchi  and  others),  or  one  on  either 
side  to  typify  the  completeness  of  his  pro- 
tection, as  in  Ps.  xxxiv.  8  (Calvin,  Bush, 
Gerlach,  'Speaker's  Commentary'),  or,  as 
the  best  expositors  interpret,  his  own  com- 
pany and  the  heavenly  host  (Aben  Ezra, 
Clericus,  Da  the,  Keil,  Lange,  Rosenmiiller, 
Kalisch,  Murphy).  Mahanaim,  afterwards 
a  distinguished  city  in  the  territory  of  Gad 
(Josh.  xiii.  26),  and  frequently  referred  to  in 
subsequent  Scripture  (2  Sam.  ii.  8  ;  xvii.  24, 
27  ;  xix.  32  ;  1  Kings  iv.  14),  as  well  as 
mentioned  by  Josephus  ('  Ant.'  vii.  9,  8),  aa 
a  strong  and  beautiful  city,  has  been  identi- 
fied with  Mahneh,  a  deserted  ruin  six  or 
seven  miles  north-west  by  north  of  Ajliin 
(Mount  Gilead),  and  about  twenty  miles 
from  the  Jabbok  (vide  '  Robinson,'  vol.  iii. 
App.  166;  and  cf.  Tristram,  'The  Land  of 
Israel,'  p.  483) ;  hut  the  narrative  appears 
to  say  that  Mahanaim  lay  not  north  of  Ga- 
leed, but  between  that  place  and  Jabbok. 
Hence  Porter  suggests  Gerasa,  the  mo  it 
splendid  ruin  east  of  the  Jordan,  and  border- 
ing on  the  Jabbok,  as  occupying  the  site  ot 
Mahanaim  (vide  Kitto's  '  Cyclopedia,'  art. 
Mahanaim,  and  cf.  '  Handbook  for  S.  and  P. ' 
ii.  811,  seq.). 

Ver.  3.  —  And  Jacob  sent  messengers 
(witK  the  messengers  of  Jacob,  the  messen- 
gers uf  Elohim  form  a  contrast  which  can 
scarcely  have  been  accidental)  before  him  t« 
Esau  his  brother  nnto  the  land  of  Seir,—  - 
vide  on  ch.  xiv.  6.  Seir,  nearly  equivalent  in 
force  to  Esau  (Ewald),and  meaning  the  rough 
or  bristling  mountain  (Gesenius),  was  origin- 
ally occupied  by  the  Horites,  but  afterwards 
became  the  seat  of  Esau  and  his  descendants 
(Deut.  ii.  4 ;  2  Chron.  xx.  10),  though  a» 
yet  Esau  had  not  withdrawn  from  Canaan 
(ch.  xxxvi.  5 — 8) — the  country  (literally, 
plain  or  level  tract  =  Padan  vide  Hosea 
xii.  13)  of  Edom,  as  it  was  afterwards 
called. 

Vera.  4,  5. — And  he  commanded  them. 


m 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[c*.  xxxii.  1—29 


•aying,  Thus  shall  ye  speak  unto  my  lord 
Esau ;  Thy  servant  Jacob  saith  thus  ; — the 
expression  "my  lord  "  may  have  been  de- 
signed to  intimate  to  Esau  that  he  (Jacob) 
did  not  intend  to  assert  that  superiority  or 
precedency  which  had  been  assigned  him  by 
Isaac's  blessing  (ch.  xxvii.  29),  at  least  so  far 
as  to  claim  a  share  in  Isaac's  -wealth  (Calvin, 
Bush,  Gerlach),  but  was  probably  due  chiefly 
to  the  extreme  courtesy  of  the  East  (Ger- 
lach), or  to  a  desire  to  conciliate  his  brother 
(Keu),  or  to  a  feeling  of  personal  contrition 
for  his  misbehaviour  towards  Esau  (Kalisch), 
and  perhaps  also  to  a  secret  apprehension  of 
danger  from  Esau's  approach  (Alford,  Inglis) 
—  I  have  sojourned  with  Laban,  and 
atayed — IDJ*,  the  fut.  Kal.  of  "inK,  occurring 
only  here,  is  a  contraction  for  "inNX,  like 
pDFl  for  prJSR  (Ps.  civ.  29 ;  vide  Gesenius, 
§  68,  2) — there  until  now :  and  I  have  (liter- 
ally, there  are  to  me,  so  that  Island  in  need 
of  no  further  wealth  from  either  thee  or 
Isaac)  oxen,  and  asses,  flocks,  and  men- 
servants,  and  womenservants : — cf.  xii.  16 
(Abraham)  ;  xxvi.  13,  14  (Isaac)  —  and  I 
nave  sent  to  tell  my  lord,  that  I  may  find 
grace  in  thy  sight  (cf.  xxriii.  8,  15  ;  xxxix. 
4  ;  and  vide  vi.  8  ;  xviii.  3). 

Ver.  6.  And  the  messengers  returned  to 
Jacob,  saying,  We  came  to  thy  brother 
Esau,  and  also  he  cometh  to  meet  thee.(virfe 
ch.  xxxiii.  1),  and  four  hundred  men  with 
him.  That  Esau  was  attended  by  400  armed 
followers  was  a  proof  that  he  had  grown  to 
be  a  powerful  chieftain.  If  the  hypothesis 
be  admissible  that  he  had  already  begun  to 
live  by  the  sword  (ch.  xxvii.  40),  and  was 
now  invading  the  territory  of  the  Horites, 
which  he  afterwards  occupied  (Delitzsch, 
Keil,  Kurtz),  it  will  serve  to  explain  his 
appearance  in  the  land  of  Seiv,  while  as  yet 
he  had  not  finally  retired  from  Canaan.  That 
he  came  with  such  a  formidable  force  to  meet 
hia  brother  has  been  set  down  to  personal 
vanity,  or  a  desire  to  show  how  powerful  a 
prince  he  had  become  (Lyra,  Menochius);  to 
fraternal  kindness,  which  prompted  him  to 
do  honour  to  his  brother  (Poole,  Calvin, 
Clarke),  to  a  distinctly  hostile  intemion 
(Willet,  Ainsworth,  Candlish),  at  least  if 
circumstances  should  seem  to  call  for  venge- 
ance (Keil),  though  it  is  probable  that  Esau's 
mind,  on  first  hearing  of  his  brother's  near- 
ness, was  simply  excited,  and  "in  that 
wavering  state  which  the  slightest  incident 
might  soothe  into  good  will,  or  rouse  into 
vengeance"  (Murphy). 

Vers.  7,  8. — Then  Jacob  was  greatly  afraid 
add  distressed  : — literally,  it  was  narrow  to 
him;  i.  e.  he  was  perplexed.  Clearly  the 
impression  left  on  Jacob's  mind  by  the  report 
of  rris  ambassadors  was  that  he  had  nothing 
to  expect  but  hostility — and  he  divided  the 


people  that  was  with  him,  and  the  flocki, 
and  herds,  and  the  camels,  into  two  bands ; 
— according  to  Gerlach,  caravans  are  fre- 
quently divided  thus  in  the  present  day, 
and  for  the  same  reason  as  Jacob  assigns — 
And  said,  If  Esau  come  to  the  one  company, 
and  smite  it,  then  the  other  company  which 
is  left  shall  escape.  It  is  easy  to  blame 
Jacob  for  want  of  faith  in  not  trusting  to 
God  instead  of  resorting  to  his  own  devices 
(Candlish),  but  his  behaviour  in  the  circum- 
stances evinced  great  self-possession,  non  ita 
escpavefactum  fuisse  Jacob  quin  res  mat 
eomponeret  (Calvin),  considerable  prudence 
(Lange),  if  not  exalted  chivalry  (Candlish), 
a  peaceful  disposition  which  did  not  wish 
vim  vi  armata  repellere  (Rosenmiiller),  and 
a  truly  religious  spirit  ( '  Speaker's  Com- 
mentary '),  since  in  his  terror  he  betakes 
himself  to  prayer. 

Vers.  9 — 12. — And  Jacob  said, — the  com- 
bined beauty  and  power,  humility  and  bold- 
ness, simplicity  and  sublimity,  brevity  and 
comprehensiveness  of  this  prayer,  of  which 
Kalisch  somewhat  hypercritically  complains 
that  it  ought  to  have  been  offered  before 
resorting  to  the  preceding  precautions,  has 
been  universally  recognised — 0  God  of  my 
father  Abraham,  and  God  of  my  father  Isaac, 
the  Lord— Jacob's  invocation  is  addressed 
not  to  Deity  in  general,  but  to  the  living 
personal  Elohim  who  had  taken  his  fathers 
Abraham  and  Isaac  into  covenant,  i.  e.  to 
Jehovah  who  had  enriched  them  with  pro- 
mises of  which  he  was  the  heir,  and  who 
had  specially  appeared  unto  himself  (cf.  ch. 
xxviii.  13  ;  xxxi.  3,  13) — which  saidst  unto 
me,  Return  unto  thy  country,  and  to  thy 
kindred,  and  I  will  deal  well  with  thee : 
—here  was  a  clear  indication  that  Jacob  had 
in  faith  both  obeyed  the  command  and 
embraced  the  promise  made  known  to  him 
in  Haran — I  am  not  worthy  of  the  least  ol 
(literally,  /  am  less  than)  all  the  mercies, 
and  (of)  all  the  truth,  which  thou  hast 
shewed  unto  thy  servant; — the  profound 
humility  which  these  words  breathe  is  a  sure 
indication  that  the  character  of  Jacob  had 
either  undergone  a  great  inward  transforma- 
tion, if  that  was  not  experienced  twenty 
years  before  at  Bethel,  or  had  shaken  off  the 
moral  and  spiritual  lethai-gy  under  which 
he  too  manifestly  laboured  while  in  the 
service  of  Laban— for  with  my  staff  (i.  e. 
possessing  nothing  but  my  staff)  I  passed 
over  this  Jordan  (the  Jabbok  was  situated 
near,  indeed  is  a  tributary  of  the  Jordan) ; 
and  now  I  am  become  two  bands  (or  Macha- 
noth).  Deliver  me,  I  pray  thee,  from  the 
hand  of  my  brother,  from  the  hand  of  Esau 
(thus  passing  from  thanksgiving  to  direct 
petition,  brief,  explicit,  and  fervent) :  for  I 
fear  him,  lest  he  will  come  and  smite  m< 
(i.  e.   my  whole   clan,   as   Ishmael,   Israel, 


em.  x*xn.  1—23.] 


THE  BOOK  Ot  GENERtS. 


8P1 


Edom  signify  not  individuals,  but  races), 
and  the  mother  with  the  children.  Liter- 
ally, mother  upon  the  children,  a  proverbial 
expression  for  unsparing  cruelty  (Rosen- 
miiller, Keil),  or  compltte  extirpation  (Ka- 
lisch), taken  from  the  idea  of  destroying  a 
bird  while  sitting  upon  its  young  (cf.  Hosea 
x.  14).  And  thou  saidst,  1  will  surely  do 
thee  good, — literally,  doing  good,  I  will  do 
good  to  thee  (vide  ch.  xxviii.  13).  Jacob 
here  pleads  the  Divine  promises  at  Bethel 
(ch.  xxviii.  13 — 15)  and  at  Haran  (ch.  xxxi. 
3),  as  an  argument  why  Jehovah  should 
extend  to  him  protection  against  Esau — 
conduct  at  which  Tuch  is  scandalised  as 
"somewhat  inaptly  reminding  God  of  his 
commands  and  promises,  and  calling  upon 
him  to  keep  his  word ;"  but  just  this  is  what 
God  expects  his  people  to  do  (Isa.  xliii.  26), 
and  according  to  Scripture  the  Divine  promise 
is  always  the  petitioner's  best  warrant— and 
make  thy  seed  as  the  sand  of  the  sea, — this 
was  the  sense,  without  the  ipsissima  verba 
of  the  Bethel  promise,  which  likened  Jacob's 
descendants  to  the  dust  upon  the  ground, 
as  Abraham's  seed  had  previously  been  com- 
pared to  the  dust  of  the  earth  (ch.  xiii.  16), 
the  stars  of  heaven  (ch.  xv.  5),  and  the  sand 
upon  the  sea-shore  (ch.  xxii.  17)— which  can- 
not be  numbered  for  multitude. 

Ver.  13. — And  he  lodged  there  that  same 
night ;  and  took — not  by  random,  but  after 
careful  selection ;  separavit( Vulgate) — of  that 
which  came  to  his  hand — not  of  those  things 
which  were  in  his  hand,  !>v  Itptptv  (LXX.), 
such  as  he  had  (Ainsworth),  qua;  in  manu 
erant  (Rosenmiiller),  but  of  such  things  as 
had  come  into  his  hand,  i.  e.  as  he  had  ac- 
quired (Keil,  Alford,  '  Speaker's  Comment- 
ary,' Inglis) — a  present  (Minchah  ;  used  in 
ch.  iv.  3,  4,  6,  as  a  sacrifice  to  Jehovah,  q.  v.) 
for  Esau  his  brother. 

Ver.  14,  15 — Two  hundred  she  goats,  and 
twenty  he  goats,  two  hundred  ewes,  and 
twenty  rams,  thirty  milch  camels  (specially 
valuable  in  the  East  on  account  of  their 
milk,  which  was  peculiarly  sweet  and  whole- 
some) with  their  colts,  forty  kine,  and  ten 
bulls,  twenty  she  asses,  and  ten  foals.  The 
selection  was  in  harmony  with  the  general 
possessions  of  nomads  (cf.  Job  i.  3  ;  xlii.  12), 
and  the  proportion  of  male  to  female  animals 
was  arranged  according  to  what  the  experi- 
ence of  the  best  ancient  authorities  has  shown 
to  be  necessary  for  the  purposes  of  breeding 
(Rosenmiiller,  Keil,  Kalisch). 

Ver.  16. — And  he  delivered  therh  into  the 
hand  of  his  servants,  every  drove  by  them- 
eelves  (literally,  drove  and  drove  separately) ; 
and  said  unto  his  servants,  Pass  over  (the 
river  Jabbok)  before  me,  and  put  a  space 
(liteii-ly,  a  breathing -place)  betwixt  drove 
and  drove — as  is  still  the  manner  with  Ori- 
ental shepherds  (cf. '  Land  and  Book,'  p.  331). 


Vers.  17—20. — And  he  commanded  th« 
forentost,  saying  (with  admirable  tact  and 
prudence),  When  Esau  my  brother' meetetb 
thee,  and  asketh  thee,  saying,  Whose  art 
thou  1  and  whither  goest  thou  1  and  who.se 
are  these  before  thee  t  then  thou  shalt  say, 
They  be  thy  servant  Jacob's  ;  it  is  a  present 
sent  nnto  my  lord  Esau :  and,  behold,  also 
he  (Jacob)  is  behind  us.  And  so  commanded 
he  the  second,  and  the  third,  and  all  that 
followed  the  droves,  saying,  On  this  manner 
shall  ye  speak  unto  Esau,  when  ye  find  him 
— literally,  in  your  finding  of  him.  And 
say  ye  (literally,  and  ye  shall  say)  moreover, 
Behold,  thy  servant  Jacob  is  behind  us— 
"for  he  thought  that  this  would  convince 
Esau  that  he  went  to  meet  him  with  com- 
plete confidence,  and  without  apprehension" 
(Kalisch)— for  he  said  (the  historian  adds 
the  motive  which  explained  Jacob's  singular 
behaviour),  I  will  appease  him  (literally, 
I  will  cover  his  face,  meaning  I  will  prevent 
him  from  seeing  my  past  offences,  i.  e.  I  will 
turn  away  his  anger  or  pacify  him,  as  in 
Prov.  xvi.  14)  with  the  present  that  goeth 
before  me, — literally,  going  before  my  face. 
So  Abigail  appeased  David  with  a  present 
(1  Sam.  xxv.  18 — 32)— and  afterward  I  will 
see  his  face ;  peradventure  he  will  accept  of 
me— literally,  lift  up  my  face  ;  a  proverbial 
expression  for  granting  a  favourable  reception 
(cf.  ch.  xix.  21  ;  Job  xlii.  8).  "Jacob  did 
not  miscalculate  the  influence  of  his  princely 
offerings,  and  I  verily  believe  there  is  not  an 
emeer  or  sheikh  in  all  Gilead  at  this  day 
who  would  not  be  appeased  by  such  pre- 
sents ;  and  from  my  personal  knowledge  oi 
Orientals,  I  should  say  that  Jacob  need  not 
have  been  in  such  great  terror,  following  in 
their  rear.  Far  less  will  now  'make  room,' 
as  Solomon  says,  for  any  offender,  however 
atrocious,  and  bring  him  before  great  men 
with  acceptance  "  ('  Land  and  Book,'  p.  371). 

Ver.  21 — 23.— So  (literally,  and)  went  the 
present  over  before  him :  and  himself  lodged 
that  night  in  the  company.  And  he  rose 
up  that  night, — i.  e.  some  time  before  day- 
break (vide  ver.  24)  —  and  took  his  two 
wives,  and  his  two  womenservants  (Bilhah 
and  Zilpah),  and  his  eleven  sons  (Dinah 
being  not  mentioned  in  accordance  with  the 
common  usage  of  the  Bible),  and  passed 
over  the  ford  —  the  word  signifies  a  place 
of  passing  over.  Tristram  ('  Land  of  Israel,' 
p.  558)  speaks  of  the  strong  current  reach- 
ing the  horses'  girths  at  the  ford  crossed 
by  himself  and  twenty  horsemen— Jabbok. 
Jabbok,  from  baleak,  to  empty,  to  pour  forth 
(Kalisch),  or  from  abah,  to  struggle  (Keil), 
may  have  been  so  named  either  from  the 
natural  appearance  of  the  river,  or,  as  is 
more  probable,  by  prolepsis  from  the  wrest- 
ling which  took  place  upon  its  banks.  It  is 
now  called  the  Wady  Zerka,  or  Blue  Riva», 


39* 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[cm.  xxxh.  1 — 28 


which  flows  into  the  Jordan,  nearly  opposite 
Shecheni,  and  midway  between  the  iake 
Tiberias  and  the  Dead  Sea.  The  stream  is 
rapid,  a^d  often  completely  hidden  by  the 
dense  mass  of  oleander  which  fringes  its 
banks  ('Land  of  Israel,'  p.  558).  And  he 
took  them,  and  sent  them  (literally,  caused 
them,  to  pass)  over  the  brook,  and  sent  over 


that  he  had  —  himself  remaining  on  the 
north  side  (Delitz~ch,  Keil,  Kurtz,  Murphy, 
Gerlach,  Wordsworth,  Alford),  although, 
having  once  crossed  the  stream  (ver.  22),  it 
is  not  perfectly  apparent  that  he  recrossed, 
which  has  led  some  to  argue  that  the  wrest- 
ling occurred  on  the  south  of  the  rivel 
(Knobel,  Rosenmuller,  Lange,  Kalisch). 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 23. — Mahanaim,  or  preparing  for  Esau.  1.  The  angelic  apparition. 
1.  The  time  when  it  occurred.  (1)  After  Jacob  had  concluded  a  covenant  of  peace 
with  Laban.  Celestial  visitations  of  a  peaceful  and  encouraging  character  are  never 
vouchsafed  to  those  who  are  living  in  a  state  of  enmity  with  their  fellow-men.  The 
troubled  sea  reflects  not  the  shining  face  of  heaven,  and  neither  does  the  wrathful 
soul  invite  approaches  of  God.  (2)  When  Jacob  was  proceeding  on  his  way  to 
Canaan.  The  road  which  Jacob  now  pursued  was  the  path  of  duty,  inasmuch  as  it 
had  been  prescribed  by  God,  and  led  to  the  covenant  inheritance ;  and  only  then 
need  the  saints  expect  to  meet  with  either  God  or  his  angels,  when  they  are  walking 
in  the  way  of  his  commandments,  and  making  for  the  better  country,  even  an 
heavenly.  2.  The  impression  which  it  made.  Whether  completely  surrounding 
him,  or  divided  into  two  companies,  one  on  either  side  of  him,  Jacob's  angelic  visitors, 
from  their  number,  their  orderly  array,  their  mil.tary  dispositions,  assumed  the 
appearance  of  a  heavenly  army  lying  encamped  over  against  his  own  ;  and  the  sight 
of  the  two  companies  immediately  suggested  the  ejaculation,  "  This  is  God's  host," 
and  caused  him  to  name  the  place  Mahanaim.  3.  The  purpose  which  it  served.  For 
an  enumeration  of  the  different  ends  which  this  sublime  vision  is  supposed  to  have 
been  intended  to  subserve  the  Exposition  may  be  consulted.  The  greatest  probability 
attaches  to  that  which  regards  it  as  having  been  designed  to  prepare  Jacob  for  his 
rapidly-approaching  interview  with  Esau.  It  was  fitted  to  remind  him  of  the 
heavenly  reinforcements  that  are  always  at  hand  to  succour  saints  in  their  extremi- 
ties (ef.  2  Kings  vi.  17  ;  Ps.  xxxiv.  6  ;  Zech.  ix.  8 ;  Heb.  i.  14). 

II.  The  friendly  embassy.  1.  The  despatch  of  the  messengers.  (1)  Their 
destination — to  Mount  Seir,  to  Esau ;  (2)  their  instructions — to  inform  Esau  of 
Jacob's  prosperous  estate  and  immediate  return  ;  (3)  their  design — to  deprecate  the 
wrath  of  Esau,  and  find  grace  for  Jacob  in  his  sight.  2.  The  return  of  the  messen- 
gers. (1)  Their  alarming  report — that  Esau  was  on  the  way  with  400  men ;  (2) 
the  terror  it  produced — Jacob  was  greatly  afraid  and  distressed ;  (3)  the  acts  to 
which  it  led — stratagem,  supplication,  conciliation. 

III.  The  sudden  strata oem.  Jacob  divided  the  people  that  were  with  him,  and 
the  flocks  and  herds  and  camels,  into  two  bands.  1.  An  evidence  of  Jacob's  self- 
possession.  The  fear  inspired  by  Esau's  approach  had  not  been  so  great  as  to  make 
him  lose  command  of  his  faculties.  Men  that  have  God  upon  their  side  should  not 
allow  themselves  to  be  thrown  by  evil  tidings  into  excessive  trepidation  (Ps.  xxvii. 
1 — 3;  Rom.  viii.  31).  2.  A  proof  of  Jacob's  prudence.  The  division  of  his  company 
into  two  bands  afforded  to  one  at  least  of  the  portions  a  chance  of  escaping  the 
sword  of  Esau.  Though  contrary  to  the  Divine  word  to  resist  evil,  it  is  not  wrong 
to  use  all  lawful  endeavours  to  avoid  it.  3.  A  testimony  to  Jacob's  chivalry.  In  a 
time  of  danger  he  thinks  of  the  safety  of  others,  of  the  women  and  children,  rather 
than  of  himself.  4.  A  sign  of  Jacob's  meekness.  He  contemplates  not  armed 
vesistance  to  the  onset  of  his  infuriated  brother,  but  prepares  by  peaceful  means  to 
elude  at  least  the  full  force  of  his  attack. 

IV.  The  earnest  prayer.  Characterised  by — 1.  Lofty  faith.  Jacob  addressee 
himself  to  God  as  to  a  living  personality,  and  not  as  to  an  impersonal  force ;  to  th« 
God  of  the  covenant, — "  0  God  of  my  father  Abraham,"  &c, — and  not  simply  to 
God  in  the  abstract,  as  the  inscrutable  power  that  presides  over  men  and  thinga,  and 
bases  his  appeal  upon  the  promises  which  God  in  virtue  of  that  covenant  had 
•attended  to  himself.     2.  Prqfound  humility.     He  not  only  acknowledges  the 


ra.  txtcii.  i— 23.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  898 


Divine  hand  in  his  remarkable  prosperity,  which  is  always  difficult  for  the  proud 
Bpirit  of  the  worldling  to  do,  but  he  distinctly  describes  "  all  the  mercies  "  he  has 
received  to  the  pure,  unmerited  grace  of  God,  declaring  himself  to  be.  utterly  less 
than  the  least  of  them.  Language  such  as  this  is  either  impious  hypocrisy  or  lowly 
humility.  3.  Beautiful  simplicity.  Plain,  direct;  artless,  and  confiding;,  it  is  such  a 
prayer  as  a  loving  child  might  breathe  into  a  mother's  ear  when  driven  by  impend- 
ing danger  to  seek  shelter  in  her  bosom  : — "  Deliver  me,  I  pray  thee,  from  the  hand 
of  Esau  my  brother:  for  I  fear  him." 

V.  The  conciliatoet  present.  "  A  man's  gift  maketh  room  for  him,''  says  Solo- 
mon (Prov.  xviii.  16)  ;  and  again,  "  A  gift  in  secret  pacifieth  anger,  and  a  reward  ir 
the  bosom  strong  wrath"  (Prov.  xxi.  14).  The  gift  of  Jacob  to  his  brother  was — 1. 
Handsomely  prepared.  It  was  munificently  and  generously  selected  from  the  best 
of  the  flocks  and  herds  in  his  possession.  2.  Shilfully  arranged.  The  sheep,  goats, 
camels,  asses,  kine  that  composed  it  were  drawn  up  in  a.  series  of  droves,  which 
were  despatched  in  succession  under  the  care  of  as  many  drivers.  3.  Promptly 
despatched.  The  measures  just  recited  were  adopted  on  the  very  day  that  Jacob's 
messengers  returned,  and  the  several  droves  despatched  upon  their  journey  ere  the 
night  fell.    4.  Peacefully  designed.    They  were  meant  to  appease  the  wrath  of  Esau. 

Lessons: — 1.  The  ministry  of  ange's.  2.  The  courage  inspired  by  true  religion. 
3.  The  value  of  prayer.     4.  The  use  of  a  present. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1,2. — Divine  protection.  The  pilgrim  on  his  way  is  met  by  the  angels  of 
God.  They  are  two  hosts—"  Mahanaim,"  that  is,  twofold  defence,  before  and  be- 
hind. There  was  fear  in  the  man,  but  there  was  trust  and  prayer.  He  saw  the 
objective  vision,  but  the  inward  preparation  of  heart  enabled  him  to  see  it.  On 
our  way  we  may  reckon  on  supernatural  protection — protection  for  ourselves,  pro- 
tection for  those  who  are  Divinely  appointed  to  be  with  us.  The  double  host  is 
an  emblem  of  that  angelic  guardianship  which  we  are  told  (Ps.  xxxiv.  and  xci.) 
"  encampeth  round  about  them  that  fear  the  Lord,  and  delivereth  them,"  "  keepeth 
them  in  all  their  ways." — R. 

Vers.  3 — 8. — Faith  and  fellowship.  Jacob's  preparation  against  danger  betokened 
his  sense  of  duty  to  do  his  utmost  under  the  circumstances,  and  his  sense  of  past 
errors  and  ill  desert  towards  his  brother.  There  is  an  exercise  of  our  own  judgment 
in  times  of  distress  and  extremity  which  is  quite  consistent  with  dependence  upon 
God.— R. 

Vers.  9 — 12. — Jacob' '»  prayer. _  1.  It  wag  the  prayer  of  humility.  2.  Of  faitK- 
faith  in  a  covenant  God,  faith  in  him  who  had  already  revealed  himself,  faith  in 
promises  made  to  the  individual  as  well  as  to  God's  people  generally,  faith  founded 
on  experience  of  the  past,  faith  which  has  been  mingled  with  obedience,  and  there- 
fore lays  hold  of  Divine  righteousness.  He  has  commanded  me  to  return  ;  I  am  in 
the  way  of  his  commandments.  Faith  in  the  great  purpose  of  God  and  his  kingdom  : 
"  I  will  make  thy  seed  as  the  sand  of  the  sea,"  &c.  So  Luther,  in  his  sense  of  per- 
sonal weakness  in  a  troubled  world,  cried,  "  The  Lord  must  save  his  own  Church." 
3.  It  was  the  prayer  of  gratitude.  "  1  was  alone  ;  I  am  now  two  bands ;  *  "  not 
worthy  of  the  least  of  thy  mercies,';  &c,  "yet  abundantly  blessed." — R. 

Vers.  13 — 23. — The  crisis  at  hand.     Jacob  understood  the  human  heart. 

I.  Kindness  will  work  wonders.  "  I  will  appease  him  with  the  present  that 
goeth  before  me,  and  afterward  I  will  see  his  face."  It  gave  Esau  time  to  think  of 
an  altered  state  of  things,  a  changed  brother,  and  his  own  brotherly  affection,  not 
entirely  destroyed. 

II.  Importunity  in  doing  good.  The  repeated  strokes  upon  the  iron  changes  its 
nature.  We  may  learn  a  lesson  from  Jacob  to  prep?i,o  human  hearts  for  the  recep- 
tion of  the  gospel  by  the  same  importunity.  Kind  deeds  and  kind  words  will  oftes 
open  the  way  for  •  more  direct  face-to-face  pleading  for  God. 


394 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[CH.  XXXII.  24—  32. 


III.  Experience  sanctifies.  The  trials  of  Jacob's  life  were  working  a  deepei 
and  more  loving  wisdom — working  out  the  more  selfish  craft,  and  transmuting  the 
natural  features  of  a  character,  far  from  pure  and  simple  at  first,  into  such  as 
blended  more  really  with  the  work  of  grace.  So  in  the  course  of  providence  family 
cares  and  anxieties  deliver  us  from  lower  thoughts,  or  may  do  so,  if  we  serve  God, 
and  help  us  to  walk  steadfastly  in  the  way  of  faith. 

IV.  The  true  love  provides  for  its  objects.  The  shepherd  with  his  flocks,  and 
family,  with  his  little  bands  of  precious  ones,  fearing  for  them,  and  yet  working  for 
them,  and  putting  them  before  him  in  the  hands  of  God,  is  a  type  of  the  great  Shep- 
herd of  the  sheep,  who  was  "  not  ashamed  to  call  them  brethren  ;  "  and  saying,  as  he 
stood  in  their  midst, — partaker  of  their  infirmities,  representative  of  their  wants  and 
sorrows,  guardian  of  their  safety, — "  I  will  put  my  trust  in  him.  Behold  I  and  the 
children  which  God  hath  given  me  "  (Heb.  ii.  13). 

V.  The  two  worlds.  If  Esau  be  taken  as  a  type  of  the  kingdoms  of  this  world 
threatening  the  kingdom  of  God,  Jacob  represents  the  little  flock  to  whom  the 
promise  of  victory  and  peace  has  been  given.  The  true  mediator  must  be  left  alone 
by  the  ford  Jabbok.  The  place  of  his  intercession  and  prevailing  is  where  none  of 
the  people  is  with  him,  can  be  with  him. — R. 


EXPOSITION. 


Ver.  24. — And  Jacob  was  left  alone  (pro- 
bably on  the  north  bank  of  'he  Jabbok  ;  but 
vide  on  ver.  23) ;  and  there  wrestled — 
thus  assaulting  in  his  strong  point  one  who 
had  been  a  wrestler  or  heel-catcher  from  his 
youth  (Murphy).  The  old  word  P5£3,  niph. 
of  p3N,  unused,  a  denom.  from  \>ZT\,  dust, 
because  in  wrestling  the  dust  is  raised 
(Aben  Ezra,  Gesenius),  or  a  weakened  form  of 
P3D,  to  wind  round,  to  embrace  (Fiirst), 
obviously  contains  an  allusion  to  the  Jabbok 
(vide  on  ver.  22) — a  man — called  an  angel 
by  Hosea  (ch.  xii.  4),  and  God  by  Jacob 
(ver.  30) ;  but  vide  infra — with  him  until 
the  breaking  of  the  day  —  literally,  the 
osce7iding  of  the  morning. 

Ver.  25. — And  when  lie  (the  unknown 
wrestler)  saw  that  he  prevailed  not  against 
him,  lie  touched — not  struck  (Knobel) — the 
hollow  of  his  thigh  (literally,  the  socket  of 
the  hip) ;  and  the  hollow  of  Jacob's  thigh 
ivas  out  of  joint,  as  he  wrestled  with  him 
— literally,  in  his  wrestling  with  him. 

Ver.  26. — And  he  (the  man)  said,  Let  me 
go  (literally,  send  me  away ;  meaning  that 
he  yielded  the  victory  to  Jacob,  adding  ?s  a 
reason  for  his  desire  to  depart),  for  the  day 
breaketh — literally,  for  the  morning  or  the 
dawn  ascendeth;  and  therefore  it  is  time 
for  thee  to  proceed  to  other  duties  (Willet, 
Clarke,  Murphy),  e.  g.  to  meet  Esau  and 
appease  his  anger  ('  Speaker's  Commentary '). 
Perhaps  also  the  angel  was  unwilling  that 
the  vision  which  was  meant  for  Jacob  only 
should  be  seen  by  others  (Pererius),  or  even 
that  his  own  glory  should  be  beheld  by 
Jacob  (Ainswovth).  Calvin  thinks  the  lan- 
guage was  so  shaped  as  to  lead  Jacob  to  infer 
tweturna  vitionese  divinitusfuisseedoctum. 
Aad  he  aaid,  I  will  not  let  thee  go,  except 


thou  bless  me.  The  words  show  that  Jacob 
now  clearly  recognised  his  mysterious  An- 
tagonist to  be  Divine,  and  sought  to  obtain 
from  him  the  blessing  which  he  had  pre- 
viously stolen  from  his  aged  father  by  craft. 

Ver.  27. — And  he  said  unto  him,  What 
is  thy  name  1  (not  as  if  requiring  to  be  in- 
formed, but  as  directing  attention  to  it  in 
view  of  the  change  about  to  be  made  upon 
it)  And  he  said,  Jacob — i.  e.  Heel-catcher, 
or  Supplantcr  (vide  ch.  xxv.  26). 

Ver.  28. — And  he  said,  Thy  name  shall 
be  called  no  more  (i.  e.  exclusively,  since 
both  he  and  his  descendants  are  in  Scripture 
sometimes  after  this  styled)  Jacob,  but  Israel: 

— t?$y?'1.,  from  niB',  to  be  chief,  to  fight, 
though,  after  the  example  of  Ishmael,  God 
hears,  it  might  be  rendered  "God  governs" 
(Kaiisch),  yet  seems  in  this  place  to  signify 
either  Prince  of  El  (Calvin,  Ainsworth, 
Dathe,  Murphy,  Wordsworth,  and  others), 
or  wrestler  with  God  (Fiirst,  Keil,  Kurtz, 
Lange,  et  alii),  rather  than  warrior  of  God 
(Gesenius),  if  indeed  both  ideas  may  not 
be  combined  in  the  name  as  the  princely 
wrestler  with  God  ('Speaker's  Commentary,' 
Bush),  an  interpretation  adopted  by  the 
A.  V. — for  as  a  prince  hast  thou  power 
with  God — literally,  for  thou  hast  contended 
with  Elohim  (Keil,  Alford,  &c),  on  ivia- 
xwav  itira  Bioi  (LXX.),  contra  deumfortii 
fuisti  (Vulgate),  thou  hast  obtained  the 
mastery  with  God  (Kaiisch),  rather  than, 
thou  hast  striven  to  be  a  prince  with  God 
(Murphy) — and  with  men,  and  hast  "pre- 
vailed. So  are  the  words  rendered  by  the 
best  authorities  (Kf'l,  Kaiisch,  Murphy, 
Wordsworth),  though  the  translation  K<ii 
fiiTa  avOpuiriMtv Swards  toy  (LXX.),  qt'jvntc 
magvs  contra  homines prevalebis  ( Vulgaiaj 


otr.  x*-*i7,  24—32.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


3»? 


U  by  some  preferred  (Calvin,  Kosenmiiller, 
to.}. 

Ver.  29 — And  Jacob  asked  him,  and  said, 
Tell  me,  I  pray  thee,  thy  name.  A  request 
indicating  great  boldness  on  the  part  of 
Jacob — the  boldness  of  faith  (Heb.  iv.  16  ; 
z.  19) ;  and  importing  a  desire  on  Jacob's 
part  to  be  acquainted,  not  merely  with  the 
designation,  but  with  the  mysterious  charac- 
ter of  the  Divine  personage  with  whom  he 
had  been  contending.  And  he  (the  mysteri- 
ous stranger)  said,  Wherefore  is  it  that  thou 
dost  ask  after  my  name?  Cf.  Judges  xiii. 
18,  where  the  angel  gives  the  same  reply  to 
Manoah,  adding,  ' '  seeing  it  is  secret ; " 
literally,  wonderful,  i.  e.  incomprehensible 
to  mortal  man ;  though  here  the  words  of 
Jacob's  antagonist  may  mean  that  his  name, 
so  far  as  it  could  be  learnt  by  man,  was 
already  plain  from  the  occurrence  which  had 
taken  place  (Murphy,  '  Speaker's  Com- 
mentary,' Bush).  And  lie  blessed  him  there. 
After  this,  every  vestige  of  doubt  disap- 
peared from  the  soul  of  Jacob. 

Ver.  30. — And  Jacob  called  the  name  of 
the  place  Peniel  (i.  e.  "the  face  of  God." 
Its  situation  must  have  been  close  to  the 
Jabbok.  The  reason  given  for  its  designa- 
tion follows) :  for  I  have  seen  God  (Eloliim) 
face  to  face,  and  my  life  is  preserved  (cf. 
ch.  xvi.  13  ;  Exod.  xxiv.  11  ;  xxxiii.  20  ; 
Judges  vi.  22  ;  xiii.  22  ;  Isa.  vi.  5). 

Ver.  81. — And  as  he  passed  over  Penuel — 
this  some  suppose  to  have  been  the  original 
name  of  the  place,  which  Jacob  changed  by 
the  alteration  of  a  vowel,  but  it  is  probably 


nothing  more  than  an  old  form  of  the  sams 
word — the  sun  rose  upon  him, — "there  was 
sunshine  within  and  sun  shine  without.  When 
Judas  went  forth  on  his  dark  design,  we 
read,  '  It  was  night,'  John  xiii.  30  "  (Inglis) 
—  and  he  halted  upon  his  thigh  —  thus 
carrying  with  him  a  memorial  of  his  conflict, 
as  Paul  afterwards  bore  about  with  him  ■ 
stake  in  his  flesh  (2  Cor.  xii.  7). 

Ver.  32. — Therefore  the  children  of  Israel 
eat  not  of  the  sinew  whioh  shrank, — the 
gid  hannasheh,  rendered  by  the  LXX.  ro 
vtvpov  8  ii'dpKt/tjtv,  the  nerve  which  became 
numb,  and  by  the  Vulgate  nervus  qui 
emarcuit,  the  nerve  which  withered,  is  the 
long  tendon  or  sinew  nervus  ischiaticus  (the 
tendo  Achillis  of  the  Greeks)  reaching  from 
the  spinal  marrow  to  the  ankle.  The  de- 
rivation of  hannashehis  unknown  (Gesenius), 
though  the  LXX.  appear  to  have  connected 
it  with  nashah,  to  dislocate,  become  feeble ; 
Ainsworth  with  nashah,  to  forget  (■£.  e.  the 
sinew  that  forgat  its  place),  and  Fiirst  with 
nashah,  to  be  prolonged  (vide  '  Michaelis 
Suppl.',  p.  303) — which  is  upon  the  hollow 
of  the  thigh,  unto  this  day : — i.  e.  the  day 
of  Moses ;  though  the  custom  continues  to 
the  present  time  among  the  Hebrews  of  cut- 
ting out  this  sinew  from  the  beasts  they  kill 
and  cat  (vide  Ainsworth  in  loco) ;  but,  ac- 
cording to  Michaelis  (Suppl.,  p.  303),  eo 
nemo  omnino  mortalium,  si  vel  nullo  cogna- 
lionis  gradu  Jacobum  attingat,  nemo  Grcecus, 
nemo  barbarus  vesd  velit — because  he  (i.  e.  the 
angel)  touched  the  hollow  of  Jacob's  thigh 
in  the  sinew  that  shrank. 


HOMILETICS. 

Verg.  24 — 32. — Peniel,  or  the  mysterious  contest.  I.  Tub  description  of  the 
struggle.  1.  Thescene.  The  north  bank  of  Jabbok  (vide  Exposition).  2.  Thetime. 
Night;  the  most  suitable  season  for  soul  exercises,  such  as  self-examination  (Ps.  iv. 
4),  meditation  (Ps.  Ixiii.  6),  devotion  (Luke  vi.  12).  3.  The  circumstances.  Jacob 
was  alone.  In  solitude  the  human  soul  discovers  most  of  itself,  and  enjoys  most 
frequent  interviews  with  God  (Ps.  Ixxvii.  6 ;  Dan.  x.  8  ;  John  xvi.  32).  4.  The 
combatants. _  (1)  Jacob:  by  nature  the  supplanter,  by  grace  the  heir  of  the  cove- 
nant ;  who  in  early  life  by  craft  had  overreached  his  brother  Esau  in  the  matters  of 
the  family  birthright  and  theocratic  blessing,  and  who  had  now,  by  the  despatch  of 
his  munificent  present  to  "  my  lord  Esau,"  renounced  both,  so  far  at  least  as  renunci- 
ation was  possible,  i.  e.  in  respect  of  material  and  temporal  advantages.  (2)  A  man, 
i.  e.  one  who  in  outward  appearance  wore  the  form  of  a  man,  though  in  reali'ty  "the 
visible  revealer  of  the  invisible  God  "  (Delitzsch) ;  the  angel  of  Jehovah,  who  bad 
previously  appeared  in  like  guise  to  Abraham  at  Mamie  (ch.  xviii.  1),  and  who 
subsequently,  in  the  fulness  of  the  times,  incarnated  himself  as  the  Word  made  flesh 
(John  i.  14).  5.  Tlie  combat.  (1)  Its  commencement.  When  precisely  this 
mysterious  conflict  began,  and  how  Jacob  was  engaged  at  the  moment  of  the 
unknown  wrestlers  approach,  are  points  upon  which  the  narrative  is  silent,  though 
it  is  probable  that  Jacob  was  employed  in  fervent  supplication,  and  that,  without 
Snowing  how,  he  suddenly  became  conscious  of  being  involved  in  a  close  physical 
itruggle  with  a  powerful  antagonist.  Perhaps  this  was  designed  to  suggest  that 
b-od  s  approaches  to  the  praying  soul  are  mostly  sudden  and  inexplicable  (cf.  John 
ui.  8).     (2)  Its  character.     Though  unquestionably  depicted  in  the  narrative  aa  « 


•96  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  [oh.  xxxii.  24—32 

veritable  contest  between  two  human  beings,  it  is  apparent  that  underlying  tie 
physical  struggle,  and  related  to  it  as  the  substance  to  the  shadow,  as  the  soul  to  the 
body,  was  another  spiritual  contending  carried  on  by  means  of  prayers  and  teai 8 
(Hosea  xii.  4).  (3)  Its  continuance.  Beginning  probably  at  midnight,  it  was  pro- 
tracted until  dawn,  a  circumstance  suggestive  of  Jacob's  earnestness  and  determin- 
ation, and  yet  attesting  the  severe  character  of  all  true  spiritual  conflicts,  and  the 
extraordinary  difficulty  of  achieving  victories  with  God  (Matt.  xii.  12).  (4)  Its 
course.  Four  stages  are  discernible  in  this  mysterious  struggle,  (a)  The  wrestlers 
appear  to  be  equally  balanced  in  their  strength  and  skill,  so  that  the  stranger  finds  him- 
self unable  to  prevail  against  Jacob,  and  laying  his  finger  on  his  adversary's  hip,  puts 
it  out  of  joint— a  hint  to  Jacob  that  though  seemingly  the  victory  inclined  towards 
him,  it  was  due  not  so  much,  or  even  at  all,  to  his  wisdom  and  prowess,  but  rather  to 
the  stranger's  grace  and  good-will.  (6)  Jacob  having  thus  been  disabled,  his 
mysterious  antagonist,  as  if  owning  that  the  mastery  remained  with  him,  requests 
permission  to  depart,  alleging  as  a  reason  that  the  ascending  dawn  proclaimed  the 
day's  return,  and  called  to  other  duties — a  valuable  reminder  that  religion  has  other 
necessary  works  for  God's  saints  besides  devotion  and  contemplation  ;  but  Jacob, 
who  by  this  time  recognised  his  antagonist  as  Divine,  objected  to  his  departure  with- 
out confirming  the  blessing  he  had  formerly  received  at  Bethel — and  this,  tho  personal 
reception  and  enjoyment  of  the  blessing  of  the  covenant,  should  be  the  end  and  aim 
of  all  the  saint's  contendings  with  God  and  communings  with  Heaven,  (c)  Inquir- 
ing Jacob's  name,  the  Divine  adversary  now  discovers  his  true  personality  by 
authoritatively  changing  that  name  to  Israel,  prince  of  El,  in  token  of  his  victory — 
an  outward  symbol  of  the  completed  spiritual  renovation  which  had  taken  place 
in  Jacob  since  God  first  met  with  him  at  Bethel.  (d)  Probably  excited,  or 
spiritually  elevated,  by  what  had  just  transpired,  Jacob  ventures,  either  with  holy 
boldness  or  with  unthinking  curiosity,  to  inquire  after  his  heavenly  antagonist's 
name,  but  is  answered  that  in  the  mean  time  lie  must  rest  satisfied  with  the  blessing 
which  was  then  and  there  pronounced.  It  was  either  a  rebuke  to  Jacob's  presumption, 
or,  and  with  greater  probability,  a  reminder  that  even  holy  boldness  has  its  limits, 
Deyond  which  it  may  not  intrude.  (5)  Its  close.  Suddenly  and  mysteriously  as  the 
stranger  came  did  he  also  disappear,  leaving  Jacob  in  possession  of  the  blessing  indeed, 
but  also  of  a  dislocated  limb.  So  God  frequently  accompanies  spiritual  enrichment 
with  material  and  temporal  deprivation,  in  order  both  to  evince  his  own  sovereignty 
and  to  keep  his  saints  humble  (cf.  2  Cor.  xii.  7).  (6)  Its  commemoration.  By 
Jacob,  who  called  the  place  Peniel ;  by  Jacob's  descendants,  who  to  this  day  eat  not 
of  the  sciatic  nerve  in  animals  they  kill  for  food. 

II.  The  beality  of  the  struggle.  The  question  arises  whether  the  contest  just 
described  had  an  objective  reality  (HSvernick,  Kurtz,  Murphy,  Alford,  &c. ),  or  par- 
took of  a  purely  subjective  character,  being  in  fact  an  allegorical  description  of  a 
spiritual  conflict  in  the  soul  of  Jacob  (Kalisch),  or  a  wrestling  which  took  place  only 
in  a  dream  (Hengstenberg),  or  in  an  ecstasy  (Delitzsch,  Keil,  Lange),  for  the  idea  of 
its  being  a  myth  (Bohlen,  De  Wette,  Oort,  Kuenen)  may  be  discarded.  1.  Against 
the  notion  of  a  dream-vision  it  is  sufficient  to  remark  that  if  Jacob's  wrestling  was  a 
dream,  so  also  were  his  victory  and  his  blessing  dreams.  Besides,  limbs  do  not 
usually  become  dislocated  in  dreams.  2.  To  read  the  passage  as  an  allegory  is  both 
forced  and  unnatural,  and  "  little  better  than  trifling  with  the  sacred  narrative " 
(Alford).  3.  There  is  no  insuperable  objection  to  the  idea  of  an  ecstasy,  provided 
it  is  not  intended  to  exclude  the  objective  manifestation  ;  yet,  4.  There  docs  not  seem 
sufficient  reason  for  departing  from  (he  obvious  and  literal  sense  of  the  passage, 
according  to  which  there  was  a  bond  fide  corporeal  contest  between  Jacob  and  the 
angel  of  Jehovah  in  human  form  ;  for  (1)  the  narrative  gives  no  indication  that  it 
was  designed  in  this  part  to  be  interpreted  otherwise  than  literally  and  historically,  as 
in  the  surrounding  context ;  (2)  unless  on  the  hypothesis  that  the  supernatural  is  the 
unreal,  there  is  no  imperative  necessity  why  exception  should  be  taken  to  the  objective 
character  of  this  remarkable  struggle ;  (3)  the  dislocation  of  Jacob's  thigh  points 
to  an  actual  physical  contest ;  and  (4)  the  other  events  in  the  narrative  appear  tc 
require  that  the  historic  credibility  of  Jacob's  wrestling  be  maintained. 
tlL  The  significance  of  thb  struggle.    That  a  moraentors,  crisis  had  arisen  is 


ch.  xxxii.  24—32.].  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  897 

Jacob's  history  is  universally  admitted.  He  was  now  returning  to  the  land  of  Canaan 
n  man  of  mature  age,  being  in  his  ninety-seventh  year,  and  of  a  singularly  diversi- 
fied experience,  both  natural  and  spiritual.  In  his  early  life  he  had  twice  supplanted 
Eaau  by  moans  of  craft,  depriving  him  of  his  birthright  and  blessing,  and  now  he 
was  on  the  eve  of  meeting  that  formidable  brother  whom  he  had  wronged.  That  the 
prospective  interview  filled  him  with  alarm  is  explicitly  declared  (ch.  xxxii.  7)  ;  but 
it  likewise  drove  him  to  take  refuge  in  prayer,  in  which  exercise  it  is  scarcely  doubt- 
ful he  was  engaged  when  his  mysterious  assailant  approached.  What  then  did  this 
extraordinary  combat  signify  in  the  spiritual  consciousness  of  Jacob?  Putting 
together  those  views  which  do  not  necessarily  exclude  one  another,  and  whirh 
appear  to  contain  an  element  of  truth,  it  may  be  said  that  this  remarkable  experience 
through  which  the  patriarch  passed  at  Jabbok  was  designed  to  have  a  threefold 
bearing.  1.  On  his  fear  of  Esau.  Apprehensive  of  his  brother,  he  now  learns  that 
not  Esau,  but  Jehovah,  was  his  real  adversary  (Keil,  Kurtz,  Gerlach,  Candlish),  and 
that  before  he  can  ever  hope  to  triumph  over  Esau  he  must  first  conquer  God.  2. 
On  his  retention  of  the  blessing.  Having  previously,  as  he  thought,  obtained  the 
birthright  and  its  accompanying  blessing  by  means  of  carnal  policy  and  worldly 
stratagem,  he  now  discovers  that  it  cannot  be  received,  or,  if  he  renounced  it  in  the 
act  of  homage  done  to  Esau  (Lange),  cannot  be  recovered  except  directly  from  the 
lips  of  God,  and  by  means  of  earnest  cries  and  entreaties  (Keil) — a  truth  taught  him, 
according  to  Kurtz,  by  the  dislocation  of  his  thigh,  which  caused  him  to  discontinue 
his  corporeal  wrestling,  and  resort  to  prayers  and  tears.  3.  On  his  personal  character. 
Jacob  during  all  his  past  career,  from  his  birth,  when  he  caught  nis  brother  by  the 
heel,  to  his  last  years  in  Haran,  when  he  overreached  the  crafty  and  avaricious  Laban, 
having  been  a  person  who  sought  to  overcome  by  means  of  self-reliance  and  personal 
effort,  it  was  now  designed  to  teach  him  that,  as  the  heir  of  the  covenant,  the  weapons 
of  his  warfare  were  not  to  be  carnal,  but  spiritual,  and  that  his  advancement  to  the 
place  predestined  for  him  of  pre-eminence  over  his  brethren  was  to  be  brought  ahoul 
by  earnest  reliance  upon  God  (Murphy). 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  24—32.—"  Peniel"  "  The  face  of  God."  The  patriarchal  revelation  at  its 
best.  The  main  point,  the  personal  wrestling  of  the  believer  with  the  angel  of 
deliverance.  Through  that  scene  Jacob  passed  as  by  a  baptism  (ford  Jabbok)  into 
the  full  enjoyment  of  confidence  in  Jehovah,  into  the  theanthropio  faith.  A  man 
wrestled  with  him.  The  faith  of  Jacob  was  now  to  be  a  faith  resting  not  upon 
tradition  alone,  nor' upon  promises  and  commandments  alone,  nor  upon  past  experi- 
ence alone,  but  upon  a  living,  personal  union  with  God.  The  wrestling  was  a  type 
of  that  intimate  fellowship  which  spiritually  identifies  the  individual  child  of  God 
with  the  Father  through  the  man  Christ  Jesus.  The  pilgrim  on  his  way  is  hence- 
forth the  prince,  having  power  with  God  and  with  men.  It  is  a  great  lesson  on  pre- 
vailing prayer.  1.  The  prayer  of  faith.  2.  The  prayer  of  importunity.  3.  The 
prayer  of  intense  desire.  "  I  will  not  let  thee  go,  except  thou  bless  me.'  Bless  me 
for  myself,  bless  me  for  my  family,  bless  me  for  the  world.  But  Jacob  was  a  type 
of  the  true  Prince  of  God  prevailing  for  his  people.  He  wrestled,  he  wrestled  alone, 
he  wrestled  to  his  own  suffering  and  humiliation,  although  into  victory.  He  obtained 
the  blessing  as  the  Mediator.  Although  the  patriarch  was  not  allowed  to  know  the 
name  of  the  angel,  he  was  himself  named  by  the  angel.  Although  we  cannot  with 
all  our  searching  find  out  God,  and  even  the  revelation  of  Christ  leaves  much 
unknown,  still  we  are  "  known  of  him."  He  gives  us  one  name,  and  by  that  name 
ive  know  him  to  be  ours,  which  is  the  true  saving  knowledge.  Peniel,  the  face  of 
God,  is  the  name  not  of  God  himself,  but  of  the  blessed  revelation  of  God.  We 
know  where  we  may  find  him.  We  may  each  one  start  afresh  from  our  Peniel,  where 
we  have  been  blessed  of  God,  and  have  through  Christ  prevailed  against  the  dark- 
ness of  the  future  and  the  helplessness  of  our  own  impotence.  Nor  must  we  forget 
that  this  wrestling  was  reconciliation— the  reconciliation  between  man  and  God  pre- 
ceding the  reconciliation  between  man  and  man.     The  lameness  of  the  patriarch 


398  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS  [ch.  xxsm.  1—20. 

symbolised  the  life  of  dependence  upon  which  he  henceforth  entered  with  much 
more  entire  surrender  than  before.  "  As  the  sun  rose  upon  him,  he  halted  upon  his 
thigh."  It  was  the  morning  of  a  new  life— the  life  of  man's  confessed  nothingness 
and  God's  manifested  sufficiency.  In  such  a  light  we  can  see  light.  The  day  may 
have  dangers  in  it,  but  it  will  be  a  day  of  mighty  deliverance,  'Divine  blessedness, 
rejoicing  in  personal  salvation  and  peaceful  life. — R. 

Ver.  28. — A  new  name.  "Thy  name  shall  be  called  no  more  Jacob,  but  Israel." 
Twenty  years  before  Jacob  learned  at  Bethel  to  know  God  as  a  living  and  present 
Protector.  This  a  great  step  in  spiritual  life ;  belief  of  God  in  heaven,  becoming 
consciousness  of  God  "  in  this  place,"  guiding  all  events.  It  is  the  first  step  towards 
walking  with  God.  But  his  training  not  yet  complete.  Truth  is  usually  grasped  by 
degrees.  Unbelief,  cast  out,  returns  in  new  forms  and  under  new  pretences.  A 
common  mistake  at  beginning  of  Christian  life  is  to  think  that  the  battle  is  at  an 
end  when  decision  made.  The  soul  may  have  passed  from  death  to  life ;  but  much 
still  to  be  done,  much  to  be  learned.  Many  a  young  Christian  little  knows  the 
weakness  of  his  faith.  During  these  years  Jacob  shows  real  faith,  but  not  perfect 
reliance  (ch.  xxx.  37  ;  xxxi.  20).  Returning  home  greatly  enriched,  he  heard  of 
Esau  at  hand.  He  feared  his  anger.  No  help  in  man  ;  God's  promise  his  only 
refuge.  Could  he  trust  to  it  ?  His  wrestling.  We  cannot  picture  its  outward  form  ; 
but  its  essence  a  spiritual  struggle.  His  endurance  tried  by  bodily  infirmity  (cf. 
Job  ii.  5)  and  by  the  apparent  unwillingness  of  the  Being  with  whom  he  strove  (cf . 
Matt.  xv.  26).  His  answer  showed  determination  (cf.  2  Kings  iv.  30).  This  pre- 
vailed ;  weak  as  he  was,  he  received  the  blessing  (cf.  Heb.  xi.  34).  And  the  new 
name  was  the  sign  of  his  victory  (cf.  Matt.  xxi.  22  ;  1  John  v.  4). 

I.  The  struggle.  Why  thus  protracted  ?  It  was  not  merely  a  prolonged  prayer, 
like  Luke  vi.  12.  There  was  some  hindrance  to  be  overcome  (cf.  Matt.  xi.  12)  ;  not 
by  muscular  force,  but  by  earnest  supplication.  Where  Scripture  is  silent  we  must 
speak  cautiously.  But  probable  explanation  is  the  state  of  Jacob's  own  mind. 
Hitherto  faith  had  been  mixed  with  faithlessness  ;  belief  in  the  promise  with  hesi- 
tation to  commit  the  means  to  God.  Against  this  divided  mind  (James  i.  8)  the 
Lord  contended.  No  peace  while  this  remained  (cf.  Isa.  xxvi.  3).  And  the  lesson 
of  that  night  was  to  trust  God's  promise  entirely  (cf.  Ps.  xxxvii.  3).  When  this 
was  learned  the  wrestling  of  the  Spirit  against  the  double  mind  was  at  an  end.  Such 
a  struggle  may  be  going  on  in  the  hearts  of  some  here.  A  craving  for  peace,  yet  a 
restless  disquiet.  The  gospel  believed,  yet  failing  to  bring  comfort.  Prayer  for 
peace  apparently  unanswered,  so  that  there  Beemed  to  be  some  power  contending 
against  us.  Why  is  this  ?  Most  probably  from  failing  to  commit  all  to  God. 
Perhaps  requiring  some  sign  (John  xx.  25),  some  particular  state  of  feeling,  oi 
change  of  disposition  ;  perhaps  looking  for  faith  within  as  the  ground  of  trust ; 
perhaps  choosing  the  particular  blessing — self-will  as  to  the  morsel  of  the  bread  oi 
life  to  satisfy  us,  instead  of  taking  every  word  of  God.  There  is  the  evil.  It  is 
against  self  thou  must  strive.  Behold  thy  loving  Saviour ;  will  he  fail  thee  in  the 
hour  of  need  ?  Tell  all  to  him ;  commit  thyself  into  his  hands ;  not  once  or  twice, 
but  habitually. 

II.  The  new  name  (cf.  Rev.  iii.  12).  No  more  Jacob,  the  crafty,  but  Israel,  God's 
prince  (cf.  Rev.  i.  6).  The  token  of  victory  over  distrust,  self-will,  self-confidence. 
In  knowledge  of  poverty  is  wealth  (Matt.  v.  3) ;  in  knowledge  of  weakness,  strength 
(2  Cor.  xii.  10).  That  name  is  offered  to  all.  The  means,  persevering  prayer ;  but 
prayer  not  to  force  our  will  upon  God,  but  that  trust  may  be  so  entire  that  our  wills 
may  in  all  things  embrace  his. — M. 

EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXXIII. 

Vera.  1,  2. — And  «<>cob,  having  the  day 
before  despatched  his  conciliatory  gift  to 
Egau,  turned  his  back  upon  the  Jabbok. 


having  crossed  to  the  sooth  bank,  if  the  pre> 
vious  night  had  been  spent  upon  its  north 
side,  passed  over  the  rising  ground  of  Peniel 
(vifle  Tristram'*  'Land  of  Israel,'  p.  658), 
and  advanced  to  meet  his  brother,  ricJily 


CH.  XZXII1.  1—20.. 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


399 


laden  with  the  heavenly  blessing  he  had 
won  in  his  mysterious  conflict  with  Elohim, 
and  to  all  appearance  free  from  those  para- 
lysing fears  which,  previous  to  the  midnigh  t 
struggle,  the  prospect,  of  meeting  Esau  had 
inspired.  Having  already  prevailed  with 
God,  he  had  an  inward  assurance,  begotten 
by  the  words  of  his  celestial  antagonist,  that 
he  would  likewise  prevail  with  man,  and  so 
he  lifted  up  Ms  eyes  {vide  on  ch.  xiii.  10), 
and  looked,  and,  behold,  Esau  came,  and 
with  him  four  hundred  men  {vide  ch.  xxxii.  6). 
And  he  {i.  e.  Jacob)  divided  the  children  unto 
Leah,  and  unto  Kachel,  and  unto  the  two 
handmaids,  Bilhah  and  Zilpah,  thus  omit- 
ting no  wise  precaution  to  insure  safety  for 
at  least  a  portion  of  his  household,  in  case 
Esau  should  be  still  incensed  and  resolved 
on  a  hostile  attack.  And  he  put  the  hand- 
maids and  their  children  foremost,  and  Leah 
and  her  children  after,  and  Kachel  and 
Joseph  hindermost.  as  being  most  beloved 
(Kalisch,  Murphy,  Lange,  and  others)  or 
most  beautiful  (Bush). 

Vers.  3,  4. — And  he  (the  introduction  of 
the  pronoun  giving  emphasis  -*"o  the  state- 
ment) passed  over  before  them  (;'.  e.  passed 
on  in  front  of  them,  thus  chivalrously  putting 
himself  in  the  place  of  danger),  and  bowed 
himself  to  the  ground — not  completely  pros- 
trating the  body,  as  Abraham  did  in  ch.  xix. 
1,  but  bending  forward  till  the  upper  part  of 
it  became  parallel  with  the  ground,  a  mode 
of  expressing  deep  reverence  and  respect, 
which  may  be  seen  to  life  in  Oriental  coun- 
tries at  the  present  day  (Roberts,  '  Oriental 
Illustrations,'  p.  41) — seven  times  (not  in 
immediate  succession,  but  bowing  and  ad- 
vancing), until  he  came  near  to  his  brother. 
The  conduct  of  Jacob  was  dictated  neither 
by  artful  hypocrisy  nor  by  unmanly  timidity ; 
but  by  true  politeness  and  a  sincere  desire  to 
conciliate.  And  as  such  it  was  accepted  by 
Esau,  who  ran  to  meet  him,  and,  his  better 
feelings  kindlirg  at  the  sight  of  his  long- 
absent  brother,  embraced  him,  and  fell  on 
hii  neck,  and  kissed  him — as  Joseph  after- 
wards did  to  Benjamin  (ch.  xlv.  14,  15), 
though  the  puncta  extraordinaria  of  the 
Masorites  over  the  word  ' '  kissed  "  seem  to 
indicate  either  that  in  their  judgment  Esau 
was  incapable  of  such  fraternal  affection 
(Delitzsch,  Kalisch),  or  that  the  word  was 
suspicious,  Origen  appearing  not  to  have 
found  it  in  his  codices  (Rosenmiiller,  Keil), 
unless  indeed  the  conjecture  be  correct  that 
the  word  was  marked  to  draw  attention  to 
the  power  of  God's  grace  in  changing  Esau's 
heart  (Ainsworth).  And  they  wept  —  the 
LXX.  adding  both.  "All  this  is  beautiful, 
natural,  Oriental"  ('Land  and  Book,'  p. 
372). 

Ver.  6. — And  he  {i.  t.  Esau)  lifted  up  hii 
eyes, — corresponding  to  the  act  of  Jaeob 


(ver.  1),  and  expressive  of  surprise — and  saw 
the  women  and  the  children ;  and  said,  Who 
are  those  with  thee  %  (literally,  to  thee,  i.  e. 
whom  thou  hast).  And  he  (Jacob)  said,  The 
children  which  God  (Elohim  ;  vide  infra  on 
ver.  10)  hath  graciously  given— the  verb 
|jn  being  construed  with  a  double  accusative, 
as  in  Judges  xxi.  22 ;  Ps.  cxix.  29 — thy 
servant. 

Vers.  6,  7. — Then  (literally,  and)  the 
handmaidens  came  near,  they  and  their 
children  (since  they  occupied  the  front  rank 
in  the  procession  which  followed  Jacob),  and 
they  bowed  themselves  (after  his  example). 
And  Leah  also  with  her  children  came  near, 
and  bowed  themselves :  and  after  came 
Joseph  near  and  Rachel,  and  they  bowed 
themselves.  The  remark  of  Lange,  that  the 
six-year  old  lad  who  comes  before  his  mother 
seems  to  break  through  all  the  cumbrous 
ceremonial,  and  to  rush  confidently  into  the 
arms  of  his  uncle,  is  as  fanciful  and  far-fetched 
as  that  of  Jarchi,  that  Joseph  took  precedence 
of  his  mother  because  he  feared  lest  Esau, 
who  was  a  homo  pro/anus,  should  be  fasci- 
nated by  his  mother's  beauty,  and  seek  to  do 
her  wrong ;  in  which  ca.se  he  would  try  to 
hinder  him. 

Ver.  8. — And  he  said,  What  meanest  thou 
by  all  this  drove — literally,  What  to  thee  all 
this  oxmp  (Mahaneh) — which  I  met  ? — i.  e. 
yesterday,  referring  to  the  droves  which  had 
beer,  sent  on  by  Jacob  as  a  present  to  my 
lord  Esau  (ch.  xxxii.  16).  And  he  said, 
Thes'j  are  to  find  grace  in  the  sight  of  my 
lord  {vide  ch.  xxxii.  5). 

Ver.  9. — And  Esau  said,  I  have  enough 
(literally,  Here  is  to  me  abundance),  my 
brother  (it  is  impossible  not  to  admire  tho 
generous  and  affectionate  disposition  of  Esau) ; 
keep  that  thou  hast  unto  thyself  (literally, 
let  be  to  thee  what  is  to  thee,  i.  e.  what  be- 
longs to  thee). 

Vers.  10, 11. — And  Jacob  said,  Nay,  I  pray 
thee,  if  now  I  have  found  grace  in  thy  light, 
then  receive  my  present  at  my  hand:  for 

therefore — JS^^'B, because  (Gesenius,  Rosen- 
miiller, Quarry),  or,  for  this  purpose  (Keil, 
Kalisch,  Hengstenberg,  Lange,  Ewald.  Vide 
ch.  xviii.  5  ;  xix.  8  ;  xxxviii.  26) — I  have 
seen  thy  face,  as  though  I  had  seen  the  face 
of  Sod, — literally,  as  a  vision  of  the  face  of 
Elohim,  in  which  language  Jacob  neither 
uses  adulation  towards  his  brother(Tostatius), 
nor  calls  him  a  god  in  the  sense  in  which 
heathen  potentates  are  styled  deities  (Vata- 
blus,  Arabic,  Chaldee),  nor  simply  uses  a 
superlative  expression  to  indicate  the  majesty 
(JUenocliius)  or  benevolence  (Ainsworth)  ol 
Esau's  countenance,  nor  signifies  that  he  had 
recognised  the  person  of  Esau  in  the  angel 
who  contended  with  him  at  the  Jabbok 
(Bush) ;  but  either  that  he  had  received  from 


400 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[oh.  xxxiii.  1 — 20. 


Esau  the  same  friendly  welcome  that  one 
coming  into  God's  presence  would  receive  from 
him  (Rosenmiiller,  Keil,  Murphy,  '  Speaker's 
Commentary'),orthat  he  had  come  in  to  Esau's 
presence  with  the  same  feelings  of  penitence 
as  if  he  had  been  coming  before  God  (Kalisch), 
or  that,  as  he  had  already  seen  the  face  of 
God  and  his  life  was  preserved,  so  now  he 
had  seen  the  face  of  Esau,  and  the  anticipated 
destruction  had  not  been  inflicted  on  him 
(Quarry),  either  of  which  accords  with  the 
words  that  follow — and  thou  wast  pleased 
with  me— literally,  thou  hast  graciously  re- 
ceived me,  the  unexpressed  thought  being,  as 
already  I  have  been  favourably  accepted  by 
Elohim.  Hence  Jacob  with  greater  urgency 
renews  his  entreaty  that  Esau  would  not 
decline  his  proffered  gift,  _  saying,  Take,  I 
pray  thee,  my  blessing  (i.  e.  my  present, 
the  word  signifying,  as  in  1  Sam.  xxv.  27 ; 
xxx.  26 ;  2  Kings  v.  15,  a  gift  by  which 
one  seeks  to  express  good  -  will)  that  if 
brought  to  thee; — or,  which  has  been  caused 
to  come  to  thee,  adding,  as  a  special  reason 
to  induce  him  to  accept — because  God  hath 
dealt  graciously  with  me,— Elohim,  it  has 
been  thought,  is  used  here  and  in  ver.  5  by 
Jacob  instead  of  Jehovah,  either  "  to  avoid 
reminding  Esau  of  the  blessing  of  Jehovah 
which  had  occasioned  his  absence  "  (Delitzsch, 
Keil),  ori"  because  Jehovah  was  exalted  far 
above  the  level  of  Esau's  superficial  religion  " 
Hengstenberg) ;  but  it  is  just  possible  that 
by  its  employment  Jacob  only  wished  to 
acknowledge  the  Divine  hand  in  the  remark- 
able prosperity  which  had  attended  him  in 
Haran — and  because  I  have  enough — liter- 
ally, there  is  to  me  all,  i.  e.  everything  I  can 
wish  (Murphy),  all  things  as  the  heir  of  the 
promise  (Keil).  The  expression  is  stronger 
than  that  used  by  Esau  (ver.  9),  and  is  re- 
garded by  some  (Ainsworth)  as  indicating  a 
more  contented  spirit  than  that  evinced  by 
Esau.  And  he  urged  him.  In  Eastern 
countries  the  acceptance  of  a  gift  is  equiva- 
lent to  the  striking  of  a  covenant  of  friend- 
ship. If  your  present  be  received  by  your 
superior  you  may  rely  on  his  friendship  ;  if 
it  be  declined  you  have  everything  to  fear. 
It  was  on  this  ground  that  Jacob  was  so 
urgent  in  pressing  Esau  to  accept  his  present 
(cf.  A.  Clarke  in,  loco).  And  he  took  it,  and 
so  gave  Jacob  an  assurance  of  his  complete 
reconciliation. 

Ver.  12. — And  he  (i.  e.  Esau)  said  (in  fur- 
ther token  of  his  amity),  let  us  take  our 
Journey,  and  let  us  go, — but  whether  he 
iniended  to  accompany  Jacob  on  his  way 
(Keil,  Kalisch,  et  alii)  or  invited  Jacob  to 
go  with  him  to  Mount  Seir  (Ainsworth, 
Clericus)  is  uncertain.  On  the  first  hypothe- 
sis it  is  difficult  to  explain  how  Esau  came 
to  be  travelling  in  the  same  direction  u  his 


brother,  while  the  adoption  of  the  second 
will  serve  in  some  measure  to  elucidate  Ja- 
cob's language  in  ver.  14.  But  whichever 
way  the  words  of  Esau  are  understood,  they 
amounted  to  an  offer  to  be  an  escort  to 
Jacob  through  the  desert  regions  with  which 
his  excursions  had  made  him  familiar,  since 
he  added,  and  I  will  go  before  thee — i.  e, 
to  lead  the  way. 

Ver.  13. — And  he  (Jacob,  politely  declin- 
ing Esau's  society  and  protection,  though 
apparently  accepting  his  invitation  to  go 
to  Mount  Seir)  said  unto  him,  My  lord 
knoweth  that  the  children  are  tender  (Jo- 
seph at  this  time  being  little  over  six  years 
of   age),   and   the   flocks   and  herds   with 

young  (literally,  giving  milk;  Tmll,  from 

?W,  to  give  suck)  are  with  me, — literally, 
upon  me,  i.  e.  are  an  object  of  my  special 
care,  because  of  their  condition  (Rosen- 
miiller, Keil) — and  if  men  should  over-drive 
them  —  literally,  and  they  (sc.  the  shep- 
herds) will  over-drive  them,  i.  e.  in  order  to 
keep  pace  with  Esau's  armed  followers  they 
must  do  so,  and  in  that  case,  if  they  were  to 
do  so  for  only — one  day,  all  the  flock  (liter- 
ally, and  all  the  flock)  will  die.  Thomson 
says  that  Oriental  shepherds  gently  lead  along 
the  mothers  when  in  the  condition  spoken  of 
by  Jacob,  knowing  well  that  even  one  day's 
over-driving  would  be  fatal  to  them,  and, 
from  the  fact  that  Jacob's  ewes  were  giving 
milk,  infers  that  it  was  winter  time,  since 
then  alone  the  flocks  are  in  that  condition — 
»n  inference  which  he  further  confirms  by 
observing  that  at  Succoth  Jacob  constructed 
booths  for  their  protection  ('  Land  and  Book,' 
p.  205). 

Ver.  14. — Let  my  lord,  I  pray  thee, — it 
is  perhaps  too  much  to  explain  Jacob's 
obsequious  and  deferential  address  to  his 
brother  (my  lord)  as  the  sign  of  a  guilty  con- 
science (Kalisch,  Alford),  when  possibly  po- 
liteness and  humility  wili  suffice — pass  over — 
not  cross  the  Jordan  (Alford\  since  Esau 
was  not  journeying  to  Canaan  ;  but  simply 
pass  on,  as  in  ver.  3 — before  his  servant :  and 
I  will  lead  on  softly  (literally,  I  will  go  on 
at  my  slow  pace),  according  as  the  cattle 
that  goeth  before  me  and  the  children  be 
able  to  endure, — literally,  according  to  the 
foot,  i.  e.  the  pace,  of  the  property  (here, 
cattle),  and  according  to  the  foot  of  the 
children;  i.  e.  as  fast  as  flocks  and  children 
can  be  made  with  safety  to  travel — until  I 
come  unto  my  lord  unto  Seir.  It  is  apparent 
that  Jacob  at  first  intended  to  accept  Esau's 
invitation  to  visit  him  at  Seir,  either  immedi- 
ately (Clericus,  Kalisch),  or,  as  is  more  pro- 
bable, afterwards  (Keil,  Murphy,  'Speaker's 
Commentary'),  though,  if  afterwards,  the  his- 
torian has  preserved  no  record  of  any  sucl 


ch.  xxxiii.  1 — 20.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


40J 


journey,  while,  if  presently  such  was  his 
intention,  he  must  have  been  providentially 
led,  from  soma  cause  not  mentioned,  to  alter 
his  determination  (Bush,  Inglis,  Clarke), 
unless  we  either  think  that  he  really  went 
to  Seir,  though  it  is  not  here  stated  (Pat- 
rick), or  entertain  the,  in  the  circumstances, 
almost  incredible  hypothesis  that  Jacob  prac- 
tised a  deception  on  his  generous  brother  in 
order  to  get  rid  of  him,  by  promising  what 
he  never  meant  to  fulfil,  viz.,  to  visit  him  at 
Mount  Seir  (Calvin),  or  leave  it  doubtful 
whether  it  is  the  old  Jacob  or  the  new  Israel 
who  speaks  (Lange). 

Ver.  15. — And  Esau  said,  Let  me  now 
leave  (literally,  set,  or  place)  with  thee  (as 
an  escort  or  guard)  some  of  the  folk — i.  e. 
armed  followers  {vide  ver.  1) — that  are  with 
me.  But  of  even  this  proposal  Jacob  a  ppoars 
to  have  been  apprehensive.  And  he  said, 
What  needeth  it?  (literally,  For  what,  or 
wherefore,  this?)  let  me  find  grace  in  the 
sight  of  my  lord— meaning  either,  I  am  satis- 
fied, since  thou  art  gracious  to  me  (Vatablus), 
— ticavbv,  oti  fvpov  x°Piv  ivavriov  aov,  tcvptt 
(LXX.) ;  hoc  uno  tantum  i/ndiqeo,  ut  inveni- 
am  gratiam  m  conspectu  tuo  (Vulgate),— or, 
be  gracious  to  me  in  this  also,  and  leave  none 
of  thy  followers  (Ainsworth,  Patrick),  though 
the  two  clauses  might  perhaps  be  connected 
thus :  "  Wherefore  do  I  thus  find  grace  in 
the  eyes  of  my  lord  1 "  (Ealisch). 

Vers.  16, 17. — So  (literally,  and,  comply- 
ing with  his  brother'*  request)  Esau  returned 
that  day  on  his  wav  into  Seir  —from  which 
he  had  come  to  meet  Jacob  {vide  ch.  xxxii. 
8).  And  Jacob  journeyed  to  Succoth.  Suc- 
coth,  so  called  here  by  anticipation,  and  after- 
wards belonging  to  the  tribe  of  Gad,  was 
situated  in  the  valley  of  the  Jordan,  on  the 
east  side  of  the  river,  and  to  the  south  of  the 
Jabbok  (Josh,  xiii  27  ;  Judges  viii.  4,  6),  and 
consequently  is  not  to  be  identified  with 
Sakut,  on  the  western  side  of  the  Jordan,  ten 
miles  north  of  the  Jabbok,  and  opposite  the 
Wady  Y&bis  (Robinson,  vol.  iii.  p.  175 ; 
Thomson,  'Land  and  Book,'  p.  456)  ;  but  is 
to  be  sought  for  at  the  ford  opposite  the 
Wady-el-Fariah,  "down  which  tho  little 
stream  from  Shechem  drains  into  the  Jordan  " 
(Tristram,  '  Land  of  Israel,'  p.  144  ;  Porter 
in  Kitto's  'Cyclop.,'  art.  Succoth  ;  cf.  Keil 
and  Ealisch  in  loco).  And  built  him  an 
house.  This  was  an  indication  that  Jacob 
purposed  some  considerable  stay  at  Succoth  ; 
and,  indeed,  if  a  period  of  repose  was  not  now 
demanded  by  the  state  of  Jacob's  health  after 
his  long  servitude  with  Laban,  his  exhaust- 
ing conflict  with  the  angel,  and  his  exciting 
interview  with  Esan  (Lange),  an  interval  of 
some  years  appears  to  be  imperatively  re- 
nuired  by  the  exigencies  of  the  ensuing 
.larrative  concerning  Dinah,  who  could  not 
at  this  time  have  bean  much  over  six  years 
OENESIS. 


of  age  (Murphy,  Alford,  Gosman,  ei  alii) 
And  made  booths  for  his  cattle.  Porter  state* 
that  he  has  frequently  seen  such  booths 
(Succoth,  from  saccac,  to  entwine)  occupied 
by  the  Bedawin  of  the  Jordan  valley,  and 
describes  them  as  rude  huts  of  reeds,  some- 
times covered  with  long  grass,  and  sometimes 
with  apiece  of  tent  (vide  Eitto's  'Cyclop.,' 
ut  supra).  Therefore  the  name  of  the  place 
is  called  (literally,  he  called  the  name  of  the 
place)  Succoth — i.  e.  booths. 

Ver.  18. — And  Jacob  (leaving  Succoth) 
came  to  Shalem — the  word  D?^,  rendered 
by  some  expositors  as  here  (LXX. ,  Vulgate, 
Syriac,  Luther,  Calvin,  Poole,  Wordsworth), 
is  better  taken  as  an  adverb  signifyingin  peace 
or  in  safety  (Onkelos,  Saadias,  Rashi,  Dathius, 
Rosenmuller,  Gesenius,  Eeil,  Ealisch,  et  alii), 
meaning  that  Jacob  was  now  sound  in  his 
limb  (Jarchi)  and  safe  in  his  person,  being 
no  more  endangered  by  Esau  (Gerundensis 
in  Drusius),  or  that  he  had  hitherto  met 
with  no  misfortune,  though  soon  to  en- 
counter one  in  the  instance  of  Dinah  (Patrick), 
or  that  the  expectations  of  Jacob  expressed 
in  ch.  xxviii.  21  (to  which  there  is  an  obvious 
allusion)  were  now  fulfilled  (Eeil) — a  city  of 
Shechem, — if  Shalem  be  the  name  of  the 
town,  then  probably  Shechem  is  the  name 
of  the  person  referred  to  in  ch.  xxxiv.  2, 
viz. ,  the  son  of  Hamor  the  Hivite  (Drusius, 
Poole)  ;  but  if  Shalem  mean  incolwmis,  then 
the  present  clause  must  be  rendered  "  to  the 
city  of  Shechem,"  the  city  being  already 
built  and  named — which  is  in  the  land  of 
Canaan, — Bush  thinks  that  Jacob  had  origin- 
ally contemplated  entering  Canaan  from  the 
south  after  rounding  the  Dead  Sea,  probably 
with  a  view  to  reach  Beersheba,  but  that, 
after  his  interview  with  Esau,  he  suddenly 
altered  his  route,  and  entered  Canaan  directly 
by  crossing  the  Jordan  and  driving  up  his 
flocks  and  herds  to  Shechem,  the  first  halt- 
ing-place of  Abraham  (vide  ch.  xii.  6), 
which  may  perhaps  lend  additional  interest 
to,  if  they  do  not  explain,  the  words  that 
follow — when  he  came  from  Fadan-aram 
(as  Abraham  previously  had  done) ;  and  (he) 
pitched  his  tent  before  the  city — because  he 
did  not  wish  to  come  in  contact  with  the 
inhabitants  (Lyra),  or  because  his  flocks  and 
herds  could  not  find  accommodation  within 
the  city  walls  (Murphy),  or  perhaps  simply 
for  convenience  of  pasturage  (Patrick). 

Ver.  19. — And  he  bought  a  parcel  of  a 
field, — literally,  the  portion  (from  a .  root 
signifying  to  divide)  of  the  field — where  he 
had  spread  his  tent, — and  in  which  he  after- 
wards sank  a  well  (cf.  John  iv.  6)— at  the 
hand  of  the  children  of  Hamor,  Shechem's 
father  (after  whom  the  town  was  named,  ut 
supro},  for  an  hundred  pieces  of  money — or 
kesitahs,  the  etymology  of  which  is  uncer- 
b  D 


402 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[CH.  XXXIII.  1 — 2ft 


tain  (Kalisch),  though  connected  by  some 
philologists  (Gesenius,  Fiirst)  with  kasat, 
to  weigh  ;  translated  lambs  (Onkelos,  LXX., 
vtilgate),  but  believed  to  have  been  a  certain 
weight  now  unknown  (Michaelis,  'Suppl.,' 
p.  2207),  or  a  piece  of  money  of  a  definite 
value,  perhaps  the  price  of  a  lamb  (Murphy), 
which,  like  the  shekel,  was  used  for  purposes 
of  commercial  exchange  by  the  patriarchs 
(Gesenius) — probably  a  coin  stamped  with 
the  figure  of  a  lamb  (Bochart,  Miinter)  ;  but 
coined  money  does  not  appear  to  have  been 


of  so  great  antiquity  (Rosenmiiller,  Words- 
worth, Alford). 

Ver.  20. — And  he  erected  there  an  altar, 
— as  Abram  his  ancestor  had  done  (ch.  xii. 
7)— and  called  it — not  invoked  upon  it, 
invocavit  super  Mud  (Vulgate),  en-eeaXiJcraro 
(LXX. ),  but  named  it  (Dathe,  Rosenmiiller, 
Keil,  &c.) — El-elohe-Israel — i.  e.  God,  the 
God  of  Israel ;  meaning,  he  called  it  the 
altar  of  God,  the  God  of  Israel  (Rosenmiil- 
ler), or,  reading  el  as  a  preposition,  "To  the 
God  of  Israel "  (Quarry,  p.  508). 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 20. — Jacob  and  Esau,  or  the  brothers  reconciled.  1.  The  meeting  of 
the  brothers.  1.  Theapproach  of  Esau.  (1)  Conscious  of  his  greatness,  being 
attended  by  400  armed  followers;  (2)  thirsting  for  revenge,  remembering  the 
wrongs  he  had  endured  at  Jacob's  hands ;  (3)  longing  to  see  his  brother,  from 
whom  he  had  been  parted  now  for  upwards  of  twenty  years.  It  is  probable  that  all 
three  emotions — pride,  anger,  affection — swelled  within  the  breast  of  my  lord  Esau, 
struggling  to  obtain  the  mastery.  Which  of  them  should  conquer  another  moment 
would  decide.  2.  The  advance  of  Jacob.  (1)  With  commendable  caution,  dividing 
his  company  into  three  several  groups — first  the  handmaids  and  their  boys,  next 
Leah  and  her  children,  and  last  Rachel  and  Joseph  ;  (2)  with  rare  chivalry,  placing 
himself  in  front  of  the  foremost,  which  may  be  placed  to  his  account  as  a  set-off 
against  his  supposed  partiality  to  Rachel  and  Joseph ;  (3)  with  profound  respect, 
bowing  and  advancing  seven  times,  with  true  Oriental  politeness,  until  he  came  to 
Esau.  3.  The  reconciliation  of  both.  The  conflict  of  emotions  in  the  breast  of 
Esau  was  brought  to  a  decision  by  the  sight  of  Jacob,  which  at  onco  cast  the  balance 
on  the  side  of  fraternal  affection.  Old  memories  of  boyhood  and  home  revived  in 
the  bosom  of  the  stalwart  hunter  as  he  looked  on  his  twin-brother,  and,  under  the 
impulse  of  generous  and  noble  feeling,  he  ran  and  embraced  him,  and  fell  on  his 
neck  and  kissed  him.  Nor  was  the  heart  of  Jacob  less  susceptible  of  such  tender 
emotion.  Reciprocating  his  manly  brother's  embrace,  he  too  yielded  to  a  rush  of 
kindly  sentiment,  and  they  both  wept.  What  a  study  for  a  painter  I  Cf.  Jonathan 
and  David  (1  Sam.  xx.  41),  and  the  prodigal  and  his  father  (Luke  xv.  20). 

II.  The  converse  of  the  brothers.  1.  Esau's  inquiries  and  Jacob's  answers. 
(1)  Esau  asks  about  the  women  and  the  children  in  Jacob's  train ;  and  Jacob, 
piously  acknowledging  the  Divine  hand  that  had  surrounded  him  with  so  many 
precious  objects  of  affection,  instructs  them  to  do  obeisance  to  their  kinsman,  which 
with  beautiful  politeness,  following  his  own  courteous  example,  they  do.  It 
bespeaks  a  devout  heart  when  domestic  as  well  as  other  blessings  are  traced  to  the 
all-bountiful  Giver,  a  well-ordered  home  when  its  inmates  imitate  the  good  conduct 
of  its  head,  and  a  fine  sensibility  when  the  claims  of  relatives  to  courtesy  and  kind- 
ness are  recognised  and  honoured.  (2)  Esau  requests  to  be  informed  about  the 
droves  which  he  had  met,  and  Jacob  explains  that  ho  had  sent  them  as  a  present  to 
conciliate  his  favour.  At  first  declining  with  a  praiseworthy  magnanimity  to 
deprive  his  brother  of  any  of  his  hard-earned  wealth,  Esau  is  afterwards  constrained 
to  accept  the  proffered  gift,  on  learning  that  Jacob  would  not  otherwise  be  sure  of 
his  forgiveness  and  friendship.  It  is  beautiful  when  brothers  emulate  each  other  in 
noble  acts.  2.  Esau's  invitations  and  Jacob's  promise.  It  appears  most  satisfactory 
to  understand  Esau  as  soliciting  his  brother  to  accompany  him  to  Seir,  where  for 
the  time  he  was  residing,  and  Jacob  as  engaging  to  drive  on  slowly  after  the  roving 
chieftain,  according  as  the  tender  age  of  his  children  and  the  condition  of  his  flocks 
and  herds  would  admit,  with  the  view  of  ultimately  paying  him  a  visit  in  his  mountain 
home  ;  but  whether  he  fulfilled  that  promise  now  or  afterwards,  or  at  all,  cannot  be 
ascertained.  If  he  did  not,  we  may  rest  satisfied  that  he  hnd  good  reasons  for 
breaking  his  word,  which,  alas,  promise-breakers  seldom  have.     3.  Esau's  offer  and 


en.  xxxm.  1—20.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  403 

Jacob's  declinature.  Esau  anxiously  desires  to  leave  a  convoy  of  his  troopers  to 
assist  bis  brother  in  the  further  prosecution  of  his  journey  ;  but  Jacob  with  respect- 
ful firmness  refused  to  accept  of  his  kindness — perhaps  because,  being  a  man  of  peace, 
he  did  not  care  for  the  society  of  soldiers,  but  chiefly,  we  apprehend,  because,  having 
Jehovah  as  a  guide,  he  did  not  need  the  help  of  roving  buccaneers  (cf.  Ezra  viii.  22). 

III.  The  parting  of  the  brothers.  1.  Esau  returned  unto  Mount  Bevr.  (1) 
Immediately,  that  day ;  but  (2)  not  as  yet  finally,  since  his  ultimate  withdrawal 
from  the  laud  of  Canaan  appears  to  have  taken  place  at  a  subsequent  period.  2. 
Jacob  journeyed  to  Suacoih,  where  he  built  himself  a  house,  constructed  booths  for  his 
cattle,  and  remained  a  considerable  time,  afterwards  moving  up  to  Shechem,  where 
he  (1)  pitched  his  tent  outside  the  city,  for  convenience  or  for  safety  ;  (2)  purchased 
a  field  from  the  chief  man  of  the  place,  honestly  paying  for  his  purchase,  as  became 
a  just  man  ;  and  (3)  erected  an  altar,  which  he  named  El-elohe  Israel. 

See  here — 1.  The  strength  of  fraternal  affection.  2.  The  beauty  of  forgiveness 
and  reconciliation.  3.  The  possibility  of  combining  politeness  and  piety.  4.  The 
power  of  kindness  in  disarming  enmity  and  opposition.  5.  The  advantage  of  con- 
ference for  promoting  good  understanding  and  exciting  kindly  feeling.  6.  The 
tender  care  which  the  strong  should  exercise  towards  thr  weak.  7.  The  sad  partings 
which  Providence  effects  between  friends.  8.  The  propriety  of  taking  God  with  us 
on  all  our  journeys.    9.  The  duty  of  affectionately  remembering  God's  mercies. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ch.  xxxiii. — The  fruits  of  prayer.  The  "prince"  who  has  been  lifted  by  the  grace 
of  God  out  of  the  humiliation  of  his  fear  and  shame  to  the  height  of  his  favour  at 
the  throne  of  the  Most  High  now  reveals  his  princely  power.  He  takes  captive 
Esau's  heart ;  he  blesses  him  in  the  name  of  God,  he  bestows  his  gifts  upon  him. 
Notice  the  fruits  of  Divine  discipline  in  the  patriarch. 

I.  The  theocratic  feeling  is  alive  in  Jacob's  heart.  He  puts  the  handmaids 
first,  Leah  next,  Rachel  and  Joseph  hindermost.  He  placed  them  in  the  order  of  his 
own  affection  ;  but  it  represented  nlso  the  Divine  order,  for  it  was  in  Joseph  that  the 
kingdom  of  God  was  about  to  be  especially  manifested.  "I  have  seen  thy  face,"  he 
said  to  Esau,  "as  though  I  had  seen  the  face  of  God."  He  saw  the  favour  of  God 
going  on  before  him,  and  like  the  sunshine  it  rested  on  the  face  of  the  enemy,  and 
catt  out  the  darkness  and  turned  it  into  light. 

II.  Jacob's  entire  steadfastnesb  as  a  servant  of  God  andbeliever  in  the  covenant. 
Seen  in  his  refusal  to  mingle  his  family  and  people  with  those  of  Esau. 

III.  Special  grace  meets  the  true  servant.  "  Succoth  "  is  better  than  "Seir;" 
and  it  is  on  the  way  to  "  Shalem, ''  ptace.  There  it  is  that  the  patriarch  finds  rest,  and 
builds  an  altar,  calling  it  "  El-elolie- Israel."  Not  merely  an  altar  to  God,  but 
to  him  who  had  revealed  himself  as  the  faithful  God,  the  God  of  Israel,  the  God  of 
his  people. — R. 

Ver.  12.—  Worldly  companionship.  "And  he  said,  Let  us  take  our  journey,  and 
let  us  go,  and  I  will  go  before  thee."  The  offer  probably  made  with  lrindly  inten- 
tion. No  sign  of  bitterness  in  Esau's  feelings ;  but  ignorance  of  the  necessities  of 
Jacob's  march.  Jacob  knew  it  was  not  possible  with  safety  (cf.  Ps.  exxxvii.  4 ;  1 
Pet.  iv.  4).  Reminds  U3  of  the  attitude  of  many  worldly  persons  towards  Christians. 
"The  carnal  mind  is  enmity  against  God."  '  Yet  worldly  men  may  have  sincere 
regard  for  Christen  men  ;  bear  unconscious  testimony  to  excellence  of  Christianity. 
And  here  a  danger,  to  Christians.  Let  us  journey  together.  I  like  you  ;  you  are 
unselfish,  trustworthy.  And  why  not  ?  Because  in  journeying  with  Esau  he  must 
be  leader,  or  he  would  cease  to  he  Esau.  The  world's  good-will  does  not  mean  a 
cnanged  heart.  Without  any  pronounced  dislike  to  higher  aims,  it  shares  them  not, 
and  knows  not  anything  more  real  than  earth.  There  is  a  journey  we  all  take  in 
company  :  in  the  thousand  ways  in  which  men  are  dependent  on  each  other ;  in  the 
courtesies  and  good  offices  of  life ;  in  what  belongs  to  our  position  as  citizens  or 
famiy  men.    But  in  what  constitutes  the  road  of  life— its  stamp  and  direction,  its 

DI>2 


404 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xxxiv.  1—31. 


motives  and  aims — no  union.     We  have  another  Leader  (Heb.  xii.  2).     The  pillar  of 
tire  led  Israelites  not  according  to  human  judgment. 

I.  This  does  not  imply  keeping  aloof  from  men,  ob  from  human  interests. 
We  are  called  to  be  the  salt  of  the  earth.  It  is  an  error  to  shrink  from  contact  with 
the  world  as  dangerous  to  us.  This  of  old  led  to  monasticism.  But  there  may  be  a 
spiritual  solitude  even  when  living  in  the  throng  of  a  city.  In  secular  matters 
refusing  to  take  an  interest  in  what  occupies  others  (cf.  Luke  vi.  31),  as  if  God  had 
nothing  to  do  with  these  ;  or  in  spiritual  things  avoiding  Christian  intercourse  with 
those  who  do  not  in  all  points  agree  with  us ;  or  being  engrossed  with  our  own 
spiritual  welfare,  and  turning  away  from  all  concern  for  the  welfare  of  others  (cf. 
1  Cor.  ix.  20—22). 

II.  It  does  imply  a  real  consciousness  of  being  redeemed,  set  free,  bought  with 
a  price  ;  of  having  a  definite  work  to  do  for  God,  with  which  nothing  must 
interfere  ;  a  real  way  to  walk  in,  from  which  nothing  must  make  us  turn  aside. 
And  in  order  to  this,  watchfulness  over  self,  that  in  seeking  to  help  others  we  our- 
selves are  not  ensnared. 

III.  Some  ways  in  which  the  world  in  its  friendship  tempts  Christians.  1. 
By  the  plea,  there  is  no  harm  in  this  or  that.  We  must  not  think  that  all  actions  can 
be  brought  to  an  absolute  standard  of  right  and  wrong.  This  is  the  spirit  of  legality, 
the  spirit  of  bondage,  and  leads  to  partial  service  instead  of  entire  dedication  (cf. 
Luke  xv.  29).  Loyalty  to  Christ  must  direct  the  Christian's  life  ;  desire  not  merely 
to  avoid  direct  disobedience,  but  to  use  our  time  and  powers  for  him  who  loved  us 
find  gave  himself  for  us.  2.  By  the  display  of  good  feelings  as  the  equivalent  of 
Christian  graces.  Esau's  kindliness  and  frankness  are  very  attractive.  Yet  he  was  a 
"  profane  person  ; "  not  because  of  his  anger  or  any  sinful  act,  but  because  he  thought 
little  of  Goti's  blessing.  3.  By  making  Christians  familiar  with  worldly  aims  and 
maxims  and  thus  insensibly  blunting  their  spiritual  aspirations.  The  way  of  safety 
is  through  prayer  for  the  Holy  Spirit  s  help,  to  maintain  the  consciousness  of  Christ's 
presence. — M. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXXIV. 


Ver.  1  — And  Dinah  the  daughter  of  Leah, 
which  she  bare  unto  Jacob, — if  Dinah  was 
born  before  Joseph  (ch.  xxx.  21)  she  was 
probably  in  her  seventh  year  when  Jacob 
reached  Succoth  (ch.  xxxiii.  17) ;  butit  does 
not  follow  that  she  was  only  six  or  seven 
years  of  age  when  the  incident  about  to  be 
described  occurred  (Tuch.Bohlen).  If  Jacob 
stayed  two  years  at  Succoth  and  eight  in 
Sheehem(Petavius),  and  if,  as  is  probable, 
his  residence  in  Shechem  terminated  with 
his  daughter's  dishonour  (Lange),  and  if, 
moreover,  Joseph's  sale  into  Egypt  hap- 
pened soon  after  (Hengstenberg),  Dinah 
may  at  this  time  have  been  in  her  sixteenth 
orscventeenthyear (Kurtz).  Yetthereisno 
reason  whysheshouldnothave  been  young- 
er, say  between  thirteen  and  fifteen  (Keil, 
Lange,  Kalisch,  Murphy,  etalii),smcein  the 
East  females  attain  to  puberty  at  the  age  of 
twelve,  andsometimes  earlier  (Delitzsch) — 
went  out — itis  not  impliedthat  this  was  the 
first  occasion  on  which  Dinah  lefthermoth- 
er'stentto  mingle  with  the  citymaidensin 
Shechem :  the  expression  is  equivalent  to 
"  once  upon  a  time  she  went  out  "  (Hengs- 
tunberg)—  to  see  the  daughters  of  the  land 


— who  were  gathered  at  afestive  entertain- 
ment (Josephus,  'Ant.,'  i.  21,  1),  a  not 
improbablesupposition(Kurtz),thoughthe 
language  rather  indicates  the  paying  of  a 
friendly  visit  (Lange),  or  the  habitual  prac- 
tice of  associating  with  the  Shechemite 
women  (Bush),  in  their  social  entertain- 
ments, if  not  in  their  religious  festivals. 

Ver.  2. — And  when  Shechem  the  son  of 
Hamor  the  Hivite,  the  prince  of  the  coun- 
try, saw  her  (literally,  and  Shechem  .  .  . 
saw  her,  and)  he  took  her.  "Dinah  paid 
the  full  penalty  of  her  carelessness.  She 
suffered  the  fate  whichSarahandRebekah 
encountered  in  the  land  of  Pharaoh  and 
Abimelech  :  she  was  seen  and  taken  by  the 
son  of  the  prince  "  (Kalisch) ;  forcibly,  i.  e. 
against  her  will  in  the  first  instance,  though 
not,  it  is  apparent,  without  the  blandish- 
ments of  a  lover.  And  lay  with  her,  and 
denied  her — literally,  oppressedher,  offered 
violence  to  her,  whence  humbled  her — ira.- 
irctvwo-ev  (LXX.),  vi  opprimens  (Vulgate). 

Vers.  3,  4. — AndhiBsoulclave(TOYfem/?vs 
on  ver.  8)  unto  Dinah  the  daughter  of  Jacob, 
— it  was  in  some  degree  an  extenuation  of 
the  wickedness  of  Shechem  that  he  did  not 
cast  off  the  victim  of  his  violence  and  lust, 
but  continued  to  regardher  with  affection — 


en.  xxxrv.  1—31.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


40r; 


aid  he  lo7td  the  damsel, — on  the  use  of 
na'arfor  ayouth  of  either  sexvide  ch.  xxiv. 
14 — and  spike  kindly  unto  the  damsel  — 
literally,  spoke  to  the  heart  of  the  damsel, 
!\o.\t]0-«  KaTd  ttJv  Sidvotav  Tfjs  irapBevou 
aiTj}  (LXX.),  i.  e.  addressed  to  her  suck 
words  as  weraagreeable  to  her  inclinations 
(cf.  on  the  import  of  the  phrase  ch.  1.  21 ; 
Judges  xix.  3  ;  Isa.  xl.  2  ;  Hosea  ii.  14), 
probably  expressing  hisaffection,  and  offer- 
ingthe  reparation  of  honourable  marriage, 
as  may  be  legitimately  in  ferred  from  what 
is  next  recorded  of  his  behaviour.  And 
Shechem  spake  unto  his  father  Hamor,  say- 
ing, Get  me  this  damsel  to  wife — cf.  the 
case  of  Samson  (Judges  xiv.  2) 

Ver.  5. — And  Jacob  heard — most  likely 
fromsorneofDinah'scompanions(Patrick), 
since  she  herself  was  still  detained  in  She- 
chem's  house  (ver.  26)— that  he  (Hamor's 
son)  had  denied — the  verb  here  employed 
conveys  the  idea  of  rendering  unclean  (cf. 
vers.  13,  27  ;  Numb.  xix.  13  ;  2, Kings xxiii. 
10;  Ps.  lxxix   1;  that  in  ver.*  2  expresses 
the     notion     of     violence) — Dinah     his 
daughter.     It  was  an  aggravation  of  She- 
chem's  wickedness  that  it  was  perpetrated 
not  against  any  of  Jacob's  handmaids,  but 
against    his  daughter      Now    (literally, 
and)  his  sons  were  with  his  cattle  in  the 
field — perhaps  that  which  he  had  lately 
purchased  (ch.   xxxiii.    19),   or  in  some 
pasture  ground   more  remote  from  the 
city.     And  Jacob  held  his  peace — literally, 
acted  as  one  dumb,  i.  e.  maintained  silence 
upon  the  painful  subject,  and  took  no 
measures  to  avenge  Shechem's  crime  (cf. 
ch.  xxiv.  21 ;  1  Sam.  x.  27  ;  2  Sam.  xiii. 
22) ;  either  through  sorrow  (Ainswortk, 
Calvin),   or 'through    caution    (Murphy, 
Lange),   or    through  perplexity,   as  not 
knowing  how  to  act  (Kalisck),  or  as  rec- 
ognising the   right  of  his  sons  by  the 
same  mother  to  have  a  voice  in  the  settle- 
ment of  so  important  a  question  (Kurtz, 
Gerlach),  to  which  undoubtedly  the  next 
clause    points — until    they  were    come — 
literally,  until  their  coming. 
-  Ver.    6. — And    (meantime)    Hamor  the 
father  of  Shechem  went  out— accompanied 
by  Shechem  (ver.  11) — unto  Jacob — who 
was  encamped  in  the  outskirts  of  the  city 
(ch.  xxxiii.  18) — to  commune  with  him  con- 
cerning Dinah's  marriage  with  his  son. 

Ver.  7. — And  the  sons  of  Jacob  (j.  e. 
Leah's  children,  Dinah's  full  brothers,  for 
certain,  though  perhaps  also  her  half 
brothers}  came  out  of  the  field  when  they 
heard  it  (Jacob  having  probably  sent  them 
word):  and  the  men  were  grieved, — liter- 
ally, grieved  themselves,  or  became  pained 
with  anger,  the  verb  being  the  hithpael  of 
a?a,  to  toil  or  labour  with  pain.     The 


LXX.  c.jnuect  this  with  the  preceding 
clause,  cos  8e  ti'kouo-ov,  KaT(-vu7r)(rav  ot 
ovSpes,  implying  that  they  did  not  learn 
of  their  sister's  seduction  till  they  came 
home— and  they  were  very  wroth,— literally, 
it  burned  to  them  greatly  (cf.  ch.  xxxi.  36; 

1  Sam.  xv.  11;  2  Sam.  xix.  43).  Michaelis 
mentions  an  opinion  still  entertained  in 
the  East  which  explains  the  excessive  in- 
dignation kindled  in  the  breasts  of  Dinah's 
brothers,  viz.,  that  "in  those  countries  it 
is  thought  that  a  brother  is  more  dis- 
honoured by  the  seduction  of  his  sister 
than  a  man  by  the  infidelity  of  his  wife ; 
for,  say  the  Arabs,  a  man  may  divorce  his 
wife,  and  then  she  is  no  longer  his;  while 
a  sister  and  daughter  remain  always  sister 
and  daughter"  (vide  Kurtz,  '  Hist,  of  Old 
Covenant,'  §  82)— because  he  (i.  e.  She- 
chem)—had  wrought  folly— the  term/o% 
easily  passes  into  the  idea  of  wickedness 
of  a  shameful  character  (1  Sam.  xxv.  25; 

2  Sam.  xiii.  12),  since  from  the  standpoint 
of  Scripture  sin  is  the  height  of  unreason 
(Ps.  lxxiv.  22;  Jer.  xvii.  11),  and  holiness 
the  sublimest  act  of  wisdom  (Ps.  cxi.  10 ; 
Prov.  i.  4)— in  (or  against)  Israel— the 
word,  here  applied  for  the  first  time  to 
Jacob's  household,  afterwards  became  the 
usual  national  designation  of  Jacob's  de- 
scendants; and  the  phrase  here  employed 
for  the  first  time  afterwards  passed  into  a 
standing  expression  for  acts  done  against 
the  sacred  character  which  belonged  to 
Israel  as  a  separated  and  covenanted  com- 
munity, especially  for  sins  of  the  flesh 
(Deut.  xxii.  21;  Judges  xx.  10;  Jer.  xxix. 
23),  but  also  for  other  crimes  (Josh.  vii. 
15)— in  lying  with  Jabob's  daughter.  The 
special  wickedness  of  Shechem  consisted 
in  dishonouring  a  daughter  of  one  who 
was  the  head  of  the  theocratic  line,  and 
therefore  under  peculiar  obligations  to 
lead  a  holy  life.  Which  thing  ought  not 
to  be  done — literally,  and  so  is  it  not  done 
(cf.  ch.  xxix.  26).  Assigned  to  the  his- 
torian ('Speaker's  Commentary'),  or  to 
the  hand  of  a  late  redactor  (Davidson, 
Colenso,  Alford),  there  is  no  reason  why 
these  words  should  not  have  been  spoken 
by  Jacob's  sons  (Keil,  Murphy,  and  others) 
to  indicate  their  sense  of  the  new  and 
higher  morality  that  had  come  in  with  the 
name  of  Israel  (Lange). 

Vers.  8 — 10. — And  Hamor  communed 
(literally,  spake)  with  them  (i.  e.  the  whole 
family,  or  Jacob  and  his  sons),  saying, 
The  soul  of  my  son  Shechem  longeth  for — 
the  root  (pUJn)  signifies  to  join  together, 

intrans.,  to  be  joined  together,  hence  to 
cleave  to  another  in  love  (cf.  Deut.  vii.  7, 
10,  15  ;  xxi.  11);  of  similar  import  to  the 
word  Cpyi)  employed  in  ver.  3,  which 


406 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xxxiv.  1—31. 


means  to  be  devotedly  attached  to  any 
one,  as,  e.  g.,  to  God  (Deut.  x.  20;,  to  a 
king  (2  Sam.  xx.  2),  to  a  wife  (1  Kings 
xi.  2) — your  daughter.  The  words  are 
addressed  to  Jacob's  sons  as  well  as 
Jacob  himself,  the  brothers  equally  with 
the  father  being  regarded  as  ihe  natural 
guardians  of  a  sister.  I  pray  you  give 
her  him  to  wife.  The  absence  of  any 
apology  for  Shechem's  atrocious  outrage 
against  Dinah  need  not  be  regarded  as  in- 
dicating some  measure  of  consent  on  the 
part  of  Dinah,  but  may  be  explained  on 
the  supposition  that  Hamor's  proposal 
was  considered  by  himself  as  a  practical 
admission  of  his  son's  guilt.  And  make 
ye  marriages  with  us, — literally,  contract 
affinity  with  us  by  marriage,  the  verb 
chathan  being  spoken  of  the  father-in-law 
(chothen),  who  makes  the  alliance  (vide 
Fiirst,  'Lex.,'  sub  wee)— and  give  your 
daughters  unto  us, — from  this  it  has  been 
inferred  that  Jacob  had  other  daughters 
besides  Dinah,  which  is  not  improbable 
(ch.  xlvi.  7),  but  the  words  may  not  imply 
more  than  that  Hamor  thought  he  had — 
and  take  our  daughters  unto  you.  And  (as 
an  inducement  to  form  this  alliance)  ye 
shall  dwell  with  us  :  and  the  land  shall  be 
before  you ;  dwell  and  trade  ye  therein,  and 
get  you  possessions  therein—  i.  e.  he  offers 
them  the  privilege  of  unrestricted  move- 
ment throughout  his  dominions,  with  the 
right  of  establishing  settlements,  carrying 
on  trade,  and  acquiring  property. 

Vers.  11,  12. — And  Shechem  said  unto 
her  father  and  unto  her  brethren  (speaking 
with  becoming  deference  and  earnestness, 
and  manifestly  prompted  by  fervent  and 
sincere  love),  Let  me  find  grace  in  your 
eyes, — i.  e.  let  my  suit  be  accepted  (vide 
ch.  xxxiii.  15)— and  what  ye  shall  say  unto 
me  I  will  give.  Ask  me  never  so  much 
dowry  and  gift, — literally,  multiply  upon 
me  exceedingly  dowry  and  gift;  the  dowry 
(mohar)  being  the  price  paid  for  a  wife  to 
her  parents  (cf.  Exod.  xxii.  18;  1  Sam. 
xviii.  25),  and  the  gift  (mathan)  the 
presents  given  to  the  bride  (Gesenius, 
Fiirst,  Rosenmuller,  Gerlach,  Alford);  or 
the  dowry  being  the  bride's  present,  and 
the  gift  the  wife  s  price  (Michaelis,  Keil, 
Murphy) ;  or  the  dowry  being  given  to 
the  parents,  and  the  gift  to  the  kindred 
(Patrick)  ;  or  the  two  being  the  same 
thing,  viz.,  the  compensation  offered  to 
the  relatives  of  the  bride  (Lange) — and  I 
will  give  according  as  ye  shall  say  unto 
me :  but  give  (or,  and  ye  will  give)  me  the 
damsel  to  wife. 

Vers.  13 — 17. — And  the  sons  of  Jacob 
(manifestly  without  the  knowledge  of 
their  father)  answered  Shechem  and  Hamor 
his  father  deceitfully,  and  said,— the  abject 


of  the  verb  said  is  to  be  found  in  the  next 
verse,  "we  cannot  do  this  thing,"  the 
clause  commencing  "  because "  being 
parenthetical  (Rosenmiiller,  Ftirst),  so 
that  it  is  unnecessary  either  to  take  *I3"1 

in  the  unusual  sense  of  dolos  struere 
(Schultens,  Gesenius,  Keil),  or  to  supply 
after  said  "  with  deceit "  from  the  pre- 
ceding clause  (Onkelos,  Ainsworth, 
Murphy,  et  alii) — because  he  had  defiled 
Dinah  their  sister  (to  be  taken  parenthetic- 
ally, as  already  explained) :  and  they  said 
unto  them  (these  words  revert  to  the  pre- 
ceding verse),  We  cannot  do  this  thing,  to 
give  our  sister  to  one  that  is  uncircumcised 
(vide  ch.  xvii.  11);  for  that  were  a  reproach 
unto  us.  The  ground  on  which  they  de- 
clined a  matrimonial  alliance  with  She- 
chem was  good;  their  sin  lay  in  advancing 
this  simply  as  a  pretext  to  enable  them  to 
wreak  their  unholy  vengeance  on  She- 
chem and  his  innocent  people.  The 
treacherous  character  of  their  next  pro- 
posal is  difficult  to  be  reconciled  with  any 
claim  to  humanity,  far  less  to  religion,  on 
the  part  of  Jacob's  sons ;  so  much  so,  that 
Jacob  on  his  death-bed  can  offer  no  pal- 
liation for  the  atrocious  cruelty  to  which 
it  led  (ch.  xlix.  6,  7).  But  in  this  (i.  e. 
under  this  condition)  will  we  consent  unto 
you :  If  ye  will  be  aB  we  be,  that  every 
male  of  you  be  circumcised  (literally,  to 
have  circumcision  administered  Jo  you 
every  male) ;  then  will  we  give  our  daugh- 
ters unto  you,  and  we  will  take  your 
daughters  to  us  (i.  e.  to  be  our. wives),  and 
we  will  dwell  with  you,  and  we  will  become 
one  people.  This  proposal  was  sinful, 
since  (1)  they  had  no  right  to  offer  the  sign 
of  God's  covenant  to  a  heathen  people  ; 
(2)  they  had  less  right  to  employ  it  in 
ratification  of  a  merely  human  agreement ; 
and  (3)  they  had  least  right  of  all  to  em- 
ploy it  in  duplicity  as  a  mask  for  their 
treachery.  But  if  ye  will  not  hearken 
unto  us,  to  be  circumcised ;  then  (rather, 
so.  then  we  will  not  consent  to  your  pro- 
posal, and)  we  will  take  our  daughter, — 
who  was  still  in  Shechem's  house  (ver. 
26) — and  we  will  be  gone. 

Ver.  18.  19. — And  their  words  pleased 
(literally,  were  good  in  the  eyes  of)  Hamor, 
and  (literally,  in  the  eyes  of)  Shechem, 
Hamor's  son.  And  the  young  man  deferred 
not  (t.  e.  delayed  not)  to  do  the  thing 
(literally,  the  word,  i.  e.  to  submit  to  cir- 
cumcision. This  is  stated  here  by  antici- 
pation), because  he  had  delight  in  Jacob's 
daughter :  and  he  was  more  honourable 
— literally,  more  honoured,  doubtless  be- 
cause more  worthy  of  regard  (cf.  1  Chron. 
iv.  9) — than  all  the  house  of  his  father. 

Vers.  20— 23.— And  Hamor  and  Shechem 


CH.  XXXtV.  1—31.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


40? 


his  sou  came  (or  went)  unto  the  gate  of 
their  city  (vide  on  ch.  xix.  2 ;  xxiii.  10), 
and  communed  with  (or  spake  to)  the  men 
of  their  city,  saying,  These  men  (i.  e.  Jacob 
and  his  sons)  are  p  aceable  with  us  (liter- 
ally, peaceable  are  they  with  us.  This  is  the 
first  argument  employed  by  Hamor  and 
Sliechem  to  secure  the  consent  of  the 
citizens  to  the  formation  of  an  alliance 
with  Jacob  and  his  sons) ;  therefore  let 
them  dwell  in  the  land,  and  trade  there- 
in;—literally,  and  they  will  dwell  in  the 
land,  and  trade  in  it  {sc.  if  you  per- 
mit)—  for  (literally,  and)  the  land,  be- 
hold, it  i-3  large  enough — literally,  broad 
of  hands,  i.  e.  on  both  sides  (cf.  Isa. 
xxxiii.  21;  Ps.  civ.  25) — for  them  (literally, 
before  them,  i.  e.  for  them  to  wander  about 
with  their  flocks  and  herds.  This  was  the 
sscoiid  argument  employed  by  Hamor  and 
his  son);  let  us  take  their  daughters  to  us 
for  wives,  and  let  us  give  them  our  daugh- 
ters. Only  herein  (or  under  this  condition) 
will  the  men  consent  unto  us  for  to  dwell 
wit  i  us,  to  be  one  people,  if  every  male 
among  us  be  circumcised  (literally,  in  the 
circumcising  to  or  by  us  of  every  male),  as 
they  are  circumcised.  After  which  state- 
ment of  the  indispensable  condition  of  the 
alliance  proposed,  they  advance  as  a  third 
argument  for  its  acceptance  the  material 
advantages  which  such  an  alliance  would 
inevitably  secure  fir  them.  Shall  not  their 
cattle  and  their  substance  and  every  beast  of 
theirs  (the  mikneh  refer  to  flocks  and 
herds;  fhebehemah  to  asses  and  cumels)  be 
ours  T — literally,  Shall  not  these  (be)  to  us? 
— only  let  us  consent  unto  them,  and  they 
will  dwell  with  us. 

Ver.  24. — And  unto  Hamor  and  unto 
Shechem  bis  son  hearkened  all  that  went  out 
of  the  gate  of  his  city.  The  ready  acqui- 
escence of  the  Shechemifes  to  the  proposal 
of  Jacob's  sons  has  not  unreasonably  been 
regarded  as  a  proof  that  they  were  already 
acq  uainted  with  circumcision  as  a  social, 
if  not  religious,  rite  (Kurtz,  Keil,  &c). 
And  every  male  was  circumcised,  all  that 
went  out  of  the  gat  a  of  his  city.  Knobel 
notes  it  as  remarkable  that  the  Hivites 
were  not  circumcised,  since,  according  to 
Herodotus,  the  rite  was  observed  among 
the  Phenicians,  and  probably  also  the 
Canaanites,  who  were  of  the  same  extrac- 
tion, and  thinks  that  either  the  rite  was 
not  universally  observed  in  any  of  these  an- 
cient nations  where  it  was  known,  or  that 
the  Hivites  were  originally  a  different  race 
from  the  Canaanites,  and  had  not  con- 
formed to  the  customs  of  the  land  (vide 
Lange  in  loco).  Murphy  thinks  the  present 
instance  may  point  oat  one  way  in  which 
the  custom  spread  from  tribe  to  tribe. 

Ver.  25. — And  it  came  to  pass  on  the 


third  day,  when  they  were  sore  (literally,  in 
their  being  in  pain ;  ot€  rjtrav  iv  tco  ir6v<a 
(LXX).  Inflammation  and  fever  commonly 
set  in  on  the  third  day,  which  was  f  i  >r  that 
reason  regarded  as  the  critical  day — that 
two  of  the  sons  of  Jacob,  Simeon  and  Levi, 
Dinah's  brethren  (i.  e.  sons  of  the  same 
mother  Leah),  took  each  man  his  sword, 
and  came  upon  the  city — accompanied  by 
their  servants  (Keil),  or  their  father's  men 
(Murphy),  but  this  is  doubtful  (Lange). 
That  the  other  sons  of  Jacob  and  breth- 
ren of  Dinah  did  not  pursue  their  thirst 
for  vengeance  to  the  same  extremity  as 
Simeon  and  Levi  seems  apparent  from 
ver.  27 ;  yet  it  is  quite  possible  that  they 
joined  with  Simeon  and  Levi  in  the 
assault  upon  the  city  (Rosenmuller, 
'  Speaker's  Commentary ')  which  they 
made — boldly, — i.  e.  either  they  them- 
selves feeling  confident  of  success  because 
of  the  sickness  which  lay  upon  the  inhab- 
itants (Ainsworth,  Dathe,  Rosenmiiller, 
Murphy,  &c),  or,  while  the  city  was 
lulled  into  security  in  consequence  of  the 
treaty  (Onkelos,  Josephus,  Keil,  Lange), 
or  perhaps  referring  only  to  the  fact  that 
they  encountered  no  opposition,  and  came 
in  safety  (a<j-<f>a\a>s)  to  the  city  (LXX., 
Kalisch) — and  slew  all  the  males.  Proba- 
bly the  town  was  small. 

Ver.  26. — And  they  slew  Hamor  and 
Shechem  his  son  with  the  edge  (literally, 
the  mouth)  of  the  sword, — without  excus- 
ing the  inhuman  barbarity  of  this  remorse- 
less massacre,  Kurtz  offers  an  elaborate 
and  interesting  analysis  of  the  complex 
motive  of  which  it  was  the  outcome,  in 
particular  showing  how  in  Jacob's  sons 
that  strange  admixture  of  religious  zeal 
and  carnal  passion,  of  lofty  faith  and  low 
craft,  existed  which  formed  so  large  a 
portion  of  the  character  of  the  patriarch 
himself  (vide  '  Hist,  of  the  Old  Covenant,' 
vol.  i.  §  82)— and  took  Dinah  out  of  Sho- 
ehorn's house, — in  which  up  to  this  time 
she  had  been  detained  against  her  will 
(Alford),  though  this  may  be  open  to 
question  (Kalisch) — and  went  out. 

Vers.  27— 29.— The  sons  of  Jacob— not 
all  except  Simeon  and  Levi  (Delitzsch), 
nor  Simeon  and  Levi  alone  (Kalisch,  In- 
glis),  but  Simeon  and  Levi  along  with  the 
others  (Rosenmuller,  Keil,  Lange), — came 
upon  the  slain,— the  absence  of  the  -|  con- 
junctive at  the  commencement  of  this 
verse,  which  partitionists  account  for  by 
the  hypothesis  that  vers.  27—29  are  an 
interpolation,  is  explained  by  Keil  as  de- 
signed to  express  the  subjective  excite- 
ment and  indignation  of  the  historian  at 
the  revolting  character  of  the  crime  he 
was  narrating — and  spoiled  the  city,  be- 
cause they  (i.  e.  the  inhabitants  being  re- 


408 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[CH.  XXXIV.  1—31. 


garded,  on  the  well-known  principle  of 
the  solidarity  of  the  nations,  as  involved 
in  the  crime  of  their  ruler)  had  denied  their 
sister,  and  so  exposed  themselves  to  re- 
prisals, in  which  they  (i.  e.  the  sons  of 
Jacob)  took  their  sheep,  and  their  oxen,  and 
their  asses,  and  that  which  was  in  the  city, 
and  that  which  was  in  the  field,  and  all 
their  wealth,  andall  their  little  ones, — taph, 
a  collective  noun  for  boys  and  girls,  who 
are  so  called  from  their  brisk  and  tripping 
motion  (Gesenius) — and  their  wives  took 
they  captive,  and  spoiled  even  all  that  was 
in  the  house  The  words  describe  a  com- 
plete sacking  of  the  city,  in  which  every 
house  was  swept  of  its  inmates  and  its 
valuables. 

Ver.  30.— And  Jacob  said  to  Simeon  and 
Levi,  Ye  have  troubled  me  (i.  e.  brought 
trouble  upon  me)  to  make  me  to  stink — or, 
cause  me  to  become  hateful ;  (i.io-i]t6v  Tie 
ireiroiTi  Kare(LXX. ) — amongtheinhabitants 
of  the  land,  among  the  Canaanites  and  the 
Perizzites  (vide  ch.  xiii.  7):  and  I  sc.  with 
my  attendants)  being  few  in  number, — 
literally,  men  of  number,  i.  e.  that  can  be 
easily  numbered,  a  small  band  (cf.  Deut. 
iv.  27  ;  Ps.  cv.  12  ;  Jer.  xliv.  28)— they 
(literally,  and  they)  shall  gather  themselves 
together  against  me,  and  slay  me;  and  I 
shall  be  destroyed,  I  and  my  house.  That 
Jacob  should  have  spoken  to  his  sons  only 


of  his  own  danger,  and  not  of  their  guilt, 
has  been  ascribed  to  his  belief  that  this 
was  the  only  motive  which  their  carnal 
minds  could  understand  (Keil,  Gerlach); 
to  a  remembrance  of  his  own  deceitfulness, 
which  disqualified  him  in  a  measure  from 
being  the  censor  of  his  sons  (Kalisch, 
Wordsworth*;  to  the  lowered  moial  and 
spiritual  tone  of  his  own  mind  Candlish, 
'  Speaker's  Commentary');  to  the  circnm- 
stancesthat,  having  indulged  his  children 
in  their  youth,  he  was  now  afraid  to  re- 
prove them  (Inglisi.  That  Jacob  after- 
wards attained  to  a  proper  estimate  of 
their  bloody  deed  his  last  prophetic  ut- 
terance reveals  (ch.  xlix.  5 — 7).  By  some 
it  is  supposed  that  he  even  now  felt  the 
crime  in  all  its  beinousness  (Kalisch), 
though  his  i  eproacb  was  somewhat  leni- 
ently expressed  in  the  word  "trouble" 
(Lange);  while  others,  believing  Jacob's 
abhorrence  of  his  sons'  fanatical  cruelty 
to  have  been  deep  and  real,  account  for 
its  omission  by  the  historian  on  the  ground 
that  he  aimed  merely  at  showing  "the 
protection  of  God  (ch.  xxxv.  5),  through 
which  J* cob  escaped  the  evil  consequences 
of  their  conduct"  (Hengstenberg,  Kurtz). 
Ver.  31. — And  they  said,  Should  he  deal 
with  our  sister  as  with  an  harlot1!  But 
Shechem  offered  Dinah  honourable  mar- 
riage. 


HOMILETICS 

Vers.  1 — 81. — The  tragedy  at  Sh  diem.  I.  Dinah  and  Shechem.  1.  A  young 
girl's  indiscretion.  "  Diuab  went  out  to  see  the  daughteis  of  the  laud."  If  Dinah's 
object  was  to  witness  the  manners  of  the  people,  the  was  guilty  of  objectionable 
curiosity  ;  if  to  exhibit  herself,  of  distressing  vanity;  if  to  mingle  in  tiieir  entrrtniu- 
meuts,  of  improper  levity;  and  for  all  these  reasons,  considering  the  charactor  of  he 
family  to  which  she  belonged,  and  the  wickedness  of  the  people  with  whom  she 
mingled,  of  exceedingly  heinous  sin.  2.  A  young  prince's  wickedness.  Shechem  saw 
her,  and  took  her,  and  lay  with  her,  and  defiled  her.  The  sin  of  Shechem  had  many 
aggravations.  It  was  done  by  a  prince,  whose  very  rank  should  have  preserved  him 
from  such  degradation.  Those  whom  Gol  makes  elevated  in  station  'should  make 
themselves  eminent  in  virtue.  Goodness  should  always  accompany  greatness.  Theu 
it  was  done  without  the  least  excuse,  since  Shechem  was  at  liberty  by  God's  law  and 
man's  to  have  a  wife  whenever  he  desired.  Again,  it  was  done  against  a  young  and 
comparatively  helpless  girl  whom  circumstances  had  placid  within  his  power. 
Further,  it  was  done  in  violation  of  the  laws  of  hospitality,  which  required  him  to 
protect,  rather  than  to  injure,  a  stranger's  good  name.  And,  lastly,  it  was  done  to  one 
belonging  to  a  family  whose  members  were  invested  with  a  high  degree  of  sanctity. 
Still  the  crime  of  Shechem  was  not  without  its  extenuations.  First,  he  loved  the 
maiden  whom  he  had  dishonoured.  Second,  he  offered  the  reparation  of  an  honour- 
able marriage.  Third,  he  treated  her  with  kindness  while  he  detained  her  in  his 
palace. 

II.  Jacob  and  his  sons.  1.  The  impression  made  on  Jacob  by  Dinah's  misfortune. 
(1)  He  held  bis  peace;  in  stupefaction,  in  sorrow,  in  meditation,  in  indecision.  (2) 
He  sent  for  his  sons,  who,  as  recognised  guardians  of  their  sister,  were  entitled  to  be 
consu  ted  in  all  that  concerned  her  welfare.  2.  The  effect  produced  on  Jacob's  sons  by 
their  sister's  shame.  (1)  They  were  grieved  for  what  had  happened— for  Dinah's, 
for  their  father's,  for  their  own  sake.  (.')  They  were  angry  at  its  perpetrator;  not 
so  much,  however,  for  the  sin  he  had  oummiited,  as  for  the  fact  that  he  had  com- 
mitted it  against  Jacob's  daughter. 


ch.  xxxiv.  1-  81.]  THE   BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  409 

III.  Jacob's  sons  and  Hamor's  son.  1.  The  honourable  proposal  of  Shechem. 
First  through  the  medium  of  his  father,  and  afterwards  in  his  own  person,  he  solicits 
Jacob  and  his  sons  to  give  him  Dinah  in  marriage,  and  to  enter  in  turn  into  matri- 
monial alliances  with  them,  offering  as  an  inducement  unrestricted  liberty  to  settle, 
trade,  and  acquire  pro.  erty  in  the  land,  and  promising  to  pay  whatever  dowry  or 
gift  might  be  demanded  for  the  damsel.  2.  The  deceitful  reply  of  Jacob's  sons.  First 
they  declared  it  impossible  that  Dinah  should  become  the  wife  of  one  who  was  uncir- 
cumcised.  Then  they  consented  to  the  proposition  on  condition  that  Hamor, 
Shechem,  and  thu  Shechemites  would  submit  to  circumcision.  And  yet  all  the  while 
it  was  only  part  of  a  deep-laid  plot  for  exacting  revenge. 

IV.  Hamor  and  the  Shechemites.  1.  The  condition  prescribed  by  Jacob's  sons 
explained.  This  was  done  by  the  rul.ng  sovereign  and  the  crown  prince  in  a  public 
assembly  convened  at  the  city  gate.  2.  The  condition  accepted  by  the  Shechemites. 
Trusting  to  the  good  faith  of  the  Hebrew  strangers,  they  assented  to  the  proposition 
that  all  the  male  inhabitants  should  be  circumcised,  and  in.good  faith  it  was  carried 
out  by  both  prince  aud  people. 

V.  The  sons  of  Jacob  anp  the  Shechemites.  1.  The  massacre  of  the  inhabi- 
tants by  Dinah's  brethren.  Three  days  after,  when,  in  consequence  of  the  painful 
operation  to  which  they  had  submitted,  the  male  part  of  the  population  was  unable 
to  stir  in  their  defence,  Simeon  and  Levi,  confident  of  success  in  their  nefarious 
deed,  fell  upon  the  unsuspecting  city,  and  slew  all  the  males.  It  was  a  h  artless, 
ruthless,  treacherous,  diabolic  massacre,  fit  to  rank  with  the  St.  Bartholomews  and 
Glencoes  of  modern  times.  2.  The  spoliation  of  the  city  by  Jacob's  sons.  If  Simeon 
and  Levi  were  alone  responsible  for  ihe  massacre,  the  sacking  of  the  city  was  the 
work  of  all  the  brethren  (Joseph  aud  Benjamin  doubtless  excepted).  Not  only  did 
they  make  captives  of  the  wives  and  children,  but  they  carried  off  every  live  thing 
they  could  find  of  any  value ;  and  not  only  did  ihey  ransack  the  houses,  from  the 
palace  to  the  cottage,  but  they  appear  to  have  snipped  even  the  very  dead.  The 
annals  of  uncivilised  warfare  scarcely  record  a  more  atrocious  crime. 

VI  Jacob  and  Dinah's  brethren.  1.  The  feeble  reproof  of  Jacob.  He  only 
complains  that  their  cruel  deed  would  cause  his  name  to  be  abhorred  in  the  laud, 
and  perhaps  lead  to  their  extermination  as  a  people.  For  the  different  views  that 
have  been  entertained  of  Jacob's  words  the  Exposition  may  be  consulted.  2.  The 
insufficient  reply  of  Dinah's  brethren.  Shechem  certainly  had  wronged  Dinah,  but 
he  never  meant  to  treat  her  as  a  harlot. 

Learn — 1  The  danger  of  unrestrained  social  intercourse  between  the  Church  and 
the  world  in  general,  and  in  particular  between  the  daughters  of  the  pious  and  the 
sons  of  the  ungodly — exemplified  in  Dinah,  who,  going  to  see  the  daughters  of  the 
land  lost  her  fair  fame,  and  brought  trouble  on  her  father's  house.  2.  The  misery 
of  yielding  to  unholy  passion— illustrated  in  Shechem,  whose  unbridled  lust  bore 
bitter  fruit  to  all  concerned :  to  Dinah  dishonour,  to  Jacob  shame  and  sorrow,  to 
Jacob's  sons  the  thirst  for  revenge,  to  Hamor  and  the  Shechemites  as  well  as  to  him- 
self overwhelming  retribution.  3.  The  wickedness  of  which  good  mi  n  when  left  to 
themselves  may  be  guilty— exhibited  in  the  conduct  of  Jacob's  sons,  who  in  this 
lamentable  affair  were  chargeable  with  treachery,  sa  rilege,  murder,  spoliation, 
oppression.  4.  The  possibility  of  the  innocent  suffering  with  and  for  the  guilty- 
shown  in  the  massacre  of  the  Shechemites  for  the  sin  of  Shechem.  5.  The  certainty 
that  a  man's  worst  foes  are  often  those  of  his  own  household — of  which  the  case  of 
Jacob  was  a  melancholy  instance,  whose  name  was  more  dishonoured  by  his  sons' 
atrocities  than  by  his  daughter's  misfortune. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ch.  xxxiv.— Good  out  of  evil.  The  whole  of  this  miserable  story  has  its  place  in 
the  development  of  the  kingdom  of  God.  No  alliance  can  be  true  and  safe  which  is 
not  upon  the  foundation  of  the  Divine  covenants.  Circumcision  without  faith  is  a 
mere  carnal  ordinance,  working  evil.  The  sin  of  Shechem  was  avenged,  but  it  was 
avenged  by  the  commission  of  a  greater  sin  by  Siim  on  and  Levi.  It  was  not  thus 
that  the  kingdom  of  God  was  to  be  spread.  "  Ye  have  troubled  me,"  Jacob  said: 
And  so  have  all  worldly  agencies  anil  methods  troubled  the  true  Church.  It  is  bet- 
ter to  suffer  at  the  hands  of  the  wicked  than  to  make  compromising  alliance  with 
them.  The  worldly  Church  has  filled  the  world  with  misery.  Abuse  of  Divine 
things  has  been  the  source  of  innumerable  evils,  not  only  among  the  people  of  God 
but  even  in  the  sphere  of  men's  secular  life.    But  notwithstanding  the  sin  of  Simson 


410 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


[CH.  XXXV.  1—15. 


and  Levi,  their  prompt  execution  of  the  Divine  judgment  upon  the  sin  of  Sbecheni 
must  have  produced  a  wholesome  fear  in  the  country,  and  connected  that  fear  with 
moral  purity.  The  sins  of  unchastity  and  violation  of  family  ria-hts  were  mon- 
strously prevalent  among  the  heathen  people  of  Canaan,  and  it  was  doubtless 
ordered  that  tins  outbreak  of  human  passion  should  bear  witness  for  God  as  the  God 
of  purity  and  the  God  of  households,  who  blesses  the  life  which  is  free  from  the  de- 
filement of  sensual  indulgence,  and  in  which  the  bonds  of  relationship  and  virtuous 
marriages  i.nd  the  sanctities  of  home  are  deeply  reverenced.  We  read  afterwards  (ch. 
xxxv.5),  "tLe  terror  of  God  was  upon  the  ciies  that  were  round  about  them." — R. 

Ver.  30. — Anger  unrestrained.  "And  Jacob  paid  to  Simeon  and  Levi,  Ye  have 
troubled  me."  It  was  not  merely  ihe  fear  of  r  taliation  by  neignl-ourin  ;  tribes. 
He  felt  that  the  act  was  wrong  (ch.  xlix.  5 — 7) ;  God's  blessing  could  not  rest  upon 
it  (cf.  Ps  xxxiv.  7) ;  and  he  and  his  fami  y  were  involved  in  that  wrong  (cf.  Josh, 
vii.  13 ;  1  Cor.  xii.  26).  But  was  not  the  anger  of  Simeon  and  Levi  just  ?  No  doubt 
there  was  causi\  and  no  doubt  a  measure  of  righteous  indignation.  But  (1)  they 
thought  more  of  the  wrong  against  themselves  than  of  the  sin  against  God  (ver.  31). 
(2)  Their  anger  was  unrestrained  bv  mercy,  or  even  by  justice  (ver.  25).  (3)  It  led 
them  into  acs  of  sin — deceit,  murder,  robbery.  (4)  It  was  soiled  by  selfish  gain 
(ver.  27).  Anger  maybe  right;  but  need  of  special  watchfulness  ( tiphes.  iv.  26). 
For  under  its  nfluence  the  heart  is  not  in  a  state  fitted  to  judge ;  and  much  danger 
of  self-deception,  uf  m'staking  a  selfish  for  a  godly  anger. 

I.  A  just  cause  foe  angee  dobs  not  bxcuse  its  excess.  Anger  may  be  called 
for  (1)  as  a  protest  against  wrong ;  (2)  to  deter  others  from  wrong.  But  vengeance, 
retribution,  belongs  to  God  (Rom.  xii.  19).  He  alone  has  the  knowledge  to  apportion 
it,  looking  b  th  to  the  past  and  to  the  future.  But  anger  tempts  to  retaliation  (Matt, 
v.  38).  The  wrong  fills  the  mind.  Our  own  errors  and  acts  of  wrong  (cf.  John 
viii.  7),  and  the  plea,  Thine  anger  brings  harm  to  the  innocent,  are  unheeded.  The 
fact  that  there  was  cause  for  anger  blinds  to  its  real  nature  ;  for  unrestrained  anger 
is  in  truth  an  offering  to  self-love.  The  plea  of  zeal  lor  right  and  of  godly  indigna- 
tion may  seem  sincere  ;  but  ' '  ye  know  not  what  manner  of  spirit  ye  are  of  " 

II.  A  just  cause  fox  angee  does  not  excuse  wrong-doing.  God's  laws  cannot 
be  set  aside.  And  he  wh  >  takes  on  himself  the  office  of  judge  should  be  especially 
watchful  not  to  transgress  (Ps.  xxxvii.  3).  To  do  wrong  on  the  plea  of  doing  God's 
work  is  to  distrust  his  providential  care  (Rom.  xii.  19 — 21).  It  is  to  do  evil  that 
good  may  come  ;  a  form  of  being  drawn  aside  by  our  own  lusts  (cf.  1  Sam.  xxiv.  7  ; 
xxvi.  9).  Such  acts  of  wrong  are  especially  evil  in  Christians.  They  are  "a  city  set 
on  a  hill."  Men  are  ever  ready  to  point  to  their  errors  as  excusing  their  own.  Men 
see  and  judge  the  act,  but  cannot  estimate  the  provocation,  or,  it  may  be,  the  sorrow, 
for  a  hasty  action. 

III.  "Works  done  in  anger  hinder  the  work  of  the  Church.  That  work  is 
to  draw  men  together  in  one  (John  xvii.  21).  The  power  by  which  this  is  done  is 
love.  The  love  of  Christ  reflected  in  us  (1  John  iv.  7).  Love  wins  men's  hearts, 
reason  only  their  minds.  And  tie  presence  of  anger  hinders  love ;  not  merely  in 
him  against  whom  it  is  directed  ;  like  a  stone  thrown  into  still  water,  it  disturbs  its 
surface  far  and  wide. 

IV.  The  power  by  which  anger  must  be  controlled.  Dwelling  on  the  work 
and  example  of  Christ.  He  bore  all  for  us.  Is  not  wrath  rebuked  in  the  presence 
of  his  patiencr?  And  if  as  a  "strange  work"  we  are  constrained  to  indignation, 
must  we  not  watch  and  pray  that  no  selfish  feeling  may  mingle  with  ii  ;  and,  know- 
ing in  how  many  things  we  offend,  that  we  be  "  slow  to  wrath,"  ready  to  forgive, 
and  ever  "  looking  unto  Jesus  "  1 — M. 

EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXXV. 
Ver.  1. — And  God— Elohim.  The  em- 
ployment of  this  name  for  the  Deity 
throughout  the  present  chapter  has  been 
deemed  conclusive  evidence  that,  with 
some  Jehovistic  alterations,  it  belongs  to 
the  fundamental  document  (Tuch,  Bleek, 
Delitzsch,  Kalisch,  et  alii)  ;  but  the  fre- 
quent   allusions  to    ch.   xxviii.   13 — 16, 


which  by  partitionists  is  almost  univer- 
sally assigned  to  the  Jehovist,  prove 
that  both  sections  have  proceededfrom  the 
same  author,  and  that,  "though  the  men- 
tion of  ihe  name  is  avoided,  this  chapter, 
there  is  no  doubt,  substantially  relates  to 
Jehovah  "  (Hengstenberg),  whilethe  name 
Elohim  may  simply  indicate  that  Jacob's 
journey  from  Shechem  was  undertaken  in 


Ch.  xxxv.  1—15.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


411 


obedience  to  Divine  intimation  (Quarry) — 
said  unto  Jacob  (shortly  after  the  inci- 
dents recorded  in  the  preceding  chapter), 
Arise,  go  up  to  Bethel, — about  thirty  miles 
distant  (ch.  xii.  8;  xiii.  3;  xxviii.  19),  to 
which,  some  thirty  years  previous,  he  had 
solemnly  vowed  to  return  (ch.  xxviii.  22) 
— a  vow  which  he  appeared  somewhat 
dilatory  in  performing,  although  its  con- 
ditions had  been  exactly  fulfilled  (Keil, 
Eurtz,  Kaliscli,  &c.) — and  dwell  there  (the 
massacre  of  the  Shechemites  had  ob- 
viously rendered  longer  residence  in  that 
neighbourhood  unsafe):  and  make  there 
an  altar — this  Jacob  had  substantially 
promised  to  do  in  his  vow  (vide  ch.  xxviii. 
22)— unto  God,  that  appeared  unto  thee — 
i.  e.  unto  Jehovah  (vide  ch.  xxviii.  13) — 
when  thou  fleddest  from  the  face  of  Esau 
thy  brother.  The  words  contained  an  as- 
surance that  the  same  Divine  arm  which 
had  shielded  him  against  the  enmity  of 
Esau  and  the  oppression  of  Laban  would 
extend  to  him  protection  on  his  future 
way. 

Vers.  2,  3. — Then  Jacob  said  unto  his 
household  (».  e.  those  more  immediately  be- 
longing to  his  family),  and  to  all  that  were 
with  him  (referring  probably  to  the  cap- 
tured Shechemites),  Put  away  the  strange 
godB — literally,  the  gods  of  the  stranger, 
including  most  likely  the  teraphim  of 
Laban,  which  Rachel  still  retained,  and 
other  objects  of  idolatrous  worship,  either 
brought  by  Jacob's  servants  from  Meso- 
potamia, or  adopted  in  Canaan,  or  per- 
haps possessed  by  the  captives — that  are 
among  you,  and  be  clean,— literally,  cleanse 
yourselves.  The  word  is  that  which  after- 
wards describes  the  purifications  of  the 
law  (Numb.  xix.  11,  12;  Levit.  xiv.  4;  xv. 
13).  Aben  Ezra  interprets  it  as  meaning 
that  they  washed  their  bodies;  and  Mi- 
chaelis  views  the  rite  as  a  kind  of  bap- 
tism, signifying  their  adoption  of  the  true 
religion  of  Jehovah — a  quasi  baptism  of 
repentance,  like  that  afterwards  preached 
by  John  (vide  'Suppl.,'  p.  1000)— and 
change  your  garments.  The  directions 
here  given  are  very  similar  to  those  which 
were  subsequently  issued  at^Sinai  (Exod. 
xix.  10),  and  were  meant  to"  symbolise  a 
moral  and  spiritual  purification  of  .the 
mind-  and  heart.  And  let  us  arise  and  go 
to  Bethel.  "  This  is  obviously  not  the 
first  time  Jacob  acquainted  his  family 
with  the  vision  at  Bethel "  (Inglis).  And 
I  will  make  there  an  altar  unto  God, — El 
is  probably  employed  because  of  its  prox- 
imity to  and  connection  with  Bethel,  or 
house  of  El,  and  the  intended  contrast 
between  the  El  of  Bethel  and  the  strange 
Elohim  which  Jacob's  household  were 
commanded  to  put  away  (cf.  Quarry,  p. 


512)— who  answered  me  in  the  day  of  my 
distress, — this  seems  to  imply  that  Jacob 
prayed  at  Bethel  before  he  slept,  if  it 
does  not  refer  to  his  supplication  before 
meeting,  Esau  (ch.  xxxii.  9) — and  was  with 
me  in  the  way  which  I  went.  This  lan- 
guage clearly  looks  back  to  Bethel  (vide 
ch.  xxviii.  20). 

Ver.  4. — And  they  gave  unto  Jacob  all 
the  straDge  gods— Rosenmuller  thinks 
these  must  have  been  many,  since  the  his- 
torian would  not  otherwise  have  used  the 
term  bb — which  were  in  their  hand  (i.  e. 
which  they  possessed),  and  all  their  ear- 
rings which  were  in  their  ears; — i.  e.  those 
employed  for  purposes  of  idolatrous  wor- 
ship, which  were  often  covered  with  alle- 
gorical figures  and  mysterious  sentences, 
and  supposed  to  be  endowed  with  a  talis- 
manic  virtue  (Judges  viii.  24;  Isa.  iii.  20; 
Hosea  ii.  13) — and  Jacob  hid  them — hav- 
ing probably  first  destroyed  tliem,  since 
they  do  not  appear  to  have  beeu  ever  after 
sought  for  or  resumed  by  the  parties  who 
gave  them  up  (Hughes) — under  the  oak 
which  was  by  Shechem.  Whether  the 
oak,  or  terebinth,  under  which  Abraham 
once  pitched  his  tent  (ch.  xii.  6),  that  be- 
neath whose  shade  Joshua  afterwards 
erected  his  memorial  pillar  (Josh.  xxiv. 
26),  the  oak  of  the  sorcerers  (Judges  ix. 
37),  and  the  oak  of  the  pillar  at  Shechem 
(Judges  ix.  6)  were  all  the  tree  under 
which  Jacob  buried  the  images  and  ear- 
rings cannot  with  certainty  be  deter- 
mined, though  the  probability  is  thaVthey 
were. 

Ver.  5.— And  they  journeyed  (from  She- 
chem, after  the  work  of  reformation  just 
described) :  and  the  terror  of  God — meaning 
not  simply  a  great  terror,  as  in  ch.  xxiii. 
6;  xxx.  8  (Dathe,  Bush),  but  either  a  su- 
pernatural dread  inspired  by  Elohim 
(Ainsworlh,  Clericus,  Rosenmuller,  Keil, 
Kalisch,  and  others),  or  a  fear  of  Elohim, 
under  whose  care  Jacob  manifestly  had 
been  taken  (Murphy,  Quarry) — was  upon 
the  cities  that  were  round  about  them, — 
literally,  in  their  circuits,  i.  e.  wherever 
they  went— and  they  did  not  pursue  after 
the  sons  of  Jacob — as  might  have  been 
expected. 

Ver.  6. — So  (literally,  and)  Jacob  came 
to  Luz  (vide  ch.  xxviii.  19),  which  is  in 
the  land  of  Canaan  (this  clause  is  added 
to  draw  attention  to  the  fact  that  Jacob 
had  now  accomplished  his  return  to  Ca- 
naan), that  is,  Bethel,  he  and  all  the  people 
that  were  with  him — i.  e.  his  household 
and  the  captured  Shechemites. 

Ver.  7. — And  he  built  there  an  altar, — 
thus  redeeming  his  vow  (cf .  Eccles.  v.  4) — 
and  called  the  place  El-beth-el:— i.  e.  God  of 
Bethel.     Not  he  called  the  place  of  God,  or 


413 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xxxv.  1—15. 


the  place  sacred  to  God,  Bethel  (Michaelis, 
'  Suppl.,'  p.  2174),  nor  he  called  the  altar 
(Keil,  Kalisch,  Gerlach,  &c),  but  he  called 
the  place  where  the  altar  was  El-bethel; 
i.  e.  either  he  devoted  the  place  as  sacred 
to  the  El  of  Bethel  (Rosenmiiller),  or  he 
gave  to  the  place  the  name  of  {so.  the  place 
of)the  El  of  Bethel,  readingthe  first  El  as 
a  genitive  (Lange) ;  or  he  called  it  El- Beth- 
el metaphorically,  as  Jerusalem  after- 
wards was  styled  Jehovah  Tsidkenu  (Jer. 
xxxiii.  16)  and  Jehovah  Shammah  (Ezek. 
xlviii.  35;  Inglis).  It  has  been  proposed, 
after  the  LXX. ,  to  avoid  the  seeming  in- 
congruity of  assigning  such  a  name  to  a 
place,  to  read,  he  invoked  upon  the  place 
the  El  of  Bethel  (Quarry  p.  513) — because 
there  God  appeared  unto  him, — the  El  of 
Bethel  was  Jehovah  (vide  ch.  xxviii.  13; 
xxxi.  13) — when  he  fled  from  the  face  of  his 
brother. 

Ver.  8. — But  Deborah — Bee  (Gesenius, 
Pilrst)  Kebekah's  nurse  (vide  ch.  xxiv.  59) 
died — at  a  very  advanced  age,  having  left 
Padan-aram  for  Carjaan  along  with  Re- 
bekah,  upwards  of  150  years  ago.  That 
she  is  now  found  in  Jacob's  household 
may  be  accounted  for  by  supposing  that 
Rebekah  had  sent  her,  in  accordance  with 
the  promise  of  ch.  xxvii.  45  (Delitzsch);  or 
that  Jacob  had  paid  a  visit  to  his  father  at 
Hebron,  and  brought  her  back  with  him 
to  Shechem,  probably  because  of  Re- 
bekah's  death  (Lange);  of  that  on  Re- 
bekah's  death  she  had  been  transferred  to 
Jacob's  household  (Keil,  Murphy,  Al- 
ford);  or  that  Isaac,  "who  had  during 
the  twenty  years  of  his  son's  absence 
wandered  in  different  parts  of  the  land  " 
(?),  had  "at  this  period  of  Lis  migrations 
come  into  the  neighbourhood  of  Bethel 
(Kalisch).  And  she  was  buried  beneath 
Bethel — which  was  situated  in  the  hill 
country,  whence  Jacob  is  instructed  to 
"  go  up  "  to  Bethel  (ver.  1) — under  an  oak. 
More  correctly,  the  oak  or  terebinth,  i.  e. 
the  well-known  tree,  which  long  after 
served  to  mark  her  last  resting-place, 
which  some  have  without  reason  identi- 
fied with  the  palm  tree  of  Deborah  the 
prophetess  (Judges  iv.  5),  and  the  oak  of 
Tabor  mentioned  in  1  Sam.  x.  3  (Delitzsch, 
Kurtz,  &c.  )■  And  the  name  of  it  was  called 
— not  "he,"  i.  e.  Jacob,  "called  it" 
(Ainsworth),  but  "one  called  its  name," 
i.  e.  its  name  was  called  (Kalisch) — Allon- 
baohutb.  (i.  e.  the  oak  of  weeping). 

Vers.  9,  10. — And  God  appeared  unto 
Jacob  again,—  this  was  a  visible  manifes- 
tation, in  contrast  to  the  audible  one  in 
Sliechem  (ver.  1),  and  in  a  state  of  wake- 
fulness (ver.  13),  as  distinguished  from 
the  dream  vision  formerly  beheld  at 
Bethel  (ch.  xxviii.  12) — when  he  cime  (or 


had  come)  out  of  Padan-aram  (as  pre- 
viously he  had  appeared  to  the  patriarch 
en  going  into  Padan-aram),  and  blessed 
him — i.  e.  renewed  the  promises  of  the 
covenant,  of  which  he  was  the  heir.  And 
God  said  unto  him,  Thy  name  is  Jacob: — 
or  Supplanter  (vide  ch,  xxv.  26).  Lange 
reads,  Is  thy  name  Jacob? — thy  name  shall 
not  be  called  any  more  Jacob,  but  Israel 
( vide  ch.  xxxii.  28)  shall  be  thy  name :  and 
he  called  bis  name  Israel.  The  renewal 
of  the  name  given  at  Peniel  may  possibly 
indicate  a  revival  in  the  spiritual  life  of 
Jacob,  which  had  been  declining  in  the 
interval  between  the  former  interview 
with  God  and  the  present  (Murphy),  but 
was  probably  designed  as  a  confirmation 
of  the  former  interview  w!th  God,  and  of 
the  experience  through  which  he  then 
passed.  Cf.  the  twice-given  name  of 
Peter  (John  i.  42;  Matt.  xvi.  16—19). 

Vers.  11,  12. — And  God  said  unto  him 
(repeating  substantially  the  promises  made 
to  Al  raham),  I  am  God  A'mighty: — El 
Shaddai  (cf.  ch.  xvii.  1) — be  fruitful  and 
multiply;— "Abraham  and  Isaac  had  each 
only  one  son  of  promise;  but  now  the 
time  of  increase  was  come  "  (Murphy;  cf. 
ch.  i.  28)— a  nation  and  a  company  of  na- 
tions shall  be  of  thee  (cf.  ch.  xvii.  5;  xxviii. 
3),  and  kings  shall  come  out  of  thy  loins 
(cf.  ch.  xvii.  6,  16);  and  the  land  which  I 
gave  Abraham  and  Isaac  (vide  ch.  xii.  7; 
xiii.  15;  xxvi.  3,  4),  to  thee  I  will  give  it 
(cf  ch.  xxviii.  13),  and  to  thy  seed  after 
thee  will  I  give  the  land.  The  time  of 
their  entering  on  possession  was  specified 
to  Abraham  (ch.  xv.  16). 

Ver.  13. — And  God  went  up  from  him — 
showing  this  to  have  been  a  visible  man- 
ifestation (cf.  ch.  xvii.  22) — in  the  place 
wheie  he  talked  with  him. 

Ver.  14. — And  Jacob  set  up  a  pillar — 
the  former  pillar  (ch.  xxviii.  18)  having 
probably  fallen  down  and  disappeared — 
in  the  place  where  he  (God)  talked  with 
him  a  (to  commemorate  the  interview) 
even  a  pillar  of  stone.  The  setting  up  of 
pillars,  according  to  Tuch  a  peculiarity  of 
the  Elohist,  appears  to  have  been  a  fa- 
vourite practice  of  Jacob's :  witness  the 
first  pillar  al  Bethel  (ch.  xxviii.  18),  the 
the  pillar  on  Galeed  (ch.  xxxi.  45),  the  sec- 
ond pillar  at  Bethel  (ch.  xxxv.  14),  the 
pillar  over  Bacliel's  grave  (ch.  xxxv.  20). 
And  he  poured  a  drink  offering  thereon. 
This  is  the  first  mention  of  those  sacrificial 
libations  which  afterwards  became  so 
prominent,  in  connection  with  the  Mosaic 
ritual  (Exod.  xxix.  40,  41;  Levit.  xxiii.  13, 
18, 37;  Numb.  vi.  15;  and  elsewhere).  Un- 
der the  law  the  ^03 — o-irovSetcv,  o-irovS^j 
(LXX.),  libamenlum,  libamen  (Vulgate); 


CH.  XXXV    1—15.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


413 


f  rankopfer  (Luther) — consisted  of  a  fourth 
part  of  a  hin  of  wine,  which  was  equal  to 
about  a  third  of  a  gallon.  And  he  poured 
oil  thereon— as  he  did  on  the  previous  oc- 
casion (ch.  xxviii.  18,  q.  «.). 
Ver.  15. — And  Jacob  called  the  name  of 


the  place  where  God  spake  with  him, 
Bethel.  This  name  was  first  given  after 
the  dream  vision  of  the  ladder  (ch.  xxviii. 
19) ;  already  on  this  occasion  it  had  been 
changed  into  El-beth-el  (ver.  7);  now  its 
old  name  is  reimposed. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 15. — Bethel  revisited.  I.  Jacob's  journey  to  Bethel.  1.  The  occasion 
of  the  journey.  The  crime  of -his  sons  had  made  it  necessary  that  Jacob  should 
leave  Shechem  aud  Us  neighbourhood  ;  but  it  is  doubtful  if  iu  the  circumstances 
Jacob  would  have  thought  of  going  to  Bethel  without  au  express  invitation  trom 
Heaven,  which,  however,  he  got.  2.  The  object  of  the  journey.  This  was  stated  by 
the  Divine  communication  which  Jacob  received  to  be  the  fulfilment  of  the  vow 
which  twenty  years  before  he  had  made  to  erect  an  altar  on  the  spot  where  he 
enjoyed  the  vision  of  the  ladder  and  the  augels.  Vows  do  not  lose  their  obligatory 
character  by  lapse  of  years.  Men  may,  but  Gorl  never  does,  forget  the  promises 
which  are  made  to  him.  Hence  the  counsel  of  the  Preacher  (Eccles.  v.  4,  5).  3. 
The  preparation  for  the  journey.  .  The  removal  of  the  strange  gods — (1)  Was  needful 
if  God  was  to  be  sin  erely  worshipped  by  Jacob  and  his  household.  The  necessity 
of  having  no  other  gods  but  Jehovah  was  afterwards  enjoined  upon  Israel  as  a 
nation.  In  the  gospel  the  law  is  equally  imperative.  God  aud  Christ  demand  the 
undivided  homage  of  the  human  hearl.  (2,  Was  counselled  by  Jacob  to  his  household. 
It  is  well  when  heads  of  families  have  the  ability  as  well  as  inclination  to  direct  their 
children  aud  dependents  in  the  duties  of  religion.  (3)  Was  cheerfully  assented  to 
by  Jacob's  household.  The  silver  aud  wooden  images  (the  teraphim;  that  Rachel 
had  abstracted  from  her  father's  tent,  the  idolatrous  objects  that  the  Shechemites 
may  have  brought  with  them,  and  the  earrings  that  were  in  their  ears,  were  at  once 
and  completely  given  up,  and  by  Jacob's  own  hand  burie  1  beneath  the  oak  of  She- 
chem. (4)  Was  symbolised  in  Jacob's  household  by  the  acts  of  washing  and  putting 
on  of  clean  apparel.  Under  the  law  corporeal  ablutions  and  beautified  habiliments 
were  typical  of  spiritual  renovation  and  the  putting  on  of  the  righteousness  of  the 
saints  (cf.  Ezek.  xxxvi.  25;  Heb.  x.  23;  Jude  23 ;  Rev.  xix.  2).  4.  The  experi- 
ence of  the  journey.  Wherever  the  travellers  went  they  found  themselves  unmo- 
lested, and  the  cities  round  about  them  alarmed,  and  afraid  to  pursue.  The  terror 
of  Elohim  was  upon  the  people  of  the  land,  and  thus  the  care  of  Jehovah  was  around 
his  saints.  5.  The  completion  of  the  journey.  Jacob  and  all  the  people  that  were 
with  him  came  to  Luz  in  the  land  of  Canaan,  which  is  Bethel.  Many  journeys  are 
begun  that  never  end.  Some  that  promise  well  at  the  outset  are  overwhelmed  in 
disaster  before  they  terminate.  It  is  only  he  who  keeps  Israel  that  can  preserve  a 
good  man's  going  out  and  coming  in. 

II.  Jacob's  residence  at  Bethel.  1.  The  building  of  an  altar.  This  was  on 
the  part  of  Jacob  (1)  an  act  of  obedience,  since  it  was  done  in  accordance  with 
Divine  instructions  (ver.  1);  (2)  an  act  of  justice,  inasmuch  as  it  was  executed  iu 
fulfilment  of  a  vow  (ch.  xxviii.  22);  (3)  an  act  of  gratitude,  being  designed  to  give 
expression  to  Jacob's  thankfulness  for  God's  mercies  (vers.  3,  7).  2.  The  death  of 
Deborah.  (1)  Her  life-work :  Rebekah's  nurse.  (2)  Her  death :  this  must  have 
taken  place  at  an  advanced  age.  (3)  Her  burial :  the  place  of  sepulture  was  on  the 
slope  of  Bethel  hill,  beneath  the  shadow  of  a  wide-spreading  oak.  (4)  Her  memorial : 
the  tree  was  named  Allon-bachuth,  oak  of  weeping.  3.  The  appearance  of  Eloh  m. 
(1)  The  blessing  renewed  (ver.  9);  (2)  the  new  name  confirmed  (ver.  10);  (3)  the 
promises  repeated  (ver.  11).  4.  The  erection  of  a  pillar.  The  old  column  having 
probably  been  thrown  down,  this  was  (1)  setup  as  a  memorial  of  the  interview  with 
God  which  had  just  been  enjoyed  ;  (2)  employed  as  an*  altar  for  the  worship  of 
Elohim— "he  poured  a  drink  offering  thereon;"  and  (3)  consecrated  as  an  object 
of  reverential  regard  by  pouring  oil  thereon.  5.  Tlie  renaming  of  the  place.  The 
name  given  twenty  years  previously  is  renewed,  Bethel  (ver.  15),  with  a  slight 
modification,  El  Bethel  (ver.  7),  to  connect  it  with  the  altar  just  e/ected. 

Learn— 1    That  good  men  sometimes  require  to  be  reminded  by  God  of  their  duty 
3.  That  acts  of  Divine  worship  should  be  preceded  by  heart  purification  and  life 


414  THE  BOOK   OP  GENESIS.  [ch.  xxxv.  1—15. 

reformation.  3.  That  God  is  perfectly  able  to  protect  his  people  when  they  are 
walking  in  his  appointed  paths.  4.  That  good  men  when  serving  God  are  not 
exempt  from  the  afflictions  of  life.  5.  That  faithful  servants  should  be  tenderly 
cherished  by  their  masters  when  old,  decently  buried  when  dead,  and  lovingly 
remembered  when  entombed.  6.  That  God  never  forgets  either  his  promises  or  his 
people.    7.  That  God  should  not  be  forgotten  by  those  whom  he  remembers. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 15. — God  with  us.  Jacob's  settlement  with  his  family  at  Bethel.  This 
was  a  solemn  renewal  of  the  covenant  to  the  patriarch  at  the  end  of  his  pilgrimage. 
It  was  the  occasion  for  a  new  dedication  of  himself  and  his  household  by  vows  and 
offerings,  and  by  separation  of  themselves  from  all  heathen  things  and  thoughts 
around  the  newly-erected  altar  El-Bethel. 

I.  Revelation  the  basis  of  faith.  God  went  up  from  him  after  he  had  spoken 
with  him,  and  there  he  set  up  a  pillar  of  stone,  and  poured  a  drink  offering  thereon, 
and  he  poured  oil  thereon. 

II.  Personal  experience  the  background  of  a  consecrated  life.  We  should  make 
the  memory  of  God's  goodness  the  foundation  on  which  we  build  up  the  rno:>u  nents 
of  our  life.  Mark  the  places  by  offerings.  Let  the  Bethel  of  our  •worship  Le  the 
Bethel  of  his  praise. — R. 

Vers.  1,  2. — Spiritual  renovation.  Spiritual  life  is  a  thing  of  growth ;  never 
finished  here  (Phil.  iii.  13  ;  Heb.  vi.  1).  No  doubt  the  all-important  question  is, 
Art  thou  in  Christ?  And  in  every  Christian  life  there  is  a  point,  known  to  God, 
when  the  soul  passes  from  death  to  life  (1  John  v.  12).  For  by  nature  children  of 
wrath.  Still  there  is  a  life's  work.  The  spirit  may  have  chosen  Christ ;  but  the 
flesh  is  weak,  and  the  law  of  sin  still  works.  Most  commonly  in  such  a  life  certain 
times  will  stand  out,  connected  with  special  lessons  and  special  dealings,  when  some 
window  of  the  soul  has  been  opened  to  heavenly  light,  some  line  of  action  pressed 
upon  the  mind. 

I.  The  lesson  learned  by  Jacob  himself.  We  know  not  when  his  spiritual 
life  began.  Probably  before  he  left  home ;  for  with  all  his  faults  he  desired  a 
spiritual  blessing.  But  at  Bethel  and  Penuel  great  steps  were  made.  He  learned 
the  presence  of  God,  and  the  protecting  care  of  God,  as  he  had  never  known  them 
before.  Yet  the  lessons  were  chiefly  subjective  ;  they  regarded  his  own  attitude 
towards  God.  And  this  generally  comes  first,  but  it  is  not  all.  "Arise,  go  up  to 
Bethel."  Take  up  again  the  lesson  book.  Is  there  not  more  to  be  learned  from  it? 
Those  angels  ascending  and  descending,  were  they  charged  with  thy  good  only? 
The  Lord  who  stood  above,  did  he  care  only  for  thee?  With  all  thy  possessions 
thou  art  in  "a  solitary  way"(Ps.  cvii.  4).  Here  Jacob  seems  first  to  realise  his 
responsibility  for  the  spiritual  state  of  others  (cf.  Ps.  cxix.  136).  The  Christian 
character  is  not  thoroughly  formed  till  it  is  felt  that  the  possession  of  truth  binds  us 
to  use  it  for  the  good  of  others.  Being  "bought  with  a  price,"  we  are  debtors  to 
all  (Rom.  i.  14) ;  and  chiefly  to  those  with  whom  we  are  connected  (1  Tim.  v.  8). 

II.  The  work  he  took  in  hand.  To  press  upon  his  household — 1.  Single-hearted 
service  of  God.  "Put  away  the  strange  gods."  Sincerity  lies  at  the  root  of  all 
real  renovation.  Hitherto  the  semi-idolatry  of  teraphim  seems  to  have  been  tacitly 
allowed.  Jacob's  fondness  for  Rachel  may  have  kept  him  from  forbidding  it. 
Hence  a  divided  service  (2  Kings  xvii.  33  ;  Mark  vii.  7).  Putting  away  does  not 
refer  only  to  formal  worship.  It  is  putting  away  service  of  the  god  of  this  world: 
covetousness  (Col.  iii.  5),  worldly  aims  (John  v.  44),  gratification  of  self  (Luke  xii. 
19;  xiv.  11),  traditional  maxims  of  conduct  aud  judgment  (Mark  iii.  21;  1  Pet.  iv. 
4).  It  is  seeking  first  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  resting  in  him  (Ps.  xxxvii.  5).  2. 
"Be  clean."  No  toleration  of  evil  (Matt.  v.  48).  Christians  are  to  be  a  holy  people 
(1  Pet.  ii.  9).  This  ia  much  more  than  a  mere  upright  and  honourable  life.  The 
Levitical  rules,  strict  and  minute  as  they  were,  faintly  shadowed  the  extent  of  the 
law  of  righteousness.  See  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount.  Vast  difference  between  an 
upright  life  and  a  holy  life.  The  one  is  a  following  of  rules,  the  other  a  walk  with 
God.  3.  "Change  your  garments."  Under  the  law  this  a  necessary  part  of  puri- 
fication.   Contrast  the  garments,  Ps.  cix.  18  and  Isa.  lxi.  10.    The  explanation, 


ch.  xxxv.  1—15.]  THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS.  415 

Zech.  iii.  4.  In  New  Testament  language,  "  put  on  Christ."  The  root  is  atonement, 
the  covering  of  sins  (Ps.  xxxii  1),  the  forgiveness  of  the  sinful  (Rom.  iii.  26).  No 
real  renovation  without  this  change— ousting  away  self-righteousness,  and  clinging 
to  the  work  of  Christ  (Jer.  xxiii.  6;  Rom.  x.  4).  Many  have  said  trust  in  free 
grace  points  to  sin.  God's  word  from  end  to  end  declares  it  is  the  only  way  of 
holiness. — M. 

Ver.  2. — Jacob's  preparation  for  acceptable  worship.  "Put  away  the  strange  gods 
that  are  among  you,  and  be  ye  clean,  and  change  your  garments:  and  let  us  arise, 
and  go  up  to  Bethel."  "  When  thou  vowest  a  vow,  defer  not  to  pay  it,"  says  Eccle- 
siastes  (ch.  v.  4);  but  Jacob  had  deferred.  He  made  a  vow  at  Bethel,  and  he  seems 
afterwards  to  have  ignored  it.  If  he  thought  of  it,  a  number  of  things  had  been  ever 
ready  to  present  themselves  as  excuses  for  delay.  His  faithful  services  given  con- 
stantly to  Laban,  his  efforts  to  make  good  his  position  in  the  land,  and  then  to  avert 
the  anger  of  Esau,  had  apparently  absorbed  so  much  of  his  attention  that  he  had 
forgotten  his  vows.  These  solemn  promises  had  been  made  at  a  very  critical  period 
of  his  life,  and  God  had  not  forgotten  them.  He  reminds  Jacob  of  them  in  a  very 
emphatic  manner.  Jacob  had  failed  to  see  in  the  circumstances  in  which  he  was 
placed  with  respect  to  the  people  among  whom  he  dwelt  that  there  was  a  hint  of 
neglected  duty.  God  permitted  Jacob  to  be  made  uncomfortable  that  he  might  be 
made  considerate.  The  way  in  which  his  sons  had  treated  the  Sbechemites  had 
brought  him  into  great  danger.  He  and  all  his  were  likely  to  be  cut  off  by  these 
enraged  inhabitants  of  the  land.  He  is  reminded  of  the  danger  in  which  he  was 
once  placed  from  the  vengeance  of  Esau.  The  similarity  of  the  circumstances 
forcibly  and  very  naturally  turn  his  thoughts  to  the  One  who  alone  can  be  his  de- 
fence. Thus  circumstances  and  Divine  communications  impel  to  the  performance  of 
duty.  How  merciful  is  God  in  his  treatment  of  souls !  how  he  leads  the  wanderer 
back  to  duty  1  Jacob,  when  about  to  strike  his  tents  and  remove  to  Bethel,  wishes, 
that  his  sons  and  servants  should  go  up  with  him,  and.  that  they  should  go  up  intthe 
right  spirit.     He  therefore  says  to  them,  "Put  away  the  strange  gods,"  &c. 

I.  Neglected  duty  is  a  hindrance  to  appopriate  and  acceptable  worship. 
That  Jacob  should  have  been  obliged  to  give  such  an  injunction  to  his  household 
shows  that  he  had  not  sufficiently  kept  before  his  sons  and  servants  the  duty  they 
owed  to  God.  He  had  allowed  himself  to  strive  for  worldly  success  until  they  might 
have  even  imagined  that  he  was  no  better  than  the  rest  of  them  or  their  neighbours; 
but  deep  down  in  the  heart  of  this  man  was  a  reverence  for  God  and  a  desire  to  do 
his  will.  His  neglect  to  carefully  instruct  his  sons  had  borne  bitter  fruit.  Had  he 
instilled  into  his  sons  ideas  more  in  accordance  with  the  character  of  the  God  he 
served,  they  would  not  have  taken  such  mean  methods  as  are  mentioned  of  reveng- 
ing themselves  on  those  they  had  come  to  dislike.  His  neglect  necessitates  the  sudden 
and  difficult  effort  now  put  forth  to  induce  his  sons  to  seek  with  him  to  serve  God. 
He  feels  that  he  cannot  rightly  worship  God  unless  his  children  and  household  are 
with  him  in  spirit.  He  wishes  to  foster  in  them  a  belief  in  his  own  sincerity.  To 
have  one  in  a  family  looking  on  indifferently  or  sneeringly  is  death  to  successful 
worship.  Jacob's  neglect  had  led  to  carelessness  by  his  sons  of  the  Divine  service. 
He  could  not  himself  enter  heartily  on  the  service  until  he- had  discharged,  in  a 
measure,  his  duty  as  guide  and  instructor'to  his  family. 

II.  Another  hindrance  is  the  attachment  to  objects  wrongly  held  in 
reverence.  The  sons  of  Jacob  had  admitted  false  gods  into  their  affections. 
Idolatry  was  rife  among  them.  Even  his  wife  Rachel  had  so  much  faith  in  her 
father's  idols  that  she  stole  them  when  she  left  home.  The  sons  caught  the  spirit  of 
the  mother,  and  indulged  in  the  worship  of  strange  gods  Perhaps  they  worshipped 
secretly  the  gods  which  Rachel  cherished,  or  they  may  have  given  adoration  to  the 
idols  they  found  among  the  spoils  of  the  Shechemites.  They  may  have  had  little 
images  which  they  carried  about  with  them,  as  many  superstitious  Christians  carry 
the  crucifix.  Amulets  and  charms  they  seem  to  have  worn  on  their  hands  and  in 
their  ears,  all  indicating  superstition,  false  worship,  and  wrong  ideas.  God  is  spoken 
of  in  the  Bible  as  "  jealous."  This  is  witn  respect  to  worship  given  to  representa- 
tions ci  gods  having  no  existence.  The  jealousy  is  right,  because  it  would  be  an 
evil  thing  for  man  himself  to  think  there  were  many  gods,  or  to  select  his  own  god. 
When,  in  after  ages,  tlie  descendants  of  these  sons  of  Jacob  yielded  to  the  sin  of 
worshipping  other  gods,  ten  of  the  tribes  were  swept  away,  and  have  _never  been 


416 


THE   BOOK   OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xxxv.  16—29. 


rediscovered.  Indeed  the  stream  was  tainted  iu  source,  and  "grew  no  purer  as  it 
rolled  along."  When  Achan  brought  the  Babylonish  garment  into  the  camp  of 
Israel,  the  chosen  of  God  could  not  stand  before  their  enemies,  but  when  it  was 
removed  they  were  agaiu  victorious.  So  strange  gods  must  be  removed  from  our 
homes  and  from  our  hearts,  or  we  can  never  be  successful  in  the  conflict  against  sin, 
or  iu  the  acceptability  of  the  worship  we  offer.  It  is  for  each  Christian  to  search  his 
soul,  and  to  see  whether  there  is  any  desire,  hiibit,  or  practice  which  in  the  least 
militates  against  the  worship  of  God.  Many  who  were  incorporated  with  Jacob's 
household  were  Syrians,  who  brought  their  evil  practices  with  them.  When  any 
enter  God's  Church  they  must  leave  behind  them  the  practices  of  the  world  ;  nor 
possessions  nor  position  must  be  the  gods  then  worshipped.  "If  any  man  love  the 
world,  the  love  of  the  Father  is  not  in  him." 

III.  The  hakbouring  of  ant  special  sin  will  be  a  sure  hindrance.  The 
sons  of  Jacob  had  not  only  outward  false  objects  of  reverence,  but  inward  evil  pro- 
pensities. They  were  treacherous,  cruel,  lustful,  envious,  murderous.  See  how  they 
treated  the  Shechemites,  and  in  after  years  their  own  brother  Joseph.  What  scandal- 
ising, jenlousy,  and  even  opposition,  are  found  in  some  homes  !  How  hard  it  is  to 
alienate  sinful  habits  from  the  heart  and  the  home  !  how  hard  to  get  the  right  tone 
•for  devout  service  iu  the  home  !  Certain  liabits  of  temper,  ridicule,  sarcasm  will 
chill  and  check  all  worship.  Jacob  urged  his  sons  to  be  "clean,"— pure, — "to  change 
their  garments."  They  had  need  to  do  the  latter,  for  they  had  been  spotted  with 
the  blood  of  the  mem  they  had  murdered.  Jacob  meant  that  they  were  to  put  on  the 
garments  kept  for  the  worship  of  God.  Rebekah  had  garments  by  her  in  which 
Esau  as  eldest  son  worshipped  God,  and  which  she  put  on  Jacob.  It  is  probable  that 
it  was  the  practice  under  the  patriarchal  dispensation  to  perform  certain  ceremonial 
ablutions  prior  loenteringou  the  solemn  worship.  "Cleanliness  is  next  to  godliness." 
It  leads  to  it.  The  need  of  purity  in  the  worship  of  God  is  thus  indicated  by  ablu- 
tions and  change  of  garments.  But  how  easily  we  may  have  the  outward  without 
the  inward.  We  need  cleansing  in  the  holy  fountain  opened  by  Christ,  and  to  be 
clothed  by  his  righteousness. 

IV.  A  great  hindrance  to  successful  worship  is  having  low  ideas  of  the  dignity 

OF  THE  ACT,  AND  THE  MAJESTY  AND  HOLINESS  OF  HIM  WHOM  WE  WORSHIP.    God  must 

be  made  to  appear  great  to  us.  He  is  "  high  and  lifted  up."  He  made  not  only  these 
frames  of  ours,  but  this  vast  universe.  He  is  worshipped  by  worlds  of  intelligent 
spirits,  and  has  been  worshipped  from  the  depths  of  eternity.  He  is  holy  and  full  of 
majesty.  Shall  we  be  indifferent  as  to  the  duty  or  the  mode  of  worship?  What  a 
marvel  that  we  should  be  permitted  to  have  fellowship  with  our  Creator  !  If  we 
have  it,  it  must  be  in  the  way  and  place  he  appoints.  For  Jacob  it  was  at  Bethel, 
for  the  Jews  at  Jerusalem,  for  Christians  at  the  cross.  To  Jacob  and  the  Jews  it  was 
by  annual  sacrifices,  to  us  it  is  by  the  offering  of  Christ  "  once  for  all." — H. 


EXPOSITION. 


Ver.  16  — And  th°y  journeyed — not  in 
opposition  to  the  Divine  commandment 
(ver.  1),  which  did  not  enjoin  ape  manent 
settlement  at  Bethel,  but  in  accordance 
probably  with  his  own  desire,  if  not  also 
Heaven's  counsel,  to  proceed  to  Mamre  to 
visit  Isaac— from  BetheUsouth  wards  in  the 
directii  n  of  Hebron);  and  there  was  but  a 
little  way  (literally,  there  was  yet  a  space  of 
land;  probably  a  few  furlongs  (Murphy), 
about  four  English  miles  (Gerlach).  The 
Vulgate  translates,  "in  the  spring-time," 
and  the  LXX.  render,  i-ycvcro  S«  ijvbca  Tfy- 
■yurev  els  x°Ppa'^'  both  of  which  are  mis- 
und  rstandingsof  the  original — to  come  to 
Ephrath: — Fruitful;  the  ancient  name  of 
B  .th\eh.em(i)ide  infra,  ver.  19)— and  Rachel 


travailed,  and  she  had  hard  labour — liter- 
ally, slie  had  hard  labour  in  her  parturi- 
tion, which  was  perhaps  all  the  more 
severe  that  sixteen  or  seventeen  years  had 
elapsed  sinceherfirst  son,  Joseph,  wasborn. 

Ver.  17. — And  it  came  to  pass,  when  she 
was  in  hard  labour  (literally,  in  Iw  labour- 
ing hard  in  her  parturition),  that  the  mid 
wife  Ba'd  unto  her,  Fear  not  thou  shalt 
have  this  son  also — literally,  for  also  this 
to  thee  a  son;  meaning  either  that  she 
would  certainly  have  strength  to  bring 
forth  ano'her  son,  or,  what  is  more  prob- 
able, that  the  child  was  already  born,  and 
that  it  was  a  son. 

Ver  18. — A^d  it  came  to  pass,  as  her  «oul 
was  in  departing,— literally,  in  the  depart- 


en.  xxxv.  16-  -29.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


417 


ing  of  her  soul ;  not  into  annihilation,  but 
(nto  another  (a  disembodied)  state  of  exist- 
ence (vide  ch.  xxv.  8) — for  she  died  (a  pa- 
ths tii  commentary  on  ch.  xxx.  1),  that  she 
called  his  name  Bon  oni  ("son  of  my  sor- 
row," as  a  memorial  of  her  anguish  in  bearing 
him,  and  of  her  death  because  of  him) :  but 
his  father  called  him  Benjamin — "son  of 
my  right  hand ; "  either  "  the  son  of  my 
•trength  "  (Clericus,  Rosenmtiller,  Murphy), 
or  "the  son  of  my  happiness  or  good  fortune  " 
'Gesenius,  Keil,  Kalisch),  with  allusion  to 
Jacob's  now  possessing  twelve  sons ;  or  as  ex- 
pressive of  Jacob's  unwillingness  to  see  a  bad 
omen  in  the  birth  of  Rachel's  child  (Candlish); 
or  "  the  son  of  my  days,"  i.  e.  of  my  old  age 
(Samaritan),  an  interpretation  which  Lange 

fiasses  with  a  mere  allusion,  but  which  Ka- 
isch  justly  pronounces  not  so  absurd  as  is 
often  asserted  (cf.  ch.  xliv.  20) ;  or  "  the  son 
of  my  affection "  (Ainsworth  ;  of.  ch.  lxxx. 
IS). 

Ver.  19.  —  And  Rachel  died,  and  was 
buried  in  the  way  to  Ephrath,  which  is 
Bethlehem — or  House  of  Bread,  about  seven 
miles  south  of  Jerusalem.  It  afterwards  be- 
came the  birthplace  of  David  (1  Sam.  xvi. 
18)  and  of  Christ'  (Matt.  ii.  1).  The  asser- 
tion that  this  clause  is  a  later  interpolation 
(Lange)  is  unfounded  (Kalisch,  Kurtz). 

Ver.  20. — And  Jacob  set  a  pillar  npon 
her  grave  {vide  on  ver.  14) :  that  is  the 
pillar  of  Rachel's  grave  unto  this  day — i.  e. 
nnto  the  times  of  Moses ;  but  the  site  of 
Rachel's  sepulchre  was  known  so  late  as  the 
age  of  Samuel  (1  Sam.  x.  2) ;  and  there 
seems  no  reason  to  question  the  tradition 
which  from  the  fourth  century  has  placed  it 
within  the  Turkish  chapel  Kubbet  Rachil, 
about  half-an-hour's  journey  north  of  Beth- 
lehem (Robinson,  vol.  i.  p.  322 ;  Tristram, 
'Land  of  Israel,'  p.  404;  Thomson,  'Land 
and  Book,'  p.  644 j  Stanley,  'Sinai  and 
Palestine,'  p.  149). 

Ver.  21. — And  Israel  (or  Jacob)  jour- 
neyed (from  Ephrath,  after  the  funeral  of 
Rachel),  and  spread — i.  e.  unfolded  (ch.  xii. 
8  ;  xxvi.  25) — his  tent  beyond  the  tower  of 
Edar — literally,  to,  i.  e.  not  tram  (Vulgate), 
ultra  (Dathe),  but  ad,  usque  (Rosenmiiller), 
as  far  as  Migdol  Edar,  the  Tower  of  the  Flock 
— probably  a  turret,  or  watch-tower,  erected 
for  the  convenience  of  shepherds  in  guarding 
their  flocks  (2  Kings  xviii.  8  ;  2  Chron.  xxvi. 
10  ;  xxvii.  4), — the  site  of  which  is  uncer- 
tain, but  which  is  commonly  supposed  to 
have  been  a  mile  (Jerome)  or  more  south  of 
Bethlehem.     The  LXX.  omit  this  verse. 

Ver.  22. — And  it  came  to  pass,  when  Israel 
dwelt  in  that  land,  that  Reuben  went  and 
lay  with  Bilhah  his  father's  concubine: — an 
»"t  of  incest  (Levit.  xviii.  8)  for  which  he 


was  afterwards  disinherited  (ch.  xlix.  4  ;  1 
Chron.  v.  1)  —  and  Israel  heard  it.  The 
hiatus  in  the  text  and  the  break  in  the  MS. 
at  this  point  may  both  have  been  designed 
to  express  Jacob's  grief  at  the  tidings.  The 
LXX.  add  feebly  ical  irovtiobv  i<pavr)  ivavriov 
airov,  which  surely  fails  to  represent  the 
mingled  shame  and  sorrow,  indignation  and 
horror,  with  which  his  eldest  son's  wicked- 
ness must  have  filled  him.  Now  the  sons  of 
Jacob  were  twelve — a  separate  verse  in  the 
LXX.,  which  is  certainly  more  in  accordance 
with  the  sense  than  the  division  in  the  text. 

Vers.  23 — 26. — The  sons  of  Leah;  Reuben, 
Jacob's  firstborn,  and  Simeon,  and  Levi,  and 
Judah,  and  Issachar,  and  Zehulun  (cf.  ch. 
xxix.  32—35;  xxx.  18—20;  xlvi.  8—15; 
Exod.  i.  2,  3).  The  sons  of  Rachel ;  Joseph, 
and  Benjamin  (cf.  ch.  xxx.  22 — 24 ;  xxxv. 
18  ;  xlvi.  19).  And  the  sons  of  Bilhah, 
Rachel's  handmaid ;  Ban,  and  Naphtali  (cf. 
ch.  xxx.  4 — 8).  And  the  sons  of  Zilpah. 
Leah's  handmaid;  Gad,  and  Asher  (cf.  ch. 
xxx.  9 — 13) :  these  are  the  sons  of  Jacob, 
which  were  born  to  him  in  Fadan-aram.  All 
except  Benjamin  were  born  there.  Either 
this  is  an  instance  of  the  summary  style  of 
Scripture  in  which  minute  verbal  accuracy  is 
not  always  preserved  (Inglis),.or  the  whole 
period  of  Jacob's  pilgrimage  to  Mesopotamia 
and  back  is  intended  by  his  residence  in 
Padan-aram  (Kalisch). 

Ver.  27. — And  Jacob  came  nnto  Isaac  his 
father  unto  Mamre  (on  the  probability  of 
Jacob's  having  previously  visited  his  father, 
vide  ver.  8),  unto  the  city  of  Arbah  (ch. 
xiii.  18  ;  xxiii.  2,  19 ;  Josh.  xiv.  15 ;  xv. 
13),  which  is  Hebron,  where  Abraham  and 
Isaac  sojourned. 

.Ver.  28. — And  the  days  of  Isaac  were 
an  hundred  and  fourscore  years.  At  this 
time  Jacob  was  120  ;  but  at  130  he  stood 
before  Pharaoh  in  Egypt,  at  which  date 
Joseph  had  been  10  years  governor.  He 
was  therefore  120  when  Joseph  was  promoted 
at  the  age  of  30,  and  107  when  Joseph  was 
sold ;  consequently  Isaac  was  167  years  of 
age  when  Joseph  was  sold,  so  that  he  must 
have  survived  that  event  and  sympathised 
with  Jacob  his  son  for  a  period  of  13  years. 

Ver.  29. — And  Isaac  gave  up  the  ghost, 
and  died,  and  was  gathered  unte  his  people, 
— cf.  the  account  of  Abraham's  death  (ch. 
xxv.  8) — being  old  and  full  of  days  (literally, 
satisfied  with  days.  In  ch.  xxv.  8  the 
shorter  expression  satisfied  is  used) :  and  his 
sons  Esau  and  Jacob  buried  him  —  Esau 
arriving  from  Mount  Seir  to  pay  the  last 
service  due  to  his  deceased  parent,  and  Jacob 
according  to  him  that  precedence  which  had 
once  belonged  to  him  as  Isaac's  firstliorn. 


8EHK81B. 


««  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  [ch.  xxxv.  16—29. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  16 — 29. — From  Bethel  to  Mamre.  I.  The  death  of  Rachel.  .1.  The 
travailing  woman.  Rachel,  overtaken  by  the  pains  of  childbirth,  had  hard  labour. 
In  every  instance  an  inheritance  derived  from  mother  Eve  (ch.  iii.  16),  the  sorrow 
of  maternity  was  in  her  case  providentially  intensified ;  perhaps  by  her  advanced 
age,  or  by  the  discomforts  of  travel,  or  by  feebleness  of  health,  or  possibly  by 
special  appointment  of  God  as  a  rebuke  for  her  inordinate  desire  for  children 
(ch.  xxx.  1),  or  as  a  means  of  shortening  her  life.  2.  The  comforting  midwife. 
Though  her  name  is  not  recorded,  wherever  this  pathetic  story  is  recited,  there 
shall  her  kindly  offices  to  the  dying  Rachel  be  remembered.  Chosen  to  assist 
Rachel  in  her  bodily  struggle,  she  was  likewise  helpful  to  Rachel  in  her  soul's 
conflict.  Sympathising  with  the  sufferer  in  her  pain,  she  sought  to  minister  com- 
fort to  the  drooping  heart  in  its  despondency.  They  who  tend  the  sick  and  dying 
should  be  tender  in  their  feelings  and  hopeful  in  their  words,  as  well  as  skilful  and 
gentle  in  their  acts.  3.  The  departing  mother.  Though  Rachel's  child  was  born, 
Rachel  herself  died ;  in  which  were  some  circumstances  of  sadness,  as  (1)  that  it 
happened  on  a  journey, — "in  the  way  to  Ephrath," — and  near  its  end — "there  was 
but  a  little  way  to  come  to  Ephrath,"  where  it  is  likely  Jacob  had  intended  to  rest  a 
while  for  Rachel's  convenience ;  (2)  that  it  occurred  on  the  occasion  of  her  confine- 
ment, death  in  child-bed  being  a  comparatively  rare  experience  in  the  history  of 
mothers,  though,  considering  the  severity  of  the  ordeal,  it  is  a  special  mercy  that  any 
mothers  survive ;  and  (3)  that  it  removed  her  from  her  newly-born  son,  than  which 
no  greater  grief  can  agitate  a  dying  mother's  heart,  and  the  thought  of  which  per- 
haps gave  added  poignancy  to  the  bitter  anguish  with  which  she  named  her  child 
Ben-oni — -the  son  of  my  sorrow.  Yet  in  Rachel's  death  were  certain  elements  of 
gladness,  as  (1)  that  she  died  in  the  presence  of  her  husband,  Jacob  being  by  her 
*ouch  to  "Catch  her  latest  breath;  (2)  that  she  died  not  before  she  gave  him  another 
son,  to  be  to  him  whom  she  loved  a  Benjamin,  though  to  herself  Ben-oni ;  and  (3) 
that  she  died  in  the  hope  of  a  glorious  immortality,  her  soul  departing  to  the  better 
country,  even  an  heavenly.  4.  The  bereaved  husband.  (1)  Cheering  the  drooping 
heart  of  his  dying  wife.  This  is  probably  the  correct  view  to  be  taken  of  what 
otherwise  interpreted  cannot  fail  to  seem  strangely  inconsistent — Jacob's  naming 
Rachel's  child  Benjamin,  the  son  of  my  right  hand,  the  son  of  my  affection,  of  my 
prosperity,  a  token  of  good  hope  and  happy  fortune,  while  Rachel  called  him  Ben- 
oni.  "  In  vain  the  broken-hearted  father — refusing  to  take  in  the  terrible  fact  pass- 
ing under  his  eye — determined  to  be  sanguine  to  the  last,  and  let  no  evil  omen  touch 
either  mother  or  child — whispers  hope  in  the  dull  ear  of  death,  and  welcomes  the 
last  pledge  of  an  undying  love  as  no  "  son  of  sorrow,"  but  "  the  son  of  the  right 
hand"  (Candlish).  (2)  Burying  the  lifeless  body  of  his  beloved  spouse,  which 
doubtless  he  would  do  with  reverent  affection  and  with  heart-felt  mourning.  (3) 
Erecting  a  pillar  above  her  lonely  grave — to  demonstrate  his  affection  for  her  who 
slept  beneath,  to  show  that  though  she  lay  not  in  the  family  tomb,  she  was  not  for- 
gotten, and  to  mark  the  last  resting-place  of  an  ancestress  of  Israel. 

II.  The  sin  of  Reuben.  1.  The  enormity  of  Reuben's  wickedness.  The  act 
which  he  committed  was  that  of  ircest,  since  Bilhah  had  been  the  wife  of  Jacob. 
It  was  a  sin  punishable  by  death  under  Moses'  law  (Levit.  xviii.  8),  and  such  a  sin  as 
should  not  be  named  among  Christians  (1  Cor.  v.  1).  It  is  not  likely  that  Bilhah  wag 
innocent  in  this  matter,  but  it  is  certain  that  Reuben  was  guilty  of  heinous  transgres- 
sion. 2.  The  impression  it  produced  on  Jacob.  "Israel  heard."  We  may  supply 
the  hiatus  by  saying,  (1)  with  inexpressible  grief —  grief  that  a  son  and  wife  of  his 
should  haye  committed  such  a  horrible  iniquity ;  (2)  with  bitter  shame — was  this  to 
be  the  end  of  all  God's  mercies  to  his  house,  and  of  all  his  efforts  to  piously  direct 
his  household  ?  (3)  with  silent  submission,  as  recognising  God's  hand  in  the  dis- 
pensation. More  bitter  and  crushing  was  this  last  stroke  than  the  death  if  Rachel 
or  even  the  ravishment  of  Dinah ;  and  Jacob's  silence  under  it  may  be  interpreted  as 
the  silence  of  devout  resignation: — "  I  was  dumb,  because  thou  didst  it." 

III.  The  dkath  of  Isaac.     1.  He  was  spared  to  see  his  sons  return-     " Jacob 


oh.  ran,  1— xxxvii.  l.J      THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


411 


came  unto  Isaac  his  father  unto  Mamre "  at  least  a  considerable  period  before  hu 
death.  According  to  calculations  (vide  Exposition),  Isaac  survived  the  sale  of 
Joseph  thirteen  years.  Hence  Jacob's  coming  home  must  have  taken  place  while 
Isaac  had  yet  many  years  to  live.  It  is  a  mercy  which  God  does  not  grant  to  all, 
to  see  their  children  and  their  children's  children  around  them  before  they  di*.  2. 
He  was  privileged  to  reach  a  good  old  age.  "The  days  of  Isaac  were  an  hundred 
and  fourscore  years."  Piety  has  a  special  tendency  to  prolong  life  (Ps.  xxxiv._12), 
while  the  wicked  live  not  half  their  days  (Ps.  lv.  23).  3.  He  was  favoured  with  a 
peaceful  and  a  blessed  end.  "  Isaac  gave  up  the  ghost,  and  died,  and  was  gathered 
unto  his  people."  See  Homily  on  the  death  of  Abraham  (ch.  xxv.  8).  4.  He  was 
honoured  with  a  decent  and  respectful  funeral.  "Esau  and  Jacob  buried  him." 
They  laid  him  beside  his  ancestral  dust  m  the  family  burying-place  of  Machpelah, 
where  already  slept  the  lifeless  bodies  of  Abraham  and  Sarah,  awaiting  the  resurrec- 
tion, while  his  spirit  went  to  company  with  theirs  in  the  better  country,  even  an 
heavenly. 

Learn — 1<  That  bereavements,  like  the  rest  of  life's  afflictions,  are  of  God's 
ordering,  both  as  to  time,  place,  and  manner.  2.  That  in  human  families  they  who 
are  most  beloved  are  frequently  removed  first.  3.  That  the  sick  and  dying  should 
J>e  ministered  to  with  sympathy  and  tender  attention.  4.  That  good  men  should 
love  their  wives  when  living,  and  remember  them  when  dead.  5.  That  faith  should 
always  try  to  see  the  bright  light  of  blessing  in  the  cloud  of  earth's  afflictions.  6. 
That  worse  calamities  may  overtake  a  saint  than  bereavements.  7.  That  pious 
children  do  not  cast  off  their  parents  in  old  age. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  16 — 29.  These  family  records  mingle  well  with  the  story  of  God's  grace. 
The  mother's  " Benoni "  is  the  father's  "Benjamin."  Out  of  the  pain  and  the 
bereavement  sometimes  comes  the  consolation.  A  strange  blending  of  joy  and 
sorrow  is  the  tale  of  human  love.  But  there  is  a  higher  love  which  may  draw  out 
the  pure  stream  of  peace  and  calm  delight  from  that  impure  fountain.  Jacob  and 
Esau  were  separated  in  their  lives,  but  they  met  at  their  father's  grave.  Death  is  a 
terrible  divider,  but  a  uniter  too.  Under  the  shadow  of  the  great  mystery,  on  the 
borders  of  an  eternal  world,  in  the  presence  of  those  tears  which  human  eyes  weep 
for  the  dead,  even  when  they  can  weep  no  other  tears,  the  evil  things  of  envy,  hatred, 
revenge,  alienation  do  often  hide  themselves,  and  the  better  things  of  love,  peace, 
brotherhood,  amity  come  forth.  Jacob  was  with  Isaac  when  he  died,  and  Esau  came 
to  the  grave. — B. 

§  10.  Thb  Gbnbeations  of  Euau  (ch.  xxxvi.  1— xxxvii.  1). 
EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXXVI. 

fer.  1. — Sow  these  are  the  generations 
(cf.  ch.  ii.  4 ;  v.  1,  &c.)  of  Esau, — Hairy 
(vide  ch.  xxv.  25)— which  is  Edom — Red 
(vide  ch.  xxv.  30). 

Vers.  2,  3. — Esau  took  his  wives  (the 
expression  refers  in  this  place  not  to  the 
marriage,  but  to  the  removal,  of  his  wives)  of 
the  daughters  of  Canaan ; — i.  e.  who  were  of 
the  daughters  of  Canaan  (vide  ch.  xxvi.  34) — 
Adah — "  Ornament,"  "  Beauty  "  (Gesenius) ; 
the  name  also  of  one  of  Lantech's  wives  (cf. 
eh.  iv.  19)— the  daughter  of  Elon— ""Oak" 
(Gesenius) — the  Hittite,  and  Aholibamah — 
"  Tent  of  the  High  Place  "  (Gesenius) — the 
tanyhter  of  Anah — "Answering"  (Gesenius) 


— the  daughter — i.  e.  the  grand-daughter, 
though,  after  the  LXX.  and  the  Samaritan, 
some  read  the  son,  as  in  ver.  24  (Gesenius, 
Kaliseh,  Fiirst,  et  alii) — of  Zibeon— "Co- 
loured" (Gesenius);  "Wild,"  "Robber" 
(Fiirst)  —  the  Hivite  ;  and  Bashemath  — 
"  Sweet  -  smelling  "  (Gesenius)  —  Ishmael'i 
daughter,  sister  of  Nebaj  oth —  "  High  Place  " 
(Gesenius).  The  difference  between  this 
account  and  that  previously  given  (ch.  xxvi. 
34  ;  xxviii.  9)  will  appear  at  a  glance  by 
setting  the  two  lists  of  wives  in  parallel 
columns : — 

1.    Judith,  daughter   1.  Aholibamah, daugh- 
of  Beeri  the  Hittite.      ter  of  Anah,  daugh- 
ter of   Zibeon   th« 
Hivite. 
II  2 


wo 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.       [cm.  xxxvi.  1— xxxvii.  1. 


2.  Bashemath,  daugh-  2.  Adah,  daughter  of 
ter  of  Elon  the  Hit-  Elon  the  Hittite. 
tite. 
S.  Mahalath,  da  ugh-  8.  Bashemath,  Ish- 
ter  of  Ishmael,  sis-  mael's  daughter,  sis- 
ter of  Nebajoth.  ter  of  Nebajoth. 
The  two  lists  agree  in  saying  (1)  that  Esau 
had  three  wives,  (2)  that  one  of  them  was 
the  daughter  of  Elon  the  Hittite,  (3)  that 
another  of  them  was  Ishmael's  daughter,  the 
sister  of  Nebajoth,  and  (4)  that  the  name 
of  one  of  them  was  Bashemath.  The  dis- 
crepancy between  the  two  is  greatest  in 
respect  of  the  first  wife,  who  appears  with 
a  diiferent  name  and  a  different  parentage 
in  the  two  lists ;  while  with  referenco  to  the 
second  and  the  third  wives,  it  is  only  the 
difference  of  name  that  requires  to  be  ac- 
counted for.  Now  since  the  two  lists  belong 
to  the  so-called  Elohistic  document  (Tueh, 
Bleek,  Stahelin,  Davidson,  el  alii),  the 
hypothesis  must  be  discarded  "  that  the 
Hebrew  text,  though  containing  several  im- 
portant coincidences,  evidently  embodies  two 
accounts  irreconcilably  different"  (Kalisch) — 
a  conclusion  which  can  only  be  maintained 
by  ascribing  to  the  author  the  most  absolute 
literary  incompetence.  Equally  the  conjec- 
ture must  be  set  aside  that  the  two  fists 
refer  to  different  persons,  the  second  three 
being  names  of  wives  which  Esau  took  on 
the  decease  of  the  first.  The  solutions  that 
appear  most  entitled  to  acceptance,  though 
all  are  more  or  less  conjectural,  proceed  .upon 
the  supposition  that  Esau  had  only  three 
wives,  or  at  most  four.  1.  On  the  hypothesis 
that  Esau  had  not  more  than  three  wives,  it 
is  only  needful  to  presume  that  each  of  them 
had  two  names,  a  not  unusual  circumstance 
in  Oriental  countries  (Rosenmiiller,  Haver- 
nick) — one  of  them,  probably  that  contained 
in  the  present  list,  bestowed  on  the  occasion 
of  marriage  ;  and  that  Anah,  the  father  of 
Aholibamah,  was  the  same  person  with  Beeri, 
or  the  Well- Man,  who  received  that  cognomen 
from  the  incident  related  in  ver.  24,  viz., 
that  he  discovered  certain  hot  springs  while 
feeding  bis  father's  asses  (Hengstenberg, 
Keil,  Kurtz)  —  the  peculiarity  that  in  one 
place  (ch.  xxvi.  34)  he  is  styled  a  Hittite,  in 
another  (ch.  xixvL  2)  a  Hivite,  and  in  a 
third  (ch.  xxxvi.  20)  a  Horite,  being  ex- 
plained by  the  conjecture  that  the  first  was 
the  generic  term  for  the  race,  the  second  the 
specific  designation  of  the  tribe,  and  the 
third  the  particular  name  for  the  inhabitants 
of  the  district  to  which  he  belonged  (Keil, 
Lange,  'Speaker's  Commentary').  2.  Another 
solution  gives  to  Esau  four  wives,  by  sup- 
posing Judith  to  have  died  without  issue 
(Murphy,  Jacobus),  or,  in  consequence  of 
being  childless,  though  still  living,  to  have 
been  passed  over  in  silence  in  the  former 
genealogical  register  (v,'uirry),  ami  Aholiba- 


mah to  have  been  the  fourth  partner  whom 
Esau  espoused.  The  Samaritan  version 
reads  Mahalath  for  Bashemath  in  the  second 
list,  which  it  regards  as  an  error  of  tran- 
scription (W.  L.  Alexander  in  Kitto's  '  Cyclo- 
pedia ') ;  while  others  think  that  Adah  has 
been  written  by  inadvertence  for  Bashemath 
(Inglis) ;  but  such  conjectures  are  as  unnece» 
sary  as  they  are  manifestly  arbitrary. 

Vers.  4,  5.  —  And  Adah  bare  to-  Esau 
Eliphaz;— "The  Strength  of  God"  (Gese- 
nius) ;  afterwards  the  name  of  one  of  Job's 
friends  (Job  ii.  11;  iv.  1;  xv.  1) — and 
Bashemath  bare  Reuel; — "The  Friend  of 
God  "  (Gesenius) ;  the  name  of  Moses'  father- 
in-law  (Exod.  ii.  18) — and  Aholibamah  bare 
Jeush,— "Collector"  (Fiirst,  Lange) ;  "whom 
God  hastens "  (Gesenius) ;  afterwards  the 
name  of  a  son  of  Behoboam  (2  Chron.  xi. 
19)  —  and  Jaalam,  —  "  whom  God  hides  " 
(Gesenius)  ;  "  Ascender  of  the  Mountains  " 
(Fiirst)— and  Korah:— "Baldness"  (Fiirst, 
Gesenius) ;  the  name  of  a  family  of  Levites 
and  singers  in  the  time  of  David  to  whom 
ten  of  the  psalms  are  ascribed— these  are  the 
sons  of  Esau,  which  were  born  unto  him  in 
the  land  of  Canaan — not  necessarily  imply- 
ing that  other  sons  were  born  to  him  in 
Edom,  but  rather  intimating  that  all  his 
family  were  born  before  he  left  the  Holy 
Land. 

Ver.  6.— And  Esau  took  his  wives,  and 
his  sons,  and  his  daughters,  and  all  the  per- 
sons (literally,  souls)  of  his  house,  and  his 
cattle  (mifoneh),  and  all  his  beasts  {beh-e- 
mah),  and  all  his  substance  (literally,  all  his 
acquisitions),  which  he  had  got  in  the  land 
of  Canaan;  and  went  into  the  country — 
literally,  into  a  land  ;  not  Ik  rijs  y^c  (LXX. ), 
or  mi  alteram  regionem  (Vulgate),  but  either 
into  the  land,  sc.  of  Seir  (Keil),  or,  taking 
the  next  as  a  qualifying  clause,  into  a  land 
apart  (Murphy,  Lange) — from  the  face  of— 
or,  on  account  of  (Rosenmiiller,  Kalisch) — 
his  brother  Jacob. 

Ver.  7. — For  their  riches  were  more  than 
that  they  might  dwell  together ;  and  the 
land  wherein  they  were  strangers — literally, 
of  their  wanderings  (cf.  ch.  xxviii.  4 ;  xxxvii 
1) — could  not  bear  them  because  of  their 
cattle.  This  does  not  necessarily  imply  that 
Jacob  was  established  in  Canaan  before  Esau 
removed.  Esau  may  have  recognised  the 
impossibility  of  two  so  rich  and  powerful 
chieftains  as  himself  and  his  brother  occupy- 
ing Canaan,  and  may  have  retired  before 
Jacob  actually  took  possession  (Keil,  Inglis). 

Ver.  8.— Thus  dwelt  Esau  in  mount  Seii 
(ch.  xxxii.  3  ;  Deut.  ii.  5 ;  Josh.  xxiv.  4) : 
Esau  is  Edom  (vide  ch.  xxv.  30).  The 
obvious  continuation  of  this  verse  is  to  be 
found  in  ch.  xxxvii.  1,  so  that  vers.  9—40 
are  parenthetical  in  their  character ;  but 
whether    originally    written    by  Moses,    of 


ca.  mvi.  1— xxxvn.  1.]    THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


UB 


inserted  by  a  late  redactor,  aa  some  main- 
tain, may  legitimately  be  Tegarded  as  an 
open  question. 

Ver.  9. — And  these  are  the  generations 
of  Esau  —  "the  repetition  of  this  clause 
shows  that  it  does  not  necessarily  indicate 
diversity  of  authorship,  or  a  very  distinct 
piece  of  composition  "  (Murphy) — the  father 
of  the  Edomites  {i.  e.  the  founder  of  the 
Edomitish  nation)  in  mount  Seir. 

Vers.    10—12. — These  are   the  names  of 
Esau's  sons  ;  Eliphaz  the  son  of  Adah  the 
wife  of  Esau,  Reuel  the  son  of  Bashemath 
the  wife  of  Esau  {vide  ver.  4).     And  the 
sons  of  Eliphaz  were  Toman, — the  name  was 
afterwards  given   to  a  district  of  Idumea 
(Jer.   xlix.   20),  and  borne  by  one  of  Job's 
friends  (Job  ii.    11)— Omar,— "  Eloquent" 
(Gesenius),    "  Mountain-dweller  "  (Fiirst) — 
Zepho, — ,r"Watch-tower  "  (Gesenius) ;  called 
Zephi  in  1  Chron.  i.  36 — and  Gatam, — "their 
touch"  (Gesenius),   "dried  up"   (Fiirst)— 
and  Kenaz — "Hunting"  (Gesenius).     And 
Timna  —  "  Restraint  "    (Gesenius,     Fiirst, 
Murphy) — was  concubine — pilgash  (vide  ch. 
xvi.  3  ;  xxv.  6)— to  Eliphaz  Esau's  son ; — 
perhaps  given  to  him  by  Adah,  so  that  her 
jhildren  were  reckoned  Adah's  (Hughes) — 
and  she  bare  to  Eliphaz  Amalek — "  Inhabit- 
rot  of  the  Valley,"  or  "Warrior"  (Fiirst); 
"  a    nation    of    head-breakers "   (Lange)  ; 
"Labouring"   (Gesenius,   Murphy).      It  is 
probable  that  this  was  the  founder  of  the 
Amalekite   nation   who   attacked   Israel   at 
Horeb  (Keil,  Kalisch,  Murphy),  though  by 
others  (Gesenius,    Michaelis,    Fiirst)  these 
have  been  regarded  as  a  primitive  people, 
chiefly  on  the  grounds  that  Amalek  is  men- 
tioned in  ch.  xiv.  7  as  having  existed  in  the 
days  of  Abraham,  and  that  Balaam  calls 
Amalek  the  first  of  nations  (Numb.   xxiv. 
20) ;  but  the  first  may  simply  be  a  prolepsiSj 
(Hengstenberg),  while  the  second  alludes  not 
to  the  antiquity  of  the  nation,  but  either  to 
its  power  (Kalisch),  or  to  the  circumstance 
that  it  was  the  first  heathen  tribe  to  attack 
Israel  (Eeil).     These  (including  Eliphaz  for 
the  reason  specified  above)  were  the  sons  of 
Adah  Esau's  wife. 

Ver.  13.- — And  these  are  the  sons  of  Reuel; 
Nahath, — Nachath,  "Going  down"  —  and 
Zerah, — or  Zerach,  "Rising"  —  Shammah, 
— "Wasting "(Gesenius,  Murphy);  "Fame," 
"  Renown  "  (Fiirst)— and  Mizzah  : — "Trepi- 
dation "  (Gesenius) ;  "Fear,"  "Sprinkling" 
(Murphy) ;  if  from  mazaz,  "Fear,". if  from 
nazah,  "Joy"  (Fiirst)— these  were  the  sons 
of  Bashemath  Esau's  wife. 

Ver.  14. — And  these  were  the  sons  of 
Aholibamah,  the  daughter  of  Anah  the 
daughter  of  Zibeon,  Esau's  wife  {vide  ver. 
2) :  and  she  bare  to  Esau  Jeush,  ancTJ  aalam, 
*nS  Koran  {vide  ver.  5). 
Vers.  15    16  —These  were  dukes  of  the 


sons  of  Esau.  The  D'Blpg,  derived  pro- 
bably from  1?X,  to  be  familiar,  whence  tc 
join  together,  or  associate,  were  Edomite 
and  Horite  phylarchs  or  tribe-leaders,  r/yt- 
fiovtg,  (LXX.),  chieftains  of  a  thousand 
men  (Gerlach).  At  a  later  period  the  term 
came  to  be  applied  to  the  Jewish  chiefs  or 
governors  of  the  Restoration  (Zeeh.  ix.  7  ; 
xii.  5).  The  sons  of  Eliphaz  the  firstborn 
son  of  Esau;  duke  Teman,  duke  Omar, 
duke  Zepho,  duke  Kenaz  {vide  on  ver.  11), 
duke  Korah, — inserted  here  probably  by 
clerical  error  from  ver.  18  (Konnicott, 
Tuch,  Knobel,  Delitzsch,  Keil,  Murphy, 
Quarry),  and  accordingly  omitted  in  the 
Samaritan  Pentateuch  and  Version,  though 
still  retained  by  Onkelos  and  the  LXX., 
and  on  the  hypothesis  of  its  genuine- 
ness explained  by  some  as  the  name  of  a 
nephew  of  Eliphaz  (Junius)  ;  of  a  son  by 
another  mother"  (Ainsworth) ;  of  a  son  of 
Korah  (ver.  13)  by  the  widow  of  Timna  (1 
Chron.  i.  36),  who,  having  died  without  issue, 
left  his  wife  to  his  brother  (Michaelis);  of 
some  descendant  of  Eliphaz  by  intermarriage 
who  subsequently  rose  to  be  the  head  of  a 
clan  (Kalisch),— duke  Gatam  {vide  ver.  11), 
and  duke  Amalek  {vide  ver.  12) :  these  are 
the  dukes  that  came  of  Eliphaz  in  the  land 
of  Edom ;  these  were  the  sons  of  Adah. 

Ver.  17. — And  these  are  the  sons  of  Reuel 
Esau's  son ;  duke  Nahath,  duke  Zerah, 
duke  Shammah,  duke  Mizzah :  these  are  the 
dakes  that  came  of  Reuel  in  the  land  of 
Edom;  these  are  the  sons  of  Bashemath 
Esau's  wife  {vide  on  ver.  13). 

Ver.  18.— And  these  are  the  sons  of  Aholi- 
bamah Esau's  wife;  duke  Jeush,  duke 
Jaalam,  duke  Korah  :  these  were  the  dukes 
that  came  of  Aholibamah  the  daughter  of 
Anah,  Esau's  wife.  In  the  two  previom 
instances  it  is  the  grandsons  of  Esau  that 
become  the  allupbim  or  heads  of  tribes, 
while  in  this  it  is  the  sons,  which  Haver- 
nick  regards  as  a  mark  of  authenticity  {vide 
'Introd.,' §20). 

Ver.  19. — These  are  the  sons  of  Esau,  who 
is  Edom,  and  these  are  their  dukes 

Vers.  20,  21.—  These  are  the  sons  of  Seir 
the  Horite,  who  inhabited  the  land.  The 
primitive  inhabitants  of  Idumea  were  Horites 
{vide  ch.  xiv.  6),  of  whom  the  ancestor,  Seir 
("Rugged"),  either  gave  his  name  to,  or 
took  his  name  from,  the  district  in  which  he 
lived.  Though  ultimately  driven  out  by  the 
Edomites  (Deut  ii.  12),  they  were  probably 
only  gradually  dispossessed,  and  not  until  a 
portion  of  them  had  coalesced  with  theii 
conquerors,  as  Esau  himself  had  a  HoriU 
wife,  Aholibamah,  and  his  son  Eliphaz  a 
Horite  concubine  of  the  name  of  Timna. 
They  were,  as  the  name  Horite,  from  chor,  a 
hole  or  cavern,  imports  a  race  of  troglodyte* 


m 


THE  600K  OP  GENESIS,    [ch.  xxxvi.  1-mvn.  t 


or  cave  men,  who  dwelt  in  the  sandstone  and 
limestone  caves  with  which  the  land  ofEdom 
abounds.  The  cave  palaces,  temples,  and 
tombs  that  have  been  excavated  in  Mount 
Seir  are  still  astonishing  in  their  grandeur. 
Lotan, — "Wrapping  up"  (Gesenius) — and 
Shobal,  —  "Flowing  "  (Gesenius )  —  and 
*ibeon,  and  Anah  (this  Anah  was  the  uncle 
of  the  Anah  mentioned  in  ver.  25),  and 
Dishon, — "Gazelle  "  (Gesenius,  Ftirst) — and 
Ezer, — "Treasure  "  (Gesenius) — and Dishan  : 
—  same  as  Dishon  (Gesenius,  Fiirst)  ; 
'<  Threshing"  (Murphy) —these  are  the  dukes 
of  the  Horites,  the  children  of  Seir  in  the 
land  of  Edom. 

Ver.  22. — And  the  children  of  lotan  were 
Hori — the  name  of  the  tribe  (ver.  20) — and 
Hemam : — or  Homam  (1  Chron.  i.  39)  ; 
"Destruction"  (Gesenius),  "Commotion" 
(Fiirst,,  Murphy) — and  Lotan's  sister  was 
Tirana — probably  the  concubine  of  Eliphaz 
(ver.  12). 

Ver.  23. — And  the  children  of  Shobal 
were  these ;  Alvan, — or  Alian  (1  Chron.  i. 
40) ;  "  Unjust "  (Gesenius),  "  Lofty  "  (Fiirst, 
Murphy) — and  Jtanahath, — "  Rest  "  (Gese- 
nius)— and  Ebal, — "Stripped  of  leaves" 
(Gesenius,  Murphy) ;  "  Bare  Mountain " 
(Fiirst) — Shepho, — or  Shephi  (1  Chron.  i. 
40);  "  Nakedness"  (Gesenius) — and  Onam — 
*'  Strong  "  (Gesenius). 

Ver.  24. — And  these  are  the  children  of 
Zibeon  ;  both  Ajah, — "  Screamer"  (Gesenius) 
— and  Anah  : — the  father-in-law  of  Esau 
(ver.  2) — this  was  that  Anah  that  found  the 
mules  in  the  wilderness, — neither  invented 
the  procreation  of  mules  (Aben  Ezra,  Kimchi, 
Luther,  Calvin,  Willet,  Clarke,  Ainsworth, 
ic),  since  ^D  does  not  signify  to  invent, 
but  to  light  upon  or  discover  (Keil),  and 
there  were  no  horses  at  that  time  in  those 
regions  (Michaelis),  and  it  is  not  said  that 
Anah  was  feeding  his  father's  horses  and 
asses,  but  only  asses  (Rosenmuller) ;  nor 
overcame  the  giants  (Onkelos,  Samaritan, 
Bochart), which  would  have  required  DVD'N 
(ch..  xiv.  5  ;  Deut.  ii.  11)  ;  nor  found  out 
salt  water  (Oleaster,  Pererius),  a  useful  herb 
(Mais),  or  'lafieiv  as  a  proper  name  (LXX.) ; 
but  discovered  the  warm  springs,  the  airai 
Ktyofitvov,  D'D^,  being  now  generally  taken 
to  mean  aquct  callidas  (Vulgate,  Dathius, 
Gesenius,  Rosenmuller,  Hengstenberg,  Keil, 
Kalisch,  Murphy),  of  which  there  were  vari- 
ous in  the  vicinity,  as,  e.  g.,  the  springs  of 
Callirrhoe  in  the  Wady  Zerka  Maein,  and 
those  in  the  Wady-el-Ahsa  to  the  south-east 
of  the  Dead  Sea,  and  those  in  the  Wady 
Hamad  between  Kerek  and  the  Dead  Sea — as 
he  fed  (literally,  in  his  feeding)  the  asses  of 
Zibeon  his  father.  "The  whirlpool  of  Karls- 
bad is  said  to  have  been  discovered  through  a 
hound  of  Charles  IV.  which  pursued  a  stag 


into  a  hot  spring,  and  attracted  the  hunt* 
men  to  the  spot  by  its  howling"  (Keil  in 
loco  ;  cf.  Tacitus,  '  Hist.,'  v.  3). 

Ver.  25.— And  the  children  of  Anah — the 
brother  of  Zibeon  (ver.  20) — were  these; 
Dishon, — named  after  his  uncle  (ver.  21)— 
and  Aholibamah  the  daughter  of  Anah. 
This  Aholibamah  was  not  Esau's  wife,  but 
the  cousin  of  Esau's  wife's  father. 

Ver.  26. — And  these  are  the  children  of 
Dishon  ;— the  son  of  Seir  (ver  21)— Hemdan, 
— or  Amram  (1  Chron.  i.  41)  ;  "Pleasant" 
(Gesenius)  —  and  Eshban,  —  or  Heshbon  ; 
"Reason,"  "Understanding"  (Gesenius); 
" Intelligent,"  "Hero "  (Fiirst) — and  Ithran, 
— the  same  as  Jethro  and  Jithron  ;  ' '  the 
Superior  or  Excellent  One  "  (Gesenius,  Fiirst, 
Murphy,  Lange)— and  Cheran  —  "  Harp  " 
(Gesenius),  "Companion"  (Fiirst). 

.Ver.  27. — The  children  of  Ezer  are  these ; 
Bilhan, — "  Modest  "  (Gesenius),  "  Tender  " 
(Fiirst) — and  Zaavan, — "  Disturbed  "  (Gese- 
nius)—and  Akan — Jakan  (1  Chron.  i.  42) ; 
"  Twisting  "  (Gesenius,  Murphy). 

Ver.  28.— The  children  of  Dishan  are 
these;  Vz, — "Sandy"  (Gesenius,  Fiirst) — 
and  Aran — "Wild  Goat"  (Gesenius); 
"  Power,"  "  Strength  "  (Fiirst). 

Vers.  29,  30.— Th«c  are  the  dukes  that 
came  of  the  Horites  ;  duke  Lotan,  dnke  Sho- 
bal. duke  Zibeon,  duke  Anah,  duke  Dishon, 
dnke  Ezer,  duke  Dishan :  these  are  the 
dukes  that  came  of  Hori,  among  (rather, 
according  io)  their  dukes  in  the  land  ol 
Seir. 

Ver.  31. — And  these  (which  follow)  ari 
the  kings  that  reigned  in  the  land  of  Edom 
before  there  reigned  any  (literally,  before  t/oe 
reigning  of  a)  king  over  (or,  to)  the  children 
of  Israel.  1.  The  reference  to  Israelitish 
kings  in  this  place  has  been  explained  as  an 
evidence  of  post  -  Mosaic  authorship  (Le 
Clerc,  Bleek,  Ewald,  Bohlen,  et  alii),  or  at 
least  as  a  later  interpolation  from  1  Chron. 
i.  43  (Kennicott,  A.  Clarke,  Lange),  but  is 
sufficiently  accounted  for  by  remembering 
that  in  ch.  xxxv.  11  kings  had  been  pro- 
mised to  Jacob,  while  the  blessing  pro- 
nounced on  Esau  (ch.  xxvii  40)  implied 
that  in  his  line  also  should  arise  governors, 
the  historian  being  understood  to  say  that 
though  the  promised  kings  had  not  yet 
arisen  in  the  line  of  Jacob,  the  house  of 
Esau  had  attained  at  a  somewhat  early  period 
to  political  importance  (Calvin,  Michaelis, 
Rosenmuller,  Keil,  Kalisch,  Gerlach,  Hiivor- 
nick,  and  others).  2.  The  difficulty  of  find- 
ing room  for  the  dukes  (seven,  four  and 
three,  all  grandsons  of  Esau,  vers.  15 — 19), 
the  kings  (eight  in  number,  vers.  32—39), 
and.  again  the  dukes  (in  all  eleven,  vers.  40 
— 43),  that  intervened  between  Esau  and 
Moses  disappears  if  the  kings  and  dukes  ex- 
isted contemporaneously,  of  which  Exod.  *v, 


c&.  xxxvi.  i— xxxvu.  t.]      THE  BOOK  OE  GENESlb. 


42S 


15,  as  compared  with  Numb.  xx.  14,  afforda 
probable  evidence.  3.  As  to  the  character 
»f  the  Edomitish  kings,  it  is  apparent  that  it 
was  not  a  hereditary  monarchy,-  since  in  no 
case  does  the  son  succeed  the  father,  but  an 
elective  sovereignty,  the  kings  being  chosen 
by  the  dukes,  alluphim,  or  phylarchs  (Eeil, 
Hengstenberg,  Kalisch,  Gerlach),  though  the 
idea  of  successive  usurpations  (Lange)  is  not 
without  a  measure  of  probability. 

Ver.  82. — And  Bela  the  son  of  Beor  (cf. 
ch.  xiv.  2,  where  Bela  is  the  name  for  Zoar ; 
and  Numb.  xxii.  5,  where  Balaam's  father 
is  called  Beor,  whence  the  XXX.  has  here 
BaXdc)  reigned  in  Edpm  (as  the  first  sove- 
reign) :  and  the  name  of  his  city  was  Dinha- 
bah— "Concealment,"  or  "Little  Place" 
(Fiirst) ;  a  place  of  plunder  (Gesenius),  the 
situation  of  which  has  not  been  identified. 

Ver.  33. — And  Bela  died,  and  Jobab — 
probably  meaning  "  Desert,"  or  "  Shout  " 
(Gesenius)  ;  identified  with  Job  (LXX., 
Augustine,  Ambrose)  —  an  opinion  which 
Michaelis  declares  to  be  insignis  error,  nee 
Mstoricus  solum,  sed  et  grammaticus,  Jobab 
beingderived  from  the  root  22\{vide  *Suppl.,' 
p.  40) ;  the  name  of  a  region  of  the  Jok- 
tanite  Arabs  (ch.  x.  29)— the  son  of  Zerah 
(who  may  have  been  the  duke  Zerah  men- 
tioned in  ver.  17,  and  is  here  described  by 
the  territory  over  which  he  ruled  as)  of 
Bozrah — "  Fort "  (Gesenius)  ;  afterwards  an 
important  city  of  the  Edomites  (Isa.  xxxiv. 
8  ;  lxiii.  1 ;  Jer.  xlix.  13) ;  still  to  be  traced 
in  El-Busaireh,  a  village  and  castle  in  Arabia 
Petrsea,  about  twenty-five  miles  south  by 
east  of  the  Dead  Sea  (Kobinson,  vol.  ii.  pp. 
670,  571  ;  Gesenius,  'Lex.,'  p.  135 :  Porter 
in  Kitto's  '  Cyclopedia ')— reigned  in  his 
stead — literally,  under  him,  i.  e.  in  succes- 
sion to  him. 

Ver.  34. — And  Jobab  died,  and  Ensham — 
Hushai ;  "  Haste  "  (Gesenius) — of  the  land 
of  Temani  (a  province  in  Northern  Idumea, 
with  a  city  Teman  which  has  not  yet  been 
discovered)  reigned  in  his  stead. 

Ver.  35. — And  Husham  died,  and  Hadad 
— "  Shouting,"  e.  g.  for  joy  (Gesenius) ; 
whence  "  Conqueror  "  (Fiirst) — the  son  of 
Bedad,  —  "  Separation  "  (Gesenius)  —  who 
smote  Midian  (vide  ch.  xxv.  2)  in  the  field 
of  Moab  {vide  ch.  xix.  37),  reigned  in  his 
stead :  and  the  name  of  his  city  was  Avith 
—"Ruins"  (Gesenius),  "Twisting"  (Mur- 
phy), "  Hut- Village  "  (Fiirst).  An  attempt 
has  been  made  (Bohles)  to  identify  this 
monarch  with  the  Edomite  of  the  same  name 
who  rose  against  Solomon  (1  Kings  xi.  14) ; 
but  (1)  this  Hadad  was  not  of  royal  blood, 
while  Solomon's  contemporary  was  ;  (2)  this 
Hadad  was  a  king,  while  Solomon's  adver- 
tary  was  only  a  pretender ;  (3)  this  Hadad 
was  a  conqueror  of  the  Midianites,  while  in 
Solomon's  time  the  Midianites  had  vanished 


from  history  ;  and  (4)  this  Hadad  lived  and 
reigned  before  Israel  had  any  kings  {vide 
Hengstenberg,  '  On  the  Genuineness  of  the 
Pentateuch,'  vol.  ii.  dissert.  6  ;  and  cf. 
Havernick's  '  Introd.,'  §  20,  and  Keil  in 
loco). 

Ver.  36. — And  Hadad  died,  and  Samlah— 
"  Covering,"  "  Garment,"  (Gesenius,  Fiirst, 
Murphy) — of  Masrekah — "Vineyard"  (Ge- 
senius)— reigned  in  his  stead. 

Ver.  37. — And  Samlah  died,  and  Saul — 
"  Asked  "  (Gesenius) — of  Behoboth  by  the 
river — Rehoboth  (literally,  wide  spaces)  of 
the  River  is  so  called  to  distinguish  it  from 
the  Asshurite  settlement  of  the  same  name 
in  ch.  x.  11  (Rosenmiiller),  though  by  some 
it  is  identified  with  Rehoboth  Ir  (Ainsworth). 
If  the  river  spoken  of  be  the  Euphrates 
(Onkelos,  Keil,  Kalisch),  then  it  is  probably 
to  be  sought  for  in  the  Errachabi  or  Racha- 
beh  near  the  mouth  of  the  Chaboras  (Keil), 
though  the  river  may  be  some  small  nahar 
in  Idumea  (Lange),  in  which  case  the  site 
will  be  uncertain — reigned  in  his  stead. 

Ver.  38. — And  Saul  died,  and  Baal-hanan 
— "  Lord  of  Benignity  "  (Gesenius) — the  son 
of  Achbor — "  Mouse  "  (Gesenius) — reigned 
in  his  stead. 

Ver.  39. — And  Baal-hanan  the  son  ol 
Achbor  died,  and  Hadar — Hadad  (1  Chron. 
i.  50) — reigned  in  his  stead  :  and  the  name 
of  his  city  was  Pau ; — Pai  (1  Chron.  i.  50) ; 
"  Bleating"  (Gesenius),  "Yawning"  (Fiirst), 
with  which  accords  *oy wp  (LXX. ) — and  his 
wife's  name  was  Mehetabel, — "  Whom  God 
benefits  "  ( Gesenius )  —  the  daughter  of 
Matred,  —  "  Pushing  "  ( Gesenius )  —  the 
daughter  of  Mezahab— "  Water  of  Gold" 
(Gesenius).  That  the  death  of  this  king, 
which  a  later  chronicler  records  (1  Chron.  i. 
51),  is  not  here  mentioned  by  the  historian 
is  commonly  regarded  (Rosenmiiller,  Haver- 
nick,  Hengstenberg,  Keil,  Kalisch,  et  alii) 
as  a  proof  that  he  was  then  alive,  and  that 
in  fact  he  was  the  king  of  Edom  to  whom 
Moses  sent  ambassadors  requesting  permission 
to  pass  through  the  land  (Numb,  xx.  14). 

Vers.  40 — 43. — And  these  are  the  names  ol 
the  dukes  that  came  of  Esau,  according  to  their 
families,  after  their  places,  by  their  names. 
It  is  now  generally  agreed  that  this  and 
the  ensuing  verses  contain  not  a  second  list 
of  dukes  who  rose  to  power  on  the  overthrow 
of  the  preceding  monarchical  institutions 
(Bertbeau,  Ainsworth,  Patrick),  or  a  con- 
tinuation' of  the  preceding  list  of  dukes,  which 
had  simply  been  interrupted  by  a  parenthesis 
about  the  kings  (Bush) ;  but  either  an  enu- 
meration ol  the  hereditary  phylarchs  who 
were  contemporaneous  with  Hadar,  and  in  all 
probability  formed,  his  council  (Murphy),  or 
a  territorial  catalogue  of  the  districts  in  which 
the  original  alluphim  who  sprang  from  Esau 
(vers.   15—19)  exercised  their  sovereignty 


tu 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS,      [ch.  xxxvi.  1— xxxvii.  i. 


(Keil,  Kaliseh,  Lange,  'Speaker's  Comment- 
>ry ').  Duke  Timnah, — according  to  the 
explanation  just  given  this  should  perhaps 
be  read  duke  of  Tininah  =  A  malek,  whose 
mother  was  Timna  (Lange),  but  this  is  con- 
jectural—  dnke  Alvah, —  or  of  Alvah,  or 
Aliah,  closely  allied  to  Alvan  (ver.  23) — 
duke  (of)  Jetheth, — "  Nail "  (Gesenius), 
"Subjugation"  (Fiirst) — duke  (of)  Aholiba- 
mah, — vide  ver.  2  ;  perhaps  Esau's  wife  as 
well  as  Eliphaz's  concubine  gave  her  name 
to  the  district  over  which  her  son  ruled — 
duke  Elah,— "  Strength  "  (Fiirst),  "Tere- 
binth" (Murphy) — duke  Pinon, — probably 
equal  to  Pinion,  dark  (Gesenius) — duke  Kenaz 
(vide  ver.  11),  duke  Teman  (ver.  15),  duke 
Mibzar, — "Fortress,"  "Strong  City"  (Gese- 
nius)— duke  Magdiel, — "Prince  of  God" 
(Gesenius) — duke  Iram :  — "  Citizen  "  (Gese- 
nius)— these  be  the  dukes  of  Edom,  accord- 
ing to  their  habitations  (i.  e.  their  capitals, 
or  districts)  in  the  land  of  their  possessions. 
The  word  seems  to  indicate  an  independent 
sovereignty  within  their  respective  provinces 
or  principalities.     He  is  Esau  the  father  of 


the  Edomites.  The  clause  is  equivalent  to 
saying,  This  Esau  (already  referred  to)  was 
the  ancestor  of  these  Edomites. 

CHAPTER  XXXVII. 

Ver.  1.— And  Jacob  dwelt  in  the  land 
wherein  his  father  was  a  stranger  (literally, 
in  the  land  of  the  sqjournings  of  his  father), 
in  the  land  of  Canaan.  This  verse  is  not  the 
commencement  of  the  ensuing  (Keil,  Kaliseh, 
Lange,  &c),  hut  the  concluding  sentence  of 
the  present,  section,  the  adversative  particle 
1,  corresponding  to  the  St  of  the  LXX.,  in- 
troducing a  contrast  between  Esau,  who  dwelt 
in  Mount  Seir,  and  Jacob,  who  dwelt  in  the 
land  of  Canaan,  and  the  following  verse  be- 
ginning the  next  division  of  the  book  with 
the  customary  formula,  "These  are  the 
generations"  (LXX.,  some  MS.,  Quarry, 
p.  523).  Eosenmiiller  less  happily  connects 
the  present  verse  with  ch.  xxxv.  29  ;  the 
Vulgate  begins  the  next  section  with  ver.  3. 
A  similar  division  of  verses  to  that  proposed 
will  be  found  in  ch.  xzv.  11 


HOMILETICS. 

Ch.  xxxvi.  1 — xxxvii.  1. — The  last  of  the  house  of  Esau.  I.  The  removal  of 
Esau's  house  from  Canaan.  1.  A  complete  removal.  "  Esau  took  his  wives,  and  his 
sons,  and  his  daughters,  and  all  the  persons  of  his  house,  and  his  cattle,  and  all  his 
beasts,  and  all  his  substance,  which  he  had  got  in  the  land  of  Canaan ;  and  went 
into  a  land  apart  from  the  face  of  his  brother."  2.  A  necessary  removal.  Two 
things  rendered  the  withdrawal  of  Esau  from  Canaan  imperative — (1)  that  which 
was  patent  to  Esau's  sense,  viz.,  that  the  land  of  Canaan  was  too  strait  to  afford 
accommodation  to  two  so  powerful  chieftains  as  his  brother  and  himself ;  and  (2) 
that  which  appears  to  have  been  accepted  by  Esau's  faith,  viz.,  that  the  decision  of 
Divine  providence  was  against  him,  and  that  the  land  belonged  to  Jacob.  Hence 
for  this  twofold  reason  his  retirement  from  Canaan  is  said  to  have  taken  place  on 
account  of  his  brother.  3.  A  peaceful  removal.  Though  in  one  sense  compulsory, 
in  another  aspect  of  it  Esau's  departure  was  voluntary.  Instead  of  disputing  pos- 
session of  the  land  with  his  brother,  which,  humanly  Bpeaking,  he  might  have  done 
with  some  considerable  hope  of  success,  he  quietly  ceded  what  perhaps  he  saw  he 
could  not  ultimately^  retain.  Still  it  was  to  his  credit  that,  instead  of  wrangling 
with  Jacob  about  its  "present  occupation,  he  peacefully  withdrew  to  the  wild  mountain 
region  of  Seir.  A  permanent  removal.  Esau  established  his  settlements  altogether 
outside  the  limits  of  the  Holy  Land,  and  never  again  appeared  as  a  claimant  for  its 
possession,  leaving  it  finally  in  the  free  and  undisputed  ownership  of  Jacob.  Hence, 
while  it  is  said  that  "  Esau  dwelt  in  Mount  Seir,"  it  is  appropriately  added  by  the 
historian,  in  concluding  the  present  section,  "  And  Jacob  dwelt  in  the  land  wherein 
his  father  was  a  stranger,  in  the  land  of  Canaan." 

II.  The  development  op  Esau's  house  in  Edom.  1.  A  numerous  race.  Though 
Esau's  sons  were  not  so  many  as  those  of  Jacob,  yet  his  descendants  developed  into 
a  people  much  more  rapidly  than  did  those  of  Jacob.  This  may  have  been  partly  due 
to  the  circumstance  that  they  were — 2.  A  mixed  race,  having  obviously  incorporated 
amongst  themselves  a  portion  at  least  of  the  original  Horites,  whose  land  they  appro- 
priated, and  whoso  political  life  they  appear  to  have  adopted.  Then  it  is  apparent 
that  they  werc^3.  An  aristocratic  race.  At  the  time  of  their  invasion  by  the 
Esahites,  the  cave-dwellers  of  Mount  Seir  had  attained  to  something  like  a  settled 
government   by   means  of   alluphim,  pliylarchs,  or  tribe  princes,  each  of   whom 


CH.  xxxvi.  1— xxxvn.l.]     THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.-  425 


enjoyed  a  sort  of  iudependentsovereignty ;  and,  as  has  often  happened  since,  though 
obliged  to  retire  before  the  more  powerful  Canaanitish  tribe,  they  succeeded  in  impos- 
ing on  their  conquerors  their  own  political  institutions.  No  fewer  than  fourteen  of 
Esau's  grandsons  became  reigning  dukes  in  the  countiy.  Still  further,  it  may  be 
inferred  that  they  were— 4.  A  progressive  race.  The  impulse  towards  a  national 
life  thus  communicated  by  the  Seirites  does  not  appear  to  have  exhausted  itself  by 
simply  the  formation  of  small  independent  principalities,  which,  as  civilisation 
advances,  are  always  felt  to  be  a  source  of  weakness  rather  than  strength  to  the 
countiy  whose  social  and  political  unity  is  thus  broken  up,  and  which  eventually 
call  for  the  reverse  process  of  a  unification  of  the  different  fragments,  whether  by 
free  confederation  or  by  imperial  subordination.  In  the  case  of  the  Edomites  the 
phylarchs  were  succeeded  by  lungs,  whether  elective  monarchs  or  foreign  usurpers 
cannot  be  determined,  though  the  preponderance  of  sentiment  amoDg  interpreters  is 
in  favour  of  the  former  hypothesis.  And  then,  finally,  they  were— 5.  An  exiled 
race  ;  that  is  to  say,  though  sprung  from  the  soil  of  Canaau,  Ihey  developed  outside 
its  limits— Jacob's  family  alone,  as  the  Heaven-appointed  heirs,  remaining  within  the 
borders  of  the  Holy  Land. 

Learn— 1.  That  God  is  able  to  bring  about  his  purposes  in  peaceful  ways  when 
he  so  desireth.  2.  That  natural  men  often  exemplify  great  virtues  in  their  conduct. 
3  That  abundance  of  wealth  is  frequently  a  cause  of  separation  among  friends.  4. 
Tuat  po.itical  greatness  is  much  more  easily  attained,  by  nations  as  well  as  indi- 
viduals, thau  spiritual  pre-eminence.  5.  That  a  nation's  advancement  in  civilisation 
is  no  certain  guarantee  of  its  continuance.  6.  That  in  nature,  as  well  as  grace,  the 
first  is  often  last,  and  the  last  first.  7.  That  the  heirs  of  the  covenant  are  certain  in 
the  long  run  to  obtain  the  inheritance. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  8. — Esau  separates  from  Jacob.  I.  God.  requires  entire  devotedness  and 
faith.  Edom  is  allied  to  the  true  kingdom,  but  is  not  one  with  it.  We  may  keep  in 
mind  the  relationship  between  the  descendants  of  the  two  brothers,  that  we  may  learn 
the  more  clearly  to  distinguish  the  true  he  rs  of  the  blessing. 

II.  The  true  believers  set  apart  by  special  grace.  The  rest  of  the  Book 
of  Genesis  follows  the  course  of  the  one  family  in  whose  midst  the  ark  of  the  covenant, 
as  it  were,  was  already  resting,  where  was  (1)  the  revelation  of  God  and  (2)  the 
special  manifestation  of  his  favour,  and  out  of  which  should  come  forth  (3)  the 
people  among  the  peoples,  the  kingdom  among  the  kingdoms,  the  Goshen  in  the 
Egypt,  the  seed  of  life  in  the  world  of  death. — R. 

Ver.  81. — Delay  in  fulfilment  of  God's  promises.  Between  two  stages  of  the  history 
of  the  covenant  family  stands  the  genealogy  of  Esau's  descendants.  The  text  sug- 
gests a.coutrast  between  their  course  and  that  of  the  family  of  Jacob.  On  the  death 
of  Isaac  Esau  departed  from  Canaan  with  family  and  possessions  (cf.  ch.  xxvii. 
40).  The  desert  and  the  valleys  of  Seir  were  more  attractive  than  quietness  of 
Canaan.  Prosperity,  ,such  as  he  cared  for,  attended  him.  Among  his  family  we  read 
of  dukes,  or  heads  of  tribes,  and  of  kings.  And  what  of  the  line  of  promise? — kings 
foretold  to  them  (ch.  xvii.  6  ;  xxxv.  11).  Yet  while  kings  were  reigning  in  Edom, 
Israelites  were  slaves  in  Egypt  or  wanderers  in  the  desert.  Is  God  slack  to  fulfil  his 
word  ?  (1  Pet.  iii.  4).  This  is  often  a  trial  to  believers  (Ps.  lxxiii.  3).  But  God's 
promises  are  sure,  though  the  time  may  seem  long.  The'  fulfilment  of  promises  of 
great  blessings  has  almost  always  been  slow,  as  we  count  it.  Abraham  waited  long 
(ch.  xii.  2).  It  was  long  ere  the  kingdom  of  Israel  arose  ;  far  longer  ere  ihe 
promise  of  a  Saviour  fulfilled  (ch.  iii.  15  ;  Gal.  iv.  4) ;  and  still  we  wait  for  the 
Lord's  return.  The  same  truth  appears  in  nature.  Great  and  precious  things  are  of 
slow  growth  (cf.  Mark  iv.  5). 

Doctrinal  lessons :— 1.  Delay  serves  for  the  trial  and  strengthening  of  faith.  Faith 
grows  by  enduring  trial.  Mark  how  often  the  faith  of  eminent  saints  has  been  tried. 
Without  faith  we  cannot  please  God  ;  for  faith  believes  God's  truth  and  love,  and 
embraces  his  will.  Unbelief  charges  God  with  untruth  (ch.  iii.  4 ;  1  John  v.  10).. 
Even  in  believers  a  leaven  of  unbelief  may  be  at  work.  Trials  are  sent  to  cause  faith 
to  develop  into  other  graces  (James  i.  3i.  2.  What  springs  up  quickly  is  apt  to  fade 
quickly  (cf.  Exod.  iii.  11  with  Haggai  i.  2).    Danger  lest  what  seems  to  be  faith  be 


426 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[cA.  xxxvii.  S — ii. 


merely  feeling.  3.  The  time  that  seems  so  long  is  not  mere  delay,  but  preparation. 
While  the  seed  lies  in  the  earth  a  process  is  going  on,  though  unseen,  -without  which 
the  perfect  plant  could  not  be  formed.  Compare  the  expression,  "  the  fu  ness  of 
time  "  (Gal.  iv.  4),  and  the  way  in  which  all  previous  history  prepared  the  way  for 
the  coming  of  Christ.  These  lessons  apply  equally  to  God's  dealings  with  the  world 
and  with  individuals. 

Practical  lessons:— 1.  Encouragement  if  disheartened  by  slow  progress  of  Christ's 
kingdom  :  much  labour  among  the  heathen  with  little  apparent  result ;  or  many 
efforts  at  home,  yet  ungodliness  not  checked.  We  have  promises  (Isa.  Iv.  11 ;  1 
Cor.  xv.. 58).  In  his  own  time  God  will  make  them  good.  2.  In  like  manner  if  our 
own  striving  for  personal  holiness,  or  for  good  of  others,  seems  to  have  little  success. 
We  require  the  training  of  disappointment  to  check  pride  (2  Cor.  xii.  7),  and  God 
will  see  to  the  result  (Gal.  vi.  9).  3.  To  bear  in  mind  that  we  are  but  instruments  in 
the  Lord's  hand  (1  Cor.  iii.  6).  Every  work  to  be  performed  "looking  unto  Jesus " 
(2  Cor.  xii.  10).— M. 

§  11.  The  Generations  of  Jacob  (ch.  xxxtii.  2 — L.  26). 

EXPOSITION. 


1.  Having  disposed,  in  the  preceding 
section,  of  the  line  of  Esau  by  a  brief 
sketch  of  its  historical  development  dur- 
ing the  two  and  a  half  centuries  interven- 
ing between  the  founding  of  the  Edomite 
empire  by  Esau's  withdrawing  to  Mount 
Seir,  and  the  days  of  Moses,  the  narrative 
reverts  to  the  fortunes  of  the  house  of  Ja- 
cob, the  story  of  which,  after  having  suf- 
fered a  temporary  interruption,  it  like- 
wise carries  forward  to  the  same  point  of 
rest,  viz. ,  to  the  period  of  the  sojourn  in 
Egypt.  Commencing  with  a  glance  at  the 
inner  family  life  of  the  patriarch  at  Mamre 
in  the  vale  of  Hebron,  where,  on  return- 
ing from  Padan-aram,  he  had  finally  es- 
tablished himself  beside  his  aged  and  bed 
ridden  father  Isaac,  it  recites  the  tragic 
incidents  connected  with  the  sale  of  Jo- 
seph by  his  brethren,  after  which,  first  re- 
hearsing the  further  wickedness  of  Jacob's 
sons  in  the  matter  of  Tamar,  it  pursues 
his  eventful  career  from  the  moment  of 
his  entering  Egypt  as  a  slave  in  the  house- 
hold of  Potiphar  to  the  time  when,  ar- 
rayed in  fine  linen  and  decorated  with  a 
golden  necklace,  he  rode  in  the  second  state 
chariot  as  Pharaoh's  prime  minister  and 
ruler  over  all  the  land.  Then,  detailing 
the  various  circumstances  arising  from  the 
famine  which  led  to  his  discovery  of  his 
brethren,  it  ends  by  describing  the  de- 
scent of  Jacob  and  his  pons  into  Egypt 
and  their  settlement  in  Goshen,  the  death 
of  Jacob  after  delivering  his  last  pro- 
phetic blessing  to  his  sons,  and  finally  the 
decease  of  Joseph  himself  at  the  age  of 


110  years,  when,  as  we  learn  from  the 
subsequent  narrative  in  Exodus,  having 
lost  their  protector  at  the  Court,  and  a 
dynastic  change  having  taken  place  upon 
the  throne,  of  Pharaoh,  the  sons  of  Israel 
gradually  sank  into  oppressive  and  ex- 
hausting bondage. 

2.  By  those  who  repudiate  the  Mosaic 
authorship  of  Genesis  the  present  section 
is  variously  distributed  among  the  alleged 
candidates  for  the  honour  of  its  compo- 
sition. Beyond  the  ascription  of  ch. 
xxxviii.  to  the  Jehovist,  there  is  the  most 
complete  absence  of  unanimity  among 
partitioners  as  to  whom  the  different  por- 
tions are  to  be  assigned.  Ch.  xxxvii.  2 — 36, 
which  Tuch  declares  to  be  the  work  of  the 
Elohist  Bleek  affirms  to  have  been  tam- 
pered with  by  the  Jehovist,  while  David- 
son divides  it  between  a  younger  Elohist, 
the  Jehovist,  and  a  subsequent  redactor. 
Ch"  xxxix.  is,  according  to  Davidson,  al- 
most exclusively  the  composition  of  the 
Jehovist  ;  while,  according  to  Bleek,  it 
has  proceeded  nearly  entire  from  the  pen 
of  the  Elohist,  and  Tuch  divides  it 
pretty  evenly  between  the  two.  Tuch 
again  thinks  that  chs.  xl. — 1.  have  been 
supplied  by  the  fundamental  document, 
and  Bleek  recognises  alterations  by  the 
hand  of  the  supplementer  ;  but  David- 
son apportions  most  of  them  to  the 
Jehovist,  giving  the  fragments  that  re- 
main to  the  younger  Elohist  and  the  late 
redactor.  The  insufficient  character  of 
the  grounds  on  which  such  assignments 
are  made  will  be  noted  in  the  opposition  ; 


ca.  xxxvti.  2—11.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


in  the  mean  time  the  remark  is  pertinent 
that  their  very  diversity  is  one  of  the 
strongest  indirect  proofs  of  the  Mosaic 
authorship  of  the  entire  composition. 

Ver.  2. — These  are  the  generations  of 
Jacob.  The  opening  of  a  new  section  (cf .  ch. 
ii.  4;  v.  1,  &c).  Joseph, — the  son  of  Ra- 
chel, and  born  in  Padan-aram(ch.  xxx.  24) — 
being  seventeen  years  old, — literally,  a  son 
of  seventeen  years,  thus  making  Jacob  108 
— was  feeding  the  fleck  with  his  brethren  ; 
— literally,  was  shepherding ;  not  his  breth- 
ren (Bush),  but  with  his  brethren,  in,  or 
among,  the  flock — and  the  lad  was — liter- 
ally, and  he  a  lad,  mtate,  moribus  et  inno- 
centia  (Lyra),  non  tantum  astate  sed  et 
ministerio  (Poole),  but  most  probably  de- 
signed simply  as  a  note  of  his  age.  Pere- 
rius,  following  the  Vulgate,  connects  the 
clause  with  what  precedes ;  Calvin,  Da- 
thius,  Lange,  Murphy,  Kalisch,  and  others 
conjoin  it  with  the  words  that  follow;  the 
LXX.,  Willet,  Rosenmtiller,  Keil,  Ains- 
worth,  Bush,  &c.  regard  it  as  a  parenthet- 
ical statement— with — not  in  the  capacity 
of  a  servant  (Vatablus)  or  of  a  ward 
(Kalisch),  but  of  a  companion — the  sons  of 
Bilhah,  and  with  the  sons  of  Zilpah,  his 
father's  wives.  With  these  rather  than 
the  sons  of  Leah,  as  being  less  supercili- 
ous and  haughty  than  the  children  of  the 
first  wife  (Lawson).  or  as  being  less  op- 
posed to  him  than  they  (Lange),  or  more 
probably  as  being  nearer  to  his  own  age 
than  they  (Keil),  or  perhaps  as  having 
been  brought  more  into  contact  with  the 
handmaids'  children,  and  in  particular 
with  those  of  Bilhah,  Rachel's  maid,  who 
may  have  been  to  him  as  a  mother  after 
Rachel's  death  (Rosenmilller).  And  Joseph 
brought  unto  his  (rather,  their)  father  their 
evil  report.  Not  aceusavit  fratres  suos 
apud  patrein  crimine  pessimo  (Vulgate),  or 
Ka.Tr|V£-yKav  <\i6yov  iroVT)po'v  irpos  IcrpatjX 
to'v  iraripa  avTuv  (LXX.),  as  if  'Joseph 
drew  down  upon  himself  their  calumni- 
ous reports,  but  carried  to  his  father  an 
evil  report  concerning  them  (Kalisch) ;  not 
informed  him  of  what  he  himself  saw  of 
their  evil  deeds  (Lawson),  though  this 
need  not  be  excluded,  but  repeated  the 
Sia1!,  or  fama,  always  of  a  bad  character 

(Rosenmilller),  which  was  circulating  in 
the  district  respecting  them — malos  ru- 
mores  qui  subinde  de  iis  spargebmtur 
(Dathius); — the  noun  being  derived  from 
an  onomatopoetic  root,  ttl,  signifying  to 
go  slowly,  or  to  creep  about. 

Ver.  3. — Now  (literally,  and)  Israel 
loved  Joseph  more  than  all  his  children 
(literally,  sons),  because  he  was  the  son  of 
his  old  age — literally,  a  son  of  old  age 


(was)  he  to  him;  not  a  son  possessing  the 
wisdom  of  advanced  years  (Onkelos),  but 
a  son  born  in  his  old  age  (Rosenmilller, 
Keil,  Kalisch,  et  alii),  which  was  literally 
true  of  Joseph,  since  he  was  born  in  his 
father's  ninety-first  year.  Yet  as  Joseph 
was  only  a  year  or  two  younger  than  the 
children  of  Bilhah  and  Zilpah,  and  as 
Benjamin  was  still  later  born  than  he,  the 
application  of  this  epithet  to  Joseph  has 
been  explained  on  the  ground  that  Ben- 
jamin was  at  this  time  little  more  than  a 
child  (Keil),  and  had  not  much  come  into 
notice  (Murphy),  or  perhaps  was  not  born 
when  this  portion  of  the  narrative  was 
originally  written  ('Speaker's  Commen- 
tary'); or  that  Joseph  had  obtained  the 
name  before  Benjamin's  birth,  and  that 
it  had  clung  to  him  after  that  event  (In- 
glis).  Josephus  ('Ant  ,'  ii.  2,  1)  gives 
another  reason  for  Jacob's  partiality  which 
is  not  inconsistent  with  the  statement  in 
the  text,  viz.,  the  beauty  of  his  person 
and  the  virtue  of  his  mind,  Sia  re  tt|v  tov 
o-u>(iaTos  etiytvaav,  Kal  Sid  ^uxfls  apcH]s. 
And  he  made  him  a  coat  of  many  colours — 
literally,  a  coat  (kithoneth,  from  hathan, 
to  cover ;  vide  ch.  Mi.  21)  of  ends  (Keil, 
Lange),  i.  e.  a  tnU  r«*ching  to  the  ancles, 
and  with  sleeves  reaching  to  the  wrists, 
and  commonly  worn  by  boys  and  girls  of 
the  upper  ranks  (Josephus,  'Ant.,'  vii.  8, 
1 ;  2  Sam.  xiii.  18),  or  a  coat  of  pieces 
(Kalisch,  T.  Lewis,  Wordsworth) ;  hence 
a  variegated  garment,  xiruy  itoikCXos 
(LXX.),  tunica polymita  (Vulgate),  a  coat 
of  many  colours  (Murphy,  'Speaker's 
Commentary').  "  Such  garments  are  rep- 
resented on  some  of  the  monuments  of 
Egypt.  At  Beni-Hassan,  for  example, 
there  is  a  magnificent  excavation  forming 
the  tomb  of  Pihrai,  a  military  officer  of 
Osirtasen  I.,  in  which  a,  train  of  foreign 
captives  appears,  who  are  supposed  to  be 
Jebusites,  an  inscription  over  one  person 
in  the  group  reading,  "The  chief  of  the 
Land  of  the  Jebusites."  The  whole  of 
the  captives  are  clad  in  parti-coloured 
garments,  and  the  tunic  of  this  individual 
in  particular  may  be  called  "a  coat  of 
many  colours"  (Thornley  Smith,  'Joseph 
and  his  Times,'  p.  12).  It  has  been  sup- 
posed that  Jacob's  object  in  conferring 
this  distinction  on  Joseph  was  to  mark 
him  out  as  the  heir  to  whom  the  forfeited 
birthright  of  Reuben  (1  Chron.  v.  1)  was 
to  be  transferred  (Kurtz,  Lange,  Gerlach, 
Bush,  Wordsworth,  'Speaker's  Commen- 
tary,' &c.) ;  but  the  historian  only  men- 
tions it  as  a  token  of  affection,  such  as 
was  customary  in  those  times  for  princes 
to  bestow  upon  their  subjects,  and  parents 
on  their  children  (vide  Thornley,  Smith 
'Joseph  and  his  Times,'  p.  11).    Roberts 


428 


THE   DOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xxxvii.  2— lL 


says  the  same  thing  is  still  done  among 
the  Hindoos,  crimson,  purple,  and  other 
colours  being  often  tastefully  sewed  to- 
gether for  beautiful  or  favoured  children 
(vide  'Oriental  Illustrations,'  p.  43). 

Ver.  4. — And  when  (literally,  and)  his 
brethren  saw  that  th  ir  father  loved  him 
more  than  all  hie  brdthrea,  they  (literally, 
and  theyyh&U.i.  him, — as  Esau  hated  Jacob 
(ch.  xxvii.  41;  cf.  ch.  xlix.  23)— and  could 
not  speak  peaceably  unto  him — literally, 
they  were  not  able  to  speak  of  him  for 
peace,  i.  e.  they  could  not  address  him  in 
such  a  way  as  to  wish  him  well ;  they 
could  not  offer  him  the  customary  saluta- 
tion of  Shalom,  or  Peace. 

Ver.  5. — And  Joseph  dreamed  a  dream 
(in  which,  though,  as  the  sequel  shows, 
intended  as  a  Divine  communication,  there 
was  nothing  to  distinguish  it  from  an  or- 
dinary product  of  the  mind),  and  he  told 
it  to  his  brtthren : — not  in  pride,  since 
there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  Joseph 
as  yet  understood  the  celestial  origin  of 
his  dream,  but  in  the  simplicity  of  his 
heart  (Kalisch,  Murphy),  though  in  doing 
so  he  was  also  guided,  unconsciously  it 
may  be,  but  still  leally,  by  an  overruling 
providence,  who  made  use  of  this  very 
telling  of  the  dream  as.-1  step  towards  its 
fulfilment  (Lawson) — and  they  hated  him 
yet  the  more — literally,  and  they  added 
again  to  liate  him. 

Ver.  6.— And  he  said  unto  them.  Hear,  I 
pray  you,  this  dream  which  I  have  dreamed. 
Though  Joseph  did  not  certainly  know 
that  his  dream  was  supernatural,  he  may 
have  thought  that  it  was,  the  more  so  as 
dreams  were  in  those  times  commonly 
regarded  as  mediums  of  Divine  communi- 
cation ;  and  in  this  case  it  was  clearly  his 
duty  to  impart  it  to  the  household,  and 
all  the  more  that  the  subject  of  it  seemed 
to  be  for  them  a  matter  of  peculiar  im- 
portance. In  the  absence  of  .information 
to  the  contrary,  we  are  warranted  in  be- 
lieving that  there  was  nothing  either  sinful 
or  offensive  in  Joseph's  spirit  or  manner 
in  making  known  his  dreams.  That  which 
appears  to  have  excited  the  hostility  of  his 
brethren  was  not  the  mode  of  their  com- 
mun'cation,  but  the  character  of  their 
contents. 

Ver  7. — For  (literally,  and),  behold  we 
were  binding  sheaves — literally,  binding 
things  bound,  i.  e.  sheaves,  alumim,  from 
alam,  to  bind ,  the  order  of  the  words  and 
the  participial  form  of  the  verb  indicating 
that  the  speaker  describes  the  vision  as  it 
appeared  to  his  mind  (vide  Ewald,  '  Heb. 
Synt.'  §  342)— in  the  field,— literally,  in 
the  middle  of  the  field;  from  which  it 
would  appear  that  Jacob  was  not  a  mere 
nomad,  but  carried  on  agricultural  opera- 


tions like  his  father  Isaac  (ch.  xxvi.  12) 
— and,  lo, — "the  "Sin,  as  repeated  in  his 
narration,  shows  that  he  had  a  presenti- 
ment of  something  great"  (Lange)— my 
sheaf  arose,  and  also  stood  upright(literally, 
stood,  i.  e.  placed  itself  upright,  and  re- 
mained so) ;  and,  behold,  your  sheaves  stood 
round  about  and  made  obeisance — i.  e. 
bowed  themselves  down  (cf.  ch.  xxiii.  7, 
Abraham  bowing  to  the  Hethites) — to  my 
sheaf.  The  fulfilment  of  this  dream  oc- 
curred in  Egypt  (vide  ch.  xlii.  6  ;  xliii.  26; 
xliv.  14). 

Ver.  8. — And  his  brethren  (who  had  no 
difficulty  in  interpreting  the  symbol's 
significance)  said  to  him  (with  mingled 
indignation  and  contempt),  Shalt  thou  in- 
deed reign  over  us?— literally,  reigning, 
wilt  thou  reign?  *  «•  wilt  thou  actually 
reign  over  us?  the  emphasis  resting  on 
the  action  of  the  verb  (vide  Ewald,  'Heb. 
Synt.,  §  312a)— or  shalt  thou  indeed  have 
dominion  over  us?  The  form  of  expres- 
sion is  the  same  as  that  of  the  preceding 
clause.  And  they  hated  him  yet  the  more 
(literally,  and  they  added  again  to  hate 
him)  for  (i.  e.  on  account  of)  his  dreams, 
and  for  (or,  on  account  of)  his  words. 

Ver.  9. — And  he  dreamed  yet  another 
dream, — the  doubling  of  the  dream  was 
designed  to  indicate  its  certainty  (cf.  ch. 
xli.  32) — and  told  it  his  brethren  and  said, 
Behold  I  have  dreamed  a  dream  more ;  and, 
behold,  the  sun  (CKTi'lj,  the  minister,  from 
Chaldee  root  CM123,  the  pael  of  which  oc- 
curs in  Dan.  vii.  10)  and  the  moon—  ITl1?!, 

probably,  if  the  word  be  not  a  primitive, 
the  circuit-maker,  from  the  unused  root 
FTP  =  rnN,  to  go  about  (Ftlrst)  ;  or  the 

yellow  one,  from  rn"1  =  p"l\  to  be  yellow, 

n  and  p  being  interchanged  (Gesenius) — 
and  the  eleven  stars — rather,  eleven  stars, 
D'SSIS,  globes,  or  balls,  from  ^53,  to  roll 

up  in  a  ball  (vide  ch.  i.  16) — made  obeisance 
to  me— literally,  bowing  themselves  to  me, 
the  participles  being  employed  ut  supra, 
ver.  7.  It  is  apparent  that  Joseph  under- 
stood this  second  dream,  even  more  plain- 
ly than  the  first,  to  foreshadow,  in  some 
way  unexplained,  his  future  supremacy 
over  his  brethren,  who  were  unmistakably 
pointed  out  by  the  eleven  stars  of  the 
vision  ;  and  this  remarkable  coincidence 
between  the  number  of  the  stars  and 
the  number  of  his  brethren  would  facili- 
tate the  inference  that  his  parents  were 
referred  to  under  the  other  symbols  of 
the  sun  and  moon.  In  the  most  ancient 
symbology,  Oriental  and  Grecian  as  well 
as  Biblical  (Numb.  xxiv.  17),  it  was  cus- 
tomary to   speak  -  of   noble   personages, 


CH.  XXXVII.  2—11.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


429 


princes,  &c,  under  such  figures;  and  the 
employment  of  such  terminology  by  a 
nomadic  people  like  the  Hebrew  patri- 
archs, who  constantly  lived  beneath  the 
open  sky,  may  almost  be  regarded  as  a 
water-mark  attesting  the  historic  credi- 
bility of  this  page  at  least  of  the  sacred 
record  («MZe_Havernick,  '  Introd.,'  §  21),  in 
opposition  to  Bohlen,  who  finds  in  the 
symbolical  character  of  Joseph's  dreams 
an  evidence  of  their  unreality,  and  De 
Wette,  who  explains  them  as  the  off- 
spring of  his  aspiring  mind. 

Ver.  10 — And  he  told  it  to  his  father, 
and  to  his  brethren — whom  it  manifestly 
concerned,  as,  for  the  like  reason,  be  had 
reported  the  first  dream  only  to  his  breth- 
ren. That  he  does  not  tell  it  to  his 
mother  may  be  an  indication  that  Rachel 
was  by  this  time  dead.  And  his  father 
rebuked  him, — either  to  avoid  irritating 
his  brethren  (Calvin),  or  to  repress  an 
appearance  of  pride  in  Joseph  (Lange, 
Murphy,  Inglis),  or  to  express  his  own 
surprise  (Candlish),  or  irritation  (Keil), 
or  sense  of  the  absurdity  of  the  dream 
(Lawson),  which  he  further  d  monstrated 
when  he  added— and  said  unto  him,  What 
is  this  dream  that  thou  hast  dreamed  t 
Shall  I  ani  thy  mother — (1).  "Rachel, 
who  was  neither  forgotten  nor  lost" 
(Keil),  who  may  possibly  have  been  living 
at  the  date  of  the  dream  ('  Speaker's 
Commentary '),  though  then  Joseph  could 


not  have  had  eleven  brothers  ;  who, 
being  dead,  was  referred  to  in  order  to 
show  the  impossibility  of  its  ever  being 
fulfilled  (Kalisch,  Pererius) ;  or  (2)  Leah, 
as  the  chief  mistress  of  Jacob's  household 
(Willet,  Hughes,  Inglis) ;  or  (3)  Bilhah, 
Rachel's  maid,  who  had  probably  acted  as 
Joseph's  mother  after  Rachel's  death 
(Jewish  interpreters,  Grotius  and  others) ; 
or,  what  seems  more  probable,  (4)  the 
lerm  ' '  mother  "  is  here  introduced  simply 
for  the  sake  of  giving  completeness  to 
the  symbol  (Kurtz,  Murphy)— and  thy 
brethren  indeed  come  to  bow  down  our- 
selves to  thee — Joseph's  brethren  ulti- 
mately did  so  in  Egypt  (ch.  xli.  6) ;  Jo- 
seph's father  practically  did  so  when  he 
recognisi  d  Joseph's  greatness  and  de- 
pended on  him  for  support  (ch.  xlvii.  12). 
It  is  certain  that  Laah  died  before  the 
immigration  to  Egypt  (ch.  xlix.  3 1 ),  and 
it  cannot  be  determined  whether  Bilhah 
or  Zilpah  went  to  Egypt — to  the  earth. 
Jacob  seems  here,  by  intensifying  Jo- 
seph's language,  to  resent  the  claim  which 
it  conveyed. 

Ver.  11. — And  his  brethren  envied  him. 
The  verb  fcOp  (unused  in  Kal),  to  become 

red  in  the  face,  seems  to  indicate  that  the 
hatred  of  Joseph's  brethren  revealed  itself 
in  scowling  looks.  But  his  father  observed 
the  saying— literally,  kept  the  word,  SieHj- 
prjo-t  to'  p%a  (LXX).  Cf.  Ban.  vii.  28 ; 
Luke  ii.  51. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  2 — 11. — Joseph  in  his  father's  house.  1.  Joseph  employed  with  his  breth- 
ren. 1.  With  them  in  the  sense  of  as  well  as  them.  That  is  to  say,  Joseph  no  more 
than  the  other  sous  of  his  father  was  trained  to  indolence.  It  is  the  duty  of  parents 
to  educate  their  children  in  some  useful  and  honourable  calling.  Even  when  not 
required  fov  procuring  daily  bread,  it  is  of  advantage  as  a  means  of  withdrawing 
oue  from  temptations  which  would  otherwise  beset  him,  while  it  largely  enhances 
the  enjoyment  of  existence,  and  enables  one  to  contribute  more  or  less  directly  to 
the  sum  of  human  happiness.  Adam,  Noah,  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  even  Laban,  all 
brought  up  their  sons  to  honest  toil.  2.  With  them  in  the  sense  of  like  them.  That 
is,  he  was,  as  they  had  been  before  him,  instructed  in  the  business  of  a  husbandman 
and  shepherd.  Then-,  is  evidence  that  Jacob  combined  the  callings  of  an  agricul- 
turist as  well  as  sheep-farmer,  and  trained  his  boys  to  sow  and  reap  and  bind  sheaves 
as  well  as  tend  the  flocks  and  herds  on  his  estate.  Prom  this,  however,  it  were  wrong 
to  argue  that  all  the  children  in  aTamily  should  be  trained  alike,  or  put  to  learn  the 
same  craft  or  profession.  In  Jacob's  day  and  Joseph's  there  was  little  choice  of 
openings  for  young  men  who  had  aspirations  above  the  crook  or  the  plough.  But  in 
these  times  the  avocations  of  men  are  as  diverse  as  their  gifts  ;  and  in  all  respects  it 
is  better— more  beneficial  to  society  at  large,  and  more  advantageous  for  the  indi- 
vidual—that a  wise  discrimination  be  exercised  by  parents  and  guardians  in  selecting 
spheres  of  labour  for  those  dependent  on  or  intrusted  to  them  that  shall  be  suited 
to  their  gifts  and  tastes.  3.  With  them,  in  the  sense  of  beside  them.  Joseph  accom- 
panied his  brethren  when  they  tended  the  flocks  or  reaped  the  ripened  grain,  and  in 
particular  associated  himself,  for  reasons  suggested  in  the  Exposition,  with  the  sons 
of  Bilhah  and  Zilpah.     It  was  a  privilege  which  Joseph  enjoyed  that  he  did  not 


430  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  [ch.  xxxvii.  S-ll 

need  to  go  from  home  to  learn  his  trade ;  and  doubtless  Joseph's  amiable  dispositioi 
would  make  the  society  of  his  father's  sons  more  agreeable  to  him  than  the  company 
of  strangers. 

II.  Joseph  preferred  above  his  brethren.  1.  By  his  father.  (1)  Thegrounc 
of  Jacob's  partiality  for  Joseph  He  was  the  son  of  Jacob's  old  age.  Howevei 
this  expression  may  be  explained  (vide  Exposition),  the  amount  of  it  seems  to  be 
that  Joseph  had  come  to  gladden  Jacob's  heart  after  a  considerable  period  of  wait- 
ing, and  at  a  time  when  Jacob  was  beginning  to  feel  himself  an  old  man.  Henct 
more  than  to  any  of  his  oiher  children  Jacob's  affections  went  out  to  the  firstborn 
of  Rachel,  and  this  affection  could  not  fail  to  strengthen  after  Rachel's  death.  II 
is  just  possible  also  that  it  was  kept  alive  and  fostered  by  a  reminiscence  of  Rachel's 
beauty,  which  be  saw  reproduced  in  the  well-proportioned  frame  and  finely-cut 
features  of  the  growing  lad.  Anyhow,  Jacob's  fondness  for  Joseph  was  palpable  ; 
and  without  affirming  that  it  was  right,  it  may  at  least  be  contended  that  it  was 
natural,  the  more  especially  when  Joseph's  piety  is  contrasted  with  the  notorious 
wickedness  of  Jacob's  other  sons.  (2)  The  exhibition  of  Jacob's  partiality  for 
Joseph.  Many  parents  who  find  themselves  in  Jacob's  situation,  drawn  to  one  child 
move  than  another  in  their  families,  make  an  effort  at  least  to  conceal  a  preference 
which  in  their  inmost  hearts  they  cannot  but  teel  to  be  justifial  le.  But  Jacob,  with 
a  sad  lack  of  prudence,  displayed  his  superior  estimation  of  Rachel's  son  by  pre- 
senting him  with  a  rich  and  valuable  coat  of  ends  or  pieces  (vide  Exposition).  As 
might  have  been  expected,  such  a  mark  of  preference  was  distasteful  to  his  other 
children,  and,  had  it  not  been  f<  r  Joseph's  superior  character,  might  have  been 
morally  hurtful  to  Joseph  himself.  As  it  was,  it  was  no  kindness  to  Joseph,  but 
only  a  foolish  gratification  to  Joseph's  father.  2.  By  God.  Joseph  was  honoured  to 
receive  dreams  prophetic  of  his  future  greatness.  The  first,  the  dream  of  the  bow- 
ing sheaves,  was  a  Divine  foreshadowing  of  his  advancement  above  his  brethren  ; 
and  the  second,  the  dream  of  the  nodding  orbs,  of  his  elevation  above  all  the 
members  of  his  family.  Even  had  they  not  concerned  himself  at  all,  to  have  been 
made  the  recipient  of  Divine  communications  was  an  honour  ;  much  more  when  these 
communications  related  to  bis  own  exaltation.  This  preference  of  Joseph  was  un- 
questionably gracious,  but  it  was  also  natural  (1  Sam.  ii.  30). 

III.  Joseph  hated  by  hts  brethren.  1 .  The  cause  of  their  hatred.  This  was — (1) 
The  superior  place  which  he  enjoyed  in  their  father's  affection  (ver.  4).  Parents  may 
here  observe  the  danger  of  chirishing,  and  especially  of  manifesting,  a  preference  of 
one  member  of  the  family  above  another.  Unless  in  very  exceptional  circumstances, 
all  are  equally  entitled  to  a  father's  care  and  a  mother's  love.  (2)  The  superior  piety 
he  displayed  above  themselves.  It  is  difficult  to  credit  the  actors  in  the  Sbechemite 
and  Dothan  tragedies  with  anything  in  the  shape  of  religion.  Certainly  they  were 
not  looked  upon  as  exemplary  characters  by  those  who  had  the  misfortune  to  live 
beside  them.  Out  of  their  father's  sight  they  shook  off  any  little  restraint  which 
his  presence  may  have  inspired.  Their  scandalous  behaviour  became  the  talk  of 
every  neighbourhood  they  chanced  to  visit ;  and  Joseph  hearing  it,  as  in  duty  bound, 
reported  it  to  Jacob.  Not  that  the  mere  reporting  of  it  at  home  would  much  concern 
these  reckless  youths.  Possibly  it  would  exasperate  their  minds  against  their  brother. 
But  the  thing  which  would  incense  them  most  would  be  the  disinclination  which  he 
showed  to  ruu  with  them  into  the  same  excess  of  riot.  (3)  The  superior  honour 
he  received  from  God.  The  brethren  clearly  enough  understood  the  dreams  to  con- 
tain a  prognostication  of  Joseph's  future,  else  why  did  they  allow  themselves  to  be- 
come inflamed  with  anger  on  account  of  a  foolish  boy's  fancies?  At  least  they 
believed  Joseph  regarded  them  in  this  light,  and  they  hated  him  ou  that  account.  2. 
The  progress  of  their  hatred.  (1)  They  omitted  to  give  him  the  customary  salutation 
of  Shalem.  It  is  a  bad  sign  when  a  man  declines  to  exchange  friendly  greetings  with 
his  neighbour,  and  much  more  with  his  brother.  (2)  They  pas  ed  ou  to  deep  and 
bitter  hatred.  They  hated  him  yet  the  more  for  his  dreams  and  his  words.  Evil 
passions  have  a  tendency  to  grow,  and  should  be  nipped  in  the  bud.  Obstaprincipiis. 
(3)  They  envied  him  ;  the  fierce  malignity  of  their  enraged  spirits  burning  in  their 
bosoms,  suffusing  their  countenances  with  ominous  looks  and  angry  scowls,  and 
generally  expressing  itself  in  dislike,  irritation,  and  annoyance.  3  The  end  of  their 
hatred.  It  was  impossible  that  the  gathering  storm  should  continue  long  without 
bursting  All  things  mundane,  evil  as  well  as  good,  strive  after  completeness. 
'Lust,  when  it  hath  conceived,  bringeth  forth  sin  :  sin,  when  it  is  finished,  bringeth 


CH.  xxxvil.  2—11.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  431 

forth  death"  (James  i.  15).  Hence,  '•  whosoever  hateth  his  brother  is  a  murderer" 
(1  John  iii.  15i ;  initially  in  thought,  and  ultimately,  granting  time  and  opportunity, 
in  deed.  The  murderous  feeling  of  Joseph's  brethren  very  speedily  found  occasion 
to  become  the  fratricidal  act. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ch.  xxxvii. — The  representative  man.  Jacob  may  be  said  to  fall  into  the  back- 
ground from  this  time  until  his  parting  benediction.  The  kingdom  of  God  is  repre- 
sented in  Jos%h  and  his  history.     The  main  points  in  this  chapter  are — 

I.  God's  distinguishing  grace  to  Joseph,  separating  him  from  his  brethren 
in  character,  in  his  father's  affection,  in  the  method  of  his  life,  in  the  communications 
of  the  Spirit.  Joseph  is  the  type  of  the  believer,  faithful  to  the  covenant,  amongst 
both  the  Canaanitish  heathen  and  the  unfaithful  children  of  the  covenant,  the 
patriarchs. 

II.  The   working  of  evil  passions  and  moral  impurity  .brought  to  a 

CLIMAX  THROUGH  THE  DEVELOPMENT   OP  GOD'S  GRACE  IN  THE  INDIVIDUAL.      Joseph 

brought  the  evil  report  to  Jacob.  Joseph  dreamed.  Joseph  was  evidently  both  in 
himself  superior  to  his  brethren  and  more  favoured  by  God.  That  is  the  old  story — 
the  Cain  spirit  developed  by  contact  with  the  Abel  spirit.  A  time  of  special  grace 
is  always  a  time  of  special  wickedness  and  judgment.  Witness  ihe  advent  of  the 
Lord,  the  Reformation  period,  the  revival  of  religion  in  the  last  century,  leading  on 
to  the  outburst  of  both  wickedness  and  judgment  at  the  end. 

III.  THE  DREAMS  OP  THE  PIOUS  LAD  WERE  THEMSELVES   STEPS  IN  THE  COURSE  OF 

revelation.  The  dominion  which  was  foreshadowed  was  that  of  the  spiritual 
kingdom  over  the  unspiritual. 

IV.  The  providential  fulfilment  op  the  promise.  Partly  through  the 
personal  character  of  Joseph,  partly  through  the  evil  passions  of  his  brethren,  partly 
through  the  apparently  casual  incidents  of  the  neighbourhood,  partly  through  the 
spirit  of  righteousness  working  in  the  heart  of  Reuben,  partly  through  the  weakness 
and  fondness  of  Jiicob.  How  strangely  "  all  things  work  together  "  in  God's  hands  ! 
He  weaves  the  web  composed  of  many  single  threads  into  one  united,  orderly  pattern 
as  a  whole  in  which  we  are  able  to  trace  his  own  thought  and  purpose. 

V.  Joseph  in  the  pit  while  his  brethren  sit  down  to  eat  bread  represents  the  be- 
liever SUFFERING  IN  THE  MIDST  OF  AN  UNBELIEVING  WORLD.      A  type  Of  JesUS 

cast  into  the  pit  of  his  humiliation,  while  the  Jewish  people  despised  and  rejected  his 
claims,  his  prophetic  words,  his  evident  favour  with  God,  and  by  their  transactions 
with  Gentiles,  the  Romans,  gave  him  up  to  what  seemed  to  them  ruin,  but  what  was 
the  crowning  of  his  head  with  glory.  We  begin  to  see  at  this  point  that,  as  the 
Psalmist  sang,  "the  word  of  the  Lord  tried  him." 

VI.  The  deliverance  of  Joseph  and  his  transference  to  the  sphere  of  his  future 
triumph  are  effected   through  Judah  immediately,    through   the   other 

BRETHREN  AND   THE   ISHMAELITES  OR  MlDIANITES   SECONDARILY.      These  names  of 

Judah,  Ishmael,  Midian  remind  us  that  the  fleshly  links  which  bind  the  descendants 
of  Abraham  together  are  not  lost  sight  of  by  God,  are  called  in  to  serve  the  purposes 
of  grace,  but  not  to  take  the  place  of  the  true  spiritual  work,  which  goes  on  in  its 
own  ap;  ointed  channel.  So  in  the  history  of  the  Church,  while  there  are  many  sec- 
ondary influences  at  work,  still  there  is  a  remnant  according  to  the  election  of  grace 
in  which  there  is  the  real  continuity  of  Divine  dealings. 

VII.  The  genuine  grief  of  Reuben,  the  barbarous  inhumanity  towards  their  father 
of  the  fallen  sons,  the  overwhelming  sorrow  of  the  aged,  heart-broken 
Jacob,  the  rising  up  of  all  his  sons  and  daughters  lo  comfort  liim,  are  all  beautiful 
and  significant  touches  of  nature  in  this  history,  which  remind  us  that  we  are  not 
"following  cunningly-devised  fables,"  and  God's  gracious  kingdom  of  truth  and  love 
does  not  annihilate  the  human  in  order  to  reveal  the  Divine,  but  puts  its  rainbow  on 
the  cloud. 

VIII.  The  introduction  of  Egypt  again  into  the  history.  Egypt  is  the  type  of 
the  world,  as  built  upon  the  foundation  of  fallen  humanity  alone,  without  the  specia' 
grace  of  God.  Into  that  bulk  of  the  unrenewed  race  the  leaven  of  the  kingdom  must 
be  put.     The  connection  between  the  covenant  family  and  Egypt,  which  we  trace  in 


4H2  TBJK    iiUUH    OF    UJSJNJiSlS.  {CB.  XXXVII.  1»— »0. 

the  history  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  as  afterwards  in  their  descendants,  repre- 
sents at  once  (1)  the  thoroughly  human  character  of  the  kingdom  that  God  would  set 
up  in  the  earth,  for  the  people  of  God  found  much  in  Egypt  which  they  carried 
away  with  them  afterwards,  and  assimilated  to  their  own  specially-communicated 
faith  ;  (2)  the  breadth  of  the  promises  of  God— the  separation  of  the  one  people  was 
for  the  sake  of  all  the  families  of  the  earth. — R. 

Vers.  2 — 4. — Joseph  at  home.  "  Joseph,  being  sevenleen  years  old,"  &c.  Pictur- 
esque scene  is  the  encampment  of  Jacob.  How  well  the  dark  camel-hair  tents  har- 
monise with  the  general  character  of  the  spots  in  which  they  are  pitched.  Peace  and 
purity  should  dwell  there.  Ten  men  of  the  tribe  of  Jiicob  are  most^lepraved,  but 
their  characters  only  threw  into  brighter  prominence  that  of  Joseph.  It  is  probable 
that  Jacob  gave  greater  attention  to  the  training  of  Joseph  than  to  that  of  his  breth- 
ren. He  showed  favouritism  also.  His  act  of  giving  him  a  garb  of  varied  colour 
may  not  altogether  have  been  so  foolish  and.weak  as  sometimes  it  has  been  supposed  to 
be.  It  was  simply  an  ordinary  Eastern  way  of  indicating  that  Joseph  was  to  be  the 
future  leader  and  sheik  of  the  encampment.    Think  of  Joseph's  home  life,  and  learn — 

I.  That  at  home  we  s-hould,  like  Joseph,  learn  to  prepare  for  future 
life.  Doubtless  Jacob  would  tell  Joseph  of  the  promises  of  God  to  Abraham,  of  the 
tradition  of  the  Deluge  and  the  Pall ;  probably  also  of  his  own  fleeing  from  home, 
and  his  dream  in  the  desert,  when  he  saw  "  the  great  altar-stair  sloping  through  dark- 
ness up  to  God,"  and  the  angels  ascending  and  descending.  Joseph  always  after- 
wards has  great  faith  in  dreams.  No  book  had  he.  The  Bible  was  not  written. 
Traditions  and  oral  teaching  formed  his  mental  training. 

II.  At  home  we  should  always  have  some  employment.  His  father  loved 
him  too  dearly  to  allow  him  to  grow  up  in  habits  of  idleness.  He  learned  to  handle 
the  crook  and  to  become  a  faithful  messenger.  No  work  is  to  be  despised,  for  all  may 
be  a  preparation  for  future  usefulness. 

III.  At  home  we  should  not  willingly  be  witnesses  of  wrong-doing. 
The  lives  of  Joseph's  brethren  were  sinful,  and  their  doings  deceitful.  Some  things 
he  is  obliged  to  know  about  of  which  it  is  dangc  rous  to  keep  silence.  The  welfare  of 
the  whole  tribe  was  being  risked  by  the  elder  brothers,  and  Joseph,  fearing  that,  tells 
his  father,  or  seeks  counsel  that  he  may  be  strengthened  to  resist  evil  influence. 

IV.  At  home  we  may  have  glowing  visions  of  the  future.  The  two 
dn  ams  concerning  the  sheaves,  and  the  sun  and  moon  and  stars,  brought  hate  from 
his  brethren,  but  they  had  an  influence  on  Joseph's  after  life.  They  were  remark- 
ably fulfilled.  We  all  have  some  such  visions.  We  build  "  castles  in  the  air."  The 
stern  realities  of  life  tone  down  our  dreams.  It  is  well  to  have  some  such  dreams. 
Without  them  few  make  any  advance  in  life.  We  are  not  to  be  like  mere  senseless 
stones,  but  growing  plants.  Belter  is  it  to  bear  fru  t  than  to  wait  to  become  only  the 
sport  of  circumstances. — H. 

EXPOSITION. 


Ver.  12. — And  his  brethren  went  to  feed 
their  father's  flock  in  Shechem — i.  e.  the 
modern  N&blous,  in  the  plain  of  Muknah, 
which  belonged  to  Jacob  partly  by  pur- 
chase and  partly  by  conquest  (vide  ch. 
xxxiii.  19  ;  xxxiv.  27)  Shechem  was  at 
a  considerable  distance  from  the  vale  of 
Hebron,  where  the  patriarchal  family  at 
this  time  resided. 

Ver.  13. — And  Israel  (vide  ch.  xxxii.  28; 
xxxv.  10)  said  unto  Joseph,  Do  not  thy 
brethren  feed  the  flock  (literally,  Are  not 
thy  brethren  shepherding  ?)  in  Shechem  ? 
come,  and  I  will  s:;nd  thee  unto  them. 
Either  he  was  solicitous  of  the  safety  of 
his  sons  while  in  the  vicinity  of  Shechem 
(Lawson)  or  he  hoped  to  effect  a  reconcil- 
iation between  them  and  Joseph  (Cand- 
lish).     And  he  (i.  e.  Joseph,  in  response 


to  this  invitation,  expressed  a  willingness 
to  undertake  a  mission  to  his  brethren, 
and)  said  to  him,  Here  am  I. 

Ver.  14. — And  he  Jacob)  said  unto  him, 
Go,  I  pray  thee,  see  whether  it  will  be  weil 
with  thy  bre:  hren  (literally,  see  the  place  of 
thy  brethren),  and  well  with  the  flocks 
(literally,  and  the  peace  of  the  flock)  ;  and 
bring  me  word  again.  So  (literally,  and) 
ho  sent  him  out  of  the  vale  of  Hebron  (vide 
ch.  xxxv.  27),  and  he  came  to  Shechem — 
a  distance  of  sixty  miles. 

Vers.  15,16. — And  a  certain  man  (or  sim- 
ply a  man)  found  him,  and,  behold,  he  was 
wandering  in  the  field  (obviously  seeking 
some  th'ng  or  person):  and  the  man  asked 
him,  saying,  What  eeeketh  thou?  And  he 
said,  I  seek  my  brethren: — or,  more  em- 
phatically, My  brethren,  I  (sc.  am)  seeking 


CH.  xxxvn.  12 — 25.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


433 


— tell  me,  I  pray  thee,  where  they  feed 
tlieir  flocks — or,  Where  (are)  they  shep- 
herding? 

Ver.  17. — And  the  man  said,  They  are 
departed  hence  ;  for  I  heard  them  say,  Let 
us  go  to  Dothan  —  Dothaim,  "the  Two 
Wells,"  a  place  twelve  miles  north  of 
Samaria  in  the  diiection  of  the  plain  of 
Esdraelon,  situated  on  the  great  caravan 
road  from  Mount  Qilead  to  Egypt  the 
scene  of  one  of  the  greatest  miracles  of 
Elisha  the  prophet  (%  Kings  vi.  13—18), 
and,  though  now  a  deserted  ruin,  still 
called  by  jts  ancient  name.  And  Joseph 
went  after  his  brethren,  and  found  them 
in  Dothan.  "Just  beneath  Tell  Dothan, 
which  still  preserves  its  name,  is  the 
little  oblong  plain,  containing  the  best 
pasturage  in  the  country,  and  well  chosen 
by  Jacob's  sons  when  they  had  exhausted 
for  a  time  the  wider  plain  of  Shechem " 
(Tristram,  'Land  of  Israel,'  p.  132;  cf. 
Thomson,  '  Land  and  Book,'  p.  466). 

Ver.  18. — And  when  (literally,  and)  they 
saw  him  afar  off,  even  (or,  and)  before  he 
came  near  unto  them,  they  (literally,  and 
they)  conspired  against  him  (or,  dealt  with 
him  fraudulently)  to  slay  him. 

Ver.  19. — And  they  siid  one  to  another 
(literally,  u,  man  to  his  broth-r),  Behold, 
this  dreamer — literally,  this  lord  of  dreams 
(cf.  ch.  xiv.  13  ;  Exod.  xxiv.  14) — cometh 
— expressive  of  rancour,  contempt,  and 
hatred. 

Ver.  20. — Come  now,  therefore,  and  let 
us  slay  him,  and  cast  him  into  some  pit 
(literally,  into  one  of  tha  pits  or  cisterns  in 
the  neighbourhood),  and  we  will  say  {sc. 
to  his  father  and  ours),  Some  (literally,  an) 
evil  beast  hath  devoured  him  (which  will 
account  for  his  disappearance) ;  and  we 
shall  see  what  will  become  of  his  dreams— 
or,  what  bis  dieams  will  be. 

Vers.  21,  22. — And  Reuben  (the  eldest 
son,  and  therefore  probably  regarding 
himself  as  in  some  degree  responsible  for 
Joseph's  safety)  heard  it,  and  he  delivered 
him  out  of  their  hands  ;  and  said,  Let  us  not 
kill  him — literally,  Let  us  not  destroy  his 
life  (nephesh).  And  Seuben  said  (further) 
unto  them,  Shed  no  blood,  but  cast  him 
into  this  pit  that  is  in  the  wilderness  (i.  e. 
into  a  dry  pit  that  was  near)  and  lay  no 
hand  upon  him  ;  that  (the  adverb  indicates 
the  purpose  Reuben  had  in  view)  he  might 
rid  him  translated  above  deliver  him)  out 
of  their  hands,  to  deliver  him  (or,  more  cor- 
rectly, to  return  hirn)  to  his  father  again. 

Ver.  23. — And  it  came  to  pasB,  when  Jo- 
seph was  come  unto  his  brethren,  that  they 
stript  Joseph  out  of  his  coat,  his  coat  of 
many  colours— i.  e.  his  coat  of  ends,  or 
coat  of  pieces  (vide  on  ver.  3)  that  was  on 
him. 

GENESIS, 


Vers.  24,  25. — And  they  took  him,  and 
cast  him  into  a  pit ;  and  the  pit  was 
em^ty,  there  was  no  water  in  it.  Cisterns 
when  empty,  or  only  covered  with  mud 
at  the  bottom,  were  sometimes  used  as 
temporary  prisons  (Jer.  xxxviii.  6  ;  xl.  15). 
And — leaving  him,  as  they  must  have 
calculated,  to  perish  by  a  painful  death 
through  starvation,  with  exquisite  cold- 
b  oodedness,  paying  no  heed  to  his  piteous 
outcries  and  appeals  (ch.xli.  21) — th.y  sat 
down  (the  callous  composure  of  the  act 
indicates  deplorable  brutality  on  the  part 
of  Joseph's  brethren)  to  eat  bread  (per- 
haps with  a  secret  feeling  of  satisfaction, 
if  not  also  exultation,  that  they  had  effect- 
ually disposed  of  the  young  man  and  his 
dreams) :  and  they  lifted  up  their  eyes  and 
looked,  and,  behold,  a  company — orchath, 
from  arach,  to  walk  ;  a  band  of  travellers, 
especially  of  merchantmen  ;  a  caravan  : 
o-vvoSCa,  oSoiiropoi  (LXX.;  cf.  Job.  vi.  19) 
— of  Ishmaelites  —  Arabs  descended  from 
Ishmael,  who  occupied  the  district  lying 
between  Egypt  and  Assyria  (ch.  xxv.  18), 
and,  as  appears  from  the  record,  carried 
on  a  trade  with  the  former  country.  That  *# 
Ishmael's  descendants  should  already 
have  developed  into  a  trading  nation  will 
not  be  surprising  (Bohlen)  if  one  reflects 
that  Ishmael  may  have  married  in  his 
eighteenth  or  twentieth  year,  i.  e.  about 
162  years  before  the  date  of  the  present 
occurrence,  that  four  generations  may 
have  been  born  in  the  interval,  and  that, 
if  Ishmael's  sons  had  only  five  sons  each, 
his  posterity  in  the  fifth  generation  (not 
reckoning  females)  may  have  amounted 
to  15,000  persons  (Murphy).  But  in  po  nt 
of  fact  the  Ishmaelites  spoken  of  are  not 
described  as  nations — simply  as  a  com- 
pany of  merchants,  without  saying  how 
numerous  it  was  (Havernick,  'Introd.,' 
§  21) — came  (literally,  coming)  from  Gilead 
(v.de  c  i.  xxxi.  21)  with  (literally,  and) 
their  camels  bearing  spice!  y — riNDJ,  either 

an  infinitive  from  N35,  to  break,  to  grind 

(?),  and  signifying  a  pounding,  breaking 
in  pieces,  hence  aromatic  powder  (Gesen- 
ius) ;  or  a  contraction  from  rrifcOS  (Ewald), 

meaning  that  which  is  powdered  or  pul- 
verised. Rendered  6iP|j.ict|jdTa  (LXX.), 
aromata  (Vulgate),  o"rvpa£  (Aquila),  it 
was  probably  the  gum  tragacanth,  many 
kinds  of  which'appear  in  Syria  (Furst, 
Gesenius,  Rosenmtlller,  Keil,  Kalisch, 
Lange,  Murphy),  or  storax,  the  resinous 
exudation  of  the  siyrax  officinale,  which 
abounds  in  Palestine  and  the  East 
(Aquila,  Bochart,  Bush.  '  Speaker's  Com- 
mentary,'  Inglis)  —  and  balm  —  ^K  (in 

pause  1kni£.  after  vau  of  union  I'nlt),  men- 


434 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xxxvu.  12—25. 


tioned  as  one  of  the  most  precious  fruits 
of  Palestine  (ch.  xliii.  11),  rendered  piyrlvt\ 
(LXX.)  and  refina  (Vulgate),  and  derived 
from  tilS,  to  flow,  to  run  (hence,  literally, 

an  outflowing,  or  out  dropping),  was  un- 
questionably a  balsam,  but  of  what  tree 
cannot  now  be  ascertained,  distilling  from 
atree  or  fruit  growing  in  Gilead.andhigh- 
ly  prized  for  its  healing  properties  (Jer. 
viii.22;  xlvi.  11).  Vide  Lexicons  (Gesenius 
and  Fflrst)  sub  voce;  Michaelis,  'Suppl.,' 
p.2142;  Kalisch  in  loco — and  myrrh, — J3?, 
o-Tairrij  (LXX.),  stacte  (Vulgate),  pistacia 
(Chaldee,  Syriac,  Michaelis,  '  Suppl.,'  p. 
1424),  was  more  probably  laudanum  (Ge- 
senius, Fttrst,  Rosenmiiller,Keil,  Kalisch, 


et  alii),  an  odoriferous  gum  formed  upon 
the  leaves  of  the  cistus-rose,  a  shrub 
growing  in  Arabia,  Syria,  and  Palestine 
{vide  Herod.,  iii.,  112;  Pliny,  '  N.  H.,' 
xii.  37;  Celsius,  'Hierob.,'  i.  280—288)— 
going — the  caravan  route  from  Gilead 
crossed  the  Jordan  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  Ber.  an,  and,  sweeping  through  Jenin 
and  the  plain  of  Dothan,  joined  another 
track  leaning  southwards  from  Damascus 
by  way  of  Bamleh  and  Gaza  (vide  Robin- 
son, iii.  27,  and  cf.  Tristram,  'Land  of 
Israel,'  p.  132) — to  carry  it  down  to  Egypt. 
At  that  time  the  land  of  tL.e  Pharaohs 
was  the  chief  emporium  for  the  world's 
merchandise. 


HOMILETICS. 


Vers.  12 — 25. — Joseph  among  his  Brethren  at  Dothan.  I.  The  friendly  mission. 
1.  Its  heal  destination.  This  was  Shechem,  at  a  distance  of  sixty  miles  from 
Hebron,  where  Jacob  had  previously  resided  for  a  number  of  years  and  acquired  a 
small  estate  (cb.  xxxiii.  18,  19),  where  Jacob's  sons  had  committed,  a  few  years  before 
the  terrible  atrocity  which  marie  the  name  of  Israel  stink  throughout  the  land  (ch. 
xxxiv.  26 — 30) ;  and  where  now  Joseph's  brethren  were  shepherding  .their  flocks, 
having  gone  thither  either  on  account  of  the  excellent  pasture,  or  in  order  to  be 
beyond  the  reach  of  Joseph  and  his  tale-bearing,  or  perhaps  with  a  mind  to  keep  an 
eye  on  their  father's  estate.  2.  I  s  kindly  intention.  Joseph  was  despatched  to  this 
important  sheep-station  in  the  north  to  inquire  after  the  welfare  of  his  brethren. 
That  Jacob  should  have  sent  a  son  so  tender  and  beloved  on  a  journey  so  arduous 
and  an  errand  so  fraught  with  danger  to  himself,  considering  the  well-known  hostility 
of  his  brethren  towards  him,  if  a  proof  of  Jacob's  want  of  consideration,  was  also 
a  mark  of  his  parental  solicitude  for  bis  son's  behaviour,  as  well  as  a  sign  of  his 
apprehensions  for  their  safety,  venturing,  as  they  had,  to  revisit  the  scene  of  their 
former  crimes,  and  perhaps  it  may  be  added,  an  indication  of  his  desire  to  effect  a 
reconciliation  between  Joseph  and  his  brethren.  3.  Its  cheerful  susception.  Though 
realising  better  than  his  father  did  the  perilous  character  of  the  enterprise,  in  con- 
sequence of  knowing  "more  exactly  than  his  father  the  depth  of  malignant  feeling 
entertained  towards  him  by  his  brethren,  Joseph  did  not  hesitate  to  comply  with  his 
father's  instructions,  but,  making  nothing  of  the  long  journey,  and  keeping  silent  as 
to  the  risks  of  increased  hatred,  if  nothing  more,  which  he  must  have  known  that 
mission  would  entail  upon  him,  cheerfully  replied,  Here  am  I.  What  a  bright 
example  of  true  filial  piety  and  obedience !  4.  Its  successful  completion.  Arriving 
at  Shechem,  he  first  failed  to  find  his  brethren,  and  then  lost  his  way,  but  ultimately, 
on  being  directed  by  a  stranger,  discovered  them  at  Dothan.  The  perseverance  of 
Joseph  in  carrying  through  his  father's  commission  may  be  profitably  studied,  as  a 
pattern  to  all  to  whom  any  sort  of  work,  but  more  especially  Christian  work,  is 
intrusted. 

II.  The  diabolical  conspiracy.  1.  It  innocent  occasion — the  approach  of  Joseph 
in  his  long-sleeved  and  long-skirted  tunic.  Like  a  guupowder  train  that  has  been  care- 
fully prepared,  and  only  wants  the  application  of  a  spark  to  produce  an  explosion, 
the  brethren  of  Joseph  were  only  needing  some  trifling  incident  to  elicit  all  the  fra- 
tricidal hate  which  was  already  growing  in  their  bosoms,  and  that  incident  was 
supplied  by  the  sight  of  the  coat  of  ends.  It  was  a  strikiug  illustration  of  how  great 
results  frequently  proceed  from  apparently  insignificant  causes  (James  iii.  4,  5).  2.  Its 
murderous  character.  It  aimed  at  the  destruction  of  Joseph's  life.  With  unex- 
ampled unanimity,  not  a  voice  was  raised  against  the  proposal  (perhaps  made  by 
Simeon)  to  kill  him  and  cast  his  lifeless  body  into  a  pit.  The  proposal  of  Reuben 
must  have  been  understood  by  the  others  as  only  a  more  excruciatingly  cruel  way  of 
inflicting  death,  viz.,  by  starvation.     See  here  in  Jacob's  family  a  development  of 


CH.  xxxvn.  12—25.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  435 

the  same  spirit  of  murder  as  existed  in  Adam's.  Like  Cain,  the  sons  of  Jacob  were 
of  that  wicked  one,  and  slew  (in  intention  at  least)  their  brother,  and  for  the  same 
reason  (1  John  iii.  12).  3.  Its  impious  design — to  spoil  his  dreams.  From  this  it  is 
evident  that  they  regarded  his  dreams  as  a  Heaven-sent  prognostication  of  his  future 
greatness;  else,  if  they  regarded  them  as  purely  boyish  fancies,  why  should  they  have 
felt  annoyed  at  what  was  so  evidently  groundless  ?  Hence,  in  seeking  to  prevent 
the  realisation  of  his  dreams  they  were  actually  fighting  against  God.  But  it-is  just 
precisely  in  proportion  as  wicked  men  see  God's  hand  in  any  prophecy  or  programme 
that  they  take  measures  to  insure  its  defeat  (cf.  1  Sam.  xix.  1;  2  Kings  vi.  14).  4. 
Its  ruthless  execution.  They  took  him  and  cast  him  into  a  pit.  The  crime  wa<  per- 
petrated (1)  with  insolent  humiliation — they  stripped  the  poor  lad  of  his  pretty  coat ; 
(2)  with  violeut  brutality — they  cast  him  into  the  pit ;  Jeremiah  was  let  down  by 
cords  (Jer.  xxxviii.  6) ;  (3)  with  relentless  cruelty — they  heeded  not  his  outcries  and 
entreaties  (ch.  xlii.  sJl,  22) ;  and  (4)  with  exquisite  cold-bloodedness— having  de- 
spatched their  infernal  business,  with  infinite  nonchalance  the  ruffians  sat  down  to 
eat  bread,  to  regale  their  appetites  after  a  good  day's  work. 

III.  The  attempted  rescue.  The  stratagem  of  Reuben  was — 1.  Mercifully 
designed.  Reuben,  in  some  respec's  not  a  person  to  be  greatly  admired,  weak  and 
vacillating  in  his  character,  and  easily  drawn  aside  by  stronger  natures  into  sinful 
courses,  appears  in  this  matter  to  have  been  the  only  one  of  Joseph's  brethren  in 
whom  the  natural  affections  of  a  brother  were  not  completely  overborne.  Though 
he  wanted  the  courage  to  resist  his  stronger-minded  brothers,  he  seems  to  have  con- 
ceived the  purpose  of  saving,  if  lie  could,  the  life  of  Joseph.  So  far  the  stratagem 
was  good,  only  it  was — 2.  Timidly  planned.  The  narrative  would  almost  seem  to 
couvey  that  Reuben  in  the  first  onset  of  his  opposition  to  his  brother's  nefarious 
intentions  had  succeeded  in  wresting  Joseph  from  their  hands.  Had  he  at  that 
moment  asserted  himself  with  vigour  and  boldness,  as  became  the  firstborn  of  the 
house,  he  might  have  saved  Joseph  altogethe  .  But,  alas,  true  to  his  feeble  and 
pusillanimous  character,  he  allowed  himself  to  be  overcome  by  the  clamors  of  his 
fiercer-natured  brethren,  and  only  proposed  that  instead  of  imbruing  their  hands  in 
Joseph's  blood  they  should  inflict  on  him  the  horrors  of  starvation.  In  making  such 
a  proposal  of  course  Reuben  hoped  to  be  able  to  effect  his  deliverance,  in  which  he 
might  have  succeeded,  had  he  acted  with  promptitude  and  decision.  But  instead  his 
st  atagem  was— 3.  Weakly  carried  through.  Where  Reuben  was  when  his  brethren 
were  comforting  their  hearts  with  a  dinner  after  Joseph's  consignment  to  the  cistern, 
and  concocting  the  matter  of  his  sale,  the  narrative  does  not  say  ;  but  most  likely  he 
was  by  himself,  deliberating,  and  resolving,  and  hesitating,  and  delaying,  instead  of 
acting.  Hence  his  stratagem  was— 4.  Completely  defeated.  By  the  time  he  had  got 
his  mind  made  up  to  act  it  was  too  late.  When  he  returned  to  the  pit  Joseph  was 
gone,  and,  like  many  another  procrastinator,  he  could  only  bemoan  his  own  folly. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  14,  15.— Joseph  leaving  home.  "Go,  I  pray  thee,  see  whether,"  &c.  Joseph 
left  home  unexpected  y.  He  knew  not  when  he  left  it  to  seek  his  brethren  that  he 
would  never  come  back  again.  After  a  longer  journey  than  he  anticipated  Joseph 
finds  his  brethren. 

I.  Like  many  leaving  home  Joseph  met  with  faithful  guides.  There  are  gen- 
erally companions,  teachers,  ministers  to  help. 

II.  Like  many  leaving  home,  Joseph  pell  into  snares.  He  could  not  help  him- 
self. The  snares  were  not  such  as  were  willingly  entered.  The  wicked  entrapped 
him.  On  this  youth,  far  from  home,  defenceless,  and  kindly-intentioned,  nine  cow- 
ardly men  fell. 

III.  Like  many  away  from  home,  Joseph  found  that  God  cared  for  him 
when  his  earthly  father  could  not.  Reuben  was  the  means  of  saving  him 
from  death.  Sold  into  slavery,  he  was  still  on  the  highway  to  eminence.  We  have 
to  beware  of  hateful  and  murderous  thoughts,  remembering  "that  he  that  hateth  his 

wv  2 


436 


THE   BOOK   OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xxxvii.  26-36. 


brother  is"  (so  far  as  intent  goes)  "a  murderer."    In  all  journeyings  we  have  to 
commit  our  way  unto  the  Lord,  and  he  will  guide  and  defend. — H. 

Vers.  20,  21. — Ood's  providence  and  man's  responsibility.  I.  God's  purposes  cab- 
hied  out  by  men  ikrespective  of  their  own  plans.  The  word  to  Abraham  (cb. 
xv.  13)  does  not  stem  to  have  been  thought  of  by  Jacob.  After  long  wandering  he 
seemed  to  be  settled  in  CanaaD.  But  God  was  bringing  to  pass  his  word.  Jacob's 
injudicious  fondness  for  Joseph,  the  auger  and  murderous  design  of  his  brethren 
(cf,  John  xi.  50;  Acts  iii.  17),  Reuben's  timid  effort  for  his  deliverance  (cf.  Acts  v. 
38),  Judah's  worldly  wise  counsel  (cf.  Luke  xiii.  31),  Joseph's  imprisonment  by 
Potiphar,  the  conspiracy  in  Pharaoh's  household,  were  so  many  steps  by  which  the 
sojourn  in  Egypt  was  brought  about.  So  in  the  founding  of  the  Christian  Church. 
The  writing  on  the  cross  (John  xix.  20)  pointed  to  three  separate  lines  of  history, 
two  of  tbem  pagan,  which  combined  to  bring  about  the  sacrifice  Of  Christ  and  the 
spread  of  the  gospel.  So  in  the  case  of  individuals.  God's  promises'are  sure  (2  Co:-, 
i.  20).  Th  re  may  seem  to  be  many  hindrances,  from  ourselves  (Ps.  Ixv.  3)  or  from 
circumstances  ;  but  no  cause  for  doubt  (Luke  xii.  32;  xxii.  35).  Unlikely  or  remote 
causes  are  ofieu  God's  instruments.  The  envy  of  the  Jews  opened  for  St.  Paul, 
through  his  imprisonment,  a  door  to  the  Gentiles  which  otherwise  he  would  not 
have  had  (Acts  xxi.  28 ;  Phil.  i.  13). 

II.  It  is  no  excuse  for  wrong-doing  that  it  has  worked  good  (cf.  Rom.  ix. 
19).  The  cruel  act  of  his  brethren  brought  about  the  realising  of  Joseph's  dreams, 
his  greatness  in  Egypt,  the  support  of  the  whole  family  during  the  famine,  and  the 
fulfilment  of  God's  word  ;  but  not  the  less  was  it  wrong  (ch.  xlii.  21  j  cf  Matt.  xxvi. 
24).  Moral  guilt  depends  not  upon  the  result,  but  on  the  motive.  God  has  given 
the  knowledge  of  redemption  to  move  our  will,  and  the  example  of  Christ  and  the 
moral  law  to  guide  our  lives.  The  fulfilment  of  his  purposes  belongs  to  himself. 
He  needs  not  our  help  to  bring  it  to  pass.  It  is  not  his  will  that  we  should  forsake 
his  immutable  rules  of  right  and  wrong,  even  for  the  sake  of  bringing  on  the  fulfil- 
ment of  prophecy.  Much  evil  has  sprung  from  neglect  of  tbis — e.  g.  the  maxim, 
Faith  need  not  be  kept  with  heretics.    God's  will  and  promise,  Ps.  xxxvii.  3 — 5. 

III.  To  each  one  there  is  a  history  within  a  history.  Our  actions  lead  to 
their  appropriate  results  (Gal.  vi.  8)  at  the  same  time  that  they  tend  to  carry  out 
God's  purposes,  whether  we  will  or  not.  Each  one  is  a  factor  in  the  great  plan 
which  in  the  course  of  ages  God  is  working  out  (John  v.  17).  Men  such  as  they  are, 
wise  or  ignorant,  guided  by  the  Spirit  or  resisting  him,  loving  or  selfish,  pressing 
upwards  or  ollowing  worldly  impulses,  all  are  so  directed  by  a  power  they  cannot 
comprehend  that  they  bring  about  what  he  wills  (Ps.  ii.  2 — 4).  But  along  with  this 
there  is  a  history  which  concerns  ourselves,  which  we  write  for  ourselves,  the  issues 
of  which  depend  immediately  upon  ourselves.  To  each  a  measure  of  time,  knowl- 
edge, opportunity  has  been  given,  on  tbe  use  of  which  the  line  of  our  course  depends. 
Nothing  can  turn  aside  the  course  of  God's  provid*  nee  ;  but  upon  our  faithfulness 
or  unfaithfulness  depends  our  place  and  joy  in  it.  Hence  encouragement  to  work 
for  Christ  however  small  our  powers  (1  Sam.  xiv.  6).  The  little  is  accepted  as  well 
as  the  great ;  and  as  "  workers  together  with  him"  (2  Cor.  vi,  1)  our  work  cannot  be 
in  vain.— M. 

EXPOSITION. 


Vers,  26,  27— And  Judah  (apparently 
shrinking  from  the  idea  of  murder)  said 
unto  his  brethren,  What  profit  is  it  if 
(literally,  what  of  advantage  that)  we  slay 
our  brother,  and  conceal  his  blood  1  (i.  e. 
and  hide  the  fact  of  his  murder).  Come, 
and  let  us  sell  him  to  the  Ishmaelites,  and 
let  not  our  hand  be  upon  him  (literally, 
and  our  hand,  let  it  not  be  upon  him,  i.  e. 
to  slay  him) ;  for  he  is  our  brother  and 
our  flesh — or,  more  expressly,  our  brother 


and  our  flesh  he  (cf.  ch.  xxix.  14).  And 
his  brethren  were  content  —  literally, 
hearkened,  viz.,  to  the  proposal. 

Ver.  28.— Then  there  passed  by  Mid- 
ianites  merchantmen ;  —  literally,  and 
passed  by  the  men,  Midianites  (by  coun- 
try), merchants  (by  profession)..  On  the 
different  appellations  given  to  the  trad- 
ers vide  infra,  ver.  36 — and  they — 
not  the  Midianites  (Davidson),  but  Jo- 
seph's  brethren  —  drew    and    lifted    up 


CH.  xxxvii  26—36.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


437 


Joseph  out  of  the  pit ,  and  sold  Joseph  to  the 
Ishmaelites  for  twenty  pieces  of  silver  — 
literally,  for  twenty  (sc.  shekels)  of  silver 
=  £2  10*. ;  the  price  afterwards  fixed  for 
a  boy  between  five  and  twenty  (Levit. 
xxvii.  5),  the  average  price  of  a  slave 
being  thirty  shekels  (Ezek.  xxi.  32  ,  and 
Joseph  only  bringing  twenty  because  he 
was  a  lad(Kurta),  because  the  Midianites 
desired  to  make  money  by  the  transaction 
(Keil),  perhaps  because  his  brethren 
wished  to  avoid  the  reproach  of  having 
acted  from  love  of  gain  (Gerlach),  but 
most  probably  because  Joseph's  brethren 
cared  little  what  they  had  for  him,  if  so 
be  they  were  rid  of  him  (Lawson).  On 
the  term  keseph  vide  ch.  xx.  16.  And  they 
brought  Joseph  into  Egypt — where  they  in 
turn  disposed  of  their  purchase,  doubtless 
at  a  profit  (ver.  36). 

Vers.  29,  30. — And  Reuben  (in  whose  ab- 
sence apparently  the  scheme  of  sale  had 
been  concocted  and  carried  through)  re- 
turned to  the  pit  (obviously  with  a  view  to 
deliver  Joseph);  and,  behold,  Joseph  was 
not  in  the  pit;  and  he  rent  his  clothes — in 
token  of  his  mingled  grief  and  horror  at 
the  discovery  (cf.  ver.  34;  xliv.  13;  2  Sam. 
xiii  31;  2  Kings  xviii.  37;  Jobi.  20)  And 
he  returned  unto  his  brethren,  and  said, 
The  child  (or  young  man,  as  in  ch.  iv.  23, 
where  "lb*  in  the  one  hemistich  is  equiv- 
alent to  UJ-'N  in  the  other)  is  not;  and  I, 

whither  shall  I  go— i.  e.  however  shall  I 
account  for  his  disappearance? 

Vers.  81,  32. — And  they — i.  e.  Joseph's 
brethren,  including  Reuben,  to  whom 
manifestly  the  matter  had  been  explained 
(Candlish  thinks  Reuben  may  have  been 
deceived  by  his  brethren),  and  who  wanted 
the  courage  either  to  expose  their  wick- 
edness or  to  dissent  from  their  device  for 
deceiving  Jacob — took  Joseph's  coat,  and 
killed  a  kid  of  the  goats, — more  correctly, 
a  he-goat  of  the  goats,  since  the  name  of 
goat  seems  to  have  belonged  in  a  wider 
sense  to  other  animals  also  (Gesenius); 
usually  understood  to  mean  the  somewhat 
older  he-goat  which  was  used  as  a  sin  of- 
fering— Levit.  xvi.  9;  xxiii.  19;  Numb.  vii. 
16;  xv.  24  (Filrst) — and  dipped  the  coat  in 
the  blood;  and  they  sent  the  coat  of  many 
colours  (vide  on  ver.  3),  and  they  brought 
it  (or  caused  it  to  be  broug  t  by  the  han  's 
of  a  servant)  to  their  father,  and  said  (of 
course  by  the  lips  of  the  messenger),  This 
have  we  found:  know  now  whether  it  be 
thy  son's  coat  or  no.  Either  Jacob's  sons 
had  not  the  fortitude  to  witness  the  first 
outburst  of  h  s  grief,  or  they  had  not  the 
effrontery  requisite  to  carry  through  their 
scheme  in  their  own  persons,  and  were 
accordingly  obliged    to   employ  another. 


probably  a  slave,  to  carry  home  the  bloody 
coat  to  Jacob  in  Hebron. 

Ver.  33  — And  he  knew  it,  and  said,  It  is 
my  son's  coat;  an  evil  beast  (vide  ver.  20) 
hath  devoured  him  (this  was  precisely 
what  his  sons  meant  him  to  infer);  Joseph 
is  without  doubt  rent  in  pieces— tnb  CPU, 

the  inf.  abs.  Kal  with  the  Pual  express- 
ing undoubted  certainty. 

Ver.  34. — And  Jacob  rent  his  clothes,  and 
put    sackcloth  upon  his   loins, — pli3   (cf. 

o-dKos,  o-cLkkos,  saccus),  the  usual  dress  of 
mourners  (2  Sam.  iii,  81 ;  Neh.  ix.  1 ;  Esther 
iv.  1),  was  a  coarse,  thick  haircloth,  of 
which  corn  sackb  were  also  made  (ch.  xlii. 
25),  and  which  in  cases  of  extreme  men- 
tal distress  was  worn  next  the  skin  (1 
Kings  xxi.  27)— and  mourned  for  his  son 
many  days.  Though  twenty-two  years 
elapsed  before  Jacob  ajjain  beheld  his  son, 
and  though  doubtless  the  old  man's  grief 
for  the  premature  and  violent  death,  as 
he  imagined,  of  Rachel's  child  was  little 
abated  by  the  lapse  of  time,  yet  the  ex- 
pression ' '  many  days  "  may  only  be  em- 
ployed to  mark  the  intensity  of  Jacob's 
sorrow,  which  continued  longer  than  the 
customary  mournings  of  the  period. 

Ver.  33. — And  all  his  sons — the  crimi- 
nals become  comforters  (Langs)— and  all 
his  daughters — either  Jacob  had  other 
daughters  besides  Dinah  (Ka  isch,  Ger- 
lach, '  Speaker's  Commentary  '),  or  these 
included  his  daughters-in-law,  the  word 
being  employed  ai  in  Ruth  i.  11,  12 
(Willet,  Bush,  Murphy),  or  the  term  is 
used  freely  wit'iout  being  designed  to  in- 
dicate whether  he  had  one  or  more  girls 
in  his  family  (Augustine)— rose  up  to  com- 
fort him  (this  implies  the  return  of  Jacob's 
brethren  to  Hebron);  but  he  refused  to  be 
comforted;  and  he  said  (here  the  thought 
must  be  supplied:  It  is  vain  to  ask  me  to 
be  comforted),  For  I  will  go  down  into  the 
grave  unto  my  son  mourning — or,  retain- 
ing the  order  of  the  Hebrew  words,  which 
is  almost  always  more  expressive  than 
those  adopted  by  our  translators,  I  will  go 
down  to  my  son  mourning  to,  or  towards, 
in  the  direction  of,  Sheol.  The  term  biXlZJ 
— more  fully  biXIU,  an  inf,  absol.  for  a 
noun,  either  (1)  frombiTO  =  bj"l25,  to  go 

down,  to  sink  (GeSenius,  Filrst),  signify- 
ing the  hollow  place;  or,  (2)  according  to 
the  older  lexicographers  and  etymologists, 
from  bBJIB,  to  ask,  and  meaning  either  the 

region  which  inexorably  summons  all 
men  into  its  shade,  the  realm  that  is  al- 
ways craving  because  never  satisfied 
(Keil,  Murphi',  Lange),  or  the  land  that 
excites   qnestioning   and  wonder  in  the 


438 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xxxvn.  26—36. 


human  heart,  ' '  the  undiscovered  country 
from. whose  bourne  no  traveller  returns  " 
(T.  Lewis) — is'not  the  grave,  since  Jacob's 
son  had  no  grave,  but  the  place  <  f  de- 
parted spirits,  the  unseen  world  "ABtjs, 
LXX.)  into  which  the  dead  disappear,  and 
where  they  consciously  exist  (2  Sam.  xii. 
23).  Thus  (literally,  and)  his  father  (not 
Isaac)  wept  for  him. 

Ver.  36. — And  the  Midianites — or  Me- 
danites,  descendants  of  Medan,  a  brother 
of  Midian,  both  of  whom  were  sons  of 
Abraham  by  Keturah  (ch.  xxv.  2).  That 
the  Arabian  merchants  are  called  Ishmael- 
ites  (ver.  27),  Midianites  (ver.  28),  and 
Medanites  (ver.  36),  is  explained  as  an 
evidence  of  varying  legends  (Tuch,  Bleek, 
Davidson,  Colenso),  but  is  better  ac- 
counted for  as  indicating  that  the  traders 
were  composed  of  men  of  various  nations 
(Clericus);  that  the  Midianiies,  Ishmael- 
ites,  and  Medanites  were  cften  confounded, 
from  their  common  parentage  and  closely 
similar  habits  (Keil) ;  that  the  narrator 
did  not  intend  to  lay  stress  upon  the  na- 
tionality, but  upon  the  occapation,  of  the 
travellers  (Havernick);  that  the  proprie- 
tors of  the  caravan  were  Ishmaelites,  and 
the  company  attending  it  Midianites  or 
Medanites  (Lange);  that  the  Ishmaelites 
■were  the  genus,  and  the  Midianites  and 


Medanites  the  species,  of  the  same  nation 
(Rosenmuller,  Quarry);  that  the  Midian- 
ites or  Medanites  were  the  actual  pur- 
chasers of  Joseph,  while  the  caravan  took 
its  name  from  the  Ishmaelites,  who  formed 
the  larger  portion  of  it  (Murphy) — sold 
him  into  Egypt  (i.  e.  having  brought  him 
into  Egypt,  perliaps,  as  Luther  conjec- 
tures, passing  through  Hebron  on  the 
way,  sold  him)  unto  Potiphar,— the  name 
is  abbreviated  from  Poti-Phera  (ch.  xli. 
50),  i.  e.  he  who  belongs  to  the  sun  (Ge- 
senins,  sub  voce).  The  LXX.  render  TU- 
Te<f>pr|  s  or  Il€Te<{>pfj — an  officer — D^D,  from 

D"nD,  an  unusrd  root  signifying  to  pull  up 

by  the  roots,  originally  means  a  eunuch 
(Isa.  lvi.  3,  4),  such  as  Oriental  monarchs 
were  accustomed  to  set  over  their  harems 
(Esther  ii.  3,  14,  15;  iv.  5),  but  is  here 
employed  to  denote  an  officer  or  courtier 
generally,  without  any  reference  to  the 
primary  signification,  since  Potiphar  was 
married — of  Pharaoh's  (vide  ch.  xii.  15), 
and  captain  of  the  guard — literally,  cap- 
tain of  the  slaughterers,  i.  e.  chief  officer 
of  the  executioners,  the  nature  of  whose 
duties  may  be  understood  from  the  fact 
that  he  was  keeper  of  tbe  State  prison, 
' '  where  the  king's  prisoners  were  bound" 
(ch.  xxxix.  20). 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  26— 36.— Joseph  carried  by  Midianites  to  Egypt.  I.  The  infamous  sale. 
1.  The  wicked  proposal.  "  Come,  and  let  us  sell  hirn."  By  whatever  motives  Judah 
was  actuated,  the  notion  that  either  he  or  his  brethren  had  a  right  thus  to  dispose  of 
Joseph's  life  was  not  simply  an  open  violation  of  the  Divine  law  which  constituted 
all  men  with  equal  rights,  and  in  particular  made  every  man  his  brother's  keeper, 
not  his  brother's  destroyer  or  proprietor,  but  a  hideous  discovery  of  the  utter  per- 
version of  moral  nature  which  had  taken  place  in  the  case  of  Joseph's  brethren.  So 
low  had  they  now  sunk,  that  they  were  become  not  alone  without  humanity,  but 
without  natural  affection  as  well.  2.  The  double  reason.  (1)  The  advantageous 
character  of  the  proposed  transaction  is  exhibited  by  Judah,  who  doubtless  under- 
stood the  sort  of  arguments  that  would  weigh  most  powerfully  with  I' is  brethren. 
Simply  to  assassinate  the  hated  stripling  and  conceal  his  blood  might  indeed  gratify 
their  feelings  of  revenge,  but  would  not  do  much  to  enrich  them.  Might  it  not  be 
possible  to  dispose  of  him  more  profitably  than  by  the  coarse  way  of  killing  him? 
Then  (2)  the  humane  aspect  of  the  proposed  transaction  is  pathetically  dwelt  upon 
by  Judah,— "  he  is  our  brother  and  our  flesh,"— iu  which  perhaps  may  also  be  de- 
tected Judah's  subtle  knowledge  of  bumiin  nature,  in  reasoning  that  men  who  cared 
nothing  for  the  claims  of  humanily  and  brotherhood  in  themselve  might  be  induced 
to  do  a  little  cheap  philanthropy  by  sparing  Joseph,  after  they  had  first  been  made 
to  see  that  it  would  likewise  be  profitable.  Judah's  last  remark  was  a  master-stroke 
which  overbore  every  vestige  of  opposition  :  "  his  brethren  were  content."  3.  The 
favourable  opportunity.  Many  wicked  schemes  are  happily  never  carried  through 
because  the  opportunity  is  wanting— thanks  to  Divine  providence!  But,  on  the 
other  hand,  thousands  of  nefarious  crimes  are  born  of  the  opportunity — thanks  to 
the  sinful  ingenuity  of  the  fallen  heart !  The  scheme  of  Judah  was  clearly  suggested 
by  the  providential  circumstance  that  at  the  moment  an  Ishmaelitish  caravan  was 
passing  by  on  its  way  with  gums  and  spicery  to  Egypt.  That  caravan  was  God's 
chariot  sent  to  convey  Joseph  to  the  throne  of  Egypt.  Judah  asked  his  brethren  to 
see  in  it  a  prison  van  to  take  their  brother  into  slavery  in  Egypt.  Wicked  men  and 
God  may  often  seem  to  play  at  cross  purposes  with  one  another,  but  God  always 


OH.  xxxvii.  26—86.]  THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS.  439 

triumphs.  Man  proposes  ;  God  disposes.  4.  The  accomplished  transaction.  ' '  They 
drew  and  lifted  Joseph  up  out  of  the  pit,  and  sold  him  to  the  Midianites  for  thirty 
pieces  of  silver."  The  first  recorded  specimen  ol  a  transaction  which  has  frequently' 
been  repeated  in  the  history  of  mankind  Slave  markets  have  often  imitated,  but 
seldom  surpassed,  the  wickedness  of  which  Joseph's  brethren  were  guilty.  It  was 
not.  simply  a  fellow  creature  that  they  sold,  but  a  brother  ;  and  they  had  not  even 
the  poor  apology  of  getting  a  good  bargain,  us  .they  sold  him  for  twenty  shekels — 
little  over  forty  shillings  !  5.  The  unforseen  result.  Joseph's  purchasers  conveyed 
him  into  Egypt,  and  sold  him,  as  probably  his  brethren  expected  ;  it  is  scarcely 
likely  they  anticipated  he  would  find  his  way  into  so  honourable  service  as  that  of  a 
high  officer  of  state.  But  God  was  taking  Joseph  thereby  a  step  nearer  to  his  pre- 
dicted elevation. 

II.  The  doleful  tidings. — 1.  The  ominous  symbol.  The  coat  of  ends,  the  token 
of  a  father's  love  for  his  darling  son,  the  insensate  ruffians,  after  dipping  it  in  blood, 
caused  to  be  conveyed  into  their  father's  presence  by  the  hands  of  a  swift-footed 
messenger.  This  was  rather  a  proof  of  their  cowardice  than  of  their  consideration 
for  Jacob's  feelings.  2.  The  pretended  discovery.  The  bearer  of  the  blood-stained 
tunic  was  directed  to  say  that  the  brethren  had  found  the  robe,  and  to  ask,  with 
expressions  of  their  deep  concern,  whether  or  not  it  was  the  coat  of  his  beloved  sou. 
Their  intention  we  cannot  think  was  to  stab  their  father's  heart,  but  to  mislead  his 
judgment.  3.  The  expected  inference.  As  they  desigi.ed,  the  old  man  concluded 
that  his  son  was  devoured :  "Joseph  is  without  doubt  rent  in  pieces."  Seldom  do 
villains'  plots  succeed  so  well. 

Ill  The  sorrowing  parent.  1.  The  bitter  grief '.  The  depth  and  tenderness  of 
Jacob's  mourning  for  his  lost  son  was — (1)  visibly  expressed  :  "he  rent  his  clothes, 
and  put  sackcloth  on  his  loins  ;  "  (2)  long  continued  :  "  he  mourned  for  his  son  many 
days ;  "  and,  if  we  accept  a  proposed  r.  ading  of  the  last  clause  of  ver.  35,  (3)  lov- 
ingly shared  :  "his  father,"  the  blind  Isaac,  who  still  survived,  "  wept  for  him  " — 
for  Rachel's  dead  child  and  Jacob's  lost  son.  2.  The  imffectual  consolation.  "  All 
his  sons  and  all  his  daughters  rose  up  to  comfort  him  ;  but  he  refused  to  be  com- 
forted." For  this  Jacob  was  (1  to  be  excused,  since  his  comforters  were  mostly 
hypocrites,  whose  proffered  consoluious  must  have  sounded  strangely  hollow  in  his 
ears;  but  also  (2,  to  be  blamed,  since  although  God  in  his  providence  had  taken 
away  Joseph,  that  was  no  reason  why  he  should  give  way  to  de-pairing  grief.  Not 
so  did  Abraham  when  he  thought  of  losing  Isaac. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  28  — Drawn  from  the  pit.  "  And  they  drew  and  lifted  up  Joseph  out  of  the 
pit."  As  a  compromise  Joseph  had  been  thrown  into  a  pit.  His  brothers  at  first 
intended  to  murder  him.  Their  intention  was  almost  as  bad  as  a  murder.  The 
Sciiptures  tells  us  that  "  he  that  hateth  his  brother  is  a  murderer."  And  one  writer 
says,  "Many  a  man  who  has  not  taken  a  brother's  life,  by  indulgence  of  male- 
volence, is  in  the  sight  of  God  a  more  sinful  man  than  manv  who  have  expiated 
their  guilt  on  a  scaffold."  Joseph  ouly  was  the  gainer  in  that  life  was  spared.  To 
the  brothe;s  deep  guilt  appertained.  They  threw  him  into  a  pit  to  perish,  thinking 
possibly  to  lessen  guilt  by  avoiding  the  actual  shedding  of  blood. 

I.  We  must  expect  to  find  pitfalls  in  life.  To  Joseph  tlie  snare  came  sud 
denly.  He  was  forced  in.  He  had  acied  as  he  believed  rightly  in  revealing  the 
wicked  deeds  of  his-  brethren,  and  he  suffered  for  it.  His  brothers  seized  the  first 
opportunity  of  bringing  reprisals  upon  him  for  what  they  considered  his  officious- 
ness.  When  alone  they  seized  him.  They  were  ten  men  to  one  stripling.  Coward 
brothers  !  "  In  with  him,"  they  say.  In  the  pit's  depth  is  security,  in  its  dryness 
speedy  death.  The  pitfalls  into  which  many  stumble  or  into  which  they  are  drawn 
are  such  as  these :  circumstances  being  altogether  unfavourable  in  life  ;  or  severe 
and  overpowering  temptations  to  some  special  sin,  as  intemperance,  passion,  or  lust ; 
or  greed,  or  ambition,  or  spiritual  pride.  Debt,  loss  of  <  haracter,  and  despondency 
are  also  deep  pitfalls.  If  we  come  to  love  evil  for  itself  that  is  a  very  deep  pit,  and 
it  adjoins  that  state  which  is  hopeless.  Many  are  drawn  into  these  pits  by  careless- 
ness, indifference,  and  neglect,  while  others  are  so  entangled  by  circums'ances  and 
conditions  of  birth  that  the  wond-r  is  that  they  ever  escape. 

II.  There  is  often  deliverance  from  the  deepest  pitfalls.  To  Joseph  it 
came  at  the  right  moment.     It  came  in  response  to  earnest  desire.     The  brothers 


440 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xxxviii.  1—30. 


thought  to  make  a  profit  by  his  deliverance,  but  God  was  saving  him  through  their 
avarice  and  timidity.  Joseph  was  helpkss.  His  brothers  had  to  lift  him  out.  We 
must  feel  our  helplessness,  and  then  Christ  is  sure  to  deliver  us  from  the  pit  of  sin 
ind  despair.  The  brothers  of  Joseph  had  low  and  mercenary  aims  in  lifting  up 
their  brother  ;  Jesus  is  all  love  and  self-sacrifice  in  the  effoTt  to  save  us.  Nothing 
but  the  long  Hue  of  his  finished  work  and  fervent  love. could  reach  souls.  When 
brought  up  from  the  pit  we  shall  not  be  inclined  to  prais-e  ourselves.  We  shall 
ascribe  all  the  glory  to  him  who."  brought  us  up  out  of  the  deep  pit  and  miry  clay, 
and  placed  our  feet  upon  a  rock,  and  established  our  goings." — H. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXXVIII. 


Ver.  1 . — And  it  came  to  pass.  The  pre- 
sent chapter  appears  to  interrupt  the  con- 
tinuity of  the  narrative  of  Joseph's  his- 
tory. Partly  on  this  account,  and  partly 
because  the  name  Jehovah  occurs  in  it 
(vers.  7,  10),  it  has  been  pronounced  a 
later  Jehovistic  interpolation  (Tuch, 
Bleek,  Davidson,  Colenso).  Its  design 
has  been  explained  as  an  attempt  to 
glorify  the  line  of  David  by  representing 
it  as  sprung  from  Judah  (Bohlen),  or  to 
disclose  the  origin  of  the  Levirate  law  of 
marriage  among  the  Jews  (Knobel) ;  but 
the  incidents  here  recorded  of  Judah  and 
his  family  are  fitted  to  reflect  dishonour 
instead  of  glory  on  the  ancestry  of  David 
(Havernick) ;  and  the  custom  here  men- 
tioned of  raising  up  seed  to  a  dead  brother 
by  marrying  his  widow,  though  the  idea 
may  have  originated  with  Judah  (Lange', 
is  more  likely  to  have  descended  from 
earlier  times  (Delitzsch,  Keil).  Rightly 
understood,  the  object  of  the  present  por- 
tion of  the  record  appears  to  have  been 
not  simply  to  prepare  the  way  for  the 
subsequent  (ch.  xlvi.  8 — 27)  genealogical 
register  (Gerlach),  or  to  contrast  the  wick- 
edness of  Judah  and  his  sons  with  the 
piety  and  chastity  of  Joseph  in  Egypt 
(Wordsworth),  or  to  recite  the  private 
history  of  one  of  Christ's  ancestors  (Bush, 
Murphy,  '  Speaker's  Commentary  '),  or  to 
show  that  the  pre-eminence  of  Judah  in 
the  patriarchal  family  was  due  exclu- 
sively to  grace  (Candlish),  but  also  and 
chiefly  to  justify  the  Divine  procedure  in 
the  subsequent  deportation  of  Jacob  and 
his  sons  to  Egypt  (Keil).  The  special 
danger  to  which  the  theocratic  family 
was  exposed  was  that  of  intermarrying 
with  the  Canaanites  (ch.  xxiv.  3  ;  xxviii. 
6).  Accordingly,  having  carried  forward 
his  narrative  to  the  point  where,  in  con- 
sequence of  Joseph's  sale,  a  way  begins 
to  open  up  for  the  transference  of  the 
patriarchal  house  to  the  land  of  the 
Pharaohs,  the  historian  makes  a  pause  to 
introduce  a  passage  from  the  life  of 
Judah,  with  the  view  of  proving  the 
necessity  of  such  removal,  by  showing, 


as  in  the  case  of  Judah,  the  almost  cer- 
tainty that,  if  left  in  Canaan,  the  de- 
scendants of  Jacob  would  fall  before  the 
temptation  of  marrying  with  the  daugh- 
ters of  the  laud,  with  the  result,  in  the 
first  instance,  of  a  great  and  rapid  moral 
deterioration  in  the  holy  seed,  and  with 
the  ultimate  effect  of  completely  obliter- 
ating the  line  of  demarcation  between 
them  and  the  surrounding  heathen  world. 
How  the  purity  of  the  patriarchal  family 
was  guarded  till  it  developed  into  a  pow- 
erful nation,  first  by  its  providential  with- 
drawment  in  infancy  from  the  sphere  of 
temptation  (ch.  xlvi.  5),  then  by  its  sepa- 
rate establishment  in  Goshen  beside  a 
people  who  regarded  them  with  aversion 
(ch.  xlvi.  34),  and  latterly  by  its  cruel  en- 
slavement under  Pharaoh  (Exod.  i.  10),  is 
a.  subject  which  in  due  course  engages  the 
attention  of  the  writer.  At  that  time.  (1) 
If  the  date  of  Judah's  marriage,  as  is 
most  probable,  was  shortly  after  the  sale 
of  Joseph  (Keil,  Kurtz,  Lange,  Alford, 
Wordsworth,  Quarry),  since  at  the  time 
of  that  atrocity  Judah  was  still  living 
with  his  brethren,  the  only  difficulty 
calling  for  solution  is  to  account  for  the 
birth  of  Judah's  grandchildren,  Hezron 
and  Hamul  (the  sons  of  Pharez,  the  twin 
child  of  Judah  by  Tamar),  in  the  short 
interval  of  twenty-two  years  which  pre- 
ceded Jacob's  descent  into  Egypt  without 
making  Er  and  Onan  marry ,in  compara- 
tive boyhood.  The  case  becomes  a  little 
less  perplexing  if  Hezron  and  Hamul, 
though  said  to  have  come  into  Egypt  (ch. 
xlvi.  27 ;  Exod  i.  1  ;  Deut.  x.  22),  may  be 
regarded  as  having  been  born  there  (Heng- 
stenberg),  since  twenty-two  years  afford 
sufficient  space  for  the  birth  of  Judah's 
three  sons,  Er,  Onan,  and  Shelah,  which 
may  have  taken  place  during  the  first  three 
years  after  their  father's  marriage,  and  for 
the  birth  of  Pharez  and  Zarah,  even  if  Er 
married  as  late  as  eighteen.  Of  course  if 
the  narrative  requires  the  birth  of  Hezron 
and  Hamul  to  have  taken  place  in  Canaan 
(Kalischl,  it  is  simply  impossible  to  hold 
that  all  this  occurred  within  little  more 
than  a  score  of  years.  Hence  (2)  the_date 
of  Judah's  marriage  has  been  placed  be- 


OH.  XXXVIII.  1—30.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


441 


fore  the  sale  of  Joseph  (Augustine,  Aben 
Ezra,  Roseninuller,  Drechsler,  Baum- 
garten,  Gerlach,  Ainsworth,  Candlish, 
Murphy,  Inglis);  but  even  on  this  assump- 
tion the  task  is  arduous  to  make  the  birth 
of  Hezron  and  Hamul  occur  before  the 
emigration  of  their  great-grandfather  to 
Egypt.  For  as  Judah  was  not  more  than 
four  years  older  than  Joseph  (cf.  ch.  xxix. . 
35  with  xxx.  25) ,  his  age  at  the  time  of 
Joseph's  sale  could  not  have  been  more 
than  twenty-one.  But  placing  Judah's 
marriage  at  the  earliest  possible  date, 
viz.,  in  his  fifteenth  year,  only  substitutes 
an  interval  of  twenty-eight  years  instead 
of  one  of  twenty-two,  in  which  Judah's 
son  Er  must  be  born,  grow  up  to  man- 
hood, (say  at  fifteen)  marry,  die,  and  leave 
his  widow  Tatnar,  who,  after  marrying 
with  Onan  and  waiting  for  Sbelah  (which 
would  consume  at  least  another  year), 
must  become  the  mother  of  twin  sons  by 
her  father-in  law  (for  which  another  year 
would  be  required),  and  must  see  the 
elder  of  the  two  married  at  ten  years  of 
age,  if  his  sons  are  to  be  born  upon  the  soil 
of  Canaan.  On  either  hypothesis,  there- 
fore, it  seems  indispensable  to  hold  that 
Judah's  grandsons  were  born  in  Egypt; 
and  in  this  case  there  is  little  gained  by 
putting  Judah's  marriage  earlier  than 
Joseph's  sale,  i.  e.  in  Judah's  twenty  first 
year.  That  Judah  went  down— f  r  >m 
Hebron  (ch.  xxxvii.  14),  or  the  mountains 
(Keil),  towards  the  south  (Aben  Ezra, 
Rosjnmiiller)— from  his  brethren, — set- 
ting up  a  separate  and  independent  estab- 
lishment apart  from  them ;  "  not  only  im- 
mediately after  Joseph  was  sold,  but  also 
on  account  of  it,"  "in  a  fit  of  impenitent 
anger''  (Kurtz),  in  a  spirit  of  remo.se 
(Lange) — and  turned  in  to  a  certain  Adulla- 
mite, — literally,  and  pitched  (sc.  his  tent, 
ch.  xxvi.  15)  up  to,  as  far  as,  or  close  by, 
a  man,  an  AduUamite,  i.  e  belonging  to 
Adullam,  a  town  in  the  Hebron  valley 
(Josh.  xv.  35);  in  the  time  of  the  conquest 
the  seat  of  a  Canaanitish  king  (Josh.  xii. 
15),  afterwards  celebrated  for  its  connec- 
tion with  the  history  of  David  (1  Sam. 
xxii.  1,  2;  2  Sam.  xxiii.  13),  subsequently 
mentioned  in  Scripture  (2  Chron.  xi.  7; 
Neh.  xi.  30;  Micah  i.  15),  but  never  suc- 
cessfully identified  (vide  '  Land  and  the 
Book,'  pp.  606,  607;  Robinson,  ii.  175)— 
whose  name  was  Hirah — '■  Nobility  "  (Ge- 
senius). 

Ver.  2. — And  Judah  saw  there  the  daugh- 
ter of  a  certain  (literally,  of  a  man,  a) 
Canaanite, — not  of  a  merchant  (Onkelos), 
but  of  an  inhabitant  of  the  land  of  Canaan 
— whose  name  was  Shuah; — "  Wealth," 
"Riches,"  "Cry  for  Help"  (Gesenius). 
This  was  not  the  name  of  Judah's  wife 


(LXX.),  but  of  her  father — (vide  ver.  12) 
— and  he  took  her,— i.  e.  married  her  (tide 
ch.  vi.  2;  xxiv.  b7) — and  went  in  unto  her. 

Ver.  3. — And  she  conceived,  and  bare  a 
son;  and  he  called  his  name  Er — "  Watch- 
er "  (Gesenius).  "What  is  commonly  re- 
garded as  an  idiosyncrasy  of  the  Elohist, 
viz.,  the  naming  of  a  child  by  its  father, 
here  occurs  in  a  so-called  Jehovistic  sec- 
tion. 

Ver.  4. —And  she  conceived  again,  and 
bare  a  son ;  and  she  called  his  name  Onan 
— "Strength"  (Gesenius).  The  naming 
of  a  child  by  its  mother  a  peculiarity  of 
the  so-called  Jehovist;  but  vide  eh.  xvi.  15. 

Ver.  5. — And  she  yet  again  conceived 
(lit.,  and  she  added  again),  and  bare  a  son ; 
and  oalled  his  name  Shelah: — "Prayer" 
(Gesenius),  "  Peace "  (Fttrst)— and  he 
(i.  e.  Judah)  was — sc.  absent  (Gerluch  ;or, 
translating  impersonally,  it  was,  i.  e.  the 
event  happened  (Murphy) — at  Chezib,— 
prob:ibly  the  same  as  Achzib  (Josh.  xv. 
44;  Micah  i.  14,  15)  and  Cbezeba  (1 
Chron.  iv.  22),  which  in  the  partitioning 
of  the  land  fell  to  the  sons  of  Shelah,  and 
was  here  mentioned  that  Shelah's  de- 
scendants might  know  the  birthplace  of 
their  ancestor  (Keil) ;  or  the  fact  of  Ju- 
dah's absence  at  the  birth  of  his  third  son 
may  be  recorded  as  the  reason  of  the  name, 
"  Peace,"  "  Rest,"  "  Prosperity,"  which 
the  child  received  (Gerlach) — when  she 
bare  him — literally,  in  her  bearing  of  him. 

Ver.  6. — And  Judah  took  a  vrife  (cf.  ch. 
xxi.  21;  xxiv.  4)  forEr  his  firstborn, — "by 
the  early  marriage  of  his  sons  J  udah  seems 
to  have  intended  to  prevent  in  them  a 
germinating  corruption  "  (Lange) — whose 
name  was  Tamar — "Palm  tree"  (Gesen- 
ius). Though  the  name  was  Shemitic,  it 
does  not  follow  that  the  person  was,  Cf. 
Melc  >isedeck  and  Abimelech.  Yet  she  is 
not  expressly  called  a  Canaanite,  though 
it  is  more  than  probable  she  was.  Lange 
conjectures  that  she  may  have  been  of 
Philistine  descent,  and  thinks  the  narra- 
tive intends  to  convey  the  impression  that 
she  was  a  woman  of  extraordinary  char- 
acter. 

Ver.  7.— And  Er,  Judah's  firstborn,  was 
wicked  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  The  con- 
nection b  tvveen  Er's  name  ("iV)  and  Er's 

character  (3H)  is  noticeable.     The  special 

form  which  his  wickedness  assumed  is 
not  stated;  but  the  accompanving  phrase 
suggests  that,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Sodom- 
ites (ch.  xiii.;  xix.  5),  it  was  some  un- 
natural abom  nation.  And  the  Lord  slew 
him — literally,  caused  Mm  to  die ;  not 
necessarily  by  direct  visitation;  perhaps 
simply  by  allowing  him  to  reap  the  fruits 
of  his  youthful  indulgence  in  premature 


142 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xxxvin.  1—80. 


and  childless  death,  which  yet  was  so 
rapid  and  so  evidently  entailed  by  his  evil 
courses  as  immediately  to  suggest  the 
punitive  hand  of  God. 

Ver.  8. — And  Judah  said  unto  Onan  (ob- 
viously after  a  sufficient  interval)  Go  in 
unto  thy  brother's  wife,  and  marry  her, — 
literally,  and  perform  thepartof  levir,  or 
husband's  brother,  to  her.  The  language 
seems  to  imply  that  what  was  afterwards 
in  the  code  Mosaic  known  as  the  Lex 
Leviratus  (Deut.  xxv.  5,  6)  was  at  this 
time  a  recognised  custom.  The  existence 
of  the  practice  has  been  traced  in  different 
forms  among  Indians,  Persians,  and  other 
nations  of  Asia  and  Africa — and  raise  up 
seed  to  thy  brother.  As  afterwards  ex- 
plained in  the  Hebrew  legislation,  the 
firstborn  son  of  such  a  Levirate  marriage 
became  in  the  eye  of  the  law  tlie  child  of 
the  deceased  husband,  and  was  regaided 
as  his  heir. 

Vers.  9,  10. — And  Onan  knew  that  the 
seed  should  not  be  his ;  and  it  came  to  pass, 
when — literally,  and  it  was  if,  i.  e.  when- 
ever (cf .  Ewald,  '  Heb.  Synt. ,'  §  3456)— he 
went  in  unto  his  brother's  wife,  that  he 
spilled  it  on  the  ground  (literally,  destroyed 
to  the  ground),  lest  that  he  should  (or,  so 
as  not  to)  give  seed  to  his  brother.  And 
the  thing  which  he  did  displeased  (literally, 
was  evil  in  the  eyes  of)  the  Lord : — the  word 
Jehovah  is  employed  not  because  the 
writer  was  a  late  interpolater,  but  because 
the  sin  of  Onan  was  an  offence  against 
the  sanctity  and  prosperity  of  the  th»o- 
cratic  family  (Hengstenberg) — wherefore 
he  (i.  e.  Jehovah)  slew  him  also  vide 
supra). 

Ver.  11. — Then  said  Judahto  Tamar,  his 
daughter-in-law,  Remain  a  widow — alma- 
nah,  from  alam,  to  be  solitary,  forsaken, 
signifies  one  bereft  of  a  husband,  hence  a 
widow  (cf.  Exod.  xxii.  21) — at  thy  father's 
house  (cf.  Levit.  xxii.  13),  till  Shelah  my 
son  be  grown.  It  is  implied  that  this  was 
merely  a  pretext  on  the  part  of  Judah, 
and  that  he  did  not  really  intend  to  give 
his  third  son  to  Tamar,  considering  her  an 
unlucky  woman  (Delitzsch,  Keil,  Ka- 
lisch),  or,  at  least,  not  at  present,  under 
the  impression  that  the  deaths  of  Er  and 
Onan  had  been  occasioned  by  their  too 
early  marriages  (Lange).  The  reason  of 
his  failure  to  release  Tamar  from  her 
widowhood  is  added  in  the  ensuing  clause. 
For  he  said  (sc.  in  his  heart),  Lest  perad- 
venture  he  die  also,  as  his  brethri  n  d  d. 
And  Tamar  went  and  dwelt  in  ker  father's 
house. 

Ver.  12. — And  in  process  of  time — liter- 
ally, and  the  days  were  multiplied  (cf.  ch. 
iv.  3),  which  is  rendered  by  ihe  same 
words  in  the  A.  V. — the  daughter  of  Shu  ah 


Judah's  wife  died;  and  Judah  was  comforted 
(or,  comforted  himself,  ceased  to  mourn), 
and  went  up  unto  his  sheep-shearers  (vide 
ch.  xxxi.  19)  to  Timnath, — a  border  town 
between  Ekron  and  Bethshemesh  (Josh, 
xv.  10)  in  the  plain  c  f  Judah  (Kalisch, 
"Wordsworth,  W.  L.  Alexander  in  Kitto's 
•  Cyclopedia  ');  but  more  probably  here  a 
town  (Josh.  xv.  57)  in  the  mountains  of 
Judah  (Robinson,  ii.  343,  Keil,  Al  ord, 
'  Speaker's  Commentary  ' — he  and  his 
friend — d  iroi|MJv  ovtov  (LXX  ) — Hirah 
the  Adullamite. 

Ver.  13. — And  it  was  told  Tamar,  say- 
ing,   Behold    thy    father-in-law — Dn,    a 

father-in-law,  from  1~fcft,  unused,  to  join 

together.  Cf.  \ap.pp6s  for  vctnepos  a  son- 
in-law,  or  generally  one  connected  by 
marriage,  from  vap.Ea» — goeth  up  to  Tim- 
nath to  shear  his  sheep. 

Ver.  14.— And  she  put  her  widow's  gar- 
ments off  from  her  (to  prevent  detection  by 
Judah),  and  covered  her  with  a  vail, — to 
conceal  her  features,  after  the  fashion  of 
a  couriesan  (ver.  15;  cf.  Job  xxiv.  15) — 
and  wrapped  herself, — possibly  with  some 
large  mantle  (Alford) — and  sat  in  an  open 
place, — literally,  in  the  opening  (i.  e.  gate) 
of  Enaim  (LXX.,  Gesenius,  Keil,  Ka- 
lisch, Lange,  et  alii);  less  happily,  in  the 
opening  of  the  eyes,  i.  e.  in  a  public  and 
open  place  (Calvin),  in  flue  parting  of  the 
ways,  in  bivio  itincris  (Vulgate),  in  the 
opening  (or  breaking  forth)  of  the  two 
fountains  (Aben  Ezra,  Rosenmuller) — 
which  is  by  (or  upon)  the  way  to  Timnath ; 
— "close  to  the  site  of  Thamna,  now 
Tibneh,  three  miles  to  the  east,  on 
an  ancient  road  coming  from  Adullam, 
the  very  road  by  which  the  patriarch 
Judah  would  have  come  from  Adullam  to 
Timnah,  is  a  ruin  called  Allin,  or 
Anim, or Ainim  "('Palestine Exploration,' 
quoted  by  Inglis) — for  she  saw  that  Shelah 
was  grown  (he  was  probably  not  much 
younger  than  either  of  his  brothers  who 
had  died),  and  she  was  not  given  unto  him 
to  wife — literally,  for  a  wife. 

Ver.  15.— When  (liteially,  and)  Judah 
saw  her,  he  (literally,  and  he)  ti  ought  her 
to  he  an  harlot ; — literally,  thought  her 
(i  e.  took  her  for)  an  harlot,  like\o'yC£«r0a( 
nva  els  ti  (cf.  1  Sam.  i  13;  Job.  xiii.  24), 
or  !"!3iT  (fern.    part,   of  !-iiT,   to   commit 

fornication);  vide  ch.  xxxiv.  31— because 
she  had  covered  her  face — more  mere- 
tricis. 

Ver.  16.— And  he  turned  unto  her  by  the 
way,  and  said,  Go  to,  I  pray  thee,  let  me 
come  in  unto  thee;  (for  he  knew  not  that 
she  was  his  daughter-in-law).  Though 
willing  to  commit  adultery  or  fornication, 
Judah  would  have  shrank  from  the  sin  of 


CH.  XXXVIII.  1—30.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


443 


incest.  And  sbe  said,  What  wilt  thou  give 
me,  that  thou  may  est  come  in  unto  mel 
The  conduct  of  Tamar,  though  in  every 
way  reprehensible,  is  not  to  be  attributed 
to  mere  lust,  or  inordinate  desire  for  off- 
spring, if  not  from  the  son  Shelah,  then 
from  the  father  Judah,  but  was  prob- 
ably traceable  to  a  secret  wish  on  the 
ope  band  to  be  avenged  on  Judah,  and  on 
the  other  hand  to  assert  her  right  to  a  place 
amongst  the  ancestresses  of  the  patriarchal 
family.  Yet  Tamar  was  really  guilty  of 
both  adultery  and  incest,  though  Lange 
thinks  the  wickedness  of  Er  and  Oiian 
renders  this  open  to  question . 

Ver.  17. — And  he  said,  I  will  send  thee 
a  kid  from  the  flock — literally,  a  kid  of  the 
goats  (ver.  20;  cf.  Judges  xv.  1).  And  she 
said,  Wilt  thou  give  me  a  pledge,  till  thou 
send  it? — literally,  if  thou  wilt  give  me  a 
pledge  ("pS'iy,  from  a'ns.to  give  in  pledge; 

a  word  peculiar  to  traders  which  the 
Greeks  and  Romans  appear  to  have  bor- 
rowed from  the  Phenicians,  the  originators 
of  traffic:  cf .  dppapiiv.  arrhabo :  vide 
Gesenius,  p.  652)  until  thy  sending  (sc. 
then  I  consent  to  thy  proposal). 

Ver.  18. — And  he  said,  What  pledge  shall 
I  give  thee?  And  she  said,  Thy  signet, — 
the  ehotham,  or  signet,  was  either  worn  on 
the  finger,  SaKruXiov  (LXX:)  or  suspended 
round  the  neck  by  a  pithil,  or  silk  string. 
Its  impression  was  a  S'gn  of  property  and 
a  means  of  security  (cf.  Matt,  xxvii.  66; 
John  iii.  33;  Ephes.  i.  13,  &c).  Among  the 
ancient  Babylonians  it  was  customary  for 
every  one  to  wear  such  a  ring  (Herod.,  i. 
195);  and  modern  Arabians  in  towns  wear 
a  seal-ring  on  the  finger,  or  fastened  by  a 
cord  round  the  neck,  the  impression  of 
which  serves  as  a  signature  (Robinson,  i. 
52).  The  seals  and  signets  that  have  been 
brought  to  light  by  the  excavations  in 
Assyria  and  Babylon  (Layard,  '  Nin.  and 
Bab.,'  152—159,  602—608)  are  of  various 
forms  and  materials.  They  show  the  art 
of  engraving  to  have  been  of  great  an- 
tiquity; but  whether  Judah's  signet  was 
marked  with  alphabetical  characters  can- 
not be  determined,  though  it  may  have 
been,  since  alphabetical  writing  was  as 
old  at  least  as  the  time  of  Abraham  (vide, 
Keil,  '  Introd.,'  Part  I.  sect.  i.  ch.  i.  §4)— 
and  thy  bracelets  (rather,  thy  chain, pithil, 
ut  supra),  and  thy  staff  (the  mateh,  or  rod, 
was  so  called  from  the  idea  of  stretching 
out,  the  root  being  natah,  to  stretch  out 
or  extend)  that  is  in  thine  hand.  This  too 
every  Babylonian  carried  (Herod.,  i.  195). 
"It  was  necessarily  adorned  with  some 
device  carved  upon  it,  and  consisting  in  a 
flower  or  a  fruit,  a  bird,  or  some  other 
animal  "  (Kalisch).  "  And  he  gave  it  her, 


and  came  in  unto  her,  and  she  conceived  by 
him. 

Ver.  19.— And  she  arose,  and  wont  away, 
and  laid  by  her  vail  from  her,  and  put  on 
the  garments  of  her  widowhood. 

Ver.  20. — And  Judah  sent  the  kid — liter- 
ally, the  kid  of  the  goais,  which  he  had 
promised  (ver.  17) — by  the  hand  of  hisfriend 
the  Adullamite,  to  receive  bis  pledge  from 
the  woman's  hand:  but  (literally,  and)  he 
(£.  e.  Hirah)  found  her  not. 

Ver.  21. — Then  he  asked  the  men  of  that 
place,  saying,  Where  is  the  harlot, — liter- 
ally, the  consecrated,  the  prostitute  being 
regarded  as  "  one  devoted  to  the  worship 
of  Astarte,  a  goddess  of  the  Canaanites, 
the  deification  of  the  generative  and  pro- 
ductive principle  of  nature,"  correspond- 
ing to  the  Babylonian  Ashtarte,  whose 
worship  was  of  a  grossly  libidinous  char- 
acter (Herod.,  i.  199).  Cf.  Deut.  xxiii.  19; 
Numb.  xxv.  1;  Hosea  iv.  14;  and  mdeKeil 
on  Deut.  xxiii.  19— that  was  openly  by  the 
way  Bide?  —or,  that  was  in  Enajim  on  the 
way,  ut  supra,  ver.  14).  And  they  said, 
There  was  no  harlot  (or  kedeshah)  in  this 
place. 

Ver  22. — And  he  returned  to  Judah,  and 
said,  I  cannot  find  her ;  and  also  the  men 
of  the  place  said,  that  there  was  no  harlot 
(or  kedeshah)  in  this  place. 

Ver.  23. — And  Judah  said,  Let  her  take 
it  to  her, — literally,  let  her  take  to  herself 
(sc.  the  pledge) — lest  we  be  shamed  (liter- 
ally, become  a  contempt,  i.  e.  by  inquiring 
after  her.  Though  not  afraid  to  sin  against 
God,  Judah  was  pained  at  the  idea  of  los- 
ing his  reputation  before  men);  behold,  I 
sent  this  kid  (i.  e.  I  take  you  to  witness 
thai  I  have  fulfilled  mypromise),  and  thou 
hast  not  found  her. 

Ver.  24. — And  it  came  to  pass  about  three 
months  after  (the  usual  time  at  which 
pregnancy  is  certainly  determined),  that  it 
was  told  Judah,  saying,  Tamarthy  daughter- 
in-law  hath  played  the  harlot  (or,  acted  as 
a  zona?!,);  and  also,  behold,  she  is  with  child 
by  whoredom.  And  Judah  said  (altogether 
unmindful  of  his  own  iniquity  three 
months  previous),  Bring  her  forth,  and  let 
her  be  burnt.  Under  the  law  stoning  was 
the  punishment  allotted  to  the  crime  of 
Tamar  (Deut.  xxii.  20 — 24),  burning  being 
added  oniy  in  cases  of  excessive  crimi- 
nality (Levit.  xx.  14;  xxi.  9).  It  is  obvi- 
ous that  the  power  of  life  and  death  lay 
in  the  hand  of  Judab ,  as  the  head  of  his 
family. 

Ver.  25. — When  she  was  brought  forth 
(literally,  she  was  brought  forth,  and),  she 
sent  to  her  father-in-law  (who  apparently 
had  not  the  heart  to  witness  the  execution 
of  his  own  sentence),  saying,  By  the  man, 
whose  these  are,  am  I  with  child:  and  she 


44 1 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xxxvni,  1 — 30. 


said,  Discern,  I  pray  thee,  whose  are  these, 
the  signet,  and  bracelets  (or  chain),  and 
staff. 

Yer.  26. — And  Judah  acknowledged  (or 
d  seemed,  ut  supra,  i.  e.  recognised) 
them,  and  said,  She  hath  been  more  right 
b.us  than  I  ; — though  Tainar  was  far 
from  innocent  (vide  ver.  16),  she  was  by  no 
means  as  culpable  as  Judah— because  that 
n3"b2"',3,  for,  for  this  cause,  i.  e  that  so 

it  might  happen  to  me:  vide  ch.  xviii.  5)  I 
jave  her  not  to  Shelah  my  son.  And  (in 
token  of  his  penitence)  he  knew  her  again 
no  more. 

V  r.  27. — And  it  came  to  pass  in  the  time 
jf  her  travail,  that,  behold,  twins  were  in 
iier  womb.  Cf .  the  case  of  Rebekah  (ch. 
sxv.  24). 

Ver.  28. — And  it  came  to  pass,  when  she 
travailed, — literally,  in  her  bringing  forth 
cf.  ch.  xxxv.  17 — that  the  one  put  out  his 


hand: — literally,  and  it  (sc.  the  child  I  prise 
a  hand,  i.  e.  it  was  an  abnormal  and  dan- 
gerous presentation — and  the  midwife  (vide 
ch.  xxxv.  17)  took  and  bound  upon  his  hand 
a  scarlet  thread,  saying,  This  came  out  fust. 

Ver.  29.- — And  it  came  to  pass,  as  he  drew 
back  his  hand,  that,  behold,  his  brother 
came  out:  and  she  (i.  e.  the  midwife)  said, 
How  hast  thou  broken  forth  ?  this  breach 
be  upon  thee  :— literally,  What  a  breach 
hast  thou  made  !  upon  thee,  a  breach!  or, 
Why  hast  thou  broken  forth  for  thyself 
a  breach  (Delitzsch)?  or,  How  hast  thou 
made  for  thee  a  breach?  (Murphy) — there- 
fore his  name  was  called  Pharez — or  Breach 
(  f.  ch.  xlvi.  12;  Numb.  xxvi.  20;  1  Chron. 
i.  4;  Matt.  i.  3). 

Ver.  30. — And  afterward  came  out  his 
brother,  that  had  the  scarlet  thread  upon 
his  hand:  and  his  name  was  called  Zarah 
— Splendour. 


HOMILETICS. 

"Vers.  1—30. — The  house  of  Judah  :  a  family  record  of  sin  and  shutne.  1.  The 
wickedness  of  Eb  and  Onan.  1.  Early.  On  any  hypothesis  Er  and  Ouan  can 
have  been  little  more  than  boys  when  Ihey  were  married,  and  yet  they  appear  to 
have  arrived  at  a  remarkable  precocily  in  sin.  Nor  was  it  simply  that  they  had  shed 
the  innocence  and  purity  of  youth,  but  they  had  also  acquired  a  shameful  proficiency 
in  vice.  Young  scholars  are  mostly  apt  learners,  especially  in  the  devil's  school. 
2.  Unnatural.  Though  not  described,  the  wickedness  of  Judah's  first  sou  had  rela- 
tion to  some  perversion  of  the  ordinance  of  marriage;  that  of  his  second  is  plainly 
stated  to  have  been  uncleanness  and  self-pollution.  Neither  against  nature  nor  con- 
trary to  grace  are  the  endearments  of  the  married  state,  but  every  act  outside  of  the 
Divine  permissions  concerning  woman  is  both.  8  Heinous.  The  act  of  Er  is  cha- 
racterised as  "wicked  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,"  while  that  of  Onan  is  said  to  have 
displeased  the  Ilord.  Hence  it  may  be  reasonably  inferred  that  the  esseutial 
criminality  in  both  cases  was  the  same.  They  were  both  perversions  of  a  natural 
Drdinance.  They  both  militated  against  the  purity  and  development  of  the  theo- 
cratic family.  Both  indicated  a  contemptuous  unbelief  in  the  promise  of  the 
covenant,  and  a  sacrilegious  disregard  for  the  calling  of  Israel  as  the  progenitor  of 
the  promised  seed.  Hence  both  were  deserving  of  Divine  reprobation.  4.  Dis- 
istrous.  The  tendency  of  all  sin  is  ruinous,  both  for  body,  soul,  and  spirit.  Whether 
is  a  natural  result  of  indulgence  in  vice,  or  as  a  direct  punitive  visitation  from  God, 
Br  and  Onan  were  consigned  to  premature  graves;  and  this,  it  should  be  noted  by 
young  persons  of  both  sexes,  is  the  almost  inevitable  consequence  of  indulgence  in 
secret  vice,  and  in  particular  of  the  practice  of  which  Onan  was  guilty.  Yielded  to, 
it  debilitates  the  physical  constitution  by  a  wasting  of  the  vital  powers,  it  impairs 
the  mental  faculties,  it  corrupts  the  moral  nature,  it  sears  and  petrifies  the  con- 
science, and  finally,  what  might  have  been  a  fair  specimen  of  noble  and  virtuous 
manhood  or  womanhood  it  covers  up,  a  poor,  wasted,  shivering  skeleton,  beneath 
the  clods  of  the  valley,  causing  it  to  lie  down  among  the  sins  of  its  youth. 

II.  The  sin  of  Tamar.  The  conduct  of  Judah's  daughter-in-law,  the  young 
widow  of  Er  and  Onau,  though  not  without  its  extenuations,  in  having  been  partly 
provoked  by  Judah's  reluctance  to  marry  her  to  Shelah,  and  partly  inspired  by  a 
iesire  to  take  her  place  among  the  ancestresses  of  the  promised  seed,  was  yet  in 
many  respects  reprehensible.  1.  She  discovered  impatience.  Although  Judah  did 
manifest  a  temporary  unwillingness  to  give  her  Shelah  for  a  husband,  she  might 
bave  reasoned  that,  after  losing  two  sons,  it  was  not  unnatural  that  he  should  hesi- 
tate about  exposing  a  third  to  the  same  risk  of  destruction.  2  She  manifested  un- 
belief. If  Tamar  did  regard  herself  as  wronged,  as  most  undoubtedly  she  was, 
instead  of  taking  measures  to  right  herself,  she  should  have  left  her  cause  to  God, 
who  had  already  vindicated  her  against  the  wickedness  of  her  youthful  husbands, 


ch.  xxxviii.  1—30.]  THE  BOOK  OF  OENESIS  445 

aud  who  in  hia  own  time  and  way  would  doubtless  have  interposed  to  assert  her 
prerogative  as  a  widow  belonging  to  the  family  of  Israel.  3  She  practised  decep- 
tion. Laying  aside  her  widow's  garments,  and  assuming  the  altire  of  a  harlot,  she 
took  her  station  at  the  gate  of  Enajim,  on  the  way  to  Timnath,  and  pretended  to  be 
a  p  ostitute.  Tamar  manifestly  was  not  a  woman  of  refined  and  delicate  sensibilities  ; 
but  hen  she  was  a  Canaa  ite,  and  had  been  the  wife  of  Er  and  Onan,  who  were  not 
calculated  to  improve  her  modesty.  4.  She  was  guilty  of  temptation.  It  is  true  the 
narrative  does  not  represent  her  as  having  been  guilty  of  solicitation,  like  the  "  fool- 
ish woman  "  described  by  Solomon  (Prov.  vii.  6—23  ;  ix.  14—18).  Perhaps  she  knew 
that  Judah  would  not  require  solicitation  ;  but  if  so,  sue  was  all  the  more  guilty  in 
placing  temptation  in  Judah's  way.  5.  She  committed  incest.  The  guilt  of  an  in- 
cestuous connection  which  rested  on  Judah  unconsciously  she  had  knowingly  and 
willingly  taken  on  herself. 

III.  The  transgressions  of  Jcdah.  More  numerous,  if  not  more  heinous,  than 
those  of  either  his  sons  or  his  daughter-in-law  were  the  offences  of  Judah.  Jacob's 
fourth  son  sinned.  1.  In  marrying  a  Canaunitish  wife.  Though  Judah's  marriage 
with  Shuah's  daughler  was  blessed  by  God,  who  made  it  fruitful,  it  does  not  follow 
that  it  was  approved  by  God.  2.  In,  withholding  Shelah  from  Tamar.  Although  it 
does  not  appear  as  yet  to  have  been  commanded  that  iu  default  of  issue  a  widow 
should  be  married  by  her  deceased  husband's  brother,  it  is  obvious  that  Judah  rec- 
ognised that  it  should  be  so,  both  by  his  own  act  in  giving  Onan  to  Tamar  after 
Er's  death,  aud  by  his  own  subsequent  confession  with  regard  to  Shelah  (ver.  26).  3. 
In  deceiving  Tamar,  Instead  of  frankly  telling  her  that  he  did  not  intend  his  third 
son  to  become  her  husband,  he  bound  tier  to  remain  a  widow,  and  sent  her  home  to 
her  father's  house  (instead  of  keeping  her  in  his  own)  under  the  impression  that  She- 
lah was  only  withheld  from  her  on  the  score  of  youth.  4.  In  committing  sin  with 
Tamar.  Though  in  reality  Judah  committed  incest,  yet  so  far  as  his  intention  went 
it  was  only  adultery,  or  fornication.  Yet  all  forms  of  uuchastity  are  forbidden  in  the 
law  of  God.  And  it  gives  a  very  low  conception  of  the  morality  of  Judah  that  he,  a 
member  of  the  consecrated  family  of  Israel,  who  had  himself  been  married,  should 
have  so  openly,  and  deliberately,  and  coolly  turned  aside  to  seek  the  company  of  a 
common  strumpet,  as  he  imagined  Tamar  to  be.  Judah  should  have  acted  on  the 
principle  afterwards  stated  by  Paul  (1  Cor.  vii.  9).  5.  In  condemning  Tamar.  "  Bring 
her  forth,  and  let  her  be  burnt,"  said  the  indignant  patriarch.  It  is  obvious  the  sen- 
tence was  excessive  in  its  severity.  It  was  not  imperative,  else  it  could  not  have  been 
remitted  ;  and  a  recollection  of  his  visit  to  Timnath  three  months  previously  should 
have  inclined  him  to  lean  to  mercy's  side.  But  the  virtuous  Angelosof  society  always 
procure  indulgence  for  themselves  by  damning  their  fellow  sinners  {Measure  for 
Measure,  Act  II.).    Scripture  counsels  differently  (Matt.  vii.  3  ;  Rom.  ii.  22  ;  Gal.  vi. 

Vers.  12— 26  —  Judah's  sin  with  Tamar.  I.  Committed.  1.  Suddenly.  It  was 
occasioned  by  the  sight  of  a  supposed  courtesan.  Much  evil  enters  by  the  eye  (cf. 
2  Sam.  xi.  2).  Great  need  for  the  prayer  of  David  (Ps.  cxix.  37).  2,  Openly.  Judah 
was  in  the  company  of  Hirah,  his  friend,  when  he  beheld  Tamar  sitting  in  the  gate 
of  Enajim,  and,  without  attempting  to  hide  it  from  his  friend,  went  to  seek  her  so- 
ciety. Shamelessness  in  sin  betokens  great  depravity.  3.  Wilfully.  Though  in  a 
manner  surprised  by  the  temptation,  Judah  was  not  inadvertently  betrayed  into  com- 
mission of  his  sin  with  Tamar,  but,  on  the  contiary,  went  about  it  in  a  remarkably 
deliberate  manner.  4.  Inexcusably.  There  was  no  reason  why  Judah  should  not 
have  sought  a  second  wife  to  succeed  Shuah's  daughter,  rather  than  consort  with 
prostitutes.  ,        ... 

II  Detected.  1.  Quickly.  No  doubt  Judah  thought  he  had  heard  the  last  of  his 
indiscretion  on  the  way  to  Timnath  ;  but  lo  !  in  three  short  months  his  guilt  is  dis- 
covered. Not  every  offender  is  so  speedily  arrested  ;  but  sooner  or  later  detection 
is  inevitable  for  all.  "Be  sure  thy  sin  will  find  thee  out,"  2.  Unexpectedly. 
Judah  never  imagined  that  his  own  signet,  and  chain,  and  staff  would  be  produced 
as  witnesses  against  him  ;  and  criminals  never  can  be  sure  from  what  quarter  testi- 
mony shall  arise  to  condemn  them.  3.  Completely.  There  was  no  possibility  of 
Judah's  evading  the  charge  of  Tamar.  By  no  sort  of  ingenuity  could  he  repudiate 
the  articles  of  dress  with  which  probably  his  household  were  familiar.  4.  Publicly. 
At  the  very  moment  when  Tamar  was  produced  for  execution  Judah  was  obliged  to- 
con  fess  his  guilt  in  presence  of  his  assembled  household  ;  and.  in  like  manner  will 
the  wicked  yet  be  openly  convicted  in  the  sight  of  an  assembled  world. 

III.    Confessed.  1.  Candidly.    Found  out,  Judah  did  not  attempt^either  to  deny 


140 


THE  BOOK  OF   GENESIS. 


[ch.  xxxix.  1—6. 


m-  to  palliate  his  guilt,  but  frankly  acknowledged  that  Tamar's  condition  was  due  to 
him.  2.  Promptly.'  Nor  did  he  hesitate  *o  own  his  guilt,  but  immediately  confessed 
what  he  had  done.  3.  Penitently.  .  This  we  may  infer  from  the  statement  of  the  his- 
torian that  the  offence  was  not  again  repeated. 

IV.  Fokgiven.  It  does  not  fall  within  the  scope  of  the  historian's  design  to  indi- 
cate whether  Judah  obtained  mercy;  but  this  may  be  reasonably  concluded  from — 
1.  1'he  promptness  of  his  confession.  2.  The  sincerity  of  his  penitence.  3.  2'7w  real- 
ity of  his  faith — as  evinced  by  the  fact  that  he  was  reckoned  among  the  ancestors  of 
jur  Lord. 

Vers.  27 — 30. — Tamar's  twins.  I.  Points  of  Resemblance.  (1)  The  offspring 
Df  the  same  parents  ;  (2)  the  fruit  of  the  same  sin  ;  (3)  the  gift  of  the  same  God. 

II.  Points  of  distinction.  (1)  The  order  of  their  birth  ;  (■>)  the  import  of  their 
names  ;  (3)  the  purpose  of  their  lives— the  first  being  an  ancestor  of  the  promised 
seed. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ch.  xxxviii. — The  goodness  and  severity  of  Bod.  These  occurrences  in  the  family  of 
Judah  would  seem  (1)  to  betoken  the  retributive  judgment  of  Ood,  and  (2)  illustrate 
his  grace.  Joseph  is  lost,  and  still  Divinely  protected.  Judah  is  a  wanderer  from  his 
brethren,  a  sensuiil,  self-willed,  degenerale  man  ;  yet  it  is  in  the  line  of  this  same 
wanderer  that  the  promised  shall  appear.  The  whole  is  a  lesson  on  the  evil  of  sepa- 
ration from  the  people  of  Ood.  Luther  asks  why  such  things  were  placed  in  Scripture, 
and  answers,  ll)  That  no  one  should  be  self-righteous,  and  (2)  that  no  one  should 
despair,  and  (3)  to  remind  us  that  Qentiles  by  nalur  I  right  are  brothers,  mother, 
sisters,  to  our  Lord  ;  the  word  of  salvation  is  a  word  for  the  whole  world.— R. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXXIX. 


Ver.  1. — And  Joseph  was  brought  down  to 
Egypt.  The  narrative  now  preparing  to  re- 
cite the  fortunes  of  Joseph  in  Egypt,  which 
eventually  led,  through  his  elevation  to 
be  Pharaoh's  prime  minister,  first  to  the 
salvation  of  the  patriarchal  family,  and 
finally  to  their  settlement  in  Goshen,  the 
historian  reverts,  in  accordance  with  his 
usual  practice,  to  a  point  of  time  antece- 
dent to  the  incidents  contained  in  the  pre- 
ceding chapter,  and  makes  a  new  depar- 
ture in  his  story  from  the  moment  of 
Josephs  crossing  into  Egypt.  And  Poti- 
phar,  an  officer  of  Pharaoh,  captain  of  the 
guard  (vide  ch.  xxxvii.  36),  an  Egyptian, 
—literally,  a  man  of  Mitzraim.  This  im- 
plies that  foreigners  were  sometimes  em- 
ployed to  fill  responsible  offices  about  the 
Court  of  Pharaoh.  The  phrase  ' '  is  not  a 
superfluous  addition,  as  the  population 
of  Heliopolis,  from  remote  times,  included 
a  considerable  admixture  of  Arabians" 
(Kalisch)— bought  him  of  the  hands  of  the 
Ishmaelites  (ride  ch.  xxxvii  36),  which 
had  brought  him  down  thither. 

Ver.  2. — Ani  the  lord — Jehovah,  as 
usual,  because  the  entire  chapter  is  the 
work  of  the  Jehovist  (Tuch,  Colenso), 
with  the  exception  of  a  few  alterations 
by  the  redactor  (Davidson),  or  because, 
though  the  work  of  the  Elohist,  it  has 
been  modified  by  the  Jehovistic  editor 


(Bleek,  Vaihinger)  ;  but  more  likely  be- 
cause the  advancement  of  Joseph  in 
Egypt  was  a  special  fruit  of  the  theocratic 
promise  which  belonged  to  the  patriar- 
chal family  (Hengstenberg,  Quarry) — 
was  with  Joseph  (cf.  ver.  21  ;  xxi.  20  ; 
xxvi.  24';  xxviii.  15),  and  he  was  a  prosper 
ous  man  (literally,  a  man  prospering)  ; 
and  he  was  in  the  house  of  his  master  the 
Egyptian — i.  e.  as  a  domestic  servant. 

Ver.  3. — And  his  master  saw  that  the 
Loid  (Jehovah)  was  with  him — this  does 
not  imply  that  Potiphar  was  acquainted 
with  Jehovah,  but  simply  that  he  conclud- 
ed Joseph  to  be  under  the  Divine  protec- 
tion— and  that  the  lord  (Jehovah)  made  all 
that  he  did  to  prosper  in  his  hand.  That 
which  led  to  the  conviction  of  Potiphar 
concerning  Joseph  was  the  remarkable 
success  which  he  saw  attending  all  his 
efforts  and  undertakings. 

Ver.  4  — And  Joseph  found  grace  in  his 
sight, —  vide  ch.  vi.  8  ;  xviii.  3  ;  xix.  19; 
xxxix.  21.  Most  men  are  pleased  with  a 
good  servant.  Even  Laban  had  no  objec- 
tions to  Jacob  so  long  as  he  divined  that 
Jehovah  was  multiplying  his  flocks  for  Ja- 
cob's sake  (ch.  xxx.  27)— and  he  served  him 
(i.  e.  he  waited  on  Potiphar,  or  acted  as 
his  personal  attendant  and  comptroller  of 
his  household)  :  and  he  (i.  e.  Potiphar) 
made  him  overseer  over  his  house,— a  posi- 
tion corresponding  to  that  occupied  by 
Eliezer  in  the  household  of  Abraham  (ch. 


OH.  XXXIX.  1—6.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


447 


xxiv.  2>.  Egyptian  monuments  attest  the 
existence  of  such  an  officer  in  wealthy 
houses  at  an  early  period ;  a  tomb  at 
Kum-el  Ahmar  exhibiting  the  account 
books,  writing  materials,  and  clerks  that 
pertain  to  the  office  of  a  steward,  and  an- 
other at  Beni-hassan,  besides  displaying 
his  accustomed  implements,  styling  him 
the  Overseer  (Wilkinson's  'Ancient  Egyp- 
tians,' vol.  i.  p.  372,  ed.  1878  ;  Hengsten- 
berg's  'Egypt  and  the  Books  of  Moses,' 
p.  24).  A  sepulchral-  inscription  belong- 
ing to  the  period  of  the  eleventh  dynasty 
also  mentions  among  the  officers  compris- 
ing the  household  of  Ameni  the  chancel- 
lor Athorsi,  the  barber  Khentikhrati,  the 
slave  Gefahapi,  the  lady's  maid  Khui, 
the  steward  Ameni,  the  steward  Santit 
(vide  '  Records  of  the  Past,'  vol.  vi.  p.  3). 
Joseph  had  also,  after  his  exaltation,  a 
ruler  or  steward  of  his  house  (cf.  ch. 
xliii.  16,  19  ;  xliv.  1) — and  all  that  he  had 
he  put  into  his  hand — literally,  and  aU 
which  was  to  him  he  gave  into  his  hand, 
i.  e.  he  intrusted  to  Joseph's  care). 

Ver.  5. — And  it  came  to  pass  from  the 
time  that  he  had  made  (literally,  from  that 
time  he  made)  him  overseer  in  his  house, 
and  over  all  that  he  had,  that  (literally, 
and)  the  Lord  (Jehovah)  blessed  the  Egyp- 


tian's house  for  Joseph's  sake  (cf.  ch.  xxx. 
12);  and  the  blessing  of  the  Lord  (Jehovah) 
was  upon  all  that  he  had  in  the  house,  and 
in  the  field.  It  is  observable  that  through- 
out this  chapter,  when  the  historian  is 
speaking  in  his  own  name  the  term 
Jehovah  is  used  to  designate  the  Supreme 
Being  (cf.  vers.  21,  23),  whereas  when 
Joseph  replies  to  his  mistress  it  is  the 
word  Elohim  which  he  employs,  the 
reason  of  which  is  sufficiently  obvious. 

Ver.  6. — And  (accordingly,  encouraged 
by  the  admirable  success  attending 
Joseph's  management)  he  left  all  that  he 
had  in  Joseph's  hand  (i.  e.  gave  him  un- 
restricted control  over  all  his  temporal 
affairs);  and  he  knew  not  ought  he  had 
(literally,  lie  knew  not  anything  with  him, 
i.  e.  he  shared  not  the  care  of  anything 
along  with  him),  save  the  bread  which  he 
did  eat.  This  was  necessitated  by  the 
laws  of  caste  which  then  prevailed  among 
the  Egyptians,  and  in  particular  by  the 
fact  that  "the  Egyptians  might  not  eat 
with  the  Hebrews  "  (ch.  xliii.  32).  And 
Joseph  was  a  goodly  person,  and  well 
favoured — literally,  beautiful  in  form  and 
beautiful  in  appearance,  like  his  mother 
Rachel  (ch.  xxix.  17). 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1—23. — Joseph  in  the  house  of  Potiphar.  I.  Purchased  as  a  slave.  I.  A 
sad  lot.  "Worse  even  than  being  kidnapped  by  strangers,  Joseph  had  been  first  sold 
by  his  brethren  ;  carried  into  Egypt,  he  had  there  been  exposed  for  sale  in  a  slave- 
market  ;  and  now,  as  if  he  had  been  a  beast  of  burden  or  a  captive  taken  in  war,  he 
had  been  a  second  time  purchased  for  money.  Few  fortunes  are  more  touchingly 
sorrowful  or  more  deeply  humiliating  than  this  which  was  now  measured  out  to 
Jacob's  youthful  sou.  2.  A  common  lot.  Happily  in  our  land,  and  indeed  wherever 
the  gospel  prevails,  it  is  not  a  spectacle  that  can  now  be  beheld — that  of  men  traffick- 
ing in  each  other's  flesh.  But  in  those  days  the  horrors  of  the  auction  block  were  not 
unfrequent  sights,  and  Joseph,  iu  being  sold  and  bought  like  goods  and  chattels,  was 
only  experiencing  a  fate  which  had  been  undergone  by  many  previous  to  his  times, 
and  has  by  myriads  been  suffered  since.  3.  An  appointed  lot.  As  everything  on 
earth  is,  so  was  Joseph's  sad  and  sorrowful  estate  assigned  him  by  Heaven  ;  and 
the  recognition  of  this  doubtless  it  was  by  Joseph  that  prevented  him  from  mur- 
muring, and  apparently  inspired  him  with  a  cheerful  confidence,  even  in  the  darkest 
times. 

II.  Employed  as  a  servant.  1.  Eminently  prosperous.  (1)  The  extent  of  this 
prosperity.  All  that  he  did  prospered.  Everything  he  put  his  hand  to  appeared  to 
thrive.  Success  seemed  to  wait  upon  him  like  his  shadow.  It  is  seldom  such  a 
measure  of  good  fortune  is  meted  out  to  any  of  God's  people  on  the  earth,  or  even  of 
the  devil's  children.  For  the  first  they  would  probably  be  spoiled  by  such  indulg- 
ence, while  for  the  second  they  mostly  fail  in  the  conditions  that  are  needful  for 
such  distinction.  (2)  The  means  of  this  prosperity.  That  Joseph  was  attentive, 
diligent,  and  conscientious  in  the  performance  of  his  household  duties,  as  well  as 
faithful  and  devoted  to  the  interests  of  his  master,  may  be  reasonably  inferred,  since 
success  seldom  waits  upon  the  negligent,  the  idle,  or  the  unprincipled.  (3)  The 
source  of  this  prosperity.  The  historian  is  careful  to  note  that  the  true  mainspring 
of  Joseph's,  as  of  every  other  person's,  prosperity  was  the  Divine  blessing  on  his 
labours.  "  The  Lord  made  all  that  he  did  to  prosper  in  his  hand."  2.  Greatly  re- 
warded. Joseph  was — (1)  Noticed  by  his  master.  It  is  a  pleasure  to  true  and  faithful 
servants  when  those  they  serve  regard  their  work  with  favourable  observation.    (8) 


MS  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  [ch.  xxxix.  1—6. 

Accepted  by  his  master.  It  says  a  great  deal  for  Potiphar  that  he  treated  Joseph 
kindly,  eveu  though  il  was  largely  on  account  of  his  excellent  qualities  as  a  servant. 
(3)  Promoted  by  his  master.  From  being  humble  valet  to  the  great  man's  person, 
he  was  exalted  to  the  high  position  of  steward  or  comptroller  of  the  great  man's 
house.  (4)  Trusted  by  his  master.  Everything  connected  with  the  management  of 
Potiphar's  establishment,  in  his  munsion  and  on  his  farm,  was  unreservedly  com- 
mitted to  the  care  of  Joseph.  Potiphar  troubled  himself  about  nothing  "save  the 
bread  which  he  did  eat." 

III.  Blessed  as  a  man.  1.  He  enjoyed  Divine  companionship  in  his  sad  captivity. 
"The  Lord  was  with  him;"  a  compensation  rich  enough  to  be  set  against  the 
miseries  of  bondage  and  exile,  as  Gi.d's  people,  when  similarly  situated,  have  notun- 
frequently  experienced  (cf.  Acts  xvi.  25 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  17).  2.  He  obtained  Divine 
assistance  in  his  arduous  duties.  When  the  circumstances  of  Joseph's  lot  might 
have  induced  despondency,  indifference,  inaction,  carelessness,  and  inattention ,  Divine 
grace  so  upheld  and  cheered  him  that  he  was  able  to  go  about  his  duties  with  alacrity 
and  cheerfulness,  so  that  everything  he  turned  his  hand  to  succeeded.  3.  He 
received  Divine  favour  in  the  eyes  of  his  master.  For  Joseph  himself  lo  have 
secretly  known  that  God  approved  of  his  person  and  behaviour  would  have  been  an 
ample  consolation  to  his  sad  heart ;  but  to  obtain  the  good-will  of  Heaven  so  conspi- 
cuously that  even  his  heathen  master  could  not  avoid  observing  it  was  surely  a  signal 
honour.  4.  He  attracted  Divine  blessing  towards  his  fellow-men.  "The  Lord 
blessed  the  Egyptian's  house  for  Joseph's  sake."  '  Here  was  a  clear  experience  by 
Joseph  of  the  truth  of  the  Abrahamic  blessing  (ch.  xii.  2,  3).  In  this  also  Joseph 
was  an  eminent  type  of  Christ. 

Lessons: — 1.  Patience  under  suffering.  2.  Contentment  with  one's  lot.  3.  Fidelity 
in  service.  4.  1  he  secret  of  prosperity.  5.  The  obligations  of  masters  towards  serv- 
ants.    6.  The  value  of  religion  to  a  workman.     7.  The  profit  of  a  pious  servant. 

Vers.  1 — 2S.—Sunshine  and  shadow.  I.  The  brightening  sky.  The  advance- 
ment of  Joseph  in  the  house  of  Potiphar.  1.  To  Joseph's  sense  it  was  a  lightening 
in  his  bondage.  2.  To  Joseph's  faith  it  was  the  smiling  of  Jehovah's  face.  3.  To 
Joseph's  hope  it  was  the  dawning  of  a  better  day. 

II.  The  threatening  cloud.  The  temptation  of  J oseph  by  his  mistress.  Here 
was — 1.  An  assault  upon  his  virtue,  which,  unless  it  were  overcome,  would  deprive 
him  of  Jehovah's  favour,  and  consequently  put  an  end  to  any  prospect  he  might 
have  of  deliverance  ;  and,  2.  An  attack  upon  his  safety,  which,  however  it  resulted, 
whether  in  his  defeat  or  his  victory,  would  likely  terminate  his  enjoyment  of  his 
master's  favour,  if  not  altogether  cost  him  his  life. 

III.  The  falling  darkness.  The  accusation  of  Joseph  by  his  mistress.  1. 
Though  untrue,  it  was  almost  certain  to  be  believed.  2.  If  believed,  it  would 
certainly  involve  him  in  punishment.  3.  If  deemed  deserving  of  punishment,  he 
would  almost  certainly  he  put  to  death. 

IV.  The  starlight  night.  The  history  of  Joseph  in  the  prison.  1.  He  had  not 
been  executed,  but  only  imprisoned.  2.  God  was  with  him  in  the  dungeon,  ashe  had 
been  in  the  palace.  3.  If  the  favour  of  his  master  had  been  lost,  the  confidence  of 
his  keeper  had  been  gained.  4.  Misfortune  might  teem  to  be  always  lying  in  wait 
for  him,  but  on  the  other  hand,  prosperity  j.ppeared  to  be  ever  following  close  upon 
his  heels. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ch.  xxxix. — The  righteous  man.  Again  the  word  of  the  Lord  tries  Joseph,  but 
not  so  much  now  as  the  word  of  prophecy,  but  as  the  word  of  command,  the 
doctrine  of  righteousness.  "  The  Egyptian's  house  is  blessed  for  Jrseph's  sake." 
"The  Lord  was  with  Joseph,  and  he  was  a  prosperous  man."  A  lesson  on  the 
true  method  of  prosperity.  A  prosperous  man  is  one  who  has  the  Lord  with  him — 
1.  To  give  him  favour  with  fellow-men.  2.  To  teach  him  wisdom,  and  put  things 
into  his  hand.  3.  To  give  him  the  faculty  of  rule,  and  dispose  others  to  trust 
him  entirely.  4.  To  keep  him  pure  from  the  vicious  besetments  of  the  world,  both 
by  his  own  personal  chastity  and  by  his  courage  and  self-command  in  hours  of 
temptation.  5.  By  delivering  him  when  he  is  entangled  in  the  meshes  of  the  evil- 
minded.  The  had  woman's  determination  is  thwarted.  Mercy  is  shown  him  in  the 
prison.  6.  By  making  him  a  messenger  of  peace  and  truth,  even  in  :he  very  prison- 
house  of  shame  and  misery. 


CH.  xxxix.  7—23.] 


THE   BOOX   OF   GENESIS. 


449 


Notice  again  the  elevation  of  Joseph's  character.  His  love  of  God.  "How  can 
I  do  this  great  wickedness,  and  sin  agaiust  God?"  2.  His  love  of  man.-  "My 
master  halh  committed  all  to  me" — how  can  I  wrong  him  so?  His  confidence  in 
the  blessing  of  God  ou  the  upright  and  holy  life.  He  knew  that  God  would  vindicate 
him.  4.  His  self-control.  His  circumstances  were  fearful  temptation.  Had  lie  not 
been  a  virtuous  man  in  his  heart  of  hearts,  he  would  have  succumbed,  and  theu 
pleaded,  as  so  many  do,  the  power  of  the  flesh  and  of  the  tempting  circumstances. 

Notice  also  how  these  characteristics  do  help  one  another  when  they  are  in  the 
character,  and  how,  when  a  man  casts  himself  upon  God,  God  makes  the  way  of 
Joseph  was  safer  in  prison  than  he  was  in  his  master's  house. — R. 


EXPOSITION. 


Ver.  7. — And  it  came  to  pass  after  these 
things, —  Joseph  had  by  this  time  been 
nearly  ten  years  in  Potiphar's  house  (vide 
ch.  xli.  46) — that  his  master's  wife  oast  her 
eyes  (lasciviously)  upon  Joseph  ;  and  she 
said,  Lie  with  me.  According  to  monu- 
mental evidence  (Wilkinson's  '  Ancient 
Egyptians,' vol.  i.  p.  392,  ed.  1878  ;  Heng- 
stenberg's  '  Egypt  and  the  Books  of 
Moses,'  i.  25  ;  Kalisch,  p.  631)  and  his 
torical  testimony  (Herod.,  ii.  Ill),  Egyp- 
tian females,  even  though  married,  were 
distinguished  for  licentiousness  and  im- 
morality, and  were  not  condemned  to  live 
in  seclusion  (Bohlen),  but  were  allowed 
freely  to  mix  in  promiscuous  society, 
which  facts  perfectly  account  for  Joseph's 
temptation  by  his  mistress. 

Vers.  8,  9. — But  he  refused, — "  it  maybe 
that  the  absence  of  personal  charms  fa- 
cilitated Joseph's  resistance  (Kalisch) ;  but 
Joseph  assigns  a  different  reason  for  his 
non-compliance  with  her  utterly  immoral 
proposition  —  and  said  unto  his  master's 
wife, —  "  for  her  unc.ean  solicitation  he 
returneth  pure  and  wholesome  words" 
(Hughes) — Behold,  my  master  wotteth  not 
what  is  with  me  in  the  house  (literally, 
knoioeth  not,  along  with  me  what  is  in  the 
house),  and  he  hath  committed  all  that  he 
hath  to  my  hand,  (l.terally,  and  all  that  is 
to  him  he  hath  given  to  or  placed  in  my 
hand)  ;  tiiere  is  none  greater  in  this  house 
than  I  ;  neither  hath  he  kept  back '  any- 
thing from  me  but  thee,  because  thou  art 
his  wife :  how  then  can  I  do  this  great 
wickedness,  and  sin  (cf.  ch.  xx.  6  ;  2  Sam. 
xii:  13  ;  Ps.  Ii.  4  for  the  estimate  of  th  s 
act  taken  by  God  and  good  men)  against 
God  ? — Elohim,  since  Jehovah  would  have 
been  unintelligible  to  a  heathen  woman. 

Ver.  10  — And  it  came  to  pass,  as  she 
spake— or,  though  she  spake  (Kalisch) — 
to  Joseph  day  by  day,  that  he  hearkened  not 
unto  her,  to  lie  by  her  (a  euphemistic  ex- 
pression), or  (which  is  not  in  the  original, 
and  may  be  omitted)  to  be  with  her. 

Vers.  11, 12. — And  it  came  to  pass  about 
this  time  (literally,  at  this  day,  i  e  it  one 
day  happened)  tbat  Joseph  went  into  the 
house  to  do  his  business  (i.  e.  to  attend  to  his 

GENESIS. 


accustomel  duties)  ;  and  there  was  none 
of  the  men  of  the  house  there  within  (or, 
in  the  house).  And  she  caught  him  by  his 
garment  (this  was  probably  the  long  loose 
robe  or  mantle,  with  short  sleeves,  used 
in  Oriental  full  dress),  saying,  Lie  with 
me  :  and  he  left  his  garment  in  her  hand, 
and  fled,  and  got  him  out, — literally,  and 
went  forth  into  the  place  without,  i.  e.  out 
of  th    house  and  into  the  street. 

Vers.  13 — 15.  —  And  it  came  to  pass, 
when  she  saw  that  he  had  left  his  garment 
in  her  hand  (a  very  indiscreet  act  on  the 
part  of  Joseph,  considering  the  possible 
use  that  might  be  made,  of  it),  and  was 
fle  I  forth,  that  she  called  unto  the  men  of 
her  house,  and  spake  unto  them,  saying, 
See,  he  hath  brought  in  (literally,  one  has 
brought  in  the  subject  of  the  verb  being 
indefinite)  an  Hebrew  (literally,  a  man,  an 
Hebrew)  unto  us  to  mock  us  (the  verb  pny 

from  which  comes  Isaac,  is  here  used  in  a 
bad  sense  ;  not  the  same  as  in  ch.  xxvi. 
8) ;  he  came  in  unto  me  to  lie  with  me,  and 
I  cried  with  a  loud  voice  :  and  it  came  to 
pass,  when  he  heard  that  I  lifted  up  my 
voice  and  cried,  that  he  left  his  garment 
with  me  (literally,  by  my  side),  and  fled, 
and  got  him  out  (or,  went  forth  into  the 
street,  ut  supra). 

Vers.  16 — 18. — And  she  laid  up  his  gar- 
ment by  her  (literally,  by  her  side), 
until  his  lord  came  home  (literally,  until 
the  coming  of  his  lord  to  his  house).  And 
she  spake  unto  him  according  to  these 
words,  saying,  The  Hebrew  servant,  which 
thou  hast  brought  unto  us  (here  she 
charges  her  husband  with  being  indi- 
rectly at  least  the  cause  of  the  alleged  af- 
front which  had  been  put  upon  her),  came 
in  unto  me  to  mock  me:  — "she  seemed 
too  modest  to  speak  in  plain  terms  of  Jos- 
eph's crime  (Lawson ) — and  it  came  to  pass, 
as  I  lifted  up  my  voice  and  cried,  that  he 
left  his  garment  with  me  and  fled  out  (j.  e. 
went  forth  into  the  stree',  ut  supra). 

Ver.  19. — And  it  came  to  pass,  when  his 
master  heard  the  words  of  his  wife,  which 
she  spake  unto  him,  saying,  After  this  man- 
ner (literally,  according  to  these  words)  did 


m 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xxxix.  7—23. 


,hy  servant  to  me  ;  that  his  wrath  was 
rindled.  A  papyrus  consisting  of  nine- 
;een  pages  of  ten  lines  of  hieratic  writing 
purchased  from  Madame  D'Orbiney,  and 
presently  in  the  British  Museum),  beloDg- 
ng  probably  to  the  nineteenth  dynasty, 
jontains  a  tale  of  two  brothers,  in  which 
ncidents  occur  very  similar  to  those  here 
aarrated.  While  the  two  are  ploughing 
in  the  field,  the  elder  sends  the  younger 
brother,  who  appears  to  have  acted  in  the 
;apacity  of  general  superintendent,  to 
fetch  seed  from  the  house.  "And  the 
younger  brother  found  the  wife  of  the 
aider  sitting  at  her  toilet."  ..."  And 
she  spoke  to  him,  saying.  What  strength 
there  is  in  thee  I  indeed  I  observe  thy 
vigour  every  day.  Her  heart  knew  him. 
,  .  .  She  seized  upon  him,  and  said  to 
bini,  Come,  let  us  lie  down  for  an  instant. 
Better  for  thee  .  .  .  beautiful  clothes." 
"  The  youth  became  like  a  panther  with 
fury  on  account  of  the  shameful  discourse 
which  she  had  addressed  to  him.  And 
she  was  alarmed  exceedingly."  .  .  . 
"  Her  husband  returned  home  at  evening, 
according  to  his  daily  wont.  He  came  to 
the  house,  and  he  found  his  wife  lying  as 
if  murdered  by  a  ruffian."  Inquiring  the 
reason  of  her  distress,  he  is  answered  as 
Potiphar  was  answered  by  his  deceitful 
spouse.  "  And  the  elder  brother  became 
like  a  panther  ;  .  .  .  he  made  his  dagger 
sharp,  and  took  it  in  his  hand "  (vide 
'  Records  of  the  Past,'  vol.  ii.  p.  139). 

Ver.  20. — And  Joseph's  master  took  Lim, 
and  put  him  into  the  prison,  —  literally, 
house  of  enclosure  ;  sohar,  from  sahar,  10 
to  encircle,  meaning  probably  a  turreted, 
arched,  or  rounded  building  for  the  con- 
finement of  prisoners — a  place  where  the 
king's  prisoners  (i.  e.  State  offenders) 
w  re  hound  :  and  he  was  there  in  the 
prison.    This,  which  some  regard  as  hav- 


ing been  a  mild  punishment  (Delitzsch, 
Keil)  since,  according  toDiodorus  Siculus, 
the  laws  of  the  Egyptians  were  specially 
severe  in  their  penalties  for  offence, 
against  women,  is  represented  by  a  He- 
brew psalmist  (Ps.  cv.  18)  as  having  been 
accompanied  with  bodily  tortures,  at  least 
for  a  time  ;  for  his  speedy  elevation  to  a 
place  of  trust  within  the  prison  almost 
gives  countenance  to  the  idea  (Kurtz, 
Lange,  &c.)  that  Potiphar  did  not  believe 
his  wife's  story,  and  only  incarcerated 
Joseph  for  the  sake  of  appearances.  That 
Joseph  was  not  immediately  punished 
with  death  is  not  improbable  (Bohlen), 
but  exceedingly  natural,  since  Joseph  was 
Potiphar's  favourite  (Havernick). 

Ver.  21.  —  But  (even  if  Joseph  was 
harshly  treated  in  the  tower  of  Heliopolis) 
the  Lord — Jehovah  (vide  on  ver.  5) — was 
with  Joseph  (vide  ver.  2),  and  showed  him 
mercy  (literally,  extended  kindness  unto 
him),  and  gave  him  favour  in  the  eyes  of 
the  keeper  (or  captain)  of  the  prison  (or 
round  honse). 

Vers.  22,  23.— And  the  keeper  of  the 
prison  (captain  of  the  round  house,  or 
chief  officer  of  the  tower)  committed  to 
Joseph's  hand  all  the  prisoners  that  were 
in  the  prison;  and  whatsoever  they  did 
there,  he  was  the  doer  of  it — literally,  and 
all  that  they  (the  prisoners)  were  doing 
there,  he  was  the  person  doing  it,  or  at- 
tending to  it ;  i.  e.  the  keeper  gave  him 
charge  to  see  that  the  prisoners  obeyed 
whatever  orders  were  issued  for  their 
regulation  ;  and,  having  implicit  confi- 
dence in  Josei  h's  probity,  the  keeper  of  the 
prison  looked  not  to  anything  that  was 
under  (or  in)  His  hand  (i.  e.  he  did  not 
trouble  himself  about  anything  entrusted 
to  Joseph)  ;  because  the  Lord  (Jehovah) 
was  with  him  and  that  which  he  did,  the 
Lord  (Jehovah)  made  it  to  prosper. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  7— 23.—  Joseph  and  the  wife  of  Potiphar.  I  The  great  temptation.  1 
The  lime  of  it.  Never  perhaps  had  Joseph's  prospects  been  brighter  since  he  left  his 
father's  house  than  towards  the  close  of  that  decade  of  years  which  he  spent  in  the 
Egyptian  officer's  employ ;,  and  yet  then  it  was  that,  like  a  thunderbolt  shot  from 
a  clear  sky,  a  fierce  temptation  burst  upon  him.  2.  The  occasion  of  it.  This  was  the 
beauty  of  Joseph's  person .  Things  innocent  and  lovely  in  themselves  may  sometimes 
be  a  source  of  clanger,  and,  if  not  guarded  against,  a  cause  of  sin,  to  their  possess- 
ors. In  particular  the  good  looks  of  men  and  women  are  often  snares  to  others  as 
well  as  fraught  with  peril  to  themselves,  as  the  cases  of  Sarah  (ch.  xii.  14),  Rebehah 
(ch.  xxvi.  10),  and  Dinah  (ch.  xxxiv.  2)  testify.  Hence  beauty  of  the  person  should 
neither  be  too  eagerly  coveted  nor  too  proudly  worn  by  either  sex,  as  by  each  its  charms 
in  the  other  should  be  moderately  admired,  and  its  allurements  earnestly  resisted. 
3.  The  form  of  it.  The  special  trial  to  which  the  young  man  Joseph  was  now  sub- 
jected partook  of  the  character  of  an  assault  upon  his  chastity.  It  is,  however,  a 
mistake  to  suppose  that  a  good  man  is  always  assaulted  at  the  point  where  he 
is  weakest.    On  the  contrary,  it  is  one  of  the -devil's  blunders  that,  in  directing  his 


CH.  xxxix.  7—23.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  451 

attacks  against  saints,  he  for  the  most  part  mistakenly  selects  the  point  where  they 
are  strongest.  Joseph  was  permitted  to  be  assailed  by  his  lascivious  mistress  not 
because  his  own  personal  virtue  was  doubted,  but  because  in  that  direction  he  was 
best  prepared  to  repel  the  fiercest  onset  of  temptation.  4.  The  strength  of  it. 
There  were  elements  in  this  assault  upon  Joseph's  virtue  which  were  calculated  to 
impart  to  it  a  vehemence  that  in  ordinary  circumstances,  i.  e.  with  persons  of  less 
robustness  of  moral  principle  than  Joseph,  must  have  proved  overwhelming.  These 
were— (1)  The  person  to  whom  it  was  directed,  viz.,  Joseph's  mistress,  the  wife  of  a 
high  officer  of  state,  whose  smile  might  have  turned  the  head  and  intoxicated  the 
heart  of  a  young  man  who  was  only  her  slave.  (2)  The  vehement  importunity  with 
which  it  was  urged,  his  mistress  speaking  to  him  day  by  day,  aud  even  by  act  as  well 
as  word  endeavouring  to  prevail.  (3)  The  convenient  opportunity  which  was  almost 
always  presented,  seeing  that  Joseph's  master  was  mostly  absent,  and  the  domestics 
often  out  of  the  way.  (4)  The  danger  he  might  incur  by  offending  one  so  high  in 
rank  as  his  master's  wife.  (5)  The  advantages  he  might  expect  to  reap  from  com- 
plying with  her  pleasure. 

II.  The  splendid  victoky.  1.  The  manner  of  Joseph's  refusal.  (1)  Promptly, 
without  the  slightest  hesitation  or  appearance  of  dallying  with  the  tempting  bait. 
Had  Joseph  hesitated,  he  might  have  been  lost ;  had  he  trifled  with  the  forbidden 
fruit,  he  might  have  plucked  and  ate.  (2)  Firmly.  There  was  no  sound  of  waver- 
ing or  indecisioih  about  the  reply  of  Joseph  It  was  not  the  answer  of  a  man  who 
was  only  half-hearted  in  putting  away  from  him  a  thing  which  he  secretly  desired. 
In  Joseph's  "  no  "  there  was  the  clear,  full-toned  ring  of  a  man  who  had  made  up  his 
mind  intelligently  and  finally.  (3).  Kindly.  Josepli  behaved  towards  his  mistress 
with  as  much  tenderness  as  his  moral  indignation  and  disgust  at  her  behaviour  would 
allow  ;  his  considerateness  shining  out  conspicuously  in  this,  that  he  studiously  en- 
deavoured to  be  as  much  as  possible  out  of  the  unhappy  woman's  sight,  in  the  hope, 
doubtless,  that  her  unholy  passion  might  abate.  (4)  Bravely.  Joseph  was  prepared 
to  run  any  risk  rather  than  accede  to  the  base  proposal  of  his  mistress,  as  was  proved 
by  his  fleeing  from  the  house  without  his  doublet,  when  the  impudent  woman  sought 
by  catching  hold  of  him  to  secure  compliance  with  her  request.  2.  The  reason  of 
Joseph's  refusal.  (1)  The  greatness  of  the  trust  reposed  in  him  by  his  master.  Poti- 
phar  had  committed  everything  to  his  (Joseph's)  care  ;  and  how  then  could  he  repay 
with  treachery  so  abominable  a  confidence  so  great?  (2)  The  extent  of  the  power 
delegated  to  him.  Potiphar  had  kept  back  nothing  from  him  except  his  wife;  how 
then,  having  privileges  so  extensive,  should  he  covet  the  one  thing  forbidden?  (3) 
The  sacredness  of  the  relationship  existing  between  his  mistress  and  Potiphar. 
"Thou  art  his  wife; "  and  by  the  covenant  of  marriage  thou  belongest  to  him  only, 
and  not  to  me.  (4)  The  heinousness  of  the  sin  of  which  he  would  be  guilty. 
"How  can  I  do  this  great  wickedness,  and  sin  against  God?" 

III.  The  remarkable  kewakd.  1.  Tlie  slander  of  his  mistress.  The  disappointed 
strumpet,  thirsting  for  revenge,  resolves  upon  accomplishing  the  ruin  of  the  fair  youth 
of  whom  the  moment  before  she  affected  to  be  enamoured.  But  indeed  all  illicit 
passion,  whether  gratified  or  baulked,  has  a  tendency  sooner  or  later  to  become  trans- 
formed into  hate.  Laying  up  the  garment  which  Joseph  had  indiscreetly  dropped  in 
his  haste,  she  makes  use  of  it  to  trump  up  a  charge  against  Joseph  of  having  attempted 
a  violation  of  her  chastity.  There  is  no  length  to  which  the  fierce  resentment  of  a 
wicked  woman  will  not  proceed  against  those  who  have  incurred  her  hate.  It 
will  commonly  go  hard  with  ker  if  out  of  a  straw  her  infernal  ingenuity  cannot 
manufacture  a  rope  wherewith  to  strangle  her  victim.  2.  The  wrath  of  his  master. 
Potiphar,  as  was  natural,  at  first  felt  inclined  to  believe  his  wife  and  to  suppose  that 
Joseph  had  foully  betrayed  the  trust  reposed  in  his  honour.  In  this,  of  course,  he 
acted  hastily,  and  therefore  sinfully.  Even  from  the  nearest  and  the  dearest  reports 
affecting  injuriously  the  characters  of  others  should  not  be  accepted  without  investi- 
gation. But  that  second  thoughts  prevailed  with  Potiphar,  who,  remembering  the 
bad  reputation  of  Egyptian  ladies  generally,  and  knowing  something  possibly  of  the 
slendemess  of  his  own  wife's  virtue,  as  well  as  recalling  the  previous  high  character 
of  Joseph,  began  to  doubt  the  truth  of  what  was  alleged  against  his  favourite,  aud  to 
think  it  more  likely  that  his  wife  lied  than  that  Joseph  sinned,  has  been  inferred  from 
the  circumstance  that  Joseph  was  not  forthwith  remitted  to  the  executioner's  block, 
but  only  committed  to  the  tower.  3.  The  mercy  of  his  God.  As  before,  Jehovah 
w«nt  with  Joseph  to  the  prison,  and  eomforted  him  with  gracious  thoughts  concerning 

se2 


152  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  [ch.  xxxix.  7—23. 

his  affliction,  with  speedy  favour  in  the  sight  of  his  keeper,  so  that  the  severity  of  his 
confinement  was  considerably  mitigated,  and  with  ultimate  promotion  to  a  position  of 
trust  within  the  prison,  the  charge  of  all  the  criminals  being  committed  to  his  care. 
And  finally,  the  Lord  made  him  prosperous  and  successful  as  before  in  all  his 
undertakings. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  21.— Joseph  in  slavery.  "  But  the  Lord  was  with  Joseph,"  &c.  Men  would 
have  thought,  as  they  looked  on  the  Hebrew  slave,  that  he  was  God-forsaken.  Not 
so.  God  blessed  him.  This  was  evidenced  in  the  character  he  developed.  The 
Lord  was  with  him. 

I.  DISCRETION,  THE  RESULT  OP  A  SENSE   OP   THE   DlVINE  PRESENCE.      He  did  110t 

betray  trust,  or  presume  on  the  confidence  placed  in  him,  or  the  kind  treatment  he 
received  ;  nor  did  he  unwisely  run  into  danger. 

II.  Diligence,  the  outcome  op  a  sense  op  the  Divine  presence.  Toil  kept 
off  much  temptation.  If  a  slave  by  circumstances,  he  will  yet  do  what  he  can  to 
benefit  his  master.     He  worked  under  apparently  hopeless  conditions. 

Ill  Devotjtness,  the  certain  consequence  op  a  sense  op  the  Divine  PRES- 
ENCE. Joseph  lived  as  under  the  eye  of  God.  Heuce  when  special  temptations 
came  he  repelled  them  in  the  Divine  strength.  "How  can  I  do  this  great  wicked- 
ness?" &c.  Joseph  was  neither  to  be  persecuted  out  of  his  religion  nor  enticed 
from  it.  This  is  the  brightest  chapter  in  Joseph's  life.  He  would  not  sin  against 
himself,  nor  against  God,  who  was  with  him. — H. 

Ver.  21. — God's  presence  mlh  his  servants.  Joseph  in  slavery,  yet  the  Lord  was 
with  him  (cf.  Rev.  i.  9).  Twice  stated  in  this  chapter.  Outward  prosperity  is  no 
test  of  God's  presence  (cf .  Rom .  v.  3 ;  2  Cor.  xii.  9).  Often  in  times  of  trial  God's 
presence  is  most  clearly  felt.  "When  all  dark  below,  the  eye  is  drawn  upwards. 
The  world's  good  seen  to  be  unprofitable  (James  iv  4).  There  is  a  sense  in  which 
God  is  always  with  all.  He  guides  men's  actions  and  course  of  life,  whether  they 
will  or  not.  But  while  unbelief  draws  no  comfort  from  this  (Zeph.  i.  12),  the 
knowledge  of  his  presence  gives  peace  to  his  people  (Isa.  xxvi.  3 — 12). 

I.  Character  op  him  with  whom  God  was  thus  present.  A  Godward  mind — 
habitually  living  as  in  the  sight  of  God,  though  left  alone  (cf.  Gal.  iv.  28).  Ful- 
filled what  his  hand  found  to  do.  God's  will  was  his  rule  of  life.  He  resisted 
temptation  (James  i.  12) ;  was  faithful  in  the  charge  committed  to  him,  though  not 
of  his  own  choice.  Did  not  look  upon  the  wrong  he  had  suffered  as  excusing  him 
from  fidelity.  This  faithful  spirit  can  spring  only  from  thorough  belief  in  God's  love 
and  care  (1  John  iv.  19). 

II.  The  blessing  op  God's  presence  extended  to  every  part  op  his  lipe.  Not 
merely  in  the  fact  of  his  being  carried  to  Egypt  (cf.  Acts  xxiii.  11),  but  in  every 
incident  God's  hand  is  seen.  His  management  of  Potiphar's  affairs  was  a  training 
for  rule  over  Egypt.  His  unjust  accusation  was  a  step  towards  his  standing  before 
Pharaoh.  His  experience  in  prison  prepared  him  to  be  the  deliverer  of  a  nation 
(ch.  Heb.  ii.  18  ;  iv.  15).  Thus  God's  presence  is  something  better  and  higher  than 
merely  a  prosperous  course.  It  is  the  certainty  that  everything  that  happens  is 
ordered  by  infinite  wisdom  and  love— is  a  step  towards  the  fulness  of  joy  (Deut.  viii. 
2).  This  holds  good  in  spiritual  experience  not  less  than  in  temporal.  A  Christian 
is  often  led  through  times  of  darkness.  Communion  with  God  seems  to  be  inter- 
rupted (Ps.  lxv.  3  ;  Rom.  vii.  24  .  Temptation,  opposition,  difficulty  in  prayer  make 
the  soul  sad.  Yet  the  Lord  is  not  absent ;  and  these  are  all  parts  of  the  training  by 
which  he  is  preparing  his  servant  for  the  fulness  of  blessing. 

ni.  He  with  whom  the  Lord  abides  (John  xiv.  23 ;  Rev.  iii.  20)  is  a  blessing 
to  others.  So  it  was  with  Joseph.  Potiphar,  the  jailer,  Pharaoh,  the  Egyptian 
nation,  were  blessed  thiough  him.  There  is  no  such  thing  as  keeping  a  blessing  to 
ourselves ;  the  very  attempt  destroys  it  as  a  blessing.  Temporal  possessions  and 
powers,  used  selfishly,  become  vanity.  They  pass  away,  and  leave  no  good,  no  joy 
behind.     And  so  with  spiritual  good.     He  who  has  experienced  the  grace  of  God 


6H.  XL.  1- 


».] 


THE   BOOK  OP  0BNESIS. 


453 


must  care  for  others,  or  his  own  state  will  suffer  (Prov.  xi.  24).  The  more  we  par- 
take of  the  mind  of  Christ,  the  more  we  learn  that  wherever  he  leads  us,  it  is  that  we 
may  be  channels  of  blessing  to  others. — M. 

Ver.  22. — Joseph  as  prison  warder.  "  And  the  keeper  of  the  prison  committed  to 
Joseph's  hands  all  the  prisoners  that  were  in  the  prison,"  &c.  Joseph  is  unjustly 
treated  and  thrown  into  prison.  Here  he  makes  the  best  of  circumstances.  He  gains 
tlie  confidence  of  the  keeper.  The  keeper  of  the  State  prison  is  glad  to  find  one  like 
Joseph,  to  whom  he  can  delegate  much  toil  and  responsibility. 

I.  Duty  discharged  in  a  sympathetic  spirit.  He  admits  many  to  prison,  and 
feels  for  all.  He  sees  that  it  is  but  a  step  from  the  presence-chamber  of  Pharaoh  to 
a  vile  prison.  To  those  who  found  higher  places  slippery,  and  those  who  found  the 
templations  of  poverty  too  strong,  lie  shows  his  pity.  His  owu  bitter  separation  from 
friends  makes  him  sympathetic. 

II.  Duty  discharged  in  a  cheerful  spirit.  Generally  he  had  a  smile  for  the 
prisoners.  They  looked  for  it,  and  responded  to  it.  The  heart  can  give  to  the  sad 
that  which  is  better  than  gold — a  cheerful  helpfulness.  Our  gloom  can  lay  extra 
burdens  on  others. 

III.  Duty  discharged  in  a  courteous  spirit.  He  would  not  trample  on  those 
already  fallen.  He  inquires  even  into  the  cause  of  the  sadness  of  the  prisoners,  and 
interprets  for  them  dreams  which  had  perplexed  them.  His  own  dreams  had  made 
him  at  one  time  elate,  but  they  seem  as  yet  far  from  being  fulfilled.  Still  this  only 
leads  him  to  be  more  courteous  to  those  who  may  also  be  doomed  to  disappointment. 
The  sympathy,  cheerfulness,  and  courtesy  of  Joseph  made  him  eventually  prime 
minister  of  Egypt. — H. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XL. 

Ver.  1. — And  it  came  to  pass  (literally, 
and  it  was)  after  these  things  (literally, 
words,  i.  e.  after  the  transactions  just  re- 
corded), that  the  butler— Fl]?.'J?n  the  hiph. 

part  of  tTpili,  to  drink,  signifies  one  who 

causes  to  drink,  hence  cupbearer  (cf.  ver. 
11) — of  the  king  of  Egypt  and  his  baker— 

the  FISS  (part,  of  MSiS,  to  cook  or  bake) 

was  the  officer  who  prepared  the  king's 
food.  The  monuments  Show  that  the 
Egyptians  had  carried  the  arts  of  the  con- 
fectiouer  and  cook  to  a  high  degree  of 
p  rfection  (vide  Hengstenbergr  'Egypt 
and  the  Books  of  Moses.'p.  27;  Wilkinson, 
'  Ancient  Egyptians,'  ii.  S3 —  39,  ed.  1878) 
— had  offended  (or  sinned  against)  their 
lord  (literally,  against,  the  preposition 
being  repeated)  the  king  of  Egypt— whom 
they  had  attempted  to  poison  (the  Targum 
of  Jonathan),  though  this  of  course  is  only 
a  conjecture  in  the  absence  of  specific  in- 
formation. 

Ver.  2. — And  Pharaoh  was  wroth— liter- 
ally, broke  forth  (sc.  into  anger) — against 
two  of  his  officers  (vide  ch.  xxxvii.  36), 
against  the  chief— sar :  the  word  occurs  in 
one  of  the  oldest  historical  documents  of 
ancient  Egypt  ('  Inscription  of  Una, '  line 


4,  sixth  dynasty),  meaning  chief  or  eunuch 
(vide  '  Records  of  the  Past, '  ii.  3) — of  the 
butlers, — an  office  once  filled  by  Nehemiau 
in  the  Court  of  Persia  (Neh.  i.  11),  and 
Rabsbakeh  (Aramaic  for  "chief  of  the 
cupbearers  ")  in  the  Court  of  Assyria  (2 
Kings  xviii.  17) — and  against  the  chief  of 
the  bakers.  Oriental  monarchs  generally 
had  a  multitude  of  butlers  and  bakers,  or 
cupbearers  and  Court  purveyors,  the  chiefs 
in  both  departments  being  invested  with 
high  honour,  and  regarded  with  much 
trust  (Herod.,  iii.  34;  Xenoph.,  'Cyrop.,.' 
i.  3,  8). 

Ver.  8.— And  he  put  them  in  ward  (or  in 
custody)  in  the  house  of  the  cap  ain  of  the 
guard, — i.  e.  Potiphar  (vide  ch.  xxxvii.  36) 
—into  the  prison, — literally,  house  of  en- 
closure (vide  ch  xxxix  20) — the  place 
where  Joseph  was  bound.   The  word  "llDN 

from  "1DN,  to  make  fast  by  binding,  seems 

to  corroborate  the  Psalmist's  assertion  (Ps. 
cv.  18)  that  Joseph  had  been  laid  in  iron 
an!  his  feet  hurt  with  fetters;  but  this 
could  only  have  been  temporarily  (vide 
vers.  4,  6). 

Ver.  4. — And  the  captain  of  the  guard 
charged  Joseph  with  them  (literally,  set 
Joseph  with  them,  i.  e  as  a  companion  or 
servant ;  to  wait  upon  them  since  they 


154 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


I"CH.  XL.  1—23. 


vere  high  officers  of  State,  not  to  keep 
pvatch  over  them  as  criminals),  and  he 
lerved  them  (i.  e.  acted  as  their  attendant): 
ind  they  continued  a  season  in  ward  (liter- 
illy,  and  they  were  days,  i.  e.  an  indefinite 
period,  in  prison). 

Ver.  5. — And  they  dreamed  a  dream  both 
)f  them  (on  dreams  cf.  ch.  xx.  3),  each 
nan  his  dream  in  one  night  (this  was  the 
irst  remarkable  circumstance  connected 
with  these  dreams — they  both  happened 
the  same  night),  each  man  according  to  the 
interpretation  of  his  dream  (i.  e.  each  dream 
sorresponded  exactly,  as  the  event  proved, 
to  the  interpretation  put  on  it  by  Joseph, 
which  was  a  second  remarkable  circum- 
stance, inasmuch  as  it  showed  the  dreams 
to  be  no  vague  hallucinations  of  the  mind, 
but  Divinely-sent  foreshadowings  of  the 
future  fortunes  of  the  dreamers),  the  but- 
ler and  the  baker  of  the  king  of  Egypt, 
which  were  bound  in  the  prison. 

Vers.  6,  7. — And  Joseph  came  in  unto 
them  in  the  morning  (a  proof  that  Joseph 
at  this  time  enjoyed  comparative  freedom 
from  corporeal  restraint  in  the  prison), 
and  looked  upon  them,  and,  behold,  they 
were  sad.     The  word  D^BST  from  E|yT,  to 

be  angry,  originally  signifying  irate, 
wrathful,  TErapa-yiUvoi  (LXX.),  is  ob- 
viously intended  rather  to  convey  the  idea 
of  dejection,  tristes  (Vulgate).  And  he 
asked  Pharaoh's  officers  that  were  with  him 
in  the  ward  of  his  lord's  house,  saying, 
Wherefore  look  ye  so  sadly  to-day  T — liter- 
ally, knowing  what  (yYTO  =  ?>1"P  !"iB  =  tC 

|ia8iiv)  are  your  faces  evil,  or  bad  (irpia-wira 
o-KvSpcaird,  LXX.;  tristior  solito,  Vulgate), 
to  day? 

Ver.  8. — And  they  said  unto  him,  We 
have  dreamed  a  dream,  and  there  is  no  in- 
terpreter of  it — literally,  a  dream  have  we 
dreamt,  and  interpreting  it  there  is  none. 
This  must  be  noted  as  a  third  peculiarity 
connected  with  these  dreams,  that  both  of 
their  recipients  were  similarly  affected  by 
them,  though  there  was  much  in  the  but- 
ler's dream  to  inspire  hope  rather  than 
dejection.  And  Joseph  said  unto  them,  Do 
not  interpretations  belong  to  God  ? — liter- 
ally, Are  not  interpretations  to  Elohimt 
i.  e.  the  Supreme  Being  (cf.  ch.  xli.  16; 
Dan.ii.  11,28,47).  TheEgyptiansbeliPved 
on  av8p<6ir<i>v  u.iv  oiSevl  irpocnc&Tai  i\  ri\vr\ 
liavTiKT),  twv  be  Befflv  fkirt^eripourt  (Herod., 
ii.  83).  Tell  me  them,  I  pray  you.  Joseph's 
request  implies  that  the  consciousness  of 
his  Divine  calling  to  be  a,  prophet  had 
begun  to  dawn  upon- him,  and  that  he 
was  now  speaking  from  an  inward  con- 
viction, doubtless  produced  within    his 


mind  by  Elohim,  that  he  could  unfold  the 
true  significance  of  the  dreams. 

Vers.  9 — 11. — And  the  chief  butler  told 
his  dream  to  Joseph,  and  said  to  him,  In  my 
dream,  behold,  a  vine  was  before  me — liter- 
ally, in  my  oream  (sc.  I  was),  and  behold 
a  vine  (gephen,  from  the  unused  root 
gaphan,  to  be  bent,  a  twig,  hence  a  plant 
which  has  twigs,  especially  a  vine;  cf. 
Judges  ix.  13;  Isa.  vii.  43;  xxiv.  7)  before 
me.  The  introduction  of  the  vine  into 
the  narrative,  which  has  been  pronounced 
(Bohlen)  an  important  factor  in  proof  of 
its  recent  composition,  since,  according  to 
Herodotus  (ii.  77),  the  vine  was  not  cul- 
tivated in  Egypt,  and,  according  to  Plu- 
tarch ('De  Is.  et  Osir.,'  6),  it  was  not,  till 
after  Psammetichus,  i.  e.  about  the  time 
of  Josiah,  that  the  Egyptians  began  to 
drink  wine,  has  now  by  more  accurate 
study  been  ascertained  to  be  in  exact 
accordance,  not  only  with  Biblical  state- 
ments (Numb,  xx.  5;  Ps  lxxviii.  47;  cv. 
33),  but  likewise  with  the  testimony  of 
Herodotus,  who  affirms  (ii.  37)  that  wine 
(oovos  &|iir&ivos)  was  a  privilege  of  the 
priestly  order,  and  with  the  representa- 
tions on  the  monuments  of  vines  and 
grapes,  and  of  the  entire  process  of  wine- 
making  (vide  Havernick's  'Introduction,' 
§21;  Wilkinson's  'Ancient  Egyptians,' 
i.  379,  et  seqq.  430,  431,  ed.  1878 ;  Heng- 
stenberg,  'Egypt,'  p.  13;  Bawlinson, 
'Hist.  Illus.,'  p.  49;  Thornley  Smith, 
'Joseph  and  his  Times,'  p.  58).  And  in 
the  vine  were  three  branches  -.—sarigim, 
tendrils  of  a  vine,  from  sarag,  to  inter- 
twine (ver.  12 ;  Joel  i.  7) — and  it  was  as 
though  it  budded,  and  her  blossoms  shot 
forth  ; — literally-,  as  it  budded  (Murphy) ; 
or,  as  though  blossoming  (Eosenmtiller, 
Keil,  Kalisch) ;  it  shot  forth  its  blossoms 
(Keil) ;  or,  its  blossoms  shot  forth  (Ro- 
senmilller,  Kalisch,  Murphy) — and  the 
clusters  thereof  brought  forth  ripe  grapes  : 
— more  correctly,  its  stems  caused  to 
ripen,  or  matured,  clusters,  the  VsTON  be- 
ing the  stalk  of  a  cluster,  as  distinguished 
from  the  D'OSS,  or  clusters  themselves 

(Gesenius,  'Lex.,'  p.  85),  though  inter- 
preters generally  (Kalisch,  Keil,  Murphy) 
regard  the  first  as  the  unripe,  and  the 
second  as  the  ripe,  cluster — and  Pharaoh's 
cup — D13,  a  receptacle  or  vessel,  either 
contracted  from  053,  like  UTS*  for  1E:N 

(Gesenius),  or  derived  from  C13,  to  con- 
ceal, to  receive,  to  keep,  connected  with 
the  idea  of  bringing  together,  collecting 
into  a  thing  (Ftlrst) — was  in  my  hand : 
and  I  took  the  grapes,  and  pressed  them — 
c{e'8\ix|;a  (LXX.),   expressi   (Vulgate),    a 


CH.  XL.  1— 23.] 


THE  600K   OP  GENESIS. 


453 


translation  adopted  by  the  most  competent 
authorities  (Gesenius,  Filrst,  Rosenmliller, 
Keil,  Kalisch,  et  alii),  though  tlie  sense 
of  diluting  with  water  is  advocated  by 
Dathe,  Haverhick  ('Introd.,'  §  21),  and 
others  as  the  most  appropriate  significa- 
tion of  tsn'iB,   which  occurs  only  here. 

That  Pharaoh  is  represented  as  drinking 
the  expressed  juice  of  grapes  is  no  proof 
that  the  Egyptians  were  not  acquainted 
with  fermentation,  and  did  not  drink  fer- 
mented liquors.  In  numerous  frescoes 
the  process  of  fermentation  is  distinctly 
represented,  and  Herodotus  testifies  that 
though  the  use  of  grape  wine  was  com- 
paratively limited,  the  common  people 
drank  a  wine  made  from  barlev  :  olvip  8'  4k 
Kpi8eW  ireiroii)|i^vu  (ii.  77) — into  Pharaoh's 
cup,  and  I  gave  the  cup  into  Pharaoh's  hand 
— literally,  /  placed  the  cup  upon  Pha- 
raoh's palm,  rj?,  used  of  Jacob's  thigh- 
socket  (ch.  xxxii.  26),  meaning  something 
hollowed  out. 

Vers.  12 — 15. — And  Joseph  (acting  no 
doubt  under  a  Divine  impulse)  said  unto 
him,  This  is  the  interpretation  of  it  (cf. 
ver.  18  ;  xli.  12,  25  ;  Judges  vii.  14  ;  Dan. 
ii.  36 ;  iv.  19) :  The  three  branches  (vide 
supra,  ver.  10)  are  three  days: — literally, 
three  days  these  (cf .  ch.  xli.  26) — yet  within 
three  days  (literally,  in  yet  three  days,  i.  e. 
within  three  more  days,  before  the  third 
day  is  over)  shall  Pharaoh  lift  up  thine 
head, — not  |j,vi)(r6T|o-eTai  rfjs  apxfls  <rov 
(LXX.),  recordabitur  ministerii  tut  (Vul- 
gate), a  rendering  which  has  the  sanction 
of  Onkelos,  Samaritan,  Jarchi,  Rosen- 
milller,  and  others ;  but  shall  promote 
thee  from  the  depths  of  thy  humiliation 
(Genesius,  Furst,  Keil,  Kalisch,  &c),  to 
which  there  is  an  assonance,  and  upon 
which  there  is  an  intentional  play,  in  the 
opposite  phrase  employed  to  depict  the 
fortunes  of  the  baker  (vide  infra,  ver.  19) 
— and  restore  thee  unto  thy  place: — epex- 
egetic  of  the  preceding  clause,  the  ]3  (or 
pedestal,  from  ]53,  unused,  to  stand  up- 
right, or  stand  fast  as  a  base)  upon  which 
the  butler  was  to  be  set  being  his  former 
dignity  and  office,  as  is  next  explained — 
and  thou  shalt  deliver  Pharaoh's  cup  into 
his  hand,  after  the  former  manner  when 
thou  wast  his  butler.  After  which  Joseph 
adds  a  request  for  himself.  But  think  on 
me  when  it  shall  be  well  with  thee  (liter- 
ally, but,  or  only,  thou  shalt  remember  me 
with  thee,  according  as,  or  when,  it  goes  well 
with  thee),  and  shew  kindness,  I  pr-y  thee, 
untD  me  (cf  Josh.  ii.  12;  1  Sam.  xx.  14, 15; 
2  Sam.  ix.  1  ;  1  Kings  ii.  7),  and  make 
mention  of  me  unto  Pharaoh, — literally, 


bfing  me  to  remembrance  before  Pharaoh 
(cf.  1  Kings  xvii,  18  ;  Jer.  iv.  16  ;  Ezek. 
xxi.  28)  —and  bring  me  out  of  this  house  : 
for  indeed  I  was  stolen  (literally,  for  stolen 
1  was  stolen,  i.  e.  I  was  furtively  abducted, 
without  my  knowledge  or  consent,  and 
did  not  vol  untarily  abscond  in  consequence 
of  having  perpetrated  any  crime)  away 
out  (literally,  from)  of  the  land  of  the 
Hebrews  : — l.  e.  the  land  where  the  Ibrim 
live  (Keil) ;  an  expression  which  Joseph 
never  could  have  used,  since  the  Hebrews 
were  strangers  and  sojourners  in  the  land, 
and  had  no  settled  possession  in  it,  and 
therefore  a  certain  index  of  the  lateness 
of  the  composition  of  this  portion  of  the 
narrative  (Bleek,  'Introd.,'  §  80);  but  if 
Abram,  nearly  two  centuries  earlier,  was 
recognised  as  a  Hebrew  (ch.  xiv.  13),  and 
if  Potiphar's  wife  could,  in  speaking  to 
her  Egyptian  husband  and  domestics,  de- 
scribe Joseph  as  an  Hebrew  (ch.  xxxix. 
14,  17),  there  does  not  appear  sufficient 
reason  why  Joseph  should  not  be  able  to 
characterise  his  country  as  the  land  of  the 
Hebrews.  The  Hebrews  had  through 
Abraham  become  known  at  least  to  Pha- 
raoh and  his  Court  as  belonging  to  the 
land  of  Canaan  (ch.  xii.  15 — 20) ;  and  it  is 
not  a  violent  supposition  that  in  Joseph's 
time  "the  land  of  the  Hebrews"  was  a 
phrase  quite  intelligible  to  an  Egyptian, 
as  signifying  not  ]  erhaps  the  entire  extent 
of  Palestine,  but  the  region  round  about 
Hebron  and  Mamre  (Nachmanides,  Cleri- 
cus,  Rosenmtiller)— scarcely  as  suggesting 
that  the  Hebrews  had  possession  of  the 
land  prior  to  the  Canaan ites  (Murphy). 
And  her  j  also  have  I  done  nothing  (i.  e. 
committed  no  crime)  that  they  should  (lit- 
erally, that  they  have)  put  me  into  the 
dungeon.  The  term  Tfo  is  here  used  to 
describe  Joseph's  place  of  confinement, 
because  pits  or  cisterns  or  cess-pools, 
when  empty,  were  frequently  employed 
in  primitive  times  for  the  incarce.ation 
of  offenders  (cf.  Jer.  xxxviii.  6;  Zech.  ix. 
11). 

Vers.  16,  17.— When  (literally,  and)  tie 
chief  baker  saw  that  the  interpretation  was 
good,  he  (literally,  and  he,  encouragtd  by 
the  good  fortune  predicted  to  his  fellow- 
prisoner)  said  unto  Joseph,  I  also  was  in 
my  dream,  and,  behold,  1  had  tfcree  (liter- 
ally, and  behold  three)  white  baske  s — 
literally,  baskets  of  white  bread;  LXX., 
Kavd  xov8plT'»v ;  Vulgate,  canistra 
farinas ;  Aquila,  k<S<|>ivoi  yipttos  (Onkelos, 
Pererius,  Gesenius,  Furst,  Keil,  Kalisch, 
Murphy,  et  alii) ;  though  the  render- 
ing "baskets  of  holes,"  i.  e.  wicker  bas- 
kets, is  preferred  by  some  (Symmachus, 


*66 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESI& 


[CH.  XL.  1—24 


Datbius,  Rosemniiller,  and  others),  and  ac- 
cords with  the  evidence  of  the  monuments, 
which  frequently  exhibit  baskets  of  wicker- 
work  (fide  Wilkinson's  'Ancient  Egyptians,' 
ii.  34,  ed.  1878) — on  my  head.  According 
to  Herodotus  (ii.  35),  Egyptian  men  com- 
monly carried  on  their  heads,  and  Egyptian 
women,  like  Hagar  (ch.  xxi.  14),  on  their 
shoulders.  And  in  the  uppermost  basket 
(whose  contents  alone  are  described,  since  it 
alone  was  exposed  to  the  depredations  of  the 
birds)  there  was  of  all  manner  of  bake- 
laeats  for  Pharaoh — literally,  all  kinds  of 
food  for  Pharaoh,  the  work  of  a  baker.  The 
monuments  show  that  the  variety  of  confec- 
tionery used  in  Egypt  was  exceedingly  ex- 
tensive (Hengstenberg,  p.  27).  And  the  birds 
—  literally,  the  bird ;  a  collective  sing.,  as  in 
ch.  i.  21,  30  (cf.  ver.  19) — did  eat  then  out 
of  the  basket  upon  my  head. 

Vers.  18,  19. — And  Joseph  answered  and 
said  (with  what  reluctance  and  pathos  may 
be  imagined),  This  is  the  interpretation 
thereof  (the  exposition  was  supplied  by  God, 
and,  however  willing  or  anxious  Joseph  might 
be  to  soften  its  meaning  to  his  auditor,  he 
could  not  deviate  a  hair's-breadth  from  what 
he  knew  to  be  the  mind  of  Cod) :  The  three 
baskets  are  three  days :  yet  within  three 
days — literally,  in  three  days  more  (ut  su- 
pra, ver.  13)  —  shall  Pharaoh  lift  up  thy 
head  from  off  thee  (i.  e.  deprive  thee  of  life, 
the  phrase  containing  a  resemblance  to  that 
employed  in  ver.  13,  and  finding  its  explana- 
tion in  the  words  that  follow),  and  shall 
hang  thee  on  a  tree — i.  e.  after  decapita- 
tion (ef.  Deut.  xxi.  22,  23  ;  Josh.  x.  2(3  r  2 
Sam.  iv.  12),  which  was  probably  the  mode 
of  execution  at  that  time  practised  in  Egypt 
(Michaelia,  Clarke,  Keil,  Murphy,  Alford, 
Inglis,  Bush),  though  some  regard  the  clause 
as  a  description  of  the  way  in  which  the 
baker's  life  was  to  be  taken  from  him,  viz., 
either  by  crucifixion  (Onkelos,  Rosenmiiller, 
Ainsworth)  or  by  hanging  (Willet,  Patrick, 
T.  Lewis),  and  others  view  it  as  simply  point- 
ing to  capital  punishment,  without  indicating 


the  instrument  or  method  (Piseator,  Lapide, 
Mercerus,  'Speaker's  Commentary').  And 
the  birds  shall  eat  thy  flesh  from  off  thee. 
"  The  terror  of  approaching  death  would  be 
aggravated  to  the  poor  man  by  the  prospect 
of  the  indignity  with  which  his  body  was 
to  be  treated  "  (Lawson). 

Ver.  20. — And  it  came  to  pass  (literally, 
and  it  was,  as  Joseph  bad  predicted)  the 
third  day  (literally,  in,  or  on,  the  third  day). 
which  was  Pharaoh's  birthday,  —  literally, 
the  day  of  Pharaoh's  being  born,  the  inf. 
hoplial  being  construed  with  an  accusative 
(vide  Gesenius,  'Grammar,'  $  148) — that  he 
made  a  feast — a  mishteh,  i.  e.  a  drinking 
or  banquet  (vide  ch.  xix.  3) — unto  all  hie 
servants.  "The  birthdays  of  the  kings  of 
Egypt  were  considered  holy,  and  were  cele- 
brated with  great  joy  and  rejoicing.  All 
business  was  suspended,  and  the  people 
generally  took  part  in  the  festivities ' 
(Thornley  Smith,  'Joseph  and  his  Times,' 
p.  62  ;  vide  Herod.,  i.  133  :  'H/iipqi'  Si  ana- 
akbiv  jiaXioTa  tKtivi]v  Tt/iap  vojiiZovm,  r« 
ticaoTot  iyeviro  ;  and  cf.  Matt.  xiv.  6  ;  Mark 
vi.  21).  And  he  lifted  up  the  head— here 
the  one  phrase  applies  equally,  though  in 
different  senses,  to  both.  A  similar  expres- 
sion occurs  in  the  annals  of  Assur-uasir-pal 
(Sardanapalus),  column  ii.  line  43:  "Their 
heads  on  the  high  places  of  the  mountain  I 
lifted  up  "  ('  Records  of  the  Past,'  vol.  iii.  p. 
54)— of  the  chief  butler  and  of  the  chief 
baker  among  hiB  servants  —  literally,  in 
their  midst,  as  a  public  example. 

Vers.  21,  22.— And  he  restored  the  chief 
butler  unto  his  butlership  again;  and  he 
gave  the  cup  into  Pharaoh's  hand  (liter- 
ally, set  the  dtp  upon  Pharaoh's  palm) : 
but  he  (i.  e.  Pharaoh)  hanged  the  chief 
baker  (vide  supra,  ver.  19) :  as  Joseph  had 
interpreted  to  them. 

Ver.  23.— Yet-did  not  the  chief  butler  re- 
member Joseph  (as  Joseph  had  desired,  and 
as  he  doubtless  had  promised),  but  forgat 
him— as  Joseph  might  almost  have  expected 
(cf.  Eccles.  ix.  15,  16). 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1—23. — Joseph  xn  the  round  house  at  Hdiopolis.  I.  The  pbisoneks  and 
their  attendant.  1.  Tlie  prisoners.  (1)  Their  rank.  They  were  liigb  officers  of 
state — the  chief  of  the  butlers  and  the  chief  of  the  bakers,  i.  e.  the  principal  cup- 
bearer and  Court  purveyor.  (2)  Their  offence.  They  had  sinned  against  their  lord 
the  king  of  Egypt;  in  what  way  it  is  of  no  importance  to  inquire,  since  "we  would 
have  heard  nothing  about  them  had  their  story  not  been  connected  with  that  of 
Joseph  "  (Lawson),  though  the  Rabbis  allege  that  they  had  been  detected  in  an  at- 
tempt at  poisoning  their  master.  (3)  Their  purislmient.  "The  king's  wrath  is  as 
the  roaring  of  a  lion,"  and  "  as  messengers  of  death"  (Prov.  xix.  12  ;  xvi.  14) ;  and 
the  two  offenders  were  immediately  arrested  and  thrown  into  prison,  committed  to 
die  keeping  of  the  captain  of  the  round  house,  where  Joseph  was  bound.  (4)  Their 
privilege.     Their  pun'ehinent  was  tempered  with  clemency.     In   consideration   of 


ch.  XL.  1— 93.]  THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS.  457 

their  official  rank,  the  governor  of  the  tower  appointed  Joseph  to  wait  upon  them  and 
act  as  their  servant.  2.  Their  attendant.  In  this  new  capacity  Joseph  behaved 
himself  wisely  and  with  discretion.  With  regard  to  his  illustrious  companions  in 
misfortune,  lie— (1)  Served  them  faithfully.  "Joseph  had  been  unjustly  enslaved, 
unjustly  imprisoned,  unjustly  detained  in  his  prison,  and  yet  he  declined  not  the 
work  enjoined  by  his  master  "  (Lawson).  Joseph  appears  to  have  always  acted  on 
the  principle  commended  by  the  royal  preacher  (Eceles.  ix.  10),  and  on  that  recom- 
mended by  Christ  (Luke  xiv.  11).  "Joseph  was  a  better  man  than  the  men  whom 
he  served.  He  was  sprung  from  noble  ancestors,  and  knew  that  he  would  one  clay 
be  exalted  above  them  ;  but  at  this  time  he  cheerfully  performed  to  them  every 
service  in  his  power  "  (Lawson).  (2)  Sympathised  with  them  sincerely.  Though 
bearing  his  own  misfortunes  with  unmurmuring  resignation  and  miinly  fortitude, 
because  sustained  by  God's  grace  and  the  possession  of  truly  religious  principles,  the 
amiability  of  Joseph's  nature  led  him  to  commiserate  his  fellow-prisoners  who  had  no 
such  inward  supports  and  consolations  as  were  enjoyed  by  him.  In  particular  on  one 
occasion  mentioned  in  the  text  he  was  so  struck  with  their  dejected  countenances 
that  he  feelingly  inquired  the  cause  of  their  sadness.  (3)  Directed  them  wisely. 
Learning  that  they  were  troubled  on  account  of  dreams  which  they  had  dreamt  over- 
night, and  of  which  they  could  not  find  the  explanation,  he  piously  exhorted  them 
to  look  to  God  for  the  desired  interpretations. 

II.  The  dreams  and  theik  interpretations.  1.  The  dreams— (X)  Agreed  in  the 
time  when  they  occurred,  happening  on  the  same  night;  in  the  impressions  they 
produced,  filling  the  hearts  of  both  dreamers  with  forebodings  ;  in  the  person  by 
whom  they  were  explained,  Joseph  givingequally  the  key  to  both  ;  and  in  the  interval 
required  for  their  fulfilment,  only  three  days  being  allowed  for  the  accomplishment 
of  each.  (2)  Differed  in  the  imagery  of  which  they  were  composed — that  of  the 
butler  consisting  of  a  tableaux  in  which  himself  and  his  royal  master  appeared 
beneath  the  shadow  of  a  blooming  vine,  Pharoah  sitting  on  his  throne,  and  himself 
pressing  the  ripe  clusters  into  Pharaoh's  cup  and  setting  it  on  Pharaoh's  hand  ;  and 
that  of  the  baker  representing  himself  also  engaged  in  the  performance  of  his 
official  duties,  bearing  into  Pharaoh's  presence  three  wicker  baskets  of  pastries  and 
confections,  out  of  the  uppermost  of  which  the  birds  came  to  eat — in  the  character 
of  the  events  which  they  foreshadowed — the  butler's  dream  prognosticating  speedy 
restoration  to  his  butlership,  and  the  baker's  dream  most  ominously  pointing  to  early 
execution.  2.  Their  interpretations.  These  were— (1)  Revealed  by  God.  Joseph  did 
not  claim  to  be  able  of  himself  to  intepret  the  significance  of  either  of  the  dreams, 
but  explicitly  affirmed  that  to  do  so  was  exclusively  the  prerogative  of  Elohim.  (2) 
Declared  by  Joseph.  Thus  Joseph  was  authenticated  as  a  prophet  of  the  Lord  in  that 
heathen  land.  (3)  Fulfilled  by  Pharaoh.  Pharaoh  was  no  doubt  unconscious  that 
he  was  accomplishing  a  Divine  prediction.  So  God  is  able  to  accord  to  men  the 
completest  liberty  of  action,  and  yet  realise  his  own  sovereign  purpose.  Exactly  as 
Joseph  had  interpreted,  both  as  to  time  and  as  to  results,  the  dreams  came  true. 

III.  The  interpreter  and  his  reward.  1.  The  interpreter's  request.  Joseph 
desired  in  return  for  his  services  to  the  butler  that  a  word  should  be  spoken  for  him 
to  the  king  by  that  officer  when  restored  to  his  occupation,  in  the  hope  that  it  might 
lead  to  his  release  from  confinement.  For  this  conduct  Joseph  has  been  blamed  by 
some  censorious  critics  ;  but  (1)  his  request  was  natural.  Though  required  to  endure 
the  crosses  laid  on  him  by  Divine  providence  with  meekness  and  resignation,  he  was 
under  no  obligation  to  stay  a  moment  longer  in  prison  than  he  could  justly  help,  but 
was  rather  bound  to  use  all  legitimate  means  to  insure  his  deliverance.  Then,  (2) 
his  request  was  moderate.  He  did  not  ask  much  at  the  butler's  hand  in  return  for 
his  own  great  service,  only  that  his  name  should  be  mentioned  to  Pharaoh.  Joseph 
w:is  not  exacting  in  his  demands.  Again,  (3)  his  request  was  touching.  As  he  tells 
the  butler,  in  the  hope  of  moving  him  to  pity,  he  was  a  stranger  in  a  strange  land, 
who  had  been  forcibly  abducted,  though  he  does  not  say  by  whom.  What  a  token  of 
the  kindly  charity  and  truly  forgiving  spirit  cherished  by  Joseph  towards  his  brethren ! 
And  finally,  (4)  his  request  was  just.  He  had  done  nothing  to  deserve  imprisonment 
in  that  or  any  other  dungeon.  2.  The  interpreter's  reward.  "Yet  did  not  the  chief 
butler  remember  Joseph,  but  forgat  him."  This  must  have  been  (1)  a  painful 
experience  to  Joseph,  probably  as  cruel  and  unkind  a  blow  as  any  he  had  yet  received; 
as  certainly  it  was  (2)  a  monstrous  iniquity  on  the  part  of  the  butler,  indicating  a 
callous,  ungrateful,  and  truly  base  disposition,  though  unfortunately  it  is  (3)  a  fre- 
quent occurrence  in  human  life. 


158  THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS.  [ch.  xl.  1—23. 

Learn— 1.  That  God's  saints  are  sometimes  thrown  by  Divine  providence  into 
companionship  with  the  worst  of  men.  2.  That  the  excellent  of  the  earth  are  often 
found  filling  the  very  humblest  situations.  3.  That  God  has  many  different  methods 
of  discovering  his  mind  to  men.  4.  That  God  is  able  to  fulfil  his  own  predictions. 
5.  That  wicked  men  sometimes  meet  their  deserts  in  this  life.  6.  That  God's  people 
should  sympathise  with  and  succour  their  fellow-men.  7.  That  they  who  do  good 
to  others  should  hope  for  nothing  again. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ch.  xl. — The  inspired  man.  Joseph  is  already  supreme  in  the  narrow  sphere  of  the 
prison :  "  all  was  committed  to  his  hand."  The  narrow  sphere  prepares  him  for  the 
wider.  The  spiritual  supremacy  has  now  to  be  revealed.  "  Do  not  interpretations 
belong  to  God  ?  "  The  dreams  are  partly  of  man  and  partly  of  God.  Each  man 
dreamed  of  things  connected  with  his  life.  The  butler  of  the  wine  coming  from  the 
grape-clusters,  pressed  inio  Pharaoh's  cup,  given  into  his  hand.  The  baker  of  the 
white  baskets  and  bakemeats,  plucked  from  him  while  upon  his  head  by  the  birds  of 
prey.  To  a  certain  extent  the  interpretation  was  natural,  but  as  at  once  communicated 
to  Joseph  it  was  inspired.  The  sphere  of  inspiration  is  concentric  with  the  sphere  of 
the  natural  intelligence  and  wisdom,  but  goes  beyond  it.  The  request  of  Joseph,  that 
his  spiritual  superiority  should  be  recognised  and  rewarded,  was  not  fulfilled  by  the 
ungrateful  man ;  but,  as  an  act  of  obedience  lo  the  Spirit  of  God,  it  was  committed 
to  him  who  seeth  in  secret  and  rewardeth  openly.  Joseph  is  still  being  tried  by  the 
word  of  God.  It  is  committed  to  him  as  a  messenger  and  witness  for  the  covenant 
people.  It  tries  his  faith  and  patience.  The  whole  is  a  parable,  setting  forth — 1. 
The  order  of  the  world,  as  resting  on  the  Divine  foreknowledge  and  appointment  in 
connection  with  the  elect  instrumentalilies,  bringing  the  things  of  Egypt  under  the 
dominion  of  the  kingdom  of  God.  2.  The  providential  hiding  of  gracious  purposes. 
Joseph  the  seer  in  the  prison,  waiting  for  the  hour  of  redemption,  sending  forth 
messages  of  truth  to  do  their  errands.  3.  Invisible  links  between  the  rulers  of  this 
world  and  the  representatives  of  the  kingdom  of  God  to  be  revealed  in  due  time.  4. 
Discipline  in  the  lives  of  God's  people  fruitful  in  blessed  results,  both  for  them  and 
for  all— R. 

Ver.  8. — TJie  interpreter  of  God's  message.  We  cannot  but  notice  the  importance 
often  assigned  in  the  Bible  to  dreams,  as  channels  of  revelation  from  God.  The 
dreams  of  Jacob  and  of  Pharaoh,  and  passages  such  as  Deut.  xiii.  1  and  Joel  ii.  28, 
show  this.  It  may  be  that  in  the  absence  of  the  written  word,  which  in  its  com- 
pleteness is  our  heritage,  God's  message  was  thus  given  to  them  in  portions.  Ap- 
plying this  thought  to  the  circumstances  of  the  text,  we  see  men  who  had  received  a 
message  from  God  which  they  believed  was  of  importance  ;  but  they  could  not 
understand  it,  and  they  are  sad  because  there  is  no  interpreter. 

I.  The  deep  importance  or  God's  message.  How  many  questions  does  life  pre- 
sent!  What  and  wheie  are  we?  Whither  going ?  What  lies  beyond  the  present ? 
I  see  that  all  things  decay  ;  yet  on  all  sides  life  from  death.  Is  there  such  revival 
forme?  Can  the  active,  thinking  spirit  be  as  though  it  had  never  been — passed 
from  existence  ere  the  frail  body  began  to  decay  ?  And  if  there  be  a  life  beyond 
the  present,  what  is  its  nature  ?  and  what  the  preparation  for  it  ?  Vainly  does 
human  wisdom  try  to  answer  these  questions.  He  who  made  all  things  alone  can 
explain  his  works  (Ps.  xciv.  9 — 12),  and  the  Bible  is  his  answer  to  our  questions, 
wherein  he  tells  us  what  we  are,  for  what  created,  and  how  to  fulfil  the  object  of 
our  being  (Ps.  cxix.  105). 

II.  Btjt  we  need  an  interpreter.  It  may  be  asked,  Why  ?  The  Bible  is  open. 
Its  words  are  such  as  any  one  can  understand.  This  is  true,  as  far  as  regards  facts, 
and  precepts,  and  doctrines.  There  is  a  knowledge  of  the  word  which  the  natural 
man  can  attain  to  ;  but  the  Holy  Spirit  alone  can  so  open  it  as  to  make  it "  the  power 
of  God."  It  is  one  thing  to  know  the  doctrines  of  sin  and  of  salvation,  and  quite 
another  to  know  ourselves  as  sinners,  and  Christ  as  the  Saviour.  The  one  puffs  up 
with  pride  of  knowledge,  the  other  leads  to  the  one  Foundation.  There  is  no  more 
dangerous  snare  than  of  ignoring  this  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Too  often  men  do 
not  believe  their  need  of  it,  and  do  not  believe  in  his  help.  And  thus  the  Bible  is 
found  dull,  and  its  teachings  departed  from  in  daily  life. 


Cfl.  xl.  1—23.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  459 

III.  How  to  get  the  interpreters  help.  "Tell  me."  Think  of  our  Lord 
watching  his  disciples  iu  the  boat.  So  he  watches  over  thee,  ready  to  help.  Hust 
thou  found  it  so  ?  Has  the  light  of  God's  love  entered  thy  heart?  It  is  the  special 
work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  guide  into  all  truth  (John  xvi.  13) ;  not  in  solving  mys- 
teries and  hard  questions,  but  in  revealing  Christ  to  the  heart.  Have  you  sought 
this  ;  sought  with  expectation  the  full  gift ;  sought  to  know  Christ  (Phil.  iii.  10), 
and  the  transforming  power  of  belief  in  his  love  r  Will  you  seek  ?  There  lies  the 
difficulty — the  waut  of  earnestness.  Men  seem  afraid  of  being  earnest.  But  it  is 
the  earnest  (Matt.  xi.  12,  Piatrral)  who  enter  the  kingdom  of  heaven.— M. 

Ch.  xl.  23;  xli.  9.— Pharaoh's  forgetful  butler.  "Yet  did  not  the  chief  butler 
remember  Joseph,  but  forgat  him."  "  I  do  remember  my  faults  this  day."  Good 
men  have  sometimes  had  to  bear  painful  imprisonments.  Think  of  Bunyau  and 
Baxter  shivering  behind  the  bars  of  a  narrow  cell,  where  light  and  air  were  almost 
excluded,  and  where  disease  and  death  held  sway.  How  much  brightness,  however, 
has  broken  at  times  from  behind  prison  bars  !  We  might  not  have  had  the  '  Pil- 
grim's Progress,'  unless  Bunyan  had  been  incarcerated  on  the  banks  of  the  Ouse. 
Nor  might  the  patience  and  kindness  of  Joseph's  disposition  have  shone  out  so  brill- 
iantly but  for  his  prison  life.  In  a  work  entitled  'Five  years'  Penal  Servitude'  a 
most  vivid  description  is  given  of  how  the  criminals  of  the  clever  and  cultured  class 
have  to  mingle  and  work  with  those  of  ignorant  and  most  sensual  type.  Defaulting 
cashiers  have  to  undergo  the  same  treatment  as  cowardly  garotters  and  desperate 
burglars.  Breaking  the  law  brings  any  under  its  rigorous  clutches,  and  levels  all 
distinctions  of  class  or  education.  Thus  Joseph,  a  Hebrew  slave,  although  not  a 
criminal,  would  be  despised  by  the  chief  butler  of  Pharaoh,  but  the  butler  had  to 
associate  with  him.  Indeed  the  former  became  his  superior  in  prison,  and  was  in  a 
position  to  render  to  a  State  official  certain  kindness. 

I.  The  forgetful  inqrate.  This  man  was  a  courtier,  a  permitted  adviser  of 
the  Pharaoh  of  Egypt,  but  he  is  sent  to  the  common  prison.  Joseph  gives  him  much 
cheer,  attention,  and  kindness.  He  seeks  in  every  way  to  relieve  the  monotony  of 
prison  life,  and  becomes  a  prophet  and  religious  helper.  He  sees  the  butler  one  day 
sad  of  countenance,  and  learns  the  reason.  Readily  he,  by  Divine  help,  interpreted 
the  perplexing  dream.  His  words  are  verified.  The  chief  buller  was  doubtless 
profuse  in  his  thanks  and  promises,  but  we  see  how  he  kept  them.  Perhaps  the 
forgetfulness  was  convenient.  He  did  not  wish,  after  his  restoration,  to  remind  his 
monarch — even  by  making  a  request — of  his  having  been  formerly  in  disfavour. 
He  possibly  never  intended  to  make  any  effort,  unless  .t  should  be  a  gain  lo  himself. 
He  is  a  very  different  man  in  prison  and  out.  Tnis  is  the  way  of  men  in  life. 
Favours  slip  from  the  memory  like  floods  from  a  smoothly-worn  rock.  We  might 
here  possibly  find  out  certain  things  in  our  own  conduct  which  would  indicate  a 
similar  forgetfulness  of  favours.  For  example,  Christ  came  as  the  good  Joseph  to 
share  our  captive  state.  Think  of  whiit  love  he  showed  in  bearing  so  much  suffer- 
ing for  us.  Do  not  put  aside  the  thought  of  it  as  not  being  definitely  for  you.  It 
was  for  each  one,  as  if  there  were  none  other  for  whom  to  suffer.  Some  have  not 
believed,  have  not  come  out  from  prison,  but  have  preferred  the  darkness  to  light, 
have  thought  that  the  atonement  was  all  unnecessary.  They  cannot  understand 
how  evil  is  their  state  until  brought  out  of  it.  A  beggar  would  not  be  troubled 
about  his  patches  and  rags  in  the  common  lodging-house  ;  but  let  him  be  taken  into 
a  room  of  decently-arrayed  people,  and  he  then  feels  the  difference,  and  shudders  at 
his  degraded  appearance.  When  once  brought  into  Christ's  light  we  see  from  what 
we  have  been  saved,  and  should  be  grateful  to  him.  Some  have  beeu  brought  into 
union  with  him,  and  afterwards  have  declined  from  his  way.  Dangerous  stale. 
We  should  blame  others  who  were  ungrateful  ;  what  if  we  have  been  !  The  longer 
action  is  postponed,  the  deeper  the  ingratitude,  and  the  less  likelihood  is  there  that 
the  favour  will  be  felt.  The  longer  postponed,  the  harder  to  acknowledge.  Thus 
the  butler  may  have  hesitated  to  speak  of  Joseph  because  he  would  have  to  reveal 
his  own  ingratitude  Possibly  he  hoped  Joseph  was  dead.  Not  so ;  Joseph  lives.- 
Forgotten  by  man,  he  is  not  forgotten  by  God.  God  will  yet  bring  the  forgetful  one 
and  his  benefactor  face  to  face. 

II.  Aroused  memories  Wonderful  is  that  faculty  of  the  mind  whereby  we  can 
imagine  ourselves  to  exist  in  the  past.  Some  have  weak  memories,  othei  s  strong. 
Some  have  memories  for  places  and  thoughts,  others  for  dates,  figures,  and  words. 
Whether  memory  be  strong  or  weak,  the  power  of  associalion  is  such  that  at  times 
facts  long  past  will  be  brought  back  most  vividly.    Revisiting  places  of  interest, 


460 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


|CH.  XLI.   1—45. 


Lraversiug  certain  countries,  will  bring  to  memory  past  friendships,  and  perhaps  even 
subjects  of  conversation  formerly  held  there.  A  house  in  which  one  has  been  born 
or  trained  becomes  a  complete  history  in  time.  Certain  seasons  arouse  memories  of 
the  past,  as  birthdays,  wedding  days,  Christmas  time,  or  Easter.  Certain  circum- 
stances also  arouse  memory.  Pharaoh's  perplexity  concerning  his  dream  forcibly 
reminded  the  butler  of  his  morniug  of-sadness  in  the  prison.  "  I  do  remember,  "&c. 
The  butler  implied  that  he  repented  of  his  sins  and  of  his  forgetfulness.  He  may 
not  have  been  very  sincere,  but  as  a  courtier  he  introduces  a  subject  in  that  way. 
Let  us  remember  our  faults,  our  inconsistencies  as  Christians,  our  hesitation  to  con- 
fess Christ,  our  excusing  ourselves  on  the  ground  of  the  doings  of  others.  Let  us  be 
plain  with  ourselves.  Let  us  not  see  the  motes  in  the  eyes  of  others,  and  forget  the 
beams  in  our  own.  Let  us  remember  them  that  we  may  be  humbled,  may  gain 
experience  of  how  to  avoid  them  iu  the  future,  may  gain  strength  to  resist,  may  gain 
pardon  for  past  faults,,  and  learn  thereby  more  of  "the  infinite  forbearance  and  love 
of  God,  who  is  so  willing  to  blot  out  our  transgressions,  and  even  the  memory  of 
our  sins. — H. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XLI. 
Ver.  1. — And  it  came  to  pass  at  the  end 
of  two  full  years  (literally,  two  years  of 
clays,  i.  e.  two  complete  years  from  the 
commencement  of  Joseph's  incarceration, 
or  more  probal  ly  after  the  butler's  libera- 
tion), that  Pharaoh — on  the  import  of  the 
term  vide  ch.  xii.  15.  Under  what  par- 
ticular monarch  Joseph  came  to  Egypt  is 
a  question  of  much  perplexity,  and  has 
been  variously  resolved  by  modem  Egypt- 
ologers in  favour  of — 1.  Osirtasen  I.,  the 
founder  of  the  twelfth  dynasty,  a  pros- 
perous and  successful  sovereign,  whose 
name  appears  on  a  granite  obelisk  at  Heli- 
opolis  (Wilkinson, '  Ancient  Egyptians,' i. 
30,  ed.  1878).  2.  Assa,  or  Assis,  the  fifth 
king  of  the  fifteenth  dynasty  of  Shepherd 
kings  (Stuart  Poole  in  Smith's  '  Bible 
Diet., 'art. Egypt).  3.  Apophis, a  Shepherd 
king  of  the  fifteenth  dynasty,  whom  ail  the 
Greek  authorities  agree  in  mentioning  as 
the  patron  of  Joseph  (Osburn, '  Monumen- 
tal History, 'vol.  ii.  ch.2;  Thornley  Smith, 
'  Joseph  and  his  Times, '  p.  42).  4.  Thoth- 
mes  III.,  a  monarch  of  the  eighteenth  dy- 
nasty (Stanley  Leathes  in  Kitto's  '  C  clo- 
pedia.'p.  744).  5.  Eameses  III.,  the  king 
of  Memphis,  a  ruler  belonging  to  the  twen- 
tieth dynasty  (Bonomi  in  '  The  Imperial 
Bible  Diet.,'  p.  488  ;  Sharpe's  '  History  of 
Egypt,'  vol.  i.  p.  35).  It  may  assist  the  stu- 
dent to  arrive  at  a  decision  with  respect  to 
these  contending  aspirants  for  the  throne 
of  Pharaoh  in  the  time  of  Joseph  to  know 
that  Canon  Cook  ('Speaker'sCommentary,' 
vol.  i.  p.  451),  after  an  elaborate  and  care- 
ful as  well  as  scholarly  review  of  the  en- 
tire question,  regards  it  as  at  least  "a  very 
probable  conjecture"  that  the  Pharaoh  of 
Joseph  was  Amenemha  III.,  "  who  is  rep- 
resented on  the  lately-discovered  table  of 


Abydos  as  the  last  great  king  of  all  Egypt 
in  the  ancient  empire  (th  e  last  of  the  twel  fth 
dynasty),  and  as  such  receiving  divine 
honours  from  his  descendant  Eameses  " — 
dreamed.  "For the  third  time  are  dreamB 
employed  as  the  agencies  of  Joseph's  his- 
tory :  they  first  foreshadow  his  illustrious 
future;  they  then  manifest  that  the  Spirit 
of  God  had  not  abandoned  him  evtn  in  the 
abject  condition  of  a  slave  and  a  prisoner ; 
and  lastly  they  are  made  the  immediate  fore- 
runners of  his  greatness  "  (Kalisch).  And, 
behold,  he  stood  by  the  river — i.e.  upon  the 
banks  of  the  Nile,  the  term  ^JO  (an  Egyp- 
tian word  signifying  great  river  or  canal, 
in  the  Memphitic  dialect  yaro,  in  the  Sa- 
hidic  yero)  being  used  almost  exclusively 
in  Scripture  for  the  Nile  (Exod.  i.  22  ;  ii. 
3;  vii.  15;  Gesenius, '  Lex.,'  p.  326).  This 
was  the  common  name  for  the  Nile  among 
the  Egyptians,  the  sacred  being  Hapi 
(Canon  Cook  in  '  Speaker's  Commentary,' 
p.  485). 

Ver.  2. — And,  heboid,  ther6  came  up  out 
of  the  river  seven  well-favoured  kine  and 
fat-fleshed.  According  to  Plutarch  and 
Clement  of  Alexandria,  the  heifer  was  re- 
garded by  the  ancient  Egyptians  as  a  sym- 
bol of  the  earth,  agriculture,  and  the 
nourishment  derived  therefrom.  It  was 
therefore  natural  that  the  succession  of 
seven  prosperous  years  should  be  repre- 
sented by  seven  thriving  cows.  That 
they  appeared  ascending  from  the  river  is 
explained  by  the  circumstance  that  the 
Nile  by  its  annual  inundations  is  the  cause 
of  Egypt's  fertility  (cf.  Havernick,  In- 
trod.,'  §  21).  A  hymn  to  the  Nile,  com- 
posed by  Euna  (according  to  the  gener- 
ality of  Egyptologers  a  contemporary  of 
Moses),  and  translated  from  a  papyrus  in 
the  British  Museum  by  Canon  Cook  (who 


CH.  XLI.  1 — 45.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


461 


ascribes  it  to  an  earlier  date  than  the  nine- 
teenth dynasty),  describes  the  Nile  as 
"overflowing  the  gardens  created  by 
Ra,  .  .  .  giving  life  to  all  animals,  .  .  . 
watering  the  land  without  ceasing  .  .  . 
Lover  of  food  bestower  of  corn  .  .  . 
Bringer  of  food!  Great  Lord  of  provi- 
sions! Creator  of  all  good  things ! "  (vide 
'Records  of  the  Past,'  vol.  iv.  }p.  107, 
108).     And  they  fod  in  a  meadow— inNSl, 

ev  r<y  "A\«  (LXX.),  literally,  in  the  NUe 
or  reed  grass.     The  word  IflN  appears  to 

be  an  Egyptian  term  descriptive  of  any 
herbage  growing  in  a  stream.  It  occurs 
only  here  and  in  ver.  18,  and  Job.  viii.  11. 

Ver.  3. — And,  behold,  seven  other  kine 
came  up  after  them  out  of  the  river,  ill- 
flavoured  and  lean-fleshed.  The  second 
seven  cows,  "evil  to  look  upon,"  i.  e.  bad 
in  appearance,  and  "thin  (beaten  small, 
dakoth,  from  dakak,  to  crush  or  beat 
small)  of  flesh,"  also  proceeded  from  the 
river,  since  a  failure  in  the  periodical 
overflow  of  the  Nile  was  the  usual  cause 
of  scarcity  and  famine  in  Egypt.  And 
stood  by  the  other  kine  upon  the  brink  of  the 
river.  The  use  of  the  term  lip,  tlB'iJ,  for 
brink,  common  enough  in  Hebrew  (ch. 
xxii.  17 ;  Exod.  xiv.  30 ;  1  Kings  v.  9), 
occurs  also  in  a  papyrus  of  the  nineteenth 
dynasty,  "I  sat  down  by  the  lip  of  the 
river,"  which  appears  to  suggest  the  im- 
pression that  the  verse  in  the  text  was  writ- 
ten by  one  who  was  equally  familiar  with 
both  languages  (Canon  Cook  in  "  Spe  k- 
.  er's  Commentary,'  p.  485). 

Ver.  4. — And  the  ill-favoured  and  lean- 
fleshel  kino  did  eat  up  the  seven  well- 
flavored  and  fat  kine — without  there  being 
any  effect  to  show  that  they  had  eaten 
them  (ver.  21).  So  (literally,  and)  Pha- 
raoh awoke. 

Ver.  5. — And  he  slept  and  dreamed  the 
second  time  (that  same  night)  :  and,  be- 
hold, seven  ears  of  corn  came  up  upon  one 
stalk,  rank  (i.  e.  fat)  an!  good.  This  clearly 
pointed  to  the  corn  of  the  Nile  valley,  the 
triticum  eompositum,  which  bears  seven 
ears  upon  one  stalk.  The  assertion  of 
Herodotus,  that  the  Egyptians  counted  it 
a  disgrace  to  live  on  wheat  and  barley 
(ii.  36),  Wilkinson  regards  as  incorrect, 
since  "  both  wheat  and  barley  are  noticed 
in  Lower  Egypt  long  before  Herodotus' 
time  (Exod.  ix.  31,  32),  and  the  paintings 
of  -the  Thebaid  prove  that  they  were 
grown  extensively  in  that  part  of  the 
country ;  they  were  among  the  offerings 
in  the  temples  ;  and  the  king,  at  his  coro- 
nation, cutting  some  ears  of  wheat,  after- 
wards offered  to  the  gods  as  the  staple 


production  of  Egypt,  shows  how  a  great 
value  was  set  on  a  grain  which  Herodo- 
tus would  lead  us  to  suppose  was  held  in 
abhorrence  "  (Rawlinson's'  Herodotus/ 
vol.  ii.  p.  49). 

Ver.  6. — And,  behold,  seven  thin  ears 
and  blasted  with  the  east  wind  sprung  up 
after  them — literally,  burnt  up  of  the  east 
D"Hp  being  put  poetically  for  the  fuller 

ti1"}]}  nil.     It  has  been  urged  that  this 

displays  a  gross  ignorance  of  the  nature 
of  the  climate  in  Egypt  (Bohlen),  since  a 
wind  directly  east  is  rare  in  Egypt,  and 
when  it  does  occur  is  not  injurious  to 
vegetation  ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is 
open  to  reply  (1)  that  direct  east  winds 
may  be  rare  in  Egypt,  but  so  are  dearth 
and  famine  such  as  that  described  in  the 
narrative  equally  exceptional  (Kalisch) ; 
(2)  that  the  Hebrews  having  only  names 
to  describe  the  four  principal  winds,  the 
kadim  might  comprise  any  wind  blowing 
from  an  easterly  direction  (Hengstenberg); 
and  (3)  that  the  south-east  wind,  "  blow- 
irrg  in  the  months  of  March  and  April,  is 
one  of  the  most  injurious  winds  and  of 
longest  continuance ' '  (Havernick).  Heng- 
stenberg quotes  Ukert  as  saying,  "As 
long  as  the  south-east  wind  continues, 
doors  and  windows  are  closed  ;  but  the 
fine  dust  penetrates  everywhere ;  every- 
thing dries  up  ;  wooden  vessels  warp  and 
crack.  The  thermometer  rises  suddenly 
from  16°  20',  up  to  30°,  36°,  and  even  38°, 
Reaumur.  This  wind  works  destruction 
upon  everything.  The  grass  withers  so 
that  it  entirely  perishes  if  this  wind  blows 
long"  (' Egypt  and  the  Books  of  Moses,' 
p.  10). 

Ver.  7. — And  the  seven  thin  ears  de 
vourcd  the  seven  rank  (i.  e.  fat)  and  full 
ears.  And  Pharaoh  awoke,  and,  behold,  it 
was  a  dream — manifestly  of  the  same  im- 
port as  that  which  had  preceded.  The 
dream  was  doubled  because  of  its  cer- 
tainty and  nearness  (ver.  32). 

Ver.  8. — And  it  came  to  pass  in  the 
morning  that  his  spirit  was  troubled;  — 
o  ,  rather,  his  mind  was  agitated,  CTapdxOt) 
ij  xvXl'  <wtoO  (LXX),  pavore  perterritus 
i  Vulgate),  the  ruach  being  the  seat  of  the 
s  nses,  affections,  and  emotions  of  various 
kinds  (cf.  Dan.  ii.  1  ;  iv.  5,  19 — and  he 
sent  and  called  for  all  the  magicians  of 
Egypt,— the  Diaa'nn.fromain  (unused), 
to    engrave,  whence  U'lfl,  a,  stylus  (Ge- 

senius),  or  from  ""Hit,  to  see  or  explain, 
and  QlU,  to  conceal,  i.  e.  he  who  explains 
hidden  or  mysterious  things  (Kalisch), 
were  sacred  scribes,  Upo-ypa(i|iaT6ts,  be- 
longing to  the  priestly  caste,  who  were 


m 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xli.  1 — 45. 


skilled  in  making  and  deciphering  hiero- 
glyphics. Besides  figuring  in  the  Court 
jf  Pharaoh  (Exod.  vii.  11,  22 ;  viii.  3  ; 
siv.  1 5)  in  the  time  of  Moses,  they  recur . 
jgain  at  a  later  period  in  that  of  the  Baby- 
lonian monarch  Nebuchadnezzar  (Dan.  i. 
20  ;  ii.  2) — and  all  the  wise  men  thereof. 
The  d^MSn,  from  Q3n,  the  primary  idea 

jf  which  is  that  of  judging  :  Qesenius), 
were  persons  capableof  judging,  henceper- 
sons  endowed  with  pre-eminent  abilities 
for  the  prosecution  of  the  ordinary  busi- 
ness of  life,  the  cultivation  of  the  arts  and 
sciences,  the  practice  of  divination,  the  in 
Serpreting  of  dreams,  and  other  kindred 
Dccupations.  They  were  the  sages  of  the 
nation.  And  Pharaoh  told  them  his  dream  ; 
but  there  was  none  that  could  interpret 
them  unto  Pharaoh.  The  magicians  of 
Egypt  were  not  so  conceited  as  their 
brethren  in  Babylon  afterwards  showed 
themselves  to  be,  Dan.  ii.  4  (Lawson). 
That  they  could  not  explain  the  dream, 
though  couched  in  the  symbolical  lan- 
guage of  the  time,  was  no  doubt  surpris- 
ing; but  "  the  things  of  God  knoweth  no 
man,  but  the  Spirit  of  God  "  (1  Cor.  ii. 
11),  and  they  to  whom  the  Spirit  doth 
reveal  them  (1  Cor.  ii.  10). 

Vers.  9 — 13. — Then  spake  the  chief  but- 
ler unto  Pharaoh,  saying,  I  do  remember 
my  faults  this  day: — literally,  my  faults  I 
(sc.  am)  remembering  to-day;  but  whether 
he  understood  by  his  faults  his  ingrati- 
tude to  Joseph  or  his  offence  against 
Pharaoh  commentators  are  not  agreed, 
though  the  latter  seems  the  more  prob- 
able—Pharaoh was  wroth  with  his  ser- 
vants,— literally,  broke  out  against  tliem 
(vide  ch.  xl.  2) — and  put  me  in  ward  in  the 
captain  of  the  guard's  house, — literally, 
put  me  in  custody  of  the  house  of  the  cap 
tain  of  the  slaughterers  (cf .  ch.  xl.  3)— both 
me  and  the  chief  baker :  and  we  dreamed  a 
dream  in  one  night,  I  and  he  ;  we  dreamed 
each  man  according  to  the  interpretation 
of  his  dream  (vide  ch.  xl.  5).  And  there 
was  there  with  us  a  young  man,  an 
Hebrew,  servant  to  the  captain  of  the 
guard  (vide  ch.  xxxvii.  36) ;  and  we  told 
him  (sc.  our  dreams),  and  he  interpreted  to 
us  our  dreams  (vide  ch.  xl.  12,  13,  18,  19) ; 
to  each  man  according  to  his  dream  he  did 
interpret.  And  it  came  to  pass,  as  he  inter- 
preted to  us,  so  it  was  ;  me  he  (not  Pharaoh, 
but  Joseph)  restored  unto  mine  office,  and 
him  he  hanged  (vide  ch.  xl.  21,  22). 

Ver.  14. — Then  Pharaoh  sent  and  called 
Joseph,  and  they  brought  him  hastily  (liter- 
ally, caused  him  to  run) .out  of  the  dungeon 
(vide  ch.  xl.  15) :  and  he  shaved  himself, 
this  was  exactly  in  acsordance  with  Egyp- 


tian custom  (Herod,  ii.  36).  Wilkinson 
states  that  "the  custom  of  shaving  the 
head  as  well  as  beard  was  not  confined  to 
the  priests  in  Egypt,  but  was  general 
among  all  classes  "  (Bawlinson's  '  Hero- 
dotus,' vol.  ii.  p.  49;  cf.  'Ancient  Egyp- 
tians, vol.  ii.  pp.  330—332,  ed.  1878). 
That  the  verb  is  not  more  exactly  defined 
by  a  term  following,  such  as  the  head 
(Numb.  vi.  9),  the  beard  (2  Sam.  x.  4), 
but  stands  alone  (the  only  instance  of  its 
intransitive  use),  appears  to  suggest  that 
the  writer  was  familiar  with  the  practice 
of  shaving  (vide  Havernick,  'lntrod.,' 
§  21)— and  changed  his  raiment, — as  re- 
quired  by  the  customs  of  Egypt  (vide 
Hengstenberg's  'Egypt,'  p.  30;  cf.  ch. 
xxxv.  2) — and  came  (or  went)  in  unto 
Pharaoh. 

Ver.  15. — And  Pharaoh  said  unto  Joseph, 
I  have  dreamed  a  dream,  and  there  is  none 
that  can  interpret  it  (literally,  and  inter- 
preting it  there  is  no  one) :  and  I  have  heard 
say  of  thee,  that  thou  canst  understand  a 
dream  to  interpret  it— literally,  I  have 
heard  of  thee,  saying,  thou  hearest  a  dream 
to  interpret  it. 

Ver.  16. — And  Joseph  answered  Pharaoh, 
saying,  It  is  not  in  me  (literally,  not  J): 
God — Elohim  (cf.  ch.  xl.  8) — shall  give 
Pharaoh  an  answer  of  peace  —  literally, 
slwll  answer  the  peace  of  Pharaoh,  i.  e. 
what  shall  be  for  the  welfare  of  Pharaoh. 
The  rendering  "Avev  toO  Qtov  ovk  diroKpi- 
O'/jo-eTai  to"  cruT^jpiov  "fapaio  (LXX.), 
though  giving  the  sense,  fails  in  accuracy 
of  translation. 

Vers.  17 — 24. — Pharaoh  then  relates  his 
dreams  in  substantially  the  same  terms  as 
those  in"  which  they  have  already  been 
recited,  only  adding  concerning  the  lean 
kine  that  they  were  (ver.  19)  such  as  I 
never  saw  (literally,  /  never  saw  such  as 
these)  in  all  the  land  of  Egypt  for  badness : 
and  that  (ver.  21)  when  they  had  eaten 
them  (i.  e.  the  good  kine)  up,  it  could  not 
be  known  they  had  eaten  them ;  literally, 
and  they  (i.  e.  the  good  kine)  went  into  the 
interior  parts,  i.  e.  the  stomach  (of  the  bad 
kine),  and  it  was  not  known  that  they  had 
gone  into  the  interior  parts — but  they  (the 
bad  kine)  were  still  ill  favoured,  as  at 
the  beginning  —  literally,  and  their  ap- 
pearance was  bad  as  in  the  beginning, 
i.  e.  previously  ;  and  concerning  the  thin 
and  blasted  ears,  that  they  were  also  (ver. 
23)  withered— n'TOSa,  from  D5S,  to  be 

hard,  meaning  either  barren  (Gesenius), 
dry  (Furst),  or  sapless  (Kalisch) — a  word 
which  the  LXX.  and  the  Vulgate  both  omit, 
Onkelos  explains  by  ]X5,  flowering,  but  not 


OH.  XLI.  1—45.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


46S 


fhiiting ;  and  Dathius  renders  by  jejuna. 
r  After  which  he  (i.  e.  Pharaoh)  informs  Joseph 
'hat  the  professional  interpreters  attached  to 
the  Court  (the  chartummim,  or  masters  of 
the  occult  sciences)  could  give  him  no  idea 
of  its  meaning. 

Ver.  25. — And  Joseph  said  unto  Pharaoh 
(the  inability  of  the  magicians  to  read  the 
dream  of  Pharaoh  was  the  best  proof  that 
Joseph  spoke  from  inspiration),  The  dream 
of  Pharaoh  is  one  (i.  e.  the  two  dreams  have 
the  same  significance)  :  God  hath  shewed 
Pharaoh  what  he  is  about  to  do  (literally, 
what  the  Elohim  is  doing,  i.  e.  is  about  to 
io,  he  causeth  to  be  seen  by  Pharaoh). 

Vers.  26 — 32.— Proceeding  with  the  in- 
lerpretation  of  the  dream,  Joseph  explains 
to  Pharaoh  that  the  seven  good  kine  and  the 
seven  full  ears  point  to  a  succession  of  seven 
years  of  great  plenty  throughout  all  the 
land  of  Egypt  which  were  already  coming 
(ver.  29),  after  which  there  should  arise 
seven  years  of  famine,  in  which  all  the 
plenty  should  be  forgotten  in  the  land,  and 
the  famine  should  consume,  or  make  an  end 
of,  the  land  (ver.  30),  and  the  plenty  should 
not  be  known  in  the  land  by  reason  of 
(literally,  from  the  face  of,  used  of  the 
efficient  cause  of  anything,  hence  on  account 
of)  that  famine  following  —  literally,  the 
famine,  that  one,  after  (things  have  happened) 
no  ;  adding  (ver.  32),  And  for  that  the  dream 
■was  doubled  unto  Pharaoh  twice  (literally, 
ond  as  for  the  doubling  of  the  dream  to 
l'haraoh  twice) ;  it  is  because  the  thing  is 
established  by  God,— literally,  the  word  (or 
tiling  spoken  of)  is  firmly  fixed,  i.  e.  cer- 
tainly decreed,  by  the  Elohim — and  God 
will  shortly  bring  it  to  pass— literally,  and 
hastening  (is)  the  Elohim  to  do  it. 

Vers.  3a— 36.-Nowtherefore(addsJoseph, 
passing  on  to  suggest  measures  suitable  to 
meet  the  extraordinary  emergency  predicted) 
let  Pharaoh  look  out  a  man  discreet  (fl21, 
uipk.  part,  of  |'3,  intelligent,  discerning), 
and  wise,  and  set  him  over  the  land  of 
Egy'pt     Let  Pharaoh  do  this,  and  let  him 
appoint  officers  (literally,  let  him  set  over- 
seers, DHJJ|,  from  IpS,  to  look  after,  in  hiph. 
to  cause  to  look  after)  over  the  land,  and  take 
up  *he  fifth  part  of  the  land  of  Egypt— liter- 
ally, let  him  fifth  the  land,  i.  e.  levy  a  tax 
upon  its  produce  to  that  extent  (LXX.,  Vul- 
gate), which  was  double  the  annual  impost 
exacted  from  Egyptian  farmers,  but  which 
che  unprecedented  fertility  of  the  soil  enabled 
ihein  to  bear  without  complaint,  if,  indeed, 
adequate  compensation  was  not  given  for  the 
second  tenth   (Rosenmiiller)— in  the  seven 
Slenteous  years.  Diodorus  mentions  the  pay- 
men  t  of  a   fifth   in   productive  years  as  a 
primitive  custom  (vide  Havernick,  p  219) 
4»d  let  them  (the  officers)  gather  all  the 


food  of  those  good  years  that  come,  and  lay 
up  corn  under  the  hand  of  Pharaoh,  and  let 
them  keep  food  in  the  cities  (or,  food  in  the 
cities,  and  let  them  keep  it).  And  that  food 
shall  be  for  store  (literally,  something  de- 
posited) to  the  land  against  the  seven  years 
of  famine,  which  shall  be  in  the  land  ot 
Egypt;  1'a.aX  the  land  perish  not  through 
the  famine— literally,  and  the  land  (i.  e.  the 
people  of  the  land)  shall  not  be  cut  off  in,  of 
by,  the  famine. 

Vers.  37,  38.— And  the  thing  was  good 
in  the  eyes  of  Pharaoh,  and  in  the  eyes  of  all 
his  servants.  The  advice  tendered  recom- 
mended itself  to  the  king  and  his  ministers. 
And  Pharaoh  said  unto  his  servants,  Can 
we  find  such  a  one  as  this  is,  a  man  in  whom 
the  Spirit  of  God  is  ?  The  Ruach  Elohim,  as 
understood  by  Pharaoh,  meant  the  sagacity 
and  intelligence  of  a  deity  (cf.  Numb,  xxvii. 
18;  Job  xxxii.  8;  Prov.  ii  6;  Dan.  iv.  8 
18;  v.  11,  14;  vi.  3). 

Vers.  39,  40. -And  Pharaoh  said  unto 
Joseph,  Forasmuch  as  (literally,  after)  Got 
(Elohim)  hath  shewed  thee  (literally,  hath 
caused  thee  to  know)  all  this,  there  is  none 
so  discreet  and  wise  as  thou  art:  thou  shalt 
be  over  my  house,  and  according  unto  thy 
word  shall  all  my  people  be  ruled —literally, 
according  to  thy  mouth  shall  all  my  people 
dispose  themselves,  i.  <j.  they  shall  render 
obedience  to  thy  commands  (LXX.,  Vulgate, 
Onkelos,  Saadias,  Pererius,  Dathius,  Rosen- 
miiller, Keil,  Kalisch,  Lange,  Murphy,  and 
others) ;  though  by  many  competent  authori- 
ties (Calvin,  Schultens,  Knobel,  Ainsworth, 
Gesenius,  Fiirst,  Wordsworth,  et  alii)  the 
rendering  is  preferred,  "upon  thy  mouth  shall 
all  my  people  kiss,"  against  which,  however, 
is  the  fact  that  not  even  then  were  governors 
accustomed  to  be  kissed  on  the  lips  by  their 
subjects  in  token  of  allegiance.  The  sug- 
gestion that  the  verb  should  be  taken  in  the 
sense  of  "arm  themselves,"  as  in  2  Chron. 
xvii.  17  (Aben  Ezra),  does  not  meet  with 
general  acceptance  Only  in  the  throne  (or, 
more  accurately,  only  as  to  the  throne)  will  I 
be  greater  than  thou. 

Vers.  41— 43.— And  Pharaoh  said  unto 
Joseph,  See,  I  have  set  thee  over  all  th» 
land  of  Egypt.  This  was  the  rojal  edict 
constituting  Joseph  grand  vizier  or  prime 
minister  of  the  empire :  the  formal  installa- 
tion in  office  followed.  And  Pharaoh  took 
off  his  ring  from  his  hand,— the  use  of  a 
signet-ring  by  the  monarch,  which  Bohlen 
admits  to  be  in  accordance  with  the  accounts 
of  classic  authors  ('Introd.,'  p.  60),  has  recent- 
ly  received  a  remarkable  illustration  by  the 
discovery  at  Koujunjik,  the  site  of  the  ancient 
Nineveh,  of  a  seal  impressed  from  the  bezel 
of  a  metallic  finger-ring,  two  inches  long  by 
one  wide,  and  bearing  the  image,  name,  and 
titles  of  the  Egyptian    king  Sabaco  (vid* 


m 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xli.  I — 45. 


L/ayard,  'Nineveh and Babylon,'p.l56) — and 
jut  it  upon  Joseph's  hand  (thus  investing 
lim  with  regal  authority),  and  arrayed  him 
in  vestures  of  fine  linen, — W,  (ivaoivi) 
LXX),  byssus,  so  called  from  its  whiteness 
'probably  a  Hebrew  imitation  of  an  Egyptian 
ivord),  was  the  fine  linen  of  Egypt,  the 
naterial  of  which  the  peculiar  dress  of  the 
ariestly  caste  was  constructed:  "vestes  ex 
jossypio  sacerdotibus  Mgypti  gratissimm" 
[Pliny,  'Nat.  Hist.,'  xix.  1).'  Herodotus 
[ii.  81)  agrees  with  Pliny  in  affirming  the 
priestly  costume  to  have  been  of  linen,  and 
not  of  wool — and  put  a— literally,  the,  tie 
irticle  showing  that  it  was  so  done  in  accord- 
mce  with  a  common  custom  (Hengstenberg, 
'  Egypt  and  the  Books  of  Moses,'  p.  30) — 
gold  chain  about  his  neck  !  of.  Dan.  v.  7, 
29).  This  was  usually  worn  by  persons  of 
iistiuction,  and  appears  in  the  monuments 
is  a  royal  ornament ;  in  the  Beni-hassan 
sepulchral  representations,  a  slave  being  ex- 
hibited as  bearing  one  of  them,  with  the 
inscription  written  over  it,  "Necklace  of 
Gold"  (vide Wilkinson,  'Ancient Egyptians,' 
ii.  343,  ed.  1S78;  Hengstenberg,  'Egypt,' 
p.  30).  And  he  made  him  to  ride  in  the 
second  chariot  which  he  had;— "which  is 
another  genuine  Egyptian  custom,  for  on  the 
monuments  the  king  constantly  appears  in 
his  war-chariot  "  (Hiivernick)  ;— and  they 
cried  before  him,  Bow  the  knee :— ^ISS, 
regarded  by  most  ancient  translators  as  a 
Hebrew  word,  an  inf.  abs.  hiph.  from  113( 
meaning  bow  the  knee  (Vulgate,  Aquila, 
Origen,  Kiinchi),  is  most  probably  an  Egypt- 
ian word  either  altered  by  the  writer  (Gese- 
nius)  or  pointed  by  the  Masorites  (Keil)  to 
resemble  Hebrew,  and  signifying  "bowtiie 
head  "  (Gesenius),  "  bend  the  knee  "  (Fiirst), 
"Governor  or  Viceroy"  (Kalisch),  "rejoice 
thou  "  (Canon  Cook  in  '  Speaker's  Comment- 
»ry '),  "Pure  Prince"  (Osburn),  "Robed  by 
che  king  "  (Forster)— and  he  made  him  ruler 
— literally,  and  he  set  him  (by  the  foregoing 
acts)— over  all  the  land  of  Egypt. 

Ver.  44. — And  Pharaoh  said  unto  Joseph, 
I  am  Pharaoh,  and. without  thee  shall  no 
man  lift  up  his  hand  or  foot  in  all  the  land 
of  Egypt.  Joseph's  authority  was  to  be  abso- 
lute and  universal. 

ver.  45. — And  Pharaoh  called  Joseph's 
name  Zaphnath  -  paaneah ;  —  an  Egyptian 
word,  of  which  the  most  accredited  inter- 
pretations are  xovBoptpavfix  (LXX.)  ;  Salva- 
tor  Mundi  (Vulgate);  "the  Salvation  of 
the  World,"  answering  to  the  Coptic  P-sote- 
m-ph-eneh — P  the  article,  sote  salvation, 
m  the  sign  of  the  genitive,  ph  the  article, 
and  eneh  the  world  (Fiirst,  Jablonsky, 
Rosellini,  and  others) ;  ' '  the  Rescuer  of  the 
Woild  "  (Gesenius) ;  "  the  Prince  of  the  Life 
of  the   World"  (Brugsch),   "the  Food  of 


Life,"  or  "  the  Food  of  the  Living  "  (Canon 
Cook  in  'Speaker's  Commentary') — and  h» 
gave  >""i  to  wife — cf.  the  act  of  Rhamp- 
sinitus,  who  gave  his  daughter  in  marriage 
to  the  son  of  an  architect  on  account  of  his 
cleverness  (Herod.,  ii.  121)  —  Asenath  — 
another  Egyptian  term,  rendered  '  AotveB 
(LXX.),  and  explained  by  Egyptologers  to 
mean,  "  She  who  is  of  Neith,  i.  e.  the 
Minerva  of  the  Egyptians"  (Gesenius,  Fiirst), 
"the  Worshipper  of  Neith"  (Jablonsky), 
"the  Favourite  of  Neith"  (Canon  Cook  in 
'  Speaker's  Commentary  '),  though  by  some 
authorities  regarded  as  Hebrew  (Poole  in 
Smith's  '  Dictionary,'  art.  Joseph)  —  the 
daughter  of  Poti-pherah — Poti-pherah  ("de- 
voted to  the  sun"  )=Potiphar(w«fech.  xxxix, 
1).  The  name  is  very  common  on  Egyptian 
monuments  (Hengstenberg's  '  Egypt  and  the 
Books  of  Moses,'  p.  32) — priest— or  prince 
(Onkelos),  as  in  2  Sam.  viii.  18,  where  the 
word  jnis,  as  explained  by  1  Chron.  xviii. 
17,  means  a  principal  minister  of  State, 
though  the  probability  is  that  Poti-pherah 
belonged  to  the  priestly  caste  in  Egypt — 
of  On — or  Heliopolis,  "HXiouwoAic  (LXX. ), 
the  name  on  the  monuments  being  ta-Ra 
or  pa-Ra,  house  of  the  sun.  "  The  site  of 
Heliopolis  is  still  marked  by  the  massive 
walls  that  surround  it,  and  by  a  granite 
obelisk  bearing  the  name  of  Osirtasen  I., 
of  the  twelfth  dynasty,  dating  about  3900 
years  ago"  (Wilkinson  in  Rawlinson's 
'Herod.,  ii.  p.  8).  The  priests  attached  to 
the  te'.nple  of  the  sun  at  Heliopolis  enjoyed 
the  reputation  of  being  the  most  intelligent 
and  cultured  historians  in  Egypt  (Herod.,  ii. 
3).  That  a  priest's  daughter  should  have 
married  with  a  foreign  shepherd  may  have 
been  distasteful  to  the  prejudices  of  an  in- 
tolerant priesthood  (Bohlen),  but  in  the  case 
of  Asenath  and  Joseph  it  was  recommended  by 
sundry  powerful  considerations.  1.  Though 
a  foreign  shepherd,  Joseph  was  a  descendant 
of  Abraham,  whom  a  foimer  Pharaoh  had 
recognised  and  honoured  as  a  prince,  and 
'  The  Story  of  Saneha,'  a  hieratic  papyrus 
belonging  to  the  twelfth  dynasty,  shows  that 
Eastern  foreigners  might  even  becomo  sons 
in-law  to  the  most  powerful  potentates  under 
the  ancient  empire  (vide  '  Records  of  the 
Past,'  vol  vi.  pp.  135—150).  2.  Though  a 
foreign  shepherd,  Joseph  was  at  this  time 
grand  vizier  if  the  realm,  with  absolute  con- 
trol of  the  lives  and  fortune*  of  its  people 
{vide  ver.  44).  8.  Though  a  foreign  shep- 
herd, he  was  obviously  a  favourite  of  Pharaoh, 
who,  besides  being  monarch  of  the  realm,  was 
the  recognised  head  of  the  priestly  caste,  over 
whom,  therefore,  he  exercised  more  than 
a  merely  external  authority.  4.  Though  a 
foreign  shepherd  Joseph  had  become  a 
naturalised  Egyptian,  as  may  be  gathered 
from  ck.  xliii.  32.    And,  5.  Though  a  foreign 


CH.  XLI.  1—45.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


465 


shepherd,  he  was  circumcised,  which,  if 
this  rite  was  already  observed  in  Egypt, 
and  did  not  originate  with  Joseph,  would 
certainly  not  prove  a  bar  to  the  contem- 
plated alliance(wde  Canon  Cook  in  'Speak- 
er's Commentary,'  vol.  i.  p.  480  ;  Kurst, 
'  Hist,  of  Old  Covenant,'  §  88;  Hengsten- 
berg,  'Egypt  and  the  Books  of  Moses,' 
pp.  32 — 35).  As  to  the  probability  of  Jo- 
seph consenting  to  become  son-in-law  to  a 
heathen  priest,  it  may  suffice  t  >  remember 
that  though  marriage  with  idolaters  was 
expressly  forbidden  by  patriarchal  com- 
mandment (ch.  xxiv.  3  ;  xxviii.  1),  aud 
afterwards  by  Mosaic  statute  (ch.  xxxiv. 
16 ;  Deut.  vii.  3),  it  was  sometimes  con- 
tracted for  what  seemed  a  perfectly  ade- 
quate reason,  viz.,  the  furtherance  of  the 
Divine  purposes  concerning  Israel,  and  ap- 
parently too  with  the  Divine  sanction  (cf. 


thecases  of  Moses,  Exod.  ii.  21 ,  and  Esther, 
ch.  ii.  16) ;  that  Joseph  may  have  deemed 
the  religion  of  Egypt,  especially  in  its 
early  symbolical  forms,  as  perfectly  com- 
patiule  with  a  pure  monotheistic  worship, 
or,  if  he  judged  it  idolatrous,  he  may  both, 
have  secured  for  himself  complete  tolera- 
tion andhave  felt  himself  strong  enough  to 
resistits  seductions;  that  Asenathmay  have 
adopted  her  husband's  faith,  though  on 
this,  of  course,  nothing  can  beaffirmed;  and 
lastly,  that  the  narrator  of  this  history  pro- 
nounces no  judgment  on  the  moral  quality 
of  Joseph's  conduct  in  consenting  tothisal- 
liance,  which,  though  overruled  for  good, 
may  have  been,  considered  in  itself,  a  sin. 
And  Joseph  went  out  over  all  the  land  of 
Egypt  in  the  discharge  of  his  vice-regal 
duties.  „ 


HOMILETICS. 


Vers.  1 — 45.—  Joseph  before  Pharaoh,  or  from  the  prison  to  the  throne.  I.  The 
dreams  of  thb  monarch.  1.  flit's  midnight  visions.  Two  full  years  have  expired 
since  the  memorable  birthday  of  Pharaoh  which  sent  the  baker  to  ignominious  exe- 
cution, but  restored  the  butler  to  the  favour  of  his  royal  master.  Slumbering  upon 
his  bed,  the  king  of  Egypt  seems  to  stand  among  the  tall  grass  upon  the  banks  of 
the  Nile.  First  seven  well-formed  and  full-fleshed  heifers  appear  to  climb  up  one 
after  the  other  among  the  reeds  from  the  river's  edge,  where  they  have  probably  been 
drinking,  followed  by  seven  lean  aud  haggard  animals,  walking  up  in  the  same 
mysterious  procession,  till  the}'  stand  side  by  side  with  their  thriving  predecessors, 
when  tliey  suddenly  fall  upon  these  predecessors  and  eat  them  up.  Startled  by  the 
strangeness  of  the  scene,  the  royal  sleeper  wakes  only  to  discover  it  a  dream.  Then 
composing  himself  a  second  time  to  slumber,  he  finds  himself  still  standing  in  the 
Nile  valley,  but  now  looking  out  towards  its  luxuriant  corn-fields.  Again  a  strange 
phenomenon  occurs.  Growing  from  the  soil  he  sees  a  tall,  massive  stalk  of  corn, 
with  seven  fat  ears  depending  from  its  top;  but  scarcely  has  this  arrested  his  atten- 
tion, when  he  notices  another  by  its  side,  spare  and  feeble,  with  its  seven  ears  parched 
and  empty,  as  if  they  had  been  burnt  up  by  the  hot  south-east  winds  blowing  up  from 
the  sandy  wastes  of  Arabia  To  his  astonishment,  as  before,  the  fat  ears  are  devoured 
by  the  thiu.  Awaking,  he  a  second  time  discovers  that  he  has  been  dreaming.  2. 
Ms  morning  agitations.  The  spirit  of  the  king  of  Egypt  was  troubled  first  because 
of  the  dreams,  which  he  obviously  regarded  as  conveying  to  his  royal  mind  some 
supernatural  communication,  which,  however,  he  failed  to  understand;  and  secondly 
because  the  interpretation  of  them  appeared  equally  to  baffle  the  penetration  of  all 
the  wise  men  and  magicians  of  his  empire,  whom  he  had  summoned  to  assist  him  in 
deciphering  their  import. 

II.  The  interjection  of  the  butler.  1.  The  recollection  of his  faults.  Ifthis 
referred  to  his  ingratitude  to  Joseph  (which  is  scarcely  likely),  that  was  a  short- 
coming which  should  have  been  remembered  at  least  two  years  before,  though  it  was 
better  he  should  recall  it  then  than  never.  But  it  is  more  than  probable  the  offence 
spokrn  of  was  the  crime  for  which  he  had  been  previously  imprisoned  by  Pharaoh, 
and  of  which  he  now  confessed  himself  to  be  guilty,  as  without  acknowledging  the 
justness  of  his  royal  master's  anger  he  could  scarcely  hope  to  experience  the  mild- 
ness of  his  royal  master's  favour.  That  he  only  remembers  Joseph  when  he  deems 
it  possible  by  doing  so  to  gratify  his  master  and  serve  himself  indicates  a  dispo- 
sition as  hypocritical  and  time-serving  as  ungrateful  and  unfeeling.  2.  The  recital 
of  his  mercies.    Narrating  the  story  of  his  imprisonment,  he  informs  the  anxious 


166  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  [ch.  xli.  1—45. 

monarch  that  he  and  his  late  companion,  the  chief  baker,  while  suffering  the 
righteous  penalty  of  their  misdeeds  in  the  round  house  or  State  prison,  had  each  a 
dream  on  one  and  the  self -same  night;  that  a  young  man,  then  an  inmate  of  the  cells, 
a.  Hebrew,  and  a  servant  of  the  provost  marshal,  to  whom  they  severally  related  their 
extraordinary  dreams,  volunteered  to  deliver  their  interpretation;  and  that  the  event, 
in  the  case  of  both  himself  and  his  companion,  had  turned  out  exactly  as  had  been 
predicted — the  chief  baker  had  been  hanged,  while  himself,  the  chief  butler,  through 
the  royal  clemency  of  Pharaoh,  had  beeu  restored  to  his  office. 

III.  The  appearance  of  the  prisoner.  1.  The  opening  of  the  interview.  In 
obedience  to  a  royal  summons,  Joseph,  after  shaving  and  exchanging  his  prison  garb' 
for  a  costume  suited  to  the  high  occasion,  is  hastily  presented  to  the  king.  Begarding 
him  with  mingled  feelings  of  respect  and  awe,  the  mighty  potentate  declares  his 
dilemma, — he  has  dreamed  a  dream  which  has  baffled  the  ingenuity  of  all  the  Court 
magicians, — and  explains  how  he  has  heard  of  Joseph's  rare  skill  as  an  interpreter  of 
dreams,  upon  which  Joseph,  disclaiming  all  ability  in  himself,  acid  pointing  Pharaoh 
to  the  true  Interpretergof  dreams,  assures  him,  speaking  in  the  exercise  of  prophetic 
faith,  that  God  would  vouchsafe  to  him  an  answer  that  should  tend  at  once  to  the 
happiness  of  his  own  person  and  the  prosperity  of  his  realm.  2.  The  interpretation 
of  the  dreams.  Listening  to  the  monarch's  recitation  of  the  singular  phenomena  of 
his  nocturnal  visions,  Joseph  (1)  declares  their  import  to  be  the  coming  of  seven 
years  of  plenty  to  the  land,  to  be  followed  by  seven  years  of  famine,  which  should 
consume  the  land  by  reason  of  its  severity  ;  (2)  affirms  the  certainty  of  this  pre- 
diction as  involved  in  the  repetition  of  the  dream;  and  (3)  concludes  by  recom- 
mending as  a  precautionary  measure  that  a  fifth  part  of  the  produce  of  the  seven 
years  of  plenty  should  be  taken  up  and  stored  in  granaries  in  the  chief  cities  of 
the  empire,  to  be  distributed  among  the  people  during  the  seven  years'  of  famine — a 
measure  which  would  necessitate  the  appointment  of  one  competent  officer  with  a 
requisite  staff  of  assistants,  and  with  supreme  authority  to  enforce  the  tax  or  compel 
the  sale,  according  as  the  king  might  determiue  to  uplift  the  grain.  3.  The  reward 
of  the  interpreter.  As  became  one  who  had  proved  of  such  incomparable  service  to 
the  monarch  and  the  State,  Joseph  was  immediately  and  generously  recompensed. 
(1)  His  counsel  was  accepted.  "The  thing,"  or  advice  tendered,  "was  good  in  the 
eyes  of  Pharaoh,  and  in  the  eyes  of  all  his  servants."  It  is  ever  a  grief  to  God's  pro- 
phets and  Christ's  ministers  when  their  Divinely-sent  communications  are  rejected, 
as  the  acceptance  of  their  heavenly  messages  never  fails  to  afford  them  occasion  of 
rejoicing.  (2)  His  person  was  exalted.'  (a)  He  was  constituted  grand  vizier  of  the 
empire,  in  the  historian's  account  of  which  may  be  noticed  the  monarch's  resolu- 
tion and  the  reason  of  it — "Forasmuch  as  God  hath  showed  thee  all  this,  thou  shalt 
be  over  my  house,  and  according  unto  thy  word  shall  all  my  people  be  ruled,"  or 
dispose  themselves;  the  royal  edict  and  the  public  attestation  of  it — "  See,  I  have  set 
thee  over  all  the  land  of  Egypt.  And  Pharaoh  took  off  his  ring,"  &c.;  the  extent 
of  his  authority  and  the  limitation  of  it — his  power  was  to  be  absolute  over  all 
the  realm—" without  thee  shall  no  man  lift  up  hand  or  foot"— only  as  to  the 
throne  was  he  to  be  subordinate  to  Pharaoh.  (6)  He  was  naturalised  as  an  Egyp- 
tian prince  by  the  assignment  of  a  new  name,  Zaphnath-paaneah,  for  the  import 
of  which  the  Exposition  may  be  consulted,  (e)  He  was  married  to  a  daughter  of 
the  priestly  caste,  who  formed  the  highest  dignitaries  in  the  State. 

Learn — 1.  The  marvellous  facility  with  which  God  can  accomplish  his  designs. 
God  can  make  Pharaoh  dream  and  the  butler  recollect  his  faults  when  it  is  time 
to  bring  Joseph  out  of  prison.  2.  The  amazing  incompetence  of  humaii  wisdom  to 
understand  God's  riddles.  The  world  by  wisdom  knows  not  God,  any  more  than 
Pharaoh's  magicians  could  in  terprete  his  dreams.  3.  The  extraordinary  insight  which 
those  have  who  receive  their  teaching  from  God.  Joseph  can  interpret  the  dreams 
of  the  monarch  and  the  dreams  of  his  officers  with  a  like  promptitude  and  accuracy, 
and  God's  people  have  an  unction  from  the  Holy  One  that  enables  them  to  know  all 
things.  4.  The  incomparable  greatness  to  which  Christ's  followers  will  eventually 
be  raised.  Joseph  stepped  from  the  prison  to  the  palace,  from  the  tower  to  the 
throne,  from  the  wearing  of  iron  fetters  to  the  wielding  of  regal  power;  and  such 
honour  will  have  all  the  saints  in  the  day  of  the  manifestation  of  the  sons  of  God. 
Even  now  God  "  raiseth  up  the  poor  out  of  the  dust,  and  lifleth  the  needy  out  of  the 
dungkill,  that  he  may  set  him  with  princes,  even  with  the  princes  of  his  people;" 


,<E.  xli.  1—45.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS  *& 

but  then  "to  him  that  overoometh  will  1  grant,"  saith  the  King,  "to  sit  with  me  on 
my  throne,  even  as  I  overcame,  and  am  set  down  with  my  Father  on  his  throne." 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ch.  xli. — The  tried  man  is  now  made  ready  by  long  experience  for  his  position  of 
responsibility  and  honour.  He  is  thirty  years  old.  He  can  commence  his  public 
ministry  for  the  people  of  God  and  the  world.  Pharaoh's  dreams,  the  kine  and  the 
ears  of  corn,  like  those  of  the  butler  and  baker,  have  their  natural  element  in  them  • 
but  apart  from  the  Spirit  of  God  Joseph  would  not  have  dared  to  give  them  such  an 
interpretation.  Even  had  his  intelligence  penetrated  the  secret,  he  would  not  have 
ventured  on  a  prophecy  without  God.  Pharaoh  himself  acknowledged  that  the  Spirit 
of  God  was  manifestly  in  Joseph.  We  may  bo  sure  there  was  evidence  of  Divine 
authority  in  his  words  and  manner.  As  a  testimony  to  the  existence  of  a  spirit  of 
reverence  for  Divine  teaching,  and  a  reference  of  all  great  and  good  things  to  God  as 
their  source,  even  in  the  mjnds  of  the  Egyptians,  such  facts  show  that  God  had  not  left 
the  world  without  light.  The  farther  we  go  back  in  human  history,  the  more  simple 
and  unsophisticated  we  find  the  minds  of  men,  pointing  to  a  primitive  revelation,  to  the 
religious  beginning  of  the  human  race,  and  to  their  corruption  being  the  result  of  a  fall, 
and  not  a  mere  negative  state,  the  state  of  undeveloped  reason.  Joseph  is  lifted  up  out 
of  the  dungeon  and  made  to  sit  among  princes.  He  submits  to  the  providential  ap- 
pointment, doubtless,  under  the  guidance  of  the  same  Spirit  which  had  given  him  his 
superiority.  Moses  refused  to  be  called  the  son  of  Pharaoh's  daughter  because  at  that 
time  to  be  so  was  to  be  separated  from  his  people.  Joseph  the  slave,  already  far 
from  his  home,  is  willing  to  be  Pharaoh's  prime  minister  that  he  may  be  the  fore- 
runner of  his  people's  exaltation.  The  opportunity  was  not  to  be  loBt.  "God,"  he 
tiaid,  "  hath  made  me  forget  all  my  toil  and  all  my  father's  house."  "  God  hath 
caused  me  to  be  fruitful  in  the  land  of  my  affliction."  The  very  names  given  to 
Manasseh  and  Ephraim  were  a  testimony  to  his  faith.  His  forgetting  -was  only  to  a 
better  remembering. .  We  must  sometimes  hide  power  for  the  sake  of  its  manifesta- 
tion. "  All  countries  came  into  Egypt  to  Joseph  for  to  buy  corn."  "  I,  if  I  be 
lifted  up,  will  draw  all  men  unto  me."  As  a  type  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the 
Hebrew  slave  exalted  to  the  rule  of  the  world  and  the  saving  of  the  world,  from  the 
cross  to  the  throne.  The  whole  story  is  full  of  analogies.  He  that  distributes  the 
bread  of  life  to  a  perishing  race  was  himself  taken  from  prison,  was  treated  as  a  male- 
factor, was  declared  the  Ruler  and  Saviour  because  the  Spirit  of  God  was  upon  him, 
was  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords.  His  benefits  and  blessings  distributed  to  the 
world  are  immediately  identified  with  his  kingdom.  He  gathers  in  that  he  may  give 
out.  He  is  first  the  all-wise  and  all-powerful  ruler  of  the  seven  years  of  plenty,  and 
then  the  all-merciful  helper  and  redeemer  in  the  seven  years  of  famine.  "  Joseph 
is  a  fruitful  bough." — B. 

Ver.  14. — The  blessing  of  svffenng  wrongfully.  Joseph  had  probably  been  three 
years  in  prison  (cf.  ver.  1  with  xl.  4).  Sorely  must  his  faith  have  been  tried.  His 
brothers,  who  had  plotted  his  death,  prosperous ;  himself  a  slave,  spending  the  best 
years  of  his  life  in  prison  ;  and  that  because  he  had  been  faithful  to  God  and  to  his 
master.  We  know  the  end,  and  therefore  hardly  realise  his  desolate  condition  when 
no  sign  of  anything  but  that  he  should  live  and  die  uncared  for  and  forgotten.  But 
the  trial  comes  more  home  to  us  when  some  one  for  whom  we  care,  or  perhaps  our- 
selves, "  endure  grief,  suffering  wrongfully  ;  "  when  unsuspecting  franknoss  has  been 
overreached,  or  trust  betrayed,  or  feebleness  oppressed.  We  feel  not  only  that  wrong 
has  been  done,  but  as  if  there  had  been  a  failure  in  God's  care.  It  is  one  thing  to 
acknowledge  the  doctrine  of  God's  providence,  and  quite  another  to  feel  it  under 
pressure  of  trouble.  A  frequent  r_  "stake  to  think  of  suffering  as  calling  for  imme- 
diate restitution.  Sines  God  beholds  the  wrong,  should  there  not  be  some  speedy 
token  that  he  does  so  ?  Th<*  truth  which  faith  has  to  grasp  is  that  God  is  carrying 
out  a  plan,  for  which  all  these  things  are  a  preparation.  We  may  not  be  able  to 
trace  it_;  but  it  is  so.  Thus  it  was  with  Joseph.  All  through  these  sad  years  God 
was  gliding  him.     It  was  not  merely  that  in  time  the  cloud  was  removed  ;   every 

H  h  2 


468  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  [oh.  xli.  1—45. 

step  of  the  way  had  its  purpose  (John  xvi.  20).  In  the  prison  he  was  learning  lessons 
of  the  soul, — unlearning  the  spirit  of  censoriousness  and  of  self-complacency  (ch. 
xxxvii.  2), — and,  by  obeying,  learning  how  to  rule.  And  the  course  of  events  bore 
liim  on  to  what  was  prepared  for  him.  Had  he  remained  at  home,  or  returned 
thither,  or  had  Potiphar  not  cast  him  into  prison,  he  would  not  have  been  the  head  of 
a  great  work  in  Egypt,  the  helper  of  his  family,  the  instrument  of  fulfilling  God'i 
promise.     Not  one  step  of  his  course  was  in  vain  ;  his  sufferings  were  blessings. 

I.  In  suffering  wrong  we  are  following  Christ.  He  suffered  for  us,  "  leaving 
us  an  example  "  (1  Pet.  ii.  21)  of  willingness  to  suffer  for  the  good  of  others.  This  is 
the  principle  of  self-sacrifice  ;  not  a  self-willed  sacrifice  (Col.  ii.  23),  but  the  sub- 
mission of  the  will  to  God  (Luke  xxii.  42;  Heb.  x.  7).  "This  is  acceptable  with 
God  " — to  accept  as  from  him  what  he  sends,  though  we  may  not  see  its  use  (Heb.  xii. 
5-7). 

II.  For  every  Christian  the  discipline  of  suffering  is  needful.  If  it  was  so  in 
our  Lord's  sinless  human  nature  (Heb.  ii.  10),  how  much  more  in  us,  who  must  be 
taught  to  subdue  the  flesh  to  the  spirit !  Without  trial  Christian  courage  and  fruit- 
bearing  graces  would  fail  (John  xv.  2),  as  without  the  winter's  cold  the  forest  tree 
would  not  form  sound  wood.  And  trial  calls  them  into  exercise  (Rom.  v.  3),  and 
through  a  sense  of  our  weakness  draws  us  nearer  to  God  (2  Cor.  xii.  7 — 9). 

III.  Not  only  trial  in  general,  but  every  part  of  it  works  good.  To  every 
part  the  promise  applies  (John  xvi.  20).  So  it  was  with  Joseph.  G  od  lays  no  stroke 
without  cause  (Heb.  xii.  10).  The  conviction  of  this  works  practical  patience.  This 
particular  suffering  has  its  own  loving  message. 

IV.  We  often  cannot  foresee  the  purpose  of  trials.  How  different  was  the 
end  to  which  God  was  leading  Joseph  from  anything  he  could  have  expected  or 
hoped  for  I  Yet  far  better.  We  can  see  but  a  very  little  way  along  the  path  by  which 
God  is  leading  us.  We  walk  by  faith  that  his  guidance  is  unerring,  and  that  which 
he  has  provided  is  best  (Ephes.  iii.  20). — M. 

Ver.  40. — Joseph  as  prime  minister.  "  Thou  shalt  be  over  my  house,  and  accord- 
ing unto  thy  word  shall  all  my  people  be  ruled  :  only  in  the  throne  will  I  be  greater 
than  thou."  Hudden  elevations  are  often  the  precursors  of  sudden  fallB.  It  was  not 
so  with  Joseph.  He  filled  satisfactorily  his  position,  retaining  it  to  the  end  of  life. 
He  made  himself  indispensable  to  Pharaoh  and  to  the  country.  He  was  a  man  of 
decision.  Seeing  what  had  to  be  done,  he  hesitated  not  in  commencing  it.  Going 
from  the  presence  of  Pharaoh,  he  passed  throughout  the  land,  arranging  for  granaries 
and  appointing  officers  to  grapple  with  the  seven  years  of  famine  which  were  immi- 
nent. Doubtless  he  felt  the  weight  of  responsibility  resting  upon  him,  and  would  have 
many  restless  nights  in  calculating  how  by  means  of  the  money  then  in  the  treasury 
and  by  forced  loans  to  meet  the  expenditure  for  granaries,  grain,  and  official  salaries. 
He  superintended  everything.     By  method  he  mastered  detail. 

I.  Consider  the  policy  of  this  Egyptian  prime  minister.  Many  things_we_  admire 
in  Joseph,  but  we  must  not  be  blind  to  the  fact  that  he  thought  more  of  binding  the 
people  to  the  throne  than  of  benefiting  the  people  themselves.  He  was  the  first 
statesman  of  that  day.  His  policy  determined  in  great  measure  what  should  be  the 
standard  of  internal  prosperity,  and  what  position  the  country  should  hold  in  the  eyes 
of  other  nations.  He  sought  to  make  Pharaoh's  rule  absolute.  He  gave  no  benefit 
without  payment,  no  supplies  without  sacrifice.  He  took  all  the  money  first  (ch. 
xlvii.  14),  then  the  cattle  (ibid.  ver.  16),  then  the  lands  and  their  persons  (ibid.  ver.  23) 
He  thus  reduced  the  people  of  Egypt  to  the  position  of  slaves.  He  made  all  the  land 
crown  lands.  Thus  the  monarch  was  pleased,  and  the  priests,  being  exempt,  were 
flittered.  It  is  possible  that  in  this  Joseph  laid  the  foundation  of  that  system 
of  mismanagement  which  has  made  the  most  flourishing  spot  in  the  world  the 
basest  of  kingdoms.  He  seems  also  to  have  striven  to  give  some  sort  of  pre- 
eminence to  his  brethren,  and  to  advance  them.  Exempt  from  the  burdens  pressing 
on  others,  they  gained  power,  and  would  have  become  eventually  the  dominant 
race  in  Egypt,  but  that  another  Pharaoh  arose  who  knew  not  Joseph,  i.  e.  who, 
although  he  knew  of  his  having  lived  and  served  the  nation,  yet  recognised  not  his 
policy.     The  state  to  which  Joseph  reduced  the  Egyptians  was  that  to  which  after- 


oa  m  4&—  57.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


m 


wards  his  own  descendants  were  reduced.     Thus  our  plans  are  overthrown.     Time 
fries  success,  and  by  removing  dimness  from  our  vision  enables  us  to  test  it  better. 

II.  Consider  the  private  life  op  this  Egyptian  prime  minister.  He  was  soon 
led  to  conform  to  the  spirit  and  practice  of  an  ungodly  nation.  He  used  a  divining 
cup  (ch.  xliv.  15,  16),  took  his  meals  apart  (ch.  xliii.  32),  recognising  and  sustaining 
class  distinctions.  He  learned  the  mode  of  speech  common  among  the  Egyptians, 
swore  by  the  life  of  Pharaoh  (ch.  xlii.  15),  and  was  affianced  to  an  idolatress,  pro- 
bably a  priestess  (ch.  xli.  45).  He  made  no  effort  to  return  to  his  own  land,  or  to  the 
pastoral  life  of  his  fathers.  It  was  in  his  power  also  for  nine  years  to  have  sent  to 
make  search  for  his  father,  who  was  sorrowing  for  him  as  dead,  but  he  sent  not 
Not  until  trouble,  by  an  apparent  chance,  drove  his  brethren  to  him  did  he  appear 
to  think  of  them,  or  of  home  and  Jacob.  When  they  came  he  was  very  slow  to  make 
known  himself,  as  though  he  feared  it  might  compromise  him  in  the  eyes  of  the 
Egyptians  to  be  known  to  have  relatives  who  were  shepherds,  an  occupation  which 
was  abominable  to  the  Egyptians  (eh  xlvi.  34).  When  he  revealed  himself  to  them, 
it  was  without  the  knowledge  or  presence  of  the  Egyptians.  He  removed  his  brethren 
also  to  a  distant  part  of  Egypt,  that  they  might  not  constantly,  by  their  presence, 
remind  him  and  others  of  his  origin.  We  fancy  that  Joseph  had  weaknesses  and 
imperfections  such  as  other  men  had.  He  had  dwelt  in  Egypt  and  caught  its  spirit. 
In  the  names  he  gave  to  his  children  there  seems  some  indication  of  regret  at  his  f  or- 
getfulness  and  wonder  at  his  fruitfulness.  Amid  views  that  might  depress  there  i° 
some  brightness.  His  forgiveness  of  his  brethren  was  noble.  His  affection  for  Irs 
father  returned.  His  faith  in  God  was  pure  at  last.  Dyinjr,  he  "gave  command- 
ment concerning  his  bones."  He  showed  that  though  outwardly  an  Egyptian,  he  was 
inwardly  an  Israelite. — H. 


EXPOSITION. 


Ver.  46. — And  Joseph  was  thirty  years 
old  when  he  stood  before  Pharaoh  king  of 
Egypt  —  literally,  a  son  of  thirty  years  in 
his  standing  before  Pharaoh.  If,  therefore, 
he  had  been  three  years  in  prison  (ch.  xl.  4  ; 
xli.  1),  he  must  have  served  for  ten  years  in 
the  house  of  Potiphar.  And  Joseph  went 
out  from  the  presence  of  Pharaoh  (in  the 
performance  of  his  official  duties),  and  went 
throughout  all  the  land  of  Egypt— super- 
intending the  district  overseers. 

Vers.  47,  48.  —And  in  the  seven  plenteous 
years  the  earth  Drought  forth  by  handfuls 
{i.  e.  abundantly).  And  he  (Joseph,  through 
bis  subordinates)  gathered  up  all  the  food 
(f.  e.  all  the  portions  levied)  of  the  seven 
years,  which  were  in  the  land  of  Egypt, 
and  laid  up  the  food  in  the  cities : — men 
bringing  corn  into  granaries  appear  upon 
the  monuments  at  Beni-hassan  (Wilkinson, 
'Ancient  Egyptians,'  vol.  i  p.  371,  ed. 
1878)  —  the  food  of  the  field,  which  was 
round  about  every  city  (literally,  the  food 
of  the  field  of  the  city,  which  was  in  its 
environs),  laid  he  up  in  the  same  (literally, 
t»  the  midst  of  it). 

Ver.  49.  —And  Joseph  gathered  (or  heaped 
up)  corn  as  the  sand  of  the  sea,— an  image 
of  great  abundance  (efvch.  xxxii.  12) — very 
much,  until  he  left  numbering  (i.  e.  writ- 
ing, or  keeping  a  record  of  the  number  of 
bushels);  for  it  was  without  number.  "In 
■  tomb  at  Eilethya  a  man  is  represented 
whose  business  it    evidently    vtin   to  take 


account  of  the  number  of  bushels  which 
another  man,  acting  under  him,  measures. 
The  inscription  is  as  follows  :  '  The  writer 
or  registrar  of  bushels — Thutnofre,"  (Heng- 
stenberg,  'Egypt  and  the  Books  of  Moses,' 
p.  36). 

Vers.  50,  51. — And  unto  Joseph  were  born 
two  sons  before  the  years  of  famine  came, 
(literally,  before  the  coming  of  the  years  of 
famine),  which  Asenath  the  daughter  of 
Foti-pherah  priest  of  On  bare  unto  him. 
And  Joseph  called  the  name  of  the  first- 
bornManasseh  ("Forgetting,"  from  nashah, 
to  forget) :  For  God  (Elohim  ;  Joseph  not  at 
the  moment  thinking  of  his  son's  birth  in 
its  relations  to  the  theocratic  kingdom,  but 
simply  in  its  connection  with  the  over- 
ruling providence  of  God  which  had  been  so 
signally  illustrated  in  his  elevation,  from  a 
position  of  obscurity  in  Canaan  to  such  con- 
spicuous honour  in  the  land  of  the  Pha- 
raohs), said  he,  hath  made  me  forget  all  my 
toil,  and  all  my  father's  house.  Not  abso- 
lutely (Calvin,  who  censures  Joseph  on  this 
account,  vixtamen  in  totum  potest  exeusari 
oblivio  paternoe  domus),  as  events  subse- 
quently proved,  but  relatively,  the  pressure 
of  his  former  affliction  being  relieved  by,  bis 
present  happiness,  and  the  loss  of  his  father'f 
house  in  some  degree  compensated  by  the 
building  of  a  house  for  himself. 

Ver.  52.  —And  the  name  of  the  seoond 
called  hsEphraim: — "Double  Fruit.fulntss  " 
(Keil),  "  Double  Land"  (Gesemus),  "  Fn>it' 


•70 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xli.  46 — 57, 


(Fiirst)  —For  God  (Elohim)  hath  caused  ma 
to  be  fruitful  in  the  land  of  my  affliction. 
This  language  shows  that  Joseph  had  not 
tjuite  forgotten  "all  his  toil." 

Vers.  53,  54. — And  the  seven  years  of 
plenteousness,  that  was  in  the  land  of 
Egypt,  were  ended.  And  the  Beven  years 
of  dearth  began  to  come,— the  most  com- 
plete parallel  to  Joseph's  famine  was  that 
which  occurred  in  A.D.  1064— 1071,  in  the 
reign  of  Fatimee  Khaleefeh,  El-Mustansir-b- 
illah,  when  the  people  ate  corpses  and 
animals  that  died  of  themselves ;  when  a 
dog  was  sold  for  five,  a  cat  for  three,  and  a 
bushel  of  wheat  for  twenty  deenars  (vide 
Smith's  '  Bib.  Diet.,'  art.  Famine) — accord- 
ing as  Joseph  had  said  (thus  confirming 
Joseph's  character  as  a  prophet):  and  the 
dearth  was  in  all  lands ; — i.  e.  in  all  the 
adjoining  countries,  and  notably  in  Palestine 
[vide  ch.  xlii  1,  2) — but  in  all  the  land  of 
Egypt  there  was  bread. 

Ver.  55. — And  when  (literally,  and)  all 
the  land  of  Egypt  was  famished  (literally, 
and),  the  people  cried  to  Pharaoh  for  bread  : 
— cf.  the  famine  in  Samaria  (2  Kings  vi.  26) 
— and  Pharaoh  said  unto  all  the  Egyptians, 
Go  unto  Joseph ;  what  he  saith  to  you,  do. 

Vers.  56,  57. — And  the  famine  was  over 
ill  the  face  of  the  earth  (vide  supra,  ver. 
54) :  And  Joseph  opened  all  the  storehouses, 
— literally,  all  wherein  was,  i.  e.  all  the 
magazines  that  had  grain  in  them.  The 
granaries  of  Egypt  are  represented  on  the 
monuments.  "  In  the  tomb  of  Amenemha 
at  Beni-hassan  there  is  the  painting  of  a  great 
storehouse,  before  whose  door  lies  a  great 
heap  of  grain  already  winnowed.  Near  by 
stands  the  bushel  with  which  it  is  measured, 
md  the  registrar  who  takes  the  account" 
(Hengstenberg's  'Egypt  and  the  Books  of 
Moses,'  p.  36) — and  sold  unto  the  Egyptians 


(cf.  Prov.  ii.  26) ;— and  the  famine  waxed 
sore  (literally,  became  strong)  in  the  land  of 
Egypt.  A  remarkable  inscription  from  the 
tomb  at  Eileythia  of  Bava,  which  Brugsch 
('Histoired'Egypte.'second  ed.,  p.  \7l,segq.) 
assigns  to  the  latter  part  of  the  seventeenth 
dynasty,  mentions  a  dearth  of  several  years 
in  Egypt  ("A  famine  having  broken  out 
during  many  years,  I  gave  corn  to  the  town 
during  each  famine"),  which  that  distin- 
guished Egyptologer  identifies  with  the  fa- 
mine of  Joseph  under  Apophis,  the  shepherd 
king  (vide  '  Encyclopedia  Britannica,'  ninth 
edition,  art.  Egypt);  but  this,  according  to 
Bunsen  ('  Egypt's  Place,'  iii.  334),  is  rather 
to  be  detected  in  a  dearth  of  several  years 
which  occurred  in  the  time  of  Osirtasen  I., 
and  which  is  mentioned  in  an  inscription  at 
Beni-hassan,  recording  the  fact  that  during 
its  prevalence  food  was  supplied  by  Amenee, 
the  governor  of  a  district  of  Upper  Egypt 
(Smith's  '  Diet.,'  art.  Joseph).  The  character 
of  Chnumhotep  (a  near  relative  and  favourite 
of  Osirtasen  I.,  and  his  immediate  successor), 
and  the  recorded  events  of  his  government, 
as  described  in  the  Beni-hassan  monuments, 
also  remind  one  of  Joseph : — "he  (i  e.  Chnum- 
hotep) injured  no  little  child ;  he  oppressed 
no  widow  ;  he  detained  for  his  own  purpose 
no  fisherman ;  took  from  his  work  no  shep- 
herd ;  no  overseer's  men  were  taken.  There 
was  no  beggar  in  his  days ;  no  one  starved  in 
his  time.  When  years  of  famine  occurred 
he  plpughed  all  the  lands  of  the  district, 
producing  abundant  food  ;  no  one  starved  in 
it ;  he  treated  the  widow  as  a  woman  with 
a  husband  to  protect  her "  (vide  '  Speaker's 
Commentary,'  vol.  i.  p.  450).  And  all  conn- 
tries  (i.  e.  people  from  all  the  adjoining 
lands)  came  into  Egypt  to  Joseph  for  to  buy 
corn  ;  because  the  famine  was  so  sore  in  all 
lands. 


flOMILETICS. 

Vers.  46 — 57. — Joseph  on  the  second  throne  in  Egypt.  I.  During  the  seven  years 
jf  plenty.  1.  His  mature  manhood  (ver.  46).  Thirteen  years  had  elapsed  since  his 
brethren  had  sold  him  at  Dothan,  and  during  the  interval  what  a  chequered  life  had 
le  experienced  I  Carried  into  Egypt  by  the  spice  caravan  of  the  Midianitish  traders, 
ie  had  been  sold  a  second  time  as  a  slave.  Ten  years  had  he  served  as  a  bondman, 
irst  as  a  valet  to  the  provost  marshal  of  the  slaughterers,  and  then  as  overseer  of  the 
jreat  man's  household.  Three  years  more  he  had  spent  in  prison,  having  been  in- 
jarcerated  on  a  charge  of  which  he  was  entirely  innocent.  And  now,  at  the  age  of 
;hirty,  he  is  the  wisest  and  the  greatest  man  in  Egypt.  God  has  strange  ways  of 
leveloping  the  talents,  maturing  the  experience,  and  advancing  the  honour  of  his 
ions.  The  case  of  Joseph  is  a  signal  illustration  of  the  beneficial  uses  of  adversity, 
md'shows  that  the  true  road  to  success  in  life,  to  the  acquisition  of  wisdom,  or  of 
power,  or  of  wealth,  or  of  fame,  or  of  all  combined,  often  lies  through  early  hard- 
ships and  trials,  disasters  and  defeats.  2.  His  political  activity  (vers.  46 — 49).  As 
jrand  vizier  of  the  empire,  Joseph's  labours  during  this  period  must  have  been 
nany  and  laborious:  surveying  the  corn-producing  land  of  the  country,  and  dividing 
it  for  purposes  of  taxation  into  districts,   appointing  overseers   in  every  district 


CH.  xli.  46—5?.]  THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS.  471 

erecting  grauaries  or  government  stores  in  every  city  of  any  size  or  importance, 
and  generally  superintending  in  every  corner  of  the  empire  the  work  of  uplifting 
the  fifth  part  of  the  superabundant  harvests  of  these  precious  years  when  the  earth 
brought  forth  by  handfuls.  The  result  was.,  that  by  the  close  of  this  period  the 
Egyptian  government  had  collected  corn  as  the  sand  of  the  sea,  very  much,  and 
without  number.  3.  His  domestic  prosperity  (ver.  50).  On  the  name  of  Joseph's 
wife,  and  the  questions  connected  with  the  subject  of  her  marriage  with  Joseph,  the 
Exposition  under  ver.  45  may  be  consulted.  That  the  marriage  itself  was  approved 
by  God  there  is  no  sufficient  reason  to  doubt,  and  that  it  was  a  marriage  of  affection 
may  be  inferred  from  the  sentiments  expressed  by  Joseph  on  the  occasion  of  his 
sons'  births.  The  birth  of  his  children  also  was  interpreted  by  him  to  be  a  mark  of 
Divine  favour.  What  a  signal  reward  for  the  fidelity  and  purity  of  Joseph's  be- 
haviour in  the  house  of  Potiphar  three  years  before  !  Had  Joseph  at  that  time  left 
the  straight  path  or  virtue,  where  had  been  his  advancement  and  felicity  now  ? 
Even  in  this  life  God  puts  a  premium  in  the  long  run  on  a  life  of  purity.  4.  His 
personal  piety  (vers.  51,  52).  To  some  indeed  Joseph's  language  on  the  birth  of 
Manasseh  appears  somewhat  hard  to  reconcile  at  least  with  true  filial  piety.  Why 
did  not  Joseph,  on  reaching  his  exalted  station  in  Egypt,  at  once  communicate  with 
his  father  ?  Was  this  a  just  or  generous  reward  for  what  he  had  experienced  of  the 
old  man's  parental  affection,  and,  what  he  must  have  still  felt  assured  of,  the  old 
man's  sorrow  for  his  imagined  death  ?  Yet  Joseph  talks  as  if  he  had  forgotten  his 
father's  house,  as  well  as  all  his  toil,  in  the  splendour  of  his  fame  and  the  exuber- 
ance of  his  happiness  in  Egypt.  But  that  these  words  are  not  to  be  interpreted  lit- 
erally becomes  apparent,  not  alone  from  the  pathetic  meeting  with  his  brethren  and 
his  father,  soon  to  be  described,  but  also  from  the  statement  which  he  makes  upon 
the  birth  of  Ephraim,  in  which  he  still  characterises  Egypt  as  the  land  of  his  afflic- 
tion. That  Joseph  did  not  at  once  declare  his  parentage  and  send  a  message  home 
to  Hebron  may  be  explained  by  many  reasons  without  resorting  to  the  hypothesis 
that  "  Joseph  was  still  unable  to  attain  perfect  calm  and  cherish  sentiments  of  love 
and  forgiveness"  towards  his  brethren  (Kurtz) :  as,  e.  g.,  the  comparative  insecurity 
that  must  have  attended  his  position  in  Egypt  until  the  years  of  famine  came,  im 
unwilliugness  prematurely  to  reveal  to  his  father  the  full  depth  of  wickedness  of 
which  his  brethren  had  been  guilty,  a  secret  impression  made  upon  his  mind  by  God 
that  the  time  of  disclosure  was  not  yet.  At  all  events  Joseph's  conduct  in  this 
matter  discovers  nothing  essentially  inconsistent  with  a  piety  which  shines  out  con- 
spicuously in  the  grateful  recognition  of  the  hand  of  God  in  turning  for  him  the 
shadow  of  death  into  the  morning. 

II.  During  the  seven  teaks  of  dearth.  1.  His  reputation  as  a  prophet  fully 
confirmed  (vers.  53,  54).  God  is  always  careful  to  maintain  the  honour  of  his  own 
prophets.  Whatever  message  he  transmits  to  the  world  or  the  Church  through  a 
messenger  of  his  sending,  he  will  in  due  time  see  to  its  fulfilment.  No  true  ambas- 
sador of  heaven  need  entertain  the  slightest  apprehension  as  to  the  failure  of  the 
words  which  God  provides  for  him  to  speak.  If  he  is  not  always,  like  Samuel,  estab- 
lished as  a  prophet  of  the  Lord  at  the  beginning  of  his  ministry  (1  Sam.  iii.  20),  his 
claim  to  that  distinction  will  in  due  course  be  made  good  by  the  exact  accomplish- 
ment of  what  God  has  through  his  lips  foretold.  2.  His  sagacity  as  an  adminis- 
trator clearly  established  (ver.  55).  If  Pharaoh  had  any  doubts  as  to  the  wisdom  of 
Joseph's  proposal  during  the  seven  years  of  plenty,  assuredly  he  had  none  now. 
With  a  famishing  population  all  around  him,  what  could  Pharaoh  have  done,  how 
averted  the  destruction  of  his  people,  and  possibly  the  overthrow  of  his  own  dynasty, 
if  it  had  not  been  for  the  prudent  forethought  of  Joseph  ?  Happy  are  the  kings  who 
have  wise  men  in  their  kingdoms,  and  who,  when  they  have  them,  can  trust  them. 
3.  His  work  as  a  saviour  hopefully  begun  (ver.  56).  If  it  be  asked  why  Joseph  did 
not  gratuitously  distribute  Pharaoh's  corn  among  the  perishing  multitudes,  the 
reply  is  obvious.  (1)  In  all  probability  the  grain  had  been  previously  purchased 
from  the  people.  (2)  The  peop'e  had  been  warned  of  the  impending  calamity,  and 
might  have  exereised  a  little  of  the  forethought  of  Joseph,  and  by  care  and  economy 
provided  for  the  day  of  want.  (3)  To  have  given  the  corn  gratuitously  would  have 
resulted  in  a  too  lavish  distribution,  and  for  the  most  part  to  the  greedy  and  the 
prodigal  rather  than  to  the  teally  necessitous.  (4)  By  affixing  to  it  a  price  the  peo- 
ple were  encouraged  as  long  as  possible  to  practise  frugality  and  preserve  independ- 
ence. Wise  governors  will  be  slow  in  making  paupers  of  their  subjects.  This  is 
one  of  the  dangers  connected  with  the  Poor  Law  Administration  in  our  own  land. 


472  THE  BOOK  OF   GENESIS.  [ch.  xli.  46—57. 

[6)  It  enabled  Joseph  by  a  judicious  husbandiDg  of  resources  to  extend  the  circle  of 
relief  to  the  starving  populations  of  oilier  countries  who  came  to  him  to  purchase 
30  rn. 

Learn — 1.  The  sin  of  national  wastefulness.  2.  The  value  of  a  wise  statesman. 
3.  The  compatibility  of  piety  with  both  personal  greatness  and  political  activity. 
i.  The  propriety  of  setting  mercies  over  against  misfortunes.  5.  The  proper  end  of 
ill  government  and  legislation — the  happiness  and  safety  of  the  people.  6.  The  true 
luty  of  a  monarch — to  sympathise  with  and  direct  his  subjects.  7.  The  legitimate 
imbition  for  a  nation — to  be  an  object  of  atti  action  for  good  to  surrounding  countries. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  51. — Destitution  and  abundance.  "  And  the  dearth  was  in  all  lands;  but  in 
ill  the  land  of  Egypt  there  was  bread."  The  time  of  harvest  is,  of  all  periods  of  the 
vear,  the  most  important.  It  is  the  point  to  which  all  previous  operations  of  the  cul- 
tivator have  tended.  He  knows  how  much  depends  on  the  weather  and  God's  mercy. 
Having  done  all  he  can,  he  has  to  wait,  and  the  harvest-time  determines  results. 
Those  who  are  not  engaged  in  agriculture  are  concerned  in  a  harvest.  Suppose 
there  were  none  ;  non-producers  must  starve.  Dwelling  in  great  towns  and  cities, 
many  who  are  engaged  in  traffic  or  manufacture  may  easily  overlook  harvest-time, 
and  forget  their  dependence  on  God  for  daily  bread.  They  see  not  the  sown  fields, 
they  watch  not  the  springing  blade,  they  sieze  not  the  sharp  sickle,  they  join  not  in 
piling  up  the  pointed  stacks,  and  are  therefore  likely  to  forget  dependence  on  God. 
It  is  well  that  God  forgets  us  not.  He  has  ever  kept  his  promise — "  So  long  as  the 
earth  remaineth,"  &c.  No  year  has  passed  without  harvest-time  being  stinted  in 
some  land.     Think  over  the  contrast  given  in  the  text. 

I.  General  distress.  "The  dearth  was  in  all  lands,"  i.  e.  all  the  lands  then 
known  to  be  peopled  by  the  descendants  of  Noah.  Their  harvests  had  failed.  Rain 
excessive,  or  drought  prolonged,  had  ruined  their  crops.  For  several  years  there 
seems  to  have  been  disappointment.  Not  only  did  the  husbandmen  suffer,  but  those 
who  could  not  toil.  Dearth  engenders  disease,  despair,  death.  See  2  Kings  vi.  24 — 
30,  to  what  straits  famine  will  reduce  people.  Even  mothers  consent  together  to  eat 
their  own  offspring.  In  the  lamentations  of  Jeremiah,  there  is  a  description  of  the 
fearful  consequences  of  famine,  leading  men  to  say,  "  Then  was  our  skin  black  like 
an  oven,  because  of  the  terrible  famine."  How  painful  must  it  be  to  have  scanty 
platters  and  empty  barn- ;  for  parents  to  have  children  clinging  to  the  skirts  of  their 
garments,  crying,  "  Give,  oh,  give  bread,"  and  to  have  none  wherewith  to  satisfy 
them  1  We  see  the  effect  of  famine  on  oEe  family  in  the  East.  Jacob's  sons  "  looked 
on  one  another  and  were  sad."  Their  looks  were  respairing.  They  had  money, 
flocks,  and  herds,  but  no  bread.  They  could  not  eat  their  money,  and  to  have  lived 
on  their  starving  flocks  alone  would  engender  disease  of  frightful  character.  Many 
had  not  even  flocks  to  fall  back  upon,  and  the  dearth  was  in  all  lands.  How  men  at 
such  a  time  must  have  looked  longingly  at  the  heavens,  and  prayed  that  God  would 
send  them  bread  1  Sometimes  such  seasons  of  trial  are  sent  that  men  may  be  re- 
minded of  the  dependence  on  God.  To  have  a  moral  and  spiritual  dearth  is  worse 
than  to  have  outward  destitution.  The  spiritual  is  more  important  than  the  physi- 
cal. A  more  terrible  death  than  all  is  that  where  there  is  a  lack  of  a  knowledge  of 
God  and  his  love,  and  of  hearing  the  word  of  the  Lord. 

II.  Exceptional  abundance.  But  for  this  plenlifulness  in  Egypt  the  whole  race 
might  have  perished.  There  were  several  reasons  for  the  abundance  in  Egypt.  1. 
God  arranged  it  by  that  wondrous  overflowing  of  the  Nile.  A  difference  in  the  rising 
a  few  feet  makes  all  the  difference  as  to  the  crops.  Even  at  this  date,  so  do  the  crops 
of  Egypt  affect  the  markets  of  the  world,  that  the  rising  of  the  Nile  is  watched,  and 
the  height  attained  telegraphed  to  all  parts.  God,  at  the  period  referred  to,  had  given 
seven  years  of  plenty,  fo  lowed  by  seven  years  of  dearth  ;  but  such  had  been  the 
previous  abundance,  owing  to  the  overflow  of  the  river,  that  in  the  terrible  time  of 
dearth  there  was  abundance  of  bread  in  Egypt.  2.  The  foresight  and  energy  of  one 
man  had  led  to  the  husbanding  of  resources  and  storing  of  excessive  crops.  3. 
Divine  revelation  caused  Joseph  to  act.  He  could  not  have  known  of  the  impending 
danger  unless  it  had  been  revealed  He  had  faith  in  God  when  in  prison,  and  main- 
tained it  when  he  became  the  governor  of  Egypt.  Indeed  that  faith  shone  as  brightly 
when  he  was  the  approved  of  Pharaoh  as  when  he  was  the  slave  of  Potiphar  and  the 


CH.  XLII.  1—38.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


473 


object  of  passion's  bate.  His  faith  was  rewarded  when  he  was  able  to  save  multi- 
tudes from  starving.  What  a  contrast  is  presented  in  the  text!  Dearth  of  many 
lands,  abundance  iu  one  Such  contrasts  are  often  seen.  On  one  side  of  the  ocean  there 
may  have  been  an  abundant  harvest,  on  the  other  side  but  scanty  crops.  The  world 
is  full  of  contrasts.  Here  is  a  wedding  ;  there  is  a  funeral.  In  one  family  is  love, 
thoughtf ulness,  harmony,  and  in  that — perhaps  separated  only  by  the  thin  partition  of 
hasty  builders— bickering,  jealousy,  and  hastiness  of  temper.  Here  sobriety,  provi- 
dence, and  religion  reign  ;  there  nothing  but  indigence,  drunkenness,  and  utter  neg- 
lect of  the  claims  of  God.  In  one  country  is  peace,  activity  in  ali  its  branches  of 
industry,  commercial  confidence,  progress  in  education  and  art,  thoughtful  ness  for  the 
untaught  and  criminal  classes,  and  higher  appreciation  of  the  sacreilness  of  life  ;  in 
another  depression,  mistrust,  plotting  of  adventurers,  rule  of  the  conscienceless, 
national  faithlessness,  and  the  spreading  pall  of  desolation.  Forceful  is  the  con- 
trast presented  by  nations  under  the  influence  of  a  simple  Chrisiianity  and  those 
enslaved  by  superstition,  as  Spain  or  Austria  ;  or  paralysed  by  fatalism,  as  Turkey 
and  Asia  Minor;  or  darkened  by  idolatry,  #s  India,  China,  Africa,  and  some  of  the 
islands  of  the  seas.  And  such  cuntrasts  are  seen  in  individuals.  There  walks  one 
whose  soul  has  no  light,  no  hope,  no  peace  ;  here  one  who  knows  he  is  pardoned,  and 
is  sure  of  acceptance  by  Christ.  At  death  what  a  contrast !  See  one  dying  shrink- 
ing, doubting,  fearing,  grasping  at  any  straw  of  comfort ;  another  rejoicing  that  he 
is  soon  to  enter  and  Head  the  streets  of  the  New  Jerusalem.  Let  all  be  prepared  for 
such  a  change.  Seek  Christ,  who  is  the  "Bread  of  life,"  the  Saviour  of  our  souls. 
Lack  of  appetite  and  numbness  may  come  from  excessive  exhaustion.  Hunger  and 
thirst  after  righteousness,  and  be  not  like  a  lady  who  once  said,  "  Sir,  I  have  been  so 
loug  without  religion  that  I  have,  I  fear,  now  no  desire  for  it."  If  we  come  to 
Christ  he  will  rec.  ive  us  readily.  Joseph  was  glad  to  receive  and  help  his  brethren. 
So  will  Christ  supply  all  our.need  out  of  the  treasures  of  his  rich  grace.  Bemember, 
that  if  the  need  of  other  nations  tested  the  charity  of  Egypt,  so  the  need  of  souls  is 
to  test  our  earnestness.  If  we  have  found  the  riches  in  Christ,  we  are  to  seek  to  bless 
others.  If  little  time  remains  to  some  of  us  in  which  to  do  much  for  Christ,  let  us 
act  as  those  who,  having  much  to  write  and  little  space,  crowd  the  letters  and  words 
the  closer.  Let  us  be  earnest  as  the  husbandman,  who,  seeing  winter  coming  apace, 
hastens  in  th  .  few  fine  days  remaining  to  garner  his  crops.  Alas,  many  of  our 
doings  will  have  to  stand  useless,  like  earless,  rotten  sheaves,  blackening  dreary 
fields.— H. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XLII. 


Ver.  1. — Now  when  Jacob  saw— liter- 
ally, and  Jacob  saw,  i.  e.  perceived  by  the 
preparations  of  others  for  buying  corn  in 
Egypt  (Lange),  but  more  probably  learnt 
by  the  report  which  others  brought  from 
Egypt  (ver.  2)— that  there  was  corn — 
'"QttJ,  either  that  which  is  broken,  e.  g. 
ground  as  in  a  mill,  from  *Qp,  to  break 
in  pieces,  to  shiver  (Gesenius),  or  that 
which  breaks  forth,  hence  sprouts  or 
germinates,  from  an  unused  root,  "QUJ,  to 
pre;s  out,  to  break  forth  (Fiirst),  is  here 
employed  to  denote  not  simply  grain,  but 
a  supply  of  it,  frument  cumulus,  for  sale 
and  purchase.  The  LXX.  render  by 
Trpdo-is,  and  the  Vulgate  by  quod  alimenta 
venderentur—ia  Egypt  (vide  ch.  xli.  54), 
Jacob  (literally,  and  Jacob)  said  unto  his 
sons, — using  verba  non,  ut  multi  volunt 
increpanlis,  sed  excitantis  (Rosenmiiller) 
— Why  do  ye  look  one  upon  another  ?  —  i.  e. 
in  such  a  helpless  and  undecided  manner 
(Keil),  which,  however,  there  s  no  need 


to  regard  as  springing  from  a  conscious- 
ness of  guilt'  (Lange),  the  language  fit- 
tingly depicting  the  aspect  and  attitude 
of  those  who  are  simply  consilii  inopes 
(Rosenmiiller). 

Ver.  2. — An3  he  said  Behold,  I  have  heard 
(this  does  not  imply  that  the  rumour  had 
not  also  reached  Jacob's  sons,  but  only 
the  proposal  to  visit  Egvpt  did  not  origi- 
nate with  them)  that  there  is  corn — '"CK5, 
ut  supra,  o-itos'LXX.),  triticum  (Vulgate) 
—in  Egypt :  get  you  down  thither.  That 
Jacob  did  not,  like  Abraham  (ch.  xii.  10) 
and  Isaac  (ch.  xxvi.  2),  propose  to  remove 
his  family  to  Egypt,  may  be  explained 
either  by  the  length  of  the  journey,  which 
was  too  great  for  so  large  a  household,  or 
by  the  circumstance  that  the  famine  pre- 
vailed in  Egypt  as  well  as  Canaan  (Ger- 
lach).  That  he  intrusted  his  sons,  and 
not  his  servants,  with  the  mission,  though 
perhaps  dictated  by  a  sense  of  its  impor- 
tance (Lawson),  was  clearly  of  Divire 
arrangement  for  the  further  accomplish- 
ment of  the  Divine  plan  concerning  Jo. 


174 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


[CH.  XXII.  1- 


seph  and  bis  brethren.  And  buy  (i.  e. 
juy  corn,  the  verb  being  a  denominative 
°rom  "QTJ3,  corn;  for  us  from  thence.   From 

;his  it  is  apparent  that  the  hitherto 
ibundant  flocks  and  herds  of  the  patri- 
archal family  had  been  greatly  reduced 
by  the  long-continued  and  severe  drought, 
thus  requiring  them  to  obtain  food  from 
Egypt,  if  either  any  portion  of  their  flocks 
were  to  be  saved,  or  themselves  to  escape 
starvation,  as  the  patriarch  explained  to 
his  sons.  That  we  may  (literally,  and  we 
shall)  live,  and  not  die. 

Ver.  3. — And  Joseph's  ten  brethren  went 
down — either  it  was  for  safety  that  all  the 
ten  went,  or  because,  the  corn  being  sold 
to  individuals,  the  quantity  received 
would  depend  on  their  numbers  (Lange) 
— to  buy  corn — the  word  for  corn,  "Q,  if 

not  a  primitive,  like  the  Latin  far  (Furst), 
may  be   derived  from  Tia,  to  separate, 

sever,  choose  out,  hence  purify  (Aben 
Ezra,  Kimchi,  Gesenius),  and  may  de- 
scribe grain  as  that  which  has  been 
cleaned  from  chaff,  as  in  Jer.  iv.  11— in 
(literally,  from,  i.  e.  corn  to  15e  brought 
from)  Egypt. 

Ver.  4. — But  (literally,  and)  Benjamin, 
Joseph's  brother  (vide  ch.  xxxv.  18),  Jacob 
sent  not  with  his  brethren.  Not  because 
of  his  youth  (Patrick,  Lange),  since  he 
was  now  upwards  of  twenty  years  of  age, 
but  because  he  was  Joseph's  brother,  and 
had  taken  Joseph's  place  in  his  father's 
affections  (Lawson,  Lange,  Murphy,  &c), 
causing  the  old  man  to  cherish  him  with 
tender  solicitude.  For  he  said  (to,  or 
within,  himself,  perhaps  recalling  the 
fate  of  Joseph),  Lest  peradventure  mis- 
chief befall  him.      T10N    from   !"iON,    to 

IT  —     T 

hurt  (Gesenius,  Furst),  and  occurring 
only  elsewhere  in  ver.  38,  ch.  xliv.  29, 
and  Exod.  xxi.  22,  23,  denotes  uny  sort 
of  personal  injury  in  general,  and  in  par- 
ticular here  such  mischance  as  might 
happen  to  a  traveller. 

Ver.  5. — And  the  sons  of  Israel  came  to 
buy  corn  among  those  that  came — literally, 
in  the  midst  of  the  comers ;  not  as  being 
desirous  to  lose  themselves  in  the  multi- 
tudes, as  if  troubled  by  an  alarming  pre- 
sentiment (Lange),  which  is  forced  and 
unnatural ;  but  either  as  forming  a  part 
of  a  caravan  of  Canaanites  (Lawson),  or 
simply  as  arriving  among  others  who 
came  from  the  same  necessity  (Keil). 
For  the  famine  was  in  the  land  of  Canaan. 
The  statements  in  this  verse  concerning 
the  descent  of  Joseph's  brethren  to 
Egypt,  and  the  prevalence  of  the  famine 
in  the  land  of  Canaan,  both  of  which 
have  already  been  sufficiently  announced 


ver.  3 ;  ch.  xli.  57 ;  xlii.  2),  are 
neither  useless  repetitions  nor  proofs  of 
different  authorship,  but  simply  the  cus- 
tomary recapitulations  which  mark  the 
commencement  of  a  new  paragraph  or 
section  of  the  history,  viz.,  that  in  which 
Joseph's  first  interview  with  his  brethren 
is  described  (cf.  'Quarry  on  Genesis,' 
pp.  556,  557). 

Ver  6. — And  Joseph  was  the  governor 
over  the  land.  The  word  iS^lp,  from 
libtU,  to  rule,  describes  one  invested  with 

despotic  authority,  or  a  sultan  (Gesenius), 
in  which  character  the  early  Shemites 
appear  to  have  regarded  Joseph  (Keil). 
It  is  probably  the  same  idea  which  recurs 
in  the  name  Salatis,  which,  according  to 
Manetho,  belonged  to  the  first  of  the 
shepherd  kings  (Josepbus,  '  Contra  Apio- 
nem,'  i.  14).  Occurring  nowhere  else  in 
the  Pentateuch,  it  reappears  in  the  later 
writings  of  Eccles.  (vii.  10;  x.  5),  Ezra 
(iv.  20  :  vii.  24),  Dan  (ii.  15 ;  v.  29),  which, 
however,  need  not  suggest  an  exilian  or 
post-exilian  authorship,  but  may  be  ex- 
plained by  the  fact  that  the  root  is  found 
equally  in  the  Arabic  and  Aramaean  dia- 
lects (Keil).  And  he  it  was  that  sold  to 
all  the  people  of  the  land.  Not  conducted 
the  retail  corn  trade  (Tuch,  Oort,  Kuenen), 
which  was  assigned  to  subordinates  (ver. 
25  ;  ch.  xliv.  1),  but  presided  over  the 
general  market  of  the  kingdom  (Murphy), 
probably  fixing  the  price  at  which  the 
grain  should  be  sold,  determining  the 
quantities  to  be  allowed  to  purchasers, 
and  examining  the  companies  of  foreign- 
ers who  came  to  buy  (Rosenmiiller, 
Havernick,  Lange,  Gerlacb).  And  Jo- 
seph's brethren  came  and  bowed  down 
themselves  before  him  with  their  faces  to 
the  earth.  And  so  fulfilled  his  early 
dream  in  Shechem  (ch.  xxxvii.  7,  8). 

Ver.  7  — And  Joseph  saw  his  brethren, 
and  he  knew  them,  but  (literally,  and)  made 
himself  strange  unto  them.     The  root  "C5, 

to  be  marked,  signed,  by  indentations, 
hence  to  be  foreign  (Furst),  or  simply  to 
be  strange  (Gesenius),  in  the  Hiphil  sig- 
nifies to  press  strongly  into  a  thing 
(Furst),  to  look  at  a,  thing  as  strange 
(G-senius),  or  to  recognise,  and  in  the 
Hithpael  has  the  sense  of  representing 
one's  self  as  strange,  i.  e.  of  feigning 
one's  self  to  be  a  foreigner.  And  spake 
roughly  unto  them — literally,  spake  hard 
things  unto  them;  not  from  a  feeling  of 
revenge  which  still  struggled  in  his  breast 
with  his  brotherly  affection  (Kurtz),  or  in  a 
spirit  of  duplicity  (Kalisch),  but  in  order 
to  get  at  their  hearts,  and  discover  the 
exact  state  of  mind  in  which  they  then 
were  wth  regard  to  himself  and  Benjamin, 


CH.  xlii.  1—38.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


475 


whose  absence  it  is  apparent  had  arrested 
his  attention,  and  perhaps  roused  his 
suspicions  (Keil,  Murphy,  Wordsworth, 
'Speaker's  Commentary').  And  lie  said 
unto  them, — speaking  through  an  inter- 
preter (ver.  23) — Whence  come  ye?  And 
they  said,  From  the  land  of  Canaan  (adding, 
as  if  they  feared  Joseph's  suspicions,  and 
wished  to  deprecate  his  anger)  to  buy  food 
(i.  e.  corn  for  food). 

Ver.  8. — And  Joseph  knew  his  brethren, 
but  they  knew  not  him.  The  lapse  of  time 
since  the  tragedy  of  Dothan,  twenty  years 
before,  the  high  position  occupied  by 
Joseph,  the  Egyptian  manners  he  had  by 
this  time  assumed,  and  the  strange  tongue 
in  which  he  conversed  with  them,  all 
conspired  to  prevent  Jacob's  sons  from 
recognising  their  younger  brother;  while 
the  facts  that  Joseph's  brethren  were  all 
grown  men  when  he  had  last  looked  upon 
them,  that  he  was  quite  familiar  with 
their  appearances,  and  that  he  perfectly 
understood  their  speech,  would  account 
for  his  almost  instantaneous  detection  of 
them. 

Ver.  9. — And  Joseph  remembered  (j.  e. 
the  sight  of  his  brethren  prostrating  them- 
selves before  him  recalled  to  his  mind)  the 
dreams  which  he  dreamed  (or  had  dreamed) 
of  them  (vide  ch.  xxxvii.  5)  and  said  unto 
them,  Ye  are  spies  (literally,  ye  are  spying, 
or  going  about,  so  as  to  find  out,  the  verb 
SIT  signifying  to  move  the  feet);  to  see  the 

nakednesB  of  the  land — not  its  present  im- 
poverishment from  the  famine  (Murphy), 
but  its  unprotected  and  unfortified  state 
(Keil).  Gf.urbsnudaprcesidio(Cic.  'Att.,' 
vii.  13);  murusnudatusdefensoribus(Cass  , 
'Bel].(jall.,'ii.6);T«Ix°S',Y,'llv''8i](Homerl 
•Iliad,'  xii.  399) — ye  are  come.  The  Egyp- 
tians were  characteristically  distrustful  of 
strangers — JEgyptii  prce  aliis  gentibus 
diffldere  aolebantperegrinis  (Rosenmtiller), 
— whom  they  prevented,  when  possible, 
from  penetrating  into  the  interior  of  their 
country  (Wilkinson's  'Ancient  Egyp- 
tians,' vol.  i.  p.  328,  ed.  1878).  In  particu- 
lar Joseph's  suspicion  of  his  Canaanitish 
brethren  was  perfectly  natural,  since 
Egypt  was  peculiarly  open  to  attacks 
from  Palestine  (Herodotus,  iii.  5). 

Vers.  10 — 12. — And  they  said  unto  him, 
Nay,  my  lord,  but  to  buy  food  are  thy  serv- 
ants come.  "  They  were  not  filled  with 
resentment  at  the  imputation  "  cast  upon 
them  by  Joseph;  "or,  if  they  were  angry, 
their  pride  was  swallowed  up  by  fear" 
(Lawson).  We  are  all  one  man's  sons;  we 
are  true  men, — i.  e.uprght,  honest,  viri 
bonce  fidei  (Rosenmullerl,  rather  than 
tlpT|viKol  (LXX.),  pacifici  (Vulgate) — thy 
servants  are  no  spies.     It  was  altogether 


improbable  that  one  man  should  send  ten 
sons  at  the  same  time  and  to  the  same 
place  on  the  perilous  business  of  a  spy, 
hence  the  simple  mention  of  the  fact  that 
they  were  ten  brethren  was  sufficient  to 
establish  their  sincerity.  Yet  Joseph  af- 
fected still  to  doubt  them.  And  he  said 
unto  them,  Nay,  but  to  see  the  nakedness 
of  the  land  ye  are  come — assuming  a  harsh 
and  almost  violent  demeanour  not  out  of 
heartless  cruelty  (Kalisch),  but  in  order 
to  hide  the  growing  weakness  of  his  heart 
(Candlish). 

Ver.  13. — And  they  said,  Thy  servants 
are  twelve  brethren,  the  sons  of  one  man  in 
the  land  of  Canaan;  and,  behold,  the  young 
est— literally,  the  little  one  (cf.  ch.  ix.  24) 
— is  this  day  with  our  father,  and  one  — 
literally,  the  one,  i.  e.  the  other  one,  6  hi 
crepos  (LXX.) — is  not — i.  e.  is  dead  (cf. 
ch.  v.  24;  xxxvii.  30) — in  which  statement 
have  been  seen  a  sufficient  proof  that 
Joseph's  brethren  had  not  yet  truly  re- 
pented of  their  cruelty  towards  him  ( Keil) : 
an  evidence  that  time  had  assuaged  all 
their  bitter  feelings,  both  of  exasperation 
against  Joseph  and  of  remorse  for  their 
unbrotherly  conduct  (Murphy);  a  suppres- 
sion of  the  truth  (WordsVorth),  if  not  a 
direct  falsehood  (Lawson).  since  they 
wished  it  to  be  understood  that  their 
younger  brother  was  dead,  while  of  that 
they  had  no  evidence  beyond  their  own 
cunningly-invented  lie  (ch.  xxxvii.  20)  and 
their  own  probable  surmisings.  But  in 
point  of  fact  the  inference  was  natural  and 
reasonable  that  Joseph  was  no  more,  since 
twenty  years  had  elapsed  without  any  tid- 
ings of  his  welfare,  and  there  was  no  ab- 
solute necessity  requiring  them  to  explain 
to  the  Egyptian  governor  all  the  particu- 
lars of  their  early  life.  Yet  the  circum- 
stance that  their  assertion  regarding  him- 
self was  incorrect  may  have  tended  to 
awaken  his-suspicions  concerning  Benja- 
min. 

Vers.  14 — 16. — And  Joseph  said  unto 
them  (betraying  his  excitement  in  his  lan- 
guage), That  is  it  that  I  spake  unto  you, 
saying,  Ye  are  spies.  But  Joseph  knew  by 
this  time  that  they  were  not  spies.  Hence 
his  persistent  accusation  of  them,  which 
to  the  brothers  must  have  seemed  despotic 
and  tyrannical,  and  which  cannot  be  re- 
ferred to  malevolence  or  revenge,  must  be 
explained  by  a  desire  on  the  part  of  Joseph 
to  bring  his  brothers  to  a  right  state  of 
mind.  Hereby  (or  in  this)  ye  shall  be 
proved:  By  the  life  of  Pharaoh— literally, 
life  of  Pharaoh!  An  Egyptian  oath  (LXX. , 
Gesenius,  Rosenmuller,  Kalisch,  Lange), 
in  using  which  Joseph  was  not  without 
blame,  aliquid  esse  fateor  quodmerito  cul- 
petur  (Calvin),  though  by  some  (Ainsworth, 


476 


THE   BOOK   OF  GENESIS. 


[cH.  xlii.  1—38. 


Wordsworth,  Murpliy,  '  Speaker's  Com- 
mentary ')  the  expres  ion  is  regarded  sim- 
ply as  a  strong  asseveration  (cf.  1  Sam.  i. 
26;  xvii.  55) — ye  shall  not  go  forth  hence 
(literally,  life  of  Pharaoh!  if  ye  go  from 
this.  The  language  is  elliptical,  meaning 
either,  May  Phaiaoh  perish  if  ye  escape 
from  punishment  as  spies,  unless,  &c. ;  or, 
As  surely  as  Pharaoh  lives,  may  retribu- 
tion fall  on  me  if  ye  go  from  tuis  place) 
except  your  youngest  brother  come  hither. 
The  condition,  which  must  have  appeared 
extremely  frivolous  to  Joseph  s  brethren, 
was  clearly  designed  to  ascerta  n  the  truth 
about  Benjamin.  Send  one  of  you,  and  let 
him  fetch  your  brother,  and  ye  (i.  e.  the  rest 
of  you)  shall  be  kept  in  prison  (literally, 
shall  be  put  in  bonds),  that  your  words  may 
be  proved  (literally,  and  your  words  shall 
be  proved),  whether  there  be  any  truth  in 
you;  or  else  (literally,  and  if  not)  by  the 
life  of  Pharaoh  surely  ye  are  spies — literally 
(sc.  I  swear),  that  ye  are  spies. 

Ver.  17. — And  he  put  them  all  together 
into  ward  (literally,  and  he  assembled  them 
into  prison)  three  days.  Ostensibly  in  con- 
sequence of  their  unwillingness  to  agree 
to  his  proposal,  but  in  reality  to  give  them 
an  experience  of  the  suffering  which  they 
had  inflicted  on  him,  their  brother,  and  so 
to  awaken  in  their  hearts  a  feeling  of  re- 
pentance. Yet  the  clemency  of  Joseph  ap-- 
pears  in  this,  that  whereas  he  had  lain 
three  long  years  in  prison  as  the  result  of 
their  inhumanity  towards  him,  he  only  in- 
flicts on  them  a  confinement  of  three  days. 

Vers.  18  —  20. — And  Joseph  (whose 
bowels  of  mercy  were  already  yearning 
towards  them)  said  unto  them  the  third 
day,  This  do,  and  live; — i.  e.  this  do  that 
ye  mav  live  (vide  Gesenius,  '  Grammar,' 
§  130,  2;  Ewald's  '  Hebrew  Syntax,'  § 3486) 
—for  I  fear  Go  J— literally,  the  Mohim  I 
fear;  the  term  Elohim  being  employed, 
since  to  have  said  Jehovah  would  have 
been  to  divulge,  if  not  his  Hebrew  origin, 
at  least  his  acquaintance  with  the  Hebrew 
faith  (Hengstenberg).  At  tbe  same  time 
its  use  would  arrest  them  more  than  the 
preceding  adjuration,  By  the  life  of 
Pharaoh  I  and,  whether  or  not  it  implied 
that  the  true  God  was  not  yet  unknown  in 
Egypt  (Murphy),  was  clearly  designed  to 
show  that  he  was  a  Teligious  and  consci- 
entious person,  who  would  on  no  account 
condemn  them  on  mere  suspicion  (Lange). 
If  ye  be  true  men,  let  one  of  your  brethren 
beboundinthehouse  of  your  prison  Joseph's 
first  proposal,  that  one  should  go  for  Benja- 
min while  nine  remained  as  hostages  for 
their  good  faith,  is  now  reversed,  and  only 
one  is  required  to  be  detained  while  the 
other  nine  return.  If  the  severity  of  the 
first  proposal  filled  them  with  consterna- 


tion, the  singular  clemency  of  the  second 
could  not  fail  to  impress  them.  Not  only 
were  the  nine  to  be  released,  but  theft' 
original  demand  for  grain  to  carry  home 
to  Palestine  was  to  be  complied  with, 
the  grand  vizier  adding,  to  their  un- 
doubted amazement,  As  for  the  rest  of 
you,  go  ye,  carry  corn  for  the  famine  of 
your  houses.  "  How  differently  had  they 
acted  towards  their  brother,  whom  they 
had  intended  to  leave  in  the  pit  to  starve" 
(Keil).  The  Egyptian  governor  feels  com- 
passion for  their  famishing  households, 
only  he  will  not  abandon  his  proposition 
that  theymust  return  w  ith  Benjamin.  But 
bring  your  youngest  brother  unto  me — or, 
more  emphatically,  and  your  brother,  the 
little  one,  ye  shall  cause  to  come  to  me. 
That  Joseph  should  have  insisted  on  this 
stipulation,  which  he  must  have  known 
would  cause  his  aged  father  much  anxiety 
and  deep  distress,  is  not  to  be  explained  as 
"almost  designed"  by  Joseph  as  a  chas- 
tisement on  Jacob  for  his  undue  predilec- 
tion in  favour  of  Benjamin  (Kalisch),  but 
must  be  ascribed  either  to  the  intensity  of 
his  longing  to  see  his  brother  (Murphy),  or 
to  a  desire  on  his  part  to  ascertain  how  his 
brethren  were  affected  towards  Benjamin 
(Lawson),  or  to  a  seciet  belief  that  the 
best  mode  of  persuading  his  father  to  go 
down  to  him  in  Egypt  was  to  bring  Ben- 
jamin thither  ('  Speaker's  Commentary '), 
or  to  an  inward  conviction  that  the  tem- 
porary concern  which  Benjamin's  absence 
might  inflict  on  Jacob  would  be  more  than 
compensated  for  by  the  ultimate  good 
whicli  would  thereby  be  secured  to  the 
whole  fan.ily  (Kurtz),  or  to  the  fact  that 
God,  under  whose  guidance  throughout 
he  acted,  was  unconsciously  leading  him 
in  such  a  way  as  to  secure  the  fulfilment 
of  his  dreams,  which  required  the  presence 
of  both  Benjamin  and  Jacob  in  Egypt 
(Wordsworth,  '  Speaker's  Commentary  '). 
The  reason  which  Joseph  himself  gave  to 
his  brethren  was  that  Benjamin's  presence 
was  indispensable  as  a  corroboration  of 
their  veracity.  So  (literally,  and)  shall  your 
words  be  verified,  and  ye  shall  not  die  (the 
death  due  to  spies).  And  they  did  so — i.  e. 
they  consented  to  Joseph's  proposal. 

Ver.  21. — And  they  said  one  to  another 
(Joseph's  treatment  of  th  m  beginning  by 
this  time  to  produce  its  appropriate  and  de- 
signed result  by  recalling  them  to  a  sense 
of  their  former  guilt),  We  are  verily 
guilty — "this  is  the  only  acknowledg- 
ment of-sin  in  the  Book  of  Genesis  "(Inglis) 
—concerning  our  brother.  They  had  been 
guilty  of  many  sins,  but  the  special  in- 
iquity of  which  their  reception  by  the 
Egyptian  governor  had  reminded  them 
was  that  which  some  twenty  years  before 


CH.  XLII.  1—38.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


477 


they  had  perpetrated  against  their  own 
brother.  Indeed  the  accusation  preferred 
against  them  that  they  were  spies,  the 
apparent  unwillingness  of  the  viceroy  to 
listen  to  their  request  for  food,  and  their 
subsequent  incarceration,  though  inno- 
cent of  any  offence,  were  all  calculated  to 
recall  to  their  recollection  successive  steps 
in  their  inhuman  treatment  of  Joseph. 
In  that  (or  because)  we  saw  the  anguish 
of  his  so  ai,  when  he  besought  us  (literally, 
in  his  beseeching  of  us,  an  incident  which 
the  narrator  omits  to  mention,  but  which 
the  guilty  consciences  of  the  brethren  re- 
member), and  we  would  not  hear;  therefore 
is  this  distress  come  upon  us.  The  retri- 
butive character  of  their  sufferings,  which 
they  cannot  fail  to  perceive,  they  en- 
deavour to  express  by  empl  >ying  the  same 
word  TX^y,  to  describe  Joseph's  anguish 

and  their  distress. 

Ver.  22. — And  Beuben — who  had  not 
consented  to,  but  had  been  altogether  un- 
able to  prevent,  the  wickedness  of  his 
brethren  (eh.  xxxvii.  22,  29) — answered 
them,  saying,  Spake  I  n,t  unto  you,  say- 
ing, Do  not  sin  against  the  child  (or  lad); 
and  ye  would  not  hear  T  therefore,  behold, 
also  his  blood  is  required— literally,  and 
also  Ais  blood,  behold  it  is  required.  This 
was  in  accordance  with  the  Noachic  law 
against  bloodshed  (ch.  ix.  5),  with  which 
it  is  apparent  that  Jacob's  sons  were  ac- 
quainted. 

Ver.  23.— And  they  knew  not  (while 
they  talked  in  what  tuey  imagined  to  be 
a  foreign  dialect  to  the  Egy  tian  viceroy) 
that  Joseph  understood  them; — literally, 
heard  (so  as  to  understand  what  was  said) 
— for  he  spake  unto  them  by  an  interpreter 
— literally,  for  the  interpreter  \,yb)21j,  the 

hiph.  part.,  with  the  art.,  of  Vlb,  to  speak 
barbarously,  in  the  hiph.  to  act  as  an  inter- 
p-eter), ».  e,  the  official  Court  interpreter, 
epIi/nvcuTTjs  (LXX.),  was  between  them. 

Ver.  24 — And  he  turned  himself  about 
from  them  (in  order  to  hide  his  em  nion). 
and  wept  (as  he  reflected  on  the  wonderful 
leadings  of  Divine  providence,  and  beheld 
the  pitiful  distress  of  his  brethren);  and 
returned  to  them  again  (having  previously 
withdrawn  from  tLtem  a  space),  and  com- 
muned with  them  (probably  about  the  one 
of  them  that  should  remain  behind),  and 
took  from  them  — by  a  rough  act  of  author- 
ity, since  they  either  could  i  ot  or  would 
not  settle  among  themselves  who  should 
be  the  prisoner  (Candlish)— Simeon, — 
passing  by  Reuben  not  because  he  was 
the  firstborn  (Tuch,  Lengerke),  but  be- 
cause he  was  comparatively  guiltless 
(Keil,  Kaliscn,  Lange,  Candlish,  and  ex- 


positors gene  i  ally),  and  selecting  Simeon 
either  as  the  eldest  of  the  guilty  ones 
(Aben  Ezra,  Keil,  Lange,  Murphy,  Words- 
worth, Alford,  and  others),  or  as  the  chief 
instigator  of  the  sale  of  Joseph  (Philo, 
Rosenmuller,  Ftlrst,  Kalisch,  Gerlach, 
Lawson,  et  alii) — and  bound  him  before 
their  eyes — thus  f  rcibly  recall  ng  to  their 
minds  what  they  had  done  to  him  (Words- 
worth), and  perhaps  hoping  to  incite 
them,  through  pity  for  Simeon,  to  return 
the  more  speedily  with  Benjamin  (Law- 
son). 

Ver.  25. — Then  (literally,  and)  Joseph 
commanded  to  fill — literally,  commanded, 
and,  they  (i.  e.  Joseph's  men)  filled — their 
sacks  (rather,  vessels  or  receptacles,  "'bs) 

with  corn,  and  torestore  every  man's  money 

(literally,  their  pieces  of  silver,  each)  into 
his  sack, — pllJ,  saccus,  o-oikos,  crdKicos,  sack 
(vide  ch.  xxxvii.  34).  Joseph  "feels  it 
impossible  to  bargain  with  his  father  and 
his  brethren  for  bread  "  (Baumgarten) — 
and  to  give  them  provision  for  the  way  : 
and  thus  did  he  (literally,  it  was  done)  unto 
them. 

Ver.  26. — And  they  laded  their  asses  with 
the  corn  (literally,  put  their  grain  upon 
their  asses),  and  departed  (or  went)  thence. 

Vi'r.  27. — And  as  one  of  them  opened  his 
sack — literally,  and  the  one  opened  his 
sack,  i.  e.  they  did  not  all  open  their  sacks 
on  the  homeward  journey,  although  after- 
wards, in  reporting  the  circumstance  to 
Joseph,  they  represent  themselves  as 
having  done  so  (ch.  xliii.  21);  but  only 
one  at  the  wayside  inn,  and  the  rest 
on  reaching  homu,  (ver.  35;  vide  infra, 
ch.  xliii.  21) — to  give  his  ass  provender 
in  the  inn  (the  "fb"Q,  from  "jib,  to  pass  the 
night,  was  not  an  inn  in  the  modern  sense 
of  the  term,  but  simply  a  halting-place 
or  camping  station  where  travellers  were 
wont  to  lodge,  without  finding  for  them- 
selves or  animals  any  other  food  than  they 
carried  with  tliem),  he  espied  his  money; 
for,  behold,  it  was  in  his  sack's  mouth — 
literally,  in  the  opening  of  his  amtachath, 
nnn7?N,  from  Hn?a,  to  spread  out,  an  old 
word  for  a  sack  (ch.  xliii.  18,  21,  22),  here 
used  synonymously  with  pip,  from  which 
it  would  seem  that  the  travellers  carried 
two  sorts  of  bags,  one  for  the  corn  called 
ib3  (ver.  25),  and  another  for  the  asses' 
provender  called  nnnUN.  It  was  in  the 
latter  that  the  money  had  been  placed. 

Ver.  28. — And  he  (i.  e.  the  one  who 
had  opened  his  sack)  said  unto  his  brethren , 
My  money  is  restored ;  and  lo,  it  is  even  in 
my  Bs.ek  (amtachath):  and  their  heart  failed 


478 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[CH.  XLII.  1  —  38. 


them  (literally,  went  forth ;  as  it  were, 
leapt  into  their  mouths  through  sudden 
apprehension),  and  they  were  afraid,  saying 
one  to  another  (literally,  they  trembled  each 
one  to  his  brother,  a  constructio  pregnans 
for  they  turned  trembling  towards  one 
another,  saying),  What  is  this  that  God 
hath  done  unto  us  T  Elohiin  is  used,  and 
not  Jehovah,  because  the  speakers  simply 
desire  to  characterise  the  ciicumstance  as 
supernatural. 

Vers.  29 — 34.  — And  they  came  unto  Jacob 
their  father,  unto  the  land  of  Canaan,  and 
told  him  all  that  befell  unto  them  (liter- 
ally, all  the  things  happening  to  them,  the 
participle  being  construed  with  the  ac- 
cusative); Baying,  The  man,  who  is  the 
lord  of  the  land,  spake  roughly  to  us  (liter- 
ally, spake  the  man,  lord  of  the  country, 
with  us  harsh  things,  the  order  and  ar- 
rangement of  the  words  indicating  the 
strong  feeling  which  their  treatment  in 
Egypt  had  excited),  and  took  us  for  spies 
of  the  country.  And  we  said  unto  him,  We 
are  true  men ;  we  are  no  spies:  we  be  twe.ve 
brethren,  sons  of  our  father;  one  is  not, 
and  the  youngest  is  this  day  with  our  father 
in  the  land  of  Canaan  (vide  vers.  11,  13). 
And  the  man,  the  lord  of  the  country,  said 
unto  us,  Hereby  shall  I  know  that  ye 
are  true  men;  leave  one  of  your  brethren 
here  with  me,  and  take  food  for  the  famine 
of  your  households,  and  be  gone.  It  is 
observable  that  they  do  not  mention 
Joseph's  first  proposal,  probably  because 
of  Joseph's  subsequent  kindness;  neither 
do  they  intimate  the  fact  that  Simeon  was 
bound,  perhaps  through  a  desire  to  soften 
the  blow  as  much  as  possible  for  their  ven- 
erable parent.  And  bring  your  youngest 
brother  unto  me:  then  shall  I  know  that 
ye  are  no  spies,  but  that  ye  are  true  men :  so 
will  I  deliver  you  your  brother,  and  ye 
shall  traffic  in  the  land  (cf.  ch.  xxxiv.  10). 

Ver.  35  — And  it  came  to  pass  as  they 
emptied  (literally,  they  emptying)  their 
sacks,  that  (literally,  and),  behold,  every 
man's  bundle  of  money  (or  silver)  was  in 
his  sack:  and  when  (literally,  and)  both 
they  and  their  father  saw  the  bundles  of 
money,  they  (literally,  and  they)  were 
afraid. 

Ver.  36. — And  Jacob  their  father  said 
unto  them,  Me  have  ye  bereaved  (or  are 
ye  bereaving)  of  my  children:  Joseph  is 
i.jt,  and  Simeon  is  not  (Jacob  appears  to 
suspect  that  in  some  way  or  another  his 
sons  had  been  responsible  for  Joseph's 
disappearance  as  well  as  Simeon's),  and  ye 


will  take  Benjamin  away:  all  these  things 
are  against  me— literally,  upon  me,  as  an 
heavy  burden,  which  I  must  bear  alone. 

Ver.  37  — And  Reuben  spake  unto  his 
father,  saying  (Reuben  was  probably  actu- 
ated by  an  ardent  brotherly  affection, 
which  prompted  him  to  endeavour  to  re- 
cover Simeon,  as  formerly  he  had  sought 
to  deliver  Joseph),  Slay  my  two  sons, — as 
Reuben  had  four  sons  (ch.  xlvi.  9),  he 
must  be  understood  as  meaning  two  of 
my  sons  (Ainsworth,  Murphy),  either  the 
two  then  present  (Junius)  or  the  two 
oldest  (Mercerus) — if  I  bring  him  (i.  e. 
Benjamin)  not  to  thee.  Reuben 's  proposal, 
though  in  one  sense  "the  greatest  and 
dearest  offer  that  a  son  could  make  to  a 
father  "  (Keil),  was  either  only  a  sample  of 
strong  rhetoric  (like  Joseph's  "By  the 
life  of  Pharaoh!")  designed  to  assure  his 
father  of  the  impossibility  of  failure  (Law- 
son,  Candlish,  Inglis),  ;  nd  of  the  fact  that 
neither  he  nor  his  brethren  entertained 
any  injurious  designs  against  Benjamin 
(Calvin);  or,  if  seriously  made,  was  not 
only  inconsiderate  and  rash,  spoken  in  the 
heat  of  the  moment  (Kuitz),  but  sinful 
and  unnatural  (Ainsworth),  plusquam  bar- 
barum  (Calvin),  and  absolutely  worthless 
besides,  as  what  consolation  would  it  be 
to  Jacob  to  add  to  the  loss  of  a  son  the 
murder  of  his  grandchildren?  (Calvin, 
Willet).  Deliver  him  into  my  hand,  and 
I  will  bring  him  to  thee  again.  Reuben 
■might  have  learned  to  avoid  strong  assev- 
erations on  this  point.  "  It  was  his  wish 
to  bring  Joseph  home  to  his  father,  and 
yet  he  could  not  persuade  his  brethren  to 
comply  with  his  intentions.  It  was  his 
desire  to  bring  Simeon  safe  to  his  father, 
and  yet  he  was  compelled  to  leave  him  in 
Egypt  (Lawson). 

Ver.  38. — And  he  (i.  e.  Jacob)  said,  My 
son  shall  not  go  down  with  you; — not  be- 
cause he  could  not  trust  Reuben  after  the 
sin  described  in  ch.  xxxv.  22  (Words- 
worth), or  because  he  could  not  assent  to 
Reuben's  proposal  (Ainsworth),  but  be- 
cause of  what  is  next  stated — for  his 
brother  (£.  e.  by  the  same  mother,  viz., 
Joseph)  is  dead  (cf.  ver.  13;  xxxvii.  33; 
xliv.  28),  and  he  is  left  alone: — i.  e.  he 
alone  (of  Rachel  s  children)  is  left  as  a 
survivor — if  mischief  befall  him  (literally, 
and  mischief  shall  befall  him)  by  the  way 
in  which  ye  go,  then  shall  ye  (literally, 
and  ye  shalli  bring  down  my  gray  hairs 
with  sorrow  to  the  grave— Sheol  (cf.  ch. 
xxxvii.  35). 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 38. — The  first  visit  of  Joseph's  brethren  to  Egypt.     I.  The  joubney  to 
Egypt  (ver*.  1 — 5).    1 .  The  famishing  household.    Although  Canaan  was  the  land 


CH.  xlii.  1—38.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  479 

of  promise,  and  the  family  of  Jacob  the  Church  of  God,  yet  neither  was  the  one  nor 
the  other  exempted  from  the  pressure  of  that  heavy  famine  which  had  fallen  on  all 
surrounding  lands  and  peoples.  It  is  not  God's  intention  that  his  people  should 
escape  participating  in  the  ills  of  life.  Besides  enabling  them,  collectively  and  indi- 
vidually, to  sympathise  with  their  fellow-men,  it  is  a  means  under  God  of  advancing 
their  own  sanctification,  and  oftentimes  as  well  of  furthering  the  purposes  of  God 
concerning  both  the  world  and  the  Church.  2.  The  perplexed  brethren.  Reuben, 
Simeon,  Levi,  Judah,  and  the  rest  of  them  were  manifestly  at  their  wits'  end  what 
to  do  to  keep  themselves  from  starving.  If  the  thought  of  Egypt  had  anything  to 
do  with  their  listlessness  and  inactivity,  it  may  remind  us  how  dangerous  it  is  to  sin, 
the  memory  of  past  transgressions  having  an  uncomfortable  habit  of  springing  up 
at  unexpected  moments,  like  grim  and  shaggy  lions  in  the  path;  if  their  spiritless 
dejection  was  in  no  way  connected  with  the  Dotbau  tragedy,  it  shows  that  saints  are 
not  necessarily  a  whit  more  tahnted  or  fertile  in  expedient  than  their  ungodly 
neighbours,  and  are  frequently  as  helpless  as  the  rest  of  them  in  the  face  of  sudden 
and  overwhelming  calamities.  Grace,  though  it  gives  goodness,  does  not  guarantee 
greatness.  3.  The  parental  exhortation.  Jacob  heard  that  there  was  corn  in  Egypt, 
and  forthwith  proposed  that  his  sons  should  undertake  a  journey  thither  to  fetch  a 
supply  for  their  necessities,  at  the  same  time  prefacing  his  sound  advice  with  a  word 
of  brisk  reproof  at  their  want  of  push  in  the  face  of  news  so  full  of  comfort  and  hope 
as  that  grain  might  be  had  for  the  purchase.  Jacob  clearly  discerned  that,  while  it 
was  right /in  them  to  look  to  God  for  help  in  their  distress,  it  was  also  expected  of 
them  by  God  that  they  should  help  themselves.  Although  God  promises  to  give  his 
people  bread,  he  does  not  undertake  to  relieve  them  of  all  trouble  in  the  matter.  If 
he  provides  corn  in  Egypt,  he  expects  men  to  go  for  it;  and  it  is  a  mark  of  sound 
sense,  if  it  is  not  a  sign  of  grace,  when  men  are  able  to  detect  in  Egypt  providential 
supplies  for  their  necessities.  4.  The  important  mission.  Concerning  which  may  be 
noticed — (1)  The  number  of  the  travellers:  Joseph's  ten  brethren.  Whether  it  was 
for  safety  to  themselves,  or  for  the  advantage  of  the  household  to  enable  them  to 
return  with  larger  supplies,  it  was  clearlya  wise  providential  arrangement  that  the 
ten  brethren  who  had  sinned  against  the  son  of  Rachel  should  go  down  to  Egypt. 
(2)  The  destination  of  the  travellers:  Egypt.  In  all  probability  Egypt  was  the  last 
place  that  they  would  ever  have  thought  of  going  to.  It  is  scarcely  likely  that  they 
had  quite  forgotten  Joseph.  Whether  or  not  they  suspected  that  Joseph  might  yet 
be  alive,  they  knew  that  he  had  gone  to  Egypt  as-  a  slave.  And  now  they  were 
themselves  upon  the  way  to  the  scene  of  Joseph's  captivity.  If  Joseph's  brethren 
were  thoughtful  men  at  all,  they  must  have  had  their  reflections  by  the  way.  (3) 
The  object  of  the  travellers:  to  buy  corn.  This  at  least  was  a  lawful  and  an  honour- 
able purpose,  which  is  more  than  could  be  said  of  some  of  their  previous  adventures. 
But  God's  people,  whether  they  abide  in  Canaan  or  go  to  Egypt,  should  follow  peace 
with,  and  provide  things  honest  in  the  sight  of,  all  men.  5.  The  paternal  reserva- 
tion. "But  Benjamin,  Joseph's  brother,  Jacob  sent  not  with  his  brethren."  If 
Jacob's  reason  for  detaining  Benjamin  was  anxiety  for  himself,  who  was  now  an  old 
man,  and  afraid  to  lose  the  lad  who  served  him  as  the  son  of  his  old  age,  it  may 
remind  us  of  the  feebleness  and  helplessness  of  age,  and  of  the  duty  of  the  young  to 
comfort  and  assist  the  old.  If  it  was  anxiety  for  Benjamin,  whom  he  feared  to 
expose  to  the  fate  of  Joseph,  it  is  a  beautiful  example  of  the  tenderness  and  strength 
of  a  father's  love,  and  may  well  suggest  the  duty  of  rewarding  that  love  with  true 
filial  affection.  If  it  was  anxiety  for  his  ten  sons,  lest  in  the  case  of  Benjamin  they 
should  repeat  the  crime  which  they  had  perpetrated  against  Joseph,  it  shows  how 
difficult  it  is  to  remove  from  the  minds  of  others,  even  of  those  who  have  the  most 
disposition  to  judge  us  with  charity,  unfavourable  impressions  concerning  ourselves 
when  once  they  have  been  formed.  There  is  good  reason  for  believing  that  a  change 
had  passed  upon  the  characters  of  Joseph's  brethren  since  the  dark  deed  at  Dothan. 
Yet  the  old  man  was  afraid  to  trust  them.  If  once  by  our  wickedness  we  forfeit  the 
confidence  of  our  fellow-men,  these  are  not  to  be  blamed  if  in  future  they  fail  to 
trust  our  integrity  and  honour. 

II.  The  interview  with  the  governor  (vers.  6 — 25).  1.  Humble  homage  to 
the  governor.  Arriving  in  Egypt,  the  sons  of  Jacob  were  conducted  to  the  pre- 
sence of  the  viceroy,  and  they  "bowed  down  before  him  with  their  faces."  Such 
respectful  behaviour  was  due  to  the  majesty  of  him  in  whose  presence  they  stood 
(Rom.  xiii.  7),  and  was  admirably  fined  to  the  character  in  which  they  came.  They 
who  have  a  suit  to  press,  at  an  earthly  or  a  heavenly  throne,  should  be  "clothed  with 


480  THE  BOOK   OF   GENESIS.  [ch.  xlii.  1—88. 

humility."  2.  Non-recognition  of  the  governor.  The  moment  Joseph  looked  upon 
the  Hebrew  strangers  he  knew  them  lo  be  his  brethren.  Bui  they  entirely  failed  to 
discern  him;  because  (l)he  spoke  like  a  foreigner — "an  interpreter  was  between 
them;"  (2)  he  diessed  like  an  Egyptian— he  wore  a  garment  of  byssus,  like  an 
Egyptian  priest  (ch.  xli.  42);  (3)  he  swore  like  a  courtier — "By  the  life  of  Pharaoh," 
which  certainly  his  brethren  knew  was  not  the  language  of  Canaan.  Yet,  if  they 
bad  been  as  anxious  to  see  their  lost  brother  as  he  had  been  to  see  them  (it  is  just 
possible  Joseph  may  have  been  on  the  outlook  for  his  brethren,  expecting  them  to 
arrive  with  every  caravan  that  came  from  Canaan),  not  even  these  disguises  would 
have  concealed  his  identity.  3.  Harsh  treatment  by  the  governor.  (1)  The  nature 
of  it.  He  spoke  to  them  roughly,  he  questioned  them  straitty,  he  accused  them 
directly,  he  proved  them  severely,  he  imprisoned  them  closely.  (2)  The  reason  of 
it.  Scarcely  revenge;  ostensibly  to  test  their  sincerity;  but  really  to  conceal  his 
own  identity,  in  order  to  secure  lime  for  thought  how  to  act,  and,  if  possible,  to 
penetrate  into  their  characters.  (3)  The  mitigation  of  it.  At  the  end  of  three 
days  he  somewhat  relaxed  his  proposition,  asking  them  to  leave  only  one  of  their 
brethren  instead  of  nine,  viz.,  Simeon,  whom  he  took  and  bound  befoie  their  eyes. 
4.  Bitter  grief  before  tlie  governor.  (1)  The  remembrance  of  their  sin.  As  a  result 
of, their  rough  handling  by  the  Egyptian  vizier,  they  began  to  think  of  Joseph  and 
their  early  sin  against  him,  which  almost  every  step  in  their  present  experience 
vividly  recalled.  It  is  good  when  affliction  brings  sin  to  mind.  (2)  The  confession 
of  their  guilt.  "We  are  verily  guilty  concerning  our  brother."  It  is  better  when 
tribulation  leads  to  an  acknowledgment  of  ill  desert.  (3)  The  recognition  of  their 
punishment.  They  saw  the  hand  of  God  pursuing  them  for  their  wickedness,  and 
requiting  them,  as  they  imagined,  for  Joseph's  blood.  It  is  best  when  God's  retribu- 
tive dispensations  make  the  soul  sensitive  and  humble.  5.  Unexpected  kindness 
from  the  governor.  Though  he  did  not  depart  f rem  his  original  demand  that  they 
should  bring  down  Benjamin,  and  though  he  insisted  on  retaining  Simeon  as  a 
hostage  for  their  obedience,  he  yet  granted  their  request  for  corn,  and,  unknown  to 
them  as  yet,  caused  their  money  to  be  restored  to  their  sacks.  So  Christ  often  deals 
with  penitents;  first  blows  and  buffetiugs,  ihen  terefits  and  blessings. 

III.  The  ketubn  to  Canaan  (vers.  26—38).  1.  The  sUtrtling  discovery.  Rest- 
ing for  the  night  at  a  wayside  khan,  or  lodging-place,  one  of  the  brethren,  having 
had  occasion  to  give  his  beast  a  little  provender,  opened  out  his  sack,  and  lo!  the 
silver  money  he  had  paid  for  his  corn  was  in  its  mouth.  The  fame  discovery  vias 
made  by  the  rest  on  reaching  Hebron.  The  instruction  which  Joseph  gave  his 
steward  had  not  been  heard  by  them,  and  they  had  penetration  to  see  how  the  cir- 
cumstance might  be  turned  to  their  disadvantage.  They  wire  innocent  of  any 
crime  in  this  matter;  but  how  were  they  to  explain  it  to  the  austere  and  impenetrable 
man  who  fat  upon  the  throne  of  Egypt  1  "  Thus  conscience  dolh  make  cowards  of 
us  all."  The  best  that  can  be  said  of  them  in  this  conneclion  is  that  they  had  piety 
enough  to  see  the  hand  of  God  in  the  ui.  toward  affa'17.  2.  The  faithful  report.  On 
arriving  at  Hebron,  they  related  to  their  father  Jacob  all  that  had  befallen  them  in 
Egypt,  beginning  with  the  rough  reception  they  had  gotten  from  the  governor,  and 
ending  with  the  startling  discovery  they  had  juM  mrde;  in  all  wbiih  th  re  was  at 
least  a  symptom  of  improvement  in  the  characters  of  Ihose  ten  brethren.  Heie  was 
none  of  the  concealment  and  lying  that  marked  them  at  an  earlier  stage  in  their 
history,  as.  when  they  palmed  off  upon  their  aged  i  areut  the  clever  story  of  1he  wild 
beast  and  the  bloody  coat  to  account  for  Joseph's  disappearance.  They  presented 
themselves  as  before  without  their  brother,  but  this  lime  they  told  the  truth:  Simeon 
was  a  hostage  in  Egypt  for  the  bringing  down  of  Benjamin.  3  Theparental  sorrow. 
In  the  anguish  of  the  moment  Jacob  committed  three  mistakes.  (1)  About  his  sons 
who  had  returned  from  Egypt,  whom  he  was  manifestly  blan  ing  for  the  loss  Kth  of 
Simeon  and  Joseph, — "Me  ye  are  bereaving," — which  should  lead  us  to  beware  of 
passing  hasty  judgments  upon  the  chaiacters  of  others,  of  those  even  whom  we  may 
think  we  know  best.  (2)  About  the  two  who  were  detained  in  Egypt,  Jos<  ph  and 
Simeon,  the  first  of  whom  he  thought  he  knew  was  already  dead,  and  the  second  of 
whom  he  feared  had  shared  the  same  fate;  when  as  Joseph  was  in  honour  in  Egypt, 
and  Simeon  was  only  languishing  in  temporary  confinement.  (3)  About  himself 
and  Benjamin,  that  their  separation  would  but  be  the  beginning  of  sorrow  for  them 
both,  whereas  it  was  to  be  the  means  of  leading  both  to  happiness  and  honour.  So 
God's  providences  are  often  misinterpreted  by  his  saints.  Contrast  with  Jacob's 
exclamation  that  of  Paul  in  Rom.  viii.  28.     4.  The  filial  security.     Reuben  offers  to 


oh.  xMi.  1—38.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  481 

undertake  the  charge  of  Benjamin,  and  to  be  responsible  for  his  safe-conduct  to 
Egypt  and  back  again,  and  in  so  far  the  act  of  Eeuben  was  generous  and  kindly 
towards  both  Jacob  and  Benjamin ;  but  his  proposal  that  Jacob  should  slay  two  of 
his  sons  if  he  failed  to  deliver  Benjamin  was  rash,  unnatural,  and  sinful,  and  accord* 
ingly  was  at  once  rejected  by  the  patriarch. 

See  in  this  interesting  narrative — 1.  The  fact  of  an  overruling  providence,  exem- 
plified in  God's  bringing  Joseph's  brethren  to  Egypt.  2.  The  strength  of  human 
affection,  illustrated  by  Joseph's  emotion  in  presence  of  his  brethren,  and  Jacob's 
pathetic  fondness  for  Benjamin.  3.  The  power  of  a  guilty  conscience,  exhibited 
in  the  mutual  recriminations  of  the  brethren  with  reference  to  the  sale  of  Joseph. 
4.  The  beneficial  influence  of  the  discipline  of  life,  as  portrayed  in  the  good  effects 
produced  by  Joseph's  rough  handling  of  his  brethren.  5.  The  short-sightedness  of 
sense  and  reason,  as  seen  in  Jacob's  lamentation,  "  All  these  things  are  against  me," 
while,  on  the  contrary,  all  things  were  working  together  for  his  good. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ch.  xlii. — God's  trials  of  his  people.  The  trial  of  Joseph  is  over.  t«ow  comes  the 
trial  of  his  brethren  and  of  Jacob.  The  Spirit  of  God  is  at  work  in  all  their  hearts. 
True  men  they  were  and  yet  sinful  men.  Before  they  can  be  made  partakers  of  the 
blessing  of  Joseph  they  must  pass  through  the  fire.  He  who  is  appointed  minister 
of  grace  to  them  is  the  instrument  of  their  trials.     Notice — 

I.  The  trial  is  one  of  conscience.  "  We  are  verily  guilty  concerning  our  brother." 
"  His  blood  is  required."  Face  to  face  with  one  whom  they  supposed  to  be  a  heathen 
man,  they  are  reproved.  They  have  to  tell  facts  which  smite  them  with  inward 
reproach. 

II.  The  trial  is  one  of  heart.  To  leave  Simeon  behind,  to  be  afraid  both  for  him 
and  for  themselves  and  for  Benjamin.  To  be  keenly  perplexed  and  agonised  for 
their  old  father.  To  be  deeply  wounded  in  the  remembrance  of  their  brother 
Joseph's  anguish  of  soul  and  helpless  cries  for  pity. 

III.  The  trial  is  one  6f  faith.  "  What  js  this  that  God  hath  done  unto  us  ?  "  In 
the  midst  of  all  the  roughness,  and  the  fear,  and  the  trouble  there  is  still  the  feeling 
that  they  are  being  dealt  with  in  some  mysterious  way  by  God  himself,  and  there  is 
a  mingling  of  faith  with  their  fear.  Reuben  again  represents  the  better  element  in 
their  character,  and  as  they  follow  him  they  are  led  into  peace.  Joseph's  smile  is 
the  smile  of  the  loving  heart  which  sometimes  dissembles  that  it  may  reveal  itself 
the  more  fully  when  the  opportunity  comes.  He  wept  behind  their  backs.  He  was 
hiding  the  intensest  love  and  the  most  abundant  forgiveness  and  pitifulness,  while 
he  appeared  to  be  a  rough  enemy.  Still  there  were  signs  mingled  with  the  harsh 
treatment  that  it  was  not  all  harsh.  The  sacks  were  filled  with  corn,  and  the  money 
was  returned.  A  deeper  faith  would  have  penetrated  the  secret  But  those  that 
have  to  be  led  from  the  feeble  faith  to  the  strong,  have  to  be  tried  with  appearances 
that  seem,  as  Jacob  said, "  all  against"  them.  How  often  the  believer  says,  "All  these 
things  are  against  me,"  when  he  is  already  close  upon  that  very  stream  of  events 
which  will  carry  him  out  of  his  distress  into  the  midst  of  plenty,  peace,  and  the  joy 
of  a  healed  heart  in  its  recovered  blessedness.  Jacob  poured  out  his  natural  fears 
and  complaints,  yet  how  little  they  were  founded  on  truth.  The  son  for  whom  he 
mourned  yet  lived  and  closed  his  eyes,  and  his  gray  hairs  went  to  the.g-ave  in 
peace. — R. 

Vers.  1,  2. — Man's  want  and  Gods  provision.  The  famine  was  part  of  God's 
plan  to  carry  out  his  promise  to  Abraham  (Gen.  xv.  13,  14).  But  it  is  not  merely  a 
fact  in  the  historical  preparation  for  what  he  was  bringing  to  pass ;  a  link  in  the 
chain  of  evonts  leading  on  to  Christ.  We  must  look  upon  it  as  part  of  a  series  of 
types  foreshadowing  gospul  truths.  The  famine  was  a  step  towards  the  promised 
possession,  and  has  its  counterpart  in  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  It  represents  the 
spiritual  want  of  man  ;  conviction  of  sin  (John  xvi.  8 ;  cf.  Rom.  vii.  9),  leading  to 
know  the  power  of  Christ's  work  (Matt,  xviii.  11). 

L  The  first  step  is  consciousness  of  famine  ;  that  a  man's  life  is  more  than  me** : 

GENESIS.  T  ' 


(82 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


Tch.  xLin.  1 — 84. 


more  than  a  supply  of  bodily  wants.  It  is  realising  that  he  has  wants  beyond  tiw 
present  life  ;  that  in  living  for  time  he  has  been  following  a  shadow.  This  know« 
ledge  is  not  natural  to  us.  Bodily  hunger  soon  makes  itself  felt,  but  the  soul's  need 
does  not ;  and  until  it  is  known,  the  man  may  be  "  poor  and  blind  and  naked,"  and 
yet  suppose  that  he  is  "  rich  and  increased  with  goods." 

II.  We  cannot  of  ourselves  supply  that  want.  Gradually  we  learn  how  great 
it  is.  We  want  to  still  the  accusing  voice  of  conscience ;  to  find  a  plea  that  shall 
avail  in  judgment ;  to  see  clearly  the  way  of  life  that  we  may  not  err  therein.  In 
vain  we  look  one  on  another,  seeking  comfort  in  the  good  opinion  of  men,  in  their 
testimony  to  our  upright  life.  In  vain  we  try  to  satisfy  ourselves,  by  promises  to 
do  better,  or  by  offerings  of  our  substance  or  of  our  work.  In  vain  is  it  to  seek  rest 
in  unbelief,  or  in  the  persuasion  that  in  some  way  all  will  be  right.  The  soul  cannot 
thus  find  peace.  There  is  a  voice  which  at  times  will  make  itself  heard — "  all  have 
Binned  " — thou  hast  sinned. 

III.  God  has  provided  bread.  ■  "  I  have  heard  that  there  is  corn  in  Egypt "  (cf . 
Bom.  x.  18),  answers  to  the  gospel  telling  of  the  bread  of  life.  As  to  this  we  mark — 
1.  It  was  provided  before  the  want  arose  (1  Pet.  i.  20;  Bev.  xiii.  8).  The  gospel 
tells  us  of  what  has  already  been  done,  not  of  a  gift  to  come  into  existence  on 
certain  conditions.  The  ransom  of  our  souls  has  been  paid.  We  have  to  believe 
and  take  (Bev.  xxii.  17).  2.  now  faith  works.  They  must  go  for  that  food  which 
was  ready  for  them.  To  take  the  bread  of  life  must  be  a  real  earnest  act,  not  a 
listless  assent.  The  manna  which  was  to  be  gathered,  the  brazen  serpent  to  which 
the  sick  were  to  look,  the  command  to  the  impotent  "  Bise,  take  up  thy  bed  and 
walk,"  all  show  that  it  is  not  enough  merely  to  wish,  there  must  be  the  effort  of 
faith  (cf .  1  Thess.  i.  3).  This  is  a  law  of  the  spiritual  kingdom.  As  natural  laws 
regulate  results  within  their  domain,  so  spiritual  results  must  be  sought  in  accord- 
ance with  spiritual  laws.  3.  It  is  our  Brother  who  has  made  provision  for  us.  This 
is  our  confidence.  He  waits  to  reveal  himself  when  in  humility  and  emptiness  we 
come  to  him,  and  to  give  us  plenty  (1  Cor.  iii.  21,  22). — M. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER.  XLIII. 


Vert.  1,  2. — And  the  famine  was  sore 
(literally,  was  heavy)  in  the  land  (so.  of 
Canaan).  And  it  came  to  pass  (how  long 
after  the  return  of  Joseph's  brethren  cannot 
be  determined,  as  the  quantity  of  grain  they 
brought  or  the  number  that  partook  of  it 
cannot  possibly  be  estimated ;  but  it  may  be 
reasonably  inferred  that  several  months  had 
elapsed  since  their  arrival  at  Hebron),  when 
they  had  eaten  up — literally,  had  finished  to 
eat  up,  i.  e.  not  nearly  (Mercerus,  Bush),  but 
entirely  consumed  —  the  corn  which  they 
had  brought  out  of  Egypt, — it  is  probable 
that  only  Jacob's  family  partook  of  the  Egypt- 
ian corn,"  the  slaves  supporting  themselves 
on  roots,  vegetables,  and  milk  (Calvin,  Rosen- 
miiller,  Gerlach)  —  their  father  said  unto 
them,  Go  again,  buy  us  a  little  food.  What 
they  could  buy  would  be  little  in  proportion 
to  their  needs. 

Ver.  3. — And  Judah  spake  unto  him,  say- 
ing,— Judah  now  becomes  the  spokesman, 
either  because  Reuben's  entreaty  had  been 
rejected,  and  Levi,  who  followed  Reuben  and 
Simeon  in  respect  of  age,  had  forfeited  his 
father's  confidence  though  his  treachery  to  the 


Shechemites  (Keil,  Murphy);  or  because  he 
could  speak  to  his  father  with  greater  free- 
dom, having  a  freer  conscience  than  the  rest 
(Lange) ;  or  because  he  was  a  man  possessed 
of  greater  prudence  and  ability  than  the  rest 
(Lawson),  if  indeed  the  suggestion  is  not 
correct  that  they  all  endeavoured  to  persuade 
their  father,  though  Judah's  eloquence  alone 
is  recorded  (Calvin)  —  the  man  (i  e.  the 
Egyptian  viceroy)  did  solemnly  protest 
(literally,  protesting  did  protest,  i.  e.  did 
earnestly  protest)  unto  us,  saying, — with  an 
oath  which  is  not  here  repeated  (ch.  xlii.  15) 
— Ye  shall  not  see  my  face,  except  your 
brother  be  with  yon. 

Vers.  4,  5. — If  thou  wilt  send — literally, 
if  thou  art  sending,  i.  e.  if  thou  art  agreeable 
to  send  (cf.  ch.  xxiv.  42,  49 ;  Judges  vi.  36) 
— our  brother  with  us,  we  will  go  down  and 
buy  thee  food:  but  (literally,  and)  if  thou 
wilt  not  send  him  (a  similar  form  of  expression 
to  the  above,  the  two  words  K^,  being,  and 
tJS,  not  being,  including  the  substantive  verb, 
and  being  conjoined  with  a  participle  for  th* 
finite  verb),  we  will  not  go  down:  forthem&s 
said  unto  us,  Ye  shall  not  see  my  face,  except 
your  brother  t«  with  you.  Judah's  peremp- 
tory language  Jeceives  sufficient  justification 


OH.  XLIII.  1 — 34.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


4gB 


from  the  fact  that  he  believed  the  Egyptian 
governor  to  be  in  thorough  earnest  when  he 
declared  that  without  Benjamin  they  should 
»ue  a  second  time  in  vain. 

Ver.  6. — And  Israel  said, — this  is  the 
second  time  that  Jacob  is  so  designated  in  the 
history  of  Joseph,  the  first  time  being  in  ch. 
xxxvii.,  which  recites  the  sad  account  of 
Joseph's  disappearance  from  the  family  circle. 
The  recurrence  of  what'may  eventually  prove 
another  breach  in  the  theocratic  family  is 
probably  the  circumstance  that  revives  the 
name  Israel,  which  besides  seems  to  prevail 
throughout  the  chapter  (vide  vers.  8,  11) — 
Wherefore  dealt  ye  so  ill  with  me,  as  to  tell 
the  man  whether  ye  had  yet  a  brother  ? — 
literally,  whether  yet  to  you  a  brother  (sc. 
there  was). 

Ver.  7. — And  they  said,  The  man  asked 
us  straitly  of  our  state,  and  of  our  kindred, 
saying,  Is  your  father  yet  alive  ?  have  ye 
another  brother  1  Though  not  appearing  in 
the  preceding  narrative  of  the  historian  (ch. 
xlii.  13,  32),  it  must  yet  be  held  as  accurate 
that  the  information  given  to  Joseph  about 
Jacob  and  Benjamin  was  supplied  in  answer  to 
direct  inquiries,  since  Judah  afterwards  gives 
the  same  account  of  it  (ch.  xliv.  19)  when 
pleading  before  Joseph  in  behalf  of  Benjamin. 
And  we  told  him  according  to  the  tenor  of 
these  words — literally,  according  to  these 
wards,  i.  e.  either  in  conformity  to  his  ques- 
tions (Ainsworth,  Rosenm  tiller,  Keil),  Kard 
rfjv  iirtpiliTtioiv  Ta«Ti\v  (LXX.),juxta  idquod 
fuerat  sciscitatus  (Vulgate),  or  like  those 
words  we  have  told  thee  (Kalisch).  Could  we 
certainly  know  (literally,  knowing  could  we 
knmo)  that  he  would  say,  Bring  your  brother 
down? 

Vers.  8 — 10. — And  Judah  said  unto  Israel 
his  father,  Send  the  lad  with  me  (Benjamin, 
though  styled  a  lad,  must  have  been  at  this 
time  upwards  of  twenty  years  of  age),  and  we 
will  arise  and  go;  that  we  may  (literally,  and 
we  shall)  live,  and  not  die,  both  we,  and  thou, 
and  also  our  little  ones.  I  will  be  surety 
for  him  (the  verb  conveys  the  idea  of  chang- 
ing places  with  another) ;  of  my  hand  shaft 
thou  require  him  (vide  ch.  ix.  5):  if  I  bring 
him  not  unto  thee,  and  set  him  before  thee, 
— the  words  are  even  more  emphatic  than 
those  of  Reuben  (ch.  xlii.  37) — then  let  me 
bear  the  blame  for  ever  —  literally,  and  I 
shall  be  a  sinner  (i  e.  liable  to  punishment 
as  a  sinner)  against  thee  all  the  days  (sc.  of 
my  life).  The  thought  is  elliptical.  Judah 
means  that  if  he  does  not  return  with  Ben- 
jamin he  shall  both  have  failed  in  his  promise 
and  be  guilty  of  a  dire  transgression  against 
his  father  (cf.  1  Kings  i.  21).  For  except  we 
had  lingered,  surely  now  we  had  returned 
this  second  time — literally,  these  two  times. 
The  nobility  of  character  which  shines  out  so 
tonspiouoURly  in  Judah'i  language  is  after- 


wards signally  illustrated  in  his  pathetta 
pleading  before  Joseph,  and  goes  far  to  count- 
enance the  suggestion  that  a  change  mu§t 
have  taken  place  in  his  inner  life  since  the 
incidents  recorded  of  him  in  chs.  xxxvii.  and 
xxxviii. 

Ver.  11. — And  their  father  Israel  said 
unto  them,  If  it  must  be  so  now  (literally, 
if  so  now),  do  this;  take  of  the  best  fruits 
in  the  land  (literally,  of  the  song  of  the  land, 
i.  e.  of  its  choicest  and  most  praised  produc- 
tions) in  your  vessels,  and  carry  down  the 
man  a  present.  That  Jacob  could  propose  to 
send  a  handsome  present  of  rich  fruits  to  the 
Egyptian  viceroy  has  been  regarded  as  incon- 
sistent with  the  prevalence  of  a  famine  in  the 
land  of  Canaan  for  over  two  or  three  years 
(Bohlen) ;  but  (1)  the  failure  of  the  cereal 
crops  does  not  necessarily  imply  a  like 
absence  of  fruit,  and  (2)  it  does  not  follow 
that,  though  Jacob  selected  the  under-men- 
tioned articles  for  his  gift,  they  existed  in 
abundance,  while  (3)  if  the  fruit  harvest  was 
small,  an  offering  such  as  is  here  described 
would  only  be  all  the  more  luxuriant  and 
valuable  on  that  account  (Kurtz,  Kalisch). 
A  little  balm, — balsam  (vide  ch.  xxxvii.  25) 
— and  a  little  honey, — BO?,  grape  honey, 
called  by  the  Arabians  dibs,  and  the  Persians 
dushab,  was  prepared  by  boiling  down  must 
or  new  wine  to  a  third  or  half;  hence  called 
by  the  Greeks  ei^rtpia,  and  by  the  Romans 
sapa,  defrutum.  It  is  still  imported  into 
Egypt  from  the  district  of  Hebron.  That  it 
was  not  the  honey  of  bees,  juIXe  (LXX. ),  mel 
(Vulgate),  is  rendered  probable  by  the  cir- 
cumstance that  Egypt  abounds  in  this  excel- 
lent production  of  nature  (vide  Michaelis, 
'Suppl.,'  p.  391)— spices,  and  myrrh  (vide 
ch.  xxxvii.  25),  nnts, — D^DS,  an  oblong 
species  of  nut,  so  called  from  its  being  flat  on 
one  side  and  bellying  out  on  the  other  (the 
pistacia  vera  of  Linnaeus),  having  an  oily 
kernel  which  is  most  palatable  to  Orientals 
(vide  Kalisch  in  loco) — and  almonds.  The 
IjP.tf  or  almond  tree,  so  called  because  of  all 
trees  it  is  the  first  to  arouse  frc  m  the  sleep  of 
winter,  the  root  being  ~I\W,  to  be  sleepless, 
(Gesenius),  does  not  seem  to  have  been  in- 
digenous in  Egypt,  while  it  flourishes  in 
Syria  and  Palestine  (Kalisch). 

Ver.  12 — And  take  double  money  (literally, 
money  of  a  second,  i.  e.  of  the  same,  amount; 
not  twice  as  much  as  the  first  time,  but  simply 
as  much  as  the  first  time)  in  your  hand; 
and  the  money  that  was  brought  again  (oi 
returned)  in  the  mouth  of  your  sacks,  carry 
it  again  in  your  band ;  peradventure  it  was 
an  oversight  (literally,  a  something  caused  to 
wander,  a  mistake,  from  a  root  signifying  to 


Vers.  18,  14. — Take  also  your  brother, 
i  I  2 


184 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  ram.  1 — 34, 


ind  arise,  go  again  unto  the  man :  and  God 
Almighty — El  Shaddai,  the  covenant  God  of 
Abraham  (ch.  xvii.  1),  and  of  Jacob  himself 
(ch.  xxxv.  11) — give  yon  mercy  (literally, 
bowels,  hence  very  tender  affection,  the  inward 
parts  being  regarded  as  the  seat  of  the  emo- 
tions) before  the  man,  that  he  may  send 
away — literally,  and  he  shall  send  with  you 
(Kalisch),  or  for  you  (Keil) — your  other 
brother,  and  Benjamin.  If  I  be  bereaved  of 
my  children,  I  am  bereaved — literally,  and  I, 
if  I  am  berewed,  J  am  bereaved,  an  expression 
of  the  patriarch's  acquiescence  in  the  Divine 
will  (cf.  2  Kings  vii.  4 ;  Esther  iv.  16). 

Ver.  15. — And  the  men  took  that  present 
(which  Jacob  had  specified),  and  they  took 
double  money  (literally,  a  doubling  of  the 
money,  i.  e.  the  first  money,  and  as  much 
again  for  the  new  purchase;  the  phrase  is 
different  from  that  used  in  ver.  12,  though 
the  words  are  the  same)  in  their  hand,  and 
Benjamin  (sc.  they  took  with  them) ;  and  rose 
up,  and  went  down  to  Egypt,  and  stood  be- 
fore Joseph  (i.  e.  in  the  corn-market). 

Ver.  16. — And  when  (literally,  and)  Joseph 
saw  Benjamin  with  them,  he  (literally,  and 
he)  said  to  the  ruler  of  his  house, — literally, 
to  him  who  was  over  his  house,  i  e.  the 
steward  (cf.  ch.  xxiv.  2  ;  xxxix.  4 ;  xliv.  1) 
— Bring  these  men  home  (i.  e.  conduct  these 
men  to  my  house,  which  wa3  probably  at 
some  distance),  and  slay, — literally,  slay  a 
slaughter.  The  assertion  that  the  narrator 
is  here  guilty  of  an  inaccuracy  in  represent- 
ing Joseph  as  having  animal  food  prepared 
for  himself  and  his  guests  (Bohlen)  is  refuted 
by  Herodotus  (ii.  37,  40)  and  by  Wilkinson 
(Ancient  Egyptians,'  vol.  ii.  ch.  vii.  pp. 
22,  23,  ed.  1878),  who  says  that  "beef  and 
goose  constituted  the  principal  part  of  the 
animal  food  throughout  Egypt,"  and  that 
according  to  the  sculptures  "a  consider- 
able quantity  of  meat  was  served  up  at  those 
repasts  to  which  strangers  were  invited." 
"Though  there  was  scarcely  an  animal 
which  was  not  held  sacred  in  some  province, 
there  was,  perhaps  with  the  only  exception 
of  the  cow,  none  which  was  not  killed  and 
eaten  in  other  parts  of  the  land "  (Kalisch) 
— and  make  ready ;  for  these  men  shall 
dine  with  me  at  noon — literally,  at  the 
double  lights  (DHnV),  i.  e.  at  mid-day,  the 
time  of  greatest  splendour. 

Vers.  17, 18. — And  the  man  did  as  Joseph 
bade ;  and  the  man  brought  the  men  into 
Joseph's  house.  And  the  men  were  afraid, 
because  they  were  brought  into  Joseph's 
house.  "A  more  natural  picture  of  the 
conduct  of  men  from  the  country,  when 
taken  into  the  house  of  a  superior,  cannot 
be  drawn.  When  they  are  told  to  go  inside 
they  at  once  suspect  that  they  are  about  to 
be  punished  or  confined  "  (Roberts'  'Oriental 
Illustrations  '  p.  49).     And  they  said  {sc.  to 


themselves),  Because  of  the  money  that 
was  returned  in  our  sacks  at  the  first  time 
are  we  brought  in  ;  that  he  may  seek  occa- 
sion against  us, — literally,  that  he  may  roVi 
himself  upon  us  (cf.  Job  xxx.  14  ;  Ps.  xxii 
8  ;  xxxvii.  5 ;  Prov.  xvi.  3).  "  To  say  a 
man  rolls  himself  upon  another  is  the 
Eastern  way  of  saying  he  falls  upon  him  " 
(Roberts'  '  Oriental  Illustrations,*  p.  49)— 
and  fall  upon  us,  and  take  us  for  bondmen, 
and  our  asses.  The  brethren  of  Joseph 
were  clearly  apprehensive  of  some  serious 
stratagem  to  deprive  them  of  liberty. 

Vers.  19 — 22. — And  they  came  near  to 
the  steward  of  Joseph's  house  (literally,  the 
man  who  was  over  Joseph's  house),  and 
they  communed  (or  spake)  with  him  at  the 
door  of  the  house  (i.  e.  before  they  entered), 
and  said,  0  sir, — literally,  Pray,  my  lord; 
St6jxi8a  Kvpu  (LXX. ) — we  came  indeed  down 
at  the  first  time  to  buy  food :  and  it  came 
to  pass,  when  we  came  to  the  inn, — or  halt- 
ing-place (vide  ch.  xlii.  27) — that  we  opened 
our  sacks, — thi3  was  not  strictly  accurate,  as 
only  one  sack  had  been  opened  at  the  way- 
side khan,  while  the  others  were  not  examined 
till  they  had  reached  home ;  though,  as  an 
explanation  of  the  difficulty,  it  has  been 
suggested  (vide  Keil's  '  Introduction,'  vol.  i. 
p.  109,  note  by  Prof.  Douglas)  that  all  the 
sacks  may  have  been,  and  probably  weie, 
opened  at  the  inn,  but  that  only  one  man 
found  his  money  in  his  sack's  mouth,  as  the 
next  clause  explains  —  and,  behold,  every 
man's  money  was  in  the  mouth  of  his  sack, 
— literally,  a  man's  money  in  the  mouth  of 
his  sack,  L  e.  one  of  them  found  his  money 
there,  while  the  others  discovered  their 
money,  which  was  not  "in  the  sack's  mouth," 
but  "in  the  sack"  (ch.  xlii.  35),  only  on 
emptying  their  sacks  at  home — our  money 
in  full  weight  (literally,  according  to  its 
weight) :  and  we  have  brought  it  again  in 
our  hand.  And  other  money  (i.  e.  the  second 
silver  of  ver.  12)  have  we  brought  down  in 
our  hands  to  buy  food :  we  cannot  tell  who 
put  our  money  in  our  sacks. 

Ver.  23. — And  he  said,  Peace  be  to  you, 
fear  not:  your  God  (Elohim),  and  the  God 
of  your  father,  —an  indication  that  Joseph's 
steward  had  been  taught  to  fear  and  trust 
the  God  of  the  Hebrews  (Wordsworth, 
Murphy) — hath  given  you  treasure  in  your 
sacks:  I  had  your  money  (literally,  your 
money  came  to  me).  And  he  brought 
Simeon  out  unto  them, 

Ver.  24. — And  the  man  (Joseph's  steward) 
brought  the  men  into  Joseph's  house,  and 
gave  them  water,  and  they  washed  their 
feet  (cf.  ch.  rviii.  4  ;  xxiv.  32)  ;  and  he 
gave  their  asses  provender. 

Ver.  25. — And  they  made  ready  th«  pre- 
sent against  Joseph  came  at  noon :  for 
tii-y   heard   that   they  should    eat   bread 


CH.  XLIII.  1 — 34.] 


THE  BOOK  ©F  GENESIS. 


4M 


there.  This  must  have  been  communicated 
to  them  after  they  had  entered  .Joseph's 
palace,  since  they  had  obviously  not  learnt  it 
upon  the  way  thither  (vide  supra,  ver.  18). 

Ver.  26. — And  when  Joseph  came  home 
(after  the  despatch  of  public  business),  they 
brought  him  the  present  which  was  in 
their  hand  (vide  ver.  11)  into  the  house, 
and  bowed  themselves  to  him  to  the  earth. 
Thus  they  fulfilled  the  dream  of  the  sheaves 
(ch.  xxxvii.  7  ;  cf.  ch.  xviii.  2 ;  xix.  1). 

Ver.  27. — And  he  asked  them  of  their 
welfare  (literally,  peace),  and- said,  Is  your 
father  well  (literally,  Is  there  peace  to  your 
father?),  the  old  man  of  whom  ye  spake  1 
Is  he  yet  alive  1 

Ver.  28. — And  they  answered,  Thy  ser- 
vant our  father  is  in  good  health,  he  is 
yet  alive.  And  they  bowed  down  their 
heads,  and  made  obeisance. 

Ver.  29. — And  he  (i.  e.  Joseph)  lifted  up 
his  eyes,  and  saw  his  brother  Benjamin, 
his  mother's  son,  and  said,  Is  this  your 
younger  brother,  of  whom  ye  spake  unto 
me  ?  And  he  Baid  (without  waiting  for  an 
answer),  God  be  gracious  unto  thee,  my 
ion.  The  tenderness  of  this  language  was 
much  fitted  to  encourage  the  brethren. 

Ver.  30. — And  Joseph  made  haste;  for 
his  bowels  did  yearn  (literally,  were  becom- 
ing warm,  from  intensity  of  love)  upon  his 
brother :  and  he  sought  where  to  weep ; — 
the  second  occasion  on  which  Joseph  is 
represented  as  overcome  by  the  strength  of 
his  inward  emotion,  the  first  having  been 
when  his  brethren  were  speaking  about  their 
cruelty  towards  himself  (ch.  xlii.  24) — and 
he  entered  into  his  chamber,  and  wept  there. 

Ver.  31. — And  he  washed  his  face  (an 
indication  of  the  violence  of  his  weeping), 
and  went  out  (from  his  chamber),  and  re- 
frained himself  (keeping  his  tears  in  check), 
and  said,  Set  on  bread — an  expression  used 
at  the  present  day  in  Egypt  for  bringing 
dinner  (Wilkinson,  'Ancient  Egyptians, 
vol.  ii.  p.  41,  od.  1878). 

Ver.  32. — And  they  set  on  for  him  by 
himself,  and  for  them  by  themselves,  and 
for  the  Egyptians,  which  did  eat  with  him, 
by  themselves.  "Joseph  eats  apart  from 
his  brethren,  keeping  strictly  to  the  Egyptian 
mode  ;  and  the  history  does  not  omit  to  re- 
mark that  in  this  point  he  adhered  to  the 
custom  of  the  country"  (Havernick,  §  21). 
Because  the  Egyptians  might  not  eat  bread 
with  the  Hebrews.  Herodotus  (ii.  41) 
aQii-ms  that  the  Egyptians  would  neither  use 


the  knife,  spit,  or  basin  of  a  Grecian,  noi 

taste  the  flesh  of  a  clean  cow  if  it  happened 
to  be  cut  with  a  Grecian  knife.  For  that  ii 
an  abomination  unto  the  Egyptians.  The 
reason  for  this  separation  from  foreigners 
being  that  they  dreaded  being  polluted  by 
such  as  killed  and  ate  cows,  which  animals 
were  held  in  high  veneration  in  Egypt. 

Ver.  33. — And  they  sat  before  him, — that 
the  Egyptians  sat  at  meals  is  in  exact  accord- 
ance with  the  representations  on  the  monu- 
ments, in  which  they  are  never  exhibited  as 
reposing  on  couches,  but  always  as  seated 
round  a  circular  table  resembling  the  mono- 
podium  of  the  Romans  (vide  Wilkinson, 
'Ancient  Egyptians,'  voL  ii  pp.  40,  41, 
with  Dr.  Birch's  note ;  Hengstenberg's 
'  Egypt  and  the  Books  of  Moses,  ch.  i.  p. 
38) — the  firstborn  according  to  his  birth- 
right, and  the  youngest  according  to  his 
youth:  and  the  men  marvelled  one  at  an- 
other— probably  thinking  that  Joseph  musl 
have  been  supernaturally  enlightened  to  dis- 
cover so  exactly  the  ages  of  strangers. 

Ver.  34. — And  he  took  and  sent  (literally, 
and  he  sent)  messes — maseoth,  from  nasa,  to 
take  or  lift  up,  i.  e.  things  taken  or  lifted 
up,  hence  portions  or  gifts  (2  Sam.  xi.  8) — 
unto  them  from  before  him  (cf.  1  Sam. 
ix.  23).  The  practice  of  thus  honouring 
guests  wa3  also  observed  among  other  nations 
(vide  'Iliad,'  vii.  321).  But  Benjamin's 
mess  (or  portion)  was  five  times  so  much  as 
any  of  theirs — literally,  exceeded  the  portions 
of  all  of  them  five  hands,  i.  e.  five  times. 
Herodotus  (vi.  57)  mentions  that  among  the 
Spartans  the  king  received  a  double  portion. 
The  unusually  large  portion  assigned  to 
Benjamin  was  designed  as  an  expression  oi 
his  strong  fraternal  affection,  and  perhaps 
also  as  a  test  of  his  brethren  to  ascertain  il 
they  were  now  free  from  that  spirit  of  envy 
which  had  prompted  their  former  cruelty  to 
him.  And  they  drank,  and  were  merry 
with  him — literally,  and  drank  largely  with 
him.  Though  the  verb  "I3B>  sometimes 
signifies  to  drink  .to  the  full  (Haggai  i  6  ; 
Cant.  v.  1),  and  though  intoxication  was  not 
unusuai  at  Egyptian  entertainments,  there  is 
no  reason  to  suppose  that  either  Joseph  or 
his  brethren  were  inebriated  (Vulgate, 
Alford),  or  that  more  is  meant  than  simply 
that  their  hearts  became  exhilarated  "  be- 
cause their  cares  were  dissipated  by  the 
kindness  they  were  receiving,  the  presence 
of  Simeon,  and  the  attention  paid  to  Benja> 
min  "  ( Murphy  V 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1— 34.—  The  second  visit  of  Joseph's  brethren  to  Egypt.  I.  The  scene  in 
Jacob's  house  at  Hkbron  (vers.  1 — 15).  1.  The  second  journey  proposed.  "Go 
■gain,  boy  as  a  little  food."     It  was  necessitated  by  the  long  continuance  of  the 


486  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  [<*■  «■»»»•  S— 34 

famine,  and  the  complete  consumption  of  the  corn  they  had  brought  from  Egypt  or 
the  previous  occasion.  2.  The  second  journey  agreed  on.  (1)  The  difficulty  started. 
As  explained  by  Judah,  it  was  useless  to  go  to  Egypt  unless  accompanied  by  Ben- 
jamin, since  the  governor  had  solemnly  protested  and  sworn  that  without  him  they 
should  not  only  not  obtain  a  grain  of  corn,  but  they  should  not  even  be  admitted  to 
his  presence.  But  to  speak  of  taking  Benjamin  to  Egypt,  as  Jacob  had  already 
testified,  and  now  again  declared,  was  like  driving  a  poniard  into  the  old  man's 
heart.  As  he  thinks  of  it  he  can  hardly  forbear  reproaching  his  stalwart  song 
for  having  heaped  upon  him  one  more  unkindness  in  even  mentioning  the  fact  of 
Benjamin's  existence.  (2)  The  difficulty  removed.  Skilfully  the  eloquent  Judah 
reasons  with  his  aged  sire,  first  pointing  out  that  it  was  only  in  reply  to  the  grand 
vizier's  interrogations  that  they  had  referred  to  Benjamin  at  all,  that,  not  suspecting 
any  sinister  motives  on  the  part  of  their  noble  questioner,  they  had  never  dreamt 
of  attempting  concealment  or  evasion  in  their  answers;  urging  the  imperative 
necessity  for  Benjamin's  going  down  with  them  if  either  they  or  their  little  ones 
were  to  be  kept  from  starvation,  solemnly  engaging  to  be  surety  for  the  safe 
convoy  of  the  beloved  youth,  and  lastly  delicately  hinting  that  but  for  the  delay 
occasioned  by  his  (their  father's)  reluctance  they  might  have  been  to  Egypt  and 
back  since  he  first  spoke  of  their  going.  3.  The  second  journey  prepared  for  (vers. 
11 — 13).  Since  it  was  inevitable  that  Benjamin  must  go,  Jacob  recommended  them 
along  with  him  to  take  (1)  a  present  in  their  vessels  for  the  great  man  whose  favour 
they  desired  to  secure ;  (2)  second  money,  or  money  for  the  purchase  of  the  grain 
they  wished,  to  show  that  they  came  not  as  beggars,  but  as  buyers ;  (3)  the  silver 
that  had  been  returned  in  their  sacks,  to  prove  that  they  were  honest,  and  regarded 
the  matter  simply  as  an  oversight.  It  is  well  always  to  put  the  best  construction  on 
a  dubious  matter,  and  in  particular  to  let  not  our  good  be  evil  spoken  of.  4.  The 
tecond  journey  began  (vers.  14,  15).  Listening  to  their  father's  prayer, — "  God 
Almighty  give  you  mercy  before  the  man," — witnessing  their  father's  sorrowful 
resignation, — "  If  I  be  bereaved,  I  am  bereaved," — and  observing  faithfully  their 
father's  instructions,  carrying  a  present  of  "  the  song  of  the  land  "  and  double  money 
in  their  hands,  the  men  rose  up  and  went  down  to  Egypt.  5.  The  second  journey 
completed  (ver.  15).  In  the  providence  of  God  they  reached  the  land  of  Egypt  and 
stood  before  Joseph.  It  is  a  special  mercy  to  travellers  when,  escaping  all  the 
perils  of  the  way,  they  arrive  at  their  desired  destinations  in  peace. 

II.  The  scene  in  Joseph's  house  in  Egypt  (vers.  16—34).  1.  The  reception  of 
the  brethren  (vers.  16,  17).  Scarcely  had  the  brethren  arrived  at  the  public  mart 
than  they  were  observed  by  Joseph.  Directing  his  eyes  eagerly  in  search  of  Ben- 
jamin, he  is  gratified  by  noticing  that  he  has  not  been  left  behind.  Preserving  as 
hefore  his  incognito,  he  gives  instructions  to  his  steward  to  convey  them  to  his 
palace,  and  prepare  a  dinner  for  him  and  them  at  the  hour  of  noon.  2.  The  appre- 
Iiensions  of  the  brethren  (vers.  18 — 24).  (1)  The  nature  of  them.  They  feared  lest 
Joseph  was  only  seeking  occasion  to  fall  upon  them  and  take  them  for  bondmen. 
(2)  The  ground  of  them.  This  was  the  money  which  bud  been  discovered  in  their 
sacks,  and  for  which  as  they  imagined  they  were  now  being  arrested.  (3)  The 
expression  of  them.  Without  directly  saying  what  they  dreaded,  they  begin  to 
deprecate  the  wrath  of  the  steward,  and  to  offer  explanations  concerning  the  money 
(vers.  20 — 22).  (4)  The  removal  of  them.  Although  the  steward  was  not  yet 
■'  aware  that  the  strangers  were  his  master's  brethren,  he  was  perfectly  cognisant  of  their 
innocence  in  the  matter  of  the  money,  and  of  his  master's  desire  to  show  them  kind- 
ness. Accordingly  he  seeks  to  reassure  them  by  encouraging  them  to  dismiss  theii 
apprehensions — "Peace  be  to  you,  fear  not;"  by  telling  them  to  regard  the  trea- 
sure in  their  sacks  as  a  Divine  gift,  since  it  was  indubitable  that  he  had  received 
their  money — "  Your  God  hath  given  you  treasure  in  your  sacks :  I  had  your  money ;  " 
by  producing  Simeon  before  them,  no  doubt  in  the  enjoyment  of  perfect  health 
and  happiness — "  and  he  brought  Simeon  out  unto  them:"  by  exercising  towards 
them  the  rights  of  hospitality — "  the  man  gave  them  water,  and  they  washed  their 
feet ; "  and  by  providing  for  the  wants  of  their  beasts — "  and  he  gave  their  asset 
provender."  3.  The  homage  of  the  brethren  (vers.  25 — 31).  (1)  Its  presentation : 
with  precious  gift* — the  delicacies  of  the  land  of  Canaan ;  with  dutiful  obeiaanoe 


en.  xttn.  1—34.3  THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS.  481 

— " they  bowed  themselves  to  him  to  the  earth."  (2)  Its  acceptance;  which  wm 
indicated  by  the  friendly  inquiries  of  the  governor — "  Is  your  father  well,  the  old 
man  of  whom  ye  apake?  Is  he  yet  alive?"  "Is  this  your  younger  brother,  of 
whom  ye  spake  unto  me  ? '  by  the  warm  benediction  he  pronounced  on  Benjamin— 
"  God  be  gracious  unto  thee,  my  son ;  "  by  the  rising  emotion  which  he  could  with 
difficulty  repress — "  his  bowels  did  yearn  upon  his  brother,  and  he  sought  where  to 
weep;"'  and  by  the  order  which  he  issued  to  his  servants — "Set  on  bread."  4. 
Thu  entertainment  of th*.  brethren.  (1)  The  separation  of  the  guests,  first  from  the 
host,  and  then  from  one  another,  the  Egyptians  from  the  Canaanites,  and  both  from 
Joseph,  the  reason  heiug  that  the  Egyptians  might  not  eat-with  foreigners  in  case  oi 
contracting  pollution.  (2)  The  order  of  the  brethren,  each  being  arranged  before 
the  governor  in  accordance  with  their  ages,  a  circumstance  which  appears  to  have 
simultaneously  evoked  their  wonder — "  and  the  men  marvelled  one  at  another."  (3) 
The  portions  from  the  host,  one  to  each  of  the  nine  oldest,  and  five  to  the  youngest, 
which  were  designed  as  marks  of  special  favour.  (4)  The  hilarity  of  the  company. 
The  fears  of  the  brethren  disappearing,  and  their  enjoyment  rising,  as  they  talked 
»nd  drank  with  the  gracious  governor  who  had  brought  them  to  his  palace. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 
Ch.  xliii. — Lessons  of  life.     I.  The  chief  lesson  of  this  chapter  is  the  mingling 

TOGETHER   OF   THE   PROVIDENTIAL   GOVERNMENT   OF   GOD  WITH   HIS  PURPOSE   OF  GRACE. 

It  was  part  of  the  Divine  plan  that  Jacob  and  his  family  should  be  settled  for  a  long 
period  in  Egypt.  It  could  only  be  brought  about  by  the  transference  in  some  way 
of .  the  point  of  attraction  to  Jacob's  heart  from  Canaan  to  the  strange  land.  Hence 
"  Jacob  "  is  now  "  Israel,"  reminding  us  how  the  future  is  involved  in  all  the  events 
of  this  time.  "  Judah  "  is  the  chief  agent  in  this  matter.  The  very  names  are 
significant  of  Divine  promises — "Judah,"  "Israel,"  "Joseph,"  "Benjamin."  The 
conduct  of  Joseph  cannot  be  explained  except  on  the  ground  of  his  inspiration. 
He  is  not  acting.  He  is  not  trifling  with  human  feelings.  He  is  not  merely  fol- 
lowing the  dictate  of  his  own  personal  affections.  He  is,  under  Divine  direction, 
planning  for  the  removal  of  his  father's  house  to  Egypt  that  the  people  of  God 
may  pass  through  their  season  of  trial  in  the  house  of  bondage.     Another  point — 

II.  God's  blessing  on  a  true  humanity.  The  thoroughly  human  character  of 
the  narrative.  The  tenderness,  the  pathos,  the  simplicity,  the  truthfulness,  espe- 
cially in  the  case  of  Joseph  himself.  How  little  he  had  been  spoiled  by  prosperity  I 
That  is  the  criterion  of  real  greatness.  The  Bible  histories  help  us  to  keep  in  mind 
that  real  religion  does  not  suppress  the  human,  but  preserves  and  develops  all  that 
is  best  and  noblest  in  the  man. 

III.  The  gracious  wisdom  of  the  good  man  in  his  conduct  towards  others. 
Joseph's  dealing  with  his  brethren  gradually  preparing  their  minds  for  the  great 
announcement  which  was  soon  to  be  made.  Both  his  kindness  to  them  and  his  par- 
ticular inquiries  after  Jacob,  and  affectionate  salute  of  Benjamin,  must  have  roused 
their  curiosity  and  disarmed  tlieir  terrors.  As  they  "  drank  and  were  merry  "  with 
the  great  Egyptian  ruler,  and  their  youngest  brother  rejoiced  in  the  special  mark  of 
favour,  which  was  favour  to  all,  they  must  have  felt  the  bondage  of  their  previous 
apprehensions  slipping  away  from  them,  and  have  anticipated  some  good  thing  in 
preparation  for  them.  Moreover,  there  may  have  been  the  intention  working  in 
Joseph's  mind  of  accustoming  the  Egyptians  to  the  sight  of  those  Hebrew  people,  and 
so  opening  the  way  to  their  subsequent  elevation  wiien  as  his  brethren  he  should 
settle  them  in  Goshen  There  was  great  wisdom  in  all  this  lingering  in  divulging 
the  great  secret. 

IV.  The  mark  of  faith  is  a  single  eye  to  God's  glory.  We  should  endeavour 
to  blend  the  personal  with  the  larger  interests  of  God's  kingdom.  Family  lift 
should  be  based  upon  religious  foundations. — R. 

Ver.  18.—  Distrust  the  fruit  of  sin.  Why  should  they  be  afraid  ?  The  invitation 
was  an  honour  not  unusual.  Abraham  was  received  at  Pharaoh's  court  (Gen.  xiL  15). 
kvA  the  brethren  were  evidently  people  of  large  possessions  with  a  considerabU 


188 


THE  BOOK  OF  QENESI8. 


[ch.  xliv.  1 — 34 


retinue,  as  they  were  to  carry  food  for  so  many ;  and  they  had  brought  the  proof 
required  that  they  were  true  men.  Had  Joseph  intended  to  do  them  harm  he  might 
have  done  it  before.  It  was  conscious  guilt  that  made  them  fear.  What  they  had 
done  to  their  brother  suggested  similar  treatment  being  meted  to  them.  Perhaps 
they  had  almost  forgotten  it.  But  God  left  not  himself  without  witness  to  bring 
their  sin  to  remembrance.  The  stain  of  sin  on  the  conscience  is  indelible.  Time 
cannot  remove  it.  Occupation  may  turn  the  thoughts  from  it,  but  it  returns  again 
and  again.  The  act  of  wrong  may  be  little  thought  of  at  the  time.  Only  after- 
wards is  it  felt  that  it  cannot  be  undone  (cf.  1  Cor.  xv.  9).  This  explains  the  attitude 
of  so  many  toward  God.  Why  is  there  such  slowness  to  receive  the  gospel  just  as 
it  is  offered  ?  When  men  are  bidden  to  their  brother's  table ;  when  his  will  is 
declared  they  shall  sup  with  me  (cf.  Bev.  iii.  20),  why  is  there  such  shrinking  as  if 
they  were  being  led  into  danger ;  as  if  God  were  laying  some  obligation  on  them 
which  they  cannot  fulfil,  to  bring  them  into  bondage  for  ever  ?  It  is  because  of  sin 
in  the  heart;  perhaps  unfelt,  unthought  of;  but  it  is  there,  the  fact  of  a  self- 
chosen  life.  And  if  these  are  invited  to  closer  communion  with  God,  straightway 
they  are  afraid  ;  suspicious  of  God.  And  hence,  when  the  gospel  invitation  is 
pressed,  and  the  Lamb  of  God  held  up,  and  the  power  of  the  blood  of  Christ  and 
the  welcome  for  all  proclaimed,  and  they  are  bidden  to  trust,  to  accept  salvation, 
men  try  to  fortify  their  position :  "  0  sir,  we  have  done  this  or  that "  (cf.  Matt,  xviii. 
26),  clinging  to  distrust  instead  of  striving  against  it. 

I.  This  distrust  and  suspicion  op  God  arises  from  the  presence  of  sin  not 
fully  becognised  as  sin  ;  while  the  man  is  still  trying  to  set  good  deeds  against  bad 
ones,  or  to  find  excuses  for  faults.  It  is  the  effect  of  sin  before  conviction  by  the 
Holy  Spirit.  Beal  conviction  brings  to  God  (Ps.  li.  4 ;  Luke  xviii.  13).  It  is 
unacknowledged  sin  that  separates. 

II.  Distrust  is  removed  by  a  real  belief  in  the  atonement  (Heb.  ix.  25),  God's 
plan  for  reconciling  the  sinful  to  himself  (Rom.  iii.  26).  Hence  this  is  the  turning 
point  of  the  spiritual  life  (John  iii.  18)  ;  the  great  work  (John  vi.  29)  out  of  which, 
as  from  a  germ,  the  whole  Christian  life  must  grow. — M. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XLIV. 

Vera.  1,  2. — And  lie  (i  e.  Joseph)  com- 
manded the  steward  of  his  house, — literally, 
him  that  was  over  his  house  (ch.  xliii.  15) — 
saying,  Fill  the  men's  sacks  with  food,  as 
much  as  they  can  carry,  and  put  every  man's 
money  in  his  sack's  mouth  (as  before,  but 
not  this  time  as  a  test).  And  put  my  cup, — 
y'3|,  from  an  unused  root,  V3|,  conveying 
the  sense  of  elevation  or  roundness  ;  hence  a 
goblet  or  bowl,  commonly  of  a  large  size.  (Jer. 
xxxv.  5),  as  distinguished  from  the  D13,  or 
smaller  cup,  into  which,  from  the  gabia,  wine 
or  other  liquid  was  poured  (cf.  ch.  xl.  11) 
—  the  silver  cup,  —  rd  Koriv  to  aoyvpovv 
(LXX.).  Bohlen  mentions  that  the  religious 
drinking  utensil  of  the  Indian  priests  is  called 
kundi — in  the  sack's  mouth  of  the  youngest, 
and  his  corn  money — literally,  the  silver  of 
his  grain,  or  of  his  purchase.  And  he  {i.  e. 
the  steward)  did  according  to  the  word  that 
Joseph  had  spoken. 

Vers.  3—5. — As  soon  as  the  morning  was 
light  (literally,  the  morning  became  bright), 
the  men  (literally,  and  the  men)  were  sent 
away,  th«y  and  their  asses.    That  Joseph 


did  not  make  himself  known  to  his  brothers 
at  the  repast  was  not  due  to  unnatural  cal- 
lousness which  caused  his  heart  to  remain 
cold  and  steeled  (Kalisch),  or  to  a  fear  lest  he 
should  thereby  destroy  the  character  of  his 
mission  which  made  him  the  medium  of  retri- 
bution for  his  brothers  (Kalisch),  but  to  the 
fact  that  in  his  judgment  either  his  brothers 
had  not  been  sufficiently  tested,  or  the  time 
did  not  appear  convenient  for  the  disclosure 
of  his  secret.    And  when  they  were  gone 
out  of  the  city  (literally,  they  went  forth  out 
of  the  city),  and  not  yet  far  off  (literally,  they 
had  not  gone  far),  Joseph  (literally,   and 
Joseph)  said  unto  his  steward  (or  man  over 
his  house),  Up,  follow  after  the  men ;  and 
when  thou  dost  overtake  them,  say  unto 
them  (literally,  and  overtake  them,  and  say 
to  them),  Wherefore  have  ye  rewarded  evil 
for  good)    The  interpolation  at  this  point 
of  the  words,  "  Why  did  you  steal  my  silver 
goblet?"  (LXX.,  Vulgate,  Syriac)  is  super- 
fluous.    Is  not  this  it  in  which  my  lord 
drinketh,  and  whereby  indeed  he  divinethl 
— literally,    and   divining    he  divineth,    ol 
maketh   trial,  in  it,   the  verb  C'nj   (from 
which  is  derived  nachash,  a  serpent;  *Wb 


OH.  XLIT.  1—34.] 


THB  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


4» 


eh.  Hi.  1)  originally  signifying  to  hiss  or  whis- 
per, and  hence  W>  mutter  incantations,  to 
practise  ophiomancy  and  generally  to  divine. 
The  special  form  of  c'ivination  here  referred 
to  (nvXiKOfiat'Ttia,  or  civining  out  of  cups) 
was  practised  by  the  ancient  Egyptians 
(Hengstenberg's  'Egypt  and  the  Books  of 
Moses,'  p.  39).  "Small  pieces  of  gold  or 
silver,  together  with  precious  stones,  marked 
with  strange  figures  and  signs,  were  thrown 
into  the  vessel ;  after  which  certain  incanta- 
tions were  pronounced,  and  the  evil  demon 
was  invoked ;  the  latter  was  then  supposed 
to  give  the  answer  either  by  intelligible 
words,  or  by  pointing  to  some  of  the  cha- 
racters on  the  precious  stones,  or  in  some 
other  more  mysterious  manner.  Sometimes 
the  goblet  was  filled  with  pure  water,  upon 
which  the  sun  was  allowed  to  play ;  and  the 
figures  which  were  thus  formed,  or  which  a 
lively  imagination  fancied  it  saw,  were  inter- 
preted as  the  desired  omen  "  (Kalisch).  Traces 
of  this  ancient  practice  of  soothsaying  have 
been  detected  by  some  writers  in  the  magni- 
ficent vase  of  turquoise  belonging  to  Jam- 
sheed,  the  Solomon  of  Persia.  Like  Merlin's 
cup,  described  by  Spenser  ('  Faery  Queene,' 
iii.  2,  19)— 

"  It  vertue  had  to  show  in  perfect  sight 
Whatever  thing  was  in  the  world  con- 
tained 
Betwixt    the  lowest   earth    and    heven's 
hight, 
So  that  it  to  the  looker  appertaynd." 

A  similar  account  is  given  by  Homer  of  the 
eup  of  Nestor ;  and  Alexander  the  Great  is 
reported  to  have  possessed  a  mystic  goblet  of 
a  like  kind.  It  is  said  that  in  the  storming 
of  Seringapatam  the  unfortunate  Tippoo  Saib 
retired  to  gaze  on  his  divining  cup,  and  that 
after  standing  awhile  absorbed  in  it  he  re- 
turned to  the  fight  and  fell  (vide  Kitto's 
'  Cyclopedia,'  art.  Divination).  Ye  have  done 
evil  in  so  doing. 

Ver.  6. — And  he  (i.  e.  the  steward)  over- 
took them,  and  he  spake  unto  them  these 
same  words. 

Vers.  7 — 10. — And  they  said  unto  him, 
Wherefore  saith  my  lord  these  words  ?  God 
forbid  that  thy  servants  should  do  (literally, 
far  be  thy  servants  from  doing)  according  to 
this  thing :  behold,  the  money  (literally,  the 
silver),  which  we  found  in  our  sacks'  mouths, 
We  brought  again  unto  thee  out  of  the  land 
of  Canaan  (this  was  an  irrefragable  proof  of 
their  honesty) :  how  then  should  we  steal 
out  of  my  lord's  house  silver  or  gold?  They 
were  even  so  confident  of  their  innocence  that 
they  ventured  on  a  rash  proposition.  With 
Whomsoever  of  thy  servants  it  be  found, 
both  let  him  die,  and  we  also  will  he  my 
lord's  bondmen — literally,  for  servants  to  my 
lard.    And  he  (the  steward)  said,  Now  alio 


let  it  he  according  to  your  words.  So  LX3L, 
Vulgate,  and  commentators  generally ;  but 
Kalisch  reads  it  as  an  interrogation,  "  Is  it 
right  according  to  your  words?"  meaning 
that  strict  justice  demanded  only  the  punish- 
ment of  the  thief,  as  he  explained.  He  with 
whom  it  is  found  shall  he  my  servant;  and 
ye  (i.  e.  the  others  of  you)  shall  be  blameless. 

Vers.  11—13. — Then  they  speedily  took 
down  (literally,  and  they  hasted  and  took 
down)  every  man  his  sack  (from  off  his  ass) 
to  the  ground,  and  opened  every  man  his 
sack.  Thus  as  it  were  delivering  them  up 
for  examination.  And  he  (the  steward) 
searched,  and  began  at  the  eldest,  and  left 
at  the  youngest  (in  order  thereby  to  mask 
the  deception) :  and  the  cup  was  found  (where 
the  steward  himself  had  put  it)  in  Benjamin's 
sack.  Then  (literally,  and)  they  rent  their 
clothes  (on  the  simlah  vide  ch.  ix.  23),  and 
laded  every  man  his  ass  (by  putting  on  the 
sack  which  had  been  taken  down),  and  re- 
turned to  the  city. 

Vers.  14 — 17. — And  Judah — who  is  recog- 
nised as  the  leader  in  this  second  embassy  to 
Egypt  (ch.  xliii.  8) — and  his  brethren  came 
to  Joseph's  house ;  for  he  was  yet  there : — 
"awaiting,  no  doubt,  the  result  which  he 
anticipated  "  (Murphy) — and  they  fell  before 
him  on  the  ground.  The  expression  indicates 
a  complete  prostration  of  the  body.  It  was 
a  token  of  their  penitence,  and  a  sign  that 
they  craved  his  forgiveness.  And  Joseph 
said  unto  them, — in  a  speech  not  of  "  cruel 
and  haughty  irony  "  (Kalisch),  but  simply  of 
assumed  resentment — What  deed  is  this  that 
ye  have  done  J  wot  ye  not  (or,  did  you  not 
know  ?)  that  such  a  man  as  I  can  certainly 
divine  ? — literally,  divining  can  divine  (vide 
on  ver.  6).  Though  Joseph  uses  this  language, 
and  is  represented  by  his  steward  as  possessing 
a  divining  cup,  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose 
that  he  was  in  the  habit  of  practising  this 
heathen  superstition.  And  Judah  said  (act- 
ing throughout  this  scene  as  the  spokesman 
of  his  brethren),  What  shall  we  say  unto  my 
lord?  what  shall  we  speak?  or  how  shall 
we  clear  ourselves  ?  (i.  e.  justify  ourselves, 
or  purge  ourselves  from  suspicion).  God 
(literally,  the  Elohim)  hath  found  out  the 
iniquity  of  thy  servants:  behold,  we  are 
my  lord's  servants  (literally,  servants  to  my 
lord),  both  we,  and  he  also  with  whom  the 
cup  is  found.  And  he  (i.  «.  Joseph)  said, 
God  forbid  that  I  should  do  so  (vide  ver.  9) : 
but  the  man  in  whose  hand  the  cnp  is 
found,  he  shall  be  my  servant;  and  as 
for  you,  get  you  up  in  peace  unto  your 
father.  Thus  they  were  once  more  tested  ai 
to  whether  they  could,  as  before,  callously 
deliver  up  their  father's  favourite,  and  so 
bring  down  the  grey  hairs  of  their  father  to 
the  grave,  or  would  heroically  and  self-sacri- 
ficingly  offer  their  own  lives  and  liberties  foi 


ft§0 


THE  BOOK  OB1  GENM8. 


£ch.  xuv.  1—54. 


his  protection  (Rosenmiiller,  Keil,  Lange, 
Murphy,  and  others).  How  nobly  they 
stood  the  test  Judah's  pathetic  supplication 
reveals. 

Vers.  18 — 34. — Then  Judah  came  near  to 
him,  and  said, — the  speech  of  Judah  in  be- 
half  of  his  young  brother  Benjamin  has  been 
fittingly  characterised  as  "  one  of  the  master- 
pieces of  Hebrew  composition"  (Kalisch), 
"  one  of  the  grandest  and  fairest  to  be  found 
in  the  Old  Testament"  (Lange),  "a  more 
moving  oration  than  ever  orator  pronounced  " 
(Lawson),  "one  of  the  finest  specimens  of 
natural  eloquence  in  the  world"  (Inglis). 
Without  being  distinguished  by  either  bril- 
liant imagination  or  highly  poetic  diction, 
"  its  inimitable  charm  and  excellence  consist 
In  the  power  of  psychological  truth,  easy 
simplicity,  and  affecting  pathos  "  (Kalisch) — 
Oh  my  lord  (the  interjection  Oh!  is  the  same 
as  that  used  by  Judah  in  ch.  xliii.  20 ;  q.  v.), 
let  thy  servant,  I  pray  thee,  speak  a  word 
in  my  lord's  ears  (probably  pressing  towards 
him  in  his  eagerness),  and  let  not  thine 
anger  burn  against  thy  servant :  for  thou 
-irt  even  as  Pharaoh  (i.  e.  one  invested  with 
!  he  authority  of  Pharaoh,  and  therefore  able, 
like  Pharaoh,  either  to  pardon  or  condemn). 
My  lord  asked  his  servants,  saying,  Have 
j-e  a  father,  or  a  brother?  And  we  said 
into  my  lord,  We  have  a  father,  an  old  man, 
and  a  child  of  his  old  age  (vide  ch.  xxxvii.  3), 
a  little  one ;  and  his  brother  is  dead,  and 
he  alone  is  left  of  his  mother,  and  his  father 
loveth  him.  Substantially  this  is  the  account 
which  the  brethren  gave  of  themselves  from 
the  first  (ch.  xlii.  13) ;  only  Judah  now  with 
exquisite  tact  as  well  as  resistless  pathos 
dwells  on  the  threefold  circumstance  that 
the  little  one  whose  life  was  at  stake  was 
inexpressibly  dear  to  his  father  for  his  dead 
brother's  sake  as  well  as  for  his  departed 
mother's  and  his  own.  And  thou  saidst 
unto  thy  servants,  Bring  him  down  unto 
me,  that  I  may  set  mine  eyes  upon  him. 
This  last  clause  is  also  a  rhetorical  enlarge- 
ment of  Joseph's  words,  iiri)it\ovpai  avrov 
(LXX.) ;  the  phrase,  to  set  one's  eyes  on  any 
one,  being  commonly  used  in  a  good  sense, 
signifying  to  regard  any  one  with  kindness, 
to  look  to  his  good  (cf.  Ezra  v.  5 ;  Job  xxiv. 
23 ;  Jer.  xxxix.  12 ;  xl.  4).  And  we  said 
unto  my  lord,  The  lad  cannot  leave  his 
father:  for  if  he  should  leave  his  father, 
his  father  would  die.  Judah  in  this  no 
doubt  correctly  reports  the  original  conversa- 
tion, although  the  remark  is  not  recorded  in 
the  first  account.  And  thou  saidst  unto  thy 
Bervants,  Except  your  youngest  brother 
come  down  with  you,  ye  shall  see  my  face 
no  more  (cf.  ch.  xliii.  3—5).  And  it  came 
to  pass  (literally,  it  was)  when  we  came  up 
an  to  thy  servant  my  father,  we  told  him 
the  words  of  my  lord.     The  effect  upon 


Jacob  of  their  sad  communication  Judah 
does  not  recite  (ch.  xlii.  36),  but  passes  on 
to  the  period  of  the  commencement  of  the 
second  journey.  And  our  father  said  (i.  A 
after  the  consumption  of  the  corn  supply), 
Go  again,  and  buy  us  a  little  food  (vide  ch, 
xliii.  2).  And  we  said,  We  cannot  go  down : 
if  our  youngest  brother  be  with  us,  then  will 
we  go  down :  for  we  may  not  see  the  man's 
face,  except  our  youngest  brother  be  with 
ns.  And  thy  servant  my  father  said  unto 
us  (at  this  point  Judah  with  increased 
tenderness  alludes  to  the  touching  lament- 
ation of  the  stricken  patriarch  as  he  first 
listens  to  the  unwelcome  proposition  to  take 
Benjamin  from  his  side),  Ye  know  that  my 
wife — Rachel  was  all  through  her  life  the 
wife  of  his  affections  (cf.  ch.  xlvi.  19) — bare 
me  two  sons: — Joseph  and  Benjamin  (ch. 
xxx.  22,  24 ;  xxxv.  18) — and  the  one  (Joseph) 
went  out  from  me  (and  returned  not,  thus 
indirectly  alluding  to  his  death),  and  I  said, 
Surely  he  is  torn  in  pieces;  and  I  saw  him 
not  since.  Jacob  means  that  had  Joseph  been 
alive,  he  would  certainly  have  returned ;  but 
that  as  since  that  fatal  day  of  his  departure 
from  Hebron  he  had  never  beheld  him,  he 
could  only  conclude  that  Lis  inference  was 
correct,  and  that  Joseph  was  devoured  by 
some  beast  of  prey.  And  if  ye  take  this  also 
from  me  (in  the  sense  which  the  next  clause 
explains),  and  mischief  befall  him,  ye  shall 
bring  down  my  grey  hairs  with  sorrow  U 
the  grave  —  Sheol  (vide  ch.  xxxvii.  35). 
Now  therefore  (literally,  and  now)  when  1 
come  (or  go)  to  thy  servant  my  father,  and 
the  lad  be  not  with  us ;  seeing  that  his  life 
(or  soul)  is  bound  up  in  the  lad's  life  hi 
soul) ;  it  shall  come  to  pass,  when  he  see th 
that  the  lad  is  not  with  us,  that  he  will  die : 
and  thy  servants  shall  bring  down  the  grey 
hairs  of  thy  servant  our  father  with  sorrow 
to  the  grave.  For  thy  servant  became 
surety  for  the  lad  unto  my  father,  saying, 
If  I  bring  him  not  unto  thee,  then  I  shall 
bear  the  blame  to  my  father  for  ever  (vide 
ch.  xliii.  9).  Now  therefore  (literally,  and 
now),  I  pray  thee,  let  thy  servant  abide 
instead  of  the  lad  a  bondman  (or  servant)  to 
my  lord ;  and  let  the  lad  go  up  with  his 
brethren.  '■'There  was  no  duty  that  im- 
periously prohibited  Judah  from  taking  the 
place  of  his  unfortunate  brother.  His  children, 
and  even  his  wife,  if  he  had  been  in  the 
married  state,  might  have  been  sent  to  Egypt. 
He  was  so  far  master  of  his  own  liberty  that 
he  could  warrantably  put  himself  in  Benja- 
min's room,  if  the  governor  gave  his  consent " 
(Lawson).  For  how  shall  I  go  up  to  my 
father,  and  the  lad  be  not  with  me  1  lest 
peradventure  I  sea  the  evil  that  shall  come 
on  (literally,  shall  find)  my  father.  The 
sublime  heroism  of  this  noble  act  of  self-sacri- 
fice on  the  part  of  Judah  it  is  impossible  to 


oft.  xtiv.  1—84.^ 


THE  BOOfc  OF  GENESIS. 


4*1 


over-estimate  In  behalf  of  one  whom  he 
knew  was  preferred  to  a  higher  place  in  his 
father's  affection  than  himself,  he  was  willing 
to  renounce  his  liberty  rather  than  see  his 
aged  parent  die  of  a  broken  heart.  The  self- 
forgetful  magnanimity  of  such  an  action  has 
never  been  eclipsed,  and  seldom  rivalled. 
After  words  so  exquisitely  beautiful  and 
profoundly  pathetic  it  was  impossible  for 
"osepb  to  doubt  that  a  complete  change  had 


5 


passed  upon  his  brethren,  and  in  particulai 
upon  Judah,  since  the  day  when  he  had 
eloquently  urged,  and  they  had  wickedly 
consented,  to  sell  their  brother  Joseph  into 
Egypt.  Everything  was  now  ready  for  the 
denouement  in  this  domestic  drama.  The 
story  of  Joseph's  discovery  of  himself  to  his 
astonished  brethren  is  related  in  the  ensuing 
chapter 


HOMILETICS. 


Vers.  1 — 34. — Joseph's  artifice  to  detain  Benjamin,  or  the  story  of  the  silver 
goblet.  I.  Joseph's  stratagem  (vers.  1—13).  1.  The  formation  of  the  plot  (vera. 
1—5).  (1)  The  singular  nature  of  the  plot.  This  was,  after  filling  the  men's  sacks 
with  corn,  and  putting  each  man's  money  in  his  sack's  mouth  as  before,  that  the 
steward  should  secretly  deposit  in  the  amtachath  of  Benjamin  the  silver  goblet  from 
which  Joseph  was  accustomed  to  fill  his  wine-cup  when  he  drank.  (2)  The  immediate 
object  of  the  plot.  It  was  designed  that  the  company  should  be  pursued  under  sus- 
picion of  theft,  and  that,  on  examination  made,  Benjamin  should  be  arrested  as  a 
criminal.  (3)  The  ultimate  purpose  of  the  plot.  Not  simply  to  detain  Benjamin, 
whom  Joseph  longed  to  have  beside  him,  but  chiefly  to  try  the  others  as  to  whether 
they  could  witness  unmoved  Benjamin's  consignment  to  exile  and  probable  imprison- 
ment, as  formerly  with  callous  hearts  they  had  beheld  his  (Joseph's)  sale  and  departure 
as  a  bondman  into  Egypt.  2.  The  execution  of  the  plot  (vers.  6 — 12).  (1)  The  cup 
was  put  into  the  sack  of  Benjamin,  as  arranged,  and  the  men  allowed  to  depart  with 
the  first  streak  of  dawn  in  happy  unconsciousness  of  what  had  been  devised  against 
them.  (2)  Overtaken  by  the  steward,  and  abruptly  charged  with  having  stolen  his 
master's  divining  cup,  they  indignantly  repel  the  charge,  and  somewhat  rashly  suggest 
that  their  sacks  should  be  searched  on  the  spot,  at  the  same  time  offering,  so  conscious 
were  they  of  innocence,  to  deliver  up  the  culprit  to  death,  and  themselves  to  a  voluntary 
captivity.  (3)  Taking  them  at  their  word,  and  modifying  their  proposal  to  the  extent 
that  he  would  take  the  guilty  one  only  as  a  servant,  the  sacks  were  opened  out,  and, 
,as  the  steward  of  course  expected,  the  missing  vase  was  found  where  he  himself 
had  placed  it,  in  the  amtachath  of  Benjamin.  3.  The  result  of  the  plot  (vers.  13 — 16). 
(1)  Utter  consternation  of  mind:  "  tlrey  rent  their  clothes"  to  give  expression  to 
the  anguish  of  their  souls.  (2)  Instantaneous  retracing  of  their  steps :  "  they  laded 
every  man  his  ass,  and  returned  to  the  city."  (3)  Abject  acknowledgment  of  their 
offence :  "  What  shall  we  say  unto  my  lord  ?  God  hath  found  out  the  iniquity  of 
thy  servants."  (4)  Faithful  fulfilment  of  their  contract :  "  Behold,  we  are  my  lord's 
servants,  both  we,  and  he  also  with  whom  the  cup  is  found." 

II.  Benjamin's  sentence  (ver.  17).  1.  Exceedingly  severe.  He  became  a  bond- 
man. Bemark  upon  the  sadness  of  slavery,  even  when  most  mitigated.  2.  Circum- 
stantially justified.  Appearances  were  against  him.  _  But  the  evidence  of  circum- 
stances is  sometimes  fallacious.  3.  Absolutely  undeserved.  In  every  sense  of  the 
expression  Benjamin  was  blameless.  4.  Wisely  designed.  It  was  meant  to  assay  the 
characters  of  both  Benjamin  and  his  brethren. 

III.  Judah's  supplication  (vers.  18—34).  1.  Deferential  humility  (ver.  18).  It 
is  difficult  to  imagine  language  more  respectful  and  deferential  than  that  of  Judah. 
Almost  every  word  is  so  framed  as  to  convey  a  sense  of  Joseph's  lofty  station, 
superior  dignity,  and  just  cause  of  indignation  against  the  speaker.  2.  Artless  sim- 
plicity (wrs.  19—26).  Infinitely  more  powerful  than  either  voluble  rhetoric  or 
closely-compacted  argument  is  the  plain  and  unsophisticated  logic  of  truth.  Without 
the  most  distant  approach  to  sophistry,  or  even  an  attempt  at  persuasion,  Judah  con- 
fines himself  to  a  bare  recital  of  the  facts  of  the  case  which  were  already  well  known 
to  Joseph.  3.  Inimitable  pathos  (vers.  28—32).  Depicting  his  fathers  love  for 
Benjamin  for  his  dead  mother's  and  his  lost  brother's  sakes,  he  tells  how  he  nimseli 
had  become  surety  for  the  lad  to  his  aged  parent,  and  that  if  he  should  fail  to  take 
him  back  again  in  safety  be  would  bring  down  hisfathert  grey  hairs  with  sorrow  to 


492  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  [ch.  xi.iv.  1—34. 

the  grave.  4.  Heroic  self-sacrifice  (vers.  33, 34).  Bather  than  that  Benjamin  should  nol 
go  home  again  to  Hebron,  he  would  himself  remain  a  bondman  to  my  lord  the  governor 
for  ever.  Nay,  he  explicitly  makes  offer  that  he  should  take  the  young  man's  place, 
as  he  would  rather  die  than  see  the  sorrow  which  his  absence  would  bring  down  upon 
bis  venerable  sire.     Noble  Judah  I  thou  art  he  whom  thy  brethren  shall  praise. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ch.  xliv. — Character  built  on  faith.  This  chapter  continues  the  same  thread  of 
Joseph's  policy,  and  the  same  lessons  are  in  it. 

I.  Practical  wisdom  the  fruit  of  piety.  The  true  man  is  the  strong  man. 
With  a  deep  knowledge  of  the  human  heart,  Joseph  felt  quite  sure  that  the  only  way 
to  move  Jacob  from  Canaan  was  to  detain  Benjamin. 

II.  The  sanctity  of  the  affections.  Real  religion  their  only  safeguard  in  the 
world's  hardening  and  perverting  influences.  Joseph  did  apparent  violence  to  his 
brethren's  and  his  father's  feelings  that  he  might  afterwards  fill  them  with  joy.  There 
was  a  great  deal  of  genuine  family  affection  at  the  bottom  of  the  scheme.  He 
could  not  bear  to  part  with  Benjamin.  He  at  first  meant  to  maintain  the  dissembling 
till  the  old  man  was  brought,  but  nature  burst  through  the  restraint.  The  whole 
a  testimony  to  the  real  purity  and  simplicity  of  Joseph's  heart,  and  therefore,  in  such 
circumstances  of  temptation  as  his,  to  his  real  religion. 

III.  Contrast  between  God's  ideal  of  greatness  and  the  world's.  Great  rulers 
and  statesmen  are  not  wont  thus  to  cultivate  the  emotions.  The  tendency  of  high 
position  is  to  harden  the  heart,  and  to  change  nature  into  policy,  and  the  real  into  the 
artificial.  Yet  such  instances  as  Joseph  show  the  possibility  of  uniting  the  two 
spheres — the  secular  and  the  spiritual,  and  being  great  in  both. — R. 

Ver.  5. — Probation.  Divination  by  cups  was  practised  by  the  ancient  Egyptians. 
But  no  reason  to  suppose  that  Joseph  actually  used  this  art.  It  would  have  been 
inconsistent  with  his  habitual  faithfulness  to  God,  and  with  the  ascription  to  him  alone 
of  the  power  to  reveal  secrets  (ch.  xl.  7 — xli.  16).  He  was  now  acting  a  part.  He 
spoke  in  the  character  of  an  Egyptian  ruler,  to  whom  the  nation  ascribed  supernatural 
wisdom.  We  need  not  now  inquire  how  fir  he  was  right  in  this.  But  his  object 
was  to  try  his  brethren,  whether,  and  how  much,  they  loved  their  father  and  their 
young  brother.  He  contrived  that  Benjamin  should  appear  to  have  incurred  the 
penalty  of  servitude.  What  would  the  rest  do  ?  Would  they,  as.  they  had  done  to 
him,  leave  their  brother  in  slavery  ?  Would  they  go  home  and  deceive  their  father 
by  a  false  story  of  his  death  ?  Could  they  bear  to  renew  his  grief  ?  Had  they 
learned  that  God  marked  their  actions,,and  ordained  the  things  that  happened  to  them  ? 
The  cup  hidden  in  Benjamin's  sack  was  indeed  that  whereby  he  was  divining  their 
secret  thoughts.  They  stood  the  test.  They  acknowledged  God's  hand,  and  refused 
to  purchase  their  own  safety  at  the  price  of  their  brother's  freedom  (contrast  ch. 
xxxvii.  26,  27,  with  ch.  xliv.  30,  34).  Forthwith  the  clouds  passed  away.  In  him 
whom  they  feared  they  found  a  brother. 

I.  God  by  his  pbovidence  tries  the  spirit  that  is  in  us.  The  events  of  our  lives 
are  ordered  so  as  to  bring  this  about  (Deut.  viii.-2).  They  are  to  us  as  Joseph's  cup. 
Daily  work,  family  life,  professional  duties,  the  common  intercourse  of  society,  raise 
questions  which  are  answered  according  as  God  or  self  rules  the  heart  and  guides  the 
actions.  Hence  no  part  of  our  life  is  unimportant  in  a  spiritual  point  of  view. 
Things,  in  themselves  of  small  account,  test  the  character  and  motives  of  the  life,  as 
floating  straws  show  the  current ;  and  this  all  the  more  because  their  spiritual  bearing 
is  not  apparent.  Kindness,  truth,  unselfishness,  in  little  matters,  reveal  the  man  more 
truly  than  on  greater  and  more  conspicuous  occasions  (cf.  1  Cor.  xiii.  3). 

II.  Trials  are  sent  in  love  as  instruments  of  blessing  (James  i.  12).  Through 
their  operation  the  Christian  life  is  matured  (Rom.  v.  3 — 5).  Every  grace  must  be 
exercised  in  order  to  grow,  and  trial  is  the  opportunity  of  exercise.  Without  trial 
there  could  be  no  real  victory  over  evil,  no  real  submission  of  the  will  to  God. 
We  pray  to  be  kept  from  temptation.    To  run  into  it  ia  to  court  a  fall.    But  where 


ch.  xliv  1—34.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  498 

God  seuda  trial  grace  is  provided  (1  Cor.  x.  13),  answering  every  need;  help  for  the 
falling  or  fallen  as  well  as  strength  for  the  steadfast. 

III.  How  to  stand  in  thb  day  of  TEiAL.  In  each  of  the  messages  to  the  Churches 
(Rev.  ii.,  iii.)  trial  is  implied — now  of  persecution,  now  of  false  doctrine,  now  of 
indolent  spiritual  ease.  And  the  blessing  is  "-to  him  that  overcometh."  How?  "By 
the  blood  of  the  Lamb  "  (Bev.  xii.  11),  i.  e.  by  faith  in  it.  Not  merely  belief  in  the 
doctrine,  but  realising  what  the  work  of  Christ  has  won  for  us,  and  the  love  of  the 
Father  from  which  it  proceeds,  and  the  claim  which  the  mercies  of  God  make  upon 
us  (Rom.  xii.  1).  The  first  step  is  receiving  with  an  undoubting  spirit  the  love  of 
God  ;  not  letting  in  unbelief  in  the  garb  of  humility.  The  next  is  keeping  that  truth 
present  in  the  mind  in  the  midst  of  daily  work,  that  the  love  of  Christ  may  constrain 
the  direction  of  our  life. — M. 

Vers.  14 — 34. — The  conversion  of  Judah.  L  The  evidence  of  it.  1.  The  un- 
expected confession  of  guilt  which  he  makes.  "  God  hath  found  out  the  iniquity  of 
thy  servants."  2.  The  sensitive  appreciation  of  the  terrible  blow  which  Benjamin's 
loss  would  be  to  Jacob.  "  When  ho  seeth  the  lad  is  not  with  us  he  will  die."  3.  The 
noble  sacrifice  he  proposes  to  make  for  Benjamin.  "  Let  thy  servant  abide  instead 
of  the  lad,  a  bondman  to  my  lord." 

II.  The  cause  of  it.  1.  The  memory  of  his  old  sin,  which  appears  to  have 
haunted  his  conscience.  2.  The  arrestment  of  Divine  Providence,  which  in  bis 
Egyptian  experience  he  suffered.  3.  The  inward  operation  of  God's  grace  upon  his 
heart. 

Learn — 1.  That  no  living  sinner  is  beyond  the  reach  of  conversion.  2.  That  for 
the  most  part  the  work  of  conversion  is  gradually  consummated ;  and — 3.  That  when 
once  it  is  completed  it  appears  in  a  change  of  character  and  life. — W. 

Ver.  32, — A  surety.  "  For  thy  servant  became  surety  for  the  lad  unto  his  father." 
The  brethren  of  Joseph  had  been  surprised  on  their  second  visit  to  Egypt  at  the  cor- 
diality of  their  reception.  They  started  homewards  with  well-laden  sacks  and  trem- 
bling gladness.  They  had  not  gone  far  when  they  were  overtaken,  their  sacks  searched, 
and  the  cup  found.  With  depressed  spirits  and  dreary  forebodings  they  were  brought 
back  to  the  city,  and  into  the  presence  of  Joseph.  Joseph  had  several  motives  in 
his  strange  treatment  of  his  brethren.  He  may  have  desired  in  some  way  to  punish 
them  for  their  sin  against  himself  by  letting  them  taste  some  of  the  bitterness  he  had 
experienced  when,  ruthlessly  torn  from  his  home,  he  was  sent  a  shrinking  slave  into  a 
distant  land.  Human  nature  was  strong  in  Joseph  as  in  others.  His  brethren  had  to 
learn  the  nature  of  their  own  sin  by  suffering.  They  have  also  to  learn  that  their 
lives  were  forfeited  by  sin  to  justice.  He  wished  also  to  bring  them  to  a  state  of 
humility,  so  that  they  should  afterwards  behave  rightly  to  each  other.  He  may  have 
had  doubts  as  t5  the  safety  of  his  own  brother  Benjamin  with  them.  He  tests  thus 
their  interest  in  their  half-brother,  for  they  could  have  left  with  some  sort  of  excuse 
Benjamin  as  a  slave  in  Egypt.  He  tests  also  their  regard  for  their  father,  and  finds 
out  also  how  they  would  look  upon  himself  when  he  should  reveal  himself  to  them. 
Judah  is  the  spokesman  for  the  rest  in  the  painful  circumstances  in  which  they  are 
all  placed.  Joseph  proposes  to  keep  only  Benjamin  as  a  slave,  but  Judah  draws  near, 
*nd  with  deepest  humility  and  heartfelt  earnestness  pleads  with  Joseph.     Consider— 

I.  Jtjdah's  pleading.  1.  Judah  pleads  as  surety  for  Benjamin,  and  as  a  brother. 
We  find  that  it  is  Judah  and  not  Reuben  who  pleads  now  for  the  life  of  a  brother. 
Age  has  mellowed  the  fierce  Judah.  We  cannot  always  tell  from  what  a  man  is  in 
his  early  years  what  he  will  be  later  on.  (1)  Judah  admits  the  wrong,  attempts  no 
excuse  or  extenuation.  All  evidence  was  against  Benjamin.  Judah  and  the  rest 
cannot  tell  what  to  think  of  the  act.  He  admitted  it.  We  must  admit  our  gin.  (I) 
Confessed  that  it  was  right  that  Benjamin  and  they  should  suffer.  Some  blame  others 
for  their  circumstances  and  sins.  To  all  appearance  here  Benjamin  was  alone  to 
blame.  (3)  He  throws  himself  on  the  righteousness  and  compassion  of  Joseph. 
This  is  all  we  can  do  before  God.  He  pleads  the  pain  which  it  will  cause  to  his  father. 
His  appeal  is  most  pathetic.  Read  it,  and  the  fount  of  tears  must  be  touched.  In  all 
the  volumes  of  fiction  ever  written  there  is  nothing  to  surpass  the  tenderness  »no 


494 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[CH.  H.T.  1 — 16. 


Jathos  of  this  pleading  of  Judah.  2.  We  learn  from  this  position  and  pleading  of 
udah  as  to  how  we  should  approach  God.  We  have  sinned  and  can  only  throw  our- 
selves on  his  mercy.  We  see  also  how  Christ  pleads  for  us.  Hie  pleading  is  real 
and  earnest.  He  prayed  on  earth  for  his  disciples.  The  present  is  a  dispensation  of 
mediation.     Hence  Christ  still  pleads  as  our  surety  in  heaven. 

II.  Judah's  offer.     He  is  ready  to  be  bound  for  Benjamin.    It  is  one  thing  to  talk, 
another  to  act.    He  had  promised  his  father  to  bring  Benjamin  again  (ch.  xliii.  9),  and 
he  wishes  to  keep  his  word.     He  became  surety,  a  guarantee,  as  one  who  is  bound 
by  signing  a  paper.    He  was  answerable  to  his  father.    He  is  ready  to  give  his  service 
fur  Benjamin',  his  life  for  his  brother.     His  faithfulness  was  thus  proved.     Christ  is 
our  surety.     He  makes  himself  one  with  us  (Heb.  ii.  11).     He  sprang  from  Judah 
(Heb.  vii.  14).     He  became  one  with  us  in  nature  and  in  temptation,  and  was  accepted 
as  our  substitute,  was  bound,  abused,  and  crucified.     He  bore  the  curse  for  us  (Gal. 
iii.  13).     He  sacrificed  himself   for  us.     Christ  died  for  us  who  were  below  him. 
We  may  see  in  the  success  of  Judah's   pleading  an  indication   of  the  success   of 
Jesus'  work.      Joseph  needed  no  entreaty  to  be  merciful  to   Benjamin.      He  was 
nearer  of  kin  to  Benjamin  than  Judah  was.     So  God  is  our  Father.    Joseph  only 
wished  to  see  the  brethren  in  a  fit  state  to  be  forgiven.     They  were  entirely  for- 
given (vers.  5 — 15).      He  forgave  freely,  and  wished  them  to  forgive  themselves. 
He  kr.sw  very  well  that  if  they  began  to  blame  themselves  too  much,  or  to  upbraid 
each  other,  they  would  never  he  happy.     Forgiveness  should  produce  peace.     1.  Lei 
us  see  ourselves  in  those  suppliant  brothers  of  Joseph.     2.  Let  us  see  in  Judah  how 
Christ  pleads  for  us,  and  with  what  power.     Certainly  he  excelled  in  his  appeal,  in 
wisdom,  boldness,  eloquence,  tenderness,  and  self-sacrifice.     How  much  more  should 
we  not  praise  Jesus  for  his  power,  his  life,  his  love,  sufferings,  death,  and  present 
intercession.     3.  Let  us  then  trust  him.     What  would  have  been  thought  of  the  others 
if  they  should  have  said  to  Judah,  "  You  are  not  equal  to  being  surety  for  him,"  or  "  You 
are  not  of  sufficient  standing,  not  above  us,  so  as  to  speak  in  the  name  of  the  rest"? 
And  is  not  Christ  equal  to  the  work  of  securing  our  salvation  ?     If  he  can  do  it,  shall 
we  attempt  to  mar  by  our  meddling  ?     Full  atonement  is  made,  as  well  as  powerful 
intercession  offered.     What  we  have  to  do  is  to  trust  Christ's  work.     Let  us  give  up 
hope  of  preparing  ourselves.     He  is  not  like  some  who  are  sureties,  and  are  unwilliig 
to  pay.     He  has  paid.     The  law  and  justice  have  nothing  to  demand.     Should  either 
present  a  claim,  point  to  the  cross,  for  that  answers  all  demands.     Oh  the  mystery 
of:  redeeming  love  1     Oh  the  simplicity  and  yet  the  depth  of  meaning  contained  in 
that  work  of  Christ  !     It  is  a  stumbling-block  to  the  high-minded,  but  a  salvation  to 
the  humble. — II. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XLV. 


Vers.  1,  2. — Then  (literally,  and)  Joseph 
could  not  refrain  himself  (i.  e.  keep  himself 
from  giving  way  to  the  impulses  of  love) 
before  all  them  that  stood  by  him  (i.e.  the 
Egyptian  officials  of  his  household) ;  and  he 
cried  (or  made  proclamation,  issued  an  in- 
struction), Cause  every  man  to  go  out  from 
me.  And  there  stood  no  man  with  him, 
While  Joseph  made  himself  known  nnto  his 
brethren.  It  was  true  delicacy  on  the  part 
of  Joseph  which  prompted  the  discoveiy  of 
himself  to  his  brethren  in  private ;  not  simply 
because  he  did  not  wish  to  pain  his  brethren 
by  a  public  reference  to  their  past  wicked- 
ness, ne  facinus  ittud  detestabile  multis 
testibus  innotesoat  (Calvin),  but  because  the 
nnrestrained  outburst  of  emotion  ergafratres 
tt  purmtem  turn  postet  ferre   alienorum 


prcesentiam  et  aspectum  ^uther).  And  he 
wept  aloud  (literally,  and  he  gave  forth, 
or  uttered,  his  voice  in  weeping) :  and  tha 
Egyptians  and  the  house  of  Pharaoh  heard. 
The  meaning  is  that  the  Egyptian  officials  of 
Joseph's  house,  who  were  standing  outside, 
heard,  and  reported  it  to  the  house  of  Pha- 
raoh (Keil,  Murphy).  It  is  not  necessary  to 
suppose  that  Joseph's  residence  was  so  close 
to  the  palace  that  his  voice  was  heard  by 
the  inmates  (Lange). 

Ver.  3.— And  Joseph  said  nnto  his  breth- 
ren, I  am  Joseph.  The  effect  of  this  an- 
nouncement can  be  better  imagined  than 
described.  Hitherto  he  had  been  known  to 
his  brethren  as  Zaphnath-paaneah.  Now 
the  voice  and  the  appearance  of  their  long- 
lost  brother  would  rush  upon  their  minds  at 
the  first  sound  of  the  familiar  name,  and  fill 
them  with  apprehension.    Probably  Joseph'! 


OH.  xtv.  1—15.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


tn 


discernment  of  this  in  their  countenances 
was  the  reason  why  he  asked  so  abruptly 
after  Jacob.  Doth  my  father  yet  live  1  It 
is  not  now  "  the  old  man  of  whom  ye  spake  " 
(ch.  xliii.  27)  for  whom  Joseph  inquires,  but 
his  own  beloved  and  revered  parent — "my 
father."  "Before  it  was  a  question  of 
courtesy,  but  now  of  love  "  (Alford).  And 
his  brethren  could  not  answer  him;  for 
they  were  troubled  (or  cast  into  a  trepida- 
tion, hence  terrified)  at  his  presence — liter- 
aJy,  before  his  face.  Not  only  did  his 
present  greatness  overawe  'them,  but  the 
recollection  of  their  former  crimes  against 
him  filled  them  with  alarm. 

Vers.  4 — 13. — And  Joseph  said  unto  his 
brethren,  Come  near  to  me,  I  pray  yon.  It 
is  probable  they  had  instinctively  shrunk  from 
his  presence  on  learning  the  astounding  fact 
that  he  was  Joseph,  but  felt  reassured  by 
the  kindly  tone  of  Joseph's  words.  And 
they  came  near.  And  he  said,  I  am  Joseph 
your  brother,  whom  ye  sold  into  Egypt. 
It  was  impossible  to  evade  allusion  to  their 
early  wickedness,  and  this  Joseph  does  in  a 
spirit  not  of  angry  upbraiding,  but  of  elevated 
piety  and  tender  charily.  Now  therefore  be 
not  grieved,  nor  angry  wi#i  yourselves 
(literally,  let  it  not  burn  in  your  eyes,  as  in 
ch.  xxxi.  35),  that  ye  sold  me  hither  (their 
self-recriminations  and  heart  upbraidings  for 
their  former  wickedness  Joseph  in  all  pro- 
bability saw  depicted  in  their  faces) :  for  God 
(Elohim)  did  send  me  before  you  to  preserve 
life  (literally,  for  the  Reservation  of  life). 
For  these  two  years  hath  the  famine  been  in 
the  land  (literally,  in  the  midst  of  the  laud) : 
and  yet  there  are  five  years,  in  the  which 
there  shall  neither  be  earing  nor  harvest — 
literally,  neither  ploughing  nor  reaping, 
the  term  ploughing,  or  earing,  eharish  (of. 
dpouif,  aratio,  Anglo-Saxon,  erian),  being 
derived  from  a  root  signifying  to  cut.  And 
God  (Elohim,  the  use  of  which  here  and  in 
ver.  5  instead  of  Jehovah  is  sufficiently 
explained  by  remembering  that  Joseph 
simply  desires  to  point  out  the  overruling 
providence  of  God  in  his  early  transportation 
to  Egypt)  sent  me  before  you  to  preserve 
you  a  posterity  in  the  earth  (literally,  to 
keep  for  you  a  remnant  on  the  earth,  i.  e.  to 
preserve  the  family  from  extinction  through 
the  famine),  and  to  save  your  lives  by  a 
great  deliverance-  literally,  to  preserve  life 
to  you  to  a  great  deliverance,  i.  e.  by  a 
providential  rescue  (Rosenmiiller,  Kalisch, 
Murphy,  'Speaker's  Commentary'),  which 
is  better  than  to  a  great  nation  or  posterity, 
riB*.?S  being  understood,  as  in  2  Sam.  xv. 
14 ;  2  Kings  xix.  30,  31,  to  mean  a  remnant 
escaped  from  slaughter  (Botlen),  an  inter- 
pretation which  Rosenmtiller  thinks  admis- 
tibla,  but  Kalisch  disputes.     So  now  (liter- 


ally, and  now)  it  was  not  you  that  sent  me 
hither,  but  God — literally,  for  the  Elohim 
(sent  me).  Joseph's  brethren  sent  him  to  be 
a  slave;  God  sent  him  to  be  a  saviour 
(Hughes).  And  he  hath  made  me  a  father  to 
Pharaoh, — i.  e.  a  wise  and  confidential  friend 
and  counsellor  (Keil,  Kalisch,  '  Speakc;  's 
Commentary;'  cf.  1  Mace.  xi.  32).  Murphy 
explains  the  term  as  signifying  "a  second 
author  of  life,"  with  obvious  reference  to  tlie 
interpretation  of  his  dreams  and  the  measures 
adopted  to  provide  against  the  famine — and 
lord  of  all  his  house,  and  a  ruler  through- 
out all  the  land  of  Egypt  {vide  ch.  xli.  40,  41). 
Haste  ye,  and  go  up  to  my  father,  and  say 
unto  him,  Thus  saith  thy  son  Joseph,  Gjd 
(Elohim)  hath  made  me  lord  of  all  Egypt : 
come  down  unto  me,  tarry  not:  and  thou 
shalt  dwell  in  the  land  of  Goshen.  Goshen, 
r«r{/i  'Apa/3£af  (LXX.),  was  a  region  on  tlie 
east  of  the  Pelusiac  branch  of  the  Nile,  ex- 
tending as  far  as  the  wilderness  of  Arabia,  a 
land  of  pastures  (ch.  xlvi.  34),  exceedingly 
fertile  (ch.  xlvii.  6),  styled  also  the  land  of 
Rameses  (ch.  xlvii.  11),  and  including  the 
cities  Pithon  and  Rameses  (Exod.  i.  11),  and 
probably  also  On,  or  Heliopolis  (Josephus, 
'Ant.,'ii.  7,6 ;  Hengstenberg's  'Egyptandthe 
Books  of  Moses,'  p.  42 ;  Gesenius,  'Lexicon,'  p. 
183).  And  thou  shalt  be  near  unto  me,  thou, 
and  thy  children,  and  thy  children's  children, 
and  thy  flocks,  and  thy  herds,  and  all  that 
thou  hast:  and  there  will  I  nourish  thee  (the 

verb  is  the  Pilpel  of  ?13,  to  hold  up,  hence 
to  sustain) ;  for  yet  there  are  five  years  oJ 
famine  ;  lest  thou,  and  thy  household,  and 
all  that  thou  hast,  come  to  poverty— liter- 
ally, be  robbed,  from  KHJ,  to  take  possession 
(Keil),  or  fall  into  slavery,  i.  e.  through 
poverty  (Knobel,  Lange).  And,  behold, 
your  eyes  Bee,  and  the  eyes  of  my  brother 
Benjamin,  that  it  is  my  mouth  that  speaketh 
nnto  you.  And  ye  shall  tell  my  father  of 
(literally,  ye  shall  relate'to  my  father)  all  my 
glory  (cf.  ch.  xxxi.  1)  in  Egypt,  and  of  all 
(literally,  all)  that  ye  have  seen;  and  ye 
shall  haste  and  bring  down  my  father  hither. 
Calvin  thinks  that  Joseph  would  not  have 
made  such  liberal  promises  to  his  brethren 
without  having  previously  obtained  Pha- 
raoh's consent,  nisi  regis  permissu ;  but 
this  does  not  appear  from  the  narrative. 

Vers.  14,  15.— And  he  {i.  e.  Joseph)  fell 
upon  his  brother  Benjamin's  neck,  and 
wept;  and  Benjamin  wept  upon  his  neck. 
"  Benjamin  is  the  central  point  whence  leads 
out  the  way  to  reconciliation"  (Lange). 
"  Here  brotherly  affection  is  drawn  out  by 
affection,  tear  answering  tear"  (Hughes; 
cf.  eh.  xxxiii.  4).  Moreover  he  kissed  all  his 
brethren,— "the  seal  of  recognition,  of  recou 
ciliation,  and  of  salutation"  (Lange)— and 
wept  upon  them.     It  has  been  thought  that 


4M 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[oh.  a*.  1—16. 


Benjamin  stood  when  Joseph  embraced  him, 
and  that  the  two  wept  upon  each  other's 
neck,  but  that  the  brethren  bowed  them- 
selves at  Joseph's  feet,  causing  the  expres- 


sion to  be,  "and  he  wept  upon  them  "  (Lango). 
And  after  that  his  brethren  talked  with 
him— feeling  themselves  reassured  by  such 
demonstrations  of  affection. 


nOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 15. — Joseph's  discovery  of himself  to  his  brethren.  I.  The  announcement, 
"  I  am  Joseph,  whom  yesold  into  Egypt."  1.  How  it  was  made.  (1)  In  privacy. 
"There  stood  no  man  with  Joseph,  while  he  made  himself  known  to  his  brethren." 
This  was  natural.  The  emotions  of  the  moment  were  too  strong  and  deep  to  be 
shared  in  or  even  witnessed  by  strangers.  But  it  was  also  merciful.  Joseph  knew 
that  he  could  not  divulge  his  secret  without  a  reference  to  the  past,  and  he  would  not 
expose  his  brothers'  guilt  and  shame  in  the  presence  of  unsympathising  lookers-on. 
(2)  With  tears.  "Joseph  could  not  refrain  himself"  even  "before  all  them  that 
stood  before  him,"  and  scarcely  had  they  withdrawn  than  "he  wept  aloud."  From 
the  first  Joseph  had  a  herculean  task  to  perform  in  keeping  his  emotion  within  bounds. 
This  was  partly  the  explanation  of  the  rough  treatment  he  gave  his  brethren.  Had 
he  yielded  to  the  tender  feelings  which  the  sight  of  Reuben  and  Judah  and  the  others 
kindled  in  his  breast,  he  would  at  once  have  been  discovered.  Yet  it  was  all  that  he 
could  do  to  avoid  detection.  Once  and  again  he  had  to  retire  from  their  presence  to 
relieve  his  bursting  heart  by  "  weeping  "  (cf.  ch.  xlii.  24 ;  xliii.  30).  But  this  time  the 
rising  flood  of  emotion  was  too  strong  to  be  repressed  even  long  enough  to  admit  of 
his  escape.  The  pathetic  eloquence  of  Judah,  the  earnest,  tearful  pleading  combined 
with  the  sublime  and  affecting  heroism  of  the  man  who  offered  himself  to  be  a  bond- 
man for  ever,  that  his  young  brother  might  escape  and  that  his  father's  heart  might 
not  be  broken,  was  too  much  for  the  Egyptian  viceroy,  and  he  sobbed  aloud.  (3) 
With  forgiveness.  Few  things  are  more  touching  in  this  wholly  melting  story  than 
the  considerate  tenderness  of  Joseph  in  sparing  his  brethren's  feelings,  and  the 
exquisite  delicacy  with  which  he  leads  them  to  understand  that  he  cherishes  against 
them  not  the  least  resentment.  Scarcely  has  he  made  the  startling  disclosure  that  he 
was  Joseph,  than,  as  if  to  prevent  them  from  thinking  of  their  sin,  he  huiries  on  to 
ask  about  their  father.  Then,  as  he  sees  them  shrinking  in  alarm  from  his  presence, 
expecting  doubtless  that  the  hour  of  recompense  for  Dothan  had  arrived,  he  kindly 
asks  them  not  to  stand  aloof  from  him,  but  to  come  near.  Again,  as  he  understands 
the  impossibility  of  their  ever  shutting  their  eyes  to  their  deplorable  wickedness,  he 
tries  to  lead  them  rather  to  contemplate  the  wonderful  way  in  which  the  hand  of  God 
had  overruled  his  captivity  for  the  salvation  of  their  entire  household.  "  So  now  it 
was  not  you  that  sent  me  hither,  but  God."  Beautiful  sophistry  of  love  I  I  do  not 
know  that  Joseph's  brethren  would  believe  it ;  but  it  is  obvious  that  in  the  enthusiasm 
of  his  forgiving  love  Joseph  did.  2.  How  it  was  received.  (1)  With  surprise.  This 
was  only  to  be  expected.  It  must  have  fallen  on  Joseph's  brethren  like  a  thunderbolt. 
It  manifestly  struck  them  into  silence.  "  They  could  not  answer  him."  (2)  -With 
alarm.  Apprehending  vengeance,  they  were ''  troubled  at  his  presence,"  and  invo- 
luntarily shrank  from  before  him.  (3)  With  pain.  They  were  grieved  and  angry 
with  themselves,  not  that  Joseph  was  alive,  but  that  ever  he  had  been  sold.  Many  a 
time  during  the  past  years,  and  in  particular  since  their  first  visit  to  Egypt,  they  had 
mourned  over  their  sin  against  the  child  of  Rachel.  Now  the  anguish  of  their  self- 
reproach  was  almost  more  than  they  could  bear.  And  this  was  the  best  sign  of  its 
sincerity,  that  it  was  intensified  rather  than  diminished  by  the  sight  of  Joseph  (cf, 
Zech.  xii.  10).  True  penitence,  as  distinguished  from  remorse,  is  sorrow  for  sin, 
irrespedive  altogether  of  its  consequences. 

II.  Tee  commission.  1.  To  carry  an  invitation.  "  Haste  ye,  and  go  up  to  my 
father,  and  say  unto  him,  Thus  saith  thy  son  Joseph,  God  hath  made  me  lord  of  all 
Egypt:  come  down  unto  me,  and  tarry  not."  2.  To  deliver  a  promise.  "And  thou 
shalt  dwell  in  the  land  of  Goshen,"  and  "there  will  I  nourish  thee."  3.  To  explain 
a  reason.  "  For  yet  there  are  five  years  of  famine  ;  lest  thou,  and  thy  household,  and 
all  that  thou  hast,  come  to  poverty."  4.  To  provide  an  authentication.  ''And, 
behold,  your  eyes  see,  and  the  eyes  of  my  brother  Benjamin,  that  it  is  my  mouth  that 


oh.  xlv.  1—15.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  491 

apeaketh  unto  you."  5.  To  supply  an  encouragement.  "  And  ye  shall  tell  my  father 
of  all  my  glory  in  Egypt."  6.  lo  return  with  an  answer.  "  And  ye  shall  haste  and 
bring  down  my  father  hither." 

III.  The  reconciliation.  1.  With  tears  of  joy.  "He  fell  upon  his  brother 
Benjamin's  neck,  and  wept;  and  Benjnmin  wept  upon  his  neck."  Over  the  rest  of  his 
brothers  also  as  they  bowed  before  him  "he  wept."  2.  With  hisses  of  love.  "More- 
over he  kissed  all  his  brethren " — not  even  forgetting  Simeon,  who  probably  had 
bound  him,     3.  With  words  of  cheer.     "  After  that  his  brethren  talked  with  him." 

Lessons':— See  in  the  character  of  Joseph,  as  portrayed  in  this  touching  scene,  a 
brilliant  constellation  of  heavenly  virtues  and  holy  graces.  1.  Of  fraternal  affection 
in  his  tender  dealing  with  his  brethren.  2.  Of  filial  piety  in  his  considerate  regard 
for  his  father.  3.  Of  eminent  devotion  in  recognising  the  hand  of  God  in  all 
his  past  fortunes.     4.  Of  exquisite  sensibility  in  being  so  quickly  moved  to  tears. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1—15.—  Darkness  turned  into  light.  Joseph's  revelation  of  himself  to 
his  brethren  in  the  atmosphere  of  the  purest  brotherly  affection  and  grateful 
Acknowledgment  of  Divine  goodness.  Only  small  natures  are  ashamed  of  tears. 
At  first  the  men  who  had  a  great  sin  upon  their  consciences  were  only  troubled  at 
the  presence  of  their  injured  brother,  but  soon  the  free  and  full  manifestation  of  his 
love  turns  all  their  fears  into  rejoicing.  Joseph  wept  for  joy  at  their  return  to  him, 
and  they  were  henceforth  Mb  brethren  indeed.  Although  for  a  time  we  carry  the 
burden  of  our  sins  and  feel  their  weight,  even  though  we  believe  that  they  are  for- 
given, still  as  God  reveals  himself  to  us  and  surrounds  us  more  and  more  with  the 
embrace  of  his  love,  we  lose  the  constraint  of  our  painful  remembrance,  and  rejoice 
with  all  our  hearts  in  present  peace  and  future  glory. — R. 

Ver.  3. — The  great  announcement.  Not  a  stranger,  but  a  brother.  Yet  they  were  slow 
to  receive  comfort  from  it.  The  fact  beyond  all  expectation ;  the  suspicion  of  the  un- 
known ruler  attaching  itself  to  the  newly-found  brother ;  the  remembrance  of  their 
own*  former  cruelty  ;  the  doubt  whether  indeed  the  past  were  forgiven,  colnbined  to 
make  them  "troubled  at  his  presence."  Akin  to  this  is  the  slowness  with  which  the 
great  revelation  of  the  gospel  is  received,  our  adoption  as  sons  (Gal.  tv.  5)  through 
our  brotherhood  with  Christ ;  members  of  Christ,  and  thus  children  of  God.  Not  the 
doctrine,  for  we  are  familiar  with  its  terms,  hut  the  practical  reception  of  it.  The 
gospel  preached  is  "  good-will  to  men  ; "  the  foundation  on  which  it  rests  is  the  work 
whereby  the  eternal  Son  became  our  brother  and  representative  (2  Cor.  v.  14).  The 
means  of  appropriation,  belief  that  God  has  indeed  done  this  thing  for  us  (Matt.  xi. 
28).  Yet  even  to  those  who  are  longing  for  peace  and  salvation  the  message  often 
seems  to  bring  no  real  comfort.  The  truth  of  -the  doctrine  is  admitted,  but  Jesus  is 
not  recognised  as  a  personal,  present  Saviour.  There  is  a  feeling  that  something 
not  declared  lies  behind;  that  there  is  some  unexplained  "if,"  some  condition  to 
be  fulfilled,  some  part  of  the  work  to  be  done,  ere  it  can  be  safe  to  trust.  Conscious 
of  sip,  they  do  not  fully  receive  the  offer  as  made  to  them  such  as  they  are.  The 
fact  is,  men  often  want  to  begin  at  the  wrong  end ;  to  make  some  worthy  offering  to 
God  ere  they  have  it  to  give  (cf.  1  Chron.  xxix.  14;  1  Cor.  iv.  7)  ;'want  to  gather 
fruit  ere  the  tree  is  planted  ;  to  build  a  spiritual  house  ere  the  foundation  is  laid. 

I.  God's  offer  precedes  faith.  The  gospel  proclaims  a  fact— Christ  crucified 
for  us,  the  fulfilment  of  Isa.  liii.  5.  Its  primary  message  is  not  of  something  to 
follow  our  faith,  but  of  that  on  which  our  faith  rests.  The  "  foundation  "  of  spiritual 
life  is  not  our  belief  but  Christ's  work  (1  Cor.  iii.  11).  But  in  practice  many  seem 
to  regard  the  right  to  trust  in  Christ's  work  as  depending  on  their  being  in  a  fitting 
state  of  mind.  And  thus  their  mind  is  turned  away  from  Christ  to  their  own  state 
(cf.  Matt.  xiv.  30).  No  doubt  there  must  be  a  conviction  of  need  ere  the  Saviour  can 
be  welcomed  (Matt.  ix.  12).  But  the  evidence  of  that  conviction  is  not  our  feelings 
but  laying  our  burden  upon  the  Lord. 

II.  God's  offer  must  be  received  by  faith— that  is,  it  must  be  accepted  as  it 
i*  made ;  not  something  else  put  in  its  place.    God's  message  is.  Trust  in  Christ 

GBNESIS.  K  K 


498 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[oh.  xly.  1«— 2R 


To  do  this  is  to  exercise  faith.  But  the  answer  often  is,  I  must  first  see  whether  ] 
have  faith.  It  is  as  if  when  our  Lord  bade  the  impotent  arise,  he  had  answered,  1 
must  first  feel  that  I  have  the  power.  Faith  depends  not  on  accurate  knowledge. 
The  gospel  is  for  the  ignorant ;  and  what  it  claims  is  that  we  receive  it  according  to 
the  measure  of  our  knowledge,  guided  by  those  means  of  instruction  which  we 
possess. 

III.  God's  offer  is  to  make  us  what  wb  ought  to  be.  Christ  accepted,  trusted, 
is  made  unto  us  wisdom,  &c.  (1  Cor.  i.  30).  Faith  leads  to  more  communion  with 
Christ.  The  Bible  becomes  a  living  voice  instead  of  a  dead  letter.  Channels  of 
knowledge  are  opened,  and  daily  increasing  powers  are  given  where  the  will  is  to  be 
really  Christ's  (John  vi.  68).— M. 

Ver.  5. — Providence.  "Now  therefore  be  not  grieved,"  &c.  I.  The  end  is  good- 
ness and  mercy.  1.  To  preserve  life.  2.  To  set  the  seed  of  the  better  society  in 
the  midst  of  the  corruptions  and  imperfections  of  the  old.  3.  To  prepare  the  way 
for  the  higher  revelations  of  the  future. 

II.  God's  method  of  instrumentalities  his  glory.  1.  The  history  of  his  people, 
their  persecutions,  their  apparent  humiliations,  their  marvellous  victories.  2.  The 
transformation  of  men,  whereby  enemies  are  made  friends,  &c.  3.  The  biographies 
of  distinguished  servants  of  God  illustrate  his  grace  in  bestowing  fitness  for  appointed 
work. 

III.  Mysteries  looked  at  from  a  higher  point  of  view  become  revelations. 
1.  Time  a  great  revealer.  Wait  for  the  Lord.  2.  The  narrow  circle  of  a  family 
history  taken  up  into  the  higher  sphere  of  Divine  purposes  concerning  nations  and 
humanity  itself.  3.  Ultimate  vindication  of  the  spiritual  men  and  spiritual  principles 
as  against  the  merely  earthly  and  selfish  aims  of  individuals  or  communities. — B. 


EXPOSITION. 


Ter.  16. — And  the  fame  thereof—  literally, 
the  voice,  hence  rumour  (cf.  Jer.  iii.  9) — was 
heard  in  Pharaoh's  hones  (having  been 
brought  thither  doubtless  by  some  of  the 
Court  officials),  saying,  Joseph's  brethren 
— it  is  probable  that  they  would  style  him 
Zaphnath-paaneah  (cf.  ch._  xli.  45)  —  are 
come  (i.e.  are  arrived  in  "Egypt):  and  it 
pleased  Pharaoh  well,  and  his  servants 
— literally,  it  was  good  in  the  eyes  of  Pha- 
raoh, and  in  the  eyes  of  his  servants  (cf.  ch. 
xli.  37).  The  LXX.  render  ixajiij  li  $apau> ; 
the  Vulgate,  gavisut  est  Pharao,  L  e.  Pha- 
raoh was  glad. 

Vers.  17,  18.— And  Pharaoh  said  onto 
Joseph,  Say  unto  thy  brethren,  This  do  ye ; 
lade  your  beasts,  and  go,  get  you  nnto  the 
land  of  Canaan ;  and  take  your  father  and 
your  households,  and  come  nnto  me.  This 
may  have  been  an  independent  invitation 
given  by  the  Egyptian  king  to  Joseph's 
relatives  j  but  it  is  more  than  likely  that 
Joseph  had  already  told  him  of  the  proposal 
he  had  made  to  his  brethren,  and  that  he 
here  receives  a  royal  confirmation  of  the 
same).  And  I  will  give  yon  the  good  of  the 
'and  of  Egypt, — t. «.  the  best  part  of  the 
land,  viz.,  Goshen  (Rosenmiiller,  Lange,  and 
others) ;  though  the  phrase  is  probably 
iynonymou8  with  that  which  follows — and  ye 
vfwU  eat  the  fat  ef  the  land.    The  fat  of  the 


land  meant  eithei-  the  richest  and  most  fertile 
portion  of  it  (Lange,  Kalisch),  or  the  best 
and  choicest  of  its  productions  (Gesenius, 
Keil).    Cf.  Dent,  xxxii.  14  ;  Ps.  cxlvii.  14. 

Vera.  19,  20. — Now  thou  art  commanded, 
this  do  ye ; — an  apostrophe  to  Joseph,  Pha- 
raoh manifestly  regarding  the  cause  of  Joseph 
and  his  brethren  as  one  (Rosenmiiller,  Keil, 
Lange,  and  others) — take  you  wagons  out  o: 
the  land  of  Egypt — the  carriages  here  re- 
ferred to  (ni/^S,  from  ?|y  to  roll)  were  small 
two-wheeled  vehicles  suitable  for  a  fiat  country 
like  Egypt,  or  for  traversing  roadless  deserts. 
They  were  usually  drawn  by  cattle,  and  em- 
ployed for  carrying  agricultural  produce. 
Herodotus  mentions  a  four-wheeled  car  which 
was  used  for  transporting  the  shrine  and 
image  of  a  deity  (h.  63  ;  vide  Rawlinson's 
edition,  and  note  by  Sir  G.  Wilkinson)— 
for  your  little  ones,  and  for  your  wives,  and 
bring  your  father,  and  come.  Pharaoh  meant 
them  to  understand  that  they  had  not  only 
Joseph's  invitation,  but  his  (Pharaoh's)  com- 
mandment, to  encourage  them  to  undertake 
so  serious  a  project  as  the  removal  of  their 
households  to  Egypt.  Also  regard  not  your 
stuff — literally,  and  your  eyes  shall  not  (i.  e. 
let  them  not)  grieve  for  your  utensils  (i.  e. 
articles  of  domestic  furniture),  although  you 
should  requirt  to  leave  them  behind  (LXX, 


OH.  xiv.  16—28.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


49f 


Rosenmiiller,  Keil,  Kalisch,  Lange,  et  alii). 
The  rendering  of  the  Vulgate,  nee  dimittatis 
quieqwid  de  supellectili  vestra,  conveys  a 
meaning  exactly  the  opposite  of  the  true  one, 
which  is  thus  correctly  expressed  by  Dathius : 
Kec  cegreferrentjactwam  supellectilis  nice. 
For  the  good  of  all  the  land  of  Egypt  is 
yours — literally,  to  you  it  (sc.  shall  belong). 

Ver.  21.— And  the  children  (better,  sons) 

of  Israel  did  so :   and  Joseph  gave  them 

wagons,   according   to   the   commandment 

(literally,  the  mouth)  of  Pharaoh,  and  gave 

hem  provision  for  the  way. 

Ver.  22. — To  all  of  them  he  gave  each 
;nan  changes  of  raiment ; — literally,  altera- 
tions of  garments,  i.  e.  changes  or  suits  of 
dress  (Judges  xiv.  12,  13  ;  2  Kings  v.  5)  ; 
jirobably  dress  clothes  for  special  occasions 
(Keil,  Lange,  Murphy);  Stao&s  oroXdc 
(LXX.)  ;  Unas  stolas  (Vulgate) — hut  (liter- 
ally, and)  to  Benjamin  he  gave — not  to  make 
amends  for  having  given  him  a  fright  (Lange), 
but  as  a  special  token  of  fraternal  affection 
(Murphy) — three  hundred  pieces  of  silver, — 
literally,  three  hundred  of  silver  (cf.  ch. 
xliii.  44) — and  five  changes  of  raiment — 
which  renders  it  probable  that  the  brothers 
only  received  two. 

Ver.  23.— And  to  his  father  he  sent  after 
this  manner ;  ten  asses  {vide  ch.  xii.  16) 
laden  with  (literally,  carrying)  the  good 
things  of  Egypt,  and  ten  she  asses  laden 
with  (or  carrying)  corn  and  bread  and  meat 
— probably  prepared  meats,  some  sort  of 
delicacy  (Clarke)— for  his  father  by  the  way. 

Ver.  24.— So  (literally,  and)  he  sent  his 
brethren  away,  and  they  departed :  and  he 
said  unto  them,  See  that  ye  fall  not  out  by 
the  way.  The  verb  \V\  signifies  to  be 
moved  or  disturbed  with  any  violent  emotion, 
but  in  particular  with  anger  (Prov.  xxix.  9  ; 
?sa.  xxviii.  21  ;  cf.  Sanscr.  rag,  to  move  one- 
cslf,  Gr.  6pyfi,  anger,  Lat.  frango,  Ger. 
regen),  and  is  here  generally  understood  as 
an  admonition  against  quarrelling  (LXX., 
.  jit)  SpyiZiaOt  ;  Vulgate,  ne  vrascimini 
(Calvin,  Dathius,  Rosenmiiller,  Keil,  Mur- 
phy, Lange,  Alford,  et  alii),  although  by 
others^  (Tuch,  Baumgarten,  Michaelis,  Gese- 


nius,  Kalisch)  it  is  regarded  as  a  dissuasive 
against  fear  of  any  future  plot  on  the  part  of 


Vers.  25 — 28. — And  they  went  up  out  of 
Egypt,  and  came  into  the  land  of  Canaan 
nnto  Jacob  their  father,  and  told  him, 
saying,  Joseph  is  yet  alive,  and  he  (literally, 
and  that  he  ;  an  emphatic  assurance  which 
Keil,  following  Ewald,  renders  by  "  yea,"  and 
Kalisch  by  "indeed")  is  governor  over  all 
the  land  of  Egypt.  And  Jacob's  (literally, 
his,  i.  e.  Jacob's)  heart  fainted  (literally, 
grew  chill,  the  primary  idea  of  the  root 
being  that  of  rigidity  through  coldness  ;  cf. 
wriyviiu,  to  be  rigid,  sm&pigeo,  rigeo,frigeo, 
to  be  chill.  The  sense  is  that  Jacob's  heart 
seemed  to  stop  with  amazement  at  the  tidings 
which  his  sons  brought),  for  he  believed  them 
not.  This  was  scarcely  a  case  of  believing 
not  for  joy  (Bush),  but  rather  of  incredulity 
arising  from  suspicion,  both  of  the  messengers 
and  their  message,  which  was  only  removed 
by  further  explanation,  and  in  particular  by 
the  sight  of  Joseph's  splendid  presents  and 
commodious  carriages.  And  they  told  him 
all  the  words  of  Joseph,  which  he  had  said 
nnto  them: — i.  e.  about  Joseph's  invitation 
and  promisu  (vers.  9 — 11)  —  and  when  he 
saw  the  wagons— probably  royal  vehicles 
(Wordsworth) — which  Joseph  had  sent  to 
carry  him,  the  sph  it  of  Jacob  their  father 
revived  (literally,  lived;  it  having  been 
previously  numb  and  cold,  as  if  dead) :  and 
Israel  said, — the  change  of  name  here  is 
significant.  The  sublime  theocratic  design- 
ation, which  had  dropped  into  obscurity 
during  the  period  of  the  old  man's  sorrow 
for  his  lost  son,  revives  with  the  resuscitation 
of  his-  dead  hope  (cf.  ch.  xliii.  6) — It  is 
enough  (one  word,  as  if  expressing  his  com- 
placent satisfaction)  ;  Joseph  my  son  is  yet 
alive  (this  is  the  one  thought  that  fills  his 
aged  heart) :  I  will  go  down — "  The  old  man 
is  young^  again  in  spirit ;  he  is  for  going  im- 
mediately ;  he  could  leap  ;  yes,  fly  "  (Lange) 
— and  see  him  (a  sight  of  Joseph  would  be 
ample  compensation  for  all  the  years  of  sor- 
row he  had  passed  through)  before  I  die. 
He  would  then  be  ready  to  be  gathered  to 
his  fathers. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  16 — 28. — Joseph' s  invitation  to  Jacob.  I.  Authorised  by  Pharaoh.  Though 
possessed  of  the  liberty  to  issue  such  a  commission  as  he  had  just  intrusted  to  his 
brethren,  Joseph  felt  that  it  would  be  right  and  proper  to  have  his  sovereign's  sanction 
Accordingly,  on  mentioning  the  matter  to  the  king,  the  required  consent  was— l' 
Immediately  obtained.  "  Say  unto  thy  brethren,  This  do  ye ;  lade  your  beasts  and 
go,  get  you  unto  the  land  of  Canaan  ;  and  take  your  father  and  your  households'  and 
come  unto  me."  It  was  also— 2.  Sincerely  given,  us  was  attested  by  the  royal  ordei 
to  take  Egyptian  curricles  in  order  to  convey  the  ire«rigreuts.  "Now  thou  art  com- 
manded, this  do  ye  ;  take  you  wagons  out  of  the  lend  w*  Egypt  feu-  vow  little  onee 
and  for  your  wives,  and  bring  your  father,  and  come.'"    A.-rf,  still  further,  it  we 

kk2 


500  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  [oh.  xlt.  1«— 28 

\  Warmly  urged,  oy  a  handsome  promise — "  I  will  give  you  the  good  of  the  land 
of  Egypt,  and  ye  shall  eat  the  fat  of  the  land  " — and  an  earnest  exhortation — "  Also 
regard  not  your  stuff ;  for  the  good  of  all  the  land  of  Egypt  is  yours." 

IL  Attested  by  Joseph.  Had  the  sincerity  of  Joseph  stood  in  need  of  any 
demonstration,  it  would  at  once  have  been  supplied  by — 1.  The  splendid  carriages 
he  sent  from  Egypt  to  convey  his  father.  That  they  had  such  an  influence  upon  the 
heart  of  Jacob  is  apparent  from  the  narrative.  At  first  the  old  man  could  not  bring 
himself  to  credit  the  report  which  his  sons  brought ;  but  when  he  saw  the  wagons 
which  Joseph  had  sent  to  carry  him,  the  spirit  of  Jacob  their  father  revived.  2.  "The 
valuable  presents  he  bestowed  upon  his  brethren  and  sent  to  his  father :  to  each  of  the 
ten  "changes  of  raiment;  "  to  Benjamin  300  pieces  of  silver  and  five  "changes  of 
raiment ;  to  his  father  ten  asses  laden  with  the  good  things  of  Egypt,  and  ten  she- 
asses  laden  with  corn  and  bread  and  meat  for  his  father  by  the  way.  Gifts  such  as 
these  were  an  index  to  the  love  which  dwelt  in  Joseph's  heart.  3.  The  good  counsel 
he  addressed  to  his  brethren:  "See  that  ye  fall  not  out  by  the  way."  It  was  not 
likely  if  they  disagreed  among  themselves  that  they  would  execute  successfully  the 
great  commission  Joseph  had  intrusted  to  them.  It  was  a  token  of  his  anxiety  for 
their  accomplishing  his  mission  that  they  should  unitedly  and  lovingly  address  them- 
selves to  its  performance. 

III.  Bepoeted  by  the  brethren.  On  arriving  at  Hebron  in  the  land  of  Canaan 
the  sons  of  Jacob  hastened  to  unburden  themselves  of  their  marvellous  intelligence. 
The  invitation  of  Joseph  was  detailed — 1.  Faithfully.  On  the  last  occasion  on  which 
they  had  returned  to  Hebron  with  tidings  concerning  Joseph  they  had  lied,  and  their 
father  believed  them ;  this  time,  although  the  old  man  believed  not,  what  they  said 
was  true  :  "  Joseph  is  yet  alive,  and  he  is  governor  over  all  the  land  of  Egypt,'-  adding 
that  he  wished  his  venerable  parent  to  go  do wn  to  Egypt  beside  him.  2.  Fully.  "  They 
told  him  all  the  words  of  Joseph  which  he  had  said  unto  them,"  not  forgetting  to 
deliver  hira  the  presents,  anil  point  him  to  the  wagons  or  royal  carriages  which  his 
son  had  sent  for  his  conveyance  thither. 

IV.  Accepted  by  Jacob.  The  strange  tale  to  which  the  old  man  listened  seemed 
on  its  first  hearing  to  be  incredible.  Such  a  shock  did  it  give  to  his  feeble  sensi- 
bilities that  his  heart  almost  stopped  its  beating.  Apprehending  that  they  were  only 
mocking  his  already  aged  and  bereaved  spirit,  he  believed  them  not.  But  at  length 
the  splendid  carriages  carried' conviction  to  his  mind,  and  he  believed — 1.  With  holy 
satisfaction.  "  It  is  enough."  Since  this  was  true,  he  had  no  desires  unsatisfied  below. 
2.  With  paternal  love.  "  Joseph  my  son"  (what  tenderness  in  the  words  I)  "is  yet 
alive."    3.  With  simple  confidence.     "  I  will  go  down  and  see  him  before  I  die." 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  16 — 28. — The  grace  of  God  to  his  people.  We  are  now  dealing  no  longer 
with  Joseph's  personal  history,  but  brought  out  into  the  larger  sphere  of  "the 
children  of  Israel"  (ver.  21).  Already  it  may  be  said  the  Egyptian  period  in  the 
history  of  the  children  of  Israel  has  commenced.  Pharaoh  comes  upon  the  scene 
and  his  servants.  All  the  wealth  of  Egypt  is  placed  at  the  command  of  Israel.  The 
n;en  who  had  been  the  transgressors  against  Joseph  are  now  the  mediators  of  the 
great  change  in  the  condition  and  prospects  of  the  Israelitish  race.  The  effect  upon 
the  old  man's  heart. — R. 

Vers.  25 — 28. — The  believer  led  to  his  reward.  Jacob's  incredulitj  conquered.  His 
spirit  revived.     His  resolution  tuken. 

I.  OUB   ENJOYMENT   OF   WHAT    GOD   HAS   PREPARED    FOR   US   IS   DEPENDENT   UPON   OUB 

confident  belief  and  expectation.  1.  Separation  from  the  old  for  the  new  life 
involves  a  struggle  wvth  self,  with  circumstances,  with  fellow-men.  2.  The  future 
must  be  laid  hold  of.  We  must  believe  that  the  better  place  is  prepared  for  us,  that 
the  will  of  God  is  good. 

II.  We  gain  the  victory  over  natural  fears,  doubts,  and  difficulties  when 

WE  SIMPLY  LOOK  AT  THE  FACTS  AS   GOD  HAS  SET  THEM  BEFORE  US,  BOTH  IN  HIS  WOBD 

and  ui  His  providence.  The  men  were  deceivers.  The  facts,  the  wagons,  the  good 
tiling*,  tha  blessings  plainly  sent  of  God,  earnest  of  the  future,  would  not  deceive. 


OH.  XLVT.  1— 34.] 


TfiE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


601 


III.  The  true  faith  is  that  which  gratefully  accepts  the  invitation  oi 
Divine  grace,  acting  upon  it,  both  by  the  decision  of  the  will  and  by  the  devo- 
tion of  the  life.    "  It  is  enough,  I  will  go." 

IV.  The  reward  which  is  prepared  for  the  true  obedience  is  much  greateb 
than  we  can  anticipate.  To  see  Joseph  was  the  patriarch's  anticipation.  The  pur- 
pose of  God  was  much  larger  for  him.  Joseph  and  Jacob  met  in  the  abundance  of 
Egypt.  The  earthly  pilgrimage  leads  to  the  true  Goshen.  "It  is  enough."  We 
follow  the  voice  of  our  God.  It  hath  not  entered  into  ouj'  heart  to  conceive  what  is 
before  us. — B. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XLVI. 


Ver.  1. — And  Israel  (as  the  head  of  the 
theocratic  family)  took  his  journey — liter- 
ally, broke  up,  sc.  his  encampment  (cf.  ch. 
xii.  9) — with  all  that  he  had,  and  came— 
from  Hebron  (ch.  xxxvii.  14) — to  Beersheba, 
— where  Abraham  (ch.  xxi.  33)  and  Isaac 
(ch.  xxvi.  25)  had  both  sojourned  for  con- 
siderable periods,  and  erected  altars  to  Jeho- 
vah— and  offered  sacrifices  unto  the  God 
(the  Elohim)  of  his  father  Isaac.  Probably 
giving  thanks  to  God  for  the  tidings  concern- 
ing Joseph  (Ainsworth)  ;  consulting  God 
about  his  journey  to  Egypt  (Rosenmiiller) ; 
it  may  be,  pouring  out  before  God  his  fear  as 
well  as  gratitude  and  joy,  more  especially  if 
he  thought  about  the  stern  prophecy  (ch. 
xv.  13)  which  had  been  given  to  Abraham 
(Kalisch) ;  perhaps  commending  himself  and 
family  to  the  care  of  his  covenant  God  (Keil), 
and  certainly  praying  that  God  would  con- 
firm to  him  and  his  the  covenant  which  had 
been  made  with  his  fathers  (Calvin). 

Ver.  2.— And  God  (Elohim)  spake  unto 
Israel  in  the  visions  of  the  night,  and  said, 
Jacob,  Jacob  —  the  name  Jacob  being  em- 
ployed probably  to  remind  Jacob  of  what  he 
had  been  (Lawson,  Bush,  Wordsworth),  and 
repeated  ut  magis  attentus  reddatur  (Calvin). 
And  he  Baid,  Here  am  I— literally,  behold 
me  (cf.  ch.  xxii.  1). 

Ver.  3. — And  he  said,  I  am  God,  the  God 
of  thy  father— literally,  /  am  the  El  (the 
Mighty  One),  the  Elohim  of  thy  father. 
Though  in  consequence  of  this  phrase  the 
section  (vers.  1 — 7),  indeed  the  entire  chap- 
ter, is  usually  assigned  to  the  Elohist  (Tuch, 
Bleek,  Vaihinger),  yet  the  contents  of  this 
theophany  are  felt  to  be  so  substantially 
Jehovistic  in  their  import  (Hengstenberg), 
that  certain  critics  have  been  constrained  to 
give  verses  1 — 5  to  the  Jehovist  (Colenso), 
or,  omitting  the  last  clause  of  ver.  5,  to  the 
redactor  (Davidson).  In  ch.  xxviii.  13  the 
designation  used  is  "  I  am  Jehovah,  the  God 
of  Abraham  thy  father. "  As  on  that  former 
occasion  when  setting,,  out  for  Padan-aram, 
to  now,  when  departing  for  Egypt,  he  receives 
»  comforting  assurance.   Fear  not  to  go  down 


into  Egypt.  There  was  reason  for  Jacob's 
apprehensions,  since  Abraham  had  been  in 
peril  in  the  land  of  the  Pharaohs  (ch.  xii 
14 — 20),  Isaac  had  been  forbidden  to  go 
thither  (ch.  xxvi.  2),  and  Egypt  had  been 
foreshadowed  as  a  place  of  servitude  for  his 
descendants  (ch.  xv.  13).  TVTVQ  is  an  irre- 
gular infinitive  iTJ|)  for  JTJT  (cf.  nj??.  for  113711 
Exod.  ii.  4),  with  |D  prefixed  after  a  verb  of 
fearing  (vide  Ewald's  '  Heb.  Synt.,'  §  336). 
For  I  will  there  make  of  thee  a  great  nation 
— literally,  for  to  a  great  nation  will  I  put 
thee  there  (cf.  ch.  xxi.  13).  Jacob  had  previ- 
ously received  the  injunction,  accompanied 
by  the  Divine  benediction,  to  be  fruitful  and 
multiply  (ch.  xxviii.  3).  Twice  over  had  it 
previously  been  predicted  that  he  should 
develop  into  a  multitudinous  people  (ch. 
xxviii.  14;  xxxv.  11).  The  present  promiso 
was  an  indication  that  the  fulfilment  of  the 
prophecy  was  at  hand. 

Ver.  4. — I  will  go  down  with  thee  into 
Egypt; — not  a  proof  that  the  Hebrews  be- 
lieved in  a  local  deity  following  them  when 
they  changed  their  abodes,  and  confined  to 
the  district  in  which  they  happened  for  the 
time  being  to  reside  (Tuch,  Bohlen),  but 
simply  a  metaphorical  expression  for  the 
efficiency  and  completeness  of  the  Divine 
protection  (Kalisch) — and  I  will  also  surely 
bring  thee  up  again  (literally,  and  I  will 
bring  thee  up  also,  bringing  thee  up;  a 
double  emphasis  lying  in  the  use  of  the  in- 
finitive absolute,  with  DJ  preceding,  as  in 
ch.  xxxi.  15,  meaning  that  God  would 
assuredly  recover  his  body  for  interment  in 
Canaan  should  he  die  in  Egypt,  and  his 
descendants  for  settlement  in  the  land  of 
their  inheritance) :  and  Joseph  shall  put  his 
hand  upon  thine  eyes — i.  e.  will  perform 
for  thee  the  last  offices  of  affection  by  closing 
thine  eyes  in  death,  a  service  upon  which  the 
human  heart  in  all  ages  and  countries  has 
set  the  highest  value  (vide  Homer,  'II.,'  xi. 
455;  'Odys.,'  xxiv.  294  ;  Virg.,  '  Mn.,'  ix. 
487;  Ovid,  'Epist.,'i.  162).  "  A  father  at  the 
point  of  death  is  always  very  desirous  that 
his  wife,  children,  and  grandchildren  should 
be  with  him.  Should  there  be  one  at  a  di* 
tance,  he  will  be  immediately  sent  for,  and 


502 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[cH.  xivi.  1 — 94 


antil  He  arrive  the  father  will  mourn  and 
complain,  '  My  son,  will  you  not  come  ?  I 
cannot  die  without  you.'  When  he  arrives, 
he  will  take  the  hands  of  his  son,  and  kiss 
them,  and  place  them  on  his  eyes,  his  face, 
and  mouth,  and  say,  'Now  I  die.'"  (Ro- 
berts' '  Oriental  Illustrations,'  p.  52). 

Vers.  5 — 7.— And  Jacob  rose  up — having 
received  new  vigour  from  the  vision  (Calvin) 
— from  Beersheba  (it  is  not  probable  that  his 
stay  there  was  of  more  than  a  day  or  two's, 
perhaps  only  a  night's,  duration) :  and  the 
sons  of  Israel  carried  Jacob  their  father, 
and  their  little  ones,  and  their  wives, — 
"  Unlike  the  heathen  tribes  around  them,  and 
Oriental  nations  generally,  the  family  of 
Jacob  gave  honour  to  the  wife  as  to  the 
weaker  vessel"  (Lawson) — in  the  wagons 
which  Pharaoh  had  sent  to  carry  him  (vide 
oh.  xlv.  19,  21).  And  they  took  their  cattle, 
and  their  goods  (including  probably  their 
servants),  which  they  had  gotten  in  the  land 
of  Canaan, — "Pharaoh  had  desired  Jacob 
not  to  regard  his  stuff,  because  the  good  of 
all  the  land  of  Egypt  was  before  him ;  but 
he  wished  not  to  take  advantage  of  Pharaoh's 

faodness,  or  to  owe  greater  obligations  to 
tm  than  he  found  necessary"  (Lawson) — 
and  came  into  Egypt, — a  scene  depicted  on 
the  tomb  of  Chnumhotep,  the  near  relative 
and  successor  of  Osirtasen  I.,  at  Beni-hassan, 
represents  a  company  of  immigrants,  appar- 
ently Shemitic  in  their  origin,  entering 
Egypt  with  their  goods,  as  well  as  women 
and  children,  borne  upon  asses.  Without 
affirming  that  this  was  the  Egyptian  ver- 
sion of  the  descent  of  Israel  into  Egypt,  it 
may  serve  as  a  striking  illustration  of  that 
event  {vide  Wilkinson,  '  Ancient  Egyptians,' 
vol.  i.  p.  480,  ed.  1878  ;  Brugseh,  '  Histoire 
d'Egypte.'p.  63  ;  Hengstenberg's  'Egypt and 
the  Books  of  Moses,'  p.  37) — Jacob,  and  all 
his  seed  (i.  e.  his  descendants)  with  him: 
his  sons,  and  his  sons'  sons  with  him,  his 
daughters  (this  need  not  imply  that  Jacob 
had  more  daughters  than  Dinah,  but  may 
include  his  sons'  wives,  who  are  not  other- 
wise mentioned  in  this  enumeration),  and  his 
sons'  daughters,  and  all  his  seed  brought  he 
with  him  into  Egypt.  The  date  of  this  event 
was  in  the  130th  year  of  Jacob's  life  (ch.  xlvii. 
9),  and  215  years  after  the  call  of  Abraham 
(ch.  xii.  4),  i.  e.  B.  c.  1728  (Usher),  1885 
(Hales) ;  or  A.  M.  2276  (Usher),  3526  (Hales). 
ver.  8. — And  these  are  the  names  of  the 
children  of  Israel,  which  came  into  Egypt. 
The  phrase  "  which  came  into  Egypt"  must 
obviously  be  construed  with  some  consider- 
able latitude,  since  in  the  appended  list  of 
■eventy  persons,  "souls  of  the  house  of 
Jacob  which  came  into  Egypt,"  are  reckoned 
Joseph,  who  undoubtedly  came  into  Egypt, 
but  not  with  Jacob,  Hezron  and  Hamul,  the 
tons  of  Pharen,  an  w«U  as  the  descendant*  of 


Benjamin,  who  probably,  and  Ephraim  and 
Manasseh,  the  children  of  Joseph,  who  cer- 
tainly, were  born  in  Egypt.  Jacob  and  his 
sons :  Beuben,  Jacob's  firstborn. 

Ver.  9.— And  the  sons  of  Reuben;  Ha- 
noch, — "  Initiated  or  Dedicated  ; "  the  name 
also  of  Cain's  firstborn  (ch.  iv.  17),  and  of 
the  son  of  Jared  (ch.  v.  19) — and  Phallu, 
— "  Distinguished  "  (Gesenius) — and  Hezron, 
—"Enclosed"  (Gesenius),  "Of  the  Court 
or  Village "  (Murphy),  "  Blooming  One  " 
(Fiirst) — and  Carmi, —  "Vine-dresser"  (Ge- 
senius, Murphy),  "  Noble  One  "  (Fiirst). 

Ver.  10. — And  the  sons  of  Simeon ;  Je- 
mnel, — "Day  of  El"  (Gesenins,  Murphy); 
in  1  Chron.  iv.  24,  Nemuel — and  Jamin, — 
"Eight  Hand"  (Gesenius,  Murphy)— and 
Ohad, — "Joined  together"  (Gesenius,  Mur- 
phy)— and  Jachin, — "  Whom  God  strength- 
ens" (Gesenius),  "He  shall  establish" 
(Murphy),  or  Jarib  (1  Chron.  iv.  24) — and 
Zohar, — "Whiteness  Geseniua  Murphy); 
named  Zerah  (1  Chron.  iv.  24)— and  Shanl, — 
"Asked  for"  (Gesenius) — the  son  of  a  Ca- 
naanitish  woman.  The  wives  of  the  other 
sons,  except  Judah,  were  probably  from 
Mesopotamia. 

Ver.  11. — And  the  sons  of  levi ;  Oershon, 
— or  Gershom, — "  Expulsion  "  (Gesenius), — 
Kohath,  or  Kehath, — "Assembly"  (Gese- 
nius)— and Merari, — "  Bitter,"  "  Unhappy" 
(Gesenius),  "Flowing"  (Murphy),  "Harsh 
One  "  (Lange). 

Ver.  12. — And  the  sons  of  Judah ;  Er,  and 
Onan,  and  Shelah  (vide  ch.  xxxviii.  3),  and 
Pharez,  and  Zarah  (ch.  xxxviii.  29  ;  1 
Chron.  ii.  4) :  but  Er  and  Onan  died  in  the 
land  of  Canaan  (ch.  xxxviii.  7,  10).  And 
the  sons  of  Pharez  were  Hezron  (vide  on 
ver.  9)  and  Hamul, —  "One  who  has  ex- 
perienced mercy  "  (Gesenius). 

Ver.  13. — And  the  sons  of  Issachar ;  Tola, 
—  "Worm,"  "Scarlet"  (Gesenius) — and 
Phuvah, — "Mouth"?  (Gesenius)— and  Job, 
— perhaps  an  incorrect  reading  for  Jashub 
("Turning  Oneself"),  as  in  Numb.  xxvi.  24  ; 
1  Chron.  vii.  1  (Gesenius),  which  the  LXX. 
adopts — andShimron, — "Watch"  (Gesenius). 
Ver.  14. — And  the  sons  of  Zebnlunj 
Sered, — "Fear"  (Gesenius) — and  Elon,  — 
"Oak"  — and  JahleeL— " Whom  God  has 
made  sick  "  (Gesenius). 

Ver.  15. — These  be  the  sonB  of  Leah, 
which  she  hare  unto  Jacob  in  Fadan-aram 
(i.  e.  the  descendants  of  Leah's  sons  which 
were  born  in  Padan-aram),  with  his  daugh- 
ter Dinah  (who  probably  had  continued 
unmarried  after  her  misfortune  in  Shechem, 
and  is  here  mentioned  as  an  independent 
member  of  Jacob's  family) ;  all  the  souls  oi 
his  sons  and  his  daughters  (reckoning  him- 
self, and  excluding  Er  and  Onan)  were  thirty 
and  three. 

Ver.  16. — And  the  sous  of  Gad  ;  Ziphioa, — 


BH.  XLVI.  1—34.5 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


50ft 


"  Expectation  "  (Gesenius) ;  Zephon  (Numb. 
«xvi.  15)— and  Haggi,—"  Festive"  (Gose- 
■ius) — Shuni,  —  "  Quiet "  (Gesenius)  —  and 
llbon, — "  Toiling  "  (Murphy)  ;  named  Ozni 
(Numb.  xxvi.  16)— Eri,— "  Guarding"  (Gese- 
nius}—and  Aiodi,  —  "Wild  Ass"  (Gese- 
nius), " Rover "  (Murphy),  "Descendants" 
(Lange) ;  styled  Arod  (Numb.  xxvi.  17) — and 
Areli— "Lion  of  El"  (Murphy),  "Son  of  a 
Hero  "  (Gesenius),  "  Heroic  "  (Lange). 

Ver.  17. — And  the  sons  of  Asher ;  Jimnah, 
—"Prosperity"  (Gesenius)— and  Ishuah,— 
"Even,"  "Level"  (Gesenius)— and  Isui,— 
"  Even,"  "  Level "  (Gesenius)  :  they  may 
have  been  twins  —  and  Beriah, — "Gift 
(Gesenius),  "In  Evil"  (Murphy)  —  and 
Serah — "Abundance"  (Gesenius),  "Over- 
flow "  (Murphy)— their  sister :  and  the  sons 
of  Beriah ;  Heber,  —  "  Fellowship  "  (Gese- 
nius)— and  Malchiel—  "  King  of  El  "  (Gese- 
nius, Murphy),  "  My  king  is  El "  (Lange). 

Ver.  18. — These  are  the  sons  of  Zilpah, 
whom  laban  gave  to  Leah  his  daughter, 
and  these  she  bare  unto  Jacob,  even  six- 
teen souls. 

Ver.  19.— The  sons  of  Rachel  Jacob's 
wife  (cf.  ch.  xliv.  27) ;  Joseph  and  Ben- 
jamin. 

Ver.  20. — And  unto  Joseph  in  the  land  of 
Egypt  were  born  Manasseli  and  Ephraim, 
which  Asenath  the  daughter  of  Foti-pherah 
priest  of  On  bare  unto  Mm  {vide  ch.  xli.  50). 
The  LXX. ,  having  probably  transferred  them 
from  1  Chron.  vii.  14,  append  the  words, 
'Ryhvovro  Se  viol  Mavaaorj,  otic  tTtKtv  ai/rat 
ij  TraXXaKi)  i)  Svpa  rov  Max<p.  Mo^ip  Si 
lyivvritre  rbv  Ta\aa$.  Yiot  Si  'E^paT/i  afitKfyov 
Mapaaaff  SovraXaafi  icai  Tadfi-Tioi  tie  Sovr- 
dKaa/i  'Biuft.  Since  they  are  not  to  be  found 
in  the  Samaritan  text,  Rosenmiiller  thinks 
they  may  have  been  originally  written  on 
the  margin,  and  thence  by  some  subsequent 
copyist  transferred  to  the  text. 
/  Ver.  21. — And  the  sons  of  Benjamin  were 
Belah,  —  "  Devouring  "  (Gesenius)  ;  the  an- 
cient name  of  Zoar,  one  of  the  cities  in  the 
Jordan  circle  (ch.  xiv.  2) — and  Becher, — "a 
Young  Camel"  (Gesenius) — and  Ashbel, — 
"Opinion  of  God"  (Gesenius),  "Sprout" 
(Lange),  "Short"!  (Murphy)  — Gera,  —  " a 
Grain"  (Gesenius),  "Fighter"?  (Lange)— 
and  Naaman,  —  "  Pleasantness  "  (Gesenius) 
— Ehi, — "  Brotherly  "  (Lange,  Murphy) ;  = 
Ehui,  "Joining  together"  (Gesenius),  1 
Chron.  viii.  6  ;  styled  Ahiram  (Numb.  xxvi. 
38)— and  Bosh, — "  Head  "  (Gesenius)— Mup- 
pim,— "Adorned  One  "  (Lange) ;  =  Shupham 
(Numb.  xxvi.  38)  and  Shephupham  (1  Chron. 
viii.  6),  "  Serpent "  1  (Gesenius) — and  Hup- 
pim, — "  Coverings  "  (Gesenius),  or  Hupham 
(Numb.  xxvi.  39)  — and  Ard— "  Fugitive," 
"Rover"  (Murphy),  " Ruler "?  (Lange).  In 
ffamb.  xxvi.  40  Naaman  and  Ard  are  given 
»s  the  sons  of  Bela,  and  the  grandsons  of 


Benjamin  ;  a  plausible  explanation  of  which 
is  that  Benjamin's  sons  died  early,  and  were 
replaced  in  the  list  of  heads  of  families  by  two 
of  Bela's  sons  who  had  been  namel  after  them 
(Keil,  Murphy,  Inglis,  et  alii).  In  the  same 
table  of  mishpachoth  the  names  of  Becher, 
Gera,  and  Rosh  have  been  omitted,  and  that 
probably  for  a  similar  reason — that  they  died 
either  without  issue,  or  without  a  numbeo 
of  descendants  large  enough  to  form  inde- 
pendent families. 

Ver.  22. — These  are  the  sons  of  Bachel, 
which  were  born  to  Jacob:  all  the  souls 
were  fourteen. 

Ver.  23.— And  the  sons  of  Dan;  Hushim 
— "Those  who  make  haste "  (Gesenius) ;  de- 
signated Shuham  in  Numb.  xxvi.  42. 

Ver.  24.— And  the  sons  of  Naphtali;  Jah- 
zeel,— "  Allotted  by  God  "  (Gesenius)— and 
Guni,  —  "  Painted  "  (Gesenius),  "  Dyed  " 
(Murphy),  "  Protected  "  (Lange)— and  Jezer, 
— "Image,"  "Form"  (Gesenius,  Lange,  Mur- 
phy)—and  Shillem  —  "Retribution"  (Ge- 
senius), "Avenger"  (Lange). 

Ver.  25. — These  are  the  sons  of  Bilhah, 
which  Laban  gave  unto  Bachel  his  daughter, 
and  she  bare  these  unto  Jaeob :  all  the  souls 
were  seven. 

Vers.  26,  27. — All  the  souls  that  came 
with  Jacob  into  Egypt,  which  came  out 
of  his  loins,  besides  Jacob's  sons'  wives, 
all  the  sonls  were  threescore  and  six ;  and 
the  Bons  of  Joseph,  which  were  born  him 
in  Egypt,  were  two  souls:  all  the  souls 
of  the  house  of  Jacob,  which  came  into 
Egypt,  were  threescore  and  ten.  Accord- 
ing to  the  LXX.  the  number  of  Joseph's 
sons  waa  nine ;  and  the  number  of  those 
who  came  with  Jacob  into  Egypt  seventy- 
five,  a  number  adopted  by  Stephen  (Acts  vii. 
14).  The  apparent  confusion  in  these  dif- 
ferent numbers,  sixty-six,  seventy,  seventy- 
five,  will  disappear  if  it  be  observed  that  the 
'first  takes  no  account  of  Jacob,  Joseph,  Ma- 
nasseh,  and  Ephraim,  while  they  are  as  pal- 
pably included  in  the  second  computation, 
and  that  Stephen  simply  adds  to  the  seventy 
of  ver.  27  the  five  grandsons  of  Joseph  who 
are  mentioned  in  the  Septuagint  version,  from 
which  he  quoted,  or  to  the  sixty-six  of  ver. 
26  the  nine  mentioned  above,  consisting  of 
Jacob,  Joseph,  Manasseh,  Ephraim,  and  Jo- 
seph's five  grandsons,  thus  making  seventy- 
five  in  all.  There  is  thus  no  irreconcilable 
contradiction  between  the  Hebrew  ..historian 
and  the  Christian  orator. 

Ver.  28. — And  he  sent  Judah  before  him 
unto  Joseph  (the  noble  qualities  displayed 
by  Judah  had  manifestly  secured,  as  they 
had  certainly  merited,  the  affectionate  admir- 
ation and  hearty  confidence  of  the  aged  patri- 
arch), to  direct  his  face  unto  Goshen ; — i.  *. 
that  Joseph  might  supply  him  with  the 
necessary  instructions    for    conducting   the 


504 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[OH.  XLTl.  1 — 94 


pilgrims  to  their  appointed  settlement  (Da- 
thius,  Rosenmiiller,  Keil,  Lange,  Ainsworth, 
Murphy,  'Speaker's  Commentary'),  rather 
than  that  Joseph  might  meet  him  in  Goshen 
(LXX.,  Vulgate, -Samaritan,  Kalisch) —  and 
(having  received  the  necessary  directions) 
they  came  into  the  land  of  Goshen.  The 
LXX.  read  «"c  y>)v  'Ta/jtiaarj,  as  in  ch.  xlvii.  11. 

Ver.  29.  — And  Joseph  made  ready  his 
chariot,  and  want  up  to  meet  Israel  his 
father,  to  Goehen,  and  presented  himself  unto 
him ; — literally,  he  (i.  e.  Joseph)  appeared 
(the  niph.  form  of  the  verb,  which  is  com- 
monly used  of  the  appearance  of  God  or  his 
angels,  being  here  employed  to  indicate  the 
glory  in  which  Joseph  came  to  meet  his 
father:  Keil)  unto  him,  viz.,  Jacob — and  he 
fell  on  his  neck, — i.  e.  Joseph  fell  upon  Ja- 
cob's neck  (LXX.,  Vulgate,  Calvin,  Dathe, 
Keil,  and  commentators  generally),  though 
Maimonides  regards  Jacob  as  the  subject  of 
the  verb  fell — and  wept  on  his  neck  a  good 
while — in  undoubted  transports  of  joy,  feel- 
ing his  soul  by  those  delicious  moments 
abundantly  recompensed  for  all  the  tears  he 
had  shed  since  he  parted  from  his  father  in 
Hebron,  upwards  of  twenty  years  before. 

Ver.  30. — And  Israel  (realising  son  ething 
of  the  same  holy  satisfaction  as  he  trembled 
in  his  son's  embrace)  said  unto  Joseph,  Now 
let  me  die,  since  I  have  seen  thy  face,  be- 
cause thou  art  still  alive — literally,  /  will 
die  this  time,  after  I  have  seen  thy  face, 
that  (Keil,  Kalisch),  or  since,  thou  art  still 
alive;  the  meaning  of  the  patriarch  being 
that,  since  with  his  own  eyes  he  was  now 
assured  of  Joseph's  happiness,  he  had  nothing 
more  to  live  for,  the  last  earthly  longing  of 
his  heart  having  been  completely  satisfied, 
and  wu  perfectly  prepared  for  the  last  scene 
of  all — ready,  whenever  God  willed,  to  be 
gathered  to  his  fathers. 

Vers.  31,  32. — And  Joseph  said  unto  his 
brethren,  and  unto  his  father's  house,  I  will 
go  up  (employed  in  ver.  29  to  describe  a 
journey  from  the  interior  of  the  country  to 
the  desert,  or  Canaan,  the  verb  H?^  is  here 
used  in  a  courtly  sense  to  signify  a  visit  to  a 
sovereign  or  superior),  and  shew  Pharaoh 
(literally,  relate,  or  tell,  to  Pharaoh),  and 
say  unto  him,  My  brethren,  and  my  father's 
house,  which  were  in  the  land  of  Canaan,  * 
are  come  unto  me ;  and  the  men  are  shep- 
herds (literally,  keepers  of  flocks),  for  their 
trade  hath  been  to  feed  cattle  (literally, 
they  are  men  of  cattle)  ;  and  they  have 
brought  their  flocks,  and  their  herds,  and 
all  that  they  have. 

Vers.  33,  34. — And  it  shall  come  to  pass, 
when  Pharaoh  shall  call  you,  and  shall  say, 
What  is  your  occupation  1  Pharaoh's  in- 
quiry was  characteristically  Egyptian,  being 
rendered  necessary  by  the  strict  distinction  of 


castes  that  then  prevailed.  According  to  a 
law  promulgated. by  Amasis,  a  monarch  ol 
the  26th  dynasty,  every  Egyptian  was  obliged 
to  give  a  yearly  account  to  the  monarch  or 
State  governor  of  how  he  lived,  with  the 
certification  that  if  he  failed  to  show  that  he 
possessed  an  honourable  calling  (Sucairiv  ^6i)v) 
he  should  be  put  to  death  (Herod.,  ii.  177). 
That  ye  shall  lay,  Thy  servants'  trade  hath 
been  about  oattle  (literally,  men  of  cattle 
are  thy  servants)  from  our  youth  even  until 
now,  both  we,  and  also  our  fathers :  that  ye 
may  dwell  in  the  land  of  Goshen.  Joseph 
probably  desired  his  brethren  to  settle  in 
Goshen  for  three  reasons.  (1)  It  was  suitable 
for  their  flocks  and  herds ;  (2)  it  would 
secure  their  isolation  from  the  Egyptians ;  and 
(3)  it  was  contiguous  to  Canaan,  and  would 
be  easier  vacated  when  the  time  arrived  for 
their  return.  For  every  shepherd  is  an 
abomination  unto  the  Egyptians.  These  are 
obviously  the  words  not  of  Joseph,  but  of  the 
historian,  and  theii  accuracy  is  strikingly 
corroboiated  by  Herodotus  (ii.  47,  164),  who 
affirms  that  the  swine-herds,  one  of  the  seven 
castes,  classes,  or  guilds  into  which  the  Egyp- 
tians were  divided,  were  regarded  with  such 
abhorrence  that  they  were  not  allowed  to 
enter  a  temple  or  contract  marriage  with  any 
others  of  their  countrymen  ;  and  by  existing 
monuments,  which  show  that  though  the 
statement  of  Josephus(' Ant.,'  ii.  7,  5)  is  in- 
correct that  "the  Egyptians  were  prohibited 
from  meddling  with  the  keeping  of  sheep," 
yet  those  who  tended  cattle  were  greatly 
despised,  Egyptian  artists  evincing  the  con- 
tempt in  which  they  were  held  by  frequently 
representing  them  as  either  lame  or  deformed , 
dirty  and  unshaven,  and  sometimes  of  a  most 
ludicrous  appearance  (vide  Wilkinson,  'An- 
cient Egyptians,"  vol.  ii.  p.  444,  ed.  1878). 
It  has  been  thought  that  the  disrepute  in 
which  the  shepherd  guild  was  held  by  the 
Egyptians  was  attributable  partly  to  the 
nature  of  their  occupation,  and  partly  to  the 
feeling  excited  against  them  by  the  domin- 
ation of  the  shepherd  kings  (Wilkinson, 
Wordsworth,  Murphy,  and  others);  but^l) 
while  this  might  account  for  their  dislike  to 
foreign  shepherds,  it  would  not  explain  their 
antipathy  to  native  shepherds ;  (2)  if,  as 
some  think,  Joseph's  Pharaoh  was  one  of  the 
shepherd  kings,  it  is  not  likely  that  this 
rooted  prejudice  against  shepherds  would 
then  be  publicly  expressed,  however  violently 
it  might  afterwards  explode ;  (3)  there  is 
good  reason  for  believing  that  the  descent 
into  Egypt  occurred  at  a  period  much  earlier 
than  the  shepherd  kings.  Hence  the  ex- 
planation of  this  singular  antipathy  to  shep- 
herds, or  wandering  nomads  has  been  sought 
in  the  fact  that  the  Egyptians  were  essen- 
tially an  agricultural  people,  who  associated 
ideas  of  rudeness   and   barbarism  with   th* 


oh.xlvi.  1—34.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


605 


very  name  of  a  shepherd  (Hengstenberg, 
Kefl,  Kurtz),  perhaps  because  from  a  very 
early  period  they  had  been  exposed  on  their 
Eastern  boundary  to  incursions  from  such 
nomadic  shepherds  (Rosenmuller),  and  per- 


,..  also  because  from  their  occupation 
shepherds  were  accustomed  to  kill  the  ani- 
mals held  sacred  by  the  other  classes  of  tha 
community  (Kalisch). 


HOMILETICa 

Vera.  1 — 34. — The  descent  of  Jacob  and  his  family  into  Egypt.  I.  The  departure 
f»om  Canaan  (vers.  1—7).  1.  The  journey  to  Beersheba.  Distant  from  Hebron 
■omewhere  over  twenty  miles,  Beersheba  lay  directly  in  the  way  to  Egypt.  Yet 
doubtless  the  chief  motive  for  halting  at  "the  well  of  the  oath"  consisted  in  the  fact 
that  it  had  been,  so  to  speak,  consecrated  by  the  previous  encampments  of  Abraham 
and  Isaac,  by  the  altars  they  had  there  erected,  and  the  revelations  they  had  there 
enjoyed.  It  is  both  pleasurable  and  profitable  to  visit  scenes  and  places  that  have 
been  hallowed  by  the  saints  of  former  days ;  and  though  now  under  the  Christian 
dispensation  it  is  true  that  every  place  is  holy  ground,  yet  few  there  are  who  do  not 
feel  their  religious  emotions  quickened  when  they  stand  upon  some  sacred  spot 
where  holy  men  have  walked  and  prayed,  or  saintly  martyrs  bled  and  died.  2.  The 
storage  at  Beersheba.  (1)  The  solemn  act  of  worship — "Jacob  offered  sacrifices 
unto  the  God  of  his  father  Isaac."  This  he  did  in  obedience  to  Divine  prescription, 
which  had  appointed  the  presentation  of  offerings  as  the  only  acceptable  mode  of 
worship,  in  imitation  of  the  piety  of  his  ancestors,  in  presence  of  his  assembled 
household,  in  supplication  of  Divine  direction  with  regard  to  his  contemplated 
journey.  (2)  The  midnight  revelation.  "  I  said  not  unto  the  seed  of  Jacob,  Seek 
ye  me  in  vain,"  was  Jehovah's  word  to  Israel  in  a  later  day  (Isa.  xlv.  19);  and 
certainly  he  never  said  so  either  to  Jacob's  ancestors  or  to  Jacob  himself.  As 
formerly  he  had  appeared  to  Abraham  and  to  Isaac  on  this  very  spot,  so  now  he 
appeared  to  their  descendant ;  solemnly,  in  the  visions  of  the  night ;  audibly,  speak- 
ing to  him  in  a  voice  articulate  and  clear ;  earnestly,  saying,  Jacob,  Jacob,  to  which 
Jacob  answered,  Here  am  I ;  and  graciously,  discovering  himself  as  the  covenant 
God  of  his  father  Isaac.  (3)  The  encouraging  exhortation — "Fear  not  to  go  down 
to  Egypt."  Abraham  had  been  formerly  reproved  for  going  into  Egypt,  and  Isaac 
prevented  from  following  his  example ;  but  here  Jacob  is  both  permitted  and 
advised  to  go.  No  saint  can  safely  guide  himself  by  following  the  example  of 
another.  What  is  God's  will  concerning  one  man  may  be  the  opposite  concerning 
another.  It  is  best  to  imitate  the  patriarch,  and  after  asking  God's  counsel  follow 
where  he,  his  Spirit,  word,  or  providence,  may  lead.  (4)  The  fourfold  promise :  "  I 
will  there  make  of  thee  a  great  nation" — "  I  will  surely  go  down  with  thee" — "  I 
will  also  surely  bring  thee  up  again  " — "  and  Joseph  shall  put  his  hand  upon  thine 
eyes ;  "  a  promise  of  enlargement,  protection,  restoration,  consolation  ;  a  promise,  like 
all  God's  promises  in  the  gospel,  suited  to  the  wants  of  his  servant.  3.  The  advance 
from  Beersheba.  This  took  place  with  alacrity,  for  Jacob  "  rose  up ;  "  with  una- 
nimity, for  they  all  went,  carrying  with  them  their  wives  and  little  ones;  and  with 
comfort,  since  they  rode  in  Pharaoh's  waggons  ;  and  with  safety,  for  it  is  added  that 
they  "  came  into  Egypt." 

II.  The  company  of  the  travellers  (vers.  8 — 27).  1.  Their  character.  (1) 
Descendants  of  Jacob.  They  came  out  of  Jacob's  loins.  In  the  entire  catalogue 
there  is  no  name  that. cannot  be  traced  down  in  a  direct  line  from  Jacob.  (2)  Immi- 
grants into  Egypt.  The  expression  of  course  is  used  with  a  certain  amount  of 
latitude,  since  Joseph's  sons  were  born  in  Egypt,  and  probably  all  the  family  of 
Benjamin.  But  the  accuracy  of  the  language,  may  be  defended  on  the  principle 
that  the  historian  represents  the  entire  family  as  having  done  what  was  done  by 
its  head.  (3)  Ancestors  of  Israel.  Jacob's  sons  were  the  heads  of  the  tribes,  and 
Jacob's  grandsons  of  the  families,  that  subsequently  formed  the  nation.  2.  Their 
number.  (1)  "A11  tne  souls  were  threescore  and  six;"  (2)  "all  the  oouls  of  the 
house  of  Jacob  were  threescore  and  ten ; "  (3)  according  to  Stephen  the  total  of 
Jacob's  kindred  was  "  threescore  and  fifteen  souls."  For  the  reconciliation  of  tbess 
different  accounts,  see  the  Exposition. 


S06  THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS.  [cu.  xlvi.  1—94 

III.  The  arrival  at  Egypt  (vers.  28— 34).  1.  The  mission  of  Judah.  "And  he 
sent  Judah  before  him  unto  Joseph,"  that  he  (Joseph)  "  might  direct  his  face  unto 
Goshen."  2.  The  coming  of  Joseph.  (1)  Joseph  and  his  father.  Learning  o£ 
Jacob's  arrival,  Joseph  "  made  ready  his  chariot  and  went  up  to  meet  Israel  his 
father  to  Goshen."  It  was  not  ostentation,  but  the  impatience  of  love  that  caused 
Joseph  to  drive  to  Goshen  in  the  royal  chariot.  Presenting  himself  before  his  aged 
parent,  he  falls  upon  his  neck  and  weeps,  unable  for  a  good  while  to  control  his  tears  ; 
while  the  old  man  is  so  overcome  at  having  his  long-lost  Joseph  once  more  in  his 
embrace,  that  he  is  quite  willing  to  depart:  "  Now  let  me  die,  since  I  have  seen  tliy 
face,  because  thou  art  yet  alive."  (2)  Joseph  and  his  brethren.  Informing  them  of 
hiB  intention  to  report  their  arrival  to  Pharaoh,  he  explains  to  them  that  Pharaoh 
will  inquire  about  their  occupation,  and  directs  them  how  to  answer  so  as  to  secure 
their  residence  in  Goshen ;  a  mark  of  duplicity  in  Joseph  according  to  some,  but 
rather  a  proof  of  the  kindly  and  fraternal  interest  he  took  in  his  brothers'  welfare. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ch.-xlvi.  1 — 4;  xlvi.  28 — 30;  xlvii.  7 — 10.  —  The-  three  meetings.  I.  Betwees 
Jacob  and  God.  1.  A  gracious  meeting.  In  the  visions  of  the  night,  at  Beersheba, 
Jehovah,  after  a  lapse  of  upwards  of  a  quarter  of  a  century,  again  makes  known  his 
presence  to  his  servant.  It  was  a  signal  act  of  gracious  condescension  on  the  part 
of  God.  2.  A  promised  meeting.  As  the  God  of  Abraham  and  of  Isaac,  Jehovah 
had  solemnly  taken  Jacob  into  covenant  with  himself,  and  engaged  to  be  with  him 
for  guidance  and  succour  wherever  he  might  wander  and  whensoever  he  might  need 
assistance;  and  such  an  occasion  had  manifestly  arisen  then  in  the  experience  of  the 
patriarch.  3.  A  solicited  meeting.  It  is  more  than  likely  this  was  the  explanation 
of  Jacob's  sacrifices  at  Beersheba.  He  was  asking  God  to  come  to  him  with  counsel 
and  help  at  the  important  crisis  which  had  come  upon  him.  4.  An  encouraging 
meeting.  Jacob  got  all  that  he  desired  and  more — words  of  cheer  and  promises  of 
love,  that  sufficed  at  once  to  dispel  his  fears  and  animate  his  hopes. 

II.  Between  Jacob  and  Joseph.  1.  A  longed-for  meeting.  How  earnestly  father 
and  son  had  yearned  to  behold  one  another  we  can  imagine  better  than  express.  2. 
An  expected  meeting.  No  doubt  Joseph  instructed  Judah  to  inform  Jacob  that  he 
(Joseph)  would  visit  him  at  Goshen.  3.  A  happy  meeting.  Those  who  have  passed 
through  experiences  in  any  degree  similar  to  this  of  Joseph  and  Jacob  meeting  after 
many  years,  when  each  perhaps  thought  the  other  dead,  will  not  be  surprised  at  their 
emotion. 

III.  Between  Jacob  and  Pharaoh.  1.  An  interesting  meeting.  Of  age  with 
(probable)  youth,  of  poverty  with  wealth,  of  lowly  birth  (at  least,  comparatively) 
with  regal  dignity,  of  piety  with  superstition.  2.  An  instructive  meeting.  No  doubt 
the  monarch  would  learn  something  of  Jacob's  by-past  history,  and  let  us  hope  too 
of  Jacob's  God  ;  and  perhaps  Jacob  would  discover  something  in  what  he  heard  from 
Pharaoh  concerning  Joseph  that  would  lead  him  to  recognise  the  Divine  hand  even 
more  clearly  than  he  did.  3.  A  profitable  meeting.  Pharaoh  got  a  good  man's 
blessing,  and  Jacob  won  a  great  man's  smile. — W. 

Vers.  1 — 7. — God  speaking  in  the  visions  of  the  night.  While  there  were  provi- 
dential intimations  which  were  clear  enough,  still  the  direct  revelation  of  God 
was  necessary  for  Jacob's  assurance.  At  Beersheba,  the  consecrated  spot,  Jacob 
offers  sacrifices  in  the  covenant  spirit,  and  receives  in  return  the  message  of  the 
covenant  God  :  "  I  will  make  of  thee  a  great  nation."  "  I  will  also  surely  bring  thee 
up  again,"  i.  e.  ■  in  thy  descendants.  The  vision  is  not  a  mere  personal  matter  foi 
Jacob's  consolation,  it  is  another  in  the  series  of  Divine  revelations  which  are  con- 
nected with  the  development  of  the  covenant. — R. 

Vers.  8 — 27. — The  beginning  of  the  nation.  "The  souls  of  the  house  of  Jacob 
which  came  into  Egypt  were  threescore  and  ten."  The  number  seventy  became 
afterwards  a  symbolic  number  among  the  Israelites  —  as  in  the  seventy  elders 
of  Moses,  the  seventy  of  the  Sanhedrim,  the  seventy  of  the  Alexandrian  version 
«f  the  Scriptures,  the  seventy  disciples  of  the  Lord,  the  seventy  heathen  nations  oi 


ott  Xtvi.  1—34.]  THE  BOCK  OF  GENESIS.  #» 

the  world  according  to  the  Jews.  There  may  be  something  in  the  combination  oi 
numbers.  Seventy  is  7  X  10.  Ten  is  the  symbol  of  the  complete  development 
of  humanity.  Seven  of  perfection.  Therefore  seventy  may  symbolise  the  elect 
people  of  God  as  the  hopeof  humanity — Israel  in  Egypt.  In  the  twelve  patriarchs 
and  seventy  souls  we  certainly  see  the  foreshadowing  of  the  Saviour's  appointments 
in  the  beginning  of  the  Christian  Church.  The  small  number  of  Israel  in  the  midst 
of  the  great  multitude  of  Egypt  is  a  great  encouragement  to  faith.  ''Who  bath 
despised  the  day  of  small  things  ?  " — R. 

Vers.  28 — 34. — The  meeting  of  the  aged  Jacob  and  his  lost  son  Jcseph.  I.  Ful- 
filment of  Divine  promises.  Both  father  and  son;  examples  of  grace.  Beminding 
us  of  Simeon,  "Now  lettest  thou  thy  servant  depart  in  peace,"  &c.  (Judah  is  sent 
forward  to  Joseph — again  a  distinction  placed  upon  the  royal  tribe).  The  meeting 
of  father  and  son  takes  place  in  Goshen.  For  the  people  of  God,  although  in  Egypt 
most  not  be  of  it. 

II.  Separation  and  distinction  from  the  heathen  world  —  enforced  from  the 
beginning.     The  policy  of  Joseph  again  is  a  mingling  together  of — 

III.  Simplicity  and  wisdom.  He  does  not  attempt  to  conceal  from  Pharaoh  the 
low  caste  of  the  shepherds,  but  he  trusts  in  God  that  what  was  an  abomination  unto 
the  Egyptians  will  be  made  by  his  grace  acceptable.  It  was  a  preservation  at  the 
same  time  from  intermarriage  with  Egyptians,  and  a  security  to  the  Israelites  of  the 
pastoral  country  of  Goshen.  It  was  better  to  suffer  reproach  with  the  people  of 
God  than  to  be  received  among  the  highest  in  the  heathen  land,  at  the  cost  of  losing 
the  sacredness  of  the  chosen  people.  A  lesson  this  on  the  importance  of  preserving 
ourselves  "  unspotted  from  the  world." — R. 

Vers.  3,  4. — Guidance.  Convinced  that  Joseph  really  lived,  Jacob's  first  impulse 
was  to  hasten  to  him.  But  at  Beersheba,  ere  he  left  the  land  of  Canaan,  he  sought 
guidance  of  God.  The  promise  made  him  reminds  of  that  at  Bethel.  Each  on  the 
occasion  of  leaving  the  land ;  each  revealing  God's  protecting  care.  His  presence 
is  the  only  pledge  of  safety  (cf.  Exod.  xxxiii.  14,  15).  It  was  not  a  word  for  Jacob 
only.  Had  it  been  so  it  would  have  failed,  for  Jacob  never  returned  to  Canaan.  It 
was  like  the  promise  to  Abraham  (Gen.  xvii.  8 ;  cf.  Heb.  xi.  9,  10).  It  was  the 
assurance  that  God's  word  would  not  fail.  Though  he  seemed  to  be  leaving  his 
inheritance,  he  was  being  led  in  the  way  appointed  for  its  more  complete  possession. 
God  was  with  him  in  all.  This  fully  made  known  to  us  in  Immanuel,  without  whom  we 
can  do  nothing,  but  who  by  the  Holy  Spirit  abides  in  his  people  (John  xv.  4 ;  xvi.  14). 

I.  Jacob's  example.  Before  taking  a  step  of  importance  he  solemnly  drew  near 
to  God  (cf.  Neh.  ii.  4 ;  2  Cor.  xii.  8).  Not  even  to  see  Joseph  would  he  go  without 
inquiring  of  the  Lord.  Christ  by  his  Holy  Spirit  is  to  his  people  wisdom  (1  Cor.  i. 
30).  The  habit  of  prayer  for  guidance,  or  for  wisdom  to  discern  the  right  way, 
rests  on  sure  promises  (Isa.  xxx.  21 ;  Luke  xi  13),  and  is  a  thoroughly  practical 
resource.  We  look  not  for  visions  or  direct  manifestations.  But  guidance  is  given 
through  channels  infinitely  varied,  though  our  way  may  seem  strange ;  and  it  may 
be  long  ere  we  find  that  our  prayer  has  been  all  along  answered  in  the  course  of 
events.  Why  so  much  neglect  of  this  ?  so  much  uncertainty  ?  Because  often  men 
do  not  really  seek  to  be  guided  by  God.     Their  real  wish  is  to  be  led  as  they  them- 

II  They  who  would  be  sure  of  God's  promises  must  lean  on  his  guidance.  They 
may  seem  to  be  led  far  from  what  they  hoped  for.  They  would  fain  have  great 
spiritual  elevation,  and  are  kept  low.  They  would  like  to  do  great  work,  and  are 
led  through  homely  duties  ;  to  have  great  powers  for  God's  service,  and  are  made 
weak.  The  cross  must  be  borne  (Rev.  iii.  19).  and  it  is  sure  to  take  a  form  they  do 
not  like.  Otherwise  it  would  not  be  really  a  cross.  Many  would  willingly  endure 
pain  or  poverty  if  they  might  thereby  gain  fame.  „„;™™. 

III.  God's  care  for  individuals.  "I  will  go  down  with  thee.*;  The  unive™ 
in  its  laws  shows  power,  wisdom,  and  love.  But  what  inspires  trust  »  the  confidence 
that  each  one  is  remembered  and  cared  for  by  God,  a  confidence  called  forth  by  tin 
human  sympathy  of  Christ  (Matt.  ix.  36  ;  Luke  -ni.  13 ;  John  x,.  35V— M. 


MM 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[CH.  XLVII.  1 — 16 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XLVII. 


Ver.  1. — Then  Joseph  came — literally,  and 
Joseph  went,  up  to  the  royal  presence,  as 
he  had  proposed  (ch.  xlvi.  31) — and  told 
Pharaoh,  and  said,  My  father  and  my 
brethren,  and  their  flocks,  and  their  herds, 
and  all  that  they  have,  are  come  out  of  the 
land  of  Canaan; — as  thou  didst  desire  (ch. 
xlv.  17,  18) — and,  behold,  they  are  in  the 
land  of  Goshen  (vide  ch.  xlv.  10). 

Ver.  2. — And  he  took  some  of  his  brethren, 
even  five  men, — literally,  from  the  end,  or 
extremity,  of  his  brethren;  not  from  the 
weakest,  lest  the  king  should  select  them 
for  courtiers  or  soldiers  (the  Rabbis,  Oleaster, 
Pererius,  and  others);  or  the  strongest  and 
most  handsome,  that  the  Egyptian  monarch 
and  his  nobles  might  behold  the  dignity  of 
Joseph's  kindred  (Lyra,  Thostatus,  and 
others) ;  or  the  youngest  and  oldest,  that  the 
ages  of  the  rest  might  be  therefrom  inferred 
(Calvin);  but  from  the  whole  body  of  his 
brethren  (Gesenius,  Rosenmiiller,  Keil,  Ka- 
liscli,  et  alii)  he  took  five  men — and  pre- 
sented them  unto  Pharaoh  (cf.  Acts  vii.  13). 

Ver.  3. — And  Pharaoh  said  unto  his  (i.  e. 
Joseph's)  brethren,  What  is  yonr  occupa- 
tion ?  (vide  ch.  xlvi.  33).  And  they  said  unto 
Pharaoh, — as  directed  (ch.  xlvi.  34) — Thy 
servants  are  shepherds,  both  we,  and  also 
our  fathers. 

Ver.  4. — They  said  moreover  (literally, 
and  they  said)  unto  Pharaoh,  For  to  sojourn 
in  the  land  are  we  come ; — an  unconscious 
fulfilment  of  an  ancient  prophecy  (ch.  xv. 
13) — for  thy  servants  have  no  pasture  for 
their  flocks  (it  was  solely  the  extreme 
drought  that  had  caused  them  for  a  season 
to  vacate  their  own  land) ;  for  the  famine  is 
sore  (literally,  heavy)  in  the  land  of  Canaan : 
now  therefore,  we  pray  thee,  let  thy  serv- 
ants dwell  (literally,  and  now  might  thy 
servants  dwell,  we  pray,  the  future  having 
here  the  force  of  an  optative)  in  the  land  of 
Goshen. 

Vers.  5,  6. — And  Pharaoh  spake  unto 
Joseph,  saying,  Thy  father  and  thy  brethren 
are  come  unto  thee:  the  land  of  Egypt  is 
before  thee  (cf.  ch.  xx.  IS) ;  in  the  best  of  the 
land  make  thy  father  and  brethren  to  dwell. 
Wilkinson  thinks  it  possible  that  Jacob's 
sons  "may  have  asked  and  obtained  a  grant 
of  land  from  the  Egyptian  monarch  on  con- 
dition of  certain  services  being  performed  by 
themselves  and  their  descendants  "  ('  Ancient 
Egyptians,'  vol.  i.  ch.  ii.  p.  86).  In  the  land 
of  Goshen  let  them  dwell.  Robinso  i  (ch.  1. 
78,  79)  speaks  of  the  pr3vince  of  es-Shar- 
Kiyeh,  which  corresponds  as  nearly  as  pos- 
rible  with  ancient  Goshen,  as  being  even  in 


modern  times  (1736)  exceedingly  productive 
and  thickly  populated.  And  if  thou  knowest 
any  men  of  activity  among  them, — literally, 
and  if  thou  knowest,  and  there  be  among  them, 
men  of  strength — chayil,  from  chul,  to  twist 
(ilXiui  IKiaaio),  the  idea  being  that  of  strengi  h 
as  of  twisted  rope — then  make  them  rulers 
over  my  cattle — literally,  amd  thou  shall 
make  them  masters  of  cattle  over  that  which  be- 
longs to  me.  ' '  The  shepherds  on  an  Egyptian 
estate  were  chosen  by  the  steward,  who  ascer- 
tained their  character  and  skill  previous  to 
their  being  appointed  to  so  important  a  trust " 
(Wilkinson,  *  Ancient  Egyptians,'  vol.  ii.  p. 
445,  ed.  1878). 

Ver.  7. — And  Joseph  brought  in  Jacob 
his  father,  and  set  him  before  Pharaoh.  It 
has  been  thought  that  Jacob's  presentation 
to  the  'Egyptian  king  was  deferred  till  after 
the  monarch's  interview  with  his  sons  be- 
cause of  the  public  and  political  character  of 
that  interview,  relating  as  it  did  to  the 
occupation  of  the  land,  while  Jacob's  intro- 
duction to  the  sovereign  was  of  a  purely 
personal  and  private  description.  And  Jacob 
—  in  reply  probably  to  a  request  from 
Pharaoh  (Tayler  Lewis),  but  more  likely  sud 
sjwntt — blessed  Pharaoh.  Not  simply  ex- 
tended to  him  the  customary  salutation 
accorded  to  kings  (Rosenmiiller,  Kalisch, 
Alford,  and  others),  like  the  "  May  the  king 
live  for  ever ! "  of  later  times  (2  Sam.  xvi. 
16 ;  1  Kings  i.  25 ;  Dan.  ii.  4 ;  iii.  9,  &c), 
but,  conscious  of  his  dignity  as  a  prophet  of 
Jehovah,  pronounced  on  him  a  heavenly 
benediction  (Murphy,  'Speaker's  Comment- 
ary,' and  others) — hoc  verba  non  vulgaris  et 
prof  ana  salutatio  notatur,  sed  pia  sanctaque 
servi  Dei  precatio  (Calvin). 

Vers.  8,  9.— And  Pharaoh  said  unto  Jacob, 
How  old  art  thou  1 — literally,  How  many 
are  the  days  of  the  years  of  thy  life  f  And 
Jacob  said  unto  Pharaoh,  The  days  of  the 
years  of  my  pilgrimage  (literally,  of  my 
sojournimgs,  wanderings  to  and  fro  without 
any  settled  condition)  are  an  hundred  and 
thirty  years.  Since  Joseph  was  now  thirty- 
seven  years  of  age  (ch.  xlv.  6),  it  is  apparent 
that  he  was  born  in  his  father's  ninety-first 
year ;  and  since  this  event  took  place  in  the 
fourteenth  year  of  Jacob's  residence  in  Padan- 
aram  (ch.  xxx.  25),  it  is  equally  apparent 
that  Jacob  was  seventy-seven  years  of  age 
when  he  left  Bcersheba  after  surreptitiously 
securing  the  patriarchal  blessing  (ch.  xxviii. 
1).  Few  and  evil  have  the  days  of  the 
years  of  my  life  been,  and  have  not  attained 
unto  the  days  of  the  years  of  the  life  of  my 
fathers  in  the  days  of  their  pilgrimage.  As 
Jacob's  life  fell  short  of  that  of  bis  ancestors 
in  respect  of  duration  (witness  the  175  years 


oh.  xrvn.  1 — 10.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


60S 


at  Abraham,  and  the  180  of  Isaac),  so  it 
greatly  surpassed  theirs  in  respect  of  the 
miseries  that  were  crowded  into  it 


Yer.  10. — And  Jacob  blessed  Pharaoh  (u 
he  had  done  on  entering  the  royal  presence^ 
and  went  out  from  before  Pharaoh. 


HOMILETICS 

Vers.  1 — 10. — Jacob  and  his  sons  be/ore  Pharaoh.  I.  Joseph's  brethren  beforb 
Pharaoh  (vers.  1 — 6).  1.  Their  arrival  announced  (ver.  1).  "  My  father  and 
brethren  are  come  out  of  the  land  of  Canaan,  and  behold  they  are  in  the  land  of 
Goshen."  2.  Their  persons  presented  (ver.  2).  "He  took  some  of  his  brethren, 
even  five  men,  and  presented  them  to  Pharaoh."  The  import  of  this  selection  of  five 
is  explained  in  the  exposition.  3.  Their  occupations  declared  (ver.  3).  In  answer 
to  the  king's  interrogation  they  replied  that  they  were  shepherds.  They  had  no 
desire  to  deceive,  although  they  had  learnt  that  persons  of  their  trades  were  not 
commonly  regarded  with  favour.  Joseph  indeed  had  convinced  them  that  in  this 
instance  honesty  would  be  the  best  policy  ;  but  even  had  it  been  precisely  the 
reverse  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  they  would  have  attempted  any  sort  of  pre- 
varication. 4.  Their  purpose  explained  (ver.  4).  It  was  not  their  intention  to 
settle  permanently  in  Egypt,  but  only  to  find  in  it  a  temporary  shelter  during  the 
years  of  famine.  But  while  man  proposes  God  disposes.  5.  Their  wish  stated  (ver. 
4).  "  Now,  therefore,  let  thy  servants  dwell  in  Goshen."  Though  Joseph  might 
have  had  sufficient  power  to  accord  them  this  favour,  it  was  only  courteous  to  ask  it 
from  Pharaoh.  "'  Honour  to  whom  honour  is  due,"  is  the  dictate  of  right  feeling 
as  well  as  of  true  religion,  and  men  seldom  find  themselves  the  losers  by  practising 
politeness.  6.  Their  request  granted  (ver.  6).  Pharaoh  at  once  responded — "  The 
land  of  Egypt  is  before  thee  ;  in  the  best  of  the  land  make  thy  father  and  brethren 
to  dwell ;  in  the  land  of  Goshen  let  them  dwell."  Nay,  Pharaoh  even  exceeded  their 
desires  or  expectations.  7.  Their  promotion  indicated  (ver.  6).  "  If  thou  knowest 
any  men  of  activity  among  them,  make  them  rulers  over  my  cattle."  "  Seest  thou  a 
man  diligent  in  business  ?  ho  shall  stand  before  kings  I " 

II.  Joseph's  father  before  Pharaoh  (vers.  7 — 11).  1.  The  old  man's  blessing. 
"And  Jacob  blessed  Pharaoh."  This  was  (1)  a  valuable  gift.  Once  before  he  had 
sent  a  present  to  one  whom  he  regarded  as  of  vice-regal  dignity ;  but  now,  when 
standing  in  the  royal  presence,  he  does  not  think  of  material  offerings,  but  presents 
what  must  ever  be  beyond  rubies,  the  intercession  of  a  saintly  heart  with  God  on  a 
fellow-creature's  behalf.  If  the  effectual  fervent  prayer  of  a  righteous  man  availeth 
much,  the  simple  benediction  of  an  aged  saint  cannot  profit  little.  (2)  Earnestly 
given.  This  was  shown  by  the  promptitude  with  which  it  was  bestowed.  Imme- 
diately the  venerable  patriarch  is  ushered  into  the  royal  presence  he  breaks  forth 
into  the  language  of  benediction,  as  if  the  inward  emotion  had  just  been  trembling 
on  the  hearrs  lip  and  ready  at  the  first  agitation  to  overflow.  And  he  for  whom  he 
prays  was  a  benefactor  indeed,  but  a  monarch  and  a  heathen ;  and  so  are  Christ's 
people  taught  to  pray  for  all  men,  for  kings  and  such  as  are  in  authority,  for  un- 
believing as  well  as  believing,  and  not  for  friends  and  benefactors  solely,  but  likewise 
foi  enemies  and  persecutors.  (3)  Solemnly  confirmed.  Spoken  on  the  first  entrance 
to  the  regal  mansion,  it  was  tremblingly  re-uttered  on  departure.  Never  before  had 
such  a  prayer  been  heard  within  an  Egyptian  palace.  Yet  the  halls  of  princes  no 
more  than  the  hovels  of  peasants  are  unsuitable  for  intercessions  and  supplications. 
Everywhere  and  always  should  be  the  saint's  motto  in  regard  to  prayer.  2.  The 
old  man's  history.  Gazing  with  tender  interest  on  the  venerable  form  of  the 
patriarch  as,  leaning  on  the  arm  of  his  son,  he  softly  steps  across  the  threshold  of 
the  magnificent  reception  hall,  the  royal  Pharaoh,  probably  struck  with  his  aged  and 
feeble  appearance,  kindly  inquires,  "  How  many  are  the  days  of  the  years  of  thy 
life?"  to  which  Jacob  with  equal  circumlocution,  with  perhaps  a  little  of  the 
garrulousness  that  is  so  natural  and  becoming  in  the  old,  but  also  with  a  true  touch 
of  pathos,  replies,  "The  days  of  the  years  of  my  pilgrimage  are  an  hundred  and 
thirty  years ;  few  and  evil  have  the  days  of  the  years  of  my  life  been,  and  have  not 
attained  unto  the  days  of  the  years  of  the  lives  of  my  fathers  in  the  days  of  then 
pilgrimage."     His  existence  on  the  earth  he  characterises  as  having  been— -(1)  A 


610  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  [oh.  xlvii.  1—10. 

perpetual  pilgrimage,  a  constant  wandering,  a  continual  sojourning,  which  in  his 
case  it  had  really  been  —  from  Beersheba  to  Padan-aram,  from  Padan-aram  to 
Canaan,  from  one  location  in  the  land  of  promise  to  another,  and  finally  from 
Canaan  to  Egypt— but  which  is  no  less  true  of  all  men's  lives;  "here  we  have  no 
continuing  city."  (2)  A  short  pilgrimage.  Adding  them  up  one  by  one,  the  days 
of  the  years  of  his  pilgrimage  might  seem  to  be  many ;  but  in  the  retrospect  they 
appeared  what  they  really  were,  few  and  soon  numbered ;  as  life,  which  to  the 
young  in  prospect  looks  long,  to  the  old  in  retrospect  is  ever  short.  How  amazing 
is  the  difference  which  a  change  of  standpoint  produces  in  the  view  which  the  mind 
takes  of  man's  existence  on  the  earth,  as  of  other  things  !  and  how  important  that 
we  should  bear  this  in  mind  when  numbering  our  days  1  (3)  A  sad  pilgrimage 
Not  only  had  the  days  of  Jacob's  years  been  few,  but  they  had  also  been  evil  filled 
with  trouble,  sorrow,  and  vexation,  more  even  than  that  of  any  of  his  predecessors 
It  was  one  more  testimony  to  the  fact  that  not  only  is  man  bom  unto  trouble  as  the 
sparks  fly  upward,  but  that  it  is  only  through  much  tribulation  that  a  child  of  God 
cnn  enter  the  kingdom. 

■  LTeam7;L  That  P™denoe  becomes  a  counsellor.  This  was  strikingly  exemnlified 
m  Joseph's  conduct  in  presenting  his  brethren  before  Pharaoh.  ^Tlmt honesty 
advances  a  suppliant  In  the  long  run  Joseph's  brethren  were  better  served  by  their 
perfect  integrity  and  strath  forwardness  in  Pharaoh's  presence  than  they  would 
h*ve  been  by  resorting  to  duplicity  and  equivocation.  3.  That  piety  adorns  thl  old 
How  beautiful  does  the  character  of  Jacob,  the  aged  wanderer!  appear  ™  it  stands 
before  us  in  Pharaoh's  palace  in  the  westering  sunlight  of  his'  earthly  pilfirimase  I 
The  hoary  head  is  a  crown  of  glory,  if  it  be  found  in  the  way  of  nghteuusl^ 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1—10.-2%.  presentation  to  Pharaoh.  I.  Testimony  to  poweb  op  chabactto 
Joaeph's  influence,  frie  five  brethren  selected  perhaps  with  a  view  to  thefr amlar- 
ance  and  in  the  number^e,  which  was  regarded  as  a  significant  number  ^rnonf  the 
Egyptians.  The  monarch's  reception  of  the  strangers  due  to  Joseph's  influlnce 
nnTMv"  \ffUSe-^  ?ere.  8  TC£  Wdoune*  in  the  heathen  monarch, although 
partly  to  be  ascribed  to  national  characteristics,  for  the  Egyptians  were  a  very  dl- 

wTmoX  SotSTf  8T;  StivW°  ^y  b6lieVe  that  *e  induct  of  PhLaoh 
XLZ  iff ,     rw t  ■    J°Seph  S  mimstry  and  Personal  exemplification  of  the 

religious  life.     One  true  man  is  a  great  power  in  a  country. 

II.  A  conspicuous  example  of  Divine  grace.     The  old  patriarch  is  presented      He 

tPenariLiwPreSSed  ^  m-ralCh  a8  '"I™™1*  Wd,  perhaps  indTcatinfthat  the  cen 
tenanan  was  a  great  rarity  then  among  heathen  nations      His  long  Kfe  was  a  long 

exemnlifief  "Th  t^Tt  ^ '  &?  ?f  ?  "**"»  '#»  in  Prolonging  tie  yea  si 
SmatelnmLnnP  h,  F  ""S!  °hn8tuu*fr  o^^ed  its  legitimate,  or  more  of  its 
Yrt  ?*  iJ^l ¥  l!r0-pe'  the  aVera^e  lenSth  of  h"man  life  has  been  doubled. 
I  ;  WW         conf  e^es,  he  is  not  as  old  as  Ms  fathers.    His  life  had  been  a  pilgrimage 

SevenT/^TvT-  1  H'8  ATfm  and  evU'  COmPared  with  what  *ey  might  We  Teen 
Seventeen  years  longer  they  were  lengthened  out-a  testimony  to  thelffect  of  peace 

r\il™VevlZr*l?nS?H  Y?1™  [t  iB  nnd»the blessing^  God.    Jacob  blS 

s  pL  o}%i^tiilf%z&tei- The  two  princes  6tood  face  to  ****- 

promise^  ™™ha7n?,T  L  fVlP  Sa?>  bIe8Sed  **"&  the  heirB  °*  the  Di™6 
Ees  us  by  hfs  examnle  not  ^^Y^  '■  and  altho«^  he  thanked  God  first-  hf> 
eventhoug/tneyr^pt^fr^ 

fcg^mp^Kthtaf  gj  hiTrSef  d^  ^F™ !  "*  h°V^  "«» 
suppose  him  unthankful.  But  blessTngs  do  "ot  n/V?  h<T  '''0UrS?-  We  Deed  DOt 
Some  worm  may  be  at  the  root     And  S,  t      v.  themselves  make  a  man  happy, 

his  whole  life.  yThe  renfembrance^f^TrlyTec  Th?s  Tl*  W^  *  Hhad™  ™ 
h.s  farmly  oares,  his  mourning  for  R^hel  (ch  ^   7?  S  8hr'nkill#  from  d^er, 

v  —  *ivm.  /)  ana  tor  Joseph,  pave  a  ting* 


oh.  n.vn.  11—27.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


Ml 


of  melancholy  not  entirely  to  be  taken  away  even  by  receiving  his  son  as  it  were 
from  the  dead.     The  retrospect  of  his  life  seemed  that  of  a  suffering  man. 

I.  Abiding  sorrow  is  the  feuit  of  early  faults,  though  repented  of  (1  Cor.  xv 
9).  It  does  not  necessarily  imply  separation  from  God,  or  doubt  of  personal  salvation. 
If  "a  godly  sorrow,"  it  works  repentance,  i.  e.  a  more  complete  turning  to  God 
But  just  as  early  neglect  of  the  laws  affecting  bodily^health  produces  a  lasting  effect, 
however  carefully  these  laws  may  be  attended  to  in  after  years,  so  neglect  of  God's 
moral  and  spiritual  laws  produces  sorrow,  varying  in  kind,  and  in  the  channel  by 
which  it  comes,  but  bearing  witness  to  the  truth  of  God's  unceasing  watchfulness. 

II.  The  discipline  of  life  is  not  in  anger,  but  for  our  purification.  Thus 
suffering  may  be  a  blessing.  But  for  sorrow  Jacob  might  have  sunk  into  taking  his 
ease.  His  besetting  danger  was  worldly  carefulness  (ch.  xxx.  41).  So  sorrow, 
from  outward  circumstances  or  from  inward  reflection,  often  brings  us  nearer  God. 
It  teaches  the  vanity  of  earth  that  we  may  realise  the  blessedness  of  the  inheritance 
above  ;  that  frail  and  weary  we  may  cling  more  closely  to  the  promises  of  the  rest 
which  remaineth  (Heb.  iv.  9). 

III.  This  life  is  intended  to  be  a  pilgrimage,  not  a  rest.  Its  blessedness  con- 
sists not  in  present  enjoyment,  but  in  preparation  for  the  rest  to  come  (Luke  xii.  20, 
21).  We  are  reminded  that  there  is  a  goal  to  be  reached,  a  prize  to  be  won  (1  Cor. 
ix.  24  ;  1  Pet.  i.  3 — 9),  and  that  the  time  is  short,  that  we  may  put  forth  all  our 
efforts  (Eccles.  ix.  10)  to  overcome  besetting  faults  and  snares  of  worldliness.  A 
pilgrim  (Heb.  xi.  14)  is  seeking  a  country  not  yet  reached.  The  remembrance  of  this 
keeps  the  life  Godward.  True  faith  will  work  patience  and  activity ;  true  hope 
will  work  cheerfulness  under  hindrances,  and,  if  need  be,  under  sufferings.  And  the 
love  of  Christ  (John  xiv.  2,  3),  and  the  consciousness  that  wo  are  his,  will  constrain 
us  "  to  walk  even  as  he  walked."  For  what  are  you  striving  ?  to  lade  yourself  with 
thick  clay  ?  To  gain  honour,  renown,  admiration,  bodily  enjoyment  ?  or  as  a  pilgrim 
(Num.  x.  29)  walking  in  Christ's  way,  and  doing  Christ's  work  ? — M. 


EXPOSITION. 


Ver.  11. — And  Joseph  placed  his  father 
and  hi»  brethren  {i.  e.  gave  them  a  settle- 
ment, the  import  of  which  the  next  clause 
explains),  and  gave  them  a  possession  (i.e. 
allowed  them  to  acquire  property)  in  the 
land  of  Egypt,  in  the  best  of  the  land,  in 
the  land  of  Rameses, — either  that  district  of 
Goshen  in  which  Jacob  and  his  family  6rst 
settled  (Michaelis,  Rosenmiiller),  or,  what 
seems  more  probable,  the  land  of  Goshen 
itself  (LXX.,  Keil,  Hengstenberg,  Kaliseh, 
et  alii),  being  so  named  proleptioally  from 
the  town  Rameses,  which  was  subsequently 
built  (Exod.  i.  11),  or,  if  the  town  existed  in 
the  time  of  Joseph,  and  was  only  afterwards 
fortified  by  the  Israelites,  deriving  its  desig- 
nation from  the  name  of  its  chief  city — as 
Pharaoh  had  commanded. 

Ver.  12. — And  Joseph  nourished — inro- 
liirpti  (LXX.),  i.  e.  gave  them  their  measure 
of  corn — his  father,  and  his  brethren,  and 
all  his  father's  household,  with  bread,  accord- 
ing to  their  families — literally,  to,  or  accord- 
ing to,  the  mouth  of  the  little  ones,  meaning 
either  in  proportion  to  the  size  of  their 
families  (LXX.,  Keil,  Kaliseh,  Murphy),  or 
with  all  the  tenderness  with  which  a  parent 
provides  for  his  offspring  (Murphy),  or  the 
whole  body  of  them,  from  the  greatest  even 


to  the  least  (Calvin),  or  completely,  down 
even  to  the  food  for  their  children  ('  Speaker's 
Commentary '). 

Ver.  13. — And  there  was  no  bread  in  all 
the  land ;  for  the  famine  was  very  sore 
(literally,  heavy),  so  that  the  land  of  Egypt 
and  all  the  land  of  Canaan  fainted  (literally, 
was  exhausted,  had  become  languid  and 
spiritless)  by  reason  of  the  famine.  The 
introduction  of  the  present  section,  which 
first  depicts  the  miseries  of  a  starving  popu- 
lation, and  then  circumstantially  describes  a 
great  political"  revolution  forced  upon  them 
by  the  stern  necessity  of  hunger,  may  have 
been  due  to  a  desire  (1)  to  exhibit  the  ex- 
treme urgency  which  existed  for  Joseph's 
care  of  his  father  and  brethren  (Bush),  (2)  to 
show  the  greatness  of  the  benefit  conferred 
on  Joseph's  house  (Baumgarten,  Keil,  Lange), 
and  perhaps  also  (3)  to  foreshadow  the  poli- 
tical constitution  afterwards  bestowed  upon 
the  Israelites  (Gerlach). 

Ver.  14. — And  Joseph  gathered  up — tho 
verb,  used  only  here  of  collecting  money, 
usually  signifies  to  gather  things  lying  on 
(he  ground,  as  e.  g.,  ears  of  corn  (Ruth  ii.  3), 
stones  (ch.  xxxi.  46),  manna  (Exod.  xvi.  14), 
flowers  (Cant.  vi.  2)— all  the  money  (literally, 
silver)  that  was  found  in  the  land  of  Sgrpt, 


612 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  xlvii.  11 — VI. 


*nd  in  the  land  of  Canaan,  for  the  corn 
•-/nice  they  bought:  and  Joseph  (who  in 
this  matter  was  simply  Pharaoh's  steward) 
brought  the  money  into  Pharaoh's  house 
(i.  e.  deposited  it  in  the  royal  treasury). 

Ver.  15. — And  when  money  failed  (liter- 
illy,  and  the  silver  was  consumed?,  or  spent) 
in  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  in  the  land  of 
Canaan,  all  (literally,  and  all)  the  Egyptians 
came  unto  Joseph,  and  said,  Give  us  bread : 
for  why  should  we  die  in  thy  presence  ?  for 
the  money  faileth  (literally,  and  why  should 
we  die  in  thy  presence  because  silver  faileth  ? 
i.  e.  seeing  that  thou  art  able  to  support  us). 

Vers.  16,  17. — And  Joseph '  said,  Give 
(literally,  bring)  your  cattle ;  and  I  will  give 
you  (sc.  bread)  for  your  cattle,  if  money  fail. 
And  they  brought  their  cattle  unto  Joseph: 
and  Joseph  gave  them  bread  in  exchange  for 
horses,  and  for  the  flocks  (literally,  and  for 
cattle  of  the  flocks),  and  for  the  cattle  of  the 
herds,  and  for  the  asses  (the  severity  of  these 
terms  of  saleand  purchase  was  not  so  great  as  at 
first  sight  appears,  since  to  a  famishing  people 
undir-fed  cattle  and  starving  horses  must  have 
heen  comparatively  worthless):  and  he  fed 
them — literally,  led,  in  the  senaa  of  c*ied  for 
and  maintained,  thttm  (cf.  Ps.  xxiii.  2 ;  Isa. 
si.  11)— for  all  their  cattle  for  that  y»*v — 
this  was  the  sixth  year  of  the  famine  (vide 
ver.  23). 

Vers.  18,19. — When  that  year  was  endei, 
they  came  unto  him  the  second  year  (not 
ihe  second  from  the  commencement  of  the 
dearth,  but  the  second  from  the  consumption 
of  their  money),  and  said  unto  him,  We  will 
uot  hide  it  from  my  lord,  how  that — literally, 
for  if  (sc.  we  should  speak  openly),  hence 
equivalent  to  an  intensified  but — our  money 
(literally,  the  silier)  is  spent ;  my  lord  also 
aath  our  herds  of  cattle; — literally,  our  herds 
of  cattle  also  (sc.  _have  come)  to  my  lord — 
there  is  not  ought  left  in  the  sight  of  my  lord, 
but  our  bodies,  and  our  lands:  wherefore 
shall  we  die  before  thine  eyes,  both  we  and 
our  land  ?  buy  us  and  our  land  for  bread, 
and  we  and  our  land  will  be  servants  unto 
Fharaoh:  and  give  us  seed,  that  we  may 
(literally,  and  wi  shall)  live,  and  not  die, 
that  the  land  be  not  desolate  (literally,  and 
the  land  shall  not  be  desolate). 

Ver.  20. — And  Joseph  bought  all  the  land 
of  Egypt  for  Pharaoh ;  for  the  Egyptians  sold 
every  man  his  field,  because  the  famine  pre- 
vailed over  them :  so  (literally,  and)  the  land 
became  Pharaoh's.  From  this  it  may  be  con- 
cluded that  originally  Pharaoh  had  no  legal 
claim  to  the  soil,  hut  that  the  people  had 
a  valid  title  to  its  absolute  possession,  each 
man  being  regarded  as  the  legitimate  pro- 
prietor of  the  portion  on  which  he  had  ex- 
pended the  labour  of  cultivation. 

Ver.  21. — And  as  for  the  people,  he  re- 
Moved  them — not  enslaved  them,  converted 


them  into  serfs  and'  bondmen  to  Pharaoh 
(LXX. ,  Vulgate),  but  simply  transferred  them, 
caused  them  to  pass  over — to  cities — not  from 
cities  to  cities,  as  if  changing  thejr  popula- 
tions (Onkelos,  Rosenmuller,  Kalisch),  but" 
either  from  the  country  districts  to  the  towns 
(Targums  Jonathan  and  Jerusalem,  Lange, 
Schumann,  Gerlach,  Murphy),  or  according 
to  the  cities,  t.  e.  in  which  the  grain  had 
been  previously  collected  (Keil) — from  one 
end  of  the  borders  of  Egypt  even  to  the 
other  end  thereof.  Not  that  the  people  were 
transported  from  one  side  of  the  country  to 
the  other  as  a  high  stroke  of  policy  to  com- 
plete their  subjugation  (Jarchi,  Grotius, 
Rosenmiiller,  Kalisch,  and  others),  but  that 
throughout  the  land  they  were  moved  into 
the  nearest  cities,  as  a  considerate  and  even 
merciful  arrangement  for  the  more  efficiently 
supplying  them  with  food  (Calvin,  Keil, 
Lange,  Wordsworth,  Speaker's  Commentary). 

Ver.  22. — Only  the  land  of  the  priests 
(so  the  LXX.,  Vulgate,  and  Chaldee  render 
cohen,  which,  however,  sometimes  signifies  a 
prince)  bought  he  not ;  for  the  priests  had 
a  portion — not  of  land  (Lange,  Kalisch),  but 
of  food  (Keil,  Murphy) — assigned  them  of 
Pharaoh  (not  of  Joseph,  who  must  not,  then- 
fore,  be  charged  with  the  sin  of  extending  a 
State  allowance  to  an  idolatrous  priesthood), 
and  did  eat  their  portion  which  Pharaoh 
gave  them :  wherefore  they  sold  not  theit 
lands, — that  is,  in  consequence  of  the  State 
aliment  which  they  enjoyed  (during  the  period 
of  the  famine)  they  did  not  require  to  alienate 
their  lands. 

Vers.  23,  24. — Then  Joseph  said  unto  the 
people.  Behold,  I  have  bought  you  this  day 
and  you;  land  for  Pharaoh  :  lo,  here  is  seed 
for  you,  and  ye  shall  sow  the  land.  This 
proves  the  time  to  have  been  the  last  year  of 
the  famine;  and  since  the  people  obtained 
seed  from  the  viceroy,  it  is  reasonable  to  sup- 
pose that  they  would  also  have  their  cattle 
restored  to  them  to  enable  them  to  .till  the 
ground.  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  the 
increase,  that  ye  shall  give  the  fifth  part 
unto  Pharaoh,  and  four  parts  shall  be  your 
own,  for  seed  of  the  field,  and  for  your  food, 
and  for  them  of  your  households,  and  for  food 
for  your  little  ones.  This  verse  is  a  sufficient 
refutation  of  the  oft-preferred  charge  that 
Joseph  had  despot  i«d  the  Egyptians  of  their 
liberties,  and  converted  a  free  people  into  a 
horde  of  abject  slaves.  Slave-owners  are  not 
usually  content  with  a  tax  of  only  twenty  per 
cent,  on  the  gross  revenues  of  their  estates. 
Nor  does  it  seem  reasonable  to  allege  that 
this  was  an  exorbitant  demand  on  the  part 
either  of  J  oseph  or  of  Pharaoh.  If  in  the  seven 
years  of  plenty  the  people  could  afford  to 
part  with  a  fifth  part  of  their  produce,  might 
not  an  improved  system  of  agriculture  enable 
them,  under  the  new  regulation*,  to  pay  ai 


OH.  XLVII.  11—27.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESia 


513 


much  as  that  in  the  shape  of  rent,  and  with 
qnite  as  much  ease  ?  At  all  events  the  people 
themselves^  did  not  consider  that  they  were 
being  subjected  to  any  harsh  or  UDJust 
exaction. 

Ver.  25.— And  they  said,  Thou  hast  saved 
our  lives  (literally,  thou  hast  kept  us  alive): 
let  us  find  grace  in  the  sight  of  my  lord 
(i.  e.  let  us  have  the  land  on  these  favourable 
terms),  and  we  will  be  Pharaoh's  servants. 
"That  a  sort  of  feudal  service  is  here 
intended — the  service  of  free  labourers,  not 
bondmen — we  may  learn  from  the  relation- 
ship of  tho  Israelites  to  God,  which  was 
formed  after  the  plan  of  this  Egyptian 
model "  (Gerlach). 

Ver.  26. — And  Joseph  made  it  a  law  over 
the  land  of  Egypt  unto  this  day  (i  e.  the 
day  of  the  narrator),  that  Pharaoh  should 
have  the  fifth  part ;  except  the  land  of  the 
priests  only,  which  oecame  not  Pharaoh's. 
The  account  here  given  of  the  land  tenure 
in  Egypt,  viz.,  (1)  that  after  the  time  of 
Joseph  the  kings  of  Egypt  became  lords  para- 
mount of  the  soil,  (2)  that  the  only  free 
landholders  in  the  country  were  the  members 
of  the  priestly  caste,  and  (3)  that  the  popu- 
lation generally  occupied  their  farms  at  the 
uniform  fixed  rent  of  one  fifth  of  their  yearly 
produce,  is  abundantly  corroborated  by  the 
statements  of  Herodotus  (ii.  109),  that 
Sesostris  divided  the  soil  of  Egypt  among  the 
inhabitants,  "  assigning  square  plots  of  equal 
size  to  all,  and  obtaining  his  chief  revenue 
from  the  rent  which  the  holders  were  required 
to  pay  him  year  by  year ; "  of  Diodorus  Siculus 
(i.  73),  that  the  land  in  Egypt  belonged 
either   to   the  priests,  to  the  king,   or  to 


the  military  order;  and  of  Strabo  (xvii. 
787),  that  the  peasants  were  not  landowner^ 
but  occupiers  of  rateable  land;  as  also  by 
the  monuments,  which  represent  the  king, 
priests,  and  warriors  alone  as  having  landed 
property  (Wilkinson,  Keil).  Dr.  Robinson 
quotes  a  modern  parallel  to  this  act  of  Joseph's, 
which  both  illustrates  its  nature  and  by  way 
of  contrast  exhibits  its  clemency.  Up  to  the 
middle  of  the  present  century  the  people  of 
Egypt  had  been  the  owners  as  well  as  tillers 
of  the  soil.  "  By  a  single  decree  the  Pasha 
(Mohammed  Ali)  declared  himself  to  be  the 
sole  owner  of  all  lands  in  Egypt ;  and  the 
people  of  course  became  at  once  only  his 
tenants  at  will,  or  rather  his  slaves."  "The 
modern  Pharaoh  made  no  exceptions,  and 
stripped  the  mosques  and  other  religious  and 
charitable  institutions  of  their  landed  endow- 
ments as  mercilessly  as  the  rest.  Joseph  gave 
the  people  seed  to  sow,  and  required  for  the 
king  only  a  fifth  of  the  produce,  leaving  four- 
fifths  to  them  as  their  own  ;  but  now,  though 
seed  is  in  like  manner  given  out,  yet  every 
village  is  compelled  to  cultivate  two- thirds  of 
its  lands  With  corn  and  other  articles  for  the 
Pasha,  and  also  to  render  back  to  him,  in  the 
form  of  taxes  and  exactions  in  kind,  a  large 
proportion  of  the  produce  remaining  after " 
('  Biblical  Researches,'  i.  42). 

Ver.  27. — And  Israel  (i.  e.  the  people) 
dwelt  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  in  the  country 
of  Goshen ;  and  they  had  possessions  therein 
(i.  e.  acquired  holdings  in  it),  and  grew  (or 
became  fruitful),  and  multiplied  exceedingly 
— or  became  very  numerous.  This  was  the 
commencement  of  the  promise  (ch.  xlvi.3). 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  11 — 27. — Joseph'n  policy  in  Egypt.  I.  Towards  the  Israelites.  1.  He 
gave  them  a  settlement  in  Goshen.  Though  in  one  sense  the  land  of  Goshen  was 
Pharaoh's  grant,  it  is  apparent  from  the  story  that  they  owed  it  chiefly  to  the  wise 
and  prudent  management  of  Joseph  that  they  found  themselves  located  in  the  fattest 
corner  of  the  land.  In  thus  providing  for  them  Joseph  had  without  doubt  an  eye  to 
their  enrichment,  to  their  separation  as  a  people  from  the  Egyptian  inhabitants  of 
the  land,  and  to  their  convenience  when  the  day  came  for  their  return.  Thus  we 
see  an  evidence  of  Joseph's  fervent  piety.  2.  He  supplied  them  with  food  while  the 
famine  lasted-  That  he  did  so  without  charges  to  them  the  narrative  explicitly 
asserts.  Nor  can  Joseph's  right  so  to  provide  for  his  own  household  be  legitimately 
challenged,  the  more  especially  that  it  was  owing  purely  to  his  wise  administration 
that  the  king's  granaries  were  filled  with  corn.  That  Joseph  did  so  was  a  proof  of 
his  natural  affection.  3.  He  allowed  them  to  acquire  possessions.  That  is  to  say, 
he  secured  them  in  their  rights  of  property  while  they  resided  among  strangers.  He 
cast  around  them  the  protection  of  the  law  all  the  same  as  if  they  had  been  Egyptians. 
This  was  a  testimony  to  Joseph's  political  equity. 

II.  Towards  the  Egyptians.  1.  Joseph's  policy  described.  (1)  Before  the 
coming  of  the  famine.  Joseph  gathered  up  a  fifth  part  of  the  produce  of  the  land 
and  stored  it  up  in  granaries  against  the  succeeding  years  of  famine,  paying  doubt- 
less for  what  he  took,  and  affording  the  inhabitants  of  the  country  an  example  of 
economy  and  foresight.      (2)  During  the  continuance  of  the  famine  he  resold  the 

OENF.HI8.  L  L 


•14  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESI&  [oe.  xlvh.  28—31 

grain  which  he  had  previously  collected;  in  the  first  instance,  for  money;  in  the 
second  instance,  when  the  money  failed,  for  horses  and  cattle ;  and  in  the  third  in- 
stance, when  nothing  remained  between  the  people  and  starvation,  for  their  lands  and 
their  persons.  (3)  At  the  close  of  the  famine  Joseph  returned  to  the  people  their 
lands,  along  with  seed,  and  of  necessity  also  cattle  for  its  cultivation,  exacting  from 
them  in  return  as  rent  a  fifth  part  of  the  produce,  the  same  proportion  that  he  had 
lifted  from  them  during  the  seven  prosperous  years.  2.  Josephs  policy  challenged. 
It  has  been  vigorously  assailed,  (1)  for  its  severity;  eloquent  wnters  dilating  with 
much  indignation  on  its  arbitrary,  oppressive,  tyrannical,  and  ferocious  character,  re- 
presenting Joseph  as  little  other  than  a  semi-royal  despot  who  little  recked  of  the 
lives  and  liberties  of  his  grovelling  subjects  so  long  as  he  could  aggrandise  himself 
and  his  royal  patron ;  (2)  for  its  injustice,  being  very  different  treatment  from  that 
which  had  been  measured  out  to  the  Israelites,  who  were  strangers  and  foreigners  in 
the  land,  while  they  (the  Egyptians)  were  the  native  population ;  and  (3)  for  its 
impiety,  Joseph  having  sinfully  taken  advantage  of  the  necessities  of  the  people  to 
reduce  them  by  one  bold  stroke  to  a  condition  of  abject  and  helpless  slavery.  3. 
Joseph's  policy  defended.  (1)  The  alleged  severity  is  greater  in  appearance  than 
reality,  since  it  is  certain  that  Joseph  did  nothing  harsh  in  selling  corn  for  money  so 
long  as  people  had  it,  or  horses  and  cattle  when  money  failed,  and  it  cannot  be  fairly 
proved  that  Joseph  did  not  give  them  full  value  for  their  lands.  (2)  The  imputa- 
tion of  partiality  will  disappear  if  it  be  remembered  that  Joseph's  brethren  were 
only  expected  to  be  temporary  settlers  in  Egypt,  and  besides  were  few  in  number, 
so  that  a  gratuitous  distribution  of  corn  amongst  them  was  not  at  all  an  unwarrant- 
able exercise  of  philanthropy,  whereas  to  have  pauperised  a  whole  nation  would  have 
been  to  inflict  upon  them  the  greatest  possible  injury.  (3)  The  charge  of  having 
enslaved  a  free  people  may  be  answered  by  stating  first  that  the  narrative  when 
fairly  construed  implies  nothing  more  than  that  Joseph  changed  the  land  tenure  from 
that  of  freehold  to  a  rent  charge,  and  that  for  the  convenience  of  supporting  the 
people  while  the  famine  lasted  he  distributed  them  (i.  e.  the  country  folks)  among 
the  cities  where  the  grain  was  stored ;  and  secondly,  that  instead  of  complaining 
against  Joseph  as  the  destroyer  of  their  liberties,  the  people  applauded  him  as  the 
saviour  of  their  lives. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  11,  12. — The  settlement  of  the  children,  of  Israel  in  Goshen.  L  A  consum- 
mation. Distinctly  the  act  of  Joseph,  under  the  command  of  Pharaoh.  1.  The  fruit 
of  righteousness  reaped.     2.  The  fulfilment  of  God's  word. 

II.    A  NEW  LIFE  BASED   UPON  THE   TESTIMONY  OF   DlVINE   GEACE.      The  weak   things 

have  been  proved  mighty,  the  elect  of  God  has  been  exalted.  The  "  best  of  the  land  " 
is  for  the  seed  of  the  righteous :  "  The  meek  shall  inherit  the  earth."  Goshen  the 
type  of  the  Divine  kingdom. 

Vers.  13 — 26.  The  policy  of  Joseph  is  faithfully  employed  for  his  monarch.  The 
advantage  taken  of  the  people's  necessities  to  increase  the  power  of  the  throne  is 
quite  Eastern  in  its  character — not  commended  to  general  imitation,  but  permitted  to 
be  carried  out  through  Joseph,  because  it  gave  him  greater  hold  upon  the  government, 
and  perhaps  wrought  beneficially  on  the  whole  in  that  early  period  of  civilisation. 
The  honour  of  the  priesthood  is  a  testimony  to  the  sacredness  which  the  Egyptians 
attached  to  religious  persons  and  things.  The  earliest  nations  were  the  most  religious, 
and  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  universality  of  religion  can  be  traced  among  the  tribes 
of  the  earth.  An  atheistic  nation  never  has  existed,  and  never  can  exist,  except  as 
in  France,  at  a  revolutionary  period,  and  for  a  short  time. — R. 

EXPOSITION. 


Ver.  28. — And  Jacob  lived  in  the  land  of 
Igypt  seventeen  years :  so  the  whole  age 
of  Jacob  was  (literally,  the  days  of  Jacob, 
the  years  of  his  life,  were)  an  hundred  forty 


and  seven  yean.  He  had  lived  seventy- 
seven  years  in  Canaan,  twenty  years  in 
Padan-aram,  thirty-three  in  Canaan  again, 
and  seventeen  in  Egypt,  in  all  147  years. 


os.  ntn.  28—31.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


611 


Ver.  29.  — And  the  time  drew  nigh  that 
Israel  (i-  e.  Jacob)  must  die  (literally,  and 
the  days  of  Israel  to  die  drew  near) :  and  he 
called  his  son  Joseph,  and  said  unto  him,  If 
now  I  have  found  grace  in  thy  sight  (not  as  if 
Jacob  doubted  Joseph's  affection,  but  simply 
as  desiring  a  last  token  of  his  love,  perhaps 
also  as  unconsciously  recognising  his  son's 
greatness),  put,  I  pray  thee,  thy  hand  under 
my  thigh, — an  ancient  form  of  adjuration 
(cf.  ch.  xxiv.  2) — and  deal  kindly  and  truly 
with  me;  bury  me  not,  I  pray  thee,  in 
Egypt.  On  the  root  "QiJ,  to  bury  (cf.  Eng. 
cover),  vide  ch.  xxiii.  i. 

Ver.  30.— But  I  will  lie  with  my  fathers, 
And  thou  shalt  carry  me  out  of  Egypt,  and 
bury  me  in  their  hurying-place.  The  re- 
juest  of  the  venerable  patriarch,  while  due 
in  some  respect  to  the  deeply-seated  instinct 
of  human  nature  which  makes  men,  almost 
universally,  long  to  be  buried  in  ancestral 
graves,  was  inspired  by  the  clear  faith  that 
Canaan  was  the  true  inheritance  of  Israel, 
and  that,  though  now  obtaining  a  temporary 
refuge  in  Egypt,  his  descendants  would 
eventually  return  to  the  land  of  promise  as 


their  permanent  abode.  And  he  (i.  e.  Joseph) 
said,  I  will  do  as  thou  hast  said— literally, 
according  to  thy  word. 

Ver.  81. — And  he  (i.  e.  Jacob)  said,  Swear 
unto  me  (in  the  manner  indicated  in  ver. 
29).  And  he  (i.  e.  Joseph)  sware  unto  him. 
And  (having  concluded  this  touching  and 
impressive  ceremonial)  Israel  bowed  himself 
upon  the  bed's  head.  Though  supported  by 
many  eminent  authorities  (Chaldee  Para- 
phrase, Symmachus,  Vulgate,  Calvin,  Wil- 
let,  Bosenmiiller,  Delitzsch,  Keil,  Kalisch, 
&c,  &c),  the  present  rendering  is  not  en- 
tirely free  from  difficulty,  since  not  until  the 
next  chapter  is  there  any  mention  of  Jacob's 
sickness;  while  in  favour  of  the  reading, 
"And  Israel  bowed  himself  on  the  top  of 
his  staff"  (LXX.),  it  may  be  urged  (1)  that 
it  is  adopted  by  the  writer  to  the  Hebrews 
(Heb.  xi.  21),  (2)  that  the  Hebrew  words  for 
staff  and  bed  differ  only  in  the  punctuation, 
and  (3)  that  the  action  of  leaning  on  his 
staff  was  quite  as  suitable  to  Jacob's  circum- 
stances as  turning  over  and  bowing  on  hia 
bed's  head. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vera.  28  —  81.  —  Jacob's  residence  in  Egypt.  I.  Jacob's  peaceful  old  agb. 
"And  Jacob  lived  in  the  land  of  Egypt  seventeen  years."  After  an  eventful  and 
chequered  pilgrimage  of  130  years,  during  which  Jacob  had  made  large  experience 
of  the  ills  of  life,  having  encountered  adversity  in  forms  both  more  numerous  and 
severe  than  are  allotted  to  most,  he  had  at  length  reached  a  happy  harbour  of  rest  in 
the  calm  contemplative  evening  of  old  age,  exchanging  the  anxieties  and  toils  of  his 
previously  wandering  condition  for  a  home  of  ease  and  comfort  in  the  fat  land  of 
Goshen,  and  bidding  farewell  to  all  his  past  tears  and  sorrows  in  the  enjoyment  of 
the  tender  care  and  rich  love  of  Joseph,  Rachel's  son.  Verily,  with  this  old  weather- 
beaten  traveller  it  had  become  light  at  eventide.  It  is  noticeable  that  Jacob  lived  as 
long  a  time  in  Egypt  as  Joseph  had  spent  in  Jacob's  home  in  Canaan— seventeen 
years — thus  receiving  an  ample  recompense  for  the  affection  he  had  lavished  on  his 
son.  Let  parents  be  encouraged  thereby  to  love  and  care  for  their  children  in  the 
tender  years  of  infancy  and  youth  ;  and  let  children  see  in  Joseph  an  example  of  the 
rich  return  which  they  should  give  their  parents,  cherishing  amid  the  infirmities  of 
age-  those  who  have  watched  over  them,  and  loved  them,  and  prayed  for  them  with 
so  much  solicitude  and  affection. 

IL  Jacob's  approaching  dissolution.  "The  time  drew  nigh  that  Israel  must 
die."  It  was  a  time  that  Israel  had  now  for  some  considerable  period  been  antici- 
pating. When  he  stood  before  Pharaoh  he  informed  that  august  but  benevolent 
monarch  that  he  reckoned  his  earthly  pilgrimage  as  good  as  closed.  At  least  his 
words  imply  that  he  had  no  expectation  of  living  to  the  age  of  his  revered  ancestors. 
Consequently  he  was  not  surprised,  though  he  perceived  that  death  wasrapidly  gam- 
ing  ground  upon  his  feeble  steps.  Perfectly  aware  that  it  was  appointed  unto  all 
men  once  to  die,  he  had  been  piously,  while  reposing  beneath  the  shadow  or.  Joseph  s 
wing,  reckoning  up  the  number  of  his  own  days  in  particular,  and  had  found  that 
the  allotted  span  was  nearly  passed.  Nor  does  it  appear  that  he  was  alarmed  by  the 
knowledge  of  that  melancholy  fact.  The  man  who  had  fought  with  God  and  pre- 
vailed wis  not  likely  to  be  dismayed  by  the  prospect  of  engaging  with  the  king  ot 
terrors.  He  who  had  been  so  lonS  in  the  enjoyment  of  Jehovah  s  friendship  and 
salvation  would  scarcely  regard  it  as  a  hardship  to  be  translated  to  Jehovah  s  pro- 
files.   Let  the  saints  Usin  to  number  their  days  that  so  they  may  apply  their  hesrU 

il2 


516  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  [oh.  xlvii.  28—31. 

to  heavenly  wisdom ;  to  live  in  habitual  contemplation  of  the  end,  that  they  may  not 
be  afraid  when  death  comes,  and  to  cultivate  that  holy  alliance  with  the  God  ol 
■alvation  which  will  enable  them  to  say,  "  For  we  know  that  if  our  earthly  house  of 
this  tabernacle  were  dissolved,  we  have  a  building  of  God,  an  house  not  made  with 
hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens." 

III.  Jacob's  dying  request.  "Bury  me  not  in  Egypt;  but  I  will  lie  with  niy 
fathers,  and  thou  shalt  carry  me  out  of  Egypt  and  bury  me  in  their  burying-place." 
This  request  was  addressed  to  his  son  Joseph,  whom  he  had  hastily  summoned  to  his 
side.  It  is  not  quite  certain  that  at  this  moment  Jacob  was  confined  to  bed,  or  that 
he  was  actually  so  near  his  decease  as  he  imagined.  The  probability  is  that  he  sur- 
vived for  6ome  little  while  longer,  but  that  with  the  knowledge  that  his  departure 
from  the  earth  could  not  be  long  delayed,  he  desired  to  leave  his  last  instructions  for 
his  funeral  with  his  honoured  and  beloved  son.  Accordingly,  in  a  conversation,  he 
explained  that  he  was  anxious  that  Joseph  should  convey  his  remains  to  the  family 
vault  at  Hebron,  and  lay  them  beside  the  dust  of  Abraham  and  Isaac.  It  was  a 
natural  desire  that  the  old  man  should  Beek  to  sleep  among  his  kindred ;  but  the 
wish  had  a  higher  origin  than  simply  the  instincts  of  nature.  Canaan  was  the  God- 
given  inheritance  of  himsel  E  and  his  descendants ;  and  though  as  yet  a  long  interval 
must  elapse  before  his  children  could  enter  on  its  possession,  he  would  manifest  his 
faith  in  the  Divine  promise  by  laying  his  bones  in  the  sacred  soil.  It  becomes  God's 
people  to  imitate  the  patriarch  in  still  holding  on  to  God's  sure  word  of  promise, 
although  the  fulfilment  should  be  long  delayed,  and  in  particular  to  remember  that 
as  with  Jacob  so  with  them,  God's  best  promises  will  be  realised  not  on  earth,  but  in 
the  better  country,  even  an  heavenly. 

IV.  Jacob's  deep  anxiety.  "And  he  said,  Swear  unto  me."  It  might  have  been 
supposed  that  Joseph's  word  of  promise,  "  I  will  do  as  thou  hast  said,"  would  be 
sufficient  to  allay  the  aged  patriarch's  apprehensions,  but  it  was  not.  Remembering 
the  old  form  of  oath  which  Abraham  had  employed  in  connection  with  Eliezer,  he 
imposed  it  on  his  son,  as  if  to  bind  him  by  the  holiest  obligations  to  fulfil  his  last 
request.  Joseph,  we  may  be  sure,  would  have  honoured  his  aged  parent's  wish 
without  the  additional  ceremony  of  swearing ;  but  inasmuch  as  it  was  not  necessarily 
sinful,  and  it  would  tend  to  dispel  his  father's  fears,  he  consented  to  the  proposal, 
"»nd  he  sware  unto  him."  Jacob  perhaps  might  have  dispensed  with  the  oath,  and 
certainly  Christians  should  be  satisfied  with  a  simple  "  yea  "  or  "  nay,"  remembering 
that  whatsoever  is  more  than  these  cometh  of  evil ;  but  sons  may  learn  from  Joseph 
to  bear  with  an  aged  parent's  infirmities  and  to  humour  his  inclinations,  when  these 
are  not  sinful. 

V.  Jacob's  solemn  worship.  "And  Jacob  bowed  himself  upon  the  bed's  head, 
or  '_'  worshipped,  leaning  upon  the  top  of  his  staff."  But  whatever  was  the  exact 
position  of  the  patriarch,  his  exercise  was  devotion.  With  reverent  inclination  of 
his  aged  head  he  poured  out  his  soul  in  grateful  adoration  to  his  God,  who  had 
enabled  him  so  successfully  to  arrange  everything  connected  with  his  funeral  that  he 
had  now  nothing  left  to  do  but  die.  And  in  this  too  the  patriarch  might  advan- 
tageously be  followed  by  his  spiritual  children.  Happy  they  who  before  being  sum- 
moned to  put  off  this  tabernacle  are  able  to  say,  "  Father,  I  have  finished  the  work 
thou  gavest  me  to  do  1 "  It  is  a  special  mercy  for  which  they  may  well  give  God 
thanks. 

BOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  27 — 31. — The  sunset  of  a  long  life.  There  is  a  touching  beauty  in  this 
scene  between  the  veteran  Israel  and  the  prosperous  Joseph. 

I.  An  illustration  of  hdman  infirmity.  The  supplanter,  the  prince  of  God,  must 
succumb  at  last  to  the  King  of  Terrors.  "  Israel  must  die."  Yet  he  is  not  afraid 
of  death. 

II.  Strength  is  made  perfect  in  weakness.  Grace  appears  brightest  at  the  end. 
His  gray  hairs  have  not  been  "brought  with  sorrow  to  the  grave,"  although  he  feared 
they  would.  The  lost  Bon  is  the  comforter  of  his  last  days  ;  to  him  he  commits  his 
dust  to  be  laid  with  his  fathers. 

III.  Perseverance  is  not  the  fboit  of  man's  perfection,  but  of  God's  meboy. 


oh.  XLvm.  1—22.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


m 


Jacob  is  faithful  to  the  covenant  spirit  to  the  end,  although  in  many  respects  his 
character  was  a  mingled  one.  Yet  he  clung  to  the  Divine  worvl.  Seventeen  years 
could  not  wear  out  his  love  for  the  promised  land.  He  knew  the  solemnity  of  an 
oath,  for  had  he  not  himself  sworn  and  changed  not?  He  would  leave  behind  him  in 
his  last  wishes  a  testimony  which  would  help  to  keep  his  children  faithful.  "  And 
Israel  lowed  himself  upon  the  bed's  Jiead."  The  LXX.,  and  the  Syriac,  and  the  Itala 
versions,  with  the  reference  in  Heb.  xi.  21,  by  a  slight  change  in  the  Hebrew  vowels, 
have  rendered  the  words  "  he  worshipped  vpon  the  top  of  his  staff" — i.  e.  leaning  on 
that  which  had  borne  him  through  his  pilgrimage,  and  thus,  as  it  were,  declaring  the 
long  journey  at  an  end.  But  whether  he  turned  towards  the  bed's  head,  as  it  were 
away  from  the  world  towards  God,  or  leaned  on  his  staff,  the  idea  is  the  same — he 
bowed  himself,  like  Simeon,  saying,  "  Now,  Lord,  lettest  thou  thy  servant  depart  in 
peace."  It  was  a  lovely  sunset  after  a  day  of  many  clouds  and  much  weariness 
and  fear. — B. 

Vers.  28 — 31. — Jacob's  apprehension.  I.  What  it  was.  1.  It  was  not  anxiety 
about  temporal  support,  for  that  had  been  generously  made  sure  to  him  by  his  son 
Joseph.  2.  It  was  not  concern  about  the  future  fortunes  of  his  family,  for  these  had 
been  graciously  taken  under  God's  protection.  3.  It  was  not  uncertainty  as  to  his 
own  personal  acceptance  with  Jehovah,  for  of  that  he  had  long  ago  been  assured. 
4.  It  was  scarcely  even  fear  of  his  approaching  death,  for  besides  being  a  thought 
with  which  Jacob  had  long  been  familiar,  to  a  weary  pilgrim  like  him  the  event 
itself  would  not  be  altogether  unwelcome.  5.  It  was  dread  lest  his  lifeless  body 
should  be  interred  in  Egypt,  far  from  the  graves  of  his  ancestors  in  the  holy  land. 

II.  Whence  it  arose.  1.  From  the  deeply-seated  instinct  in  human  nature,  which 
makes  men  wish,  if  possible,  to  sleep  beside  their  fathers  and  friends.  Though 
religion  teaches  us  to  believe  that  every  spot  on  earth  is  in  a  manner  holy  ground, 
yet  it  does  not  induce  a  spirit  of  indifference  as  to  the  last  resting-place  where  we 
shall  lie.  2.  From  a  firm  faith  in  the  Divine  promise  that  his  descendants  should 
yet  return  to  Canaan.  Even  if  Jacob  did  not  anticipate  that  this  would  immediately 
occur,  if,  as  is  probable,  he  had  already  dark  forebodings  that  the  period  of  exile  and 
servitude  spoken  of  by  Jehovah  to  Abraham  was  about  to  commence,  he  was  yet  able 
to  detect  a  silver  lining  in  the  cloud,  to  see  the  happy  time  beyond,  when  his  children, 
in  accordance  with  the  promise  "  I  will  surely  bring  thee  up  again,"  should  return 
home  to  their  presently  abandoned  inheritance. 

III.  How  it  was  removed.  1.  By  Joseph's  promise.  Requested  by  his  aged 
parent  to  convey  his  body  back  to  Canaan,  when  the  life  had  departed,  Joseph  solemnly 
engages  to  carry  out  that  parent's  wishes  to  the  letter.  "  I  will  do  as  thou  hast  said.'' 
2.  By  Joseph's  oath.  As  if  to  remove  every  possible  ground  of  apprehension,  the 
old  man  further  binds  his  son  by  an  appeal  to  heaven.  "And  he  said,  Swear  unto 
me ;  and  he  (Joseph )  sware  untohim."  The  venerable  patriarch's  anxieties  were  at  an 
eni     "  And  Israel  bowed  himself  upon  the  bed's  head." — W, 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XLVIII. 


Ver.  1. — And  it  came  to  pass  after  these 
things  (i.  e.  the  events  recorded  in  the  pre- 
ceding chapter,  and  in  particular  after  the 
arrangements  which  had  been  made  for 
Jacob  s  funeral),  that  one  told  Joseph, — the 
verb  "lOX'l  is  here  used  impersonally,  or  pas- 
sively, for  "one  told,"  or  "it  was  told,"  to 
Joseph  (LXX. ,  airtyys).  t) ;  Vulgate,  nunciatim 
est;  Rosenmuller,  Keil,  Kalisch,  Murphy, 
et  alii) ;  or  probably  emphatically,  by  way  of 
•ailing  attention  to  the  circumstance— de- 


noting perhaps  a  special  messenger  (Tayler 
Lewis)  —  Behold,  thy  father  is  sick.  The 
word  in  the  original  conveys  the  idea  of 
being  worn  down  or  becoming  infirm  through 
age  or  disease,  and  may  suggest  the  notion 
that  Jacob  was  now  regarded  as  rapidly 
approaching  dissolution.  And  he  took  with 
him  his  two  sons,  Manasseh  and  Ephraim 
—who  at  this  time  must  have  been  about 
eighteen  or  twenty  years  of  ago  (Keil),  and 
who  appear  to  have  accompanied  their  father 
from  respectful  affection  to  their  aged  rela- 
tive (Murphy),  or  to  have  been  taken  in  th« 
hope  that  "  the  words  of  their  blewed  grind 


818 


THE  feOOfe  OE  GENESIS. 


[OH   XLVHI.  i— M. 


father  would  make  an  indelible  impression 
on  their  hearts  "  (Lawson),  rather  than  in 
order  to  obtain  from  Jacob  "a  pledge  of 
their  unqualified  admission  as  members  of 
his  house,"  of  their  exclusion  from  which 
Joseph  was  not  altogether  groundlessly  ap- 
prehensive, in  consequence  of  their  being  the 
children  of  an  Egyptian  mother  (Kalisch). 

Ver.  2.— And  one  told  Jacob  pj.y,  also 
used  impersonally,  like  "IDX'l  in  ver.  1),  and 
said,  Behold,  thy  son  Joseph  cometh  unto 
thee:  and  Israel — the  significance  of  this 
change  of  name  it  is  impossible  to  overlook 
(cf.  ch.  xlv.  27,  28)— strengthened  himself 
(for  the  work  which,  as  head  of  the  theocratic 
family,  he  now  felt  himself  inwardly  moved 
to  perform),  and  sat  upon  the  bed — i.  c.  he 
raised  himself  up  to  a  sitting  posture. 

Vera.  8,  4.— And  Jacob  said  unto  Joseph, 
— recalling  the  experiences  of  early  days — 
God  Almighty — El  Shaddai  (vide  ch.  xvii.  1) 
— appeared  unto  me  at  Lnz — i.  e.  Bethel 
(vide  ch.  xxviii.  17,  19 ;  xxxv.  6,  15)— in 
the  land  of  Canaan,  and  blessed  me,  and 
said  unto  me,  Behold,  I  will  make  thee 
fruitful,  and  multiply  thee,  and  I  will  make 
of  thee  a  multitude  of  people ;  and  will  give 
this  land  to  thy  seed  after  thee  for  an  ever- 
lasting possession.  It  is  obvious  that  Jacob 
principally  has  in  his  mind  the  theophany  at 
Bethel  on  his  return  from  Padan-aram. 

Vers.  8,  6. — And  now  thy  two  sons, 
Ephraim  and  Manasseh,  which  were  born 
unto  thee  in  the  land  of  Egypt  [vide  ch.  xli. 
50 — 52)  before  I  came  unto  thee  into  Egypt, 
—  this  would  almost  seem  to  imply  that 
Jacob  knew  of  Joseph's  having  had  sons 
born  to  him  since  his  (Jacob's)  arrival  at 
Goshen — are  mine  (i.  e.  I  shall  reckon  them 
as  my  own  sons,  giving  them  an  equal  place 
with  the  other  members  of  my  family) ;  as 
Benben  and  Simeon,  they  shall  be  mine  — 
literally,  Ephraim  and  Manasseh,  as  Reuben 
aatd  Simeon,  shall  be  mine.  The  double 
portion  thus  conferred  upon  Joseph  in  the 
persons  of  his  sons  was  a  practical  investiture 
of  him  with  the  birthright  of  which  Reuben 
had  been  deprived  (1  Chron.  v.  1),  in  respect 
at  least  of  the  inheritance  ;  in  respect  of  the 
honour  of  being  the  next  connecting  link  in 
the  chain  of  redemption,  leading  on  and 
down  to  the  coming  of  the  Saviour,  the 
birthright  appears  to  have  been  transferred 
to  Judah  (ch.  xlix.  8 — 10).  And  thy  issue, 
which  thou  begettest  after  them,  shall  be 
thine  (i.  e.  shall  be  reckoned  in  thine  own 
family),  and  shall  be  called  after  the  name 
of  their  brethren  in  their  inheritance. 
They  should  not  form  heads  of  separate 
tribes,  but  be  ranked  under  the  banners  of 
Ephraim  and  Manasseh.  It  is  uncertain 
whether  Joseph  had  more  sons  than  two  (vide 
Mfra) ;  if  he  had,  they  were  included  in  the 


families  of  their  brethren,  as  here  directed  (cf. 
Numb.  xxvi.  28—37  ;  1  Chron.  vii.  14—29). 

Ver.  7. — And  as  for  me  (literally,  and  I, 
the  pronoun  being  emphatic),  when  I  canu 
from  Fadan, — literally,  in  my  coming,  i.  e. 
while  on  ray  journey,  from  Padan,  or  Padan- 
aram.  This  is  the  only  place  where  the 
shorter  designation  is  employed  (cf.  ch.  xxv. 
20) — Eachel— the  mention  to  Joseph  of  his 
beloved  mother  could  not  fail  to  kindle 
emotion  in  hie  breast,  as  obviously  it  had 
revived  a  pang  of  sorrow  in  that  of  the  old 
man — "  the  remembrance  of  the  never-to-be- 
forgotten  one  causing  a  sudden  spasm  of 
feeling"  (Delitzsch)—  died  by  me — not  for 
me  in  the  sense  of  sharing  with  me  my  toils 
and  perils,  and  so  bringing  on  herself  the 
deadly  travail  which  cut  her  off  (Lange), 
which  is  too  subtle  and  metaphysical  in  its 
refinement ;  but  either  upon  me,  i.  e.  as  an 
heavy  affliction  falling  on  me  (Kosenmiiller, 
Gesenius,  Murphy,  ei  alii) ;  or  at  my  side, 
i.  e.  near  me  (Keil,  Wordsworth,  'Speaker's 
Commentary') ;  or  perhaps  to  me,  meaning, 
This  happened  to  me,  or,  I  saw  Eachel  die 
(Kalisch) ;  or  possibly  with  a  touch  of  tender 
emotion,  Rachel  to  me,  i.  e.  my  Rachel  died 
(Tayler  Lewis) — in  the  land  of  Canaan  in  the 
way,  when  yet  there  was  but  a  little  way— 
literally,  a  length  of  ground ;  the  LXX.  add 
iiriroSpofioQ,  meaning  probably  such  adistance 
as  a  horse  can  go  without  being  over-worked 
(vide  ch.  xxxv.  16)— to  come  unto  Ephrath : 
and  I  buried  her  there  in  the  way  oi 
Ephrath ;  the  same  is  Bethlehem. 

Ver.  8. — And  Israel  beheld  Joseph's  sons, 
and  said,  Who  are  these  ?  The  failing  sight 
of  the  patriarch  (ver.  10)  probably  was  the 
reason  why  he  did  not  sooner  recognise  his 
grandchildren,  and  the  fact  that  he  did  not 
at  first  discern  their  presence  shows  that  his 
adoption  of  them  into  the  number  of  the 
theocratic  family  was  prompted  not  by  the 
accidental  impulse  of  a  natural  affection 
excited  through  beholding  the  youths,  but 
by  the  inward  promptings  of  the  Spirit  of 
God. 

Ver.  9. — And  Joseph  said  unto  his  father, 
They  are  my  sons  (of  whom  you  have  just 
spoken),  whom  God  hath  given  me  in  this 
place.  It  speaks  highly  in  Joseph's  favour 
that,  after  listening  to  Jacob's  promise  re- 
garding Ephraim  and  Manasseh,  he  did  not 
seek  to  draw  his  aged  father's  attention  to 
the  young  men  before  him,  but  quietly 
waited  for  Jacob  to  take  the  initiative  in  any 
further'communications  of  a  personal  natuiie 
that  he  might  wish  to  address  to  them.  And 
he  (i.  e.  Jacob)  said  Bring  them,  I  pray 
thee,  unto  me,  and  I  will  biess  them. 

Ver.  10. — Now  (literally,  and)  the  eyes  of 
Israel  were  dim  (literally,  heavy)  for  age,  so 
that  he  could  not  see.  This  explains  why  h< 
did  not  earlier  recognise  nU  grandchildren, 


ea.  xlvih.  1—22.] 


1'feE  fiook  OP  GENESIS. 


MS 


and  why  he  asked  them  to  be  set  close  by 
his  bed.  And  he  (their  father)  brought 
them  near  unto  him ;  and  he  (their  old 
grandfather)  kissed  them,  and  embraced 
them  (cf.  Isaac's  blessing  of  Jacob,  ch.  xxvii. 
26,  27). 

Ver.  11. — And  Israel  said  unto  Joseph,  I 
had  not  thought  to  see  thy  face :  and,  lo, 
God  (Elohim)  hath  shewed  me  also  thy  seed. 
The  first  half  of  Israel's  utterance  is  rendered 
by  the  LXX.  "  'Idoi  roi  wpoatbTrov  aov  ou* 
iaripr]6i)v." 

Ver.  12. — And  Joseph  brought  them  out 
from  between  his  knees  (literally,  from  near 
his  knees,  i.  e.  the  knees  of  his  father,  who 
while  in  the  act  of  embracing  had  drawn 
them  into  that  position),  and  he  (viz.  Joseph) 
bowed  himself  with  his  face  to  the  earth. 
The  reading  "  and  they  bowed  themselves," 
i.  6.  Ephraim  and  Manasseh  (Samaritan, 
Michaelis),and  the  rendering  Kaiirpotriciviiaav 
airtf  (LXX.),  are  incorrect. 

Ver.  13. — And  Joseph  took  them  both, 
Ephraim  in  his  right  hand  toward  Israel's 
left  hand,  and  Manasseh  in  his  left  hand 
toward  Israel's  right  hand,  and  brought 
them  near  unto  him.  Joseph  naturally  ex- 
pected that  Jacob's  right  hand  would  fall 
upon  the  head  of  Manasseh,  as  the  firstborn, 
although  with  regard  to  even  this  a  doubt 
might  have  been  suggested  if  he  had  re- 
membered how  Isaac  had  been  preferred  to 
Ishmael,  and  Jacob  to  Esau. 

Ver.  14. — And  Israel  stretched  out  his 
right  hand,  and  laid  it  upon  Ephraim's  head, 
— the  first  instance  of  the  imposition  of  hands 
being  used  as  a  symbol  of  blessing.  Though 
not  necessarily  connected  with  the  form  of 
benediction,  it  is  not  without  a  natural  fit- 
ness to  suggest  the  transmission  of  spiritual 
benefit.  Accordingly  it  afterwards  became 
the  recognised  mode  of  conveying  to  another 
some  supernatural  power  or  gift,  and  was 
employed  in  the  Old  Testament  Church  in 
the  dedication  of  priests  (Numb,  xivii.  18, 
23  ;  Deut.  xxxiv.  9),  and  in  the  New  in  the 
ordination  of  Christian  office-bearers  (Acts  vi. 
6;  viii.  17;  1  Tim.  iv.  14  ;  2  Tim.  i.  6),  as 
well  as  by  the  Saviour  and  his  Apostles  in  the 
performance  of  many  of  their  miracles  (Matt. 
xix.  13  ;  Mark  viii.  23,  25  •  Acts  ix.  17 ;  xix. 
6 ;  xxviii.  8) — who  was  the  younger  (liter- 
ally, amd  he  the  little  one,  i.  e.  the  younger), 
and  his  left  hand  upon  Manasseh's  head, 
guiding  his  hands  wittingly ; — literally,  he 
placed  his  hands  prudently,  i.  e.  of  set  pur- 
pose, the  piel  of  tOS?,  to  look  at,  conveying 
the  intensive  signification  of  acting  with 
prudence  and  deliberation  (Gesenius,  Fiirst) ; 
intelligere  fecit  mantis  suas  hoc  est,  dock,  scite, 
tt  peritt  imposuit  eis  momus  (Vatablus,  vide 
wkss.    •  Phil.  Tract.,'  p.  781) ;  a  rendering  of 


the  words  which  has  been  adopted  by  th« 
best  scholars  (Calvin,  Bathe,  Rosenmuller, 
Keil,  Kalisch,  Murphy,  Tayler  Lewis,  and 
others),  though  the  translation,  "he  crossed 
his  hands,''  which  regards  ?3B>  as  the  piel  of 
an  unused  root  signifying  to  intertwine, 
IvaXXdl  t&q  xcipac  (LXX.),  commutans 
manus  (Vulgate),  is  not  entirely  destitute  of 
leamea  supporters  (Targums  of  Jonathan  and 
Jerusalem,  Pererius,  Knobel,  Delitzsch,  Ger- 
lach,  and  others) — for  Manasseh  was  the 
firstborn. 

Vers.  15, 16. — And  he  blessed  Joseph  (ie.  in 
his  sons),  and  said,  God, — literally,  the  Elo- 
him. The  use  of  Elohim  in  a  passage  (vers. 
15 — 19)  which  is  undoubtedly  Jehovistic  in 
its  import,  and  is  by  advanced  critics  (David- 
son, Colenso)  assigned  to  that  writer,  has 
been  explained  (Hengstenberg)  as  an  indica- 
tion that  "  the  great  spiritual  Sun,  Jehovah, 
was  at  that  time,"  viz.,  at  the  entrance  of 
the  captivity,  "concealed  behind  a  cloud 
from  the  chosen  race  ; "  but,  without  resorting 
to  any  such  doubtful  hypothesis,  it  is  suffi- 
cient to  observe  that  Jacob  practically  iden- 
tifies the  Elohim  spoken  of  with  Jehovah, 
•while  by  using  the  former  expression  he  con- 
veys the  thought  that  the  blessing  about  to 
be  pronounced  proceeded  forth,  not  from  Deity 
in  general,  but  from  the  particular  Elohim 
who  had  graciously  manifested  himself  in  the 
manner  after  described — before  whom  my 
fathers  Abraham  and  Isaac  did  walk,— (cf. 
ch.  xvii.  1 ;  xxiv.  40)  the  God  here  referred 
to  was  one  who  had  "a  face,"  or  manifested 
presence ;  in  other  words,  was  Jehovah — the 
God  which  fed  me — literally,  the  Eiohim 
shepherding  me  (cf.  Ps.  xxiii.  1 ;  xxviii.  9) — 
all  my  life  long — literally,  from  as  yet  (sc.  I 
was),  i.  e.  from  the  beginning  of  my  existence, 
£J  vtoTtirog  (LXX.) — unto  this  day,  the 
Angel — the  Maleach  here  spoken  of  cannot 
possibly  be  a  creature,  since  he  is  explicitly 
identified  with  Elohim,  but  must  have  been 
the  Jehovah  Angel  with  whom  Jacob  wrestled 
at  the  ford  of  Jabbok  (ch.  xxxii.  W—Wi). 
The  reading  of  the  Samaritan  codex,  12^0, 
the  king,  is  open  to  suspicion — which  re- 
deemed me  from  all  evil, — literally,  the  (sc. 
angel)  redeeming  me;  the  first  use  of  the 
term  go'el,  from  ?K|,  to  buy  back  or  redeem 
(Gesenius),  to  separate  or  untie  (Fiirst),  or  to 
stain  as  with  blood,  hence  to  be  stained  or 
polluted,  as  one  who  suffers  »  kinsman's 
blood  to  go  unavenged,  hence  to  remove  the 
stain  of-  blood  by  taking  vengeance  on  the 
murderer  (Tayler  Lewis).  Applied  under  the 
law  to  the  next  of  kin  (Levit.  xxv.  25 ;  xxvii. 
13,  15,  19,  &c,  &c),  it  is  also  used  of  God 
redeeming  men,  and  especially  Israel,  from 
captivity  (Exod.  vi.  6  ;  Isa.  *liii.  1).  In  thu 
aense  it  was  employed  by  Jacob  (cf.  ch,  slviii 


520 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[CH.  XLVIH.  1 — 22, 


16  with  xlix.  18)  and  by  Job  (xix.  21)  to 
describe  the  Divine  Rescuer  who  had  delivered 
them  from  ill  both  temporal  and  spiritual, 
and  who  was  to  complete  his  emancipating 
work  by  ultimately  ransoming  them  from  the 
powei  of  the  grave.  The  Goel  to  whom  both 
Jacob  and  Job  looked  forward,  and  of  whom 
both  Moses  and  the  prophets  testified,  was 
Christ  (Gal.  iii.  11  ;  Titus  ii.  14 ;  1  Pet.  i. 
18)— bless  the  lads.  The  singular  verb  sug- 
gests to  Luther  the  reflection  that  the  writer 
"  conjungit  in  una  qpere  benedicendi  tresper- 
tonas,  Dewm  Patrem,  Dewm,  Pastorem,  et 
Angelwm,"  from  which  he  draws  the  obvious 
conclusion,  "sunt  igitur  hi  tres  unus  Deus  et 
unus  benedictor."  And  let  my  name  be 
named  on  them,  and  the  name  of  my  fathers 
Abraham  and  Isaac ; — literally,  and  my  name 
and  the  name  of  my  fathers  shall  ie  named  in 
them,  i.  e.  they  shall  be  counted  my  sons  and 
the  children  of  my  ancestors,  though  born  of 
thee  (Calvin,  Eosenmiiller,  Lawson,  Murphy, 
Wordsworth,  and  others) ;  or,  May  this  name 
be  preserved  by  them,  and  the  race  of  Abra- 
ham propagated  by  them !  may  the  fathers  and 
I  live  in  them !  (Gerlach,  Kalisch)  ;  or,  what 
seems  more  appropriate  than  either,  May  the 
grace  and  salvation  enjoyed  by  my  fathers 
and  myself  be  renewed  in  them !  (Keil,  Lange) 
— and  let  them  grow  into  a  multitude  in  the 
midst  of  the  earth.  The  original  conveys 
the  sense  of  swarming  like  the  fishes  of  the 
sea,  the  airai,  \ey6pfvov,  P31J  (from  which 
comes  the  term  2*1,  a  fish,  from  being  so  won- 
derfully prolific),  signifying  to  cover  over 
with  a  multitude  (vide  Gesenius,  'Lexicon,' 
sub  voce). 

Ver.  17. — And  when  (literally,  and)  Joseph 
saw  that  his  father  laid  (or  was  laying)  his 
right  hand  upon  the  head  of  Ephraim,  it 
displeased  him : — literally,  and  it  was  evil  in 
his  eyes  (cf.  ch.  xxviii.  8) — and  (supposing  his 
father  had  made  a  mistake)  he  held  up  (or 
took  hold  of)  his  father's  hand,  to  remove  it 
from  Ephraim' e  head  unto  Manasseh's  head. 

Ver.  18. — And  Joseph  said  unto  his  father, 
Not  so,  my  father :  for  this  is  the  firstborn ; 
put  thy  right  hand  upon  his  head.  "  From 
Joseph's  behaviour  we  cannot  certainly  infer 
that,  like  Isaac,  he  loved  the  firstborn  better 
than  the  youngest;  but  he  was  sorry  that 
an  honour  was  not  given  to  the  eldest  which 
he  would  naturally  expect,  and  bestowed  on 
the  youngest,  who  did  not  expect  it,  and  who 
would  not  have  been  hurt  by  the  watt  of  it " 
(Lawson). 

Ver.  19. — And  his  father  refused,  and 
said,  I  know  it,  my  son,  I  know  it :  he  also 
shall  become  a  people,  and  he  also  shall  be 
great:  but  truly  (literally,  and  over  against 
OuU;  D^-IK,  the  strongly  adversative  particle, 
signifying  that  which  stands  in  front  of,  or 
apposite  to,  another  thing)  bis  younger  bro- 


ther shall  be  greater  than  \e  (cf.  Numb.  i. 
33  with  i.  35 ;  ii.  19  with  ii.  21),  and  hit 
seed  shall  become  a  multitude  of  nations — 
literally,  shall  be  a  fulness  of  natior*.  In  the 
time  of  Moses  this  prediction  began  to  realise 
itself.  In  the  first  census  which  took  place  in 
the  wilderness  the-  tribe  of  Ephraim  iiad 
40,500  men,  while  that  of  Manasseh  could 
only  reckon  32,200  ;  in  the  second  the  num- 
bers received  a  temporary  alteration,  Ephraim 
counting  only  32,500,  and  Manasseh  52,700  ; 
but  after  the  conquest  the  ascendancy  of 
Ephraim  was  restored,  so  that  she  easily 
assumed  the  lead  among  the  ten  northern 
tribes,  and  acquired  a  name  and  an  influence 
only  seoond  to  that  of  Judah  (cf.  Judges  iv. 
5;  v.  14 ;  viii. ;  xii.). 

Ver.  20. — And  he  (i.  e.  Jacob)  blessed  them 
that  day,  saying,  In  thee  (i.  e.  in  Joseph, 
who  is  still  identified  with  his  sons)  shall 
Israel  (the  nation)  bless,  saying,  God  (Elo- 
him,  the  supreme  source  ef  all  blessing)  make 
thee  as  Ephraim  and  as  Manasseh :  and  he 
set  Ephraim  before  Manasseh — "in  the 
position  of  his  hands,  and  the  terms  of  the 
blessing  "  (Keil). 

Ver.  21. — And  Israel  (Jacob)  said  as  to 
Joseph,  Behold,  I  die:  but  God  (Elohim) 
shall  be  with  yon,  and  bring  yon  again  unto 
the  land  of  your  fathers.  "  For  Joseph  and 
his  children  a  great  promise  and  dispensation  " 
(Lange). 

Ver.  22.— Moreover  (literally,  and)  I  have 
given — or,  I  give  (Keil),  I  will  give  (Kalisch), 
the  preterite  being  used  prophetically  as  a 
future,  or  even  as  a  present,  the  event  being 
regarded,  from  its  certainty,  as  already  ac- 
complished. It  is  thus  not  absolutely  clear 
that  Jacob  here  alludes  to  any  past  transac- 
tion in  his  own  personal  history— to  thee  on* 
portion — literally,  one  shoulder,  or  ridge,  or 
elevated  tract  of  land,  D3tf^;  unam  partem 
(Vulgate),  with  which  agree  several  of  the 
ancient  versions  (Onkelos,  Syriac) — above 
thy  brethren,  which  I  took— or  take  (Keil), 
or  shall  take  (Kalisch) — out  of  the  hand  ol 
the  Amorite — a  general  name  for  the  in- 
habitants of  Canaan  (vide  ch.  xv.  16) — with 
my  sword  and  with  my  bow.  As  Scripture 
has  preserved  no  account  of  any  military 
exploit  in  the  history  of  Jacob  such  as  is  here 
described,  the  patriarch's  language  has  been 
understood  as  referring  to  the  plot  of  ground 
at  Shechem  which  Jacob  purchased  of  Hamor 
the  father  of  Shechem  (ch.  xxxiii.  19),  and 
as  signifying  either  that  he  had  captured 
it  by  sword  and  bow,  in  the  sense  that  his 
sons  at  the  head  of  his  armed  retainers 
had  put  the  inhabitants  of  the  town  to  the 
sword,  and  so  taken  possession  of  the  entire 
district  (Calvin,  Rosenmuller,  Murphy);  or 
that,  though  he  had  peacefully  paid  for  it,  hi 
yet  required  at  a  subsequent  period  to  recr  vet 


OH.  XLVIII.  1—22.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


621 


It  by  force  of  arms  from  the  Canaanites  (Law- 
son,  Bush,  Wordsworth) ;  or  that  after  the 
terrible  tragedy  at  Shechem,  when  God  put 
a  fear  upon  the  surrounding  cities,  Jacob  and 
his  sons  stood  in  the  gate  of  Shechem  in  the 
armed  expectation  of  a  hostile  attack,  and  so 
may  he  said  to  have  taken  it  by  sword  and 
bow  (Rabbi  Solomon,  Lyra,  "Willet).  It 
seems,  however,  better  to  regard  the  words 
as  a  prophetic  utterance  pointing  forward  to 
the  conquest  of  Canaan,  which  Jacob  here 


represents  himself,  in  the  persons  of  his  de- 
scendants, as  taking  from  the  Amorites  by 
means  of  sword  and  bow,  and  as  intimating 
that  the  tribes  of  Ephraim  and  Manasseh 
would  receive  a  double  portion  of  the  inherit- 
ance, the  word  DJB'  being  probably  designed 
to  convey  a  hint  that  the  tract  to  be  in  future 
assigned  to  Joseph's  descendants  would  be 
the  region  round  about  the  ancient  city  She- 
chem (Ainsworth,  Koil,  Kalisch,  Lange,  kc). 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 22. — Jacob's  dying  utterances.  I.  An  old  man's  sick-bed.  u  It  came  to 
pass  after  these  things,  that  one  told  Joseph,  Behold,  thy  father  is  sick."  In  this  the 
venerable  patriarch — 1.  Suffered  an  experience  that  is  common  to  all.  For  nearly 
three  half-centuries  had  this  weather-beaten  pilgrim  been  able  to  maintain  himself 
erect  amid  the  numberless  vicissitudes  of  life.  Strong,  healthy,  vigorous,  and  active 
too,  he  appears  to  have  been  until  now,  notwithstanding  the  peculiarly  trying  and 
ihequered  career  through  which  he  had  passed.  But  all  the  while,  the  rolling  years, 
as  they  glided  softly  by,  had  been  touching  him  with  their  invisible  fingers,  and 
leaving  on  him  their  ineffaceable  impressions,  imperceptibly  but  surely  relaxing  his 
corded  muscles,  whitening  and  diminishing  his  manly  locks,  loosening  his  joints, 
making  his  step  less  lithe  and  firm,  and  generally  draining  away  his  strength.  And 
now,  at  length,  he  had  arrived  where  all  men  must,  sooner  or  later,  come,  if  they  have 
a  death-bed  at  all,  no  matter  how  bright  may  be  their  eye,  or  how  ruddy  their  coun- 
tenance, or  how  stalwart  their  frame,  or  how  herculean  their  strength,  to  that  period 
of  infirmity  and  sickness  that  precedes  dissolution.  2.  Enjoyed  a  privilege  accorded 
to  few.  Immediately  that  he  had  fallen  sick,  a  messenger,  despatched  from  Goshen, 
carried  tidings  to  the  vice-regal  palace  inthe  great  metropolis,  and  Joseph,  his  beloved 
son,  accompanied  by  his  two  boys,  Ephraim  and  Manasseh,  at  once  descended  to 
express  his  sympathy  and  lend  his  aid.  Not  to  many  is  it  granted,  in  this  world  of 
separations  and  bereavements,  to  have  all  their  family  around  them  when  they  breathe 
their  last,  or  to  have  their  Josephs  even,  to  put  their  hands  upon  the  sinking  eyelids, 
a  d  gently  close  them  in  the  sleep  of  death.  Venerable  pilgrim!  Much  afflicted  in 
thy  riper  years,  thou  wast  greatly  comforted  in  thy  latter  days. 

II.  An  old  pilgrim's  reminiscences.  Learning  of  Joseph's  arrival,  the  aged  father 
in  isters  his  rapidly  failing  strength,  and,  recognising  within  his  withered  bosom  the 
stirrings  of  the  old  prophetic  spirit,  prepares  himself,  by  sitting  upright  in  his  bed, 
for  delivering  whatever  communication  should  be  put  into  his  trembling  lips.  Cast- 
ing his  thoughts  back  upon  the  past  with  that  fond  delight  with  which  the  aged 
recall  the  story  of  their  younger  years,  he  relates  to  Joseph — 1.  How  El  Shaddai 
had  appeared,  to  him  at  Luz,  or  Bethel,  in  the  land  of  Canaan,  as  he  returned  from 
Mesopotamia.  2.  What  God  had  promised  him  on  that  memorable  occasion,  that 
he  should  grow  into  a  multitude  of  people,  who  should  eventually  possess  the  land, 
adding  by  way  of  parenthesis,  at  this  stage,  that  in  view  of  that  inheritance  to  come 
he  intended  to  adopt  the  sons  of  Joseph  as  his  own  ;  and  3.  The  great  affliction  that  had 
happened  to  him  almost  immediately  after  in  the  loss  of  Rachel,  Joseph's  mother,  to 
whose  premature  death  and  affecting  burial  "  in  the  way  of  Ephrath"  the  old  man, 
even  at  that  long  distance  of  time,  cannot  refer  without  emotion.  "  As  for  me, 
Rachel  died  upon  me  in  the  land  of  Canaan  in  the  way." 

III.  An  old  saint's  blessing.  It  is  probable  that,  though  Jacob  had  already  re- 
ferred to  Joseph's  sons,  he  had  not  yet  been  conscious  of  their  presence,  for  the 
eyes  of  Israel  were  dim  for  age,  so  that  he  could  not  see."  At  length,  however,  dis- 
cerning unfamiliar  forms  in  the  chamber,  and  ascertaining  they  were  Ephraim  and 
Manasseh,  he  proceeds  to  give  them  his  patriarchal  benediction.  1.  The  actions  of 
the  patriarch  (1)  Requesting  his  grandchildren  to  be  brought  to  his  bedside,  he 
tenderly  embraces  them,  and  kisses  them  with  all  an  old  man's  affeotion,  at  the  same 


ft22  THE  BOOK  Of  GENESIS,  ten.  xlviil  i— 22, 

time  giving  special  thanks  to  Elohim  for  his  superabundant  mercy  in  permitting  him 
to  see  Joseph's  sons,  and  his  beloved  Rachel's  offspring.  (2)  Guiding  his  handi 
wittingly,  he  sets  them  crosswise  upon  his  grandsons'  heads,  the  right  hand  upon 
that  of  Ephraim,  the  younger,  and  the  left  hand  upon  that  of  Manasseh,  the  elder. 
Supposing  that  the  patriarch  had  erred,  Joseph  endeavours,  by  changing  his  father' § 
hands,  to  rectify  the  mistake,  saying,  "Not  so,  my  father:  for  this  is  the  firstborn  ; 
put  thy  right  hand  upon  his  head."  But  the  old  man  replies,  thinking  perhaps  at  the 
moment  of  himself  and  Esau,  when  they  came  before  Isaac  for  his  blessing,  "  I  know 
it,  my  son,  I  know  it,"  but  refuses  to  comply  with  his  son's  suggestion.  2.  The  con- 
tents of  the  blessing.  (1)  The  blessing  upon  Ephraim.  This  was  the  heirship  of  the 
theocratic  bleBsing,  the  right  of  primogeniture,  the  place  and  power  of  the  firstborn. 
"  Truly  his  younger  brother  shall  be  greater  than  he,  and  his  seed  shall  become  a 
multitude  of  nations."  (2)  The  blessing  upon  Manasseh.  "He  also  shall  become 
a  people,  and  he  also  shall  be  great."  (3)  The  blessing  upon  both.  "  The  angel 
who  redeemed  me  from  all  evil  bless  the  lads  " — a  promise  of  spiritual  blessing 
for  themselves ;  and  "  In  thee  shall  Israel  bless,  saying  " — a  promise  of  spiritual 
influence  with  others.  (4)  The  blessing  upon  Joseph.  Joseph  was  blessed  in  the 
blessing  of  his  sons,  by  their  adoption  into  Jacob's  family, — "My  name  shall  be 
named  upon  them,  and  the  name  of  my  fathere,  Abraham  and  Isaac  ;  "  and  by  their 
reception  of  a  double  portion  of  the  inheritance, — "  Moreover,  I  have  given  to  thee 
one  portion  above  thy  brethren,  which  I  took  out  of  the  hand  of  the  Amorite  with  my 
sword  and  with  my  bow." 

IV.  An  old  prophet's  prediction.  "  Behold,  I  die  ;  but  God  shall  be  with  you. 
and  bring  you  again  into  the  land  of  your  fathers."  1.  The  time  when  itwas  uttered. 
When  Jacob  was  on  the  eve  of  death.  It  is  not  at  all  improbable  that  the  soul's  vision 
of  unseen"  (celestial  and  future)  things  becomes  clearer  as  the  obscuring  veil  of  this 
mortal  flesh  wears  thin ;  but  the  power  of  apprehending  things  to  come,  which  Jacob 
in  this  instance  displayed,  was  not  due  to  such  intensified  spiritual  penetration. 
Neither  is  it  necessary  to  suppose  that  he  received  at  this  moment  any  special  super- 
natural communication.  Simply,  he  directed  his  dying  gaze  to  the  sure  word  ol 
promise.  2.  The  substance  of  what  it  said-  It  announced  nothing  more  than  God 
already  promised,  viz.,  that  he  would  continue  with  Jacob's  descendants  in  Egypt, 
and  eventually  bring  them  up  again  to  Canaan.  3.  The  guarantee  to  which  it  pointed. 
This  was  implicitly  contained  in  the  expression,  "  the  land  of  your  fathers. "  Canaan 
had  been  given  in  covenant  to  Abraham,  and  Isaac,  and  Jacob  ;  and  hence  of 
necessity  it  would  ultimately  be  restored  to  their  seed  according  to  the  terms  of  the 
covenant. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ch.  xlviii. — We  are  admitted  into  the  inner  chamber  of  the  patriarch's  departing 
life,  and  we  see  there  the  presence  of  Jehovah  with  him.  He  is — 1.  The  subject  oj 
ins2iiration.  2.  The  mediator  of  the  Divine  promises.  He  is  under  the  control  of 
purposes  which  have  been  swaying  him  all  his  life.  3.  A  witness  to  Divine  faith- 
fulness. The  grandfather  blessing  the  grandchildren.  The  blessing  passes-onto  the 
third  and  fourth  generation.  Yet  the  human  blessing  is  only  the  type  of  the  Divine. 
"  The  angel  which  redeemed  me  from  all  evil  bless  the  lads.'"  Jacob  made  a  cross 
with  his  hands  over  the  heads  of  the  boys.  It  displeased  Joseph,  but  it  pleased  God. 
The  imposition  of  hands  is  also  here.  The  name  of  Jacob  is  named  upon  them,  the 
mjmbol  of  the  covenant.  Their  prosperity  is  predicted,  but  it  is  connected  immedi- 
ately with  their  covenant  standing.  The  elevated  state  of  mind  in  the  patriarch  is  a 
testimony  to  the  sustaining  power  of  religion  in  fleshly  weakness.  It  points  on  too 
to  the  survival  of  the  soul  after  the  death  of  the  body.  The  preference  of  Ephraim 
reminds  us  that  all  is  ascribed  to  the  grace  of  God. — R. 

Vers.  15,  16. — The  threefold  blessing.  Though  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  is  not 
revealed  in  the  Old  Testament  with  the  same  clearness  as  in  the  New  Testament,  the 
light  of  the  gospel  reveals  many  indications  of  it.  In  Numb.  vi.  24,  27,  the  "  name  " 
of  God  is  prt  upon  the  children  of  Israel  in  a  trifle  formula.     A  name  suggests  what 


C&.  *LM.  i— 5§.j 


the  BOOif  OF  GEtfESIS. 


5*9 


we  know  of  the  person  named.  The  "  name  "  of  God  is  what  he  has  revealed  concern- 
ing himself  (of.  Exod.  xxxiv  5—7 ;  Ps.  xx.  1).  The  threefold  benediction  of  Numb. 
vi.  24  (cf.  Isa.  vi.  3 ;  Eev.  iv.  8)  answers  to  the  apostolic  benediction  of  2  Cor.  xiii. 
14.  And  Jacob's  solemn  blessing  of  his  grandsons  in  a  threefold  name  of  God, 
answers  to  the  formula  of  Christian  baptism  (Matt,  xxviii.  19)  into  («fc)  the  name  of 
the  Trinity ;  while  the  word  "  bless,"  being  in  the  singular,  points  to  the  unity  of  the 
Godhead.  Whether  the  distinction  of  the  Persons  was  known  to  Jacob  matters  little 
to  us,  if  we  believe  that  "  these  things  were  written  for  our  learning."  His  prophetic 
blessing  speaks  to  us  of  Fatherhood,  Sanctiflcation,  Redemption,  the  blessings  which 
we  refer  to  the  three  Persons.  The  order  of  the  two  last  is  different  from  that  which 
we  usually  observe  ;  but  cf.  1  Cor.  i.  30.  "  God  before  whom  my  fathers  did  walk." 
The  well-spring  of  all  grace  and  source  of  all  blessing.  Of  his  own  inherent  love, 
caring  for  us  (1  Pet.  v.  7).  His  purpose,  that  we  should  rejoice  in  hope  (Rom.  xii. 
12) ;  having  communion  with  him  here  (Phil.  iv.  6,  7),  the  foretaste  of  eternal 
joy.  Creation  the  proof  of  this  good  will  (Ps.  xix.  1).  Thie  infinity  of  his  power, 
and  minuteness  of  his  care.  The  application  of  this  to  us  (Matt.  x.  29 — 31).  The 
Bible  and  nature  agree  in  declaring  God's  fatherhood.  On  this  rests  the  call  to 
walk  before  him  (Gen.  xvii.  1 ;  Mai.  i.  6),  which  can'  be  obeyed  only  through 
■  belief  of  his  fatherhood  and  love  (Rom.  viii.  3).  Therefore  he  gives  the  spirit 
of  adoption  (Rom.  viii.  15),  the  personal  application  of  the  general  truth  of  his 
love,  whereby  we  realise  our  position  as  children  by  grace  (Titus  iii.  5).  "  The  God 
which  fed  me."  The  Holy  Ghost  imparts  to  men  the  bread  of  life.  1.  Historically. 
By  his  agency  the  eternal  Son  became  incarnate  to  give  his  flesh  as  the  living  bread. 
2.  Practically.  By  his  power  we  are  fed.  Christ's  work  is  applied  to  our  conscience 
(John  xvi  14)  ;  we  receive  the  food  of  our  souls.  This  is  the  way  of  sanctiflca- 
tion. It  cannot  be  enforced  by  rules  or  penalties.  However  these  may  constrain 
outward  observance,  they  cannot  bring  about  the  surrender  of  the  will,  the  desire 
"  Thy  will  be  done,"  which  is  the  principle  of  holiness.  "  The  angel  which  redeemed 
me  from  all  evil."  Reminded  of  Ps.  xcL  11,  and  probably  some  such  idea  was  in 
Jacob's  mind.  But  there  is  a  foresight  of  Christ,  the  Angel  of  the  covenant  (Mai.  iii. 
1),  in  whom  God's  name  is  (Exod.  xxiii.  20) ;  of  a  redemption  going  far  beyond 
earthly  danger ;  "  all  evil."  From  sin  and  all  its  fruits  of  sorrow  Christ  redeemed 
us  (Rom.  vi.  14  ;  Gal.  iii.  13^).  Jacob,  from  his  own  experience,  knew  that  "  God  is 
faithful."  To  us,  a  wider  view  of  deliverance  is  given.  And  the  pledge  of  God's 
faithfulness  is  Rom.  viii.  32  ;  and  the  assurance  that  it  gives  us  1  John  vi.  2. — M. 


EXPOSITION 


CHAPTER  XLIX. 


Vet.  1. — And  Jacob  (having  closed  his 
interview  with  Joseph  and  his  two  sons) 
called  (by  means  of  messengers)  unto  his 
■ona  (t.  e.  the  others  who  were  then  absent), 
and  said,  Gather  yourselves  together,— the 
prophet's  last  utterance  must  be  a  public  one 
— that  I  may  tell  yon — literally,  and  I  will 
tell  you — that  which  shall  befall  yon— Nig, 
in  the  sense  of  happening  or  occurring  to  any 
one,  is  here  equivalent  to  rnjj  (cf.  ch.  xlii.  4, 
88)— in  the  last  days— literally,  yn.  the  end 
of  the  days,  not  simply  in  future  time  (Gese- 
nius,  Rosenmiiller,  Kalisch),  or  in  the  times 
intervening  between  the  speaker  and  the  end 
of  the  human  race  (Murphy),  but  in  the  last 
age,  the  closing  period  of  time,  the  era  of 
fulfilment  (Kurtz,  Hengstenherg),  which  era, 
however,  must  be  judged  from  the  stand- 
point of  the  speaker  (Baumgarten).  Hence 
hM  period  most  not  be  restricted  to  exclu- 


sively Messianic  times  (Rabbi  Nachmanides), 
lir'  iaxaTdv  tCiv  t'lfupdv  (LXX. ),  in  diebus 
novUnmis  (Vulgate),  but  must  commence 
with  what  to  Jacob  was  the  era  of  consum- 
mation, the  days  of  the  conquest  (Baum- 
garten, Hengstenherg) ;  while,  on  the  othei 
hand,  it  can  as  little  be  limited  to  these,  but 
must  be  held  as  extending  over  totum  tempos 
ab  cxtiu  dlgypti  ad  Ghristi  regnum  (Calvin), 
and  even  as  reaching,  though  unconsciously 
to  Jacob,  to  the  very  terminus  of  human 
history  (Keil,  tange). 

Ver.  2. — Gather  yourselves  together,— the 
repetition  indicates  at  once  the  elevation  of 
the  speaker's  soul,  and  the  importance,  in 
his  mind,  of  the  impending  revelation— and 
hear,  ye  sons  of  Jacob  j  and  hearken  unto 
Israel  yonr  father.  The  two  clauses  form  n 
synthetic  or  synonymous  parallel,  numerous 
illustrations  of  which  are  to  be  found  in  tht 
succeeding  verses. 

Vers.  3,  4.— Beuben.  thoa  art  my  first 


534 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


fCH.  XLTX.  1 33 


born,  my  might,  and  the  beginning  of  my 
strength,  the  excellenoy  of  dignity,  and 
the  excellency  of  power: — Jacob's  patriarchal 
benediction  takes  the  form  of  an  elevated 
poem,  or  sublime  religious  hymn,  exhibiting 
the  well-known  classes  of  parallelism,  the 
synthetic, the  antithetic,and  the  synonymous, 
not  alone  in  its  separate  clauses,  but  some- 
times also  in  its  stanzas  or  verses.  As  was 
perhaps  to  be  expected,  it  begins  with 
Reuben,  who  is  characterised  by  a  threefold 
designation,  viz.,  (1)  by  his  position  in  the 
family,  as  Jacob's  firstborn ;  (2)  by  his  rela- 
tion to  Jacob,  as  the  patriarch's  "might," 
n3,  or  robur  virile,  and  "the  beginning"  of 
his  "strength,"  not  "of  his  sorrow"  (Vul. 
gate,  Aquila,  Symmachus),  though  ]1S  might 
be  so  translated  (cf.  ch.  xxxv.  18),  and  the 
sense  would  sufficiently  accord  with  the  al- 
lusion of  ver.  4,  but,  as  required  by  the  par- 
allelism, "of  his  vigour,"  |1K  being  here 
equivalent  to  03  (Rosenmiiller,  Kaliseh, 
Keil,  'Speaker's  Commentary,'  et  alii);  and 
(3)  by  the  natural  prominence  which  as 
Jacobs  eldest  son  belonged  to  him,  "the 
excellency  of  dignity  "  or  "  elevation,"  i.  e. 
the  dignity  of  the  chieftainship,  and  "  the 
excellency  of  power,"  or  authority,  which  the 
first-born  claimed  and  received  as  his  pre- 
rogative. Yet  the  natural  advantages  en- 
joyed by  Reuben  as  Jacob's  firstborn  were 
to  be  taken  from  him,  as  the  patriarch  pro- 
ceeded to  announce — Unstable  as  water, — 
literally,  boiling  over  like  water,  the  import 
of  which  is  not  effusus  es  sieut  aqua  (Vulgate), 
but  either  IZvjipuTas  i>g  vcwp  (LXX.),  or 
lasciviousness  (sc.  was  to  thee)  as  the  boiling 
of  water  (Gesenius,  Rosenmiiller,  Keil,  Ka- 
liseh, &c. ),  the  same  root  in  Arabic  convey- 
ing the  notion  of  pride,  and  in  Syriac  that 
of  wantonness — thon  shalt  not  excel; — 
literally,  thou  shalt  not  have  the  "HJ.J  or  ex- 
cellency (ver.  3),  i.  c.  the  pre-eminence  be- 
longing to  the  firstborn,  a  sense  which  the 
versions  have  more  or  less  successfully  ex- 
pressed :  /ii}  irepiaaivarit  (Aquila),  ovk  l ay  tti- 
pwaortpot  (Symmachus),  jit)  tic?e<rijc.  (LXX.), 
non  crescas  (Vulgate) — because  thou  wentest 
up  to  thy  father's  bed  (vide  ch.  xxxv.  22  j 
t  Chron.  v.  1) ;  then  defiledst  thou  it : — the 
verb  is  used  obuolutely,  as  meaning  that 
Reuben  had  desecrated  what  ought  to  have 
been  regarded  by  Mm  as  sacred  (cf.  Deut. 
ixvii.  20) — he  went  up  to  my  couch — lit- 
erally, my  couch  he  ascended ;  the  order  of 
the  words  and  the  change  from  the  second 
to  the  third  person  helping  to  give  expres- 
sion to  the  horror  and  indignation  with 
which,  even  at  that  distance  of  time,  the 
venerable  patriarch  contemplated  the  shame- 
ful deed. 
Vera,  6— 7  — Simeon  and  levl  are  breth- 


ren (not  in  parentage  alone,  hut  also  in 
their  deeds;  e.  g.  their  massacre  of  the 
Shechemites  (ch.  xxxiv.  26),  to  which  un- 
doubtedly the  next  words  allude);  instru- 
ments of  cruelty  are  in  their  habitations — 
literally,  instruments  of  violence  their  0130, 
a  IxTta I  Xtyofi.  which  has  been  variously  ren- 
dered—(1)  their  dwellings,  or  habitations 
(Kimchi,  A.  V.,  Calvin,  Ainsworth),  in  the 
land  of  their  sojournings  (Onkelos),-  for  which, 
however,  there  does  not  seem  to  be  much 
authority ;  (2)  their  machinations  or  wicked 
counsels,  deriving  from  "U!?,  *°  string  to- 
gether, to  take  in  a  net,  to  ensnare  (Nahum 
iii.  4),  the  cognate  Arabic  root  signifying  to 
deceive  or  practise  stratagems  (De  Dieu, 
Schultens,  Castelli,  Tayler  Lewis,  and  others); 
(3)  their  betrothals,  or  compacts  of  marriage, 
connecting  with  the  same  root  as  the  pre- 
ceding; in  the  sense  of  "binding  together" 
(Dathius,  Clericus,  Michaelis,  Knobel,  Furst, 
et  alii);  (4)  their  rage,  as  suggested  by  the 
unused  root  *Vp,  to  boil  or  seethe  (Kaliseh) ; 
(5)  their  swords,  from  "1-13  =  PHS,  to  dig  or 
piercethrough,  cf.  p.a\aipa  (Vulgate,  Luther, 
Gesenius,  Rosenmiiller,  Keil,  Murphy,  and 
others).  The  preponderance  of  authority 
appears  to  be  in  favour  of  this  last.  0  my 
soul,  come  not  thou  into  their  secret; — 
literally,  into  their  council  or  assembly  ("11D, 
from  ID),  to  set  or  sit)  come  not,  my  soul,  or 
my  soul  shall  not  come  (cf.  Prov.  i.  15,  16) 
— unto  their  assembly,  mine  honour,  be  not 
thou  united : — literally,  with  or  in  their  as- 

sembly  or  congregation  pilj5  from  7i1j3,  to  call 
together :  cf.  ch.  xxviii.  8 ;  xxxv.  11 ;  xlviii. 
4),  mime  honour  or  glory  (i.  e.  the  soul  as 
being  the  noblest  part  of  man :  Ps.  xvi.  9 ; 
IviL  9 ;  cviii.  2  —  the  term  H33  is  parallel 
with  the  preceding  V$)),  do  not  join  (Keil), 
or  shall  not  join  (Kaliseh) — for  in  their 
anger  they  slew  a  man, — literally,  man,  a 
collective  singular  for  "men,"  the  plural 
form  of  t5"fc<  occurring  rarely ;  only  in  Ps. 
cxli.  4 ;  Prov.  viii.  4  ;  and  Isa,  liii.  3— and 
in  their  selfwill  they  digged  down  a  wall 
—literally,  they  houghed  ox  (LXX.,  Gesenius, 
Furst,  Rosenmiiller,  Keil,  Kaliseh,  Lange, 
Gerlach,  T.  .Lewis,  Murphy,  &c,  &c),  the 
singular  "lie,  the  plural  of  which  is  only 
found  once,  in  Hosea  xii.  12,  being  re- 
tained here  to  correspond  with  t5"{j>.  The 
received  rendering,  which  is  not  without 
sanction  (Onkelos,  Targum  of  Jonathan, 
Syriac,  Arabic,  Aquila,  Symmachus,  Vul- 
gate, Dathius,  Calvin),  reads  ~AW  instead  of 
"rtK>,  and  takes  "IJ2|J  in  the  primary  sense  of 
destruere,  everter*.  Cursed  be  their  anger, 
for  it  was  fierce :  and  their  wrath,  for  it  wu 


OH.  XLIX.  1 — 33.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


52! 


cruel : — the  second  synonym  "wrath,"  liter- 
ally, outpourings,  indicates  the  fulness  and 
intensity  of  the  tide  of  fury  which  by  Simeon 
and  Levi  was  let  loose  upon  the  unsuspecting 
Shechemites — I  will  divide  them  in  Jacob, 
aid  scatter  them  in  Israel.  While  for  the 
sin  (the  deed,  not  the  doers)  Jacob  has  a  curse, 
for  the  sinners  themselves  he  has  a  well- 
merited  chastisement.  They  had  been  con- 
federate in  their  wickedness,  they  should  in 
future,  when  returning  to  occupy  their  God- 
assigned  inheritance,  be  disjoined.  That 
this  prediction  was  exactly  fulfilled  Scripture 
testifies.  At  the  second  census  in  the  wilder- 
ness, shortly  before  the  conquest,  the  tribe 
of  Simeon  had  become  so  reduced  in  its 
numbers  (reckoning  only  22,000  as  against 
76,500  in  Judah)  as  to  be  the  smallest  of  the 
twelve  (Numb.  xxvi.  14);  to  be  passed  over 
entirely  in  the  last  blessing  of  Moses  (Dout. 
xxxiii. ) ;  to  be  accorded  no  independent  allot- 
ment of  territory  in  Canaan  on  the  completion 
of  the  conquest,  having  only  a  few  cities 
granted  to  it  within  the  borders  of  Judah 
(Josh.  xix.  1 — 9) ;  and  to  be  ultimately  ab- 
sorbed in  the  more  powerful  and  distinguished 
tribe  under  whose  protection  and  tutelage, 
so  to  speak,  it  had  been  placed  (1  Chron.  iv. 
27).  The  tribe  of  Levi  also  was  deprived  of 
a  separate  inheritance,  receiving  only  a 
number  of  cities  scattered  here  and  there 
among  the  possessions  of  their  brethren 
(Josh.  xxi.  1,  40) ;  and,  though  by  its 
election  to  the  priesthood  the  curse  may  be 
said  to  have  been  turned  into  a  blessing,  yet 
of  this  signal  honour  which  was  waiting 
Levi  Jacob  was  completely  silent,  showing 
both  that  no  prophecy  was  of  any  private 
interpretation  (the  seer  seeing  no  further  than 
the  Holy  Spirit  helped  him),  and  that  Jacob 
spoke  before  the  days  of  Moses.  It  is  almost 
incredible  that  a  late  writer  would  have 
omitted  to  forecast  the  latter-day  glory  of 
the  tribe  of  Levi  ;  and  this  opinion  is  con- 
firmed by  observing  the  very  different  strain 
in  which,  after  Levi's  calling  had  been  re- 
vealed, the  benediction  of  Moses  himself 
proceeds  (Dent,  xxxiii.  8 — 11). 

Vers.  8 — 12. — Judah,  thou  art  he  whom 
thy  brethren  shall  praise — literally,  Judah 
thou,  will  praise  thee  thy  brethren,  the  word 
*pTP  being  a  palpable  play  on  fTTIiV.  (cf. 
ch.  xxix.  35).  Leah  praised  Jehovah  for  his 
birth,  and  his  brethren  should  extol  him  for 
his  nobility  of  character,  which  even  in  his 
acts  of  sin  could  not  be  entirely  obscured 
(ch.  xxxvii.  26  ;  xxxviii.  26),  and  certainly 
In  hi*  later  days  (ch.  xliii.  8  ;  xliv.  18—34) 
shone  out  with  undiminished  lustre.  Thy 
hand  shall  be  in  the  neck  of  thine  enemies 
(i  «.  putting  his  foes  to  flight,  Judah  should 
grasp  them  by  the  neck,  a  prediction  remark- 
ably accomplished  in  the  victories  of  David 
and  Solomon) ;  thy  father's  children  shall 


bow  down  belore  thee.  Fulfilled  in  the  el» 
vation  of  the  house  of  Judah  to  the  throne, 
which  owned  as  its  subjects  not  simply 
Judah's  mother's  children,  i.  e.  the  tribes 
descended  from  Leah,  but  also  hie  father's, 
i.  e.  all  the  tribes  of  Israel.  Judah  is  a 
lion's  whelp :  from  the  prey,  my  son,  thou 
art  gone  up :  he  stooped  down,  he  couched 
down  as  a  lion,  and  as  an  old  lion;  who 
shall  rouse  him  up  1  By  a  bold  and  striking 
figure  Judah  is  jjompared  to  a  young  lion, 
ripening  into  its  full  strength  and  ferocity, 
roaming  through  the  forests  in  search  of  prey, 
repairing  to  his  mountain  den  (Ik  f3\aorov 
&vij3tis,  LXX.)  when  his  booty  has  been 
devoured,  and  there  in  quiet  majesty,  full  of 
dignified  repose,  lying  down  or  crouching  in 
his  lair,  and  calmly  resisting  all  attempts  to 
disturb  his  leonine  serenity.  The  effect  of 
the  picture  is  also  heightened  by  the  alterna- 
tive image  of  a  lioness,  which  is  particularly 
fierce  in  defending  its  cubs,  and  which  no 
one  would  venture  to  assail  when  so  em- 
ployed. The  use  of  such  figures  to  describe 
a  strong  and  invincible  hero  is  by  no  means 
infrequent  in  Scripture  (vide  Ps.  vii.  3  ;  lvii. 
5  ;  Isa.  v.  29  ;  Ezek.  xix.  2 — 9).  The  sceptre 
shall  not  depart  from  Judah, — literally,  a 
sceptre  (i.  e.  an  emblem  of  regal  command, 
hence  dominion  or  sovereignty ;  ap%o>v, 
LXX.,  Theodotion ;  iZovofa,  Symmachus) 
shall  not  depart  from  Judah — nor  a  law- 
giver from  between  his  feet — literally,  and 
a  legislator  (sc.  shall  not  depart)  from  be- 
tween his  feet;  pp/ll?,  the  poel  part,  of  ppj}t 

to  cut,  to  cut  into,  hence  to  decree,  to  ordain, 
having  the  sense  of  one  who  decrees  ;  hence 
leader,  as  in  Judges  v.  44,  dux  (Vulgate), 
t'lyoviiivoc  (LXX.),  or  lawgiver,  as  in  Deut. 
xxxiii  21  and  Isa.  xxxiii.  22  (Calvin, 
Dathiu3,  Ainsworth,  Rosenrmiller,  Murphy, 
"Wordsworth,  'Speaker's  Commentary').  In 
view,  however,  of  what  appears  the  require- 
ment of  the  parallelism,  PRnp  is  regarded 
as  not  the  person,  but  the  thing,  that  deter- 
mines or  rules,  and  hence  as  equivalent  to 
the  ruler's  staff,  or  marshal's  baton  (Gesenius, 
Fiirst,  Keil,  Lange,  Bleek,  Tuch,  Kalisch, 
and  others),  in  support  of  which  is  claimed 
the  phrase  "from  between  his  feet,"  which 
is  supposed  to  point  to  the  Oriental  custom, 
as  depicted  on  the  monuments,  of  monarchs, 
when  sitting  upon  their  thrones,  resting  their 
staves  between  their  feet  (cf.  Agamemnon, 
'Iliad,'  ii.  46,  101 ;  Layard's  'Nineveh  and 
Babylon,'  p.  195).  But  the  words  may  like- 
wise signify  "  from  among  his  descendants," 
"from  among  his  children's  children" 
(Onkelos),  ic  tuv  ptiQtov  abrov  (LXX.). 
Until  Shiloh  come.  This  difficult  clause  has 
been  very  variously  rendered.  1.  Taking 
Shiloh  as  the  name  of  a  place,  viz. ,  Shiloh  in 
Ephraim  (Josh,  xsiii  1,  8,  9,  10  ;  zix.  51  j 


526 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ck.  MX.  1—88. 


Judges  Tviii.  31 ;  1  Sam.  i.  8,  9,  24 ;  ii.  14, 
fee),  the  sense  has  been  explained  as  meaning 
that  the  leadership  of  Judah  over  the  other 
tribes  of  Israel  should  not  cease  until  he 
came  to  Shiloh  (Rabbi  Lipmann,  Teller, 
Eichhom,  Bleek,  Fiirst,  Tuch,  Delitzsch). 

But  though  iW&  fcOJl,  and  they  came  to 
Shiloh,  a  similar  phrase,  is  found  in  1  Sam. 
iv  12,  yet  against  this  interpretation  may  be 
urged  (1)  the  improbability  of  so  obscure  » 
locality,  whose  existence  a*  the  time  is  also 
problematical,  being  mentioned  by  Jacob, 
Zidon,  the  only  other  name  occurring  in  the 
prophecy,  having  been,  even  before  the  days 
of  Jacob,  a  city  of  renown  (ch.  x.  19) ;  and 
(2)  the  inaccuracy  of  the  historical  statement 
which  would  thus  be  made,  since  the  su- 
premacy of  Judah  was  in  no  way  affected, 
and  certainly  not  diminished,  by  the  setting 
up  of  the  tabernacle  in  Shiloh  ;  to  obviate 
which  objection  Kalisch  proposes  to  read 
*5  "IJ?  as  "even  if,"  or  "even  when,"  and  to 
understand  the  prediction  as  intimating  that 
even  though  a  new  empire  should  be  estab- 
lished at  Shiloh,  as  was  eventually  done, 
Judah  should  not  forfeit  her  royal  name  and 
prerogative — only  this  sense  of  »3  "\V_  is  not 
dearly  recognised  by  the  best  grammarians 
(Gesenius,  Fiirst),  and  is  not  successfully 
supported  by  the  passages  referred  to  (ch. 
xxviii.  15 ;  Pa.  ex.  1 ;  cxii.  8},  in  every  one 
of  which  the  received  rendering  "until"  is 
distinctly  preferable.      2.  Regarding  Shiloh 

as  an  abstract  noun,  from  n^K>  to  be  safe, 
like  TV}  from  i"l$>|,  the  import  of  the  pro- 
phecy has  been  expressed  as  asserting  that 
the  sceptre  should  not  depart  from  Judah, 
either  until  he  (Judah)  should  attain  to  rest 
(Hofmann,  Kurtz),or  until  tranquillity  should 
come,  i.  e.  until  Judah's  enemies  should  be 
subdued  (Gesenius),  an  interpretation  which 
Rosenmuller  properly  characterises  as  "  Ian- 
guidum  et  pwne  frigidum."  Hence — 3.  Be- 
lieving Shiloh  to  be  the  name  of  a  person,  the 
majority  of  commentators,  both  Jewish  and 
Christian,  and  ancient  as  well  as  modern, 
agree  that  the  Messiah  is  the  person  referred 
to,  and  understand  Jacob  as  fore-announcing 
that  the  time  of  his  appearance  would  not 
b?  till  the  staff  of  regal  power  had  dropped 
from  the  hands  of  Judah  ;  only,  the  widest 

Sossible  diversity  exists  among  those  who 
incoYer  a  Messianic  reference  in  the  predic- 
tion as  to  the  exact 'significance  of  the  term 
Shiloh.  Some  render  it  his  son,  or  progeny, 
or  (great)  descendant,   from   an  imaginary 

root,  T$,  which,  after  Chaldee  and  Arabic 
analogies,  is  supposed  to  mean  "  offspring  " 
(Targnm  of  Jonathan,  Kimchi,  Calvin, 
Ainsworth,  and  others) ;  others,  deriving  it 
from  n?t%,  to  send,  compare  it  with  Siloam 


(John  ix.  7)  and  Shiloah  (Isa.  viii  6),  and 
interpret  it  as  qui  mittendus  est  (Vulgate, 
Pererius,  A.  Lapide,  Grotius) ;  a  third  clasi 

of  expositors,  connecting  it  with  i"l7B>,  to  ba 
safe  or  at  rest,  view  it  as  a  nomen  appellatum, 
signifying  the  Pacificator,  the  Rest-giver,  the 
Tranquilliser,  the  Peace  (Luther,  Venema, 
Rosenmuller,  Hengstenberg,  Keil,  Gerlach, 
Murphy,  &c.) ;  while  a  fourth  resolve  it  into 

1?  "I^Si  and  conjecture  it  to  signify,  he  to 
whom  it  (sc.  the  sceptre  or  the  kingdom) 
belongs,  or  he  whose  right  it  is,  as  in  Ezek. 
xxi.  27  (LXX.,  f'wc  lav  i\9y  ra  airoKti/uva 
avrm  ;  Aquila and Symmachus,  w  airoKiirai ; 
Onkelos,  Syriac,  Saadias,  Targum  of  Jerusa- 
lem, et  alii).  It  seems  indisputable  that  the 
preponderance  of  authority  is  in  favour  of  the 

last  two  interpretations,  and  if  flV^  be  the 
correct  reading,  instead  of  flPE'  (=  ii?S5>  = 
y>  ~W$),  as  the  majority  of  MSS.  attest,  it 
will  be  difficult  to  withhold  from  the  former, 
"  the  Tranquilliser,"  the  palm  of  superiority. 
The  translations  of  Dathius  (quamdiu  prolem 
habebit,  ei  gentes  obedient),  who  professes  to 
follow  Gulcher,  who  understands  the  words 
as  a  prophecy  of  the  perpetuity  of  Judah's 
kingdom,  fulfilled  in  David  (2  Sam.  vii),  and 
of  Lange  ("  until  he  himself  comes  home  at 
the  Shiloh  or  Rest-bringer "),  who  also  dis- 
cerns in  Judah  a  typical  foreshadowing  o! 
the  Messiah,  may  be  mentioned  as  examples 
of  ingenious,  but  scarcely  convincing,  expo 
sition.  And  unto  him  shall  the  gathering 
Of  the  people  be.  Not  "  nai  airbe  7rpo<ifo>ifi'a 
iOv&v"  (LXX.),  ipse  erit  expeclatio  gentium 
(Vulgate),  with  which  also  agrees  the  Syriac, 
or  "to  him  nations  will  flock"  (Samaritan), 
aiartiiia  \adv  (Aquila),  but  to  him,  i.  e. 
Shiloh,  will  be  not  aggregatio  populorum 
(Calvin),  but  the  submission  or  willing  obe- 
dience (a  word  occurring  elsewhere  only  in 
Prov.  xxx.  17)  of  nations  or  peoples  (Onkelos, 
Targum  of  Jonathan,  Kimchi,  Aben  Ezra, 
Dathius,  Rosenmuller,  Keil,  Kalisch,  Ger- 
lach, Murphy,  Tayler  Lewis,  'Speaker's  Com- 
mentary'). Binding  hie  foal  unto  tho  vine,— 
i.  e.  not  Shiloh,  but  Judah.  The  verb  nt?K 
has  the  archaic  *  appended,  as  in  ch.  xxxi. 
89  ;  Dent,  xxxiii.  16  ;  Zech.  xi.  17— ana  hie 
ass's  colt  unto  the  choice  vine.  The  DjVit? 
(fern,  of  p~&)  was  a  nobler  kind  of  vine  which 
grew  in  Syria,  with  small  berries,  roundish 
and  of  a  dark  colour,  with  soft  and  hardly 
perceptible  stones  (Gesenius,  p.  796).  '34 
is  an  archaic  form  of  the  construct  state 
which  occurs  only  here.  He  washed  his 
garments  in  wine,  and  his  clothes  in  the 
blood  of  grapes.  The  word  TT1D  is  * 
aira£  \ty6ixtvov,  and  is  either  put  by  aphas- 
resis  for  P-1D3.  which  occursin  the  Samaritan 


oh  xtnt.  1—33.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


Ml 


Version,  or  is  derived  from  H)p,  an  uncertain 
root,  signifying  to  cover  (Gesenius,  Ealisch). 
His  eyes  shall  be  red  with  wine,  and  hii 
teeth  white  with  milk.  Otherwise  rendered 
"redder  than  wine,"  and  "whiter  than 
milk"  (LXX.,  Vulgate,  Targum  of  Jerusalem, 
tt  alii),  as  a  description  of  Judah's  person, 
which  scarcely  seems  so  appropriate  as  the 
received  translation  (Calvin,  Rosenmiiller, 
Keil,  Kalisch,  Murphy,  Lange,  and  others), 
which  completes  the  preceding  picture  of 
Judah's  prosperity.  Not  only  would  Judah's 
soil  be  so  fertile  that  its  vines  should  be 
employed  for  tying  asses  and  colts  to  their 
branches,  but  the  grapes  of  those  vines  should 
be  so  plentiful  and  luscious  as  to  make  wine 
run  like  the  water  in  which  he  washed  his 
clothes,  while  the  wine  and  milk  should  be 
so  exhilarating  and  invigorating  as  to  impart 
a  sparkling  brilliance  to  the  eyes  and  a 
charming  whiteness  to  the  teeth.     The  aged 

frophet,  it  has  been  appropriately  remarked, 
as  here  no  thought  of  debauchery,  but  only 
paints  before  the  mind's  eye  a  picture  of  the 
richest  and  most  ornate  enjoyment  (Lange). 
Minime  consentaneum  esse  mdetur  profusam 
intemperiem  et  projectionem  in  benediction* 
censeri  (Calvin). 

Ver.  13. — Zebulun  shall  dwell  at  the 
haven  of  the  sea  ; — not  Trap*  oppov  irXoiwv 
(LXX. ),  in  statione  naviwm  (Vulgate),  but  to, 
or  at,  or  beside,  the  shore  (from  the  idea  of 
being  washed  by  the  waters  of  the  ocean)  of 
the  waters,  i.  e.  of  the  Galilean  and  Mediter- 
ranean seas — and  he  shall  be  for  an  haven 
of  ships ; — literally,  and  he  to,  at,  or  on,  a 
shore  of  ships,  i  e.  a  shore  where  ships  are 
unloaded  (sc.  shall  dwell),  the  words  being  a 
repetition  of  the  previous  thought,  with  only 
the  expansion,  suggested  by  the  term  ships, 
that  Zebulun's  calling  should  be  in  the 
direction  of  commerce ; — and  his  border  shall 
be  unto  Zidon  —  literally,  and  his  side,  or 
hinder  part  (sc.  shall  be,  or  extend),  towards, 
rather  than  unto, — usque  ad  (Vulgate),  i'wc 
(LXX), — Zidon,  since  the  territory  subse- 
quently allotted  to  Zebulun  neither  actually 
touched  the  Mediterranean,  nor  reached  to 
Zidon — a  circumstance  that  may  be  noted  as 
an  indirect  hint  that  this  prophecy  was  not 
spoken,  or  even  first  written,  after  the  occu- 
pation of  the  land. 

Vers.  14,  15. — Issachar  is  a  strong  ass 
couching  down  between  two  burdens  — 
literally,  an  ass  of  lane — hence  astrong,  power- 
ful animal,  asinus  fortis  (Vulgate),  asinus 
mlidi  corporis  (Gesenius),  asinus  robustus 
vRosenmiiller) — lying  down  between  the  folds, 
or  cattle-pens,  which  received  and  protected 
the  flocks  by  night,  the  dual  being  used  pro- 
bably because  such  pens  were  divided  into  two  ' 
parts  for  different  kinds  of  cattle  (Gesenius, 
Keil,  Kalisch,  Murphy, '  Speaker's  Comment- 


ary,' &c),  though  the  word  mishpetaim  hai 
been  also  rendered  ava.  piaov  twv  /cXijpw« 
(LXX. ),  inter  terminos  (Vulgate,  Rosenmiil- 
ler), "within  their  own  boundaries"  (On- 
kelos,  Targums  of  Jerusalem  and  Jonathan), 
"between  two  burdens"  (A.  V.,  Lange, 
Murphy,  &c).  And  he  saw  that  rest  was 
good,  and  the  land  that  it  was  pleasant. 
Issachar  was  to  manifest  a  keen  appreciation 
of  the  land  or  portion  of  territory  that  should 
be  assigned  to  him,  and  to  renounce  the 
warlike  spirit  and  military  enterprises  of  his 
brethren  for  the  indolent  and  luxurious  repose 
of  his  fat  pastures,  crouching  between  hia 
sheep-folds,  or  rejoicing  within  his  tents,  like 
a  lazy  ass,  capable  indeed  of  mighty  efforts, 
but  too  self-satisfied  to  put  forth  much  exer- 
tion, devoting  himself  to  agriculture  and 
pastoral  pursuits,  and  preferring  rather  to 
pay_  tribute  to  his  brethren,  in  order  to  secure 
their  protection,  than  to  leave  his  ploughshare 
and  cast  aside  his  shepherd's  crook  to  follow 
them  into  the  tented  field  of  war,  as  the 
patriarch  next  describes.  And  bowed  his 
shoulder  to  bear,  and  became  a  servant  unto 
tribute — or  a  tributary  servant.  The  phrase 
"I3ITDD,  though  sometimes  used  of  servi- 
tude under  a  foreign  sovereignty  (Deut.  xx. 
11 ;  Josh.  xvi.  10),  commonly  refers  to  tribute 
rendered  by  labour  (1  Kings  ix.  21 ;  2  Chron. 
viii.  8),  and  is  correctly  rendered  avBpuiwoc 
«"f  Qopov  SovXtvuiv  (Aquila),  factusque  est 
tributo  serviens  (Vulgate).  The  translation 
Kai  iyivr)9r)  ivr/p  yewpyoc  (LXX.)  discovers 
in  the  clause  an  allusion  to  Issachar's  agri- 
cultural pursuits. 

Vers.  16 — 18. — Dan  shall  judge  his  people 
as  one  of  the  tribes  of  Israel.  With  a  play 
upon  his  name,  the  firstborn  son  of  Rachel's 
handmaid,  Bilhah,  is  described  as  one  who 
should  occupy  an  important  place  and  exer- 
cise highly  beneficial  functions  in  the  future 
commonwealth,  enjoying  independence  and 
self-government  as  one  of  the  tribes  of  Israel 
(Herder,  and  others),  and  performing  the 
office  of  an  administrator  among  the  people 
not  of  his  own  tribe  merely,  but  also  of  all 
Israel,  a  prediction  pointing  perhaps  to  the 
transient  supremacy  enjoyed  by  Dan  over  the 
other  tribes  in  the  days  of  Samson  (Onkelos, 
tt  alii).  Dan  shall  be  a  serpent  by  the  way, 
an  adder  in  the  path,  that  biteth  the  horse 
heels,  so  that  his  rider  shall  fall  backward. 
The  |fc'$&  from  the  Syriac  tjffl,  to  glide 
(Gesenius),'  from  t\fl&,  to  sting  (Kalisch), 
S|36}\  to  bite  (Fiirst),  was  the  horned  serpent, 
cerastes,  of  the  colour  of  sand,  and  marked 
with  white  and  black  spots,  which  was 
exceedingly  dangerous  to  passers-by,  its  bite 
being  poisonous  and  fatal.  The  allusion  ha, 
been  almost  unanimously  explained  as  point. 
ing  to  Samson  (Judges  xvi  28),  but  the  tribe 


628 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[CH.  XL1X.  1— 38. 


in  general  appears  not  to  have  been  entirely 
destitute  of  the  treacherous  and  formidable 
lAaracteristics  here  depicted  (Judges  xviii. 
97).  "It  is  certainly  observable  that  the 
fast  introduction  of  idolatry  in  Israel  is 
ascribed  to  the  tribe  of  Dan  (Judges  xviii ), 
and  that  in  the  numbering  of  the  tribes 
in  Rev.  vii.  the  name  of  Dan  is  omitted. 
S'rom  these  or  other  causes  many  of  the 
Fathers  (Irenseus,  Ambrose,  Augustine, 
Thecdoret)  were  led  to  believe  that  Anti- 
christ should  spring  from  the  tribe  of  Dan  " 
('Speaker's  Commentary').  I  have  waited  for 
thy  salvation,  0  Lord.  To  discover  in  this 
beautiful  and  tender  ejaculation  of  the  dying 
patriarch  an  apprehensive  sigh  lest  his  strength 
should  be  exhausted  before  his  benediction 
was  completed  (Tuch),  or  a  prayer  that  God 
might  speedily  effect  his  painless  dissolution 
(Hengstenberg),  or  a  device  for  dividing  his 
benedictions,  and  separating  the  group  of 
Judah  from  that  of  Joseph  (Lange),  is  surely 
to  fail  in  seizing. its  hidden  spirit.  It  is 
doubtful  if  even  the  usual  interpretation,  that 
Jacob  here  expresses  his  hope  and  expectation 
that  God  would  help  and  succour  his  descend- 
ants (Calvin,  Rosenmullor,  Keil,  Kalisch, 
Murphy,  and  others),  exhausts  its  rich  signi- 
ficance. That,  speaking  in  their  name,  he 
does  anticipate  the  deliverance  of  Jehovah — 
"  In  thy  help  do  I  hope,  0  Jehovah  ! " — is 
apparent ;  but  nothing  surely  can  be  more 
natural  than  to  suppose  that  the  dying 
patriarch,  at  the  moment  when  he  was  form- 
ally transmitting  to  his  children  the  theo- 
cratic blessing,  had  his  thoughts  lifted  up 
towards  that  great  salvation,  of  which  all 
these  material  and  temporal  benedictions 
pronounced  upon  his  sons  were  but  the 
shadows  and  the  types,  and  of  which  perhaps 
he  had  been  incidentally  reminded  by  the 
mention  of  the  biting  serpent,  to  which  he 
had  just  likened  Dan  ('  Speaker's  Comment- 
ary ').  It  is  noticeable  that  this  is  the  first 
occurrence  of  the  term  salvation  (njMK^,  from 
the  root  V&l,  unused  in  Kal,  to  be  roomy  or 
spacious,  hence  in  the  Hiphil  to  set  free  or 
deliver). 

Ver.  19. — Gad,  a  troop  shall  overooma 
him:  but  he  shall  overcome  at  the  last. 
Tie  threefold  alliteration  of  the  original, 
which  is  lost  in  the  received  translation,  may 
be  thus  expressed:  "Gad — a  press  presses 
him,  but  he  presses  the  heel'  (Keil);  or, 
"  troops  shall  troop  on  him,  but  he  shall  troop 
on  their  retreat "  ('  Speaker's  Commentary '). 
The  language  refers  to  attacks  of  nomadic 
feibes  which  wiuld  harass  and  annoy  the  Gad- 
ties,  but  which  they  would  successfully  repel. 

Ver.  20. — Out  of  Amer  his  bread  shall  be 
rat,  and  he  shall  yield  royal  dainties  — 
literally,  dainties  of,  or  for,  the  king.  The 
first  clause  may  be  otherwise  rendered:  Of 


Ashei  the  bread  shall  be  fat  (Kalisch) ;  fat 
shall  be  his  bread  (Murphy) ;  Out  of  Asher 
(cometh)  fat  his  bread  (Keil).  The  import 
of  the  blessing  is  that  Asher  should  possect 
a  specially  productive  soil. 

Ver.  21.—  Naphtali  is  a  hind  let  loose- 
he  giveth  goodly  words.  The  LXX.,  to! 
lowed  by  Dathe,  Michaelis,  Ewald,  Bohlcu, 
and  others,  read,  Naphtali  iBa  tall  terebinth 
that  putteth  forth  beautiful  boughs  ;  but  tl.a 

word  H?JK  signifies  a  hind  or  gazelle,  and 
is  here  employed,  along  with  the  qualify- 
ing epithet  i\rp}$,  let  loose,  running  freely 
(Keil),  or  graceful  (Kalisch),  to  depict  Naph- 
tali  as  a  beautiful  and  agile  warrior.  In  the 
appended  clause  he  is  represented  as  possess- 
ing in  addition  the  capacity  of  "  giving 
worls  of  beauty,"  in  which  may  be  detected 
an  allusion  to  the  development  in  eloquence 
and  song  which  afterwards  took  place  in  that 
northern  tribe  (Judges  iv.  6 — 9  ;  v.  1 — 31). 

Vers.  22 — 26. — Joseph  is  a  fruitful  bough, 
even  a  fruitful  bough  by  a  well;  whose 
branches  run  over  the  wall — literally,  son  of 
%  fruit  tree,  Joseph  ;  son  of  a  fruit  tree  at  the 
well ;  daughters  run  (each  one  of  them  :  vide 
Gesenius,  'Grammar,'  §  146,  4)  over  the  wall. 
The  structure  of  the  clauses,  the  order  of  the 
words,'  the  repetition  of  the  thoughts,'  supply 
a  glimpse  into  the  fond  emotion  with  which 
the  aged  prophet  approached  the  blessing  of 
his  beloved  son  Joseph.  Under  the  image  of  a 
frnit  tree,  probably  a  vine,  as  in  Ps.  lxx  x. , 
planted  by  a  well,  whence  it  draws  forth 
necessary  moisture,  and,  sending  forth  its 
young  twigs  or  offshoots  over  the  support 
ing  walls,  he  pictures  the  fruitfulness  and 
prosperity  which  should  afterwards  attend 
the  tribes  of  Ephraim  and  Manasseh,  as  the 
twofold  representative  of  Joseph,  with  per- 
haps a  backward  glance  at  the  service  which 
Joseph  had  performed  in  Egypt  by  gathering 
up  and  dispensing  the  produce  of  the  land 
for  the  salvation  of  his  family  and  people. 
The  archers  have  sorely  grieved  him,  and 
shot  at  him,  and  hated  him — literally,  t/iey 
provoked  him,  and  shot  at,  and  laid  snares 
for  him,  inasters  of  arrows,  though  Kalisch 
translates  -13"!},  and  they  assembled  in 
multitudes,  which  yields  a  sense  sufficiently 
clear.  It  is  sometimes  alleged  (Keil,  Lange, 
'  Speaker's  Commentary ')  that  the  words  con- 
tain no  allusion  to  the  personal  history  oi 
Joseph,  but  solely  to  the  later  foi  tunes  of  the 
tribes  of  Ephraim  and  Manasseh  ;  but  even 
if  they  do  point  to  the  subsequent  hostilities 
which  Joseph's  descendants  should  incui 
(Josh.  xvii.  16—18  ;  Judges  xii.  4—6),  it.it 
almost  morally  certain  that  the  image  of  th« 
shooting  archers  which  he  selects  to  depict 
their  adversaries  was  suggested  to  his  mind 
by  the  early  lot  of  his  beloved  son  (Calvin! 


CH.  XLIX.  1 — 33.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


52S 


Rosenmtiller,  Kalisch,  Gerlach,  Murphy, 
and  others).  But  ■  his  bow  abode  in 
strength,  and  the  arms  of  his  hands  were 
made  strong  by  the  hands  of  the  m'ghty 
God  of  Jacob.  Notwithstanding  the 
multitudinous  and  fierce  assaults  which 
had  been  made  on  Joseph,  he  had  risen 
superior  to  his  adversaries  ;  his  bow  had 
continued  firm  and  unbroken  (cf.  1  Sam. 
ii.  4 ;  Job  xii.  19 ;  xxxiii.  19),  and  his 
arms  had  been  rendered  active  and 
flexible — neither  !(je\«0T)  tA  veCpa  (3pa 
Xiovwv  xapo's  avruv  (LXX.;,  dissolata 
sunt  vincula  brachiorum  et  manuum 
(Vulgate),  as  if  Joseph's  enemies  were  the 
subjects  referred  to;  nor,  "Therefore 
gold  was  placed  upon  his  arms  "  (Onkelos, 
Kashi,  and  others),  referring  to  the  gift 
of  Pharaoh's  ring — by  the  hands  of  the 
Mighty  One  of  Jacob,  i.  e.  God,  who  had 
proved  himself  to  be  Jacob's  Mighty  One 
by  the  powerful  protection  vouchsafed 
to  his  servant.  The  title  here  ascribed 
to  God  occurs  afterwards  in  Isa.  i.  24. 
From  thence  is  the  shepherd,  the  stone  of 
Israel.  If  the  clause  is  parenthetical,  it 
may  signify  either  that  from  the  time  of 
Joseph's  exaltation  he  became  the  shep- 
herd (who  sustained)  and  the  stone  of 
(£.  e.  the  rock  which  supported)  Israel 
(Oleaster),  or  that  from  God,  the  Mighty 
One  of  Jacob,  Joseph  received  strenglh 
to  become  the  shepherd  and  stone  of 
Israel  (Pererius,  Ainsworth,  Lawson, 
Patrick,  and  others),  in  which  ca  acity 
he  served  as  a  prefiguration  of  the  Good 
Shepherd  who  was  also  to  become  the 
Rock  or  Foundation  of  his  Church 
(Calvin,  Pererius,  Candlish,  &c.)  ;  but  if 
"  the  clause  is  rather  co-ordinate  with  that 
which  precedes  and  that  which  follows, 
as  the  introductory  particle  to  appears  to 

suggest,  then  the  words  ' '  shepherd  and 
stone  of  Israel "  will  apply  to  God,  and 
the  sentiment  will  be  that  the  hands  of 
Joseph  were  made  strong  from  the  hands 
of  the  Mighty  One  of  Jacob,  from  there 
(i.  e.  from  there  where  is,  or  from  him 
who  is)  the  Shepherd,  the  Stone  of  Israel 
(Keil,  Kalisch,  Murphy,  Gerlach,  Lange, 
etalii).  Even  by  the  God  of  thy  father, 
who  shall  help  thee  (literally,  from  the 
God  of  thy  father,  and  he  shall  help  thee, 
i.  e.  who  shall  help  thee);  and  by  the 
Almighty,  who  shall  bless  thee— literally, 
and  with  (sc.  the  aid  of)  the  AlmigMy, 
and  he  shaU  bless  thee.  It  is  unnecessary 
to  change  riNl  into  btX)  (LXX.,  Vulgate, 
Samaritan,  Syriac,  Ewald),  or  to  insert 
TO  before  nN,  as  thus,  ntTO  (Knobel, 
Rosenmiiller,  Kalisch),  since  nK  may  be 
understood  here,  as  in  ch.  iv.  1;  ▼.  24,  in 


the  sense  of  helpful  communion  (Keil) — 
with  blessings  of  heaven  above,  blessings 
of  the  deep  that  lieth  under,  blessings  of 
the  breasts,  and  of  the  womb.  "From  the 
God  of  Jacob,  and  by  the  help  of  the 
Almighty,  should  the  rain  and  dew  of 
heaven  (ch.  xxvii.  28),  and  fountains  and 
brooks  which  spring  from  the  great  deep 
or  the  abyss  of  the  earth,  pour  their  fer- 
tilising waters  over  Joseph's  land,  so  that 
everything  .that  had  womb  and  breast 
should  become  pregnant,  bring  forth  and 
suckle"  (Keil).  The  blessings  of  thy 
father  have  prevailed  above  the  blessings  of 
my  progenitors  unto  the  utmost  bound  of 
the  everlasting  hills.  The  meaning  is, 
according  to  this  rendering,  which  some 
adopt  (the  Targums,  Vulgate,  Syraic, 
Saadias,  Rosenmilller,  Lange,  Murphy, 
et  alii),  that  the  blessings  which  Jacob 
pronounced  upon  Joseph  surpassed  those 
which  he  himself  had  received  from 
Abraham  and  Isaac,  either  as  far  as  the 
primary  mountains  towered  above  the 
earth  (Keil,  Murphy) ,  or,  while  exceed- 
ing the  benedictions  of  his  ancestors, 
those  now  delivered  by  himself  would 
last  while  the  hills  endured  (Rosen- 
muller, 'Speaker's  Commentary').  But 
the  words  may  be  otherwise  rendered : 
"The  blessings  of  thy  father  prevail 
over,  are  mightier  than  the  blessings  of 
the  mountains  of  eternity,  the  delight, 
or  glory,  or  loveliness  of  the  hills  of 
eternity"  (LXX.,  Dathe,  Michaelis. 
Gesenius,  Bohlen,  Kalisch,  Gerlach,  and 
others);  and  in  favour  of  this  may  be  ad- 
duced the  beautiful  parallelism  between 
the  last  two  clauses,  which  the  received 
translation  overlooks.  They  shall  be  on 
the  head  of  Joseph,  and  on  the  c  own  of 
the  head  of  him  that  was  separa„;  from 
his  brethren  —  literally,  of  him,  the  sepa- 
rated (from  nazar,  to  separate)  from  his 
brethren  (Onkelos,  Rashi,  Rosenmtiller, 
Keil,  and  others),  though  by  some  differ- 
ent renderings  are  preferred,  as,  e.  g.,  the 
crowned  among  his  brethren  (LXX. 
Syriac,  Targum  of  Jerusalem,  "limchi, 
Kalisch,  Gerlach),  taking  nazir  to  signify 
he  who  wears  the  nezer,  or  roy-1  diadem. 

Ver.  27. — Benjamin  shall  ravin  as  a 
wolf  (literally,  a  wolf,  he  shall  tear  in 
pieces) :  in  the  morning  he  shall  devour 
the  prey,  and  at  night  he  shall  fiide  the 
spoil.  The  prediction  alludes  to  the  war- 
like character  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin, 
which  was  manifested  in  Ehud  the  judge 
(Judges  iii.  15),  and  Saul  f  •  king  of 
Israel  (1  Sam.  xi.  6—11 ;  xiv.  ^3,  15,  47, 
48),  who  both  sprang  from  Rachel's 
younger  son. 

Ver.  28.— All  these  are  the  twelve  tribes 
of  Israel  (the  underlying  thought  is  that 


530 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[ch.  XLII.  1 — 33. 


in  blessing  bis  sons  Jacob  was  really 
blessing  the  future  tribes) :  and  this  is  it 
that  their  father  spake  unto  them,  and 
blessed  them;  every  one  according  to  his 
blessing  he  blessed  them  (i.  e.  every  one 
received  his  own  appropriate  benedic- 
tion). 

Vers.  29,  30.— And  he  charged  them, 
and  said  unto  them,  I  am  to  be  gathered 
unto  my  people  (vide  on  ch.  xv.  15) :  bury 
me  with  my  fathers — thus  laying  on  them 
the  injunction  he  had  previously,  with 
the  superadded  solemnity  of  an  oath, 
laid  on  Joseph  (ch.  xlvii.  29 — 31)— in  the 
cave  that  is  in  the  field  of  Ephron  the 
Hittite,  in  the  cave  that  is  in  the  field  <  f 
Machpelah,  which  is  before  Mamre,  in  the 
land  of  Canaan,  which  Abraham  bought 
with  the  field  of  Ephron  the  Hittite  for  a 
possession  of  a  buryingplace  {vide  cb. 
xxiii.    16 — 20).     Jacob  had  learnt  from 


his  father  and  had  carefully  preserved  al! 
the  details  relating-  to  the  purchase  of 
their  family  sepulchre.  There  they  buried 
Abraham  and  Sarah  his  wife  ;  there  they 
buried  Isaac  and  Bebekah  his  wife ;  and 
there  I  buried  Leah.  From  this  it  would 
appear  that  Leah  had  not  descended  into 
Egypt. 

Ver.  32. — The  purchase  of  the  field  and 
of  the  cave  that  is  therein  was  from  the 
children  of  Heth.  Kalisch  connects  the 
present  verse  with  the  30th,  and  reads 
ver.  31  as  a  parenthesis. 

Ver.  33. — And  when  Jacob  had  made  an 
end  of  commanding  his  sons,  he  gathered 
up  his  feet  into  the  ted  (having  on  the  ar- 
rival of  Joseph  strengthened  himself  and 
sat  up  upon  the  bed,  probably  with  his 
feet  overhanging  its  edge),  and  yielded  up 
the  ghost,  and  was  gathered  unto  his  people 
(vide  on  ch  xxv.  8 ;  xxxv.  29). 


HOMILETICS. 


Vers.  1—33. — The  patriarchal  blessing,  or  the  last  words  of  Jacob.  I  The  sons 
of  Lbah.  1.  The  blessing  on  Reuben.  (1)  A  declaration  of  Reuben's  natural  pre- 
cedence, as  the  first-born  in  Jacob's  family,  the  beginning  of  Jacob's  strength,  and 
therefore  the  legitimate  heir  of  Jacob's  house.  (2)  A  proclamation  of  Reuben's 
deposition  from  this  honourable  position :  "  Boiling  as  water,  thou  shalt  not  have  the 
precedence,"  i.  e.  the  birthright  is  taken  from  thee,  and  assigned  to  another.  (3)  A 
statement  of  Reuben's  sin,  as  the  reason  of  this  forfeiture  of  the  firstborn's  place : 
"  because  thou  wentest  up  to  thy  father's  bed  :  then  defiledst  thou  it ;  he  went  up  to 
my  couch."  2.  The  blessings  on  Simeon  and  Levi.  It  is  only  by  a  species  of  irony 
that  the  words  pronounced  on  the  authors  of  the  Shechem  massacre  can  be  styled  a 
blessing.  (1)  The  patriarch  expresses  his  abhorrence  of  their  atrocious  wickedness, 
describing  them  with  a  refined  sarcasm  as  brethren,  confederates  in  sin  as  well  as  the 
offspring  of  common  parents,  characterising  their  swords,  or  their  compacts,  or  their 
rage,  or  their  machinations,  according  to  the  translation  adopted,  as  instruments  of 
violence,  and  shudderingly  recoiling  from  the  least  association  with  two  such  reckless 
murderers,  who  in  their  wrathful  fury  spared  neither  man  nor  beast :  "Man  they  slew, 
and  ox  tiiey  houghed."  (2)  He  pronounces  a  solemn  curse  upon  their  sin.  Not  upon 
themselves,  it  is  noticeable,  but  upon  their  deed,  meaning  that  while  God  might  mer- 
cifully pardon  transgressors  such  as  they  had  been,  he  could  not  do  otherwise  than 
reveal  his  wrath  against  appalling  wickedness  like  theirs.  (8)  He  allots  to  them  a 
punishment  appropriate  to  their  offence  :  "  I  will  divide  them  in  Jacob,  and  scatter 
them  in  Israel."  3.  The  blessing  upon  Judah.  Recalling  probably  the  part  which 
his  fourth  son  had  played  with  reference  to  Benjamin,  Jacob  fervently  declares  that 
Judah  should  be — (1)  The  admiration  of  his  brethren :  "Judah,  thou  art  he  whom 
thy  brethren  shall  praise ; "  and  "thy  father's  children  shall  bow  down  unto  thee." 
(2)  The  terror  of  his  foes:  "thy  hand  shall  be  in  the  neck  of  thine  enemies;" 
"Judah  is  a  lion's  whelp,"  &c.  (3)  The  ancestor  of  the  Messiah,  whose  character 
he  defines  by  the  term  Shiloh,  whose  advent  he  marks  by  the  time  :  "The  sceptre 
shall  not  depart  from  Judah,  nor  a  lawgiver  (or  ruler's  staff)  from  between  his  feet, 
until  Shiloh  come;  "  and  the  result  of  his  appearance :  "  unto  him  shall  the  gathering 
of  the  people  be."  (4)  The  possessor  of  a  prosperous  domain,  whose  vine-trees 
should  be  abundant,  and  whose  pasture  grounds  should  be  fertile.  4.  The  blessing  on 
Zebulun.  "With  allusion  to  the  import  of  his  name,  Jacob  prophesies  that  Leah's  sixth, 
son  should  be  the  ancestor  of  a  flourishing  community  devoted  to  commercial  pursuits, 
with  a  territory  reaching  towards  the  sea-coast,  where  ships  should  come  to  load  and 
unload  their  cargoes  of  merchandise.  5.  The  blessing  on  Issaehar.  The  last  men- 
tioned son  of  Leah,  though  the  fifth  in  the  order  of  birth,  the  patriarch  predicts  should 


ch.  xlix.  1—33.]  THE  BOOK   OF  GENESIS. 


531 


develop  mlo  a  powerful  and  sagacious  tribe,  capable  of  great  exertion  and  warlike 
achievements,  but  addicted  to  pastoral  pursuits,  and  so  fond  of  luxuriant  repose,  that 
for  the  sake  of  resting  among  his  sheepfolds  and  in  his  fat  meadows  he  should  be 
willing  to  fulfil  the  mute  anticipation  of  his  name,  and  render  tribute  to  his  more 
heroic  brethren. 

IJ'.,Thb  sons  °?  THE  concubines.  1-  The  blessing  on  Dan.  Dan  was  the  firstborn 
of  Buhah,  the  maid  of  Rachel ;  and  concerning  him  the  patriarch  announces— (1) 
That  though  the  child  of  a  secondary  wife,  his  descendants  should  attain  to  the 
position  of  an  independent  and  self-governing  tribe  :  "  Dan  shall  judge  his  people 
as  one  of  the  tribes  of  Israel ";  (2)  That  if  not  as  a  tribe,  yet  as  individuals,  and  if 
not  permanently,  yet  occasionally,  they  should  manifest  the  qualities  of  sudden, 
unexpected,  and  even  treacherous  attack  that  were  so  remarkably  characteristic  of 
the  horned  serpent ;  (3)  That  he  should  enjoy,  in  all  the  perils  to  which  he  might  in 
future  be  exposed,  the  gracious  succour  of  Jehovah— a  thought  which  appears  to 
elevate  the  speaker's  soul  to  the  contemplation  of  another  and  higher  keeper,  who 
was  yet  to  come  to  heal  the  fatal  bite  of  that  great  serpent  the  Devil,  who  had 
injected  his  mortal  virus  into  the  race.  2.  The  blessing  on  Qad.  The  firstborn  of 
2Ilpah,  Leah's  handmaid,  obtains  the  next  place  in  the  order  of  the  sons,  and  con- 
cerning him  it  is  declared  with  a  threefold  play  upon  his  name,  which  signifies  a 
troop,  that — (1)  He  will  be  sore  pressed  on  every  side  by  troops  of  marauding  foes  ; 
but  that — (2)  He  will  in  the  end  prove  himself  to  be  victorious  over  the  fiercest  and 
the  boldest.  3.  The  blessing  on  Asher.  The  happy  one  should  be  the  occupier  of  a 
territory  exceeding  fertile,  and  capable  of  yielding  rich  and  dainty  fruits  for  royal 
tables.  4.  The  blessing  on  Naphtali.  Naphtali  was  Bilhah's  child,  which  Rachel 
named  in  honour  of  her  triumphant  wrestling  or  contending  with  her  sister ;  and 
for  him  were  reserved  the  gifts  of  a  graceful  exterior,  agile  movements,  and  attrac- 
tive speech  both  in  eloquence  and  song. 

III.  The  sons  op  Rachel.  1.  The  blessing  on  Joseph.  With  a  fulness  and  ten- 
derness of  paternal  emotion  like  that  with  which  already  he  had  spoken  of  Judah, 
the  expiring  patriarch  declares  the  fortunes  of  Joseph,  setting  forth — (1)  The  g>  neral 
prosperity  that  awaited  him,  representing  him  as  the  son  (or  offshoot)  of  a  fruit-tree 
planted  by  a  well,  and  rushing  up  into  such  luxuriance  of  growth  that  its  branches 
(or  daughters)  overhung  the  walls  that  gave  it  support;  (2)  The  severe  adversity  to 
which  in  early  years  he  had  been  exposed,  and  of  which  in  future  his  descendants 
should  have  experience,  comparing  him  to  one  whom  the  archers  shot  at  and  hated, 
and  fiercely  persecuted  ;  (3)  The  heavenly  succour  which  had  enabled  him  to ,  over- 
come his  bitter  trials,  and  which  would  yet  advance  his  children  to  safety,  viz.,  the 
assistance  of  the  mighty  God  of  Jacob,  the  Shepherd  and  Stone  of  Israel,  the  God  of 
his  fathers  Abraham  and  Isaac ;  (4)  The  wealth  of  Benediction  that  should  descend 
upon  the  head  of  him  who  had  been  separated  from  his  brethren,  viz.,  blessings  of 
heaven  above,  blessings  of  the  deep  that  lieth  uuder,  blessings  of  the  breasts  and  of 
the  womb,  blessings  that  should  surpass  those  bestowed  on  any  of  his  progenitors, 
or,  according  to  the  more  correct  rendering,  that  should  outlast  the  everlasting  hills. 
2.  The  blessing  on  Benjamin.  x  Though  latest  born  of  Jacob's  family,  he  should  not 
be  the  least  important,  but  should  show  himself  possessed  of  a  warlike  and  adven- 
turous disposition,  causing  him  with  eagerness  and  animation  to  take  the  field 
against  the  foe,  and  to  desist  not  from  battle  till  he  could  lead  back  his  legions  as 
rejoicing  conquerors,  enriched  with  the  spoils  of  glorious  victory. 

Learn — 1.  That  God  is  the  great  arbiter  of  human  destiny.  2.  That  each  man's 
sphere  in  life,  as  well  as  each  nation's  place  on  earth,  is  adapted  to  his  or  its  peculiar 
character.  3.  That  though  fore-appointed  and  fore-known,  the  destinies  of  men  and 
nations  are  freely  wrought  out  by  themselves.  And — 4.  That  in  Providence  as  well 
as  Grace,  it  often  happens  that  the  first  becomes  last,  and  the  last  first. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ch.  xlix. — Last  words.  Jacob's  benediction  on  his  sons  was  a  prophetic  treasure, 
to  be  kept  in  store  by  future  generations,  and  a  foundation  on  which  much  faith 
could  afterwards  be  built  It  has  been  called  "the  last  full  bloom  of  patriarchal  pro- 
phecy and  theocratic  promise."     The  central  point,  the  blessing  on  the  royal  tribe  of 

M  M  2 


532  THE   BOOK   OF  GENESIS.  [CH.  xlix.  1—33. 


Judab.  The  corresponding  eminence  being  given  to  Joseph.  The  Israel  blessing  to 
the  one,  the  Jacob  blessing  to  the  other.  In  each  case  we  distinguish— 1.  The  earthly 
basis  of  the  blessing  in  the  tribe  itself.  2  The  nearest  fulfilments  of  it  in  tJie  temporal 
history.  3.  The  symbolical  import  pointing  to  u  remoter  fulfilment.  We  may  com- 
pare the  many  dying  scenes  of  the  Bible  with  this ;  as  the  last  words  of  Isaac,  Moses, 
Joshua,  Samuel,  David,  Simeon,  Stephen,  Paul,  Peter,  and  the  apocalyptic  visions  of 
John.  Compare  especially  the,song  of  Moses,  and  the  prophecy  of  Balaam.  It  seems 
possible  that  the  beautiful  exclamation,  ver.  18,  " I  have  waited  for  thy  salvation, 
O  Lord,"  was  intended  to  form  a  kind  of  middle  point,  separating  the  groups  of 
blessings  into  one  of  seven,  and  another  of  five.  The  first  group  has  a  Messianic 
character,  the  second  a  wider,  cosmopolitan*  In  the  first,  Judah,  the  royal  tribe,  re- 
presents the  theocracy.  In  the  second,  Joseph,  the  link  of  connection  between  Israel 
and  Egypt,  represents  the  kingdom  of  Christ  becoming  the  universal  kingdom ,  from 
thence  is  the  shepherd,  the  stone  of  Israel.  The  whole  is  a  typical  representation  of 
"  Israel "  in  the  higher  sense.  1.  It  comes  out  of  sinful  human  nature.  2.  It  is  devel- 
oped by  tlie  grace  of  Ood  in  human  history.  3.  It  stands  upon  the  Divine  order  of  the 
twelve  tribes,  the  revealed  truth,  and  the  Divinely  sanctioned  religious  life  and 
institutions.  4.  The  essential  element  in  the  history,  is  the  Messiah  coming  out  of 
Judah,  the  shepherd  of  Israel,  the  stone  of  help  out  of  Joseph,  the  Nazal  ite,  the  tried 
man,  the  blessed  one.  5.  The  kingdom  of  Christ  is  the  universal  blessedness  of  the 
world.  When  Jacob  has  handed  on  his  blessing  to  his  heirs,  he  gathers  up  his  feet 
into  the  bed,  yields  up  the  ghost,  and  is  gathered  to  his  people.  When  the  carnal 
Israel  is  done  with,  the  spiritual  Israel  remains.  When  the  promises  of  God  shall 
be  fulfilled,  then  there  shall  be  no  more  concern  with  the  earthly  pilgrimage.  "The 
blessings  prevail  unto  the  utmost  bound  of  the  everlasting  hills." — R. 

Vers.  8 — 12. — Judah' s  portion.  "Judah,  thou  art  he  whom  thy  brethren  shall 
praise,"  &c.  This  dying  vision  and  the  utterances  of  the  dying  patriarch  seem  in 
harmony  with  all  the  surroundings  in  this  part  of  the  sacred  record.  The  aged 
Jacob  is  dying.  He  has  passed  through  such  changes,  such  trials  and  successes,  has 
had  such  seasons  of  depression  and  of  exultation,  but  now  his  soul  is  filled  with  rap- 
ture at  what  will  be  the  future  of  his  children.  He  saw  how  he  would  live  in  his 
children.  A  man  should  not  be  indifferent  to  his  name  dying  out.  Some  are,  but 
only  such  as  are  not  of  intense  nature.  As  a  man  nearing  the  close  of  life,  great 
importance  was  attached,  by  his  son,  to  his  utterances.  On  a  farewell  festive  occa- 
sion, Isaac  partook  of  venison  before  giving  his  blessing  to  Jacob  and  Esau.  Jacob 
called  all  his  sons  together,  as  he  was  dying,  and  seems  to  have  had  supernatural 
strength  given  to  utter  so  many  and  distinct  prophecies.  He  knew  the  individual 
character  of  his  sons,  and  so  could  better  foretell,  almost  apart  from  Divine  inspira- 
tion, what  would  be  their  future.  The  words  uttered  on  the  borders  of  the  other 
land  seemed  necessarily  inspired.  Such  a  man  as  Jacob  would  no  more  pass  away, 
if  possible,  without  such  utterances,  than  would  a  millionaire  think  of  dying  with- 
out a  will.  No  mere  offspring  of  a  disordered  brain,  or  over-excited  imagination, 
were  these  words.  They  were  actual  prophecies.  Jacob  was  not  only  a  patriarch, 
but  a  prophet.  He  speaks  under  the  influence  of  the  God  of  his  fathers  (ch.  xlviii. 
15),  and  the  future  bore  out  what  he  had  foretold.  We  wish  to  consider  chiefly  the 
utterances  concerning  one  tribe,  Judah. 

I.  A  prophecy  of  power.  His  enemies  were  "to  flee  before  him,"  &c.  As 
victor  he  lays  his  hands  on  their  necks,  that  they  may  be  subject  and  yet  live.  His 
brethren  were  to  acknowledge  his  power.  He  is  to  be  as  a  young  lion  in  agility,  and 
as  an  old  lion  with  the  strength  of  years  remaining,  whom  none  will  dare  to  anger. 
All  this  seems  to  be  the  glorification  of  mere  physical  power.  Spiritual  power  is  to 
be  desired  above  the  physical.     And  this  we  have  in  Christ. 

II.  A  prophect  of  precedency.  Jacob  seems  to  have  come  at  last  upon  the  one 
for  whom  he  was  seeking.  He  speaks  of  Judah  as  one  whom  his  brethren  shall  praise. 
This  is  said  to  be  "  a  play  upon  the  name,  Judah,  as  meaning  one  who  is  celebrated." 
And  the  name  of  Judah  was  accepted  afterwards  by  the  whole1  nation.  We  should 
have  thought  that  if  the  firstborn,  Reuben,  had  not  been  placed  first,  Joseph  would 
have  been.  Judah's  character,  however,  was  more  noble  in  some  things  even  than 
that  of  Joserh.  He  did  not  delight  in  the  wrong-doing  of  the  brethren.  Jacob  may 
in  his  mind  have  blamed  Ji  seph,  in  that  he  had  not  sought  to  know  whether  his  father 
was  alive  before  circumstances  of  death  drove  him  to  know  of  his  still  being  alive. 


ch.  ilix.  1—83.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  533 

Judah  was  always  ever  ready  to  sacrifice  himself,  to  be  bound  for  his  brother.  There 
seems  to  have  been  much  tliat  was  noble  iu  him.  Hence,  we  can  understand,  in  a 
measure,  the  precedency  accorded  to  him.  Precedency  is  not  to  be  sought  for  its  own 
sake.  It  is  then  "only  another  form  of  vanity.  When  precedency  is  forced  on  men,  it 
is  because  their  worth  and  their  usefulness  to  others  is  recognised  by  others,  although 
not  by  themselves.  How  remarkable  it  is  that  God  often  selected  the  younger  before 
the  elder,  e.  g.  Abel,  Jacob,  Moses,  David.  Judah  is  taken  before  Reuben.  A  lesson 
evidently  taught  in  this,  viz.,  that  God  is  no  respecter  of  persons,  that  he  seeth  not  as 
man  seeth,  that  the  course  of  spiritual  feeling  does  not  always  follow  the  line  of  birth. 

III.  Prophecy  of  permanency.  This  permanency  was  comparative  in  one  sense 
and  actual  in  another.  Judah  lasted  longer  than  any  of  the  tribes  as  a  distinct  power, 
and,  since  Christ  came  of  that  tribe,  may  be  said  to  be  permanent  still.  Who  thinks 
of  Naphtali,  or  Zebulun,  or  Issachar?  but  Judah  is  a  name  most  familiar.  The 
"sceptre"  is  the  sheik's  staff,  which,  like  a  marshal's  baton,  indicates  his  right  to 
lead.  Judah  was  to  lead,  and  to  give  the  law  until  Shiloh  came;  and  he  did. 
Shiloh  evidently  points  to  the  Messiah.  It  is  a  mystic  name  (comp.  ch.  xlviii.  16; 
Is.  ix.  6;  xi.  1).  Some  render  this  passage,  "Until  he  [Judah]  comes  as  the  rest- 
giver;"  others,  "until  he  comes  to  whom  it  belongs  "  Christ  is  the  only  rightful  rest- 
giver,  and  to  him  alone  belongs  all  honour  aud  praise.  We  see  that  the  aim  of  God 
with  respect  to  the  descendants  of  Jacob  was  to  provide  a  race  which  should  keep 
alive  a  knowledge  of  God  in  the  world  until  the  Messiah  should  come  When  that 
race  had  fulfilled  this  mission,  it  dropped  into  line  with  the  rest  of  the  nations.  It  is 
no  longer  to  lead.  We  see  that  as  t  n  tribes  were  broken  off  by  Jeroboam  from  Judah , 
they  were  carried  captive  by  the  Assyrians,  and  with  that  nation  swallowed  up  in 
oblivion,  never,  probably,  to  be  known  of  again.  And  so  with  the  Jews;  they  no 
longer  lead.  Although  still  retaining  much  that  is  distinctive,  they  will  gradually, 
we  believe,  assimilate  with  other  nations,  and,  accepting  Christ,  be  one  with  other 
Christians  in  that  one  fold  of  mercy  he  has  provided.  Christ  unites  us  to  God  and  to 
others,  breaks  down  middle  walls  of  partition,  gives  to  us  also  "  life  eternal, "so  that 
when  this  life  shall  fail,  we  shall  be  received  into  "  everlasting  habitations,"  and 
know  as  real  a  permanency  as  that  of  Judah. 

IV.  Prophecy  of  prosperity.  In  the  eleventh  verse,  Jacob  indicates  the  sort  of 
territory  Judah  will  hxve, — one  rich  in  vineyards  and  oliveyards.  He  foretel  s  his 
prosperity  during  the  period  intervening  b  tween  the  prophecy  and  the  advent  of 
Shiloh.  The  twelfth  verse  means,  that  "his  eyes  should  be  redder  than  wine,"  i.  e. 
brilliant  with  joy.  The  words  "  white  as  milk  "  refer  to  purity  as  well  as  prosperity. 
Both  are  found  in  Christ.  True  joy  and  puiity  shall  draw  souls  to  Chr  st.  "  Unto 
him  shall  the  gathering  of  the  people  be."  His  truth  has  "the  promise  of  the  life 
that  now  is,  and  of  that  which  is  to  come."  How  much  that  is  foretold  of  Judah  is 
only  typical  of  Jesus.  He  is  the  true  conqueror,  ruler,  object  of  praise.  He  is  "the 
Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah "  (Rev.  v.  5),  the  "desire  of  all  nations  "  (Hag.  ii.  7),  the 
one  who  if  lifted  up  would  draw  all  unto  him  (John  xii.  32),  the  one  in  whom  all  the 
children  of  God  are  to  be  gathered  in  one  (John  xi.  52). 

Learn — 1.  We  find  much  to  confirm  faith  in  the  way  in  which  the  prophecy  of 
Jacob  was  fulfilled.  2.  We  find  much  to  lead  us  to  seek  to  be  in  Christ,  through 
whom  Judah  obtained  such  blessings  antecedenily.  3.  We  find  something  to  lead 
us  to  ask  as  to  whether  we  have  grown  in  purity,  power,  and  whether  our  souls  pros- 
per and  are  in  health. — H. 

Ver.  10. — The  coming  of  Shiloh.  Remarkable  agreement  of  ancient  interpreters, 
Jewish  as  well  as  Christian,  to  consider  this  a  prophecy  of  Messiah.  The  former  of 
special  value,  as  being  before  the  event.  The  Targum  of  Onkelos  renders  the  passage, 
"until  Messiah  comes,  whose  is  the  kingdom."  Many  others  equally  distinct.  Some 
have  observed  that  the  words,  "  Shiloh  shall  come,"  make  in  Hebrew  the  same  num- 
ber as  the  name  "  Messiah."  Ancient  Christian  writers  all  take  the  same  view.  The 
name  Shiloh  expresses  rest  or  peace.  Observe  how  this  answers  the  need  of  man. 
Sin  brought  the  curse  of  labour  (ch.  iii.  17-19),  and  unrest  (Isa.  lvii.  ?0,  21),  and 
want  of  peace.  Hence  the:  frequent  mention  of  rest,  which,  however,  was  only  typical 
aud  temporary  (Heb.  iv.  8).  Hence  the  common  salutation,  "Peace  be  unto  you." 
And  rest  and  peace  are  ours  through  the  coming  of  Christ  (Matt.  xi.  28;  John  x.  28; 
Rom.  viii.  38). 


584  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  [ch.  xlix.  1—33. 


I.  The  history  of  Israel  a  preparation  for  the  coming  of  Christ.  The 
moral  law  convincing  of  sin  (Gal.  iii.  24).  The  ceremonial  law  foreshadowing  res- 
toration (Heb.  x.  1);  the  prophets  declaring  God's  purpose,  and  the  person  and  work 
of  Christ;  the  dispersion  by  the  captivity,  bringing  the  people  into  contact  with  other 
nations,  and  thus  preparing  for  a  universal  Church;  their  sufferings  and  state  of 
subjection  after  their  return,  keeping  alive  the  expectation  of  "Messiah,  the  prince." 

II.  The  history  op  the  world  a  preparation  for  Christ.  The  colonising 
instinct  of  the  Greeks  making  their  language  almost  universal ;  the  contact  of  Greek  and 
Jewish  learning  at  Alexandria  and  elsewhere,  by  which  the  heathen  language  was 
made  capable  of  expressing  Divine  truth;  the  widespread  power  and  organisation  of 
the  Eomans,  by  which'  in  so  many  ways  the  fulfilment  of  prophecy  was  brought 
about  (Luke  ii.  1;  John  xix.  36,  37). 

III.  For  what  Shiloh  should  come.  To  gather  all  natious  unto  himself  (Isa.  ii. 
2,  3;  John  xi.  52;  xii.  32).  To  redeem  mankind,  both'Jews  and  Gentiles  (Ps.  xlix. 
15;  Isa.  xxxv.  4 — 10;  John  x.  16;  Gal.  iv.  5).  To  bear  the  sins  of  mankind  (Isa.  liii. 
11,  12;  2  Cor.  v.  14;  1  Pet.  ii.  24).  To  teach  his  people  the  way_  of  life  (Deut.  xviii.  15; 
Matt.  xi.  27;  John  iv.  25).  To  reign  over  his  people  (Dan.  ii.  44;  Rev.  xi.  15).  To 
give  them  victory  (Ps.  xliv.  5;  1  John  v.  4;  Rev.  xii.  11). 

IV.  Lesson  of  encouragement.  Why  doubt  God's  acceptance  of  thee  ?  or  his 
readiness  to  help?  Mark  his  desire  that  all  should  be  saved  (Ezek.  xviii.  32;  1  Tim. 
ii.  4).  Mark  how  this  is  the  ruling  principle  running  through  the  whole  Bible.  The 
work  of  Christ  was  no  newly  devised  thing,  but  "that  which  was  from  the  begin- 
ning" (1  Pet.  i.  20).  All  our  imperfections,  all  our  weakness  of  faith  is  known  to 
God,  yet  such  as  we  are,  he  bids  us  trust  in  Christ's  work.  Judah  himself  was  a  very 
imperfect  character.  His  descendants  not  less  so.  Yet  of  them  the  text  was  spoken. 
"Be  not  afraid,  only  believe." — M. 

Ver.  18.  God's  salvation.  I.  What  it  is.  Deliveranee  from  evil,  succour  against 
foes,  victory  over  sin  and  death. 

II.  Whence  it  comes.  The  primal  fountain  is  Jehovah,  the  covenant  God  of  the 
believer.  The  salvation  of  the  gospel  is  God's  in  its  original  conception  and  procla- 
mation, in  its  subsequent  procurement  and  donation,  in  its  ultimate  development  and 
consummation. 

III.  How  it  is  obtained.  Not  by  merit,  or  by  works,  but  by  believing,  and  wait- 
ing, and  hoping.  "He  that  believeth  shall  be  saved."  "The  Lord  loveth  them  that 
hope  in  his  mercy."  "It  is  good  for  a  man  both  to  hope,  and  to  quietly  wait  for  the 
salvation  of  the  Lord." — W. 

Ver.  18. — A  dying  saint's  exercise.  I.  Adoration.  "O  Lord!"  Jehovah  the 
God  of  redemption,  the  supreme  object  of  worship. 

II.  Meditation.  "Thy  salvation! "  What  a  theme  for  the  thoughts  to  dwell  on 
God's  salvation  in  its  origin,  in  its  greatness,  in  its  freeness,  &c. 

III.  Expectation.  "For  thy  salvation  do  I  hope."  Hope  is  the  expectation  of 
future  good,  and  presupposes  faith  as  its  ground-work  and  support. — W. 

Ver.  26. — The  separated  one,  or  Joseph  a  type  of  Christ.  Joseph  was  separated  from 
his  brethren — 

I.  In  his  father's  affections.  Jacob  loved  him  more  than  any  of  his  other  sons. 
So  was  Christ  the  only-begotten  and  well-beloved  Son  of  the  Father. 

II.  In  his  personal  character.  Joseph  brought  unto  Jacob  the  evil  report  that 
he  heard  circulating  about  his  brethren,  thus  proving  that  he  had  no  sympathy  with 
their  wicked  ways.  So  Christ  was  "  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  and  separate  from 
sinners." 

HI.  In  his  heavenly  communications.  Joseph  was  favoured  above  his  brethren 
in  being  made  the  recipient  of  dreams,  and  the  depositary,  as  it  were,  of  Divine 
secrets.  And  Christ  received  not  the  Spirit  by  measure,  so  that  of  him  it  could  be 
said,  No  man  knoweth  the  Father  but  the  Son. 


Cfl.  L.  1—14.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


535 


but  separated  from  all  ^ML'^StoS.^  h s  ZSSfi^eStf"*"*- 
and  a  Saviour  for  maukind.-w!  >esurrection  was  exalted  to  be  a  Prince, 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  L. 


Ver.  1.— And  Joseph  fell  upon  his  father's 
face,  and  wept  upoa  him,  and  kissed  him. 

Joseph  had  no  doubt  closed  the  eyes  of 
his  revered  and  beloved  parent,  as  God 
had  promised  to  the  patriarch  that  he 
would  (ch.  xlvi.  4),  and  now,  in  demonstra- 
tion both  of  the  intensity  of  his  1  ve  and 
of  the  bitterness  of  his  sorrow,  he  sinks 
upon  the  couch  upon  which  the  lifeless 
form  is  lying,  bending  over  the  pallid 
countenance  with  warm  tears,  and  im- 
printing kisses  of  affection  on  the  cold 
and  irresponsive  lip.  It  is  neither  un- 
natural nor  irreligious  to  mourn  for  the 
dead  ;  and  he  must  be  callous  indeed  who 
can  see  a  parent  die  without  an  outburst 
of  tender  grief. 

Ver.  2. — And  Joseph  commanded  his  ser- 
vants the  physicians— literally,  the  healers, 
DiND'lfl  from  NEH   to  sew  together,   to 

mend,  hence  to  heal,  *  class  of  persons 
which  abounded  in  Ancient  Egypt,  each 
physician  being  only  qualified  to  treat  a 
single  disorder  (Herod,  ii.  84).  The  med- 
ical n  en  of  Egypt  were  held  in  high  re- 
pute abroad,  and  their  assistance  was  at 
various  times  required  by  persons  from 
other  countries,  as  e.  g.,  Cyrus  an  I  Da- 
rius (Herod.,  iii.  1,  132).  Their  knowl- 
edge of  medicines  was  extensive,  and  is 
referred  to  both  in  sacred  (Jer.  Ixvi.  11) 
and  profane  (Homer,  'Odyssey,'  iv.  229) 
writings.  The  Egyptian  doctors  belonged 
to  the  sacerdotal  order,  and  were  expected 
to  know  all  things  r  Iating  to  the  body, 
and  diseases  and  remedies  contained  in 
the  six  last  of  the  sacred  books  of  Hermes. 
According  to  Pliny  (vii.  56),  the  study  of 
medicine  originated  in  Egypt  (vide  Wil- 
kinson in  Rawlinson's  '  Herodotus,'  vol.  ii. 
pp.  116,  117).  The  physicians  employed 
by  Joseph  were  those  attached  to  his  own 
household,  or  the  court  practitioners— to 
embalm  his  father : — literally,  to  spice  or 
season  (the  body  of)  his  father,  i.  e.  to 
prepare  it  for  burial  by  means  of  aromat- 
ics  ;  ut  aromatibus  condirent  (Vulgate) ; 
«VTacj>ido-cu  rov  ira/repa  avToC  (LXX.), 
which  is  putting  part  of  a  proceeding  for 
the  whole  (Tayler  Lewis).  According  to 
Herodotus  (ii.  86),  the  embalmers  belonged 


to  a  distinct  hereditary  class  or  guild  from 
the  ordinary  physicians  ;  but  either  their 
formation  into  such  a  separate  order  of 
practitioners  was  of  later  origin  (Hengsten- 
berg,  Kurtz,  Kalisch),  or  Jacob  was  em- 
balmed by  the  phi  sicians  instead  of  the 
embalmers  proper  because,  not  being  an 
Egyptian,  he  could  not  be  subjected  to 
the  ordinary  treatment  of  the  embalming 
art   ('Speaker's   Commentary') — and  the 
physicians  embalmed  Israel.     The  method 
of  preparing  mummies  in  Ancient  Egypt 
has  been  elaborately  described,  both  by 
Herodotus  (ii.  86)  and  Diodorus  Siculus 
(i.  91),  and,  in  the  main,  the  accuracy  of 
tbeir  descriptions  has  been  confirmed  by 
the  evidence  derived  from  the  mumm  es 
themselves.     According  to  the  most  ex- 
pensive process,  which  cost  one  talent  of 
silver,  or  about  £250  sterling,  the  brain 
was  first  extracted  through  the  nostrils 
by  means  of  a  crooked  piece  of  iron,  the 
skull  being  thoroughly  cleansed  of  any 
remaining  portions  by  rinsing  with  drugs ; 
then,  through  an  opening  in  the  left  side 
made  with   a  sharp  Ethiopian  knife  of 
agate  or  of  flint,  the  viscera  were  re- 
moved,  the    abdomen   being  afterwards 
purified  with  palm  wine  and  an  infusion 
of  aromatics ;   next,   the  disembowelled 
corpse  wns  filled  with  every  sort  of  spicery 
except    frankincense,    and    the   opening 
sewed  up ;   after  that  the  stuffed  form 
was  steeped  for  seventy  days  in  natrum 
or  subcarbonate  of  soda  obtained  from 
the  Libyan  desert,  and  sometimes  in  wax 
and   tanning,    bitumen    also    being    em- 
ployed in  later  times  ;  and  finally,  on  the 
expiration    of    that    i  eriod,    which  was 
scrupulously    obse  ved,    the    body    was 
washed,  wrapped  about  with  linen  ban- 
dages, smeared  over  with  gum,  decorated 
with  amulets,  souietimes  with  a  network 
of  porcelain  bugles,  covered  with  a  linen 
shroud,  and,  in  due  course,  transferred 
to     a    mummy    case    (vide    Wilkinson's 
'Ma  ners  and  Cu-toms   of  the  Ancient 
Egyptians.'   vol.   iii.    p.   471,    ed.    1878 ; 
Rawlinson's  '  Hei  odotus, '  vol.  ii.  pp.  118 
—123). 

Ver.  3. — And  forty  days  were  fulfilled 
for  him ;  for  so  are  fulfilled  the  days  of 
those  who  are  embalmed  :  and  the  Egypt- 


536 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


[CH.  L.  1—14, 


ians    mourned    (literally,   wept)  for    him 
three  score  and  ten  days — i.  e.  the  whole 
period  of  mourning,  including  the  forty 
days  for  em:  a'.ming,  extended  to  seventy 
days,  a  statement  which  strikingly  coin- 
cides with  the  assertion  of  DiodorusSiculus 
(i.  72),  that  the  embalming  process  occu- 
pied about  thirty  days,  ..  hile  the  mourning 
continued  seventy  two  days ;  the  first  num- 
ber, seventy,  being  seven  decades,  or  ten 
weeks  of  seven  days,  and  the  second  12  X 
6  =  72,  the  duodecimal  calculation  being 
also  used  in  Egypt  (vide  Wilkinson   in 
Eawlinson's  '  Herodotus,'  vol.  ii.  p.  121 ; 
and  in  'Manners  and  Customs  of  the  An- 
cient Egyptians,'  vol.  iii.  p.  471,  et  seqg., 
ed.  1878).     The  apparent  discrep  ncy  be- 
tween the  accounts  of  Genesis  and  Herod- 
otus will  disappear  if  the  seventy  days 
of  the  Greek  historian,  during  which  the 
body  lay  in  natrum,  be  viewed  as  the  en- 
tire period  of  mourning  (Hengsteoberg's 
'Egypt  and  the  Books  of  Moses,'  p.  68 ; 
Sir  G.  Wilkinson  in  Rawlinson's  '  Herod- 
otus.' vol.  it.  p.  121),  a  sense  which  the 
words  tovto.  St   irotfio-avTis  Tapix«iov<ri 
XtTpip,     Kpvi|/avres     iji^lpas    i|38o|i.TJKovTa 
(Herod,  ii.  86)  will  bear,  though  Kaiisch 
somewhat  arbitrarily,  but  unconvincing- 
ly,  pronounces  it  to  be  "excluded  both 
by  the  context  and  Greek  syntax." 

Vers.  4,  5. —And  when  the  days  of  his 
mourning  were  past,  Joseph  spake  unto 
the  house  of  Fharaoh,  saying  If  now  I 
have  founl  grace  in  your  eyes,  speak,  I 
pray  you,  in  the  ears  of  Pharaoh,— that 
Joseph  did  not  address  himself  directly 
to  Pharaoh,  but  through  the  members  of 
the  royal  household,  was  not  owing  to 
the  circumstance  that,  being  arrayed  in 
mourning  apparel,  he  could  not  come 
before  the  king  I  Rosenmilller),  since  it 
is  not  certain  that  this  Persian  custom 
(Esther  iv.  2)  prevailed  in  Egypt,  but  is 
supposed  to  have  been  duv,  either  to  a 
desire  on  Joseph's  part  to  put  himself  on 
a  good  understanding  with  the  priesthood 
who  composed  the  courtly  circle,  since 
the  interment  of  the  dead  was  closely  con- 
nected with  the  religious  beliefs  of  Egypt 
(Havernick),  or,  what  was  more  likely,  to 
the  fact  that  Joseph,  having,  according 
to  Egyptian  custom  (Herod,  ii.  36),  al- 
lowed his  beard  and  hair  to  grow,  could 
not  enter  the  king's  presence  without  be- 
ing both  shaven  and  shorn  (Hengsten- 
berg,  Kurtz,  Keil).  It  has  been  suggested 
(Kaiisch)  that  Joseph's  power  may  have 
been  restricted  after  the  expiration  of  the 
famine,  or  that  another  Pharaoh  may  have 
succeeded  to  the  throne  who  was  not  so 
friendly  as  his  predecessor  with  the  grand 


vizier  of  the  realm  ;  but  such  conjectures 
are  not  required  to  render  Joseph's  con- 
duct in  this  matter  perfectly  intelligible 
— saying,  My  father  made  me  swear  (ch. 
xlvii.   29),   saying  (i.   e.   my  father  say- 
ing), Lo,  I  die :  in  my  grave  which  I  have 
digged  for  me— not  bought  (Onkelos,  Dm- 
sius,  Ainsworth,  Bohlen,  and  others),  but 
digged,  dipvga  (LXX. ) ,  fodi  ( V  ulgate) .   Ja- 
cob may  have  either  enlarged  the  original 
cave  at  Machpelah,  or  prepared  in  it  the 
special  niche  which  he  designed  to  occupy 
— in  the  land  of  Canaan,  ther-;  shalt  thou 
bury  me.     Bow  therefore  (literally,  and 
now)  let  me  go  up,  I  pray  thee  (the  royal 
permission  was  required  to  enable  Joseph 
to  pass  beyond  the  boundaries  of  Egypt, 
especially  when  accompanied  by  a  large 
funeral  procession),  and  bury  my  father, 
and  I  will  come  again. 

Vers.  6. — And  Fharaoh  said,  Go  up,  and 
bury  thy  father,  according  as  he  made 
thee  swear.  Pharaoh's  answer  would, 
of  course,  be  conveyed  through  the  cour- 
tiers. 

Vers.  7 — 9  — And  Joseph  went  np  to  bury 
his  father :  and  with  him  went  up  all  the 
servan.s  of  Pharaoh  (i.  e.  the  chief  officers 
of  the  royal  palace,  as  the  next  clause 
explains),  the  elders  of  his  house  (i.  e.  of 
Pharaoh's  house),  and  all  the  elders  of  the 
land  of  Egypt  (i.  e.  the  nobles  and  State 
officials),  and  all  the  house  of  Joseph,  and 
his  brethren,  and  his  father's  house  :  only 
their  little  ones,  and  their  flocks,  and  their 
herds,  they  left  in  the  land  of  Goshen.  And 
there  went  up  with  him  (as  an  escort)  both 
chariots  and  horsemen  :  and  it  was  a  very 
great  company.  Delineations  of  funeral 
processions,  of  a  most  elaborate  character, 
may  be  seen  on  the  monuments.  A  de- 
tailed and  highly  interesting  account  of 
the  funeral  procession  of  an  Egyptian 
grandee,  enabling  us  to  picture  to  the 
mind's  eye  the  scene  of  Jacob's  burial, 
will  be  found  in  Wilkinson's  'Manners 
and  Customs  of  the  Ancient  Egyptians,' 
vol.  iii.  p.  444,  ed.  1878.  First  servants 
led  the  way,  carrying  tables  laden  with 
fruit,  cakes,  flowers,  vases  of  ointment, 
wine  and  other  liquids,  with  three  young 
geese  and  a  calf  for  sacrifice,  chairs  and 
wooden  tablets,  napkins,  and  other  things. 
Then  others  followed  bearing  daggers, 
bows,  fans,  and  the  mummy  cases  in 
which  the  deceased  and  his  ancestors  had 
been  kept  previous  to  burial.  Next  came 
a  table  of  offerings,  f auteuils,  couches, 
boxes,  and  a  chariot.  After  these  men 
appeared  with  gold  vases  and  more  offer- 
ings. To  these  succeeded  the  bearers  of  a 
sacred  boat  and  the  mysterious  eye  of 


CH.  L.  1—14.] 


THE  BOOt   OF  GENESIS. 


637 


Osiris,  as  the  god  of  stability.  Placed  in 
the  consecrated  boat,  the  hearse  containing 
the  mummy  of  the  deceased  was  drawn 
by  four  oxen  and  by  seven  men,  under 
the  direction  of  a  superintendent  who 
regulated  the  march  of  the  funeral.  Be- 
hind the  hearse  followed  the  male  rela- 
tions and  friends  of  the  deceased,  who 
either  beat  their  breasts,  or  gave  token  of 
their  sorrow  by  their  silence  and  solemn 
step  as  they  walked,  leaning  on  their  long 
sticks ;  and  with  these"  the  procession 
closed. 

Ver.  10. — And  they  came  to  the  thresh- 
ing-floor of  Atad.  The  threshing-floor, 
or  goren,  was  a  large  open  circular  area 
which  was  used  for  trampling  out  the 
corn  by  means  of  oxen,  and  was  exceed- 
ingly convenient  for  the  accommodation 
of  a  large  body  of  people  such  as  accom- 
panied Joseph.  The  goren  at  which  the 
funeral  party  halted  was  named  Atad 
(i.  e.  Buckthorn),  either  from  the  name 
of  the  owner,  or  from  the  quantity  of 
buckthorn  which  grew  in  the  neighbour- 
hood. Which  is  beyond  Jordan— literally, 
on  the  other  side  of  the  Jordin,  i.  e.  west 
side,  if  the  narrator  wrote  from  his  own 
standpoint  Jerome,  Drusius,  Aii  sworth, 
Ealisch,  'Speaker's Commentary,' Words- 
worth, et  alii  ,  in  which  case  the  funeral 
train  would  in  all  probability  follow  the 
direct  route  through  the  country  of  the 
Philistimes,  and  Goren  Atad  would  be 
situated  somewhere,  south  of  Hebron,  in 
the  territory  (afterwards)  of  Judah  ;  but 
east  side  of  the  river  if  the  phrase  must 
be  interpreted  from  the  standpoint  of 
Palestine  (Clericus,  Rosenmilller,  Heng- 
stenberg,  Kurtz,  Keil,  Lange,  Gerlach, 
Havernick,  Murphy,  and  others),  in  which 
case  the.  burial  procession  must  have 
journeyed  by  the  wilderness,  as  the  Is- 
raelites on  a  latter  occasion  did,  and  prob- 
ably for  not  dissimilar  reasons.  In  favour 
of  the  former  interpretation  may  be 
claimed  ver.  11,  which  says  the  Canaanites 
beheld  the  mourning  implying  seemingly 
that  it  occurred  within  the  borders  of 
Canaan,  i.  e.  on  the  west  of  the  Jordan  ; 
while  support  for  the  latter  is  derived 
from  ver,  13,  which  appears  to  state  that 
after  the  lamentation  at  Goren  Atad  the 
sons  of  Jacob  carried  him  into  Canaan, 
almost  necessarily  involving  the  infer- 
ence that  Goren  Atad  was  on  the  east  of 
the  Jordan  ;  but  vide  infra.  If  the  former 
is  correct,  Goren  Atad  was  probably  the 
place  which  Jerome  calls  Betagla  tertio 
ab  Hiericho  lapide,  duobus  millibus  ab 
Jordane  ;  if  the  latter  is  correct,  it  does 


not  prove  a  post-Mosaic  authorship  (Tuch, 
Bohlen,  &c),  since  the  phrase  appears  to 
have  had  an  ideal  usage  with  reference 
to  Canaan  in  addition  to  the  objective 
geographical  one  (Hengstenberg  '  on  the 
Genuineness  of  the  Pentateuch,' vol.  ii. 
p.  260 ;  Keil's  '  Introduction,'  vol.  ip.  189 '; 
Kalisch  'on  Genesis,'  p.  776).  And  there 
they  mourned  with  a  great  and  very  Bore 
lamentation.  The  Egyptians  were  ex- 
ceedingly demonstrative  and  vehement  in 
their  public  lamentations  for  the  dead, 
rending  their  garments,  smiting  on  their 
breasts,  throwing  dust  and  mud  on  their 
heads,  calling  on  the  deceased  by  name, 
and  chanting  funeral  dirges  t  >  the  music 
of  a  tambourine  with  the  tinkling  plates 
removed  (Wilkinson's  'Ancient  Egyp- 
tians,'vol.  iii.  p.  440,  ed.  1878).  And  he 
made  a  mourning  for  his  father  seven  days. 
This  was  a  special  mourning  before  in- 
terment (cf.  Ecclus.  xxii.  11). 

Ver.  11.— And  when  (literally,  and)  the 
inhabitants  of  the  land,  the  Canaanites,  saw 
the  mourning  in  the  floor  of  Atad,  they 
(literally,  and  they)  said,  This  is  a  griev- 
ous mourning  to  the  Egyptians  :  wherefore 
the  name  of  it  was  called  Abel-mizraim, — 
i.  e.  the  meadow  (b3N)  of  the  Egyptians, 
with  a  playupon  the  wordplay)  mourning 

(Keil,  Kurtz,  Gerlach,  Rosenmilller,  &c), 
if  indeed  the  word  has  not  been  punc- 
tuated wrongly— b5N  instead  of  bsO  (Kal- 
isch), which  latter  reading  appears  to 
have  been  followed  by  the  LXX.  (ir^v0os 
AIy«ittov)  and  the  Vulgate  (planctus 
jEgypti) —  which  is  beyond  Jordan  (vide 
supra). 

Vers.  12,  13. — And  his  sons — the  Egyp- 
tians halting  at  Goren  Atad  (Keil,  Haver- 
nick, Kalisch,  Murphy,  &c.)  ;  but  this 
does  not  appear  from  the  narrative — did 
unto  him  according  as  he  commanded  them 
(the  explanation  of  what  they  did  being 
given  in  the  next  clause) :  for  his  sons 
carried  him — not  simply  from  Goren  Atad, 
but  from  Egypt,  so  that  this  verse  does 
not  imply  anythi'  g  about  the  site  of  the 
Buckthorn  threshing-floor  (vide  supra, 
ver.  11) — into  the  land  of  Canaan,  and 
buried  him  in  the  cave  of  the  field  of  Hach- 
pelah,  which  Abraham  bought  with  the 
field  for  a  possession  of  a  burying  place  of 
Ephron  the  Hittite,  before  Mamre  (vide 
ch.  xxiii). 

Ver.  14.  —  And  Joseph  returned  into 
Egypt,  he,  and  his  brethren,  and  all  that 
went  up  with  him  to  bury  his  father,  after 
he  had  buried  his  father. 


588  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  [c*.  L.  1—14. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 14. — The  funeral  of  Jacob.  I.  The  private  sorrow.  That  a  great  and 
good  man  like  Jacob,  the  father  of  a  numerous  family,  the  ancestor  of  an  important 
people,  the  chieflain  of  an  influential  tribe,  the  head  of  the  Church  of  God,  should 
depart  this  life  without  eliciting  from  some  heart  a  tribute  of  sorrow,  is  inconceivable. 
That  any  of  his  sons  witnessed  the  last  solemn  act  of  this  great  spiritual  wrestler, 
when  he  gathered  up  his  feet  into  his  bed  and  yielded  up  his  spirit  into  the  hands  of 
God,  without  a  tear  and  without  a  pang  of  grief,  although  it  is  only  the  emotion  of 
Joseph  that  is  recorded,  is  what  we  cannot  for  a  moment  believe.  Less  demonstrative 
than  was  that  of  Joseph,  less  deep  too,  probably,  since  the  heart  of  Joseph  appears 
to  have  been  peculiarly  susceptible  of  tender  emotions,  we  may  yet  suppose  that  the 
grief  of  Joseph's  brethren  was  not  less  real. 

II.  The  public  mourning.  In  accordance  with  the  customs  of  the  times,  and  of 
the  country,  it  was  needful  that  a-public  ceremonial  should  be  observed,  in  honour 
of  the  dead.  Accordingly,  Joseph,  as  the  first  step  required  by  the  usages  of  the 
people  amongst  whom  he  lived,  gave  instructions  to  his  court  physicians  to  embalm 
his  father.  For  details  as  to  the  process,  which  occupied  a  period  of  forty  days,  the 
Exposition  may  be  consulted.  Then,  along  with  this,  for  seventy  days,  peculiar  rites, 
supposed  to  be  expressive  of  the  heart's  grief,  such  as  rending  the  garments,  smiting 
the  breast,  throwing  dust  upon  the  head,  calling  on  the  deceased,  were  maintained 
with  the  assistance  of  friends,  neighbours,  and  professional  mourners. 

III.  The  funeral  procession.  1.  The  train  of  mourners.  This  consisted  of  the 
state  and  court  officials  of  Pharaoh's  house,  and  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  the  members 
of  the  houses  of  Joseph  and  his  brethren,  and  a  troop  of  horsemen  and  charioteers  for 
protection  on  the  journey.  2.  The  line  of  march.  This  was  either  straight  north, 
through  the  country  of  the  Philistines,  if  Goren  Atad  was  south  of  Hebron  in  Judea, 
or  it  was  round  about  by  the  way  of  the  wilderness,  if  the  halting-place  was  east  of 
Jordan.  3.  The  lamentation,  at  Goren  Atad.  This  was  -intended  as  a  special  de- 
monstration before  burial,  and  was  conducted  with  such  vehemence  as  to  arrest  the 
attention  of  the  Canaanites,  who  called  the  place  in  consequence,  Abel-Mizraim  ;  i.  e. 
the  plain  or  the  mourning  of  Mizraim.  4.  The  advance  to  Hebron.  It  is  more  than 
probable  that  the  Egyptians,  who  had  accompanied  the  funeral  procession  from 
Goshen,  remained  behind  at  Goren  Atad,  while  Joseph  and  his  brethren  bore  the 
patriarch's  body  on  to  Hebron. 

IV.  The  solemn  interment.  His  sons  buried  him  in  the  ancestral  vault  of  Mach- 
pelah.  Reverently,  affectionately,  tearfully,  yet  hopefully,  let  us  hope,  they  laid  the 
weary  pilgrim  down  to  sleep  till  the  resurrection  morn  beside  the  dust  of  his  own 
Leah,  and  in  the  company  of  Abraham,  and  Sarah,  and  Isaac,  and  Rebekah.  It  must 
have  been  an  affecting,  as  surely  it  was  a  sublime  spectacle,  this  coming  home  of  an 
aged  exile  to  lay  his  bones  in  his  native  land,  this  returning  of  the  heir  of  Canaan  to 
claim  his  inheritance,  this  laying  down  of  the  last  member  of  the  great  patriarchal 
family  among  the  other  inmates  of  Machpelah.  With  the  burial  of  Jacob,  the  first 
patriarchal  family  was  complete,  and  the  tomb  was  closed.  The  members  of  the 
second  household  slept  at  Shechem. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ch.  1. — Retrospect  and  prospect.  The  fellowship  of  Egypt  with  the  children 
of  Israel  in  the  burial  of  Jacob  is  full  of  significance.  "A  very  great  company 
went  with  them."  "  Abel-Mizraim  "  the  Canaanites  called  it,  "a  grievous  mourn- 
ing to  the  Egyptians."  It  seemed  to  them  altogether  an  Egyptian  funeral.  Vet  we 
know  that  it  was  not.  The  work  of  God's  grace  will  transform  the  world  that  it  shall 
not  be  recognised.  The  funeral  itself  said,  Egypt  is  not  our  home.  It  pointed  with 
prophetic  significance  to  the  future  of  God's  people.  Canaan,  the  home  of  God's 
people,  is  the  symbol  of  the  everlasting  home.  Strange  that  the  conscience  should 
wake  up  in  the  brethren  of  Joseph  after  the  father's  death.  How  great  the  power  of 
love  in  subduing  fear  I  The  true-hearted,  tender  piety  of  Joseph  both  towards  God 
and  towards  his  father  and  his  kindred  is  not  influenced  by  such  considerations  as 
affected  the  lower  characters  of  his  brethren.  They  feared  because  they  were  not  as 
true  as  he.    "  Joseph  wept  when  they  spake  unto  him,"  wept  for  them,  wept  to  think 


ca,  l.  15—26.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS 


539 


they  had  not  yet  understood  him.  It  is  a  great  grief  to  a  good  man,  a  man  of  large 
simple,#  loving  nature,  to  be  thought  capable  of  unkindness  and  treachery.  Joseph 
recognised  that  his  life  had  been  a  Divine  thing.  He  was  only  an  instrument  in  the 
hands  of  God,  in  the  place  of  God.  He  saw  Providence  working  with  grace.  The 
influence  of  real  religion  is  to  sanctify  and  exalt  natural  affections.  Joseph's  end, 
like  his  father  s,  was  a  testimony  to  the  faithfulness  of  God,  and  a  fresh  consecration 
of  the  covenant  people  to  their  Divine  future.  "  I  die,  and  God  will  surely  visit 
you."  He  was  a  truly  humble  man  to  the  last.  His  people's  blessedness  was  not  of 
his  making.  His  death  would  be  rather  their  gain  than  their  loss.  Yet  "  by  faith  he 
gave  commandment  concerning  his  bones  "  (Heb.  xi.  22),  not  in  any  foolish  feeling 
of  relic  worship,  but  because  he  would  have  the  people  while  in  Egypt  not  to  be  of 
Egypt.  Those  who  live  on  the  promises  of  God  will  feel  that  "  faith  is  the  substance 
of  things  hoped  for,  the  evidence  of  things  not  seen,"  and  confess,  not  by  word  only 
but  by  deed,  and  to  the  last  moment  of  life,  "  that  they  are  pilgrims  and  strangers 
on  the  earth,"  "  seeking  a  better  city,  even  a  heavenly." — R. 

EXPOSITION. 

Ver.  15.  —  And  when  (literally  and) 
Joseph's  brethren  saw  that  their  father 
was  dead,  they  (literally,  and  they)  said, 
Joseph  will  peradventnre  hate  us, — liter- 
ally, If  Joseph  hated  us,  or  pursued  us 
hostilely  (se.  what  would  become  of  us  ?), 
13  with  the  imperfect  or  future  setting 
forth  a  possible  but  undesirable  con- 
tingency (vide  Ewald's  '  Hebrew  Syntax,' 
§ 358a ;  .Gesenius,  '  Lexicon,'  sub  voce) — 
and  will  certainly  requite  us  (literally,  if 
returning  he  caused  to  return  upon  us)  all 
the  evil  which  we  did  unto  him.  ' '  What 
then?"  is  the  natural  conclusion  of  the 
sentence.  "We  must  be  utterly  undone." 
Vers.  16, 17. — And  (under  these  errone- 
ous though  not  unnatural  apprehensions) 
they  sent  a  messenger  unto  Joseph, — liter- 
ally, they  charged  Joseph,  i.  e.  they  de- 
puted one  of  their  number  (possibly  Ben- 
jamin) to  carry  their  desires  to  Joseph — 
saying,  Thy  father  did  command  before  he 
died,  saying  (though  not  recorded,  the 
circumstance  here  mentioned  may  have 
been  historically  true),   So  shall  ye  say 

unto  Joseph,  Forgive,  I  pray  thee  now,  the 

trespass  of  thy  brethren,  and  their  sin  ;  for 

they  did  unto  thee  evil  (nothing  is  more 

inherently  probable  than  that  the  good 

man  on  his  death-bed  did  request  his  sons 

to  beg  their  brother's  pardon):  and  now, 

we  pray  thee,  forgive  the  trespass  of  the 

servants  of  the  God  of  thy  father.  Joseph's 

brethren  in  these  words  at  once  evince  the 

depth  of  their  humility,  the  sincerity  of 

their  repentance,  and  the  genuineness  of 

their  religion.      They  were  God's  true 

servants,  and  they  wished  to  be  forgiven 

by  their    much-offended    brother,   who, 

however,  had  long  since  embraced  them 

in  the  arms  of  his  affection.     And  Joseph 

wept  when  they  spakehunto  him — pained 

that   they  should  f  r  a  single  moment 

have  entertained  such  suspicions  against 

his  love. 


Ver.  18. — And  his  brethren  also  went  and 
fell  down  before  his  face  ;  and  they  said, 
Behold,  we  be  thy  servants.  Both  the 
attitudes  assumed  and  the  words  spoken 
were  designed  to  express  the  intensity  of 
their  contrition  and  the  fervour  of  their 
supplication. 

Ver.  19. — And  Joseph  said  unto  them, 
Fear  not :  for  am  I  in  the  place  of  God? — 
i.  e.  either  reading  the  words  as  a  ques- 
tion, Should  I  arrogate  to  myself  what 
obviously  belongs  to  Elohim,  viz.,  the 
power  and  right  of  vengeance  (Calvin, 
Kalisch,  Murphy,  '  Speaker's  Commen- 
tary '),  or  the  power  to  interfere  with  the 
purposes  of  God  ?  (Keil,  Rosenmtiller) ;  or, 
regarding  them  as  an  assertion,  I  am  in 
God's  stead,  i.  e.  a  minister  to  you  for 
good  (Wordsworth). 

Ver.  20. — But  as  for  you,  ye  thought  evil 
against  me;  but  God  meant  it  unto  good 
(literally,  and  ye  were  thinking  or  medi- 
tating evil  against  me;  Elohim  was  think- 
ing or  meditating  for  good,  i.  e.  that  what 
you  did  should  be  for  good),  to  bring  to 
pass,  as  it  is  this  day,  to  save  much  people 
alive  {vide  ch.  xlv.  5). 

Ver.  21. — Now  therefore  (literally,  and 
now)  fear  ye  not :  I  will  nourish  you,  and 
your  little  ones.  Thus  he  repeats  and  con- 
firms the  promise  which  he  had  originally 
made  to  them  when  he  invited  them  to 
come  to  Egypt  (ch.  xlv.  11,  18,  19).  And 
he  comforted  them,  and.,  spake  kindly  unto 
them — literally,  to  their  hearts  (cf.  ch. 
xxxiv.  3). 

Ver.  22. — And  Joseph  dwelt  in  Egypt, 
he,  and  his  father's  house  :  and  Joseph  lived 
an  hundred  and  ten  years.  Wordsworth 
notices  that  Joshua,  who  superintended 
the  burial  of  Joseph  in  Shechem,  also 
lived  110  years.  Joseph's  death  occurred 
fifty-six  years  after  that  of  Jacob. 

Ver.  23. — And  Joseph  saw  Ephraim'e 
ohildren  of  the  third  generation-. — i.  e. 


540 


THE  BOOK  OP  GENESIS. 


[ch.  L.  15—26. 


Ephraini's  great-grandchildren  (Kaliscb, 
Lange),  or  Ephraim's  great-great-grand- 
sons (Keil,  Murphy),  which  perhaps  was 
not  impossible,  since  Ephraim  must  have 
been  born  before  Joseph's  thirty-seventh 
year,  thus  allowing  at  least  sixty-three 
years  for  four  generations  to  intervene 
before  the  patriarch's  death,  which  might 
be,  if  marriage  happened  early,  say  not 
later  than  eighteen — the  children  also  of 
Machir  the  son  of  Manasseh — by  a  concu- 
bine (1  Chron.  vii.  14) — were  brought  up 
upon  Joseph's  knees — literally,  were  born 
upon  Joseph's  knees,  i.  e.  were  adopted  by 
him  as  suon  as  they  were  born  (Kalisch, 
Wordsworth,  '  Speaker's  Commentary '), 
or  were  born  so  that  he  could  take  them 
also  upon  his  knees,  and  show  his  love 
for  them  (Keil). 

Vers.  24,  25. — And  Joseph  said  unto  his 
brethren,  I  die  :  and  God  (Elohim)  will 
surely  visit  you, — literally,  visiting  will 
visit  you,  according  to  his  promise  (ch. 


xlvi.  4) — and  bring  you  out  of  this  land 
unto  the  land  whictt  he  sware  to  Abraham, 
to  Isaac,  and  to  Jacob.  And  Joseph  took  an 
oath  of  the  children  of  Israel, — as  bis 
father  had  done  of  him  (ch.  xlvii.  31), — 
saying,  God  will  surely  visit  you,  and  ye 
shall  carry  up  my  banes  from  hence.  The 
writer  to  the  Hebrews  (ch.  xi.  22)  refers 
to  this  as  a  signal  instance  of  faith  on  the 
part  of  Joseph. 

Ver.  26. — So  Joseph  died,  being  an  hun- 
dred and  ten  years  old  (literally,  a  son  of  a 
hundred  and  ten  years),  and  they(j.  e.  the 
children  of  Israel)  embalmed  him  (ride  on 
ver.  2),  and  he  was  put  in  a  coffin  (or  chest, 
t.  e.  a  mummy  case,  which  was  comm  nly 
constructed  of  sycamore  wood)  in  Egypt, 
where  he  remained  for  a  period  of  360 
years,  until  the  time  of  the  Exodus, 
when,  according  to  the  engagement  now 
given,  his  remains  were  carried  up  to 
Canaan,  and  solemnly  deposited  in  the 
sepulchre  of  Shechem  (Josh.  xxiv.  32). 


HOM1LETICS. 

Vers.  15 — 26.  — The  last  of  ilie  house  of  Jacob.  I.  Joseph  and  his  brethren 
(vers.  15 — 18).  1.  The  unworthy  suspicion.  After  Jacob's  death,  Joseph's  brethren 
begau  to  fear  lest  he  should  seek  to  revenge  himself  on  account  of  his  early  injuries. 
It  was  perhaps  natural  that  such  an  apprehension  should  arise  within  their  breasts, 
considering  the  enormity  of  the  wickedness  of  which  they  had  been  guilty ;  but 
remembering  all  the  tokens  of  Joseph's  love  which  already  they  had  received,  it  was 
surely  unkind  to  Joseph  to  suffer  such  a  thought  for  even  a  moment  to  find  a  lodg- 
ment in  their  breasts.  2.  The  friendly  embassage.  Deputing  Benjamin,  it  is  thought, 
to  be  the  bearer  of  their  wishes,  they  instructed  him  to  remind  Joseph  of  their  dead 
father's  desire  that  he  should  forgive  the  evil  he  had  suffered  at  their  hands,  and  to 
solicit  an  express  assurance  from  his  own  lips  that  it  was  so.  3.  The  voluntary 
humiliation.  Whether  they  allowed  their  messenger  to  return  or  followed  close 
upon  his  heels  cannot  be  certainly  concluded.  But  they  appear  to  have  resorted  in 
a  body  to  Joseph's  palace,  and  placed  themselves  unconditionally  in  his  power. 
"Behold,  we  be  thy  servants,"  meaning,  "  Do  with  us  what  seemeth  good  in  thy 
sight."  4.  The  generous  assurance.  As  they  desired,  be  explicitly  declared,  though 
with  tears  at  their  uukindness,  that  they  had  no  cause  whatever  to  anticipate  his 
anger,  that  he  was  not  in  God's  place  that  he  should  seek  to  punish  them  for  a  sin 
which  had  turned  out  so  providentially  for  good,  and  that  on  the  contrary  he  would 
continue  to  nourish  them  and  their  little  ones  so  long  as  they  remained  in  Egypt. 

II.  Joseph  and  his  children's  children.  1.  The  children  of  Ephraim.  He  lived 
long  enough  to  see  the  children  of  Ephraim's  grandchildren  born  into  this  sinful 
world,  and  then  he  died  at  the  good  old  -age  of  110  years.  2.  The  children  of 
Manatseh.  He  saw  the  offspring  of  Manasseh's  son  born,  and  either  adopted  into 
his  own  family,  or  brought  up  in  his  own  house. 

III.  Joseph  and  the  house  of  Israel.  1,  Joseph's  premonition  of  approaching 
death.  "  Joseph  said  unto  his  brethren," — i.  e.  the  descendants  of  his  brethren,  his 
actual  brethren  having  in  all  probability  predeceased  him, — "  I  die."  Along  with 
this  Joseph  recalled  to  their  minds  the  sacred  promise  that  God  would  eventually 
visit  them  and  cause  them  to  return  to  their  own  land.  It  is  well  when  death  ap- 
proaches to  remember  God's  promises.  The  thoughts  of  God  are  very  suitable  for 
dying  hours.  2.  Joseph's  preparation  for  death.  He  took  an  oath  of  the  children  of 
Israel  that  they  would  carry  up  his  bones  to  Canaan,  in  this  following  the  example 
and  imitating  the  faith  of  his  revered  father  Jacob.  3.  Joseph's  falling  asleep  in 
death.  "  Joseph  died,  the  son  of  an  hundred  and  ten  years."  He  had  lived  a 
shorter  life  than  any  of  the  four  great  preceding  patriarchs;  but  his  life  had  been 


ch.  l.  15—26.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


541 


eminently-honoured  and  useful,  and  his  death,  we  may  be  sure,  would  be  beautifully 
calm  and  peaceful.  4.  Joseph's  body  after  death.  It  was  embalmed,  and  the  mummy 
put  into  a  coffin  for  better  preservation,  until  the  time  approached  when  it  could  be 
taken  for  consignment  to  the  holy  land. 

Learn— 1.  How  difficult  it  is  to  shake  oneself  free  from  the  evil  consequences  of 
sin,  even  after  it  has  been  forgiven,  2.  How  painful  to  a  loving  heart  it  is  to  be 
suspected  of  cherishing  a  feeling  of  revenge  3.  How  generously  God  sometimes 
rewards  his  servants  on  earth,  by  permitting  them  to  see  children's  children,  born 
and  brought  up,  and  sometimes  also  bi  ought  into  the  family  of  his  Church.  4  How 
peacefully  a  child  of  God  can  die;  and  5.  How  hopefully  he  ought  to  look  forward 
to  the  resurrection. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  20  — Intended  bane  an  unintentional  boon.  "Ye  thought  evil  against  me  ;  but 
God  meant  it  unto  good."  Joseph  must  have  been  deeply  pained  by  the  mistrust  of 
his  brethren.  They  implied  that  it  was  only  out  of  consideration  for  his  father  that 
hi  had  been  kind  to  thera.  Yet  Joseph  had  forgiven  them.  They  could  not  so  easily 
believe  in  the  forgiveness  :  ju-t  as  man  now  is  forgiven  by  God,  but  he  has  the 
greatest  difficulty  in  believing  in  the  reconciliation.  Joseph's  bre'hren  sent  a  mes- 
senger unto  him,  probably  Benjamin.  They  who  had  once  sold  Joseph  as  a  slave 
now  offer  to  be  his  slaves.  The  offer  is  to  him  humiliating.  Moreover,  it  is  great 
pain  to  him.  To  a  noble  soul  designing  only  good  to  others  there  is  no  greater 
offensiveness  than  to  have  his  doings  viewed  with  suspicion.  Joseph  repudiated  the 
mistrust,  and  refused  the  offered  self-enslavement.  He  assures  his  bretbren  of  full 
forgiveness  in  words  which  must  have  been  as  softest  balm  to  wounded  spirits.  In 
a  spirit  of  the  highest  magnanimity  he  tries  even  to  make  them  view  with  compla- 
cency the  result  of  their  wrong-doing.  In  the  text  we  have  the  "  grand  goldeu  key 
to  the  whole  of  his  life's  history."    Notice  how — 

I.  Intended  bane  often  becomes  unintentional  boon.  Evil  works  evil  to 
others,  but  sometimes  good.  Intended  evil  is  overruled  by  God  when  he  has  some 
good  object  iu  view.  '■  Man  proposes,  God  disposes."  God  always  knows  what  the 
result  of  certain  actions  will  be.  If  they  are  good  actions  they  work  in  line  with  his 
will :  if  evil,  he  overrules  them.  If  the  horse  keeps  the  road  it  feels  not  the  rein, 
but  if  it  will  turn  aside,  the  sharp  bit  must  draw  it  back  again.  Whatever  specula- 
tion there  may  be  about  our  absolute  freenuss,  vie  feel  that  we  are  free.  It  is  the 
glory  of  God  to  be  able  to  trust  with  freedom  a  being  with  such  great  powers  for 
moral  evil,  like  man.  He  would  teach  us  to  use  our  wills,  by  giving  us  full  freedom. 
We  frequently  pain  him  by  our  misuse  and  our  abuse  of  our  powers.  What  evil  we 
devise  and  strive  to  carry  out  !  The  brethren  of  Joseph  even  intended  murder,  and 
modified  it  by  selling  their  brother  into  slavery.  They  acted  more  cruelly  than  some 
of  the  men-stealers  of  Africa.  The  latter  steal  strangers  to  sell  them,  but  these  ten 
men  sold  their  own  brother.  They  thought  they  were  rid  of  him.  Egypt  was  a 
long  way  off  ;  Joseph  was  but  a  weakling,  and  might  soon  perish.  They  would  be 
free  from  his  presence,  and  could  divide  their  guilty  gains.  They  hardened  them- 
selves against  his  tears  and  entreaties  ;  and  even  in  malicious  spite  were  ready  to  slay 
the  weeping  youth  because  he  did  not  appreciate  their  considerateuess  in  selling  him 
into  slavery  instead  of  killing  him  outright.  It  was  an  evil  deed.  Those  who  looked 
on  could  see  no  good  to  come  out  of  it.  There  were,  however.'several  great  results. 
1.  He  was  personally  advanced  in  life,  and  was  able  to  make  the  best  of  it.  2.  He 
saved  thousands  of  people  from  perishing,  and  among  them  his  own  family.  3.  He 
was  the  means  of  bringing  Israel  into  Egypt,  where  it  developed  as  a  people.  Its 
deliverance  gave  occasion  to  the  mightiest  display  of  Divine  power.  4.  He  became 
a  type  of  the  Messiah— rejected  of  men.  Thus  we  know  not  there  suits  of  any  of  our 
acts.  God  can  overrule,  to  the  development  of  character  and  spiritual  power,  circum- 
stances seemingly  most  opposed  to  our  test  interests.  God  knows  what  is  best.  He 
could  break  the  plans  of  the  evil  in  pieces.  Instead  of  this  he  oft  confounds  the 
wicked  by  letting  them  see  that  the  ends  they  did  not  d<sire  have  been  attained  m 
spite  of  their  opposition,  and  even  by  the  very  existence,  that  the  intended  bane  be- 
comes an  unintentional  boon.  Thus  Joseph's  brothers  fqund  it,  and  bowed  their 
heads. 


543  THE  BOOK   OF  GENESIS.  [ch.  l.  15—26. 

II.  There  are  several  lessons  to  be  learned  from  the  way  in  which,  by 
God's  overruling,  intended  bane  becomes  a  boon.  1.  It  is  a  dangerous  thing 
to  scheme  against  others.  Especially  is  it  a  dangerous  thiug  when  a  good  man  is  the 
object  of  the  attack.  It  is  likely  to  be  checked  and  to  recoil.  "A  greater  power 
than  we  can  contradict  may  thwart  our  plans."  There  are  a  thousand  chances  of 
check  or  change.  Men  have  so  noticed  this  that  even  a  French  moralist  said,  "  I  do 
not  know  what  hidden  force  it  is  that  seems  (o  delight  in  breaking  up  human  plans 
just  at  the  moment  when  they  promise  to  turn  out  well."  Yes,  there  is  a  "  hidden 
force,"  ever  watchful,  ever  balancing  human  actions,  ever  ordaining,  either  in  this 
world  or  the  next,  the  just  meed  of  praise  or  blame,  of  retribution  or  reward.  See 
how  the  scribes  and  Pharisees  held  councils  against  Jesus,  the  gentle,  pure,  loving 
teacher  of  truth,  and  healer  of  diseases.  They  sought  how  they  might  kill  him. 
They  excommunicated  him,  they  sent  others  to  entrap  him.  They  succeeded  at 
length  in  nailing  him  to  the  cross.  They  carried  out  their  evil  intentions  ;  but  that 
cross  became  the  throne  of  the  Saviour's  power,  ihe  salvation  ;  and  ihe  death  of 
Christ  became  the  life  of  the  world.  They  went  by  wagging  their  heads,  but  at  last 
they  had  to  wring  their  hands.  They  themselves  were  left  in  their  sin,  and  their 
"  house  left  unto  them  desolate,"  while  unto  the  Christ  they  hated  all  men  are  being 
drawn.  2.  That  God  overrules  evil  is  no  license  to  do  evil.  Many  would  say,  "  Let 
us  do  evil  that  good  may  come."  This  would  suit  carnal  nature.  They  would  say, 
"  Sin  is  not  so  great  an  evil,  since  God  can  overrule  it."  To  talk  like  this  would  be 
like  throwing  dust  in  our  own  eyes  when  we  have  reached  an  eminence  from  whence 
we  might  behold  a  beautiful  landscape.  It  would  be  like  a  youth  who,  seeing  a 
gardener  pruning  trees,  should  take  a  knife  and  cut  and  slash  all  the  trunks.  Or,  it 
would  be  like  the  act  of  one  who,  seeing  how  an  artist  had  wrought  in  a  picture 
some  blunder  into  a  beauty,  should  take  a  brush  and  streak  with  black  the  brilliant 
sky.  We  are  not  at  liberty  to  sin  that  God  may  bring  good  of  it.  3.  That  God 
overrules  evil  should  make  us  feel  our  dependence  on  him.  If  we  could  succeed  in 
good  without  him,  if  all  we  intended  to  do  could  surely  be  calculated  upon,  we 
should  become  proud.  It  is  well  that  God  sometimes  even  breaks  up  our  good  plans 
in  order  that  we  may  learn  this  lesson.  We  might  even  intend  good  without  him 
otherwise,  and  that  would'lead  to  evil  in  ourselves.  But  we  are  dependent  on  him 
to  check  the  evil  of  our  own  lives  and  of  others'  intentions.  4.  It  should  make  us 
hopeful  also  with  respect  to  our  affairs.  Surely  out  of  this  thought  we  may  get 
"royal  contentment,"  as  knowing  we  are  in  the  bauds  of  a  noble  protector,  "  who 
never  gives  ill  but  to  him  who  deserves  ill."  5.  It  should  make  us  hopeful  with 
respect  to  the  order  and  destiny  of  the  world.  In  some  way,  far  off,  God's  glory  may 
be  advanced,  even  by  the  way  in  which  he  will  have  subdued,  by  Christ,  all  things 
unto  himself.  6.  Intended  good  is  not  always  a  benefit  to  those  for  whom  intended. 
God  intends  good  to  men,  and  provides  a  way  to  bless,  but  men  refuse.  See  at  what 
a  cost  the  way  has  been  provided.  Those  who  refuse  are  under  worse  condemna- 
tion. "It  were  better  for  them  not  to  have  known  the  way  of  righteousness  than, 
after  they  have  known  it,  to  turn  from  the  holy  commandment  delivered  unto  them." 
7.  We  must  all  face  our  wrong-doing  some  time  or  other.  We  shall  find  that  the 
evil  we  have  sown  has  produced  a  harvest  of  weeds,  which  we  shall  have  sorrowfully 
to  reap.     We  ought  to  pray  earnestly,  "Deliver  us  from  evil." — H. 

Ver.  26. — The  lessons  of  a  lift.  Joseph's  life  remarkable  for  the  variety  of  his  ex- 
perience, and  for  the  consistency  of  his  character  through  all.  A  man  full  of  human 
sympathy,  who  also  walked  with  God.  Here  the  charm  of  his  history.  We  can 
thoroughly  enter  into  his  feelings.  In  his  boyhood,  deservedly  loved  by  his  father, 
and  on  that  verv  account  hated  by  his  brethren  (1  John  iii.  13) ;  in  his  unmerited 
sufferings  ;  in  his  steadfast  loyalty  to  God  and  to  his  master  ;  in  his  exaltation,  and 
the  wisdom  with  which  he  ruled  Egypt ;  and  in  his  forgiveness  of  those  who  had 
sold  him  as  a  slave,  we  feel  for  him  and  with  him.  But  Joseph  died.  His  trials  and 
his  triumphs  passed  away.  The  scene  where  he  had  played  so  conspicuous  a  part  is 
filled  by  other  forms.  And  he  who  was  the  means  of  savins  a  nation  must  share  the 
lot  of  the  most  commonplace  life.     One  events  happen  to  all  (Eccles.  ii.  15.). 

I.  The  uncertain  tenure  of  earthly  good.  No  care  can  keep  away  misfor- 
tune, not  even  care  to  walk  uprightly  before  God.  Sin  brings  sorrow  sooner  or  later ; 
but  it  is  a  great  mistake  to  think  that  all  sorrow  springs  from  faults  committed  (Ps. 
lxxiii.  5).  Joseph's  slavery  was  because  his  Godward  life  condemned  his  brothers 
and  made  them  angry.    His  being  thrown  into  prison  was  because  he  would  not  yield 


CH.  l.  15—26.]  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.  543 


to  temptation.  This  often  a  slumbling-block.  If  God  really  marks  all  that  is  done, 
why  are  his  most  faithful  servants  often  so  sorely  smitten?  We  can  neither  deny 
the  fact  nor  trace  the  reason  of  the  stroke  Enough  to  know  that  it  is  part  of 
God's  plan  (Heb.  xii.  6),  to  fit  us  for  Ihe  end  of  our  being.  As  Christ  was  perfected 
by  suffering  (Heb.  ii.  10),  so  must  we  be.  And  just  because  to  bear  the  cross  is 
needful  for  a  follower  of  Ctirist  (Matt.  xvi.  24,— aud  this  is  not  the  endurance  of 
suffering  at  our  own  choice,  but  the  willing  receiving  of  what  God  is  pleased  to 
send — the  uncertainty  of  life  gives  constant  opportunity  for  that  submission  to  his 
will  which  is  the  result  of  living  f  aith. 

II.  The  one  end  of  all  living  (Exod.  i.  6).  How  varied  soever  the  outward 
lot,  wealth  or  penury,  joy  or  mourning,  one  day  all  must  be  left  behind.  To  what 
purpose  then  is  it  to  labour  for  good,  or  to  dread  impending  evil?  Can  we  not 
remember  many  whose  name  was  much  in  men's  mouths,  full  of  youthful  vigour  or 
mature  wisdom?  And  they  are  gone,  and  the  world  goes  on  as  before.  Joseph, 
embalmed  in  Egypt  with  almost  royal  honours,  was  as  completely  separated  from 
all  his  wealth  and  power  as  if  he  had  never  possessed  them.  Others  filled  his  place 
and  occupied  his  gains,  in  their  turn  to  give  them  up,  and  awake  from  the  dream  of 
possessions  to  join  the  company  of  those  who  have  left  all  these  things  behind.  And 
is  this  all?  Has  life  nothing  worth  striving  for?  Is  there  no  possession  that  we  can 
really  regard  as  our  own  ? 

III.  Life  has  abiding  treasures.  Was  it  nothing  to  Joseph  that  he  possessed 
and  showed  a  forgiving  spirit  (Matt.  vi.  14,  15),  and  singleness  of  heart,  and  earnest 
benevolence,  and  watchful  consciousness  o±  God's  presence?  These  are  treasures  the 
world  thinks  little  of.  But  these  are  treasures  indeed,  ministering  comfort  without 
care.  And  when  earthly  things  slip  from  the  grasp  these  abide,  reflections  of  the 
mind  of  Christ,  and  telling  of  his  abiding  in  the  soul  (Rev.  xiv.  13).— M. 


HOMILETICAL  INDEX 


TO 


THE    BOOK    OF    GENESIS. 


"*~^r?"C  ♦ 


CHAPTER  L 

THEMB  PAGE 

The  Visible  Universe           . .         . .  6 
Chaos    an  Emblem  of  the  Unre- 
newed Soul 7 

The  Value. of  Light 13 

Light  an  Emblem  of  the  Gospel   . .  14 
The  Atmospheric  Firmament      . .  16 
Sea,  Land,   and  Vegetation,  Con- 
trasted and  Compared      . .         . .  19 
The  Celestial  Luminaries   . .         . .  23 

The  Fourth  Day        24 

The  Mystery  of  Life 27 

The  Fifth  Day           28 

The  Greatness  of  Man        . .         . .  32 

The  Sixth  Day          33 

The  Creation  of  Man          . .         . .  33 

Perfection        34 

CHAPTER  H. 

The    Two    Sabbaths:    the   Divine 

and  the  Human 37 

Rest  and  Light          . .         . .        \ .  33 

The  First  Man            43 

Man  the  Living  Soul          . .         . .  43 

The  Garden  of  Eden 47 

Man's  First  Dwelling  Place         . .  48 
The  Tree  of  Life  and  the  Water  of 

Life 49 

The  Frst  Marriage 53 

The  True  Life  of  Man        ..        ..55 

CHAPTER  HI. 

The  First  Sin 61 

The  Tempter 62 

The  Moral  Chaos  before  the  Moral 

Restoration 62 


THEMB  PiGK 

The  Tempter's  Chief  "Weapon      . .  63 

The  First  Judgment  Scene  . .  68 

The  Working  of  the  Sin-stricken 

Conscience 69 

The  Searching  Question  . .  . .  69 
The  Doom  of  Satan  and  the  Hope 

of  Man  70 

The  Word  of  God  in  the  Moral  Chaos  70 

First  Fruits  of  the  Promise        . .  74 

Covering  76 

The  Dispensation  of  Redemption. .  76 

CHAPTER  IV. 

The  First  Brothers 82 

Am  I  my  Brother's  Keeper?         ..  84 

The  Kingdom  of  God        . .         . .  8<5 

Care  for  our  Brethren  . .  . .  86 
The  Condemnation  and  Judgment 

of  the  First  Murderer      . .        . .  86 

The  Progress  of  the  Race  . .  . .  90 
The  Kingdom  of  God  contrasted 

with  the  Kingdom  of  this  World  92 

Revelation  in  History         . .        . .  92 

CHAPTER  V. 
The  Antediluvian  Saints    . .        . .    98 

Enoch 100 

Walking  with  God 100 

A  Great  Example  and  a  Great  Re- 
ward    101 

CHAPTER    VI. 

"  The  Days  that  were  Before  the 

Flood"  104 

The  Work  of  Sin 106 


INDEX. 


THEME  PAGE 

The  Demoralisation  of  the  Race. .  106 
Probation,.  Approbation,   and  Re^ 

probation 107 

The  Striving  of  the  Spirit. .         . .  107 
The  Building  of  the  Ark   ..         ..Ill 

The  Obedience  of  Noah     . .         . .  113 

Righteousness  and  Peace  . .         . .  113 

The  Way  of  Safety 113 

CHAPTER  Vn. 

The  Ark  Entered 115 

God  the  Saviour  Inviting  Faith. .  116 

Realised  Salvation 117 

Was  the  Flood  Universal?          ..  119 

The  Deluge 121 

The  Believer's  Safety        ..         ..123 

CHAPTER   VIII. 
Mount  Ararat,  or  the  Landing  of 

the  Ark       127 

Hoping  and  Waiting         . .         . .  128 
The  Returning  of  the  Waters,  or 

the  Recall  of  Divine  Judgments  128 

God's  Infinite  Care 130 

Grace  and  Providence       . .         . .  131 
The    Dispensations  of  Righteous- 
ness and  Love 131 

The  Saint  and  the  Saviour          . .  135 

Rest  and  Restoration        . .         . .  137 

The  Sanctification  of  the  Earth. .  137 

CHAPTER  IX. 
New  Arrangements  for  a  New  Era  141 
The  New  Life  of  Man  on  the  Earth  142 
The  Covenant  Renewed    . .         . .  145 
The  New  Noachic  Covenant  Estab- 
lished             146 

The  Bow  in  the  Cloud       . .         . .  147 

The  Future  Unveiled        . .         . .  151 
The  Threefold  Distribution  of  the 

Human  Race        154 

CHAPTER  X. 

The  Ethnological  Register          . .  161 

Nimrod           163 

The  Canaanites        163 

Peleg,  or  the  Division  of  the  Peop]  e  163 

Nations           163 

CHAPTER  XI. 

The  Tower-Builders  of  Babel      . .  166 

Order  brought  forth         . .         . .  168 

Unity  of  Language 169 

Ancient  Brickmakers        . .        . .  169 

The  Tower  of  Babel          . .         . .  169 


THEME  PACK 

God's  City  or  Man's  City  . .         . .  169 
The  Cities  of  Men  and  the  City  of 

God 170 

Vain  Imaginings 170 

Babel  &  Zion 170 

From  Shem  to.  Abram      . .         . .  172 

The  Order  of  Grace 173 

Divine  Traditions .173 

The  Migration  of  the  Terachites. .  176 

Two  Weddings        177 

CHAPTER  XH. 
The  Chaldean  Emigrant  ..         ..180 

The  Preparations  of  Grace        . .  181 
The  Voices  of  God  at  the  Opening 

of  the  World's  Eras      . .         . .  181 

Abraham  Called 182 

Abraham  Useful 182 

Sevenfold  Promises 182 

The  Promised  Land           . .         . .  184 

Revelations 185 

The  First  Wanderer  and  the  Se- 
cond, or  Cain  and  Abram  Com- 
pared and  Contrasted     . .         . .  185 
The  Strength  and  Weakness  of 

Abram         186 

Abraham  Worshipping     . .         . .  186 

Abraham's  Altar 186 

The  Descent  into  Egypt   . .         . .  190 

The  Church  and  the  World        . .  191 

Famines          192 

Abraham  and  Carnal  Policy       . .  192 

Abram  and  Israel ;   a  Parallel     . .  192 

CHAPTER  XIII. 

The  Magnanimity  of  Abram      . .  194 
The  Separation  between  Abram 

and  Lot 195 

Abraham,  the  Peaceable  Man     . .  196 

The  Choice  of  Lot      . .         . .     197,  198 
Sodom  and  the  Sodomites,  or  the 

Place  and  the  People     . .         . .  198 

The  Parting  of  the  Friends         . .  198 

Lot's  Unwise  Choice          . .         . .  199 

Going  to  Sodom 199 

Going  towards  Sodom      . .         . .  199 
Magnanimity  Rewarded,  or  Divine 

Compensations 201 

CHAPTER  XIV. 

The  Capture  of  Lot,  or  Nemesis 

pursuing  Sin         204 

The  Kingdom  of  God  in  its  Rela- 
tion to  the  Contending  Powers 

of  this  World        205 


INDEX. 


ifi 


The  Kinsman  Deliverer,  or  Ab- 

ram's  Military  Expedition        . .  207 
Abram's  Expedition  a  Sermon  for 

the  New  Testament  Church    . .  208 

Visited  by  Kings 210 

A  King-Priest  212 

Melchizedek  Blessing  Abraham  . .  214 

The  Church  Militant          ..         ..  215 

Abraham's  Independent  Spirit   . .  215 

CHAPTER  XV. 

Under  the  Stars  with  God           . .  217 

Faith 218 

What  the  Lord  is  to  His  People  . .  219 

.  Faith  and  Righteousness  . .         . .  219 

Taken  into  Covenant         . .         . .  222 
The  Strength  and  "Weakness  of 

Faith           224 

The  Silent  Worshipper      ..         ..224 

Abraham's  "Watch  and  Vision    . .  224 

CHAPTER  XVI. 

Crooked  "Ways,  or  Marrying  with 

Hagar         226 

Hagar :          . .  227 

The  Maid,  the  Mistress,  and  •  the 

Master         227 

The  Capture  of  the  Runaway,  or 

Hagar  and  the  Angel  of  the  Lord  229 

Wells  in  the  Wilderness   . .         . .  231 

Glimpses  of  the  Godhead  . .         . .  231 

God  Pleading  with  Wanderers  . .  231 

CHAPTER  XVII. 

The.  Covenant  Renewed    . .         . .  234 

God's  Call  to  Believers      . .         . .  235 

The  True  Life  of  Faith  set  forth. .  236 

The  Covenant  Completed. .         . .  238 

CHAPTER  XVHI. 
Noontide  at  Mamre,   or  Angels' 

Visits           .242 

The  Theophany  at  Mamre           . .  244 

Sodom's  Doom  Revealed  . .         . .  246 

Abraham's  Intercession  for  Sodom  247 

God's  Rule  in  the  Family..         ••  248 

Abraham  and  Family  Training  ..  248 

Abraham's  Intercession    . .         . .  250 

CHAPTER  XIX. 
Warning  Lights  in  Sodom          . .  253 
The  Judgment  of  Fire       ..        ..257 
The   Righteousness    of  God  Re- 
vealed           359 

The  Danger  of  Falling  Back       . .  259 


The  Last  Days  of  Lot        . .        . .     262 
The   Destruction  of  Sodom  and 
Gomorrah 263 

CHAPTER  XX. 

Abraham  in  Gerar,  or  Two  Royal 

Sinners        266 

Falsehood  the  Fruit  of  Unbelief..  268 

Abraham  and  Abimelech  at  Gerar  268 

CHAPTER  XXI. 

The  Son  of  Promise,  or  a  Young 

Child's  Biography 270 

Birth,  Circumcision,  and  Wean- 
ing of  Isaac  271 

The  Separation  of  the  Bond- 
woman's Son  from  the  Pro- 
mised Seed 271 

The  Expulsion  of  Ishmael         . .     273 
Hagar  and  Ishmael,  or  the  For- 
tunes of  the  Outcasts     . .         . .     275 
Hagar,  a  Weary  Outcast  . .         . .    276 
God's  Appearance  to  Hagar       . .     276 
Hagar  in  the  Wilderness  . .        . .    277 
God's  Care  for  Ishmael     . .         . .     277 
Abimelech  and  Abraham,  or  An- 
cient Covenanters  . .         . .     281 
A  Covenant  between  the  Patriarch 
and  the  Philistine  King. .         . .     282 

CHAPTER   XXH. 
Mount  Moriah,  or  the  Mount  of 

Sacrifice 285 

Abraham's  Perfect  Faith  . .         . .     286 

The  Lamb  of  God 287 

The  Great  Trial  and  the  Great 

Revelation 288 

Good  News  from  a  Far  Country. .     290 

CHAPTER  XXHI. 
The  Death  and  Burial  of  Sarah   294,  295 
Lessons  from  the  Sepulchre        . .     295 

CHAPTER    XXIV. 

A  Bride  for  the  Heir.— 1.  Abra- 
ham and  Eliezer,  or  the  Mission 
for  the  Bride        298 

The  Unfolding  of  the  Divine  Pur- 
pose . .         .  ■        •  •         •  •        •  •     *<"* 

No  Turning  Back 299 

A  Bride  for  the  Heir.— 2.  Eliezer 
and  Rebekah,  or  the  Finding  of 
the  Bride 303 

Eliezer,  or  a  Wife-Seeker  . .         . .     304 


IV 


INDEX. 


PAGE 

A  Bride  for  the  Heir. — 3.  Eliezer 
and  Laban,  or  Proposals  for  the 

Bride  308 

Laban's  Eye  of  Greed        ..         ..309 
Laban  the  Solicitous  Host. .         . .     310 
A  Bride  for  the  Heir. — 4.  Bebekah 
and  Isaac,  or  the  Wedding  of 

the  Bride 311 

Isaac  in  the  Field 312 

CHAPTER  XXV. 

The  Last  Days  of  Abraham        . .  314 

The  Line  of  Blessing  . .  . .  315 
The  Generations  of  Ishmael,  or  the 

Biography  of  a  Prince   . .         . .  316 

The  Childless  Pair 318 

Divine  Purposes  Unfolded. .        . .  319 

The  Twin  Brothers 321 

Esau,  the  Spiritually  Indifferent  322 

Neglect  of  Heavenly  Things       . .  323 

CHAPTER  XXVI. 

A  Good  Man's  Perplexity. .  ..  325 

Line  upon  Line,  in  God's  Teaching  326 

A  Good  Man's  Transgression  . .  327 

A  Good  Man's  Prosperity. .  . .  329 

Digging  Wells  of  Salvation  . .  330 

A  Good  Man's  Environment  . .  832 

CHAPTER  XXVH. 

The  Stolen  Blessing ;  a  Domestic 
Drama. — 1.  Isaac  and  Rebekah, 
or  Plotting  and  Counterplotting    336 

The  Stolen  Blessing :  a  Domestic 
Drama. — 2.  Isaac  and  Jacob,  or 
the  Successful  Stratagem        . .     339 

The  Stolen  Blessing :  a  Domestic 
Drama. — 3.  Isaac  and  Esau,  or 
the  Hunter's  Lamentation      . .     342 

Jacob's  Deceit.    Esau  Supplanted    343 

Unfaithfulness  in  Believers        . .     344 

The  Stolen  Blessing :  a  Domestic 
Drama. — 4.  Rebekah  and  Esau, 
or  Fratricide  Frustrated  . .     846 

Rebekah,  the  Disappointed        . .     847 

CHAPTER  XXVIII. 
Jacob   and   Esau,   or  Diverging 

Paths  348 

Life  With,  and  Life  Without,  God  349 
Jacob    at     Bethel,    or     Heaven 

Opened        352 

Jacob's  Dream         353 

A  Stairway  to  Heaven  . .  . .  354 
God's  Providential  Care  . .  . .  355 
The  Grateful  Retrospect  and  the 

Consecrated  Prospect    . .        . .    855 


CHAPTER  XXIX. 

THEME  PA0E 

Jacob  at  the  Well  of  Haran:  a 

Romantic  Adventure     . .         . .  357 

Jacob  among  his  Mother's  Kindred  358 
Jacob  and  Laban,  or  the  Deceiver 

Deceived 361 

The  Power  of  True  Affection      . .  362 

Christ's  Love  for  the  Church     . .  362 
Leah   and   Rachel,   or  the  Two 

Wives         863 

CHAPTER  XXX 

Rachel  and  Leah,  or  Unholy  Ri- 
valry.. . •  ..  . ■  ..  866 
Envy  Working  in  God's  People. .  367 
The  Story  of  the  Mandrakes  . .  368 
The  Life  of  Faith  and  its  Reward  369 
Jacob  and  Leban,  or  Craft  versus  ■ 

Greed          372 

Jacob's  History  an  Illustration  of 
the  Blending  Together  of  the 
Natural  and  the  Supernatural  in 

God's  Dealings 873 

CHAPTER  XXXI. 

Jacob's  Flight  from  Laban          . .  377 

Teraphim       378 

The  Separation  from  Laban        . .  379 
Laban's  Pursuit  of  Jacob  . .        . .  384 
Galeed  and  Mizpah,  or  the  Coven- 
ant of  Peace          387 

Final    Covenant  between   Jacob 

and  Leban 388 

CHAPTER  XXXH. 

Mahanaim,  or  Preparing  for  Esau  392 

Divine  Protection 393 

Faith  and  Fellowship        . .        . .  393 

Jacob's  Prayer        893 

The  Crisis  at  Hand 393 

Peniel,  or  the  Mysterious  Contest  395 

" Peniel."    "  The  Face  of  God". .  397 

A  New  Name 398 

CHAPTER  XXXHI. 

Jacob  and  Esau,  or  the  Brothers 

Reconciled 402 

The  Fruits  of  Prayer        . .        . .  403 

Worldly  Companionship  . .        . .  403 

CHAPTER  XXXIV. 

The  Tragedy  at  Shechem . .        . .  408 

Good  Out  of  Evil 409 

Anger  Unrestrained          . .         . .  410 


INDEX. 


CHAPTER    XXXV. 

THEME  PAGE 

Bethel  Revisited 413 

Godwith  Us 414 

Spiritual  Renovation         . .         . .  414 
Jacob's  Preparation  for  Accept- 
able "Worship        416 

From  Bethel  to  Mamre     . .         . .  418 

CHAPTER  XXXVI. 

The  Last  of  the  House  of  Esau  . .  434 

Esau  Separates  from  Jacob        . .  435 
Delay  in  Fulfilment  of  God's  Prom- 


435 


CHAPTER  XXXVH. 

Joseph  in  his  Father's  House     . .  439 

The  Representative  Man  . ."       . .  431 

Joseph  at  Home 433 

Joseph   among    his  Brethren  at 

Dothan        434 

Joseph  Leaving  Home      . .         . .  435 
God's  Providence  and  Man's  Re- 
sponsibility            436 

Joseph  Carried  by  Midianites  to 

Egypt          438 

Drawn  from  the  Pit  ..        ..439 

CHAPTER  XXXVm. 

The  House  of  Judah:  a  Family 

Record  of  Sin  and  Shame        . .  444 
Judah's  Sin  with  Tamar   ..         ..445 

Tamar's  Twins         446 

The  Goodness  and  Severity  of  God  446 

CHAPTER  XXXTX. 

Joseph  in  the  House  of  Potiphar. .  447 

Sunshine  and  Shadow       . .         . .  448 

The  Righteous  Man 448 

Joseph  and  the  Wife  of  Potiphar  450 

Joseph  in  Slavery 452 

God's  Presence  with  His  Servants  453 

Joseph  as  Prison  Warder  . .         . .  453 

CHAPTER  XL. 
Joseph   in  the  Round  House  at 

Heliopolis 456 

The  Inspired  Man 458 

The  Interpreter  of  God's  Message  458 

Pharaoh's  Forgetful  Butler        . .  459 

CHAPTER  XLI. 

Joseph  before  Pharaoh,  or  fron 
Prison  to  the  Throne     ..        ..465 


THEME  PAGE 

The  Blessing  of  Suffering  Wrong- 
fully   467 

Joseph  as  Prime  Minister. .        . .  468 

Joseph  on  the  Second  Throne  in 

Egypt          470 

Destitution  and  Abundance        . .  473 

CHAPTER  XLII. 

The  First  Visit  of  Joseph's  Breth- 
ren to  Egypt         478 

God's  Trials  of  His  People        . .  481 

Man's  Want  and  God's  Provision  481 

CHAPTER  XLHI. 

The   Second    Visit    of    Joseph's 

Brethren  to  Egypt         . .         . .  485 

Lessons  of  Life        487 

Distrust  of  the  Fruit  of  Sin         . .  487 

CHAPTER  XLIV. 

Joseph's  Artifice  to  Detain  Ben- 
jamin, or  the  Story  of  the  Sil- 
ver Goblet..       ' 491 

Character  Built  on  Faith  . .        . .  492 

Probation       493 

The  Conversion  of  Judah. .        . .  493 

A  Surety        493 

CHAPTER  XLV. 

Joseph's  Discovery  of  Himself  to 

his  Brethren        496 

Darkness  Turned  into  Light       . .  497 

The  Great  Announcement. .        ..  497 

Providence 498 

Joseph's  Invitation  to  Jacob       . .  499 

The  Grace  of  God  to  His  People. .  500 

The  Believer  Led  to  His  Reward. .  500 

CHAPTER  XL VI. 

The  Descent    of   Jacob  and  his 

Family  into  Egypt        . .         . .  505 

The  Three  Meetings 506 

God  Speaking  in   the  Visions  of 

the  Night 506 

The  Beginning  of  the  Nation     . .  506 
The  Meeting  of  the  Aged  Jacob 

and  his  Lost  Son  Joseph          . .  507 

Guidance        507 

CHAPTER  XLVH. 

Jacob  and  his  Sons  before  Pharaoh  509 

The  Presentation  to  Pharaoh     . .  510 
The  Discipline  of  Life        ..        ..510 


INDEX. 


Joseph's  Policy  in  Egypt  . .         . .  513 
The  Settlement  of  the  Children  of 

Israel  in  Goshen 514 

Jacob's  Residence  in  Egypt        . .  515 

The  Sunset  of  a  Long  Life        . .  516 

Jacob's  Apprehension        . .        . .  517 

CHAPTER  XLVIII. 

Jacob's  Dying  Utterances. .         ..  520 

The  Threefold  Blessing     . .         . .  522 

CHAPTER  XLIX. 

The  Patriarchal  Blessing,  or  the 

Last  Words  of  Jacob      . .        . .  530 


THBMR  PAGE 

Last  Words 531 

Judah's  Portion       532 

The  Coming  of  Shiloh       ..        ..533 

God's  Salvation        534 

A  Dying  Saint's  Exercise . .         . .  534 
The  Separated  One,  or  Joseph  a 

Type  of  Christ 534 

CHAPTER  L. 

The  Funeral  of  Jacob        . .         . .  537 

Retrospect  and  Prospect  . .         . .  538 

The  Last  of  the  House  of  Jacob. .  540 
Intended  Bane  an  Unintentional 

Boon 541 

The  Lessons  of  a  Lift        . .        . .  642 


JH 

liiii 

:;|i;rii|iiii'l 

ill  I 


