»  »■• 

''% 

•  'M'l 

''W- 

& 

-y?jt; 

SHi 

ir 

afc&lji    J- 

iill 

Vff 

•\PA 

i-t-f 

Ji  z. 

mk 

m 

CORNELL 

UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 


The  original  of  this  book  is  in 
the  Cornell  University  Library. 

There  are  no  known  copyright  restrictions  in 
the  United  States  on  the  use  of  the  text. 


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924101104671 


THE 

PULPIT    COMMENTARY, 

EDITED    BY   THE 

VERY  REV.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  D.D., 

DEAN  OF  GLOUCESTER  ; 

AND   BY  THE 

REV.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A. 

WITH 


'  '  INTRODUCTIONS 


BY   THE 


VEN.  AKCHDEACON  F.  W.  FAERAR,  D.D.,  F.R.S.— RIGHl  REV.  H.  COTTERILL,  D.D.,  F.R.S.B, 

—VERT  REV.  PRINCIPAL  J.  TULLOCH,  D.D.— REV.  CANON  G.  EAWLINSON,  M.A. 

— EEV.  A.  PLUMMER,  M.A.,  D.D. 


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
New  York  and  Toronto. 


THE 


PULPIT    COMMENTARY, 


EDITED   BY  THE 


VERY  REV.  II.  1).  M.  SPENCE,  D.D., 


DEAN  OF   GLOUCESTER  ; 
AND   BY   THE 


REV.  JOSEPH    S.   EXELL,   M.A. 


EZEKIEL. 

(ffjeposition : 
By  very  rev.   E.   H.   PLUMPTRE,   D.D., 

LATE   DEAN  OF  WELLS  ; 
AND    BY 

REV.   T.   WHITELAW,  D.D. 

fomiUtics ; 
By  REV.   PROFESSOR   W.   F.   ADENEY,   M.A. 

ISomilies  bji  Various  QVutl)ors : 

REV.  PROF.  J.  R.  THOMSON,  M.A.  REV.  W.  JONES. 

REV.  J.  D.  DAVIES,  M.A.  REV.  W.  CLARKSON,  B.A. 

VOL.  II. 


EUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
New  York  and  Toronto. 


THE 


BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXIL 


Vers.  1,  2. — moreover,  etc.  The  word 
oonneots  what  follows  with  the  word  of  the 
Lord  which  began  in  ch.  xx.  2.  That  con- 
nection is,  indeed,  sufBciently  indicated  by 
the  recnrrenoe  of  the  formula,  "Wilt  thou 
judge?"  (see  note  on  ch.  zx.  4).  In  obedi- 
ence to  the  commands  which  that  question 
implied,  Ezekiel  has  once  more  to  go  through 
Uie  catalogue  of  the  sins  of  Jndah  and 
Jerusalem.  It  is  not  without  significance 
that  he  applies  the  very  epithet  of  bloody 
city  (Hebrew,  dty  of  bloods)  which  Kahum 
(iii.  1)  had  applied  to  Nineveh. 

Yer.  8. — The  oity  sheddeth  blood,  etc.  As 
in  the  great  indictment  of  Isaiah  (i.  15,  21 ; 
ir.  4),  the  sins  of  murder  and  idolatry  are 
grouped  together.  She  sins  as  if  with  the 
purpose  "that  her  time"  (f.e.  the  time  of 
her  punishment)  "  may  come." 

Yer.  4. — Thou  hast  caused  thy  days  to 
draw  near,  etc  As  in  ver.  it,  the  days-  and 
the  years  are  those  of  God's  judgments. 
The  people  had  made  no  effort  to  avert 
their  doom  by  repentance.  They  had,  as  it 
were,  rushed  upon  their  appointed  fate.  So, 
though  in  another  sense,  the  righteous  lives 
of  the  faithful  are  said,  in  2  Pet.  iii.  12,  to 
"hasten  the  coming  of  the  day  of  God." 
Exceptional  evil  and  exceptional  good  alike 
hasten  the  approach  of  the  day  which  is  to 
decide  between  the  two. 

Yer.  5. — Those  that  be  near,  etc.  The 
Hebrew  words  are  both  feminine,  and  refer 
to  the  neighbouring  and  distant  cities  which 
took  up  their  proverbs  of  reproach  against 
the  city,  once  holy  and  faithful,  now 
infamons  (Hebrew,  defiled  in  name)  and 
much  vexed.  The  last  words  point  to 
another  form  of  punishment.  Jerusalem  is 
described  as  in  a  state  of  moral  tumult  and 
X2SKIEL — n. 


disorder  aa  the  oonseqnence  of  its  gnilt 
(oomp.  Amos  iii  9;  Dent.  viL  23;  Zeob. 
xIt.  13,  where  the  same  word  is  rendered  by 
"  tumults  "  and  "  destruction  "). 

Yer.  6. — ^Behold,  the  princes  of  Jndah,  ete. 
For  the  "bloodshed,"  which  was  con^ 
spicuous  among  the  sins,  comp.  ch.  ix,  9; 
xvi.  38;  xxiii.  37,  45;  and  for  special  in- 
stances of  that  sin  among  its  princes,  those 
of  Manasseh  (2  Kings  xxi.  16)  and  Jehoiakim 
(2  KiDg8xxiv.4).  To  their  power ;  Hebrew, 
eaeh  man  according  to  hU  arm,  i.e.  his 
strength.  There  was  no  restraint  upon  the 
doer  of  evil  other  than  the  limitation  of  his 
capacity. 

Yer.  7. — We  pass  to  sins  of  another  kiijd. 
The  fifth  commandment  was  trampled  under- 
foot as  well  as  the  sixth,  and  the  blessings  of 
continued  national  existence  (Exod.  xx.  12) 
was  thereby  forfeited.  The  widow  and  tie 
orphan  and  the  stranger  (we  note  in  ^hat 
last  word  the  width  of  Ezeklel's  sympathies) 
were  oppress-ed  (compare  the  same  grouping 
in  Dent.  xxviL  16,  19). 

Yer.  8. — ^Mine  holy  things,  ete.  The  words 
take  in  the  whole  range  of  Divine  ordinances 
as  affecting  both  things  and  persons.  (For 
"profaning  sabbaths,"  see  ch.  xx.  16.) 

Yer.  9. — Men  that  oarry  tales,  etc.  Hebrew, 
men  of  danders  (comp.  Exod.  xxiii.  1 ;  Lev. 
xix.  16).  The  sin  of  the  informers,  ever 
ready  to  lend  themselves  to  plots  against 
the  life  or  character  of  the  innocent,  was 
then,  as  at  all  times,  the  besetting  evil  of 
corrupt  government  in  the  East.  Compare 
the  story  of  Naboth  (1  Kings  xxi.  10)  and  of 
Jeremiah  (Jer.  xxxvii.  13).  (For  eating  on 
the  mountains,  see  note  on  oh.  xviU.  6 ;  and 
for  lewdness,  that  on  ch.  xvi.  43.)  WbAt 
the  lewdness  consisted  in  is  stated  in  the 
following  verses. 

Ver.  10.— This,  well-nigh  the  vilest  of  all 


THE  BOOK   OF   THE   PROPHET   EZEKIBL.     [ch.  xxii.  1— 31 


forms  of  incest,  against  which  the  horror 
naturalis  of  the  heathen,  as  in  the  story  of 
Hippolytus,  uttered  its  protest,  would  seem 
to  have  been  common  among  the  corruptions 
o"  Israel  (Amos  li.  7;  (Omp.  1  Cor.v.  1).  (For 
the  sin  described  in.  the  second  clause,  see 
notes  on  oh.  xviii.  6.) 

Vers.  11, 12. — The  list  of  sins  followson  the 
lines  of  Lev.  xviii.  9,  15.  (For  those  in  ver. 
12,  see  notes  on  ch.  xviii.  12.)  It  is  to  be  re- 
marked, however,  that  the  prophet  does  not 
confine  himself  to  the  mere  enumeration  of 
specific  sins.  These  are  traced  to  their 
source  in  tliat  "  forgetting  God  "  which  was 
at  once  the  starting-point  and  the  consum- 
mation of  all  forms  of  evil  (comp.  Bom. 
i.  28). 

Ver.  13. — I  have  smitten  my  hand.  The 
gesture,  as  in  ch.  xxi.  14,  17,  was  oue  of 
indignant,  and,  as  it  were,  impatient  com- 
mand. 

Ver.  14. — Can  thine  heart  endure,  etc.? 
The  question  implies  an  answer  in  the 
negative.  Heart  would  fail  and  hands  wax 
feel>le  in  the  day  of  the  Lord's  judgment. 
The  doom  of  exile  and  dispersion  must  come, 
wjth  all  its  horrors ;  but  even  here,  Judah 
was  not,  like  Ammon,  to  be  forgotten  (ch.  xxi. 
32).  Her  punishment  was  to  do  its  work, 
and  to  consume  her  filthiness  out  of  her. 

Ver.  16. — Thou  shalt  take  thine  inherit- 
ance, etc.;  better,  with  the  Revised  Version, 
Eeil,  and  most  other  commentators.  Thou 
shalt  be  profaned  in  thyself,  etc.  The  prophet 
is  still  speaking  of  punishment,  not  of  re- 
stwation. 

Ver.  18. — The  house  of  Israel  is  to  me 
become  dross,  etc.  A  new  parable,  based 
upon  Isa.  i.  22, 23  and  Jer.  vl.  30,  begins,  and 
is  carried  out  with  considerable  fulness.  In 
Mai.  iii.  2,  3  we  have  the  same  imagery. 
Baser  metals  have  been  mingled  with  the 
silver,  and  must  be  burnt  out,  but  there  is 
hope,  as  well  as  terror,  in  the  parable.  Men 
throw  the  mixed  metals  into  the  smelting- 
pot  in  order  that  the  silver  may  be  separated 
from  the  dross  and  come  out  pure  (comp. 
1  Pet.  i.  7).  And  this  was  to  be  the  issue  of 
the  "  fiery  trial  "  through  which  Jerusalem 
and  its  inliabitants  were  to  pass. 

Vers.  23,  24. — A  fresh  section  opens,  and 
the  propliet  addresses  himself,  not  to  Jeru- 
salem only,  but  to  the  whole  land.  A  land 
that  is  not  cleansed.  The  words  admit  of 
the  rendering,  not  shined  upon,  and  this  is 
adopted  by  Keil.  The  land  is  deprived  at 
once  of  the  sunshine  and  the  rain,  which  are 
the  conditions  of  fertility.  The  LXX.  gives 
"  not  rained  upon,"  and  so  the  two  clauses 
are  parallel  and  state  the  same  fact.  So 
Ewaid.    The  Vulgate  gives  immunda,  and 


this  is  followed  both  by  the  Authorized 
Version  and  the  Eevised  Version  (comp. 
Isa.  V.  6 ;  Amos  iv.  7). 

Ver.  25.— A  conspiracy  of  prophets.  The 
prophet's  thoughts  go  back  to  ch.  xiii.  1 — 16, 
from  which,  in  ver.  28,  he  actually  quotes. 
It  is  probable  that,  in  the  interval,  fresh 
tidings  had  reached  him  of  the  evil  work 
which  they  were  doing  at  Jerusalem.  The 
LXX.  a<pT}yoiiievoi  (equivalent  to  "princes") 
suggests  that  they  followed  a  different  text, 
and  this  is  adopted  by  Keil  and  Hitzig.  Like 
a  roaring  lion  (comp.  ch.  xix.  2, 3;  1  Pet.  v.  8). 
The  word  probably  points  to  the  loud  decla- 
mations of  the  false  prophets  (compare,  as  a 
striking  parallel,  Zeph.  iii.  3,  4). 

Ver.  26. — The  sins  of  the  prophets  are 
followed  by  those  of  the  priests.  Their  guilt 
was  that  they  blurred  over  the  distinction 
between  the  holy  and  the  profane  (Revised 
Version,  "common"), between  the  clean  and 
the  unclean  (comp.  ch.  xliv.  23 ;  Lev.  x.  10, 
where  the  same  terms  are  used),  in  what  we 
have  learnt  to  call  the  positive  andceremonial 
ordinances  of  the  Law,  and  so  blunted  their 
keenness  of  perception  in  regard  to  analogous 
moral  distinctions.  Extremes  meet,  and  in 
our  Lord's  time  the  same  result  was  brought 
about  by  an  exaggerated  scrupulosity  about 
the  very  things  the  neglect  of  which  was, 
in  Ezekiel's  time,  the  root  of  the  evils 
which  he  condemns.  This  was  true  gene- 
rally, conspicuously  true  in  the  case  of  the 
sabbath.  Its  neglect  was  a  crying  evil  in 
Ezekiel's  time,  just  as  its  exaggeration  was 
in  the  later  development  of  Judaism. 
Though  in  itself  positive  rather  than  moral, 
to  hide  the  eyes  from  its  holiness  was,  for 
those  to  whom  the  commandment  had  been 
given,  an  act  of  immorality. 

Ver.  27.— Wolves  (comp.  Hab.  i.  8;  Zeph. 
iii.  3 ;  Matt.  vii.  15 ;  Acts  xx.  29). 

Ver  28.— (See  oh.  xiii.  10.)  The  fact  that 
the  prophets  are  addressed  here  gives  some 
force  to  the  idea  that  "  chiefs  "  or  "judges  " 
were  addressed  in  ver.  27. 

Ver.  29. — From  the  classes,  the  prophet 
turns  to  the  masses.  The  people  of  the  land, 
the  common  people  (2  Kings  xxv.  3,  19), 
come  under  the  same  condemnation.  Greed 
of  gain,  the  oppression  of  the  poor  and  the 
stranger,  were  seen  everywhere. 

Ver.  30. — And  I  sought  for  a  man,  eto. 
(For  the  imagery  that  follows,  see  ch.  xiii.  5 ; 
Fs.  cvi.  23.)  The  fact  stated,  as  in  Jer.  v.  1, 
is  that  there  was  no  one  in  all  Jerusalem 
righteous  enough  to  be  either  a  defender  or 
an  intercessor,  none  to  be  a  "  repairer  of  the 
breach"  (Isa.  Iviii.  12).  Nothing  was  left 
but  the  righteous  punishment  proclaimed  in 
ver.  81. 


OH.  XXII.  1— 31.J    TUB  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL. 


HOMILBTICS. 

Ver.  7. — Soeial  tins.  The  wickedness  of  Jerusalem  was  not  confined  to  what  might 
be  called  sins  of  religion — idolatry,  sabbath-breaking,  profanation  of  sacred  things,  etc. 
It  was  witnessed  in  gross  outrages  of  social  rights.  Failure  in  religion  leads  to  failure 
in  society.  Social  wrongs  are  sins  in  the  sight  of  Heaven  which  Grod  observes,  con- 
demns, and  punislies. 

I.  Loss  OF  FILIAL  REVERENCE.  "  They  havo  set  light  by  father  and  mother."  The 
Hebrew  Law  attached  great  weight  to  the  duty  children  owe  to  their  parents  (Exod.  xx. 
12).  The  requirement  to  honour  father  and  mother  was  "  the  first  commandment 
with  promise  "  (Eph.  vi.  2).  The  breach  of  this  law  was  a  sin  in  the  sight  of  God ;  so 
the  prodigal  son  confessed  that  he  had  sinned  against  Heaven  (Luke  xv.  21).  Christ 
condemned  the  mean  devices  by  which  some  Jews  in  his  day  endeavoured  to  escape 
from  their  filial  duty  (Matt.  xv.  4 — 6).  In  this  respect,  the  Bast,  which  we  often 
despise  for  its  supposed  corruption  and  barbarism,  is  in  advance  of  the  West.  One  of 
the  most  ominous  portents  among  us  is  a  growing  levity  in  the  treatment  of  parental 
claims.  No  doubt  it  is  well  that  the  old  stiffness  of  the  family  relationship  has  broken 
down,  and  that  there  is  more  mutual  confidence  between  parents  and  children  than  there 
was  in  the  olden  times.  Parental  tyranny  is  no  more  admirable  than  filial  rebellion. 
The  formal  manners  which  separated  the  older  generation  from  the  younger  were  hurtful 
to  both.  But  with  a  fuller  recognition  of  the  rights  of  the  young,  and  a  greater  freedom 
of  intercourse  between  the  older  and  the  younger  members  of  a  family,  we  are  in 
danger  of  losing  filial  reverence — one  of  the  most  sacred  of  duties.  Well  might  King 
Lear  exclaim — 

"  Sharper  than  a  serpent's  tooth  it  is 
To  have  a  thankless  child  "  I 

n.  OpPBBSSiotr  OF  THE  STRANGBB.  Many  and  merciful  were  the  regulations  of  the 
Jewish  Law  in  favour  of  "  the  stranger  that  is  within  thy  gates."  In  spite  of  the 
supposed  Jewish  exclusiveness — a  trait  of  late  Judaism  rather  than  of  ancient  Israelite 
manners — the  foreigner  had  a  higher  status  in  Jerusalem  than  was  accorded  by  the 
liberal-minded  Greeks  at  Athens  to  the  Xenoi.  Oppression  of  foreign  residents  was  a 
sign  of  peculiar  wickedness.  The  Jevrs  were  reminded  that  because  they  had  been 
received  as  guests  in  Egypt  and  then  betrayed  by  their  hosts,  they  should  feel  peculiar 
sympathy  with  aliens.  Let  us  beware  of  selSsh  national  exclusiveness.  This  is  not 
patriotism;  it  is  narrow-minded,  selfish  injustice  and  inhumanity.  Observe  some  of 
the  cases  in  which  the  sin  of  oppressing  strangers  may  be  committed.  1.  Unhindnest 
to  foreign  immigrants.  England  is  the  boasted  shelter  of  the  world's  refugees.  May 
she  never  forfeit  her  good  name  from  greedy  jealousy !  Missions  to  Italian  pedlars, 
lodging-houses  for  Lascars,  etc.,  claim  Christian  attention  for  the  saving  of  the  poor 
and  friendless  from  cruel  wrong.  2.  Crudty  to  foreigners  abroad.  England  has  vast 
relations  with  feeble  inferior  races.  The  great  empire  of  India  is- entrusted  to  our  care. 
In  Africa  we  have  peculiar  influence.  The  abominations  of  the  treatment  of  women 
in  the  former  case,  and  the  evil  of  the  traffic  in  drink  and  fire-arms  in  the  latter  case, 
are  instances  of  gross  oppression  of  strangers. 

III.  VBXiNa  THE  FATHBELBsa  AND  THE  WIDOW.  In  the  absence  of  a  poor  law,  special 
attention  was  given  to  the  provision  for  orphans  and  widows  by  private  charity  under 
the  Jewish  economy.  But  the  rough  justice  of  the  East  often  failed  to  secure  to  the 
helpless  even  their  own  rights.  Times  of  lawlessness  were  times  when  those  poor  persons 
suffered  grievously.  There  is  always  a  danger  that  the  helpless  should  be  trodden  down 
in  the  fierce  race  of  life.  We  cannot  excuse  such  cruelty  by  quoting  Adam  Smith  and 
Mill,  as  though  the  laws  of  political  economy  were  sacred  mandates  or  decrees  of  fate, 
instead  of  being  simply  generalizations  of  conduct  prompted  by  self-interest.  We  are 
called  to  higher  aims — to  sympathy  and  mutual  helpfulness. 

Ver.  13. — Dishonest  gain.  I.  Dishonest  gain  is  a  common  bouecb  of  wealth.  We 
set  before  our  children,  in  their  copy-books,  the  motto,  "  Honesty  is  the  best  policy ; " 
but  in  the  experience  of  life  it  is  found  that  dishonesty  is  often  a  more  successful  worldly 
policy.     Thieves  fatten  on  their  booty,  and  swindlers  live  in  lordly  palaces.     There  is 


4  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxii.  1—81. 

not  only  the  vulgar  dishonesty  that  steals  by  direct  robbery.  We  have  our  civilized 
and  refined  dishonesty — a  dishonesty  which  contrives  to  keep  on  the  near  side  of  the 
law,  and  yet  is  not  the  less  real  theft.  The  "  sweater"  is  a  thief.  The  promot'^r  of 
bubble  companies  is  a  robber  on  a  colossal  scale.  The  breadth  of  the  area  embraced, 
the  number  of  the  dupes  victimized,  and  the  amount  of  the  gain  realized,  do  not  destroy 
the  guilt  of  the  robbery ;  they  heighten  it.  There  was  a  certain  frank  daring  about 
the  old  highwaymen  which  entitled  them  to  the  respect  of  those  who  condemned  t  sir 
lawlessness,  in  comparison  with  which  the  sneaking  dishonesty  of  those  who  steal  w  fl- 
out risking  their  lives  or  liberties  is  a  despicable  cowardice. 

II.  Dishonest  gain  is  got  by  mubdbrous  obueltt.  In  our  text  Bzekiel  associates 
dishonest  gain  with  blood-guiltiness.  The  thief  is  near  to  becoming  a  murderer ;  the 
brnglar  carries  fire-arms.  The  immense  growth  of  the  custom  of  insuring  the  lives  of 
young  babies,  together  with  the  frightful  extent  of  infant  mortality,  forces  us  to  the 
conclusion  that,  either  by  neglect — the  cruellest  kind  of  murder — or  by  the  more 
merciful  means  of  direct  suffocation,  numbers  of  children  are  yearly  slaughtered  by 
their  parents  for  the  sake  of  the  paltry  gain  obtained  from  the  insurance.  We  cannot 
say  much  of  the  old  pagan  habit  of  exposing  children  while  this  more  vile,  because 
more  cunning  and  mercenary,  crime  is  commonly  committed  in  Christian  England.  It 
is  the  duty  of  all  good  citizens  to  be  on  the  watch  for  cases  of  cruelty  to  children  among 
their  neighbours — often  practised  in  the  decent  homes  of  thrifty  folk.  In  other  ways 
theft  may  mean  murder — slow  murder  of  the  most  painful  kind.  The  customer  helps 
to  murder  the  shopkeeper  when  he  takes  an  imjust  advantage  of  competition.  He  who 
steals  a  man's  livelihood  virtually  steals  his  life,  for  it  is  no  credit  to  the  thief  that  his 
victim  may  be  saved  from  .starvation  by  the  charity  of  others. 

III.  Dishonest  gain  calls  down  the  vengeance  or  Heaven.  God  has  smitten 
hit  hand  at  it.  Dishonesty  can  only  appear  the  best  policy  for  a  season.  In  the  long 
run  the  old  proverb  is  certain  to  justify  itself.  1.  National  dishonesty  will  bring 
vengeance  on  a  nation.  The  English  cotton-trade  has  suffered  materially  through  the 
cheating  custom  of  adding  weight  to  goods  shipped  to  the  East  by  sizing  the  fabric. 
If  trade  with  lower  races  is  corrupt,  unjust,  and  cruel,  the  wrong  will  be  avenged  either 
by  the  loss  of  the  trade  or  in  the  hatred  earned  by  the  traders.  The  oppression  of  the 
poor  in  our  midst  by  those  who  make  dishonest  gains  in  grinding  down  their  employes 
will  be  assuredly  avenged  by  some  awful  social  revolution,  unless  the  injustice  is  speedily 
atoned  for  by  more  fair  treatment.  2.  Private  dishonesty  will  ttring  vengeance  on  the 
tinner.  God  sees  and  judges  the  man  who  enjoys  dishonest  gain.  If  he  does  not 
sufifer  on  earth  from  the  enmity  he  has  stirred,  this  Dives  will  certainly  not  be  carried 
with  the  Lazarus  he  oppressed  to  Abraham's  bosom.  His  gold  will  scorch  him  like  fire 
in  some  dread  hell. 

Ver.  14. — A  total  collapse.  I.  Delusive  hope.  Consider  what  it  rests  on.  1.  A 
stout  heart.  The  sinner  believes  in  himself.  He  feels  brave  and  confident.  No  doubt 
this  temper  of  mind  will  help  him  over  a  number  of  difficulties.  But  will  it  stand  in 
the  awful  day  of  Divine  judgment?  2.  Strong  hands.  The  sinner  is  conscious  of 
stiength  in  himself  and  in  his  possessions,  in  his  body  and  mind,  and  in  the  resources 
of  his  ill-gotten  gain.  The  wicked  king  owns  his  army ;  the  bad  millionaire  holds  his 
money ;  the  sinful  man  of  humbler  pretensions  relies  on  his  wits,  his  energy,  or  at  worst 
on  his  luck.  3.  Present  prosperity.  The  text  refers  to  future  days,  when  God  will  deal 
with  the  sinner.  Those  days  have  not  yet  dawned,  and  all  is  fair  at  present.  The 
natural  tendency  is  to  believe  that  the  world  will  continue  as  it  is  now.  "  For  as  in 
the  days  that  were  before  the  Flood  they  were  eating  and  drinking,  marrying  and  givin^ 
in  marriage,  until  the  day  that  Noah  entered  into  the  ark  "  (Matt.  xxiv.  38).  "^ 

II.  Certain  failure.  The  text  is  in  the  form  of  a  question,  but  it  plainly  suggests 
only  one  dismal  answer.  The  delusive  hope  must  fail.  Note  the  grounds  of  the  certain 
failure.  1.  Human  feebleness.  It  is  a  case  of  the  strength  of  man  matched  ai'ainst  the 
might  of  God.  Who  can  doubt  the  issue?  In  such  a  contest  the  stoutest  heart  must 
fail  and  the  strongest  arm  go  down.  Man  is  the  lord  of  creation ;  but  he  is  a  feeble 
insect  before  Omnipotence.  2.  Divine  constancy.  "I  the  Lord  have  spoken  it,  and 
will  do  it."  God  is  true  to  his  word.  He  does  not  mock  his  children  with  idle  threats. 
He  is  too  sure  to  fail.    3.  Changed  circumstances.    "  In  the  days  that  I  shall  deal  with 


OH.xxn,.l— 31.J    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZBKIEL.  6 

thee."  Those  days  have  not  yet  arrived.  Therefpre  we  cannot  comfort  ourselves  that 
we  shall  be  safe  in  the  future  because  we  are  comfortable  enough  at  present.  The 
coming  days  will  wear  a  new  aspect.  We  are  not  fortified  against  winter  storms  by  the 
enjoyment  of  summer  sunshine.  The  ease  with  which  we  glide  down  the  stream  ii  no 
guarantee  that  the  thunder  of  the  falls  will  never  be  reached.  The  delusive  hope 
which  shines  fair  in  the  old  times  of  Divine  waiting  will  be  shattered  to  fragments  in 
the  new  days  of  Divine  judgment. 

III.  Consequent  misery.  The  question  of  the  text  is  not  answered ;  but  the  doleful 
silence  with  which  it  is  received  suggests  the  misery  that  is  to  follow.  If  heart  and 
hand  fail,  the  ruin  aud  wretchedness  must  be  complete.  While  a  good  man  fighting 
against  adversity  is  said  to  be  a  sight  for  the  admiration  of  gods  as  well  as  men,  a  bad 
man  crushed  by  misery  is  only  an  object  of  horror.  The  stout  heart  of  honest  intentions 
can  bear  up  against  unmerited  woes  and  find  in  its  own  fortitude  a  certain  solace.  But 
this  solace  will  be  wanting  in  the  collapse  of  the  false  hope  of  the  sinner.  Then  will 
follow  the  deepest  misery,  the  sense  of  being  confounded,  the  helplessness  of  being 
swept  away  in  a  flood  of  destruction.  Pain  is  not  the  worst  evil.  The  depth  of  hell 
is  reached  when  heart  and  strength  fail,  and  the  sinner  loses  all  power  to  withstand  his 
fate.    Hence  the  supreme  need  of  a  Saviour  (Bom.  viii.  1). 

Vers.  18 — 22. — Dross.  I.  The  nature  of  the  dross.  Israel  is  compared  to  dross. 
The  nation  should  have  been  God's  precious  metal,  pure  white  silver.  By  sin  it  has 
become  base  metal.  1.  Dross  is  an  inferior  substance.  Characters  are  deteriorated  by 
sin.  Wickedness  lowers  the  very  nature  of  a  man.  We  cannot  commit  sin  and  stiU 
keep  our  persons  in  primitive  worth  and  dignity.  We  are  either  exalted  or  degraded 
by  our  deeds ;  they  react  upon  our  very  being  and  assimilate  it  to  themselves.  Thus 
silver  becomes  dross ;  the  man  made  in  the  image  of  God  becomes  a  child  of  the  devil 
(John  viii.  44).  2.  Dross  may  he  of  various  kinds.  There  are  brass,  tin,  iron,  and  lead 
in  the  furnace.  Yet  all  are  counted  as  dross.  In  human  life  there  are  various  types  of 
evil.  Vice  is  more  picturesque  than  virtue  because  it  is  more  variegated.  But  one 
common  stamp  is  on  every  evil  coin — the  same  diabolical  effigy.  3.  Dross  is  in  the  place 
of  good  metal.  It  is  mixed  with  silver  (ver.  20).  Moreover,  it  pretends  to  be  the 
good  metal.  Brass  would  pass  as  gold,  and  tin  as  silver.  Sin  is  generally  hypocritical. 
It  craves  the  honour  of  goodness.  Wheat  and  tares  grow  together.  Good  and  bad  fishes 
come  to  land  in  one  net.     Society  contains  the  good  and  the  bad  in  close  association. 

II.  The  evil  of  the  dkoss.  1.  It  is  directly  hwtful.  Brass  is  poisonous.  Tin  is 
soft,  and  the  vessel  made  with  it  will  stand  neither  the  heat  nor  the  wear  which  silver 
is  capable  of  enduring.  All  the  base  metals  readily  corrode,  while  the  precious  metals 
can  be  kept  bright.  The  dross  of  bad  character  is  poisonous,  and  a  source  of  weakness 
and  corrosion  to  society.  2.  It  is  deceptive.  Passing  itself  off  as  better  metal,  it 
succeeds  in  taking  the  place  of  honour  that  does  not  belong  to  it.  Deceitful  men  worm 
their  way  into  posts  of  dignity  which  they  degrade  by  their  evil  character.  3.  It 
is  injurious  to  the  good  metal.  The  choice  silver  is  lost  in  the  dross  when  the  various 
metals  are  amalgamated  into  one  lump.  Good  men  are  injured  by  bad  companions. 
The  presence  of  wicked  characters  hinders  the  work  of  the  good  who  are  joined  with 
them,  in  a  common  enterprise. 

III.  The  treatment  op  thA  dross.  1.  God  deeds  with  it.  We  cannot  always 
detect  its  presence  or  distinguish  between  it  and  good  metal.  Both  tares  and  wheat 
are  to  be  let  grow  together  until  the  harvest  (Matt.  xiii.  30).  God  knows  the  secrets 
of  all  hearts.  The  great  Assayer  will  not  be  deceived  by  the  most  specious  forgery.  2. 
Qod  tries  it  in  the  furnace.  Israel  was  to  go  into  the  furnace  of  affliction,  that  the 
dross  might  be  detected.  In  her  prosperity  and  confidence  she  listened  to  the  prophets 
of  smooth  things,  who  flattered  her  into  the  notion  that  she  was  a  choice  nation  of  rare 
quality — pure  silver  compared  to  the  base  metal  of  the  Gentile  world.  The  Captivity 
tried  this  boast.  Not  only  was  the  land  laid  waste  and  the  city  of  Jerusalem  destroyed, 
but  the  mass  of  the  Jewish  nation  proved  itself  unequal  to  cope  with  its  difficulties,  and, 
failing  to  retain  its  distinctive  character,  melted  away  into  the  neighbouring  nations, 
leaving  only  a  remnant — the  true  silver — to  carry  on  the  Hebrew  tradition  and  earn 
the  right  of  restoration.  Persecution  would  show  how  much  worldly  dross  there  is  in 
the  Church  (Matt.  xiii.  21).     Trouble  reveals  the  dross  of  individual  souls. 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIBL.    [oh.  xxn.  1—31. 


Vor.  26. — Eoly  and  profane.  I.  The  thub  distinction  between  holy  and 
PBOFANE.  The  Jewish  Law  made  elahorate  distinctions  hetween  the  clean  and  the 
unclean,  some  of  which  were  founded  on  naoral  differences,  some  on  sanitary  reqmre- 
ments.but  others  on  merely  symbolical  and  ceremonial  points.  Many  of  these  distinc- 
tions were  only  temporary,  as  that  between  certain  foods,  and  that  between  Jews  and 
Gentiles,  the  abolition  of  which  was  revealed  to  St.  Peter  in  his  vision  at  Joppa  (Acts 
X.  15).  Christ  denounced  the  folly  of  formal  distinctions  (Matt.  xv.  11).  St.  Paul 
cLiimed  large  liberty  in  this  respect,  and  pointed  out  the  danger  and  delusion  of  tl;e 
will-worship  which  was  associated  with  too  punctilious  an  observauce  of  minute  external 
distinctions  (Col.  ii.  23).  Nevertheless,  there  remain  true  distinctions  apart  from  the 
formal  and  ceremonial  differences.  1.  The  distinction  hetween  holiness  and  sin.  In  this 
distinction  we  have  tha  root  out  of  which  the  ceremonial  notions  of  cleanness  and 
uncleanness  sprang.  The  formal  notions  may  pass,  the  moral  foundation  is  eternal. 
2.  The  distinction  hetween  the  service  of  Qod  and  the  service  of  the  world.  We  do  not 
want  to  regard  the  temple  as  the  only  sacred  place,  so  that  the  forum  must  be  relegated 
to  profanity.  In  the  Christian  age, "  Holiness  unto  the  Lord  "  is  not  only  to  be  inscribed 
on  the  bells  of  the  high  priest ;  it  is  to  be  seen  on  the  bells  of  the  horses  (Zech.  xiv. 
20).  But  this  means  a  dedication  of  all  to  the  service  of  Grod.  If  we  neglect  that 
service  and  sink  into  secularism,  we  fail  to  observe  the  holiness ;  we  then  make  all 
things  profane — temple  as  well  as  forum. 

II.  The  sin  op  destboyino  the  distinction  between  sacred  and  peofanb.  We 
Lave  not  now  to  do  with  deSnite  Jewish  offences  against  the  Law  of  Moses,  in  which  the 
finely  drawn  distinction  between  the  clean  and  the  unclean  is  disregarded.  Sacred 
things  of  the  temple  were  desecrated  by  the  insolent  heathen  at  Belshazzar's  feast,  but 
they  had  been  first  desecrated  by  Jews  in  the  house  of  God,  while  they  were  touched 
with  sinful  hands  and  used  without  holy  motives.  They  who  are  most  careful  to  keep 
up  the  ceremonial  distinction  may  yet  profane  sacred  things.  1.  The  sabbath  is  pro- 
faned, not  only  when  the  shops  are  open  and  when  crowds  throng  the  public  resorts 
of  amusement,  but  when  the  congregations  at  church  play  the  part  of  ostentatious 
Pharisees,  and  mock  God  with  pretentious  prayers  while  their  hearts  and  thoughts  ar« 
far  from  him.  2,  The  Sihle  is  profaned  when  it  is  quoted  to  prop  up  a  private  opinion 
in  disregard  to  the  royal  rights  of  truth.  3.  The  gnspd  is  profaned  when  it  is  preached 
for  the  sake  of  winning  popularity  or  raising  money,  to  the  neglect  of  the  claims  of 
Christ  and  the  needs  of  mankind.  4.  The  conscience,  which  should  be  a  holy  standard 
of  right,  is  profaned  when  it  is  distorted  by  casuistry  into  excusing  a  lack  of  integrity. 
5.  The  body  is  profaned  when,  instead  of  being  a  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  it  is  an 
instrument  of  sin  (1  Cor.  vi.  15).  6.  The  Church,  which  should  be  the  bride  of  the 
Lamb,  is  profaned  when  she  sinks  into  worldly  living  or  is  divided  against  herself  in 
bitter  uncharitableness. 

Ver.  30. — A  man  to  stand  in  the  gap.  The  nation  of  the  Jews  is  in  a  desperate 
condition.  Their  defence  is  broken  down,  and  God  is  ready  to  rush  in  through  the 
breach  with  devastating  vengeance.  But  he  is  loth  to  do  so,  and,  though  his  is  the 
threatening  power,  yet  in  a  wonderful  clemency  God  looks  for  some  one  to  fill  the  gap 
and  so  to  save  the  devoted  nation.     Unhappily,  no  such  man  is  to  be  found. 

I.  The  breach  is  made.  The  Jews  have  been  already  beaten  in  the  war  with 
Babylon.  In  the, corresponding  experience  of  souls  the  same  lamentable  condition  is 
observable.  The  sinner  sets  himself  against  God  with  a  brazen  face,  and  makes  the 
stoutest  fence  of  worldly  precautions  wherewith  to  protect  himself.  But  alas  1  this  is 
a  feeble  structure.  We  have  not  to  wait  long  before  we  discover  that  it  has  been  broken 
through.  Trouble  has  come.  Misfortune  has  fallen  on  the  self-complacent  sinner.  Or 
it  may  be  he  has  suffered  from  severe  sickness,  that  has  weakened  the  energies  of  his 
body.  Possibly  his  mental  faculties  have  begun  to  fail.  He  receives  unpleasant 
warning  of  his  mortality.     There  is  a  breach  in  his  hedge. 

II.  God  is  preparing  to  come  thkouoh  the  breach.  He  cannot  disregard  the  sins 
of  his  people,  for  he  is  their  King,  and  ho  must  act  justly.  He  might  even  make  a 
breach  at  any  moment,  and  in  the  awful  crash  of  judgment  sweep  away  the  strongest 
fortifications  of  the  soul  as  so  much  dust  and  rubbish.  Much  more,  then,  must  the 
enfeebled  soul,  with  ruined  fences,  stand  open  to  the  irresistible  wrath  of  God  1    So  long 


OH.  XXII.  1—31.]    THE   BOOK   OP  THE  PK0PHI,T  BZEKIEL.  7 

as  we  live  in  sin  we  are  inviting  Grod  to  come  in  vengeance  through  the  ever-widening 
breaches  in  our  paltry  defences. 

III.  God  wishes  the  breach  to  be  filled.  Here  is  the  wonderful  part  of  our 
subject.  Though  we  deserve  God's  vengeance,  he  is  reluctant  to  wreak  it  upon  us. 
While  he  is  necessarily  preparing  to  smite  the  sinner,  he  longs  to  spare  him.  When 
the  soul  is  indifferent  to  its  own  danger,  God  grieves  over  it  and  looks  out  for  a  way  of 
escape.     God  now  longs  to  save  us  before  we  think  of  seeking  for  our  deliverance. 

IV.  A  MAN  IS  NEEDED  TO  FILL  THE  bbeaoh.  The  Jews  canuot  do  this  for  them- 
selves. They  do  not  see  their  danger,  or  they  are  too  busily  engaged  upon  the  walls,  or 
no  one  among  them  is  strong  and  brave  enough  to  take  so  perilous  a  position.  We 
cannot  mend  the  breach  in  our  own  lives.  We  cannot  fortify  our  own  souls  against  the 
wrath  of  God. 

V.  No  MAN  IS  FOUND  TO  FILL  THE  BBBACH.  Jeremiah  might  have  seemed  the  most 
likely  saviour  in  this  time  of  extreme  need ;  but  even  that  great  prophet  was  not  able 
to  stand  alone  against  the  iniushing  army  of  vengeance.  No  man  can  save  his 
neighbour  from  sin  and  ruin.  The  evil  of  the  world  is  too  great  for  all  the  good 
men  in  it  to  resist.  The  case  of  man  is  hopeless  if  it  is  left  only  to  his  fellow-man  to 
save  him. 

VI.  GoD  HAS  BENT  HIS  SoN  TO  FILL  THE  BBEAOH.  God  looked  to  See  if  there 
was  any  to  save,  and  wondered  that  there  was  no  man.  Then  his  own  arm  brought 
salvation.  1.  Christ  came  as  a  man.  A  man  was  wanted.  God  coming  in  wrath 
against  mankind  must  be  met  by  a  representative  man.  2.  Christ  came  into  the  world. 
He  stood  in  the  breach  and  met  the  fury  of  the  storm.  He  was  "  made  sin  for  us," 
aud  faced  the  curse  of  the  cross.     3.  Christ  came  in  the  might  of  God. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOES. 

Vers.  1 — 12, — The  reproach  of  Jerusalem.  Patriot  as  he  was,  Bzekiel  was  not,  like 
gome  sincere  patriots,  blind  to  his  country's  faults.  His  conscience  ami  judgment  were 
enlightened,  and  his  emotional  nature  was  rendered  especially  sensitive,  so  that  a  just 
and  deep  impression  was  made  upon  his  mind  by  the  contemplation  of  his  countryman's 
errors  and  iniquities.  Leaders  of  public  opinion,  teachers  of  the  time,  are  ever  in 
danger  of  flattering  those  among  whom  their  lot  is  oast,  with  whom  their  interests  are 
identified.  "Set  Ezekiel  proves  himself  to  have  the  true  spirit  of  the  prophet,  who 
rises  superior  to  this  temptation,  and  whose  motto  is,  "  Be  just,  and  fear  not  1 " 

I.  The  reasons  fob  beproaoh  existino  in  the  mobal  condition. of  the  inha- 
bitants OF  Jerusalem.  The  catalogue  of  the  people's  sins  is  both  a  long  and  an  awful 
one.  It  suffices  to  mention  these  as  boldly  charged  upon  them  by  the  faithful  prophet 
of  the  Lord.  1.  Idolatry.  2.  Violence  and  murder.  3.  Disregard  of  parents,  i. 
Oppression  of  strangers,  of  the  widows  and  fatherless.  5.  Profanation  of  the  sabbath. 
6.  Lewdness  and  vile  indulgence  of  lust.  7.  Bribery.  8.  Extortion.  Was  ever  such 
an  indictment  brought  against  a  community  ?  The  marvel  is,  not  that  the  threatened 
judgment  came,  but  that  it  was  so  long  delayed. 

IL  The  reproach  as  brought  by  men  against  the  inhabitants  of  Jebusalbm. 
It  certainly  seems  strange,  all  but  incredible,  that  the  highly  favoured  Jerusalem 
should  be  famed  among  the  very  heathen  for  degradation  in  iniquity  and  moral 
debasement.  But  the  language  of  Bzekiel  is  explicit ;  and  he  would  be  more  likely  to 
soften  than  to  exaggerate  the  charge.  Jerusalem  a  reproach,  a  mocking,  infamous, 
du61ed,  full  of  tumult  1'  How  are  the  mighty  fallen  1  The  city  of  the  great  King,  the 
seat  of  the  temple  of  Jehovah,  the  home  of  the  consecrated  priesthood, — infamous 
among  the  surrounding  idolaters  for  flagitious  violation  of  those  very  moral  laws 
which  the  city  was  coniecrated  to  conserve  \ 

III.  The  reproach  bhouqht  by  God  against  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem. 
The  simple  dignity  of  the  Divine  reproach  is  beyond  all  rhetoric,  all  denunciation. 
"  Thou  hast  forgotten  me,  saith  the  Lord  God."  Here,  indeed,  was  the  real  secret  of 
the  defection  and  rebellion,  of  the  vices  and  crimes  of  the  sons  of  Israel.  Had  they 
kept  Jehovah  in  memory,  they  would  have  kept  themselves  free  from  the  errors  ana 
the  follies  into  which  they  fell.     Alter  all  that  the  Lord  had  done  for  them,  after  all 


8  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZBKIBL.    [oh.  xxn.  1—31. 

his  forbearance  and  long-suffering,  they  nevertheless  forgot  him  1  There  was  but  one 
hope  for  Jerusalem,  but  one  way  of  recovery  and  restoration — that  they  should  bring 
again  to  memory  him  whom  they  had  not  only  forsaken,  but  forgotten. — T. 

■y^ers.  13 — 22. — The  dross  in  the  furnace.  God's  mercy  and  kindness  scarcely  any- 
Hfjiere  appear  more  manifest  than  in  bis  method  of  dealing  with  his  erriug  people,  whom 
he  subjects  to  chastening  and  discipline  with  the  view  of  purging  away  their  faults. 

Se  figure  employed  by  Bzekiel  in  this  passage  occurs  in  other  of  the  prophetic  writings, 
ere  is  some  obscurity  in  his  expression ;  for  it  seems  as  if,  to  convey  the  fulness  of 
lus  meaning,  he  represents  the  people  first  as  dross,  and  then  as  the  metal  from  which 
ihe  dross  is  burnt  away.  Perhaps  his  meaning  is  that  the  ore  which  is  smelted  contains 
a  i^ery  large  proportion  of  dross  compared  with  the  genuine  metaL 

L  Thb  value  which  the  Lobd  assigns  to  Judah.  This  is  very  qualified.  There 
Ig,  indeed,  metal,  whether  more  precious  as  silver  or  less  so  as  iron.  Yet  there  is  much 
^at  is  worthless ;  so  that  the  Lord  says,  "  Ye  are  all  become  dross."  The  inference  is 
^t,  however  there  may  be  latent  some  possibility  of  good,  this  can  only  become  actual 
^ter  the  subjection  of  it  to  much  discipline. 

IL  The  tebatmbnt  to  which  the  Lord  subjects  Judah.  The  ore  is  gathered, 
cast  into  the  furnace,  left  there,  to  be  blown  upon  by  the  blast  of  indignation,  and  sub- 
jected to  the  heat  of  the  fire,  until  it  be  melted  in  the  midst  thereof.  Through  such  a 
^ocess  must  Judah  pass  before  God  could  take  pleasure  therein.  Siege,  suffering, 
pivation,  pestilence,  famine,  decimation,  captivity,  reproach,  mockery, — such  were  the 
differings  appointed  for  the  people  of  Jerusalem.  And,  as  a  matter  of  fact  and  history, 
0od  did  not  spare  Jerusalem — ^favoured  though  the  city  had  been.  He  poured  out 
^  fury  upon  it,  and  for  a  time  and  for  a  purpose  withheld  from  it  his  clemency  and 
OQigmassion. 

ni.  The  utter  incapacity  and  helplessness  of  Judah  to  resist  or  to  enduek 
w)|AT  thb  Lord  appoints.  This  is  expressed  very  powerfully  in  ver.  14,  "  Can 
tt^ne  heart  endure,  or  can  thine  hands  be  strong,  in  the  days  that  T  shall  deal  with 
ttjee  ?  "  We  are  reminded  of  the  inquiry,  "  Who  may  abide  the  day  of  his  coining  ? 
tW^  who  shall  stand  when  he  appeareth  ?  for  he  is  like  a  refiner's  fire."  The  discipline 
rfOod's  justice  is  enough  to  overcome  and  break  down  the  hard  and  obdurate  hearts 
of  men.  They  cannot  accept  it  with  equanimity.  They  must  profit  by  it  or  be 
0(m|umed  by  it. 

Iv.  The  purpose  op  the  Lord's  severe  treatment  of  Judah.  Ammon  was  cast 
Into  the  fire,  to  be  consumed  into  smoke  and  to  vanish  away ;  Judah,  in  order  to 
llBnement  and  purification.  The  intention  of  Eternal  Wisdom  and  Goodness  was  and 
e#r  is  that  the  dross  may  be  consumed  in  the  furnace  of  affliction  and  trial,  and  thus 
du't  the  pure  metal  may  be  brought  forth  fit  for  the  use  and  for  the  pleasure  of  the 
Most  High.— T. 

Vers.  23 — 31. — Common  corruption  of  all  classes.  To  complete  the  picture  of  the 
debasement  and  moral  deterioration  of  Jerusalem,  the  prophet  reviews  the  several  classes 
•I  which  the  population  of  a  great  city  is  composed.  He  finds  in  every  class  signs  of 
departure  from  God,  signs  of  abandoment  to  the  vices  and  crimes  which  prevailed 
among  the  heathen  around. 

I.  The  prophets,  who  should  speak  God's  truth,  dbobivk  and  lib,  and  thus 
UIBLEAD  THE  PEOPLE.  In  what  Bcuse  these  worthless  deceivers  could  have  been  called 
prophets,  it  is  not  easy  to  determine.  Probably  they  were  persons  who  pretended  to 
ihU  ofBce,  and  who  were  deemed  by  their  neighbours  entitled  to  the  appellation.  But 
a  prephet  is  one  who  speaks  for  God  as  his  representative;  and  of  all  men  deception  on 
his  part  is  reprehensible.  Prophets  are  nothing  if  not  true.  Yet  in  how  many  cases  have 
the  multitude  been  misled  by  crafty,  designing  pretenders  to  Divine  illumination !  And 
aot  the  multitude  only,  but  even  kings  and  commanders  have  too  often  given  themselves 
ovejr  to  the  virtual  dictation  of  men  no  better  than  soothsayers  and  diviners. 

II.  Thb  pbibsts,  who  should  keep  and  reverence  the  Divisb  Law,  tiolatb 
and  profane  it.  The  priesthood  must  be  regarded  as  part  of  a  system,  the  object  of 
which  was  to  maintain  right  relations  between  the  Almighty  Ruler  and  his  chosen 
people.     Themselves  divinely  instituted,  they  were  peculiarly  bound  to  observe  every 


OH,  xxn.  1—31.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIBL.  9 

ordinance  and  regulation  of  Heaven.  Tet  these  are  the  men  whom  the  inspired  prophet 
of  the  Lord  denounces  as  doing  violence  to  God's  Law,  profaning  holy  things,  as  break- 
ing down  the  distinction  between  clean  and  unclean — a  distinction  which  it  was  especially 
their  office  to  maintain.  How  should  they  be  clean  who  bear  the  vessels  of  the  Lord  1 
"Like  priest,  like  people."  The  moral  degradation  of  the  priesthood  promoted  the 
degeneration  of  the  nation. 

IlL  The  princes,  who  shottls  protect  theib  subjects  and  promote  theib 
WELFARE,  BAVIN,  SPOIL,  AND  DESTROY.  Judah  had  been  afflicted  with  a  succession  of 
monarchs  who  did  that  which  was  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord.  The  deeper  the  nation 
sank  in  poverty,  huaiiliation,  and  despondency,  the  greater  the  opportunity  for  those  in 
authority,  by  self-denial  and  sympathy,  to  improve  the  state  of  the  nation.  But  the 
wretched  rulers  who  found  themselves  in  place  and  power  appeared  indifferent  to 
everything  except  their  own  selfish  interests,  and  did  their  worst  to  hasten  and  to  com- 
plete the  ruin  which  was  manifestly  so  near. 

IV.  The  people,  who  should  live  in  the  exercise  of  justice,  sympathy,  and 
CONCORD,  OPPRESS  and  BOB  THEIR  NEIGHBOURS.  National  life  may  be,  and  is  in  many 
cases,  an  opportunity  for  the  display  of  civic  and  social  virtues.  But  the  abuse  of  the 
best  of  institutions  may  make  them  evil.  It  is  the  spirit  iu.  which  the  life  of  the  nation 
is  lived  which  determines  the  condition  of  the  people.  Differences  in  power,  intelligence, 
and  wealth  always  have  existed,  and  always  will  exist,  in  every  community.  But 
•uperiority  ought  to  be  regarded  as  a  trust  to  be  employed  for  the  public  good.  Where 
it  is  used  for  purposes  of  oppression,  especially  for  the  oppression  of  the  poor  and  the 
Btranger,  such'  a  state  of  things  is  a  sure  presage  of  national  downfall.  "  When  all 
men  live  like  brothers,"  a  nation  may  defy  a  public  enemy,  a  foreign  foe.  But  suspicion 
and  discord  lay  the  axe  at  the  root  of  the  tree. 

Such  being  the  state  of  Jerusalem  and  Judah,  all  classes  striving  together  as  it  were 
for  the  nation's  ruin,  no  wonder  that  to  the  prophet  the  outlook  appeared  gloomy,  and  the 
day  of  retribution  near  at  hand.  "  I  sought,"  says  Jehovah,  "  for  a  man  among  them, 
that  should  make  up  the  fence,  and  stand  in  the  gap  before  me  for  the  land,  that  I  should 
not  destroy  it :  but  I  found  none." — T, 

Vers.  1 — 16. —  The  prophet  on  the  judgment-seat.  As  among  men  there  occurs,  now 
«nd  again,  a  great  assize,  when  flagitious  deeds  are  examined  and  flagrant  offenders 
judged,  so  God  has  his  seasons  when  high-handed  crime  is  arrested,  and  the  offenders 
feel  the  reality  of  Divine  justice.  Penalties  are  not  awarded  in  the  dark.  Good  men 
see  clearly  the  equity  of  the  proceeding  and  the  extreme  patience  of  the  Judge.  God 
places  his  doings  in  the  public  light. 

I.  The  INDICTMENT.  It  is  a  long  indictment,  and  embraces  all  classes  of  people. 
1.  Oross  abuse  of  power.  The  princes — i.e.  heads  of  tribes — used  their  power  for  the 
destruction  of  life,  not  to  preserve  it.  The  sceptre  was  turned  into  a  dagger.  Even 
neglect  to  protect  innocent  life  becomes  murder.  2.  Idolatry.  "  The  city  maketh  idols 
against  herself."  In  Israel  idolatry  was  trtason.  It  was  the  rejection  and  humbling  of 
their  proper  King.  3.  Murder.  "  The  city  sheddeth  blood."  He  who  begins  to  despise 
God  soon  learns  to  under-value  human  life.  Their  children  were  made  to  pass  through 
the  fire.  Violence  against  property  and  life  abounded.  4.  Filial  disobedience.  "  In 
tliee  have  they  set  light  by  father  and  mother."  The  slaughter  of  innocent  children 
soon  produced  its  natural  fruit.  Children  grew  up  without  natural  affection.  If  the 
central  sun  be  destroyed,  the  planets  will  soon  rush  headlong  to  mutual  destruction. 
5.  Tyranny.  "  They  have  dealt  by  oppression  with  the  stranger :  they  have  vexed 
the  fatherless  and  the  widow."  All  regard  for  humane  virtues,  for  common  morality, 
had  vanished.  It  is  the  custom  throughout  the  Bast  to  show  hospitality  to  strangers. 
This  is  considered  a  virtue  of  the  first  order ;  yet  even  this  ordinary  virtue  was  trampled 
underfoot.  6.  Profanity.  "  Thou  hast  despised  mine  holy  things,  and  hast  profaned 
my  sabbaths."  In  Israel  this  was  a  most  flagrant  sin.  God  had  given  them  tokens 
of  his  presence  and  favour  which  he  had  not  given  unto  others ;  therefore  to  profane 
these  sacred  tokens  was  to  disgrace  God  in  the  eyes  of  the  surrounding  heathen.  It 
was  as  if  a  soldier  on  the  battle-field  trailed  his  country's  flag  in  the  mire.  It  was  as  if 
a  married  woman  should  fling  her  wedding-ring  into  the  fire.  7.  Murderous  intrigues. 
"  Men  carry  tales  to  shed  blood."    Untruthfulness  is  a  common  sin  among  the  Orientals. 


10  THE   BOOK  OF   THE   PROPHET   BZIiKIEL.     [ch.  xxii.  1—31. 

Lying  intrigues,  to  encompass  a  rival's  death,  are  plentiful  as  haws.  This  sin  the 
Hebrews  had  copied  from  their  neighbours.  8.  Unchastiiy  and  adultery.  "'J'hey 
commit  lewdness."  The  sanctity  of  the  marriage-tie  disappeared.  Virtuous  affection 
was  strangled  by  animal  lust.  Incest  and  other  abominations  followed.  The  people 
gradually  sank  to  the  Ifivel  of  the  beasts.  All  the  special  dignity  and  nobleness  of 
manhood  died  out.  Degradation  of  humanity  spread.  9.  Judicial  bribery.  "  They  have 
taken  gifts  to  shed  blood."  Not  an  upright  judge  remained.  Wickedness,  like  an 
epidemic,  spread  and  infected  every  office  and  every  rank.  The  fountain  of  justice 
became  a  fountain  of  corruption  and  death.  10.  Avarice.  There  were  gains  that  were 
dishonest.  Extortion  was  on  every  side.  Avarice,  like  a  cancer,  had  eaten  out  all  the 
healthy  flesh  of  honour  and  sincerity.  Gold  became  to  them  a  god.  11.  Forgetfulneas 
of  Qod.  This  was  the  root  and  the  crown  of  their  sins.  The  very  memory  which  God 
created  refused  to  entertain  him ;  as  if  a  house  which  a  man  himself  had  built  should 
shut  its  doors  against  him.  When  God  is  driven  out,  all  his  retinue — purity,  strength, 
unity,  peace,  honour — go  with  him.     This  is  a  long  and  dismal  catalogue  of  crimes. 

II.  The  assize-DAT.  "  Thou  hast  caused  thy  days  to  draw  near."  1.  Tliis  assize 
ts  certain.  "  I  the  Lord  have  spoken  it,  and  I  will  do  it."  As  surely  as  night  succeeds 
to  day,  the  reckoning-day  of  God's  justice  comes;  It  has  never  yet  failed.  Neither 
the  man  nor  the  nation  that  has  defied  God  has  on  any  occasion  escaped,  2,  The 
proceeding  will  be  strictly  equitable.  The  people  had  made  alliance  with  the  gods  of 
the  heathen,  therefore  among  the  heathen  shall  they  dwell,  3.  The  irresistibleness  of 
Ood's  judicial  act.  "  Can  thine  hands  be  strong  in  the  day  that  I  shall  deal  with  thee?" 
From  his  bar  there  is  no  appeal.     Against  his  power  it  is  vain  to  strive. 

in.  The  verdict.  "  Thou  shalt  show  her  all  her  abominations,"  Here  is  threatened : 
1,  Self -discovery.  All  sin  has  a  subtle  potency  to  blind  the  judgment.  Men  are  prone 
to  measure  themselves  only  by  others,  or  to  look  at  their  conduct  only  in  the  mirror  of 
their  neighbours'  conduct.  But  when  the  clear  light  of  eternal  truth  flashes  upon 
the  soul,  past  sins  start  into  gigantic  magnitude ;  they  are  like  mountains  for  their 
size,  2,  Public  shame.  "  ThereCore  I  have  made  thee  a  reproach  unto  the  heathen," 
This  is  a  stinging  verdict.  Even  the  heathen,  so  much  more  barbarous  and  degraded 
than  were  the  Hebrews  aforetime,  shall  now  reproach  them  for  their  flagitious  deeds. 
The  fall  is  all  the  greater  if  we  have  first  climbed  to  some  stupendous  height,  3.  Over- 
whelming affliction.  "  Can  thine  heart  endure  in  the  days  that  I  shall  deal  with  thee?" 
When  Cain  felt  the  full  stress  of  his  sentence,  he  cried  out, "  My  punishment  is  greater 
than  I  can  bear!"  The  just  wrath  of  the  Creator:  how  can  frail  man  endure  it?  4. 
Banishment.  "I  will  disperse  thee  ...  in  the  countries."  In  the  same  measure  in 
which  the  Hebiews  had  been  confident  and  boastful  in  their  own  land,  was  the  gravamen 
of  the  sentence  that  scattered  them  among  many  nations.  To  be  shut  out  from  one's 
own  land  and  home  is  a  heavy  stroke.  .6.  Abando'.iment.  "  Thou  shalt  take  thine 
inheritance  in  thyself."  In  other  words,  thou  shalt  shift  for  thyself:  thou  shalt  find 
no  good  beyond  thyself.  When  men  persist  in  saying  to  God,  "  Depart  from  mel  " 
God  will  say  to  them,  "  Depart  from  mel "     To  be  left  to  ourselves  is  heaviest  doom. 

IV.  The  ultimate  dbsiqn.  ,  "I  will  consume  thy  filthiness  out  of  thee."  1. 
Purification,  lids  abandonment  is  only  for  a  time.  When  penalty  and  suffering 
have  accomplished  their  end,  God  promised  to  return  to  them  in  mercy.  Meanwhile, 
alas  1  many  would  be  out  off  by  death.  Only  a  remnant  would  partake  of  the  distant 
grace.  So  it  came  to  pass.  The  seventy  years'  banishment  purged  out  effectually  the 
spirit  of  idolatry.  It  was  a  severe,  yet  a  successful,  remedy  1  2.  Surrender.  "  Thou 
shalt  know  that  I  am  the  Lord,"  This  knowledge  would  be  not  only  intellectual,  but 
practical.  It  was  a  knowledge  of  God  as  Supreme  King  and  Judge.  It  was  a  know- 
ledge that  produced  fruits  of  obedience.  "  A  burnt  child  dreads  the  fire : "  so  the  painful 
experiences  through  which  that  generation  passed  loft  wholesome  effects  upon  their 
children.    Full  surrender  is  the  only  safety, — D, 

Vers,  17—22. — The  smelting  furnace.    For  every  material  thing  there  is  a  test.    We 

may  know  metals  by  their  action  under  chemical  agents,  or  by  the  furnace-flame.    We 

can  test  gases  by  their  power  to  sustain  life  or  to  sustain  flame.     We  can  test  dynamical 

forces  by  electricity  or  by  their  power  to  create  motion.      So  for  human  character 

here  is  a  crucial  test. 


oil.  XXI.  1— 31.J    THE   BOOK  OP  THE   PROPHET   E2BK1EL.  11 

I.  Adulterated  metal.  The  seed  of  Israel  had  sadly  degenerated.  They  had 
bean,  compared  with  other  people,  as  silver  and  gold.  Now  they  were,  in  God's 
esteem,  only  as  dross,  and  "his  judgment  is  according  to  truth."  What  virgin  gold 
is  in  a  human  kingdom,  true  righteousness  is  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  Loyalty  and 
love  are  the  coins  current  in  God's  empire.  A  good  man  is  worth  more  than  argosies 
of  gold  and  rubies.  Wisdom,  righteousndfes,  and  love, — these  are  the  only  durable  riches. 
They  exalt  and  enrich  men  for  time  and  for  eternity.  Selfishness,  disobedience,  and 
rebellion  are  the  dross  and  rust  which  eat  out  the  very  life  of  the  sou-.  Real  riches 
become  part  and  parcel  of  the  man. 

II.  The  fuenace-fibb.  What  the  material  flame  of  the  furnace  is  to  metal?,  God's 
anger  is  to  human  character.  It  tests  the  qualities  of  mind  and  heart.  As  metals  have 
no  power  to  resist  being  cast  into  the  furnace,  neither  has  any  man  power  to  exempt 
himself  from  Divine  chastisement.  It  comes  upon  all  in  some  form  or  other.  In 
some,  humility,  submission,  resignation,  appear.  'These  are  precious  metals — the  gold 
and  silver  ot  moral  excellence.  In  others,  fretfulness,  remorse,  defiance,  are  the  effect. 
These  are  base  dross,  destitute  of  any  worth.  A  myriad  ofmen  know  nothing  about  their 
characters  until  trial,  in  some  sort,  comes  upon  them.  If  milder  forms  of  chastisement 
will  not  melt  the  hardened  metal,  the  anger  of  Jehovah  will  wax  hot.  There  shall  be, 
sooner  or  later,  self-revelation— the  sooner  the  better. 

III.  Separation.  The  furnace  is  not  merely  a  test  of  metal  and  alloy;  it  further 
separates  the  one  from  the  other.  Among  men  this  separation,  resulting  from  God's 
visitations,  is  twofold.  1.  This  separation  is  seen  as  one  between  man  and  man.  The 
precious  and  the  vile  I  ecome  more  distinguishable  one  from  the  other.  2.  The  separa- 
tion is  internal.  In  those  who  turn  the  affliction  to  good  account  there  follows  self- 
inspection,  self-denial,  pruning.  The  idol  is  dethroned.  The  vice  is^  abandoned.  The 
evil  is  withstood  and  fought.  Kefinement  goes  on  within.  The  darkness  and  the  light 
separate.     The  man  comes  out  of  the  process  as  gold  that  is  purified. 

IV.  Destruction.  The  residuum  of  alloy  is  cast  out  as  base  and  worthless.  God 
will  not  tolerate  falsehood,  hypocrisy,  or  any  iniquity  in  his  kingdom.  "  Every  liar 
shall  have  his  portion  in  the  lake  that  burneth  with  fire  and  brimstone."  The  liar  is 
not  only  the  man  who  speaks  with  intention  to  deceive;  he  is  the  man  who  has 
preferred  to  deceive  himself  rather  than  face  the  truth.  Unquestionably,  separation, 
accomplished  io  the  furnace,  is  with  a  view  to  refinement,  but  also  with  a  view  of 
destruction  to  the  worthless  dross.  Every  man  has  his  face  either  toward  purity  or 
toward  perdition.  The  processes  of  God's  furnace  are  going  on  among  us  every  day. 
Are  we  getting  better  or  worse  ? — D. 

Vers.  23 — 31. — Highest  rank  among  men  not  sought.  The  development  of  human 
civilization  demands  an  organized  system.  Men  require  to  be  classified  according  to 
their  ability  and  fitness  to  contribute  to  the  welfare  of  the  whole.  For  the  public 
benefit  there  must  be  ruler  and  subject,  master  and  servant,  teacher  and  taught, 
commander  and  army.  Each,  according  to  his  office,  has  duties  and  obligations,  the 
neglect  of  which  brings  instant  loss  and  distant  ruin. 

I.  Official  rank  has  definite  responsibilities.  We  cannot  hold  any  office  nor 
possess  any  wealth  without  incurring  corresponding  obligation.  There  is  force  in  the 
French  proveib,  " Noblesse  oblige ! ''  Although  the  sovereign  may  be  above  written 
law,  it  is  only  for  expediency'.',  sake,  and  certainly  he  is  under  law,  equally  binding, 
though  not  expressed  in  words.  Every  person  holding  office  of  whatever  sort  or  kind 
has  undertaken  a  definite  responsibility  to  protect  or  promote  certain  interests  of  the 
people.  He  may  be  responsible  for  social  order,  or  for  immunity  against  invaders,  or 
for  advancement  of  learning,  or  for  development  of  wealth,  or  for  the  maintenance  of 
religion.    But  some  responsibility  springs  out  of  his  office. 

II.  High  rank  does  not  secure  high  character.  Character  may  and  does  qualify 
for  office;  but  official  position  does  not  generate  moral  character.  High  rank  has 
special  temptations  and  special  perils.  Rank  is  only  a  change  of  situation ;  office  is 
simply  a  change  of  occupation.  They  involve  changes  only  outside  the  man;  they  do 
not  touch  or  purify  his  real  self.  A  man  may  be  an  apostle,  and  yet  be  harbouring  a 
demon  in  his  heart.    A  man  may  be  a  prophet,  yet  need  himself  to  be  taught. 

III.  Rank  has  a  crowd  op  imitators  among  inferior  orders.     Because  the 


12         THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPHET  BZBKIEL.  [ch.  xxu.  1— 3L 

princes,  priests,  and  prophets  acted  basely  in  Israel,  therefore  the  "people  of  the  land 
used  oppression  and  exercised  robbery  "  (ver.  29).  Vice  is  more  contagious  than  fever. 
Rank  gives  artificial  importance  to  its  possessor,  and  exerts  extensive  influence  either 
for  evil  or  for  good.  As  a  monument  attracts  the  notice  of  human  eyes  in  proportion 
to  the  elevation  on  which  it  is  raised,  so  according  to  the  station  in  society  a  man 
occupies  he  will  have  more  or  fewer  imitators.  Wide  influence  is  a  perilous 
possession. 

rV.  The  hmhest  bank  is  not  desibbd  among  men.  "  I  sought  for  a  man  who 
should  make  up  the  hedge,  and  stand  in  the  gap  before  me  for  the  land,  that  I  should 
not  destroy  it :  but  I  found  none."  Real  and  thorough  reform  is  always  unpopular. 
Men  are  often  eager  to  reform  their  institutions  or  their  laws,  but  always  backward  to 
reform  themselves.  A  faithful  prophet,  who  shall  recall  the  people  back  to  Grod,  has 
always  been  a  scarce  man.  Nor  is  this  the  only  time  in  which  God  expressed  his 
surprise  that  no  intercessor  for  men  could  be  found.  Yet  this  is  the  noblest  office  any 
man  can  occupy.  Its  aim  is  the  very  loftiest.  It  brings  man  into  companionship  with 
God.  Its  fruits  are  permanent,  yea,  eternal.  Alongside  this  order  of  service  every 
other  rank  pales  into  insignificance.     A  mediator  is  a  peerless  man ! 

V.  The  influbnob  op  one  man  may  be  enormous.  Had  one  real  man  been  found 
to  reprove  the  people,  restore  religious  worship,  and  plead  with  God,  Israel  might  have 
been  spared  its  overthrow.  One  man  may  save  a  nation  or  plunge  it  into  perdition. 
Paul,  on  board  ship,  obtained  the  lives  of  all  the  crew.  The  intercession  of  Moses 
brought  a  deed  of  pardon  for  the  Hebrew  host.  For  David's  sake  God  conferred  large 
favours  on  the  nation.  Luther's  firm  faith  brought  deliverance  both  spiritual  and 
temporal  to  all  Europe.  What  one  man  can  do  no  language  can  portray,  imagination 
can  scarce  conceive.  A  man  of  wisdom,  piety,  and  faith  may  quietly  revolutionize  the 
world. — D. 

Vers.  1 — 16. — An  appalling  indictment  and  a  just  judgment.  "  Moreover  the  word 
of  the  Lord  came  unto  me,  saying.  Now,  thou  son  of  man,  wilt  thou  judge,  wilt  thou 
judge  the  bloody  city  ?  "  etc.  "  This  chapter,"  says  Fairbairn,  "  stands  closely  related 
to  the  last  chapter,  and  may  fitly  be  regarded  as  supplementary  to  it ;  the  former 
having  presented  a  striking  delineation  of  the  Lord's  purpose  to  execute  the  severity  of 
his  displeasure  upon  the  people  of  Jerusalem,  while  this  returns  to  lay  open  the  fearful 
mass  of  corruption  on  account  of  which  such  severity  was  to  be  inflicted.  In  what  is 
written  here  there  is  nothing  properly  new;  in  its  general  purport  it  is  a  repetition  of 
the  charges  which  were  urged  in  ch.  xx. ;  and  so  the  chapter  begins  much  in  the  same 
way — with  a  call  upon  the  prophet  to  judge  the  people,  and  set  before  them  their 
iniquities.  There,  however,  the  charge  took  the  form  of  an  historical  review  for  the 
purpose  of  connecting  the  present  state  of  wickedness  with  the  past,  and  showing  how 
continuously  the  stream  of  corruption  had  flowed  through  all  periods  of  their  national 
existence.  Here,  on  the  other  hand,  the  prophet  looks  exclusively  to  the  present,  and 
brings  out  in  fearful  array  the  many  heinous  and  rampant  sins  which  were  crying  in 
Heaven's  ear  for  vengeance."    -We  have  in  the  text — 

I.  An  appalling  oatalooue  of  the  people's  sins.  1.  The  nature  of  these  sins. 
(1)  Forgetfulness  of  God.  "Thou  hast  forgotten  me,  saith  the  Lord  God."  We 
mention  this  first,  because  it  was  the  root-sin  out  of  which  all  the  others  sprang. 
Men  foiget  God's  holy  authority,  his  constant  and  universal  presence,  and  his  great 
goodness,  and  thus  the  principal  restraints  from  sin  are  removed.  "  Forgetfulness  of 
God  opens  the  window  to  every  wicked  action."  (2)  Blood-guiltiness.  This  charge 
is  repeatedly  and  variously  stated.  "The  bloody  city.  ...  A  city  that  sheddeth 
blood  in  the  midst  of  her.  .  .  .  Thou  art  become  guilty  in  thy  blood  that  thou  hast 
shed."  This  may  refer,  as  Schroder  suggests, "  to  murderous  deeds  generally ;  specially 
to  judicial  murders,  consequently  to  the  shedding  of  the  innocent  blood  of  righteous. 
God-fearing  men,  prophets,  etc.  (of.  Matt,  xxiii.  37).  The  city  which  had  its  name 
from  'peace'  has  become  a  city  of  death  to  those  who  require  true  peace."  Even  the 
princes  were  guilty  of  violence  and  bloodshed.  "  Behold,  the  princes  of  Israel,  every 
one  according  to  his  power,  have  been  in  thee  to  shed  blood"  (ver.  6).  They  did  not 
recognize  the  sacred  duties  or  the  solemn  accountabilities  of  their  exalted  station. 
They  ruled  not  in  accordance  with  right,  but  according  to  their  might;  and  that  mi?hj 


OH.  xxir.  1— 31.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  BZEKIEL.  13 

tney  exercised  barbarously  and  bloodily.  And  there  were  those  who  were  guilty  of 
bloodshedding  by  reason  of  their  false  witness.  "  Slanderous  men  have  been  in  thee 
to  sbed  blood."  They  were  malignant  slanderers  of  the  innocent,  who  because  of  their 
daaders  were  adjudged  to  death.  Moreover,  mercenary  and  unjust  judges  condemned 
meu  to  death  for  bribes.  "  In  thee  have  they  taken  bribes  to  shed  blood  "  (ver.  12). 
And  it  is  probable  that  Schroder  is  correct  in  his  opinion  that  both  the  false  witnesses 
and  the  unrighteous  judges  were  thus  wickedly  employed  by  the  violent  and  murderous 
princes.  Thus  in  Jerusalem,  "  the  holy  city,"  human  life  was  no  longer  regarded  as  a 
sacred  thing.  It  was  ruthlessly  slaughtered  in  defiance  of  law,  in  defiance  of  the 
feelings  of  our  common  humanity,  and  in  defiance  of  the  Creator  and  Father  of  men. 

(3)  Idolatry.  "  A  city  .  .  .  that  maketh  idols  against  herself  to  defile  her.  Thou 
art  defiled  in  thine  idols  which  thou  hast  made.  .  .  .  And  in  thee  they  have  eaten 
upon  the  mountains."  (On  the  extent  of  their  idolatry  and  the  pollutions  thereof,  see 
ch.  Tiii.  5 — 16,  and  our  notes  thereon.)  The  eating  upon  the  mountains,  the  seats  of 
idol-worship,  refers  to  the  eating  of  things  sacrificed  unto  idols  (cf.  ch.  xviii.  6, 11). 

(4)  Disregard  of  the  tenderest  and  most  sacred  obligations  towards  their  fellow-men. 
"  In  thee  have  they  set  light  by  father  and  mother  :  in  the  midst  of  thee  have  they 
dealt  by  oppression  with  the  stranger :  in  thee  have  they  wronged  the  fatherless  and 
the  widow."  Loving  respect  to  parents  is  commanded  and  encouraged  in  the  Law  of 
the  Lord  (Exod.  xx.  12 ;  Lev.  xix.  3 ;  Deut.  v.  16).  The  New  Testament  enforces  the 
game  obligation  (Matt.  xy.  4  j  xix.  19  ;  Eph.  vi.  1 — 3) ;  and  the  best  feelings  of  the 
human  heart  plead  for  its  observance.  But  in  Jeiusalem  there  were  those  who  set  at 
naught  this  obligation.  God  had  made  the  cause  of  the  stranger,  the  widow,  and  the 
fatherless  in  a  special  manner  his  own,  and  repeatedly  enjoined  righteousness  and 
kindness  in  the  treatment  of  them  (Exod.  xxii.  21 — 24 ;  Deut.  x.  18, 19 ;  xxvii.  19 ; 
Ps.  X.  14, 18 ;  Ixviii.  5 ;  cxlvi.  9 ;  Jer.  vii.  6  ;  Zeoh.  vii.  9, 10).  Yet  there  were  those 
in  Jerusalem  who  opposed  and  wronged  them.  (5)  Profanation  of  Divine  institutions. 
*•  Thou  hast  despised  mine  holy  things,  and  hast  profaned  my  sabbaths."  The  holy 
things  comprise  "  all  that  the  Holy  One  has  instituted,  consecrated,  and  commanded  " — 
the  priests,  the  temple,  the  sacred  vessels,  the  sacrifices  and  sacraments,  and  all  other 
religious  ordinances  of  his  appointment.  These  they  had  despised.  And  the  sabbath 
they  had  profaned  (cf.  eh.  xx.  12,  24).  "  He  profanes  the  sabbath  who  does  not 
celebrate  it,  who  celebrates  it  ill,  or  who  consecrates  it  to  the  service  of  sin"  (Schroder). 
(6)  Unchastity  in  its  most  revolting  forms  (vers.  10,  11).  On  the  first  clause  of 
ver.  10,  cf.  Lev,  xviii.  8 ;  xx.  11 ;  1  Cor.  v.  1 ;  on  the  second,  cf.  Lev.  xviii.  19 ;  xx.  18 ; 
on  the  first  clause  of  ver.  11,  cf.  Lev.  xviii.  20 ;  xx.  10 ;  on  the  second,  cf.  Lev.  xviii.  15 ; 
XX.  12 ;  and  on  the  third,  cf.  Lev.  xviii.  9 ;  xx.  17.  (7)  Covetousness  in  its  worst 
manifestations.  "  In  thee  have  they  taken  bribes  to  shed  blood ;  thou  hast  taken 
usury  and  increase,  and  thou  hast  greedily  gained  of  thy  neighbours  by  oppression  " 
(ver.  12).  Covetousness  in  their  judges  was  so  extreme  that  they  accepted  bribes  to 
condemn  the  innocent  to  death.  "  Usury  is  the  profit  exacted  for  the  loan  of  money, 
increase  that  which  is  taken  for  goods ;  both  are  alike  forbidden  (Lev.  xxv.  36 ; 
Deut.  xxiii.  19)."  Yet  in  Jerusalem  they  had  taken  both.  And  taking  advantage  of 
their  neighbours'  distress  and  need,  they  had  oppressed  them  by  exacting  exorbitant 
interest  on  any  loan  granted  for  their  help.  Such  were  the  sins  charged  against  the 
people  of  Judah  at  this  time.  2.  The  scene  of  these  sins.  Jerusalem.  In  this  para- 
graph we  have  the  words,  "  in  thee,"  or  "  in  the  midst  of  thee,"  not  less  than  twelve 
times.  This  was  a  grievous  aggravation  of  their  sins  that  they  were  committed  in 
Jerusalem.  Jerusalem  was  spoken  of  as  "  the  holy  city ; "  it  was  the  seat  of  the 
worship  of  the  true  and  holy  God ;  it  was  celebrated  in  sacred  song  as  the  dwelling- 
place  of  the  Most  High  (Ps.  Ixxvi.  2) ;  and  it  was  favoured  religiously  above  any  other 
city  in  the  world.  But  now  it  had  become  "  the  bloody  city,"  the  "  defiled"  city,  the 
home  of  the  foullest  crimes.  "  A  Jerusalem  may  become  a  Sodom,  a  holy  city  a  den 
of  murderers."  And  if  it  do  so,  its  former  privileges  aggravate  its  guilt  and  augment 
its  doom  (cf.  Matt.  xi.  20 — 24 ;  Luke  xii.  47,  48).  3.  The  maturity  of  these  sin$, 
"Thou  hast  caused  thy  days  to  draw  near,  and  art  come  even  unto  thy  years"  (ver.  4j 
cf.  oh.  xxi.  25,  29).  By  reason  of  its  sins  Jerusalem  had  grown  ripe  for  the  sickle  of 
the  Divine  judgment.  By  the  extent  and  enormity  of  its  transgressiouB  it  had  hastened 
the  time  of  its  doom.     In  the  history  of  persistent  wickedness  there  comes  a  crisi  - 


14  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZBKIBL.    [oh.  xxii.  1—31. 

when  the  evil-doers  are  ripe  for  judgment ;  and  then  the  Divine  executioners  go  forth 
against  them. 

II.  The  Divine  visitation  on  account  op  the  people's  sins.  1.  They  become 
a  reproach  among  the  nations.  "Therefore  have  I  made  thee  a  reproach  unto  the 
nations,  and  a  mocking  to  all  the  countries.  Those  that  be  near,  and  those  that  be  far 
trom  thee,  shall  mock  thee,  thou  infamous  one  and  full  of  tumult."  We  noticed  (on 
oh.  xxi.  28)  how  the  Ammonites  reproached  the  people  of  Judah,  and  were  to  be 
punished  for  so  doing.  Yet  although  the  people  of  Ammon  had  no  right  to  reproach 
their  suffering  neighbours,  the  Jews  deserved  reproach.  Jerusalem  had  made  itself 
infamous  by  its  wickedness  before  it  became  a  reproach  and  a  mocking  unto  the  nations. 
"  Righteousness  exalteth  a  nation ;  but  sin  is  a  reproach  to  any  people."  2.  They  shall 
he  dispersed  among  the  nations.  "  And  I  will  scatter  thee  among  the  nations,  and 
disperse  thee  through  the  countries."  We  have  noticed  this  point  in  ch.  v.  12 ;  xii. 
1 — 16;  XX.  23  (cf.  Deut.  iv.  27;  xxviii.  25,  64).  3.  They  shall  be  dishonoured  in  the 
sight  of  the  nations.  "  And  thou  shalt  be  profaned  in  thyself,  in  the  sight  of  the 
nations,"  etc.  (ver.  16).  "Thou  shalt  by  thine  own  fault  forfeit  the  privileges  of  a 
holy  nation."  Mark  the  retributiveness  of  this.  "Jerusalem  has  desecrated  the  holy 
things  of  the  Lord  (ver.  8) ;  therefore  shall  it  also  be  desecrated  for  a  requital  (ver.  16). 
It  has  wickedly  insulted  the  dignity  of  God ;  for  this  it  must  suffer  the  loss  of  its  own 
dignity  "  (Hengstenberg).  4.  They  would  be  unable  to  witKstand  this  visitation  of 
judgment.  "  Can  thine  heart  endure,  or  can  thine  hands  be  strong,  in  the  days  that  1 
shall  deal  with  thee  ? "  (ver.  14).  Says  Greenhil'i,  "  0  Jerusalem !  be  thine  heart 
never  so  stout  or  strong,  my  judgments  will  be  too  heavy  for  thee  to  bear  them ;  when 
they  come,  thine  heart  will  fail  thee,  fail  thee  of  counsel,  that  thou  shalt  not  know 
what  to  do,  and  fail  thee  of  strength,  that  thou  shalt  not  be  able  to  do  what  thou 
knowest."  When  God  in  judgment  visits  any  one,  "  heart  and  hand,  courage  and 
power,  fail "  (of.  Job  xl.  9 ;  Ps.  Ixxvi.  7 ;  Nah.  i.  6). 

Conclusion.  Many  are  the  lessons  deducible  from  our  subject.  We  mention  three. 
1.  The  fearful  growth  of  sin.  Forgetfulness  of  God  may  develop  into  idolatry, 
adultery,  murder.  2.  The  essential  ruinousnesa  of  sin.  It  is  of  its  very  nature  to 
blight  and  destroy  everything  that  is  true  and  beautiful,  wise  and  good,  right  and 
strong,  both  in  individuals  and  communities.  "  Sin,  when  it  is  full-grown,  bringeth 
forth  death."  3.  The  righteous  judgment  of  Ood  against  sin.  (Rom.  ii.  2 — 11.) 
—W.J. 

Vers.  17 — ^22. — Deplorable  deterioration  and  deserved  destruction.  "  And  the  word 
of  the  Lord  came  unto  me,  saying,  Son  of  man,  the  house  of  Israel  is  to  me  become 
dross,"  etc.    Notice — 

I.  The  deplobable  betbhioeation  or  the  house  of  Israel.  1,  Here  are  several 
varieties  of  sinful  character.  We  will  notice  them  as  they  are  here  adduced, 
(1)  Dross.  "  The  house  of  Israel  is  to  me  become  dross ;  .  .  .  they  are  the  dross  ol 
silver."  This  does  not  mean  ore  which  contains  silver,  but  dross  which  has  been 
separated  from  the  silver — the  refuse  of  dirt  and  rubbish  which  is  removed  from  the 
precious  metal  in  the  cleansing,  melting,  and  refining  of  it.  The  people  of  Judah  and 
Jerusalem  had  become  "  the  ignoble  dross  of  noble  silver.''  "  The  metaphor  denotes 
the  corruption  of  the  people,  who  had  become  like  base  metal."  (2)  "  Brass  "  probably 
indicates  the  hardihood  of  the  people  in  sin ;  that  they  had  become  impudent  ip 
wickedness  (cf.  Isa.  xlviii.  4).  (3)  "  Tin "  is  suggestive  of  hypocrisy,  being  brilliant 
in  appearance,  but  inferior  in  substance  and  value.  So  there  were  those  in  Jerusalem 
who  made  great  profession  of  true  religion,  but  whose  moral  cliaracter  and  conduct 
were  base.  (4)  "  Iron  "  may  denote  harshness  and  cruelty.  That  such  was  a  charac- 
teristic of  some  of  their  great  men  and  rulers  is  clear  from  ver.  27 ;  ch.  xxxiv.  2 — 4; 
and  Zeph.  iii.  3.  (5)  "  Lead,"  pliable,  yet  not  precious  as  compared  with  silver  and 
gold,  indicates  the  moral  dulness  and  stupidity  of  the  house  of  Israel.  They  were 
pliable  to  evil,  yet  not  available  for  any  hiirli  or  holy  uses  (cf.  Jer.  iv.  22).  Thus  in 
Jerusalem  there  were  various  types  of  evil  character ;  and  these  types  are  reproduced 
in  our  own  age  and  country.  2.  Here  is  one  characteristic  which  marks  each  of  these 
varieties  of  sinful  character.  They  were  each  and  all  marked  by  degeneracy.  In  every 
one  of  these  classes  of  evil  character  there  had  been  a  lamentable  deterioration.     "  Thy 


OH.  XXII.  1—31.]     THE   BOOK   OF   THE   PROPHET   EZEKIEL.  15 

silver  is  become  dross,  thy  wine  mixed  with  water."  "  How  is  the  gold  become  dim ! 
how  is  the  most  pure  gold  changed  1 "  Thus  the  prophets  Isaiah  and  Jeremiah  lamented 
this  deterioration.  (1)  There  was  degeneracy  of  moral  character.  Their  affections 
were  corrupted;  their  principles  were  degraded;  their  conscience,  having  been  often 
set  at  naught,  was  debased.  So  in  the  sight  of  him  to  whom  all  hearts  are  open  they 
had  become  as  dross.  "The  house  of  Israel  is  become  dross  unto  me."  Beware  of  the 
beginnings  of  sin,  the  initial  stages  of  this  degeneration  of  moral  character.  (2)  Dege- 
neracy of  religious  services.  This  deterioration  is  forcibly  set  forth  and  sternly  rebuked 
in  Isa.  i.  11 — 17.  Moreover,  they  had  become  idolaters :  how,  then,  could  their  worship 
of  the  true  God  be  genuine  and  acceptable  ?  When  personal  character  degenerates,  the 
quality  of  the  religious  service  rendered  must  decline.  (3)  Degeneracy  of  national 
position  and  power.  The  might  and  majesty  of  their  kingdom  were  almost  entirely 
departed.  Their  national  independence  was  quite  gone.  When  moral  deterioration 
once  powerfully  sets  in  amongst  any  people,  deterioration  in  all  other  forms  quickly 
follows.     Says  Robertson,  "The  destiny  of  a  nation  is  decided  by  its  morals." 

II.  The  determined  destruction  of  the  house  op  Israel.  1.  The  gathering 
of  the  doomed  people  for  destruction.  "Thus  saith  the  Lord  God;  Because  ye  are  all 
become  dross,  behold,  therefore  I  will  gather  you  into  the  midst  of  Jerusalem,"  etc. 
(vers.  19,  20).  When  pressed  by  their  Chaldean  enemies  the  people  from  far  and  wide 
took  refuge  in  Jerusalem,  trusting  to  its  forces  and  fortifications  for  safety.  So  that 
city  became  as  it  were  the  furnace  in  which  they  were  consumed  by  the  trijde  fire  of 
famine,  pestilence,  and  sword.  Mark,  how  naturally  and  easily  God  effects  his  purposes. 
He  has  not  to  build  the  furnace  for  their  destruction:  it  is  already  built.  He  has  not 
to  force  them  into  that  furnace  by  supernatural  means :  in  their  approaching  troubles 
they  will  hasten  into  it  of  their  own  accord.  He  controls  all  things  for  the  executioB 
of  his  deep  and  righteous  designs.  2.  The  infliction  of  destruction  upon  the  doomed 
people.  (1)  It  was  by  the  hand  of  God.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ...  I  will  gather 
you  into  the  midst  of  Jerusalem,"  etc.  The  Chaldeans  were  the  instruments  by  which 
he  effected  his  purpose ;  but  God  himself  was  the  great  Agent  in  the  work.  (2)  It  was 
an  expression  of  the  anger  of  God.  "  So  will  I  gather  you  in  mine  anger  and  in  my 
fury,"  etc.  (vers.  20,  21).  The  wrath  of  God  burns  with  awful  intensity  against  sin. 
"  Our  God  is  a  consuming  fire."  (3)  It  leads  to  the  recognition  of  the  hand  of  God. 
•"  Ye  shall  know  that  I  the  Lord  have  poured  out  my  fury  upon  you."  These  words  do 
not  point  to  their  reformation  or  purification.  As  Hengstenberg  observes,  "  In  the  whole 
section  the  judgment  is  regarded,  not  in  the  light  of  purification,  but  in  that  of  destruc- 
tion ;  as  Ezekiel  usually  considers  the  population  of  Jerusalem  as  an  ungodly  multitude 
doomed  to  be  extirpated."  Moreover,  dross  cannot  be  benefited  by  fire.  It  cannot  be 
purified.  After  all  burnings  it  remains  dross — refuse.  The  fire  was  not  to  purify,  but 
to  punish  them ;  not  to  cleanse,  but  to  consume  them.  And  in  its  fierce  heat  they 
would  recognize  the  dread  power  of  the  God  whom  they  had  forsaken  for  idols,  and 
whose  word  they  had  set  at  naught. 

Conclusion.  Guard  against  the  beginnings  of  the  deterioration  of  character.  Beek 
the  growth  and  progress  of  character  in  the  true  and  good. —  W.  J. 

Vers.  23 — 31. — The  universal  prevalence  of  wickedness,  and  the  consequent  certainty 
of  Judgment.  "  And  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  me,  saying,  Son  of  man,  say  unto 
her,  Thou  art  the  land  that  is  not  cleansed,"  etc. 

I.  The  universal  prevalence  of  wickedness.  This  is  exhibited  by  Ezekiel : 
1.  In  the  absence  of  any  effective  correction  thereof.  .  "  Thou  art  the  land  that  is  not 
cleansed."  This  refers  to  the  moral  condition  of  the  people.  The  figure  is  viewed  by 
some  as  a  land  that  is  not  freed  from  noxious  weeds,  by  others  as  not  cleansed  as  metals 
are  by  the  refiner's  fire.  With  either  view  the  spiritual  signification  is  the  same. 
"  Jud^a  had  been  oft  cleansing,"  says  Greenhill,  "  but  was  never  thoroughly  cleansed. 
Hezekiah  and  Josiah  made  the  greatest  oleaiisings,  but  all  the  sin  was  not  purged  out 
in  their  days ;  they  took  away  the  objects  and  mediums  of  sin,  viz.  the  idols,  images, 
groves,  and  high  places,  but  the  people  continued  wicked ;  they  did  not  cleanse  their 
hands  nor  hearts  and  turn  to  the  Lord,  but  returned  to  their  former  and  worse  abomi- 
nations, when  those  good  kings  were  gone.  The  Lord  had  sent  them  many  prophets, 
who  dealt  with  them  several  ways  to  draw  them  to  repentance.  .  .  .  Besides  these 


W  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxii.  1—31. 

things,  God  oft  Bent  sweeping  and  fierce  judgments  amongst  them,  famine,  sword, 
pestilence ;  and  notwithstanding  all  these,  they  returned  not  to  the  Lord,  but  the  land, 
that  is,  the  people  of  it,  did  remain  uncleansed,  they  were  like  a  land  wherein  was 
nothing  but  weeds,  nettles,  briars,  and  thorns."  2.  In  its  pernicious  custivity  amongst 
all  dasses.  (1)  The  prophets.  These  should  have  been  zealous  by  wordand  example 
in  cleansmg  the  land  of  its  sins;  but  they  were  prominent  in  evil-doing.  Several 
forms  of  this  are  mentioned  by  Ezekiel,  (a)  Their  guilty  subservience  to  wicked 
rulers.  "Her  prophets  have  daubed  for  them  [i.e.  the  princes]  with  untempered 
mortar,"  etc.  (ver.  28).  The  clauses  of  this  yerse  have  come  under  our  notice  already 
(ch.  xiii.  10,  6,  7 ;  xxi.  29).  The  piinces  were  insatiably  covetous,  grossly  dishonest, 
and  ruthlessly  cruel ;  and  these  false  prophets  who  should  have  rebuked  their  wicked- 
ness, countenanced  their  procedure,  encouraged  their  practices,  and  assured  them  that 
their  ways  were  approved  by  God.  (5)  Their  scandalous  cupidity.  "They  take 
treasure  and  precious  things  "  (ver.  25).  They  extorted  from  the  people  their  valued 
possessions  as  the  price  of  their  prophesying.  They  did  not  forcibly  despoil  them  of 
their  treasures,  but  they  obtained  them  by  arts  and  devices  which  disgraced  the  sacred 
office  whose  functions  they  had  assumed.  "  The  dogs  are  greedy,  they  can  never  have 
enough ;  .  .  .  they  have  all  turned  to  their  own  way,  each  one  to  his  gain,  from  every 
quarter "  (Isa.  Ivi.  11).  (c)  Their  grievous  cruelty.  "  Like  a  roaring  lion  ravening 
the  prey :  they  have  devoured  souls ;  .  .  .  they  have  made  her  widows  many  in  the 
midst  thereof "  (ver.  25).  "  The  false  prophets,"  says  Hengstenberg,  "  rob  the  goods 
and  devour  the  souls,  in  so  far  as  they  stand  by  to  help  forward  the  robbing  and 
murdering  acts  of  the  great  (ver.  27),  and  sbarpen  not,  but  rather  soothe  their  con- 
Bcience  by  saying,  Peace,  peace,  when  there  is  no  peace.  Thus  they  are  accomplices  in 
the  robbing  and  murdering  course  of  the  great,  who  have  them  in  their  pay.  They 
deport  themselves  as  smooth  and  peaceful  men,  and  present  themselves  as  men  of 
tenderness,  in  contrast  with  the  rough  preachers  of  repentance,  the  true  prophets;  but 
when  examined  in  the  light  they  are  thieves  and  murderers."  (d)  Their  shameful 
combination.  "  There  is  a  conspiracy  of  her  prophets  in  the  midst  thereof."  They 
were  solemnly  banded  together  for  the  accomplishment  of  their  atrocious  designs. 
They  had  entered  into  a  compact  to  prophesy  the  same  things,  and  "  were  careful  not 
to  contradict  each  other's  lies."  (2)  The  priests.  Two  principal  charges  are  brought 
against  them,  (a)  Misinterpretation  of  God's  Law.  "Her  priests  have  done  violence 
to  my  Law."  "  To  violate  the  Law  is  to  break  it — to  offer  violmce  to  the  Law  is  to 
misinterpret  it."  The  latter  is  the  charge  which  is  here  preferred  against  the  priests. 
They  perverted  the  holy  Law  to  make  it  harmonize  with  the  inclinations  of  a  sinful 
people,  and  with  their  own  wicked  practices,  (b)  Profanation  of  God's  institutions. 
"And  have  profaned  mine  holy  things :  they  have  put  no  difference  between  the  holy 
and  the  common,"  etc.  (ver.  26).  We  have  noticed  God's  holy  things  in  dealing 
with  ver.  8.  "  It  was  the  special  office  of  the  priests  to  keep  up  the  distinction 
between  holy  and  unholy,  clean  and  unclean,"  consecrated  and  common  things  (cf. 
Lev.  X.  10;  xxii.  1 — 13).  They  "should  have  instructed  the  people  what  meats 
were  lawful  for  them,  what  not;  what  sacrifices  were  fit  to  be  brought  to  the  Lord 
and  what  not;  who  were  worthy,  and  who  not,  to  eat  of  the  holy  things  and  to 
approach  unto  the  holy  God  "  (GreenhiU).  But  this  they  had  not  done.  "  The  law 
of  the  sabbath,"  as  Hengstenberg  remarks,  "  is  given  as  an  example.  This  they  rob  of 
its  deep  spiritual  import,  and  limit  it  to  the  external  rest,  as  if  it  were  <dven  for 
animals,  and  not  for  men  who  are  to  serve  God  in  spirit"  (cf.  ver.  8).  By  these 
doings  they  profaned  God  himself.  "  And  I  am  profaned  among  them."  The  priests 
had  degraded  his  infinitely  holy  and  exalted  character  in  the  estimation  of  the  people 
(cf.  Mai.  i.  6,  7).  (3)  The  princes  are  charged  with  :  (a)  Cupidity,  They  sought  "to 
get  dishonest  gain."  They  had  their  own  resources  and  revenues;  but  not  content 
with  these,  they  coveted  other  and  larger  resources,  and  resorted  to  oppression  to  obtain 
them,  imposing  burdensome  taxes  upon  the  people.  (J)  Cruelty.  "  Her  princes  in 
the  midst  thereof  are  like  wolves  ravening  the  prey;  to  shed  blood,"  etc.  (ver  27  •  and 
cf.  vers.  6,  7;  Zeph.  iii.  3).  The  covetousness  of  King  Ahab  led  to  the  murder  of 
Naboth  the  Jezreelite.  (4)  The  people.  "  The  people  of  the  land  have  used  oppres- 
sion, and  exercised  robbery,"  etc.  (ver.  29).  The  prophet  charges  them  with  oppression 
by  force  and  fraud.     They  deceived  and  cheated  and  robbed  those  whom  they  dared  so 


OH  Mill.  1—49.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PROPHET  EZBKIEL.  17 

to  treat.  And  tbey  thus  injured  those  whom  they  should  have  protected,  viz,  "  the 
poor  and  needy  and  the  stranger."  Frequently  these  were  specially  commended  to  the 
care  of  the  Israelites ;  and  God  had  taken  them  under  his  own  special  guardianship 
(cf.  Exod.  xxii.  21;  Dent.  x.  18,  19;  xxvii.  19;  Ps.  x.  14;  xli.  1;  cxl.  12;  cxlvi.  9; 
Frov.  xiv.  21 ;  Zech.  vii.  9,  10).  Moreover,  it  is  inexpressibly  mean  to  wrong  those 
who  are  unable  to  defend  themselves  and  their  rights.  Tet  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at 
that  these  things  were  done  by  the  common  people;  for  in  so  doing  they  trod  in  the 
footsteps  of  their  guides  and  rulers.  Thus  amongst  all  classes  wickedness  in  some  of 
its  worst  forms  was  terribly  prevalent.  3.  In  the  fact  that  no  one  was  found  to  keep 
hack  the  destruction,  which  it  was  bringing  wpon  the  land.  "  And  I  sought  for  a  man 
among  them  that  should  make  up  the  fence,"  etc.  (ver.  30 ;  cf.  Isa.  lix.  4 ;  Jer.  v.  1 ; 
and  see  our  homily  on  ch.  xiii.  5).  The  Lord  represents  himself  as  looking  solicitously 
and  diligently  for  such  a  man,  but  finding  none.  "  Jeremiah,"  says  Hengstenberg,  "  by 
his  powerful  preaching  of  repentance,  presented  himself  as  such  a  public  deliverer; 
but  they  despised  him,  and  be  could  gain  no  position.  The  man  alone  is  nothing. 
The  position  must  be  added,  and  the  people  must  gather  around  him.  One  '  against 
whom  every  man  contends'  cannot  avert  the  judgment  of  God;  he  can  only 
accelerate  it." 

n.  The  consequent  oebtaintt  of  juooment.  When  wickedness  has  become  so 
flagrant  and  universally  prevalent,  and  there  is  no  one  to  stand  between  the  guilty 
people  and  the  approaching  judgment,  the  execution  of  judgment  is  inevitable. 
Kotice:  1.  The  dread  severity  of  this  judgment.  "Therefore  have  I  poured  out  mine 
indignation  upon  them ;  I  have  consumed  them  with  the  fire  of  my  wrath  "  (ver.  31). 
Words  similar  to  these  we  have  already  noticed  (ver.  22 ;  ch.  xxi.  31).  The  judgment 
is  so  certain  that  it  is  spoken  of  as  already  accomplished.  And  as  to  its  severity,  what 
a  day  is  "  the  day  of  the  indignation  "  of  God  I  Who  can  even  conceive  the  terrors  of 
his  indignation  ?  or  the  dread  intensity  of  his  wrath  ?  2.  2%e  total  absence  of  allevia- 
tions of  this  judgment.  "  Thou  art  a  land  that  is  not  rained  upon  in  the  day  of 
indignation  "  (ver.  24) ;  that  "  is  a  land  that  in  the  outburst  of  the  Divine  judgment 
finds  no  grace;  and  simply,  as  the  connection  shows,  because  its  impurity  is  not 
removed.  The  rain  in  the  day  of  indignation  would  be  a  benefit.  It  would  quench 
the  flame  of  the  Divine  indignation  "  (Hengstenberg).  But  such  rain  it  will  not  have. 
The  clause  we  are  dealing  with  amounts  to  a  declaration  like  this :  "  Thou  shalt  have 
no  mercy  when  the  fire  of  my  wrath  is  kindled."  3.  The  retributiveness  of  this  judg- 
ment. "  Their  own  way  have  I  brought  upon  their  heads,  saith  the  Lord  God."  This 
aspect  of  the  Divine  judgment  has  already  engaged  our  attention  more  than  once  (on 
eh.  vii.  3.  4;  ix.  10;  xvi.  43). 

Conclusion.  The  whole  subject  is  charged  with  most  solemn  warnings  to  the 
wicked,  both  as  individuals  and  as  communities  or  nations  (Ps,  ii.  10 — ^12 ;  Isa.  Iv. 
6»  7).— W.  J. 


EXPOSITION. 
OHAPTBE  XXra. 


After  another  pause,  the  prophet  enters 
on  another  elaborate  parallel,  after  the 
pattern  of  ch.  xvi.,  but  with  a  marked  vari- 
ation. There  we  have  the  history  of  one 
harlot,  se.  of  Israel  in  its  collective  unity. 
Here  we  have  two  sister  harlots,  the  daughters 
of  one  mother,  and  they  are  Samaria  and 
Jerusalem,  as  both  belonging  to  Israel.  For 
the  purpose  of  the  parable,  they  are  repre- 
•ented  as  having  had  a  separate  existence, 
even  during  the  period  of  the  sojourn  in 
Egypt  This  was  probably  historically  true, 
the  line  of  cleavage  oaosed  by  the  claims 


of  Ephraim  to  supremacy  appearing  again 
and  again  long  before  the  revolt  of  the  ten 
tribes  under  Jeroboam  (Judg.  viii.  I ;  xii.  1 ; 
2  Sam.  xix.  43).  Both  were  alike  tainted  with 
idolatry,  as  in  the  history  of  the  golden  calf, 
when  they  came  out  of  Egypt  (oomp.  ch. 
xvi  7;  XX.  7,  8).  Tet  even  then  Jehovah, 
like  Hosea  in  the  personal  history  which  was 
to  be  to  him  as  a  parable  of  that  of  Israel, 
had  compassion  on  them,  harlots  though  tUey 
were  (Hos.  L  2),  They  became  his,  and  "  bare 
sons  and  daughters." 

Ver.  4. — The  occurrence  of  proper  name* 
is  almost  uniqne  in  the  parables  of  the 
Bible,  the  Lazarus  of  Luke  zvi.  20  being 


EZEKIEL — II.  " 


18 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxiii.  1—49. 


the  only  other  instance.  Their  meaning  is 
•nfficiently  clear.  Aholah  (hut  hoth  names 
should  begin  witli  0  rather  than  A)  means 
"  Her  tent ; "  Aholibah,  "  My  tent  is  in  her.' ' 
A  parallel,  which  may  have  suggested  the 
names,  is  found  in  the  Ahulibamah  (equiva- 
lent to  "  My  tent  is  in  the  high  place")  of 
Oen.  xxxvi.  2,  and  another  in  the  use  of 
Ohel  as  a,  proper  name  in  1  Chron.  iii.  20. 
The  common  element  of  the  two  names  is 
the  word  that  is  commonly  used  for  the 
sacred  tent  or  tabernacle  in  the  Pentateuch 
and  elsewhere.  The  distinctive  element  of 
each  points  to  the  fact  that  the  worship  in 
Samaria  was  unauthorized.  Her  "tent" 
was  hers,  not  Jehovah's.  Of  .Terusalem  with 
its  temple  Jehovah  could  say, "  My  tent  is  in 
her,"  and  this,  as  magnifying  her  privilege, 
also  aggi'avated  her  guilt.  Keil  and  others 
take  the  adjective  here,  as  in  cb.  zvi.  46,  as 
meaning  "greater"  rather  than  "older." 
The  former  adjective  is,  of  course,  applicable 
to  the  greater  power  of  the  kingdom  of  the 
Ten  Tribes,  and,  even  if  we  retain  the  render- 
ings of  the  Authorized  Version,  is  probably 
the  explanation  of  Samaria  being  named  as 
the  elder  of  the  two. 

Ver.  5. — The  history  of  hoth  the  sisters 
passes  from  the  time  of  the  Exodus  to  that 
of  their  separate  existence,  and  starts,  in 
fact,  from  their  first  intercourse  with  the  great 
monarchies  of  Asia.  So  far  it  is  less  a  survey 
of  their  successive  stages  of  degradation, 
like  that  of  ch.  xvi.,  than  a  retrospect  of  their 
political  alliances.  Aholah  played  the  harlot. 
The  loTeiB,  as  in  ch.  xvi.  33,  are  the  nations 
with  which  the  kings  of  Israel  were  in 
alliance,  and  of  these  the  Assyrians  are 
named  as  pre-eminent.  The  word  neigh- 
honrs,  which  in  its  literal  sense  is  hardly 
applicable,  is  probably  to  be  taken  of  spiritual 
affinity,  or  may  be  taken  as  "  come  near  "  is 
in  Gen.  xx.  4;  Ezek.  xviii.  6;  Lev.  xx.  16. 
The  Assyrians  were  those  who,  in  that  sense, 
came  near  to  the  harlot  city.  We  have  in 
2  Kings  XV.  20  the  fact  that  Menahem  paid 
tribute  to  Pul.  Hos.  v.  13  and  vii.  11  speak 
generally  of  suoh  alliances.  The  black 
obelisk  of  Shalmaneser  records  the  fact  that 
Jehu  paid  tribute  to  him  ('Records  of  the 
Past,'  V.  41).  In  the  last-named  case  the 
tribute  consisted  chiefly  of  vessels  of  gold, 
bowls,  goblets,  etc. 

Ver.  6.— Clothed  with  blue.  The  same 
word  as  that  used  in  the  description  of  the 
tabernacle  (Exod.  xxvi.  4 ;  xxvi.  31,  et  aj.). 
It  was  probably  some  hue  of  the  Tyriau 
purple  kind  which  marked  the  official  dress 
of  the  "captains"  of  the  Assyrian  armies. 
The  words,  with  those  that  follow,  bring 
before  us  the  magnificent  array  of  the 
Assyrian  cavalry — a  force  in  which  Israel, 
throughout  its  history,  was  deficient  (Judg, 
T.  10 ;  Zech.  ix.  9 ;  Isa.  zxxvi  8). 


Vers.  7 — 10. — The  next  two  verses  paint 
the  consequence  of  the  alliance  first  with 
Assyria  and  then  with  Egypt.  She  adopted 
the  religion  of  Assyria,  probably  in  the  form  of 
the  worship  of  Ishtar  (Ashtoreth)  as  the  queen 
of  heaven.  Having  done  this,  the  kings  of 
Israel  sought  to  play  off  one  kingdom  against 
the  other  (see  Hos.  vii.  11 ;  2  Kings  xvii.  4). 
It  was,  in  fact,  the  discovery  of  Hoshea's 
trtfccheryin  this  matter  that  led  Shalmaneser 
to  besiege  Samaria.  The  result  of  that  siege 
is  described  in  general  terras  in  ver.  10. 
She,  the  city  of  Samaria,  was  slain  vrith  the 
sword.  Her  sons  and  daughters  were  taken 
into  exile.  So  she  became  famous  (i.e. 
infamous,  like  the  Latin /amnsus),  literally, 
a  name  among  women,  so.  among  the 
neighbouring  nations. 

Vers.  11, 12. — The  issue  of  the  Assyrian 
alliance  in  the  fall  of  Samaria  might  have 
served  as  a  warning  to  the  kings  of  Judah. 
But  it  did  not.  They  also  cuurted  the 
alliance  of  the  kings  of  Assyria,  as  in  the 
case  of  Ahaz  (2  Kings  xvi.  7 — 10)  and 
Tiglath-Plleser.  Hezekiah  followed  in  the 
same  line,  though  he  too  trusted  in  Egypt, 
and  afterwards  rebelled.  Manasseh  too  paid 
tribute,  and  made  Jerusalem  the  scene  of  ■ 
confiuent  idolatry,  which  included  that  of 
Assyria.  Even  Josiah  went  forth  against 
Pharaob-Neoho  as  the  faithful  vassal  of 
either  Assyria  or  Babylon.  The  splendour 
which  had  fascinated  Samaria  fascinated 
her  also.  Here  olothsd  most  gorgeously 
takes  the  place  of  "clothed  in  blue"  in 
ver.  6,  describing,  probably,  the  same  fact. 

Ver.  14. — The  sin  of  Judah  went  a  step 
further  than  that  of  Samaria.  She  courtea 
the  alliance  of  the  Chaldeans.  Probably 
the  sojourn  of  Manasseh  at  Babylon  (2  Chron. 
xxxiii.  11)  led  him  to  see  in  that  city  a 
possible  rival  to  Assyria.  The  embassy  of 
Merodach-Baladanto  Hezekiah  (Isa.  xxxix.,* 
implies,  on  the  other  hand,  that  Babylot 
was  looking  to  Judah  for  support  agains, 
Assyria.  The  prophet  represents  this  politi- 
cal coquetting,  so  to  speak,  as  another  aoJ 
of  whoredom.  Aholibah  saw  the  imager 
of  the  Chaldeans  portrayed  with  vermilion 
(probably  "red  ochre:"  colours  seem  to 
have  been  used  largely  both  in  Assyrian 
and  Babylonian  sculpture  as  in  Egyptian, 
and  Judah  seems  to  have  copied  them, 
Jer.  xxii.  14)  and  fell  in  love  with  them. 
As  the  passions  of  a  Messalina  might  be 
roused  by  sensuous  pictures  of  masculine 
beauty,  so  Judah  was  led  on  by  what  her 
envoys  reported  of  the  magnificence  of 
the  palaces,  the  strength  of  the  armies,  of 
the  Chaldeans.  The  journey  of  Jonah 
to  Nineveh,  and  those  implied  in  Hos.  vii, 
11,  as  well  as  the  prophecy  of  Nalium, 
all  indicate  a  more  or  less  intimate  know- 
ledge of  the  M^opotamian  monarchies.   Tfce 


<3H.  xxin.  1—49.]     THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL. 


19 


mission  of  Merodaoli  -  Baladan  would  be 
naturally  followed  by  a  return  embaasy  from 
Judah.  A  later  instance  under  Zedekiah 
meets  us  in  Jer.  xxix.  3. 

Ver.  15. — Exceeding  in  dyed  attire ;  better, 
with  dyed  turbans,  or  tiaras,  9Qch  as  are 
eueu  on  the  Assyrian  monuments  of  Nimrftd, 
Khorsabad,  and  Kouyunyik. 

Ver.  17. — Tlie  words  paint  the  intimate 
alliance,  the  {lolitical  prostitution,  ea  it  were, 
involved  in  the  alliance  with  Babylon.  Her 
mind  was  alienated  from  them.  Interpreted 
by  the  history,  the  words  point  to  the  fact 
that  Judah  soon  found  out  how  hollow  was 
the  help  gained  by  the  alliance  with 
Babylon,  and  turned,  ufter  Josiah's  death, 
to  Egypt  as  a  coimterpoise.  As  in  the 
history  of  Amnon  (2  Sam.  xiii.  15),  lust,  when 
it  had  wrought  its  will,  passed  into  loathing 
ami  disgust.  Jeboiakim  and  Zedekiah  were 
examples  of  what  we  may  well  call  this 
distracted  policy.  But,  as  it  was,  this  aliena- 
tion did  but  increase  her  guilt.  As  things 
were,  it  would  have  been  better,  as  Jeremiah 
all  along  counselled,  to  accept  the  rule  of 
the  Chaldeans.  The  mind  of  Jehovah  was 
alienated  from  Jeru^ialem  as  hers  had  been 
from  the  Chaldeans. 

Ver.  19. — Yet  she  moltiplied  her  whore- 
doms. The  disappointment  and  failure, 
however,  did  not  lead  to  repentance. 
Foreign  alliances,  and  with  them  foreign 
idolatries,  were  com  ted  more  eagerly  than 
ever,  tliough  in  a  different  direction.  The 
lovers  were  changed,  but  the  harlotry  went 
on. 

Ver.  20. — She  doted  on  her  paramours. 
Commonly  the  word  is  used  of  a  concubine 
(Gen.  xxii.  24 ;  Judg.  viii.  31).  Here  it  is 
used  in  scorn  of  the  Egyptian  princes  whose 
favour  Judah  courted,  reminding  us  of 
Homer's  'AxoitSes  oixer'  'Axaioi,  as  indicat- 
ing their  political  weakness.  All  that  need 
be  said  of  the  comparison  that  follows  is  that 
here  also  Ezekiel  follows  in  the  footsteps  of 
Jeremiah  (Jer.  T.  8).  What  is  indicated  is 
that  Judah  threw  herself  into  the  idolatrous 
ritual  of  Egypt  witli  an  almost  orgiastic 
passion.  The  harlot  nation  returned,  as  it 
were,  to  her  first  love,  and  renewed  the 
whoredoms  of  her  youth. 

Vers.  22,  23. — The  lovers  from  whom  the 
mind  of  Judah  was  alienated  were,  as  in 
ver.  17,  the  Chaldeans.  With  these  are  joined 
Pekod,  and  Shoa,  and  Eoa.  The  Authorized 
and  Revised  Versions,  following  the  LXX., 
take  these  as  proper  names,  and  Ewald, 
Smend,  and  Eiirst  find  in  them  those  of 
Chaldean  tribes.  The  Vulgate,  followed  by 
Luther,  gives  nobiles,  tyrannosque,  el  prin- 
eipes,  and  Keil  and  Hengstenberg  substanti- 
ally adopt  this  rendering,  giving  "rulers, 
lords,  and  nobles."  "  Pekod  "  appears  as  a 
place  in  Jer.  1. 20  (compare  Schrader's '  Cunei- 


form Inscriptions,'  ii.  pp.  82, 117, 120,  where 
Shoa  and  Koa  are  identified  with  Medo- 
Elamite  tribes  east  of  the  Tigris),  but  the 
other  names  are  unknown  to  history.  On 
the  whole,  the  balance  seems  in  favour  of 
the  rendeiing  in-the  text.  With  these  are 
joined  all  the  Assyrians,  who,  under 
Nebuchadnezzar,  fought,  of  course,  in  his 
armies."  Now  she  should  see  her  desir- 
able young  men  .  .  .  riding  upon  horses 
(the  prophet  repeats  with  sarcasm  the  phrase 
of  ver.  12)  in  another  guise  than  she  had 
expected. 

Ver.  24. — With  ohariots,  waggons,  and 
wheels,  etc.  The  first  word  is  only  fonnd 
here,  and  probably  means  "  armour."  So  the 
Bevised  Version,  with  weapons,  chariots,  and 
waggons.  They  shall  judge  thee  according  to 
their  judgments ;  sc,  shall  execute  the  judg- 
ment which  God  has  assigned  to  them  after 
their  own  manner,  so.  tlieir  usual  omel 
treatment  of  barbarous  nations. 

Ver.  25. — They  shall  take  away  thy  noie 
and  thine  ears,  etc.  (For  instances  of  thia 
or  like  mutilation,  in  the  case  of  prisoners 
of  war,  see  the  casu  of  Zedekiah,  Jer. 
lii.  11 ;  Herod.,  iii.  69,  154.)  Possibly  it 
may  have  been  known  to  Ezekiel  aa  • 
punishment  for  the  adulterer  or  adulterea 
in  Egypt  and  other  countries,  and  if  b<^  he 
might  have  selected  it  as  specially  appropri- 
ate to  his  parable  (Martial,  'Epigr.,'  ii.  88; 
ill.  85).  Thy  residue  shall  he  oonsumel 
with  fire.  The  Hebrew  word  for  "  residue  " 
(not  that  usually  so  translated)  is  the  same 
as  that  previously  translated  "remnant." 
In  the  first  clause  it  clearly  points  to  the 
men  of  Jerusalem  who  are  left  after  the 
capture.  In  the  second  its  meaning  is  de- 
termined by  the  fact  that  it  follows  after 
the  deportation  of  the  sons  and  daughters. 
All  that  was  left — In  the  parable,  of  the 
mutilated  trunk  of  the  adulteress,  in  the 
history,  of  the  devastated  city,  <c.  the  empty 
houses — should  be  destroyed  by  fire. 

Ver.  27. — Thy  whoredom  brought  from  the 
land  of  Egypt;  t'.e.  the  last  political  alliance 
between  Judah  and  Egypt.  This,  together 
with  the  Egyptian  cultus  that  accompanied 
it,  should  be  made  to  cease.  That  would  no 
longer  be  in  the  thoughts  of  the  exiles; 
their  hopes  from  that  quarter  were  extin- 
guished for  ever. 

Ver.  28. — Once  again  with  incisive  sarcasm 
the  prophet  reiterates  the  phrase  of  ver.  17. 
The  punishment  should  be  all  the  more 
terrible  as  coming  from  those  whom  the 
adulteress  had  once  loved  with  the  love  that 
bad  passed  into  loathing. 

Ver.  29.— All  thy  labour;  $e.  all  the 
results  of  labour,  all  thy  wealth. 

Vers.  31 — 83. — I  will  give  her  cup  into  thine 
hand.  (For  the  image  of  the  cup  as  the 
symbol  of   good  or  evil  fortune,  aee    Ps. 


20 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  BZEKIEL.      [ch.  xxni.  1—49. 


xxiii.  5;  Isa.  li.  17;  Jer.  xxv.  15;  Matt. 
XX.  22 ;  xxvi.  39.)  The  cup,  in  this  case,  was 
to  be  deep  and  large  as  that  of  Samaria.  The 
adulteress  was  to  be  "  drunk,  but  uot  with 
■vrine"  (Isa.  xxix.  9).  And  that  "cup," 
over  and  above  the  laughter  and  derision, 
would  contain  much  of  unknown  calamities, 
thei  astonishment  and  desolation  of  ver.  83. 

Yer.  31.— Thou  shalt  break  the  sherds 
thereof.  The  picture  of  the  desolate 
adulteress  becomes  yet  more  terrible.  Like 
a  forlorn  and  desperate  castaway,  she  does 
shamefal  execution  on  herself ;  breaks  her 
cup,  and  completes  the  work  of  mutilation 
in  its  most  terrible  form.  That  is  the  doom 
decreed  for  her,  because  she  bad  forgotten 
her  true  husband  and  the  love  of  her 
espoQsals.  Bevised  Version  gives  gnaw  the 
iherds  thereof,  painting  yet  more  yividly 
the  despair  of  the  outcast. 

Ver.  36. — ^As  often,  Ezekiel  emphasizes  by 
reiteration,  begins  yet  a  fresh  disoouiee  with 
the  same  woAs,  wilt  thou  judge,  as  in  ch. 
XX.  4  and  xxii.  2,  and  enters  on  another 
summary  of  the  sins  of  the  two  harlot  sisters, 
in  which  Moloch-worship  (ver.  37)  and 
sabbath-breaking  (ver.  38)  were  conspieuouB 
elements.  The  nature  of  the  guilt  is  em- 
phasized (vers.  38,  89)  by  the  fact  that  the 
idolatrous  ritoal  was  performed  on  the  very 
day  in  which  the  people  sacrificed  in  the 
temple;  that  it  found  a  local  habitation  even 
there  (oomp.  ch.  viii.  17 ;  2  Kings  xxi.  4 ;  Jer. 
xxxii;  34). 

Ver.  40. — ^Te  have  sent  for  men  to  come 
from  far,  etc.  The  words  obviously  refer 
to  the  embassies  which  had  been  sent  from 
time  to  time  by  both  Samaria  and  Jerusalem 
to  Egypt,  Assyria,  and  Babylon.  The 
imagery  of  the  earlier  stage  of  the  harlot's 
progress  is  resumed,  and  we  have  a  picture 
almost  the  counterpart  of  that  in  Prov.  vii 
10—21.  She  takes  her  bath,  paints  her  eye- 
lashes with  hohol,  the  black  pigment  still 
used  in  the  East,  as  Jezebel  had  done 
(2  Kings  ix.  30).  She  decks  herself  with 
jewels,  and  sits  on  a  divan  (a  sofa-couch, 
rather  than  bed),  and  prepares  a  table  for 
a  banquet.  And  on  that  table  are  the 
tnoense  and  the  oil,  symbols  alike  of  wealth 
and  worship,  which  Jehovah  claims  as  his, 
and  which  she  offers  to  her  lovers  (comp. 
oh.  xvi.  13, 19 ;  Hob.  ii.  5,  8). 

Ver.  42.— A  voice  of  a  multitude,  etc. 
The  word  for  "multitude"  is  strictly 
"  tnmnlt,"  and  Keil  and  Ourrey  render  "  The 
Toise  of  tumult  became  still,"  eo.  the  threats 
of  the  alien  powers  whom  Judah  courted 
were  far  a  time  hushed  by  the  tributes  thus 


paid  to  them.  With  the  men  of  the  common 
sort ;  literally,  as  in  the  margin,  of  the  multi- 
tude of  men.  Saheans  from  the  wilderness. 
The  Eevised  Version,  with  Keil  and  almost 
all  recent  commentators,  follows  the  margin, 
drunkardt  (LXX.,  olvdii^voi).  "Sabeans 
rests  on  a  Jewish  rendering  of  the  text,  but, 
as  a  people,  the  Sabeans,  who  dwelt  south 
of  Meroe,  though  named  in  Isa.  xlv.  14,  were 
too  remote  to  come  within  the  horizon  of  the 
parable.  What  Ezekiel  dwells  on  is  the 
ever-growing  degradation  of  the  harlot  city. 
Not  only  the  officers  of  the  Chaldeans,  but 
the  mixed  multitude,  the  very  drunkards 
from  the  wildernesfl  of  Babylon,  were  ad- 
mitted to  her  embraces.  Possibly  the  word 
may  point  to  the  false  gods  to  whom  libations 
of  wine  were  offered,  but  I  incline  to  refer 
it  rather  to  those  who  got  drunk  at  their 
idol-festivals  even  in  Jerusalem.  Drunken- 
ness was  one  of  the  vices  of  the  Babylonians, 
and  the  prophets,  who  atlmired  the  Bechabite* 
and  the  Nazarites  (Jer.  xxxv. ;  Amos  ii.  11), 
must  have  looked  on  Judah's  participation 
in  that  sin  as  a  measureless  degra(&tion. 
The  bracelets  and  crowns  symbolize  the 
wealth  and  prestige  which  the  Chaldean 
alliance  was  supposed  to  bring  with  it. 

Ver.  43. — ^The  whole  verse  is  obscure,  and 
has  been  very  differently  rendered.  (1) 
The  Authorized  Version  may  be  paraphrased, 
"  Then  said  I  to  her  that  was  worn  out  with 
Ker  whoredoms,  passed  her  prime  and 
enfeebled.  Will  they  (the  foreign  nations) 
commit  whoredoms  (enter  into  alliances)  with 
her  ?  80.  What  is  there  to  attract  now?  And 
yet  the  habit  is  inveterate.  She  has  grown 
old  in  her  vice,  and  cannot  cease  from  it." 
(2)  The  Eevised  Version  takes  it  not  as  a 
question,  but  as  a  statement :  Now  said  1  of 
her  that  was  old  in  adulteries.  Now  toiU  they 
aommit,  etc.  So,  in  the  main,  Keil.  The 
text  is  probably  corrupt,  and  resists  con- 
jectural emendation.  In  any  case  the  general 
meaning  is  clear.  The  sin  is  of  too  long 
standing  to  be  cured. 

Ver.  45, — The  righteous  men  are  in  effect 
the  ministers  of  God's  wrath.  The  doom 
comes  at  last  on  both  the  sisters,  who  are 
murderers  as  well  as  adulteresses.  They 
shall  suffer  the  punishment  of  stoningwhioh 
the  Law  commanded  (Lev.  ix.  10;  Deut. 
xxii.  22, 24 ;  John  viii.  5),  and  after  that  their 
bodies  were  to  be  hacked  to  pieces.  The 
result  of  that  judgment  would  be  that  all  • 
women  should  learn  not  to  do  after  tlieir 
lewdness,  i.e.  that  idolatry  should  cease 
from  being  the  sin  of  the  cities  of  Urael. 


OH.  xxm.  1— 49.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPHET  EZBKIEL.  21 


HOMILE'l'ICS. 

Ver.  4. — Aholah  and  AhoUhah.  "  Her  tent "  and  "  My  tent  is  in  her."  These 
niinieg  stand  respectively  for  Israel  and  Judah.  Israel,  the  northern  kingdom,  had 
her  own  tent,  i.e.  she  was  independent  after  secession  from  Judah,  like  a  woman  who 
has  left  her  mother's  tent  and  has  one  of  her  own.  Judah  retained  the  temple,  the 
representative  of  the  tahernaole  of  the  wilderness;  therefore  God's  tent  was  in  her. 
These  prosaic  facts  were  suggestive  of  deeper  traits  of  national  character,  which  the 
aymholioal  names  suggested. 

I.  Indbpendenoe.  Israel  is  named  Aholah.  She  has  her  own  tent;  she  is  inde- 
pendent. This  national  independence  has  its  counterpart  in  individual  independence. 
Jacoh  leaves  bis  home  and  fights  his  own  battle  with  the  world.  Joseph  is  sent 
away  fiom  his  family,  and  cast  in  his  youth  among  the  grand  opportunities  of  a  great 
nation  and  the  direful  temptntions  of  a  dissolute  society.  The  young  man  going  out 
into  the  world  enters  on  the  exhilarating  but  trying  career  of  independent  life.  There 
are  special  opportunities,  duties,  and  dangers  in  having  one's  own  tent.  1.  Opportu- 
nities. The  independent  position  is  not  hampered  with  restrictions.  Freedom  means 
a  wide  range  for  individual  activity.  Now  is  the  time  to  realize  the  long-cherished 
dreams  of  earlier  days.  2.  Duties.  Duty  dogs  the  footsteps  of  opportunity.  As  our 
scope  for  choice  and  individual  activity  is  enlarged,  the  obligations  of  service  are 
correspondingly  increased.  The  slave  has  few  duties;  the  free  man  great  obligations. 
The  liberty  of  manhood  brings  the  burden  of  a  man's  duty.  Christian  liberty  increases 
the  obligations  of  Christian  service.  3.  Dangers.  Israel  gained  in  freedom  by  her 
rebellion  against  the  petty  tyranny  of  Eehoboam ;  but  the  liberty  which  was  got  by 
separation  brought  its  own  great  dangers.  Cut  off  from  tlie  temple-worship,  excluded 
from  the  national  festivals,  deprived  of  the  highest  religious  ministrations,  the  freed 
people  were  tempted  to  fall  into  the  idolatry  of  their  ancestors  and  their  neighbours. 
This  temptation  was  too  great  for  them,  and  they  apostatized  earlier  than  Judah.  It 
is  dangerous  to  be  separated  from  religious  ordinances.  The  young  man  who  leaves  the 
Christian  home  of  his  childhood  for  new  scenes  of  worldly  life  is  entering  on  a  path  of 
peril.  A  self-contained  life  is  open  to  temptation.  To  seek  to  be  independent  of  God 
is  to  court  ruin. 

II.  Divine  fellowship.  Judah  is  named  Aholibah.  God's  tent  is  in  her.  She 
has  the  outward  means  and  symbols,  at  least,  of  the  Divine  presence.  This  fact  repre- 
sents high  privileges,  with  corresponding  guilt  when  God  is  forsaken.  1.  Sigk 
privileges.  (1)  Prosperity.  God's  presence  brings  joy  and  true  welfare.  (2)  Pro- 
tection.^  If  God's  tent  is  in  our  midst,  the  Captain  of  salvation  is  with  us,  and  though 
a  host  should  encamp  around  us,  we  need  fear  no  evil.  (3)  Spiritual  grace.  The 
temple  was  not  a  mere  meeting-place,  sanctuary,  and  fortress.  Its  services  were 
"means  of  grace."  God  is  with  us  to  enlighten,  purify,  quicken.  2.  Heavy  guilt. 
Aholibah  apostatized.  Her  guilt  was  all  the  greater  that  she  bore  such  a  name,  and 
could  claim  the  symbol  of  God's  presence  as  peculiarly  her  own.  The  greatest  guilt 
is  that  of  men  who  know  God  and  have  enjoyed  his  presence  and  grace  in  the  past, 
and  who,  sinning  openly  against  light,  have  spurned  those  privileges  and  wilfully 
rebelled  against  their  chosen  God.  No  sinners  are  so  guilty  as  apostatized  Christians. 
Mark  :  it  is  possible  to  be  Aholibah  and  to  enjoy  God's  presence,  and  yet  to  turn  against 
him,  fall,  and  be  ruined. 

Ver.  12. — Doting  on  the  Assyrians.    This  foolish,  fatal  infatuation  of  Israel  for  the 

Assyrians  may  be  takeu  as  a  striking  instance  of  the  fascination  of  worldliness.    Israel 

,  had  known  the  true  God,  and  had  been  called  to  a  peculiar  destiny  as  a  holy  and 

separate  nation;   yet  she  turned  aside  from  her  high  vocation,  lured  by  the  fatal 

charms  of  military  splendour  and  sensuous  luxury  in  a  great  heathen  empire. 

L   CtoD'S  PEOPLE  ARE  REQUIRED   TO  SEPARATE  THEMSELVES  FROM   THE  WORLD.      All 

who  hear  the  call  of  God  must  follow  him  into  the  wilderness,  or,  if  he  gives  them  a 
land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey,  must  still  keep  themselves  apart  from  the  evil 
world.  This  does  not  mean  the  physical  separation  of  a  hermit's  exile  or  a  monk's 
cloistered  imprisonment.     The  true  separation  is  spiritual,  not  local.     We  are  called 


22  THE   BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxm.  1—49. 

to  forsake  the  spirit  of  the  world,  to  renounce  its  evil  practices,  and  to  repudiate  its 
low,  material,  sensuous  tone  of  life. 

II.  The  wobld  endeavours  to  ensnare  the  people  of  God.  It  is  not  content 
to  let  them  stand  aloof;  it  appears  as  a  tempter  trying  to  charm  the  bride  of  Christ 
into  infidelity.  We  cannot  afford  to  despise  its  fascinating  influence,  for  this  is  most 
subtle  and  potent.  It  comes  through  various  means.  1.  Proximity.  Assyria  was  a 
"neighbour"  of  Israel.  The  Church  is  in  the  world.  Christian  men  are  in  daily- 
intercourse  with  worldly  men.  "Evil  communications  corrupt  good  manners."  2. 
Earthly  attractiveness.  There  was  a  material  splendour  in  the  great  empire  of  Assyria, 
which  the  marvellous  sculptures  and  inscriptions  that  have  been  made  familiar  to  us 
by  Layard  and  others  put  beyond  question.  The  "  governors  and  rulers  clothed  most 
gorgeously,"  and  the  horsemen,  "  all  of  them  desirable  young  men,"  awoke  the  admira- 
tion of  the  poor  little  semi-barbarous  nation,  Israel.  The  luxury  of  the  world,  it» 
luscious  literature  and  sensuous  art,  its  enormous  resources,  and  its  elaborate  Culture 
of  earthly  re6nement,  are  necessarily  most  fascinating.  3.  Natural  inclination.  The 
world  could  not  touch  us  for  harm  if  it  found  nothing  sympathetic  in  us.  But  it 
easily  discovers  remains  of  its  old  dominion.  The  old  Adam  is  not  quite  dead.  Passion 
within  may  be  roused  to  answer  to  temptation  from  without. 

HI.  The  snabes  op  the  world  are  fatal  to  those  who  abb  entangled  is 
THEM.  Israel's  doling  upon  the  Assyrians  was  fatal  to  her  religion,  her  morals,  and 
her  national  existence.  To  succumb  to  the  spirit  of  the  world  is  to  make  shipwreck 
of  life.  1.  Religious  ruin.  "  Ye  cannot  serve  Grod  and  mammon."  The  spirit  of  world- 
linesa  Is  autigoniatic  to  God.  As  surely  as  this  spirit  gains  ground  in  our  lives,  the 
spirit  of  devotion  will  recede.  2.  Moral  ruin.  True  worldliness  is  morally  evil.  It  is 
not  a  mere  habit  of  external  and  earthly  living.  It  carries  with  it  the  indulgence  of 
the  lower  life.  At  least  it  tends  to  this,  and  all  its  fascinations  drag  the  soul  down. 
S.  Life-ruin.  In  the  end  the  Christian  man  who  gives  himself  up  to  the  attraction* 
of  worldly  living  will  reap  the  consequences  of  his  sin  in  corruption  and  death. 

Ver.  31. — A  had  example.  Judah  followed  the  bad  example  of  her  sister  Israel ; 
consequently,  she  was  to  share  the  fate  of  Israel.  We  see  here  an  instance  of  the  evil 
influence  of  a  bad  example,  and  of  its  fatal  consequences. 

I.  The  evil  infltjence  of  a  bad  example.  Consider  how  this  fell  power  i» 
exerted.  1.  By  the  fascination  of  suggestion.  The  path  is  made  by  the  pioneer,  and 
the  follower  has  only  to  walk  in  it.  The  sight  of  a  predecessor  indicates  the  road, 
calls  attention  to  it,  suggests  the  idea  of  walking  in  it.  The  publications  of  the  details 
of  a  horrible  crime  in  the  newspaper  exerts  a  most  deleterious  influence  in  this  way 
by  filling  the  minds  of  people  with  thoughts  of  a  kindred  character.  Hence  the 
common  occurrence  tif  an  epidemic  of  similar  crimes.  2.  By  the  attraction  of  sym- 
pathy. Judah  is  drawn  to  follow  her  sister  Israel.  When  Israel  goes  wrong,  Judah 
accompanies  her  and  goes  wrong  in  a  similar  manner.  Affection  is  fatal  when  it 
induces  us  to  copy  the  vices  of  those  whom  we  love.  Even  sisters  must  part  when 
one  chooses  an  evil  way,  if  the  other  would  not  also  choose  sin.  But  it  is  hard  to 
resist  the  charms  of  affection.  3.  By  the  delusion  (fa  false  excuse.  Judah  pleads  the 
exami)le  of  her  sister  as  an  excuse.  What  others  are  doing  seems  to  be  justified  by 
their  action.  Instead  of  measuring  our  conduct  by  the  Law  of  God,  we  are  tempted  to 
test  it  by  the  corresponding  conduct  of  others. 

II.  The  sin  op  following  a  bad  example.  Judah  is  blamed  for  following  the 
bad  example  of  Israel.  It  is  not  for  one  moment  supposed  that  the  misconduct  of  her 
sister  could  be  phaded  as  a  justification  for  her  own  repetition  of  it.  We  cannot  be 
excused  in  our  own  sin  on  the  ground  that  we  are  simply  treading  in  the  footsteps  of 
predecessors.  See  how  this  sin  is  inexcusable.  1.  Because  the  evil  of  the  way  is  known. 
The  foolish  follower  is  not  deceived.  Judah  knows  that  Israel  has  taken  an  evil 
course.  Bad  examples  may  ensnare  the  careless,  but  those  who  have  minds  to  think 
for  themselves  cannot  be  blind  to  the  wrong  character  of  the  example  before  them. 
2.  Because  of  the  freedom  of  the  will.  A  bad  example  is  a  temptation  to  evil;  but 
it  is  not  a  force  compelling  men  to  follow.  Its  attraction  can  only  work  through  the 
will,  never  contrary  to  it.  Therefore  one  must  consent  vohmtarily  to  follow  the  evil 
pattern  before  doing  so,  and  this  free  consent  destroys  the  excuse  that  the  examjile  i» 


on.  XXIII.  1—49.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  23 

to  blame  rather  than  the  man  who  imitates  it.  3.  Because  of  one^s  own  advantages. 
Judah  might  plead  that  she  was  sorely  tempted  hy  her  sister's  example.  But  then 
she  possessed  higher  privileges  than  Israel.  She  was  Aholibah,  while  her  sister  was 
only  Aholah.  She  had  the  temple  of  God  in  her  midst,  whUe  Israel  was  left  to  her 
own  resources.  Christians  are  doubly  guilty  in  following  the  bad  example  of  godless 
men.  They  sin  in  spite  of  higher  influences  which  should  suffice  to  keep  them  in  the 
right  path. 

III.  The  fatal  conbequences  of  followiko  a  bad  example.  Judah  was  walk- 
ing in  the  way  of  her  sister;  therefore  she  must  drink  of  her  sister's  cup.  Com- 
panions in  guilt  will  be  companions  in  doom.  It  is  impossible  to  walk  in  the  same 
path  as  another  without  going  towards  the  same  goal.  Moreover,  if  higher  religious 
privileges  do  not  keep  us  from  followitig  the  sinful  practices  of  worldly  men,  most 
certainly  they  will  not  protect  us  fiom  sharing  their  fate.  He  who  treads  the  sinner's 
flowery  path  will  drink  of  the  sinner's  bitter  cup. 

Ver.  35  (first  half  of  verse). — Forgetting  Ood.  I.  Foegbttino  God  implies  that 
HE  HAS  FORMERLY  BEEN  KNOWN.  We  Cannot  forget  what  we  have  never  known. 
The  lower  animal,  which  is  incapable  of  entertaining  a  thought  of  God,  cannot  forget 
him.  If  I  forget  much,  I  must  have  known  much.  1.  Men  Jiave  a  natural  knowledge 
(^  Ood.  Few  races,  if  any,  are  without  a  trace  of  religion.  The  Andaman  islanders 
and  the  Fuegians  are  said  to  have  been  discovered  in  that  state.  If  so,  they  are  just 
the  exception  that  proves  the  rule.  The  science  of  comparative  religion  reveals  an 
underlying  primitive  theism  beneath  the  tangled  growth  of  later  mythology.  St. 
Paul  appealed  to  the  natural  knowledge  of  God  among  the  heathen  (Acts  xvii.  28 1 
Rom.  i.  21).  2.  They  who  have  seen  the  Jewish  and  Christian  revelation  have  a  larger 
knowledge  of  Ood.  Israel  had  known  God  by  his  special  manifestations  in  the  Law, 
in  his  providence  and  miracles,  in  the  prophets.  All  Christendom  is  open  to  the  higher 
knowledge  of  Gud  in  Christ.  Children  in  Christian  homes  and  Sunday  schools  hav* 
known  God,  though  they  may  have  forsaken  him  in  later  days.  3.  The  people  of  Ood 
have  the  fullest  knowledge  of  Ood.  True  Israelites  and  Christians  know  God  as  he  is 
never  known  to  the  outer  world.  They  have  the  knowledge  of  experience,  spiritual 
sympathy,  and  fellowship  (John  xiv.  7). 

II.  Thebe  are  MANY  INDUCEMENTS  TO  FORGET  GoD.  1.  He  is  invisible.  The 
knowledge  of  God  is  held  only  by  iaith.  The  decay  of  faith  leads  to  forgetting  Gnd. 
It  requires  some  spiritual  effort  to  keep  our  hold  on  the  Unseen.  2.  Earthly  interests 
distract  our  thoughts.  These  things  are  seen,  present  and  pressing ;  they  crowd  about 
us  and  force  themselves  upon  us.  They  make  themselves  felt  as  intensely  real. 
Pleasures  of  life  and  cares  of  life,  fascinating  delights  and  absorbing  anxieties,  all  tend 
to  put  out  the  thought  of  God.  3.  Sinful  inclinations  rouse  an  aversion  to  the  thought 
<)f  Ood.  He  is  holy  ;  he  disapproves  of  sin.  It  is  not  pleasant  to  think  of  God  when 
we  are  choosing  the  evil  way. 

III.  FoBGETTiNG  GoD  18  ITSELF  A  GREAT  SIN.  We  can  control  our  memory  by 
fixing  our  thoughts  upon  Gud.  This  is  not  a  case  of  mere  brain  failure.  There  is  a 
moral  defect  behind  it.  Apart  from  all  active  deeds,  the  very  forgetting  God  is  itselt 
wicked  on  several  grounds.  1.  Ood  has  never  forgotten  us.  He  has  provided  for  our 
daily  needs,  while  we  have  been  ignoring  the  baud  from  which  the  provision  came. 
He  is  our  Father.  Gratitude  and  love  should  keep  the  thought  of  God  warm  in  our 
heart.  To  forget  God  implies  gross  unthankfuliiess  and  a  base  lack  of  natural  affec- 
tion. 2.  Qod  claims  our  attention,  and  obedience.  He  is  our  Lord.  He  expects  us  to 
listen  to  his  voice,  give  heed  to  his  commands,  and  obey  his  will.  But  to  forget  God 
is  to  ignore  these  duties. 

IV.  FoKGETTiNG  GoD  IS  HURTFUL  TO  MAN.  They  know  not  what  they  miss  who 
forsake  their  true  life  and  forget  their  Father  in  heaven.  Seeking  liberty,  they  court 
death.  1.  This  is  the  loss  of  the  best  blessings  of  Heaven.  The  light  of  God's  coun- 
tenance is  despised.  His  guidance,  comfort,  support,  and  salvation  are  neglected. 
T)ie  joy  of  communion  is  renounced,  2.  This  incurs  a  fatal  doom.  God  cannot  let 
us  forget  him  for  ever.  If  we  do  not  remember  his  love  to-day,  we  may  encounter  his 
wrath  to-morrow  (Ps.  xliv.  20,  21). 

v.  God  mercifully  interferes  to  save  us  from  forgetting  him.    1.  He  revealt 


24  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PKOPHBT  EZEKIEL.    [ch.  xxm.  1— 48. 

himself  in  his  Word.  The  revelation  of  nature  is  daily  spread  before  us.  But  when 
that  is  despised,  God  adds  the  more  clear  voice  of  prophecy.  We  have  the  open  Bible 
tp  remind  ua  of  God.  2.  Ood  comes  to  us  in  his  Son.  As  men  had  forgotten  him, 
God  came  right  down  among  them,  looked  at  them  throtigh  a  human  countenance,  and 
spoke  in  a  human  voice.  Christ  comes  to  save  us  from  foigetting  God.  3.  Ood  rouses 
us  hy  his  providence.  We  are  forgetting  God  while  all  goes  smoothly.  Then  hi« 
thunders  burst  over  us.  They  startle  and  alarm,  but  they  awaken.  Thus  God  saves 
us  from  forgetting  him. 

Ver.  36  (last  clause). — Abominations  declared.  L  Abominations  may  be  hidden. 
I.  They  may  he  committed  in  secret.  Then  they  are  unknown  to  every  one  but  the 
guilty  persons  and  their  accomplices.  2.  Their  corrupt  character  may  not  he  admitted. 
Then  they  may  be  done  in  open  daylight  without  shame  or  rebuke.  Not  only  the  out- 
side public,  but  even  the  guilty  persons  themselves,  may  not  perceive  the  full  evil  of 
what  they  are  doing.  3.  They  may  hu  forgotten.  People  do  not  wish  to  call  to  mind 
a  disagreeable  past.  As  the  years  glide  by  it  slides  further  and  further  into  the  dim 
land  of  forgetfulness.  By  dint  of  reiterated  self-flattery  the  guilty  persons  almost 
persuade  themselves  that  they  did  not  do  the  evil  things  of  those  old  bad  years,  or  that 
somehow  they  have  left  their  former  selves  behind  them  in  that  evil  past ;  or  they  put 
the  thought  of  it  quite  out  of  their  minds. 

II.  Abominations  oannot  be  hidden  fob  bvek.  God  does  not  forget  them.  The 
recording  angel  has  written  them  in  his  awful  book  with  ink  that  never  fades.  The 
subtle  poison  of  them  lingers  in  the  souls  of  the  guilty.  "  Whatsoever  a  man  suweth, 
that  shall  he  also  reap."  Some  seeds  take  long  to  germinate.  But  the  seeds  of  evil 
deeds  have  a  fatal  vitality,  though  they  be  slow  to  make  an  appearance.  We  cannot 
escape  the  consequences  of  our  misdeeds  by  forgetting  them. 

III.  It  is  best  that  abominations  should  be  revealed  to  the  guilty  on  earth. 
It  is  no  piice  of  idle  vengeance  that  tortures  Israel  with  a  levelation  of  its  abominations. 
1.  It  is  well  for  the  guilty  to  know  them.  There  is  no  chance  of  repentance  until  the 
heinousness  of  sin  is  acknowledged.  But  that  this  may  be  the  case,  the  abominations 
must  first  be  revealed  to  the  sinner.  There  may  be  little  good  in  proclaiming  his  guilt 
aloud  to  the  world.  What  is  needed  is  that  it  should  be  brought  well  home  to  bis  own 
oonscience.  2.  It  is  well  that  they  should  he  known  now.  If  men  wait  for  the  certain 
revelation  of  final  judgment,  the  abominations  will  be  declared  in  trumpet-tones  of 
denunciation,  and  burned  into  the  soul  in  memories  of  fire.  It  is  iofinitely  better  to 
become  conscious  of  them  first,  that  the  awakening  knowledge  of  guilt  may  perchance 
lead  to  contrition  and  repentance. 

IV.  God  deolabes  theib  abominations  to  sinnebs.  He  is  too  merciful  to  permit 
his  children  to  perish  without  warning.  The  Bible  contains  awful  revelations  of 
human  sin.  If  we  take  it  as  a  lamp,  and  turn  its  light  on  our  own  lives  and  into  our 
own  hearts,  it  will  reveal  many  an  abomination  of  wickedness  hitherto  calmly  ignored. 
The  prophets  of  Israel  were  required  to  reveal  man's  sin  quite  as  much  as  to  make 
known  the  thoughts  and  will  of  God.  John  the  Baptist  came  to  prepare  for  Christ  by 
declaring  to  men  the  abominations  of  their  ways.  Christ  himself  makes  men  feel  their 
bin  by  his  own  holy  presence.  So  Peter  feared  to  be  near  him  (Luke  v.  8).  A  vision 
of  Christ  throws  a  wholesome  light  on  the  hideous  condition  of  an  impenitent  souL 
This  is  to  lead  to  repentance  and  salvation  through  Christ.  Then  the  abominations 
may  be  blotted  out  (1  John  i.  7). 

Vers.  40  and  42. — The  foreign  and  the  common.  In  ver.  40  Israel  is  seen  to  be  seek- 
ing distant  foreign  connections,  like  a  faithless  wife  who  goes  far  afield  for  oompanions 
in  sin.  In  ver.  42  the  charm  of  the  distant  and  the  foreign  is  swallowed  up  in  the 
vulgarity  of  sin,  which  is  the  same  in  essence  all  the  world  over. 

L  The  ohabm  of  the  fobeiqn.  The  Jews  were  especially  warned  against  foreign 
alliances,  as  they  meant  distrust  in  God,  and  as  they  led  to  the  introduction  of  corrupt- 
ing heathen  influences.  Nevertheless,  the  foolish  people  gave  way  to  the  fatal  fascina- 
tion of  foreigners.  1.  There  is  a  charm  in  novelty.  We  are  tempted  to  accept  alien 
ideas  just  because  they  strike  us  with  a  certain  freshness.  Thus  all  sorts  of  earthly 
notions  and  .practices  have  been  imported  into  God's  Israel,  the  Christian  Church,  by 


on.  xxm.  1— 49.]  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIBL.         26 

men  who  have  been  "  sent  for  from  far,"  t'.e.  by  the  influence  of  external  philosophy 
and  worldly  example.  2.  There  is  an  attraction  in  cosmopolitanism.  We  in  England 
have  peculiarly  wide  and  varied  relations  with  the  world,  and  Christianity  claims  all  the 
earth  as  its  domain.  But  the  fatal  charm  is  that  of  following  the  example  of  the  various 
practices  of  mankind  instead  of  impressing  a  Christian  influence  on  the  race.  This 
was  Israel's  mistake.  Called  to  carry  out  a  mission  to  the  world,  she  succumbed  to  the 
spirit  of  the  world.  There  is  great  danger  lest  the  Church  should  follow  her  example 
in  this  respect.  Indeed,  this  has  happened  already  to  a  deplorable  extent.  A  pseudo- 
liberalism  claims  to  be  foUowin";  the  zeit-geist,  and  so  to  be  adapting  Christianity  to 
the  world.  This  means  unfaitlifulness  to  Christ.  St.  Paul  would  be  all  things  to  all 
men,  but  only  that  he  might  win  all  men  to  Christ,  never  so  as  to  surrender  Christ  to 
please  the  world.    That  is  the  part  of  a  Judas. 

II.  The  disillusion  of  the  common.  Israel  and  Judah  cast  wistful  glances  on  the 
foreigner.  But  when  they  had  accomplished  their  purpose  and  were  indulging  in 
revelry  with  a  multitude  of  people  who  had  adorned  them  with  the  barbaric  magui- 
flcence  of  golden  bracelets  and  crowns,  what  did  it  all  amount  to  but  the  shame  of  a 
low,  drunken  debauch  ?  Novelty  in  sin  does  not  elevate  the  evil  thing,  which  is 
essentially  the  same,  however  it  may  be  clothed  and  decorated.  The  so-caJled  refine- 
ment of  vice  is  but  a  veneer  on  the  surface  which  leaves  the  rottenness  beneath 
untouched.  Cosmopolitanism  does  not  save  from  moral  corruption.  The  whole  world 
is  essentially  one  in  its  sin.  There  is  a  horrible  vulgarity  about  all  wickedness.  If 
we  would  be  saved  from  this  we  must  in  a  sense  become  a  "separate  people."  We  may 
and  we  should  still  sympathize  vrith  all  our  fellow-men,  send  the  gospel  to  every  nation, 
and  ourselves  learn  such  lessons  as  a  wide  view  of  mankind  may  teach  us.  Yet  for  all 
the  higher  efforts  of  life  the  inspiration  must  be  found  in  the  retired  and  secret  chamber 
of  prayer. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 49. — Inexcusable  infidelity.  What  it  must  have  cost  the  patriotic  prophet 
to  write  this  chapter  passes  our  power  to  imngine.  The  Jew  was  naturally  and  pardon- 
ably proud  of  his  country  and  of  its  history.  No  thoughffnl  Jew  could,  indeed,  be 
insensible  to  imperfections  and  flaws  in  the  national  character,  to  stains  upon  the 
nation's  annals.  But  in  this  passage  of  his  prophecies  the  dark  shading  is  relieved  by 
no  gleam  of  light.  Israel  is  depicted  as  bad  from  the  dnys  of  Egyptian  bondage  down 
to  the  days  of  Babylonian  captivity.  The  figurative  language  employed  is  such  as 
could  only  be  justified  by  facts  most  discreditable  to  the  character  of  the  Hebrew 
people.  That  there  were  exceptions  to  the  rule,  Bzekiel  was  well  aware.  But  the 
rule  was  that  the  people  were,  at  every  stage  of  their  existence,  prone  to  depart  from  the 
God  to  whom  they  owed  every  privilege,  every  blessing ;  that  they  resisted  no  tempta- 
tion to  idolatry ;  that  they  v?ere  incessantly  provoking  the  anger  and  just  condemnation 
of  the  theocratic  king.  To  complete  the  horror  of  the  representation,  the  northern  and 
southern  tribes  are  alike  included  in  the  indictment  and  in  the  guilt.  Penetrating 
beneath  the  faithful  but  very  repulsive,  yet  necessary  and  just,  similitude  employed 
by  the  prophet,  to  the  moral  and  spiritual  lessons  thus  conveyed,  we  may  trace  the 
story  of  the  inexcusable  infidelity  of  Judah  and  Israel  as  related  without  exaggeration 
by  one  of  their  own  race. 

I.  DiSLOTALTT   TO   JeHOVAH   WAS  COMMON  TO  JuDAH  AND  ISBAEL.      We  have  but  tO 

turn  to  the  Books  of  Kings  and  of  Chronicles  to  see  that  in  this  respect  the  northern 
and  southern  kingdoms  were  alike,  if  not  equally,  guilty.  In  the  'record  we  find,  not- 
withstanding certain  remarkable  exceptions  in  the  case  of  Judah,  that  kings  and  people 
continually  forsook  their  Divine  Deliverer  and  rightful  King,  and  addicted  themselves 
to  the  degrading  idolatries  practised  by  the  surrounding  nations. 

II.  Disloyalty  to  Jehovah  commenced  in  the  nation's  youth,  during  thb 
EoTPTiAti  BONDAaB.  The  record  of  the  wanderings  in  the  wilderness  is  a  sufficient 
proof  of  this.  The  worship  of  the  golden  calf  is  a  well-known  instance  of  the  readiness 
of  Israel  to  fall  back  into  the  Biyptian  idolatry,  which,  it  might  have  been  supposed, 
they  had  for  ever  left  behind  them  when  they  crossed  the  Red  Sea,  and  witnessed  the 


26  THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxm.  1— 49. 

powerlessness  of  the  gods  of  Egypt  to  save  Pharaoh  and  his  mighty  but  misguided 
host. 

III.  Disloyalty  to  Jehovah  waseepbated  whbk  Israel  was  bbouqht  into  con- 
tact WITH  thk  Assyrians.  In  the  frank  and  painful  language  of  the  prophet  is 
depicted  the  fatal  readiness  of  the  Israelites  to  yield  themselves  to  the  sp.ductions  of  the 
Oriental  idolatries,  and  even  to  go  out  of  their  way  to  court  the  corruption  which  they 
should  have  eschewed.  Compared  with  the  pure  and  stately  rites  instituted  by  Divine 
conamand,  and  celebrated  in  the  temple  courts  of  Jerusalem,  the  worship  of  the 
Assyrians  was  inexpressibly  degrading.  The  length  of  time  during  which  the  Hebrews 
had  enjoyed  peculiar  privileges  increased  their  culpability  in  transferring,  at  this  period, 
the  allegiance  they  owed  to  the  true  God  from  him  to  the  contemptible  iilols.of  Assyria. 

IV.  Disloyalty  to  Jehovah  alienated  him  fbom  the  people  whom  he  had 
CHOSEN.  As  the  soul  of  a  husband  is  estranged  from  the  adulteress  who  Las  deserted 
him,  so  the  Lord  declared  his  soul  to  be  alienated  from  her  whom  he  had  signalized  by 
his  favour.  Israel  had  forsaken  the  one  incomparably  holy  and  gracious  God,  and  had 
attached  herself  to  the  lords  many  and  the  gods  many  of  the  surrounding  peoples ;  and 
such  conduct  could  not  but  raise  a  barrier  between  Jehovah  and  the  nation  that  had 
shown  such  insensibility  to  his  favour,  and  such  readiness  to  yield  to  the  advances  of 
his  enemies. 

V.  Disloyalty  to  Jehovah  was  punished  through  the  agency  op  the  very 
people  through  whose  INSTIGATION  IT  WAS  COMMITTED.  How  remarkable  the  threat, 
"  I  will  raise  up  thy  lovers  against  thee " !  By  Assyria  Judah  and  Israel  were 
corrupted ;  and  by  Assyria  they  were  chastened.  They  nlienated  the  Lord,  and  yet 
found  no  help  from  the  false  gods  for  whose  sake  they  had  deserted  him. 

VI.  Partners  in  disloyalty  were  partners  in  punishment.  Alike  they  sinned, 
and  alike  they  suffered.  They  incurred  the  same  fate,  and  from  the  same  sword. 
Samaria  and  Judah  alike  endured  the  sorrows  of  the  Eastern  captivity  and  the  shock  of 
the  Eastern  armies. 

VII.  Disloyalty  to  Jehovah  was  severely  dealt  with.  In  various  figures,  each 
with  its  own  dark  shade  of  significance,  the  prophet  portrays  the  impending  fete  ot  the 
guilty,  apostate  nations.  They  were  mutilated  ;  they  were  compelled  to  drink  the  cup 
of  astonishment  and  desolation ;  they  were  consumed  with  fire  and  slain  with  the  sword. 

VIII.  The  aim  op  thus  punishing  disloyalty  was  to  bring  it  to  an  end. 
"Thus  will  I  cause  lewdness  [i.e.  idolatry]  to  cease  out  of  the  land,  that  all  women  [i.e. 
nations]  may  be  taught  not  to  do  a'ter  your  lewdness." 

IX.  Jehovah  thus  vindicates  his  own  claim  to  the  loyalty  op  all  men, 
avenging  himself  upon  those  who  wrong  him.  "  Ye  shall  know  that  I  am  the  Lord 
God."  His  honour  he  will  not  give  unto  another.  To  our  reverence  and  our  obedience, 
to  our  devotion  and  service,  our  Greater  and  Eedeemer  has  an  indisputable  and 
indefeasible  claim ;  and  this  he  will  assuredly  assert  and  maintain.  He  will  be 
honoured,  both  by  the  condemnation  of  the  unfaithful  and  rebellious,  and  by  the  salva- 
tion of  the  penitent,  the  submissive,  and  the  loyal. — T. 

Ver.  5a. — Exalted  relationship  and  enormous  sin.  "  And  Aholah  played  the  harlot 
when  she  was  mine." 

I.  A  relationship  op  the  highest  privilege.  "  She  was  mine."  Aholah  is 
intended  to  represent  the  people  of  Israel  as  disiinguished  from  the  people  of  Judah. 
The  Lord  here  says  that  she  was  his.  In  common  with  all  other  peoples,  Israel  was  his : 
(1)  By  creation.  God  "  himself  giveth  to  all  life,  and  breath,  and  all  things."  He  is 
"the  Father  of  spirits."  (2)  By  sustentation.  He  is  "the  God  in  whose  hand  our 
breath  is,  and  whose  are  all  our  ways."  With  Job,  we  may  say  to  him,  "  Thou  hast 
granted  me  life  and  favour,  and  thy  visitation  hath  preserved  my  spirit."  But: 
(3)  Israel  was  his  by  redemptiim.  He  redeemed  them  from  their  bondage  in  Egypt 
by  mighty  works  and  marvellous  signs.  That  emancipation  is  an  illustration  of  the 
redemption  of  man  from  sin  effected  by  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  "  The  Lord  hath 
anointed  him  .  ,  .  to  proclaim  liberty  to  the  captives,"  etc.  (Isa.  Ixi.  1,  2).  He  "  cave 
himself  a  ransom  for  all."  (4)  Israel  was  his  pre-eminently  by  covenant  engagenient. 
"  1  sware  unto  thee,  and  entered  into  a  covenant  with  thee,  saith  the  Lord  God  and 
thou  becamest  mine  "  (ch.  xvi.  8).     They  belonged  to  him  as  a  wife  belongs  to  her 


OH.  xxin.  1— 49.]    THE  BOUK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  2T 


husband.  This  is  the  relationship  to  which  the  text  points,  and  which  is  treated  of  in 
ch.  xvi.  It  is  great  condescension  on  the  part  of  God  to  authorize  the  prophets  thus 
to  represent  his  relation  to  his  people.  "  Thy  Maker  is  thy  Husband ;  the  Lord  of 
hosts  is  his  name  "  (Isa.  liv.'S).  "  Eeturn,  0  backsliding  children,  saith  the  Lord ;  for 
I  am  a  Husband  unto  you"  (Jer.  iii.  14).  This  relationship  should  be  characterized 
by :  1.  Tender  affection.  We  may  see  this  in  the  way  in  which  St.  Paul  writes  of 
the  love  between  Christ  and  the  Church  (Bph.  v.  23 — 32).  When  marriage  is  con- 
tracted without  true  mutual  affection,  the  relation  is  desecrated.  2.  Exalted  privilege. 
In  taking  the  Israelites  to  be  his,  God  gave  himself  to  them  as  their  supreme  Portion. 
"  They  shall  be  my  people,  and  1  will  be  their  God  "  (Jer.  xxxii.  38).  "  This  of  God's 
being  our  God,"  says  Charnocke,  "  is  the  quintessence  of  the  covenant,  the  soul  of  all 
the  promises :  in  this  he  hath  promised  whatsoever  is  infinite  in  him,  whatsoever  is 
the  glory  and  ornament  of  bis  nature,  for  our  use ;  not  a  part  of  him,  or  one  single 
perfection,  but  the  whole  vigour  and  strength  of  all.  As  he  is  not  a  God  without 
infTnite  wisdom,  and  infinite  power,  and  infinite  goodness,  and  infinite  blessedness,  etc., 
so  he  passes  over,  in  this  covenant,  all  that  which  presents  him  as  the  most  adorable 
Being  to  his  creatures :  he  will  be  to  them  as  great,  as  wise,  as  powerful,  as  good,  as  he 
is  in  himself.  And  the  assuring  us,  in  this  covenant,  to  be  our  God,  imports  also  that 
he  will  do  as  much  for  us  as  we  would  do  for  ourselves,  were  we  furnished  with  the 
same  goodness,  power,  and  wisdom :  in  .being  our  God,  he  testifies  it  is  all  one  as  if  we 
had  the  same  perfections  in  our  power  to  employ  for  our  use ;  for  he  being  possessed 
with  them,  it  is  as  much  as  if  we  ourselves  were  possessed  with  them  for  our  own 
advantage,  according  to  the  rules  of  wisdom,  and  the  several  conditions  we  pass  through 
for  his  glory."  3.  Scrupulous  fidelity.  The  relationship  imperatively  demands  this. 
God  would  not  fail  in  one  jot  or  tittle  on  his  part.  "  If  we  are  faithless,  he  abideth 
faithful ;  for  he  cannot  deny  himself."  And  Israel  was  required  to  be  true  to  him  in 
obeying  his  commands,  and  above  all  in  worshipping  him  alone.  "  I  am  the  Lord  thy 
Qod,  which  brought  thee  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  out  of  the  house  of  bondage.  Thou 
■halt  have  none  other  gods  before  me,"  etc.  (Exod.  xx.  1,  seq.).  Through  Jesus  Christ 
we  may  ench  enter  into  this  exalted  relationship.  Through  him  we  may  each  be 
enabled,  without  presumption,  to  say  of  the  great  God, "  He  is  my  God  and  my  Father." 
n.  A  SIN  OF  THE  GREATEST  HEiNousNESs.  "  And  Aholah  played  the  harlot  when 
she  was  mine."  Israel  is  here  represented  as  a  wife  who  has  been  unfaithful  to  her 
husband.  The  primary  reference  is  to  the  sin  of  Jeroboam  in  setting  up  the  golden 
calves  at  Bethel  and  at  Dan,  and  calling  upon  the  penple  to  worship  God  through  them 
(1  Kings  xii.  26 — 33).  And  this  was  but  the  beginning  of  Israel's  .sin.  Afterwards 
they  worshipped  Baal  and  Astarte.  Their  sin  involved :  1.  Positive  injustice.  They 
robbed  God  of  his  rights.  He  has  a  just  claim  on  our  obedience,  our  reverence,  and 
our  love.  This  claim  is  firmly  based  upon  what  he  is  in  himself^ — the  Supremely  Great 
and  Good ;  and  upon  what  he  is  and  does  in  relation  to  us — our  Creator,  etc.  Not  to 
comply  with  his  claims  is  to  defraud  him  of  his  due.  2.  Base  ingratitude.  How 
shameful  were  the  returns  which  Israel  made  for  his  great  kindness  to  tliem!  Very 
strikingly  is  this  set  forth  in  ch.  xvi.  And  their  conduct  has  been  too  closely  repro- 
duced by  us.  For  his  fidehty  we  have  returned  unbelief;  for  his  love,  coldness  of 
heart;  for  his  beneficence,  disobedience.  How  heinous  this  ingratitude  is  I  And  yet, 
alas,  how  common  I 

"  Blow,  blow,  thou  wiater  wind. 

Thou  art  not  so  unkind 
As  man's  ingratitude ; 

Thy  tooth  is  not  so  keen. 

Because  thou  art  not  seen, 
Although  thy  breath  be  rude. 

"  Freeze,  freeze,  thou  bitter  sky. 
That  dost  not  bite  so  nigh 

As  benefits  forgot : 
Though  thou  the  waters  warp, 
Thy  sting  is  not  so  sharp 
As  friend  rsmember'd  not." 

(Shiikespsare.) 


28  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIBL.    [oh.  xxra.  1— 4». 

3.  Heinous  infiddity.  This  is  the  aspect  of  Israel's  sin  to  which  prominence  ia  given 
in  tlie  text.  In  forsaking  the  Lord  God  for  idols  they  committed  a  treacherous  breach 
of  a  sacred  engagement.  Their  conduct  is  an  illustration  of  the  action  of  those  who, 
having  avowed  their  allegiance  to  him,  turn  their  backs  upon  him  and  upon  his  cause. 
Terrible  is  their  guilt,  and  deplorable  their  condition.  "  It  is  a  miserable  thing,"  says 
Bishop  Eyle,  "  to  be  a  backslider.  Of  all  \mhappy  things  that  can  befall  a  man,  I 
suppose  it  is  the  worst.  A  stranded  ship,  a  broken-winged  eagle,  •  garden  overrun 
with  weeds,  a  harp  without  strings,  a  church  in  ruins, — all  these  are  sad  sights ;  but  a 
backslider  is  a  sadder  sight  still."  And  appalling  will  be  their  doom,  even  "  a  certain 
fearful  expectation  of  judgment,  and  a  fierceness  of  fire  which  shall  devour  the  adver- 
saries." Says  Bunyan,  "  They  fall  deepest  into  hell  who  fall  backwards  into  hell." 
Let  backsliders  return  unto  the  Lord  while  there  is  yet  time.  "  Return,  thou  back- 
sliding Israel,  saith  the  Lord ;  I  will  not  look  in  anger  upon  you,"  etc.  (Jer.  iii.  12, 14; 
Eos.  xiv.  1— 4),— W.  J. 

Ver.  9. — Sinners  left  to  themselves  and  to  their  sins.  "  Wherefore  I  delivered  her 
into  the  hand  of  her  lovers,"  etc.  The  aspect  of  the  sin  of  Israel  which  ia  most  con- 
spicuous in  this  chapter  is  not  their  idolatry  so  much  as  their  contracting  political 
alliances  which  were  forbidden  by  God.  "The  imagery,"  as  Fausset  remarks,  "is 
similar  to  that  in  ch.  xvi. ;  but  here  the  reference  is  not,  as  there,  so  much  to  the 
breach  of  the  spiritual  marriage-covenant  with  God  by  the  people's  idolatries,  as  by 
their  worldly  spirit,  and  their  trusting  to  alliances  with  the  heathen  for  safety,  rather 
than  to  G(id."    Our  text  suggests  two  observations — 

I.  Detekminbd  persistence  in  sin  leads  God  to  allow  the  sinnek  to  take  his 
OWN  COURSE.  The  Israelites  would  trust  in  Egypt  or  in  Assyria  rather  than  in  the 
Lord  their  God.  Remonstrances  against  political  alliances  with  heathen  nations,  oi 
conformity  to  their  religious  observances,  with  warnings  of  the  consequences  of  so 
doing,  had  been  addressed  to  them  in  vain.  Exhortations  to  trust  in  Jehovah  alone 
had  proved  fruitless.  All  moral  means  had  been  employed  to  secure  their  fidelity  to 
their  duty  and  their  God,  but  without  avail.  Wherefore  the  Lord  "  delivered  her  into 
the  hand  of  her  lovers,  into  the  hand  of  the  Assyrians,  upon  whom  she  doted."  The 
Israelites  would  have  their  own  way,  and  God  at  length  allowed  them  to  take  it 
(cf.  Ps.  Ixxxi.  11,  12).  There  are  some  to-day  in  whom  we  fear  the  same  process  is  at 
work.  Here  is  a  man  who  makes  riches  the  object  of  his  supreme  concern.  Money  is 
the  god  in  which  he  trusts,  and  to  which  he  is  devoted.  His  great  and  constant  efforts 
are  made  in  order  to  acquire  and  retain  riches.  Remonstrances  and  rebukes  for  the 
course  he  is  pursuing  are  unheeded  by  him.  Exhortations  and  encouragements  to 
cherish  a  different  and  nobler  ambition,  to  trust  a  worthy  object,  and  to  live  to  God, 
are  addressed  to  him  in  vain.  He  will  go  on  in  his  own  way.  And  at  length  God 
allows  him  to  take  his  course,  and  live  for  money.  The  same  thing  takes  place  with 
others  who  make  a  god  of  pleasure,  or  who  will  trust  supremely  in  their  own  sagacity 
and  judgment,  or  whose  grand  ambition  and  ruling  purpose  is  to  attain  conspicuous 
position  or  commanding  power.  If  they  are  invincibly  determined  to  foUow  their  own 
course,  God  allows  them  to  do  so.  The  case  is  thus  forcibly  stated  by  Dr.  Joseph 
Parker:  "  A  man  sets  his  mind  on  standing  on  some  high  place;  he  points  to  a  pillar, 
and  says  that  if  he  could  ascend  to  its  summit  he  would  see  from  that  lofty  elevation 
glimpses  of  heaven,  and  he  determines  that  he  will  stand  upon  that  summit,  whatever 
hazards  he  may  incur.  At  length  God  grants  him  his  request;  and  when  the  man  has 
ascended  to  the  eminence  which  he  coveted,  what  does  he  find  ?  Sand,  sand,  sand  1 
Mile  on  mile  of  sand — sand  for  mile  on  mile  1  And  now  he  wishes  to  descend ;  but 
how  to  get  down  is  his  great  difficulty.  There  may  be  no  way  down  but  that  which 
involves  suicide.  Yet  the  man  was  determined  to  reach  that  elevation ;  nothing  could 
stand  between  him  and  his  wish;  he  urged  God  to  grant  him  his  request;  with 
importunate  desire  he  besought  that  he  might  have  his  own  way ;  and  there  is  no 
punishment  heavier  than  that  which  falls  upon  any  man  when  God  allows  him  to  take 
his  own  course."  God  does  much  to  lead  men  to  forsake  sin  and  follow  holiness ;  ha 
gave  his  own  beloved  Son  as  a  sacrifice  for  the  abolition  of  sin  and  the  salvation  of  the 
sinner ;  he  is  working  for  these  ends  by  many  and  powerful  agencies ;  for  these  objects 
he  will  do  everything  that  he  can,  everything  that  is  consistent  with  his  own  holiness 


OH.  XXIII.  1—49.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PROPHET   EZEKIEL.  29 

and  with  the  moral  constitution  which  he  has  given  to  man.  But  one  thing  he  will 
not  do — he  will  not  compel  men  to  forsake  their  own  evil  ways  aud  walk  in  his  way 
of  holiness.  And  if  men  were  forced  into  righteousness  of  action,  what  would  such 
righteousness  he  worth  ?  The  ohedience  which  is  not  willing  is  mechanical,  not  moral. 
The  goodness  whicii  is  not  hearty  is  in  the  sight  of  God  but  a  dead  and  hypocritical 
form. 

II.  The  punishment  of  sin  generally  aeisrs  out  of  the  sin  itself.  "  Where- 
fore I  delivered  her  up  into  the  hand  of  her  lovers,  into  the  hand  of  the  Assyrians,  upon 
whom  she  doted."  "The  cause  which  at  last  brought  destruction  on  Israel  was  that 
the  King  of  Assyria  found  conspiracies  in  Hosea,  who  was  intriguing  with  Egypt  at 
the  same  time  that  he  acknowledged  himself  a  tributary  to  Assyria  (2  Kings  xvii.  4)." 
Says  Matthew  Henry,  "  The  neighbouring  nations,  whose  idolatries  she  had  conformed 
to  and  whose  friendship  she  had  confided  in,  and  in  both  had  affronted  God,  are  now 
made  use  of  as  the  instruments  of  her  destruction.  The  Assyrians,  on  whom  she  doted, 
soon  spied  out  the  nakedness  of  the  land,  discovered  her  blind  side,  on  which  to  attack 
her,  stripped  her  of  all  her  ornaments  and  all  her  defences,  and  so  uncovered  her,  and 
made  her  naked  and  bare,  carried  her  sons  and  daughters  into  captivity,  slew  her  with 
the  sword,  and  quite  destroyed  that  kingdom  and  put  an  end  to  it.  .  .  .  And  that  iha 
Assyrians,  whom  they  had  been  so  fond  of,  should  be  employed  in  executing  judgments 
upon  them,  was  very  remarkable,  and  shows  how  God,  in  a  way  of  righteous  judgment, 
often  makes  that  a  scourge  to  sinners  which  they  have  inordinately  set  theit'  hearts 
upon.  The  devil  will  for  ever  be  a  tormentor  to  those  impenitent  sinners  who  now 
hearken  to  him  and  comply  with  him  as  a  tempter."  "God  excites  those  against  us 
for  punishment  to  please  whom  we  had  sinned."  Scott  says  truly,  "  God  commonlj 
Employs  tempters  to  punish  those  who  listen  to  them."    And  Shakespeare — 

"  Heaven  is  most  just,  and  of  our  pleasant  vices 
Makes  instruments  to  scourge  us." 

In  the  righteous  government  of  God  punishment  is  not  arbitrarily  annexed  to  sin  :  it 
grows  out  of  the  sin.  As  Hesiod  observes,  "  The  seeds  of  our  own  punishment  ar« 
sown  at  the  same  time  we  commit  sin."  "  Whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he 
also  reap,"  etc.  (Gtal.  vi.  7,  8).  If  men  will  trust  in  riches  or  rank,  in  pleasure  or  power ; 
if  they  will  live  for  these  things,  their  life  will  bear  its  appropriate  fruit.  These  their 
gods  will  prove  their  ruin.  Their  hopes  will  be  utterly  disappointed,  their  lives  deplor- 
ably impoverished  and  degraded,  and  their  souls  lost.  Let  us  take  heed  to  the  object 
of  our  trust.  "  Blessed  is  the  man  that  trusteth  in  the  Lord,  and  whose  hope  the  Lord 
is,"  etc.  (Jer.  xvii.  7,  8).— W.  J. 

Ver.  27. — A  severe  Judgment  and  its  satisfactory  consequences.  "  Thus  will  I  maka 
thy  lewdness  to  cease  from  thee,  and  thy  whoredom  brought  from  the  land  of  Egypt," 
etc.  The  sin  referred  to  in  this  verse  is  the  idolatry  of  the  people.  Two  of  its  clauses 
make  this  quite  clear.  "Thy  whoredom  brought  from  the  land  of  B;;ypt;  .  .  -  thou 
thalt  not  lift  up  thine  eyes  unto  them."  The  form  of  the  idols  which  Jeroboam  set  up 
he  derived  from  Egypt,  where  he  had  resided  for  some  time.  In  setting  up  the  golden 
calves  at  Bethel  and  Dan  he  "  translated  to  Israelitish  soil  the  worship  which  he  had 
seen  at  Memphis  and  Heliopolis  "  (1  Kings  xii.  26 — 36).  And,  what  is  more  important 
for  the  elucidation  of  our  text,  which  is  addressed  to  the  people  of  Judah,  the  whole 
Israelitish  people  brought  with  them  their  deep-rooted  tendency  to  idolatry  when  they 
came  out  of  Egypt.    Two  chief  points  are  presented  to  our  notice. 

L  A  judgment  of  gbbat  seveeitt  followed  by  batisfactoby  consequences. 
God  had  already  yisited  the  kingdom  of  Israel  with  his  judgments  because  of  their 
idolatries.  He  had  sent  famine  upon  them  (1  Kings  xvii.  1;  xviii.  1,  2);  he  had 
allowed  them  to  suffer  by  the  invasions  of  their  enemies  (2  Kings  vi.  24 — 29 ;  x.  32, 
33;  xiii.  3,  4,  7).  Amos  the  prophet  forcibly  sets  forth  these  visitations  of  Israel  by 
reason  of  their  sins  (iv.  6 — 11).  And  as  all  these  judgments  failed  to  turn  them 
from  idolatry,  the  Lord  suffered  them  to  be  carried  captive  into  Assyria  (2  Kings  xvii. 
3 — 6).  These  things  should  have  been  a  warning  to  the  people  of  Judah  to  keep  clear 
of  idolatry ;  yet  they  frequently  lapsed  into  it.  God  had  caused  them  also  to  suffer  by 
reason  of  it  (2  Kings  xviii.  13—16;  xxi.  1—15  ;  xxiii.  31 — 35;  xxiv.  1—4,  10—16). 
But  these  judgments  did  not  cleanse  the  kingdom  of  Judah  of  idolatry.    Checked  for 


30         THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  [oh.  xxm.  1—49. 

a  time,  the  sinful  practice  broke  out  vigorously  again.  And  in  consequence,  the 
complete  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  the  utter  overthrow  of  the  kingdom,  and  the  captivity 
of  tlie  people,  are  declared  to  be  at  hand.  And  the  text  asserts  that,  by  means  of  this 
severe  judgment,  the  people  would  he  finally  and  for  ever  freed  from  idolatry.  And  the 
result  has  proved  the  prophetic  assertion  true.  One  effect  of  the  Captivity  was  the 
complete  eradication  of  the  tendency  of  the  Jews  to  idolatry ;  "  so  that  whereas,  before 
the  Captivity,  no  nation  (all  things  considered)  was  more  impetuously  bent  upon  idols 
and  idolatry  than  they  were,  after  that  Captivity  no  nation  was  more  vehemently  set 
against  idols  and  idolatry  than  they  were."  The  sin  of  idolatry  is  not  limited  to  those 
who  are  called  heathen.  Dr.  Thomas  Guthrie  says  truly,  "  In  a  sense  all  men  are 
idolaters.  In  the  days  of  old,  it  is  said  that  Egypt  had  more  gods  than  men.  Else- 
whore  than  in  Egypt,  everywhere,  as  the  Bible  says,  '  there  be  lords  many  and  gods 
many,'  The  Hindu  reckons  his  divinities  by  thousands  and  tens  of  thousands ;  yet 
the  world  has  a  larger  pantheon — as  many  gods  as  it  has  obj  cts,  be  they  innocent  or 
guilty,  which  usurp  the  place  of  Jehovah,  and  dethrone  him  in  the  creature's  heart. 
Nor  are  men  less  idolaters  if  drunkards,  though  they  pour  out  no  libation  to  Bacchus, 
the  god  of  wine ;  nor  less  idolaters,  if  impure,  that  they  bum  no  incense  at  the  shrine 
of  Venus ;  nor  less  idolaters,  if  lovers  of  wealth,  that  they  do  not  mould  their  god  into 
an  image  of  Plutus,  and,  giving  a  shrine  to  what  lies  hoarded  in  their  coffers,  offer  it 
their  morning  and  evening  prayers.  He  has  been  an  idolater,  who,  rebelling  against 
Providence,  follows  the  hearse  of  a  cofiBned  god ;  he  made  an  idol  of  wife  or  child;  and 
now,  when  the  robber  of  all  our  homes  has  stolen  these  his  gods  away,  and  bears  off  his 
plunder  to  the  grave,  the  feelings  of  that  man's  heart  may  be  expressed  in  Micah's 
complaint  to  the  Danite  robbers, '  Te  have  taken  away  my  gods  which  I  made,  and 
what  have  I  more  ?  and  what  is  this  that  ye  say  unto  me,  What  aileth  thee  ? '"  Let  no 
one  deem  it  strange  if  God  should  visit  him  for  his  idolatries.  He  may  do  so  by  forcibly 
removing  the  idol,  by  depriving  the  idolater  of  the  riches  which  he  has  worshipped,  or 
by  taking  to  himself  the  child  or  other  relative  which  has  been  made  an  idol.  Or  he 
may  visit  those  who  sin  thus  by  making  the  idol  the  occasion  of  sharp  sorrow  or  bitter 
trial,  as  when  a  child  has  been  idolized  by  his  parents,  and  grows  up  to  "  bring  down 
their  grey  hairs  with  sorrow  to  the  grave."  Blessed  will  it  be  if  such  visitation  leads 
to  the  turning  of  the  heart  entirely  to  God. 

II.   A   PKOPHBTIO    PREDICTION   WHICH  WAS    REMABKABLT    FULFILLED.        "  ThuS    Will 

I  make  thy  lewdness  to  cease  from  thee,"  etc.  "  This  prediction  is  frequently  repeated ; 
and  the  accomplishment  of  it  has  been  most  wonderful.  It  might  have  been  expected 
that  a  nation,  ever  prone  to  idolatry  in  a  country  where  the  worship  of  the  true  God 
was  established  and  none  else  tolerated,  would  have  readily  conformed  to  the  idolatrous 
usages  of  the  nations  among  whom  they  were  scattered  by  the  Captivity,  and  so  have 
been  incorporated  with  them.  Yet  neither  the  authority,  the  frowns,  the  examples,  or 
the  favour  of  their  conquerors  or  powerful  neighbours ;  nor  their  own  fears,  hopes, 
interests,  or  predilection  for  the  sensual,  jovial  worship  of  idols,  could  prevail  with  them 
to  run  into  gross  idolatry,  during  the  Captivity  or  afterwards  1  Nay,  they  were  instru- 
mental to  the  proselyting  of  numbers  of  idolaters  to  the  worship  of  Jehovah,  in  the 
countries  where  they  were  dispersed  "  (Scott).  This  is  certainly  a  remarkable  fulfilment 
of  prophetic  prediction ;  and  it  furnishes  :  1.  Evidence  of  the  omniscience  of  God.  He 
clearly  and  certainly  foresaw  what  the  result  of  the  Captivity  would  be  in  this  respect. 
Such  foreknowledge  points  to  the  omniscience  of  him  who  possesses  it.  "  0  Lord,  thou 
hast  searched  me  and  known  me,"  etc.  (Ps.  cxxxix.  1—4).  This  knowledge  should 
prove:  (1)  A  restraint  to  the  evil-doer.  There  is  no  possibility  of  sinning  in  secret (cf. 
Job  xxxiv.  21,  22  j  Ps.  xo.  8 ;  Heb.  iv.  13).  (2)  An  inspiration  and  consolation  to 
every  one  who  trusts  in  God.  "  Our  individual  life,"  to  use  the  words  of  Dr.  Parker, 
"  is  all  understood  by  him.  That  life  is  but  dimly  known  to  ourselves.  We  catch 
glimpses  of  it  here  and  there,  but  its  scope  and  meaning  are  still  unrevealed  to  us.  Wo 
are  often  in  shadow.  There  are  scattered  rays  of  light,  but  no  steady  shining  of  the 
sun  which  protects  us  from  the  mystery  of  much  darkness.  It  is  enough  that  God 
knows  our  life,  and  that  his  wisdom  is  pledged  as  our  defence.  To-morrow  is  coming 
upon  us,  and  we  know  not  with  what  messages  and  revelations,  with  what  joys  and 
troubles ;  but  God  is  coming  with  it,  and  in  his  path  is  the  brightness  of  all-sufficient 
wisdom."    2.  Evidence  of  the  Divine  inspiration  of  the  prophet.    The  influence  of  pa^t 


OH.  XXIII.  1-49.]     THK  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  31 

judgments  upon  the  people  could  not  have  led  Ezekiel  to  have  predicted  such  a  result 
of  the  Captivity,  but  one  of  an  opposite  character.  The  character  of  the  people  and  the 
circumstances  of  their  captivity  were  not  calculated  to  inspire  a  declaration  like  this. 
It  could  not  have  been  the  product  of  mere  human  geoius  in  an  exalted  mood,  or 
human  foresight  in  a  condition  of  intense  activity.  Such  a  prediction  must  have  been 
communicated  to  the  prophet  by  him  to  whom  all  thiags  are  known. 
Conclusion.    "  G-uard  yourselves  from  idols." — W.  J. 

Vers.  38,  39. — The  exdvMveness  of  the  worship  of  the  Lord  Qod.  "Moreover  this 
they  have  done  unto  me :  they  have  defiled  my  sanctuary  in  the  same  day,"  etc.  The 
chief  practical  suggestions  of  our  text  may  be  arranged  under  three  heads. 

I.  Men  instructed  in  the  true  religion  practising  the  greatest  abominations 
OF  heathenism.  "  Tliey  had  slain  their  children  to  their  idols  "  (ver.  39).  "  They  have 
caused  their  sons,  whom  they  bare  unto  me,  to  pass  through  the  fire  unto  them  to  be 
devoured"  (ver.  37).  We  have  already  noticed  the  offering  of  children  to  Moloch 
(on  ch.  xvi.  20,  21).  And  in  this  age  and  in  this  professedly  Christian  land  people 
make  sacrifices  which  bear  some  resemblance  to  these  in  spirit.  How  many  respect- 
able and  avowetlly  Christian  parents  sacrifice  their  daughters  in  marriage  to  mammon  I 
The  man  may  be  unsuitable  in  age,  uncongenial  in  temper,  immoral  in  character  and 
conduct;  but,  if  be  be  rich,  he  is  welcomed  as  a  suitor.  How  frequently,  too,  are  the 
best  and  the  abiding  interests  of  children — their  intellectual,  spiritual,  and  eteinal 
interests — risked,  or  even  sacrificed,  by  their  parents,  in  order  that  they  may  attain 
untu  higher  social  status  or  gain  worldly  honours  and  distinctions!  And  in  other 
ways  practices  which  are  worthy  only  of  heathen  intelligence  and  morality  are  at  work 
wmongft  U8. 

II.  lUliN    t'ASSING  AT  ONCE  FROM  THE  FBACTIOE  OF  THE  ABOMINATIONS  OF  HEATHENISM 

INTO  THE  SANCTUARY  AND  SERVICE  OF  THE  LIVING  GoD.  "  When  they  had  slain 
their  children  to  their  idols,  then  they  came  the  same  day  into  my  sanctuary  to  pro- 
fane  it;  and,  lo,  tlius  have  they  done  in  the  midst  of  mine  house."  The  Prophet 
Jeremiah  complains  of  a  similar  sin :  "  Will  ye  steal,  murder,  and  commit  adultery, 
and  swear  falsely,  and  burn  incense  unto  fiaal,  and  walk  after  other  gods  whom  ye 
have  not  known ;  and  come  and  stand  before  me  in  this  house,  which  is  called  by  my 
Kame,  and  say.  We  are  delivered ;  that  ye  may  do  all  these  abominations  ?  "  (Jer.  vii. 
9, 10).  The  sin  is  not  unknown  amongst  us  in  these  days.  Men  are  on  the  race- 
course, with  its  cruelty, ,  profanity,  and  gambling,  on  the  weekday,  and  on  Sunday 
they  enter  the  sanctuary  of  God,  and  take  part  in  its  services.  There  are  those  who, 
during  the  week,  visit  scenes  of  drunkenness  and  profligacy,  and  on  the  Lord's  day 
they  go  to  church  and  unite  in  the  forms  of  worship.  It  is  an  ill  preparation  for  the 
sacred  engagements  of  the  house  of  God  to  spend  the  Saturday  evening  in  the  public- 
house,  worshipping  Bacchus^  Nor  is  the  character  of  the  case  much  altered  when 
persons  attend  church  on  Sunday  morning,  and  spend  the  remainder  of  the  day  in 
social  festivity  and  dissipation. 

III.  That  such  conduct  is  a  profanation  both  of  the  sabbath  and  ths 
8ANCTUAET  OF  GoD.  "Moreovcr  this  they  have  done  unto  me:  they  have  defiled 
my  sanctuary  in  the  same  day,  and  have  profaned  my  sabbaths.  For  when  they  had 
slain  their  children  to  their  idols,"  etc.  We  may  show  this  by  noticing:  1.  That 
these  things  should  be  held  in  reverence.  (1)  Because  they  were  instituted  by  Gud. 
He  ordained  the  sabbath  and  the  sanctuary.  They  rest  upon  the  basis  of  Divine 
authority.  (2)  Because  they  were  instituted  for  his  glory.  Both  the  sabbath  and 
the  sanctuary  are  for  the  worship  of  the  Most  High.  Both  are  intended  to  promote 
the  best  interests  of  man,  to  elevate  him  as  a  spiritual  and  immortal  being,  and  thus 
to  enable  him  more  fully  to  glorify  God.  As  man  grows  in  spiritual  purity  and  power, 
in  righteousness  and  kindness  towards  men,  and  in  reverence  and  devotion  towards 
(rod,  his  life  contributes  to  the  honour  of  God.  The  sabbath  and  the  sanctuary,  when 
properly  used,  further  these  ends.  2.  The  conduct  exhibited  and  condemned  in  the-  text 
is  most  irreverent  in  relation  to  these  things.  (1)  Because  it  puts  the  sanctuary  and 
the  sabbath  on  the  low  level  of  heathen  institutions  and  customs.  So  did  the  people 
of  Israel  and  of  Judah.  How  many  to-day  attend  religions  services  for  no  higher 
reason  than  this,  that  it  is  socially  respectable  to  do  so  I    (2)  Because  it  dispamgey 


S9 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  BZEKIEL.    [oh.  xnv.  1—27. 


them  in  the  eyes  of  observers.  If  men  form  their  opinion  of  religious  services  and 
ordinances  from  such  persons  as  take  part  in  them  on  Sunday,  and  during  the  rest 
of  the  week  lead  lives  of  a  character  which  is  in  utter  opposition  to  them,  they  must 
conclude  that  they  are  shams  and  unworthy  of  the  regard  of  true  men.  (3)  Because 
it  is  insulting  to  God.  Such  conduct  implies  that  our  outward  and  empty  forms  and 
ceremonies  can  please  him,  or  that  he  will  accept  our  attendance  upon  his  worship  as 
a  compensation  for  our  disregard  of  his  will  when  we  are  absent  from  his  house. 
"But  the  Lord  looketh  on  the  heart."  He  rejects  the  worship  which  is  offered  to  him 
by  such  persons  as  hypocritical  service  and  offensive  to  him  (of.  Ps.  1.  7 — 23 ;  Isa.  i. 
11—15). 

CoNOliUSiON.  The  worship  of  God  is  exclusive.  "  Thou  shall  have  none  other  gods 
before  me ; "  "  Thou  shalt  worship  the  Lord  thy  God,  and  him  only  shalt  thou  serve ; " 
"  Te  cannot  serve  God  and  mammon."  Let  us  cultivate  decision  and  thoroughness  in 
his  service.  How  different  from  the  conduct  condemned  in  the  text  was  that  of 
Cyprian  1  On  his  way  to  martyrdom  he  was  told  by  the  emperor  that  ie  would  give 
him  time  to  consider  if  he  had  not  better  cast  a  grain  of  incense  into  the  fire  in  honour 
of  the  idol-gods  than  die  so  ignominiously.  Cyprian  replied,  "There  needs  no  delibera- 
tion in  the  case."  John  Huss,  at  the  stake,  was  offered  a  pardon  if  he  would  recant. 
His  reply  wa?,  "  I  am  here,  ready  to  suffer  death."  Thomas  Hawkes,  in  like  circum- 
stances, said,  "  If  I  had  a  hundred  bodies,  I  would  suffer  them  all  to  be  torn  in  pieces, 
rather  than  recant."  Let  us  seek  to  be  alike  true,  whole-hearted,  and  firm  in  our 
allegiance  to  our  Lord. — W.  J. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTEE  XXIV. 


Ver.  1. — In  the  ninth  year.  We  pass  from 
the  date  of  ch.  xx.  1  (bo.  593)  to  b.o.  590, 
and  the  very  day  is  identified  with  that  on 
which  the  army  of  Nebuchadnezzar  besieged 
Jernsalem  (Jer.  xxxix.  I ;  2  Kings  xxv.  1 — 
12).  To  the  prophet's  vision  all  that  was 
passing  there  was  as  plain  as  though  he 
saw  it  witli  his  own  eyes.  The  siege  lasted 
for  about  two  years.  The  punishments 
threatened  in  ch.  xxiii.  bad  at  last  come 
near.  We  may  probably  infer  that  a  con- 
siderable interval  of  silence  had  followed 
on  the  Abolah  and  Aholibah  discourse. 
Kow  the  time  had  come  to  break  that  si- 
lence, and  it  .was  broken,  after  the  prophet's 
manner,  by  a  parable.  In  the  "rebellious 
honse"  we  find,  as  in  oh.  ii.  3  and  else- 
where, primarily  Ezekiel's  immediate  hearers, 
secondarily  the  whole  house  of  Israel  as 
rewesented  by  them. 

vers.  3,  i. — Set  on  a  pot,  etc.  The  words 
contain  an  obvious  reference  to  the  imagery  of 
eh.  xi.  3 — 7.  The  people  had  used  that  ima- 
gery either  in  the  spirit  of  a  false  security  or 
in  the  recklessness  of  despair.  It  is  now  the 
prophet's  work  to  remind  them  that  the  in- 
terpretation which  he  gave  to  their  own 
ciimparison  had  proved  to  be  the  true  one. 
The  cauldron  b  the  city,  the  fire  is  the  in- 
vading army,  the  metal  of  the  caiddron  does 
not  pi'oteot  them.  The  pieces,  the  choice 
bones,  were  the  princes  and  chief  men  of  the 
people. 
Ver.  5. — Burn  also  the  bones  nnder  it; 


better,  with  the  Vulgate  and  Bevised  Vei* 
sion,  pilt  the  hones.  The  bones  of  animals 
were  often  used  as  fuel.  Currey  quotes  an 
interesting  passage  fi-om  Livingstone's  'Laet 
Journal,'  i.  p.  347,  narrating  how,  when  the 
supply  of  ordinary  fuel  failed,  be  made  his 
steamer  work  with  the  bones  of  elephants. 
See  a  like  practice  among  the  Scythians 
(Herod.,  iv.  61). 

Ver.  6.— Scum.  The  word  is  not  found 
elsewhere.  The  Authorized  Version  foUows 
the  Vulgate.  Keil  and  the  Bevised  Version 
give  "rust."  As  the  cauldron  was  of  brass 
(ver.  11),  this  must  have  been  the  verdigris 
which  was  eating  into  the  metal,  and  which 
even  the  blazing  fire  could  not  get  rid  of. 
The_  pieces  that  are  to  be  brought  out  are 
the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  who  are  to  be 
carried  into  exila  There  was  to  be  "no  lot 
cast,"  as  was  often  done  with  piisoners  of 
war,  taking  every  tenth  man  (decimating) 
of  the  captives  for  death  or  exile  (oomp. 
2  Sam.  viii.  2).  All  alike  were  doomed 
(Joel  iii.  3). 

Ver.  7.— The  parable  is  for  a  moment  in- 
terrupted, and  Jerusalem  is  the  murderess 
who  has  shed  blood,  not  where  the  earth 
might  cover  it  (Job  xvi.  18 ;  Isa.  xxvi.  21^ 
but  as  on  the  top  of  a  rook  visible  in  the  sight 
of  all  men. 

Ver.  9.— We  return  to  the  image  of  the 
cauldron,  and  once  again,  as  in  ver.  6  and 
cb.  xxii.  3  and  xxiii.  37,  we  have  the  words 
which  Nahum  (iii.  1)  had  used  of  Nine\  uh 
applied  to  Jerusalem. 

Ver.  10.— Spioeit  well;  Utter, make  (Mek 


OH.  XXIV.  1—27.]     THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  E2,EK1EL. 


33 


the  brofft  (Revised  Yeraion).  The  verb  is  used 
in  Exud.  xxz.  83,  35,  of  the  concoction  of 
the  anointing  oil,  and  the  cognate  adjective 
in  Job  xlL  31  for  the  "boiling"  of  the 
water  caused  by  the  crocodile.  We  are  re- 
minded of  the  "bubble,  bubble"  of  the 
witches'  cauldron  in  '  Macbeth.' 

Ver.  11. — Then  set  it  empty  upon  the  coals, 
etc  The  empty  cauldron  is,  of  course,  the 
city  bereaved  of  its  inliabitants.  The  fire 
must  go  on  till  the  rust  is  consumed.  There 
is,  however,  in  spite  of  the  seemingly  terrible 
hopelessness  of  the  seutence,  a  gleam  of 
hope,  as  there  had  been  in  eh.  xvi.  42.  When 
the  punishment  bad  done  its  full  work,  then 
Jehovah  might'  cause  his  fuiy  to  rest  (ver. 
13).  Till  then  he  declares,  through  the 
prophet,  there  will  be  no  mitigation  of  the 
punishment.  The  word  has  gone  forth,  and 
there  will  be  no  change  of  purpose. 

Ver.  12. — She  hath  wearied  herself  with 
lies,  etc. ;  better,  it  (keeping  to  the  image  of 
the  cauldron)  is  worn  out  with  labours;  so. 
vrith  the  paius  taken  to  cleanse  it,  and  yet 
the  lust  remains.  The  fire  must  bum,  the 
retributive  judgment  must  continue,  till  the 
work  is  done. 

Vers.  15 — 17. — ^Behold,  I  take  away  from 
thee,  etc.  The  next  word  of  the  Lord,  com- 
ing after  an  interval,  is  of  an  altogether  ex- 
ceptional character,  as  giving  one  solitary 
glimpse  into  the  personal  home  life  of  the 
prophet.  The'  lesson  which  the  history 
teaches  is,  in  substance,  the  same  as  that  of 
3s€ ,  xvi.  5.  The  calamity  that  falls  on  the 
natKoi  will  swallow  up  all  personal  sorrow, 
but  it  is  brought  home  to  Ezekiel,  who  may 
have  read  those  words  with  wonder,  by  a 
new  and  terrible  experience.  We  are  left  to 
eonjeoture  whether  anything  in  the  prophet's 
home  life  furnished  a  starting-point  for  the 
terrible  message  that  was  now  borne  in  upon 
his  soul.  Had  his  wife  been  ill  before  ?  or,  as 
the  words,  with  a  stroke,  suggest,  did  it  fall 
on  him,  as  a  thunderbolt "  out  of  the  blue  "  ? 
I  mention,  only  to  reject,  the  view  that  the 
vrife'a  death  belongs  as  much  to  the  category 
of  aymbolio  visions  as  the  boiling  cauldron. 
To  me  such  a  view  seems  to  indicate  an  in- 
capacity for  entering  into  a  prophet's  life 
and  calling  as  great  as  that  which  sees 
nothing  but  an  allegoiy  in  the  history  of 
Gomer  in  Hos.  ii.,  iii.  We,  who  accept  the 
Scripture  record  as  we  find  it,  may  believe 
that  Ezekiel  was  taught,  as  the  earlier  pro- 
phet, to  interpret  his  work  by  his  own  per- 
sonal experience.  To  Ezekiel  himself  the 
loss  of  one  who  is  thns  described  as  the 
desixe  (or,  ddight)  of  his  eyes  (the  word  is 
used  of  things  in  1  Kings  xx.  6,  of  young 
warriors  in  Lam.  ii.  4,  of  sons  and  daughters 
in  ver.  25),  must  have  been,  at  first,  as  the 
crowning  sorrow  of  his  life ;  but  the  feelings 
■«t  the  patriot-prophet  were  stronger  even 

£Z£KI£L — II. 


than  those  of  the  husband,  and  his  personal 
bereavement  seemed  as  a  small  thing  com- 
pared with  the  desolation  of  his  country. 
He  was  to  refrain  from  all  conventional 
signs  of  mouruiag,  from  weeping  and  wad- 
ing, from  the  loud  sighing  (for  foibear  to 
cry,  read,  with  the  Bevised  Version,  sigh, 
hut  not  alovd),  from  the  head  covered  or 
sprinkled  with  ashes  (Isa.  Ixi.  3),  and  from 
the  bare  feet  (2  Sum.  xv.  SO;  Isa.  xx. 
2),  from  the  covered  lips  (Lev.  xiii.  45; 
Mlcah  iii,  7),  which  were  "  the  trappings  and 
the  garb  of  woe  "  in  such  a  case.  £at  not 
the  bread  of  men.  The  words  point  to  the 
custom,  mure  or  less  common  in  all  nation* 
and  at  alt  times,  of  a  funeral  feast,  like  the 
parentdlia  of  the  Romans.  Wine  also  was  com- 
monly part  of  such  a  feast  (Jer.  xvi.  7).  The 
primary  idea  of  the  custom  seems  to  haie 
been  that  the  mourner's  friends  sent  the 
materials  for  the  feast  as  a  token  of  theb 
sympathy. 

Ver.  18. — So  I  spake  unto  the  people  is 
the  morning,  etc.  In  yet  another  way  tlw 
calling  of  the  prophet  superseded  thenatnril 
impulses  of  the  man.  He  knew  that  tit 
wife's  hours  were  numbered,  yet  the  day 
was  spent,  not  in  ministering  at  her  deati^ 
bed,  but  in  one  last  effort  to  impress  the 
_  teachings  of  the  time  upon  the  seared  con- 
'  sciences  and  hardened  hearts  of  bis  country- 
men and  neighbours.  I  cannot  help  referrine 
to  the  poem  '  Ezekiel,'  by  B.  M.,  published 
in  1871,  as  expressing  the  meaning  of  the 
history  better  than  any  commentary, 

Ver.  19. — We  must  read  between  the  line^ 
what  had  passed  in  that  eventful  night  ^ 
sorrow.  The  rumour  must  have  spreM 
among  the  exiles  of  Tel-Abib  that  the  pre- 
phet  had  lost  the  wife  whom  he  loved  ao 
tenderly.  They  were  ready,  we  may  ima- 
gine, to  offer  their  consolations  and  theii 
sympathy.  And,  behold,  he  appears  as  one 
on  whom  no  special  sorrow  had  fallen.  But 
that  strange  outward  hardness  had  the  effect 
which  it  was  meant  to  have.  It  roused  them 
to  ask  questions,  and  it  was  one  of  the  oases 
in  which  the  prudens  interrogatio,  which  if 
not  in  itself  the  dimidium  seientias,  at  least 
prepared  the  way  for  it.  The  form  of  their 
question  implies  that  they  had  a  forecast 
that  the  strange  conduct  was,  in  some  way, 
connected  with  the  prophet's  work.  WUt 
thou  not  tell  us  what  these  things  an  to 
us? 

Ver.  21. — The  desire  of  your  eyes.  There 
is  something  exquisitely  pathetic  in  the 
iteration  of  the  phrase  of  ver.  17.  To  the 
priest  Ezekiel  himself,  to  the  people  whom 
he  addressed,  the  temple  was  as  dear  as  the 
wife  to  the  husband!  It  was  also  "the 
pride  of  their  power"  (Revised  Version), 
the  "pity  of  their  soul"  (margin).  The 
former  phrase  comes  &om  Lev.  xxvi.  19. 


84 


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PBOPHET  BZEKIEL.    [ch.  xxit.  1—27. 


When  that  temple  should  be  profaned,  when 
sons  and  daughters  should  fall  by  the  sword, 
then  they  would  do  as  the  prophe't  had  done. 
They  would  learn  that  there  is  a  sorrow 
which  is  too  deep  for  tears,  something  that 
passeth  show.  The  state  which  the  prophet 
describes  is  not  one  of  oallonsnesa,  or  im- 
penitence, or  despair.  The  people  shall 
mourn  for  their  iniquities;"  this  will  be 
the  beginning  of  repentance.  Lev.  xxvi. 
39,  40  was  obviously  in  the  prophet's 
thoughts.  We  note  that  ver.  24  is  the  one 
solitary  passage  since  oh.  i.  3  in  which 
Kzekiel  names  himself.  As  single  acts  and 
gestures  had  before  (oh.  iv.  1 — 12)  been  a 
sign  of  what  was  coming,  so  now  the  man 
himself  waa  to  be  in  that  hour  of  bereave- 
menL 


Vers.  26,  27.— Yet  another  sign  was  given, 
not  to  the  people,  but  to  the  prophet  himself. 
For  the  present  there  was  to  be  the  siltiioe 
of  unutterable  sorrow,  continuing,  day  after 
day,  as  there  had  been  before  (ch.  iii.  26) 
Then  there  should  come  a  messenger  from 
Jerusalem,  reporting  its  capture  and  destruc- 
tion, and  then  his  mouth  should  be  opened. 
The  raetsengerdoes  not  come  till  nearly  three 
years  afterwards  (oh.  xxxiii.  21);  and  we 
must  infer  that  there  was  no  spoken  message 
during  the  liiterval,  but  that  from  ch.xxv.  1 
onward  we  have  the  written  words  of  the 
Lord  that  came  to  him  from  time  to  time, 
not  as  messages  to  Israel,  but  as  bearing  on 
the  fate  of  the  surrounding  nations.  We 
have,  i.e.,  what  is,  strictly  speaking,  a  paran- 
thesis  in  the  prophet's  work. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — ITie  seetking-pot.  L  The  vessel.  Jerusalem  is  compared  to  a  seething- 
pot.  The  character  of  the  city  had  certain  points  of  resemblance.  1.  Unity.  All  the 
parts  are  thrown  into  one  vessel.  There  was  a  common  life  in  the  one  city.  All 
dasses  shared  a  common  fortune.  They  who  are  united  in  sin  will  be  united  in  doom. 
2.  Vain  protection.  The  heat  of  the  Are  came  through  the  vessel.  The  walls  of 
Jerusalem  did  not  save  the  doomed  city.  No  earthly  shelter  will  protect  the  guilty 
from  the  wrath  of  God.  3.  Fatal  imprisonment.  The  miserable  inhabitants  of  Jeru- 
salem were  shut  up  to  the  horrible  fate  of  a  besieged  city.  There  is  no  escape  from 
the  scene  of  Divine  judgment.  Indeed,  the  sufferings  of  a  siege  are  worse  than  those 
of  the  open  battle-field.  They  who  hold  out  against  God  will  be  more  miserably 
punished  than  those  who  meet  him  early. 

II.  The  contents  or  the  vessel.  1.  Flesh.  The  various  joints  of  the  butchered 
animal  are  flung  into  the  seething-pot.  They  represent  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem. 
The  punishment  of  sin  falls  on  the  persons  of  the  sinners.  "  The  soul  that  sinneth,  it 
shall  die."  There  is  something  humiliating  in  this  comparison  with  mere  joints  of 
meat.  The  doomed  sinner  is  in  a  degraded  condition.  His  higher  spiritual  nature  hag 
been  neglected  and  well-nigh  lost.  He  appears  as  "  flesh,"  and,  having  sunk  into  the 
lower  life  of  flesh,  he  must  expect  to  receive  the  treatment  of  flesh.  Sowing  to  the 
flesh,  he  reaps  corruption  (Gal.  vi.  8).  2.  The  choice  parts.  "The  choice  bones"  are 
to  be  thrown  into  the  seething-pot.  The  princes  of  Judah  share  the  fate  of  their  city; 
they  are  even  selected  for  exceptional  indignity  and  suffering.  No  earthly  rank  or 
wealth  will  save  from  the  just  punishment  of  sin.  On  the  contrary,  if  large  privileges 
have  been  abused,  and  high  duties  neglected,  the  penalty  will  be  all  the  heavier. 

in.  The  fire.  The  seething-pot  is  to  be  put  on  a  fire.  Sin  is  punished  by  burning 
wrath.  1.  Suffering.  The  symbol  of  fire  certainly  suggests  pain,  although  we  may 
dismiss  the  gross  medisaval  picture  of  actual  physical  flames  belching  forth  from  some 
subterranean  volcano.  2.  Destruction.  The  fire  is  to  go  on  beyond  its  wonted  task 
till  all  the  water  is  dried  up  and  the  contents  of  the  vessel  are  burnt.  This  is  the 
final  issue  of  the  penalties  of  sin.  At  first  they  come  in  sufi'ering.  But  if  there  is 
no  amendment,  and  the  lessons  of  chastisement  are  not  taken  to  heart,  the  broad 
road  leads  to  destruction  (Matt.  viL  13),  and  "the  wages  of  sin  is  death"  (Bom. 
vL  23). 

Ver.  2. — Memorable  days.  Bzekiel  was  to  take  note  of  the  day  on  which  he  received 
a  message  concerning  the  approaching  ruin  of  Jerusalem,  as  it  was  to  be  on  the  anni- 
versary of  that  day  that  the  King  of  Babylon  would  besiege  Jerusalem.  Thus  it  would 
be  seen  that  the  prediction  was  strikingly  fulfilled.  This  is  one  instance  of  the  marking 
of  «iemorable  days. 


OH.  XXIV.  1—27.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  35 

I.  The  ooourrence  of  memorable  days.  In  themselves  all  days  may  be  equally 
gacred  (Rom.  xiv.  5).  Nevertheless,  a  differeuoe  of  oharaoter,  history,  and  assooiations 
will  divide  our  days  out  into  very  various  classes,  and  will  mark  some  for  especial 
interest.  There  are  days  that  stand  out  in  history  like  great  promontories  along  the 
coast.  We  must  all  have  lived  through  days  the  memory  of  which  is  burnt  into  our 
Bouls.  There  are  the  red-letter  days,  days  pf  honour  and  gladness ;  and  there  are  the 
black-letter  days  of  calamity.  Note  some  of  the  kinds  of  memorable  days.  1.  Days 
of  warning.  Such  was  the  day  of  our  text.  We  cannot  afford  to  forget  such  days. 
They  may  occur  but  rarely;  yet  their  influence  should  be  permanent.  2.  Days  of 
Uessing.  If  we  have  had  times  of  exceptional  prosperity,  or  occasions  when  we  have 
been  surprised  with  new  and  unexpected  good,  surely  such  happy  seasons  deserves  to 
be  chronicled.  It  is  ungrateful  to  leave  a  blank  in  our  diaries  for  those  days.  3.  Days 
tf  sorrow.  These,  too,  may  be  days  of  bl  ssing,  though  of  blessing  in  disguise.  It  is 
not  easy  to  forget  such  days,  nor  is  it  altogether  desirable.  The  softened  memory  of 
past  grief  has  a  wholesome,  subduing  influence  over  the  soul.  4.  Days  of  revelation. 
The  day  to  be  noted  by  Buekiel  was  of  this  character.  We  have  no  prophetic  visions. 
But  there  may  be  days  when  God  has  seemed  to  draw  especially  near  to  us.  Truth 
has  then  been  most  clear  and  faith  most  strong.  The  memory  of  such  days  is  a  help 
for  the  darker  seasons  uf  doubt  and  dreary  solitude. 

II.  The  use  of  memorable  says.  1.  To  chronicle  then.  A  diary  of  sentiments 
is  not  always  a  wholesome  production ;  but  a  journal  'of  events  should  be  full  of 
instruction.  An  almanack  marked  with  anniversary  dates  is  a  constant  reminder  of 
the  lessons  of  the  past.  2.  To  study  them.  Dates  are  but  sign-posts.  They  indicate 
events  which  require  separate  consideration.  It  is  good  sometimes  to  turn  aside  from 
the  noisy  scenes  of  the  present  and  walk  in  the  dim  cloisters  of  the  sweet,  sad  past, 
communing  with  bygone  days  and  musing  over  the  deeds  of  olden  times.  Our  own 
rushing,  heedless  age  would  be  the  better  for  such  meditations  among  the  tombs,  not 
to  grow  melancholy  in  the  thought  of  death,  but  to  learn  wisdom  in  the  lessons  of  the 
ages.  3.  To  avoid  their  errors.  There  are  bad  past  days.  Antiquity  does  not  conse- 
crate sin  and  folly.  4.  To  follow  their  good  excumple.  We  have  the  whole  roll  of  the 
world's  history  from  which  to  select  instances  of  inspiring  lives.  The  Christian  ye«f 
is  gacred  to  the  memory  of  a  holy  past,  and  its  anniversaries  revive  the  lessons  of  good 
examples;  chiefly  it  repeatedly  reminds  us  of  the  great  events  in  the  life  of  our  Lord. 
6.  To  be  prepared  for  their  recurrence.  The  day  of  prophecy  was  anticipatory  of  the 
day  of  juilgment.  Past  days  of  judgment  point  to  the  future  judgment.  "  Of  that  day 
and  of  that  hour  knoweth  no  one,"  but  the  fulfilment  of  prophecy  in  the  destruction 
of  Jerusalem  is  a  solemn  warning  of  the  sure  fulfilment  of  predictions  concerning  the 
judgment  on  the  whole  world. 

Ver.  12. — A  weary  task.  Jerusalem  is  represented  as  endeavouring  to  remove  her 
own  evil,  but  as  growing  weary  in  the  fruitless  task.  The  rust  cannot  be  cleansed 
from  the  vessel. 

I.  Sin  acts  like  rust.  1.  It  comes  from  a  corroding  agent.  Temptation  bites 
into  the  yielding  soul  like  an  acid.  2.  It  reveals  an  inferior  character.  Brass  and 
iron  become  rusty  under  circumstances  which  leave  gold  and  silver  untarnished. 
Readiness  to  yield  to  temptation  is  a  sign  that  there  is  base  metal  in  the  soul.  3.  It 
corrupts  the  very  substance  of  the  soul.  Rust  on  metal  is  not  like  moss  on  stone,  a 
mere  excrescence  and  parasite  growth.  It  is  formed  from  the  metal  itself;  it  is  a 
portion  of  it  disintegrated  and  mixed  with  an  alien  body.  Sin  breaks  down  the  fabric 
of  the  soul-life,  and  wears  it  away  in  a  slow  death.  4.  It  tarnishes  the  beauty  of  the 
sold.  Rust  is  like  ingrained  dirt  on  the  bright  surface  of  the  metal.  The  rusty  mirror 
no  longer  reflects  light.  The  sin-stained  soul  has  lost  its  lustre  and  ceases  to  reflect 
the  light  of  heaven. 

II.  Men  try  to  remove  the  rust  of  sin.  This  is  the  task  that  the  people  of 
Jerusalem  are  supposed  to  have  undertaken.  L  They  turn  from  their  past.  The 
atmosphere  which  caused  the  rust  is  abandoned.  The  old  days  are  to  be  forgotten ;  a 
new  life  is  to  be  commenced.  2.  They  put  their  souls  under  discipline.  The  attempt 
is  made  to  bum  off  the  rust  or  to  scour  it  away.  3.  They  offer  compensation.  New 
deeds  of  goodness  are  to  supersede  and  atone  for  old  deeds  of  sin.     4.  l^ey  offer 


36  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [gh.  xxiv.  1—27. 

lacrifices  of  expiation.    The  history  of  religion  is  full  of  such  sacrifices — sacrificeg 
wHch  constitute  a  leading  element  in  the  Old  Testament  economy. 

III.  The  attempt  to  ebmovk  the  rust  of  sin  is  a  weaby  task.  1.  New  cir- 
cumstances do  not  destroy  old  sim.  Though  the  vessel  be  taken  out  of  the  damp 
atmosphere  which  first  corroded  it,  it  does  not  become  bright.  The  rust  is  still  on  it. 
We  may  try  to  make  amends  in  the  future,  but  by  such  means  we  cannot  get  rid  of 
the  guilt  and  the  consequences  of  the  past.  2.  Bin  has  eaten  its  way  so  deeply  into 
the  soul  that  no  efforts  of  ours  can  remove  it.  It  is  not  like  dust  that  lies  loosely  on 
the  surface ;  it  has  cut  into  our  nature  like  rust.  Our  feeble  self-discipline  is  ineffectual 
for  removing  so  close-clinging  an  evil.  3.  No  compensation  of  good  works  nor  expiatory 
lacrifices  will  remove  this  evil.  "  It  is  not  possible  that  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats 
should  take  away  sin  "  (Heb.  x.  4).     Such  sacrifices  can  be  but  symbols  at  the  best. 

IV.  Christ  has  accomplished  this  weart  task.  1.  He  has  made  the  great 
atonement  with  Ood.  He  is  the  one  true  Sacrifice  for  sinXHeb.  x.  14).  Thus  the  way 
is  now  clear  for  the  soul's  cleansing.  2.  He  removes  the  rust  of  sin  from  the  soul.  As 
"  the  Lamb  of  God  that  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world,"  Christ  not  only  brings 
pardon,  he  produces  purity.  His  mighty  arm  scours  the  rust  off  the  soul.  3.  This 
was  a  weary  task  for  Christ.  Even  he  found  it  no  easy  work.  It  required  the 
humiliation  of  Bethlehem,  the  agony  of  Gethsemane,  and  the  death  of  Calvary.  Christ 
toiled,  suffered,  and  grew  weary  unto  death  in  the  awful  task.  Yet  he  persevered  to 
the  end.  4.  Christ  invites  us  to  abandon  our  useless,  weary  task  and  come  to  him  for 
cleansing.  It  is  especially  to  those  who  labour  and  are  heavy  laden  with  sin  that  h« 
gives  his  great  invitation  (Matt.  xi.  28 — 30). 

Ver.  14  (first  clause). — Qod  true  to  his  word.  "I  the  Lord  have  spoken  it:  it  shall 
oome  to  pass,  and  I  will  do  it." 

I.  The  supposition  that  God  mat  not  be  teue  to  his  word.  Certain  observa- 
tions and  considerations  shelter  that  supposition.  1.  The  changefulness  of  life.  It 
looks  as  though  things  fell  out  by  chance.  We  do  not  discern  regular,  orderly  move- 
ments in  Divine  providence.  2.  The  tardy  fulfilment  of  threat  and  promise.  Both 
•re  delayed.  Then  men  lose  hold  of  both,  and  regard  them  as  inoperative.  3.  A  falsa 
idea  of  God's  mercy.  It  is  thought  that  God  must  be  too  kind  to  execute  his  awful 
threatenings  of  wrath.  4.  Unbelief.  This  condition  of  the  souls  of  men  is  at  the  root 
of  the  error,  and  it  is  only  by  its  existence  that  other  considerations  are  laid  hold  of 
and  made  occasions  for  doubting  God's  certain  performance  of  what  he  has  foretold. 

II.  The  ceetaintt  that  God  will  be  teue  to  his  woed.  This  is  based  on 
important  considerations.  1.  The  constancy  of  Qod.  He  is  "the  Eternal."  Men 
vary,  but  God  is  changeless.  What  he  wills  tu-day,  he  wills  for  ever.  2.  The  perfect 
knowledge  of  Ood.  We  may  be  forced  to  change  our  plans  by  reason  of  the  discovery 
of  new  facts.  A  change  in  our  circumstances  may  compel  a  change  in  our  conduct. 
But  God  knows  all  things,  and  he  has  prevision  of  all  future  contingencies  when  he 
makes  his  promise.  Of  course,  he  acts  in  regard  to  changing  events  and  the  alteration 
of  the  characters  of  men.  But  these  things  are  all  foreknown,  and  where  his  action  is 
concerned  with  them  it  is  conditioned  accordingly  from  the  first.  There  is  no  surprise 
and  consequent  sudden  turn.  3.  The  power  q^  Ood.  We  may  fail  to  keep  our  word 
from  simple  inability.  A  man  may  promise  to  pay  a  sum  of  money  by  a  certain  day, 
and,  in  the  mean  time,  unforeseen  misfortunes  may  rob  him  of  the  power  to  redeem 
his  word.  No  such  chances  can  happen  with  the  Almighty.  4.  The  mercy  of  God. 
Archbishop  Tillotson  pointed  out  that  God  was  not  so  bound  to  fulfil  his  threats  as  to' 
keep  his  promises  of  grace,  because  men  had  a  claim  on  the  latter,  but  no  one  would 
claim  the  former.  Nevertheless,  it  would  not  be  merciful  in  God  to  torture  us  with 
warnings  of  a  doom  that  was  not  impending.  God  does  remit  penalties.  But  then, 
from  the  first  he  has  promised  pardon  to  the  penitent. 

III.  Thb  consequences  of  God's  being  true  to  hib  wobd.  1.  Th»  vanity  of 
wibeli^.  It  may  be  with  us  as  it  was  in  the  days  of  Noah  (Matt.  xxiv.  37—^9). 
But  the  judgment  will  not  be  the  less  certain  because  we  refuse  to  expect  it.  2.  Tke 
need  of  a  sure  rrfuge.  God  has  threatened  judgment  against  sin.  He  will  be  true  to 
his  word.  Then  we  should  be  prepared  to  face  the  day  of  wrath.  Our  only  refuge  is 
to  "flee/r«>»iGod<«  God."    Z.  The  assurance  of  true  faith.     God  has  given  gracious 


CH.  XXIV.  1—27.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  37 

promises  of  pardon  to  his  returning  children  {e.g.  Isa.  i.  18).  He  will  certainly  be  as 
true  to  those  promises  as  to  any  threateniugs  of  wrath  against  the  impenitent.  The 
eternal  constancy  of  God  is  a  rock  of  refuge  for  his  humble,  repentant,  trusting 
children. 

Ver.  16. — "  The  desire  of  thine  eyes.''  I.  A  picture  of  domestic  love.  Bzekiel'g 
wife  is  called  "  the  desire  of  his  eyes."  God  has  ordained  marriage,  and  the  blessedness 
of  the  true  union  of  husband  and  wife  is  from  him.  It  is  in  itself  good  and  a  source  of 
fui  thir  blessings.  It  is  not  the  doctrine  of  the  Bible  that  monkish  celibacy  is  mora 
holy  than  homely  wedded  love.  1.  The  hlessednest  of  wedded  love  is  a  solace  in  trouble. 
If  Ezc-'kiel  had  a  wife  who  could  be  described  in  the  language  of  our  text,  it  must  have 
been  refreshing  for  him  to  turn  from  the  rancour  of  Jewish  enmity  to  the  sympathy  of 
a  true  woman.  The  home  is  a  sacred  refuge  from  the  storms  of  the  world.  2.  Wedded 
love  is  a  type  of  Divine  love.  The  Church  is  the  bride  of  the  Lamb.  God  loves  his 
people  as  a  true  husband  loves  his  wife.  3.  Such  a  great  blessing  should  be  tenderly 
guarded.  Wedded  love  may  be  hurt  by  want  of  thought  as  much  as  by  want  of  heart. 
Small  kindnesses  constitute  much  of  the  happiness  of  life,  and  small  negligences  may 
make  its  cup  very  bitter.  It  needs  care  lest  the  bloom  of  love  be  ruthlessly  brushed 
•side. 

II.  A  STROKE  OF  PEABFUL  TROUBLE.  1.  "  7%e  desire  of  his  eyes"  is  taken  from 
Ezekiel.  A  prophet  is  not  exempt  from  the  greatest  troubles  that  fall  to  the  lot  of 
men.  Divine  privileges  do  not  save  us  from  earthly  sorrows.  Love  cannot  hold  the 
beloved  for  ever.  The  pair  who  love  much  may  yet  be  parted.  This  awful  grief  of 
widowhood  may  invade  the  happiest  home.  They  who  are  never  divided  in  love  may 
yet  be  thrust  asunder  by  "  the  dark  divorce  of  death."  2.  This  trouble  comes  by  a 
iudden  stroke.  Sudden  death  seems  to  be  best  for  the  victim,  for  it  spares  all  tha 
agonies  of  a  protracted  illness,  and  all  the  horrors  of  the  act  of  dying.  But  to  those 
who  are  left  it  comes  as  an  awful  blow  1  Still,  as  such  events  do  occur  in  the  most 
affectionate  and  most  peaceful  households,  we  should  do  well  to  be  prepared  for  them. 
The  sweet  summer  garden  of  to-day  may  be  a  waste,  howling  wilderness  to-morrow. 
S.  TTie  trouhle  comes  from  God.  Therefore  it  must  be  irresistible.  On  the  other  hand, 
it  must  be  right.  We  cannot  understand  why  so  fearful  a  blow  should  fall.  We  can 
only  say,  "  It  is  the  Lord." 

III.  A  REQUIREMENT  OF  UNKATUBAL  BETICBNOB.  Ezekiel  is  not  to  "moum  noF 
weep."  Inwardly  his  grief  cannot  be  stayed,  for  no  man  can  escape  from  nature ;  but 
ril  outward  signs  of  grief  are  to  be  suppressed.  This  is  a  hard  requirement.  1.  Public 
men  must  repress  private  emotion.  Here  is  one  of  the  penalties  of  a  prominent  position. 
The  great  duties  must  be  performed  as  though  nothing  had  happened.  The  leader  of 
others  must  present  a  confident  face  to  the  foe,  though  his  soul  is  wrung  with  despair, 
A  smiling  countenance  must  mask  a  breaking  heart.  2.  Private  sorrow  is  buried  in 
public  calamity.  The  national  disaster  of  Jerusalem  is  so  huge  that  even  the  most 
terrible  grief  of  sudden  widowhood  is  not  to  be  considered  by  the  side  of  it.  Grief  is 
generally  selfish ;  but  what  is  one  soul's  agony  to  the  misery  of  mankind  ?  3.  Divine 
judgments  are  not  to  be  gainsaid.  Ezekiel's  trouble  is  typical,  Hengstenberg  and 
others  hold  that  he  did  not  really  lose  his  wife — that  the  story  is  buf  a  parable.  Even 
though  we  take  it  as  history,  we  see  that  it  is  used  as  an  illustration  of  the  fate  of 
the  Jews,  This  was  unanswerable.  The  penalty  was  deserved  by  the  guilty  nation. 
Gidlt  is  silent.  In  all  sorrow  we  have  no  right  to  reply  to  God.  The  psalmist  says, 
"  I  was  dumb  "  (Ps.  xxxix.  2).  Christ  went  to  his  cross  in  silence.  "  As  a  sheep,"  etc. 
(Isa.  liii,  7),  4,  Ood  has  consolations  for  patient  sorrow.  Though  the  mourner  is 
silent,  God  is  not,  and  his  voice  whispers  peace  to  all  his  trusting  sons  and  daughters 
in  their  sorrow. 

Ver.  27. — The  dumb  mouth  opened.  I.  There  re  a  time  to  keep  silence.  Ezekiel 
was  not  stricken  dumb  physically  like  Zacharias.  He  was  silenced  by  circumstances 
and  the  will  of  God.  Even  a  prophet  may  have  to  learn  that  "  silence  is  golden." 
Consider  the  indications  of  the  time  to  keep  silence.  1.  When  one  has  nothing  to  say. 
It  is  a  great  mistake  to  speak  because  one  ought  to  say  something  instead  of  waiting 
till  there  is  something  to  be  said.    Prophets  have  not  always  messages  to  deliver. 


38  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [ch.  xxiv.  1—27. 

Poets  are  not  always  inspired.  2.  When  men  will  not  hear,  Ezekiel's  repeated  dis- 
courses, and  even  his  striking  illustrative  actions,  bad  beei.  treated  with  indifference 
by  the  Jews.  It  is  useless  to  "cast  pearls  before  swine."  S.  When  events  are  speak- 
ing. God  says,  "  Be  still,  and  know  that  I  am  G  A  "  (P.-.  xlvi.  10).  The  awful  Yowe 
of  providence  silences  every  utterance  of  man.  4.  When  we  are  called  to  reflect.  We 
have  too  much  talking  and  too  little  thinking.  This  is  an  age  of  expression.  We 
have  lost  the  art  of  reticence.  The  consequence  is  shallowness  and  instability.  More 
Bilence  would  allow  of  a  richer  brooding  thoughtful ne.ss. 

II.  Events  open  the  mouth  of  the  silent.  Ezekiel  was  to  be  silent  in  the  grief 
of  bis  sudden  widowhood,  and  the  Jews  would  be  silenced  by  the  frightful  calamities 
of  the  siege  of  Jerusalem.  Afterwards  the  prophet's  lips  would  be  unsealed,  and  he 
would  be  able  to  speak  to  better  purpose.  Events  help  to  this  result:  1,  In  suggest- 
ing topics.  The  truest  thought  is  inspired  by  fact.  New  occurrences  give  rise  to  new 
lessons.  The  age  of  literature  follows  the  age  of  action,  and  great  books  spring  up  in 
the  soil  that  has  been  fertilized  by  great  deids.  The  facts  of  the  gospel  history  are 
the  chief  topics  for  Christian  preaching.  The  new  scenes  of  the  life  of  Christ  and  the 
Acts  of  the  Apostles  are  the  inspiration  of  all  evangelistic  speech.  2.  In  inclining 
men  to  listen.  Ezekiel  was  silenced  by  indifference ;  he  was  to  be  rendered  eloquent 
again  by  a  newly  awakened  interest,  l^ow,  this  cliange  was  to  be  brought  about 
through  the  instrumentality  of  external  events.  Thus  God  breaks  up  the  fallow 
ground  and  prepares  the  soil  to  receive  the  seed  of  the  Word.  3.  In  inducing  faith. 
This  is  the  principal  cause  of  the  change  in  the  present  instance.  The  Jews  had 
refused  to  believe  Ezekiel.  But  when  his  words  had  been  verified  by  the  occurrence 
of  the  calamities  he  had  predicted,  the  sceptical  hearers  would  be  forced  to  acknow- 
ledge that  he  was  a  true  prophet.  The  fulfilments  of  Christ's  prophecy  in  the  growth  of 
the  kingdom  from  the  grain  of  mustard  seed  to  the  great  tree  should  incline  people  to 
listen  to  Christian  teaching  with  faith. 

III.  The  wise  teacheb  will  seize  oppoktukities  fob  speech.  His  mission  is 
to  proclaim  the  will  of  his  Master ;  and,  though  silence  may  be  suitable  on  occasion, 
»nd  room  for  thought  is  greatly  to  be  desired,  he  must  be  on  the  watch  for  every 
opportunity  of  delivering  his  great  message.  It  is  a  glorious  time  when  inspired  lips 
•re  unsealed.  The  mere  babble  of  empty  talk  is  not  to  be  compared  with  such  utter- 
ance. The  Jews  had  it  in  the  thunders  of  prophecy,  and  the  early  Christians  in  the 
gift  of  the  cloven  tongues.  But  every  Christian  teacher  who  has  power  to  speak  to 
his  brother  may  receive  Divine  impulses  which  should  give  him  words  of  helpfulness 
and  healing.  The  great  art  is  then  to  utter  the  word  in  season — the  light  word,  to 
the  right  person,  in  the  right  spirit,  at  the  right  moment. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 14. — The  consuming  cauldron.  The  threatened  judgment  has  at  last  descended 
upon  the  guilty  city  ;  and  Ezekiel,  far  away  in  the  land  of  the  Captivity,  sees  in  vision,- 
and  declares  to  his  fellow-captives  by  a  parable,  the  siege  of  Jerusalem  now  actually 
taking  place.  As  in  so  many  parts  of  his  prophecies,  Ezekiel  reveals  by  symbol  that 
which  he  has  to  communicate.  Opinions  differ  as  to  whether  the  cauldron  was  actually 
filled  with  the  joints  of  animals  and  was  actually  heated  by  a  fire.  But  the  familiar 
operation,  whether  literally  perfoimed  or  merely  imagined  and  described,  served  vividly 
to  portray  to  the  mind  the  calamities  which  were  befalling  the  doomed  metropolis. 

I.  The  bin  of  the  citt.  As  described  in  this  passage,  the  errors  of  Jerusalem  may 
te  classified  under  three  headings.  1.  Lies.  By  which  we  must  understand  the  corrup- 
tion, the  deceits  and  frauds,  the  political  insincerity,  which  had  eaten  away  the  very 
heart  of  the  citizens.  2.  Lewdness.  Or  the  prevalence  of  sensual  sins  and  of  carnal 
luxury,  opposed  to  that  purity  and  simplicity  of  domestic  life  in  which  the  moral  health 
of  a  nation  ever  consists.  8.  Blood-guiltiness.  Or  violence  and  murder,  which  at  this 
time  were  rife  in  Jerusalem,  each  man  seeking  his  own  interests,  even  at  the  expense  ot 
the  life  of  his  neighbours.  These  three  classes  of  iniquity  are  chosen  by  the  prophet  as 
peculiarly  heinous  and  obtrusive,  not  as  exhausting,  but  simply  as  exemplifying,  the 
eity's  sinfulness. 


OH.  XXIV.  1—27.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET   EZEKIEL.  89 

II.  The  judgment  of  the  city.  As  the  flesh  and  hones  are  placed  in  the  cauldron, 
and  hoiled  and  seethed  by  the  fire  being  applied  beneath,  so  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem 
are  enclosed  within  the  walls,  the  besieging  army  surrounds  them,  and  the  citizens  are 
abandoned  to  all  the  privations  and  fears  and  sufferings,  and  finally  to  the  destruction, 
incident  to  so  miserable  a  condition.  The  instrument  of  chastisement  is  appointed  to 
be  the  nation  into  whose  idolatries  Judah  had  been  seduced,  the  nation  >■  hose  protection 
might  for  a  time  have  availed  to  avert  further  evils,  had  not  the  catastrophe  been 
hastened  by  the  treachery  and  i;ebellion  of  prince  and  people.  The  Divine  Judge  never 
lacks  instruments  for  the  carrying  out  of  his  own  purposes.  "  Heap  on  wood;  kindle 
the  fire  1 " 

III.  The  destbhction  op  the  oitt.  Previous  punishment  has  been  of  the  nature  of 
chastisement,  of  correction ;  this  is  of  the  nature  of  consuming.  All  the  calamities 
which  have  come  upon  Jerusalem  have  failed  to  produce  true  repentance  and  radical 
reformation  ;  it  remains  now  to  execute  the  threats  and  to  complete  the  ruin  foretold. 
The  language  coming  from  the  Almighty  Euler,  who  had  taken  Jerusalem  under  his 
especial  patronage  and  care,  is  frightful  indeed.  "  I  will  do  it ;  I  will  not  go  back, 
neither  will  I  spare,  neither  will  I  repent ;  according  to  thy  ways,  and  according  to  thy 
doings,  shall  they  judge  thee,  saith  the  Lord  God."  It  is  evident  that  the  purpose  of 
God  is  this — that  the  era  of  rebellion  shall  come  to  an  end,  that  there  must  be  a  break 
in  the  continuity  of  the  national  life,  that  a  future  revival  must  be  a  new  beginning 
unaffected  for  evil  by  the  habits  and  traditions  of  the  past.  To  this  end  the  people  and 
all  their  ways  and  practices,  all  their  rebellions  and  idolatries,  all  their  oppressions  and 
immoralities,  must  first  be  cast  into  the  cauldron  of  judgment,  and  many  must  be 
consumed  and  destroyed. — T. 

Ver.  13. — Ineffectual  discipline.  Men  who  are  providentially  entrusted  with  the  care 
and  training  of  the  young,  or  with  the  probation  of  undisciplined  members  of  society, 
often  have  reason  to  complain  that  their  endeavours  seem  to  be  utter  failures,  that  there 
is  no  response  to  the  appeal  which  by  language  and  by  action  they  are  constantly 
addressing  to  those  who  are  placed  beneath  tlieir  charge.  It  is  very  instructive  to  all 
such  to  observe  what  was  the  result  of  Jehovah's  dealing  with  Judah  and  Jerusalem. 
It  is  not  to  be  disputed  that  the  results  in  question  were  perfectly  known  to  the 
Omniscient  before  they  came  to  pass.  Yet  it  seemed  good  to  him,  in  dealing  with 
moral  agents,  to  afford  them  the  means  of  repentance,  and  to  furnish  them  with  induce- 
ments to  repentance.  Lamentable  is  the  record  of  what  without  irreverence  we  may 
term  the  Divine  experience :  "  I  have  purged  thee,  and  thou  wast  not  purged." 

I.  Divine  discipline.  There  is  presumed  the  need  for  such  discipline.  It  is  because 
the  metal  is  mixed  with  dross  that  it  is  cast  into  the  furnace.  It  is  because  the  patient 
is  sick  that  medicine  is  administered.  It  is  because  the  wheat  and  the  chaff  are  inter- 
mingled that  the  winnowing-fan  is  employed.  And  it  is  because  the  heart  and  life  of 
the  individual  or  the  nation  are  contaminated  with  evil  that  the  chastening  hand  of 
God  intervenes  to  purge  away  the  mischief — the  dross,  the  chaff.  The  means  employed 
is  usually  affliction  in  some  one  or  more  of  the  many  forms  it  assumes.  One  heart  is 
reached  in  one  way,  another  by  a  way  altogether  different ;  one  nation  is  humbled  by 
pestilence  or  famine,  another  by  defeat  in  war  and  privation  of  territory. 

II.  The  motive  and  purpose  of  Divine  DisorPLiNE.  To  the  careless  observer  it  may 
seem  as  if  such  experiences  as  those  described  were  evidences  of  malevolence  in  the 
Governor  of  the  world.  But  in  fact  it  is  otherwise.  "  Whom  he  loveth  he  chasteneth, 
and  scourgeth  every  child  whom  he  receiveth."  The  son  does  not  always  understand 
his  father's  treatment  of  him,  and  does  not  always  accept  that  treatment  with  submis- 
sion and  gratitude  ;  neither  does  he  always  profit  by  it  as  he  might  do.  Yet  the  treat- 
ment may  be  wise  and  well  adapted  for  purposes  alike  of  probation  and  of  education; 
and  the  time  may  come  when,  looking  back  with  enlarged  experience  and  rnaturer 
judgment,  he  may  a])prove  his  father's  action.  So  is  it  with  God's  dealing  with  his 
great  family.  The  Father  of  the  spirits  of  all  flesh  has  at  heart  the  welfare  of  his 
offspricg,  his  household.  He  knows  that  uninterrupted  prosperity  would  not  be 
beneficial,  that  many  lessons  could  never  be  acquired  amid  circumstances  pf  ease  and 
enjoyment,  that  character  could  not  by  such  experience  be  formed  to  ripeness  and 
moral  strength.     It  is  through  trials  and  afflictions  that  true  men  are  fashioned.     And 


40  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIBL.    [oh.  xxiv.  1—27. 


the  same  is  the  case  with  nations.  Israel  had  to  wander  and  to  fight  in  the  wilderness. 
England  has  only  reached  her  present  position  by  means  of  many  generations  of  conflict 
and  many  epochs  of  adversity.  Qod  has  "  purged "  his  people,  not  because  he  i» 
indifferent  to  their  sufferings,  but  because  he  is  solicitous  for  their  welfare,  which  only 
through  sufferings  can  be  achieved. 

III.  The  apparent  failCbe  oi'  Divhtb  discipline.  There  is  a  pathetic  tone  m  the 
assertion,  "I  have  purged  thee,  and  thou  wast  not  purged."  The  explanation  of  this 
failure  is  to  be  found  in  the  mysterious  fact  of  human  liberty.  An  eminent  philosopher 
has  said  that  he  would  be  content  to  be  wound  up  like  a  clock  every  morning,  if  that 
would  ensure  his  going  right  throughout  the  day.  Determinism  is  mechanism ;  it 
reduces  man  to  the  level  of  a  machine.  But  this  is  not  the  true,  the  Divine  idea  of 
man.  God  evidently  designs  to  do  something  better  with  man  than  to  constrain  him. 
He  even  gives  to  man  the  prerogative  of  resisting  the  high  motives  which  he  in  wisdom 
and  mercy  brings  to  bear  upon  him.  And  when  he  perceives  that  the  purposes  of  dis- 
cipline are  not  fulfilled,  he  laments,  "  I  have  purged  thee,  and  thou  wast  not  purged." 
Yet  it  is  not  for  us  to  say  that  even  in  such  cases  there  has  been  real  failure.  Endi 
may  be  answered  of  which  we  cannot  judge ;  good  may  be  done  which  we  cannot  see ; 
preparation  may  be  making  for  advanced  stages  which  we  are  now  incapable  of  com- 
prehending. Doubtless  in  many  cases  the  "  purging "  which  is  ineffectual  here  and 
BOW  will  be  brought  about  hereafter,  and  perhaps  above.  It  is  open  to  us  to  beli«v% 
with  the  poet— 

"That  nothing  walks  vrith  aimless  feet, 

That  not  one  life  shall  be  destroyed 

Or  cast  as  rubbish  to  the  void. 
When  God  has  made  his  work  completA." 

T. 

Vers.  15 — 27, — Speechless  and  tearless  sorrow.  If  the  event  here  described  really 
happened,  and  if  the  death  of  the  prophet's  wife  was  a  fact  and  not  a  mere  vision  or 
parable,  at  all  events  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  this  death  took  place  from  other 
than  natural  causes.  Foreseeing  what  would  happen,  the  Qod  of  men  and  of  nations 
used  the  affliction  of  his  servant  and  turned  it  to  account,  making  it  the  occasion  and 
the  means  of  spiritual  instruction  and  impression  for  the  benefit  of  the  Hebrew  com- 
munity. The  decease  of  Ezekiel's  wife  symbolized  the  fate  of  the  guilty  Jerusalem.  It 
was — 

I.  Sudden  and  unexpected.  The  Lord  took  away  from  the  prophet  the  desire  of 
his  eyes  "  with  a  stroke."  How  touching  is  the  prophet's  record  I — ^^"  At  even  my  wife 
died."  It  is  the  simplicity  of  truth,  the  simplicity  of  submission,  which  speaks  in  this 
language.  The  terms  Ezekiel  employs  show  how  great  was  his  love  and  attachment  to 
his  wife  ;  all  the  more  was  this  sudden  bereavement  a  shock  of  distress  and  anguish  to 
him.  Similarly  swift  was  the  stroke  of  retribution  and  ruin  which  came  upon  the 
Jewish  metropolis.  Notwithstanding  repeated  warnings  and  threatenings,  the  Israelite! 
would  not  believe  that  their  beloved  Jerusalem,  "the  joy  of  the  whole  earth,"  could  fsdl 
before  the  mighty  conqueror  from  the  east.  But  their  confidence  was  misplaced,  and 
their  pride  was  destined  to  humiliation.  The  deathstroke  came,  and  it  came  with  th« 
sharpness  and  suddenness  which  corresponded  with  the  prophet's  bereavement. 

II.  Severe.  No  affliction  which  could  befall  Ezekiel  could  be  so  distressing  and  so 
crushing  as  the  loss  of  his  beloved  wife.  In  this  it  was  emblematical  of  the  blow  which 
was  about  to  descend  upon  Jerusalem.  "  Behold,"  said  the  Lord,  "  I  will  profane  my 
sanctuary,  the  pride  of  your  power,  the  desire  of  your  eyes,  and  that  which  your  soul 
pitieth."  Patriotism,  historical  associations,  religious  pride,  and  other  elements  of 
feeling  conspired  to  render  their  metropolis  dear  to  the  sons  of  Abraham ;  and  its 
destruction  and  the  dispersion  of  its  citizens  could  not  be  contemplated  by  them 
without  the  liveliest  emotions  of  anguish  and  anxiety.  No  heavier  blow  could  fall  upon 
them  than  this.  Distress,  as  of  the  bereaved  and  desolate,  must  needs  take  possession 
of  every  true  Hebrew  heart,  when  predictions  of  Divine  wrath  were  fulfilled,  when  the 
heathen  entered  and  possessed  the  sanctuaiy  of  Jehovah. 

III.  Inevitable  and  irreparable.  Life  is  in  the  hands  of  the  Lord  and  Giver  o! 
life.    When  he  recalls  his  gilt,  his  creatures  can  do  nothing  but  submit.    So  Ezekiel 


OH.  XXIV.  1—27.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  41 


himself  acknowledged  and  felt;  it  was  God  who  deprived  him  of  the  desire  of  his  eyes. 
The  dead  return  not  to  their  place,  which  knows  them  no  more.  This  fact  gives  keen- 
ness to  the  sorrow,  whilst  it  aids  submission.  Ezekiel's  fellow-countrymen  were  to 
learn  that  it  was  the  Divine  purpose  to  inflict  upon  Jerusalem  the  last  indignity.  No 
human  power  could  avert,  and  no  human  power  could  repair,  this  evil,  any  more  than 
such  power  could  save  or  restore  the  life  which  the  Creator  resumed.  A  new  career 
might  indeed  open  up  before  the  people  of  larael,  but  the  old  career  was  closed 
peremptorily  and  irrecoverably. 

lY.  CBUSHiNa  £TEN  TO  BiLBNCE.  Ezekiel  was  bidden,  when  his  bereavement  came 
upon  him,  to  refrain  from  weeping  and  mourning,  and  from  all  the  outward  signs  of 
grief.  Distressing  and  difficult  as  the  command  certainly  was,  it  was  obeyed.  And  the 
prophet's  obedience  to  it  was  significant.  When  the  day  of  Judah's  trouble  came,  it 
came  in  such  a  manner  and  with  such  circumstances  accompanying  it  that  the  sur- 
Tivors  and  spectators  of  the  national  calamity  were  rendered  speechless  through  grief. 
Their  experience  reminds  us  of  the  memorable  language  of  the  psalmist,  "  I  was  dumb, 
I  opened  not  my  mouth,  because  thou  didst  it."  There  is  a  time  to  be  silent.  When 
the  hand  of  Grod  is  heavy  upon  those  who  have  resisted  his  laws  and  rebelled  against  his 
authority,  they  have  nothing  wherewith  to  answer  their  righteous  Lord  whom  they  have 
offended.  It  is  for  them  to  refrain  from  complaint,  which  in  such  a  case  would  be  merely 
blasphemy  ;  it  is  for  them  to  bow  beneath  the  rod ;  it  is  for  them,  in  silence  and  in 
speechless  bitterness  of  heart,  to  repent  of  all  their  sins.  It  is  the  Lord :  "  Behold, 
hare  am  I;  let  him  do  to  me  as  seemeth  good  unto  him." — T. 

Yer.  24. — Ezekiel  a  sign.  This  prophet  was  commissioned  to  utter  many  words 
snd  to  perform  many  actions  which  were  of  the  nature  of  signs  to  Israel.  But  in  this 
T«rse,  by  Clod's  own  instruction,  Ezekiel  is  directed,  not  to  show,  but  to  be,  a  sign  to  the 
people.    In  his  own  person,  in  his  own  remarkable  experience,  he  typified  great  truths. 

I.  Ik  the  affliction  which  befell  him. 

n.  In  the  anguish  which  he  expebienobd. 

IIL  In  his  silent  bubuisbion  to  Divine  appointments. 

lY.  In  HI3  UNCouFLAiNiNa  obedience  to  Divine  behests. 

Y.  In  his  dsbibe  and   besolution,   bt  au,  his  expebibnos   and  aotion,  to 

■IlOBII'T   OOD. 

Application.  There  are  occasium)  when  a  good  man  can  do  little  in  the  way  of 
directly  benefiting  or  influencing  the  ungodly  by  whom  he  may  be  surrounded.  But 
«ren  in  such  circumstances  he  may  be  a  witness  to  God,  and  he  may  render  service  to 
Ms  fellow-men,  by  his  own  life,  and  especially  by  his  demeanour  in  times  of  af3iction 
and  trial.— T. 

Yers.  1 — 14. — TOe  interior  mechanism  of  war.  The  prophet  is  commissioned  to 
•mploy  another  homely  metaphor.  The  patience  and  ingenuity  of  God's  love  are 
inexhaustible.  The  homeliest  imagery  is  employed  with  a  view  to  vivid  and  abiding 
impression.  Here  it  is  shown  that  behind  all  the  machinery  and  circumstance  of  war, 
•  hand  Divine  directs  and  overrules.  A  moral  force  resides  within  the  material  and 
human  agency. 

I.  The  necessity  fob  the  scouegb.  The  necessity  arose  from  the  excessive 
criminality  of  the  Jewish  people.  1.  They  are  described  as  a  "house  of  rebellion." 
The  authority  of  Jehovah  was  trampled  in  the  dust.  2.  Jerusalem  was  a  city  of  blood. 
Justice  was  so  grossly  maladministered  that  the  guilty  escaped ;  the  innocent  were 
judicially  murdered.  3.  Sin  assumed  the  most  flagrant  forms. ,  "  In  thy  filthiness  is 
lewdness."  All  restraint  to  vice  was  cast  off.  a1\  moral  vigour  was  eaten  out  with 
self-indulgence.  4.  ITiere  had  been  wanton  abase  of  OocTs  corrective  methods.  "  1 
purged  thee,  and  thou  wast  not  purged."  Costly  remedies  had  been  wasted  and  scorned. 
The  hand  of  the  great  Physician  had  been  withstood.  This  is  the  culmination  of 
guilt.     The  condition  of  such  is  hopeless. 

II.  The  certainty  of  the  scoubge.  "  I  the  Lord  have  spoken  :  it  shall  come, 
and  I  will  do  it."  The  event  was  based  upon  the  word  of  God,  and  God's  word  is  the 
forthputting  of  his  will.  He  puts  himself  into  his  speech.  Fulfilment  of  his  word  is 
•not  only  invariable  as  law ;   fulfilment  is  a  necessity.     But  further,  the  scourge  had 


42  THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  BZBKIBL.    [ch.  xxiv.  1—27. 

already  come.  By  prophetic  inspiration  Ezekiel  knew  that  on  that  identical  day  on 
which  he  spoke  to  the  people  in  Chaldea,  Nebuchadnezzar  lay  siege  to  Jerusalem.  The 
verification  of  this  fact  would  impart  a  weight  of  authority  to  Ezekiel's  mission  as  a 
prophet  of  Jehovah.  It  was  now  too  late  to  evade,  by  repentance,  the  scourge.  Still, 
the  moral  lesson  would  be  healthful.  It  is  never  unseasonable  to  be  assured  of  the 
righteous  faithfulness  of  God. 

in.  The  severity  of  the  scourge.  The  truth  intended  to  be  conveyed  by  this 
•ingular  and  striking  figure  is  that  of  entire  and  indiscriminate  destruction.  Chastii-e- 
ments  less  drastic  in  their  nature  had  been  tried  in  vain ;  and,  as  the  evil  seemed  to 
be  ingrained  in  the  very  nature  of  the  body  politic,  no  other  measure  was  availing  than 
overwhelming  disaster.  This  is  represented  by  keeping  the  cauldron  on  tne  fire  till 
its  contents  were  evaporated.  To  men  this  punishment  appears  severe,  but  to  those 
intelligences  who  stand  near  God's  throne  the  punishment  does  not  appear  such  an  evil 
as  does  the  sin.  No  punishment  is  equal  to  the  hatred  of  man's  heart  toward  God. 
Calamity  that  is  external  to  the  man  is  not  such  a  curse  as  the  sin  in  the  soul.  This 
inward  canker  is  the  heaviest  of  all  catastrophes. 

IV.  The  thoroughness  of  the  scourge.  "  I  will  not  go  back,  neither  will  I  spare, 
neither  will  I  repent,  saith  the  Lord"  (ver.  14).  Every  piece  of  flesh  was  to  be  brought 
out  for  the  foe  ;  no  exemption  was  to  be  allowed.  Even  the  scum  was  to  be  consumed. 
The  very  rust  upon  the  cauldron  was  to  be  burnt  off.  In  other  words,  the  city  itself 
was  to  be  destroyed  as  well  as  the  inhabitants — the  institutions,  political  and  religious, 
as  well  as  nobles  and  priests.  God's  cleansing  will  be  thorough.  In  God's  esteem  there 
are  no  small  sins.  Only  give  them  time,  and  small  sins  become  great.  Therefore,  no 
sin  must  be  spared.  God  is  represented,  in  one  place,  as  "  searching  Jerusalem  with 
candles  "  in  order  to  discover  her  secret  sins.  Over  the  gateway  of  the  new  Jerusalem 
it  shall  be  written,  "  Nothing  that  is  defiled,  or  that  worketh  abomination,  can  enter 
herein  1 "  And  unless  sin  be  separated  from  us,  we  and  our  sins  must  be  destroyed  together. 
Liiht  and  darkness  cannot  dwell  in  the  same  room  at  the  same  moment ;  nor  can  nn 
anil  holiness.     The  God  of  righteousness  will  exterminate  sin  root  and  branch. 

V.  The  hidden  hand  that  wields  the  scourge.  Ordinary  observers  of  the 
Invasion  of  Judraa,  and  of  the  overthrow  of  Jerusalem,  saw  only  the  activity  of  man. 
To  them  it  would  seem  only  a  human  quarrel.  Human  ambition  on  the  one  side,  and 
Tiolation  of  treaties  upon  the  othei-,  appeared  as  the  immediate  causes  of  the  war.  To 
military  captains,  I  dare  say  the  probability  of  success  was  on  the  side  of  the  besieged. 
The  walls  were  strong  and  high ;  the  natural  ramparts  were  almost  inaccessible ;  the  gates 
had  withstood  many  a  foe.  Yet  there  was  a  factor  in  that  martial  business  that  was 
not  apparent.  The  mightiest  agent  was  out  of  sight.  All  the  forces  of  righteousness 
were  on  the  side  of  Nebuchadnezzar.  He  had  been  commissioned  to  this  undertaking 
by  the  invincible  God.  At  what  point,  or  in  what  way,  the  directing  and  controlling 
will  of  Jehovah  acted  upon  the  mind  of  the  Babylonian  k'ing,  we  cannot  say.  But  that 
Giid  did  move  him  to  this  undertaking,  and  did  give  him  success,  is  a  plain  fact.  Even 
men  of  the  world  are  the  sword  in  the  hand  of  God. — D. 

Vers.  15 — 27. — Oraduattd  lessons.  Most  important  truths  can  only  be  learnt  by  m 
series  of  comparisons.  We  best  know. the  magnitude  of  the  sun  by  comparison  with 
the  moon  and  stars.  We  prize  the  fragrance  of  the  rose  by  comparison  with  the  per- 
fume of  other  flowers.  We  learn  the  dignity  and  strength  that  belong  to  a  man  by 
p  issing  through  the  stages  of  childhood  and  youth.  God  teaches  us  and  trains  us,  not 
only  through  the  understanding,  but  also  through  the  feelings,  affections,  griefs,  inward 
experiences.    Every  event  that  occurs  is  a  lesson  for  the  immortal  life. 

I.  Grief  fob  the  loss  op  a  wife  is  natural.  A  wife  occupies  a  more  central 
place  in  a  man's  heart  than  any  other  among  humankind.  God  himself  has  ordained 
that  this  mutual  affection  shall  transcend  all  other.  It  is  a  relationsh  ip  born  of  mutual 
choice.  In  proportion  to  this  depth  and  intensity  of  affection  is  the  sense  of  loss  when 
deat;h  occurs.  To  suffer  anguish  of  heart  at  such  a  time  accords  with  the  laws  and 
instincts  of  nature.  It  is  a  loss  not  to  be  measured  by  words,  and  in  proportion  to  the 
sense  of  loss  is  the  abundance  of  the  grief. 

II.  Man's  capacity  for  feeling  grief  is  limited.  Every  capacity  of  the  soul 
of  man  has,  on  earth,  limitation.     Whether  this  will  continue  when  released  from  the 


OH.  XXIV.  1—27.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET   EZEKIEL.  43 

trammels  of.  the  flesh  is  not  known.  In  all  likelihood,  capacity  of  mind  and  feeling 
will  be  enlarged,  but  will  still  be  limited.  If  grief  be  indulged  for  minor  losses,  the 
80ul  will  have  no  power  of  grief  remaining  for  heavier  demands.  Therefore  effort  of 
will  should  be  employed  to  restrain,  and  not  to  excite,  our  grief.  Those  who  weep  over 
imaginary  sorrows  portrayed  in  novels  often  become  callous  in  the  presence  of  real 
distress.     The  fountain  of  grief  is  exhausted. 

III.  Beal  grief  should  be  keberved  fob  oub  heaviest  calamities.  Because, 
if  we  allow  the  severest  disasters  to  occur  without  an  adequate  sense  of  sorrow,  we  do 
our  moral  nature  an  injury ;  we  do  injury  to  others.  We  convey  to  men  a  wrong 
impression.  We  emphasize  the  less  important  matters.  The  result  is  that  our  nature 
gets  out  of  harmony  with  God's  nature — a  disaster  the  heaviest  of  all.  Then  God^ 
kssons  are  lost  upon  us.  We  become  incapable  of  receiving  good.  We  are  "  past  feeling." 
To  lose  feeling  is  to  lose  enjoyment — is  to  endure  diminished  life. 

IV.  Sin  so  outweighs  all  other  calamities  that  cue  chief  boeeow  should 
BE  EESEBVBD  FOE  SIN.  God  forbade  Ezekiel  to  weep  for  the  loss  of  his  wife.  He 
forbade  the  Hebrews  to  exhibit  signs  of  mourning  for  the  fall  and  ruin  of  their  temple. 
"  But,"  he  added — "  but  ye  shall  pine  away  for  your  iniquities,  and  mourn  one 
toward  another."  All  other  disaster  is  external  to  a  man.  This  disaster,  sin,  ii 
internal  and  injures  the  very  texture  and  fabric  of  his  soul.  This  is  without  question 
•'  sorrow's  crown  of  sorrow."  A  man  belonging  to  the  criminal  class  obtained  an  inter- 
view with  a  Christian  gentleman.  Beplying  to  questions,  the  man  told  bis  sad  history 
—his  gradual  lapse  into  crime,  his  ultimate  detection.  Said  he,  "  I  have  been  twice  in 
gaol ;  I  have  endured  all  kinds  of  misery ;  but  I  confess  that  my  worst  punishment  i$ 
in  being  what  I  am  now."  This  is  the  cardinal  truth  set  forth  by  Ezekiel — that  sin 
is  the  sum  of  all  disasters,  the  quintessence  of  hell.    Hatred  of  God  is  man's  curse. 

V.  A    GOOD    MAN    IB  A    SIGN  TO  THE  UNGODLY,    OF    UNSEEN    REALITIES.       "  ThuS 

Ezekiel  is  unto  you  a  sign."  A  sign  is  an  index  of  unseen  things.  Smoke  is  the  sign 
of  fire.  A  sword  is  the  sign  of  hostility.  An  English  ensign  is  an  index  of  the  queen's 
authority.  A  good  man's  life  is  a  "  sign  "  or  proof  that  there  is  a  God,  and  that  God 
is  the  Friend  of  man.  The  purity  and  piety  of  a  good  man  is  an  indsx  of  the  trans- 
forming grace  of  God.  The  peace  in  a  good  man's  heart  is  an  index  of  the  peace  of 
God — the  peace  of  heaven.  The  obedience  of  a  good  man  is  an  index  of  God's  gracious 
authority.  The  resignation  of  a  good  man  under  trouble  is  a  sign  of  the  superiority  of 
heavenly  good  to  earthly.     Every  good  man  is  a  sign  and  witness  for  God. — ^D. 

Vers.  1 — 14. — Tlie  parable  of  the  cauldron;  or,  the  judgment  upon  Jerusalem, 
"  Again  in  the  ninth  year,  in  the  tenth  month,  in  the  tenth  day  of  the  month,  the 
word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  me,"  etc.  The  interpretation  of  the  chief  features  of  this 
parable  is  not  difficult.  "  The  cauldron  is  Jerusalem.  The  fiesh  and  the  bones  that 
are  put  therein  are  the  Jews,  the  ordinary  inhabitants  of  the  city  and  the  fugitives 
from  the  country.  The  fire  is  the  fire  of  war.  Water  is  poured  into  the  cauldron, 
because  in  the  first  place  only  the  inhabitants  are  regarded,  not  the  city  as  such. 
Afterwards,  where  the  cauldron  only  is  intended,  it  is  set  on  empty  (ver.  11).  The 
bones,  in  ver.  4,  in  contradistinction  to  the  pieces  of  flesh,  are  those  who  lend  support 
to  the  body  of  the  state — the  authorities,  with  the  king  at  their  head"  (Hengstenberg). 
The  precise  meaning  of  one  clause  is  controverted.  "  Burn  also  the  bones  under  it " 
(ver.  5);  Revised  Version,  "Pile  also  the  bones  under  it."  The  interpretation  of 
Pairbairn  appears  to  us  to  be  correct :  "  What  the  prophet  means  is  that  the  best,  the 
fleshiest  parts,  full  of  the  strongest  bones,  representing  the  most  exalted  and  powerful 
amoEg  the  people,  were  to  be  put  within  the  pot  and  boiled ;  but  that  the  rest,  the  very 
poorest,  were  not  to  escape  :  these,  the  mere  bones  as  it  were,  were  to  be  thrown  as  a 
pile  beneath,  suffering  first,  and,  by  increasing  the  fire,  hastening  on  the  destruction  of 
the  others."  A  remarkable  confirmation  and  illustration  of  this  interpretation  is  quoted 
in  the  '  Speaker's  Commentary '  from  Livingstone's  '  Last  Journal : '  "  When  we  first 
steamed  up  the  river  Shir&,our  fuel  ran  out  in  the  elephant  marsh  where  no  trees  exist. 
Coming  to  a  spot  where  an  elephant  had  been  slaughtered,  I  at  once  took  the  bones  on 
board,  and  these,  with  the  bones  of  a  second  elephant,  enabled  us  to  steam  briskly  up  to 
where  wood  abounded.  The  Scythians,  according  to  Herodotus,  used  the  bones  of  the 
»Bimal  sacrificed  to  boil  the  flesh ;  the  Guachos  of  South  America  do  the  same  when  they 


44  THE   BOOK   OF  THE   PROPHET   EZEKIEL.     [oh.  xxiv.  1—27. 

have  no  fuel ;  tbe  ox  thus  boils  himself."     The  parable  and  its  interpretation  as  given 
by  Ezekiel  suggest  the  following  observations. 

I.  The  time  roR  the  execution  of  the  Divine  judgmbnts  may  seem  to  men  to 
BE  LONQ  DELATED,  BUT  ITS  ABBivAli  IS  CERTAIN.  (Vers.  1,  2.)  This  judgment  against 
Jerusalem  had  been  spoken  of  by  the  prophets  for  a  long  time.  The  people  of  that 
city  had  refused  to  believe  in  its  approach ;  but  now  it  has  actually  commenced.  "  The 
King  of  Babylon  set  himself  against  Jerusalem  this  same  day."  But  notice :  1.  The 
minuteness  of  the  Divine  knowledge  of  the  beginning  of  the  judgment,  "  In  the  ninth 
year,  in  the  tenth  month,  in  the  tenth  day  of  the  month,"  etc.  (vera.  1,  2 ;  and  cf. 
2  Kings  XXV.  1).  The  very  day,  yea,  the  hour  and  the  moment,  when  Nebuchadnezzar 
began  the  siege  were  known  unto  God.  Nothing  is  hidden  from  him  (cf.  2  Kings  xix. 
27;  Ps.  oxxxix.  1—4;  Matt.  ix.  4;  John  ii.  24,  25;  Heb.  iv.  13).  2.  !Z%«  communi- 
cation of  this  knowledge  to  Ezekiel.  Here  on  a  particular  day,  which  is  clearly 
specified  and  set  down  in  writing,  the  prophet  announced  to  his  fellow-exiles  that 
Nebuchadnezzar  had  begun  to  besiege  Jerusalem.  "  The  place  on  the  Chebar  where 
the  prophet  lived,"  says  J.  D,  Michaelis,  "  was  distant  from  Jerusalem  more  than  a 
hundred  German  miles ;  it  was  therefore  impossible  for  Ezekiel  to  know  by  human 
means  that  the  siege  of  Jerusalem  had  commenced  on  that  day;  and  when  it  was 
afterwards  ascertained  that  the  prediction  had  exactly  corresponded  with  fact,  it  would 
be  regarded  as  an  invincible  proof  of  his  Bivine  mission."  3.  The  minute  record  of  the 
fact.  "  Son  of  man,  write  thee  the  name  of  the  day,  even  of  this  selfsame  day." 
When  this  prophecy  was  found  to  be  exactly  true,  the  record  of  it  would  rebuke  the 
people  for  their  unbelief  of  the  prophet,  and  witness  to  the  Divine  inspiration  and 
authority  with  which  he  spake.  But  to  revert  to  our  main  point,  the  apparent  delay 
of  a  Divine  judgment  does  not  affect  its  certainty.  "  Because  sentence  against  an 
evil  work  is  not  executed  speedily,  therefore  the  heart  of  the  sons  of  men  is  fully  set  in 
them  to  do  evil."  God's  visitation  because  of  persistent  sin  is  certain,  and  it  will  take 
place  at  the  precise  time  appointed  by  God.  With  what  remarkable  iteration  and 
emphasis  is  this  awful  certainty  expressed  in  the  fourteenth  verse  I  "I  the  Lord  havo 
spoken  it :  it  shall  come  to  pass,  and  I  will  do  it ;  I  will  not  go  back,  neither  will 
I  spare,  neither  will  I  repent"  (cf.  Numb,  xxiii.  19;  1  Sam.  xv.  29).  God's  threaten- 
ings  of  punishment  will  as  surely  be  fulfilled  as  his  promises  of  blessing. 

II.  In  the  execution  or  his  judombnts  God  is  no  Bespecteb  op  persons.  "  Set 
on  the  cauldron,  set  it  on,  and  also  pour  water  into  it ;  gather  the  pieces  thereof  into  it, 
even  every  good  piece,  the  thigh,  and  the  shoulder ;  fill  it  with  tlie  choice  bones.  Take 
the  choice  of  the  flock."  Thus  the  prophet  teaches  that  the  great  ones  of  Judah  and 
Jerusalem — the  king,  the  princes,  the  nobles — would  suffer  in  this  judgment.  There  is 
another  expression  which  points  to  the  same  conclusion :  "  No  lot  is  fallen  upon  it " 
(ver.  6).  In  former  visitations  some  had  been  taken  captive  and  others  left.  So  it  was 
when  Jehoiakim  and  when  Jehoiacbin  were  taken  away  (2  Kings  xxiv. ;  2  Chron.  xxxvi. 
1 — 10).  But  in  this  case  the  judgment  was  to  fall  upon  all  without  distinction! 
"  There  is  no  respect  of  persons  with  God,"  He  is  a  Respecter  of  character,  but  not  of 
persons.  No  outward  rank  or  riches,  no  distinctions  of  place  or  power,  nor  anything 
in  man's  secular  circumstances  or  condition,  can  exempt  him  from  the  stroke  of  God's 
anger  in  the  day  when  he  visits  a  people  for  their  sins. 

III.  When  wickedness  has  become  flagrant,  the  Divine  judgment  will  be  not 
LESS  conspicuous.  "For  her  blood  is  in  the  midst  of  her;  she  set  it  upon  the  bare 
rock;  she  poured  it  not  upon  the  ground,  to  cover  it  with  dust;  that  it  might  cause 
fury  to  come  up  to  take  vengeance,  I  have  set  her  blood  upon  the  bare  rock  that  it 
should  not  be  covered,"  Blood  upon  the  bare  rock  is  here  mentioned  in  contradistinc- 
tion to  blood  shed  upon  the  earth,  which  is  absorbed  by  it,  or  which  is  covered  and 
concealed  with  dust.  There  is,  perhaps,  as  Hengstenberg  suggests,  a  reference  to  the 
judicial  murders  which  were  perpetrated  in  Jerusalem,  of  which  that  of  the  Prophet 
Urijah  is  an  example  (Jer.  xxvi.  10—23).  But  there  certainly  is  set  forth  the  notorious 
wickedness  of  the  people  of  Jerusalem  and  Judah.  They  were  "  distinguished  by  the 
openness  and  audacity  with  which  they  sinned."  The  conspicuousness  of  their 
wickedness  would  manifest  the  righteousness  of  the  judgment  of  God ;  and  it  would 
lead  to  an  equal  conspicuousness  in  the  infliction  of  that  judgment.  She  had  poured 
out  blood  "  upon  the  bare  rook,"  and  God  would  "  set  her  blood  upon  the  bare  rock  " 


cii.  XXIV.  1-27.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  45 

In  the  administration  of  the  Divine  government  there  is  a  close  relation  and  proportion 
between  sin  and  its  punishment.  "  It  is  fit,"  siys  Matthew  Henry,  "  that  these  who 
sin  before  all  should  be  rebuked  before  all,  and  that  the  reputation  of  those  should  not 
be  consulted  by  the  concealment  of  their  punishment  who  were  so  impudent  as  not  to 
desire  the  concealment  of  their  sin." 

IV.  When  wickedness  has  become  tttterlt  invbtbkate,  the  time  fob  the 
EXECUTION  OF  JODSMENT  HAS  COMB.     Several  things  in  the  text  indicate  the  invete- 
racy of  the  wickedness  of  the  people.    The  scum  or  rust  of  the  cauldron  was  not 
cleansed  (vers.  6, 12)  ;  so  the  cauldron  shall  be  put  empty  upon  the  fire,  that  the  rust 
may  be  burnt  away  (ver.  11).   J.  D.  Michaelis  explains  this  verse  :  "  When  verdigris 
has  eaten  very  deeply  into  it,  copper  is  made  red-hot  in  the  fire,  and  cooled  in  water, 
when  the  rust  falls  off  in  scales.    It  can  be  partially  dissolved  by  the  application  of 
vinegar.    Only  one  must  not  think  of  a  melting  away  of  the  rust  by  the  fire,  since  in 
that  case  the  copper  would  necessarily  be  melted  along  with  it.    Also  through  the 
mere  heating  the  greater  part  can  be  loosened,  so  that  it  can  be  rubbsd  off."    But  here 
it  seems  that  both  the  cauldron  and  the  rust  are  to  be  consumed ;  both  Jerusalem  and 
its  guilty  inhabitants  are  to  be  destroyed.     Nothing  will  avail  to  cleanse  them  but  the 
fierce  fires  of  stern  retribution.     Another  evidence  of  the  exceeding  wickedness  of  the 
people  is  the  application  to  them  of  the  word  translated  "lewdness."    nijj  means 
"deliberate  wickedness,"  wickedness  meditated  and  planned.     For  such  wilful  and 
studied  evil-doing  there  remained  but  judgment.    "All  measures  of  a  less  extreme 
kind,"  says  Fairbairn,  "had  been  tried  in  vain ;  those  were  non-exhausted  ;  and  as  the 
iniquity  appeared  to  be  entwined  with  the  whole  fubric  and  constitution  of  things, 
nothing  remained  but  to  subject  all  to  the  crucible  of  a  severe  and  overwhelming 
catastrophe.     This  is  represented  by  keeping  the  cauldron  on  the  fire  till  its  contents 
were  stewed  away,  and  the  very  bones  burnt.     And  as  if  even  this  were  not  enough, 
as  if  something  more  were  necessary  to  avenge  and  purge  out  such  scandalous  wicked- 
ness, the  cauldron  itself  must  be  kept  hot  and  burning  till  the  pollution  should  be 
thoroughly  consumed  out  of  it.     The  wicked  city  must  be  laid  in  ruins  (cf.  Isa.  iv.  4). 
...  In  plain  terms,  the  Lord  was  no  longer  going  to  deal  with  them  by  half-measures ; 
their  condition  called  for  the  greatest  degree  of  severity  compatible  with  their  preser- 
vation as  a  distinct  and  separate  people,  and  so  the  indignation  of  the  Lord  was  to  rest 
on  them  till  a  separation  was  effected  between  them  and  sin." 

v.  That  the  judgments  of  God  are  heteibutoby  in  theie  chaeaotee.  "  Accord- 
ing to  thy  ways,  and  according  to  thy  doings,  shall  they  judge  thee_,  saith  the  Lord 
God."  (We  have  already  noticed  this  aspect  of  the  Divine  judgments  in  our  treatment 
of  ch.  vii.  3,  4 ;  ix.  10;  xvL  43.)— W.  J. 

Vers.  15, 16. — A  sudden  and  sorrowful  bereavement.  "Also  the  word  of  the  Lord 
came  unto  me,  saying.  Son  of  man,  behold,  I  take  away  from  thee  the  desire  of  thine 
eyes,"  etc.  The  death  of  the  prophet's  wife  is  introduced  here  as  a  type  of  the 
calamities  which  were  impending  over  Jerusalem  and  its  inhabitants.  We  believe 
that  her  death  was  a  fact,  and  not  merely  "a  vividly  drawn  figure"  designed  to  set 
forth  the  more  impressively  the  overwhelming  troubles  which  were  coming  upon  the 
Jews.  We  may  notice,  in  passing,  that  the  fact  that  Ezekiel  had  a  wife  suggests  the 
unscripturalnesB  of  the  papal  dogma  of  the  celibacy  of  the  clergy.  Moses  was  most 
eminent  as  a  prophet,  and  he  was  married  (Exod.  ii.  21,  22).  So  also  was  his  brother 
Aaron,  the  high  priest.  Samuel  the  seer  and  judge  was  married  (1  Sam.  viii.  1,  2); 
and  St.  Peter  (Matt.  viii.  14).  St.  Paul  claimed  for  himself  the  "  right  to  lead  about 
a  wife  that  is  a  buliever,  even  as  the  rest  of  the  apostles,  and  the  brethren  of  the  Lord, 
and  Cephas"  (1  Cor.  ix.  5).  And  he  writes  of  the , prohibition  of  marriage  as  a 
"  doctrine  of  demons  "  (1  Tim.  iv.  1—3).  Eegarding  the  death  of  the  wife  of  the 
prophet  as  a  real  actual  occurrence,  we  propose  to  consider  it  at  present  apart  from  its 
typical  significance.     We  notice — 

L  The  bbmoval  of  a  beloved  relative  by  death.  "  Son  of  man,  behold,  I  take 
•way  ...  the  desire  of  thine  eyes."  This  undoubtedly  refers  to  the  wife  of  Ezekiel ;  and 
this  mode  of  speaking  of  her  indicates  the  high  esteem  and  tender  affection  in  which 
she  was  held  by  her  husband.  "  A  good  wife,"  says  Jeremy  Taylor,  "is  Heaven's  last 
best  gift  to  man — his  angel  and  minister  of  graces  innumerable — his  gem  of  many 


46  THE  BOOK  Oii"  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh,  xxiv.  1— 27. 

virtues — his  casket  of  jewels.  Her  voice  is  sweet  music ;  her  smile,  his  brightest  day ; 
her  kiss,  the  guardian  of  his  innocence ;  her  arms,  the  pale  of  his  safety,  the  balm  of 
his  liealth,  the  balsam  of  his  life ;  her  iadastry,  his  surest  wealth  ;  her  economy,  his 
safest  steward  j  her  lips,  his  faithful  counsellors ;  her  bosom,  the  softest  pillow  of  his 
cares ;  and  her  prayers,  the  ablest  advocates  of  Heaven's  blessing  on  his  head."  The 
sacred  Scriptures,  especially  in  the  New  Testament,  represent  the  love  which  the 
husband  should  bear  towards  his  wife  as  being  of  the  closest,  tendere3t,_holiest  kind 
(Eph.  V.  25 — 33).  When  a  man  has  a  good  wife,  who  is  to  him  the  desire  of  his  eyes, 
and  she  is  taken  from  him  by  death,  great  is  his  loss  and  sore  his  sorrow.  "  The  death 
of  a  man's  wife,"  says  Lamartine,  "  is  like  cutting  down  an  ancient  oak  that  has  long 
shaded  the  family  mansion.  Henceforth  the  glare  of  the  world,  with  its  cares  and 
vicissitudes,  falls  upon  the  old  widower's  heart,  and  there  is  nothing  to  break  their 
force  or  shield  him  from  the  full  weight  of  misfortune.  It  is  as  if  his  right  hand  were 
withered ;  as  if  one  wing  of  his  angel  was  broken,  and  every  movement  that  he  made 
brought  iiim  to  the  ground.  His  eyes  are  dimmed  and  glassy,  and  when  the  film  ot 
death  falls  over  him,  he  misses  those  accustomed  tones  which  have  smoothed  his 
passage  to  the  grave."  How  frequently  are  beloved  relatives  removed  by  death  I  At 
one  time  it  is  the  true  wife  and  tender  mother.  At  another,  it  is  the  faithful  husband 
and  the  wise  and  loving  father.     Again,  it  is  the  beloved  and  beautiful  child. 

II.  The  removal  of  a  beloved  relative  by  death  suddenly.  "I  take  away 
from  thee  the  desire  of  thine  eyes  with  a  stroke."  The  wife  of  Ezekiel  did  not  suffer 
long  from  any  illness,  she  had  no  antecedent  affliction  which  tended  to  prepare  him  for 
her  removal,  but  was  snatched  away  as  it  weie  in  a  moment.  It  is  not  unfrequently 
the  case  that  our  beloved  are  taken  from  us  without  any  warning  or  without  any 
anticipation  of  their  removal.  By  virulent  disease,  by  public  calamity,  by  private 
accident,  men  are  taken  away  with  a  stroke.  This  renders  the  suffering  of  the  survivort 
more  severe.  If  the  life  had  slowly  faded  away,  they  would  in  a  moment  have  been 
prepared  for  its  departure.  When  there  is  a  protracted  affliction,  the  hearts  of  those 
who  are  soon  to  be  bereaved  nerve  themselves  for  the  last  separating  stroke  when  it 
shall  come.  The  idea  of  the  parting  to  some  extent  familiarizes  itself  to  the  mind. 
But  in  cases  of  sudden  death  there  is  no  such  preparation  for  the  trial.  And  the  stroke 
•ometimes  stuns  the  bereaved  by  its  unlooked-for  force,  sometimes  overwhelms  their 
hearts  with  sorrow,  and  sometimes  drives  them  into  hiilf-madness. 

III.  The  removal  of  a  beloved  relative  by  death  suddenly  by  God.  "  The 
word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  me,  saying.  Son  of  man,  behold,  I  take  away  from  thee  the 
desire  of  thine  eyes  with  a  stroke."  The  agent  in  the  removal  of  the  prophet's  wife  is 
here  said  to  be  neither  disease,  nor  accident,  nor  chance,  nor  fate,  but  the  Lord  himself. 
This  is  the  general  teaching  of  the  Bible  as  to  man's  decease  (cf.  Job  i.  21 ;  xiv.  5, 20; 
Ps.  xxxi.  15;  Ixviii.  20;  xc.  3,  5;  civ.  29;  Eev.  i.  18).  In  the  fact  which  we  are 
considering  there  is :  1.  Dtep  mystery.  Why  does  God  take  away  our  beloved  ones 
with  a  stroke?  Why  does  he  not  grant  us  at  least  some  intimation  and  preparation 
for  the  coming  trial?  We  cannot  tell.  But  he  says  unto  us, "  What  I  do  thou 
knowest  not  now ;  but  thou  shalt  understand  hereafter,"  2.  Divine  instruction.  The 
fact  should  teach  us  important  lessons;  e.y,:(l)  Not  to  place  too  much  leliance  on 
creatures,  however  wise  and  good  and  beloved  (cf.  Ps.  cxlvi.  3,  4  ;  Isa.  ii.  22 ;  1  Cor. 
vii.  29).  (2)  To  live  in  a  state  of  preparedness  for  death.  He  w  ho  lives  a  tndy  Chris- 
tian life  will  not  be  found  unprepared  whenever  death  shall  come  to  him  (cf.  Phil.  i.  21). 
(3)  To  acknowledge  God  as  the  Sovereign  of  our  life.  This  is  manifestly  our  duty  and 
our  interest.  3.  £ich  comfort.  God  is  all-wise,  perfectly  righteous,  infinitely  kind, 
and  graciously  interested  in  us.  Therefore  his  arrangements  concerning  us,  and  his 
actions  in  relation  to  ns,  must  be  for  our  good.  It  is  consoling  and  even  inspiring  to 
know  that  our  times  are  in  his  hand. 

IV.  The  removal  by  God  of  a  beloved  relative,  who  was  not  to  be  mourned 
by  the  bereaved  survivor.  "  Yet  neither  shalt  thou  mourn  or  weep,  neither  shall 
thy  tears  run  down."  God  does  not  prohibit  to  his  servant  the  feeling  of  sorrow,  but 
only  its  outward  expression.  All  the  visible  signs  of  mourning  in  use  amongst  his 
countrymen  he  must  abstain  from  (ver.  17).  He  may  not  weep,  and  even  the  relief 
of  silent  tears  is  forbidden  him.  It  has  been  well  said  by  Albert  Smith  that  tears  are 
"  the  safety-valves  of  the  heart,  when  too  much  pressure  is  laid  on."     And    Lei^h 


oil.  XXIV.  1—27.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  47 

Hunt  writes,  "  Tears  enable  sorrow  to  veat  itself  patiently.  Tears  hinder  sorrow  from 
becoming  despair  and  madness."  But  in  this  painful  bereavement  Bzekiel  must 
neitlier  weep  nor  shed  tears,  in  order  that  he  may  be  a  more  impressive  sign  unto  his 
fellow-exiles.  Exceedingly  severe  were  his  trials.  But  for  us  in  our  sorrow  there  is  no 
such  prohibition.  Christianity  does  not  forbid  tears.  "  Jesus  wept."  In  the  days  of 
his  flesh  he  "offered  up  prayers  and  supplications  with  strong  crying  and  tears  unto 
him  that  was  able  to  save  him  from  death."  And  the  solace  of  tears  is  allowed  unto 
us.  We  may  relieve  the  over-laden  heart  by  sighs,  and  cool  the  burning  brain  by  our 
flowing  tears.  And  in  the  sorrows  of  bereavement  we  have  richer,  diviner  consolations 
than  these..  We  know  that  to  those  who  are  in  Christ  death  is  unspeakable  gain ;  that 
the  separations  which  it  causes  are  more  in  appearance  than  in  reality ;  and  that  in  the 
great  hereafter  there  will  be  blessed  reunions  with  those  who  have  passed  beyond  the 
veil.— W.  J. 

Vers.  20 — 23. — An  awful  catastrophe  and  a  prohibition  of  mourning.  "  The  word  of 
the  Lord  came  unto  me,  saying,  Speak  unto  the  house  ol  Israel,  Thus  saith  the  Lord 
God,"  etc.  The  death  of  Bzekiel's  wife,  and  his  abstinence  from  mournlDg  by  reason 
thereof,  were  symbolical,  and  their  signification  is  brought  before  us  in  our  text.  Two 
scenes  are  presented  for  our  contemplation. 

I.   A   PEOPLE   DEPRIVED   OP   THEIB   MOST  PBEOIOnS    POSSESSIONS.      1.    The    possessions 

of  which  they  were  to  le  deprived.  (1)  The  temple  itself.  "  Behold,  I  will  profane 
my  sanctuary,  the  pride  of  your  power,  the  desire  of  your  eyes,  and  that  which. your 
soul  pitieth."  The  last  clause  is  literally,  "  the  pity  of  your  soul;  "  that  which  "your 
soul  would  spare — pledging  life  itself  for  it."  See  also  in  what  exalted  terms  the 
temple  is  spoken  of  in  ver.  25 :  "I  take  from  them  their  strength,"  or  stronghold, 
"  the  joy  of  their  glory,  the  desire  of  their  eyes,  and  that  whereupon  they  set  their 
heart."  The  wife  of  Ezekiel,  vvho  was  the  desire  of  his  eyes,  symbolized  the  temple. 
In  some  respects  the  Jews  made  too  much  of  their  temple.  They  gloried  in  its  out- 
ward beauty  and  splendour,  even  while  they  dishonoured  God  by  their  idolatries ;  they 
trusted  in  it  as  their  stronghold,  instead  of  making  him  their  Befuge  and  Strength ; 
they  set  their  heart  upon  it,  when  they  should  have  loved  him  with  all  their  heart, 
and  soul,  and  mind,  and  strength.  And  they  were  now  about  to  lose  that  temple. 
Heathen  intruders  would  first  desecrate  it  and  then  destroy  it  (cf.  Ps.  Ixxix.  1 ;  Ixxiv. 
3 — 8).  (2)  The  temple  as  a  symbol.  "The  temple,"  says  Schroder,  "symbolizes  all 
the  possessions  and  power  of  Israel.  To  its  existence  in  their  midst  they  appealed 
against  their  brethren  (ch.  xi.  15) ;  and  to  this  they  trusted  amid  all  their  wickedness 
and  apostasy  (cli.  viii.  6;  Jer.  viii.  4)."  And  Hengstenberg  remarks  that  in  the  pro- 
fanation of  the  sanctuary  "is  included  the  dissolving  of  the  whole  covenant  relation, 
the  removal  of  everything  sublime  and  glorious,  that  had  flown  from  that  covenant 
relation,  of  all  that  was  valuable  and  dear  to  the  people.  The  general  conception  is 
demanded  by  the  fundamental  passage,  Lev.  xxvi.  19,  where  by  '  the  pride  of  power ' 
is  meant  all  the  glory  of  Israel.  Then  also  by  ver.  25,  where  in  place  of  the  sanctuary 
here  all  that  is  glorious  appears."  (3)  Their  sons  and  daughters.  "  Your  sons  and 
your  daughters  whom  ye  have  left  behind  shall  fall  by  the  sword."  Hitzig  suggests 
thftt,  "  on  the  occasion  of  the  expatriation,  many  parents  may  have  been  obliged  to 
leave  their  children  with  relatives,  from  their  being  of  too  tender  age  to  accompany 
tiem  ; "  and  these  would  be  slain  by  the  sword.  But  it  seems  to  us  better  to  interpret, 
with  Hengstenberg,  "  The  sons  and  the  daughters  are  not  those  of  individuals,  but  of 
the  people  as  a  whole.  The  house  of  Israel,  not  the  exiles  in  particular,  are  addressed. 
In  point  of  fact,  it  is  as  much  as  to  say,  'your  countrymen.'"  They  were  soon  to  be 
stripped  of  their  temple  and  its  ordinances,  their  independence  and  liberty,  their  homes 
and  country,  and  many  of  their  fellow-countrymen  would  perish  by  famine,  pestilence, 
and  sword."  2.  The  Person  by  whom  they  were  to  he  thus  deprived.  "  Thus  saith  the 
Lord  God ;  Behold,  I  will  profane  my  sanctuary,"  etc.  (ver.  21) ;  "  I  take  from  them 
thtir  strength,"  etc.  (ver.  25).  In  this  destruction  and  slaughter  the  Chaldeans  were 
as  instruments  and  weapons  in  the  hand  of  God,  who  was  himself  the  great  Agent. 
8.  ITie  reason  why  they  were  to  be  thus  deprived.  All  this  loss  and  misery  was  coming 
upon  them  because  of  their  sins.  They  had  forsaken  God,  and  he  was  about  to  leave 
them  without  his  defence.     Tl  ey  had  profaned  his  temple  by  their  idolatries,  and  he 


M  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZBKIBL.    [oh.  xxit.  1—27. 

W8B  about  to  allow  the  idolatrous  Chaldeans  to  enter  into  it  and  destroy  it.  Their 
calamities  were  caused  by  their  crimes.  Their  sufferings  were  the  righteous  retribu' 
tion  of  their  sins. 

II.   A   PEOPLE  THAT  SHOULD  NOT   MOURN   THE   LOSS  OF   EVEN   THEIB   MOST    PEEOIOUS 

POSSESSIONS.  "  And  ye  shall  do  as  I  have  done :  ye  shall  not  cover  your  lips,  nor  eat 
the  bread  of  men.  And  your  tires  shall  be  upon  your  heads,"  etc.  The  outward 
demonstrations  of  mourning  are  thus  forbidden  to  the  Jews  in  their  distress.  The 
covering  of  the  face  from  the  upper  lip  downwards  was  a  sign  of  mourning  (cf.  Lev. 
xiii.  45 ;  Micah  iii.  7).  In  great  grief  the  mourners  partook  of  food  which  their  neigh- 
bours prepared  and  sent  to  them  (cf.  Jer.  xvi.  7,  Revised  Version).  This  is  here 
called  "the  bread  of  men."  In  many  cases  of  mdumiiig  the  head-dress  was  taken  off, 
and  dust  or  ashes  sprinkled  upon  the  head  (cf.  Lev.  x.  6 ;  Job  ii.  12 ;  Isa.  Ixi.  3 ;  Lam. 
ii.  10).  But  David  and  his  companions  in  a  season  of  deep  distress  went  weeping  with 
their  beads  covered  (2  Sam.  xv.  30).  It  was  also  customary  for  mourners  to  go  bare- 
foot, as  David  did  on  the  occasion  just  referred  to.  All  these  visible  symbols  of  grief 
were  to  be  absent  from  the  house  of  Israel  during  the  great  distresses  that  were  coming 
upon  them.  Yet  our  text  speaks  of  their  great  sorrow.  "  Ye  shall  pine  away  in  your 
iniquities,  and  moan  one  toward  another."  We  suggest,  by  way  of  explanation : 
1.  Their  calamities  would  so  overwhelm  them  as  to  leave  them  no  power  to  think  of 
the  ceremonial  of  mourning.  Their  losses  and  miseries  would  stun  them  with  amaze- 
ment and  anguish  of  soul.  "  As  in  the  prophet's  case,"  says  Schroder, "  the  misfortune 
of  his  wife's  death  disappears  in  the  deep  shadows  of  the  overthrow  of  Jerusalem  and 
Judah,  so  all  the  personal  feelings  of  the  exiles "  (and  we  must  not  limit  this  to  them 
to  the  exclusion  of  their  fellow-countrymen)  "  shall  be  absorbed  in  this  destruction  of 
the  last  remnant  of  the  kingdom  and  city.  One  and  another  shall  be  benumbed  with 
pain,  BO  that  no  comfort  shall  come  from  any  quarter ;  on  the  contrary,  a  desolating 
feeling  of  guilt  shall  be  general — such  shall  be  their  knowledge  of  the  Lord."  2.  Their 
tonsciousness  of  the  sin  which  caused  their  calamities  should  check  the  outward  exhibi- 
tions of  sorrow  because  of  them.  This  is  well  set  forth  by  Pairbairn :  "  In  the  typical 
part  of  the  delineation,  it  was  not  because  the  prophet  was  insensible  to  the  loss  he 
sustained  by  the  death  of  his  wife  that  he  was  to  abstain  fiom  the  habiliments  and 
usages  of  mourning ;  but  because  there'was  another  source  of  grief  behind,  of  which 
this  was  but  the  sign  and  presage,  and  in  itself  so  much  greater  and  more  appalling, 
that  his  spirit,  instead  of  venting  itself  in  expressions  of  sorrow  at  the  immediate  and 
ostensible  calamityj  was  rather  to  brood  in  silent  agony  and  concern  over  the  more 
distressing  evil  it  foreshadowed.  And  in  like  manner  with  the  people,  when  all  their 
fond  hopes  and  visions  were  finally  exploded,  when  the  destruction  of  their  beautiful 
temple,  and  the  slaughter  of  their  sons  and  daughters,  came  home  to  them  as  dreadful 
realities,  they  could  only  refrain  from  bewailing  the  loss  of  what  had  so  deep  a  hold 
on  their  desires  and  affections,  by  having  come  to  discern  in  this  the  sign  of  what  wai 
still  greatly  more  dreadful  and  appalling.  And  what  might  that  be  but  the  blood- 
Btained  guilt  of  their  iniquities,  which  had  brought  on  the  catastrophe  ?  ,  .  .  The  over- 
whelming sense  should  then  break  in  upon  them  of  the  iniquities  to  which  they  had 
clung  with  such  fatal  perverseness,  absorbing  their  spirits,  and  turning  their  meanings 
into  a  new  and  higher  direction.  The  agonies  of  bereavement  would  be  in  a  manner 
lost  under  the  self-inflicted  pains  of  contrition  and  remorse  (cf.  ch.  vii.  16).  Yet  the 
description  must  be  understood  with  certain  qualifications,  and  indeed  is  to  be  viewed 
•s  the  somewhat  ideal  delineation  of  a  state  of  things  that  should  be  found,  rather  than 
the  exact  and  literal  description  of  what  was  actually  to  take  place.  .  .  .  The  people 
should,  on  the  occurrence  of  such  a  fearful  catastrophe,  have  sunk  under  an  overpower- 
ing sense  of  their  guilt  and  folly,  and,  like  the  prophet,  turned  the  tide  of  their  grief 
and  mourning  rather  against  the  gigantic  evil  that  lay  behind,  seen  only  in  the  chambeM 
of  imagery,  than  what  outwardly  appeared  ;  they  should  have  bewailed  the  enormous 
fins  that  had  provoked  the  righteous  displeasure  of  God,  rather  than  the  present 
troubles  in  which  that  displeasure  had  taken  effect.  And  such,  undoubtedly,  was  the 
case  with  the  better  and  more  enlightened  portion  of  the  people;  but  many  still  cleaved 
to  their  idols,  and  would  not  receive  the  instruction  given  them,  either  by  the  prophet'i 
parabolical  example  or  by  the  reality  of  God's  afflicting  dispensations." 
Conclusion.    Mark  well  the  dread  consequences  of  persistence  in  sin. — '^.  J. 


CH.  XXV.  1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROrHET  EZEKIEL. 


49 


EXPOSITION 


CHAPTER  XXV. 


The  section  on  which  we  now  enter — the 
great  "  parenthesis,"  as  I  have  called  it,  of 
Ezekiel's  prophetio  work — contains  messages 
to  the  seven  nations  that  were  most  closely 
connected  with  the  fortunes  of  Israel  and 
Judah.  These  were  (1)  Ammon  (ch.  xxv. 
1_7) ;  (2)  MoabCoh.  xxv.  8—11);  (3)  Edom 
(oh.  XXV.  12—14)1  (4)  Philistia  (ch.  xxv. 
15—17);  (5)  Tyre  (oh.  xxvi.  1— xxvili.  19) ; 
(6)  Zidon  (ch.  xxviii.  20—24);  (7)  Egypt 
(oh.  xxix.  1— xxxii.  32).  A  prophet's  work 
was  hardly  complete  without  such  a  survey 
of  the  Divine  order  of  the  world  so  far  as 
it  oame  within  the  horizon  of  his  thoughts ; 
and  Bzekiel  had  before  him  the  example  of 
like  groups  of  prophecies  addressed  to  the 
heathen  nations  with  whieh  Israel  was 
brought  into  contact,  in  Isa.  xiii.— xxiii.  and 
Jer.  xlvL — ^U.  It  was  natural  that  the  two 
contemporary  prophets  should  be  led  to 
address  their  messages  to  the  same  nations, 
and  so  we  find  Ezekiel's  seven  named  to- 
gether with  others  in  Jer.  xxv.  15 — 26, 
and  five  of  them  (Egypt  and  PhUistia  being 
excepted)  in  Jer.  xxvii.  1 — 4;  while  we 
have  fuller  and  special  prophecies  for  Egypt 
(Jer.  xlvi.);  Philistia  (Jer.  xlvii.);  Moab 
(Jer.  xlviii.);  Ammon  (Jer.  xlix.  1 — 6); 
Edom  (Jer.  xlix.  7—22),  with  the  addition 
of  Damascus  (Jer.  xlix.  23—27);  Kedar 
(Jer.  xlix.  28—33);  Blam  (Jer.  xlix.  34— 
89);  Babylon  (Jer.  1.  1).  What  is  remark- 
able in  Bzekiel  is  that  he  has  no  message 
for  Babylon,  which  for  Isaiah  and  Jeremiah 
was  the  leading  representative  of  the  world- 
powers  considered  in  their  antagonism  to 
the  Divine  kingdom.  This  may,  in  part,  be 
explained  by  supposing  that  he  omitted  it  in 
order  to  keep  to  his  number  of  seven  nations 
as  the  symbol  of  completeness ;  but  a  more 
probable  hypothesis  is  that  he  was  led,  as 
Jeremiah  had  at  one  time  been  (Jer.  xxix. 
1 — 7),  to  see  in  the  Chaldean  monarchy  the 
appointed  minister  of  the  Divine  judgments 
on  Jerusalem  and  on  the  other  nations.  For 
his  immediate  purpose  it  was  fitter  that  the 
exiles  for  whom  he  wrote  should  "  seek  the 
peace"  of  the  people  among  whom  they 
dwelt  rather  than  that  they  should  exult  in 
its  future  downfall.  He,  like  Jeremiah, 
EZEKIEL — n. 


may  have  been  personally  favoured  by 
Nebuchadnezzar  and  his  ofScials;  and 
Daniel,  whom  he  mentions  with  honour 
(ch.  xiv.  14),  and  whom  he  may  have  known 
personally,  was  the  king's  chief  minister. 
There  was,  we  may  well  believe,  a  sufficient 
reason  for  this  exceptional  reticence. 

Yer.  2. — Set  thy  face  against  the  Ammon- 
ites. The  main  facts  that  are  essential  to 
a  right  understanding  of  the  message  to  this 
people,  not  to  speak  of  their  long-standing 
enmity  against  Isiael  for  many  centuries, 
are  (1)  that  tliey  formed  part  of  Nebu- 
chadnezzar's army,  as  allies  or  tributaries, 
against  Jehoiakim  (2  Kings  xxiv.  2);  |2) 
that  afterwards  tliey,  with  other  neighbour- 
ing nations,  intrigued  with  Zedekiah  against 
the  Chaldean  king  (Jer.  xxvii.  3),  so  that 
it  was  an  open  question  whether  his  first 
act  of  vengeance  should  fall  on  Babbath- 
Ammon  or  Jerusalem  (oh.  xxi.  20).  In  ch. 
xxi.  28 — 32,  written  not  long  before,  Bzekiel 
had  uttered  his  prediction  of  the  coming 
judgment.  Here  we  read  that  when  they 
saw  that  Jerusaleni  had  been  laid  waste, 
they,  like  Edom  (Ps.  cxxxvii.  7),  exufted 
in  her  downfall.  Earlier  traces  of  cruelty 
and  outrage  are  found  in  Ps.  Uxxiii.  7 ; 
Amos  i.  13 — 15 ;  Zeph.  ii.  8 — 11.  We  leam 
from  Jer.  xl.  14  that  the  name  of  the 
Ammonite  king  at  this  time  was  Baalis. 

Vers.  4,  5. — The  men  of  the  east;  Hebrew, 
children  of  the  east.  The  name  is  applied 
in  Gen.  xxix.  1 ;  1  Kings  iv.  30 ;  Job  i.  3 ; 
Judg.  vi.  3,  33;  vii.  12;  viii.  10,  to  the 
nomadic  tribes,  Midianites  and  others,  which 
roamed  to  and  fro  in  the  wilderness  east  of 
Ammon  and  Moab,  after  the  manner  of  the 
modem  Bedouins,  with  their  sheep  and 
camels,  and  were  looked  upon  as  descendant* 
oflshmacl.  Falaoes;  better,  with  the  Bevis^ 
Version,  encampments,  or  tent-villages.  The 
word  is  found,  in  this  sense,  in  Gen.  xxv.  1ft ; 
Ps.  Ixix.  25;  Numb.  xxxi.  10.  Tliis  was, 
probably,  the  immediate  result  of  Nebuchad- 
nezzar's march.  Babbah  was  left  unde- 
fended, and  became  a  stable  for  the  camels 
of  tlie  Midianites  and  other  tribes  (Judg.  vi. 
5).  The  prediction  has  been  slowly  fulfilled. 
Under  the  Grffloo-Egyptian  rule  the  city 
revived,  was  named  after  Ptolemy  Philadel- 
phus,  and  was  flourishing  under  the  Boman 
empire.  Eemains  of  temples,  theatres, 
houses,  are  still  found  on  its  site,  but  its 
present  desolate  condition  agrees  with  the 
picture  drawn  here  by  Bzekiel  and  in 
Jer.  xlix.  2.  The  language  of  Jer.  xlix.  6 
implies  captivity  and  a  partial  return  from  it. 

Ver.  7.— A  spoil  to  the  heathen.  The 
noun  for  "spoU"  is  not  found  elsewhere^ 


(SO 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xsv.  1—17. 


btit  probably  means  "  food."  The  Hebrew 
Keri,  i.e.  its  marginal  reading,  gives  the 
same  word  as  that  rendered  "spoil"  in  ch. 
xxvii.  5.  The  meaning  is  substantially  the 
same  whichever  word  we  choose.  Ezekiel, 
it  will  be  noticed,  says  nothing  about  the 
return  of  the  Ammonites,  but  contemplates, 
M  in  ch.  ixi.  32,  entire  destruction.  The 
meaning  of  Rahbah  ("great"  or  "popu- 
lous"), the  mother-city  of  Ammon,  gives 
greater  force  to  the  prophecy  of  desolation. 

Ver.  8. — Uoab  and  Seir.  "  Seir  "  stands 
elsewhere  for  Bdom,  but  here  appears  as 
distinguished  from  it,  the  latter  nation 
having  a  distinct  message  in  ver.  12.  A 
possible  explanation  is  found  in  2  Ohron.  xx. 
23,  where  we  find  Moab  ami  Ammon  joined 
together  against  the  inhabitants  of  Mount 
Seir.  The  Moabites  may  have  retained 
possession  of  it,  and  so  Ezekiel  may  have 
coupled  the  two  names  together.  Their  sin 
also,  like  that  of  Ammon,  is  that  they  ex- 
ulted in  the  fall  of  Jerusalem. ,  It  was  come 
down  to  the  leivel  of  other  cities,  no  longer 
exalted  above  them  by  the  blessing  of 
Jehovah.  The  Moabite  Stone,  found  in  the 
ruins  of  Dibon  ('Eecords  of  the  Past,'  ix. 
1 65), on  which  Mesha,King  of  Moab,narrates 
his  conquests  over  neighbouring  nations, 
including  Israel,  testifies  to  the  strength  of 
the  kingdom,  and  in  Isa.  xv.  and  xvi.  it  is 
represented  as  conspicuous  for  its  pride. 
They  too,  like  the  Ammonites,  served  in 
Nebuchadnezzar's  army  (2  Kings  xxiv.  2). 

Ver.  9. — I  will  open  the  side  of  Moab; 
literally,  the  ehoiUder,  i.e.  the  slopes  of  the 
mountain  of  Moab  (Josh.  xv.  8,  10).  For 
Beth-jeshimoth  (equivalent  to  "House  of 
wastes "),  see  Numb,  xxxiii.  49 ;  Josh.  xii. 
3 ;  xiii.-20.  It  had  been  assigned  to  Beuben, 
but  had  been  seized  by  the  Moabites.  It 
has  been  identified  by  De  Sauley  with  the 
ruins  now  known  as  Suaime,  on  the  north- 
eastern border  of  the  Dead  Sea.  Baal- 
meon  (Numb,  xxxii.  38),  more  fuUy  Beth- 
baal-meon  (Josh.  xiii.  17),  or  Beth-meon 
(Jer.  xlviii.  23).  The  name  is  found  in 
ruins  of  some  extent,  known  fis  the  fortress 
of  Mfun  or  Maein,  about  three  miles  south 
of  Heshbon  ('  Diet.  Bible,' ».«.).  Kiriathaim. 
The  dual  form  of  the  name  (equivalent  to 
"  Two  cities  ")  implies,  perhaps,  the  union  of 
an  old  and  new  town,  or  two  towns  on  the 
opposite  sides  of  a  brook  or  wady.  The  name 
appears  in  Gen.  xiv.  5;  Numb,  xxxii,  37; 
Josh.  xiii.  19 ;  Jer.  xlviii.  1, 23.  It  has  been 
Identified  with  El-Teym,  about  two  miles 
from  Medeba  (Burckhardt),  and  with  Kurei- 
unt,  on  the  south  side  oijebel  Altarui.  Euse- 
bius  ('  Onom.,'  ».v.)  describes  it  as  about  ten 
miles  from  Medeba,  and  close  to  the  Baris, 
but  not! ling  is  known  as  to  the  last-named 
place.  The  three  cities  all  belonged  to  the 
legion  which  Sihon  and  Og  had  conquered 


from  the  Moabites  before  Israel  obtained 
possession  of  them,  and  they  were  afterwards 
claimed  as  belonging  to  the  Israelites  by 
right  of  conquest  (Jndg.  xi.  23),  and  there 
may  therefore  be  a  touch  of  irony  in  Eze- 
kiel's  language  describing  them  as  Moabite 
cities.  Collectively  they  were  the  glory  of 
the  conntry,  the  region  known  as  the  Belka, 
in  which  they  were  situated,  giving  the  best 
pasturage,  then  as  now,  in  Southern  Syria. 
Haverniok  quotes  a  Bedouin  proverb,  "  There 
is  no  land  like  Belka"  (see  Tristmm's 
'Land  of  Moab,'  pp.  275,  303—305,  350). 
Kirjath  and  Baal-meon  appear  in  Meslia's 
inscription  on  the  Moabite  Stone. 

Ver.  10. — Unto  the  men  of  the  east  with 
the  Ammonites.  The  Authorized  Version 
is  obscure.  What  is  meant  is  that  tlie 
Moabites  as  well  as  the  Ammonites  were  to 
be  given  to  the  nomadic  tribes,  the  "  children 
of  the  east,"  fur  a  possession.  The  doom 
that  Amman  was  to  be  no  more  remembered 
(ch.  xxi.  32)  was  to  be  carried  out  to  the 
uttermost,  and  the  children  of  the  east  were  to 
complete  what  Nebuchadnezzar  had  begun. 
The  utter  destruction  of  Ammon  was,  as  it 
were,  uppermost  in  the  prophet's  thoughts, 
and  that  of  Moab  was  but  secondary.  His- 
torically, the  words  received  a  partial  fulfil- 
ment in  Nebuchadnezzar's  conquests  five 
years  after  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem 
(Josephus, '  Ant.,'  X.  9. 7,  and  M.  von  Niebuhr'g 
'  Gesch.  Assurs,'  p.  215),  but  the  Ammonites 
were  still  an  important  people  in  the  time 
of  the  Maccabees  (1  Maoo.  v.  6,  30—45)  and 
Justin  Martyr  ('  Dial,  cum  Trypho,  p.  272). 

Vers.  12,  13. — Because  that  £dom  hath 
dealt  against  the  house  of  Judah,  etc.  The 
statement  receives  many  illustrations, notably 
in  Fs.  cxxxvii.  7,  and  at  an  earlier  date 
in  Amos  i.  11;  Obad.  II.  What  had  been 
malicious  exultation  (the  imxatpeKoKia, 
which  Aristotle  describes  as  the  extremest 
type  of  evil)  passed  in  the  case  of  Edom  into 
overt  acts  of  hostility.  The  moment  of 
Judah's  weakness  was  seized  on  as  an  oppor- 
tunity for  gratifying  what  Ezekiel  elsewhere 
(ch.  xixv.  5)  calls  the  "  perpetual  hatred  " 
of  the  people  against  Israel,  for  taking  ven- 
geance for  the  primal  wrong  which  Esau 
had  suffered  at  the  hand  of  Jacob  (Gen. 
xxvii.  36).  (For  other  prophecies  agamst 
Edom,  see  Numb.  xxiv.  18, 19;  Isa.  xi.  34; 
Jer.  xlix.  7—12 ;  Joel  iii.  19.)  Teman.  The 
name,  which  signifies  "  South,"  was  probably 
applied  to  a  district— twice,  here  and  ia 
Jer.  xlix.  7,  8,  coupled  with  Dedan.  In 
Jer.  xlix.  20,  21  the  cry  of  the  inhabitants 
of  Toman  is  said  to  have  been  "  heard  in  the 
Bed  Sea,"  and  this  determines  its  geogra- 
phical position,  as  being,  in  accordance  with 
its  name,  the  southern  region  of  Edom.  In 
Job  ii.  11  we  have  Elipliaz  the  Temanite  as 
one  of  the  patriarch's  friends,  and  the  same 


OH.  XXV.  1—17.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  BZEKIBL. 


51 


name  appears  as  that  of  a  son  of  Esan  (Gen. 
xxxvi.  11).  In  Jeremiah  Qoe.  cU.)  Teman  is 
named  as  famous  for  its  wisdom.  Dedan  is 
named  as  a  grandson  of  Oush  in  Gen.  x.  7, 
«nd  of  Abraham  by  Keturah  in  Gen.  xxv.  3. 
It  has  been  inferred  from  this  that  there 
were  two  branches  of  the  nation,  one  on  the 
shores  of  the  Persian  Gulf,  nomadio  and 
trading,  as  in  the  "  travelling  companies  "  of 
Dedanim  (Isa.  xxi.  13;  ch.  xxvii.  15,  20); 
the  other  settled  in  the  territory  of  the 
Kdomites  ('Diet.  Bible')-  The  latter  is 
that  to  which  Ezekiel  refers.  A  various 
punctuation  gives,  with  a  better  sense, "  From 
Teman  even  unto  Dedan  they  shall  fall  by 
the  sword." 

Ver.  14. — By  the  hand  of  my  people  Israel. 
The  words  received  a  fulfilment  in  the  con- 
quest of  Edom  by  John  Hyroanus,  who 
compelled  its  people  to  receive  circumcision 
(Josephus,  'Ant.,'  xiii.  9.  1).  In  Amos 
ix.  12  its  subjugation  is  connected  with  the 
Messianic  prophecy  that  the  fallen  tabernacle 
«f  David  should  be  raised  up.  There  is 
an  obvious  emphasis  in  the  repetition  of 
the  word  vengeanoe.  The  law  of  a  Divine 
retribution  will  work  out  its  appointed  pur- 
pose— vengeance  to  those  who  sought  ven- 
geance. They  (the  Edomites)  shall  reap  as 
they  have  sown,  and  shall  know  that  the 
vengeance  of  Jehovah  is  more  tenible  than 
their  own. 


Ver.  15. — The  sin  of  the  Philistines  is 
virtually  the  same  as  that  of  the  Edomites. 
They  also  had  a  perpetual  hatred.  Cen- 
tury after  century  they  had  been,  with 
various  fortunes,  the  enemies  of  Israel — 
defeated  (to  confine  ourselves  to  more  recent 
history)  by  Jehoshaphat  (2  Obron.  xvii.  11) 
and  Uzziah  (2  Chron.  xxvL  6),  formidable 
under  Jehoram  (2  Chron.  xxi.  16)  and  Ahaz 
(2  Chron.  xxviii.  18),  repressed  by  Hezeklab 
(Isa.  xiv.  31),  combining  with  Amalek,  and 
Animon,  and  Tyre,  and  Assyria  against 
Jerusalem  (Ps.  Ixxxiii,  7). 

Ver.  16.— The  Cherethims.  The  name 
appears,  coupled  with  the  Philistines,  in 
Zeph.  ii.  5,  and  has  been  supposed  to  be 
connected  with  Crete  as  the  region  from 
which  they  came,  or  in  which  they  afterwards 
settled.  By  many  writers  both  names  are 
identified  with  the  Cherethites  and  Feleth- 
ites,  who  appear  as  David's  body-guard  in 
2  Bam.  viii.  18 ;  xv.  18,  et  al.,  and  who  are 
BuppoHed  to  represent  a  body  of  mercenary 
or  subject  troops  formed  out  of  the  two 
nations.  Both  Ezekiel  and  Zephaniah  con- 
nect the  Cherethims  with  a  paronomasia,  the 
verb  I  will  out  off  being  almost  identical  in 
sound  with  it.  (For  other  prophecies,  see 
Isa.  xi.  14 ;  xiv.  29 — 31 ;  Jer.  xlvii. ;  Joel 
iii.  4;  Amos  i.  6 — 8;  Zeph.  ii.  1— -7 ;  Zeoh. 
ix.  4—7.) 


HOMILBTICS. 

Ver.  1. — The  judgment  of  the  nations.  This  verse  introduces  a  new  series  of 
prophecies,  which  contain  successive  utterances  of  judgment  against  foreign  nations, 
extending  over  the  following  chapters  to  the  end  of  the  thirty-second.  The  whole 
series  is  deserving  of  consideration,  both  for  the  sake  of  its  common  character  and 
in  order  to  note  the  distinctions  of  the  several  parts. 

I.  God  bules  oveb  the  whole  eakth.  The  prophet  has  not  ended  his  mission 
when  he  has  delivered  his  message  to  the  Jews.  He  has  a  new  oracle  to  utter.  The 
word  of  God  comes  to  him  again  with  fresh,  full,  distinct  declarations,'and  the  whole 
of  these  declarations  concern  foreign  nations.  Seven  nations  are  specified.  The  number 
is  suggestive ;  the  typical  number  of  completeness,  it  implies  that  the  nations  named 
are  not  the  only  ones  over  whom  God  exercises  jurisdiction,  but  that  those  nations, 
being  the  nearest  to  Israel,  are  selected  as  prominent  specimens.  The  Hebrew  prophets 
repeatedly  extended  their  gaze  far  beyond  the  hills  of  Palestine.  The  Moabites  might 
regard  Jehovah  as  the  tribal  God  of  Israel,  in  the  same  sense  in  which  Chemosh  was 
their  God  (see  the  Moabite  Stone),  and  Jephthah  might  use  language  which  appeared 
to  recognize  this  position  (Judg.  xi.  24),  but  the  inspired  prophets  made  no  such 
mistake.  They  knew  that  the  one  God  was  Lord  over  the  whole  earth.  God  is  now 
concerned  with  the  heathen.  He  is  also  concerned  with  the  godless  at  home.  Men 
may  ignore,  renounce,  or  oppose  him,  but  they  cannot  elude  his  notice  or  escape  from 
his  authority. 

n.    GfOD   BXEEOISES  HIS  JUDGMENTS  AGAINST  WICKEDNESS  OVEE  THE  WHOLE  EARTH. 

Those  seven  nations  were  called  to  account  by  God,  charged  with  wickedness,  and 
threatened  with  destruction.  They  were  heathen  nations,  but  that  fact  did  not  exone- 
rate  them  from  blame  or  protect  them  against  just  punishment.  Christ  announced 
a  judgment  of  all  the  nations  to  follow  that  of  Israel  (Matt.  xxv.  32).  St.  Paul  spoke 
to  the  Athenians  of  God's  judgment  of  all  men  (Acts  xvii.  30,  31),  and  pointed  out 


6S  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PBOPHET  EZEKIEL.     [oh.  xjcv.  1—17. 

to  the  Romans  that  the  heathen  would  be  Bubject  to  it  (Rom.  i.  18).  These  and  other 
expressions  show  us  that  those  people  who  had  not  light  and  law  would  not  be  judged 
by  the  high  standard  of  the  more  instructed,  but  that  their  own  consciences  would  be 
the  measure  of  their  guilt.  The  heathen  know  sin.  Unbelievers  cannot  deny  their 
own  misconduct  in  daily  life,  though  they  may  deny  the  doctrines  of  Scripture.  As 
sinners,  just  like  other  men,  if  not  as  unbelievers,  will  they  be  judged.  We  cannot 
escape  the  consequences  of  our  sins  by  repudiating  religion. 

III.  God  visits  national  bins  with  national  judgments.  1.  Each  nation  U 
judged  as  a  whole.  There  is  and  there  will  be  separate,  individual  judgments.  Of  this 
Christ  spoke  (Matt.  xxv.  32).  But  while  the  New  Testament  is  individualistic,  the 
Old  Testament  is  national.  It  more  frequently  takes  a  nation  as  a  corporate  unit. 
There  are  national  sins,  (1)  sins  which  are  committed  by  many  in  the  nation,  and 
■0  become  characteristic  of  it,  as  drunkenness  among  Teutonic  nations ;  ami  (2)  sins 
committed  by  the  people  as  a  whole  through  its  government.  For  such  sins  the 
nation  is  punished.  England  will  be  punished  as  a  nation  for  England's  sins.  2. 
Each  nation  is  judged  separately,  A  distinct  judgment  is  pronounced  against  each 
of  the  seven  nations.  God  is  discriminating  in  his  judgment  of  communities  as  well 
as  in  his  judgment  of  individuals.  All  have  not  sinned  in  the  same  way,  therefore 
all  will  not  be  punished  on  the  same  scale.     The  Judge  of  all  the  earth  will  do  right. 

In  conclusion,  note  that  God,  who  rules  over  all  the  nations,  and  will  judge  them 
all,  has  sent  his  Son  to  be  the  Saviour  of  alL  The  gospel  is  as  broad  as  the  judgment 
(Rom.  v.  20). 

Vers.  2 — 7. — The  scoffing  nation.  The  first  nation  selected  for  denunciation  is  the 
Ammonite,  situated  on  the  east  of  the  Jordan  and  to  the  north  of  Moab,  with  its 
further  border  towards  the  Syrian  desert.  Its  scof&ng  at  the  sacred  things  of  the 
Jews,  and  its  cruel  mockery  of  their  calamities,  are  to  be  followed  by  a  dreadful 
destruction.  Scoffing  and  mockery  are  dangerous  practices  for  those  who  Indulge  in  them. 

I.  The  CRUEL  BOOFFiNa.  1.  An  insult  to  religion,  "  Thou  saidst.  Aha  1  against  my 
sanctuary  when  it  was  profaned  "  (ver.  3).  No  doubt  the  sanctuary  wag  regarded  as 
a  mystical  centre  of  the  power  of  the  Jews.  When  the  sacred  edifice  was  overthrown, 
the  talisman  was  destroyed,  the  spell  was  broken.  This  was  a  matter  of  delight  to 
an  enemy.  Thus  scofiirig  is  itself  a  testimony  to  the  power  of  religion,  though  that 
power  may  be  apprehended  in  a  very  ignorant  and  superstitious  way.  But  to  rejoice 
in  the  downfall  of  religious  influence  is  to  proclaim  one's  self  an  enemy  of  God.  It  is 
fair,  however,  to  see  that  scoffing  at  religion  may  be  provoked  by  the  misconduct  of 
its  champions.  Much  of  the  sooflSng  of  unbelievers  at  Christianity  is  not  inspired  by 
hatred  to  the  gospel,  but  by  disgust  at  the  unworthy  conduct  of  Christians.  The  sins 
of  the,  Jews  led  to  dishonour  to  their  temple.  The  sins  of  Christians  invite  insults 
against  Christ.  2.  A  love  of  destruction.  The  Ammonites  scoffed  "  against  the  land 
of  Israel  when  it  was  desolate."  The  northern  nation  had  been  already  destroyed  and 
scattered,  but  the  waste  and  ruined  condition  of  the  deserted  land  was  a  delight  to  the 
jealous  neighbours  on  the  eastern  border.  There  is  a  fierce  joy  in  the  idea  delenda  est 
Carthago.  But  this  is  heathenish  and  wicked.  Sin  that  works  for  death  creates  a 
delight  in  destruction.  The  Christian  idea  is  the  opposite  to  this — ^not  breaking  a 
bruised  reed,  but  helping  on  the  time  when  "the  wilderness  and  the  solitary  place 
shall  be  glad ;  and  the  desert  shall  rejoice  and  blossom  as  the  rose "  (Isa.  xxxv.  1). 
3.  A  pleasure  in  cruelty.  The  Ammonites  scoffed  at  the  contemporary  calamity  of  the 
southern  kingdom — "  the  house  of  Judah,  when  they  went  into  captivity."  The  earlier 
destruction  of  Israel  is  a  source  of  wild,  fiendish  joy.  "Thou  hast  clapped  thine  hands, 
and  stamped  with  the  feet,  and  rejoiced  in  heart  with  all  thy  despite  against  the  land 
of  Israel"  (ver.  6).  There  is  no  more  Satanic  wickedness  than  joy  springing  from  the 
contemplation  of  the  misery  of  others. 

II.  The  national  doom.  This  is  to  be  very  similar  to  that  of  Israel  and  Judah, 
80  that  what  the  Ammonites  rejoiced  to  see  in  their  neighbours  shall  come  on  their 
own  heads,  but  still  with  certain  variations  determined  by  their  situation  and  character. 
1.  Subjection  to  others.  Ammon  had  rejoiced  over  the  downfall  of  her  western 
neighbours.  She  in  turn  shall  be  overrun  by  people  from  the  east.  The  destruction 
was  to  come  from  Babylon,  but  "  the  men  of  the  east,"  i.e.  the  Arabs,  would  follow  it, 


VB.  XXV.  1—17.1    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  EZEKIEL.  63 


and  like  vultures  pounce  on  the  prey  left  by  the  advancing  Chaldean  army.  Cruelty 
makes  many  enemies  and  no  friends.  The  scoffer  must  expect  to  be  scoffed  at.  2. 
Reduced  civilization-  Rabbah,  the  proud  capital,  will  become  a  pasture  for  camels, 
and  the  once  populous  land  of  Ammon  a  sheep  run.  Nationixl  punishment  lowers  a 
people  in  the  scale  of  social  life.  3.  National  destruction.  The  Ammonites  are  to 
*' perish  out  of  the  countries."  This  old-world  nation  did  cease  to  exist.  Though 
individuals- may  remain,  the  corporate  life  of  the  nation  is  destro\ed.  As  the  wa,?es  of 
individual  sin  is  individual  death,  so  a  nation's  sin  is  punished  by  national  destruction. 
The  wicked  Roman  empire  was  destroyed.  It  depends  "on  our  national  conduct  whether 
the  same  fate  will  come  on  the  British  empire. 

Vers.  8 — ^11. — The  sceptuxd  nation.  The  sister  nation  of  Moab,  lying  just  to  the 
south  of  Ammon,  comes  second  in  the  order  of  the  peoples  whose  doom  is  pronounced 
by  the  prophet  of  Jehovah.  It  has  its  characteristic  sin,  and  it  will  have  its  charac- 
teristic punishment. 

I.  The  reckless  scepticism.  "  Moab  and  Seir  do  say.  Behold,  the  house  of  Judah 
is  like  unto  all  the  heathen."  This  utterance  expressed  unbelief  in  regard  to  the 
peculiar  privileges  of  Judah.  The  Jews  had  given  themselves  out  as  the  chosen  people 
of  God,  and  their  claim  was  disputed  by  Moab.  1.  The  scepticism  was  prompted  hy 
jealousy.  Moab  was  vexed  at  the  pretensions  of  the  Jews.  What  right  had  one  little 
nation  to  arrogate  to  itself  the  favour  of  Heaven?  The  same  jealousy  leads  those  who 
are  outside  the  Christian  profession  to  depreciate  the  privileges  of  the  Church.  But  in 
the  latter  case  there  is  far  less  excuse,  because  the  doors  of  the  Church  are.  open  for 
all  to  enter  it.  There  is  no  exchisiveness  in  Christianity.  Judaism  was  narrow,  and 
while  men  of  most  heathen  nations  could  only  enter  the  covenant  by  becoming  Jews, 
i.e.  by  renouncing  their  own  nation,  an  express  provision  was  made  to  rigorously 
exclude  Moabites  and  Ammonites  (Deut.  xxiii.  3).  2.  The  scepticism  was  encouraged 
hy  the  sins  of  the  Jews.  Unhappily  there  was  a  sting  of  truth  in  the  taunt  which  the 
Moabites  had  flung  at  the  degenerate  Jews.  As  a  fact,  Judah  had  become  only  too 
like  the  heathen.  Her  separateness  was  based  on  a  distinction  of  faith  and  morals ; 
but  alas!  this  distinction  was  fast  melting  away,  and  both  in  the  practice  of  idolatry 
and  in  a  departure  from  the  high  ethical  standard  of  the  Law,  the  Jews  were  assimilating 
themselves  to  their  pagan  neighbours.  In  the  same  way,  the  sins  of  Christians  sow 
seeds  of  scepticism  in  the  world.  The  Church  is  too  much  like  the  world,  and  the 
consequence  is  that  the  world  doubts  the  high  pretensions  of  the  Church.  3.  This 
tceptieism  was  grounded  in  error.  The  view  of  the  Moabites  was  superficial.  They 
saw  the  glaring  faults  of  the  Jews,  they  observed  the  external  likeness  of  Judah  to 
heathen  people,  but  they  did  not  look  beneath  the  surface  to  certain  great  spiritual 
truths.  They  did  not  see  "the  remnant"  of  the  faithful,  in  which  the  prophets 
detected  the  germ  of  the  future  and  recognized  already  the  true  Israel  of  God.  They 
failed  to  note  that  a  people  may  fall  grievously  from  its  mission,  and  yet  may  not 
utterly  lose  its  vocation.  It  is  the  same  with  the  world's  judgment  of  the  Church.  In 
the  darkest  ages  there  has  ever  been  a  remnant  of  true  Christians  with  whom  could  be 
found  the  sacred  deposit  of  truth  and  grace.  Even  when  the  Church  had  siiined 
greatly,  "  the  root  of  the  matter  "  may  still  be  in  her,  so  that  after  heavy  chastisement 
she  may  learn  to  repent  and  be"  restored.  Moreover,  the  real  Christian  privileges 
which  distinguish  the  true  and  faithful  people  of  God  from  the  world,  the  privileges  of 
membership  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  fellowship  with  God,  etc.,  are  not  perceived  by 
the  worldly,  for  they  are  "  spiritually  discerned  "  (1  Cor.  ii.  14),  and  "  eye  hath  not 
seen  .  .  .  the  things  which  God  hath  prepared,"  etc.  (1  Cor.  ii.  9). 

II.  The  just  punishment.  This  is  assimilated  to  the  guilt.  There  is  to  be  nothing 
distinctive  in  the  punishment  of  Moab,  only  a  repetition  of  that  of  Ammon.  Denying 
the  distinction  of  the  Jews,  the  Moabites  are  not  to  be  distinguished  in  their  doom. 
Refusing  to  admit  the  unique  national  destiny  of  Israel,  they  themselves  are  to  cease  to 
be  remembered  among  the  nations.  Now  look  at  the  just  irony  of  history.  In  course 
of  time,  the  sceptical  nation  melts  out  of  memory,  while  the  people  of  God  grow  into 
a  greater  distinction  and  fulfil  a  higher  destiny  than  they  ever  anticipated. 

Ver.  10. — A  forgotten  people.     "  That  the  Ammonites  may  not  be  remembered 


64  THH  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZBKIBL.    [oh,  xxr.  1—17, 

among  the  nations,"  We  have  the  name  of  this  little  nation  preserved,  but  even  that 
only  reaches  us  through  its  connection  with  Israel;  or  if  archaeologists  can  point  it  out 
to  us  on  ancient  inscriptions,  no  history  of  value,  nothing  to  identify  the  race,  remains. 
It  is,  indeed,  a  forgotten  people.  Let  us  consider  how  a  nation  may  bring  upon  itself 
this  fate  of  oblivion. 

I.  It  mat  obase  to  exist.  Though  the  Jewish  nation  was  broken  up  eighteen 
centuries  ago,  the  Jewish  people  remain  among  us  to  this  day  as  a  numerous,  marvel- 
lously energetic,  and  quite  distinct  section  of  mankind.  But  where  are  the  Ammonites  f 
We  do  not  hear  of  Ammonite  bankers,  Ammonite  newspaper  editors,  or  the  admission 
of  the  Ammonites  to  Parliament,  Neither  in  Europe  nor  in  their  ancient  Syrian 
plains  and  uplands  are  those  long-lost  people  ever  mentioned  except  as  a  race  of 
antiquity,  Now,  how  comes  it  that  a  people  thus  ceases  to  exist  ?  A  nation  can  only 
withstand  the  shock  of  invasion,  conquest,  and  deportation  to  foreign  parts  without  tho 
loss  of  separate  existence  if  its  members  are  inspired  and  bound  together  by  tho 
possession  of  one  common  great  idea.  It  is  the  Hebrew  idea  that  retains  the  Jewish 
name  and  race  as  a  separate  entity  independent  of  geographical  boundaries  and  political 
revolutions.  If  the  English  are  not  to  become  an  extinct  people,  they  must  depend  on 
more  than  a  strong  navy  and  a  well-equipped  army ;  for  no  one  can  predict  the  chances 
of  war.  If  we  continue  distinguished  in  our  mission  as  a  civilizing.  Christianizing 
people,  we  can  never  cease  to  have  our  part  in  the  great  world's  history.  The  Church 
will  idtimately  cease  to  exist  if  she  eliminates  all  that  is  distinctive  in  Christian  truth, 
and  thinks  to  prosper  simply  on  account  of  the  strength  of  her  organization  and  tho 
wealth  of  her  vested  interests.  But  if  she  retains  her  sacred  tradition  of  truth,  she  can 
outlive  all  revolutionary  attacks  on  her  worldly  status. 

II,  It  hat  fail  to  exert  ihfluenoe.  Each  nation  has  its  own  peculiar  privileges 
and  vocation.  However  small  a  people  may  be,  if  it  truly  appreciates  its  privileges 
and  honestly  fulfils  its  vocation,  it  cannot  well  be  forgotten,  Achaia  wbs  a  small 
state,  yet  as  long  as  civilization  endures  it  can  never  be  forgotten.  The  Greek* 
contributed  permanent  elements  to  the  world's  civilization ;  and  since  Greek  thought 
has  passed  into  universal  culture,  it  is  impossible  for  Hellas  to  fall  out  of  the  memory  of 
man,  unless  man  degenerates  to  barbarism.  The  memory  of  Israel  is  greater  than  her 
present  appearance  and  immediate  influence.  The  Jews  gave  us  the  Bible,  and  with 
the  Bible  the  eternal  foundation  of  our  faith.  Therefore  the  Jews  can  never  bo 
forgotten.  But  what  have  the  Ammonites  given  to  the  world?  Contributing  nothing, 
they  deservedly  sink  into  oblivion.  If  England  is  to  live  in  history  and  in  the  world's 
continuous  course,  she  must  do  her  part  and  contribute  her  elements  towards  tho 
progress  of  the  race.  The  Church  of  the  apostolic  era  was  too  fruitful  ever  to  bo 
forgotten.  The  Church  of  the  nineteenth  ceutury  will  live  or  be  forgotten  according 
as  it  contributes  to  the  spread  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  and  the  help  of  man  in  his 
higher  thought  and  life,  or  fails  in  this  mission  and  sinks  back  into  ignominious 
inactivity,  frivolous  formalism,  and  unspiritual  self-complacency. 

Vers.  12 — 14, — The  revengeful  nation.  The  Bdomites  are  characterized  as  an 
especially  revengeful  people,  because  they  watched  for  their  opportunity,  and,  when 
the  Jews  were  crushed  and  prostrate  beneath  the  cruel  Chaldean  invasion,  rushed  in 
to  smite  their  fallen  foe. 

I.  The  wiokbd  kbvbnqe,  1,  Vengeance  is  presumptuous.  There  is  a  right 
recompense  for  sin,  but  this  lies  with  God.  "Vengeance  is  mine;  I  will  repay 
saith  the  Lord"  (Rom.  xii.  19).  He  who  seizes  the  weapons  of  vengeance  usurps  tho 
•uthority  of  God.  2.  Vengeance  is  cruel.  Divine  vengeance  is  a  just  punishment. 
There  is  no  vindictive  pleasure  in  it.  But  human  vengeance  springs  from  an  evil 
appetite,  that  seeks  a  personal  satisfaction  in  the  sufferings  of  its  victim.  Such 
vengeance  is  distinctly  wicked.  Indeed,  the  self-elected  minister  of  vengeance  is  forced 
Into  this  dilemma — either  his  vengeance  is  a  delight  to  him,  or  it  is  not.  If  it  is  » 
delight,  the  joy  is  wicked,  devilish ;  if  it  is  no  delight,  why  does  he  practise  it,  for  the 
plea  that  he  is  urged  by  a  sense  of  public  duty  is  delusive?  Directly  that  becomes 
the  motive,  revenge  vanishes  and  punishment  takes  its  place.  3,  Vengeance  is 
unehristian.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  this  vengeful  spirit  was  charged  as  a  great 
wickedness  against  the  Bdomites,     They  lived  in  the  pre-Christian  days,  and  they 


CH.  XXV.  1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  61 

were  a  heathen  nafion.  Much  more,  then,  is  revenge  sinful  in  a  Christian.  We  have 
the  clearer  New  Testament  light;  we  have  also  the  wonderful  example  of  Christ  to 
deter  us  from  revenge.  For  us  to  behave  as  the  Edomites  is  to  merit  their  doom  twice 
over.  4.  Vengeance  is  mean-spirited.  Apart  from  all  the  above-named  considerations, 
when  the  question  is  approached  on  the  lowest  ground,  vengeance  bears  a  despicable 
aspect.  The  Edomites  waited  till  the  Chaldean  power  had  overthrown  Judah ;  then 
they  rushed  in  to  complete  the  destruction.  This  was  behaving  like  the  jackals,  who 
cannot  destroy  big  game,  but  who  are  mad  to  devour  the  carrion  that  the  lion  has 
left.  Revenge  knows  no  honourable  laws  of  war.  It  has  the  degraded  spirit  of  the 
assassin. 

II.  The  NAT0BAL  PUNISHMENT.  There  is  generally  a  resemblance  between  sin  and 
its  penalty.  The  punishment  is  just  the  fruit  of  the  sin.  Thus  the  vengeful  conduct 
of  the  Edomites  brings  vengeance  on  the  head  of  the  vindictive  people.  1.  Revenga 
does  not  end  a  quarrel.  This  is  the  mistake  of  it.  It  is  foolish  and  short-sigh  tad,  for, 
in  return  for  its  own  brief,  wild  delight,  it  rouses  fresh  enmity  and  provokes  retaliation. 
The  too  stern  treatment  of  the  French  by  the  Germans  left  a  rankling  spirit  of 
vengeance  in  the  breasts  of  the  defeated  people.  The  vendetta  in  Corsica  keeps  up  a 
feud  for  generations — each  member  on  one  side  provoking  one  in  return  from  the  other 
side.  Shylock  speaks  of  the  mutual  vengeance  of  race-hatred,  "  If  a  Jew  wrong  a 
Christian,  what  is  his  humility  ?  Revenge.  If  a  Christian  wrong  a  Jew,  what  should 
his  sufferance  be  by  Christian  example?  Revenge."  2.  Bevenge  provokes  tJte  most 
litter  punishment.  This  comes  from  the  wronged  victim.  Judah  takes  vengeance  on 
Edom.  Possibly  this  happens  indirectly  through  the  Chaldean  invasion  predicted  by 
Jewish  prophets,  or  Jews  may  have  some  direct  hand  in  the  work.  Vengeance  makes 
enemies.  This  form  of  self-protection  is  a  fatal'  failure.  The  true  victory  over  one'i 
enemies  is  by  forgiveness,  the  heaping  coals  of  fire  on  his  head  (Prov.  xxv.  21,  22). 

Vers.  15—17. — The  hating  nation.  The  Philistines  are  signalized  by  an  ugly  pre- 
eminence in  hatred,  and  they  are  to  be  punished  with  an  extremity  of  Divina 
vengeance. 

I.  The  pke-eminent  hatred.  Partly  through  her  own  mischief-making,  but  largely 
on  account  of  unwarrantable  jealousy,  the  favoured  land  of  Israel  had  been  troubled 
■with  the  enmity  of  most  of  her  neighbours.  But  no  people  had  shown  such  bitter  and 
long-cherished  animosity  as  the  little  fishing  and  farming  community  on  its  south- 
western border. '  From  the  days  of  the  judges,  the  Philistines  appear  as  the  hereditary- 
enemies  of  Israel.  Possibly  the  fact  that  they  were  hemmed  in  bttween  the  hill 
country  of  Judah  and  the  sea,  and  so  were  cramped  for  room  and  had  their  access  to 
the  east  and  the  west  cut  off  from  them,  made  them  jealous  of  their  more  prosperous 
snd  expansive  neighbours.  Be  that  as  it  may,  hatred  characterizes  the  relations 
between  the  two  peoples.  Close  contact  does  not  produce  friendship  if  sympathy  or 
its  worldly  substitute,  mutued  interest,  be  lacking.  The  most  bitter  quarrels  are  those 
between  near  neighbours.  Family  feuds  are  proverbially  rancorous.  Means  of  com- 
munication will  not  bring  "peace  on  earth"  and  "good  will  towards  men."  Commerce 
does  not  abolish  war.  Railways  have  not  made  friends  of  France  and  Germany. 
Hatred  must  be  conquered  by  deeper  means  than  worldly  advantage. 

II.  The  dreadful  doom.  1.  It  is  a  Divine  vengeance.  This  must  always  be 
fearful;  but  there  are  degrees  in  the  execution  of  it  determined  by  varieties  in  the 
character  and  conduct  of  men.  Here  it  is  described  as  peculiarly  heavy—"  great 
vengeance,"  "  with  furious  rebukes."  There  is  nothing  that  God  prizes  so  highly  as 
unselfish  love,  the  queen  of  all  virtues;  and  accordingly  there  is  nothing  that  he  so 
deeply  hates  as  hatred.  This  is  a  sin  that  most  surely  provokes  the  wrath  of  Heaven. 
2.  It  is  seen  in  destruction.  The  Philistines  had  been  named  "  Cherethims  " — "  extir- 
pated" from  their  old  land  when  they  came  as  exiles  across  the  Levant  and  settled  on 
its  eastern  shore.  Now  they  will  deserve  that  name  a  second  time,  for  they  must  be 
extirpated  outright.  This  thing  has  been  accomplished.  The  Philistines  have  ceased 
to  exist.  A  similar  doom  had  been  threatened  against  the  other  nations,  but  with 
Fhilistia  it  was  most  impressive,  as  coming  most  directly  from  the  hand  of  God.  3. 
It  is  experienced  after  long  delay.  For  generations  the  Philistines  had  been  the  inces- 
sant enemies  of  Judah,  a  perpetual  thorn  in  her  side,  sometimes  utilized  for  purposes 


56  THE  BOOK  OF  THE   rROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [ch.  xxv.  1—17. 

of  needful  castigatioa,  often  slumbering  in  impotent  inactivity,  but  never  truly  recon- 
ciled to  the  Jews.  Their  punishment  was  long  delayed,  but  it  was  not  outlived.  It 
is  a  fearful  thing  to  suffer  from  accumulated  punishment.  Awful  must  be  the  doom  of 
the  aged  sinner.  Yet  it  is  never  too  late  to  return.  Even  penitent  Philistines  will 
be  pardoned. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 7. — Malignity.  The  prophet,  having  been  enjoined  to  silence  for  a  season 
with  regard  to  Israel,  turns  to  the  several  heathen  nations  by  which  his  countrymen 
were  encompassed.  His  mission  to  them  must  have  been  one  very  painful  to  dis- 
charge J  for  he  was  called  upon  to  rebuke  their  sins  and  to  denounce  against  them  the 
anger  of  an  omniscient  and  righteous  Ruler.  Between  Amnion  and  Israel  there  wa» 
ancient  feud.    But  the  day  of  Ammon's  judgmept  was  now  at  hand. 

I.  The  nature  op  malignity.  The  children  of  Ammon  are  charged  with  male- 
volence and  malignity.  They  wished  harm  to  their  neighbours,  the  children  of  Israel ; 
and,  when  evil  came  upon  them,  they  rejoiced  in  their  neighbours'  calamities.  When 
Judah's  sanctuary  was  profaned,  when  the  land  was  laid  waste  and  desolate,  when 
Judah's  sons  were  carried  captive,  they  said,  "  Aha ! "  they  clapped  their  hands,  they 
stamped  with  their  feet,  and  rejoiced  with  all  the  despite  of  their  soul.  All  these 
actions  were  manifestations  of  a  vile  disposition  and  habit  of  mind  leading  to  satisfac- 
tion in  the  ills  and  adversity  befalling  others.  The  reality  of  such  a  vice  as  malignity 
cannot  be  questioned. 

II.  The  baseness  or  malignity.  There  are  sins  into  which  men  fall  through  the 
pressure  of  temptation  arising  from  their  naiural  constitiition,  and  through  the  oir- 
gnmstances  of  life  providentially  permitted.  We  recognize  in  such  sins  signs  of  the 
frailty  of  human  nature,  and  we  make  allowances  for  the  strength  of  the  temptation 
to  which  the  sinner  has  yielded.  But  the  sin  of  which  the  Ammonites  were  guilty 
was  of  a  different  kind.  What  were  called  by  Lord  Shaftesbury,  the  author  of  the 
'  Characteristics,'  the  "  unsocial  passions,"  are  of  all  the  most  blamable  and  inexcusable. 
They  are  those  habitual  emotions  known  as  malice,  envy,  jealousy,  malignity.  It  is 
wrong  to  seek  our  own  pleasures  overmuch ;  but  it  is  worse  to  seek  and  to  delight  in 
the  Buffering  and  the  ruin  of  our  fellow-creatures.  Inasmuch  as  we  are  members  of 
one  race,  of  one  body,  and  partakers  of  one  nature,  we  are  peculiarly  bound  to  sym- 
pathy, benevolence,  and  mutual  helpfulness.  The  Christian  law  is  one  of  great 
beauty  both  in  substance  and  in  expression,  "  Rejoice  with  them  that  do  rejoice,  weep 
with  them  that  weep."  The  malignity  displayed  by  the  children  of  Ammon  was  not 
only  neglect  and  violation  of  the  natural  law  of  sympathy,  it  was  in  exact  opposition 
to  that  law.  This  is  a  sin  not  even  now  extinct ;  traces  of  its  presence  may  be  found 
even  in  Christian  communities,  though  decency  may  compel  those  who  are  guilty  of 
it  to  conceal  it  with  a  thin  disguise.  But  it  is  a  sin  which  every  conscience  must 
condemn,  and  in  defence  or  even  extenuation  of  which  no  word  can  be  uttered. 

IIL  The  explanation  op  malignity.  This  habit  of  miml  may  have  originated 
in  a  state  of  society  in  which  every  man's  hand  was  against  his  neighbour,  in  which, 
consequently,  suspicion  and  distrust  were  prevalent.  In  such  a  state  of  social  life  (if 
it  may  so  be  called)  the  strength  of  a  neighbour  was  a  source  of  danger  and  fear  to 
a  people  conscious  of  their  own  weakness;  and  any  calamity  which  diminished  a 
formidable  neighbour's  power  to  harm  would  awaken  satisfaction  and  rejoicing,  as  pre- 
saging peace  and  the  opportunity  of  progress  and  prosperity.  The  emotion  may  survive 
the  circumstances  in  which  it  arose.  But  this  can  be  no  excuse  for  the  cherishing 
of  malevolence  and  malignity  in  ordinary  states  of  society,  in  which  it  is  an  unjusti- 
fiable expression  of  the  worst  tendencies  of  human  nature. 

IV.  The  condemnation  and  punishment  op  malignity.  The  sentence  issued 
against  Ammon  is  one  of  awful  severity ;  the  sin  must  have  been  inexcusable  and  even 
horrible  to  call  for  such  a  punishment  as  is  here  published.  They  were  to  be  con- 
quered and  spoiled ;  strangers  were  to  possess  their  land  and  enjoy  its  produce ;  and 
as  a  people  they  were  to  be  blotted  out  from  amongst  the  nations,  and  to  be  no  niore, 
Tlie  displeasure  of  the  Eternal  could  not  be  more  powerfully  exhibited.    And  there 


CH.  xsY.  1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  1  HE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.         57 

ig  every  reason  for  believing  that  the  same  sin  is  ever  regarded  with  the  same  dis- 
apiiroval  and  meets  with  a  similar  retribution.  Malignity  reached  its  deepest  depths 
when  the  holy  Jesus  was  hated  by  scribes,  Pharisees,  and  religious  leaders,  who 
found  in  his  goodness  the  reproach  of  their  sin.  Israel  rejected  Israel's  noblest  Son, 
nay,  the  Son  of  God  himself.  And  in  rejecting  Christ  the  ancient  people  of  God 
brought  upon  themselves  the  condemnation  which  has  from  that  day  to  this  remained 
upon  the  scattered  and  homeless  sons  of  Abraham.  How  awful  and  how  instructive 
*ie  the  lessons  concerning  God's  hatred  of  sin  embodied  in  the  history  of  mankind! — T. 

Vers.  8 — 11. — The  llasphemy  and  the  punishment  of  Moah.  Although  Ezekiel, 
speaking  as  the  prophet  of  the  Lord,  has  words  of  upbraiding  and  of  threatening  for 
the  several  nations  Irom  whose  hostility  Israel  suffered,  it  is  not  the  case  that  these 
words  are  words  of  indiscriminate  application.  On  the  contrary,  they  have  special 
reference  to  the  circumstances  of  the  several  peoples  and  to  their  peculiar  relations 
with  Israel.  In  the  case  of  Moab,  the  prophet  urges  a  peculiar  charge,  which  is  not, 
indeed,  supported  by  detailed  facts,  but  which  he  was  nevertheless  assured  was  a  just 
charge  and  a  heinous  offence. 

I.  The  peculiar  offence.  Moab  was  convicted  of  saying,  "  The  house  of  Judah 
is  like  unto  all  the  nations."  The  prophet  knew,  and  we  know,  that  the  descendants 
of  Jacob  were  a  separated,  chosen,  and  peculiar  people.  And  to  assert  the  contrary, 
as  Moab  had  done,  was  to  cast  a  slur  upon  the  revelation  of  God,  upon  the  vocation 
with  which  his  people  were  called,  upon  the  purpose  which  Divine  wisdom  had  in 
view  in  conferring  upon  them  special  privileges. 

II.  The  moeal  enormity  of  the  offence.  It  is  only  when  the  character  of  this 
sin  of  Moab  is  carefully  considered,  with  all  that  it  involves,  that  the  guilt  of  Moab 
appears  in  its  proper  blackness.  1.  It  involves  the  classing  of  the  holy  and  ever- 
blessed  Jehovah  with  the  idols  which  were  the  expression  of  human  injustice,  cruelty, 
caprice,  and  lust.  2.  It  involves  the  confusion  of  the  righteous  laws  of  Moses  with 
the  regulations  and  observances  which  obtained  in  heathen  communities,  some  just  and 
some  unjust,  and  many  of  them  superstitious  and  impure.  3.  It  involves  the  con- 
fusion of  the  Divine  ordinances  of  sacrifice,  of  priesthood,  of  religious  service,  of  sacred 
festivals,  with  the  debasing  rites  practised  among  the  unenlightened  idolaters.  4.  It 
involves  the  classing  together  of  the  people  consecrated  to  Jehovah  with  those  who 
had  abandoned  themselves  to  systems  of  selfishness,  worldliness,  or  superstition.  All 
this  was  just  calling  daikness  light,  and  light  darkness.  It,  indeed,  reminds  us  of  what 
our  Lord  has  said  regarding  blasphemy  against  the  Holy  Ghost.  We  cannot,  therefore, 
look  upon  this  offence  of  the  Moabites  as  something  which  has  no  application  to  our- 
selves. The  offence  of  calling  evil  good  and  good  evil  is  an  offence  which,  in  various 
forms,  is  committed  in  our  own  day,  and  against  which,  therefore,  men  need  still  to  be 
warned.  There  are  blemishes  in  the  Church  of  Christ  as  it  actually  exists  upon 
earth ;  but  still  it  is  the  Church  of  Christ,  and  it  must  not,  therefore,  be  confounded 
with  institutions  of  human  origin,  and  to  speak  of  it  as  we  might  speak  of  other 
organizations  and  institutions  is  to  sin  somewhat  after  the  manner  of  the  sin  of  Moab 
in  the  days  of  the  Captivity. 

III.  The  punishment  of  the  offence.  In  the  case  of  Moab  this  was  terrible 
indeed.  The  territory  was  to  be  laid  open  to  the  incursions  of  the  Eastern  foe,  the 
cities  were  to  be  taken  by  a  foreign  force,  judgments  were  to  be  executed  upon  the 
people,  and,  like  the  Ammonites,  they  were  to  be  overtaken  by  speedy  and  irreme- 
diable ruin.  The  very  thought  of  such  infliction  is  enough  to  make  the  sinner 
tremble,  to  induce  him  to  repent  of  his  evil  words  and  actions,  and  to  seek,  in  God's 
own  way,  reconciliation  with  the  authority  which  he  has  despised.  Silence,  contrition, 
and  true  submission  of  heart  are  the  true  way  of  peace. — ^T. 

Vers.  12 — 14. — The  hostility  and  the  curse  of  Edom.  Often  in  the  course  of  Old 
Testament  history  do  we  meet  with  references  to  the  inhabitants  of  Edom,  and  usually 
they  are  exhibited  as  taking  an  attitude  of  hostility  towards  the  chosen  people.  It  is 
certainly  remarkable  that  Ezekiel,  in  his  Eastern  captivity,  should  concern  himself 
with  these  border  states.  But  it  is  evident  that  he  was  at  the  time  very  deeply 
impressed  with  the  great  principle  of  national  responsibility  and  national  retribution  ; 


58  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET   EKEKIEL.    [oh.  xxv.  1— 17. 


and  that  it  was  revealed  to  him  that  this  principle  had  application,  not  to  the  Jews 
alone,  hut  to  all  the  nations  of  the  earth.  The  Bdomites,  upon  the  eastern  frontiers 
of  the  southern  tribes,  were  often  a  source  of  annoyance  to  the  inhabitants  of  Judah 
and  their  neighbours.  They  were  regarded  as  the  foes,  not  of  Israel  only,  but  of  Israel's 
God.    And  against  them  the  prophet  utters  words  of  reproach  and  of  threatening. 

I.  The  manifestation  of  Edom's  hostility  aoainst  Judah.  The  attitude  of 
opposition  which  Edom  assumed  had  an  especial  character;  it  was  designated 
"  vengeance,"  "  revenge."  This  implies  a  standing  feud,  and  the  bitterness  which  is 
bred  of  repeated  acts  of  enmity  and  injustice. 

II.  The  obound  and  cause  op  this  hostility.  We  are  not  expressly  informed 
upon  this  point;  but  we  shall  not  err  in  assigning  this  enmity  to  the  repugnance 
entertained  by  the  Bdomites  to  the  religion  of  Judah,  and  to  the  worship  and  prescribed 
rites  and  observances  which  were  so  much  in  conflict  with  the  idolatrous  religion  pro- 
fessed and  practised  by  the  children  of  Edom. 

III.  The  guilt  of  this  hostility.  This  is  apparent  both  from  the  nature  of  the 
case  itself,  and  from  the  retribution  which  Divine  justice  deemed  necessary  in  its 
chastisement. 

IV.  The  pbouliae  form  op  punishment  with  which  Edom  was  visited.  This 
is  perhaps  the  most  striking  figure  in  the  passage.  Retribution  was  to  be  wrought 
upon  Edom  "by  the  hand  of  my  people,  Israel."  The  sufferers  were  the  instruments 
of  punishment.  The  power  of  Judah  may  have  seemed  scarcely  adequate  to  the  task. 
But  it  was  appointed  by  the  King  of  nations  that  the  Edomites  should  pay  the  penalty 
of  gin  ;  and,  not  only  so,  but  that  those  whom  they  had  hated  and  reviled  should  b» 
the  scourge  by  which  the  smiters  should  be  smitten.  The  hand  of  God's  people  Israel 
was  God's  own  hand,  and,  when  the  Edomites  felt  it,  they  knew  by  bitter  experience 
the  righteous  vengeance  of  the  Lord. — T. 

Vers.  15 — 17. — Ttie  old  hatred.  Between  the  Israelites,  the  children  of  light,  and 
the  Philistines,  the  children  of  darkness,  there  existed  for  centuries  almost  uninter- 
rupted hostility.  Their  position  upon  the  coast,  their  powerful  cities,  their  formidable 
warriors,  their  imposing  yet  debasing  religion,  concurred  to  make  them  mighty.  And 
the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  the  descendants  of  Abraham  brought  the  two  peoples 
into  frequent  collision.  The  Philistines  were  sometimes  used  as  the  means  of  humi- 
liating the  unfaithful  and  disobedient  children  of  Israel ;  and  bitterly  was  the  discipline 
felt  when  the  Philistines  rejoiced  over  them.  For  the  Philistines  on  the  west,  as  well 
as  for  the  Ammonites  and  Edomites  upon  the  east,  the  day  of  reckoning  was  at  hand. 

I.  The  hatred  of  the  Philistines  towards  Israel  was  ancient,  perennial,  and 
UNDECATINQ.  This  may  be  illustrated  from  the  historical  books  of  the  Old  Testament 
Scriptures. 

II.  This  hatred  had  its  political  origin  in  the  settlement  or  teb  Israelites 
IK  Canaan. 

III.  And  its  religious  origin  in  the  contrast  between  the  puke  worship  op 
Jehovah  and  the  degrading  religion  practised  in  Philistia. 

IV.  This  hatred  displayed  itself  offensively   in    the    time    of    Israel's 

DEPRESSION  and  HUMILIATION. 

V.  This  hatred  brought  down  upon  the  Philistines  the  indignation  and  thb 

RETRIBUTIVE    RECOMPENSE   OF   THE    MoST    HiGH. 

VI.  This  hatred  thus  furnished  an  occasion  foe  the  vindication  by  God  or 
HIS  own  righteous  government  and  irresistible  authority. 

Application.  1.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  national  morality.  Apart  firom  the 
character  and  conduct  of  individuals,  a  nation  by  its  collective  action  proves  itself  to- 
possess  a  certain  moral  unity."  2.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  national  responsibility. 
The  people  sin,  and  the  people  suffer  ;  the  people  repent  and  call  upon  God,  and  the 
people  are  saved.  3.  There  is  especial  scope  for  the  display  of  national  virtues,  and 
for  the  right  use  of  national  opportunity  and  probation,  in  the  relations  which  subsist 
between  different  and  sometimes  rival  communities.  4.  National  pride,  power,  and 
prosperity  are  of  no  avail  in  God's  sight,  if  injustice  and  malevolence  are  exhibited  by 
nations  in  their  intercourse  and  transactions  with  each  other.  "  The  righteous  Lord  loveth 
righ  teousness." — T. 


OH.  sxY.  1—17.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  59 

Vers.  1 — 17. — 2%e  tribimal  of  nations.  The  Hebrews  in  captivity  might,  with 
probability,  suppose  that,  since  God  had  employed  other  armies  to  chastise  Israel, 
such  nations  were  without  sin,  or  else  their  sins  had  been  condoned  by  God.  Nothing 
of  the  sort.  God  is  no  Kespeoter  of  nations.  Eighteousness  everywhere  is  acceptable 
to  him.  UnrighteoHsness  anywhere  is  offensive.  And  touching  the  degrees  of  iniquity, 
he  claims  to  be  Supreme  Judge  and  the  wise  Punisher.  Because  he  employs  men  in 
his  service,  he  does  not  allow  this  to  be  a  criterion  of  their  acceptance.  Internal 
character,  not  external  service,  is  the  only  passport  to  heaven.    "  The  just  shall  live." 

I.  Thb  Sopremb  Authority  amoko  nations.  Never  yet  have  the  nations  of  the 
«vorld  combined  to  elect  a  common  tribunal,  before  which  international  disputes  may 
be  heard.  We  may  hope  for  such  in  the  future.  Yet  a  Supreme  Authority  there  is — 
a  King  of  nations !  U  ndoubtecUy,  the  God  of  heaven  takes  note  of  every  national 
delinciuency,  deals  with  every  nation  in  a  method  consonant  with  its  present  develop- 
ment, and  visits  it  with  reward  or  punishment  according  to  its  desert.  "  The  eyes  of 
the  Lord  are  in  every  place,  beholding  the  evil  and  the  good."  And  not  individual 
persons  only,  but  societies  and  empires,  are  weighed  every  day  in  the  balance  of  Divine 
justice.  A  fierce  light,  not  on^y  from  human  eyes,  but  from  the  Divine  eye,  bends 
upon  every  throne. 

II.  The  indictment.  The  indictment  brought  against  the  neighbours  of  Israel 
was  twofold.  1.  Rancorous  hatred.  The  people  of  Ammon  and  otliers  were  cliiefly 
incensed  against  Israel  because  of  their  peculiar  religion.  For  a  long  period,  Israel  had 
maintained  a  great  distinction,  in  that  they  scorned  idol-deities.  By  virtue  of  their 
allegiance  to  the  true  God  they  had  gained  tlieir  triumphs  over  the  degeuerat© 
Canaanites.  Hence  this  dislike  of  Israel  was,  at  its  root,  a  dislike  of  Jehovah ;  and 
dislike  of  Jehovah  meant  dislike  of  righteousness.  2.  Spiteful  revenge.  The  rations 
whom  God  employed  to  humble  Israel  had  gone  beyond  their  commission.  They  had 
fostered  the  lowest  animal  passions,  and  had  given  way  to  fiercest  revenge.  So  far  as 
a  nation  wages  war  in  defence  of  its  rights,  it  may  be  approved.  Yet  if,  in  the  pro- 
secution of  its  task,  it  inflicts  needless  suffering,  or  rejoices  in  mere  destruction,  tiiat 
nation,  in  its  turn,  has  violated  the  rights  of  humanity,  and  will  be  punished.  Even 
if  God  has  given  to  a  nation  the  clearest  command  to  invade  and  to  conquer,  that  com- 
mand is  circled  round  with  tlie  requirements  of  righteousness.  Personal  feeling  must 
be  repressed.  Public  advantage  alone  must  be  promoted.  Otherwise  that  nation  so 
employed  becomes  a  criminal. 

III.  The  sentence.  1.  It  is  equitable.  Edom  had  dealt  vengeance  "  against  the 
house  of  Judah."  Therefore  the  sentence  is,  "  I  will  lay  my  vengeance  upon  Edom." 
The  Philistines  had  "  taken  vengeance  with  a  despiteful  heart."  Therefore,  said  God, 
"  I  will  execute  great  vengeance  upon  them."  Retribution  is  complete.  The  same 
word  that  describes  the  sin  describes  also  the  penalty.  Every  sin  contains  in  its 
womb  the  embryo  of  chastisement.  2.  The  sentence  includes  desolating  war.  "  They 
that  take  the  sword,  perish  by  the  sword."  The  successful  warrior  teaches  his  enemies 
how  to  handle  spear  and  shield.  His  personal  strength  does  not  abide  for  ever,  nor  yet 
his  personal  influence.  His  watchful,  sleepless  foes  wait  in  secret  for  their  opportunity 
of  revenge.  Violenee  naturally  begets  violence.  In  return  for  reckless  destruction  on 
others,  their  lands  were  to  be  desolated — productiveness  to  cease,  cities  to  be  razed, 
and  their  palaces  to  be  occupied  by  the  foe  I  3.  Annihilation  of  e/mpire  and  name. 
The  justice  of  God  is  far  more  sweeping  than  anything  that  we  can  conceive.  "The 
Ammonites  shall  not  be  remembered  among  the  nations."  "I  will  cause  thee  to 
perish  out  of  the  countries."  Men  find  a  pleasure  in  posthumous  fame.  They  love  the 
anticipation  of  living  again  in  their  children  and  in  their  children's  children.  To 
know  in  their  lifetime  that  this  prospect  is  cut  off  is  ^  serious  loss  of  enjoyment.  One 
great  source  of  pleasure  is  destroyed.    One  great  inspiration  to  effort  is  extinguished. 

IV.  A  GRACIOUS  eespitb.  The  simple  fiiot  that  Jehovah's  prophet  fore-announced 
these  things  was  an  act  of  kindness.  It  gave  the  people  an  occasion  and  an  urgent 
reason  for  repentance.  This  is  not  after  the  manner  of  men.  In  human  jurisprudence 
there  is  no  place  for  repentance.  But  God's  agencies  are  every  way  superior  to  man's. 
As  it  was  with  NineVeh  in  Jonah's  day,  so  might  it  have  been  with  Moab  and  Edom 
and  Philistia.  God's  patience  and  pity  are  wonderful.  Yet,  at  length,  justice  strike* 
the  avenging  blow. 


60  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PEOPHET  EZEKIEL.    [ch.  xxv.  1—17. 

V.  The  final  aim.  "  They  shall  know  that  I  am  the  Lord."  Thia  conviction  of 
God's  existence  and  God's  active  righteousness  will  surely  come  at  length,  but  in  many 
cases  will  not  come  in  time  to  avert  the  great  catastrophe.  Every  such  national  over- 
throw will  be  a  monument  to  God's  power  and  God's  veracity.  "  Being  dead,  these 
nations  yet  speak."  The  mounds  ransacked  to-day  for  treasures  produce  eloquent 
demonstrations  of  the  truthfulness  of  ancient  prophecy  and  of  the  certainty  of  Divine 
retribution.  There  is  a  knowledge  that  saves;  there  is  a  knowledge  that  does  not 
save. — D. 

Vers.  1 — 7, — The  tin  and  Judgment  of  the  Ammonites.  "  The  word  of  the  Lord  came 
again  unto  me,  saying,  Son  of  man,  set  thy  face  against  the  Ammonites,"  etc.  For  a 
time  the  mouth  of  Ezekiel  was  closed  in  relation  to  his  own  countrymen ;  he  was  to  be 
to  them  as  a  dumb  man,  or  at  least  dumb  as  a  prophet  (ch.  xxiv.  27).  But  having  already 
proclaimed  the  judgment  of  God  upon  Israel  and  Judah  by  various  figures  and  with 
much  reiteration,  he  proceeds  to  declare  that  judgment  against  the  neighbouring 
heathen  nations.  "  Judgment  indeed  begins  at  the  house  of  God ;  but  if  the  Father  of 
the  household  does  not  spare  the  sons,  how  soon  nmst  it  alight  upon  the  others  I  This 
doctrine  first  of  all  shines  forth  from  the  connection  of  this  chapter  with  the  preceding 
chapters.  Then,  also,  we  see  here  how,  with  all  the  special  solicitude  wherewith  God 
interested  himself  iu  Israel,  he  still  by  no  means  lets  the  heathen  out  of  his  sight,  since 
he  must  show  himself  to  be  a  God  also  for  the  heathen."  Of  these  nations  the  prophet 
first  addresses  himself  to  the  Ammonites.  They  were  related  to  the  Israelites,  being 
the  descendants  of  Ben-ammi,  the  son  of  Lot  by  his  younger  daughter.  Yet  they  were 
inveterate  enemies  to  Israel.  "  They  had  joined  Bglon,  had  oppressed  Israel  in  the 
time  of  Jephthah,  had  fought  against  Saul,  David,  Jehoshaphat,  and  Jotham.  They  had 
joined  the  Moabites  in  Nebuchadnezzar's  army,  when  he  besieged  Jerusalem  in  the 
reigQ  of  Jehoiakim  (2  Kings  xxiv.  2)."  And  they  exulted  in  the  miseries  of  Israel 
and  Judah.  The  date  of  this  prophecy  is  uncertain.  Hengstenberg  says  that  "  the 
date  in  ch.  xxiv.  1  applies  to  this  also.  What  was  predicted  in  ch.  xxiv.  regarding 
the  immediate  future  of  Judah  is  here  presupposed  as  already  accomplished ;  so  that 
the  point  of  view  is  ideal."  But  the  '  Speaker's  Commentary '  supposes  "  that  this 
prophecy  was  delivered  immediately  after  the  capture  of  the  city  by  Nebuchadnezzar." 
We  have  in  the  text — 

I.  An  exhibition  of  the  sin  of  the  Ammonites.  1.  Exultation  in  the  miseries  of 
others.  "  Thou  saidst,  Aha !  against  my  sanctuary,  when  it  was  profaned  ;  and  against 
the  land  of  Israel,  when  it  was  made  desolate ;  and  against  the  house  of  Judah,  when 
they  went  into  captivity."  "  They  were,"  says  Greenhill,  "  the  neighbours  bordering 
upuu  them;  they  were  their  confederates,  in  league  with  the  King  of  Egypt,  as  the 
Jews  were ;  they  were  their  half- brethren,  descending  from  Lot ;  and  upon ,  these 
accounts  should  have  sympathized  with  the  Jews,  wept  with  those  that  wept 
{Eom.  xii.  15),  been  sensible  of  their  great  adversities  (Heb.  xiii.  3) ;  but  they  insulted 
over  them,  mocked  at  them,  were  despiteful  against  them,  and  added  coals  to  the  fire, 
weight  to  their  burdens,  and  more  chains  to.  their  bonds"  (cf.  Lam.  i.  2).  They 
rejoiced  when  Shalmaneser  King  of  Assyria  invaded  Israel,  desolated  the  land,  and 
carried  the  people  into  captivity  (2  Kings  xvii.  1 — 6).  Again,  they  exulted  in  the 
miseries  of  the  people  of  Judah  when  they  were  conquered  and  carried  into  exile  in 
Babylon  (2  Kings  xxiv.  10—16;  xxv.  1—11).  They  triumphed  in  the  national  ruin 
and  sore  calamities  of  the  Jews  (cf.  ch.  xxi.  28 ;  Lam.  ii.  15, 16 ;  Zeph.  ii.  8).  Such 
derision  and  insultation  are  directly  opposed  to  the  will  of  God,  especially  when,  as  in 
this  case,  the  mockers  are  themselves  also  guilty  of  the  sin  which  brought  down  the 
distresses.  _  When  some  suffer  sore  calamities,  God's  will  is  that  others  should  be 
thereby  stimulated  to  consider  their  ways  and  repent  of  their  evil  doings  (cf.  Luke 
siii.  1—5).  Moreover,  in  exulting  over  the  fallen  and  mocking  the  miserable  there  is 
Satanic  malevolence  and  shocking  cruelty.  Sometimes  saintly  men  have  severely 
suffered  by  reason  of  such  mockery.  David  smarted  under  it  (Ps.  xxxv.  12 — 16). 
But  the  guilt  of  the  Ammonites  was  darker  even  than  this.  They  rejoiced  in  the 
desecration  of  the  temple  of  God.  "  Thou  saidst.  Aha  1  against  my  sanctuary,  when  it 
was  profaned."  They  looked  upon  that  as  the  overthrow  of  the  religion  of  the  Jews, 
ind  probably  declared  that  Jehovah  was  unable  to  defend  either  his  temple  or  his 


CH.  XXV.  1—17.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  61 

worshippers.  Thus  they  were  guilty  of  blasphemy  against  the  Lord  Q-od.  2  Exulta- 
tion in  the  miseries  of  others  with  cruel  animosity.  "  Thou  hast  rejoiced  with  all  the 
despite  of  thy  soul  against  the  land  of  Israel "  (ver.  6).  They  rejoiced  "  with  the  soul, 
with  passion,  therefore  with  the  whole  heart's  contempt  of  which"  they  were  capable. 
They  triumphed  with  revolting  malignity.  3.  Exultation  in  the  miseries  of  others  with 
eruel  animosity  mi  unrestrained  expression.  "Thou  hast  clapped  thine  hands,  and 
stamped  with  the  feet,"  etc.  (ver.  6).  Their  bitter  rejoicing  knew  no  bounds  of 
moderation  or  even  of  common  decency.    -Such  was  their  grievous  and  inhuman  sin. 

II.   A  DBCLAKATION  OF  THE  PUNISHMENT  OF  THE  AMMONITES.      1.   Their  land  should 

Je  given  to  others.  "  Therefore,  behold,  I  will  deliver  thee  to  the  children  of  the  east 
for  a  possession,  and  they  shall  set  their  encampments  in  thee,  and  make  tbeir 
dwellings  in  thee ;  they  shall  eat  thy  fruit,  and  they  shall  drink  thy  milk."  In  the 
fifth  year  after  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  Nebuchadnezzar  made  war  against  the 
Ammonites,  and  brought  them  under  subjection  (Josephua,  'Ant.,'  x.  9.  7).  "After 
this  the  land  was  subjected  to  various  masters."  But  at  length  it  fell  to  the  Arabians, 
who  are  spoken  of  by  the  prophet  as  "  the  children  of  the  east."  This  was  a  common 
designation  of  the  wandering  tribes  of  the  desert  (cf.  Judg.  vi.  3).  "  They  encamp 
now  periodically  in  the  land  of  Ammon.  They  have  continued  to  do  so  for  centuries. 
They,  and  they  only,  eat  up  the  fruits  of  the  land."  Thus  the  children  of  Ammon, 
who  had  exulted  in  the  expatriation  of  Israel  and  Judah,  were  despoiled  of  their  own 
■  country.  2.  Their  metropolis  should  become  a  desolation.  "  And  I  will  make  Babbah 
a  stable  for  camels,  and  the  children  of  Ammon  a  couching-place  for  flocks."  When 
this  judgment  was  fulfilled  we  know  not.  But  that  it  has  been  fulfilled  is  placed  beyond 
dispute  by  the  ruins  of  what  was  once  a  flourishing  city.  That  city  entered  upon  an 
era  of  marked  prosperity  under  Egyptian  rule.  It  was  rebuilt  or  restored  by  Ptolemy 
Philadelphus,  and  was  called  Philadelphia,  after  his  name.  It  existed  for  some  centuries 
afterward  with  varying  fortunes.  "  As  far  down  as  the  fourth  century  (of  the  Christian 
era)  it  was  esteemed  one  of  the  most  remarkable  and  strongest  cities  of  the  whole  of 
Coele-Syria."  And  now  amidst  its  ruins  may  be  traced  the  remains  of  a  magnificent 
theatre,  an  ancient  castle,  temples,  mausoleum,  and  other  buildings.  The  doom  has 
been  fulfilled,  and  Kabbah,  "the  populous"  (as  the  name  signifies),  is  now  a  desolation 
and  without  an  Inhabitant.  Dr.  Kitto  brings  forward  several  witnesses  to  the  fulfil- 
ment of  the  word  of  the  Lord  by  the  prophet  in  ver.  5.  "  Dr.  Keith,  in  the  last  edition 
of  his  'Evidence  from  Prophecy,'  states  that  Lord  Claud  Hamilton  told  him  that 
'  while  he  was  traversing  the  ruins  of  the  city  the  number  of  goats  and  sheep  which 
were  driven  in  among  them  was  exceedingly  annoying,  however  remarkable  as  fulfilling 
the  prophecies.'  Lord  Lindsay  found  bones  and  skulls  of  camels  mouldering  in  the 
area  of  the  theatre,  and  in  the  vaulted  galleries  of  this  immense  structure.  He  says, 
•  The  valley  stinks  with  dead  camels,  one  of  which  was  rolling  in  the  stream  ;  and 
although  we  saw  none  among  the  ruins,  they  were  absolutely  covered  in  every  direction 
with  their  dung.  That  morning's  ride  would  have  convinced  a  sceptic.  How  says  the 
prophecy  ?  "  I  will  make  Babbah  a  stable  for  camels." '  He  adds, '  We  met  sheep  and 
goats  by  thousands,  and  camels  by  hundreds,  coming  down  to  drink,  all  in  beautiful 
condition.'  Mr.  George  Robinson  also  testifies, '  The  space  intervening  between  the  river 
and  the  western  hills  is  entirely  covered  with  the  remains  of  private  buildings,  now  only 
used  as  stables  for  camels  and  sheep.  There  is  not  a  single  inhabitant  remaining :  thus 
realizing  the  prophecy  respecting  this  devoted  city.'  These  testimonials  have  occurred 
since  attention  lias  been  called  to  the  subject  of  the  literal  fulfilirient  of  local  prophecies. 
We  add  that  of  Mr.  Buckingham,  which  is  all  the  more  valuable  as  being  of  anterior 
date.  He  halted  for  the  night  with  a  tribe  of  Arabs  which  he  found  encamped  among 
the  ruins,  in  a  hollow  behind  the  top  of  the  theatre,  IS'ext  morning  he  writes  in  his 
journal,  '  During  the  night  I  was  almost  entirely  prevented  from  sleeping  by  (he 
bleating  of  flocks,  the  neighing  of  mares,  and  the  barking  of  dogs.' "  Thus  literally 
and  minutely  has  the  prediction  of  the  prophet  been  accomplished.  3.  Their  existence 
as  a  people  would  he  terminated.  "Therefore,  behold,  I  have  stretched  out  my  hand 
upon  thee,  and  will  deliver  thee  for  a  spoil  to  the  nations ;  and  I  will  cut  thee  off  from 
the  peoples,  and  I  will  cause  thee  to  perish  out  of  the  countries  :  I  will  destroy  thee  ; 
and  thou  shalt  know  that  I  am  the  Lord."  These  expressions  indicate  utter  and  total 
destructiin.    In  this  respect  the  judgment  of  the  Ammonites  was  more  severe  than 


62  THE  BOOK  OP  THK  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [ch.  xxv.  1—17. 

that  pronounced  upon  Israel.  For  the  latter  there  was  hope  and  a  future ;  but  for  the 
former  the  prophetic  message  closes  darkly,  even  as  their  history  has  closed.  As  a  tribe 
the  Ammonites  "  disappear  wholly  at  last  in  the  Arabians." 

OoNOLUBiON.  "Whoso  mooketh  the  poor  reproaoheth  his  Maker:  and  he  that  is 
glad  at  calamity  shall  not  be  unpunished"  (Prov.  xvii.  5).  "  He  that  maketh  others' 
calamities  the  object  of  his  gladness  stirs  up  God  to  be  the  Author  of  his  destruction" 
XGreenhiU).— AV.  J, 

Vers.  8 — 11. — The  sin  and  punishment  of  the  Moahitei.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God ; 
Because  that  Moab  and  Seir  do  say,  Behold,  the  house  of  Judah  is  like  unto  all  the 
heathen,"  etc.  The  Moabites  were  the  descendants  of  Moab,  the  son  of  Lot  by  his 
«lder  daughter.  They  occupied  the  fertile  district  east  of  the  Dead  Sea,  and  south  of 
the  territory  of  the  Ammonites.  The  condition  of  the  Moabites  may  be  gathered  from 
Isa.  XV.,  xvi.,  and  Jer.  xl  viii.  The  latter  prophecy  was  pronounced  about "  ten  or  twelve 
years  before  the  invasion  of  Nebuchadnezzar  by  which  Jerusalem  was  destroyed ;  "  so 
that  it  may  be  taken  as  setting  forth  their  condition  in  the  time  of  our  prophet.  That 
condition  is  well  stated  by  Sir  George  Grove, in  Dr.  Smith's  'Dictionary  of  the  Bible: ' 
"  The  nation  appears  in  them  as  high-spirited,  wealthy,  populous,  and  even  to  a  certain 
extent  civilized,  enjoying  a  wide  reputation  and  popularity.  With  a  metaphor  which 
well  expresses  at  once  the  pastoral  wealth  of  the  country  and  its  commanding,  almost 
regal,  position,  but  which  cannot  be  conveyed  in  a  translation,  Moab  is  depicted  as  the 
strong  sceptre,  the  beautiful  staff,  whose  fracture  will  be  bewailed  by  all  about  him, 
and  by  all  who  know  him.  In  his  cities  we  discern  a  '  great  multitude '  of  people 
living  in  '  glory,'  and  in  the  enjoyment  of  great '  treasure,'  crowding  the  public  squares, 
the  house-tops,  and  the  ascents  and  descents  of  the  numerous  high  places  and  sanctu- 
aries where  the  *  priests  and  princes '  of  Chemosh  or  Baal-peor  minister  to  the  anxious 
devotees.  Outside  the  towns  lie  the  'plentiful  fields,'  luxuriant  as  the  renowned 
Carmel — ^the  vineyards  and  gardens  of '  summer  fruits ; '  the  harvest  is  being  reaped, 
and  the  '  hay  stored  in  its  abundance,'  the  vineyards  and  the  presses  are  crowded  with 
peasants,  gathering  and  treading  the  grapes,  the  land  resounds  with  the  clamour  of  the 
▼intagers.  These  characteristics  contrast  very  favourably  with  any  traits  recorded  of 
Ammon,  Edom,  Midian,  Amalek,  the  Philistines,  or  the  Canaanite  tribes.  And  since 
the  descriptions  we  are  considering  are  adopted  by  certainly  two,  and  probably  three, 

Erophets — Jeremiah,  Isaiah,  and  the  older  seer — extending  over  a  period  of  nearly  two 
undred  years,  we  may  safely  conclude  that  they  are  not  merely  temporary  circum- 
gtances,  but  were  the  enduring  characteristics  of  the  people.  In  this  case  there  can  be 
no  doubt  that,  amongst  the  pastoral  people  of  Syria,  Moab  stood  next  to  Israel  in  all 
matters  of  material  wealth  and  civilization."    Our  text  presents  to  our  notice — 

I.  A  BIN  SEEMiNaLY  SLIGHT,  BUT  ESSENTIALLY  HEINOUS.  "  Moab  and  Seir  do  say, 
Behold,  the  ho\ise  of  Judah  is  like  unto  all  the  heathen."  In  these  words  we  have : 
1.  A  denial  of  the  superiority  of  the  Jews  over  their  heathen  neighbours.  In  many 
respects  they  were  their  superiors.  God  had  granted  to  them  the  clearest  revelation  of 
his  character  and  will,  his  temple  also,  and  the  ordinances  of  his  worship.  His  mighty 
hand  had  frequently  been  stretched  out  in  glorious  deeds  on  their  behalf.  He  had 
assured  them  of  many  blessings  and  of  a  bright  future.  Jerusalem  "  was  great  among 
the  nations,  and  princess  among  the  provinces."  But  now  that  Nebuchadnezzar  hag 
quite  vanquished  them,  taken  their  famous  city,  and  destroyed  their  holy  and  beautiful 
temple,  the  Moabites  say,  "  The  house  of  Judah  is  like  unto  all  the  nations."  By  this 
they  probably  meant :  (1)  They  are  no  better  in  their  character.  By  their  idolatries 
and  idolatrous  customs,  and  by  their  political  treacheries,  the  Jews  had  given  their 
enemies  too  much  occasion  to  say  this.  Yet  the  religion  which  was  prescribed  to  them 
was  incomparably  superior  to  those  of  their  heathen  neighbours ;  and  there  was  at 
least  a  small  remnant  that  was  faithful  to  that  religion.  (2)  They  are  no  better  in 
their  condition.  When  the  Chaldeans  came  against  them,  they  were  no  more  able  to 
resist  them  than  any  heathen  people  would  have  been.'  And  these  things  were  said 
by  the  Moabites,  not  soirowfuUy,  but  scornfully.  Like  the  Ammonites,  they  rejoiced 
over  the  miseries  of  the  people  of  Israel  and  Judah  (Zeph.  ii.  8).  Hence  the  Prophet 
Jeremiah  cries,  "Moab  shall  be  in  derision.  For  was  not  Israel  a  derision  unto 
thee?  ...  for  as  often  as  thou  speakest  of  him  thou  waggest  the  head  "  (Jer.  zlviii. 


OH.  XXY.  1—17.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  63 

26,  27).  2,  A  denial  of  the  superioriiy  of  the  Lord  Jehovah  over  heathen  gods.  This 
aspect  of  the  sin  of  the  Moabites  is  clearly  and  forcibly  presented  by  Hengstenberg : 
"  The  guilt  consists  in  the  denial  of  the  true  Deity  of  the  God  of  Israel ;  for  only  on 
this  ground  could  Israel  be  placed  on  the  same  level  with  all  other  nations.  The  pre- 
tence for  this  denial  they  take  from  the  misery  of  Israel,  which  they  derive,  not  from 
their  guilt,  but  from  the  feebleness  of  their  God,  and  discern  therein  a  palpable  proof 
against  his  true  and  full  Deity.  Their  God  Jehovah,  the  absolutely  pure  Being,  the 
primeval  Ground  of  all  things,  the  absolutely  certain  Helper  of  his  people,  is  a  mere 
fancy :  otherwise  must  they  soar  above,  and  not  sink  beneath.  This  full  Deity,  against 
whose  historically  extant  evidence  they  rashly  close  their  eyes,  they  must  now  discover 
by  their  own  destruction.  The  transgression  is  seemingly  small;  but  it  is  that  by 
which  the  nations  perish  even  to  the  present  day.  As  each  takes  its  stand  towards 
God,  who  is  historically  revealed  in  his  Church,  bo  is  its  destiny  measured  out."  Thus 
"  Moab  magnified  himself  Against  the  Lord"  (Jer.  xlviii.  26). 

II.  A  P0NI.SHMBNT  coBBESPONDma  TO  THBiB  SIN.  1.  The  Moobites  had  rejoiced  in 
the  overthrow  and  exile  of  the  Jews,  and  they  also  should  le  overthrown  and  their  land 
possessed  by  others.  "  Therefore,  behold,  I  will  open  the  side  of  Moab  from  the  cities, 
from  his  cities  which  are  on  his  frontiers."  He  would  expose  Moab  to  the  assaults  of 
its  enemy.  Certain  cities  are  mentioned,  and  are  appropriately  described  as  "  on  his 
frontiers."  They  lay  to  the  north  of  the  river  Arnon,  which  was  the  proper  boundary 
of  Moab  (Numb.  xxi.  13).  Again,  these  cities  are  called  "  the  glory  of  the  country." 
The  tract  in  which  they  were  situated,  "belonging  to  the  district  called  by  the 
Arabians  Al  Bdka,  has  been  at  all  times  highly  valued  on  account  of  the  excellence  of 
its  pastures  for  cattle.  Among  others,  Bochart  writes, '  As  the  pasturage  in  Belka  is 
far  better  than  in  the  rest  of  Southern  Syria,  there  has  been  a  continual  struggle  among 
the  various  Arab  tribes  as  to  who  should  secure  it.  The  Bedouins  are  accustomed  to 
say,  "  Thou  canst  find  no  land  like  Belka  "'  (Havernioh)  "  ('  Speaker's  Commentary '). 
Moreover,  their  country  was  ultimately  to  pass  away  from  them  into  the  possession  of 
♦'  the  children  of  the  east,"  the  wandering  Arab  tribes.  Like  Ammon,  the  land  was 
ravaged  by  hostile  armies,  and  at  last  was  left  unoccupied  except  by  the  Bedouins. 
2.  The  Moabites  had  denied  the  superiority  of  Jehovah  over  heathen  gods,  and  they  should 
be  brought  by  painful  eicperience  to  know  his  supremacy.  "  And  I  will  execute 
judgments  upon  Moab ;  and  they  shall  know  that  I  am  the  Lord."  Says  Hengstenberg, 
"  Through  the  judgments  under  which  Moab  falls,  it  is  forced  to  acknowledge  the  true 
Deity  of  Jehovah,  which  it  did  not  willingly  accept."  (See  our  notes  on  oh.  vi.  7, 10 ; 
vii.  4.) 

Conclusion.  1.  Let  those  who  are  avowedly  followers  of  Christ  take  heed  that  they 
do  not  give  occasion  to  sinners  to  blaspheme  the  Name  or  the  cause  of  Ood.  Let  them 
show  "  all  good  fidelity,  that  they  may  adorn  the  doctrine  of  God  our  Saviour  in  all 
things ;"  "  Walk  worthily  of  the  calling  wherewith  ye  were  called."  2.  Let  thue  who 
are  not  Christians  take  heed  that  they  do  not  bring  upon  themselves  the  cmger  ^  the 
Lord  by  speaking  against  his  cause  or  his  people. — W,  J. 

Vers.  12 — 14.— Z%e  judgment  of  Edom  j  or,  the  sin  and  punishment  of  revenge. 
"  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Because  that  Edom  hath  dealt  against  the  house  of  Judah 
by  taking  vengeance,"  etc.  The  Bdomites  were  the  descendants  of  Esau,  who  settled 
in  Mount  Seir  immediately  after  the  death  of  his  father  Isaac.  The  country  in  which 
they  dwelt  was  called  Edom,  or  Iduma^a.  It  was  situated  south  of  the  territory  of  Moab ; 
and  "  it  only  embraced  the  narrow  mountainous  tract  (about  a  hundred  miles  long  by 
twenty  broad)  extending  along  the  eastern  side  of  the  Arabah,  from  the  northern  end  of 
the  gulf  of  Elath  to  near  the  southern  end  of  the  Dead  Sea."  Of  their  religion  little  is 
known;  but  that  they  were  idolaters  appears  from  2  Chron.  xxv.  14,  15,  20,  and 
Josephus, '  Ant.,'  xv.  7.  9.   Consider — 

I.  Thb  heinous  sin  or  the  Edomites.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God ;  Because  that 
Edom  hath  dealt  against  the  house  of  Judah  by  taking  vengeance,  and  hath  greatly 
offended,  and  revenged  himself  upon  them."  Notice :  1.  2%e  sin  itself.  Revenge  is  tbs 
sin  with  which  the  Edomites  are  here  charged.  Distinguish  between  revenge  and 
vengeance.  "  Revenge  is  an  act  of  passion ;  vengeance,  of  justice ;  injuries  are  re  rengcl 
«rimes  are  avenged  "  (Johnson).    Vengeance  is  righteous,  calm,  majestic  •  raven?   if 


64  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIBL.     [oh.  xxv.  1— 17. 

wicked,  crael,  malignant.  The  accusation  against  the  Bdomites  is  revenge.  Schroder 
translates,  "  Because  Bdom  exercises  vindictive  revenge  upon  the  house  of  Judah." 
The  hatred  of  Esau  towards  his  brother  Jacob  for  fraudulently  depriving  him  of  his 
blessing  seems  to  have  run  down  through  all  his  genoiations.  And  it  was  increased 
by  what  the  Edomites  afterwards  suffered  in  conflict  with  the  descendants  of  Jacob 
(cf.  1  Sam.  xiv.  47 ;  1  Kings  xi.  15,  16  ;  2  Chron.  xxv.  11, 12) ;  although  Hengsten- 
D«g  says  "  that  Edom  brought  upon  himself,  by  his  own  conduct,  what  he  formerly, 
particularly  under  David,  suffered  from  Judah.'  For  only  on  this  supposition  was  the 
revenge  sinful."  Revenge  was  prohibited  by  the  holy  Law  of  God  as  declared  in  the 
Old  Testament  (of.  Lev.  xix.  18).  And  much  more  so  as  expressed  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment (cf.  Matt.  V.  44—48  ;  Rom.  xii.  17, 19 ;  Bph.  iv.  31).  2.  The  mani/estaHon  of 
this  sin.  Joel,  who  probably  prophesied  in  the  early  years  of  the  reign  of  King  Uzziah, 
predicts  that  "  Edom  shall  be  a  desolate  wilderness,  for  the  violence  done  to  the  children 
of  Judah,  because  they  have  shed  innocent  blood  in  their  land  "  (Joel  iii.  19  ;  see  also 
Amos  i.  11,  12).  But  probably  the  reference  in  our  text  is  chiefly  to  the  action  of 
Edom  during  the  Chaldean  invasion  of  Jiidcea.  "When  Nebuchadnezzar  besieged 
Jerusalem,  the  Bdomites  joined  him,  and  took  an  active  part  in  the  plunder  of  the 
city  and  slaughter  of  the  poor  Jews.  Their  cruelty  at  that  time  seems  to  be  especially 
referred  to  in  the  hundred  and  thirty-seventh  psalm :  "  Remember,  0  Lord,  the  children 
of  Edom  in  the  day  of  Jerusalem ;  who  said,  Raze  it,  raze  it,  even  to  the  foundation 
thereof  I"  Their  conduct  at  that  time  is  described  by  the  Prophet  Obadiah  (vers.  10 — 14). 
8.  The  aggravations  of  their  sin.  They  were  kinsfolk  of  Israel  and  Judah.  In  joining 
Nebuchadnezzar  against  Judah,  they  were  uniting  with  a  foreigner  against  those  who 
had  descended  from  the  same  ancestor  as  themselves.  Moreover,  in  former  times  tha 
Israelites  had  made  distinctions  in  their  favour.  When  they  marched  to  the  conquest 
of  Canaan,  they  were  commanded  not  to  contend  with  the  Bdomites  (Deut.  iL  4,  5) ; 
and  they  observed  that  command.  The  Lord  also  commanded  them  not  to  hate  the 
Edomites  (Deut.  xxiii.  7).  Yet  the  Edomites  hated  the  Jews,  and  rejoiced  in  revenging 
themselves  upon  them. 

II.  The  eiqhteous  retribution  of  the  sin  op  the  Edomites.  "  Therefore  thus 
■aith  the  Lord  God  ;  I  will  also  stretch  out  mine  hand  upon  Bdom,  and  will  cut  off  man 
and  beast  from  it,"  etc.  (vers.  13,  14).  1.  The  judgment  inflicted.  Two  chief  elements 
of  it  are  mentioned  by  the  prophet — slaughter  by  the  sword,  and  the  laying  waste  of  th» 
land.  It  is  also  intimated  that  the  judgment  should  pass  over  the  whole  land.  "  And  I 
will  make  it  desolate  from  Teman ;  even  unto  Dedan  shall  they  fall  by  the  sword."  Or, 
as  some  would  punctuate,  "  From  Teman  even  unto  Dedan  they  shall  fall  by  the  sword." 
Teman  was  a  district  in  the  south  of  Edom,  and  Dedan  was  in  the  north ;  so  that  "  from 
Teman  imto  Dedan  "  signifies  over  the  entire  country.  Not  in  one  event  alone  may  we 
trace  the  fulfilment  of  this  prediction,  but  in  several.  In  the  time  of  the  Maccabees, 
Judas  the  Maccabee  slew  more  than  forty  thousand  Edomites  (1  Maoc.  v.  3 ;  2  Maco.  z. 
15 — 23).  About  thirty  years  afterwards,  John  Hyrcanus  turned  his  forces  against 
Bdom,  completely  subdued  the  country,  and  compelled  the  people  to  submit  to  circum- 
cision and  to  conform  to  the  Jewish  religion,  or  to  suffer  expatriation.  And  they  were 
BO  desirous  of  remaining  in  the  country  of  their  forefathers,  that  they  yielded  to  his 
conditions, and,  as  Josephus  says,  "  they  were  hereafterno  other  than  Jews"  (Josephus, 
'  Ant.,'  xiii.  9.  1).  So  complete  was  their  incorporation  with  the  Jews  "  that  the  name 
of  Idumsea  appears  no  more  in  history  as  a  separate  kingdom."  As  Schroder  remarks, 
"  The  vengeance  of  God  could  not  in  a  more  marked  retribution  manifest  itself  upon 
Bdom  than  by  the  extirpation  of  his  nationality,  and  that  precisely  in  the  form  of  aa 
absorption  by  Israel."  The  desolation  of  the  land  was  at  length  accomplished  by  the 
Mohammedans.  "  In  the  seventh  century,"  says  Dr.  J.  L.  Porter,  "  the  Mohammedan 
conquest  gave  a  death-blow  to  the  commerce  and  prosperity  of  Edom.  Under  the 
withering  influence  of  Mohammedan  rule,  the  great  cities  fell  to  ruin,  and  the  country 
became  a  desert.  The  followers  of  the  false  prophet  were  here,  as  elsewhere,  the  instru- 
ments, in  God's  hands,  for  the  execution  of  his  judgments."  And  so  "  the  Edom  of 
prophecy— Edom  considered  as  the  enemy  of  God  and  the  rival  of  Israel — has  perish  ■-d 
for  ever:  all,  in  that  respect,  is  an  untrodden  wilderness,  a  hopeless  ruin  ;  and  ther>  m 
the  veracity  of  God's  Word  finds  its  verification."  2.  The  instruments  for  iheinflictiua 
qf  the  Judgment.    "  I  will  lay  my  vengeance  upon  Bdom  by  the  hand  of  my  people 


CH.  XXV.  1—17.]     THE  BOOK  OP   THE   PROPHET   EZEKIEL.  65 

Israel,"  etc. ;  "  A  nd  tte  house  of  Jacob  shall  be  a  fire,  and  the  house  of  Joseph  a  flame, 
and  the  house  of  Esau  for  stubble,"  etc.  (Obad.  18).  The  prophecy  points  to  Judas  the 
Maccabee  and  his  army,  and  yet  more  to  John  Hyrcanus,  who  completely  subjugated 
the  country  of  Edom,  and  annihilated  the  nationality  of  the  Bdomites.  3.  I%« 
retributory  character  of  the  judg-ment.  "  Because  that  Edom  hath  dealt  against  the 
house  of  Judah  by  taking  vengeance,  and  hath  greatly  offended,  and  revenged  himself 
upon  them;  therefore  thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ,  .  .  I  will  lay  my  vengeance  upon  Edom 
by  the  hand  of  my  people  Israel, .  .  .  and  they  shall  know  my  vengeance,  saith  the 
Lord  God."  The  Edomites  inflicted  vindictive  revenge  upon  the  Jews;  and  for  so 
doing  they  must  suffer  the  vengeance  of  the  Lord  Jehovah.  "  Revenge  for  revenge." 
"  The  Lord  is  a  God  of  recompenses ;  he  shall  surely  requite  "  (Jer.  li.  56). 

CoHCLuaioir.  Our  subject  addresses  to  us :  1.  Warning  against  estrangement  or 
want  of  love  amongst  relatives.  When  kinsfolk  or  former  friends  become  hostile  to  each 
other,  they  are  much  more  embittered  than  strangers  in  a  similar  condition.  "A 
brother  offended  is  harder  to  be  won  than  a  strong  city  :  and  such  contentions  are  like 
the  bars  of  a  castle  "  (Prov.  xviii.  19) ;  "  Love  one  another  with  a  pure  heart  fervently." 
2.  Warning  against  encouraging  any  feeling  of  revenge.  Such  feelings  turn  the  heart 
which  entertains  them  into  a  hell ;  and  the  entertainment  of  them  awakens  the  stern 
displeasure  of  the  Most  High.  Our  Lord  says,  "  Love  your  enemies,  and  pray  for  them 
that  persecute  you,"  etc.  (Matt.  v.  44,  45).  And  St.  Paul  writes,  "  Render  to  no 
man  evil  for  evil .  .  .  Avenge  not  yourselves,  beloved,  but  give  place  unto  wrath," 
etc.  (Rom.  xii.  17, 19— 21).— W.  J. 

Vers.  15 — 17. — The  heinous  sin  and  severe  punishment  of  the  Philistines.  "Thus 
saith  the  Lord  God ;  Because  the  Philistines  have  dealt  by  revenge,"  etc.  This  paragraph 
treating  of  the  Philistines  is  similar  in  its  prominent  features  to  those  which  dealt  with 
the  Ammonites,  Moabites,  and  Edomites,  especially  the  last.  In  each  case  there  is  a 
setting  forth  of  the  sin  and  an  announcement  of  the  punishment.  And  there  is  a  close 
resemblance  between  the  Edomites  and  the  Philistines,  both  in  their  sin  and  in  their 
punishment.  With  this  similarity  of  essential  character  in  the  paragraphs  of  this 
chapter,  it  is  not  easy  to  suggest  variety  of  homiletical  treatment  for  each  paragraph. 
In  our  text  we  have — 

I.  A  BBiBF  STATEMENT  OF  A  LONG  C0UE8B  OF  HEINOUS  SIN.  "  The  Philistines  have 
dealt  by  revenge,  and  have  taken  vengeance  with  despite  of  soul  to  destroy  it  with 
perpetual  enmity."  Mark  the  gradations  of  their  sin  as  they  are  indicated  in  the  text. 
1.  The  sin  of  the  Philistines  was  hatred  against  the  Jews.  They  were  a  powerful 
people,  occupying  territory  to  the  south-west  of  Judah,  and  were  unvarying  in  their 
hostility  to  the  Israelites.  Their  sin  was  the  very  opposite  of  that  love  which  God 
commands  as  the  supreme  duty  of  man  to  his  fellow-man :  "  Thou  shalt  love  thy 
neighbour  as  thyself"  (Lev.  xix.  18).  And  in  Christian  ethics  their  sin  is  equivalent 
to  murder :  "  Whosoever  hateth  his  brother  is  a  murderer  "  (1  John  iii.  15).  2.  Their 
hatred  was  hitense  and  scornful.  It  was  no  superficial  emotion.  They  took 
"  vengeance  with  despite  of  soul."  They  were  hearty  and  passionate  and  zealous  in 
their  enmity  to  the  Jews.  3.  Their  haired  was  inveterate.  "The  old  hatred,"  or 
"perpetual  enmity."  A  glance  at  their  history  shows  this.  In  the  time  of  the 
judges  "  they  vexed  and  oppressed  the  children  of  Israel "  (Judg.  x.  7,  8).  Near  the 
close  of  the  career  of  Eli  they  defeated  Israel  in  battle  with  great  slaughter,  and  seized 
the  ark  of  God  (1  Sam.  iv.  10,  11).  They  were  conquered  by  the  Israelites  under 
Samuel,  and  were  kept  in  check  all  his  days  (1  Sam.  vii.  7 — 14).  But  in  the  days  of 
Saul  they  again  became  troublesome,  and  brought  Israel  in  a  measure  into  subjection 
to  them  (1  Sam.  xiii.  19,  20).  In  the  battle  in  which  Saul  and  his  sons  were  slain, 
they  inflicted  a  disastrous  defeat  upon  Israel  (1  Sam.  xxxi.).  They  were  vanquished 
by  David.  But  in  after-times  they  caused  much  trouble  and  •  damage  to  Judah 
(2  Ohron.  xxi.  16, 17 ;  xxviii.  18).  And  they  showed  their  old  animosity  by  acts  of 
hostility  at  the  time  when  Nebuchadnezzar  besieged  Jerusalem.  Their  hatred  was 
ancient  and  persistent.  4.  Their  hatred  was  hahituaily  active.  "  The  Philistines  have 
dealt  by  revenge,  and  have  taken  vengeance."  Their  enmity  existed  not  simply  as  an 
emotion,  but  found  vigorous  expression.  And  it  expressed  itself,  not  simply  in  hostile 
and  bitter  words,  but  in  malignant  deeds,  in  revengeful  actions.    And  these  deeds  were 

EZEEIBL — ^n.  9 


66  THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET   EZKKIEL.    [oh.  xxvi.  1— 21. 


not  occasional,  but  habitual.  They  "  dealt  by  revenge,"  as  if  it  had  been  their  trade 
or  occupation.  "  A  perpetually  enduring  war,"  says  SchrSder,  "  is  the  standing  feature 
of  the  relation,  while  fixed  hostility  was  the  root  of  it."  o.  This  hatred  was  destructive 
in  its  design.  "  Have  taken  vengeance  with  despite  of  soul  to  destroy  it  with  perpetual 
enmity."  I'he  aim  of  the  hostile  Philistines  was  to  bring  the  Jewish  nation  to  an  utter 
end.  This  was  their  steadfast  purpose.  One  aspect  of  hatred  is  very  conspicuous  in 
this  brief  delineation,  and  it  is  as  admonitory  as  it  is  conspicuous,  viz.  its  tendency  to 
continuance  and  growth.  If  animosity  be  not  resisted,  if  it  be  not  combated  by  the 
presentation  of  prayer  to  God  and  by  the  cultivation  and  expression  of  kindness 
towards  men,  especially  towards  the  object  of  our  aversion,  it  will  increase  in  depth 
and  intensity.  Hence  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance  to  check  the  beginnings  of  hatred. 
"  Let  all  bitterness,  and  wrath,  and  anger,  and  clamour,  and  railing  be  put  away  from 
you,  with  all  malice;  and  be  ye  kind  one  to  another,  tender-hearted,  forgiving  each 
other,  even  as  God  also  in  Christ  forgave  you." 

11.   A    STARTLING    ANNOUNCEMENT    OF    SEVERE    PUNISHMENT    FOB    PROTRACTED    AND 

HEINOUS  SINS.  "  Therefore  thus  saith  the  [>ord  God ;  Behold,  I  will  stretch  out  mine 
hand  upon  the  Philistines,"  etc.  (vers.  16,  17).  We  see  here  :  1.  Punishment  of  great 
severity,  "  I  will  execute  great  vengeance  upon  them  with  furious  rebukes."  Who 
can  conceive  the  dread  severity  of  the  great  vengeance  of  the  Almighty  with  furious 
Kibukes?  They  who  had  dealt  by  revenge  and  taken  vengeance  on  Israel  should  suffer 
the  great  vengeance  of  the  God  of  Israel.  After  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  when 
Nebuchadnezzar  turned  his  mighty  forces  against  Egypt,  "  the  result  was  specially 
disastrous  to  the  Philistines :  Gaza  was  taken  by  the  Egyptians,  and  the  population  of 
the  whole  plain  was  reduced  to  a  mere  '  remnant '  by  the  invading  armies."  2. 
Punishment  ending  in  destruction.  "  I  will  cut  off  the  Oherethites,  and  destroy  the 
remnant  of  the  sea  coast."  The  name  "  Oherethites  "  is  given  "  to  the  whole  of  the 
Philistines,  for  the  sake  of  the  paronomasia."  The  name  signifies  "  cut  off,"  or  "  extir- 
pated," and  it  was  to  find  its  fulfilment  in  their  doom.  "  The  destruction  of  the 
remnant  points  to  this,"  says  Hengstenberg,  "  that  they  shall  be  destroyed  to  the  last 
man,  as  in  fact  the  Philistines  have  utterly  disappeared.  It  is  the  great  privilege  of 
the  people  of  God,  that  how  heavy  soever  the  judgments  of  God  may  be  upon  them, 
never  will  it  be  said  of  them, '  I  will  destroy  the  remnant.' "  They  who  had  made  it 
their  object  to  destroy  the  Jewish  nation  should  themselves  be  destroyed  by  the 
Almighty.  "  With  what  measure  ye  mete,  it  shall  be  measured  unto  you."  3. 
Punishment  from  the  hand  of  God.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Behold,  I  will  stretch 
out  mine  hand  upon  the  Philistines,"  etc.  The  Chaldeans  and  others  were  but  as 
weapons  in  the  hands  of  the  supreme  Sovereign  and  righteous  Judge  of  all. 

"  The  Lord  sitteth  as  King  for  ever : 
He  hath  prepared  his  throne  for  judgment. 
And  he  shall  judge  the  world  in  righteousness. 
He  shall  minister  judgment  to  the  peoples  iu  uprightness." 

And  if  men  will  not  be  brought  to  know  him  by  the  sweet  influences  of  his  grace,  then 
by  the  stern  severities  of  his  vengeance  they  shall  know  that  he  is  the  Lord. — ^W,  J. 


EXPOSITION. 

QCT^pppgjj  XXVI  I  "^""^  ^^'^  ^'^  commerce.    It  is  nshered  ii. 

with  special  solemnity  as  "a  word  of  Je- 
hovah." 


The  prophetic  messages  against  Ammon, 
Moab,  Edom,  and  the  Philistines  were  com- 
paratively short  That  against  Tyre  spreads 
over  three  chapters  (xxvi.  1 — xxix.  18).  The 
■peoial  prominence  thus  given  to  the  latter 
eity  was  probably  due  to  its  political  impor- 
tance in  Ezekiel's  time,  possibly  also  to  the 
personal  knowledge  which  may  be  inferred 
from  his  minute  desoription  of  its  magnifi- 


Ver.  1. — In  the  eleventh  year,  etc.  The 
last  date  given  (oh.  xxiv.  1)  was  the  tenth 
day  of  the  tenth  month  of  the  aiinth  year 
(go.  B.C.  590>  We  have  now  come  to  the 
eleventh  yeiir,  on  which,  on  the  ninth  day 
of  the  fourth  month,  Jerusalem  was  taken, 
while  its  destruction  followed  in  the  seventh 
day  of  the  fifth  month  (Jer.  lii.  6, 12;.  Here 
the  immber  of  the  month  is  not  given  in  the 


«H.  XXVI.  1—21.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PROPHET  EZEKIEL. 


67 


Hebrew  or  the  Vulgate,  while  the  LXX. 
inserts  the  "  first  month."  In  oh.  xxxii.  17 
we  have  s  like  omiBsion,  and  in  both  cases  it 
is  natural  to  aasnme  an  error  of  transcription. 
The  tidings  of  the  capture  may  have  reached 
both  Tyre  and  Tel-Abib,  and  Ezekiel  may 
have  heard  of  the  temper  in  which  the 
former  had  received  ^em,  jnst  as  he  had 
heard  how  the  nations  named  in  the  pre- 
Tiona  chapter  had  exnlted  in  the  fall,  immi- 
nent and,  aa  they  thought,  inevitable,  of  the 
holy  city. 

Ver.  2. — Beoause  that  Tyras,  etc.  As  the 
nearest  peaX  commercial  city,  the  Venice  of 
the  ancient  world,  Tyre,  from  the  days  of 
David  (2  Sam.  v.  11)  and  Solomon  (1  Kings 
T.  1)  onward,  had  been  prominent  in  the 
eyes  of  the  statesmen  and  prophets  of  Judah ; 
•nd  Ezekiel  follows  in  the  footsteps  of  Joel 
ill.  4 ;  Amos  i.  9, 10 ;  Isa.  xxui.,  in  dealing 
with  it.  The  description  in  vers.  5  and  14 
points,  not  to  the  city  on  the  mainland,  the 
old  Tyre  of  Josh.  xix.  29,  which  had  been 
taken  by  Shalmaneser  and  was  afterwards 
destroyed  by  Alexander  the  Great,  but  to 
the  isutnd-city,  the  new  Tyre,  which  was,  at 
(his  time,  the  emporium  of  the  ancient  world. 
The  extent  of  her  commerce  will  meet  us  in 
oh.  xxvii.  Here^  too,  as  in  the  case  of  the 
aations  in  ch.  xxr.,  Ezekiel's  indignation  is 
ronsed  by  the  exalting  selfishness  with  which 
Tyie  had  looked  on  the  downfall  (actual  or 
imminent,  as  before)  of  Jerusalem.  "  Now," 
her  rnlers  seem  to  have  said,  "  we  shall 
be  the  only  power  in  the  land  of  Canaan." 
Jerasalem,  that  had  been  the  gate  of  the 
peoples,  was  now  broken.  The  name  thus 
given  may  imply  either  (1)  that  Jerusalem 
was  regarded  as  to  a  considerable  extent  a 
eommercial  city,  carrying  on  much  inter- 
oonrse  with  the  nations  with  which  she  was 
In  alliance  (oh.  xxiii.  40,  41;  1  Kii)<^s  ix. 
26—28 ;  xxii.  48 ;  lea.  ii.  7 ;  Herod.,  iii.  5,  of 
Gadytis,  t'.e.  probably  Jerusalem) ;  or  (2)  that 
Its  temple  had,  under  Hezekiah  and  Josiah, 
drawn  many  proselytes  from  the  neiglibour- 
ing  nations,  as  in  Ps.  Ixxxvii.  4 — 6,  and  was 
looking  forward  to  a  yet  fuller  confluence  of 
men  of  all  races,  as  in  the  prophecies  of 
Hicah  iv.  1,  2  and  Isa.ii.  2,  3— expectations 
which  may  well  have  become  known  to  a 
city  like  Tyre,  in  frequent  intercourse  with 
Judah.  "Now,"  the  Tyrians  might  say, 
"that  hope  is  shattered."  I  shall  be  re- 
plenished. The  interpolated  "now"  indi- 
cates what  is,  of  course,  implied,  that  Tyre 
expects  her  prosperity  to  increase  in  propor- 
tion to  the  decline  and  fall  of  Jerusalem. 

Ver.  3. — As  the  sea  causeth,  etc.  We  note 
the  special  appropriateness  of  the  comparison 
to  the  position  of  the  island  city. 

Ver.  5. — It  shall  bo  a  place  for  the  spread- 
ing of  nets,  etc.  The  prediction  is  repeated 
i  1   ver.   14,  and  after  many  chances  and 


chanpjps,  apparent  revival  followed  by 
another  period  of  decay,  the  present  condi- 
tion of  Tyre  strikingly  corresponds  with  it. 
The  travellers  of  the  seventeenth  and  eigh> 
teentli  centuries  report  that  "  its  inhabitants 
are  only  a  few  poor  wretches  that  harbour  in 
vaults  and  subsist  upon  fishing"  (Mandrell, 
in  1697);  that  the  number  of  those  inhabit- 
ants was  "only  ten,  Turks  and  Christians" 
(Hasselquist,  in  1751);  that  there  were,  a 
little  later  on,  "  fifty  or  sixty  poor  families  " 
(Volney,  in  1766).  During  the  present 
century  there  has  been  a  partial  revival,  and 
Porter,  in  1858,  estimates  its  population  at 
from  three  to  four  thousand.  The  present 
state  of  its  harbour,  as  compared  with  that 
of  Beyrout,  is  against  any  future  expansion 
of  its  commerce  ('  Diet.  Bible,'  s.v.  "  Tyre  "). 

Ver.  6. — The  daughters  in  the  field  are, 
according  to  the  usual  symbolism  of  pro- 
phecy, the  subject  or  allied  cities  on  the 
mainland. 

Ver.  7. — I  will  bring  against  thee,  etc. 
There  is  a  special  emphasis  of  abruptness  in 
the  way  in  which  Ezekiel  brings  in  the 
name  of  the  great  Chaldean  conqueror  (we 
note,  by  the  way,  that  he  adopts  the  less 
common  spelling  of  the  name),  of  whom  he 
speaks  as  "king  of  kings."  The  title  is 
used  by  Daniel  (ii.  37)  of  Nebuchadnezzar, 
and  by  Artaxerxesof  himself  (Ezra  vii.  12), 
by  Darius  in  the  Nakshi  Rustam  inscription 
('  Records  of  the  Past,'  v.  151),  by  Tiglath- 
Pileser,  with  the  addition  of  "  lord  of  lords  " 
(ibid.,  V.  8). 

Vers.  8 — 10. — (For  the  usual  operations  of 
a  siege,  see  notes  on  oh.  iv.  1,2.)  The  buckler 
was  the  roof  of  shields  under  which  the 
besiegers  protected  themselves  from  the 
missiles  of  the  besieged.  For  engines  of  war, 
read  hattering-rams ;  for  wheels,  waggons. 
The  final  result  will  be  that  the  breach  will 
be  made,  with  results  such  as  those  described 
in  ver.  11. 

Ver.  11. — Thy  strong  garrisons;  literally, 
the  pillars  of  thy  strength  (Revised  Version). 
So  the  Vulgate,  nobiles  statues.  So  the  word 
is  used  in  Isa.  xix.  19;  Jer.  xliii.  13; 
2  Kings  iii.  2.  The  words  probably  refer  to 
the  two  famous  columns  standing  in  the 
temple  of  the  Tyrian  Hercules,  one  of  gold 
and  one  of  emerald  (possibly  malachite  or 
lapis-lazuli),  as  symbols  of  strength,  or  as 
pedestals  surmounted  by  a  statue  of  Baal 
(Herod.,  ii.  44). 

Ver.  12. — Thy  pleasant  houses;  Hebrew, 
houses  of  desire.  The  palaces  of  the  mor- 
el lant-prinoes  of  Tyre,  stately  as  those  ol 
Genoa  or  Venice.  In  the  midst  of  the  water. 
We  are  again  reminded  that  it  is  the  island- 
city  of  which  the  prophet  speaks. 

Ver.  1:^. — The  noise  of  thy  songs.  As  in 
the  imagery  of  Isa.  xxiii.  16,  Tyre  seems  to 
have  been  famous  for  its  music — the  operatio 


68 


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [ch.  xxvi.  1— 21 


city,  as  It  were,  of  the  aneient  world — emi- 
nent no  less  for  its  culture  than  its  commerce 
(comp.  ch.  xxviii.  13).  The  description  of 
the  desolation  of  the  captured  city  is  summed 
up  once  more  in  the  words  of  ver.  5.  It  shall 
be  a  place  to  "  spread  nets  upon." 

Yer.  IS. — Shall  not  the  isles,  etc.  7  The 
Hebrew  word  is  used  in  a  wider  sense,  as 
including  all  settlements  on  the  sea-coast  as 
well  as  islands.  So  it  is  used  of  Fliilistia 
(Isa.  zz.  6),  and  of  the  maritime  states  of 
Asia  Minor  (Dan.  xi.  18),  of  the  east  and 
south  coasts  of  Arabia  (ch.  xxyii.  15). 
Looking  to  the  extent  of  commerce  described 
in  ch.  xxvii.,  it  probably  includes  all  the 
Mediterranean  settlements  of  tlie  Tyriaus, 
possibly  also  those  in  the  Indian  Ocean  and 
the  Persian  Oulf.  The  report  of  ttie  fall  of 
Tyre  was  to  spread  far  and  wide. 

Yer.  16. — The  princes  «f  the  sea  are  not 
the  kings  of  the  isles,  bat  the  merchant- 
princes  of  the  city  (Isa.  xxiii.  8).  They 
shall  lay  aside  their  robes  of  state — Tyrian 
purple  embroidered  with  gold  and  silver — 
and  shall  put  on  the  garments  of  mourners. 
Jonnb  iii.  6  presents  an  interesting  parallel. 
The  word  thrones  is  used,  as  in  1  Sam.  iv, 
13,  for  any  chair  of  state,  as  that  of  priest  or 
judge  (ProT.  ix.  14;  Elsth.  iii.  1),  as  well  as 
for  the  specifically  kingly  throne.  For  the 
moet  part,  however,  the  later  meaning  is 
dominant. 

Yer.  17. — Inhabited  of  seafaring,  etc.; 
Hebrew,  from  (he  seas.  The  sense  is  the 
same,  but  we  lose  the  poetry  of  the  original 
In  the  paraphrase.  Possibly,  however,  the 
phrase  may  represent  the  position  of  Tyre 
as  rising  out  of  the  sea  or  as  deriving  its 
wealth  from  it.  Ewald  adopts  a  conjectural 
reading,  which  gives  "destroyed  from  the 
seas;"  or,  with  another  conjecture,  "She 
that  was  settled  from  the  days  of  the  remote 
past." 

Yer.  18. — It  is  noticeable  that  the  com- 
mercial policy  of  Tyre  is  not  represented  ai 
having  been  oppressive.     The  isles  do  not 


exult  in  their  deliverance,  but  mourn  over 
the  captured  city  whose  commerce  had  con- 
tributed to  their  prosperity.  The  "  terror  " 
of  ver.  17  is  rather  the  impression  of  awe  and 
wonder  made  on  all  who  came  to  it. 

Yer.  19.— When  I  shall  bring  np  the  sea. 
The  picture  of  desolation  is  completed.  The 
sea  washes  over  the  bare  rock  that  was  onc» 
covered  with  the  palaces  of  the  merchant- 
princes. 

Yer.  20. — ^When  I  shall  bring  thee  down^ 
eto.  The  pit  is  eheol,  Hades,  the  unseen 
world  of  the  dead.  The  image  may  have  been 
suggested  by  Isa.  xiv.  9,  where  it  is  used 
of  Babylon.  It  was  obviously  one  on  which 
the  mind  of  Ezekiel  dwelt,  and  is  repiodaoed 
in  oh.  xxxii.  17 — 32.  Here,  apparently,  th© 
sinking  in  the  depth  of  the  waters  (ver.  19) 
is  thought  of  as  leading  to  that  world  of  the 
dead  that  lay  beneath  them.  The  people  of 
old  time  may  possibly  include  the  races  of 
the  old  world  that  were  submerged  in  th* 
waters  of  the  Flood.  The  imagery  of  Ps. 
Ixxxviii.  3 — 1  seems  to  have  been  floating 
before  the  prophet's  mind.  I  shall  set  glory; 
better,  will  setr  The  contrast  drawn  is  that 
between  the  shadow-world  of  the  dead,  and 
the  earth  with  its  living  inhabitants.  Ther» 
Jehovah  would  establish  his  glory,  would^ 
sooner  or  later,  manifest  his  kingdom,  while 
Tyre  and  its  pomp  should  be  no  more, 
belonging  only  to  the  past.  Conjectural 
readings  and  renderings  have  been  suggested 
as  follows :  (1)  Hitzig,  "And  thou  no  longer 
shinest  with  glory  in  the  Zand  of  the  living.'^ 
(2)  Haverniok  and  Kliefoth,  "That  I  no 
longer  produce  anything  glorious  from  thee 
in  the  land  of  the  living."  (3)  Ewald, "  That 
thou  mayest  not  remain  (or  stand)  in  the 
land  of  the  living."  I  have  adopted  Keil'a 
interpretation  of  the  Authorized  Yersion. 

Yer.  22. — I  will  make  thee  a  terror^ 
Ewald  translates,  "  To  sudden  death  will  I 
bring  thee,"  which  corresponds  with  the 
margin  of  the  Bevised  Yersion,  I  will  make 
thee  a  deitruotum. 


HOMILBTICS. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — Tyre,  the  England  of  antiquity.  We  have  here  an  outline  of  the  great, 
desolating  judgment  that  was  to  fall  upon  Ty™;  it  is  more  fully  described  in  the 
succeeding  verses  of  the  chapter,  and  lamented  over  in  the  next  chapter.  There  ar» 
several  points  in  the  condition  and  history  of  Tyre  that  call  for  especial  attention  to 
the  fate  of  this  famous  city ;  but  the  resemblance  between  Tyre  and  England  is  so 
striking,  that  we  may  feel  much  more  interest  in  Ezekiel's  utterances  when  we  consider 
their  bearing  on  our  own  country  in  the  present  day. 

I.  The  similar  pbosperitt  op  Tyre  and  England.  1.  In  wealth.  Tyre  was  one  of 
the  richest  cities  of  the  East,  if  not  the  very  richest.  Her  splendour  was  renowned,  and 
the  wealth  of  her  merchants  was  proverbial  Like  England  to-day,  she  was  envied 
by  other  peoples  for  her  worldly  prosperity.  2.  Thr<mgh  commerce.  The  wealth  of 
Tyre  was  not  drawn  from  rich  mines  or  fertile  soil  of  her  own  territory.  It  was  not 
^looty  taken  in  war,  like  that  of  Babylon.    Her  riches  came  by  trade.    Her  princeS' 


€H.  xxvi.  1— 21.]    THE   BOOK  OF  THE   PEOPHET  EZEKIEL.  69 

were  merchants.  Thus  she  was  like  our  "  nation  of  shopkeepers."  3.  By  seafaring. 
The  early  commerce  of  Syria  was  carried  on  by  Midianites  over  the  desert  (Q-en. 
xxxvii.  28) ;  but  the  later  and  more  profitable  commerce  was  over  the  waters  west- 
ward, round  the  coast  of  the  Mediterranean  and  to  as  far  as  Cornwall  in  Britain,  perhaps 
even  to  the  distant  Azores.  Like  Venice  in  the  Middle  Ages,  like  Spain  later,  like  the 
Netherlands  after  the  Keformation,  like  England  to-day.  Tyre  in  ancient  times  was  the 
mistress  of  the  sea.  Hence  a  certain  cosmopolitan  character.  4.  With  constructive  art. 
Ihe  vast  foundations  of  Baalbec  tell  of  the  building  powers  of  Tyre.  Solomon's 
temple  was  a  grand  specimen  of  Tyrian  architecture,  built  with  Tyiian  art.  We  do 
not  equal  those  great  builders  in  originality.  But  inventive  genius  and  manufacturing 
energy  are  characteristic  of  our  race.  Thus  the  material  splendour  of  Tyre  has  passed 
to  England. 

II.  The  fate  of  Tyee  a  warning  tor  England.  The  splendour  and  prosperity  of 
Tyre  did  not  save  her  from  ruin.  Can  we  see  in  her  fall  any  hint  of  a  similar  danger 
threatening  our  own  country  ?  Consider  both  its  immediate  cause  and  tlie  providential- 
necessity  that  lay  behind.  1.  The  immediate  cause.  Tyre  was  overthrown  by 
Babylon  (ver.  7).  She  was  not  able  to  withstand  the  terrific  onward  march  of  the 
Eastern  power.  She  was  strong  at  sea,  but  feeble  ashore.  She  was  not  a  military 
power.  She  proves  that  wealth  will  not  protect  from  ruin,  but  will  rather  invite  it. 
The  wealth  of  London  is  a  temptation  to  the  invader.  Prosperity  is  not  its  own 
security.  2.  Tlie  providential  necessity.  Wealth  enervates,  and  no  doubt  Tyre  was 
weakened  by  luxury.  But  behind  such  natural  operations  God,  the  Judge  of  all  the 
earth,  saw  the  sin  of  Tyre.  She  was  greedy  and  selfish  (ver.  2).  Commerce  does  not 
always  win  friends.  By  competition  it  stirs  up  jealousy.  When  deceptive  or  over- 
reaching, it  rouses  the  antagonism  of  those  on  whom  it  preys.  Tyre  was  a  most  wicked 
city.  Her  very  religion  was  shamefully  immoral.  Though  the  temple  of  Jehovah  was 
built  by  Tyrian  artists,  the  worship  of  Jehovah  was  not  accepted  by  the  Tyrian 
citizens.  Like  Tyre,  we  may  build  a  temple  for  others,  and  never  worship  in  it  our- 
selves. We  may  patronize  religion,  and  be  none  the  better  for  it.  We  may  send  the 
gospel  to  the  heathen,  and  become  pagans  at  home.  The  temple  they  built  for  the  Jews 
did  not  save  the  Tyrians.  Nothing  can  save  England  but  the  uprightness  and  the 
personal  religion  of  her  people. 

Ver.  2  (last  clause,  "I  shall  be  replenished,  now  she  is  laid  was'e"). — An  unworthy 
mnticipaiion.  The  destruction  of  Jerusalem  afforded  delights  to  Tyre,  because  the 
mercenary  Tyrians  imagined  that  they  would  gain  by  the  loss  of  the  Jewish  capital. 
This  was  an  unworthy  anticipation,  and  the  event  proved  that  it  was  founded  on  a 
delusion.    Tyre  did  not  ultimately  profit  by  the  ruin  of  Jerusalem. 

I.  It  is  wicked  to  hope  for  gain  through  the  distress  of  others.  Tyre  should 
have  sympathized  with  her  old  ally  in  the  time  of  adversity.  But  her  commercial 
greed  bears  down  all  thoughts  of  friendship  and  all  feelings  of  commiseration,  She 
only  looks  at  the  direful  event  as  an  opportunity  for  enlarging  her  trade.  Nations  are 
guilty  of  this  wickedness  when  they  exult  in  the  downfall  and  misery  of  their 
neighbours,  expecting  to  reap  a  harvest  of  gain  for  themselves.  Thus  while  two 
peoples  are  in  the  agonies  of  war,  a  third  may  be  delighted  at  the  opportunity  of 
coining  wealth  by  seizing  the  ground  for  commerce  which  the  belligerents  have  been 
forced  to  relinquish.  It  may  come  more  nearly  home  to  us  to  see  the  same  greedy 
spirit  in  the  shopkeeper  who  inwardly  rejoices  over  the  bankruptcy  of  his  rival, 
believing  that  now  the  custom  will  be  all  in  his  own  hands.  The  same  miserable, 
mercantile  selfishness  is  even  witnessed  in  ecclesiastical  regions,  when  one  Church  takes 
pleasure  in  the  misfortunes  of  a  neighbouring  Church,  expecting  thus  to  have  grist 
brought  to  its  mill.  In  this  case  there  is  far  less  excuse,  for  Christians  profess  brother- 
hood, and  a  true  Church  exists  for  the  glory  of  God,  not  for  the  pomp  and  aggrandize- 
ment of  its  members.  Qoi  is  not  glorified  when  one  Church  fattens  on  the  wreck  of 
another  Church. 

II.  This  unworthy  anticipation  is  doomed  to  ultimate  failure.  Tyre  did  not 
gain  by  the  overthrow  of  Jerusalem ;  on  the  contrary,  she  was  swept  away  by  the  same 
besom  of  destruction  that  she  had  greedily  rejoiced  to  see  turned  against  her  ancient  ally. 
We  are  members  one  of  another.    What  is  hurtful  to  one  part  of  the  body  injures  the 


to  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [ch.  xxvi.  1—21. 

whole  body.  War  brings  nothing  but  loss  in  the  long  run.  Selfish  commerce  does  not 
ultimately  pay.  Greedy  competition  overreaches  itself  and  reaps  a  Nemesis  of  general 
commercial  depression.  It  is  olten  found  that  the  ruin  of  one  house  of  business  is 
followed  by  that  of  others.  A  mitrket  is  injured,  and  all  concerned  with  it  suffer. 
Selfishness,  envy,  jealousy,  and  greed  destroy  mutual  confidence.  They  introduce  a 
condition  in  which  every  man's  hand  is  against  his  fellow.  This  must  be  one  of 
general  disaster,  because  it  is  one  of  gi  neral  distrust.  We  do  not  suffer  in  the  end  by 
being  magnanimous.  Assuredly  these  considerations  apply  with  double  force  to 
religious  communities.  The  Church  that  exults  in  the  downfall  of  its  rival  cannot 
truly  prosper.  Here,  indeed,  what  hurts  a  member  of  the  body  hurts  the  whole  body. 
Par  wiser  as  well  as  higher  was  the  spirit  of  St.  Paul,  who  rejoiced  in  the  preaching  of 
the  £;ospel  by  all  means,  even  though,  in  some  cases,  it  involved  enmity  to  himself 
(Phii.  i.  18). 

Ver.  3. — Divine  antagonism.  I.  It  is  possible  fob  God  to  be  in  antagonism  to 
MEN.  We  have  come  t^^  regard  the  quarrel  between  man  and  God  as  one-sided.  Now,  it 
is  one-sided  in  its  origin,  its  evil,  and  its  malice.  God  never  wislies  to  be  at  war  with 
men,  and  never  originates  any  breach  of  the  peace.  His  conduct  throughout  is  just, 
considerate,  marvellously  long-suffering.  Even  when  the  conflict  is  forced  on  to  an 
extremity,  God  never  ceases  to  love  his  foolish,  fallen  children. :  He  is  ever  waiting  to  be 
gracious,  longing  for  signs  of  contrition  and  a  door  of  reconciliation.  The  origin  of  the 
quarrel,  its  evil,  and  its  malice  are  all  on  our  side.  But  this  does  not  meau  that  God 
takes  no  part  in  it,  that  he  only  stands  before  us  as  an  impassive  and  immoble  granite 
wall  that  we  may  dash  our  heads  against,  but  that  never  moves  an  inch  against  us  ; 
much  less  that  he  gives  way  before  our  rebellious  onslaught,  and  weakly  yields  to 
wilful  opposition  on  our  part.  We  can  provoke  the  Lord  to  anger  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  58), 
"  God  is  angry  with  the  wicked  every  day  "  (Ps.  vii.  11).  As  Lord  and  Judge,  he 
executes  sentence.  By  necessity  of  righteousness,  he  sets  himself  in  array  against 
his  sinful  creatures. 

II.  Sin  provokes  the  antagonism  of  God.  God  was  angry  with  Tyre  for  it* 
wickedness,  and  his  anger  was  not  mitigated  by  the  fact  that  the  greedy  were  rejoicing 
over  the  calamities  of  their  neighbours.  All  sin  rouses  the  anger  and  active  opposition 
of  God,  He  is  not  opposed  to  any  one  from  prejudice,  as  men  are  too  often  opposed  to- 
their  neighbours.  But  sin,  which  is  opposition  to  the  will  of  God,  must  needs  be 
opposed  by  him  if  that  will  is  to  be  done  on  earth  as  it  is  in  heaven.  This,  then,  is  not 
a  question  for  a  few  rare  souls  in  the  awful  condition  of  victims  of  Divine  displeasure. 
Every  sinner  lias  God  for  his  opponent.  The  fatal  punishment  of  others  ought  to  be  a 
warning.  It  was  not  so  taken  by  Tyre.  Instead  of  seeina  a  dreadful  lesson  in  the  ruin 
of  Jerusalem,  the  Tyrians  rejoiced  over  it.  Such  wickedness  the  more  stirred  up  the 
antagonism  of  God.  Now,  these  Tyrians  were  heathen  people,  judged  only  according 
to  their  light.  Yet  they  were  condemned,  for  the  ground  of  judgment  was  moral  evil, 
not  defective  theology.  But  much  more  must  Gud  be  in  antagonism  to  those  who 
have  fuller  light  and  yet  rebel  against  him.  "Therefore  thou  art  inexcusable," 
etc.  (Rom.  ii.  1). 

III.  Chbist  has  come  to  pdt  an  end  to  the  Divine  antagonism.  This  does  not 
mean  that  God  is  reluctant  to  sheathei  his  sword,  till  Christ  succeeds  in  persuading  him 
to  do  so ;  for  our  Lord  was  sent  by  his  Father  for  the  express  purpose  of  mnking  peace. 
But  the  cause  of  the  antagonism  had  to  be  remove  t,  and  Christ  came  to  effect  that  end 
by  making  his  great  atonement  for  sin.  Through  this  also  he  brought  men  into  a  new 
■tate  of  repentance,  and  reconciled  them  to  God.  Now,  we  are  under  the  doom  of 
Divine  antagonism,  so  long  as  we  live  in  unrepented  sin.  But  the  offer  of  the  gospel 
Bhows  the  way  of  escape  from  it  in  free  forgiveness  and  perfect  restoration  to  the  favour 
of  God. 

Ver.  7. — The  mission  of  Nebuchadnezzar.  I.  God  employs  human  agents.  He  doe» 
not  shatter  Tyre  as  he  created  the  world,  with  a  word.  Nor  does  he  send  Michael  and 
the  hosts  of  heaven  with  flaming  swords  to  smite  the  devote.l  city.  The  devastating 
conquests  of  Babylon  effect  his  pnrpose.  Nebuchadnezzar  is  his  "  servant "  (Jer.  xxv.  9). 
In  the  happier  work  of  bringing  salvation  to  a  ruined  world  God  uses  human  agents. 


OH.  XXVI.  1—21.]    THK  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  71 

God  appeared  incarnate  in  a  human  form.  Apostles  were  next  sent  forth  to  proclaim 
the  glad  tidings.  In  the  present  day  God  uses  human  ministers  or  justice  and  human 
ministers  of  mercy. 

II.  God  employs  as  his  AaBNTS  men  who  do  not  know  him.  This  is  the  singular 
fact  brought  before  us  in  relation  to  the  use  of  Nebuchadnezzar  as  a  minister  of  Divine 
judgment.  The  King  of  Babylon  was  a  heathen  monarch,  who  did  not  acknowledge  the 
true  God  (see  Dan.  iii.  15).  Yet  he  was  impressed  into  the  Divine  service.  We  may 
serve  God  unconsciously.  It  is  possible  to  be  an  instrument  for  effecting  his  purposes 
even  when  we  are  thinking  that  we  are  resisting  them.  The  Jews  who  crucified  Christ 
were  unconsciously  the  means  of  leading  his  work  on  to  completion.  Thus  God 
controls  men.  He  claims  all ;  he  uses  all.  For  he  is.  the  God  of  all,  though  all  do  not 
own  or  even  know  him. 

III.  God  employs  bad  men  as  his  agents.  The  worst  thing  about  Nebuchad- 
nezzar was  not  his  paganism,  for  which  he  was  not  responsible,  as  he  had  inherited  it 
from  his  ancestors ;  but  his  wickedness,  his  cruelty,  his  ambitious  greed  and  intolerant 
despotism.  Yet  not  only  was  this  man  unconsciously  enlisted  in  the  service  of  God. 
His  very  wrath  was  made  to  praise  God,  and  the  very  exercise  of  his  wicked  disposition 
was  just  the  thing  that  carried  out  tlie  Divine  purpose.  The  nations  were  otiastised 
according  to  the  ends  of  Divine  justice  by  the  unjust  and  wicked  scourge  of  Nebuchad- 
nezzar's invasions.  This  wonderful  fact  does  not  solve  the  enigma  of  evil,  but  it  helps 
to  lighten  the  burden  of  that  great  mystery.  We  see  that  evil  itself  may  be  turned 
into  a  ministry  of  good. 

rV.  God's  employment  of  human  agents  is  no  justification  op  their  conduct. 
The  use  of  their  action  is  no  defence  for  it.  God  does  not  approve  of  Nebuchadnezzar 
because  he  seizes  that  cruel  monarch's  plans  and  makes  them  to  fall  in  with  his  own  holy 
purposes.  Nebuchadnezzar  must  be  content  to  be  judged  by  the  moral  character  of  his 
deeds,  not  by  the  unsuspected  Divine  issue  of  them.  It  is  no  excuse  for  sin  that  God 
may  overrule  it  for  good.  The  Jews  were  not  exonerated  from  blame  in  rejecting  Christ 
because  this  rejection  was  the  means  of  the  world's  redemption.  We  may  be  used  by 
God  to  high  ends,  and  then  cast  away  as  worthless  souls  unless  we  serve  him  consciously 
and  do  his  will  from  our  hearts. 

Ver.  13. — Songs  silenced.  Songs  may  be  silenced  either  because  they  are  found  to  ba 
unworthy  to  be  sung  or  because  the  singers  are  no  longer  able  to  sing  them.  The  harp 
may  be  broken,  or  the  minstrel  may  be  in  no  mood  to  touch  its  chords.  Our  old  joys 
may  be  given  up  for  either  of  these  reasons.  We  may  find  them  to  be  unworthy,  or,  if 
no  fault  is  discovered  in  them,  sorrow  may  extinguish  them. 

I.  Songs  are  silenced  by  the  discovekt  of  theie  unworthiness.  The  songs 
of  Tyre  were  not  like  those  of  Zion.  Heathen  songs  are  too  often  degrading  to  the 
singers  of  them,  because  false  religion  and  immoral  conduct  are  therein  celebrated. 
There  are  pleasures  of  sin  which  it  is  a  shame  to  permit  unchecked.  The  awakening 
of  conscience  necessarily  extinguishes  such  pleasures  and  stills  their  accompanying 
songs.  In  this  way  the  thoughtless  world  may  be  brought  to  regard  religion  as  a  gloomy, 
repressive  influence,  inimical  to  joy,  and  therefore  very  unattractive.  We  should  look 
a  little  deeper.  The  wicked  song  must  be  stopped  at  any  cost.  But  it  need  not  be 
followed  by  a  reign  of  perpetual  silence.  A  new  song  may  follow,  and  this  may  be  as 
joyous  as  it  is  innocent.  Christianity  is  not  the  enemy  of  g;ladne3s,  it  is  only  the 
enemy  of  wickedness ;  and  when  joy  is  purged  from  evil,  joy  is  found  to  be  deeper, 
stronger,  and  sweeter  than  ever  it  was  while  intoxicated  with  the  old  corruption. 

II.  Songs  abe  silenced  by  borrow.  There  is  a  time  for  everything,  and  singing 
is  not  always  seasonable.  Nothing  can  be  move  unnatural  than  a  forced  song.  Now, 
there  are  sorrows  that  quench  the.most  vigorous  soul's  delights,  as  there  are  storms  that 
beat  down  the  strongest  wings.  Such  were  the  calamities  that  accompanied  Nebuchad- 
nezzar's invasion-.  Such  too  were  the  troubles  of  the  Jewish  captives  when  they  hung 
their  harps  upon  the  willows,  and  refused  to  sing  the  Lord's  song  in  a  strange  land 
(Ps.  cxxxvii.  2 — 4).  But  there  will  be  worse  causes  of  the  silence  of  old  songs  in  God's 
future  judgments  on  sin.  Pleasure  is  no  refuge  from  trouble.  It  tempts  to  hopes  that 
are  delusive.  No  one  is  safe  just  because  he  feels  himself  happy.  Cheerful  people 
may  be  in  as  great  danger  as  despondent  ones. 


72  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PEOPHBT  EZEKIEL.    [ch.  xxvt.  1-2L 

III.  Songs  abb  silenced  to  save  the  sikger.  Tyre  is  made  desolate  utterly  and 
eternally.  The  songs  of  her  gay  citizens  are  no  more  heard.  Her  very  rocks  are 
scraped  bare,  and  the  fisherman  spreads  his  nets  on  her  once  populous  places.  Thus 
cities  are  doomed  to  irretrievable  ruin.  But  it  is  not  so  with  souls.  There  are 
restoration  and  redemption  for  individual  men.  At  all  events,  though  a  dark  shadow 
of  mystery  hangs  over  the  grave,  this  is  the  case  on  earth.  Now,  it  would  be  best  for  the 
singer  to  silence  his  old  thoughtless  song  in  the  sober  reflection  of  repentance.  The 
silence  may  be  a  first  step  to  better  things.  We  are  too  noisy  and  too  superficial. 
The  hush  of  demonstrative  life  gives  us  an  opportunity  of  hearing  the  still  small  voice 
of  God.  When  our  songs  are  silenced  we  may  listen  to  the  songs  of  the  angels.  Then 
that  heavenly  music  may  teach  us  to  tune  our  harps  to  its  higher  melody  and  inspire 
our  souls  with  new  songs  of  redemption  (Eev.  v.  9). 

Var.  16. — "  The  princes  of  the  sea."  The  Tyrians  were  a  senfaring  people  on  a  large 
icale.  Unlike  the  poor  Philistines,  who  did  not  go  beyond  the  fisherman's  simple  toil, 
those  adventurers  swept  the  Mediterranean  with  their  fleets,  and  even  ventured  to 
distant  shores  of  the  Atlantic.  They  had  the  advantages  and  the  evils  of  a  great 
maritime  nation. 

I.  Thb  princes  of  the  sea  gathered  kiohes.  The  merchants  of  Tyre  were 
princes.  Wealth  was  got  by  industry,  daring,  and  enterprise.  Thus  the  Tyrians 
anticipated  the  good  fortune  of  the  English.  Prosperity  is  not  often  won  except  by 
means  of  energy  and  adventure.  When  the  spirit  that  urges  on  daring  attempts  is 
enervated  by  luxury,  the  success  that  it  once  achieved  is  surely  doomed.  It  is  happy 
when  that  spirit  is  transformed  into  a  higher  character,  and  seeks  for  belter  returns  than 
bales  of  merchandise.  We  cannot  but  feel  that  the  voyages  of  the  Beagle  and  the 
Challenger  are  nobler  in  this  respect,  as  their  aim  was  to  gather  treasures  of  knowledge. 
But  better  still  is  it  when  the  command  of  the  waters  is  used  for  the  promotion  of 
peace,  the  extension  of  liberty,  and  the  check  of  the  slave-trade,  and  above  all,  the 
propagation  of  Christianity. 

II.  The  princes  op  the  sea  ttnitbd  races.  In  ancient  times  the  Tyrians  were 
the  great  link  of  connection  between  the  East  and  the  West.  Through  them  the 
venerable  civilization  of  Asia  woke  up  the  genius  of  Europe,  as  yet  slumbering  in 
unconscious  barbarism.  Tyre  gave  the  alphabet  to  Europe.  Thus  she  laid  the" 
foundation  of  Greek  culture  and  started  European  literature  on  its  wonderful  course. 
She  gave  more  than  she  took.  Immense  and  untold  good  comes  from  the  peaceful 
intercommunication  of  races. 

III.  The  princes  op  the  sea  ran  great  risks.  They  trusted  their  wealth  to  the 
treacherous  waves.  The  Merchant  of  Venice  finds  himself  beggared  by  unexpected 
calamities.  The  greatest  wealth  is  usually  won  by  the  most  uncertain  means,  i.e.  by 
foreign  trade  and  home  speculation.  This  is  a  warning  to  the  prosperous  not  to  put 
their  trust  in  riches  which  so  easily  take  wings  and  fly  away.  The  fate  of  Tyre  should 
drive  us  further  to  seek  those  better  riches  in  the  heavenly  treasury,  where  neither 
moth  nor  rust  corrupt,  nor  thieves  break  through  and  steal  (Matt.  vi.  20).  If  even 
the  princes  of  the  sea  were  ruined,  who  can  be  satisfied  to  rest  in  the  greatest  earthly 
success  ? 

IV.  The  princes  op  the  sea  lived  low  lives.  Princes  they  were,  but  not  saints. 
Their  mercenary  character  was  not  hidden  by  all  the  splendour  of  their  surroundings. 
In  their  gorgeous  palaces,  among  their  well-stocked  bazaars,  with  their  heavy-la(J«n 
ships  on  many  waters,  they  were  the  cynosure  of  every  eye.  Yet  in  God's  sight  they 
were  "  miserable,  and  blind,  and  naked,"  for  they  were  but  mammon-worshippers.  Mora 
enlightened  than  the  Tyrian  merchants,  Bnglishmea  will  be  guilty  of  greater  sin  and 
folly  if  they  fall  down  and  worship  the  same  image  of  gold. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  2. — The  jealousy  of  Tyre.  It  is  a  singular  fact  that,  in  his  reproaches  and 
censures  directed  against  the  states  and  tribes  by  which  Israel  was  surrounded,  Ezekiel 
does  not  confine  himself  to  a  condemnation  of  their  idolatries  and  their  vices  and  crimes 


OH.  xxn.  1— 21.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  73 

generally,  but  refers  especially  to  the  attitude  these  peoples  had  taken  towards  his  own 
countrymen,  their  land,  and  their  metropolis.  No  doubt  there  was  patriotism  in  this 
way  of  looking  at  matters.  But  the  frequency  and  evident  deliberateness  of  such 
references  show  that  it  was  not  mere  personal  and  patriotic  feeling  which  animated 
Ezekiel.  He  spoke  as  a  religious  teacher  and  as  the  prophet  of  the  Lord ;  and  he 
recognized,  as  underlying  hostility  to  Israel,  hostility  to  Israel's  God.  It  is  observable 
that  in  the  powerful  and  eloquent  denunciation  of  Tyre's  offences,  in  the  awful  predic- 
tiou  of  Tyre's  impending  fate,  which  forms  so  interesting  and  instructive  a  portion  of 
this  book,  Ezekiel  puts  in  the  very  forefront  of  his  indictment  Tyre's  attitude  towards 
Jerusalem,  the  Hebrew  metropolis.  Tyre's  jealousy  of  Jerusalem's  historic  power, 
prosperity,  and  wealth.  Tyre's  malicious  delight  in  Jerusalem's  humiliation  and  fall, 
are  adduced  as  reasons  for  the  Divine  displeasure,  and  for  the  execution  of  the  sentence 
of  Divine  condemnation.  The  proud  queen  of  the  seas  was  to  be  smitten  and  deposed, 
not  only  because  of  her  luxury,  pride,  and  idolatry,  but  especially  because  of  her 
jealousy  and  malevolence  towards  the  beloved  and  chosen  city  of  Jehovah. 

I.  The  fact  upon  which  this  jealousy  was  based,  i.e.  the  fobmbe  pbospbbitt 
OP  Jerusalem.  According  to  the  poetical  language  of  the  prophet,  Jerusalem  had 
been  "  the  gate  of  the  peoples."  In  the  reign  of  Solomon  especially,  and  to  some 
extent  subsequently,  the  metropolis  of  the  Jewish  people  had  been  an  emporium  of 
commerce.  Its  situation  in  some  degree  fitted  it  to  be  the  centre  of  communication 
between  the  great  Eastern  countries,  and  Egypt  on  the  south,  and  the  Mediterranean 
and  its  traffic  Westwards.  We  are  not  accustomed  to  think  of  Jerusalem  in  this  light; 
but  this  verse  in  Ezekiel's  prophecies  brings  before  our  minds  the  unquestionable  fact 
that  there  was  a  time  when  this  city  was  a  mart  in  which  the  surrounding  nations 
were  wont  to  exchange  their  produce  and  their  commodities. 

IT.  The  BBJOioisa  to  which  this  jealousy  led,  i.e.  m  the  downfall  of 
Jebusalem.  "  She  is  broken,"  was  the  exulting  exclamation  of  Tyre  upon  beholding 
the  distress  of  her  rival.  That  Jerusalem  deserved  her  fate  there  is  no  room  for  doubt- 
ing; yet  it  was  not  generous  in  Tyre  thus  to  triumph  over  the  misfortunes  and 
calamities  of  her  neighbour.  The  wealth  and  prosperity  of  the  Jewish  capital  was 
about  to  end;  the  days  of  her  glory  were  over ;  her  streets  were  to  be  forsaken ;  the 
caravans  of  the  merchants  were  no  more  to  thread  their  way  through  the  proud  gates 
of  the  city.     And  in  this  change,  in  these  disasters,  Tyre  rejoiced. 

III.  The  hope  with  which  this  jealousy  was  associated,  i.e.  the  extension  of 
the  pkosperity  of  Tyre.  The  Phoenician  city  anticipated  that  she  would  gain  what 
Jerusalem  was  about  to  lose :  "  I  shall  be  replenished,  now  that  she  is  laid  waste." 
The  greatness,  opulence,  and  renown  of  Tyre  were  such  that  it  seems  scarcely  cre- 
dible that  her  prosperity  could  be  affected  by  anything  which  could  happen  to  a  small 
and  inland  capital  such  as  Jerusalem.  Yet  it  is  evident  that  the  Tyrian  spirit  was  a 
spirit  of  selfishness,  exclusiveness,  and  grasping.  Nothing  was  too  great  for  Tyre's 
ambition,  nothing  too  small  to  be  beneath  her  notice  and  cupidity. 

IV.  The  meanness  which  this  jealousy  revealed.  In  what  follows  Ezekiel 
displays  the  pomp,  splendour,  and  magnificence  of  the  great  seaport  of  Phoenicia;  it  ia 
strange  that  he  should  put  in  the  forefront  of  his  address  to  Tyre  this  imputation  of 
littleness.  There  is  a  reason  for  this ;  it  may  be  that  the  prophet  spoke,  not  only  as  a 
patriot  who  resented  Tyre's  jealousy,  but  as  a  religious  teaclier  for  whom  moral  distinc- 
tions were  all-important,  and  for  whom  a  moral  fault  was  of  more  consequence  than  all 
material  splendour. 

V.  The  displeasure  which  this  jealousy  excited  in  the  mind  of  the  Dfvinb 
Kino  and  Judge.  "  I,"  says  God — "  I  am  against  thee,  0  Tyre  I "  The  city  which 
had  envied  and  hated  his  own  Jerusalem,  the  seat  of  his  worship,  and  the  metropolis  of 
his  chosen ;  the  city  which  was  pained  by  Jerusalem's  prosperity,  and  which  rejoiced  in 
Jerusalem's  fall, — incurred  the  indignation  as  well  as  the  disapproval  of  the  Most  High. 
For  dispositions  were  revealed  discreditable  to  human  nature,  and  repugnant  to  Divine 
purity.    Because  Tyre  was  against  Jerusalem,  the  Lord  God  was  against  Tyre. — T. 

Vers.  3 — 6. — The  fate  of  Tyre.  From  such  obscure  peoples  as  the  Ammonites, 
Moabites,  and  Edomites,  who — except  for  their  occasional  association  with  Israel — are 
quite  aside  from  the  world's  history,  the  prophet  passes  to  deal  with  Tyre,  one  ai  the 


74  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxvi  1— 21. 

greatest  and  most  commanding  cities  whose  deeds  and  fame  adorn  the  annals  of  man- 
kind. The  Ruler  of  men  does  not,  indeed,  allow  the  meanest  to  defy  his  authority  with 
impunity ;  his  sway  extends  to  the  most  insignificant  of  peoples,  of  tribes.  But  on  the 
other  hand,  the  proudest  and  the  mightiest  are  subject  to  his  control,  and,  when 
rebellious  and  defiant,  must  feel  the  weight  of  his  irresistible  hand. 

I.  The:  qreatkesb  of  Ttbe.  The  elements  of  this  greatness,  the  causes  which 
conspired  to  produce  it,  were  many  and  various.  There  may  be  noticed :  1.  Its  com- 
manding maritime  situation.  Partly  upon  a  rook,  partly  upon  the  mainland.  Tyre 
sat — a  queen.  To  the  east,  the  north,  the  south,  were  countriei  which  poured  their 
produce  into  the  PhoBnioian  port ;  before  her,  to  the  west,  were  the  waters  of  the  great 
sea,  upon  whose  shores  lay  the  great  states  and  cities  of  the  ancient  world.  Tyre  was 
thus  the  highway  of  the  nations.  2.  Its  commerce.  This  was  carried  on  with  all  the 
known  countries  accessible  to  the  Tyrian  fleets.  Her  supremacy  upon  the  sea  gave 
Tyre  a  foremost  position  among  the  nations ;  her  adventurous  mariners  not  only  visited 
every  port  of  the  Mediterranean,  they  passed  the  Pillars  of  Hercules,  and  traded  with 
"  the  islands  of  the  West."  3.  Its  wealth.  Every  nation  pMd  tribute  to  Tyre.  The 
exchange,  the  mart,  of  the  world,  it  acquired  and  retained  riches  scarcely  equalled. 
4.  Its  splendour — such  as  is  described  by  Ezekiel — was  the  natural  result  of  the 
opulence  of  its  enterprising  merchants  and  sea-captains.  6.  Its  political  power  was  out 
of  all  proportion  to  its  territory,  its  population ;  its  alliance  was  sought,  and  its  hostility 
was  dreaded. 

II.  The  ekemies  op  Ttbe.  These  were  many  and  formidable.  It  is  a  sad  symptom 
of  human  depravity  that  unusual  prosperity  should  excite  general  dislike,  jealousy, 
envy,  and  ill  will.  "  Many  nations  came  up  against  Tyre,  as  the  sea  causeth  his  waves 
to  come  up."  But  sume  of  these  adversaries  Tyre  could  treat  with  derision  or  con- 
tempt. This  was  not  so,  however,  with  Babylon.  A  different  type  of  civilization  and 
national  life  was  no  doubt  exhibited  in  the  great  kingdom  of  the  East ;  but  the  popu- 
lation and  armies  of  Babylonia  were  enormous,  and  the  resources  of  the  kingdom  all 
but  inexhaustible.  When  the  King  of  Babylon  turned  his  arms  against  Tyre,  brave 
and  powerful  as  was  the  regal  city  by  the  sea,  there  was  no  disguising  the  fact  that  the 
time  of  trial  and  of  danger  had  come. 

III.  The  siege  and  conquest  of  Tyre.  It  is  matter  of  history  that  the  prophet's 
predictions  were  fulfilled.  Nebuchadnezzar  King  of  Babylon  came  up  against  Tyre, 
and,  notwithstanding  its  boasted  impregnability,  laid  siege  to  it,  and  directed  against  it 
all  the  vast  military  resources  of  his  kingdom.  For  long  years  the  siege  was  main- 
tained. The  besieged,  having  open  communication  by  sea,  were  able  to  withstand  the 
assaults  of  the  entmy ;  and  it  was  only  the  patience  and  indomitable  perseverance  of 
the  Babylonians  that  gave  them  the  final  victory. 

IV.  The  destetjotion  and  desolation  of  Tyeb.  A  more  striking  and  detailed 
prediction  than  this  was  never  uttered ;  and  never  was  prediction  more  strikingly  and 
literally  fulfilled.  The  downfall  of  Tyre  was  complete.  The  walls  and  towers  of  the 
city  were  broken  down.  The  rock  upon  which  she  stood— a  stronghold  of  defiance — 
was  left  bare  and  desolate.  The  nets  of  the  solitary  fisher  were  spread  where  magnifi- 
cence and  revelry  had  reigned.  Tyre  became  a  spoil  to  the  nations.  Her  dependencies 
were  vanquished  and  destroyed  with  her ;  in  her  they  had  trusted,  in  her  favour  they 
had  basked,  and  in  her  ruin  they  were  overwhelmed.  The  destruction  and  desolation 
were  in  awful  contrast  to  the  light  and  glory,  the  splendour  and  power,  of  bygone  days. 

Application.  The  time  of  national  greatness  and  prosperity  is  to  any  people  a  time 
of  trial.  Then  especially  does  it  behove  a  nation  to  beware  of  pride  and  self-confidence. 
For  the  rebellious,  contumacious,  and  ungodly  there  is  assuredly  retribution  prepared. 
The  King  of  all  is  God  of  hosts,  and  he  never  wants  means  and  agencies  to  carry  out  his 
own  righteous  and  judicial  purposes.  Resistance  to  Qod  is  vain ;  it  can  last  but  for  a 
short  time.    And  every  nation  must  learn  that  the  Lord  is  God  alime. — T. 

Vers.  7 — 14. — The  hesieging  of  Tyre.  The  fate  foretold  for  the  famous  city  is  here 
related,  so  to  speak,  beforehand,  with  singular  copiousness  and  exactness  of  detail. 

1.  The  enemy — the  King  of  Babylon.  Tyre  had  many  foes,  but  at  most  of  them 
■he  could  afford  to  laugh,  for  they  had  no  power  to  carry  their  hostility  into  effect. 
But  Nebuchadnezzar,  the  king  of  kings,  was  an  enemy  that  none  could  despise.    Hi? 


OH.  XXVI  1—21.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  76 

power  and  his  resources  were  such  as  to  render  him  formidable  even  to  the  mightiest. 
Flu.-hed  with  previous  successes,  confident  in  the  irresistible  force  of  his  aims,  thii 
puissant  monarch,  in  unconscious  obedience  to  Divine  behests,  turaed  his  sword  against 
the  proud  mistress  of  the  seas. 

IL.  The  hostile  army  and  the  appabatus  of  wab.  Ezekiel  describes,  with  the 
accuracy  and  minuteness  of  one  who  beheld  it,  the  force  which  the  King  of  Babylon 
directed  against  Tyre.  We  see  the  dreaded  conqueror  of  the  nations  advance  from  the 
north-east  "  with  horses,  and  with  chariots,  and  with  horsemen,  and  a  company  of 
much  people."  The  undertaking  was  only  possible  to  a  power  which  commanded 
abundance  of  military  resources,  and  which  was  able  to  bring  up  successive  reinforce- 
ments, and  to  continue  warlike  operations  through  the  changing  fortunes  and  the  long 
delays  often  incident  to  ancient  campaigns.  AH  that  was  neoes.-^ary  for  his  purpose, 
Nebuchadnezzar  knew,  before  he  commenced  operations,  that  he  could  command. 

III.  The  siege.  The  several  stages  of  this  enterprise  are  described  as  by  an  eye- 
witness. First,  engagements  take  place  with  the  neighbouring  powers  dependent  upon 
and  in  alliance  with  Tyre.  These  are  de(eated,  and  their  opposition  is  subdued.  Then 
forts  are  constructftd  and  a  mount  is  raised  from  which  the  besiegers  can  direct  their 
attack  against  the  beleaguered  city.  Further,  battering-engines  are  brought  forward 
to  play  against  the  walls,  and  the  towers  are  assaulted  by  the  battle-axes  of  the 
besiegers.  The  dust  raised  by  the  galloping  horses  marks  where  the  cavalry  repel  the 
sally  from  the  garrison.  The  sights  of  warfare  rise  before  the  eye,  its  sounds  salute 
anil  deafen  the  ear.  Through  long  years  these  military  manoeuvres  go  forward  with 
changing  fortune ;  yet  leaving  the  city  weaker  and  less  able,  even  with  the  open  com- 
munication seawards,  to  sustain  the  siege. 

IV.  The  assault,  conquest,  and  subjugation.  At  length  the  fatal  breach  is  made 
in  the  city  wall,  and  we  seem  to  see  the  victorious  army  rush  forward  to  overpower  the 
gallant  but  now  disheartened  defenders.  The  walls  shake  at  the  noise  of  the  horse- 
men, the  waggons,  and  the  chariots,  as  the  conquerors  pour  into  the  streets  of  the  city. 
The  conquering  troops,  mad  with  long-delayed  success,  ride  over  and  cut  down  every 
armed  man  they  meet,  and  even  slay  the  defeuceless  inhabitants  with  the  sword.  The 
famous  c.ty,  which  had  boasted  itself  invincible  and  impregnable,  is  taken  and  occupied 
by  the  Babylonian  forces. 

V.  The  spoiling  and  destruction.  The  riches  and  merchandise  fall  a  prey  into 
the  hands  of  the  victors,  who  are  satiated  with  booty.  The  monuments  of  Tyrian 
pride  and  grandeur  are  levelled  in  the  dust.  The  fortifications  are  demolished,  the 
pleasant  houses,  luxurious  abodes  of  merchant-princes,  are  pulled  down,  and  the  stone 
and  timber  are  flung  into  the  sea.  Precious  goods  are  appropriated  or  wantonly 
destroyed.     As  ever  in  warfare,  so  here,  the  spoils  go  to  the  conquerors.     Vcb  victis! 

VI.  The  desolation  and  waste.  In  those  palaces  and  halls  were  once  heard  the 
songs  of  joy  and  of  love,  of  feasting  and  of  mirth — the  strains  of  music  vibrating  from 
harp  and  lyre,  and  breathing  from  the  tuneful  flute.  Now  a  mournful  silence  reigns, 
broken  only  by  the  cry  of  the  sea-bird  or  the  plash  of  the  wind-smitten  waves.  In 
those  harbours  rode  but  lately  the  fleets  laden  with  the  commerce  of  the  world,  and 
Tyrian  merchants  gazed  with  pride  upon  their  noble  and  richly  laden  argosies.  Now 
the  fisherman  spreads  his  nets  upon  the  deserted  rocks,  and  looks  wistfully  over  the 
forsaken  roadsteads  and  the  waste  of  waters  where  no  sail  curves  before  the  wind  or 
glitters  in  the  sunshine.  "  The  Lord  has  spoken  it,"  and  what  he  has  said  has  come 
to  pass.  The  Tyrian  sidendour  and  opulence  were  of  this  world,  and  they  are  no 
more.     Sic  transit  gloria  mundi  I — T. 

Vers.  15 — 21. — Qlory  departed.  A  more  imaginative  and  pathetic  picture  than  that 
painted  in  these  words  will  scarcely  be  found  in  revelation,  or  indeed  in  all  literature. 
The  anticipation  of  Tyre's  destruction  seems  to  have  awakened  all  the  poetry  of  the 
prophet's  nature.  And  no  wonder;  for  never  was  a  contrast  more  marked  and  more 
significant  than  that  between  Tyre  in  its  grandeur  and  Tyre  in  its  desolation.  The 
isles  shake  with  the  resounding  crash  of  the  city's  fall.  The  groans  of  the  wounded 
and  the  dying  are  heard  afar.  Princes  exchange  their  splendour  for  trembling  and 
astonishment.  The  city  strong  in  the  sea  has  fallen  weak  and  helpless  in  the  day  of 
Divine  judgment.    And  the  seamen  who  were  Tyre's  glory  and  security  are  no  more 


76  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PBOPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxvL  1— 21 

to  be  found.  Terror  and  trembling  are  upon  those  who  dwell  in  the  islands  of  the 
deep.  Where  Tyre  reared  herself  in  opulence,  grandeur,  and  pride,  the  sea  breaks  upon 
the  deserted  rocks,  and  upon  the  ruins  strewn  in  disorder  by  the  lonely  shore.  The 
waters  engulf  the  merchants,  the  seafaring  men,  and  all  those  who  minister  to  the  pomp 
and  pleasures  of  a  wealthy  and  luxurious  city.  Tyre  is  as  though  it  had  not  been ;  men 
seek  the  city,  and  it  is  not  found. 

I.  The  obibf  and  lamentation  of  those  who  shabbd  in  the  city's  pbobpebity 
AND  gbeatnebs,  and  WHO  LOSE  AND  SUFFER  BY  ITS  FALL.  Somc  Survived  the  destruc- 
tion of  Tyre,  to  cherish  the  memory  of  days  of  wealth  and  feasting,  haughtiness  and 
boasting.  Some  escaped  with  life,  but  with  the  loss  of  all  which  to  them  made  life 
precious.  And  others,  who  had  brought  their  merchandise  to  the  great  Phoenician 
emporium,  now  found  no  market  for  the  commodities  they  produced.  For  all  such 
material  loss  gave  sincerity  and  even  bitterness  to  their  mourning  and  woe. 

U.  The  geief  and  lamentation  of  those  who  witnessed  the  city's  destedotion, 

AND   who   WEBB   IMPRESSED   AND  APPALLED   BY  THE   BPEOTAOLB.      Bzekiel  himself  WaS 

one  of  these.  Even  the  conquerors  could  scarcely  fail  to  feel  the  pathos  of  the  situation, 
and  to  cherish  some  sympathy  for  the  city  whose  splendour  and  power  their  arms  had 
brought  to  an  end.  The  ruin  of  Tyre  was  a  loss  to  the  nations  of  the  world.  Embody- 
ing, as  the'  city  did,  the  world-spirit,  civic  and  commercial  greatness,  it  must  needs 
have  awakened  poignant  feelings  of  desolation  in  the  hearts  of  many  who  had  no 
personal,  material  interest  in  Tyrian  commerce.  The  lesson  of  the  frailty  and  perish- 
ableness  of  earthly  greatness,  even  if  its  moral  side  was  missed,  could  not  but  impress 
the  historical  imagination. 

III.  The  grief  and  lamentation  of  those  who  in  afteb-timb  inquibb  fob 

THE    city    whose   GREATNESS    AND    SPLBNDOUB    ABE    BECOEDED    IN   TRADITION   AND    IN 

HISTORY.  The  traveller  who,  impelled  by  curiosity  or  by  historical  interest,  seeks  for 
the  site  of  Tyre  the  magniflcent,  learns  that  every  trace  of  the  city  has  vanished. 
Some  ruined,  deserted  cities,  famous  in  story,  leave  behind  them  some  ruin,  some 
memorial,  to  which  imagination  may  attach  the  traditions  of  the  past.  But  for  Tyre 
the  traveller  can  only  inquire  from  the  waves  that  beat  upon  the  shore,  from  the  rocks 
where  the  fishermen  spread  their  nets.  "  Though  thou  be  sought  for,  yet  shalt  thou 
never  be  found  again,  saith  the  Lord  God." 

IV.  The  temporary  and  departed  bplendodrs  of  earth  suggest  bt  contrast 
ETBBNAL  AND  UNFADING  GLORY.  Who  Can  contemplate  the  ruin  of  such  a  city  as 
Tyre  without  being  reminded  of  "the  city  which  hath  foundations,  whose  Builder  and 
Maker  is  God  "  ?  which  the  glory  of  God  illumines  with  nightless  splendour,  and  into 
which  are  brought  the  glory  and  honour  of  the  nations  ? — T. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — Collision  letween  man's  plans  and  Qo6Ps  plans.  Appearance  is  never 
a  safe  guide.  It  might  seem  to  a  carnal  eye  as  if  the  downfall  of  Israel  would  bring 
worldly  advantage  to  Tyre.  But  that  prospect  was  soon  overcast.  Eighteous  obedience 
is  the  only  safe  guide  to  men.  The  path  may  be,  for  a  time,  rough  aud  dark,  yet  it 
will  bring  us  into  a  paradise  of  light. 

I.  National  selfishness  is  sin.  Nations  have  their  vices  as  well  as  individual 
persons.  If  the  leaders  of  a  nation  cherish  evil  purposes  or  pursue  evil  plans,  unchecked 
by  the  subjects  of  the  realm,  the  whole  nation  contracts  guilt.  Yet  if  one  person  or 
more,  moved  by  better  feelings,  discountenances  the  national  dee3,  that  person  is 
exculpated  from  the  common  blame,  and  shall  be  owned  by  God.  The  protection  of 
Noah  and  his  family,  of  Lot  and  his  daughters,  amid  the  general  destruction,  proves 
the  fatherly  caie  of  God  for  individuals.  The  single  grain  in  a  heap  of  chaff  shall  be 
cared  for  by  God. 

II.  An  offence  done  to  a  nation  is  an  offence  against  God.  Tyre  had  rejoiced 
in  Jerusalem's  overthrow.  Instead  of  lamenting  Israel's  sins,  the  people  of  Tyre  had 
room  only  for  one  thought — their  own  selfish  advantage.  The  trade  of  Jerusalem  would 
flow  to  Tyre.  This  calamity  in  Israel  would  bring  a  talent  or  two  of  gold  into  the 
pockets  of  Tyrian  traders.  What  base  ground  for  jubilation  1  No  matter  what  suffer- 
ing or  humiliation  the  Jews  may  endure.  Tyre  would  add  to  the  smart  by  taunt  and 
triumph.  But  God  is  not  deaf.  Into  his  ears  every  sound  of  selfish  boasting  came. 
He  weighs  every  thought  and  word  of  man  in  his  balances  of  justice.    That  selfish 


OH.  xxn.  1— 21.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZBKIBL.  Tl 

taunt  will  not  float  idly  on  the  summer  gale.  It  is  a  grief  to  Jetovah,  and  he  will 
repay.  "The  Lord  executeth  righteousness  and  judgment  for  all  that  are  oppressed." 
In  all  human  afifairs,  individual  or  national,  God  has  a  real  interest.  He  will  never  be 
left  out  of  the  account. 

III.  Selfish  plans  abb  doomed  to  beversb.  Tyre  had  said, "  I  shall  be  replenished." 
God  said,  "  I  will  make  her  like  the  top  of  a  rock."  Tyre  had  "  reckoned  without  her 
host."  Instead  of  security,  she  was  to  be  inundated  with  invasion.  Instead  of  wealth, 
there  should  be  want.  Instead  of  glory,  desolation.  Her  selfish  hope  should  burst  like 
•  bubble.  The  golden  eggs  she  expected  soon  to  be  hatched  proved  to  be  the  eggs  of  a 
cockatrice.  Selfish  greed  is  a  bad  investment.  The  desire  to  promote  our  national 
Interests,  to  the  injury  of  another  nation,  is  not  patriotism ;  it  is  selfish  envy  and  piide. 
Triumph  over  another's  fall  is  base,  is  diabolic. 

IV.  SEctTLAB  LOSSES  OFTEN  BRING  SEAL  aADT.  "  They  shall  know  that  I  am  the 
Lord."  This  is  a  gain  of  the  noblest  kind — a  gain  that  is  abiding  and  permanent. 
Such  knowledge  is  better  than  rubies.  The  bulk  ot  men  will  not  learn  this  lesson  in 
the  day  of  prosperity,  but  in  the  cloudy  days  of  adversity,  when  all  earthly  good  has 
vanished,  the  lesson  stands  out  clearly  before  their  eyes.  Some  earthly  sciences  are 
best  learnt  in  the  dark.  This  knowledge  of  God  is  best  learnt  in  the  dark  hour  of 
affliction.  For  when  all  human  calculations  have  failed,  and  all  human  plans  have 
collapsed,  men  are  compelled  to  feel  that  an  unseen  hand  has  been  working,  an  unseen 
Being  has  been  presiding  in  their  affairs.    Of  a  truth,  "  the  Lord  reigneth." — D. 

Vers.  7 — 14. — A  miracle  of  foreknowledge.  False  prophets  discourse  only  in  general 
terms  and  in  ambiguous  language.  Their  announcements  may  have  the  most  contrary 
meanings.  At  best  they  are  happy  conjectures,  fortunate  guesses.  But  the  prophecies 
of  Scripture  are  like  sunlight  compared  with  such  a  phosphorescent  flame.  The  clear- 
ness and  fulness  of  these  prophetic  utterances  can  be  accounted  for  only  as  a  revelation 
from  the  omniscient  God. 

I.  Divine  predictions  abb  always  biqhteous  in  their  substance.  The  predic- 
tions of  pretentious  men  are  usually  trivia! — the  effect  of  a  prurient  curiosity.  God's 
revelations  of  the  future  are  always  concerned  in  the  rebuke  of  sin  and  in  the  furtherance 
of  righteousness.  As  in  the  manufacture  of  cordage,  in  our  Gbvernment  arsenals  a 
worsted  thread  of  a  distinct  colour  runs  through  every  yard  of  rope,  so  through  all 
God's  dealings  with  men  this  principle  of  righteousness  is  ever  prominent.  What  does 
not  serve  a  righteous  end  is  not  of  God. 

II.  Divine  pebdigtions  aeb  olbab  in  theib  annoxtncements.  There  is  no 
ambiguity,  no  double  meaning,  here.  No  one  is  left  in  doubt  whether  the  event  to 
happen  is  to  be  favourable  or  unfavourable.  No  one  is  left  in  doubt  what  place  or 
people  is  the  subject-matter  of  the  prophecy.  In  this  case  every  circumstance  ia 
narrated  with  as  much  minuteness  of  detail  as  if  it  were  a  piece  of  history  acted  before 
the  eye  of  the  speaker.  The  place  to  be  overthrown,  its  peculiar  situation  and  structure, 
its  former  greatness  and  splendour,  the  name  of  the  invader,  all  his  military  enginery 
and  tactics,  the  steps  by  which  he  should  proceed,  and  the  extent  of  his  triumph,  are 
announced  beforehand  with  a  clearness  and  definiteness  that  can  only  come  from  a 
superhuman  source.  The  contents  of  the  prophecy  are  often  so  unlikely  in  themselves 
that  no  human  foresight,  however  shrewd,  would  conceive  such  issues ;  and  the  fulfil- 
ment of  such  improbable  predictions  most  plainly  indicate  the  operation  of  a  Divine 
mind. 

III.  Divine  pbedictions  abb  cektain  in  their  ruLFiLMENT.  "I  the  Lord  have 
spoken  it,  saith  the  Lord."  The  true  prophet  of  Jehovah  is  modest  and  -self-oblivious. 
He  does  not  speak  in  his  own  name.  He  keeps  himself  in  the  background.  His  object 
il  to  exalt  his  Master  and  to  gain  homage  for  him.  The  predictions  of  God  always  take 
effect.  For  with  God  there  is  no  future.  He  sees  things  distant  as  though  they  were 
near.  Looking  along  the  vista  of  ages,  he  perceives  how  every  event  unfolds  from  pre- 
ceding event  The  history  of  men  and  of  nations  is,  to  his  eye,  drawn  out  in  long 
perspective.  And  his  word  is  the  mightiest  force  in  the  universe.  "  He  spake,  and  it 
was  done;"  "By  the  word  of  the  Lord  were  the  heavens  made ; "  "  By  the  breath  of 
bis  lips  shall  he  slay  the  wicked." 

IV.  Divine  predictions  abb  merciful  in  theib  intentions.    Wherefore  did  God 


78  THE   BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxvi.  1—21. 

declare  beforehand  tUs  coming  sufFerinc;  and  disaster?  Was  it  not  enough  to  endure 
the  calamity  when  the  destined  hour  came?  As  the  main  design  was  to  promote 
righteousness,  this  shall  be  done,  if  possible,  in  a  way  of  mercy.  The  prediction  would 
serve  to  instruct  and  console  the  Jews  in  captivity.  It  would  be  beneficial  for  them  to 
be  convinced  that  Jehovah  ruled  in  all  the  affairs  of  men.  If  the  prophecy  reached  the 
ears  of  the  King  of  Babylon,  it  would  serve  a  good  purpose  for  him  to  know  that  he  was 
a  servant  of  the  King  of  heaven,  that  his  army  was  under  the  control  of  Grod,  and  that 
the  success  of  his  military  expeditions  depended  on  the  good  will  of  Jehovah.  And  if 
the  prophecy  should  be  repeated  in  the  ears  of  the  Tyrians,  who  can  tell  that  some 
among  them  may  repent  and  opportunely  escape  from  the  catastrophe?  To  fore- 
shadow the  dread  event  is  an  act  of  kindness,  which  the  humble  and  teachable  would 
appreciate. — D. 

Vers.  15 — 21. — National  disaster  lecomes  a  public  lesson.  The  world  of  men  is  one, 
although  nationalities  are  many.  There  is  a  thread  of  unity  on  which  the  separate 
jewels  of  humanity  are  strung.     What  affects  one  nffects,  in  some  measure,  the  whole. 

I.  There  is  mutual  inteedependencb  op  nations.  Nations,  like  individuals,  have 
been  incarnations  of  selfishness.  They  have  tried  to  aggrandize  for  self  alone,  but  they 
have  failed,  and  in  most  cases  the  failure  has  been  a  disaster.  In  respect  to  material 
property  obtained  through  commerce,  it  is  emphatically  true  that  the  prosperity  must 
he  shared  by  others.  God  will  not  allow  any  nation  to  retain  every  particle  of  its  riches 
within  itself.  To  be  most  prosperous,  it  must  make  others  partakers  of  its  wealth.  The 
real  welfare  of  one  nation  may  be  the  welfare  of  all.    Stable  prosperity  is  difi'iisive. 

II.  Material  prosperity  is  poweb.  It  brings  position,  honour,  and  extensive 
influence.  The  isles  and  lands  with  which  Tyre  traded  held  her  in  high  repute. 
Many  of  the  traders  in  other  parts  grew  rich,  gained  powerful  influence,  became  in  their 
circles  princes,  and  sat  upon  thrones.  It  is  power,  less  potent  than  knowledge — power 
of  an  inferior  sort — yet  it  is  a  perceptible  power.  It  gives  leisure  fot  investigation  and 
discovery.  It  can  purchase  stores  of  good.  It  can  be  converted  into  various  forms  of 
utility. 

III.  Material  prosperity  is  very  insecure.  It  often  awakens  the  envy  and  the 
cupidity  of  others.  It  germinates  pride  in  its  possessor,  and  not  pride  only,  but  also 
arrogance  and  oppressiveness.  In  the  natural  course  of  things  reaction  appears.  The 
oppressed  classes  combine  and  rise.  Ofi'ence  given  to  another  nation  in  a  spirit  of  over- 
bearing arrogance  awakens  resentment,  provokes  vengeance.  The  wealthy  nation  is 
over-confident  in  its  security  and  in  its  natural  defences.  But  a  little  shrewdness  or 
contrivance  undermines  every  natural  defence,  or  else  confidence  in  men  disappoints, 
and  in  an  hour  the  fancied  security  is  dissipated. 

IV.  The  fall  of  one  nation  is  a  grief  to  many  nations.  "  They  shall  take  up  a 
lamentation  for  thee,  and  say.  How  art  thou  destroyed,  that  wast  inhabited  of  seafaring 
men,  the  renowned  city ! "  Some  selfish  peoples  would  rejoice  that  a  rival  and  a 
menace  was  overthrown.  But  others  would  be  plunged  into  profound  grief.  Their 
traffic  would  be  diminished,  perhaps  destroyed.  Still  worse,  if  Tyre,  so  mighty,  so 
well-defended,  be  overthrown,  what  security  have  we?  The  downfall  of  Tyre  shook 
the  foundations  of  other  empires,  shook  the  hearts  of  many  thoughtful  men.  It  was 
evident  that  every  kind  of  material  defence  was  a  broken  reed. 

V.  True  life  is  the  only  true  glory.  "  I  shall  set  glory  in  the  land  of  the  living." 
The  only  {lermanent  life  is  a  righteous  life.  Other  life  is  ephemeral.  This  abides,  this 
is  eternal.  Bighteousness  not  only  "  exalts  a  nation,"  it  consolidates  and  establishes  it 
also.  The  "  land  of  the  living  "  is  the  empire  of  righteousness — the  true  holy  land. 
The  kingdom  which  is  built  on  righteous  principles  is  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  Every 
other  kingdom  has  wood  and  hay  and  stubble  intermixed  with  the  gold  and  silver  of 
Bterling  goodness.  So  far  as  righteous  life  prevails  in  any  land  on  earth,  so  far  will  true 
and  permanent  glory  abide  there.  All  other  foundations,  all  other  defence,  can  and 
will  be  shaken. — D. 

Vers.  1 — 21. — ITie  sin  and  doom  of  Tyre.  "  And  it  came  to  pass  in  the  eleventh 
year,  in  the  first  day  of  the  month,  that  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  me,  say- 
ing,"  etc. 


OH.  XXVI.  1—21.]    THE   BOOK  OP  THE  PKOPHET   EZEKIEL.  79 

I.  The  sin  of  Tyre.  "Son  of  man,  because  that  Tyre  hath  said  against  Jerusalem, 
Aha !  she  is  broken  that  was  the  gate  of  the  peoples ;  she  is  turned  unto  me :  I  shall  be 
replenished,  now  that  she  is  laid  waste."  The  sin  which  is  here  charged  against  Tyre 
is  extreme  and  cruel  selfishness.  There  is  no  evidence  in  this  chapter  that  the  Tyrians 
were  animated  by  any  hostile  feelin^iS  towards  the  Jews,  as  the  Ammonites,  Edomites, 
and  Philistines  were.  But  Tyre  was  a  great  and  prosperous  commercial  city,  and  the 
inhabitants  thereof  rejoiced  in  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  because  they  thought  that 
they  should  profit  thereby.  This  is  made  quite  clear  in  the  verse  before  us.  The 
Tyrians  are  represented  as  speaking  of  Jerusalem  as  "  she  that  was  the  gate  of  the 
peoples."  The  plural  expresses  the  fact,  says  the '  Speaker's  Commentary,' "  that  many 
peoples  passed  through  Jerusalem  as  the  central  place  on  the  highway  of  commerce. 
This  was  eminently  the  case  in  the  reign  of  Solomon,  when  for  the  time  Jerusalem 
became  the  mart  to  which  was  gathered  the  trade  of  India  and  of  the  far  East.  The 
fame  of  its  early  greatness  as  the  emporium  of  Eastern  commerce  still  clung  to  Jerusalem, 
and  this  city,  even  in  decadence,  kept  up  enough  of  its  original  trade  to  be  viewed  with 
jealousy  by  Tyre,  who  owed  her  greatness  to  the  same  cause,  and  ia  the  true  spirit  of 
mercantile  competition  exulted  in  the  thought  that  the  trade  of  Jerusalem  would  now 
be  diverted  into  her  markets."  Their  greed  of  gain  had  rendered  them  unfeeling  and 
even  cruel  in  their  attitude  towards  their  suffering  neighbours,  with  whom  in  former 
times  they  had  been  in  friendly  relations.  They  rejoiced  at  the  calamity  of  others 
because  they  believed  it  would  contribute  to  their  prosperity.  They  exulted  in  the 
downfall  of  others  if  it  was  likely  to  promote  their  own  rise.  This  spirit  is  unbrothevly, 
selfish,  mean,  cruel.  It  is  utterly  opposed  to  the  Divine  will,  and  awakens  the  stem 
displeasure  of  the  Almighty.  Here  is  solemn  admonition  to  persons,  companies, 
societies,  and  nations,  who  would  secure  prosperity  without  regarding  the  means  which 
they  employ  to  do  so.  Are  there  not  many  to-day  who  care  not  who  is  impoverished 
if  only  they  are  enriched,  who  suffers  if  only  they  succeed,  or  who  sinks  provided  that 
they  rise  ?  However  their  spirit  may  be  tolerated  or  even  approved  by  men,  it  is 
abhorrent  unto  God. 

II.  The  judgment  op  God.  1.  Its  Author,  "Therefore  thus  saith  the  Lord  God; 
Behold,  I  am  against  thee,  0  Tyre,  and  will  cause  many  nations  to  come  up  against 
thee,  as  the  sea  causeth  his  waves  to  come  up."  God  himself  in  his  iTovidence  brought 
upon  Tyre  the  punishment  of  her  extreme  selfishness  and  cruel  boastings  against  fallen 
Jerusalem.  Ill  fares  it  with  any  city  which  has  the  Lord  against  it.  2.  Its  instru- 
ments. "1  will  cause  many  nations  to  come  up  aa;ainst  thee  ...  I  will  bring  upon 
Tyre  Nebuchadnezzar  King  of  Babylon,"  etc.  (ver.  7).  Nebuchadnezzir  had  conquered 
many  kingdoms.  He  was  a  "  king  of  kings,"  and  the  army  which  he  led  against  Tyre 
was  recruited  from  "  many  nations."  He  was  the  first  instrument  employed  by  God 
to  punish  Tyre  for  her  sin.  And  ages  afterwards,  Alexander  and  his  forces  inflicted 
terrible  sufferings  and  losses  upon  the  people  of  the  proud  city.  3.  Its  nature.  Several 
features  of  the  punishment  of  Tyre  are  exhibited  by  the  prophet.  (1)  Siege.  "  They 
shall  destroy  the  walls  of  Tyre,  and  break  down  her  towers  .  .  .  and  he  shall  make 
forts  against  thee,"  etc.  (vers.  8 — 10).  Nebuchadnezzar  besieged  insular  Tyre  foi 
thirteen  years.  Very  great  must  have  been  the  miseries  of  the  people  during  those 
weary  years.  (2)  Spoliation.  "  She  shall  become  a  spoil  of  the  nations  .  .  .  and  they 
shall  make  a  spoil  of  thy  riches,  and  make  a  prey  of  thy  merchandise,"  etc.  (ver.  12). 
The  riches  in  which  they  had  prided  themselves,  and  in  the  hope  of  the  increase  of 
which  they  had  exulted  in  the  downfall  of  Jerusalem,  would  be  seized  and  possessed  by 
others.  The  beautiful  houses  of  their  merchant-princes  would  be  destroyed  and  their 
city  ruined.  (3)  Slaughter.  "  Her  daughters  which  are  in  the  field  shall  be  slain  »ith 
the  sword  ...  he  shall  slay  thy  people  with  the  sword."  The  daughters  in  the  field 
are  the  cities  on  the  mainland  which  were  dependent  on  Tyre,  or  submitted  to  her 
supremacy,  with  special  reference,  perhaps,  to  Palsetyrus,  or  Old  Tyre,  "  the  suburb  of 
the  insular  Tyre,  standing  on  the  shore."  We  are  not  aware  of  any  record  of  the  extent 
of  the  slaughter  by  Nebuchadnezzar  and  his  army.  Probably  it  was  very  great.  When 
Alexander  besieged  Tyre,  fearful  was  the  slaughter  of  the  inhabitants  thereof.  "  Besides 
eight  thousand  men  slain  in  the  attack,  two  thousand  were  crucified  after  the  city  was 
taken  "  (Kitto).  (4)  Complete  and  irretrievable  overthrow.  "  They  shall  destroy  the 
walk  of  Tyre,  and  break  down  her  towers :  I  will  also  scrape  her  dust  from  her,  a»td 


80  THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PROPHET  EZEKIBL.    [oh.  xxvi.  1—21. 

make  her  a  bare  rook,"  etc.  (vers.  4,  5, 14, 19 — 21).  This  part  of  the  prophecy  was  not 
fully  accomplished  until  centuries  had  passed  away.  Nebuchadnezzar,  as  we  have  said, 
besieged  Tyre  for  thirteen  years.  He  would  be  able  soon  to  take  Palsetyrus,  i  n  the 
mainland,  which  was  dismantled,  if  not  entirely  destroyed,  by  him.  Whether  at  the 
end  of  the  thirteen  years  he  took  the  island-city  is  uncertain.  The  suggestions  of 
the  '  Speaker's  Commentary  '  on  the  point  seem  to  us  very  probably  correct :  "  Nebu- 
chadnezzar was  indeed  determined  not  to  leave  this  city,  once  the  vassal  of  the  Assyrian, 
independent,  and  persevered  until  Tyre  gave  in.  Nebuchadnezzar  may  then  have 
insisted  upon  his  right,  as  a  conqueror,  of  entering  the  island-city  with  his  army ;  but 
the  conquest  was  probably  barren  of  the  fruits  he  had  expected  so  far  as  spoil  was  con- 
cerned (cf.  ch.  xxix.  18),  and  Nebuchadnezzar,  having  asserted  his  majesty  by  reducing 
the  city  to  vassalai^e,  may  have  been,  content  not  to  push  matters  further,  and  have 
willingly  turned  his  forces  in  another  direction."  More  than  two  centuries  later,  Alex- 
ander besit-ged  Tyre.  At  that  time  the  city  "  was  completely  surrounded  by  prodigious 
walls,  the  loftiest  portion  of  which,  on  the  side  fronting  the  mainland,  reached  a  height 
of  not  less  than  a  hundred  and  fifty  feet."  The  island  on  which  it  was  built  was  nearly 
half  a  mile  from  the  mainland.  And  as  Alexander  had  no  fleet,  its  situation  made  his 
task  a  difBcult  one.  The  difiiculty  was  thus  overcome :  The  harbour  of  Tyre  to  the 
north  being  "  blockaded  by  the  Cyprians,  and  that  to  the  south  by  the  Phoenicians," 
afforded  Alexander  an  opportunity  for  constructing  the  enormous  mole,  or  breakwater, 
which  joined  the- island  to  the  mainland.  This  mole  was  two  hundred  feet  wide,  and 
was  composed  of  the  ruins  of  Palsetyrus,  the  stones  and  the  timber  and  the  dust  of 
which  were  thus  laid  in  the  midst  of  the  waters  (ver.  12).  Across  the  mole  Alexander 
marched  his  forces,  and  soon  made  himself  master  of  insular  Tyre.  Having  done  so, 
in  addition  to  the  ten  thousand  who  were  slain,  thirty  thousand  of  the  inhabitants, 
including  slaves,  free  women,  and  free  children,  were  sold  for  slaves.  But  even  after 
the  Chaldean  invasion  under  Nebuchadnezzar,  Tyre  "  never  regained  independence,  but 
was  great  and  wealthy  under  Persian,  Greek,  and  Boman  masters.  ...  It  was  never 
again  a  world-power,  capable  of  raising  itself  again  in  its  own  might  against  the  kingdom 
of  God.  In  the  present  condition  of  Tyre  we  note  the  fulfilment  of  Ezekiel's  predic- 
tions. In  A.D.  638  it  formed  part  of  the  conquests  of  Khalif  Omar,  who,  however,  dealt 
leniently  vrith  the  inhabitants,  and  the  city  for  many  years  enjoyed  a  moderate  degree 
of  prosperity.  The  ruin  of  Tyre  was  due  to  the  Sultan  of  Egypt,  who,  in  the  year 
A.D.  1291,  took  possession,  the  inhabitants  (who  were  Christians)  having  abandoned  it 
without  a  struggle.  The  Saracens  thereupon  laid  it  in  ruins,  and  did  not  allow  the 
former  inhabitants  to  return.  In  the  first  half  of  the  fourteenth  century  it  was  visited 
by  Sir  John  Mandeville,  who  found  it  in  that  state  of  desolation  in  which  it  has 
remained  ever  since  "  ('  Speaker's  Commentary ').  Of  modem  travellers  we  quote  the 
testimony  of  M.  E^nan  as  to  its  present  state :  "  No  great  city  which  has  played  so 
important  a  part  for  centuries  has  left  fewer  traces  than  Tyre.  Ezekiel  was  a  true 
prophet  when  he  said  of  Tyre,  •  They  shall  seek  for  thee,  and  thou  shalt  be  no  more ' 
(oh.  xxvi.  21).  A  traveller  who  was  not  informed  of  its  existence  might  pass  along  the 
whole  coast,  from  La  Kasmie  to  Bas-el-Ain,  without  being  aware  that  he  was  close  to  an 
ancient  city.  .  .  .  Tyre  is  now  the  ruin  of  a  town  built  with  ruins." 

III.  Thb  lamentation  fob  Ttbb.  (Vers.  15 — 18.)  1.  The  deep  and  widespread 
impression  made  iy  Tier  destruction.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  to  Tyre ;  Shall  not  the 
isles  shake  at  the  sound  of  thy  fall,"  etc.  ?  (ver.  15).  The  coasts  and  islands  of  tho 
Mediterranean  are  represented  as  shaking  at  the  fall  of  the  proud  city,  because  her  fall 
would  denote  the  instability  of  all  things.  When  Tyre  is  overthrown,  what  place  can 
be  deemed  secure  ?  2.  The  consternation  produced  ly  her  destruction.  "  Then  all  the 
princes  of  the  sea  shall  come  down  from  their  thrones,"  etc.  (ver.  16).  By  "  the  princes 
of  the  sea,"  we  should  probably  understand  the  chief  men  in  "  the  settlements  of  tha 
Phoenicians  in  the  Sidonian  and  Tyrian  period  along  the  various  coasts,  in  Cyprus, 
Ehodes,  Malta;  in  Spain,  Sicily,  Sardinia,"  etc.  These  are  represented  as  changing 
their  splendid  robes  for  the  garb  of  mourners,  as  coming  down  from  their  exalted  and 
luxurious  seats  and  sitting  upon  the  ground.  Persons  in  great  afSiction  or  sorrow 
are  frequently  represented  as  seated  or  prostrate  upon  the  ground  (of.  Job  ii.  8,  13 ; 
Isa.  iii.  26;  zlviL  1;  Lam.  ii.  10).  Shakespeare,  in  'King  John,'  makes  Constancft 
say — 


OH.  xxn.  1— 21.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIBL.  81 

"My  griefs  so  great. 
That  no  Bnpporter  but  the  huge  firm  earth 
Can  hold  it  up :  here  I  and  sorrow  sit ; 
Here  is  my  throne,  bid  kings  come  bow  to  it." 

These  great  men,  moreover,  were  seized  with  amazement  and  continual  trembling.  8. 
The  lamentation  awakened  by  her  destruction.  "  And  they  shall  take  up  a  lamentation 
for  thee,  and  say  to  thee,  How  art  thou  destroyed,"  etc.  I  Thus  would  the  fall  of  the 
prosperous  island-city  be  bewailed  by  neighbouring  peoples. 

CoNOLcsioir.  Certain  lessons  stand  out  with  impressive  clearness  and  force.  1.  The 
insecurity  of  worldly  greatness,  glory,  and  power.  2.  The  heinousness  of  the  tin  qf 
tdfishness.  3,  The  evanescence  <f  the  prosperity  which  is  attained  without  regard  to 
the  rights  or  interests  of  others. — ^W.  J. 

Vers.  2 — 4. — The  exultation  of  the  world  over  the  Church.  "  Son  of  man,  because 
that  Tyrus  hath  said  against  Jerusalem,  Ahal  she  is  broken  that  was  the  gate  of  the 
peoples,"  etc.  Tyre  is  viewed  by  the  prophet,  not  merely  in  its  literal  aspect,  but  also 
in  a  typical  one.  "  Tyre,  in  the  prophets,"  says  SchrSder,  "  comes  into  consideration, 
not  in  a  political  respect,  but  as  the  representative,  the  might,  of  the  world's  commerce, 
Jehovah  and  mammon  are  the  counterpart  to  Jerusalem  and  Tyre."  And  says  Heng- 
stenberg,  "  Along  with  Babylon  and  Egypt,  Tyre  was  then  the  most  glorious  concen- 
tration of  the  worldly  power.  In  the  queen  of  the  sea,  the  thought  of  the  vanity  of  all 
worldly  power  was  strikingly  exemplified.  'Hand-in-hand  with  this  thought  goes,  in 
Ezekiel,  that  of  the  indestructibleness  of  the  kingdom  of  God."  If,  then,  we  take  Tyre 
as  representing  the  world  with  its  riches  and  pomp  and  power,  and  Jerusalem  the 
Church,  the  text  gives  us  as  a  subject  the  exultation  of  the  world  over  the  Church. 
But  it  behoves  us  to  be  clear  as  to  what  we  are  to  understand  by  the  world — the  world 
that  is  antagonistic  to  the  Church.  It  is  neither  the  material  world,  nor  the  human 
world — the  world  of  men,  nor  our  worldly  or  secular  occupation.  Very  admirably  has 
F.  W.  Robertson,  on  1  John  ii.  15^17,  brought  out  the  meaning  of  the  world  which  is 
forbidden  to  Christians.  "  Now  to  define  what  worldliness  is.  Remark,  first,  that  it  is 
determined  by  the  spirit  of  a  life,  not  the  objects  with  which  the  life  is  conversant.  It 
is  not  the  '  flesh,"  nor  Ae  '  eye,'  nor  ' life,'  which  are  forbidden,  but  it  is  the  Imt  of  the 
flesh,  and  the  lust  of  the  eye,  and  the  pride  of  life.  .  .  .  Look  into  this  a  little  closer. 
The  lust  of  the  flesh.  Here  is  afiection  for  the  outward :  pleasure,  that  which  affects 
the  senses  only :  the  flesh,  that  enjoyment  wliich  comes  from  the  emotions  of  an  hour, 
be  it  coarse  or  be  it  refined.  The  pleasure  of  wine  or  the  pleasure  of  music,  so  far  as  it 
is  only  a  movement  of  the  flesh.  Again,  the  lust  of  the  eye.  Here  is  affection  for  the 
transient,  for  the  eye  can  only  gaze  on  form  and  colour;  and  these  are  things  that  do 
not  last.  Once  more,  the  pride  of  life.  Here  is  affection  for  the  unreal — men's 
opinion,  the  estimate  which  depends  upon  wealth,  rank,  circumstances.  Worldliness, 
then,  consists  in  these  three  things — attachment  to  the  outward,  attachment  to  the 
transitory,  attachment  to  the  unreal,  in  opposition  to  love  for  the  inward,  the  eternal, 
the  true;  and  the  one  of  these  affections  is  necessarily  expelled  by  the  other."  In  this 
view  of  worldliness,  Tyre  was  representative  of  the  world.  She  gloried  in  her  secure 
situation,  her  commercial  prosperity,  her  great  riches,  etc.  We  remark  that  the  exulta- 
tion of  the  world  over  the  Church — 

I.  Is  BITTEB  AND  BOASTFUL.  "  Tyre  hath  said  against  Jerusalem,  Aha  I  she  is  broken 
that  was  the  gate  of  the  peoples,"  etc.  (ver.  2).  As  we  have  already  shown  (in  our 
homily  on  the  chapter  as  a  whole),  this  unseemly  triumphing  arose  from  the  selfish- 
ness which  anticipated  that  the  fall  of  Jerusalem  would  promote  the  commercial 
prosperity  of  Tyre.  But  probably  this  was  not  the  only  reason  for  the  rejoicing  of  the 
'J'yrians  in  the  ruin  of  the  sacred  city.  The  antagonism  between  their  religion  and 
the  religion  of  the  Jews  would  increase  their  joy  at  the  downfall  of  Jerusalem  and 
the  destruction  of  the  temple.  "Only  thirty-four  years  before  the  destruction  of 
Jerusalem,"  say's  Mr.  Twisleton,  "  commenced  the  celebrated  reformation  of  Josiah 
(B.C.  622).  This  momentous  religious  revolution  (2  Kings  xxii._,  xxiii.)  fully  explains 
the  exultation  and  malevolence  of  tiie  Tyrians.  In  that  reformation  Josiah  had  heapeci 
insults  on  the  gods  who  were  the  objects  of  Tyrian  veneration  and  love ;  he  had  con- 
-sumed  with  fire  the  sacred  vessels  used  in  their  worship ;  he  bad  burnt  their  images 

■ZEKIEL — ^H.  • 


82  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET   EZBKIEL.    [ch.  xxvi.  1—21. 

and  defiled  their  high  places — nnt  excepting  even  the  liigh  place  near  Jerusalem),  which 
Solomon  the  friend  of  Hiram  had  built  to  Ashtnreth  the  queen  of  heaven,  and  which 
for  more  than  three  hundred  and  fifty  years  had  been  a  striking  memorial  of  the 
reciprocal  good  will  which  once  united  the  two  monarchs  and  the  two  nations. 
Indeed,  he  seemed  to  have  endeavoured  to  exterminate  their  religion,  for  in  S<»maria 
(2  Kiugs  xxiii.  20)  he  had  slain  upon  the  altars  of  the  high  places  all  their  priests. 
These  acts,  although  in  their  ultimate  results  they  may  have  contributed  powerfully 
to  the  diffusion  of  the  Jewish  religion,  must  have  been  regarded  by  the  Tyrians  as  a 
series  of  sacrilegious  and  abominable  outrages;  and  we  can  scarcely  doubt  that  the 
death  in  battle  of  Josiah  at  Megiddo,  and  the  subsequent  destruction  of  the  city  and 
temple  of  Jerusalem,  were  hailed  by  them  with  triumphant  joy  as  instances  of  Divine 
retribution  in  human  affairs." '  Moreover,  it  is  very  probable  that  some  of  the  predic- 
tions of  the  Hebrew  prophets  concerning  Tyre  in  its  relation  to  Jerusalem  were  known 
to  the  people  of  the  island-city,  and  increased  the  bitterness  of  their  joy  over  the 
calamities  of  the  Jews.  "  In  the  Messianic  announcements,  the  homage  of  Tyre  to 
Jerusalem,  and  its  incorporation  into  the  kingdom  of  God,  were  expressly  celebrated  " 
(see,  as  examples,  Ps.  xlv.  12 ;  Ixxxvii.  4 ;  Isa.  xxiii.  18).  "  Without  doubt,"  says 
Hengstenberg,  "  these  bold  hopes  of  Zion  were  known  in  Tyre,  and  caused  much  bad 
blood  in  the  proud  queen  of  the  sea."  And  still  there  are  those  who,  worldly  in  spirit, 
are  bitter  against  the  Church  of  God.  They  deride  its  noblest  enterprises ;  they  ridicule 
its  vital  beliefs ;  they  mock  its  most  cherished  hopes.  If  Christians  are  rigid  and  scru- 
pulous in  their  religious  duties  and  observances,  the  world  reproaches  them  for  their 
narrowness  and  Pharisaism.  If  Christians  stumble  and  fall,  the  world  rejoices  in  their 
overthrow  arid  scoffs  at  their  religion.  But  the  exultation  of  the  world  over  the  Church — 

II.  Is  VAIN.  The  things  from  which  the  world  draws  its  satisfaction,  and  upon 
which  it  rests  its  hopes,  are  uncertain  and  delusive.  Tyre  rejoiced  in  her  security,  her 
riches,  her  commercial  prosperity ;  but  these  things  failed  her  in  her  time  of  need. 
That  these  things  are  unstable,  impermanent,  transient,  is  a  truth  which  no  one 
attempts  to  deny.  How  vain,  then,  to  exult  in  the  ascendancy  which  such  things  give ! 
The  world's  triumph,  even  at  the  best,  is  inore  in  appearance  than  reality.  "  The  world 
passeth  away,  and  the  hist  thereof."  But  the  essential  elements  of  the  Church's  life 
are  real  and  abiding  verities.  The  Church  may  be  brought  down  very  low,  but  it  shall 
rise  again.  Its  course  leads  on  to  splendid  triumph.  But  the  ungodly  world  shall 
sink.  Its  rank  and  riches,  its  pomp  and  power  and  pleasures  shall  pas»  away  as  the 
dreams  of  niaht  fade  before  the  light  and  the  activities  of  day. 

III.  Is  OBSERVED  BY  THE  LoKD  GoD.  He  knew  and  took  notice  of  the  cruel  triumph 
of  proud  Tyre  over  prostrate  Jerusalem.  He  made  known  the  fact  of  that  triumph  to 
his  servant  Ezekiel  f^n  the  banks  of  the  Chehar.  He  still  observes  the  attitude  of  the 
world  towards  his  Church.  No  persons  or  powers  can  exalt  themselves  against  his 
people  without  attracting  the  notice  of  his  ever-watchful  eye  (cf.  2  Chron.  xvi.  9 ; 
Ps.  xxxiv.  15, 16 ;  1  Pet.  iii.  12,  13). 

IV.  Will  be  punished  by  the  Lord  God.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God;  Behold,  J 
am  against  thee,  0  Tyre,"  etc.  (vers.  3,  4).  The  Lord  here  proclaims  himself  against 
Tyre,  and  threatens  to  strip  the  proud  city  of  her  boasted  pomp,  pros[ierity,  and  power. 
He  would  break  down  her  defences,  level  her  to  the  ground,  make  an  utter  end  of  her, 
leaving  nothing  but  the  bare  rock  on  which  she  had  stood.  The  defences  of  the 
irreligious  world  are  subtle  policies,  material  riches,  social  power,  etc.  These  are  all 
impermanent  things.  And  should  they  endure,  the  time  comes  when  they  will  fail  to 
meet  the  needs  of  those  who  put  their  trust  in  them.  If  no  other  punishment  awaited 
the  votaries  of  this  world,  surely  this  would  be  a  heart-crushing,  a  heart-breaking  one, 
to  awake  to  the  sad  realization  of  the  stern  truth  that  the  objects  for  which  they  had 
striven  in  life,  which  they  had  looked  upon  as  their  chief  good,  and  in  which  thny  had 
trusted,  were  vain,  having  no  power  or  fitness  to  answer  the  deep  cravings  of  their 
souls,  or  to  help  them  in  the  awful  needs  of  their  being.  "  Whose  confidenca  shall 
break  in  sunder,  and  whose  trust  is  a  spider's  web;"  "And  their  hope  shall  be  tbfl 
giving  up  of  the  ghost." — W.  J. 

Vers,  15 — 18. — A  lamentation  over  fallen  greatness.    "  Thus  saith  the  Lora  Qod  to 
»  Dr.  Smith's  '  Bibl.  Dictionary,'  art.  "  Tyre." 


JH.  XXVI.  1—21.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PEOPHET   EZEKTEL.  83 

Tyrus ;  Shall  not  the  isles  shake  at  the  sound  of  thy  fall,"  etc. ?    These  veises  suggest 
the  following  observations. 

I.  The  judgments  of  God  are  sometimes  so  awful  as  to  fill  the  exalted  and 
MIGHTY  WITH  AMAZEMENT  AND  DI8MAT.  (Vers.  15,  16 ;  cf.  Jer.  iv.  7 — 9.)  The  isles 
are  the  islands  of  ths  Mediterraaean,  and  places  on  the  coast  also  are  perhaps  referred 
to.  The  princes  are  those  of  the  various  island  and  sea-board  settlements,  and  the 
wealthy  merchant-princes  of  prosperous  commercial  centres.  Thus  it  was  said  of  Tyre, 
"  whose  merchants  are  princes,  whose  traffickers  are  the  honourable  of  the  earth  " 
(Isa.  xxiii.  8).  The  fall  of  Tyre  would  cause  them  extreme  astonishment  and 
trembling  for  their  own  safety.  The  Divine  retributions  sometimes  appall  even  the 
stoutest  hearts,  and  lead  the  highly  placed  and  powerful  to  realize  (at  least  for  a  time) 
their  wealsness. 

II.  The  judgments  of  God  sometimes  awaken  the  lamentations  of  those  who 
BEHOLD  THEM.  "They  Shall  take  up  a  lamentation  for  thee,"  etc.  (ver.  17).  This 
verse  seems  to  suggest  that  the  fall  of  Tyre  would  be  bewailed  in  mournful  threnodies. 
It  is  instriiclive  to  notice  what  it  w;is  which  the  neighbouring  states  lamented  in  the 
downfnll  of  the  island-city.  The  things  which  are  particularized  iu  the  text  are  such 
as  these :  the  eclipse  of  brilliant  renown,  "  How  art  thou  destroyed  .  .  .  the  renowned 
city  I"  the  destruction  of  distinguished  power,  "which  was  strong  in  the  sea;"  the 
overthrow  of  one  which  had  been  so  formidable  to  others,  "  which  caused  their  terror 
to  be  on  all  that  haunt  it."  Worldly  minds  mourn  the  loss  of  woildly  prosperity. 
"  When  Jerusalem,  the  holy  city,  was  destroyed,"  says  Matthew  Henry,  "  there  were 
no  such  lamentations  for  it ;  it  was  nothing  to  those  that  passed  by  (Lam.  i.  12) ;  but 
when  Tyre,  the  trading  city,  fell,  it  was  universally  bemoaned.  Note :  Those  who 
have  the  world  in  their  hearts  lament  the  loss  of  great  men  more  than  the  loss  of  good 
men."  But  the  pious  patriot  and  prophet  Jeremiah  bewailed  the  destruction  of 
Jerusalem  "  in  his  unrivalled  elegies."  As  Dr.  Milman  observes, "  Never  did  city  suffer  a 
more  miserable  fate,  never  was  ruined  city  lamented  in  language  so  exquisitely  pathetic." 

III.  The  judgments  of  God  should  lead  those  who  behold  them  to  exeeoisb 
8EMOU8  REFLECTION.  Catastrophes  like  the  fall  of  Tyre  startle  peoples  and  nations 
into  short-lived  concern  or  even  alarm.  They  ought  to  lead  to  sober  thought  and 
earnest  self-examination.  They  are  fitted  to  impress  salutary  lessons  and  to  direct  to 
a  salutary  course  of  action.  May  we  not  say  that  they  are  designed  to  do  so  ?  "  Whea 
Ood  punishes,  he  does  it  not  merely  on  account  of  the  ungodly,  who  must  feel  such 
punishment,  but  also  on  account  of  other  ungodly  persons,  that  they  may  become 
better  by  such  examples."  This  judgment  upon  Tyre  was  fitted  to  teach :  1.  The 
limitation  of  human  greatness.  Unquestionably,  Tyre  was  great;  but  she  was  not 
great  enough  to  stand  against  the  forces  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  or,  in  after-times,  against 
the  might  of  Alexander.  The  greatest  of  human  states  is  pitiably  small  when  God 
arrays  himself  against  it  (cf.  ver.  3).  2.  The  uncertainty  of  secular  prosperity.  Tyre 
was  a  rich  and  prosperous  city ;  but  where  now  are  its  riches,  its  great  commerce,  etc.? 
Fresh  illustrations  arise  almost  daily  of  the  unreliableness  of  secular  success,  and  the 
uncertain  tenure  of  temporal  possessions.  "  For  riches  certainly  make  themselves 
wings,  like  an  eagle  that  flieth  toward  heaven."  3.  The  insecurity  of  those  who  seem 
most  firmly  established.  The  proud  island-city  seemed  most  securely  founded  and 
fortified.  Her  situation  was  a  source  of  great  strength  and  safety  against  any  adver- 
sary. She  was  able  to  offer  long  and  stubborn  resistance  to  the  powerful  and  victorious 
King  of  Babylon.  But  she  was  conquered;  and  now  she  is  utterly  demolished.  The 
very  strongest  and  most  stable  of  cities  or  empires  may  slowly  decline  into  insignifi- 
cance and  feebleness,  or  speedily  reel  into  ruin.  4.  The  ruinousness  of  sin.  The 
intense  selfishness  and  cruel  boasting  of  Tyre  against  Jerusalem  led  to  her  overthrow. 
No  state  or  kingdom  can  be  strong  apart  from  righteousness.  Yice,  injustice,  oppres- 
sion, cruelty,  will  bring  the  mightiest  city  or  empire  to  ruin,  "The  throne  is 
established  by  righteousness ;  "  "  Take  away  the  wicked  from  before  the  king,  and  his 
throne  shall  be  established  in  righteousness ; "  "  The  king  that  faithfully  judgeth  the 
poor,  his  throne  shall  be  established  for  ever."  Lessons  such  as  these  the  fall  of  Tyre 
should  have  impressed  upon  those  who  were  affected  by  it.  Others'  miseries  should 
be  our  monitors.  When  God's  judgments  are  in  the  earth,  the  inhabitants  of  the  world 
should  learn  righteousness  (Isa.  xxvi.  9). — W.  J. 


84         THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIBL.  [oa.  ixn.  1—21. 

Ver.  20.  —An  eneowraging  assurance  /or  a  depressed  people.  "  And  I  shall  set 
glory  in  the  land  of  the  living."  Accepting  this  rendering  as  expressing  the  meaning 
of  the  original,  and  as  applicable  to  Judah,  we  see  in  it — 

I.  A  BEMABEABLE  DESIGNATION  OF  THE  HOLT  LAND.  It  is  here  Called  "  the  land  of 
the  living."  Hengstenberg  views  "  the  land  of  the  living  "  as  standing  in  "  contrast 
to  Sheol,  the  land  of  the  dead,  to  which  in  the  foregoing  the  inhabitants  of  Tyre  are 
assigned."  The  expression  seems  to  refer  particularly  to  Palestine.  The  '  Speaker'i 
Commentary'  says,  "The  land  of  the  living  is  the  land  of  the  true  God,  as  opposed  to 
the  land  of  the  dead,  to  which  ii  gathered  the  glory  of  the  world."  And  Matthew 
Henry,  "  The  holy  land  is  the  land  of  the  living ;  for  none  but  holy  souls  are  properly 
living  souls."  There  wa»  propriety  in  applying  this  designation  to  that  land,  becaasa 
there :  1.  The  living  Ood  was  known  and  worshipped.  "  In  Judah  is  God  known : 
his  Name  is  great  in  Israel,"  etc.  (Ps.  Ixxvi.  1,  2) ;  "  My  soul  thirsteth  for  God,  for  the 
living  God,"  etc.  (Ps.  xlii.  2).  The  people  of  other  lands  had  riches,  honours,  power ; 
but  they  were  Idolaters.  Their  gods  were  no  gods,  but  dead  idols.  In  the  highest 
Bense  no  land  can  be  called  living  whose  deity  or  deities  are  dead,  unreal,  mere  human 
inventions.  To  the  people  of  Judah  and  Jerusalem  the  living  and  true  God  had 
revealed  himself  through  law-giver,  prophet,  and  poet,  and  through  his  hand  in  their 
history  as  a  nation.  2.  The  living  Word  was  possessed.  The  sacred  writings  of  the 
Jews  are  far  superior  to  those  of  heathen  nations.  They  were  true :  "  the  Word  of 
truth"  (Ps.  cxix.  43,  142,  160).  They  were  vital  and  lasting:  "living  oracles" 
(Acts  vii.  38) ;  "  the  Word  of  God,  which  liveth  and  abideth  "  (1  Pet.  i.  23).  They 
were  life-giving :  "  Thy  Word  hath  quickened  me  "  (Ps.  cxix.  50,  93).  Moreover, 
their  Scriptures  were  light-giving :  "  Thy  Word  is  a  lamp  unto  my  feet,  and  a  light  unto 
my  path  "  (Ps.  cxix.  105,  130).  3.  The  living  ordinances  were  observed.  The  pure 
worship  of  the  living  and  true  God  was  instituted  and  practised  there,  and,  after  the 
return  from  the  Captivity,  without  any  admixture  of  idolatry.  Worship,  when  it  is 
directed  to  the  true  Object  and  offered  in  a  true  spirit,  develops  and  strengthens  tha 
noblest  life  of  the  worshipper.  To  the  pious  Jews  the  means  of  grace  were  as  "  welli 
of  salvation."  In  these  respects,  then,  Palestine  was  appropriately  called  "  the  land  of 
■  the  living."  And  with  even  greater  fulness  and  force  may  the  designation  be  applied 
to  this  favoured  land  of  ours. 

n.  An  encouragino  AssuBiNOE  coNOEBNma  THE  HOLT  LAND.  "I  shall  sot  glory  in 
the  land  of  the  living."  Let  us  look  at  this  assurance :  \.  In  its  primary  signification. 
By  the  side  of  the  utter  overthrow  of  Tyre,  Bzekiel  predicts  the  renewal  of  the  Divine 
favour  and  of  prosperity  to  Jerusalem.  Brief  as  the  clause  is,  it  indicates  the  return  of 
the  people  of  Judah  from  captivity  to  their  own  land,  the  rebuilding  of  the  temple  of 
Jehovah,  the  re-establishment  of  religious  ordinances,  and  the  restoration  of  the  sacred 
city.  And  all  these  things  were  in  due  season  accomplished.  And  thus  interpreted, 
the  assurance  given  in  the  text  is  the  more  significant  from  the  fact  that,  after  their 
return  home,  the  Jews  never  obscured  the  Divine  glory  by  the  practice  of  idolatry. 
They  neither  gave  God's  glory  to  another  nor  his  praise  unto  graven  images.  2.  Jn 
its  other  and  grander  sign^cation.  The  text  prophetically  points  to  the  coming  of  the 
Messiah  and  the  proclamation  of  the  glorious  gospel.  In  the  work  of  redemption  by 
Jesus  Christ  we  have  a  much  more  illustrious  display  of  the  glory  of  God  than  in  the 
return  of  the  exiles  from  Babylon  to  Jerusalem,  the  rebuilding  of  the  temple,  etc. 
And  this  glory  is  ever  increasing  amongst  men  as  the  triumphs  of  the  gospel  are 
multiplied.  The  enemies  of  the  cause  of  God  are  being  vanquished  by  truth  and  love, 
and  bis  true  kingdom  is  constantly  being  established  more  and  more  deeply  and  widely 
in  this  world.  And  at  length  "all  the  earth  shall  be  filled  with  the  glory  of  the 
Lord," 

CoNOLUBiON.  Even  in  the  darkest  seasons  of  its  history  there  is  always  a  bright  and 
Inspiring  hope  for  the  true  Church  of  God.  By  its  unfaithfulness  it  may  bring  upon 
itself  severe  chastisement  from  its  great  Head ;  but  it  shall  arise  from  the  dust  purified 
and  strengthened,  and  go  forward  in  its  glorious  course,  "  fair  as  the  moon,  olear  aa  the 
sun,  tenrible  as  an  army  with  banners." — ^W.  J. 


OH.  xxni.  1— 36.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL. 


85 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTBK  XXVII. 


Ver.  2. — Take  np  a  lamentation  for  Tyma. 
The  dirge  over  the  mereliant-oity  that 
follows,  the  douiu  sio  Iranait  gloria  mundi, 
■worked  out  with  a  fulness  of  detail  which 
reminds  us  of  the  Homurio  catalogue  of 
ships  ('  Iliad,'  ii.  484—770),  is  almost,  if  not 
alto^elher,  without  a  pfirallel  in  the  history 
of  literature.  It  oai.  scarcely  have  rested 
on  anything  but  personal  knowledge.  Eze- 
kiel,  we  must  believe,  had,  at  some  time  or 
other  in  his  life,  trod  the  sinful  streets  of 
the  great  city,  and  noted  the  mingled  crowd 
of  many  nations  and  in  many  costumes 
that  he  met  there,  just  as  we  infei-  from 
Dante's  vivid  description  of  tlie  dockyards 
of  Venice  ('  Inf.,'  xxi.  7 — 15)  that  lie  had 
Tisited  that  city.  Apart  from  its  poetic 
or  prophetic  interest,  it  is  for  us  almost  the 
locus  dassicus  as  to  the  geography  and 
commerce  of  that  old  world-  of  which  Tyre 
was  in  some  sense  the  centre.  Wo  may 
compare  it,  from  that  point  of  view,  with 
the  ethnological  statements  in  Gen.  x. ; 
just  as,  from  the  stamlpoint  of  prophecy,  it 
has  to  be  compared  with  Isaiah's  "  burden  " 
against  Babylon  (Isa.  xiii.,  xiv.),  and  with 
St.  Jolin's  representation  of  Borne  as  the 
spiritual  Babylon  of  the  Apocalypse  (Bev. 
xviii.). 

Ver.  3. — ^We  begin  with  the  picture  of  the 
dty,  situate  at  the  entry  (Hebrew,  entries), 
m  harbours  of  the  sea.  Of  these  Tyre  had 
two — the  northern,  known  as  the  Sidonian; 
the  southern,  as  the  Egyptian.  There  she 
dwelt,  a  merchant  of  the  peoples,  that  came, 
in  the  wider  sense  of  the  word  (see  oh.  xxvi. 
15),  from  the  isles  of  the  Mediterranean.  I 
am  perfect  in  beauty.  The  boast  here  put  into 
the  mouth  of  the  city  appears  afterwiu'da 
as  the  utterance  of  its  ruler,  or  as  applied 
to  him  (ch.  xxviii.  2,  15 — 17).  We  are 
reminded  of  Genoa,  la  superba. 

Ver.  4. — In  the  midst  of  the  seas ;  lite- 
rally, in  the  heart  (Eevised  Version).  The 
words  were  true  of  the  island-city,  but 
Ezekiel  has  already  present  to  his  thoughts 
the  idealized  picture  of  the  city  under  the 
figure  of  its  stateliest  ship.  The  builders 
are  ship-builders,  and  in  the  verses  that 
follow  we  have  a  picture  of  the  Bucentaur 
of  the  Venice  of  the  ancient  world. 

Ver.  5. — Fir  trees  of  Senir.  The  name  ap- 
pears in  Deut.  iii.  9  and  Song  of  Sol.  iv.  8  as 
Bhenir ;  in  IChron.  v.  23  it  is  spelt  as  here. 
From  Deut.  iii.  9  we  learn  that  it  was  the 
Amorite  name  for  Hermon,  as  Sirion  was 
the  Sidonian  jiame.  In  1  Kings  v.  10 
Hiram  King  of  Tyre  appears  as  supplying 
Solomon  with  the  fir  and  cedar  timber  men- 


tioned here  for  the  erection  of  hia  palace, 
the  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon  (1  Kings 
vii.  2).  The  fir  tree  was  more  commonly 
used  for  ships,  the  cedar  for  houses  (Virgil, 
'  Georg.,'  ii.  444).  The  Hebrew  for  "  boards  " 
is  unique  in  its  form  as  a  plural  with  a  dual 
form  superadded  to  indicate  that  each  plank 
had  its  counterpart  on  the  other  side  of  tha 
ship. 

Ver.  6. — The  high  plateau  of  Bashan,  tha 
region  east  of  the  sea  of  Galilee  and  the 
Jordan,  now  known  as  the  Hauran,  was 
famous  then,  as  it  is  now,  for  its  oak  forests 
and  its  wild  cattle  (Ps.  xxii.  12).  The  com- 
pany of  the  Ashurites,  etc. ;  better,  with 
the  Bevised  Version,  they  have  made  thy 
benches  of  ivory  inlaid  in  hoxwood.  Tlio 
Authorized  Version-  follows  tlie  present 
Hebiew  text,  but  the  name  of  tlie  nation 
tliere  is  not  the  same  as  that  of  the  As- 
syrians, and  corresponds  with  Ihe  Ashurites 
of  2  Sam.  ii.  9  —  an  obscure  tribe  of 
Canaanites,  possibly  identical  with  tha 
Geshurites.  A  difference  of  punctuation 
or  spelling  (Bithasshurim  for  Bath-asshu- 
rini)  gives  the  meaning  which  the  Revised 
Version  follows;  thasshur  being  used  in 
Isa.  xli.  19  and  Ix.  13  for  the  box  tree,  or  per- 
haps cypress,  or  larch,  aa  forming  part  of  tha 
glory  of  Lebanon.  The  use  of  ivory  in  ship 
or  house  buikliug  seems  to  have  been  one  of 
the  arts  for  which  Tyre  was  famuus.  So 
we  have  the  ivory  palace  of  Ahab,  after  he 
had  married  his  Sidonian  queen  (1  Kings 
xxii.  39)  and  those  of  the  monai  ch  who  had 
married  a  Tyrian  princess  in  Ps.  xlv.  8  (see 
also  Amos  iii.  15).  For  the  use  of  such  in- 
laid wood  in  later  times,  see  Virgil, '  .ffineid,' 
X.  137.  Eitlier  the  ivory  or  the  wood  is 
said  to  come  from  the  isles  of  Chittim. 
The  word  was  about  as  wide  in  its  use  as 
the  "Indies"  in  the  time  of  Elizabeth. 
Josephus  ('  Ant.,'  i.  6.  1)  identifies  it  with 
Cyprus,  which  perhaps  retains  a  memorial 
of  it  in  Oitium.  The  Vulgate,  aa  in 
Numb.  xxiv.  24,  identifies  it  here  with  Italy, 
and  in  Dan.  xi.  30  translates  the  "ships 
of  Chittim  "  as  trieres  et  Bomani,  while  in 
1  Maco.  i.  1  it  is  used  of  Greece  as  in- 
cluding Macedonia.  In  Gen.  x.  4  the 
Kittim  appear  as  descended  from  Javan, 
t.e.  are  classed  as  Greeks  or  lonians.  The 
ivory  which  the  Tyrians  used  probably 
came  from  Northern  Africa,  and  may  have 
been  supplied  through  Carthage  or  other 
Phoenician  colonies.  A  supply  may  have 
come  also  from  Ethiopia  tlirough  Egypt, 
or  from  the  Bed  Sea  ports,  with  which  the 
Plicenicians  carried  on  a  trade  with  Arabia. 
Inlaid  ivory-work,  sometimes  in  wood, 
sometimes  with  enamel,  is  fonnd  both  in 


66 


THE  BOOK   OF  THE  PBOPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxvn.  1—36. 


Egyptian  and  Assyrian  remains  ('  Diet. 
Bible,'  t.v.  "  Ivory  "). 

Ver.  7.— For  tlie  fine  linen  of  Egypt,  the 
byssns  famons  in  its  commerce,  see 
Gen  xli.  42 ;  Exod'.  xxvi.  36.  This,  which 
took  the  place  of  the  coarse  canvas  of  the 
common  ships,  was  made  more  magnificent 
by  being  embroidered  with  purple  or  orim- 
Bon,  with  gold  borders.  The  ship  of  An- 
tony and  Cleopatra  had  purple  sails,  which, 
as  they  swelled  out  with  the  wind,  served 
as  a  banner.  The  ancient  ships  had  no 
flags  or  pennons.  So  tbe  Revised  Version 
renders,  of  fine  linen  .  .  .  was  thy  sail, 
that  it  might  he  to  thee  for  an  ensign.  The 
word  for  "  sail "  in  the  Antliorized  Version 
is  rendered  "  banner"  in  Ps.  Ix.  4 ;  Isa.  xiii.  2, 
and  "ensign"  in  Isa.  xi.  12.  The  isles  of 
Elishah,  The  name  appears  in  Gen.  x.  4 
as  one  of  the  sons  of  Javan.  It  has  been 
identified,  on  the  ground  chiefly  of  simi- 
larity of  sound,  with  Elis,  Hella.s,  or  iEolia. 
Laconia  has  been  suggested  as  being 
famous  for  the  murex  which  supplied  the 
purple  dye.  The  Targum  gives  Italy. 
Bioily  also  lias  been  conjectured.  The  murex 
is  common  all  over  the  Mediterranean,  but 
Cytherii  and  Abydos  are  named  as  having 
been  specially  famous  for  it.  Probably,  as 
in  the  case  of  "Chittim,"  the  word  was  used 
with  considerable  latitude.  The  latter 
clause  of  tlie  veise  describes  the  awning 
over  the  deck  of  the  queenly  ship.  Was 
Ezckiel  describing  what  he  had  actually 
fcecn  in  the  state-ship  of  Tyre? 

Ver.  8. — The  two  cities  are  named  as 
tributaries  of  Tyre  from  which  she  drew 
her  sailors,  the  Tyrians  themselves  acting 
as  captains  and  pilots.  Zidon  (now  Saidd) 
is  named  in  Gen.  x.  15  as  the  firstborn  of 
Canaan,  and  was  older  than  Tyre  itself 
(Isa.  xxiii.  2,  12).  Arvad  is  identified  with 
the  Greek  Aradus,  the  modern  Ruad,  an 
island  about  two  miles  from  the  coast,  about 
two  miles  north  of  the  mouth  of  the  river 
Eleu;hcri  s  (^Nahr-el-Kehir).  It  is  scarcely 
a  mile  in  circumference,  but  was  prominent 
enough  to  be  named  here  and  in  Gen.  x. 
18;  1  Chron.  i.  16.  Opposite  to  it  on  the 
mainland  was  the  town  of  Antaradus.  For 
mariners,  the  Revised  Version  gives  rowers. 

Ver.  9. — The  ancients  of  Gebal.  The 
Tvord  is  used  in  tlie  sense  of  "  elders "  or 
•'senators,"  the  governing  body.  Gebal,  for 
which  the  LXX.  gives  BihUi,  is  identified 
with  the  Greek  Byblus.  The  name  appears 
in  Ps.  Ixxxiii.  7  in  connection,  among  other 
nations,  with  Tyre  and  Asshur,  as  allied 
with  them  against  Israel;  in  Josh.  xiii.  5 
as  near  Lebanon  and  Hermou  ;  in  1  Kings  v. 
18  (margin  Revised  Version)  as  among  the 
itonemasons  who  worked  with  Hiram's 
builders.  Byblus  was  situated  on  an 
eminence    overlooking    the    river    Adonis 


between  Beirut  and  Tripoli.  Its  modem 
name,  Gebail,  retains  the  old  Semitic  form, 
and  its  ruins  abound  in  marble  and  granite 
columns  of  Phoenician  and  Egyptian 
workmansliip.  The  work  of  the  caulKers 
was  to  stop  the  chinks  of  the  ship,  and  tlie 
men  of  Gebal  appear  to  have  been  specially 
skilful  in  this.  We  note  that  tbe  metaphor 
of  the  ship  falls  into  the  background  In  the 
latter  clause  of  the  verse,  and  does  not  appear 
again. 

Ver.  10. — Persia,  The  name  does  not  mec  t 
us  in  any  Old  Testampnt  book  before  tho 
exile,  Elam  taking  its  place.  It  was  just 
about  the  time  that  Ezekiel  wrote  that  the 
Persians  were  becoming  conspicuous  through 
their  alliance  with  the  Medes.  So  we  find 
it  again  in  ch.  xxxviii.  5;  Dan.  v.  28; 
viii.  20 ;  2  Chron.  xxxvi.  20,  22 ;  Ezia  i.  1 ; 
iv.  5 ;  Esth.  i.  3.  Here  they  are  named  as 
mercenaries  in  the  Tyriaii  army.  Ind.  The 
LX  X .  and  the  Vulgate,  led  by  the  similarity 
of  sound,  give  Lydians.  In  Gen.  x.  18  the 
Ludim  appear  as  descendants  of  Mizraim, 
while  Lnd  in. Gen.  x.  22  is  joined  with 
Elam  and  Asshur  as  among  the  sons  nf 
Shem.  Its  combination  with  "Phut"  (i.e. 
Libya)  here  and  in  Jer.  xlvi.  9  is  in  favour 
of  its  referring  to  an  African  nation  (comp. 
also  ch.  XXX.  5;  Isa.  Ixvi.  19).  Phut. 
Both  the  LXX.  and  the  Vulgate  give 
Libyans.  In  Gen.  x.  6  the  name  is  joined 
with  Cush  and  Mizraim.  The  Lubim 
(Libyans)  are  named  as  forming  part  of 
Shishak's  army  in  2  Chron.  xii.  3 ;  xvi.  8, 
and  in  Nah.  iii.  9  and  Jer.  xlvi.  9  as  closely 
allied  with  the  Egyptians.  Ezekiel  names 
Phut  again  as  sharing  in  the  fall  of  Tyre 
(ch.  XXX.  5),  and  as  serving  in  the  army  of 
Gog  (ch.  xxxviii.  5).  Mr.  E.  S.  Poole  is 
inclined  to  identify  them  with  the  Nu- 
bians. ' 

-Ver.  1 1. — (For  Arvad,  see  ver.  8.)  Gam- 
madim.  The  LXX.  translates  "guards" 
(^(pi\aKes') ;  the  Vulgate,  Pygmies,  probably 
as  connecting  the  name  with  Oamad  (equi- 
valent to  "a  cubit").  The  Targum  gives 
"  watchmen ; "  Gesenius,  "  warriors  :  "  Hit- 
zig,  "deserters."  The  name  probably 
indicates  that  they  were  the  flower  of  the 
Tyriau  army— the  life-guards  (like  the  "  Im- 
mortals" of  the  Persians)  of  the  merchant- 
city.  On  the  whole,  we  must  leave  the  pro- 
blem as  one  that  we  have  no  data  for 
solving.  The  grouping  with  Arvad,  however, 
suggests  a  Syrian  or  Phoenician  tribe. 
They  hanged  their  shields.  The  custnni 
seems  to  have  been  specially  PhoenioiaM. 
Solomon  introduced  it  at  Jerusalem  (Song 
of  Sol.  iv.  4).  The  siglit  of  the  walls  thus 
decorated,  the  shields  being  sometimes  gilt 
or  painted,  must  liave  been  suflaoientl" 
striking  to  warrant  Ezekiel's  phrase  th. 
thus  the  beauty  of  the   city  was  "  maae 


CH.  xxvii.  1— 36.]    TRK  iiO.iK  OF  THE   PKOFHET   EZEKIEL. 


87 


perfect"  by  it.     The  custom  reappears  in 
1  Blaco.  iv.  57. 

Ver.  12. — ^Tarshisli,  The  de"oription  of 
the  city  is  followed  by  a  catalogue  raieonnie 
of  the  countriea  with  which  she  traded. 
Here  we  are  on  more  certain  ground,  there 
being  a  general  consensus  that  Tarshish,  the 
Greek  Tartessns,  indicates  the  coast  of  Spain, 
which  was  pre-eminent  in  the  ancient  world 
for  the  metals  named  (Jer.  x.  9).  The  ships 
of  Taisliish  (1  Kings  xxii.  48;  Isa.  ii.  16) 
were  the  larger  merchant-vessels  that  were 
made  for  this  distant  traffic.  Like  all  such 
names,  it  was  probably  used  with  consider- 
able latitude,  and  it  is  worth  noting  that 
both  the  LXX.  and  the  Vulgate  give  Car- 
thaginiang.  Probably  the  chief  Phoenician 
colonieB  in  Spain,  notably,  of  course,  Car- 
thago Nova,  were  offshoots  from  Carthage, 
in  wliich,  by  the  way,  we  trace  the  old 
Hebrew  Kirjath  (equivalent  to  "city"). 
Traded  in  thy  fairs ;  better,  with  the  Kevised 
Version,  traded  for' thy  wares;  i.e.  they 
bartered  their  mineral  treasures  for  the 
goods  brought  by  the  Tyrian  merchants. 
The  same  Hebrew  word  appears  in  vers.  14, 
16,  19,  22,  23,  but  is  not  found  elsewhere  in 
the  Old  Testament,  and  may  have  been  a  tech- 
nical word  in  Tyrian  commerce.  The  LXX. 
gives  ayopi;  the  Vulgate,  nundinsB,  which 
seems  to  have  suggested  the  Revised  Versinn. 
Ver.  13. — Javan  (father  of  Elishah, 
Tarshish,  Kittim,  and  Dodauim,  and  son  of 
Japheth,  Gen.  x.  2,  4)  stands  genetically  for 
Greece,  and  probably  represents  Ionia. 
Tubal  and  Meshech  are  suns  of  Japheth  in 
Gen.  X.  2,  and  are  always  grouped  together, 
except  in  Ps.  cxx.  5,  where  Meshech  ap- 
pears alone,  and  in  Isa.  Ixvi.  19,  where 
Tubal  is  named,  but  not  Meshech.  In  ch. 
xxxii.  26  they  are  associated  with  Elam 
and  Asshur  (Assyria);  in  ch.  xxxviii.  2, 3  and 
xxxix.  1  with  Gog.  The  two  names  pro- 
bably represented  the  tribes  on  the  south- 
east coast  of  the  Black  Sea.  Here  the  chief 
traffic  was  in  slaves,  the  Tyrian  traders 
probably  buying  them  in  exchange  for  their 
manufactured  goods,  and  selling  them  to  the 
cities  of  Greece  as  well  as  Phoenicia.  In 
Greek  history  the  names  appear  as  Tibareni 
and  Mosehi  (Herod.,  iii.  94;  Xenophon, 
'Anab.,'  v.  5.  2,  et  at).  In  Joel  iv.  6 
Tyrians  are  represented  as  selling  Israelites 
as  slaves  in  Greek  cities  (Hebrew  "  sons  of 
Javan").  Thrace  and  Scytliia  were  at  all 
times  the  chief  countries  Irom  wliich  Greece 
imported  her  slaves.  Vessels  of  brass. 
Here,  as  throughout  the  Old  Testament,  we 
should  read  "copper,"  the  mixed  metal 
which  we  know  as  "  brass  "  not  being  known 
to  ancient  metallnrgy.  Copper-mines  were 
found  near  the  Caucasus,  and  Eubcea  was 
also  famous  for  them.  The  region  was  also 
noted  for  its  iron. 


Ver.  14. — Togarmah.  The  name  appears 
in  ch.  xxxviii.  6  as  an  ally  of  Gog,  in  Gin. 
X.  3  as  a  son  of  Gomer.  Jerome  identifii  s 
it  with  Phrygia,  others  with  Capparbcia, 
but  there  is  a  wider  consensus  for  Armenia, 
wh  ich  was  famous  for  its  horses  and  mules 
(Xenophon, '  Anab.,'  5.  34 ;  Strabo,  xi.  14.  9 ; 
Herod.,  i.  194). 

Ver.  15. — The  men  of  Dedau.  The  name 
occurs  again  in  ver.  20,  and  has  already  met 
ns  in  ch.  xxv.  13  (where  see  note).  Here  the 
words  probably  refer  to  the  many  isles  of  the 
Persian  Gulf  or  the  Eed  Sea.  So  the  ships 
of  Solomon  and  Hiram — ships  of  Tars'  iah 
(name  used  generically  for  merchant-  v(  ssels) 
— brought  ivory  among  their  other  impoi  ts, 
starting  from  Ezion-Geber  (1  Kings  ix.  26 ; 
X.  22).  Ebony  came  from  Ethiopia  and 
India.  Virgil,  indeed,  names  the  latter 
country  as  the  only  region  which  produced 
it  ('  Georg.,'  ii.  115).  Ceylon  is  at  present 
one  of  the  chief  sources  of  supply.  The 
LXX.  curiously  enough  gives  RJiodiani,  the 
Hebrew  letters  for  d  aud  r  being  easily 
mistaken  by  copyists. 

Ver.  16.— Syria;  Hebrew,  Aram.  The 
LXX.  which  gives  avdpdirovs,  seems  to  have 
read  Adam  (equivalent  to  "man  "),  annthcr 
instance  of  the  fact  just  referred  to.  And  this 
has  led  many  commentators  (Miehai.-lis, 
tewald,  Uitzig,  Fiirst)  to  conjecture,  follow- 
ing the  Peshito  Version,  that  Edom  must 
have  been  the  true  reading.  As  regards 
the  products  named,  we  Know  too  little  of 
the  commerce  of  Edom  to  say  whether  it 
included  them  in  its  exports,  and  the  fact 
that  the  broidered  work  of  Babylon  had 
been  famous  from  of  old  (Josh.  vii.  2 1 ),  and 
that  it  was  also  the  oldest  emporium  for 
precious  stones,  may  be  urged  in  favour  ot 
the  present  reading,  and  of  taking  Aram  in 
its  widest  sense  as  including  Mesopotamia. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  mention  of  onyx, 
sapphire,  coral,  pearls,  topaz,  in  Job  xxviii. 
16 — 19,  the  local  colouring  of  which  if 
essentially  Idumsaan,  supports  the  conjec- 
tural emendation.  Emeralds  (comp.  Exod. 
xxviii.  18).  Some  writers  identify  it  with 
the  carbuncle.  It  meets  us  again  in  oh. 
xxviii.  13.  The  fine  linen  (butz)  is  different 
from  that  of  ver.  7  {shesK),  and  appears  only 
in  the  later  books  of  the  Old  Testament 
(1  Chron.  iv.  21 ;  2  Chron.  iii.  14 ;  Esth.  i. 
6,  et  al.).  It  was  probably  the  byssus  of  the 
Greeks!,  made  of  cotton,  while  the  Egyptian 
fabric  was  of  flax.  Coral.  The  Hebrew 
(ramolh)  oicm-a  only  here  and  in  Job  xxviii. 
18.  ''  Coral "  is  the  traditional  Jewish  inter- 
pretation, but  the  LXX.  transliterates,  and 
the  Vulgate  gives  sericum.  Agate  is  found 
here  and  in  Isa.  liv.  12,  and  has  been  identified 
with  the  ruby  or  carbuncle.  In  Exod.  xxviii. 
19  and  xxxix.  12  the  English  represents  » 
different  Hebrew  word. 


88 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  EZEKIEL.     [ch.  xxvn.  1—36. 


Yer.  17. — Jndah  and  tlie  land  of  Israel. 
The  narrow  strip  of  land  occupied  by  the 
FhoBnioians  was  unable  to  supply  its  crowded 
population.  It  was  dependent  on  Israel  for 
its  oom  and  oil  and  the  like  in  the  days  of 
Solomon  (1  Kings  t.9 — 11)  and  continued  to 
be  80  to  those  of  Herod  Agnppa  (Acts  xii. 
20).  Uinuitli  appears  in  judg.  xi.  33  as  a 
ei^  of  the  Ammonites  near  Heshbon,  and 
the  region  of  Ammon  was  famous  for  its 
wheat  (2  Obron.  xxvii.  5).  Minnith  wheat 
probably  fetched  the  highest  price  in  the 
Xyrlan  markets.  Fannag  is  found  here 
only.  The  versions,  Targum,  LXX.,  give 
"  ointments  "  (^iJpoi),  Vulgate,  ijolsam.  Most 
modem  commentators  take  it  as  meaning 
tweetmeats,  the  syrup  of  grape-juice,  pos- 
fibly  something  like  the  modern  rahat-la- 
koum  of  Turkish  commerce.  Possibly,  like 
Minnith,  it  may  have  been  a  proper  name 
the  significance  of  which  is  lost  to  ua. 
Honey  was  at  all  times  one  of  the  famous 
prodnotti  of  Palestine  (Judg.  xir.  8 ;  1  Sam. 
xiy.  27;  Ps.  xiK.  10;  Exod.  xxxiii.  3). 

Ver.  18. — Samascns.  The  chief  export  of 
the  great  capital  of  Syria  was  the  wine  of 
ef  Helbon.  The  name  occurs  only  here  in 
the  Old  Testament.  The  LXX.  gives  Chel- 
hon;  the  Vulgate,  as  if  it  described  the 
quality  of  the  wine,  vinum  pingue.  It  has 
been  identified  with  Aleppo  and  with  Ohaly- 
bon,  but  botli  of  these  places  are  too  remote 
from  Damascus,  and  Mr.  J.  R.  Porter  ('  Diet. 
Bible,'  i.v.)  finds  it  in  a  place  a  few  miles 
from  Damascus,  still  bearing  the  name,  and 
&mous  as  producing  the  finest  gr.ipes  in 
Syria.  Strabo  (ch.  xv.  p.  735)  names  the 
wine  of  Ohalybon  as  the  favourite  drink  of 
the  Persian  kings,  and  Athenaeus  (i.  22) 
says  the  same  of  the  wine  of  Damascus. 
The  name  appears  in  Egyptian  monuments 
in  conjunction  with  Eedes,  as  a  Hittite  city, 
and  Brugsch  ('  Qeogr.  JEgypt.,'  ii.  45)  agree* 
with  Porter  as  to  its  position.  White  wool. 
The  adjective  has  been  taken  as  a  proper 
name  (Smend)  "  wool  of  Zaehar,"  the  region 
being  identified  with  Nabathcsa,  whioh  was 
famous  for  its  sheep.  The  LXX.  gives 
"  wool  of  Miletus,"  the  city  most  famous  in 
Greek  commerce  for  its  woollen  fabrics. 

Ver.  19. — San  also ;  Hebrew,  Vedan.  The 
Authorized  Version,  following  the  Vulgate, 
takes  the  first  syllable  as  the  common  con- 
junction "aTid;"  but  no  other  verse  in  the 
chapter  begins  in  this  way,  and  the  Bevised 
Version  is  probably  right  in  giving  the 
Hebrew  word  as  its  stands.  Dan,  it  may 
be  added,  was  hardly  likely  to  have  been 
singled  out  of  all  the  tribes  after  the  men- 
tion of  Judah  and  Israel,  especially  as  it 
had  shared  in  the  exile  of  the  ten  tribes. 
Smend  identifies  it  with  Waddcm,  between 
Mecca  and  Medina,  or  with  Aden.  Javan, 
too,  already  named  in  ver.  13,  can  scarcely 


here  be  Greece,  though  it  may  possibly 
refer  to  Greek  traders.  It  also  has  been 
identified  conjeoturally  witli  an  Aral  dan 
city.  The  words,  going  to  and  tro,  have 
been  rendered  "  from  Uzal "  (Qen.  i.  ^7), 
the  ancient  name  of  the  capital  of  Yemen « 
in  Arabia;  or,  as  in  the  Bevised  Versinn, 
wilh  yarn.  The  bright  iron  describes  the 
steel  used  for  sword-blades,  for  which 
Yemen  was  famous.  Cassia  (Exod.  xxx.  24 ; 
Ps.  xlv.  8)  and  calamus  (Exod.  xxx.  23; 
Song  of  Sol.  iv.  14)  both  belong  to  the 
class  of  perfumes  for  which  Arabia  was 
famous.  It  is  probably  the  Acorus  fragrant, 
the  "  sweet  cane  "  of  Isa.  xliii.  24 ;  Jer.  vi 
20. 

Ver.  20. — Sedan  (see  ver.  15).  Here  pro- 
bably we  have  another  portion  of  the  same 
race.  The  precious  clothes  for  riding  (Be- 
vised Version)  were  probably  of  the  nature 
of  the  carpets  used  then  as  now  as  saddle- 
cloths— the  ephippia  of  the  Greeks — in 
Persia  and  other  parte  of  Asia.  Compare 
"  ye  that  sit  on  rich  Carpets,"  in  Judg.  v.  10 
(Bevised  Version).  So  the  Vulgate,  tapetibui 
ad  eedendum.  The  LXX.  gives  KT■^ll7| 
?k\6kto,  as  though  it  referred  to  horses. 

Ver.  21. — Arabia.  The  word,  commonly 
in  connection  with  Dedan,  is  used  in  the 
limited  sense  whioh  attaches  to  it  in  the 
Old  Testament  (2  Ohron.  ix.  14;  Isa.  xxi. 
13 ;  Jer.  xxv.  24)  for  the  tribes  of  what  in 
Greek  and  Roman  geography  were  known 
as  Arabia  Deserta.  Eedar.  The  name 
(equivalent  to  "  blaok-akinned  ")  appears  aa 
that  of  the  second  son  of  Ishmael  (Gen.  xxv. 
13).  The  black  tents  of  Kedar  (Ps.  oxx.  5 ; 
Song  of  Sol.  i.  5)  indicate  a  nomadio  tribe 
of  the  Bedonin  type,  famous,  as  in  Isa.  Ix.  7 
and  Jer.  xllx.  28, 29,  for  their  flocks  of  sheep 
and  camels.  They  appear,  also,  as  having 
cities  and  villages  in  Isa.  xlii.  11.  The  name 
is  used  in  later  rabbinic  writings  for  all 
the  inhabitants  of  Arabia. 

Ver.  22.— Sheba.  The  Sabsea  of  the 
Greeks.  It  is  applied,  in  Gen.  x.  7  and 
1  Chron.  i.  9,  to  a  grandson  of  Gush ;  in  Gen. 
X.  28  and  1  Chron.  i.  22,  to  a  sdn  of  Joktan ; 
and  in  Gen.  xxv.  3  and  1  Chron.  i.  82,  to 
a  grandson  of  Abraham.  Geographically, 
in  Ezekiel's  time  it  probably  included 
the  South-Arabian  region,  that  of  Yemen, 
or  Arabia  Felix,  and  was  famous,  as  in 
the  history  of  the  Queen  of  Sheba,  for 
its  gold,  gems,  and  spices  (I  Kings  x.  1,  2 ; 
Ps.  Ixxii.  10,  15).  Baamah.  Named  is 
Gen.  X.  7  as  father  of  the  Oushite  Sheba, 
and  probably,  therefore,  connected  with  it 
ethnologically  and  geographically.  The 
chief  of  al  spices  had  probably  a  technical 
name,  like  the  '■principal  spices"  of  Exod. 
xxx.  23  and  Bong  of  Sol.  iv.  14  for  the 
genuine  balsam,  l£e  product  of  the  Amyrit 
opobalsamum,    which    is     found    between 


OH.  ixvn.  1—36.]    THE   BOOK   OP  THE    PEOPHET   EZEKIEL. 


8» 


Mecca  ani^  Medina.  The  preoions  stones 
Includes  onyx,  rubies,  agates,  and  cornelians 
found  in  the  mountains  of  Hadramant,  and 
the  jaspers  and  crystals  of  Yemen.  In  the 
BhammanitsB,  mentioned  by  Strabo  as  a 
Babnan  tribe  (xvi.  782),  we  have,  perhaps, 
•  lurTiral  of  the  old  name. 

Yer.  23. — Haran  and  Canneh,  etc.  From 
Arabia  we  pass  to  Mesopotamia.  Haran 
(Gen.  zi.  31)  stands  for  the  Carrhse  of  the 
Itomans,  situated  at  the  point  where  the 
old  military  and  commercial  roads  bifurcated 
towards  Babylon  and  the  Delta  of  the 
Persian  Gulf  in  the  one  direction,  and 
Oanaan  in  the  other.  It  appears  in  Gen. 
ixiT.  10  and  xxix.  4  as  the  city  of  Nahor,  in 
Mesopotamia  (Aram-Kaharaim,  equivalent 
to  "  Syria  of  the  two  rivers  "),  or,  more  defi- 
nitely, in  Padan-Aram,  which  lies  below 
Mount  Masius,  between  the  Khabour  and 
the  Euphrates.  It  is  famous  in  Boman 
history  for  the  defeat  of  Crassus  by  tha 
Farthians.  Canneh.  Theeasternof  the  two 
roads  just  mentioned  ran  on  to  Calneh  (of 
which  Canneh  is  a  variant),  named  in 
Gen.  X.  10  as  one  of  the  cities  built  by 
Nimrod.  It  is  probably  represented  by  the 
modern  Niffer,  about  sixty  miles  south- 
east of  Babylon.  It  is  named  in  Isa.  x.  9 
in  connection  with  Oarohemish,  in  Amos  vi. 
S  with  Hamath  the  great,  as  conquered  by 
the  Assyrians.  It  has  been  conjecturally 
Identified  by  the  Targum  and  other  ancient 
writers  with  Otesiphon,  but  (?).  Eden ;  spelt 
differently  in  the  Hebrew  from  the  Eden  of 
Gen.  ii.  8.  It  is  probably  identical  with 
the  Eden  near  Thelassar  (^Tel-Assar)  of 
laa.  xxxvU.  12  and  2  Kings  xix.  12,  where, 
as  here,  it  is  connected  with  Haran  as 
among  the  Assyrian  conquests.  Its  site 
has  not  been  determined,  and  it  has  been 
placed  by  some  geographers  in  the  hill- 
country  above  the  Upper  Mesopotamian 
plains;  by  others  near  the  confluence  of 
the  Tigris  and  Euphrates.  The  position 
of  the  Eden  of  Amos  i.  5,  near  Damascus, 
points  to  a  Syrian  town  of  the  same 
name.  The  merchants  of  Sheba.  The 
recurrence  of  the  name  after  the  full  men- 
tion of  the  people  in  ver.  22  arises  pro- 
bably from  the  fact  that  they  were  the 
carriers  in  the  commerce  between  the 
Mesopotamian  cities  just  named  and  Tyre. 
Asshur.  The  name  may  stand  (Smend),  as 
it  commonly  does,  for  Assyria  as  a  country ; 
but  its  juxtaposition  with  the  names  of 
<»tieg  has  led  some  geographers  (Movers, 
p.  252,  in  Keil)  to  identify  with  »  city 
Sura  (Eiturieh)  on  the  west  bank  of  the 
Euphrates,  above  Thapsacus  (the  Tiphsah 
of  1  Kings  iv.  24),  and  on  the  caravan- 
route  which  runs  from  Palmyra  (the  Tad- 
mor  of  2  Chron.  viii.  4)  to  Haran.  Chil- 
mad.     The  name  is  not  found  elsewhere. 


The  LXX.  gives  Charman,  a  town  near  the 
Euphrates,  mentioned  in  Xenophon, '  Anab.,' 
i.  5,  10,  as  Charmande.  It  can  scarcely 
have  been  a  place  of  much  general  note,  but 
may  have  had  some  special  reputation  which 
made  it  prominent  in  Tyrian  commerce. 

Ver.  24. — In  all  sorts  of  things ;  better, 
with  the  Revised  Version,  in  choice  ware$. 
Hebrew,  articles  of  beauty;  or,  as  in  margin  of 
the  Authorized  Version,  "  excellent  things." 
The  words  have  been  variously  interpreted, 
(1)  by  Ewald,  as  "  suits  of  armour; "  (2)  by 
Keil, as  "stately  dresses;"  byHavernick,  a* 
"  works  of  art "  generally.  The  description 
in  detail  that  follows  ii  so  vivid  as  to 
give  the  impression  that  Ezekiel  had 
seen  the  merchants  of  Sheba  unloading 
their  camels  and  bringing  out  their  trea- 
sures as  they  arrived  at  Tyre.  The  blue 
clothes  (wrappingt  of  blue,  as  in  the  Be- 
vised  Version)  were  the  purple  robes  of 
Babylon,  which  were  famous  all  over  the 
world.  The  words  that  follow  are  some- 
what obscure,  but  are  probably  rightly 
translated  by  Keil,  "  embroidered  of  twisted 
yarn,  in-wound,  and  strong  cords  for  thy 
wares."  The  yarn  may  have  been  used  for 
the  cordage  of  the  Tyrian  ships.  Tha 
words,  made  of  cedar,  are  in  this  rendering 
taken  as  an  adjective,  equivalent  to  "  firm  " 
or  "  strong  "  (so  Fiirst). 

Ver.  25. — The  verse  begins  a  new  section, 
and  glides  back  into  the  original  metaphor 
of  the  ship,  as  in  vers.  4—9.  The  ship* 
of  Tarshisb  are  used  generically  for  mer- 
chant-ships. The  catalogue  of  the  com- 
merce ends  wit)i  ver.  21,  and  the  more 
poetic  imagery  reappears.  It  was,  as  cen- 
tring in  herself  all  that  they  brought  to  her 
that  the  merchant-city  was  very  glorious 
in  the  midst  of  the  waters.  For  sing-  of 
thee,  read,  the  ehipi  of  Tarihiih  were  thf 
earavant  (Bevised  Version).  The  word  has 
also  the  sense  of  "wall,"  as  in  Jer.  v.  10 
and  Job  xxiv.  11 ;  and  this,  describing  the 
ships  as  the  "  wooden  walls  "  of  Tyre,  gives 
a  tenable  oense  here. 

Ver.  26. — Thy  rowers  have  brought  thea. 
The  metaphor  goes  on  its  course.  Tha 
state-ship  is  in  the  open  sea,  and  the  east 
wind,  the  Euroclydon  of  the  Mediterranean 
(Acts  ixvii.  14),  blows  and  threatens  it 
with  destruction  (eomp.  Ps.  xlviii.  7).  In 
that  destruction  all  who  contributed  to  her 
prosperity  were  involved.  The  picture  re- 
minds us  of  the  description  of  the  ship  of 
Tarshish  in  Jon.  i  4,  5.  The  city  shall 
be  left,  in  that  terrible  day,  in  the  heart 
of  the  seas  (Bevised  Version). 

Ver.  28. — The  suburbs.  The  word  is  so 
translated  in  eh.  xlv.  2,  and  xlviii.  17,  and  is 
used  of  the  pasture-lands  round  the  cities 
of  refuge  in  Numb.  xxxv.  2.  Here  it  is 
probably  used  in  a  wider  sense   for   tha 


90 


TUE   BOOK   OF   THE    PROPHET  EZEKIEL.     [oh.  xxvii.  1—36. 


coast-landa  of  Phcenioia,  or  even  (as  in  the 
margin)  for  the  "waves"  that  wr.shed  the 
shores  of  the  island-city.  The  Vulgate 
gives  classes  (equivalent  to  "  ileets  "). 

Vers.  29— 31.— And  aU  that  handle  the 
oar,  etc.  The  picture  ia,  perhaps,  figura- 
tive. As  Tyre  itself  was  the  great  state-ship, 
so  the  other  ships  may  stand  for  the  other 
Plieenician  cities  that  beheld  her  downfall, 
Looking  to  the  picture  itself,  it  presents  tlie 
rowers  and  others  as  feeling  that,  if  the 
great  ship  had  been  wrecked,  there  was 
little  hope  of  safety  for  them,  and  so  they 
leave  their  ships  and  stand  on  the  cna«t 
wailing.    (For  oasting  dust,  as  a  sign  of 


mourning,  see  Josh.  vii.  6 ;  1  Siun.  iv.  12  ; 
Job  ii.  12,  et  al. ;  for  "wallinMiif;  in  tlie 
dust,"  Jer.  vi.  26;  xxv.34;  Miran  i.  10  10. 
For  the  "baldness"  and  "Backeloin  "  nf 
ver.  31,  see  oh.  vii.  18.) 

Ver.  32. — As  in  other  instanceis  ni  extreme 
sorrow,  the  inarticulate  signs  of  gref  piSi 
after  a  time  into  spoken  wonls.  What  city 
is  like  Tynis,  etc.?  What  parallel  ciu  be 
found  in  the  world's  history,  eithei  for  lier 
magnificence  or  her  fall?  Tli'  shipwieck 
of  her  foitunes  (we  are  still  i n  the  r  gio  i 
of  the  prophet's  metaphors)  wjuld  be  utter 
and  irretrievable. 


HOMILBTICS. 

Ver.  2. — A  lamentation  for  Tyre.  In  the  previous  chapter  the  prophet  denounced 
judgment  on  Tyre;  in  this  chapter  he  utters  a  lamentation  over  the  doomed  city.  The 
one  is  in  the  spirit  of  vengeance,  the  other  in  the  spirit  of  sympathy.  The  prophet 
thus  reveals  to  us  two  elements  in  the  Divine  treatment  of  sin — first  the  wrath  that 
punishes,  then  the  tenderness  that  commiserates. 

I.  Tyre  is  in  a  lamentable  condition.  At  present  she  is  wealthy  and  pro»- 
pero'JS.  But  the  prophet  looks  into  the  future  and  sees  her  doom  approaching. 
Therefore  he  sings  her  funeral  dirge  while  the  thoushtless  city  still  revels  in  luxury. 
Christ  uttered  his  lament  over  Jerusalem  before  a  shadow  of  appioaching  calamity  had 
fallen  on  the  wicked  city.  1.  It  is  lamentable  to  he  living  under  a  doom  of  destruction. 
In  ignorance,  unbelief,  or  carelessness,  men  enjoy  life  although  they  are  guilty  of  Bin* 
that  must  bring  down  the  wrath  of  Heaven.  "  As  in  the  days  that  were  before  the 
Flood,  they  were  eating  and  drinkin?,  marrying  and  giving  in  marriage,  until  the  day 
that  Noah  entered  into  the  ark"  (Matt.  xxiv.  38).  But  to  thoughtful  spectators  aucn 
unseemly  gaiety  is  only  a  source  of  profound  distress.  Surely  if  men  would  but  look 
up,  the  sword  of  Damocles  above  their  heads  should  arrest  the  untimely  mirth.  It  ia 
fearful  for  the  wise  to  be  lamenting  over  the  approaching  fate  which  the  foolish  will 
not  perceive.  2.  It  is  more  lamentable  to  he  living  in  the  sin  that  deserves  this  doom. 
Sin  is  worse  than  its  punishment.  Whatever  men  may  believe  about  the  future,  the 
present  case  of  the  sinner  is  most  deplorable.  If  he  glories  in  his  shame,  that  slukme 
is  only  the  more  lamentable.  The  moat  wretched  condition  of  the  prodigal  son  is  that 
before  he  has  come  to  himself,  when  he  revels  insanely  in  his  degradation. 

II.  The  condition  of  Tteb  excites  commiseration  in  the  servant  of  God. 
Ezekiel  does  not  merely  threaten  vengeance,  he  bewails  the  ill-fated  city.  It  was  the 
crowning  fault  of  Jonah  that  he  had  no  pity  for  Nineveh  (Jonah  iv.  1).  No  one  is 
fit  to  speak  of  future  punishment  who  is  not  moved  to  tenderness  by  a  contemplation 
of  its  woes.  A  harsh  denunciatory  style  is  not  in  harmony  with  the  example  of 
Hebrew  prophecy,  much  less  does  it  agree  with  the  New  Testament  model.  1.  Sin 
should  not  destroy  pity,  but  excite  it.  Jerusalem  was  most  wicked ;  therefore  Christ 
wept  (Luke  xix.  41).  2,  The  heathen  call  for  our  commiseration.  Missionary  enter- 
prises are  founded  on  two  great  motives — the  claims  of  Christ,  and  the  pitiable  con- 
dition of  the  Christless.  Human  brotherhood  should  excite  sympathy  for  the  condition 
of  the  moat  remote.  This  was  here  seen  in  Judaism;  much  more  is  it  to  be  looked 
for  in  Christianity.  3.  We  should  he  most  concerned  at  the  sin  and  danger  of  our 
friends.  Tyre  was  an  old  ally  of  Israel.  If  the  Jews  had  been  more  faithful,  possibly 
the  Phoenicians  might  have  been  saved.  Our  negligence  may  be  to  blame  for  the  fate 
of  our  friends. 

III.  The  lamentation  tor  Tyre  did  not  save  the  city.  1.  Lamentation  will 
not  save  without  repentance.  The  lear  of  future  punishment  will  not  give  a  means  of 
escape  Irom  that  punishment.  We  must  go  further  to  a  confession  of  sin  and  a  ■iesire 
for  a  better  life.     2.  The  lamentation  of  others  will  not  save  the  impenitent.     Ezekiel'^ 


CH.  xxvii.  1—36.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  91 


elegy  did  not  deliver  Tyre.  Even  Christ's  tears  did  not  save  Jerusalem.  3.  The  cross 
of  Christ  is  the  supreme  condition  of  salvation.  Our  own  tears,  a  prophet's  tears,  even 
Christ's  tears,  will  not  save.  But  Christ's  death  brings  deliverance  for  all  who  will 
have  it,  by  atoning  for  sin  and  reconciling  the  sinner  to  God.  When  no  prophet's 
lamentation  will  move  the  hardened  sinner,  the  sight  of  Christ  on  the  cross  dying  for 
him  should  melt  him  to  penitence. 

Ver.  3  (last  clause,  "  Thou  hast  said,  I  am  of  perfect  beauty  "). — Mstheticism,  as 
a  religion.  The  craze  for  sestlieticism  has  been  exalted  into  the  creed  of  a  new  religion. 
It  is  well  so  see  once  for  all  what  this  means,  and  how  hollow,  foolish,  and  fatal  are  its 
pretensions. 

I.  .ffisTHETICISM   AS   A    RELIGION   IS  THE   WORSHIP  OF   BEAUTY.      1.    It   is    more   than 

the  enjoyment  of  beauty,  which  is  innocent  and  even  helpful  to  a  right,  appreciation 
of  God's  wonderful  works.  Beauty  implies  harmony  aud  refinement;  it  excludes 
everything  harsh  and  coaise.  So  far  it  is  good.  2.  .Slstheticism  is  more  than  the 
effort  io produce  beauty.  This  aim  of  art  is  good.  3.  It  is  more  also  than  the  conse- 
cration of  beauty  to  the  service  of  religion.  This  is  right;  we  should  bring  our  best 
to  God ;  religion  should  be  honoured  with  the  homage  rendered  to  it  by  art.  4.  But 
lestheticism  as  a  religion  makes  an  idol  of  the  sacrifice,  by  putting  the  beauty,  which 
should  be  enlisted  in  the  service  of  God,  in  the  place  of  God  himself.  It  is  bowing 
the  knee  to  beauty.  It  sees  nothing  higher  than  the  perfection  of  grace  and  colour 
and  melody.  This  is  as  much  idolatry  as  the  Hottentot's  adoration  of  a  hideous 
fetish. 

II.  .ffiSTHBTICISM    AS   A   BELIQION  MAT  BE   JOINED   TO   THE  GREATEST   ERKOBS.      The 

beautiful  is  not  always  the  true.  There  are  lovely  lies  and  there  are  ugly  truths.  By 
exalting  the  idea  of  the  beautiful  above  all  else,  we  sacrifice  truth  wherever  the  two  do 
nut  a;;ree.  Thus  the  sterner  facts  of  life  are  ignored  and  its  less  attractive  duties  left 
out  of  account. 

III.  .ffisTHETiciSM  AS  A  RELIGION  RISKS  MORALITY.  It  is  Satisfied  with  something 
lower  than  the  beauty  of  holiness.  If  it  rose  to  the  celestial  beauty,  it  could  not  afford 
to  discard  goodness,  for  all  beauty  that  admits  evil  is  corrupted  with  moral  u£;liness ; 
but  this  is  not  perceived  by  the  religion  of  astheticism.  Therefore  there  is  a  degrada- 
tion of  the  very  idea  of  beauty.  Too  often  this  is  in  danger  of  falling  even  lower,  till 
beauty  becomes  a  tempter  to  sin. 

IV.  .ffiSTHETICISM   AS  A   RELIGION  WILL    NOT    SATISFY    THE    SOUL.      A    man    canuot 

live  on  the  perpetual  contemplation  of  a  lily.  Too  much  beauty  cloys.  The  soul 
needs  the  sustenance  of  solid  truth.  It  requires  inward  spiritual  grace.  In  the  hour 
of  temptation  and  in  the  season  of  great  sorrow  the  religion  of  beauty  utterly  fails.  It 
may  charm  the  sentimental;  it  has  no  spell  for  the  suffering;  it  cannot  save  the  fallen; 
it  has  no  evangel. 

"V.  jEsTHETicisM  AS  A  RELIGION  CANNOT  AVERT  BUIN.  Tyre  was  proud  of  her 
beauty  and  confident  in  it.  But  this  was  only  a  piece  of  senseless  self-deception.  Her 
imposing  palaces  did  not  keep  back  the  invader;  they  rather  invited  his  ruthless 
armies.  She  found  no  security  in  the  vain  boast,  "I  am  of  perfect  beauty."  There 
is  no  redemption  in  Eestheticism.  The  sinner  will  not  find  here  any  refuge  from  the 
doom  of  his  guilt.  It  would  be  a  poor  diet  for  unfallen  angels;  for  fallen  men  it  is 
assuredly  no  healing  balm.  Beauty  has  been  brought  down  to  shame  and  suffering. 
No  culture  of  art  or  literature  will  lift  the  refined  mind  out  of  the  danger  that  threatens 
"  the  common  herd  "  of  sinners.  Cultured  and  rough  people  must  come  through  the 
same  strait  gate  of  penitence  and  walk  the  same  narrow  way  of  the  footsteps  of  Christ 
if  they  would  hope  for  salvation. 

Ver.  13. — The  slave-trade.  Among  the  wares  that  the  Phoenicians  imported  into 
Asia  were  Greek  slaves.  "With  the  persons  of  men  ...  did  they  trade  for  thy 
wares"  from  Javan  and  elsewhere.  Thus  early  have  we  a  picture  of  that  hideous 
trafiBc  in  human  flesh  which  is  desolating  the  continent  of  Africa  in  our  own  day. 

I.    The   SLAVE-TRADE  IS  CARRIED   ON  TO  A   TREMENDOUS   EXTENT.      This  is  UO  Small 

evil.  Every  traveller  Into  the  interior  of  Africa  writes  of  its  wide  prevalence.  Whole 
provinces,  vast  regions  as  big  as  European  kingdoms,  are  completely  wrecked  and 


92  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  BZEKIBL.    [ch.  xxvii.  1—36 

depopulated.    We  are  here  face  to  face  with  one  of  the  most  gigantic  evils  of  the 
human  race. 

II.  The  slave-thadb  is  diabolically  ORtrEL.  There  is  cruelty  In  the  very 
seizing  of  innocent  human  beings,  depriving  them  of  their  liberty,  tearing  them  from 
their  families,  driving  them  from  their  native  villages,  and  exporting  them  to  foreign 
countries,  there  to  live  in  perpetual  bondage.  But  the  manner  in  which  this  process 
is  carried  out  aggravates  the  cruelty  of  it  immensely.  No  pruper  provision  is  made 
for  the  transport  of  great  companies  of  men,  women,  and  children  through  vast  regions 
of  African  forest  to  the  const,  and  thence  by  sea  to  their  destination.  By  far  the 
larger  portion  of  the  stolen  victims  perish  on  the  way,  after  suffering  piteously. 

III.  The  slave-trade  is  an  otttbaoe  on  humanity.  All  slaves  are  our  fellow- 
men.  The  Greek  slaves  of  antiquity  were  higher  in  race  than  their  captors.  But  we 
have  no  reason  to  believe  that  they  were  treated  so  cruelly  as  the  African  slaves  are 
treated  hy  the  Arabs.  The  modern  slaves  are  lower  in  civilization  than  their  captors 
— they  cannot  be  lower  in  morals.  But  it  is  the  more  shameful  that  a  powerfid  people 
should  oppress  these  children  of  nature.  They  are  human,  and  God  "hath  made  of 
one  blood  all  nations  of  men  "  (Acts  xvii.  26).  Mankind  is  insulted  in  the  person  of 
the  slaves  and  degraded  to  the  level  of  devilry  in  that  of  their  hunters. 

IV.  The  slave-trade  is  a  wrong  in  the  sight  of  Heaven.  The  notion  that 
the  Arabs  are  civilizing  Africa,  and  even  prepanng  for  Christianity  by  leading  the 
native  people  out  of  their  heathen  darkness  to  the  belief  in  one  God  and  the  higher 
life  of  Mohammedanism,  is  not  encouraged  by  the  reports  of  those  who  have  witnessed 
what  is  happening  on  the  spot.  On  the  contrary,  the  enforced  conversion  of  whole 
tribes  who  are  terrorized  by  the  slave-hunters  cannot  mean  any  real  advance  in  religion, 
while  the  awful  wickedness  of  the  trade  carried  on  by  these  Mohammedan  missionaries 
is  one  of  the  greatest  sins  in  the  sight  of  God. 

V.  The  slave-trade  must  be  stopped.  No  crusade  could  be  more  needed  or 
more  blessed  in  its  result  than  one  that  was  wisely  directed  for  the  suppression  of  this 
curse  of  Africa.  Christianity  is  the  inspiration  of  philanthropy.  Christ  infnses  an 
enthusiasm  of  humanity  in  his  true  followers.  Christians  should  not  rest  till  they 
have  done  all  that  in  them  lies  to  suppress  the  vile,  cruel  slave-trade. 

Ver.  26. — Great  waters  of  affliction.  The  troubles  that  are  to  overtake  Tyre  In  the 
Chaldean  invasion  are  compared  by  the  prophet  to  a  sea  of  great  waters  into  which 
the  rowers  have  brought  the  ship— an  image  that  would  come  home  to  ft  maritime 
people. 

I,  Souls  may  have  to  encountbb  great  waters  of  AwiiioTioH.  1.  Their 
troubles  are  muUitudinouB.  People  talk  of  "a  sea  of  troubles,"  referring  to  the  number 
of  distresses  that  they  have  met  with.  2.  Their  troubles  are  reitlesi.  They  come 
with  changes,  and  they  make  disturbance  like  the  ceaseless  tossing  and  moaning  of 
the  sea.  3.  Their  troubles  are  aggressive.  The  great  waters  roU  in  waves,  beat 
against  the  ship,  sweep  her  deck,  and  threaten  to  dash  her  to  pieces.  Troubles  are 
not  merely  negative  evils  like  cold  and  darkness ;  they  are  positive  in  their  activity, 
and  they  threaten  to  dash  the  soul  to  destruction.  4.  Their  troubles  are  overwhelming. 
The  waves  pour  over  the  ship,  the  great  waters  threaten  to  drown  the  sailor.  6.  Their 
troubles  are  deep.  Fathoms  deep  the  sinking  ship  goes  down  in  the  black,  engulfing 
raters.    So  souls  sink  in  sorrow  and  despair. 

n.  These  great  waters  or  affliction  mat  bis  fousd  where  onlt  prosperitt 
IB  expected.  The  Phoenicians  were  not  helpless  landsmen.  Familiar  with  the  ses 
from  their  childhood,  they  regarded  it  as  the  highway  of  their  commerce.  Their 
wealth  was  got  by  trading  over  its  waters.  Yet  the  treacherous  sea  can  turn  against 
its  most  trusting  children.  None  dread  it  so  much  as  sailors  who  have  learnt  its 
power  and  their  own  helplessness  when  it  rises  in  its  fury.  It  often  happens  that 
calamity  meets  a  man  in  his  most  familiar  haunts.  Where  he  looks  for  a  blessing 
he  meets  with  a  curse.  This  is  possible  with  all  earthly  things.  Therefore  the  most 
confident  is  not  secure  against  trouble. 

in.  Too  often  men  bring  themselves  into  their  obeatbst  troubles.  "  7%y 
rowers  have  brought  thee  into  great  waters."  Instead  of  keeping  to  the  sheltered 
course  in  the  lea  of  the  cliffs,  the  heedless  rowers  have  pulled  out  into  a  reach  of  water 


OH.  xxvn.  1— 36.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIBL.  93 

where  the  sea  is  runnuig  high.  It  is  no  fault  of  the  waters  that  the  ship  is  thus  thrust 
into  danger.  Men  rush  headlong  into  trouble  by  folly  and  sin.  They  have  no  right 
to  set  down  the  consequences  to  the  inscrutable  mystery  of  Providence. 

IV.   God  18   THE  ONB   REFuaS   FEOM    THB    GEBAT   WATBB8    OF    AFFLICTION.      1.    IT9 

may  still  the  tvateri.  As  Christ  quieted  the  storm  on  Oennesaret,  so  will  he  still 
tumults  of  trouble.  Our  course  is  to  pray  for  help,  and  trust  him  where  we  can  do 
nothing  for  ourselves.  2.  Se  may  draw  us  out  of  the  waters.  Thus  David  says,  "  He 
sent  from  above,  he  took  me,  he  drew  me  out  of  many  waters  "  (Ps.  xviii.  16).  Christ 
put  forth  his  hand  and  saved  Peter  from  perishing  (Matt.  xiv.  31).  When  circum- 
stances cannot  be  altered,  we  may  be  uplifted  and  saved  from  sinking  in  them.  3.  Se 
may  b«  with  us  on  the  waters.  It  may  not  be  possible  to  alter  circumstances  nor  to 
remove  us  from  them.  Then  we  may  be  strengthened  to  withstand  them,  as  St. 
Paul's  ihip  was  strengthened  when  the  sailors  undergirded  it. 

**  With  Christ  In  the  vessel,  I  smile  at  the  stoim."  • 

Ver.  32. — An  incomjxtrahle  doom.  The  dreadful  doom  of  Tyre  is  regarded  as  without 
paralleL    Consider  why  this  is  so. 

I.  Ths  sbeatesx  sm  bbinos  the  obeatest  doou.  All  men  do  not  sin  equally,  and 
all  will  not  be  punished  to  the  same  extent — some  with  few  stripes,  others  with  many 
■tripes.  Tyre  sinned  grievously,  therefore  Tyre  was  to  be  punished  grievously.  It  is 
not  the  man  who  thinks  himself  the  lightest  sinner  who  will  certainly  be  let  off  with 
the  smallest  amount  of  punishment.  We  are  not  to  be  our  own  judges  and  the  assessors 
of  our  own  guilt.  There  will  be  many  great  surprises  in  the  day  of  judgment.  Tht 
heaviest  doom  will  be  for  those  who  kuew  the  right  way  and  yet  did  not  walk  in  it 
(Luke  xii.  47,  48).  Therefore  there  will  be  heavier  penalties  even  than  those  earned 
oy  Tyre.  Christ  says  it  will  be  more  tolerable  for  Tyre  and  Sidon  in  the  day  of  judg- 
ment than  for  Bethsaida  and  Cfaorazin,  for  the  heathen  Pboenician  cities  had  not  the 
Wportunities  that  were  afiorded  to  the  GalilEean  towas  in  which  Christ  had  laboured 
flLuke  z.  13).  If  London  sins  like  Tyre,  London's  doom  must  be  greater  than  Tyre's, 
ua  a  city  of  Christendom  has  privileges  which  the  pagans  never  enjoyed. 

n.   ThB  GBEATEBT  doom  will   be   felt  Of  C0KTBA3T   TO   THE   HI0HB8T   PBOSPEBITT. 

The  fall  of  Tyre  was  most  appalling  because  her  previous  splendour  had  been  most 
Imposing.  Dives  writhing  in  agony  in  Hades  arrests  attention  because  he  was  previously 
enjoying  the  greatest  luxury.  The  contrast  is  not  merely  a  striking  dramatic  effect  for 
the  outside  observer.  It  produces  the  most  intense  results  in  the  feelings  of  the  sufferer. 
We  feel  by  contrast,  and  the  greater  the  contrast  the  keener  are  our  feelings.  Thus  a 
millionaire  brought  down  to  destitution  feels  the  hardships  of  the  poor-house  far  more 
•cutely  than  the  beggar  who  has  never  been  accustomed  to  more  sumptuous  fare. 
Souls  that  have  tasted  of  Christ's  grace  must  sutfer  more  agonies,  if  they  become  cast- 
aways at  last,  than  souls  that  have  never  experienced  its  blessedness, 

III.  Thk  GBBATE8T  DOOM  MAV  BE  AVERTED.  Thsse  things  are  written  for  our 
instruction — to  warn  us  to  flee  from  the  approaching  wrath,  not  to  paralyze  us  wiih 
hopeless  dismay.  Tyre  was  overthrown,  and  its  foundations  became  drying-grounds 
for  the  fisherman's  nets  exactly  as  Ezekiel  had  predicted  (ch.  xxvi.  5).  The  threats 
of  future  punishment  are  equally  certain  so  long  as  the  sin  that  rouse?  them  remains. 
But  Christ  has  come  to  destroy  the  curse  of  sin  and  to  free  the  soul  from  its  doom.  It 
is  foolish  to  seek  some  faint  encouragement  from  risky  attempts  to  minimize  the 
prospect  of  future  punishment,  and  so  to  lull  the  soul  to  sleep  in  its  periL  There  can 
be  no  use  in  exaggerating  the  statements  of  Scripture,  nor  can  there  be  any  wisdom  in 
making  the  least  of  them.  True  wisdom  lies  in  recognizing  the  tmspeakable  horror  ol 
sin  and  its  doom  to  the  full,  and  then  turning  to  Christ  for  deliverance  from  the  sin  as 
much  ai  from  its  penalties. 

Ver.  35. — A  great  surprise.  All  the  neighbouring  inhabitants  are  astonished  at  the 
terrible  and  unexpected  fate  of  strong,  proud  Tyre.  The  dramatic  event  sends  a  shock 
of  »mazement  through  all  the  region  round  about.     This  great  surprise  is  instructive. 

I.  Men  expect  the  odbtomaet  to  coNTiNms.  The  intellect  is  conservative. 
Novelty  is  unlocked  for.  We  believe  that  the  future  will  be  like  the  past  for  no  other 
reatuju  than  that,  on  the  whole,  things  seem  to  be  stable  and  tlie  course  of  tne  world 


94  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [ch.  xxvii.  1—36, 

uniform.  But  every  now  and  tben  the  unexpected  happens,  as  though  to  warn  us  that 
things  may  not  continue  for  ever  in  their  present  quiet  state.  The  antediluvians  were 
too  much  accustomed  to  the  regular  rotation  of  the  seasons  to  believe  Noah's  preaching. 
Vesuvius  had  slumbered  for  unknown  years  before  the  great  eruption  overthrew 
Herculaneum  and  Pompeii,  and  the  consequence  was  that  its  foot  was  covered  with 
buildings.  People  have  but  faint  apprehensions  of  Divine  judgment  because  life  runs 
on  at  present  in  its  old  groove. 

II.  SUPEEFICIAL  PROSPERITY  IS  OFTEN  MISTAKEN  FOB  SOLID  SBOURITY.      Tyre  waS  SO 

great  and  rich  and  beautiful  that  her  neighbours  had  never  anticipated  her  downfall. 
There  is  no  surprise  at  the  destruction  of  poor  little  pastoral  kingdoms  like  Ammon 
and  Moab.  But  when  a  nation  that  is  in  the  foremost  rank  of  the  world's  progress  is 
smitten  down,  men  are  simply  confounded.  Thus  the  destruction  of  Tyre  surprised  her 
neighbours,  as  the  sack  of  Rome  by  the  Goths  astounded  the  contemporaries  of  St. 
^Augustine  and  St.  Jerome.  Men  have  to  learn  that  splendour  is  not  strength,  and  that 
prosperity  is  not  its  own  security. 

III.  People  may  be  taken  fob  a  time  at  thbib  own  estimate.  Tyre  boasted  of 
her  magnificence.  "  Thou  hast  said,  I  am  of  perfect  beauty  "  (ver.  3).  She  prided 
herself  in  her  strong  sea-walls,  and  until  they  were  tested  in  battle  none  knew  that  they 
were  not  strong  enough  to  withstand  the  shock  of  the  northern  invader.  The  Church 
is  proud  of  her  orthodoxy,  her  splendour,  her  stren  •  'i,  and  thus  she  may  lead  simple 
minds  to  trust  in  her  certain  safety.  But  all  such  boasting  brings  no  real  strength.  It 
goes  down  at  a  touch  from  hard  realities.  Then  the  deceived  are  dismayed.  In  the 
end  the  discovery  brings  shame  on  the  head  of  the  boasters. 

IV.  A  PBABFUL  CALAMITY  IS  ASTouNDiNO.  We  USB  big  words,  but  We  fail  to  com- 
prehend their  meaning ;  and  even  when  our  own  language  is  translated  into  fact  we 
are  surprised  at  seeing  what  it  really  meant.  There  is  a  tendency  to  water  down  the 
strong  language  of  Scripture.  No  doubt  this  is  largely  due  to  a  reaction  against  th» 
coarse  literalism  of  earlier  ages.  A  revolt  from  descriptions  of  future  punishment  which 
quiet,  thinking  people  could  not  believe  to  h".  true  of  their  own  familiar  acquaintances, 
has  landed  us  in  a  region  of  mild  theology.  But  there  are  stern  and  terrible  realities  in 
Gk)d's  judgments  on  that  horrible  thing  sin.  When  these  are  witnessed  assureilly  they 
will  give  a  great  surprise  to  complacent  people  who  are  now  content  to  imbibe  the 
thinnest  dilutiong  of  Scripture  doctrines  of  coming  judgment. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — ^25. — The  beauty,  glory,  and  replenishment  of  the  city  of  !l\/r«.  This 
portion  of  Ezekiel's  writings  evinces  a  very  remarkable  acquaintance  with  the  geography 
and  the  economics  of  the  then  known  world.  Perhaps  the  prophet,  living  in  the  heart 
of  a  great  Oriental  monarchy,  and  in  intercourse  not  only  with  his  countrymen,  but 
with  men  of  various  nationalities,  may  have  acquired  something  more  of  a  cosmopolitan 
habit  of  mind  than  was  common  among  the  Jews.  Certain  it  is  that  the  commercial 
relations  of  Tyre  are  described  with  singular  care  and  minute  accuracy.  It  is  evident 
that,  in  the  view  of  Bzekiel,  every  society  and  community  of  men  was  in  some-  way 
connected  with  the  reign  of  Q-od  upon  earth ;  that  whilst  in  a  special  sense  Jehovah 
was  ac  ounted  the  Sovereign  of  the  Hebrews,  there  was  a  very  important  sense  in  which 
all  peoples  were  subject  to  Divine  authority,  and  were  the  objects  of  Divine  regard  and 
interest.  The  sympathies  of  Ezekiel,  though  patriotic,  were  far  from  being  narrow  and 
provincial.  He  was  able,  by  the  force  of  histurical  imagination,  to  consider  Tyre  as, 
for  a  time  and  for  a  purpose,  the  centre  of  the  life  and  activity  of  the  world.  Though 
inspired  to  foretell  Tyre's  destruction,  the  prophet  was  by  no  means  insensible  to 
Tyre's  beauty  and  splendour,  to  the  magnificent  range  of  the  city's  commerce  and 
interests,  to  the  importance  of  the  city  to  the  work  and  well-being  of  the  nations. 
There  may  have  been  soraethina  of  rhetorical  art  in  thus  dilating  upon  Tyre's  glory  in 
the  very  moment  of  foretelling  Tyre's  fall.  But  the  religious  motive  was  the  strongest. 
Ezekiel  wished  to  show  that,  however  indispensable  a  city  or  a  state  may  be  in  the 
view  of  men,  God  doe^  not  regard  it  as  indispensable,  and  may  even  fulfil  his  purposes 


OH.  XXVII.  1—36.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  95 

by  bringing  about  its  dissolution  and  destructioiu     In  this  brilliant  sketch  of  the 
position  of  Tyre  among  the  nations  of  the  earth,  we  may  recognize — 

I.  The  stateliness  of  the  city's  beauty. 

II.  The  splbndoub  of  the  city's  fleets. 

III.  The  skill  of  the  city's  mariners. 

IV.  The  valouk  of  the  city's  armies. 

V.  The  vastness  of  the  city's  trade.  It  is  in  this  connection  that  Ezekiel 
introduces  neighbouring  and  even  distant  states,  showing  in  detail  in  what  manner 
each  was  connected  with  Tyre,  what  were  the  natural  productions  or  manufactures 
which  they  brought  to  the  world's  great  emporium.  It  was  as  a  commercial  port  that 
Tyre  was  celebrated,  and  by  its  ships  and  its  fearless,  adventurous  navigators  distant 
lands  wi  re  brought  within  the  range  of  civilization, 

VI.  The  abundance  of  the  city's  wealth. 

VII.  The  glory  of  the  city's  renown. 

Vin.  The  hollowness  of  the  city's  prosperity.  No  wonder  that  Tyre  was  tho 
envied  of  the  nations;  no  wonder  that  men  looked  upon  the  city  as  secure  of  a  long 
lease  of  opulence,  of  ease  and  luxury,  of  splendour,  of  power,  and  of  fame.  Yet  beneath 
all  this  there  was  wanting  the  basis  upon  which  alone  can  be  surely  reared  the  edifice 
of  true  prosperity.  There  was  boasting  and  arrogance ;  but  there  was  no  humility,  no 
suVijection  to  the  righteous  sway  of  the  Eternal  King,  no  recognition  of  the  sacred 
respousibiliti'  s  which  accompany  the  possession  of  advantages  and  acquisitions  such  as 
those  of  Tyie.  Thus  it  was  that  in  the  time  of  trial  the  city  was  found  incapable  of 
enduring  and  of  profiting  by  Divine  discipline.  It  was  founded,  not  upon  the  rock  of 
righteousness  and  piety,  but  upon  the  shifting  quicksands  of  worldly  prospeiity  and 
renown.  It  fell,  and  great  was  the  fall  of  it.  "  Every  plant,"  said  Jesus,  "  which  my 
heavenly  Father  hath  not  planted,  shall  be  plucked  up." — T. 

Vers.  26,  27. — National  shipwreck.  The  metaphor  employed  in  this  passage  by  the 
poet-prophet  is  peculiarly  appropriate.  What  so  fitted  to  represent  the  maritime  city 
Tyre  as  a  gallant  ship  ?  In  figurative  language  Ezekiel  pictures  the  stateliness  and 
prosperity,  followed  by  the  wreck  and  destruction,  of  the  famous  mistress  of  the  seas. 

I.  Tyre  m  its  prosperity  is  like  a  majestic  and  richly  laden  oalley.  Com- 
m.'ice  and  wealth,  maritime  and  military  greatness,  are  characteristic  of  the  famous 
Phoenician  port ;  and  these  are  represented  as  the  freight  of  the  vessel  as  she  skims  the 
surface  of  the  smooth  waters  beneath  the  sunny  skies. 

II.  Tyre  in  its  time  of  trial  is  like  a  galley  overtaken  by  a  sudden  and 
VIOLENT  tempest.  The  vessel  is  built  for  calm  weather,  and  is  ill  fitted  to  contend 
with  storms.  When  war  was  waged  against  Tyre  by  "  the  king  of  kings,"  Nebuchad- 
nezzar of  Babylon,  then  the  power  of  "  the  queen  of  the  seas"  was  put  to  the  proof. 
Not  that  Tyre  succumbed  at  once ;  the  resistance  offered  was  long  and  stubborn  ;  the 
city  was  fighting  for  its  life.  It  was  not  like  a  great  and  populous  nation  occupying 
an  extensive  territory,  which  may  be  vanquished,  but  cannot  be  exterminated.  If  tho 
city  upon  the  rock  was  captured  and  destroyed,  Tyre  was  annihilated  as  well  as 
conquered.  Hence  the  severity  of  the  struggle,  which  was  a  struggle,  not  for  wealth 
and  power  merely,  but  for  existence. 

III.  Tyre  in  its  defeat  and  destruction  is  like  a  galley  which,  with  all  its 
CAitGO,  sinks  in  the  MIDST  OF  THE  SEAS.  The  great  waters  and  the  east  wind  work 
their  will.  The  rowers  are  powerless ;  skill  and  strength  are  of  no  avail.  The  richly 
laden  vessel  goes  down  with  all  her  costly  freight  and  gallant  crew.  Riches  and 
magnificence,  valour  and  experience,  are  powerless  to  save  when  the  decree  has  gone 
forth  that  opportunities  have  been  neglected,  iTivileges  have  been  abused,  that  moral 
laws  have  been  violated,  and  that  the  God  of  nations  has  been  defied.  The  lessons  of 
history  have  been  studied  to  little  purpose  if  they  have  not  taught  us  that  "  the  Lord 
reigneth,"  that  he  "  doeth  according  to  his  will  among  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth," 
that  he  "  brings  down  the  lofty  from  their  seat."  The  multitude  of  the  host  and  much 
strength  are  a  vain  refuge  from  the  justice  and  the  power  of  "  the  Lord  of  lords." — ^T. 

Vers.  28 — 36. — The  hewailing  of  the  city.  Very  picturesque  and  impressive  is  thii 
representation  of  the  effect  produced  upon  the  nations  by  the  fall  of  Tyre.     So  world- 


96  THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxvn.  1— 36. 

wide  was  the  city's  commerce,  that  no  people,  however  distant,  could  be  unaffected  by 
the  catastrophe;  and  so  awful  was  its  fate,  that  no  sensitive  mind  could  contemplate  it 
unmoved.  To  the  vision  of  the  prophet-poet,  the  galley  labours  and  strains,  and  at  last 
sinks  in  the  waters  of  the  Mediterranean.  The  dwellers  upon  the  land  and  those  who 
sail  the  sea  gather  together  upon  the  shore  to  witness  the  shipwreck.  Their  cry  and 
bitter  wailing  fill  the  air.  Every  sign  of  humiliation  and  of  mourning  is  exhibited  by 
thf-  spectators.  A  lamentation,  a  dirge,  rises  from  the  company  of  those  deeply  moved 
by  sympathetic  sorrow.  They  celebrate  the  glories  of  the  past ;  they  bear  witness  to 
present  calamity  and  woe ;  they  confess  with  terror  that  Tyre  never  shall  be  more. 
We  trace  in  the  demeanour  and  the  language  hei'e  depicted — 

I.  Astonishment  at  the  bpbctaole  of  destruction.  The  scene  was  so  unexpected, 
so  much  in  contradiction  to  all  human  anticipation  and  fores-ight,  so  revolutionary,  so 
appailing,  tliat  amazement  was  the  predominant  emotion  of  those  who  witnessed  it. 

II.  Sense  op  the  world's  lobs  by  reason  or  the  shipwreck.  The  earth  seemed 
poorer  for  the  overthrow  and  annihilation  of  Tyre — the  leading  seaport  and  commercial 
centre  of  the  nations.  In  ver.  33  this  loss  is  depicted,  the  loss  alike  of  peoples  and  of 
kings.  Biches  and  mercl  andise  disappeared,  engulfed  with  Tyre  iu  the  insatiable  deep. 
The  march  of  human  civilization  seemed  to  be  arrested. 

III.  Contrast  with  the  remembered  and  memorable  past.  Cities,  like  men, 
are  sometimes  best  understood  and  appreciated  when  they  are  no  more.  Those  who 
recollected  Tyre's  splendour  would,  in  their  old  age,  tell  a  new  generation  of  the  bygone 
wonders.  "  Who  is  there  like  Tyre,  like  her  that  is  brought  to  silence  in  the  midst  of 
the  sea  ?  "  The  puny  successors  to  the  peerless  seaport  would  point  many  a  moral,  and 
inspire  many  a  regret  for  vanished  glories. 

IV.  Unsettlehent  and  forebodinq  as  to  the  futdbb.  Astonishment  is  often 
associated  with  fear  and  trouble.  When  a  vast  calamity  occurs,  it  is  as  if  the  fountains 
of  the  great  deep  were  broken  up.  Men's  hearts  fail  them  for  fear.  What  is  to  be  the 
future  of  the  world's  history  ?  What  nation  is  secure  ?  What  throne  is  stable  ?  What 
principle,  what  power,  shall  bear  sway  in  coming  times  ?  There  is  but  one  answer  to 
these  questions,  but  one  confidence  that  can  never  be  shaken,  "  The  kingdoms  of  the 
earth  are  the  Lord's."— T. 

Vers.  1 — 36. —  Wreck  of  a  stately  ihip.  There  is  a  striking  resemblance  between  a 
gallant  ship  and  an  empire.  Many  persons  and  orders  are  united  in  a  state  under  one 
governor  or  captain.  There  is  a  unity  amid  diversity.  A  state,  like  a  ship,  has  inter- 
change of  interests  witli  other  nations.  Upon  the  skill  and  prudence  of  the  pilot 
depends  the  prosperity  of  empire  or  ship.  The  whole  life  of  Tyre  was  poured  into  the 
channel  of  commerce.     Heaoe  the  figure  would  be  readily  appreciated. 

L  The  component  parts  of  this  ship  were  gathered  world-wide.  The  timber 
was  supplied  from  one  country,  iron  from  another,  cordage  from  a  third,  sails  from 
ft  fourth.  Evidently  God  intended  that  nations  should  be  linked  together  in  inter- 
dependence. The  commodities  essential  for  civilization  are  wisely  distributed  through 
many  lands,  so  that  friendly  intercommunion  may  be  mutual  advant^e.  National 
exclusiveness  is  substantial  loss.  No  country  is  prosperous  in  the  highest  measure 
that  is  nut  willing  to  import  learning  and  legislation,  scientific  inventions  and  natural 
products,  I'rom  other  lands.  Tyre  owed  her  greatoess  and  her  prosperity  to  a  large  and 
generous  commerce.  She  was  willing  to  receive  from  the  most  obscure  or  most  distant 
people.     The  ripest  sage  can  learn  from  a  little  child. 

II.  The  ship's  grew.  "  "  Thy  wise  men,  0  Tyrus,  that  were  in  thee,  were  thy  pilots." 
Sailors,  helmsmen,  aad  defenders  were  choseu  of  those  most  skilful  for  their  particular 
work.  Such  a  course  is  the  only  reasonable  one ;  and  yet,  in  the  direction  of  political 
affairs,  this  course  is  often  abandoned.  Men  are  allowed  to  rule,  or  are  chosen  to  rule, 
either  in  supreme  or  subordinate  places,  because  of  their  pedigree,  or  their  titles,  or 
their  wealth,  or  their  arrogance.  The  interests  of  the  state  are  imperilled,  the  safety 
of  the  state  is  jeopardized,  by  partiality  or  by  partisanship.  The  only  qualification 
for  office  is  personal  fitness.  No  one  would  entrust  his  life  in  a  ship  which  was  not 
commanded  by  a  skilful  and  experienced  captain. 

III.  The  ship's  business.  The  proper  business  of  a  ship  is  usefulness.  She  has 
been  constructed  and  manned  to  convey  passengers  and  commodities  from  land  to  land. 


OH.  xxra.  1— 36.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEU  97 

The  overplus  of  material  substance  in  one  land  may  thus  be  conveyed  to  lands  where 
lack  is  felt.  Interchange  promotes  mutual  advantage,  mutual  confidence,  mutual  good 
wiU.  The  nation  so  employed  is  a  blessing  to  the  world.  Knowledge  is  diffused, 
healthy  emulation  is  aroused,  religious  truth  is  disseminated. 

IV.  Every  detail  of  a  nation's  commebob  has  an  interest  in  the  mind  of  God. 
It  is  very  noteworthy  that  God  should  have  made  known  to  Ezekiel  all  these  particulars 
in  the  history  and  commerce  of  Tyre ;  for  it  is  obvious  that  the  prophet  in  Chaldea 
could  have  known  them  in  no  other  way — unless,  indeed,  he  had  been  there  before  the 
Captivity.  Not  an  item  in  the  mercantile  transactions  of  Tyre  but  received  the  cog- 
nizance of  God.  Every  purchase,  every  sale,  obtained  either  his  smile  or  his  frown. 
Nor,  if  we  reflect  on  the  matter,  need  we  wonder.  If  God  tiikes  an  interest  in  all  our 
personal  affairs,  so  must  he  also  in  our  united  interests  and  in  our  public  concerns.  If 
he  stoops  to  count  the  hairs  of  our  head,  he  is  only  consistent  with  himself  when  he 
notes  every  legislative  measure  and  every  international  transaction. 

"V.  Self-esteem  is  an  element  of  weakness.  "  0  Tyrus,  thou  hast  said,  I  am  of 
perfect  beauty."  A  well-built  ship,  weli  fitted  and  complete,  is  a  thing  of  beauty.  It 
has  a  charm  for  the  eye.  But  herein  lies  a  danger.  If  the  owner  be  taken  up  with 
the  beauty  of  his  ship,  he  is  prone  to  neglect  her  planks  and  bolts  and  cordage.  The 
external  brightness  of  a  ship  is  no  security  against  inward  rottenness.  So  is  it  with 
the  state  politic.  There  may  be  Qiany  outward  signs  of  prosperity — wealth,  magni- 
ficence, high  reputation,  prosperous  commerce — and  yet  there  may  be  a  worm  at  the 
root,  a  hidden  leak  that  may  founder  the  gallant  ship.  The  only  real  element  of 
stability  is  righteousness.  The  only  true  rampart  of  defence  is  the  favour  of  Jehovah. 
Instead  of  self-esteem,  there  ought  to  be  thankfulness.  Instead  of  self-boasting,  there 
should  be  trust  in  God. 

VI.  The  stoutest  ship  is  liable  to  wbeoe.  Every  part  in  the  construction  and 
furniture  of  a  ship  is  a  human  contrivance  to  harmonize  with  the  forces  of  God  in 
nature,  and  to  resist  what  is  perilous  to  life.  Yet  human  contrivances  are,  at  the  best, 
imperfect.  They  cannot  face,  in  serious  battle,  the  material  forces  of  God.  Some 
simple  occurrence  in  nature,  such  as  a  waterspout,  an  electric  spark,  or  an  earthquake, 
may  shatter  in  a  moment  the  staunchest  ship.  Sooner  or  later  every  ship  finishes  its 
career.  Scarcely  ever  has  a  ship  endured  the  natural  period  of  a  human  life.  If  it  has 
braved  a  thousand  storms,  it  yields  to  natural  decay,  and  falls  to  pieces  in  the  harbour. 
Apart  from  God,  there  is  nothing  durable,  nothing  permanent. 

VII.  The  wkbok  of  a  noble  ship  pboduobs  widespbead  gbief.  It  is  a  spectacle 
distressing  to  the  eye  to  see  a  fine  ship  wrecked  upon  a  rocky  coast.  But  as  soon  as 
the  imagination  takes  in  the  full  meaning  of  the  event,  the  paiu  felt  is  greater.  We 
think  of  the  crew — all  their  privations  and  anxieties  and  final  death.  We  think  of 
desolate  widows  and  orphaned  children.  We  think  of  the  loss  of  valuable  property, 
the  frustration  of  hopes,  the  impotence  of  human  contrivances  and  skill,  the  blow  to 
further  enterprise,  the  sense  of  hidden  danger  which  surrounds  us  all.  Wider  still  and 
deeper  is  the  terror  awakened  in  men's  minds  when  a  flourishing  empire  succumbs  to 
fierce  invasion.  Human  hopes  are  crushed.  Security  to  Ufe  and  property  is  disturbed. 
A  great  panic  spreads.  Life  in  every  place  seems  imperilled.  If  Tyre  falls,  what 
empire,  what  city,  can  be  safe?  Things  material  often  receive  rude  disturbance,  that 
we  may  find  our  security  in  that  kingdom  "  which  cannot  be  shaken." — D. 

Vers.  1 — 36. — A  celebration  of  remarlcabU  prosperity.  "  The  word  of  the  Lord  came 
again  unto  rae,  saying,  Now,  thou  sou  of  man,  take  up  a  lamentation  for  Tyrus,"  etc. 
"  We  have  here,"  says  Hengstenberg, "  the  lamentation  over  the  fall  of  Tyre,  announced 
in  the  foregoing  chapter.  First,  its  present  glory  is  presented  at  full  length  to  the  view 
(vers.  1 — 25) ;  then  its  fall,  the  importance  of  which  can  only  be  understood  from  the 
knowledge  of  its  glory.  We  must  profoundly  know  the  gloria  mundi  if  we  are  to  take 
to  heart  the  sio  transit  gloria  mundi."  So  the  prophet  sketches  the  riches  and  luxury, 
the  power  and  glory,  of  the  island-city.     We  have  before  us — 

I.  A  oblebbation  of  remabkablb  pbospebitt.    Ezekiel  exhibits  several  distinct 

features  of  the  prosperity  of  Tyre.      1.   Ber  advantageous  situation.     "  Thou  that 

dwellest  at  the  entry  [Hebrew,  '  entrances ']  of  the  sea  .  .  .  thy  borders  are  in  the 

heart  of  the  seas."     Being  built  on  an  island,  the  sea  was  accessible  from  every  side  of 

kzekiel — n.  H 


98  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxvn.  1— «6. 

Tyre,  and  its  ships  might  go  forth  into  all  seas  with  their  merchandise.  Those  towns 
which  are  situated  on  navigable  rivers,  or  on  seaports,  geuerally  become  rich  and 
prosperous.  The  situation  of  Tyre  was  favourable  both  to  its  safety  and  to  its  com- 
mercial prosperity.  2.  The  grandew  of  her  buildings.  "  Thy  builders  have  perfected 
thy  beauty."  In  the  architecture  and  construction  of  her  edifices.  Tyre  occupied  a 
distinguished  position  amongst  the  cities  of  her  age  (cf.  ch.  xxvi.  12, 17).  3.  Bar  great 
riches,  important  handicrafts,  and  extensive  commerce.  In  vers.  5 — 9  the  riches  of  the 
proud  city  are  indicated.  In  these  verses  "  the  state  of  Tyre  appears  under  the  figure 
of  a  splendid  ship.  ...  In  the  Tynan  state,"  says  Hengstenberg,  "  the  representation 
by  the  symbol  of  a  ship  was  the  more  natural,  as  it  was  a  maritime  power.  The  capital 
lay  lilie  a  ship  in  the  midst  of  the  sea,  and  was  suriouuded  with  a  forest  of  masts."  All 
the  materials  and  fittings  and  furniture  of  this  ship  were  of  the  best  and  richest  materials, 
indicating  the  wealth  and  luxury  of  the  Tyrians.  Persons  from  other  Phoenician  cities 
are  represented  as  serving  in  subordinate  offices  in  the  ship,  while  the  chief  offices  were 
held  by  the  Tyrians  themselves,  thus  indicating  that  the  powers  of  those  cities  were 
used  to  advance  the  prosperity  of  Tyre,  while  the  Tyiians  retained  authority  in  their 
state  in  their  own  hands.  Tyre  was  also  famous  for,  and  her  prosperity  was  advanced 
by,  her  handicraftsmen.  In  both  ver.  16  and  ver.  18  we  read  of  "  the  multitude  of  her 
handiworks."  The  prophet  does  not  mention  the  nature  of  these  arts  and  manufactnrts. 
But  the  Tyrians  were  skilful  in  the  mechanical  arts.  Much  beautiful  artistic  work  in 
brass  or  copper  in  the  temple  which  Solomon  built  was  executed  by  Tyrian  workmen 
(1  Kings  vii.  13 — 45).  Moreover,  Tyre  was  celebrated  for  the  manufacture  of  costly 
robes,  jewellery,  etc.  The  wide  extent  of  the  trade  of  the  island-city  is  exhibited  by 
Ezekiel  in  this  chapter  (vers.  12 — 25).  Without  entering  into  the  details  of  that 
account  here,  it  will  be  clear  to  any  one  who  will  examine  it  that  Tyre  "  traded  with 
every  part  of  the  tbecL  known  world,  either  immediately  or  through  the  medium  of 
other  nations."  So  great  was  her  prosperity,  riches,  etc.  4.  Her  strong  fortificottions 
and  military  defences,  (Vers.  10, 11.)  Here  are  walls  and  towns  manned  by  mercenary 
soldiers  for  the  protection  of  the  city.  There  was  a  general  tendency  in  commercial 
cities  to  employ  mercenaries  for  their  military  service,  "  on  account  of  the  high  wages 
which  may  be  obtained  by  artisans  in  a  thriving  community  compared  with  the  ordinary 
pay  of  a  soldier."  To  this  tendency  Tyre  had  conformed.  In  her  service  there  were 
hardy  mountaineers  from  Persia,  Africans  obtained  through  the  commerce  of  Egypt, 
Phoenicians  from  AiTad,  and  the  Gammadim,  or  valorous  men,  or  bold  champions — a 
designation,  probably,  of  a  troop  eminent  for  bravery.  Thus  was  Tyre  favourably  situ- 
ated, splendidly  built,  abundant  in  riches,  prosperous  in  trade,  and  efficiently  guarded. 

II.  A  OELBBBATION  OF  EBMAEKABLE  PKOSPERITY  INOBDINATELT  OLOBtED  IN.     "  ThoU, 

O  Tyre,  hast  said,  I  am  perfect  in  beauty  "  (ver.  3 ;  cf.  Isa.  xxiii.  8,  9).  The  Tyrians 
boasted  themselves  in  their  riches,  prosperity,  and  power.  In  the  next  chapter  this 
proud  boasting  is  very  strikingly  exhibited  (vers.  2 — 5).  Pride,  self-confidence,  and 
sinful  boasting  the  Tyrians  had  grown  into  by  reason  of  their  position,  prosperity,  and 
power.  Babylon  in  the  height  of  her  glory  and  strength  manifested  a  similar  spirit. 
.She  said  in  her  heart,  "  I  shall  be  a  lady  for  ever  ...  I  am,  and  there  is  none  else 
beside  me,"  etc.  (Isa.  xlvii.  7, 8).  There  is  grievous  sin  and  great  danger  in  such  pride 
of  heart  and  presumption  of  speech.  It  is  worse  than  vain  for  either  a  community  or 
an  individual  to  boast  of  worldly  power  or  prosperity ;  for  commanding  power  may 
soon  be  reduced  to  abject  weakness,  and  conspicuous  prosperity  to  deplorable  destitu- 
tion. "  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  Let  not  the  wise  man  glory  in  his  wisdom,  neither  let 
the  mighty  man  glory  in  his  might,"  etc.  (Jer.  ix.  23,  24). 

III.  A  OBliBBBATION  OF  BBMARKABLE  PEOSPEBITT  WITH  A  BI8NIFICANT  OMISSION.      In 

recounting  the  glories  of  Tyre,  nothing  is  said  of  her  religion  or  righteousness.  The 
prophet  makes  no  mention  of  her  piety  towards  Qod,  or  her  kindness  or  justice  towards 
men.  He  praises  her  "  for  all  that  she  had  that  was  praiseworthy.  He  has  nothing  to 
say  of  her  religion,  her  piety,  her  charity,  her  being  a  refuge  to  the  distressed,  or  using 
hor  interest  to  do  good  offices  among  her  neighbours ;  but  she  lived  great,  and  had  a 
great  trade,  and  all  the  trading  part  of  mankind  made  court  to  her."  A  nation  is  in  a 
sad  plight  when  its  only  glories  are  temporal  and  material,  when  it  is  not  established 
and  exalted  by  reverence  and  righteousness.  In  such  case  its  glories  are  likely  to  ba 
evanescent,  its  prosperity  fleeting,  and  its  power  insecure. 


OH.  xxvn.  1— 36.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  W 

lY.   A  OELEBBATIOISI  OF  BEItABKABLE  FBOBPEBTTT  DISASTBOUBLT  TEBUINATED.     "  Thy 

rowers  have  brought  thee  into  great  waters,"  etc.  (Vers.  26,  27).  The  figure  of  a  ship, 
which  was  dropped  while  narrating  the  trade  of  Tyre,  is  here  resumed,  and  her  &11  is 
depicted  as  a  shipwreck.  The  great  waters  and  the  east  wind,  which  in  that  district 
was  marked  by  violent  and  continued  blasts,  indicate  the  sufferings  and  perils  which 
issued  in  the  overthrow  of  the  proud  city.  Notwithstanding  her  secure  situation, 
abundant  riches,  extensive  commerce,  and  strong  defences,  she  has  been  reduced  to 
ruins.  "  Nothing  human,"  says  Greenhill,  "  can  protect  a  sinful  city  and  people  from 
the  judgments  of  God.  Tyrus  was  as  strong  a  place  as  the  world  had ;  her  walls, 
towers,  ships,  wise,  strong  men,  could  not  do  it.  Tyrus  was  as  rich  a  place  as  any 
under  heaven — she  had  a  multitude  of  riches ;  yet  these  kept  her  not  from  being 
brought  into  great  waters.  What  power  or  art  of  man  can  keep  off  the  wind  from  a 
ship  when  it  is  at  sea?  It  is  not  in  the  power  of  all  the  seamen  or  mariners  in  the 
world  to  do  it ;  neither  can  any  number  of  men,  or  all  men,  keep  off  a  judgment  of 
Ood  when  it  is  coming  upon  a  sinful  place." 

V.  The  DISASTROUS  TGBMINATIOK  OF  BEMABKABLB  PBOSPEBITY  VABIOtTSLT  BEOABDED. 

(Vers.  28^36.)  Some  would  look  upon  the  overthrow  of  Tyre :  1.  With  lamentation. 
"  At  the  sound  of  the  cry  of  thy  pilots  the  suburbs  shall  shake,"  etc.  (vers.  28 — 33). 
They  bewail  the  fall  of  the  island-city,  not  merely  because  of  that  catastrophe,  but  also 
because  of  its  significance.  If  the  queen  of  the  sea  is  ruined,  what  city  upon  earth  can 
be  safe  ?  (See  our  homily  on  ch.  xxvL  16 — 18.)  2.  With  affright,  "  All  the  inhabit- 
ants of  the  isles  are  astonished  at  thee,  and  their  kings  are  horribly  afraid,  they  are 
troubled  in  their  countenance  "  (ver.  35).  Alarm  for  their  own  safety  would  be  joined 
with  their  amazement  at  the  downfall  of  Tyre.  3.  With  scoffing.  "  The  merchants 
among  the  peoples  hiss  at  thee  "  in  malicious  joy.  They  who  had  been  her  rivals  in 
commerce,  and  they  who  had  envied  her  prosperity,  would  look  upon  the  ruin  of  Tyre 
with  rejoicing  and  scorn.  Tyre  had  exulted  in  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  and  when 
her  evil  day  came  there  were  those  who  exulted  in  her  destruction.  "  The  Lord  is  a 
Ood  of  recompenses,  he  shall  surely  requite." 

CoNoiiUSioN.  Our  subject  has  an  impressive  message  to  a  nation  like  our  own.  In 
some  respects  we  resemble  the  proud  queen  of  the  sea,  particularly  in  our  insular 
situation,  our  world-wide  commerce,  and  our  great  power.  Let  us  take  heed  that  we 
do  not  resemble  her  in  her  sins — her  selfishness,  her  self-sufficiency,  her  pride,  her 
boasting.  Only  as  our  life  as  a  nation  is  marked  by  righteousness  and  the  fear  of  God 
have  we  any  reliable  guarantee  for  our  continued  permanence  and  prosperity. — W.  J. 

Vers.  12 — 25. — A  pictv/re  of  exteniive  commercial  relation!,  "Tarslish  was  thy 
merchant  by  reason  of  the  multitude  of  all  kind  of  riches,"  etc.  The  following  topics 
are  suggested  for  consideration. 

I.  The  disteibution  of  the  pboduots  of  obeation  in  the  vaeious  couktries  of 
THE  world.  We  see  from  the  verses  before  us  that  Tyre  drew  its  supplies  from  and 
sent  its  productions  to  most  or  all  the  places  of  the  then  known  civilized  world.  No 
country  can  supply  its  own  inhabitants  with  all  the  necessaries  and  luxuries  of  life. 
Every  country  produces  something  which,  if  not  needful,  is  desirable  for  other  countries. 
N:  one  can  say  to  another,  "  I  have  no  need  of  thee."  In  this  arrangement  we  have 
an  evidence  of  the  wisdom  and  goodness  of  the  Creator. 

n.  The  mutual  dependence  and  intercourse  of  nations  abisinq  out  of  the 
uiSTBiBUTiON  OF  THEiB  BESPEOTIVB  PBODUOTS.  Tyre  had  commercial  relations  with 
all  the  places  mentioned  in  our  text.  Amongst  these  difierent  peoples  there  was  a 
mutual  dependence.  The  interests  not  even  of  the  mightiest  and  most  extensive 
empire  are  absolutely  self-contained  or  independeut  of  others.  The  strong  depend  upon 
the  weak  at  least  for  some  things.  To-day  Great  Britain  draws  supplies  for  ber  count- 
less and  multifarious  wants  from  every  quarter  and  almost  (if  we  may  use  the  expres- 
sion) from  every  corner  of  the  world,  and  sends  her  products  to  every  part  of  the  world. 
This  mutual  dependence  and  intercourse  of  nations  helps  forward  the  development  and 
progress  of  mankind.  It  contributes  to  the  recognition  of  excellence  in  others,  though 
it  may  be  of  a  type  different  from  our  own,  to  the  enlargement  of  our  views  and  ideas, 
to  the  promotion  of  peace,  etc. 

III.  The  duty  and  intebest  of  nations  to  cultivate  pbaoeful  and  fbisndt.t 


100  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxvii.  1— 36 

MUTUAL  RELATIONS.  Mutual  dependence  and  interests  should  beget  mutual  considera- 
tion. Misunderstandings  and  wars  amongst  nations  are  exceedingly  prejudicial  to 
commercial  development  and  prosperity.  Wars  severely  check  both  the  cultivation 
and  the  distribution  of  the  products  of  the  countries  which  are  engaged  therein.  They 
lay  waste  lands,  they  block  up  ports,  they  draw  men  away  from  peaceful  and  remune- 
rative industries,  and  they  tax  national  resources  which  might  otherwise  be  profitably 
employed.  A  just  and  comprehensive  view  of  commercial  relations  and  the  conditions 
of  commercial  prosperity  would  constitute  a  strong  barrier  against  war  and  a  powerful 
incentive  to  international  peace  and  friendship. 

"War's  a  game  which,  were  their  subjects  wise, 
Kings  would  not  play  at.    Nations  would  do  well 
To  extort  their  truncheons  from  the  puny  hands 
Of  heroes,  whose  infirm  and  baby  minds 
Are  gratified  with  mischief;  and  who  spoil. 
Because  men  suffer  it,  their  toy  the  world." 

(Cowper.) 

IV.  The  Divine  observation  of  oommbboial  relations  and  praotioes.  This 
minute  and  extensive  recognition  and  enumeration  of  the  dealings  of  Tyre  with  other 
places  and  peoples,  in  the  inspired  message  of  the  prophet,  implies  such  observation, 
God's  law  is  coextensive  with  man's  life.  No  province  of  our  being  and  activity  is 
beyond  his  authority.  No  transactions  of  our  life  escape  his  notice.  Well  does  Matthew 
Henry  say,  "  This  account  of  the  trade  of  Tyre  intimates  to  us  that  God's  eye  is  uprm 
men,  and  that  he  takes  cognizance  of  what  they  do  when  they  are  employed  in  their 
worldly  business,  not  only  when  they  are  at  church,  praying  and  hearing,  but  when 
they  are  in  their  markets  and  fairs,  and  upon  the  exchange,  buying  and  selling,  which 
is  a  good  reason  why  we  should  in  all  our  dealings  keep  a  conscience  void  of  offence, 
and  have  our  eye  always  upon  him  whose  eye  is  always  upon  us."  And  Scott,  "They 
who  engage  in  commerce  should  remember  that  they  are  the  servants  of  God,  and 
learn  to  conduct  their  business  accnrding  to  the  precepts  of  his  Word,  in  submission 
to  his  providence,  and  with  an  aim  to  his  glory." 

v.  The  supreme  impobtanoe  in  commerce  of  righteous  principles  and  prac- 
tices. Selfish  disregard  of  the  interests  of  others  (ch.  xxvi.  2),  proud  boasting  of  her 
own  power,  prosperity,  and  glory  (ver.  3 ;  ch.  xxviii.  2 — 5) ;  and  a  debasing  idolatry, — 
led  to  the  overthrow  of  Tyre.  Apart  from  righteousness,  commercial  and  all  other  pros- 
perity will  pass  away.  Tyre  was  once  the  most  famous  city  "  in  the  world  for  trade 
and  commeice.  But,"  as  Bishop  Newton  observes,  "trade  is  a  fluctuating  thing;  it 
passed  from  Tyre  to  Alexandria,  from  Alexandria  to -Venice,  from  Venice  to  Antwerp, 
from  Antwerp  to  Amsterdam  and  London,  the  English  rivalling  the  Dutch,  as  the 
French  are  now  (1754)  rivalling  both.  All  nations  almost  are  wisely  applying  them- 
selves to  trade ;  and  it  behoves  those  who  are  in  possession  of  it  to  take  the  greatest 
care  that  they  do  not  lose  it.  It  is  a  plant  of  tender  growth,  and  requires  sun  and 
soil  and  fine  seasons  to  make  it  thrive  and  flourish.  It  will  not  grow  like  the  palm 
tree,  which  with  the  more  weight  and  pressure  rises  the  more.  Liberty  is  a  friend  to 
that,  as  that  is  a  friend  to  liberty.  But  the  greatest  enemy  to  both  is  licentiousness, 
which  tramples  upon  all  law  and  lawful  authority,  encourages  riots  and  tumults, 
promotes  drunkenness  and  debauchery,  sticks  at  nothing  to  supply  its  extravagance, 
practises  every  art  of  illicit  gain,  ruins  credit,  ruins  trade,  and  will  in  the  end  ruin 
liberty  itself.  Neither  kingdoms  nor  commonwealths,  neither  public  companies  nor 
private  persons,  can  long  carry  on  a  beneficial  flourishing  trade  without  virtue,  and 
what  virtue  teacheth,  sobriety,  industry,  frugality,  modesty,  honesty,  punctuality, 
humanity,  charity,  the  love  of  our  country,  and  the  fear  of  God.  The  prophets  will 
Inform  us  how  the  Tyrians  lost  it;  and  the  like  causes  will  always  produce  lik» 
effects."'— W.J, 

I  *  Dial,  on  the  Prophecies,'  diss.  xi. 


OH.  xxvni.  1— 26.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIBL. 


101 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEB  XXVIII. 


Ver.  1. — ^Fiom  the  city  the  prophet  passes 
to  ita  rnler,  who  concentrated  in  himself 
whatever  was  most  arrogant  and  boastful  in 
the  temper  of  his  people.  He  is  described 
here  as  a"  prince,"  in  ver.  12  aa  "  king,"  and 
the  combination  of  the  two  words  points 
probably  to  some  peculiarity  of  the  Tyrian 
constitution.  "Prince"  it  will  be  remem- 
bered, is  constantly  used  by  Ezekiel  of  Zede- 
kiah  (ch.  vii.  27 ;  xii.  20,  et  al.).  The  King  of 
Tyre  at  the  time  was  Ithobal  or  Ethbaal  III. 
(Josephns,  '  Contra  Apion,'  i.  21),  who  had 
taken  part  with  Phaiaob-Hoplira  and  Zede- 
kiah  in  the  league  against  N^ebuohadnezzar. 
Ezekiel's  description  of  what  one  may  call 
his  self-apotheosis  may  probably  have  rested 
on  11  personal  knowledge  of  the  man  or  of 
official  documents. 

Ver.  2. — ^I  am  a  God.  We  are  reminded 
of  Isaiah's  words  (xiv.  IB,  14)  as  to  the 
King  of  Babylon.  Did  Ezekiel  emphazise 
and  amplify  the  boasts  of  Ethbaal,  with  a 
side-glance  at  the  Ohaldean  king,  who  also 
was  lifted  up  in  the  pride  of  his  heart 
(Dan.  iv.  30)  ?  For  like  examples,  see  the 
boast  of  Hophra,  in  oh.  xxix.  3 ;  and  the 
praise  given  to  Herod  Agrippa  by  the 
Tyrians  (Acts  xii.  21).  It  is  noticeable  that 
St.  Paul's  description  of  the  man  of  sin  (2 
Thess.  ii.  4)  presents  the  same  picture  in 
nearly  the  same  words.  I  sit  in  the  seat  of 
God,  etc.  Tyre  was  known  as  the  Holy 
Island  (Sanehon.,  edit.  Orelli,  p.  86).  The 
city  was  thought  of  as  rising  f^om  its  waters 
like  the  rock-throne  of  God.  Though  thou 
let  thy  heart.  The  words  remind  us  of  the 
temptation  in  Gen.  iii.  5.  To  foiget  the 
limitations  of  human  ignorance  and  weak- 
ness, to  claim  an  authority  and  demand  a 
homage  wliioh  belong  to  God,  was  the  sin 
of  the  Prince  of  Tyre,  as  it  liad  been  that 
of  Sennacherib,  as  it  was  of  Nebuchad- 
nezzar, as  it  has  been  since  of  the  emperors 
of  Borne,  and  of  other  rulers. 

Yer.  3. — Thou  art  wiser  than  Daniel,  etc. 
There  is,  of  course,  a  marked  irony  iu  the 
words.  Daniel  was  for  Ezekiel — and  there 
aeems  something  singularly  humble  and 
pathetic  in  the  prophet's  levereuoe  for  his 
contemporary — llie  ideal  at  once  of  right- 
eousness (oh.  xiv.  14)  and  of  svisdom.  He  was 
a  revealer  of  the  secrets  of  tlie  future,  and 
read  the  hearts  of  men.  His  fame  was 
spread  far  and  wide  through  the  Chaldean 
empire.  And  this  was  the  man  witli  whom 
the  King  of  Tyre  compared  himself  with  a 
eelf-satisded  sense  of  superiority,  and  he 
found  the  proof  of  his  higher  wisdom  in  his 
wealth.    Here,  again,  I  venture  to  trace  a 


side-thrust  at  Nebuchadnezzar  and  hli 
tendencies  in  the  same  direction,  "Ii  not 
this  great  Babylon,  which  I  have  builded  ?" 

Ver.  7. — I  will  bring  strangers,  etc. 
These  are,  of  course,  the  hosts  of  many 
nations  that  made  up  the  Chaldean  army 
(comp.  the  parallel  of  ch.  xxx.  11  and  zxxi. 
12).  The  beauty  of  thy  wisdom  is  that  of 
the  city  on  which  the  prince  looked  ai 
having  been  produced  by  his  policy. 

Vers.  8,  9.— The  effect  of  the  Ohaldean 
invasion  was  to  bring  the  king  down  to  the 
nether  world  of  the  dead.  In  the  use  of 
the  plural  "deaths"  we  have  a  parallel  to 
the  "  plurima  mortis  imago "  of  Virgil 
('  .^neid,'  ii.  369).  And  this  death  was  not 
to  be  like  that  of  a  hero-warrior,  but  as  that 
of  those  who  are  slain  in  the  midst  of 
the  seas,  who  fall,  i.e.,  in  a  naval  battle,  and 
are  cast  into  the  waters.  Would  he  then 
repeat  his  boast,  I  am  Ood  t 

Ver.  10. — The  climax  comes  in  the 
strongest  language  of  Hebrew  gcom.  As 
the  uncircumcised  were  to  the  Israelita 
(1  Sam.  xvii.  36;  xxxi.  4),  so  should  the 
King  of  Tyre,  uuhonoured,  unwept,  with  no 
outward  marks  of  reverence,  be  among  the 
great  ones  of  the  past  who  dwell  in  Hades. 
Ezekiel  returns  to  the  phrase  in  ch.  xzzi. 
18  ;  xxxii.  24.  The  words  receive  a  special 
force  from  the  fact  that  the  Phoenician* 
practised  circumcision  before  their  inter- 
course with  the  Greeks  (Herod.,  ii.  104). 

Yer.  12. — Thou  sealest  up  the  sum,  etc. 
The  noun  is  found  only  here  and  in  oh. 
zliii.  10,  where  it  is  translated  "pattern," 
but  is  cognate  with  the  word  rendered  "  tale  " 
(equivalent  to  "  measure  ")  of  Exod.  v.  13, 
and  "  measure  "  in  ch.  xiv.  11.  The  probable 
meaning  is,  ITwu  setteit  the  seal  to  Oiy 
completenesa  (^perfection).  Thou  deemest 
that  thou  hast  attained  the  consummation 
of  all  bpauty  and  wisdom.  The  LXX.  and 
the  Vulgate  give,  "  Tliou  art  a  seal ; "  and 
this  suggests  a  parallelism  with  Jeremiah't 
works  to  Coniah  (Jer.  xxii.  24).  The  words 
were,  of  course,  written  with  a  keen  irony. 
This  was  what  the  King  of  Tyre  thought  of 
himself. 

Yer.  13. — Thou  hast  been  in  Eden,  etc. 
The  words  are  suggestive,  as  showing  that 
Ezekiel  n  as  familiar  with  the  history  of  Gen. 
ii.  and  iii.  (compare  the  mention  of  Noah, 
in  ch.  XV.  14,  20).  To  him  the  King  of 
Tyre  seemed  to  claim  a  position  like  that 
of  Adam  before  his  full,  perfect  in  beauty 
and  in  wisdom,  the  lord  of  the  creatiou. 
And  in  that  fancied  Eden  he  stood,  go  he 
thought,  not  like  Adam,  "  naked  and 
ashamed,"  but  like  one  ot  the  ulierubim  tliat 
guarded  the  gates  of  the  primeval  Paradise 


102 


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxvin.  1— 26. 


(Gen.  Hi.  24),  covered  with  all  imaginable 
eplendour.  Ezekiel  returns  to  the  phrase 
in  ch.  xxxi.  8,  16,  18  and  xxxvi.  35.  Other 
instances  meet  ns  in  Jnel  ii.  3  and  Isa.  li.  3. 
Every  preciona  stone.  All  the  stones 
named  are  found  in  the  list  of  the  gems  on 
the  high  priest's  breastplate  (Exod.  xxviii. 
17 — 20;  xxxiz.  8—14).  Three,  however, 
of  those  gems  are  wanting — those  in  the 
third  row  of  the  breastplate — which  are 
not  named  elsewhere;  and  the  order  is 
not  the  same.  The  LXX.  maies  the  two 
lists  identical,  apparently  correcting  Ezekiel 
by  Exodus.  St.  John  (Kev.  xxi.  19)  re- 
produces his  imagery  in  his  vision  of  the 
foundation-stones  of  the  new  Jerusalem,  but 
naturally  returns  to  the  fulness  of  the 
symbolic  number — twelve.  Possibly  the 
description  of  gold  and  bdellium  and  onyx 
(or  beryl),  as  in  Gen.  ii.  11,  12,  may  have 
sugi>;ested  the  thought  that  Eden  was  a 
laud  of  jewels.  The  workmanship  of  thy 
tabret  and  pipes;  better,  the  service.  The 
Authorized  Version  and  Revised  Version 
follow  Luther.  Keil  agrees  as  to  "  tabret " 
(so  Gen.  xxxi.  27 ;  Isa.  T.  12 ;  elsewhere, 
as  in  Exod.  xv.  20  and  Job  xxi.  12,  the 
Authorized  Version  gives  "timbrels"),  but 
takes  the  latter  word  (not  found  elsewhere) 
as  identical  with  its  feminine  form,  and 
meaning  "  female."  He  sees  in  the  clause, 
accordingly,  a  picture  of  the  pomp  of  the 
Tyrian  king,  surrounded  by  the  odalisques 
of  the  harem,  who,  with  their  timbrels, 
danced  to  his  honour  as  their  lord  and  king 
(comp.  Isa.  xxiii.  16 ;  Exod.  xv.  20 ;  1  Sam. 
xviii.  6),  Havernick,  who  agrees  with 
Eeil,  calls  attention  to  a  passage  in 
Athenseus  (xii.  8.  p.  531),  in  which  Strato, 
a  Sidonian  king,  is  said  to  have  prepared 
for  a  great  festival  by  bringing  girls  who 
played  on  the  flute  and  harp  from  all  parts 
of  Greece.  Others,  however  (Smend),  find 
in  both  the  words  articles  of  jewellery, 
pearls  perforated  or  set  in  gold  (as  in  Exod. 
zzviii.  20),  and  so  see  in  them  the  conclu- 
sion of  the  description  of  the  gorgeous 
apparel  of  the  king.  Fiirst  takes  the  words 
as  meaning  musical  instruments  that  were 
of  gold  set  with  jewels.  Ewald,  following 
out  the  Urim  and  Thummim  idea,  takes  the 
gems  as  the  subject  of  the  sentence,  and 
translates,  "  they  were  for  the  work  of  thine 
oracles  and  divining."  On  the  whole,  the 
interpretation  giveu  above  seems  preferable. 
In  the  day  that  thou  wast  created.  The 
words  point  to  the  timeof  the  king's  enthrone- 
ment ur  coronation.  It  was  then  that  lie 
appeared  in  all  his  supreme  magnificence. 
Had  Ezekiel  been  a  witness  of  that  ceremony  7 
Ver.  14. — The  anointed  cherub  that 
covereth.  The  word  for  "anointed"  is  not 
found  elsewhere,  but  is  cognate  in  form 
with  that  which  is  commonlv  so  rendered. 


The  Vulgate,  however,  tracing  it  to  another 
root,  gives  extentui  et  protegens,  and  is 
followed  by  Luther,  Gesenius,  Ewald,  and 
others.  Eeil  and  Hengstenberg  accept 
"anointed."  The  sequence  of  thought 
seema  to  be  as  follows:  The  splendour  of 
the  King  of  Tyre  had  suggested  the  idea  of 
Eden  the  garden  of  God.  This,  in  its  turn, 
led  on  to  that  of  the  cherub  that  was  the 
warder  of  that  garden  (Gen.  iii.  24).  The 
Paradise  of  God  is  pictured  as  still  existing, 
and  the  cherub — we  remember  how  promi- 
nent the  word  and  the  thing  had  been  in  ■ 
Ezekiel's  thoughts  (ch.  i.  10  ;  x.  1 — 16) — is 
there  (according  as  we  take  the  above 
words)  either  as  its  anointed,  t.e.  "con- 
secrated," ruler,  or  as  extending  the  protec- 
tion of  its  overshadowing  wings  far  and 
wiile  as  the  cherubim  of  the  tabernacle 
extended  their  wings  over  the  ark  (comp. 
Exod.  XXV.  20;  xxxiii.  22;  1  Kings  viii. 
7).  Those  cherubim,  we  may  remember, 
were  actually  anointed  (Exod.  xxx.  2,  6). 
The  King  of  Tyro  boasted  that  he  was,  like 
them,  consecrated  to  his  ofiSce  as  king  "  by 
the  grace  of  God."  In  that  eaithly  Paradise 
the  prophet  saw  the  "holy  mountain  of 
God,"  the  Olympus,  bo  to  speak,  of  the 
Hebrews,  the  throne  of  the  Eternal  (com- 
pare the  Meru  of  India,  the  Albard  of  Iran, 
the  Asgard  of  German  poetry).  Isaiah's 
words  as  to  the  Kin^s;  of  Babylon  (xiv. 
13,  14)  present  a  suggestive  parallel.  In 
the  midst  of  the  stones  of  fire.  The  words 
receive  their  interpretation  partly  from  Gen. 
iii.  24;  partly  from  2  Sam.  xxii.  9,  13; 
Ps.  xviii.  8,  12 ;  cxx.  4.  The  cherub's 
sword  of  fire  is  identified  with  the  light- 
ning-flash, and  that  in  its  turn  with  the 
thunderbolts  of  God.  Out  oF  the  throne  of 
God  went  thunders  and  lightnings  (Exod. 
xix.  16).  The  "Flammantia  mienia 
mundi "  of  Lucretius  (I.  73)  offers  a  sug- 
gestive parallel.  The  King  of  Tjie,  like 
the  King  of  Babylon  (Isa.  xiv.  13.  1-1),  is 
painted  as  exulting  in  that  attribute  of  the 
Divine  glory. 

Ver.  15. — Thou  wast  perfect  in  thy  ways. 
The  glory  of  the  King  of  Tyre  was,  the 
prophet  goes  on  to  say,  conditional.  He 
began  his  reign  in  righteousness,  but  after- 
warils  iniquity  was  found  in  him.  And 
the  rout  of  that  iniquity  was  the  pride  of 
wealth  engendered  by  the  greatness  of  his 
commerce  (ver.  16).  He  was  no  longer  like 
the  cherub  who  guarded  the  Paradise  of 
God,  but  like  Adam  when  he  was  cast  out 
from  it.  Wealth  and  pride  had  tempted  liim 
to  violence  and  to  wron<r,  and  he  was  no 
longer  an  "  anointed  "  or  consoorated,  but 
a  proraned  and  desecrated,  king.  The,, 
"stones  of  fire,"  the  thunders  and  light- 
nings  of  the  Divine  Majesty,  sliould  no> 
longer  protect  him. 


OH.  KViii.  l-^26.j    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  BZEKIBL. 


lOS 


Yer.  17. — Thine  heart  was  lifted  up,  etc. 
Id  yet  anothei  point  Ezekiel  sees  the  fall  of 
Adam  reproduced  in  that  of  the  Tyrian 
king.  He  had  forfeited  his  beauty  and 
his  xnsdom  through  the  pride  which 
Bought  for  a  yet  greater  glory  by  a  false 
and  counterfeit  wisdom  (Gen.  iii.  6).  I 
will  cast  thee,  etc.  The  words  are  better 
taken,  as  in  the  Hevised  Version,  in  the 
past  tense,  I  have  cast  thee  . ,.  .  I  have  laid 
thee  before  kings.  Pride  was  to  have  its  fall, 
as  in  Isa.  xxiii.  9.  The  very  sanotunries, 
tlie  temples  which  made  Tyre  the  "  holy 
island,"  were  defiled  by  the  iniquities 
through  which  the  wealth  that  adorned 
them  had  been  gained.  The  "  fire,"  instead 
of  being  a  lampart  of  protection,  should 
burst  forth  as  from  the  centre  of  the 
sunciuary  to  destroy  him.  Is  there  an 
implied  allusion  to  the  fiery  judgment  that 
fell  on  Nadab  and  Abihu  (Lev.  x.  2)  and  on 
Kiirah  and  his  company  (Numb.  xvi.  35)?, 
The  doom  of  8ie  transit  gloria  mandi  was 
already  passed  on  her. 

Ver.  19. — Thou  shalt  be  a  terror,  etc. 
The  Icnell  of  doom,  as  heard  in  oh.  xxvii.  36, 
rings  out  again.  The  same  judgment  falls 
alike  on  the  city  and  on  its  king. 

The  question  when  and  in  what  manner 
the  prediction  received  its  fulfilment  lias 
been  much  discussed.  Josephus  ('  Ant.,'  x. 
11.  1 ;  '  Contra  Apion,'  i.  19)  states  that 
Nebuchadnezzar  besieged  the  island  Tyre 
and  Ithobal  (Ethbaal  III.)  for  thirteen  years; 
that,  on  his  father's  death,  leaving  his 
Phoenician  and  other  captives  to  be  brought 
by  slower  stages,  he  himself  hastened  to 
Biibylon,  and  that  afterwards  he  conquered 
tho  whole  of  Syria  and  Fhcenicia;  but  he 
does  not  say,  with  all  the  Tyrian  records 
before  him,  that  the  city  was  actually 
captured  by  him.  It  has  been  inferred) 
indeed,  from  ch.  xxix.  18,  that  Nebuchad- 
nezzar's siege  of  Tyre  ended  in,  at  least, 
partial  failure,  that  he  and  his  army  had  no 
"  wages  "  for  their  work,  i.e.  that  the  spoil 
of  the  city  was  meagre  and  disappointing. 
Possibly  the  merchant-princes  of  the  city 
had  contrived  to  carry  off  part  of  their 
treasures  in  their  ships.  On  the  other  hand, 
it  may  be  noted  (1)  that  the  national 
historians  of  the  ancient  world  (perhaps  not 
of  that  only)  willingly  minimized  the 
disasters  of  their  country ;  and  (2)  that  the 
Phoenician  fragment  quoted  by  Josephus 
('Contra  Apion,'  i.  21)  simply  for  syn- 
chronistic purposes,  shows  a  significant 
cliange   of  government  following    on    the 


siege.  Ithobal  was  "king"  during  the 
thirteen  years,  but  afterwards  "judges" 
were  appointed,  and  these  ruled  for  periods 
of  two,  or  three,  or  ten  months.  All  this 
indicates  a  period  of  confusion  and  anarchy, 
the  consequence  of  some  great  catastrophe. 
As  a  whole,  too,  we  have  to  remember  that 
it  was  with  Tyre,  as  with  Babylon  and  with 
other  nations.  The  prophecies  against  them 
had  "  springing  and  germinant  accomplish- 
ments." What  the  prophet  saw  in  vision,  as 
wrought  out  in  a  moment  of  time,  was 
actually  the  outcome  of  the  slow  decay  of 
centuries,  and  of  catastrophes  separated 
from  each  other  by  long  intervals  of  a 
dwindling  history.  The  main  facts  of  that 
history  may  be  briefly  stated.  There  was, 
as  implied  in  Isa.  zxiii.  17,  a  revival  of 
commerce  under  the  Persian  monarchy,  and 
of  this  we  have  traces  in  Neh.  xiii.  16. 
Two  hundred  and  fifty  years  after  Nebu- 
chadnezzar, Tyre  was  stiU  so  strongly 
fortified  that  Alexander  the  Great  did  not 
take  it  till  after  a  seven  years'  siege  (Died. 
Sic, xvii.  20 ;  Arrian.,  ii  17;  Q.  Curtius,  iv. 
2 — 4).  It  rose  again  into  wealth  and  power 
under  the  Seleucidss,  and  the  Ilomans  made 
it  the  capital  of  their  province  of  Phcenicia. 
It  appears  as  a  flourishing  town  in  Matt.  xv. 
21 ;  Acts  xii.  20 ;  xxi.  37,  and  is  described 
by  Strabo  (xvi.  2, 23)  as  having  two  harbours 
and  lofty  houses.  Prom  a.d.  636  to  1125  it 
was  in  the  hands  of  the  Saracens.  Saladin 
attacked  it  without  success  in  a.d.  11S9. 
In  A.D.  1291,  after  Acre  had  been  taken  by 
storm  by  £1-Ashraf,  Sultan  of  Egypt,  Tyre 
passed  into  his  bands  without  a  struggle. 
When  it  again  passed  into  the  power  of  the 
Saracens,  its  fortifications  were  demolished, 
and  Irom  that  time  it  sank  gradually  into 
its  present  obscurity.  The  present  Sur  is  a 
small  town  of  narrow,  crookel,  and  dirty 
streets,  and  the  ruins  of  the  old  Phoenician 
city  cover  the  suburbs  to  the  extent  of  half 
a  league  round.  The  harbour  is  choked  up 
with  sand,  and  with  remains  of  the  old 
palaces  and  walls  and  temples,  and  is 
available  for  small  boats  only.  The  sea  has 
swallowed  up  its  grandeur.  The  soil  on 
which  the  traveller  stands  is  a  mass  of 
debris,  in  which  marble,  porphyry,  and 
granite  mingle  with  coarser  stones.  So  it 
has  come  to  pass  that  it  is  little  more  than 
"  a  place  for  the  spreading  of  nets "   and 


104 


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PEOPHET  EZEKIBL.    [oh.  xxvm.  1—26. 


that  the  Bentence,  "  Thou  shalt  never  be  any 
more,"  seems  to  be  receiving  its  fulfilment. 
There  was  for  it  no  prospect  of  an  earthly 
restoration,  still  less  that  of  a  transfigured 
and  glorified  existence  like  that  which,  in 
t!ie  prophet's  visions,  was  connected  with 
Jerusalem. 

Ver.  21. — Set  thy  face  against  Zidon. 
The  relation  of  this  city  to  Tyre  was  one 
of  sufficient  independence  to  justify  a  sepa- 
rate orsicle  for  the  completeness  of  the 
prophet's  arrangement  of  his  messages  (oh. 
xxvii.  8 ;  Joel  iii.  4 ;  Jer.  xxv.  22 ;  Zech.  is. 
2).  It  was  sufficiently  identified  with  it 
not  to  call  for  any  long  description.  It  is 
assumed  that  her  sins  were  of  the  same 
kind  and  required  a  like  punishment. 

Yer.  22. — I  will  he  glorified  in  .  .  .  thee. 
The  thought  and  the  phrase  come  from  Exod. 
xiv.  4;  Lev.  x.  3.  Bzekiel  reproduces  it 
in  oh.  xxxix.  13.  God  is  glorified,  or,  as  in 
the  next  clause,  sanctified,  when  his  power 
and  holiness  are  manifested  in  righteous 
judgment.  (For  "  sanctified,"  see  oh.  xxxviii. 
16:  Numb.  XX.  13.) 

Ver.  23. — Pestilence  was  the  natural  ao- 
eompaniment  of  a  siege.  As  in  ch.  xiv.  19, 
blood  probably  points  to  death  from  this 
cause,  as  distinct  from  the  slaughter  threat- 
ened in  the  following  clause. 

Ver.  24. — There  shall  be  no  more  a  prick- 
ing brier,  There  is  a  special  appropriateness 
in  Ezekiel's  imagery.  The  words  had  been 
used  in  Numb,  xxxiii.  55  of  the  Canaanites 
at  large  (comp.  Josh.  xxii.  13).  Ezekiel 
applies  them  to  the  cities  which  were  the 
most  conspicuous  sm'vivora  of  the  old  Ca- 


naanite  races.  Israel,  he  implies,  had  been 
wounded  with  those  thorns  and  briers,  had 
caught  (as  e.g.  in  the  case  of  Jezebel)  the 
taint  of  evil  life  and  evil  worship  from  those 
races ;  but  for  her  there  is,  as  in  ver.  25,  the 
future  of  restoration,  and  when  that  future 
comes,  the  Canaanite  cities,  with  their  idola- 
tries and  vices,  should  have  passed  away  for 
ever. 

■  Ver.  25. — My  servant  Jacob.  The  use  of 
"  Jacob "  for  "  Israel  "  is  not  common  in 
Ezekiel,  but  ch.  xx.  5 ;  xxvii.  25 ;  xxxiv.  25 
may  be  noted  as  parallels. 

Ver.  26.^Shall  build  houses,  etc.  The 
words  sound  almost  like  a  direct  quotation 
from  Jer.  xxiii.  6  and  xxxvi.  28 ;  and,  at  all 
events,  present  a  suggestive  parallel.  The 
restoration  was  to  include  also  the  blessing 
of  confidence  and  hope ;  no  longer  a  ground- 
less'aud  false  confidence,  like  that  of  Jer.  ii. 
37  and  xlviii.  13,  but  one  restiug  on  the  fact 
that  God  was  in  very  deed  the  Judge  of  all 
the  earth. 

We  may  note,  at  the  close  of  the  chapter, 
how  its  juxtaposition  of  the  two  Fhcenioian 
cities  seems  to  have  been  present  to  the 
mind  of  the  Christ  in  his  references  to  the 
judgment  that  should  come  upon  both  of 
them  (Matt.  xi.  21 ;  Luke  x.  13).  He  him- 
self, it  will  be  remembered,  passed  through 
the  coasts  of  Tyre  and  Zidon  (Matt.  XT.  21), 
and  probably,  according  to  the  best  text  of 
Mark  vii.  24,  actually  trod  the  streets  of  the 
latter  city.  They  supplied  some  of  the  great 
multitude  of  Mark  iii.  8,  who  listened  to  his 
teaching. 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  2, — A  prince^i  sin.  L  Geeat  eesponsibilitt  is  attached  to  high  office. 
In  the  two  previous  chapters  the  prophet  denounced  judgment  on  the  city  of  Tyre, 
and  lamented  its  approaching  accomplishment.  Now  he  turns  io  the  ruler  of  the 
city,  selecting  him  for  an  ugly  pre-eminence  of  guilt.  This  man  is  entrusted  with 
the  weal  of  the  city.  If  Tyre  is  doomed,  a  heavy  share  of  the  blame  must  lie  at  his 
door.  It  is  a  fearful  thing  to  be  responsible  for  the  fate  of  so  great  and  splendid  a 
community.  In  the  sight  of  God  accountability  is  always  measured  by  power.  Heed- 
less men  grasp  hastily  at  the  reins  of  government,  little  considering  how  severe  must 
be  the  judgment  of  Heaven  if  they  abuse  their  great  trust.  It  is  no  light  thing  to  be 
in  a  position  of  influence  over  our  fellow-men.  We  need,  therefore,  especially  to  pray 
for  the  souls  of  princes  and  governors.  The  ambition  that  craves  their  privileges 
might  be  restrained  if  people  considered  the  terrible  questions  that  they  will  have  to 
answer  when  called  upon  to  give  an  account  of  their  stewardship. 

n.  Pride  is  the  besetting  sin  of  high  office.  The  Prince  of  Tyre  exclaims,  "  I 
am  a  God,  I  sit  in  the  seat  of  God."  There  tire  many  temptations  to  this  sin  of  pride. 
1.  Power.  Holding  high  office  necessarily  confers  great  influence.  The  man  in  power 
ruay  really  be  a  weak  person,  but  he  has  great  resources  at  his  command.  Thus  he  is 
inclined  to  think  too  much  of  himself,  and  to  transfer  to  the  score  of  his  merits  what 
really  only  belongs  to  his  position.    2.  Flattery.     The  prince  is  not  the  only  person 


CH.  XXVIII.  1—26.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  105 

to  blame.  They  are  highly  culpable  who  encourage  him  in  a  belief  in  his  own  great- 
ness by  their  base  adulation.  All  people  in  o£Bce  need  to  beware  of  the  honeyed  words 
of  those  beneath  them. 

III,  The  pbidb  op  high  office  is  an  iksult  to  God.  The  prince  compares 
himself  to  a  god,  and  his  throne  to  the  seat  of  a  god.  This  implies  two  evils.  1.  Ood- 
lessness.  Carrying  out  this  notion  in  practice,  the  Prince  of  Tyre  refuses  to  humble 
himself  in  the  sight  of  Heaven.  As  all  men  bow  to  him,  he  is  tempted  to  forget  that 
he  should  look  up  to  and  bow  before  a  higher  Power.  2.  Rebellion  against  Ood. 
The  proud  ruler  usurps  the  place  of  God.  He  elects  to  become  an  earthly  providence. 
He  dispenses  with  any  reference  to  the  holy  will  of  the  Supreme,  and  sets  up  his  own 
will  as  the  highest  authority. 

IV.  Sin  in  high  office  is  especially  culpable  because  it  involves  a  multi- 
tube  IN  its  evil  effects.  The. effects  are  seen  in  its  contagious  influerfla  and  in 
its  punishment.  1.  Its  influence.  The  bad  ruler  is  like  Jeroboam,  whose  awful 
climax  of  wickedness  was  seen  in  the  fact  tliat  he  "  made  Israel  to  sin  "  (1  Kings  xv. 
30).  The  power  of  a  bad  ruler  is  one  that  makes  for  wickedness.  It  sows  seeds  of 
sin  broadcast.  Society  takes  its  fashion  from  the  court,  and  then  each  order  of  the 
community  from  that  next  above  it.  It  is  a  fearful  thing  to  be  the  leader  of  a  fashion 
of  wickedness.  2.  Its  punishment.  The  ruler's  sin  brings  misery  on  the  nation.  The 
people  must  reap  the  consequences  of  the  misdeeds  of  their  princes.  Tyre's  doom  is 
the  heavier  because  her  prince  is  a  bad  man.  Therufore  (1)  the  people  should  look 
well  to  the  characters  of  the  men  they  put  in  ofBce ;  (2)  all  persons  in  authority 
should  dread  the  double  gtult  of  bringing  ruin  on  the  multitude  as  well  as  wrecking 
their  own  lives. 

Ver.  3. — "  Wiser  than  Daniel."  I.  The  ttpical  wisdom  of  Daniel.  Evidently 
this  wisdom  was  proverbial  in  the  days  of  Ezekiel.  The  prophet  implies  that  the 
fame  of  it  had  reached  the  province  of  Tyre.  Consider  its  nature,  its  application,  and 
its  source.  1.  Its  nature.  (1)  Insight.  Daniel  was  able  to  discern  the  meaninc;  of 
mysteries  that  baffled  the  ingenuity  of  the  most  skilful  of  the  magL  The  greatest 
wisdom  is  required  to  penetrate  beneath  the  surface.  Foolish  people  are  shallow; 
wisdom  dives  into  depths  of  truth.  (2)  Foresight.  Daniel  had  visions  of  the  future. 
We  speculate  on  the  future;  he  saw  it.  2.  Its  application.  (1)  To  human  affairs. 
Daniel's  wisdom  was  not  expended  on  abstract  problems ;  he  did  not  even  use  it  for 
that  interpretation  of  nature  which,  since  the  clays  of  Bacon,  has  yielded  us  such  rich 
results ;  he  employed  it  in  the  consideration  of  what  was  most  nearly  concerned  with 
man.  Here  wisdom  is  most  practically  valuable ;  but  it  is  just  here  that  the  applica- 
tion of  it  is  most  difEcult.  (2)  To  large  questions.  Daniel  did  not  spend  his  mind 
on  little  personal  affairs.  His  vision  swept  empires.  The  highest  wisdom  is  required 
for  large  public  interests.  3.  Its  source.  (1)  Springing  from  Divine  inspiration. 
Daniel  was  trained  in  Chaldean  lore,  but  he  did  not  find  his  wisdom  in  that  school. 
It  was  derived  from  his  religion.  We  must  connect  it  with  his  fidelity.  He  who 
diired  the  lions'  den  rather  than  be  unfaithful  to  God  was  rewarded  with  heavenly 
wisdom.  True  wisdom  is  from  above  (Jas.  iii.  17).  (2)  Engaged  in  self-restraint. 
No  doubt  the  simple  living  which  Daniel  chose  in  common  with  his  three  companions 
prepared  him  to  receive  light  from  God.  Luxury  and  self-indulgence  blind  the  eyes 
Df  the  soul.  Simplicity  and  self-restraint  make  a  man  most  susceptible  to  the  influ- 
ences of  Heaven. 

II.  The  mockeby  of  wobldly  wisdom.  The  proud  Prince  of  Tyre  vainly  pretends 
to  excel  this  high  wisdom  of  Daniel.  1.  Its  nature.  It  is  "  earthly,  sensual,  devilish  " 
(Jas.  iii.  15).  The  wisdom  of  the  Prince  of  Tyre  was  seen  in  his  successful  manage- 
ment of  the  commercial  affairs  of  his  city.  It  did  not  touch  the  counsels  of  God;  it 
had  no  hearing  on  the  true  welfare  of  the  state ;  it  gave  no  insight  into  the  essentially 
corrupt  condition  of  the  city ;  it  was  entirely  lacking  in  foresight  of  impending  doom. 
But  it  was  in  a  large  measure  successful  in  opening  up  new  markets,  favouring  mer- 
cantile exchange,  and  generally  promoting  the  trade  interests  of  the  community.  This 
was  its  highest  attainment.  There  are  many  people  in  the  present  day  whose  minds 
are  entirely  absorbed  in  similar  subjects.  They  are  keen  men  of  business,  and  they 
imagine  that  their  astuteness  in  making  money  is  the  height  of  wisdom.     Flattered 


106  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxvni.  1— 26. 

by  temporary  success,  they  despise  all  other  considerations  as  dreamy.  The  intelli- 
gence that  makes  money  is  with  them  true  wisdom ;  all  else  is  but  so  much  wasted 
thinking.  2.  Its  folly.  This  wisdom,  when  held  to  be  supreme,  is  really  foolishness, 
because  then  it  blinds  men  to  the  great  facts  of  life  and  eternity.  It  is  bad  to  throw 
dust  in  the  eyes  of  people,  even  if  this  be  gold-dust.  The  supposed  wisdom  of  the 
Prince  of  Tyre  was  one  element  that  contributed  to  his  ruin,  because  it  prevented  him 
from  seeing  approaching  danger,  in  the  confidence  of  his  worldly  success.  The  wisdom 
of  the  world  is  foolishness  when  it  comes  as  a  veil  between  us  and  truths  that  we  need 
to  know.  Thus  the  proudly  wise  may  perish,  while  the  foolish  in  this  world  are 
endowed  with  heavenly  wisdom,  especially  that  highest  wisdom  oi  the  gospel  of  Christ 
(1  Cor.  i.  21,  25). 

Ver.  15. — TAe  innocewx  of  ewrly  days.  I.  There  ib  ah  innooenob  or  eablt 
DATS.  1.  In  the  race.  The  Bible  represents  Adam  and  Eve  as  commencing  life  in 
primitive  innocence.  However  we  may  interpret  the  narrative  in  Genesis — ^as  literal 
history  or  as  allegory — ^if  we  attach  any  inspired  authority  to  it  we  must  see  that  it 
points  back  to  a  time  when  man  lived  in  childlike  innocence  and  ignorance  of  evil. 
2.  In  the  nation.  Even  Tyre,  wicked,  corrupt  Tyre,  bad  once  known  better  days. 
Nearly  every  people  has  traditions  of  a  good  age  preceding  the  later  corruptions.  We 
do  not  see  that  the  heathen  are  advancing.  On  the  other  hand,  behind  idolatry,  there 
are  often  to  be  discovered  shreds  of  an  ancient  faith  in  one  spiritual  God.  Thus  the 
Vedas  show  a  purer  religion  and  a  higher  thought  than  are  to  be  found  in  modern 
Hinduism.  We  may  believe  that  God  is  educating  the  world,  and  yet  see  that  vast 
portions  of  it  do  not  as  yet  respond  to  the  uplifting  influences.  3.  In  the  individual. 
Children  begin  life  in  innocency.  Though  they  come  into  the  world  with  hereditary 
tendencies  to  evil,  those  tendencies  are  at  first  latent,  and  until  they  have  received  the 
consent  of  the  will  they  cannot  be  accounted  elements  of  guilt.  Concerning  little 
children  our  Lord  said,  "  Of  such  is  the  kingdom  of  God"  (Mark  x.  14). 

II.  This  peimitive  innocence  aqqbavates  the  guilt  of  latbb  tears.  1.  In 
the  community.  Man  was  not  created  corrupt.  He  cannot  lay  the  charge  of  his  sin 
against  his  Maker.  There  has  been  a  fall.  Degeneracy  is  especially  evil.  To  go 
from  good  to  bad  and  from  bad  to  worse  in  a  descending  scale  of  wickedness  is  to  be 
without  excuse  in  sin..  2.  In  the  individual.  The  child  who  has  never  known  good- 
ness can  scarcely  be  blamed  for  living  a  bad  life.  He  can  hardly  be  said  to  have  chosen 
evil  rather  than  good,  for  he  has  had  no  alternative  set  before  him.  But  it  is  other- 
wise with  one  who  has  begun  well.  Israel  is  the  more  to  blame  because  her  good- 
ness was  like  the  morning  cloud  (Hos.  vi.  4).  The  child  of  a  Christian  home  is 
exceptionally  wicked  When  he  turns  his  back  on  the  good  influences  of  his  early  days, 
and  deliberately  descends  into  the  lower  paths  of  sin.  There  is  this  guilt  with  sin  in 
some  measure  for  all  of  us.  For  we  have  all  turned  aside.  When  the  hardened  sinner 
looks  back  on  bis  child-days,  when  he  remembers  his  simple,  innocent  life  in  the  old 
home,  when  he  sees  his  younger  condition  reflected  in  the  frank  countenance  of  some  little 
child,  he  may  well  learn  that  his  own  self  will  be  his  accuser  in  the  day  of  judgment. 

HI.  The  innocence  op  earlt  datb  inspires  us  with  hopes  of  restoration, 
Man  is  not  naturally  a  brute.  What  he  has  been  suggests  what  he  may  yet  become. 
Absolute  primitive  innocence  is  indeed  irrecoverably  lost.  The  bloom  of  childhood 
can  never  be  restored.  Yet  as  Naaman's  flesh  became  like  the  flesh  of  a  little  child 
after  he  had  bathed  seven  times  in  the  Jonlan  (2  Kings  v.  14),  it  is  possible  to  be 
converted,  and  become  as  a  little  child  again  (Matt,  xviii.  3)  in  simplicity  and  a  new 
purity  of  heart.  This  is  the  great  Christian  hope.  The  most  abandoned  sinner  may, 
through  Christ,  be  restored.  He  need  not  despair  when  he  compares  his  present  shame 
with  his  past  innocencCj  The  old  fallen  world  may  be  recovered.  The  gospel  of 
Christ  goes  forth  to  arrest  the  deepening  degeneracy  of  mankind. 

Vers.  20 — 23. — The  judgment  of  Zidon.  I.  Partners  in  guilt  will  bb  partners 
IN  DOOM.  Tyre  and  Zidon  were  constantly  associated  together  by  reason  of  their 
nearness  to  one  another,  and  their  common  interests  and  actions.  Zidon  followed 
Tyre  in  its  degenerate  course  of  wickedness.  Thus,  like  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  Tyre 
and  Zidon  were  commonly  named  together  as  conjoined  in  an  ugly  pre-eminence  of 


CH.  xxvm.  1— 26.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  107 

■wickedness  (e.g.  Luke  x.  14)  There  is  no  security  in  such  companionship.  We  gaia 
nothing  by  following  a  multitude  to  do  evil  (Bxod.  xxiii.  2).  When  a  large  province 
rebels,  there  is  more  hope  of  immunity  than  when  a  few  citizens  behave  seditiously, 
because  the  central  government  may  not  be  strong  enough  to  cope  with  tlie  more 
serious  disturbance.  But  in  dealing  with  the  Almighty  such  considerations  do  not 
apply.  God  can  as  easily  destroy  two  cities  as  one.  The  number  of  sinners  does  not 
dilute  the  guilt  of  the  separate  individuals ;  it  cannot  mitigate  their  doom. 

II.  Unprobpbeous  snnrEBS  will  be  punished  as  well  as  peospeeous  ones.  Tyre 
was  prosperous ;  Zidon  was  unprosperous.  At  least,  the  history  of  Zidon  is  that  of  a 
decline  in  influence  compared  with  the  growing  importance  of  Tyre.  The  oldest  and 
most  prominent  settlement  of  the  Canaanites  (Q-en.  x.  15),  and  the  representative  of 
the  whole  Canaanitish  trade  (Gen.  xlix.  13),  Zidon  had  gradually  declined  until  it 
had  become  virtually,  if  not  nominally,  a  dependence  of  Tyre.  But  though  she 
reaped  less  earthly  good  from  her  wickedness,  she  did  not  therefore  escape  punish- 
ment. There  is  a  superstitious  notion  that  those  people  who  suffer  adversity  on  earth 
will  be  spared  further  punishment  after  death.  But  this  notion  is  utterly  without 
warrant,  unless  it  can  be  proved  that  the  last  farthing  is  paid,  and  we  can  scarcely 
be  bold  enough  to  assert  that  anything  of  the  kind  has  happened  to  the  most  unfortu- 
nate. Further,  it  is  sometimes  thought  that  failure  exonerates.  The  evil  deed  is  not 
carried  out  to  perfection  because  the  doer  of  it  is  hampered  by  external  circumstances. 
This  fact  is  no  mitigation  of  his  guilt.  He  would  have  consummated  his  wickedness 
had  he  been  able  to  do  so.-  Then  he  is  guilty  of  the  full  completion  of  it,  for  the  sin 
lies  in  the  intention.  Lastly,  it  is  perhaps  secretly  thought  that  obscurity  will  hide 
from  judgment.     It  was  not  so  with  Zidon.     God  sees  all. 

IIL  God  is  conobened  with  what  we  regard  as  secondary  in  importance. 
He  even  gets  glory  through  his  just  treatment  of  such  a  second-rate  place  as  Zidoiu 
God  is  too  great  to  need  to  confine  his  attention  to  what  is  only  of  primary  importance. 
As  this  is  true  of  judgment,  so  it  is  also  true  of  redemption.  God  does  not  only  get 
glory  through  "pestilence  and  blood."  His  highest  glory  is  seen  in  the  redemption 
of  the  world.  This  redemption  is  not  only  for  the  great  and  notable.  Second-rat© 
characters  are  not  befieath  the  attention  of  Christ.  His  salvation  is  for  all — for  the 
obscure,  the  neglected,  the  unfortunate. 

Ver.  25. — The  kome-gathering.  It  is  a  relief  to  turn  from  repeated  threatenings  of 
approaching  doom  to  the  voice  of  gracious  promises.  We  have  here  a  gleam  of  sun- 
shine breaking  for  a  moment  through  the  clouds  of  judgment.  As  there  was  light  in 
the  land  of  Goshen  while  a  plague  of  darkness  fell  on  the  rest  of  Egypt  (Exod.  x.  23), 
go  now  the  Jews  are  to  be  blessed  when  every  neighbouring  nation  lies  in  ruins.  The 
home-gathering  of  the  Jews  is  their  great  expected  blessing,  which  stands  out  in  strong 
contrast  with  the  hopeless  desolation  of  the  heathen.  A  wider  Christian  vision  will 
desire  to  see  in  this  a  type  of  that  great  spiritual  restoration  which  is  for  all  the  people 
of  God,  and  for  all  who  are  willing  to  become  his  people,  even  though  they  now  belong 
to  lost  heathen  races.  A  Jewish  prophet  predicted  this  wider  and  more  glorious  future 
(Isa,  xix.  25). 

I.  The  feuit  of  Divine  redemption  is  a  great  home-gathering.  It  was  so 
physically  with  Israel ;  it  is  so  spiritually  with  Christians.  1.  Sin  scatters.  It  drives 
men  from  God,  banishes  them  from  their  old  privileges,  breaks  up  the  brotherhood  if 
fellow-men,  and  destroys  the  true  family  spirit.  All  evil  is  a  solvent  of  society.  2. 
Christ  restores.  (1)  To  God.  The  first  departure  was  from  God.  Where  the  parent 
is,  there  is  the  home.  We  leave  our  home  in  leaving  God;  in  restoration  we  first 
come  back  to  God.  The  first  great  result,  of  it  is  a  return  of  the  soul  to  communion 
with  God.  (2)  To  the  home.  Israel  is  restored  to  Palestine,  the  land  flowing  with- 
milk  and  honey.  The  redeemed  are  now  restored  to  what  is  better  than  Caanan  even 
in  its  palmy  days — to  the  kingdom  of  heaven  brought  down  to  the  earth.  Here  the 
Christian  may  eat  of  the  tree  of  life  and  drink  of  the  river  of  water  of  life.  Here  no 
pricking  briars  may  grow.  (3)  To  Christian  fellowship.  The  home  is  the  abode  of 
the  family.  By  redemption  Christ  heals  enmity,  destroys  selfishness,  inspires  sym- 
pathy, draws  and  binds  souls  together.  This  is  the  earthly  blessedness  of  the  Divine 
recovery. 


108  THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxviri.  1—26. 

n.  This  orejat  homb-oathbkino  is  fob  the  oi.obt  of  God.  God  was  to  be 
glorified  in  tlie  punishment  of  the  wicked  (ver.  22),  But  he  gains  a  fresh  glory  from 
redemption.  When  Israel  is  restored  God  "shall  be  sanctified  in  them  in  the  sight 
of  the  heathen."  The  holiness  of  God  will  then  be  made  apparent  to  the  world.  The 
restoration  of  Israel  reveals  the  power  and  goodness  of  God,  and  shows  how  he  cares 
for  and  saves  the  people  who  acknowledge  him.  In  a  much  higher  way  the  redemption 
of  the  world  sanctifies  God  by  revealing  his  holiness.  1.  It  shows  hin  power  over  sin. 
He  restrains  the  wicked,  that  those  who  obey  his  Word  may  have  freedom  to  do  so. 
2.  It  shows  his  recovering  grace.  The  Jews  had  sinned  and  had  been  banished  as  a 
punishment  for  their  wickedness,  in  which  they  resembled  the  heathen.  But  they 
were  penitent,  and,  being  pardoned,  they  were  also  restored.  There  is  greater  glory 
in  redemption  than  in  retribution.  If  God  conquers  sin,  not  by  destroying  the  sinner, 
but  by  converting  him,  God's  holiness  is  most  fully  glorified.  There  is  nothing  on 
earth  that  so  sanctifies  God,  by  revealing  him  in  separate,  supreme  goodness,  as  the 
triumphs  of  the  gospel.  Nebuchadnezzar  glorified  God,  but  Gyrus  more  so.  God  was 
glorified  in  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem;  he  was  more  glorified  in  the  preaching  of 
St.  Paul. 

Ver.  26. — Gonjidence.  I.  Chbistians  mat  bnjot  oonfidbnob.  This  is  named  as 
part  of  the  blessedness  of  the  restoration :  "  Yea,  they  shall  dwell  with  confidence." 
Confidence  is  good  on  many  accounts.  1.  It  glorifies  God.  To  be  for  ever  doubting, 
questioiUDg,  and  fearing  shows  an  unworthy  want  of  appreciation  of  God's  glorious 
redemption.  We  honour  God  by  taking  him  at  his  word,  and  quietly  trusting  in  his 
grace.  2.  It  confers  peace  on  the  soul.  We  can  possess  our  souls  in  quietness  when 
we  have  confidence.  Diffidence  keeps  up  a  sense  of  perpetual  unrest.  3.  It  inspires 
energy/.  "  They  shall  build  houses,  and  plant  vineyards."  So  long  as  the  restored 
Je-W'3  expected  to  be  surprised  at  any  moment  by  their  foes  and  driven  away  again 
frcm  their  homes,  they  would  not  have  much  heart  to  build  up  the  walls  of  Zion. 
Tents  are  sufficient  for  sojourners.  Confidence,  however,  will  give  a  motive  for  laying 
good  foundations  and  building  solid  structures.  The  confident  Church  will  launch  out 
in  daring  enterprises,  or  carry  on  long  patient  toil  in  sure  expectation  of  enduring  results. 

4.  It  gives  leisure  for  seme.  The  distrustful  workmen  must  carry  the  sword  as  well 
as  the  trowel,  and  thus  be  hampered  in  their  work.  Confidence  dismisses  fear  of 
danger.    The  confident  servant  of  God  may  give  himself  wholly  to  his  Master's  work, 

5.  It  ivins  others  to  confidence.  Timorous  Christians  will  make  but  few  converts,  but 
one  person's  confidence  infuses  a  corresponding  confidence  in  others. 

II.  Tbub  confidbnob  is  based  on  safbtv.  Confidence  is  a  feeling;  safety  is  a 
fact.  The  one  is  only  justified  by  the  other.  Confidence  without  security  is  mere 
bravado.  There  is  no  security  in  the  bare  sense  of  safety.  Thus  often  they  are  most 
oonfiiient  who  have  least  reason  to  be  so.  The  first  inquiry  is  as  to  facts,  not  feelings. 
If  we  lack  confidence  our  business  is  not  to  endeavour  to  stimulate  it,  to  lull  fear  with 
spiritual  opiates,  or  to  rouse  assurance  with  spiritual  intoxicants.  Such  conduct  is  as 
foolish  as  it  is  dangerous.  The  right  course  is  to  look  into  the  question  of  the  justifi- 
cation of  confidence.  If  we  want  to  know  whether  the  house  will  stand,  let  us  have 
its  foundations  examined.  When  we  can  be  assured  of  safety,  confidence  will  be  a 
natural  result. 

III.  The  safety  on  which  tbue  confidbnob  is  based  is  accomplished  by  thb 
EBDEBMING  woBK  OF  GoD.  The  Jcws  Were  to  dwell  in  confidence  when  God  had 
destroyed  the  power  of  their  enemies.  Thus  they  were  to  "  despise  them  round  about 
them,"  It  is  shown  in  the  Old  Testament  as  well  as  the  New  that  the  sources  of 
confidence  as  well  as  the  grounds  of  safety  are  not  to  be  found  in  man.  We  are  not 
to  be  confident  nor  to  count  ourselves  safe  because  of  anything  we  have  done,  or 
because  of  our  assurance  of  our  own  strength  and  resources.  Our  confidence  is  in  God  ; 
therefore  the  feeblest  souls  may  be  confident,  as  the  weakest  of  men  may  be  quite  safe 
within  a  strong  fortress.  Judgment  reveals  God  to  the  wicked.  Thus  Zidon  knows 
that  God  is  the  Lord  (ver.  22),  Redemption  reveals  him  still  more  to  his  people,  to 
those  who  trust  and  acknowledge  him.  They  will  be  coufldent  when  they  are  brought 
by  the  gracious  goodness  of  the  Lord  to  know  him  by  experience  as  indeed  "their 
Ood." 


CH.  xxviii.  1— 26.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZBKIEL.  109 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  2. — Tke  height  of  arrogance.  In  addressing  the  Prince  of  Tyre,  the  prophet  is 
in  reality  dealing  with  what  may  be  called  the  national  spirit  pervading  the  proud  and 
mighty  city — a  spirit  regarded  as  embodying  itself  in  the  person  of  the  chief  ruler. 
The  claim  made  by  Tyre,  and  disputed  by  the  prophet,  is  a  claim  to  virtual  divinity. 
Exalted  above  other  cities,  Tyre  deems  itself  superior  to  human  infirmity  and  to  human 
fortune.  This  attitude  God  resents;  and  his  representative  here  declares  it  to  be  the 
deep-seated  and  ultimate  reason  and  cause  of  Tyre's  approaching  overthrow  and 
destruction. 

I.  The  qkound  of  this  abbooant  claim.  1.  There  is  on  the  part  of  Tyre  an 
assumption  of  extraordinary  wisdom,  superior  to  that  of  Daniel,  a  wisdom  from  which 
no  secret  can  be  hidden.  2.  By  the  exercise  of  this  singular  wisdom  and  understanding, 
the  city  has  devised  means,  such  as  the  enterprise  of  its  merchants,  by  which  it  has 
accumulated  riches,  and  has  filled  its  treasuries  with  store  of  gold  and  silver  and  all 
the  conveniences  and  luxuries  which  wealth  can  purchase.  3.  The  eminent  position 
among  the  nations  which  Tyre  has  thus  attained,  the  honour  accorded  to  it,  its  weight 
in  political  relations,  have  so  lifted  up  its  heart  that  it  claims  to  be  a  god,  and  to  sit 
in  the  seat  of  God.  By  this  must  be  understood  a  claim  and  assumption  to  be  supe- 
rior to  the  need  of  any  Divine  care  or  protection,  to  be  independent  of  all  assistance 
of  any  kind,  to  be  secure  ag&inst  the  assault  of  any  foe,  and  even  against  the  mutability 
characteristic  of  the  human  lot.  This  is  arrogance  beyond  what  is  to  be  found  even 
in  the  wisest  and  the  greatest  of  mankind. 

II.  The  vanity  akd  folly  of  this  arboqant  claim.  A  state  is  a  human  insti- 
tution; and  although  it  undoubtedly  embodies  the  Divine  idea  and  principle  of  authority 
requiring  submission,  although  there  is  such  a  thing  as  national  character  and  national 
life,  still  every  earthly  and  human  institution,  beginning  in  time,  ends  in  time,  and  par- 
ticipates in  human  weakness  and  ignorance.  They  who  claim  deity  for  aught  earthly 
cannot  understand  what  Deity  is,  how  it  is  creative  and  not  created,  eternal  and  not 
transitory,  immutable  and  not  shifting,  perfect  and  not  subject  to  development  and  disso- 
lution. To  know  one's  self  is  true  wisdom;  he  who  forgets  or  disclaims  his  humanity 
is  the  subject  of  illusion,  and  illusion  which  must  be  speedily  and  irretrievably  dispelled. 

III.  The  sinfulness  of  this  abroqant  claim.  The  assumption  of  Tyre  is  rebuked 
and  censured,  not  as  a  violation  of  good  taste,  not  as  an  insult  to  other  nations,  but  as 
a  defiance  of  the  Lord  of  all.  To  claim  unfailing  wisdom  and  irresistible  power  is  to 
assume  the  attributes,  to  aspire  to  the  throne,  of  the  Eternal.  Pride  has  been  reckoned 
as  one  of  the  seven  deadly  sins.  It  is  indeed  pernicious  in  its  effect  upon  the  character 
of  those  who  suffer  it  to  take  possession  of  their  being  and  to  control  the  habits  of 
their  life.  It  is  offensive  and  injurious  in  its  influence  upon  human  society.  But 
priraaiily  it  is  a  sin  against  God — the  placing  of  the  creature  in  that  supreme  position 
which  is  God's  of  right,  and  God's  alone. 

rV.  The  dispboof  op  this  abroqant  claim.  Events  occur  which  dispel  human 
illusions,  confound  human  vanity,  and  unmask  human  pretensions.  In  the  days  of 
its  prosperity  and  power,  men,  ever  ready  to  flatter  and  to  worship  the  great,  were  too 
ready  to  concede  the  extravagant  and  monstrous  claims  Tyre  advanced.  But  the  time 
of  trial  comes,  and  their  baselessness  and  absurdity  are  exposed.  Evils  which  a  Civine 
power  would  avert  prove  able  to  assault  and  master  the  pretentious  and  self-confident. 
The  one  great  lesson  of  human  history  is  this — man  is  but  man,  and  not  God. 

v.  The  punishment  of  this  arrooant  claim.  In  the  zenith  of  its  prosperity, 
the  acme  of  its  power,  Tyre  is  confronted  by  a  force  mightier  than  its  own.  The 
agency  is  the  king  and  army  of  Babylon ;  but  the  great  Actor  in  the  awful  scenes 
which  transpire  is  none  other  than  the  Eternal  himself.  The  forces  of  Tyre  are 
defeated,  the  fleets  of  Tyro  destroyed,  the  walls  of  Tyre  razed,  the  wealth  of  Tyre 
dispersed,  the  city  of  Tjte  itself  demolished.  "  Wilt  thou  yet  say  before  him  that 
slayetb  thee,  I  am  God?  but  thou  shalt  be  a  man,  and  no  God,  in  the  band  of  him 
that  slayeth  thee."  Here  is  something  more  than  disproof;  here  is  reversal,  rafut*- 
tion,  annihilation.  Pride  is  humbled  to  the  dust ;  and  the  proud  are  scattered  «nd 
ar«  no  more. — T. 


no  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [ch.  xxvhl  1— 26. 

Vers.  3 — 10. — The  fully  of  worldly  wisd6m.  It  might  not  have  occurred  to  an 
ordinary  observer  that  Tyre  owed  its  position  to  its  wisdom,  and  its  downfall  to  an 
unwise  confidence  in  that  wisdom.  But  the  Prophet  Bzekiel  looked  below  the  surface, 
and  traced  the  arrogance  and  presumptuous  ungodliness  of  the  great  city  to  its  claim 
to_  worldly  prudence,  sagacity,  and  skill,  which,  being  substituted  for  true  and  Divine 
wisdom,  became  the  occasion  of  the  city's  downfall  and  destruction. 

I.  The  range  and  reality  or  worldly  wisdom.  It  has  respect  to  earthly  good, 
prescribing  means  by  which  health  of  body,  riches  and  luxuries,  worldly  honour,  etc., 
may  be  attained.  It  bounds  its  regards  by  the  horizon  of  earth  and  time.  It  employ! 
instrumentalities  which  experience  approves  as  efficacious.  It  takes  counsel  of  the 
prosperous  and  the  honoured.  It  pursues  patiently  and  persistently  aims  which  are 
mimdane  and  which  are  within  human  reach,  wasting  no  time  (as  it  would  say)  upon 
ethereal  sentiment,  imaginary  and  ideal  perfection,  Utopian  schemes. 

II.  The  fruit  of  this  wisdom.  The  case  of  Tyre  is  to  the  point.  The  understand- 
ing and  skill  for  which  the  Tyrian  merchants  and  mariners  were  noted  were  not 
employed  in  vain.  Success  was  their  attestation  and  approval.  Uncertainty  is  indeed 
^listinctive  of  all  human  endeavour  and  undertaking.  But  a  large  measure  of  success 
may  fairly  be  reckoned  upon  as  likely  to  be  secured  by  the  use  of  means  devised  by 
the  wisdom  of  this  world.    As  a  man  soweth,  so  does  he  reap. 

III.  Tee  boast  of  this  wisdom.  Tyre  claimed  to  be  vnser  than  Daniel,  and  to  be 
able  to  penetrate  all  secrets.  There  are  those  who  would  think  it  Tulgar,  and  con- 
temptible  to  boast  of  their  birth,  their  wealth,  their  honours,  who,  however,  are  not 
above  boasting  of  their  insight,  sagacity,  and  prudence.  They  would  never  have  fallen 
into  errors  which  misled,  their  neighbours !  They  would  have  known  how  to  deal  with 
such  a  person,  how  to  contend  with  such  difficulties,  how  to  adapt  themselves  to  such 
circumstances!    Trust  them  to  find  their  way,  however  intricate  its  windings  1 

IV.  The  trial  of  this  wisdom.  It  is  admitted  that,  in  ordinary  circvunstances  and 
times,  worldly  wisdom  is  sufficient  to  preserve  a  man  and  a  nation  from  calamities,  to 
secure  to  them  many  and  real  advantages.  But  every  true  student  of  human  natur» 
and  human  history  is  aware  that  times  of  exceptional  probation  and  difficulty  hare  to 
be  encountered.  It  is  so  in  the  life  of  every  man,  it  is  so  in  the  history  of  every 
people.  The  principles  which  served  well  enough  before  are  useless  now.  The  men 
of  the  world  are  at  a  loss,  and  know  not  whither  to  turn.  The  crisis  has  come :  how 
shall  it  be  met  ? 

v.  The  vanity  of  this  wisdom.  Mere  cleverness  and  fox-like  keenness,  mere 
experience  upon  the  low  level  of  expediency,  are  proved  in  times  of  trial  to  be  alto- 
gether worthless.  Deeply  rooted  convictions  of  Divine  truth,  and  habits  of  reverential 
conformity  to  laws  of  Divine  righteousness,  "  the  fear  of  the  Lord  "  (in  the  language 
of  Scripture), — such  are  true  wisdom.  Anything  short  of  this  must  issue  in  disappoint- 
ment and  powerlessness.  Human  expediencies  may  carry  us  a  long  way,  but  a  point  is 
reached  where  they  fail,  and  where  their  worthlessness  is  made  apparent.  Such  a  point 
was  reached  in  the  history  of  Tyre,  when  it  was  found  that  wealth  could  not  buy  off 
the  hostility  of  Babylon,  and  that  mercenaries  could  not  resist  Babylonian  arms  or 
policy  overcome  Babylonian  persistence. 

yi.  Tee  overthrow  and  confusion  of  teis  wisdom.  The  language  of  the  prophet 
upon  this  is  singular  and  suggestive :  "  I  will  bring  strangers  upon  thee,  the  terrible  of 
the  nations ;  and  they  shall  draw  their  swords  against  tht  beauty  of  thy  wisdom,  and 
they  shall  defile  thy  brightness."  The  wisdom  in  which  the  Tyrians  trusted,  and 
which  excited  the  admiration  of  their  neighbours  and  rivals,  could  not  withstand  the 
attack  of  Oriental  soldiery  and  tactics.  It  was  boasted  in  days  of  prosperity ;  but  in 
the  day  of  adversity  its  strength  was  small. 

VII.  Tee  dibcrediting  and  contempt  of  teis  wisdom.  There  are  times  when 
professions  are  accepted  as  valid  and  trustworthy  ;  but  there  are  also  times  when  pro- 
fessions are  of  no  avail,  and  when  solid  facts  and  realities  alone  will  abide.  As  in  the 
case  of  Tyre,  the  wisdom  which  is  weighed  in  the  balances  and  is  found  wanting  is  utterly 
discredited.  Men  despise  what  formerly  they  praised.  Such  is  the  fate  to  which  the 
wisdom  of  the  worldly  wise  is  doomed.  "  It  is  written,  I  will  destroy  the  wisdom  of 
the  wise,  and  the  prudence  of  the  prudent  will  I  reject  .  .  .  Hath  not  Qod  made 
foolish  the  wisdom  of  the  world?" — T. 


<3H.  XXVIII.  1—26.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  lU 

Ver.  16. — Sin  and  destruction.  No  doubt  the  inspired  prophet  of  the  Lord  saw  in 
the  fate  of  Tyre  what  waa  not  discernible  to  worldly  and  enlightened  minds.  These 
would  look  for  political  causes  and  motires  and  consequences  iu  the  rise  and  fall  of 
states.  But  Ezekiel  saw  below  the  surface.  He  knew  that  there  was  Divine  action  in 
and  beneath  the  action  of  Tyre's  enemies;  and  that  there  were  reasons  only  recogniz- 
able by  a  reflecting  and  religions  man  for  the  awful  disasters  which  he  was  commissioned 
to  foretell. 

I.  The  O00A8I0N8  of  sin.  1.  We  may  discover  what  may  be  called  material  occasions 
of  sin,  in  the  wealth  and  prosperity,  the  fame  and  renown,  the  beauty  and  splendour,  of 
Tyre.  Circumstances  of  very  different  kinds  may  yet  agree  in  suggesting  evil  thoughts, 
desires,  and  habits.  Men  lay  the  blame  upon  circumstances,  but  this  is  a  very  short- 
sighted method  of  proceeding.  2.  There  are  moral  promptings  to  sin  which  may 
spring  out  of  the  former.  The  heart  is  lifted  up  with  exultation ;  a  not  unnatural 
confidence  in  possessions  and  resources  springs  up  and  asserts  itself. 

II.  The  manifestations  of  bin.  "  Thou  hast  sinned  "  is  the  reproach  addressed 
by  God  to  the  guilty  city ;  and  it  is  the  reproach  addressed  to  every  nation  and  to 
every  man  that  has  yielded  to  temptations  which  should  have  been  withstood,  repelled, 
and  mastered.  The  forms  which  sin  assumes  are  innumerable,  and  vary  with  varying 
times  and  with  varying  states  of  society.  The  context  refers  to :  1.  Iniquity,  or  the 
violation  of  Divine  laws  regulating  men's  relations  among  themselves  and  to  God 
himself.  2.  Violence,  such  as  the  powerful,  wilful,  and  haughty  are  given  to  exercise 
in  their  treatment  of  their  inferiors.  3.  Corruption  and  defilement,  such  as  are  certain 
to  prevail  where  God  is  not  honoured,  and  where  selfish  ends  inspire  men's  conduct. 

III.  The  punishment  of  sin.  This  is :  1.  By  the  decree  of  God.  He  is  the  Speaker 
throughout  this  passage.  He  claims  to  bestow  privileges,  and  to  call  men  to  account 
for  the  manner  in  which  those  privileges  are  used.  Whatever  be  the  agency  or 
instrumentality  of  chastisement  and  correction,  it  is  by  the  Eternal  Wisdom  and 
Bighteousness  that  it  is  inflicted,  2.  In  the  case  of  national  sin,  the  penalties  are  put 
in  force  through  the  instrumentality  of  neighbouring  nations.  A  barbarian  horde,  or  a 
mighty  sovereign  and  conqueror,  has  again  and  again  been  used  as  a  "  scourge  of  God." 
It  would  be  wrong  to  attribute  any  moral  superiority  to  the  victorious  people ;  they 
may  be  merely  the  rod,  the  sword,  in  the  hand  of  the  Lord  of  hosts.  3.  Where  the 
offence  has  been  heinous,  the  visitation  may  be  one  involving  complete  destruction,  as 
in  the  case  of  Tyre.  The  terms  of  threatening  here  recorded  are  of  the  strongest  and 
most  unsparing.  " I  will  destroy  thee ;"  "I  will  cast  thee  to  the  ground ; "  " I  will 
bring  forth  a  fire  from  the  midst  of  thee ;  it  shall  devour  thee."  Such  punishment  is 
sometimes  regarded  as  inconsistent  with  the  attributes  of  a  just  and  merciful  King  and 
Judge.  But,  whilst  it  may  not  be  in  our  power  to  vindicate  all  the  ways  of  God,  it  is 
certainly  not  for  us  to  question  the  acts  of  him  who  is  omniscient,  and  whose  righteous- 
ness is  without  a  flaw.  There  is  nothing  in  Scripture  to  support  the  opinions  of  those 
who  think  that^  because  God  is  benevolent,  therefore  there  is  no  such  thing  as  punish- 
ment. There  is  a  moral  law  which  the  Sovereign  Judge  will  surely  maintain  and 
vindicate.  4.  The  punishment  inflicted  upon  sinners  shall  be  published  far  and  wide. 
What  is  done  by  God  in  the  exercise  of  punitive  justice  is  done  in  the  sight  of  all,  and 
all  shall  be  astonished.  This  publicity  may  surely  be  explained  as  an  arrangement 
intended  for  the  universal  good — to  impress  upon  the  minds  of  all  mankind  the 
heinousness  of  iniquity,  that  they  may  "  stand  in  awe,  and  sin  not."— T. 

Vers.  25,  26. — The/avour  shown  to  Israel.  In  the  writings  of  Ezekiel,  as  in  those 
of  other  prophets,  we  cannot  but  Observe  the  remarkable  conjunction  of  passages 
denouncing  judgment  with  passages  revealing  Divine  grace  and  promising  Divine 
clemency.  The  attentive  reader  cannot  but  be  surprised  and  charmed  upon  meeting 
with  such  a  promise  as  is  contained  in  these  two  verses,  coming  in  between  the  denunci- 
ation of  Tyre  and  the  denunciation  of  Egypt.  Undoubtedly,  the  fate  of  surrounding 
nations  had  relation  to  the  history  and  prospects  of  Israel,  though  it  would  be  pre- 
sumption in  us  to  define  those  relations  too  exactly.  It  was  not  a  mere  rhetorical  art 
which  led  to  the  introduction  of  this  portion  of  the  prophecies  just  in  this  place.  Yet 
we  feel  that  its  position  both  enhances  its  beauty  and  deepens  its  interest  and 
significance. 


112  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PEOPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxvul  1—26. 

I.  The  favour  to  be  shown  to  Tsrabl  is  m  oontbast  to  the  pate  op  otheb 
KATiONs.  Tyre  should  perish  from  off  the  earth  ;  Egypt  should  be  trodden  underfoot, 
and  should  be  degraded  in  the  scale  of  nations ;  but  Israel  should  dwell  in  their  own 
land  with  confidence. 

II.  The  pavoub  shown  to  Isbael  is  consequent  upon  Israel's  depression,  conquest, 
AND  CAPTIVITY.  It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  Israel,  because  the  chosen  nation,  was 
exempt  from  calamity  and  discipline.  On  the  contrary,  it  was  because,  to  some  extent, 
the  discipline  was  answering  its  intended  purpose,  that  brightness  followed  the  storm, 
that  the  winter  of  Israel's  discontent  was  succeeded  by  the  genial  and  happy  spring- 
time. 

III.  The  favour  shown  to  Israel  was,  however,  undeserved  bt  Israel's  own 
OHABAOTES  AND  ACTION.  So  it  had  been  from  the  beginning.  Israel  was  a  rebellious 
and  sti£f-necked  people,  lapsing  now  into  idolatry  and  again  into  murmuring  oi 
licentiousness.  God  had  a  purpose  in  Israel's  election,  and  that  purpose  must  needs  be 
carried  out.  But  in  any  case,  it  was  no  virtue,  excellence,  or  merit  in  Israel  that 
accounted  for  the  forbearance  continually  and  repeatedly  extended  towards  the  people 
of  the  covenant. 

IV.  The  favour  shown  to  Israel  was  owino  to  the  olemenot  of  the  Divine 
BuLER.  Why  such  clemency  was  extended  to  Israel,  and  was  withheld  from  Tyre,  it 
may  not  be  possible  for  us  to  explain.  But  there  is  no  caprice  in  the  government  of 
God;  justice  and  mercy  are  his  attributes,  and  it  would  be  folly  in  man  to  impugn 
them.  Who  is  there  who  is  not  indebted  to  Divine  long-suffering  and  loving-kindness  ? 
What  nation  has  not  beeo  spared  and  delivered  from  its  enemies,  once  and  again  in 
the  course  of  its  history  ?  Certainly,  the  mercy  of  the  God  of  Abraham  towards  the 
people  that  sprang  from  the  father  of  the  faithful  was  great  and  marvellous. 

V.  The  FAVOUR  shown  to  Israel  was  manifest  in  the  delivebanoe  of  the 
PEOPLE  PBOH  CAPTIVITY  AND  EXILE.  They  Were  "  gathered  from  the  people  among 
whom  they  were  scattered."  Instead  of  being  reduced  to  perpetual  bondage  or 
absorbed  by  their  conquerors,  the  Hebrew  people,  though  appointed  to  exile,  were  in 
due  time  redeemed  from  their  subjection,  dependence,  and  expatriation. 

VI.  The  favoue  shown  to  Isbael  was  manifest  in  theib  peaceful  be-eb- 
Tablishmbnt  in  thbie  own  land.  It  was  the  land  given  by  Jehovah  to  his  servant 
Jacob,  the  land  of  promise,  the  land  of  the  covenant.  God  had  his  own  wiso  purposes 
to  work  out  by  this  replanting  and  resettling  of  the  people  of  Israel  upon  the  sacred 
soil.  There  it  was  appointed  for  them  to  dwell  in  safety  and  confidence,  to  build  their 
houses  and  to  plant  their  vineyards,  and  above  all  to  worship  the  God  of  their  fathers 
in  his  chosen  sanctuary. 

VII.  The  favoub  shown  to  Israel  was  intended  to  awaken  the  aoknowledq- 
ments  op  gbateful  piety.  The  services  and  their  motives  may  not  always  have 
been  spiritual  and  pure,  free  from  every  taint  of  selfishness  and  self-satisfaction.  The 
Israelites,  thinking  of  the  judgmentEf  God  had  executed  upon  all  those  who  had 
despised  them  round  about  them,  congratulating  themselves  that,  whilst  their  foes 
had  been  humiliated  or  destroyed,  they  had  been  spared,  restored,  and  blessed,  may, 
perhaps,  have  allowed  some  feelings  of  self-righteousness  to  take  possession  of,  their 
hearts.  Yet  they  could  not  fail  to  acknowledge  Jehovah  as  their  true  Friend  and  mighty 
Deliverer;  they  could  not  but  offer  grateful  sacrifices  of  adoring  praise  to  him  who 
had  remembered  them  in  their  low  estate ;  for  his  mercy  endureth  for  ever.  They 
could  not  but  know  and  confess  liim  as  the  Lord  their  God.^T. 

Vers.  1 — ^10. — Pride's  terrible  fall.  A  real  king  incorporates  in  himself  all  that  is  best 
and  mightiest  in  the  people.  The  aims,  and  enterprises,  and  ambitions,  and  spirit  of  the 
nation  should  find  a  place  in  his  breast.  He  is  a  mirror,  in  which  the  life  of  the  empire 
is  reflected.  Whether  he  leads  or  whether  he  follows  the  bent  of  the  nation's  will 
(and,  in  part,  he  will  do  both),  he  becomes  the  visible  exponent  of  the  nation's  life. 
All  that  is  good  in  the  empire,  and  all  that  is  evil,  blossoms  in  him.  Hence  thii 
message. 

I.  Sufebiob  wisdom  leads  to  success  in  commerce.  "  With  thy  wisdom  and 
with  thine  understanding  thou  hast  gotten  thee  riches."  So  far,  no  sin  waa  com- 
mitted.   It  is  God's  will  that  the  rocks  of  earth  should  disclose  their  treasures  of  ailver 


OH.  xxvni.  1— 26.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  EZEKIEL  113 

and  gold.  It  is  God's  will  that  the  nations  of  the  earth  should  interchange  their 
products.  The  wisdom  requisite  for  enterprise  and  commerce  God  himself  gives. 
"  Buy  not  in  thine  heart,  My  power  and  the  might  of  my  hand  have  gotten  me  this 
wealth ;  but  thou  sbalt  remember  the  Lord  thy  God,  for  he  it  is  who  giveth  thee  power 
to  get  wealth."  Par-reaching  sagacity,  careful  plan,  prudent  thrift,  and  bold  adven- 
ture bring  stores  of  wealth.    "  The  hand  of  the  diligent  maketh  rich." 

II.  CoMiiEROiAL  snccBSS  LEAD6  TO  STATE  UAaNiFicENGB.  More  or  less  in  every 
human  breast  there  is  a  hunger  for  dignity,  luxury,  magnificent  display.  As  soon  as 
means  are  forthcoming  this  hunger  will  satiate  itself.  Nor  is  it  merely  a  matter  of 
personal  satisfaction.  It  lends  importance  to  the  man;  it  lends  importance  to  the 
state ;  it  impresses  other  people — other  nations — with  a  sense  of  superiority.  It  obtains 
homage  and  deference  from  men,  and  this  is  delicious.  How  otherwise  can  wealth  be 
expended?  The  king  cannot  consume  more  food, unless  it  be  to  his  injury.  Expendi- 
ture on  drrss  soon  reaches  its  utmost  limit.  Therefore  wealth  can  find  outlets  only  on 
palatial  buildings,  pompous  equipages,  and  martial  defences. 

III.  State  maqnificence  breeds  a  spikit  op  vain  assumption.  The  tendency  of 
all  material  possession  is  to  foster  a  feeling  of  self-importance.  The  adulation  of  others 
strengthens  this  feeling.  Every  addition  of  influence  or  power  contributes  to  this 
inward  vanity.  In  proportion  to  a  king's  poverty  of  mind  will  he  over-estimate  his 
importance.  He  looks  upon  his  granite  ramparts  and  upon  his  vast  armaments,  and 
imagines  himself  unconquerable.  All  other  monarchs  flatter  him.  He  is  easily  cajoled 
into  the  belief  that  he  possesses  a  clear  superiority  among  men — ^yea,  positive  supremacy. 
He  conceives  that  he  is  cast  in  a  mould  unlike  that  of  mortals — that  he  is  deathless 
and  divine.  He  demands  honours  which  belong  to  God  alone.  Instead  of  making  his 
perilous  position  secure  by  the  ramparts  of  God's  friendship,  he  makes  God  an  enemy. 

IV.  Profane  assumption  is  destined  to  a  terrible  reverse.  "  Thou  shalt  die 
the  deaths  of  the  uncircumcised  by  the  hand  of  strangers."  A  castle  built  without 
foundation  is  sure,  sooner  or  later,  to  fall.  In  proportion  to  the  loftiness  of  the 
erection  will,  in  such  a  case,  be  the  greatness  of  the  catastrophe.  Instead  of  being 
secure  and  permanent  as  God,  he  will  find  himself  vulnerable  as  a  man,  frail  as  a 
flower  at  noonday.  The  spears  of  those  he  had  despised  will  pierce  his  flesh  as  they 
would  the  flesh  of  another  man ;  and  when  another  king — the  king  of  terrors — ^riding 
furiously  on  his  pale  horse,  shall  confront  him,  his  heart  will  be  the  victim  of  such 
remorse  and  shame  as  other  mortals  have  never  known.  Better  far  not  to  be  lifted  up 
than  to  be  lifted  up  and  then  cast  down.  The  momentum  of  a  body  falling  from  a 
dizzy  height  is  terrible :  what  is  the  momentum  of  a  lost  soul  ? 

V.  God's  word  is  miohtieb  than  all  human  bbsouroes.  "  I  have  spoken  it, 
saith  the  Lord  God."  In  the  largest  sense  it  is  true  that  we  cannot  go  against  the 
word  of  the  Lord.  God's  word  is  the  forthputting  of  his  thought,  purpose,  wiU.  It  is 
omnipotent  resolve  interpreted  into  speech.  "  He  spake,  and  it  was  done."  A  word 
becomes  a  world.  A  breath  of  God  sweeps  the  earth  like  a  tornado.  A  promise  is  a 
ladder  by  which  we  can  climb  to  the  skies ;  it  is  a  ship  that  will  bear  us  away  safely 
to  the  eternal  haven.  One  word  of  God  is  a  feast  that  will  nourish  the  life  of  our  soul 
for  ages.  It  is  a  refuge  in  which  we  may  securely  hide.  Jehovah's  word  is  a  rampart, 
from  behind  which  we  may  calmly  defy  ten  thousand  foes.  It  is  a  wall  of  flre  that 
never  has  been  broken  through.  That  word  is  more  worth  than  all  bankers'  coffers — 
Uian  all  Californian  mines.     It  is  a  title-deed  to  immortality  and  to  heaven. — ^D. 

Vers.  11 — 19. — The  glory  and  shame  of  Eden  reproduced.  There  is  no  reason  why 
fve  should  not  regard  the  biblical  narrative  of  Adam's  trial  and  fall  as  fact  and  as 
allegory  also.  There  is  no  real  discrepancy  between  these  two  principles  of  interpreta- 
tion. We  are  bound  to  accept  it  as  a  narrative  of  historical  fact.  Tet  it  is  also  an 
outline  picture  of  every  man's  history.  In  each  man's  case  there  is  the  Edenic  period 
of  innocence,  there  is  the  crisis  of  first  temptation,  there  is  the  fall,  and  then  the 
banishment  from  Edenic  joy.  The  circumstances  of  the  first  probation  are  more 
clearly  and  vividly  reproduced  in  the  case  of  a  young  prince  than  in  any  other.  Hence 
the  application  to  the  King  of  Tyre. 

I.  The  kino  considered  as  the  ideal  man.  Adam  was  placed  in  Eden  as  • 
monarch.    He  was  placed  in  dominion  over  all  creatures  in  earth,  or  air,  or  sea.    This 

EZEKIBL II.  " 


114  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [ch.  xxviii.  1—26, 

gave  him  a  great  "  coign  ot  vantage."  In  this  rerpeot  he  was  made  after  the  pattern 
of  God — he  was  God-like.  All  that  ministered  to  his  needs  was  within  his  reach.  Not 
a  thing  was  denied  to  him  that  could  meet  a  want  or  satisfy  a  just  desire.  His  home 
was  stored  with  every  form  of  beauteous  vegetation  and  with  every  kind  of  precious 
gem._  And  he  was  priest  as  well  as  king.  He  had  accesis  to  God  at  all  times.  In  him 
creation  was  summed  up.  In  a  similar  position  was  the  King  of  Tyrus  placed.  All 
material  good  was  within  his  reach.  There  was  no  temptation  to  acquire  wealth  by 
unlawful  means.  Tyre  and  its  possessions  were  to  him  as  a  garden,  over  which  he 
could  roam  at  large.  He  stood  towards  men  in  the  stead  of  God — the  dispenser  of 
truth  and  justice.  He  was  gifted  with  robust  health  and  with  abundant  wisdom. 
He  had  all  that  heart  could  wish.  He  was  placed  in  an  Eden  of  abundance — "  in 
Eden,  the  garden  of  God."    Like  Adam,  he  was  on  his  trial. 

II.  The  temptation.  To  every  man  temptation  comes.  If  his  heart  be  not  set 
upon  the  acquisition  of  spiritual  riches — wisdom,  holiness,  and  love— he  will  desire 
inordinately  the  lower  good,  and  will  break  through  lawful  restraints  in  order  to  possess 
it.  This  is  the  core  and  essence  of  temptation.  In  this  way  the  King  of  Tyre  was 
tested.  He  was  set  up  by  God  to  exemplify  righteousness,  and  to  administer  justice 
among  the  people.  Nor  among  his  own  subjects  only,  but  from  his  high  position — 
"  the  mountain  of  God  " — he  could  have  disseminated  righteous  principles  among  all  the 
nations  with  whom  Tyre  traded.  Yet  in  this  respect  the  king  egregiously  failed.  His 
love  of  gain  was  too  great — was  excessive.  It  overmastered  his  love  of  righteousness. 
What  advantage  he  could  not  gain  by  fair  and  legitimate  methods  he  extorted  by 
violence.  This  is  clear  from  ver.  16,  "By  the  multitude  of  thy  merchandise  they 
have  filled  the  midst  of  thee  with  violence."  If  the  king  personally  was  not  the  prime 
instigator  of  these  deeds,  he  connived  at  them  through  unprincipled  or  corrupt  judges. 
His  prosperity  and  glory  made  him  vain  and  arrogant.  Temptation  came  to  pluck  the 
forbidden  fruit,  and  the  king  weakly  yielded. 

III.  The  cbime.  The  crime  was  selfishness,  covetousness,  avarice.  This  favoured 
and  fortunate  man  was  placed  in  the  possession  of  abundance.  There  was  one  thing  he 
might  not  do.  He  might  not  rob  others  to  enrich  himself.  The  possessions  of  the 
foreigner  ought  to  have  been  as  much  respected  and  protected  as  his  own.  Bnt  the 
devil  whispered  in  his  ear  counsels  of  unrighteous  enrichment,  and  he  listened, 
wavered,  succumbed.  "Iniquity  was  found  in  thee."  "Thou  hast  corrupted  thy 
wisdom ; "  i.e.  thou  hast  twisted  it  into  cunning  and  craftiness.  "  Thou  hast  defiled 
thy  sanctuaries  by  the  multitude  of  thine  iniquities,  by  the  iniquity  of  thy  traffic." 
He  had  imagined  that  no  higher  power  than  himself  woidd  supervise  his  deeds.  "  God 
is  not  observant  of  such  things,"  said  his  wily  tempter.  "  Thou  shalt  not  surely  die." 
This  was  his  crime,  bis  very  brightness — his  prosperity — brought  him  into  scenes 
of  new  temptation.  He  might  have  blessed  mankind ;  but  he  was  set  on  selfish  ends. 
He  was  in  indecent  haste  to  aggrandize  self.  He  trampled  on  others'  rights,  on  law 
and  order,  that  he  might  swell  his  self-importance.  He  chafed  against  the  idea  that 
he,  a  king,  was  only  a  subject  to  a  higher  sceptre.  He  woiild  brook  no  interference 
with  his  proud  will.     This  was  his  crime. 

IV.  The  banishment.  "  I  will  cast  thee  as  profane  out  of  the  mountain  of  God. 
...  I  will  cast  thee  to  the  ground,  I  will  lay  thee  before  kings,  that  they  may  behold 
thee."  The  exclusion  from  Eden  is  here  repeated.  The  changes  of  fortune  through 
which  Adam  passed,  every  one,  in  a  measure,  passes  through  also,  "  I  will  bring  forth  a 
fire  from  the  midst  of  thee."  No  heavier  punishment  can  be  passed  upon  a  man  than 
banishment  from  God's  favour.  Where  God  is,  there  is  safety ;  where  God  is  not, 
there  is  ruin.  Where  God  is,  there  is  heaven ;  where  he  is  not,  there  is  hell.  To  be 
forsaken  of  God — this  is  despair  and  woe.  God  departed  from  Saul,  and  straightway  he 
began  to  descend  the  slippery  plane  that  landed  him  in  destruction.  Appearances  are 
very  delusive.  The  eye  is  easily  deceived.  Beneath  a  fair  exterior  of  prosperity  there 
la  often  incipient  decay,  yea,  corruption  hastening  to  final  ruin.  "  Pride  goeth  before 
a  fall."  If  we  have  made  God  our  foe,  not  all  the  alliances  and  intrigues  in  the  universe 
can  save  us  from  destruction. — D, 

Vers.  1 — 10. — The  course  and  doom  of  arrogance.  This  prophecy  is  directed  against 
"  the  Prince  for, '  King ']  of  Tyre  "  (ver.  1),  and  was  doubtless  meant  lor  him  particularly ; 


OH.  >xviii.  1—26.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  BZEKIEL.  115 

but  it  may  be  taken  that  he  was  representative  of  his  court  and  of  his  people,  and  that 
the  denunciation  and  doom  here  recorded  apply  to  the  state  as  well  as  to  its  head.  We 
have  suggested  to  us  the  course  as  well  as  the  doom  of  arrogance. 

I.  It  begins  in  a  dangerous  and  ibrevebent  complaoenot.  The  consciousness 
of  power  or  of  priority  is  found  to  be  a  pleasant  thing,  and  it  need  not  be  any  wise 
associated  with  evil.  It  is  often  the  gift  of  God ;  it  is  often  the  result  of  such  natural 
advantages  as  Tyre  possessed.  It  may  give  a  pure  and  honest  joy  to  the  heart ;  and 
when  it  leads  to  gratitude  and  ends  in  blessing,  it  is  good  in  every  light  and  at  every 
turn.  But  when,  as  is  only  too  often  the  case,  it  gives  rise  to  an  unwholesome 
complacency  of  spirit,  which  ascribes  too  much  to  its  own  sagacity  and  too  little  to  the 
Divine  favour,  then  it  stands  on  perilous  ground  (vers.  4,  5).  Indeed,  it  has  already 
begun  to  depart  from  the  highway  of  wisdom  and  goodness ;  for  this  is  not  the  spirit 
of  godjiness,  but  of  irreverence. 

II.  It  passes  on  to  a  weak  and  foolish  exaggeration.  Its  heart  is  "lifted  up" 
(ver.  2).  It  magnifies  its  own  capacities,  its  own  virtues,  its  own  achievements.  It 
conceals  its  own  errors,  defects,  misdoings,  so  that  they  are  not  visible  to  its  own  eyes. 
It  thinks  much  "more  highly  of  itself  than  it  ought  to  think,'' and  supposes  itself 
capable  of  accomplishing  that  to  which  it  is  wholly  unequal.  It  thinks  itself  a  Daniel 
(ver.  3)  when  it  is  not. 

III.  It  ends  in  impious  presumption.  It  says,  "  I  am  a  god,  I  sit  in  the  seat  at 
God  "(ver.  2).  There  have  been  many  men  and  there  have  been  some  "  world-powers  " 
— Babylon,  Macedon,  Rome,  Spain — who  (which)  have  arrogated  to  themselves  an 
authority  and  a  power  little  (if  any)  short  of  the  Divine.  They  have  believed  them- 
selves able  to  act  as  a  Divine  providence,  determining  who  or  what  should  be  raised  up 
or  cast  down,  supposing  that  their  will  could  be  impressed  upon  the  institutions,  or  the 
peoples,  or  the  Churches  of  their  age.  They  have  claimed  a  homage  and  assumed  a 
function  which  belong  to  none  but  the  Most  High  himself.  Thus  human  arrogance 
places  on  its  own  haughty  head  the  crown  of  a  daring  and  impious  assumption. 

IV.  It  brings  upon  itself  the  severe  condemnation  of  God.  (Text ;  see  2  Sam. 
xxii.  28 ;  Isa.  ii.  11 ;  Dan.  iv.  37 ;  Luke  i.  51 ;  Jas.  iv.  6.) 

V.  It  is  doomed  to  destruction.  (Vers.  6, 10.)  The  strong  terms  of  the  text  speak 
of :  1.  The  decisive  and  successful  antagonism  of  those  who  have  been  despised,  but  who 
prove  to  be  "  terrible  "  and  victorious  (ver.  7,  former  part).  2.  The  loss  of  all  that  has 
been  most  prized  (ver.  7,  latter  part).  3.  Uttermost  ruin  (ver.  8).  And  this  is  the  fate 
of  the  haughty-hearted.  They  sufler  the  most  mortifying  humiliation  in  the  discovery 
to  themselves  and  exposure  to  others  of  their  false  pretensions;  the  loss  of  their  high 
position  and  forfeiture  of  all  that  they  once  held  in  so  tight  a  grasp;  the  ruin,  material 
or  moral,  which  is  fitly  described  as  "death."  They  " go  down  to  the  pit."  Let  ua 
learn :  1.  To  guard  our  power  and  our  success  by  cidtivating  the  spirit  of  humility  and 
of  gratitude.  2.  To  gain  the  approval  of  our  Lord  by  employing  our  position  and  our 
privilege  to  bless  our  neighbours,  so  that  we  may  win  his  smile  and  not  suffer  his 
reproach.  3.  To  humble  our  heart,  if  it  should  be  lifted  up,  that  we  may  gain  God's 
mercy  and  not  endure  the  penalty  of  our  sin. — 0 

Vers.  11 — 19. — TTie  inmffmency  of  circumstance,  etc.  However  we  may  interpret 
this  imaginative  passage  (see  Exposition),  there  are  certain  truths  which-  are  not  only 
clear,  but  even  brilliant  to  our  sight  as  we  regard  it. 

J.  The  iksufficibnct  of  favourable  circumstance.  The  Prince  of  Tyre  was 
under  such  fortunate  and  enviable  conditions  that  he  is  drawn  by  the  prophet  as  a  man 
who  dwelt  in  the  garden  of  Eden,  in  a  perfect  paradise ;  as  one  clothed  with  garments 
that  shone  with  all  precious  stones  ;  as  one  who  was  admitted,  Jike  th«  cherubim  of  th« 
most  holy  place,  to  the  very  near  presence  of  God;  as  one  that  stood,  with  the 
illustrious  leader  of  Israel,  on  the  sacred  mount,  and  that  saw,  with  him,  the  splendour 
of  the  Divine  manifestation  (vers.  13, 14).  Nothing  was  wanting  that  the  craving  heart 
of  man  could  desire ;  he  "  sealed  up  the  sum,"  or  he  "  sealed  completeness"  (Fairbaim) 
(ver.  12).  He  was  "  perfect  in  his  ways "  (ver.  15) ;  i.».  not  perfect  in  the  ways  of 
wisdom  and  worth,  but  of  pleasure  and  honour  and  privilege.  He  lacked  nothing  that 
•  would  lend  beauty  or  grandeur  or  delight  to  human  life.  But  what  availed  it  all  with- 
out righteousness?  No  barrier  of  rocky  ualls  or  of  surrounding  sea  would  keep  out  t'la 


116  THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PROPliBT  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxviii.  1—26. 

enemy  when  unrighteousness  had  hred  corruption  (ver.  15),  and  corruption  had  ended 
in  weakness  and  downfall.  No  wealth  of  favouring  circumstance,  no  multiplication  of 
earthly  good,  even  though  a  man  should  have  (as  this  king  is  imagined  to  have)  the 
choicest  advantages  of  different  generations,  will  secure  lasting  good  ;  that  is  only  to  be 
gained  by  righteousness,  by  a  strong  and  virtuous  character,  by  steadfast  piety. 

II.  The  peril  of  great  exaltation.  "  He  that  is  down  need  fear  no  fall ; "  but  he 
that  is  exalted  may  suffer  a  terrible  humiliation — he  may  be  cast  out  (or  down)  from 
the  aountain  on  which  he  stood  (vers.  16,  17)  ;  he,  the  overshadowing  cherub,  may  be 
ejected  from  the  holy  place,  from  the  innermost  chamber  of  sacred  privilege,  and  be 
cast  forth  among  the  unholy  (ver.  16).  Let  those  who  are  exalted  beware,  for  there  is 
an  abasement  possible  to  them  of  which  the  unprivileged  have  no  need  to  be  afraid. 
And  they  have  no  other  security  than  in  a  humble  heart,  an  obedient  spirit,  a  life  of 
integrity  and  devotion. 

III.  The  penalty  op  profanation.  Tyre  had  "  corrupted  its  wisdom  "  (ver.  17) ; 
had  "profaned  its  sanctuaries"  (ver.  18).  Its  traffic  should  have  been,  as  it  might 
have  been,  carried  on  in  honesty  and  equity ;  but  it  had  been  depraved,  it  had  become 
lawless  and  dishonest ;  its  streets,  that  should  have  been  the  highways  of  peaceful  industry 
and  happy  fellowship,  had  became  the  places  of  violence  and  iniquity  (vers.  18  and  16). 
That  which  was  intended  for  the  practice  and  illustration  of  virtue  and  excellence  had 
become  the  scene  and  source  of  wrong  and  guilt.  Therefore  the  righteous  Judge  would 
"profane"  it  (ver.  16;  Paiibairn),  would  "cast  it  out  as  profane"  (Authorized 
Version) ;  the  fires  of  retribution  would  devour  it  (ver.  18) ;  its  sad  and  shameful  end 
would  excite  the  awe  and  even  the  terror  of  the  beholder  (ver.  19).  Profanation  means 
penalty.  If  we  do  wrong  to  that  human  spirit  of  ours  which  comes  to  us  from  God, 
and  in  which  we  may  closely  resemble  him ;  if  we  defile  that  human  lody  in  which  the 
Son  of  God  himself  was  once  clothed,  and  which  should  be  the  very  sanctuary  or  temple 
of  the  Divine ;  if  we  profane  that  human  life  of  oiirs  which  should  be  so  sacred  in  our 
sight  and  may  he  so  charged  with  blessing  and  crowned  with  fruitfulness  and  beauty ; 
— then  may  we  expect  the  severe  condemnation  and  the  serious  visitation  of  the  righteous 
Euler  of  mankind.  We  have  then  "  sinned  "  (ver.  16) ;  "  iniquity  is  found  "  in  us 
(ver.  15).  And  there  will  come  the  wages  of  sin,  the  brand  of  iniquity — loss,  sorrow, 
shame,  death.  But  to  the  penitent  there  is  reconciliation  and  return ;  for  though  "  the 
wages  of  sin  is  death,"  yet  "  the  gift  of  God  is  eternal  life." — 0. 

Vers.  20 — 26. — The  end  of  Divine  jvdgment.  This  severe  condemnation  of  the 
Idolatrous  and  vicious  Zidon,  coupled  with  the  very  gracious  promise  to  Israel,  with 
which  the  prophecy  concludes,  many  instnict  us — 

I.  Why  and  how  God  is  against  us.  "I  am  against  thee,  0  Zidon"  (ver.  22). 
And  we  know  that  Jehovah  was  expressing  his  hijih  displeasure  and  was  warning  of 
serious  national  disaster  (ver.  23)  because  of  the  iniquities  of  the  state.  The  worst 
forms  of  religious  superstition  had  long  existed — idolatrous  rites  accompanied  by  immoral 
practices ;  the  city  was  utterly  corrupt ;  its  condition  called  for  Divine  rebuke  and 
chastisement.  And  the  prophet  delivers  the  one  while  he  foretells  the  other,  in  the 
Name  of  the  Lord.  God  may  he  "  against "  us.  Not  that  he  ever  wishes  us  evil  (ch. 
zxxiii.  11) ;  on  the  contrary,  he  always  desires  the  return  and  restoration  of  the  worst 
(Luke  XV.  7).,  But  God  is  against  us:  1.  When  our  spirit  and  our  life  are  wrong;  when 
these  are  irreverent,  immoral,  unworthy,  miscliievous.  2.  He  then  is  seriously  displeased 
with  us,  especially  when  his  special  kindness  to  us  demands  a  very  different  return 
(John  iii.  19).  3.  He  (1)  rebukes  us  in  his  Word — he  condemns  us  iu  the  strong  but  yet 
the  merciful  language  which  bis  Son  and  his  human  spokesmen  have  uttered  in  his 
Name ;  and  he  (2)  chastens  us, — he  sends  us,  as  individual  souls,  that  which  answers  to 
the  national  distresses  liere  announced  (ver.  23).  He  lets  sickness  and  suffering,  or  defeat 
and  disappointment,  or  opposition  and  overthrow,  or  bereavement  and  loneliness,  come 
to  our  home  or  our  heart ;  we  are  laid  low ;  some  "  sword  "  goes  through  us,  and  we  are 
among  the  slain. 

II.  His  aim  in  judgment.  Jehovah  would  smite  Zidon,  that  that  city,  darkened  in 
its  mind  by  its  long-continued  guilt,  might  be  enlightened;  that  it  might  understand 
that  its  licentious  goddess  was  impotent  to  help  in  the  hour  of  peril,  and  might  know 
that  God  "  was  the  Lord  "(vers.  22 — 24).     God's  purpose  in  permitting  or  in  sending 


OH.  xxvni.  1—26.]    THE   BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  117 


trouble  to  the  home  and  sorrow  to  the  soul,  is  restorative.  He  seeks  to  enlighten,  and, 
by  enlightening,  to  restore  us.  1.  He  wishes  us  to  understand  clearly  that  the  earthU 
forces  and  human  attachments  in  which  we  have  been  putting  our  trust  and  seukins; 
our  satisfaction  are  wholly  insufficient  to  us;  that  they  break  down  when  we  most 
need  their  help ;  that  they  are  vain  ;  and  that  we  are  wrong.  2.  He  desires  to  lead  113 
back  to  himself — to  his  side  and  to  his  service ;  to  an  absolute  trust  in  his  Son  our 
Saviour ;  and  to  a  whole-hearted  consecration  to  his  holy  service.  And  it  is  well  worth 
while  to  suffer  anything  and  everything  that  we  may  "  know  that  he  is  Lord ;  "  that  we 
may  recognize  in  him  the  Saviour  in  whom  to  hide,  the  Divine  Friend  whom  we  can 
love  with  all  tbe  strength  of  our  soul,  the  Leader  whom  we  can  follow  at  every  step,  the 
Lord  whom  it  is  both  our  sacred  duty  and  our  lasting  joy  to  serve  in  every  sphere. 

in.  His  BEOMISB  TO  HIS  PEOPLE.  (Vers.  24 — 26.)  How  far  this  prediction  has  been 
fulfilled  is  matter  of  sacred  history ;  perhaps  it  is  one  of  those  promises  which  are  only 
realized  by  "the  springing  and  germinant "  fulfilment  of  which  Lord  Bacon  speaks. 
Beside  (1)  the  historical,  there  is  (2)  the  spiritual ;  and  there  is  also  (3)  the  heavenly 
fulfilment.  Of  these  three,  the  second  is  found  in  the  spiritual  condition  of  those  who, 
by  a  full  surrender  of  spirit  to  their  Divine  Lord,  find  a  perfect  rest  in  him  (Matt.  xi.  28 ; 
John  xiv.  27;  Phil.  iv.  7;  Bph.  iii.  16 — 19),  The  last  will  be  found  when  the  thorns 
and  the  briers  which  here  are  felt  even  in  "  the  garden  of  the  Lord  "  shall  have  been  cut 
away  by  the  strong  hand  of  the  Divine  Husbandman,  and  there  shall  be  beauty  without 
decay,  joy  without  suffering  or  satiety,  life  without  any  fear  of  death  or  of  decline. 

"Thorn  without  flowers ;  flowers  on  the  thorn, 
Then  thoruless,  everlasting  bloom. 
Three  crowns; — the  first  when  Failh  has  worn, 
And  Eope  the  next,  with  brow  still  torn. 
Love  shall  the  last  assume." 

a 

Vers.  1—10. — The  Prince  of  Tyre;  or,  the  expression  and  punishment  of  pridt, 
"■  The  word  of  the  Lord  came  again  unto  me,  saying,  Son  of  man,  say  unto  the  Prince 
of  Tyre,"  etc.  Following  the  prophecies  concerning  the  city  and  state  of  Tyre,  and 
completing  them,  Ezekiel  delivers  these  concerning  the  king  of  the  famous  city.  They 
apply  to  him,  not  only  as  a  person,  but  as  the  representative  of  the  people  in  their 
prosperity,  power,  and  pride.  "  Throughout  the  East,"  says  the '  Speaker's  Commentary,' 
"  the  majesty  and  glory  of  a  people  were  collected  in  the  person  of  their  monarch,  who 
in  some  nations  was  not  feared  as  a  man,  but  actually  worshipped  as  a  god.  .  .  .  The 
prince  is  here  the  embodiment  of  the  community.  Their  glory  is  his  glory,  their  pride 
his  pride..  The  doom  of  Tyre  could  not  be  complete  without  denunciation  of  the 
Prince  of  Tyre."    Our  subject  has  two  chief  divisions. 

I,  The  expression  of  peidb  by  man.  (Vers.  2 — 6.)  1.  Pride  of  personality. 
"  Thine  heart  is  lifted  up,  and  thou  hast  said,  I  am  a  god  "  (ver.  2  ;  cf.  Isa,  xiv.  14). 
There  are  other  instances  of  exceeding  pride  recorded  in  the  sacred  Scriptures;  e.g. 
"  Pharaoh  King  of  Egypt  .  .  .  said,  My  river  is  mine  own,  and  I  have  made  it  for 
myself"  (ch.  xxix.  3).  Nebuchadnezzar  said,  "  Is  not  this  great  Babylon,  which  I 
have  built  for  the  royal  dwelling-place  ? "  etc.  (Dan.  iv.  30).  Herod  accepted  the 
homage  of  the  people  who  greeted  him  as  a  god  (Acts  xii.  21,  22).  But  the  Prince  of 
Tyre,  in  claiming  to  be  a  god,  goes  beyond  these  examples.  It  is  as  if  he  upheld  the 
city  and  state,  maintained  the  prosperity  and  power  of  his  people,  and  gave  them  all 
their  glory.  It  is  a  claim  of  independence  and  self-sufficiency.  In  it  pride  reaches  its 
most  daring  and  blasphemous  develo[iment,  as  weak,  mortal,  sinful  man  sets  himself 
as  a  rival  even  unto  God.  2.  Pride  of  position.  "  I  sit  in  the  seat  of  God,  in  the 
midst  of  the  seas  "  (ver.  2).  This  proud  boast  of  the  Tyrian  prince  is  partly  accounted 
for  by  "  the  situation  of  the  islaud-city,  full  of  luxury  and  beauty,  in  the  midst  of  the 
blue  water  of  the  Mediterranean."  Moreover,  Tyre  was  regarded  by  many  as  a  sacred 
island.  Fairbairn  says  that  "  Sanohouiathon  expressly  calls  it '  the  holy  island ; '  and 
it  is  known  that  the  Tyrian  colonies  all  reverenced  it  as  the  mother-city  of  their 
religion,  not  less  than  the  original  source  of  their  political  existence.  It  was  only  in 
the  spirit  of  ancient  heathenism  to  conclude  that  a  state  which  was  not  only  strong  by 
natural  position,  and  by  immense  maritime  resources,  but  also  stood  in  such  close 


118  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [ch.  xxviii.  1—26. 

connection  with  the  Divine,  might  be  warranted  In  claiming,  through  its  head,  some- 
thing like  supernatural  strength  and  absolute  perpetuity  of  being."  3.  Pride  o/vnsdom, 
"  Behold,  thou  art  wiser  than  Daniel ;  there  is  no  secret  that  they  can  hide  from  thee." 
Three  facts  concerning  the  wisdom  of  the  Prince  of  Tyre  are  here  brought  to  light. 
(1)  He  laid  claim  to  pre-eminent  wisdom.  He  looked  upon  himself  as  being  wiser 
than  Daniel.  It  is  implied  that  the  extraordinary  wisdom  of  Daniel  was  at  this  time 
generally  and  widely  known  and  acknowledged.  "  The  prophet  presumes  it  to  be 
acknowledged  that  Daniel  stands  on  the  highest  stage  of  wisdom  attainable  by  man." 
When  he  made  known  unto  Nebuchadnezzar  the  dream  which  that  monarch  had 
forgotten,  he  did  that  of  which  the  wise  men  of  Chaldea  had  declared,  "  It  is  a  rare 
thing  that  the  king  requireth,  and  there  is  none  other  that  can  show  it  before  the 
king,  except  the  gods,  whose  dwelling  is  not  with  flesh "  (Dan.  ii.  11).  Hence,  as 
Eengstenberg  remarks,  for  the  Prince  of  Tyre  "  to  declare  himself  wiser  than  Daniel,  is 
at  once  to  transcend  the  stage  of  man,  and  make  himself  equal  with  God."  (2)  This 
wisdom  had  special  reference  to  the  discovery  of  secrets.  The  proud  prince  boasted 
that  no  secret  could  be  hidden  from  him  (ver.  3).  The  comparison  with  Daniel  is  still 
maintained.  "The  secret"  of  the  forgotten  dream  of  Nebuchadnezzar  was  revealed 
unto  Daniel  in  a  "vision  of  the  night  "(Dan.  ii.  19),  and  then  communicated  by  him  to 
the  troubled  king.  And  on  a  subsequent  occasion  that  king  said  to  him,  "I  know  that 
the  spirit  of  the  holy  gods  is  in  thee,  and  no  secret  troubleth  thee"  (Dan.  iv,  9).  But 
the  Prince  of  Tyre  boasted  that  his  wisdom  transcended  even  this;  and  from  his  proud 
boast  we  infer  that  his  wisdom  was  not  genuine.  True  wisdom  humbles  its  possessor. 
Where  it  really  is,  as  knowledge  increases  reverence  also  increases.  (3)  The  aim  of 
this  wisdom  was  the  increase  of  their  material  riches.  "  By  thy  wisdom  and  by  thine 
understanding  thou  hast  gotten  thee  riches,"  etc.  (vers.  4,  5),  However  great  this 
wisdom  might  have  been,  however  varied  its  manifestations,  its  great  aim  was  the 
secular  prosperity  of  the  state.  It  did  not  look  beyond  the  material  and  temporal  to 
the  spiritual  and  eternal.  It  was  bounded  by  time  and  that  little  portion  of  this  world 
over  which  the  Prince  of  Tyre  reigned.  What  a  contrast  it  presents  in  this  respect 
from  the  wisdom  which  is  commended  in  the  sacred  Scriptures  I  4.  Pride  of  richet. 
(Vers.  4,  5.)  In  our  survey  of  ch.  xxvi.  and  zxvii.  we  noticed  the  abounding  com- 
mercial prosperity  of  Tyre.  Its  merchants  lived  as  princes.  Its  wealth  was  exceeding 
great.  And  as  its  king  contemplated  these  immense  riches  his  heart  exulted  in  the 
sense  of  his  own  wisdom,  importance,  and  power.  "  Thine  heart  is  lifted  up  because 
of  thy  riches."  In  all  self  was  supreme.  In  his  treasures,  in  his  wisdom,  in  his  might, 
in  the  security  of  his  situation,  he  recognizes  no  person  or  power  greater  than  himself. 
Terily  he  regarded  himself  as  a  god. 

II.  The  punishment  of  fbide  by  God.  (Vers.  6 — 10.)  Since  "  pride  goeth  before 
destruction,  and  an  haughty  spirit  before  a  fall,"  the  Prince  of  Tyre  must  soon  meet 
with  a  severe  check  to  his  unbridled  arrogance.  The  prophet  proclaims  bis  doom. 
Notice :  1.  The  nature  of  this  punishment.  (1)  The  abasement  of  his  glory.  "  They 
shall  draw  their  swords  against  the  beauty  of  thy  wisdom,  and  they  shall  defile  thy 
brightness"  (ver.  7).  We  have  seen  that  the  great  end  for  which  the  Prince  of  Tyre 
employed  his  wisdom  was  the  promotion  of  their  mercantile  success,  and  the  consequent 
increase  of  their  riches.  So  that  the  beauty  of  his  wisdom  was  the  commercial 
prosperity  of  the  state,  which  he  viewed  as  its  choicest  result.  Their  affluence  and 
success,  their  luxury  and  splendour,  would  be  diminished,  and  their  glorying  in  these 
things  would  be  abased.  (2)  The  slaughter  of  his  life.  "  They  shall  bring  thee  down 
to  the  pit ;  and  thou  shalt  die  the  deaths  of  them  that  are  slain  in  the  heart  of  the 
teas."  The  plural  is  used  here — "  deaths,"  because  "  the  king,  the  central  personage, 
the  animating  breath  of  the  whole  people,  as  the  king  is  called  in  Lam.  iv.  20,  dies  as 
it  were  many  deaths — dies  in  each  of  his  slain  subjects"  (Eengstenberg),  Here  is 
death  in  dishonour :  "  The  deaths  of  them  that  are  slain  in  the  heart  of  the  seas." 
"  For  kings  to  be  slain  by  foreigners  is  dishonourable;  when  slain,  not  to  be  buried  as 
kings  is  a  greater  dishonour;  to  be  cast  out,  and  drowned  as  common  men,  is  a  height 
of  dishonour."  Here  is  death  in  sin :  "  Thou  shalt  die  the  deaths  of  the  uncircumcised 
by  the  hand  of  strangers."  The  uncircumcised  denotes  the  heathen  world  in  contra- 
distinction to  the  covenant  people  of  God.  The  death  of  the  uncircumcised  is  the 
exact  opposite  of  "  the  death  of  the  righteous  "  (Numb,  xxiii.  10).   2.  The  Author  of  this 


OH.  xxvm.  1— 26.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  119 

puaishment.  "Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  .  .  .  Behold,  I  will  bring  strangers  upon 
thee,"  eto.  (ver.  7).  God  himself,  in  the  operations  of  his  providence,  would  thus  bring 
down  his  pride  of  heart  and  vain-glorious  boasting.  3.  The  instruments  of  this  punish- 
ment. "  1  will  bring  strangers  upon  thee,  the  terrible  of  the  nations."  The  Chaldeans 
were  strangers  to  the  Tynans.  They  are  not  mentioned  (in  ch.  xxvii.)  amongst  the 
peoples  who  traded  with  Tyre.  They  were  a  people  of  a  strange  language,  and  their 
army  was  drawn  from  countries  which  were  strange  to  the  proud  people  of  the  island- 
city.  And  they  were  "  terrible."  They  were  powerful  and  violent  beyond  all  others 
in  that  age — the  dread  conquerors  of  all  whom  they  assailed.  They  came  against 
Tyre,  and,  after  long  persistence,  humbled  the  proud  city.  4.  The  consequence  of  this 
punishment.  "  Wilt  thou  say  before  him  that  slayeth  thee,  I  am  God  ?  but  thou  art 
man,  and  not  God,  in  the  hand  of  him  that  woundeth  thee "  (ver.  9).  The  proud 
boasting  of  the  Prince  of  Tyre  would  be  effectually  silenced.  He  would  learn  not  only 
that  he  was  not  a  god,  sitting  in  the  seat  of  God,  but  a  man,  whose  honour  could  be 
liiid  in  the  dust,  and  who  could  be  slain  by  a  world-power  mightier  than  that  in  which 
he  had  gloried.  God  will  certainly  bring  down  the  pride  of  those  who  exalt  themselves 
against  him.  "  The  lofty  looks  of  man  shall  be  brought  low,  and  the  haughtiness  of 
men  shall  be  bowed  down,  and  the  Lord  alone  shall  be  exalted"  (Isa.  ii.  11).  This 
was  strikingly  exemplified  ia  Pharaoh  (cf.  Exod.  v.  2 ;  xii.  29 — 32),  in  Nebuchadnezzar 
(Dan.  iv.  29—37),  and  in  Herod  (Acts  xii.  21 — ^23).  5.  2%e  certainty  of  this  punish- 
ment. "  I  have  spoken  it,  saith  the  Lord  God"  (ver.  10).  And  his  word  did  not  fail 
of  fulfilment. 

Conclusion.  Learn :  1.  The  danger  of  prosperity  generating  pride.  "  When  flowers 
are  full  of  heaven-descended  dews,  they  always  hang  their  heads ;  but  mea  hold  theirs 
the  higher  the  more  tbey  receive,  getting  proud  as  they  get  full "  (Beecher).  Let  the 
prosperous  guard  against  this  danger.  2.  The  certainty  of  pride  meeting  with  punish- 
ment.  (Cf.  Ps.  cxxxviii.  6 ;  Prov.  xi.  2 ;  xvi.  6, 18 ;  xviii.  12 ;  xxix.  23 ;  Matt.  xxiiL  12 ; 
Jas.  iv.  6.>— W.  J. 

Vers.  11 — 19. — Man  in  impressive  aspects.  "  Moreover  the  word  of  the  Lord  came 
unto  me,  saying,  Son  of  man,  take  up  a  lamentation  upon  the  King  of  Tyrus,"  etc. 
This  lamentation  for  the  Prince  of  Tyre  presents  considerable  difiBculties  to  the 
expositor.  It  has  been  interpreted  from  various  points  of  view,  which  we  need  not 
discuss  here.  Different  meanings  also  have  been  assigned  to  many  of  its  clauses. 
Two  things  of  great  importance  to  a  correct  understandmg  of  it,  however,  seem  to  us 
quite  clear.  1.  That  in  the  King  of  Tyre  here  we  have  the  representation  of  an  ideal 
person,  who  stands  for  the  Tyrian  monarchy.  "  The  kings  of  Tyre,"  says  Fairbaim, 
"  are  personified  as  one  individual,  an  ideal  man — one  complete  in  all  material  excel- 
lence, perfect  manhood."  2.  That  a  deep  vein  of  irony  runs  through  the  description  of 
the  perfections  and  splendours  of  this  ideal  prince;  "  This  ideal  man,  the  representative 
of  whatever  there  was  of  greatness  and  glory  in  Tyre,  and  in  whom  the  Tyrian  spirit 
of  self-elation  and  pride  appears  in  full  efflorescence,  is  ironically  viewed  by  the  prophet 
as  the  type  of  humanity  in  its  highest  states  of  existence  upon  earth.  All  that  ia  best 
and  noblest  in  the  history  of  the  past  he  sees  in  imagination  meeting  in  this  new 
beau-ideal  of  humanity."  This  irony  implies  that  the  Prince  of  Tyre  had  a  very 
exaggerated  sense  of  bis  own  greatness  and  glory;  otherwise  it  would  be  pointless  and 
inapt.     This  paragraph  presents  to  us  man  in  three  impressive  aspects. 

I.  Man  in  a  most  exalted  condition  and  most  felioitoub  oibcumbtances. 
(Vers.  12 — 15.)  1.  Sere  is  a  most  exalted  condition.  This  condition  is  "variously 
described.  "  Thou  sealest  up  the  sum  "  (ver.  12).  "  To  seal  means  to  seal  wp  and 
close  that  which  is  complete  (cf.  Dan.  ix.  24 ;  Job  ix.  7).  To  seal  the  sum  is  to  make 
up  the  whole  measure  of  perfection."  The  King  of  Tyre  is  said  to  be  "  full  of  wisdom." 
In  our  homily  on  the  foregoing  paragraph  we  noticed  that  he  boasted  of  his  wisdom 
(cf.  vers.  3 — 5).  He  was  probably  praised  and  flattered  because  of  it.  With  truth 
Greenhill  observes,  "  When  princes  know  a  little  in  anything,  they  are  applauded  and 
magnified  for  knowing  men ;  but  if  they  have  got  some  deeper  insight  into  things  than 
others,  then  they  are  deifled."  This  king  is  also  represented  as  "  perfect  in  beauty." 
In  form  and  features,  in  expression  and  action,  he  deemed  himself  perfect.  Or  the 
Tyrians  regarded  their  monarchy  as  perfect  in  its  order  and  power  and  splendour. 


120  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [ch.  xxviii.  1—26. 

"Thou  wast  perfect  in  all  thy  ways  from  the  day  that  thou  wast  created  "  (ver.  15). 
2.  Eere  are  most  felicitoua  circumstances.  Cy^rs.  13,  14.)  (1)  Delightful  residence. 
"Thou  wast  in  Eden,  the  garden  of  God."  The  referenre  is  probably  to  the  luxurious- 
ness  and  beauty  and  grandeur  of  Tyre.  The  king  had  lived  there  in  the  full  enjoyment 
of  its  countless  comforts  and  its  yarious  pleasures,  realizing  as  it  were  a  paradisaical 
existence.  (2)  Royal  splendours.  "  Every  precious  stone  was  thy  covering,  the 
sardius,  the  topaz,  and  the  diamond,"  etc.  "  The  precious  stones  with  which  the  king 
is  bedecked  bring  the  glory  of  his  rank  to  outward  view."  He  had  jewels  in  great 
abundance,  and  rich  variety,  and  of  rare  lustre  and  beauty.  "  Full  many  a  gem  of 
purest  ray  serene"  glittered  upon  his  person.  Music  is  mentioned  as  another  element 
of  the  royal  state  and  glory.  "  The  workmanship  of  thy  tabrets  and  of  thy  pipes  was 
in  thee ;  in  the  day  that  thou  wast  created  they  were  prepared."  The  accession  of  the 
king  to  the  throne  was  celebrated  with  musical  honours  and  rejoicings.  Or  perhaps 
the  clause  means  that  the  Tyrian  monarchy  was  thus  inaugurated.  In  either  case, 
music  was  one  of  the  delights  of  the  royal  court  of  Tyre.  (3)  Illustrious  station 
(ver.  14).  "  Thou  wast  the  anointed  cherub  that  covereth."  The  cherub  was  an  ideal 
combination  of  creature  life  in  highest  forms  and  fullest  perfection ;  and  the  cherubs  in 
the  temple  were  consecrated  and  anointed  with  oil  (Exod.  xl.  9).  And  as  a  king  the 
Prince  of  Tyre  was  anointed,  and  was  lookeil  up  to,  or  looked  upon  himself,  as  the 
embodiment  of  perfection.  Moreover,  as  the  cherubim  with  outstretched  wings  covered 
the  mercy-seat,  so  the  King  of  Tyre  covered  his  people  with  his  protection.  The 
prophet  goes  on  to  say,  "  Thou  wast  upon  the  holy  mountain  of  Grod,"  which  the 
'  Speaker's  Commentary '  explains  thus :  "  The  cherub  was  in  the  temple  on  the  holy 
mountain,  so  the  Prince  of  Tyre  was  presiding  over  the  island-city,  rising  like  a 
mountain  from  the  deep."  But  "  the  holy  mountain  of  God  "  may  be  simply  a  figure 
denoting  a  very  exalted  station.  The  prophet  continues :  "  Thou  hast  walked  up  and 
down  in  the  midst  of  the  stones  of  fire."  Various  and  conflicting  are  the  interpretations 
of  this  clause.  It  probably  means  that  his  state  apartments  were  decorated  with 
precious  stones  like  those  mentioned  in  ver.  13  (cf.  ch.  i.  27),  and  that  he  walked  in 
the  midst  of  their  glittering  splendour.  Here,  then,  notwithstanding  that  the  exact 
meaning  of  some  parts  of  the  text  is  uncertain,  we  have  a  picture  of  a  man  in  very 
exalted  condition  and  very  felicitous  circumstances. 

II.  Man  or  a  most  exalted  condition  and  most  rELiciTous  oiectjmstancbb 
FALLiKd  INTO  HEINOUS  SINS.  (Vcrs.  16 — 18.)  Unrightcousness  was  found  in  this 
exalted  prince.  Two  forms  of  sin  in  particular  are  charged  against  him.  1.  Injustice 
in  commerce.  "  By  the  multitude  of  thy  traffic  they  filled  the  midst  of  thee  with  vio- 
lence, and  thou  hast  sinned.  ...  By  the  multitude  of-  thine  iniquities,  in  the  unrigh- 
teousness of  thy  trafGc,  thou  hast  profaned  thy  sanctuaries."  Great  trafBc  occasions 
great  temptation.  When  men  are  deyoted  to  merchandise,  their  path  is  beset  by  moral 
perils.  They  will  be  tempted  to  achieve  commercial  success  by  unworthy  or  unrighteous 
means — means  which  the  unsophisticated  conscience  condemns  as  sinfiJ,  but  which  the 
commercial  world  allows  and  practices  under  plausible  names.  "  The  constant  excite- 
ment of  selfishness  and  covetousness  connected  with  trade  can  only  be  effectually 
counteracted  by  the  grace  of  Ood."  "  They  that  desire  to  be  rich  fall  into  a  temptation 
and  a  snare,"  etc.  (1  Tim.  vi.  9, 10).  2.  Pride  of  person  atid  position.  "Thiue  heart 
was  lifted  up  because  of  thy  beauty,  thou  hast  corrupted  thy  wisdom  by  reason  of  thy 
brightness."  The  pride  of  this  prince  has  already  met  with  deserved  rebuke.  "  Thina 
heart  is  lifted  up  because  of  thy  riches  "  (ver.  5) ;  "  Thine  heart  is  lifted  up,  and  thou 
hast  said,  I  am  a  god,  I  sit  in  the  seat  of  God,  in  the  midst  of  the  seas "  (ver.  2), 
Secular  prosperity  often  begets  pride,  and  pride  (as  in  the  case  of  the  King  of  Tyre) 
corrupts  wisdom.  Hengstenberg  observes  truly,  "  The  foundation  of  wisdom  is  humility, 
which  sees  things  as  they  are,  has  an  open  eye  for  its  own  weakness  and  the  excellences 
of  others,  and  is  on  its  guard  against  dangerous  undertakings,  as  David  says  in  Ps.  cxxxi. 
1,  '0  Lord,  my  heart  is  not  haughty,'  etc.  The  'brightness'  received  into  the  heart 
blinds  the  eye,  so  that  one  regards  himself  alone  as  great,  and  everything  else  as  small, 
and  rushes  wantonly  into  dangers  for  which  he  is  not  prepared,  and  enters  on  paths 
which  lead  to  perdition;  as,  for  example,  Tyre  undertook  the  combat  against  the 
flourishing  Chaldee  monarchy.  God  does  not  need  to  appear  as  a  Deus  ex  machind  in 
the  judgment  upon  the  proud,  who  wanto  ly  brings  himself  to  ruin." 


OH.  XXVIII.  1—26  ]    THE   BOOK  OP  THE  PKOPHET  EZEKIEL.  121 

m.  Man  in  exalted  condition  and  felicitous  cieccmstances,  ha  vino  fallen 
INTO  HEINOUB  BINS,  VISITED  WITH  SEVERE  PUNISHMENT.  Three  features  of  the  punish- 
ment of  the  proud  Prince  of  Tyre  are  exhibited  by  the  prophet.  1.  His  forcible  removal 
from  his  exalted  condition  and  felicitous  circumstances.  "  Therefore  have  I  cast  thee  as 
profane  out  of  the  mountain  of  God ;  and  I  have  destroyed  thee,  0  covering  cherub,  from 
the  midst  of  the  stones  of  fire."  He  had  gloried  in  his  wealth  and  power  and  grandeur, 
and  he  should  be  deprived  of  them  all.  2.  His  open  degradation.  "  I  have  cast  thee 
to  the  ground,  I  have  laid  thee  before  kings,  that  they  may  behold  thee."  "  Formerly," 
says  Hengstenberg,  "  in  its  brightness  a  spectacle  of  wonder  and  envy  for  kings,  Tyre 
is  now  become  for  them  a  spectacle  of  astonishment  and  sjiiteful  joy  in  its  terrible 
downfall "  (cf.  ch.  xxvii.  36).  This  was  the  appropriate  punishment  of  excessive  pride. 
The  punishment  corresponiied  with  the  sin.  "  When  pride  cometh,  then  cometh  sliame  : 
but  with  the  lowly  is  wisdom  "  (Prov.  xi.  2 ;  xvi.  18 ;  xviii.  12).  3.  His  utter  destruction. 
"  Therefore  have  I  brought  forth  a  fire  from  the  midst  of  thee,  it  hath  devoured  thte, 
and  I  have  turned  thee  to  ashes  upon  the  earth  in  the  sight  of  all  them  that  behold  thee." 
The  fire  signifies  the  wrath  of  God  in  the  punishment  of  sin ;  and  the  effect  of  that 
vprath  would  be  the  complete  destruction  of  the  Tyrian  monarchy.  Here  is  an  impor- 
tant fact.  The  destructive  fire  springs  out  of  the  midst  of  that  which  is  to  be  destroyed. 
"  All  God's  judgments  upon  sinners  take  rise  from  themselves ;  they  are  devoured  by 
a  fire  of  their  own  kindling."  "  The  fire  of  lust  arid  covetous  desire  draws  after  it  the 
other  fire  of  judgment." 

Conclusion.  Several  important  lessons  are  enforced  by  this  subject.  We  mention 
three  of  them.  1.  The  unsatisfactoriness  of  temporal  prosperity  when  dissociated  from 
righteous  principles  and  intelligent  piety.  2.  The  peculiar  moral  perils  of  succes^ul 
traders,  whether  as  communities  or  individuals.  3.  The  necessity  of  resisting  the  earliest 
risings  of  pride, — W.  J. 

Vers.  20 — 24. — God  glorified  in  the  execution  of  judgment,  "Again  the  word  of 
the  Lord  came  unto  me,  saying.  Son  of  man,  set  thy  face  against  Zidon,"  etc.  Zidon 
was  "  an  ancient  and  wealthy  city  of  Phcenicia,  on  the  eastern  coast  of  the  Mediterranean 
Sea,  less  than  twenty  English  miles  to  the  north  of  Tyre,"  and  on  the  extreme  north- 
western border  of  the  land  of  Israel.  The  Hebrew  word  Tsidon  signifies  "  Fishing,"  and 
indicates  the  earliest  employment  of  its  inhabitants.  The  land  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
Zidon  was  of  great  fertility.  "Adjoinirjg  the  city  there  are  luxuriant  gardens  and 
orchards,  in.  which  there  is  a  profusion  of  the  finest  fruit  trees  suited  to  the  climate." 
"  The  gardens  of  Zidon,"  says  Dean  Stanley,  "  are  conspicuous  even  from  a  distance." 
In  early  times  Zidon  seems  to  have  been  a  more  important  city  than  its  neighbour.  Tyre 
(cf.  Josh.  xi.  8  ;  xix.  28).  Homer,  in  his  poems,  makes  no  mention  of  Tyie,  bat  several 
times  he  mentions  Zidon  and  the  Zidonians.  But  from  the  time  of  Solomon  until  the 
invasion  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  Zidon  appears  to  have  been  less  influential  than  Tyre.  Our 
text  declares  the  judgment  of  God  against  Zidon,  and  that  in  that  judgment  he  will  be 
glorified ;  and  it  suggests  that  he  is  glorified, 

i ,  In  the  reasons  of  his  judgment.  These  reasons  may  be  arranged  under  two 
heads.  1.  The  conduct  of  the  Zidonians  in  relation  to  himself.  They  were  idolaters, 
worshipping  Baal,  the  sun-god  (1  Kings  xvi.  31),  and  Ashtoreth  as  their  tutelary 
goddess  (1  Kings  xi.  5,  33;  2  Kings  xxiii.  13).  It  was  from  them  that  these 
idolatries  had  been  introduced  amongst  the  chosen  people.  The  influence  of  Zidonian 
women  upon  the  religious  character  of  Solomon  was  most  deplorable;  and  the  marriage 
of  Ahab  to  Jezebel,  a  Zidonian  princess,  was  prolific  of  most  disastrous  consequences 
to  the'kingdom  of  Israel,  both  religiously  and  in  other  ways.  The  Zidonians  might 
have  obtained  the  knowledge  of  the  true  God  from  their  neighbours  the  Israelites, 
and  have  turned  to  him  in  heart  and  life,  if  they  had  been  so  disposed.  But  instead  of 
that,  they,  corrupted  Israel  with  their  idols.  Thus  they  robbed  God  of  his  rightful 
honour  and  praise.  And  his  glory  he  will  not  give  to  another,  neither  his  praise  unto 
craven  images  (Isa.  xlii.  8).  2.  The  conduct  of  the  Zidonians  in  relation  to  his  peoph. 
We  have  already-  spoken  of  their  evil  influence  over  them  religiously.  In  other  ways 
they  were  troublesome  to  them.  They  had  been  as  "  a  pricking  brier  "  and  "  a  grieving 
thorn  "  to  Israel  (ver  24).  There  is  probably  a  reference  in  this  verse  to  Numb,  xxxiii. 
65  and  Josh,  xxiii.  13.     And,  like  others  of  the  neighbours  of  the  Israelites,  the 


122  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET   EZBKIEI«    [oh.  xxviii.  1— 26. 

Zidonians  seem  to  have  rejoiced  in  their  troubles  and  distresses.  They  are  said  to  have 
done  "  despite  unto  them  ".  (ver.  24).  They  had  made  them  smart  with  their  contempt 
and  derision.  The  Lord  takes  notice  of  this,  and  will  judge  them  for  it.  Says  Heng- 
Btenberg,  "  While  the  Lord  chastises  his  own  people  with  an  unsparing  rod,  he  visits 
the  neighboiuing  heathen  nations  for  the  wrong  which  they  have  done  to  his  people,  as 
if  it  were  directed  against  himself,  and  verifies  in  them  his  word,  *  He  that  toucheth  yon 
toucheth  the  apple  of  his  eye'  (Zech.  ii.  8)."  Thus  we  see  that  there  were  good  reasoni 
for  this  judgment,    God  does  not  punish  any  person  or  people  without  just  cause. 

"  His  work  is  perfect ; 
For  all  his  ways  are  judgment ; 
A  god  of  faithfulness  and  without  iniquity, 
Jnst  and  right  ia  he." 

(Dent,  xxxii.  4.) 

"BighteousnesB  and  judgment  are  the  foundation  of  thy  throne  "  (Ps.  Izxxiz.  14)  j 
"Righteous  and  true  are  thy  ways,  thou  Eling  of  the  ages  '  (Rev.  xv.  3). 

n.  In  the  natube  of  his  jT7DaiiENT.  "I  will  send  into  her  pestilence,  and 
blood  in  her  streets ;  and  the  wounded  shall  fall  in  the  midst  of  her,  with  the  sword 
upon  her  on  every  side"  (ver.  23).  This  judgment  by  pestilence  and  sword  can 
hardly  be  said  to  have  been  executed  in  the  invasion  by  Nebuchadnezzar,  seeing  that 
Zidon  submitted  to  him  apparently  without  offering  any  serious  resistance.  But  this 
threatening  of  pestilence  and  sword  may  point  to  the  sufferings  of  the  Zidonians  at  a 
later  period  of  their  history,  in  consequence  of  their  revolt  against  the  Persians,  to 
whom  they  were  then  subject.  Zidon  was  at  that  time  a  wealthy  and  flourishing  city ; 
and  the  revolt  would  probably  have  been  successful  but  for  the  treachery  of  Tennes, 
their  king,  who,  in  fulfilment  of  a  compact  with  Artaierxes  Ochus,  the  Persian  monarch, 
betrayed  into  his  "  power  one  hundred  of  the  most  distinguished  citizens  of  Zidon,  who 
were  all  shot  to  death  with  javelins.  Five  hundred  other  citizens,  who  went  out  to  the 
king  with  ensigns  of  supplication,  shared  the  same  fate ;  and  by  concert  between  Tennes 
and  Mentor,  the  Persian  troops  were  admitted  within  the  gates,  and  occupied  the  city 
walls.  The  Zidonians,  before  the  arrival  of  Ochus,  had  burnt  their  vessels  to  preveet 
any  one  leaving  the  town ;  and  when  they  saw  themselves  surrounded  by  the  Persian 
troops,  they  adopted  the  desperate  resolution  of  shutting  themselves  up  with  their 
familieB,  and  setting  fire  each  man  to  his  own  house  (b.o.  351).  Forty  thousand  persons 
are  said  to  have  perished  in  the  flames.  Tennes  himself  did  not  save  his  own  life,  as 
Ochus,  notwithstanding  his  promise  to  the  contrary,  put  him  to  death.  The  privilege 
of  searching  the  ruins  "  •  for  the  gold  and  silver  they  contained  was  sold  by  Artaxerxes 
for  money.  But  our  point  is  that  the  character  of  this  judgment  contributes  to  the 
glory  of  God.  Whether  we  refer  the  prophecy  to  the  conquest  by  Nebuchadnezzar,  oi 
to  the  terrible  transactions  connected  with  the  revolt  against  the  Persian  power,  or  to 
both,  there  was  nothing  arbitrary  on  God's  part  in  the  execution  of  the  judgment.  The 
Lord  did  not,  as  it  were,  go  out  of  his  way  to  inflict  it.  The  Zidonians  may  he  said  to 
have  brought  it  upon  themselves.  Tet  all  was  regulated  and  controlled  by  the  providence 
of  God.  The  Divine  punishment  of  sin  is  never  an  arbitrary  infliction,  but  the  natural 
working  of  a  necessary  law.  The  penalty  is  the  natural  consequence  of  the  transgression. 
The  suffering  is  the  fruit  of  the  sin. 

in.  In  THE  EFFECT  OF  HIS  JUDGMENT.  A  twofold  effect  is  exhibited  by  the  prophet,. 
1 ,  Belief  and  blessitig  to  the  people  of  the  Lord.  "  And  there  shall  be  no  more  a  pricking 
brier  unto  the  house  of  Israel,  nor  a  grieving  thorn  of  any  that  be  round  about  them, 
that  did  despite  unto  them  "  (ver.  24).  This  refers  not  to  the  Zidonians  alone,  but  to 
the  other  peoples  who,  being  neighbours  to  the  house  of  Israel,  had  been  a  trouble  vmto 
them.  They  "  that  are  round  about  them,  that  did  despite  unto  them,"  would  cease  to 
molest  and  distress  them.  "  God's  judgment  on  the  ungodly  tends  to  the  good  of  his 
Church."  2.  Acknowledgment  o/thetupremact/  of  the  Lord.  Twice  in  this  brief  paragraph 
it  is  said  of  the  Zidonians,  "  And  they  shall  know  that  I  am  the  Lord."  (These  words, 
which  occur  so  frequently  in  this  book,  we  noticed  in  oh.  vi.  7, 10 ;  viL  4.)  The  people 
of  Zidon  "must  recognize  or  experience  him  in  his  operations,  whom  they  obstinately 
refused  to  recognize  willingly  "  (Hengstenberg).    It  is  also  said  of  the  Israelites,  "  And 

'  Dr.  Smith's  •  Bible  Dictionary,'  art  "  Sidon." 


OH.  xxvui.  1—26.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  123 

they  shall  know  that  I  am  the  Lord  God."  In  the  relief  afforded  to  them  and  the 
deliverances  wrought  for  them  they  would  recognize  the  presence  and  power  and 
supremacy  of  Jehovah.  Thus  "  the  Lord  of  hosts  is  exalted  in  judgment,  and  God  the 
Holy  One  is  sanctified  in  righteousness  "  (Isa.  v.  16). — W.  J. 

Vers.  25, 26. —  Ood  glorified  m  his  dealings  with  his  people  under  chastisement.  "  Thus 
saith  the  Lord  God;  Wheu  I  shall  have  gathered  the  house  of  Israel  from  the  peoples 
among  whom  they  are  scattered,"  etc.  In  bringing  to  a  close  the  prophecies  against 
the  heathen  nations  which  bordered  upon  the  Holy  Land,  Ezekiel  briefly  outlines  the 
glorious  restoration  of  the  people  of  God  in  contrast  to  the  judgments  which  destroyed 
those  nations.  He  also  declares  that  he  will  be  sanctified  in  his  people  in  the  sight  of 
the  nations.  His  dealings  with  his  people  who  were  ia  captivity  would  be  of  such 
a  character  as  to  promote  his  honour  in  the  eyes  of  the  nations  who 'were  cognizant  of 
those  dealiogs.  Thus  the  subject  is  presented  to  us  of  Ood  glorified  in  his  treatment  of 
his  people  tmder  chastisement. 

L  In  his  oabe  fob  them  while  they  abb  ukdeb  chastisement  because  of 
THBIB  SINS.  Our  text  is  itself  aa  evidence  of  this  care.  They  needed  some  strong 
encouragement  to  counteract  "  the  despondency  which  was  now,  after  the  opening  of 
the  siege  of  Jerusalem,  the  most  dangerous  foe  "  which  they  had  to  contend  against. 
God  recognized  their  need,  and  the  inspiring  promises  of  the  text  were  a  contribution 
towards  its  supply.  Moreover,  his  purpose  to  gather  them  again  and  restore  them  to 
their  own  land  necessitated  the  exercise  of  care  over  them  during  their  exile.  We  have 
reason  to  believe  that  when  his  people  are  under  chastisement  they  are  the  objects  of 
his  special  care.  This  is  taught  in  his  holy  Word,  especially  in  Mai.  iii.  3,  "  He  shall 
sit  as  a  refiner  and  purifier  of  silver,  and  he  shall  purify  the  sons  of  Levi,  and  purge 
them  as  gold  and  silver."  In  purifyii^  silver  from  its  dross  "  the  refiner  not  only  places 
his  crucible  on  a  hot  fire,  but  heaps  fire  around  and  above  it.  Under  this  process  it  at 
first  throws  out  a  dark  and  offensive  smoke,  which,  as  the  heat  and  its  effects  increase, 
becomes  less  offensive,  until  it  altogether  ceases,  and  the  silver  becomes  beautifully 
white.  The  point  of  requisite  purity  and  perfection  is  when  the  refiner  sees  his  own 
likeneu  reflected  in  the  silver.  How  admirably  does  this  illustrate  the  gracious  process 
by  which,  through  means  of  afi9iction,  our  heavenly  Father  carries  on  the  work  of 
purification  in  the  hearts  of  his  children  I  "  The  refiner  of  silver  keeps  his  eye  steadily 
on  the  furnace,  lest  the  silver  should  be  injured  by  the  intense  heat,  and  thkt  he  may 
see  when  the  process  is  complete;  so  the  great  Befiner  watches  over  his  children  when 
they  are  passing  through  the  cleansing  fires  of  Divine  chastisement.  Here,  then,  is 
encouragement  to  the  people  of  God  in  season^  of  triaL  God  himself  is  graciously 
observing  you.  His  eye  is  constantly  and  tenderly  upon  you.  In  this  fact  there  is 
also  vindication  of  the  Divine  honour  in  relation  to  the  afflictions  of  his  people. 

IL  In  his  bemotal  of  the  chastisement  when  it  has  accomplished  its  fubposb. 
"  Thus  saith  the  Lord  ;  When  I  shall  have  gathered  the  house  of  Israel  from  the  peoples 
among  whom  they  are  scattered,"  etc.  (ver.  25).  When  the  object  for  which  the 
covenant  people  were  sent  into  captivity  was  achieved,  he  brought  them  together  ani 
reinstated  them  in  the  land  which  he  gave  to  his  servant  Jacob.  "  In  that  furnace  of 
affliction  the  national  tendency  to  idolatry  was  burnt  out  of  the  national  heart,  never  tc 
reappear ; "  and  then  they  were  delivered  out  of  the  furnace.  In  their  restoration  tc 
their  own  land  the  nations  would  see  that  the  Lord  had  not  cast  them  off  or  forsaken 
them.  "  For  the  Lord  will  not  cast  off  for  ever.  For  though  he  cause  grief,"  etc.  (Lam. 
iii.  31 — 33).  Moreover,  in  that  restoration  there  was  a  manifestation  of  the  faithfulness, 
power,  and  goodness  of  the  Lord  to  his  people.  Faithfulness  in  his  remaining  true  to 
them  and  to  his  engagements  to  them,  notwithstanding  their  former  long-continued 
unfaithfulness  to  him.  "  If  we  are  faithless,  he  abideth  faithful ;  for  he  cannot  deny 
himself."  Power  in  his  controlling  the  hearts  and  actions  of  men  for  the  accomplish- 
ment of  his  purposes  in  relation  to  his  people.  And  goodness  in  dealing  with  them  so 
graciously,  notwithstanding  their  ill  desert.  Thus  would  the  Lord  God  "  be  sanctified 
in  them  in  the  sight  of  the  nations."  And  still  he  speedily  removes  the  chastisements 
of  his  people  when  they  have  effected  the  purpose  for  which  they  were  inflicted. 

"  Praise  him  still  the  same  for  ever. 
Slow  to  chide,  and  swift  to  bless." 


124 


THE   BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET   EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxix.  1—21 


III.  Tn  his  bestoration  of  peace  and  prospkritt  to  them.  "  And  they  shall 
dwell  securely  therein ;  yea,  they  shall  build  houses,  and  plant  vineyards,"  etc.  (ver. 
26).  "  As  we  have  seen  that  the  prophecies  against  the  heathen  reached,  not  merely 
to  the  particular  nations,  hut  to  the  world-power  which  they  represented ;  as  the  sarr.e 
predictions  are  directed  against  Tyre  by  Ezekiel,  against  Babylon  by  Isaiah,  and  against 
the  Apocalyptic  Babylon  by  St.  John;  so  this  prophecy  reaches  far  beyond  a  mere 
temporal  restoration.  It  points  to  times  of  more  permanent  security,  when  from  all 
nations  and  kingdoms  the  Church  of  Christ,  the  Israel  of  God,  shall  be  gathered  in, 
when  the  power  of  the  world  shall  be  for  ever  broken,  and  the  kingdom  of  Christ  shall 
be  established  for  ever"  ('Speaker's  Commentary").  Two  blessings  are  particularly 
mentioned  by  the  prophet.  1.  Safety.  "  They  shall  dwell  securely."  Israel  was  not 
free  from  enemies  and  molestations  after  their  return  from  captivity.  Delivered  from 
idolatry,  yet  their  evil  hearts  broke  out  into  other  forms  of  sin ;  and  distresses  followed 
transgressions.  Christian  believers  are  not  exempted  from  either  enemies  or  trials. 
Tet  we  may  say  that  "believers  always  dwell  safely  under  the  Divine  protection,  and 
may  be  quiet  from  the  fear  of  evil."  For  "  if  God  is  for  us,  who  is  against  us  ?  .  .  . 
In  all  these  things  we  are  more  than  conquerors,  through  him  that  loved  us  "  (Bom. 
viii.  31,  37;  Heb.  xiii.  6;  1  Pet.  iii.  13).  2.  Prosperity.  "They  shall  build  houses, 
and  plant  vineyards,  and  dwell  securely."  These  operations  denote  the  return  of 
prosperity  to  the  people.  And  it  is  ceitain  that  at  times  they  flourished  considerably 
in  their  condition  and  circumstances.  There  is  evidence  of  this  in  the  sumptuous 
houses  which  they  built  for  themselves  (cf.  Hag.  i.  4).  In  thus  dealing  with  his  people 
also  the  Lord  would  "  be  sanctified  in  them  in  the  sight  of  the  nations."  But  the  text 
points  onward  to  blessings  yet  in  store  for  the  Israel  of  God.  Seasons  of  unprecedented 
power  and  prosperity  await  the  Church  in  the  future,  when  men  everywhere  shall  know 
and  acknowledge  the  Lord  God.  "  All  the  earth  shall  be  filled  with  the  glory  of  the 
Lord  "  (Numb.  xiv.  21).  "  In  the  name  of  Jesus  every  knee  shall  bow,  of  things  in 
heaven,  and  things  on  earth,"  etc.  (Phil.  ii.  10, 11).  And  in  the  heavenly  Canaan  shall 
be  enjoyed  the  complete  triumph,  and  the  undisturbed  peace,  and  the  deep^  eternal 
joy. 

"And  the  temple  again  shall  be  built. 

And  filled  as  it  was  of  yore  j 
And  the  burden  be  lift  from  the  heart  of  the  wodit, 

And  the  nations  all  adore ; 
Prayers  to  the  throne  of  heaven 

Morning  and  eve  shall  rise. 
And  unto,  and  not  of  the  Lamb 

Shall  be  the  sacrifice." 

(P.  J.  Bafley,) 

W.J. 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEB  XXIX. 


Ver.  1. — ^In  the  tenth  year,  eto.  The 
precision  with  which  the  dates  of  the  several 
portions  of  the  prophecy  against  Egypt  are 
given,  here  and  in  ver.  17 ;  ch.  xxx.  20  j  ixxi. 
1 ;  xxxiL  1,  7,  shows  that  each  was  called 
forth  by  the  political  events  of  the  time,  and 
has  to  be  studied  in  connection  with  them. 
It  will  be  well,  therefore,  to  begin  with  a 
brief  survey  of  the  relations  which  existed 
at  this  period  between  Judab,  Egypt,  and 
Babylon.  After  the  great  defeat  of  Pharaoh- 
Necho  by  Nebuchadnezzar  at  Carchemish 
(B.C.  604),  on  which  Jeremiah  (xlvi.) 
dwells  fully,  he  was  succeeded  in  b.o.  594 
by  his  son  Fsammetik  II.,  the  Psammis  of 


Herodotus  ii.  160,  who  invaded  Ethiopia,  and 
died  in  B.C.  588,  leaving  the  throne  to  hi* 
son  Uah-prahet,  the  Pharaoh  Hophra  of 
Jer.  xliv.  SO,  the  Apries  of  Herod.,  ii.  161. 
The  Greek  historian  tells  us  that  he  attacked 
Tyre  and  Zidon,  failed  in  an  enterprise 
against  Gyrene,  and  was  deposed  by  Amasia 
(B.C.  569).  Zedekiah  and  his  counsellors, 
following  in  the  steps  of  Hezekiah  (Isa. 
XXX.)  and  -Jelioiakim  (Jer.  xlvi.),  had 
courted  his  alliance  against  the  Chaldeans. 
As  Ezekiel  had  prophesied  (oh.  xvii.  1 1 — 18X 
they  found  that  they  were  once  more  leaning 
on  a  broken  reed.  We  have  now  come  to 
B.C.  589,  when  Jerusalem  was  actually  be- 
sieged, but  was  still  dreaming  of  being 
relieved  by  an  Egyptian  army. 


CH.  XXIX.  1—21.]    THE   BOOK  OP  THE   PROPHET  EZEKIEL. 


126 


Ver.  S. — The  great  dragon,  The  word  is 
cognate  with  that  used  in  Gen.  i.  2]  for  the 
great  "  whales,"  monsters  of  the  deep.  The 
"  dragon,"  probably  the  crocodile  of  the  Nile 
(compare  the  description  of  "  leviathan  "  in 
Job  xli.)  had  come  to  be  the  received  pro- 
phetic symbol  of  Egypt  (Ps.  Ixxiv.  13 ;  Isa. 
xxvii.  1 ;  li.  9).  The  rivers  are  the  Nile- 
branchea  of  the  Delta.  Hy  river  is  mine 
own.  The  words  probably  imply,  that 
Hophra,  like  his  grandfather  Necho,  in  his 
plan  of  a  canal  from  the  Kile  to  the  Bed 
Sea,  had  given  much  time  and  labour  to 
irrigation  works  in  Lower  Egypt.  The 
boast  which  rose  to  his  lips  reminds  us  of 
that  of  Nebuchadnezzar  as  he  looked  on 
Babylon  (Dan.  iv.  30);  He,  like  the  kings 
of  Tyre  and  Babylon,  was  tempted  to  a  self- 
apotheosis,  and  thought  of  himself  as  the 
Creator  of  his  own  power.  The  words  of 
Herodotus  (ii.  169),  in  which  he  says  that 
Apries  believed  himself  so  firmly  established 
in  his  kingdom  that  there  was  no  god  that 
could  cast  liim  out  of  it,  present  a  suggestive 
parallel. 

Vers.  4,  5. — ^I  will  put  hooks  in  thy  jaws. 
So  Herodotus  (ii.  70)  describes  the  way  in 
which  the  Egyptians  caught  the  crocodile 
by  baiting  a  large  hook  with  swine's  flesh. 
Jomard  ('Description  de  I'Egypt,'  i.  27) 
gives  a  similar  account  (comp.  also  Job 
xli.  1,  2,  though  there  the  capture  seems 
represented  as  an  almost  impossible  achieve- 
ment; probably  the  process  had  become 
more  familiar  since  the  date  of  that  book). 
The  fish  that  stick  to  the  scales  of  the 
crocodile  are,  of  course,  in  the  interpre- 
tation of  the  parable,  either  the  Egyptian 
army  itself  or  the  nations  that  had  thrown 
themselves  into  ■  alliance  with  Egypt,  and 
the  destruction  of  tlie  two  together  in 
the  wilderness  points  to  some  great  over- 
throw of  the  Egyptian  army  and  its  auxi- 
liaries, probably  to  that  of  the  expedition 
against  Gyrene  (Herod.,  ii.  161)  which  led 
to  the  revolt  of  Amasia,  and  which  would 
take  the  wilderness  west  of  the  Nile  on 
its  line  of  march.  The  beasts  of  the  field 
and  the  fowls  of  the  heaven  (we  note  the 
recurrence  of  the  old  Homeric  phrase,  as 
in  'Iliad,'  i.  4,  5)  should  devour  the  car- 
cases of  the  slain,  the  corpses  of  the  fallen 
and  prostrate  nation. 

Ver.  6. — A  staff  of  reed  nnto  the  honse  of 
Israel.  Ezekiel  reproduces  the  familiar 
image  of  2  Kings  xviiL  21;  Isa.  xxxvi.  6. 
The  proverb  had  not  ceased  to  be  true, 
though  the  rulers  were  different.  Here, 
again,  the  imagery  is  strictly  local.  The 
reeds  were  as  characteristic  of  the  Nile  as 
the  crocodiles  (Exod.  i.  3;  Job  xL  21). 
The  image  of  the  reed  is  continued  in  ver. 
7,  and  the  efiect  of  trusting  to  its  support 
is  described  in  detail. 


Ver.  8.— Behold,  I  will  bring  a  sword 
upon  thee.  The  words  are  probably 
addressed  to  the  nation  personified  rather 
than  to  the  king.  The  sentence  of  doom 
is  now  pronounced,  no  longer  figuratively. 
And  the  special  guilt  for  wliich  it  was  in- 
flicted, a  guilt  which  the  nation  shared  witli 
its  ruler,  is  emphatically  repeated  in  ver.  9. 

Ver.  10. — From  the  tower  of  Syene,  etc. 
The  Authorized  Version  is  misleading,  as 
Syene  was  itself  on  the  border  of  Ethiopia. 
Better,  with  the  Eevised  Version  margin, 
from  Migdol  to  Syene,  even  to  the  border  of 
Ethiopia.  The  Migdol  (equivalent  to 
"tower")  so  named  is  mentioned  in  the 
•  Itinerarium '  of  Antoninus  (p.  171,  edit. 
Wafael),  and  was  about  twelve  miles  from 
Pfclusium,  and  thus  represented  the  northern 
extremity  of  Egypt;  as  Syene,  identified 
with  the  modern  Asmiian,  represented  the 
southern,  being  the  last  fortified  town  in 
Egypt  proper.  The  expedition  of  Psammig 
against  Ethiopia,  as  ahove,  had  probably 
given  prominence  to  the  latter  fortress.  So 
taken,  the  phrase  corresponded  to  the 
familiar  "  from  Dan  to  Beersheba  "  of  Judg. 
XX.  1,  etc. 

Ver.  11.— Neither  shall  it  be  inhabited 
forty  years.  It  need  hardly  be  said  that 
history  reveals  no  such  period  of  devastation. 
Nor,  indeed,  would  anything  but  the  most 
prosaic  literalism  justify  us  in  looking  for  it 
We  are  dealing  with  the  language  of  a  poet- 
prophet,  which  is  naturally  that  of  hyper- 
bole, and  so  the  "forty  years"  stand,  as, 
perhaps,  elsewhere  (Judg.  iii.  11 ;  v.  31,  etc.), 
for  a  period  of  nndelinea  duration,  and  the 
picture  of  a  land  on  which  no  man  or  beast 
sets  foot  for  that  of  a  time  of  desolation,  and 
consequent  cessation  of  all  the  customary 
traific  along  the  Nile.  Such  a  period,  there 
is  reason  to  believe,  did  follow  on  the 
conquests  of  Nebuchadnezzar.  It  is  implied 
in  vers.  17 — 21,  which  carry  us  to  a  date 
seventeen  years  later  than  that  of  the  verse 
with  which  we  are  now  dealing ;  and  also 
in  Jer.  xliii.  10 — 12.  Josephus  ('Contra 
Apion,'  i.  20)  speaks  of  Nebuchadnezzar  as 
having  invaded  Libya.  The  reign  of 
Amasis,  whioli  followed  on  the  deposition  of 
Hophra,  was  one  of  general  prosperity  as 
regards  commerce  and  culture,  but  Egypt 
ceased  to  be  one  of  the  great  world-powers 
after  the  time  of  Nebuchadnezzar  and  fell 
easily  into  the  hands  of  the  Persians  under 
Cambyses.  It  is  noticeable  that  Ezekiel 
does  not,  like  Isaiah  (xix.  18—25),  connect 
the  future  of  Egypt  with  any  Messianic 
expectations. 

Ver.  12.— I  win  scatter  the  Egyptiani 
among  the  nations,  As  before,  records  ai« 
silent  as  to  any  such  dispersion.  All  that 
we  can  say  is  that  such  a  deportation  was 
uniformly  the  sequel  of  the  conquests  nt 


126 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxix.  1—21. 


an  Oriental  king,  as  in  the  case  of  the 
captivities  of  Samaria  (2  Kings  xvii.  6)  and 
Jtrusalem,  and  of  the  nations  that  were 
settler!  in  Samaria  (2  Kings  xvii.  6),  and  of 
the  Persians  by  Darius;  that  if  we  find 
reiison  to  believe  that  Egypt  was  invaded 
by  Nebuchadnezzar  after  the  destruction  of 
Jerusalem,  we  may  assume,  with  little  risk 
of  doubt,  that  it  was  followed  by  what 
Ezekiel  describes. 

Ver.  13.— At  the  end  of  forty  years. 
The  restoration  described  may  probably  be 
connected  with  the  policy  of  the  Persian 
kings.  There  may  have  been  a  parallel,  ns 
regards  Egypt,  to  the  return  of  the  Jewish 
exiles  under  Cyrus  and  his  successors, 
though  it  has  not  left  its  mark  on  history. 

Ver.  14. — Into  the  land  of  Pathros.  (For 
the  laud  of  their  habitation,  read,  with  the 
Revised  Version,  the  land  of  their  birth.)  (For 
Pathros,  see  Gen.  1. 13,  14  ;  1  Chron.  i.  12 ; 
Isa.  zi.  1 :  Jer.  xliv.  1.)  Its  position  is  some- 
what doubtful,  but  the  balance  of  evidence 
is  in  favour  of  p.^aiaug  it  in  the  Tbebaid  of 
Upper  Egypt,  which  Herodotus  (ii.  4, 15) 
describes  as  the  original  seat  of  the 
Egyptian  monarchy.  Its  name  may  be 
connected  with  the  Pathyiite  nome  in 
which  Thebes  was  situated  (Pliny,  'Hist. 
Nat.,'  v.  9).  The  LXX.  gives  the  form 
Pathuret,  and  is  followed  by  the  Vulgate, 
with  a  slight  change,  Phathures. 

Ver.  15. — It  shall  be  the  basest  of  the 
kingdoms.  The  words  describe  vividly 
the  condition  of  Egypt  under  the  Persian 
monarchy,  alter  its  conquest  by  Cambyses. 
With  the  Ptolemies  it  rose  again  to  some- 
thing like  eminence,  but  that,  it  must  be 
remembered,  was  an  alien  dynasty.  The 
nationality  of  Egypt  was  suppressed,  and 
Alexandria,  practically  a  Greek  city,  took 
the  place  of  Memphis,  Sais,  and  Thebes. 

Ver.  16. — It  shall  be  no  more  the  con- 
fidence of  the  house  of  Israel.  Throughout 
the  history  of  the  two  kingdoms  of  Israel 
and  Juilah,  as  in  the  case  of  Hoshea  (2 
Kings  xvii.  4),  Hezekiah  (Isa.  xxx.  2,  3; 
xxxvi.  4,  6),  and  Jehoiakim  (2  Kings  xxiii. 
35),  their  temptation  had  been  to  place  its 
"  confidence  "  in  the  "  chariots  and  horses  " 
of  Egypt  as  an  ally.  That  temptation 
should  not  recur  again.  Egypt  should  not 
in  that  way  bring  the  iniquity  of  Israel  to 
the  remembrance  of  the  Judge,  acting,  as  it 
were,  as  a  Satan,  first  tempting  and  then 
accnsing.  There  should  be  no  more  look- 
ing after  Egypt  instead  of  Jehovah,  ai  their 
succour  and  defence. 

Ver.  17. — In  the  seven  and  twentieth,  etc. 
The  lection  that  follows  has  the  interest  of 
being,  as  far  as  the  dates  recorded  enable 
OS  to  determine,  the  latest  of  Ezekiel's 
prophecies,  and  brings  us  to  B.o.  572.  It 
was   manifestly  inserted  at  a  later  date. 


seventeen  years  after  those  which  precede 
and  follow  it,  either  by  the  prophet,  as 
he  collected  and  revised  his  writings,  or 
by  some  later  editor,  as  a  proof  that  his 
earlier  predictions  had  already  received,  or 
were  on  the  point  of  receiving,  their  fulfil- 
ment. The  fact  that  the  special  word  of 
the  lord  came  on  the  first  day  of  the  year 
is  not  without  significance.  Then,  aa  now, 
the  beginning  of  a  new  year  was  a  tima 
for  men  generally  to  look  before  and  after, 
for  a  propliet  to  ask  himself  what  new  stage 
in  the  order  of  the  Divine  government  tha 
year  was  likely  to  produce. 

Ver.  18. — Nebuchadnezzar,  etc.  The 
words  carry  us  to  the  close  of  the  thirteen 
years'  siege  of  Tyre  referred  to  in  the  notes 
on  ch.  xxviii.,  and  enable  ns  to  refer  the 
commencement  of  that  siege  to  the  four- 
teenth year  of  Jehoiaohiu's  captivity,  ciro. 
B.o.  586,  two  years  after  the  destruction 
of  Jerusalem.  This  agrees  with  the 
report  of  the  Tyrian  Annals  given  by 
Josephus  ('  Contra  Apion,'  i.  21),  who  gives 
the  names  of  the  kings  of  Tyre  from 
Ithobal  to  Hirom,  in  the  fourteenth  year  of 
whose  reign  Cyrus  became  King  of  Persia. 
Josephus,  however,  gives  the  seventh,  in- 
stead of  the  seventeenth,  year  of  Nebuchad- 
nezzar as  the  date  of  the  beginuing  Of  the 
siege.  Here  the  point  dwelt  on  is  not  the 
success  of  the  siege,  but  its  comparative 
failure.  The  labours  and  sufferings  of 
the  besiegers  had  been  immense.  Jerome 
(in  loe.)  states  (not,  however,  giving  '  his 
authority)  that  tl^ese  labours  consisted 
mainly  in  the  attempt  to  fill  up  the  strait 
between  the  island-city  and  the  mainland 
with  masses  of  stone  and  rubbish.  These 
were  carried  on  the  heads  and  shoulders  of 
the  troops,  and  the  natural  result  was  that 
the  former  lost  their  hair  and  the  latter 
their  skin,  and  the  whole  army  was  in  a 
miserable  plight.  And  after  all,  the  king 
had  no  wages  for  his  labours.  The  city. 
indeed,  was  taken,  but  the  inhabitants 
made  their  escape  by  sea,  with  their  chief 
possessions,  and  the  hopes  of  spoil  W'^r^ 
disappointed. 

Ver.  19. — Behold  I  give  the  land  9f 
Egypt,  eto.  For  this  disappointment, 
Ezekiel,  writing,  so  to  speak,  the  postscript 
which  he  incorporates  with  his  earlier 
oracles,  promises  compensation.  Egypt,  as 
he  had  said  seventeen  years  before,  should 
be  conquered,  and  its  cities  plundered,  and 
so  there  should  be  wages  enough  for  the 
whole  thirteen  yean  of  fruitless  labour  in 
the  siege  of  Tyre.  In  that  labour,  the 
prophet  adds  (ver. .  20),  they,  though  they 
knew  it  not,  had  been  working  out  the  will 
of  the  Supreme.  They  also  had  been 
servants  of  Jehovah,  as  Jeremiah  (xxv.  9) 
had  described  Nebuchadnezzar  himself. 


CH.  XXIX.  1—21'.]    THE   BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  EZEKIBL. 


la? 


Yer.  21. — ^The  horn  of  the  lionae  of  Isiael. 
The  "  horn "  is,  as  always  (1  Sam.  iL  1 ; 
Pa.  xcii.  10;  cxii.  9;  oxzxii.  17),  the 
symbol  of  power.  Jeremiah's  use  of  it 
(Lam.  ii.  3)  may  well  have  been  present  to 
Ezekiel's  thonghts.  That  horn  had  been 
out  off,  but  it  should  begin  to  sprout  again, 
and  the  prophet  himself  should  resume  bis 


work  as  the  teacher  of  bis  people,  which  bad 
apparently  been  suspended  for  many  yeara 
after  the  dosing  vision  of  the  restoration 
of  the  temple  and  of  Israel.  The  words 
justify  the  conclusion  that  Ezekiel  resumed 
his  labours  after  b.o.  572.  Was  he  watch- 
ing the  growth  of  Salathiel  or  Zerubbabel? 


HOMILBTICS. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — The  damn  of  Egypt.  I.  An  kssibed  pbxacheb  pbophbbies  ooHOERNiNa 
A  OREAT  FOBEiON  NATION.  The  Hebrew  prophet  did  not  oonBne  his  attention  to  the 
little  atrip  of  territory  on  the  eastern  shore  of  the  Mediterranean  Sea,  which  we  call  the 
Holy  Land.  He  was  God's  messenger  to  the  world.  1.  The  heathen  art  concerned  with 
Ood's  messages.  God  notices  them  and  has  intentions  concerning  them.  Therefore : 
2.  It  is  the  duty  of  the  Church  to  make  Qois  truth  known  to  the  heathen.  Ezekiel  was 
not  a  Jonah;  he  was  not  called  upon  to  visit  the  heathen  as  a  prophet  of  Jehovah,  But 
his  written  wurds  might  be  read  by  some  of  the  more  inquiring  Egyptians.  It  is  well 
to  take  large  views  of  God's  thoughts,  our  duties,  and  the  world's  needs. 

II.  God  calls  a  mighty  empire  to  judgment.  Tyre  was  greater  and  more  famous 
than  the  little  Ammonite  and  Moabite  countries ;  but  even  Tyre  was  small  compared 
with  Egypt— one  of  the  great  world-empires.  1.  No  people  can  he  above  the  rule  of 
Ood.  The  biggest  earthly  kingdom  is  beneath  the  King  of  kings.  Egypt  is  compared 
to  one  of  its  monster  crocodiles  (ver.  3).  But  it  is  not  the  less  to  be  called  to  account 
by  God.  2.  No  people  can  he  too  strong  to  he  overthrown.  Even  great  Egypt  is  to  fall. 
The  strongest  have  their  weak  places.  Mighty  citadels  may  be  shaken  by  earthquakes. 
All  man's  grandest  works  and  most  imposing  institutions  are  frail,  and  may  be  broken 
up  by  the  rod  of  the  Unseen. 

III.  The  gbbatnesb  of  antiquity  is  no  safeouaed  against  the  danobbb  of 
FUTURITY.  After  China,  Egypt  seems  to  be  about  the  most  ancient  empire  in  the 
world.  In  the  region  of  its  influence  and  among  its  neighbours  Egypt  was  venerable 
with  age  before  any  of  its  rivals  had  made  an  appearance  on  the  world's  stage.  Its 
known  history  goes  back  to  four  thousand  years  before  Christ.  For  tens  of  centuries 
this  hoary  old  empire  of  the  Pharaohs  held  on  its  course  amidst  the  rising  and  falling 
of  many  ambitious  but  short-lived  neighbours.  Yet  Egypt  was  not  immortal.  Dynasty 
succeeded  dynasty,  and  Egypt  long  stood  the  shock  of  war  and  change.  But  at  last  her 
hour  of  reckoning  drew  near.  ThSn  her  long  past  afforded  her  no  shelter.  England 
cannot  live  in  the  future  on  her  past  history.  The  Church  of  the  coming  age  cannot 
stand  strong  and  safe  on  no  better  foundation  than  the  glory  of  saints  and  martyrs  in 
earlier  ages.  ^^       .         r  c 

IV.  Intellect  is  no  bubstitote  foe  a  good  coksciencb.  Egypt  was  tamous  tor 
her  learning  and  her  science.  Long  before  the  Babylonian  and  Persian  astronomical 
science  arose  by  the  Euphrates,  there  were  achools  of  literature,  philosophy,  and  physical 
science  on  the  banks  of  the  Nile.  It  was  a  help  in  the  training  of -Israel's  great  dehverer 
that  he  was  educated  in  the  greatest  centre  of  light  of  his  age  (Acts  vu.  22).  Yet  the 
great  intelligence  of  ancient  Egypt  did  not  preserve  its  sons  from  gross  moral  corruption, 
and  no  worldly  wisdom  was  able  to  provide  against  the  descending  arm  of  judgment 
Culture  will  not  dispense  with  the  need  of  conscience.  University  honours  are  not 
passports  to  heaven.  Knowledge  and  thought  will  not  shield  the  sinful  against  the 
wrath  of  future  judgment. 

Vers.  6,  7. — "  A  staff  of  reed."  Egypt  is  here  compared  to  a  staff  of  reed  that  had  been 
trusted  by  Israel  and  had  failed  her  in  the  hour  of  need.  Earlier  than  this  the  Jews  were 
warned  not  to  trust  Egypt  because  the  old  empire  of  the  Nile  had  become  weak  as  one 
of  the  reeds  that  grew  by  her  sacred  river.  The  confidence  would  be  fatal,  for  the  staff 
would  break  and  pierce  the  hand  of  one  who  leaned  upon  it  (Isa.  xxxvi.  6).  It  was 
common  for  the  prophets  to  warn  the  Jews  against  the  mistake  of  going  down  to  Egypi 


1^8  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIBL.    [oh.  xxix.  1—21. 

for  help  (Isa.  xxxi.  1).    Now,  however,  Egypt  is  blamed  for  being  so  false  and  treacherous 
an  ally  as  she  proved  herself  in  the  time  of  Judah's  need. 

I.  Weakness  re  culpablb.  Egypt  ought  not  to  have  been  weak  as  a  Nile  reed. 
In  her  friendship,  at  all  events,  she  should  have  shown  more  stamina.  Moral  weakness 
is  certainly  blameworthy.  There  is  a  great  mistake  in  pleading  weakness  as  an  excuse 
for  failure  of  duty.  God  never  calls  upon  any  one  to  do  more  than  he  is  able  to  accomplish. 
If,  therefore,  bis  strength  fails,  and  he  cannot  perform  his  task  or  face  his  temptations, 
the  blame  lies  at  his  own  door.  We  ought  to  be  strong  in  soul.  We  have  not  even  the 
excuse  of  Egypt — a  heathen  nation  that  knew  not  the  true  God.  With  inexhaustible 
fountains  of  spiritual  strength  within  our  reach  in  the  gospel  of  Christ,  it  is  our  own 
fault  if  we  become  as  worthless  reeds  when  we  should  be  like  strong  trees  of  the  Lord. 

II.  Pailino  fbiendship  m  of  the  nature  op  treachebt.  We  can  wrong  our 
friend  without  lifting  a  finger  to  hurt  him,  if  we  are  found  wanting  in  the  time  of  need. 
Of  all  places  friendship  is  the  last  in  which  weakness  should  be  discovered.  A  true 
friend  will  make  it  a  point  of  honour  to  be  at  his  very  best  to  give  expected  help,  even 
though  he  be  weak  and  suffer  defeat  in  pursuing  his  own  interests.  He  is  an  unworthy 
friend  of  Christ  who  is  weak  as  a  reed  when  called  upon  to  do  any  service  or  make  any 
gacriSce  for  his  Master.  It  is  treason  to  Christ  to  be  found  wanting  in  the  day  of  duty 
or  danger. 

m.  There  is  no  protection  in  the  plea  of  weakness.  Egypt  was  not  saved 
on  account  of  her  weakness.  She  found  no  excuse  in  her  inability  to  help  her  allies. 
She  ought  to  have  been  able  to  help  them.  They  who  refuse  to  go  into  the  Lord's 
battle  because  they  have  not  moral  strength  with  which  to  fight  the  foe  will  not  there- 
fore be  permitted  to  shelter  themselves  in  peace  and  quiet.  They  may  escape  the 
wounds  of  the  field,  but  they  will  encounter  the  ills  of  an  attack  at  home.  No  soul  can 
be  safe  in  neglecting  duty,  shunning  peril,  or  fleeing  from  the  place  where  Christ  would 
have  him  stand. 

rV.  Weakness  may  bb  conquered.  The  reed-like  character  may  be  made  stout  as 
an  oak.  God  can  make  the  feeble  strong.  "  To  them  that  have  no  might  he  increaseth 
strength  "  (Isa.  xl.  29).  Thus  St.  Paul  could  say, "  When  I  am  weak,  then  am  I  strong  " 
(2  Cor.  xii.  10).  Christ  will  not  break  the  bruised  reed ;  but  he  will  not  leave  it  bowed 
and  useless.  He  will  strengthen  it.  The  secret  of  this  transformation  from  weakness 
to  strength  is  faith.  They  were  the  heroes  of  faith  who,  according  to  the  Epistle  to 
the  Hebrews,  "  out  of  weakness  were  made  strong  "  (Heb.  xi.  34). 

Ver.  9. —  The  pride  of  creation.  In  the  insanity  of  his  pride,  Pharaoh  is  supposed 
even  to  claim  the  mighty  Nile,  that  great  work  of  nature  on  which  the  wealth  and  even 
the  very  life  of  his  people  depended,  as  a  creation  of  his  own  imperial  power.  Such  a 
foolish  boast  illustrates  in  an  extreme  form  the  common  mistake  of  claiming  to  create 
what  has  in  fact  been  received  as  a  gift  of  God. 

I.  NcTB  THE  prevalence  OF  THE  PBIDE  OF  CREATION,  This  Is  seen  with  many 
kinds  of  success.  1.  National  greatness.  The  proud  nation  glories  in  having  built  up 
its  own  greatness.  The  mighty  monarch  regards  himself  as  the  maker  of  his  empire. 
2.  Private  fortune.  One  who  has  risen  fiom  the  ranks  regards  himself  as  a  self-made 
man.  His  success  he  attributes  to  his  own  ability  and  energy ;  and  his  ability  and 
eijorgy  he  regards  as  springing  from  himself.  3.  Skilful  inventions.  Man  does  indeed 
seem  to  create  with  his  brain.  We  say  that  Homer  created  tlie  '  Iliad ; '  Phidias,  the 
Elgin  Marbles;  Watt,  the  steam-engine;  Stephenson,  the  locomotive.  The  thought 
that  constituted  or  shaped  these  great  works  of  genius  was  bred  in  the  brains  of  the  men 
who  originated  them.  4,  Personal  character.  Men  commonly  regard  themselves  as 
the  architects  of  their  own  characters.  II  there  is  growth  in  wisdom  or  strength,  the 
strong  temptation  is  to  think  that  this  growth  is  due  to  their  own  thought  and  effort. 
ISut— 

II.  CoNSiDEB  THE  FOLLY  OF  THE  PRIDE  OF  CREATION.  This  pride  Springs  from  a 
delusion.  Certainly  it  did  with  Pharaoh.  He  make  the  Nile!  The  Nile  made  himl 
Bj^ypt  was  just  the  child  of  the  Nile.  Her  wealth  depended  on  the  ministry  of  the 
mighty  river.  Floods  gathered  from  melting  snows  on  distant  African  mountains  far 
beyond  the  territory  or  even  the  knowledge  of  the  Pharaohs,  swelled  its  waters  so  that 
they  overflowed    their  banks  and  spread  fertility  on  the  narrow  strips  of  river-side 


OH.  XXIX.  1—21.]    THE  BOOK  OF    THE  PROPHET  EZEKIBL.  129 

called  Egypt.  But  this  is  but  an  evident  instance  of  what  is  true  in  less  conspicuous 
ways.  AH  great  things,  all  new  things,  all  things  that  exist,  come  from  God.  They 
spring  from  God,  and  they  depend  on  him.  1.  In  nature.  God  is  the  Creator  and 
Preserver  of  nature.  He  not  only  made  the  stone  that  the  sculptor  chisels ;  he  made 
the  laws  of  matter  and  the  fundamental  principles  of  art  along  which  the  sculptor  must 
work.  National  greatness  largely  depends  on  geographical  and  other  physical  conditions 
of  Divine  creation.  2.  In  providence.  God  is  still  in  the  world,  ruling  it  according  to 
his  own  thought  for  his  own  great  purposes.  He  overrules  the  government  of  kings.  In 
private  life  he  helps  one  on  to  prosperity,  and  sends  another  needful  adversity  through 
those  turns  of  events,  those  conjunctions  of  circumstances,  which  the  wisest  cannot 
foresee  and  which  the  ablest  cannot  modify.  iJ.  In  grace.  For  the  higher  good  of  life 
spiritual  attainments  are  necessary.  Without  these  attainments  Pra  Angelico  could  not 
have  painted  his  beautiful  angels,  MUton  could  not  have  written  his  grand  epics,  Luther 
cotild  not  have  wrought  his  Titanic  revolution,  God's  inward  grace  makes  souls  and 
characters  good  and  great. 

m.  Avoid  the  sin  of  the  pride  or  creation.  This  pride  is  positively  wicked. 
It  robs  God  of  his  rightful  honour.  It  is  distinctly  ungrateful.  Indeed,  it  is  atheistic ; 
«nd  practical  atheism  of  this  character  is  far  worse  morally  than  the  intellectual 
atheism  that  denies  the  being  of  God  as  a  proposition  in  academic  discussions.  Such 
a  sinful  pride  destroys  a  man's  sense  of  dependence,  his  remembrance  of  obligations, 
his  consciousness  of  responsibility,  that  admission  of  his  own  littleness  which  is  necessary 
for  humility  as  vrell  as  that  feeling  of  God's  greatness  and  goodness  which  is  at  the  root 
of  religion. 

Vers.  14 — 16. — The  meagre  restoration  of  Egypt.  I,  GrOB  has  mbrot  on  thh 
HEATHEN.  Egypt  is  to  be  conquered  by  Nebuchadnezzar;  but  in  course  of  time  the 
Chaldean  yoke  shall  be  broken  off  its  neck  and  Egypt  shall  be  restored  to  national 
■  existence.  There  is  here  a  promise  somewhat  similar  to  that  which  the  prophets 
repeatedly  gave  in  God's  name  to  the  Jews.  Now,  this  promise  is  offered  to  a  heathen 
people.  God  is  not  only  the  Judge  of  the  heathen ;  he  is  also  their  Saviour.  He  does 
not  deal  only  in  one  way  with  any  people.  He  cannot  confine  his  relations  with  any  to 
one  side  of  his  nature.  He  must  be  ever  himself,  his  true  and  whole  self.  But  the 
judicial,  and  that  only  in  condemning  to  punishment,  by  no  means  includes  the  whole 
nature  of  God.  God  is  essentiaUy  love.  Therefore  whenever  God  is  dealing  with  any 
of  his  creatures,  since  he  is  always  true  to  his  nature  and  approaches  them  in  the  totality 
of  his  character,  he  must  come  in  love,  though  at  first  this  love  may  be  hidden  behind 
the  clouds  of  wrath  and  judgment.  In  the  gospel  God  shows  his  mercy  to  the  heathen. 
Christ  came  because  of  God's  love  for  the  whole  world.  It  is  now  the  desire  of  Christ 
that  his  gospel  should  be  preached  to  every  creature. 

II.  There  are  irreparable  losses  which  are  brought  about  by  sin.  The 
proud  pre-eminence  of  the  empire  of  the  Pharaohs  was  never  recovered.  The  restored 
Pharaohs  were  feeble  shadows  of  their  awful  predecessors.  Cambyses  the  Persian  king 
asked  and  received  the  daughter  of  one  of  them,  not  as  a  wife,  but  in  the  lower  rank  of 
a  concubine.  To  the  present  day  Egypt  has  been  a  weak  and  dependent  nation.  Ezekiel 
predicts  that  it  shall  be  the  "  basest  of  the  kingdoms."  1.  The  temporal  consequencei 
of  sin  are  unavoidable.  Repentance  does  not  bring  hack  the  spendthrift's  squandered 
fortune.  A  shattered  constitution  cannot  be  restored  to  sound  health.  2.  Without  a 
return  to  Ood  the  worst  consequences  of  sin  must  continue.  There  is  a  striking  differ- 
ence between  the  predictions  of  the  glorious  restoration  of  Israel  and  this  prophecy  of 
the  meagre  and  uninviting  restoration  of  Egypt,  The  conditions 'of  the  two  peoples 
were  very  different.  Israel  humbled  herself  and  returned  in  faith  and  devotion  to  God. 
Egypt  remained  a  heathen  nation,  and  as  far  as  we  know  underwent  no  moral  reforma- 
tion. God  was  still  merciful  to  her,  but  she  could  not  reap  the  full  blessings  of 
restoration.  We  must  believe  that  the  heathen  will  bejudged  according  to  their  light, 
and  certainly  not  be  punished  for  being  heathen  when  they  have  no  opportunity  of 
knowing  the  truth.  But  the  fact  remains  that  while  they  lie  sunken  in  moral 
corruption  they  cannot  be  also  enjoying  the  heavenly  blessedness  of  the  pure  in 
heart. 

m.  It  is  well  that  false  grounds  of  confidence  should  be  exposed,  In 
■zsKiBii — n.  X 


130  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET   EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxix.  1— 21. 

the  past  the  Jews  continually  hankered  after  the  Egyptian  alliance.  They  will  do  so 
no  longer.  "  Egypt  shall  be  no  more  the  confidence  of  the  house  of  Israel."  1.  When 
the  nature  of  false  hopes  is  exposed  we  are  driuen  to  the  truth  for  our  refuge.  No  longer 
going  down  to  Egypt  for  help,  restored  Israel  will  inow  that  God  is  the  Lord,  ajd  learn 
to  trust  him  better.  God  wins  us  by  disillusioning  us.  2.  The  ruin  of  false  hopes  is 
a  perpetual  warning.  Egypt  is  not  to  be  swept  to  permanent  destruction  like  Tyre,  on 
vvliose  rocks  the  fishermen  are  to  hang  their  nets.  She  is  to  continue  in  existence,  but 
no  longer  as  a  ruling  nation.  Thus  Israel  will  have  the  spectacle  of  her  neighbour's 
humiliation  perpetually  bringing  her  own  iniquity  to  remembrance.  Buins  are  a 
melancholy  sight  j  but  they  are  an  instructive  one.  It  is  well  to  study  the  sadder 
lebsons  of  history. 

Vers.  17 — 20.— Nebuchadnezzar's  wages.  Nebuchadnezzar  was  used  as  God's  servant 
in  the  work  of  destroying  Tyre.  But  he  got  little  profit  out  of  that  expedition. 
Therefore  he  was  to  receive  his  wages  in  the  possession  of  the  fertile  and  wealthy  land 
of  Egypt.  This  curious  rendering  of  history  in  the  light  of  Hebrew  prophecy  and 
poetry  is  suggestive. 

I.  The  obbatest  Eora  is  but  God's  HiBELiNa,  Nebucliadnezzar  is  referred  to  as 
a  common  labourer  whose  wages  must  be  provided  for.  The  pomp  and  ceremony  of 
royalty  are  nothing  in  the  sight  of  Heaven.    Beligion,  like  death,  is  a  great  leveller. 

II.  God  makes  use  of  SELF-SEExma  uen.  Nebuchadnezzar  was  called  upon  to 
work  out  Divine  decrees.  But  it  was  not  pretended  that  he  did  this  of  set  purpose  or 
vith  any  disinterested  motives.  His  aims  and  ends  were  selfish,  his  views  and  ideas 
dark  and  heathenish.  Yet  he  was  a  useful  instrument  of  Providence.  Thus  the  greatest 
selfishness  may  be  converted  into  a  means  of  doing  God's  will. 

III.  God  is  a  jnsT  Masteb  who  pats  good  waoes.  No  man  shall  lose  by  entering 
bis  service.  At  first  there  may  be  no  advantage,  and  the  service  is  found  to  be 
disappointing.  Tyre  does  not  pay.  Then  Egypt  must  be  thrown  in.  The  beginning 
of  the  service  seems  to  be  unprofitable ;  the  end  of  it  will  certainly  be  amply  rewarded. 
The  labourer  is  not  paid  hour  by  hour.  He  must  wait  for  his  wages.  God's  labourers 
often  seem  to  be  kept  long  waiting.  But  they  will  surely  see  their  pay-day,  and  then 
receive  their  dues  with  interest. 

IV.  He  deqradbs  himself  who  beeves  foe  nothing  better  than  wages.  The 
servant  needs,  earns,  and  has  a  right  to  expect  and  enjoy,  his  wages.  But  he  has  a  gross 
and  selfish  mind  if  be  has  no  other  interest  in  his  work  than  the  prospect  of  making  a 
living  out  of  it.  Every  man's  work  should  be  valued  by  him  on  its  own  account  as 
a  contribution  to  the  good  of  society.  Especially  is  this  true  of  spiritual  work.  In 
that  there  is  a  prospect  of  rewards  for  which  even  Christ  looked  forward  (Heb.  xii.  2). 
Therefore  it  is  not  wrong  to  expect  rewards ;  every  lawful  stimulus  that  can  be  had  is 
needed  to  encourage  our  service.  But  he  is  no  true  Christian  who  only  serves  his  Lord 
for  the  sake  of  what  he  can  get.  Nebuchadnezzar  the  heathen,  not  Paul  the  Christian, 
is  his  model. 

V.  The  highest  sbevioe  is  disinterested.  Nebuchadnezzar,  king  as  he  was,  had 
degraded  himself  to  the  level  of  a  common  hireling  in  the  sight  of  Heaven  by  carrying 
out  his  great  expeditions  in  a  mean  and  mercenary  spirit.  But  the  lowliest  Christians 
rise  to  the  rank  of  "kings  and  priests"  (Rev.  i.  6)  when  they  give  the  royal  service 
that  seeks  for  no  selfishness.  This  condition  does  not  contradict  that  previously 
mentioned,  in  which  a  reward  is  expected.  All  depends  on  its  quality.  It  is  the 
working  for  self-seeking  ends  that  degrades  Christian  work.  Christ's  reward  was 
unselfish — to  "see  of  the  travail  of  his  soul,  and  ba  satisfied."  The  true  Christian 
should  learn  to  say — 

"  And  I  will  ask  for  no  reward. 
Except  to  serve  thee  still." 

Ver.  21. — 2%e  budding  horn.  We  are  nut  to  think  of  a  full-grown  horn  putting 
forth  buds,  like  Aaron's  rod — in  this  case  a  useless  monstrosity  of  growth.  The  idea  is 
that  of  a  young  horn  first  appearing  as  in  a  bud  and  then  growing.  A  horn  is  to  bud 
Dnd  grow  on  the  house  of  Israel. 

I.  The  fbomise.    1.  In  the  nature  of  the  horn.    This  signifies  three  things.    (1) 


OT.  XXIX.  1—21.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  131 

Strength.  The  horn  is  a  symhol  of  strength.  God  protnisBS  an  end  of  weakness,  a 
time  of  power  and  energy.  (2)  Defence.  The  horn  is  a  weapon,  and  by  means  of  it 
its  possessor  wards  o£f  attack.  The  people  of  God  have  been  harrassed  and  oppressed. 
But  this  time  of  helplessness  is  to  be  succeeded  by  one  of  security.  (3)  Glory.  The 
torn  is  an  ornament.  The  stag's  antler  is  the  animal's  pride  and  beauty.  Women 
wore  horns  as  part  of  their  head-attire.  The  exalted  horn  (Ps.  oxii.  9)  stands  for  the 
jaising  up  of  honour  and  dignity.  2.  In  the  growth  of  the  horn.  It  buds :  (1)  With 
«  small  beginning.  The  budding  horn  is  at  first  only  discovered  as  a  slight  sweUing  on 
the  head  of  the  animal  from  which  it  grows.  The  best  things  begin  in  a  small  way — 
the  obscure  spring  of  the  great  river,  the  grain  of  mustard  seed,  the  little  child,  the 
■Christian  experience.  (2)  With  continuous  advance.  The  horn  buds,  pushes  forward, 
develops  into  maturity.  The  best  things  are  living  and  growing.  They  cannot  remain 
in  a  stationary  condition.  The  type  to  be  followed  is  not  the  fossil  horn  in  the  museum, 
but  the  budding  horn  on  the  living  head.  All  things  of  worth  have  a  future  towards 
which  they  press  onward. 

II.  The  FULFILMENT.  1.  In  Israel.  Ahom  budded  on  the  head  ofthe  restored  Israel 
From  the  doleful  captivity  by  the  waters  of  Babylon  the  Jews  returned  to  their  own 
land.  At  first  they  were  but  a  small  and  feeble  folk — ^like  the  first  appearance  of  the 
horn.  But  the  horn  was  present  in  the  bud.  Israel  was  alive  and  growing,  and  she  had 
yet  a  great  destiny  before  her.  2.  In  Christ.  Christ  appeared  like  a  horn  growing  out 
of  Israel.  He  came  as  (1)  the  strength,  (2)  the  defence,  and  (3)  the  glory  of  Israel, 
fie  was  born  an  infant  in  a  lowly  condition.  Elsewhere  he  is  compared  to  a  sprout  from 
the  stem  of  Jesse  (Isa.  xi.  1).  Christ  was  a  Jew,  and  he  grew  up  quietly  in  the  Jewish 
nation.  His  beginning  was  humble ;  but  his  complete  life  is  beyond  all  description  in  its 
greatness  and  glory.  All  the  hope  of  the  future  is  with  him.  3.  In  the  Church.  Christ 
lives  in  his  people.  He  is  born  again  in  his  Church,  and  he  grows  again  in  the  growth 
of  this  his  new,  mystical  body.  Thus  on  the  weary,  faded  world  there  is  seen  to  grow 
a  new  and  surprising  life.  The  Christian  Church  came  in  strength  and  promise  as 
a  horn  of  salvation  to  the  old  world.  It  is  still  a  growing  horn.  All  Christians  may 
enjoy  its  great  advantages,  and  all  men  may  be  Christians.  Thus  there  is  for  all  the 
threefold  promise  of  the  budding  horn — its  strength,  its  defence,  and  its  glory.  No 
tnaa  enjoys  these  privileges  to  the  full  at  first.  The  horn  appears  as  a  bud.  The 
Christian  life  begins  in  lowly  spheres.     But  it  grows  like  Israel's  horn. 


HOMILIES  BY  VAEIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  3. — Boastful  self-confidence.  The  prophet,  interdicted  from  prophesying  con- 
cerning his  own  nation,  directs  his  regard  to  one  and  another  of  the  neighbouring  states, 
with  all  of  which  the  Jews  were  in  some  way  connected.  With  Egypt,  Israel  had 
from  the  earliest  period  of  its  history  been  related  and  associated.  During  the  epoch  of 
tLe  Captivity,  the  attention  of  those  Jews  who  were  left  in  Jerusalem  and  in  Judah  was 
turned  towards  Egypt,  from  which  source  they  thought  they  might  obtain  assistance 
against  the  power  of  Babylon.  The  prophets  who  lived  and  prophesied  about  this 
period  had  occasion  again  and  again  to  warn  their  countrymen  against  alliance  with 
Egypt,  against  looking  to  Egypt  for  help  and  deliverance.  They  regarded  Babylon  as 
"uiaUing  with  respect  to  the  Jewish  people  the  decrees  of  Jehovah  himself,  and 
<M)unselled  submission  and  a  willingness  to  learn  the  Divine  lessons  of  calamity  and  ot 
«xile.  It  was  this  just  view  of  the  position  of  their  countrymen  which  led  Bzekiel  and 
others  to  warn  the  Jews  against  seeking  the  aid  of  Egypt.  But  the  ofl'ence  of  Egypt, 
on  account  of  which  tlie  prophet  in  the  passage  denounces  the  indignation  of  the 
Divine  Euler,  was  the  sin  of  pride  and  haughty  self-confidence. 

I.  Egypt's  grounds  foe  self-confidence.  There  was  very  much  in  the  position, 
the -Strength,  and  the  history  of  Egypt  which  seemed  to  men  to  justify  the  nation's 
pride  and  assumption  tf  superiority.  1.  The  river  Nile  is  alluded  to  by  Ezekiel  in  this 
passage — a  river  in  some  respects  the  most  marvellous  in  the  world.  The  mystery  of 
its  source,  the  remarkable  rise  and  fall  of  the  stream,  occasioning  the  extraordinary 
fertility  of  the  soil,  the  stately  (emples  and  the  lordly  cities  upon  its  banks,  the  harbour 
and  port  at  its  entrance  into  the  Mediterranean, — all  invested  the  Nile  with  a  peculiar 


132  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PEOPHET  BZBKIEL.    [oh.  xxix.  1— 21. 

interest.  In  fact,  as  has  often  been  said,  it  is  the  Nile  which  made  Egypt  what  It 
was — the  birthplace  of  civilization  and  the  granary  of  nations.  2.  Hence  the  won* 
derfnl  fruitfulness  of  the  land,  and  the  wealth  of  every  kind  which  in  its  ages  of 
prosperity  Egypt  enjoyed  by  reason  of  its  teeming  products,  by  which  not  only  were 
its  own  inhabitants  supplied,  but  distant  peoples  were  fed.  The  territory  was  narrow, 
hemmed  in  by  the  desert  on  either  side,  yet  abounding  in  most  of  the  necessaries  and 
Inxuries  of  life.  3.  The  antiquity  and  fame  of  Egypt  were  unparalleled.  A  great  nation 
before  the  other  famous  monarchies  and  empires  of  the  ancient  world  came  into  being, 
a  nation  renowned  wherever  civilization  existed,  Egypt  was  prone  to  count  herself  the 
mother  of  nations,  and  to  look  upon  all  others  as  parvenus.  A  genealogy  lost  in 
remote  antiquity  not  unnaturally  inspired  much  pride  and  self-confidence,  much 
haughty  contempt  for  those  who  had  their  position  still  to  make  among  the  nations. 
4.  Add  to  all  this  the  consciousness  of  great  military  power.  The  armies,  and 
especially  the  cavalry  and  the  war-chariots  of  Egypt,  were  such  as  to  render  her  both 
fbrraidable  as  a  foe. and  desirable  as  an  ally.  These  several  circumstances  account  for 
the  conviction  cherished  by  the  Egyptians  that  they  were  of  all  nations  the  greatest, 
and  the  least  exposed  to  calamity  and  disaster. 

II.  The  wickedness  op  Egypt's  self-confidence.  1.  This  appears' from  the  fact 
that  Egypt  assumed  the  prerogative  of  the  Creator  himself.  "  The  river  is  mine ! " 
was  the  proud  boast  of  Pharaoh,  who  herein  proved  himself  to  have  lost  sight  of  the 
dependence  and  feebleness  which  are  attributes  of  humanity.  God's  river,  given  for 
their  use,  was  by  the  arrogant  Egyptians  claimed  as  their  own.  2.  Egypt  failed  to 
recognize  its  dependence  for  material  and  social  advantages  upon  the  superhuman 
Source  and  Giver  of  all  good.  God  was  not  in  all  their  ways.  3.  On  the  contrary,. 
the  people  of  Egypt  took  credit  to  themselves  for  national  greatness  and  prosperity. 
It  is,  indeed,  a  sin  common  among  the  mighty,  the  wealthy,  the  flattered ;  who  are  too 
much  given  to  assume  first  that  they  deserve  credit  for  the  powers  of  body  and  of 
mind  with  which  they  are  endowed ;  and  then,  secondly,  that  all  the  results  of  the 
exercise  of  those  powers  are  due  to  themselves. '  But  nothing  is  clearer  than  that  our 
humanity  is  bound  both  to  gratitude  and  to  humility.  The  appeal  may  well  be 
addressed  to  every  individual  and  to  every  nation,  "  Who  made  thee  to  differ  ?  What 
hast  thou  that  thou  didst  not  receive  ?  " 

HI.  The  punishment  op  Egypt's  sblp-confidbncb.  Such  a  temper  of  mind,  such 
language,  and  such  confidence  as  the  prophet  here  describes,  could  not  be  allowed  to 
pass  unchecked,  unrebuked.  The  Egyptians  were  preparing  humiliation  for  them- 
selves ;  for  if  there  is  one  scriptural  principle  more  than  another  enforced  by  the  lessens 
of  history,  it  is  this :  "  He  hath  scattered  the  proud  in  the  imagination  of  their  heart ; 
he  hath  put  down  princes  from  their  thrones."  The  facts  recorded  agree  with  the  pre- 
dictions of  the  inspired  prophet.  Egypt  was  speedily  (1)  subdued  by  her  Babylonian, 
foe ;  (2)  hnmiliated  by  defeat ;  and  (3)  enfeebled  in  her  military  power,  crippled,  and 
rendered  impotent. — ^T. 

Vers.  3 — 6. — Mightier  than  the  mighty.  It  Is  ever  the  Tocation  of  the  prophet,  and 
indeed  of  every  religious  teacher,  to  counteract  the  superficial  views  and  to  expose  the 
worldly  standards  which  too  often  obtain  among  men.  In  the  time  of  Ezekiel  there 
were  certain  States  of  great  wealth,  power,  and  renown,  which  men  were  wont  to  regard, 
with  feelings  of  reverence  amounting  to  superstition.  One  ofSce  which  he  was  called 
upon  to  discharge  was  to  shake  the  confidence  of  men  in  the  great  secular  world-powers 
which  seemed  capable  of  enduring  for  ever,  and  of  defying  the  assaults  of  human  arms 
and  even  the  decaying  power  of  time  itself.  In  this  passage  the  prophet  concedes  the 
greatness  of  Egypt,  and  yet  afSrms  the  superiority  and  supremacy  of  Jehovah,  the  God. 
of  nations. 

I.  The  povfbe  or  a  mighty  state  bepresented  undeb  an  impbessite  similitude 
By  the  dragon  we  are  to  understand  the  crocodile,  the  powerful  and  monstrous  creature 
which  haunts  the  river  Nile,  and  which  is  the  terror  of  the  population.  An  appropriate 
emblem  of  Egypt  in  its  ancient,  settled,  and  formidable  strength. 

II.  The  ebputation  of  that  state  as  invulnerable  and  irkesistiblb.  A». 
the  giant  crocodile  seems  to  make  the  river  its  own,  lording  it  over  all  beside,  devouring, 
the  fish,  terrifying  the  dwellers  upon  the  river's  banks,  lo  Pharaoh  King  of  Egypt,  in. 


CH.  XXIX.  1—21.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  EZEKIEL.  138 

his  haughty  self-confidence  and  defiant  fearlessness,  regarded  himself  as  the  great 
potentate  of  the  world,  secure  from  all  molestation,  able  to  carry  out  all  his  schemes  of 
aggrandizement,  ready  to  meet  iu  battle,  and  certain  to  overcome,  the  forces  of  any 
nation  that  might  be  foolhardy  enough  to  challenge  his  supremacy.  As  "  the  (^eat 
dragon  that  lieth  in  the  midst  of  his  rivers,"  so  the  power  of  Egypt  dwelt  secure  and 
proud,  claiming  dominion,  and  dreading  no  disturbance  from  any  foreign  rival 
or  foe. 

III.  The  almighty  God  controls  and  vanquishes  the  poweb  of  the  miohtibst 
OF  nations  and  of  kings.  The  language  attributed  to  Jehovah,  who  is  represented  as 
addressing  Pharaoh,  is  very  graphic :  "  1  will  put  hooks  in  thy  jaws,  . . .  and  I  will  bring 
thee  up  out  of  the  midst  of  thy  rivers."  God  uses  his  own  agents,  but  he  always 
accomplishes  his  owu  purposes.  He  saw  the  need  of  humbling  Egypt's  pride,  and  he 
employed  Babylon  to  do  this  work.  It  was  done,  and  done  effectively.  The  arms  of 
Nebuchadnezzar  were  turned  against  Egypt,  and  God  gave  the  land  of  Egypt  to  the 
King  of  Babylon,  as  a  spoil  and  prey,  and  as  his  hire  and  wages  for  the  service  he  had 
rendered  in  the  siege  and  destruction  of  Tyre. 

IV.  Thb  mighty  of  this  world,  when  dealt  with  by  the  Mightiest,  is  left 
DEFENCELESS,  HUMILIATED,  AND  ASHAMED.  The  picture  here,  in  the  fourth  and  fifth 
verses,  painted  by  the  prophet,  is  painful,  but  it  is  effective.  The  mighty  .monster  of  the 
Nile  is  dragged  by  hook  and  line  from  the  depths  of  the  river  it  has  been  wont  to  call 
its  own,  is  flung  into  the  wilderness,  and  is  "  given  for  meat  to  the  beasts  of  the  field 
and  to  the  fowls  of  the  heaven."  Egypt,  and  all  her  dependents  who  trusted  in  her  and 
boasted  of  her  patronage,  are  brought  low,  their  helplessness  is  made  apparent ;  and 
those  who  but  lately  were  an  object  of  envy  and  of  fear  are  now  regarded  with  pity  or 
with  derision. — T. 

Vers.  6,  7. — The  "staff  of  reed."  The  figure  is  a  very  striking  and  effective  one, 
however  it  may  have  been  distasteful  to  the  house  of  Israel,  and  even  more  so  to  the 
vaunted  prowess  of  Egypt. 

I.  The  SINFUL  and  foolish  trust  of  Israel  in  Egypt.  The  circumstances  in 
which  Judah  was  placed  at  the  time  were  such  as  to  make  it  madness  on  the  part  of 
the  remnant  at  Jerusalem  to  seek  help  from  Egypt.  Not  only  so ;  they  were  strictly 
forbidden  upon  Divine  authority  to  act  in  this  manner.  In  quietness  and  confidence 
lay  their  safety,  in  returning  and  rest,  as  Isaiah  most  powerfully  and  urgently 
represented  to  the  people ; — not  in  the  horsemen  and  the  chariots  of  Egypt. 

II.  The  helplessness  or  Egypt  as  a  friend  and  deliverer.  Why  Egypt  was 
at  this  time  so  powerless  to  help  those  who  sought  her  alliance  may  not  be  perfectly  clear 
to  us ;  but  the  fact  is  so,  and  of  this  the  events  are  sufficient  evidence.  It  was  a  vain 
confidence  which  the  Jews  placed  in  the  great  and  ancient  world-power  on  the  banks  of 
the  Nile.  They  thought  they  grasped  a  staff  strong  and  trustworthy,  and  they  found 
it  "  a  staff  of  reed." 

III.  The  iNJDRy  inflicted  upon  Israel  by  the  failure  of  Egypt's  aid.  Not 
only  did  the  helper  prove  hel|)less;  not  only  did  the  staff,  wlien  leant  upon,  bend  and 
break.  Those  who  applied  for  help  received  hurt  instead  of  aid ;  the  reed  broke  and 
pierced  the  hand  that  grasped  it  and  trusted  in  its  support.  Jerusalem  was  all  the 
worse  for  turning  to  Egypt  for  assistance  against  Babylon,  the  victorioas  and,  just 
then,  irresistible  power. 

IV.  The  common  confusion  of  those  who  foolishly  trusted  and  of  those 
WHO  PLACED  CONFIDENCE  IN  THEM.  Babylou  losc ;  but  Egypt  and  Judati  fell.  "  All 
their  loins  shook  ; "  i.e.  the  consequences  of  their  policy  were  trouble,  fear,  and  misery 
to  both.  Both  incurred  the  hostility  of  the  power  which  they  in  vain  leagued  with  each 
other  to  resist. 

V.  The  moral  asd  bbligious  lesson  of  the  incident  and  experience  hbbb 
DBSOBIBED.  There  is  a  proneress  among  all  nations  to  be  guided  in  their  alliances, 
aims,  and  efforts  by  consiJerations  of  worldly  policy  and  expediency.  Too  seldom  do 
they  ask  themselves — What  is  right  ?  What  is  in  accordance  with  the  eternal  Reason 
and  Kighteousness  which  rule  the  world  ?  What,  in  a  word,  is  the  course  which  God 
approves  and  enjoins?  The  proceedings  undertaken  at  the  instigation  of  worldly 
expediency,  and  in  violation  of  Divine  law,  may  meet  with  apparent  and  temporary 


134  THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [ch.  xxix.  1— 21, 

Buccess.    But  the  Lord  reigneth ;  and  sooner  or  later  action  which  he  disapproves  shall 
issue  in  disappointment  and  disaster. — T. 

Vers.  8 — 12. — I%e  humiliation  of  Egyptt  pride.  It  certainly  gives  a  reader  » 
somewhat  dark  and  gloomy  view  of  the  state  of  the  world  in  the  time  of  Ezekiel,  to 
read,  as  we  have  to  do  in  his  prophecies,  one  almost  uninterrupted  series  of  reproaohe* 
and  condemnations.  The  prophet  spares  no  man  and  no  nation ;  and  his  writings  are 
a  monument  to  human  iniquity,  and  especially  to  the  faults  and  errors  of  the  nations 
that  flourished  and  fell  in  pre-Christian  antiquity.  In  this  passage  he  foretells  th» 
approaching  humiliation  of  Egypt. 

I.  The  gbodnds  of  this  humiliation.  It  is  a  law  of  eternal  justice  that  they  who 
exalt  themselves  shall  be  made  low  and  brought  to  the  ground.  The  faults  with 
which  Egypt,  as  a  state,  are  particularly  charged  are  the  faults  of  self-confidence,  pride^ 
and  boasting — sins  peculiarly  offensive  to  the  Most  High,  who  will  be  acknowledged  as 
God  alone,  and  who  will  not  give  his  honour  to  another, 

II.  The  power  and  cause  of  this  humiliation.  We  are  taught  by  the  prophet 
—and  the  lesson  is  in  harmony  with  the  teaching  of  Scripture  generally — to  attribute 
this  to  the  Eternal  King  and  Judge,  who  is  supreme  over  all  nations.  His  sway  is  some- 
times questioned  and  disputed,  and  is  too  often  forgotten  and  practically  repudiated. 
But  behind  and  above  all  human  powers  there  is  a  Power  supreme  and  universal,  not 
cognizable  by  sense,  but  discerned  by  the  reason  and  the  conscience.  To  this  th» 
working  of  moral  law  in  the  affairs  of  individual  men  and  of  nations  is  to  be  referred  j 
to  leave  this  out  of  sight  is  to  leave  much  that  we  meet  with  in  history  and  experience 
obscure  and  perplexing. 

III.  The  instrument  op  this  humiliation.  The  sword  that  was  to  cut  off  maa 
and  beast  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  that  was  to  lay  waste  and  desolate  the  cities,  was 
the  sword  of  Nebuchadnezzar  King  of  Babylon,  himself  a  heathen,  doubtless  stained 
with  the  errors  and  crimes  of  heathenism,  yet  employed  as  a  suitable  agent  in  the  chas- 
tisement of  many  rebellious  peoples.  It  is  remarkable  that  the  same  power  should  be 
employed  to  chasten  Israel,  Israel's  allies,  and  Israel's  foes ! 

IV.  The  character  of  this  humiliation.  The  armies  of  Egypt  were  defeated  ; 
the  land  was  laid  waste ;  the  cities  were  dismantled ;  and  the  Egyptians  themselves 
were  scattered  and  dispersed  among  the  nations.  Scarcely  an  element  of  disgrace  wa» 
omitted ;  the  chastisement  was  complete. 

V.  The  extent  and  duration  of  this  humiliation.  It  was  to  affect  the  whole 
land,  from  the  mouth  of  tbe  Nile  to  the  southernmost  boundary.  And  it  was  to  last 
for  the  space  of  forty  years — a  limit  of  time  which  is  not,  perhaps,  to  be  taken  literally, 
but,  as  is  usual  in  Hebrew  writings,  as  representing  a  long  period. 

VI.  The  lessons  of  this  humiliation.  1.  It  was  a  rebuke  to  haughty  self-con- 
fidence. 2.  It  was  a  summons  to  penitence  and  contrition  on  account  of  sin.  3.  It 
was  an  inducement  to  submission.  4.  It  was  a  clear  voice  from  heaven,  calling  the 
nations  to  put  their  trust,  not  in  an  arm  of  flesh,  but  in  the  living  God.  "  Some  put 
their  trust  in  chariots,  and  some  in  horses ;  but  we  will  remember  the  Name  of  the  Lord 
our  God."— T. 

Vers.  13 — 16. — Light  out  of  darkness.  The  case  of  Egypt  was  very  different  fron» 
that  of  Tyre.  For  inscrutable  reasons,  Tyre  was  destined  to  destruction,  and  Egypt  t* 
recovery  and  revival.  The  destruction  of  one  city  occupying  a  rook  upon  the  seashore 
was  the  extinction  of  Tyre.  Egypt  was  a  vast  territory,  peopled  by  a  widespread  and 
prolific  race;  it  might  be  humiliated,  but  could  not  easily  be  politically  annihilated. 
The  fortunes  of  the  land  of  the  Pharaohs  were  gloomy  in  the  immediate  future  ;  but 
the  remoter  prospect  was  not  without  relief  and  even  brightness. 

I.  The  promised  recovery  and  restoration.  The  prophet  was  instructed  to  fore- 
tell, first  Egypt's  defeat,  dispersion,  and  captivity,  and  then  Egypt's  restoration  to  the 
land  of  Pathros,  the  land  of  their  origin.  We  are  not  told,  and  we  do  not  know  hov^ 
large  was  the  section  of  the  army  or  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  country  affected  by  these 
predictions.  The  fact  only  concerns  us,  and  we  recognize  that  in  the  midst  of  judgment 
the  Lord  remembered  mercy,  that  banishment  was  not  perpetual,  and  that  the  national 
life  was  appointed  for  revival. 


CH.  XXIX.  1—21.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  BZEKIBL.  135 

II.  The  qualitioation  and  tempebino  op  the  boon  thus  graciously  vouchsafed. 
Lest  Egypt  should  be  again  puffed  up,  the  prophet  was  directed  to  utter  an  assurance 
that  the  nation,  though  spared  utter  humiliation  and  extinction,  should  nevertheless 
never  resume  its  former  greatness.  Two  points  are  expressly  mentioned.  1.  The 
restored  ^gypt  should  be  "  a  base  kingdom."  It  should  not  take  the  rank  among  the 
nations  which  it  had  been  entitled  to  hold  aforetime.  Its  power  should  be  crippled,  and 
its  splendour  should  he  dimmed.  2.  It  should  no  more  bear  rule  over  other  nations. 
Such  had  in  former  times  been  subject  to  its  authority,  as  dependents,  subjects,  and 
tributaries.  Egypt's  might  should  no  longer  avail  to  reduce  surrounding  peoples  to 
subjection. 

III.  Th%  moral  and  political  lessons  op  the  providential  action  op  God 
TOWARDS  Egypt.  These  also  are  very  explicitly  stated  by  Bzekiel.  1.  Israel  shculd 
no  more  look  to  Egypt  for  aid,  as,  in  defiance  of  express  warnings  from  Jehovah,  she  had 
been  wont  to  do  in  times  past.  2.  Both  Israel  and  Egypt  should  know  that  the  Lord 
is  God.  This  was  a  truth  with  which  Israel  was  speculatively  well  acquainted,  but 
which  Israel  was  too  ready  to  forget.  Egypt  had  not  enjoyed  the  same  opportunity  of 
learning  the  wisdom,  the  authority,  the  compassion,  of  Jehovah.  Yet  lessons  may  bo 
learnt  in  adversity  which  prosperity  cannot  teach.  Egypt  was  taught  by  stern 
discipline;  but  some  impression  was  doubtless  made.  It  was  not  for  Israel's  sake  alone 
that  Egypt's  calamities  were  permitted ;  but  that  the  smitten  nation  might  bow 
beneath  the  rod,  and  acknowledge  the  justice  of  the  King  of  men. — T. 

Vers.  17 — 20. — The  King  of  Icings.  By  the  very  remarkable  events  here  foretold, 
viewed  in  the  light  of  the  very  remarkable  interpretation  which  Bzekiel  was  inspired  to 
add,  we  are  taught  some  lessons  of  wider  application  and  deeper  interest  than  those  which 
appear  upon  the  surface  of  the  prophet's  writings. 

I.  God  is  over  all.  (1)  The  hearts  of  kings,  (2)  the  power  of  armies,  and  (3)  the 
fortunes  of  nations,  are  in  his  hand. 

XL  God  uses  all.  1.  He  has  and  directs  his  own  instruments  of  work,  kings  and 
nations  being  at  his  service.  2.  He  has  his  own  resources  from  which  to  provide  wages 
and  rewards  for  those  whom  he  employs  as  his  ministers  of  righteousness  and 
retribution. 

III.  God  is  glorified  in  all.  1.  In  the  submission  of  the  rebellious.  2.  In  the 
chastisement  of  the  proud.     3.  In  the  recovery  of  the  erring  but  penitent. — T. 

Vers.  1 — 12. — The  world-power  doomed.  The  work  of  the  prophet  is  clear  and 
definite.  He  does  not  declare  his  own  speculations,  nor  the  conclusions  of  his  own 
judgment.  He  can  specify  the  day  and  the  hour  in  which  God  makes  known  to  him 
his  supreme  will.  Nor  is  the  work  so  pleasant  to  the  flesh  as  to  induce  men  to  adopt 
it  of  their  own  accord.  The  true  prophet  has  to  set  himself  against  wickedness  every- 
where, of  every  sort  and  kind.  He  has  to  forego  all  human  friendships,  if  he  will 
publish  God's  Word. 

I,  The  worldly  king  is  sblp-dbgraded.  He  is  likened  here  to  a  crocodile.  This 
is  a  fitting  emblem,for  the  King  of  Egypt.  As  the  crocodile  flourishes  in  the  rivers  of 
tropical  lands,  so  the  prosperity  of  Egypt  depended  wholly  on  the  Nile.  Without  the 
Nile,  Egypt  would  be  a  desert.  So,  instead  of  rising  to  the  dignity  of  a  true  king, 
a  representative  of  God,  he  sank  into  a  condition  of  self-indulgence,  i.e.  to  the  level  of 
an  animal.  To  grovel  in  the  mire,  to  find  satisfaction  in  earthly  possessions,  to  gratify 
the  lower  nature, — this  was  the  supreme  aim  of  Pharaoh.  This  is  animalism;  this 
is  self-degradation. 

II.  The  worldly  kino  is  vain-glorious.  "  My  river  is  mine  own  :  I  have  made 
it  for  myself."  Self-degradation  leads  to  ignorance,  ignorance  to  pride,  pride  to  empty 
boastfulness.  A  man  must  divest  himself  of  his  intelligence  and  his  reason  before  ho 
can  say,  "  I  have  made  this  river  for  myself."  This  is  an  abuse  of  inteUeot,  a  prosti- 
tution of  conscience.  Not  even  a  crocodile  has  said  this.  To  depart  from  God  »  to 
wander  into  darkness,  folly,  madness.  Such  a  state  of  mind  is  practical  atheism.  It 
is  a  direct  challenge  to  God  to  display  his  judicial  might  and  to  vindicate  his  rule. 
Such  a  vain-glorious  temper  of  mind  is  profane,  insolent,  little  short  of  the  Satnuio 
mind. 


136  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZBKIEL.    [ch.  xxix.  1— 21. 

ni.  The  wobldlt  kino  is  a  dangerous  ally.  '<  They  have  been  a  staff  of  reed 
to  the  house  of  Israel."  As  a  man  maimed  or  invalided  rests  his  weight,  when  walking, 
upon  some  mechanical  support,  and  suffers  grievous  injury  if  his  support  breaks,  so 
was  it  when  Israel  foolishly  leant  upon  Egypt  for  support.  The  prospect  of  succour 
was  specious  and  plausible.  Egypt  promised  friendly  aid,  but  when  the  hour  of  trial 
came  the  support  collapsed,  and  both  Israel  and  Egypt  were  injured.  It  is  perilous  to 
trust  in  any  godless  power.  We  are  often  depoyed  into  a  fatal  ambush  by  appearances. 
Friendship,  if  not  a  real  advantage,  is  a  bane.  It  is  an  injury  to  us  personally,  if  the 
one  on  whom  we  trusted  fails ;  it  is  a  hundredfold  more  injurious  to  an  empire.  Test 
your  allies  before  you  trust  them. 

IV.  The  wobldlt  kins  is  easily  vulnerable.  Carnal  security  is  weakness 
incarnate.  It  is  a  rampart  of  cobwebs.  The  King  of  Egypt  trusted  wholly  in  his 
river  with  its  seven  branches ;  yet  nothing  was  easier  than  for  God  to  dry  up  the 
sources  of  that  stream,  and  leave  the  crocodile  on  the  dry  land,  with  dead  fish  sticking 
to  his  scales.  This  is  a  graphic  picture  of  defeat,  a  sudden  collapse  of  brag.  The  river 
having  failed,  the  prophecy  would  speedily  be  verified,  "  I  have  given  thee  for  meat 
to  the  beasts  of  the  field  and  to  the  fowls  of  the  heaven."  Achilles  was  said  to  have 
been  vulnerable  only  in  the  heel,  but  every  world-power  is  vulnerable  in  a  thousand 
points.     God's  favour  is  the  only  known  shield  that  is  impregnable. 

V.  The  defeat  op  the  woeld-powee  will  be  the  establishment  of  God's 
KINGDOM.  "  All  the  inhabitants  of  Egypt  shall  know  that  I  am  the  Lord."  This  is  a 
diflicult  lesson  for  men  to  learn,  and  the  task  is  long.  Yet  God  is  not  impatient.  He 
calmly  waits  his  time.  Slowly,  yet  surely,  the  foundations  of  his  empire  are  being 
laid.   'The  idols  of  Egypt  have  been  completely  overthrown,  and  gradually  God  ia 

•   being  acknowledged.    "  He  must  reign,"    It  i§  a  grand  necessity. — D.  j 

Vers.  8—16. — God's  frown,  a  chill  of  death.  Men  have  very  erroneous  ideas  of 
God  when  they  think  lightly  of  making  him  their  foe.  They  have  a  vague  idea  that 
he  is  as  impotent  as  one  of  their  idols.  Did  they  but  know  the  magnitude  of  his 
power,  and  his  complete  supremacy  over  human  affairs,  they  would  feel  that  his  frowB 
was  blackest  death.     The  fruits  of  God's  hostility  are —  i 

I.  Disasteous  was.  "I  will  bring  a  sword  upon  thee."  It  would  not  be  true  to 
say  that  God  takes  part  in  every  war.  In  many  cases  both  combatants  are  to  blame, 
and  God  cannot  take  sides  with  either.  But,  in  every  case  in  which  one  of  the 
combatants  is  impelled  to  fight  for  an  unrighteous  cause,  clearly  God  will  aid  the  other 
side.  Not  always  then.  For  although  a  combatant  may  have  a  righteous  cause  to 
defend,  he  may  defend  it  in  a  vindictive  spirit  and  with  unhallowed  weapons.  It  is 
well  to  note  that  God  does  fight  with  his  trusty  servants  against  evil-doers.  He 
does  employ  the  sword  of  men  in  his  cause ;  and  when  he  is  behind  the  sword,  "  it 
will  cut  off  man  and  beast." 

II.  WiDESPBBAD  DESOLATION.  "  The  land  of  Egypt  shall  be  desolate  and  waste." 
Nothing  ia  easier  with  God  than  to  make  waste  the  land  of  Egypt.  He  has  but  to 
diminish  the  water-supply  of  the  Nile,  and  the  territory  becomes  a  desert.  To  him  it 
must  be  a  grievous  pain  to  make  the  fair  face  of  nature  desolate.  He  who  delights  in 
beauty,  and  caused  the  "  sons  of  God  to  sing  for  joy  "  when  earth  was  first  robed  in 
.leafy  vesture,  must  be  pained  when  the  verdure  of  forests  and  cornfields  is  blasted. 
Yet  his  desire  for  human  good,  and  for  the  development  of  righteousness  in  the  earth, 
is  stronger  far.  I%is  gives  him  a  deeper  joy ;  and,  in  order  to  promote  moral  loveliness, 
it  is  sometimes  worth  while  to  sacrifice  the  fair  face  of  nature. 

III.  Equitable  repbisalb.  "Because  he  hath  said.  The  river  is  mine,  .  .  .  there- 
fore I  am  against  thy  rivers."  This  is  language  which  men  everywhere  can  under, 
stand.  This  is  argument  which  leaves  deep  impression  in  the  human  breast.  If  men 
despiseand  treat  with  contempt  God's  messages  sent  in  the  form  of  human  speech, 
God  will  speak  to  them  ia  language  they  will  not  contemn.  The  strict  equity  of 
God's  dealings  has  often  been  written  in  largest  capitals.  The  prohibited  thin<'  has 
become  a  scourge.  The  quails  lusted  after  became  disease  in  the  intestines.  The°Nile 
worshipped  as  a  god,  was  changed  into  blood.  God  is  never  in  haste  to  vindicate  his 
rights,  because  at  any  moment  he  can  cast  a  bombshell  of  alarm  in  his  enemies'  camp. 
If  men  must  needs  trifle,  let  them  trifle  with  Satan— never  with  God. 


OH.  XXIX.  1—21.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  137 

IV.  Another  fruit  of  God's  displbasubb  is  tbmpora.ry  dispersion.  "I  will 
scatter  the  Egyptians  among  the  nations.  ...  I  will  hriog  again  the  captivity  of 
Egypt."  Compulsory  banishment  is  a  serious  disgrace,  a  heavy  calamity.  -  The  poor, 
no  less  than  the  rich,  have  tender  attachment  to  their  homes.  The  tendrils  of  strong 
affection  twine  round  the  cottage  in  which  otie  is  born.  To  be  compelled  to  turn 
away  from  the  familiar  scenes — to  be  compelled  by  a  foreign  conqueror — ^is  galling  to 
every  sentiment,  is  like  a  fire  in  one's  bones.  Such  enforced  separation  means  loss, 
hardship,  uncertainty,  dishonour.  Defeat  in  war  is  affliction  sore  enough;  banishment 
is  tenfold  worse.  Hovr  insane  on  the  part  of  men  to  provoke  God  into  such  necessity 
X>i  chastisement  I 

V.  Another  effect  op  God's  anger  is,  perpetual  DEaRADAnoH.  "  It  shall  be 
the  basest  of  the  kingdoms,  neither  shall  it  exalt  itself  any  more  above  the  nations." 
To  have  a  friend  who  is  cultured  and  refined  is  to  have  an  elevating  power  at  our  side, 
iifiing  us  up  to  a  better  life.  God  is  wise;  and  to  have  God  as  a  Friend  is  to  gain 
wisdom  steadily.  God  is  pure;  and  to  have  God's  friendship  is  to  become  pure  also. 
God  is  love ;  and  he  who  is  much  in  God's  society  becomes  lovely  and  loving.  All  good 
flows  from  God  as  its  Fount;  and  to  out  off  one's  self  wilfully  from  that  fount  is  to  sink 
into  ignorance  and  misery.  The  friends  of  God  must  rise ;  the  foes  of  God  must 
deteriorate.  To-day  this  prophecy  is  signally  fulfilled.  For  centuries  past  Egypt  has 
been  the  tool  and  the  slave  of  other  empires.  She  has  been  ground  to  the  dust  by  the 
■oppressor,  nor  is  there  at  present  any  prospect  that  she  will  rise  again.  The  word  of 
the  Lord  by  Ezekiel,  although  then  improbable,  has  been  performed. — D. 

Vers.  17 — 20. — A  New  Tear's  gift  to  a  king.  There  is  a  common  proverb,  that  "  ha 
■who  gives  qmckly  gives  double."  But  this  is  not  always  true.  A  deferred  gift  is 
sometimes  uie  best  gift.  God  may  to  us  seem  to  forget,  but  it  is  only  seeming.  His 
memory  never  fails,  nor  yet  his  good  will. 

I.  Rough  war  is  sometimes  service  done  for  God.  "They  wrought  for  me, 
saith  the  Lord  God."  Men  of  delicate  sensibility  cannot  understand  how  God  can 
allow  the  rough  business  of  war  to  serve  his  cause.  Nevertheless,  he  does.  If  a 
warrior-king  is  actuated  by  a  desire  to  vindicate  righteousness  or  to  redress  a  wrong, 
he  is  fighting  in  the  cause  of  Jehovah.  Probably  his  motives  and  ambitions  may  be 
of  a  mixed  and  conglomerate  character.  Love  of  self  may  be  commingled  with  love  of 
justice;  yet  so  far  as  a  righteous  purpose  appears,  he  may  expect  the  beriediction  of 
God.  If  our  Lord  Jehovah  did  not  bless  human  endeavour  until  it  was  free  from 
every  admixture  of  selfishness,  he  would  never  bless  at  all.  Abundant  generosity 
marks  all  his  action.  By  so  doing  he  encourages  youngest  efforts  in  the  right 
direction. 

XL  In  war,  God  is  the  supreme  Arbiter.  Possibly  Nebuchadnezzar  did  not 
know  Jehovah — did  not  know  that  he  was  rendering  a  service  to  the  God  of  heaven. 
This  happens  sometimes.  Isaiah  was  commissioned  by  God  to  say  to  Cyrus,  "  I  girded 
thee,  though  thou  hast  not  known  me."  Ignorance,  if  not  preventible,  is  excusable. 
Ignorance  that  is  wilful  is  a  crime.  God  does  not  always  take  sides  in  war.  Very 
often  both  sides  are  actuated  simply  by  malice  or  some  equally  base  passion.  Tem- 
porary success  in  war  cannot,  therefore,  be  accepted  as  the  approval  of  Jehovah.  The 
devil  does,  now  and  again,  obtain  a  transient  triumph — at  least  a  seeming  triumph. 
But,  on  the  whole,  God  acts  as  Arbiter,  and  often  quickly  reverses  the  effect  of  a 
visible  conquest.  In  every  battle  he  sees  much  to  condemn,  sometimes  much  to 
approve. 

TTT.  God  is^the  undisputed  Disposer  op  empires.  Without  question,  ha  gave 
the  empires  of  Canaan  to  the  seed  of  Abraham.  He  gave  the  territory  of  North 
America  to  the  British.  He  gave  Egypt  for  a  time  to  the  kings  of  Persia.  "  He 
setteth  up  one,  and  putteth  down  another."  As  he  claims  supreme  control  over 
individual  persons,  so  he  does  also  over  empires,  large  and  small.  "  Tha  earth  is  the 
Lord's."  He  alone  may  rule  with  a  high  hand,  and- give  to  men  no  account  of  his 
doings. 

IV.  His  rewards,  though  seemingly  delayed,  are  timelt  and  gkheboub.  In 
this  passage  God  does  not  stint  his  praise  to  Nebuchadnezzar.  He  generously  styles 
it  "a  great  service."    He  has  noted  carefully  all  the  hard  toil  which  his  army 


138  THE   BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [en.  xxix.  1—21. 

endured.  Not  an  item  of  hardship  or  fidelity  is  overlooked.  Every  tear  of  the 
widow,  every  sorrow  of  the  orphan,  was  lodged  in  his  memory.  To  have  rewarded 
the  king  immediately  might  nave  been  to  do  him  injury.  It  might  have  unduly 
elated  him.  It  might  have  fed  his  pride.  It  might  have  fostered  an  ambition  for 
farther  conquests.  Ambition  of  this  sort  is  a  terrible  passion  in  man,  and  needs  to  be 
held  in  with  a  strong  curb.  But  when  danger  of  abusing  the  reward  is  past,  God  will 
give  it,  and  give  it  in  an  ample  measure.  To  possess  Egypt  was  wealth,  honour,  fame. 
It  was  to  gain  a  notable  place  in  the  history  df  the  world.  Be  quite  sure  that  when 
God  rewards  a  man  it  will  be  with  generosity  more  than  royal — generosity  not  to  be 
measured.    Having  done  good  service,  we  can  afford  to  wait. — D. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — Egypt :  a  guilty  vaunt.  Notwithstanding  that  Judah  was  now  looking 
to  Egypt  for  deliverance,  Ezekiel  uttered  his  strong  and  unqualified  condemnation  of 
that  idolatrous  power.  The  Hebrew  prophet  was  always  entirely  unaffected  by  con- 
siderations of  worldly  policy.  What  is  here  energetically  rebuked  is  the  sinful  pride 
of  that  self-sufficient  people.  "  My  river  is  my  own.  I  have  made  it  for  myself,"  said 
the  Egyptian  "  crocodile."  Whether  that  tone  be  taken  by  Pharaoh  or  by  the  country 
over  which  he  ruled,  by  the  minister  or  the  Church,  by  the  individual  or  the  community, 
anywhere  and  at  any  time,  it  is — 

I.  A  piBOK  OP  FOLLY.  In  a  purely  political  sense  a  country  does  belong  to  its 
inhabitants,  and  they  have  made  it  what  it  is.  But  in  no  other  sense.  That  noble 
river  Nile,  the  strength  and  the  glory  of  the  land,  flowed  in  its  channels  and  enriched 
the  soil,  not  because  Pharaoh  or  because  Egypt  had  done  anything  remarkable,  but 
because  he  who  "sendeth  forth  the  springs  into  the  valleys"  and  "  watereth  the  hills 
from  his  chambers  "  made  the  streams  to  run  from  the  mountain-sides  and  to  meet 
and  flow  in  the  great  river-bed.  Heaven  sent  the  rains  and  the  showers  which  fed  the 
river  which  fertilized  the  land.  And  if  we  will  but  go  back  far  enough  and  trace  our 
treasures  and  our  joys  to  their  ultimate  source,  we  shall  see  and  we  shall  feel  the  folly 
of  appropriating  to  ourselves  the  wealth,  the  knowledge,  the  spiritual  capacity,  the 
material  or  moral  resources,  which  proceed  from  God  himself.  Prom  him  they  come 
and  to  him  they  belong.  To  say,  "My  river  is  my  own,"  is  to  speak  with  falsehood  on 
our  tongue ;  such  language  is  the  utterance  of  foolish  thoughtlessness. 

II.  An  act  op  sin.  It  is  positively  wrong ;  for  is  it  not  "robbing  God"?  When 
we  speak  in  this  strain,  because  we  think  and  feel  in  this  habit  of  mind,  we  assume 
to  ourselves  that  which  we  should  be  freely  and  continually  offering  to  our  Creator. 
We  are  denying  to  him  that  which  is  his  due;  We  are  showing  ourselves  to  him  as 
the  irreverent,  ungrateful,  undutiful  subjects  and  recipients  that  we  are.  Thus  that 
which  is  foolish  and  false  is  also  that  which  is  guilty;  it  is  accumulating  Divine 
displeasure.  It  is  taking  up  a  position  in  which  God,  just  because  he  loves  us  and 
wishes  our  true  and  lasting  welfare,  is  compelled  to  say  to  us,  "  I  am  against  you  " 
(ver.  3). 

III.  The  WAT  TO  disillusion  and  humiliation.  Por  the  interpretation  or  appli- 
cation of  the  solemn  threatenings  here  pronounced  (vers.  4—0),  see  Exposition.  But 
however  we  explain  the  prophet's  words,  it  is  clear  that  Kgypt  was  awakened  from  its 
dream  of  absolute  authorship  and  ownership,  and  that  it  had  to  stand  down  from  its 
proud  position  of  protector,  and  wear,  for  some  time  and  in  some  degree,  the  yoke  of 
subjection.  Pride  preceded  a  fall  beneath  those  skies  as  beneath  the  heavens  every- 
where. Everywhere,  to  the  proud  country,  to  the  pretentious  power  in  Church  or 
state,  to  the  arrogant  individual,  there  is  sure  to  come  the  hour  when  the  fond  dream 
of  lasting  superiority  is  dis|ielle>t,  when  the  pedestal  on  which  it  (he)  stood  is  broken, 
when  the  homage  once  rendered  it  turns  to  defiance,  and  the  honour  it  once  enjoyeii  is 
lost  in  shame.  How  excellent,  on  the  other  hand,  is  that  humility  which  leads  ever 
upwards  and  ends  in  immortal  glory ! — 0. 

Ver.  16. — The  confidence  which  w  condemned.  To  whatever  straits  and  to  whatever 
desolation  Egypt  was  actually  reduced — that  is  a  question  to  be  decided  by  our  prin- 
ciple of  interpretation  and  by  our  knowledge  of  history — ^it  is  clear  that  it  was  to  be 
brought  BO  low  that  it  would  be  incompetent  to  play  the  part  of  deliverer  to  Israel  or 
Judah,  as  it  had  done  before  (see  ch.  xvii.  15 — 17).     It  would  never  again  be  "  the 


OS.  XXIX.  1—21.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  139 

confidence  of  the  house  of  Israel,  bringing  iniquity  to  remembrance  "  (Revised  Version). 
For  that  misplaced  hope  in  Egypt  was  iniquity  in  the  sight  of  God  (see  Isa.  xxx.  2,  3 ; 
xxxi.  1 ;  xxxvi.  4, 6).  It  was  a  sinful  failure  to  trust  in  its  one  true  Refuge,  and  it  vvas 
a  blind  and  sensuous  confidence  in  mere  numbers  and  military  prowess.  The  "  iniquity  " 
to  wMch  Egypt  would  never  again  tempt  the  people  of  God,  or  even  bring  to  their 
remembrance,  was,  as  we  thus  see,  an  unwarrantable  and  God-fovgetting  trust.  We 
ask — Where  do  our  temptations  to  this  same  folly  lie,  and  how  are  they  to  be  shunned 
or  to  be  defeated  ? 

I.  Where  ouk  tempt atioks  lib.  We  are  continually  invited  to  look  for  our 
resources  or  for  our  refuge  in  other  beings  than  in  God,  in  other  things  than  in  his  Word 
and  in  his  service.  1.  In  man ;  in  the  human  counsel  which  proves  to  be  short-sighted 
and  shallow  folly,  and  not  the  profound  wisdom  which  it  purported  to  be  (see  Jer.  xvii.  5). 
2.  In  money ;  in  that  which  commands  many  valuable  things  (Eccles.  x.  19),  but  which 
conspicuously  fails  in  the  hour  of  darkest  trouble  and  deepest  need,  which  cannot 
enlighten  the  mind,  or  cleanse  the  conscience,  or  heal  the  heart,  or  amend  the  life :  it 
is  ill  indeed  to  "trust  in  uncertain  riches"  (1  Tim.  vi.  17).  3.  In  numbers;  it  is  a 
very  common  delusion  that  we  are  right  and  safe  if  we  have  a  great  majority  on  our 
side.  But  what  are  all  the  hosts  that  man  can  gather  when  God  is  ^'  against "  us 
(ver.  3)  ?  How  often  in  human  history  have  great  numbers  proved  to  be  utterly  vain, 
and  to  have  done  nothing  but  stamp  and  signalize  defeat?  4.  In  our  own  intelligence. 
The  proud  of  heart  say  within  themselves,  "  We  shall  discern  the  danger,  we  shall 
distinguish  between  the  faithful  and  the  false,  we  shall  be  able  to  defeat  the  enemy  and 
to  secure  ourselves ;  others  may  have  failed,  but  our  sagacity  will  suffice."  But  they 
go  on  their  way  of  false  confidence,  and  they  are  rudely  awakened  from  their  dream 

•  (see  Prov.  iii.  5 ;  Jer.  ix.  23,  24).  All  these  false  trusts  are  temptations  to  us.  For 
they  (1)  lead  us  away  from  the  one  true  source  of  strength  and  safety ;  and  they  (2)  con- 
duct us  to  defeat  and  to  disaster.  The  hour  comes  when  we  recognize  our  folly,  and 
Bee  that  we  must  suffer  seriously  for  our  fault. 

II.  How  THEY  ABE  TO  BE  MET  AND  MASTERED.  1.  Not  by  attempting  to  avoid  them 
altogether.  Those  who  have  sought  to  shun  all  temptation  to  seek  safety  or  satisfaction 
in  lower  objects  by  placing  themselves  wholly  out  of  their  range,  have  found  that  they 
have  only  put  themselves  within  range  of  other  evils,  less  apparent  but  more  subtle 
and  quite  as  serious.  2.  By  a  studious  and  strenuous  endeavour  to  moderate  our 
trust  in  the  human  and  the  material  according  to  its  worth.  Bat  ^hifc% :  3.  By 
careful  and  constant  cultivation  of  our  trust  in  the  living  God,  by  seeking  liis  face,  by 
worshipping  in  his  house,  by  consulting  his  Word,  by  daily  addressing  ourselves  to  him 
in  the  still  hour  of  private,  personal  communion.— 0. 

Ver.  21. — Speech,  silence,  and  prophecy.  "I  will  give  thee  the  opening  of  the 
mouth."    We  may  be  led  up  to  the  proper  subject  of  the  text  by  reference  to — 

I.  The  gift  of  speech.  We  wonder  how  animals  succeed  in  communicating  with 
one  another;  that  they  are  supplied  with  some  method  of  making  known  and  passing 
on  is  unquestionable.  But  whatever  their  means  may  be,  they  fall  very  short  of  the 
great  gift  of  speech  which  it  is  our  priceless  advantage  to  possess.  So  common  and  so 
familiar  has  it  become,  that  we  little  heed  its  value  or  the  goodness  of  God  in  bestowing 
it.  But  when  we  dwell  in  thought  upon  all  the  difference  it  has  made  to  human  life, 
and  the  extent  to  which  it  has  enriched  us,  we  may  well  bless  God  with  fervent  feeling 
that  he  has  given  to  our  race  "the  opening  of  the  mouth"  in  speech  and  in  song.  Huw 
has  it  multiplied  our  power  to  instruct  and  enlighten,  to  warn  and  save,  to  comfort  and 
to  heal,  to  cheer  and  to  gladden,  to  pray  and  to  praise  and  to  exhort,  to  prepare  for  all 
the  duty  and  the  burden  of  life,  to  make  ready  for  the  brighter  scenes  and  ampler 
spheres  of  immortality!  And  as  this  is  so,  (1)  how  carefully  should  we  guard,  how 
earnestly  pray,  how  seriously  admonish,  against  its  abuse  I  (2)  how  studious  should  we 
be  to  make  the  best  and  wisest  use  of  this  inestimable  gift  of  God  1 

II.  The  grace  op  silence.  If  there  is  a  great  value  in  "  the  opening  of  the  mouth," 
so  also  is  there  much  virtue  in  keeping  it  closed  when  "  only  silence  suiteth  best."  To 
spare  the  stinging  but  severe  retort  that  rises  to  the  lips ;  to  delay  the  accusation  until 
more  knowledge  has  been  gained ;  to  bear  without  rebuke  the  sound  that  tries  our 
nerves,  but  is  the  delight  of  others ;  to  refuse  to  pass  on  the  unproved  default ;  to 


uo 


THE,  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [on.  xxx.  1—26. 


'refrain  from  the  commonplaces  of  comfort  in  presence  of  some  fresh,  acute,  overwhelming 
"sorrow ;  to  wait  our  time  and  our  turn  until  others  have  spoken  who  should  precede 
us,  or  until  we  have  earned  the  right  to  speak ;  to  "  be  dumb,  to  open  not  our  mouth  " 
Under  the  chastening  hand  of  God,  aud  to  retire  into  the  sanctuary  of  the  inner 
chamber  that  we  may  think  and  understand ; — this  is  a  true  "  grace,"  which  they  who 
seek  the  best  in  human  character  and  life  will  not  fail  to  desire  and  to  pursue. 

III.  The  PBiviLEQB  OF  PKOPHECY.  No  uobler  order  of  men  ever  rose  and  wrought 
thail  the  Hebrew  prophets.  They  were  "  men  that  spoke  for  Grod,"  as  their  name 
indicates  they  should  have  been.  And  they  "  opened  their  mouth  "  fearlessly,  faithfully, 
even  heroically.  They  were  to  be  found  in  the  front  when  there  was  unpalatable  truth 
to  be  spoken,  uninviting  duty  to  be  done,  serious  danger  to  be  dared.  They  did  not 
shrink  from  speaking  the  straightforward  truth  to  the  people,  the  army,  the  sovereign. 
The  Lord  "  before  whom  they  stood,"  and  in  whose  near  presence  they  felt  that  they 
were  safe,  gave  them  the  wisdom  to  speak  and  the  courage  to  act.  He  "  gave  them 
the  opening  of  the  mouth;"  and  hence  these  strong,  brave,  searching,  sometimes 
scathing,  sometimes  cheering  words,  which  we  still  read  in  our  homes  and  in  our 
sanctuaries,  which  still  help  to  form  our  character  and  to  shape  our  life.  Their  true 
successors  are  found  in  those  Christian  ministers,  and  in  those  who  do  not  call  them- 
selves by  that  name,  who  "  speak  for  God,"  and  who  do  speak  for  him  because,  lika 
their  prototypes,  they  (1)  are  enriched  by  him  with  knowledge  and  insight — under- 
standing of  his  will  and  insight  into  the  nature  and  character  of  their  fellowmen ; 
(2)  are  endowed  by  him  with  the  power  of  utterance — such  utterance  as  constrains 
tttention  and  secures  reflection  and  emotion ;  (3)  are  impressed,  if  not  oppressed,  with 
m  inextinguishable  impulse  to  speak  what  they  have  learned  of  God  (Jer.  xx.  9 ; 
f  s.  xxxix.  3 ;  Acts  iv.  20 ;  1  Cor.  ix.  16).— 0. 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEE  XXX. 


Ver.  1. — The  word  of  the  lord  came 
again,  etc.  The  section  that  follows,  ending 
-with  ver.  18,  is  exceptional  as  standing  with- 
out a  date.  It  may  be  either  (1)  a  con- 
tinuation of  the  prophecy  in  ch.  xxix.  17 — 
21,  and  so  belong  to  the  latest  years  of 
Ezekiel's  work;  or  (2)  that  prophecy  may 
be  regarded  as  standing  by  itself — a  paren- 
thesis inserted  at  a  later  date,  so  that  we 
go  back  to  the  eailier  woid  of  the  Lord 
ill  ch.  xxix.  1 — 16.  Jerome,  Haverniok, 
Hitzig,  EoeenmuUer,  Klieloth,  and  otheis 
are  in  favour  of  the  former  view,  chiefly  on 
the  ground  that  ver.  3  speaks  of  the  nearness 
of  the  coming  judgment.  That  the  day  of 
the  Lord  should  be  "  near  "  is,  however,  too 
vague  and  relative  a  term  to  be  decisive. 
On  the  whole,  the  question  must  be  left  as 
one  which  we  have  no  suflBcient  data  for 
solving.  The  close  parallelism  with  ch. 
xxix.  seems  to  me  slightly  in  favour  of  the 
second  view. 

Ver.  2. — Howl  ye.  The  words  read  like 
an  echo  of  Isa.  xiii.  6,  and  find  a  parallel 
also  in  Joel  i.  11, 13;  Zeph.  i.  7,  14.  Woe 
worth  the  day  I  It  may  be  well  to  note  that 
the  familiar  phrase  is  a  survival  of  the 
Anglo-Saxon  verb  weorthan  (German  tecr- 
den),  "  to  become,"  so  that  its  exact  meaning 
is  "  Woe  be  to  the  day  I  " 

Ver.  3. — The  day  of  the  lord.     Here,  as 


everywhere  (see  note  on  ch.  xiii.  S),  the 
words  stand  for  any  time  in  which  the  Di- 
vine judgments  manifest  themselves  in  the 
world's  history.  Of  it  Ezekiel  says,  follow- 
ing in  the  footsteps  of  Joel  (ii.  2),  that  it 
shall  be  a  day  of  cloud,  i.e.  of  darkness  and 
trouble;  a  day  of  the  heathen,  i.e.  a  time 
in  which  the  heathen  who  had  exulted  in 
the  punishment  of  Israel  should  know  that 
the  Lord  was  their  Judge  also,  that  he  had 
his  "  day  "  appointed  for  them. 

Ver.  4. — Great  pain  shall  be  in  Ethiopia. 
The  wbrds  point  to  the  extension  of  the 
invasion  of  Kgypt — by  Nebnchadnezzar  in 
the  first  insitauce,  and  afterwards  by  other 
conquerors — to  the  upper  valley  of  the  Nile, 
They  shall  take  away  her  multitude.  The 
word  is  taken  by  Keil,  Smend,  and  others 
of  things  rather  than  persons,  the  multitude 
of  possessions.  Hengstenberg  renders  "  tu- 
mult "  in  the  sense  of  the  stir  of  a  crowded 
city.  The  foundations  are  probably  to  be 
taken  figuratively  of  the  bases  of  the  pros- 
perity of  Egypt,  its  allies  and  mercenaries, 
rather  than  of  actual  buildings  (comp.  Pa, 
xi.  3 ;  Ixxxii.  5). 

Ver.-5.— Libya.  Here  the  Authorized  Ver- 
Bio)i  gives  (rightly  enough,  though  inconsis- 
tently) the  Greek  equivalent  of  the  Hebrew 
Phut,  which  is  reproduced  in  the  Revised 
Version.  TIjo  'Lydians,  in  like  manner, 
stand  for  Lud ;  but  we  have  to  rememlaer,  as 
before  (ch.  xxvii.   10),  that  they  are   the 


OH.  XXX.  1—26.]  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL. 


141 


African,  and  not  the  Asiatic,  people  of  that 
name.  In  Jer.  xlvi.  9  the  two  nations  are 
named  among  the  auxiliaries  of  Egypt. 
Possibly  the  simUaiity  of  name  may  have 
led  to  the  term  being  used  also  for  the 
Lydian  and  Ionian  forces  enlisted  by  Psam- 
metichuB  I.  (Herod.,  iii.  4) ;  but  there  seems 
more  reason  for  including  these  in  the 
mingled  people  that  are  next  mentioned. 
Chub,  or  Cub  (Bevised  Version),  is  found 
here  only,  and  has  consequently  given  occa- 
sion to  many  guessea  Havemick  connects 
it  with  the  Kufa,  a  district  of  Media,  often 
named  in  Egyptian  monuments ;  Michaelis, 
with  Kobe  on  the  Ethiopian  coast  of  the 
Indian  Ocean ;  Maurer,  with  Cob,  a  city  of 
Hauretania ;  Qesenius,  Ewald,  and  Bunsen 
■uggest  the  reading  Nub,  and  Identify  it 
with  Kubia;  Sell  and  Smend  adopt  the 
form  LiA,  found  in  the  Lubim  of  2  Chron. 
xvi.  8  and  Nah.  iii.  9.  On  the  whole,  there 
are  no  adequate  data  for  the  solution  of 
the  problem.  The  men  of  the  land  that 
is  in  league.  Here,  again,  we  are  in  a 
(egion  of  many  conjectures.  (1)  Hitzig 
and  Kliefoth  (following  Jerome  and  the 
LXX.,  which  gives,  "the  land  of  my  cove- 
nant ")  take  it  of  Canaan,  as  being  the  land 
in  covenant  with  Jehovah  (Fs.  Ixxiv.  2,  20 ; 
Dan.  xi.  28;  Acta  iii.  25).  (2)  Hengsten- 
berg,  for  the  Sabeans,  as  being  members  of 
the  JudsDo-Bgyptian  confederacy  implied  in 
ch.  xxiii.  42.  (3)  Keil,  Ewald,  and  Smend, 
of  a  people  among  the  allies  of  Egypt,  un- 
known to  us,  but  sufficiently  designated  by 
Ezekiel  for  his  readers. 

Ver.  6.— They  that  uphold  Egypt.  The 
words  include  the  allies  named  in  ver.  5 ; 
but  also  embrace  the  rulers,  generals,  per- 
haps the  idols,  of  Egypt  itself.  From  the 
tower  of  Syene.  As  before,  in  ch.  xxix. 
10,  "from  Migdol  to  Syene." 

Ver.  9. — In  that  day  shall  messengers,  etc. 
The  whole  passage  seems  an  echo  of  Isa. 
xviii.  2.  The  ships  are  those  that  bear  the 
tidings  of  the  conquest  of  Lower  Egypt  to 
the  upper  valley  of  the  Nile.  The  careless 
Xthiopians  are  so  named  as  confiding  in 
their  remoteness  from  the  scene  of  action. 
They  thought  themselves  safe,  and  were 
lulled  into  a  false  security  (oomp.  Isa.  xxxii. 
9 — 11  and  Zeph.  ii.  15,  for  a  like  render- 
ing of  the  verb).  As  in  the  day  of  Egypt. 
As  Isaiah  (ix.  4)  refers  to  "  the  day  of  Mi- 
dian,"  so  Ezekiel  points  to  the  memorable 
time  when  like  tidings  of  the  judgments 
that  fell  on  Egypt  carried  dismay  into  the 
hearts  of  the  surrounding  nations  (Exod. 
XV.  14, 15). 

Vers.  10, 11. — By  the  hand  of  Nebuchad- 
nezzar. Hitherto  (on  the  assumption  that 
oh.  xxix.  17 — 21  stands  by  itself,  and  that 
we  are  still  in  the  piophetio  message  of  ch. 
xxix.  1 — 16)   the   predictions  have    been 


general.  Now  Ezekiel,  following  in  the 
footsteps  of  Jeremiah  (oh,  xlvi.),  specifies  the 
Chaldean  king  and  his  people,  the  terrible 
of  the  nations  (as  in  oh.  xxviii.  7 ;  xxxi.  12; 
et  cd.),  as  those  who  were  to  execute  the; 
Divine  judgments. 

Ver.  12.— I  will  make  the  rivers  dry.  The 
rivers  are  the  Nile-bianches  of  the  Delta,' 
and  their  being  dried  up  points^  pefhaps,' 
literally  to  a  failure  in  the  inundation  of 
the  Nile  on  which  its  fertility  depended; 
figuratively  to  a  hke  failure  of  all  its  sourqea 
of  prosperity. 

Ver.  13. — Soph,  or,  as  in  Hos.  ix.  6, 
Moph,  is  a  form  of  the  Egyptian  M'noph,  the 
Greek  Memphis  (so  in  the  LXX.),  the  capi- 
tal of  Lower  Egypt,  the  chief  centre  of  the 
worship  of  Phtliah,  whom  the  Greeks  iden- 
tified with  Hephsestoa.  Hence  the  special 
mention  of  the  idols  and  images. 

Ver.  14. — (For  Pathros,  see  note  on  ch. 
xxix.  14.)  Zoan — joined  with  Noph  in  Isa. 
xix.  11,  mentioned  in  Numb.  xiii.  22  as  older 
than  Hebron — is  the  Tanis  of  the  Greeks, 
situated  on  the  Tanitic  branch  of  the  Delta 
of  the  Nile.  No ;  or,  as  in  Nah.  iii.  8,  No 
Amnn  (equivalent  to  "the  abode  of  Am- 
mou"),  the  sacred  name  of  the  Egyptian 
Ti.ebes.  The  LXX.  gives  Diospolis;  the 
Vulgate,  by  a  curious  anachronism,  Alex- 
andria. 

Vers.  15,  16. — Sin.    The  name  signifies 
"mire,"  like  the  Greek  Pelusium   (so  the 
Vulgate),  from  miK6s  (Strabo,  xvii.  p.  802). 
The  modern  name  Pheromi  has  the  same 
meaning.     The  remains  of  an  old  fortress 
near  the  town  are  still  known  as  Tineh, 
the  "clay"  of  Dan;  ii.  41.     The  fortress 
stood  on  the  eastern  branch  of  che  Nile, 
surrounded   by   swamps,   and    its   position 
made  it,  in  modern  phrase,  thu  "  key "  of 
Egypt.     Suidas    and    Strabo    (at   supra) - 
describe  it  as  an  obstacle  to  invaders  from^ 
the    Bast.      Ezekiel,  in    describing'  it   as* 
"  the  strength  of  Egypt,"  must  have  knowms 
its  local  characteristics.    The  multitude  ■  of • 
No;  in  the  Hebrew,  as  in  Jer.  xlvi.  25,.; 
-Bamon-No.      Did  the  prophet,    after  the- 
manner  of  Micah  i.  10 — 14,  indulge  in'a- 
play  on  the  full  name  of  the  city  as  given » 
in  Nah.  iii.  8?    The  LXX.,  as  before,  gives  • 
Diospolis,    and    the    Vulgate   Alexandria.  - 
Noph  shall  have  distresses  daily.     So  the  . 
Vulgate,  angustiss  quotidianse.    Hitizig  and 
Keil,  however,  take  the  words  as  "troubles  ' 
in    the    day-time."     The   city  should    be- 
attacked,  not  by  night  (Obad.  5),  but  in 
open  day  (compare  "  the  spoiler  at  noonday  "  ' 
of  Jer.  XV.  8).    The  LXX.  omits  the  name  ' 
of  the  city,  and  renders,  "  waters  shall  be 
poured  out."    For  Sin  the  LXX.  here  gives,  •  ■ 
following  a  different  reading,  "  Syene." 

Ver.  17. — The  young  men  of  Aven;  the 
"On"  of  Gen.  xli.  45,  the  "house  rf  the 


142 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIBL,  [oh.  xxx.  1— 26. 


sun ''  of  Jer.  xliii.  13,  the  EeliopoUs  of  the 
LXX.  and  Vulgate.  The  form  Aven  (Heb. 
for  "  a  vain  thing  I "  as  in  Hos.  Iv.  15 ;  x.  5) 
was  perhaps  chosen  as  a  word  of  scoia 
pointing  to  the  idolatry  of  the  city.  Pi- 
beseth;  LXX.,  Buhastoi.  The  city  situated 
on  the  Buez  Canal,  begun  by  Necho  and 
fiuislied  under  Ptolemy  II.  (Herod.,  ii.  59). 
It  derived  its  name  from  the  cat-headed 
goddess  Pasht,  and  was  the  chief  seat  of  the 
nome  which  was  named  after  it.  It  was 
destroyed  by  the  Persians  (Diod.  Sic,  xv. 
51),  but  the  name  lingers  in  Teb-lastat,  a 
heap  of  ruins  about  seven  hours'  journey 
from  the  Nile. 

Yer.  18. — At  Tehaphnehes ;  the  Taha- 
panes  of  Jer.  il.  16 ;  xlii.  7 ;  xliv.  1 ;  xlvi.  14 ; 
(where  it  appears  as  having  a  royal  palace) ; 
tbe  TaphnsB  of  the  LXX. ;  the  Daphne  of 
Herod.,  ii.  30.  It  was  another  frontier-for- 
tress in  the  neighbourhood  of  Pelusium, 
built  by  Psammetichus.  It  may,  perhaps, 
be  represented  by  the  modern  Tel-ed- 
Vefenne,  about  twenty-seven  miles  south- 
west of  Pelusium.  The  day  shall  be  dark- 
ened. The  Uf^rmal  image  for  the  departure 
of  the  Bunthhie  of  prosperity,  as  in  ver.  3 
and  ch.  xxxii.  7  (oomp.  Amos  v.  20 ;  viii.  9 ; 
Isa.  T.  30 ;  Jer.  xiii.  16,  et  td.).  The  yokes  of 
Egypt.  Commonly,  as  in  ch.  xxxiv.  27; 
Lev.  xxvi.  13;  Jer.  xxvii.  2;  xxviii.  10,  12, 
the  phrase  would  imply  the  deliverance  of 
Egypt  from  the  yoke  of  oppression  suffered  at 
the  hand  of  others.  Here  that  sense  is  clearly 
inappropriate.  The  LXX.  and  Vulgate  give 
"the  sceptres"  of  Egypt,  which  implies  a 
different  reading,  and  iiis  is  adopted  in 
substance  by  Ewald  and  Smend,  the  latter 
preferring  rendering  it  by  "supports"  or 
"props,"  the  "rod"  being  used  as  a  "staff" 
rather  than  as  a  "sceptre"  (comp.  ch.  xix. 
14;  Jer.  xliii.  8;  xlviii.  17).  The  pomp  of 
her  strength.  The  phrase  meets  us  again 
in  ch.  xxxiii.  28,  and  includes  what  we 
speak  of  as  the  parade  of  power,  here 
probably  with  a  view  to  the  foreign  forces 
that  garrisoned  both  Daphne  and  Pelusium. 
The  daughters  may  be  literally  the  women  of 
the  city,  who  were  to  share  the  usual  fate  of 
their  sex  on  the  capture  of  a  oity ;  or  as  in 
ch.  xxvi.  6,  8 ;  or  probably  as  in  ch.  "xvi.  53, 
65,  for  the  villages  and  towns  dependent  on 
the  strong  oity.  On  the  wliole,  looking  to 
the  mention  of  the  "young  men"  in  ver.  17, 
the  literal  meaning  seems  preferable. 

Ver.  20. — In  the  eleventh  year,  etc.  As- 
suming that  the  whole  seoticm,  ch.  xxix.  17 
— xxx.  19,  were  a  later  insertion,  that  which 


follows  was  written  in  April,  b.o.  586.  Its 
contents  show  that  it  was  written  at  or  about 
the  time  of  the  abortive  attempt  of  Pharaoh- 
Hophra  to  come  to  the  relief  of  Jerusalem 
(Jer.  xxxiv.  21 ;  xxxvii.  5 — 7).  This  was 
the  breaking  of  the  arm  of  Egypt,  of  which 
the  next  verse  speaks. 

Ver.  21. — I  have  broken  the  arm.  The 
metaphor  was  in  itself  one  of  the  most 
familiar  (ch.  xvii.  9  ;  xxii.  6 ;  1  Sam.  ii.  31 ; 
Jer.  xlviii.  25).  What  is  characteristic  in 
Ezekiel  is  the  way  in  which  he  follows  the 
figure,  so  to  speak,  into  its  surgical  details. 
A  man  with  a  broken  arm  might  be  cured 
and  fight  again ;  but  it  was  not  to  be  so 
with  Pharaoh.  His  arm  was  not  to  be 
bound  with  a  roller  (the  equivalent  of  the 
modern  process  of  putting  it  in  "  splints  "). 
The  Hebrew  word  for  "roller"  is  not  found 
elsewhere,  and  Ezekiel's  use  of  it  is  one  of 
the  instances  of  his  knowledge  of  surgery. 
The  corresponding  verb  is  used  by  hua  of 
the  bandages  or  swaddling-clothes  of  infancy 
(oh.  xvi  ,4). 

Vers.  22— 24.— The  strong,  and  that  which 
was  broken.  Tbe  image  is  pressed  yet 
further.  A  warrior  whose  swoni-arm  was 
broken  might  go  on  fighting  with  bis  left. 
Hophra  might  continue  to  struggle,  though 
with  diminished  strength.  Ezekiel's  words 
shut  out  the  hope  of  any  such  struggle. 
The  left  arm  also  should  be  broken  as  the 
right  had  been.  The  Chaldean  king  should 
wax  stronger  and  stronger.  The  sword  of 
Nebuchadnezzar  should  be  as  truly  "the 
sword  of  Jehovah,"  as  that  of  Gideon  had 
been  (Judg.  vii.  18).  Figuratively,  he 
should  stand  before  him  groaning  as  a  man 
wounded  to  the  death.  So  in  Jer.  xliii.  9 ; 
xliv.  30 ;  xlvi.  26,  we  have  allusions  to  an 
invasion  of  Egypt  by  Nebucbaduezzar, 
which  was  to  end  in  his  sitting  on  his  throne 
in  the  stronghold  of  Tahapanes. 

Vers.  25,  26. — ^The  imagery  is  slightly 
varied.  The  arms  of  the  Egyptian  king  are 
described,  not  as  broken,  but  as  feeble.  They 
hang  down  by  his  side  instead  of  wielding 
the  sword.  I  will  scatter,  etc.  The  prophet 
dwells  once  more,  repeating  the  very  words 
of  ver.  23  and  cli.  xxix.  12  with  all  the 
emphasis  of  iteration,  on  the  dispersion 
which  was  the  almost  inevitable  sequel  of 
an  Oriental  conquest.  There  in  the  land 
of  exile  they  should  see  that  they  had  been 
fighting  against  God;  and  so  the  prophet 
ends  the  chapter  with  his  ever-reouiring 
formula,  Taey  shall  know  that  I  am  JehOTU 
(ch.  xxviii.  26 ;  xxix.  21). 


HOMILETIOS. 

Vers,  1^^. — A  cloudy  day.    As  in  the  case  of  Tyre,  the  denunciation  of  Divine 
judgments  against  Egypt  is  succeeded  by  a  lamentation  for  the  doleful  results  of  those 


CH.  XXX.  1—26.]  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.         143 

judgments.  Pity  follows  wrath.  The  terrible  condition  that  fills  the  prophet's  mind 
with  dismay  is  full  of  more  pressing  warning  when  it  is  such  as  to  excite  the  deepest 
commiseration.    The  advent  of  Divine  chastisement  is  always  a  cloudy  day. 

I.  Pboqnostications  of  a  cloudy  day.  The  dreadful  day  has  not  yet  come ;  but 
the  prophet  foresees  It  in  the  near  future.  The  newspapers  furnish  us  with  weather 
forecasts.  The  prophets  supplied  the  Jews  with  premonitions  of  approaching  changes  in 
the  political  and  social  atmosphere.  We  have  no  gifted  seers  to  take  their  place  in  the 
present  day.     But  we  liave  hints  and  warnings  that  should  aid  us  in  this  direction. 

1.  The  laws  of  God  are  changeless  and  eternal.  Spiritual  meteorology  may  appear  to 
be  as  fickle  as  English  weather.  But  as  clouds  and  rain  come  and  go  by  fixed  Divine 
ordinances,  in  spite  of  their  apparent  waywardness,  so  the  darkness  and  storms  that 
afflict  human  life  are  really  directed  by  God's  inflexible  principles  of  righteousness. 
Therefore,  if  any  people  are  in  the  condition  that  drew  down  clouds  of  judgment  on 
Israel  or  Egypt  centuries  ago,  they  will  assuredly  repeat  the  dreadful  process  to-day. 

2.  Clouds  do  not  come  without  producing  causes.  They  seem  to  sail  up  like  ships  from 
the  sea,  coming  and  going  at  their  own  will.  But  we  know  that  they  are  produced  by 
certain  causes.  Mountains  and  forests  attract  rain-olouds.  Clouds  of  calamity  are  not 
uncaused.  Sin  and  folly  collect  the  heaviest  of  them.  Some  may  come  in  mercy,  like 
cooling  clouds  that  refresh  the  traveller  who  is  fatigued  with  the  heat  and  glare  of  the 
day ;  other.s,  thunder-clouds  of  judgment,  charged  with  fatal  fires,  are  gathered  by  an 
evil  condition  of  life.     When  the  cause  is  present  we  may  well  expect  its  consequence. 

II.  Thb  bxpbbibnce  of  a  cloudy  day.  This  would  mean  more  in  the  sunny  East 
than  it  seems  to  imply  to  inhabitants  of  our  cloud-girt  island.  1.  A  cloudy  day  is  dark. 
Instead  of  the  familiarly  brilliant  noon,  men  see  only  gloom  at  midday.  In  cloudy 
days  of  human  life  joy  vanishes  and  the  soul  is  plunged  into  sadness.  2.  A  cloudy  day 
obscures  the  heavens.  A  curtain  of  inky  clouds  covers  the  blue  sky  and  hides  the  sun. 
The_ saddest  hours  are  those  in  whioh  the  vision  of  heaven  is  lost,  when  doubt  and  despair 
destroy  our  consciousness  of  Grod,  when  faith  in  the  Unseen  is  drowned  in  spiritual 
darkness.  3.  A  cloudy  day  blots  out  the  beauty  of  earth.  The  loveliest  prospect  is 
sobered  and  saddened  in  heavy  weather.  The  whole  aspect  of  the  world  is  changed  by 
a  transfuniiation  of  its  sky.  We  cannot  be  independent  of  heavenly  influences.  Our 
present  earthly  life  is  coloured  and  shaded  by  our  spiritual  experiences.  A  clouded  soi  i ! 
will  see  nothing  but  gloom  in  the  fairest  of  external  fortunes. 

III.  The  consequences  of  a  cloudy  day.  1.  The  cloudy  day  may  usher  in  a  storm. 
Thus  was  it  for  Egypt  and  the  other  nations  wariifd  by  Ezekiel.  The  cloud  from  the 
north  was  to  burst  in  the  troubles  of  Nebuohadntzzar's  invasion.  Threatening  days 
may  be  followed  by  days  of  real  calamity.  God  does  not  speak  in  vain.  He  holds  the 
thunderbolt,  and  he  throws  it  also.  There  are  tempests  of  Divine  wrath.  "  Woe 
worth  the  day "  when  such  a  tempest  bursts !  It  will  come  upon  every  impenitent 
soul.  2.  The  cloudy  day  may  break  in  refreshing  showers.  (1)  Some  of  our  most 
alarming  prospects  are  accompanied  by  blessings  in  disguise.  'The  cloud  is  "  big  with 
mercy."  (2)  Even  clouds  of  judgment  bring  ultimate  good.  Storms  clear  the  air. 
Judgments  are  not  purely  vindictive  and  destructive.  They  open  the  door  for  mercy. 
3.  The  cloudy  day  may  he  followed  by  a  bright  day.  No  sunshine  is  so  sweet  and 
bright  as  that  which  follows  rain.  No  joy  is  so  sunny  as  that  which  accompanies  a 
penitent's  restoration. 

Vers.  4 — 6. — Associated  calamities.  I.  Tkouble  sfbeads.  1.  In  the  individual. 
The  first  mischief  in  Egypt  comes  from  the  sword  of  the  invader ;  but  this  is  quickly 
followed  by  other  ills.  After  Nebuchadnezzar's  invasion  the  "  abundance  "  is  taken 
away,  and  the  "  foundations  "  are  broken  down.  2.  Among  communities  of  men.  Gush 
follows  the  fate  of  Egypt,  and  other  nations  also  fall  under  the  wide  sweep  of  judgment. 
We  are  members  one  of  another,  and  when  one  member  suffefs  all  the  members  suffer. 
No  people  can  afford  to  ignore  the  ruin  of  their  neighbours.  Selfish  indifference  is 
ultimately  punished  by  a  man's  being  compelled  to  share  the  sad  consequences  of  the 
troubles  of  those  whom  he  has  neglected. 

11.  Association  in  sin  will  be  followed  by  association  in  punishment.  Gush 
was  joined  to  Egypt  in  wickedness ;  she  will  be  joined  to  the  greater  nation  in  suffering. 
He  who  walks  in  the  way  of  sinners  will  come  to  the  end  of  sinners.    There  is  no 


144  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHBT  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxx.  1— 2&. 

assurance  against  the  fatal  consequences  of  wickedness  that  can  be  effected  by  mean». 
of  association.  "Though  hand  join  in  hand,  the  wicked  shall  not  be  unpunished"' 
(Prov.  xi.  21). 

III.  Thbbk  IB  HO  PEOTEOTioN  IN  OBsotTBiTT.  Poor  Cush  snd  Phut  and  Lud  are- 
obscure,  unimportant,  and  remote.  Yet  they  share  the  fate  of  better-known  Egypt. 
No  one  can  hide  his  sin  under  the  cloak  of  his  own  insignificance.  No  ferret  is  sO' 
keen  as  a  man's  own  sin  when  the  time  comes  for  it  to  find  him  out. 

IV.  Alliance  with  great  sinners  will  not  affobd  ant  pbotection.  These - 
other  nations  were  joined  to  great  Egypt.  But  this  alliance  did  not  save  them.  Oq> 
the  contrary,  the  grandeur  of  Egypt  attracted  Nebuchadnezzar  to  their  neighbourhood. . 
Had  there  been  no  rich  and  famous  Egypt,  he  would  not  have  troubled  himself  to  attack. 
Cush  and  Phut  and  Lud.  We  gain  nothing  by  the  power  or  prestige  of  InfiuentiaK 
connections  when  we  are  called  to  judgment  for  our  sins. 

V.  They  abb  guiltt  op  sin  who  aid  and  abet  it.    These  neighbouring  nations- 
uphold  Egypt.    They  wiU  share  her  fate.    From  Migdol  on  the  Delta  to  the  granite- 
quarries  of  Syene  far  away  to  the  south  on  the  borders  of  the  Soudan — five  hundred  miles- 
— ^the  ruin  of  great  Egypt  will  extend ;  it  will  also  spread  to  the  people  who  support  her 
policy  and  contribute  to  her  prosperity.    He  who  makes  others  to  sm  is  himself  the- 
greatest  of  sinners.  Fagin  the  trainer  of  child-thieves  is  himself  a  monstrous  thief,  though 
he  never  steals  a  handkerchief  with  his  own  fingers.    People  who  encourage  opium- 
eating,  drunkenness,  or  profligacy,  by  supporting  the  causes  of  those  evilS)  are  guilty  of 
them.     The  mercenaries  of  Egypt  share  the  fate  of  their  wealthy  mistress.     There  are- 
too  many  mercenaries  of  sin  in  the  present  day.    For  the  sake  of  gain  men  will  carry 
on  a  business  which  they  know  is  directly  ministering  to  the  ruin  of  their  fellow- - 
creatures.    They  attempt  to  defend  themselves  with  the  excuse  that  they  do  not  force  - 
those  whom  they  snppl}'  with  the  means  of  self-destruction  to  avail  themselves  of  it.  - 
This  is  true ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  they  tempt  the  miserable  victims  by  affording . 
facility  for  fatal  indulgence.    That  is  the  sin  of  Satan. 

Ver.  7. — Desolation.  Egypt  is  to  be  desolate  in  the  midst  of  countries  that  are- 
desolate,  and  her  cities  laid  waste  in  the  midst  of  other  ruined  cities.  A  picture  of " 
widespread  and  general  desolation. 

I.  Thebe  is  a  desolation  of  lands  and  cities.     Having  lived  free  from  ths- 
ravages  of  an  invader  ever  since  the  Norman  conquest,  we  find  it  impossible  to  imagine- 
the  agonies  of  war  among  the  people  who  suffer  from  them.    The  excitement  of  battle - 
may  drown  those  horrors  for  a  season.    But  when  that  excitement  is  over,  the  con- 
sequent distress  is  deep  and  bitter,  widespread  and  lasting.     War  is  a  demon  of  destruc- 
tion.   It  literally  ravages  a  country.     No  incursion  of  wild  beasts-  from  the  forest,  no 
pestilence  or  famine,  can  bring  about  evils  equal  to  those  of  war.     It  is  the  duty  of  aU 
Christian  people  to  band  themselves  together  into  a  league  of  peace.  .  The  war-mongers . 
often  raise  cries  of  "  British  interests  in  danger  I "    The  country  should  learn  that  the 
greatest  British  interest  is  peace. 

II.  Theeb  is  a  desolation  of  homes.     1.   Ihis  happens  in  hanhruptcy,  which  is- 
often  brought  about  by  wicked  devices  of  cunning  men.    The  successful  promoter  of 
a  company  entraps  unwary  people,  pockets  a  rich  premium,  escapes  before  the  crash, 
and  leave  his  victims  to  ruin  and  misery.    Gambling  ruins  multitudes  of  homes.    If  a 
man  considered  his  duty  to  his  wife  and  children,  he  would  see  that  this  terribly  prevalent 
national  vice  is  selfish  and  cruel.   2.  This  happens  in  external  prosperity.    Drunkenness  • 
makes  a  home  desolate  even  before  it  has  brought  poverty,  and  no  home  can  be  more 
wretched  for  the  children  than  that  of  drunken  parents.    Therefore  the  self-indulgence 
of  intemperance  is  brutally  cruel.    Quarrelling  desolates  •  home.    Many  a  house  that 
is  envied  by  the  ignorant  for  its  affluence  and  luxury  is  a  very  prison  of  miseiy.    When 
love  departs,  the  best-appoint&i  home  is  desolate.      Dreary  souls  then  drag  out  •» 
beclouded  existence  among  the  melancholy  ruins  of  wasted  affection. 

III.  Thebb  is  a   desolation  of  Chitbohes.      1.  2%ts  may  le  physical.     The- 
Mohammedans  simply  stamped  out  the  relics  of  a  decaying  and  quarrelsome  Christianity  - 
in  North  Africa — the  home  of  TertuUian,  Cyprian,  and  Augustine.    The  seven  Churches  ■ 
of  Asia  have  nearly  all  disappeared.    If  we  are  not  true  and  strong  in  the  Christian  life, 
our  candlestick  will  at  length  be  taken  away  from  us.    2.  It  may  le  spiritual.    The  - 


OH.  XXX.  1—26.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  145 

ruined  abbeys  of  England  are  famed  for  their  beauty,  and  few  may  regret  their  present 
condition  when  admiring  the  relics  of  architectural  splendour.  But  there  is  a  worse 
desolation  for  Churches  than  roofless  naves  and  crumbling  walls.  A  Church  is  indeed 
desolate  when  the  Spirit  of  Christ  has  forsaken  her.  She  may  seem  to  flourish  in  numbers, 
finance,  and  mechanical  enterprise.  But  in  the  sight  of  Heaven  she  is  a  mouldering  ruin. 
IV.  There  is  a  desolation  op  souls.  1.  ITiis  may  come  in  great  torrow.  When 
"  the  desire  of  his  eyes  "  is  taken  from  a  man,  how  can  he  be  other  than  desolate?  Job 
was  desolate  indeed  when  his  children  were  killed.  Eizpah  was  desolate  when  she  sat 
by  the  corpses  of  her  two  sons  to  drive  off  the  foul  birds  of  prey  (2  Sam.  xxi.  10),  and 
Naomi  when  she  returned  to  Bethlehem  a  childless  widow.  But  Q-od  can  comfort  this 
desolation  and  iill  its  victim  with  heavenly  peace.  2.  The  worst  desolation  is  in  sin. 
The  soul  is  a  wreck.  Its  very  constitution  is  a  ruin.  God  is  driven  from  his  seat  in 
conscience.  Here  is  the  most  dire  and  dreadful  desolation — that  of  the  prodigal,  who 
feeds  swine  in  a  far  country,  and  who  would  fain  fill  himself  with  the  husks  that  the 
■wine  eat!  It  reaches  its  climax  in  pitiless  solitude— " and  no  man  gave  unto  him" 
(Luke  XV.  16). 

Ver.  9. — "  TJie  careless  Ethiopians."  These  people  who  were  heedless  of  the  coming 
danger  that  threatened  them  in  common  with  great  Egypt  may  serve  as  a  type  of  the 
careless  generally. 

I.  The  fbevalenoe  of  cabelessness.  These  "  careless  Ethiopians "  are  not  rare 
specimens  of  an  obscure  class.  We  have  not  to  go  to  Africa,  nor  to  antiquity,  for  the 
like  of  them.  The  genus  to  which  they  belong  is  far  from  extinct  even  in  this  age  of 
anxiety  and  energy.  Note  the  various  forms  which  carelessness  takes.  1.  In  regard  to 
danger.  This  was  the  condition  of  the  easy-going  Ethiopians.  They  would  not  consider 
the  approaching  danger  of  the  Chaldean  invasion.  Men  will  not  see  risks  to  health 
till  they  suddenly  break  down ;  then  they  discover  them,  perhaps,  too  late.  Soul- 
danger  is  ignored  by  thoughtless  sinners.  2.  In  respect  to  guilt.  The  pilgrim  felt  the 
weight  of  his  burden,  but  most  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  City  of  Destiuotion  seem  to 
have  had  no  thought  of  their  sins.  Many  men  sin  recklessly.  They  add  up  the  score  of 
guilt  without  a  thought.  3.  In  reference  to  duty.  Multitudes  live  as  though  they  were 
only  to  be  expected  to  please  themselves.  The  sacred  word  "duty  "  has  no  meaning  for 
them.  They  may  be  very  anxious  about  their  business  and  what  will  be  profitable,  but 
they  are  quite  careless  as  to  what  they  ought  to  do.  4.  In  connection  with  other  men. 
Dives  is  careless  as  to  the  condition  of  Lazarus.  The  Church  is  too  negligent  of  the  state 
of  the  heathen  world.  In  great  cities  people  think  little  of  their  next-door  neighbours. 
It  is  possible  to  starve  in  a  land  of  plenty,  and  for  uo  one  to  give  heed  till  too  late. 
5.  In  relation  to  Ood.  He  is  our  Father  and  Master,  and  it  is  our  first  duty  and  our 
highest  interest  to  regard  his  will.  Yet  many  act  as  if  he  did  not  exist.  They  care 
neither  for  his  love  nor  for  his  wrath. 

II.  The  evil  of  oabblbssness.  The  "careless  Ethiopians"  are  to  share  in  the  great 
deluge  of  general  calamities  that  is  about  to  sweep  over  the  nations.  Their  carelessness 
does  not  protect  them.  Carelessness  is  evil  on  many  accounts.  1.  Because  of  its  folly. 
This  is  more  than  childish.  It  is  the  stultification  of  mind.  Man  is  made  in  the  image 
of  God,  a  thinking  being.  To  renounce  thought  is  to  abdicate  the  throne  of  supremacy 
over  the  lower  creation.  2.  Because  of  its  negligence.  This  carelessness  is  wilful.  It 
springs  from  an  idle  refusal  to  take  the  trouble  of  thinking,  or  from  an  insane  infatuation 
with  superficial  interests.  It  is  our  duty  to  cousider  our  ways,  to  consider  the  poor, 
and  to  remember  our  Creator.  Negligence  is  sin.  Z.  Because  of  its  danger.  The  danger 
is  not  in  any  degree  lessened  because  we  decline  to  consider  it.  The  recklessness  of  an 
engine-driver  about  red  lights  does  not  annihilate  obstructions  on  the  line.  The  wages 
of  sin  will  be  paid  punctually  and  to  the  full,  whether  we  expect  the  day  of  recom- 
pense or  never  anticipate  it. 

Observe,  in  conclusion,  that  there  is  a  way  of  being  saved  from  care.  This  is  not  to 
be  found  in  carelessness,  however.  We  can  quench  worldly  care  with  trust.  Other 
anxieties  may  be  softened  and  ultimately  abolished  when  we  seriously  set  ourselves  to 
seeking  God's  favour  and  doing  his  will. 

Ver.  13. — Destroying  idols.    Egypt  was  a  land  of  innumerable  idols.   In  the  general 
xzbeiel — a.  I, 


146  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  BZEKIEL.    [ch.  xxx.  1—26. 

desolation  that  was  approaching,  not  only  would  these  idols  prove  themselrea  useless 
protectors,  they  themselves  would  share  the  fate  of  their  patrons.  The  idols  are 
destroyed  in  the  ruin  of  the  idolaters. 

I.  Thekb  is  no.  defence  in  idols.  This  is  a  lesson  for  the  heathen.  But  not  only 
pagans  who  worship  images  of  wood  and  stone  need  to  learn  it ;  men  who  despise  the 
superstitions  of  heathendom  have  their  own  superstitions  and  practise  their  own  idolatry, 
and  the  lesson  is  also  for  such  people.  1.  Every  substitute  for  Ood  is  an  idol.  What 
a  man  loves  supremely  and  trusts  in  absolutely  is  his  god.  One  man  thus  idolizes  his 
money,  believing  that  he  has  only  to  draw  a  cheque  to  frighten  away  the  most  dreadful 
calamity.  Another  makes  an  idol  of  his  own  ability,  his  skill,  energy,  or  cleverness, 
proudly  supposing  that  he  is  equal  to  any  emergency.  A  third  worships  a  theory,  and 
imagines,  say,  that  the  general  course  of  evolution  will  assuredly  bring  all  right.  A 
fourth  idolizes  his  own  religious  experience,  and,  instead  of  trusting  God,'  puts  his  faith 
in  his  own  saintliness.  2.  No  idol  will  preserve  its  worshipper.  Money,  ability,  theory, 
Kaintliness,  all  fail  in  the  hour  of  trial,  as  surely  as  the  sacred  hawks  and  cats  of  Egypt 
proved  useless  in  face  of  the  march  of  the  Chaldean  army. 

II.  God  will  destroy  idols.  The  idols  of  Egypt  were  to  be  destroyed  in  the 
general  havoc  of  the  invasion.  The  Philistine  god  Dagon  fell  down  and  was  broken 
before  the  ark  of  the  Lord  (1  Sam.  v.  4).  The  false  hope  will  be  laid  low.  It  may 
be  done  speedily ;  if  so,  we  may  thank  God  for  a  merciful  deliverance.  It  may  be  long 
delayed,  and  not  even  seen  during  the  present  life.  Dives  lives  clad  in  purple  and  fine 
linen,  and  faring  sumptuously  till  the  end  of  his  days.  The  rich  fool  is  not  disillusioned 
till  the  very  night  of  his  death.  But  in  the  next  world,  if  not  in  this,  men  must  see 
things  in  their  true  light.  A  happier  destruction  of  idols  comes  through  the  revelation 
of  their  vanity  in  the  light  of  GtcA's  truth.  This  is  the  Christian  method  of  iconoclasm. 
The  missionary  will  do  little  good  if  he  simply  rails  at  the  folly  and  sin  of  idol-worship. 
But  if  he  makes  men  know  of  the  existence  of  the  one  spiritual  God,  the  idols  will  dis- 
appear without  his  taking  any  trouble  to  hew  them  down.  Idols  vanish  from  the  soul 
when  the  vision  of  Christ  is  received. 

III.  The  destruction  of  his  idols  is  for  the  salvation  of  the  idolateb. 
There  is  redemption  in  the  Divine  iconoclasm.  Idols  delude  men,  hold  them  in 
bondage  to  superstition,  degrade  their  souls,  and  blot  out  the  view  of  the  true  heavens. 
God,  seeing  a  rich  man  worshipping  gold,  snatches  the  fatal  idol  away  and  plunges  the 
man  into  poverty,  that  there  he  may  learn  to  search  for  the  true  treasure  of  the  kingdom 
of  heaven.  Earthly  loss  is  often  thus  sent  to  clear  away  obstructions  that  hide  us  from 
seeing  what  are  our  souls'  true  possessions.  But  the  mere  destruction  of  idols  is  not 
itself  a  salvation.  It  is  remarkable  that  Christian  and  European  education  is  rapidly 
destroying  the  native  idolatry  of  India ;  but  it  is  questionable  how  far  this  is  a  gain  if 
nothing  is  substituted  but  a  hard  and  scornful  agnosticism.  When  the  idols  are  cast 
out  of  our  lives,  we  need  that  the  Christ  shall  come  in  and  bring  his  new  life. 

Vers.  20 — 26. — Broken  arms.  Pharaoh's  arms  are  to  be  broken,  while  the  arms  of 
the  King  of  Babylon  are  to  be  strengthened.  This  metaphor  describes  the  condition 
of  the  great  empires  that  is  consequent  on  the  shook  of  conflict.  The  broken  arm  is 
suggestive  of  loss  of  power. 

I.  It  is  a  calamitt  to  lose  power.  Tliis  is  felt  to  be  so  physically.  So  it  is 
spiritually ;  for  there  are  broken-armed  Churches  and  broken-armed  souls.  1.  Men 
suffer  great  inconvenience  who  have  broken  arms.  They  cannot  work.  They  are  help- 
lessly dependent  on  t'thers.  What  can  be  a  more  pitiable  picture  of  helplessness  than 
a  man  with  both  arms  broken  ?  Weak  Churches  are  helpless ;  i.e.  when  spiritual 
activity  fails.  Weak  souls  are  in  a  miserable  plight.  2.  Broken  arms  may  be  found 
on  healthy  men.  There  is  no  disease,  only  the  result  of  an  act  of  violence  or  of  an 
accident.  Spiritual  failure  may  be  suddenly  brought  about,  possibly  by  a  sudden  fall 
into  temptation.  3.  Broken  arms  may  be  seen  on  strong  men.  The  muscle  is  stout, 
but  the  bone  has  snapped.  So  there  are  men  who  display  great  energy  and  resources. 
But  they  lack  stamina.  They  cannot  hold  up  against  any  strain.  They  have  plenty 
of  sijiritual  muscle,  but  the  spiritual  bones  are  brittle.  Hence  they  sink  into  worse 
than  a  molluscous  state. 

II.  The  loss  of  power  may  oome  as  a  Divine  judgment.    Egypt  is  not  only 


OH.  XXX.  1—26.]    THE   BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  BZEKIEL.  147 

robbed  of  honour,  possessions,  etc.  Her  arms  are  broken.  She  loses  power.  This  must 
be  a  bitter  trouble  for  a  great,  proud  people.  God  punishes  nations  by  crippling  their 
resources.  If  they  have  not  used  their  powers  well,  these  are  taken  from  them.  Thus 
the  Roman  empire  was  weakened  in  its  corruption.  It  is  the  same  with  individuals. 
The  misused  talent  is  taken  away.  Sin  destroys  a  man's  best  powers.  It  weakens  the 
soul ;  often  it  weakens  the  mind  also.  This  result  may  be  quite  unexpected — a  sudden 
outbreak  of  war,  a  sudden  attack  of  paralysis,  a  sudden  failure  of  spiritual  power. 

ni.  Power  gbows  with  use.  The  arms  of  the  King  of  Babylon  are  strengthened. 
Muscles  become  stout  and  tough  with  exercise.  Brains  grow  strong  with  thinking. 
Souls  become  vigorous  by  service.  The  battles  of  the  Lord  are  not  cruel  and  desolating 
like  those  of  man.  The  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ  leaves  no  ruins  in  his  wake.  The 
martial  virtues  of  spiritual  service  are  without  alloy.  It  is  well  to  gain  renown  and 
strength  in  the  noble  warfare  against  the  world's  sin  and  misery.  If  Nebuchadnezzar, 
doing  God's  will  unwittingly,  is  still  rewarded  for  the  service,  much  more  shall  God's 
true,  willing  servants  not  fail  of  their  recompense.  The  best  reward  is  not  to  lie  on  beds 
of  ease,  but  to  receive  more  strength  for  more  arduous  service  and  sterner  warfare  in  the 
future.    The  wages  of  God's  servant  is  to  have  his  arms  strengthened. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 8. — "  The  day  of  the  Lord."  There  is  in  this  expression,  which  occurs  in 
various  parts  of  this  book  of  prophecy,  a  certain  vagueness  which  is  not  inconsistent 
with  grandeur  and  sublimity.  The  prophet's  own  mind  was  evidently  impressed  with 
the  fact  that,  whilst  every  day  is  an  occasion  for  the  manifestation  of  the  Divine 
presence  among  men,  there  are  days  which  are  peculiarly  the  Lord's,  because  connected 
in  an  especial  manner  with  the  purposes  of  the  Eternal  with  regard  to  the  sons  of 
time. 

I.  The  day  of  the  bevel ation  op  the  Lord's  powbe.  Memorable  are  such  days 
M  those  which  witness  a  great  king's  accession  to  the  throne,  a  great  battle  deciding 
the  fortunes  of  nations,  the  passing  of  a  great  measure  affecting  the  welfare  of 
millions,  the  sending  forth  of  a  religious  mission  to  a  heathen  community.  But, 
whilst  every  day  upon  which  some  grand  deed  is  wrought,  or  some  noble  institution 
founded,  is  in  a  sense  a  day  of  the  Lord,  there  are  days  in  which  Divine  providence 
signally  asserts  or  vindicates  itself,  in  which  the  might  of  the  Omnipotent  is  con- 
vintsingly  displayed ;  and  such  days  are  emphatically  designated  by  the  term  employed 
in  the  text. 

II.  The  day  op  the  execution  of  the  Lobd's  beoompbnse  and  judombnt. 
Judging  by  the  language  here  employed  by  the  prophet,  the  day  of  the  Lord  he 
announces  seems  especially  of  this  character.  "  Howl  ye  1  Woe  worth  the  day ! "  are 
expressions  which  surely  betoken  the  coming  of  the  Lord  in  vengeance — "  a  day  of 
clouds,"  "  the  time  of  the  heathen."  Long-deferred  correction  is  now  to  be  inflicted  ; 
threatonings  often  repeated  are  now  to  be  fulfilled.  Forbearance  is  exhausted,  and  the 
day  of  the  Lord  shall  see  him  arise  to  judgment. 

III.  The  day  op  the  redemption  or  the  Lord's  people.  The  defeat  and  con- 
fusion of  the  adversaries  is  accompanied  by  the  deliverance  and  exaltation  of  the  friends 
of  God.  When  the  day  comes  which  shall  see  the  destruction  of  Israel's  foes,  Israel 
shall  go  free  and  shall  rejoice  in  her  liberty,  with  the  shout,  "  Now  is  the  day  of 
salvation ! "  "  Lift  up  your  heads,  for  the  day  of  redemption  draweth  nigh  1 " 

IV.  The  day  which  DispiiLs  the  night  of  human  mis0Nderstandino  and  doubt. 
The  day  of  man  is  the  day  of  ignorance  and  of  fear,  and  is  little  better  than  the  night 
when  compared  with  the  brightness  which  God's  presence  brings.  To  Christians,  the 
day  of  the  Lord  is  the  day  of  their  Saviour's  birth  and  coming  to  this  world  of  sin.  "  The 
people  which  sat  in  darkness  saw  a  great  light."  Then  the  errors  and  hopelessness 
of  long  ages  were  rolled  away,  like  mists  before  the  rising  of  the  Sun  of  Righteousness, 
with  heaUng  in  his  wings. 

V.  The  day  which  shall  manifest  the  Lord's  glory  and  fuiiFil  his  purposes. 
The  day  of  the  Lord  has  interest  and  significance  for  men ;  but  the  very  term  implies 
that  its  central  meaning  is  not  human,  but  Divine.    The  fools  who  have  said  in.  the 


U8         THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  [ch.  xxx.  1— 26. 

heart,  "There  is  no  God  1"  the  hypocrites  and  formalists,  who  have  professed  belief  in  God, 
but  to  whom  the  meaning  of  such  belief  is  limited  to  words ;  the  defiant  and  rebellioui 
sinners,  of  whom  it  may  justly  be  said,  "  God  is  not  in  all  their  ways; " — all  these  are 
addressed  with  power,  and  are  aroused  from  their  infidelity,  when  the  day  of  the  Lord 
breaks  upon  the  world,  and  when  the  Lord  himself  draws  near. — ^T. 

Vers.  5 — 8. — The  fate  of  the  allies.  Egypt  was  not  alone  in  her  forgetfulness  of  the 
principles  of  righteousness,  in  her  defiance  of  God;  and  she  was  not  alone  in  her 
ohastisement  and  desolation.  She  had  allies,  who  were  included  by  the  prophet  in  the 
denunciation  he  was  directed  to  utter  against  Pharaoh  and  his  people. 

I.   POLITIOAIi  AND  NATIONAL   ALLIANCES   ABB   OFTEN   BASED  UPON  INTEREST   BATHER 

THAN  UPON  MOBAL  PEINC1PLE8.  The  weak  seek  the  support  of  the  strong ;  the  strong 
would  be  stronger  through  the  support  of  their  neighbours.  A  common  hope  of  profit 
KoA.  aggrandizement  in  many  cases  accounts  for  the  leagues  into  which  states  enter  with 
one  another. 

n.  Such  alliances  abb  easily  dibbolyed  when  theib  objects  are  found 
IKOAPABLE  OF  BEALizATioN.  They  do  not  deserve  to  endure,  and  as  a  matter  of  fact 
they  do  not  endure.  There  is  no  guarantee  of  permanence  in  such  combinations,  and 
it  is  well  for  the  world  that  this  is  so.  The  political  centre  of  gravity  shifts,  and 
the  instability  of  alliances  based  upon  interest  is  made  apparent. 

m.  Conjoint  human  powers  aee  evee  vain  when  they  oppose  the  purposes 
OF  GfOD.  Such  was  proved  to  be  the  case  with  regard  to  the  alliances  between  Egypt 
•nd  the  neighbouring  states  mentioned  by  the  prophet.  "  Though  hand  join  in  hand, 
the  wicked  shall  not  be  impunished."  Add  together  as  many  flnites  as  you  will, 
•nd  you  are  no  nearer  the  Infinite ;  and  all  the  resources  of  all  the  nations  upon  earth 
•re  as  nothing,  are  less  than  the  dust  of  the  balance,  when  weighed  against  the  incalcul- 
able, inexhaustible,  irresistible  power  of  the  Omnipotent.  "  Why  do  the  nations  rage, 
and  the  peopleB.imagine  a  vain  thing?  " 

IT.  Those  who  share  in  bin  bhall  bhabe  in  punishment.  "They  also  that 
uphold  Egypt  shall  fall."  "All  her  helpers  are  destroyed."  The  leagues  of  the 
righteous  and  godly  shall  contribute  to  the  common  strength;  the  measure  of  the 
Church's  influence  in  the  world  is  determined  by  the  Church's  unity.  But  as  there  is 
no  cohesion  in  wickedness,  the  blow  which  falls  dissolves  the  superficial  combination, 
and  overwhelms  all  the  elements  in  a  common  destruction.  Kotwithstanding  all 
recrimination,  there  is  no  escape  and  no  consolation ;  confidence  is  destroyed,  succour 
there  is  none ;  one  ruin  overtakes  all. 

V.  A  COMMON  fate  impresses  the  same  lesson  upon  booiett.  The  downfall  of 
one  proud,  self-confident  nation  is  impressive  and  instructive ;  but  when  a  league  is 
dissolved,  and  disaster  comes  upon  those  who  have  encouraged  one  another  in  injustice 
and  impiety,  the  attention  of  the  world  is  arrested,  and  men  are  the  more  disposed  to 
learn  how  vain  are  all  merely  human  projects,  how  unstable  are  all  alliances  based  upon 
worldly  principles,  and  how  utterly  powerless  are  the  nations  when  they  array  them- 
selves together  against  the  truth,  the  Word,  the  Church,  of  the  living  God.  When 
God  arises,  his  enemies  are  scattered.  There  is  none  that  can  stand  before  him. 
Might  is  feebleness,  wisdom  is  foUy,  and  unions  fall  to  pieces,  when  they  ore  directed 
against  him  who  is  mighty  to  punish  as  he  is  mighty  to  save. — T. 

Ver.  13. — Idols  destroyed.  It  is  well  known,  from  the  records  of  ancient  history,  and 
from  the  explorations  and  studies  of  Egyptologists  of  our  own  century,  that  the  land  of 
the  Pharaohs  was  the  seat  of  idolatry  of  the  most  deeply  rooted,  widespread,  and  at 
the  same  time  most  debasing  and  conttimptible  kind.  It  was  not  possible  that  the 
prophet  of  the  Lord,  in  rebuking  Egypt,  should  confine  himself  to  the  region  of  politics; 
he  could  not  but  deal  with  the  religion  and  the  religious  practices  which  prevailed  in 
the  land  of  immemorial  superstition.  His  words  upon  this  matter  are  few,  but  they  are 
clear,  direct,  and  powerful.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God,  I  will  also  destroy  the  idols, 
and  I  will  cause  their  images  to  cease  from  Noph." 
L  The  vanity  and  inability  of  idols  to  help  thosb  who  trust  in  thxil 
IL  The  helplessness  of  theib  devotees  to  retain  fob  idols  the  alleqiancb 

OF  theib  WORSHIFPEBS. 


OH.  XXX.  1—26.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  149 

m  The  certainty  that  pbovidentiaii  ocoubrbnobs  will  shake  the  oonpi- 

DBNOB  OP  IDOLATERS  IS   THBIB  IDOLS,   AND   WILL   BBINO   IDOLATRY   TO   NOUGHT. 

IV.  The  DrviNB  pbovision  that,  as  idols  abe  confounded,  the  tbub  and  only 
God  will  be  exalted. 

Application.  1.  The  principles  underlying  this  prophecy  are  a  great  encouragement 
to  all  those  who  labour  for  the  propagation  of  the  gospel  among  the  heathen ;  their 
labours  shall,  sooner  or  later,  meet  with  a  full  success  and  recompense.  2.  There  is 
here  an  implicit  counsel  as  to  the  replacing  of  idolatry  by  true  religion.  It  is  one  thing 
to  destroy,  another  thing  to  construct.  In  our  Indian  dominions  at  the  present  time, 
education  is  shaking  the  faith  of  the  native  population  in  their  idols  and  idol-worship. 
But  in  very  many  instances,  education  has  done  nothing  to  supply  the  place  made 
vacant  by  the  exorcism  of  superstition.  Hence  the  importance  of  philosophical  and 
historical  instruction  in  connection  with  Christian  missions;  so  that  provision  may 
be  made  for  the  deep-seated  needs  of  the  spirit  of  man,  so  that  a  reasonable  faith  in 
the  Supreme  may  be  encouraged,  and  so  that  the  evidences  of  supernatural  Christianity 
may  be  presented  in  a  convincing  and  satisfying  form.  It  should  be  the  aim  of  the 
Church,  in  her  missionary  capacity,  to  replace  idolatry,  not  by  an  irrational  atheism  or 
a  degrading  secularism,  but  by  intelligent  and  scriptural  Christianity.— T. 

Vers.  20 — 24. — One'  gtrengthened  and  another  weakened.  Historians  chronicle  the 
events  which  take  place  among  the  nations,  and  especially  those  which  bring  about  the 
transference  of  supremacy,  hegemony,  from  one  people  to  another.  The  great  empires 
of  antiquity  succeeded  one  another  in  a  movement  both  picturesque  and  instructive. 
Ezekiel,  in  this  passage,  describes  the  defeat  and  humiliation  of  Egypt,  and  the  victory 
and  exaltation  of  Babylon.  But  he  does  more  than  this;  as  a  religious  teacher  and 
prophet  he  affords  us  an  insight  into  the  moral,  the  religious,  principles  which  underlie 
all  political  changes. 

I.  Thebe  is  no  buoh  thing  ab  chance  in  histoby.  Men  often  suppose  them- 
selves to  account  for  events  when  they  attribute  them  to  fortune,  to  caprice,  to 
chance.  But  chance  is  no  cause,  it  is  the  name  for  our  ignorance  of  causes — a  useful 
name  if  its  signification  is  not  transformed,  and  if  in  its  use  men  do  not  impose  upon 
themselves. 

II.  The  operation  op  divinely  instituted  laws  effects  changes  in  the  pros- 
perity AND  POWER  OP  NATIONS.  Some  of  these  laws  are  physical,  some  intellectual, 
others  moral.  They  are  of  the  greatest  interest  to  the  historian,  who  traces  their 
action  and  interaction,  their  co-operation  and  conflict,  as  these  are  manifested  in  the 
rapid  or  gradual,  the  unobserved  or  conspicuous,  changes  which  take  place  in  the  rela- 
tions of  great  communities,  and  in  the  succession  of  one  people  to  another  in  the 
development  of  the  great  drama  of  humanity. 

III.  Yet  to  the  thoughtful  mind  law  in  itself  is  insufficient  to  account 
POR  histoby.  The  mind  craves,  not  indeed  for  something  competing  with  law,  but  for 
something  behind  law,  expressing  itself  by  means  of  law.  Law  in  its  phenomenal 
manifestations  is  mere  uniformity.  Now,  just  as  our  actions  may  be  accounted  for  on 
their  phenomenal  side  by  physical  laws,  whilst  yet  we  know  that  purpose,  intention, 
thought,  do  really  and  in  the  highest  sense  govern  our  actions,  and  that  we  are  therefore 
moral  and  responsible  beings ;  so  in  human  history  religion  teaches  us  to  look  through 
facts  and  laws  to  Mind  beyond  them  all,  controlling,  inspiring,  and  governing  them  all, 
in  a  wgrd,  accounting  for  them  all.  That  is  to  say,  we  are  taught  by  the  prophet  to 
see  God  in  history.     And  reflection  shows  us  how  reasonable  and  justifiable  is  this  view. 

IV.  A   GENERAL   DiVINE   PURPOSE    BUNS   THROUGHOUT   HUMAN   HISTORY.       It  is   God 

who  raises  one  nation  and  humiliates  another.  These  changes  may  for  the  most  part 
be  justified  by  the  well-informed  and  thoughtful  student.  It  is  admitted  that  there  are 
cases  which  occasion  us  the  greatest  perplexity.  But  the  obscure  must  be  interpreted 
by  the  plain.  We  should  never  forget  that  we  are  ignorant,  short-si ghted,  and  very 
fallible  beings,  and  should  avoid  dogmatizing  upon  individual  cases.  But  the  reflecting 
and  pious  man  will  make  a  point  of  recognizing  the  Divine  hand  in  the  affairs  of 
nations,  and  in  the  continuity  of  human  history.  This  lesson  has  been  taught  most 
effectively  by  modem  philosophers  of  history,  from  Herder  to  Hegel,  and  from  Hegel  to 
Bunsen. 


160  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  EZEKIEL.    [ch.  xxx.  1— 26. 

V.  Cub  acceptance  op  this  ntufciPLE  does  not  involvb  the  approval  of 

HUMAN    PASSIONS   WHICH    IMPEL   TO   MANY    HISTORICAL    CHANGES,    OB   THE    DELIGHT   IN 

EUUAN  SDFFEBINGS  WHICH  FOLLOW  UPON  THEM.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  God  in  his 
wisdom  makes  use  of  many  agencies  and  instrumentalities  of  a  character  which  cannot 
be  approved.  The  ambitions,  jealousies,  envies,  etc.,  which  animate  nations  and  rulers 
are  overruled  by  the  Lord  of  all  to  secure  ends  which  appear  good  and  desirable  to  bim. 
"  He  maketh  the  wrath  of  man  to  praise  him."  It  is  not  for  a  moment  to  be  supposed 
that  the  King  of  heaven  takes  any  delight  in  the  bereavements  and  desolations  which 
befall  the  innocent  as  a  consequence  of  those  wars  which  are  incident  to  the  achieve- 
ment of  great,  historically  important  ends.  We  can  only  reconcile  much  that  happens 
with  our  highest  view  of  the  Divine  character  by  remembering  that  God  has  a  higher 
end  before  him  than  human  enjoyment,  and  that  in  the  execution  of  his  purposes  ho 
is  not  limited  by  the  horizon  of  time. 

VI.  All  the  events  which  transpire  among  the  nations  shall  ultimately 

BE  been  to  subserve   MORAL   AND   RELIGIOUS  ENDS,  ESPECIALLY  THE  (iLORY  OF  DiVINB 

righteousness.  This  is  the  faith  of  the  godly,  and  is  encouraged  by  revelation. 
Faith  shall  be  justified.    "  The  day  shall  declare  it."— T. 

Vers.  1 — 19. — The  LorcCs  day  in  Egypt.  1  he  Lord's  day  is  the  day  in  which  God 
comes  nearest  to  men  and  manifests  himself.  Whether  he  will'  come  as  our  Friend  or 
as  our  Foe  depends  on  our  state  of  mind  towards  him.  He  has  not  abandoned  the  race 
of  men.  They  are  on  trial,  undergoing  discipline.  Now  and  again  he  comes  near, 
either  in  his  radiant  robes  of  grace  or  in  solemn  aspect  as  an  impartial  Judge.  Even 
when  he  approaches  nations  in  the  latter  character,  he  gives  premonitions  of  his 
coming,  and  this  is  an  act  of  grace.  In  all  his  doings  righteousness  and  love  are 
sweetly  blended. 

I.  The  cause  of  Divine  judgments  in  Egypt.  This  is  explicitly  stated,  "  I  will 
also  destroy  the  idols,  and  I  will  cause  their  images  to  cease."  Idolatry  is  not  merely 
a  system  of  error ;  it  is  a  fount  of  immorality,  it  is  a  seed-bed  of  moral  corruption. 
In  the  realm  of  religion  you  cannot  separate  theory  from  practice.  Theories  of 
atheism  to-day  become  habits  of  sensuality  to-morrow.  Where  God  is  ignored,  every 
vice  will  speedily  appear.  The  deprav^ities  of  Egypt  had  tainted  all  the  nations  round 
about. 

II.  The  severity  of  Divine  judgments.  It  is  impossible  for  the  wisest  man  to 
estimate  the  demerit  of  sin.  No  human  jurist  can  place  a  competent  penalty  against 
transgression  of  the  Law  of  God.  He  alone  who  created  man  and  imposed  law  can 
determine  adequate  punishments.  We  can  leave  God  to  do  what  is  wise  and  right. 
Usually,  the  sky  over  Egypt  is  transcend ently  bright;  now  that  clear  sky  shall  he 
covered  with  a  cloud.  1.  A  foreign  sword  shall  invade  the  land.  "  It  shall  be  the 
time  of  the  heathen."  A  sharp  sword  wielded  by  a  fierce  enemy  was  ordained  to  mow 
down  the  people.  2.  Desolation  was  decreed.  So  great  was  the  decimation  to  be,  that 
populous  cities  would  be  silent,  and  death-like  desolation  would  prevail  throughout 
that  once  prosperous  land.  Like  the  deserts  which  envelop  Egypt  round — barren 
and  dreary — so  was  Egypt  itself  to  become  1  3.  Fire  was  to  complete  the  overthrow. 
"1  will  set  fire  in  Egypt."  Her  mansions  and  cottages,  built  of  most  combustible 
material,  would  be  ready  food  for  flames ;  and,  for  lack  of  water,  towns  and  villages 
would  speedily  disappear.  How  vulnerable  on  every  side  was  this  renowned  empire ! 
4.  Ser  very  foundations  woidd  he  rooted  up.  Under  this  language  there  is  portrayed, 
not  the  removal  of  material  substructions  of  cities,  but  the  demolition  of  imperial  and 
national  foundations.  The  throne  should  be  completely  undermined ;  the  government 
should  pass  into  other  hands.  6.  The  overthrow  should  he  coextensive  with  Egypt. 
No  part  was  to  be  excepted.  Beginning  at  the  first  stronghold — the  tower  of  Syene — 
the  devastation  should  sweep  throughout  the  land.  Flourishing  cities  are  mentioned 
by  name  as  devoted  to  doom.  One  calamity  shall  befall  one;  some  other  calamity  is 
prepared  for  another.     God  calls  to  his  service  ten  thousand  agents. 

III.  The  instrument  of  the  Divine  judgment.  In  this  case  God  has  announced 
beforehand  ^hat  instrument  he  will  employ.  The  main  leader  in  this  great  tragedy 
was  Nebuchadnezzar  King  of  Babylon.  Some  good  reason  prevailed  with  God  why  he 
should  be  selected.    To  be  the  tool  of  a  ba'l  man  is  a  great  dis*-  nour,  but  to  do  any 


OH.  sxx.  1— 26.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  151 

service  for  our  righteous  King  is  a  substantial  honour.  Sometimes  God  has  seen  fit  to 
employ  material  forces  to  execute  his  vengeance,  as  in  the  cases  of  Lisbon  and  Pompeii. 
Sometimes  he  has  employed  an  angel,  as  when  he  discomfited  Sennacherib,  as  when 
he  smote  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem.  Yet,  if  the  human  instrument  be  not  himself 
righteous,  he  shall  also  in  his  turn  be  chastised.  God  gives  to  men  rewards  on  earth 
to  whom  he  is  bound  to  deny  the  possession  of  heaven. 

TV.  The  cbktaintt  op  Divine  jiiDaMBSTS.  It  is  made  sure  by  the  testimony 
of  Jehovah.  "Thus  saith  the  Lord;"  "I  the  Lord  have  spoken  it."  Not  even  the 
•ctiial  overthrow  of  Egypt  made  the  event  more  certain  than  it  was  made  by  the 
word  of  Jehovah.  His  declarations  are  as  good  as  his  performances.  His  words  are 
deeds.  As  soon  as  he  speaks  the  event  begins  to  evolve,  although  we  only  perceive 
the  final  stroke.  Our  business,  therefore,  is  simply  to  ascertain  whether  God  has 
spoken;  if  he  has,  we  may  conclude  that  the  word  will  become  fact.  Between  his 
word  and  its  fulfilment  there  is  an  iron  link  of  necessity.     It  must  be  done. 

V.  The  collateral  effects  of  Divine  JtrooMENTS.  "  The  men  of  the  land  that 
Is  in  league,  shall  fall  with  them  by  the  sword."  Allies  shall  suffer  along  with  the 
principal  offenders.  To  prop  up  a  rotten  throne  is  a  crime.  Judicious  care  is  needed 
in  the  choice  of  friends,  whether  public  or  private.  By  thoughtlessly  identifying 
ourselves  with  bad  men,  we  become  "partakers  of  their  sins."  Such  overwhelming 
judgment  as  this  in  Egypt  would  strike  terror  into  the  hearts  of  neighbours.  "In 
that  day  shall  messengers  from  me  make  the  careless  Ethiopians  afraid."  All  who 
dwell  in  the  vicinity  shall  be  awed  by  the  great  catastrophe.  If  such  disaster  overtook 
the  Egyptians,  might  it  not  also  overtake  them?  Had  they  no  sin  to  be  chastised? 
If  the  Egyptians  were  unable  to  buy  off,  or  resist,  the  foe,  what  could  tJiey  do  in  the 
day  of  visitation?  Well  may  all  wrong-doers  tremble  1  "When  thy  judgments  are 
abroad  in  the  earth,  the  inhabitants  of  the  world  will  learn  righteousness." 

VI.  The  final  pueposb  of  Divine  judgment.  "  They  shall  know  that  I  am  the 
Lord."  In  their  death  they  shall  be  convinced  of  a  truth  which  they  refused  to 
acknowledge  during  life.  In  the  crisis  of  the  conflict  between  Jehovah  and  the  idols 
men  shall  learn  on  which  side  the  real  strength  lies.  So  is  it  still — when  too  late  to 
reverse  the  course  of  life,  too  late  to  change  character — ^men  discover  that  there  is  a 
God  in  the  earth,  and  that  they  must  pass  through  the  crucial  process  of  judgment. 
Yet  how  slow  are  the  nations  still  to  recognize  and  revere  Jehovah  I  What  patience 
and  forbearance  doth  our  God  show  I  Nevertheless,  it  is  true — men  shall  confess  that 
Jehovah  is  Lord.     Is  it  not  wiser  to  learn  the  lesson  forthwith  ? 

VII.  Sektiments  proper  to  the  near  approach  of  judgment.  "  Howl  ye !  Woe 
worth  the  day  !  "  It  is  an  impressive  proof  of  the  tender  love  of  God  that  he  employs 
all  suitable  means  to  warn  us  of  the  gradual  approach  of  doom.  Of  him  it  is  not  true 
that  the  "gods  have  feet  of  wool."  The  noise  of  his  chariot- wheels  is  heard  in  the 
distance.  He  sends  messengers  of  various  kinds  in  advance,  to  prevent,  if  possible, 
the  threatened  disaster.  Wiiat  gratitude  ought  to  break  forth  from  our  hearts!  And 
with  what  awe  should  we  hear  the  thunderous  tread  of  his  footsteps  1  Verily,  men  are 
as  the  small  dust  of  the  balance  compared  with  the  majesty  of  God.  For  the  creature 
to  contend  with  his  Creator  is  folly  inexpressible  !  While  yet  the  day  of  opportunity 
lingers,  let  counsels  of  wisdom  prevail ! — D. 

Vers.  20 — 26. — 2%e  hroken  arm.  It  is  marvellous  that  men  do  not  realize  as  a  fact 
how  completely  dependent  they  are  upon  the  unseen  God.  In  theory,  the  bulk  of  men 
are  theists;  in  practice,  atheists.  It  would  produce  a  blessed  revolution  in  society  if 
believers  in  God's  nearness  lived  up  to  their  beliefs.  How  differently  would  kings  and 
statesmen  act,  compared  with  their  ordinary  conduct!  What  a  scene  of  order  and 
quietness  would  our  earth  become ! 

I.  That  a  conflict  betviteen  nations  mat  be  regarded  as  a  personal  combat. 
The  bulk  of  an  army  are  tools,  who,  for  considerations  of  pay,  fight  the  battles  of  their 
sovereign  king.  It  would  often  be  more  just,  and  more  advantageous,  if  the  persons 
who  pick  a  national  quarrel  would  personally  and  singly  fight  it  out.  Yet  even  the 
military  equipment  of  a  king  is  simply  his  arm  magnified.  Hence  we  call  weapons  of 
war  arms.  They  are  the  artificial  arm  (Jf  the  monarch.  In  almost  every  case  the 
;aus«  of  war  is  a  personal  matter  between  two  sovereigns,  or  their  representatives. 


162  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxx.  1— 26, 

The  nation  is  expected  to  identify  itself,  willingly  or  unwillingly,  with  their  sovereign, 
and  act  as  his  confedei-ates. 

II.  'J'HAT   in   such   personal   combat    the   AEM   18   AN   ESSBNTIAI,  INSTBUMBNT.     Aa 

many  animals  are  furnished  by  God  with  weapons  of  defence,  so  the  human  arm,  so 
skilfully  constructed,  is  man's  chief  instrument  in  battle.  Without  question,  it  was 
designed  to  serve  other  purposes.  It  is  more  adapted  for  industrial  pursuits  than  for 
martial  engagements.  Yet,  as  self-existence  is  a  law  of  nature,  the  right  arm  has  an 
unspeakable  value  in  defending  one's  self  against  a  foe.  In  armament  it  is  man's 
masterpiece.  Shield  and  sword  are  reduced  to  uselessness  unless  there  be  a  brawny  arm. 

III.  That  the  Creator  of  man  can  weaken  or  strengthen  man's  arm  at 
PLEASURE.  No  part  of  man's  nature  has  been  constructed  by  himself  No  part  can 
be  maintained  in  vigour  by  himself.  He  is,  in  every  part  and  through  every  moment, 
dependent  on  his  Maker.  As  man  cannot  make  an  arm,  neither  can  he  maintain  its 
life  and  energy.  The  strength  of  that  arm  depends  on  occult  forces  of  nerve  and 
ligament,  that  man  knows  little  about.  He  is  just  discovering  some  of  the  channels 
and  laws  through  which  his  Divine  Creator  works :  so  far  he  can  act  with  God ;  but 
still  the  Fount  of  life  is  in  God  alone.  Wisely  did  King  David  recognize  that  it  was 
God  who  "  taught  his  hands  to  war,  and  his  fingers  to  fight."  The  maintenance  of 
vitality  rests  with  God.  Every  increment  of  strength  is  due  to  him.  His  favour 
invigorates  us;  his  frown  makes  us  weak.  The  man  of  giant  strength  is  but  an 
infant  in  God's  hands.  Without  his  upholding  power  our  arms  would  fall  at  onc«, 
paralyzed  at  our  side. 

IV.  That  if  God  breaks  the  arm  of  ant  combatants  defeat  ensues.  How 
Gompletely  is  God  the  Arbiter  in  every  battle  1  Very  cleai'ly,  we  are  told,  God  inter- 
poses, in  a  hundred  different  ways,  to  decide  the  wage  of  war.  If  a  spirit  of  timidity 
or  fear  fills  the  hearts  of  rank-and-file,  the  arm  on  which  the  monarch  depended  is 
broken.  If  treachery  lurks  in  any  department  of  the  military  service,  or  even  in  one 
man's  breast,  the  arm  of  the  king  is  broken.  On  the  other  hand,  God  has  a  sword  of 
his  own,  and  there  are  times  when  he  places  this  in  the  hand  of  a  combatant.  There 
are  times  when  Gk)d  gives  extraordinary  strength,  or  skill,  to  a  human  arm.  For  wise 
reasons  his  assistance  is  not  seen,  his  action  is  not  discovered.  Men  put  down  the 
result  to  chance  or  to  the  fortunes  of  war.  It  is  a  common  failing  to  forget  God.  We 
may  always  have  God's  strength  in  our  arm  if  we  will.  If  we  keep  closely  at  his  side, 
and  calmly  do  his  will,  he  will  surely  be  on  our  side  if  we  are  forced  into  battle.  Then 
we  shall  feel  that  the  battle  is  not  ours ;  it  is  the  Lord's. — D, 

Vers.  1  —3,  7. — 2%e  day  of  desolation.  To  what  extent  we  are  to  take  the  prophet's 
description  of  the  "  woe  "  that  was  to  overtake  Egypt  in  a  strictly  external  sense  must 
(as  said  before  on  ch.  xxix.  16)  depend  on  our  principle  of  biblical  interpretation, 
together  with  our  reading  of  ancient  history.  For  the  purpose  of  religious  edification 
it  is  enough  that  we  accept  these  words  as  a  picture  of  the  desolation  to  which  a 
course  of  guilt,  whether  national  or  individual,  may  be  expected  to  lead. 

I.  National  desolation.  Of  this  Ezekiel  furnishes,  in  the  whole  chapter,  a  most 
graphic  picture.  1.  Prosperity  (fulness)  departs,  and  there  is  no  more  boast  of  its  great 
population  (ver.  10).  2.  Violent  death  lays  numbers  of  its  people  low ;  the  land  is 
"  filled  with  the  slain  "  (vers.  4,  11).  3.  Its  hope,  in  the  person  of  its  young  men,  is 
slain  (ver.  17).  4.  Its  beauty,  its  pride,  in  the  person  of  its  daughters,  is  removed 
(ver.  18).  5.  Its  physical  resources  are  dried  up  (ver.  12).  6.  Its  natural  leaders  are 
lost  to  it  (ver  13).  7.  Its  religious  institutions  aie  broken  up  (ver.  13).  8.  Its  allies 
and  dependencies  are  dragged  down  with  it  to  the  ground  (vers.  5,  6)  ;  "its  yokes  are 
broken"  (ver.  18).  9.  Its  people  are  stricken  with  dismay;  instead  of  its  ancient 
pride  and  pomp  (ver.  18),  fearfulness  fills  the  heart  of  its  inhabitants  (ver.  13) ;  a  cloud 
of  dire  misfortune  throws  the  whole  country  into  daik  shadow  (vers.  3, 18).  The 
final,  comprehensive  touch  is  in  the  language  of  the  text,  10.  Desolation  in  the 
midst  of  desolation.  It  does  not  appear  that  Egypt  ever  presented  so  desperate  a 
scene  as  this ;  and  we  may  understand  either  (1)  that  God,  for  some  sufiicient  reason, 
forbore  to  visit  the  land  with  the  last  extremity  of  woe  (see;  Jonah  iii.  4, 10);  or  (2) 
that  the  language  of  the  prophecy  is  to  be  faken  as  hyperbolical,  and  thus  interpreted. 
But  we  must  also  understand  that   (3)   tlie  ultimate  issue  of  collective  (national) 


OH.  XXX.  1—26.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PEOPHET  EZEKIEL.  153 

iniquity  is  destruction,  desolation ;  witness  the  cities  of  the  plain,  Nineveh,  Babylon, 
Jerusalem.  The  "day  "  of  sin  and  of  defiance,  of  tyrannical  power  and  guilty  grati- 
fication may  last  long,  but  its  sun  is  sure  to  set  in  dark  clouds,  and  when  the 
morrow  comes,  as  it  will  come,  there  will  be  a  day  of  dire  and  widespread  desolation. 
"  Woe  worth  the  day ! "  when  it  arrives. 

II.  The  desolation  op  thk  spirit.  1.  In  what  it  is  found.  Spiritual  desolation 
is  experienced  when  all  that  is  really  precious  to  the  human  soul  is  broken  up  and  has 
departed.  When  (1)  the  good  habits  of  devotion  and  of  virtue,  formed  in  childhood, 
have  become  loosened  and  have  given  way  ;  (2)  the  soul  has  lost  its  faith  ia  the 
providence,  the  nearness,  the  notice,  and  perhaps  even  the  being  of  God  ;  (3)  the  man 
has  become  separated,  both  in  sympathy  and  in  action,  from  those  with  whom  he  once 
walked  and  worshipped ;  (4)  hope  of  future  blessedness  has  left  the  heart  bare  of  all 
expectancy  beyond  the  grave,  and  the  fixture  is  nothing  but  a  blank ;  (5)  life  has  lost 
all  its  saeredness,  and  therefore  nearly  all  its  worth.  This  sad  desolateness  of  soul 
culminates  in  (6)  the  loss  of  all  self-respect,  and  in  (7)  the  extension  of  the  same 
spiritual  waste  to  those  who  are  within  range  of  its  influence ;  when  one  is  "  desolate 
in  the  midst  of  deisolation."  2.  How  it  may  6e  averted.  "  None  of  them  that  trust  in 
him  shall  be  desolate,"  says  the  psalmist  (Ps.  xxxv.  22).  The  fear  of  God,  walking  in  the 
light  of  his  truth,  communion  with  Jesus  Christ  and  association  with  his  friends  and 
followers,  the  daily  prayer  for  the  restraining  and  the  prompting  influences  of  the 
Spirit  of  God,— this  wiU  secure  the  soul  from  loss  and  from  decline.  He  who  lives 
thus  will  not  enter  even  the  outer  shadow  of  this  calamity.  3.  The  way  of  deliverance. 
Men  once  thought  that  there  was  no  way  for  a  human  soul  to  ascend  from  the  pit  of 
spiritual  ruin  to  the  lofty  levels  of  holy  service  and  sacred  joy  and  inmiortal  hope. 
We  think  thus  no  more  now  that  ht  has  spoken  to  us  who  has  said,  "  /  am  the 
Way."— C. 

Ver.  18. — Broken,  yokes.  "  I  shall  break  there  the  yokes  of  Egypt."  There  are  many 
yokes  which  are  laid  on  men's  shoulders  from  which  they  may  well  wish  to  be  freed  ; 
and  there  is  one  yoke  concerning  which  no  such  thought  need  be  cherished  for  a 
moment.     There  is  the  yoke  of — 

I.  Human  oppression.  The  sad  story  of  the  human  race  is,  to  a  very  large  extent, 
the  history  of  human  oppression.  "  Man's  inhumanity  to  man  "  may  well  "  make  us 
mourn"  as  we  dwell  upon  it.  And  among  his  various  cruelties  and  wrongs  we  have 
to  give  oppression  a  prominent  place — political,  domestic,  personal  oppression.  It 
includes  the  denial  of  the  rights  of  manhood  and  of  womanhood,  the  exacting  of  hard 
and  burdensome  labour,  or  of  heavy  and  excessive  tribute,  or  of  a  dishonouring  and 
hurtful  homage,  the  inflicting  of  pain  and  suffering  of  many  kinds.  It  seems  to  be  in 
the  nature  of  sin  to  harden  men's  hearts  against  one  another,  until  they  not  only 
endure  but  positively  enjoy  the  sight  of  the  oppression  they  impnse.  Ezekiel  speaks 
of  "  the  yokes  of  Ejiypt."  No  doubt  that  country,  in  the  plenitude  of  its  power,  exacted 
tribute,  enforced  labour,  laid  heavy  burdens  upon  many  of  its  own  subjects  or  (as  in 
an  earlier  time,  when  Israel  was  under  its  heel)  on  other  peoples.  But  when  the 
Babylonian  power  came  up  and  subdued  it,  its  hard  hold  on  these  had  to  be  relaxed, 
its  yoke  was  broken  in  twain.  This,  in  the  providence  of  God,  has  frequently 
happened.  Power  becomes  wealthy ;  wealth  leads  to  luxury  and  indulgence;  indul- 
gence leads  to  effeminacy  and  decline ;  weakness  succumbs  to  some  other  power  that 
has  arisen ;  and  then  and  thus  its  "  yoke  is  broken." 

II.  The  servitude  of  sin.  "  Know  ye  not  that  to  whom  ye  yield  yourselves 
seivants  to  obey,  his  servants  [slaves]  ye  are  to  whom  ye  obey?  ...  Ye  were  the 
servants  [slaves]  of  sin  "  (Rom.  vi.  16,  17).  Sin  conducts,  by  sure  steps,  to  spiritual 
bondage ;  it  lays  a  hard  and  heavy  yoke  upon  the  soul ;  it  may  be  that  of  a  grasping 
selfishness,  or  of  an  absorbing  worldliness,  or  of  a  degrading  vice,  or  of  such  a  fatal 
habit  as  that  of  procrastination.  But  it  is  a  hard  bondage,  a  cruel  yoke,  which  rrmsl 
he  broken  if  there  is  to  be  spiritual  liberty  and  eternal  life.  God,  in  the  gospel  of 
Jesus  Christ,  can  and  does  break  this  deadly  yoke.  1.  He  fills  the  soul  with  a  sense 
of  shame,  and  with  a  holy,  renewing  sorrow.  2.  He  leads  the  awakened  soul  to  a 
Divine  Saviour,  in  whose  love  and  service  the  bond  is  broken.  3.  He  gives  to  the 
seeking,  trustful  soul  the  cleansing,  liberating  power  of  his  Holy  Spirit;  and  thus  the 


164  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [ch.  xxxi.  1— 18. 

yoke  is  broken  and  the  man  is  freed.     There  is  another  yoke  of  an  entirely  different 
nature ;  it  is  in — 

III.  The  service  of  Jesus  Chbist.  "  Take  my  yoke,"  he  says ;  "  my  yoke  is 
easy,  and  my  burden  is  light."  In  that  which  is  the  service  of  love  and  of  righteous- 
ness there  is  real  liberty  and  lasting  joy. — C. 

Vers.  21,  22,  24. —  The  broken  and  the  strengthened  arm.  "  I  have  broken  the  arm  of 
Pharaoh  King  of  Egypt ; "  "I  will  strengthen  the  arms  of  the  King  of  Babylon." 
These  words  suggest  to  us  three  things. 

I.  God's  action  on  all  the  nations.  God  was  in  an  especial  sense  "  the  God  of 
Israel,"  but  certainly  not  in  an  exclusive  sense.  He  was,  as  he  is,  the  God  of  all  the 
nations.  He  was  observing,  directing,  overruling  everywhere.  If  Egypt  fell,  it  was 
because  he  "  broke  the  arm  of  Pharaoh ;  "  if  Babylon  triumphed,  it  was  because  he 
made  it  strong  in  the  day  of  battle.  Statesmen  and  warriors  were  supposing  that  all 
events  were  the  outcome  of  their  policy  and  of  their  strategy ;  but,  in  fact,  there  was  a 
power  behind  them  and  all  their  schemes,  laying  low  or  raising  up,  bringing  into 
humiliation  or  causing  to  succeed.  And  there  has  been  no  age  of  the  world,  as  there 
has  been  no  part  of  the  earth,  in  which  the  Divine  hand  has  not  been  engaged  either  in 
breaking  or  in  building. 

II.  The  beoken  aem  of  iniquity.  We  may  truly  say  that  God  is  continually 
occupied  in  "  breaking  the  arm  "  of  wrong  and  sin.  He  does  so  in  one  of  two  ways. 
1.  Either  by  his  direct  active  interposition  ;  so  touching  the  chain  of  events  at  one  of 
its  links,  as  to  bring  about  disaster ;  intervening  at  some  point  by  the  introduction  of 
some  factor  which  makes  all  the  difference  in  the  end.  2.  Or  by  the  steadfast  action 
of  his  wise  and  holy  laws — those  laws  which  compel  all  wrong-doing  to  others  and  all 
violation  of  what  is  due  to  ourself  to  lead  down  to  weakness,  to  misery,  to  death. 
Iniquity  often  seems  very  strong ;  it  is  sustained  by  stone  fortresses,  by  armies  and 
navies,  by  high  rank,  by  great  wealth,  by  numbers,  by  deep-rooted  customs,  by  vener- 
able institutions.  Nevertheless,  it  is  on  its  way  to  overthrow  and  ruin;  For  God  has 
designed  to  "  break  its  arm."  He  may  do  so  by  unexpected  means ;  he  may  take 
longer  time  than  we  wish  he  would  take  in  the  process;  but  he  will  accomplish  it. 
He  will  bring  Divine  justice,  Divine  wisdom,  Divine  penalty,  to  bear  upon  and  against 
it,  and  its  power  will  be  broken.  It  is  a  vain  thing  to  ba  on  the  side  of  prevailing 
wrong ;  for  if  we  are,  God  is.against  us,  and,  sooner  or  later,  we  shall  "  be  confounded." 

III.  The  strengthened  arm  of  rectitude.  It  maybe  that  God  will  "strengthen 
the  arm  ...  of  Babylon,"  of  some  "  power"  or  of  some  man  who  has  no  claim  on  the 
ground  of  righteousness,  doing  this  for  the  accomplishment  of  some  wise  and  holy 
purpose.  But  there  is  no  promise  to  unrighteousness.  Those  who  regard  not  the 
works  nor  the  Word  of  the  Lord  need  not  expect  that  he  will  "build  .them  up"  (see 
Ps.  xxviii.  5).  It  is  those  who  fear  him,  who  seek  to  do  his  will  and  t>  follow  in  the 
footsteps  of  his  Son, — it  is  they  who  may  hope  to  have  "their  arm  streng*fcened,"  their 
work  crowned  with  success,  their  hopes  fulfilled.  Not,  indeed,  that  all  good  men  will 
receive  from  God  all  that  they  would  like  to  have ;  for  we  cannot  "  choose  our  own 
inheritance  "  with  any  deep  wisdom,  and  it  is  well  for  us  that  many  things  on  which 
we  set  our  heart  should  be,  as  they  are,  denied  us  of  God.  But,  making  all  needful 
exceptions,  the  soul  that  earnestly  seeks  God's  face  and  strives  to  live  his  life  will  find 
that  his  Divine  Lord  will  "  strengthen  his  arm  "  by ;  1.  Directing  his  course  in  ways  of 
competence  and  peace.  2.  "  Strengthening  him  with  strength  in  his  soul,"  and  thus 
fitting  him  for  all  duty,  trial,  and  temptation.  3.  Making  him  the  source  of  blessing 
to  those  whom  he  seeks  to  serve  in  the  fields  of  sacred  usefulness. — 0. 

EXPOSITION. 
CHAPTER  XXXI. 


Ver.  1. — In  the  eleventh  year,  etc.  June, 
B.O.  586.  Two  months  all  but  six  days  had 
passed  since  the  utterance  of  ch.  xxx.  20 — 
26,  when  Ezekiel  was  moved  to  expand  his 


prediction  of  the  downfall  of  Egypt  into  a 
parable  which  is  partly  a  replica  of  those  in 
oh.  xvii.  and  xix.  1—14,  and  which  also  finds 
a  parallel  in  Dan.  iv.  10 — 14. 

Ver.  2. — The  parable  is  addressed,  not  to 
Pharaoh  only,  but  to  his  multitude,  i.e.,  as  in 


CH.  XXXI.  1—18.]    THE   BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL. 


155 


ch.  XXX.  4,  for  his  auxiliary  forces.  It  opens 
with  one  of  the  customnry  formulse  of  an 
Eastern  apologue  (Mark  iv.  30),  intended  to 
sharpen  the  curiosity  and  win  the  attention 
of  the  prophet's  hearers  or  readers.  It  is 
significant  that  the  question  is  repeated  at 
the  close  of  the  parable,  as  if  the  prophet 
had  left  the  interpretation  to  his  readers,  as 
our  Lord  does  in  saying, "  He  that  hath  ears 
to  liear,  let  him  hear." 

Ver.  3. — Behold,  the  Assyrian  was  a  cedar 
in  Lehanon.  The  Hebrew  text,  as  rendered 
in  all  versions  and  interpreted  by  most 
commentators,  gives  us,  in  the  form  of  the 
parable  of  the  cedar,  the  history  of  the 
Assyrian  empire  in  its  glory  and  its  fall. 
That  had  passed  away  in  spite  of  its  gi'eat- 
ness,  and  so  should  Egypt.  The  question  in 
ver.  18  takes  the  place  of  "Thuu  art  the 
man  I  *  in  Nathan's  interpretation  of  his 
parable  (2  Sam.  xii.  7),  or  the  mutato  nomine 
de  tefahula  narratur  of  the  Boman  satirist. 
Some  recent  commentators,  however,  either 
like  Ewald,  taking  the  Hebrew  word  for 
"  Assyrian  "  as  describing  a  particular  kind 
of  cedar  or  fir  tree,  or,  like  Cornill  and  Smend, 
adopting  a  conjectural  emendation  of  the 
text  which  actually  gives  that  meaning 
fTasshur  for  Asshur),  refer  the  whole  parable 
primarily  to  Egypt,  and  dwell  on  the  fact 
that  the  words  of  vers.  10,  18  are  addressed 
to  the  living  representative  of  a  great 
monarchy,  and  not  to  a  power  that  has 
already  passed  away  into  the  Hades  of 
departed  glory.  The  former  view  seems  to 
me  the  more  tenable  of  the  two,  and  I  there- 
fore adopt  it  throughout  the  chapter.  It 
may  be  admitted,  however,  that  the  inner 
meaning  of  the  parable  at  times  breaks 
through  the  outward  imagery,  as  was  indeed 
to  be  expected,  the  prophet  seeking  to  apply 
his  apologue  even  before  he  had  completed 
it.  'I'he  "cedar  in  Lebanon"  has  already 
met  us  as  the  symbol  of  a  kingdom,  in  cli. 
zvii.  2.  The  shadowing  shroud  may  be 
noted  as  a  specijUy  vivid  picture  of  the 
peculiar  foliage  of  the  cedar  rendered  with 
singular  felicity.  His  top  was  among  the 
thick  boughs;  better,  eloude,  as  in  the 
margin  of  the  Bevised  Version.  So  Keil, 
Smend,  and  others  (oomp.  vers.  10, 14). 

Ver.  4. — The  waters  made  h^  great. 
The  scenery  is  hardly  that  of  Lebanon,  but 
finds  its  counterpart  in  that  of  the  Nile, 
perhaps  also  of  the  Tigris,  with  the  waters 
of  the  river  diverted  into  streams  and 
channels  by  a  careful  system  of  irrigation. 
The  cedar  grew  close  to  the  river  itself;  the 
other  trees  of  the  field  were  watereii  only  by 
the  smaller  channels,  and  so  were  inferior  to 
it  in  the  fulness  of  their  growth.  (For  the 
general  imagery,  comp.  oh.  xvii.  5 ;  Pa.  i.  3 ; 
Jer.  xvii.  8 ;  Numb.  xxiv.  6.) 

V«r.  6.— All  the  fowls  of  heaven.    This, 


as  in  ch.  xvii.  23 ;  Dan.  iv.  9 ;  Matt.  xiii. 
32,  was  the  natural  symbol  of  the  fact 
that  all  the  neighbouring  nations  owned  the 
sovereignty  of  Assyria  and  were  sheltered 
by  her  protection.  In  the  great  nations  wo 
have  the  parable  passing  into  its  interpreta- 
tion. 

Ver.  8. — The  cedars  in  the  garden  of  Ood. 
As  in  ch.  xxviii.  13,  the  thoughts  of  the 
prophet  dwell  on  the  picture  of  Eden  in 
Gen.  ii.  8.  Far  above  all  other  trees,  the 
cedar  of  Assyria  rose  high  in  majesty.  All 
the  trees  that  were  in  the  garden  of  God 
envied  him.  The  trees  specially  chosen  for 
comparison  are  (1)  the  fir  trees — probably, 
as  in  ch.  xxvii.  5,  the  cypresses ;  and  (2) 
the  chestnut  trees,  for  which  the  Bevised 
Version,  following  the  Vulgate  and  the  LXX. 
of  Gen.  XXX.  37,  gives  the  "  plane,"  which 
held  a  high  place  in  the  admiration  of  Greek 
and  Buman  writers.  Of  this  we  have  % 
special  instance  in  the  story  of  Xerxes,  who 
decorated  a  plane  tree  near  the  Meander 
with  ornaments  of  gold  (Herod.,  vii.  31  ; 
'  .ffilicon,'  V.  14 ;  also  comp.  Eoclus.  xxiv.  14  ; 
Virg., '  Georg.,'  iv.  146 ;  Cicero,  '  De  Orat.,' 
i.  7,  28). 

Vers.  10, 11. — Because  thon  hast  lifted  up 
thyself.  The  second  and  third  persons  are 
curiously  mixed ;  probably  the  former  was 
in  the  nature  of  a  warning  addressed  to  the 
King  of  Egypt,  while  the  latter  continues 
the  parable  of  the  history  of  Assyria.  For 
boughs  read  clouds,  as  in  ver.  3.  Ezekiel 
writes  as  with  the  feeling  which  led  Solon 
to  note  that  the  loftiest  trees  are  those 
which  are  most  exposed  to  the  strokes  of 
the  thunderbolts  of  Zeus  (Herod.,  vii.  10). 
The  Assyrian's  heart  was  "  lifted  up  with 
pride"  (Isa.  x.  5),  and  therefore  he  was 
delivered  to  the  mighty  one  of  the  nations ; 
so.  to  Nebuchadnezzar. 

Ver.  12.— Strangers,  the  terrible  of  the 
nations.  We  note  the  recurrence  of  the 
phrase  of  ch.  xxx.  11,  as  pointing,  here  as 
there,  to  the  Chaldean  invaders.  The 
branches  of  the  tree  were  broken,  the  pen  pie 
of  the  earth  no  longer  dwelt  under  its  shadow 
(Dan.  iv.  11). 

Ver.  13. — Upon  his  ruin.  The  prophet,  as 
it  were,  corrects  his  imagery.  The  birds 
and  beasts  are  still  tliere,  but  instead  of 
dwelling  in  the  boughs,  they  (vulturos  and 
owls,  jackals  and  hyenas)  hover  and  creep 
as  over  the  carcase  of  the  dead,  decaying 
trunk. 

Ver.  14. — To  the  end  that  none,  etc.  Withi 
a  characteristic  amplitude  of  style,  Ezekiel 
preaches  tlie  groat  lesson  of  the  mutability 
of  earthly  greatness.  This  was  the  lessim 
that  the  history  of  Assyria  ought  to  have 
taught  the  nations  of  the  earth,  and  it  was 
just  that  lesson  that  they  refused  to  leam. 
They  are  all  delivered  to  death.    The  scuuery 


166 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxxi.  1—18. 


of  the  parable  passes  from  Eden  to  Shcol, 
the  Hades  of  the  nations,  and  the  prophet 
gives  the  first  stroke  of  the  imagery  after- 
wards more  fully  developed  in  oh.  xsxii.  17 
—32. 

Ver.  15. — ^I  covered  the  deep  for  him.  The 
face  of  the  whole  world  of  nature  is  painted 
by  the  prophet  as  sharing  in  the  awe  and 
terror  of  that  tremendous  fall  Lebanon 
was  made  to  mourn  (literally,  to  be  hlach), 
the  waters  failed  in  tLeir  channels,  the  trees 
(all  that  drink  water)  shuddered.  They 
formed  part,  as  it  were,  of  the  pageantry 
of  woe  at  the  funeral  of  the  fallen  kingdom. 
It  is  as  if  the  prophet  felt,  in  all  its  intensity, 
what  we  have  learnt  to  call  the  sympathy  of 
nature  with  the  sorrows  of  humanity.  It 
would,  perhaps,  be  over-literal  to  press 
details ;  but  the  picture,  in  one  of  its  features 
•t  least,  suggests  a  failure' of  the  inunda- 
tion of  the  Nile,  like  that  indicated  in  ch, 
zxx.  12. 

Ver.  16.— Shall  be  comforted,  eto.  The 
Dante-like  imagination  of  the  prophet  points 
the  contrasts  between  the  impression  made 
by  the  fall  of  Assyria  on  the  nations  that 
yet  survived,  and  on  those  that  had  already 


perished.  The  former  mourn  and  shake 
with  fear,  for  it  is  a  warning  to  them  that 
their  turn  also  may  come.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  trees  of  Eden — the  great  mo- 
narchies that  are  already  in  Sheol — shall 
be  "  comforted  "  with  the  thought  that  yet 
another  kingdom  mightier  than  they  haa 
fallen  as  tliey  fell  (comp.  Isa.  xiv.  4—20; 
ch.  xxxii.  17—32,  where  the  thought  is 
elaborately  expanded). 

Ver.  17. — They  that  were  his  arm.  The 
words  point  to  the  allies,  in  the  first  instance 
of  Assyria,  and  secondly  of  Egypt.  The  last 
words  of  the  verse  present  a  striking  parallel 
to  Lain.  iv.  20. 

Ver.  18. — To  whom  art  thon  Haa  like, 
etc.  ?  As  in  ver.  10,  tlie  prophet  passes  from 
tlie  past  to  the  present,  from  the  third  person 
to  the  second,  and  as  it  were  says  to  Hoijhra, 
"  Thou  art  the  man  I  all  that  I  have  said  of 
Assyria  is  true  of  thee."  This  is  Fharaoh 
and  all  his  multitude.  In  the  midst  of  tha 
nncircumcised  (see  note  on  ch.  xxviii.  10). 
As  a  matter  of  faut,  the  Egyptians  practised 
circumcision,  and  Kzekiel  must  be  thought 
of  as  using  the  term  aa  simply  an  epithet  of 
Boorn. 


HOMILETIOS. 

Vers.  1 — ^9. — 2%e  great  cedar.  Assyria  is  compared  to  a  cedar  of  Lebanon,  which  ta 
an  emblem  of  earthly  magnificence. 

I.  The  oedae  ib  magnificent.  It  is  the  favourite  tree  in  biblical  imagery  to  expresa 
splendour.  In  this  respect  it  could  be  taken  as  a  symbol  of  a  great  triumphant  empire 
Buch  as  that  of  Assyria.  Thus  it  is  plainly  declared  that  there  is  a  splendour  of  thia 
world.  We  are  not  to  be  surprised  when  we  seethe  wicked  flourishing  like  a  green  bay 
tree  (Ps.  xxxvii.  35).  He  may  even  attain  to  the  proportions  of  the  cedar  of  Lebanon. 
Note  some  of  the  characteristics  of  this  magnificence.  1.  Size.  This  is  what  first  strikes 
one  in  viewing  the  cedar.  Assyria  was  a  big  empire.  Worldly  success  may  be  large. 
2.  Altitude.  The  cedar  is  not  only  broad-spreading.  It  towers  high.  There  is  an 
unchecked  pride  in  worldly  success.  3.  Persistency.  The  cedar  is  green  in  winter. 
By  clever  devices  unscrupulous  people  may  escape  msiny  of  the  troubles  of  the  true 
servants  of  God.  4.  Fragrance.  It  cannot  be  denied  that  there  is  a  certain  fascination 
in  worldly  splendour. 

II.  The  cedar  of  Lebanon  excels  all  the  tbbbs  of  Eden.  There  are  pol'i** 
in  which  worldly  magnificence  surpasses  the  visible  excellence  of  spiritual  goodnese. 
"  Nor  any  tree  in  the  garden  of  the  Lord  was  like  unto  him  in  his  beauty."  The 
reasons  for  this  should  be  considered,  lest  we  be  disappointed  and  confounded.  1.  Hie 
impressiveness  of  the  external.  The  cedar  bulks  largely  before  the  eye  of  an  observer, 
while  the  vine  seems  to  creep  feebly  among  the  rocks  or  round  its  much-needed  support. 
Yet  it  is  the  vine  that  yields  refreshing  fruit.  There  is  a  striking  aspect  in  worldly 
success.  Spiritual  achievements  do  not  arrest  attention  in  the  same  way,  because  they 
are  spiritual.  Yet  (Jod  looks  not  to  worldly  greatness,  but  to  spiritual  success.  2. 
Unscrupulousness.  Men  who  trample  on  conscience  take  short  cuts  to  success.  It  is 
not  surprising  that  they  outbid  the  conscientious  in  the  market  of  the  world's  wares. 
S.  Want  of  restraint.  The  cednr  is  unpruned.  It  grows  in  wild,  rank  luxuriance  on 
the  unfrequented  slopes  of  Lebanon.  But  the  trees  in  the  gaiden  of  the  Lord  are  care- 
fully pruned.     "  Whom  the  Lord  loveth  he  ohasteneth  "  (Heb.  xii.  6). 

in.  The  cbdae  is  not  independent  of  supplies  outside  itself.  "The  waters 
made  him  great."    If  the  waters  were  dried  up,  the  proud  tree  would  droop  and  die. 


CH.  XXXI.  1—18.]    THE  BOOK  OF   THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  157 

Proud  men  glory  in  their  own  resources.  But  no  one  can  he  strong  and  continue  in 
vigour  without  receiving  supplies  from  without.  The  mind  must  be  fed  with  fresh 
knowledge,  as  the  body  with  fresh  food.  Moreover,  the  success  that  a  man  seems  to 
create  for  himself  is  largely  due  to  favourable  circumstances.  If  the  water  did  not  run 
by  tiie  root  of  the  tree,  the  tree  would  not  flourish  in  its  magnificent  state.  Therefore 
the  pride  of  self-sufBciency  is  founded  on  an  error;  and  he  who  ignores  his  dependence 
on  help  from  without  will  one  day  find  that  that  help  is  cut  off  and  he  left  to  wither 
in  despair.  Men  who  will  not  acknowledge  God  are  yet  daily  recipients  of  his  bounty. 
While  they  lift  their  heads  in  worldly  self-satisfaction,  he  is  still  mercifully  watering 
their  roots  and  giving  the  good  things  on  which  they  build  their  pride.  1.  This  fact 
should  teach  hwniUty.  2.  It  should  excite  gratitude.  3.  It  should  cause  fear  in 
negligent  self-sufSciency.  4,  It  should  lead  to  trust  in  Ood  rather  than  in  superficial 
worldly  advantages. 

Ver.  7. — The  root  and  the  waters,  I.  The  tebb  flotjeishes  through  its  koot.  1. 
The  root  supports  the  tree.  It  is  the  foundation.  Unless  the  root  is  deep  and  strong 
the  tree  will  fall,  blown  over  by  the  hurricane  or  swept  away  by  the  flood.  Our  life 
needs  a  root,  a  foundation.  2.  The  root  brings  nourishment  to  the  tree.  It  sucks  in 
moisture  from  the  earth  and  draws  the  rich  juices  of  the  soil  up  into  the  plant.  When 
the  roots  are  cut  the  tree  must  wither  and  die.  The  child's  Christmas-tree  looks  green 
for  the  short  season  of  festivities,  but  according  to  a  common  custom,  being  cut  off 
without  a  proper  root,  it  cannot  live.  There  are  souls  that  have  no  root  in  themselves  . 
(Matt.  xiii.  21).  They  can  only  endure  for  a  while.  We  must  find  supplies  of  spiritual 
nourishment  if  we  are  to  persevere  unto  everlasting  life.  3.  The  root  lies  low.  The 
lordly  branches  of  the  cedar  wave  in  the  air  and  toss  themselves  proudly  against  the  sky, 
but  they  could  not  thus  thrive  without  the  lowly  root.  Souls  thrive  on  their  humbler 
experiences.  They  grow  strong  in  humility  and  trust,  4.  The  root  is  unseen.  It  lies 
in  dark  underground  regions.  He  is  but  a  shallow  being  whose  every  experience  lies  on 
the  surface.  "  The  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  him  "  (Ps.  xxv.  14).  The 
tree  will  die  if  the  root  be  laid  bare  to  the  sun.  Spiritual  experience  should  be  decently 
covered,  not  dragged  to  the  light  and  made  a  matter  of  common  talk.  Let  the  leaves 
snd  fruit  be  seen ;  keep  the  root  in  the  dark.  5.  The  root  must  press  down  to  deep 
sources  of  supply.  If  the  water  be  far  from  the  surface,  the  root  must  go  after  it.  "  The 
well  is  deep  "  (John  iv.  11) ;  then  the  water  will  be  all  the  more  cool  and  refreshing. 
It  is  good  to  press  down  to  the  deeper  experiences  of  the  Christian  life. 

II.  The  boot  kbbds  good  supplies  of  wateb.  1.  It  needs  water.  Trees  will  not 
grow  on  the  Sahara  Desert.  But  a  little  moisture  will  bring  vegetation.  Ou  the  rare 
occasion  of  rain  falling  in  the  desert  a  sudden  greenness  appears  on  the  sand ;  but  the 
minute  vegetable  growth  disappears  as  quickly  as  it  comes,  for  the  moisture  rapidly 
evaporates  in  the  heated  air.  Souls  need  the  living  waters.  They  need  these  waters 
because,  like  trees,  they  are  alive.  The  statue  does  not  droop  in  the  noonday  sun, 
because  it  is  of  stone,  dead  stone.  There  are  statuesque  souls  that  seem  to  thrive  with- 
out any  spiritual  supplies,  but  they  have  no  vitality  in  them.  They  are  too  stolid  to 
faint.  Fiery  souls  pine  and  wither  when  deprived  of  living  water.  2.  It  must  It 
within  reach  of  water.  It  is  nearly  useless  for  the  water  to  fall  on  the  leaves  if  the 
root  is  not  reached,  but  when  the  root  is  in  moisture,  though  the  leaves  are  covered 
with  dust  and  sadly  need  cleansing  showers,  the  tree  will  still  live.  We  can  bear  heat 
and  drought  in  the  world  if  the  soul's  hidden  roots  are  supplied  by  Divine  grace.  But 
we  do  not.  merely  require  superficial  refreshment ;  we  need  such  deep  soul-supplies  as 
shall  penetrate  to  the  roots  of  our  being.  For  this  purpose  the  roots  must  be  near  the 
water.  Cattle  can  go  down  to  the  brooks  and  drink,  but  trees  must  be  planted  in  moist 
soil.  It  is  customary  in  the  East  to  cut  channels  for  water  deflected  from  larger  streams, 
that  this  may  run  among  the  roots  of  trees.  The  best  trees  grow  by  rivers  of  water 
^Ps.  i.  3).  Souls  must  be  within  reach  of  Divine  supplies.  It  is  not  sufficient  that 
God  is  gracious  and  that  Christ  can  give  of  the  water  of  life.  We  must  be  near  the 
water  ourselves.  There  must  be  personal  appropriation.  This  is  only  possible  by 
means  of  that  spiritual  neighbourhood  which  is  sympathy.  The  use  of  "  means  of 
grace  " — ^prayers.  Christian  fellowship,  meditation  on  Scripture,  etc. — helps  to  rouse  that 
■ympathy,  and  bo  to  bring  the  roots  near  to  the  great  waters. 


158  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIBL.    [oh.  xxxi.  1— 18, 

Vers.  10 — 14. — Pride  humiliated.  The  proud  cedar  is  laid  low.  Assyria  falls.  The 
fate  of  this  great  empire  gives  warning  for  all  ages.  Magnificence  does  not  secure 
protection. 

I.  Pbidb  is  the  besettino  fault  op  wobldlt  8U00ES8.  Many  things  contribute 
to  the  excitement  of  this  passion.  1.  The  perception  of  the  success.  No  man  can  thrive 
in  a  worldly  way  without  perceiving  the  fact.  2.  The  consciousness  of  power.  The 
greatest  success  is  that  to  which  a  person  attains  by  his  own  efforts.  When  he  puts 
forth  energy  and  finds  it  fruitful,  he  is  naturally  tempted  to  think  much  of  himself. 
3.  The  attraction  of  the  superficial.  This  worldly  success  is  but  a  shallow  growth.  But 
lying  all  on  the  surface,  it  is  very  obvious  to  the  eye  and  appears  to  be  much  more 
important  than  it  really  is,  4.  The  flattery  of  others.  Directly  a  man  is  successful 
a  host  of  flatterers  arise  about  him,  some  greedily  expecting  crumbs  from  his  table, 
others  slavishly  adoring  his  worldly  greatness.    Now,  flattery  accepted  makes  for  pride, 

II.  The  pkidb  of  worldly  suocbss  is  a  qebat  sin  in  the  sight  op  God.  1.  It  is 
false.    The  success  is  not  so  glorious  a  thing  as  the  proud  man  imagines  it  to  be. 

Moreover,  it  is  not  purely  created  by  the  man  who  attains  to  it.  He  takes  many 
advantages  that  ave  given  to  him  by  Providence,  and  claims  them  as  of  his  own  making. 
2.  It  is  ungrateful.  The  gifts  of  Heaven  ai'e  held  as  though  their  owner  were  under  no 
obligation  to  hirii  -who  sent  them.  3.  It  is  impenitent.  The  proud  man  will  not  admit 
his  faults.  He  attempts  to  hide  his  sin  under  his  success.  4.  It  is  selfish.  Proud 
Assyria  crushed  her  subject-nations.  All  pride  is  a  glorification  of  self,  too  often  at  the 
expens6  of  others.  Pride  excludes  love.  5.  It  is  worldly.  This  pride  is  simply  con- 
cerned with  earthly  success.  It  shuts  out  all  contemplation  of  the  spiritual  and  the 
eternal.  Thus  it  beclouds  the  view  of  heaven  and  destroys  the  reverence  that  should 
be  felt  for  God ;  it  lowers  the  soul  while  it  exalts  self-esteem. 

III.  This  peidb  will  bkinq  its  own  downfall.  Because  the  cedar  has  lifted 
himself  up  in  height,  God  has  delivered  him  into  the  hands'of  the  mighty  one.  1.  ThU 
is  a  Divine  Judgment.  God  is  higher  than  the  highest.  He  has  power  over  the  greatest. 
No  pride  can  assert  itself  successfully  in  face  of  his  wrath.  At  a  touch  from  the  hand 
of  God  the  grandest  pretensions  crumble  to  dust.  Empires  topple  to  the  earth  at  a 
glance  from  the  Almighty.  2.  This  is  brought  about  through  the  direct  working  of 
pride.  It  acts  inwardly  on  the  proud  man  and  compasses  his  ruin.  The  height  and 
breadth  of  the  majestic  cedar  make  it  a  prey  to  the  whirlwind.  The  tall  tree  attracts 
the  lightning.  The  rich  man  is  waylaid  by  thieves,  who  neglect  the  poor  man  and  so 
leave  him  in  safety.  The  successful  man  is  an  object  of  envy.  But  pride  increases 
the  danger  tenfold.  It  destroys  sympathy  and  excites  animosity.  It  also  throws  a  man 
off  his  guard,  making  him  think  himself  safe  from  attack  or  strong  to  defend  himselt 
The  false  sense  of  security  which  it  induces  lays  a  snare  for  the  man  who  harbours  it. 

Our  safety  lies  in  the  opposite  direction — in  humility,  confession  of  sin,  and  trust  in 
the  pardoning,  protecting  grace  of  God. 

Ver.  18. — The  disappearance  of  Eden.  The  downfall  of  Assyria  is  compared  to  the 
falling  of  a  great  cedar,  and  the  shock  that  this  event  produces  among  the  nations  is 
likened  to  the  shaking  of  neighbouring  trees  when  the  cedar  is  laid  low.  The  cedar 
disappears,  as  Eden  has  disappeared.  The  poetic  image  suggests  more  than  that  the 
tree  lies  prone  on  the  ground.  It  pictures  it  sinking  into  the  earth  and  passing  out  of 
sight,  as  it  supposes  the  trees  of  Eden  to  have  done  before.  This  striking  idea  of  the 
old  Paradise  going  down  into  the  depths  of  the  earth — like  an  enchanted  garden  that 
sinks  at  the  magician's  wand,  and  leaves  odly  a  desolate  wilderness  on  its  site — seems 
to  be  referred  to  by  Ezekiel  as  a  prevalent  popular  notion. 

I.  Eden  has  disappeabed.  According  to  the  account  in  Genesis,  irian  was  expelled 
from  the  garden,  but  the  garden  itself  was  not  laid  waste  or  removed.  On  the  contrary, 
flaming  swords  kept  man  from  re-entering  its  coveted  precincts.  But  we  see  no  garden 
of  Eden.  Gecgraphers  search  in  vain  for  its  situation  on  the  map.  The  old  Eden  has 
vanished.  This  is  not  the  only  charm  of  the  world's  childhood  that  has  passed  away. 
Primitive  innocence  has  disappeared.  The  unfading  flowers  and  unblighted  fruit  of  the 
Eden  of  soul-purity  have  vanished  from  off  the  earth.  The  fresh  strong  imagination  of 
the  world's  childhood  has  passed  away.    Our  later  age  produces  no  '  Iliad,' 

II.  Eden  cannot  bb  kecovbeed.    The  fair  garden  that  has  descended  into  the  earth 


OH.  XXXI.  1—18.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHBT  EZEKIEL.  159 

will  never  rise  again.  Beneath  the  ground  the  miner  finds  vast  remains  of  primeval 
forests.  These  Edens  of  the  past  have  become  coal-fields.  Never  again  can  they  be 
green  and  fruitful  gardens.  Primitive  innocence  can  never  be  restored.  The  child-mind, 
once  lost,  cannot  be  had  back  agaia.    There  are  irreparable  losses. 

III.  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  better  than  the  oabden  of  Eden.  The  original 
Paradise  cannot  be  regained.  But  a  better  Paradise  is  created  by  Christ.  The  earthly 
Paradise  had  its  serpent  lurking  in  the  grass.  The  heavenly  is  more  safe,  more  fruitful, 
more  beautiful.  Yet,  though  it  is  heavenly,  i.e.  in  its  origin  and  in  its  character,  it  is 
for  the  earth — it  is  planted  in  this  world,  and  it  is  to  be  enjoyed  in  the  present  life. 
"  The  kingdom  of  God  is  within  you  "  (Luke  xvii.  21). 

IV.  A.  STILL   FAIKEB  EdbN  18  BBSBBVED  FOB   THIS    EABTH   IN    THE   FUTDEB.        The 

New  Testament  promises  a  millennium.  In  our  weary  disappointmoats  we  are  tempted 
to  quench  the  hope  of  tliat  glorious  future.  But  if  the  rule  and  truth  of  Christ  is  to 
spread  among  all  men,  the  blessed  time  must  come.  Then,  indeed,  the  dead  Eden  itself 
will  be  forgotten  and  despised  in  the  splendour  of  the  reign  ot  Christ. 

V.  Theee  is  a  Pabadise  fob  the  blessed  dead.  Jesus  promised  it  for  the 
crucified  robber.  "  To-day  shalt  thou  be  with  me  in  Paradise  "  (Luke  xxiiL  43).  Old 
Edeu  goes  down.  The  beauty  and  pomp  of  earth  descend.  But  the  spirits  of  Christ's 
people  ascend.  They  do  not  go  down  to  the  grave  with  their  bodies,  and  their  Paradise 
is  not  beneath,  but  above.    Heaven  is  the  eternal  Eden  of  souls. 

"  There  everlasting  spring  abides. 
And  never-withering  flowers," 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 9. — Z%e  greatness  of  Assyria,  The  Prophet  Ezekiel,  in  witnessing  against 
Pharaoh  and  Egypt,  inculcated  the  lesson  with  all  the  more  emphasis  by  the  help  of  an 
historic  parallel.  He  has  to  remind  Egypt  that,  great  as  is  her  power,  there  have  been 
powers  as  great  as  she  that  have  been  brought  low.  The  consequences  of  national 
pride  and  self-confidence,  the  downfall  and  destruction  of  the  mighty,  may  be  learnt 
by  considering  the  history  and  the  fate  of  Assyria.  References  to  the  kingdom  of 
which  Nineveh  was  the  magnificent  capital  are  all  the  more  interesting  and  intelligible 
to  us  because  of  the  explorations  which  in  our  own  time  have  brought  to  light  so  many 
monuments  of  Assyrian  greatness,  and  so  many  illustrations  of  the  social,  religious, 
and  military  habits  of  the  population  of  that  long-vanished  empire.  The  figure  under 
which  Ezekiel  sets  forth  the  grandeur  and  the  fall  of  Assyria  is  one  beautiful  in  itself, 
and  peculiarly  impressive  to  his  own  mind  and  to  those  who,  like  him,  were  acquainted 
with  the  scenery  of  Syria.  Under  the  similitude  of  a  lofty  and  spreading  cedar  of 
Lebanon,  the  prophet  exhibits  the  dignity,  the  strength,  the  vastness  and  beauty  of 
the  kingdom  which  nevertheless  perished,  as  the  monarch  of  the  forest  is  felled,  cast 
to  the  earth,  and  delivered  to  destruction.     The  figure  brings  before  us — 

I.  The  MAGNITUDE  OF  THE  AssTBXAN  KINGDOM.  The  noble  Cedar  of  lofty  stature 
and  spreading  boughs  is  a  striking  figure  of  the  great  world-empire  of  which  colossal 
vasttiess  is  considered  the  most  cliaracteristic  feature. 

II.  Its  pkospbbitt.  The  vigour  and  vitality  of  the  proud  cedar  of  Lebanon  ar» 
artistically  set  forth  by  the  poet-prophet.  "  The  ^yaters  nourished  him,  the  deep  made 
him  to  grow;  her  rivers  ran  round  about  her  plantation,"  etc.  So  the  great  state 
throve,  all  cironmstances  concurring  to  enhance  its  prosperity,  all  allies  and  tributaries 
furnishing  material  for  its  growth. 

III.  Its  stbength.  The  exalted  stature,  the  multiplied  boughs,  the  long  branches, 
are  signs  of  the  cedar's  strength;  the  storms  may  beat  upon  its  head, but  it  withstands 
the  fiercest  blast,  and  endnres  whilst  generation  after  generation  admire  its  grandeur, 
and  come  and  go.  The  Assyrian  empire  seemed  of  unassailable  power ;  the  sovereigns 
arrogated  to  themselves  an  unquestionable  authority;  men  thought  of  Nineveh — "  that 
great  city" — as  of  a  city  which  could  never  be  moved.' 

IV.  Its  beauty.  Pair  was  the  cedar  in  his  greatness,  in  the  length  of  his  branches, 
nor  was  any  tree  in  the  garden  of  God  like  unto  him  in  his  beauty.  Evidently  to  the 
mind  of  the  prophet  there  was  beauty  in  Assyria  such  as  no  choice  similitude  could 


160  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  BZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxxi.  1— 18. 

exaggerate.    This  may  not  be  so  obvious  to  us  as  the  assertion  of  Assyria's  strength ; 
but  so  it  seemed  to  the  mind  of  the  world  of  old. 

V.  Its  influence.  This  seems  to  be  the  idea  conveyed  by  the  sixth  verse :  "  All 
the  fowls  of  the  heaven  made  their  nests  in  his  boughs,  and  under  his  branches  did  all 
the  beasts  of  the  field  bring  forth  their  young,  and  under  his  shadow  dwelt  all  great 
nations."  A  power  so  commanding,  a  position  so  authoritative,  secured  the  homage  of 
lesser  states,  which  looked  up  to  Nineveh  for  protection,  and  were  ever  ready,  by  flattery 
or  by  service,  to  minister  to  her  greatness. 

VI.  Its  pre-bmini  noe.  The  stature  of  the  cedar  of  Lebanon  was  exalted  above  all 
the  trees  of  the  field.  Even  so,  during  its  palmy  days,  Nineveh  was  the  leader,  the 
chief  of  the  nations.  It  was  long  before  that  supremacy  was  questioned  and  disputed. 
Yet  the  day  came,  and  Assyria  fell. 

Application.  (1)  A  great  nation  enjoying  prosperity  and  wielding  influence  is 
especially  bound  to  remember  whence  its  power  is  derived ;  and  (2)  to  cultivate  the 
conviction  and  sense  of  responsibility  for  the  use  made  of  gifts  and  influence  entrusted 
to  it.    From  God  all  comes,  and  to  God  the  account  must  be  rendered. — ^T. 

Vers.  10 — ^13. — The  penalty  of  pride.  The  description  of  Assyria's  power  and  glory 
is  introduced  by  the  prophet  in  order  to  give  point  to  the  account  now  given  of  that 
nation's  tragic  fate.  The  more  majestic  the  cedar,  the  more  awful  its  downfall,  and  the 
more  affecting  the  desulation  thus  wrought.  For  the  warning  of  Egypt  the  prophet 
brings  to  memory  the  fate  of  one  of  the  mightiest  and  most  famous  of  the  kingdoms  of 
the  East. 

I.  The  offence.  This  lay,  not  in  the  greatness  and  the  might  of  the  nation,  which 
were  appointed  by  Divine  providence,  but  in  the  misuse  of  the  position  attained.  The 
language  used  by  Ezekiel  concerning  Assyria  is  very  instructive  as  to  Assyria's  sin : 
"His  heart  is  lifted  up  in  his  height."  It  is  not  the  gifts  bestowed  in  which  the 
ofienoe  is  to  be  Bought,  but  it  is  in  the  erroneous  view  taken  by  the  possessor,  and  in  his 
abuse  of  those  gifts.  When  we  read  of  the  heart  being  lifted  up,  we  are  led  to  under- 
stand that  the  nation  took  credit  to  itself  for  its  position  and  acquirements,  and  for  the 
influence  thus  enjoyed.  In  fact,  as  our  Lord  has  expressly  taught  us,  the  heart  is  the 
seatand  the  source  of  all  sin.  Especially  apparent  is  this  in  the  case  of  the  gifts  of 
national  exaltation,  wealth,  and  military  power ;  when  the  hearts  of  king  and  of  people 
are  flUed  with  pride,  self-confidence,  and  self-glorification. 

II.  The  chastisement.  The  tree  was  smitten  and  felled  by  the  hand  of  the 
stranger.  A  foreign  foe,  a  rival  nation,  was  employed  to  humble  the  pride  of  Assyria. 
The  mighty  one  of  the  nations  (by  which  we  are  to  understand  the  King  of  the 
Babylonians)  dealt  with  Assyria's  pretensions  to  supremacy,  and  confounded  them. 
"  Strangers,  the  terrible  of  the  nations,  have  cut  him  off."  No  greater  calamity  could 
have  befallen  the  proud  and  boastful  nation ;  no  more  unexpected  disaster ! 

m.  The  btjin.  The  figurative  language  used  to  describe  this,  though  succinct,  is 
conclusive  and  appalling :  "  Upon  the  mountains  and  in  all  the  valleys  his  branches 
are  fallen,  and  his  boughs  are  broken  by  all  the  water-courses  of  the  land,"  etc.  The 
description  affirms  of  the  conquered  Assyria  :  1.  Humiliation ;  for  the  lofty  is  laid  low. 
2.  Desertion :  "  All  the  people  of  the  earth  have  gone  down  from  his  shadow,  and  have 
left  him."  Those  who  praised  and  flattered  Assyria  in  prosperity,  in  the  time  of 
adversity  forsake  and  flout  her.  3.  The  ruined  nation  becomes  the  prey  of  other 
peoples,  who  seek  to  profit  by  its  fall. — T. 

Ver.  14. — The  lesson  for  all  nations.  Doubtless  the  immediate  aim  of  the  downfall 
of  such  a  nation  as  Assyria  has  respect  to  the  people  and  their  rulers,  upon  whom  the 
judgment  comes.  But  there  is  a  universal  lesson  intended  for  the  benefit  of  all  peoples 
throughout  all  time. 

1.  God  inculcates  moral  lessons  by  the  words  uttered  by  his  sebvants.  His 
law-givers,  such  as  Moses ;  his  prophets,  such  as  Ezekiel ;  his  priests  and  scribes,  such 
■  as  Ezra,  have  messages  of  instruction,  encouragement,  warning  (as  the  case  may  be), 
for  all  mankind  in  every  age.  And  God  summons  the  children  of  men  to  give  heed  to 
his  servants  when  they  utter  their  messages,  prefacing  them  with  the  assertion, "  "Hius 
saith  the  Lord." 


OH.  xsxi.  1— 18.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  161 

II.  God  enfoeobs  these  yerbaii  lessons  by  facts,  and  bspboiallt  bt  the  event* 
OF  HiSTOBT.  In  such  catastrophes  as  the  downfall  of  Assyria,  as  the  siege  of  Jerusalem, 
as  the  destruction  of  Tyre,  as  the  humiliation  of  Egypt,  the  eternal,  righteous,  and 
omnipotent  Buler  of  mankind  speaks  to  his  subjects  with  an  authoritative  and  unmii- 
takable  voice.  Facts  embody  principles.  Historical  incidents  elucidate  moral  lawi. 
Judgments  enforce  commands. 

III.  The  wonder  of  men's  insensibilitt  to  these  lessons.  It  might  be  expected 
that  those  upon  whom  the  message  of  the  herald  produces  no  impression  would  be 
loused  from  their  apathy  by  the  stirring  incidents  of  political  change  and  national 
disaster.  But,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  multitudes  are  unaffected  even  by  the  downfall  of  a 
city,  the  revolution  of  a  government,  the  displacement  of  a  dynasty,  the  transference 
of  the  balance  of  power  among  the  nations.  Is  not  this  in  accordance  with  Christ's 
own  words,  "  If  they  hear  not  Moses  and  the  prophets,  neither  will  they  be  persuaded, 
though  one  rose  from  the  dead  "  ? 

IV.  The  folly  and  penalty  of  indifference  to  these  lessons.  They  who  give 
heed  to  Divine  counsels,  who  profit  by  Divine  admonitions,  deliver  their  soul  in  the 
day  of  trouble  and  temptation.  But  they  who  hear  unmoved,  incredulous,  vmrespon- 
sive,  the  solemn  and  faithful  appeals  of  God,  uttered  as  with  a  voice  of  thunder  in  the 
«vents  that  befall  the  nations  of  mankind,  by  their  conduct  aggravate  their  guilt  and 
pen  their  own  condemnation. 

V.  The  wisdom  of  immediate  attention  to  these  lessons,  with  the  pbopeb 
FBinTB  OF  SUCH  ATTENTION  IN  REPENTANCE  AND  OBEDIENCE.  The  parable  was  spoken, 
the  providential  interposition  was  recounted, "  To  the  end  that  none  of  all  the  trees  by 
the  waters  exalt  themselves,"    "  He  that  hath  an  ear,  let  him  hear." — T. 

Vers.  15 — 17. — Mowming  cmd  lamentation.  The  description  here  given  of  the 
distress  and  mourning  which  took  place  upon  the  occasion  of  the  downfall  of  Assyri* 
is  very  poetical,  and  might  appear  exaggerated  were  we  not  able,  by  the  aid  of 
Imagination,  to  place  ourselves  in  the  position  of  an  observer  at  that  critical  epoch  in 
the  history  of  the  world.  It  was  necessary  that  Pharaoh  and  his  people  should  be 
«nabled  to  enter  into  the  fate  of  Assyria  in  order  that  they  might  learn  the  warning 
intended  to  be  conveyed  by  that  awful  event.  It  was  the  aim  of  Ezekiel  to  portray 
Assyria  in  all  her  glory  and  in  all  her  desolation,  in  order  to. impress  upon  the 
Egyptians  the  lesson  which  at  that  conjuncture  it  was  so  important  for  them  to  lay  to 
heart.  The  mourning  raised  over  the  one  kingdom  might  speedily  be  required  by  the 
condition  of  the  other. 

I.  The  OA0SE  of  hodrnino.  The  immediate  cause  was  the  disaster  which  befell 
Assyria  and  the  allied  and  dependent  nations.  But  to  those  who  looked  beneath  the 
surface  there  was  a  deep-seated  cause  in  the  sin  by  which  the  mighty  kingdom  and  its 
/ulers  brought  upon  themselves  a  fate  so  calamitous  and  irreversible.  Wherever  there 
is  lamentation  it  may  be  suspected  that  the  ultimate  explanation  of  it  is  sin. 

II.  The  moubnbbs.  The  prophet  speaks  of  the  mighty  rivers  and  the  terrible  ocean, 
of  the  majestic  trees  of  the  forest,  as  taking  part  in  this  lamentation.  The  nations 
shook  at  the  sound  of  Assyria's  fall,  v^hen  it  went  down  to  Hades.  The  literal  fact  is 
this — that  all  spectators  with  intelligence  to  understand  what  had  occurred,  and  with 
A  nature  susceptible  of  feeling,  viewed  the  calamity  with  appreciative  pity.  It  was  a 
catastrophe  never  to  be  forgotten,  and  the  compassion  of  those  who  witnessed  it  rose 
to  sublimity. 

III.  The  extent  and  vastness  of  the  moubnino.  This  is  evident  from  the  fact 
of  the  Divine  intervention.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God,  I  caused  a  mourning."  There 
could  then  be  nothing  petty  or  trivial  in  it.  Originating  in  the  counsels  of  the 
Eternal,  and  diffused  throughout  the  earth,  and  reaching  to  the  gates  of  Hades,  this 
lamentation  was  worthy  of  the  event.  And  it  certainly  justifies  us  in  making  our  own 
the  sorrows,  not  of  individuals  alone,  but  of  nations  and  of  mankind.  It  is  a  Divine 
exercise  so  to  sympathize.    "  In  all  their  afl^ictions  he  is  afflicted." 

IV.  The  profit  of  mournino.  We  are  assured  upon  high  authority  that  "  it  it 
better  to  go  to  the  house  of  mourning  than  to  the  house  of  feasting."  It  is  a  whole- 
some and  chastening  discipline  of  the  soul.  To  mourn  for  our  own  faults  is  morally 
necessary.    "  They  that  lack  time  to  mourn  lack  time  to  mend."    But  the  case  before 

ezekiel — n,  X 


162  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  BZBKIEL.    [oh.  xxxi.  1— 18. 

the  reader  of  this  passage  is  that  of  mourning  for  the  sins  and  the  chastisement  of 
humanity  generally,  and  especially  of  the  nations  with  whose  experience  we  are 
personally  conversant.  A  common  sorrow  binds  hearts  together,  and  enables  men  to 
realize  their  community.  Grief  over  sin  and  its  consequences  is  no  inconsiderable  pro- 
tection against  participation  in  the  evil  lamented. — T. 

Yen  18. — OreatnesB  no  exemption  from  retribution.  The  argument  of  Ezekiel  is 
clear.  His  appeal  is  to  Egypt.  Having  related  the  fall  of  Assyria  the  great,  he  turoi 
to  Pharaoh  and  to  his  people,  and  reminds  them  that  the  fate  which  overtook  Assyria 
is  not  impossible  to  them.  Greatness  is  manifestly  no  security  against  judgment.  It 
is  no  sure  defence  against  the  arms  of  men,  and  no  defence  at  ajl  against  the  judgments 
of  the  almigbty  Buler  of  mankind. 

L  G-BEATNESS  MAY  AND  OFTEN  DOES  SEOUBB  THB  ADUIBATION  AKD  ETEH  TBI 
ADULATION  OF  MEN. 

n.  But  eabtbly  qbeatnesb  is  as  nothino  in  the  sight  of  God. 

III.  It  is  not  gbbatness,  but  eightbousness  of  action  and  faithfulnbss  to 

its  vocation,  which  18  A  NATION'S  TBUE  BEOUBITT. 

IV.  A  TIME  OF  PEOBATION  COMES  TO  EVEBT  NATION,  WHEN  DNFAITHFDLNBSS  AND 
BBLF-CONFIDENCE   MEET   WITH  THEIB   DESEBTS  IN  CHASTISEMENT   AND   HT7MIIiIATI0N. 

Application.  Greatness  is  best  shown  in  (1)  subjection  to  the  King  of  all,  and 
(2)  service  and  help  rendered  to  the  feebler  and  less  favoured.— T. 

Vers,  1 — 18. — A  terrible  perdition.  Precious  lessons  can  be  learnt  &om  Gk>d's  treat- 
ment of  others.  As  in  others'  conduct  we  may  find  a  mirror  of  our  own,  so  in  others' 
chastisement  we  may  find  a  reflected  image  of  our  own  deserts.  The  principles  on  which 
God  acts  are  those  of  eternal  immutability.  Therefore  we  may  learn  with  certainty 
what  will  sooner  or  later  happen.  On  the  part  of  God,  it  is  an  act  of  genuine  kindness 
that  he  holds  up  the  perdition  of  one  to  deter  others  from  sin.  Thus  he  wonld  turn 
the  curse  into  a  blessing — retribution  into  a  gospel. 

L  We  have  HEBE  GBEAT  PBiviLEQE.  The  Assyrian  monarch  is  compared  to  a 
"cedar  in  Lebanon,  with  fair  branches,  with  shadowing  foliage,  and  of  high  stature." 
1.  Ee  enjoyed  a  position  of  superior  elevation.  What  a  cedar  of  Lebanon  was,  compared 
to  other  trees,  the  Assyrian  king  was  in  respect  to  other  men.  He  possessed  superior 
qualities.  Possibly  he  had  larger  capacity  of  mind,  and  had  larger  opportunities  of 
furnishing  it.  Certainly  he  had  external  advantages  such  as  no  others  enjoyed.  He 
enjoyed  an  eminence  above  other  men,  yea  more,  above  other  kings.  2.  He  received 
generous  treatment  from  Ood.  "The  waters  made  him  great."  An  unfailing  stream 
from  the  heavenly  fount  irrigated  his  roots.  Divested  of  poetical  form,  it  means  that 
God  sustained  body  and  soul  by  hourly  supplies  of  good,  though  his  band  was  unseen. 
If  his  bodily  strength  did  not  languish,  it  was  owing  to  a  constant  stream  of  vitality 
from  God.  If  the  capacity  of  his  mind  was  maintained,  it  was  due  to  the  Divine 
succour.  Substantial  blessing,  through  invisible  channels,  was  incessantly  flowing  into 
his  roots.  He  was  entirely  dependent  on  the  kindness  of  another.  3.  He  had  a 
prosperous  growth.  As  the  result  of  so  much  blessing,  he  grew  and  prospered.  In  him- 
self, in  his  kingdom,  in  his  reputation,  he  flourished.  BUs  people  were  loyal ;  his  army 
was  valiant ;  his  empire  grew.  Over  every  province,  over  every  department  of  his 
government,  the  sunshine  of  Heaven  rested.  All  that  a  king's  heart  could  desire  he 
had.  He  was  the  envied  among  contemporary  kings :  "  the  cynosure  of  neighbouring 
eyes."  4.  Large  influence  was  within  his  reach.  "  All  the  fowls  of  heaven  made  their 
nests  in  his  boughs.  .  .  .  Under  his  shadow  dwelt  all  great  nations."  Such  a  tree  was 
not  simply  an  image  of  beauty,  the  delight  of  the  human  eye ;  it  was  useful  to  various 
forms  of  life.  It  was  a  source  of  blessing.  So  with  the  King  of  Assyria.  His  strong 
government  was  a  protection  to  all  classes  of  the  people.  It  was  a  bulwark  against 
invasion.  It  was  a  shield  for  industry,  investigation,  and  commerce.  The  rich  and  the 
poor  could  dwell  seciprely.  All  grades  of  his  subjects  could  pursue  their  occupations 
without  fear  of  molestation.  Greater  influence  still  he  might  have  exerted.  He  could 
have  fostered  learning,  encouraged  many  arts,  established  peace  among  surrounding 
nations,  diffused  joy  in  a  myriad  homes,  lifted  up  the  nation  to  a  higher  life.  Such 
varied  usefulness  is  a  fountain  of  bliss. 


OH.  XXXI.  1—18.]     THE  BOOK  OP  THK  PROPHET  BZEKIEL.  163 

n.  Great  folly.  "  His  heart  is  lifted  up.  in  his  height."  1.  Self-adulation.  To 
admire  one's  self  so  as  to  forget  our  Divine  Benefactor  is  both  foolishness  and  sin.  This 
is  to  cheat  God  of  his  due.  If  robbery  is  criminal  anywhere,  it  is  specially  criminal 
when  directed  against  God.  To  interpose  ourselves  between  God  and  his  proper  worship 
is  grievous  sip.  2.  False  ground  for  admiration.  To  find  satisfaoiion  in  external 
rank  or  elevation  is  a  sore  mistake.  Neither  wealth,  nor  station,  nor  anything  outside 
ourselves  is  a  proper  ground  for  solid  satisfaction.  We  should  find  our  chief  delight  in 
real  excellence — in  likeness  to  God.  Else  we  divert  our  minds  from  substantial  good, 
and  are  taken  up  with  gaud  and  tinsel.  3.  Self -trust.  Pride  arrogates  to  itself  qualities 
and  possessions  which  do  not  belong  to  it.  It  is  a  condition  of  mind  we  may  call "  self- 
inflation."  Self-trust  is  ruinous,  because  it  is  reliance  upon  a  broken  reed.  Human 
strength,  apart  from  God,  is  sheer  frailty.  No  figure  can  exaggerate  its  feebleness.  It 
is  a  vapour,  a  shadow,  a  mere  cobweb.  Man  is  strong  only  when  afBliated  to  God. 
Therefore  self-trust  is  self-deception,  is  suicide. 

III.  A  GBEAT  DOWNFALL.  Carrying  out  the  harmony  of  the  figure,  there  is:  1. 
Mutilation.    "  His  boughs  are  broken."     So  pitiful  is  God,  that  he  does  not  at  once 

.destroy.  He  visits  with  partial  chastisement,  in  the  hope  that  repentnnce  and  amend- 
ment may  be  the  result.  If  he  can  spare  from  destructic  n,  he  wiU.  This  mutilation 
of  his  beauty  was  a  lesson  he  ought  to  have  taken  to  heart.  If  a  higher  being  than 
he  could,  against  his  will,  despoil  him  of  some  of  his  members,  could  he  not  despoil  him 
of  all?_  A  wise  man  would  have  halted,  reflected,  turned  over  a  new  leaf.  This 
mutilation  represents  dismemberment,  loss  of  territory.  This  outward  mutilation 
indicates  diminution  of  vitality :  "  Grey  hairs  were  here  and  there  upon  him,  though 
he  knew  it  not."  2.  Scattering.  "Upon  the  mountains  and  in  all  the  valleys  his 
branches  are  fallen."  Memorials  of  this  ruined  cedar  were  distributed  far  and  wide. 
Every  stream  bore  them  on.  Every  storm  of  wind  scattered  them.  So  in  the  time  of 
a  nation's  misfortune,  fair-weather  allies  easily  desert.  As  prosperity  brings  many 
Buperflcial  friends,  so  adversity  scatters  them.  At  such  a  time  a  hundred  foes  will 
■tart  out  of  ambush  to  annoy,  if  they  cannot  injure.  When  God  becomes  our  foe,  our 
resources  speedily  waste  like  snow  at  midday.  3.  Degradation.  "  Upon  his  ruin 
shall  all  the  fowls  of  heaven  remain,  and  all  the  beasts  of  the  field  shall  be  upon  his 
branches."  In  other  words,  he  shall  be  treated  with  contempt.  Those  before  whom  he 
has  paraded  his  superiority,  shall,  in  turn,  triumph  over  him.  This  conduct  is  to  many 
a  sweet  revenge.  It  gives  to  them  a  conviction  that  they  too  have  some  hidden  merit 
which  now  shall  come  to  light.  This  degradation  in  the  scale  of  being,  in  the  scale  of 
society,  is  a  bitter  element  in  God's  penalty.  "  He  that  exalteth  himself  shall  be 
abased."  The  pendulima  that  has  swung  too  far  in  one  direction  will  presently  swing 
to  the  other  extreme.  4.  Commiseration.  "  I  caused  Lebanon  to  mourn  for  him,  and 
all  the  trees  of  the  field  fainted  for  him."  The  fall  of  a  flourishing  king  naturally  causes 
consternation  and  concern  in  every  palace.  The  self-security  of  others  is  rudely  shaken. 
Every  throne  on  earth  seems  to  totter  with  the  great  vibration.  Then,  in  noble  minds, 
the  sense  of  brotherhood  appears.  A  tender  tie,  though  often  unseen,  runs  through  the 
human  race.  The  fall  of  one  is  a  lesser  fall  to  all.  We  all  have  a  common  interest  in 
the  fortune  and  destiny  of  humanity.  6.  Diabolic  trivmph.  "  All  the  trees  of  Eden  .  ,  . 
shall  be  comforted  in  the  nether  parts  of  the  earth."  This  sense  of  exultation  over  the 
fall  of  another — whether  it  be  latent  or  expressed — is  base  and  devilish.  Hence  we 
learn  that  the  feelings  of  men,  in  the  state  of  Hades,  is  not  improved  by  suffering ;  the 
exact  reverse.  Intelligent  natures  degenerate  in  hell.  "  Evil  men  wax  worse  and  worse." 
Some,  too,  to  whom  the  king,  in  prosperity,  rendered  signal  service,  will  be  disposed 
to  taunt  him  in  the  day  of  his  fall.    An  ingrate  becomes  the  blackest  of  demons. 

IV.  A  GBBAT  LESSON.  "  To  the  end  that  none  of  all  the  trees  by  the  waters  exalt 
themselves  for  their  height."  The  terrible  fall  of  the  Assyrian  king  is  used  as  a  lesson 
and  a  warning  to  Pharaoh.  God's  judgments  are  stepping-stones  to  mercy.  Over  the 
most  lurid  cloud  he  flings  the  rainbow  of  his  kindness.  The  darkest  events  may 
become  to  us  fountains  of  blessing,  if  wo  are  willing  to  gain  the  good.  Thus  God  exhibits 
the  strength  and  fulness  of  his  love.  If  by  any  method,  by  any  example,  he  can  win 
us  back  from  evil  courses,  he  will.  Marvellous  is  the  obduracy  of  the  human  heart 
that  will  not  yield  to  the  charms  of  infinite  love !  The  death  of  one  may  become  life 
to  many.     God's  aims  are  magnificent  and  far-reaching.      By-and-by,  he  shall  have 


164  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET   EZBKIEL.    [oh.  xxxi.  i— 18. 

the  praise  which  is  his  rightful  due.  If  with  such  displays  of  Divine  kindness  mun 
are  not  ashamed  of  their  sin,  they  must  become  more  hardened  and  more  depraved  thaa 
over.    "  My  soul,  come  not  thoa  into  their  secret! " — ^D. 

Ver.  7. — The  source  of  ttrength  and  heauty.  The  "great  power"  of  Assyria  is 
likened  in  this  parable  to  a  noble  cedar  planted  in  (or  transferred  to)  the  garden  of 
Eden,  raising  its  head  high  above  all  the  other  trees  in  that  "garden  of  God;  "  its 
eminence  and  its  beauty  being  largely  due  to  the  fact, that  it  was  so  well  watered  at  its 
roots,  that  "  the  waters  nourished  him,  the  deep  made  him  to  grow ;  her  rivers  ran 
about  her  plantations  "  fver.  4,  Bevised  Version) ;  and  that  "  his  root  was  hy  many 
loaters  "  (Revised  Version),  Here  we  have  a  picture  of  strength  showing  itself  beautiful, 
extending  its  influence  far  and  wide,  owing  everything  to  the  hidden  source  below. 

L  Gbbat  strength.  The  greatness  of  Assyria  was  the  greatness  of  national  power. 
We  are  accustotned  to  speak  of  the  greater  nations  of  the  earth  as  the  "  great  powers." 
As  history  has  shown  us,  such  "  powers  "  have  often  proved  to  be  little  better  than 
weakness  when  the  hour  of  trial  came ;  still,  in  appearance,  in  size,  in  equipment,  in 
•minence,  or  in  reputation,  they  have  been  comparatively  great  and  strong.  Greatness, 
as  we  recognize  it,  is  seen  in  national  position,  in  physical  strength  and  skill,  in  mental 
grasp  and  literary  accomplishment,  in  art  and  science,  in  social  rank,  in  statesmanship, 
in  character  and  moral  weight.  In  any  one  of  these  spheres  a  community  or  a  man 
may  be  "  great "  in  the  sight  of  its  (his)  contemporaries. 

II.  Gbeatnbss  showing  itself  taib.  "  He  was  fair  [or, '  beautiful ']  in  his  greatness." 
Greatness  may  be  either  (1)  imposing,  compelling  the  homage  of  all  who  behold  it. 
Instantly  commanding  their  regard  and  their  tribute ;  or  it  may  be  (2)  admircAle,  such 
that  the  longer  it  is  watched  by  observant  and  critical  eyes  the  more  it  is  esteemed  and 
the  higher  it  is  prized;  or  it  may  be  (3)  attractive,  of  such  gracious  and  winning 
mien  that  every  one  is  drawn  towards  it  and  desires  to  come  into  closer  association  with 
It.  There  ii  much  "  greatness,"  or  what  commonly  passes  for  such,  that  is  distinctly 
unbeautifuL  Possibly,  indeed,  it  may  be  imposing  or  attractive  to  minds  that  are  easily 
Imposed  upon  or  readily  captivated ;  but  it  is  devoid  of  all  that  is  reaUy  excellent,  and 
no  true  eye,  that  can  distinguish  the  good  from  the  pretentious,  wovdd  call  it  fair.  All 
beauty  that  is  worthy  of  the  name,  and  the  only  excellency  that  will  last,  is  that  which 
commends  itself  to  the  mind  of  the  heart-searching  Truth — beauty  on  which  purity  can 
look  with  pleasure,  and  which  love  can  regard  with  genuine  delight. 

III.  Extending  its  influence.  One  of  its  characteristics  is  "the  length  of  its 
branches."  It  is  the  province  of  greatness  to  make  itself  felt  on  every  hand,  just  as  a 
noble  tree  throws  out  its  branches  far  around  its  stem.  This  it  may  do  deliberately  and 
determinately ;  or  it  may  do  this  unconsciously,  as  the  simple  and  inevitable  result  of 
its  own  nature  and  life.  The  extension  of  our  influence  should  be  regarded  by  us,  not 
as  a  right,  but  as  a  duty  and  a  privilege.  So  far  as  we  can  make  ourselves  felt,  and 
inasmuch  as  we  believe  ourselves  to  be  the  possessors  and  exponents  of  what  is  right 
and  true,  we  should  seek,  even  diligently,  to  "  spread  the  branches  "  of  our  power  as  far 
as  they  will  go.  We  should  therefore  shun  all  acts  and  extirpate  all  habits  that  tend  to 
dwarf  these  branches,  to  diminish  the  influence  we  might  be  and  should  be  exerting. 

IV.  The  boueob  of  strength  and  beautt.  This  great  cedar  was  what  it  was 
because  "  its  root  was  by  great  [many]  waters."  It  was  altoays  nourished  from  below. 
It  drew  its  strength  from  its  roots,  and  its  roots  found  their  resources  in  the  abundant 
streams  that  never  failed  to  water  and  to  refresh  them.  Strength  and  beauty  grow  out 
of  character,  moral  and  spiritual,  as  the  leaves  and  the  branches  and  the  stem  grow  out  of 
the  roots  of  the  tree.  And  character  must  be  fed  by  the  living  streams  of  truth  that 
flow  in  the  garden  of  God ;  not  any  one  truth,  nor  yet  one  set  or  class  of  truths,  but  "  all 
the  truth "  (John  xvi.  13)  which  we  are  able  to  receive :  our  root  is  to  be  "  by  many 
waters."  We  must,  if  we  would  be  the  symmetrical  and  fruit-bearing  tree  we  should 
aspire  to  become,  take  care  that  mind  and  heart  are  well  nourished  by  all  the  truth  we 
can  gather  from  the  great  Teacher,  or  glean  from  those  who  spoke  in  his  Name.  Nor 
must  we  forget  that,  beside  the  root  drinking  in  the  moisture  below,  there  are  the 
myriad  leaves  drinking  in  the  air  and  sunshine  above.  We  must  open  all  the  leaves  oi 
our  nature  to  receive  the  warm  sunshine  of  the  love  of  God,  and  to  admit  all  the  direct 
Divine  influences  which  the  Spirit  of  God  will  breathe  upon  us, — 0. 


OH.  xxxL  1— 18.]     THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIBL.  165 

Vers.  8,  9. — "  The  garden  of  Ood,"  "The  garden  of  God,"  itanding,  as  it  does,  fnr 
the  ideal  region  in  which  man  in  his  perfection  was  placed  when  God  was  "  well  pleased 
with  "  him,  may  he  taken  as  a  picture  of  human  society  itself  as  it  once  was  for  however 
hrief  a  period,  and  as  it  shall  he  again  when  the  purposes  of  the  Bedeemer  are  fulfilled. 

I.  A  BEOION  ABOUNSiNa  IN  FBUITFCLNESS.  In  the  first  garden  of  God  there  grew 
every  tree  that  was  "good  for  food."  The  ideal  state  of  human  society  is  one  in  which 
all  conceivahle  fruitfulness  will  he  found ;  there  will  be  ready  for  the  hand  of  th< 
Husbandman  the  fruits  of  faith,  of  devotion,  of  love,  of  sacred  joy,  of  helpfulness,  oi 
calm  contentment,  of  happy  and  unquestioning  obedience.  From  all  hearts  and  lives 
these  fair  fruits  will  spring. 

II.  A  SCENE  OF  EXQUISITE  BEAUTY.  "The  garden  of  God"  must  be,  quite 
independently  of  all  reference  to  Eden,  a  place  of  perfect  beauty.  Its  trees  and  shrubs, 
its  herbs  and  flowers,  its  lawns  and  paths  must  together  present  the  appearance  of 
perfect  pleasantness  to  the  eye.  Such  should,  such  (one  day)  shall  our  humau  societies, 
our  communities,  and  our  Churches  be;  they  will  be  scenes  where  there  is  every  forni 
of  human  loveliness.  There  must  be  no  unnatural  monotony.  As  in  our  gardens  we 
like  to  have  vegetation  of  every  possible  variety  of  size  and  shape  and  hue,  so  in 
"  the  garden  of  God  "  shall  there  be  every  manifestation  of  moral  worth,  of  spiritual 
beauty.  One  will  not  say  to  another,  "  There  is  no  need  of  your  particular  excellence ; " 
but  each  will  rejoice  in  the  manifold  graces  which  are  to  be  seen  on  every  hand. 

III.  The  sphere  op  happy  oultuee.  Our  first  parents  were  placed  in  Eden  "  to 
dress  it  and  to  keep  it."  Even  "  the  garden  of  God "  requires  attention,  planting, 
culture.  So,  certainly,  does  the  most  refined  and  Christianized  human  society.  There 
maybe  much  knowledge  and  there  maybe  excellent  habits  within  it, but  it  will'alwaya 
need  careful  and  diligent  culture — much  seed-sowing ;  some  weeding ;  some  pruning 
and  occasional  transplanting.  We  may  learn :  1.  That  it  is  better  to  be  the  humblest 
herb  in  the  garden  of  God  than  the  stateliest  cedar  outside  it;  better  be  utterly 
obscure  in  the  right  place  than  very  prominent  in  the  wrong  one.  2.  That  each 
particular  flower  in  the  garden  of  God  lends  its  own  fragrance  to  the  air ;  the  garden 
would  not  he  complete  without  it.  3.  That  not  only  does  it  behove  us  to  be  as  a 
flower  in  the  garden  of  God,  but  it  also  befits  us  to  be  as  a  gardener  extending  the 
grounds,  or  planting  or  tending  within  its  bounds. — 0. 

Vers.  10 — 18. — The  spectacle  of  fallen  greatness.  This  very  beautiful  parable  is 
suggestive  of  many  things.  The  latter  verses  of  the  chapter  bring  the  Divine  meaning 
into  full  view.    By  the  fact  of  the  prophecy  itself,  we  are  reminded  of — 

I.  The  delusion  to  which  gbeatness  is  subject;  viz.  that  of  ima^ning  that 
it  is  invulnerable  and  irremovable.  The  strong  kingdom  says,  "What  power  will 
touch  me  to  hurt  me?  "  The  strong  man  says,  "What  misfortune  will  overtake,  what 
enemy  will  prevail  against  me?  "  (see  Fs.  xlix.  11).  It  is  in  the  very  nature  of  human 
exaltation  to  become  foolishly  assured  of  its  own  security,  and  to  defy  the  assaults  of 
time  and  change. 

II.  The  pbeqnant  lesson  of  histoby.  Egypt  was  now  to  learn  of  Assyria ;  to 
consider  how  surpassingly  great  she  had  been  in  her  prime  (vers.  1 — 9),  and  to  reflect 
upon  the  utter  humiliation  to  which  she  had  been  condemned  in  the  retribntive  pro- 
vidence of  Gtod.  We  may  now  learn  of  Egypt  herself,  to  whom  this  lesson  was  addressed, 
and  also  of  Macedonia,  of  Greece,  of  Rome,  of  Spain,  etc.,  that  a  nation  may  tower  high 
and  far  above  the  others,  like  this  parabolic  cedar  (ver.  6)  above  the  trees  of  the 
garden,  and  yet  be  discrowned,  be  levelled  to  the  very  dust.  And  not  only  the  lofty 
nation,  but  the  ancient  family,  the  proud  dynasty,  the  titled  and  wealthy  individual. 

III.  The  penalty  op  unrighteousness.  It  is  certain  that  no  kingdom  or  "power" 
of  any  kind  will  very  long  outlive  its  purity,  its  virtue,  its  simplicity.  Two  things 
determine  its  doom.  1.  God  will  punish  its  pride  (see  vers.  10, 11, 18).  2.  Iniquity 
begets  strife,  folly,  inward  corruption,  weakness;  and  this  must  end,  in  time,  in 
disaster  and  ruin.  The  seeds  of  death  are  already  sown  when  power,  either  in  the 
aggregate  or  in  the  individual  man,  gives  way  to  iniquity.  Without  any  extraordinary 
means,  by  God  letting  his  righteous  laws  do  their  constant  work,  such  a  one  is  "  driven 
away  for  his  wickedness"  (ver.  11).  And  the  end  of  evil  is  nakedness  and  desertioi^ 
emptiness  and  misery  (ver.  12).    Incidental  truths  are  here  portrayed,  viz. — 


166 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  EZEKIBL.    [oh.  xxxii.  1— 32. 


IV.  The  unebliablbnbss  of  huuan  pbops.  Ver.  12,  "All  the  people  of  the 
land  have  gone  from  his  shade,  and  have  left  him."  There  are  noble  souls  that  will 
cleave  to  the  sinking  cause  or  to  the  failing  man  just  because  it  is  sinking,  because  he 
is  failing.  But  their  name  is  not  legion ;  these  are  not  the  rule,  but  the  exception. 
When  the  day  of  decadence  comes,  and  the  hour  when  the  house  is  likely  to  fall,  then 
expect  those  who  have  lived  in  the  shadow  of  it  to  leave  it  to  its  fate.  Nay,  there  will 
be  found  many  of  those  who  in  the  day  of  its  strength  enjoyed  its  hospitaUty  that  on 
the  night  of  its  adversity  will  find  themselves  comfortable  seats  upoa  its  ruins  (ver.  13). 
We  have  another  trace  of — 

V.  The  depth  to  which  greatness  will  descend  in  becomino  the  object  op 
OENEBAL  COMPASSION.  (Ver.  15.)  Once  it  was  the  province  of  the  great  power  to  pity 
the  necessitous  and  to  stretch  forth  its  strong  hand  of  help  and  healing ;  now  it  lies 
prostrate  and  is  itself  the  object  of  universal  commiseration.  "  And  none  so  poor  to  do 
it  reverence."  1.  Let  human  greatness  beware.  It  is  high  and  uplifted  in  the  sight  of 
men ;  but  beware  lest  its  heart  be  lifted  up  in  arrogance  and  in  self-confidence ;  for,  if 
that  be  so,  or  if  it  be  allowing  evil  to  creep  into  any  cracks  of  its  walls,  it  will  call 
down  the  condemnation" of  Heaven,  and,  in  time,  it  will  meet  its  doom.  Where  other 
prostrate  powers  lie,  where  the  humblest  and  commonest  are  stretched,  "  in  the  midst 
of  the  children  of  men,"  "  delivered  to  death  "  (ver.  14),  there  shall  it  also  be  found, 
down  and  dishonoured.  2.  Let  the  holy  humble-hearted  he  filled  with  a  wise  content- 
ment. How  much  better  than  the  greatness  which  is  humiliated  is  the  lowliness  which 
is  blessed  and  crowned  1 — blessed  with  the  benediction  of  God  and  man,  croiimed  with  the 
glory  to  which  righteousness  conducts  and  in  which  it  ends.^}. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXXn. 


Ter.  1. — ^In  the  twelfth  year,  etc  March, 
B.O.  581,  nineteen  months  after  the  destmc- 
tion  of  Jemsalem.  The  two  sections  of  the 
ehapter,  vers.  1 — 16  and  17 — 32,  belong  to 
the  same  year,  and  probably,  though  the 
date  of  the  month  is  not  given  for  the 
■econd,  were  written  within  a  fortnight  of 
eaoh  other.  The  thoughts  of  the  prophet 
■till  dwell  npon  the  downfall  of  Egypt,  and 
he  is  stirred,  as  by  a  special  inspiration,  to 
write  an  elaborate  "lamentation"  over  its 
departed  greatness.  It  would  seem,  from 
the  repetition  of  the  word  in  ver.  16,  as  if 
the  elegy  had  originally  been  intended  to 
end  there.  Possibly  it  may  have  occurred 
to  the  prophet  that  what  he  had  written 
was  rather  a  prediction  of  coming  evil  than 
A  lamentation,  and  therefore  needed  to  be 
completed  by  a  second,  coming  more  strictly 
under  that  title. 

Ver.  2. — Thou  art  like  a  yonng  lion  ; 
rather,  with  the  Revised  Version,  thou  mast 
likened  unto  a  yovmg  lion.  The  two  clauses 
of  the  verse  stand  in  direct  contrast  to  each 
other.  Flatterers,  orators,  courtiers,  had 
nsed  the  nsual  symbolism  of  the  animal 
world.  The  King  of  Egypt  was  as  the  king 
of  beasts.  EzeMel  rejects  that  comparison, 
and  likens  him  rather  to  the  whale,  the 
iragon  (Revised  Version),  in  the  seas,  i.e. 
to  the  crocodile  of  his  own  river  (compare 
the  use  of  the  "dragon"  for  the  King  of 
Egypt,  in  oh.  xxix  3;  Isa.  li.  9).    Ewald 


and  Smend,  however,  translate, "  young  lion 
of  the  nations,  thou  art  brought  to  nought ; " 
but  there  is  no  adequate  reason  for  abandon- 
ing the  Revised  translation.  Trouhledst  the 
waters.  As  in  ch.  xxxiv.  18,  the  act  is  nsed 
as  the  symbol  of  all  selfish  and  aggressive 
rule,  defiling  the  streams  of  righteousness 
and  judgment.  Thou  earnest  forth  with  thy 
rivers.  Ewald  and  Smend  translate,  "  Thou 
didst  spurt  out  the  water,"  as  describing 
the  act  of  the  crocodile  when  it  raises  ita 
head  out  of  the  water  as  in  the  "  neesingg," 
or  sneezings"  of  Job  xIL  12,  Hebrew 
[English  version,  18]. 

Ver.  3.— I  will  spread  out  my  net.  The 
imagery  of  oh.  xxix.  3  is  repeated,  with  a 
variation  as  to  the  mode  of  capture.  There 
is  no  evidence  that  the  crocodile  was  ever 
taken  with  a  net ;  but  Ezekiel  may  have 
chosen  the  comparison  for  that  very  reason. 
What  was  impossible  in  the  parable,  accord- 
ing to  its  letter,  was  possible  when  it  received 
its  application. 

Ver.  4. — The  picture  is  carried  out  to  its 
completion.  The  carcase  of  the  crocodile 
becomes  the  prey  of  unclean  birds  and 
beasts.  The  carcase  of  the  Egyptian  great- 
ness was  to  satiate  the  appetite  of  the  invad- 
ing hosts.  Were  the  words  of  Ps.  Ixxiv. 
14,  as  to  leviathan  being  "  given  for  meat 
to  the  people  in  the  wilderness  "  floating  in 
Ezekiel's  mind  (compare  the  strange  refer- 
ence to  leviathan  in  2  Esdr.  vi.  49,  52,  and 
in  later  Jewish  traditions)?  Greek  writer* 
describe  the  iohthyophagi  of  Africa  a*  feed- 


CH.  XXXII.  1—32.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIBL. 


16? 


ing  on  the  flesh  of  Bea-monsters  (Diod.  Sic, 
iii.  14 ;  Herod.,  ii.  69  ;  Strabo,  p.  773),  and 
the  word  may  possibly  include  the  orooodile. 

Ver.  6. — I  will  water  with  thy  blood. 
Was  the  plague  of  the  water  of  the  Nile 
turned  to  blood  (Exod.  vii.  19,  20)  present 
to  Ezeldel's  miad  ?  Such  an  inundation  of 
the  Kile,  in  all  its  honors,  was  a  fit  symbol 
of  the  deluge  of  invaders  by  whom  Egypt 
was  laid  waste. 

Ver.  7. — When  I  shall  put  thee  out ;  better, 
with  the  Bevised  Version,  extinguish.  The 
verb  is  used  of  lamps  in  2  Chrcn.  xxix.  7. 
The  change  of  metaphor  is  at  first  startling, 
but  V  follow  Ewald,  Hitzig,  and  Smend,  ia 
thinking  that  there  is  a  traceable  sequence 
of  ideas.  The  "dragon  of  the  Egyptian 
waters  "  suggested  the  "  dragon  "  wliioh  was 
conspicuous  between  Ursa  Major  and  Minor 
among  the  constellations  of  the  heavens,  and 
the  name  of  which,  probably  derived  by  the 
Greek  astronomers  from  a  remote  past,  sug- 
gested that  of  an  enemy  of  God  (comp.  Isa. 
li.  9).  So  taken,  the  new  comparison  finds 
a  parallel  in  that  of  the  King  of  Babylon  to 
Lucifer,  the  morning  star,  in  Isa.  xiv.  12. 
Upon  this  there  follows  naturally  the  imagery 
of  oh.  XXX.  18 ;  Isa.  xxxiv.  4.  As  the  other 
trees  of  the  forest  had  mourned  for  the  cedar 
{cb.  xzxi.  15),  BO  the  other  lights  of  heaven 
mourn  for  that  particular  star  which  has 
been  quenched  for  ever  (comp.  fori  the 
general  imagery,  Isa.  xiii.  10 ;  Joel  ii.  10 ; 
iii.  4,  Hebrew  [English  version,  ch.  ii.  31]). 

Ver.  9. — I  will  also  vex  the  hearts.  The 
words  intensify  the  bitterness  of  the  down- 
fall. The  prophet  passes  out  of  the  region 
of  metaphors  into  that  of  facts.  The  fall  of 
Egypt  will  cause  pity  among  the  nations. 
They  shall  simply  be  "vexed"  in  heart, 
terrified  at  the  thought  (ver.  10)  that  the 
Bword  which  had  laid  her  low  was  "  bran- 
dished "  also  against  them. 

Vers.  11 — 14. — The  sword  of  the  King  of 
Babylon,  etc.  The  effects  of  Nebuchad- 
nezzar's invasion  are  now  described  in  lan- 
guage which  seems  plain  enough,  but  in 
which  we  may  read  between  the  lines  an 
allusive  reference  to  the  previous  symbol- 
ism. Thus  in  ver.  13  we  are  thrown  back 
upon  the  thought  of  the  "  troubled  waters" 
of  ver.  2.  The  Nile  was  np  longer  to  be 
troubled  by  the  foot  of  beasts ;  the  streams 
of  justice  were  no  longer  to  be  defiled  with 
ft  selfish  corruption,  but  were  to  run  smooth 
ftud  calm,  even  as  the  "  rivers  of  oil "  which 
were  the  symbols  of  ethical  blessedness 
^Job  xxix.  6 ;  Deut.  xxxii.  13).  So  Ewald 
and  Keil,  for  once  agreeing.  The  rule  of 
Nebnohadnezzar  was  to  be  a  righteous  rule, 
in  spite  of  its  severity.  I  am  unable,  how- 
ever, to  follow  these  commentators  further 
in  seeing  in  the  words  a  prediction  of  the 
Messianic  kingdom.    The  Egyptians  were 


to  "know  the  Lord,"  as  the  other  nations 
addressed  by  Ezekiel  were  to  kuow  him,  as 
a  righteous  Judge,  not  as  yet  as  a  Deliverer 
(comp.  oh.  xxviii.  26 ;  xxix.  21 ;  xxx.  26). 

Ver.  16. — This  is  the  lamentation,  etc. 
The  work  of  mourning  for  the  dead  was  for 
the  most  part  assigned  to  women  (2  Sam. 
i.  24 ;  Jer.  ix.  17  ;  2  Ohron.  xxxv.  25),  and 
is  therefore  appropriately  assigned  to  the 
daughters  of  the  nations.  He  hears,  as  it 
were,  their  wailing  over  the  fallen  greatness 
of  Egypt,  even  in  the  solitude  of  Td-Abib. 

Ver.  17. — For  yet  fourteen  days  the  mind 
of  the  prophet  brooded  over  the  fall  of 
Egypt,  and  bis  thoughts  at  last  found  utter- 
ance in  another  lamentation,  based  upon 
that  of  Isa.  xiv.  Taken  together,  the  two 
passages  give  a  vivid  picture  of  the  thoughts 
of  the  Hebrews  as  to  the  unseen  world,  and 
we  find  in  them  the  germs  of  the  later  belief 
of  Judaism  in  Paradise  and  Gehenna.  Wi  lat 
I  have  called  the  Dante  element  in  Ezekiel 
it  seen  here  raised  to  its  highest  power. 

Ver.  18. — Cast  them  down,  etc.  The 
prophet  thinks  of  himself  as  not  only  the 
predictor,  but  the  minister,  of  the  Divine 
judgments.  So  it  was  given  to  Jeremiah 
(i.  10)  "to  root  out  and  to  pull  down," 
and  to  Amos  (ix.  1)  to  "smite"  and  to 
wound.  He  executes  the  sentence,  not  on 
Egypt  only,  but  on  the  other  daughters  of 
the  famous  nations,  bc.  on  the  nations  them- 
selves, specially  those  that  are  named  in  the 
verses  that  follow. 

Ver.  19. — Whom  dost  thou  pass  in  beauty  1 
The  lamentation,  as  might  be  expected  from 
Ezekiel's  standpoint,  is  an  illustration  of 
irony  and  triumph  ratherthan  of  sorrow.  The 
question  implies  a  negative  answer.  Glorious 
as  Egypt  had  been,  other  nations  bad 
equalled  her.  They  had  passed  away,  and 
so  should  she.  With  the  nnoircnmcised. 
The  words,  as  in  ch.  xxxi.  18,  suggest  the 
thought  that  Israel,  so  far  as  it  was  faithful 
to  its  calling,  circumcised  in  heart  as  well  as 
flesh  (Jer.  ix.  26),  had  a  higher  and  happier 
dwelling  in  Hades  than  the  unoircumciiied 
heathen.  As  tlie  Egyptians  practised  cir- 
cumcision, the  language  of  the  prophet  had 
a  special  significance.  Their  place  in  Hadtjs 
was  among  the  heathen  to  whom  that  rite 
was  unknown. 

Ver.  20. — She  is  delivered  to  the  sword ; 
better,  with  the  margin  of  the  Revised 
Version,  the  luiord  is  appointed — possibly,  as 
Ewald  suggests,  with  reference  to  the  practice 
of  burying  a  warrior  with  his  sword  beneath 
his  head  (comp.  ver.  27).  Drawher,etc.  Tlie 
command  would  seem  to  be  given,  so  to 
speak,  to  the  warders  of  Sheol.  They  are 
to  receive  the  new  comers  and  take  them  to 
their  appointed  place. 

Ver.  21 The  strong  among  the  mighty. 

Those   already  in    Sheol  watch  the  new 


168 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  BZEKIBL.    [oh.  xxxn.  1— 32. 


arrival,  and  make  their  Bcomfnl  oomments 
(oomp.  laa-ziv.  9,  18),  at  once  clasBingthem 
with  the  nnciroumcised.  Had  they  heard, 
we  ask,  of  the  downfall  of  Egypt  ? 

Vers.  22,  23. — ^Asshoi  is  there.  The  verses 
that  follow  contain,  as  it  were,  the  prophet's 
retrospect  of  the  history  of  the  past,  as  far 
as  he  had  knowledge  of  it.  Foremost  in 
these  is  Assyria,  which  the  prophet  had 
already  chosen  (oh.  zxxl.  3)  as  the  pattern 
instance  of  a  fallen  greatness.  There  in  the 
sides  of  the  pit  (t.e.  in  its  remotest  and 
deepest  regions)  lie  the  graves  of  the  rulers 
snrronnded  by  those  of  their  subjects. 
They  had  caused  terror,  the  prophet  adds, 
with  a  keen  irony,  in  the  land  of  the  living. 
They  can  cause  no  terror  now. 

Ver.  24. — There  is  Elam,  etc.  The  nation 
■o  named  appears  grouped  with  Asshur  in 
Gen.  X.  22 ;  in  Isa.  xi.  11  it  stands  between 
Cushand  Sbinar;  in  Isa.  xzii.  6  its  warriors 
form  part  of  the  host  of  Sennacherib;  in 
Ezra  iv.  9  they  are  named  as  having  been 
among  the  settlers  in  Samaria ;  in  Isa.  xxi.  2 
as  joining  with  the  Modes  in  the  attack  on 
Babylon;  in  Jer.  xxv.  25  again  coupled 
with  the  Medes  among  the  enemies  of 
Nebnchadnezzar ;  in  Dan.  viii.  2  as  the 
province  in  which  Shnshan  was  situated, 
and  therefore  subject  to  Babylon.  Jeremiah 
(zliz.  81 — 39)  had  uttered  a  special  prophecy 
•gainst  it  From  Ezekiel's  point  of  view  it 
might  well  take  its  place  among  the  powers 
that  had  received  their  death-blow  at  the 
hand  of  Nebuchadnezzar.  Tet  have  they 
borne  their  shame;  to.  the  disgrace  of  being 
nnciroumcised,  and  therefore  taking  theit 
place  with  the  lower  circles  of  the  dead. 

Ver.  25. — They  have  set  her  a  bed.  The 
noun  is  used  for  the  sleeping-place  of  the 
dead — the  cemetery,  if  we  trace  that  word  to 
its  loot  in  Isa.  IviL  2;  2  Chron.  xvi.  14.  In 
the  rest  of  the  verse  Ezekiel  reiterates  what 
had  been  said  in  ver.  24  with  an  emphatio 
■olemnity.  In  the  Hebrew,  as  in  the  English, 
there  is  a  constant  variation  in  the  pronouns 
used,  now  masculine,  now  feminine,  now 
singular. 

Yer.  26.— There  is  Uesheoh,  Tubal.  (On 
the  ethnological  relations  of  the  two  tribes, 
see  note  on  ch.  xxvii.  13,  and  later  on  in 
ch.  xzxviii.  and  xxxix.)  Ezekiel  obviously 
speaks  of  them  as  one  of  the  powers  that 
had  been  conspicuous  in  his  own  time,  and 
had  been,  in  part  at  least,  overthrown  by  the 
Ohaldean  monarchy.  We  may  probably 
connect  his  words  with  the  great  irruption 
of  the  Scythians  mentioned  by  Herodotus 
(L  103;  iv.  11)  as  having  swept  over  Asia 
even  to  Palestine  and  Egypt,  in  the  time  of 
Josiah,  and  which,  after  compelling  Oyaxares 
to  raise  the  siege  of  Nineveh,  left  traces 
of  itself  in  the  name  of  the  city  of  Scytho- 
polis.    Many  commentators  find  a  reference 


to  th  at  invasion  in  the  "evil  from  the  north  " 
of  Jer.  L  14;  iv.  6;  and  in  Zeph.i.  13 — 16. 
They  also,  once  the  terror  of  the  nations, 
are  now  represented  by  the  prophet  as  in 
the  shadow-world  of  Sheol. 

Ver.  27. — ^And  they  shall  not  lie  with  th» 
mighty.  The  words  seem  at  first  to  con- 
tradict ver.  26.  The  L2LK.  meets  the  diffi- 
culty by  omitting  the  negative ;  Ewald  and 
Havernick,  by  taking  it  as  an  interrogative,^ 
"Shall  they  not  lie," etc.?  Probably  the 
explanation  is  laying  stress  on  the  word 
"mighty."  Meshech  and  Tubal  have  a 
lower  place  in  Hades;  they  are  buried 
without  the  honours  of  war.  Their  sword* 
are  not  placed  beneath  their  heads  (for 
the  practice  thus  referred  to,  see  Died.  Sic, 
xviii.  26 ;  Arrian,  i.  5;  Virg., '  .^n.,'  vi,  233). 
For  the  Scythians,  who  worshipped  the 
sword  (Herod.,  i  62),  this  would  be  the 
extremest  ignominy.  In  this  way  their 
iniquities  should  be  npon  their  bones  as 
they  lay  dishonoured. 

Ver.  28.— Yea,  thou  shalt  be  broken.  Th* 
words  are  obviously  addressed  to  Pharaoh. 
He  must  prepare  himself  for  a  like  doom. 
His  place,  proud  as  he  was  of  his  magnifl> 
cence,  shall  be  with  the  wild  nomad  horde* 
of  Scythia. 

Yer.  29. — ^There  is  Edam,  her  kings  and 
her  princes.  (For  the  political  relations  at 
Edom  at  this  time,  see  ch.  xxv.  12^14.^ 
Whatever  shadow  of  power  might  yet  remain 
to  it,  Ezekiel,  from  his  standpoint,  could  yet 
declare  that  her  greatness  had  departed. 
The  exultation  which  the  Edomites  had 
shown  over  the  fall  of  Jerusalem  (Ps. 
cxxzvii.  7)  would  naturally  tend  to  accen* 
tnate  the  prophet's  language.  The  "  princes'* 
of  Edom  are  probably  identical  with  tha 
"  dukes  "  of  Gen.  xxxvi.  15 — 43  and  1  Chron. 
L  51,  where  the  word  means  literally  the 
heads  or  captains  of  thousands,  t.e.  of  tribes, 
as  in  Judg.  vi.  15  (oomp.  Zech.  iz.  7; 
xii.  5> 

Yer.  30.— There  be  the  princes  of  th» 
north.  The  noun  for  "  princes  "  is  different 
&om  that  of  ver.  29,  and  has  the  sense  (tf 
"  vassal  rulers,"  as  in  Josh.  xiii.  21 ;  Micah. 
T.  4.  So  we  have  the  "  kings  of  the  north  " 
in  Jer.  xxv.  26.  The  fact  that  they  are 
coupled  wih  the  Zidonians  (it  is  suggestive 
that  Ezekiel  names  these  rather  than  the 
Tyrians)  points  in  the  direction  of  Northern 
Syria,  including  cities  like  Damasons,  Ha- 
math,  Arpad,  and  others. 

Yer.  31. — Shall  be  comforted,  etc.  (comp. 
for  the  thought,  ch.  xxxi.  16).  That  shall 
be  all  that  he  will  have  to  console  him.  As 
before,  other  nations  were  comforted  by  the 
downfall  of  Egypt,  so  Egypt  in  her  tuin 
finds  her  comfort  in  their  downfall.  All 
are  eharers  alike  in  the  flend-like  temjiHr 
which  exults  in   the   miieries   of  others. 


OH.  xxxu.  1—32.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  BZEKIEL. 


168 


Ewald  and  Hitzig,  here  as  there,  take  the 
word  as  in  the  senee  of  "  monming  over." 

Ab  to  the  extent  and  manner  in  which 
the  predictions  of  the  chapter  have  been 
fulfilled,  see  notes  on  ch.  zxiz. — zzzi.  Suf- 
ficient evidence  has  been  given  that  Egypt 
was  probably  invaded  and  conquered  by 
Nebuchadnezzar.  The  silence  of  the  Greek 
historians,  and  notably  of  Herodotus,  as  to 


any  such  invasion  goes  for  little  or  nothing. 
He  could  not  read  the  Egyptian  records, 
and  derived  his  knowledge  &om  the  priests 
through  an  interpreter.  They,  after  their 
manner,  would  draw  avail  over  all  disasters, 
and  BO,  while  he  records  the  revolution  which 
placed  Amasis  upon  the  throne  of  Hophra, 
he  is  silent  as  to  any  invasion,  and  does  not 
even  mention  the  battle  of  Oarchemish. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  2,  3. — The  lion  in  a  net.  Pharaoh  is  compared  both  to  a  young  lion  and  to 
a  whale.  The  young  lion  has  left  his  mark  at  the  watering-place  of  the  cattle.  There- 
fore a  net  is  spread  for  bim,  and  he  is  entrapped. 

I.  The  obeatebt  abe  ukdeb  the  foweb  of  Qod.  The  lion  is  the  king  of  beasts ; 
the  whale  is  the  greatest  sea-monster.  Yet  both  are  under  the  power  of  their  Creator. 
Kings  are  subject  to-God.  Successful  rich  men  have  not  grown  out  of  his  reach.  Men 
of  great  intellect  are  not  able  to  outwit  Heaven.  The  raging  of  the  wicked  will  not 
save  them.  They  may  roar  like  lions ;  they  may  plunge  like  whales ;  but  they  cannot 
escape  God's  net  and  hook.  We  are  all  entirely  in  the  hands  of  God.  It  is  a  miserable 
thing  that  this  thought  should  inspire  terror,  a  happy  thing  when  it  only  encourage! 
confidence.  The  lions,  fierce  and  Btrong  as  they  are,  cannot  save  themselves  from  the 
net ;  but  the  most  helpless  lambs  of  the  flock  are  safe  under  their  shepherd's  care.  It 
is  better  to  be  God's  feeblest  sheep  than  as  the  mightiest  lions  of  the  forest  in  opposition 
to  God. 

II.  God  OANiroT  endtjbb  the  bftbit  of  dbstbuotign.  The  lion  ravages  the  flock ; 
even  when  he  is  not  doing  this  deadly  work,  he  is  represented  as  fouling  the  rivers.  He 
is  in  all  respects  a  mischief-maker.  Then  his  lordly  mien  will  not  protect  him.  The 
great  heathen  empires  incurred  the  wrath  of  Heaven  for  their  rapacious  destructivenes*. 
If  a  man  is  injuring  his  fellow-men  in  body  or  soul,  he  will  be  treated  by  God  as  a 
beast  of  prey,  hunted  and  netted  and  destroyed, 

III.  Sin  must  be  bestbained.  The  lion  is  caught  in  a  net.  There  he  may  rage  and 
roar  to  his  heart's  content,  but  he  can  do  no  more  mischief.  The  best  treatment  of 
evil  is  to  change  the  lion  into  the  lamb.  This  is  Christ's  method.  The  wild  demoniac 
sits  at  the  feet  of  Jesus,  clotlied  and  in  his  right  mind.  But  men  will  not  always  yield 
to  the  influence  of  Christ.  They  cannot  then  be  left  at  large  for  ever.  There  are  two 
nets — a  gospel  net  (Matt.  xiii.  47)  and  a  net  of  judgment.  The  latter  is  for  those  who 
have  escaped  the  meshes  of  the  former. 

IV.  SiNNBES  MAT  BE  ENTBAPPBD  UNAWABB8.  The  liou  would  not  enter  the  net 
knowingly.  "  Surely  in  vain  the  net  is  spread  in  the  sight  of  any  bird  "  (Prov.  i.  17). 
But  the  net  is  hidden,  and  it  ensnares  its  victim  before  he  is  aware  of  his  danger.  Souls 
are  entrapped  by  their  own  sins.  They  fall  into  danger  before  they  obsei-ve  it.  We 
cannot  say  that  sin  will  go  on  unchecked  and  unpunished  simply  because  we  do  not 
perceive  any  immediate  signs  of  Divine  interference.  God  has  his  hidden  nets,  fine  as 
gossamer  thread,  strong  as  steel. 

v.  The  woBiiD  cwncubs  in  the  ovbbtheow  or  evu-doebs.  All  the  peoples  help 
to  ensnare  the  lion.  The  nations  assist  at  the  down-casting  of  Egypt.  The  selfish, 
cruel  man  may  be  thronged  with  flatterers  in  his  prosperity.  In  his  adversity  he  will 
be  equally  thronged  with  revengeful  victims.  It  is  a  terrible  thing  to  prepare  hatred 
for  the  day  of  calamity.  No  fate  excites  less  commiseration  than  that  of  a  proud,  selfish, 
heartless  soul. 

Ver.  8. — Lights  darkened.  I.  Man  oaiwot  dispense  with  lights  of  heavbk. 
Hp  may  never  look  up.  Yet  he  cannot  live  without  the  light  that  comes  from  over  his 
Head.  In  spiritual  experience  there  are  men  who  ignore  the  light  above  and  the  very 
existence  of  the  heavenly  world.    Yet  they  are  not  the  less  largely  dependent  on  those 


170  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PEOPHBT  BZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxxn.  1—32. 

higher  influences.  If  the  sun  were  blotted  out,  all  life  on  our  glohe  would  perish  in 
darkness  and  cold — the  -world  reduced  to  a  block  of  silent  frozen  matter,  li  (iod  were 
to  withdraw,  all  being  would  come  to  an  end. 

IL  Tee  LiaHTS  of  heaven  abe  darkened  bt  sin.  Sin  eclipses  the  soul's  sun. 
It  spreads  black  clouds  between  the  offender  and  the  heavenly  regions.  It  shuts  a  nnan 
out  from  fellowship  with  God.  This  is  its  worst  effect,  though  men  may  treat  it  lightly 
at  first.  The  process  is  twofold.  1.  Man  is  blinded.  Though  the  sun  shines  in  noon- 
day splendour  the  blind  man  walks  in  midnight  darkness.  Now,  sin  puts  out  the  eyes 
of  the  soul.  It  is  like  a  red-hot  iron  that  burns  away  the  vision  of  spiritual  things;  then 
the  bright  lights  of  heaven  are  made  black.  2.  God  withdraws  his  brightness.  We 
pr»y  that  God  may  lift  up  the  light  of  his  countenance  upon  us.  But  he  may  do  the 
reverse,  and  turn  bis  face  from  us.  He  will  not  for  ever  display  his  graciousness  to  heed- 
less, rebellious  sonls. 

III.  The  daekening  on  the  lights  of  heaven  bbinos  many  grievous  con- 
BBQUBNCBS.  1.  Knowledge  is  obscured.  We  cannot  see  truth  when  God's  light  is  with- 
drawn or  when  our  souls  are  blinded  to  the  perception  of  it.  "  In  thy  light  we  shall 
see  light  "(Ps.  ixxvi.  9).  "Judicial  blindness"  must  be  a  fearful  fate.  2.  Joy  ii 
extinguished.  A  gloomy  day  is  depressing.  Darkness  brings  sadness.  When  heaven 
is  dark  all  sunshine  vanishes  from  the  soul.  3.  Life  is  threatened.  The  soul's  higher 
life  grows  sickly  and  threatens  to  pass  away  in  the  darkness  of  separation  from  God. 

IV.  There  is  a  darkening  op  the  bright  lights  op  heaven  which  may  come 
IN  tee  course  of  the  soul's  discipline.  There  was  darkness  round  the  cross  when 
Jesus  was  dying.  Then  in  mysterious  spiritual  gloom  he  cried, "  My  God,  my  God,  why 
hast  thou  forsaken  me?"  (Matt,  xxvii.  46).  Earnest  souls  may  have  times  of  darkness, 
during  which  the  vision  of  heaven  is  obscured,  seasons  of  deep  depression,  when  all  that 
once  seemed  most  real  melts  into  the  blackness  of  a  great  doubt. 

Y.  Christ  brings  a  hew  light  to  benighted  souls.  If  we  are  dark  now  we 
need  not  remain  in  gloom  for  ever.  "  The  people  that  walked  in  darkness  have  seen 
a  great  light "  (Isa.  ix.  2).  Christ  came  as  "  the  Light  that  shineth  in  darkness,"  as 
"  the  Light  of  the  world."  Though  the  bright  lights  of  heaven  be  made  dark  over  us, 
they  are  not  annihilated ;  they  are  but  beclouded  or  at  worst  eclipsed.  For  all  dim, 
bewildered,  sorrow-laden  souls  there  is  the  hope  of  light  in  Christ.  But  as  sin  brings 
on  the  deepest  night  of  darkness,  so  it  is  by  repentance  and  after-forgiveness  that  we 
can  hope  to  see  the  darkness  clear  away  and  a  new  light  from  heaven  arise  to  shine  into 
our  souls. 

Ver.  9  ("I  will  also  vex  the  hearts  of  many  peoples"). — Vexation  of  heart, 
L  The  greatest  distress  is  that  which  n  caused  by  vexation  of  heart. 
Terrible  reverses  of  fortune  may  be  endured,  and  the  millionaire  may  become  a  beggar, 
and  yet  the  deepest  sorrows  may  not  be  reached ;  for  there  are  men  who  have  proved 
themselves  superior  to  their  circumstances,  and  who  have  been  able  to  look  with  a 
serene  countenance  on  the  wreck  of  their  fortunes,  because  they  have  been  possessed  of 
interior  sources  of  happiness.  Bodily  sickness  which  produces  acute  physical  pain  does 
not  induce  the  greatest  real  sufferings.  Not  only  have  martyrs  learnt  to  triumph  at 
the  stake,  but  patient,  obscure  sufferers  have  acquired  peace  and  even  joy  while  their 
bodies  have  been  racked  with  torment.  But  when  the  heart  is  sore  vexed  the  most 
terrible  sorrow  is  felt.  This  may  be  endured  amid  external  circumstances  of  afBuence, 
and  then  those  circumstances  appear  but  as  gilded  vanities,  mocking  the  bitter  grief 
that  lurks  within.  We  live  in  our  hearts,  and  if  our  hearts  be  sore  and  sorrowful,  oui 
lives  are  darkened  with  a  distress  that  no  outer  comforts  can  cheer. 

II.  Vexation  op  heart  springs  especially  from  loss  and  disappointment. 
We  accustom  ourselves  to  the  usual,  and  do  not  grieve  greatly  over  what  we  never  had 
and  never  expected  to  possess.  No  man  is  much-  distressed  at  the  thought  that  he  is 
not  a  prince  of  the  archangels.  The  simple  peasant  does  not  grieve  because  he  is  not 
the  owner  of  a  kingdom,  as  Alexander  is  said  to  have  grieved  because  he  could  find  no 
new  worlds  to  conquer.  The  childless  wife  is  not  desolate  as  the  mother  whose  baby 
has  been  snatched  from  her.  The  loss  of  the  loved  and  the  disappointment  of  cherished 
hopes  are  the  greatest  sources  of  vexation  of  heart.  Now,  we  have  all  lost  a  great 
inheritance,  we  have  missed  our  high  Divine  vocation.    The  sorrow  of  failure  is  at  the 


CH.  xxxii.  1—32.]    THE   BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET   EZEKIEL.  171 

root  of  the  woTst  heart-ache.  The  old  weary  world  groans  without  perceiving  the  causa 
of  its  anguish.  Clearly  something  is  wrong,  for  a  good  Creator  would  not  have  made  a 
world  for  sorrow  and  disappointment.  The  great  disillusion  which  at  some  time  comes 
to  every  sanguine  soul,  and  turns  May  into  November,  must  have  a  cause.  The  world 
has  suffered  a  great  loss ;  it  has  met  with  a  great  disappointment.  The  first  step  is 
to  have  the  courage  to  admit  the  fact,  and  not  to  he  living  in  the  optimism  which  the 
first  touch  of  reality  proves  to  he  hut  a  dream.  The  next  is  to  discover  the  cause  and 
to  see  that  the  loss  is  the  loss  of  God,  and  the  failure  sin. 

in.  Chbist  has  come  to  cube  vexation  of  heart.  He  may  not  help  us  to 
retrieve  broken  fortunes.  "To  the  poor  the  gospel  is  preached" — and  yet  they  remain 
poor ;  he  may  not  now  restore  health  as  he  did  during  his  earthly  ministry.  But  he 
aims  at  the  deepest  trouble — he  cures  vexation  of  heart.  To  the  labouring  and  heavy 
laden  he  gives  rest.  It  is  not  his  will  that  bis  people  should  go  mourning  all  their 
days.  The  dim  and  faded  life  may  be  brightened  and  gladdened  by  the  love  of  the 
great  Saviour.  This  is  possible  because  Christ  goes  to  the  seat  of  the  trouble,  whereas 
most  earthly  comforters  have  only  tried  to  smooth  away  the  superficial  symptoms.  He 
finds  the  lost  God.  He  restores  man  to  his  missed  destiny.  He  slays  the  sin  that  is 
the  worm  at  the  root  of  the  world's  life.  He  brings  the  heart-joy  of  life  eternal  in 
-  fellowship  with  God. 

Ver.  14:.—Still  waters  of  death.  The  waters  of  Egypt  are  to  settle  and  so  to  be 
clean.  From  beiog  a  highway  of  commerce  the  Nile  is  to  become  an  imdisturbed 
inland  river.  The  water-wheels  shall  be  still,  the  splash  of  the  oar  shall  be  no  more 
heard.     The  silent  river  shall  be  left  to  its  own  peace — the  peace  of  death. 

I.  Sin  DE8TB0T8  CIVILIZATION.  The  river  is  the  busy  scene  of  Egyptian  life  and 
activity.  Its  waters  will  be  quiet  because  Egypt  will  lose  its  energy.  This  is  repre- 
sented as  the  consequence  of  the  nation's  wickedness.  Consider  how  the  process 
works.  1.  Sin  is  anti-social.  Civilization  is  the  art  of  city-life.  It  is  dependent  on 
co-operation,  division  of  labour,  mutual  ministries,  and  mutual  confidence.  All  these 
things  are  shattered  by  the  selfish  and  untrue  conduct  of  sin.  2.  Sin  it  unaspiring. 
Civilization  presses  forward ;  essentially  it  seeks  an  advance.  Sin  may  be  greedy  and 
grasping,  and  may  incline  men  to  seize  much  for  themselves,  but  it  does  not  inspire 
energy  for  general  progress.  It  is  depressing  and  discouraging.  3.  Sin  is  essentially 
opposed  to  the  laws  of  God.  Now,  no  civilization  can  be  secure  and  lasting  that  is  not 
based  on  those  laws.  All  corrupt  civilization  bears  within  it  the  seeds  of  its  own 
destruction.  The  only  "  city  which  hath  foundations  "  is  the  city  of  God,  and  this  is 
"  let  down  from  heaven,"  t.e.  it  is  a  city  of  which  the  constitution  is  Divine,  and  which 
embodies  the  idea  of  "  the  kingdom  of  heaven." 

n.    It  is  well  THAT  A   BINFDL  CIVILIZATION   SHOULD  BE   SHATTERED.      The  East  is 

■cored  with  the  ruins  of  ancient  empires.  To-day  the  scene  of  decay  is  melancholy 
and  oppressive.  Yet  the  sight  of  those  old,  bad  empires  in  their  flourishing  days  was 
far  more  sad  to  behold.  They  were  seats  of  cruelty  and  haunts  of  vice.  It  is  well 
that  they  have  ceased  to  be.  The  hyenas  and  jackals  that  now  infest  their  neglected 
temples  and  palaces  are  clean  and  innocent  inhabitants  compared  with  the  lustful  and 
murderous  men  who  formerly  lived  there.  The  running  sore  of  modem  Christendom 
is  in  the  condition  of  its  great  cities.  The  broken-down  wrecks  of  civilization  are  far 
more  degraded  than  the  simple  savages  of  the  forest.  It  was  good  for  the  world  that 
Sodom  and  Gomorrah  were  destroyed,  that  great  Nineveh  became  a  .lonely  resort  of 
lions  of  the  desert,  that  the  Egypt  of  the  Pharaohs  fell  from  her  proud  and  wicked 
splendour.  It  will  be  well  for  modem  civilization  to  be  swept  away  if  it  becomes  only 
secular,  atheistic,  and  immoral. 

III.  The  results  or  a  shattebed  civilization  will  be  a  fbefabatioh  fob  a 
BXTTEB  fdtube.  The  old  foul  Nile  is  to  settle  quietly  and  so  become  clear.  Its  once 
disturbed  waters  are  to  mn  smoothly  like  oil.  These  facts  which  occur  in  the  list  of 
calamities  for  Egypt — and  rightly,  because  they  indicate  the  departure  of  the  old,  busy, 
populous  life  from  its  banks  and  its  surface — are  nevertheless  in  themselves  good.  It 
u  well  that  the  river  should  be  clear  and  run  smoothly.  The  destmction  of  empires 
brings  deliverance  to  oppressed  subject  races.  The  loss  of  civilization  may  be  the  gain 
of  naturalness.    There  may  be  less  wealth,  but  more  welfare ;  less  pleasure,  but  more 


172  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PEOPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxxn,  1— 32. 

peace.  In  silence  and  sorrow  of  Bonl  people  learn  to  look  beneath  the  surface  of  life, 
•8  the  Egyptians  in  their  desolation  could  look  deep  down  into  the  still,  smooth  waters 
of  the  Nile.    This  may  be  a  preparation  for  a  holier  new  life  in  the  future. 

Ver.  IS,— Sympathetic  sorrow.  I.  Sympathetic  sobbow  is  called  fob  bt  the 
TROUBLES  OF  CUB  FELLow-MBN.  Ezekiel  is  told  by  God  to  wail  for  the  multitude  of 
Egypt.  He  had  his  own  troubles  among  the  disaffected  Jews  j  but  he  was  not  to  shut 
himself  up  in  the  selfishness  of  private  distress.  His  nation  was  passing  through  a 
season  of  terrible  experiences,  many  of  his  kinsfolk  driven  into  exile,  and  the  remaining 
inhabitants  threatened  with  fresh  war-cruelties.  Yet,  Jew  as  he  was,  Ezekiel  was  to 
find  room  in  his  heart  for  grief  over  the  distresses  of  Egypt.  It  is  inhuman  not  to  be 
moved  by  a  neighbour's  trouble.  We  ought  to  widen  the  area  of  our  sympathy,  and 
embrace  in  it  the  interests  and  troubles  of  foreign  nations.  If  a  Jew  should  wail  for 
Egypt,  should  not  a  Christian  wail  for  the  evils  of  the  world  ?  Mansion  House  funds 
for  various  successive  foreign  needs — Persian  and  China  famines,  etc. — are  among  the 
healthiest  signs  of  our  times,  and  contain  a  better  augury  of  the  future  of  England 
than  the  high  price  of  government  stock.  Individually  we  are  called  upon  to  grieye 
over  our  neighbour's  troubles. 

II.  Sympathetic  boeeow  is  espboiallt  bbquiebd  by  the  wobld'b  sin.  1.  We 
ihould  grieve  more  over  sin  than  over  external  calamity.  The  gambling  of  England 
is  a  more  sorrowful  sight  than  the  wreckage  that  strews  our  coast  after  a  disastrous 
gale.  We  mourn  for  the  death  of  the  good  and  noble ;  we  should  mourn  more  for  the 
life  of  the  wicked  and  ignoble.  Drunkenness  is  a  worse  evil  than  pauperism.  Pro- 
fligacy is  infinitely  more  deplorable  than  poverty.  Therefore  people  who  think 
themselves  happy  and  do  not  seek  our  commiseration  may  most  need  it.  2.  We  shovld 
grieve  over  sin  rather  than  coldly  condemn  it.  The  sympathizer  is  himself  a  sinner. 
Many  who  have  fallen  most  low  have  been  most  grievously  tempted ;  but  even  when 
the  kindest  charity  can  discover  no  excuse,  wickedness  itself  should  be  regarded  as  » 
miserable  source  of  grief  to  all  right-minded  people.  God  pitied  the  sinner,  and  sent 
his  Son  to  save  him.  Christ  wept  over  Jerusalem.  The  Cmristian  treatment  of  sin  is 
to  approach  it  with  sympathetic  sorrow. 

III.  Sympathetic  boeeow  is  a  ministbeing  ansel  or  heect.  1.  It  is  a  sovret 
of  consolation.  Sympathy  may  comfort  when  no  helping  hand  can  relieve  suffering. 
It  is  much  to  know  that  we  are  not  plone,  uncared  for,  and  forgotten.  The  sympathy 
of  God  is  offered  to  every  distressed  son  of  man.  This  is  a  type  and  pattern  of  what 
must  be  in  the  heart  of  every  godly  man.  2.  It  is  an  inspiration  of  deliverance.  To 
be  content  to  wail  for  the  troubles  of  others,  when  by  any  effort  or  sacrifice  we  might 
alleviate  those  troubles,  is  to  declare  ourselves  no  better  than  hypocrites.  Rich  people 
who  deplore  the  misery  of  their  poor  neighbours,  and  yet  do  nothing  to  relieve  the 
burden  of  poverty,  are  guilty  of  shameful  inconsistency  and  moral  untruth.  If  they 
really  grieved  they  would  relieve.  The  first  step  is  to  feel  the  troubles  of  our  fellow- 
men  ;  the  next  must  be  to  do  all  in  our  power  to  help  them.  Happily  in  regard  to 
spiritual  troubles  Christian  people  have  a  source  of  assistance  to  offer  in  the  gospel  of 
Christ. 

Vers.  18 — 30. — 2%e  world  of  the  dead,  "The  strong  among  the  mighty"  are  the 
inhabitants  of  the  under-world  who  once  were  kings  and  heroes  on  earth.  Now  those 
monarchs  of  the  dead  stir  themselves  as  they  see  great  Pharaoh  coming  to  join  their 
company,  and  prepare  to  give  him  a  stately  though  a  gloomy  welcome. 

I.  Theee  is  a  woeld  whbeb  the  dead  yet  live.  This  world  only  appeared  to 
be  a  realm  of  shades  and  desolation  to  the  Jews  of  Old  Testament  times.  For  those 
who  have  not  the  life  of  Christ  in  them  the  New  Testament  offers  a  worse  prospect. 
Yet  that  some  world  of  departed  spirits  exists  is  taught  in  the  Old  Testament  as  well 
•I  in  the  New.  This  agrees  with  the  almost  universal  belief  of  man  in  all  ages  and  of 
sU  nations  and  of  most  religions.  There  seems  to  be  implanted  in  us  an  instinct  of 
immortality.    We  cannot  escape  from  some  conception  of  a  hereafter. 

II.  It  IB  or  bomb  impoetancb  that  we  should  conbjdeb  cub  belation  to  thh 
wobld  of  the  dead.  Beligion  is  primarily  for  this  life,  to  help  us  to  do  oni  daily 
duty.    But  it  also  bears  on  the  future.    We  cannot  but  feel  that  our  life  is  swiftly 


OH.  xxxn.  1— 32.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  173 

fleeting.  Every  year  brings  us  nearer  to  the  great  mystery.  We  know  full  well  that 
every  soul  among  us  will  soon  solve  the  awful  riddle  sit  futurity.  Surely,  then,  it  is  of 
•ome  moment  that  we  should  stand  in  right  relations  with  the  world  of  the  dead,  if 
only  we  can  know  what  those  relations  should  be. 

IIL  God  bules  ovbb  the  kbalmb  Of  the  dead.  The  psalmist,  when  meditating 
on  the  Divine  omnipresence,  exclaimed,  "  If  I  make  my  bed  in  Sheol,  behold,  thou  art 
there  "  (Ps.  cxxxix.  8).  1.  Therefore  it  is  vain  to  hope  to  escape  from  Ood  hy  the  gate 
of  death.  The  suicide  is  mistaken  if  he  thinks  he  will  elude  the  grasp  of  the  great 
Avenger.  2.  Qod  will  maintain  order  and  justice  in  the  realm  of  the  dead.  Bad  souls 
do  not  descend  into  a  Miltonic  hell,  ruled  over  by  Satan  and  bis  crew,  at  whose  mercy 
they  must  be  without  the  interference  of  God.  Such  a  pandemonium  does  not  exist. 
As  far  as  the  Bible  is  a  guide  on  the  subject,  there  seems  to  be  a  solemn  order  in  the 
regions  of  the  dead.  The  confusion  of  earth  does  not  reach  the  silent  realms  on  the 
other  side  of  the  dark  river.  If  we  would  be  well  dealt  with  there,  we  must  be  right 
and  straight  with  God's  justice  here. 

IV.  The  bealm  of  the  dead  will  be  a  dolbftjl  place  fob  the  sinneb.  The 
old  delights  will  all  be  extinguished.  The  worldly  store  will  be  left  behind.  If  the 
soul  has  no  better  treasure,  it  wiU  be  starved  and  beggared.  The  strongest  and  most 
exalted  on  earth  will  find  that  their  power  and  rank  are  utterly  gone.  There  kings  lie 
low.  The  guilty  soul  will  stand  naked,  with  all  its  sin  exposed.  There  will  be  no 
shelter  from  wrath  and  punishment.  Christ  alone  can  save  us  from  this  doleful  prospect, 
by  giving  us  his  life  eternal. 

V.  The  wobld  will  weab  a  new  aspect  when  viewed  fbom  the  bealm  of 
THE  DEAD.  Seen  from  the  sun,  the  earth  must  appear  to  be  a  very  small  planet. 
Many  great  interests,  delights,  and  distresses  of  earth  must  seem  but  poor  child's  play 
to  the  large  sad  eyes  of  death,  but  spiritual  experiences  must  seem  intensely  real. 
Tet  every  man  will  be  himself  still.  Pharaoh  is  recognized.  The  future  ia  linked  on 
to  the  past;  it  will  look  back  on  the  past,  and  gravely  judge  it. 

Ver.  27  ("Their  imquities  shall  be  upon  their  bones"). — Inddible  sin.  The  idea 
seems  to  be  that  the  guilty  Egyptians  shall  not  have  honourable  burial  like  that  of  the 
kings  and  princes  who  have  been  laid  in  the  tombs  with  their  weapons  of  war  by  their 
side — a  token  that  they  may  yet  roam  as  great  fighting  heroes  through  the  dim  regions 
of  the  nether  world.  The  Egyptians  are  forbidden  this  prospect.  They  who  of  all 
people  cared  for  the  preservation  of  the  bodies  of  the  dead,  by  embalming  and  burying 
in  huge  pyramids,  are  to  have  their  bones  flung  in  a  heap  like  a  confused  mass  of  corpses 
hurriedly  gathered  together  from  a  battle-field.    This  is  a  punishment  of  sin. 

L  Sin  once  committed  bemains  with  the  binneb.  Our  own  deeds  are  our  lasting 
possession.  We  may  lose  all  else  and  still  not  lose  them.  In  the  exciting  moment  of 
temptation  the  foolish  fancy  is  entertained  that  the  sin  may  be  quickly  committed  and 
then  left  behind.  The  sinner  will  flee  from  his  guilt  and  leave  it  in  the  dark  depths 
of  some  distant  forest.  Alas  1  this  is  impossible.  The  awful  thing  pursues  its  maker 
into  the  wilderness,  into  the  city,  into  the  sacred  sanctuary  of  the  home. 

II.  Sin  enters  deeply  into  the  natueb  of  the  sqtneb.  It  is  not  merely  a  deed 
of  the  hand.  If  it  were  that  only  it  would  have  no  moral  character.  But  it  springs  from 
the  inner  being,  and  it  comes  home  to  roost.  Though  the  flesh  be  scraped  from  the 
bones,  still  the  sin  remains,  as  though  cleaving  to  the  very  skeleton^it  ia  so  close  a 
companion,  its  seat  is  so  terribly  centred  within. 

III.  Sin  fubsites  the  sinneb  afteb  death.  The  sinner  does  not  carry  his  wealth 
with  him,  but  he  carries  his  wickedness.  His  estate  must  be  left  behind,  his  iniquity 
will  accompany  him.  His  body  he  must  cast  ofi^,  but  he  cannot  cast  off  his  sin.  The 
man  and  his  sin  will  enter  into  the  dread  world  of  the  dead  together,  there  to  be  judged 
by  God,  there  to  reap  the  consequences  of  their  fearful  partnership. 

rV,  No  HUMAN  EXPBBiBNOB  CAN  EEMOVB  SIN,  Iniquities  lying  on  the  very  bones  of 
the  dead  I  Who  shall  tear  them  oflf  and  fling  them  away  ?  Tears  will  not  wash  them 
out,  for  tears  cannot  undo  the  past.  Amendment  will  not  destroy  them,  for  even  if 
that  be  possible,  it  is  wholly  a  thing  of  the  future,  it  does  not  touch  the  record  of  the 
paat. 

V.  Chbist  blots  out  bin  that  IS  OTHEEWISE  INDELIBLE,    He  cannot  deny  history, 


174  THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PhOPHET   EZBKIEL.    [oh.  xtxti.  1—32. 

turn  back  the  wheels  of  time  and  unknit  the  web  of  the  past.  But  he  can  and  he  does 
offer  pardon.  When  sin  is  forgiven  God  will  remember  it  no  more  against  the  sinner 
(Jer.  xxxi.  34),  With  pardon  Christ  also  brings  a  new  heart  and  life.  The  new  inner 
life  has  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  old  sin.  It  makes  a  fresh  start  unhampered  with 
the  ugly  burden  of  the  past.  This  great  result  is  brought  about  on  Christ's  side  by  his 
death  and  resurrection  (Bom.  iy.  25),  and  on  our  side  through  penitence  and  faith  (Acta 
iiL  19). 

Ver.  31. — Pha/raoh  comforted.  After  his  death  Pharaoh  is  comforted  by  what  he 
beholds  of  his  companions  in  the  realm  of  departed  spirits.  He  sees  that  the  great 
ones  who  preceded  him  are  as  badly  off  as  he  is.  Those  kings  and  princes  were  not  his 
enemies ;  they  were  his  allies.  Therefore  Pharaoh  could  scarcely  gain  comfort  from  a 
malignant  satisfaction  in  seeing  them  degraded.  Accordingly,  Hengstenberg  unde>  stands 
the  passage  to  say  that  Pharaoh  sighs.  But  might  he  not  find  some  consolation  in  the 
perception  that  he  was  not  alone  in  his  calamity  ? 

I.  Thebe  may  be  some  mitigation  op  the  futube  supfebinos  of  snwEES.  Thig 
is  a  dark  and  mysterious  subject — one  about  which  it  is  very  unwise  to  dogmatize. 
Still,  we  cannot  but  remember  that  the  same  merciful  God  who  rules  on  earth  also  reigns 
over  all  the  realms  of  the  dead.  Certainly  we  iiave  the  assurance  of  Christ  that  all  will 
not  suffer  equally ;  some  will  be  beaten  with  many  stripes,  and  others  with  few  stripes 
(Luke  xii.  47,  48). 

II.  The  justice  of  God  should  be  a  consolation  in  view  of  futube  punishment. 
God  will  never  exceed  what  is  right.  All  his  dealings  will  be  fair  and  equable.  His  aim 
will  be  to  maintain  goodness,  not  to  wreak  personal  vengeance  on  his  victims.  We 
should  feel  that  righteousness  is  the  supreme  end  of  all  things.  The  vision  of  sin  is 
dark  and  dreadful.  If  there  be  any  lightening  of  its  gloom  this  must  be  seen  in  the 
&ct  that  the  Almighty  God  has  set  his  hand  to  destroy  it. 

III.  The  univbbsality  of  death  suggests  the  belief  that  it  falls  in  with  thb 
Divine  obdeb  of  human  existence.  It  may  be  said  that,  just  as  sin  is  universal 
through  man's  own  fault,  so  death  is  universal  as  the  consequence  of  sin.  Death  in  iti 
horror  is  associated  with  sin :  "  The  sting  of  death  is  sin  "  (1  Cor.  xv.  56).  But  physio* 
logically,  death  belongs  to  the  order  of  nature.  Everything  that  lives  dies.  Wo  regard 
this  fact  with  distress  when  it  touches  our  friends,  and  perhaps  with  dread  when  it 
approachee  ourselves.    But  we  should  learn  to  trust  God,  who  orders  all  things  well. 

**  Like  aa  the  damask  rose  yon  gee^ 
Or  like  the  blossom  on  the  tree, 
Or  like  the  dainty  flower  in  May, 
Or  like  the  morning  of  the  day, 
Or  like  the  sun,  or  like  the  shade. 
Or  like  the  gourd  which  Jonah  had. 
E'en  such  is  man ;  whose  thread  is  span. 
Drawn  out,  and  cut,  and  so  is  done. 
The  rose  withers,  the  blossom  blasteth ; 
The  flower  fades,  the  morning  hasteth ; 
The  sun  sets,  the  shadow  flies ; 
The  gourd  consmnes — and  man  he  dies  1 " 

(Sunon  Wastell.) 

IV.  The  dxkpest  oomfobt  in  view  of  death  is  only  to  be.  dbawn  fbok  taith  va 
Chbist.  All  else  leaves  but  a  desolate  prospect  at  best.  But  Christ  sheds  a  glorious 
light  on  the  realm  beyond.  For  those  who  trust  and  follow  him  death  has  lost  its 
terrors.  The  grim  under-world  is  transferred  into  a  peaceful  sleep,  from  which  to  awake 
in  Christ.  "  I  am  the  Resurrection  and  the  Life :  he  that  believeth  on  me^  though  he 
were  dead,  yet  shall  he  live"  (John  xi.  25). 


HOraLIBS  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOBa 

y«r.  2. — Th»  noxioumesi  of  a  iimful  nation.    In  order  to  justify  the  humiliation  and 
the  calamities  appointed  for  Egypt,  the  prophet  mentions  the  evil  which  the  king  and 


OH.  xxsii.  1— 32.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPHET  EZEKIEL.  175 

people  of  that  land  have  committed,  and  which  an  omniscient  and  righteous  Ruler 
cannot  possibly  pass  unnoticed  and  unrebuked.  According  to  his  metaphorical 
habit,  Ezekiel  pictures  Egypt  as  a  young  and  ravening  lion,  seizing  and  devouring 
prey ;  as  a  dragon  or  crocodile,  troubling  the  waters  with  its  feet,  and  fouling  the  rivers. 
Such  creatures  are  regarded  by  men  as  noxious,  and  as  fit  to  be  seized  and  destroyed. 

I.  The  cause  of  a  nation's  moral  noxiousness.  The  ultimate  cause,  recognized 
by  inquirers  who  penetrate  beneath  the  surface,  is  estrangement  from  Q-od,  a  spirit  of 
rebelliousness  against  God,  leading  to  the  violation  of  Divine  Law  and  defiance  of 
Divine  authority. 

n.  The  manifbbtations  of  a  nation's  moral  noxiousness.  1.  An  ungodly  people 
is  its  own  enemy.  Its  irreligiousness  reacts  upon  itself,  and  saps  the  springs  of  national 
life.  2.  Its  example  is  injurious  to  surrounding  peoples,  who  are  in  danger  of  being 
corrupted  thereby ;  for  "  evil  communications  corrupt  good  manners."  ^.  Mischief  is 
done  by  unprincipled  states  by  fostering  discord,  suspicion,  and  war.  The  weak  are 
oppressed,  and  powerful  rivals  are  provoked  to  hostilities.  The  peace  of  the  world  is 
ever  threatened  by  ambitious,  aggressive,  and  quarrelsome  nations. 

III.  The  punishment  op  a  nation's  noxiousness.  In  the  figurative  language  of 
Ezekiel,  the  dragon  is  captured,  dragged  to  the  shore,  and  suffered  to  die,  so  that  its 
flesh  is  left  to  be  consumed  by  birds  and  beasts,  and  its  blood  is  mingled  with  the 
waters  of  the  rivers.  By  this  it  is  intimated  that  Egypt,  as  a  punishment  for  the  evil 
and  mischief  it  has  wrought,  shall  be  brought  low,  its  power  crippled,  and  its  glory 
dimmed. — T. 

Vers.  7 — 10. — The  sympathy  of  nature  and  of  man  with  a  fallen  people.  The  great- 
ness of  the  catastrophe  by  which  Egypt  is  to  be  overwhelmed  is  depicted  by  the 
propbet  in  a  striking  and  poetical  manner.  It  is  represented  that  an  impression  is 
made  thereby  upon  the  heavenly  bodies  by  which  the  earth  is  illumined,  and  upon  the 
nations  and  kings  who  are  astonished  witnesses  of  the  overthrow  of  one  of  the  greatest 
monarchies  of  the  world. 

I.  The  luminaries  of  the  day  and  of  the  niqht  veil  theie  splendour  and 
WITHDRAW  their  SHINING.  The  Scriptures  teach  us  that  all  nature  is  a  vehicle  for 
the  manifestation  of  Divine  attributes,  and  that  creation,  in  a  very  real  sense,  is  one. 
Hence  the  sympathy  appointed  between  nature  and  humanity.  When  men's  sins  are 
grievous,  the  floods  cover  the  earth  and  sweep  its  guilty  inhabitants  into  destruction. 
When  the  children  of  light  strive  in  battle  with  the  children  of  darkness,  the  sun 
stands  still  to  prolong  the  hours  of  victory  and  pursuit.  When  the  Saviour  expires 
upon  the  cross,  it  is  amidst  thick  darkness.  When  the  Holy  Spirit  is  given,  it  is  with 
the  rush  of  wind  and  with  lambent  flames.  These  are  but  some  instances  of  the  part 
which  nature  plays  in  human  history.  No  wonder,  then,  that  when  the  Almighty,  by 
the  hand  of  his  servant  Nebuchadnezzar,  smites  Egypt  to  its  fall,  the  sun,  the  moon, 
and  the  stars  should  be  represented  as  withholding  their  light,  as  weeping  over  the 
calamities  of  one  of  the  greatest  of  human  powers. 

II.  The  peoples  and  their  kings  abe  amazed  and  tremble  as  fob  their  own 
SAFETY.  1.  They  experience  a  natural  compassion  for  fallen  greatness ;  it  is  a  spectacle 
fitted  to  melt  every  heart.  Envy  and  hatred  vanish  in  the  presence  of  misfortune  so 
appalling.  2.  They  feel  themselves  in  the  presence  of  a  supernatural  power,  which  is 
righteousness  taking  the  form  of  judicial  interposition.  The  consciousness  of  the  near- 
ness and  action  of  such  a  power  is  enough  to  rouse  any  nation  from  insensibility, 
secularity,  and  unspirituality.  The  hand  of  God  is  seen  and  the  voice  of  Grod  is  heard. 
The  Lord  himself  is  near.  3.  They  mingle  with  the  general  apprehension  of  the 
activity  of  supernatural  justice  a  certain  apprehension  and  fear  with  regard  to  them- 
selves. _  Have  they  not  shared  in  some  measure  Egypt's  sin  ?  Have  they  not  reason 
to  dread  Egypt's  punishment?  Who  are  they  that  they  should  be  exempt  from  the 
retributive  justice  of  the  Eternal  ?  The  sword  is  brandished  before  them :  may  it  not 
smite  them  ?    They  tremble  every  man  for  his  own  life. — T. 

Vers.  11, 12. — The  sword  the  implement  of  Divine  judgment.  The  sword  has  been 
a  mighty  factor  in  human  history.  However  peace  and  harmony  may  be  the  ideal 
state  of  human  society,  the  chronicles  of  the  past  and  the  observation  of  the  present 


176  THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxxii.  1—32. 

concur  to  assure  us  that  there  are  elements  in  man's  nature  which  will  surely  reveal 
themselves  in  hostility  and  in  mutual  ill  will,  in  bloodshed,  and  in  violent  death. 
Nation  rises  against  nation.  The  sword  is  drawn,  and  is  only  sheathed  when  one 
combatant  is  constrained  to  submit  to  the  superior  power  of  the  other. 

I.  Thebe  is  a  sense  in  which  the  bwobd  op  the  mighty  conqubrob  is  thb 
■WOBD  OF  God  himself.  When  the  King  of  Babylon  attacked  the  King  of  Egypt, 
there  is  no  doubt  he  was  actuated  by  motives  of  hostility,  of  personal  ambition,  perhaps 
of  revenge.  But  for  all  this,  and  although  he  knew  it  not,  he  was  the  minister  of  God, 
was  doing  God's  work,  executing  God's  purposes.  The  Almighty  can  overrule  the 
irrathful  passions  of  men  to  bring  about  the  objects  he  desires  to  compass. 

II.  The  sword  of  the  conquebob  is  the  symbol  of  supkbmb  powbb.  Men  talk  of 
submitting  matters  to  the  arbitrament  of  the  sword,  implying  that  there  is  no  possi- 
bility of  going  behind  and  beyond  this.  In  all  earthly  government  physical  force  is 
the  ultimate  resource;  it  may  not  be  brought  prominently  forward,  but  it  lies  in  the 
background,  to  be  used  when  necessary.  God's  power  controls  and  rules  the  nations  ; 
he  cannot  be  resisted.  "  The  nations  are  as  nothing  before  him  ;  they  are  counted  as 
less  than  nothing  and  vanity ;  "  "  Let  not  the  rebellious  exalt  themselves  1 " 

III.  The  conqttebob's  swobd  is  the  emblem  of  the  execution  of  Divine 
JUSTICE.  We  speak  of  the  sword  of  the  magistrate,  as  well  as  of  the  sword  of  the 
soldier :  "  He  beareth  not  the  sword  in  vain."  There  is  certainly  no  allusion  in  this 
prophetic  passage  to  judicial  functions,  if  they  are  understood  to  be  distinct  from 
military  operations.  Yet  in  God's  hand  the  sword  is  not  a  weapon  of  violence,  far  less 
of  injustice.  He  never  smites  vindictively,  but  always  as  a  righteous  Ruler  and  an 
impartial  Judge.  -Even  in  warfare  he  is  exercising  a  magisterial  as  well  as  a  military 
office  and  power.  His  sword  subdues  the  rebel,  corrects  the  offender,  and  establishes 
the  rule  of  justice,  and  brings  about  the  purposes  of  equitable  and  happy  peace. — T. 

Vers.  17 — 32. — The  gathering  of  the  guilty  nations  in  Sades.  This  vision  of  the 
poet-prophet  is  one  of  the  boldest  and  most  sublime  in  the  whole  compass  of  literature. 
As  a  lofty  flight  of  imagination  it  excites  the  wonder  and  admiration  of  every  reader 
gifted  with  poetical  appreciation.  Ezekiel  is  bringing  to  a  close  his  prophecies  regarding 
the  nations  by  which  the  land  of  Israel  was  encompassed.  How  far  from  the  narrow- 
ness  and  the  lack  of  sympathy  sometimes  attributed  to  the  Hebrews  was  the  prophet 
oi  the  Oriental  captivity  1  How  wide  the  sweep  of  his  vision !  How  resuiy  his 
sympathy  for  the  fate  of  other  peoples  than  his  own  1  And,  above  all,  how  sublime 
lus  conception  of  the  unity  and  the  true  immortality  of  the  human  race  1  As  he  was 
not  limited  by  space,  but  interested  himself  in  the  territories  and  the  dominions  of  distant 
monarchs,  so  he  disdained  the  bounds  of  time,  passed  beyond  this  scene  of  discipline 
•nd  probation,  and  anticipated  the  community  of  the  heathen  nations  in  the  realm  of 
Hades.  There  his  prophetic  spirit  beheld  Pharaoh  and  his  people  surrounded  by  the 
kings  and  armies  and  multitudes  from  other  lands,  participating  in  a  just  and 
common  fate. 

L  The  common  sin  of  the  nations.  Of  all  those  mentioned  by  the  prophet,  it  may 
be  said  that  they  were  unfaithful  to  their  trust,  and  incurred  the  just  displeasure  of  the 
Euler  of  the  universe.  1.  They  had  all  forgotten  God,  for  it  is  in  this  light  that  we 
must  view  their  idolatry.  2.  They  had  all  sought  their  own  aggrandizement  and  glory 
rather  than  the  life  of  righteousness.  3.  They  had  all  been  rapacious,  violent,  and 
unscrupulous  in  their  treatment  of  neighbouring  peoples. 

11.  The  common  doom  of  the  nations.  It  is  said  of  one  after  another  of  these 
guilty  states,  that  they  were  all  slain  with  the  sword,  and  bore  their  shame  with  them 
that  go  down  to  the  pit,  to  the  midst  of  Sheol.  It  is  said  that  "  their  iniquities  were 
upon  their  bones,"  by  which  we  may  understand  that  their  sin  clave  to  them,  that  they 
were  counted  responsible  for  it,  and  were  required  to  bear  the  penalties  attaching  to  it. 
It  would  be  absurd  to  attempt  a  precise  explanation  of  the  poetical  language  of  this 
splendid  vision,  which  is  utterly  insusceptible  of  logical  analysis.  It  expresses  th« 
mood  of  the  inspired  prophet ;  it  conveys  a  great  moral  truth ;  it  aids  us  in  the 
appreciation  of  national  continuity  and  vitality;  it  brings  powerfully  before  our  mind 
the  amenability  of  governments  and  states  to  the  moral  law  and  jurisdiction  of  the 
Eternal  Righteousness, 


OH.  xxxn.  1— 32.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  177 

in.  The  couuon  woe  and  lamentation  of  the  nations.  "  Son  of  man,"  said  the 
Lord, "  wail  for  the  multitude  of  Egypt."  Although  the  nations  are  represeated  aa 
lying  still  in  the  depths  of  Sheol — ^their  swords  under  their  heads — yet  they  are  repre- 
sented as  in  some  measure  conscious ;  Pharaoh  of  Egypt  being  "  comforted "  at  the 
awful  approach  of  hia  compeers  in  pride  and  terror,  and  the  Zidoniana  as  ashamed 
because  of  their  sin  and  its  recompense.  Mourning  and  lamentation  must  ensue  upon 
sin,  even  though  during  its  commission  there  be  insensibility  and  obduracy. 

IV.  The  common  testimony  op  the  nations.  The  fate  of  the  colossal  world- 
empires  of  antiquity  has  preached,  in  tones  of  power  and  in  terms  of  unmistakalJe 
preUMion,  to  the  after-times.  These  nations,  in  their  worldly  pride  and  in  their  provi- 
dential fall,  hAve  t»ught  mankind  that  there  is  but  one  sure  foundation  for  a  people's 
well-being,  and  that  those  who  build  upon  another  foundation  are  doomed  to  fall.  God 
himself  is  the  Source  of  true  national  life  and  prosperity.  Where  he  is  repudiated  or 
forgotten,  ruin  is  sure.  Where  he  is  honoured  and  obeyed,  there  and  there  only  will 
there  prevail  progress  and  stability  and  peace. — ^T. 

Vers.  1 — 10. — Judgment  on  a  proud  king.  The  mightiest  king  is  not  irresponsible. 
Although  he  may  find  no  authority  on  earth  to  exercise  control  over  him,  he  shall  find 
that  an  unseen  Power  holds  him  in  check,  and  chastises  his  oppressions.  From  the 
ubiquity  of  God's  sceptre  he  cannot  escape.    We  have  here  described — 

I.  A  MONSTER  OF  MISCHIEF.  He  is  represented  as  "  a  young  lion  of  the  nations," 
as  "  a  whale  in  the  seas."  He  is  noteworthy,  not  for  intellectual  or  manly  qualities, 
but  merely  for  animal  strength  and  violence.  This  is  ignoble  and  infamous.  This 
is  to  degrade  one's  self.  He  who  was  created  to  be  a  ruler  over  the  animal  tribes  lowers 
himself  to  be  their  equal.  His  crown  is  gone.  To  do  good  is  worthy  of  a  man ;  to  do 
mischief  is  beast-like.  "  Thou  troubledst  the  waters  with  thy  feet,  and  fouledst  their 
rivers."  It  is  easy  to  do  mischief;  it  is  tenfold  harder  to  do  permanent  good.  A  maniac 
can  destroy  in  an  hour  what  a  man  of  genius  has  taken  long  years  to  create.  The  king 
who  devotes  himself  to  aggressive  warfare  lowers  himself  to  the  level  of  a  beast.  A 
lion  of  the  forest  does  the  same. 

II.  His  EUMiLiATiNa  oaftueb.  "I  will  therefore  spread  out  my  net  over  thee." 
The  man  who  has  been  a  firebrand  among  the  nations,  a  pestilent  destroyer,  God 
often  takes,  with  facility,  in  one  of  his  nets.  In  the  net  of  bodily  disease  King  Herod 
was  taken — "was  eaten  up  of  worms,  and  died."  Sometimes  God  captures  men  by 
means  of  their  own  vices.  Their  lust  or  their  drunkenness  hath  slain  them.  Some- 
times God  uses  the  plot  of  a  conspirator,  the  intrigue  of  a  palace  cabal.  Sometimes 
God  uses  the  simplest  agency  of  nature,  as  when  the  snow-flakes  overwhelmed 
Napoleon's  army,  and  defeated  his  purpose.  A  change  of  wind  is  sufScient  to  capture 
the  royal  monster,  as  when  God  turned  the  waves  of  the  Red  Sea  over  Pharaoh  and  his 
host.  It  is  the  height  of  folly  for  a  king  to  be  self-willed  or  to  lose  sight  of  the  King 
of  kings. 

III.  His  complete  desteuotion.  "I  will  cast  thee  forth  upon  the  open  field." 
The  figure  is  maintained,  viz.  that  the  dead  carcase  of  the  monster  shall  lie  unburied 
in  the  open  field.  This  is  not  spoken  of  the  person  of  Pharaoh,  but  of  his  imperial 
power,  his  existence  as  a  monarch.  His  rule  was  to  be  destroyed.  His  crown  and 
sceptre  should  pass  into  hostile  hands.  Improbable  as  this  event  seemed  at  the  moment 
jf  Ezekiel's  announcement,  it  nevertheless  came  to  pass.  The  dynasty  of  the  Pharaohs 
ceased.  The  line  of  the  Ptolemies  occupied  the  throne.  The  improbable  very 
frequently  becomes  the  actual. 

IV.  Notorious  dishonour.  "I  will  fill  the  beasts  of  the  whole  earth  with  thee." 
The  extreme  idea  of  degradation  and  infamy  is  here  delineated.  Men  crave  for  posthu- 
mous fame.  They  yearn  to  have  a  place  of  honour  in  the  memory  of  coming  genera- 
tions. For  the  lifeless  body  to  be  treated  with  insult  and  neglect  is  a  perpetual 
dishonour.  Still  greater  is  the  dishonour  when  precious  human  blood  is  poured  out,  as 
a  worthless  thing,  to  irrigate  the  soil.  Herein  is  the  old  doctrine  confirmed,  "  They 
that  despise  me  shall  be  lightly  esteemed."  In  silent,  unexpected  methods  God 
vindicates  himself. 

V.  His  funeral  dibos.  "I  will  cover  the  sun  with  a  cloud,  and  the  moon  shall 
not  give  her  light."    The  inanimate  objects  of  nature   are  poetically  described  as 

EZEKIEL ^11.  V 


178  THE  BOOK   OP  THE   PROPHET  BZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxm.  1—32. 

sympathizing  with  the  doleful  event.  Man  and  nature  are  linked  together.  Man's 
fall  was  felt  throughout  the  natural  world.  "The  whole  creation  groaneth  and 
travaileth  together  in  pain  until  now."  Man's  recovery  will  be  the  consummation  of 
nature's  joy.  "  Then  shall  all  the  trees  of  the  field  rejoice ; "  "  There  shall  be  new 
heavens  and  a  new  earth."  If  only  to  give  to  men  a  Uvelier  impression  of  the  greatness 
of  the  disaster  in  Egypt,  the  luminaries  of  heaven  are  supposed  to  hide  their  faces  in  a 
mantle.  In  Egypt  the  light  of  the  sun  and  of  the  moon  are  most  brilliant.  Seldom 
ever  is  a  cloud  seen.  Hence  the  singular  occurrence  of  sudden  darkness  would  leave  a 
deeper  effect  upon  the  human  mind.  The  distant  stars  are  moved  by  man's  rise 
or  fall. 

YI.  A  woBLD-wiDE  SHOOK.  "  I  Will  make  many  people  amazed  at  thee,  and  their 
kings  shall  be  horribly  afraid  for  thee."  Pharaoh  had  seemed  to  be  the  highest 
embodiment  of  strength.  His  army  had  been  prodigious.  The  desert  on  every  side 
had  been  a  rampart  of  defence.  His  power  was  well-established — had  been  of  long 
continuance.  His  sceptre  had  wide  renown.  If  he  fell,  who  can  stand  ?  where  could 
safety  be  found?  A  sense  of  insecurity  shook  every  monarch.  Every  man's  life 
seemed  to  tremble  in  a  balance.  Distant  nations  heard  the  news  of  Pharaoh's  fall  with 
bated  breath.  Clearly  a  tremendous  power  hovered  about  them,  all  the  more  to  be 
dreaded  because  unseen.  Each  man  felt  that  he  might  be  the  next  to  be  stricken 
down.  All  human  calculations  failed.  Calm  self-possession,  in  all  seasons,  is  the 
special  heritage  of  the  godly.— D. 

Vers.  11 — 16. — The  downfall  of  one  involves  the  downfall  of  many.  Every  man  is 
linked  to  society  by  organic  ties.  A  king  especially  holds  an  important  and  responsible 
place.  He  is  the  key-stoQe  of  the  arch.  "  No  man  iiveth  unto  himself."  He  lifts 
others  up  or  drags  others  down.     He  goes  not  to  heaven,  nor  to  hell,  alone. 

I.  Wab  IB  THE  BOOUEGB  IN  God's  HAND.  "  By  the  swords  of  the  mighty  will  I 
cause  thy  multitudes  to  fall."  Even  the  angry  passions  of  men  God  utilizes  for 
righteous  purposes.  However  reluctant,  the  devil  shall  become  his  servant.  Sin  shall 
illustrate  the  splendours  of  his  grace.  His  amazing  power  shall  form  and  mould  all 
things  to  his  will.    The  cruel  sword  shall  serve  to  establish  the  empire  of  universal 


II.  One  Han's  dbstbuotion  inoludes  ten  thousand  others.  Every  man  is,  in 
greater  measure  or  less,  a  moral  magnet.  The  fall  of  a  great  commercial  house 
brings  down  to  ruin  smaller  enterprises.  The  bankruptcy  of  an  employer  of  labour 
brings  loss  to  all  his  servants.  If  the  commander-in-chief  falls  in  battle,  the  entire 
army  is  weakened.  If  a  throne  is  overturned,  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  land  suffer. 
We  are  bound  each  to  each  by  manifold  ties,  and  influence  each  other's  destiny.  A 
sense  of  responsibility  should  lend  dignity  to  all  our  words  and  actions. 

III.  Human  dbstkuotion  is  measured  in  nature's  desolation.  "  I  will  destroy 
all  the  beasts  thereof  from  beside  the  great  waters ; "  "  The  country  shall  be  destitute 
of  that  whereof  it  was  fuU."  Under  man's  care,  cattle  increase,  and  the  fields  become 
trebly  fertile.  But  if  the  inhabitants  are  swept  off  by  the  sword,  domestic  cattle 
disappear,  and  wild  beasts  roam  at  large.  The  land,  uncultivated,  cannot  maintain  the 
flocks.  Desolation  spreads  far  and  wide.  Barrenness  appears  where  formerly  plenty 
smiled.     The  face  of  nature  mourns  in  sympathy  with  ruined  man. 

IV.  The  knowledge  of  God  is  well  purchased  with  the  loss  op  all  thxnqs. 
"  When  I  shall  make  the  land  of  Egypt  desolate,  then  shall  they  know  that  I  am  the 
Lord."  All  knowledge  is  power,  but  the  knowledge  of  God  is  power  of  the  highest 
kind;  it  is  life.  To  know  God  is  practical  wisdom;  it  is  the  only  path  to  safety, 
elevation,  and  honour.  If  the  issue  of  suffering,  loss,  or  defeat  in  battle  be  to  gain  the 
knowledge  of  Q«d,  then,  however  jjreat  the  outlay,  the  reward  is  amply  satisfying.  To 
know  God  is  the  way  to  obtain  likeness  to  God;  and  this  is  the  supreme  privilege  of 
every  man.   This  is  wealth  that  is  abidin;:;,  joy  that  is  eternal ;  honour  that  never  fades. 

V.  Severe  disaster  brinqb  into  view  the  ukity  of  the  human  race.  "  The 
daughters  of  the  nations  shall  lament  her."  The  prosperity  of  a  man  or  of  a  nation 
often  excites  envy.  But  distress  awakens  compassion.  The  sight  of  suffering  moves 
into  action  the  better  part  of  human  nature ;  it  awakens  the  deepest  feelings  of  the 
sold.    In  •  time  of  great  disaster,  men  forget  their  rivalries  and  hostilities,  and,  by 


OH.  XXXII.  1—32.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET   EZEKIBL.  179 

their  deeds,  proclaim  the  oneness  of  the  human  family.  Such  sympathy  in  suffering 
has  a  benign  and  purifying  influence  ©n  human  nature.  The  night-dew  is  a  prepara- 
tion for  higher  fertility  and  beauty  in  the  garden,  both  in  nature  and  in  the  soul. — D. 

Vers.  17 — 32. — OoTHipanionship  in  woe.  The  prophet  is  a  man  of  power.  He  is  a 
king  bearing  an  invisible  sceptre.  As  a  monarch  wields  only  a  borrowed  power — a 
power  lent  by  God — so  a  true  prophet  is  God's  vicegerent.  Here  he  unfolds  a  terrible 
vision,  the  outline  of  a  woeful  reality.  He  leads  the  Egyptian  king  to  the  mouth  of  a 
vast  abyss,  in  which  lie  multitudes  of  the  vanquished  and  the  slain.  He  is  invited  to 
contemplate  the  condition  of  those  thus  dishonoured  by  the  King  of  Babylon.  And  he 
is  forewarned  that  such  will  be  his  doom.  Escape  was  just  possible,  but  it  was  almost 
a  forlorn  hope. 

L  Doty  ofttimeb  is  bxcbedinglt  painful.  God's  servant  is  called  upon  to  wail 
He  ia  even  an  agent,  though  a  subordinate  agent,  in  casting  king  and  people  into  the 
abyss  of  death.  He  is  under  obligation  to  act  for  God.  The  path  of  duty  is  often 
severely  rugged ;  yet  no  other  path  is  smoother,  though  another  path  may  seem  to  be. 
The  course  of  righteousness  will  be  in  the  end  peace,  but  in  the  process  there  is  stri  ''o 
and  hard  discipline.  The  harvest  will  be  plentiful,  but  severe  exertion  is  required,  and 
faith  is  put  to  the  strain.  The  pain  of  travail  must  precede  the  joy  of  young  life. 
Through  toil  we  pass  to  honour. 

II.  Sm  ALWAYS  LEADS  TO  TERRIBLE  DEGRADATION.  Sin  is  already  real  degradation, 
although  very  often  men  do  not  see  it.  But  the  disease  will  appear  by-and-by  on  the 
exterior  circumstance.  The  seed  will  come  to  the  fruitage.  Sin  is  no  "  respecter  of 
persons."  Even  "  the  daughters  of  the  famous  nations  " — eminent  for  strength  and 
beauty — "shall  be  cast  down  into  the  nether  parts  of  the  earth."  There  shall  be 
visible  a  terrible  downfall,  an  unmitigated  degradation.  As  the  .lower  orders  of 
creatures  cannot  sin,  neither  can  they  suffer  such  degradation.  The  balances  are  in  the 
hands  of  supreme  justice,  and  the  hour  of  final  retribution  draws  on  apace. 

**  Though  the  mills  of  God  grind  slowly,  yet  they  grind  exceeding  smaU." 

III.  SbLF-BSTEBM    IB    NO    BAFEGUAED    AGAINST    JUST   RETRIBUTION.      "  Whom   dost 

thou  pass  in  beauty?  Go  down, and  be  thou  laid  with  the  uncircumoised."  The  spirit 
of  vanity  may  tempt  us  to  say,  "  We  are  better  than  they.  The  doom  of  others  will 
not  be  our  doom."  It  ia  marvellous  how  men  are  taken  in  the  web  of  self-deception. 
Yet  no  external  circumstance  has  ever  yet  saved  men  from  the  effects  of  unrighteous- 
ness. Riches  have  not  saved  them.  The  beauty  of  Cleopatra  did  not  protect  her  from 
a  terrible  doom.  The  honour  of  our  contemporaries  cannot  save  us.  Posterity  will 
easily  reverse  the  present  judgment  of  men,  and  the  hand  of  justice  will  tear  in  pieces 
our  flimsy  reputation.    Present  fame  may  be  future  disgrace. 

IV.  Association  with  others  will  be  determined  by  moral  affinities.  In 
the  present  state,  men  are  associated  by  natural  afBnities  and  by  external  circumstances. 
But  such  arrangements  are  temporary  and  provisional  only.  Children  nursed  at  the 
same  breast  and  fed  at  the  same  table  will  have  their  final  portion  as  separate  as  the 
poles  asunder.  Now  kings  consort  with  kings,  nobles  with  nobles,  poets  with  poets ; 
but  in  the  final  apportionment,  the  righteous  of  every  social  grade  will  consort  with  the 
righteous ;  vile  kings  will  consort  with  vile  beggars.  Earthly  circumstance  and  pomp 
will  have  disappeared.  Only  moral  distinctions  will  remain.  Association  in  sin  must 
terminate  by  association  in  woe.  Human  beings  and  all  beings  gravitate  to  that  state 
f  JT  which  they  are  fitted.  No  affinities  are  so  deep  and  strong  as  moral  affinities,  and, 
though  for  a  time  suppressed,  they  will  by-and-by  be  uppermost. 

V.  The  ruin  of  others  is  impotent  to  deter  from  sin.  "The  strong  among 
the  mighty  shall  speak  to  him  out  of  the  midst  of  hell."  If  only  men  would  be  warned 
by  the  fall  and  ruin  of  others,  we  might  hope  that  all  future  generations  of  mankind 
would  be  saved.  There  are  beacons  without  number  to  frighten  men  away  from  the 
rocks  and  quicksands  of  peril,  yet  all  to  no  purpose.  We  think  others  to  be  in  peril, 
not  ourselves.  Alas  1  "  the  heart  is  deceitful  above  all  things."  Nothing  will  turn  us 
away  from  the  fascinating  eye  of  sin  but  the  working  of  almighty  grace  within. 
Beacons  become  to  us  what  scarecrows  do  to  birds — they  soon  cease  to  alarm. 

VI.  Self-inflation  is  the  prelude  to  eternal  shame.    "  They  were  the  terror 


180  THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  EZKKIEL.    [ch.  xxxii.  1— 32. 

of  the  mighty  in  the  land  of  the  living ;  "  "  With  their  terror,  they  are  [now]  ashamed 
of  their  might."  After  all,  what  a  frail  reeii  is  the  mightiest  sceptre  or  the  most 
martial  arm  I  What  real  weakness  is  at  the  heart  of  him  who  brandishes  the  gory 
•word  1  Like  the  frog  who  attempted  to  inflate  himself  to  the  magnitude  of  an  ox,  so 
the  paltry  man  who  assays  to  play  the  tyrant  soon  collapses.  One  sharp  prick,  and 
the  windbag  soon  collapses.  As  a  child  feels  overwhelmed  with  shame  when  he  sees 
in  the  clear  light  of  morning  the  tree  or  the  gate-post  that  terrified  him  in  the  darkness ; 
■o  men  at  length  discover  the  emptiness  of  the  monarch,  whose  frown  was  for  a  moment 
their  terror.  All  pretence  to  power  and  authority  shall  presently  be  hurled  to  the 
ground,  ay,  cast  into  the  pit  of  oblivion.     All  real  power  shall  abide. 

VII.  God'b  tekkor  is  supreme  over  uan's.  "I  have  caused  my  terror  in  the 
land  of  the  living."  There  is  such  a  thing  as  power  in  the  universe — ^an  infinite  power — 
befiire  which  it  becomes  every  man  to  tremble ;  but  this  power  is  in  the  hand  of  Gnd. 
"Jehovah  reigneth,  therefore  let  the  people  tremble."  "Before  him  the  inhabitants 
of  the  earth  are  as  grasshoppers ;  they  are  like  the  small  dust  of  the  balance."  His 
power  is  real,  all-pervading,  all-enduring.  No  being  in  the  universe  can  diminish  it 
nor  resist  it.  Being  a  reed  power,  it  is  becoming  that  it  should  inspire  us  with  awe. 
The  terror  which  tyrants  and  warriors  awaken  ii  only  for  a  moment.  The  sham  soon 
gets  exposed.  But  presently  the  Kincr  of  kings  will  make  even  tyrants  shake,  and 
the  hearts  of  warriors  melt.  "Vengeance  is  mine,"  saith  God;  "I  will  repay." 
When  JehoTah  appears,  tyrants  hide  themselves  "  in  dens  and  caves  of  the  earth. 

"Fear  him,  ye  saints,  and  ye  will  then 
Have  nothing  else  to  fear." 

D. 

Ten,  1 — \Q.—Ood?»  teaching  in  history.  As  the  prophet  continues  his  utterance  in 
the  same  strain,  our  thought  is  directed  to  the  same  class  of  truths,  and  we  learn — 

L  That  great  sikkers  are  great  troublers.  Egypt  was  a  young  lion  among 
the  nations,  fierce,  dangerous,  dreaded  (ver.  2).  It  was  a  crocodile  in  the  river, 
"  breaking  forth,"  "  troubling  the  waters,  and  "  fouling  "  them  (ver.  2).  Great  cities 
like  Bome  and  Sparta,  powerful  kingdoms  like  Assyria  and  Egypt,  strong  men  like 
Scylla  and  Napoleon,  have  beeu  sad  troublers  of  their  time.  They  have  been  invaders 
of  territory,  destroyers  of  institutions,  disturbers  of  domestic  life.  And  whenever 
strength  is  found  dissociated  from  Christian  principle  and  the  Christian  spirit,  there 
must  always  be  grave  danger  of  trouble.  To  propound  their  own  notions,  to  contrive 
their  own  comfort,  to  extend  their  own  influence,  unprincipled  or  selfish  men  vrill  use 
their  strength  to  disturb  their  neigh botirs'  peace,  reckless  of  the  good  they  are  undoing 
and  of  the  misery  and  mischief  they  are  causing. 

n.  That  they  find  themselves  defeated  in  the  end.  God  spreads  out  his 
net  (ver.  3),  and  the  raging  animal,  the  powerful  fish,  is  taken  in  it.  In  the  height  of 
their  power  great  nations  and  strong  men  imagine  themselves  to  be  absolutely  secure, 
and  they  laugh  at  the  designs  of  their  enemies.  But  they  do  not  know  what  forces  are 
at  work  either  within  or  around  them ;  and  they  do  not  calculate  that  there  is  One 
who  is  working  above  them  and  against  them.  And  as  surely  as  the  night  follows  the 
day,  the  hour  of  darkness  will  come  to  those  who  use  the  light  of  heaven  to  abuse  their 
privileges  and  to  wrong  their  fellow-men.  Defeat  and  calamity  await  them.  And 
Bometimes  it  will  be  found — 

m.  That  falpable  discomfiture  bucoeeds  defeat.  This  great  dragon  of  tht 
deep  could  not  be  buried  out  of  sight  j  its  carcase  was  "  upon  the  green  field,"  "  laid 
upon  the  mountains,"  and  "  filling  the  valleys,"  even  "  watering  the  land  with  its  blood  " 
(vers.  4—6).    It  could  not  be  hidden ;  the  ruin  of  the  once  proud  kingdom  should  be 

"  Oroas  as  a  mountain,  open,  palpable." 

Every  eye  should  see  it,  every  tongue  should  talk  about  it.    Let  men  who  are  now 

Srominent  in  power  take  heed  lest  they  should  become  conspicuous  for  shame  and  for 
estitution,  lest  the  name  that  is  now  on  the  lip  of  praise  should  be  branded  with 
dishonour.  Unrighteousness,  impurity,  and  selfish  cruelty,  when  they  have  rim  their 
guilty  and  wretched  course,  will  be  held  up  before  the  eyes  of  men  to  receive  the 
execration  they  deserve.    The  false  divinity  of  to-day  will  be  the  fiend  of  to-morrow. 


CH.  XXXII.  1—32.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  181 

rV.  That  the  discomfitubb  of  one  may  mean  the  confusion  of  mamt.  When 
Egypt's  light  went  out,  the  world  immediately  around  it  would  be  in  darkness ;  all 
those  who  were  walking  in  its  light  would  be  utterly  benighted  and  confused  (vers.  7, 
8).  If  we  live  in  no  better  aod  no  more  enduring  light  than  that  of  a  very  strong  but 
unprincipled  power,  we  may  prepare  for  utter  darkness  before  long.  Our  light  will  ba 
extinguished ;  we  shall  lose  our  guide,  and  grope  our  way  miserably.  Well  it  is  for 
those  who  choose  the  Sun  of  Righteousness,  the  Light  of  the  world,  that  in  the  beams  of 
his  Divine  truth  they  may  rejoice  all  the  day,  may  do  their  life-work,  may  "  have 
light  at  eventide,''  and  may  be  ready  for  a  still  brighter  and  everlasting  morning  under 
other  skies. — 0. 

Vers.  13, 14. — The  unvisited  river ;  or,  life  at  a  low  level.  The  great  river  appro- 
priately represented  the  great  nation  which  it  enriched ;  and  the  picture  of  the  fall  of 
the  kingdom  includes  the  desertion  of  the  banks  of  these  "  great  waters  "  by  man  and 
beast  (ver.  14);  and  also  the  sinking  of  the  river  itself:  "Then  will  I  cause  their 
waters  to  subside"  (Fairbairn's  translation).  Such  a  river  as  the  Nile  may  well 
illustrate — 

I.  A  NOBLE  LIFE.  It  is  a  source  of  beauty  and  fertility,  and  therefore  of  enrichment, 
to  the  land  through  which  it  runs.  Itself  an  object  of  delight  to  the  eye,  it  is  the 
source  of  verdure  all  along  its  banks.  By  its  overflow,  or  through  simple  agricultural 
appliances,  it  waters  the  whole  district  in  which  it  flo  ivs,  and  makes  all  the  differenoa 
between  barrenness  and  abundance.  Thousands  of  animals  drink  of  it  and  bathe  in  it, 
while  the  inhabitants  of  town  and  village  flock  to  its  banks  in  their  various  necessities 
A  noble  human  life  may  be  all  this  in  a  higher  sphere.  1.  It  may  add  very  con- 
siderably to  that  spiritual  worth  and  beauty  on  which  Christ  looks  down  with  Divine 
satisfaction.  2.  It  may  be  the  source  of  all  kinds  of  good — of  health,  of  sustenance,  of 
knowledge,  of  wisdom,  of  purity,  of  piety ;  of  life  at  its  best  below,  of  the  beginning  of 
the  life  eternal.  3.  It  is  a  constant  source  uf  blessing.  As  the  river  runs,  not  spasmo- 
dically, but  night  and  day,  continually  sending  forth  its  refreshing  and  nourishing 
moisture  into  the  land,  so  a  true,  Christian  life  is  incessantly  and  unconsciously  com- 
municating good,  in  many  forms,  to  those  around  it. 

II.  A  LIFE  PITIFULLY  EBDUCBD.  A  Very  pitiful  sight  would  be  a  river  in  such  • 
state  as  that  here  imagined  (rather  than  foreseen).  Instead  of  being  what  it  once  was, 
it  is  now  to  the  prophet's  eye  a  diminished  stream,  its  waters  are  low  (not  deep,  but 
sunk ;  "  the  verb  is  properly  to  '  sink ' "),  and  lie  far  beneath  its  banks ;  and  they  are 
such  that  DO  beast  cares  to  drink  of  them ;  no  man  approaches  to  use  them  for  the' 
purposes  of  human  life,  whether  of  nourishment  or  of  cleansing.  The  river  is  useless, 
worthless,  abandoned  to  itself.  How  much  more  pitiable  is  the  life  that  has  been 
reduced ;  the  life  th(^  has  svnle,  that  moves  not  any  longer  on  the  higher  plane  of 
heavenly  wisdom,  but  only  on  the  low  and  muddy  levels  of  selfishness,  of  covetousnesg, 
of  a  base  indulgence;  the  life  that  has  shrivelled  up  into  a  poor  dirty  stream,  no  longer 
reflecting  the  beauty  that  is  about  it  or  the  glory  that  is  above  it ;  the  life  that  is 
unvisited,  that  no  man  cares  to  consult,  by  which  no  virtuous  man  directs  his  own, 
from  which  no  man  gains  any  strength,  or  impetus,  or  pure  refreshment,  which  does  no 
man  any  spiritual  good;  the  life  that  is  severely  left  alone  I 

m.  The  cause  of  its  decline.  If  any  river  ba  thus  actually  reduced  (as  in 
Ezekiel's  thought),  it  is  because  it  is  no  longer  fed  as  it  once  was  by  the  rains  of  heaven. 
If  a  noble  human  life  is  thus  reduced,  it  is  because  it  is  no  longer  supplied  from  above. 
It  lacks  the  truth,  the  influences,  the  sustaining  power,  which  should  come  to  it  from 
God.  These  may  be  cut  off  by  some  serious  sin ;  or  they  may  be  withdrawn  because 
we  no  longer  keep  open  the  channels  through  which  they  come.  1.  Keep  the  mind 
open  to  all  Divine  wisdom  and  the  heart  to  all  holy  influences.  2.  Draw  down  the 
renewing  rains  of  Heaven  by  constant  communion  and  earnest  prayer.  3.  See  that  no 
"  great  transgression  "  diverts  the  waters ;  and  the  river  of  our  life  will  flow  on  to  the 
sea,  without  loss  to  its  beauty  or  its  power. — C. 

Vers.  17—32. — A  vision  of  the  unseen  world.    In  this  highly  figurative  prophetic 
utterance  we  have — 
I.  The  phofhet's  vision  itself.    He  sees  Egypt  taking  her  place,  as  a  fallen  pow«r, 


182  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  EZEKIBL.    [ch.  xxxii.  1—32 

amongst  the  departed  in  the  nether  world.  Nothing  could  pave  her;  there  was  no 
reason  why  she  should  not  go  down  as  other  guilty  powers  had  done.  "  Whom  did 
she  pass  in  heauty?"  (ver.  19).  No  distinction  could  be  made  In  her  case;  she  must 
"  go  down  and  be  laid  with  the  unoircumoised  "  (ver.  19),  "  she  and  all  her  multitude" 
^ver.  20\  "  The  strong  amongst  the  mighty  "  (in  Sheol)  give  the  latest  comer  welcome 
(ver.  21).  Assyria,  with  all  her  company,  is  there  to  greet  her ;  there,  too,  is  Persia 
jElam),  and  there  is  Scythia  (ver.  26),  with  "  their  swords  under  their  heads,  but  their 
iniquities  upon  their  bones"  (ver.  27);  Bdom  also  is  there,  with  her  kings  and 
princes,  and  "  all  the  Zidonians,  gone  down  with  the  slain."  The  old  kingdoms  that 
arose  and  that  were  sustained  by  violence  have  "  perished  with  the  sword  "  (Matt.  xxvi. 
62),  and  the  prophet  of  Jehovah  is  commissioned  to  "  cast  down  Pharaoh  "  (ver.  18)  into  i 
"  the  nether  parts  of  the  earth  "  with  them.  1.  It  is  Egypt's  sai/ate  to  be  discrowned 
of  her  power,  as  a  mighty  monarchy,  to  come  down  from  her  high  place  of  honour  and 
of  command,  to  suflfer  an  humiliating  prostration  from  which  she  could  have  no  hope  of 
recovering.  2.  It  was  Egypt's  comfort  that,  in  this  descent,  she  would  take  her  place 
amongst  the  greatest  and  strongest  powers  that  once  were  upon  the  earth,  but  that  had 
"gone  down"  to  the  shades.  Pharaoh  should  see  these,  "and  he  comforted."  She 
would  not  suffer  alone. 

II.  Its  historical  parallel.  Those  who  have  lived  as  God's  servants,  and  have 
cared  for  the  cause  of  righteousness,  for  the  kingdom  of  God,  have  watched  that  they 
might  witness  the  working  of  his  hand  among  the  great  kingdoms  of  the  earth.  And 
they  have  seen  that  issue  which  Ezekiel  here  foretells  concerning  Egypt.  They  have 
seen  great  empires,  rich  and  flourishing  cities,  powerful  republics,  that  once  "  stood 
strong  "  and  even  claimed  to  be  irnmortal,  broken  under  the  weight  of  their  iniquities, 
burdened  with  their  wealth  and  all  the  corruptions  it  engendered,  struck  by  the  holy 
hand  of  Divine  retribution,  "  go  down,"  and  disappear.  We  look  for  them  now,  but 
they  are  no  more.  The  same  skies  and  the  same  hills  and  plains  are  there ;  the  rivers 
that  ran  through  the  land  still  flow  on;  but  what  is  left  of  their  buildings,  if  anything 
is  left  at  all,  is  in  ruin;  and  the  power  that  once  was  has  utterly  departed.  It  lives  in 
nothing  but  in  story  and  in  song.     But  what  i&— 

IIL  Its  personal  application.  Not  only  the  king  or  the  prince,  but  also  "  the 
multitude,"  are  seen  in  the  nether  parts  (vers.  18,  24, 26).  The  people  are  there.  This 
directs  us  to :  1.  A  common  impending  fate.  Some  day  the  grave  will  hold  all  the 
living.  Indeed,  to  the  poet's  eye,  this  earth  is  less  the  home  of  the  living  than  the 
feetiiig-place  of  the  dead, 

"The  hills 

Bock-ribbed  and  ancient  as  the  sun,  the  valei 

Stretching  in  pensive  quietness  between ; 

The  venerable  woods,  rivers  that  move 

In  majesty,  and  the  complaining  brooks 

That  make  the  meadows  green ;  and,  poured  round  all. 

Old  ocean's  grey  and  melaiioholy  waste, 

Are  liut  the  solemn  decorations  all 

Of  the  great  tumb  of  man." 

(Bryant.) 

As  the  multitude  that  once  trod  the  earth  now  "  slumber  in  its  bosom,"  so  we  also 
shall  soon  find  our  place  beneath  the  ground.  2.  A  poetical  consolation.  Small  comfort 
would  it  be  to  Pharaoh  (see  ver.  31)  to  find  that  he  and  his  were  in  no  worse  plight 
than  other  kings  and  peoples  who  tenanted  the  shades.  But  such  as  it  was,  it  WM  at 
his  service,    .^d  it  is  quite  true,  as  the  same  writer  (jsupra)  reminds  us— 

"  Yet  not  to  thine  eternal  resting-place 
Shalt  thou  retire  alone.    Thou  shalt  lie  down 
With  patriarchs  of  the  infant  world,  with  kiugi, 
The  powerful  of  the  earth,  the  wise,  the  good, 
Fair  forms,  and  hoary  eecrs  of  ages  past, 
All  in  one  mighty  sepulchre." 

Bat  Wfl  want  some  better  consolation  than  this  very  imaginary  and  unsatiifying  one. 
Surely  this  is  a  yery  poor  alleviation  for  losing  life  and  all  that  a  true  and  full  human 
life  holds.     We  must  look  elsewhere  for  our  comfort.     And  we  shall  not  fail  to  find  it 


OH.  xxxin,  1— 33.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL. 


183 


3.  ITie  real  redeeming  thought,  viz.  that  the  future  to  which  we  look  forward,  as  the 
disciples  and  foUowprs  of  Christ,  is  neither  the  dark  grave  in  the  cemetery  nor  the 
little  less  inviting  Sheol  of  Hebrew  thous;ht,  but  the  home  of  the  blessed  in  the  near 
presence  of  God,  where  life  is  free  and  full  and  pure,  the  mansions  of  the  Father's 
houM. — 0. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXXni. 


Ver.  1. — If  we  may  think  of  Ezekiel  as 
eompiling  and  arranging  his  own  prophecies, 
we  may  tliink  of  him  as  returning,  with 
something  like  a  sense  of  relief,  to  his  own 
special  work  as  the  watchman  of  the  house 
of  Israel.  For  upwards  of  two  years  the 
messages  which  it  bad  been  given  Mm  to 
write  (how  far  they  were  in  any  sense 
published  we  have  no  means  of  knowing)  in 
ch.  XXV. — xxxii.  had  dealt  exclusively  with 
foreign  nations.  Now  his  own  people  are 
again  the  object  of  hla  care.  He  resumes 
his  pastoral  ofiSce  at  once  for  warning  and 
consolation.  From  this  point  onwards,  with 
the  exception  of  the  strange  Mesbech-Tubal 
episode  in  ch.  xxxviii.,  xxxix.,  all  is  leading 
onwards  to  the  final  vision  of  the  rebuilt 
temple,  and  the  redistributed  land  of  Israel, 
and  through  them  to  the  times  of  the  Mes- 
sianic restoration.  No  date  is  given  here 
for  the  word  of  the  IiOTd  which  now  came 
to  him,  but  it  may,  perhaps  be  inferred, 
from  vers.  21,  22,  that  it  was  immediately 
before  the  arrival  of  the  messenger  who 
brought  the  tidings  that  Jeruisalem  was 
taken.  In  the  ecstatic  state  indicated  by 
"the  hand  of  the  Lord"  he  knew  that  some 
great  change  was  coming,  that  he  had  a  new 
message  to  deliver,  a  new  part  to  play. 

Yer.  2.— Speak  to  the  childien  of  thy 
people.  (On  the  force  of  the  possessive 
pronoun,  see  note  on  ch.  iii.'l.)  The  formula 
is  carried  on  throughout  the  chapter  (vers.  12, 
17,  30).  Set  him  for  their  watchman.  Eze- 
kiel  falls  back  upon  the  thought  of  ch.  ill. 
17,  but  the  image  is  expanded  with  charac- 
teristic fulness.  The  function  of  the  watch- 
man, in  which  lie  sees  a  parable  of  his  own 
o£Sce,  is  to  stand  upon  his  tower  (2  Sam. 
xviii.  24,  25;  2  Kings  ix.  l'7  ;  Hah.  ii.  1),  to 
keep  his  eye  ou  the  distant  horizon,  and  as 
soon  as  the  clouds  of  dust  or  the  gleam  of 
armour  gives  notice  of  the  approach  of  the 
enemy,  to  sound  the  trumpet  of  alarm  (Amos 
iii.  6 ;  Hos.  viii.  1 ;  Jer.  iv.  5 :  vi.  1),  that 
men  may  not  be  taken  unawares.  If  he 
discharge  that  duty  faithfully,  then,  as  in 
ch.  iii.  17 — 21,  the  blood  of  those  that  perish 
through  their  own  negligence  shall  rest  on 
their  own  head. 

Vers.  6— 9.— But  if  the  watchman,  etc. 
The  words  imply  what  we  might  almost  call 
the  agony  of  self-accusation.    The  prophet 


asks  himself  whether  he  has  acted  on 
the  warning  which  was  borne  in  on  his 
mind  at  the  very  beginning  of  his  mission. 
Has  he  sounded  &e  trumpet?  Has  he 
warned  the  people  of  the  destruction  that  is 
coming  on  them  ?  The  outward  imagery 
vanishes  in  ver.  7.  It  is  of  no  Chaldean 
invader  that  the  prophet  had  to  give  per- 
sonal and  direct  warning,  but  of  each  man's 
own  special  sin  which  was  bringing  ruin  on 
himself  and  on  his  country. 

Ver.  10. — Thus  ye  speak,  saying,  etc.  At 
the  earlier  stage  the  prophet  had  to  contend 
with  scorn,  incredulity,  derision  (ch.  xii.  22), 
They  trusted  in  the  promises  of  the  false 
prophets  (ch.  xiii.  6).  They  laid  to  their 
soul  the  flattering  unction  that  they  were 
suffering,  not  for  their  own  sins,  but  for  the 
sins  of  their  fathers  (ch.  xviii.  2).  Now 
they  stand  face  to  face  with  the  fulfilment 
of  the  prophet's  words.  They  cherish  no 
hopes,  and  they  make  no  excuses.  They 
have  fallen  into  the  abyss  of  despair.  Ad- 
mitting their  own  sin  and  the  righteousness 
of  their  punishment,  does  not  the  very 
admission  exclude  hope?  Who  can  bring 
life  to  those  that  are  thus  dead  in  trespasses 
and  sins  ?  The  parallelism  with  Lev.  xxvi. 
39 — 12  is  so  striking  that  it  can  scarcely  be 
accidental. 

Ver.  11. — Say  unto  them,  ete.  To  meet 
that  despair  the  prophet  has  to  fall  back  on 
the  truth  which  he  had  proclaimed  once 
before  (ch.  xviii.  32).  He  must  appear  as 
uttering  a  message  of  pardon  resting  on  the 
unchanging  character  of  the  great  Absolver. 
Now,  as  ever,  it  is  true  that  he  willeth  not 
the  death  of  the  wicked,  that  all  punishment 
(in  this  world,  at  least)  is  meant  to  lead  to 
repentance,  and  that  for  those  who  repent 
there  is  the  hope  of  restoration  and  of  life. 
No  righteousness  in  the  past  avails  against 
the  trangression  of  the  present  (ver.  12) ;  but 
then  also  no  wickedness  of  the  past  prevails 
to  shut  out  the  penitenf  s  claim  to  pardon. 
As  a  man  is  at  any  given  moment,  when 
the  judgment  comes  on  him,  so  is  he  dealt 
with.  In  some  sense,  as  in  ver.  13,  the 
righteousness  of  the  past  may  become  a 
stumbling-block.  The  man  may  trust  in 
it,  and  be  off  his  guard,  ceasing  to  watch 
and  pray,  and  so  the  temptation  may 
prevail. 

Ver.  15. — If  the  wicked  restore  the  pledga. 
In  ch.  xviii.  7, 12, 16,  this  and  its  oppoaito 


184 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxxiii.  1— 3a 


had  been  grouped  with  other  forms  of  good 
and  evil.  Here  it  stands  out  in  solitary  pre- 
eminence. The  reason  may  possibly  be 
found  in  the  faot  that  a  time  of  exile  and 
suffering  ^as  likely  to  make  the  sin,  which 
the  penitent  thus  showed  that  he  had  re- 
nouDced,  a  specially  common  one.  The 
■tarving  man  pledged  his  garment  or  Lis 
tools  for  the  loan  of  money  or  of  food  at  a 
price  far  below  its  value.  There  was  a  real 
self-sacrifice,  a  proof  of  the  power  of  the 
faith  that  worl;eth  by  love,  when  the  creditor 
restored  it.  The  primary  duty,  when  a  man 
turned  from  evil,  was,  ns  far  as  in  him  lay, 
to  oTercome  his  besetting  sin  and  make 
restitution  for  the  past.  Compare  the  words 
of  the  Baptist  (Luke  iii.  12 — 14),  and  those 
of  ZacchseuB  (Luke  zix.  8).  The  statutes  of 
life.  The  words  are  used  as  in  ch.  zx.  11  and 
Lev.  xviii.  5,  on  the  assumption  that,  if  a 
man  kept  the  statutes,  be  should  (iu  the 
highest  sense  of  the  word)  live  in  them. 
It  was  reserved  for  the  fuller  illumination 
of  St.  Paul,  taught  by  a  representative  expe- 
rience to  proclaim  the  higher  truth  that  the 
Law,  ordained  for  life,  was  yet  the  minister 
of  condemnation  and  death  unless  there  was 
something  higher  than  itself  to  complete 
the  work  which  it  could  only  begin  (Bom. 
Til.  10 ;  viii.  3 ;  comp.  also  Heb.  vii.  19). 

Ver.  17. — The  way  of  the  Lord  is  not  equal. 
The  prophet  now  proclaims  what  he  had 
been  taught,  perhaps  then,  without  pro- 
claiming it,  in  oh.  xviii.  25 — 30.  Men  are 
dealt  with  by  the  Divine  Judge,  not  as  their 
fathers  have  been  before  them,  not  even 
as  they  themselves  have  been  in  times 
past,  but  exactly  as  they  are.  Where  could 
there  be  a  more  perfect  rule  of  equity? 
The  question  how  far  Bzekiel  thinks  of  the 
judgment  itself  as  final,  whether  there  is 
the  possibility  of  repeatance  and  pardon 
after  it  has  falleo,  and  during  its  con- 
tinuance, is  not  directly  answered.  He  is 
speaking,  we  must  remember,  of  a  judgment 
on  this  side  the  grave,  and  therefore  what 
we  call  the  problems  of  esehatology  were 
not  before  him.  But  the  language  of  the 
document  which  lies  at  the  basis  of  his 
theology  (Lev.  xxvi.  41)  asserts  that  if  men 
repented  and  "  accepted "  their  earthly 
punishment,  then  Jehovah  would  remember 
his  covenant,  and  would  not  destroy  them 
utterly.  And  his  own  language  as  to 
Sodom  and  Samaria  (ch.  xvi.  53)  indicates  a 
leaning  to  the  wider  hope.  If  the  problems 
of  the  unseen  world  had  been  brought  before 
him,  we  may  believe  tliat  he  would  have 
dealt  with  them  as  with  those  v;ith  whioli 
he  actually  oame  in  contact,  and  tliat  tliere 
also  his  words  would  have  been, "  O  house  of 
Israel,  0  sons  of  men,  are  not  my  ways 
equal  ?  are  not  your  ways  unequal  ?  " 
Ver.  21.— In  the  twelfth  year,  etc.    The 


capture  of  Jerusalem  took  place  in  the 
fourth  month  of  the  eleventh  year  (Jer. 
xxxix.  2;  Iii.  6)  from  the  captivity  of 
Jehoiachin  and  the  beginning  of  Zedekiah's 
reign.  Are  we  to  assume  some  error  of 
transcription?  or  is  it  within  the  limits  of 
probability  that  eighteen  months  would  pass 
without  any  direct  communication  from  Je- 
rusalem of  what  had  passed  there  ?  Tliere 
is,  I  conceive,  nothing  improbable  in  what 
is  stated.  The  exiles  of  Tel-Abib  were  not 
on  the  high-roads  of  commerce  or  of  war. 
All  previous  communications  were  out  off 
by  the  presence  of  the  Chaldean  armies. 
In  the  words,  one  that  had  escaped,  the 
prophet  clearly  referred  to  the  intimation 
given  him  at  the  time  of  his  wife's  death 
(ch.  xxiv.  26).  When  the  fugitive  entered 
he  saw  that  the  hour  had  at  last  come.  One 
would  give  much  to  know  who  the  fugitive 
was,  but  we  can  only  conjecture.  Had 
Baruch  been  sent  by  Jeremiah  to  bear  the 
tidings  to  his  brother  pr  phet?  Such  a 
mission  would  have  been  a  fulfilment  of 
Jer.  xlv.  5.  A  later  tradition  ascribes  to 
Baruch  a  prominent  part  as  a  teacher  among 
the  exiles  of  Babylon  (Bar.  i.  2)  shortly  after 
the  destruction  of  Jerusalem. 

Ver.  22. — Now  the  hand  of  the  lord. 
When  the  messenger  arrived  he  found  the 
prophet  in  a  state  of  ecstasy.  This  was  in 
the  evening.  In  that  prophetic  ecstasy  his 
mouth  was  opened,  and  the  long  silence 
broken,  and  though  he  had  not  heard  the 
message  with  his  outward  ears,  he  had 
taken,  as  it  were,  that  message  as  hU  text. 
It  was  not  till  his  discourse  was  ended,  and 
the  morning  came,  that  he  himself  heard 
the  terrible  tidings  from  the  lips  of  the 
messenger.  Then  a  change  came  over  him. 
He  was  no  more  dumb.  The  long  silence 
was  broken.  Had  the  silence  lasted,  we 
ask,  from  ch.  iii.  26  onward?  Had  the 
whole  intervening  period  been  one  of  simply 
symbolic  action,  and  of  written  but  unspoken 
prophecies  ?  The  words  at  first  suggest  that 
conclusion;  but  it  is  travened  by  the  facts; 
by  the  commands  of  ch.  xii.  10,  23 ;  by  the 
order  to  "  prophesy  "  in  ch.  xiii.  2 ;  by  the 
message  to  speak  unto  the  elders  in  oh.  xiv. 
4 ;  by  the  question,  "  Doth  he  not  speak 
parables  ?  "  of  ch.  xx.  49.  I  infer,  therefore, 
that,  though  the  silence  had  been  dominant, 
it  had  not  been  unbroken.  To  some,  at 
least,  a  message  had  been  spoken.  Others 
may  have  been  allowed  to  read  the  written 
prophecies.  The  death  of  the  prophet's 
wife  tended,  probably,  to  the  continuance 
of  the  silence,  and  it  seems  a  legitimate 
inference  from  oh.  xxiv.  27  that  it  had  con- 
tinued from  that  date  onward. 

Ver.  24. — They  that  inhabit  those  wastes 
of  the  land.  The  utterance  that  follows 
was  probably  the  direct   result   of   what 


OH.  XXXIII.  1— 3Sf.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL, 


185 


Ezekiel  heard  from  the  messenger  He  it 
was  who  reported  the  boastful  claims  of 
those  who  had  been  left  in  the  land  by  the 
Clialdean  armies — the  "  bad  iigs  "  of  Jere- 
miah's parable,  the  least  worthy  represen- 
tatives of  the  seed  of  Abraham,  the  assasBlns 
of  Gedaliah  (Jer.  xli.  1,  2),  who  in  these 
"  waste  places,"  the  dens  and  oaves  in  which 
they  found  a  refuge  (or,  it  may  be,  the 
phrase  describes  the  condition  of  the  whole 
country),  led  the  lives  of  outlaws  and 
bandits.  Tlie  very  words  of  tlieir  boast  are 
reproduced :  "  Abraham,  when  he  was  yet 
but  one,  received  the  promise  of  inheritance. 
We  are  comparatively  miiny,  and  are  left  as 
the  true  seed  of  Abraham  (oomp.  Matt.  iii.  9). 
The  land  is  ours,  and  we  will  take  posses- 
gion  of  the  estates  of  the  exiles." 

Ver.  25. — Ye  eat  with  the  blood.  It  is 
characteristic  of  Ezekiel  that  the  first 
offence  which  he  names  with  honor  should 
be  a  sin  against  a  positive  commandment. 
He  felt,  as  it  were,  a  sense  of  loathing  at 
what  seemed  to  him  a  descent  into  the 
worst  form  of  pollution,  forbidden,  not  to 
the  Jews  only  (Lev.  xvii.  10;  xix.  26; 
Deut.  xii.  16),  but  to  mankind  (Gen.  ix.  4); 
compare  the  scene  in  1  Sam.  xiv.  32.  The 
game  feeling  shows  itself  in  Zech.  ix.  7  and 
Acts  XV.  20,  29.  The  prohibition  of  blood 
took  its  place,  in  later  Judaism,  as  amoLg 
the  precepts  of  Noah,  which  were  binding 
even  on  the  proselytes  of  the  gate,  upon 
whom,  as  distinct  from  the  proselytes  of 
righteousness,  the  rite  of  circumcision  was 
not  enforced ;  and  as  such  were  accepted  by 
the  council  at  Jerusalem,  as  binding  also 
among  Christian  converts.  Not  for  such  as 
these  was  the  inheritance  of  Israel,  and  the 
prophet  asks  Indignantly,  after  naming  yet 
more  hateful  offences,  Shall  ye  possess  the 
landl 

Ver.  26. — Ye  stand  upon  your  sword.  The 
words  point  to  the  open  assertion  of  the  law 
that  might  is  right.  Men  relied  on  the 
■word,  and  on  that  jonly,  for  their  support. 
Assassinations,  as  in  Jer.  xli.,  were,  so  to 
speak,  as  the  order  of  the  day.  Ye  work 
abomination.  The  noun,  Ezekiel's  ever- 
recurring  word,  indicates  both  the  act  of 
idolatry  and  the  foul  orgiastic  rites  that 
accompanied  it.  The  verb,  curiously  enough, 
has  the  feminine  sufSx.  Was  it  used  in- 
tentionally, either  as  pointing  to  the  promi- 
nence of  women  in  those  rites  (Jer.  xliv.  15), 
or  to  the  degrading  vices  which  involved 
the  loss  of  true  manhood  (2  Kings  xxiii.  7)? 
So  some  have  thought;  but  I  agree  with 
Keil,  Smend,  and  others,  in  seeing  only  an 
error  of  transcription.  Once  more,  after 
heaping  up  his  accusations,  Ezekiel  asks 
the  question,  "  Shall  ye  possess  the  land  ?  " 
"  Are  you  the  seed  of  Abraham?" 

Yer.  27. — They  that  are  in  the  wastes. 


The  words  paint,  with  a  terrible  vividness, 
what  was  passing  in  Ezekiel's  fatherland. 
Did  the  fugitives  of  Judah  seek  the  open 
country  ?  they  were  exposed  to  the  sword  of 
the  Chaldeans  or  of  marauding  outlaws. 
Did  they  seek  safety  in  fortresses  or  caves  ? 
they  were  exposed,  crowded  together  as 
they  were  under  the  worst  possible  con- 
ditions, to  the  ravages  of  pestilence. 

Ver.  30.— The  children  of  thy  people. 
The  words,  like  those  of  ch.  xiv.  1  and  xx.  1, 
49,  throw  light  on  the  prophet's  relations  to 
his  people.  Now  that  the  long  silence  was 
broken,  and  the  prophet  spoke  with  greater 
freedom  than  he  had  ever  done  before,  he 
acquired  a  fresh  notoriety.  The  cliaracter 
of  his  last  utterance,  vindicating,  as  it  might 
seem,  the  claim  of  the  exiles  to  "  possess 
the  land,"  as  against  that  of  the  remnant 
"in  the  wastes,"  may  even  have  maile  him 
popular.  The  Authorized  Version  against 
is  misleading;  read,  with  the  margin  and 
the  Revised  Version,  about.  There  was  for 
the  time  no  open  hostility.  They  talked 
much,  in  places  of  private  or  public  resort, 
of  the  prophet's  new  action.  Each  invited 
his  neighbour  to  go  and  hear  the  prophet 
as  he  spake  to  them  his  message  from 
Jehovah.  And  they  came  as  the  people 
Cometh,  in  crowds,  even  as  my  people,  the 
people  of  Jehovah,  with  reverent  gestures 
and  listening  eagerly.  Never  before,  we 
may  well  believe,  had  the  prophet  had  so 
large  or  so  promising  a  congregation.  But 
he  was  taught  to  look  below  the  surface  and 
to  read  their  thoughts,  and  there  he  read, 
as  preacliers  of  all  ages  have  too  often  read 
after  him,  that  they  were  hearers,  and  nnt 
doers  (Matt.  vii.  24—27;  Jaa.  i.  23—25). 
In  words  they  showed  much  love  (the  LXX. 
gives  "  falsehood  "),  spoke  pleasant  things, 
but  the  root-evil,  the  besetting  sin,  wa.t  still 
there.  Their  heart  went  after  their  covetous- 
ness  (oomp.  Matt.  xiii.  22 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  10). 

Ver.  32. — A  very  lovely  song;  literally, 
a  song  of  love,  an  erotic  idyll,  the  word  being 
the  same  as  iu  ver.  31.  Yet  this  was  the 
meaning  of  the  large  gathering.  They  came 
to  hear  the  prophet,  as  they  would  to  hear 
a  hired  singer  at  a  banquet,  like  those  of 
Amos  vi.  5.  The  prophet's  words  paseed 
over  them  and  left  no  lasting  impression. 
All  that  they  sought  was  the  momentary 
tickling  of  the  sense.  The  words  receive  a 
special  significance  from  Ps.  cxxxvii.  3. 
The  Jewish  exiles  were  famous  among  their 
conquerors  for  the  minstrel's  art.  The 
nobler  singers  refused  to  "  sing  the  songs  of 
Zion  in  a  strange  land ; "  others,  it  may  he, 
were  not  so  scrupulous.  Had  the  prophet 
seen  his  people  gather  to  listen  to  such  a 
singer?  Were  they  better  occupied  when 
they  were  listening  to  hit  message  from 
Jehovah  ? 


18« 


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [en.  xxxm.  1— 3 


Ver.  33.— When  this  oometh  to  pass.  The 
words  can  scarcely  refer  to  the  immediately 
preceding  predictions  in  vers.  27,  28,  which 
svere  primarily  addressed  to  "  the  people  in 
the  waste  places,"  the  remnant  left  in 
Judah,  and  we  have  to  go  back  to  the 
wider,  more  general  teaching  of  vers.  10 — 


20.  That  was  the  prophet's  message  of 
judgment,  his  call  to  repentance.  When 
the  judgment  sliould  come,  as  it  surely 
would,  then  they  would  know,  in  the  bitter- 
ness of  self-condemnation,  that  they  had 
been  listening,  not  to  a  hireling  singei,  but 
to  •  prophet  of  Jehovah. 


HOMILETIOS. 

Vers.  1 — ^9. — The  watchman.  Ezekiel  here  returns  to  an  idea  which  he  has  expressed 
earlier  (ch.  iii.  17).  He  stands  as  a  watchman  for  his  people.  Every  Christian  preacher 
and  teacher  is  in  a  similar  position.  The  same  may  be  said  of  every  Gbristian  man  and 
woman  who  knows  the  peril  of  sin  and  has  an  opportvmity  of  warning  the  ignorant  and 
careless. 

I.  The  duties  op  the  watchman.  1.  To  watch.  In  order  to  serve  his  people  he 
must  first  of  all  see  for  himself.  We  can  only  teach  men  what  we  have  first  learnt. 
The  prophet  must  be  a  seer,  the  apostle  a  disciple,  the  missionary  a  Christian.  To  watch 
means  (1)  to  be  awake  while  others  sleep ;  (2)  to  fix  attention  while  others  are  listless ; 
(3)  to  look  abroad  while  others  are  satisfied  with  what  they  can  see  at  home.  The 
Christian  watchman  must  be  spiritually  alert ;  he  must  not  be  satisfied  with  his  own 
notions ;  he  must  sweep  the  horizon  of  truth ;  he  must  consider  the  distant  and  the 
future,  but  chiefly  that  which  is  approaching  and  of  practical  moment.  He  must  look 
especially  in  two  directions  :  (1)  into  the  revealed  truths  of  Christianity,  to  see  indica- 
tions of  the  principles  of  life  and  death  ;  (2)  into  the  actual  world,  to  note  its  condition. 
Knowledge  of  men  must  go  with  knowledge  of  Sciipture.  The  Christian  teacher  must 
not  be  a  mere  bookworm  or  cloistered  student ;  he  must  know  the  world — men  and 
affairs.  2.  To  warn.  Having  seen  danger,  the  watchman  must  at  once  inform  the  city 
of  the  fact.  He  must  wake  the  slumbering  guard,  blow  the  trumpet,  or  run  to  the 
belfry  and  sound  the  alarm.  The  Christian  teacher  is  to  warn  as  well  as  to  comfort 
and  exhort  (1  Thess.  v.  14). 

II.  The  limit  of  his  ebsponsibilitt.  The  watchman  has  but  to  watch  and  warn. 
When  he  has  been  quick  to  detect  approaching  danger,  perhaps  at  first  but  as  a  faint 
cloud  of  dust  on  the  horizon,  and  vigorous  in  blowing  his  trumpet  to  rouse  the  city, 
his  part  is  done.  He  cannot  meet  the  foe  in  the  plain  and'prevent  them  from  approach- 
ing the  city.  He  cannot  man  the  walls  and  guard  the  citadel.  He  can  but  blow  his 
trumpet.  Further,  if  the  people  will  not  heed  or  believe  him,  he  cannot  compel  them  to 
prepare  for  the  conflict.  If  they  still  prefer  their  couches  to  their  swords,  the  watchman 
cannot  force  them  to  arm.  He  is  not  the  commander  of  the  city.  The  greatest  Christian 
teacher  is  but  a  watchman.  No  servant  of  Christ  can  compel  men  to  turn  from  their 
carelessness  and  face  tlie  stern  facts  of  life.  If  they  will  not  hearken  to  faithful  expos- 
tulation, the  preacher  can  do  no  more  for  them.  They  are  free,  and  they  must  choose 
for  themselves.  1.  This  is  a  warning  to  thecareless.  Thpy  may  refuse  to  attend.'  They 
can  fall  asleep  again,  vexed  at  the  rousing  trumpet-blast.  But  if  they  do  this  it  is  at 
their  peril.  (1)  The  danger  is  not  the  less  because  it  is  neglected.  (2)  The  folly  and  sin 
of  negligence  aggravate  the  faults  of  those  who  give  no  heed  to  warning.  Now  they  are 
without  excuse.  They  can  blame  no  one  but  themselves.  2.  2%m  is  a  consolation  for 
the/aiihful  watchman.  If  he  is  a  true  man,  he  must  grieve  over  his  negligent  hearers. 
StiU,  lii»  Master  will  recognize  his  fidelity. 

III.  The  oniLT  of  his  heoligehcb.  1.  It  is  failure  in  a  trust.  The  citizens 
sleep  ill  time  of  peril,,  and  no  one  expects  them  to  be  on  guard.  But  the  watchman's 
special  duty  is  to  be  awake  and  give  warning.  He  who  is  entrusted  with  responsibility 
is  expected  to  be  true  to  his  charge.  2.  Jt  is  sin  against  light.  The  watchman  sees 
the  danger  which  the  sleeping  citizens  do  not  perceive.  His  knowledge  adds  to  his 
responsibility.  His  sin  is  but  negative,  he  gives  no  false  news,  he  does  not  play  the 
traitor  by  opening  the  gates  to  the  enemy.  Yet  he  is  unfaithful.  3.  Jt  is  negligence 
that  hurts  others.  It  risks  a  whole  city.  We  risk  the  welfare  of  all  whom  we  uiiglit 
help  to  save,  if  we  fail  to  warn  them.    Fear  of  disturbing  their  peace  is  no  excuse.    The 


OH.  xxxm.  1— 33.]    THE   BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  BZEKIEL.  187 

watchman  must  have  courage  to  sound  the  alarm.  There  are  times  when  the  harp  must 
be  exchanged  for  the  trumpet.  The  preacher  must  have  courage  to  say  unpleasant 
things. 

Ver.  10. — A  question  of  despair,  I.  The  cause  of  the  despair.  The  prophet  has 
just  been  told  that  his  responsibility  is  limited  to  his  warning  the  people  faithfully.  If 
tL?  watchman  blows  the  trumpet  lustily  he  can  do  no  more.  The  blood  of  the  careless 
people  will  then  be  on  their  own  heads.  But  this  truth,  which  gives  consolation  to  the 
prophet,  is  alarming  to-the  people.  It  is  meant  to  be  so.  Yet  the  alarm  may  be  taken 
in  a  wrong  way.  Instead  of  rousing  themselves  to  meet  and  overcome  the  danger,  tVie 
people  may  sink  down  paralyzed  in  the  blankness  of  despair.  The  explanation  of  this 
despair  is  suggested  by  the  language  of  the  people.  1.  A  consciousness  of  guilt.  The 
people  perceive  that  their  transgressions  and  their  sins  are  upon  them.  The  pilgrim 
feels  the  weight  of  his  burden.  The  sudden  awakening  of  an  evil  conscience  plunges  its 
possessor  into  midnight  darkness.  The  new  thing  is  not  to  know  that  wickedness  was 
done ;  that  knowledge  was  always  possessed,  though  hitherto  not  much  considered.  It 
is  to  know  that  the  sins  still  rest  upon  their  doer,  i.e.  it  is  the  feeling  of  present  guilt 
for  past  deeds  of  wickedness.  2.  An  experience  of  the  consequences  of  sin.  "And  we 
pine  away  in  them."  The  death-penalty  of  sin  does  not  come  like  a  flash  of  lightning. 
Sin  is  a  slow  poison.  It  kills  by  a  sort  of  spiritual  consumption.  With  an  awakening 
conscience  the  man  perceives  himself  to  be  in  a  spiritual  decline.  No  perception  can  be 
more  provocative  of  despair. 

II.  The  question  it  arouses.  "  How  should  we  then  live  ?  "  The  despair  is  not 
yet  absolute,  or  it  would  not  suggest  such  a  question  as  this.  The  most  awful  despair 
does  not  lire  in  Doubting  Castle.  It  is  immured  in  a  black  dunaeon  of  certain  negation. 
Possibly  the  question  suggested  does  not  expect  any  answer.  It  sees  no  reply,  and  does 
not  believe  that  any  can  be  given.  The  decline  is  so  steadfast,  and  the  disease  of  sin 
that  causes  it  so  deep-rooted,  that  the  despairing  soul  cannot  look  for  deliverance,  and 
the  question  is  a  sort  of  expostulation  offered  to  the  prophet  when  he  would  take  a  more 
hopeful  view.  Still  it  is  a  question,  and  therefore  it  leaves  room  for  an  answer.  It  is 
much  that  men  should  be  brought  to  ask  such  a  question.  Too  many  do  not  perceive 
their  danger,  though  they  live  in  sin  unrepented  and  unrestrained.  The  question  implies 
certain  thoughts.  1.  Sinners  are  in  imminent  peril  of  death.  To  those  who  are  truly 
awakened  the  prospect  must  be  alarming.  But  the  danger  is  not  the  less  for  those  who 
do  not  yet  perceive  it.  2.  Men  cannot  save  their  owr^souls.  These  endangered  people 
must  look  elsewhere  for  safety.  Unless  salvation  comes  from  above,  it  cannot  be  had. 
3.  Men  need  light  on  the  way  of  salvation.  It  is  not  visible  to  the  eye  of  sense ;  it 
cannot  be  discovered  by  thinking.  The  world  needs  a  gospel.  The  heathen  pine  away, 
not  knowing  the  Divine  source  of  life.  4.  Christ  answers  the  question  of  despair  with 
a  gospel  of  hope.  The  answer  is  suggested  in  the  next  verse  (ver.  11).  It  is  completed 
in  the  gospel  of  Christ. 

Ver.  11. — God^s  desire  for  the  world^s  salvation.  This  is  a  Divine  oath.  God  swears 
by  his  own  life  (see  Heb.  vi.  18).  This  shows  how  certain  are  the  words  spoken,  how 
earnestly  God  desires  men  to  accept  them,  and  how  difficult  it  is  for  men  to  belif'^'' 
them. 

1.  Men  have  pound  it  difficult  to  believe  that  God  has  no  plbasubb  in 
THE  death  of  the  WICKED.  Dootrlnes  of  reprobation  were  once  popular.  People 
thought  that  God  destined  the  greater  part  of  mankind  to  eternal  misery  before  they 
were  born,  in  order  to  magnify  his  own  glory.  The  heathen  have  had  ideas  of  gods  who 
delighted  in  blood.  Christians  have  thought  that  there  is  a  certain  Divine  satisfaction 
in  taking  vengeance  on  the  sinner.  Consider  the  causes  of  these  views.  1,  Divine 
warnings.  God  warns  sternly.  Hence  he  is  thought  to  will  harshly.  It  is  supposed 
that  he  desires  to  do  what  he  threatens.  2.  The  analogy  of  human  passions.  With 
man  "  revenge  is  sweet."  Therefore  it  is  thought  to  be  so  with  God.  Men  act  too 
much  in  order  to  please  themselves.  Therefore  they  imagine  that  God  does  the  same. 
3.  The  experience  of  Divine  judgments.  They  are  at  times  so  sweeping  and  wholesale, 
and  escape  from  them  seems  to  be  so  hopeless,  that  their  victims  are  tempted  to  regard 
them  as  the  outcome  of  God's  own  desires. 


188  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIBL.    [oh.  xxxiii.  1—33. 

n.  It  is  a  fact  that  God  has  no  plbasubb  in  the  death  of  the  wicked, 
1.  This  is  positively  affirmed.  Here  it  is  stated  oa  oath.  No  truth  of  revelation  i.-i  more 
clear  or  positive  than  this.  2.  It  is  true  to  the  character  of  Qod.  God  is  love,  and  love 
can  have  no  pleasure  in  suffering  and  death.  God  is  our  Father,  and  a  true  father  can 
have  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  his  children.  8.  It  is  confirmed  by  the  action,  of  Qod, 
who  has  sent  his  Son  to  save  the  world.  While  death  is  the  wages  of  sin,  the  gift  of 
God  is  the  opposite — eternal  life.  The  New  Testament  is  a  grand  contradiction  to 
tbeological  pessimism. 

HI.  The  death  of  the  wicked  is  due  to  theib  own  wills.  "  Why  will  ye 
die  ?  "  He  wills  to  die  who  wills  the  means  of  death.  The  man  who  takes  poison  takes 
his  life.  When  the  process  is  revealed  this  is  done  openly.  When  it  is  not  seen  it  i» 
Btill  done.  The  sinner  then  wills  his  own  death,  though  unwittiugly,  by  deliberately 
choosing  the  course  that  will  certainly  issue  in  it.  Now,  this  is  a  matter  of  a  man's 
own  volition.  So  absolute  is  the  territory  of  will  that  the  wicked  may  yet  die  in  their 
sins,  although  God  not  only  does  not  desire  their  death,  but  earnestly  desires  tlieir 
salvation.  The  awful  freedom  of  man's  will — this  is  the  rock  on  which  universalism 
breaks. 

IV.  God  entebats  men  to  then  and  live.  1.  It  is  possible/or  all  to  live.  A« 
the  sinner  chooses  his  own  death,  so  the  means  of  life-deliverance  are  within  his  reach. 
He  cannot  save  himself,  but  he  may  choose  whether  he  will  be  saved.  2.  The  condition 
of  life  is  conversion.  "  Turn  ye  from  your  evil  ways."  This  is  true  repentance.  It 
means  more  than  regretful  tears.  It  takes  place  in  the  will,  not  merely  in  the  emotions. 
A  tearless  change  is  true  conversion,  while  weeping  without  change  is  worthless  senti- 
ment. Yet  this  does  not  require  perfect  conquest  of  evil  and  a  full  recovery  from  it 
before  God  will  have  mercy.  We  are  to  turn  round.  The  progress  up  the  hiU  to  light 
and  life  has  yet  to  be  made.  Bepentance  sets  our  faces  in  the  right  direction.  3.  God 
urges  and  entreats  sinners  to  turn  and  live.  This  shows  (1)  their  great  danger ;  (2) 
God's  wonderful  compassion  and  love ;  and  yet  (3)  the  difficulty  of  inducing  men  to 
repent.  Thus  God  still  pleads  in  infinite  pity  with  his  lost  children.  Happy  are  thej 
who  hear  his  gracious  call  and  respond  to  it  1 

Vers.  12 — 16. — Past  and  present.  I.  The  present  will  not  be  judqed  by  thb 
past.  This  is  one  principle  underlying  the  various  very  clear  statements  of  the  passage. 
It  is  a  principle  that  is  needed  in  order  to  balance  the  influence  of  other  principles  that 
appear  to  work  in  an  opposite  direction.  Indeed,  at  first  sight  it  seems  to  be  con- 
tradictory to  some  well-known  laws.  Is  it  not  repeatedly  asserted  that  a  man  will 
be  judged  by  his  past  life  ?  The  sins  of  the  past  may  be  forgotten,  but  they  stand 
recorded  in  the  book  of  judgment  and  the  guilt  of  them  remains  on  the  sinner.  How,- 
then,  is  it  possible  for  the  present  and  future  to  be  free  firom  the  past  ?  1.  Thepast  lives 
by  its  effects  in  the  present.  If,  however,  by  effort  of  will,  aided  by  Divine  grace,  we 
neutraUze  the  bad  past,  then  that  past  is  slain.  2.  Forgiveness  removes  the  guilt  of  the 
past.  3.  Past  innocence  has  no  power  in  it  to  prevent  present  sin.  It  is  a  help  in  that 
direction,  for  it  works  through  the  force  of  habit.  But  habit  may  be  resisted  and 
broken. 

II.  Past  righteousness  will  not  excuse  present  sin.  We  are  judged  chiefly, 
at  all  events,  by  what  we  are,  rather  than  by  what  we  were.  Moreover,  there  is  no 
possibility  of  our  having  acquired  an  extra  stock  of  merit  in  the  past  which  we  can  set 
off  against  our  present  failings.  We  never  have  a  balance  on  the  creJit  side  of  our 
account  with  Heaven.  At  our  best  we  are  but  "  unprofitable  servants  "  (Luke  xvii.  10). 
An  employer  cares  little  for  old  testimonials.  He  must  see  a  certificate  of  character  up 
to  date.  If  a  man  has  borne  an  excellent  reputation  for  years,  and  at  last  breaks  down  and 
disgraces  himself,  he  is  said  to  have  "  lost  his  character."  His  good  name  in  the  past 
now  counts  for  nothing.  It  is  utterly  gone.  Now,  the  practical  warning  that  issues 
from  these  considerations  is  that  we  must  take  good  heed  to  our  present  life.  It  is  of 
no  use  to  hark  back  to  the  day  of  conversion  for  assurance.  We  may  long  have  left  the 
good  beginnings  of  that  day.  There  is  no  security  in  past  service,  position  in  the 
Church,  etc.  We  need  to  be  on  our  guard  against  falling,  even  to  the  last.  It  is  possible 
to  turn  aside  at  the  eleventh  hour.  The  ship  may  be  wrecked  in  sight  of  the  haven ; 
then  her  passengers  will  not  be  saved  by  their  memory  of  their  long  prosperous  voyage. 


m.  XXXIII.  1—33.]    THE   BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET   EZEKIEL.  189 

m.  Past  sin  will  not  prevent  pbesbnt  salvation.  Happily,  the  principle  works 
buth  ways,  if  we  must  first  take  it  as  a  warning  against  trusting  in  a  good  past,  we 
may  also  consider  it  as  a  reason  for  not  despairing  on  account  of  a  bad  past.  1.  The 
had  past  may  he  forsaken.  The  grace  of  Christ  will  help  us  to  break  loose  from  the 
tyranny  of  habit.  2.  The  bad  past  may  be  forgiven.  The  Lamb  of  God  who  taketh 
•way  the  sin  of  the  world  removes  the  stains  of  guilt  from  penitent  souls.  Then  Gorl 
will  no  more  accuse  them  of  the  past.  Pardon  covers  the  past  with  oblivion.  3.  The 
new  present  is  what  God  observes.  "  If  any  man  be  in  Christ,  he  is  a  new  creature ;  old 
things  are  passed  away ;  behold,  all  things  are  become  new  "  (2  Cor.  v.  17).  Then  God 
only  looks  at  the  new  life  and  judges  of  that.  Therefore  we  supremely  need  grace  lor 
the  present  moment.     We  live  ia  the  present.     Religion  is  for  the  present. 

Ver.  17. — Charging  Ood  with  injustice.  I.  It  is  natural  for  men  to  be  con- 
cerned about  the  justice  of  God's  actions.  The  moral  character  of  Providence  is 
of  immense  importance.  If  God  acted  from  caprice,  there  would  be  no  ground  on  which 
we  could  rely  in  approaching  him,  and  our  whole  lives  would  lie  at  the  mercy  of  chance. 
If  he  were  unjust,  the  most  fearful  confusion  would  result.  Our  secnrity  lies  in  the 
justice  of  God,  in  our  knowledge  that  he  will  only  do  what  is  fair  and  equable  ,and  right. 
Though  we  depend  on  the  mercy  of  Goil,  we  cannot  refrain  from  appealing  repeatedly 
to  his  justice.     We  are  much  concerned  to  know  that  he  is  perfectly  just. 

II.  There  are  oircdmstanoes  unheb  which  God  appears  to  be  unjust.  It 
certainly  canuot  be  said  that  nature  and  providence  are  clear  revelations  of  Divine 
justice,  so  legibly  written  that  he  who  runs  may  read.  The  world  abounds  with 
inequalities.  There  are  the  greatest  differences  in  the  lots  of  innocent  children.  Good 
men  fall  into  adversity ;  bad  men  prosper.  The  special  ground  of  difficulty  with  tht 
readers  of  Ezekiel  was  that  men  of  time-honoured  character  were  punished,  while 
notorious  sinners  were  pardoned.  This  was  apparently  a  matter  of  much  distress  and 
doubt,  leading  to  accusations  against  God  fur  not  acting  equally,  i.e.  fairly. 

III.  It  is  foolish  to  form  hasty  opinions  coNOBKNiNa  God's  justice.  1.  We  do 
noi  know  all  the  facts.  We  gee  a  certain  superficial  condition ;  what  lies  deeper  is  hidden. 
Possibly  Ezekiel's  contemporaries  did  not  know  of  the  fall  of  the  men  of  good  repute, 
or  of  the  amendment  of  their  notoriously  wicked  acquaintances.  2.  We  do  not  know 
all  the  principles  on  which  Ood  acts.  They  may  be  ultimately  based  on  justice,  and  yet 
they  may  be  complicated  with  various  considerations.  God  is  not  only  rewarding  and 
punishing.  3.  We  do  not  know  the  true  character  of  events.  What  we  name  evil  may 
really  be  good.     At  all  events,  fhere  may  be  mercies  in  disguise. 

IV.  Men  ABE  SLOW  to  BErooNizE  God's  perception  op  character.  Most  people 
are  reluctant  to  admit  that  characters  are  susceptible  of  change.  They  label  their 
acquaintances  with  certain  moral  titles,  and  they  refuse  to  allow  that  those  titles  are 
altered.  At  all  events,  this  is  especially  true  in  regard  to  changes  for  the  worse  in 
themselves  and  in  regard  to  alterations  for  the  better  in  others.  A  man  takes  it  for 
.granted  that  he  will  always  be  estimated  according  to  his  old  good  character.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  world  is  slow  to  believe  in  repentance  and  amendment.  It  regards  the 
pardon  of  the  sinner  as  unreasonable,  because  it  will  not  see  that  when  he  repents  he  is 
no  longer  a  sinner. 

V.  It  is  common  to  lay  the  charqe  of  man's  injustice  to  God's  account. 
"  But  as  for  them,  their  way  is  not  equal."  Straight  lines  look  crooked  when  regarded 
through  a  crooked  glass.  To  the  unjust  man  justice  seems  to  be  unjust.  Sin  gives  an 
evil  colour  to  holiness.     The  righteousness  of  God  is  obscured  by  man's  unrighteousness. 

VI.  It  would  be  well  fob  men  to  consider  their  own  ways  instead  op 
JITDOINO  God's  ways.  The  trouble  that  is  wasted  in  difficult  theological  speculations 
had  better  be  spent  in  searching  self-examination.  While  we  are  looking  for  a  mote  in 
God's  eye,  we  fail  to  see  the  beam  in  our  own  eye — the  beam  that  caused  us  to  fancy 
there  was  any  mote  in  God's  eye  at  all  I  Theology  is  too  often  an  excuse  for  the  neglect 
of  religion,  but  difficulties  in  providence  do  not  destroy  the  guilt  of  sin. 

Ver.  24. —  The  right  of  the  many.  The  idea  seems  to  be — though  Abraham  was  but 
one  man,  yet  he  was  promised  Canaan ;  much  more,  then,  must  his  descendants  have  a 
right  to  the  land,  since  they  now  form  a  numerous  nation.    This  plea  is  urged  against 


laO  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PBOPHBT  BZEKIBL.    [oh.  xxxiil  1— 33. 

the  threat  that  the  Jews  shall  be  expelled  from  their  land.  It  is  not  difficult  to  dis- 
coYer  its  hoUowDeBs.  But  it  is  propped  up  by  common  fallacies  against  which  we  need 
to  be  on  our  guard. 

I.  The  plea.  It  stands  on  two  grounds.  1.  That  children  have  a  right  to  their 
father's  property.  This  is  recognized  in  law  and  equity.  If  a  man  dies  intestate,  his 
family  inherits  his  goods  as  a  matter  of  course.  The  same  is  looked  for  in  regard  to 
the  special  privileges  of  Divine  grace.  2.  ITiat  numhers  multiply  rights.  If  Abraham 
had  a  right  to  the  land,  much  more  must  a  whole  nation  of  his  descendants  hold  that 
right.  This  democratic  age  glories  in  the  rights  of  nimibers.  No  doubt  the  people 
have  rights  as  against  privileged  monopolists.  Thus  it  may  well  be  urged  in  an  over- 
populous  country,  that  the  people  have  certain  rights  in  the  land,  that  there  must  be 
some  limit  at  least  to  landlord  monopoly.  The  same  democratic  feeling  passes  over  to 
religion.  Christ  preached  to  the  people,  and  "  the  common  people  heard  him  gladly  " 
(Mark  xii.  37).  Hence  the  idea  that  privilege  in  religion  is  transferred  from  the 
monopolist  to  the  multitude,  from  priest  to  people,  from  Israel  to  the  world. 

II.  The  fallacy.  1.  The  descendants  of  Abraham  may  not  be  his  true  children.  It 
was  a  mistake  to  make  much  of  descent  from  the  great  ancestor.  That  only  condemned 
the  more  heavily  the  sins  of  his  unworthy  descendants.  John  the  Baptist  rebuked 
this  mistake  when  he  told  the  proud  Jews  that  God  was  able  to  raise  up  children  to 
Abraham  from  the  very  stones  of  the  wilderness  (Matt.  iii.  9).  St.  Paul  pointed  out 
that  not  all  who  were  of  the  stock  of  Israel  could  be  accounted  the  true  Israel  of  God 
(Bom.  iic.  6).  They  are  Abraham's  children  who  inherit  Abraham's  faith.  2.  Where 
no  right  exists,  the  nwrriher  of  claimants  vnll  not  create  it.  The  right  to  Canaan  was 
only  conferred  by  God's  grace,  and  only  held  on  condition  of  faithfulness.  It  could  be 
and  it  was  withdrawn  when  that  condition  was  broken.  The  number  who  claimed  the 
right  could  not  affect  the  question  as  to  the  desert  of  the  people  to  retain  it.  No  one 
merits  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  If  millions  claim  the  privileges  of  the  kingdom,  the 
millions  have  no  right  to  it.  The  number  of  sinners  creates  no  right  to  have  the  pardon 
of  sin.  If  the  whole  world  deserves  destruction,  the  whole  world  may  be  destroyed.  Its 
numbers  will  not  save  it.  If  we  appeal  to  God's  grace,  that  applies  to  a  single 
individual.  Not  a  sparrow  falls  to  the  ground  without  his  notice.  He  has  infinite  love 
for  the  most  obscure  of  his  subjects.  Therefore  the  multiplication  of  the  number  of  the 
guilty  will  not  arouse  his  pity  in  a  new  and  special  manner.  3.  Each  individual  must 
seeJc  individual  grace.  We  cannot  be  made  citizens  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  «n 
masse.  We  must  go  single  file  through  the  strait  gate.  4.  There  is  room  in  the  grace 
of  Qodfor  the  greatest  number.  The  multitude  of  applicants  can  never  be  too  great  for 
infinite  bounty.  The  many  can  claim  no  rights.  But  the  gospel  is  for  them,  not  for 
the  few.    Christ  came  to  give  his  life  a  ransom  "  for  many  "  (Matt.  xx.  28), 

Vers.  30 — 33. — Popular  preaching.  Ezekiel  illustrates  the  characteristics  of  popular 
preaching  in  his  own  person  and  example.  He  is  also  brought  to  see  how  vain  and 
delusive  the  attractiveness  of  it  may  be. 

L  The  secret  of  poptjlab  pbeachino.  1.  A  good  voice.  Ezekiel's  preaching  was 
•'  as  a  very  lovely  song  of  one  that  hath  a  pleasant  voice."  The  first  physical  condition 
of  preaching  is  to  be  able  to  make  one's  self  heard.  The  story  of  Demosthenes  declaim- 
ing with  pebbles  in  his  mouth  by  the  seashore  shows  how  the  Greeks  valued  good 
articulation  in  oratory.  2.  A  graceful  manner.  Ezekiel  was  compared  to  a  skilled 
player  of  music.  The  human  voice  is  a  delicate  instrument.  The  manner  in  which  it 
is  used  considerably  affects  the  attractiveness  of  the  speaker.  An  audience  likes  to  hear 
pleasant  speaking.  3.  Rhythmic  utterance.  The  special  charm  of  Ezekiel's  speech 
was  compared  to  song  and  music.  There  is  a  rhythm  of  thought  as  well  as  of  words. 
People  do  not  enjoy  rude  shocks  to  their  prejudices.  4.  Imaginativeness.  We  have 
the  substance  of  Ezekiel's  preaching,  and  even  in  the  reduced  form  of  an  abstract  nnd 
a  translation  it  teems  with  imagery.  Penple  enjoy  good  illustrations.  The  concrete  is 
more  interesting  than  the  abstract.  5.  Fervowr.  The  popular  description  of  Ezekiel's 
preaching  would  do  injustice  to  the  prophet  if  we  were  not  able  to  supplement  it  with 
his  recorded  utterances.  Ezekiel  was  not  an  empty,  mellifluous  rhetorician.  He  put 
his  heart  into  his  words.  Though  less  pathetic  than  Hosea  and  Jeremiah,  and  though 
falling  short  of  the  rapture  of  Isaiah,  he  was  a  preacher  of  power  and  earnestness.  Pleasant 


OH.  xran.  1— 33.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  BZEKIBL.  181 

words  cloy  if  forcible  words  do  not  accompany  them.  Demosthenes  the  orator  of  force 
was  greater  than  Cicero  the  orator  of  grace.  6.  Truth.  Ezekiel  spoke  true  words — 
words  that  were  true  to  fact  and  life,  true  to  the  heart  of  man,  and  true  to  the  thought 
of  God.  There  is  a  spell  in  truth.  To  speak  truth  feebly  may  arrest  attention  when 
to  clothe  error  with  all  the  charms  of  rhetoric  fails.  7.  Inspiration.  Ezekiel  was  a 
prophet.  He  spoke  under  Divine  inflaence.  This  was  the  greatest  cause  of  his  power. 
The  preacher  needs  to  be  a  prophet.  He  must  drink  of  the  Divine  well  if  he  would 
give  forth  words  of  power. 

II.  The  failtthb  of  populab  pbbaohtno.  1.  Popularity  it  no  proof  of  success. 
In  his  early  preaching  Ezekiel  was  neglected  (oh.  iii.  7).  But  there  came  a  turn  in  the 
tide,  and  then  his  name  was  in  everybody's  mouth,  and  people  thronged  to  hear  him. 
Tet  this  was  not  success.  There  is  no  proof  that  a  good  work  is  being  accomplished, . 
in  the  fact  that  crowds  hang  upon  the  utterances  of  a  famous  speaker.  It  may  be  that 
he  is  prostituting  his  gifts,  and  catering  only  for  applause,  to  the  neglect  of  truth  and 
right,  like  Jeremiah's  pleasant-speaking  rivals  (Jer.  xxiii.  16, 17).  But  even  if  he 
speaks  like  Ezekiel,  like  Ezekiel  he  may  be  to  the  people  but  a  pleasant  voice.  2.  To 
he  interested  in  preaching  is  no  proof  of  truly  benefiting  by  it.  (1)  There  may  be  a 
social  interest,  in  following  the  crowds  who  run  after  a  fashionable  orator.  (2)  There  may 
be  an  emotional  interest,  when  the  pulpit  is  taken  as  the  Sunday  substitute  for  the  stage, 
and  people  relieve  the  ennui  of  commonplace  existence  by  indulging  in  the  emotions 
stirred  by  eloquence.  (3)  There  may  be  an  intellectual  interest,  when  theological 
questions  are  in  vogue,  as  in  Puritan  times,  when  men  discussed  predestination  at  the 
ale-house.  Milton  represents  Satan  and  his  crew  debating  deep  theological  problems 
in  heU.  Their  interest  in  theology  did  not  save  them.  We  may  be  interested  in  the 
substance  of  preaching,  and  anxious  to  learn  truth,  and  yet  still  fail  to  receive  the 
designed  good  of  the  message.  3.  Preaching  fails  if  it  does  not  lead  to  practice. 
Ezehiel's  hearers  flatter  him  with  lip-thanks,  and  make  verbal  acknowledgments  of 
what  he  says ;  but  they  go  no  further.  (1)  The  heart  is  not  touched.  "  Their  heart 
goeth  after  their  covetousness."  (2)  The  conduct  is  not  affected.  "  They  hear  thy 
words,  but  they  do  them  not."  Ezekiel  agrees  with  St.  James,  that  hearing  without 
doing  is  vain  (Jas.  i.  22).  So  Christ  teaches  in  his  parable  of  the  house  on  the  sand 
•od  the  house  on  the  rock  (Matt.  vii.  24 — 27). 

Ver.  33. — The  recognition  of  a  prophet.  L  A  prophet  is  not  always  becoonized. 
Ezekiel  was  among  his  people  as  a  prophet,  yet  they  did  not  admit  his  claim.  This  is 
the  more  remarkable  because  they  recognized  the  charm  of  his  preaching,  which  had 
become  exceedingly  popular.  His  higher-  ministry  was  still  ignored.  While  the 
common  people  heard  Christ  gladly,  and  confessed  that  "  never  man  spake  like  this 
Man,"  his  greatest  message  was  ignored,  and  his  chief  claim  set  aside  by  the  multitude. 
God  sometimes  sends  a  prophet  to  these  later  times.  His  gifts  and  powers  are  recog- 
nized, but  the  world  is  slow  to  perceive  that  he  brings  a  message  from  God.  1.  The 
deeper  truth  does  not  show  itself  in  outward  effects  on  the  senses.  2.  Men  are  too  often 
out  of  all  sympathy  with  spiritual  truth.    3.  ApropheCs  words  may  refer  to  the  future. 

II.    A  PBOPHET  WILIi  BE  EECOGNIZBD  WHEN  THE  TBUTH  OF  HIS  WOKDS  IS  CONFIRMED 

BY  EVENTS.  1.  A  prophet's  words  are  true.  The  mere  utterance  of  lofty  thoughts  is  of 
little  value  if  those  thoughts  are  not  true.  The  authority  of  a  prophet  resides  in  the 
truth  of  his  message.  2.  A  true  prophet's  words  concern  facts  of  life.  They  have 
not  only  to  deal  with  unseen  verities ;  they  also  concern  the  application  of  those  verities 
to  everyday  experience.  There  they  may  be  seen  and  tested.  Eeligion  bears  upon 
life.  Its  truth  is  illustrated  by  its  working  in  the  world.  If  our  faith  will  "  work," 
we  have  a  good  reason  for  believing  that  it  is  grounded  in  truth.  3.  A  prophet's 
words  will  be  tested  by  events.  The  false  prophet  will  be  surely  exposed.  If  people 
had  not  very  short  memories  they  would  observe  how  a  succession  of  modern  prophets 
have  fixed  near  dates  for  the  accomplishment  of  predictions  in  Daniel  and  the 
Revelation;  the  wave  of  time  has  wiped  out  these  fatal  dates,  and  yet  the  world 
exists  I  On  first  thought  we  should  think  it  a  privilege  to  have  been  contemporaries 
with  the  prophets — to  have  heard  Isaiah  preach,  and  Ezekiel,  and  Hosea ;  to  have 
listened  to  Peter  and  John  and  Paul;  above  all,  to  have  been  in  the  throng  that 
gathered  on  the  shores  of  the  Sea  of  Galilee  when  Jesus  was  on  earth.    Yet  our  present 


102  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPHET  EZEKIEL.    [ch.  xxxiii.  1—33. 

privileges  are  really  greater  tli  an  any  could  have  been  under  those  circumstances,  became 
we  have  the  grand  confirmation  of  history. 

III.    A  PROPHET   SHOULD   BE   BECOGNIZBD   BY  HIS   HEAHEBS.      1.    Not  to  reCOgmze  Mm 

reveals  spiritual  callousness.  The  true  prophet  is  not  orily  discerned  by  visible  signs.  We 
are  required  to  "  try  the  spirits  "  (1  John  iv.  1).  Thus  it  is  possible  to  know  whether 
a  man  comes  to  us  from  God.  At  all  events,  we  may  judge  by  the  present  moral  and 
spiritual  results  of  teaching.  Without  waiting  for  historical  events,  "  by  their  fruits 
ye  shall  know  them"  in  their  influence  on  present-day  life.  It  is  to  the  disgrace  of 
the  Church  that  some  of  her  best  teachers  have  been  tabooed  as  hevttics  or  neglected 
■with  chilling  indifference.  2.  Not  to  recognize  him  means  to  miss  a  golden  opportunity. 
For  a  prophet  to  have  been  among  us,  and  yet  not  to  have  been  recognized,  means  a 
sad  loss.  He  may  have  been  popular  as  a  preacher,  yet  we  have  grieved  his  heart  if 
we  have  not  acknowledged  his  Divine  mission.  When  it  is  too  late  this  is  seen.  No 
sooner  is  the  persecuted  or  neglected  prophet  departed  than  a  chorus  of  praises  springs 
up  around  his  grave.  It  would  have  been  better  to  have  hearkened  to  his  living  words. 
Men  build  the  tombs  of  dead  prophets,  and  stone  their  living  successors. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  7. — The  commission  of  the  watchman.  In  the  position  occupied  by  Ezekiel 
there  was  much  that  was  special  and  peculiar ;  his  commission  and  his  duty  accordingly 
differed  in  many  respects  from  those  of  other  prophets,  and  in  a  degree  still  more 
marked  from  those  of  ordinary  ministers  of  religion.  Still,  the  points  in  which  his 
ministry  accorded  with  that  of  other  heralds  of  Divine  righteousness  and  mercy  were 
both  more  numerous  and  more  important  than  those  which  were  special  to  himself. 
The  consideration  of  Ezekiel's  calling  must  therefore  not  only  help  us  to  realize  what 
was  his  work,  but  help  us  to  apprehend  and  feel  how  solemn  and  sacred  is  the  responsi- 
bility attaching  to  the  office  of  every  true  religious  teacher  and  preacher. 

I.  His  Divine  appointment.  Upon  this  the  mind  of  the  prophet  was  clear.  He 
nad  heard  his  God,  the  God  of  his  fathers,  addressing  his  inmost  nature :  "  I  have  set 
thee  a  watchman."  He  did  not  assume  the  office  and  the  work  at  the  instigation  of 
his  own  heart.  It  was  not  through  vanity  or  ambition  that  he  took  upon  him  to 
speak  authoritatively  to  his  countrymen.  He  was  not  invited  or  summoned  by  the 
house  of  Israel  to  be  their  counsellor.  The  voice  that  called  him  was  Divine;  it  was 
a  voice  which  he  had  no  moral  option  but  to  obey. 

II.  HiB  BFEOIAL  OHARGE.  Ezekiel  did  indeed  receive  messages  for  others  than  his 
countrymen ;  he  communicated  the  mind  and  will  of  God  to  Edom  and  to  Moab,  to 
Tyre  and  to  Egypt.  But  it  was  the  house  of  Israel  to  whom  he  was  sent,  who  were 
placed,  in  a  measure,  under  his  care.  They  were  his  own  people  and  kindred,  sharing 
his  inherited  advantages  and  privileges.  And  he  seems  to  have  felt  towards  them 
very  much,  as  centuries  afterwards,  Paul  felt  towards  his  kindred  according  to  the  flesh. 
He  had  a  burning  zeal  and  solicitude  for  their  welfare.  He  counted  it  an  honourable 
and  sacred,"  although  a  very  painful,  office  to  watch  for  their  souls. 

III.  His  PERSONAL  QUALIFICATIONS.  It  is  not  fanciful  to  lay  great  stress  upon  the 
appellation  by  which  he  is  constantly  addressed  by  the  Lord  himself:  "Son  of  man." 
In  order  to  mediate  between  God  and  man,  a  prophet  needs  not  only  a  nature  reverent 
and  receptive  towards  God,  but  a  nature  sympathetic  towards  man.  A  true  man, 
understanding  human  strength  and  weakness,  entering  into  the  trials  and  temptations 
of  human  life,  appreciating  human  motives,  hopes,  fears,  and  aims,  the  minister  of 
religion  is  qualified  to  deal  with  the  souls  of  his  fellow-creatures.  No  one  can  read  the 
book  of  his  prophecies  without  feeling  that  Ezekiel  was  just  such  a  man. 

IV.  His  beceptive  attitude.  Ezekiel's  first  business  was  to  place  himself  in 
communication  with  the  Being  in  whom  is  all  truth,  in  whom  is  all  authority. 
"  Hear  the  word  at  my  mouth  I  "  was  God's  command.  A  mind  confident  in  its  own 
wisdom,  self-sufficient  and  arrogant,  could  not  fulfil  the  prophetic  office  aright.  The 
prophet  speaks  for  God  ;  but  he  must  first  be  with  God.  He  must  see  the  vision  he 
is  to  relate,  and  hear  the  message  he  is  to  repeat.  There  is  ever  danger  lest  religious 
teachers  should  teach  upon  their  own  account ;  but  reverence  and  modesty  should  lead 


OH.  xxxra.  1— 33.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIBL.  198 

them  to  regard  themselves  as  vehicles  of  truth  and  warning,  promise  and  encourage- 
ment, to  their  fellow-men. 

V.  His  active  duty.  "Warn  them  from  mel"  was  the  Divine  command;  which 
implies  that  the  house  of  Israel  was  iu  danger,  and  needed  stirring  and  authoritative 
admonition.  And  this  was  indeed  the  case,  as  is  apparent  from  the  facts  of  their 
history.  It  is  an  unthankful  ofHce  to  discharge,  and  Ezekiel  met,  as  every  faithful 
teacher  must  do,  with  hostility  and  unbelief,  with  resentment  and  ingratitude.  But 
the  duty  was  plain,  and  the  prophet  ful&Ued  it,  whether  men  gave  heed  or  forhora. 
And  his  ministry  was  not  wholly  in  vain. — T. 

Vers.  8,  9. — The  responsibility  of  the  watchman.  It  was  well  that  the  prophet 
should  be  given  clearly  to  understand  what  was  expected  and  required  of  him,  not  by 
men  to  whom  he  was  sent,  but  by  God  who  sent  him.  Plainer  language  could  not 
have  been  used  than  this,  in  which  Ezekiel  is  not  only  told  the  nature  of  his  message 
to  the  house  of  Israel,  but  is  informed  of  the  responsibility  attaching  to  the  manner  in 
which  the  commission  was  fulfilled, 

I.  The  duty.  The  special  duty  of  the  watchman  or  guardian,  as  here  explained, 
concerns  the  treatment  of  the  wicked.  More  particularly  it  is  for  him  (1)  to  warn  the 
wicked ;  (2)  to  assure  the  inattentive  and  impenitent  that  the  punishment  of  death 
awaits  him ;  (3)  to  admonish  him  to  repent. 

II.  The  possibility  of  failube.  Enthusiasm  sometimes  loses  sight  of  this.  Many 
a  young  minister  of  religion  commences  his  work  with  the  conviction  that  God'g 
message  has  only  to  be  delivered  in  order  to  its  acceptance ;  that  the  moral  Law  is  so 
beautiful  that  it  has  but  to  be  exhibited  in  order  to  be  revered  and  honoured ;  that 
the  gospel  is  so  precious  and  glorious  that  no  one  who  hears  it  can  fail  to  embrace  it. 
Experience  dispels  many  of  our  illusions ;  and  it  is  soon  found  that  there  are  men 
capable  of  listening  to  the  threats  of  the  Law  and  to  the  promises  of  the  gospel  with  utter 
indifference  and  unconcern.  Ezekiel  was  reminded  that  some  of  the  wicked  might  not 
turn,  might  die  in  their  iniquity.  Doubtless  he  found  that  this  was  actually  the  case. 
It  is  no  discredit  either  to  the  message  or  to  the  messenger  that  men  do  not  accept  the 
Word  and  act  upon  it.  Our  Lord  Jesus  had  occasion  to  marvel  at  the  unbelief  of 
those  to  whom  he  ministered ;  and  when  St.  Paul  preached,  "  some  believed,  and  some 
believed  not." 

III.  The  unfaithfui.  watchman.  This  is  the  appointed  guardian  who  "  does  not 
speak  to  warn  the  wicked  of  his  way."  This  unfaithfulness  may  be  accounted  for  by 
indolence,  or  by  undue  fear,  or  by  a  desire  to  conciliate  and  please  his  hearers.  But  all 
such  motives  should  be  consumed  by  a  burning  desire  on  the  part  of  the  spiritual 
guardian  to  commend  himself  to  his  Master.  The  watchman  is  assured  that  if, 
through  his  unfaithfulness,  the  wicked  dies  unwarned  and  impenitent  in  his  iniquity, 
the  blood  of  the  perishing  shall  be  required  at  the  watchman's  hand. 

IV.  The  faithful  watchman.  Faithfulness  does  not  involve  uniform  or  even  uiual 
success.  The  earnestly  and  frequently  warned  may  nevertheless  die  in  his  iniquity. 
The  fervent  prophet,  the  zealous  preacher,  the  diligent  pastor,  may  have  the  inexpres- 
sible sorrow  of  seeing  little  fruit  of  their  labour.  It  may  be  necessary  that  the  testimony 
should  be  borne,  even  though  rejected  and  despised.  But  the  servant  of  the  Lord  is 
assured,  for  his  encouragement,  that,  if  he  does  his  duty,  he  delivers  his  souL  His 
workmanship  may  perish  in  the  flames ;  yet  he  himself  may  be  saved,  though  through 
the  fire.— T. 

Vers.  12, 13. —  JTie  vanity  of  transitory  goodness.  The  ministers  of  religion  are  often 
pained  and  sometimes  discouraged  by  instances,  such  as  are  here  referred  to,  of  that 
goodness  which  is  "  as  the  morning  cloud  and  the  early  dew,  which  soon  goeth  away." 

L  Thebe  is  a  goodness  which  is  SFECiorrs,  but  superficial.  Like  the  seed  growing 
upon  rocky  soil,  it  springs  up  rapidly,  and  its  show  is  fair ;  but  the  reality  has  no 
correspondence  to  the  appearance.  Impressible,  easily  influenced,  and  fickle  natures  are 
the  soil  upon  which  this  growth  is  observed. 

II,  In  tiue  of  tbial  tee  baselessness  of  this  goodness  is  hade  afpabent.  The 
man  trusts  to  his  own  righteousness,  commits  iniquity,  and  transgresses  the  Divina 
Law.    Temptation  assails,  persecution  terrifies,  ridicule  overcomes,  evil  example  per- 

EZEEIEL — n.  O 


194  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxxm.  1— 33. 

suadeg ;  and  then  the  weak  character  yields,  unable  to  endure  the  probation.  Such  cases 
are  frequent  in  the  experience  of  all  who  work  for  God  and  hare  to  deal  with  a  variety 
of  human  character  and  disposition. 

III.  Goodness  which  does  not  endube  probation  is  not  beuehbered,  and  avails 
NOTHING  in  God's  sight.  The  character  of  a  man  is  regarded  as  a  whole,  and  is  not 
judged  by  any  partial  aspects  or  manifestations.  Because  a  man  has  had  good  feelings 
or  has  performed  good  acts,  it  does  not  follow  that  he  is  a  good  man.  It  is  life,  and 
not  any  one  day  of  life,  which  is  the  true  period  of  probation.  A  virtue  that  cannot 
endure  temptation  is  no  true  virtue.     "  He  that  endureth  to  the  end  shall  be  saved." 

Application.  The  minister  of  religion  must  not  be  misled  by  the  mere  appearance 
of  piety.  He  must  wait  and  look  for  the  proof  of  that  deep-seated  principle,  which 
alone  can  govern  the  conduct  and  transfigure  the  life.  At  the  same  time,  he  must 
make  use  of  every  means  to  fortify  men  against  inevitable  temptation,  and  especially 
must  he  admonish  the  young  and  inexperienced  to  watch  and  to  pray,  and  to  take 
unto  them  the  whole  armour  of  God. — T. 

Vers.  14,  15. — The  efficacy  of  repentance.  If,  on  the  one  hand,  the  prophet  was 
warned  that  some  seemingly  righteous,  superficially  good,  would  fall,  he  was  encour- 
aged, on  the  other  hand,  by  the  assurance  that  some  wicked  persons  would,  as  the 
result  of  his  admonitions,  repent  and  convert,  and  would  be  brought  to  true  and  Divine 
life. 

L  The  seat  of  repentance.  This  must  be  the  spiritual  nature.  The  promptings 
to  a  better  life  come  from  within,  from  better  feelings  and  better  convictions  and 
purposes.     Repentance  is  a  change  of  mind,  of  heart. 

II.  The  manifestations  of  repentance.  These  will  vary  with  the  previous  life, 
with  the  special  circumstances,  the  opportunities  and  position  of  the  convert.  In  ver.  16 
these  practical  proofs  of  repentance  are  mentioned,  and  these  acts  may  be  taken  as 
examples  of  the  modes  in  which  true  repentance  will  undoubtedly  display  itself. 

III.  The  reward  of  repentance.  1.  The  evil  deeds  of  the  former  life  shall  not  he 
remembered  or  imputed.  2.  The  sentence  of  death  shall  be  cancelled,  S.  The  penitent 
and  reformed  shall  live,  i.e.  in  the  life  of  God  himself. — T. 

Ver.  20. — Divine  eguity.  Ezekiel  was  well  aware  that  his  message  would  not  meet 
with  universal  acceptance.  But  he  was  also  aware  that  it  would  meet,  not  only  with 
indifference  and  unbelief,  but  also  with  hostility  and  rejection.  The  very  principles  of 
the  Divine  government  would  be  questioned.  Forewarned  is  forearmed.  And  the  prophet 
was  himself  convinced  of  the  Divme  justice.  For  were  he  not  so  convinced,  the  heart 
would  have  been  taken  out  of  his  work,  and  his  personal  and  ministerial  life  would 
have  been  blighted  and  weakened. 

I.  The  Divine  equity  challenged.  There  were  those  who,  when  they  listened  to 
the  intentions  of  the  Supreme  Buler,  as  declared  by  his  minister,  criticized  the  principle! 
of  God's  administration,  afiBrming,  "The  way  of  the  Lord  is  not  equal."  1.  There  is 
a  presumption  against  this  criticism,  arising  from  human  ignorance  and  the  limitation 
of  human  faculties.  2.  And  there  is  a  presumption  against  it,  arising  from  all  that  we 
certainly  know  of  the  character  of  the  supreme  Eternal  Judge.  3.  Another  objection 
in  many  cases  arises  from  the  character  of  those  who  censure  the  ways  of  God:  they 
have  much  to  fear  from  judgment  by  a  righteous  and  impartial  tribunal. 

II.  The  Divine  eqcitt  vikdicated.  It  is  very  remarkable  that  the  method  of 
vindication  is  not  by  a  laboured  argument,  but  by  a  direct  statement  of  fact  and  a  direct 
appeal  to  men's  reason  and  conscience.  "  O  house  of  Israel,  I  will  judge  every  one  of 
you  after  his  ways."  That  is  to  say :  1.  God's  judgment  and  the  consequent  retribu- 
tion are  facts  which  no  objection  or  scepticism  can  destroy.  2.  The  principles  of 
God's  judicial  action  are  such  as  it  is  hard  for  any  reasonable  man  to  blame  or  mspute. 
Every  man  is  to  be  judged  individually,  and  every  man  is  to  be  judged  upon  his  own 
conduct  and  his  own  character.  These  considerations  have  only  to  be  amplified  and  to 
be  pondered,  and  they  afford  a  convincing  and  satisfactory  reply  to  the  objections  of 
the  captious  and  critical. — T. 

Ver.  21. — Evfl  tidings.  Ezekiel  had  repeatedly  and  most  plainly  foretold  the  capture 


m.  xxxra.  1--S3.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  BZEKIEL.  196 

«f  Jerusalem.  He  waited  in  sad  suspense  for  the  fulfilment  of  his  inspired  prediction. 
At  last  it  came  ;  and  one  who  had  escaped  from  Jerusalem,  and  who  had  fled  eastward, 
brought  the  tidings  to  the  children  of  the  Captivity. 

L  These  tidings  affected  Ezekibl  as  a  man,  akousino  his  sympathy. 

II.  These  tidings  affected  him  as  a  patriot,  afflictino  him  with  eumiliatios. 
Jerusalem  was  the  metropolis  of  his  country,  of  his  race, — it  was  the  scene  of  eventi 
famous  in  national  story.  It  had  heen  won  hy  the  prowess  of  David ;  it  had  heen  adorned 
by  the  opulence  and  splendour  of  Solomon ;  it  had  heen  the  emporium  of  commerce,  and 
the  home  of  the  learned  and  the  great.  It  had  heen  the  chosen  seat  of  the  sanctuary 
of  Jehovah.  How  could  a  true-hearted  Hebrew  like  Ezekiel  hear  of  the  capture  and 
iaX\  of  the  city  of  David,  without  feeling  his  heart  sore  and  anguished  because  of  his 
country's  bitter  humiliation  ? 

in.  These  tidinqs  affected  him,  as  a  devout  Isbaelite,  with  sincere  distress. 
Ezekiel  looked  upon  this  event  as  a  chastisement  from  God  inflicted  because  of  the 
unfaithfulness  of  the  people,  and  their  neglect  to  use  their  privileges  and  opportunities 
418  they  should  have  done.  When  the  blow  fell,  his  fears  were  realized  and  his  sorrow 
was  stirred  within  him,  because  of  this  consequence  of  Judah's  sins,  and  because  of  the 
evidence  afforded  of  the  displeasure  of  the  righteous  God. 

IV.  These  tidings  affected  him  as  a  prophet  who  recognized  herein  the 
rCLFlLMENT  OF  THE  INSPIRED  PREDICTION.  What  befell  Jerusalem  was  what  Ezekiel 
bad,  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  repeatedly  and  plainly  foretold.  He  could  not  but  be 
confirmed  in  the  veracity  of  his  God  and  in  the  authenticity  of  his  own  commission, 
when  the  word  which  he  had  spoken  was  fulfilled,  and  when  the  disaster  of  which  be 
bad  faithfully  warned  his  fellow-countrymen  fell  upon  them  in  all  its  destructiveness 
•ad  desolation. — ^T. 

Vers.  23 — 29. — The  powerlessnest  of  privilege  to  save.  At  length  the  prophet's  lips 
are  opened ;  and  he  who  for  so  long  has  been  dumb,  so  far  as  ministration  to  his  own 
fieople  was  concerned,  is  set  free  to  testify  to  the  sons  of  Abraham.  While  silenced  at 
fegards  Israel,  Ezekiel  has  prophesied  concerning  the  heathen  nations.  Now  he  again 
addresses  his  countrymen,  and  it  is  interesting  to  observe  to  what  purpose  he  uses  hie 
(recovered  liberty  of  speech.  Always  candid,  fearless,  and  faithful,  the  prophet  assure* 
lus  countrymen  that  a  position  of  privilege,  regarded  by  itself,  is  no  guarantee  of 
•alvation  and  blessing,  that  privileges  neglected  and  abused  only  entail  the  severer 
condemnation. 

I.  Israel's  privileges.  These  were  many,  but  Ezekiel  makes  especial  reference  to 
two.  1.  The  descent  of  the  nation  from  Abraham,  the  father  of  the  faithful  and  the 
friend  of  God.  2.  The  promise  of  inheriting  the  land.  This  Jehovah  had  given  to  the 
progenitors  of  the  nation,  and  he  had  fulfilled  his  gracious  assurance.  No  people  were 
so  highly  favoured ;  they  possessed  the  memory  of  their  glorious  ancestors ;  the  laws 
and  promises  given  by  Moses,  their  great  leader,  deliverer,  and  legislator ;  the  institu- 
tions of  priesthood,  sacrifice,  and  worship,  by  which  God  revealed  himself  to  his  people 
and  secured  to  them  his  mercy  and  favour ;  and  all  the  associations  and  advantages 
connected  with  the  occupation  of  the  land  of  promise. 

II.  Israel's  unfaithfulness.  The  people  had  Abraham  to  their  father,  but  they 
did  not  the  works  of  Abraham,  and  they  had  not  Abraham's  faith.  The  people  did 
{lOESess  the  land,  but  they  did  not  use  their  national  privileges  as  they  might  have  done, 
they  did  not  make  the  land  a  land  of  righteousness  and  true  piety.  The  prophet,  in 
this  passage,  refers  to  faults  and  sins  of  two  orders,  with  which  the  people  are  especially 
upbraided.  (1)  Idolatrous  apostacy;  and  (2)  moral  delinquency, — both  of  which  are 
charged  upon  the  people  with  that  outspoken  plainness  by  which  Ezekiel's  writings 
are  so  strikingly  and  honourably  marked. 

III.  Israel's  punishment.  There  is  a  certain  monotony  about  these  threats  and 
denunciations.  Because  of  the  abominations  which  these  highly  favoured  people  have 
committed,  it  is  foretold :  1.  That  multitudes  shall  be  slain  hy  the  sword  of  the  enemy, 
by  the  wild  beasts  that  shall  multiply  because  of  the  desolation  of  the  land,  and  by  the 
{)estilence.  2.  That  the  country,  in  consequence  of  the  calamities  befalling  its  inhabit- 
ants, shall  be  wasted.  The  pride  and  pomp  of  her  power  shall  cease,  and  her  mountains 
•hall  be  desolate,  that  none  shall  pass  through. 


196  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  EZEKIEL.    [ch.  xxxni.  1— Sa. 

rV.  Israel's  witness  to  God.  This  is  an  unintentional  and  unconscious  witness^ 
but  none  the  less  a  valuahle  and  effective  testimony  for  all  who  receive  it.  Those  wha 
see  and  hear  of  the  fulfilment  of  the  Divine  warnings  and  predictions  cannot  but  hare 
their  faith  confirmed  in  the  truth  and  power  of  the  Most  High,  and  in  the  righteousnew 
of  his  dealings  with  the  sons  of  men.  He  is  shown  to  be  a  Judge,  from  whose  observa- 
tion and  cognizance  no  misdemeanour  can  be  screened,  and  from  whose  righteous 
sentence  no  criminal  can  escape. — T. 

Vers.  30 — 33. — The  propheft  reception.  Oftentimes  have  faithful  ministers  of 
religion  to  share  the  experience  and  the  distress  of  Ezekiel,  who  was  listened  to  with  a 
measure  of  curiosity,  interest,  and  satisfaction,  but  whose  counsels  were  unheeded  and 
whose  requirements  were  imfulfiUed.  The  Lord,  who  commissioned  his  servant  the 
prophet,  assured  him  that,  notwithstanding  his  authoritative  commission,  he  should 
meet,  from  many  who  heard  his  voice,  v/ith  incredulity  and  practical  rejection.  Some, 
who  were  gratified  with  his  discourse,  his  poetical  illustrations,  his  sublime  flights  of 
imagination,  his  grand  and  rhetorical  invective,  should  nevertheless  refuse  or  neglect  to 
put  his  precepts  and  admonitions  into  practice.  There  is  something  very  picturesque 
in  the  account  here  given  of  the  prophet's  reception.     Some  of  its  points  are  these — 

I.  Genebal  interest.  The  people  talk  <^  him,  even  if  they  talk  against  him  ; 
they  say  one  to  another,  "  Come,  let  us  hear  the  word."  Ezekiel  had  not,  therefore,  to 
complain  of  neglect. 

II.  OuTWABD  AND  vEBBAL  RESPECT.  His  pTophetic  vocation  is  acknowledged.  The 
people  come  to  him  and  sit  before  him  and  listen  to  his  discourse.  There  is  every 
outward  demonstration  of  honour. 

III.  Enjoyment  of  his  language.  "  Thou  art  unto  them  as  a  very  lovely  song  of 
one  that  hath  a  pleasant  voice,  and  can  play  well  on  an  instrument,"  The  melody  of 
the  prophet's  speech,  the  grace  of  his  diction,  the  grandeur  of  his  style,  excite  and 
please  the  imagination  of  all  who  are  capable  of  literary  appreciation. 

IV.  Professions  of  love.  There  is  something  beyond  mere  admiration.  "  With 
their  mouth  they  show  much  love."  A  witness  within  assures  the  people  that  tho 
prophet  is  a  man  who  feels  for  them  and  desires  their  welfare.  Love  awakens  love, 
and  in  a  superficial  way  they  feel  a  certain  attachment  to  the  prophet  personally; 
they  know  him  to  be  their  true  friend. 

V.  Consciousness  of  inconsistency  between  the  peophetic  doctbinb  and  theib 
OWN  LIFE.  This  arises  from  their  disobedience  to  the  prophetic  counsel  and  require-  , 
ments.  They  bear  the  words  of  the  Lord,  but  they  will  not  do  them ;  their  heart 
goeth  forth  into  covetousness.  A  schism  is  thus  created  between  their  innermost 
convictions— the  voice  of  reason  and  of  conscience  on  the  one  hand,  and  their  habitual 
practice  on  the  other.  The  Word  fails  to  produce  a  moral  reformation.  In  such  cases 
the  prophet  prophesies  in  vain. 

VI.  Matter  is  thus  laid  up  fob  future  repentance.  When  we  see  what  is  best 
and  do  it  cot,  we  may  be  assured  that  our  choice  is  one  which  we  shall  surely  come  to 
regret.  The  Hebrews  of  Ezekiel's  time  knew  that  he  was  a  just  and  faithful  man,  to 
whom  they  listened  with  interest  and  pleasure.  They  were  assured  that  the  time 
should  come  when  they  should  know  that  there  had  been  a  prophet  among  them,  and 
that  in  neglecting  his  ministrations  they  had  forfeited  blessings  then  placed  within 
their  reach,  and  had  wronged  their  own  souls.  Privileges  neglected  and  abused  can 
never  be  recalled,  but  their  memory  will  be  bitter  when  they  rise  up  in  judgment 
against  the  unfaithful. — T. 

"Vers.  1—9. — 2%e  watchman's  office.  All  the  resources  of  God's  ingenuity  are 
employed  to  find  argument  and  appeal  for  man's  slumbering  conscience.  The  incident* 
of  ordinary  life  are  carved  into  channels  for  the  conveyance  of  Divine  messages.  No 
man  shall  say  that  the  message  was  above  his  comprehension.  For  even  a  child  can 
understand  if  it  is  willing.  Lessons  concerning  the  heavenly  life  meet  the  eye  of  the 
observer  all  the  day  long.  As  prudent  men  act  to  conserve  their  bodily  life,  so  God 
acts  in  our  spiritual  concernments. 

I.  A  hostile  invasion  supposed.  In  the  earlier  days  of  human  history  raids  from 
feeighbouring  tribes   were  frequent.     International  rights  and  usages  were    things 


<«.  xxxni.  1— 33.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  19T 

unknown.  Such  aa  act  as  a  public  declaration  of  war  was  never  considered  a  public 
duty.  The  more  secretly  and  suddenly  a  hostile  army  could  make  its  attack,  the 
more  to  its  credit.  Hence  a  border  population  was  kept  in  continual  suspense.  It  had 
to  bear  the  brunt  of  a  thousand  alarms  and  a  thousand  perils.  Such  invasions  were 
often  the  act  of  God.  Even  idolatrous  and  wicked  men  are  sometimes  God's  instru- 
ments— God's  hand.  As  often  as  the  invaders  marched  on  territory  to  vindicate  a  right 
or  to  punish  an  offence,  they  marched  at  God's  command.  If  the  motive  for  war  was 
mere  desire  for  plunder,  or  greed  of  land,  or  sheer  military  ambition,  God  was  not  in  it. 
For  God  cannot  sanction  any  form  of  iniquity,  whether  it  be  public  or  private.  But 
war  is  often  the  scourge  which  God  uses  to  vindicate  his  claims  or  to  punish  men; 
and  though  in  outward  appearance  the  invasion  may  seem  only  a  piece  of  human  malice, 
it  is,  in  truth,  an  act  of  God's  retribution.  As  God  has  his  methods  for  chastising 
individual  men,  so  has  he  his  methods  for  chastising  nations.  His  forms  of  penalty  are 
myriadfold. 

II.  A  SENTINEL  APPOINTED.  In  such  a  time  of  peril  as  that  of  invasion  the  people 
knit  themselves  together  for  mutual  defence.  It  w^s  wise  economy  to  choose  one  who 
should  be  drafted  off  from  other  occupation  to  fill  the  watchman's  post.  One  was 
selected  for  the  office  specially  suitable.  All  were  not  equally  apt  for  this  work.  Such 
a  man  was  chosen  as  had  long  resided  on  the  border  territory,  one  who  knew  the 
distant  signs  and  prognostications  of  war,  one  who  knew  the  contour  of  the  country, 
and  could  occupy  the  best  points  of  observation.  An  expert  with  eagle  eye  and  cool 
nerve  was  selected.  This  was  practical  wisdom.  By  such  a  precaution  war  was  some- 
times averted.  If  the  foe  lost  the  advantage  of 'secrecy,  his  plans  were  foiled.  Or  a 
resisting  force  could  be  gathered.  Or  possibly  the  removal  of  their  cattle,  or  their  own 
flight  for  a  time,  would  avert  the  catastrophe.  The  season  or  other  natural  circum- 
stance would  come  to  their  aid,  and  the  deadly  clash  of  arms  be  avoided.  Immense 
gain  might  be  attained  by  well  posting  a  sentinel. 

III.  It  was  a  post  involving  tremendous  eesponsibilitt.  The  interests  and 
fortunes  and  lives  of  the  entire  nation  were  placed  in  the  keeping  of  one  man.  He  was 
responsible  to  ten  thousand  persons  of  every  rank  and  station.  The  safety  of  the  empire 
hung  on  him.  It  was  a  distinctive  honour  to  be  selected  for  the  post,  a  proof  that  he 
possessed  remarkable  qualities  of  soul ;  and  this  responsible  occupation  did  the  man 
good — it  tended  to  develop  all  that  was  gracious  and  excellent  in  him.  Besponsible 
■ervice  is  an  ennobling  and  a  joyous  thing.     It  nourishes  large  and  generous  sympathy. 

IV.  Faithfulness  demanded.  The  characteristic  quality  of  a  watchman  is  faith- 
falness.  He  might  be  deficient  in  many  bodily  and' mental  qualities,  and  yet  be  a 
good  sentinel ;  but  fidelity  to  duty — ^fidelity  to  the  momentous  trust — there  must  be, 
or  he  had  better  not  be  a  watchman.  Better,  far  better,  appoint  no  watchman  than 
have  a  man  who  is  unfaithful.  The  blood  of  ten  thousand  innocent  men  justice  might 
require  at  his  unfaithful  hands.  Equally  true  is  this  of  God's  watchman,  the  prophet. 
The  first  and  most  central  requisite  is  faithfulness.  He  may  be  deficient  in  bodily 
stature  and  strength,  he  may  be  deficient  in  learning  and  culture,  he  may  be  deficient 
in  high  birth  and  in  social  standing,  but  he  must  be  gifted  with  trustworthiness.  This 
is  an  essential.  If  he  be  unfaithful,  he  is  of  all  men  most  unsuitable.  If  he  accepts  the 
ofiBce,  and  neglects  its  high  duties,  his  guilt  is  immeasurable.  Setter  for  his  own  sake, 
better  for  others'  sake,  that  he  hart  never  been  God's  messenger  to  men,  than  to  lack 
fidelity  in  his  tremendous  trust.  An  unfaithful  preacher  must  be  held  up  to  the  world's 
execration. 

V.  Possible  failube.  Yet  even  faithfulness  will  not  ensure  success.  The  people 
may  not  credit  his  warnings.  They  may  deride  his  anxieties.  They  may  persuade 
themselves  that  the  peril  is  not  so  near  as  he  avers.  It  is  a  matter  that  can  wait. 
They  riiay  put  down  to  official  propriety,  or  to  sensitive  regard  for  his  own  credit,  what 
ought  to  have  been  put  down  to  wise  solicitude  and  to  approaching  disaster.  In  a 
thousand  cases  men  persist  in  deceiving  themselves  as  to  the  nearness  of  the  peril. 
Ten  thousand  men  have  fallen  over  the  precipice  of  ruin  through  self-infatuation,  and 
ten  thousand  more  will  follow.  They  will  not  learn  practical  wisdom  from  the  folly 
and  the  ruin  of  others.  And  it  becomes  every  one  of  us  to  lay  the  lesson  upon  our 
own  hearts :  "  Let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth  take  heed  lest  he  falL"  Oh  for  a 
prophet's  vision  to  interpret  the  signs  of  the  times  1 — D. 


198  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  BZEKIEL.    [ch.  xxxin.  1—33. 

Vers.  10 — ^20. — Mer^s  misconception  of  God's  government.  Men  are  naturally  prone 
to  merge  themselves  in  the  nation.  This  was,  perhaps,  a  stronger  habit  among  the 
Jews  than  among  us.  They  could  not  understand  how  that,  while  God  punished  th» 
nation,  he  could  protect  the  individual.  Israel  may  be  depressed  in  fortune,  while  yet 
Daniel  and  his  companions  are  elevated.  Sodom  may  be  destroyed,  but  Lot  shall  b» 
preserved. 

I.  SuFFEBiNO  OFTEN  BLINDS  men's  EYES  TO  God's  equitableness.  It  IS  natural  t» 
suppose  that  luxurious  prosperity  is  due  to  our  merits;  and,  if  adversity  visits  us,  we 
judge  ourselves  to  be  hardly  dealt  with.  Scarcely  one  man  in  a  thousand  realizes  th» 
foot  that  he  deserves  nothing,  and  that  the  common  benefits  of  air  and  food  are  the 
unpurchased  gifts  of  God.  As  soon  as  the  suspension  of  Divine  favours  is  felt  we  are 
disposed  to  complain.  We  cannot  conceive  that  we  have  deserved  such  hardship.  We 
see  others,  no  more  replete  with  virtue  than  ourselves,  enveloped  in  silk  and  purple,, 
riding  abroad  in  gilded  chariots.  Does  God  really  rule  over  the  interests  and  fortunes 
of  men  ?  We  have  abandoned  some  evil  courses :  is  not  God  going  to  reward  us  for 
this?  Still,  we  can  only  think  of  our  losses  and  our  afflictions;  we  cannot  see  the 
higher  benefits  God  is  bringing  to  us.  Through  our  blinding  tears  we  can  only  see 
oppression  and  injustice.  Through  selfish  tears  we  see  only  what  we  have  lost,  not 
what  we  have  gained.  We  would  rather  discover  injustice  in  God  than  iniquity 
within  ourselves.  Truly  has  it  been  said,  "  There's  none  so  blind  as  those  who  will 
not  see." 

II.  National  calamity  is  a  symbol  of  personal  perdition.  The  overthrow  of  • 
nation  is  something  visible,  impressive,  startling.  Yet  it  is  not  the  worse  thing  that  can 
happen  to  a  man.  He  may  have  to  transfer  his  political  allegiance  to  another.  He 
may  have  to  live  under  a  different  set  of  laws  and  institutions.  He  may  have  to  quit 
■cenes  in  nature,  with  which  he  has  been  long  familiar,  for  other  scenes  in  a  distant 
land.  This  loss,  dishonour,  banishment,  are  intended  to  remind  him  that  there  is  a 
worse  exile — an  exile  from  his  spirit's  home,  an  exile  from  the  kingdom  of  God,  of  which 
Canaan  was  but  a  symbol.  To  be  compelled  to  dwell  among  idolaters  was  a  gracious 
chastisement,  to  make  his  spirit  recoil  from  the  fear  of  dwelling  for  ever  among  the  foes 
of  God.  And  if  the  Hebrew  exile  took  to  heart  the  lesson,  that  banishment  to  Babylon 
might  become  to  him  salvation. 

III.  National  calamity  ib  consonant  with  personal  well-being.  The  typical 
Jew  was  murmuring  in  Babylon  that  this  destruction  of  the  nation  was  incompatible 
with  God's  promise  of  life — a  promise  founded  on  personal  repentance.  "If  our 
transgressions  and  our  sins  be  upon  us,  and  we  pine  away  in  them,  how  should  we 
then  live?"  I^eir  idea  of  life  was  free  life  in  Judaea.  God's  idea  of  life  was  their 
return  to  allegiance  and  piety.  "  In  his  favour,"  and  in  this  alone,  they  could  fin4 
life.  Consequently,  a  penitent  Jew  could  have  found  the  highest  life,  even  while  an 
exile  in  Babylon.  If  he  personally  felt  and  confessed  his  sin,  if  he  reposed  his  soul  on 
God's  great  mercy,  if  he  bowed  his  spirit  to  God's  will,  and  walked  humbly  with  hi* 
God,  this  was  life  of  the  noblest  kind.  And,  like  a  saint  of  later  date,  he  could  "  rejoice 
even  in  tribulation."  Better  to  dwell  on  Chebar's  banks  in  the  society  of  Jehovah 
than  to  dwell  in  the  palaces  of  Jerusalem  without  God  as  a  Friend.  If  God  be  my 
God,  exile  has  no  terror  for  me.    Where  God  is,  there  is  my  heaven. 

IV.  KlQHTEOUSNESS   MUST   BE  PERSONAL,   NOT  HEKEDITABY  NOB   TRADITIONAL.      The 

foolish  and  hurtful  idea  dwelt  iri  the  minds  of  the  Jews  that  God's  former  favour  t» 
them  as  a  nation  was  a  guarantee  for  all  future  security.  It  was  a  species  of  anti- 
nomianism.  Their  maxim  was,  "  Once  righteous,  always  righteous,  notwithstanding 
our  deeds."  They  imagined  tliat  they  could  not  fall  from  their  exalted  position.  It 
is  marvellous  how  deep-rooted  in  some  minds  this  ]irejudice  respecting  traditional  piety 
becomes.  But  the  fervid  piety  of  former  days  will  avail  us  nothing  if  faith  and  lOve 
are  now  dead.  It  is  only  a  living  faith,  a  present  submission,  that  God  accepts.  And 
if  our  former  faith  and  love  have  evaporated,  there  is  clear  evidence  that  it  wag  only 
a  pretence,  and  not  the  reality.  To  be  accepted  of  God,  and  to  be  accounted  worthy  of 
heaven,  I  personally  must  be  righteous.  The  righteousness  of  the  nation  is  nothing 
else  than  the  ri^ihteousness  of  the  component  parts.  And  unless  I  individually  am 
righteous  in  God's  esteem,  I  shall  be  rejected  and  condemned  in  the  great  assize. 

T.   PeBSONAL    BIGHTE0U8NES8   HAS   1TB   BOOT   IN   BINCEBE   BEPENTANCE.      BepentaOCe 


OH.  mm,  1—33.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PEOPHET  EZEKIEL.  199 

is  the  birth  of  right  and  honest  feeling  towards  God.  Whether  our  past  feelings  and 
actions  have  been  wrong  by  way  of  omission  or  by  way  of  guilty  commission,  the 
whole  sin,  greater  or  less,  will  be  candidly  confessed.  Repentance  does  not  consist  in 
excessive  grief,  but  in  genuine  turning — a  complete  change  of  mind.  The  repentant 
man  opens  his  mind  to  the  light.  He  allows  the  light  of  truth  to  enter  every  part  of 
his  nature.  He  yields  to  the  light.  He  follows  the  light.  He  submits  his  thought, 
his  choice,  his  will,  his  life,  to  G-od  his  King.  He  welcomes  the  indwelling  and  the 
inworking  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Righteousness  is  gradually  wrought  into  the  warp  and 
woof  of  his  nature,  and  so  he  becomes  the  righteousness  of  God  through  his  Spirit. 

VI.  God's  coxjnsels  advooatins  kepbntanob  are  pboofs  op  his  compassion. 
Full  well  God  knows  that  the  possession  of  perfect  righteousness  is  the  noblest 
possession  any  man  can  acquire,  and  that  this  righteousness  must  begin  in  sincere  and 
thorough  repentance.  We  have  a  thousand  proofs  of  God's  compassion  towards  the 
erring  children  of  men.  We  have  them  especially  in  the  gift  of  his  only  Son,  and  in 
the  gift  of  his  Divine  Spirit.  But  the  crowning  proof  of  his  compassion  is  in  stooping 
to  plead  with  men's  prejudices  and  pride.  He  remonstrates  and  entreats  as  if  he  were 
the  party  about  to  be  benefited.  Such  self-forgetful  love  wa»  never  seen  before  on 
earth.  It  is  distinctive  of  our  redeeming  God.  And  when  he  succeeds,  and  the  human 
heart  relents,  then  a  new  wave  of  joy  rolls  through  the  realm  of  heaven.  "  There  is 
joy  in  the  presence  of  the  angels  of  God." — D. 

Vers.  21 — 29. — Right,  not  might,  tht  foundation  of  stable  empire.  The  shortest 
path  to  gaining  empire  over  men  seems  to  be  might,  or  might  conjoined  with  cunning. 
But  "  things  are  not  what  they  seem."  The  throne  whose  foundations  have  been  well 
and  slowly  laid  will  attain  to  greater  permanence.  The  oak  that  has  been  rooting 
itself  for  a  hundred  years  will  resist  many  a  howling  tempest.  Things  unseen  are  the 
things  that  endure. 

I.  We  have  an  instance  op  Divine  chastisement  unheeded.  "The  city  is 
smitten."  The  city  of  which  they  had  been  so  proud,  the  city  which  had  seemed  an 
impregnable  stronghold,  was  captured  by  the  invader.  Their  honoured  sanctuary  was 
levelled  to  the  ground.  Precious  lives  were  sacrificed.  Their  honour  was  trampled  in 
the  dust.  Judah's  sceptre  was  broken.  It  had  been  long  time  announced  that  this 
would  be  the  outcome  of  Jehovah's  anger,  and  now  the  warning  had  been  completely 
verified.  If  this  painful  event  did  not  afflict  their  souls  as  an  unmistakable  chastise- 
ment for  sin,  then  nothing  would.  The  tree  that  remains  fruitless,  after  skilful  and 
severe  pruning,  is  hopelessly  barren.  Affliction  not  converted  into  blessing  becomes  a 
great  disaster.  Black  clouds  that  dissolve  not  in  r^n  become  magazines  of  thunder- 
bolts. 

II.  An  instance  op  pallacious  keasoning.  Although  their  numbers  were  deci- 
mated by  war,  they  discovered  that  they  were  yet  more  in  number  than  when  Abraham 
dwelt  in  the  land.  He  was  in  a  minority  of  one,  yet  his  posterity  attained  possession. 
These,  his  degenerate  progeny,  were  still  a  strong  body  compared  with  solitary 
Abraham.  Tlierefore  their  case  was  not  utterly  forlorn.  True,  they  had  been  defeated, 
driven  back,  pressed  into  the  barren  hills  and  wastes  of  the  land,  yet  they  could  still 
muster  a  thousand  or  two.  This  was  enough  to  regain  a  conquest.  Their  confidence 
was  in  numbers — in  themselves.     "We  are  many;  the  land  is  given  us." 

III.  The  important  element  omitted.  The  vital  omission  was  tAt's,  that  Abraham 
had  God  at  his  back,  and  all  the  resources  of  heaven  for  his  defence ;  they  had  set  God 
against  them  as  their  foe,  and  all  the  forces  of  righteousness  were  leagued  for  their 
overthrow.  Their  banners  were  stained  with  vice  and  crime.  They  had  forsaken 
God,  and  had  sought  unto  idols.  No  marvel,  then,  that  God  had  forsaken  them. 
Violence,  adultery,  sensuality,  and  murder  cried  to  Heaven  for  vengeance,  and  did  not 
cry  in  vain.  The  pleasures  of  sin  had  blinded  their  eyes  to  the  real  facts  of  the  case. 
They  had  forgotten  that  God  had  declared  himself  the  Arbiter  in  the  field  of  war,  and 
a  moment's  reflection  would  have  convinced  them  that  God  was  with  their  adversary. 
The  white  escutcheon  of  their  father  Abraham  had  been  by  them  basely  defiled  ;  and 
the  worst  feature  was  this — they  perceived  it  not. 

IV.  An  instance  op  judicial  visitation.'  The  great  Judge  of  men  had  pronounced 
his  verdict,  and  all  their  boastful  expectations  were  reversed.    Over  against  their  boast, 


200  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxxiii.  1—33. 

"  The  land  is  given  us  for  inheritance,"  God  placed  his  edict, "  The  mountains  of  Israel 
shall  be  desolate,  that  none  shall  pass  through."  The  fiainisters  of  Divine  vengeance 
had  received  their  commission,  and  the  time  for  revoking  it  liad  passed.  Wild  beasts, 
the  pestilence,  and  the  sword  had  heard  the  fiat  of  God,  and  proceeded  to  do  their 
deadly  work.  No  fortress  could  protect  them  against  such  insidious  enemies.  Into 
every  secret  cave  of  the  mountains  wild  beasts  and  miasma  would  force  their  way.  The 
array  of  God  is  a  hundredfold  more  difficult  to  opposs  or  to  elude  than  any  host  of 
human  king.    Sane  men  will  promptly  yield. 

V.  The  great  lesson  learnt  too  late.  "  Then  shall  they  know  that  I  am  the 
Lord."  The  light  which  they  had  sullenly  barred  out  of  their  minds  all  their  lifetime 
shall  find  its  way  within  in  the  hour  of  death.  Some  men  will  listen  to  no  warning 
voice  except  the  warning  voice  of  death.  They  learn  at  last  what,  had  they  learnt 
before,  would  have  been  their  salvation.  But  now  to  them  the  lesson  is  useless ;  it 
serves  only  to  admonish  others.  Crowds  of  man  are  practical  infidels  all  through  life, 
although  they  profess  to  believe  in  a  reigning  God ;  but  death  scatters  the  clouds  of 
unbelief,  and  is  a  startling  revelation  of  the  invisible  world.  Amid  the  excitements 
and  the  turmoil  of  life  they  would  not  reflect,  nor  ponder,  nor  decide.  They  preferred 
to  remain  in  the  haze  of  doubt.  At  no  point  would  they  brace  up  their  moral  energy  to 
say,  "  I  know."  Yet  there  comes  an  hour  when  faith,  and  righteousness,  and  God,  and 
judgment  will  be  real.     "  Then  shall  they  know." — D. 

Vers.  80 — 33. — Superficial  religiousness.  The  Pall  in  Eden  is  an  old  story,  yet  it  ig 
repeated  every  day  in  our  midst.  Bach  one  of  us  is  in  a  garden  of  privilege.  To  each 
of  us  daily  comes  Divine  commands  and  Divine  prohibitions.  The  path  by  which  we 
may  rise  to  higher  things,  yea,  to  a  higher  life,  lies  open  before  us.  It  is  straight  and 
clearly  seen.  The  path  which  runs  downward  to  destruction  is  hard  by.  The  tempter 
is  still  busy  with  his  seductive  whispers  and  false  blandishments.  Everything  in  our 
personal  destiny  hangs  on  this  pivot,  viz.  whether  we  will  listen  to  the  voice  of  God 
or  to  the  wily  voice  of  the  devil.     Conscience  or  inclination — which  shall  rule  us  ? 

I.  The  teub  pkophet  beings  a  message  from  God.  1.  A  prophet  possesses  a 
spiritual  organ  by  which  he  can  receive  communications  from  God.  He  is  in  touch 
with  God.  All  his  best  faculties  are  enlarged  and  vitalized,  so  that  the  knowledge  of 
God's  will  can  be  reached  and  received.  To  such  a  one  God  conveys  special  informa- 
tion,  and  delegates  him  to  convey  it  to  others.  He  is  put  in  trust  with  the  heavenly 
wisdom  for  the  well-being  of  his  fellow-men.  2.  Such  a  revelation  is  known  and 
recognized,  partly  by  the  internal  character  of  the  message,  partly  by  the  character  and 
endowments  of  the  man.  Except  where  prejudice  and  guilty  habits  blind  the  vision, 
the  hearers  of  the  message  feel  and  confess  that  it  comes  from  a  Divine  origin.  3.  Such 
a  message  must  always  conform  to  the  known  character  of  God.  If  the  message  is 
trivial,  imimportant,  puerile,  baneful,  it  is  clearly  not  from  God.  Falsehood  is  intro- 
duced somewhere.  If  it  is  a  message  salutary,  elevating,  purifying,  benevolent, 
certainly  it  is  Divine.  It  may  run  counter  to  a  man's  inclinations ;  it  often  will ; 
nevertheless,  if  its  tendency  is  to  lead  men  to  faith  and  holiness,  it  has  the  signature 
of  God.- 

II.  The  prophet's  message  excites  public  attention.  1.  There  is  a  craving  to 
know  the  unknown.  Men  long  to  see  the  unseen — long  to  scan  the  future.  Especially 
in  times  of  adversity,  in  hours  of  serious  illness,  men  yearn  to  know  what  the  immediate 
future  will  bring.  In  times  of  health  there  is  a  prurient  curiosity  to  gaze  into  the 
distant  future,  the  great  eternity.  But  in  times  of  pressing  personal  danger  a  feeling 
of  self-interest  is  vividly  astir.  Men  naturally  want  to  have  clear  and  accurate  know- 
ledge respecting  God,  and  respecting  his  dispositions  manward.  They  want  to  know 
what  the  womb  cl  the  future  contains  for  them.  2.  The  message  will  be  welcome  in 
proportion  as  it  gratifies  inclination,  flatters  pride,  and  opens  a  vista  of  sunny  hope. 
Fidelity  on  the  part  of  the  prophet  often  exposes  his  message  and  himself  to  public 
contempt.  3.  Shallow  hearers  discuss  the  messenger  rather  than  his  message.  They 
"  talked  about  him  by  the  walls  and  in  the  doors  of  the  houses."  It  was  a  matter  of 
street-gossip  rather  than  of  heart-searching  and  personal  profit.  Was  the  preacher 
eloquent  or  dull  ?  Was  his  voice  mellifluent  or  harsh  ?  Was  his  style  plain  or  ornate  ? 
These  are  the  trivial  questions  men  ask,  instead  of — What  word  from  God  did  ha 


OH.  XS2UII.  1— 33.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  BZEKIEL.  201 

bring  ?  By  what  steps  can  we  find  reconciliation  ?  What  immediate  duty  presses 
for  fulfilment  ?  4.  Imitation  of  good  men  is  a  confession  of  their  excellence.  "  They 
come  as  my  people  come,  and  sit  as  my  people  sit."  Such  conduct  is  grossly  incon- 
Bistent — is  self-condemning. 

III.  The  prbaohbb's  message  meets  with  a  serious  hikdbancb.  1.  Obedience  is 
difiScult.  To  lend  the  ear  is  easy.  Eeceiving  the  message  is  somewhat  pleasant.  It 
requires  no  serious  effort.  But  to  undo  the  past,  this  brings  the  ridicule  of  companions. 
To  create  new  habits,  this  is  laborious.  To  confess  our  past  life  to  be  folly,  this  is 
painful.  2.  The  heart  is  preaocupied.  Its  tendrils  of  affection  have  entwined  about 
other  things.  They  can  more  easily  trust  to  visible  wealth  than  to  the  invisible  God. 
They  know  by  experience  that  money  brings  luxury,  ease,  human  honour,  sensuous 
pleasures ;  and  they  have  learnt  to  prize  these.  The  joys  of  religion  are  unknown — 
far  away  in  cloudland.  The  eagerness  for  gain  chokes  the  Word,  so  that  it  becomes 
unfruitful.  "  The  love  of  money  is  the  root  of  all  evil."  Covetousness  is  idolatry. 
3.  Behind  this  opposition  lies  the  degrading  power  of  Satan.  "  He  blinds  the  minds  of 
those  that  believe  not."  He  gives  to  gold  a  blandishment  which  belongs  alone  to  the 
Burface.  By  the  excessive  pursuit  of  worldly  gain  he  deadens  the  moral  sensibilities 
and  destroys  the  eye  of  immortal  hope. 

IV.  The  pbophet's  mbssagk,  kesisted,  darkens  human  destint.  1.  Men's  neglect 
of  the  warning  in  no  way  hinders  the  catastrophe.  The  evil  announced  by  God  still 
"cometh  to  pass."  "Judgment  slumbereth  not."  The  wheels  of  God's  chariot  are  all 
the  while  moving  on.    As  the  poet  says — 

"Though  the  mills  of  God  grind  slowly,  yet  they  grind  exceeding  small." 

2.  Comprehension  of  the  truth  often  comes  too  late.  When  overwhelmed  with  the 
predicted  calamity,  men  wake  up  to  the  feet  that  "  a  prophet  has  been  among  them." 
They  had  thought  him  only  a  plain  man,  who  sought  to  alarm  them  needlessly  and  at 
every  inconvenient  time.  Now  how  totally  different  the  matter  seems!  Alas!  how 
often  does  the  sense  of  eternal  things  visit  the  soul  too  late  !  3.  Then  comes  useless 
eelf-blame.  The  lost  man  naturally  reproaches  himself.  In  the  new  light  that  has 
dawned  he  sees  the  folly  of  blaming  others.  He  lashes  only  himself.  He  becomes  his 
own  tormentor.  That  Being  whose  word  cannot  be  broken  says,  "  Lo,  it  will 
come!"— D. 

Vers.  1 — 9. — Ministerial  and  individual  responsibility.  The  supposition  in  the 
text  is  that  it  is  a  time  of  war  and  consequently  of  danger ;  that  therefore  the  people 
choose  one  that  lives  near  the  boundary  of  the  kingdom  or  the  province,  and  appoint 
him  as  a  watchman,  to  give  the  signal  at  the  first  approach  of  the  enemy.  It  is  not 
pressing  the  figurative  very  far  to  say  that  all  the  life  of  man  below  is  a  time  of 
spiritual  conflict;  we  are  all  engaged  in  a  long,  a  lifelong  campaign.  The  enemy  whom 
we  have  to  fight  is  strong,  subtle,  dangerous  (see  Eph.  vi.  12) ;  and  it  may  well  be 
that  one  here  and  another  there  should  be  chosen  as  a  spiritual  "  watchman  "  to  observe 
and  to  forewarn. 

I.  The  ministerial  function.  Those  who  have  accepted  the  post  of  the  Christian 
minister  to-day  are  in  a  very  similar  position  to  the  Hebrew  prophet.  It  is  their 
province :  1.  To  keep  well  in  view  the  movements  of  their  time ;  to  observe  with  great 
care  the  advances  which  are  made  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  withdrawals  and  retreats 
upon  the  other  hand ;  to  note  with  constant  and  sleepless  vigilance  the  temper  and 
,  spirit,  the  tendency  and  current,  of  the  time.  2.  To  understand  and  to  interpret  all 
that  is  passing,  in  the  light  of  revealed  truth ;  to  distinguish  between  a  change  of  form 
and  a  decadence  of  life  or  a  departure  from  Divine  truth ;  to  know  what  attitude  should 
be  taken  up  toward  that  which  is  new,  and  which  approaches  the  people  of  God  with 
professions  of  good  will, — ^whether  of  welcome  or  resistance.  3.  To  utter  the  voice  of 
truth,  which  is  (or  should  be)  the  voice  of  Christ,  with  all  promptitude,  decision, 
earnestness,  unflinching  fidelity. 

II.  The  duty  of  the  individual  citizens.  This  is  very  clear;  it  is  to  heed  and 
to  act.  1.  To  give  earnest  heed  to  the  warning  that  is  uttered,  to  consider  well  whether 
it  is  not  true,  to  have  a  mind  prepared  to  receive  the  message.  For  as  the  watchman 
has  been  "taken"  and  been  "set"  by  them  (ver.  2),  and  is  their  chosen  guardian,  he 


202  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxxra.  1— 33. 

is  entitled  to  their  respect,  while  to  his  solemn  monition  a  serious  regard  is  due.  2.  To 
act  immediately  on  conviction ;  to  place  a  distinct  distance  between  themselves  and  the 
threatened  evil ;  to  keep  the  iasidious  theory,  the  subtle  falsehood,  the  dangerous  half- 
truth  well  out  of  their  miud;  to  refuse  any  entrance  to  the  perilous  habit  or  the 
tainted  practice;  or,  on  the  other  hand,  to  welcome  the  old  truth  in  its  new  form, 
render  the  old  service  in  the  new  method,  as  the  more  suitable  and  the  more  excellent, 
way. 

III.  The  large  element  of  ministerial  eesponsibilitt.  The  watchman  who 
sleeps  at  his  post  or  who  fails  to  arouse  his  fellow-citizens  when  the  enemy  is  in  sight, 
is  severely  condemned  (see  vers.  6,  8).  The  spokesman  for  God  who  does  not  "  watch 
for  souls  as  one  that  must  give  account,"  who  has  no  deep  feeling  of  the  seriousness  of 
his  position,  and  no  abiding  sense  of  the  urgency  and  imperativeness  of  his  duty,  is 
gravely  at  fault ;  so  also  is  that  watchman  (minister)  who  perceives  but  who  does  not 
speak,  or  who  does  not  speak  quickly,  plainly,  forcibly  in  the  ears  of  the  people, — he 
will  have  an  account  to  give,  and  a  judgment  to  bear,  from  which  he  may  well  shrink. 
But  there  is  also — 

IV.  A  LARGE  REMAINDER  OP  iNDiviDiTAL  RESPONSiBiLiTT.  "  Every  man  must  bear 
his  own  burden"  here.  No  man  can  devolve  it  upon  his  religious  teacher.  He  is  only 
responsible  for  speaking  the  truth  faithfully;  that  done,  his  soul  is  delivered  (see  vers. 
5,  9).  Whether  we,  as  individual  men  and  women,  are  assimilating  Divine  truth  or  are 
appropriating  deadly  error;  whether  we  are  forming  healthy  and  life-preserving  habits, 
or  poisonous  and  pernicious  ones ;  whether  we  are  moving  up  the  incline  of  heavenly 
wisdom  and  Christian  purity,  or  descending  the  decline  of  folly  and  of  wrong ;  whether 
we  are  exerting  an  elevating  and  redeeming  influence,  or  a  depressing  and  degrading 
one,  upon  our  contemporaries  and  upon  those  who  will  succeed  us — this  must  depend 
very  largely  indeed  on  whom  we  hear,  and  how  we  hear.  Therefore  let  the  Master  say 
to  us, "  Take  heed  how  ye  hear  :  for  whosoever  hath,  to  him  shall  be  given ;  and  whoso- 
ever hath  not,  from  him  shall  be  taken  away  even  that  which  he  seemeth  to  have 
[thinketh  that  he  hath]  "  (Luke  viii.  18).— C. 

Vers.  10,  11. — The  hope  imd  the  way  of  life.  Taking  these  words  apart  from  their 
immediate  application,  as  we  may  do  without  departing  from  their  spirit  and  inner 
meaninii,  we  are  invited  to  think  of — 

I.  Human  hopelessness.  "  Our  transgressions  and  our  sins  are  upon  us,  and  we 
pine  away  in  them."  The  men  into  whose  lips  these  words  are  put  are  very  far  from 
being  the  only  ones  to  whom  they  apply.  All  men  everywhere  may  say  the  same — all 
who  live  on  in  conscious  departure  from  the  will  of  God.  1.  Sin  bears  its  penalty 
with  it;  it  enfeebles  the  body,  it  injures  the  mind,  it  lowers  the  life,  it  degrades  the 
soul, — it  robs  of  Divine  favour,  of  spiritual  worth,  of  abiding  peace.  2.  It  may  become 
an  increasing  burden.  It  may  indeed  lead  down  to  a  most  dangerous  and  deplorable 
insensibihty,  so  that  the  sinful  man  no  more  knows  how  serious  and  fatal  is  his  condi- 
tion than  does  the  man  who  lies  down  to  sleep  in  the  snow,  or  he  who  talks  freely  and 
happily  in  a  delirium  ;  but  often  the  conscious  burden  of  sin  rests  with  a  heavy  and 
growing  weight  upon  the  soul,  and  despondency  leads  down  to  despair.  3.  It  ends  in 
hopelessness ;  the  man  feels  that  he  is  "  pining  away,"  that  there  is  nothing  for  him  in 
the  future,  his  heritage  is  forfeited ;  there  is  nothing  beyond  but  the  gates  of  death. 
But  he  has  not  taken  into  his  account — 

II.  The  Divine  disposition.  "  As  I  live, ...  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  the 
wicked,"  etc.  There  is  much  in  this  statement :  1.  Regarded  in  its  negative  aspect. 
"God  has  no  pleasure,"  etc.  That  may  not  seem  much  to  us  who  have  become 
habituated  to  think  of  him  as  a  Divine  Father ;  but  it  was  very  much  indeed  to  those 
who  had  not  thus  learnt  of  Christ,  very  much  indeed  to  those  who  lived  in  an  age  when 
the  Divine  powers  were  supposed  to  find  a  terrible  satisfaction  in  the  miseries  they 
inflicted  on  their  enemies.  Then  the  cruelty  of  man  was  transferred,  in  thought,  to  the 
beings  who  were  worshippedi  and  they  were  believed  quite  capable  of  taking  pleasure 
in  the  sorrows  and  in  the  death  of  their  devotees.  But  God  tells  us  here  that  that  is 
not  his  disposition.  The  reaping  by  guilty  men  of  the  full  consequences  of  their  sin 
against  himself  would  give  him  no  pleasure  at  all ;  it  would  not  be  to  satisfy  him  that 
their  course  would  go  downward  until  it  ended  in  death.    2.  Regarded  in  its  potitive 


OH.  xxxiii.  1— 33.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPHET  EZBKIEL.  203 

aspect.  God  would  "  that  the  wicked  turn  from  his  way  and  live."  If  the  absence  of 
any  desire  on  the  part  of  the  Supreme  that  sin  should  go  on  and  down  to  death  gives 
a  gleam  of  hope  to  the  hopeless,  how  much  light  may  not  be  gained  from  the  presence 
of  a  distinct  and  positive  desire  on  his  part  that  the  sinner  should  live  ?  If  God  wills 
that  it  should  be  so,  there  can  be  no  occasion  to  despair ;  there  must  be  reason,  and 
strong  reason,  to  hope.  To  know  that  tliis  is  the  Divine  disposition  is  a  great  thing 
indeed ;  it  is  to  have  left  midnight  a  long  way  behimi ;  it  is  to  have  entered  the  dawn 
of  the  morning.  But  we  have  much  further  to  go  into  the  light  of  day ;  for  the 
prophet's  message  includes — 

III.  The  Divine  challenge.  "Turn  ye  .  .  .  for  why  will  ye  die?"  This 
includes :  1.  A  summons  to  repentance.  Clearly  repentance  is  an  act  which  it  is  open 
to  any  soul  to  render  at  once  if  he  will.  It  is  not  therefore  either-  (1)  the  feeling  of  a 
certain  amount  of  emotion,  for  this  is  not  always  at  command ;  or  (2)  a  certain  amount 
of  good  works  done  or  sacred  services  performed,  for  this  can  only  be  the  issue  of  time. 
Bepentance  is  the  turning  of  the  heart  and  of  the  will  to  Grod  and  righteousness ;  it  is 
the  act  of  the  soul  by  which  it  turns  away  from  its  evil  course  of  godlessness  and 
wrong-doing,  and  turns  toward  the  Divine  Father  with  the  full  and  fixed  intention  of 
henceforth . serving  him  in  the  ways  of  righteousness.  To  do  that  which  any  and 
every  soul  may  do  and  should  do  without  a  day's  delay,  God  is  summoning  his  disloyal 
servants  (see  Acts  xvii.  30).  2.  A  gracious  and  powerful  appeal.  "Why  will  ye 
die  ?  "  Why  should  we  die,  when :  (1)  Death  means  so  sad  and  so  great  a  sacrifice — 
the  loss  of  a  human  soul,  capable  of  such  beauty  and  such  blessedness  on  the  one 
band,  and  of  such  baseness  and  such  misery  on  the  other  band  ?  (2)  God  has  done 
Buch  great  things  to  save  us ;  has  so  loved  us  as  to  give  his  only  begotten  Son  to  die 
for  us,  and  by  his  death  to  restore  us.  (3)  The  way  of  life  is  so  free  and  so  open  to  us 
all :  "  Whosoever  believeth,  .  .  .  shall  not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life."  3.  The 
life  that  is  offered  us  in  Christ  means  all  that  eternal  life  is  found  to  be  here  and  will 
prove  to  be  hereafter. — 0. 

Vers.  12 — 19. — Qod^s  equal  way.    These  words  bring  out — 

I.  The  oppobtunitt  of  the  sinner.  God  gives  him  the  opportunity  of  returning, 
•nd  of  recovering  that  which  was  lost  (see  previous  homily).  He  is  "  not  to  fall  in  the 
day  that  he  turns  from  his  wickedness."  1.  God  condemns  and  warns  him;  he  tetU 
him  that  his  sin  is  ruining  him,  leadinc;  him  to  death  (ver.  14).  2.  He  hearkens  and 
repents ;  has  so  deep  a  sense  of  his  folly  and  his  guilt  that  he  turns  utterly  away,  in 
heart  and  in  life,  from  all  his  wrong-doing  (vers.  14, 15).  And  then :  3.  God  takes 
him  back  freely  and  fully  into  his  Divine  favour  (ver.  16).  His  sin  is  frankly  forgiven 
him,  and  he  "lives"  unto  God  and  in  his  sight.  This  opportunity  is  offered  to:  1. 
The  ignorant  idolater  who  has  been  brought  up  in  the  dark  shadows  of  superstition. 
2.  The  man  who,  though  brought  up  in  the  light  of  truth,  has  fallen  into  flagrant  and 
shameful  sin,  into  vice  or  crime.  3.  The  man  who,  while  maintaining  the  proprieties 
of  behaviour,  and  perhaps  the  semblance  of  devotion,  keeps  his  heart  closed  against  the 
truth  and  grace  of  Jesus  Christ.  To  all  of  these,  though  they  have,  lived  through 
many  years  and  even  whole  periods  of  sin,  there  is  open  the  gateway  of  immediate 
return  and  of  full  reconciliation  to  God. 

II.  The  febil  op  the  righteous.  1.  Eis  Ood-given  hope.  He  looks  for  life :  "  He 
shall  surely  live  "  (ver.  13).  The  future  before  him  is  bright  with  many  a  precious 
promise ;  the  further  he  goes  the  more  he  has  to  expect  at  the  hands  of  the  faithful 
and  generous  Giver.  But  let  him  not  presume ;  here  is :  2.  Sis  serious  danger.  Ha 
may,  like  the  Jew,  and  like  too  many  an  erring  Christian,  imagine  a  favouritism  on  the 
part  of  the  Supreme  which  does  not  exist,  and,  presuming  upon  it,  may  fall.  If  once 
the  devout  man  loses  his  humility ;  forgets  that  he  is  but  a  weak,  endeavouring  human 
spirit ;  fosters  in  himself  a  sense  of  security ;  "  trusts  to  his  own  righteousness ; " — then 
he  stands  at  once  within  the  circumference  of  spiritual  peril.  It  is  "  when  he  is  (con- 
sciously) weak,  then  he  is  strong  "  (2  Cor.  xri.  10).  And,  conversely,  when  he  is 
confidently  strong,  then  is  he  weak,  then  is  he  most  exposed  to  the  darts  of  the  enemy : 
pride  precedes  a  fall.  3.  His  condemnation  and  his  doom.  His  former  "  righteousness 
will  not  deliver  him ; "  for  his  iniquity  and  in  his  iniquity  "  he  will  die."  No  man 
living  in  sin  may  look  up  to  Gud  and  say,  "I  was  once  pure,"  with  any  hope  of 


204  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxxiii.  1— 33. 

acceptance ;  Gk>d  requires  of  us  that  we  he  pure  in  heart,  loyal  in  spirit,  upright  in 
word  and  deed,  or  he  cannot  grant  us  his  benediction  or  admit  us  to  his  home. 

III.  The  bighteousness  of  God  in  both  respects.  1.  God  is  righteous  in  for- 
giving the  sinful  man  and  restoring  him  to  fulness  of  life.  The  Pharisaic  view  of  this 
act  is  that  it  is  unrighteous,  inasmuch  as  a  guilty  soul  is  taken  back  to  favour  and 
raised  up  to  life  and  joy.  But  there  are  two  things  overlooked.  (1)  God  is  ever 
seeking  the  best  in  man ;  he  is  working  towards  purity  and  goodness.  How  can  this 
be  promoted  in  the  sinful  ?  In  no  way  so  well  as  by  the  extension  of  Divine  mercy. 
Unrelieved  penalty  only  crushes  and  condemns  to  a  hopeless  continuance  in  sin ;  but 
mercy  implants  hope, — it  leads  to  penitence,  and  it  ends  in  purity,  in  wisdom,  in  moral 
and  spiritual  well-being.  (2)  Though  mercifully  restored  to  life,  the  sinner  does  not  fail 
to  suffer ;  some  penalty  for  past  transgression  he  must  pay.  In  the  nature  of  things,  or 
rather  under  the  working  of  the  wise  and  righteous  laws  of  God,  sin  works  immediate 
mischief  in  the  soul,  and  it  importantly  affects  the  life ;  so  that  not  even  the  abounding 
mercy  of  God  makes  it  the  same  thing  to  a  njan  whether  he  spends  his  earlier  years  in 
wisdom  or  in  folly.  2.  God  is  merciful  even  in  condemning  the  backslider.  For  if  he 
were  to  act  otherwise,  if  he  were  to  allow  a  man,  because  he  had  once  been  righteous, 
to  fall  into  any  sinfulness  without  condemning  and  punishing  him,  what  licence  he 
would  be  giving  to  iniquity,  and  how  would  he  be  multiplying  transgression  on  every 
hand  1  It  is  in  the  true  and  lasting  interest  of  our  race,  and  of  all  his  intelligent  crea- 
tion, that  God  affixes  his  rebuke  and  some  appropriate  penalty  to  all  wrong-doing  or 
wrong-being,  in  whomsoever  it  may  be  found.  Thus  the  Divine  Buler  and  Father  of 
men  is  righteous  when  he  forgives,  and  is  merciful  when  he  condemns.  His  ways  are 
equal,  and  if  we  fail  to  see  it  it  is  because  we  fail  to  recognize  the  profound  righteous- 
ness of  mercy,  and  the  equally  profound  mercy  of  righteousness. — 0. 

Vers.  23 — ^25. — lU-groimded  hope.  The  address  of  the  prophet  is  delivered  to  that 
"  miserable  fraction  in  Judsea  who  dwelt  amons;  its  desolations,  and  who,  notwith- 
standing all  they  had  seen  and  suffered  of  the  righteous  judgments  of  God,  were  still 
wedied  to  their  sinful  ways,  and  cherishing  the  most  groundless  hopes.  .  .  .  They  were 
appealing  in  the  most  confident  manner  to  their  connection  with  Abraham,  and  on  that 
ground  assuring  themselves  of  their  right  to  possess  the  land  of  Canaan.  'He,  though 
but  one,  got  the  land  for  an  inheritance,  and  we,  his  descendants,  who  are  a  greatly 
larger  company  than  he  could  boast  of,  may  we  not  justly  expect  to  be  kept  in  posses- 
sion of  it  ? ' "  (Pairbairn).  The  prophet  dismisses  this  claim  in  the  language  of 
decisive  disallowal  and  of  strong  rebuke.  He  tells  them  that,  so  far  from  God  raising 
their  position  and  making  them  possessors  and  rulers  in  the  land,  they  may  look  for 
more  judgments  from  his  hand,  for  their  iniquities  were  loudly  demanding  them.  Here 
were — 

I.  Men  mistaking  theib  spiritual  position.  It  was  much,  in  their  mind,  that 
they  "  had  Abraham  to  their  father."  How  little  that  mere  genealogical  fact  weighed 
in  the  estimate  of  God  we  know  from  the  language  of  the  great  prophet  John,  and  ol 
that  One  who  was  so  much  greater  than  he  (Matt.  iii.  9 ;  John  viii.  33 — 39).  While 
boasting  of  their  descent  from  Abraham,  they  were,  in  character  and  conduct,  every- 
thing that  Abraham  was  not — everytliing  from  which  that  "  friend  of  God  "  woiUd 
have  turned  away  with  holy  indignation  (see  vers.  25,  26).  Consequently,  they  were 
numbered  amongst  the  most  disloyal  subjects  of  Jehovah,  and  were  the  objects  of  bis 
most  severe  displeasure.  Their  confidence  in  themselves  was  utterly  misplaced.  They 
Bjay  be  said  to  be  the  spiritual  ancestors  of  a  very  numerous  seed.  How  many  are  they 
who  because  (1)  they  have  been  born  and  brought  up  in  the  midst  of  some  Christian 
community,  or  because  (2)  they  have  gone  through  the  formal  rites  of  some  Christian 
Church,  imagine  themselves  to  be  the  sons  of  God,  enjoying  his  Divine  favour  and 
subjects  of  his  spiritual  kingdom!  Yet  the  state  of  their  heart,  and  (it  may  be)  even 
the  tenor  of  their  life,  effectually  disprove  it.  Their  hearts  are  far  from  God,  and  their 
deeds  from  uprightness  and  Christian  worth. 

II.  Mbn  deluding  themselves  with  a  false  hope.  This,  of  course,  follows  from 
the  other.  The  remnant  of  the  Jews  were  hoping  to  become  the  possessors  of  the  land^ 
and  to  rise  to  the  position  from  which  their  countrymen  had  fallen.  But  their  hopes 
were  vain,  for  they  were  built  upon  mistake  and  error.    We  may  be  looking  forward  to 


OH.  xxxin.  1-33.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  208 

some  position  of  authority  and  influence  in  the  Church  of  Christ,  or  to  a  home  In  the 
heavenly  country ;  hut  we  have  no  right  whatever  to  expect  either  of  these  if  our  claim 
is  hased  either  on  fleshly  connections  or  on  the  formalities  of  devotion,  and  the  sooner 
we  awake  from  our  dream  the  better  will  it  he  for  us.  We  must  imderstand  the  one 
and  only  ground  for  hope  in  the  future  is  our  real,  spiritual  union  with  Jesus  Christ, 
»nd  the  consequent  rectitude  of  life  which  is  the  invariable  and  happy  fhiit  of  it. 

IIT.  A  FAITHFUL  HUitiAN  TEACHEB.  It  is  a  Very  painful  thing  to  extinguish  a 
pleasant  but  a  false  hope  in  the  heart.  Yet  it  has  sometimes  to  be  done  at  all  costs. 
And  kinder  far  is  it  to  destroy  that  hope  when  it  is  budding  than  to  let  it  grow  to 
maturity  when  it  has  to  suffer  a  severe  and  sad  extinction.  The  faithful  course  ii 
always  the  kind  one  as  well  as  the  wise  one,  when  aU  things  are  counted. — 0. 

Vers.  30 — 32. — Thi  test  of  piety.  If  we  read  "  of  thee  "  instead  of  "  against  thee  "  (ver. 
30,  marginal  reading),  and  understand  that  the  captives  by  the  Chebar  were  talking  in 
not  unfriendly  fashion  of  the  prophet,  all  the  parts  of  this  deliverance  are  consistent, 
and  they  supply  a  valuable  lesson  for  all  time.  We  learn  what  is  the  true  test  of 
piety ;  that  it  is  found — 

I.  Not  in  attendance  on  belioioitb  obdinanoes.  These  Jews  were  saying  to  one 
another,  "  Come  and  hear,"  etc.,  and  they  not  merely  exhorted  one  another  thus,  but 
they  went  and  heard — they  sat  and  listened  to  the  truth  as  it  was  spoken  by  EzekieL 
But  they  were  far  from  being  right  "with  God  for  so  doing.  We  may  be  very  attentive 
upon  all  "  means  of  grace,"  may  never  absent  ourselves  from  the  "  house  of  the  Lord," 
may  go  solemnly  and  even  reverently  through  all  the  outward  ordinances  of  the 
Christian  faith,  and  yet  remain  outside  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  None  were  more  constant 
in  their  "  devotions  "  than  the  Pharisees,  and  none  more  blameless  in  their  attitude  and 
demeanour, — and  none  more  really  ungodly  than  they. 

II.  Not  obitioal  undebstanding  of  the  tbuth.  These  captives  of  Babylon  were 
habitually  speaking  about  Ezekiel,  and  no  doubt  discussing  his  prophetic  deliverances ; 
they  were  probably  very  keen  disputants,  yery  fine  analysts  of  his  sentences,  very  careful 
hearers  of  his  doctrine.  But  they  were  not  "  the  children  of  wisdom  "  and  heirs  of  the 
best  inheritance.  We,  too,  may  take  a  very  systematic  view  of  the  faith  we  hold,  or 
we  may  be  clever  critics  of  the  message  to  which  we  listen  in  the  sanctuary,  we  may 
be  able  to  discuss  with  much  special  learning  and  a  great  show  of  piety  the  things 
pertaining  to  the  kingdom  of  God,  but  we  may  be  very  wide  indeed  of  that  knowledge 
of  God  which  constitutes  eternal  life. 

III.  Not  sensibility.  These  hearers  by  the  river-side  were  affected  by  what  they 
heard.  They  "  liked  "  Ezekiel  well.  His  discourses  charmed  them  much ;  they  felt 
moved  by  his  words  as  he  spoke  with  that  directness,  fervour,  and  imaginative  force 
which  characterized  his  utterance,  and  which,  whenever  put  forth,  never  do  fail  to 
attract  and  to  delight.  But  it  is  one  thing  to  be  moved  by  sacred  eloquence,  and  quite 
another  thing  to  be  filled  with  true  conviction  and  to  be  governed  by  Christian  principle. 
They  who  depend  on  the' exciting  impulses  that  come  from  the  large  assembly,  the 
strains  of  powerful  music,  or  the  fervid  addresses  of  the  pulpit,  for  the  movements  of 
their  soul,  are  leaning  on  the  reed,  are  building  on  the  sand.  The  piety  that  will  be 
wanted  for  the  long  path  of  duty,  for  the  deep  waters  of  trouble,  for  the  searching  fires 
of  temptation,  for  the  hour  of  heroism,  for  the  day  of  judgment,  must  go  deeper  down 
into  the  natiu-e  of  spiritual  reality  than  the  stratum  of  sensibility. 

rV.  But  obedience.  "  They  do  them  not."  That  was  their  defect ;  there  was  found 
the  fatal  omission.  They  had  not  the  spirit  of  obedience.  We  know  what  the  Master 
said  on  this  subject  (see  Matt.  vii.  24 — 27).  And  that  which  Jesus  Christ  especially 
and  emphatically  calls  upon  us  to  do,  which  it  is  a  fatal  error  to  leave  undone,  is  (1) 
to  come  into  close  personal  union  with  himself  (Matt.  xi.  28,  29 ;  John  vi.  35,  60, 
61 ;  XV.  1—7  i  1  John  iii.  23)i  (2)  t»  fellow  him  in  the  path  of  purity,  devotion, 

loTft— a 


206 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxxiv.  1— 3L 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXXIV. 


Ver.  1. — And  the  word  of  the  Lord,  eto. 
As  no  date  is  given,  we  may  infer  that  what 
follows  came  as  an  almost  immediate  sequel 
to  that  which  precedes  it.  The  kernel  of 
the  chapter  is  found  in  the  Messianic 
prophecies  of  vers.  23,  24,  as  the  first  stage 
in  the  restoration  of  Israel  which  is  hegin- 
ning  to  open  to  the  prophet's  gaze.  We  can 
hardly  avoid  seeing  in  it  the  deliberate 
expression  of  words  that  had  been  spoken 
by  EzekieVs  master  (Jer.  zxiii.  1 — 4),  and 
which  in  his  case  also  were  followed  by  a 
directly  Messianic  announcement.  In  Matt. 
ix.  36,  still  more  in  John  x.  1 — 16,  we  can 
scarcely  avoid  recognizing  the  distinct  ap- 
propriation of  the  words  to  himself  by  him 
of  whom  they  both  had  spoken.  8o  far  ag 
we  may  venture  to  speculate  on  the  influence, 
go  to  speak,  of  the  words  of  the  prophets  of 
the  Old  Testament  on  our  Lord's  human 
soul,  we  may  think  of  these  as  having 
marked  out  for  him  the  work  which  he  was 
to  do,  just  as  we  may  think  of  Ps.  xxii.  and 
Isa.  liii.  as  having  pointed  out  to  him  the 
path  of  suffering  which  he  was  to  tread. 

Ver.  2. — Prophesy  against  the  shepherds 
of  Israel,  eto.  Our  modem  associations  with 
the  words,  our  use  of  terms  like  "  the  pastoral 
oflBce,"  "  the  pastoral  Epistles,"  lead  us  to 
think  of  the  priests  and  prophets,  the  spiritual 
guides  of  the  people,  as  being  those  whom 
the  prophet  has  in  view.  In  the  language 
of  the  Old  Testament,  however,  as  in  that  of 
Homer  ('  Iliad,'  i.  1.  263 ;  ii.  1.  85,  etc.).  the 
shepherds  of  the  people  are  always  its  kings 
and  other  civil  rulers  (1  Kings  xxii.  17; 
Ps.  Ixxvii.  20 ;  Ixxviii.  71 ;  Jer.  xxiii.  1 — 6), 
and  those  whom  Ezekiel  had  in  his 
thoughts  were  the  tyrannous  rulers  of  the 
house  of  David,  like  Jelioiakim  and  Zede- 
kiah  and  their  satellites.  Our  Christian 
thoughts  of  the  word  are  the  outcome  of  tlie 
leading  of  John  x.  1 — 16;  xxi.  15^17; 
1  Pet.  V.  2 — 4 ;  Acts  xx.  28 ;  but  it  is  pro- 
bably true  that  even  there  the  original 
thought  is  still  dominant.  Christ  is  the 
"good  Shepherd,"  because  he  is  the  true 
King.  His  ministers  are  shepherds  as  being 
ofScers  in  his  kiLgdom.  Should  not  the 
shepherds  feed  the  flocks  ]  The  question  is 
an  appeal  to  the  universal  conscience  of 
Israel  and  of  maukind.  No  shepherd  was 
worthy  of  his  name  who  did  not  do  that 
which  the  vory  name  implied.  Ho  that 
neglects  that  duty  is  simply  as  a  hireling 
or  a  robber  (John  x.  10,  12). 

Ver.  3.— Ye  eat  the  fat.  The  LXX.  and 
the  Vulgate,  following  a  difierent  reading, 
give  milk,  and,  as  "killing"  comes  in  the 


next   clause,   this   is    probably  preferable 
(comp.  1  Cor.  ix.  7 ;  Isa.  vii.  22). 

Ver.  4.  —  The  diseased  have  ye  not 
strengthened.  The  verbs  indicate  the  dif- 
ference between  the  "diseased,"  i.e.  the 
weak  sheep  (comp.  Isa.  xl.  11 ;  Ps.  Ixxviii.  71) 
and  the  sick,  that  were  suffering  from  more 
definite  maladies.  So  the  broken  are  the 
sheep  that  have  fallen  from  a  rock  and  thus 
maimed  themselves.  Each  case  required  its 
appropriate  treatment,  and  none  had  met 
with  it. 

Ver.  5.— And  they  were  scattered.  The 
words  are  an  echo  of  1  Kings  xxii.  17,  and 
are,  in  their  turn,  echoed  by  Matt.  ix.  36. 
The  words  that  follow  paint  the  sufferings 
of  the  exiles  who  left  their  homes  and  were 
scattered  among  the  heathen  in  the  days  of 
Jehoiachin  and  Zedekiah.  Of  these  the 
kings  took  no  heed,  and  shut  themselves  up 
in  the  luxurious  seclusion  of  their  palace. 

Vers.  7 — 10. — As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord 
God,  etc.  The  sentence  of  the  Supreme 
Judge,  of  the  "  chief  Shepherd  "  (1  Pet.  v.  4). 
that  follows,  is  naturally  preceded  by  a 
recapitulation  of  the  guUt  of  the  tyrannoog 
rulers — the  "idol"  or  sham  shepherds  of 
Zeoh.  xi.  17  (comp.  also  Zech.  x.  3).  Both 
chapters  sliould  be  studied  as  throwing 
light  on  the  teaching  of  the  earlier  prophet 
It  may  be  noted  also  how  the  thought  enters 
into  Ezekiel's  vision  of  the  restored  Israel 
(oh.  xlv.  8—10). 

Ver.  11. — Behold,  I,  even  I,  etc.  The 
words,  as  the  last  reference  shows,  and  as 
we  find  in  vers.  23 — 31,  do  not  exclude, 
rather  they  imply,  human  instrumentality, 
just  us  our  Lord's  do  in  Matt,  xviii.  12  and 
Luke  XV.  4 — 7;  but  they  reveal  the  truth 
that  Jehovah  is  tlje  true  Shepherd  of  his 
people.  Not  the  sweet  psalmist  of  Israel 
only,  but  the  lowest  outcast,  might  use  the 
language  of  Ps.  xxiii.,  and  say,  "The 
Lord  is  my  Shepherd."  He  will  gather 
the  sheep  that  have  been  scattered  in  the 
"  cloudy  and  dark  day,"  the  day  of  the  Lord's 
judgment  (ch.  xxx.  3).  For  the  prophet  the 
words  pointed  to  that  vision  of  a  restored 
Israel,  which  was  dominant  in  the  expecta- 
tions both  of  Isaiah  (or  the  dentero-Isaiah) 
in  ch.  xl. — xlviii.,  and  in  Jeremiah  (xxxiii. 
12 — 18),  which  floated  before  the  minds  of 
the  apostles  (Acts  i.  6),  and  to  which  even 
St.  Paul  looked  forward  as  the  solution  of 
i  the  great  problems  of  the  world's  history 
(Bom.  ix. — xi.). 

Vers.  13—15. — On  the  moontains  of  Israel 
by  the  rivers.  The  picture  of  the  pleasant 
pasture-lands  of  Judah,  almost,  as  it  were, 
an  expansion  of  Ps.  xxiii.,  of  the  mountains 
which  are  not  barren  and  stony,  of  the 
streams  that  flow  calmly  in  the  inhabited 


OH.  xxxiv,  1— 31.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL. 


207 


places  of  the  country,  serves  as  a  parable  of 
that  which  is  to  follow  on  the  restoration  of 
Israel.  The  sheep  that  had  been  wandering 
BO  long  in  the  wililerness  should  at  last  lie 
down  in  a  fat  pasture  (ver.  15),  and  the 
tender  care  of  the  Shepherd  should  watch 
with  an  individualizing  pity  over  each  sheep 
tliat  had  been  brought  back.  Every  broken 
,  liiub  shonld  be  bound  up.  Every  sickness 
should  be  treated  with  its  appropriate  means 
of  healing. 

Ver.  16. — ^I  will  destroy  the  fat  and  the 
strong.  What  follows  introduces  another 
feature  into  the  parahle,  and  is  hardly  leas 
than  an  anticipation  of  the  great  scene  of 
judgment  in  Matt.  xxv.  32.  The  "fat  and 
the  strong,"  as  contrasted  with  the  "  broken  " 
and  the  "  sick,"  are,  when  we  interpret  the 
parable,  the  noble  and  wealthy  who,  under 
the  kings  of  Judah,  had  been  allowed  to 
work  their  evil  will  upon  the  peoi>le.  Of 
these  he  says  that  he  will  feed  them  with 
(better,  in)  judgment,  that  for  Ihem  there 
must  be  the  discipline  of  punishment.  They 
too  are  his  sheep,  but  they  require  a  dif- 
ferent treatment  from  the  others. 

Yer.  17. — Behold,  I  judge  between  cattle 
and  cattle.  It  may  be  worth  while  to  note, 
as  modern  English  usage  tends  to  limit  the 
range  of  the  word,  tliat  it  is  commonly  used 
in  the  Old  Testament  of  sheep  rather  tLau 
of  kine  (Gen.  xxx.  31—42;  xxxi.  8—12). 
In  Gen.  xxx.  32  we  hiive  the  same  Hebrew 
word  as  that  which  Ezekiel  uses.  Between 
the  rams  and  the  he-goats.  The  words,  at 
first,  seem  to  point  to  a  division  like  that 
of  Matt.  xxv.  32,  and  may,  perhaps,  have 
suggested  it.  Here,  however,  the  contrast 
lies,  not  between  the  sheep  and  goats  as 
■uch,  but  between  the  strong  and  the  weak 
of  each  class.  The  "  rams  "  are  as  much  tlie 
object  of  the  shepherd's  discipline  of  judg- 
ment as  the  "lie-guats."  Both  stand  as  the 
representative  of  the  rapacious  self-seeking 
classes  who  oppressed  the  poor  and  needy, 
and,  not  content  with  being  the  first  to  feed 
on  tlie  pastures  and  to  drink  of  the  waters, 
trampled  on  the  former  and  defiled  the 
latter.  So  in  the  next  verse  the  contrast 
lies  between  the  "  &t  cattle,"  whether  sheep 
or  goats,  and  the  "  lean." 

Ver.  23. — ^And  I  will  set  up  one  Shepherd 
over  them.  Here,  more  than  ever,  we  have 
an  anticipation  of  our  Lord's  teaching  in 
John  X.  1 — 18.  He  claims  to  be  the  FulfiUer, 
as  of  the  prediction  of  Isa.  xl.  11  and  Jer. 
xxiii.  1 — 3,  so  also  of  this.  He,  the  "  Son  of 
David,"  is  the  David  that  iLherits  that 
among  other  promises.  It  has  to  be  noted, 
however,  that  Ezekiel's  words  paint,  less 
distinctly  than  those  of  the  earlier  prophets, 
the  picture  of  an  individual  Messianic  king, 
and  seem  rather  to  point,  as  do  those  of 
Zech.  xii.  10  (I  do  not  <vow  discuss  the  date 


of  tliat  prophecy),  to  a  line  of  true  rulers, 
each  faithfully  representing  the  ideal  David 
as  the  faithful  Buler,the  true  Shepherd  of  hia 
people  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  71 ;  oomp.  oh.  xxxvii.  24 ; 
xlv.  8,  9). 

Ver.  25. — I  will  make  with  them  a  oove- 
nant  of  peace.  The  whole  verse  is  an  echo 
of  Lev.  xxvi.  6,  in  part  also  of  Hos.  ii.  20 
[Enu;lish  version,  ver.  18].  The  words  are 
less  definite  as  to  the  nature  of  the  covenant 
than  those  of  Jer.  xxxi.  31,  but  probably  the 
same  thought  underlies  both.  Sins  are 
pardoned,  the  capacity  for  righteousness, 
righteousness  itself,  are  given.  In  bright 
contrast  with  the  picture  of  a  country 
haunted  by  the  lion,  the  jackal,  and  the 
wolt^ — the  "evU  beasts"  of  oh.  xiv.  15— so 
that  no  man  could  pass  through  without 
risk,  we  have  that  of  a  land  from  which 
such  evU  beasts  have  been  cleared  out,  so 
that  men  may  sleep  safely  even  in  the 
wilderness  and  the  woods.  The  language, 
however,  is  figurative  rather  than  literal. 
As  the  "  sheep  "  are  the  people  of  the  true 
Israel,  so  the  evil  beasts  must,  at  least,  in- 
clude the  enemies,  Chaldeans,  Edomites, 
Philistines,  and  others,  that  had  before  made 
havoc  of  them. 

Ver.  26. — Bound  about  my  hill.  Ezekiel's 
thoughts,  like  those  of  Mieah  iv.  1  and  Isa. 
ii.  2,  cluster  round  the  hill  of  Zion,  the 
mountain  of  Jehovah,  as  the  centre  of  the 
restored  Israel.  In  that  land,  as  the  pro- 
phet saw  it  here,  and  still  more  in  the 
closing  vision  of  his  book  (oh.  xlvii.  12), 
there  were,  outwardly  as  well  as  spiritually, 
to  be  showers  of  blessing  (the  phrase  is 
peculiar  to  Ezekiel),  and  the  land  should 
yield  its  fruits. 

Vers.  27,  28.— When  I  have  broken  th« 
bands  of  their  yoke.  The  underlying  mean- 
ing of  the  figurative  language  of  ver.  25  is 
now  utterly  explained.  Israel  is  to  be  de- 
livered from  its  Chaldean  and  other  oppres- 
sors. The  "  yoke  shall  be  broken."  They 
shall  no  more  be  a  prey  to  the  heathen.  Kone 
shall  make  them  afraid. 

Ver.  29. — A  plant  of  renown.  The  words 
at  first  suggest  the  thought  that  Ezekiel 
was  reproducing  the  ideal  picture  of  the 
"branch,"  the  "root,"  the  "stem,"  the 
"  plant,"  of  Isa.  xi.  1 ;  Jer.  xxiii.  5 ;  Zech. 
vi.  12.  Here,  however,  the  word  is  collective, 
and  is  translated  "plantation"  in  ch.  xvii.  7, 
"  planting  "  in  Micah  i.  6 ;  Isa.  Ix.  21 ;  Ixi.  3. 
It  can  hardly  be  taken  as  speaking  of  more 
than  the  general  fertility  of  the  land.  The 
rendering  of  the  LXX.,  "a  plant  of  peace," 
obviously  implies  a  different  reading  {shalom 
instead  of  sheni),  and  this  Cornill  has  adopted 
in  his  text.  So  taken,  the  words  naturally 
lead  on  to  what  follows — the  promise  that 
men  should  no  more  be  consumed  i^tb 
hunger. 


203 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  EZBKIEL.    [oh.  xxxiv.  1— 31. 


Ver.  31.— And  ye  my  flook.  The  great 
utterance,  we  might  call  it  the  "  ode  of  the 
Bhepherds,"  comes  round  to  the  point  from 
which  its  seeond  portion  started  (ver.  11). 
All  blessings  were  summed  up  in  the 
thought  that,  behind  every  representative 


of  the  Father's  care,  the  ideal  David  and 
his  house,  there  was  the  eternal  relationship 
between  Jehovah  and  his  people,  even  that 
of  the  Shepherd  and  his  sheep.  The  LXX. 
omits  the  words  "  are  men,"  and  here  also  U 
followed  by  Comill. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — ^10. — Shepherds  denounced.  I.  Theib  besponsibilitt.  Ezek!el  now  turns 
from  the  people  to  their  leaders.  Theirs  is  the  greatest  guilt.  They  were  placed  in  posi- 
tions which  led  to  much  being  expected  of  them.  Their  failure  means  a  correspund- 
ing  guilt.  The  princes  and  priests,  the  political  leaders  and  the  religious  teachers, 
would  be  included  under  the  designation  "  shepherds."  The  same  two  classes  and  other 
varieties  may  be  seen  to-day ;  i.e.  political  rulers,  Christian  ministers,  leaders  of  public 
movements,  public  writers ;  all  who  influence  others  in  thought  and  life  are  like  Israel's 
shepherds.  Note  the  grounds  of  the  great  responsibility  of  such  people.  1.  Frivikge, 
The  shepherds  have  the  honour  of  being  set  oyer  the  flock.  Position  is  a  privilege ;  it 
brings  a  responsibility.  2,  Power.  (1)  There  is  the  natural  power  of  superior  gifts. 
The  shepherd  is  higher  in  mental  power  than  his  sheep.  Great  intellectual  gifts  bring 
with  them  a  sort  of  pastoral  responsibility  in  regard  to  weaker  minds.  (2)  There  is  the 
superadded  power  of  ofQce.  The  shepherd  is  appointed  over  the  sheep.  All  who  are 
placed  in  positions  of  influence  are  made  especially  responsible. 

II.  Theib  wickedness.  1.  Positive  wrong-doing.  (1)  Self-seeking.  The  shepherds 
feed  themselves  instead  of  feeding  the  flock.  They  are  mere  hirelings,  not  true  shepherds 
(John  X.  13).  All  who  undertake  public  office  for  the  sake  of  private  gain  belong  to 
this  disgraceful  category.  It  would  be  hypocritical  to  suppose  that  the  shepherd  should 
not  consider  his  wages.  But  his  fault  is  when  he  puts  his  profit  above  his  duty.  (2) 
Cruelty.  The  shepherds  "  kill  them  that  are  fed."  They  are  worse  than  hirelings ;  they 
behave  like  robbers  and  wolves.  So  was  it  in  the  Middle  Ages,  when  bishops  preyed  on 
their  flocks.  The  same  is  true  of  all  tyrannous  governments  under  which  rulers  oppress 
the  people  for  their  own  advantage.  It  applies  to  the  use  of  power  and  influence  for 
selfish  advantage  to  the  injury  of  others,  as  in  making  a  living  out  of  pernicious  litera- 
ture, etc.  2.  Negative  negligence.  Looking  after  themselves,  the  wicked  shepherds 
neglect  their  flock.  (1)  The  flock  is  not  fed.  It  is  the  duty  of  the  preacher  to  feed 
Clhrist's  sheep  (John  xxi.  16).  If  he  is  making  his  own  profit  to  the  neglect  of  this  duty 
the  people  may  starve  for  lack  of  the  bread  of  life.  (2)  The  sick  are  not  tended.  Care 
for  the  sick  sheep  is  an  especial  duty  of  the  true  shepherd.  Sick  souls  need  sympathy 
and  help.  The  poor,  the  unfortunate,  the  sorrowful,  the  fallen,  are  all  neglected  by  self- 
seeking  leaders.  (3)  The  sheep  are  scattered.  There  is  no  bond  of  union.  The  sheep 
do  not  listen  to  the  voice  of  the  bad  shepherd.  He  forgets  to  call  them,  or  does  so  in 
a  listless,  unattractive  manner,  or  makes  himself  uninteresting  to  them,  so  that  they 
will  not  respond.  Bad  leaders  scatter  the  Church.  (4)  Wild  beasts  ravage  the  flock. 
David  delivered  his  flock  from  a  lion  and  a  bear.  "  The  good  shepherd  giveth  his  life 
for  the  sheep"  (John  x.  11).  But  the  hireling  fleeth  at  the  sight  of  the  wolf  (John 
X.  13).    With  bad  leaders  men  are  a  prey  to  evil  and  error. 

III.  Theib  boom.  1.  Ood's  opposition.  "  Behold,  I  am  against  the  shepherds.'' 
They  may  be  stronger  than  the  sheep,  but  God  is  stronger  than  they  are.  Faithlessness 
in  office  provokes  God's  great  wrath.  2.  Hopeless  requirements.  "  I  will  require  my 
flock  at  their  hand."  But  it  is  lost !  3.  Loss  of  office.  The  bad  shepherds  are  dis- 
missed. The  unfaithful  servant  is  deprived  of  his  talent  (Matt.  zxv.  28).  Disgrace, 
dismissal,  ruin,  are  the  punishments  of  unfaithful  service. 

Vers.  11 — 13. — Seeking  lost  sheep.  I.  Thb  sheep  abb  lost.  Israel  was  scattered 
among  the  nations  like  sheep  that  have  wandered  from  the  fold  and  are  lost  in  the 
wilderness.  Souls  have  been  scattered  from  their  shelter  and  have  wandered  into  distant 
places.  Kote  some  of  the  characteristics  of  the  lost  sheep.  1.  They  were  originally  in 
the  fold.  This  refers  to  Jews  rather  than  to  heathen,  to  backsliding  Christians,  to 
children  of  Christian  homes ;  but  also  in  a  general  way  to  all,  because  all  men  begin 


OH.  xxxiT.  1— 31.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZBKIBL.  209 

life  in  innocent  cUlclhood  not  far  from  the  bosom  of  God.  2.  Thty  have  gone  into 
distant  places,  Israel  was  driven  abroad  locally;  souls  depart  from  their  homes 
spiritually,  (1)  in  thought,  when  the  old  beliefs  are  abandoned  for  the  wilderness  of 
doubt ;  (2)  in  life,  when  the  old  ways  are  left,  and  God  and  duty  are  neglected.  Heaven 
then  recedes  into  the  background.  3.  They  were  scattered.  No  bond  of  union  remains. 
The  flock,  which  was  a  imit,  becomes  broken,  and  there  are  now  only  separate  sheep. 
Error  and  sin  disintegrate  society.  4.  They  were  lost  in  darkness.  The  disaster 
happened  "  in  the  cloudy  and  dark  day."  The  time  of  doubt,  trouble,  or  temptaticn  is 
one  of  danger.  Then  souls  may  be  cast  adrift  for  want  of  wise  and  tender  shepherding. 
6.  They  steered  through  the  neglect  of  the  shepherds.  The  great  sin  is  that  of  the  faith- 
less leaders. 

II.  Thet  ABE  BOuaHT.  The  shepherds  lost  them ;  God  seeks  them.  God  himself 
desires  that  the  lost  should  be  restored.  For  he  values  them  as  the  farmer  values  his 
flock.  It  is  not  a  matter  of  indifference  to  God  that  souls  should  perish.  He  does  not 
leave  the  sheep  to  come  home,  prepared  to  welcome  them  on  their  return ;  he  seeks  them. 
He  does  not  only  hold  himself  ready  to  welcome  the  returning  penitent.  He  goes  forth 
to  seek  him.  The  housewife  sweeps  the  house  to  find  her  lost  piece  of  silver  (Luke  xv. 
8).  The  father  goes  to  meet  the  prodigal  son  (Luke  xv.  20).  1.  God  seeks  ly  his 
previdence.  The  movements  of  life  should  bring  us  back  to  God.  2.  He  seeks  hy  his 
prophets.  Ezekiel  was  seeking  the  lost  sheep.  The  Bible  is  sent  forth  as  God's  means 
of  seeking  the  lost.  So  is  all  true  preaching  of  the  gospel.  3.  He  seeks  hy  his  Son. 
Christ  came  first  to  seek  "  the  lost  sheep  of  the  house  of  Israel "  (Matt.  xv.  24),  and 
then  all  lost  sheep.     Christianity  is  a  search  for  the  lost. 

III.  Thet  are  found.  "  I  will  bring  them  out  from  the  peoples,"  etc.  When  God 
finds  a  soul,  he  restores  it.  He  may  find  it  in  the  wilderness  ;  if  so,  he  will  not  leave 
it  there.  The  shepherd  may  find  his  sheep  buried  in  the  snow ;  it  may  be  hard  to  dig 
them  out ;  he  may  even  have  to  carry  them  home  on  his  shoulders.  If  he  is  strong 
enough  he  will  do  this.  God  not  only  finds ;  he  restores.  1.  Be  hrings  the  sheep  home. 
Israel  is  restored  to  her  own  land.  Souls  are  restored  to  their  home  in  God.  2.  He 
feeds  them.  They  must  be  hungry  in  the  wilderness,  far  from  the  green  pastures.  So 
"  he  feeds  them  upon  the  mountains  of  IsraeL"  The  father  kUla  the  fatted  calf  for  his 
restored  son.  Christ  gives  his  body  as  bread  of  life  for  his  people.  3.  He  refreshes 
them.  The  sheep  are  led  "by  the  rivers."  They  thirsted  in  the  wilderness ;  now  they 
can  drink  and  live.  God  gives  new  life  and  peace  to  his  restored  children.  Christ 
l^ves  "  living  water  "  (John  iv.  10).  When  God  finds  a  lost  soul,  that  soul  is  safe — 
restored,  fed,  refreshed  by  his  grace. 

Ver.  17. — The  flock  divided.  When  the  flock  is  found  it  is  not  all  treated  alike. 
The  rough,  horned  cattle  are  separated  from  the  gentle,  helpless  sheep.  Israel  was  not 
to  be  restored  to  prosperity  as  a  nation  without  discrimination.  God  would  judge 
between  the  different  characters  of  exiles.    Judgment  of  individuals  is  here  referred  to. 

I.  God  deals  with  iNDiviDtrALS  as  well  as  with  nations.  As  there  are  national 
sins,  so  there  are  national  punishments,  and  also  national  mercies.  The  whole  nation 
must  in  a  measure  participate  in  these  things.  But  over  and  above  such  matters  there 
is  an  individual  treatment  of  separate  men  and  women.  No  man  is  safe  from  trouble 
■  by  belonging  to  a  prosperous  nation.  God's  returning  favour  to  a  community  may 
leave  hardened  rebellious  souls  still  in  the  dark. 

n.  God  jddqes  the  individual  mbmbbes  of  Chubohes.  No  man  is  safe  just 
because  he  lives  in  Christendom,  neither  is  any  one  safe  because  he  is  a  member  of 
any  Church.  There  are  rough,  cruel  animals  in  the  flock,  which  are  injurious  to  others, 
and  unworthy  of  their  privileges.  In  the  final  judgment  the  sheep  wiU  be  separated 
from  the  goats  (Matt.  xxv.  32),  and  in  dealing  with  Churches  the  same  method  of 
discrimination  must  be  applied.  Indeed,  it  is  worse  for  one  who  is  not  a  Christian  to 
be  enrolled  in  the  membership  of  a  Church,  than  for  him  to  remain  outside.  His 
position  is  false  and  hypocritical.  Moreover,  his  presence  is  injurious  to  the  well- 
being  of  the  worthy  members.  If  the  rough,  horned  animals  were  abroad  in  the 
wilderness,  they  would  do  little  harm.  The  mischief  arises  when  they  are  crowded 
together  with  the  sheep  in  one  fold. 

in.  It  is  the  duty  of  Chdbohis  to  xxebcibb  DisoiPLim.  Care  should  be  taken 
E2EKIIL — n.  r 


810  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxxiv.  1— 31, 

AS  to  who  are  entrusted  with  the  highest  privileges  of  Christian  fellowship.  It  is 
easier  not  to  encourage  the  unworthy  to  enter  than  to  eject  them  after  they  have  made 
themselves  obnoxious  to  the  community.  Nothing  can  be  more  foolish  than  to  enlarge 
the  nominal  roll  of  a  Church  by  including  doubtful  names.  A  wise  teacher  has  said, 
"  It  would  be  well  if  we  had  fewer  Christians,  and  better  ones." 

IV.  Therk  is  a  dibciplinb  which  bblongs  only  to  God.  We  can  regulate  the 
conditions  of  membership  in  organized  societies.  But  we  cannot  really  determine  who 
are  true  members  of  Christ's  flock.  Therefore,  in  excluding  the  apparently  unfit  from 
a  Church,  we  cannot,  we  dare  not,  pretend  to  pronounce  a  sentence  of  excommunica- 
tion upon  them.  Much  less  are  we  justified  in  forcibly  stamping  out  heresy,  schism, 
«nd,  what  is  far  worse,  worldly  and  sinful  professions  of  Christianity,  by  the  rough 
treatment  of  persecution.  Wheat  and  tares  must  both  grow  together  until  the  harvest 
(Matt.  xiii.  30).  Then,  indeed,  God  will  judge.  The  great  Fisherman  will  divide  hi« 
own  fish  when  he  brings  the  net  to  land  (Matt.  xiii.  48). 

Ver.  23. — The  one  shepherd.  In  place  of  the  many  unworthy  shepherds  who  have 
fattened  themselves  by  spoiling  the  flock  of  Israel,  God  will  now  give  his  people  one  good 
Shepherd,  reviving  the  royal  line  of  David.  The  shepherd  of  Bethlehem  had  been  a 
true  protector  of  his  people.  He  is  to  appear  again  in  his  great  Descendant.  No 
doubt  Ezekiel's  contemporary  readers  would  look  for  a  restoration  of  the  temporal 
monarcliy,  as  Christ's  disciples  looked  for  it  (Acts  i.  6).  But  such  a  restoration  was 
never  accomplished.  The  prophecy  is  fulfilled  in  a  higher  though  an  unexpected  way 
by  Christ  as  our  good  Shepherd. 

I.  The  person  of  the  Shepherd.  "  My  servant  David."  Jesus  Christ  is  the  only 
person  to  whom  these  words  can  apply.  Not  only  was  he  of  the  family  of  David ;  he 
realized  to  the  full  the  ideal  that  David  set  forth  in  broken  lights  and  failed  to  attain 
himself.  He  is  the  true  David,  the  true  Shepherd-King.  Thus  amid  the  sorrows  of  the 
exile,  the  disconsolate  captives  are  cheered  by  a  vision  of  the  coming  Christ,  though  as 
yet  but  vaguely  and  dimly  discerned.  We,  with  fuller  knowledge,  can  turn  from  our 
disappointments  and  failures  and  find  consolation  in  the  Christ  who  has  come  and  who 
Is  ever  in  our  midst.  Perhaps  if  the  old  shepherds  had  not  been  so  unworthy,  this 
wonderful  predictioa  of  the  new  Shepherd  would  not  have  been  made.  The  disappoint- 
ments of  worldly  confidence  drive  us  to  Christ.  When  earthly  friends  "fail  or  leave 
us,"  we  need  the  true  Friend  who  "sticketh  closer  than  a  brother."  If  Christian 
ministers  have  been  unworthy,  Christ  abides  faithful.  Perhaps  too  much  confidence  was 
given  to  the  human  instruments ;  then  the  shock  of  discovering  this  to  be  misplaced  may 
not  be  wholly  hurtful ;  it  may  help  the  Church  to  look  away  from  men  and  trust  only 
in  Christ. 

II.  The  appointment  of  the  Shepherd.  He  is  set  up  by  God.  God  sent  Christ. 
It  is  God's  will  that  his  scattered  sheep  should  be  restored.  That  was  stated  earlier 
(see  vers.  11, 12).  Now  we  see  how  it  is  to  be  done.  Christ  is  to  be  the  new  Shepherd 
who  will  seek  and  find  the  lost  sheep.  He  comes  to  us  thus  with  all  the  authority  of 
bis  Father.  He  is  called  God's  "  Servant " — a  remarkable  and  unusual  expression  for  the 
Messiah.  This  reminds  us  of  "  the  Servant  of  the  Lord  "  in  the  latter  part  of  Isaiah. 
The  name  was  recalled  by  St.  Peter  when  preaching  to  the  Jews  (Acts  iii.  13).  St. 
Paul  tells  us  that  in  his  great  humiliation  Christ  took  on  him  the  form  of  a  servant 
(Phil.  ii.  7).  This  agrees  with  the  whole  spirit  of  the  life  of  our  Lord,  who  came  not  to 
do  hid  own  will,  but  the  will  of  him  that  sent  him.  It  implies  a  rebuke  of  the  bad 
shepherds,  who  had  only  pleased  themselves  and  so  neglected  their  Master's  interests. 
They  were  too  proud  to  consider  themselves  servants.  But  the  great  Son  of  David  is 
willing  to  be  a  Servant. 

III.  The  work  of  the  Shepherd.  1.  He  rules  the/lock.  He  is  "set  over"  the 
sheep.  The  shepherd  has  authority  over  the  flock.  They  are  required  to  follow  him. 
He  shuts  them  up  in  the  fold  at  night.  Christ  is  King,  as  the  Greater  David.  He  is 
appointed  to  rule  his  flock  as  the  Shepherd  and  Bishop  of  souls.  If  we  would  profit  by 
his  care  we  must  obey  his  voice.  2.  He/eeds  the  flock.  They  would  starve  in  the 
wilderness.  The  shepherd  can  lead  them  into  the  green  pastures.  He  can  supply 
them  with  winter  stores.  Christ  feeds  bis  people  with  his  own  body  and  blood.  3.  He 
saves  the  flock.    Though  not  stated  in  this  verse,  and  perhaps  not  directly  following 


OH.  XXXIV.  1—31.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  211 

ftom  the  preceding  verses,  this  is  very  prominent  in  our  Lord's  own  description  of  his 
work.  By  the  sacrifice  of  his  own  life  he  saves  his  sheep  (John  x.  15).  The  favourite 
picture  of  the  persecuted  early  Christians,  on  the  walls  of  the  catacomhs  at  Borne,  is 
perhaps  the  choicest  of  all  representations  of  Christ — viz.  the  good  Shepherd. 

Ver.  25. — "  A  covenant  of  peace.''  I.  The  makino  or  the  covenant.  A  covenant  is 
ail  agreement  hetween  two  parties.  But  in  the  case  of  covenants  between  Gh)d  and 
man  this  agreement  is  not  arrived  at  after  the  fashion  of  human  bargaining,  in  which 
the  two  who  are  concerned  meet  on  equal  terms.  The  covenant  is  made  by  God  and 
offered  to  man,  by  whom  it  has  to  be  accepted  in  order  that  it  may  take  effect.  We 
meet  with  several  successive  covenants — ^with  Adam,  with  Noah,  with  Abraham,  with 
Israel  in  the  Law.  Jeremiah  promises  a  new  covenant  (Jer.  xxxi.  31).  A  similar  idea 
is  here  presented  by  Bzekiel.  The  old  arrangement  has  broken  down.  For  a  time,  the 
people  of  God  are  outlawed  exiles,  cut  off  from  their  ancient  privileges,  with  little  hope 
for  the  future.  Now  they  are  assured  that  God  will  not  forsake  thein.  It  is  impossible 
to  renew  the  old  covenant ;  but  a  new  one  shall  be  granted.  God  now  approaches  us 
in  the  gospel  with  that  new  covenant  which  Christ  said  was  given  in  his  blood  (Luke 
xxii.  20).  It  was  given  to  the  world  in  the  work  of  Christ.  But  it  is  ratified  afresh 
with  every  soul  that  accepts  its  conditions — viz.  repentance  and  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  (Acts  iii.  19,  26).  All  who  thus  enter  into  it  enjoy  the  privileges  of  Qod's 
covenant  mercies — mercies  promised  and  assured  to  God's  people. 

II.  The  0HABA.0TEB  OF  THE  COVENANT.  It  is  essentially  a  covenant  of  peace. 
Every  covenant  is  intended  to  be  of  this  character.  It  is  to  prevent  misunderstandings, 
to  define  mutual  relations,  to  harmonize  reciprocal  actions.  It  is,  in  fact,  a  sort  of 
treaty ;  and  treaties,  as  long  as  they  are  observed,  are  instruments  of  peace.  But  the 
new  covenant  is  emphatically  and  in  a  very  special  manner  one  of  peace.  1.  It  endorses 
the  restoration  of  peace  between  Ood  and  man.  Sin  is  a  breach  of  the  peace,  pardon  is 
the  making  of  peace.  The  restored  Jews  were  brought  into  relations  of  peace  with 
God.  Christ  reconciles  us  to  God.  2.  It  signalizes  the  eitahlishment  of  peace  hetween 
man  and  his  fellow-man.  Christ  is  our  peace  in  regard  to  mutual  human  relations. 
He  breaks  down  "  the  middle  wall  of  partition  "  between  Jew  and  Gentile  (Eph.  ii.  14). 
He  brings  peace  on  earth  (Luke  ii.  14).  3.  It  is  the  outward  evidence  of  internal 
peace.  Cbrist  gives  peace  to  the  soul.  'The  covenant  assures  his  people  that  this  peace 
Issound  and  solid  (John  xiv.  27). 

III.  Thb  feuits  of  the  COVENANT.  The  evil  beasts  are  to  depart  and  the  people 
are  to  dwell  safely  in  the  open  pastures  and  even  sleep  in  the  woods  without  danger. 
The  departure  of  man  is  followed  by  an  iacursion  of  wUd  beasts.  Lions  came  into  the 
land  when  it  was  much  depopulated  by  the  Captivity.  Then  it  would  only  be  safe  for 
people  to  live  in  close  communities.  At  the  present  day  we  never  see  in  Palestine 
those  scattered  farmhouses  and  cottages  that  give  so  much  picturesqueness  to  rural 
England.  The  people  all  live  in  villages  or  towns.  That  must  be  a  very  safe  condition 
of  the  country  which  would  admit  the  manner  of  living  described  in  our  text.  A 
similar  condition  spiritually  is  brought  about  under  the  new  covenant  of  Christ.  The 
wild  beasts  of  haunting  sins  and  prowling  temptations  are  driven  away.  It  is  possible 
to  enjoy  a  sense  of  freedom  and  security  when  under  the  protection  of  Christ.  To 
plant  one's  homestead  in  the  midst  of  the  pasturage,  to  be  able  to  sleep  out  in  the 
woods  in  the  summer-time  when  at  work  far  from  home,  would  mean  much  comfort 
and  happiness  in  a  safe  and  settled  community.  Such  a  condition  is  typical  of  the 
citizen  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  and  though  certainly  it  is  not  yet  fully  enjoyed,  it 
will  be  when  the  reign  of  Christ  is  perfectly  established. 

Ver.  26. — "  Showers  of  blessing,"  The  grateful  rain  in  a  semi-tropical  country,  that 
brings  fruitful  uesi>  to  the  earth  and  refreshment  to  man  and  beast,  is  suggestive  of  the 
Divine  grace  that  comes  on  parched  and  weary  souls.  _ 

I.  Showebb  of  BLESsiNa  ABE  NEEDED.  It  Is  a  sigu  of  miserable  deadness  when 
any  Church  or  soul  can  be  satisfied  to  continue  in  the  dull  routine  of  formal  service 
without  receiving  any  refreshing  Divine  grace.  The  first  awakening  from  such  a 
condition  of  torpor  must  result  in  a  great  thirst  of  spirit.  The  need  is  indeed  such 
that  all  might  well  feel  it,  viz. :  L  Individual  souls.   Bach  soul  needs  a  blessing.    It  is 


212  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZBKIEL.    [ch.  xxxiv.  1— 31. 

sad  to  be  on  the  margin  of  a  shower,  perhaps -to  receive  some  of  the  dnst  that  precedes 
it,  yet  to  have  no  droppings  of  its  refreshing  water.  2.  Active  lervants  tf  Ood.  The 
preacher,  the  missionary,  the  Sunday  school  teacher,  the  Christian  worker  in  all  kinds 
of  service,  need,  greatly  need,  showers  of  blessing  (1)  in  their  own  hearts,  to  strengthen 
and  cheer,  to  stimulate  and  rouse;  (2)  in  their  work.  3.  The  Church.  Deadness  seizes 
the  Church  without  a  Divine  blessing.  Worldliness,  formalism,  narrowness,  selfishness, 
then  degrade  and  corrupt  it.  The  Church  sadly  needs  a  Divine  benediction.  4.  The 
world.  All  men  need  what  few  men  seek — the  grace  and  aid  of  God.  The  old  weary 
earth  thirsts  and  pines  unconsciously  for  a  new  Pentecost. 

II.  Showebb  of  blessino  come  from  heaven.  1.  Thei/r  source.  This  is  above 
us.  Showers  fall  from  the  clouds  that  sail  far  over  our  heads.  We  must  look  up  for 
the  blessing.  Men  put  too  much  trust  in  the  earth.  The  most  fertile  land,  without 
rain,  would  be  a  Sahara  Desert.  The  most  capable  and  energetic  human  work  needs 
grace  from  above.  Paul  plants,  ApoUos  waters,  and  God  gives  the  increase  (1  Cor.  iii.  6). 
2.  Their  descent.  The  showers  are  formed  in  the  clouds,  but  they  do  not  remain 
there.  It  is  disappointing  to  see  black  clouds  gather  in  a  season  of  drought,  and  then 
pass  away  without  shedding  a  drop  of  rain.  Showers  are  descending  waters.  Blessings 
are  not  only  promised  and  retained  in  the  treasury  of  heaven ;  they  come  down  and 
water  the  earth. 

III.  Showers  of  blessing  descend  nt  abundance.  It  would  take  long  for  men 
with  watering-cart  and  hose  to  distribute  the  moisture  that  is  spread  over  a  wide  area 
in  an  hour  by  one  summer  shower.  God  blesses  richly  and  abundantly.  His  grace  is 
widespread.  Every  root  of  grass  in  the  meadow  comes  in  for  a  share  of  the  shower ; 
every  leaf  in  the  forest  is  cleansed  and  refreshed.  Moreover,  the  result  is  done  with  the 
utmost  gentleness.  It  is  a  shower,  not  a  flood.  "  He  shaU  come  down  like  rain  upon 
the  mown  grass  "  (Ps.  Ixxii.  6). 

IV.  Showebs  of  blessing  comb  at  various  seasons.  It  is  not  always  raining. 
Palestine  had  its  former  and  its  latter  rain.  Showers  alternate  with  sunshine  in  our 
April  weather.  There  are  seasons  of  especial  blessing.  It  may  not  be  well  for  us  to 
be  always  receiving  the  most  stimulating  kind  of  Divine  grace.  Nor  is  it  possible  for 
us  to  be  perpetually  cheered.  Yet  we  can  and  should  pray  for  blessing,  and  hail  the 
cloud  no  bigger  than  a  man's  hand  as  the  promise  of  coming  showers. 

V.  Showebs  op  blessing  abb  followed  by  beauty  and  feuitfulnesb.  How  fair 
and  fresh  the  earth  looks  after  a  spring  shower!  Then  "  the  dainty  flowers  lift  up  their 
heads,"  the  grass  shines  in  its  greenest  hues,  and  the  very  ground  is  fragrant.  The 
world,  the  Church,  the  soul  of  man,  will  wear  a  new  beauty  and  gladness,  and  bring 
forth  fruit  to  the  glory  of  God,  when  heavenly,  showers  of  blessing  have  been  received. 
Well  may  we  pray  for  them  with  more  than  Elijah's  earnestness  I 

Ver.  29. — "A  plantation  of  renown."  Restored  Israel  is  to  be  a  plantation  of  renown. 
The  Israel  of  God,  the  Church  of  Christ,  may  be  considered  as  of  the  same  character. 

I.  The  Chueoh  ib  a  Divine  plantation.  \.  It  is  planted  hy  God.  A  plantation 
is  not  a  wild,  primeval  forest.  It  is  a  wood  the  trees  of  which  have  been  carefully 
selected  and  set  in  the  soil  by  the  hands  of  men.  God  plants  his  people.  (1)  He 
originates  the  life  of  the  soul.  (2)  He  determines  the  position  and  sphere  of  individual 
activity.  (3)  He  calls  men  into  his  Church.  2.  It  is  a  community.  A  plantation  is 
not  a  single  tree,  nor  is  it  the  scattering  of  a  few  separate  trees  over  the  fields.  It  is  a 
collection  of  plants.  "  God  setteth  the  solitary  in  families"  (Pb.  Ixviii.  6).  He  has 
ordained  domestic  and  social  life.  Christ  founded  the  Church.  Brotherly  fellowship 
is  a  Divine  ordinance.  3.  It  is  care/idly  tended.  The  woodman  visits  the  plantation, 
removing  dead  boiigha,  keeping  the  soil  clean,  destroying  dangerous  parasitic  growths, 
etc.  God  does  not  leave  his  people  alone.  They  are  not  like  the  neglected  tropical 
forest,  in  which  the  wreck  of  the  hurricane  lies  undisturbed  and  dead,  and  living  trees 
are  matted  together  with  gigantic  creepers  and  tangled  with  undergrowth ;  they  are 
like  a  well-trimmed  plantation.  4,  It  is  expected  to  grow.  A  plantation  in  poor  soil 
on  a  bleak  hillside  may  be  slow  to  thrive,  and  one  on  a  hot  sandy  plain  may  even 
)iorish  in  drought.  But  healthy  well-placed  plants  should  grow  from  saplings  till  they 
b(  come  great  trees. 

TT.  The  Chueoh  is  a  plantation  of  eenown.    1.  There  is  renown  in  the  planting 


OH.  mrv.  1— 31.]    IHE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  BZEKIEL.  213 

of  it.  It  is  customary  for  a  member  of  the  royal  family  who  visits  a  country  place  to 
be  asked  to  plant  a  tree.  If  the  request  is  complied  with,  the  young  tree  is  watched 
with  peculiar  care  and  erer  after  pointed  out  with  ioterest.  It  is  a  plant  of  renown. 
Not  only  has  the  Church  been  planted  by  God ;  it  lias  been  planted  at  the  cost  of  the 
sacrifice  of  Christ.  This  plantation  has  been  watered  with  the  blood  of  Christ.  It  has 
the  renown  of  the  great  sacrifice  of  Divine  love  consummated  on  Calvary.  2.  There  is 
renown  tn  the  history  of  it.  There  are  trees  of  historic  interest.  Such  was  the  oak  of 
Mamre,  sacred  to  the  memory  of  Abraham.  Englishmen  have  foimd  a  romantic  interest 
in  King  Charles's  oak.  Sherwood  Forest  is  famous  for  Bobin  Hood  and  his  merry 
men.  The  plantation  of  the  Church  has  a  very  mixed  history.  The  greatest  trees  are 
not  always  the  most  fruitful,  and  the  greatest  names  in  ecclesiastical  history  are  not 
always  those  that  deserve  the  highest  honour.  The  public  and  official  history  of  the 
Church  is  disgraced  with  many  a  deed  of  un-Christlike  and  worldly  conduct.  But  the 
plantation  as  a  whole,  the  general  body  of  Christians,  the  quiet  town  and  country 
congregations,  have  done  a  work  of  charity— enlightening,  comforting,  and  saving — in 
all  ages  of  Christendom.  Here,  rather  than  in  her  calendar  of  saints,  the  true  renown 
of  the  Church  is  to  be  found,  and  this  renown  is  the  glory  of  Christ,  whose  body  she 
is ;  so  that  her  members  must  exclaim,  "  Not  unto  us,  not  unto  us,  but  unto  thy  Name 
be  the  glory."  3.  There  is  renown  in  the  destiny  of  it.  The  Church  has  a  great 
future  before  it.  It  goes  forward  to  realize  a  grand  idea.  It  has  to  win  such  a  name 
as  it  dares  not  wear  as  yet.  But  even  now,  as  the  army  shares  the  renown  of  its 
car>tain,  the  Church  is  honoured  in  its  Head,  to  whom  God  has  given  "a  Name  aboi« 
every  name." 

Ver.  30. — The  pretenee  of  Ood.  I.  God  re  PEoiTLiABtT  pbesemt  with  his  feoplb. 
We  know  that  he  is  everywhere— on  the  desolate  sea  and  the  fair  earth,  in  the  high 
heavens  and  the  dark  regions  of  death  (Pa.  cxxxix.).  Therefore  if  any  would  desire  to 
escape  from  his  presence,  this  is  impossible.  How,  then,  can  Gud  be  said  to  be  in  on 
especial  manner  present  with  his  people?  Spiritual  presence  is  spiritual  manifestation. 
God  is  more  fully  present  whore  he  more  completely  manifests  his  power  and  grace.  1. 
He  is  present  in  the  hearts  of  his  people.  He  dwells  in  the  contrite  and  humble  spirit 
(Isa.  Ivii.  15).  The  Christian's  body  is  a  "  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost"  (1  Cor.  vi  19). 
God  comes  into  especially  close  contact  with  those  who  are  reconciled  to  him,  and  who 
open  their  hearts  to  receive  his  Spirit.  2.  He  is  present  in  the  lives  of  his  people.  He 
shapes  their  lives  with  his  providential  guidance,  and  watches  over  them  with  tender 
care,  warding  off  danger  and  supplying  wants.  Even  when  they  forget  him  in  the 
slumbers  of  the  night  and  during  the  busy  distractions  of  the  day,  he  neither  sleeps  nor 
neglects  his  people.  Ever  with  them  to  guide  and  help  and  save,  as  he  was  with  Israel 
in  the  pillar  of  cloud  by  day  and  the  pillar  of  fire  by  night,  God  overshadows  and 
surrounds  his  people  with  his  fostering  presence. 

II.  God's  people  mat  becognizb  his  pbbsenob.  The  verse  which  suggests  these 
reflections  is  somewhat  like  a  frequent  expression  in  the  prophecies  of  Ezekiel.  After 
denunciations  of  wrath  and  judgment  against  the  heathen  nations,  the  conclusion 
repeatedly  arrived  at  is,  "  And  they  shall  know  that  I  am  the  Lord  "  (e.g.  ch.  xxx.  25). 
In  these  cases  the  awful  action  of  Gud  in  his  wrath  is  to  bring  home  to  the  heathen  the 
fact  of  his  existence  and  supremacy;  but  it  is  not  said  that  they  will  know  that  God 
Is  with  them.  To  Israel,  however,  this  new  thing  is  asserted.  Israel  will  not  merely 
know  that  God  is  the  eternal  Lord ;  she  will  know  that  God  is  present.  This  further 
knowledge  belongs  to  Christians.  They  are  not  merely  theists,  who  believe  in  the 
existence  of  God ;  they  know  his  actual,  living  presence.  It  is  not  suggested  that  this 
knowledge  is  to  be  obtained  by  direct,  mystical  intuition ;  it  is  rather  suggested  that  it 
is  gathered  from  the  experience  of  God's  goodness.  Hagar  recognized  the  presence  of 
God  when  the  angel  addressed  her  (Gen.  xvi.  13).  Jacob  perceived  it  on  awakening 
from  his  dream  (Gen.  xxviii.  16).  The  later  Jews  were  to  see  it  in  their  restoration 
from  the  Captivity.  We  are  to  acknowledge  it  in  the  experience  of  the  Christian 
redemption.  In  this  Christ  will  manifest  himself  to  us  as  he  does  not  unto  the  world 
(John  xiv.  21,  22). 

III.  The  reoo&nition  of  God's  pbbsencb  ib  accompanied  by  that  of  his  owneb- 
•HIP  or  his  people.    •'  And  that  they,  even  the  house  of  Israel,  are  my  people."     God 


214  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL,    [oh.  xxxiv.  1— 31- 

18  present  with  his  people  as  their  Owner.  He  comes  to  them  to  claim  them.  H» 
visits  his  inheritance  to  take  possession  of  it.  When  we  perceive  that  God  is  with  us 
we  have  to  go  further  and  acknowledge  his  relationship  to  us.  It  is  much  to  acknow- 
ledge that  we  do  not  belong  to  ourselves,  that  we  are  God'g  possession,  bought  with  » 
great  price,  and  valued  by  him  as  precious  property  is  valued  by  its  owner. 

Ver.  31. — Ood's  flock.  Israel  was  formerly  God's  flock.  Christians  are  now  God's 
flock. 

I.  Cheistianb  ABE  CONSTITUTED  INTO  A  ixooK.  The  wandering  sheep  are  restored. 
They  no  longer  roam  at  large  over  the  mountains.  ■  They  are  gathered  together.  Man 
is  naturally  gregarious.  Beligion  should  deepen  this  characteristic  by  destroying 
selfishness  and  quickening  the  great  social  instinct,  love.  Thus  Christ  founded  the 
Church  idea.  He  recognized  that  he  had  many  sheep  that  were  not  of  the  fold  of 
Israel,  or  of  his  first  community  of  disciples,  and  he  prayed  that  they  might  all  become 
one  flock,  even  if  they  might  not  all  be  gathered  into  onefold.  It  may  be  impossible 
to  restore  the  external  unity  of  Christendom.  At  all  events,  this  grand  consummation 
seems  at  present  to  be  far  off,  and  some  of  those  who  profess  to  desire  it  most  fervently 
do  their  worst  to  postpone  it  by  their  narrowness,  bigotry,  and  self-assertion.  Certainly^ 
if  the  dream  is  ever  realized,  it  will  not  be  by  all  sections  of  Christendom  succumbing 
to  the  views  and  practices^  of  any  one  party,  but  by  a  general  agreement  within  largfr 
lines  of  liberty.  Meanwhile,  though  we  may  not  have  one  fold,  we  should  he  one 
flock.  There  should  be  a  spirit  of  brotherhood  among  all  Christians.  The  boundaries 
of  folds  do  not_ convert  sheep  into  wolves.  The  spiritual  unity  of  Christendom  may  be 
accomplished  in  the  spirit  of  charity  and  sympathy  taking  possession  of  the  hearts  of 
all  Christians. 

II.  Chkistians  ake  tended  as  a  flock.  The  flock  is  under  the  care  of  a  shepherd. 
God  has  "  set  up  one  Shepherd  over  "  his  flock  (ver.  23) — Christ,  who  cares  for  his 
sheep  to  the  extent  of  giving  his  life  for  them.  The  flock  of  Christ  is  variously  tended. 
1.  It  ie/ed.  God  has  not  left  his  people  in  the  wilderness,  or,  if  they  must  traverse 
that  barren  region,  he  sends  heavenly  manna  and  gives  water  from  the  rock.  2.  It  i»^ 
sheltered.  The  shepherd  watches  over  the  flock  by  night  and  drives  off  beasts  of  prey. 
Christ  guards  his  people  from  harm  and  danger.  3.  It  is  led.  The  shepherd  leads  hi» 
sheep  by  the  still  waters,  and  ultimately  home  to  their  fold.  God  led  his  people- 
Israel  "like  a  flock"  (Ps.  Ixxvii.  20),  till  they  had  passed  all  the  perils  of  the  forty 
years'  wandering,  crossed  the  Jordan,  and  taken  possession  of  the  promised  land.^ 
Christ  leads  his  people  through  life  safely  on  towards  the  heavenly  Canaan. 

III.  Christians  should  behave  as  a  flock,  1.  They  should /oKow  the  Shepherd.^ 
Christianity  is  walking  in  the  footsteps  of  Christ  (John  xii.  26).  We  cannot  expect 
the  grace  of  Christ  if  we  wander  from  him.  2.  The  flock  is  the  property  of  its  Owner ;. 
it  exists  for  his  advantage.  It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  we  are  to  receive  cotmtless 
blessings  and  render  no  return  in  obedience.  The  supreme  end  of  the  Church  is  the 
glory  of  God,  though  this  is  attained  in  conjunction  with  its  own  highest  welfare. 
3.  The  sheep  are  foolish,  weak,  helpless  creatures.  The  Shepherd  is  far  greater  than, 
they.  He  deserves  to  be  looked  up  to  with  trust,  and  followed  obediently.  In  our 
ignorance,  folly,  and  weakness  we  should  trust  and  obey  our  good  Shepherd,  who  ic< 
wiser  and  stronger  than  we,  and  whose  will  is  supreme  over  our  lives. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 10. —  The  human  shepherds  of  the  flock.  It  is  a  comparison  as  old,  yes,  older 
than  literature,  this  of  the  people  to  a  flock  of  sheep,  and  of  their  rulers,  leaders,  and 
spiritual  instructors  to  the  shepherds  whose  vocation  it  is  to  protect,  care  for,  and  feed, 
them.  Both  in  the  Old  and  New  Testament  Scriptures  we  meet  with  passages  in  which- 
unfaithful,  careless,  selfish,  and  grasping  religious  teachers  and  leaders  are  denounced 
as  hirelings  who  have  nothing  of  the  true  shepherd's  heart — no  watchfulness,  com- 
miseration, and  self-sacrifice.  In  the  time  of  Ezekiel  there  were  those  who,  called  to- 
be  pastors  and  reputed  to  be  pastors,  were  nevertheless  destitute  of  the  pastorah 
charixoter  and  habits. 


OH.  XXXIV.  1—31.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  BZEKIEL.  214 

I.  Their  conduct.  This  is  very  graphically  and  (after  Ezekiel's  manner)  with 
outspoken  plainness  described  in  these  verses.  1.  The  shepherds'  neglect  of  the  fluck. 
They  neither  feed  them  upon  suitable  pastures,  nor  strengthen  the  weak,  nor  heal  the 
sickly,  nor  recover  the  lost,  nor  deliver  the  defenceless  sheep  from  the  wild  beasts  of 
tte  field.  On  the  contrary,  they  treat  them  with  violence  and  with  rigour.  2.  Tha 
shepherds'  care  for  themselves.  They  use  the  flock  merely  for  their  own  pleasure  and 
advantage,  eating  of  the  flesh  of  the  sheep,  and  clothing  themselves  with  their  wooL 
3.  The  consequent  condition  of  the  flock.  Neglected  by  their  custodians,  they  are 
scattered,  they  wander  upon  every  high  hill,  they  fall  a  prey  to  the  beasts  of  the  field. 
In  all  these  respects  there  is  a  parallel  between  the  conduct  of  careless,  hireling  shep- 
herds and  the  conduct  of  those  in  Israel  who  claimed  to  be  the  spiritual  pastors  of  the 
people.  These,  whether  priests  or  prophets  by  profession,  simply  used  their  position 
as  a  means  towards  their  personal  wealth,  ease,  pleasure,  and  aggrandizement.  And  no 
vronder  that  the  sons  of  Israel,  so  neglected  by  those  who  should  have  made  their 
highest  welfare  their  care,  were  abandoned  to  every  enemy,  and  sank  into  a  state  of 
degeneration,  debasement,  and  hopelessness. 

II,  Theib  condemnation.  That  such  flagrant  neglect  of  duty  could  not  pasi 
unnoticed  and  unpunished  may  be  presumed  by  the  least  tlioughtful.  Under  the  rule 
of  a  Governor  of  infinite  justice,  those  placed  in  a  position  of  eminence  and  of  influence, 
if  they  neglect  to  fulfil  the  duties  of  their  position,  must  surely  be  called  to  an  exact 
account  of  their  trust.  The  prophet  tells  us  concerning  the  unfaithful  shepherds  that: 
1.  God  is  against  them.  He,  whose  help  and  countenance  would  have  been  vouchsafed 
had  they  honestly  and  earnestly  set  themselves  to  do  the  work  which  they  professed 
to  undertake,  now  sets  himself  against  the  unfaithful.  2.  They  are  held  responsible 
for  the  flock.  "  I  will  require,"  says  God,  "  my  sheep  at  their  hand."  3.  The  custody 
of  the  flock  is  taken  away  from  them.  And  at  the  same  time,  they  are  prevented  from 
any  more  feeding  themselves.  It  cannot  be  that  the  flock  should  be  punished  for 
wandering,  and  that  the  careless  shepherds,  through  whose  neglect  they  wandered, 
■hould  be  suffered  to  go  free. — ^T. 

Vers.  11 — 16. — The  Divine  Shepherd  of  the  flock.  What  a  marvellous  contrast  is 
here  presented  between  the  hireling  and  unfaithful  shepherds  who  have  presumptuously 
undertaken  the  care  of  God's  people,  and  the  Lord  God,  who  in  his  condesoensioa 
assumes  the  pastoral  office,  and  fulfils  it  with  Divine  qualifications  and  completeness ! 
According  to  the  beautiful  and  touching  representation  of  this  passage — 

I.  The  Lord  seeks  his  siiebp  when  lost.  They  have  gone  astray,  through  wilful- 
ness on  their  part  and  through  negligence  on  the  part  of  the  pretended  shepherds.  But 
the  Divine  Shepherd  seeks  and  saves  that  which  was  lost,  and,  distant  though  they  be, 
and  in  dangerous  places,  finds  them  out  and  lays  his  gracious  hand  upon  them. 

II.  The  Lobd  delivers  his  sheep  from  the  power  of  their  enemies.  They 
have  their  enemies,  and  they  have  fallen  into  their  enemies'  hands.  Prom  such  peril 
One  only  can  save;  and  the  Lord  rescues  them  and,  in  the  exercise  of  his  pity  and  his 
power,  sets  them  free  from  bondage  and  oppression. 

III.  The  Lord  restores  them  to  the  fold  of  safety  and  of  peace.  Even  as 
Jehovah  brought  back  the  exiles  from  the  East  into  the  land  of  their  fathers,  so  does 
the  good  Shepherd  and  Bishop  of  souls  ever  restore  the  penitent  and  believing  to  tha 
welcome  of  his  gracious  heart,  and  to  the  fellowship  of  his  rejoicing  Church,  to  go  no 
more  out. 

IV.  The  Lord  feeds  them  in  the  pastures  of  his  grace.  The  language  of  this 
passage  is  upon  this  point  very  full,  rich,  and  reassuring.  The  good  Shejiherd  declares, 
"  I  will  feed  them  upon  the  mountains  ot  Israel,  by  the  water-courses ;  I  will  feed 
them  upon  good  pasture,  and  on  fat  pasture  shall  they  feed  upon  the  mountains  of 
Israel."  We  may  understand  by  this  all  the  provision  which  the  wisdom  and  loving- 
kindness  of  God  have  made  for  the  wants  and  the  welfare  of  his  redeemed — the  truth 
of  his  Word,  the  blessings  of  his  sacraments,  the  fellowship  of  his  saints. 

V.  The  Lord  heals  them  from  all  their  weaknesses  and  swfebinos.  "I 
will  bind  up  that  which  was  broken,  and  strengthen  that  which  was  sick."  He  healeth 
all  our  diseases.  His  hand  applies  the  remedy,  administers  the  medicine,  restores  the 
broken  health  of  the  soul.     No  necessity  is  uncared  for ;  no  ill  fails  to  meet  his  sym- 


216  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  ixxit.  1— 31. 

pathy ;  no  weakly,  tender  lamb  of  his  flock  sliall  perish  through  neglect.  "  He  shall 
gather  the  lambs  in  bis  arm,  and  carry  them  in  his  bosom,  and  shall  gently  lead  those 
that  give  suck," 

Application.  These  representations  of  Divine  pity  and  tenderness  are  amply 
fulfilled  in  the  gospel  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  In  his  own  discourses 
he  set  forth  his  mission  under  the  similitude  of  the  faithful,  devoted  shepherd.  He 
laid  down  his  life  for  the  sheep.  The  apostles  felt  the  justice  and  the  beauty  of  the 
similitude.  And  upon  the  early  Christians  generally  it  made  a  profound  impression; 
in  their  works  of  art  they  delighted  to  picture  Jesus  as  the  good  shepherd. — T. 

Vers.  23,  24.^ — A  pastor  and  a  prince.  Christians  cannot  fail  to  recognize  th« 
Messianic  reference  of  this  portion  of  prophecy.  The  language  employed  not  only 
exactly  depicts  him  who  is  "  Immanuel,  God  with  us ; "  it  is  so  exalted  that  it  is  not 
possible  to  refer  it  to  any  inferior  being,  to  any  under-shepherd  of  the  flock,  any  over- 
seer and  ruler  in  the  Church  subject  to  human  infirmities  and  failings. 

L  The  sole  supeemaot  op  Christ  oveb  the  flock.  The  "  one  Shepherd,"  God's 
"  servant  David,"  who  can  this  be  but  Christ  ?  For  he  is  the  Head  of  the  new 
humanity,  who  has  made  both  one.  "  There  shall  be  one  flock  and  one  Shepherd." 
This  is  no  other  than  the  one  Mediator  between  God  and  man,  the  Mau  Christ  Jesus. 

II.  The  sacrificial  death  of  Christ  fob  his  flock.  Christ's  people  are  a  pur- 
chased possession;  he  laid  down  his  life  for  the  sheep.  Thus  he  proved  his  love;  thus 
he  accomplished  the  gracious  purposes  of  his  Father ;  thus  he  eifected  the  deliveranoa 
of  his  ransomed  ones  from  the  power  of  the  enemy.  All  that  the  Saviour  does  for  his 
people  is  comprehended  in  and  follows  from  his  identification  of  himself  with  them  in 
his  incarnation  and  sacrifice. 

III.  The  perpetual  swat  of  Christ  over  his  flock.  God's  servant  is  appointed 
to  be,  not  only  the  pastor,  but  the  prince,  of  the  redeemed.     His  rule  is  marked  by 

iustice  and  equity,  and  at  the  same  time  by  benignity  and  compassion.  He  is  the 
Mnce  of  righteousness  and  the  Prince  of  peace.  His  dominion  shall  be  universal— 
"  from  sea  to  sea,  and  from  the  river  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth."  His  dominion  shall  be 
imperishable — from  one  generation  to  another,  "and  of  the  increase  of  his  government 
there  shall  be  no  end." 

Application.  These  representations  of  Christ  summon  all  the  members  of  his  flock 
to  accept  with  gratitude  his  pastoral  provision  and  care ;  and  to  submit  with  cheerful* 
ness  to  bis  just  and  gracious  rule. — T. 

Ver.  26, — The  promise  of  Messing.  By  general  consent  this  promise  is  referred  to 
the  time  'of  the  new  covenant,  to  the  coming  of  Christ  for  man's  salvation,  and  ths 
outpouring  of  the  Holy  Spirit  upon  the  Church. 

I.  Fertilizing  showers  of  blessing.  As  the  rain  waters  the  earth,  and  tumi 
barrenness  into  fruitlulness,  so  the  provision  of  Divine  grace  transforms  this  humanity 
from  a  wilderness  of  sin  into  a  Paradise  of  God.  1.  The  need  of  such  blessing  is 
apparent -from  the  spiritual  barrenness  which  prevails  where  it  is  not  bestowed,  2.  Tho 
source  of  such  blessing  is  implied  in  this  language ;  for  as  the  showers  come  from  th« 
clouds  of  the  sky,  so  the  Spirit  descends  from  the  presence,  the  heaven  of  God.  3.  The 
time  of  such  blessing  is  indicated  as  appointed  by  supreme  wisdom ;  the  shower  comes 
"  in  its  season,"  and  the  promise  of  the  Father  was  given  in  the  Father's  good  time. 
4.  The  abundance  of  such  blessing.  God's  spiritual  favours  come  to  his  people,  not  in 
drops,  but  in  showers,  such  as  are  fitted  to  refresh  the  parched  and  thirsty  land.  5. 
The  effects  of  such  blessing  are  life  and  fertility.  The  wilderness  and  the  solitary  plao« 
are  made  glad,  and  the  desert  rejoices  and  blossoms  as  the  rose.  Spiritual  growth  and 
fruit  are  the  blessed  result  of  showers  of  Divine  mercy. 

II.  Abiding  scenes  of  benediction.  By  the  "  hill "  of  God  must  be  understood 
the  Church  of  God,  which  he  ever  visits,  refreshes,  and  vivifies  by  the  dews  and 
showers  of  his  pity  and  loving-kindness.  The  Church,  because  the  object  of  Divine 
favour  and  the  depository  of  Divine  truth  and  power,  becomes  and  remains  the  agent 
of  untold  benefits  to  the  world  around.  It  receives  blessing  from  heaven ;  it  commu- 
nicates blessing  to  earth.  The  heaven  above  is  never  as  brass  intercepting  and  restrain- 
ing blessing ;  it  is  as  the  clouds  distilling  and  diffusing  blessing.    And  the  rills  kra 


OH.  XXXIV.  1—31.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIBL.  217 

never  dry  which  convey  the  blessing  of  Qod  from  the  Church  to  fertilize  a  thirsty  and 
barren  world. — T. 

Veri.  27,  28. — The  peace  and  welfare  of  the  Church.  So  much  of  this  book  of  pro- 
phecy is  occupied  with  denunciation  and  with  pictures  of  destruction  and  desolation, 
that  a  passage  like  this  is  grateful  and  welcome,  as  a  relief  and  contrast  to  much  of 
what  has  gone  before.  The  prophet  was  evidently  inspired  to  look  into  the  far  future, 
and  to  see  visions  of  happiness  and  of  glory  which  exalted  and  delighted  his  spirit. 
He  was  taught  that  the  God  of  infinite  compassion  has  counsels  of  salvation  for  sinful 
men,  and  plans  of  felicity  for  the  ransomed  Church.  Some  of  the  elements  of  blessed- 
ness, assured  by  God's  faithfulness  and  mercy  to  his  people,  are  pictured  in  these 
beautiful  and  encouraging  verses. 

I.  Peospbbitt,  secured  by  the  visitation  or  God's  mbboy  and  LoviNO-KiNDNEsa. 
This  is  figuratively  represented  by  the  promise,  "  The  tree  of  the  field  shall  yield  its 
fruit,  and  the  earth  shall  yield  her  increase."  The  Church  is  a  garden,  a  vineyard,  a 
forest;  when  it  flourishes,  it  puts  forth  signs  of  vigorous  life,  and  it  is  fruitful  abun- 
dantly. The  vitality  of  the  Church  expresses  itself  in  its  praises,  thankgivings,  and 
prayers,  in  its  unity  and  brotherly  love,  in  its  deeds  of  justice  and  purity,  in  its  bene- 
volent and  self-denying  efi'orts  for  the  good  of  the  world. 

II.  Deliverance  and  liberty,  secured  by  the  inteeposition  or  God's  might. 
The  Lord  "  broke  the  bars  of  their  yoke,  and  delivered  them  out  of  the  hands  of  those 
who  made  bondmen  of  them."  "Where  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is,  there  is  liberty." 
It  is  his  office  to  set  God's  people  free  from  thraldom  to  error  and  to  sin,  and  to  make 
them  God's  freedmen,  to  introduce  them  into  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  sons  of  God, 
The  promise  must  have  had  a  special  significance  and  sweetness  for  those  who,  like 
Ezekiel  and  his  companions,  were  captives  and  exiles  in  a  foreign  land,  and  subject 
to  the  authority  of  strangers.  Its  spiritual  meaning  is  comprehended  and  appreciated 
by  all  Christ's  ransomed  ones  who  are  set  free,  his  banished  ones  for  whose  return  he 
has  devised  effectual  means. 

ni.  Sbourity  through  God's  protection.  In  a  less  settled  state  of  society  than 
our  own,  the  literal  meaning  of  the  promise  must  have  been  peculiarly  welcome: 
"They  shall  no  more  be  a  prey  to  the  heathen,  neiiher  shall  the  beasts  of  the  field 
devour  them ;  but  they  shall  dwell  securely,  and  none  shall  make  them  afraid."  Th« 
Church  of  Christ  is  secure  as  the  fold  of  God's  flock,  the  fortress  of  God's  warriors,  the 
home  of  God's  children.  The  powers  of  earth  and  of  hell  are  strong,  but  the  power  of 
Heaven  is  mightier,  and  this  power  is  pledged  for  the  guardianship  and  safety  of  the 
people  of  Christ.  The  power  of  Divine  providence  controls  all  outward  events.  The 
power  of  the  Divine  Spirit  within  checks  every  rising  fear.  "Pear  not,"  sayt 
the  Almighty  Guardian  and  Helper,  "  fear  not :  I  am  with  you ! " — ^T. 

Vers.  1 — 16. — Ood's  verdict  upon  self-serving  rulers.  The  disasters  that  overtook 
the  land  and  the  people  of  Israel  were  largely  due  to  the  misdeeds  of  their  rulers.  The 
people  in  olden  time  were  more  easily  led  by  their  sovereign  than  they  are  now.  The 
ability  to  read,  combined  with  the  free  use  of  printed  literature,-  has  stimulated 
the  power  to  think,  and  this  has  led  to  self-reliance,  independence,  and  freedom.  But 
in  Ezekiel's  day  a  dearth  of  literature  made  the  people  largely  dependent  on  priests 
and  rulers.  The  self-will  of  Eehoboara  was  the  initial  downward  step  to  civic  strife 
and  national  ruin.  Eehoboam  and  his  successors  never  learned  the  lesson  that  a  ruler 
is  a  shepherd,  that  he  is  entrusted  with  the  welfare  of  a  nation,  that  he  is  appointed  to 
live  for  the  people,  and  not  to  expect  that  the  people  shall  live  for  him.  This  is  a 
wholesome  lesson  for  all  kings  and  magistrates.  They  are  expected  to  care  for  every 
interest  in  the  commonwealth. 

I,  God's  estimate  of  a  eulbb's  duty.  A  ruler,  whether  supreme  or  subordinate, 
is  required  by  God  to  act  as  a  shepherd.  He  is  ordained  to  this  office  (at  least 
theoretically)  on  the  ground  of  superior  knowledge,  skill,  and  fitness  to  govern.  God's 
intention  is  that  the  personal  endowments  of  one  shall  be  employed  for  the  welfare  of 
the  many.  The  design  in  erecting  the  kingly  office  is  not  that  everything  in  the  state 
shall  contribute  to  the  pomp  and  magnificence  of  the  king,  but  contrariwise,  that  the 
king  shall  devote  his  talents  and  energies  to  the  well-being  of  his  weakest  subjects. 


218  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  BZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxxiv.  1— 31. 

The  public  health  must  be  his  care.  Measures  for  alleviating  and  uprooting  disease 
must  originate  at  the  palace.  The  education  of  the  young,  the  development  of  mental 
resources,  the  dissemination  of  all  useful  knowledge,  form  part  of  the  monarch's  duty. 
The  sanitation  of  the  people's  dwellings  is  a  more  royal  service  than  leading  battalions 
on  the  battle-field.  Whatever  increases  mutual  conoord,  Industry,  virtue,  wealth, 
morality,  and  religion  demands  the  king's  attention.  And  what  is  true  respecting  a 
king  is  true  (in  its  measure)  respecting  every  meaner  magistrate  and  ofSoer  of  state. 
Every  man  who  fills  an  oflBce  of  rule  is  a  shepherd,  under  obligation  to  safeguard  the 
interests  of  the  people.     Such  is  the  doctrine  taught  by  God. 

II.  God's  eecoonition  of  a  kulbk's  selp-agoeandizembnt.  Every  occupant  of  a 
throne  acts  in  the  stead  of  God.  He  is  a  delegate  of  the  Most  High.  Therefore  it  is 
his  duty  to  imitate  the  rule  of  God — to  act  as  God  acts.  Inasmuch  as  God  cares 
equally  for  all  the  members  in  his  family,  for  the  obscure  and  the  weak,  as  well  as  for 
the  rich  and  the  strong,  it  becomes  earthly  monarchs  to  do  likewise.  Every  neglect  of 
the  well-being  of  subjects  is  noted  down  by  God.  The  cry  of  the  oppressed  toilers 
enters  the  ears  of  the  Lord  of  hosts.  In  God's  esteem  kingly  condescension/ is  a  nobler 
quality  than  animal  courage.  It  is  better  every  way  to  enlarge  a  people's  virtue  than 
to  enlarge  the  boundaries  of  empire.     God  notes  down  carefully  each  royal  delinquency. 

III.  God's  modes  of  chastising  a  eulbb's  contumacy.  1.  Removal  from  office. 
"I  will  cause  them  to  cease  from  feeding  the  fiuck."  Defeat  upon  the  battle-field^ 
dethronement,  loss  of  regal  power,  early  death,: — these  are  among  the  modes  of  chastise- 
ment God  employs.  So  many  are  the  plans  for  vindicating  himself  which  are  avail- 
able to  bim,  that  he  seldom  employs  the  same  mode  of  chastisement  in  two  separata 
instances.  What  are  often  deemed  common  disasters  are  forthputtiugs  of  the  chastising 
rod.  2.  Arraignment  at  the  bar  of  Ood.  "  I  will  require  my  flock  at  their  h»nd. 
Kings,  as  well  as  private  persons,  must  give  a  faithful  account  of  life.  Kings  are 
usually  here  the  objects  of  envy ;  but  when  we  include  in  our  survey  the  etemsd  future, 
envy  may  well  cease.  Every  place  of  honour  is  a  place  of  responsibility.  Kings  may 
recognize  on  earth  no  superior  authority,  yet  they  too  are  under  law,  and  must  in  due 
time  "  give  an  account  of  their  stewardship."    The  day  of  audit  draws  on  apace. 

IV.  God's  inteeposition  for  the  neglected  flock.  "  I,  even  I,  will  both  search 
my  sheep,  and  seek  them  out."  The  political  and  imperial  events  of  Asia  in  Ezekiel'a 
day  were  dominated  by  the  superior  will  of  Jehovah,  and  the  political  events  of  every 
empire  are  under  the  same  jurisdiction.  All  valuable  reward  comes  from  the  favour  of 
God ;  all  real  punishment  is  from  his  hand.  1.  Return  from  exile  is  promised.  They 
shall  dwell  in  their  own  land.  Every  man  has  naturally  an  attachment  to  the  land  of 
his  fathers,  and  removal  means  weakness  and  loss  to  the  social  fabric.  Under  God's 
rule  this  banishment  shall  be  reversed.  2.  Prosperity  is  pledged.  "  I  will  feed  them 
in  a  good  pasture.".  Agriculture  shall  again  prosper  under  the  jegis  of  righteous 
government.  Security  of  person  and  property  is  the  vital  breath  of  industry.  Fields 
and  gardens  shall  smile  with  beauty  under  the  sunshine  of  Divine  favour.  3.  Perfect 
protection  is  assured.  "  I  will  cause  them  to  lie  down."  No  harsh  noise  of  Invasion 
shall  disturb  them.  They  shall  be  far  removed  from  all  disquietude  beneath  Jehovali's 
wing.  Their  munitions  of  granite  are  the  words  of  the  Omnipotent.  The  power  that 
supports  the  heavens  is  their  defence.  4.  (h'ocious  care  of  the  suffering  is  announced. 
This  was  a  rew  thing  in  Ezekiel's  day.  In  such  stormy  times  the  weak  and  diseased 
were  counted  a  burden.  This  conduct  is  emphatically  God-like.  For  God  takes  a 
special  pleasure  in  conveying  sympathy  and  succour  to  his  suffering  ones.  "  In  all 
their  affliction  he  is  afflicted."  5.  Here  is  intimation  also  of  moral  recovery  for  the 
lost  and  the  guilty.  "  I  will  seek  that  which  was  lost."  He  who  cares  for  men's 
temporal  interests  cares  infinitely  more  for  their  soul's  health  and  joy.  The  gladness 
that  rolls  through  heaven  when  a  sinner  turns  is  gladness  that  originates  with  God. 
He  delights  to  reclaim  a  wayward  lamb.  His  patience  and  tenderness  are  most  of  all 
conspicuous  in  dealing  with  rebels.     His  greatness  haJh  made  many  great. — D. 

Vers.  17 — 22. — Social  oppressions.  The  wisest  men  detect  only  some  of  the  evils 
that  blemish  a  nation ;  they  are  blind  to  more  secret  delinquencies.  The  Almighty 
Ruler  detects  every  hidden  iniquity,  nor  will  he  spare  any  form  of  sin. 

I.  Observe  the  contagion  of  wickedness.     The  first  part  of  the  chapter  reveals 


DH.  XXXIV.  1—31.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  21» 

God's  judgment  upon  evil  rulers.  Now  is  brought  to  light  the  wrong-doing  of  men  in 
private  and  unofficial  stations.  The  sins  of  pride  and  violence  soon  filter  down  Irom 
magnates  to  merchants,  from  princes  to  peasants.  Vice  is  more  contagious  than  any 
bodily  disease  we  are  familiar  with.  As  children  easily  learn  to  imitate  the  words  and 
ways  of  parents,  so  men  in  inferior  stations  copy  the  deeds  of  those  immeiliately  above 
them.     As  thistle-down  bears  an  abundant  crop  of  seed,  so  do  also  most  kinds  of  sin. 

II.  Mark  the  evil  and  bitteb  fruits  op  selfishness.  Selfishness  is  the  prolifio 
mother  of  a  thousand  sins.  In  a  ruler  silfishness  becomes  as  a  scourge  of  scorpions  to 
the  people,  and  makes  the  man  a  monster;  in  a  private  person  it  works  a  world  of 
minor  mischiefs.  In  any  form  it  is  a  malignant  and  despicable  thing.  As  night  casts 
its  black  shadow  over  every  scene  of  natural  beauty,  so  selfishness  blights  and  disfigures 
every  relationship  between  man  and  man.  1.  Eere  are  acts  of  malevolence.  The  rich 
and  the  strong  cared  only  for  themselves.  Self-aggrandizement  in  them  had  grown 
into  ill  will  for  their  neighbours.  National  calamity,  which  ought  to  have  brought 
them  nearer  to  each  other  for  mutual  help,  had  generated  a  malevolent  temper. 
2.  This  ill  win  led  to  acts  of  wanton  destruciiveness.  Such  portions  of  agricultural 
produce  as  they  could  not  use  themselves  they  destroyed,  so  that  their  poorer  neigh- 
bours might  be  reduced  to  yet  direr  straits.  Never  was  the  fable  of  the  dog  in  the 
manger  more  literally  realized.  Landlords  who  destroy  cottages  in  order  to  drive  out 
the  poor  from  the  parish,  walk  in  these  men's  shoes.  3.  Acts  of  personal  cruelty. 
"They  pushed  the  diseased  with  their  horns  until  they  had  scattered  them."  The 
horns  were  weapons  provided  by  God  for  their  defence  against  their  foes,  and  it  was  a 
strange  abuse  of  God's  kindness  to  use  these  weapons  for  the  injury  of  their  sufi'eiing 
fellows.  Every  form  of  disease  is  a  mute,  pathetic  appeal  to  our  better  nature  for 
sympathy  and  help.  We  do  ourselves  a  lasting  injury  when  we  refuse  assistance.  We 
torn  the  natural  milk  of  human  kindness  into  gall.  Men  are  members  of  one  social 
organism ;  and  in  injuring  each  other  they  injure  themselves.  The  culture  of  benevolence 
is  a  primary  duty — a  fountain  of  joy.  4.  Self-blindness,  To  these  self-indulgent  men 
"  it  seemed  a  small  thing  "  to  treat  their  weaker  and  suffering  brethren  thus.  Yet  it 
was  a  very  mountain  of  wickedness.  A  selfish  eye  looks  through  the  wrong  end  of 
the  telescope,  and  sees  real  objects  greatly  minimized.  By-and-by  their  eyes  will  be 
opened.  By-and-by  the  mist  of  appearances  will  vanish,  and  all  human  actions  will 
be  revealed  in  naked  reality. 

III.  Righteous  disomminatioh  and  award  are  not  far  awat.  "  Thus  saith  the 
Lord  God,  Behold,  I  judge  between  cattle  and  cattle."  Probably  many  of  these  rich 
blustering  men  complained  bitterly  enough  of  the  selfish  violence  of  their  rulers,  and 
never  surmised  that  they  were  committing  the  very  same  sin  under  another  guise. 
They  saw  the  mote  in  others'  eyes,  yet  did  not  suspect  that  a  beam  filled  their  own 
eye.  But  an  unseen  Judge  was  there,  and  weighed  in  the  balance  of  perfect  equity 
every  deed  and  word  of  man.  It  is  a  consolation  to  the  suffering  that  deliverance  from 
the  highest  source  will  come,  and  will  come  at  the  best  possible  moment.  The  great 
Refiner  sits  by  and  watches  the  refining  process  in  the  furnace.  His  plans  to  us  are 
fiill  of  mystery,  for  our  vision  is  very  limited,  while  he  sees  the  end  from  the  beginning. 
His  eye  skilfully  discriminates  between  every  form  and  every  degree  of  human  offence. 
Men  will  not  be  judged  (as  they  are  often  now)  in  classes,  but  as  individuals.  Some 
Canaanites  will  be  accepted ;  some  Israelites  will  be  rejected.  Some  Pharisees  shall 
find  their  way  to  heaven ;  some  publicans  will  perish.  A  rich  man  may  be  saved  in 
spite  of  the  encumbrance  of  riches ;  some  poor  men  will  be  outcasts  eternally  because 
destitute  of  faith  and  love.  The  balance  of  God  is  an  even  balance,  and  in  his  presence 
the  smallest  deception  is  impossible. — D. 

Vers.  23 — 31. — The  golden  age  of  peace.  Predictions  of  Divine  retribution,  added  to 
bitter  experience  of  misfortune,  had  well-nigh  filled  the  souls  of  the  people  with  despair. 
And  despair  is  a  critical  condition  for  man.  It  may  lead  to  self-abandonment,  to  the 
wildest  excesses  of  vice  and  devilry.  Will  God  make  no  interposition  on  their  behalf? 
Must  their  only  prospect  be  midnight,  unrelieved  by  a  single  star?  No]  over  the 
black  cloud  God  again  flings  the  bow  of  gracious  promise.  Black  midnight  shall  be 
followed  by  a  roseate  dawn.  The  old  order  shall  give  place  to  a  new.  A  nobler 
kingdom  shall  be  set  up. 


220  THE  BOOK   OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxxiv.  1— 31. 

I.  A  NEW  Kma.  He  is  described  as  "  my  servant  David."  This  description  is  not 
to  be  accepted  literally,  but  symbolically.  The  people  could  not  understand  the 
magnificent  purpose  of  God  by  any  other  language.  As  God  stoops  to  our  infantile 
state  by  describing  heaven  to  us  in  language  borrowed  from  earth,  so  did  he  portray 
the  era  of  Messiah's  reign  by  language  borrowed  from  the  most  prosperous  events  in 
their  past  career.  Despite  all  his  failings,  David  had  been  their  most  illustrious 
sovereign.  His  reign  had  brought  them  prosperity  and  honour  and  great  enlargement. 
They  shall  have  anotlier  David — a  better  David.  In  reality,  as  well  as  in  name,  he 
shall  be  the  "  Beloved,"  even  "  the  Man  after  God's  own  heart."  Gk)d  shall  make  tha 
appointment,  therefore  questions  touching  its  wisdom  may  well  be  silenced.  The 
King  of  their  King  is  God,  therefore  the  new  Monarch  shall  be  a  true  Shepherd,  viz. 
one  who  will  care  more  for  the  flock  than  for  himself.  The  spirit  of  his  reign  shall 
be  love. 

II.  A  NEW  OHARTEE  OF  INCORPORATION.  "  I  wiU  make  them  a  covenant  of  peace." 
For  centuries  past  they  had  tasted  the  horrors  and  the  misery  of  war.  Civil  strife  and 
foreign  invasion  had  made  the  beauteous  land  a  desolation.  War  between  man  and 
man  had  been  incessant,  because  the  whole  nation  was  at  war  with  God.  The 
influence,  the  virtue,  the  spirit  of  the  new  King  were  designed  to  spread  until  they  had 
permeated  the  whole  nation.  Love  to  God  would  produce  benevolence  to  each  other. 
Further,  it  was  an  act  of  incomparable  condescension  on  the  part  of  God  to  make  such 
a  covenant  with  men,  particularly  with  such  rebellious  men.  For  a  covenant  is  a  con- 
tract which  brings  obligation  on  both  parties  entering  into  it,  and  which  deprives  them 
of  a  portion  of  their  liberty.  So,  in  amazing  kindness  to  men,  and  that  he  may  lift 
them  up,  God  freely  brings  himself  under  obligation,  and  gives  to  undeserving  men  a 
right  they  did  not  before  possess.  This  gracious  covenant  embraced  the  most  precious 
interests  of  the  true  Israel,  and  was  appointed  as  a  root  of  prosperity  and  joy.  And 
the  conclusion  of  the  covenant  was  guaranteed.  "  I,"  said  God,  "  I  will  make "  it. 
Hence  it  included  the  solution  of  men's  opposition.  It  deals  witli  men  in  their  internal 
nature  as  well  as  in  their  outward  conduct.  Divine  love  will  gradually  melt  all 
hostility,  and  will  fertilize  human  nature  with  heavenly  grace.  '*  They  shall  be  my 
people." 

IIL  A  NEW  EBA  OF  PROSPERITT.  A  long  Catalogue  of  beneficial  effects  are  specified. 
1.  Civic  concord.  "  I  will  cause  the  evil  beasts  to  cease."  By  evil  beasts  we  may 
properly  understand  unprincipled  and  oppressive  men.  A  gracious  influence  shall 
touch  and  remodel  the  characters  of  men.  "The  wolf  shall  dwell  with  the  lamb,  and 
the  leopard  shall  lie  down  with  the  kid."  Instead  of  an  instinct  to  injure,  there  shall 
be  an  instinct  to  benefit  each  other.  2.  Personal  security.  "  They  shall  dwell  safely 
«ven  in  the  wilderness,  and  sleep  in  the  woods."  The  security  shall  be  perfect.  The 
former  haunts  of  robbers  shall  become  the  abodes  of  peace.  The  very  deserts  shall 
resound  with  the  merry  laughter  of  children  and  with  the  songs  of  honest  swains. 
3.  Agricultural  fertility.  "  The  tree  of  the  field  shall  yield  its  fruit,  and  the  land 
shall  yield  her  increase."  Often  in  the  olden  time  they  sowed  a  bushel  and  reaped  a 
peck ;  but  this  resulted  from  God's  displeasure.  Now  crops  shall  be  prolific.  The 
barren  hills  shall  smile  with  the  olive  and  the  vine.  The  valleys  shall  be  robed  with 
russet  com.  The  table  of  every  cottager  shall  be  laden  with  plenty.  4.  Seasonable 
tommunications  of  good.  "  I  will  cause  the  shower  to  come  down  in  its  season."  As 
in  most  lands  rain  is  essential  to  fertility,  so  in  Messiah's  kingdom  the  descent  of 
spiritual  influence  is  essential  to  a  fruitful  piety.  The  windows  of  heaven  shall  in  due 
season  open,  and  plentifully  irrigate  the  souls  of  suppIitHits.  Out  of  the  inexhaustible 
storehouse  a  gracious  supply  shall  come.  5.  Unprecedented  blessing  shall  be  given.  "  I 
will  raise  up  for  them  a  plantation  of  renown."  This  seems  to  indicate  some  useful 
product  of  a  most  beneficent  kind — "  a  plantation  "  remarkable,  and  that  shall  bring 
them  high  renown.  Without  question,  gifts  and  graces  have  been  bestowed  upon  men 
in  this  gospel  age  unheard  of  in  former  years ;  and  richer  donations  of  grace  are  yet  in 
•tore.  6.  Honour.  For  long  and  dreary  centuries  they  had  borne  the  reproach  of  the 
heathen.  They  had  been  the  tools  of  rival  kings — the  laughing-stock  of  the  Gentiles. 
Now  this  shall  be  reversed.  In  proportion  to  the  depth  of  their  dishonour  shall  be  the 
height  of  their  exaltation.  Not  false  and  meretricious  honour  shall  they  have,  but 
that  true  honour  which  is  the  fruit  of  rijjhteousness.    7.  Intimate  friendshiji  with  Ood. 


OH.  XXXIV.  1—31.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PEOPHET  EZEKIBL.  221 

Their  knowledge  of  God  shall  be  deep  and  experimental.  They  shall  have  something 
better  than  theoretical  and  e^eculative  knowledge.  They  shall  have  the  full  assure  nc« 
that  God  is  among  them.  They  shall  feel  that  Ood  has  a  proprietorship  in  them,  and 
that  they  have  a  proprietorship  in  God.  God  is  their  God.  "  The  house  of  Israel  8'  e 
my  people,  saith  the  Lord  God."  This  is  supreme  joy,  the  beginning  of  heaven,  wben 
God  dwells  in  vis  and  we  dwell  in  God.    The  union  is  organic,  inseparable. — ^D. 

Vers.  1 — 10. — 2^e  «se  and  He  abuse  of  offlce.  It  is  generally  agreed  that  by  the 
shepherd  of  the  text  we  are  to  understand  primarily  the  kings  and  princes  of  Israel, 
who  should  have  guarded  and  nourished  the  people  of  Israel  with  the  devotedness  with 
which  David  (see  ver.  23)  once  tended  his  people ;  but  the  interpretation  need  not 
exclude  the  "  ecclesiastical "  officers  of  the  land,  those  whose  practice  was  to  teach  and 
warn  the  people — priest  and  Levite  and  prophet.  These  strong  words  of  correction 
will  apply  to  all  those,  of  every  time  and  country,  who  hold  office  and  undertake  public 
trust.    We  gathsr — 

I.  That  we  should  accept  oitiob  with  a  deep  sense  op  besponsibilitt.  Ths 
Hebrew  king  held  office  under  God ;  so  also  did  priest  and  prophet.  And  so  do  we.  1. 
It  is  in  the  providence  of  God  that  we  are  led  to  take  our  position,  whatever  it  may 
be.  2.  It  is  God  who  has  given  us  the  capacity  and  the  advantages  which  have  fitted 
us  for  the  post  we  occupy.  3.  We  are  sacredly  bound  to  do  everything  in  every 
sphere  "  unto  him  "  and  for  the  glory  of  hig^ame.  So  that  the  deepest  desire  as  well 
as  the  uppermost  purpose  of  our  mind  shoim  be  to  do  all  things  which  devolve  upon 
us  as  in  his  eye,  to  his  approval,  in  accordance  with  his  expressed  will,  after  the  manner 
snd  in  the  spirit  of  Christ. 

II.  That  wb  shouiiD  bold  office  with  a  distinct  view  to  faithful  bebvicb. 
Not — ^How  shall  we  please  ?  or.  How  shall  we  rise  ?  but.  How  can  we  serve  f  or,  How  useful 
can  we  prove  to  be  ?  should  be  the  question  on  our  lips  because  in  our  minds.  The  special 
opportunities  presented  to  us  must  necessarily  depend  on  the  particular  post  we  hold. 
But,  whether  it  partake  of  a  more  secular  or  of  a  more  sacred  character,  it  is  not 
unlikely  that  it  will  embrace  the  opportunity  of :  1.  Strengthening  those  that  are  weak 
(ver.  4) ;  offering  a  helping  hand  or  cheering  voice  to  those  that  are  less  skilful  or  less 
experienced  than  ourselves.  2.  Bestoring  those  that  have  failed  or  fallen  (ver.  4) ; 
going  to  those  that  have  made  a  mistake,  or  that  may  have  committed  that  which  is 
worse  than  a  mistake,  and  enabling  them  to  regain  the  confidence  and  the  hope  which 
they  have  lost.  3.  Enlightening  those  who  have  not  been  taught  or  trained ;  "  feeding  " 
them  (ver.  2).  4.  Sustaining  in  comfort,  in  wisdom,  in  hope,  in  gladness  of  heart,  in 
usefulness,  those  who  are  walking  in  their  integrity.  These  services  especially  apply  to 
the  Christian  minister ;  it  is  his  sacred  function,  his  welcome  opportunity,  in  a  peculiar 
sense,  to  do  all  this  in  the  spirit  of  holy,  happy  service ;  thus  following  in  the  footsteps 
of  the  good  Shepherd  himself. 

III.  That  selfish  nbgliqencb  in  office  will  draw  down  the  Divine  dis- 
PLBASUEE.  God's  high  displeasure  is  revealed  against  the  kings  and  princes  of  Israel, 
who  only  sought  their  own  honour  and  enrichment  (see  vers.  2,  7 — 10).  And  those 
who  profess  to  teach  and  to  guide  in  the  name  of  his  Son,  the  chief  Shepherd  of  the 
Church,  and  who  use  their  office  not  to  feed,  or  guard,  or  save  the  flock,  but  to  care  for 
their  own  comfort  and  seek  their  own  pleasure, — how  shall  they  escape  the  judgment 
of  God  (see  ch.  xxxiii.  1 — 8)  1    On  the  other  hand,  we  may  confidently  reckon — 

IV.  That  the  devotedness  of  love  will  meet  with  a  laege  kbwaed.  They 
who  seek  the  wandering,  who  strengthen  the  weak,  who  sustain  the  whole  and 
healthful  in  their  integrity ;  they  who  pray  earnestly,  and  watch  vigilantly,  and  work 
diligently,  and,  when  the  hour  comes,  strike  manfully,  shall  in  no  wise  lose  their 
reward. — C. 

Vers.  11, 12. — God's  interest  in  men.  We  learn  of  the  interest  God  takes  in  na  that 
he  is — 

I.  Unaffected  by  oub  social  distinctions.  The  great  ones  of  the  land  regarded 
those  who  were  at  the  bottom  of  society  as  beneath  their  consideration.  What 
mattered  it  if  they  lived  in  privation  and  in  ignorance,  so  long  as  the  royal  palace,  so 
long  as  the  costly  castle,  was  well  furnished  ?    But  this  distinction  between  the  worth 


222  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PEOPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxxiv.  1— 3L 

of  men  on  the  ground  of  Bocial  rank  or  of  circumstance  finds  no  place  at  all  in  the 
mind  and  heart  of  God.  He  cares  for  men  as  they  are ;  possessed  as  they  are  with  a 
nature  that  is  capable  of  great  things^great  sufferings,  sorrows,  degradation,  iniquities, 
on  the  one  hand,  and  great  joys,  hopes,  nobilities,  achievements,  on  the  other  hand. 
Not  where  we  stand  or  what  we  hold,  but  what  we  are  and  what  we  may  become,  is  tho 
Divine  consideration. 

II.  Deawn  towaeds  the  neoleotbd.  It  is  the  guilty  neglect  of  the  flock  by  the 
selfish  ihepherds  that  drives  the  sheep  to  the  notice  of  the  Divine  Shepherd,  and  that 
draws  out  his  pitiful  pastoral  affection  (vers.  8 — 11).  And  we  may  infer  that  the 
neglected,  because  they  are  such,  are  the  objects  of  the  Divine  sympathy.  The 
neglected  child  in  the  home,  member  of  the  Church,  pupil  in  the  school,  student  or 
toiler  in  the  world  of  art  and  industry,  citizen  in  social  circle  or  the  broader  sphere  of 
the  nation,  is  the  object  of  the  pitiful  regard  of  One  who  never  overlooks,  who  under- 
gtands  how  that  heart  feels  which  is  wounded  by  the  disregard  of  men,  who  "  lifteth 
up  the  meek,"  who  "  hath  respect  unto  the  lowly." 

III.  CoNOEENBD  FOB  THE  LOST  AND  soATTEBBD.  Those  who  are  far  away  from  Zion 
and  from  all  its  sacred  and  hallowing  influences  are  still  "my  sheep"  (ver.  11);  and 
the  strain  of  the  twelfth  verse  is  one  of  tender  sympathy  and  earnest  solicitude  for 
those  who  "  in  the  day  of  clouds  and  thick  darkness  "  have  been  "  scattered  on  the  wild." 
We  have  wandered  away  from  the  home  of  the  Father;  some  of  us  into  a  very  "far 
country;"  it  may  be  that  of  almost  entire  forgetfulness ;  or  of  an  utter  shameles* 
indifference ;  or  of  a  deliberate  disobedience  of  his  known  will ;  or  of  an  absolute  denial 
of  his  existence ;  or  of  a  wanton  endeavour  to  corrupt  and  destroy  the  character  of  his 
chUdren.  And  yet,  however  far  we  have  gone  astray,  in  all  the  emptiness  and  spiritual 
poverty  of  our  distance  from  home,  in  all  our  misery  and  aching  of  heart,  in  all  our 
hopelessness,  our  Divine  Father  follows  us  and  pities  us;  his  heart  is  filled  with  • 
parental  solicitude  for  us. 

"  For  though  deceived  and  led  astray. 

We've  travelled  far  and  wandered  long. 
Our  God  hath  seen  us  all  the  way. 
And  all  the  turns  that  led  us  wrong." 

IV.  AonvBLT  ENGAGED  IN  THEiB  KBDBMPTioN.  "  I  Will  Seek  out  my  sheep,  and 
deliver  them."  1.  The  restoration  of  the  exiled  Jews  may  be  one  part  of  the  fulfilment 
of  this  promise.  2.  The  coming  of  the  Son  of  man  "  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was 
lost "  was  a  later  and  better  fulfilment.  And  we  find  a  further,  a  perpetual  Divine 
redemption  of  this  ancient  word  of  promise  in :  3.  The  putting  forth  by  the  Church  of 
Christ  of  all  its  redeeming  energies.  Whenever  and  however  any  one  that,  filled  with 
the  spirit  of  his  Saviour,  seeks  to  raise  the  fallen,  to  bring  back  to  truth  and  piety 
those  that  have  gone  away  in  the  darkness,  to  heal  the  stricken  and  suffering  spirit  and 
to  enrobe  it  with  "  the  garment  of  praise,"  there  God  is  himself  "  searching  out  his 
sheep,"  and  "  delivering  them  from  the  places  whither  they  have  wandered."  How 
excellent  is  the  portion  of  those  who  are  his  agents  in  this  gracious  work  I — 0. 

Ver.  14. — The  mountain-height  of  Israel — moral  and  spirituai  elevation.  "  I  will 
feed  them  "  upon  the  mountains  of  the  height  of  Israel "  (literally,  see  Bevised  Version ; 
see  also  ch.  xvii.  23  and  xx.  40) ;  i.e.  upon  the  mountain-height  of  Israel ;  and  the 
reference  is  to^ 

I.  The  exobllenot  of  Israel  in  the  sight  of  God.  The  neglected  and  scattered 
sheep  that  had  been  untaught  or  misdirected  by  their  rulers  should  be  oared  for  by  the 
Lord  himself;  they  should  be  placed  on  the  very  summit  of  sacred  privilege,  thoy 
should  be  sheep  feeding  on  the  mountain-heights  of  the  Holy  Land.  Mount  Zion  was 
"  the  holy  mountain"  (ch.  xx.  40),  where  the  best  spiritual  pasture  was  to  be  had  for 
the  hungering  heart  of  the  devout  Hebrew ;  but  "  everything  in  Israel  had  a  moral 
elevation."  At  any  rate,  Israel  in  its  best  days,  under  David,  Solomon,  Jehoshaphat, 
Uzziah,  Hezekiah,  Josiah,  attained  to  an  elevation  of  knowledge  and  of  character 
which  was  comparatively  great  and  high.  Its  superiority  to  all  surrounding  nations 
was  seen  in :  1.  Its  knowMlge  of  the  living  Ood,  While  they  were  worshipping  godi 
of  their  own  creation — false,  capricious,  cruel,  lustful — the  people  of  Qod  were  honour- 


OH.  XXXIV.  1—31.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PEOPHET  EZEKIEL.  223 

ing  One  wha  was  just,  holy,  kind,  true,  faithful ;  one  who  was  worthy  the  deepest 
reverence,  the  fullest  trust,  the  strongest  affection  that  the  human-  soul  could  offer ; 
One  whose  service  constituted  the  most  lofty  enjoyment  and  exerted  the  most  elevat- 
ing influence  on  the  minds  and  lives  of  his  worshippers.  2.  Its  morality.  There  are 
many  passages  in  Scripture  condemning  immoralities  among  the  Jews,  and  there  wore 
periods  when  Hebrew  morality  declined.  In  the  time  of  our  Lord  it  had  sunk  with 
the  sinking  of  religion  into  formality  and  routine.  Tet  an  historical  comparisoa 
between  the  morale  of  the  Jewish  nalion  and  that  of  all  contemporary  peoples  would 
show  that  the  children  of  Israel,  in  any  period  of  their  history,  towered  high  and  far 
above  their  neighbours.  Comparatively  speaking,  they  were  true,  and  pure,  and 
temperate,  and  just.  To  be  taught  and  trained  as  was  the  Hebrew  child  in  his  home 
and  in  his  school  and  in  the  sanctuary  of  God,  was  to  ascend  and  to  move  along  the 
"  mountain-height  of  Israel."  The  very  best  and  the  saintliest  men  of  Israel,  whose 
names  are  held  in  highest  honour  by  the  good  and  pure  of  every  laud,  were  the 
mountain-peaks  that  did  not  rise  straight  and  lonely  from  the  deep  valleys ;  they  rose 
from  the  high  elevation,  the  mountain-ranges  of  general  national  piety  and  purity. 
The  idea  is  far  more  perfectly  realized^  and  the  prophecy  finds  its  complete  fulfil- 
ment in — 

II.  The  hiqheb  excellency  of  tee  CHimcH  of  Chbist.  Here  we  stand  on  loftier 
ground.  We  have :  1.  A  still  loftier  conception  of  the  chwracter  and  the  wUl  of  Ood. 
Learning  of  Jesus  Christ,  knowing  God  as  revealed  to  us  in  him,  we  recognize  a 
Divine  Father,  grieved  with  his  children's  sin  and  departure  from  himself;  yearning 
over  them  in  their  distance  and  their  misery ;  seeking  at  his  own  infinite  cost  to  save 
them ;  engaged  through  the  centuries  in  the  gracious  and  glorious  work  of  redeeming 
the  human  race  to  holiness  and  happiness,  to  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  2.  A  tlHtl  higher 
morality.  Sitting  at  the  feet  of  the  great  Teacher,  following  in  the  steps  of  the  Divine 
Exemplar,  restrained  and  constrained  by  the  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  we 
rise  to  and  walk  along  the  lofty  mountain-range  of  Christian  morals,  breathing  a 
Christian  atmosphere,  engaged  with  our  Lord  and  Leader  in  his  great  wojk  of  grace  and 
truth.  With  Christ's  own  truth  in  our  mind,  with  his  example  before  our  eyes,  with 
his  Spirit  willing  to  dwell  within  and  to  inspire  all  that  seek  his  presence  and  his 
power,  (1)  how  utterly  unworthy  of  us  is  everything  small  and  mean  in  feeling  and  in 
action  1  (2)  how  it  becomes  us  to  take  a  high  and  noble  course,  to  speak  in  an  elevated 
■train,  to  breath  a  pure  and  bracing  air,  to  do  lofty  and  magnanimous  deeds,  as  we 
move  up  the  mountain-path  to  the  heavenly  places  I — 0. 

Vers.  17 — 22. — Z%e  sinfulness  of  selfishness.  It  was  not  only  the  shepherds,  but 
■ome  of  the  sheep,  of  "the  rams  and  the  he-goats,"  that  were  injuring  and  robbing  the 
sheep.  It  was  not  only  the  kings  and  the  princes,  but  the  strong  and  wealthy  among 
the  people  of  Israel,  that  were  disturbing  and  distressing  the  land.  It  is  not  only  those 
"  who  have  the  rule  over  "  the  Churches  of  Christ,  but  some  of  the  fellow-members,  who 
have  to  be  corrected,  and  whose  conduct  needs  to  be  transformed.  Bzekiel's  vision  was 
that  of  a  fiuck  of  sheep  seeking  nourishment  "  in  the  green  pastvu°es  and  by  the  still 
waters "  of  Israel ;  but  instead  of  each  one  taking  its  turn  and  making  room  for  its 
fellow,  he  saw  the  strong  ones  eating  and  drinking  themselves,  and  befouling  the  grass 
and  the  water  for  those  who  came  after,  or  else  pushing  violently  at  the  weaker  ones 
and  driving  them  away,  "  scattering  them  abroad  "  to  pine  and  to  perish,  for  anything 
they  cared.  A  painful  picture  of  a  selfish  society,  each  man  struggling  for  himself,  and 
"the  weaker  going  to  the  wall."  How  utterly  unlike  should  this  scene  be  to  any 
oomnmnity  that  claims  to  be  Christian!  And  yet  shall  we  venture  to  say  that  there 
are  no  societies  that  bear  that  name,  and  that  write  themselves  among  the  number  of 
the  good,  to  whose  condition  this  prophet's  picture  bears  a  sad  resemblance?  Do  we 
not  see  in  countries  and  communities  where  nothing  like  this  should  be  seen,  a  selfish 
■cramble,  a  disregard  for  the  claims  and  the  necessities  of  others,  a  cruel  indifference  to 
the  wants  of  the  weaker,  a  willingness  and  an  eagerness,  and  indeed  a  determined 
(truggle,  to  be  well  pastured  and  well  watered,  however  many  there  may  be  that  are 
perishing  for  lack  of  food  and  shelter  ?    We  may  well  dwell  upon — 

L  Its  unlovelihebs.  Even  to  the  eye  of  the  loving  and  tender-hearted  man  such 
nnrelievsd  selfishness  is  offensive ;  it  is  unsightly  and  repellent  in  a  high  degree.    How 


224  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxxiv.  1— 31. 

utterly  uubeautiful  must  it,  then,  seem  in  the  sight  of  him  who  is  Love  itself!  Surely 
it  is  one  of  those  things  which  be  is  "  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold,"  which  he  "  cannot 
look  upon  "  save  with  profound  aversion. 

II.  Its  HBAETLES8NESS  AND  DEMOKALIZING  EFFECT  tTPON  THE  AGENTS  OP  IT.     It  argUes 

k  pitiful  inconsiderateness  of  other  people's  need,  a  guilty  indifference  to  the  wants  and 
Bufferings  of  other  souls.  And  such  cruel  carelessness  as  this  is  not  only  a  great  and 
sad  evil  in  itself,  a  sin  and  a  wrong  in  itself;  it  is  a  hardening,  mischief-working  course. 
It  indurates  the  soul,  and  leads  down  to  such  an  immoral  condition  that  at  last  a  man's 
own  personal  comfort  and  enlargement  are  everything  to  him,  and  the  wants  and  woes 
of  his  brethren  and  sisters  nothing. 

III.  Its  tTTTEK  un-Ghbistlikeness.  Can  anything  be  more  painfully  and  com- 
pletely unlike  the  spirit  and  the  conduct  of  Jesus  Christ  than  a  selfish  struggle  for  the 
first  place,  let  who  will  go  hungry  and  thirsty  and  be  driven  away  ?  Anything  more 
diametrically  opposed  to  the  spirit  and  contrary  to  the  will  of  that  "  Son  of  man  who 
came  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to  minister,  and  to  give  his  life  a  ransom  for 
many,"  it  would  be  difBcult  to  discover. 

rV.  Its  condemnation  and  its  doom.  "  I  will  judge  between  the  fat  cattle  and 
the  lean "  (ver.  20).  The  day  will  come  when  we  shall  give  account  of  the  use  we 
have  made  of  our  power.  And  if  then  it  be  found  that  we  have  used  our  horns  (ver.  21) 
to  thrust  aside  our  brother  from  the  good  he  was  seeking,  in  order  that  we  might  enjoy 
it;  that  we  have  not  used  our  power  to  help  the  needy,  to  strengthen  the  weak,  to 
give  drink  unto  the  thirsty,  to  raise  them  that  are  bowed  down,  we  may  expect  the 
language  of  condemnation  from  the  Judge  of  quick  and  dead  (see  Matt,  zxv,  41 — 
46).— C. 

Vers.  23,  24. — One  greater  than  David.  Certainly  this  prophecy  finds  its  fulfilment 
In  the  coming  of  the  Messiah.  He  was  to  be  the  "great  Shepherd,"  the  "chief 
Shepherd,"  the  "  good  Shepherd  "  of  the  sheep.  He  was  to,  be  to  the  people  of  God 
all,  and  very  much  more  than  all,  that  David  had  been  in  his  time.  We  have  thus 
before  us  the  persons  and  the  work  of  David  and  of  his  "  greater  Son."  The  Son  of 
David  excelled  his  human  prototype  in — 

I.  The  good  pleasube  he  gave  to  the  Fatheb.  David  was  a  man  of  Gkni's  own 
choice,  was  "  the  man  after  his  own  heart."  But  there  were  times  when  God's  pleasure 
in  him  was  withdrawn ;  one  time  when  "  the  thing  that  David  had  done  displeased 
the  Lord,"  and  that  in  no  slight  degree.  But  there  never  was  an  hour  in  the  life  of 
Jesus  Christ  when  he  was  not  the  "beloved  Son,  in  whom  the  Father  was  well 


II.  The  completeness  of  his  chabaotbb.  David's  character,  all  things  considered, 
was  a  very  fine  one ;  he  was  a  man  we  can  admire.  He  was  brave,  generous,  affec- 
tionate, devout ;  he  loved  the  people  over  whom  he  reigned,  and  strove  to  serve  them 
well.  But  there  were  grave  defects  in  his  character,  showing  themselves  occasionally 
in  serious  mistakes  or  positive  transgressions.  But  the  David  of  Ezekiel's  prophecy 
was  One  whose  character  lacked  nothing  whatever.  Each  one  of  his  attributes  was 
complemented  and  completed  by  its  opposite — gentleness  by  holiness,  sensitiveness  by 
firmness,  piety  by  activity,  etc.  Once,  as  it  has  been  well  said,  and  only  once,  the 
plant  of  our  humanity  bore  a  perfect  flower,  and  that  was  when  Jesus  was  bom  in 
Bethlehem.  In  him  all  the  elements  that  go  to  make  up  an  absolutely  perfect 
human  character  met  and  blended.  He  was  the  Son  of  man,  "  perfect  and  entire, 
wanting  nothing."  "  He  was  holy,  harmless,  undefiled ; "  "  and  in  him  was  no  sin ; " 
"  in  his  mouth  no  guile  was  found." 

III.  The  gee  at  woek  he  wbottght.  David  did  a  very  good  work.  He  welded 
the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel  into  one  strong  nation;  he  defeated  and  drove  away  his 
country's  enemies ;  he  extended  the  borders  of  the  land  and  made  Jerusalem  a  praise 
and  Judah  a  power  in  the  earth;  he  bound  the  people  in  strong  bonds  to  the  worship 
and  service  of  Jehovah ;  he  wrought  for  the  intelligence  and  the  morality  of  the 
people.  That  was  much;  but  a  large  part  of  it  was  soon  undone  by  unwise  oi 
unworthy  successors;  the  kingdom  he  formed  and  strengthened  was  soon  cleft  in 
twain,  and  before  very  long  it  was  dissolved.  How  incomparably  greater  is  the  work 
that  Jesus  wrought  I    1.  He  spoke  that  truth  concerning  God  and  man  and  human  lift 


ou.  XXXV.  1—15.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  EZEKIEL. 


225 


and  character  which,  the  world  will  always  want  to  learn.  2.  He  lived  that  life  of 
love  and  purity,  of  blamelessness  and  beauty,  of  piety  and  sweetaess,  in  which  the 
world  will  always  find  its  one  faultless  instance.  3.  He  endured  those  sorrows  and 
died  that  death  which  constitute  the  world's  redemption.  4.  He  left  behind  him  k 
message  of  mercy,  an  invitation  to  eternal  life  which  is  the  world's  great  hope  and 
heritage.  It  is  in  his  gospel  that  the  real  fulfilment  of  the  prophet's  promises  are  to 
be  found  (vers.  25 — 30). 

lY.  His  febsokal  belation  to  mankind.  David  is  a  very  interesting  historical 
character,  whose  life  we  like  to  study  j  and  we  are  thankful  for  the  privilege  of  reading 
and  singing  his  imperishable  psalms.  But  Jesus  Christ,  apart  from  the  truth  he 
spoke  and  the  example  he  left  us,  is  himself  the  Divine  Saviour  in  whom  we  trust, 
the  Divine  Friend  we  love,  the  Divine  Lord  we  live  to  serve. — 0. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXXV. 


Ver.  1. — moreover  the  word  of  the  Lord 
came  unto  m6,  saying.  As  no  date  is  given, 
the  present  oracle,  extending  to  the  close 
of  eh.  xxxvi.  1^,  may  be  assumed  to  have 
beeu  communicated  to  and  delivered  by 
the  prophet  in  immediate  succession  to  the 
foregoing,  with  which  it  has  also  an  intimate 
connection.  Having  announced  the  future 
restoration  of  Israel,  as  Jehovah's  flock,  to 
her  own  land  under  the  leadership  of 
Jehovah's  servant  David,  who  should  feed 
them  like  a  shepherd  and  rule  them  like  a 
prince  (ch.  xxxiv.  13,  23,  2i),  the  prophet 
proceeds  to  contemplate  the  existing  hin- 
drance to  this  return  in  the  occupation  of 
Palestine  by  the  Edomites,  who  had  pro- 
bably been  allowed  by  the  Chaldeans  to 
take  possession  of  it  in  payment  of  services 
rendered  by  them  against  Judah  in  the 
Biege  of  Jerusalem — to  predict  the  entire 
removal  of  this  hindrance  (vers.  1 — 15),  and 
to  administer  to  Israel  the  comfort  which, 
M  a  consequence,  would  ensue  (oh.  xxxvi. 
1—15). 

Ver.  2.— Set  thy  face  against  Mount  Seir, 
The  mountainous  region  between  the  Dead 
Sea  and  the  Blanitic  Gulf,  which  formed 
the  original  settlement  of  Esau  and  his 
descendants  (Gen.  xxxvi.  9),  is  here  put  for 
the  land  of  Edom,  as  the  land  in  turn 
stands  for  its  people  (oh.  xxv.  8).  Although 
already  the  prophet  has  pronounced  a 
threatening  doom  against  Edom  (ch.  xxV. 
12 — 14),  he  once  more  directs  against  it 
the  judgments  of  Heaven,  on  this  occasion 
viewing  it  as  the  representative  of  all  those 
hostile  world-powers  which  from  the  first 
had  been  opposed  to  Israel  as  the  theocratic 
nation,  and  which  even  then,  by  their 
antagonism,  hindered  her  return  (of.  Isa. 
Ixiii.  1—8). 

Ver.  8.— Behold,   0  Hount   Seir,  I  am 
against  thee  (of.  ch.  v.  8;  xiii.  8;  and  con- 
trast oh.  xxxvi.  9),  and  I  will  stretch  out 
mine  hand  against  thee  (of.  oh.  vi.  11; 
BZEEI£L — n. 


xiv.  9,  13;  xxv.  7,  13;  and  Exod.  vii  6), 
and  I  will  make  thee  most  desolate;  lite- 
rally, a  desolation  and  cm  astonishment  (cf. 
ver.  7).  Against  the  mountains  of  Israel 
had  been  denounced  a  similar  fate,  which 
the  idolatrous  remnant  that  lingered  in  the 
land  after  the  Captivity  had  commenced 
began  to  experience  (oh.  xxxiii.  28,  29). 
The  doom,  however,  connected  with  the 
day  of  Israel's  return  was  to  fall  upon 
Edom,  whose  cities  should  be  emptied  of 
their  inhabitants  and  whose  fields  should 
be  cursed  with  barrenness  (oh.  xxv.  13; 
Obad.  8, 10). 

Ver.  4.— They  shall  know  that  I  am 
Jehovah.  By  this  expressive  formula 
Ezekiel  intimates  the  moral  effect  whicli 
should  be  produced  upon  the  nations  of  the 
earth,  whether  by  beholding  or  by  experi- 
encing the  Divine  judgments  (oh.  vi.  7,  13 ; 
vii.  4,  9 ;  xi.  10,  12 ;  xiii.  9, 14,  21,  23 ;  xiv. 
8 ;  XV.  7,  et  passim ;  of.  Exod.  vi.  7 ;  vii.  5, 
17;  xxix.  4B;  xxxi.  13;  all  of  which  pas- 
sages belong  to  Wellhausen's  grundsehri/t, 
wmch  it  is  supposed  had  no  existence  in 
the  time  of  Ezekiel). 

Ver.  5. — Because  thou  hast  had  a  per- 
petual hatred;  literally,  hatred  of  old,  or 
eternal  enmity  (cf.  ch.  xxv.  15).  This  was 
the  first  of  the  two  specific  grounds  upon 
which  Edom  should  feel  the  stroke  of 
Divine  vengeance.  Edom  had  been  Israel's 
hereditary  foe  from  the  days  of  Esau  and 
Jacob  (Gen.  xxv.  22,  sqq. ;  and  xxvii.  37) 
downwards.  Inspired  with  unappeasable 
wrath  (Amos  i.  11),  during  the  period  of 
the  wandering  he  had  refused  Israel,  "  his 
brother,"  a  passage  through  his  territory 
(Numb.  XX.  14—21 ;  Judg.  xi.  17),  and  in 
the  daysof  Jehoshaphathad  combined  with 
Ammon  and  Moab  to  invade  Judah  (2 
Chron.  xx.  10,  11;  cf.  Ps.  Ixxxiii.  1—8). 
His  relentless  antipathy  to  Israel  culmi- 
nated, according  to  Ezekiel  (cf.  Obad.  13), 
in  the  last  days  of  Jerusalem,  in  the  time 
of  her  calamity,  when  Nebuchadnezzar'g 
armies  encompassed  her  walls,  in  the  time 


226 


THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PROPHET  EZEKIBL.    [ch.  xxxv.  1—15. 


that  her  miqmty  had  an  end ;  or,  in  the  time 
of  the  iniquity  of  the  end  (Revised  Version) ; 
meaning,  according  to  Keil,  "the  time  of 
Judah's  final  transgression ;  "  or,  according 
to  Dr.  Currey,  in  the  '  Speaker's  Commen- 
tary,' the  time  when  the  capture  of  the  city 
put  an  end  to  h^r  iniquity  ;  but,  with  more 
probability,  according  to  Hengsteuberg, 
Piumptre,  and  others,  the  time  of  that 
iniquity  which  brought  on  her  end  (oomp.  oh. 
xxi.  29).  Gwald  translates,  "  at  the  time  of 
her  extremest  punishment,"  taking  avon  in 
the  sense  of  punishment — a  rendering  the 
Bevisers  have  placed  in  the  margin.  Then, 
according  to  Obadiah  (vers.  11 — 14),  the 
Edomites  had  not  only  stood  coolly  by,  but 
malevolently  exulted  wlien  tfiey  beheld 
Jerusalem  besieged  by  the  Babylonian 
warriors;  and  not  only  joined  with  the 
foreign  invaders  in  the  sacking  of  the  city, 
bat  occupied  its  gates  and  guarded  the 
roads  leading  into  tlie  country,  so  as  to 
prevent  the  escape  of  any  of  the  wretched 
inhabitants,  and  even  hewed  down  with  the 
sword  such  fugitives  as  they  were  not  able 
to  save  alive  and  deliver  up  to  captivity. 
To  this  Ezekiel  refers  when  he  accuses 
Edom  of  having  shed  the  blood  of  the 
children  of  Israel  by  the  force  of  the  sword ; 
literally,  of  having  poitred  the  children  of 
Israel  upon  the  hands  of  the  sword  ;  i.e.  of 
having  delivered  them  up  to  the  sword  (of. 
Ps.  Ixiii.  11 ;  Jer.  xviii.  21). 

Ver.  6. — I  will  prepare  thee  unto  blood. 
This  peculiar  expression  was  probably 
selected  because  of  the  suggestion  of  the 
name  Edom  ("  red  ")  contained  in  the  term 
dam  ("blood") — though  Smend  doubts 
this — and  designed  to  intimate  that  Edom's 
name  would  eventually  be  verified  in 
Edom's  &te.  And  blood  shall  pursue  thee. 
"As  blood-guiltiness  invariably  pursues  a 
murderer,  cries  for  vengeance,  and  delivers 
him  up  to  punishment "  (Havemick),  so 
should  blood  follow  in  the  steps  of  Edom, 
The  translation  of  Ewald,  who  reads  '^V?? 
instead  of  ''I^JJN,  "And  because  thy  incli- 
nation is  after  blood,  therefore  blood  shall 
pursue  thee,"  is  hardly  an  improvement, 
and  is  besides  unnecessary.  Sith  thou  hast 
not  hated  blood.  So  render  Ewald,  Keil, 
Kliefoth,  JBtavernick,  Schroder,  Piumptre, 
and  the  Bevised  Version,  meaning  that 
Edom  had  loved  bloodshed.  Kimohi,  Hit- 
zig,  Hengsteuberg,  Smend,  and  Fairbairn 
regard  n'?-dk  as  a  particle  of  strong  afSr- 
mation,  equivalent  to  "forsooth,"  "verily," 
and  understand  the  prophet  to  say  that 
Eilom  had  hated  blood.  As  to  the  precise 
import  of  this  rendering,  diversity  of  senti- 
ment prevails.  Some,  with  Theodoret, 
explain  "blood"  as  an  allusion  to  the 
hluod-relationship    of    Esau    and    Jacob, 


Edom  and  Israel,  and  hold  the  charge  to  be 
that  Edom  had  hated  his  "brother"  Israel. 
Others,  with  Hengsteuberg,  take  the  blood 
Edom  hated  to  be  the  blood  he  had  shed. 
Hitzig  and  Fairbairn  suppose  the  sense  to 
be  that  Edom  hated  the  idea  of  his  own 
blood  being  shed.  Even — better,  therefore 
(Bevised  Version) — blood  shall  pursue  thee. 
A  parallel  to  this  expression  is  supplied  by 
Dent,  xxviii.  22,  45.  According  to  the 
first  or  commonly  accepted  exposition  of 
the  preceding  clause,  the  sense  is  that 
Edom  would  ultimately  fall  beneath  the 
great  law  of  retribution,  and  reap  as  she  had 
sown — blood  for  blood;  according  to  the 
second,  the  allusion  is  to  the  fact  that  wbat 
Edom  now  most  dreaded,  the  shedding  of 
his  own  blood,  would  be  that  which  should 
ultimately  overtake  him  (of.  ch.  zi.  8 ;  Job 
iii.  25). 

Ver.  7. — Thus  will  I  make  Uount  Seir 
most  desolate ;  literally,  desolation  and  a 
desolation  (nQDB'i  n^P^;  or,  as  in  the  Bevised 
Version,  an  astonishment  and  a  desolation} 
changing  nna^  into  npwD,  for  which,  how- 
ever, there  is  no  suCBcient  warrant.  And  I 
will  cut  off  .  .  .  him  that  passeth  out  (or, 
through)  and  him  that  retometh.  No  more 
should  traders  or  travellers  pass  through 
the  land  of  Edom  or  go  to  and  return  from 
it  (of.  ch.  xxxiii.  28 ;  Zech.  vii.  14 ;  ix.  8, 
10). 

Ver.  8. — And  I  will  fill  his  mountains 
with  his  slain;  literally,  pierced  through; 
hence  mortally  wounded.  Then  Edom's 
desolation  would  result  from  an  exterminat- 
ing war,  which  should  fill  its  hills,  valleys, 
and  rivers,  or  rather,  water-courses,  with 
slaughtered  men  (of.  ch,  xxxi.  12 ;  xxxii.  5). 
The  physical  features  of  Edom  here  speci- 
fied by  the  prophet  have  often  been  attested 
by  travellers.  "  Idumea  embraces  a  section 
of  a  broad  monntain  range,  extending  in 
breadth  from  the  valley  of  the  Arabah  to 
the  desert  plateau  of  Arabia.  . . .  The  ravines 
which  intersect  these  sandstone  mountains 
are  very  remarkable.  Take  them  as  a 
whole,  there  is  nothing  like  them  in  the- 
world,  especially  those  near  Petra.  .  . .  The 
deep  valleys  and  the  little  terraces  along 
the  mountain-sides,  and  the  broad  downs 
upon  their  summits,  are  covered  with  rich 
soil,  in  which  trees,  shrubs,  and  flowers 
grow  luxuriantly"  (Porter,  in  Kitto's 
' Oyclopiedia,'  art.  "Idumea"). 

Ver.  9. — Thy  cities  shall  not  return,  as  in 
ch.  xvi.  55  (Authorized  Version  after  the 
Keri);  or,  shall  not  be  inhabited,  as  in  oh. 
xxvi.  20 ;  xxix.  11 ;  xxxvi.  33  (LXX.  and 
Bevised  Version,  both  of  which  follow  the 
Chethib).  Hengstenberg's  translation, "  Thy 
cities  shall  not  sit,"  but  lie  prostrate,  is  not 
extremely  happy. 


CH.  XXXV.  1—15.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET   EZEKIEL. 


227 


Ver.  10. — Because  thou  hast  said.  The 
second  ground  of  Edom's  punishment  lay  in 
this,  that  she  had  presumptuously  as  well 
as  confidently  exclaimed,  not  concerning 
Idumea  and  Judah,  as  Jerome  conjecture(^ 
but  concerning  Israel  and  Judah  when 
she  saw  them  stripped  of  their  inhabitants. 
These  two  nations  and  these  two  countries 
ihall  be  mine,  and  we  wiU  possess  it ;  "  it " 
meaning  either  the  region  over  which  the 
two  countries  extended,  or,  as  Schroder 
suggests,  Jerusalem  their  common  capital 
(see  oh.  xxxvi.  2 ;  and  comp.  Ps.  Ixxziii 
4 — 12).  And  what  constituted  the  grava- 
men of  Edom's  offence  waa  that  she  had  so 
spoken,  whereas  (or,  thcmgh)  the  Lord  was 
there.  It  is  not  necessary,  with  the  LXX. 
and  Kliefoth,  to  read  "  is  there,"  to  guard 
against  the  supposition  that  Ezekiel  de- 
signed to  suggest  that,  though  Jehovah  had 
formerly  been  in  the  land,  he  was  there  no 
longer.  But,  in  point  of  fact,  Jehovah  liad 
for  a  time  withdrawn  his  visible  presence 
from  the  temple  and  the  city  (see  ch.  z.  18 ; 
xi.  22,  23),  though  he  had  by  no  means 
renounced  his  right  to  the  land ;  and  Edom's 
error  lay  in  not  regarding  this,  but  in  acting 
as  if  Jehovah  had  departed  from  Israel  for 
ever  (Havemick);  or  (better,  "and")  in 
tliinking  he  could  appropriate  to  himself 
what  really  belonged  to  Jehovah,  viz.  the 
territory  out  of  which  Israel  and  Judah  had 
been  oast  (Hengstenberg). 

Vers.  11 — 13. — I  will  make  myself  known 
among  them — Israel  and  Judah  ;  not  to  thee 
(LXX.,  Hitzig,  Bwald)— when  I  have 
judged  thee.  Edom's  wickedness  should  be 
requited  by  his  being  made  to  suffer  the 
indignities  he  designed  to  heap  on  Israel. 
In  him  the  lex  talumii  should  have  fuU 
sway.  Edom's  misconception  as  to  J  ehovah's 
relation  to  the  land  and  people  should  be 
coriected  when  Jehovah  should  rise  up  in 
judgment  against  him.  Those  judgments 
should  in  the  first  instance  be  a  revelation 
to  Israel  and  Judah,  who  should  discern 
therefrom  that  they  had  not  been  utterly 
abandoned  by  Jehovah  (ver.  11;  of.  ch.  xx. 
5) ;  and  in  the  second  instance  should  open 
Edom'i  eyes  to  perceive  that  Jehovah  had 
been  a  silent  listener  to  all  the  blasphemies 
she  had  uttered  against  the  mountains  of 


Israel  (ver.  12),  and  had  reckoned  these  as 
blasphemies  uttered  against  himself  (ver. 
13). 

Ver.  14. — When  the  whole  earth  r^oioeth, 
I  will  make  thee  desolate.  By  "  the  whole 
earth,"  Pairbairn,  Havemick,  and  Schroder 
understand  "  the  whole  land  of  Edom."  In 
this  case  the  sense  is  that,  as  the  whole  land 
of  Edom  had  previously  exulted  with  joy, 
so  should  it  in  the  future  be  made  com- 
pletely desolate.  Ewald,  Hengstenberg, 
Eeil,  Kliefoth,  Smend,  and  Plumptre,'  how- 
ever, more  correctly  interpret  the  phrase  oa 
signifying  the  whole  human  race,  with  the 
exception  of  Edom.  Accordingly,  the  thought 
seems  to  be,  not  that  of  Ewald  and  Smend, 
that  Jehovah  would  make  Edom's  devastation 
a  sport  or  comedy  (freudespieT)  to  the  whole 
world ;  or  that  of  Kliefoth  and  Hitzig,  that 
Gk)d  would  make  Edom  desolate,  wMlst  all 
the  earth  rejoiced  over  her  downfall;  but 
that  of  Keil,  Plumptre,  and  others,  that  just 
as  Jehovah  was  preparing  for  the  whole 
earth  of  redeemed  humanity  a  glorious 
future  of  joy,  so  certainly  would  Edom  and 
all  whom  Edom  represented  be  excluded 
from  participation  in  that  joy. 

Ver.  15. — ^As  thou  didst  rejoice,  o  ia 
here  a  particle  of  comparison ;  and  the 
import  of  the  passage  is  that  precisely  as 
Edom  exulted  over  the  desolation  of  Israel's 
inheritance,  so  would  Jehovah  cause  others 
to  rejoice  over  the  downfall  and  desolation 
of  Edom.  All  Idumea.  Instead  of  this 
Greek  term,  the  Revised  Version  properly 
substitutes  the  usual  word  Edom.  Note : 
Tliat  the  prediction  here  uttered  concern- 
ing Edom  received  literal  fulfilment,  the 
following  extract  relative  to  the  present 
state  of  the  country  will  show :  "  Idumea, 
once  so  rich  in  flocks,  so  strong  in  its 
fortresses  and  rock-hewn  cities,  so  extensive 
in  its  commercial  relations,  so  renowned  for 
the  architectural  splendour  of  its  palaces,  is 
now  a  deserted  and  desolate  wilderness. 
Its  whole  population  is  contained  in 
some  three  or  four  miserable  villages.  No 
merchant  would  now  dare  to  enter  its 
borders;  its  highways  are  untrodden,  its 
cities  are  all  in  ruins"  (J.  L.  Porter,  in 
Eitto'i  '  Oyclop»dia,'  art.  "  Idumea  "). 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — i, — 7%e  desolation  of  Mount  Seir.  I.  An  AFTHB-THOtroHT  or  judqment. 
This  is  a  distressing  and  disappointing  passage.  We  seemed  to  have  done  with  the 
weary  recital  of  successive  judgments  against  the  several  heathen  nations.  Passing 
from  these  painful  scenes,  we  had  come  to  the  cheerful  picture  of  the  restoration  of 
Israel.  Now  that~picture  is  rudely  torn,  and  a  description  of  the  desolation  of  Mount 
Seir  inserted  in  the  midst  of  it.  The  darkness  of  this  unexpected  scene  of  Judgment 
is  the  more  appalling  inasmuch  as  it  is  in  startling  contrast  with  the  precoiing  and 


228  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET   EZEKIEL.    [ch.  xxxv.  1— 15. 

the  succeeding  brightness  of  Israfl's  restoration.  This  looks  like  an  after-thought  of 
judgment.  It  is  as  though  Edom,  the  nation  typified  by  Mount  Seir,  had  been  for- 
gotten until  suddenly,  by  an  unlucky  chance,  she  came  into  mind,  and  then  without 
delay  the  thread  of  joyous  prophecy  is  broken  and  her  doom  is  ruthlessly  pronounced. 
At  all  events,  the  solitary  and  peculiar  position  of  the  prophecy  against  Edom  gives  to 
it  a  striking  significance.  1.  No  impenitent  sinners  can  be  always  overlooked.  There 
are  no  exceptions  to  the  law  of  retribution.  "  Whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he 
also  reap,"  is  a  principle  of  universal  application.  No  single  soul  can  by  any  rare  good 
fortune  ultimately  escape  from  it.  2.  Qod's  forbearance  does  not  destroy  his  Justice. 
He  may  wait  long.  But  if  the  soul  is  finally  impenitent,  he  will  surely  smite.  3.  The 
goodness  of  Qod  does  not  abolish  his  wrath  against  sin.  Even  when  the  mercy  is  most 
fully  displayed,  this  wrath  is  also  seen. 

II.  The  doom  of  those  who  abb  not  fab  feom  the  kingdom.  There  was  one 
reason  why  Edom  should  receive  exceptional  treatment.  Slie  was  not  only  a  near 
neighbour  to  Israel,  she  was  a  blood-relation.  Her  people  were  the  descendants  of 
Esau,  the  brother  of  Jacob.  Though  a  foreign  nation,  her  cousinly  relationship  with 
Israel  was  like  that  of  America  with -England.  She  could  reckon  two — the  two  best — 
of  the  patriarchs  as  her  ancestors.  Like  Israel,  she  was  descended  from  Abraham  and 
Isaac.  Might  not  she,  then,  expect  the  blessings  of  the  patriarchs  ?  Esau  had  begged 
for  a  blessing  with  bitter  tears,  and  he  had  received  one,  but  not  the  best  blessing  (Gen. 
xxvii.  38 — 40).  The  young  man  whom  Christ  loved  was  "not  far  from  the  kingdom 
of  God  "  (Mark  xii.  34).  Tet  for  all  we  know,  he  did  not  enter  it.  The  members  of 
Christians  families  are  favoured  with  great  religious  privileges.  It  is  much  to  be  able 
to  claim  godly  ancestors.  But  these  advantages  will  not  serve  as  substitutes  for 
personal  piety.  Nay,  they  will  make  the  guilt  of  godlessness  the  greater.  We  may 
be  like  Edom,  very  near  to  Israel,  yet  like  Edom  we  may  be  cast  aside  and  lost,  if  we 
have  not  really  entered  ourselves  into  the  Divine  covenant. 

III.  The  punishment  of  hatred.  Edom  was  accused  of  "perpetual  hatred" 
(ver.  5) — a  hatred  which  perhaps  sprang  from  original  jealousy,  still  one  that  had  been 
long  cherished.  As  love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  Law,  so  hatred  is  the  most  effectual 
breaking  of  it.  It  is  hatred  that  brings  war  and  misery  on  mankind.  This  is  con- 
stituted out  of  the  very  venom  of  hell.  It  cannot  be  allowed  to  remain  unchecked. 
If  it  is  not  abandoned  and  repented  nf,  its  curses  must  come  home  to  roost,  and  they 
who  harbour  it  must  suffer  its  doom.  So  long  as  a  man  cherishes  hatred  in  his  heart 
towards  a  single  fellow-creature,  he  cannot  be  accepted  by  God  (1  John  iv,  20). . 

Ver.  6. — The  end  of  iniquity.  I.  Iniquity  must  have  an  end.  God  will  not 
permit  it  to  run  on  for  ever  unchecked  and  unpunished.  The  sinner  has  a  long  leash, 
but  it  is  not  interminable.  God  steps  in  at  length  and  puts  a  stop  to  the  awful  suc- 
cession of  wicked  deeds.  Wicked  cities  and  nations  have  had  their  end.  So  must  it 
be  with  sinful  lives. 

II.  The  natueal  end  or  iniquity  is  death.  Sin  is  the  great  destroyer.  It  is  a 
raging  fire  which  will  ultimately  fade  away  into  dull  ashes  by  consuming  all  the  fuel 
on  which  it  feeds.  The  sinner  is  a  suicide.  His  evil  is  a  slow  but  sure  poison,  that 
eats  out  the  very  fibre  of  his  soul.  This  awful  fate  does  not  come  on  with  a  sudden 
shock  so  that  men  can  be  roused  by  its  approach.  It  is  like  a  creeping  paralysis,  and 
its  insidious  advent  is  least  readily  recognized  by  the  very  persons  in  whose  experience 
it  is  taking  place. 

III.  Iniquity  may  hate  an  end  in  bbpentanob.  There  is  an  alternative.  We 
are  not  bound  to  let  the  sin  run  through  all  its  fatal  course  to  the  final  silence  and 
desolation.  We  must  end  the  sin  or  it  will  end  us;  but  the  former  may  be  done.  The 
warnings  of  the  fatal  consequences  of  sin  are  set  before  us  for  the  express  purpose  of 
urging  us  to  cast  off  the  deadly  thing  before  it  has  completed  its  awful  work. 

IV.  Chbist  has  come  to  put  an  end  to  iniquity.  He  works  in  common  with 
the  fundamental  moral  law  in  regard  to  the  ending  of  sin.  No  lawgiver  could  be  more 
stern  in  the  denunciation  of  sin  than  the  gracious  Saviour.  He  gave  it  no  quarter. 
From  the  first  he  declared  himself  its  deadly  enemy.  He  came  "  to  destroy  the  works 
of  the  devil "  (1  John  iii.  8).  There  is  no  shadow  of  excuse  for  the  notion  that  we 
can  find  in  Christ  a  shelter  from  the  rigorous  requirements  of  morality,  so  that  we 


CH.  XXXV.  1—15.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  BZEKIEL.  229 

need  not  be  so  strictly  righteous  if  we  are  Christians,  as  we  should  need  to  be  if 
we  were  not.  Christ  expects  a  higher  righteousness  than  that  of  the  Law  (Matt.  v.  20). 
But  when  we  perceive  that  our  sin  is  our  utter  undoing,  we  are  prepared  to  welcome 
Christ  as  our  Saviour  from  this  chiefly. 

V.  It  is  well  to  consider  the  end  op  iniquity.  It  has  not  yet  arrived.  All 
is  now  calm  and  apparently  prosperous.  We  may  say  that  there  is  time  enough  to 
consider  the  evil  day.  But  the  end  may  come  before  we  expect  it.  Its  slow  and 
sradual  approach  leads  to  our  failing  to  perceive  how  near  it  may  be.  Then  the 
nearer  it  is  the  more  difficult  is  it  for  us  to  draw  back.  The  descent  becomes  more 
steep  as  it  approaches  the  precipice ;  the  rapids  grow  swifter  as  they  near  the  falls ; 
the  poison  more  effectually  pervades  the  system  as  death  comes  on.  The  longer  we 
postpone  re|ientance,  the  harder  it  is  to  repent.  But  apart  from  such  thoughts  of 
warning,  sin  that  leads  to  so  awful  an  issue  should  be  accounted  hateful  in  itself. 
Its  present  vile  character  is  revealed  by  its  end.  With  such  fruit  the  plant  must  be 
odious. 

Ver.  10. — A  miscalculation.  Edom  had  taken  for  granted  that  she,  in  conjunction 
with  the  allied  nations,  no  doubt,  would  be  able  to  seize  the  territories  of  Israel  and 
Judah.  She  had  calculated  her  resources  and  matched  her  strength  against  those  of 
her  foes.  But  she  had  forgotton  one  essential  element  in  the  reckoning — she  had 
failed  to  take  any  account  of  the  presence  of  Crod.  This  was  a  fatal  blunder,  and  it 
upset  the  whole  scheme.  It  is  very  common  for  people  to  discuss  their  prospects  with- 
the  same  mistake  in  their  minds.  Worldly  reasoning  that  ignores  God  is  not  only 
irreligious ;  it  is  false  and  foolish.     Irreligious  thought  is  had  logic. 

I.  A  selfish  qreed.  Edom  covets  the  fair  and  fruitful  land  of  Israel.  This  is  the 
common  spirit  of  national  plunder.  It  is  the  spirit  of  the  veiled  warfare  of  commerce. 
Men  and  nations  hunger  after  their  neighbours'  property.  All  seltish  persons  are 
robbers  at  heart,  though  many  are  restrained  by  prudential  considerations  from  carry- 
ing out  their  evil  desires.  Now,  the  prevalence  of  this  selfish  greed  gives  a  very  ugly 
look  to  the  world,  and  suggests  the  thought  that  the  weak  must  be  the  prey  of  the 
strong.  It  is  only  when  we  can  look  above  the  scramble  for  wealth  that  we  can 
discern  the  play  of  higher  influences  on  man's  history  and  destiny. 

II.  A  NARROW  VIEW.  Edom  sees  the  weakness  of  Israel  clearly  enough ;  and  she 
makes  no  mistake  in  estimating  the  strength  of  herself  and  her  allies.  But  she  con- 
fines her  view  to  these  local  and  earthly  facts.  Here  is  the  limitation  of  all  worldliness. 
Men  of  the  world  are  keen  and  clear-headed.  They  see  distinctly  their  points  of 
advantage,  and  seize  them  quickly.  But  their  gaze  is  confined  to  earthly  things. 
Thus  worldliness  is  essentially  low  and  narrow.  It  has  a  sharp  vision,  but  it  is  very 
short-sighted.  There  are  more  things  in  heaven  and  earth  than  are  dreamed  of  in  itti 
philosophy. 

III.  A  Divine  fact.  "The  Lord  was  there."  This  was  a  fact,  although  Edom 
knew  nothing  of  it,  just  as  God  was  at  Bethel  before  Jacob  recognized  his  presence. 
1.  God  is  in  human  affairs.  It  is  not  simply  asserted  that  God  interfered  from  a 
distance.  He  was  present.  Palestine  was  a  God-haunted  land.  The  difference 
between  Israel  and  Edom  was  not  merely  racial  or  geographical.  It  was  chiefly  this — 
that  God  manifested  his  presence  to  the  one  people  as  he  did  not  to  the  other.  2.  Qod 
takes  an  active  part  in  the  world.  God  was  not  merely  in  Palestine  as  a  spectator. 
He  was  present  to  act.  Edom's  error  was  in  not  recognizing  a  real  influence.  It  is 
like  that  of  the  naturalist  who  dissects  a  brain  to  discover  the  secret  of  thought,  but 
takes  no  account  of  the  mind  that  once  inhabited  the  brain.  God  is  now  present 
actively  in  the  world,  not  in  Palestine  especially,  but  (1)  in  Christendom  when  men 
acknowledge  him  and  make  themselves  open  to  his  influence ;  and  also  (2)  among  all 
men  in  his  great  providential  government. 

IV.  A  NEEDED  CORRECTION.  The  Diviue  element  must  be  introduced  if  the  mis- 
calculation is  to  be  corrected.  This  will  make  a  surprising  difference  to  Edom's  reckon- 
ing. So  it  will  in  individual  affairs.  The  oppressing  Pharaoh  did  not  reckon  on  God's 
power  to  save  Israel ;  the  rich  fool  counted  up  his  wealth,  but  forgot  that  his  life  was 
in  God's  hand  (Luke  xii.  16 — 21).  Life  and  death  are  more  dependent  on  heavenly 
influences  than  most  men  suppose.    We  need  a  new  order  of  reasoning,  a  fresh 


230  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxxv.  1— 15. 

arithmetic  that  shall  not  fail  to  give  a  large  place  to  the  influence  of  God  on  all 
things. 

Ver.  13. — Boasting  against  God.  Edom  had  ignored  the  presence  of  God  (ver.  10). 
Now  she  has  gone  further,  and  boasted  against  God.  This  is  a  sign  either  of  heathenish 
darkness  that  does  not  know  God,  or  of  wilful  rebellion  that  proudly  rises  up  against 
him,  or  of  both. 

I.  The  boast  of  iqnobanob.  Men  who  forget  God  boast  themselves :  1.  In 
thought.  Man  looks  very  big  when  God  is  left  out  of  sight.  The  hill  is  a  grand 
sight  to  one  who  has  not  seen  an  Alp.  The  worship  of  humanity  proceeds  on  the 
assumption  of  the  non-existence  of  Divinity.  If,  indeed,  there  be  no  God,  man  may  be 
the  loftiest  existence;  in  that  case,  he  may  stand  on  the  very  topmost  pinnacle  of 
being.  2.  In  practice.  The  same  condition  will  be  reflected  in  practical  life  when  a 
man  ignores  the  influence  of  God  on  his  affairs.  He  feels  himself'  the  master  of  the 
situation.  By  science  and  art  he  can  subdue  nature.  His  powers  and  opportunities 
have  given  him  a  free  hand  among  his  fellow-men.  Why,  then,  should  he  not  dream 
great  dreams  and  imagine  himself  to  be  a  very  monarch  of  life?  The  glorying  of 
irreligion  in  a  successful  man  seems  to  be  perfectly  natural,  nay,  inevitable. 

II.  The  boast  of  opposition.  Edom  boasts  herself  against  God.  In  heathenish 
ignorance  she  supposes  herself  to  be  stronger  than  the  God  of  Israel.  At  all  events, 
she  sets  herself  up  in  opposition  to  Jehovah.  It  is  customary  for  contending  powers, 
when  going  to  war,  to  keep  their  courage  up  by  boasting  of  their  own  strength  and 
despising  that  of  their  enemy.    The  same  is  seen  in  man's  great  warfare  against  God. 

1.  In  intelligence.  People  act  as  though  they  supposed  they  could  outwit  God.  Though 
they  do  not  draw  out  the  thought  into  a  clear  argument — when  It  would  certainly 
break  down  in  a  great  fallacy — they  tacitly  assume  that  they  are  clever  enough  to  elude 
the  consequences  of  their  sins.  Other  people  may  blunder  into  ruin,  but  they  will 
steer  their  craft  so  deftly  that,  though  it  runs  down  the  rapids,  it  will  not  go  over  the 
falls.  2.  In  will.  The  stubborn  rebellion  of  man's  will  asserts  itself  in  opposition  to 
the  wise,  holy,  strong  v?ill  of  God.  Men  think  in  their  strong-headed  sin  that  they  can 
force  their  way  against  the  will  of  God.  Because  for  the  time  being  they  have  a  free 
hand,  they  imagine  that  it  will  always  be  so.  Now,  it  certainly  does  appear  that  man 
could  assert  his  self-will  in  wildest  opposition  to  God.  The  mistake  is  in  judging  of 
the  future  issue  by  present  appearances. 

III.  The  fatal  boast.  Boasting  against  God  cannot  succeed.  If  there  be  a  God, 
he  must  be  supreme.  He  may  be  too  magnanimous  to  hurl  his  rebellious  creature  to 
sudden  destruction.  He  may  even  regard  the  sinful  boasting  with  compassion  on 
account  of  its  helpless  folly.  But  he  certainly  will  not  let  it  ultimately  triumph. 
Boasting  is  not  victory.  Boasting  does  not  create  strength.  It  is  only  "  with  the 
mouth  " — a  mere  matter  of  empty  sound.     But  facts  are  not  changed  by  words.     All 

'  the  oratory  of  boasting  that  was  ever  practised  will  not  dissolve  one  of  the  hard,  stern 
realities  of  life.  God  is  still  God,  though  men  ignore  his  presence  and  resist  his  will. 
Therefore  to  boast  against  God  is  fatal  to  the  boaster.  He  is  like  one  who  dashes  hia 
head  against  a  wall.  He  only  destroys  himself  by  his  vain  pretence.  Our  safety  lies 
in  humility,  contrition,  and  submission  to  our  God  and  Father. 

Ver.  14. — Desolate  in  the  midst  of  general  joyfulness.  I.  There  is  to  bk  a  BKASOn 
OP  OENERAL  JOYFULNESS.  "  When  the  whole  earth  rejoiceth  " — that  is  a  glimpse  of  a 
wonderful  future.  At  present  the  earth  mourns  and  languishes.  Tyranny  oppresses 
nations  of  slaves.  Penury  holds  multitudes  in  weary  drudgery  on  the  verge  of  starva- 
tion. War  devastates  fields  and  towns  and  countries.  Sorrow  sighs  from  the  heart  of 
humanity.  But  this  shall  not  continue  for  ever.  1.  There  wiU  he  joy  in  a  glorious 
future.    The  Bible  is  full  of  hope.     Its  golden  age  always  lies  before  us,  not  behind  us. 

2.  This  joy  will  be  attained  through  the  gospel  of  Christ.  The  angels  sang  for  joy  at 
his  birth  on  earth.  Gladness  comes  to  the  heart  in  which  he  is  revealed  afresh,  ^len 
the  old  earth  is  subject  to  the  rule  of  Christ,  and  the  sin  that  is  its  curse  is  blotted  out, 
a  new  Divine  joy  must  take  possession  of  men.  3.  This  joy  mil  be  for  the  whole  earth. 
At  first,  only  a  remnant  is  to  be  saved  (Eom.  ix.  27).  But  this  remnant  does  not 
represent  the  whole  harvest  of  Divine  salvation.     It  is  but  the  firstfruits.     The  gospel 


OH.  XXXV.  1—15.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  231 

is  for  the  wide  world.  All  the  nations  are  to  enter  into  the  heritage  of  the  future. 
Christ  "shall  see  of  the  travail  of  his  soul,  and  shall  he  satisfied"  (Isa.  liii.  11).  No 
scanty  salvage  from  the  huge  wreck  of  humanity  could  satisfy  the  great  soul  of  Jesus. 

II.  It  is  possible  fob  any  one  to  be  excluded  fbom  this  qeneral  jotfulnesb. 
Edom  is  to  be  shut  out  when  the  whole  earth  rejoices.  1.  The  joy  of  the  whole  earth  is 
the  Joy  of  its  several  inhabitants.  The  sheet  of  sunshine  that  lies  broadly  over  meadow 
and  hillside  is  woven  out  of  innumerable  rays  of  light.  The  flood  of  music  that  fills 
the  valley  with  meloHy  consists  in  a  succession  of  distinct  notes.  The  blaze  of  colour 
that  flashes  on  us  in  the  summer  garden  comes  from  the  sevaral  hues  of  separate 
flowers.  The  general  joy  is  the  joy  of  many  hearts.  Each  must  share  it  individually 
if  all  are  to  display  it  collectively.  2.  The  individual  participation  in  the  general  Joy 
depends  on  an  individual  condition  of  receptiveness.  It  is  supremely  the  joy  of 
reconciliation.  Now,  Christ  died  to  make  atonement  for  the  whole  world.  Yet  each 
80ul  has  to  be  separately  reconciled  to  God.  And  when  the  old  rebellion  of  man 
against  God  is  virtually  quelled,  if  but  a  single  soul  held  out,  that  soul  must  be 
excluded  from  the  joy  which  comes  in  with  the  great  peace. 

III.  It  IB   UNSPEAKABLY  DREADFUL  TO   BE   DESOLATE  AMIDST  GBNEBAl  JOYFULNESB. 

1.  The  perception  of  contrast  is  intensely  distressing.  The  one  heavy  heart  is  in  painful 
contrast  to  the  many  light  hearts.  Sorrowful  people  shun  merry  gatherings,  shrinking 
from  them  as  people  with  pained  eyes  shrink  from  bright  lights.  It  is  an  acute  grief 
to  the  desolate  soul  to  be  alone  in  a  joyous  festivity  when  all  others  are  of  one  mind. 
For  a  lost  soul  to  be  placed  in  the  midst  of  the  blessedness  of  heaven  would  be  far  worse 
than  the  torments  of  hell.  2.  The  discovery  of  needless  failure  is  especially  grievous. 
The  rejoicing  is  practically  universal.  Why,  then,  should  one  poor  soul  be  excluded? 
Nearly  all  are  in  when  the  door  is  shut,  but  one  miserable  creature  is  left  out  in  the 
darkness.  If  salvation  were  only  intended  for  a  few,  the  many  might  learn  to  acquiesce 
in  their  dismal  lot.  But  when  a  man  sees  that  it  is  intended  for  the  whole  world,  and 
yet  by  his  own  folly  he  is  excluded,  he  must  torture  himself  with  bitter  regrets. 

Ver.  15. — Rejoicing  over  the  ruin  of  others.  I.  The  ugly  fact.  Edom  had  rejoiced 
over  the  ruin  of  Israel.  One  would  say  that  such  a  joy  must  be  impossible.  Regard- 
ing the  world  from  the  high  ground  of  ideal  speculation,  one  would  suppose  that 
sympathy  for  the  suffering  must  spring  forth  as  a  natural  instinct,  or  that,  if  the 
feelings  were  callous  and  selfishness  hardened  the  heart,  still  there  would  be  no  room 
for  joy  under  such  circumstances.  But  the  facts  of  history  and  observation  show  that 
Edom's  joy  was  no  monstrous,  impossible  experience.  People  do  rejoice  in  the  sufifer- 
iiigs  of  others :  1,  In  national  life.  The  downfall  of  rival  nations  is  accepted  by  their 
more  fortunate  neighbours  with  delight.  2.  In  amusement.  The  old,  fierce  delights 
of  the  amphitheatre,  which  delicate  ladies  shared  with  bloodthirsty  warriors,  were  just 
the  joys  of  cruelty,  pleasures  got  directly  out  of  the  sufferings  of  fellow-creatures.  The 
Emperor  Domitian  is  said  to  have  taken  a  keen  interest  in  watching  the  contortion! 
of  agony  on  the  face  of  a  dying  gladiator.  A  similar  spirit  lurks  in  the  present-day 
popular  taste  for  amusements  that  involve  great  risk  of  life.  A  Christian  spirit  should 
discourage  such  amusements  as  feeding  on  cruelty.  3.  In  private  life.  Some  people 
soem  to  take  a  spiteful  pleasure  in  the  disgrace  and  ruin  of  their  neighbours.  Is  not 
this  pleasure  at  the  root  of  much  idle  gossip  and  fascinating  scandal? 

II.  Its  evil  causes.  How  comes  it  that  the  misery  of  one  man  can  cause  pleasure 
to  hw  brother,  when  by  the  influence  of  sympathy  it  should  produce  an  opposite  effect  ? 
The  causes  of  this  gross  perversion  of  the  appetite  for  pleasure  are  various.  1.  Revenge. 
Israel  had  been  an  old  enemy  of  Edom.  The  commonest  pleasure  of  cruelty  is  in 
seeing  a  foe  humiliated.  There  may  be  natural  elements  in  this  feeling :  (1)  a  reaction 
from  the  tension  of  fear ;  and  (2)  a  satisfaction  of  the  desire  for  self-protection.  Still, 
the  joy  is  evil  and  hateful,  for  it  exceeds  self-regarding  considerations,  and  it  excludes 
pity ;  it  denies  the  duty  of  loving  our  enemies.  2.  Envy.  Edom  had  formerly  envied 
the  prosperity  of  Israel.  She  afterwards  rejoiced  in  her  rival's  downfall.  This,  again, 
is  a  sort  of  reaction  from  the  pain  of  envy.  It  is  the  more  powerful  if  the  successful' 
rival  has  shown  scorn  for  her  less  fortunate  neighbour.  Now,  the  scorn  is  reversed, 
8.  A  sense  of  contrast.  Sitting  at  ease,  the  spectator  compares  his  comforts  with  the 
agonies  before  him,  and  as  all  feeling  arises  from  contrasted  states,  the  sharpness  of  this 


232  THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [ch.  xxxv,  1—15. 

contrast  heightens  the  relish  of  a  man's  present  comfort.  This  is  brutally  selfish.  4. 
Malignity.  There  does  seem  to  be  a  direct  pleasure  in  seeing  others  suffer.  This  is 
the  glee  of  devils.     It  may  be  shared  by  diabolical  men. 

III.  Its  fatal  effects.  Edom  is  to  be  punished  and  made  desolate.  God  will 
certainly  punish  cruelty  as  a  great  sin,  because  it  is  the  direct  opposite  of  man's  first 
duty,  which  is  to  love  all  beings.  The  evil  joy  will  work  mischief  in  the  heart  of  the 
man  who  cherishes  it.  It  is  a  venom  that  will  rankle  in  the  breast  that  engenders  it. 
We  need  love  and  sympathy  for  our  own  soul's  health.  The  pleasures  of  cruelty  cut  a 
man  off  from  the  honds  of  fellowship,  even  with  those  who  are  not  themselves  its  victims, 
because  they  destroy  the  elements  on  which  the  spirit  of  brotherhood  lives.  Thus  a 
cruel  person  is  inwardly  lonely.  Selfishness  makes  the  heart  desolate.  The  exclusion 
of  love  is  the  exclusion  of  the  greatest  joy  of  human  fellowship.  In  seeking  his  own 
pleasure  the  man  who  admits  evil  passions  of  revenge  or  spite  into  his  breast  darkens 
his  life  with  the  gloom  of  spiritual  solitude.  On  the  other  hand,  the  deepest  joy  is 
found  in  sacrificing  one's  self  in  order  to  save  one's  brother. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  6,  6. — "Lex  ialionis."  Ezekiel  returns  to  his  prophecy  regarding  the  inha- 
bitants of  Mount  Seir.  These  neighbours  of  the  Israelites  were  animated  by  hostility 
to  God's  people  which  was  of  a  peculia,rly  bitter  character.  The  prophet's  mind  was 
deeply  affected  and  sorely  pained  by  the  language  and  the  actions  of  these  enemies  of 
Israel.  This  probably  accounts  for  his  revertiug  to  his  inspired  threats  of  adversity 
and  eyen  destruction  about  to  overtake  these  bitter  and  blasphemous  foes  of  Israel  and 
of  Israel's  God. 

I.  The  charge  brought  against  the  people  or  Mount  Sbib.  1.  The  offence. 
They  were  guilty  of  violence  against  Israel  and  inexcusable  bloodshed.  A  predatory 
and  warlike  race,  they  had  turned  their  arms  against  their  neighbours,  instead  of 
allowing  them  to  dwell  in  security.  2.  The  motive.  This  was  malice,  malignity.  A 
perpetual,  unappeasable  enmity  actuated  those  of  Mount  Seir  in  their  repeated 
inoursions  into  the  territory  of  the  Israelites,  and  the  desolation  of  the  land  and  the 
destruction  of  life  laid  to  their  charge.  Other  more  excusable  motives  accounted  for 
the  hostilities  waged  by  other  peoples ;  against  Mount  Seir  the  charge  is  brought  of 
acting  upon  the  u.eMnest  and  basest  of  motives.  3.  The  opportunity.  This  was  the 
time  of  Israel's  calamity  and  weakness.  They  took  advantage  of  the  circumstances  of 
tlieir  neighbours,  and  ■  attacked  them  at  a  conjuncture  when  they  were  powerless  to 
defend  themselves. 

n.  The  rbteibution  vtith  which  the  people  or  MotrifT  Seir  were  threatened. 
1.  The  Author  of  this  retribution  was  none  other  than  the  Lord  God  himself.  He 
ruleth  among  the  nations ;  "  let  not  the  rebellious  exalt  themselves."  His  justice  is 
unquestionable  and  his  power  is  irresistible.  "  He  is  terrible  in  his  doings  towards  the 
children  of  men."  2.  The  nature  of  it.  It  is  foretold  that  the  cities  shall  be  laid 
waste,  and  that  the  land  shall  be  desolate,  that  the  blood  of  the  inhabitants  of  Mount 
Seir  shall  be  shed.  "  I  will  prepare  thee  unto  blood,  and  blood  shall  pursue  thee."  3. 
The  law  of  it.  Observe  that  the  judgment  and  penalty  here  foretold  is  not  simply 
retributive ;  it  is  of  the  nature  of  retaliation.  The  lex  talionit  prescribed  "  an  eye  for 
an  eye,  a  tooth  for  a  tooth,"  etc.  The  punishment  matched  the  offence.  Such  a 
correspondence  is  noticeable  between  Seir's  treatment  of  Israel  and  Jehovah's  treatment 
of  Seir.  They  had  shed  blood,  and  in  recompense  their  blood  should  be  shed.  This  is 
not  to  be  regarded  as  private,  personal  revenge,  which  is  forbidden  to  man,  and  could 
never  be  practised  by  a  holy  God.  It  is  a  public  measure,  a  judicial  act,  a  proceeding 
warranted  by  justice,  and  intended  to  produce  a  deep  and  wholesome  impression  upon 
all  who  should  witness  it.  It  certainly  marks  the  heinousness  of  sin  in  the  view  of 
the  righteous  Ruler,  and  it  exemplifies  the  inevitable  and  universal  action  of  the 
retributive  government  of  the  God  of  nations. — T. 

Vers.  11 — 16. — The  LorcPs  identification  of  himself  with  Israel.  A  careless  reader 
might  possibly  consider  that  a  passage  like  this  exemplifies  prophetic  partiality;  that 


OH.  XXXV.  1—15.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  23a 

Ezekiel,  because  himself  a  Jew  by  birth  and  by  sentiment,  was  disposed  to  repre- 
sent the  Supreme  as  upon  his  side  and  against  his  countrymen's  enemies ;  that  the 
view  given  of  the  Eternal  is  of  a  Euler  whose  government  is  distinguished  by 
favouritism.  But  further  consideration  will  show  that  this  is  not  the  case.  The  cause 
of  Israel  was  the  cause  of  monotheism  in  religion,  of  spirituality  in  worship,  and  ot 
purity  and  righteousness  in  morals.  It  is  true  that  the  Hebrew  people  did  not  actually, 
as  a  matter  of  fact,  attain  the  standard  which  as  a  nation  they  adopted ;  and  for  this 
reason  their  leaders  and  thinkers  were  at  this  very  time  enduring  the  purifying 
humiliation  of  the  Captivity.  But  the  highest  interest  and  the  fairest  prospects  of 
mankind  were  bound  up  with  the  preservation  of  Israel  as  God's  witness  concerning 
himself  to  the  world,  and  as  God's  preparation  for  the  advent  of  the  Messiah. 

I.  The  iNiQUiTOtrs  conduct  of  Sbib.  They  were  guilty :  1.  Of  anger  and  enmity 
against  Israel.  2.  Of  evil  speech,  of  blasphemy,  against  Israel.  3.  Of  rejoicing  over 
the  sorrows,  calamities,  and  desolations  of  Israel. 

n.  The  Lobd's  identification  of  himself  with  Israel  in  the  wbong  they 
SUSTAINED  AT  THE  HAND  OP  Seib.  The  fact  is  that  Israel  was  his  people,  and  he, 
Jehovah,  was  Israel's  God.  This  is  said  with  the  recollection  that  Israel  had  trans- 
gressed his  Law,  rebelled  against  his  authority,  despised  the  privileges  he  had  bestowed  j 
with  the  recollection  that  tlieir  God  had  chastened  them  sorely,  and  at  this  very  time 
was  causing  them  to  pass  through  the  furnace  of  affliction.  All  this  does  not  interfera 
with  our  belief  of  the  close  identification  between  the  Lord  and  the  sons  of  Jacob.  It 
was  not  for  their  goodness,  but  for  his  purposes,  that  they  were  chosen.  They  were  a 
consecrated  nation,  i.e.  a  nation  set  apart  to  fulfil  a  deliberate  intention  of  the  most 
high  and  holy  God.  Therefore,  in  a  special  manner,  the  Lord  took  the  part  of  Israel, 
resented  the  wrongs  done  to  them,  the  indignities  put  upon  them,  and  the  blas- 
phemies uttered  concerning  them.  Therefore  the  Lord  avenged  them  of  their  advei^ 
Baries.  Other  nations  might  be  destroyed,  but  it  did  not  consist  with  God's  purposes 
that  Israel  should  perish.     He  was  against  those  who  wore  against  his  people. 

III.  The  Lord's  avenging  of  Israel's  wrongs  as  done  to  himself.  1.  He  heard 
with  displeasure  all  the  evil  words  uttered  against  those  whom  he  had  set  apart  for 
himself.  2.  He  judged  with  a  righteous  and  severe  judgment  all  who  injured  his- 
servants.  3.  For  Mount  Seir,  as  a  flagrant  offender,  was  reserved  an  especial  punish- 
ment :  "  When  the  whole  earth  rejoiceth,  I  will  make  thee  desolate."  Let  it  be  observed 
that  this  was  a  reversal  of  what  had  formerly  taken  place ;  for  when  Israel  was  deso 
Ukted,  Mount  Seir  had  rejoiced. — T. 

Vers.  1 — 15. — Special  punishment  of  special  sin.  Very  painful  must  it  be  to  an 
intelligent  spirit  to  be  the  executor  of  Jehovah's  vengeance  upon  transgressors:  th» 
pain  is  only  one  remove  the  less  to  announce  the  coming  doom.  Yet,  as  we  gain 
broader  and  clearer  views  of  God's  administration,  we  discover  that  the  suffering  of  a 
few  brings  advantage  to  the  many.  The  splendour  and  the  rare  excellence  of  God's 
righteousness  are  thereby  clearly  revealed.  And  gradually  we  perceive  that  pain  and 
pleasure  are  matters  vastly  inferior  to  light  and  wrong.  The  well-being  of  heaven  is 
luspended  upon  just  government  in  the  universe.  Bight  must  he  done,  though  the 
stars  should  fall  and  the  material  fabric  become  a  wreck. 

I.  An  aggbavatbd  national  ofienoe.  1.  It  sprang  out  of  an  ancient  hitved. 
The  then-existent  inhabitants  of  Israel  had  done  the  Edomites  no  wrong.  It  whs 
simply  an  ember  of  an  old  fire  the  Edomites  had  fanned  and  kept  alive  generation  after 
generation.  Their  duty  clearly  was  to  forgive  and  to  forget.  Centuries  before,  the 
blood-stained  hatchet  ought  to  have  been  buried.  Heedlessly  the  Edomites  were  doing 
their  own  nature  a  cruel  wrong.  They  were  strangling  their  noblest  qualities.  2. 
Eatred,  nursed,  soon  develops  into  murder.  "  They  had  shed  the  blood  of  the  children 
of  Israel."  Murder  may  stain  the  character  of  a  state  as  much  as  it  stains  the 
character  of  an  individual ;  and  every  war,  unjustly  provoked,  is  only  murder.  The 
lives  of  a  myriad  innocent  men  will  be  required  at  some  tyrants'  hands.  And  this 
murderous  outrage  was  an  act  of  basest  cowardice.  They  had  plimged  the  sword  into 
Israel's  breast  when  Israel  was  prostrate  and  wounded  by  other  foes.  It  was  as  black 
a  deed  as  ever  had  been  done  under  the  eye  of  the  sun.  3.  Added  to  this  was  an 
attempted  spoliation  of  IsraeVs  territory.     "  Because  thou  hast  said,  These  two  nations 


234  THE   BOOK   OF  THE  PROPHET   EZEKIEL.     [ch.  xxxv.  1—15. 


.  .  .  stiall  be  mine."  Bdom  had  hoped  to  blot  Israel's  name  completely  out  of  history, 
and  to  embrace  the  sacred  territory  in  the  empire  of  Edom.  Their  hatred  had  hatched 
a  purpose  to  murder  and  bury  a  nation — a  nation  that  had  been  and  might  again  be 
a  blessing  to  the  globe.  And  the  guilt  was  equally  as  great  as  if  the  vile  purpose  had 
succeeded.  To  the  eye  of  our  righteous  G-od  there  is  often  a  vast  volume  of  crime 
secreted  in  a  single  purpose,  in.  a  hidden  motive.  The  quintessence  of  sin  may  he 
found  there. 

II.  Crime  against  a  nation  is  sin  against  God.  1.  Qod  has  identified  himself 
with  men.  This  was  conspicuous  in  a  marked  degree  in  the  case  oi  Israel.  Yet  this 
identifli  atioQ  with  Israel's  true  welfare  is  typical  of  God's  fatherly  interest  in  all 
trustful  souls.  More  or  less,  God  identifies  himself  with  humanity ;  and  no  wrong  to 
humanity  shall  oo  unpunished.  He  will  champion  the  interests  of  the  oppressed 
everywhere.  2.  Qod  carefully  notes  every  act  of  injustice.  "  I  have  heard  all  thy 
blasphemies  which  thou  hast  spoken  against  the  mountains  of  IsraeL"  Every  whisper 
of  man  is  heard  by  God.  Such  acute  heating  staggers  our  understanding.  Yet  "  he 
that  formed  the  ear,  shall  he  not  hear  ?  "  The  secrets  of  imperial  councils  are  all  seen 
and  heard  by  Jehovah.  Ultimately,  and  in  the  best  time,  he  baffles  all  wicked  designs. 
3.  Human  folly  in  ignoring  Ood's  presence.  "  Whereas  the  Lord  was  there."  In 
every  age  worldly  men  concoct  their  plans  as  if  no  God  ruled  over  the  affairs  of  men. 
Ambitious  rulers  parcel  out  a  neighbour's  territory,  totally  unmindful  that  God  is  in 
possession.  "  The  earth  is  the  Lord's,"  and  his  eye  is  never  absent  from  his  property. 
The  weakest  child  of  man  may  always  summon  God  to  his  side — his  Helper  and  Friend. 

III.  Equitable  retribution.  1.  Divine  activity.  "  I  will  stretch  out  mine  hand." 
Hath  God,  then,  a  human  hand  ?  The  language  is  an  accommodation  to  the  under- 
standing of  man.  God  has  an  adaptation  of  power  more  than  equivalent  to  the 
dexterous  strength  of  the  human  hand.  His  almighty  hand  can  reach  to  the  very 
extremities  of  the  universe.  As  by  a  breath  of  the  lips  he  can  create,  so  by  a  breath 
can  he  desolate  cities.  2.  Exact  retribution.  "  Sith  thou  hast  not  hated  blood,  even 
blood  shall  pursue  thee."  No  human  judge  has  ever  been  able  to  mete  out  such  exact 
penalties  as  God  does.  A  combination  of  perfect  qualities  is  needed,  and  this  perfect 
combination  no  one  possesses  save  Jehovah.  It  is  always  a  real  alleviation  if  the  victim 
can  feel  that  he  has  not  deserved  so  much  severity ;  and  it  is  the  very  core  of  anguish  to 
realize  that  the  suffering  is  absolutely  just.  Conscience  itself  becomes  the  executioner 
of  God.  3.  The  penalty  vjiU  he  set  in  the  light  of  contrast.  "  When  the  whole  earth 
rejoiceth,  I  wiU  make  thee  desolate."  It  is  a  slight  mitigation  of  suffering  when  others 
share  it  with  us.  It  aggravates  our  suflfering  if  all  around  us  are  bright  with  joy.  The 
rich  man  of  the  parable  felt  his  torment  the  keener  because  Lazarus  was  seen  in  the 
repose  of  blessedness.  Isolation  in  misery  is  an  additional  element  of  woe.  4.  Tfit 
desolation  was  to  le  final.  No  prospect,  not  the  most  distant,  could  be  entertained  of 
relief.  The  stroke  was  to  he,  not  disciplinary,  but  utterly  penal.  It  was  to  be  a 
perpetual  desolation.  The  race  was  to  suffer  extirpation  from  the  district.  5.  The 
edict  was  confirmed  hy  an  oath,.  "As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord  God,"  this  shall  be  done. 
This  form  of  speech  by  God  is  a  further  accommodation  to  men.  As  an  affirmation 
makes  a  deeper  impression  upon  the  minds  of  men  when  accompanied  by  an  oath,  by 
a  solemn  appeal  to  the  presence  of  God,  so  Gud  condescends  to  speak  to  men  in  such 
manner  as  shall  most  powerfully  affect  them.  From  God  the  simplest  form  of  words  is 
enough.  "  He  is  not  a  man,  that  he  should  lie."  A  word  from  him  creates  or  destroys. 
But  he  speaks  by  way  of  oath,  in  order  to  arrest  our  thoughts  and  to  convince  our 
judgment.  6.  Conviction  of  Ood's  jurisdiction  often  eomes  too  late.  Men  ignore  God's 
presence  and  God's  interference  in  human  affairs,  until  events  force  upon  them  the 
fact  that  they  are  fighting,  not  simply  against  their  fellows,  nor  contending  against 
adverse  circumstance,  but  are  verily  fighting  against  God.  At  length,  out  of  the  chaos 
of  atheistic  thoughts  there  looins  the  form  and  features  of  the  living  God.  But  the 
knowledge  comes  too  late.  They  know  God  as  their  overpowering  Foe,  whereas  they 
might  have  known  him  as  a  gracious  Friend. — ^D. 

Vers.  1 — 9, 14,  15. — Features  to  he  found  in  penalty.  When  God  is  obliged  to  be 
"against"  a  laan  or  a  people,  as  he  was  against  Edom  (ver.  2),  he  (it)  may  look  fa 
these  three  things  in  the  retribution  which  imuends — 


OH.  xxxy.  1— 15.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  BZBKIEL.  235 

I.  An  infliction  answebino  in  character  to  the  sin.  "Because  thou  hast 
given  over  ...  to  the  power  of  the  sword  .  .  .  therefore  ...  I  will  prepare  thee  unto 
blood,  and  blood  shall  pursue  thee"  (vers.  5,  6).  Our  Lovd  also  himself  tells  us  that 
"  they  who  take  the  sword  shall  perish  with  the  sword."  Violence  shown  to  others 
commonly  brings  down  violence  on  its  own  head.  Craft  and  cunning  lead  men  to 
great  wariness,  and  even  to  a  corresponding  wiliness,  in  their  dealing  with  the  man 
who  endeavours  to  undermine  and  to  deceive.  The  man  who  is  much  engaged  in 
digging  pits  for  others  is  very  likely  to  fall  into  one  himself.  Miserliness  of  spirit  and 
behaviour  always  leads  to  a  real  impoverishment  of  soul,  and  often  to  an  imaginary 
poverty  of  circumstance  which,  though  imaginary,  is  real  enough  to  the  man's  own 
mind.  There  is  no  one  whom  the  penurious  man  deprives  of  so  much  good  and  joy 
as  himself.  Penalty  always  answers  to  wrong-doing  in  its  character.  They  who  sin 
in  the  flesh  suffer  in  the  flesh,  and  they  who  sin  in  the  spirit  suffer  in  the  spirit.  The 
man  who  sins  against  his  family  will  suffer  domestic  trouble ;  he  that  does  not  respect 
himself  wrongs  himself  grievously,  if  not  fatally. 

II.  An  infliction  answering  in  measure  to  the  sin.  The  severity  of  Edom's 
punishment  was  to  answer  to  the  greatness  of  her  crime.  1.  Lasting  enmity  was  to 
be  visited  with  lasting  desolation  (see  vers.  5,  9).  2.  Because  they  had  "  hated 
blood,"  i.e.  had  shown  such  determined  malice  and  cruel  hatred  towards  their  own 
relatives  (Theodoret,  Jerome,  Michaelis),  therefore  "  blood  should  pursue  them ; " 
violence  should  not  only  overtake  and  slay,  but  should  ^ttrsM*  tliem,  should  continue 
to  smite  them.  3.  "According  to  the  joy  of  the  whole  land  [of  Edom],  God  would 
make  it  a  desolation"  (ver.  14;  Fairbairn);  as  it  did  rejoice  in  Israel's  fall,  in  like 
measure  would  it  be  the  object  of  derision  and  of  triumph  "  in  the  dark  hour  coming 
on."  As  its  joy,  so  its  desolation ;  the  height  of  the  one  would  measure  the  depth  of 
the  other.  We  cannot  always  prove  that  penalty  answers  in  measure  to  the  extent 
of  the  wrong  that  has  been  wrought ;  but  we  can  very  often  see  that  it  does,  and  we 
are  quite  sure  that  it  does  so  when  we  cannot  recognize  the  fact.  The  truth  that 
much  sorrow  is  not  penalty  at  all  but  discipline  and  preparation  for  higher  work  and 
a  larger  life,  and  the  further  and  deeper  truth  that  a  very  large  and  most  important 
part  of  penalty  is  found  in  inward  experience  and  especially  in  spiritual  deterioration, 
will  explain  many  apparent  exceptions  to  this  rule.  Fuller  knowledge  and  profounder 
wisdom  will  bring  their  sufficient  revelations  in  good  time;  meanwhile  we  may  be 
perfectly  assured  of  the  fact  that  the  further  we  wander  from  God,  from  truth,  from 
righteousness,  from  love,  the  deeper  is  the  brand  that  enters  into  our  soul,  and  the 
sadder  is  the  destiny  we  are  weaving  for  ourselves. 

III.  The  constantly  recurring  elemknt  of  desolation.  As  the  word  "desolate," 
or  "desolation,"  is  the  prevailing  note  of  this  prophecy,  and  indeed  of  many  others 
also,  so  may  it  be  said  that  loss,  diminution,  destitution,  ruin,  is  the  constantly 
recurring  evil  which  sin  is  working  in  the  soul  and  in  the  life  of  men.  They  who 
forsake  the  God  of  their  fathers  and  who  seek  their  heritage  not  in  his  holy  service 
but  in  material  successes  or  in  the  lower  affections  and  delights,  will  surely  find  that 
they  are  bereaving  themselves  of  all  that  is  best ;  that  they  are  denuding  their  life  of 
its  highest  worth,  that  they  are  going  down,  step  by  step — sometimes  it  is  by  very 
steep  steps,  too^to  the  condition  which  may  be  well  described  in  the  prophet's  words 
as  "  a  desolation  and  an  astonishment "  (ver.  3). — C. 

Vers.  10 — 13. — J%e  supreme  mistake.  The  two  striking  and  significant  sentences 
in  this  passage  are  in  the  tenth  and  thirteenth  verses:  "And  Jehovah  was  there" 
(ver.  10) ;  "  I  have  heard  "  (ver.  13).     They  bring  out — 

I.  Edom's  great  miscalculation.  No  doubt  Edom  had  its  princes,  its  statesmen, 
its  warriors,  of  whom  it  was  proud,  on  whose  sagacity  and  prowess  it  was  leaning. 
But  however  astute  her  ministers  may  have  been,  they  made  one  great  and  fatal  mis- 
take— they  left  out  of  the  account  one  factor,  the  presence  of  which  made  cM  the 
difference  to  the  issue.  Under  their  false  guidance  Edom  thought  itself  more  than  a 
match  for  Israel,  which,  with  its  pastoral  and  agricultural  pursuits,  was  less  warlike 
than  itself.  And  Edom  said  to  itself,  "  These  two  nations  .  .  .  shall  be  mine,  and  we 
will  inherit  it"  (ver.  10).  "And  Jehovah  was  there,"  interjects  the  prophet,  with 
burning  indignation.    Edom,  forsooth,  going  to  appropriate  Israel,  and  swallow  it  up 


236 


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PEOPHET  BZEKIBL.    [oh.  xxxvi.  1— 38. 


as  a  dainty  morsel,  as  if  it  had  only  to  stretch  out  its  hand  and  take  itl  "And 
Jehovah  was  there" — that  One  in  whose  presence  all  Edom,  with  all  its  civil  and 
military  power,  was  but  the  dust  of  the  balance,  was  nothing  and  less  than  nothing 
and  vanity ;  that  Holy  One  who  held  Edom  responsible  for  its  enmity  and  its  cruelty ; 
that  Mighty  One  at  the  breath  of  whose  mouth  all  its  proud  soldiery  would  go  down 
as  saplings  before  the  storm  1  What  senseless  infatuation!  what  infinite  presumption ! 
to  remember  and  to  covet  Israel's  well- watered,  meadows  and  well-cultivated  fields, 
and  to  forget  that  "  Jehovah  was  there  "  1  to  resolve  to  go  up  and  possess  its  pleasant 
places,  and  occupy  its  strong  cities,  and  plant  its  flag  on  Mount  Ziun  without  taking 
into  the  account  that  "  Jehovah  was  there  "  1  Edom  was  entertaining  proud,  ambitious 
schemes,  and  it  was  making  "  scornful  speeches  against  the  mountains  of  Israel,  saying,. 
A  desolation,  to  us  they  are  given  for  fire,"  and  was  thus  "  magnifying  itself  against " 
the  Lord.  But  what  depth  of  meaning,  and  what  vigour  of  action,  and  what  certainty 
of  doom  lies  in  those  simple  words  of  Jehovah,  "I  have  heard"!  Those  disdainful 
words  of  theirs  have  entered  the  Divine  ear,  and  they  will  move  that  mighty  hand  to 
its  work  of  righteousness  and  judgment. 

II.  Our  own  sufbeme  mistake.  We  never  commit  so  great  and  so  ruinous  an 
error  as  when  we  leave  out  of  our  account  the  presence  and  the  handiwork  of  God.  We 
are  never  so  utterly  and  so  perilously  in  the  wrong  as  when  we  lay  our  plans  and 
make  our  speeches,  forgetful  that  God  is  near  us,  overruling  all  we  do,  and  hearing 
every  word  we  speak.  We  make  this  supreme  mistake :  1.  When  we  think  we  can 
sin  without  his  banning.  If  we  lay  our  schemes  to  injure  our  brethren,  or  if  we 
design  to  enrich  or  indulge  ourselves  in  any  forbidden  way,  without  smarting  for  our 
sin,  we  shall  find,  sooner  or  later,  that  "Jehovah  is  there,"  with  his  penalty  in  his 
hand.  2.  When  we  think  we  can  succeed  without  his  blessing.  To  succeed  without  the 
favouring  presence  of  God  and  the  co-operation  of  his  gracious  power  is  as  hopelessly 
impossible  as  it  is  to  sin  without  encountering  his  Divine  displeasure  and  rebuke.  If 
we  prosper  in  our  toil,  if  we  find  joy  and  gladness  in  our  life,  it  will  ba  only  because 
"  Jehovah  is  there ; "  because  he  makes  our  land  to  yield  its  increase,  because  he  fills  our 
soul  with  the  blessedness  that  abides.  3.  When  we  think  we  can  he  wise  without  his 
teaching.  Neither  workman  in  the  field  of  nature  nor  student  in  the  realm  of  truth 
can  leave  out  of  his  accotmt  the  presence  and  the  aid  of  the  Divine.  There  is  nothing 
sadder  than  the  sight  of  men  seeking  and  straining  after  the  wisdom  that  they  want 
for  life  and  for  death  and  for  eternity,  trying  to  fiud  their  way  by  the  light  of  the 
sparks  of  their  own  intelligence ;  this  will  they  have  of  God — "  that  they  will  lie  down 
in  sorrow  "  (Isa.  1.  10, 11).  But  blessed  are  they  who  take  into  their  account  the  fact 
that  "  Jehovaih  is  there,"  that  God  is  speaking  to  us  in  his  Word,  by  that  Son  who 
was  and  is  the  Eternal  Word  of  God ;  for  they  who  are  wise  in  his  wisdom  shall  enter 
the  kingdom  of  truth,  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  they  shall  rise  up  in  everlasting  life 
and  joy. — 0. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXXVI. 


Vers.  1 — 38. — The  present  chapter  is  en- 
tirely devoted  to  the  oonsolation  of  Israel, 
though  its  parts  are  derived  from  two 
separate  "  words  "  of  Jehovah.  Vers.  1 — 15 
belong  to  the  "  word  "  whioh  opened  with 
the  first  verse  of  tlie  preceding  chapter; 
ver.  16  begins  another  "  word,"  whioh  only 
closes  at  ch.  xzxvii.  14.  The  subject  of 
the  first  part  is  the  comfort  offered  to  Israel 
In  the  destruction  threatened  against  the 
heathen,  and  in  the  blessings  promised  to 
her  land  and  people. 


Ver.  1. — Prophesy  nnto  the  monntains  ot 
Israel.  This  prediction  must  be  read  in 
contrast,  first,  to  that  delivered  against  the 
mountains  of  Seii  in  the  last  chapter 
(zxzv.),  and,  seoondlyj  to  that  uttered 
against  the  mountains  of  Israel  at  an  earlier 
stage  of  Ezekiel's  activity  (ch.  vi.).  That 
"the  mountains  of  Israel"  was  a  familiar 
expression  for  the  land  of  Israel,  see  ch. 
vi.  1 ;  xvii.  22 ;  zxxiii.  28 ;  xxxiv.  14 ; 
xxxvii.  22 ;  xxxviii.  8 ;  and  oomp.  Ps. 
cxxi.  1 ;  Isa.  lii.  7. 

Ver.  2. — Beoatise  the  enemy  hath  said 
against  you.  The  ground  of  Jehovah's 
purposed  proceeding  against  Edom  and  the 
surrounding  heathen  peoples  (ver».  3,  5)  is 


CH.  XXXVI.  1—38.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PEOPHET  EZEKIEL. 


237 


«xpie8sly  declared  to  be  the  jubilation  over 
the  downfall  of  Israel,  and  the  eagerness 
with  which  they  sought  to  appropriate  to 
themselves  her  forsaken  land.  Aha  I  Ex- 
ulting over  Israel's  misfortune  (comp.  oh, 
XXV.  3;  Ps.  xl.  16).  The  anoient  high 
places,  which  Israel's  enemies  fancied  had 
become  theirs  in  possession,  were  probably 
"the  everlasting  hills"  of  Gen.  xlix.  26 
and  Deut.  xxxiii.  15,  the  principal  moun- 
tains of  Palestine,  which,  as  Havemick 
finely  observes,  were  "  the  honourable  wit- 
nesses and  indestructible  monuments  of 
that  ancient  blessing  spoken  by  Israel's 
ancestor,  and  still  resting  on  the  people ;  " 
land  to  assail  which  was,  in  consequence, 
not  only  to  sin  against  Jehovah,  but  to 
attempt  an  enterprise  foredoomed  to  failure 
-and  shame.  At  the  same  time,  Plumptre's 
suggestion  ('  Ezekiel :  an.Ideal  Biography,' 
Expositor,  vol.  viii.  284 ;  and  Unpublished 
Notes)  is  not  without  plausibility,  that,  con- 
sidering the  special  significance  of  the  term 
hamoth  in  Ezekiel,  the  phrase  should  be 
held  as  referring  to  the  sanctuaries  which 
stood  upon  those  heights — including,  of 
course,  the  chief  sanctuary,  or  temple  (Schro- 
der); in  support  of  which  the  dean  cites 
the  frequency  with  which  the  enemies  of 
Israel,  as,  for  instance,  the  Assyrians  and 
the  Moabites,  in  their  inscriptions,  boasted 
that  they  had  captured  these  sanctuaries 
(see  'Records  of  the  Fast,'  2nd  series, 
vol.  i.  p.  107 ;  ii.  203). 

Ver.  3.— Therefore,  Ewald  calls  atten- 
tion to  the  fivefold  repetition  of  this  con- 
junction, saying,  "  It  repeats  itself  five 
times,  the  reasons  [for  God's  judgments] 
against  these  enemies  thrusting  themselves 
forward,  before  the  discourse  calmly  dwells 
upon  the  mountains  of  Israel,  of  which  it  is 
-strictly  intended  to  treat."  As  it  were,  the 
prophet's  emotion  is  so  strong,  and  his  in- 
dignation against  Israel's  enemies  so  vehe- 
ment, that,  though  he  three  times  in  succes- 
sion begins  to  prophesy  to  the  mountains  of 
Israel,  he  on  each  occasion  breaks  off  before 
he  can  get  his  message  told,  to  expatiate 
upon  the  wickedness  of  Israel's  foes.  In  the 
prophet's  estimation  that  wickedness  was  so 
heinous  as  to  inevitably  carry  in  its  bosom 
appropriate  retribution.  Because— literally, 
hecauie  and  because,  or  even  because,  a  re- 
duplication for  the  Bake  of  emphasis,  as  in  ch. 
xiii.  10  and  Lev.  xxvi.  43 — they  have  made 
you  desolate,  and  swallowed  you  up  on 
every  side ;  literally,  watting  of  and  panting 
after  you  (are)  round  about.  Fairbairn, 
Ewald,  and  Smend,  deriving  nioK'  from  DK'j, 
"to  pant,"  rather  than  from  op^,  "to  lay 
waste,"  translate,  "because  there  is  snapping 
«nd  puffing  at  you  round  about,"  which 
Plumptre  thinks  "falls  in  better  with  the 
context,"  since  "  the  prophet's  spirit  seems 


to  dwell  throughout  on  the  derision  rather 
than  the  desolatinn  to  which  his  country, 
the  mountains  of  Israel,  had  been  subject." 
And  ye  are  taken  up ;  literally,  ye  are  made 
to  come,  if  'h})^  be  an  imperf.  niph.  of  nh^^ 
"to  go  up " "(EosenmuUer,  Schroder);  or, 
ye  are  come,  if  it  be  imperf.  kal  of  hhjl,  "  to 
press,  or  go  in"  (Bwald,  Havernick);  or,  ye 
are  gone  up,  if  it  be  second  pers.  kal  of  n^J{ 
(Hitzig,  Smend).  In  the  lips  of  talkers ; 
literally,  upon  the  lip  of  the  tongue — the  lip 
being  regarded  as  tne  instrument  or  organ 
with  which  the  tongue  speaks.  Havernick 
unnecessarily  takes  "  the  tongue  "  as  equiva- 
lent to  "  people  "  in  the  parallel  clause — 
a  signification  ]'iti'^  has  only  in  Isa.  Ixvi.  18; 

while  Kliefoth  views  it  as  synonymous  with 
"slander,"  as  in  Ps.  cxl.  11,  and  translates, 
"upon  the  lip  of  slander  and  of  the  evil 
report  of  the  people."  Keil  sees  in  "  the 
tongue "  a  personification  for  the  "  tongue- 
man"  or  talker  of  Ps.  cxl.  11 ;  and  Gesenius 
considers  the  two  clauses  as  tautological. 

Ver.  4. — The  rivers  (or,  channels,  bottoms, 
dales)  were  the  water-courses,  wadies,  or 
ravines  through  which  mountain  streams 
fiowed,  as  in  ch.  xxxv.  8 ;  and  the  residue 
of  the  heathen  were  the  surrounding  na- 
tions that  had  mucked  Israel  in  her  degra- 
dation, and  were  then  profiting  by  her  fall 
(comp.  Ps.  Ixxix.  4). 

Ver.  5. — Sorely.  n!?-d»},  the  particle  of 
adjuration,  as  in  ch.  v.  11;  xxxiii.  27; 
xxxiv.  8;  xxxviii.  19.  The  fire  of  my 
jealousy.  Zepbaniah  (i.  18 ;  iii.  8)  uses  the 
same  phrase.  Similar  expressions  occur  in 
ch.  xxi.  31,  "  the  fire  of  my  wrath ; "  and 
ch.  xxxviii.  19,  "in  my  jealousy  and  in 
the  fire  of  my  wrath  "  (comp.  Deut.  iv.  24). 
Against  all  Idumea.  Edom.  As  in  ch. 
xxxv.  15,  so  here,  it  is  the  wickedness,  more 
especially  of  the  Edomites,  that  excites  the 
prophet's  indignation.  They  had  not  only 
concluded  that  Israel's  territory  should  be 
to  them  for  a  possession,  but  they  had  done 
so  with  the  joy  of  all  their  heart,  and  with 
despiteful  minds ;  or,  with  contempt  of  soul 
(comp.  ch.  XXV.  6,  15);  i.e.  with  deadly 
(Ewald)  or  hearty  (Smend)  contempt. 
"The  temper  of  the  Edomites,"  writes 
Plumptre,  "  might  almost  serve  as  the  re- 
gulative instance  of  the  form  of  evil  for 
which  Aristotle  ('  Eth.  Nio.,*  2,  7, 15)  seems 
to  have  coined  the  word  4mxaipeKanCa,  the 
temper  which  rejoices  in  the  ills  that  fall 
on  others."  The  concluding  clause,  to  cast 
it  out  for  a  prey,  has  been  differently  ren- 
dered.   (1)  Begarding  n^'^ja  as  an  infinitive 

after  ]yah,  "  to  spoil  it,"  «.«.  the  laud  (Ge- 
senius), "  empty  out "  (Keil)  or  "  drive  out " 
(Ewald,  Smend)  its  inhabitants  (so  as  ti. 


2iH 


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxxvi.  1—38. 


get  It)  for  a  prey.  (2)  Taking  PiB'nm  as  a 
noua,  "for  the  sake  of  its  possesBion  for 
a  prey"  (Kliefoth),  "that  their  suburbs 
should  be  a  prey"  (Hengetenberg),  "on 
account  of  its  pasturage  for  a  prey  "  (Schro- 
der). (3)  Changing  13^  into  nh,  "  in  order 
to  plunder  its  produce  "  (Hitzig)  or  "  pas- 
turage' (Pairbairn). 

Verf  6,  7. — Because  ye  have  borne  the 
shame  it  the  heathen  (I'.e.  the  shame  cast 
upon  yon  by  the  heathen,  see  oh.  xxxiv. 
29)  .  .  .  Bvrely  the  heathen  that  are  about 
yon,  they  shall  bear  their  shame.  Not  the 
shame  which  should  be  cast  upon  them  by 
Israel,  which  would  be  retaliation,  but  their 
own  shame — the  shame  due  to  them  in 
virtue  of  the  Divine  law  of  retribution  (oh. 
xvi.  52),  their  own  curses  come  home  to 
roost,  Ezekiel  seeming  to  distinguish  be- 
tween retaliation  and  retribution.  "  The 
law  [of  retribution]  is  demanded  by  the 
absolute  righteou9nes3  of  God.  The  ju- 
dicial visitations  of  God  cannot  possibly  be 
one-sided.  Punishment  can  so  mucli  the 
less  strike  Israel  alone,  as  precisely  in  its 
punishment  the  deep  degradation  of  heathen- 
dom, its  apostasy  from  God  and  its  pride, 
has  set  itself  forth  in  the  most  striking 
way "  (Haverniok).  The  certainty  that 
this  law  would  operate  in  the  case  of  the 
heathen  no  less  than  in  that  of  Israel,  the 
prophet  expresses  by  representing  Jehovah 
•s  having  Ufted  np  his  hand,  or  sworn  that 
it  should  be  so  (eomp.  oh.  xx.  5,  6,  15,  23, 
28 ;  xlvii.  14;  Exod.  vi.  8;  Numb.  xiv.  30; 
Deut.  xxxii.  40 ;  and  Virgil,  '  Mneid,'  xii. 
195,  "Tenditque  ad  sidera  dextram"). 

Yer.  8. — For  they  are  at  hand  to  come. 
Keil  and  Plumptre  make  the  subject  of  the 
verb  the  material  blessings  in  which  Israel's 
prosperity  is  depicted  as  consisting,  viz.  the 
foliage  and  fruit  her  mountains  were  soon 
to  bear  for  the  people  of  Jehovah.  The 
majority  of  expositors  believe  the  subject  to 
be  the  people  whose  return  from  exile  was 
in  this  way  declared  to  be  approaching. 
Nor  is  there  any  reason  why  Ezekiel  should 
not  have  represented  the  return  from  exile 
as  an  event  soon  to  take  place,  since  of  the 
seventy  years  of  captivity  predicted  by 
Jeremiah  (xxv.  11)  at  least  twenty  years 
had  passed,  if  its  commencement  be  dated 
from  the  fourth  year  of  Jehoiakim  (ch. 
xxxiii.  21);  and  the  ful61ment  of  Jehovah's 
promise  was  to  the  prophet  so  mucli  a 
matter  of  certainty  (ch.  xi.  17)  that  his 
fervent  imagination  conceived  it  as  at 
hand. 

Ver.  9.— I  am  for  you.  He  had  pre- 
viously been  against  (ch.  v.  8  ;  xiii.  8),  but 
was  now  for  Israel  and  against  Seir  (ch. 
XXXV.  3).  This  change  of  dispensation 
implied  no   mutation  in  God,  but  merely 


that,  as  God  had  previously  visited  Israel 
with  judgment  on  account  of  sin,  so'  hence- 
forth would  he  visit  her  with  grace  on  con- 
dition of  repentance.  I  will  turn  unto  yon. 
Always  it  is  presupposed  that  Israel  turns 
unto  Jehovah. 

Vers.  10,  1 1. — I  will  multiply  men  upon 
you.  Jehovali's  promise  contemplated  a 
return  of  botli  sections  of  the  Goldh,  the 
whole  house  of  Israel,  Ephraim  as  well  us 
Judah  (comp.  ch.  xx.  40),  to  the  land  from 
which  they  had  been  deported,  and  a  re- 
storation of  the  united  kingdom  to  a  con- 
dition of  prosperity  in  which  its  cities 
should  again  be  inhabited,  its  ruined  home- 
steads repaired,  its  fields  cultivated,  and 
its  flocks  and  herds  multiplied  (see  ch. 
xvi.  55;  Isa.  xliv.  26;  liv.  3;  Ixi.  4)— a 
condition  of  prosperity  so  great  that  it 
should  surpass  any  measure  or  degree  of 
good  fortune  previously  enjoyed  (comp. 
Deut.  XXX.  5 ;  Job  xlii.  12). 

Ver.  14. — Thou  shalt  devour  men  no  more, 
Prom  the  middle  of  ver.  12  the  form  of 
address  changes  from  the  plural  to  the 
singular,  the  whole  country,  mountains, 
and  valleys  being  regarded  as  one  land,  as 
in  Deut.  iii.  25.  The  charge  preferred 
against  the  country  by  her  enemies  was  that 
she  had  been  a  land  that  devoured  men 
and  "  bereaved  its  nations  "  (or,  "  nation," 
Revised  Version) ;  literally,  an  eater-up  of 
men  and  a  hereaver  of  thy  ncUitme;  i.e.  of 
Israel  and  Judah,  perhaps  also  of  the 
Oanaanites,  their  predecessors  (Fausset), 
the  image  being  that  of  a  wild  beast  which 
ravages  the  population  and  makes  tliem 
childless,  as  in  ch.  v.  17  and  xiv.  15  (Smend), 
rather  than  that  of  an  unnatural  mother,  a 
Babenmutter,  as  in  2  Kings  vi.  29,  who 
devours  her  offspring  (Ewald).  This  charge, 
in  which,  perhaps,  the  prophet  detected  an 
allusion  to  Numb.  xiii.  32,  had  certainly 
in  times  past  been  true;  not,  however,  as 
Hengsteiiberg  suggests,  because  the  land 
had  been  "  an  apple  of  discord  for  the 
Asiatic  and  African  powers,"  or,  as  Ewald 
explains,  because  "  the  tremendous  restless- 
ness, the  excited  push  and  liurry  of  such  a 
mentally  active  city  must  in  any  case  have 
used  up  its  inhabitants  more  rapidly ; " 
but,  as  Keil,  Plumptre,  and  others  interpret, 
because  of  the  judgments  of  sword,  famine, 
and  pestilence  sent  upon  the  land  by  Je- 
hovah for  its  sins.  These  judgments  had 
so  destroyed  its  inhabitants,  tirst  the  Ga- 
naanites,  and  latterly  the  two  peoples  of 
Israel  and  Judah,  that  "  those  who  looked 
upon  it  deemed  it  a  fatal  land,  which 
brought  destruction  to  all  who  should 
occupy  it"  (Ourrey).  In  the  golden  age 
to  which  the  prophet  looked  forward,  no 
such  reproach  should  be  possible.  Not 
only  should  the  land  not  bereave  its  nationt 


CH.  XXXVI.  1-38.]    THE    BOOK  OF   THE  PROPHET  EZBKIEL. 


23S 


(according  to  the  Keri,  followed  by  the 
Authorized  and  Bevised  Veraiona,  as  well 
as  by'Ewald  and  Smend),  but  (according 
to  the  Chethib,  preferred  by  Keil,  Kliefoth, 
Havernick,  Heugatenberg,  Schroder,  and 
Plumptre)  it  ahould  not  even  cause  them 
(or  it)  to  stumble ;  <.«.  should  no  more 
cause  its  inhabitants  to  lapse  into  those 
sins,  amongst  which  idolatry  stood  promi- 
nent, which  entailed  on  them  ruin.  Heng- 
Btenberg's  idea,  that  "moral  stumbling  is 
not  to  be  thought  of  in  this  connection," 
is  certainly  to  be  rejected. 

Ver.  15. — Neither  will  I  cause  men  to 
hear  in  thee — ht  thee  hear,  proclaim  againit 
thee  (Bevised  Version);  or  literally,  cause 
to  he  heard  against  thee — the  shame  of  the 
heathen  any  more;  i.e.  the  contemptuous 
■peech  uttered  againat  thee  by  the  heathen, 
equivalent  to  the  reproach  of  the  people;  or, 
peoples ;  ie.  the  reproach  cast  upon  thee  by 
the  nations  (see  oh.  xvi.  57;  xxii.  4;  and 
comp.  Josh.  T.  9;  Mioah  vi.  16),  rather 
than,  as  Currey  suggests,  the  reproach  cast 
upon  thee  by  thy  rightful  possessors  for 
want  of  fortuity.  This  prophecy  clearly 
looked  beyond  the  return  from  exile  under 
Zerubbabel  and  Joshua,  Ezra  and  Neho- 
miah,  since  under  these  leaders  only  a 
portion  of  the  whole  house  of  Israel  re- 
established themselves  in  Canaan,  while 
the  land  was  often  afterwards  subjected  to 
reproach  and  oppression  under  heathen 
powers.  At  the  same  time,  the  home- 
coming from  Babylon  and  the  prosperity 
that  ensued  thereupon  were  partial  fulfil- 
ments of  the  blessings  here  promised, 

Ver.  16.— The  oracle,  commencing  with 
this  verae  and  extending  to  ch.  xxxvii.  11, 
has  an  ultimate  connection  with  that  which 
precedes.     Having  predicted  a  golden  age 
in  the  future  for  Israel,  when  her  people 
should  have  returned  from  banishment,  her 
cities  should   again  be  inhabited  and  her 
fields  cultivated,  the  prophet  is  directed  (1) 
to  explain  that  the  ground  of  this  would 
not  lie  in  any  wortliiness  Jehovah  should 
behold  in  Israel,  who  had  rather  in  the 
past  been  punii>hed  and  dispersed  (vers.  16 — 
20),  but  only  in  the  regard  he,  Jehovah, 
should   have  for  his  own  holy  Name  or 
character  (vers.  21 — 24);  (2)  to  intimate 
that  this  glorious  period  should  be  accom- 
panied by  a  moral  and  spiritual  renovation 
of  the  people,  which,  however,  could  and 
therefore  would  be  brought  about  only  by 
God  himself  giving  them  a  new  heart  and 
a  new  spirit,  again  for  his  own  Name's  sake 
(vers.  25—32),  and  which,  when  attained, 
should  lead  to  a  prosperity  so  unparalleled 
as  to  recall  the  pristine  splendours  of  earth's 
paradisiacal   condition,  and    convince   the 
heathen  tiiat  should   then  be  sharers  in 
Israel's    felicity  that  Jehovah  alone  was 


God  (vers.  33—38) ;  and  (8)  io  remove  •!] 
doubt  from  the  people's  minds  as  to  iha 
possibility  of  this  happening  by  the  vision 
of  the  dry  bones  (ch.  xxxvii.  1 — ^14). 

Vers.  16— 20.— That  Israel's  restoration 
should  not  be  brought  about  on  account  of 
Israel's  merit,  the  prophet  shows  by  briefly 
rehearsing  the  story  of  Israel's  demerit,  as 
the  reason  of  her  exile. 

Ver.  17.— Their  way  wai  before  me. 
Their  ways  and  doings,  i.e.  their  violent 
deeds  and  idolatrous  practices  (ver.  18),  were 
as  morally  loathsome  in  Jehovah's  sight  as 
the  uncleanness  of  a  woman  in  her  separa- 
tion was  materially  disgusting.  The  com- 
parison may  have  been  derived  from  Isa. 
Ixiv.  6,  but  was  as  likely  to  have  been 
original,  seeing  Bzekiel  was  a  priest-prophet, 
to  whom  the  details  of  the  Levitical  Law 
must  have  been  familiar  (comp.  oh.  xviii.  6  • 
Lev.  IV.  19). 

Ver.  19. — Aooordisg  to  their  way  and 
according  to  their  doings  I  jndged  them. 
The  language  hints  at  a  correspondence 
between  the  punishment  and  the  crime.  As 
a  woman  in  her  separation  was  not  only 
defiled,  but  separated  from  the  congregation 
(Lev.  XV.  19),  ao  Israel,  having  defiled  both 
herself  and  her  land,  required  to  be  removed 
from  it  (Lev.  xviii.  28).  And  she  waa. 
Jehovah  scattered  her  among  the  heathen 
and  dispersed  her  through  the  countries. 

Ver.  20.— They  profaned  my  holy  Name ; 
or,  the  name  of  my  holiness.     According  to 
Kliefoth,  the  subject  of  the  verb  is  "the 
heathen,"  but  expositors  generally  regard 
it  as  "the   house  of  Israel"   of  ver.   17. 
Plumptre  thinks  that  "  while  grammatically 
the  words  may  refer  to  either  the  heathen 
or  the  exiles  of  Israel,  possibly  the  sentence 
was  purposely  left  vague,  so  as  to  describe 
the  fact  in  which  both  were  sharers,"  and 
cites  in  support  of  this  view  similar  con- 
structions in  Isa.  Iv.  5  and  Bom.  ii.  24. 
What  led  to  the  profanation  of  Jehovah's 
Name  by  the  heathen  was  the  arrival  among 
them,  not  of  the  news  of  the  calamity  which 
had   befallen   Israel  (Kliefoth,   Hengsten- 
berg),  but  of  the  house  of  Israel  itaelf ;  and 
the  actual  profanation  lay  in  this,  that, 
having  beheld  the  exiles,  they  said,  These 
are  the  people  of  the  Lord,  and  they  are 
gone  forth  out  of  his  land.    As  the  heathen 
recognized  only  local  divinities,  they  con- 
cluded Jehovah  had  either  behaved  capri- 
ciously towards  his  people  and  oast  them  off 
(comp.  Jer.  xxiii  40;  xxix.  18;  xxxiii.  24), 
or  had  proved  unequal  to  the  task  of  pro- 
tecting them,  so  that  they  had  been  driven 
off  (comp.  cli.  XI.  5,  etc.;  Numb.  xiv.  16; 
Jer.  xiv.  9).     In  either  case,  the  honour  of 
Jehovah  had  been  lessened  in  the  minds 


240 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [ch.  xxxvi.  1—38. 


anil  tarnished  by  the  words  of  the  heathen, 
and  inasmuch  as  this  result  had  beun  brought 
about  by  Israel's  sin,  on  Israel  properly  the 
blame  lay. 

Yei.  21. — ^I  had  pity  for  mine  holy  Name. 
Ha vemiok,  after  the  LXX.,  wrongly  renders, 
"  I  spared  (them,  i.e.  Israel)  for  my  holy 
Name's  sake ;  "  but  the  preposition  "  for " 
oi  -'  upon  "  following  the  verb  usually  marks 
the  object  upon  which  the  aotiou  of  the  verb 
terminates  (see  ch.  zvi.  5).  Gesenius  trans- 
lates, "  I  will  be  sparing  of  my  holy  Name ; " 
i.e.  I  will  care  for  its  honour. 

Yer.  22. — Not  for  your  sakes  ,  .  .  bnt  for 
mine  holy  Name's  sake.  Thus  Jehovah 
repudiates  the  claim  of  merit  on  Israel's 
part  (comp.  ver.  32) ;  and  if  Israel  bad  no 
claim  on  Jehovah  for  deliverance  from  the 
Uabylonibh  exile  any  more  than  she  had  at 
first  to  be  put  in  possession  of  Ounaan  (Deut. 
ix.  6),  much  less  has  fallen  man  a  claim  on 
God  for  salvation  from  the  condemnation 
and  dominion  of  sin  (Rom.  xi.  6 ;  Eph.  ii. 
8 — 10).  As  the  essential  holiness  and 
righteousness  of  God  were  the  real  reason 
of  Israel's  exile  and  dispersion  among  the 
nations,  so  were  these  qualities  in  God  the 
ultimate  grounds  to  which  Israel's  recovery 
and  restoration  should  be  traced, 

Ver.  23.— I  will  sanctify  my  great  Name ; 
i.e.  the  name  of  my  holiness  (Deut.  xxviii. 
58;  P».  viii.  1;  Mai.  i.  11).  As  Israel's  dis- 
persion had  caused  that  Name  to  be  pro- 
faned, so  Israel's  restoration  would  secure 
that  it  should  be  magnified  among  the 
heathen  (oh.  xxxviii.  23),  who  should  learu 
from  this  event  tliat  their  previous  ideas  of 
Jehovah,  as  a  feeble  and  local  divinity,  had 
been  wrong.  The  question  whether  your 
eyes,  as  in  the  Hebrew  text,  or  "  their  eyes," 
as  in  many  ancient  versions,  should  be  retid 
is  debated.  The  latter  reading  appears  to 
be  demanded  by  the  usus  loquendi  of  Ezekiel 
(see  ch.  xx.  41;  xxviii.  25;  xxxviii.  16; 
xxxix.  27),  and  is  adopted  by  both  English 
versions  as  well  as  by  interpreters  of  emi- 
nence ;  but  other  expositors  of  equal  name 
adhere  to  the  former  reading  on  the  ground 
that  the  sanctifying  of  Jehovah's  Name  in 
the  eyes  of  Israel  was  an  indispensable  pre- 
liminary to  its  sanctification  in  the  eyes  of 
the  heathen.  Havemick  regards  "their 
eyes  "  as  "  an  obvious  emendation  to  relieve 
a  difficulty,"  to  which  in  no  case  should 
criticism  accord  the  preference ;  while  Keil 
gives  it  the  preference,  though  admitting 
that  "  your  eyes  "  can  be  justilied. 

Ver.  24. — I  will  take  you  from  among  the 
heathen ;  or,  nations.  The  first  step  in  the 
sanctification  of  J  ehovah's  Name.  A  promise 
already  given  (ch.  xi,  17;  xx.  41,  42),  and 
afterwards  repeated  (oh.  xxxvii.  21).  The 
mention  of  "  all  countries  "  shows  the  pro- 
phet's gaze  to  have  been  directed  beyond 


the  present  or  immediate  future.  The  Israel 
of  Ezekiel's  time  had  not  been  scattered 
among  and  could  not  be  gathered  from  all 
countries ;  yet  in  the  years  that  have  passed 
since  then  Ezekiel's  language  as  to  Israel's 
dispersion  has  been  literally  fulfilled.  Where- 
fore the  inference  is  reasonable  that  the  re- 
assembling to  which  Ezekiel  refers  is  an 
event  that  has  not  yet  occurred,  at  least  in 
its  fullest  measure  and  degree,  but  will  only 
then  be  realized  completely  and  finally 
when  the  scattered  members  of  the  house  o( 
Israel  shall  have  been  received  into  the 
Christian  Church  (Eom.  xi.  25,  26). 

Ver.  25.— Then  (literaljy,  and)  I  will 
sprinkle  clean  water  upon  yon.  The  second 
step  in  the  sanctification  of  Jehovah's  Name, 
and  one  absolutely  necessary  to  render  the 
preceding  either  permanent  or  valuable,  was 
the  moral  renovation  of  the  people ;  and  in 
this  the  first  stage  was  the  forgiveness  of  the 
people's  sins.  The  image  under  which  this 
is  set  forth,  "  sprinkling  with  clean  water," 
would  naturally  present  itself  to  a  priest- 
prophet  such  as  Ezekiel.  Jarohi,  Bosen- 
miiller,  Hengstenberg,  and  others  suppose 
the  allusion  to  be  to  the  water  of  purification 
prepared  by  mixing  running  water  with  the 
ashes  of  a  red  heifer  (Numb.  xix.  17 — 19), 
and  in  the  account  given  of  this  rite  the 
verb  for  "  sprinkle  "  is  that  used  by  Ezekiel, 
viz.  pni.  Havemick  prefers  the  rite  per- 
formed in  tlie  consecration  of  the  Levites 
(Numb.  viii.  7,  21).  Smend,  who  holds  the 
priest-code  had  no  existence  in  Ezekiel's 
day,  traces  the  image  to  Zech.  xiii.  1  or  Ps. 
li.  2,  though  he  also  cites  Numb.  viii.  19. 
Hilzig,  Kliefoth,  and  Currey  think  of  the 
lustrations  of  the  Law  in  general ;  and  per- 
haps this  best  explains  the  prophet's  lan- 
guage, since  the  element  sprinkled  is  not 
"blood"  or  "water  mixed  with  ashes,"  but 
"  clean  water,"  "  the  best  known  means  of 
purification "  (Sohio  ier).  As  to  whether 
legal  or  moral  cleansing  were  intended  by 
the  prophet,  possibly  Ezekiel  drew  no  sharp 
distinction  between  the  two,  such  as  the 
New  Testament  draws  between  justification 
and  sanctification  ;  if  he  did,  then  tlie  figure 
in  the  text  must  be  taken  as  alluding  rather 
to  the  former  than  to  the  latter — rather  to 
the  forgiveness  of  Israel's  sin  than  to  the 
regeneration  of  Israel's  heart,  which  is  next 
referred  to. 

Vers.  26,  27.— A  new  heart  also  will  I 
give  yon,  and  a  new  spirit  will  I  put  within 
yon.  The  third  step  in  the  progress  of 
sanctifying  Jehovah's  Name  (comp.  oh. 
zi.  19,  where  a  similar  promise  is  made,  and 
oh.  xviii.  81,  where  tlie  new  heart  is  repre- 
sented as  a  thing  Israel  must  make  for  her- 
self). This  antinomy  frequently  occurs  in 
Scripture,  which  never  shrinks  from  holding 
man  responsible  for  the.  production  of  that, 


OH.  XXXVI.  1—38.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPHET  EZEKIEL. 


211 


as  e.g.  faith,  for  which  he  is  incompetent 
without  the  help  of  Divine  graoe.  Besides 
the  oleansing  of  her  guilt  and  her  restitution 
In  consequence  to  Jehovah's  favour,  Israel 
is  promised  such  an  inward  renovation  of 
her  moral  and  spiritual  disposition  as  to 
secure  that  she  shall  in  future  adhere  to 
the  worship  and  service  of  Jehovah.  This 
phange   is  desorlhed  in   a   fourfold  way, 

(1)  Negatively,  as  a  removal  of  the  old, 
stony,  unsusceptible  heart,  which  had  re- 
mained impervious  to  all  appeals  and  insen- 
sible to  all  higher  feelings  (Zech.  vii.  12). 

(2)  Positively,  as  a  new  heart  and  a  new 
spirit,  called  elsewhere  "one  heart"  and 
"a  heart  of  flesh"  (oh.  xi.  19;  Jer.  xxxii. 
89),  "a  heart  to  know  God"  (Jer.  xxiv.  7). 

(3)  Causally,  its  existence  being  traced  to 
the  indwelling  of  0od's  Spirit,  who  writes 
God's  Law  upon  the  new  heart,  and  inclines 
it  to  a  life  of  obedience  thereto  (Jer.  xxxi. 
S3).  (1)  Praetioally,  by  its  manifestation, 
walking  in  God's  statutes  and  keeping  God's 
judgments  («h.  xi.  20).  The  account  here 
furnished  of  the  moral  and  spiritual  change 
proposed  to  be  in*rnught  on  Israel  cor- 
responds exactly  with  that  given  in  the 
New  Testament  of  the  regeneration  of  the 
individual  soul  (John  iii.  3 — 8 ;  Bom.  viii. 
2,  5,  9;  Gal.  v.  22;  Titus  iii.  5,  6;  1  Pet. 
L22). 

Vers.  28 — 31  describe  the  results  which 
■hould  follow  in  Israel's  experience  when 
God  slionld  have  thus  gathered,  cleansed, 
and  renewed  them.  They  should  then 
J>ave  (1)  permanent  occupation  of  the  land 
(ver.  28);  (2)  covenant  relationship  with 
God  as  his  people  (ver.  28);  (3)  protection 
against  future  lapsing  into  idolatry  and  im- 
morality (ver.  29);  (4)  abundant  supply 
for  every  want  (vers.  29,  30);  and  (5)  a 
deepening  sense  of  self-humiliation  on  ac- 
oount  of  and  repentance  for  past  sin  (ver. 
81). 

Ver.  28. — ^Ye  shall  dwell  in  the  land.  As 
the  Jews  who  returned  &om  Babylon  did 
not  permanently  dwell  in  the  land,  but 
were  again  ejected  from  it,  the  promise  con- 
tained in  these  words  must  be  viewed  as 
having  been  conditional  on  the  realization 
of  the  moral  and  spiritual  purity  above 
described.  If,  therefore,  it  be  argued  that 
inasmuch  as  this  promise  must  be  fulfilled 
(2  Oor.  i.  20;  Heb.  x.  23),  the  Jews  must 
yet  be  restored  to  Palestine,  the  reply  is 
that  their  return  can  only  take  place  when 
they  have  been  converted  to  Christianity; 
■o  that  the  whole  promise  must  be  regarded 
•i  receiving  its  highest  fulfilment  in  the 
experiences  of  the  Church  of  Christ.  That 
this  view  is  correct  is  vouched  for  by  the 

EZEKIEL — II. 


fact  that  the  words.  Ye  shall  he  my  people, 
and  I  will  be  your  God  (comp.  ch.  xi.  20 ; 
Jer.  vii.  23 ;  xi.  4 ;  xxx.  22),  descriptive  of 
the  covenant  relationship  in  whioh  Jehovah 
stood  towards  Israel  (Exod.  xix.  5;  Lev. 
xxvi.  12;  Deut.  xxvi.  17,  18),  have  been 
chosen  by  Kew  Testament  writers  to  set 
forth  the  relationship  of  God  towards  the 
Christian  Church,  first  here  on  earth  (2  Cor. 
vi.  16 — 18),  and  afterwards  in  the  heavenly 
Jerusalem  (Bev.  xxi.  3). 

Yer.  29.— From  all  yonr  unoleannesses. 
The  same  word  as  in  ver.  25,  though  with  a 
difference  in  mpaning.  From  their  unolean- 
ness  of  the  past  they  have  already  been 
saved  (ver.  25) ;  the  present  promise  guaran- 
tees preservation  against  future  lapsing  into 
uncleanness,  i.e.  the  filthiness  of  idol-service. 
"With  this,"  writes  Plumptre,  "the  neces- 
sity for  temporal  chastisements  as  a  correc- 
tive discipline  should  cease,  and  there  would 
be  nothing  to  check  the  full  outpouring  of 
all  material  as  well  as  spiritual  blessings." 
Witli  the  phrase,  I  will  call  for  the  corn, 
compare  the  similar  expressions  in  2  KingB 
vUi.  1 ;  Hos.  ii.  23,  etc. ;  Jer.  xxxi.  12 ;  Zech. 
ii.17. 

Ver.  31. — ^Ye  shall  loathe  yourselves  in 
your  own  sight  (comp.  ch.  xvi.  61 ;  xlii.  10). 
The  last  result  of  this  enlarged  experience 
of  the  Divine  goodness  would  be  to  quicken 
in  the  heart  of  forgiven  and  renewed  Israel 
a  sense  of  shame  and  a  feeling  of  repentance 
(comp.  Bom.  iL  4). 

Yer.  32  repeats  and  emphasizes  the  thought 
of  ver.  22,  that  the  true  ground  of  God's 
{n^oious  dealing  with  Israel  should  be  found, 
not  in  their  merit,  but  in  his  grace.  So  far 
as  their  ways  were  concerned,  there  was 
cause  only  for  judgment  on  his  part  and 
self-humiliation  on  theirs. 

Yers.  33—36  describe  the  effect  of  Israel's 
restored  prosperity  on  the  innounding 
nations. 

Yer.  35. — This  land  that  was  desolate  is 
become  like  the  garden  of  Eden.  (For  the 
reverse  picture,  see,  Joel  il  3.)  The  thought 
of  the  first  Paradise  (Gen.  ii.  8),  in  the  his- 
toricity of  which  clearly  EzeMel  believed, 
was  one  on  which  his  mind  often  dwelt  (oh. 
xxviii.  13;  xxxi.  9)  as  an  ideal  of  earthly 
beauty  and  fertility  which  should  recur  in 
the  closing  age  of  the  world — a  hope  which 
appears  to  have  been  shared  by  Isaiah  (11. 
3),  and  taken  up  by  John  (Bev.  ii.  7 ;  xxii.  1 
—3).  In  the  day  when  that  hope  should  be 
realized  for  Israel,  the  waste,  desolate,  and 
ruined  cities,  on  which  the  passers-by  who 
visited  Palestine  gazed,  should  be  fenced 
and  inhabited ;  literally,  inhabited  at  for- 
trettei.  The  three  predicates, "  waste,"  "  deso  ^ 
late,"  and  "  ruined,"  have  been  distinguished 
as  signifying  "  stripped  of  its  inhabitants," 


242 


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  BZEKIEL.    [ch.  xxxvi.  1—38. 


"nniilled  in  its  lands,"  and  "broken  down 
in  its  buUdings ; "  in  contrast  with  which, 
in  the  golden  era  of  the  future,  the  towns 
ehonld  oe  inhabited,  the  fields  tilled,  and 
the  ruined  fortresses  built. 

Yer.  36. — The  heathen  that  are  left  round 
about  yon.  The  language  presupposes  that 
at  or  before  the  time  of  Israel's  restoration 
the  judgments  pronounced  against  the 
nations  will  hare  overtaken  them,  so  that 
only  a  remnant  of  them  will  be  then  in 
existence.  Kliefoth  and  Currey  view  this 
remnant  as  those  who  shall  have  been  con- 
verted out  of  heathendom  and  become 
attached  to  the  oommonity  of  Israel,  like 
"  the  nations  of  the  saved  "  in  Bev.  xxi.  24 ; 
Keil,  with  more  accuracy,  regards  their  con- 
version as  resulting  from  their  reception 
of  the  hand  of  God  in  building  again  the 
wastes  places  of  Jerusalem. 

Ver.  37.— I  will  yet  for  this  be  inquired 
of  by  the  house  of  IsraeL  On  two  previoos 
oooasioDB  (ch.  xiv.  3;  xz.  3),  Jehovah  had 
declined  to  be  inquired  of  by  the  hypocri- 
tical and  idol-loving  elders  of  Israel,  who 
pretended  to  consult  him  through  his  pro- 
phet ;  now  he  makes  it  known  that  in  the 
future  era  no  barrier  of  moral  and  spiritual 
unfitness  on  their  part  will  prevent  their 
free  approach  to  his  throne,  but  rather  that 
they  will  come  to  him  with  fervent  snppli- 


oations  for  the  very  blessings  he  has  pro- 
mised. In  answerto  their  prayers.he  engages, 
going  back  to  the  language  of  ch.  xxxiv.  22, 
to  increase  them  with  men  like  a  flook — in- 
correctly rendered  by  Kliefoth  to  "multiply 
them  so  that  they  shall  become  the  flock  of 
mankind."  Thus  he  meets  the  despondency 
of  those  among  the  exiles  who,  fixing  their 
attention  on  the  small  number  of  them  who 
should  form  the  new  Israel — ^thoee  who 
should  return  with  those,  perhaps,  who  still 
remained  in  the  land — could  not  see  how 
Israel's  future  prosperity  was  to  be  secured. 
Yer.  38. — The  people  who  should  occupy 
the  land  of  Israel  in  the  coming  age  ehoi^d 
be  as  the  holy  flook — literally,  a*  thefloek  of 
hdy  things,  or  beasts ;  t.e.  of  sacrificial  lamba 
— as  the  flook  of  Jerusalem  in  her  solema 
feasts;  literally,  in  her  appointed  times;  i.a. 
her  festal  seasons  (comp.  Micah  ii.  12),  re- 
ferring to  the  three  well-known  annual  occa- 
sions when  the  male  population  of  the  land 
came  to  the  sanctuary  (Dent.  zvi.  16),  and 
when  in  consequence  the  flocks  and  herda 
poured  into  the  metropolis  were  well-nigh 
past  reckoning  (see  2  Chron.  xxix.  33; 
XXXV.  7 ;  and  comp.  Josephus, '  Wars,'  vi.  9. 
S).  Perhaps  in  addition  to  the  idea  of  the 
multiplication  of  the  people,  that  of  their 
dedication  to  the  service  of  Jehovah  is  sug- 
gested by  the  prophet'i  language. 


HOMILETIOa 

Yer.  2, — Prematura  Mwnph.  The  enemies  of  Israel  were  triumphing  OTer  the 
fallen  nation,  but  prematurely ;  for  they  did  not  reckon  on  a  possibility  of  a  restora- 
tion.   This  is  like  the  triumph  of  evil  over  the  ruined  world. 

I.  Thbbb  IB  A  TRIUMPH  OF  BTiL.  1.  In  the  fttU  of  man.  When  Adam  fell  it 
seemed  as  though  the  greatest  work  of  God  had  been  hopelessly  ruined  almost  aa 
soon  as  it  appeared.  No  sooner  was  man  made  in  the  image  of  God  than  he  grovelled 
in  the  dust,  and  marred  the  heavenly  likeness  with  ugly  stains  of  sins.  2.  In  the 
history  of  primitive  man.  So  evil  is  man  that  the  whole  race,  with  the  exception  of  a 
single  family,  is  swept  off  the  face  of  the  earth.  Once  more  the  world  is  reduced  to  a 
desolate  condition,  once  more  evil  seems  to  have  conquered.  3.  In  th*  trouble*  of  the 
Hebrews.  The  people  of  God  become  oppressed  slaves  in  Egypt.  "  Where  is  the  pro- 
mise delivered  to  the  fathers?"  4.  In  the  failure  to  enter  Palestine.  The  Israelites 
reach  the  borders  of  the  land,  and  are  then  driven  back  defeated,  and  compelled  to 
wander  in  the  wilderness  for  forty  years.  5.  In  the  miserable  days  of  the  Judges. 
When  the  land  was  at  length  possessed,  it  was  not  found  to  be  all  milk  and  honey.  War 
and  wickedness,  sorrow  and  shame,  make  the  first  ages  of  the  possession  of  Canaan 
almost  the  darkest  period  in  Jewish  history,  6.  The  wickednest  of  later  days.  The 
story  of  Israel  is  a  story  of  repeated  rebellions  against  God,  and  repeated  Divine 
chastisements.  7.  In  the  Captivity.  When  the  two  nations  were  driven  into  captivity, 
and  their  territory  devastated  by  the  heathen,  the  triumph  of  the  enemies  of  the 
people  of  God  seemed  to  be  complete.  8.  In  the  cruelty  of  later  days.  Eastern 
empires,  the  Seleucidss,  and  the  Romans  successively  triumphed  over  and  oppressed 
the  once  favoured  people.  9.  In  the  cross  of  Christ.  Here,  indeed,  the  enemies  of 
righteousness  reach  their  crowning  triumph.  Satan  now  exults  over  the  sorrow  and 
death  of  the  Son  of  man.  10.  Jn  the  history  of  Christendom,  This  has  not  been  a 
history  of  continuous  growth  and  victory  over  eviL    First  there  were  the  great  per- 


OH.  xxsvi.  1— 38.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  243 

■ecutions.    Then  followed  the  great  apostasy.    The  dark  ages  marked  the  triumph  of 
Ignorance  and  cruelty.    To-day  the  powers  of  evil  are  mighty  and  exultant. 

II.  This  tbiumph  will  be  bevbbsbd.  It  is  premature.  We  have  not  yet  reached 
the  end  of  the  story.  The  battle  is  still  raging;  it  is  too  early  for  the  foe  to  sing  his 
pasans  of  victory.  All  along  the  dark  recital  of  victories  of  evil  there  hai  been  the 
alternative  picture  of  Divine  deliverance.  We  make  a  mistake  when  we  dwell  only 
on  the  gloomy  side  of  history.  Qod  has  been  revealing  himself  in  history.  Not  only 
did  he  save  the  eight  in  the  ark.  He  delivered  all  Israel  from  Egypt.  He  gave 
Canaan,  and  he  gave  restoration  from  the  Captivity.  He  sent  his  Son  to  save  the 
world.  In  the  darkest  hour  when  Christ  hung  dying  on  the  cross  while  evil  seemed 
to  be  most  triumphant,  victory  was  really  being  won  by  that  very  death  of  the  world'i 
Saviour.  We  have  not  seen  the  end  yet.  Perhaps  we  are  on  the  fringe  of  a  great 
contest  between  the  servants  of  Christ  and  his  foes.  But  never  was  the  work  of  Christ 
more  manifest  than  it  is  to-day  in  Christian  activity  at  home  and  in  the  harvest  of  the 
mission-field  abroad.  While  the  imbeliever  exults  in  what  he  thinks  is  the  demon- 
■tration  of  the  falsehood  of  Christianity  and  the  sure  prospect  of  its  speedy  downfall, 
there  are  more  earnest  active  Christians  at  work  than  ever  there  were.  By  the  grace 
of  God  we  may  trust  that,  though  the  battle  is  still  fierce,  we  are  moving  on  to  victory 
under  the  Captain  of  our  salvation. 

Ters.  8,  9. — Eetuming  prosperity.  L  Eestobatioh  of  charaotkb  bbings  a 
betubn  ov  fbospebity.  During  the  absence  of  the  captives  in  Babylon  their  land 
fell  into  decay.  The  mountains  which  had  been  carefully  terraced  for  vines  were 
neglected,  just  as  they  are  to-day  on  the  hills  about  Jerusalem,  where  rows  of  stones 
mark  the  site  of  the  ancient  terraces.  Sin  ultimately  ruins  the  outer  as  well  as  the 
inner  man,  for  the  prosperity  of  the  wicked  is  but  temporary,  and  though  it  may 
extend  through  an  individual  lifetime,  it  must  break  down  during  the  course  of  the 
longer  life  of  a  nation.  But  on  the  other  hand,  restoration  to  God  undoes  the  ruin 
of  the  outer  life.  This  too  may  be  a  slow  process.  The  individual  man  who  has 
beggared  himself  with  sinful  extravagance  may  never  become  rich;  but  the  nation 
that  hai  returned  to  better  ways  of  Uving  wUl  in  time  reap  the  good  results  of  its 
renovation  of  character  even  on  earth.  When  we  think  not  only  of  external  prosperity, 
but  of  inward  blessedness,  the  result  is  seen  sooner,  and  it  is  found  in  every  individual 
soul  that  is  pardoned  and  renewed.  No  one  need  despair  of  his  present  desolation. 
Bepentance  renews  the  face  of  the  penitent's  whole  life. 

II.  This  betubn  of  fbospebity  is  caused  by  a  betubn  of  God.  "For  behold 
I  am  with  you,  and  I  will  turn  unto  you."  God  had  abandoned  the  guilty  land. 
Therefore  a  blight  had  fallen  upon  it.  If  God  deserts  a  man,  nothing  can  really  prosper 
with  him.  He  may  still  coin  gold  in  his  business,  but  it  will  be  a  curse  to  him. 
When  God  smiles  upon  a  man's  life  he  brings,  not  necessarily  wealth,  but  certainly 
welfare.  It  would  be  well  for  everybody  to  ask  himself — ^Is  my  business  such  that  I  dare 
ask  God  into  it?  Can  I  regard  my  workshop  as  a  temple,  or  my  work  as  a  sacrifice? 
For  these  are  the  conditions  on  which  true  prosperity  depends,  because  they  are  tha 
conditions  of  God's  gracious  help. 

III.  The  betubn  of  God  is  accompanied  by  a  bevival  of  huilan  activity. 
"  And  ye  shall  be  tilled  and  sown."  That  work  will  not  be  done  directly  by  God,  nor 
will  it  be  accomplished  by  the  unseen  hands  of  angel-husbandmen.  Men  must  till 
and  BOW.  God's  blessing  does  not  dispense  with  man's  labour.  Assuredly  it  is  not  an 
excuse  for  himian  idleness.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  the  inspiration  of  the  highest 
activity.  God  blesses  by  stirring  men  up  to  wise  and  earnest  work.  St.  Paul  teaches 
us  that  God  gives  the  increase  after  man's  sowing  and  watering  (1  Oor.  iii.  6|.  But 
Ezekiel  shows  that  God's  great  work  does  not  only  follow  man's  smaller  toil ;  it  pre- 
cedes that  toil,  and  is  the  spring  from  which  the  energy  for  it  proceeds.  We  are  first 
told  that  God  will  turn  unto  his  people,  and  not  till  after  this  is  it  said,  "  And  ye  shall 
be  tilled  and  sown."  This  is  the  happiest  way  of  giving  prosperity.  If  all  the  glory 
is  God's,  still  the  joy  of  service  is  man's.  The  same  is  true  of  spiritual  prosperity.  If 
we  would  reap  a  harvest  in  Christian  work,  we  must  not  only  bring  it  to  God  and 
ask  his  blessing  upon  it ;  we  must  first  of  all  seek  his  presence  in  it,  that  it  may  b« 
his  work  from  the  first.    Then  he  will  be  the  Inspiration  of  his  servants'  activity. 


244  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPHBT  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxxvi.  1— 38. 

We  shall  be  able  to  till  and  sow  just  because  God  is  with  us.  The  glorious  prosperitj 
will  come  from  God  as  a  fruit  of  his  gracious  benediction,  and  it  will  come  through  us 
as  the  human  instruments  who  are  called  by  God  like  labourers  to  work  in  his  vineyard. 

Ver.  10. — MulUplying  men.  I.  The  tkub  wealth  of  a  people  is  in  its  popu- 
lation. God  makts  this  promise  to  the  house  of  Israel,  that  he  "  will  multiply  men," 
The  land  is  desolate  for  want  of  inhabitants,  the  fields  untilled  for  want  of  labourers, 
and  the  cities  lying  in  ruins  for  lack  of  men  to  build  up  the  waste  places.  The 
restoration  shall  be  signalized  by  a  return  of  the  captives  and  a  consequent  increase  of 
population.  Now,  tlie  striking  fact  is  tLat  this  multiplication  of  the  population  is 
noted  as  a  great  good  for  the  land.  Other  things  being  equal,  every  country  is  strong 
iu  proportion  to  the  number  of  its  able-bodied  citizens.  In  times  of  war  this  is 
obvious ;  the  strong  nation  is  one  that  can  command  a  large  army.  But  in  industrial 
relations  the  same  is  equally  true.  The  more  producers  there  are  the  more  wealth 
must  be  produced — either  in  the  form  of  food  or  in  the  form  of  commodities  that  may 
be  exchanged  for  food  purchased  elsewhere.  These  plain  facts  are  obscured  by  bad 
social  habits.  1.  Overcrowding  in  cities.  The  waste  places  should  be  built — ^not  the 
reeking  fever-dens  crammed  with  an  overflowing  population  of  sickly  creatures,  who 
have  no  energy  for  work,  and  whose  surroimdings  do  not  permit  decent  living.  One 
of  the  greatest  evils  of  our  day  is  the  depletion  of  our  rural  districts  and  the  pressing 
of  the  population  into  the  cities.  What  is  needed  is  not  a  reduction  of  the  population, 
but  a  scattering  of  it  over  the  face  of  the  land  at  home  and  also  throughout  the 
colonies.  The  mistake  that  led  to  the  building  of  the  tower  of  Babel  is  still  fatally 
prevalent.  2.  Unworthy  living.  Too  many  men  are  not  doing  men's  work — ^idle  rich 
men  who  consume  without  producing,  and  idle  poor  men  who  are  always  near  the 
border-land  of  crime,  on  the  further  side  of  which  they  would  become  positive  destroyers. 
We  cannot  have  too  many  true  men,  but  they  must  be  men  indeed — workers,  not  drones. 

n.  The  BTKENOTH  OP  THE  Chubch  is  IN  ITS  MEMBERSHIP.  The  word  "  Church  "  Stands 
for  a  community.  The  great  Catholic  Church  of  all  nations  and  creeds  is  the  whole 
body  of  Christians.  This  obvious  fact  is  too  often  neglected.  Thus  the  Church  is 
sometimes  regarded  as  an  institution  apart  from  the  souls  of  which  it  consists ;  it  is 
said  to  have  its  rights,  its  triumphs,  while  no  thought  is  given  to  the  people  in  it. 
This  is  a  pure  delusion — the  glorification  of  an  empty  abstraction.  Again,  for  the 
Church  some  would  substitute  its  officers.  The  Christian  ministry  is  regarded  as  the 
Church.  This  was  the  case  in  the  Middle  Ages,  when  popes  and  great  ecclesiastical 
dignitaries  contended  with  emperors  and  kings  for  the  privileges  of  the  Church,  In 
those  contests  little  account  was  taken  of  the  interest  of  the  people — the  townsfolk  and 
village  folk  who  constituted  the  body  of  the  Church.  But  iu  these  democratic  days 
the  rights  of  the  people  are  being  better  recognized,  and  now  we  are  coming  to  see  that 
the  Church  is  just  the  men,  women,  and  children  that  constitute  it,  viewed  in  their 
corporate  relation  as  the  body  of  Christ  on  earth.  The  Church  is  honoured  when  men 
are  multiplied  in  her  midst.  She  cannot  be  in  health  if  the  missionary  spirit  dies  out 
of  her.  But  while  she  gathers  in  the  heathen  her  first  duty  is  to  train  her  own 
children.  She  should  thus  grow  her  own  members.  Here,  however,  we  need  a  caution. 
Mere  numbers  will  count  for  nothing  apart  from  character.  Statistical  Christianity  is 
a  poor  production.  We  want  true  men — ^living  souls  united  to  Christ  and  working  for 
his  glory.  Still,  the  honour  of  the  Church  is  not  in  remaining  small  and  select,  and 
keeping  her  privileges  to  herself  and  neglecting  the  world,  but  in  multiplying  men. 
She  should  be  a  great  popular  institution,  true  to  the  spirit  of  Christ,  who  called  himself 
"  the  Son  of  mam,." 

Ver.  11  ("  And  I  will  do  better  unto  you  than  at  your  beginnings  "). — The  httter 
future.  I,  Thk  BETTER  FUTURE  OF  THE  WORLD.  There  is  a  natural  tendency  among 
men  to  say,  "The  former  times  were  better."  Nations  cherish  legends  of  an  ancient 
golden  age.  People  talk  about  "  the  good  old  times."  But  when  we  search  history  wo 
cannot  find  these  happy  days.  On  the  contrary,  writers  in  the  very  ages  to  whioh 
sume  of  our  contempurary  dreamers  look  back  with  sentimental  regret  deplore  the 
<  egeneraoy  of  their  days.  Our  owu  age  is  bad  enough,  but  it  is  not  easy  to  lay  our 
finger  on  any  previous  age  that  was  not  worse.     This,  however,  is  not  the  principal 


OH.  xxxvL  1— 38,]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPHBT  EZEKIEL.  245 

■ — ' 1 

question.  Waiving  the  point  as  to  whether  the  past  history  of  our  race  has  been 
characterized  by  progress  or  by  a  process  of  degeneration,  we  have  still  to  ask  whether 
the  future  may  not  be  better  than  anything  that  has  been  experienced  in  the  past. 
Kow,  it  is  the  distinct  teaching  of  the  Bible  that  it  will  be  so.  "  The  earth  shall  be 
full  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord,  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea."  While  men  Una  back 
wistfully  to  tHfe  lost  Eden,  God  promises  a  better  heaven.  We  do  not  need  to  discuss 
the  idea  of  a  Paiadise  regained,  for  we  have  the  more  glowing  picture  of  the  heavenly 
Jerusalem.  Even  if  we  grant  the  worst  that  has  been  said  of  man's  continuous  decline, 
the  New  Testament  points  to  an  arrest  of  this  dreadful  movement,  to  a  redemption  and 
more  than  a  restoration,  to  a  perfection  of  humanity  never  attained  in  the  past. 

II.  The  betteb  fdturb  of  thk  Chueoh.  The  Church,  which  has  the  seed  of  Divine 
life  in  her,  should  be  continually  growing  in  grace.  While  like  the  mustard  tree  she 
enlarges  her  size,  she  should  also,  like  the  rising  temple,  become  ever  more  radiant 
with  the  beauty  of  holiness.  Perhaps  there  is  no  sadder  story  than  that  of  the  history 
of  the  Church.  No  doubt  there  have  been  ages  of  glorious  zeal  and  devotion ;  no 
doubt  God  has  been  continuously  educating  his  people.  But  there  have  been  awful 
times  of  relapse.  We  think  we  can  see  progress  in  our  own  day — a  wiser  thought,  a 
larger  charity,  a  more  practical  activity  in  the  service  of  man.  But  we  are  far  indeed 
from  realizing  Christ's  great  ideal.  That  ideal,  however,  is  the  picture  of  the  future, 
and  the  pattern  after  which  we  are  to  toil  with  the  utmost  hopefulness.  The  New 
Testament  promises  a  glorious  future  to  the  people  of  God  (Eph.  ii.  21). 

III.  The  betteb  future  of  the  soul.  In  our  melancholy  moods  we  yearn  after 
the  old  sweet  da}  s  of  childhood — their  innocence,  their  simplicity,  their  joyousness. 
We  forget  their  limitations,  their  fears,  their  infantine  distresses.  But  perhnps  we  have 
fallen  far  from  those  early  days.  Then  we  knew  nothing  of  the  world's  dreadful  sin. 
Now  we  must  confess  that  we  have  not  kept  ourselves  unspotted.  And  with  the  soul's 
fall  has  cume  the  soul's  sorrow,  and  many  disappointments  and  losses  have  made.the 
day  which  dawned  in  golden  sunshine  overcast  with  fjloomy  clouds.  Still,  we  have  not 
reached  the  end.  After  bathing  in  the  Jordan,  Naaman's  leprous  flesh  became  healthy 
as  that  of  a  little  child.  The  leprous  soul  may  be  cleansed,  the  worn-out  life  renewed. 
"If  any  man  be  in  Christ  Jesus,  he  is  a  new  creature"  (2  Cor.  v.  17).  Then  the 
future  is  full  of  hope.  The  victorious  Christian,  with  all  his  scars,  and  even  with  his 
memory  of  shameful  unfaithfulness,  stands  higher  than  the  unfallen  because  untried 
child.  God  has  a  blessed  future  in  the  heavenly  inheritance  reserved  for  the  most 
weary  souls.  The  secret  of  this  happy  prospect  is  in  the  power  and  grace  of  God.  It 
is  he  who  will  do  better  for  his  people  than  at  the  beginning. 

Vers.  21 — ^24. — God  saving  for  his  ovon  Name's  sake.  L  A  principle  of  DrvruE 
AOTIOK.  We  are  here  admitted  to  the  secret  council-chamber  of  heaven.  The  inner 
motive  of  God's  activity  is  revealed  to  us.  He  shows  on  what  grounds  he  proceeds  in 
redeeming  man.  Man  is  redeemed  for  the  sake  of  God's  Name,  and  not  on  account 
of  any  human  deserts  and  claims.  1.  Ood^s  faifhfvUness.  A  person's  good  name  is 
associated  with  his  keeping  his  word.  If  a  man  has  put  his  name  to  a  document,  he 
must  not  ignore  its  stipulations.  A  just  person  will  swear  to  his  own  hurt  and  not 
change.  Now,  God  is  the  type  and  pattern  of  all  truth  and  fidelity.  His  eternal 
constancy  lies  at  the  root  of  the  order  of  the  universe.  What  he  has  promised  he  will 
do,  because  he  is  faithful.  But  he  has  promised  redemption  {e.g.  ch.  xxxiv.  22 — 31). 
Therefore  he  will  redeem  his  people,  that  he  may  redeem  his  word.  Though  it  coBte 
the  sacrifice  of  his  Son,  nothing  shall  be  wanting  to  a  faithful  execution  of  his  promise. 
2.  Ood^s  character.  The  name  is  supposed  to  express  the  nature.  God  is  named  after 
what  he  is.  Now,  God's  nature  is  essentially  good  and  gracious.  With  the  New 
Testament  before  us,  we  know  that  God's  best  name  is  Love  (1  John  iv.  8).  Jesus 
Christ  has  taught  us  to  concentrate  our  thoughts  of  God  on  his  Fatherhood.  God  will 
act  according  to  his  Name,  i.e.  according  to  his  nature.  Love  must  characterize  hia 
conduct,  and  whatever  he  does  he  will  do  it  "  like  as  a  father."  His  fatherly  character 
will  lead  him  to  redeem  and  save,  irrespective  of  desert,  for  sheer  love  and  pity.  9. 
God's  glory.  To  get  a  name  is  to  receive  glory.  When  Christ  is  glorified  he  is  said  to 
receive  "  a  Name  which  is  above  every  name  "  (Phil.  ii.  9).  God's  Name  is  his  glaty. 
Now,  God  is  glorified  in  many  ways,  but  in  none  so  highly  as  in  his  saving  the  lost. 


246  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxxvi.  1— 38. 

The  best  song  of  heavenly  praise  is  the  hymn  of  redemption  (Rev.  v.  9).  There  is 
glory  in  creation ;  and  the  greatness,  the  order,  the  beauty,  the  life  of  the  universe 
praise  God.  There  is  glory  in  Divine  government ;  and  the  manner  in  which  God  rules 
all  things  and  establishes  righteousness  displays  his  glory.  But  we  know  of  no  glory 
like  that  of  God's  grace  revealed  at  Calvary.  This  fact  shonld  help  us  to  understand 
how  God  cao  ask  for  his  own  glory  without  being  selfish.  When  men  seek  their  own 
glory  they  usually  do  so  at  the  expense  of,  or  to  the  neglect  of,  others.  But  God's  glory 
shines  out  of  his  supreme  self-sacrifice.    This  is  the  secret  of  the  highest  glory. 

II.  Its  PBAcnoAL  conbequenobs.  1.  We  can  never  hope  to  earn  salvation.  It  is  • 
gift  of  God,  never  a  work  or  reward  of  man.  (1)  This  is  a  rebuke  for  pride.  (2)  It 
also  warns  us  against  the  folly  of  seeking  to  establish  some  claim  with  God  by  penance, 
works,  or  sacrifice 

"  Nothing  in  my  hands  I  bring ; 
Simply  to  thy  CIOBS  I  cling." 

2.  We  need  never  despair  i^  salvation.  If  it  were  given  for  our  own  sakes  in  any  way, 
we  might  well  torture  ourselves  with  doubts  as  to  whether  we  should  merit  it,  nay,  we 
had  better  give  up  all  hope  at  once,  for  we  could  not  earn  it.  But  now  the  ground  is 
■tufted  from  ourselves  to  QoA.  The  question  is  not  as  to  what  is  in  ns,  but  as  to  what 
is  in  him.  The  most  unworthy,  those  who  have  made  the  worst  &ilures  in  life,  the 
weakest  or  the  most  sinful,  may  yet  dare  to  hope  for  full  and  perfect  salvation  through 
the  great  grace  of  God,  for  his  Name's  sake.  3.  We  have  the  highest  reasons  for  joy  and 
adoration.  The  redemption  is  ofi'ered  to  the  worst  sinners — to  all  men,  on  their 
repenting  and  seeking  the  grace  of  God.  Here  is  a  glad  fact  and  one  to  inspire  eternal 
praise.  Translating  it  into  Christian  language,  we  see  that  we  are  to  rejoice  and  glory 
m  salvation  given  to  us  through  Christ ;  for  Christ  is  "  the  Word  "  (John  i.  1),  ije.  the 
Name  of  God.    God  saves  for  the  sake  of  his  Name  when  he  saves  for  Christ's  sake, 

Ver.  25. — "  Glean  water"  I,  Souls  nbbd  olbansino  fbou  sin.  Here  we  come  to 
the  deeper  part  of  man's  need.  The  Jews  perceived  their  external  disasters  only  too 
clearly.  War,  captivity,  poverty,  sickaess,  death,  were  visible  evils.  But  they  did  not 
80  readily  discern  the  unseen  spiritual  evils  which  were  behind  those  troubles,  as  their 
causes.  The  greatest  calamity  is  not  so  bad  as  sin.  While  we  are  eager  to  elude  the 
consequences  of  wrong-doing,  God  sees  that  the  wrong-doing  itself  is  our  chief  evil. 
The  principal  part  of  the  redemption  required  by  Israel  was  not  deliverance  from  the 
power  of  Babylon,  but  deliverance  from  the  tyranny  of  sin ;  their  most  needed  recovery 
was  not  restoration  to  Palestine,  but  restoration  to  God.  To  be  cleansed  from  their 
Idolatry  and  brought  into  a  condition  of  spiritual  worship  was  their  greatest  salvation. 
Israel  is  restored  if  that  is  done,  even  though  she  be  still  far  from  possessing  her  land ; 
ehe  is  not  restored  without  it,  though  she  have  the  fee  simple  of  every  acre  of 
Palestine. 

II.  The  oleansino  of  souls  will  ebmove  both  the  quilt  and  the  poweb  of  sih. 
1.  The  guilt.  Sin  leaves  a  stain  behind.  Blame  justly  attaches  itself  to  all  wrong- 
doing, and,  though  the  deed  of  evil  may  be  swiftly  accomplished,  the  blame  lingers 
long.  The  stain  of  sin  is  not  merely  an  ugly  fact ;  it  produces  dreadful  consequences. 
(1)  It  excludes  the  soul  from  the  presence  of  God.  No  stained  souls  can  be  permitted 
to  tread  the  courts  of  heaven.  (2)  It  draws  down  the  wrath  of  God.  (3)  It  carries 
with  it  continuous  shame.  2.  The  power.  The  evil  is  more  than  a  stain  upon  the 
conscience.  It  is  a  poison  within  the  soul.  It  works  harm  by  its  corrupting  as  well 
as  its  defiling  influence.  We  need  some  antidote  to  this  poison,  or  some  wonderful 
cleansing  that  shall  completely  purge  it  out  of  our  being — a  real  internal  washing,  not 
merely  a  clearing  of  a  darkened  reputation. 

III.  God  has  provided  cleansing  wateb.  What  is  needed  is  clean  water.  Now, 
this  is  just  what  is  not  to  be  got  in  places  of  defilement.  The  foul  soil  stains  and 
poisons  the  streams  that  flow  through  it.  No  human  thing  is  clean  from  the  con- 
tamination of  man's  great  sin.  Therefore  there  can  be  no  human  fountain  for 
tmcleanness.  But  God  has  opened  a  fountain,  and  the  gospel  of  Christ  introduces  ua 
to  it.  He  it  pure,  and  he  can  give  perfect  purification.  The  water  that  flows  from 
this  rock  is  not  defiled  with  earth's  contamination.  "  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  his 
Son  cleanscth  us  from  all  8in".(l  John  i.  7).    Here  we  have  the  double  cleansing. 


OH  XXXVI.  1—38.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  BZEKIEL.  247 

The  guilt  is  washed  out  by  a  Divine  pardon  given  through  the  propitiatory  sacrifice  of 
Christ,  and  the  impurity  is  purged  away  by  the  Holy  Spirit  communicated  to  us  by 
the  grace  of  God  in  Christ.  The  cross  redeems  from  all  sin.  The  Lamb  of  God 
taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world.  There  is  perfect  cleansing  of  character,  motive^ 
heart,  and  soul  in  Christ. 

IV.  This  olbansing  wateb  is  sfbinkled  on  individdai.  souls  fob  thsib  olbansino. 
It  is  not  enough  that  the  water  exists,  nor  that  we  behold  it,  nor  that  it  flows  in  a  full, 
free  torrent.  1.  It  must  he  applied  to  each  individual  soul — sprinkled.  This  great 
fact  is  suggested  by  the  rite  of  baptism.  The  future  tense  is  here  used.  The  prophecy 
was  written  before  the  advent  of  Christ.  But  even  now  the  future  tense  must  be 
used  for  all  who  are  still  in  sin  and  earnestly  desire  cleansing.  Christ's  atonement  is 
finished ;  but  his  cleansing  must  be  continually  given  afresh  to  separate  souls.  2.  Thit 
deansmg  is  divinely  given.  "  I  will  sprinkle,"  etc.  God  himself  cleanses  souls.  We 
have  to  repent  and  seek  his  mercy.  Then  he  will  work  directly  in  his  pardoning  and 
purifying  grace. 

Ver.  26. — "  A  new  heart."  We  are  here  introduced  to  one  of  those  profound  utterances 
in  which  the  Old  Testament  anticipates  some  of  the  richest  truths  of  the  New.  The 
grace  here  promised  was  doubtless  given  in  all  ages  to  those  who  truly  repented  and 
Bought  it.  But  reading  these  words  in  the  light  of  the  gospel,  we  are  able  to  see  much 
more  clearly  what  is  their  eternal  significance. 

I.  The  essence  of  salvation  is  the  benewal  of  the  heabt.  The  commonest 
mistake  is  to  ignore  this  most  significant  fact.  People  regard  salvation  too  much  as  » 
change  in  the  soul's  estate  rather  than  a  change  in  its  very  nature.  But  while  there  is 
*  change  of  condition,  and  while  the  greatest  possible  external  consequences  flow  from  the 
redemption  of  souls,  that  redemption  does  not  consist  in  these  things ;  they  are  but  of 
secondary  importance.  The  primary  fact  is  internal.  To  be  saved  from  the  visible 
fires  of  a  material  hell,  and  to  be  carried  aloft  to  the  tangible  pleasures  of  a  celestial 
Paradise,  may  satisfy  the  Mohammedan-minded  Christian,  hut  it  will  not  fulfil  the 
great  thought  of  Christ.  Hearts  are  wrong,  foul,  diseased.  Men  have  false  ideas, 
corrupt  dusires  and  affections,  evil  imaginations,  or  perhaps  a  blank  deadness  of  souL 
Here  is  the  seat  of  the  disease ;  here,  then,  the  cure  must  begin.  Sin  is  heart-disease ; 
salvation  is  heart-renewal. 

II.  The  old  evil  heabt  is  of  stone.  A  terrible  and  most  significant  description. 
1.  It  is  ha/rd.  It  does  not  respond  to  the  call  of  God ;  it  neither  perceives  spiritual 
truth,  nor  feels  Divine  influences,  nor  responds  to  heavenly  voices.  It  has  no  sympathy 
with  God.  It  is  inflexible  and  immobile.  2.  It  is  cold.  Not  only  does  it  not  respond 
to  the  influences  of  God ;  in  itself  and  in  its  new  condition  it  is  unfeeling.  There  is 
no  glow  of  generons  affection  in  the  sinrul  heart.  3.  It  is  dead.  The  heart  is  the 
most  vital  organ.  For  this  part  of  the  body  to  be  petrified  involves  a  fearful  condition 
of  utter  death.  The  hands  might  be  turned  to  stone,  and  yet  the  man  might  Uve. 
But  if  he  had  a  heart  of  stone  he  must  be  dead.  Souls  are  "  dead  in  trespasses  and 
ein "  (Eph.  ii.  1).  Men  fear  a  future  death,  but  the  Bible  teaches  that  there  is  • 
present  death  of  godless  souls.  4.  It  is  unnatural.  A  heart  of  stone — what  can  be 
more  monstrous  ?  Sin  is  all  unnattual.  It  is  contrary  to  nature  not  to  have  feelings 
of  love  for  our  heavenly  Father. 

III.  God  gives  a  new  heabt  of  flesh.  1.  It  is  a  new  heart.  There  is  no  curing 
the  old  one.  "Ye  must  be  born  again  "  (John  iii.  3).  To  be  in  Christ  is  to  be  "a 
new  creature."  Thus  Christ  gives  complete  renewal.  Now,  the  hope  of  the  world 
lies  in  this  great  fact.  We  try  to  patch  up  the  face  of  society,  but  it  is  mortifying  at 
the  core ;  and  Christ  goes  at  once  to  the  root  of  the  matter.  With  creative  power  he 
makes  the  heart  afresh,  i.e.  he  gives  quite  new  thoughts,  feelings,  and  desires.  The 
most  abandoned  wrecks  of  society  may  take  courage  and  believe  that  even  they  can 
be  saved  if  this  is  the  glorious  work  of  Christ  in  souls.  2.  It  is  a  hea/rt  of  flesh.  (1) 
Tender.  The  old  coldness  and  hardness  pass  away.  Pride,  stubbornness,  obstinacy,  are 
broken  down.  The  penitent  soul  is  melted.  The  softening  of  the  hardened  spirit  is  an 
essential  part  of  conversion.  (2)  Sympathetic.  The  renewed  heart  readily  answers  to 
the  call  of  God  and  to  the  joys  and  sorrows  of  men.  (3)  Living.  This  new  heart 
beats.    It  drives  life-blood  through  the  whole  being.    The  fainting  soul  is  invigorated. 


248  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxxvi.  1— 3& 

Energy  spiiiigs  frpm  the  new  heart.  It  pulsates  with  the  vigour  of  a  glad,  strong  life. 
(4)  Natwal.  The  heart  is  of  flesh,  not  of  some  foreign  angelic  substance.  Sin  is 
Monstrous,  goodness  natural.  The  true  Christian  is  natural ;  he  is  intensely  human. 
God's  work  in  the  soul  brings  a  man  into  close  sympathy  with  his  fellows.  It  restores 
true  human  nature. 

Ver.  27. — The  indwelling  Spirit.  Three  stages  in  redemption  ■  are  successively 
brought  before  us.  First,  cleansing :  "  Then  will  I  sprinkle  clean  water  upon  you," 
etc. ;  second,  renewal :  "  A  new  heart  also  will  I  give  you,"  etc. ;  third,  inspiration  : 
"  And  I  will  put  my  Spirit  within  you."  Let  us  now  consider  this  third  stage  of  the 
grand  process  of  redemption. 

I.  The  fbesenob  of  God's  Spibit  depends  on  the  condition  of  hen's  heabts  and 
LIVES.  The  third  stage  of  redemption  is  closely  connected  with  those  that  precede.  It 
cannot  be  attained  without  them,  any  more  than  the  top  of  the  staircase  can  be  reached 
without  passing  over  the  lower  steps.  We  cannot  reverse  the  order.  Cleansing  and 
renewal  must  precede  inspiration.  God  does  not  dwell  equally  with  all  men.  There 
are  God-haunted  souls  and  there  are  God-deserted  souls.  The  Spirit  of  God  entered 
into  Samson  (Judg.  xiv.  6),  but  Satan  entered  into  Judas  (Luke  zzii.  3).  Here  is 
one  great  motive  for  our  seeking  to  attain  to  the  two  earlier  stages.  They  are  the 
conditions  on  which  we  may  enter  into  the  highest  privileges  of  all  religion. 

II.  God  futs  his  Spibit  in  the  heabts  of  his  people.  He  does  not  merely  give 
gifts;  he  also  comes  in  his  own  Spirit's  presence.  The  good  man  walks  with  Qoi 
(Gen.  V.  24).  He  enjoys  God's  abiding  presence.  He  is  a  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
These  facts  show  us  that  religion  is  not  only  a  human  experience  of  beliefs  and 
devotion.  Its  creeds  and  its  worship  are  but  one  side  of  it.  Its  deeper  character  lies 
on  the  other  side,  in  the  Divine  action.  In  true  religion  God  enters  the  soul  and 
touches  its  secret  centres. 

III.  The  pebsbncb  of  God's  Spibit  is  manifested  bt  its  effects.  We  need  not 
look  for  mystical  signs  like  the  incorruptible  light  which  the  monks  of  Mount  Athos 
imagined  they  were  able  to  see  as  the  revelation  of  the  very  presence  of  God  in  o\ir 
souls.  We  need  not  despair  if  immediate  consciousness  does  not  give  us  a  vision  of  God's 
Spirit.  The  joy  of  commimiou  should  be  very  real.  Yet  it  is  rather  by  the  fruits  of 
the  Spirit  that  we  are  to  be  assured  of  liis  presence  (Gal.  v.  22),  They  are  of  two  kinds. 
1.  Qraces.  There  are  given  to  every  soul,  and  consist  in  the  illuminating,  sanctifying, 
strengthening  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Thus  God  helps  us  to  understand  his  truth, 
baptizes  us  with  his  holiness,  and  breathes  into  us  the  power  of  the  Divine  life.  2.  Qi/U, 
It  is  important  to  distinguish  the  graces  of  the  Spirit  from  its  gifts.  While  the 
former  are  for  all  Christians,  the  latter  are  special  and  distinctive.  They  vary  in  different 
ages  and  with  different  persons.  There  were  gifts  of  healing,  of  prophesying,  of  tongues, 
in  the  ancient  Church  (Bom.  zii.  6).  Bezaleel  had  a  gift  for  art  (Exod.  xxxv.  30,  31) ; 
Samson,  a  gift  of  strength  (Judg.  xiii  25),  etc. — all  from  the  Spirit  of  God.  Christ 
now  gives  gifts  unto  men  through  his  Spirit — not  exactly  those  of  New  Testament 
times,  but  such  as  the  present  age  needs. 

IV.  Chbibtianb  should  act  on  the  enowleode  of  the  indwelling  Spibit. 
1.  Making  use  of  his  aid.  JS  we  are  Christ's,  we  are  not  left  to  our  own  resources.  It 
is  much  to  know  that  the  gracious  Spirit  is  with  us  to  cheer  and  help.  2.  liot  grieving 
him  away.  We  may  grieve  the  Spirit  (Eph.  iv.  30).  We  are  to  remember  that  we  are 
temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  therefore  to  keep  the  dwelling  of  GK>d  clear  of  all 
defilement  (1  Cor.  vi.  19). 

Yer.  31. — Sad  memories.  The  restored  people  are  to  be  cleansed,  renewed,  and  inspired. 
Yet  they  will  still  carry  with  them  sad  memories  of  their  former  sins. 

I.  The  fabdoned  penitent  oannot  fobget  his  past.  The  hardened  nnner  may 
do  su ;  or  at  least  he  may  carry  the  memory  of  his  ill  deeds  with  so  light  a  heart  that 
It  will  be  no  burden  to  him.  While  he  thus  bears  the  whole  weight  of  his  sin,  its 
Kuilt,  and  its  hurtful  influence,  he  is  scarcely  conscious  of  it ;  but  directly  he  begins  to 
repent,  the  sin  grows  into  an  unbearable  burden,  and  the  sinner  becomes  keenly  con- 
hoious  of  its  continuous  presence.  He  carries  about  with  him  the  vision  of  his  life's 
btury  written  in  letters  of  fire.    Now,  after  forgiveness  and  renewal,  the  burden  and 


AH.  XXXVI.  1—38.]     THE   BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPIIET  EZEKIEL.  249 

■tain  of  guilt  are  gone.    Still  tlie  sin  is  not  undone.    The  restored  penitent  must  feel 
that  his  was  an  evil  past.    God  forgets  his  sin,  but  he  cannot  forget  it  himself. 

II.  The  mehobt  of  past  bin  bhould  not  become  a  HAMPERiNa  bubden.  It  is 
possible  that  it  may  be  so  in  a  morbid  conscience.  But  if  God  has  forgiven  our  sin, 
we  need  not  feel  continuous  distress  at  the  thought  of  it.  It  is  hard  for  the  penitent 
ever  to  forgive  himself.  Yet  he  may  do  dishonour  to  the  grace  of  God  by  dwelling  too 
pfdnfully  on  the  memory  of  sin,  so  that  he  even  forgets  the  wealth  of  pardoning  love 
with  which  it  has  been  covered.  We  need  courage  to  take  the  grace  of  God,  and  to  dare 
to  go  on  our  way  rejoicing  in  the  gladness  which  it  is  meant  to  afford  us. 

III.  Sad  uemobieb  hat  be  turned  to  wholesome  uses.  1.  They  may  keep  tM 
humhle.  Though  restored  now,  we  cannot  forget  the  pit  from  which  we  have  been  digged. 
Let  us,  then,  beware  of  falling  back  into  it.  "  The  burnt  child  dreads  the  fire."  The 
soul  th3t  has  fallen  once  should  fear  temptation  for  the  future.  2.  They  should  make 
us  grateful.  Every  time  we  remember  past  sins  we  should  also  recollect  the  grace  of 
God  that  has  delivered  us  from  them.  The  memory  of  the  disease  should  call  up  the 
picture  of  the  good  Physician,  Christ's  love  never  shines  so  brightly  as  when  it  is 
seen  against  the  background  of  man's  sin.  3.  They  should  drive  us  to  Christ.  Still  do 
we  need  him.  Away  from  him  our  souls  are  saddened  with  dark  shadows  of  the  horrible 
past.  A  gloom  hangs  over  the  earth  when  the  light  of  Christ  is  withdrawn  from 
it.  Thus  we  are  kept  back  from  too  much  earthly  elation  that  tends  to  frivolity.  It 
may  not  be  bad  for  us  at  times  to  be  subdued  to  a  sober  sadness.  Through  the  experi- 
ence of  it  there  may  steal  over  the  soul  a  sense  of  deep  peace  in  God.  Then  we  can 
see  that  Christ  is  our  Light  and  the  Light  of  the  world.  Life  may  be  sunny  still,  but  its 
light  is  from  Christ. 

lY.  We  should  beware  of  bowing  the  seed  of  bad  memories.  This  is  a  lesson 
for  the  young.  During  youth  the  memories  that  will  cbeer  or  sadden  age  are  created 
and  stored  up  for  use  in  years  to  come.  It  is  impossible  to  un write  a  soul's  history. 
Then  let  those  who  are  engaged  on  its  early  pages  take  heed  what  they  set  down  upon 
them.  It  is  possible  to  sow  very  carelessly  seeds  that  will  spring  up  in  a  most  bitter 
harvest.  If  we  would  not  have  a  gloomy  old  age  of  sad  memories,  let  us  spend  our  early 
years  wisely  and  purely.  Though  God  may  forgive  the  follies  of  youth,  old  age  will 
not  forget  them.     In  this  sense,  "  Whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap." 

Yer.  35. — A  new  Eden.  The  new  heart  (ver.  26)  is  to  be  followed  by  a  new  Eden. 
The  outer  world  is  to  be  changed  when  the  inner  world  is  renewed,  and  that  sweet, 
fair  Paradise,  the  dream  of  which  hovers  on  the  distant  horizon  of  history,  is  to  be  once 
more  seen  on  earth,  when  men  are  renewed  in  nature.  The  new  Adam  brings  the  new 
Eden.    Consider  some  of  its  features. 

I.  Life.  The  desolate  land  becomes  like  the  garden  of  Eden.  It  was  desolate  in 
death.  Parched  up  and  neglected,  unwatered  and  untilled,  the  ruined  country  resembles 
tiie  wilderness.  Sin  reduces  the  world  to  a  wilderness.  But  Isaiah  had  prophesied 
that  the  wilderness  should  blossom  like  the  rose  (Isa.  xxxv.  1).  Heathenism  is  charac- 
terized by  deadness  of  civilization.  The  vitality  and  energy  of  the  world  are  found  in 
Christendom.  The  life  of  the  earthly  paradise  of  culture,  art,  science,  invention, 
manufacture,  and  commerce  is  concentrated  in  Christian  lands.  It  is  by  no  means  all 
in  the  lands  of  Christian  men.  But  it  flourishes  in  an  atmosphere  of  Christianity — some 
of  the  essential  elements  of  which  are  (1)  justice,  (2)  truth,  (3)  liberty,  (4)  human 
brotherhood,  and  (5)  hopefulness.  Without  these  five  things  progress  languishes.  They 
constitute  the  very  air  it  breathes. 

IL  Obdeb.  The  desolate  place  is  in  confusion ;  the  garden  is  a  well-ordered  scene 
of  life  and  growth.  Its  perfection  is  largely  dependent  on  its  perfect  culture — well- 
kept  paths,  smooth  lawns,  fiower-beds  without  weeds,  trees  pruned  and  trim.  Christ 
brings  order  to  a  world  of  confusion.  St,  James  wrote  of  the  "  perfect  law  of  liberty  " 
— 4br  Christian  freedom  observes  its  own  lofty  law.  The  great  secret  of  disorder 
is  selfishness.  Hence  spring  war  and  all  strife  and  confusion.  The  great  secret 
of  order  is  love ;  for  love  involves  sympathy,  and  sympathy  inspires  harmony,  and 
harmony  secures  order.  If  human  society  is  ever  to  become  like  an  orderly  garden, 
it  will  not  be  by  means  of  the  fierce  contests  of  competition;  nor  owing  to  the 
rankling  jealousy  of  class-differences  between  rich  and  poor,  landlord  and  tenant^ 


250  THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  EZBKIEL.    [oh.  xixvi.  1— 38, 

empluyer  and  workpeople ;  it  will  be  through  the  spread  of  the  spirit  of  Christian 
brotherhood.     Thus  Chrbt  will  bring  "  on  earth  peace." 

III.  Fruitfulkebs.  The  fruit-trees  covering  the  walls  of  s  rich  and  fertile  old 
English  garden  give  to  it  great  value.  In  the  East  a  garden  is  often  just  an  orchard. 
The  garden  of  Eden  is  described  as  a  fruit-growing  place.  The  wilderness  is  barren ; 
the  garden  is  fruitful.  Now,  there  are  various  fruits  that  grow  out  of  the  redeeming 
work  of  Christ.  The  best  and  choicest  are  spiritual — i.e.  "  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit." 
But  society  also  reaps  external  good  in  the  activities  and  charities  of  the  Christian  life, 
A  living  Church  must  be  a  boou  to  a  neighbourhood — ^like  a  fruit-garden  planted  among 
weary  men  who  sadly  need  its  refreshing  products. 

IT.  Beauty.  Whenever  the  name  of  Eden  is  mentioned,  we  think  of  a  picture  ot 
exceeding  beauty.  There  are  few  more  lovely  sights  than  a  cottage  garden,  with  its 
quaint  old-fashioned  flowers — its  airy  columbines — its  still,  tall,  white  lilies — its  sweet, 
rich  roses, 

"  How  the  lose  of  orient  glow 
Mingles  with  the  lily's  snow  t " 

Alasl  for  the  scenes  of  city  life  contrasted  with  this  fresh  vision  of  beauty  I  But 
Christ  will  plant  a  new  Eden.  He  will  bring  beauty  into  faded  lives,  and  joy  to  the 
old,  weary  earth,  Christ  does  not  only  give  grace ;  he  adds  glory.  The  beauty  of  the 
Lord  is  on  his  people.  And  this  joy  is  not  reserved  for  a  future  heaven  of  departed 
souls.  The  new  Eden,  like  the  old  one,  is  to  flourish  on  earth.  Here  Christ  converts 
the  wilderness  into  a  garden. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ters.  8 — 12. — Promise  of  revival.  Ezekiel  is  inspired  to  foretell  the  confusion  of 
the  enemies  of  Israel  who  Lave  brought  about  her  calamities,  and  who  delight  in  her 
humiliation,  and  in  their  contempt  deride  her  sorrows.  But  this  in  itself  is  small  con- 
solation. And  he  adds  predictions  of  the  restoration,  recovery,  and  revival  of  Israel 
after  "  her  warfare  is  accomplished,  and  her  iniquity  is  pardoned."  The  land  and  its 
inhabitants  are  naturally,  as  well  as  poetically,  associated  in  his  mind.  The  restored 
and  rejoicing  sons  of  Jacob  till  the  soil  which  has  been  long  neglected,  and  the  soil 
rewards  their  labours  with  abundaat  fruitfulness.  It  is  obvious  that  these  prophetic 
descriptions  have  an  application  to  the  spiritual  renovation  of  a  repenting  nation,  to 
the  Church  of  Christ  under  the  genial  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  to  the 
ransomed  race  of  men  in  millennial  prosperity. 

I.  The  Acthob  or  this  revival.  "  I,"  says  the  Lord,  "  am  for  you,  and  I  will 
turn  unto  you."  The  Creator  is  the  Source  and  Giver  of  all  life,  both  in  the  natural 
and  in  the  spiritual  realm.  If  the  wilderness  is  to  be  as  the  garden  of  God,  it  must  be 
through  the  fall  of  showers  from  heaven,  through  dews  of  grace,  through  the  Divine 
breath  awakening  the  dead  to  life,  through  the  sunshine  from  God's  own  countenance 
calling  forth  the  vitality  and  the  fragrance  of  the  spiritual  spring. 

II.  The  scene  of  this  revival.  The  land  which  has  been  so  long  desolate  by 
reason  of  its  occupation  by  hostile  armies,  and  by  reason  of  the  deportation  of  its 
inhabitants,  is  visited  by  reviving  mercy.  The  waste  places,  the  dismantled  and 
forsaken  cities,  are  regarded  in  compassion  and  visited  in  mercy. 

III.  The  sdbjects  of  this  revival.  These  are  living  men,  moral  natures,  capable 
of  true  life.  "  I  will  multiply  men  upon  you ; "  "  I  will  cause  men  to  walk  upon 
you."  It  is  the  men  who  make  the  land  what  it  is,  who  till  the  soil,  occupy  the  cities, 
garrison  the  fortresses,  fiU  the  temples,  raise  to  heaven  the  free  song  of  trust  and  praise. 
The  return  of  the  Hebrew  captives  to  their  inheritance,  the  land  given  to  their  fathers, 
was  a  joyful  occasion,  and  was  the  earnest  of  good  things  to  come.  When  God  gives 
blessing,  it  is  to  living,  spiritual,  immortal  natures  that  he  gives  it.  He  blesses  his 
Church  by  raising  up  and  consecrating  to  his  service  holy  men  and  women,  who  in 
every  position  and  vocation  of  life  fulfil  duty  under  a  sacred  impulse  and  with  a 
noble  aim. 

IV.  The  tokens  of  this  revival.  Fruitfulness,  increase,  abundance, — ^these  9X% 
the  signs  that  God  is  working,  that  the  winter  is  over  and  past,  that  the  blossoms  of 


OH.  xxxvL  1— 38.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  BZEKIEL.  261 

the  spring,  the  promise  of  the  year,  have  not  been  delusive.    "  Herein,"  says  Christ, 
"  is  my  Father  glorified,  that  ye  bear  much  fruit." 

Y.  Thb  heasube  or  bkvival.  •  "  I  will  do  better  unto  you  than  at  your  begin- 
nings." Such  is  the  gracious  assurance  of  the  Almighty.  Israel  had  knoim  times  of 
benediction  and  prosperity ;  she  should  kaow  them  again,  only  more  abundantly.  All 
past  experience  is  transcended  when  the  Lord  stretches  out  his  hand  to  bless. — T. 

Vers.  20— 2i,— Profanation  and  pity.  The  conjunction  is  somewhat  singular. 
Israel  has  profaned  God's  Name.  Upon  this  suggestion  the  Lord,  pitying  his  own 
Kome,  resolves  to  sanctify  it,  and  to  this  end,  and  not  for  Israel's  deserts,  succours  and 
restores  his  people.  The  several  steps  in  this  progress  of  thought  should  be  attentively 
traced. 

I.  Thb  Isbaelites  have  pbofaned  God's  Naue  amonq  the  heathen.  They  are 
nniversally  known  as  the  people  of  Jehovah.  When  exiled  from  their  land,  they 
are  the  objects  of  derision  and  contempt  to  the  heathen  who  behold  them,  and  who, 
despising  them,  despise  also  the  Name  of  Jehovah. 

n.  The  Lobd  is  uoved  with  pitt  fob  his  owk  Naue.  The  language,  nay,  the 
very  thought,  is  remarkably  bold.  But  especially  as  it  is  repeated,  it  must  be  taken  as 
deliberate  and  intentional,  and  as  corresponding  with  a  wonderful  and  Divine,  though  but 
partially  comprehensible,  reality.  His  Name,  his  reputation,  even  among  the  heathen, 
18  dear  to  him,  and  he  deigns  to  be  concerned  when  men  speak  lightly  of  his  Name 
and  blaspheme  him  openly.  In  human  language,  he  is  distressed  at  the  evil  things 
which  are  said  of  him  among  the  enemies  of  his  people. 

m.  The  pubposeb  of  God's  ueboy  abe  not  pbompted  bt  ant  deserts  or  Isbael. 
"I  do  not  this  for  your  sake,  0  house  of  Israel."  This  is  a  principle  which  should 
ever  be  borne  in  mind  in  interpreting  Old  Testament  history.  The  Hebrew  writers  are 
bithful,  candid,  and  outspoken  in  describing  the  national  character,  in  relating  the 
actions  of  their  countrymen.  They  were  a  rebellious  and  stiff-necked  people.  They  had 
their  good  qualities,  but  their  many  and  grievous  sins  are  not  extenuated.  If  God 
chose  them  as  his  peculiar  people,  it  was  not  for  any  special  excellence  or  meritorious- 
nesB  in  themselves.  And  when  he  restored  them  from  captivity,  he  let  it  be  understood 
that  he  did  this  not  from  a  regard  to  their  deserts. 

IV.  God's  pubfoses  of  mehoy  to  Isbael  abe  pbohfted  bt  a  beoabd  to  his  own 
Naue.  He  had  made  certain  promises  to  the  descendants  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and 
Jacob;  and  those  promises  he  must  needs  fulfil.  He  has  intentions  of  mercy  to  man- 
kind to  be  realized  by  means  of  the  "  children  of  promise,"  and  he  will  not  ^ow  those 
intentions  to  be  frustrated.  He  has  his  own  faithfulness  to  vindicate^  his  own  moral 
attributes  to  manifest.  By  his  Name  must  be  ifiiderstood  his  character,  especially  as 
known  among  men ;  and,  this  lieing  the  case,  it  is  not  difScult  to  comprehend  the 
meaning  of  "  having  pity  on  his  holy  Name." 

V.  Pitt  becomes  praotioai,  in  the  bestobation  of  Isbael  to  thbib  own  land, 
BY  which  God's  Name  is  sanctified.  There  is  dignity  and  even  moral  grandeur  in 
the  resolution  which  is  expressed  in  this  passage ;  it  is  felt  to  be  worthy  of  him  in 
whose  lips  it  is  placed  by  the  prophet.  When  the  great  work  of  restoration  is  achieved, 
the  nations  who  behold  it  see  that  the  taunts  and  ridicule  in  which  they  have  indulged 
are  both  foolish  and  blamable.  Israel  is  proved  to  be  the  consecrated  nation,  preserved 
by  God's  wisdom  and  goodness  as  the  instrument  in  effecting  his  purposes.  The  Lord 
God  is  seen  to  be,  not  powerless  like  the  so-called  gods  of  the  nations,  but  omnipotent 
and  just.  His  promises  are  vindicated  as  faithful.  "  I  will  sanctify  my  great  Name, 
and  the  nations  shall  know  that  I  am  the  Lord." — T. 

Vers.  25 — 27. — Renewal.  It  is  observable  that,  in  the  view  of  the  prophet,  political 
revival  and  national  restoration  are  associated  with  moral  and  spiritual  improvement 
and  renovation.  No  sooner  has  he  uttered  the  prediction  that  the  people  of  Israel  shall 
be  delivered  from  their  captivity  and  be  brought  back  into  their  own  land,  than,  in  a 
strain  of  singular  beauty  and  eloquence,  he  proceeds  to  assure  his  countrymen  of  the 
Divine  fiivour  revealing  itself  in  a  deeper  and  more  precious  form.  Jehovah  promises 
to  complete  his  work  of  mercy  on  behalf  of  his  chosen  people.  They  shall  not  only  be 
rescued  from  the  humiliation  and  reproach  of  banishment  and  servitude.    They  shall 


252  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIBL.    [oh.  xxxvi.  1— 38. 

be  saved  from  the  sin  which  was  the  occasion  of  their  calamities.  They  shall  experi- 
ence a  spiritual  renovation — they  shall  be  cleansed,  renewed,  and  sanctified.  Tli« 
change  shall  be  within  the  spiiitual  nature,  and  it  shall  manifest  itself  in  the  outer  life, 
which  shall  be  made  a  life  of  purity  and  of  obedience.  The  figurative  language  in 
which  this  Divine  work  of  renewal  is  described  deserves  careful  attention;  each 
several  figure  seems  to  present  the  transformation  in  a  new  light;  taken  together, 
they  exhibit  the  most  marvellous  work  of  God  in, its  true  beauty  and  completeness. 

I.  God  will  oivs  fob  foulness,  purity.  The  defiling  and  offensive  nature  of 
sin  is  symbolized  in  Scripture  by  uncleanness  of  body.  Of  the  sins  with  which 
Israel  is  especially  charged,  that  of  idolatry  is  perhaps  the  most  prominent  and  the 
most  debasing,  bringing  in  its  train  a  host  of  moral  abominations.  From  idolatry  and 
all  its  contaminations  the  consecrated  people  must  needs  be  delivered,  as  a  condition 
of  all  other  blessing.  With  what  simplicity  and  exquisite  beauty  is  the  gracious  pur- 
pose of  the  Divine  Purifier  here  expressed  1  "  I  will  sprinkle  clean  water  upon  you, 
and  ye  shall  be  clean :  from  all  your  filthiness,  and  from  all  your  idols,  will  I  cleanse 
you."  The  moral  purity  of  the  Divine  nature  is  imparted  to  the  nature  of  man.  The 
Holy  Spirit  produces  the  holy  character,  which  expresses  itself  in  the  holy  life.  Much 
of  the  religious  observance  practised  among  the  Hebrews  was  intended  to  convey  the 
idea  and  to  cultivate  the  practice  of  hoUness.  In  the  New  Testament  the  greatest 
stress  is  laid  upon  this  disposition  and  habit :  "  Be  ye  holy ;  for  your  Father  in 
heaven  is  holy." 

II.  Gk>D  WILL  GIVE   rOR  HARDNESS  OF   HEART,  A   TENDERNESS  AND  SU80KFTIBILITT. 

By  hardness  or  obduracy  we  understand  insensibility  to  Divine  appeals,  to  rebukes  and 
to  promises — a  character  repelling  all  higher  and  holier  motive.  The  stony  heart  is  to 
be  taken  away,  and  replaced  by  a  heart  of  flesh,  i.e.  a  heart  sensitive  to  Divine  good- 
ness and  responsive  to  Divine  appeals.  The  Israelites  seem  to  have  been,  peculiarly 
hard  and  stubborn  in  character.  The  word  addressed  to  them,  if  it  was  to  produce  any 
impression,  must  needs  have  been  "as  a  fire,  and  as  a  hammer  that  breaketh  the  rock 
in  pieces."  This  was  so  throughout  long  periods  of  the  national  history.  When  God 
dealt  with  them  in  his  mercy,  he  rendered  their  obdurate  nature  susceptible  to  gracious 
influences.  Under  the  Christian  dispensation,  the  softer  features  of  the  human  character 
are  brought  out  into  prominence.  The  Spirit  of  Christ  is  a  Spirit  of  meekness  and 
gentlene.ss.  The  heart  of  flesh  which  he  imparts  is  susceptible  to  all  that  is  good  and 
winning,  purifying  and  consolatory. 

III.  God  WILL  GIVE  for  oldness,  newness  of  oharaoter.  "  A  new  heart  also  will 
I  give  you,  and  a  new  Spirit  will  I  put  within  you."  It  is  remarkable  that  we  should 
find  in  Ezekiel's  prophecies  so  striking  an  anticipation  of  the  promises  and  privi- 
leges of  Christianity.  Living,  as  we  do,  under  the  new  covenant,  we  are  especially 
able  to  appreciate  this  gracious  assurance.  Old  things  pass  away,  all  things  become 
new,  to  him  who  is  "in  Christ  Jesus,"  who  is  "a  new  creation."  The  oldness  of  the 
letter,  the  oldness  of  disobedience,  are  left  behind ;  and  spiritual  newness  opens  up,  in 
all  its  beauty  and  hopefulness,  before  us.  "  Kewness  of  life  "  is  the  plainest  mark  of 
a  Christianity  more  than  nominal  and  formal. 

IV.  God  WILL  oive  for  alienation,  acceptance.  Those  who  had  been  afar  off 
were  to  be  brought  nigh ;  those  who  had  been  estranged  by  sin  were  to  be  restored 
to  fellowship;  those  who  had  been  in  rebellion  were  to  be  reconciled.  The  exiled 
should  be  bruught  home,  and  the  cold  oppression  and  scorn  of  the  foreign  conqueror 
should  be  exchanged  for  the  acceptable  services  of  the  temple,  and  the  smile  of  Ocod. 
upon  bis  people  and  their  inheritance.  A  marvellous  emblem  of  the  restoration  of 
God's  people  to  himself  through  Jesus  Christ.  For  our  Saviour  has  "made  peace," 
80  that  those  who  accept  his  mediation,  from  having  been  alienated  and  at  enmity,  are 
reconciled,  and  enjoy  the  fellowship,  the  smile,  the  approval,  of  their  God, 

V.  God  will  give  fob  error,  obedience,  submission,  and  conformity  to  hib 
WILL.  "I  will  cause  you  to  walk  in  my  s'tatutes,  and  ye  shall  keep  my  judgments, 
and  do  them."  To  feel  the  force  of  this  promise,  we  must  remember  how  grievously 
the  Israelites  had  erred,  and  how  far  they  had  strayed  from  the  path  of  true  and 
acceptable  service.  A  renovation  wortliy  of  the  name  must  include  a  thorough  sub- 
mission to  the  will  which  had  been  defied,  a  thorough  and  cordial  performance  of  the 
service  which  had  been  neglected.    As  it  was  with  the  Israelites,  lo  must  it  ever  b« 


CH.  xixvi.  1—38.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET   EZEKIEL.  253 

with  all  upon  whom  God  has  mercy.  He  puts  his  Spirit  withia  them,  and  thus  the 
life  which  would  otherwise  hare  been  impracticable  becomes  the  life  deliberately 
chosen  and  consistently  and  perseveringly  followed  out. — T. 

Yer.  31. — Self-knowledge  and  sdf-loathing.  It  is  instructive  to  obsenre  that  thia 
assertion  that  Israel  shall  remember  and  loathe  past  sin  is  placed  immediately  after 
the  promise  of  renewal,  purification,  fruitfulness,  and  blessing.  However  this  may 
seem  out  of  place,  a  little  reflection  will  convince  us  that  the  juxtaposition  is  both 
inteDtional  and  just.  Men  do  not  truly  know  the  heinousness  of  their  sin  until  they  have 
been  turned  from  it.     It  is  the  holy  character  to  which  moral  evil  is  most  repugnant. 

I.  Sm  BLINDS  MEN  TO  THEIR  BEAIi  CONDITION,  AJSIB  FOSTEBS  nNDITB  SELF-SATIS- 
FACTION. It  is  when  men  are  offending  most  grievously  that  they  are  least  sensible 
of  their  folly  and  guilt.  They  will  not  think,  they  will  not  suffer  conscience  to  speak, 
they  will  not  listen  to  any  voice  save  the  voice  of  passion  and  the  voice  of  prejudice. 
They  persuade  themselves,  and  they  allow  themselves  to  be  persuaded  by  others,  that 
they  are  not  to  blame  in  following  the  dictates  of  "nature,"  in  conforming  to  the 
usages  of  "  society." 

II.  Qoo'b  ohastisementb  and  God's  uebcies  awaken  hen  to  befleotion  and 
TO  SBLF-KN0WLED8E.  Israel  came  to  herself  when  she  had  passed  through  the  dis- 
cipline of  defeat,  of  captivity,  of  national  humiliation.  This  was  needed  in  order  to 
open  the  eyes  which  were  blind  to  her  own  state.  Yet  even  this  was  not  sufficient. 
Bestoration  and  favour  melted  the  heart  to  penitence  and  to  gratitude.  Sensible  of 
God's  mercies,  she  became  sensible  to  her  own  faults.  And  it  has  often  been  observed 
that,  after  forgiveness  has  been  obtained  and  reconciliation  has  been  experienced,  after 
Divine  kindness  has  made  its  appeal  to  the  better  nature,  then  men's  minds  become 
alive  to  the  magnitude  and  inexcusableness  of  the  transgressions  which  have  been 
committed.  In  the  light  of  God's  forbearance  and  loving-kindness,  sin  is  seen  to  be 
what  it  really  is. 

III.  Sblf-knowledoe,  bt  ebvbalino  iniqttitt  in  its  tbub  light,  LEADS  to 
SELF-LOATHING.  Israel,  remembering  her  evil  ways,  loathed  herself  in  her  own  sight 
for  her  iniquities  and  for  her  abominations.  Now  that  she  was  restored  to  her  own 
territory,  now  that  she  entered  again  upon  the  enjoyments  and  privileges  of  her  national 
life,  she  reflected  upon  her  past.  The  guilt  and  folly  of  her  idolatry,  her  unfaithfulness 
to  Jehovah,  her  sensuality  and  pride,  were  apparent  to  her  conscience.  She  saw  herself 
in  some  measure  as  her  God  saw  her.  And  at  the  sight  she  was  filled  with  remorse 
and  with  self-loathing.  What  Christian  is  there  who  has  not  passed  through  an 
experience  somewhat  similar  to  this?  There  are  times  when  we  are  comparatively 
insensible  to  the  blemishes  and  imperfections  of  our  own  character.  And  there  are 
times  when  God's  mercy  in  Christ  comes  home  to  our  hearts ;  and  then  we  feel  that 
to  such  a  Being,  who  has  so  dealt  with  us,  our  sin  must  indeed  be  distressing  and 
offensive,  and  we  hate  ourselves  because  we  are  not  more  what  he  would  have  us  to  be. 

IV.  Thus  self-knowlbdoe  leads  to  bbpentanoe  and  to  a  bettbb  life.  To 
repent  of  sin  is  to  aspire  after  holiness.  It  is  well  that  we  should  have  a  conscience 
of  sin ;  but  it  is  not  well  to  rest  in  this.  This  should  lead  us  to  desire  both  to  escape 
•nd  to  conquer  sin  in  the  future,  and  to  resolve,  by  God's  grace,  that  there  shall  not 
in  that  future  be  the  same  reason  for  self-reproach  as  in  the  past.  Thus  the  pardon 
of  sin  and  the  victory  over  sin  are  made,  by  the  appointment  of  Divine  wisdom,  the 
means  of  progress  in  the  spiritual  life  towards  moral  perfection.  Explain  the  mystery 
of  sin,  we  cannot.  But  we  are  at  liberty  to  remark  how,  in  Christian  experience,  even 
the  prevalence  of  sin  is  made  the  occasion  of  the  manifestation  of  God's  grace  to  his 
people,  and  how  in  this  manner  evil,  ever  remaining  evil,  is  overruled  for  good.  To 
love  God  and  to  loathe  the  sinful  self  are  very  closely  associated  in  the  Christian 
experience.  It  is  to  be  desired  by  all  of  us  that  we  may  not  be  the  victims  of  self- 
delusion;  that  we  may  see  and  feel  our  sin,  our  need  of  a  Saviour;  that  all  the 
motives  of  the  gospel  may  he  brought  to  bear  upon  our  nature,  with  %  view  to  our 
swifter  progress  in  the  Divine  and  holy  Ufe. — T. 

Ver.  87. — Inquiry  of  Qod.  Light  is  oast  upon  the  function  of  prayer  in  the  Divin* 
economy  by  observing  that  in  this  passage  explicit  promises  of  blessing  are  first  given 


254  THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxxvi.  1—38. 

to  Israel ;  and  then,  afterwards,  it  is  affirmed  that,  for  this  blessing,  God  requires  that 
his  people  should  make  supplication  to  him.  The  fact  is  that  unless  there  be  a  basis 
for  prayer  in  the  explicit  assurances  of  God,  although  it  may  be  a  natural  and  instinc- 
tive, it  can  hardly  be  a  reasonable,  exercise. 

I.  ThB  promises    of    God    abb    an    BNCOUBAaKMENT    TO    THE    PBATEBB    OF    God's 

PEOPLE.  The  fact  that  explicit  promises  have  been  given  is  a  fact  familiar  to  every 
reader  of  Scripture.  These  promises  are  numerous  and  repeated.  They  have  respect 
to  the  varied  wants  of  men,  and  accordingly  are  characterized  by  a  wonderful  and  very 
precious  variety.  Blessings  so  valuable  and  so  desirable  may  well  be  sought  with 
earnestness  and  importunity. 

II.  The  prayebs  of  God's  people  abb  the  condition  of  the  obtainins  of 
God's  BLESsiNa.  This  affirmation  rests  upon  the  plain  declarations  of  God's  Word. 
"  Ask,  and  ye  shall  receive ;  seek,  and  ye  shall  find.  It  rests  also  upon  reason.  The 
best  gifts  of  God  are  of  such  a  nature  that  they  cannot  be  bestowed  irrespectively  of 
the  moral  condition,  the  spiritual  attitude  of  the  recipient.  They  are  not  material, 
they  are  not  conferred  as  by  mechanical,  physical  law.  God  opens  the  heart  that  it 
may  receive  the  benefits  he  waits  to  bestow. 

III.  The  pbatebs  op  God's  people  abe  the  occasion  of  God's  OABBTiNa  out 
EI8  PDBPOSBB  OF  UXBOT.  We  have  looked  at  the  matter  from  the  human  side,  but 
it  must  be  regarded  also  from  the  Divine  side.  The  All-wise  himself  propoimds  his 
own  terms ;  he  carries  out  his  intentions  of  mercy  in  the  way  that  seems  good  to  him. 
"  For  this  moreover  will  I  be  inquired  of  by  the  house  of  Israel,  to  do  it  for  them." 
For  reasons  which  are  only  very  partially  within  our  powers  of  comprehension,  this 
is  the  ordinance,  the  arrangement  of  Jehovah  himself.  We  may  be  content  to  under- 
stand that  which  is  within  our  range,  to  trace  the  bearing  of  prayer  upon  our  religious 
interests,  and  to  learn  from  experience  its  reasonableness  as  respects  ourselves.  And 
we  must,  in  childlike  faith,  accept  upon  God's  authority  what  is  beyond  our  limited 
powers  with  any  completeness  to  comprehend. 

IV.  The  pbatebs  of  God's  people  abb  bbquieed  and  ooiimanded  by  him  who 
IS  THE  GiVBB  OF  THE  PBOMisES.  With  One  hand  our  Father  in  heaven  offers  the 
gifts;  with  the  other  hand  he  delivers  to  his  Church  his  written  and  express  command. 
"Ask,  and  ye  shall  receive,  that  your  joy  may  be  full;"  "Pray  without  ceasing;" 
"  If  ye  being  evil  know  how  to  give  good  gifts  unto  your  children,  how  much  mors 
shall  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven  give  good  things  to  them  that  ask  him ! " — ^T. 

Vers.  1 — 15. — The  material  creation  sharing  in  the  fortunes  of  men.  Man  has  a 
many-sided  nature.  He  is  linked  with  the  past  history  of  angels  and  with  the  past 
history  of  the  entire  universe.  His  interests  and  fortunes  are  interwoven  with  the 
material  creation  and  with  the  dynamic  forces  of  nature.  He  has  an  interest  in 
heaven  and  in  hell.  The  intelligences  of  the  universe  are  interested  in  him,  and  he 
is  interested  in  them. 

I.  The  land  op  Canaan  ib  honouebd  by  a  Divine  communication.  It  is  a 
reasonable  conclusion  that  the  main  interest  God  felt  in  the  mountains  and  hills  of 
Palestine  arose  from  their  use  as  a  home  and  storehouse  for  his  people.  Yet  it  ia 
proper  that  we  should  regard  God  as  finding  a  pleasure  in  the  hiUs  and  valleys  on 
account  of  their  native  beauty.  They  were  the  workmanship  of  his  hand,  and  there 
is  every  reason  why  he  should  find  pleasure  in  his  creations.  The  long,  past  history 
of  their  internal  structure  was  open  to  his  eye,  and  the  beauty  of  their  clothing  was 
to  him  a  delight.  But  why  should  he  despatch  to  these  unconscious  mountains  a 
prophetic  messenger?  Without  doubt,  this  was  intended  as  a  rebuke  to  the  people 
who  had  grievouSy  disregarded  his  messages.  It  was  as  if  he  said  indirectly  to  the 
nation,  "It  is  vsin  to  speak  longer  to  your  stony  ears.  I  turn  away  in  sorrow,  and 
address  my  meseaje  to  the  unconscious  earth.  The  very  mountains  will  give  me 
better  aadienca  than  yon  have  done.  If  I  speak  to  the  dew,  it  will  obey.  If  I  speak 
to  the  fragrant  soil,  it  will  yield  its  fruit.  If  I  speak  to  the  mountains,  they  will  put 
on  verdure  and  beauty.  But,  alas  I  if  I  speak  to  the  intelligent  sons  of  Jacobs  they 
turn  deaf  ears  and  rebellious  wills  to  my  gracious  voice  I  O  earth,  earth,  earth,  hear 
the  word  of  the  Lord  I "  By  such  methods  of  rebuke  God  endeavours  to  bring  con- 
viction home  to  the  consciences  of  the  people. 


OH.  XXXVI.  1—38.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PEOPHET  EZEKIEL.  265 

II.  The  land  or  Canaan  was  an  ihfobtant  7aotob  in  Ibbael'b  fast  bekown. 
This  land  had  been  specially  selected  by  God  as  the  most  fitting  scene  for  the  training 
of  the  Hebrew  nation.  It  was  the  glory  of  all  lands,  the  envy  of  surrounding  nations. 
Compared  with  thp  territory  north,  or  east,  or  south,  it  was  splendidly  fertile,  while 
its  mountains  made  it  a  secure  fortress.  The  diversity  of  hill  and  vale  gave  it  peculiar 
beauty  and  served  to  exhilarate  the  mind.  The  mountain-peaks  drew  heavenward 
men's  thoughts.  According  to  the  known  law,  that  the  physical  features  of  a  country 
mould  unconsciously  the  character  of  the  inhabitants,  Canaan  had  been  a  benefit  to 
the  Jewish  tribes.  The  land  was  a  contrast  to  the  soft,  fertile  loam  of  Egypt.  The 
relaxing  climate  of  Lower  Egypt,  together  with  the  won<h:ous  facility  of  obtaining  large 
crops,  made  the  people  indolent  and  effeminate — impatient  of  arduous  exertion.  In 
Palestine  a  totally  different  condition  of  things  prevailed.  For  the  most  part  the 
operations  of  husbandry  were  severe.  The  sides  of  the  hills  required  to  be  built  in 
terraces  in  order  to  retain  the  soil.  But  climate  and  soil  were  congenial  for  almost 
every  kind  of  fruit.  It  was  a  territory  in  which  it  was  scarcely  possible  for  one  to 
grow  rich;  it  was  a  territory  eminently  suitable  for  the  development  of  hardy  and 
industrious  peasants.  Especially  the  land  was  singularly  dependent  upon  the  periodic 
rainfall.  For,  devoid  of  rain  and  dew,  the  olives  dropped  withered  and  unripe,  the 
vines  were  blighted,  the  young  corn  was  shrivelled.  Hence,  in  an  eminent  degree,  the 
people  hung  in  constant  dependence  on  the  good  will  of  God.  He  held  in  his  hand 
the  helm  of  their  prosperity. 

III.  The  land  of  Canaan  had  shared  m  Israel's  dibcoufitube  and  shamb. 
Frequent  invasions  on  their  borders  bad  made  their  homes  and  crops  insecure,  and, 
without  security  for  obtaining  crops,  men  will  not  sow  their  6elds.  Frequent  absence 
also,  to  serve  on  the  battle-field,  drew  away  the  young  men  from  quiet  husbandry. 
Such  losses  in  such  a  country  soon  became  serious.  A  diminution  in  their  produce 
left  them  unable  and  unwilling  to  pay  tribute  to  their  foreign  conquerors,  and  this 
resulted  in  fresh  invasion.  Step  by  step  the  land  went  out  of  cultivation.  The 
terraces  on  the  hillsides  were  neglected.  The  people  forgat  God,  and  God  withdrew 
the  light  of  his  favour.  The  mountain-slopes,  denuded  of  soil,  soon  became  bald, 
bleached  rocks.  The  high  reputation  for  fertility  which  the  land  had  enjoyed  was  gone. 
Its  excellence  and  glory  departed.  Sharon  was  no  longer  a  fold  for  flocks.  Carmel  laid 
aside  her  bridal  garments  of  floral  beauty.  Jackals  and  foxes  and  hyenas  infested  the 
land.     With  the  degradation  of  the  elect  people  came  the  degradation  of  the  elect  land. 

IV.  The  land  of  Canaan  was  about  to  shabe  in  Isbael's  new  peobpeeitt, 

1.  In  proportion  to  the  infamy  the  land  had  endured  was  to  he  the  fertility  again  to 
he  enjoyed.  The  prosperity  should  not  only  rise  to  the  former  level;  it  should  greatly 
surpass  it.  The  infallible  promise  was  made  directly  to  every  part  and  branch  of  the 
territory.  God  had  a  tender  regard  for  every  mountain  and  valley,  for  every  river  and 
plain;  each  should  be  enriched  and  gladdened  by  his  favouring  smile.  The  shame 
of  the  heathen  should  be  outbalanced  by  corresponding  reputation  and  honour.  On 
condition  of  the  faithfulness  of  the  people  this  revival  of  prosperity  should  be  enduring. 

2,  Ood  speaks  in  language  adapted  to  the  age.  By  any  other  mode  of  speech  God 
could  not  have  been  understood ;  and  in  such  a  case  he  may  as  well  not  have  spoken. 
As  men  were  stimulated  to  great  exertions  by  a  sentiment  of  national  jealousy,  so,  in 
accommodation  to  imperfect  men,  God  speaks  of  himself  as  stirred  to  activity  by  the 
fire  of  jealousy.  Such  jealousy  was  only  another  form  of  considerate  love.  It  had  no 
respect  to  himself.  It  was  a  jealous  regard  for  the  good  of  Israel,  a  jealous  desire  to 
fulfil  his  ancient  promises.  3.  These  pledges  of  good  were  redeemed  in  the  centuries 
which  followed  Israel's  restoration.  The  land  was  reclaimed  from  the  ravages  of  wild 
beasts.  Cities  and  villages  were  rebuilt.  Many  parts  of  Canaan  became  fertile  as  a 
garden.  Confessedly,  we  feel  a  disappointment  that  tiie  revival  of  prosperity  was  not 
more  complete,  nor  more  abiding.  But  this  was  due  alone  to  the  folly  and  guilt  of  the 
people.  In  every  promise  of  God  there  underlies  a  moral  condition.  For  him  to  give 
unmingled  blessing  to  evil-doers  would  be  a  fresh  evil  and  an  encouragement  to  sin. 
The  actual  fortunes  of  Canaan,  in  the  later  centuries,  prove  the  faithfulness  of  God  and 
the  fickleness  of  the  people.— D. 

Vers.  16 — 32. — A  vision  of  the  true  golden  age     Up  to  this  point  God  had  been 


256  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxxvi.  1— 38. 

revealing  more  clearly  his  active  righteousness  to  Israel;  and  this  with  a  view  to 
arouse  their  drugged  and  drowsy  con«cieDces.  The  equity  and  justice  of  his  sceptre 
had  heen  vividly  portrayed.  The  keen  edge  of  his  judicial  sword  had  been  felt.  Some 
movements  of  hotter  feeling  in  the  exiles  were  apparent.  And  now  God  hastens  to 
foster  penitential  sentiments  with  a  promise  of  geuerous  kindness.  Further  revela- 
tions of  his  great  nature  are  made.  The  excellence  of  hig  grace  is  unveiled  to  the 
opening  eye  of  the  penitents.  Stupendous  condescension  is  shown.  God  himself  will 
undertake  the  renovation  of  human  nature.  He  will  go  down  to  the  very  root  of  the 
evil.  He  will  transform  the  innermost  principles  in  the  minds  of  the  people,  and  so 
qualify  them  for  national  restoration  and  national  prosperity.  And  he  will  do  this 
mainly  that  he  may  set  before  the  world  the  wealth  of  goodness  and  kindness  which 
constitutes  his  glory.    "  I  do  this  for  my  holy  Name's  sake,  saith  the  Lord." 

I.  Israel's  ABBAiaKHENT.  1.  The  gravamen  of  the  accusation  is  idolatry.  Than 
idolatry,  no  greater  affront  can  be  put  upon  God,  no  greater  evil  can  be  wrought. 
God  was  deposed  from  his  rightful  throne,  and  senseless  matter  elevated  into  his  place. 
The  perfect  will  of  God  was  set  aside  for  the  vain  fancies  of  wicked  men.  The  devil 
was  preferred  to  Jehovah.  2.  Idolatry  was  a  system  of  active  vice.  It  did  not  repre- 
sent merely  a  change  of  belief;  it  was  the  enthronement  and  deification  of  vice. 
Public  sanction  was  given  to  lust  and  unchastity.  The  marriage-tie  was  dissolved. 
The  temple  of  God  was  desecrated  with  animal  lust.  The  barbarous  rites  of  idolatrous 
worship  served  to  crush  every  tender  feeling  and  to  make  men  fiends.  Wrong  soon 
lost  its  hideous  features  in  the  eyes  of  men.  They  became  inhuman,  cruel,  quarrel- 
some, munlerous.  Human  life  lost  its  sanctity,  and  the  laud  was  stained  with  blood. 
3.  Idolatry's  fruits  were  most  offensive  to  Qod.  In  order  to  convey  to  men  an  approxi- 
mate idea  of  this  offensiveness,  God  was  compelled  to  borrow  an  illustration  from  the 
most  loathsome  thing  familiar  to  men.  As  if  he  had  said,  "Picture  to  yourselves  the 
thing  most  repulsive  to  your  senses ;  this  thing  will  feebly  convey  the  idea  of  disgust 
I  feel  towards  this  monstrous  crime."  A  common  dung-hill  is  fragrance  itself  compared 
with  the  moral  foulness  of  idolatry ;  and  dead  to  every  virtuous  instinct  must  be  th« 
man  who  can  endure  it. 

II.  ISEAEIj's   ARRAIGNMENT    LED    TO    BEVBBEST  PENALTY.      1.  A   discllOrge  of  Ood't 

anger.  "  I  poured  out  myfwry  upon  them!'  The  long-gathering  storm  of  just  indig- 
nation burst  upon  tliem  as  torrents  from  a  broken-  reservoir.  This  is  God's  own 
account  of  his  conduct,  and  he  speaks,  as  usual,  after  the  manner  of  a  man.  The 
violent  anger  of  a  man  under  a  strong  sense  of  injury  has  its  correspondence  in  God, 
save  that  in  God  it  is  filled  with  the  element  of  righteousness,  and  is  in  exact  propor- 
tion to  the  sinner's  deserts.  2.  It  embraced  the  dissolution  of  the  covenant.  The 
covenant  made  with  Abraham  and  renewed  with  the  Israelites  was  founded  on  a 
moral  conditron.  That  condition  had  been  broken  and  abandoned  by  the  nation; 
hence  God  publicly  testified  that  he  was  no  longer  bound.  The  land  of  Canaan  ceased 
to  be  held  by  Divine  covenant ;  and,  as  the  resi:dt  of  the  broken  compact,  the  Assyrians 
took  possession.  Pledges  and  contracts  between  God  and  man,  wantonly  violated, 
are  surely  followed  by  gravest  disaster.  This  should  teach  all  men  the  reality  and 
the  value  of  righteousness.  3.  The  penalty,  though  severe,  was  strictly  equitable, 
"  According  to  their  doings  I  judged  them."  The  fullest  equity  in  God's  dealings  is 
guaranteed  (1)  by  the  qualities  of  his  nature  and  ^2)  by  the  well-being  of  all  the 
moral  intelligences  of  his  kingdom.  Every  act  of  lovmg  obedience  shall  be  rewarded. 
Every  deed  of  rebellion  shall  be  punished  according  to  the  most  equitable  scale.  And 
in  this  category  is  registered  every  secret  design,  as  well  as  every  overt  deed. 

III.  This  manifestation  of  justice  overshadowed  the  benignant  natukb  of 
God.  "  They  profaned  my  holy  Name."  It  is  a  great  responsibility  to  bear  the  Name 
of  God— a  great  responsibility  to  belong  to  his  kingdom.  We  carry  his  reputation  in 
our  hands.  Mankind  will  judge  him  by  what  they  see  in  us.  If  they  discover  in  us 
selfishness,  avarice,  lust,  they  will  conclude  that  our  God  is  not  over-righteous.  If  we, 
for  our  sins,  are  chastised,  men  will  shrink  from  serving  such  a  Master,  Such  was  the 
case  in  the  olden  time  among  all  the  peoples  that  dwelt  in  the  vicinity  of  Palestine. 
They  said  contemptuously,  "This  Jehovah,  who  conquered  Canaan  for  his  people,  waa 
not  able  to  retain  it  for  them  I  Or  else,  he  is  a  God  easily  offended!  He  chooses  a 
nation  for  his  favour  one  day,  and  casts  it  off  on  the  morrow  1    Or  else,  his  justice  is  m 


OH.  xxxvL  1— 38.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  257 

severe  that  we  prefer  to  keep  aloof  from  him ! "  Such  were  the  judgments  of  men. 
But  this  was  the  result  of  ignorance.  This  was  derogatory  to  God.  This  prejudiced 
the  public  mind  against  just  conceptions  of  God.  Now,  it  had  been  God's  high  design 
to  unveil  gradually  to  mankind  all  the  fulness  of  his  nature — his  strong  affection,  the 
riches  of  his  mercy,  his  self-sacriScing  grace.  Did  men  but  know  him  thoroughly, 
one  great  hindrance  to  confidence  and  obedience  would  be  removed.  Most  surely  be 
deserves  our  allegiance ;  he  is  infinitely  worthy  of  our  trust.  Therefore  God  had  pity 
upon  his  Name  ;  for  his  Name  is  the  sum-total  of  his  goodness.  Men  were  suffering, 
because  they  did  not  know  God — \*ere  misled  by  erroneous  views  of  his  character.  Hence 
God  resolved  to  adopt  another  plan — to  make  a  grand  experiment.  He  will  make  a 
new  covenant  with  the  people,  and  will  write  his  laws  on  the  tablet  of  their  hearts.  He 
will  yet  conquer  their  rebellions  with  his  abounding  grace. 

IV.  The  6BAND  EZPEBIMENT  OF  KINDNESS ;  viz.  a  gracious  renewal  of  human  nature. 
1.  The  first  step  is  cleansing.  "  From  all  your  idols  will  I  cleanse  you."  A  disposition 
of  repentance  was  already  apparent.  Many  were  beginning  to  ask  how  deliverance 
could  be  obtained ;  and,  before  they  asked,  the  remedy  is  announced.  God  will  under- 
take to  purge  out  the  virus  of  disease,  and  if  he  imdertakes  it,  the  change  will  be 
effectual.  He  will  go  to  the  root  of  the  matter.  The  love  of  idols  shall  be  rooted  out 
of  the  heart ;  and,  the  root  being  killed,  all  the  fruits  will  disappear.  The  instrument 
to  be  employed  is  the  Truth — the  revelation  of  Divine  mercy.  This  is  the  "  clean  water  " 
mentioned.  To  the  same  effect  David  declared,  "  The  Law  of  the  Lord  is  perfect,  con- 
verting the  soul."  And  Jesus  the  Christ  affirmed,  "  Now  ye  are  clean,  through  the 
word  which  I  have  spoken  unto  yott."  2.  The  next  step  is  heart-renovation.  "  A  new 
heart  also  will  I  give  you."  By  the  mystic  power  of  .his  grace  God  produces, gradually 
a  complete  change  in  the  moral  principles  of  every  penitent  man.  New  light  enters  the 
mind.  Sin  is  seen  in  its  loath somenesH.  A  gracious  influence  from  heaven  softens  the 
dispositions  of  the  heart.  Feeling  becomes  tender.  The  tastes  cluster  round  nobler 
objects.  God  is  seen  to  be  supremely  good,  and  new  affections  begin  to  entwine  round 
him.  Old  habits  of  evil  are  dissevered.  New  inclinations  and  aspirations  are  engen- 
dered. Step  by  step  the  man  rises  out  of  his  dead  self  into  a  new  life.  "  Old  things 
pass  away,  and  all  things  "  within  him  "  become  new."  3.  A  further  step  is  the  indwell- 
ing of  God's  Spirit  in  the  man.  This  is  an  anticipation  of  the  new  dispensation, 
more  fully  developed  at  Pentecost ;  this  is  the  highest,  noblest  gift  God  can  impart.  In 
a  word,  this  is  spiritual  evolution.  On  Adam  God  breathed,  and  he  "  became  a  living 
soul."  But  this  is  a  new  departure.  The  Spirit  of  God  finds  an  entrance  into  the  human 
soul,  and  works  therein  a  new  creation.  All  the  dispositions  of  God  are  gradually 
reproduced.  The  man  learns  to  think  as  God  thinks,  to  feel  as  God  feels,  to  love 
as  God  loves,  to  act  as  God  acts.  Then  God's  will  is  done,  and  God's  image  is 
reflected  in  the  man  as  a  face  is  reflected  iu  a  mirror.  4.  A  further  step  is  national 
restoration.  The  man  who  truly  loves  God  learns  to  love  his  fellow-man ;  and  this 
bond  of  mutual  love  was  the  very  thing  wanted  to  weld  the  Hebrews  into  a  nation.  A 
people  can  safely  be  trusted  with  national  prosperity  only  when  they  are  loyal  to  God. 
The  whole  land  of  Palestine  was  a  kind  of  enlarged  temple,  and  only  a  consecrated 
people  are  fitted  for  a  consecrated  place.  The  old  covenant,  in  its  essential  principL  s 
was  to  be  restored.  God  would  give  himself  to  the  people ;  they  would  give  themselves 
up  to  him.  5.  Material  prosperity.  "  I  will  call  for  the  corn,  and  will  increase  it." 
Soul-prosperity  is  the  foundation ;  temporal  fortune  is  the  superstructure.  "  All  things 
are  ours,  if  we  are  Christ's."  "  No  good  thing  will  bn  withhold  from  them  that  walk 
uprightly."  In  Palestine  the  state  of  the  harvest-field  was  a  mirror  in  which  meu 
saw  the  smile  or  the  frown  of  God.  To  obedient  Jews,  land-fertility  was  secured  by 
an  inviolable  pledge  of  Jehovah.  The  windows  of  heaven  were  opened ;  the  vines  were 
embellished  with  splendid  clusters  j  the  very  moimtarns  seemed  to  send  out  rills  of  oil 
from  the  olive-groves. 

V,  The  fdjal  aim  of  this  stopendoub  change  ;  viz.  to  reveal  God's  Name.  In 
other  words,  to  make  known  to  the  world  his  wealth  of  goodness.  That  the  purpose 
and  aim  of  Jehovah  in  this  grand  experiment  might  be  made  clear,  it  is  stated  both 
positively  and  negatively.  "  Not  for  your  sakes  do  I  this,"  saith  God,  "  but  for  my 
holy  Name's  sake."  A  full  and  accurate  knowledge  of  God  is  hope  and  inspiration  to 
men.    If  only  the  state  of  feeling  in  a  man's  heart  be  right,  then  in  proportion  as  God 

EZEKIEL — n.  a 


S68  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxxvi.  1— 38. 

b  known,  he  will  be  admired,  trusted,  loved,  served.  If  the  soil  of  the  heart  be  broken 
up  and  pulverized,  the  knowledge  of  God,  like  living  seed,  will  grow  and  flourish  and 
bear  a  rich  harvest  of  fruit.  "  They  that  know  thy  Name  will  put  their  trust  in  thee." 
This  heart-knowledge  of  God  brings  eternal  life.  Misunderstanding  of  God  brings 
fear,  bondage,  misery,  hell.  The  glory  of  God  and  the  good  of  men  are  twin-purposes 
—two  sides  of  the  same  coin.  God's  will  is  man's  salvation.  As  we  know  God 
experimentally,  we  aspire  to  be  like  God,  we  yearn  to  do  his  will,  heaven  is  begun 
within. — D. 

Vers.  32 — 38. — Prosperity  suspended  on  human  prayer.  In  the  previous  verses  God 
has  disclosed  a  new  scheme  of  spiritual  tactics.  He  will  lay  siege  to  man's  heart  with 
the  artillery  of  love.  He  will  touch  and  melt  his  will.  He  will  gently,  yet  powerfully, 
dispose  him  to  obedience.  Yet  God  will  not  reduce  man  to  a  machine.  He  will  not 
coerce  his  will.  Men  shall  not  become  passive  instruments  under  God's  hand.  There 
Bhall  be  place  for  human  thought,  human  choice,  human  effort.  "  I  will  yet  be  inquired 
of  by  the  house  of  Israel,  to  do  it  for  them." 

I.  God's  gifts  are  bestowed  in  a  definite  obder.  "  Order  is  heaven's  first 
law."  In  nature  and  in  human  nature,  God  works  from  the  centre  outwards.  Jerusa- 
lem was  such  a  centre.  The  home. is  a  centre.  Man's  soul  is  a  centre — a  centre  for 
himself,  his  family,  his  fortunes,  his  contemporary  society.  1.  Soul-cleansing  is  the  root- 
hlessing.  This  embraces  cleansing  from  the  love  of  sin,  the  power  of  sin,  the  stain  and 
curse  of  sin.  The  animal  part  of  our  nature  is  kept  in  subjection  to  the  spiritual.  The 
old  fountain  of  evil  is  cleansed.  The  real  man  no  longer  lives  in  the  cellar  and  scullery  of 
his  nature;  he  prefers  now  to  live  and  move  in  the  capacious  rooms  above — in  the  great 
halls  of  reason  and  conscience.  2.  A  better  social  life.  They  "  shall  dwell  in  the 
cities,"  It  is  easier  to  live  a  godly  life  in  a  garden  than  in  a  city,  but  that  sequestered 
life  would  be  narrow  and  poor  and  weak.  In  the  city  temptations  and  hindrances 
abound ;  and  he  who  surmounts  them  is  raised  into  a  higher  plane  of  life.  Men' of  pure 
and  lofty  tastes  constitute  a  society  that  is  fruitful  in  gooidness.  They  shall  be  cemented 
in  strong  and  vital  ties  for  mutual  security  and  mutual  help.  3,  Agricultmral  fertility. 
The  Jews  were  devoted  to  the  pursuits  of  husbandry ;  hence  fertiUty  in  the  field  was 
their  greatest  earthly  prosperity.  This  fertility  would  be  the  more  highly  prized 
because  of  its  contrast  with  recent  desolation.  That  which  had  been  like  a  desert  was 
to  be  prolific  and  beauteous  as  the  virgin  soil  of  Eden.  The  last  vestige  of  the  curse 
was  to  vanish.  With  the  smallest  measure  of  labour  shall  come  the  largest  measure  of 
increase.  4.  Orowing  population.  An  unmistakable  mark  of  national  prosperity  is 
increase  of  men.  The  stalwart  and  athletic  youth  would  not  be  slain  on  the  battle- 
plain,  nor  decimated  by  pestilence,  nor  destroyed  by  ruinous  vice.  Just  as  the  streets 
of  Jerusalem  were  crowded  with  flocks  in  the  time  of  the  Passover,  brought  thither  for 
the  Paschal  feast,  so  should  the  towns  and  villages  teem  with  hale  and  sinewy  men. 
*'  I  will  increase  them  with  men  like  a  flock."  6.  Renown  among  the  neighbouring 
nations.  "  The  heathen  shall  know  "  that  Jehovah  is  the  real  Source  oY  prosperity. 
They  had  learnt  to  think  of  him  as  an  austere  Buler,  or  as  indifferent  respecting 
his  people's  weal.  Truer  thoughts  of  God  and  of  God's  goodness  shall  displace  the 
old  ideas.  They  shall  understand  God's  high  designs,  and  shall  admire  and  praise.  To 
serve  such  a  God  will  be  counted  true  honour. 

IL  God's  gifts  abe  fledged  bt  an  infallible  fbouise.  The  advantages  of 
making  this  prosperity  a  matter  of  promise  was  manifold.  1.  It  would  sustain  their 
hope.  In  their  exiled  state,  they  were  in  danger  of  yielding  to  sullen  despair. 
Adversity  had  demoralized  them.  They  had  well-nigh  lost  heart.  2.  It  would  encour- 
age wise  effort.  The  bright  prospect  of  a  golden  age  would  stimulate  them  to  exer- 
tion. They  could  the  better  bear  the  ills  of  banishment  when  they  knew  these  were 
ooly  for  a  time.  They  would  more  bravely  face  the  toils  of  another  journey  home- 
ward when  they  knew  what  splendid  prosperity  was  guaranteed.  3.  It  would  more 
clearly  unfold  God's  moral  intention,  in  their  adversity.  That  defeat  and  its  conse- 
quent hardships  were  no  mere  caprices  on  God's  part.  Nor  had  he  wholly  abandoned 
them.  The  judgment,  though  severe,  was  disciplinary.  It  was  moral  medicine, 
destined  to  produce  better  health.  Hence  a  window  was  opened  through  which  they 
gained  an  insight  into  God's  heart.    4,  The  promise  gave  them  a  grasp  upon  Ood. 


OH.  XXXVI.  1—38.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  BZEKIEL.  259 

They  well  knew  his  faithfulness.    No  word  of  his  had  ever  failed,  nor  ever  would.    If 
he  had  fulfilled  his  threats  of  evil,  much  more  would  he  fulfil  his  promises  of  good. 

III.  God's  gifts  abb  bubpendbd  upon  human  pbayer.  1.  This  waa  an  honour 
conferred  upon  men.  God  takes  imperfect  men  into  partnership  with  himself.  Great 
though  his  power  may  be,  he  loves  to  ally  himself  with  men,  so  that  he  may  inspire 
them  with  a  sacred  ambition,  and  lift  them  to  a  higher  level  of  life.  He  would  have 
us  to  feel  a  responsibility  respecting  the  welfare  of  mankind.  This  expands  both 
mind  and  heart.  2.  Prayer  itself  is  salutary.  No  other  occupation  of  the  human 
mind  is  so  salutary.  There  is  hope  for  the  lowest  sunk,  if  he  has  begun  to  pray. 
Prayer  generates  humility.  It  dissolves  self-trust  and  fosters  trust  in  God.  It 
enhances  the  value  of  God's  gifts  if  we  have  to  ask  for  them.  Prayer  serves  to  purify 
and  elevate  the  nobler  emotions.  It  brings  our  wills  into  submission  to  the  Eternal 
Will.  3.  The  most  successful  prayer  is  united  prayer.  The  request  must  be  made  "by 
the  house  of  Israel."  This  union  of  hearts  in  prayer  promotes  sympathy,  brotherly 
love,,  concord,  co-operation.  Social  piety  is  fostered.  The  whole  people  is  prepared  for 
the  blessing.  The  furrows  are  opened  to  receive  the  heavenly  rain.  This  announce- 
ment forecasts  that  of  the  New  Testament — ^that  if  "  two  shall  agree  on  earth  as 
touching  anything  they  shall  ask,  it  shall  be  done  for  them  of  my  Father  which  is  in 
heaven." — D. 

Vers.  1 — 15. — Encouragement  in  exile.  Israel  was  in  a  very  deplorable  condition. 
It  was  away  from  its  native  land,  in  the  power  and  in  the  servioe_  of  the  enemy ; 
its  own  "inheritance"  was  peopled  by  a  poor  and  weak  remnant;  it  was  the  prey 
and  the  butt  of  the  merciless  mocker;  its  fortunes  were  low,  its  heart  was  sad 
indeed ;  it  could  not  sing  the  Lord's  song  in  such  a  strange  land  as  that  in  which 
it  was  exiled.  But  after  words  of  condemnation  comes  the  language  of  hope.  'The 
prophet  of  God  is  commissioned  to  break  into  their  gloom  with  some  beams  of  promise. 
Here  are  gracious  words  from  his  mouth ;  here  is  a  prophecy  delivered  to  "  the  moun- 
tains of  Israel,"  which  may  well  have  filled  the  hearts  of  the  people  of  God  with  great 
joy  and  gladness.     The  lessons  we  glean  from  the  passage  (vers.  1—15)  are — 

I.  That  something  is  left  us  when  an  enemy  has  done  his  wobst.  As 
Matthew  Henry  well  remarks,  the  mountains,  the  hills,  the  rivers,  and  the  valleys,  the 
desolate  wastes  and  the  forsaken  cities  (ver.  4)  "  remained  to  be  spoken  to,  .  .  .  these 
the  Chaldeans  could  not  carry  away  with  them."  They  might  deport  and  depopulate, 
but  they  could  not  destroy  the  land  which  Jehovah  had  given  to  his  people.  Still  the 
mountains  stood,  and  still  the  rivers  ran,  and  still  the  valleys  stretched  beneath  the 
aun  and  received  the  rains  of  heaven.  1.  Our  human  enemy  may  do  much  to  harm 
us,  but  his  power  is  very  limited  after  all.  At  the  most  and  the  worst,  he  can  but 
-"  kill  the  body ;  after  that  he  hath  no  more  that  he  can  do."  He  cannot  kill  the  soul ; 
be  cannot  take  away  faith,  or  love,  or  peace,  or  hope  from  the  human  heart ;  he  cannot 
rob  us  of  our  real  inheritance.  2.  Or  if  our  spiritual  enemy  injures  us  in  a  more  deadly 
way  than  the  tyrant  or  the  persecutor  can  do ;  if  he  gain  dominion  over  us  and  rob  us 
of  our  rectitude,  and  so  of  our  peace  and  rest  in  God;  even  then  there  remains  a 
fipiritual  nature  which  is  capable  of  redemption ;  the  soil  remains,  which,  sown  again 
with  the  good  seed  of  the  kingdom,- may  yet  bring  forth  very  precious  fruit. 

II.  That  the  tendency  op  sin  is  to  a  dangerous  extebub.  Edom  and  other 
heathen  lands  carried  their  enmity  and  their  cruelty  so  far  that  they  brought  down 
upon  themselves  the  righteous  anger  of  God.  "  Because  they  have  made  you  desolate, 
and  swallowed  you  up  on  every  side,"  etc.  (ver.  3),  "  therefore,  thus  saith  the  Lord, 
surely  in  the  fire,"  etc  (ver.  5).  These  persecuting  nations  had  succeeded  only  too 
well ;  they  had  filled  their  hands  with  spoil,  and  their  souls  with  spiteful  pleasure 
(yei.  5) ;  and  the  extremity  to  which  they  pushed  their  triumph  led  to  their  discomfi- 
ture. Such  is  sin  everj^  where.  It  leads  to  extravagance  and  excess  ;  to  a  most  guilty 
and  ruinous  indulgence;  or  to  a  high-handed  arrogance  and  blasphemy  which  call 
forth  the  deep  displeasure  of  the  righteous  God,  and  bring  down  the  strong,  stern  hand 
of  judgment.  When  we  once  give  way  to  temptation,  of  whatever  kind  it  be,  we 
enter  a  path  which  leads  and  lures  us  on  much  further  than  we  at  first  meant  to  go ; 
and  the  end  of  it  is  condemnation  and  doom. 

IIL  That  God  pities  his  people,  though  they  suffer  at  his  own  hand      It 


?60  THE  BOOK   OP  THE  PROPHET  BZBKIBL.    [oh.  xxxvi.  1— Sft. 

was  God  who  caused  the  children  of  Israel  to  lose  their  heritage  and  to  be  carried- 
away  as  they  were.  Their  sorrows  were  the  penalty  of  their  sin ;  it  was  the  hand  of 
the  Lord  that  was  laid  upon  them.  Yet  their  distressing  condition  'called  forth  the 
Divine  compassion.  It  was  in  mercy,  in  true  pity,  that  he  saw  them  "  bearing  th» 
shame  of  the  heathen "  (ver.  6 ;  see  ver.  15).  Even  though  it  is  in  virtue  of  God's 
own  righteous  laws  that  we  "  are  minished  and  brought  low,"  that  we  suffer  in  the- 
flesh  or  in  the  spirit,  in  circumstance  or  in  soul,  as  the  consequence  of  our  wrong- 
doing, even  then,  in  our  straits  and  in  our  misery,  in  our  bondage  and  in  our 
degradation,  we  are  the  objects  of  Divine  compassion.  God  likes  not  to  see  hi» 
children  suffer  and  "  bear  shame  "  as  they  do.  And  he  sends  the  messenger  of  mercy 
that  bids  us  rise  from  our  wretchedness  and  ruin  and  return  unto  himself. 

IV.  That  eveeythino  mat  be  eecovebed  when  God  is  on  oub  side.  (Vers.  8- 
— 15.)  When  God  says,  "  I  am  for  you,  and  I  will  turn  unto  you,"  what  is  there 
that  we  may  not  hope  for  ?  Then  the  land  of  Israel  might  look  to  be  retilled  and 
resown,  to  yield  its  fruit  as  in  the  best  days  that  were ;  to  be  repeopled  by  those  wha 
had  a  right  to  walk  upon  its  hills  and  to  cultivate  its  villages  ;  it  should  no  longer  be 
a  grave  for  the  dead,  but  a  home  for  the  living.  And'when  we  turn  in  penitence  and 
in  faith  to  God,  and  he  turns  in  mercy  and  in  grace  to  us,  what  is  there  that  ive  may 
not  hope  for  ?  What  glorious  spiritual  restoration  is  within  our  reach ! — the  peac& 
which  no  earthly  good  can  either  give  or  take  away :  the  /oy  which  abides  and  which 
blesses  while  it  lasts;  the  excellency  of  character  and  of  life  which  makes  us  take  rank, 
with  the  children  of  God  everywhere;  the  hope  which  is  full  of  immortality. — 0. 

Vers.  16 — 21. — God's  Nameand  ours.  The  most  striking  thought  contained  in  these 
words  is  God's  regard  for  the  honour  of  his  own  Name.  But  there  are  two  truths- 
which  claim  attention. 

I.  Two  THINGS  WHICH  iNCUB  HIS  HIGH  DISPLEASURE.  The  pouring  out  of  his 
"  fury  "  is,  of  course,  language  which  is  accommodated  to  our  human  feelings ;  but  it 
speaks  of  the  Divine  displeasure  existing  in  a  very  high  degree ;  and  the  two  evils^ 
which  excite  it  are :  1.  Perverted  piety ;  the  giving  to  another  the  glory  due  to  himself  r 
idolatry  (ver.  18).  2.  Inhumanity.  "  They  had  shed  blood  upon  the  land  "  (ver.  18). 
The  wanton  taking  of  human  life  is  the  darkest  and  saddest  form  of  cruelty ;  but  it 
is  by  no  means  the  only  one  which  meets  the  severe  rebuke  of  God.  All  forms  of 
unkindness  or  of  wrong,  by  which  men's  circumstances  are  reduced  or  their  spirit* 
are  wounded,  call  down  his  reproach  and  bear  their  penalty. 

II.  One  ESPECIAL  fokm  of  penalty.  God  "scattered"  the  Israelites;  he  caused 
them  to  be  "  dispersed  through  the  countries  "  (ver.  19).  The  evil  which  they  sutfered 
in  Babylon  was  negative  rather  than  positive.  They  were  not  ill  treated  there.  The 
misery  of  it  lay  in  its  unhomeliness.  They  were  far  from  their  own  land — from  Mount 
Zion  and  its  glorious  temple,  from  the  happy  services  and  holy  institutions  which  made 
their  childhood  and  their  youth  what  they  were ;  they  were  exiles,  dwelling  in  "  a  strange 
land."  This  is  the  constant  penalty  of  sin.  .  It  causes  us  to  dwell  afar  off  from  God ; 
we  lose  our  sense  of  nearness  to  him ;  we  are  in  no  spiritual  home ;  we  are  in  the  hand 
and  in  the  land  of  the  enemy.  It  is  not  that  earth  is  far  from  hraven  ;  it  is  that  sin  is 
far  from  righteousness  ;  it  is  that  the  disloyal  subject,  the  unfilial  child,  is  far  from  hia- 
gracious  Sovereign,  far  from  his  heavenly  Father. 

III.  God's  solicitude  concerning  his  Name.  "  They  profaned  my  holy  Name "' 
(ver.  20);  "I  had  pity  for  my  holy  Name"  (ver.  21).  Why  should  God  be  concerned 
thus  "  for  his  Name  "  ?  Knowing,  as  we  do,  that  God  is  love,  and  that  he  lives  not  for 
himself,  but  for  the  good  of  his  universe,  we  cannot  believe  that  this  Divine  solicitude 
has  any  selfishness  at  the  root  of  it.  We  conclude  that  its  explanation  is  in  the  fact 
that  it  is  of  vital  consequence  to  the  world  that  he  should  be  rightly  regarded  and  truly 
honoured.  It  is  so  in  both  aspects,  affirmative  and  negative.  1.  It  is  a  boundless 
blessing  when  God  is  known  and  understood ;  when,  therefore,  he  is  honoured  and 
obeyed ;  and  when,  therefore,  all  the  priceless  blessings  of  obedience  are  secured.  2.  It 
is  an  immeasurable  evil  when  God  is  misrepre.-iented  and  misunderstood;  when  hig- 
Name  is  profaned,  and  men  think  of  him  as  he  would  not  be  thought  of;  when  his  Name 
is  associated  with  weakness,  or  with  indifference,  or  with  injustice,  or  with  any  kind  of 
wrung.     Then  comes  irreverence,  and  all  the  long  train  of  evils  that  accompany  it 


«H.  XXXVI.  1—38.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  261 

— irreligion,  disobrdience,  rebellion,  degradation,  ruin,  death.  We  may  well  pray, 
•  Hallowed  be  thy  Name ; "  for  as  men  speak  of  God,  and  as  they  think  of  him  and  know 
bim,  so  will  they  order  their  lives  and  construct  their  character  and  choose  their 
destiny.  We  ought,  similarly,  to  be  concerned  about  our  name.  Not  that  it  is  the 
part  of  a  wise  man  to  covet  notoriety ;  that  is  weakness  rather  than  wisdom.  To  wish 
to  be  notorious  is  simply  selfish,  and  to  be  notorious  is  to  stand  on  the  same  ground 
with  many  of  the  very  worst  men  that  ever  strove  and  sinned.  But  we  should  be 
concerned  bo  to  live  that  our  name,  however  far  it  may  go,  may  be  associated  with  all 
ihat  is  pure  and  good  and  wise ;  that  such  influence  as  God  gives  us  to  exert  may  all 
go  into  the  right  scale ;  that  whenever  and  wherever  we  do  speak  or  strike,  we  may 
speak  what  is  true  and  strike  for  justice  and  humanity ;  that  the  issue  of  our  lives 
shall  be  a  brave  and  faithful  witness  for  God,  for  the  kingdom  of  Jesus  Christ ;  that  no 
man  shall  find  a  shelter  for  anything  that  is  base  or  immoral  behind  our  name ;  that 
many  men  may  walk  more  steadily  along  the  path  of  life  or  work  more  devotedly  in 
the  fields  of  usefulness  because  our  name  lends  some  strength  to  virtue  and  to  holy 
service. — C. 

Vers.  26 — 28. — ITie  three  elements  of  piety.  The  Israelites  were  "  profaning  the 
Name  "  of  Jehovah  in  the  lands  through  which  they  were  dispersed.  But  this  could 
not  be  permitted  to  remain.  For  the  sake  of  his  own  Divine  Name,  the  sacredness  of 
which  was  of  such  vital  moment  to  mankind  (see  previous  homily),  God  would  work  a 
gracious  revolution  (vers.  21 — 23).  And  what  he  would  do  is  this :  1.  He  would  work 
within  their  hearts  an  entire  change  of  thought  and  feeling,  removing  their  strong 
stubbornness  and  replacing  it  with  a  childlike  sensibility.  2.  He  would  thus  lead 
them  to  live  in  purity  and  uprightness  before  the  eyes  of  those  among  whom  they 
dwelt.  Thus  would  he  magnify  his  holy  Name.  3.  Then  he  would  restore  them  to 
the  old  relation  which  they  bad  forfeited  by  their  sin;  they  should  be  again  his  people, 
and  he  would  be  their  God,  dwelling  among  them  and  ruling  over  them  in  peace  and 
jrighteousness.     We  have  here  the  three  constantly  recurring  elements  of  true  piety, 

I.  Inwaed  renewal.  (Ver.  26.)  Consisting  of:  1.  Sensibility  taking  the -place  at 
indifference  or  stubborn  rebelliousness.  Instead  of  the  "  stony  heart "  is  the  "  heart  of 
flesh  ; "  instead  of  an  utter,  brutish  disregard  of  Divine  claims  or  a  perverse  and  froward 
determination  to  reject  them,  is  the  "  new  heart,"  the  "  new  spirit "  of  openness  of 
mind,  willingness  which  ends  in  eagerness  to  learn  of  God,  responsiveness  of  feeling  when 
he  speaks,  tenderness  of  conscience  under  the  spoken  truth  of  Christ.  2.  Humility 
taking  the  place  of  pride  or  careless  unconcern ;  a  sense  of  past  sin  and  of  present 
unworthiness ;  the  inward  conviction  that  God  has  not  been  remembered,  reverenced, 
served,  trusted,  as  he  should  have  been,  and  that  life  has  been  stained  with  many  errors, 
faults,  shortcomings,  transgressions;  a  spirit  of  true  penitence  and  shame ;  a  voice,  not 
loud  but  deep,  says  within  the  soul,  "  I  have  sinned."  3.  Consecration  instead  of 
selfishness.  The  heart  turns  away  from  selfishness  and  from  worldliness  toward  God, 
toward  the  Divine  Bedeemer,  whom  it  receives  gladly  and  fully  as  the  Saviour  of  the 
soul,  as  the  Sovereign  of  the  life. 

II.  Odtwakd  kectitudb.  "  I  will  cause  you  to  walk  in  my  statutes,"  etc.  (ver.  27). 
The  obedience  which  springs  from  mere  dread  of  penalty  is  of  very  small  account;  but 
that  which  proceeds  from  a  loyal  and  a  loving  heart  is  worth  everything.  The  Divine 
6on,  who  was  also  a  Servant,  could  say,  "I  delight  to  do  thy  will;  .  .  .  thy  Law  is 
within  my  heart."  And  when  the  new  spirit  or  the  new  heart  is  within  us,  we  can 
speak  in  the  same  strain.  Our  piety  passes,  with  perfect  naturalness,  from  the  reverent 
thought  to  the  right  word ;  from  the  grateful  feeling  to  the  upright  action,  from  the 
consecrated  spirit  to  the  devoted  and  useful  life.  We  obey  God's  word  because  we 
lionour  himself;  we  keep  the  commandments  of  Christ  because  we  love  our  Lord 
^John  xiv.  15,  21,  23).  If  the  Spirit  of  God  be  in  us  we  shall  bring  forth  the  fruits  of 
the  Spirit  (Gal.  v.  22,  23).  Of  the  commandments  of  Christ,  to  which,  by  his  own 
words  or  by  those  of  his  apostles,  he  has  attached  the  greatest  weight,  as  indispensable 
to  the  Christian  life  and  as  the  condition  of  his  acceptance,  we  must  include  purity, 
truthfulness,  sobriety,  honesty,  reverence,  love — the  love  which  forbears,  which  pities, 
which  succonrs  in  time  of  need. 

III.  Heavenly  intercoubsb.    (Ver.  28.)    While  still  inhabitants  of  earth,  our 


262  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PEOPHBT  BZEKIEL.    [on.  xxxvL  1— 3a 

citizenship  is  to  be  in  heaven  (see  Phil.  iii.  20).  God  is  to  he  out  God,  and  we  aw  tc 
be  his  people.  All  human  and  earthly  relationships  are  to  find  their  highest  and  best 
illustration  in  those  which  are  "in  the  heavens,"  which  are  spiritual  and  etemaL 
Communion  between  ourselves  and  our  Father  in  heaven  is  to  be  common  and  con» 
stant — a  daily,  an  hourly  incident  through  all  our  life  and  in  all  our  circumstance! 
and  conditions.  Far  below  and  far  above  all  other  things,  we  are  to  be  the  children 
and  the  heirs  of  God,  we  are  to  be  the  servants  of  Jes\is  Christ,  we  are  to  bear  witness 
to  his  truth,  we  are  to  promote  the  coming  of  his  kingdom  on  the  earth. — C. 

Vers.  33 — 37. — The  period  of  spiritual  prosperity.  The  promised  restoration  and 
prosperity  of  Israel  very  fitly  portrays  the  condition  of  spiritual  well-being  in  the 
Church  of  Christ.    It  is  marked  by  four  things. 

I.  Spieitdal  stability.  "I  will  cause  you  to  dwell  in  the  cities"  (ver,  33).  They 
were  not  to  be  as  travellers  who  are  always  moving,  sleeping  beneath  the  trees  or  the 
stars,  or  as  men  that  pitch  their  tents  for  a  few  days  and  pass  on ;  they  should  "  dwell 
in  the  cities."  It  is  one  sign  of  a  healthy  moral  condition  when  we  reach  some  per- 
manency of  principle  and  of  feeling;  when  we  are  not  "driven  with  the  wind  and 
tossed,"  but  abide  where  we  are,  dwelling  in  the  strong  cities  of  assured  conviction,  of 
peace,  of  sacred  joy,  of  blessed  hope.  It  is  the  man  who  has  learnt  much  of  Gk)d  and 
has  attained  to  no  small  measure  of  heavenly  wisdom  whom  we  know  where  to  find, 
on  whose  constancy  we  may  depend,  who  is  "  steadfast  and  immovable." 

II.  Fruitful  enbkot.  "  The  wastes  shall  be  builded,  and  the  desolate  land  shall 
be  tilled  "  (vers.  33,  34).  Before  the  Churches  of  Christ  there  lie  sad  and  desolate 
wastes — souls  that  are  in  ruins  and  urgently  need  to  be  restored;  large  stretches  of 
manhood  that  are  now  uncultivated,  but  that  would  yield  a  very  precious  harvest  if 
only  the  seed  of  heavenly  truth  were  sown.  The  great  work  to  which  these  Churches 
should  have  addressed  themselves  with  utmost  earnestness  and  zeal  is  the  work  of 
human  restoration,  of  sacred  culture.  The  fields  lie  fallow  and  are  barren;  the  land 
is  desolate ;  mankind  is  not  yielding  its  fruit,  though  there  are  boundless  capacities 
slumbering  in  the  soil.  But  when  the  breath  of  Divine  inspiration  is  felt  by  the 
Church,  and  the  pulse  of  a  Divine  life  is  beatiog  within  it,  then  does  it  go  forward  in 
the  fulness  of  its  faithfulness  and  its  pity,  and  the  wastes  are  builded  and  the  land  is 
tilled. 

III.  Impeessiveness  and  INPI.UENCB.  (Vers.  35,  36.)  A  Christian  Church  may 
not  be  composed  of  those  whose  outward  behaviour  contrasts  greatly  with  what  it 
once  was ;  for  its  members  may  be  those  who  have  "  been  with  Christ  from  the  begin- 
ning." Nevertheless,  it  ought  to  be  a  distinctively  and  unmistakably  holy  community; 
a  society  of  men  and  women  who  are  recognized  by  "all  that  pass  by"  as  those  tlutt 
love  righteousness  and  hate  iniquity;  as  those  that  are  seriously  and  earnestly  endea- 
vouring to  translate  the  will  of  Christ  into  their  daily  and  their  public  life ;  as  those 
whose  whole  conduct  is  governed  by  Christian  principle;  as  those  who  are  intent  upon 
the  elevation  of  their  country  and  of  their  race,  whatever  sacrifice  of  time,  or  money,  or 
strength  it  may  require  to  accomplish  it.  Then  would  the  great  Name  of  Jesus  Christ 
be  magnified,  and  men  would  know  that  he  was  the  Lord,  the  Lord  of  all  power  and 
grace. 

IV.  Peatebfulnbss.  (Ver.  37.)  God  will  have  his  children  near  to  him  in  reve- 
rential and  grateful  thought,  and  he  desires  that  they  ask  him  for  the  help  and  the 
blessings  they  need  at  his  hand.  He  will  "  be  inquired  of."  As  soon  as  we  reach  • 
point  where  we  begin  to  think  of  independence,  we  are  in  spiritual  danger.  The  wise^ 
safe,  prosperous  condition,  both  of  the  individual  and  of  the  Church,  is  that  of  constant 
nearness  to  God  and  a  deep  sense  of  dependence  upon  him.  The  upward  look  and  the 
earnest  prayer  become  us  well ;  and  they  not  onlj  }>ecome  v*,  but  they  secure  for  u*  tte 
responsive  bounty  and  blessing  of  God.— 0. 


.  xxxvn.  1— 28.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIBL. 


268 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXXVn. 

This  chapter  embraces,  in  its  earlier  sec- 
tion (vera.  1 — 14),  the  concluding  portion  of 
the  "word  of  God"  begun  at  ch.  zxxvi. 
16;  in  its  later  section  (vera.  15 — ^28),  an 
•dditional  "word,"  to  which  the  former 
naturally  leads.  The  earlier,  under  the 
figure  of  a  resurrection  of  dry  bones,  be- 
held by  the  prophet  in  vision,  describes 
the  political  and  religious  reawakening  of 
Israel;  in  the  later  is  depicted,  by  means 
of  a  symbolic  action,  the  reunion  of  its 
two  branches.  The  first  divides  itself 
into  two  parts — the  vision  (vers.  1 — 10) 
and  its  interpretation  (vers.  11 — 14).  The 
vision  was  to  all  appearance  designed  to 
meet  the  objections  the  preceding  picture 
of  Israel's  future  glory  might  naturally  be 
expected  to  call  forth.  It  was  true  that  in 
the  past  Israel  had  often  suffered  a  decline 
in  her  national  life,  and  as  often  experienced 
a  revival.  But  with  the  fall  of  her  capital, 
the  burning  of  her  temple,  the  slaughter  of 
her  people,  and  the  expatriation  of  her 
nobles,  her  life  was  henceforth  extinct ;  and 
to  speak  of  returning  prosperity  to  her  in 
such  a  condition  was  like  talking  of  the 
restoration  of  vitality  to  withered  bones. 
Besides,  the  exiles  were,  comparatively 
speaking,  only  a  handful,  and  to  picture 
Judah's  waste  cities  as  being  filled  with 
flocks  of  men  was  like  mocking  the  dejected 
with  hopes  certain  to  be  dashed  to  the 
ground.  The  Exposition  will  show  how  the 
vision  was  fitted  to  dispel  such  despondent 
reflections.  Yet  diversity  of  sentiment 
prevails  as  to  whether  the  vision  was  in- 
tended to  predict  an  actual  resurrection  of 
the  physically  dead  at  the  end  of  time,  or 
merely  to  symbolize  an  ideal  resurrection  of 
Israel,  then  nationally  dead. 

1.  The  view,  that  what  the  prophet  beheld 
in  vision  was  the  final  resurrection  of  man- 
Jtind,  though  favoured  by  Jerome,  Oalovius, 
and  Kliefoth,  must  be  abandoned,  not  be- 
canse  the  doctrine  of  a  general  resurrection 
would  not  have  been  a  powerful  consolation 
to  the  pious-hearted  in  Israel,  or  because 
that  doctrine  was  not  then  known,  but 
oeoanse,  in  the  prophet's  own  explanation. 


the  bones  are  declared  to  be  those,  not  of 
the  whole  family  of  man,  but  merely  of  the 
house  of  Israel.  At  the  same  time,  those 
interpreters  are  right  who,  like  Hengsten- 
berg,  KeU,  and  Flumptre,  hold  that,  even 
if  the  doctrine  of  a  general  resurrection  had 
not  been  current  in  Ezekiel's  time,  this 
vision  was  enough  to  call  it  into  existence, 
and  even  to  lend  strong  probability  to  its 
truth. 

2.  Accordingly,  the  view  is  commonly 
preferred  that,  while  an  objective  reality  to 
the  prophet's  mind,  and  by  no  means  a 
mere  rhetorical  garb  for  its  conceptions,  the 
vision  was  desigtted  as  a  symholio  representa- 
tion of  Israel's  resuscitation;  though  here 
again  opinions  diverge  both  as  to  what 
formed  the  mental  background  for  the 
prophet's  use  of  such  a  symbol,  and  as  to 
how  it  served  to  suggest  the  thought  of 
Israel's  revival.  While  some,  like  Jerome 
and  Hengstenberg,  as  above  indicated,  re- 
gard "  the  doctrine  of  the  proper  resurrec- 
tion "  as  "  the  presupposition  of  the  expanded 
figurative  representation,"  others,  with  Ha- 
vernick,  find  its  historical  basis  in  such 
instances  of  raising  from  the  dead  as  were 
performed  by  Elijah  and  Elisha,  and  per- 
haps also  in  such  passages  as  Isa.  xxvi.  19. 
If  Smend  thinks  the  vision  was  intended 
to  assist  Israel  merely  by  suggesting  that 
"  the  unbelievable  might  happen,"  and  Ha- 
vernick  that  it  was  designed  to  inspire  hope 
by  presenting  to  the  mind  a  lively  picture 
of  the  creative,  life-giving  power  of  God, 
"which  can  raise  even  dead  bones  to  life 
again,"  Ewald  finds  its  chief  power  to 
oonsole  in  the  thought  "  that  the  nation  or 
individual  which  does  not  despair  of  the 
Divine  Spirit  will  not  be  forsaken  of  this 
Spirit  in  any  situation,  but  will  always  be 
borne  on  by  it  to  new  life." 

Ver.  1. — The  hand  of  the  Lord  was  upon 
me.  The  absence  of  the  customary  "  and  " 
(comp.  ch.  i.  1,  3 ;  iii.  14,  22),  wanting  only 
once  again  (ch.  xl.  1),  appears  to  indicate 
something  extraordinary  and  unusual  inthe 
prophet's  experience.  In  tlie  words  of  Ewald, 
"  such  a  never-beheld  sight  one  sees  &eely 
(by  itselO  in  a  moment  of  higher  inspiratioii 
or  never ; "  and  that  in  this  whole  vition  the 
prophet  was  th'e  subject  of  a  special  and 


2fi4 


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PEOPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxxvn.  1—28. 


intensified  inspiration  is  evident,  not  alone 
fiom  the  contents  of  the  vision,  but  also 
Irom  the  language  in  which  it  is  recorded. 
And  carried  me  out  in  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord. 
So  the  Vulgate  and  Hitzig — a  translation 
•which  Smeud  thinks  might  be  justitied  by 
an  appeal  to  oh.  xi.  24,  in  which  the  similar 
plirase,  "  Spirit  of  God  (JEWhim)"  occurs ; 
tliough,  with  Grotius,  Haveruick,  Keil,  and 
others,  he  prefers  the  rendering  of  the 
IjXX,,  "And  Jehovah  carried  me  out  in 
the  Spirit."  The  Eevised  Version  combine* 
the  two  thus :  "  Ami  he  carried  me  out  in  the 
Spirit  of  the  Lord."  Keil  suggests  that  the 
words,  "of  God,"  in  ch.  xi.  24,  were  omitted 
here  because  of  the  word  "  Jehovah  "  imme- 
diately following.  And  set  me  down  in  the 
midst  of  the  valley.  As  the  article  indi- 
cates, the  valley  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
Tel-Abib,  where  the  prophet  receiveil  his 
first  instructions  conceming  his  mission 
(ch.  iii.  22) ;  although  Hengstenberg  holds, 
wrongly  we  think,  that  "the  valley  here 
has  nothing  to  do  with  the  valley  in  ch.  iii. 
22."  Which  (literally,  and  it)  was  full  of 
bones ;  i.e.  of  men  who  had  been  slaughtered 
there  (ver.  9;  comp.  oli.  xxxix.  11),  and 
whose  corpses  had  been  left  unburied  upon 
the  face  of  the  plain  (ver.  3),  so  that  tliey 
were  seen  by  the  prophet.  Whether  these 
bones  were  actually  in  the  valley,  or  merely 
formed  part  of  the  vision,  can  only  be  con- 
jectured, though  the  latter  opinion  seems 
the  more  probable.  At  the  same  time,  such 
a  plain  as  is  here  depicted  may  well  have 
been  a  battle-ground  on  which  Assyrian 
and  Chaldean  armies  had  often  met. 

Ver.  2. — And  he  caused  me  to  pass  by 
them  round  about.  Not  over,  as  Keil,  Klie- 
foth,  and  Plumptre  translate,  but  round 
about  them,  so  as  to  view  them  from  every 
side.  The  result  of  the  prophet's  inspection 
of  the  bones  was  to  excite  within  him  a 
feeling  of  surprise  which  expressed  itself 
in  a  twofold  behold ;  the  first  occasioned  by 
a  contemplation  of  their  number,  very  many, 
and  their  situation,  in  the  open  valley, 
literally,  upon  the  face  of  the  valley;  i.e.  not 
underground,  where  they  could  not  have 
been  seen,  but  upon  the  surface  of  the  soil, 
and  not  piled  up  in  heaps,  but  scattered 
over  the  ground;  and  the  second  by  a  dis- 
cernment of  their  condition  bs  very  dry,  so 
bleached  and  withered  as  to  foreclose,  not 
the  possibility  alone,  but  also  the  thought 
of  their  resuscitation. 

Ver.  3. — Son  of  man,  can  these  bones  live  t 
Whether  or  not  this  question  was  directed, 
as  Plumptre  surmises,  to  meet  despairing 
thoughts  which  had  nr:s(jn  in  the  prophet's 
own  mind,  it  seems  reasonable  to  hold,  with 
Havernick,  that  the  question  was  addressed 
to  him  as  representing  "o?er  against  God 
the  people,  and  certainly  as  to  this  point 


the  natural  and  purely  human  consoiousnea 
of  the  same,"  to  which  Israel's  restoration 
appeared  as  unlikely  an  occurrence  as  the 
reaniraation  of  the  withered  bones  that  lay 
around.  The  extreme  impiobability,  if  not 
absolute  impossibility,  of  the  occurrence,  at 
least  to  human  reason  and  power,  is  perhaps 
pointed  at  in  the  designation  "  Son  of  man  " 
here  given  to  the  prophet.  The  prophet's 
answer,  0  Lord  God,  thou  knowest,  is  nut  to 
be  interpreted  as  proving  that  to  the  prophet 
hitherto  the  thought  of  a  resurrection  had 
been  unfamiliar,  if  not  completely  absent, 
or  as  giving  a  direct  reply  either  affirmative 
or  negative  to  the  question  proposed  to 
him,  but  merely  as  expressing  the  prophet's 
sense  of  the  greatness  of  the  wonder  sug- 
gested to  his  mind,  with  perhaps  a  lateut 
acknowledgment  that  God  alone  had  the 
power  by  which  such  a  wonder  could,  and 
therefore  alone  also  the  knowledge  whether 
it  wo  old,  be  accomplished  (comp.  Eev.  vii.  14). 

Ver.  4. — Prophesy  upon  (or,  over)  these 
bones.  This  instruction — which  shows  Je- 
hovah regarded  the  prophet's  answer  as 
equivalent  to  an  admission  that  the  revivi- 
fication of  the  bones  lay  within  his  (Jeho- 
vah's) power — was  not  a  mere  command  to 
prediel;,  as  in  ch.  vi.  2  and  xi.  4,  but  an  injunc- 
tion to  utter  the  Divine  word  through  which 
the  miracle  (of  creation,  as  it  really  was) 
should  be  performed.  "  The  significance  of 
the  command  lies  in  the  fact  that  it  taught 
the  prophet  that  he  was  himself  to  be  in- 
strumental in  the  great  work  of  resuscita- 
tion. He  who  had  been  so  often  troubled 
with  the  sense  of  impotence  and  failure, 
who  had  heard  the  people  say  of  him, 
'Doth  he  not  speak  parables?'  who  had 
been  to  them  as  the  lovely  song  of  one  that 
hath  a  pleasant  voice,  and  nothing  more 
than  that,  was  at  last  to  learn  that  the 
'word  of  the  Lord,'  spoken  by  his  lips,  was 
mighty,  and  would  not  return  to  him  void  " 
(Plumptre). 

Ver.  5. — ^I  will  cause  breath  to  enter  into 
you ;  literally,  I  am  causing  breath  (or,  spirit) 
to  enter  into  you.  The  real  agent,  therefore, 
in  the  resuscitation  of  the  bones  was  to  be, 
not  the  prophet  or  the  word,  but  Jehovah 
himself;  and  that  the  end  aimed  at  by  the 
Divine  activity  was  "  life  "  shows  the  breath 
spoken  of  (roach)  was  not  to  be  the  wind,  as 
in  ver.  9,  or  the  Spirit,  but  the  breath  of 
life,  as  in  Gen.  vi.  17  and  vii.  22  (comp.  Gen. 
ii.  7 ;  Ps.  civ.  30 ;  Isa.  xxvi.  19). 

Ver.  6. — The  process  of  revivification  is 
now  divided  into  two  stages — a  preliminary 
stage  which  should  effect  the  reconstruction 
of  the  external  skeleton,  by  bringing  to- 
gether its  different  parts  and  clothing  them 
with  sinews,  flesK  and  skin  (comp.  Job  x. 
11);  and  a  finishing  stage,  which  .should 
consist  in  animating,  or  "putting  breath  in.'' 


OH.  XXXVII.  1—28.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL. 


265 


the  reoonstrnotetl  Bkeleton ;  corresponding 
to  the  two  stages  into  which  the  process  of 
man's  original  creation  was  divided  (Gen. 
iu  7).  The  result,  would  be  that  the  resur- 
rected and  reanimated  bones,  like  newly 
made  man,  would  know  the  Lord. 

Vers.  7,  8. — So  I  prophesied  as  I  was 
oomraanded.  The  words  uttered  were  with- 
out doubt  those  of  vers.  4 — 6.  The  effect 
produced  is  depicted  in  its  various  steps. 
First,  there  resulted  »  noise — literally,  a 
voice — which  the  Revisers  take  to  have  been 
"a  thundering;"  and  Havernick,  Keil, 
Smend,  and  others,  "a  sound"  in  general; 
but  which  Ewald,  Hengstenberg,  and 
Schroder,  with  more  propriety,  regard  as 
having  been  an  audible  voice,  if  not,  as 
Kliefoth  supposes,  the  trumpet-blast  or 
"  voice  of  God,"  which,  according  to  certain 
New  Testament  passages,  shall  precede  the 
resurrection  and  awaken  the  dead  (John  v. 
25,  28 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  52 ;  1  Thess.  iv.  16) ;  per- 
haps, as  Plumptre  suggests,  the  "counter- 
part" thereof.  Kext,  a  shaking,  o-Eiir/i&s 
(LXX.) ;  which  the  Revisers,  following  Klie- 
foth, understand  to  have  been  an  earth- 
quake, as  in  1  Kings  xix.  11 ;  Amos  i.  1 ; 
Zech.  i.  1 ;  xiv.  5  (comp.  Mutt,  xxvii.  51), 
and  Ewald  explains  as  "  a  peal  of  thauder 
running  througli  the  entire  announcement," 
as  in  eh.  iii.  12, 13  and  xxxviii.  19,  20 ;  but 
which  is  better  interpreted  by  Keil,  Smend, 
and  others  as  a  rustling  proceeding  from 
a  movement  among  the  bones.  Thirdly,  the 
bones  came  together  in  the  body  as  a  whole, 
and  in  particular  bone  to  his  bone ;  i.e.  each 
bone  to  the  bone  with  which  it  was  designed 
to  be  united,  as  e.g.  "the  upper  to  the  lower 
part  of  the  arm"  (Schroder).  Lastly,  the 
sinews  and  the  flesh  came  up  npon  them, 
and  the  skin  covered  them  above ;  or,  as  in 
the  Revised  Version,  there  were  sinews  upon 
them,  and  flesh  came  up  and  shin  covered  tliem 
above ;  precisely  as  Jehovah  had  announced 
to  the  prophet  would  take  place  (ver.  6). 
Yet,  tliough  the  external  framework  of  the 
bodies  was  finished,  there  was  no  breath  in 
them — ruach  having  still  the  same  import 
as  in  ver.  5.  With  this  the  preliminary 
stage  in  the  reanimating  process  terminated. 

Ver.  9. — The  finishing  stage  began  by  the 
prophet  receiving  a  command  to  prophesy 
unto  the  wind  (better,  hreaih,  or  spirit),  and 
to  summon  it  from  the  four  "breaths,"  or 
"  winds  "  (in  this  case  the  preferable  render- 
ing), that  it  might  breathe  upon  the  slain. 
"  Four  winds  "  are  mentioned,  as  in  ch.  xl. 
20,  to  indicate  the  four  quarters  of  heaven 
(comp.  ch.  V.  10,  12;  xii.  14;  xvii.  21),  and 
perhaps  also  to  suggest  the  immense 
quantity  of  vitalizing  force  demanded  by 
the  multitude  of  the  dead  (Smend),  "the 
fulness  and  force  of  the  Spirit's  operations  " 
(Hengstenberg),  or   the    notion    that    the 


Spirit,  in  resuscitating  Israel,  would  make 
use  of  all  the  varied  forces  that  were  then 
working  in  the  world  (Plumptre).  The 
designation  of  the  dead  as  slain  reveals 
that  the  resurrection  intended  was  not  that 
of  men  in  general,  but  of  the  nation  of 
Israel. 

Ver.  10. — An  exceeding  great  aimy.  This 
harmonizes  with  the  feature  in  the  vision 
which  describes  the  bones  as  those  of  slain 
men,  while  also  it  may  be  viewed  as  fore- 
shadowing the  future  destiny  of  Israel. 
"The  bones  of  the  slain  on  the  field  of 
battle,  having  been  brought  together,  clothed 
with  flesh,  and  a  new  life  breathed  into 
them,  now  they  stand  np,  not  as  '  a  mixed 
multitude,'  but  as  'an  exceeding  great 
army'  prepared  to  take  their  part  in  the 
wars  of  Jeliovah  under  new  and  happier 
conditions  "  (Plumptre).  (On  the  phrase,  "to 
stand  upon  the  feet,"  comp.  ch.  ii.  1 ;  Zech. 
xiv.  12 ;  Rev.  xi.  11.) 

Vers.  11 — 14  contain,  according  to  most 
commentators,  the  Divine  interpretation  of 
the  vision,  Kliefoth  alone  contending  that 
they  furnish,  not  so  much  an  exposition  of 
the  vision — which,  he  thinks,  must  be  ex- 
plained independently,  and  which  he  regards 
as  teaching  the  future  resurrection  of  God's 
people — as  an  application  to  Israel's  case  of 
the  doctrine  contained  in  the  vision. 

Ver.  11. — These  bones  are  the  whole  house 
of  Israel.  On  the  principle  that  "God  is 
his  own  best  interpreter,"  it  should  not  be 
difficult  to  see  that,  whatever  foreshadowings 
of  the  final  resurrection  of  the  just  may  be 
contained  in  the  vision,  its  primary  inten- 
tion was  to  depict  the  political  and  national 
restoration  of  Israel  (Ephraim  and  Judah), 
whose  condition  at  the  time  the  field  of 
withered  bones  appropriately  represented. 
That  Hitzig  errs  in  supposing  the  "  bones  " 
alluded  to  in  this  verse  symbolized  the 
portions  of  Ephraim  and  Judah  then  dead, 
instead  of  the  portions  still  living  (in  exile), 
who  considered  themselves,  as  practically 
dead,  is  apparent  from  the  words  that 
follow.  Behold,  they  say.  The  complaint 
was  manifestly  taken  from  the  popular  say- 
ings current  among  the  people  of  the  exile. 
Broken  up,  dispersed,  expatriated,  and  de- 
spairing, the  members  of  what  had  once 
been  "  the  whole  house  of  Israel "  felt  there 
was  no  hope  more  of  recovering  national 
lil'e  and  unity.  The  cheerless  character  of 
the  outlook  they  expressed  by  saying.  Our 
bones  (not  the  bones  of  the  dead,  but  of  the 
living)  are  dried — meaning, "  The  vital  force 
of  our  nation  is  gone  "  (the  bones  being  re- 
garded in  Scripture  as  the  seat  of  the  vital 
force ;  comp.  Ps.  zxxii.  S) — onr  hope  is  lost — 


26e 


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [ch.  xxxvii.  1—28. 


our  hope,  i.e.,  of  ever  again  returning  to  our 
own  land  or  regaining  national  existence — 
and  we  are  out  off  for  our  parts ;  literally, 
we  are  out  off  for  tnmelvei;  which  Gesenius 
explains  to  mean,  "We  are  lost,"  taking 
*^  as  a  dativuB  pleonasti'em ;  Hitzig,  "  We 
are  reduced  to  ourselves;"  Delitzsch  and 
Keil,  "  We  are  cut  off  from  the  land  of  the 
living,"  i.e.  it  is  all  over  with  us;  Heng- 
(tenberg,  "We  are  cut  off— a  sad  fact  for 
us ; "  Bevised  Version,  "  We  are  clean  cut 
off; "  any  one  of  which  renders  the  force  of 
the  words  (comp.  Lam.  iii.  54). 

Vers.  12 — 14. — I  will  open  your  graves. 
That  this  is  not  exact  interpretation  of  the 
foregoing  symbol  may  be  argued  from  the 
fact  that  in  the  vision  no  mention  is  made 
of  graves ;  yet  the  discrepancy  to  which  it 
is  supposed  to  point  is  more  apparent  than 
real.  If  the  prophet  was  to  see  the  bones,  - 
it  was  requisite  that  these  should  be  above 
ground  rather  than  beneath.  On  the  other 
hand,  when  one  speaks  of  a  grave,  it  is  not 
needful  to  always  think  of  an  uuderground 
tomb.  To  all  intents  and  purposes  a  person 
is  in  his  grave  when,  life  being  extinct,  his 
body  has  returned  to  the  dust.  So,  the 
opening  of  graves  promised  in  Scripture  is 
not  so  much,  or  always,  the  cleaving  asunder 
of  material  sepulelirea,  as  the  bringing  back 
to  life  of  those  whose  bodies  have  returned 
to  the  dust.  Hence  the  opening  of  Israel's 
graves  could  only  signify  the  reawakening 
of  the  politically  and  religiously  dead 
people  to  national  and  spiritual  life.  This 
was  the  first  stop  in  the  restoration  of  the 
future  held  up  before  the  minds  of  the 
despairing  people.  The  second,  indicated 
by  the  clause,  and  shall  put  my  Spirit  in 
yon,  pointed,  as  in  ch.  xxxvi.  26,  27,  to 
their  future  endowment  with  higher  moral 
and  spiritual  life  than  they  had  previously 
possessed,  and  not  merely,  as  in  vers.  5,  6, 
to  their  political  and  national  resuscitation 
(Smend).  The  last  step,  the  re-establish-' 
ment  of  the  reconstructed  nation  in  Pales- 
tine, was  guaranteed  by  the  word,  I  will 
plaoe  yon  in  your  own  land,  The  circum- 
stance that  this  is  twice  repeated  (vers.  12, 
14)  shows  that  whatever  view  be  entertained 
of  the  ultimate  occupation  of  Canaan  by 
Israel,  this  was  the  goal  towards  which  the 
vision  looked.  That  it  received  partial, 
limited,  and  temporary  fulfilment  of  a  literal 
kind  in  the  restoration  under  Zerubbabel  and 
Ezra,  is  undeniable ;  that  it  will  ever  obtain 
historical  realization  of  a  permanent  sort 
is  doubtful ;  that  it  will  eventually  find  its 
highest  significance  when  God's  spiritual 
Israel,  the  Church  of  Christ,  takes  posses- 
sion of  the  heavenly  Canaan,  is  one  of  the 
clearest  and  surest  announcements  of  Scrip- 
ture. 


Note. — On  the  above  nine  verses  (6—14) 
Plumptre  writes,  "  We  can  scarcely  fail  to 
find,  in  our  Lord's  words  in  John  v.,  some- 
thing like  an  echo  of  Ezekiel's  teaching. 
There  also,  though  the  truth  of  the  general 
resurrection  is  declared  more  clearly,  the 
primary  thought  is  that  of  a  spiritual 
resurrection.  Further,  we  may  note  that 
the  complement  of  Ezekiel's  message  is 
found  in  the  language  of  Dan.  xii.  2. 
Taking  the  two  together,  we  find  both 
reproduced  in  the  teaching  of  John  v." 
(manuscript  notes). 

Vers.  15— 28.— The  "word"  embodied  in 
this  section  was  probably  communicated  to 
the  prophet  at  the  close  of  the  preceding 
vision.  Its  connection  with  this  is  apparent, 
treating  as  it  does  of  the  union  of  the  then 
severed  branches  of  the  house  of  Israel,  and 
of  the  subsequent  prosperity  which  sliould 
attend  united  Israel  under  the  rule  of  the 
Messianic  King  of  the  fnture.  That  this 
oracle,  like  the  former,  had  only  a  tem- 
porary and  partial  accomplishment  in  the 
return  from  captivity  is  so  obvious  as  to 
gtand  in  no  need  of  demonstration.  Its 
true  fulfilment  must  be  sought  in  the  future 
ingathering  of  Israel  to  the  Christian 
Church. 

Ver.  16. — Take  thee  one  sllok,  and  write. 
The  symbolic  action  thus  prescribed  to  the 
prophet  was  manifestly  based  on  the  well- 
known  historical  fact  that  the  tribes  of 
Israel,  in  Mosaic  times,  had  been  repre- 
sented by  a  rod,  on  which  was  inscribed  the 
name  of  the  tribe  (Numb.  xvii.  2) ;  but 
whether  the  stick  Ezekiel  was  instructed 
to  take  was  a  staff,  ^d$5os  (LXX.,  Havei^ 
nick,  Hitzig,  Kliefotb,  and  Smend),  or  a 
block  (Ewnl(l),  or  simply  a  piece  (Keil, 
Schroder)  of  wood  on  which  a  few  words 
might  be  traced,  cannot  be  decided.  On 
the  first  stick  the  prophet  was  directed  to 
write,  For  Judah,  and  the  house  of  Israel 
his  companions ;  i.e.  for  the  southern  king- 
dom and  those  of  the  northern  tribes  who 
adhered  to  it,  as  e.g.  Benjamin,  Levi,  and 
part  of  Simeon,  with  those  devout  Jehovah- 
worshippers  who  from  time  to  time  emi- 
grated from  other  tribes  and  settled  in  the 
land  of  Judah  (2  Cliron.  xi.  12—16;  xv.  9; 
XXX.  11, 18,  31;  xxxi.  1;  though  by  Well- 
hausen,  Smend,  and  others,  such  passages 
are  prnnonnced  unhistorieal).  On  the  second 
stick  also  the  prophet  was  directed  to 
write ;  but  whether  For  Joseph,  the  stick  of 
Ephraim  and  for  (or,  of)  all  the  house  of 
Israel    his    companions    (Authorized    and 


CH.  xxxvii.  1—28.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PKOPHBT  EZEKIEL. 


26  T 


Bevised  Versions),  or  "  For  Joseph  and  the 
whole  house  of  Isiael"  (Keil),  or  Bimply 
"For  Joseph"  (Ewald,  Haverniok,  Smeiid), 
cannot  be  determined.  Each  interpreta- 
tion can  be  supported  by  quite  reasonable 
considerations.  For  the  first  may  be  pleaded 
that  it  best  accords  with  the  natural  sense 
of  the  text ;  for  the  second,  that  the  phrase, 
tlie  tlick  of,  Ephraim,  appears  to  be  explana- 
tory of  and  in  opposition  to  "  For  Joseph ; " 
for  the  third,  that  all  the  house  of  Israel 
Btanda,  like  "  Ephraim,"  under  the  regimen 
of  "  stick."  The  iutvoduction  of  Joseph  as 
the  representative  of  the  northern  kingdom 
rests,  not  on  the  fact  that  Joseph's  was  tlie 
most  honourable  name  among  the  ten  tribes 
(Havemick),  but  on  the  circumstance  that 
the  tribe  of  Joseph,  as  represented  by 
Ephraim  and  Manassch,  constituted  the 
main  body  of  the  northern  kingdom.  The 
addition  of  Ephraim's  name  is  best  ac- 
counted for  by  remembering  that  in  liis 
hand  lay  the  hegemony  of  the  kingdom. 
"  All  the  house  of  Israel  his  companions  " 
signified  the  rest  of  the  ton  tribes.  That 
.  the  two  sticks,  when  joined  together  in  the 
prophet's  hand,  were  to  become  one  cannot 
signify  that  they  were  then  and  there  to 
be  miraculously  united. 

Vers.  18— 20.— WUt  thou  not  show  us 
what  thou  meanest  by  these  1  literally,  what 
these  (two  pieces  of  wood)  are  to  thee.  The 
Buggestlon  that  such  a  request  would  be 
preferred  to  Ezekiel  makes  it  clear  he  was 
meant  to  perform  the  symbolic  action  in 
public.  That  his  countiymea  should  fail 
to  understand  this  action  accorded  with 
their  proverbial  dulness  of  apprehension 
(comp.  ch.  xii.  9;  xxiv.  19).  In  explana- 
tion, the  prophet  was  enjoined  to  say  unto 
them,  while  holding  the  sticks  in  his  hand, 
that  just  as  he  had  made  the  sticks  one  in 
his  hand,  so  would  God  make  one  in  his 
hand  the  two  kingdoms  symbolized  by  the 
sticks.  The  union  of  the  sticks  was  to  be 
Ezekiel's  work  (ver.  17,  "in  thy  hand"); 
the  union  of  the  kingdoms  should  be  Jeho- 
vah's (ver.  19,  "  in  my  hand  ").  The  separa- 
tion of  the  kingdoms  had  been  Ephraim's 
doing  ("in  the  hand  of  Epliraim");  their 
combination  should  be  God's  ("  in  my 
hand  ").  Their  severance  had  been  effected, 
on  the  part  of  Epliraim,  by  an  unlawful 
breaking  off  from  the  house  of  Judab,  and 
the  establishment  of  an  independent  king- 
dom ;  their  unification  should  be  brought 
about  by  the  putting  down  of  Ephraim, 
and  the  confirming  of  the  crown  rights  of 
Judah.  The  translation,  And  wlU  put  them 
with  him,  even  with  the  stick  of  Judah, 
■ignifying  "  And  will  put  the  tribes  of  Israel 
with  him."  t.e.  the  tribe  of  Judah,  supported 
by  the  LXX.,  and  preferred  by  Ewald, 
6mend,  and  others,  is  superior  to  that  of, 


the  Heviecd  Version  margin,  "  And  will  put 
them  together  with  it,  unto  [or,  '  to  be ']  the 
stick  of  Judah."  Keil's  rendering,  "  I  will 
take  the  stick  of  Joseph  . .  .  and  the  tribes 
of  Israel  his  companions,  which  I  put  there- 
on [literally,  'and  I  put  them,'  viz.  the 
tribes,  '  upon  it,'  i.e.  the  stick  of  Joseph] 
with  the  stick  of  Judah,"  is  too  involved. 

Vers.  21 — 28  explain  how  the  unification 
of  the  two  kingdoms  should  be  brought 
about.  The  first  step  should  be  the  bring- 
ing of  the  people  home  to  their  own  land 
(vers.  21,  22) ;  the  second,  their  pnrifloation 
from  idolatry  (ver.  23);  the  third,  the  in- 
stallation over  them,  thus  united  and  puri- 
fied, of  one  King,  the  ideal  David  of  the 
future,  or  the  Messiah  (vers.  24,  25);  tho 
fourth,  the  establishment  with  them  of 
Jehovah's  covenant  of  peace  (ver.  26),  and 
the  permanent  erection  amongst  them  of 
Jehovah's  temple  (vers.  27,  28). 

Vers.  21,  22.— I  wlU  take  the  children  of 
Israel  from  among  the  heathen.  That  this 
promise  was  intended  to  find  an  initial  and 
partial  fulfilment  in  the  return  from  Babylon 
is  undoubted.  That  it  was  also  designed  to 
look  across  the  centiuies  towards  the  final 
ingathering  of  God's  spiritual  Israel  into 
their  permanent  inheritance,  the  heavenly 
Oanaan,  an  examination  of  its  terms  shows. 
These  clearly  presuppose  a  wider  dispersion 
of  Israel  than  had  then,  i.e.  in  Ezekiel's 
day,  taken  place ;  and  that  Israel  has  never 
yet  been  made  one  nation  npon  the  monn- 
tains  of  Israel,  is  incontestable.  Kor  is  there 
ground  for  expecting  she  ever  will  be.  Not 
even  after  the  exile  closed  did  all  Israel 
return  to  Palestine.  Nor  did  it  ever  come 
true  in  their  experience  that  one  king  was 
king  to  them  all,  since,  in  point  of  fact, 
they  never  afterwards  had  an  earthly  sove- 
reign at  all  who  was  properly  independent. 
If,  therefore,  the  prince  who  in  the  future 
should  shepherd  them  was  not  to  be  • 
temporal  monarch,  but  the  Messiah,  the 
probability  is  that  the  Israel  he  should 
shepherd  was  designed  to  be,  not  Israel 
after  the  flesh,  but  Israel  after  the  spirit, 
who  should  walk  in  his  judgments  and 
observe  his  statutes,  and  who,  in  the  fulness 
of  the  times,  should  develop  out  into  the 
Christian  Church.  Hence  it  seems  reason- 
able to  conclude  that  their  own  land,  into 
which  they  should  eventually  be  brought, 
would  be  not  so  much  the  veritable  soil 
from  which  their  ancestors  had  been  ex- 
pelled, as  the  country  or  region  in  which 
the  new,  rejuvenated,  reunited,  and  re- 
formed Israel  should  dwell,  which,  again, 
should  be  a  territory  cleansed  from  sin  and 
idolatry,  so  as  to  render  it  a  fit  abode  for 


268 


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  BZKKIEL.    [ch.  xxxvii.  1— 28. 


a  people  devoted  to  lighteousuess.  Viewed 
in  this  light,  their  own  land  was  first 
Canaan,  in  eo  far  as  after  the  exile  it  was 
cleansed  from  idolatry;  now  it  is  those 
portions  of  the  earth  in  which  the  Christian 
Church  lias  been  planted,  so  far  as  these  are 
influenced  by  the  holy  principles  of  religion ; 
finally,  it  will  be  the  new  heavens  and 
tlie  new  earth,  whereia  dwelleth  righteous- 
ness (comp.  ch.  xxxiv.  24 ;  xxxvi.  21). 

Ver.  23.  —  The  dwelUng-plaoes  wherein 
they  have  Binned,  from  which  Jehovah 
promises  to  save  them,  are  in  accordance 
with  the  views  expressed  above,  not,  as 
Hengstenberg  and  Hitzig  conjecture,  the 
dwelling-places  of  the  exile  in  which  the 
people  then  were,  but  the  dwelling-plaoes 
in  Canaan  in  which  they  had  formerly 
transgressed,  but  would  in  future  be  pre- 
served from  transgressing.  The  idea  is,  as 
Schroder  suggests,  the  localization  of  trans- 
gression which  is  viewed  as  proceeding 
from  the  dwelling-places  in  which  it  is 
committed ;  or,  according  to  Plumptre,  the 
conception  is  that,  as  their  habitations  had 
formerly  been  contaminated  by  their  detest- 
able things,  "the  worship  of  teraphim  and 
such  like,  if  not  worse,"  so  Jehovah  would 
save  them  from  that  contamination.  The 
proposal  to  alter  the  text  by  the  trans- 
position of  a  letter.convertingmosM/ioiAeAem, 
"  dwelling-places,"  in  to  meskubhothehem,  "de- 
fections," as  in  Jer.  iii.  22  (comp.  oh.  xxxvi. 
29),  though  adopted  by  some  ancient  ver- 
sions and  favoured  by  Ewald  and  Smend, 
is  not  necessary. 

Ver.  25. — The  phrase,  my  servant  David 
(comp.  ch.  xxxiv.  23,  24;  Jer.  xxxiii.  21, 
22,  26;  Ps.  Ixxviii.  70;  Ixxxix.  3,  20; 
cxliv.  10),  goes  back  to  the  Messianic 
promise  of  2  Sam.  vii.  12 — 16,  and  cannot  be 
satisfactorily  explained  as  signifying  the 
Davidic  house  (Smend),  or  as  pointing  to 
"  a  line  of  true  rulers,  each  faithfully  repre- 
senting the  ideal  David  as  the  faithful 
Buler,  the  true  Shepherd  of  his  people" 
(Plumptre,  on  ch.  xxxiv,  23),  inasmuch  as 
Israel,  after  Ezekiel's  day,  never  possessed 
any  such  line  of  rulers,  and  certainly  no 
such  line  continued  for  ever.  The  only 
feasible  exegesis  is  that  which  umlerstands 
Jehovah's  servant  David  to  be  Messiah,  or 
Jesus  Christ,  of  whom  the  writer  to  the 
Hebrews  (i.  8)  says,  "  Thy  throne,  O  God, 
is  for  ever  and  ever." 

Vers.  26,  27.  —  With  the  people  thus 
gathered  (ver.  21),  united  (ver.  22),  purified 
(ver.  23),  and  estublished  under  the  rule  of 
Messiah  (ver.  25),  Jehovah  makes  a  cove- 
nant of  peace  (see  on  ch.  xxxiv.  25;  and 
oomp.  Pb.  Ixxxix.  3),  further  characterized 
as  an  everlasting  covenant ;  or,  covenant  of 


eternity  (see  on  ch.  xvi.  60 ;  and  comp.  Gen. 
xvil.  7;  Isa.  Iv.  3;  Jer.  xxxii.  40);  which 
guarantees  the  continuance  between  him 
and  them  of  undying  friendship,  conjoined 
with  the  hestowment  on  his  part  and  the 
enjoyment  on  theirs  of  the  highest  social 
and  religinus  blessings.  First,  national 
existence  and  secure  possession  of  the  soil. 
I  will  place  (literally,  give)  them,  either  to 
their  land,  as  in  ch.  xvii.  22  (Smend),  or 
to  be  a  nation  (Keil),  or  perhaps  both 
(Kliefoth).  Next,  steady  increase  of  popu- 
lation—  I  will  multiply  them  (comp.  ch. 
xxxvi.  87;  Lev.  xxvi.  9).  Thirdly,  per- 
petual residence  of  Jehovah  amongst  them, 
I  will  set  (or,  give)  my  sanctuary  (mikdashi, 
conveying  the  idea  of  sanctity)  in  the  midst 
of  them  for  evermore  (comp.  Lev.  xxvi.  1 1) ; 
my  tabernacle  (mishkani,  the  idea  being  that 
of  residence  or  dwelling)  also  shall  be  with 
them ;  or,  over  them — the  figure  being  derived 
from  the  elevated  site  of  the  temple,  which 
overhung  the  city  (Ps.  Ixix.  29),  and  in- 
tended to  suggest  the  idea  of  jehovah'i 
protecting  grace.  That  this  promise  was 
in  part  implemented  by  tlie  erection  of 
the  second  temple  in  the  days  of  Zerub- 
babel  may  be  conceded,  and  also  that 
Ezekiel  himself  may  have  looked  forward 
to  a  literal  restoration  of  the  sanctuary; 
but  its  highest  realization  must  be  sought 
for,  first  in  the  Incarnation  (John  i.  14), 
next  in  God's  inhabitation  of  the  Church 
through  the  Spirit  (2  Cor.  vi.  16),  and  finally 
in  his  tabernacling  with  redeemed  men  in 
the  heavenly  Jerus^em  (Rev.  xxi.  3,  22). 
The  last  blessing  specified  is  the  intimate 
communion  of  God  with  his  people,  and  of 
them  with  him — Yea,  I  will  he  their  Ood, 
and  they  shall  be  my  people.  This,  which 
formed  the  kernel  of  the  old  covenant  with 
Israel  (Lev.  xxvi.  12),  became  the  essence 
of  the  new  covenant  with  the  Israel  of  the 
restoration  (ch.  xi.  20 ;  xxxvi.  28 ;  Jer.  xxx. 
22 ;  xxxi.  33 ;  xxxii.  38 ;  Zech.  viii.  8 ;  xiiL 
9),  but  only  attained  to  complete  realization 
in  the  relation  of  Christian  believers  to  the 
Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (2  Cor. 
vi.  16). 

Ver.  28  describes  the  effect  which  such 
a  glorious  transformation  of  Israel's  cha- 
racter and  condition,  should  produce  upon 
the  heathen  world.  They  should  recognize 
from  his  presence  amongst  his  people, 
symbolized  by  the  establishment  in  their 
midst  of  his  sanctuary,  that  he  had  both 
the  power  and  the  will  to  sanctiry  them, 
by  making  them  inwardly  as  well  as  out- 
wardly holy;  and,  recognizing  this,  they 
would  seek  admittance  to  the  congregation 
and  fellowship  of  God's  spiritual  IsraeL 


OH.  XXXVII.  1—28.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  269 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 14. — The  valley  of  dry  bones.  I.  A  vision  of  restoration.  Undoubtedly, 
the  restoration  of  Israel  is  the  immediate  thought  in  the  mind  of  Ezekiel.  He  sees 
his  people  stricken  to  death.  The  nation  is  virtually  dead.  The  exiled  citizens  of 
Jerusalem  have  lost  all  spirit  and  energy.  But  with  the  restoration  will  come  a 
restored  energy  to  the  people.  The  nation  also  will  once  more  rise  up  as  from  the 
dead.  These  resurrections  of  communities  have  been  seen  more  than  once  in  history ; 
e.g.  when  papal  Rome  rose  on  the  ashes  of  imperial  Rome,  when  Germany  was  reunited 
under  the  Emperor  William,  when  France  astonished  the  world  by  her  renewed 
strength  and  prosperity  after  the  terrible  invasion  of  1870.  But  while  this  material 
form  of  national  resurrection  is  not  infrequent,  a  moral  resurrection  is  more  rare. 
Byron  was  enthusiastic  for  the  liberation  of  Greece,  and  our  age  has  witnessed  the 
establishment  of  a  free  Greek  kingdom  at  Athens.  But  it  remains  to  be  seen  whether 
the  genius  of  ancient  Greece  will  ever  return  to  its  old  seat.  Athens  may  be 
rebuilt,  and  yet  Athene  (the  goddess  of  intellect)  may  still  slumber  in  the  grave.  A 
true  national  restoration  is  only  possible  as  a  work  of  God.  Degenerate  nations  need 
more  than  liberation  from  external  tyranny — they  need  national  regeneration. 

II.  A  vision  of  redemption.  The  people  could  not  be  truly  restored  unless  they 
were  reformed  and  renewed  in  heart  and  character.  Hence  the  strange  and  striking 
form  in  which  the  promise  of  restoration  is  given.  It  appears  as  a  resurrection.  What 
happened  to  ancient  Israel  happens  to  all  the  people  of  God.  They  are  restored  to 
true  life  and  prosperity  by  means  of  a  spiritual  resurrection.  Souls  are  dead  in  sin. 
The  world  is  like  a  valley  of  dry  bones — ^ugly  in  its  wickedness,  helpless  in  its  con- 
fusion, utterly  unable  to  save  itself.  But  Christ  has  come  to  give  new  life  to  the  souls 
of  men.  His  resurrection  is  a  type  of  the  soul's  resurrection.  St.  Paul  assumes  that 
Christians  are  "risen  with  Christ"  (Col.  iii.  1).  The  gospel  is  thus  supremely  a 
message  of  life.  It  comes  to  us  iti  our  most  degraded,  desolate,  despairing  condition. 
It  brings  life  and  incorruptibility  to  light. 

IIL  A  vision  of  the  resurrection,  a  fair  reading  of  this  passage  will  not  permit 
US  to  take  it  as  a  promise  of  an  individual  resurrection  after  natural  death.  It  is  a 
parable  of  the  restoration  of  Israel.  The  notion  that  the  very  bones  of  the  dead  are  to 
be  pieced  together  and  clothed  with  flesh,  that  the  scattered  dust  of  corpses  is  to  be 
gathered  from  the  four  quarters  of  the  earth,  that  the  very  same  animal  organism  that 
once  lived  and  died  and  decayed  or  was  devoured  by  worms  shall  be  built  up  again,  is 
a  coarse,  degrading  idea.  It  gives  no  suggestion  of  a  future  exalted,  spiritual  life.  It 
is  beset  with  monstrous  difflculties  when  we  look  at  it  in  the  light  of  the  facts  of ' 
nature.  If  this  old  conception  of  the  resurrection  be  set  forth  as  the  only  Christian  idea, 
men  will  not  accept  it,  and  the  glorious  hope  of  any  resurrection  or  future  life  at  all 
will  be  endangered.  But  this  idea  is  quite  contrary  to  the  profound  teaching  of  St. 
Paul,  who  says  expressly,  "  Thou  sowest  not  that  body  that  shall  be,"  and  "  Flesh  and 
blood  shall  not  inherit  the  kingdom  of  heaven"  (1  Cor.  xv.  50).  The  Bible  teaches 
the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  but  not  the  resurrection  of  flesh.  The  old,  coarse, 
impossible  notion  has  no  support  in  the  passage  before  us.  We  have  here  a  symbolical 
vision,  and  it  is  no  more  to  be  taken  literally  than  the  illustration  of  the  two  sticks 
that  follows  (ver.  16).  Still,  as  a  figure  and  an  image  it  is  strikingly  suggestive  of  the 
future  resurrection.  He  who  restores  nations  and  souls  by  quickening  grace  will  also 
awaken  them  that  sleep  in  Jesus,  and  raise  them  up,  a  glorious  army  redeemed  iirom 
death. 

Vers.  4,  9. — Prophesying  to  the  dry  hones  and  to  the  wind.  I.  Prophestino  to  the 
DRY  bones.  Ezekiel  beholds  the  dismal  sight  of  a  valley  of  dry  bones.  It  is  a  scene 
of  silent  desolation.  No  picture  of  death  could  be  more  complete.  The  human 
remains  are  not  even  covered  with  flesh.  He  sees  bones,  not  corpses.  The  bones  are 
dry — the  vultures  have  picked  them  clean,  and  they  have  been  left  to  bleach  in  the 
sun.  They  are  not  even  lying  in  their  natural  order  as  ranks  of  complete  skeletons. 
They  are  scattered  about.  The  unclean  scavengers  that  have  been  at  work  among 
them  have  ruthlessly  torn  them  joint  from  joint,  and  mixed  them  up  in  apparently 


270  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxxvu.  1—28. 

hopeless  confusion.  Was  there  ever  a  scene  of  more  perfect  and  utter  deadness?  Yet 
the  prophet  is  required  to  preach  to  these  dry  bones !  St.  Peter  preaching  to  the  fishes 
and  St.  Francis  preaching  to  the  birds  had  at  least  living  audiences,  tliough  soulless 
ones.  But  here  we  have  a  preacher  to  dry  bones.  What  is  most  remarkable  is  that 
the  preaching  is  effective.  An  awful  scene  is  witnessed — the  bones  shake  and  move 
and  fit  themselves  together,  and  flesh,  sinews,  and  skin  cover  them.  All  this  is  illus- 
trative of  much  preaching  to  men,  and  it  contains  a  great  encouragement  for  the 
preacher.  Some  audiences  are  almost  like  Ezekiel's  valley.  They  are  cold,  dead, 
utterly  indifferent.  These  people  are,  indeed,  as  so  many  dry  bones.  The  preacher 
despairs  of  doing  any  good  to  them.  So  long  as  he  despairs  he  will  do  no  good.  If 
Ezekiel  had  not  had  obedience,  faith,  and  energy,  he  would  not  have  taken  the  trouble 
to  preach  to  the  bones;  and  then  the  great  resurrection  would  not  have  taken  place. 
It  is  our  duty  to  preach  to  all,  despairing  of  no  one.  We  are  to  sow  beside  all  waters. 
God  can  quicken  the  dead.  Note  that  Ezekiel's  preaching  was  prophesying,  i.e.  it  was 
speaking  as  God's  messenger  and  in  his  power.  This  is  the  only  preaching  that  will 
succeed  with  the  indifferent.  The  preacher  to  the  godless  must  be  a  prophet.  He 
must  speak  Q-od's  truth  in  God's  strength.  Mere  reasoning  or  persuading  is  not 
■ufBcient.  But  prophesying  does  succeed  again  and  again  with  the  most  obdurate. 
It  stirs  dry  bones. 

II.  Peophebtino  to  the  wind.  Ezekiel  had  a  measure  of  success — a  wonderful 
•uccess  it  appeared  to  be.  The  bones  fitted  themselves  together  and  were  clothed  with 
flesh.  Still  they  were  not  alive.  All  the  result  attained  hitherto  is  that  the  scattered 
skeletons  have  become  compact  corpses.  But  this  is  but  a  valley  of  death.  Now,  the 
first  preaching  has  done  its  work.  It  is  useless  merely  to  repeat  it.  A  new  thing 
must  be  tiied.  Ezekiel  must  prophesy  to  the  wind  to  breathe  on  the  slain  and  make 
them  live.  When  he  does  this  the  wind  comes,  and  there  stands  up  "  an  exceeding 
great  army"  of  living  men.  The  wind  is  here  regarded  as  the  power  of  life.  It  is 
typical  of  the  Spirit  of  God  (John  iii.  8).  Life  can  only  come  from  God's  Spirit.  The 
most  stirring  preaching  will  not  create  it.  We  may  preach  God's  truth  in  God's 
strength,  and  good  results  may  follow,  but  not  the  new  birth  of  the  Divine  life  unless 
the  Spirit  of  God  comes  and  produces  it.  Preaching  does  not  regenerate.  After  pro- 
phesying to  the  bones  Ezekiel  must  prophesy  to  the  wind.  Preaching  must  be 
followed  by  prayer.  The  preacher  must  call  down  the  power  of  God  to  his  aid  if  his 
work  is  to  issue  in  living  results.  We  need  more  prophesying  to  the  wind.  If  life  is 
to  take  possession  of  dead  souls,  we  must  pray  more  for  the  coming  of  the  quickening 
Spirit.  He  does  come  in  response  to  prayer.  If  the  first  kind  of  prophesying  is  not. 
barren,  assuiedly  the  second  will  not  be.  When  God's  Spirit  is  invoked  in  the  preach- 
in"  of  God's  Word,  exceeding  great  armies  of  souls  may  rise  from  the  death  of  sin.   , 

Vers.  15 — 22. — Tht  two  sticks.  Under  the  image  of  two  sticks  that  are  joined 
together,  Ezekiel  is  to  symbolize  the  reunion  of  Israel  and  Judah  that  is  to  take  place 
in  the  great  restoration.  We  may  see  here  illustrated  a  great  principle,  viz.  that 
reunion  accompanies  restoration,  it  was  so  as  a  fact  in  the  history  of  Israel.  After 
the  restoration  we  no  longer  meet  with  the  rivalry  of  the  two  nations  that  made  the 
previous  history  one  long  quarrel.  The  people  return  to  their  land  as  one  nation,  for 
no  doubt  there  were  representatives  of  the  ten  tribes  (Luke  ii.  36)  as  well  as  people  of 
Judah  in  the  caravans  that  travelled  back  from  the  Captivity.  This  must  have  been 
understood  in  Christian  times.  Thus  St.  James  writes  to  "the  twdve  tribes"  (Jas. 
i.  1  ■  cf.  also  1  Pet.  i.  1).  Christ  restores  man  to  himself  and  to  God.  In  doing  so  he 
reunites  man  to  his  fellow-men.  Let  us  see  how  this  happy  result  is  brought  about, 
observing  some  of  its  causes. 

I.  A  COMMON  soRBOW.  Here  the  foundation  of  the  reunion  was  laid.  Both  of  the 
rival  nations  were  driven  into  captivity.  1.  Sorrow  should  soften  animosity.  In  our 
proud  prosperity  we  may  foolishly  imagine  that  we  can  afford  to  quarrel.  There  then 
seems  to  be  an  immense  reserve  of  resources,  and  we  can  be  lavish  in  squandering  what 
should  be  regarded  as  the  riches  of  friendship.  But  in  truth  we  need  friends,  and 
we  desire  to  cherish  them.  2.  Trouble  subdues  pride.  3.  Trouble  elicits  sympathy. 
They  who  have  passed  through  the  dei  p  waters  of  affliction  are  usually  most  ready  to 
s}  mpathize  with  their  sorrowing  brethren.    If  we  are  "  partners  in  (iistress,"  we  are 


OH.  XXXVII.  1—28.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  271 

the  more  naturally  drawn  together.    Perhaps  this  result  will  gire  us  one  explanation 
of  the  mystery  of  sorrow. 

II.  A  COMMON  BLEssuia.  The  call  to  return  is  for  all  Israel.  All  men  are  called  to 
share  in  the  restoring  mercies  of  Christ.  Christians  who  have  responded  to  the  gracious 
invitation  of  the  gospel  and  entered  into  the  joy  of  the  new  life  have  all  one  experience 
in  common.  That  was  a  happy  day  in  which  hearts  leaped  for  joy  when  the  beloved  hills 
of  Palestine  came  into  sight  in  the  blue  distance.    Sarely  all  old  feuds  would  be  for- 

.  gotten  as  the  restored  captiTes  actually  walked  on  their  own  land  and  built  the  cities 
and  planted  the  vineyards  while  their  gladness  overflowed.  "  When  the  Lord  turned 
again  the  captivity  of  Zion,"  they  said,  "  we  were  like  them  that  dream.  Then  was 
our  mouth  filled  with  laughter,  and  our  tongue  with  singing :  then  said  they  among 
the  heathen.  The  Lord  hath  done  great  things  for  them.  The  Lord  hath  done  great 
things  for  us;  whereof  we  are  ghid"  (Ps.  cxxvi,  1 — 3).  That  was  no  time  foi 
reviving  old  feuds.  Sharing  the  common  blessings  of  the  gospel,  we  should  forget  our 
old  quarrels. 

III.  A  COMMON  RELIGION.  Beligion,  which  should  he  the  great  bond  of  union,  has 
become  the  great  divider  of  men.  People  who  could  agree  to  live  together  peaceably 
on  all  other  accounts  fall  out  about  their  religion  and  stand  apart  in  hopeless  divisions 
on  this  one  ground.  Thus  Israel  and  Judah  were  divided  by  their  religion.  Israel  was 
jealous  of  the  temple  privileges  of  Jerusalem,  and  Judah  was  indignant  at  the  calf- 
worship  of  Israel.  But  now  the  idolatry  is  over,  and  a  new  temple  is  to  be  built  at 
which  all  parties  can  work.  Christ  is  our  Peace  (Eph.  ii.  14).  He  breaks  down 
distinctions  of  race  and  party.  It  is  the  Ohristlessness  of  religion  that  makes  religious 
differences.  If  we  all  had  more  of  Christ  we  should  all  be  more  united ;  for  he  is  the 
one  centre  of  union  in  the  Christian  Church. 

Ver.  23. — The  fascination  of  idolatry.  Idolatry  was  a  besettins  sin  of  IsraeL  No 
Bonner  were  the  people  delivered  from  Egypt  by  the  great  unseen  God  than  they  made 
a  golden  calf.  Intercourse  with  the  Moabites  led  to  idolatry  in  a  later  stage  of  the 
wilderness-wanderings  (Numb.  xxv.  2).  The  story  of  Micah  and  his  god  gives  us  a 
glimpse  of  the  gross  popular  superstition  that  was  to  be  found  in  Israel  during  the 
days  of  the  judges  (Judg.  xvii.  4).  Solomon  in  all  his  glory  was  lured  to  idolatry  by 
foreign  heathenish  wives  (1  Eiugs  xi.  4).  The  separated  northern  tribes  emphasized 
their  schism  by  setting  up  calves  at  Dan  and  Bethel.  The  prophets  were  compelled 
to  denounce  idolatry,  and  the  doom  of  the  Captivity  was  largely  earned  by  this  sin 
(ch.  xiv.  7).  What  is  its  essential  character?  and  whence  does  it  draw  its  singular 
fascination  ? 

I.  The  suevival  op  antiquitt,  Joshua  reminded  the  people  that  their  fathers 
worshipped  "  other  gods "  (Josh.  xxiv.  2).  The  Hebrews  cannot  be  described  as  an 
originally  and  naturally  monotheistic  race.  Monotheism  does  not  seem  to  be  innate  in 
any  branch  of  the  Semitic  family.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  much  more  readily  traced  in 
the  early  history  of  the  Aryan  races.  The  Semitic  instinct  rather  points  to  cruel  and 
lustful  nature-worship,  accompanied  by  gross  idolatry,  although  by  the  inspiration  of 
their  prophets  the  Hebrews  were  called  out  of  this  low  form  of  religion  to  the  worship 
of  the  holy  Jehovah.  Superstitions  of  idolatry  linger  long  after  a  more  spiritual  worship 
is  established.  This  is  seen  in  missionary  lands;  aud  even  in  Europe  heathenish 
customs  are  mixed  up  vrith  Christian  belief.  Much  of  the  coiTuption  of  Christianity 
in  Eomanism  is  just  the  perpetuation  of  the  old  paganism  under  Christian  names. 

II.  The  contagion  of  example.  The  Jews  were  surrounded'  by  heathen  peoples. 
They  were  called  to  a  lonely  destiny  of  separation.  But  they  did  not  always  realize 
their  vocation.  Their  later  idolatry  was  an  importation  from  their  neighbours.  Men 
are  much  influenced  in  religion  by  what  is  called  "  the  spirit  of  the  times,"  by  the  fashion 
of  the  day,  by  the  stream  of  prevalent  customs.  It  is  hard  to  make  our  religion  a 
continual  protest  against  popular  ideas  and  practices. 

III.  The  charm  op  the  SENSnous.  Idols  were  visible,  tangible  objects.  It  was  so 
much  easier  to  offer  worship  to  such  things  than  to  the  unseen  God  of  heaven.  It  is 
our  perpetual  temptation  to  neglect  the  spiritual  for  the  material.  We  do  not  prostrate 
ourselves  before  calves  of  gold ;  but  we  are  tempted  to  worship  coins  of  gold.  Our  idol- 
temples  are  the  marts  of  commerce.    The  British  Parthenon  is  the  Bank  of  England, 


272  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxxvii.  1—28. 

The  whole  tendency  of  life  is  towards  absorption  in  things  temporal,  concrete,  visible — 
eating  and  drinking,  clothing  and  building,  merry-making  and  amusements.  Even  in 
religion  we  tend  to  degenerate  to  the  sensuous,  and  music  and  pageantry  threaten  to 
supersede  worship  and  meditation.  The  visible  ritual  endangers  the  invisible  devotion. 
All  this  is  idolatry. 

IV.  The  compdrt  of  a  low  ideal.  The  intellectual  strain  of  spiritual  worship  is 
not  its  most  exacting  characteristic.  God  is  not  only  unseen;  he  is  holy,  and  he  can 
only  be  approached  with  clean  hands  and  a  pure  heart.  The  religion  of  Israel  was  a 
religion  of  holiness.  This  was  its  most  marked  feature  in  contrast  with  heathenism. 
It  was  possible  to  satisfy  all  the  demands  of  idolatry  and  yet  to  remain  in  sin.  Nay, 
much  of  the  monstrous  ritual  of  idol-worship  consisted  in  the  indulgence  of  licentious 
passions.  It  was  much  easier  to  worship  idols  than  to  worship  the  holy  God.  A 
worldly  life  is  compatible  with  a  low  moral  standard.  Hence  the  temptation  to  be 
satisfied  with  this  life.  But  Christ  calls  us  to  the  loftiest  ideal  and  to  a  warfare  against 
sin.    We  must  take  up  the  cross  if  we  would  follow  him. 

Vers.  24,  25. — Christ  the  King.  I.  The  Kinqship  op  Christ  is  a  olorious  fact. 
In  Ezekiel  it  is  only  predicted.  To  Christians  it  is  an  accomplished  fact.  Christ  has 
come  and  has  realized  the  ideal  of  ancient  prophecy.  1.  He  is  of  the  line  of  David. 
He  was  welcomed  as  the  Son  of  David  (Luke  xviii.  38).  He  gathers  up  the  old 
traditions  of  Israel's  golden  age,  and  lifts  their  promises  to  a  higher  fulfilment.  2.  He 
is  a  Shepherd.  Aristotle  quoted  Homer  to  show  that  the  true  king  should  be  a 
shepherd.  Christ  rules  tenderly  and  with  regard  to  the  welfare  of  his  people,  not  like 
the  cruel,  selfish,  despotic  monarchs  of  heathen  empires.  3.  He  is  God's  Servant. 
Therefore  (1)  it  is  God's  will  that  we  should  have  Christ  as  our  King,  and  (2)  Christ 
rules  according  to  the  will  of  God. 

II.  The  Kingship  of  Christ  is  a  centre  op  unity.  "And  they  all  shall  have 
one  Shepherd."  Judah  and  Israel  are  to  have  but  one  King,  and  are  to  be  united  under 
the  reign  of  this  new  David.  "  The  envy  also  of  Ephraim  shall  depart,"  etc.  (Isa.  xi. 
18).  The  supreme  advantage  of  the  institution  of  a  monarchy  is  that  it  cements  the 
people  under  it  into  a  consolidated  unity.  Christ  is  the  Head  of  the  body,  and  as  such 
he  harmonizes  the  movements  of  all  the  limbs.  It  is  strange  that  Christendom  should 
be  broken  up  into  innumerable  mutually  antagonistic  factions.  But  Christ  is  not 
responsible  for  those  divisions.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  just  the  loss  of  Christ  in  the 
Churches  that  leads  to  their  severance. 

III.  The  Kingship  of  Christ  is  an  inspiration  fob  obedience.  "They  shall 
also  walk  in  my  judgments,  and  observe  my  statutes  to  do  them."  It  is  more  difficult 
to  obey  an  abstract  law  than  to  serve  a  living  person.  Christianity  by  no  means  gives 
ns  a  dispensation  from  the  obligation  of  obedience.  Our  Lord  expects  his  disciples  to 
"  exceed  the  righteousness  of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees"  (Matt.  v.  20),  and  it  is  possible 
to  do  this  by  his  new  method.  No  longer  painfully  toiling  along  the  dreary  road  of 
formal  legalism,  Christians  are  inspired  by  an  enthusiasm  for  their  Master  which  fires 
their  love  and  zeal  to  do  or  suffer  on  his  behalf;  and  this  glorious,  loving  service  of 
Christ  is  just  the  obedience  and  righteousness  transformed  into  a  new  and  attractive 
shape. 

IV.  The  Kingship  of  Christ  is  a  foundation  of  solid  prosperitt.  Under  the 
new  David  the  people  will  live  at  peace  in  the  possession  of  their  land.  The  service  of 
Christ  introduces  all  Christians  to  a  splendid  inheritance.  The  Christian  life  is  not  a 
wild  knight-errantry.  It  is  the  enjoyment  of  a  happy  and  peaceful  kingdom.  When 
Christ's  reign  is  universal,  society  will  be  happy  and  prosperous.  Even  now  inward 
peace  and  rich  treasures  of  Divine  grace  are  the  portion  of  his  people  on  earth,  while 
thay  are  cheered  with  the  prospect  of  entering  into  a  wonderful  "  inheritance  of  the 
saints  in  light "  when  the  present  life  is  over. 

V.  The  Kingship  of  Christ  is  to  be  eternal.  "My  Servant  David  shall  be 
their  Prince  for  ever."  The  reign  of  Christ  was  never  so  widespread  as  it  is  in  this 
nineteenth  century.  His  sun  dawned  nearly  two  thousand  years  ago.  It  is  still 
climbing  to  its  meridian.  Sunset  Christ  shall  never  have.  The  Light  of  the  world  is 
the  light  of  the  ages'^"  Jesus  Christ,  the  same  yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  for  ever " 
(Heb.  ziii.  8). 


CH.  XXXVII.  1—28.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZBKIEL.  27a 

Ver.  27. — OocPs  tabertMde.  I.  God  is  in  the  midst  of  his  people.  He  is  not  a 
distant  divinity  seated  on  cloud-capped  Olympus  or  bidden  in  remote  heavenly  regions. 
He  visits  the  earth  and  even  dwells  there.  We  recognize  his  presence  in  the  beauty 
of  spring  and  the  wealtli  of  autumn ;  we  hear  his  voice  in  the  thunderstorm,  and  we 
■ee  his  glory  in  the  sunshine.  He  haunts  the  cathedral  aisles  of  the  forest ;  he  unveils 
his  glory  beneath  the  blue  dome  that  covers  the  fair  fields  of  nature.  Assuredly  he  is 
in  our  homes  shedding  peace  and  love;  he  draws  very  near  to  our  souls  in  the  night  of 
sorrow ;  and  be  smiles  upon  us  in  our  innocent  joys.  Moreover,  while  God  is  thus 
universally  present,  he  manifests  himself  especially  to  his  people  as  he  does  not  unto 
the  world  (John  xiv.  22,  23).  This  is  not  on  account  of  any  unreasonable  partiality, 
any  unfair  favouritism.  He  says  justly,  "  I  love  them  that  love  me ;  and  those  that 
seek  mo  early  shall  find  me  "  (Prov.  viii.  17). 

II.  God's  pbesenoe  is  a  fbotection  fob  his  people.  He  says  that  his  taber- 
nacle shall  be  not  merely  "  with  them,"  but  "  over  them,"  as  the  phrase  should  be 
rendered.  We  think  of  a  sheltering  tent  protecting  the  people  from  the  beat  of  the 
sun  by  day  and  from  the  frosts  by  night.  In  the  olden  times  the  tabernacle  was  planted 
in  the  midst  of  the  camp,  but  the  people  generally  were  not  admitted  to  its  covered 
shrine,  which  ^sas  reserved  for  a  privileged  priesthood.  Now,  however,  the  veil  is  rent, 
and  now  all  Gud's  people  are  priests,  as  the  apostle  to  the  Jews  declared  (1  Pet.  ii.  9). 
Now,  therefore,  God's  tabernacle  is  not  only  in  the  midst  of  the  camp,  gazed  at  with 
admiration  by  a  surrounding  host.  It  is  spread  over  the  people  of  God,  because  they 
are  allowed  to  enter  its  most  holy  place.  Our  safety  lies  in  our  nearness  to  God,  ana 
when  we  truly  seek  to  enter  into  close  communion  with  Heaven  we  find  that  there  ii  a 
sense  of  security  and  peace  that  can  be  found  in  no  other  way.  1.  God  then  protects 
from  trovble,  even  when  the  blow  falls,  by  strengthening  us  to  bear  it.  2.  He  protects 
from  temptation  by  giving  us  a  joy  greater  than  that  of  the  pleasures  of  sin.  3.  He  pr(^ 
tects  from  the  guUt  of  the  pa^,  by  taking  away  our  sins  and  giving  free  forgiveness. 
4.  He  protects  from  ihe  fear  of  the  future,  by  assuring  us  that  he  will  never  leave  us 
nor  forsake  us. 

III.  God's  pbesenoe  with  his  people  beoubis  theib  union  with  hiu.  "Yea, 
I  will  be  their  God,  and  they  shall  be  my  people."  It  is  difGcult  to  love  and  trust  an 
absent  Being,  but  nearness  stimulates  affection  and  confidence.  1.  The  people  own  Ood. 
He  is  "  their  God."  This  signifies  willing  acceptance  following  deliberate  choice.  No 
man  has  a  true  experience  of  religion  until  he  can  say  from  bis  heart,  "  The  Lord  is  my 
God."  2.  ffod  owns  his  people.  They  are  bis  by  right  of  creation;  they  are  still 
more  bis  by  right  of  redemption — "  bought  with  a  price."  God's  ownership  implies 
fl)  his  right  to  do  as  be  will  with  his  people ;  (2)  his  care  to  preserve  bis  possession ; 
(3)  his  joy  in  dwelling  among  his  children. 

Observe,  in  conclusion :  1.  Sin  removes  the  tabernacle  of  Oodfrom  our  midst.  When 
Israel  sinned,  the  tabernacle  was  pitched  outside  the  camp.  2.  Christ  brings  Ood 
back  into  closest  association  tnth  us.  In  Christ  he  "pitches  hit  tent  among  us" 
(John  i.  14). 

Yer.  28. — The  sanetijlcation  of  the  Cfhurek  a  gospel  for  the  world.  I.  The  sanotifi- 
CATIOH  OF  TEE  Chubch.  1.  Its  form.  Sanctification  is  essentially  a  being  set  apart 
for  God.  This  involves  two  ideas.  (1)  Separation.  The  Jews  were  separated  from 
the  heathen.  Christians  are  called  out  from  the  world.  Christ  founded  the  Church 
partly  in  order  that  Christians  might  realize  the  brotherhood  of  a  family  within  it« 
borders,  and  partly  that  they  might  be  divided  from  the  heathenish  world.  This 
superficial  Christianizing  of  the  world,  and  the  more  than  superficial  ,worldliness  of  the 
Church,  have  combined  to  obscure  the  old  lines  of  demarcation.  But  we  cannot  afibrd 
to  neglect  them.  (2)  Dedication.  The  separated  people  are  set  apart  for  God,  as 
young  Samuel  was  separated  from  his  house  and  given  to  the  Lord.  This  is  the 
explanation  of  the  separation ;  here  we  see  its  purpose.  The  separation  does  not  take 
place  for  the  sake  of  making  a  difference,  but  in  order  that  the  people  of  God  may 
wholly  give  themselves  to  his  service.  2.  Its  character.  Though  the  pure  idea  oi 
sanctification  is  formal  rather  than  moral,  and  means  essentially  a  setting  apart  for 
God,  it  is  only  realized  in  the  experience  of  personal  holiness.  (1)  We  can  only  b« 
separated  from  the  world  by  giving  up  the  sin  of  the  world.  The  mark  of  sepantioa 
uxkul — ^n.  v 


274  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET   EZEKIBL.    [oh.  xxxvii.  1— 28. 

is  purity  of  character.  (2)  We  can  only  be  devoted  to  God  by  purity  of  heart.  Only 
thus  can  we  see  God  (Matt.  v.  8).  Only  thus  can  our  service  be  acceptable  in  his  sight. 
Thus  saoctification  comes  to  be  equivalent  to  making  pure  and  holy.  3.  Its  caute. 
God  sanctifies  bis  people.  1'hey  must  desire  and  seek  the  sanctification,  but  they 
cannot  create  it.  Men  may  separate  themselves  from  the  world  in  external  profession 
and  habit,  living  as  hermits  in  the  wilderness,  immuring  themselves  in  cloistered 
monasteries,  repudiating  conventional  manners  with  Puritan  precision;  and  all  the 
while  they  may  remain  worldly  at  heart.  They  may  offer  themselves  formally  for  the 
service  of  God,  and  take  office  in  the  Church,  and  yet  be  only  self-seekers  and  servants 
of  sin.  As  purification  is  essential  to  sanctiiication,  sanctification  mtist  be  a  Divine  act. 
This  is  the  great  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  God  separates,  consecrates,  and  purifies  his 
people  through  the  action  of  his  Spirit  in  them. 

II.  The  influence  of  the  sanotifioation  of  the  Chubch  on  the  woeld.  The 
heathen  shall  know  that  God  sanctifies  Israel.  This  fact  will  be  a  witness  to  tlie  pagan 
world  of  the  power  and  character  of  God.  It  will  be  a  great  sermon  in  history,  a 
preaching  in  events.  No  preaching  can  be  more  powerful.  The  greatest  hindrance  to 
missionary  work  consists  in  the  wicked  conduct  of  persons  from  Christian  lands  who 
visit  heathen  countries.  The  example  of  the  Christian  life  is  its  best  help.  Christ 
preached  by  his  life  more  than  by  his  words.  His  cross  on  Calvajy  i3  more  eloquent 
than  his  Sermon  on  the  Mount.  If  we  desire  to  give  a  new  impulse  to  missionary 
enterprises  we  must  begin  at  home.  We  must  first  of  all  consecrate  our  own  hearts 
and  lives  afresh  to  our  Master ;  we  must  seek  a  new  baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost  for  the 
sanctification  of  the  Church.  The  Pentecost  that  brought  a  spiritual  blessing  to  the 
little  company  in  the  upper  room  at  Jerusalem  started  the  great  evangelistic  triumphs 
of  the  apostolic  age.  While  it  may  be  well  to  discuss  missionary  methods,  we  much 
more  need  to  seek  a  spiritual  revival  of  the  home  Churches,  that  a  new  impulse  may  be 
given  to  the  most  fruitful  form  of  missionizing — the  living  influence  of  a  consecrated 
people. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — Hie  valley  of  death.  The  picture  so  impressively  presented  in  these 
verses  is  a  picture  of  the  Israelitish  people  in  their  Eastern  captivity.  ITie  national 
life  is  for  a  period  suspended.  The  people  are  dead  and  dry  as  bones  scattered  upon 
the  surlace  of  an  open  valley  which  has  been  the  scene  of  carnage  in  battle.  Yet  the 
description  is  always  and  justly  held  to  portray  the  moral  condition  of  our  sinful 
humanity  apart  from  the  quickening  interposition  of  the  Lord  and  Giver  of  life. 

I.  SpIBITUAL  enlightenment  BBVBALS  what  IB  REAL  BENEATH  WHAT  IS  APPARENT. 

To  other  eyes  no  such  vision  as  that  which  broke  upon  the  sight  of  the  inspired 
prophet  was  accorded.  On  the  contrary,  men  might  have  lookedupon  Israel — part  of 
the  people  in  captivity,  and  part  still  occupying  the  land  of  then:  fathers— and  have 
seen  nothing  but  such  misfortune  and  calamity  as  are  incident  to  human  history.  To 
the  prophetic,  quickened,  illumined  mind  of  Ezekiel  the  real  state  of  the  nation  was 
manifest.  In  like  manner,  a  superficial  observer  might  direct  his  attention  to  the  human 
race  without  apprehending  its  spiritual  condition  as  one  of  deprivation,  of  gloom,  of 
death ;  he  might  be  dazzled  by  external  splendour  and  prosperity,  and  it  might  not 
occur  to  him  thai  beneath  the  fair  and  glittering  outside  there  was  concealed  from  his 
eyes  what,  after  all,  is  the  most  important  characteristic  of  humanity,  regarded  spiritually. 

II.  The  bbality  to  be  beoognized  is  the  pbesenob  and  the  power  of  spibitual 
DEATH.  1.  The  cause  of  this  is  sin.  Life  flows  from  communion  with  him  who  is  the 
ever-living  Fountain  of  life.  Severed  from  God,  the  soul  cannot  live.  2,  The  effects 
and  signs  of  this  death  are  numerous  and  evident.  Insensibility  to  Divine  truth,  to 
virtue,  to  immortality,  may  be  mentioned  as  most  impressively  brought  before  us  in 
the  vision  which  Ezekiel  saw.  The  dry  bones  lay  scattered  about  the  plain,  insensible 
to  everything,  to  every  presence  about  them,  neither  affected  by  any  occurrence  nor 
initiating  any  movement.  Such  is  the  state  of  the  spiritually  dead — the  "  dead  in 
trespasses  and  sins." 

III.  Hopelessness  distinguishes  the  state  of  the  spiritually  dead.    "Son 


OT.  xxxvn.  1—28.]    THE  BOOK  OF   THE   PROPHET  EZEKIBL.  275 

of  mao,  can  these  bones  live  ?  "  If  the  answer  depended  upon  hums  l  sagacity,  if  the 
means  to  awaken  life  were  such  as  are  available  to  human  wisdom  alone,  such  as  are 
known  by  human  experience,  there  can  be  but  one  answer  "  Life  is  impossible  1 "  Who 
that  looked  upon  pre-Christian  society  could  cherish  the  hope  that  from  that  necropolis 
there  could  start  into  vitality  and  activity  a  host  of  living,  consecrated  beings,  filled 
with  the  life  of  God,  eager  to  do  the  work  of  Grod?  Could  the  Church  have  grown 
out  of  the  world?  The  supposition  is  an  absurdity.  The  prophet's  reply  to  the 
inquiry  was  the  only  reply  that  was  reasonable.  All  depended  upon  God ;  man  was  ■ 
powerless  and  hopeleis  for  revival.    ",0  Lord  God,  thou  knowest ! " — ^T. 

Vers.  4 — 10. — The  caM  to  life.  The  sublimity  of  this  vision  is  the  sublimity,,  not  of 
imagination,  but  of  truth.  But  it  was  truth  that  was  not  open  to  every  mind ;  it  was 
truth  discerned  by  an  intellect  quickened  into  supernatural  insight  and  comprehensioa 
by  the  Divine  Source  alike  of  truth  and  of  life. 

I.  The  ministry  of  propheot.  1,  It  presumes  intelligent  natures  to  which  the 
appeal  is  made.  2.  It  presumes  a  Supreme  Authority  by  which  the  prophet  is  selected, 
fitted,  and  guided  in  the  discharge  of  his  ofiBce.  3.  It  presumes  a  ministerial  nature 
and  character,  on  the  one  side  open  to  communications  from  God,  on  the  other  side 
■ympathetio  with  those  for  whose  benefit  such  communications  are  vouchsafed.  4.  It 
presumes  an  occasion  and  circumstances,  suggesting  the  fulfilment  of  a  spiritual 
mission. 

II.  The  power  ant  authohitt  of  the  livinq  God  accompantino  true  propheot. 
1.  The  prophet  speriks  at  the  Divine  command.  There  are  times  when  he  is  nlant, 
and  times  when  he  utters  the  thoughts,  the  warnings,  the  exhortations,  that  are  in 
him.  When  the  command  is  given,  then  the  silence  is  broken.  2.  The  prophet  utters 
•  Divine  message.  He  speaks  for  God,  and  they  who  listen  to  him  hear  the  voice  of 
God.  3.  His  utterances  are  therefore  altogether  without  regard  to  what  men  would 
call  probabilities  or  even  possibilities.  Nothing  could  have  been  fiirther  from  all 
human  likelihood  than  that  anything  should  follow  upon  sucl^  a  ministry  as  that  here 
described.  The  prophet  was  directed  to  address  "  dry  bones,"  and  to  lummon  dry 
bones  to  "  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord  "  I  Had  he  been  other  than  a  prophet,  he  would 
have  deemed  such  a  mission  an  absurdity.  "  God's  ways  are  not  our  ways,  neither  onr 
thoughts  his  thoughts."  4.  A  higher  than  human  wisdom  and  might  breathe  in  the 
utterances  of  the  prophet.  The  dignity  of  his  attitude,  the  sublimity  of  his  thoughts, 
are  not  of  this  world.  He  must  be  either  a  pretender  and  a  fanatic,  or  else  a  represen- 
tative of  God  himself,  who  can  make  uie  of  such  language  as  Ezekiel  records  himself 
to  have  used :  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  CM  unto  these  bones  ;  Behold,  I  will  cause  breath 
to  enter  into  you,  and  ye  shall  live." 

III.  The  movement  effected  bt  the  aobnot  of  peopheot.  In  this  impressive 
vision  the  prophet  witnessed  the  power  of  the  words  he  was  directed  to  utter.  A 
thundering  noise  and  an  earthquake  followed  his  prophesying,  and  to  his  own  amaze- 
ment he  saw  bones  come  together — ^bone  to  his  bone ;  he  saw  the  bones  clothed  with 
sinews,  flesh,  and  skin.  This  marvellous  transformation  was  still  unaccompanied  by 
life,  Surely  a  revelation  to  us  of  the  great  things  that  may  be  and  are  effected  through 
the  instrumentality  of  a  personal  and  spiritual  agency,  which  yet  fall  .short  of  the 
highest  and  most  beautiful  and  blessed  of  all  effects,  viz.  spiritual  vitality  itself.  Is  it 
not  still  and  ever  the  case  that  by  human  agencies  men  are  taught,  admonished,  ti  ained 
to  habits  of  rectitude,  encouraged  in  a  useful  life,  by  a  Divine  Power  indeed — for  all 
good  of  every  grade  is  from  Gud — but  by  an  exercise  of  power  which  is  yet  inferior  to 
the  highest  ol'  all  ? 

IV.  The  new  life  which  is,  in  consonance  with  propheot,  breathed  by  the 
DiviKE  Spirit.  The  result  of  the  summons  to  the  breath  from  the  four  winds  was  at 
once  and  most  wonderfully  apparent.  The  dry  bones  lived,  and  stood  up  upon  their 
feet,  an  exceeding  great  army !  It  is  impossible  to  l>elieve  that  the  significance  of  thii 
glorious  conclusion  to  the  vision  is  exhausted  by  the  restoration  of  the  sons  of  Israel 
to  their  native  soil  and  ancient  inheritance.  We  have  the  authority  of  the  prophet 
himself  for  believing  that  in  this  event  there  was  a  fulfilment  of  the  vision.  And  it 
probably  seemed  to  many  observers  almost  as  incredible  'that  the  Jews  should  be 
brought  back  from  their  captivity  and  shcild  as  a  nation  again  live  and  prosper,  as 


276  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PKOPHET  EZEKIEL.     [oh.  xxxvii.  1-  28. 

that  the  bones  of  the  dead,  strewn  upon  a  battle-field,  should  be  restored  to  life. and 
■hould  become^  again  an  army  of  mighty  warriors.  To  the  mind  that  thinks  deeply 
»nd  justly  it  will  seem  still  more  surprising  that  our  humanity,  gunk  in  the  slumber 
and  the  death  of  sin,  should  awake  to  newness  of  life,  should  receive  the  Spirit  of  God, 
and  should  become  his  living  army  of  truth  and  righteousness.  It  was  the  purpose  of 
Christ's  coming  that  we  might  have  life,  and  that  in  abundance.  It  is  the  Spirit 
that  quickeneth.  Thus  it  may  be  said  that  the  production,  fulness,  and  increase  of 
spiritual  life  is  the  main  result  of  the  advent  of  the  Saviour  and  the  sift  of  the  Holv 
Ghost.  ' 

V.  Tee  tkansfobmation  and  oontbast  BsotraHT  about  in  pulpilmbnt  op  pro- 
phecy. God  speaks  by  his  herald  and  representative,  and  his  word  is  a  word  of  power. 
The  disjointed  and  sundered  are  united,  the  dry  bones  are  clothed  with  flesh,  the  dead 
live,  movement  and  the  glad  sound  of  life  follow  the  stillness  and  the  silence  of  the 
grave.  An  army  of  the  living  God  is  fashioned  out  of  material  the  most  unlikely.  Thus 
the  presence  and  operation  of  the  Eternal  is  made  manifest,  the  flagging  faith  of  men 
is  revived,  and  the  future  of  humanity  is  irradiated  with  immortal  hope. — T. 

Vers.  11—14. — T?ie  Divine  Restorer.  The  interpretation  of  the  vision  of  the  valley  of 
dry  bones  was  given  by  the  prophet  himself.  It  was  intended  that  the  Israelites, 
when  restored  to  their  own  land  and  to  national  unity  and  vigour,  should  discern  in 
this  restoration  the  hand  of  Divine  Providence.  A  most  unlikely  event  was  about  to 
happen,  and  Ezekiel  desired  that  those  in  whose  favour  the  great  interposition  was 
about  to  be  wrought  should  be  mindful,  both  of  the  condition  of  hopelessness  into 
which  they  had  been  plunged  by  their  own  sins,  and  of  the  marvel  of  the  Divine 
mercy  to  which  they  owed  their  deliverance,  renewal,  and  revival. 

I.  The  DEATH  AND  DBSPONDENOY  OP  THB  Captivity.  The  Jewish  people  had  endured 
many  afflictions  and  chastisements ;  but  the  Captivity  was  the  sorest  disaster  which 
had  overtaken  them,  the  profoundest  humiliation  into  which  they  had  been  plunged.  To 
■o  earnest  a  patriot  as  Ezekiel  the  case  seemed,  apart  from  Divine  commiseration  and 
help,  one  utterly  depressing  to  contemplate.  Human  deliverer  there  was  not ;  way  of 
deliverance  opened  not  up ;  the  prospect  was  dark.  The  whole  house  of  Israel,  con- 
templating the  situation,  summed  it  up  in  the  mournful  exclamation,  "  Our  hope  is 
lost ;  we  are  clean  cut  off." 

II.  The  compassionate  intebposition  op  the  Divine  Delitebeb.  When  human 
help  there  was  none,  the  Lord  looked  in  pity  upon  his  own.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord 
God ;  Behold,  I  will  open  your  graves,  and  cause  you  to  come  up  out  of  your  graves, 
0  my  people."  Their  state  was  as  that  of  those  dead  and  buried  out  of  men's  sight. 
But  with  God  nothing  is  impossible.  His  voice  can  summon  even  the  dead  to  life. 
The  hearts  of  kings  and  rulers  are  in  his  hands.  He  deviseth  means  whereby  his 
hanished  ones  may  return. 

III.  The  spiritual  energy  oonditionin»  the  bbooveby  and  renewal.  Provi- 
dential intervention  is  not  all  that  is  necessary.  An  internal  as  well  as  an  external 
oondition  is  requisite.  TSo  great  work  on  behalf  of  a  nation  can,  any  more  than  a  great 
work  on  behalf  of  an  individual,  be  effected  apart  from  the  state,  the  character,  the 
purposes,  the  voluntary  co-operation  of  those  who  are  to  be  benefited.  We  have  an 
intimation  of  this  in  the  present  case  in  the  promise,  "  I  will  put  my  Spirit  in  you,  and 
ye  shall  live."  To  put  a  people  in  their  own  territory  would  be  of  no  avail  to  the 
national  life  were  not  the  people  gifted  with  a  spirit  of  patriotism,  of  unity,  of  hopeful- 
ness, above  all,  of  true  religion.  A  restoration  such  as  that  effected  for  Israel,  in  order 
to  be  a  real  thing,  must  be  accompanied  by  the  new  heart,  the  new  national  endeavour 
and  patience,  the  new  devotedness  to  the  higher  aims  of  social  and  political  existence. 
God,  who  gives  the  boon,  gives  also  the  preparation  by  which  the  boon  may  be  appro-, 
priated  and  nsed. 

IV.  The  bestoeation  itsblp.  This  was  mainly,  at  all  events  in  the  general 
apprehension,  a  political  movement.  The  capital  was  reoccupied,  the  temple  services 
were  restored  in  something  like  their  former  dignity  and  beauty ;  the  reputation  of  the 
nation  was  in  some  measure  retrieved.  But  beyond  all  this,  in  the  apprehension  of  the 
more  thoughtful  there  was  a  religious  reformation  of  greater  interest  and  importance.  The 
life  from  the  dead  was  life  unto  Jehovah  and  unto  his  laws  and  ordinances — a  life  not 


OH.  ixxvii.  1—28.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  EZEKIEL.  277 

ceremonial,  but  spiritual.  Idolatry,  at  all  events,  was  for  ever  abandoned  ;  Ihany  of 
the  temptations  of  former  times  were  for  ever  outgrown.  Some  good  was  tli\is  effected, 
and  good  of  such  a  nature  as  to  confer  a  real  service  and  blessing  upon  mankind. 

v.  The  giving  of  glokt  to  whom  it  was  due.  In  two  respects  especiaily  the 
Lord  assured  the  Israelites,  by  his  prophets,  honour  should  accrue  to  himself  through 
the  return  of  his  chosen  people.  1.  Hia  power  should  be  recognized  as  the  true  cause 
of  the  redemption.  .2.  His  faithfulness  should  be  adored  by  those  to  whom  the  promise 
had  been  given,  and  by  whom  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise  was  enjoyed. — ^T. 

Vers.  15 — 28. — Unity.  As  in  many  other  instances,  so  here  Bzekiel  propounds  a 
great  moral  and  prophetical  lesson  by  means  of  symbol.  The  two  sticks  which  he  is 
directed  to  join  one  to  another  into  one  stick  represent  the  two  divisions,  the  two 
kingdoms,  of  Judah  and  of  Northern  Israel,  and  their  union  represents  the  abolition  of 
the  distinction,  the  schism,  which  had  been  so  injurious  to  the  national  welfare,  and 
the  formation  of  one  people,  one  in  brotherly  love,  one  in  mutual  helpfulness,  one 
in  the  unity  of  national  and  political  life,  and  one  in  religious  faith,  worship,  and 
observance.  This  exhibition  of  the  beauty  and  value  of  unity  is  worthy  of  the  con- 
sideration of  Christians  in  our  own  time,  when  divisions  are  so  abundant  and  are  thought 
of  so  lightly,  whilst  they  are  most  injurious  to  the  interests  of  Christianity  and  most 
pernicious  in  their  influence  upon  the  unbelieving  world.  General  lessons  underlie  thiS 
special  exhortations  and  promises  of  this  passage  of  prophecy. 

I.  Unity  is  brought  about  by  God  himself.  He  is  the  God  of  peace,  and  delight* 
in  peace.  "  I,"  says  he,  "  will  make  tliem  one  nation  in  the  land."  The  kind  of  unil^ 
which  is  effected  by  the  action  of  common  human  sympathy  or  interest  is  neither  valuabU 
nor  permanent.     True  unity  needs  a  Divine  basis. 

II.  Ukity  is  manifest  in  brotherly  love  and  sympathy.  That  is  to  say,  it  ii, 
first  of  all,  unity  of  heart.  When  the  same  Divine  Spirit  works  in  many  natures  h* 
produces  similar  effects  in  all ;  and  his  handiwork  is  nowhere  more  evident  than  in  the 
j)revalence  of  mutual  love.  The  members  of  the  same  body,  being  obedient  to  the  one 
Head,  render  one  to  another  the  tribute  of  mutual  interest  and  kindly  willingness  to 
serve  and  help. 

III.  Unity  consists  in  common  bitojeotion  to  one  King.  "  One  King  shall  b« 
king  to  them  all ; "  "  My  Servant  David  shall  be  King  over  them,  and  they  shall  all 
have  one  Shepherd."  The  political  unity  of  the  Jews  seems  lost  sight  of  in  th« 
Messianic  reference  of  the  prediction.  The  Church  of  Christ  is  one  because  there  is 
over  it  but  one  Head,  even  Christ  himself.  All  true  Christians,  every  true  Christian 
community  in  every  place,  acknowledge  his  sole  sovereignty  and  confess  allegiance 
to  his  sole  authority. 

IV.  Unity  is  displayed  in  the  abandonment  and  repudiation  of  all  unfaith- 
fulness. When  some  of  the  children  of  Israel  worshipped  Jehovah,  and  others  some 
one  or  other  of  the  various  hateful  deities  of  the  heathen,  it  was  impossible  that  there 
should  be  unity.  "  How  can  two  walk  together  except  they  be  agreed  ? "  There  is 
thus  a  negative  condition  of  spiritual  oneness.  The  minds  of  men  must  be  turned  away 
from  error  and  sin,  in  order  that  they  may  with  one  accord  be  turned  Godwards  and 
heavenwards.  The  unfaithful  to  God  cannot  be  faithful  one  to  another.  They  must 
have  the  same  loathing  and  the  same  liking. 

V.  Unity  is  displaykd  in  a  common  and  conjoint  obedience.  This  is  apositivt 
condition  of  spiritual  oneness.  "  They  shall  also  walk  in  my  judgments,  and  observe 
my  statutes  to  do  them."  They  who  are  one  in  heart  will  not  find  it  difficult  to  be 
one  in  life.  The  laws  are  one,  although  the  obedient  are  scattered  far  and  wide,  although 
the  forms  of  obedience  vary  with  varying  circumstances. 

VI.  The  unity  is  everlasting.  This  can  be  true  only  of  a  unity  which  is  Divine 
in  its  basis  and  its  bonds.  The  language  used  in  this  portion  of  prophecy  must  refer  to 
the  spiritual  kingdom  of  Christ.  "  David  my  Servant  shall  be  their  Prince /or  ever;' 
"  They  shall  dwell  in  the  land /or  ever ;  "  "  1  will  make  an  everlasting  covenant  with 
them  ; "  "I  will  set  my  sanctuary  in  the  midst  of  them/or  evermore."  Such  expressions 
are  true,  and  they  are  true  only  of  the  kingdom  which  is  "  righteousness,  peace,  and 
joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost."  No  national,  probably  no  ecclesiastical,  unity  upon  earth  is 
permanent.    But  the  Son  of  God  is  King  for  ever,  and  the  subjects  of  his  spiritual 


278  THE   BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  EZEKIEL.    [  oh.  xxxvn.  1— 28. 


empire  are  bound  together  by  the  common  ties  which  unite  them  to  their  Lord — tiei 
which  time  cannot  weaken  and  death  cannot  diasolve. — T. 

Ver.  27. — The  tabemade  of  Ood  with  men.  There  can  be  no  question  th»t  one  great 
purpose  of  the  appointment,  first  of  the  tabernacle,  and  then  of  the  temple,  as  the  centre 
of  the  national  and  religious  life  of  Israel,  was  to  familiarize  the  people  with  the  thought 
of  G-od'g  constant  presence  in  the  midst  of  them,  as  well  as  to  provide  means  and 
opportunities  for  special  intercommunion  between  the  Divine  King  and  his  subjects. 
The  coming  of  Christ  whose  bodj'  was  the  temple  of  Deity,  the  coming  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  whose  abiding  indwelling  constitutes  the  temple,  the  Church,  of  God,  did  away 
with  the  necessity  for  a  local  and  temporary  dwelling-place  of  God  upon  earth,  but 
•ecured  the  permanent  reality  of  the  fellowship  of  which  such  a  dwelling-place  was  the 
symbol  and  the  means. 

L  God's  tabeenaole  with  men  reminds  ub  of  the  univebsal  presence  or  thb 
Dbity  upon  eaeth  throughout  all  time. 

n.  And   of   his  special  and  congenial  presbnob  among   and  with   his   owm 

FBOPLE. 

III.  And  of  his  ohaoioub  purpose  to  reveal  unto  them  his  own  ohabaiteb 
and  will. 

IV.  And  of  his  constant  willingness  to  eeoeitb  thbib  worship  and  homage. 

V.  And  of  his  desire  to  maintain  close  and  unbroken  relations  of  cordiality 
and  kindness  with  his  people. 

Application.  The  privilege  of  fellowship  with  God  should  be  reverently  cherished, 
prized,  and  cultivated.  The  means  and  occasions  of  such  fellowship  should  not  be 
mistaken  for  the  fellowship  itself.  The  truest  dignity  and  sacredness  of  this  earthly 
life  consists  in  the  opportunity  it  offers  of  communion  with  the  unseen  but  ever-present 
God  and  Saviour.  The  strongest  attraction  of  the  life  to  coine  lies  in  the  prospect  of 
a  closer  approach  to  Gud,  a  more  uninterrupted  fellowship  with  God,  and  a  nearer 
assimilation  to  hii  perfect  and  glorious  character. — T. 

Veri.  1 — 14. —  The  vision  of  dry  hones.  As  an  architect,  before  erecting  a  mansion, 
sketches  accurately  all  his  plan  on  paper — a  guide  to  himself  and  to  his  co-workers — 
60,  prior  to  God's  resuscitation  of  Israel,  he  sketches  out  his  plan  before  the  mental  eye 
of  Ezekiel.  By  a  mighty  influence  from  God,  the  prophet  is  borne  away  in  spirit  to 
a  great  valley  in  Chaldea,  devoted  to  the  burial  of  Israel's  dead.  The  spot  possibly 
was  sadly  familiar  to  the  prophet's  eye.  The  loose  sand  had  been  swept  aside  by  some 
violent  tornado.  The  bones  of  the  buried  were  exposed,  and  were  dry  and  bleached  by 
tlie  tropical  sun.  It  was  a  pitiable  and  repulsive  spectacle.  That  such  vestiges  of 
human  beings  could  be  reclothed  in  flesh  and  raised  again  to  life  seemed,  to  human 
view,  impossible ;  and  Ezekiel  did  wisely  to  refer  the  matter  back  to  God.  The  man 
of  God  is  commanded  to  address  these  silent  remnants  of  human  nature,  and  to  announce 
to  them  God's  high  design;  and  while  he  spake,  lo!  a  noise,  a  movement,  bone  sought 
its  fellow-bone.  Flesh  silently  grew  upon  these  skeletons,  and  a  fair  covering  of  skin 
veiled  the  rugged  flesh.  Still,  it  was  a  valley  of  death — a  spectacle  more  revolting 
than  before.  Again  Ezekiel  is  summoned  to  prophesy,  and  ttiis  time  to  prophesy  to 
the  winds.  Then  the  breath  of  life  passed  into  those  ghastly  forms ;  the  dead  stood 
erect  and  strong — an  army  of  living  men,  a  nation.  Such  was  the  vision — a  vivid 
picture  imprinted  on  the  mind. 

I.  Mark  Israel's  desperate  condition.  Whatever  may  have  been  the  fortunes 
of  some  individuals,  as  a  nation  their  fortunes  were  deplorable.  All  that  was  distinctive 
about  Israel  had  vanished.  Titliijigs,  temple  ritual,  priesthood,  Passover,  distinction 
in  meats, — all  had  disappeared.  They  were  fast  becoming  amalgamated,  in  language, 
habits,  and  occupation,  with  their  conquerors.  As  a  body,  they  were  utterly  dislocated. 
Their  several  orders  had  vanished.  The  organism  was  bmken  up.  Their  national  life 
was  destroyed.  Their  condition  was  deplorable,  fitly  symbolized  by  dry  and  dissevered 
bones.  Prospect  of  restoration  there  was  none.  The  faithful  few  were  sinking  into 
despair.  Vivid  picture  this  of  human  r^ature  severed  from  the  living  God.  Compared 
.with  the  purity  and  nobleness  that  might  be,  tlie  condition  is  aptly  figured  by  death. 
Filial  love  and  trust  are  dead.     Conscience,  the  sense  of  right,  is  dead.     Heavenly 


CH.  XXXVII.  1—28.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKJEL.  279 

aspirations  are  dead.  The  hope  of  immortality  is  dead.  Departing  from  God,  men 
become  "  earthly,  sensual,  devilish."  The  captivity  of  the  grave  aptly  symbolizes  their 
estate.  The  high  design  of  their  being  is  frustrated.  Severance  from  God  is  followed 
by  the  rupture  of  social  ties,  mutual  discords,  and  mutual  hate. 

II.  Israel's  prospect  of  new  organization.  The  piospect  is  due  solely  to  the 
interposition  of  God.  He  proposes  a  tremeuflous  question  to  his  servant,  "  Can  these 
bones  live?"  Devoutly  the  prophet  refers  the  question  back  to  God.  By  propooini^ 
difficult  questions  to  his  servants,  God  stimulates  tliem  to  reflection,  concentrates  their 
attention  upon  salient  points,  teaches  them  a  modest  estimate  of  their  powers.  1.  In 
elevating  mankind  there  is  need  for  the  prophefs  mission.  As  the  greatest  enemy  of 
mankind  is  man,  so  man  can  be  a  real  friend  and  helper  to  his  race.  The  world  is 
deeply  indebted  to  its  teachers.  All  the  ages  are  indebted  to  Mosds,  to  Solon,  to 
Socrates,  and  to  St.  Paul.  The  man  wlio  can  lay  his  finger  upon  a  plague-spot  and 
announce  a  remedy,  the  man  who  can  lead  a  natioa  up  to  a  higher  level  of  life,  is  a 
benefactor  to  the  race.  Most  of  all,  the  man  who  can  reveal  to  us  God,  who  can  uuveil 
to  us  his  character,  his  designs  concerning  us,  our  duty  to  him,  he  is  of  all  men  the 
most  influential,  the  most  kingly.  2.  No  rtal  improvement  in  human  nature  can  be 
achieved  without  Ood's  power.  Although  the  man  of  God  was  charged  to  prophesy, 
his  message  simply  declared  what  God  was  about  to  do.  "  I  will  lay  sinews  upon  you ; 
I  will  bring  up  flesh  upon  you ;  I  will  cover  you  with  skin,"  saith  the  Lord  God.  No 
amelioration  is  abiding  that  does  not  come  from  God.  All  political  organization  that 
is  to  produce  benefit  to  a  nation  must  be  full  of  God.  Every  step  in  the  process  of 
moral  elevation  must  have  God  in  it.  We  can  only  act  successfully  while  we  act  in 
the  line  of  his  Law,  and  have  all  the  channels  we  create  filled  with  a  Divine  force.  God 
deigns  to  take  a  practical  interest  in  the  minutest  affairs  of  men. 

III.  Obqanization  is  impotent  without  life.  To  the  prophet's  ecstatic  vision  tha 
human  organism  was  now  complete.  Every  limb  and  member  was  articulated — was  in 
its  allotted  place.  But  the  great  want  was  yet  uamet.  The  highest  endowment  w,a3 
lacking.  Everything  waited,  in  silent  yearning,  for  life.  Then  the  prophet  is  summoned 
to  another  duty.  Having  spoken  to  men,  he  must  speak  to  God.  He  must  invoke 
the  vital  breath  of  Heaven.  For  this  great  undertaking  there  is  required  all  the  fuloess 
and  force  of  the  Divine  S[jirit.  "  Come  from  all  quarters,  0  breath  of  life  1 "  "  Wind 
of  the  north,  come  and  rouse  men  from  their  long  slumber !  Wind  of  the  east,  coma 
and  brace  men's  energies  for  new  exertions.  Wind  of  the  west,  come  and  bring 
fertilizing  showers,  that  shall  penetrate  and  soften  the  heart  1  Wind  of  the  south,  come, 
quicken  the  plants  of  grace  and  ripen  the  fruits  of  piety  1 "  If  only  God  be  with  us, 
the  most  difficult  undertaking  will  succeed.  If  God  did,  at  the  first,  create  human 
nature  out  of  nothing,  the  work  of  reconstruction  cannot  be  more  difficult.  To  God 
nothing  is  impossible.     Omnipotence  covers  every  task. 

IV.  A  MAGNIFICENT  RESULT.  The  prophet  was  not  disobedient  to  the  heavenly 
Toice.  As  the  echo  responds  to  the  speaker,  so  promptly  did  Divine  influence  attend 
the  prophetic  word.  Under  the  direction  and  inspiration  of  God,  human  labour  and 
prayer  can  produce  prodigious  effects.  The  scenes  of  death  become  scenes  of  life.  A 
nation  rises  up  as  if  out  of  its  grave.  By  the  manifested  power  of  God's  graoi  the 
highest  personal  life  appears ;  the  Church's  life  is  created ;  national  life  is  purged  and 
elevated ;  and  the  resurrection  to  an  imperishable  life  is  assured.  If  God  be  on  our 
side,  no  height  of  excellence  is  inaccessible ;  and  if  he  has  pledged  his  word,  he  will 
perform  it  in  no  stinted  fashion.  To  have  real  childlike  faith  in  God's  word  and  in 
God's  faithfulness  brings  the  highest  joy.  To  be  in  actual  touch  with  God  trans- 
figures character  and  enriches  human  life.  Heaven  is  begun  on  earth  if  we  know  God 
by  personal  and  lamiliar  experience.  A  grand  climax  of  blessing  is  involved  in  the 
words,  "  Then  shall  ye  know  that  I  the  Lord  have  spoken  it,  and  performed  it." — ^D. 

Vers.  15 — 28. —  Union  essential  to  highest  prosperity.  It  is  clear  that  this  series  of 
prophecies  had,  at  least,  a  twofold  meaning.  These  predictions  pointed  to  beneficial 
changes  near,  visible,  temporal;  they  pointed  also  to  grander  events  more  distant, 
more  spiritual.  The  fulfilment  of  prophecy  was  also  another  prophecy.  The  imme- 
diate performance  of  God's  promise  was  a  type  of  larger  performance.  As  each  harvest 
is  a  prophecy  of  the  next,  so  one  fulfilment  of  God's  covenant  symbolizes  a  fulfilment 


280  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxxvii.  1— 28. 

on  a  larger  and  nobler  scale.  Time  is  a  picture  of  eternity.  What  was  really  good 
in  the  past  shall  reappear  in  the  future.  Israel's  passage  through  the  Bed  Sea  was  a 
■ymbol  of  later  deliverances.  The  royal  life  of  David  shall  be  reproduced.  As  ths 
secret  principle  of  David's  power  and  David's  prosperity  was  that  he  ruled  by  a  spirit 
of  love,  which  knit  the  people  in  unity ;  so  David  shall  be  the  emblem  of  Messiah's 
person,  and  Messiah's  gentle  sway.  The  passage  now  under  consideration  refuses  to  be 
confined  within  a  local  application ;  it  embraces  the  renovated  race  and  the  immortal 
King.  To  make  this  announcement  the  more  impressive,  it  was  attended  by  a  signifi- 
cant action.  It  is  a  prophecy  both  spoken  and  acted.  It  was  an  ancient  custom, 
prevalent  still  in  the  East,  to  write  on  flat  sticks,  and  these  were  sometimes  tied  together 
after  the  simplest  fashion  of  a  book.  Discord  and  division  had  been  the  first  step  in 
Israel's  retrogression  and  fall.  Internal  strife  prepared  the  way  for  invasion  and  defeat. 
Now,  reunion  is  a  necessary  step  to  the  fulfilment  of  the  Divine  promise — the  first  step 
towards  a  new  national  life. 

I.  Real  union  can  only  be  effected  by  inwabd  renovation.  Hence  the  gracious 
promise  is  repeated,  "  I  will  save  them  out  of  their  dwelling-places  wherein  they  have 
sinned,  and  will  cleanse  them."  This  truth  must  be  repeated  times  without  number. 
So  long  as  rebellion  against  God  occupies  the  heart,  so  long  there  will  be  strife  and 
hatred  between  man  and  man.  Infidelity  has  always  been  hostile  to  society.  But  as 
men  get  nearer  to  God  as  their  Centre,  the  circumference  diminishes,  and  they  get 
nearer  to  each  other.  The  uprooting  of  selfishness  from  the  human  heart  is  the 
removal  of  discord  and  war.  If  the  fountain  be  made  pure,  pure  will  be  the  streams. 
Bin  separates.  Piety  unites.  After  the  descent  of  the  Spirit  at  Pentecost,  men  were 
fiised  in  brotherhood,  and  did  not  even  count  their  goods  their  own.  New-felt  love 
•wallowed  up  every  other  sentiment.    "  They  had  all  things  common." 

II.  Union  among  the  people  is  obmbntbd  by  allegiance  to  one  King.  "  David 
my  servant  shall  be  King  over  them,  and  they  all  shall  have  one  Shepherd."  The  rivalry 
of  opposing  kings  in  Behoboam's  day  had  been  the  root  of  endless  mischief.  "  Like  king, 
like  people."  This  new  Monarch  has  such  incomparable  claims  that  a  rival  is  out  of  the 
question.  His  august  worth  will  win  from  his  subjects  intense  loyalty  and  love  ;  and 
in  proportion  to  their  intense  love  for  him  there  will  develop  attachment  to  each  other. 
In  his  pure  presence  mutual  suspicion  and  distrust  hide  away  abashed.  It  is  a  part  of 
his  royal  mission  to  foster  all  right  sympathies.  To  be  like  their  King  is  the  high 
ambition  of  each.  To  serve  and  please  their  King  is  the  common  purpose  of  every  true 
Israelite.     To  love  one  another  is  but  another  form  of  loving  him. 

III.  Union  ib  fosteeed  by  doing  God's  will.  "  They  shall  also  walk  in  my  judg- 
ments, and  observe  my  statutes."  They  that  walk  in  the  same  road  usually  become 
good  companions.  And  these  new  subjects  of  Messiah  delight  in  these  paths.  They 
speak  to  each  other  of  their  joy.  They  delight  to  encourage  each  other  to  surmount  such 
obstacles  as  appear,  and  to  press  on  in  the  royal  way.  Their  understandings  being 
divinely  illumined,  they  see  such  excellence  in  God's  will  that  their  wills  become  con- 
formed to  his.  So,  in  becoming  conformed  to  God's  will,  they  become  like  each  other. 
Among  the  children  a  common  likeness  appears.  Fellow-soldiers  on  the  same  battle- 
field become  fast  friends.  Common  service  and  exposure  to  common  dangers  form  • 
•trong  bond  of  union.     In  serving  God  we  also  serve  one  another. 

IV.  Union  secures  God's  nearer  pbesenok.  "I  will  set  my  sanctuary  in  the 
midst  of  them  for  evermore."  If  men  feel  that  it  is"  good  for  brethren  to  dwell  together 
in  unity,"  God  feels  it  still  more  to  be  both  "  good  and  pleasant."  Our  God  is  a  God  of 
order.  Amid  scenes  of  discord  he  will  not  abide.  If  men  prefer  his  foe — the  fomenter 
of  hatreds— he  will  depart.  But  where  true  unity  of  spirit  reigns  among  men  God  will 
nearer  come,  will  take  up  his  abode,  will  make  an  everlasting  covenant  with  them ;  his 
sanctuary  is  the  sign  of  union  and  the  security  for  union.  Then  the  channel  is  open  for 
the  highest  good  to  descend.  God  will  become,  in  every  practical  respect,  their  God. 
His  light  shall  be  their  light,  his  strength  shall  be  their  strength,  his  purity  shall 
become  their  purity,  his  joy  shall  become  theirs.  God's  fulness  shall  replenish  their 
emptiness. 

V.  Union  in  the  true  Israel  shall  prohuce  a  salutary  effect  upon  thk 
•WORLD.  "  "The  heathen  shall  know  that  I  the  Lord  do  sanctify  Israel."  Here  is  th« 
germ  of  the  truth  which  was   fully  expanded  in  the  intercessory  prayer  of  Christ, 


CH.  xxsvn.  1-28.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIBL,  281 

"  That  they  all  may  he  one,  that  the  world  may  helieve  that  thou  didst  send  me." 
It  is  little  short  of  a  miracle  that  the  kingdom  of  our  Lord  should  be  maintained,  mucli 
less  grow,  when  so  much  division  exists.  That  man  contracts  no  light  sin  who  uses 
his  influence  in  keeping  Christians  apart.  Real  schism  is  a  monstrous  sin.  And  when 
the  purity,  the  piety,  the  practical  love,  of  the  Church  become  eminent,  these  will 
produce  a  stupendous  impression  upon  the  world  without.  Holiness  which  is  nut 
austere,  holiness  expressed  in  its  native  form  of  sterling  goodness,  has  an  omnipotent 
charm  which,  once  seen  by  men,  fascinates  all  hearts.  The  love  of  money  and  of 
pleasure  will  fade  and  vanish  when  men  discover  the  superior  worth  of  true  righteous- 
ness. God's  nianifeut  residence  in  the  Church  will  win  the  homage  of  all  the  nations. 
"  Then  shall  the  heathen  know,"  etc. — D. 

Vers.  1 — 12. — From  death  to  life.  The  primary  reference  of  this  prophecy  is  placed 
beyond  all  doubt  by  the  passage  itself  (see  ver.  12).  1.  Israel  was  in  a  foi  Jorn  and 
hopeless  condition  in  her  dispersion  and  captivity ;  she  seemed  to  be  irrecoverably  lust ; 
as  a  nation  she  was  as  one  dead,  if  not  buried.  2.  But  God  had  a  gracious  purpose 
concerning  her.  He  intended  to  exercise  his  Divine  power  on  her  behalf;  the  dead 
should  be  revived ;  the  lost  should  be  found ;  the  scattered  should  be  restored  and  united. 
3.  That  which  seemed  so  hopeless  is  seen  to  be  accomplished;  instead  of  "  a  valley  full 
of  liones  "  (ver.  1)  is  "  an  exceeding  great  army  "  (ver.  10) ;  instead  of  a  "  lost  hope  " 
(ver.  4)  is  a  revived  and  recovered  nation  (ver.  12).  The  true  analogue  to  this  vision  of 
the  prophet  is  the  revival  of  the  lost  and  dead  human  soul  under  the  renewing  and 
inspiring  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God.    What  is  suggested  here  on  this  vital  theme  is — 

I.  The  fatal  and  hopeless  condition  to  which  sin  eeduces  us.  Could  we  see 
our  sin-stricken  humanity  as  it  appears  in  the  sight  of  God,  then  where  now  we  look 
upon  fair  scenes  and  shows  of  beauty  or  activity,  we  should  see  a  "valley  full  of  dry 
bones" — a  valley  of  death.  Let  "  the  dead  bury  their  dead,"  said  the  Master.  "  She 
that  liveth  in  pleasure  is  dead  while  she  liveth,"  said  his  apostle.  To  be  separated 
from  God  in  thought  and  sympathy ;  to  be  living  in  selfishness,  in  vanity,  in  sin ;  to 
be  forfeiting  our  fair  heritage  of  righteousness  and  holy  service,  and  to  lose  our  life  in 
human  gratifications  or  earthly  acquisitions; — this  is  to  be  lost  to  God  and  wisdom;  it 
is  to  have  entered  at  least  the  outer  shadows  of  the  valley  of  death ;  and  when  sin  has 
done  its  worst,  when  it  has  led  the  man  or  the  commimity  down  to  its  nethermost  abyss, 
then  is  he  (or  it)  in  such  a  state  of  spiritual  deathfulness  and  hopelessness  that  all 
recovery  seems  impossible,  as  impossible  as  for  a  great  mass  of  dry  and  disparted  bones 
scattered  on  some  broad  valley  to  be  readjusted  and  to  be  reanimated  with  life.  "  Can 
these  bones  live  ?  "  "  No,"  human  intelligence  replies,  "  they  are  dead  beyond  all 
recovery."  Yet  is  it  well  to  remember  that  "  the  things  which  are  impossible  to  man 
are  possible  with  God ;  "  and  it  is  well  to  make  reply,  as  in  the  text, "  0  Lord  God,  thou 
knuwest."  For  God's  reply  is  not  in  the  negative.  He  summons  to  activity ;  and  w« 
have — 

II.  The  thbeefold  agency  called  into  exercise.  1.  The  human  teacher.  "  He 
said  unto  me,  Prophesy,"  etc.  (ver.  4).  "  So  I  prophesied  as  I  was  commanded  '  (ver. 
7).  It  is  the  bounden  duty,  the  sacred  privilege,  of  the  human  teacher — ^in  the  house, 
in  the  sanctuary,  in  the  school,  in  the  street,  anywhere  and  everywhere  that  men  will 
listen — to  summon  the  lost  ones  to  return,  the  fallen  to  rise,  the  slumbering  to  awake 
and  to  return  unto  the  Lord  their  God.  2.  The  sinful  souls  themselves.  "As  I 
prophesied  there  was  a  noise,  and  behold  a  shaking,"  etc.  (ver.  7).  Men  may  seem  as 
dead,  and  in  ^  sadly  serious  sense  they  may  be  "dead  in  sin; "  yet  they  are  not  so 
absolutely  lifeless  that  there  is  no  possible  response  in  them  when  the  word  of  Divine 
truth  is  spoken.  On  the  contrary,  they  will  respond ;  there  is  the  spiritual  movement 
which  begins  in  being  aroused,  and  which  ends  in  the  actual  return  of  the  heart  unto 
its  Divine  Father,  and  its  entrance  into  eternal  life.  3.  T!ie  Divine  Spirit.  "  Prophesy 
unto  the  wind  .  .  .  breathe  upon  these  slain,  that  they  may  live"  (ver.  9).  What  the 
breathing  wind  in  the  prophet's  image  wrought,  that  now  works  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God. 
Vain  the  words  of  the  teacher,  the  movement  of  the  fallen  and  lost  spirit,  without  the 
renewing  and  reviving  energy  that  comes  from  God.  But  that  does  come.  God  waits 
to  work  with  us  and  for  us ;  and  when  there  is  honest  effort  accompanied  with  earnest 
prayer,  the  breath  of  the  Divine  Spirit  is  not  wanting ;  then  comeii — 


282  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  KZEKIEL.    [oh.  ixxni.  1—28. 

m.  The  blessed  issue  in  newness  of  life.  "  They  lived,  and  stood  up  ...  an 
exceeding  great  army  [or  '  force  *]  "  (ver.  10).  The  glorious  issue  of  this  agency,  human 
»nd  Divine,  is  (1)  life, — life  in  God's  view,  life  in  God,  life  unto  God,  life  now  and  ever- 
more with  God ;  it  is  (2)  largely  extended  life, — an  exceeding  great  army,  innumerable, 
stretching  over  all  lands  and  through  all  the  centuries;  it  is  {Z")  powtrful  life,— the 
word  translated  "  army  "  might  be  rendered  "  force."  The  "  multitude  of  them  that 
believe,"  and  that  have  life  by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  should  be  a  great  force  or  power 
for  good.  If  it  did  but  realize  its  resources,  and  knew  how  strong  it  was  in  Christian 
truth  and  the  power  of  God  which  is  at  command,  it  would  do  far  "greater  works" 
than  any  it  has  yet  accomplished  for  its  Master  and  for  mankind, — C. 

Yer.  11. — The  cry  of  the  hopeless.  "  Our  hope  is  lost :  we  are  cut  ofif  to  ourselves  " 
(Fairbaim's  translation) ;  i.e.  we  are  "  cut  off  from  the  source  of  power  and  influence,  and 
abandoned  to  ourselves."  Taking  these  words  apart  from  their  connection  (though  quite 
in  accordance  with  their  spirit  and  tenor),  our  attention  is  directed  to — 

I,  The  hopeless,  because  the  abandoned.  Many  are  they  who  have  had,  or  still 
have,  occasion  to  utter  this  most  sad  exclamation.  It  has  been :  1.  The  remnant  of  a 
moribund  race;  or  a  dishonoured  community  (like  Israel  in  Egypt  or  in  Babylon);  or 
a  people  held  in  hopeless  slavery  or  a  company  of  men  and  women  doomed  to  lifelong 
exile  (Cayenne  or_Siberia).  2.  Individuals,  or  families,  or  small  groups  of  those  who 
have  once  cherished  hopes,  perhaps  high  hopes,  of  a  happy  life,  but  who  find  themselves 
hopeless,  cut  off,  away  from  all  their  resources,  abandoned  to  themselves,  with  nothing 
but  misery  and  death  in  view ;  it  may  be  the  marooned  or  castaway,  left  on  some  lonely 
island  to  pine  and  die ;  or  it  may  be  the  condemned  felon  when  the  last  effort  to  obtain 
a  reprieve  has  failed ;  or  it  may  be  the  family  in  the  great  city  allowed  to  perish  for  lack 
of  food ;  or  it  may  be  the  helpless  straggler  whom  the  army  has  left  behind  to  fall  into  the 
hands  of  a  barbarous  enemy.  Sad  and  pitiable  in  the  last  degree  is  the  fate  of  those  who 
have  to  lament  that  they  are  "  cut  off  (and  abandoned)  to  themselves."  Distinguished 
from  these  are :  3.  The  spiritually  hopeless.  Those  who  are  perplexed  and  distressed  in 
heart,  because  (1)  they  cannot  satisfy  their  minds  as  to  the  reality  of  sacred  truths,  as 
to  the  soundness  of  Christian  doctrine ;  or  because  (2)  they  cannot  find  the  peace  and 
rest  of  heart  they  have  been  long  seeking ;  or  because  (3)  they  fancy  that  they  have 
finned  beyond  forgiveness  and  restoration.  These  souls  cannot  find  the  help  they  need ; 
it  seems  to  them  that  "  no  man  careth  for  their  soul,"  or  can  enter  into  their  feelings, 
or  go  down  to  the  dark  depths  of  their  necessity.  They  do  not  know  what  to  do  in 
their  extremity ;  everything  and  every  one  has  failed  them ;  their  "  hope  is  perished ; " 
they  are  "  cut  off"  and  abandoned. 

II,  Theib  one  besoubce.  When  man  fails  us,  we  can  turn  to  God  and  trust  in  him. 
In  him  the  helpless  and  the  hopeless  find  their  Refuge.  "  I  am  alone,  and  yet  not  alone, 
for  the  Father  is  with  me,"  said  our  Lord.  And  many  thousands  of  his  disciples  have 
gained  relief  where  their  Master  sought  and  found  it.  The  great  and  supreme  fact  that 
God  "  remembered  us  in  our  low  estate ;  "  that  when  we  were  as  a  race  utterly  undone, 
"cut  off"  from  all  resources,  with  no  hope  whatever  in  man,  he  had  compassion  on  us, 
and  stooped  to  save  us ; — this  is  the  strong,  unfailing  assurance  that  God  will  not  desert 
VB,  even  though  we  abandon  one  another.  However  low  be  our  condition,  and  in  what- 
ever sense  we  may  be  hopeless,  we  may  confidently  count  upon  (1)  the  near  presence 
of  God ;  (2)  the  tender  sympathy  of  our  Divine  Friend ;  (3)  his  gracious  and  timely 
succour.  This  will  come  to  us,  indeed,  in  his  own  time  and  way,  which  may  not  be 
after  our  choice  or  according  to  our  expectation.  But  it  will  come ;  for  it  is  quite 
impossible  that  the  eternal  Father  will  abandon  his  children,  that  the  once-crucified 
and  now  exalted  Saviour  will  leave  to  their  fate  those  for  whom  he  died,  and  who  turn 
earnest  eyes  to  him  for  help  and  for  salvation. — 0. 

Vers.  21 — 28. — The  blessed  kingdom.  Understanding  this  Divine  promise  to  find 
Its  true  and  complete  fulfilment  in  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  we  may  recognize  some  of 
the  features  of  that  kingdom  as  it  will  one  day  be  constituted. 

L  Its  one  acknowlbdoed  Head.  The  ideal  "  David  "  (vers.  24,  25)  is  found,  not 
In  any  future  ruler  like  Judas  Maccabseus,  but  in  Jesus  Christ;  in  him  who  is  exalted 
"  to  be  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour,"  the  Lord  and  Sovereign  of  his  people  everywhere.     A 


OH.  ixxTHi.  1— 23.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  BZBKIBL.  288 

for  Greater  than  David  is  he  (see  homilj  on  ch.  xxziT.  23,  24).  He  will  hare  do  rivi^ 
in  the  day  of  the  Lord,  when  all  the  Churches  of  Christ  shall  know  and  lore  the  truth, 
•ud  exalt  him  in  the  eyes  of  the  world. 

II.  Its  unitt.  (Vers.  21,  22.)  The  time  will  come  when  the  Dirine  Head  of  the 
Church  will  look  down  upon  a  united  people.  There  may  be  a  great  variety  of 
organizations,  but  there  wiU  be  no  discord  or  disunion ;  none,  because,  while  there  will 
be  no  uniformity  of  method,  but  every  order  of  spiritual  life,  there  will  be  everywhere 
prevalent  the  ipirit  of  a  benignant  charity,  of  Christ-like  confidence,  and  love ;  all 
Churches  and  all  hearts  owning  one  Saviour,  teaching  one  redeeming  truth,  breathing 
one  spirit,  living  one  life,  moving  towards  one  goal,  and  looking  for  one  prize. 

III.  Its  holiness.  (Ver.  23.)  There  shall  be  nothing  to  defile.  What  the  entire 
absence  of  idolatry  signified  in  the  case  of  Israel  is  realized  by  the  Church  in  the 
abseiice  of  all  worldliness  and  iniquity  of  every  kind  from  its  pale.  It  is  "cleansed* 
by  the  truth  and  power  of  God,  so  that  vice  and  violence,  oppression  and  injustice^ 
covetousneas  and  selfishness,  uncharitableness  and  inconsiderateness,  are  banished  from 
its  midst. 

lY.  Its  olobious  haonitudb.  "I  will  multiply  them.''  If  the  largest  promisai 
made  to  Israel  had  been  fulfilled  to  the  letter,  that  fulfilment  would  have  been  small 
and  slight  indeed  when  comx>ared  with  the  realization  they  have  had  in  the  establish- 
ment and  the  growth  of  the  Church  of  Christ.  And  It  is  extending  its  borders  still, 
indeed  much  more  rapidly  now  than  in  any  century  hut  the  first.  It  has  attained  to 
a  noble  magnitude,  and  will  "  multiply  and  still  increase,"  until  that  little  stone  of 
Nebuchadnezzar's  dream  shall  have  rolled  and  grown  till  it  "fills  the  whole  earth." 

y.  Its  jot  in  God.  God's  "sanctuary  is  to  be  in  the  midst."  His  "tabernacle 
shall  be  with  them."  He  will  "  be  their  God,  and  they  shall  be  his  people  "  (vers.  26, 
27).  The  picture  is  one  of  happy,  holy  converse  between  God  and  man.  It  is  a  great 
thing  for  a  nation  to  rejoice  because  the  Holy  One  is  near,  is  knovm  and  felt  to  be  near. 
la  the  "  glorious  future  time,"  when  the  kingdom  6t  Christ  shall  be  established  on  the 
earth,  it  will  be  the  very  near  presence  of  God  that  will  be  felt  to  be  the  source  of  the 
deepest  satisfaction,  of  the  largest  and  truest  enrichment.  To  be  with  him,  coming 
Into  bis  nearer  presence  in  all  the  ordinances  of  religion,  to  live  in  the  spirit  and 
habitude  of  demotion,  to  walk  with  God  all  the  day  long,  to  be  guests  at  his  tHble,  to 
lift  up  the  face  unto  him  as  unto  the  heavenly  Father,  to  lean  on  Christ  as  on  the 
unfailing  Friend  of  the  heart  and  life, — this  is  the  heritage  of  the  good  in  the  blessed 
kingdom  of  our  Lord. — 0. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXXVin. 


The  present  and  the  following  chapters, 
•omprising  the  next  oracle,  or  "  word  of  God," 
delivered  by  the  prophet,  relate  to  the  expe- 
dition (oh.  xxxviil.  1 — 13),  overthrow  (vers. 
14 — 23),  and  destruction  of  Gog  (ch.  xxxix. 
1 — 20),  with  the  results  of  the  same  to  the 
heathen  world  and  to  Israel  (vers.  21 — 29). 
Attempts  to  identify  Gog  and  hie  armies  with 
particular  nations,  as  e.g.  with  the  Chaldeans 
(Ewald),  the  Scythians  (Knobel,  Hitzig), 
the  Greeks  under  Antiocbus  Epiphanes 
(Grotius),  and  even  the  Turks  (Luther), 
have  not  been  and  are  not  likely  to  be  suo- 
eessful.  Either  the  highly  idealized  picture 
the  prophet  sketches  was  designed,  as 
Bengsteuberg  thinks,  to  sum  up  and  present 
in  one  great  battle-piece  all  the  conflicts 


which,  thronghont  subsequent  centuries,  the 
restored  and  united  Israel  should  have  to 
maintain  against  the  heathen  world;  or  it 
was  intended,  as  H'avernick,  Keil,  and  others 
believe,  to  point  to  one  closing  struggle,  in 
which  the  world's  hostility  to  the  Church  of 
God  should  culminate,  and  in  which  it 
should  be  utterly  and  finally  broken.  In 
favour  of  this  latter  view  stand  the  facts  that 
by  the  prophet  the  uprising  of  Gog  is  located 
in  "the  latter  days,"  and  by  the  author  of 
the  Apocalypse,  who  seems  to  allude  to  the 
same  event,  the  last  battle  between  the 
powers  of  evil  and  the  Church  of  God  is 
placed  immediately  before  the  final  judg- 
meiit  and  the  emergence  of  the  new  heavens 
and  the  new  earth  (Rev.  xx.  8). 

Vers.  1 — 13. — The  announcement  of  Gog** 
expedition  against  Israel. 


284 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  BZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxxvm.  1— 28. 


Vor.  1. — The  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto 
aie.  Although  this  oracle  is  unaccompanied 
by  any  note  of  time,  it  was  obviously  deli  vered 
before  the  twenty-flftli  year  of  the  Captivity 
(ch.  xl.  1),  and  most  likely  in  immediate 
iucoession  to  the  preceding  prophecy,  with 
which  also  it  has  a  close  relation  in  respect 
of  purport,  being  designed  to  show  tliat 
against  restored  and  united  Israel,  i.e. 
against  the  Church  of  Gcid  of  the  future,  the 
ctrongest  combinations  uf  hostile  force  would 
not  prevail,  but  would  fall  back  defeated 
and  self-destroyed. 

Ver.  2. — Set  thy  face  against  (or,  toward) 
God.  Althougli  occurring  in  1  Chron.  v.  4 
as  the  name  of  a  Reubeuite,  Gog  was  probably 
a  title  formed  by  Ezekiel  himself  irom  yie 
word  Magog,  the  syllable  ma  being  treated 
as  equivalent  to  "  land."  A  similar  freedom 
appearB  to  have  been  exercised  by  the  author 
of  the  Apocalypse,  who  out  of  Magog,  here 
a  territorial  designation,  makes  a  military 
power  co-ordinate  with  Gog  (Eev.  xx.  8). 
That  Gog  was  not  an  actual  person — though 
the  name  reminds  one  of  that  of  the  Lydian 
king  Gyges,  as  it  appears  on  tlie  monuments, 
Gu-gu,  Gu-ug-gu,  and  of  that  of  one  8a-gi, 
or  Ha-agi,  the  ruler  of  another  Eastern  terri- 
tory not  yet  identified  (see  Solirader,  '  Die 
Keilinschriften  und  das  Alte  Testament,' 
p.  427 ;  and  comp.  '  Records  of  the  Past,' 
firet  series,  vol.  ix.  46) — but  an  ideal 
character,  must  be  held  as  proved  by  the 
composite  structure  of  his  army,  which  was 
drawn  from  the  four  corners  of  tlie  globe,  as 
well  as  by  the  highly  imaginative  texture 
•f  the  whole  prophecy,  wliich,  as  Hengsten- 
berg  properly  remarks,  has  a  thoroughly 
"Utopian  [perhaps  better,  'ideal ']  character," 
show  ing  that  it  moves  "  in  the  region  of 
holy  fancy."  The  woi  ds,  the  laud  of  Magog, 
are  not,  with  Havernick,  Bwald,  and  Smend, 
to  be  interpreted  as  the  local  or  geograpliioal 
terminus  of  the  prediction,  as  if  the  word 
of  God  had  said,  "  Set  thy  face  toward  Gog, 
toward  the  land  of  Magog ;  "  but,  with  the 
majority  of  expositors,  as  a  territorial  desig- 
nation signifying  that  Gog  was  iu  .or  of  the 
land  of  Magog,  which  is  here  marked  with 
the  article,  probably  to  identify  it  with  the 
well-known  Magog  mentioned  in  Gen.  x.  2, 
along  with  Tubal  and  Mesech  as  among  the 
descendants  of  Japlieth.  From  the  circum- 
stance that  in  the  table  of  nations  Magog 
stands  between  Gomer{the  Cimmerians)  and 
Madai  (the  Medians),  and  that  Gomer 
appears  in  Gog's  army,  it  has  been  not  un- 
reasonably concluded  that  to  Ezekiel  Magog 
represented  a  fierce  Northern  tribe,  most 
likely,  as  Joseiihus  ('  Ant.,'  i.  6,  1)  asserts, 
the  Scytliians,  whose  territories  lay  upon 
the  borders  of  the  sea  of  Azov  and  in  the 
Caucasus.  Flumptre  even  thinks  tliat, 
"placed  as  Ezekiel  was,  he  may  well  have 


come  into  contact  with  these  Scythian  tribes, 
either  as  part  of  Nebuchadnezzar's  army  or 
by  a  journey  on  his  part  into  the  regions 
north  of  Ararat "  ('  Ezekiel :  an  Ideal  Bio- 
graphy,' JEJxpotitor,  vol.  viii.  p.  291,  second 
series).  Yet,  could  both  of  these  hypotheses 
be  established,  it  would  not  follow  that 
Ezekiel  was  thinking  merely,  as  Knobel 
and  Gesenius  suppose,  of  a  future  struggle 
which  Israel  shoulil  have  to  maintain  against 
these  gentes  ;S  ytldcan  immanes  et  innumer- 
abileB,  as  Jerome  in  his  day  described  them. 
In  addition  to  being  named  from  his  land, 
Gog  is  further  distinguished  by  the  peoples 
over  whom  he  rules,  Ezekiel  styling  him 
the  chief  prince  of  Meshech  and  Tubal — 
a  translation  adhered  to  by  Hengstenberg, 
Bwald,  and  Smend ;  or,  according  to  the 
LXX.,  which  most  expositors  and  the 
Revised  Version  follow,  the  prinee  of  Bosh, 
Meshech,  and  Tubal.  The  furmer  rendering 
is  obtained  by  interpreting  tot  N'to)  after 
the  analogy  of  ^'^t^   [rjan,  "chief  priest," 

or  "  minister,''  in  1  Chron.  xxvii.  5 ;  and  is 
supported  by  a  similar  use  of  the  word  rosh 
on    coins    under    the    government   of  the 
Persian  satraps;  yet  the  second  rendering 
is  not  devoid  of  considerations  that  may  be 
urged  in  its  favour.      Besides  being  gram- 
matically possible,  it  yields  a  sense  which 
is  not  improbable.    Byzantine  and  Arabian 
writers  of  the  tenth  century  were  acquainted 
with    a   people    called  oi  "PiSs,    who  were 
Scythian  mountaineers,  dwelling  north  of 
the  Taurus,  on  the  shores  of  the  Black  Sea 
and  on  the  banks  of  the  Volga.    The  Koran 
speaks  of  a  land  of  Bas  not  far  from  the 
Araxes.    Whether  either  of  these  can  be 
connected    with   present-day    Russians,  as 
Gesenius    suggests— an   hypothesis  which 
Hengstenberg  protests  deals  hardly  with  the 
poor    Russians — must    be    left    undecided. 
So  must  the  question  whether  the  people 
inquired  after  can  be  identified,  as  Delitzsch 
suggests,  vrith  the  inhabitants  of  the  land  of 
Easch  (mat   Ra-a-H)  of  the  Inscriptions, 
which  was  situated  on  the  confines  of  Elam 
on  the  Tigris  (see  Schrailer,  '  Die  Keilin- 
schriften und  das  Alte  Testament,'  p.  427; 
and  comp.  '  Records  of  the  Past,'   vol.  ix. 
p.  84,   11.  122,   124).     At  the  same  time, 
Jerome's  objection  will  scarcely  hold  good 
against  understanding  Rosh  as  the   tame  of 
a  people,  viz.  that  the  Bible  elsew  :ere  ha* 
no  knowledge  of  any  such  people,  lince,  as 
Havernick    observes,    "one   cannot   know 
beforehand  whether  to  Ezikiel,  in  his  then 
place  of  abode,  the  knowledge  of  such  a 
people  was  not  likely  sooner  to  come  than 
to  any   Old   Testament  writer,"  and  it  is 
certain   that  the   Book  of  Ezekiel  is  not 
wanting  in  names  that  occur  only  once,  as 
e.g.  Chilmad  (ch.  xxvii.  23)  and  Chub  (ch. 
XXX.  5).   Hitzig  points  out  that  in  Gen.  x.. 


•H.  xxxviiL  1— 23.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PBOPHET  EZEKIBL. 


285 


along  with  Mesech  and  Tubal,  is  mentioned 
a  third  nation,  Tirat,  which  Von  Hammer 
has  attemptert  to  connect  with  Bosh  ;  while 
Schroder  sees  in  Rosh  (allied  to  rose, "  horse") 
an  indication  that  the  people  were  equestiian 
in  their  habits,  like  the  Scythians.  Tlie 
other  peoples,  Mesheoh  and  Tubal,  were 
undoubtedly  the  Mosohians  and  Tibarenes, 
who,  according  to  Herodotus  (iii.  94 ;  vii. 
78),  dwelt  south  of  the  Black  Sea. 

Ver.  3. — I  am  against  thee,  0  Gog.  Just 
because  Gog  was  against  Israel,  Jehovah 
was  against  Gog.  Gog's  invasion  of  Israel's 
land  would  be  a  declaration  of  war  a;<ain8t 
Israel's  God,  so  that  the  conflict  wonld 
rather  be  between  Jehovah  and  Gog  than 
between  Israel  and  Gog.  Hence  throughout 
this  propliecy  Jehovah  is  represented  as 
thu  principal  actur  on  the  side  of  Israel, 
who  seeks  her  defence  not  in  walls  and  bul- 
warks or  in  earthly  alliances  and  military 
combinations,  as  in  the  days  of  the  monarchy 
before  the  exile,  but  in  the  presence  of 
Jehovah  in  her  midst. 

Ver.  4. — ^I  will  torn  thee  baok.    "^riaaiii* 

(pilel  of  aits',  and  signifying  "to  oanse  to 
return")  has  by  Hitzig,  Havemick,  lEwald, 
and  Keil,  been  interpreted  in  the  sense 
of  "  enticing,"  "  misleading,"  decoying  to 
a  dangerous  enterprise,  as  in  Isa.  xlvii.  10 ; 
but  the  ordinary  meaning  seems  sufficient, 
that  Jehovah  would  turn  him  back  from 
his  own  self-devised  career,  or  turn  him 
about  like  a  wild  beast,  patting  hooks  into 
his  jaws  (comp.  ch.  xxix.  4 ;  2  Kings  xix. 
28 ;  Isa.  xxxvii.  29),  and  so  compelling  him 
to  follow  the  lead  of  a  power  superior  to 
himself.  It  is  as  evident  that  a  turning 
back  from  the  Holy  Land  cannot  be  intended, 
as  it  is  that  a  turning  back  to  the  Holy 
IJand  is  unsuitable,  unless,  with  Hengstenberg 
and  Bwald,  one'  regards  Gog  as  the  Chal- 
deans, or,  with  Hitzig,  and  Schroder,  as  the 
Scythians,  though  these  latter  never  were 
in  Palestine,  having  left  it  unvisited  in  their 
campaign  in  b.o.  626,  and  had  not  as  yet 
formed  the  design  of  invading  Israel. 
Smend  is  not  wide  of  the  mark  in  suggest- 
ing that  the  thought  expressed  in  the  verb 
if  simply  that  of  the  superior  might  of 
Jehovah.  I  will  bring  thee  forth,  That 
the  power  which  stirs  up  Gog  is  here  repre- 
sented as  that  of  Jehovah,  while  in  Eev. 
XX.  8  it  is  affirmed  to  he  that  of  Satan,  need 
occasion  no  more  difficulty  than  the  similar 
■tatements,  in  1  Sam.  xxiv.  1,  about  God 
and  in  1  Chron.  xxi.  1  about  Satan,  stirring 
np  David  to  number  Israel.  The  enume- 
lation  of  horses  and  horsemen  in  Gog's  army 
points  to  the  Scythians,  who,  according  to 
Herodotus  (iv.  46, 136),  were  mostly  eques- 
trian tribes,  although  the  Scythian  remains 
discovered  at  Kertch  do  not  give  an  example 
of  a  Scythian  horse-archer  (see  Bawlinson's 


'  Herodotus,'  vol.  iii.  p.  34,  note  6).  All  of 
them  clothed  with  all  sorts  of  armour,  better, 
clothed  with  perfection,  i.e.  splendidly  attir.  d, 
all  of  them.  A  characteristic  of  the  Assyrian 
army  (comp.  ch.  xxiii.  12;  Nah.  ii.  3).  Tlio 
arms  of  the  warlike  host — a  great  company, 
as  in  oh.  xvii.  17  (comp.  Eev.  xx.  8,  "  the 
number  of  whom  is  as  the  sand  of  the  sea  ") 
— are  described  as  consisting  of  bucklers,  or 
shields  large  enough  to  cover  the  whole  of 
the  soldier,  and  not  so  suitable  for  cavalry 
as  for  infantry  (comp.  ch.  xxiii.  24) ;  shields, 
i.e.  bucklers  of  smaller  size  tliau  the  pre- 
ceding,such  as  Assyrian  warriors  were  accus- 
tomed to  carry  (Sayoe,  '  Assyria,  its  Princes, 
Priests,  and  People,'  p.  126);  and  swords, 
or  weapons  for  laying  waste.  The  Assyrian 
soldiery  employed  "the  short  dagger,  or 
dirk,  and  the  sword,  which  was  of  two  kinds. 
The  ordinary  kind  was  long  and  straight, 
the  less  usual  kind  being  curved,  like  a 
scimitar  "  ('  Assyria,  its  Princes,'  etc.).  In 
connection  with  the  allied  nations  in  ver. 
5,  only  the  small  "  shield  "  and  "  helmet  *• 
are  mentioned. 

Vers.  5 — 7. — These  allied  nations  are  d»- 
picted  as  coming  from  the  four  qitarters  of 
the  globe.  Persia  (see  rh.  xxvii.  10),  from 
the  east;  Ethiopia  (see  ch.  xxx.  5),  or 
Cvsh  (Gen.  x.  6),  from  the  south;  Libya, 
or  Fhut  (see  ch.  xxvii.  10 ;  xxx.  5),  from 
the  west ;  and  Gomer  (see  Gen.  x.  2,  3 ; 
1  Chron.  i.  5),  the  Cimmerians  of  Homer 
('  OdysB.,'  xi.  13 — 19),  whose  abodes  were  the 
shores  of  the  Euxine  and  Caspian  Seas,  and 
the  Gimirrai  of  the  Assyrian  Inscriptions 
(see  Schrader,  'Die  Keilinschriften,'  etc, 
p.  80) ;  with  the  house  of  Togarmah,  from  the 
north,  or  the  extreme  regions  of  the  north, 
as  in  Isa.  xiv.  13  (see  ch.  xxvii.  14).  The 
first  three  are  portrayed  as  armed  with 
shield  and  helmet,  or  more  accurately  as 
being  all  of  them  shield  and  helmet,  which 
might  signify  that  they  should  serve  as  a 
shield  and  helmet  to  Gog,  who  in  turn 
should  be  unto  them  and  their  confederates 
a  guard ;  i.e.,  according  to  Keil  and  Schro;  !er, 
one  who  keeps  watch  over  tbem  ;  according 
to  Michaelis  and  Haverniok,  one  who  gives 
them  law;  according  to  Hengstenberg,  one 
who  is  their  authority ;  according  to  Ewald 
and  Smend,  one  who  serves  to  them  as  an 
ensign,  i.e.  acts  to  them  as  a  leader  or 
commander.  The  LXX.  translation,  with 
wliich  Hitzig  agrees,  "  And  thou  shalt  be 
to  me  for  a  guard,"  is  manifestly  wrong. 

Ver.  8. — After  many  days  thou  shalt  be 
visited.  The  principal  controversy  raised 
by  these  words  is  as  to  whether  they  signify, 
as  Hitzig,  Fairbaim,  and  Kliefoth  suppose, 
that  after  many  days  Gog  should  be  en- 
trusted with  the  command  of  the  aforemen- 
tioned nations,  or,  as  Ewald,  Hengstenberg, 
Keil,  Sihroder,  Plumptre,  and  Ourrey  trans- 


286 


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  BZEKIBL.    [oh.  xxiviu.  1—23. 


late,  that  Gog,  who  intended  to  visit  Israel, 
should  himself  be  visited,  in  the  sense  of 
being  punished.     In  support  of  the  former 
rendering  appeal  is  taken  to  Neh.  vii.  1 ; 
xii.  44;  and  Jer.  xv.  3;  but  the  verb  tpt^ 
when  used  in  this  sense  is  commonly  followed 
by  hs  with  the  aoousative  of  that  or  those 
with    reference   to    which    or    whom    the 
appointment  is  made  or  commission  issued, 
and  in  addition  no  such  commission  with 
reference  to  these  other  nations  wag  ever 
given  by  God  to  Gog.     In  vindication  of 
the  second  meaning  of  the  words,  Isa.  zxiv. 
22  and  xxix.  6  are  ordinarily  quoted ;  while 
in  answer  to  the  objection  that  it  is  too  soon 
to  talk  of  punishment  for  an  offence  not  yet 
committed,  it  is  customary  to  reply  that,  as 
Jehovah's  stirring  up  of  Gog  was  the  first 
gtep  towards  his  ultimate  overthrow,  that 
itirring  up  might  fairly  be  described  as  at 
least  the  beginning  of  his  judicial  visitation. 
Havernick's  translation,  "  For  a  long  time 
thou  wilt  be  missed,"  i.e.  considered  as  a 
people  that  has  utterly  vanished,"  is  forced  ; 
8mend's  is  better,  "  After  many  days  thou 
■halt  be  muitered,"  or  numbered.    In  any 
case  Gog's  first  movement  should  take  place 
in  the  latter  years ;  literally,  at  the  end  of  the 
yean — a  frequent  prophetic  phrase  (see  Gen. 
xlix.  1 :  Numb.   xxiv.  14 ;  Isa.  ii.  2 ;  Dan. 
X.  14 ;  Mioah  iv.  1),  here  denoting  the  Mes- 
iianic  era,  and  should  assume  the  form  of 
•n  invasion  of  the  land  of  Israel,  which  is 
next   described  by  a  threefold  characteri- 
zation.   (1)  As  a  land  bronght  back  from 
the  iword,  not  in  the  sense  of  its  people 
having    been  made    to    desist    from    war, 
through  being  henceforth  peacefully  inclined 
(oomp.  laa.  ii.  4 ;  Mioah  ii.  8),  or  of  their 
having  ceased  to  expect  war,   because  of 
living  ever  after  securely  (ver,  11),  but  in 
that  of  having  been  recovered  from  ite  devas- 
tations (ch.  vi.  3—5);  (2)  as  a  land  whose 
inhabitants  had  been  gathered  out  of  many 
nations — a  phrase,  which  while  starting  from 
and  including  the  return  from   Babylon, 
manifestly  looked  beyond  that  event  to  the 
wider  dispersion  of  Israel  that  should  pre- 
cede the  final  ingathering ;  and  (3)  as  aland 
whose  mountains  had  been  always  waste ; 
literally,  for  a  watte  mnUmmlly.    If  snob 
was  their  condition  prior  to  the  return  from 
caplivity,  it  is  undeniable  that   such   hns 
practically  been  their  condition  ever  since, 
and  such  it  is  likely  to  continue  to  be,  until 
the  final  ingathering  of  the  dispersed   of 
Israel. 

Ver.  9. — Like  a  storm,  and  like  a  cloud. 
Gog's  invasion,  hii  "  ascension,"  or  "  going 
up  "  (compare  the  Greek  term  avdffairts  for  a 
military  expedition),  should  be  like  a  storm 
in  its  Buddennesg  and  violence,  as  in  Prov 
1.  27,- and  like  a  cloud  in  its  threatening 
aspect  and  overshadowing  nearness  (see  ver. 


16 ;  and  comp.  Jer.  iv.  13).  Taken  together, 
the  images  suggest  that  Gog's  invasion 
should  burst  forth  suddenly,  rage  violently, 
spread  quickly,  alarm  greatly,  biit  cease 
finally.  Storms  roar  and  crash,  alarm  and 
destroy,  but  do  not  continue.  Clouds  diffuse 
gloom  and  fear,  but  ultimately  disperse. 

Ver.  10.  —  Thou  shalt  think  an  evil 
thought  J  "  conceive  a  mischievous  purpose  " 
(nuirgin) ;  or,  devise  an  evil  device  (Revised 
Version).  The  ultimate  responsibility  for 
Gog's  expedition  should  rest  on  Gtog  him- 
self, who  should  be  impelled  thereto  by  his 
own  lust  of  conquest.  Bzekiel  here  recog- 
nizes what  the  Bible  is  full  of,  the  duality 
of  existence,  according  to  which  man  is  both 
a  free  agent,  acting  out  his  own  thoughti 
and  plans,  and  an  unconscious  instrument 
in  the  hands  of  God  cairyiug  out  his  counsels 
and  designs. 

Vers.  11, 12  give  voice  to  the  tilings  that 
should  come  into   Gog's  mind  and   incite 
him  to  his  enterprise  against   Israel.    The 
spectacle   of   Israel    dwelling   safely,   t.«. 
securely  and  confidently,  in  a  land  Of  nn- 
walled  villages — literally,  a  land  of  open 
places,  as  opposed  to  fortified  cities — i.e.  of 
towns  without  walls,  and  having  neither 
bars  nor  gates  (comp  Zeoh.  ii.  4,  5 ;  Cent, 
iii.  5 ,   1  Sam.  vi.  18),  because  of  being  no 
more  apprehensive  of  invasion,  should  excite 
within  his  bosom  the  thought  that  Israel 
would  fall  an  easy  prey  to  his  assault;  and 
this  thought   again  should  kindle  in  hii 
bosom  the  lust  of  conquest  which  should 
finally  impel  him    to    the    sinful    project 
described,  viz.  to  take  a  spoil  and  to  take  a 
prey;  literally, Jo  spoU  the  »poi7  (comp.  ch. 
xxix.  19;    Isa.  x.  6)  and   to  prey  the  prey 
(Isa.  xxxiii.  23).    In  execution  of  this  he 
would  fall  upon  the  once  desolate  but  then 
inhabited  places,  upon   the  once   scattered 
but  then  collected  population,  upon  the  pre- 
viously poor  but  then  wealthy  inhabitants, 
who  should  then  have   gotten  cattle  and 
goods  (cattle   and   chattel  best  renders  the 
Hebrew  paronomasia,  miknek  v'Mnyan),  as 
the  patriarchs  of  their  nation  had  once  done 
(Gen.  xxxiv  23 ;  xxxvi.  6),  and  who  should 
then  be  dwelling  in  the  midst  of  the  land ; 
literally,  t'n    the    height,  or,  navel  (LXX., 
Vulgate),  of  the  earth  (comp.  Judg.  ix.  37), 
the  Hebrews  generally  regarding  Palestine 
as  the  Greeks  did  Delphi,  both  as  the  middle 
(ch.  v   S)  and  perhaps  therefore,  if  not  aa 
the  highest  (Gesenins),  at  least  as  the  faireii 
and  most  fertile  portion  of  the  earth. 

Ver.  13. — Sheba,  and  Dedan,  and  the 
merchants  of  Tarshish  were  the  great 
trading  communities  of  the  South,  East, 
and  West  respectively  (see  on  oh.  xxvii.  15, 
20, 22, 25).  The  young  lions  thereof— t.e.  of 
Tarshish,  not  of  the  other  communitiei 
(Keil) — were  probably  intended  to  repreient, 


,  XXXVIII.  1—23.]    THE   BOOK  OP   THE   PROPHET   EZEKIEL. 


287 


not  the  "  authorities  "  of  Taraliish,  as  Hitzig 
•uggcsts,  but  ita  smaller  tradesmen  who 
were  equally  rapacious  with  its  larger 
merchants.  All  are  depicted  as  following 
in  the  wake  of  Gog,  like  vultures  in  the 
rear  uf  an  army,  and  as  inquiriag  whether 
Gog  had  come  simply  for  the  purpose  of 
destruction  or  in  the  hope  of  trading  with 
the  booty  he  should  capture.  In  this  case 
they  intimate  their  wish  to  be  partakers  of 
the  spoil.  ThiB(Plumptre),  rather  than  the 
thirst  for  booty  which  characterized  them 
(Keil),  their  question  to  Gog  signified; 
Schroder's  idea,  that  they  purposed  ironically 
to  ridicule  the  smallness  of  the  spoil  which 
would  reward  so  gigantic  an  expedition,  has 
as  little  to  recommend  it  as  Kliefoth'g 
■uggestion,  that  they  designed  to  intimate 
their  sympathy  with  Gog's  invasion  of 
Israel. 

Vers.  14 — 23. — The  prophet  ii  next 
directed  to  assure  Gog  of  four  things,  (1) 
that  in  the  latter  days  he  should  oome  up 
against  Israel  as  predicteJ  (vers.  14 — 16); 
(2)  that  he  should  not  do  so  without  Divine 
observation,  permission,  and  direction  (vers. 
16,  ;17);  (3)  that  nevertheless  Jehovah's 
indignation  should  flame  forth  against  him 
(ver.  18);  and  (4)  that  Jehovah  would 
magnify  himself  in  his  destruction. 

Ver.  14.— Shalt  thou  not  know  it?  viz. 
that  Israel  is  dwelling  safely  and  unsuspect- 
ingly? Assuredly;  because  the  barbarian 
chieftain  will  then  be  on  the  watch,  as  it 
were,  to  spy  out  Israel's  defenceless  condition, 
and  to  fix  upon  the  most  opportune  moment 
for  an  assault.  The  LXX.  read,  "  Shalt  thou 
notarise?"  OIik.  .  .  iyepdiitrji ;  and  following 
it,  both  Hitzig  and  Bwald,  without:  other 
justification,  change  yjn  into  ipn,  "Wilt 
thou  bestir  thyself?" 

Ver.  15. — All  of  them  riding  upon  horses 
(see  on  ver.  4 ;  and  comp.  ch.  xxiii.  6 ;  xxvi. 
7 ;  Jer.  vi.  23 ;  and  Amos  ii.  15).  The 
Scythians  are  said  to  have  been  able  to  eat, 
drink,  and  sleep  in  the  saddle  (Schroder). 

Ver.  16. — I  will  be  sanctified  in  thee,  0 
Oog.  Jehovah  meant  that  in  taking 
vengeance  upon  Gog  for  assailing  Israel, 
he  would  be  seen  to  be  a  holy  and  a  right- 
eous God. 

Ver.  17.— Art  thou  he  of  whom  I  have 
■poken  in  old  time  1  As  no  existing  pro- 
phecy, prior  to  Ezekiel's  time,  mentions 
Gog  by  name,  it  must  be  concluded  either 
(1)  that  Ezekiel  refers  to  prophecies  known 
in  his  day,  though  no  longer  extant ;  or  (2) 
tliat  his  words  simply  mean  that  earlier 
prophets  had  predicted  such  an  invasion  of 
Israel  in  the  last  times  as  that  which  he 
announces   under  the  leadership  of  Gog. 


The  former  opinion,  though  countenanced 
by  Ewald,  Kuenen,  and  Smend,  is  less  pro- 
bable than  the  latter,  which  expositors  both 
ancient  and  modem  favour.  Schroder  con- 
siders the  hypothesis  that  earlier  prophets 
had  spoken  of  Gog  by  name  as  excluded 
by  the  interrogatory  form  of  the  sentence, 
since,  had  Gog  been  thus  explicitly  pointed 
out,  there  would,  he  thinks,  have  been  no 
need  to  ask,  "Art  thou  he?"  But  it  is 
doubtful  if  the  interrogatory  form  of  the 
words  had  any  other  intention  than  to  lend 
emphasis  to  the  assertion  that  Gog  was  he 
to  whom  the  earlier  prophets  had  uncon- 
sciously referred.  As  to  which  earlier 
prophets  he  alluded  opinions  vary.  Ewald 
oitea  laa.  x.  6  ;  xvii.  4 ;  Smend  adding  Mioah 
V.  11 ;  Zepti.  iii.  8 ;  Keil,  Isa.  xxv.  5,  10  ; 
Jer.  XXX.  28,  25 ;  Joel  iv.  2,  11,  etc. ;  Eeng- 
stenberg,  Deut.  xxxii. ;  Isa.  xxiv. — xxvii. ; 
xxxiv. ;  and  Fairbairn,  Numb.  xxiv.  17—24 ; 
Isa.  xiv.  28—32;  xviii. ;  Joel  iii.;  Dan.  ii 
44,  45 ;  though  Schroder  is  probably  correct 
in  holding  that  all  should  be  included 
which  represent  the  hostility  of  the  heathen 
world  as  culminating  in  the  latter  days  is 
a  grand  concentrated  attack  upon  Israel. 
Smend  sees  in  the  unusual  phenomenon 
that  Ezekiel  reflects  upon  earlier  prophecies 
an  indication  of  the  declining  spirit  of 
propbetism ;  it  should,  however,  rather  be 
regarded  as  a  sign  of  superior  spiritual 
insight  on  the  part  of  Ezekiel,  who  could 
discern  that  from  the  first  the  prophets 
had  been  guided  in  their  utterances  by  One 
who  was  intimately  acquainted  with  the 
whole  world-programme,  and  knew  the  end 
from  the  beginning,  so  that  however  dark 
and  enigmatical  their  predictions  might  be 
when  taken  separately,  when  viewed  in 
connection  they  were  recognized  as  forming 
parts  of  a  harmonious  whole. 

Vers.  18— 20.— Vers.  18  and  19  are  not,  as 
Hitzig,  Kliefoth,  and  others  explain,  on  the 
ground  of  the  perfect, "  I  have  spoken  "  (ver, 
19),  which,  however,  is  rather  a  prophetical 
present — a  free  recapitulation  of  the  earlier 
predictions,  but  a  direct  announcement 
through  Ezekiel  that  when  Gog  should 
arrive  upon  the  scene  Jehovah  should  take 
the  field  against  him,  so  that  he  should 
have  to  fight  against  Jehovah  rather  than 
against  Israel.  The  expression,  my  fury 
shall  oome  up  in  my  face;  or,  my  wrath 
ascends  in  my  nose,  has  parallels  in  ch.  xxiv. 
8 ;  Ps.  xviii.  9 ;  and  Dent,  xxxii.  22,  and 
describes  the  vehement  breathing  (inhala- 
tion and  exhalation)  of  an  angry  man 
through  his  nose.  The  fire  of  Jehovah's 
wrath  (comp.  ch.  xxl.  36 ;  xxxyi.  5)  should 
make  itself  known  in  tliat  day  by  a  great 
shaking  in  the  land  of  Israel,  which  oan 
hardly,  as  Kliefoth  surmises,  refer  to  the 
tiiiftl  judgment,  or,  as  Keil  thinks,  to  the 


288 


THE  BOOK  OF   THE   PROPHET   EZEKIEL.    [ch.  xxxviii.  1-23, 


trembling  of  the  whole  earth,  with  all  the 
creatures,  before  the  Lord,  who  comes  to 
judgment,  as  in  Joel  It.  16  and  Zeoh.  xiv. 
4,  5,  since  the  locality  in  which  this  con- 
vulsion of  nature  is  to  happen  is  expressly 
defined  as  "  the  land  of  Israel ; "  but  must 
be  understood,  with  Schroder  and  Smend,  as 
a  figurative  description  of  the  terrible  over- 
throw which  Jehovah  should  inflict  upon 
Gog,  and  which  should  produce  within  the 
heathen  mind  a  feeling  of  consternation,  as 
if  the  whole  fabric  of  the  globe  were  falling 
into  ruin.  Grounding  upon  what  occurred 
at  Sinai  (Exod.  xix.  18 — 18),  Hebrew 
writers  generally  depicted  Bjjecial  inter- 
positions of  Jehovah  as  being  witnessed  to 
and  accompanied  by  awe-inspiring  natural 
convulsions  (eomp.  Ps.  xviii.  7,  15 ;  xlvi.  2, 
3;  Ix.  2;  Isa.  xiii.  9—13;  xxiv.  19—22; 
Jer.  iv.  23—26;  Nah.  i.  5;  Zech.  xiv.  4); 
and  in  the  same  manner  does  Ezekiel 
delineate  Jehovah's  intervention  in  behalf  of 
Israel  and  against  Gog,  as  so  alarming  that 
all  living  creatures,  irrational  as  well  as  ra- 
tional—fishes of  the  sea,  fowls  of  the  heaven, 
beasts  of  the  field,  creeping  things  that  creep 
npon  the  earth  (or,  ground — adamaJi),  and 
men  upon  the  face  of  the  earth ;  nr,  ground 
(comp.  Gen.  i.  26 ;  vii.  21— 23)— should 
shake  at  its  accompanying  manifestations, 
and  that  even  the  mightiest  objects  in 
naion,  inoh  as  the  monntainB,  iteep  places, 


or,  "rock-clefts"  (Ewald),  such  elevations 
as  can  only  be  ascended  by  means  of  steps 
as  by  a  ladder  (comp.  Cant.  ii.  14),and  walls 
(comp.  Jer.  xv.  20),  including  natural  ram- 
parts as  well  as  humanly  constructed 
erections,  should  be  overthrown  (ver.  20). 

Ver.  21.— Every  man's  sword  shall  be 
against  his  brother  (comp.  Zech.  xiv.  13). 
The  consternatiiin  produced  by  Jehovah's 
interposition  should  be  sueh  that  the  ranks 
of  Gog  should  fall  into  utter  confusion,  and 
liis  warriors  exterminate  eaoli  other,  as  did 
the  Midianites  in  the  days  of  Gideon  (Judg. 
vii.  22),  and  the  Hoabiteg,  Ammonites,  and 
Seirites,  who  invaded  Jndah  in  the  reign  of 
Jehoshaphat  (2  Chron.  xx.  23). 

Vers.  22,  23. — Pestilence  and  blood  (comp. 
ch.  V.  17 ;  xiv.  19 ;  xxviii.  23)  ...  an  overt 
flowing  rain  and  great  hailstones— literally, 
stones  of  ice  (comp.  ch.  xiii.  11, 13) — fire,  and 
brimstone,  or,  pitdi  (comp.  Gen.  xix.  24). 
The  imagery  here  brought  together  was 
probably  borrowed  from  the  accounts  given 
in  the  Pentateuch  of  the  destruction  of 
Sodom  and  Gomorrah  (Gen.  xix.  24),  of 
the  plagues  in  Egypt  (Exod.  vii. — x.),  and 
of  the  extermination  of  the  Canaanite* 
(Josh.  X.  11).  The  result  of  the  whole 
would  be  to  impress  the  minds  of  many 
nations  with  the  conviction  that  Israel's 
God  was  both  gieai  and  powerful,  that,  in 
fact,  he  was  God  alone. 


HOMILETIOa 

Vers.  1—4. — Oog  and  Magog.  If  we  take  these  names  as  representing  the  Scythians 
and  their  king,  we  have  a  description  of  God's  judgment  of  the  most  wild  and  remote 
heathen  tribes  and  of  their  relation  to  Israel. 

I.  The  Bible  is  fob  all  nations.  It  contains  a  message  even  for  Gog  and  Magog- 
it  is  intended  to  reach  the  Scythians.  It  has  to  do  with  all  people  in  the  world.  The 
Hebrew  prophet  was  not  permitted  to  narrow  his  thoughts  to  the  parochial  mind. 
His  vision  was  world-wide.  A  Jew  of  the  Jews,  he  was  nevertheless  a  preacher  to 
mankind.  Much  more  is  the  Christian  apostle  a  preacher  to  all  men.  Here  is  a  great 
motive  for  circulating  the  Scriptures  among  all  nations. 

II.  God  has  dbalinos  with  all  people.  His  influence  extends  to  Gog  and  Magog. 
God's  hook  will  be  put  in  the  jaws  of  the  distant  prince.  The  heathen  are  under  God's 
notice  and  affected  by  his  supreme  authority.  To  be  far  from  the  Church  of  God  i» 
not  to  be  far  from  the  power  of  God.  The  ends  of  the  earth  feel  his  great  energy. 
The  arms  of  God  are  long.  This  is  a  reason  for  our  seeking  to  enlighten  the  most 
remote  and  heathenish  people ;  for  they  all  belong  by  right  to  God. 

III.  God  takes  accoont  op  savages.  The  Scythians  of  ancient  times  were  about 
the  wildest  known  people ;  they  were  to  the  Easterns  of  the  past  what  the  cannibals 
of  Central  Africa  are  to  modern  Europeans.  It  was  difficult  to  make  civilized  nations 
feel  that  they  belonged  to  the  same  species  with  such  wiid  men  of  the  Northern  lorestt. 
Yet  God  knew  these  people.  God  does  not  ignore  the  most  degraded  savages.  They, 
too,  are  naturally  made  in  the  image  of  God.  Judged  according  to  their  poor,  obtuse, 
perverted  consciences,  even  they  \^1  have  to  give  account  to  the  God  of  all.  H  liey 
are  not  responsible  for  the  ignorance  and  degradation  in  which  they  are  born,  and 
surely  God  will  deal  very  leniently  with  these  unhappy  races.  Yet  for  their  acknow- 
ledged evil  even  they  must  be  punished.     But  if  there  is  a  judgment  of  Gog,  madh' 


OH.  xxxvin.  1— 23.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PEOPHET  BZEKIEb.  289 

more  must  there  be  a  judgment  of  Israel;  if  tlie  savages  of  Africa  must  give  on 
account  of  the  deeds  done  in  the  body,  much  more  must  the  Ohristians  of  Europe 
appear  before  the  judgment-seat  of  God. 

IV.  ChBISTIANTTT  :pBING8  A  GOSPEL   OF  SALVATION  AOT)   UNION  FOB   ALL  NATIONS. 

It  even  includes  Gog  and  Magog  in  its  gracious  outlook ;  for  St.  Paul  taught  that  the 
Scythians  were  to  share  in  the  common  brotherhood  of  the  Christian  Ohurch  (Ool.  iiL 
11).  1.  The  gospel  is  suited  to  the  lowest  Jteathen.  This  fact  is  proved  by  its  effects. 
While  the  dreamer  at  home  pronounces  the  Christianizing  of  savages  to  be  an  impos- 
aibility,  the  worker  in  the  missionary  field  answers  effectually  by  quietly  accomphsh- 
ing  the  so-called  impossible  feat.  Charles  Darwin  was  so  struck  with  the  good  work 
of  missionaries  in  civilizing  the  inhabitants  of  Tierra  del  Fuego,  whom  he  regarded  as 
about  the  most  degraded  savages  on  the  face  of  the  earth,  tihat  he  subscribed  to  the 
society  from  which  the  missionaries  had  gone  forth.  2.  The  gospel  should  he  spread 
among  the  lowest  heathen.  We  have  no  excuse  to  despair  of  any.  The  very  degra- 
dation of  heathendom  is  a  call  to  Christians  for  help.  Bousseau's  fancy  of  the 
innocence  and  happiness  of  the  simple  savage  is  not  justified  by  experience.  Oppressed 
with  cruelty  and  superstition,  degraded  in  uncleanness,  the  savage  greatly  needs  the 
liberty  and  salvation  of  Christ. 

Ver.  8. — "After  many  days."  Time  is  an  element  which  needs  to  be  taken  into 
calculation  in  the  consideration  of  all  human  affairs.  We  are  too  short-sighted,  too 
hasty,  too  inpatient.    God  has  the  leisure  of  eternity. 

"The  mills  of  God  grind  slowly. 
But  thsy  grind  exceeding  small." 

We  must  ^eam  to  use  the  telescopes  of  faith  and  hope,  and  look  far  beyond  the  scene 
of  the  present,  if  we  would  form  a  right  estimate  of  any  important  human  event. 

I.  The  insoHiEF  of  evil  is  seen  afteb  mant  dats.  This  would  be  a  pertinent 
consideration  in  regard  to  the  evil  work  of  remote  Gog  and  Magog.  1.  The  mischief 
may  he  slow  to  devSop,  At  first  men  enjoy  the  pleasures  of  sin ;  the  pains  come  later. 
Judgment  is  deferred.  God  is  patient  and  long-suffering,  and  he  gives  ample  time  for 
repentance.  Nevertheless,  the  accumulations  of  wrath  will  at  length  burst  over  the 
heads  of  the  finally  impenitent.  2.  The  mischief  may  long  endure.  It  may  last  for 
many  days.  A  hasty  sin  may  be  followed  by  a  lengthy  penalty.  The  crime  of  a 
moment  may  be  punished  with  penal  servitude  for  life.  One  man's  wickedness  may 
bring  misery  oa  generations. 

IL  The  fbutts  of  ooodnebs  abk  been  afteb  mant  dats.  Earnest  men  work, 
and  yet  see  but  little  results  coming  from  their  labours;  so  that  they  seem  to  be 
labouring  for  nothing.  Like  the  disciples  who  toiled  all  night  and  took  nothing, 
perhaps  they  are  re^y  to  despair  just  when  a  grand  reward  is  within  their  reach. 
We  have  to  learn  to  work  and  wait,  and  to  obey  our  Master's  command  even  when  we 
expect  but  little  good  to  come  fi:om  our  labour. 

III.  The  harvest  of  the  oosfel  is  beaped  afteb  mant  dats.  The  Christian 
preacher  may  have  to  go  forth  weeping,^ut  he  bears  precious  seed.  Therefore,  though 
he  BOWS  in  tears,  he  will  reap  in  joy.  What  we  have  to  remember  is  that  our  work  is 
seed-sowing,  not  the  planting  of  full-grown  trees.  The  latter  process  would  give  us 
the  more  immediate  results;  but  it  would  be  the  more  precarious,  for  the  trees  would 
not  be  easily  kept  alive.  Now,  since  our  work  iB  a  sowing  of  seeds,  necessarily  it  cannot 
produce  visible  results  at  once.  The  field  that  has  been  sown  all  over  with  the  beat 
seed  looks  at  first  much  like  one  that  has  been  left  waste  and  neglected.  The  Christian 
preacher,  the  Sunday  school  teacher,  the  missionary,  have  M  to  bow  in  patience. 
Perhaps  one  may  sow  and  another  reap.  A  man  may  not  live  to  gather  the  harvest  of 
his  labour;  then  his  works  will  follow  him  (Rev.  xiv.  13). 

IV.  The  best  blesbinos  of  the  Chbibtian  life  aee  enjotu>  afteb  mant  satb. 
1.  We  may  have  to  wait  for  them.  Some  inestimable  blessings  may  be  had  at  onoe. 
We  have  no  delay  in  receiving  the  pardon  of  our  sins  and  the  regeneration  of  our  bouIb 
whea  we  truly  repent  and  yield  ourselves  to  Christ.  Still, "  this  is  not  your  rest." 
We  are  xtot  yet  in  heaTen.  The  cross  must  now  be  carried ;  we  must  wait  for  the 
crown.    2.  They  tfiU  endttre  for  ever.    We  ahall  have  them  after  many  dayB,  and 

■EKKiEL — 11,  n 


290  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxxviii.  1—23. 

after  many  days  more  these  best  blessings  of  God  will  still  endure.  The  things  which 
are  not  seen  are  eternal  (2  Oor.  iv.  18).  No  moth  nor  rust  corrupt  the  heavenly 
treasures.  When  all  things  on  earth  fade  these  shall  abide,  the  everlasting  inheritance 
of  God's  people. 

Ver.  10. — "  An  evU  thought."  I.  An  kvil  thofoht  mat  comb  trNBiDDBN.  "  Tilings 
come  into"  the  mind.  Like  a  bird  of  passage  from  a  distant  continent,  like  a  stray 
seed  dropped  into  a  well-tilled  garden,  like  a  breath  of  infection  on  a  healthy  person, 
evil  may  come  from  without  unsought  and  even  unsuspected.  Every  one  must  be 
conscious  of  the  way  in  which  a  thought  will  flash  into  his  mind.  But  often  a  sugges- 
tion of  evil  may  come  from  some  visible  external  thing.  An  evil  sight  will  suggest  an 
evil  thought ;  therefore  we  need  to  pray  that  God  may  turn  away  our  eyes  from  behold- 
ing vanity.  Bad  companions  will  prompt  evil  thoughts ;  therefore  we  have  to  be  on 
our  guard  as  to  what  society  we  frequent.  We  cannot  but  be  in  the  world,  though  we 
should  not  be  of  it.  Sights  and  sounds  of  evil  assail  us  on  every  side — in  visible 
occurrences,  in  conversation,  in  newspapers,  in  books.  It  is  impossible  to  bar  every 
avenue  against  the  intrusion  of  an  evil  thought.     It  may  come  to  the  purest  souL 

n.  An  evil  thought  ib  a  dangbeoub  guest.  The  Americans  and  the  Australians 
are  much  concerned  at  the  character  of  persons  who  pour  into  their  territories  from 
the  overflowing  population  of  Europe.  Hence  their  regulations  setting  conditions  to 
the  reception  of  emigrants.  We  cannot  always  prevent  the  incoming  of  evil  thoughts, 
but  we  must  beware  of  the  mischief  of  their  presence  when  they  have  come.  1.  An 
evil  thought  tends  to  spread.  It  is  like  the  little  leaven  that  leavens  the  whole  lump, 
like  the  worthless  seed  which,  growing  up,  produces  a  host  of  new  seeds,  and  so  makes 
the  weeds  take  possession  of  the  soil.  A  striking  idea  starts  a  whole  chain  of  thoughts. 
2.  An  evil  thought  tends  to  rouse  an  evil  desire.  The  active  evil  from  without  appeals 
to  the  latent  evil  within  the  soul.  Thus  while  in  one  place  St.  James  writes  of  Satan 
as  our  tempter  (Jas.  iv.  7),  in  another  he  says  that  we  are  tempted  by  our  own  evil 
desires  (Jas.  i.  14).  The  evil  thought  is  most  dangerous  because  it  is  lodged  in  an 
evil  nature.  Unhappily,  the  seed  of  evil  falls  on  congenial  soil. .  The  germ  of  sin 
attacks  one  who  has  what  the  doctors  would  call  a  sinful  diathesis,  a  temperament 
that  is  naturally  prone  to  sin. 

III.  An  evil  thought  bhould  be  quickly  expelled.  We  cannot  prevent  its 
coming ;  but  we  may  refuse  to  give  it  quarter.  If  we  harbour  it  we  consent  to  its 
presence,  and  take  the  guilt  of  it  on  ourselves.  Thus  we  make  it  no  longer  a  foreign 
intruder,  but  our  own  thought.  The  practical  question  is  how  may  the  evil  thought 
be  cast  out  ?  1.  Directly,  by  resisting  it.  We  should  pray  against  an  evil  thought, 
and  firmly  set  our  foot  upon  it  when  it  has  come  near  to  us.  2.  Indirectly,  by 
encouraging  a  better  thought.  An  empty  mind  is  always  ready  to  receive  bad  guests. 
The  last  state  of  the  house  from  which  the  evil  spiiit  was  cast  out  became  wonie  than 
the  first,  because,  though  it  was  swept  and  garnished,  it  was  left  empty  (Matt.  xii.  44). 
There  are  plants  the  very  vigour  of  which,  when  they  are  once  well  establishsd,  will 
prevent  the  growth  of  weeds  among  them;  in  the  struggle  for  existence  they  are 
stronger  than  the  weeds.  The  presence  of  Christ  in  the  heart  is  the  best  antidote  to 
evil  thoughts. 

Ver.  14. — The  day  of  security.  I.  Thbeb  is  a  day  of  becueity.  Then  GWs  people 
dwell  safely.  We  talk  of  the  warfare  of  the  Christian  life.  There  is  a  lifelong  war. 
But  this  is  not  a  perpetual  battle.  There  are  lulls  in  the  storm,  and  quiet  seasons  in  the 
Christian  contest.  At  such  times  there  is  a  temptation  to  unreasonable  ease  and  con- 
fidence, just  as  in  times  of  trouble  people  are  ready  to  despair  and  imagine  that  "  all 
these  things  are  against "  them.  Still,  the  day  of  security  has  its  blessing,  and  if  this 
is  not  abused  it  may  be  welcomed  as  helpful.  1.  It  affords  an  opportunity /or  recover- 
ing strength.  The  soldier  cannot  be  always  fighting.  Repose  is  essential  an  4  pre- 
paration for  future  exertion.  2.  It  enables  vs  to  perform  quiet  work.  The  whole  of 
Christian  experience  is  not  covered  by  the  idea  of  warfare.  There  are  such  things  as 
working  in  the  vineyard,  fruit-bearing,  building  up  the  house  of  God,  etc.,  which  his 
servants  have  to  attend  to,  and  which  can  be  best  accomplished  without  diatraotmg 
thoughts,  in  times  of  security.     3.  It  offers  ut  a  foretaste  of  heavenly  Ussiedr-'Fs. 


OH.  XXXVIII.  1—23.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  EZEKIEL.  291 

Heaven  is  a  safe  place,  and  its  blessed  inhabitants  dwell  there  securely.  Their  security, 
indeed,  is  sound  and  enduring;  while  ours  on  farth  may  be  but  brief  and  treacherous, 
like  the  calm  on  a  mountain  lake,  which  may  be  broken  at  any  moment  by  a  sudden 
■quail.  Still,  while  we  enjoy  the  peace  we  may  be  tl)ankful  for  it,  and  gratefully 
accept  it  as  an  earnest  of  that  in  the  eternal  home,  "where  the  wicked  cease  from 
troubling,  and  the  weary  are  at  rest." 

II.  The  sboubitt  op  God's  peopIjE  is  observed  by  theib  foes.  Gog  and  Magog 
take  note  of  the  security  of  Israel  and  bestir  themselves.  Satan  watches  his  oppor- 
tunity, and  often  finds  it  best  when  the  servants  of  God  are  quite  confident  in  the 
sense  of  safety.  The  city  gates  are  left  open  and  the  walls  unmanned  because  no 
enemy  is  expected.  The  doors  are  unbolted  at  night  because  the  householder  never 
imagines  that  any  burglar  will  visit  his  home.  But  these  very  signs  of  security  tempt 
an  attack,  and,  when  it  comes,  give  fatal  facility  to  the  enemy's  projects.  The  Ewt/dice 
suddenly  went  down  with  all  on  board,  when  struck  by  a  squall  off  the  Isle  of  Wight,  just 
because  the  fine  weather  had  tempted  the  crew  to  leave  all  the  port-holes  open.  It 
must  have  been  observed  by  every  one  who  has  watched  his  own  experience  that 
seasons  of  spiritual  peace  and  joy  are  commonly  followed  by  times  of  severe  temptation. 
Immediately  after  the  Holy  Spirit  descended  on  Jesus  he  was  led  into  the  wilderness 
to  be  tempted.  Peter's  boast  was  swiftly  followed  by  his  denial  of  his  Master.  "  Let 
him  that  thinketh  he  standeth  take  heed  lest  he  fall "  (1  Cor.  x.  12). 

IIL  The  secdeitt  op  God's  people  eevealb  the  attractiveness  of  his  service. 
Gog  and  Magog  seem  to  take  note  of  tiie  security  of  Israel  as  beasts  of  prey  observe  the 
unsuspecting  confidence  of  the  game  they  are  scenting ;  but  they  might  also  observe  it 
with  admiration,  as  Balaam  did  that  of  the  tents  of  Israel  (Numb.  xxiv.  5),  as  Milton's 
Satan  observed  the  peace  and  joy  of  the  happy  pair  in  Eden.  If  so,  however,  the  prospect 
need  not  inspire  despairing  regrets  as  it  did  in  Balaam  (Numb.  xxiv.  17),  nor  malignant 
envy  as  Milton  represents  it  doing  in  Satan.  The  peace  of  God's  people  may  be  shared 
by  all,  for  all  may  become  God's  people.  Even  Gog  and  Magog  may  enjoy  the  same 
security.  Bussia,  the  land  of  the  ancient  Scythians,  became  a  Christian  nation.  We 
may  see  the  calmness  of  Christian  experience,  and  take  it  as  a  witness  to  the  blessed- 
ness of  the  Christian  privileges.  Thus  the  gospel  is  preached  by  the  very  countenances 
of  God's  people. 

Vers.  19,  20. — An  earihguake.  In  the  day  of  God's  jealousy  and  wrath  there  is  to 
be  a  great  shaking  of  sea,  air,  and  land,  so  that  the  very  fishes  and  birds,  as  well  as  the 
beasts  of  the  earth,  will  feel  its  shock. 

L  An  earthquake  mat  occur.  There  were  once  two  opposed  schools  of  geology — 
one  believing  that  our  earth  had  reached  its  present  condition  after  successive  violent 
catastrophes  had  wrought  great  and  sudden  changes  on  its  surface ;  the  other  holding 
that  the  most  striking  results  could  be  produced,  and,  therefore — on  the  principle  that 
the  minimum  cause  is  the  only  one  that  one  can  affirm — ^have  been  produced,  by  the 
operation  of  the  very  forces  which  we  now  witness.  This  latter,  the  uniformitarian 
theory,  has  been  so  well  established  by  Sir  Charles  Lyell,  that  few  would  now  think  of 
reviving  the  more  dramatic  hypothesis.  Nevertheless,  even  this  theory  admits  of  many 
great  and  violent  movements  under  the  operation  of  present  laws  and  forces.  Earth- 
quakes do  now  occur.  So  is  it  in  the  world  of  men.  We  are  governed  by  orderly 
Divine  laws.  Tet  we  meet  with  great  shocks  in  political  changes,  when  empires  topple 
to  the  dust ;  in  social  changes,  when  the  old  order  is  upset,  as  in  the  French  Revolution ; 
in  domestic  changes,  when  a  man's  quiet  home-life  is  ruthlessly  upset,  and  sudden 
poverty,  or  the  death  of  those  he  loves  most,  or  fearful  family  divisions,  shake  him  like 
an  earthquake.  There  are  earthquakes  in  religion,  when  the  old  beliefs  are  shaken  or 
the  old  practices  disturbed.  Such  an  earthquake  occurred  at  the  advent  of  Christ,  at 
the  Beformation,  etc.  There  are  also  spiritual  earthquakes  in  the  breasts  of  individual 
men.  The  crust  of  self-confidence  is  widely  torn,  and  great  chasms  opened  in  well- 
settled  notions.  Some  day  the  easy-going  sinner  will  be  astonished  at  the  earthquake 
shock  that  will  disturb  his  misplaced  confidence. 

II.  Men  should  be  pbepabed  fob  an  earthquake.  In  countries  where  such  an 
occurrence  is  frequent  it  is  necessary  to  build  the  walls  with  especial  solidity,  and  to 
bind  them  together  with  iron  bands.     Yet  even  there  the  lessons  of  experience  fade 


292  THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET   EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxxviii.  1—23. 

•way  in  a  season  of  long  security.  It  is  strange  how  villages  creep  npthe  sides  of 
■lumbering  volcanoes  which  may  at  any  moment  overwhelm  them  in  torrents  of  lava. 
We  ought  to  be  prepared  for  the  coming  of  trouble,  although  all  is  now  quiet  and 
smiling.  This  does  not  mean  that  we  should  be  "anxious  about  the  morrow,"  for 
"  sufiScient  unto  the  day  is  the  evil  thereof."  But  the  best  way  to  dismiss  anxiety  is 
to  be  well  fortified  against  the  possibility  of  disaster.  If  we  would  be  prepared  fw  the 
upset  of  our  earthly  home  comforts,  we  need  to  have  a  deeper  foundation  on  which  to 
rest,  so  that  when  the  things  which  are  shaken  are  removed  the  things  which  cannot 
be  shaken  may  remain  (Heb.  xii.  27). 

m.  An  eabthquaee  hat  be  a  blebsinq  m  disouise.  At  first  it  is  ruinous,  and 
the  destruction,  misery,  and  death  that  it  spreads  make  it  appear  as  a  huge  calamity. 
But  in  changing  the  face  of  the  earth  it  may  prepare  for  a  better  future.  Political  and 
social  earthquakes  throw  duwn  old  abuses  and  clear  the  ground  for  a  new  and  better 
order.  God  upsets  a  man's  life  that  he  may  lead  the  man  to  build  afresh  on  a  more 
sure  foundation.  Earthquakes  in  himian  affairs  should  make  us  look  above  the 
earth  and  have  our  treasure  in  heaven — "  seeking  first  the  kingdom  of  Qod  and  his 
righteousness." 

Yer.  21. — Mutual  antagonism.  L  MnnrAL  antagonisii  is  common.  In  primitive 
times  it  was  well-nigh  universal.  Pre-historic  man  seems  to  have  lived  in  a  state  of 
perpetual  warfare ;  and  in  the  present  day  savages  are  often  at  war  one  with  another ; 
they  maintaia  continuous  feuds — ^tribe  against  tribe,  clan  against  clan,  family  against 
family.  In  these  later  times,  even  in  enlightened  Christendom,  Europe  appears  as  an 
armed  camp.  Every  nation  is  suspicious  of  its  neighbour,  which  it  regards  as  a  possible 
enemy.  The  same  miserable  attitude  of  antagonism  is  held  in  the  political  world, 
though  here  it  is  generally  found  possible  to  avoid  overt  violence.  Government  by 
party  means  government  in  face  of  antagonism,  for  there  is  always  "  her  Majesty's 
Opposition."  Business  life  is  maintained  on  the  principle  of  mutual  antagonism.  The 
market  is  ruled  by  competition.  Each  house  of  business  fiercely  contends  with  its 
rivals  for  popular  patronage.  The  relations  between  capital  and  labour  have  fallen  into 
the  same  evil  condition,  and  each  side  just  fights  for  what  it  can  seize  at  the  expense 
of  the  other.  Unhappily,  the  same  spirit  is  observed  in  religion.  When  the  Church 
should  be  engaged  in  conquering  the  world  for  Christ,  she  is  consumed  with  internal 
discord  and  the  contention  of  mutually  excommunicating  parties. 

II.  Mutual  antagonism  is  wrong.  It  springs  from  an  evil  root — selfishness. 
War  is  the  awful  fruit  of  national  selfishness.  In  public  life  the  good  of  the  people  is 
too  often  sacrificed  to  the  ambition  of  the  politician  or  the  interest  of  the  ^rty. 
Business  is  degraded  into  a  horrible  scramble  of  selfishness,  in  which  each  clutches  at 
whatever  he  can  lay  hands  on  without  actually  transgressing  the  law.  Beligious 
selfishness  is  the  worst  form  of  selfishness,  for  it  belies  the  faith  it  professes.  In  sheer 
bigotry  the  antagonism  may  be  honest;  but  bigotry  is  largely  inspired  by  a  subtle, 
unsuspected  self-regarding  spirit. 

III.  Mutual  antagonism  mat  be  oveeeuled  foe  good.  We  see  it  in  nature 
where  no  moral  ideas  have  dawned,  and  where,  therefore,  no  blame  can  be  ascribed. 
The  evolution  of  higher  types  of  life  is  brought  about  by  the  struggle  for  existence,  in 
which  the  strong  kill  out  the  weak,  so  that  they  only  survive  who  are  fittest  for  tkeir 
habitat.  No  doubt  national  jealousy  necessitates  the  maintenance  of  national  vigour. 
Political  partisanship  keeps  a  watch  on  the  government,  and  checks  wrong-doing  by  a 
perpetual  shower  of  criticisms.  Competitive  business  cheapens  produce  for  the  con- 
sumer ;  it  also  stimulates  invention  and  enterprise,  and  therefore  encourages  progress 
which  monopoly  paralyzes.  Perhaps  even  in  religious  rivalry  we  may  provoke  one 
•uother  to  good  works.  These  results  cannot  excuse  selfishness,  but  they  may  show 
bow  God  overrules  it  for  a  measure  of  good. 

lY.  Mutttal  antagonism  can  onlt  be  oast  out  bt  Ohbistian  lote.  Reasoning 
will  not  destroy  selfishness.  The  only  cure  for  war  is  the  reign  of  Christ,  the  Priao* 
of  Peace.  Internal  peace  can  only  be  brought  about  by  the  influence  of  love  in  the 
hearts  of  men.  Christ  came  to  set  up  the  kingdom  of  heaven  on  earth.  One  of  the 
essential  characteristics  of  this  kingdom,  as  opposed  to  all  earthly  kingdoms,  is  that  it 
docs  not  appeal  chiefly  to  self-regarding  motives.    It  demands  love  of  God  and  of 


OH,  xxxvm.  1— 23.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHBT  EZBKIEL.  2»8 

one's  neighlwurj  and  it  inspires  that  love  by  the  influence  of  the  occstraining  love 
of  Ohrist. 

Ver.  23. — Qod  sanctifying  himsdf.  I.  An  explanation  op  the  fact.  What  is 
it  for  QoA  to  sanctify  himself  ?  Man  is  sanctified  when  he  is  set  apart  for  QoA ;  and 
this  sanctification  is  needed  in  the  case  of  man  because  he  has  been  alienated  from 
Qod  and  deyoted  to  the  world.  Further,  in  the  case  of  man,  sanctification  involvea 
purification,  and  perhaps  the  first  thought  that  occurs  to  us  when  the  word  is  mentioned 
is  that  sin  is  to  be  purged  out  of  the  heart,  and  holiness  infused  by  the  influence  of  the 
Holy  Spirit.  But  now  all  these  notions  are  inapplicable  to  God.  He  is  the  Lord,  not 
the  servant,  and  he  is  not,  therefore,  to  be  thought  of  as  set  apart  for  any  purpose.  Ha 
never  failed  in  his  position,  and  he  does  not  need  the  recovery  and  re-dedication  which 
we  understand  by  sanctification.  Lastly,  he  never  sinned,  and  therefore  he  requires  no 
purification.  What,  then,  is  meant  by  God  sanctifying  himself?  The  idea  seems  to  be 
partly  interpreted  by  the  earlier  phrase,  "  Thus  wiD  I  magnify  myself."  God  has  not 
been  rightly  appreciated  by  men.  His  supreme  majesty  and  his  ineffable  holiness  have 
been  slighted.  The  awful  separateness  of  character  which  distinguishes  between  Odd 
and  man  has  not  been  enough  regarded.  Thus,  though  God  himself  has  remained 
unchanged  as  he  is  unchangeable,  his  Name  has  been  profaned.  When  the  Name  of 
God  is  rescued  and  restored  to  its  true  place  of  honour,  God  is  said  to  be  sanctified. 

IL  A  DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  FBOCESS.  If  this  is  the  sanctification  of  God,  how  is  it 
brought  about  ?  We  are  here  told  that  God  accomplishes  it  himself.  He  is  the  great 
Sanctifler.  He  sanctifies  his  people  by  his  Spirit.  He  says,  "  Thus  will  I  magnify 
myself,  and  sanctify  myself."  1.  This  is  done  by  revelation.  God  manifests  himself. 
His  Name  was  dishonoured  while  his  greatness  was  hidden.  He  unveils  his  glory,  and 
then  men  are  amazed  to  read  his  great  Name.  Thus  it  is  rescued  from  degradation. 
2.  This  is  done  in  Judgments.  God  comes  down  among  defiant  men  and  scatters  his 
foes.  The  heathen  once  regarded  him  as  on  a  level  with  their  own  gods.  But  now  hill 
supremacy  and  therefore  his  separateness  are  seen.  Thus  God  is  known  among  the 
nations  and  sanctified  among  men.  3.  This  is  done  in  spiritttal  experience.  The 
sanctification  by  judgments  is  an  external  process.  It  may  arouse  wonder  and  even 
create  conviction,  but  it  does  not  stimulate  the  veneration  which  includes  love  and  true 
worship.  But  when  Gtod  manifests  himself  to  his  people  as  he  does  not  unto  the  world, 
his  holiness  and  his  goodness  are  brought  home  to  them  with  a  fresh  force.  4.  This  is 
done  Ml  the  sanctification  of  Qod's  people.  They  are  called  upon  to  sanctify  the  Lord 
God  in  their  hearts  (1  Pet.  iii.  15).  When  the  heart  is  consecrated  to  God,  God'i 
holiness  is  confessed  as  it  never  was  before.  To  be  devoted  to  God  is  the  way  to 
recognize  Qod's  supreme  glory. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AXJTHOBS. 

Vers.  1 — 13.^ — l%e  invasion  of  those  who  dwell  secure.  The  occurrence  in  this  pkca 
of  tliis  and  the  following  chapters  is  somewhat  perplexing.  The  events  here  propheti- 
cally described  take  place  after  the  restoration  of  the  Israelites  from  their  Eastern 
captivity.  Yet  they  are  altogether  too  stupendous  to  be  applicable  to  anything  wUch 
happened  in  the  time  or  soon  after  the  time  of  Ezekiel.  Thus  many  interpreters  of 
prophecy  refer  them  to  a  period  still  in  the  future,  when  a  final  struggle  may  take  place 
between  the  Church  of  Christ  and  the  powers  of  this  world.  The  general  moral  and 
religious  lessons  of  the  passage  are,  however,  independent  of  any  special  prophetical 
int^retation. 

L  The  manifestation  of  God's  favoitb  does  not  involvk  pebfkot  TBANqtnii- 
UTT.  Israal  had  been  restored  from  the  East  to  the  land  of  inheritance  and  promise. 
The  hand  of  Divine  retribution  had  been  removed,  and  the  hidden  countenance  of  God 
had  shone  upon  his  people.  But  their  troubles  were  not  over ;  their  land  was  not  ts 
remain  in  their  undisturbed  possession;  Jerusalem  was  not  to  be  the  city  of  peace. 
This  indicates  a  general  principle  of  the  Divine  government.  The  Church  of  Christ  ia 
a  ransomed  Church,  a  chosen  and  beloved  possession.  But  upon  earth  it  is  the  OHirch 
militant;  there  is  a  warfare  to  be  waged;  this  is  not  our  rest.     Even  in  the  latest 


294  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  EZBKIEL.    [oh.  xiiviii.  1— 2a 

period  of  this  dispensation  repose  may  be  disturbed,  enemies  may  arise,  a  conflict  may 
he  passed  tbrough.  All  this  would  be  consistent  with  the  favour  and  loving-kindness 
of  the  God  of  salvation. 

II.  Sinful  bapaoitt  is  not  dbtebkbd  by  the  bignb  op  Divihb  peotkotion. 
Not  a  few  of  the  enemies  of  Israel  had  been  defeated  and  put  to  shame,  whilst  Israel 
had  been  spared,  favoured,  and  exalted.  He  who  questioned  the  power  and  kindnesB 
of  Jehovah  might  well  be  pointed  to  the  history  of  the  Hebrattr  people.  Yet,  as  a 
matter  of  fact,  there  were  enemies  of  Israel  and  of  God  who,  notwithstanding  these 
apparent  lessons,  renewed  their  assaults  upon  the  objects  of  Divine  protection. 
Similarly,  the  Church  of  Christ  is  exposed  to  assaults  open  and  insidious,  physical  and 
moral.  The  enemies  of  religion,  if  they  have  studied  history,  must  be  aware  that 
Christ  has  built  his  Church  upon  a  rock,  and  that  the  gates  of  Hades  do  not  prevail 
against  it.  Tet  they  are  not  found  to  desist  from  their  endeavours  or  to  abate  their 
hostility.  Nor  need  the  people  of  God  expect  to  be  exempt  from  "  rude  assaults  of 
raging  foes." 

III.  The  eneuies  of  God's  people,  ooNSoions  of  thexb  nctmbbb  and  theib  poweb, 

BEOABD    THE    AFFABENTLY    DEFENCELESS  AS  AH   EASY    PBEY.      The  foC  18  described  in 

these  verses  in  a  manner  which  depicts  his  formidable  character.  Gog  and  his  auxili- 
aries and  allies  are  represented  as  preparing  for  the  attack,  as  mustering  to  make  war 
upon  those  who  are  without  the  protection  of  walls,  bars,  or  gates.  The  unwalled 
villages  seem  to  invite  the  marauder,  and  he  counts  the  cattle  and  goods,  the  silver  and 
gold,  as  already  a  prey.  In  like  manner,  the  foes  of  the  Church,  confident  in  their 
resources,  relying  upon  the  force  of  their  arms,  encourage  one  another  in  their  hostile 
designs  against  the  Church,  by  observing  bow  defenceless  she  appears,  and  how  open  to 
the  hostile  attack  and  the  crafty  strategy  of  her  foes.  The  weapons  of  her  warfare  are 
not  carnal,  and  weapons  of  any  other  kind  are  beyond  the  comprehension  of  the  foe. 

lY.  The  aggbebsob  should  bemeubeb  that  the  Lobd  of  all  oan  ohsok  and 
DEFEAT  the  ablest  AND  THE  MIGHTIEST.  If  the  Omnipotent  do  but  say,  "  I  am 
against  thee,"  it  matters  not  how  formidable  and  vast  are  the  hostile  resources  of  the 
enemy.  One  word  from  his  lips,  one  glance  from  his  eye,  is  enough  to  put  to  confusion 
all  the  boasted  power  of  the  foe. 

V.  The  defenceless  should  bemembeb  that  God  is  able  in  all  oibcumstanoes 
TO  defend  and  to  deliveb  his  own.  The  true  security  of  Israel  was  in  God's  care ; 
Jehovah  was  the  Shield,  the  Stronghold  of  his  people,  and  when  they  trusted  in  him 
they  were  safe.  The  Israel  of  God  has  a  sure  defence.  "  Fear  not,"  says  Jehovah ;  "  I 
am  with  thee."  The  protection  of  the  Church  is  not  in  the  favour  of  kings  or  in  the 
arm  of  the  warrior;  it  is  the  eternal  God  who  is  our  Befuge,  and  underneath  us  are  the 
everlasting  arms. — T. 

Ver.  4. — Diinne  control.  The  picture  of  Israel's  foes  is  indeed  one  fitted  to  strike 
dismay  into  any  heart  depending  upon  human  aid,  defence,  or  deliverance.  Orog  and 
his  armies,  the  hostile  nations  in  league  with  him,  are  described  with  all  the  pomp  and 
circumstance  of  war.  Yet,  when  Jehovah  declares,  "  I  will  turn  thee  about,  and  will 
put  hooks  into  thy  jaws,"  this  declaration  outweighs  all  the  professions,  all  the  threats, 
all  the  designs  of  the  enemy.  We  are  reminded — and  the  whole  Church  in  every  age 
Deeds,  in  time  of  danger  especially,  to  learn  the  lesson — that  above  all  the  plans  and 
purposes  of  men  there  reigns  Divine  control. 

I.  It  is  little  expeoted.  When  plans  are  laid,  and  evil  designs  matured,  nothing 
is  further  from  the  mind  of  the  enemies  of  God's  people  than  the  unquestionable  fact 
that  the  Lord  of  all  is  supreme.  Some  poor,  faint  human  opposition  may  be  antici- 
pated ;  but  it  is  not  expected  that  a  superior  Power  should  intervene. 

II.  It  is  hauobtily  spubned.  Shall  hooks  be  put  into  the  jaws  of  the  dragon  ? 
Shall  the  wUd  horse  of  the  desert  be  bridled  ?  Shall  the  lion  of  the  jungle  be  tamed  ? 
The  very  thought  is  repudiated  and  resented.  The  mighty  of  the  earth  are  not  wont 
to  brook  restraint  or  interference.  Those  who  plan  the  ruin  of  the  cause  of  God,  of  the 
religion  of  Christ,  of  the  Church  on  earth  and  all  its  agencies— whether  they  so  plan 
in  the  name  of  atheism  and  secularism,  or  in  the  name  of  worldly  policy— spam  and 
•ontemn  the  restraint  of  Heaven.  They  tee  no  power  which  they  need  to  fear,  and  in 
tkair  yiew  it  is  superstition  to  fear  the  unseen. 


OH.  XXXVIII.  1—23.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEIi.  295 

in.  It  is  TABionsLT  exeeoised.  Sometimes  God  controls  the  foe  by  natural 
causes  and  instrumentalities.  The  destroying  angel  comes  down  upon  the  camp  and 
amites  the  host ;  pestilence  decimates  the  hands  of  the  enemy;  an  earthquake  opens 
the  prison-doors ;  the  storm  scatters  the  invader's  fleet.  Sometimes  God  controls  the 
foe  by  human  agency.  One  enemy  of  God  makes  war  upon  another,  and  cripples  the 
forces  which  were  on  the  point  of  being  employed  against  the  Lord's  people.  Or  a 
great  deliverer  is  raised  up,  whose  valour  and  heroism  crush  the  enemy,  and  set  the 
threatened  free  from  fear  and  danger.  In  any  case  God  is  never  at  a  loss  for  means 
by  which  he  may  bring  his  counsels  to  pass. 

lY.  It  IB  ALWAYS  EFFEOTUAii.  The  control  of  God  may  he  defied  by  God's  enemies, 
and  it  may  he  ignored  or  distrusted  by  his  friends.  But  it  exists,  and  it  is  superior 
to  all  earthly  powers  and  machinations.  Revelation  is  fiill  of  instances  of  this  control 
as  manifested  in  the  history  of  Israel  and  in  the  history  of  the  infant  Church  of  Christ. 
And  the  annals  of  Christianity,  through  long  centuries,  contain  abundant  confirmation 
of  the  great  and  blessed  truth — "  the  Lord  reigneth." 

Y.  It  shall  bb  finally  ACKNowLEDaBO.  Here  and  now  men  may  withhold  th« 
confession.  But  sooner  or  later  it  shall  be  publicly  admitted  that  all  powers  are  subject 
to  the  King  of  kings. — T. 

Ver.  10. — An  evtl  device.  We  have  been  taught  by  the  Divine  Master,  Christ,  that 
it  is  from  within  that  human  conduct  takes  its  origin.  It  is  the  heart  which  is  the 
source  alike  of  good  and  of  evil.  The  tree  bears  fruit,  whether  sound  and  wholesome 
and  palatable,  or  harsh  and  useless ;  the  living  well,  the  fountain,  sends  forth  streams, 
whether  sweet  and  cheering,  or  bitter  and  polluted.  So  the  thoughts,  intents,  and 
devices  of  the  heart  find  their  expression  in  the  words  which  reach  men's  ears  and 
in  the  deeds  which  draw  men's  eyes.  God,  who  knew  the  inmost  nature  of  men,  as 
well  as  their  individual  and  political  acts,  revealed  the  secret  spring  of  the  malicious 
efforts  of  the  foes  of  Israel,  saying,  "  It  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  that  things 
shall  come  into  thy  mind,  and  that  thou  shalt  devise  an  evil  device." 

I.  Passion  pbompts  the  evil  device.  There  is  in  all  men's  nature  a  principle 
assuming  various  forms — impulse,  propensity,  passion.  If  there  were  no  such  principle, 
we  cannot  see  how  human  life  could  go  forward'  It  is  the  spring,  the  motive  power, 
of  the  machine.  It  is  not  implanted  within  us  in  order  that  it  may  be  eradicated,  but 
in  order  that  it  may  be  governed,  directed,  controlled.  In  itself  it  is  not  bad.  But 
passions  become  bad  when  misdirected  and  uncontrolled  by  reason  and  conscience. 

II.  Choice  adopts  it.  Anger,  lust,  or  some  other  passion  prompts  to  a  certain 
course  of  action.  The  mischief  is  wrought  when  the  man,  in  the  exercise  of  choice, 
accepts  as  the  motive  of  his  action,  and  identifies  himself  with,  a  passion,  the  indul- 
gence of  which  works  evil,  preferring  such  a  principle  of  action  to  a  higher  and  better 
one.  The  device  thus  adopted  by  the  enemies  of  Israel  was  a  device  of  selfish  passion, 
only  to  be  indulged  at  the  expense  of  justice  and  good  feeling. 

in.  Sinful  habit  noueishes  it.  It  is  not  a  single  feeling,  a  single  purpose,  which 
usually  accounts  for  a  man's,  a  nation's,  evil  ways.  The  mischief,  when  isolated,  might 
be  checked.  But  it  is  too  often  fostered  and  thus  encouraged,  complicated,  and  multi- 
plied, as  the  mind  broods  upon  it.  A  mere  fancy  becomes,  when  encouraged,  a  desire ; 
a  desire,  when  encouraged,  becomes  a  settled  purpose. 

IV.  Sinful  activity  executes  it.  The  desire  does  not  long  remain  such;  it 
tends  to  its  satisfaction.  The  device  is  a  means  to  an  end,  and  achieves  itself.  God's 
mercies  are  permitted,  in  some  cases  and  to  some  extent,  to  "  bring  wicked  devices  to 
pass."  For  wise  purposes,  the  Ruler  of  all  sufifers  men  not  only  to  think  evil  thoughta, 
but  to  accomplish  evil  deeds. 

Y.  God  can  and  often  does  pbustbatb  it.  The  oft-quoted  proverb  is  a  true 
one,  "  Man  proposes,  God  disposes."  The  All-wise  has  his  own  plans,  the  Almighty 
has  his  own  means;  and  the  wisdom  and  the  power  of  men,  measured  against  the 
Divine  resources,  will  surely  he  brought  to  nothing.  "Hitherto  shalt  thou  go,  and 
no  further ;  and  here  shall  thy  proud  waves  be  stayed."  There  is  no  occasion  for  the 
people  of  Christ  to  be  dismayed  or  overmuch  distressed  when  evil  devices  enter  into 
the  minds  of  their  adversaries.  All  is  known  to  their  Divine  Friend  and  Protector, 
who  is  abundantly  able  to  defend  and  to  deliver  his  own.     "  He  taketh  the  wise  in 


296  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxxvnt  1— 2a 

their  own  CTaftinesB,"  their  wisdom  is  seen  to  be  but  folly.  "  In  quietness  and  in  oonfi- 
denoe  shall  be  your  strength ; "  "  The  Lord  shall  fight  for  you,  and  ye  shall  hold  your 
peace."    The  enemy  may  devise;  but  he  will  not  be  suffered  to  execute  his  device!.— T. 

Vers.  14 — 22. — The  invader  discomfited.  Although  it  would  be  presumptuous  to 
apply  the  language  of  this  prophetic  passage  to  any  particular  political  event  in  th« 
history  of  Israel,  there  were  many  occasions  upon  which  invasion  was  permitted  and 
the  soil  of  Palestine  was  trodden  by  hostile  armies ;  many  occasions  upon  which  the 
invader  retreated,  overwhelmed  with  disaster  and  ignominy.  It  is  therefore  allowable 
to  interpret  great  political  incidences  and  occurrences  in  the  light  of  the  principles 
here  propounded  upon  the  highest  authority.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  just  to  ol»erve 
that  there  is  truth  here  which  has  a  wider  range,  and  that  the  final  confusion  and 
destruction  of  the  enemies  of  the  Lord  and  of  his  Church  are  intimated  in  terms  which 
cannot  be  mistaken. 

L  Invasion  was  pebuitted  bt  the  God  op  nations.  The  limguage  which 
Jehovah  is  here  represented  as  using,  "  I  will  bring  thee  against  my  land,"  is  very 
remarkable,  and  must  be  interpreted,  in  conformity  with  the  common  usage  of  Hebrew 
literatpe,  as  implying  that  all  events  happened  by  Divine  permission,  and  may  in  a 
sense  in  this  universe,  which  is  under  Divine  control,  be  attributed  to  the  Supreme. 
But  this  not  in  such  a  sense  as  to  charge  Gtod  with  men's  iniquity,  or  to  relieve  men 
of  their  proper  responsibility. 

n.  The  dtvadbb  was  yet  the  object  of  Ditine  displeabube.  The  lust  of 
aggrandizement  and  of  political  power  was  the  usual  motive  of  the  invader;  and  a 
knowledge  of  the  Divine  character  a^tsures  us  that  action  prompted  by  such  motives 
cannot  be  other  than  disapproved  and  condemned. 

III.  The  interposition  or  the  Mightiest  confounded  the  iqghtt.  The  terms 
employed  to  give  expression  to  the  judicial  and  retributive  action  of  the  Lord  of  all 
•re  most  emphatic  and  unqualified :  "  My  fury  shall  come  up  in  my  nostrils ;  for  in 
my  jealousy  and  in  the  fire  of  my  wrath  have  I  spoken.  ...  I  will  call  for  a  sword 
against  him,"  etc.  The  means  by  which  the  invader  is  put  to  fliglit,  and  the  people 
whom  he  has  attacked  are  delivered,  are  described:  "Every  man's  sword  shall  be 
against  his  brother ;  and  I  will  plead  against  him  with  pestilence  and  with  blood,"  etc. 

IV.  GbEAT   as  was  the   confidence   of   the   AOOBESSOB,   GBEATEB   BTILI.  WAS  HIB 

humiliation.  The  defeat  and  consternation  of  the  invader  are  forcibly  depicted.  He 
came  in  pride;  he  departed  in  dishonour  and  disgrace.  He  came  in  numbers;  he 
departed  a  mere  remnant.  Ho  came  amidst  the  terror  of  all  beholders ;  he  departed 
amidst  hatred  and  contempt. 

V.  God  globified  himself  in  the  destbcction  of  his  foes  and  in  the  deliveb- 
anob  of  his  fbiends.  God  magnified  and  sanctified  himself  before  many  nations; 
and  this  he  did  by  openly  fulfilling  his  own  predictions,  by  saving  his  own  people, 
and  by  confounding  all  the  selfish  and  rapacious  plans  of  his  enemies. 

Application.  The  principle  contained  in  the  prediction  is  one  which  is  always 
applicable  to  all  God's  people,  and  which  has  an  especial  reference  to  those  awfiil  crises 
through  which,  it  may  be,  the  Church  of  Christ  has  yet  to  pass.  Mysterious  as  it 
seems  to  us,  it  is  yet  a  fact  that  the  Omnipotent  suffers  the  powers  of  error  and  of  sin 
to  gather  themselves  together  against  his  people.  But  this  should  not  strike  dismay 
into  the  breasts  of  Christians,  however  they  may  feel  themselves  powerless  and  defence- 
less. When  they  gaze  upon  the  hosts  of  their  adversaries,  let  them  remember  that 
"he  that  sitteth  in  the  heavens  shall  laugh;  the  Lord  shall  have  them  in  derision." — T. 

Vers.  1 — 13. — The  stability  of  OotTs  kingdom.  The  lengthened  subjection  of  the 
Hebrews  had  sapped  their  courage  and  their  hope.  The  promises  of  a  return  to 
Canaan  fell  upon  Hearts  full  of  apathy  and  self-diffidence.  A  latent  fear  was  growing 
up  that,  even  should  they  regain  their  old  possession,  they  would  soon  be  exposed  to 
fresh  invasion  from  some  grasping  monarch.  They  felt  their  lack  of  organization, 
their  lack  of  milita.-y  prowess,  and  men  devoid  of  energy  felt  that  it  was  better  to 
remain  in  exile  than  to  be  more  completely  crushed  alter  a  temporary  restoration. 
Hence  Ezekiel  was  commissioned  to  deal  with  this  form  of  indifference  before  it  grew 
into  active  opposition.    A  vision  respecting  a  great  confederacy  against  Israel  is 


OH.  xixvm.  1— 23.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIBL;  297 

granted  to  the  prophet.  Qoi  anticipates  the  gravest  eviL  He  reveals  to  his  peopl* 
that  this  criminal  conspiracy  will  end  in  complete  disaster  to  its  originators,  and  that 
Israel's  triumph  will  be  complete  and  perpetmd.  Ezekiel's  bee  was  set  firmly  againat 
Qog,  because  Qod's  face  was  against  him. 

LOod'b     EINQDOM     18     BBCUBB    AOAINBT    THE    aSBATEBT    WORLOLT    OONnDEBAOT. 

The  theory  that  is  propounded  in  this  prophetic  picture  is  that  possibly  all  peoples 
adverse  to  righteousness  will  combine  against  the  righteous  nation.  The  empires  of 
th«  extreme  North  will,  sooner  or  later,  coalesce  with  the  great  empires  of  Asia  and 
Africa  in  a  common  greed  for  the  territory  and  possessions  of-  Israel.  The  world- 
power  ii  provoked  into  active  opposition  by  the  presence  of  a  righteous  and  spiritual 
kingdom.  As  darkness  is  the  foe  of  light,  water  the  foe  of  fire,  death  the  foe  of  life^ 
80  selfish  wickedness  is  the  foe  of  goodness.  Sooner  or  later,  these  two  great  forcM 
shall  meet  for  final  and  mortal  combat  on  the  earth.  But  the  mightiest  forces  are  not 
those  which  are  visible.  Yictory  will  not  finally  sit  on  the  banners  of  largest  battalions. 
These  numbers  count  for  nothing  with  God.  Minor  rivalries  are  often  forgotten  by 
reason  of  a  mightier  passion,  viz.  a  common  hatred  of  truth  and  God. 

XL  God's  kinqdou  is  sEonsE  against  this  olevebest  iulitabt  taotios.  Men 
have  enormous  faith  in  swords  and  shields,  in  rifles,  cannons,  and  dynamite.  Against 
the  empire  of  righteousness  the  most  complete  and  prudent  preparations  will  be  made. 
No  precaution  foreseen  by  human  sagacity  will  be  omitted.  Each  nation  will  fight 
with  such  weapons  as  they  can  most  skilfully  wield.  The  most  clever  inventions  in 
offensive  artillery  will  be  pressed  into  service.  The  hostility  will  be  pressed  on  with 
all  the  arts  and  machinations  possible  to  the  human  mind.  Tet  there  is  a  force 
enlisted  upon  the  side  of  the  righteous  kingdom  that  shall  baffle  all  human  combina- 
tion, and  make  all  human  energy  to  appear  as  an  embodiment  of  weakness.  Man's 
strength  and  skill  are  only  borrowed  instruments. 

III.  God's  kinqoom  is  secure  amid  unfriendly  neutrals.  "  Sheba,  and  Dedan, 
and  the  merchants  of  Tarshish  .  .  .  shall  say  to  thee,  Art  thou  come  to  take  a 
spoil?"  These  peoples  were  neighbours  to  Israel,  unwilling  to  join  openly  the  ranks 
of  Israel's  foes,  yet  secretly  desiring  to  see  Israel  humbled.  They  were  heartless 
enough  to  cheer  on  the  aggressive  leaders  of  the  foe,  moved  by  a  selfish  hope  that 
they  might  avoid  the  toil  and  the  peril  of  war,  and  yet  gain  some  advantage  out  of 
Israel's  defeat.  Neutrality  at  such  a  time  and  in  such  a  manner  was  a  crime  scarcely 
minor  to  the  crime  of  invasion,  and  such  neutrality  will  be  covered  with  disgrace. 
The  most  hidden  motive  of  man,  Israel's  Buler  will  detect,  and  in  proportion  to  wrong- 
doing will  be  the  award.  Neutrals  are  usually  despised  by  both  sides.  Nor  can  wa 
forget  how  deeply  God  felt  a  selfish  neutrality  upon  a  former  occasion,  when  the  voice 
of  the  angel  said,  "Curse  ye  Meroz;  curse  ye  bitterly  the  inhabitants  of  Meroz, 
because  they  came  not  to  the  help  of  the  Lord  against  the  mighty  I " 

IV.  God's  kingdom  is  seoube  beoause  etebt  foe  is  undeb  the  restraint  or 
Jehotae.  Every  selfish  passion  of  man  is  under  the  control  of  God.  A  world  of 
meaning  is  in  that  phrase,  "  I  will  put  hooks  into  thy  jaws."  At  any  point  in  the 
development  of  the  hostile  project,  God  could  have  defeated  it.  He  could  have  bridled 
the  malicious  impulse  of  Gog,  the  originator.  He  could  have  deprived  him  of  reason 
or  of  life.  He  could  have  smitten  with  blindness  all  the  leaders  of  the  expedition. 
But  God  sees  it  to  be  best  to  allow  large  liberty  to  wicked  men.  The  inner  nature  of 
wickedness  is  seen  when  it  bears  its  full  and  proper  fruit.  Some  plants  look  well  in 
the  shoot  and  in  the  leaf,  but  the  fruit  thereof  is  deadly.  Men  are  seldom  conscious 
of  the  action  of  God  upon  them.  He  "  girded  Cyrus "  with  strength  and  courage  for 
his  work,  although  Cyrus  knew  Iiim  not.  And  Gog  would  pursue  his  brilliant  march, 
proud  of  himself  and  of  his  forces,  least  of  all  imagining  that  his  Boyal  Foe  had  put 
already  a  hook  in  his  jaw,  and  was  simply  leading  him  on  to  destruction.  Utterly 
insane  is  the  man  who  dares  fight  against  God.    The  issue  may  be  early  foreseen,^D 

Vers.  14 — 23. — Bwnan  malice  a  contribution  to  Ood's  glory,  God  has  a  variety  of 
methods  for  dealing  with  rebellious  men.  Sometimes  he  allows  them  to  have  ^eir 
wilful  way  up  to  the  margin  of  success,  when  suddenly  the  tables  are  turned,  and 
apparent  success  becomes  conspicuous  defeat.  With  vain  confidence  they  press  on 
their  daring  measures,  and  are  led,  as  it  were,  into  an  ambush  and  completely  destroyid 


298  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL,    [oh.  xxxviil  1— 2& 

Thus  God  dealt  with  Pharaoh  at  the  Bed  Sea,  and  thus  he  purposes  to  deal  with  the 
unscrupulous  monarch  of  the  north.  Their  disastrous  fortunes  should  leave  on  all 
surviving  minds  the  vital  lesson  that  Jehovah  is  the  Supreme  King,  and  that  he  is 
worthy  of  universal  homage. 

I.  Wicked  mbk  abb  the  dupes  of  slenderest  temptation.  This  ideal  monarch 
— type  of  worldly  kings — was  seduced  into  battle  by  the  appearance  of  Israel's  consoiou» 
fcecurity.  Here  was  a  nation  without  an  army,  without  fortresses,  without  military 
generals;  a  nation  having  no  visible  means  of  protection.  To  evil  men  this  was  a& 
irresistible  bait.  Now  men  with  better  dispositions  would  have  argued,  "  Here  is  a 
peaceful  nation,  bent  on  the  innocent  arts  of  industry,  devoid  of  ambitious  aims.  They 
deserve  our  respect,  and  (if  needful)  our  protection."  But  impiety  is  as  injurious  to 
society  as  it  is  offensive  to  God.  The  slenderest  hope  of  plunder  and  of  territorial 
aggrandizement  incites  them  to  sharpen  their  weapons  for  human  destruction.  To  get 
an  empty  bubble  of  fame,  or  gain  rule  over  a  few  square  miles,  ten  thousand  precious 
lives  will  be  sacrificed.  Worse  still,  God's  favour  will  be  forfeited.  In  this  respect 
man  has  sunk  to  a  lower  level  than  the  beasts  of  the  forest. 

n.  Sebmino  success  often  a  snabb  to  complete  ovbbthbow.  "  Thou  shalt  come 
up  against  my  people  Israel,  as  a  cloud  to  cover  the  land."  It  seemed  as  if  success  were 
certain.  What  other  result  was  possible?  Their  multitudinous  horde  seemed  omnipo- 
tent by  reason  of  its  very  numbers.  They  could  compass  every  town  and  village  so  as 
to  prevent  a  single  escape.  This  over-confidence  was  weakness,;  it  seemed  to  under- 
rate the  opposing  force ;  it  served  to  relax  discipline ;  it  blinded  them  to  the  fact  that 
invisible  forces  might  be  silently  at  work  against  them.  Thus  it  happened  to  the  first 
Napoleon.  His  brilliant  successes  flushed  him  with  vain  confidence,  led  him  on  to 
destruction.  "  Cursed  is  the  man  who  trusteth  in  man ; "  "  He  that  trusteth  his  own 
heart  is  a  fool." 

III.  Hostile  invasion  against  Israel  is  olbarlt  fobeseen  bt  God.  The  know- 
ledge of  an  enemy's  designs  and  tactics  is  half-way  towards  defeating  him.  Many 
military  commanders  succeed  by  the  secrecy  of  their  projects.  If  one  knows  where 
and  when  the  foe  will  strike,  one  can  be  well  prepared.  To  be  forewarned  is  to  be 
forearmed.  In  this  respect,  the  servants  of  God  enjoy  a  great  advantage.  No  design 
nor  project  of  our  foes  can  escape  the  eye  of  our  God.  The  first  formation  of  the  evil 
thought  is  clearly  detected  by  him,  and  he  keeps  us  well  informed  of  our  adversaries' 
schemes.  In  the  case  of  Gog,  the  prophets  of  Jehovah  had  repeatedly  foretold  the 
formidable  invasion ;  and,  although  Israel  seemed  unprepared  for  the  assault,  Israel's 
Defender  was  well  equipped  for  the  occasion.     The  issue  was  secured  for  Israel's  glory. 

IV.  God's  enemies  abb  often  defeated  by  intbbnecine  strife.  A  confederacy 
cemented  by  wickedness  is  never  durable.  It  will  not  bear  any  strain  of  trial.  Men 
who  fight  for  spoil  soon  discover  that  their  interests  and  their  leaders'  interests  are 
distinct  and  separate  things.  Sin  has  no  principle  of  cohesion.  In  many  cases  an 
army  has  defeated  itself  by  internal  discord.  Each  man's  sword  has  been  turned  upon 
his  jD'^.rade.  So  God  here  announces  that  he  will  dissolve  their  base  alliance.  "  Every 
man's  eword  shall  be  against  his  brother." 

V.  God's  abmy  is  composed  of  unexpected  forces.  In  ancient  times  God  has 
empl<jyed  winds,  storms,  hail,  fire,  to  defeat  the  enemies  of  Israel.  The  sea  was  God's 
triumphant  aimy  against  Pharaoh.  He  sent  the  hornet  to  drive  out  the  Gannanite. 
Locusts  hare  been  once  and  again  employed  as  his  invading  regiment. .  Flakes  of  snow 
have  dons  his  destructive  work.  Pestilence  has  often  served  as  his  light  brigade. 
Hailstones  have  been  his  irresistible  artillery.  He  has  turned  back  an  army  by  the 
spectre  of  its  own  superstitious  fears.  Fire  overthrew  the  cities  of  the  plain.  The 
eruption  of  Yesuvius  did  a  deadly  work.  Every  force  in  nature  is  a  servant  of  the 
livin'4  God,  and  in  a  moment  can  be  made  a  soldier,  armed  to  the  teeth.  Men  are 
slowly  discovering  that  God's  forces  stored  in  nature  are  mightier  than  the  brawn  o( 
the  human  arm,  and  are  depending  more  upon  dynamite  and  gun-cotton  than  upon 
human  strength  and  courage.  So  says  God,  "  I  will  rain  upon  him,  and  upon  his  bands 
...  an  overflowing  rain,  and  great  hailstones,  fire,  and  brimstone." 

VI.  The  triumph  is  with  God.  Mere  overthrow  of  the  enemy  is  not  the  triumph 
that  satisfies  God.  His  aim  is  to  bring  light  and  conviction  to  men's  minds — to  renew 
and  elevate  men's  best  nature.    "  I  will  plead  against  him."    By  means  of  this  defensiv* 


OH.  xxxvui.  1—23.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  BZEEIEL.  29S 

contest  God  will  address  himself  to  the  minds  and  hearts  of  the  people.  "  I  will 
magnify  myself."  Impossible!  God  cannot  magnify  himself.  He  cannot  be  greater 
than  he  is.  But  he  will  make  his  greatness  known.  By  such  mighty  deeds  he  will 
reveal  to  men  his  invisible  power,  his  matchless  skill,  his  various  exceUehces,  hia 
ineffable  goodness.  Men  shall  discover  more  of  his  compassion,  his  patience,  his  fatherly 
desu-e  for  men's  good ;  and,  instead  of  hating  him,  they  shall  admire  and  honour  him. 
To  a  large  extent  men  fight  against  God  because  they  do  not  know  him.  They  mis- 
conceive his  government  and  his  dispositions.  Beal  knowledge  of  God  is  the  road  to 
life  and  bliss.  As  the  outcome  of  the  final  struggle,  even  the  "  heathen  sball  know  " 
and  serve  the  righteous  King.    "  I  will  sanctify  myself." — ^D. 

Vers.  1,  2. — Ths  supreme  contest.  What  is  the  real  significance  of  this  prophecy? 
Is  it  to  receive  a  literal  or  a  symbolical  interpretation  ?  If  not  fairly  open  to  the  one, 
in  what  direction  shall  we  look  for  the  other  ?  Agreeing  with  the  views  advocated  by 
Fairbairn,  we  give  his  exposition,  reproducing  his  arguments  as  given  in  his  work  on 
this  prophet.    And  thus  guided,  we  look  at — 

I.  Th£  seasons  fob  BEjEOTiNa  A  LITERAL  DTEEBFBETATioN.  1.  The  name  given 
to  the  hostile  leader  points  to  an  "  ideal  delineation ; "  while  the  name  of  the  country  is 
that  of  a  "very  indefinite  territory,"  impossible  to  define.  2.  The  extraordinary 
character  of  the  combination  of  forces,  including  those  most  remote  and  dissociated  from 
one  another,  is  "  the  reverse  of  the  natural  one,"  and  points  to  "  the  clothing  of  an  idea 
rather  than  to  a  literal  reality."  3.  The  immensity  of  the  numbers  of  the  allied  host 
makes  it  impossible  that  they  would  actually  come  up  against  Israel  for  plunder ;  they 
must  necessarily  lose  rather  than  gain,  even  if  they  succeeded  to  the  full  extent  of  their 
expectations.  4.  The  details  respecting  the  wood  of  the  enemy's  weapons  (ch.  xxxix. 
9,  10)  and  the  burial  of  the  dead  (ch.  xxxix.  11, 12)  are  not  such  as  would  become 
historicaL  5.  The  particulars,  especially  as  to  the  exact  locality,  do  not  correspond 
with  those  given  in  other  prophecies  (see  Isa.  xxxiv. ;  Joel  iii. ;  Zech.  xiv.).  6.  The 
undoubted  Messianic  element  in  the  prophecy  demands  a  non-literal  interpretation ; 
for  the  kingdom  of  Christ  was  not  to  be  established  or  secured  by  carnal,  but  by  spiritual 
means. 

II.  The  tbue  spieitxtal  inteepeetation.  The  prophet  has  already,  in  previous 
visions,  brought  us  on  to  a  period  when  Israel  (the  Church  of  Christ)  has  entered  on 
•  time  of  rest  and  triumph.  The  second  David,  the  Divine  Shepherd  of  Israel,  presides 
over  his  people  who  dwell  in  security.  But  that  is  not  the  end ;  much  has  still  to  be 
done  and  to  be  experienced.  For :  1.  The  peace  and  the  prospects  of  the  Christian 
Church  stir  up  the  enmity  of  the  world,  and  "  enlarge  the  field  of  conflict ; "  and  "  as  '  the 
whole  earth  is  Christ's '  heritage,"  there  must  be  conflict  until  the  victory  is  complete. 
Z.  The  war  is  to  be  on  a  gigantic  scale,  for  the  question  now  is  "  whether  God's  truth 
or  man's  sin  is  to  have  possession  of  the  field ;  in  comparison  with  this  great  final 
conflict  all  previous  contests  seem  small,  and  the  largest  numbers  are  applicable.  3. 
Great  and  preponderating  as  are  the  odds  against  the  Church,  reckoned  by  material 
resources,  the  presence  of  Divine  power  and  grace  on  the  side  of  Israel  makes  her 
completely  victorious,  and  issues  in  the  defeat  of  the  adversary.  4.  The  kingdom  over 
all  the  earth  becomes  the  Lord's.  It  becomes  clear  that  it  was  his  zeal  on  behalf  of 
righteousness  which  led  to  previous  chastisements,  and  that  same  zeal  now  causes  them 
to  triumph.  Before  the  Church  there  stretches  a  "prospect  of  eternal  peace  and 
blessedness."  The  delineation  may,  or  it  may  not,  have  to  do  with  some  particular 
crisis  or  decisive  moment  when  the  "  spiritual  controversy  rises  to  a  gigantic  magnitude, 
and  ranges  on  either  side  all  that  is  good  and  all  that  is  evil  in  the  world." 

Pbacttoal  snooESTioNS.  1.  We  need  not  be  discouraged  because  a  great  and 
threatening  battle  has  still  to  be  fought  out.  We  have  intimations  in  Scripture  that 
the  Church  will  be  called  to  fade  overwhelming  hosts.  2.  We  may,  by  doing  our  beat 
in  the  sphere  in  which  we  are  placed,  contribute  something  to  the  final  triumph  of  the 
good.  3.  We  ought  to  have  some  better  assurance  than  the  presence  of  vast  and 
apparently  invincible  numbers  that  we  are  on  the  winning  side.  The  one  decisira 
question  is  this — Is  God  with  us  or  against  us  ? — C. 

Yer.  4. — Sent  lack  by  Qod.    "  I  will  turn  thee  bacL"    "  There  ii  a  way  whidk 


300  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZBKIEL.    [oh.  xxxvin.  1— 23. 

seemeth  right  unto  a  man,  but  the  end  thereof  are  the  ways  of  death  "  (FroT.  xiv. 
I2y  There  are  paths  that  attract  us,  that  we  enter  upon  with  keen  expectancy,  that 
we  pursue  with  pleasure,  but  that,  in  time,  we  find  to  be  wrong  ;  then  is  it  best  to  turn 
back,  and  %  "  return  on  our  way  "  at  once. 

I.  Mi»!»  iXBN  PATHS.  Such  as  those  of:  1.  Extravagance.  A  larger  expenditure  of 
our  roiav/i  than  we  can  properly  afford,  pointing  toward  and  leading  to  financial 
embarrassment  and  grave  difficulty  and  distress.  2.  Unregulated  activity.  Such 
mental  or  physical  work  as,  either  in  measure  or  in  method,  draws  too  largely  on  our 
resources,  and  ends  in  nervous  disorder  or  some  serious  illness.  3.  Self-mdulgmee  ; 
either  in  unwholesome  literature  or  in  the  grosser  gratifications  of  the  flesh.  4-  A 
iceptical  liahit.  The  disposition,  which  in  time  becomes  a  habit,  to  regard  everything 
with  a  cynical  and  distrustful  eye,  and  would  rather  accept  the  uncharitable  view  than 
the  generous  one.  5.  Wbrldliness.  The  way  in  which  the  multitudes  are  walking ;  the 
endeavour  to  find  satisfaction  and  rest  in  the  interests  and  engagements,  in  the  treasures 
and  the  pleasures,  of  time  and  sense. 

II.  A  CONVICTION  WHICH  COMES  FBOM  GoD.  The  couviction  that  the  way  that  has 
been  chofien  is  the  wrong  one.  This  assurance  may  come  through  one  of  many  channels; 
it  may  be  the  utterance  of  one  of  many  voices ;  it  may  be  the  solemn  warning  of  some 
providential  occurrence;  or  lit  may  be  the  faithful  rebuke  of  a  true  and  fearless  friend; 
or  it  mrty  be  a  deep  and  bitter  sense  of  insufiSciency,  of  failure,  of  heart-ache,  of 
perversion  of  power  and  misuse  of  opportunity,  a  sense  of  wrong  and  sin ;  or  it  may  be 
the  direct  enlightenment  and  appeal  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  But  the  conviction  is  written 
on  the  tablet  of  the  soul  that  the  way  is  wrong ;  a  voice  is  heard  in  the  inner  chambers 
of  the  spirit.  "  Turn  back,  return  on  thy  way,  pursue  a  different  course,  start  in  an  opposite 
direction,  seek  another  and  a  better  goal." 

III.  The  wisdom  of  BETTmNHfo.  1.  We  can  afford  to  rttum.  It  may  cost  us 
something ;  there  may  be  some  companions  to  forsake,  but  these  are  best  at  a  distance ; 
there  may  be  some  tender  regrets,  but  these  are  temporary  and  will  .soon  be  left 
behind ;  there  may  be  some  humiliation  to  endure,  but  this  is  not  of  an  unmanly  kind, 
but,  on  the  contrary,  honourable  and  commendable;  there  may  be  some  sacrifice  of 
enjoyment  or  of  treasure,  but  this  can  very  well  be  borne  with  a  moderate  measure  of 
fortitude, — we  shall  very  soon  reconcile  ourselves  to  that.  But :  2.  We  cannot  afford  to 
go  on.  If  we  do,  we  must  prepare  for  the  very  worst-  that  we  can  suffer ;  the  wrong 
road  leads  not  only  to  embarrassment,  but  also  to  saddest  loss,  to  bitter  disappointment, 
to  helplessness,  to  ruin,  to  death.  Moreover,  God  has  met  us  with  a  Divine  encourage- 
ment. He  has  taught  us  that :  3.  ITiere  is  a  way  upward,  which  we  can  all  take. 
One  has  come  to  us  to  say,  "  I  am  the  Way."  Intimate  association,  living  union,  with 
him  is  the  way  of  wisdom,  the  way  of  righteousness,  the  way  of  life. — C. 

Yer.  11. — Spiritual  security.  We  may  treat  this  subject  in  two  ways.  We  may  have 
regard  to — 

I.  National  secueitt.  Unfortunately,  it  is  only  too  typical  of  our  race  that  a  great 
power  should  say,  "  I  will  go  up  to  the  land  of  unwalled  villages,"  etc.  Taking  men 
and  nations  as  they  are,  we  have  to  reckon  upon;  1.  National  unscrupulousness. 
It  has  been  enough  that  one  country  has  been  strong  and  another  weak,  one  covetous 
and  another  wealthy,  one  well  armed  and  another  defenceless,  for  the  military  enterprise 
to  be  undertaken,  the  attack  to  be  delivered,  and  the  disaster  to  be  sustained.  Then 
there  has  to  be :  2.  Some  means  and  method  of  national  defence.  And  we  may  find 
a  country  :  (1)  Pitiably  helpless.  Such  is  the  case  with  Israel  (in  the  text) ;  it  has  not 
yet  recovered  from  its  past  defeats  and  despoilments ;  it  has  not  had  the  opportunity  of 
strengthening  itself  against  attack.  (2)  Culpably  negligent.  It  may  be  so  intent  on 
enrichment  or  enjoyment  that  it  has  not  given  the  needftu  time  and  strength  to  make 
itself  secure  against  assault  from  without.  (3)  Secured  'by  international  covenant ;  as 
Switzerland.  (4)  Wisely  regardful  of  its  chief  source  of  safety.  This  is  found,  not  in 
regiments  and  in  ships,  not  in  fortresses  and  in  magazines — though  these  may  not  be 
disregarded — but  in  the  manliness  and  temperance  of  its  citieens,  and  in  the  favour  of 
Almighty  God. 

II.  Individual  bkovbitt.  Every  man  has  to  guard  the  sanctity  of  bis  own  heart 
and  character,  the  honotur  of  his  own  name ;   his  most  sacred  and  bounden  duty  is  ^"^ 


OH.  xxxvm.  1— 23.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PEOPHBT  EZEKIBL.  301 

lee  that  it  Is  not  invaded  and  defiled.  That  it  may  he  preserved  in  its  purity  and 
Integrity  it  hecomes  him ;  1.  To  recognize  the  strength  of  the  enemy.  To  remember  and 
to  realize  that  the  adversaries  of  his  soul  are  many,  subtle,  and  strong ;  they  are  such 
as  these — covetousness,  passion,  pride,  intemperance,  worldliness,  unbelief.  2.  To  raise 
the  strongest  defences  he  can  secure.  And  these  are  (1)  good  principles, — the  love  of  that 
which  is  true  and  pure  and  sound,  the  hatred  of  that  which  is  base  and  shameful  and 
degrading;  (2)  good  kaMts, — the  habits,  well  cultivated  and  constantly  sustained,  of  self- 
commandj  of  temperance,  of  purity,  of  thorough  investigation  before  acceptance  and 
utterance,  of  devotion.  There  are  "  the  walls,  the  bars,  and  the  gates  "  of  the  soul, 
which  the  adversary  must  take  before  he  succeeds  in  his  attack,  within  which  the  soul 
should  be  safely  entrenched.  3.  To  secure  the  guardianship  of  God.  By  simplicity 
and  uprightness  of  heart,  by  prayerrulness  of  attitude  and  engagement,  to  secure  that 
gracious  and  mighty  power  against  which  all  the  devices  and  all  the  assaults  of  evH  will 
not  he  able  to  succeed, — C. 

Ver.  23. — Making  Ood  great  and  holy.    "I  magnify  myself,  and  sanctify  myself." 

I.  God  iiAEiNa  himself  great  and  holt  in  the  '  sight  of  men.  We  may  ask  : 
1.  Why  Qod  magnifies  himself;  and  the  answer  will  be — ^Not  for  the  mere  purpose  of 
self-glorification.  We  cannot  think  that  of  him  "  whose  nature  and  whose  name  is 
Love"  (see  homily  on  ch.  xxxvi.  16 — 21).  We  conclude  that  he  desires  and  deter- 
mines to  make  his  Name  to  be  had  in  reverence,  and  to  cause  himself  to  be  honoured 
as  the  Great  and  Holy  One,  because  (1)  it  is  inherently  right  that  it  should  be  so ;  and 
because  (2)  it  is  altogether  and  immeasurably  advantageous  and  elevating  to  hii 
children  that  it  should  be  so ;  it  is  indeed  the  only  way  by  which  they  can  attain  a 
true  and  worthy  manhood ;  for  it  is  reverence  toward  God  which  is  the  very  root  of 
human  excellence  and  nobility.  2.  How  he  magnifies  himself.  This  is  by  (1)  all  that 
he  has  said  of  himself  in  his  Word ;  (2)  all  that  he  makes  known  of  his  disposition 
and  his  character  by  his  Divine  providence ;  (3)  by  the  revelation  of  himself  in  th« 
Person  of  his  Son.  In  these  three  ways  especially  God  makes  us  know  how  great  h« 
is, — ^how  great  is  his  majesty,  his  power,  bis  goodness,  his  righteousness ;  and  how  htijf 
ho  is, — ^how  utterly  he  hates  sin,  how  determined  he  is  to  rebuke  it,  and  not  only  to 
rebuke  it,  but  to  conquer  and  to  expel  it.  Most  especially  does  he  "magnify  and 
sanctify  himself"  in  Jesus  Christ;  for  in  his  Person  and  in  his  work  we  see  the  great- 
ness of  Ms  love,  and  the  intensity  of  his  hatred  of  sin  and  the  fixedness  of  his  purpose 
to  subdue  and  to  extirpate  it. 

II.  OuB  duty  to  magnify  him.  1.  Why  we  should  do  so.  Because :  (1)  It  Is  the 
one  right  thing  for  us  to  do.  The  Great  One  should  be  exalted;  the  Holy  One  should 
be  honoured,  because  he  is  great  and  holy,  especially  because  his  greatness  is  the 
greatneeg  of  goodness  as  well  as  of  power,  and  because  his  holiness  is  crowned  with 
patience  and  mercy.  (2)  To  revere  God  and  magnify  him  in  our  heart  is  the  one  way 
to  our  own  moral  and  spiritual  elevation,  to  nobility  of  character,  to  excellency  of  life. 
(3)  It  Is  distinctly  the  way  to  promote  the  happiness  and  well-being  of  the  world,  2. 
How  "WB  can  do  so.  (1)  In  owr  spirit ;  by  cherishing  in  our  hearts  the  reverence  that 
is  "  dus  to  his  Name ; "  i.e.  due  to  himself  for  all  that  he  is  and  has  done  for  us.  (2)  In 
«w  lift,  (See  PhiL  i.  20.)  By  bringing  all  our  actions  into  harmony  with  the  known 
will  of  God ;  by  living  in  such  a  way  that  we  show  ourselves  to  he  loyal  subjects  of 
Jesus  Christ,  consulting  his  mind  and  obedient  to  his  Word  in  everything ;  by  making 
it  clear  that  we  are  willing  to  put  forth  any  effort  or  submit  to  any  sacrifice  in  order 
that  Christ  may  he  great  in  the  esteem  and  in  the  affections  of  men;  thus  we 
"magnify  and  sanctify"  him,  (3)  By  our  speech.  We  need  net  be  always  intro- 
ducing the  distinctive  language  of  religion  into  our  conversation ;  yet  we  may  take 
opportunity  in  the  home,  as  well  as  at  the  desk  or  in  the  pulpit,  to  commend  Jesus 
CSirist  to  the  hearts  of  young  and  old,  as  that  Divine  Saviour  in  whom  to  trust,  as 
that  Diviae  Lord  in  whose  service  they  wiU  fiad  freedom,  rest,  and  etenukl  life.— GL 


302 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  BZEKIBL.    [ch.  xxxix.  1—29. 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTBB  XXXIX. 


Of  the  two  main  divisioni  of  this  chapter, 
the  fiiat  (vers.  1 — 20)  depicts  the  greatness 
of  the  overthrow  of  Gog ;  the  second  (vers. 
21 — 29)  records  the  impression  made  hy  it 
npon  both  Israel  and  the  heathen,  and  adds 
a  closing  promise  to  the  former. 

Vers.  1 — 20. — In  the  first  main,  diyision 
Ezekiel  repeats  the  substance  of  what  has 
already  been  advanced  concerning  the  de- 
feat of  Gog  (vers.  1 — 8),  after  which  he 
strives  to  represent  its  completeness  (vers. 
9 — 20),  by  setting  forth  (1)  the  immense 
quantity  of  spoil  Israel  should  obtain  from 
the  fallen  foe  (vers.  9, 10),  (2)  the  length  of 
time  it  should  take  Israel  to  bury  the  dead 
and  cleanse  the  land  from  defilement  (vers. 
11 — 16,  and  (3)  the  horrible  carnage  which 
should  ensue  on  Gog's  destruction,  sym- 
bolized by  a  vast  sacrificial  feast  prepared 
by  Jehovah  for  the  beasts  and  birds  (vers. 
17—20). 

Yer.  1. — The  chief  prince  of  Ueshech 
and  Tubal ;  or,  prince  of  Both,  Meshech,  and 
Tubal  (see  on  oh.  xxxviii.  2). 

Ter.  2. — I  will  .  .  .  leave  bnt  the  sizth 
part  of  thee.  The  word  "^-nrnd  is  derived 
either  fiom  the  numeral  six,  ef^,  or  from 
the  root  nkjk/,  the  import  of  which  is  un- 
certain, although  a  cognate  root  in  Ethioplo 
suggests  the  idea  of  "  going  on  "  or  "  proceed- 
ing"— a  meauing  Havernick  also  finds  in 
the  Hebrew.  The  former  derivation  has 
been  followed  by  the  Authorized  Version, 
which  renders  in  the  margin,  "  I  will  strike 
thee  with  six  plagues,"  or  "  draw  thee  back 
with  a  hook  of  six  teeth,"  and  by  Heng- 
stenberg,  with  whom  Plumptre  agrees,  "I 
will  six  thee,"  i.e.  "afflict  thee  with  six 
plagues,"  viz.  those  mentioned  in  ch.  xxxviii. 
22.  The  latter  derivation,  presumably 
the  more  correct,  is  adopted  by  the  LXX. 
(KofloSoTifirai),  the  Vulgate  (editcam),  the 
Bevised  Version  ("I  will  lead  thee  on"), 
and  by  modem  expositors  generiilly.  Eitzig 
end  Smend  approve  of  Ewald's  translation, 
"I  entice  thee  astray,  and  lead  thee  with 
leading  strings." 

Ver.  3.— I  •will  smite  thy  bow  out  of  thy 
left  hand.  Bows  and  arrows  were  charao- 
teristio  weapons  of  the  Boythians,  whom 
Eerodotns  (iv.  46)  styles  hnroTo(6Tai  (oomp. 
J«r.  T.  16;  «i  28;  and  see  note  on  ch. 
xxxviii  IS). 

Vers.    4—6.  —  I    will   give   thee    unto 


ravenous  birds  of  every  sort;  or,  wing. 
The  language  depicts  an  army  on  the 
march,  followed  by  jackals,  vultures,  and 
other  birds  of  prey,  ready  to  feast  npon 
the  corpses  of  slaughtered  men  (comp. 
ch.  xxxiii.  27 ;  1  Sam.  xvii.  46 ;  and  Homei^s 
'Iliad,'  i.  4,  5).  In  addition  to  destroying 
Gog,  causing  him  to  fall  npon  the  moun- 
tains of  Israel  and  upon  the  open  field; 
literally,  upon  tlte  face  of  the  field,  Jehovah 
engages  to  carry  the  fire  of  war  and 
generally  of  devastation  (of.  oh.  xxxxiii.  22 ; 
Amos  ii.  2,  5 ;  Bev.  xx.  29)  into  Gog's  own 
land,  Magog  (see  on  ch.  xxxviii.  2),  and 
among  them  that  dwell  carelessly  (better, 
securely)  in  the  isles;  or,  eoaitrianda  (ch. 
xxvii.  7);  i.e.  not  merely  the  merchants  of 
Tarshish,  or  the  "isles"  of  the  bading 
nations  mentioned  in  ch.  xxxviii.  13,  as 
Hengstenberg  and  Flnmptre  prefer,  but, 
as  Smend,  Schroder,  and  Keil  explain,  all 
the  distant  peoples  of  the  coast-lands  from 
whom  Gog's  armies  were  drawn  (ch.  xxxviii. 
5,  6),  and  in  whom  were  many  of  Gog's 
sympathizers. 

Ver.  8.— Behold!  it  is  come.  "The 
words  which  a  man  might  speak  on  be- 
holding his  purpose  accomplished  are,  with 
Ezekiel's  bold  anthropomorphism,  put  into 
the  mouth  of  Jehovah  "  (Plumptre). 

Vers.  9,  10  set  forth  as  the  first  proof  of 
the  greatness  of  Gog's  overthrow  the  im- 
mense booty  in  the  shape  of  weapons  of 
war  which  should  be  obtained  by  the  in- 
habitants of  the  cities  of  Israel.  So  huge 
should  he  the  quantity  of  weapons  left 
behind  by  the  slain,  that  the  Israelites 
should  burn  them  with  fire  seven  years. 
This  burning  of  the  weapons  has  been 
explained  by  Havernick,  on  the  ground  that 
weapons  of  war,  as  Incompatible  with  Mes- 
sianic times,  should  be  no  more  required 
(of.  Isa.  ii.  4) ;  by  Ewald,  as  in  accordance 
with  the  custom  of  the  Hebrews  (Isa.  ix. 
5)  and  other  ancient  peoples  (Livy,  xxxviii. 
23 ;  Virgil, '  .ffineid,'  viii.  562) ;  by  Hitzig 
and  Smend,  as  prompted  by  the  considera- 
tion that  Israel,  for  whom  Jehovah  had 
fought,  should  have  no  further  need  of  wea- 
pons; by  Sohrodur,  as  indicating  that  for 
Israel  these  warlike  instruments  should 
then  so  completely  lose  their  power  to 
terrify  that  they  might  be  looked  upon 
simply  as  so  much  firewood ;  and  by  Keil,  as 
designeS  to  annihilate  the  enemy  and  remove 
every  trace  of  him.  Kliefoth  appears  nearest 
the  mark,  in  suggesting  that  the  emphasis 
lies  upon  the  length  of  time  the  burning 
should  continue;  and  that  this  was  in- 
tended, by  conveying  an  idea  of  the  vastness 
of  the  spoil,  to  represent  the  thoroughness 


OH.  XXXIX.  1—29.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET   EZEKIEL. 


303 


of  Gog's  destroction  and  of  Israel's  de- 
liverance. That  the  whole  delineation  is 
symbolical  appears  from  the  nnmber  of 
years  the  weapons  are  said  to  serve  for 
fuel,  viz.  seven,  and  from  the  character  of 
the  weapons  themselves,  which,  if  not  en- 
tirely wooden,  were  at  least  all  combustible. 
Of  the  "armour"  generally  (pt^J,  "some- 
thing joined,"  from  a  root  signifying  "to 
join  ")  the  pieces  mentioned — the  shields 
and  the  bncklers  (see  ch.  xxxviii.  4),  the 
hows  and  arrows  (see  ver.  3),  the  hand- 
staves,  or,  javelina  (margin),  perhaps,  as 
Hitzig  and  Smend  suggest,  the  staff  with 
-which  a  horseman  strikes  his  beast  (see 
Numb.  xxii.  27),  and  the  spears — were 
mostly  composed  of  timber.  When  all 
should  have  been  given  to  the  flames,  it 
would  then  appear  that  on  their  late  owners 
the  lex  talionia  had  worked  out  its  literal 
arengement,  that  they  who  had  intended 
to  despoil  Israel  were  themselves  spoiled  ; 
and  they  who  hoped  to  plunder  Israel  were 
themselves  plundered  (comp.  Isa.  xvii.  14). 

Vers.  11 — 16  contain  a  second  proof  of 
the  completeness  of  Gog's  destruction,  viz. 
the  length  of  time  occupied  in  burying 
the  slain  and  cleansing  the  land. 

Ver.  11. — Gog,  who  should  invade  Israel 
in  tlie  hope  of  acquiring  the  entire 
mastery  of  her  land,  would  obtain  at  Jeho- 
vah's hands  only  a  place  there  of  graves, 
i.e.  either,  as  Hitzig,  Ewald,  Eeil,  and 
Smend  suggest,  a  place  where  a  grave 
might  be  possible — a  place  large  enough  to 
receive  his  slaughtered  carcases ;  or  as 
H'avemiot  proposes,  "  an  altogether  special 
grave  as  no  other  in  Israel ; "  or  as 
Schroder  interprets,  "  a  place  where  there  is 
a  grave  for  him  and  nothing  else."  Gon- 
cernitig  both  the  designation  and  the  site 
of  this  divinely  provided  sepulchre  contro- 
versy has  ai'isen.  (1)  As  to  its  site.  The 
notion  of  Michaelis  and  Eichhom,  that 
the  valley  of  the  passengers  on  the  east  of 
the  sea  was  in  some  way  related  to  the 
mouiitaius  of  Abarim  mentioned  In  Numb, 
szvii.  12  and  Deut.  xxxii.  49,  and  that  of 
Hitzig,  that  it  signified  "the  valley  of  the 
opposite  heights,"  as  in  1  Sam.  xvii.  3,  and 
was  to  be  sought  for  in  the  "  very  great 
valley  "  of  Zech.  xiv.  4,  may  at  once  be 
dismissed — the  former  as  untenable,  and 
the  latter  as  far-fetched.  The  suggestion 
of  Hengstenberg  and  Eliefoth,  that  by  the 
burial-place  of  Gog  was  meant  the  valley 
of  Hegiddo,  where  Josiah  fell  in  battle 
against  Pharaoh-Necho  (2  Kings  xxiii.  29), 
derives  snpport  from  these  considerations, 
that  the  very  name  of  Megiddo  points  to 
battles,  that  in  its  vicinity  are  found  such 
passes  as  are  here  described,  and  that  its 


modem  designation  Lejun  (legio),  in  all  pro- 
bability containsareminiscenceof  the  present 
passage.  It  is,  however,  open  to  the  obvious 
objections  that  the  place  of  Gog's  burial  was 
not  contiguous  to  the  field  of  his  overthrow, 
•nd  that  the  clause  locating  it  "on  the 
east  of  the  sea,"  by  which  on  this  hypothe- 
sis must  be  understood  the  Mediteiranean, 
is  rather  descriptive  of  the  entire  land  than 
of  any  particular  spot  therein.  Hence  the 
view  of  Havernick,  Ewald,  Keil,  and  Smend, 
which  finds  the  valley  in  the  neighbour- 
hood of  the  Dead  Sea,  is  to  be  preferred, 
though,  even  with  agreement  as  to  this, 
interpreters  are  not  unanimous  as  to  the 
spot  intended.  Ewald  thinks  of  "  the  hor- 
rible, unwholesome  valley  over  against  the 
sea,  i.e.  (comp.  oh.  xlvii.  8)  the  Dead  Sea,  that 
valley  which  covers  the  ancient  overbearing 
ones  (^die  Zerreisenden),  the  Sodomites,  who 
resemble  these ; "  Keil,  translating  kidmath 
as  "  in  front  of,"  holds  by  "  the  valley  of 
the  Jordan  above  the  Dead  Sea ; "  Haver- 
nick and  Smend  advocate  "  a  place  outside 
the  Holy  Land,"  though  tte  clause,  "a 
grave  in  Israel,"  seems  against  this.  Dr. 
Currey,  in  the  'Speaker's  Commentary,' 
hints,  not  without  reason,  that  the  valley 
was  "imaginary."  (2)  As  to  its  designa- 
tion. That  in  the  word  "  passengers  "  lies 
a  paronomasia  is  apparent;  but  whether 
threefold  or  only  twofold  is  uncertain.  In 
the  present  verse  ciayg  may  signify  either 
(1)  such  travellers  as  were  wont  to  pass 
through  the  valley  (Keil),  which  is  the  ob- 
vious and  natural  interpretation;  or  (2) 
the  warriors  of  Gog  (Ewald,  Hitzig),  who 
intended  to  pass  through  tlie  land,  but  whose 
invasion  had  only  proved  a  passing  storm  ; 
or  (3)  the  commissioners  who  should  be 
appointed  to  pass  through  the  land  in  search 
of  bones  (ver.  15).  The  notion  of  Ewald,  who 
derives  n'l?j'  from  np??,  and  translates 
"haughty,"  "overbearing,"  meaning  the 
GSgites,  is  countenanced  by  no  other  ex- 
positor. If  the  first  sense  be  taken,  then 
the  verse  will  read,  "The  valley  of  the 
passers  through,  and  it  (the  valley,  in  con- 
sequence of  having  become  the  grave  of 
Gog)  stops  (the  way  of)  the  passers  through ; " 
i.e.  it  becomes  thereafter  impassable  for 
travellers  (Rosenmiiller,  Keil);  or,  it  stops 
the  noses,  or  breath,  of  such  travellers  by 
reason  'of  its  horrible  stench  (Ewald, 
Havernick).  If  the  second  meaning  be 
selected,  the  valley  must  be  understood  to 
have  afterwards  received  its  name  from  the 
fact  that  Gog's  warriors  lay  entombed  be- 
neath its  sod,  and  "  the  stopping  of  the 
passengers"  to  signify  that  whereas  Gog 
purposed  to  overrun  the  land,  his  destmo- 
tive  career  was  there  ignominiously  arrested 
(Schroder).  If  the  third  rendering  be  pre- 
ferred, then  the  valley  will  be  held  to  have 


304 


THE   BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxxn.  1— !J9. 


derived  its  designation,  after  tlie  event,  fiom 
the  passing  through  it  or  through  the  land 
of  the  searchers,  in  which  case  the  stopping 
of  the  passengers  can  only  have  alluded  to 
the  fact  that,  as  the  "  huriers "  proceeded 
with  the  work  of  intermtrnt,  they  were  com- 
pelled to  turn  away  their  faces  and  stop 
their  noses  because  of  the  noisome  efSuvium 
whicli  arose  from  the  corpses.  The  first 
interpretation  is  the  best,  though  the  first 
and  second  might  be  combined  by  making 
the  first "  passengers"  stand  for  the  tiavellers 
and  the  second  for  the  invaders,  whose 
career  shonld  there  be  stopped ;  and  to  this 
view  a  certain  coimtenance  is  lent  by  the 
Btatements  which  fullow,  that  there  shonld 
Gog  and  all  his  multitude — literally,  all  his 
noisy  twmult — be  buried,  and  tliat  the  valley 
ever  afterwards  shonld  bear  the  name  of 
Eamon-gog,  or,  Gog's  multitude. 

Vers.  12,  13.— The  time  that  should  be 
occupied  in  Gog's  funeral  should  be  seven 
months — so  great  should  be  the  nnmber  of 
the  dead — the  sacred  number  seven  recall- 
ing the  seven  years  consumed  in  the  burn- 
ing of  the  weapons  (ver.  9),  and  reminding 
one  of  the  "seven  times  heated"  furnace 
into  which  the  Hebrew  children  were  cast, 
and  of  the  "  seven  times "  of  Nebuchad- 
nezzar's humiliation  (Dan.  iii.  19 ;  iv.  23), 
The  parties  who  should  conduct  his  ob- 
sequies should  be  the  house  of  Israel,  even 
all  the  people  of  the  land,  indicating  the 
common  joy  occasioned  by  the  barbaric 
chieftain's  overthrow.  The  motive  which 
should  impel  them  in  their  work  would  be 
a  desire  to  cleanse  the  land  from  the  defile- 
ment it  had  contracted  from  the  corpses  of 
the  slain  (comp.  Knmb.  zix.  11,22;  xxxi. 
19 ;  XXXV.  33) ;  and  the  end  should  be  that 
the  work  should  be  to  them,  not  for  "a 
remembrance"  (Bwald),  but  a  renown,  not 
because  they  should  have  helped  to  bury 
Gog  (Hengstenberg),  or  through  burying 
Gog  should  have  proved  themselves  his 
conquerors  (Smend),  and  in  virtue  of  Jeho- 
vah's protection  the  possessors  of  his  grave 
(Hitzig),  but  because  in  the  day  when 
Jeliovnh  glorified  himself  through  Gog's 
desimction,  he  (Jehovah)  should  also  be 
glorified  by  their  (Israel's)  zeal  "  to  show 
themselves  »  holy  people  by  sweeping  all 
nncleanness  away"  (Keil). 

Ver.  14. — When  the  work  of  burying 
Gog  should  have  gone  on  for  seven  months, 
at  the  end  of  that  time  the  Israelites  shuuld 
sever  ont  (comp.  Deut.  x.  8)  men  of  oon- 
tinnal  employment ;  literally,  men  of  con- 
tinuance; i.e.  persons  hired  for  a  continuous 
work  or  devoted  to  a  constant  occupation, 
whose  business  it  should  be  passing 
through  the  land  to  bniy  with  the  pas- 
sengers those  that  remain — or,  as  the  Re- 
vised Version  reads,  to  bury  Oiem  that  past 


through,  that  remain — upon  the  faoe  of  the 
land.  Here,  again,  the  old  play  upon  the 
word  "  passengers  "  recurs,  and  with  it  two 
or  three  difficulties.  (1)  It  is  not  clear 
whether  the  commissioners  consisted  of  two 
classes  of  officers,  "passers  through,"  or 
"searchers,"  who  scoured  the  land  in 
search  of  nnburied  skeletons  or  bones, 
which,  however,  they  did  not  bury;  and 
"  buriers  "  proper,  who,  accompanying  these 
searchers,  conducted  the  interment  of  such 
skeletons  or  bones  as  were  found  (Hengsten- 
berg, Keil);  or  whether  the  commissioners 
were  only  one  body,  who  both  searched  and 
buried  (fSwald  and  Smend).  (2)  It  is 
doubtful  whether  the  m  in  D'najjrmu 
should  be  taken  as  the  sign  of  the  accusa- 
tive, and  the  clause  translated  as  in  the 
Eevised  Version,  in  whicii  case  the  "  pas- 
sengers "  that  should  be  buried  could  only 
be  the  "  invaders  "  as  above  (see  ver.  11) ; 
or  as  a  preposition,  in  which  case  the 
rendering  of  the  Authorized  Version  must 
stand,  and  the  "  passengers  "  be  regarded 
as  the  "searchers."  (3)  It  is  open  to  debate 
whether  vor.  14  should  not  close  with  the 
initial  words  of  ver.  15,  as  Ewald  pro- 
poses, "And  the  passengers  shall  search 
and  pass  through  in  the  land ; "  or  at 
least  whether  the  first  clause  in  ver,  15 
should  not  form  an  independent  sentence, 
thus :  "  And  they  that  pass  through  in 
the  land  shall  pass  through,"  as  in  the 
Eevised  Version,  in  which  case  the  sight- 
ing of  unburied  bones  (ver.  15)  would  not 
necessarily  be  the  work  of  "searchers,"  but 
of  any  one,  the  verb  n^j)  being  impersonal! 
It  is  impossible  to  decide  dogmatically  in 
a  question  of  so  much  difficulty ;  but  the 
Bevised  Version  appears  to  present  the 
most  exact  rendering  of  the  Hebrew,  and 
npon  the  whole  the  most  intelligible  ac- 
count of  what  was  intended  to  take  place, 
viz.  the  appointment  of  a  special  body  of 
commissioners,  who  should  be  designated 
both  "passengers,"  in  ironical  allusion  to 
Gog  who  had  meant  to  pass  through  the 
land,  and  "buriers,"  from  the  nature  of  the 
task  delegated  to  them,  viz.  the  interment 
of  the  "passengers,"  t.«.  the  G5gite8,  and 
who  should  begin  their  work  after  the  main 
body  of  the  slain  had  been  removed,  t.e.  at 
the  end  of  the  seven  months  of  burying. 

Ver.  15  describes  the  method  of  pro- 
cedure these  "  searchers  "  and  "  buriers," 
should  follow.  If  these  were  distinct  from 
each  other,  the  "searchers" — if  they  were  the 
same,  any  others— on  discovering  a  man's 
bone  should  set  up  a  sign  by  it;  literally, 
build  near  it  a  pillar ;  erect  a  heap  of  stone 
(comp.  2  Kings  xxiii,  17;  Jer.  xxzi,  21) 
to  call  the  attention  of  the  buriers,  who,  ea 
coming  to  the  spot,  should  inter  it  in  the 
valley  of  Hamon-gog. 


OH.  xsxix.  1— 29.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET   EZEKIEL. 


305 


Yer.  16. — As  another  mark  to  diatinguiah 
Gog's  tomb,  a  city  should  arise  in  its  vi- 
cinity, bearing  the  name  Eamonah,  oi  "  Mul- 
titude" (oomp.  Isa.  xii.  18,  "the  city  of 
destruction  "),  though  Sohmieder  thinks  it 
must  liavo  been  "a  city  of  graves,"  since 
a  city  of  houses  could  not  exist  in  such  a 
▼alley  of  the  dead,  and  indeed  the  LXX. 
gives  as  the  city's  name  Tlo\udvSpioy,  by 
which  later  Greek  writers  were  accustomed 
to  call  the  common  ground  in  a  cemetery 
as  distinguished  from  ita  paternal  se- 
pulchres. If  quite  improbable  that  Bethshan 
or  Scythopolis  near  Megiddo  was  Ezekiel's 
Hamonah,  it  is  possible  the  actual  city  may 
have  been  named  after  the  ideal.  Flumptre 
cites  as  a  modern  parallel  the  English 
town  of  Lichfield  (or  "  Field  of  corpses  "), 
which,  according  to  tradition,  commemorates 
the  destruction  of  the  Danes.  When  the 
work  of  the  buriers  should  be  finished,  the 
land  would  be  completely  cleansed. 

Vers.  17 — 20  exhibit  in  a  third  way  the 
severity  of  Gog's  overthrow  by  setting  forth 
the  bloody  carnage  which  should  attend  it. 

Ver.  17. — Expanding  the  thought  of  ver. 
4,  and  borrowing  the  imagery  of  the  older 
prophets,  Isaiah  (xxxiv.  6 ;  Ivi.  9)  and  Je- 
remiah (xlvi.  10;  1.  29;  li.  40),  EzeMel 
represents  Gog's  destruction  as  a  great 
saorifloe — literally,  slaying;  hence  a  sacri- 
ficial feast  or  simply  banquet  (as  in  Gen. 
xxxi.  54)— upon  the  mountains  of  Israel,  pre- 
pared by  Jehovah  for  the  fowls  of  the  air 
and  the  beasts  of  the  field,  wliiob  he,  there- 
fore, invites  to  come  from  all  quarters  to  eat 
flesh  and  drink  blood. 

Vex.  18  specifies  the  victims  whose  flesh 
and  blood  sliould  form  their  banquet,  viz. 
the  mighty,  as  in  oh.  xxxii.  12,  27,  and  the 
princes  of  the  earth,  meaning  the  nobles 
and  other  dignitariesin  Gog's  army,  who,  in 
accordance  with  the  symbol  of  a  feast,  are 
spoken  of  as  "rams,"  "lambs,"  "goats,"  "bul- 
locks," and  "  fallings  of  Bashan  "  (comp.  Ps. 
xxii.  12).  "Fer  hesc  animantium,  quie  in 
saorifidis  usurpari  eolebant,  nomina  varii 
hominum  ordines  inteUiguntur,  prineipum, 
duBum,  militum,  quod  et  OhcddtBux  obiervat" 
(Grotius.  Comp.  Bev.  xix.  17j  18).  In 
Zeph.  i.  7  the  heathen  are  the  guests,  and 
his  people  the  victims,  at  Jehovah's  banquet. 

Vers.  21 — 29  record  the  impression  Gog's 
overthrow  should  make  upon  both  Israel 
and  the  heathen. 

Ver:  22. — Th*  house  of  Israel  shall  know 
that  I  am  the  Lord  their  God  from  that  day 
forward.  What  should  convince  them  of 
this  would  be  their  triumph  and  deliverance 
through  Gog's  annihilation. 

Vers.  23,  21. —  And  the  heathen  shall 

■EBKIEIi — II. 


know.  The  special  lesson  for  them  should 
be  not  so  much  teaching  concerning  God'a 
supremacy  over  them,  or  concerning  their 
relation  to  Israel,  as  concerning  the  prin- 
ciples of  God's  dealings  with  Israel.  'They 
should  learn  that  if  Israel  had  for  a  season 
been  abandoned  to  the  sword  and  driven 
into  exile,  it  was  not  because  of  Jehovah's 
inability  to  protect  them,  but  because  of 
their  wickedness  which  had  caused  him  to 
hide  his  face  from  them  —  an  expression 
which  in  Ezekiel  occurs  only  here  and  in 
ver.  29,  thougli  it  is  found  in  the  Penta- 
teuch (Deut.  xxxi.  17,  18)  and  in  the  older 
prophets  (Isa.  viii.  17 ;  liv.  8 ;  Ivii.  17 ; 
Ixiv.  7 ;  Jer.  zxziit  5). 

Vers.  25 — 29. — This  section  Hengstenberg 
regards  as  "  the  close  of  the  whole  ayatem 
of  prophecies  of  a  predominantly  comforting 
character  from  ch.  xxxiii.  21  onwards ; " 
Keil  viewa  it  as  the  proper  conclusion  to 
the  prophecy  concerning  Gog  and  the  series 
of  predictions  from  ch.  xxxv.  1  onwards. 
It  is  in  substance  a  recapitulation  of  God's 
gracious  promise  to  bring  again  the  cap- 
tivity of  Israel,  of  which  the  prophet  had 
just  been  reminded  in  ver.  23,  and  to 
which  accordingly  he  now  in  thought  goes 
back.  It  traces  the  whole  course  of  the 
Divine  dealings  with  the  nation  from  the 
point  of  the  exile  onwards. 

Ver.  25. — I  will  bring  again  the  captivity 
of  Jacob,  (For  the  use  of  "Jacob"  as  a 
designation  of  the  people,  see  ch.  xxviii. 
25  ;  xxxvii.  25.)  "The  promise  goes  back 
to  Deut.  XXX.  3;  Jer.  xxix.  14;  xxx.  3; 
xxxi.  23;  xxxii.  44;  and  other  passages. 
That  its  fulfilment  began  with  the  return 
from  Babylon  is  not  inconsistent  with  the 
view  that  its  fulfilment  will  terminate  with 
the  final  ingathering  of  Israel  out  of  the 
nations  by  her  conversion  to  Christianity, 
and  her  consequent  admission  to  tlie  Church. 
That  its  first  cause  will  be  "  mercy  "  to  the 
whole  house  of  Israel  will  not  prevent  that 
cause  from  being  at  the  same  time  a  jealous 
regard  for  the  Divine  holiness  (comp.  ch. 
xxxvi.  21,  22). 

Ver.  26. — After  they  have  borne  their 
shame  (comp.  ch.  xvi.  52,  51;  xxxii.  24, 
80;  xxxiv.  29;  xxxvi.  6).  The  captivity 
of  Israel  would  not  be  brought  back  until 
her  people  had  been  thoroughly  chastbed 
for  their  iniquities,  and  that  chastisement 
had  wrought  in  them  a  spirit  of  penitence 
and  a  disposition  towards  obedience.  Then 
should  Jehovah  interpose  for  their  deliver- 
ance by  gathering  them  out  of  their  enemiet' 
lands  and  leading  them  back  to  their  own 
land ;  and  these  two  experiences,  the  Oap- 


806 


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZBKIBL.    [oh.  xxxnc  1— 2». 


tivity  and  the  Bestoration,  the  diiTing  out 
and  the  bringing  in,  should  complete  their 
conversion  to  Jehovah,  and  secure  their 
perpetual  enjoyment  of  Jehovah's  favour. 

Ver.  29. — I  have  poured  oat  my  Spirit 
upon  the  honse  of  Israel.  Already  Jehovah 
had  promised  to  put  his  Spirit  in  his  people 
(ph.  xxzvi.  27;  zxxviL  14);  now  the  fact 
wat  he  has  implemented  that  promise  by 
•  copious  effusion  of  the  same  ne  cites  as 
a  proqf  that  Israel  shall  no  more  forfeit  his 
favour  because  no  more  shall  she  forsake 
his  ways  (comp.  Isa.  liz.  21).  The  same 
promise  had  been  previously  given  by  Joel 
Hi.  28),  and  was  afterwards  renewed  by 
Zechariah  (xrL  10).  The  citation  of  Joel's 
words  by  Peter  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost  (Acts 
U.  17)  shows  that  he  regarded  the  remarkable 
effusion  of  the  Holy  Ghost  on  that  memor- 
able occasion  as  a  fulfilment  of  the  promise 
here  recorded  by  Ezekiel.  Yet  the  promise 
was  not  then  exhausted.  Bather  it  has 
often  since  been  implemented,  and  will  doubt- 
leas  receive  its  consummation  in  the  new 
Jernsalem.  "  No  historical  Church,  Jewish 
or  Genlile,"  writes  Plumptre,  "has  ever 
yet  realized  the  picture  here  sketched  by 
Ezekiel.  We  ask,  as  before — Will  it  ever  be 
realized  on  earth?  or  must  we  look  for  it 
only  in  the  heavenly  city  whose  Builder  and 
Maker  is  God?" 

NoTB. — In  addition  to  what  has  been 
■tated  at  the  beginning  of  this  prophecy 
(oh.  xxxviii.  1)  with  reference  to  the  gene- 
ral significance  of  this  invasion  by  and 
overthrow  of  Gog,  that  it  points  to  some 
tremendous  conflict  in  the  latter  days 
between  the  powers  of  the  world  and  the 
Ohnroh  of  Christ,  a  few  words  may  he 
offered  in  support  of  the  proposition  that 
nevertheless  there  is  no  reason  to  expect 
that  this  conflict  will  take  the  form  of  an 
actual  invasion  of  the  land  of  Israel  or  of 
a  real  flre-and-sword  battle  with  the  Church, 
or  that  Gog  will  step  upon  the  field  as  a 
veritable  flesh-and-blood  personality,  and 
bis  armies  find  a  grave  in  the  manner 
sketched  by  the  prophet.  That  the  whole 
delineation  is  symbolic,  and  embodies  spiri- 
tual truths  under  material  emblems,  will 
hardly  be  doubted  by  one  who  impartially 
weighs  the  following  considerations,  which 
have  been  admirably  brought  together  by 
Fairbaim.     _ 

1.  The  designation   given  to  the  great 


assailant  of  the  latter  times  —  Gog,  which 
discovers  itself  to  be  an  ideal  name,  if  by 
nothing  else  by  the  manner  in  which  it  has 
been  formed. 

2.  The  composition  of  his  army,  which  la 
drawn  from  the  foni  quarters  of  the  globe, 
in  fact,  from  the  extremities  of  the  earth, 
and  consists  of  peoples  not  only  remote  from 
one  another,  but  "the  most  unlike  natur- 
ally to  act  in  concert  for  any  portionlar 
pnrpose." 

8.  The  object  of  his  attack— the  land  of 
Israel,  a  territory  so  small  that  it  is  incon- 
ceivable a  host  so  great  should  have  been 
required  to  capture  it,  and  so  po<»  that  had 
the  invaders  got  all  it  contained  it  "could 
not  have  served  to  maintain  them  toi  • 
single  day." 

4.  The  fruits  of  Israel's  victory — ^firewood 
for  seven  years  out  of  the  enemies'  weapons, 
and  seven  months  of  labour  in  burying  their 
corpses.  "  It  would  be  but  a  very  moderate 
allowance,  on  the  literal  supposition,  to  say 
that  a  million  of  men  would  thus  be  en- 
gaged, and  that  on  an  average  each  would 
consign  two  corpses  to  the  tomb  in  one  day ; 
which  for  the  hundred  and  eighty  working 
days  of  the  seven  months  would  make  an 
aggregate  of  three  hundred  and  sixty  millions 
of  corpses !  Then  the  putrefaction,  the  pes- 
tilential vapours  arising  from  such  masses 
of  slain  victims,  before  they  were  all  buried  t 
Who  could  live  at  such  a  time  ?  " 

5.  The  impossibility  of  harmonizing  pro- 
phecy on  the  hypothesis  that  Ezekiel's 
picture  must  receive  a  literal  interpretation, 
since  Isaiah  (xxxiv.),  Joel  (iii.  12, 14),  and 
Zechariah  (xiv.),  who  all  appear  to  depict 
the  same  conflict  as  Ezeidel  portrays,  each 
pitches  its  scene  in  a  different  locality. 

6.  The  gross  carnality  of  the  whole  pioturv 
on  the  assumption  that  it  must  be  literally 
interpreted,  which  is  wholly  inconsistent 
with  that  spirituality  one  associates  with 
the  Messianic  times. 

"  Persons,"  writes  Fairbaira, "  who  in  the 
face  of  all  these  considerations  can  still 
cling  to  the  literal  view  of  this  prophecy, 
must  be  left  to  themselves ;  they  ore  inei^ 
pable  of  btinK  oonvisced  in  th»  waj  4  arg«- 
uenk* 


en.  XXXIX.  1—29.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZBKIEL.  307 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  8.-^Ood's  purpose  aecompUshed.  The  prophet  does  not  dream  dreams  of  Idle 
fancy,  build  castles  in  the  air,  or  terrify  men  with  nightmares  of  unreal  judgments. 
The  Word  of  God  comes  true.  The  predicted  day  arrives,  the  promised  action  is  per- 
formed— "  It  is  come,  and  it  is  done." 

L  In  obeatioh.  Qod  spake,  and  it  was  done.  He  said,  "  Let  there  be  light ;  and 
light  was."  The  creative  word  was  with  power.  Men  plan  great  things,  but  they  are 
quite  incompetent  to  carry  the  best  of  them  out.  The  greater  the  artist  is  the  more 
he  must  feel  that  his  execution  falls  lamentably  short  of  his  design.  It  is  not  so  with 
Qod.  When  he  carries  out  his  idea  in  his  work  it  can  be  said  of  each  stage  of 
creation,  "  And  God  saw  that  it  was  good."    He  is  mighty  to  perform  all  his  will. 

II.  In  bbdemption.  This  new  creation  was  a  harder  work  than  the  first  creation. 
No  human  agent  could  accomplish  it,  and  God's  own  arm  brought  salvation.  But 
though  it  involved  the  sacrifice  of  his  Son,  he  carried  out  his  great  design  of  redeeming 
the  lost  world.  The  dying  Jesus  exclaimed,  "It  is  finished!"  The  application  of  this 
redemption  is  not  yet  complete.  The  promise  concerning  this  is,  "  He  shall  see  of  the 
travail  of  his  soul,  and  shall  be  satisfied  "  (Isa.  liii.  11).  But  St.  Peter  looked  forward 
to  the  grand  restitution  of  all  things,  when  all  shall  be  brought  in  subjection  to  Christ 
(Acts  iii,  21).  We  know  that  he  who  has  begun  a  good  work  in  us  is  able  to  finish  it 
(Phil.  i.  6). 

III.  In  judgment.  If  God  accomplishes  his  designs  in  creation  and  redemption,  it 
cannot  be  supposed  that  he  will  fail  to  carry  them  out  iii  regard  to  judgment.  Delay 
is  no  proof  of  fnilure,  for  the  long-promised  Messiah  was  slow  to  appear,  yet  in  due 
time  Christ  was  born.  The  mercy  of  God  is  no  sign  of  the  failure  of  jndgment,  for  God 
was  as  merciful  when  he  threatened  wrath  as  he  will  be  when  the  time  comes  for 
executing  the  threat.  The  day  of  judgment,  that  dreadful  "  day  of  the  Lord,"  as  the 
prophets  called  it,  came  to  the  nations  and  to  Israel  with  fearful  calamities.  Assuredly 
it  will  come,  and  its  work  will  be  done  also  among  all  sinners. 

IV.  In  pbovidbnob.  God  made  great  promises  to  Abraham,  and  the  patriarch  did 
not  live  to  reap  their  accomplishment.  Yet  God  was  true  to  his  word.  All  the  might 
of  Egypt  could  not  frustrate  God's  gracious  designs.  He  has  great  purposes  for  his 
people  now.  Satan  may  oppose  the  execution  of  them ;  sin,  unbelief,  and  worldliness 
may  rise  up  against  them.  Yet  God  will  not  desert  his  own  inheritance.  Indeed,  he 
does  now  accomplish  bis  gracious  providential  designs  in  spite  of  all  opposition. 

V.  In  obbdibnob.  There  is  one  region  in  which  the  purpose  of  God  is  more  slow 
to  realize  itself.  That  is  the  region  of  human  will.  There  man  is  free  to  resist  its 
demands  for  obedience.  God's  kingdom  has  not  yet  fully  come,  his  will  is  not  yet 
done  on  earth  as  it  is  in  heaven.  But  we  pray  for  this  glorious  consummation.  It  is 
our  duty  to  labour  to  help  it  on.  If  God's  design  is  accomplished  in  every  other 
respect,  it  is  monstrous  for  man's  stubborn  will  to  hold  out  against  it.  The  spirit  of 
the  life  of  Christ — "Lo,  I  come  to  do  thy  will,  0  God" — is  the  spirit  which  should 
animate  his  people. 

Ver.  21. — Ood's  glory  among  the  heathen.  I.  God  is  concbbned  fob  his  gloet 
AMONO  THE  HEATHEN.  It  may  be  a  light  thing  to  us  that  his  Name  is  unknown  or 
dishonoured  among  the  heathen ;  but  it  is  no  light  matter  in  the  sight  of  God.  He 
does  not  confine  his  gaze  to  the  little  spot  of  light  where  he  is  recognized  and  loved. 
He  is  the  Creator  of  the  universe,  and  he  is  concerned  with  what  happens  everywhere 
throughout  his  dominion.  Consider  why  he  desires  his  glory  to  be  spread  among  the 
heathen.  1.  For  its  own  sake.  God  cares  for  his  glory  and  desires  to  be  glorified. 
Such  a  conception  applied  to  a  man  would  suggest  selfishness.  This  is  not  the  case 
with  God,  because  his  glory  resides  in  his  goodness.  The  spread  of  his  glory  is  the 
vindication  of  righteousness.  The  eternal  claims  of  holiness  demand  assertion.  To 
suppress  them  is  to  give  the  victory  to  sin ;  to  spread  the  glory  of  God  is  to  assert  them. 
2.  For  the  sake  of  the  heathen.  Ignorance  of  God's  glory  is  their  loss.  To  know  God 
is  life  eternal.  It  is  for  the  supreme  good  of  men  thmt  they  should  understand  their 
heavenly  Father.     "Acquaint  now  thyself  with  him,  and  be  at  peace"  (Job  xxii.  21). 


308  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIBL.    [oh.  xxxix.  1— 2a 

n.  God  ha8^  means  fob  bfbeadikgi  his  olobt  among  thb  hbathbh.  L  /• 
judgments.  This  seems  to  be  the  method  suggested  in  the  chapter  now  under  con- 
sideration. The  restoration  of  Israel  and  the  accompanying  overthrow  of  her  enemiei 
will  strike  dismay  into  the  host  of  the  enemy,  and  so  impress  them  with  the  might 
and  majesty  of  the  true  God.  This  is  a  fearful  process  in  the  eyes  of  the  heathen,  and 
yet  it  is  educational,  and  may  help  to  lead  them  out  of  superstition  and  foolish  opposi- 
tion to  wiser  ways.    God  arrests  the  careless  now  by  his  judgments.    2.  In  the  gospel. 

When  the  gospel  is  preached  to  the  heathen  God's  gloty  is  revealed  among  them 

surely  the  happier  method  of  making  it  known.  This  was  already  foreshadowed  in  Old 
Testament  times  (Isa.  lii.  15).  It  was  in  part  accomplished  by  the  labours  of  St.  PauL 
Now,  we  must  ever  bear  in  mind  that  this  is  God's  work.  Though  human  agents 
preach  the  gospel,  God  himself  shows  forth  his  glory  in  his  truth.  He  too  awakens 
the  souls  of  the  hearers  by  his  Spirit.  All  perception  of  the  glory  of  God  comes  from 
his  own  revelation  of  himself. 

ni.  Chbistianb  bhould  take  pabt  in  sFBEADma  God's  olobt  among  the  ebathbn. 
We  sometimes  hear  missionary  enterprises  described  as  quixotic  schemes  of  amiable 
fanatics,  and  so-called  practical  people  tell  us  that  we  had  much  better  spend  our 
money  and  our  energies  in  endeavouring  to  better  the  condition  of  the  poor  of  our  own 
cities.  "  These  ought  ye  to  have  done,  and  not  to  leave  the  other  undone  "  (Matt. 
xxilL  23).  It  is  Christ  s  command  that  his  gospel  should  be  preached  to  all  people, 
and  whether  our  wisdom  commend  the  command  or  not,  if  we  are  true  Christians  it  is 
our  plain  duty  to  render  unquestioning  obedience  (Matt,  xzviii.  19).  But  the  heathen 
need  the  knowledge  of  the  truth  of  Christ.  Experience  proves  that  the  most  ignorant 
and  the  most  cultivated  can  both  receive  it  and  profit  by  it.  There  is  no  more 
practical  work  than  that  of  wise  labour  in  the  missionary  field.  It  is  the  bounden 
duty  of  all  Christians  to  support  it.  The  Church  that  has  no  missionary  spirit  is  not 
Christian,  for  it  has  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ. 

Vers.  23,  24. — Sin  and  its  consequences.  I.  The  dbeadful  evil  of  bin.  Fain  is 
a  mystery,  but  sin  is  a  darker  mystery.  We  instinctively  shrink  from  death  as  the 
last  dread  enemy,  but  death  is  not  so  great  a  foe  as  sin.  We  must  go  to  the  Bible  for 
a  revelation  of  sin  in  its  extent  and  its  depth.  The  Greeks  were  acute  thinkers  on 
most  subjects  connected  with  human  experience,  but  they  were  singularly  obtuse  to 
moral  distinctions.  In  the  Bible  we  see  a  true  mirror  held  up  to  the  world's  sin.  There 
we  discover  that  events,  which  the  secular  historians  would  ascribe  to  political  causes, 
have  moral  causes  behind  them.  Thus  the  Captivity  would  seem  to  the  eye  of  ordinary 
observers  to  be  a  natural  result  of  the  fanatical  patriotism  of  a  little  mountain  kingdom 
-7-the  Montenegro  of  antiquity — ^when  opposed  to  the  irresistible  march  of  a  great 
conquering  empire.  But  more  lay  behind.  The  corruption  of  the  Jews  made  them 
an  easy  prey  to  their  enemy,  and  their  sin  deprived  them  of  the  providential  protection 
of  God.  This  sin  is  seen  in  four  aspects.  1.  In  relation  to  righteousness.  It  is 
iniquity.  It  is  falling  short  of  what  is  right,  an  unjust  treatment  of  life,  a  living  lie. 
The  sinner  is  unequal.  He  does  not  truly  balance  his  life.  His  whole  being  is 
corrupted  and  distorted.  2.  In  relation  to  Ood.  It  is  a  trespass  against  him.  The 
prodigal  confesses  that  be  has  sinned  against  Heaven,  as  well  as  in  his  father's  sight 
(Luke  XV.  21).  David  even  describes  the  murder  of  Uriah  as  a  sin  against  God  only, 
so  utterly  does  the  transgression  of  God's  Law  swallow  up  all  other  considerations 
(Ps.  li.  4).  Whenever  we  sin  we  directly  rebel  against  our  Father.  Sin  always  has 
this  ugly  personal  feature.  3.  In  relation  to  purity.  Uncleanness.  4.  In  relation  <• 
law.    Transgression. 

11.  The  dismal  conbequenokb  of  bin.  1.  The  loss  oj  the  vision  of  Qod.  "  There- 
fore hid  I  my  face  from  them."  This  is  the  first  consequence  of  sin.  It  is  reaped 
immediately  the  soul  falls  away  from  God.  Without  holiness  it  is  impossible  to  see 
him  (Matt.  v.  8).  To  some  it  may  seem  a  light  penalty.  Like  Adam  and  Eve,  they 
may  em  try  to  bide  themselves  from  God.  But  the  attempt  is  vain,  because, 
thot^h  m  may  easily  lose  sight  of  God,  he  never  ceases  to  behold  us.  Moreover, 
though  we  may  not  be  aware  of  our  loss,  it  is  not  the  less  great.  But  to  the  sensitive 
tool  this  spiritual  consequence  of  sin  is  most  bitter  to  endure.  Such  a  one  will 
bflseeoh  Ood  net  to  hide  his  countenance,  and  will  cry,  "  Take  not  thy  Holy  Spirit 


CH.  xxxnc.  1— 29.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PBOPHET  EZEKIBL.  809 

from  me  "  (Ps.  li.  11).  All  joy  and  hope  vanish  from  the  Christian  life  when  the  sweet 
Tision  of  God  ie  darkened  hy  sin.  2.  Fearful  external  ruin.  "  And  gave  them  into 
the  hand  of  their  enemies :  so  fell  they  all  by  the  sword."  If  men  do  not  care  for  the 
present  spiritual  consequences  of  sin,  other  more  easily  recognized  consequences  will 
follow.  The  most  blunt  and  hardened  soul  can  be  made  to  quake  under  the  wrath  of  God. 
In  conclusion,  observe  that  all  this  was  to  be  known  to  the  heathen,  (1)  that  they 
might  not  boast  themselves  as  though  the  result  were  directly  due  to  their  prowess ;  (2) 
that  they  might  not  despise  God  as  though  his  designs  were  frustrated;  (3). that  they 
might  take  waruing.  God  warns  us  by  the  history  of  the  past  punishment  of  sin.  But 
he  also  points  out  a  way  of  escape  in  Jesus  Christ,  who  came  to  save  his  people  from 
their  sins. 

Vers.  25 — ^29. — The  glorious  restoration.  I.  The  people  who  enjoy  it.  1,  The 
people  of  Qod.  This  is  promised  for  the  Jews,  the  ancient  people  of  God.  God  does 
not  forget  his  people  in  their  captivity  any  more  than  he  forgot  them  in  their  Egyptian 
bondage.  Now,  we  know  that  God  regards  the  whole  human  race  as  one  family  (Acts 
xvii.  26).  Though  many  reject  him  and  many  know  him  not,  he  cares  for  all.  As  all 
belong  by  right  to  their  heavenly  Father,  so  the  perfect  restoration  in  Christ  is  now 
offered  to  all  men.  2.  Sinners.  This  gracious  promise  is  not  only  for  the  unfortunate 
— like  the  Hebrews  in  Egypt ;  it  is  for  the  guilty  who  were  driven  into  captivity  on 
account  of  their  own  wickedness.  This  fact  shows  (1)  the  grace  of  God,  who  is  willing 
to  be  reconciled  to  his  worst  foes,  to  pardon  his  rebel  subjects,  to  receive  back  his  lost 
and  disgraced  children ;  and  (2)  the  hope  of  the  world.  The  peculiarity  of  the  mission 
of  Christ  was  that  he  came  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was  lost.  The  most 
degraded  may  hope  to  share  in  the  glorious  restoration  of  Israel  if  they  will  rightly 
seek  to  have  their  part  in  it. 

II.  The  means  by  which  it  is  bbought  about.  1.  Ood?t  saving  work.  God 
brought  back  the  captivity  of  Israel.  If  Nebuchadnezzar  was  his  servant  for  punish- 
ment, Gyrus  was  even  his  "  Messiah  "  for  restoration  (Isa.  xlv.  1).  The  great  restora- 
tion of  souls  is  God's  work.  He  does  not  wait  for  men  to  regenerate  their  own 
characters,  and  then  consent  to  give  them  a  welcome  home.  He  himself  efifects  the 
regeneration.  It  was  God's  thought  to  send  his  Son  to  be  the  Saviour  of  the  world. 
This  Divine  action  springs  (1)  from  God's  mercy ;  (2)  from  his  jealousy  for  his  holy 
Name.  God  is  most  glorified  in  saving  his  people.  Righteousness  is  most  honoured 
not  by  the  punishment  of  sin,  but  by  the  cure  of  it.  2.  On  condition  of  confession. 
"And  they  shall  take  upon  them  their  shame,  and  all  their  trespass  which  they  have 
committed  against  me."  The  restored  Jews  will  own  the  guilt  of  the  sin  that  drove  them 
into  captivity.  Thus  the  chastisement  will  produce  its  bitter  but  wholesome  fruit. 
God  only  forgives  sin  on  condition  of  man's  confession  (1  John  i.  9).  When  the 
penitent  takes  the  shame  of  his  sin  God  removes  the  guilt  of  it. 

III.  The  blessings  which  it  beings.  1.  Eeturn  to  the  old  home  and  its  privileges. 
The  Jews  came  back  to  Palestine  from  their  captivity.  Redeemed  man  is  restored  to 
the  true  human  inheritance  which  he  has  lost  by  sin;  Science,  art,  literature,  social 
and  domestic  life,  etc.,  will  be  enjoyed  at  their  best  when  men  are  regenerated  in  heart. 
The  earth  will  never  yield  her  choicest  increase  until  the  people  of  God  inherit  it.  But 
with  these  secular  advantages,  and  far  above  them,  is  restoration  to  the  spiril;ual  home 
— to  the  kingdom  of  heaven  here,  to  the  glory  of  heaven  hereafter.  2.  Feace  and 
security.  "  When  they  dwell  safely  in  their  land,  and  none  make  them  afraid."  This 
suggests  a  striking  contrast  to  the  former  position,  when  Israel  was  harassed  by 
enemies  on  every  side — not  the  least  being  those  of  their  own  household  in  the  long 
feud  between  the  northern  and  the  southern  kingdoms.  That  feud  was  now  ended  for 
ever.  Still,  the  subsequent  time  was  scarcely  one  of  solid  security.  We  must  look  to 
the  spiritual  restoration  for  the  perfect  accomplishment  of  the  happy  vision.  The 
redeemed  people  of  (Jod  enjoy  peace  and  safety.  Christ  said,  "  My  peace  I  give  unto 
you  "  (John  xiv.  27).  3.  Closer  communion  with  God.  Then  they  shall  know  Qod 
better  than  before,  with  the  knowledge  of  experience,  and  enjoy  the  never-failing  light 
of  his  countenance.    This  is  the  Christian's  highest  privilege. 

Ver.  29. — 27l«  restored  vision  of  God.    This  is  a  great,  we  may  say  the  supreme  and 


310  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PUGPHET  EZEKIEL.    [ch.  xxxix.  1—29. 

final,  result  of  the  restoratioo  of  Israel.  While  the  people  are  eagerly  craving  a  return 
to  their  farms  and  villages,  with  temporal  prosperity,  the  prophet  teaches  them  that, 
though  these  advantages  are  to  be  received  in  the  good  time  coming,  a  better  blessing 
will  be  the  restored  vision  of  God  enjoyed  by  means  of  the  pouring  out  of  his  Spirit  upon 
the  liouse  of  Israel.  This  is  the  best,  the  highest,  the  most  spiritual,  result  of  Christ's 
redemption  of  the  world. 

I.  'J'hr  bbatifio  vision  op  God.  God  will  no  more  hide  his  face.  1.  The  restora- 
tion of  Qod's  fa/owur.  The  averted  countenance  signifies  disapproval.  God  hides  his 
countenance  when  he  refuses  to  hold  communion  with  those  of  his  creatures  with 
whom  he  is  angry.  Therefore  we  are  here  reminded  that  sin  leads  to  an  action  on 
God's  part — to  his  veiling  his  bright  countenaace.  There  is  then  a  need,  not  only  for 
man  to  be  reconciled  to  God,  but  for  God  to  change  his  grieved  and  wrathful  attitude 
towards  man.  This  is  an  essential  element  in  the  atonement,  which  is  suggested  by 
the  word  "propitiation"  (Rom.  iii.  25;  1  John  iu  2).  When  God  ceases  to  hide  his 
countenance  he  looks  favourably  on  his  people.  2.  The  enjoyment  of  Ood^s  presence. 
The  favour  of  a  king  secures  many  privileges,  and  the  favour  of  God  the  best  privileges; 
but  no  gift  of  God  can  equal  in  value  the  enjoyment  of  his  own  presence  To  behold 
Mb  countenance  is  to  have  the  greatest  of  blessings.  (1)  God  is  our  Father ;  to  see 
him  is  to  be  at  home.  (2)  He  is  the  centre  of  ail  light  and  truth;  the  vision  of  God 
is  the  highest  knowledge.  (3)  He  is  supreme  brightness  and  beauty;  to  behold  God 
is  to  gaze  on  the  "  beatific  vision."  Heaven  consists  in  the  undimmed  vision  of  God. 
3.  An  eternal  blessedness.  God  will  not  hide  his  face  any  more.  The  hiding  was  an 
abnormal  thing.  The  words  before  us  suggest  the  idea  that  it  is  natural  for  God  to 
reveal  himself,  and  that  the  hiding  was  something  temporally  superinduced  by  man's 
sin.  Not  to  know  God  is  a  monstrously  defective  experience.  When  the  black  cloud 
has  been  dispelled  the  sun  will  shine  out  in  unwaning  splendour.  There  is  no  fading 
of  the  glory  of  heaven.     The  blessedness  of  God's  restored  people  is  eternal. 

II.  The  inspiration  that  ekstoebs  the  vision  of  God.  This  vision  has  been 
lost,  and  God  now  promises  a  restoration  of  it,  indicating  the  means  by  which  the 
happy  result  will  be  brought  to  pass.  It  is  because  God  has  poured  out  his  Spirit  upon 
the  house  of  Israel.  Eevelation  is  a  result  of  inspiration.  This  is  the  process  in  pro- 
phecy. God  reveals  his  will  through  prophets,  i.e.  by  means  of  inspired  men.  Here 
we  see  that  the  spiritual  revelation  of  the  saint,  who  may  learn  no  new  truth,  but  who 
is  brought  into  the  enjoyment  of  the  favour  of  God  and  into  communion  with  him,  is 
also  a  result  of  inspiration.  1.  Ohrisfs  redemption  leads  to  a  hestowal  of  ihe  Spirit  of 
Ood.  John  the  Baptist  promised  that  he  who  came  after  him  would  baptize  with  the 
Holy  Ghost  (Matt.  iii.  11).  Christ  promised  the  Spirit  as  "the  Comforter"  (John 
xiv.  16,  17).  Pentecost  followed  the  crucifixion  and  resurrection  of  Christ.  Christ 
has  ascended  up  on  high  to  give  gifts  unto  men;  and  the  best  of  his  gifts,  the  gift  th»t 
includes  all  others,  is  that  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  2.  The  hestowal  of  the  Spirit  of  Qod 
unveils  the  countenance  of  God.  (1)  It  purges  men's  hearts  of  the  thick  film  of  doubt 
and  earthly-mindedness  that  hides  the  vision  of  God.  (2)  It  puts  men  into  right 
telations  with  God,  so  that  he  can  manifest  his  grace  to  them.  (3)  Itdirectly  opens  the 
eyes  of  the  soul  to  see  the  truth  of  God.  (4)  It  is  itself  a  communing  Spirit  com- 
municating God  to  us. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver,  7. — The  Lord's  care  for  his  own  Name.  In  several  passages  of  his  prophecies, 
Ezekiel  lays  stress  upon  the  honour  shown  to  the  Name  of  Jehovah.  He  does  this 
especially  in  connection  with  the  predictions  of  Israel's  deliverance,  and  of  the  defeat 
and  humiliation  of  the  foes  of  Israel  and  of  God.  The  idiom  is  a  Hebrew  one,  and 
deserves  attention;  while  the  broad  moral  lessons  conveyed  are  of  a  nature  to  strengthen 
our  faith  in  the  providential  government  of  God, 

I.  What  is  God's  Name?  An  examination  of  the  passages  in  Old  Testament 
Scripture  in  which  the  expression  occurs  will  convince  the  student  that  by  the  Nauje 
We  are  to  understand  the  attributes  and  the  character  of  God.  It  is  generally  held 
that  the  name  Jehovah  signifies  the  self-existing  Being ;  and  it  might  be  argued  that 


<CH.  xxxix.  1— 29.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  BZEKIBL.  311 

all  Divine  perfections  are  involved  in  and  may  be  developed  from  the  very  definition. 
But  it  will  be  found  that  when  "  the  Name  "  of  God  is  used,  as  in  this  passage,  it  calls 
attention  to  these  two  attributes  of  Deity.  1.  He  is  righteous  in  his  judgments.  2. 
He  is  faithful  to  bis  promises. 

II.  Amonq  whom  would  God  make  his  Name  known?  To  whom  would  he  have 
his  attributes  and  the  characteristics  of  his  moral  government  revealed  with  clearness 
and  unmistakable  power?  The  text  gives  an  explicit  answer  to  this  question,  1. 
Among  the  Hebrews:  "In  the  midst  of  my  people  Israel."  These,  his  people,  had 
been  prone  to  forget  or  to  misunderstand  his  Name,  and  needed  that  their  attention 
should  be  recalled  to  the  revelation  which  Jehovah  had  given  of  himself.  2.  Among 
the  heathen :  "  The  heathen  shall  know  that  I  am  the  Lord,  the  Holy  One  in  Israel." 
In  this  case  it  was  not  a  revival  of  knowledge  that  had  lapsed  or  grown  dim ;  it  was 
a  fresh  communication.  Those  who  had  trusted  in  their  false  gods  should  have  their 
foolish  confidence  shaken ;  those  who  had  thought  lightly  of  Jehovah  should  learn  to 
revere  his  power,  and  (better  still)  should  learn  to  contemplate  the  moral  attributes 
of  the  Supreme  Power,  and  thus  receive  a  special  illumination,  which  might  be  for 
their  spiritual  good. 

III.  How  WOULD  God  effect  this  end,  and  make  his  Name  known?  1.  By 
delivering  his  people.  The  dangers  threatening  Israel  were  great,  and  their  foes  were 
formidable.  All  the  more  marvellous  was  the  interposition  wrought  upon  their  behalf. 
The  Name  of  God,  as  the  great  Deliverer,  was  manifested  and  glorified  by  the  experi- 
ence of  the  rescued  and  saved.  2.  By  destroying  the  enemies  of  his  people.  In  this 
manner  the  fame  of  the  Most  High,  the  God  of  hosts,  was  spread  abroad,  so  that  distant 
nations  were  impressed  by  the  revelation  of  his  power,  by  the  proof  of  his  universal  sway. 

Application.  The  preacher  and  teacher  of  religion  should  never  lose  sight  of  the 
fact  that  his  one  great  aim  is  the  honour  and  exaltation  of  the  Name  of  God.  This  is 
often  utterly  misrepresented,  either  through  the  childishness  or  the  malice  of  the 
«nemies  of  religion,  and  it  is  affirmed  to  involve  an  unworthy  conception  of  the  Deity, 
as  though  in  vanity  God  delighted  in  the  adulations  of  men.  This  is  anthropo- 
morphism indeed.  The  Name  of  God  is  truth,  righteousness,  holiness,  and  love.  To 
manifest  and  extol  his  Name  is  to  display  the  supremacy  of  his  glorious  attributes. 
And  than  this  man  can  have  no  higher  object  at  which  to  aim.  If  man's  chief  end  is 
to  glorify  God,  if  human  life  does  not  find  its  law  and  its  aim  in  itself,  then  it  is 
«vident  that  the  exaltation  of  the  Divine  Name  is  a  worthy  and  most  noble  end  for  the 
Ghristian  man,  and  for  the  Christian  minister,  to  set  before  him. — T. 

Ter,  10. — The  spoiler  spoiled.  There  is  something  very  picturesque  and  impressive 
in  this  prediction.  The  foes  of  Israel,  under  the  leaidership  of  Gog,  are  represented  as 
defeated,  scattered,  and  slain.  Their  bodies  are  strewn  over  the  soil  which  they  came 
in  their  haughty  self-confidence  to  conquer  and  to  possess.  The  dwellers  in  the  cities 
of  Israel  are  depicted  as  going  out  upon  the  plains  to  gather  the  weapons  of  war — the 
shields,  the  bows,  and  the  spears — which  lie  upon  the  ground  where  the  mighty  have 
fallen,  and  as  collecting  them  that  they  may  use  them  as  fuel.  The  Israelites  spare 
their  own  forests,  and  use  the  weapons  of  their  enemies  in  place  of  the  firewood  they 
have  been  accustomed  to  cut.  Thus  for  seven  years  their  necessities  in  this  respect 
are  supplied  I  The  spoiler  is  spoiled,  aud  those  who  robbed  them  are  robbed  in  turn. 
This  poetical  hyperbole  sets  forth  the  utter  confusion  of  the  enemies  of  God's  people, 
end  the  signal  and  complete  character  of  Jehovah's  interposition  and  delivering  power 
and  mercy.  It  is  impossible  to  confine  such  statements  as  these  to  any  event  which 
has  ever  happened  or  ever  vrill  happen  in  any  particular  time  or  place.  They  enun- 
ciate a  principle  of  world-wide  and  lasting  application.  Sin  is  the  great  spoiler  that 
has  entered  into  the  world  with  the  view  of  robbing  and  ruining  mankind,  and  Christ 
is  the  great  Deliverer,  who  spoils  the  spoiler,  leads  captivity  captive,  and  rescues  from 
the  threatened  destruction. 

I.  This  fact  is  entirely  contrary  to  human  undbhstandinq  and  expectation. 

IT.  This  fact  is  an  exemplification  of  a  Divine  pbinoiplb  that  the  battle 
IB  not  to  the  btrono. 

III.  This  fact  is  a  proof  of  God's  care  and  solicitude  fob  his  own. 

IV.  And  of  God's  universal  bovernmbnt  asd  control. 


«12  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [on.  xxxix.  1—29. 

V.  This  fact  ib  ak  bamjest  of  final  and  eveblastino  beoubitt  and  viotobt 

FOB   THOSE   WHOM   GOD   DBLIVBEB   AND   EBDBBM8. 

Application.  In  preaching  the  gospel  of  Christ,  stress  should  be  laid  upon  tha 
Lord's  power,  as  well  as  upon  his  love.  Christ,  in  his  resurrection,  was  proved  to  be 
"the  Son  of  God  with  power."  The  same  might  which  was  then  manifested  is  ever 
eserciserl  for  the  protection  and  preservation  of  all  sincere  Christians.  They  who 
adhere  faithfully  to  the  Saviour  need  to  be  encouraged  by  the  assurance  that  Omnipo- 
tence is  upon  their  side.  Enemies  and  opposition  they  may  have  to  encounter ;  but 
the  Lord  will  deliver  their  foes  into  their  hands.  They  shall  be  more  than  conquerors 
through  him  that  loved  them.  There  is  therefore  no  ground  for  fear  or  for  depression. 
The  Lord  shall  fight  for  them,  and  they  shall  hold  their  peace.  In  returning  and  in 
rest  they  shall  be  saved.     They  shall  pass  through  victory  to  rest. — T. 

Vers.  23,  24. — The  Divine  reason  for  IsraeVs  captivity.  Israel  is  in  prophecy  the 
representative  of  mankind,  of  the  "new  humanity"  that  God  has  redeemed  to  himself 
and  appointed  to  everlasting  life.  In  every  dispensation,  in  all  God's  dealings  with 
men,  there  has  been  the  manifestation  of  wisdom.  Nothing  that  God  has  done  has 
been  done  without  a  purpose,  an  intention.  Faith  convinces  us  of  this.  And  Scripture 
sometimes,  as  in  this  passage,  gives  us  an  insight  into  the  Divine  counsels,  and  points 
out  to  us  the  particular  reasons  by  which  the  action  of  Eternal  Wisdom  has  been 
actuated  in  the  treatment  which  we  have  received,  especially  in  so  far  as  we  have 
sinned  against  God  and  done  wickedly. 

L  The  fact  of  Israel's  bin.  Various  terms  are  employed  to  set  this  forth: 
"  iniquity,"  "  trespass,"  "  uncleanness,"  "  transiression."  By  these  various  terms  the 
Lord,  speaking  by  his  prophet,  detiotes  our  attitude  in  respect  to  God,  in  respect  to 
moral  law,  in  respect  to  the  ideal  of  perfect  human  conduct.  Kationally  and  indi- 
vidually, Israel  transgressed  and  sinned. 

II.  1'hb  Divine  displbaburb  with  Israel.  The  Lord  expressea  this  by  a  remark- 
able idiom :  "I  hid  my  face  from  them."  The  metaphor  is  simple.  As  favour  is  denoted 
by  an  open,  radiant,  smiling  countenance,  so  the  veiling  or  averting  of  the  face  which 
is  clouded  with  a  frown  denotes  censure  and  dissatisfaction,  llaking  proper  allowance 
for  the  imperfections  of  human  speech,  and  the  impossibility  of  using  adequate  language 
when  referring  to  the  Supreme,  we  may  assuredly  say  that  there  is  nothing  in  this 
representation  derogatory  to  God.  It  is  no  infirmity,  but  a  perfection  of  our  Divine 
Buler,  that  he  is  not  indifferent  to  the  moral  conduct  of  his  subjeota.  He  is  angry 
with  the  wicked  every  day.     He  cannot  look  upon  sin. 

III.  Israel's  enemies  the  ministers  of  DivmE  ebtbibdtion.  "I  gave  them 
into  the  hands  of  their  adversaries ; "  "  According  to  their  transgressions  did  I  unto 
them."  There  were  many  forms  of  chastisement  from  which  Israel  suffered.  This 
was  perhaps  the  sorest.  David  entreated  the  Lord  that,  whatever  might  happen  to 
him,  he  might  not  be  delivered  into  the  hands  of  hia  enemies.  It  was  an  enfeebling 
and  an  humiliating  form  of  chastisement  which  God's  people  were  called  upon  to  endure. 
The  attacks  of  the  foe  may  not  have  been  in  themselves  justifiable,  but  the  Buler  of 
nations  (as  is  shown  nowhere  more  effectively  than  in  this  book)  employs  instruments 
to  fulfil  his  purposes  that  are  animated  by  no  desire  for  justice  and  for  the  kingdom  of 
God.  The  surrounding  nations  were  employed  as  the  scourge  by  which  the  culprits 
were  chastised. 

IV.  Israel's  captivity  as  punitive  discipline.  It  is  remarkable  that  the  chosen 
people  of  Jehovah,  whose  nationality  was  cradled  (so  to  speak)  in  the  bondage  of 
Egypt,  were  called  upon,  centuries  afterwards,  to  endure  the  bitter  humiliation  of  exile 
and  captivity  in  the  East.  They  "  went  into  captivity  for  their  iniquity."  Punish- 
ment is  thus  declared  to  be  a  characteristic  of  Divine  government  when  dealing  with 
the  sinful  and  rebellious.  There  were  certain  ends  answered  by  the  special  form  which 
Israel's  punishment  and  humiliation  assumed ;  it  is  well  known  that,  when  the  people 
returned,  they  returned  free  from  the  taint  of  idolatry  and  from  all  temptation  to  return 
to  the  heathen  practices  into  which  they  had  been  misled.  Still,  it  was  punishment 
which  they  endured — punishment  for  past  offences,  as  well  as  correction  with  a  view 
to  future  obedience  and  subjection.  They  learned  by  bitter  experience  that  "the  way 
of  traasgressors  is  hard." — T. 


1—29.]  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIBL.       H» 

Vera.  26 — 29.— IsraePi  reitoration  a  proof  of  Divine  merey.  The  reader  of  this 
passage  cannot  but  be  impressed  with  the  conTiction  that  it  has  reference,  not  only 
to  Liiael,  but  to  the  redeemed  race  of  mao.  His  interest  in  it  is  not  merely  historical; 
it  is  personal  and  moral.  There  is  a  largeness,  a  fulness,  in  the  promises  given,  which 
can  scarcely  be  exhausted  by  the  immeSate  reference  to  the  return  from  the  Oriental 
captivity. 

I.  Dbuyebahob  ms  bestobation  abb  wBonaHT  bt  tee  baub  fowbb  that 
DEOBBBD  OAFTITITT.  "He  that  scattereth  Israel  shall  gather."  The  Father  who 
smites  has  pity ;  and  he  who  wounds  is  he  also  who  heals.  The  righteous  Ruler  and 
Judge  who  visits  transgression  with  penalties  proves  himself  to  be  the  Qod  to  whom 
belong  forgivenesses.  He  is  not  Indifferent  to  sin ;  yet  he  delights  in  mercy.  Men  are 
wont  to  picture  to  themselves  a  Deity  all  wrath  or  all  benignity.  But  revelation  shows 
ns,  in  that  Supreme  Being  who  hates  sin  and  who  corrects  the  sinner,  "  the  Saviour  of 
all  men,  specially  of  them  that  believe." 

IL  T^UFOBAL  BLESSINGS,  8E0DBITT  AND  PBOSPEBITT,  ABE  ABBUBED  TO  TEE  BEBTOBSD. 

To  Israel  the  promise  was  given  that  they  should,  upon  their  return,  dwell  safely  in 
their  land,  and  none  should  make  them  afraid.  We  blow  that  this  promise  was  only 
partially  realized,  and  that  it  must  accordingly,  so  far  as  it  refers  to  Israel,  be  con- 
sidered aa  comparative;  the  people  enjoyed  a  measure  of  security  and  peace  beyond 
what  they  had  experienced  or  could  expect  to  experience.  It  is  right  to  regard  pros- 
perity and  all  external  blessings  as  the  gift  of  God's  goodness.  And  whether  enjoyed 
now  in  this  Christian  dispensation  or  in  the  period  of  millennial  happiness  to  which  the 
Ohurch  looks  forward,  it  must  ever  be  considered  as  the  gift  of  Divine  bounty  and 
the  expression  of  Divine  love. 

in.    SfIBITUAL    BLEBSINGB    ABE    PB0MI8BD  AS  TEE    OEOIOEBT    EXPBESSION  OW  Gk>D'» 

FAvouB  TO  THE  BESTOBED.  1.  These  blessiugs  are  conveyed  by  the  outpouring  of  the 
Spirit  of  God.  It  is  impossible  to  do  other  than  refer  this  event  to  the  Day  of  Pente- 
cost, and  to  the  dispensation  of  the  Spirit  which  was  then  inaugurated.  Other  prophets 
concurred  with  Ezekiel  in  this  prediction ;  and  Peter  authoritatively  recognized  the  fulfil- 
ment of  such  prophetic  words  in  the  bestowal  of  the  promise  of  the  Father,  and  in  that 
effusion  which  commenced  at  Pentecost,  but  which  has  never  ceased.  2.  These  blessings 
are  equivalent  to  the  manifestation  of  the  Divine  favour.  The  Lord's  promise  was  no 
more  to  hide  his  face  from  his  restored  ones.  We  know  that  Israel  passed  through 
many  afflictions  subsequently  to  the  restoration ;  and  that,  on  account  of  the  rejection 
of  the  Messiah,  Israel  was  condemned  to  endure  Divine  displeasure.  We  are  therefore 
constrained  to  refer  this  promise  to  the  accepted  people  of  God,  to  whom  is  no  con- 
demnation, and  who  walk  in  the  light  of  his  countenance.  3.  These  blessings  are  the 
occasion  of  the  acknowledgment  and  of  the  hallowing  of  the  Lord's  Name.  As  is  ever 
the  case,  God  is  himself  made  the  End  of  all.     All  things  are  of  him  and  to  him. 

IV.  Impeession  fob  good  is  TO  BE  PEODUOBD  UPON  TEE  NATIONS.  In  former  times 
Israel  was  a  lesson  for  the  world,  as  is  the  Church  of  Christ  in  these  latter  days.  In  the 
favour  shown  to  God's  people,  his  Divine  hand  is  recognized.  He  is  glorified  both  by 
the  affliction  and  by  the  elevation  of  his  own.  All  nations  and  all  ages  are  summoned 
to  behold  the  work  of  the  Lord,  to  submit  to  his  power  and  to  adore  his  wisdom.  His 
treatment  of  his  own  people  does  not  end  with  them ;  it  is  designed  for  the  instruction 
and  for  the  highest  benefit  of  mankind.  There  shall  thus  be  made  known  by  the 
Church  the  manifold  wisdom  of  God.— T. 

Vers.  1 — 21. — Z%e  terr&ilt  doom  <jf  rebeli.  We  may  regard  it  as  certain  that  this 
prophecy  has  in  view  the  final  conflict  between  good  and  evil  in  this  world.  Already, 
in  the  preceding  prophecies,  Ezekiel  has  been  portraying  the  prosperous  times  of 
Messiah's  reign;  and  now  he  has  a  vision  of  an  age  still  more  remote,  when  shall  come 
the  final  clash  of  arms  between  God  and  a  rebel  world.  We  may  take  it  that  Satan, 
or  Apollyon,  will  be  the  real  leader  in  this  final  onset.  All  the  forces  of  infidelity,  and 
superstition,  and  vice,  and  earthly  pomp,  and  carnal  force  will  be  led  against  the  kingdom 
of  Emmanuel.  The  confflct  will  be  terrible,  and  defeat  of  the  world-power  will  be 
complete  and  irreparable.  The  description  of  Ezekiel  is  most  vivid  and  impressive. 
It  was  thrown  in  this  parabolic  form  in  order  to  meet  the  exigencies  of  that 
particular  age. 


314  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  BZBKIBL.    [ch.  xxxix.  1—29, 

L  Mabtial  AoaBEBBioN  IS  God'b  bnabe  fob  DBSTBnoTioN.  When  a  man  resisti 
every  friendly  counsel  of  (Jod,  God  allows  him  to  pursue  his  own  way,  and  removes 
even  the  restraints  which  before  impeded  his  ruin.  In  a  similar  way  he  deals  with 
kings  and  with  nations.  "  Bphraim  is  joined  to  his  idols :  let  him  alone  I "  Thus 
God  dealt  with  Pharaoh.  In  the  first  stages  of  Moses'  intercourse  with  Pharaoh,  we 
read,  "  And  Pharaoh  hardened  his  heart."  But  as  the  negotiation  proceeded,  and  the 
proud  king  grew  more  obstinate,  we  read,  "  The  Lord  hardened  Pharaoh's  heart."  It 
is  true  that  "  God  tempteth  no  man,"  that  is,  allures  no  man  into  sin.  Yet,  by  taking 
out  of  the  way  former  barriers  or  ceasing  to  remonstrate,  God  helps  on  the  final 
catastrophe.  There  is  no  advantage  in  prolonging  the  crisis.  There  is  great  disadvan- 
tage. Give  a  bad  man  full  scope  for  his  vile  passions,  and  he  soon  rushes  into  the  pit 
of  ruin.  In  this  way  God  purposes  to  deal  with  Gog:  "Thus  saith  the  Lord  God; 
Behold,  I  am  against  thee."  Nevertheless,  God  continues  to  say,  "  I  will  cause  thee 
to  come  up,  .  .  .  and  will  bring  thee  upon  the  mountains  of  Israel."  Worldly  success 
is  only  a  covered  snare. 

II.  Human  weapons  abe  poweblbbs  against  God's  kingdom.  "I  will  smite 
thy  bow  out  of  thy  left  hand,  and  will  cause  thine  arrows  to  fall  out  of  thy  right 
hand."  Neither  material  instruments  of  assault  nor  human  violence  of  any  kind  can 
injure  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  That  kingdom  is  spiritual,  and  has  its  foundations  in 
the  spiritual  natures  of  men,  so  that  ordinary  weapons  of  war  are  pointless.  The 
Jewish  rulers  imagined  that  they  had  uprooted  the  cause  of  Jesus  when  they  nailed 
him  with  iron  spikes  to  the  tree ;  but  three  days  later  they  discovered  how  powerless 
they  were,  and  how  deathless  his  kingdom  was.  If  falsehood  shall  prove  itself 
mightier  than  truth ;  if  rebellion  shall  show  itself  mightier  than  loyalty ;  if  wrong 
can  develop  a  greater  power  than  right ; — then,  and  then  alpne,  will  God's  kingdom 
succumb.  In  this  great  contest  weapons  must  be  suitable,  or  theyrwill  break  in  the 
wanior's  hand  and  leave  him  dismayed  and  defeated. 

III.  Wab  material  convebtbd  into  blessing.  "The  shields  and  bucklers,  the 
bows  and  arrows,  the  handstaves  and  the  spears,"  served  as  household  fuel  for  seven 
years.  The  period  mentioned  is  intended  to  denote  a  sacred  completeness.  Not  once 
merely,  but  often,  the  weapons  of  infidelity  have  been  changed  into  instruments  of 
righteousness.  The  devil's  artillery  has  been  turned  against  himself.  Lord  Lyttelton 
and  Mr.  West  undertook  to  explode  Christianity,  and  sat  down  to  prepare  their 
weapons ;  but  they  came  from  the  armoury  with  a  splendid  defence  of  the  Christian 
faith.  Saul  of  Tarsus  set  out  on  his  journey  to  assail  the  infant  Church ;  but  on  the 
way  he  changed  sides,  and  sharpened  all  his  weapons  for  the  defence  of  the  gospeL 
The  death-bed  of  Voltaire  was  enough  to  drive  all  his  followers  into  the  ranks  of  King 
Jesus.  Tom  Paine's  writings  were  so  coarse  and  scurrilous  that  present-day  infidels  are 
put  to  shame  by  them.  The  faggots  of  martyr-fires  have  kindled  a  light  which  has 
led  many  into  heaven. 

IV.  God's  foes  ahe  doomed  to  a  tebrible  destbuotion.  The  prophet's  delinea- 
tion of  the  overthrow  of  proud  antagonists  is  graphic  and  harrowing.  The  keen  sword 
of  death  is  used  with  terrific  force.  The  numbers  of  the  dead  become  a  peril  to  health 
and  to  life.  A  considerable  valley  is  set  apart  as  a  necropolis.  Seven  months,  i.e.  a 
whole  cycle  of  time,  is  required  for  the  sickening  work  of  sepulture.  So  terrible  and 
complete  is  the  carnage  that  the  whole  population  of  the  land  employs  itself  in  burying 
the  d^d.  Not  a  single  soldier  among  the  foe  survives  to  tell  to  posterity  the  tale  of 
woe.  It  is  an  unsparing  slaughter.  Thus  shall  perish  all  who  refuse  to  serve  their 
Makei  and  to  work  righteousness.  Obedience  is  life ;  rebellion  is  death — death  without 
alleviation. 

V.  Basest  dibhonoub  is  added  to  destbuotion.  With  the  eye  of  a  prophet 
Bzekiel  foresees  the  contempt  and  dishonour  in  store  for  the  slain.  Their  dead  bodie* 
shall  become  a  banquet  for  the  brutes.  Birds  of  prey  shall  feed  upon  human  flesh. 
Wild  beasts  from  the  forest  shall  quench  their  thirst  in  the  blood  of  warrior-kings. 
The  doom,  though  severe,  is  equitable.  These  slaves  of  wickedness — braggarts  iu 
crime — ^had  degenerated  to  a  level  lower  than  the  beasts  of  the  field,  and  lower  than 
the  beasts  shall  be  their  final  portion.  As  men  fear  dishonour  more  than  they  fear 
death,  so,  with  thoughtful  kindness,  God  would  deter  them  from  sin  by  the  prospect 
of  coming  shame. 


OH.  xxxDC.  1— 29.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PEOPHET  EZEKIEL.  315 

VI.  God's  terbitoby  shall  be  puEiriED.  "That  they  may  cleanse  the  land." 
Whatever  measures  are  required  to  purge  God's  universe  from  sin,  these  measures  shall, 
sooner  or  later,  be  employed.  Our  God  has  transcendent  patience  with  men ;  but  no 
advantage  can  accrue  to  an  undue  prolonging  of  probatiou.  When  measures  of  restora- 
tion to  virtue  have  been  well  tried,  then  the  earth  shall  be  swept  of  its  impurities  with 
the  besom  of  di  ath.  The  God  of  holiness  will  not  allow  his  house  to  be  defiled  for 
ever.  The  evil  of  sin  shall  cease.  God  shall  be  "  all  in  alL"  The  final  triumph  of 
God  ia  certain.  As  surely  as  this  globe  was  created  this  globe  shall  be  purified.  The 
same  voice  that  said,  "  Let  there  be  light,"  has  said  also,  "  There  shall  be  no  more 
death."  To  the  eye  of  the  inspired  prophet  this  grand  terminus  of  evil  was  visible. 
"  It  is  done !  saith  the  Lord  God ; "  and  God's  promise  is  as  sure  as  its  perform- 
ance,—D. 

Vers.  21 — 29. — God'a  revelation  of  himsdf  a  fount  of  blessing.  Ignorance  of  God 
and  strength  of  animal  appetite  are  the  two  primal  founts  of  ungodliness.  Animal 
appetite  is,  in  order  of  time,  the  first  source  of  vice ;  but  as  the  understanding  opens 
to  receive  knowledge,  this  source  of  evil  may  be  checked.  To  this  end  God  deigns  to 
make  himself  known.  A  clear  vision  of  God  is  a  strong  antidote  to  evil  propensity. 
Faith  in  God  is  the  great  regenerative  principle.  Therefore,  through  the  procession  of 
the  ages,  Gud  has  been  revealing  his  qualities  and  excellences  to  our  race.  From  this 
passage  we  learn — 

I.  That  God  beyeals  himself  as  the  aotive  Bulee  in  human  ArPAiBS.  Such 
men  in  Ohaldea  as  had  faith  in  their  idols  would  attribute  the  prosperity  of  their  king- 
dom and  their  success  in  war  to  the  power  of  their  deities.  Others,  and  probably  the 
larger  portion,  would  conclude  that  military  fortunes  were  matters  of  chance,  and  that 
the  gods  took  little,  if  any,  interest  in  the  affairs  of  men.  Human  industry,  sagacity, 
and  courage, — these  seemed  then,  as  now,  the  main  factors  in  success.  The  general 
impression  was  that  the  gods  lived  in  remote  serenity,  sublimely  indifferent  to  the 
needs  and  strifes  of  men.  Unbelief,  violence,  and  stoicism  followed.  Our  God  took 
pains  to  dispel  this  mistake.  The  living  God  takes  a  Fatherly  interest  in  every  man — 
in  his  personal,  domestic,  and  national  concerns.  Not  a  hair  of  his  head  can  be  touched 
without  the  cognizance  of  God.  He  administers  joy  and  sorrow,  success  and  disap- 
pointment, with  judicious  care.  The  God  of  heaven  manifests  a  friendly  activity  in 
all  human  aifairs,  as  great  as  if  this  globe  were  the  sole  object  of  his  care.  "  In  all  our 
affiictions  he  is  afSicted." 

II.  That  God  bevealb  himself  as  the  seal  Fount  of  all  blessino.  It  wag 
Qod'^  endeavour  to  make  it  clear  to  the  world  that  Israel's  prosperity  was  Jehovah's 
gift ;  that  Israel's  exile  was  the  effect  of  Jehovah's  anger.  When  Israel  escaped  from 
Egyptian  bondage,  plainly  it  was  by  the  interposition  of  Jehovah.  Their  successful 
march  through  the  desert  was  due  to  the  leadership  of  God.  Their  triumphal  march 
through  Canaan  was  widely  attributed  to  the  personal  power  of  Jehovah.  As  often  as 
they  loyally  served  him  he  smiled  upon  their  fields  and  gave  them  prolific  harvests. 
As  often  as  they  forsook  him  disaster  befell  them.  If  they  asked  his  guidance  he 
directed  them  in  the  choice  of  a  King.  From  his  hand  they  had  personal  fiberty,  just 
laws,  beneficent  government,  agricultural  plenty,  national  security,  and  the  joys  of 
ennobling  religion.  He  taught  their  "  hands  to  war,  their  fingers  to  fight."  Unless 
the  Hebrews  were  as  blind  as  a  door-post,  they  must  have  perceived  that  every  good 
they  had  came  from  the  liberal  hand  of  Jehovah.    To  them  he  was  the  Fountain  of  life. 

III.  That  God  eevbals  HiMSELr  to  the  wobld  as  the  Wobkeb  op  eiqhteous- 
ness.  "  The  he^,then  shall  know  that  the  house  of  Israel  went  into  captivity  for  their 
iniquity."  We  must  never  lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  God  had  raised  up  Israel 
specially  to  reveal  to  the  world  the  righteousness  of  God.  The  Hebrews  were  ordained 
to  educate  the  world  in  the  truths  and  principles  of  righteousness.  They  were 
appointed  to  be  par  excellence  a  moral  people,  a  nation  in  whom  conscience  was 
highly  developed.  The  gods  of  paganism  were  renowned  for  strength  and  for  cunning. 
The  idea  of  righteousness  they  had  not  deified.  Hence  Jehovah  was  concerned  to  be 
known  as  essential  purity.  To  him  sin  is  intolerable — ^the  root  of  all  discord  and  all 
misery.  The  exile  was  no  haphazard.  It  was  Divine  punishment  for  grievous  sin. 
Dtfeat  in  war  was  the  rod  of  God's  righteous  anger.    Hence  also  the  Jewish  subjuga- 


81«  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZBKIEL.    [ch.  xxxix.  1— 2& 

tion  would  not  be  pannanent.  The  element  of  life  was  in  the  people  still ;  and,  as 
soon  as  repentance  and  moral  renovation  appeared,  return  to  independence  and  to 
Palestine  foUowerl.     It  was  a  moral  discipline. 

IV.  That  previous  eevelations  op  God  were  preparatobt  to  the  obeat 
EEVBLATION  OF  HIS  OBACE.  "  Therefore  thus  saith  the  Lord,  Now  will  I  .  .  .  have 
mercy  upon  the  whole  honse  of  Israel,  and  will  be  jealous  for  my  holj'  Name."  The 
glory  of  God  is  his  compassion — pure,  unstinted,  self-pscrificing  love.  To  Moses,  whn 
craved  to  see  God's  glory,  the  responding  voice  proclaimed,  "  The  Lord  God,  merciful 
and  gracious."  Mioah  asked,  in  profound  surprise,  "  Who  is  a  God  like  unto  thee  ?  " 
In  what  respect  did  he  mean?  In  the  splendours  of  his  kingly  state?  In  the  might 
of  his  arm?  In  the  range  of  his  government?  Nay.  "  Who  is  a  God  like  unto  thee, 
that  pardoneth  iniquity,  transgression,  and  sin?"  Herein  lies  the  central  excellence  of 
Jehovah,  viz.  that,  providing  for  the  violated  interests  of  justice  by  his  own  suffering, 
he  freely  forgives,  renovates,  and  uplifts  the  guilty  sons  of  men.  Men  have  not  seen 
the  full  significance  of  his  Name,  nor  conjectured  the  dazzling  radiance  of  his  goodness, 
until  they  have  seen  his  meicy — seen  him  as  the  Healer  of  the  fallen.  But  his  mercy 
is  a  righteous  mercy.  Whom  he  pardons,  he  purifies.  Righteousness  is  the  foundation 
on  which  he  erects  the  mngniflcent  structure  of  his  grace.  So  far  as  we  know  at 
present,  this  is  the  climax  of  his  self-revelations. 

V.  That  the  PERPETaAL  enjoyment  op  his  pavotjb  is  guaranteed  by  the 
gift  of  his  Spirit.  "  Neither  will  I  hide  my  face  any  more  from  them ;  for  I  have 
poured  out  my  Spirit  upon  the  house  of  Israel,  saith  the  Lord  God."  The  possession 
of  prosperity  and  blessing  outside  a  man  depends  upon  the  state  of  feeling  and  desire 
within  a  man.  And  a  right  state  of  mind  Godward  is  secured  to  the  genuine  Israelite 
by  the  indwelling  of  God's  mighty  Spirit.  If  men  cannot  withstand  temptation  in 
their  native  and  unaided  state,  God  will  not  leave  them  to  themselves.  As  the  supreme 
culmination  of  all  blessing,  God  will  impart  himself  to  humble,  suppliant  men.  He 
will  inweave  his  own  Spirit  into  our  spirit.  He  will  unite  himself  with  us  by  indis- 
soluble bonds — will  portf  his  life  into  the  empty  channels  of  oiur  nature.  His  great 
salvation  is  first  internal,  then  external.  We  cannot  miss  our  highest  destiny  if  God, 
by  his  Spirit,  be  within  us.  Then,  surely,  we  have  the  highest  guarantee  of  safety, 
elevation,  and  noble  joy.  We  shall  be  renovated  in  the  very  root-principles  of  our 
nature,  moulded  into  a  higher  life  by  the  silent  workmanship  of  his  Spirit.  His  mercy 
wiU  never  forsake  us. — D. 

Ver.  3. — Divine  interposition.  God  would  smite  the  bow  out  of  the  left  hand  and 
cause  the  arrows  to  fall  out  of  the  right  hand  of  the  impious  invader.  He  would  disarm 
hiin ;  he  would  interpose  to  break  his  purpose,  to  arrest  him  in  his  evil  course.  We 
have  here — 

I.  God's  eighteous  intbeposition.  God  permits  evil — in  the  form  of  bad  institu- 
tions, wicked  governments  or  powers,  unprincipled  men — to  go  certain  lengths,  and  when 
they  think  they  have  finally  established  themselves  he  lays  his  hand  upon  them,  takes 
away  their  weapons,  reduces  them  to  helplessness  and  humiliation.  "  A  fool  doth  not 
understand  it,"  but  the  very  prosperity  of  the  wicked  is  only  a  preparation  for  their 
utter  and  irrecoverable  downfall ;  "  When  the  workers  of  iniiiuity  do  flourish,  it  is  that 
they  shall  be  destroyed  for  ever"  (Ps.  xcii.  6,  7).  God  interposes  to  smite  the  weapons 
out  of  the  hand  of  the  disloyal  and  of  the  mischievous  when :  1.  He  causes  death  to 
overtake  the  guilty  before  his  time.  And  he  is  continually  doing  this ;  for  under  the 
action  of  his  laws,  which  are  at  once  severe  and  beneficent,  the  vicious  man  is  the 
victim  of  his  vice  and  the  violent  man  of  his  violence.  The  one  can  sow  no  more  of 
his  pernicious  seed,  and  the  other  can  do  no  more  of  his  lawless  harm,  because  God  lias 
smitten  them,  and  their  weapons  fall  from  their  hand.  2.  He  makes  the  unprincipled 
adventurer  to  suffer  an  irretrievable  disaster ;  when  the  man  who  has  climbed  to  a 
throne  by  usurpation  and  bloodshed,  and  wielded  authority  in  the  exercise  of  despotic 
power,  suffers  some  disaster  which  sends  him  to  the  lonely  rock  or  to  the  quiet  country 
house  for  thu  rest  of  his  days.  3.  He  breaks  the  schemes  of  the  wily  plotter;  when 
some  dissatisfied,  and  consequently  malignant  and  even  (it  may  be)  murderous  citizen 
determines  to  wreak  his  vengeance  on  those  whom  he  takes  to  be  his  enemies,  and 
when,  in  the  midst  of  his  machinations,  his  plans  are  discovered  and  overthrown. 


OH.  XXXIX.  1—29.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIBL.  817 

(1)  Let  the  wicked  pause  before  they  begin  their  wicked  cotirse.  They  take  many 
things  into  the  account ;  let  them  not  leave  this  one  out  of  their  reckoning,  that  when 
they  have  reached  the  field  of  their  proposed  achievement,  though  they  may  reach  it 
Well  armed  and  eager  for  the  fight,  there  may  come  down  upon  them,  out  of  the 
heavens,  a  blow  which  will  smite  their  weapons  out  of  their  hand,  and  leave  them 
"  naked  to  their  enemies."  (2)  Let  the  righteous  hope,  even  if  they  be  outnumbered 
and  out-weaponed.  It  is  not  every  well-equipped  army  that  wins  the  battle.  Victory 
does  not  necessarily  go  with  the  latest  rifles  and  the  cannon  that  carry  the  farthest. 
There  is  one  Power  that  presides  over  all  the  forces  that  are  at  work ;  when  he  will  and 
as  he  will,  he  will  interpose  on  behalf  of  his  children,  and  those  who  seemed  so  strong 
and  80  invincible  will  stand  like  a  disarmed  soldier  in  the  midst  and  in  the  power  of 
his  enemies.     It  is  worth  while,  by  way  of  contrast,  to  glance  at — 

IT.  God's  obacious  besumption.  He  who  "smites  the  bow  out  of  the  hand"  of 
the  enemy  is  the  One  who  gently  and  graciously  takes  the  sword  out  of  the  hand  of 
his  own  soldiers,  that  he  may  place  on  their  head  the  "  crown  of  righteousness,"  the 
"  crown  of  life."  When  God  sends  the  feebleness  which  can  do  no  more  active  work 
below,  or  when  he  comes  to  us  in  death,  he  resumes  the  weapon  he  once  put  into  our 
hands,  and  either  (in  the  one  case)  bids  us  wait  his  time  and  our  reward,  or  (in  the 
other)  he  takes  us  where  a  stronger  and  a  wiser  hand  will  wield  a  far  better  weapon 
in  a  much  nobler  sphere. — 0. 

Ver.  6. — Falling  on  the  field.  "  Thou  shalt  fall  upon  the  open  field."  These  words 
are  clearly  to  be  taken  as — 

I.  A  SERIOUS  PENALTY.  The  hosts  of  the  invader  should  encounter  those  whom 
they  thought  to  defeat,  and  be  by  them  defeated  and  slain ;  they  would  perish  where 
they  fought,  beneath  the  heavens,  on  the  open  field.  Now,  a  life  of  sin  is  only  too 
likely  to  lead  to  such  a  death  as  men  would  not  willingly  die,  and  such  a  death  "on 
the  open  field  "  of  battle  is  fitted  to  suggest :  1.  A  death  of  violence,  or  in  some  way 
that  is  unnatural.  Sin  begets  strife,  hatred,  jealousy,  the  dominance  of  some  evil 
passion ;  and  in  how  many  cases  does  this  lead  to  the  loss  of  life  by  some  unnatural 
means !  Instead  of  passing  peacefully  away,  according  to  the  order  of  nature,  dying 
under  his  own  roof  and  in  his  own  chamber,  a  sinful  man,  more  especially  if  he  be  a 
man  who  indulges  in  the  greater  transgressions,  is  likely  enough  to  die  an  unnatural 
death  in  some  form  or  other.  2.  A  death  in  loneliness.  The  hosts  of  Gog  were  to  be 
stretched  in  the  valley,  and,  though  they  would  indeed  keep  one  another*  company, 
how  different  is  the  near  neighboiurhood  of  wounded  and  dying  suldiers  from  the 
presence  of  the  nearest  and  dearest  of  human  kindred  and  of  beloved  friends  I  How 
often  has  a  sinful  course  led  the  erring  one  to  die  a  lonely  death,  far  froaa  a  father's 
grasp,  from  a  mother's  ministry,  from  the  sympathy  and  succour  of  dear  ones  at  home  1 
3.  A  death  in  the  midst  of  life.  It  is  not  the  aged,  but  the  strong  and  the  young,  who 
go  forfh  to  battle  and  die  on  the  open  field.  The  army  of  the  slain  in  the  open  field 
is  a  large  company  of  men  who  have  perished  before  their  time;  their  days  are  incom- 
plete ;  they  have  been  cut  off  from  many  (or  from  some)  of  the  possibilities  of  life,  of 
its  engagements  and  achievements.  This,  too,  is  the  frequent,  the  continually  recurring, 
consequence  of  an  evil  course.  They  who  enter  upon  it  may  reckon  that  their  life 
will  not  hold  all,  or  nearly  all,  the  blessings  which  are  the  heritage  of  the  holy  and  the 
wise.  4.  A  death  without  the  consolations  of  piety.  These  are  seldom,  indeed,  found 
"  on  the  open  field ; "  and  they  are  usually  absent  from  the  experience  of  the  man  who 
abandons  himself  to  an  evil  life.  But  while  these  words  are  meant  as  a  penalty,  they 
may  be  regarded,  on  the  other  hand,  as — 

n.  Ah  acceptable  promise.  For  the  Christian  workman  would  most  willingly 
"fall  upon  the  open  field"  of  sacred  usefulness.  There  is  no  vision  of  death  more 
welcome  to  an  earnest  spirit  than  that  of  an  end  arrived  at  in  the  very  midst  of  useful 
•nd  fruitful  activities.  Oood  it  may  be  to  spend  some  months  in  retirement  and  con- 
templation before  the  eyes  close  in  death  and  open  in  immortality;  yet  shall  we  not 
say  that  it  is  letter  to  work  on,  in  untiring  and  joyous  devotion,  building  up  tha  king- 
dom of  Christ,  cheering  and  comforting  the  feeble,  raising  up  the  fallen,  leading  the 
undecided  into  the  fold  of  the  good  Shepherd,  striking  strong  and  faithful  blows  for 
righteousness  and  heavenly  wisdom,  and,  "falling  on  the  field"  of  spiritual  o<«flict, 


318  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET   EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xxxix.  1— 29, 

pass  from  the  Jbattle-ground  of  earth  to  the  peaceful  shores  and  the  blessed  scenes  of 
heaven  ? — 0. 

Vers.  17 — 20. — Degradation  and  reversal.  The  scene  before  us  is  painful ;  it  hardly 
befits  description ;  we  cannot  dwell  upon  it  without  turning  from  it  with  repulsion. 
But  we  may  so  far  realize  it  in  our  thought  as  to  learn  two  lessons  respecting  the  issue 
of  evil,  the  sad  and  painful  consequences  of  sin.     These  are — 

I.  Deobasation.  The  imclean  birds  of  the  air  and  the  foul  beasts  of  the  field  eating 
the  flesh  and  drinking  the  blood  *'of  the  princes  of  the  earth"!  To  what  a  miserable 
and  shameful  death  has  human  greatness,  human  dignity,  fallen  1  For  those  who  had 
sat  on  the  loftiest  seats  of  honour,  and  moved  in  the  highest  spheres  of  action,  to  lie 
unburied  on  the  enemy's  soil,  and  to  furnish  a  meal  for  carrion-birds  and  for  "  four- 
footed  beasts "  1  Could  dishonour  or  degradation  go  further  than  this?  And  is  not 
degradation  the  constant  end  of  persistent  wrong,  of  wilful  and  wanton  disobedience 
to  the  Word  of  God  ?  And  shall  we  not  acknowledge,  when  we  think  of  it,  that  some 
of  those  things  which  seem  to  most  men  allowable,  and  some  which  seem  even  honour- 
able and  desirable,  are,  in  the  sight  of  God,  deplorable  and  condemnable,  because  they 
are  really  a  degradation  and  a  descent?  This  is  so  when ;  1.  The  powers  of  the  human 
soul  are  exhausted  upon  very  small  things;  when  men  seek  their  chief  satisfaction,  not 
in  their  relationship  to  God,  in  their  service  of  Christ,  but  in  the  petty  honours  and 
conventional  proprieties,  and  sensuous  gratifications  of  this  passing  world.  To  allow 
the  things  of  utter  unimportance  to  absorb  the  manifold  ami  noble  powers  of  heart  and 
mind,  leaving  no  room  for  the  heavenly  and  the  Divine,  is  surely  a  pitiful  degradation. 
Men  do  not  know,  they  cannot  see,  how  they  are  lowering  their  life,  how  they  are 
dishonouring  themselves.  Similarly  and  more  obviously  when  :  2.  The  lower  passions 
tyrannize  over  the  soul ;  when  covetousness,  or  the  craving  for  alcoholic  or  for  social 
excitement,  or  the  demon  of  lust,  or  jealousy,  or  overweening  and  maddening  ambition, 
possesses  the  soul  and  leads  it  astray ;  any  one  of  these  passions  will  lead  a  man  down 
into  very  dark  depths;  he  has  become  the  prey  of  the  spoiler.  3.  Human  life  is 
reduced  to  a  pursuit  of  mere  amusement  or  passing  gratification.  4.  The  forces  of  a 
country  are  employed,  not  in  the  enrichment  and  the  elevation  of  the  people,  but  in 
fighting  the  armies  and  despoiling  the  strength  and  wealth  of  neighbouring  powers. 

n.  Rbveksal.  Ordinarily  and  naturally  birds  and  beasts  provide  the  sacrifice  for 
men.  Here,  however,  the  case  is  reversed,  and  men  provide  a^  sacrifice  for  them. 
Properly,  men  sit  down  to  the  table  on  which  bird  and  beast  are  set  forth  for  food ; 
here,  however,  men  are  placed  upon  the  table,  and  bird  and  beast  are  the  partakers. 
What  a  strange  and  pitiful  reversal!  But  under  the  dominion  of  sin,  what  do  we  look 
for  but  anomalies  and  reversals?  1.  Instead  of  man  moving  constantly  upward,  yre 
find  him  moving  steadily  downward.  2.  Instead  of  habit  being  the  faithful  and  valu- 
able servant  of  man,  it  becomes  its  tyrannous  and  unrelenting  master.  3.  Instead  of 
asking  how  we  can  serve  men  at  every  turn  and  in  every  possible  way,  we  ask  how  we 
can  use  them,  how  we  can  make  them  serve  us.  4.  Instead  of  our  seeking  God  with 
the  eagerness  that  will  not  be  denied,  we  hold  aloof  or  wander  away,  and  he  is  seeking 
US  with  a  patience  that  does  not  fail  and  that  follows  us  through  many  rebellious 
years.  6.  Instead  of  the  felt  nearness  of  God  being  a  heritage  and  a  joy,  it  becomea 
an  inconvenience  and  an  intrusion.  6.  Instead  of  death  being  regarded  as  the  heginning 
of  the  larger  and  better  life,  it  is  treated  as  the  melancholy  end  of  the  life  un  earth. 
But  Christ  comes  to  revolutionize  and  reverse  the  anomalies  and  the  reveises  of  sin; 
and  thus  to  bring  again  the  primeval  blessedness.  Happy  they  who  learn  of  him  and 
follow  him,  for  they  will  be  restored  to  the  truth  and  the  life  which  they  have  lost  1 — C. 

Vers.  21 — 29. — God  his  oivn  Interpreter.  The  final  result  of  this  great  conflict 
between  Gog  and  the  people  of  Jehovah  will  prove  to  be  that  God's  Name  is  hallowed 
as  it  never  was  before.  There  had  been  great  misconstruction  of  his  ways  and  mistake 
as  tu  his  purpose,  but  all  should  be  made  clear. 

I.  Goi)  MUCH  MIBUSDEB8T00D.  How  seriously  and  sadly  God  has  been  and  is  mis- 
understood is  seen  in  the  facts  that  (1)  his  very  existence  has  been  denied;  (2)  he  hai 
been  mistaken  for  a  blind,  unintelligent  Force,  without  any  knowledge  or  character ; 
(S)  his  unity  has  been  disregarded,  and  his  manifold  activities  referred  to  a  plurality 


OH.  sx.  1—49.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PEOPHET  EZBKIEL. 


81» 


of  heavenly  powers  j  (4)  he  has  been  belieyed  to  be  occupied  with  himself  and  indif- 
ferent to  the  conduct  and  the  cliaracter  of  his  children ;  (5)  he  lias  been  represented 
as  partial,  or  as  malevolent,  or  as  unrelentiugly  and  inconsiderately  severe,  or  as  simply 
good-natured  without  any  concern  for  the  righteousness  of  his  rule  and  the  moral 
integrity  of  his  subjects,  or  as  tied  and  bound  by  the  laws  which  he  has  instituted,  lo 
as  to  be  wholly  unable  to  interpose  in  the  affairs  of  men. 

II.  God  impebfeotlt  explained.  Many,  indeed,  have  been  the  interpreters  who 
have  undertaken  to  "justify  the  ways  of  God  to  men ; "  and  very  unsatisftictory  have 
their  explanations  been.  They  may  have  given  a  measure  of  comfort  to  a  few  and 
for  a  brief  time.  But  as  the  world  has  moved  on,  and  "  the  thoughts  of  men  have 
widened,"  most  of  these  solutions  have  gone  their  way,  and  given  place  to  others  which  , 
in  their  turn  have  been  exploded  and  have  disappeared. 

III.  God  iktebpbeting  himself.     Cuwper's  line  is  true  enough— 

"  Ood  it  liis  own  Interpreter." 

He  does  make  plain  that  which  was  inexplicable  and  perplexing.  Thus  we  find  that 
(vers.  21 — 24)  the  heathen  nations  were  in  time  made  to  see  that  the  Jews  were  not 
taken  captive  by  them  because  (as  they  once  igno.rantly  supposed)  Jehovah  was  unable 
to  protect  them,  but  because  he  was  determined  to  punish  them  for  their  transgressions. 
And  we  find  further  (vers.  28,  29)  that  Israel  at  length  understood  that  he  who  sent 
them  into  captivity  and  then  brought  them  forth  therefrom  was  in  very  deed  and 
truth  "the  Lord  their  God,"  whom  they  should  serve,  and  in  whose  service  they 
would  find  security  and  peace.  We  find  ourselves  perplexed  by  many  insoluble  pro- 
blems; serious  difficulties  respecting  our  own  humau  life,  and  the  dealings  of  our 
Divine  Father  with  ourselves ;  more  serious  difficulty  and  perhaps  distressing  darkness 
as  to  God's  government  of  the  human  world.  We  wonder  why  he  permitted  this  and 
that ;  why  he  does  not  act  when  and  how  we  should  expect  that  he  would ;  how  he 
can  be  both  just  and  kind  wlien  such  and  such  things  are  as  they  are  and  as  they 
ought  not  to  be,  etc.  Let  us :  1.  Bemember  that  in  the  light  of  the  present  we  can 
understand  much  of  the  once-mysterious  past.  2.  Be  assured  that  in  the  light  of 
the  future  we  shall  perfectly  understand  that  which  is  troubling  and  even  burdenins; 
us  now.  God  will  interpret  himself,  as  he  has  been  doing  all  through  the  ages  of 
humau  history.  We  shall  see  one  day  what  we  now  believe,  that  "  all  his  paths  we 
mercy  and  truth." — 0. 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTBB  XL. 


The  magnificent  temple-vision,  as  it  is 
Dsually  styled,  a  description  of  which  forms 
the  closing  section  of  this  book  (ch.  xl. — 
xlviii.),  was  the  last  extended  "  word  "  com- 
aiunicated  to  the  prophet,  and  was  given 
Mm  in  the  five  and  twentieth  year  of  the 
Captivity,  t'.e.  about  B.O.  675.  Two  years 
later  he  received  a  brief  revelation  concern- 
ing Egypt,  which,  in  compiling  his  volume, 
he  incorporated  with  the  other  prophecies 
relating  to  the  same  subject  (ch.  xxix.  17— 
21).  Of  the  present  oracle  as  a  whole  the 
significance  will  be  best  understood  when 
its  several  parts  hare  been  examined  in 
detail.  Meanwhile  it  may  suffice  to  note 
that  it  manifestly  connects  itself  with  the 
promise  in  ch.  xzxvii  27,  28,  and  forms  an 
appropriate  conclusion  to  the  series  of  con- 


solatory predictions  which  the  prophet  began 
to  utter  when  tidings  came  to  him  that  the 
city  was  smitten  (ch.  xxxiii.  22, 23).  Having 
set  forth  the  moral  and  spiritual  conditions 
upon  which  aloue  restoration  was  possible 
for  Israel  (ch.  xxxiii.  21 — xxxiv.),  announced 
the  destruction  of  all  Israel's  ancient 
enemies,  of  whom  Edom  was  the  standing 
type  (oh.  XXXV.),  foretold  the  dawning  of  a 
better  day  for  Israel  (oh.  xxxvi.),  when  she 
should  be  resuscitated,  reunited,  and  re-es- 
tablished in  her  old  land,  with  Jehovah's 
sanctuary  in  its  midst  (oh.  xxxvii.),  and 
predicted  the  utter  and  final  overthrow  of 
all  future  combinations  of  hostile  powea 
against  her  (ch.  xxxviii.,  xxxix.),  the  piia> 
phet  proceeds  to  develop  the  thought  t* 
which  he  has  abeady  alluded,  that  of 
Israel's  re-establishment  in  Canaan,  and  to 
■ketch  an  outline  of  the  reorganized  cois 


320 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIBL.      [oh.  XL.  1—49. 


munity  or  kingdom  of  God  as  that  had  been 
shown  him  in  viaion.  His  material  he  ar- 
ranges in  three  main  divisionB,  speaking 
first  of  a  re-ereoted  temple  (oh.  zl. — ^xliii.), 
next  of  a  reorganized  worship  (oh.  xliv. — 
xlvi.),  and  lastly  of  a  redistributed  territory 
(oli.xlvii.jxlviii.).  That  Ezekiel,  sorrowing 
over  the  first  Israel's  glories  which  had 
vanished  with  the  fall  of  Jerusalem  and 
the  burning  of  her  temple,  and  filled  with 
eager  anticipations  of  the  golden  era  which 
was  then  beginning  to  loom  np  before  him 
in  OTer  fairer  proportions  and  brighter 
colours, — that  Ezekiel  himself  may  have 
inwardly  believed  or  hoped  the  picture  he 
was  then  placing  on  his  canvas  would  be 
ultimately  realized  upon  the  old  soil,  is  by 
no  means  improbable ;  that  the  Holy  Spirit, 
the  real  Author  of  the  temple-vision,  was 
draughting  for  tbe  new  Israel,  soon  to  arise 
from  the  ashes  of  the  old,  a  fresh  religious 
and  political  constitution,  which  could  not 
be  satisfied  with  any  merely  local,  temporal, 
a]id  material  realization,  such  as  might  be 
given  to  it  in  Palestine  on  the  close  of  the 
exile,  but  reached  out  to  something  larger, 
broader,  and  more  spiritual,  even  to  the 
Israel  of  Messianic  times,  i.e.  to  the  Church 
of  G«d  in  Christian  ages ; — ^tbat  the  Holy 
Spirit  had  some  such  design  is  at  least  an 
idea  which  one  might  be  pardoned  for  enter- 
taining. (For  the  different  views  which 
have  been  held  as  to  the  proper  interpre- 
tation of  tliis  vision,  gee  note  at  the  end  of 
«h.  xlviii.) 

Vers.  1 — 4. — The  introduetion  to  the  vision. 

Ver.  1. — In  the  five  and  twentieth  year 
«f  our  captivity ;  i.e.  in  b.o.  575,  assuming 
Jehoiakin's  deportation  to  have  taken  place 
B.o.  600,  i.e.  in  the  fiftieth  year  of  the 
pi'opliet's  age,  in  the  twenty-fifth  of  his 
prophetic  calling,  and  in  the  fouiteenth 
after  the  fall  of  Jerusalem.  As  tliu  last 
note  of  time  was  the  twelfth  year  (ch.  xxxii. 
17),  it  may  be  assumed  the  interval  was 
largely  occupied  in  receiving  and  delivering 
the  prophecies  that  fall  between  those  dates, 
though  it  is  more  thun  likely  ^  period  of 
silence  preceded  the  vision  of  which  this 
last  section  of  the  book  preserves  an  account. 
If  not  the  last  of  the  prophet's  utterance! 
(see  oh.  xxiz.  17),  it  was  beyond  question 
the  grandest  and  most  momentous.  Accord- 
ingly, the  prophet  notes  witli  his  customary 
exactness  that  the  vision  came  to  him  in  the 
beg^inning  of  the  year,  which  Hitzig,  whom 


Dr.  Currey,  in  the  '  Speaker's  Commentary,' 
follows,  believes  tc>  have  been  a  jnbllee 
year,  which  began  on  the  tenth  day  of  the 
seventh  month.  As,  however,  tbe  practice 
of  commencing  the  year  with  this  month 
was  not  introduced  among  the  Jews  till 
after  the  exile,  and  as  Ezekiel  everywhere 
follows  the  purely  Mosaic  arrangement  of 
the  year,  the  presumption  is  that  the  begin- 
ning of  the  year  here  alluded  to  was  the 
month  Abib,  and  that  the  tenth  day  of  the 
month  was  the  day  on  which  the  Torah 
enjoined  the  selection  of  a  lamb  for  the 
Passover.  Indeed,  the  two  clauses  in  Eze- 
kiel read  like  an  abbreviation  of  the  Mosaic 
statute  (Exod.  xii.  2,  3) — a  circumstance 
sufficiently  striking  and  probably  significant, 
though  emphasis  should  not,  with  Hengsten- 
berg,  be  laid  upon  the  fact  that  every  word 
in  Ezelriel's  copy  is  found  in  the  Exodus 
original.  On  tliat  day,  which  was  the 
anniversary  of  the  beginning  of  a  merciful 
deliverance  to  Israel  in  Egypt,  of  the  initial 
step  in  a  gracious  process  of  transforming 
Pharaoh's  captives  into  a  nation, — on  that 
day  (for  emphasis  the  selfsame  day,  as  in 
ch.  xxiv.  2),  the  prophet's  soul  was  rapt 
into  an  ecstasy  (see  on  ch.  i.  3),  in  which  he 
seemed  to  be  transported  thither,  t.e.  to- 
wards the  smitten  city,  and  a  disclosure 
made  to  him  concerning  that  new  com- 
munity which  Jehovah  was  about  to  form 
out  of  old  Israel. 

Ver.  2. — In  the  visions  of  God;  t.e.  in  the 
clairvoyant  state  which  had  been  super- 
induced upon  him  by  the  hand  of  God,  and 
in  whiph  lie  beoame  conscious  both  of  bodily 
sensations  and  mental  perceptions  transcend- 
ing those  that  were  possible  to  him  in  his 
natural  condition.  TTpon  a  very  high  moun- 
tain (comp.  Matt.  iv.  8;  Lnke  iv.  5).  Schro- 
der atands  alone  in  taking  hv.  as  "  beside " 
rather  than  "upon,"  other  interpreters  con- 
sidering that  hvi  has  here  the  force  of  ^J, 
as  in  ch.  xviii.  6,  and  ch.  xxxi.  12.  That 
this  mountain,  though  resembling  the  temple 
hill  in  Jevusalem,  was  not  that  in  reality, 
but  "  the  mountain  of  the  Lord's  house  "  of 
Messianic  times  (see  on  ch.  xliii.  12;  and 
comp.  ch.  xvii,  22,  23 ;  xx.  40 ;  Isa.  ii.  2 ; 
Micah  iv.  6),  may  be  inferred  from  its 
greater  altitude  than  that  of  either  Morioh 
or  Zion,  which  ptinted  obviously  to  tho 
loftier  spiritual  elevation  of  the  new  .leru- 
saleni.  As  the  frame  of  a  oity  on  the  eoutli. 
What  Ezekiel  beheld  was  not  "  beside  '  iir 
"by"  (Authorized  Version),  but  "on"  the 
mountain,  and  was  not,  as  H'avemiofc,  Kwald, 
and  Kliefoth  suppose,  the  new  city  of  Jeru- 
salem, though  this  miglit  with  a  fair  measure 
of  accuracy  be  described  as  lying  south  of 
Moriah  on  which  the  temple  stood,  but  the 
temple  itself,  which,  with  its  walls  and  gatei, 


OH.XL.  1—49.1  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL. 


321 


chambers  and  courts,  rose  majeetically  before 
the  prophet's  view,  with  all  the  magnificence, 
and  indeed  (as  the  particle  *3  indicates), 
■with  the  external  appearance  of  a  city. 
That  the  prophet  should  speak  of  it  as  "  on 
the  south "  receives  suffioient  explanation 
from  the  circumstance  that  he  himself  came 
from  the  north,  and  had  it  always  before 
him  in  a  southerly  direction.  The  idea  is 
correctly  enough  expressed  by  the  imivavn 
of  tho  IjXX.,  which  signifies  "  over  against " 
to  one.  (Wming  from  the  noith. 

Ver.  9. — The  word  "  thither  "  carries  the 
thougl.i  back  to  ver.  1.  When  the  prophet 
had  been  brought  into  the  land  of  Israel,  to 
the  mountain  and  to  the  building,  he  per- 
ceived a  man,  whese  appearance  was  like  tie 
appearance  of  brass,  or,  aucording  to  thci 
LXX,,  "  shining  or  polished  brass,"  xo^koB 
ari\fiovTos,  as  in  oh.  i.  7-— a  description 
recalling  those  of  the  likene&g  of  Jehovah  in 
ch.  i.  26,  27,  of  the  angel  \iho  appeared  to 
Daniel  (x.  6),  and  of  the  glorified  Christ 
(Eev.  i.  15),  and  suggesting  i  iJeas  of  strength, 
beauty,  and  duTAbiJity.  In  his  hand  he 
carried  a  line  of  flitz  and  a  measoring-reed 
(Jtaiteh  hammidah,  or  "  reed  of  measuring," 
reed  having  been  the .  customary  material 
out  of  which  such  rods  were  made ;  compare 
the  Assyrian  for  "  a  measuring-rod  "  qanu, 
the  Greek  xavav,  and  the  Latin  canna).  Pos- 
sibly he  carried  these  as  "  emblems  of  building 
activity  "  (Hengstenberg),  and  because  "  he 
had  many  and  different  things  to  measure  " 
(Kliefoth);  but  most  likely  the  line  was 
meant  to  measure  large  dimensions  (comp. 
ch.  zlvii.  3)  and  such  as  could  not  he  taken 
by  a  straight  stick,  as  e.g.  the  girth  of  pillars, 
and  the  rod  to  measure  smaller  dimensions, 
like  those  of  "the  gates  and  walls  of  the 
temple.  Hitzig's  conjecture,  that  the  line 
was  linen  because  the  place  to  be  measured 
was  the  sanctuary,  whose  priests  were 
obliged  to  clothe  themselves  in  linen,  Klie- 
foth rightly  pronounces  artificial  and  in- 
accurate, since  the  line  was  made,  not  of 
manufactured  flax,  or  linen,  but  of  the  raw 
material.  That  the  "man"  was  Jehovah  or 
the  Angel  of  the  Presence  (comp.  oh.  ix.  2) 
the  analogy  of  Amos  viii.  7,  8  and  the  state- 
ment of  Bzekiel  in  ch.  xliv.  2,  5  would 
seem  to  suggest;  only  it  is  not  certain  in 
the  last  of  these  passages  that  the  speaker 
was  "  the  man  "  and  not  rather  "  the  God  of 
Israel,"  who  bad  already  taken  possession  of 
the  house  (see  ch.  zliii.  2),  and  whose  vpice 
is  once  at  least  distinguished  from  that  of 
the  man  (see  oh.  xliii.  6).  Accordingly, 
Kliefoth,  Smend,  and  others  identify  the 
"  man  "  with  the  ordinary  angelat  interpres 
(cf.  Rev.  xxi.  9).  The  gate  in  which  he 
itood  "  waiting  for  the  new  comer "  was 
manifestly  the  north  gate,  since  Ezekiel 
same   from  the  porth,  though  Eavemick 

EZBKIBL. n. 


and  Smend  put  in  a  plea  for  the  east  gate, 
on  the  grounds  that  it  was  the  principal 
entrance  to  the  sanctuary,  and  the  distance 
between  it  and  the  north  gate,  five  hundred 
onbits,  was  too  great  to  be  passed  over  so 
slightly  as  in  ver.  6. 

Ver.  4. — The  threefold  summons  addressed 
to  the  prophet  (comp.  ch.  xliv.  5)  intimated 
the  importance  of  the  communication  about 
to  be  made,  and  reminded  him  of  the  neces- 
sity of  giving  it  the  closest  attention  in 
order  to  be  able  to  impart  it  to  the  people 
(comp.  ch.  xliii.  10,  11). 

Vers.  5 — 27. — The  outer  court,  with  its 
gates  and  chambers :  (1)  the  enclosing  wall 
(ver.  5) ;  (2)  the  east  gate  (vers.  5—16)  ;  (3) 
the  outer  court  (vers.  17 — 19);  (4)  the  north 
gate  (vers.  20 — 23) ;  (5)  tlie  south  gate  (vers. 
24—27). 

Ver.  5. — The  enclosing  wall.  And  behold 
a.  wall  on  the  outside  of  the  house  round 
I  bout.  The  "  house  " — n;an  with  the  article 
-  -was  the  temple  as  the  dwelling-place  of 
3\  hovah ;  only  not  the  temple  proper,  but 
th(,i  whole  complex  structure.  The  "  wall " 
belonged  to  the  outer  court;  that  of  the 
inner  court  being  afterwards  mentioned 
(ch.  xlii.  7).  In  having  a  "wall  round 
about "  Jehovah's  sanctuary  resembled  both 
Greek  and  Babylonian  shrines  (see  Herod., 
i.  18  ;  '  Records  of  the  Past,'  vol.  v.  126;,  but 
differed  from  both  the  tabernacle,  which 
had  none,  and  from  the  Solomonic  temple, 
whose  "  wall "  formed  no  essential  part 
of  the  sacred  structure,  but  was  more  or  less 
of  arbitrary  erection  on  the  part  of  Solomon 
and  later  kings.  Here,  however,  the  wall 
constituted  an  integral  portion  of  the  whole ; 
and  was  designed,  like  that  in  ch.  xlii.  20, 
"  to  make  a  separation  between  the  sanctu- 
ary and  the  profane  place,"  as  the  Greeks 
distinguished  between  the  $e^\oy  and  the 
Up6v  (see  Thuoyd.,  iv.  95).  Its  breadth  and 
height  were  the  same  (comp.  Eev.  xxi.  16)  — 
one  reed,  of  six  cubits  by  the  cubit  and  an 
hand-breadth;  that  is  to  say,  each  cubit 
measured  an  ordinary  cubit  and  a  hand- 
breadth  (comp.  oh.  xliii.  13).  Hengstenberg 
suggests  that  the  greater  cubit  of  Ezekiel 
was  borrowed  from  the  Chaldeans;  and 
certainly  Herodotus  (i.  178)  speaks  of  a 
royal  cubit  in  Babylon  which  was  three 
finger-breadths  longer  than  the  ordinary 
measure,  while  in  Egypt  also  two  such 
cubits  of  varying  lengths  were  current 
(Bockhart,  'Metrol.  Untersuch,'  p.  212); 
"from  which  it  might  be  supposed,"  says 
Smend,  "  that  the  same  thing  held  good  for 
Asia  Minor."  Still,  the  hypothesis  is  like- 
lier that  the  cubit  in  question  was  the  old 
Mosaic  cubit — the  cubit  of  a  man  (Deut. 
ii.  11),  equal  to  the  length  of  the  forearm 


322 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  BZEKIEL.  [oh.  xl.  1—49. 


from  the  elbow  to  the  end  of  the  longest 
finger — \Yhich  was  employed  in  the  building 
of  the  Solomonic  temple  (2  Ohion.  iii,  3). 
Assuming  the  cubit  to  have  been  eighteen 
inches,  the  lieight  and  breadth  of  the  wall 
would  be  nine  feet — no  great  elevation,  and 
presenting  a  striking  contrast  to  the  colossal 
proportions  of  city  vfalls  in  Babylon  and  in 
Greeje  (see  Herod.,  i.  170 ;  '  Eeoprds  of  the 
Past,'  vol.  v.  127,  1st  series),  and  even  of  the 
walls  of  the  first  temple  in  Jerusalem  (see 
JosephuB,  '  Wars,'  v.  1) ;  but  in  this,  per- 
haps, lay  a  special  significance,  since,  as  tliu 
oity-like  temple  stood  in  no  need  of  walls 
and  bulwarks  for  defence,  the  lowness  of  its 
walls  would  permit  it  tlie  more  easily  to  be 
8§on,  would,  in  fact,  make  it  a  conspicuous 
object  to  all  who  might  approach  it  for 
worship. 

Ver.  6. — The  east  gate.  The  gate  which 
looketh  toward  the  east;  literally,  whose 
face  was  toward  the  east.  That  this  was 
not  the  gate  in  which  tlje  angel  had  been 
first  observed  standing  seems  implied  In  the 
statement  that  he  CRme  to  it.  That  he 
began  with  it  is  satisfactorily  uccouuted  for 
by  remembering  that  the  east  gate  was  the 
principal  entrance,  and  stood  directly  in 
front  of  the  porch  of  the  temple  proper. 
The  same  reasons  will  explain  the  fulness 
of  description  accorded  to  it  rather  than 
to  the  others.  It  was  ascended  by  stairs, 
or  steps,  of  Which  the  number  seven  is 
omitted,  though  it  is  mentioned  in  con- 
nection with  the  north  (ver.  22)  and  south 
(ver.  26)  gates.  "The  significance  was 
obvious,"  writes  Plumptre.  "  Men  must  as- 
cend in  heart  and  mind  as  they  enter  the 
sanctuary,  and  the  seven  steps  represented 
the  completeness  at  last  of  that  ascension." 
The  steps  lay  outside  the  wall,  and  at 
their  head  had  a  threshold  (^p,  properly  an 
"expansion,"  or  "spreading  out  ")  one  ree4 
broad,  i.e.  measuring  inwards  from  east  to 
west,  the  thickness  of  the  wall.  Its  ex- 
tension from  south  to  north,  afterwards 
stated,  was  ten  cubits,  or  fifteen  leet  (ver.  II). 
The  last  clause,  improperly  rendered,  and 
the  other  threshold  (Authorized  and  Revised 
Versions),  or  "  the  back  threshold  "  (Ewald), 
of  the  gate  which  was  one  reed,  should  be 
translated,  even  one  threshold  (Revised  Ver- 
sion margin),  or  the  first  threshold,  m  distin- 
guished from  the  second,  to  be  afterwards 
gpeoified  (ver,  7);  oomp.  Gen.  i.  5,  "the 
first  (one)  day." 

Ver.  7, — And  every  little  chamber.  Pro- 
ceeding inward  beneath  a  covered  porch, 
the  exact  width  of  the  gate  and  threshold, 
i.e.  ten  cubits,  the  prophet's  guide,  after 
having  passed  the  threshold,  conducted  him 
to  a  series  of  lodges,  D;Nn,or  "  guard-chambers," 
six  in  number,  three  on  each  side  (ver.  10), 


one  reed  or  six  cubits  square,  roofed  (ver. 
11),  and  separated  from  each  other  by  a 
space  of  five  cubits  square,  open  overhead 
and  closed  towards  the  north  or  south  as 
the  case  might  be  by  a  side  wall.  Tl^ese 
"  lodges,"-or  "  cells,"  were  intended  for  the 
Levite  sentinels  who  kept  guard  over  the 
house  (see  ch.  xliv.  11,  14;  and  comp.  1 
Kings  xiv.  28 ;  2  Ohron.  xii.  11).  Beyond 
the  cells  stretched  the  threshold  of  the  gate 
by  the  porch  (Hebrew,  D^iN ;  the  LXX.,  oUi/i: 
Vulgate,  vestibulum,  "  a  portico  ")  of  the  gate 
witMn;  Lterally,/ro7»  the  house;  i.e.  the  gate 
fronting  one  coming  from  the  temple,  hence 
the  gate  looking  "  towards  the  house." 
".'?3St  "from  the  house,"  does  not  qualify 
the  threshold  as  if  to  indicate  that  this  was 
an  interior  threshold  in  contrast  to  the 
former,  or  exterior,  but  "the  gate,"  its 
intention  being  to  state  that  the  porch  in 
front  of  which  extended  the  second 
"  threshold "  was  the  vestibule  or  pnrtico 
before  the  gate  which  conducted  inwards 
towards  the  temple,  or  on  which  one 
first  stepped  on  his  way  from  the  temple. 

Vers.  8,  9. — The  divergent  measurements 
of  this  porch,  which  are  given  in  these  verses, 
led  the  LXX.  and  the  Vulgate  to  reject 
ver.  8  as  spurious,  and  it  is  certainly  want- 
ing in  some  Hebrew  manuscripts.  Hitzig, 
Ewald,  and  Smend  have  accordingly  ex- 
punged it  from  the  text — an  altogether 
unnecessary  proceeding.  The  seeming 
discrepancy  may  be  removed  by  supposing 
either,  with  Kliefoth,  that  ver.  8  furnishes 
the  measurement  of  the  porch  from  east  to 
west,  and  ver.  9  its  measurement  froii  north 
to  south,  with  the  measurements  in  addition 
of  the  posts  (D<^'N,  from  '?;«,  "a  ram,"  henoe 
anything  curved  or  twisted),  t.e.  pillars  or 
jambs ;  or,  with  Keil,  that  ver.  8  states  the 
depth  from  east  to  west,  and  ver.  9  the 
length  from  north  to  south.  The  "posts," 
which  were  sixty  cubits  higli  (ver.  14),  were 
two  cubits  square  at  the  base. 

Ver.  10. — Having  reached  the  furthest 
limit  westward,  the  guide  retraces  his  steps 
baokwaid  in  an  easterly  direction,  noting 
that  on  the  side  of  the  covered  way  opposite 
to  that  already  examined  the  same  arrange- 
ments existed  as  to  "  lodges  "  and  "  posts," 
the  latter  of  which  (Q^^K)  are  here  first 
mentioned  in  connection  with  the  guard- 
rooms, and  must  be  understood  as  signifying 
"  pillars  "  or  "jambs  "  in  front  of  the  walls. 
Their  measurements,  which  were  equal, 
were  probably  as  in  ver.  9,  two  cubits 
square. 

Ver.  11. — The  breadth  of  the  Mtry 
(literally,  opening)  of  the  gate,  ten  enbits. 
Obviously  this  measurement  was  taken  from 
north  to  south  of  the  gate-entrance  (var.  6), 
and  represented  the  whole  breadth  Ox  ^a 


OH.  XL.  1—49.]  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL. 


323 


doorway  and  the  threshold,  or  one-fifth  of 
the  entile  length  of  the  gate-building.  The 
second  portion  of  the  verse,  the  length  of 
the  gate  thirteen  cnblts,  is  explained  by 
Bottoher,  Hitzig,  Haverniolr,  Keil  (with 
whom  Plumptre  agrees),  as  signifying  the 
length  of  the  covered  way  from  the  east 
entrance,  since  it  is  supposed  the  whole 
lengthof  forty  cubits  (the  length  of  the  gate 
without  the  porch)  would  hardly  be  roofed 
in ;  so  that  assuming  a  similar  covered  way 
of  thirteen  cubits  at  the  other  end  of  the 
gate-building,  as  one  came  "  from  tlie  house," 
there  would  be  an  open  space,  well,  or 
uncovered  courtyard,  of  fourteen  cubits  in 
length  and  six  broad,  enclosed  on  all  sides 
by  gate-buildings.  T?he  roofs  extending 
from  the  east  and  west  would  be  supported 
on  tlie  "  posts"  of  the  chambers  mentioned 
in  ver.  10.  Smend,  however,  infers,  from 
the  windows  in  the  posts  within  the  gate 
(ver.  16),  that  the  whole  extent  was  roofed 
in,  and  accordingly  can  offer  no  explanation 
of  the  clause ;  Kllefoth  and  Schroder  prefer 
to  regard  the  thirteen  cubits  as  the  height 
of  the  gate,  although  the  wori  trauslated 
"  length  "  never  elsewhere  has  this  meatjing. 

Yer.  12.^Ihe  space  also  before  the  little 
chambers  ;  more  correctly,  and  a  border  be- 
fore the  lodges.  Though  the  construction 
of  this  borSer,  fence,  or  barrier  (oomp.  ch. 
xxvli.  i ;  xliii.  13,  17 ;  Exod.  xix.  12)  is  not 
described,  its  design  most  likely  was  to 
enable  the  guardsman,  by  stepping  beyond 
his  cell,  to  observe  what  was  going  on  in  the 
gate  without  either  interrupting  or  being 
interrupted  by  the  passengers.  As  the 
barrier  projected  one  cubit  on  each  side  of 
the  ten-cubit  way,  only  eight  cnblts  re- 
mained for  persoiis  going  in  or  out. 

Ver.  13. — The  breadth  of  the  gate  from 
the  roof  of  one  little  chamber  or  lodge  to 
anotlier,  measuring  from  door  to  door,  was 
five  and  twenty  cubits,  which  were  thus 
made  up :  10  cubits  of  footway  +  12  (2  x  6) 
cubits  for  the  two  guard-rooms  -f-  3  (2  X  say 
IJ)  cubits  for  the  thickness  of  the  two  side 
walls  =  25  cubits  in  all.  According  to 
ver.  42,  the  length  of  a  hewn  stone  was  one 
cubit  and  a  half.  The  doors  from  which  the 
measurements  were  taken  must  have  been 
In  the  side  walls  at  the  back  of  the  guard- 
rooms. 

Yer.  14. — He  made  also  posts.  In  using 
the  verb  "  made  "  tlie  prophet  either  went 
back  in  thought  to  the  time  when  the  man 
who  then  explained  the  building  had 
fashioned  it  (Hengstenberg) ;  or  he  employed 
the  term  in  the  sense  of  eondituit,  i.e.  fixed 
or  estimated,  "  inasmuch  as  such  a  height 
cotild  not  be  measured  from  the  bottom  to 
the  top  with  the  measuring-rod"  (Keil). 
The  "  posts,"  the  a-h^tt  of  ver.  9,  were  sixty 
cubits  high,  and  corresponded  to  the  towers 


in  modem  churches.  To  the  objection 
sometimes  urged  against  what  is  called  the 
"  exaggerated "  height  of  these  colnmns, 
Kliefoth  replies,  "  If  it  had  been  considered 
that  our  church  towers  have  grown  up  out 
of  gate-pillars,  that  one  can  see,  not  merely 
in  Egyptian  obelisks  and  Turkish  minarets, 
but  also  in  our  own  hollow  factory  chimneys, 
how  upon  a  base  of  two  cubits,  square 
pillars  of  sixty  cubits  high  can  be  erected, 
and  that  finally  the  talk  is  of  a  colossal 
building  seen  in  vision,  no  critical  difS- 
culties  would  have  been  discovered  in 
this  statement  as  to  height."  The  last 
clause,  even  unto  the  post  of  the  court  round 
about  the  gate,  should  read,  arid  the  court 
reached  unto  the  post  (h)H  being  nsed 
collectively),  the  gate  being  round  about 
(Revised  Version) ;  or,  the  court  round  about 
the  gate  reached  to  the  pillars  (Keil)  ;  or, 
at  the  pillar  the  court  was  round  about  the 
gate  (Kliefoth).  The  sense  is,  that  the 
court  lay  round  about  the  inner  egress  from 
tlie  gate.  The  Authorized  Version,  with 
which  Dr.  Currey,  in  the  '  Speaker's  Com- 
mentary,' agrees,  thinks  of  an  inner  hall 
between  the  porch  of  the  gate  and  the  two 
most  western  guard-chambers,  round  the 
sides  of  which  the  sixty-cubit  columns 
stood.  Ewald,  follpwing  the  corrupt  text 
of  the  LXX.,  translates,  "  And  the  threshold 
of  the  outer  vestibule  twenty  cubits,  the 
gate  court  abutting  on  the  chambers  round 
about." 

Yer.  15. — The  whole  length  of  the  gate, 
from  the  outer  entrance  to  the  inner  exit, 
fifty  cubits,  was  thus  composed — 

1.  An  outer  threshold    6  cubits 

2.  Three     guard-chambers,    six 

cubits  each 18     „ 

S.  Two  spaces  between  the  cham- 
bers, five  cubits  each        ...     10      „ 

4.  An  inner  threshold 6     „ 

5.  A  porch  before  the  gate       ...      8     „ 

6.  One  post,  or  pillar     ...        ^      2     n 

Total  ...  50  „ 
Ver.  16. — And  there  were  narrow  (Hebrew, 
closed)  windows,  probably  of  lattice-work, 
so  fixed  as  to  prevent  either  egress  or 
ingress.  That  these  "  windows "  (nu'i'pri, 
so  called  from  being  perforated)  were 
intended  to  impart  light  to  the  gateway, 
either  in  whole  or  in  part,  is  apparent, 
though  it  is  difficult  to  form  a  clear  idea  of 
how  they  were  situated.  They  were  in  the 
chambers,  and  in  their  posts  and  in  the 
arches,  or  colonnades  (Revised  Version 
margin).  In  the  chambers,  or  "lodges," 
they  were  most  likely  in  the  back  walU, 
and  in  or  near  the  posts,  or  pillais,  belong- 
ing to  the  doors  of  these  chambers,  the 
clause,   "and  in  their   post*,"    being   re- 


324 


THE   BOOK   OF   THE   PROPHET   EZEKIBL.     [oh.  xl.  1—49. 


gaided  as  epezegetic  of  the  piecedicg, 
and  designed  to  furnieb  a  more  precise 
explanation  of  the  particular  part  of  the 
guard-room  in  -which  the  windows  were. 
Similar  windowB  existerl  in  the  Solomonic 
temple  (1  Kings  vi  4).  The  "arches,"  or 
•colonnades"  (n^B^^5),  were  probably  wall- 
ejections  on  the  sides  of  the  chambers, 
*,  tiiat  light  was  admitted  from  three  sides. 

OVTXB  Gate. 


m 

F 

pi 

F 

p 

H 

T 

H 

IV       C 

f     f\ 

C 

w 

r   ^ 

I 

S 

c 

w    c 

f     f\ 

1 

c 

w 

r  ^ 

I, 

s   ^ 

r 

•    c 

f     f\ 

1 

c 

w 

€ 

}    w 

T 

w 

0 

r — "A 1 

Thus  to  one  standing  within,  the  whole 
gateway  appeared  studded  round  ami  round 
with  windows.  The  description  of  the  gate 
closes  with  the  statement  that  npon  each 
post  were  palm  trees,  which  may  signify 
either  that  the  shaft  was  fashioned  like  a 
palm  tree,  as  is  sometimes  seen  in  ancient 
buildings  in  the  East  (Dr.  Onrrey,  Flumptre) 
OT  that  it  was  ornamented  with  lepresenta- 

Inkbb  Gate. 


0 

W 

T 

W 

0 

w 

C 

j 

C 

Yt 

1 

s 

S 

L 

w 

c 

e   f 

c 

w 

3 

s 

s 

c 

w 

c 

U    r 

i 

c 

, 

- 

"  H 

T. 

H 

■"' 

'° 

F 

I' 

^^m  ■ 

■  A 

a. 

D  D 

□  D 

0 

L 


10 

J. 


80ALE 

20 

_L 


IN 


OUBITS. 
90  40 

I         ■         I 


1.1. 


60 
_J 


rof  MTCnateps;  i,  threshold  of  «  X  10  enblts;  0,  ohuiiben  of  6  cubits  square  j  s,  spaces  between 
iben;  »,  porch  of  gate,  «  X  »  cnblts;  o,  onler  wall,  »  X  6  onblts;  w,  waU  of  gate,  6x8  cubits; 
ckneBB  of  chamber  wall,  li  cubit ;  /,/,  btrriera  or  fence  before  chambers,  B  X  1  cubits ;  I,  I,  lines  to 


Ik,  ftalrc 
Ibe  diamben ; 

which  covering  of  wayreached;'  s,'gate'pillMii',  arabita  square  and  «0  cubits  high ;  h,  f,  walls  of  threshold 
and  porch,  14  x  B  cubits;  6,  6,  chambers  for  washing;  0, «,  tables  for  sUnghterIng;  d,  d,  table  for  knives, 
etc.  (  c, «,  Ubles  for  hiying  flesh ;  a',  stair  of  eight  steps. 


tions  of  palm  branches  or  palm  trees  (Keil, 
Ewald,  Eliefoth).  Hengstenberg's  idea, 
that  "whole  palms  beside  the  pillars  are 
meant,"  is  favoured  by  Smend,  who  cites,  in 
addition  to  ver.  26,  ch.  xli.  18,  etc.,  and  1 
Kings  Tt  29;  vii.  36. 

Vers.  17 — 19.— 3%e  onttr  eourt.  Emerg- 
ing from  the  doorway  inwards,  the  prophet, 
Bocompanied  by  hii  celestial  guide,  stepped 


into  the  outward  court,  i.e.  the  area  surround- 
ing the  temple  buildings.  There  the  first 
thing  observed  was  that  chambers  and  % 
pavement  ran  round  the  court.  The 
chambers  were  cells,  or  rooms  —  rfoi^ 
always  signifying  single  rooms  in  a  build- 
ing (see  oh.  xlii.  1;  1  Chron.  ix.  26)— whose 
dimensions,  exact  sites,  and  uses  are  not 
specified,  though,  as  they  were  thirty  ia 


OH.XL.  1— 49.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET   EZEKIBL. 


325 


number,  it  is  probable  they  were  arranged 
on  the  east,  north,  and  south  Bides  of  the 
court,  five  upon  each  side  of  the  gate,  and 
atanding  somewhat  apart  from  each  other; 
that  they  were  large  enough  to  contain  aa 
many  as  thirty  persons  (see  1  Sam.  ix.  22 ; 
and  comp.  Jer,  xxxv.  2) ;  and  that  they  were 
designed  for  sacrificial  meals  and  such-like 
purposes  (see  eh.  xliv.  1,  etc.).  In  pre-exilio 
times  such  halls  had  been  occupied  by  dis- 
tinguished persons  connected  with  thetemple 
service  (see  ch.  viii.  8 — 12;  2  Kings  xxiii.  11 ; 
Jer.  XXXV.  4,  etc. ;  xxxvi.  10;  Ezra  x.  6).  The 
pavement  was  a  teaselated  floor  (comp. 
Esth.  i.  6 ;  2  Ohron.  vii.  3),  which  ran  round 
the  court  and  was  named  the  lower  pave- 
ment, to  distinguish  it  from  that  laid  in  the 
inner  court  which  stood  at  a  higher  elevation 
than  the  outer.  As  another  note  of  position, 
it  is  stated  to  have  been  by  the  side 
(literally,  shoulder)  of  the  gates  over  against 
— or,  anawerable  to  (Revised  Version) — the 
length  of  the  gates.  This  can  only  mean 
that  the  breadth  of  the  pavement  was  fifty 
cubits  (the  length  of  the  gates,  ver.  15)  less 
six  cubits  (the  thickness  of  the  wall,  ver.  5), 
or  forty-four  cubits,  and  that  it  ran  along 
the  inner  length  of  the  wall  on  either  side 
of  the  gates.  The  breadth  of  the  court  from 
the  forefront  of  the  lower  gate,  i.e.  from  the 
inner  end  of  the  east  gate  or  the  edge  of  the 
pavement,  unto  the  forefront  of  the  inner  court 
withont  was  an  hundred  oubits.  Wliether 
the  measurement  was  up  to  the  wall  of  the 
inner  court,  within  wliich,  on  this  hypothesis, 
its  gate  must  have  wholly  lain,  or  only  up 
to  the  door  of  the  inner  court,  which,  on  this 
understanding,  must  have  projected  beyond 
its  wall,  is  obscure.  The  first  interpretation 
derives  support  from  the  circumstance  that 
the  terminus  ad  quern  of  the  measurement  is 
gaid  to  liave  been,  not  the  inner  gate,  but  the 
inner  court ;  while  the  second  finds  counte- 
nance in  the  use  of  the  preposition  yina,  which 
seems  to  indicate  that  the  measuring  pro- 
ceeded from  the  western  extremity  of  the 
outer  gate  to  the  eastern  extremity  of  the 
inner  gate,  and  appears  to  be  confirmed  by 
vers.  23  and  27,  as  well  as  by  the  considera- 
tion that  in  this  way  the  symmetry  of  the 
building  would  be  better  preserved  than 
by  making  the  outer  gate  project  into  the 
com  t  and  the  inner  gate  lie  wholly  within 
the  inner  wall.  In  this  way  the  hundred 
cubits  marked  the  distance  between  the 
extremities  of  the  gates,  the  whole  breadth 
of  the  court  being  two  hundred  cubits,  i.e. 
a  hundred  cubits  between  the  gates,  with 
two  gates'  lengths  of  fifty  cubits  each  added. 
The  same  measm-ements  applied  to  the 
north  gate,  which  the  seer  next  approaclied. 
Vers.  20— 23.— The  north  gate.  -This  was 
in  all  respects  similar  to  that  upon  the  east, 
though    its    description    proceeds    in    the 


reverse  order,  beginning  with  the  threa 
"  chambers,"  or  lodges,  on  each  side  of  the 
footway  (ver.  21),  going  on  to  the  "  posts," 
"  arches,"  and  "  windows,"  and  ending 
with  the  outside  steps,  seven  in  number 
(ver.  22),  which  are  here  first  mentioned 
in  connection  with  the  gates.  Its  dimensions 
were  the  same  as  those  of  the  "  first  "  gate, 
fifty  cubits  long  and  twenty-five  cubits 
broad.  It  stood  exactly  in  front  of  a 
corresponding  gate  into  the  inner  court, 
and  the  distance  between  the  two  gates  was, 
as  before,  a  hundred  cubits. 

Vers.  24 — 27. — The  south  gate.  Here  again 
the  same  details  recur  as  to  the  structure  of 
the  gate,  its  dimensions,  and  distance  from 
the  gate  which  led  into  the  inner  court. 

Vers.  28 — 47. — The  inner  court,  with  its 
gates,  chambers  and  slaughtering-tables: 
(1)  the  south  gate  (vers.  28—31) ;  (2)  the 
east  gate  (vers  32—34);  (3)  the  north  gate 
(vers.  35—37);  (4)  the  arrangements  for 
sacrifice  (vers.  38 — 43);  and  (5)  the 
chambers  for  the  officiating  priests  (Ten. 
44—47). 

Vers.  28 — 31. — The  south  gale  of  the  inner 
court  The  construction  and  measurements 
of  this  corresponded  with  those  of  the  gatea 
in  the  outer  court,  with  only  two  points  of 
difference,  viz.  that  it  possessed  a  flight  of 
eight  steps  instead  of  seven,  and  that  th* 
arches,  or  wall-projections,  were  toward  the 
outer  court.  The  difierenoe  in  the  number 
of  the  steps  was  doubtless  of  symbolio 
significance,  and  pointed  not  only  to  the 
higher  sanctity  in  general  which  attached 
to  the  inner  court,  but  to  the  truth  that, 
as  one  approached  the  dwelling-place  of 
Jehovah,  an  increasing  measure  and  degree 
of  holiness  were  demanded — what  Plumptre 
styles  "an  ever-ascending  sursum  corda." 
The  seven  steps  of  the  outer  door  added  to 
the  eight  steps  of  this  amount  to  fifteen, 
with  which  corresponds  the  number  of  the 
pilgrim-psalms  (Pg.  cxx. — oxxxiv.),  which 
are  supposed  to  have  been  sung,  one  upon 
each  step,  by  the  choir  of  Levites  as  they 
ascended  first  into  the  outer  and  then  into 
the  inner  court.  The  statement  that  the 
wall-projections  were  towards  the  outer 
court  showed  that,  in  walking  through  the 
inner  gateway,  one  would  reverse  the  order 
of  the  outer  gate,  i.e.  would  first  pass 
through  the  porch,  then  cross  the  threshold 
to  the  guard-rooms,  next  step  upon  the 
second  threshold,  and  finally  enter  the 
inaer  court. 

Vers.  32 — 34. — The  east  gate  of  the  inner 
court.  The  same  resemblance  to  the  outer 
gates  are  noted  in  connection  with  this  door- 
way, and  the  same  two  points  of  distinotioD 
iust  commented  on. 


326 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  EZEKIEL.  [ch.  xl.  1—49, 


Vera.  35 — 37. — The  north  gate  of  the  inner 
court.  The  eame  minute  specification  of 
the  guard-room s,  the  pillars,  wall-prnjeo- 
tions,  windows,  steps,  is  again  repeated,  as 
if  to  sliow  that  all  parts  in  this  divinely 
fashioned  edifice  were  of  equal  moment. 

Vers.  ;-i8 — 43. — The  arrangements  for 
tacrifloe.  Three  things  demand  atten- 
tion— the  cells  for  washing,  the  tables  for 
■laughtering,  and  the  hooks. 

Ver.  38. — The  ohambers.     As  the  verse 
explains,  these    were    different    from    the 
guard-rooms  in  the  gates  (vers.  7,  21)  and 
the  chambers  on  the  pavement  (ver.  17), 
although  the  same  Hebrew  word  is  employed 
to  designate  the  latter.    The  cells  under 
oonsideration  were  expressly  designed  for 
•washing  "  the  inwards  and  the  legs  "  of  the 
victims  brought  for  sacrifice  (Lev.  i.  9). 
Whether  such  a  cell  stood  at  each  of  the 
three  gates,  as  the  plural  seems  to  indi- 
cate, although  described  only  in  connection 
with  the  north  (Keil,  Kliefoth,  Plumptre), 
or  merely  at  one  gate,  and  that  tlie  north — 
because,  according  to  the  Law  (Lev.  i.  11 ; 
vi.  18 ;  vii.  2),  on  the  north  side  of  the  altar 
burnt,  sin,  and  trespass  offerings  were  to  be 
killed  (Havernick,  Hengstenberg)— or  the 
east,  which  is  'alluded  to  in  vers.  39,  40 
(Hitzig,  Ewald,   Smend),  is  controverted, 
though  the  former  view  seems  the  prefer- 
able, seeing  that,  according  to  oh.  xlvi.  1,  2, 
the  priests  were  to  prepare  burnt  offerings 
and  peace  offerings  for  the  prince  at  the 
posts  of  the  east  gate.    The  situation  of  the 
cells  is  stated  to  have  been  by  (or,  beside)  the 
posts  of  (i.e.  at)  the  gates  (see  on  ver.  14), 
but  on  which  side  of  the  gates,  whether  near 
the  right  or  left  pillar,  no  information  is 
furnished.    Keil  and  Kliefoth  place  those 
at  the  south  and  north  gates  on  the  west 
aide ;  that  at  the  east  gate  Keil  locates  on 
its  north  side,  Kliefoth  placing  one  in  the 
side  wall  at  each  side  of  the  gate. 

Vers.  39— 42.— The  tables.  These  were 
twelve  in  number,  of  which  eight  were  used 
for  slaughtering  purposes,  t'.e.  either  for 
slaying  the  sacrifices  or  for  laying  upon 
them  the  carcases  of  the  slaughtered  victims ; 
and  the  remaining  four  for  depositing  there- 
on the  instruments  employed  in  killing  the 
animals.  Of  the  eight,  four  stood  within 
the  porch  of  the  gate,  two  on  each  side,  and 
.four  without — two  on  the  side  as  one  goeth 
up  to  the  entry  of  the  north  gate;  rather, 
at  the  shoulder  to  one  going ^  up  to  the  gate 
opening  towards  the  north,  i.e.  on  the  out- 
side of  the  porch  north  wall ;  and  two  on  the 
other  side  or  shoulder,  i.e.  on  the  outside  of 
the  porch  eouth  wall.  This  determines  the 
gate  in  question  to  have  been,  not  the  north 
gate,  as  the  Authorized  Version  has  con- 
jectured, but  the  east  gate,  whose  side  walls 


looked  towards  the  north  and  south.  The 
third  quaternion  of  tables  appears  to  have 
been  planted  at  the  steps,  presumably  two 
on  eaoh  side,  i.e.  if  with  Kliefoth,  Keil,  and 
Schroder,  nViJ)|j  be  translated  "  at  the  ascent," 
or  "  going  up,"  i.e.  at  the  staircase  (comp. 
ver.  26).  If,  however,  with  the  Authorized 
and  Revised  Versions,  Ewald,  Hengsten- 
berg, Smend,  and  others,  !~l}^yh  be  read 
"for  the  burnt  offering,"  then  the  exact 
position  of  the  tables  is  left  undetermined,, 
though  in  any  case  they  must  have  been 
near  the  slaughtering-tables.  As  they  were 
designed  for  heavy  instruments,  they  were 
constructed  of  hewn  stones  a  cubit  and  a 
half  long,  a  cubit  and  a  half  broad,  and  one 
cubit  high;  from  which  it  may  be  argued 
the  eight  previously  mentioned  were  made 
of  wood. 

Ver.  43. — The  hooks.     The  word  D'HSE^ 
occurs  again  only  in  Pa.  Ixviii.  13,  where  it 
signifies    "  sheepfolds,"    or    "  stalls ; "   its 
older  form  (D'nsB'p)  appearing  in  Gen.  xlix. 
14  and  Judg.  v.  16.    As  this  sense  is  un- 
suitable, recourse  must  be  had  to  its  derivsi- 
tion  (from  new,  "  to  put,  set,  or  fix  "),  which 
suggests  as  its  import  here  either,  as  Ewald,. 
Kliefoth,   Hengstenberg,    Havernick,   and 
Smend,  following  the  LX.X.  and  Vulgate, 
prefer, "  ledges,"  or  "  border  guards,"  on  the 
edge  of  the  tables,  to  keep  the  instruments 
or  flesh  from  falling   off;    or,  as  Kimchi, 
Gesenius,  Fiiist,  Keil,  Schroder,  and  Plump- 
tre, after  the  Chaldean  paraphrast,  explain^ 
"pegs"  fastened  in  the  wall  for  hanging 
the  slaughtered  carcases  before  they  were 
flayed.     In  favour  of   the  first   meaning 
stand  the  facts  that  the  second  clause  of 
this  verse  speaks  of  "  tables,"  not  of  "  walls," 
and  that  the  measure  of  the  sliephataim 
is  one  of  breadth  rather  than  of  length; 
against  it  are  the  consideratious  that  the 
dual  form,  shephataim,  fits  better  to  a  forked 
peg  tlian  to  a  double  bolder,  and  that  the 
shephataim  are  stated  to  have  been  fastened 
"  in  the  house  "  (ba-baith),  which  again  suita 
the  idea  of  a  peg  fastened  in  the  outer  wall 
of  the  porch,  rather  than  of  a  border  fixed 
upon  a  table.    The  last  clause  of  this  verse 
is  rendered  by  Ewald,  after  the  LXX., "  and 
over  the  fables"  (obviously  those  standing 
outside  of  the  porch)  "  were  covers  to  pro- 
tect them  from  rain  and  from  drought ; " 
and  it  is  conceivable  that  coverings  might 
have  been  advantageous  for  both  the  woodea 
tables  and  the  officiating  priests ;  only  the 
Hebrew  must  be  changed  before  it  can  yield 
this  rendering. 

Vers.  44 — 46.— Ke  ehanibers  of  the  iinger$. 

According  to  ver.  44,  these,  of  which  the 

number  iS  not  recorded,  were  situated  in  the 

I   inner  court,  outside  of  the  inner  gate,  at 


OH.XL.  1— 49.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL. 


327 


the  side  of  the  north  gate,  and  looked 
towaidg  the  south,  one  only  being  located 
at  the  side  of  the  east  gate  with  a  prospect 
towards  the  north.  Interpreted  in  this  way, 
they  cannot  have  been  the  same  as  the 
"  priests'  chambers "  mentioaed  in  vers.  45, 
46,  though  these  also  looked  in  the  same 
direction.  The  language,  however,  seems  to 
indicate  that  they  were  the  same,  and  on 
this  hypothesis  it  is  difficult  to  understand 
how  they  should  be  called  "  the  chambers 
of  the  singers,"  and  at  the  same  time  be 
assigned  to  the  priests,  "  the  keepers  of  the 
charge  of  the  house  "  and  "  the  keepers  of 
the  charge  of  the  altar."  Hengsteiiberg, 
Kliefoth,  Schroder,  and  others  hold  that 
Ezekiel  purposed  to  suggest  that  in  the 
vision-temple  before  him  the  choral  service 
was  no  longer  to  be  left  exclusively  in  the 
hands  of  the  Levitea  as  it  had  been  in  the 
Solomonic  temple  (1  Chron.  vi.  33 — 47 ; 
IV.  17;  2  Ohrou.  xx.  19),  but  that  the 
priests  were  to  participate  therein  Dr. 
Currey  imagines  the  chambers  may  have 
been  occupied  in  common  by  the  singers 
and  Vti6  priests  when  engaged  on  duty  at 
the  temple.  The  LXX.  text  reads,  "  And 
he  led  me  unto  the  inner  court,  and  behold 
two  chambers  in  the  inner  court,  one  at  the 
back  of  the  gate  which  looks  towards  the 
north,  and  bearing  towards  the  south,  and 
one  at  the  back  of  the  gate  which  looks 
towards  the  south,  and  bearing  .towards  the 
north ; "  and  in  accordance  with  this  Eosen- 
miiller,  Hitzig,  Ewald,  Keil,  and  Smend 
propose  sundry  emendations  on  the  Hebrew 
text.  Since,  however,  it  cannot  be  certified 
that  the  LXX.  did  not  paraphrase  or  mis- 
translate the  present  rather  than  follow  a 
different  text,  it  is  safer  to  abide  by  the 
renderings  of  the  Authorized  and  Bevised 
Versions.  Yet  one  cannot  help  feeling  that 
the  LXX,  translation  has  the  merit  of 
clearness  and  simplicity. 

Yer.  45. — The  priests,  the  keepers  of  the 
charge  of  the  house.  Under  the  Law  the 
Levite  families  of  Gershon,  Kohath,  and 
Merari  had  the  charge  of  the  tabernacle 
and  all  its  belongings  (Numb.  iii.  25,  etc.) ; 
but  of  these  Levites  who  kept  the  charge  of 
the  sanctuary,  Eleazar  the  son  of  Aaron 
the  priest  had  the  oversight,  Hence  the 
priests  alluded  to  by  Ezekiel  as  the  keepers 
of  the  charge  of  the  house  were  most  likely 
those  who  superintended  the  Levites  in  the 
execution  of  their  tasks. 


Ver.  46.— The  keepers  of  the  charge  of 
the  altar.  These  formed  another  body  of 
priests,  whose  duties  generally  were  to  omoiF 
ate  in  the  temple-worship,  and  more  specifi- 
cally to  sacrifice  and  burn  incense  upon  the 
altars  (Lev.  i. — vi.).  Under  the  Law  the 
priests  were  all  descendants  of  Aaron 
(Bxod.  xxvii.  20,  21 ;  xxviii.  1—4 ;  xxix. 
9, 44 ;  xl.  15).  By  David  these  were  divided 
into  two  classes — the  sons  of  Eleazar,  at  the 
head  of  whom  stood  Zadok ;  and  the  sons 
of  Ithamar,.  with  Ahimelech  as  their  chief 
(1  Chron.  xxiv.  3).  In  the  vision-templo  the 
sons  of  Zadok  among  the  sons  of  Levi  have 
the  sole  right  of  drawing  near  to  the  Lord 
to  minister  unto  him  (see  on  eh.  xliii.  15). 

Ver.  47. — He  measured  the  court  .  .  . 
and  the  altar.  The  dimensions  of  the 
former,  the  open  space  in  front  of  the 
temple,  alone  are  given — a  hundred  cubits 
long  and  a  hundred  cubits  broad ;  tho.^e  of 
the  latter,  which  stood  before  the  "  house," 
and  occupied  the  centre  of  the  square,  are 
afterwards  recorded  (oh.  xliii.  13).  The 
distance  from  north  to  soutli  of  the  inner 
court  being  a  hundred  cubits,  if  to  these  be 
added  twice  two  hundred  cubits,  the  space 
between  the  outer  court  wall  and  that  of 
the  inner  court,  the  result  will  give  five 
hundred  cubits  as  the  breadth  of  the  outer 
court,  from  north  gate  to  south  gate.  Then 
as  the  length  of  the  inner  court  was  a 
hundred  cubits,  if  to  these  be  added  first 
the  hundred  cubits  lying  before  the  inner 
court  towards  the  east,  secondly,  the 
hundred  cubits  covered  by  the  temple  (eh. 
xli.  13,  14),  and  thirdly,  the  one  hundred 
cubits  which  extended  behind  the  temple 
(ch.  xli.  13, 14),  the  total  will  amount  to  five 
hundred  cubits  for  the  length  of  the  outer 
court  from  east  to  west.  The  outer  court, 
therefore,  like  the  inner,  was  a  square. 

.  Vers.  48,  49. — With  these  verses  the 
following  chapter  ought  to  have  commenced, 
as  the  seer  now  advances  to  a  description 
of  tlie  house,  or  temple  proper,  as  in  1  Kings 
vi.  2,  with  its  tliree  parts — ^a  porch  (vers. 
48,  49),  a  holy  place  (oli.  xli.  1),  and  a  holy 
of  holies  (ch.  xli.  4). 

Ver.  48.— The  porch,  or  vestibule,  accord- 
ing to  Keil,  appears  to  have  been  entered  by 
a  folding  door  of  two  leaves,  each  three 
cubits  broad,  which  were  attached  to  two 
side  pillars  five  cubits  broad,  and  met  in  the 
middle,  so  that  the  whole  breadth  of  the 
porch  front  was  six  cubits,  or,  including 
the  posts,  sixteen  cubits.  The  measurements 
in  ver.  49  of  the  length  of  the  porch  (from 
east  to  west)  twenty  cubits,  and  the  breadth 
(from  north  to  south)  eleven  cubits,  he 
harmonizes  with  this  view  by  assuming  that 
the  pillars,  which  were  five  cubits  broad  in 


328 


THE   BOOK   OF   THE   PROPHET   KZEKIBL.      [ch.  xl.  1—49, 


front,  -were  only  half  that  breadth  in  the 
insiJe,  the  side  wall  dividing  it  in  two,  so 
that,  although  to  one  entering  the  opening 
was  only  six  cubits,  the  moment  one  stood 
in  the  interior  it  was  6  cubits  +  2  x  2J 
cubits  =  11  cubits.  Kliefoth,  however,  rejects 
this  explanation,  and  understands  the  three 
cubits  to  refer  to  the  portion  of  the  entrance 
on  either  side  which  was  closed  by  a  gate, 
perhaps  of  lattice-work,  leaving  for  tlie  in- 
gress and  egress  of  priests  a  passage  of  five 
cubits.  In  this  view  tlie  whole  front  of  the 
poroli  would  be  5  cubits  of  passage  4-  6 
(2  X  3)  cubits  of  lattice-work  4- 10  (2  x  5) 
cubits  of  pillar,  equal  in  all  to  21  cubits.  Dr. 
Ourrey,  in  the  '  Speaker's  Commentary,'  in- 
cludes the  three  cubits  of  door  in  the  five 
cubits  .of  post,  and,  supposing  tlie  temple 
entrance  to  be  ten  cubits,  makes  the  whole 
front  to  have  been  twenty  cubits.  We  pre- 
fer Kliefoth's  opinion. 


Ver.  49. — Like  the  gates  into  the  courts, 
the  temple  porch  was  entered  by  steps,  of 
which  the  number  is  not  stated,  though, 
after  the  LXX.,  it  is  usually  assumed  to 
have  been  ten,  Hengstenberg  suggesting 
fourteen.  The  last  particular  noted,  that 
there  were  pillars  by  the  posts,  has  been 
explained  to  signify  that  upon  the  posts,  or 
bases,  stood  shafts  or  pillars  (Ourrey),  or 
with  more  probability  that  by  or  near  the 
pillars  lose  columns  (Kail,  Kliefoth).  The 
height  of  these  is  not  ^Ten,  though 
Hengstenberg  again  finds  it  in  the  elevation 
of  the  porch  of  Solomon's  temple — a 
hundred  and  twenty  cubits  (2  Ohron.  iii.  4). 
Their  exact  position  is  not  stated  ;  but  they 
were  probably,  like  Jaohin  and  Bjaz  in  the 
Solomonic  temple,  stationed  one  on  eaoh 
side  of  the  steps. 


HOMILBTICS. 

Ver.  2. — The  exalted  city.  Ezekiel  now  comes  to  an  elaborate  vision  of  the  restored 
condition  of  the  Jews — first  that  of  their  city,  and  then  that  of  the  temple  which  is  iti 
crowning  glory.  Being  well  acquainted  with  his  native  land,  which  he  could  never 
forget  in  the  weary  days  by  the  waters  of  Babylon,  he  was  able  to  picture  its  scenes 
when  inspired  with  prophetic  sight.  He  sees  the  city  of  the  future,  "  upon  a  very  high 
mountain."  As  the  Swiss  pines  for  his  mountain  home  when  banished  to  some  dreary- 
flat  land,  the  Jewish  highlander  turns  in  thought  from  the  low  river-banks  of  Meso- 
potamia to  the  longed-for  heights  of  bis  native  Judaea.  It  is  a  happy  thing  for  him 
to  dream  of  a  city  crowning  a  mountain  height.  Jerusalem  is  a  mountain-city,  stand- 
ing some  two  thousand  feet  above  the  level  of  the  Mediterranean.  Viewed  from  the 
wilderness,  which,  indeed,  sinks  down  another  eighteen  hundred  feet  to  the  Dead  Sea, 
its  domes  and  minarets  seem  to  float  in  the  air  like  the  habitations  of  a  city  in  cloud- 
land.     The  visionary  Jerusalem  appears  to  the  wrapt  seer  as  an  even  more  exalted 

I."  The  city  of  God.  Ezekiel  conceives  his  vision  of  the  great  future  under  the 
image  of  a  splendid  city.  St.  John  beheld  the  heavenly  city,  the  new  Jerusalem,  as  the 
type  of  the  glorious  Church  of  God,  or  of  human  society  Christianized.  The  Greeks 
conceived  their  ideal  of  perfected  human  life  after  the  model  of  a  pattern  city 
Undoubtedly,  writiug  as  he  was  to  the  captives  of  Pabylon,  Ezekiel  intended  to  direct 
attention  to  the  earthly  Jerusalem,  which,  after  being  destroyed,  was  to  be  rebuilt. 
Thus  only  could  his  language  be  understood  by  his  contemporaries.  But  the  definite, 
material  prediction  embodies  and  exemplifies  ideas  that  may  be  applied  to  the  spiritual 
restoration  of  man,  illustrated  by  this  city  prospect.  1.  There  is  to  he  a  blessed  life  on 
earth.  The  mountain-city  is  terrestrial.  The  Apocalyptic  new  Jerusalem  is  let  down 
from  heaven.  Tlie  city  of  God  is  set  up  here  iu  the  Christian  Cliurch,  as  St.  Augustine 
showed.  But  alas !  it  is  as  yefbut  a  poor  realization  of  the  grand  prophetic  dieain.  A 
few  shanties  mark  the  site  of  the  glorious  city  of  the  future.  That  city  is  yet  to  be.  2. 
This  blessed  life  will  be  social.  Perhaps  the  ancient  and  the  Eastern  prized  the  city 
—well-walled  and  safe-guarded — more  ihan  we  do  in  the  crowded  West,  with  our  modern 
love  of  the  country.  But  the  essential  thought  here  is  that  the  perfect  state  is  social. 
In  the  perfect  city  order  is  supreme  through  universal  love— a  strange  contrast  to  our 
miserable  cities  of  sin  and  selfishness.  It  is  the  best  that,  being  corrupted,  becomes  the 
worst. 

II.  Its  exalted  position.  1.  It  is  in  the  land  of  Israel.  Men  must  enter  the 
Holy  Laud  to  reach  the  Holy  City.  Its  citizens  were  Jews — as  indeed  most  of  the 
inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  are  at  the  present  day.  We  must  be  the  true  people  of  God, 
i.e.  true  followers  of  Christ,  if  we  would  enjoy  the  privileges  of  the  glorious  future. 


CH.  xul— 49.]     THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  EZEKffiL,  329 

2.  It  is  "  set  upon  a  very  high  mountain."  The  exaltation  of  the  city  suggests  many 
advantages,  (1)  Its  glory.  It  is  exalted  in  favour — crowning  a  height.  (2)  Its  strength. 
Cities  were  set  aloft  that  nature  might  fortify  them.  Jerusalem  is  a  natural  fortress. 
The  city  of  God  is  safe.  (3)  Its  salubrity.  High  lands  are  hracing.  The  Christian 
life  braces  the  soul  in  spiritual  health.  (4)  Its  nearness  to  heaven.  Nothing  over- 
shadows the  exalted  city.  The  people  of  God  are  lifted  into  direct  relations  with  heaven. 
(5)  Its  conspicuousness.  "  A  city  that  is  set  upon  a  hill  cannot  be  hid  "  (Matt.  v.  14). 
The  Church  is  to  bear  witness  to  the  world.  The  best  gospel  la  that  of  lofty  Christian 
Siving. 

Ver.  3. — The  man  with  the  measuring-reed.  We  shall  lose  ourselves  in  a  jungle  of 
fancies  if  we  attempt  to  see  mystical  allusions  in  the  various  measurements  of  Ezekiel's 
prophetic  city.  What  we  may  call  Pythagorean  theology,  the  exegesis  that  runs  riot 
among  the  numbers  and  dates  of  prophecy,  has  done  much  to  suggest  doubt  as  to  the 
plain,  direct  use  of  the  Bible.  We  have  no  evidence  that  the  measurements  of  the 
exalted  city  contain  any  spiritual  symbolism.  Neither,  as  Hengstenberg  has  wisely 
pointed  out,  are  the  proportions  of  the  city  so  colossal  as  to  suggest  an  unheard-of 
splendour  of  size.  The  new  Jerusalem  is  much  smaller  than  Babylon  ;  it  would  be  but 
an  insignificant  suburb  if  it  were  joined  on  to  our  huge  London.  But  mere  bigness  is 
no  commendation  for  a  city.  Athens  and  Jerusalem  were  far  smaller  than  Nineveh 
and  Babylon  ;  yet  they  took  a  far  more  important  place  in  the  history  of  man.  Why, 
then,  does  Ezekielcall  attention  to  the  man  with  the  measuring-reed  ?  and  why  does  he 
give  the  exact  details  of  the  plan  of  the  city  and  temple?  However  we  may  shun 
mysticism  in  favour  of  prosaic  literalism,  we  must  not  forget  that  Bzekiel  was  a  prophet, 
not  an  architect.  Why,  then,  does  he  fill  his  pages  with  these  architectural  details  ? 
Ezekiel  must  mean  to  suggest  certain  characteristics  of  the  happy  future. 

I.  Reality.  Ezekiel  here  comes  down  to  concrete  facts.  There  is  nothing  that  so 
impresses  men  with  a  sense  of  reality  as  a  vivid  presentation  of  details.  Much  religious 
teaching  is  unimpressive  because  it  is  too  geqeral  and  abstract.  Christ's  teaching  was 
\  ery  concrete ;  he  dwelt  on  illustrative  specimens,  rather  than  on  general  principles. 
Therefore  "  the  common  people  heard  him  gladly."  Reality  marked  off  the  teaching  of 
Christ  from  the  dry  discussions  of  rabbinical  lore.  A  significant  rebuke  of  much 
religious  teaching  is  unconsciously  conveyed  by  the  remark  of  the  rustic  who,  on  hear- 
ing that  some  one  had  been  to  Jerusalem,  exclaimed  with  amazement,  "  I  thought 
Jerusalem  was  only  a  Bible  town ! " 

II.  DEFrNiTBNBSS.  The  new  Jerusalem  is  to  be  no  city  of  cloudland,its  golden  streets 
and  rosy  domes  passing  one  into  another  and  melting  while  we  gaze  at  it.  Here  we 
have  sharp  outlines  as  well  as  solid  substances.  Many  people  sadly  need  a  man  with 
the  measuring-reed  to  define  their  religious  notions.  We  are  suffering  from  a  violent 
reaction  against  the  old  exactness  of  theological  definition,  according  to  which  heavenly 
things  were  most  minutely  mapped  out  without  a  shadow  of  doubt.  We  now  greatly 
lack  precision  of  thought.     Men's  ideas  are  generally  hazy.     They  want  outline. 

III.  Obdeb.  The  several  parts  being  measured  off  will  stand  in  their  allotted  places. 
The  private  house  will  not  trepass  on  the  line  of  the  street,  nor  will  one  builder 
interfere  with  the  foundations  of  another.  There  is  order  in  the  kingdom  of  religion. 
We  need  it  (1)  in  thought,  that  our  ideas  may  be  rightly  arranged ;  (2)  in  work,  that  we 
may  not  clash  with  one  another ;  (3)  in  the  social  element  of  religion,  that  each  may 
take  his  place.     The  Church  is  not  a  mob. 

IV.  Divine  direction.  Ezekiel  wrote  as  a  prophet,  as  a  messenger  of  God.  Moses 
was  to  make  the  tabernacle  after  the  pattern  shown  to  him  in  the  mount  (Exod.  xxv. 
40).  God  cares  for  the  smallest  details  of  his  people's  life  and  work.  We  should  seek 
for  his  guidance  in  these  matters. 

Ver.  6. — "  2%e  gate  which  looketh  toward  the  east."  Let  us  clearly  understand  that 
this  is  only  a  prosaic  description  of  part  of  Jerusalem  as  the  prophet  conceives  it  in  his 
vision  of  the  city  rebuilt.  We  cannot  fairly  see  in  these  words  any  profound  mystical 
allusions.  But  we  may  use  them  as  illustrations  of  other  things,  as  we  may  take 
nature  in  illustration  of  religion  without  believing  that  our  parables  are  founded  on 
fixed,  objective,  Swedenborgen-like  correspondences.     Let  us,  then,  follow  the  fancy 


330  THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PROPHET  EZEKIEL.     [oh.  XL.  1—49. 

which  the  picture  of  a  gate  looking  towards  the  east  may  call  up  when  we  take  it  a» 
an  illustration  of  what  may  be  similar  in  other  regions  of  life, 

I.  An  Oeiental  outlook.  The  new  city  of  God  has  this  outlook — she  has  a  gate 
which  looketh  towards  the  Bast.  We  must  never  forget  that  our  religion  comes  from  the 
East.  In  form  it  is  Oriental  still.  1.  We  need  to  remember  this  fact  when  we  are  in 
danger  of  interpreting  its  glowing  metaphors  in  the  cold  matter-of-fact  style  of  the 
West.  2.  It  might  quiet  the  pride  of  Europe  for  men  to  remember  that  "they  owe  what 
is  best  in  European  civilization  to  an  Asiatic  stock.  3.  The  wonder  is  that  the  unpro- 
gressive  East  produced  the  most  progressive  religion.  The  world-religion  of  Christ 
sprang  from  Asia.  This  very  fact  testifies  to  its  Divine  origin.  4.  It  shows,  however, 
that  Orientals  especially  should  receive  the  gospel. 

II.  An  outlook  towards  the  light.  The  light  dawns  in  the  East.  We  all  need 
light,  and  should  luve,  seek,  and  cherish  it.  We  are  too  satisfied  with  our  dim,  human, 
artificial  light,  instead  of  looking  for  that  Light  of  the  world,  which  is  indeed  the 
Light  of  the  ages.     The  true  Christian  will  be  ever  looking  towards  Christ,  his  Sun. 

in.  An  outlook  towards  the  new  day.  Bach  day  begins  in  the  east.  We 
shall  miss  the  sunrise  if  we  set  our  faces  towards  the  west.  Some  natures  always 
incline  to  turn  with  a  melancholy  gaze  towards  the  waning  light  of  setting  suns.  They 
depjore  the  good  old  times ;  they  weep  over  the  days  that  have  been,  but  can  never  be 
again ;  they  weary  their  souls  with  incessant  regrets.  This  continuous  dreaming  on  the 
past  is  unwholesome ;  it  tends  to  paralyze  our  energies  and  leave  us  in  neglect  of  the 
duties  as  well  as  the  hopes  of  the  future.  They  are  wiser  who,  like  St.  Paul,  forget 
the  things  that  are  behind,  and  reach  forth  unto  those  which  are  before  (Phil.  iii.  13). 
God  has  a  new  day  of  light  and  service  for  the  saddest,  most  wearied  soul  that  will 
turn  to  his  grace.     Wise  men  live  in  the  future ;  they  look  to  the  rising  sun. 

IV.  An  outlook  towards  Christ.  The  first  sight  which  many  a  visitor  to 
Palestine  craves  to  set  eyes  on  is  the  Mount  of  Olives ;  his  most  earnest  desire  is  to 
climb  the  very  hill  that  Jesus  Christ  often  trod.  Of  all  sacred  spots  about  Jerusalem 
this  must  be  most  like  its  original  self.  Now  the  eastern  gate  looks  right  on  the  Mount 
of  Olives.  To  the  Christian  its  prospect  is  profoundly  interesting.  Yet  Christ  has 
arisen.  He  is  not  there.  What  we  now  look  for  is  an  eastern  gate  of  the  soul  tumeil 
to  that  ever-living  Christ  who  ascended  from  the  Mount  of  Olives — 

"Faith  has  yet  her  Olivet, 
And  Love  her  Galilee." 

Ver.  39. — Sacrifices  in  the  new  temple.  As  we  read  the  dry  details  of  the  city  that 
is  to  be  rebuilt  and  its  new  temple,  we  are  suddenly  pulled  up  by  a  startling  item. 
Among  the  various  arrangements  of  the  ancient  temple  that  are  to  be  revived,  provision 
is  made  for  the  sacrificial  rites.  There  are  to  be  sacrifices  in  the  new  temple.  The 
burnt  offering  and  the  sin  offering  and  the  trespass  offering  are  all  to  be  there.  Then 
sacrifices  will  be  needed  after  the  restoration.  It  might  have  been  supposed  that  these 
would  now  be  dispensed  with,  since  sin  was  put  away  and  the  people  were  re-dedicated 
to  Ck)d.  But  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  temple  ritual  was  never  before  cultivated  with 
such  assiduity  and  elaborateness. 

I.  We  need  repeated  rededication  op  our  lives  to  God.  The  burnt  offering 
signified  the  self-dedication  of  the  man  who  presented  it.  It  was  given  whole,  to  show 
that  he  had  surrendered  his  all  to  God  ;  it  was  consumed  by  fire,  to  suggest  that  he  was 
to  make  this  surrender  complete  in  depth,  intensity,  and  reality,  as  well  as  in  compre- 
hensiveness. Now,  to  have  made  this  ofi^ering  once  for  all  did  not  suffice.  It  had  to  be 
continually  renewed.  The  dedication  of  Israel  to  God  in  the  restoration  to  their  land 
could  not  be  accepted  as  sufficient  if  it  were  done  once  for  all  It  had  to  be  made  over 
and  over  again.  So  is  it  with  the  Christian's  offering  of  himself.  When  thinking  of 
his  great,  decisive  step,  he  may  exclaim,  in  Doddridge's  well-known  words — 

"'Tis  done,  the  great  transaction's  done: 
I  am  my  Lord's,  and  he  is  mine." 

Yet  if  he  rests  satisfied  with  having  once  taken  that  step,  he  will  soon  find  himself 
slipping  back  from  his  high  resolve.  We  must  continually  renew  our  self-dedication  to 
Ciirist.     The  sacrament  of  baptism,  which  signifies  the  first  dedication,  is  taken  but 


on.  XL.  1—49.]     THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIBL.  331 

once ;  but  it  is  followed  by  that  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  which  suggests  renewal  of 
dedication  in  deliberate  intention,  as  when  the  Roman  soldier  took  the  oath  of  allegiance 
to  his  general.     This  sacrament  we  repeat  many  times. 

II.  We  need  kepbated  oleansikq  from  sin.  There  were  to  be  sin  and  trespass 
offerings  in  the  new  temple.  This  fact  is  startling  and  most  painful.  Even  while  the 
people  are  returning,  penitent  and  restored,  provision  has  to  be  made  for  future  falls 
and  sins.  1.  Christian  people  sin.  We  know  that  this  is  only  too  true  of  all  Christian 
people.  There  is  no  sinless  soul  on  earth.  "  If  we  say  we  have  no  sin,  we  deceive  our- 
selves, and  the  truth  is  not  in  us  "  (1  John  i.  8).  The  foresight  of  the  fact  is  no  excuse 
for  us ;  for  God  does  not  make  his  children  sin — ^he  endeavours  to  save  them  from  it. 
Thus  Christ  predicted  Peter's  fall  although  he  had  prayed  that  his  disciple  might  be 
kept  faithful  (Luke  xxii.  31,  32).  2.  God  has  provided/or  the  recovery  of  Christians 
when  they  sin.  There  were  to  be  sacrifices  in  the  restored  temple.  This  arrangement 
shows  the  wonderful  long-auffering  mercy  of  God.  The  same  mercy  is  displayed  towards 
Christians.  It  is  a  shame  that  they  who  have  once  washed  their  robes  and  made  them 
white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb  should  again  stain  them  with  the  ruin  of  sin.  Yet  at 
this  is  done,  God  provides  even  again  for  cleansing — not  now  by  repeated  sacrifices,  but 
by  the  eternal  efficacy  of  the  one  perfect  Sacrifice.  "  And  if  any  man  sin,  we  have  an 
Advocate  with  the  Father,  Jesus  Christ  the  Righteous :  and  he  is  the  Propitiation  for 
our  sins  "  (1  John  ii.  2,  3). 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  3. — Measurement.  It  strikes  the  reader  of  this  prophetic  book  as  strange  that 
several  chapters  towards  its  close  should  be  chiefly  occupied  with  measurements  of  the 
temple  which  Ezekiel  saw  in  his  vision.  The  reed  and  the  line  seem  at  first  sight  to 
have  little  to  do  with  a  prophetic  vision.  Especially  does  this  seem  the  case  when  it 
is  perceived  to  how  large  an  extent  these  measureiiients  are  a  repetition  of  those  found 
in  earlier  books  of  the  Scriptures.  But  reflection  will  show  us  that  measurements 
such  as  are  here  described  may  suggest  thoughts  very  helpful  to  the  devout,  religious 
mind. 

I,  Measurements  aee  necessary  dj  order  to  the  explanation  op  proportion, 
OBDER,  and  beauty.  It  is  Well  known  to  students  of  science  that  mathematical  relations 
are  found  to  exist  where  an  ordinary  observer  would  little  expect  to  find  them.  When 
they  come  to  ask  whether  explanation  can  be  given  of  such  differences  as  those  which 
obtain  between  different  colours  and  different  sounds,  they  are  led  to  investigations 
which  show  that  regular  variations  in  the  number  of  vibrations  in  a  second,  whether 
of  the  ether  or  of  the  atmosphere,  account  for  the  differences  in  question.  When  they 
come  to  ask  why  the  heavenly  bodies  fulfil  their  regular  movements  and  preserve 
their  beautiful  harmony,  they  are  led  to  investigations  which  issue  in  the  discovery 
that  mathematical  laws  govern — as  the  phrase  is — the  movements  which  excite  our 
wonder  and  admiration.  These  are  but  familiar  illustrations  of  a  principle  which  is 
recognieed  throughout  the  material  universe.  If  we  may  use  such  lanj;uage  with 
reverence,  we  may  say  that  the  cosmos  is  evidently  the  work  of  a  great  Mathematician, 
Measurer,  and  Mechanic.  When  we  turn  from  the  works  of  nature  to  works  of  art,  we 
are  confronted  by  the  same  principle.  If  a  building,  whether  a  temple  or  a  palace,  be 
erected,  it  is  constructed  upon  principles  which  involve  numerical  relations  and 
measurements.  The  sculptor  measures  his  proportions  in  trunk  and  head  and  limb ;  the 
poet  measures  the  feet  in  his  verse.  Wherever  we  find  order  and  beauty,  we  have  but 
to  look  below  the  surface,  and  we  shall  discover  numbers  and  measurements. 

II.  Measurements  are  evidences  op  mind.  There  are  different  grades  of  intel- 
ligence, and  this  is  nowhere  more  obvious  than  in  the  varying  degrees  in  which  human 
workmanship  is  regulated  by  mathematical  principles.  The  rudest  wigwam  is  a  proof 
of  design  and  of  adaptation,  of  the  possession  by  the  builder  of  some  powers  of  space- 
measurement.  But  a  complicated  machine,  such  as  a  watch  or  a  steam-engine,  bears 
unmistakable  evidence  of  mathematical  as  well  as  of  manipulative  ability.  If  a 
temple  be  constructed,  of  vast  size,  of  harmonious  proportions,  of  symmetry,  con- 
taining many  parts  all  bound  into  an  organic  unity,  it  speaks  to  every  beholder  of 


832  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.      [ch.  xl.  1—49. 

a  mind — a  mind  capable  and  cultured,  a  mind  patient  and  comprehensive.  To  those 
who  believe  in  the  existence  of  God,  the  material  universe  is  full  of  evidences  of 
his  unequalled  and  supreme  intellect;  the  measurements  of  the  scientific  observer 
are  sufficient  to  establish  this  conviction.  The  universe  is  God's  temple,  and  all  its 
lines  are  laid  down,  all  its  parts  are  co-ordinated,  in  such  a  manner  as  to  evince 
what,  in  human  language,  we  may  term  measurements  the  most  complete  and  the 
most  exact.  To  the  deeply  reflecting  mind,  the  existence  of  the  spiritual  temple  is 
even  more  eloquent  concerning  the  attributes  and  especially  the  comprehensive  and 
foreseeing  wisdom  of  the  Eternal. 

III.  Material  mbas0bbmbnts  are  pboperlt  symbolioal  of  the  spibitual.  A 
reflecting  reader  of  these  chapters  will  hardly  rest  in  any  conclusions  regarding  a 
structure  of  stone,  of  timber,  of  precious  metal.  Whatever  may  be  his  canon  of 
interpretation,  whether  he  adopts  the  literal  or  the  figurative  principle,  whether  or 
not  he  looks  for  a  material  temple  still  to  be  reared  upon  the  soil  of  Palestine, — certain 
it  is  that  for  him  the  material  and  perishable  constructions  of  human  skill  and  labour 
are  chiefly  interesting  as  the  embodiment  of  thought  and  the  suggestion  of  eternal 
realities.  The  universe  is  God's  temple;  the  body  of  Christ  was  God's  temple;  the 
Church  is  the  chosen  and  sacred  temple  of  the  Eternal  and  Supreme.  The  thoughts 
of  those  who  meditate  upon  these  remarkable  chapters  of  Ezekiel  will  be  sadly  mis- 
directed if  they  do  not  ascend  to  him  who  is  both  the  Architect  of  the  sanctuary  and 
the  one  supreme  Deity  to  whom  is  directed  all  the  sacrifice  and  all  the  worship 
presented  within  its  hallowed  precincts. — T. 

Ver.  4. — ITie  office  of  the  prophet.  The  angel  who  was  appointed  to  show  to  Ezekiel 
the  temple  of  vision,  and  to  take  its  measurements  in  his  presence,  and  to  explain  its 
details  and  its  various  purposes,  prefaced  his  special  mission  by  an  exhortation  in  which 
he  expressed,  in  a  very  complete  and  instructive  manner,  the  vocation  and  functions  of 
a  true  prophet. 

I.  In  order  that  there  mat  be  propheot,  there  must  be  a  revelation.  In 
the  case  before  us  there  was  a  temple  to  be  seen,  and  there  was  an  angel  to  exhibit  and 
to  explain  it.  In  every  case  where  a  man  has  been  called  upon  to  fulfil  the  office  of 
a  prophet,  there  has  been  a  special  manifestation  of  the  Divine  mind  and  will.  The 
prophet  may  be  gifted,  original,  luminous ;  but  he  does  not,  so  far  as  he  is  a  pro- 
phet, utter  forth  his  own  thoughts,  deal  with  any  matter  according  to  the  light  of 
his  own  reason.  There  must  be  a  communication  from  the  Being  who  is  the  Source 
of  all  good  for  men.  Otherwise  the  vocation  of  the  prophet  is  endued  with  no  peculiar, 
Divine  authority. 

II.  Ik  oeder  that  there  may  be  prophecy,  there  must  be  the  attentivb 
and  observant  intelliqencb.  "  Behold  with  thine  eyes,  and  hear  with  thine  ears." 
Such  was  the  admonition  of  the  angel  to  Ezekiel.  A  prophet  must  be  a  man  gifted 
with  powers  of  observation  and  uiiderstanding.  He  is  not  a  passive  medium,  but 
an  active  agent.  He  exercises  his  human  faculties,  thinks  and  feels  in  a  truly  human 
way.  Even  if  they  had  not  received  the  prophetic  commission,  the  seers  of  Israel 
would  have  been  "  men  of  light  and  leading,"  men  "  discerning  the  signs  of  the  times." 
In  a  word,  to  be  a  prophet,  one  must  be  a  man. 

III.  In  order  that  there  may  be  prophecy,  there  must  be  a  beobptivb 
SPIRITUAL  NAT0RE.  "  Set  thine  heart  upon  all  that  I  shall  show  thee."  Such  was  the 
further  admonition  addressed  to  the  prophet.  His  was  not  a  work  to  be  discharged  in 
a  perfunctory,  official,  uninterested  manner.  Not  only  was  it  required  that  the  intel- 
lect should  be  alert,  the  spiritual  nature  needed  to  be  receptive  and  responsive. 
Intelligence  is  sufficient  for  some  services ;  but  for  a  spiritual  "minis  try  there  is  needed 
a  spiritual  susceptibility,  a  spiritual  energy.  The  messajie  of  God  needs  to  be  assimi- 
lated and  appropriated,  to  enter  into  the  prophet's  very  nature — to  become,  so  to  speak, 
part  of  himself.  The  evidence  is  abundant  that  such  was  the  case  with  Ezekiel.  He 
felt  deeply  what  he  received  and  what  he  had  to  communicate.  It  was  to  him  "  the 
burden  of  the  Lord,"  by  which  he  was  oppressed  as  well  as  laden,  yet  which,  for  hia 
country's  sake  he  was  willing  to  bear. 

IV.  In  order  that  there  may  be  prophecy,  thbbb  must  be  the  communicatiok 
or  the  tidinos,  the  threat  ob  the  pbomisb,  to  those  to  whom  the  prophet 


OH.  XL.  1—49.]      THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  BZBKIBL.  833 

IS  SENT.  "  Declare  all  that  thou  seest  to  the  house  of  Israel."  There  are  natures 
which  are  receptive,  hut  not  communicative ;  deep  thinkers,  who  are  lacking  in  the 
power  of  the  orator,  the  author,  the  artist;  for  whose  greatness  the  world  has  little 
reason  to  be  thankful.  Mystic  communers  with  heaven  may  see  visions  and  hear 
voices,  and  yet  may  not  be  able  to  ccmmunicate  their  experiences  to  their  fellow-men. 
Not  such  was  the  case  with  the  Hebrew  prophets.  They  went  forth  from  the  presence 
of  the  Lord  as  his  heralds  and  authoritative  agents  and  messengers  to  their  country- 
men. Nothing  hindered  them  from  discharging  the  duties  of  their  ofiSce.  They  sought 
not  men's  favour  and  they  feared  not  met's  frown.  Whether  men  would  hear  or 
forbear  was  not  a  matter  for  them  to  consider.  It  was  theirs  to  relate  what  they  had 
Been  and  heard  and  known  of  the  counsels  of  the  Eternal. — T. 

Ver.  44. — Singers.  Praise  is  an  essential  part  of  the  worship  of  God.  However  it 
may  be  with  the  imaginary  deities  of  the  heathen,  we  know  of  the  one  true  Grod  that  he 
is  infinitely  great  and  infinitely  good ;  and  that  it  therefore  becomes  his  creatures  to 
be  his  worshippers,  and  that  it  becomes  his  worshippers  to  utter  forth  his  praise — the 
memory  of  his  great  goodness.  In  the  Jewish  economy  praise  occupied  a  very 
important  part  in  Divine  service,  especially  during  and  after  the  time  of  David,  the 
sweet  singer  of  Israel.  There  were  persons,  gifted  by  nature  and  trained  by  art,  who 
were  set  apart  for  the  purpose  of  expressing  the  nation's  gratitude  and  devotion, 
by  performing  "the  service  of  song  in  the  house  of  the  Lord."  These  had  their 
appointed  place  in  the  worship  of  the  temple,  and  their  appointed  dwelling-places  in 
its  precincts.  Their  vocation  and  ministry  symbolize  the  service  of  praise  ever  offered 
both  by  the  Church  militant  on  earth  and  by  the  Church  triumphant  in  heaven. 

I.  In  okdeb  to  psalmody,  theee  must  be  an  iktelliqent  nature  capable  op 

APPREHENDING   God'b    GLORIOUS  ATTRIBUTES   AND    ESPECIALLY   HIS   GREAT    GOODXESS. 

By  a  figure  of  speech  we  represent  the  heavens,  the  earth,  and  the  sea,  the  living  crea- 
tures which  people  the  globe,  the  wells  that  spring  into  the  light  of  day,  the  trees 
of  the  forests,  as  all  rendering  their  tribute  of  praise  to  the  Creator.  But  this  is  to 
project  our  human  feelings  upon  the  world  around  us.  It  is  absurd  to  suppose  the 
most  sagacious  of  quadrupeds  as  even  conceiving  of  God,  far  less  as  consciously  speak- 
ing or  singing  his  praise.  But  it  is  the  glory  of  man's  nature  that  his  apprehensions 
are  not  limited  to  God's  works.  He  "  looks,  through  nature,  up  to  nature's  God."  Ha 
discerns  the  tokens  of  the  Divine  presence,  and  finds  reasons  for  believing  in  the  Divine 
goodness.     If  he  offers  praise,  his  is  a  reasonable  service. 

II.  In  order  to  psalmody,  there  must  be  an  emotional  nature  CAPABLE  OF 
rEELING  THB  kindness  AND  RESPONDING  TO  THE  LOVE  OF  GoD.      Music  is  the  Tehicls 

of  emotion. 

"  Why  should  feeling  ever  tpeak. 
When  thou  canst  breathe  ner  tones  so  well  7  " 

A  being  with  no  emotion  would  be  without  song.  Spontaneous  is  the  outflow  of 
feeling — of  joy,  of  sorrow,  of  love — in  the  notes  of  melody.  What  so  fitted  to  call 
forth  the  purest  and  most  exalted  strains  of  music  as  the  loving-kindness  of  the  Lord  ? 
As  a  matter  of  fact,  much  of  the  most  exquisite  music  produced  by  the  great  and  gifted 
masters  of  song  has  been  inspired  by  religion  and  religious  themes.  The  oratorios,  the 
anthems,  the  chorales,  of  Christian  composers,  rendered  with  all  the  resources  of  musical 
art,  may  be  regarded  as  endeavours  tu  express  the  tenderest,  the  most  pathetic,  the 
■ublimest  feelings  which  the  mind  of  man  has  ever  experienced. 

III.  In   order   to   psalmody,   there    must   be   an   artistic    nature    CAPABLE    OP 

OOHSTEUOTiNG  APPROPRIATE  POEMS  OP  MUSICAL  EXPRESSIVENESS.  These  formg  Vary  with 
the  vdrying  states  of  human  society,  of  culture,  and  of  civilization.  What  is  adapted 
to  •  ruder  age  may- be  ill  suited  to  an  epoch  of  rtfinement.  It  is  a  tradition  that  the 
music  composed  by  David,  and  preserved  for  centuries  among  the  Jews,  was  taken  over 
by  the  Christian  Church,  and  so  survives  in  archaic  forms  of  psalmody  still  used  amongst 
ourselves.  However  this  may  be,  it  is  certain  that  there  has  never  been,  in  the  history 
of  the  Jewish  or  the  Christian  Church,  a  period  when  silence  has  reigned  in  the  sacred 
assemblies,  when  speech  has  not  been  accompanied  by  song.  Like  all  good  things, 
sacred  music  has  been  abused,  and  attention  has  been  given  to  the  artistic  qualities 
rather  than  to  the  spuitual  import  and  impression.    Yet  this  Is  an  art  which  deserves 


834  THE   BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHBT  EZEKIBL.      [oh.  xl.  1—49. 

cultivation,  anrl  which  will  lepay  for  cultivation.  Without  psalmody,  how  would  our 
religious  sentiments  and  aspirations  be  repressed ! 

IV.   In  ORDEB  to  psalmody,  there    must    be  a  PHTSIOAL,   VOOAL    CONSTITnTION, 

CAPABLE  OF  GIVING  EXPRESSION  TO  DEVOTIONAL  FEELINGS.  Instrumental  musig  has 
taxed  the  mental  [  owers  of  the  composer  and  the  artistic  faculty  of  the  performer  to 
so  high  a  degree  that  a  cultivated  and  honourable  profession  has  found  here  abundant 
scope  for  study  and  for  skill.  But  the  art  of  vocal  minstrelsy  is  more  glorious  and 
delightful  still.  There  is  no  music  like  the  human  voice;  and  if  this  is  so  when  other 
themes  inspire  the  song,  how  much  more  when  the  high  praises  of  God  are  poured 
forth,  whether  with  the  enchanting  sweetness  of  a  solitary  voice,  or  with  the  loud  and 
joyful  burst  of  the  chorus  in  which  the  many  blend  in  one  1 — T. 

Ver.  45. — Priests.  What  would  a  temple  be  with  no  priesthood  to  minister  at  its 
altars,  to  present  the  offerings  of  its  worshippers?  The  priests  give  meaning  and 
interest  to  the  temple,  not  only  to  the  scenery  of  its  services,  but  to  its  great  purpose 
and  aim.  The  mention  in  this  passage  of  the  priests  who  dwelt  and  ministered  within 
the  temple  precincts  suggests  rtfleotioijs  of  a  more  general  character  regarding  the 
ofBce  and  those  who  were  called  to  undertake  it. 

I.  Humanity  is  constituted  fob  conscious  and  happy  belations  of  intimatk 

FELLOWSHIP   with   GoD. 

II.  Humanity  is  by  sin  rekdbbed  morally  unfit  for  such  fellowship. 

III.  Priesthood  is  appointed  by  God  himself  as  the  medium  by  which  such 
fellowship  may  be  restored  and  maintained. 

IV.  The  exercise  of  the  priestly  office  is  a  perpetual  expression  of  man's 
dependence  fob  every  blessing  upon  God. 

V.  The  office  of  the  priesthood  is  especially  designed  to  restore  the 
interrupted  harmony  of  moral  relations  between  man  and  God. 

VI.  And  to  present  to  God  from  man  the  tribute  and  offering  ever  due. 

VII.  The  Hebrew  priesthood   was  intended  to  prefigure  and  to  peefabb 

for   the   PRlBSTfiOOD   OF   THE   SoN   OF   GOD. 

Application.  The  priesthood,  as  exercised  among  the  Jews,  has  for  us  an  interest 
more  than  historic.  It  foreshadowed  facts  and  principles  which  could  only  reach  theii 
perfect  fulfilment  and  realization  in  the  mediation  of  Christ.  The  Jewish  priesthood 
ought  not  to  be  regarded  as  merely  typical;  it  expressed  Divine  and  eternal  truths. 
At  the  same  time,  the  sacerdotal  office  of  the  Lord  Jesus  cannot  be  placed  upon 
the  same  level  as  the  ministry  of  the  temple  at  Jerusalem.  That  which  was  fully 
exhibited  in  him  was  but  faintly  outlined  in  his  predecessors.  Chnst's  was  the  real 
offering,  the  true  sacrifice.  And  this  is  made  perfectly  plain  by  the  provision  that  he 
should  have  no  successor  in  the  wurk  of  atonement.  Yet  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that 
there  is  a  function  of  priesthood  which  is  perpetual  in  the  Church — the  function  of 
obedience  and  of  praise.  In  this  all  true  Christians — ministers  and  worshippers  alike 
— take  part.  This  unceasing  offering  and  sacrifice  ascends  from  the  heart-altars  of  the 
faithful  throughout  the  spiritual  temple  of  the  living  God.  And  this  comes  up  with 
acceptance  through  him  who  is  the  High  Priest  of  our  profession,  by  whom  all  offerings 
that  his  people  present  to  Heaven  are  laid  upon  the  upper  altar,  and  are  well  pleasing 
to  the  King  and  Saviour  of  all. — T. 

Vers.  1 — 4. —  Vision  of  the  new  temple.  These  visions  of  the  restored  temple  are  a 
fitting  close  to  this  series  of  revelations.  The  opening  visions  displayed  the  righteous 
God  marching  forth  in  majestic  splendour  to  vindicate  himself.  His  vast  army  is  at 
hand  to  execute  his  royal  will.  Now  the  will  of  God  upon  Israel  is  accomplished. 
Exile  has  done  its  gracious  work.  The  old  love  of  idolatry  is  killed.  In  vision  at 
least  the  people  have  returned  in  loyalty  to  their  own  King.  A  regeneration  of  heart 
and  life  has  occurred.  Bright  prospects  of  return  to  Palestine  open  before  them.  God 
has  pledged  himself  to  reinstate  them  permanently  in  Judsaa.  There  remains  only  one 
thought — it  concerns  their  temple.  This  had  been  the  visible  symbol  of  their  eleva- 
tion and  their  strength.     Shall  their  temple  lift  its  royal  domes  heavenward  again  ? 

I.  Right  aspirations  qualify  men  to  receive  fresh  revelations  from  God. 
The  frame  of  thought  and  fteling  in  Ezekiel's  mind  was  an  essential  condition  for 


OH.XL.  1— 49.]     THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  EZBKIEL.  335 

obtaining  this  vision.  Natural  principles  prevailed  then  as  now.  Ezekiel  was  by 
birth  and  office  a  priest.  Nor  was  he,  as  many  had  been,  a  priest  simply  by  hereditary 
right.  He  was  in  every  fibre  of  his  nature  a  priest.  His  soul  yearned  to  see  Jehovah 
enthroned  in  his  temple  at  Jerusalem.  He  yearned  lo  take  his  proper  place  at  the 
altars  of  the  Most  High.  The  visions  and  promises  God'  had  vouchsafed  to  him 
touchiug  the  reoccupation  of  the  land  had  revived  his  hopes.  He  longed  to  see  the 
gracious  promise  fulfilled.  To  Ezekiel,  in  this  state  of  sanguine  hopefulness,  the  new 
vision  came.  Earnest  zeal  for  God's  glory  is  a  condition  essential  to  gain  further 
kaowledge  of  his  will.  "The  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  him,  and  he 
will  show  to  them  his  covenant."  As  steel  points  draw  off  the  electric  fluid,  so  a  state 
of  childlike  affection  draws  down  communications  from  God. 

II.  Fob  evebt  kind  of  bntbepeise  God  has  well-equipped  sebvantb.  As  soon 
as  Ezekiel  was  transported  in  vision  to  Mount  Zion,  lol  there  was  a  heavenly  messenger 
furnished  with  plans  for  the  new  temple.  Without  doubt  the  unfallen  angels  have 
differences  of  character  and  differences  of  endowment  as  great  as  appear  among  men. 
Very  likely  qualities  of  mind  are  even  more  varied  and  diverse  in  heaven  than  upon 
earth.  Gabriel  is  described  to  us  as  the  presence-angel — a  sort  of  prime  minister. 
Michael  is  always  spoken  of  as  engaging  in  battle  for  Jehovah — a  commander-in-chief 
in  the  army  of  God.  Some  angels  at  least  have  gifts  of  music  and  of  song.  This 
visitor  from  the  heavenly  realm  who  met  Ezekiel  on  the  mount  was  endowed  with 
architectural  skill,  and  unfolded  specifications  and  plans  for  the  house  of  God.  "  His 
appearance  was  like  the  appearance  of  brass" — steadfast,  durable,  irresistible.  His 
qualities  weie  the  very  opposite  of  a  weak,  timid,  vacillating  person.  The  circum- 
stances were  such  that  severe  opposition  was  expected,  and  the  architect  of  God  was 
well-prepared  for  his  task.  So  has  it  always  been  in  human  history.  Gideon  was  the 
man  for  his  times.  Elijah  was  well  adapted  for  his  age.  Paul  well  fitted  the  niche  he 
occupied. 

III.  To    BECEIVB    REVELATIONS  FROM    GOD   EVERY   HUMAN   ORGAN   MUST   BE   ACTIVE. 

"  Behold  with  thine  eyes,  and  hear  with  thine  ears,  and  set  thine  heart  upon  all  that  I 
shall  show  thee."  The  eye  and  the  ear  are  the  channels  through  which  we  obtain  the 
raw  material  of  information,  which  is  manufactured  into  wisdom  by  the  machinery  of 
the  ndnd.  God  does  degrade  men  by  using  them  only  as  machines.  He  will  not  do 
for  them  what  they  can  do  for  themselves.  He  will  give  no  premium  to  indolence. 
By  the  diligent  use  of  our  highest  faculties  we  rise  into  higher  states  of  life  and  joy. 
It  was  after  a  season  of  prayer  that  Jesus  was  transfigured.  While  David  "  mused, 
the  fire  burned."  He  that  uses  well  his  ten  talents  obtains  largest  reward.  The 
eunuch  was  diligently  scanning  the  Scriptures  when  the  interpreter  came  to  him. 
While  Daniel  was  speaking  in  prayer,  Gabriel  ariived  to  unfold  the  heavenly  mysteries. 
We  do  not  receive  larger  and  clearei  revelation  from  God  because  our  minds  and  hearts 
are  not  open  vride  to  receive  it.     The  oil  stayed  because  there  was  no  empty  vessel. 

IV.  Divine  knowlbdob  is  given  that  it  may  be  communicated.  "  Declare  all 
that  thou  seest  to  the  house  of  Israel."  In  the  kingdom  of  Gud  no  form  of  selfishness 
is  tolerated.  Every  man  receives  in  order  that  he  may  distribute.  This  is  God's  great 
jrinciple  of  economy.  He  kindles  the  light  on  one  point,  that  from  this  point  other 
torches  may  be  lighted.  "  Freely  ye  have  received,  freely  give."  The  fount  of  know- 
ledge is  fed  by  what  it  gives  out,  as  well  as  by  what  it  receives.  By  virtue  of  St.  Paul's 
possession  of  the  gospel  mysteries  he  counted  himself  a  debtor  both  to  the  Greek  and 
to  the  barbarian.  Men  of  God  are  stewards  of  spiritual  blessing,  God's  almoners  to 
the  world.  God  has  enlightened  us  that  the  light  may  shine  out  upon  others.  God 
has  enriched  us  that  we  may  enrich  the  poor.  God  has  filled  us  with  sacred  comfort 
that  we  may  comfort  the  distressed.  God  has  made  his  servants  trustees  for  humanity. 
"  No  man  liveth  unto  himself;  no  man  dieth  unto  himself." — D. 

Vers.  6 — 27. — Ood^s  kingdom  divinely  organized.  It  is  no  part  of  God's  procedure 
to  provide  a  sketch -plan  for  his  kingdom  and  allow  others  to  supply  the  details.  In 
the  kingdom  of  material  nature  his  matchless  wisdom  has  designed  the  minutest  parts. 
In  the  construction  of  the  human  body  he  has  taken  care  to  do  the  best  in  the  articu- 
lation of  every  joint — in  the  interaction  of  the  most  delicate  organ.  So  in  the  building 
of  his  gpiritual  kingdom  he  has  laid  down  all  the  essential  principles  that  are  to  be 


336  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIBL.      [oh.  xl,  1—49. 

embodied  and  perpetuated.  At  the  same  time,  there  is  ample  proTision  for  the  adapta- 
tion of  these  principles  to  the  changes  incident  to  the  development  of  human  character 
and  incident  to  the  needs  of  human  society. 

I.  The  leading  idea  of  the  temple  is  separation.  "Behold  a  wall  on  the 
outside  of  the  house  round  about."  The  etymological  meaning  of  the  word  "  temple  " 
conveys  this  lesson.  It  is  a  place  "  cut  off,"  i.e.  cut  off  from  secular  uses.  The  temple 
of  God  is  capacious  enough  to  include  mankind ;  yet  it  excludes  whatever  is  selfish, 
base,  corrupting,  or  perishable.  There  is  exclusion  as  well  as  inclusion.  Its  mission 
upon  the  earth  is  to  separate  the  precious  elemeufs  from  the  vile  in  very  man.  It  is 
deagned  to  elevate  and  purify  what  is  excellent  in  men ;  but  mere  dross  it  purges  out. 
In  this  work  of  separation — the  separation  of  the  evil  from  the  good — it  is  a  pattern 
of  the  heavenly  city.     Gates  are  for  exclusion  and  for  safety. 

II.  God's  temple  conveys  the  idea  or  elevation.  "  Then  came  he  to  the  gate 
. .  .  and  went  up  the  stairs  thereof."  The  mind  of  man  is,  in  many  respects,  dependent 
npon  his  body.  As  by  steps  we  find  an  easy  method  for  bodily  elevation,  so  with 
spiritual  ascent.  An  important  lesson  is  left  upon  the  mind.  The  elevation  of  the 
body  aids  the  elevation  of  the  soul.  On  the  gi-eat  occasions  on  which  God  descended 
and  held  intercourse  with  men,  the  scene  was  the  summit  of  a  mount.  On  Horeb 
God  manifested  himself  to  Moses.  Prom  Gerizim  and  Ebal  the  Law  was  to  be  pro- 
claimed. On  Moriah  Abraham  was  to  present  the  great  sacrifice  of  faith.  On  Nebo 
Moses  was  to  close  his  earthly  career.  On  a  mountain  (probably  Hermon)  Jesus  was 
transfigured.  Prom  the  slopes  of  Olivet  the  Saviour  ascended  to  his  throne.  Without 
question  temple-worship  helps  to  lift  the  soul  into  a  higher  life.  The  more  we  are 
with  God  the  purer  and  nobler  we  become. 

III.  God's  temple  oitbbs  bast  access  to  men.  The  gates  were  many.  They 
were  wide.  They  looked  in  all  directions.  These  facts  impressed  men  with  the  truth 
that  God  desires  the  society  of  men.  He  has  not  retired  from  men  into  remote  seclu- 
sion. He  invites  them  to  the  most  intimate  friendship.  His  dwelling  shall  have 
capacious  gates.  As  with  a  hundred  voices,  they  seem  to  accord  a  hearty  welcome. 
We  cannot  come  too  often.  We  cannot  presume  too  much  on  his  friendship.  "  God 
is  known  in  his  palaces  for  a  Refuge."  The  gates  of  his  palace  open  to  every  point  — 
north,  south,  east,  and  west. 

IV.  God's  temple  ib  embellished  with  beauty.  Between  the  arches  and  upon 
the  posts  were  palm  trees.  "  Strength  and  beauty  are  in  his  sanctuary."  All  beauty 
has  its  fount  in  God.  He  finds  delight  in  the  outward  forms  of  beauty.  All  his  works 
partake  of  beauty.  But  material  beauty  is  only  the  shadow  of  the  reaUy  beautiful. 
Holiness  is  beauty.  Goodness  is  beauty.  Love  is  beauty.  Therefore  in  God's  house 
the  beautiful  should  everywhere  appear. 

V.  God'b  temple  provides  for  plentiful  light.  In  the  gates  "there  were 
windows,  and  in  the  arches  thereof  round  about."  However  small  the  chamber,  it  had 
a  window.  For  every  department  of  human  life  and  service  God  provides  light.  It 
is  an  essential  for  human  progress  and  for  human  sanctity.  As  fast  as  we  appropriate 
God's  spiritual  light  he  supplies  more.  "  Then  shall  we  know,  if  we  follow  on  to  know 
the  Lord." 

VI.  God'b  temple  has  stages  in  the  way  of  approaching  God.  There  was 
court  within  court — an  outer  court  and  an  inner.  The  proselytes  from  the  Gentiles 
might  not  come  so  near  the  altars  of  God  as  the  Hebrews.  The  people  of  the  tribe 
of  Levi  might  approach  nearer  than  those  of  other  tribes.  The  high  priest  might,  once 
a  year,  come  into  closer  access  to  God  than  any  other  man  on  earth.  All  these  arrange- 
ments were  types  of  better  things,  lessons  of  high  spiritual  import.  God  vrill  not 
tolerate  a  rebellious  will,  nor  allow,  in  his  presence,  falsehood  or  impurity.  The  barriers 
imposed  served  to  teach  men  the  real  and  tremendous  evil  of  sin ;  they  served  to 
encourage  men  in  the  abandonment  of  sin,  that  they  might  have  the  friendship  of  God. 
Bo  far  as  men  are  in  'eague  with  sin  they  separate  themselves  from  God  and  from  hope 
and  from  heaven.  It  is  not  easy  to  regain  moral  purity  after  it  has  been  corrupted. 
It  is  impossible  without  God's  help.  But  it  is  worth  a  lifelong  effort  to  get  back  to 
God,  and  to  live  as  a  child  in  the  sunshine  of  his  smile.  The  method  God  has  adopted 
to  teach  us  this  lesson  is  a  singular  accommodation  of  his  grace  to  our  ignorance  and 
to  oor  weakness. — D. 


OH.  Xi.  1—49.]     THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  337 

Vers.  38—47. — Scunnfice  essential  to  hvman  worship.  The  entrances  and  vestibules 
of  the  new  temple  were  planned  on  a  magniSoent  scale.  The  mind  of  the  worshipper 
would  be  nat  iraUy  impressed  both  with  the  greatness  of  the  Proprietor  and  with  the 
transcendent  importance  of  the  use  to  which  it  was  devoted.  But  by  what  methods 
will  the  "Jovereign  Majesty  of  heaven  be  approached  ?  More  and  more  this  question 
oppressef  i  reflecting  man.  As  he  gains  the  central  courts  of  the  temple  the  answer 
is  clear.  Sin  is  the  great  separator  between  man  and  his  Maker.  Beconciliation  caa 
only  be  effected  by  sacrifice.  At  the  altar  of  burnt  offering  God  will  meet  with  peni- 
tent men,  and  confer  on  them  his  mercy.  "  Without  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no 
remission  of  sin." 

I.  SaOMFICB  IB  THE  TBTaTDfO-PLAOB    BETWEEN    MAN    AND    Gk)D.      "The  altar   was 

before  the  house."  From  the  first  days  of  man's  fall  the  mercy  of  God  allowed  access 
for  man  to  the  presence  of  his  Maker ;  yet  access  not  free  and  unrestrained,  as  in  the 
pristine  state  of  innocence.  Access  to  God's  favour  could  now  be  found  only  at  the 
altar  of  sacrifice.  Hence  Cain's  suit  failed  because  he  brought  only  the  fruits  of 
the  ground.  Abel  was  accepted  because  his  faith  was  loyal  to  the  Divine  command, 
and  because  he  felt  the  evil  of  sin.  Such  sacrifice  of  animal  life  could  be  in  no  respect 
proper  compensation  for  moral  rebellion  against  God.  Yet  it  was  to  man  a  revelation 
that  God  would  accept  substitution,  and  it  served  as  a  matter-of-fact  prophecy,  that 
in  due  time  God  would  provide  an  efficacious  sacrifice.  It  was  as  much  for  man's 
welfare  as  for  the  maintenance  of  Divine  rule,  that  God  would  henceforth  meet  his 
fallen  creature,  and  give  heed  to  his  prayer,  only  at  the  sacrificial  altar. 

II.  Saobipice  sebyeb  many  anb  vital  pubfoses  in  man's  SALVATION.  In  the 
temple  sacrifices  were  of  various  kinds,  and  were  presented  with  great  variety  of  cere- 
mony. There  was  the  sin  offering,  the  trespass  offering,  the  wave  offering,  etc.  These 
were  designed  to  meet  the  several  wants  of  men.  They  expressed  gratitude  for  benelit 
received;  submission  to  the  wiU  of  God;  confession  of  past  sin;  acknowledgment  that 
our  sin  deserved  death;  acquiescence  in  God's  plan  for  forgiveness;  a  new  act  of  cove- 
nant with  God ;  complete  devotion  of  self  to  the  service  of  Jehovah.  The  future,  as 
well  as  the  past,  was  considered.  The  minds  of  men  must  be  fitly  impressed  with  the 
terrific  evil  of  sin  and  with  the  excellence  that  comes  out  of  self-sacrifice.  God's 
stupendous  gift  wakens  our  profoundest  love.  We  aspire  to  act  as  he  acts,  and  so  rise 
into  the  better  life.     Condescension  is  the  road  to  eminence. 

III.  Sacrifice  demands  a  yabiett  of  human  bebyioe.  There  were  porters  to 
keep  the  gates  and  to  prevent  base  intruders.  There  were  men  to  slay  the  inimala, 
and  men  to  wash  the  flesh.  There  were  men  in  charge  of  the  buildiog,  and  men  in 
charge  of  the  altar.  Some  kinds  of  service  were  repulsive  to  the  senses;  some  kinds 
were  joyous  and  exhilarating.  In  God's  temple  there  is  some  service  which  every 
loyal  subject  of  Jehovah  can  render.  The  least  endowed  may  perform  some  useful 
mission.  As  in  nature  every  dewdrop  has  its  effect,  and  the  tiniest  insect  performs 
a  useful  task,  so  it  is  also  in  the  kingdom  of  grace.  The  tears  of  the  babe  Moses 
changed  the  fortunes  of  the  world.  The  child  Samuel  was  teacher  to  the  high  priest 
of  Israel.  A  lad  in  the  crowd  possessed  the  barley  loaves  which  served  as  the  founda- 
tion of  the  Saviour's  miracle.  Provision  was  made  in  the  temple  for  great  variety  of 
servants.  The  service  of  God  is  not  arduous.  "They  also  serve  who  only  stand  and 
wait." 

IV.  Saobifiob  should  be  accompanied  bt  a  bbbvice  of  bono.  "Without  the 
inner  gate  were  the  chambers  of  the  singers."  Sacrifice  may  commence  with  sorrow ; 
It  also  ends  with  joy.  "Blessed  are  they  that  mourn"  here;  "they  shall  be  com- 
forted." Music  well  befits  temple-worship.  Here,  if  anywhere,  the  souls  of  men 
should  go  forth  in  swelling  tides  of  gladness.  Before  Jesus  and  his  companions  went 
to  Gethsemane  they  sang  a  hymn.  In  the  inner  dungeon  at  midnight,  with  feet 
bound  in  the  stocks,  Paul  and  Silas  sang  to  God  their  praise.  If  joy  thnlls  afresh  the 
hearts  of  angels  when  one  sinner  on  earth  repents,  it  is  meet  that  joy  should  also  fill 
God's  temple  on  earth. — D. 

Ver.  3. — Divine  measurement.  Assuming  that  the  realization  of  this  vinon  is  found 
in  no  actual  structure  ever  built  by  the  hand  of  man,  but  in  that  great  spiritual  edifice, 
the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ,  which  is  still  in  course  of  erection,  we  ask  what  it  is  that  is 

BZEKIEL — II.  ■ 


338  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PEOPHET  EZEKIEL.      [oh.  XL.  1— 4S>. 

measured  by  the  tape,  oi  the  leed,  which  the  heavenly  messengef  holds  in  his  hand. 
What  are  the  heights  and  the  depths  and  the  lengths  that  are  seen  and  reckoned  in 
the  kingdom  of  Clirist  ?    They  are  those  of — 

I.  Sincerity.  There  may  be  much  singiDg  and  many  "  prayers,"  and  much  preach- 
ing ;  there  may  be  multiplied  activities  of  many  kinds ;  but  if  there  be  not  sincerity  and 
simplicity  of  heart,  there  will  he  nothing  for  the  measuring  angel  to  record.  If,  however, 
in  the  culture  of  our  own  character  or  in  the  work  we  do  for  our  Lord,  our  hearts  go 
forth  in  genuine  endeavour,  if  we  think  and  feel  what  we  say,  if  we  mean  what  we  do, 
if  the  purpose  of  our  soul  is  toward  God  and  toward  the  honour  of  his  Name, — then  we 
are  really  "  building ; "  and  the  more  of  spirituality  and  of  earnestness  there  is  in  our 
effort,  the  higher  will  the  figure  be  which  the  recording  angel  enters  in  his  book. 

n.  Trustfulness.  "  Without  faith  it  is  impossible  to  please  God  "  in  anything  we 
undertake  for  him.  The  measure  of  our  trustfulness  is,  to  a  large  extent,  the  degree 
of  our  acceptableness.  Trustfulness  is  in  the  freeness  and  fulness  of  the  grace  cf  God, 
in  the  presence  and  the  promises  of  the  Son  of  God,  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God 
to  enlighten  and  to  renew.  The  more  of  this  element  in  our  personal  relations  with 
God  and  in  our  Christian  walk,  the  higher  the  sacred  fabric  rises  in  the  reckoning  of 
the  heavenly  world. 

III.  Love.  This  is  an  essential  element  in  all  Christian  edification.  1.  Love  to 
Christ  himself.  The  restraining  love,  which  keeps  back  from  all  evil;  the  constraining 
love,  which  inspires  to  cheerful  and  prompt  obedience ;  the  submissive  love,  which  knows 
how  to  endure  as  seeing  the  Invisible  One ;  the  lasting  love,  which  outlives  all  the 
changes  and  triumphs  over  all  the  difSculties  of  human  life.  2.  Love  to  Christian 
men;  which  is  more  and  better  than  beino;  drawn  toward  the  amiable  and  the 
attractive ;  which  consists  in  the  outgoing  of  the  heart  toward  all  the  disciples  of  Jesus 
Christ  because  they  are  sttch,  even  though  in  taste  and  temper  and  habit  of  life  they 
may  difier  from  ourselves;  which  includes  the  willingness  to  acknowledge  all  that  love 
Christ,  arid  to  work  with  them  in  every  open  way.  3.  Love  to  those  outside  the 
Christian  pale — the  love  of  a  holy  pity  for  men  who  are  wrong  because  they  are  wrong, 
which  shows  itself  in  active,  practical,  self-denying  labour  to  raise  and  to  restore  them. 
The  practical  question  for  each  man  and  for  every  Church  to  ask  is  this — ^When  the 
measuring  angel  comes  to  us,  and  applies  his  reed  to  our  worship,  our  work,  our  life 
what  is  the  entry  he  makes?  what  is  his  measurement  ?  There  may  be  balance-sheets 
and  attendances,  activities  and  engagements,  which  are  very  satisfactory  in  the  human 
estimate,  but  if  simplicity,  trustfulness,  love,,be  not  found,  there  is  nothing  to  count  in 
the  reckoning  of  Heaven  (see  1  Cor.  xiii.). — 0. 

Vers.  6 — 11. — Entrance  to  the  kingdom.  Much  mention  is  made,  in  this  description 
of  the  temple,  of  the  gates  of  that  building ;  access  was  provided  in  abundance  to  its 
interior  as  well  as  exterior  compartments.  Having  regard  to  the  kingdom  of  God  (of 
which  this  ideal  structure  is  a  picture  (see  previous  homily),  and  taking  into  our 
thought  the  work  and  the  teaching  of  our  Lord  on  the  subiect,  we  learn — 

I.  That  there  is  one  way  into  the  kingdom.  Jesus  Christ  himself  is  that  Way. 
"I  am  the  Way,  ...  no  man  cometh  unto  the  Father,  but  by  me"  (John  xiv.  6);  "I 
am  the  Door :  by  me  if  any  man  enter  in,  he  shall  be  saved  "  (John  x.  9).  Through  him 
"  both  [Jews  and  Gentiles]  have  access  .  .  .  unto  the  Father  "  (Bph.  ii.  18) ;  "  There 
is  one  Mediator  between  God  and  men,  the  Man  Christ  Jesus"  (1  Johnii.  6).  To  know 
Jesus  Christ,  to  trust  and  love,  to  serve  and  follow  him — that  is  the  way  to  find  eternal 
life.     "  Whosoever  believeth  in  him  has  life  eternal." 

II.  That  there  are  uany  approaches  to  the  kinodou.  Though  there  is  but 
one  "  door  "  or  "  way  "  into  the  kingdom,  but  one  Divine  Saviour  in  whom  to  trust  and 
by  whom  to  be  redeemed,  yet  are  there  many  approaches  that  may  be  regarded  as 
"  gates,"  many  paths  that  lead  to  him  and  to  his  salvation.  We  may  be  led  to  him : 
1.  By  our  sense  of  the  priceless  value  of  the  human  soul  and  our  knowledge  that  only 
he  can  bless  it.  2.  By  our  view  of  the  seriousness  of  our  human  life  and  the  desire  to 
place  it  under  his  wise  and  holy  guidance.  3.  By  the  example  and  influence  of  those  to 
whom  we  are  most  nearly  related.  4.  By  the  attractiveness  we  see  in  him,  the  Lord 
of  love  and  truth.  5.  By  the  felt  force  of  the  claims  of  the  heavenly  Father,  and  th« 
belief  that  it  is  God's  will  that  we  should  hear  and  follow  him.  his  Son.  eto. 


«H.  XL.  1-49.]     THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHBT  EZBKIEL.  339 

III.  That  men  come  prom  all  quarters  to  the  kingdom.  There  were  gates 
^Eusing  the  north,  the  south,  and  the  east;  and  in  another  book  (Revelation)  we  read  of 
gates  in  all  four  directions  (Rev.  zxi.  13).  To  the  broad  and  blessed  kingdom  of  God 
«11  souls  come :  it  is  not  a  provision  for  one  type  of  mind,  or  for  one  particular  race, 
-or  for  one  social  class,  but  for  all  types,  races,  classes.  In  Jesus  Christ  there  is  neither 
-Greek  nor  Jew,  male  nor  female,  bond  nor  free ;  there  is  neither  poor  nor  rich,  learned 
aor  ignorant,  philosophical  nor  simple-minded.  From  every  quarter  in  the  great  world 
■of  meu  there  come  to  the  kingdom  those  who  need  and  who  find  all  that  they  crave  in 
Christ  Jesus  the  Lord. 

lY.  That  the  gate  is  too  narrow  fob  some.  He  who  is  swollen  with  pride 
•cannot  pass  through  it ;  nor  he  who  is  cumbered  with  worldliness ;  nor  be  who  is  filled 
with  selfishness;  nor  he  who  is  gross  with  self-indulgence  (Matt.  vii.  14)» 

V.  That  it  is  broad  enough  for  all  earnest  seekers.  They  who  are  in  earnest 
Jts  disciples  of  truth,  as  seekers  after  God ;  they  who  profoundly  desire  to  return 
■unto  their  heavenly  Father  and  to  secure  eternal  life,  will  not  find  the  gate  of  the 
gospel  too  narrow.  They  will  gladly  part  with  their  pride  and  their  selfishness,  with 
their  vanities  and  their  indulgences  ;  they  will  come  eagerly  to  the  Lord  and  Saviour 
of  mankind,  that  they  may  take  everything  from  him  and  yield  everything  to  him. — C. 

Ver,  16. — Palms  upon  the  posts :  ornamental  strength.  "  Upon  each  post  were  palm 
■tre«s."    It  is  well  indeed  to  bring  to  the  Church  of  Christ— 

I.  The  contribution  of  stbbnqth.  There  are  disciples  who  add  little  to  the  Church 
4>ut  feebleness.  They  want  to  be  continually  comforted  or  corrected ;  to  be  shielded  or 
to  be  sustained.  We  feel  that  the  community  to  which  they  belong  would  be  the 
«tronger  for  their  absence,  except  as  they  supply  suitable  objects  for  the  exercise  of 
CShristian  kindness,  and  in  this  way  for  the  development  of  the  Church's  strength.  But 
it  cannot  be  said  that  this  is  at  all  a  satisfactory  way  of  rendering  service.  We 
rejoice,  and  we  believe  that  our  Lord  himself  rejoices,  in  those  who  bring  a  solid  con- 
tribution of  strength  to  the  cause  of  wisdom  and  of  piety.  These  are  they  who,  with 
their  Christian  principles,  bring  a  trained  and  robust  intelligence,  a  sacred  sagacity,  a 
■well -gathered  knowledge  of  men  and  things ;  or  who  bring  a  liberal  spirit,  an  open 
hand,  a  large  proportion  of  their  substance ;  or  who  bring  a  loving  spirit,  a  spirit  of 
•conciliation  and  concession  into  the  council,  and  who  are  on  the  side  of  concord ;  or  who 
bring  warmth,  vigour,  energy,  sustained  zeal  and  hopefulness  to  the  work  which  is 
■undertaken ;  or  who  bring  a  large  measure  of  devotion,  of  the  spirit  of  true  reverence  to 
the  worship  of  the  Church.  These  are  the  "  posts  "  of  the  temple ;  they  "  seem  to  be 
pillars,"  and  they  are  such.  And  there  is  no  reason  why  the  same  members  of  the 
Church  who  bring  their  contribution  of  strength  should  not  add — 

II.  The  element  of  beauty.  "  Upon  each  post  were  palm  trees."  These  posts  were 
sot  unsightly  props,  whose  one  and  only  service  was  that  of  sustaining  that  which 
rested  upon  them ;  they  were  so  fashioned  that  they  adorned  what  they  upheld.  It  is 
not  always  so  in  the  spiritual  temple.  Some  posts  have  no  palm  trees  engraved  upon 
them ;  they  are  rude,  bare,  uncomely.  They  are  tolerated  for  the  service  they  render ; 
but  for  what  they  are  in  themselves  they  are  heartily  disliked.  But  this  need  never 
i>e.  Why  should  not  the  strong  be  beautiful  as  well  as  helpful?  why  should  they  not 
«dd  grace  to  power  ?  It  is  a  serious  mistake  men  make  when  they  think  that  they 
fnay  dispense  with  the  finer  excellences  of  Christian  character  and  life  because  they 
contribute  an  efSciency  which  others  cannot  render.  The  uncultivated  rudeness  of 
many  a  pillar  in  the  Christian  "temple"  detracts  most  seriously  from  its  wotth;  on  the 
-other  hand,  the  palm  trees  upon  the  posts  constitute  a  very  appreciable  addition.  Be 
beautiful  as  well  as  strong.  "  Whatsoever  things  are  lovely  and  of  good  report "  should 
be  "  considered  "  well,  andshould  be  secured  as  well  as  "  whatsoever  things  are  true, 
honest,  just,  and  pure."  Add  to  your  faith  virtue  (manliness)  and  knowledge,  but  do 
not  fail  to  add  temperance  (self-command),  patience,  and  charity  as  well.  Strive  after,- 
pray  for,  carefully  cultivate,  all  that  is  beautiful  in  the  sight  of  man,  in  temper,  in  bear- 
ing, in  spirit,  in  word  and  deed;  so  shall  the  value  of  your  strength  be  greatly 
enhanced  in  the  estimate  of  Christ. — 0. 

Vers.  22,  25,  29,  33. — The  windows  of  the  Church.    Allusion  is  made  again  and 


840  THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PEOPHET  EZBKIEL.      [on.  xl.  1— 4ff. 

ag&4^  to  the  windows  which  were  to  be  provided  in  this  sacred  edifice.  The  Church  of 
Christ  must  he  well  furnished  with  windows,  and  they  must  not  be  closed,  but  .open. 
For  it  has  to — 

I.  Acquaint  itself  with  Divine  truth.  Through  the  open  window  we  look  out 
and  see  the  busy  street  and  the  ways  of  men ;  or  we  see  the  fields  and  the  hills  and  the 
work  of  God.  We  acquaint  ourselves  with  what  is  passing  in  the  world.  The  Church 
of  Christ  must  keep  its  windows  open,  and  be  actively  engaged  in  learning  all  that  it 
can  acquire  of  the  heart  and  ways  of  men,  and  also  of  the  truth  and  the  purposes  of 
God.  It,  after  its  Lord,  is  to  be  "  the  light  of  the  world"  (Matt.  v.  14).  It  is  to  be 
the  source  of  all  sacred  knowledge  to  the  world ;  it  is  to  enlighten  men  on  the  two 
supreme  subjects  of  their  own  spiritual  nature,  with  all  its  possibilities  of  good  and 
evil,  and  of  the  Divine  Being,  with  all  his  holiness  and  his  grace,  with  all  his  power 
and  his  patience,  with  all  his  expectation  from  them  and  all  his  nearness  to  them  and 
his  abiding  in  them.  And  if  it  is  to  discharge  this  high  and  noble  function,  the  Church 
must  not  only  treasure  what  it  has  gained  of  heavenly  wisdom,  but  it  must  be 
always  learning  of  God,  always  admitting  the  light  of  heaven,  always  be  recipient  of 
his  truth  as  that  truth  bears  on  the  present  life  of  men,  as  it  affects  the  spiritual 
and  social  struggles  they  are  now  passing  through.  The  Church  that  wouid  not  close 
its  door  must  keep  its  windows  open,  must  honestly  and  earnestly  believe  that 

"  God  hat  yet  more  light  and  truth 
To  break  forth  from  his  Word." 

n.  Admit  heavenlt  influences.  The  open  window  means  the  admission,  not 
only  of  the  light,  but  also  the  air  of  heaven  ;  and  we  need  the  cleansing  air  quite  a& 
much  as  the  enlightening  ray.  Shut  up  to  ourselves,  our  souls  become  defiled,  deterio- 
rated, enfeebled  ;  open  to  the  renewing  and  cleansing  air  of  heaven,  they  are  purified^ 
ennobled,  strengthened.  It  is  a  very  great  advantage  to  live  or  to  worship  in  a  building 
of  good  rather  than  of  poor  dimensions,  because  its  air  is  purer  and  more  healthful.  It 
is  a  very  great  benefit  to  belong  to  a  Church  that  is  not  cramped  and  bound  within 
narrow  limits,  in  which  there  is  ample  room  for  the  circulation  of  all  reverent  and 
earnest  thought ;  that  is  the  most  spiritually  healthful  condition.  But  however  large 
and  free  be  the  community,  we  must  have  the  incoming  of  the  influences  which  are- 
outside,  which  are  from  above— the  quickening,  illumining,  kindling,  cleansing,  power 
of  the  Spirit  of  God.  Without  this  we  shall  surely  suffer  deterioration  and  decline — 
a  decline  that  slopes  towards  death  itself.  We  must  keep  the  heart  open,  we  must 
keep  the  Christian  Church  open,  to  the  best  and  highest  influences,  if  we  would  be  and 
io  what  Christ  calls  us  to  accomplish. 

IIL  Enoaok  nj  HOLY  activities.  We  cannot  work  in  the  dark;  we  pray 
thus — 

"Lord,  give  me  light  to  do  thy  work  I" 

And  we  do  well  to  pray  thus.  But  we  must  take  care  that  we  do  not  shut  out  the  light 
by  our  own  bad  building,  by  our  own  institutions,  habits,  organizations,  prejudices. 
We  must  make  our  arrangements,  lay  our  plans,  form  our  habits,  so  that  we  receive  all 
that  we  can  gain  with  a  special  view  to  Christian  work.  The  Church  that  is  not  learn- 
ing of  Christ  in  order  to  labour  for  him,  is  lacking  in  one  most  important  characteristic  ^ 
it  is  missing  one  main  end  of  its  existence.  Let  us  take  care  that  our  institutions,  our 
societies,  our  Churches,  are  so  constructed  that  we  shall  be  in  the  best  possible  position^ 
be  under  the  most  favourable  conditions,  for  earnest  and  efficient  work.  Otherwise  we 
shall  not  be  sucli  a  spiritual  "temple  "  as  our  Lord  will  look  upon  with  approval ;  and  his- 
measuring  angel  (see  ver.  3)  will  have  no  satisfactory  entry  to  make  in  his  record  and 
to  repeat  to  his  Lord. — 0. 

Vers.  26,  31. — Spiritual  ascent.  "There  were  seven  steps  to  go  up  to  it" — the 
outer  oo\irt ;  "  and  the  going  up  to  it  [the  inner  court]  had  eight  steps."  Translating, 
this  into  the  Christian  analogue,  we  learn — 

I.  That  to  be  in  the  kingdom  of  Christ  is  to  occupy  a  noble  heiqht.  The 
base  of  the  temple  was  the  summit  of  a  "  very  high  mountain  "  (ver.  2) ;  to  be  any- 
where within  even  its  outer  precincts  was  to  be  far  above  the  world.  To  be  in  the 
kingdom  of  God,  even  to  be  the  least  therein,  is  to  stand  in  the  place  of  very  high 


<0H.  XL.  1— 49.]      THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  841 

privilege  indeed  (see  Matt.  xi.  11).  But  not  of  privUege  only ;  of  spiritual  iveU- 
being  also.  It  is  to  be  high  and  far  ahove  the  baseness  of  selflshnesa,  of  vanity,  of 
ingratitude,  of  rebelliousness ;  above  the  low  ground  of  unbelief,  of  indecision,  of 
procrastination.  It  is  to  live  and  move  on  the  sacred  heights  of  devotion,  of  sacred 
service,  of  consecration,  of  the  sonship  and  friendship  of  the  living  Q-od. 

II.  That  within  that  kinqdom  are  deqbebs  op  spibitual  altitude.  Not 
'every  one  that  is  "in  Christ  Jesus"  stands  on  the  same  spiritual  level.  There  is 
not  only  considerable  variety  of  character  and  service,  there  is  also  much  difference 
in  degree  of  attainment.  There  are  those  who  are  behind  and  those  who  are  before  in 
the  race ;  there  are  those  who  stand  lower  down  in  the  outer  court  and  those  who  stand 
'higher  up  in  the  inner  court.    Many  are  the  degrees  among  the  disciples  of  Christ  in  : 

1.  Knowledge.  Some  have  but  a  very  elementary  acquaintance  with  the  truth  of 
God ;  some  hold  the  faith  of  Christ  much  mixed  with  corrupt  accretions ;  others  have 
a  comparatively  clear  view  of  the  doctrines  taught  by  Christ  and  by  bis  apostles ; 
-there  are  those  who  have  gone  far  into  "the  deep  things  of  God."  2.  Piety.  A 
Ohristian  man  may  have  but  a  slender  capacity  for  devotion ;  he  may  only  be  able  to 
worship  God  and  commune  with  him  feebly  and  occasionally,  with  no  power  of  sus- 
tained devotion ;  or  he  may  have  ascended  the  higher  ground,  and  be  "  praying 
always ; "  his  "  walk  may  be  close  with  God ; "  he  may  be  "  a  devout  man  and  full  of 
the  Holy  Ghost."  3.  Moroi  worth.  From  the  recently  converted  idolater  whose 
licentious  habits  cling  to  him  and  have  to  be  hardly  and  laboriously  torn  away  by 
long  and  earnest  struggle,  to  the  saintly  man  or  woman  who,  inheriting  the  pnrified 
nature  and  disposition  of  reverent  and  godly  parents,  has  breathed  the  air  of  purity 
and  goodness  all  his  days,  and  has  grown  up  into  holiness  and  Christliness  in  a  very 
marked  degree,  there  is  a  great  ascent.  4.  Inflvence,  and  consequent  usefulness. 
There  are  those  whose  influence  counts  for  very  little  among  their  fellows ;  there  are 
others  who  weigh  much,  whose  presence  is  a  power  for  good  everywhere,  who  can  pro- 
duce a  great  and  valuable  effect  by  their  words  of  wisdom. 

III.  That  spiBrraAL  ascent  is  attained  bt  divinely  provided  means.  There 
were  steps  or  sturs  leading  up  from  the  lower  to  the  higher  ground  within  the  temple. 
There  are  steps  of  which  we  may  avail  ourselves  if  we  would  rise  in  the  kingdom  of 
Ood.  They  are  these :  1.  Worship ;  including  pnblic  worship  in  the  sanctuary,  meet- 
ing the  Master  at  his  table,  private  prayer  in  the  home  and  the  quiet  chamber. 

2.  Study;  including  the  reading  of  the  Scriptures  and  also  of  the  lives  of  the  best  and 
noblest  of  the  children  of  men.  3.  Fellowship  with  the  good ;  associating  daily  and 
-weekly  with  those  like-minded  with  ourselves,  and  choosing  for  our  most  intimate 
iriends  those,  and  those  only,  whose  convictions  and  sympathies  are  sustaining  and 
uplifting.     4.  Activity  in  one  or  other  of  the  many  fields  of  sacred  ucefulness. — C. 

Ver.  44. — Sacred  song.  "  The  chambers  of  the  singers."  The  ideal  Church  would 
oot  be  complete  without  the  service  of  sacred  song.  Abundant  arrangement  was  made 
for  this  order  of  worship  iu  the  first  temple  (1  Kings  x.  12 ;  1  Chron.  xzv.).  It  was  to 
be  a  daily  offering  unto  the  Lord  (1  Chron.  zxiii.  30).  And  it  has  found  a  large  and 
lionourable  place  in  the  Church  of  Christ.  The  Master  himself  and  his  disciples 
"'  sang  an  hymn  "  on  the  most  solemn  and  sacred  of  all  occasions  (Matt.  zxvL  30)  ; 
«nd  Paul  refers  to  "psalms  and  hymns  and  spiritual  songs"  as  if  they  were  well 
Icnown  in  the  experience  of  the  early  Church.    This  service  of  song  should  be — 

L  Compbehensive  in  its  banqe.  It  should  not  only  include  pruse  (with  which  it 
is  more  particularly  identified ;  see  infra),  but  also  adoration,  e.g.  "We  praise,  we 
wor9hip  thee,  0  God,"  etc. ;  and  confesnon,  e.g.  "  Oppressed  with  sin  and  woe,"  etc. ; 
-  ^ni/aith,  e.g.  "  My  foith  looks  up  to  thee,"  etc. ;  and  consecration,  e.g.  "  My  gracioui 
Lord,  I  own  thy  right,"  etc. ;  and  prayer  for  the  Divine  guidance  and  inspiration, 
■e.g.  "  0  thou  who  camest  from  above,"  etc.,  "  0  God  of  Bethel,  by  whose  hand,"  etc. ; 
and  resignation,  e.g.  "  My  God,  my  Father,  while  I  stray,"  etc. ;  and  solenm,  reverent 
■challenge  to  one  another,  e.g.  "Come  we  that  love  the  Lord,"  etc.,  "Stand  up, 
'Stand  up  for  Jesus,"  etc.,  "Ye  servants  of  God,"  etc.;  and  holy,  heavenly  expecta- 
iion,e.g.  "Jerusalem,  my  happy  home."  So  that  there  is  no  sentiment  suitable  to 
'reverent  lips,  no  grace  of  Christian  character,  that  may  not  find  expression  in  sacred 
«ong ;  and  such  utterance  may  not  only  be  true  worship,  but  it  may  give  real  relief 


342 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  [oh.  m.  1— 2« 


to  the  full  and  perhaps  burdened  soul,  while  it  also  deepens  conTiction  and  eleTate» 
character. 

II.  Mabebd  bt  three  OHABA0TEBISTIC8.  1.  Musical  harmony.  For  that  which 
we  offer  to  our  Lord  should  be  the  very  best  we  can  bring ;  not  the  blemished  but  th& 
whole,  not  the  disfigured  but  the  beautiful,  not  the  rude  but  the  cultured,  not  the 
discordant  but  the  harmonious.  2.  Spirituality.  The  God  who  himself  is  a  Spirit 
must  be  worshipped  in  spirit  and  in  truth  (John  iv.  24).  And  however  musical  may 
be  the  sound,  no  service  of  song  even  approaches  the  satisfactory  which  is  not  spiritual ; 
we  must  make  melody  in  our  heart,  as  well  as  with  our  voice,  unto  the  Lord  (Eph.  v. 
19).  3.  Congregational.  There  are  services  in  which  it  is  not  possible  for  "  all  the 
people "  to  participate  audibly ;  but  these  are  exceptional ;  as  a  rule,  the  order  of 
worship  should  be  such  that  every  voice  should  be  heard  "  blessing  and  praising  God," 
for  expression  is  the  true  friend  of  feeling. 

III.  Joyous  in  its  pbbvailinq  note.  The  word  "praise"  is  commonly  asso- 
ciated with  "  singing."  The  singers  sing  "  the  praises  of  Jehovah."  As  already 
said,  there  is  no  spiritual  experience  to  which  vocU  utterance  may  not  be  well  and 
wisely  given  in  sacred  song.  But  the  prevailing  strain  is  that  of  praise  or  thanks- 
giving. And  this  may  well  be  so  when  we  realize,  as  we  should  in  the  praise  of  God  t 
1.  How  worthy,  in  his  own  Person  and  character,  is  the  Lord  our  Saviour  of  our  most 
reverent  and  joyful  praise.  2.  How  great  things  he  wrought  and  suffered  for  us  when 
he  dwelt  among  us.  3.  How  perfect  is  the  "great  salvation,"  and  how  open  to  all 
mankind  without  reserve  (Jude  3).  4.  How  high  are  the  privileges  and  how 
heavenly  the  blessings  we  have  in  him  whilst  we  live  below;  how  much  it  is  to  be 
able  to  say,  "  For  us  to  live  is  Christ,"  5.  How  grand  is  the  heritage  to  which  we 
move. — G, 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XLI. 


The  present  chapter  continues  the  de- 
■oription  of  "  the  house,"  and  falls  into  four 
subdivisions.  (1)  The  interior  of  the 
temple,  or  the  holy  and  most  holy  places 
(vers.  1 — 4);  (2)  the  wall  and  the  side 
buildings  (vers.  5—11);  (3)  the  gizrah,  or 
separate  place  (vers.  12 — 14) ;  (4)  the  pro- 
jecting portions  of  the  temple  building 
(vers.  15—20). 

Vers.  1 — 4. — The  interior  of  the  temple. 

Ver.  1. — The  temple.  '7:^^rir\,  frequently 
applied  to  the  whole  building  (2  Kings 
xxiv.  13;  2  Chron.  iii.  17;  Jer.  1.  28;  Hag. 
ii.  15;  Zeoh.  vi.  14,  15),  is  here  used  of  the 
nave  of  the  temple,  the  holy  place,  as 
distinguished  from  the  holy  of  holies  (comp. 
1  Kings  vi.  5,  17;  vii.  50).  Schroder  alone 
of  commentators  holds  by  the  extended 
meaning.  The  measuring  began  from  the 
east  wall  of  the  holy  place.  The  posts 
(D'^'jj),  aa  in  ch.  xl.  9,  the  corner  pillars  on 
each  side  of  the  entrance,  measured  six 
cubits  broad,  whereas  those  of  the  porch 
measured  only  five  (ch.  xl.  48).  The  phrase, 
The  breadth  of  the  tabernaole ;  or,  the  tent 
(''?'»!?)>  ^^^  occasioned  difficulty.  Hitzig, 
Ewaid,  and  Smend  propose  to  substitute  for 
S,^n  the  word  ^'ij.^  ("  post "),  which  might 


in  itself  be  unobjectionable,  only  no  snob 
device  is  required  to  render  the  clause 
intelligible.  It  is  sufficient  to  understand 
the  phrase  as  signifying  that  the  measure* 
ments  noted  had  a  special  relation  to  the 
entire  breadth  of  the  temple,  here  styled 
"  tabernacle,"  or  "  tent,"  to  indicate  the 
coveied  portion  of  the  edifice,  which,  in  thie 
respect,  and  in  respect  of  its  being  the  place 
of  meeting  between  Jehovah  and  Israel, 
resembled  the  ancient  sanctuary  of  the 
wilderness. 

Ver.  2.— The  breadth  of  the  door,  i.e.  ot 
the  opening  from  the  porch,  was  ten  cnbits ; 
whereas  the  door  into  the  porch  was  eleven 
cubits  (ch.  xl.  49).  This  would  have  the 
effect  of  rendering  the  door  into  the  holy 
place  more  conspicuous.  The  sides  (or, 
shoulders)  of  the  door — according  to  Klie- 
foth,  "  the  side  walls,"  from  the  door  to  the 
corner  pillars :  according  to  Keil,  the 
shoulders  lay  behind  the  pillars — were  five 
cnbits  on  the  one  side,  and  five  cnbits  on  the 
other ;  i.e.  were  as  broad  as  the  posts  of  the 
porch.  The  length  of  the  holy  place,  forty 
cubits,  and  the  breadth,  twenty,  were  the 
same  as  in  the  Solomonic  structure.  The 
entire  frontage  of  tlie  holy  place  was  20' 
cubits  of  interior  breadth  +  12  (2  X  6> 
cubits,  as  breadth  of  pillars  =  32  cubits;  or, 
otherwise,  6+6,  for  the  two  pillars,  5  +  5 
for  the  sides,  and  10  for  the  door  opening  s 
32  cubits  in  all. 


CH.  XLi.  1—26.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL. 


34a 


Ver.  3.— Then  went  he  inward;  i.e.  into 
the  EiOEt  holy  place.  As  this  could  not  be 
entered  even  by  a  priest,  but  only  by  the 
high  priest  once  a  year  (Exod.  xxx.  10; 
Ley.  xvi.  17 ;  Heb.  ix.  7),  Ezekiel  was  left 
■without,  while  "the  man"  announced  to 
him  in  succession  the  measurements  of  the 
adytum,  aa  these  were  taken.  First,  that  of 
tAfl  post  ot  the  door  (the  singular  for  the 
plural,  meaning  the  post  on  either  side  of 
the  doorway)  two  cubits.  Next,  that  of  the 
door  itself,  which  is  given  first  as  six  and 
second  as  seven  cubits.  Kliefoth  and  Keil 
take  the  six  as  the  height  aud  the  seven  as 
the  breadth  of  the  entrance  into  the  holy  of 
holies;  but  as  no  other  measurement  of 
height  occurs  throughout  this  description, 
Dr.  Currey  regards  "  six "  as  the  distance 
from  "post"  to  "post,"  and  "seven"  as  the 
actual  width  of  Vae  door,  each  post  project- 
ing half  a  cubit  beyond  the  hinge  of  the 
door,  whioU  opened  inward.  Ewald  and 
Villalpandus,  after  the  LXX.,  read,  "  the 
entrance  six  cubits  and  the  flanks  of  the 
entrance  seven  cubits;"  and  these  figures, 
7  +  6+7,  certainly  make  up  the  breadth 
of  the  interior;  cmly  it  is  impossible  to 
extract  this  meaning  from  the  Hebrew 
witliout  tampering  with  the  text. 

Ver.  4. — The  holy  of  holies  was  an  exact 
square  of  twenty  cubits,  as  in  the  temple  of 
Solomon  (1  Kings  vi.  20),  and  to  the 
measnring-man,  who  had  turned  himself 
round,  lay  along  the  whole  breadth  of  the 
temple  or  holy  place. 

Vers.  5 — 11. — The  wcM  and  tide  builditigt. 

Ver.  5. — The  measuring  commenced  with 
the  wall  of  the  house,  i.e.  with  the  outer 
wall,  which,  beginning  at  the  pillars  (ver. 
1),  enclosed  the  temple  on  its  south,  west, 
and  north  sides.  Its  great  thickness,  six 
cubits,  corresponded  with  and  even  sur- 
passed the  colossal  proportions  of  archi- 
tecture in  the  ancient  East.  The  walls  of 
Solomon's  temple,  though  not  mentioned  in 
either  Kings  or  Chronicles,  could  hardly 
have  been  less  than  four  cubits  thick  (see 

1  Kings  vi.  6),  and  were  probably  more 
(Sohiirer).  Like  the  Solomonic  (I  Kings 
Ti.  5 — 10),  the  Ezekeliau  temple  had  side 
chambers,  which,  like  those  of  the  earlier 
buildtng,  served  as  storehouses  for  priests' 
clothing,  temple  utensils,  and  temple 
treasures  (1  Kings  vii.  51 ;  2  Kings  xi.  2 ; 

2  Chron.  v.  1),  and  measured  four  cubits 
broad  in  the  clear. 

Ver.  6. — The  side  chambers  were  three, 
one  over  another,  and  thirty  in  order ;  lite- 
rally, tide  chamber  over  tide  chamber,  three 
and  thirty  timet;  whioh_  means  that  they 
were  ranged  in  three  stories  of  thirty  each ; 
in  this,  again,  agreeing,  as  to  number  and 
position,  with  the  chambers  in  Solomon'i 


temple  (see  Josephus,  •  Ant.,'  viii.  3.  2).  It 
is  not  needful  to  alter  the  text,  as  Bfiittcher, 
Hitzig,  H'avernick,  and  Ewald  propose  to 
do,  in  order  to  make  it  read,  with  the  LXX., 
"  chamber  against  chamber,  thirty  and  (this) 
three  times,"  on  the  ground  that  ^K.and  not 
h^  is  the  preposition,  because  in  Ezekiel  hit 
often  stands  for  hy  (ch.  xviii.  6 ;  xxxi.  12 ; 
xL  2^.  How  the  chambers  were  arranged 
along  the  three  sides  is  not  stated ;  but  most 
likely  there  were  twelve  threes  on  each  of 
the  longer  sides,  the  north  and  the  south, 
and  six  threes  on  the  shorter  or  western  side. 
Like  the  chambers  in  Solomon's  temple 
(I  Kings  vi.  6),  those  in  Ezekiel's  were  not 
fastened  to  "  the  wall  of  the  house,"  i.e.  of 
the  temple  proper;  the  only  question  is 
whether  they  were  built  against  the  temple 
wall,  as  Kliefotli,  Keil,  Smend,  and  Schro- 
der suppose,  or,  as  Ewald  and  Dr.  Ourrey 
seem  to  think,  against  another  wall,  five 
cubits  thick  (ver.  9),  which  ran  parallel  to 

The  Temple. 


SCALE  V  CUBITt 


I- 


A,  ponh  of  temple ;  b,  holy  place,  20  X  4o 
cubits ;  0,  holy  of  holieB,  20  x  20  cubits ;  b,  wall 
of  house,  6  cubits  ;  f.  side  chambers,  4  cubits ;  g, 
wall  of  chambers,  5  cubits;  H,  light  passage,  5 
cubits  (in  other  plans,  this  light  passage  mna  in 
front  of  the  chambers) ;  p,  q,  r,  »,  temple  area,  100 
cubits  square ;  s,  8,  s,  free  space.  '20  cubits  broad ; 
a,  altar  of  incense  in  the  holy  place ;  d,  d,  doors 
of  side  chambers. 

the  temple  wall,  and  which,  having  been 
built  expressly  for  the  support  of  the  side 
chambers,  might  properly  enough  be  siiid 
to  be  "  of  the  house,"  i.e.  belonging  to  it. 
In  the  former  case   the  chambers  would 


344 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.     [ch.  xll  1—26. 


donbtlesB  be  faetenerl  to  the  temple  wall  by 
means  of  "ledges,"  "holds,"  "rebates," 
as  in  the  temple  of  Solomon ;  in  the  latter 
case,  as  Kwald  translates,  there  would  be 
"a  light  passage  between  the  wall  of  the 
house  and  the  side  chambers  around." 

Ver.  7. — In  the  side  chftmbera  an  en- 
larging took  place  as  they  went  up,  i.e.  the 
floorage  of  the  second  story  exceeded  that 
of  the  first,  and  the  floorage  of  the  third 
that  of  the  second;  though  how  this  was 
effected  can  only  be  conjectured.  If  the 
chambers  were  built  against  the  temple 
wall,  then  probably  the  wall  at  each  story 
went  in,  say  a  cubit  oi  a  cubit  and  a  half 
from  the  outside,  so  as  to  admit  the  beams ; 
or,  if  the  chambers  were  built  against  an 
ontside  wall,  a  similar  recession  of  the 
wall  from  the  inside  may  have  taken  place. 
In  either  case,  the  (interior)  breadUt  of  the 
house,  i.e.  of  the  side  chambers,  would  be 
upward,  and  would  increase  from  the  lowest 
chamber  to  the  highest  by  the  midst. 
Flnmptre,  after  Eliefoth,  suggests  that  the 
increasing  size  of  the  chambers  in  the  three 
stories  may  have  been  due  to  projecting 
galleries.  Ewald,  taking  "  house  "  as  "  the 
temple,"  supposes  that  it  gradually  became 
bigger,  «.e.  broader,  as  it  rose,  which  could 
be  the  case  only  if  the  side  cliambers  were 
built  against  the  temple  wall,  and  the  in- 
creased width  of  the  stories  was  secured  by 
projecting  galleries  or  corridors.  Greater 
obscurity  attaches  to  the  second  clause, 
and  a  grinding  about  still  upward  to  the 
side  chambers,  which  the  Authorized  Yer- 
iion  and  some  expositors  regard  as  an 
indication  that  Ezekiel's  temple  had  a 
spiral  staircase  like  that  in  Solomon's 
temple  (see  1  Kings  vi  8);  and  probably 
some  such  mode  of  passing  from  story  to  story 
did  exist  in  Ezekiel's  temple ;  yet  the  clause, 
when  properly  rendered,  does  not  refer  to 
this.  The  Bevised  Version  reads,  "And 
the  side  chambers  were  broader  as  they 
encompassed  the  house  higher  and  higher; 
for  the  encompassing  of  the  house  went 
higher  and  higher  round  about  the  house ; 
therefore  the  breadth  of  the  house  continued 
upward ;  and  so  one  went  up  (most  likely 
by  a  spiral  stair)  from  the  lowest  chamber 
to  the  highest  by  the  middle  eharriber." 

Ver.  8  explains  that  "  the  houae  "  did  not 
stand  upon  the  level  ground,  but,  like  many 
temple  buildings  in  antiquity  (see  Schiirer, 
in  Biehm's  '  Handworterbuoh,'  art.  "  Tem- 
pel  Salomo"),  upon  a  height— or,  raised 
basement  (Bevised  Version)— round  about, 
which  agi'ees  with  the  statement  in  ch.  xl. 
49  that  the  temple  was  approached  by 
means  of  a  stair.  In  consequence  of  this, 
the  foundations  of  the  side  chambers  were 
ft  fall  reed  of  six  great  cubits;  or,  of  six 
tvbits  to  the  joining  (Kevised  Version)  ; "  six 


cubits  to  the  story"  (Ewald);  literally,  tia 
cubits  to  the  armpit.  This  can  hardly  mean 
six  cubits  each  equal  to  the  distance  from 
the  elbow  to  the  wrist,  which  would  be  a 
new  definition  of  the  length  of  the  reed ; 
but,  as  Havemick  and  Kliefotb  propose, 
must  be  taken  as  an  architectural  term 
indicative  of  the  point  where  one  portion  of 
the  buUding  joined  on  to  another.  Accord- 
ingly, by  most  interpreters  the  six  cubits 
are  considered  to  be  a  statement  of  the 
height  of  the  ceiling  above  the  floor  in  each 
story,  which  would  give  an  elevation  ot 
eighteen  cubits  for  the  three  stories;  but 
probably  they  mark  only  the  height  of  the 
temple  and  side  chamber  basis  above  the 
ground.  Kliefoth  includes  both  views,  and 
obtains  an  altitude  of  twenty-four  cubits 
from  the  ground  to  the  temple  roof. 

Ver.  9. — The  thickness  of  the  wall,  which 
was  for  the  side  chambers  on  the  ontside,  it 
next  mentioned  as  having  been  five  cubits, 
i.e.  the  same  as  the  breadth  of  the  wall 
of  the  porch  (ch.  xl.  48),  but  one  cubit 
thinner  than  that  of  the  temple  (ver.  5). 
The  clause  which  follows  is  obscure.  By 
that  which  was  left,  the  Authorized  and 
Bevised  Versions  understand  the  place  et 
the  side  chambers  that  were  within— or, 
that  belonged  to  the  house  (Bevised  Version) 
— ^without  intending  to  assert  that  the 
whole  space  left,  which  was  five  cubits 
(ver.  II),  was  occupied  by  the  side  cham- 
bers, which  were  only  four  cubits  Ivoad 
(ver.  5).  Accepting  these  measurements, 
Eliefoth  and  Keil  regard  the  free  space  as 
a  walk  of  five  cubits  broad  on  the  outside 
of  the  side  chambers.  Ewald,  and  Dr. 
Cnrrey,  in  the  'Speaker's  Commentary,' 
place  the  five  cubits  between  the  temple 
wall  and  the  side  chambers. 

Ver.  10. — Ewald  and  Smend,  following 
the  LXX.,  combine  vers.-  9  and  10  thus: 
"  And  that  which  was  left  between  the  side 
chambers  of  the  house  and  the  cells  (along 
the  inner  court  wall)  was  twenty  cubits 
round  about  the  house  on  every  side." 
Interpreters  who  reject  this  combination  of 
the  verses  explain  ver.  10  as  a  statement  of 
the  distance  between  the  outside  wall  of  the 
side  chambers  and  the  cells  of  the  inner 
court.  Between  the  two  lay  the  wideness 
of  twenty  cubits ;  i.e.  a  free  space  o^  such 
breadth  on  the  north,  south,  and  west  sides 
of  the  house, 

Ver.  11,— The  place  that  was  left  has 
been  differently  explained  (see  above  on 
ver.  9);  but  on  any  hypothesis  the  side 
chambers  opened  on  the  free  space  towards 
the  nortli  and  towards  the  south,  i.e.  one 
row  of  chambers  was  entered  by  a  door  firom 
the  south,  another  by  a  door  from  the  north. 
The  corridor  into  which  the  chambers 
opened — whether   between    them  and  th« 


OH.  XLi.  1— 26.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  EZEKIEL. 


846 


hoTiBe(EwaId,  Currey)  or  between  them  and 
an  outside  wall  (Kllefoth,  Hengstenberg, 
Keil) — was  five  cubits  broad.  Thus  the 
whole  breadth  of  the  temple  court  can  be 
obtained. 

I.  The  breadth  of  the  coort — 

1.  Breadth  of  the  house  ...       20  cubits 

2.  Breadth  of  wall,  6x2  cubits  =  12     „ 

3.  Breadth  of  chambers,  4:  X  2  „  =    8     „ 

4.  Breadthofchamberwall,5x2„  =  10  „ 
6.  Breadth  of  corridor,  5  x  2  „  =  10  „ 
6.  Breadth  of  free  space,  20  x  2  „  =  40     „ 

Total         ...    100     „ 

II.  The  length  of  the  court— 

1.  The  length  of  the  house    .-      60  cubits 

2.  The  temple  wall      6     „ 

8.  The  chambers  ...        _        4     „ 

4.  The  chamber  wall 5     „ 

5.  The  corridor 5     „ 

6.  The  space  towards  the  west      20     „ 

Total        ...     100     „ 

The  "house"  was  thus  one  hundred  cubits 
square.  Tbe  porch  of  the  house  was 
reckoned  as  belonging  to  the  inner  court 
(oh.  xl.  48). 

Thb  Bkpabate  Placb. 


fCALC  OF  eusrrt 

90       40    -   BO         fiO       Itt 

I X ZC '         ' 


o,  the  glzrah,  or  separate  place, 90  X 10  cubits; 
B,  wall  of  gizrab,  G  cublte  thick ;  8,  tree  space, 
10  cubits  broad;  t,t,  temple  place,  20  cubits 
broad. 

Vers.  12 — 14. — 3%e  teparaU  plaet, 

Ver.  12.— The  building  that  was  before 
the  separate  place.  The  word  nit^n, 
oocuiring  only  in  this  chapter,  and  trans- 
lated "separate  place,"  is  derived  from  a 
root  signifying  to  "out  o£^"  and  here  de- 


notes a  space  behind  tbe  temple  on  the 
west,  which  was  marked  off  from  the  rest 
of  the  ground  on  which  the  temple  with  its 
courts  and  chambers  stood,  and  devoted 
most  likely  to  less  eaored  purposes.  Be- 
hind Solomon's  temple  lay  a  similar  space 
(2  Kings  ixiii.  11 ;  1  Obron.  xxvi.  18),  with 
buildings  upon  it  and  a  separate  way  out ; 
and  as  the  name  gizrah  appears  to  convey 
the  notion  of  something  that  required  to  be 
kept  apart  and  removed  from  the  sacred 
precincts,  the  opinion  of  Kliefoth  is  pro- 
bably corrrect  that  "this  space  with  its 
bnildings  was  to  be  used  for  the  reception 
of  all  refuse,  sweepings,  all  kinds  of  mb- 
bish — ^in  brief,  of  everything  that  was 
separated  or  rejected  when  the  holy  service 
was  performed  in  the  temple,  and  that  this 
was  the  reason  why  it  received  the  name  of 
'the  separate  place.'"  The  dimensions  of 
this  building  were  (1)  the  breadth,  seventy 
cubits ;  (2)  the  length,  ninety  cubits ;  (3) 
the  thickness  of  the  wall,  five  cubits  round 
about. 

Vers.  13, 14.— Thus  the  whole  breadth  of 
this  erection  was  seventy  plus  ten,  or  eighty 
cubits ;  which,  with  ten  cubits  of  free  space 
on  the  north  and  south  sides,  make  a  hun- 
dred cubits  in  all.  Its  whole  length  was 
ninety  plus  ten,  or  a  hundred  cubits.  The 
entire  area  was  thus  once  more  a  hundred 
cubits  square.  At  this  point,  again,  a  con- 
venient estimate  of  the  whole  dimensions  of 
the  temple  area  may  be  made. 

L  The  breadth  of  the  area  from  west  to 
east — 


1.  The  separate  place  (includ- 

ing walls) 

100  cnbiu 

2.  The  "house  "(with  free  space 

behind)     

100     „ 

8.  The  inner  court       

100     „ 

4.  The    outer   court    (the   two 

gates  with  space  between 

them)       

200     „ 

Total        ...     500     „ 

II.  The  length  of  the  area  from  north  to 
south — 

1.  The  outer  court   (the   two 

northern  gates  with  spaces 

between  them)    200  cubits 

2.  The ' '  house  "  (with  free  space 

on  both  sides)      100     „ 

8.  The  outer  court  (the  two 
southern  gates  with  dis- 
tance between  them)      ...     200     „ 

Total        ...    500     „ 
Vers.  15—26. — The  projecting  portion*  of 
the  temple  building. 

Ver.  15. — With  this  verse  begins  a  sum- 
mary of  measurements  of  which  some  have 


346 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [on.  xu.  1—26. 


been  already  given,  while  others  are  new. 
Starting  from  the  gizrah,  or  separate  place, 
this  summary  mentions  that  the  "man" 
measured  (1)  the  whole  length  of  the  erec- 
tion; (2)  the  length  of  its  "galleries"  on 
the  north  and  south  sides ;  and  (3)  the  inner 
temple  with  the  poichea  of  the  court.  The 
length  of  the  separate  place  is  not  stated, 
that  having  been  already  done  (ver.  13). 
The  length  of  the  galleries  is  specified  as  a 
hundred  cubits,  which  shows  they  extended 
along  the  whole  side  of  the  building.  As 
for  the  nature  of  these  "galleries,"  or  D'pni*, 
nothing  can  be  ascertained  from  the  deriva- 
tion of  the  word.  The  LXX.  renders  it  in 
this  verse  by  im6\oma  ("  things  left  over "), 
in  ch.  xlii.  3  and  5  by  vepta-TvKa  and  a-roal  : 
the  Vulgate  has  here  etheeai,  the  Hebrew 
Latinized,  and  in  ch.  xlii.  portieus.  The 
ethekim  were  most  lilsely  passages  or  porches 
running  along  both  (north  and  south)  sides 
of  the  building,  and  supported  either  by 
pillars  or  ledges  in  the  wall.  The  inner 
temple,  which  was  measured,  was  the 
"house"  which  stood  between  the  gizrah 
and  the  inner  court;  the  porches  of  the 
court  were  the  gate  buildings  in  the  inner 
and  outer  courts.  Of  all  these  the  dimen- 
sions have  already  been  reported,  and  are  not 
agiiin  rehearsed. 

Vers.  16, 17  introduce  several  new  details. 

(1)  That  the  door-posts  (rather,  thresholds), 
and  the  narrow  (or,  closed)  windows,  and 
the  galleries  round  about  on  their  three 
stories,  were  covered  with  a  wainscotting  of 
wood  from  the  ground  up  to  the  windows. 

(2)  That  the  windows,  whether  openings  on 
the  first  fioor  (Kliefoth)  or  skylights  in  the 
roof  (Hengstenberg),  were  "  covered,"  which 
may  signify,  as  Ewald  and  Plumptre  think, 
that  they  were  not  left  open,  but  protected 
by  a  lattice- work  of  bars  or  planks ;  or,  as 
Currey  suggests,  that  they  were  wainscotted 
as  well  as  the  space  from  the  ground  to  the 
windows.  (3)  That  nothing  was  constructed 
by  caprice  or  at  random,  but  that  all  about 
the  building  proceeded  by  exact  measure- 
ment. 

Vers.  18 — 20. — As  in  Solomon's  temple 
(1  Kings  vi.  29),  the  wainscotting  was  adorned 
with  artistic  carving  of  cherubim  and  palm 
trees,  a  palm  tree  and  a  cherub  standing 
alternately.  Each  cherub  had  two  of  its 
four  faces  exhibited  (since  four  could  not  be 
conveniently  represented  on  a  plain  surface) 
— a  man's  face  (symbolizing  the  rational  crea- 
tion) directed  towards  the  palm  tree  on  one 
■ide,  and  a  young  lion's  face  (symbolizing 
the  irrational  creation)  turned  towards  the 
palm  tree  on  the  other  side.  This  parti- 
cular style  of  ornamentation  was  employed 
from  the  ground  nnto  above  the  door,  which 
Plumptre  interprets  as  an  indication  of  the 
height  of  the  palm  trees  and  cherubic  figures, 


but  which  probably  meant  the  same  thing 
as  the  preceding  clause,  "  through  all  the 
house  round  about."  Cherubic  figures 
formed  part  of  the  adornment  of  the  taber- 
nacle curtains  (Exod.  xxvi.  1 ;  xxxvi.  8). 
(On  the  nature  of  the  cherubim  and  their 
symbolic  significance,  see  ch.  i.  5 — 10.) 

Ver.  21. — The  posts  of  the  temple  were 
squared ;  literally,  a>  for  the  temple  the  door- 
posts were  squared,  or  "  the  sanctuary  post 
work  of  square  form  "  (Keil).  The  remain- 
ing clauses  ought  to  read  as  in  the  Bevised 
Version,  "  As  for  the  face  of  the'  sanctuary, 
the  appearance  thereof  yja,&  as  the  appearance 
of  the  temple,"  the  sanctuary  being  the  holy 
of  holies  as  distinguished  from  the  holy 
place  or  the  house  as  a  whole.  The  precise 
force  of  the  last  words,  the  appearance  as 
the  appearance,  is  supposed  by  Klietbth  and 
Keil  to  be  that  the  sanctuary  door,  like  that 
of  the  temple,  had  square  posts ;  by  Ewald, 
that  it  appeared  to  be  what  it  really  was; 
by  Plumptre,  that  the  appearance  was  like 
that  he  (Ezekiel)  had  formerly  described; 
by  Currey,  that  the  appearance  iu  this  vision 
was  the  same  as  in  the  other  visions,  and  as  in 
the  actual  temple  (corap.  ch.  xliii.  2).  Some- 
thing can  be  said  for  each  of  these  attempti 
to  elucidate  a  dark  plirase.  Smend  and 
Hitzig,  follow  the  LXX.  in  connecting  the 
last  clause  of  ver.  21  with  ver.  22  in  this 
fashion,  "  And  in  front  of  the  holy  place  was 
an  appearance  like  the  sight  of  a  wooden 
altar." 

Ver.  22. — The  altar.  This  was  the  altar 
of  incense  (Exod.  xxx.  1,  etc.),  which  stood 
in  the  holy  place  in  contradistinction  to  the 
altar  of  burnt  offering,  which  was  located  in 
the  outer  court.  The  altar  of  burnt  offering 
in  Solomon's  temple  was  of  brass  (2  Chron.  , 
iv.  1),  and  in  the  tabernacle  of  shittim  wood 
(Exod.  xxvii.  1);  the  altar  of  incense  in  the 
tabernacle  (Exod.  xxx.  1)  and  in  Solomon's 
temple  (1  Kings  vii.  48)  was  constructed  of 
wood  overlaid  with  gold,  but  in  this  temple 
only  of  wood.  Plumptre,  commenting  on 
this,  writes,  "Possibly  Ezekiel  shared  the 
feelings  of  Daniel  (ix.  25),  that  the  rebuild- 
ing would  bo  '  in  troublous  times,'  and  did 
not  contemplate  an  abundance  of  gold  as 
likely  to  be  the  outcome  of  the  scant  offer- 
ings of  an  impoverished  people."  The 
dimensions  of  this  altar  in  the  tabernacle 
were  two  cubits  high  and  one  cubit  long 
and  broad ;  in  the  Solomonic  temple,  though 
not  stated,  they  were  probably  the  same  as 
in  the  tabernacle;  in  Ezekiel's  temple  they 
were  three  cubits  high,  two  cubits  long  (and 
probably  two  cubits  broad).  The  corners 
of  the  altar  were  most  likely  "  the  horns,  or 
horn-shaped  points  projecting  at  the  cor- 
ners." The  length.  Ewald,  Keil,  Smend, 
and  others,  after  the  LXX.,  change  into 
"base,"    "stand,"    or  "pedestal,"   on   the 


CH.  XLI.  1—26.]    THE  BOOK   OF  THE   PROPHET  EZEKIEL. 


347 


ground  that  the  length  has  heen  alrpady  men- 
tioned, and  that  one  does  not  usually  speak 
of  a  length  being  of  wood ;  but  it  does  not 
strike  one  as  peculiarly  objectionable  to  say 
that  the  altar  had  corner  pieces,  a  length, 
and  walls  (or  sides)  of  wood,  meaning  there- 
by to  intimate  that  it  was  wholly  constructed 
of  timber.  When  the  prophet's  attention 
had  been  directed  to  it,  the  guide  who  ac- 
oompanieil  him  observed,  This  is  the  table 
that  is  before  the  Lord,  not  because,  as 
Bottcher  conjectured,  the  altar  was  regarded 
as  including  the  table  of  shewbread,  but 
because  in  the  Law  the  offerings  laid  upon 
the  altar  had  been  spoken  of  as  the  bread 
of  God  (see  Ley.  zzvi.  6,  8,  17,  21,  22 ;  and 
comp.  Mai.  1.  7) ;  and  because  in  this  vision 
table  and  altar  appear  to  be  used  inter- 
changeably (see  ch.  xliv.  16). 

Vers.  23— 26.— The  doors  of  the  temple 
and  of  the  sanctuary  form  the  next  subject 
for  description.  Again  as  in  the  Solomonic 
edifice  (1  Kings  vi.  81,  etc.),  the  holy  place 
and  the  holy  of  holies  had  two  doors;  i.e. 


each  had  one  door  composed  of  two  turning 
(or,  folding)  leaves,  ornamented,  like  the 
walls  of  the  house,  with  carvings  of  cheru- 
bim and  palms.  On  the  fane  of  the  porch 
without  were  thick  planks,  by  which  Ewald 
understands  "foliage"  or  "leaf work,"  but 
which,  with  greater  likelihood,  were  either 
as  Keil  renders,  "  mouldings  of  wood  "  for 
the  threshold ;  or  "  cornicings,"  as  Kliefoth 
translates;  if  not,  as  Smend  suggests,  pro- 
jecting beams  to  afford  shelter  to  one  stand- 
ing in  the  porch ;  or  as  Hengstenberg  and 
Plumptre  say,  "steps."  The  last  verse 
states  that  narrow  or  closed  (as  in  ver.  16) 
windows  admitted  light  into  the  porch, 
while  carvings  of  palm  trees  adorned  its 
walls  on  each  side.  The  cherubic  figures, 
Plumptre  hints,  were  absent,  because  the 
porch  was  a  place  of  less  sanctity  than  the 
temple.  Hengstenberg  notes  that  the  words, 
"  thick  planks,"  "  thick  beams,"  or  "  steps," 
as  he  translates,  fitly  close  this  description, 
"  as  placing  the  extreme  east  over  against 
the  extreme  west  with  which  it  began." 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  1. — Tlve  new  temple.  Ezekiel  is  a  priest  (ch.  i.  3).  It  is  natural  that  hii 
thoughts  should  run  on  the  lines  of  his  professional  occupations,  and  travel  to  the 
familiar  haunts  of  his  old  life.  Thus  we  find  that  with  him  the  picture  of  the  restora- 
tion centres  in  a  glorified  temple,  just  as  to  Isaiah  the  statesman  of  war-times  it  appears 
as  an  era  of  unparalleled  peace  (Isa.  xi.  6),  and  as  to  Daniel  the  minister  of  a  foreign 
court  it  appears  as  a  kingdom  conquering  the  great  world-empires  (Dan.  vii.  27).  The 
happy  future  is  so  rich  and  wide  and  manifold  that  it  has  room  for  all  of  these  prophecies. 
Each  prophet  may  conceive  it  in  his  own  style.  We  must  combine  all  their  various 
visions  if  we  would  gain  anything  like  a  complete  idea  of  its  character,  and  even  then 
we  shall  fail,  for  "  eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither  have  entered  into  the  heart 
of  man  the  things  which  God  hath  prepared  for  them  that  love  him  "  (1  Cor.  ii.  9). 
Let  us  now  consider  the  special  suggestiveness  of  the  restored  temple.  We  know  that 
a  new  temple  was  built  ou  IVIount  Zion.  But  the  very  building  of  it  enshrined  large 
ideas  concerning  God's  great  and  perfect  restoration  of  his  people. 

I.  The  pbesbnoe  of  God.  The  temple  is  more  than  a  place  of  assembly.  It  is  a 
house  in  which  God  dwells.  The  tabernacle  in  the  wilderness  was  called  the  "  tent  of 
meeting,"  i.e.  the  tent  in  which  God  meets  man.  There  is  no  temple  in  St.  John's 
new  Jerusalem,  because  God  fills  the  whole  city  with  his  presence,  i.e.  the  whole  city 
is  a  temple.  The  Christian  Church  is  growing  into  a  great  temple  for  the  dwelling 
of  God.  God  dwells  now  in  the  midst  of  his  people.  This  is  their  highest  privilege. 
The  dTrelling  of  God  in  heaven  constitutes  its  bliss. 

II.  Holiness.  The  temple  was  sacred.  It  had  its  holy  place  reserved  for  the 
priests,  and  its  holy  of  holies  into  which  only  the  high  priest  could  enter,  and  he  but 
once  a  year.  Eveu  the  court  of  the  congregation  was  strictly  confined  to  Jews,  and 
for  a  Gentile  to  enter  it  was  accounted  a  dreadful  profanation — as  we  see  in  the  case 
of  the  attack  of  a  mob  on  St.  Paul,  on  the  ground  that  he  had  been  a  party  to  such  a 
profanation  (Acts  xxi.  28).  Now  God  calls  his  people  to  holy  living.  They  are  to  be 
all  priests,  with  free  access  to  his  presence  (Heb.  iv.  16).  Their  holiness  is  to  be  real 
and  spiritual,  not  ritual  and  ceremonial  like  that  of  the  priests  of  Israel.  The  sanctity 
of  the  Church  is  just  the  holiness  of  the  lives  of  her  members.  It  is  not  the  church 
that  sanctifies  the  worshippers,  but  the  worshippers  wlio  s-anotify  the  church. 

III.  Worship.  1.  There  were  sacrifices  in  the  tem|ile.  Christ  is  our  Sacrifice, 
and  he  is  in  his  Church.     The  ordinance  of  the  Lord's  Supper  commemorates  that  one 


348         THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  [oh.  xli.  1—26. 

s\ipreme  sacrifice.  We  have  now  to  offer  our  bodies  as  living  (not  slain)  sacrifices 
(Rom.  xiL  1).  2.  There  was  service  in  the  temple.  Levites  as  well  as  priests  worked 
there.  It  was  a  busy  scene  of  activity.  Christ's  people  are  all  priests  and  Levites. 
They  are  not  called  to  gaze  at  a  spectacle,  but  to  take  an  active  part  in  the  work  of 
the  Church.  3.  There  was  praise  in  the  temple.  The  sons  of  Korah  and  their  later 
representatives  made  its  walls  resound  with  loud,  ir  not  always  with  what  we  should 
call  sweet,  music.    The  Christian  life  should  be  as  a  glad  psalm  of  praise. 

Ver.  12. — Solidity.  "  The  wall  of  the  building  was  five  cubits  thick."  This  suggests 
a  solid  structure. 

I.  The  STBiTOTUBG  OF  SALVATION  IS  SOLID.  The  temple  was  strong  as  a  castle. 
Indeed,  it  was  used  as  a  fortress  in  the  time  of  the  Roman  siege  of  Jerusalem,  and  was 
the  last  part  of  the  city  to  yield  to  the  foe.  The  Church  of  God  is  better  than  an  ark 
on  the  waters ;  it  is  a  mighty  fortress,  built  upon  a  strong  foundation,  and  strongly 
protected  by  the  presence  of  G-od.  We  need  not  fear  for  our  spiritual  shelter.  It  will 
not  be  blown  away  with  every  wind  of  doctrine.  What  Christ  has  done  for  us  will 
stand  the  hardest  strain. 

II.  The  btbuoture  of  the  Ghbistlan  life  is  solid.  There  are,  indeed,  some 
Christian  people  whose  faith  seems  to  be  no  better  than  the  flimsiest  summer  tent, 
quite  unfit  to  stand  against  the  least  gale  of  doubt,  temptation,  or  trouble.  But  he  who 
is  really  and  earnestly  endeavouring  to  live  the  Christian  life  by  the  grace  of  God  will 
find  that,  though  he  is  weak,  God  can  make  him  strong,  and  build  up  his  spiritual  life 
into  a  vigour  at  which  the  man  himself  may  well  be  surprised. 

ni.  The  btbuotube  of  tbuth  is  solid.  There  is  a  great  deal  in  men's  opinions 
of  religion  that  will  need  to  be  swept  away  by  widening  knowledge.  But  this  is  not 
truth.  As  soon  as  a  real  fact  is  reached,  no  granite  from  Aberdeen  can  be  more  hard 
and  firm.  When  we  reach  truth  our  feet  touch  the  rock,  and  when  we  build  up  oiii 
teachings  out  of  truths  they  must  stand.    "  Truth  is  great,  and  it  must  prevul." 

IV.  The  btbuotube  of  good  wobe  is  solid.  Here  is  the  test  by  which  to  reveal 
showy,  worthless  work,  and  to  distinguish  it  from  that  which  is  of  real  value.  There 
are  men  who  build  on  the  right  foundation,  and  yet  only  pile  up  wood,  hay,  and  stubble. 
Their  work  will  be  burnt,  though  they  themselves  will  be  saved  (1  Cor.  iii.  13 — 15). 
But  when  a  man  with  an  honest  heart  toils  unpretentiously  to  build  up  what  is  real 
and  true — to  better  society,  to  spread  the  gospel  by  it — all  on  the  foundation  of  Christ, 
he  may  rest  assured  that  his  work  will  stand.     Such  work  is  solid. 

y.  The  Chubch  of  Chbist  is  solid.  The  Church  has  stood  many  shocks  and 
dangers — ^temptations  and  persecutions.  Still  she  endures.  Philosophies,  social 
systems,  and  political  movements  have  risen  and  fallen.  But  the  Church  of  Christ  has 
outlived  them  all.  She  outlived  the  Roman  empire  and  the  ancient  civilization. 
She  will  outlive  her  rivals  in  thought  and  social  movements  in  the  present  day. 

YI.  Heaten  is  solid.  It  is  no  vague  cloudland.  Christ  spoke  of  his  Father's 
house  (John  xiv.  1).  St.  Paul  contrasted  the  house  not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in 
the  heavens,  with  the  present  temporary  tahernade  of  the  earthly  body  (2,0w.  v.  1). 
The  writer  to  the  Hebrews  shows  us  Abraham  looking  "  for  a  city  which  hath 
fowndations,  whose  Builder  and  Maker  is  God  "  (Heb.  xL  10). 

Ver.  18. — "  ChenMrns  and  palm  trees."  Ezekiel  is  here  in  the  midst  of  his  favonrita 
imagery.  But  as  there  were  no  palm  trees  in  the  old  tabernacle  of  the  wilderness,  nor 
in  Solomon's  temple,  why  does  the  prophet  plant  them  among  his  cherubim  ? 

I.  The  futubg  will  be  viotobious.  The  old  times  were  times  of  darkness,  fear, 
difficulty,  and  strife.  Even  yet  we  are  not  out  of  the  noise  of  the  battle,  and  perhaps 
a  more  fierce  conflict  is  gathering.  But  beyond  all  these  is  the  peace  of  Divine  victory 
assured  to  the  servants  of  Christ.  This  was  anticipated  by  the  exultant  Galilaeans,  who 
spread  palm  branches  before  our  Lord  as  he  rode  up  to  Jerusalem.  Now,  the  vision  of 
the  palm  trees  should  encourage  patience  and  inspire  energy.  A  splendid  future  is 
before  us ;  let  us,  then,  press  on  with  undimmed  hope.  1.  The  palm  tree  is  lofty.  It 
shoots  straight  up  and  towers  above  the  plain,  a  graceful  and  a  conspicuous  object. 
The  happy  future  will  be  exalted  and  heavenly.  2.  The  palm  tree  hears  all  its  fruit 
on  its  summit.    It  is  a  high,  bare  pillar,  crowned  with  fruit  and  foliage.    Men  must 


OH.  XLi.  1— 26.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  349 


climb  to  reach  its  treasures.  The  victory  of  Christian  experience  is  not  for  thoie  who 
grovel  in  earthly-mindedness.  3.  The  palm  flourishes  in  the  desert.  It  is  the  one 
fruitful  tree  of  the  desert.  The  victory  of  Christ  over  Satan  was  obtained  amidst  out- 
ward darkness  and  despair.  His  future  victory  over  all  evil  may  be  among  discouraging 
external  signs.  We  need  not  despair  of  the  human  desert  if  the  palm  of  Christ  is  there. 
4.  The  palm  tree  requires  water  for  its  nourishment.  It  will  not  grow  in  the  sandy 
wastes  of  the  Sahara.  The  victory  of  Christianity  depends  on  hidden  supplies  of  the 
water  of  life. 

II.  The  viotoby  of  the  putube  will  be  Divine.  The  palm  tree  is  in  the  temple, 
planted  among  the  heavenly  cherubim.  It  is  a  bit  of  nature  surrounded  with  things 
never  found  in  nature.  Christ's  kingdom  grows  upon  earth.  The  people  of  God  are 
to  flourish  like  the  palm  tree  (Ps.  xcii.  12).  But  this  prosperity  is  no  mere  natural 
growth  of  wild  humanity ;  neither  is  it  the  cultivated  product  of  secular  education. 
The  palm  tree  is  not  in  the  well-pruned  and  tended  garden,  but  in  the  temple.  It  is 
through  religion  that  we  are  led  on  by  Christ  to  victory.  1,  There  is  the  conquest  of 
evil.  The  palm  tree  is  planted  by  the  place  of  sacrifices — in  the  temple.  We  can 
only  hope  for  a  good  future  when  the  wrongs  and  sins  of  mankind,  which  are  its 
greatest  evils,  are  overcome.  2.  There  is{  dedication  to  God.  The  palm  tree  grows  in 
a  holy  place.  We  must  be  devoted  to  God  if  we  would  enjoy  his  smile  and  favour. 
The  highest  glory  wiU  crown  the  work  of  the  most  devoted  servant  of  Christ.  At  the 
monastery  of  Mar  Saba,  in  the  wilderness  of  the  Dead  Sea,  a  palm  tree  grows  on  a  shelf 
of  the  rock  high  up  a  wild,  barren  cliff,  and  yet  flourishes  there  and  bears  fruit, 
because — as  the  monks  say — it  springs  from  a  date-stone  sown  by  the  saint  who 
founded  the  monastery.  True  saints  will  grow  palms  of  victory  from  the  hardest 
lives. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  4. — "  The  most  holy  place."  Holiness  is  an  idea  which  admits  of  gradual  pre- 
cision and  elevation.  There  is  a  very  simple  and  primitive  meaning  of  the  term,  which 
it  would  ill  become  us  to  despise  and  ridicule,  inasmuch  as  it  was  preliminary  and 
preparatory  to  a  more  spiritual  conception.  At  the  same  time,  we  should  do  discredit 
to  our  Christian  training  did  we  not  strive  to  rise  to  a  higher  and  nobler  conception 
of  holiness  than  that  which  obtained  among,  and  was  sufiScient  for,  a  people  in  an  early 
stage  of  spiritual  culture.  In  the  temple  at  Jerusalem  there  was  a  holy  place,  and  a 
holy  of  holies,  or,  in  the  language  of  Ezekiel,  the  most  holy  place.  An  effort  may  be 
made  to  reach  and  to  explain  the  several  ideas  which  together  made  up  the  peculiar 
sanctity  of  the  adytum  of  the  Jewish  temple. 

I,  The  peimitive  signifioation  or  holiness  is  sepabation,  and  the  most  holt 

PLACE    WAS   ONE   MABEED   OFF   AND    SET   APABT    FROM   ALL    ABOUND.      A    pUrpOSC    WaS 

Mrred  by  the  distinction  between  the  sacred  and  the  profane — a  distinction  which  may, 
itt  the  highest  stage  of  spiritual  culture,  be  transcended.  Men  have  to  be  taught  by 
their  senses  ;  and  the  separation  of  a  certain  spot,  a  certain  building,  a  certain  portion 
of  a  building,  from  all  around,  contributes  to  the  formation  of  the  idea  of  sanctity. 
This  might  not  be  necessary  in  a  world  where  no  sin  exists ;  but  in  this  world,  where 
sin  has  reigned,  »nd  where  sin  still  so  largely  prevails,  the  evil  has  impressed  itself  on 
men's  minds  as  normal,  and  the  pure  and  Divine  as  exceptional.  Hence  the  consecra- 
tion of  sites,  and  temples,  oracles,  and  holy  places. 

II.  The  most  holt  place  served  to  educate  the  Jewish  people  in  hobalitt 
AND  IH  TBUE  BELloioN.  The  wholc  Ceremonial  and  sacrificial  dispensation  established 
by  Moses,  with  all  the  observances  of  the  Levitical  Law,  may  justly  be  regarded  aa 
instructive  and  disciplinary,  in  the  first  place  for  Israel,  and  then  for  all  mankind. 
Those  who  looked  upon  the  temple  and  its  sanctuary  could  not  but  be  reminded  that 
hers  was  the  peculiar  dwelling-place  of  a  holy  God.  The  degrees  of  holiness  attaching 
to  the  several  parts  of  the  sacred  edifice,  culminating  in  the  sanctity  of  the  most  holy 
place,  were  fitted  to  elicit  the  spiritual  apprehensions,  the  reverence,  the  devotion,  the 
penitence,  of  those  who  felt  themselves  in  the  presence  and  under  the  training  of  the 
•Il-holy  God.    To  •  certain  extent  every  Israelite  not  specially  disqualified  might  draw 


350  TEE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [ch.  xli.  1— 26. 

near  to  Jehovah ;  the  priests  were  suffered  and  required  to  approach  still  nearer  to  the 
shrine ;  but  the  high  priest  alone  was  permitted,  and  that  only  upon  a  special  occasion, 
to  enter  the  most  holy  place.  Such  arrangements  and  provisions  were  admirably 
adapted  to  educate  the  Jewish  people  in  the  idea  and  in  the  practice  of  holiness. 

III.  Ebconciltation  between  a  binpul  nation  and  a  just  and  pdbb  God  was 

EFFECTED  THROUGH  THE  MEDIUM  OF  THE  MOST  HOLY  PLACE.      In  the  holy  of  holies  WaS 

performed  the  especially  solemn  and  sacred  service  in  which,  upon  the  Day  of  Atone- 
ment,  the  high  priest  alone  was  suffered  to  take  part  as  the  representative  of  the  people 
«f  the  covenant.  On  that  occasion  the  federal  relation  of  Israel  was  conspicuously  set 
fxth.  To  the  pious  Jew  the  contents  of  the  holy  of  holies,  the  vestments  of  the 
officiating  high  priest,  the  blood  of  atonement,  must  all  have  possessed  a  very  special 
and  very  sacred  interest.  And  that  interest  centred  in  the  idea  of  reconciliation 
between  Jehovah  and  the  chosen  nation — reconciliation  rendered  necessary  by  the  sins 
of  the  people,  and  by  the  perfectly  holy  character,  the  perfectly  righteous  government, 
of  God.  Consecrated  to  this  use,  the  inmost  sanctuary  was  naturally  invested  with  a 
saciedness  altogether  unique. 

IV.  The  most  holy  place  became  associated  with  communion  between  Isbabl 
AND  Israel's  God.  Reconciliation  naturally  led  to  fellowship.  The  enlightened  Jews 
doubtless  took  a  spiritual  view  of  the  Divine  presence,  and  sympathized  with  the 
sublime  language  of  Solomon  at  the  dedication  of  the  temple :  "  Will  God  in  very  deed 
dwell  with  men  on  the  earth  ?  Behold,  heaven  and  the  heaven  of  heavens  cannot  con- 
tain thee ;  how  much  less  this  house  which  I  have  built  I "  Still,  it  was  by  means  of 
this  temple,  its  priesthood  and  its  services,  that  the  Jewish  nation  generally  were,  by 
Divine  appointment  and  intention,  made  familiar  with  the  possibility  and  privilege  of 
fellowship  with  the  Eternal.  It  was  inculcated  upon  them  that  such  communion  wag 
only  possible  in  virtue  of  the  condescension  and  compassion  of  the  Most  High,  and  that 
there  was  needed  on  their  part,  in  order  to  the  enjoyment  of  the  privilege,  a  peculiar 
preparation,  a  spiritual  cleansing.  The  thoughtful  and  devout  Jew  learued,  by  means 
of  the  temple  services,  to  form  such  an  idea  of  God  as  led  him  to  seek  a  spiritual 
discipline.  He  knew  that  the  sacrifices  in  themselves  were  insnfSoient,  and  that  the 
sacrifices  required  by  the  Searcher  of  hearts  were  spiritual,  consisting  in  humility, 
penitence,  faith,  and  obedience.  Those  thus  prepared  might  draw  near  unto  God,  and 
God  would  draw  near  unto  them. 

V.  The  most  holt  place,  as  the  scene  or  high  priestly  mediation,  symbolizes 
THE  mediatorial  WORK  OF  Christ.  In  order  to  understand  the  symbolical,  and 
indeed  typical,  character  of  the  holy  of  holies,  and  of  the  ministration  therein  performed 
by  the  Jewish  high  priest,  it  is  important  to  study  the  ninth  chapter  of  the  Epistle  to 
the  Hebrews.  In  that  portion  of  Scripture  is  an  authoritative  and  lucid  explanation 
of  the  spiritual  meaning  of  the  central  scenes  and  observances  of  the  Jewish  economy. 
It  is  shown  that  the  shadow  was  in  Christ  superseded  by  the  substance,  and  that  in 
the  new  and  spiritual  dispensation  we  have  the  fulfilment  of  ancient  promise.  The 
transactions  which,  on  the  great  Day  of  Atonement,  took  place  within  the  holy  of 
holies  prefigured  and  adumbrated  the  great  events  by  which,  not  Israel  only,  but 
humanity  as  a  whole,  was  reconciled  to  God.  For  when  Christ  expired  upon  the  cross 
the  veil  of  the  temple  was  rent  in  twain ;  and  thenceforth,  through  the  rent  veil  of 
Christ's  humanity,  the  way  into  the  holiest  of  all  was  opened  up  j  the  alienation  of  the 
human  race  from  God  was  abolished ;  and  perpetual  communion  was  provided  between 
a  gracious  Father  and  his  restored  and  accepted  children.  The  most  holy  place  into 
which  through  Christ  we  have  access  is  nothing  else  than  the  favour,  the  fellowship,  the 
love  of  God.— T. 

Ver.  22. — "  The  table  that  is  le/ore  the  Lord."  There  can  be  no  question  that  by  this 
table  Ezekiel  intends  the  altar  of  incense,  which  stood  in  the  holy  place,  but  which,  on 
account  of  its  sacredness  and  value,  is  mentioned  by  the  author  of  the  Epistle  to  the 
Hebrews  as  part  of  the  furniture  of  the  holy  of  holies.  This  altar  in  the  tabernacle  was 
of  acacia  wood  covered  with  gold ;  that  in  the  temple  of  Solomon  was  of  cedar  wood 
covered  with  the  same  pure  and  costly  metal.  Upon  this  table  was  burned,  every 
morning  and  evening,  the  incense  which  represented  the  devotions  of  Israel.  Upon 
the  day  of  atonement  the  horns  of  the  altar  of  incense  were  touched  with  the  blood  of 


OH.  XLi.  1— 26.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  351 

eacrifice.  But  as  no  sacrifice,  in  the  strict  meaning  of  that  term,  was  offered  upon  it 
it  seems  appropriately  designated  "  the  table  that  is  before  the  Lord."  Remember- 
ing the  symbolical  intention  of  the  offering  of  incense  as  described  in  the  Apocalypse, 
v'e  cannot  fail  to  understand  by  this  table  the  appointment  that  prayer  and  praise, 
as  an  acceptable  offering  to  God,  should  ever  be  presented  by  the  Church  through  the 
priestly  mediation  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

I.  A  8PIBIT0AI.  OFFEBiNG.  The  costly  and  fragrant  incense  had  value  in  the  sight 
of  God,  as  representing  the  spiritual  sacrifices  with  which  he  is  ever  well  pleased. 
Prayer  is  not  only  natural  to  man  as  a  needy  and  dependent  being;  it  is  enjoined  by 
God  as  an  exercise  profitable  to  man  and  as  the  wisely  ordained  means  of  securing 
spiritual  and  promised  blessings.  Thanksgiving  and  praise  are  becoming  to  those  who 
are  ever  receiving  from  Heaven  more  than  they  desire  or  deserve.  We  are  not  to  under- 
stand merely  verbal  offerings,  but  those  which  proceed  from  a  devout,  grateful,  confid- 
ing, and  affectionate  heart. 

II.  Ah  appointed  offebino.  In  the  thirtieth  chapter  of  Exodus  we  find  minute 
directions  concerning  the  presentation  as  well  as  the  preparation  of  incense.  This 
service  was  not  an  invention  of  man  ;  it  was  prescribed  by  Divine  authority.  In  the 
Church  it  is  God's  will  that  there  should  be  constant  presentation  of  devotion — "  incense 
and  a  pure  offering."  From  the  altar  of  Christian  hearts  such  sacrifices  are  to  ascend 
to  heaven.  God  will  be  "inquired  of"  by  his  people.  "Whoso  offereth  praise 
glorifleth  God." 

III.  An  acceptable  offebino.  We  have  abundant  testimony  in  Scripture  to  the 
Lord's  indifference  to  the  merely  material  gifts  of  men.  If  such  gifts  are  not  the 
expression  of  faith  and  loyalty,  he  disdains  and  rejects  them.  But,  on  the  other  hand, 
nothing  is  more  clearly  revealed  in  Scripture  than  the  delight  of  the  Supreme  in  the 
offering  of  true  and  loving  and  reverent  hearts.   This  is  a  "sweet-smelling  savour"  to  him. 

"  Vainly  we  offer  each  ample  oblation, 

Vainly  with  gifts  would  his  favour  Becuie ; 
Sweeter  by  far  is  the  heart's  adoration, 

Dearer  to  God  are  the  prayers  of  the  poor." 

IV.  A  PEBPETXTAL  OFFEBING.  Incensc  was  offered  by  the  Jewish  priest  daily — 
every  morning  and  every  evening.  Not  less  frequent  should  be  the  offering  of  prayer 
and  piaise  by  God's  people — in  the  Church  and  in  the  home,  above  all  in  the  heart. 
There  is  no  cessation  of  God's  favours ;  there  should  be  no  cessation  of  our  thanks- 
givings. There  is  no  intermission  of  our  needs ;  there  should  be  no  interruption  of  our 
prayers.    "  Pray  without  ceasing." 

y.  A  HEAVENLT  OFFEBING.  It  is  obscrvable  that  the  one  altar  mentioned  in  the 
Book  of  the  Revelation  as  existing  in  the  celestial  temple  is  the  altar  of  incense.  The 
purpose  of  sacrifice  is  answered  and  accomplished  upon  earth.  There  remains  no  more 
offering  for  sin.  In  heaven,  accordingly,  is  no  altar  of  sacrifice.  But  the  altar  of 
incense  is  imperishable.  From  it  ascend  immortally  the  praises  and  the  prayers  of  the 
redeemed  and  glorified.  In  heaven  fellowship  with  God  is  never  suspended ;  there 
harps  are  never  unstrung  and  voices  are  never  silent.— T. 

Ver.  4. — Sacred  places.  "This  is  the  most  holy  place."  There  has  always  dwelt 
in  the  minds  of  men  a  feeling  that  some  places  are  peculiarly  sacred.  Unfortunately, 
there  has  been  no  small  amount  of  superstition  connected  with  this  feeling,  which 
should  be  discouraged  in  others  and  should  be  resisted  in  our  own  case.  We  should 
strongly  insist  upon  the  truth,  and  carefully  cultivate  the  conviction,  that  if  some  places 
have  a  peculiar  sanctity,  it  is  that  "  every  place  may  be  holy  ground  "  to  us ;  that 
we  may  find  God  everywhere  and  in  everything;  that  we  may  worship  and  serve  him 
jn  every  sphere  and  on  all  occasions  whatsoever.  Still,  the  feeling  rests  on  a  basis 
of  truth.    We  know  that  there  was  a  "most  holy  place" — 

I.  In  the  ancient  temple.  Within  the  veil  was  "  the  holy  of  holies,"  into  which 
none  but  the  high  priest  might  enter,  and  he  only  once  a  year,  and  then  only  with  the 
blood  of  the  slain  goat.  God  might  only  be  approached  by  men  as  they  were  purified 
from  sin ;  and  this  the  careful  graduation  of  access  to  him  clearly  symbolized.  That 
inner  chamber  of  the  temple  was  the  most  sacred  'spot  on  earth,  because  there  Gud 
mahifested  his  presence  as  nowhere  else.    But  there  were  very  holy  places  indeed — 


362         THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PEOPHET  EZEKIBL.  [oh.  xm.  1—26. 

n.  In  the  life  op  our  Lord.  He  was  the  living  Temple  when  ho  was  with  us ; 
for  was  not  God  manifest  in  Mm  far  more  truly  and  importantly  than  he  was  present 
"  between  the  cherubim  "  in  the  luminous  cloud  ?  There  were  three  places  which,  in 
the  experience  of  Jesus  Christ,  may  be  said  to  be  "  most  holy  " — the  upper  room  in 
Jerusalem,  where  he  "  sat  down  with  the  twelve "  to  that  sacred  meal,  and  delivered 
that  discourse  of  priceless  value  to  mankind  (John  ziv.) ;  the  garden  of  Oethsemane, 
where  he  passed  through  the  great  agony ;  and  the  "  place  which  is  called  Calvary," 
where  the  great  sacrifice  was  offered  for  the  sins  of  the  world. 

III.  In  ouB  OWN  BUILDINGS  NOW.  We  find  such  in  those  sanctuaries  or  in  those 
ihambers  which  are  closely  associated  with  our  converse  with  the  Most  High.  Apart 
from  and  independent  of  any  act  of  formal  "  consecration,"  the  place  where  we  gather 
together  to  worship  God,  the  place  where  we  hold  holy  and  happy  fellowship  with 
Christ,  the  place  where  we  listen  with  eager  mind  and  fervent  spirit  to  his  Divine 
truth, — this  is  hallowed  ground  to  us ;  these  are  sacred  spots  which  We  tread  reverently, 
where  we  feel  near  to  God,  which  will  always  be  peculiarly  dear  to  our  hearts. 

ly.  In  cub  rEBSoNAL  ezpebienoe.  There  are  certain  very  solemn  and  sacred 
experiences  through  which  the  God  of  our  life  "  makes  us  to  pass,"  of  which  we  may 
truly  say  that  they  are  "  most  holy."  Of  these  we  have  instances  in  :  1.  The  time 
of  separation,  of  loneliness,  when  we  first  find  ourselves  cast  upon  God  for  guidance 
and  for  fellowship.  2.  The  day  of  desperate  grief,  of  overwhelming  sorrow,  when 
men  can  do  nothing  for  us,  but  God  everything.  3.  The  hour  of  very  special  privilege, 
when  we  feel  the  nearness  of  Christ,  the  excellency  of  his  salvation,  the  power  of  the 
world  to  come,  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit ;  when  we  feel  that  we  stand  before  the 
open  gate  of  the  kingdom  of  God.  4.  The  occasion  of  great  opportunity,  when  it  is 
in  our  power  to  make  some  great  sacrifice  for  others  or  to  render  some  valuable 
service  to  them  or  to  speak  faithfully  snd  effectively  for  Jesus  Christ. — C. 

Vers.  18 — 20,  25. — The  lignificance  of  the  cherubim.  Among  the  difSculties  that 
attend  this  question,  it  seems  clear  that  these  composite  forms  were  intended  either  to 
represent  the  human  or  the  angelic,  not  the  Divine.  The  idea  of  any  artistic  repre- 
sentation of  the  Divine  Being  in  a  Hebrew  temple  is  surely  quite  inadmissible  (see 
Deut.  iv.  15 — 17).  Making  our  choice,  then,  between  the  human  and  the  angelic,  we 
distinctly  prefer  the  former,  and  think  that  the  general  idea  is  that  man,  when  raised 
to  the  highest  conceivable  condition,  when  possessed  of  the  greatest  variety  of  powers, 
should  bring  everything  he  has  and  is  to  the  worship  and  service  of  God.  The  fact 
that,  in  Ezekiel's  vision,  the  cherubim  had  so  large  a  share  iu  the  ornamentation, 
"  made  through  all  the  house  round  about,"  suggests  the  very  close  connection  there 
should  be  between  the  finest  and  highest  powers  of  man  and  the  worship  of  God.  In 
other  places  (see  ch.  i.)  we  have  a  far  fuller  description  of  these  "  living  ones,"  and 
there  we  have  the  idea  not  only  of  "  peerless  strength  and  majesty  "  suggested  by  the 
"  face  of  a  young  lion  "  (ver.  19),  but  also  of  patient,  productive  labour  (the  ox),  and 
of  penetrating  vision  (the  eagle)  ;  while  the  thought  of  swift  motion  is  conveyed  both 
by  the  wings  and  the  wheels  of  the  prophet's  former  vision.  Conceive  man  at  his  very 
best,  endowed  generally  with  such  powers  as  he  is  never  or  rarely  possessed  of  now ; 
add  to  those  capacities  which  he  does  enjoy  those  which  are  borrowed  from  other  non- 
human  spheres ;  and  as  he  would  then  be,  thus  invested,  thus  enlarged  and  crowned, 
the  fitting  thing  would  be  for  him  to  be  found  in  the  temple,  blessing  and  praising  God. 
This  is  so,  in  several  aspects  and  for  many  reasons. 

I.  It  IB  bib  most  baored  and  boukden  duty.  For  however  high  in  dignity  man 
may  rise,  and  to  whatever  commanding  faculty  he  may  attain,  it  is  certain  that :  1. 
He  will  always  owe  everything  he  may  be  or  may  possess  to  the  creative  power  of  God, 
and  that :  2.  He  will  be  dependent  on  the  providential  goodness  of  God  for  their  con- 
tinuance. Thus  gratitude  and  hope  should  bring  him  to  the  sanctuary,  to  bless  God 
for  bestowing  them  upon  him,  and  to  ask  him  to  sustain  and  to  enlarge  them. 

II.  It  18  HiB  truest  and  hiobebt  honour.  There  are  many  engagements  by  which 
man  does  some  honour  to  his  human  nature;  e.g.  conversing,  r^ing,  discussing, 
meditating,  planning,  learning,  executing  works  of  art,  composing  works  of  literature, 
etc.  But  never  does  he  confer  such  honour  on  himself  as  when  he  is  worshipjung 
Oed ;  then  the  life  of  the  "  living  one  "  reaches  its  very  highest  point.    To  come  con 


OH.  xLi.  1— 26.]  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIBL.         858 

Bciously  into  the  near  presence  of  Qod,  to  hold  communion  with  the  Eternal,  to  hymn 
his  praise,  to  dwell  in  thought  upon  his  nature  and  his  high  purposes,  to  speak  his 
Divine  truth  or  hear  it,  to  work  with  him  toward  the  gracious  and  glorious  end  he  hu 
in  view, — ^there  is  nothing  we  can  do,  here  or  perhaps  hereafter,  so  worthy  of,  so  honour- 
able to,  our  human  nature.  Man  reaches  the  very  summit  of  his  manhood  when  he  is 
engaged  in  worshipping  God. 

III.  It  IB  THE  SODBOE  OF  THE  PUBEST  AND  MOST  EXA.LTIKO  JOY.      Of   all   SOUrceS 

of  delight,  beginning  with  the  sensuous  and  rising  to  the  spiritual,  there  can  be  none 
purer  or  more  ennobling  than  this. 
lY.  It  BBiNas  down  a  labqe  bhabb  of  Divine  blessinq. — 0, 

Vers.  18 — 20,  25. — The  significance  of  the  palm  trees.  The  cherubim  and  the  palm 
trees  were  closely  associated ;  both  were  largely  represented,  and  they  were  found  in 
close  conjunction :  "  a  palm  tree  was  between  a  cherub  and  a  cherub."  Both  of  them 
pictured  the  righteous  man  in  the  sanctuary  of  God,  but  while  the  cherub  signified  the 
good  man  at  his  best  bringing  himself  and  all  that  he  had  as  an  offering  to  God,  the 
palm  tree  stood  for  the  goodf  man  as  one  who  had  been  made  what  he  was  by 
the  services  of  the  sanctuary ;  the  one  was  enlarged  and  ennobled  humanity  bringing 
its  offering  to  God,  the  other  was  that  same  humanity  gaining  its  goodness  and  worth 
from  God  and  firom  his  house.  "  The  righteous  shall  flourish  like  the  palm  tree,"  said 
the  psalmist  (Ps.  zcii.  12).  And  there  is  very  good  reason  why  that  tree  should  be  takes 
as  a  type  or  picture  of  the  righteous  man ;  there  is  also  excellent  reason  why  the  pro- 
minence of  the  palm  tree  in  the  prophet's  vision  should  picture  the  truth  that  man's 
goodness  is  the  fair  and  excellent  result  of  much  communion  with  God.  Among  the 
resemblances  are  these — 

I.  Itb  ufbiqhtness.  Some  trees  are  irregular,  they  are  twisted  and  tortuous  in  their 
growth ;  some  hug  the  ground  before  they  rise ;  but  the  palm  rises  straight  toward 
heaven,  it  stands  upright  among  the  trees.  "  Like  some  tall  palm  the  noiseless  fabric 
grew."  The  good  man  is  well  figured  here ;  he  is  the  man  who  does  not  stoop,  who 
does  not  bend  and  bow  earthward,  who  stands  erect,  who  moves  in  one  heavenward 
direction,  who  is  governed  constantly  by  true  and  abiding  principles.  And  these  he 
gains  from  God  and  from  his  house.  There,  in  the  sanctuary,  he  is  sustained  in  his 
principles,  is  reminded  of  them,  gains  fresh  inspiration  to  illustrate  and  adorn  them. 

n.  Its  FBTnTFirLNBBS.  The  palm,  as  a  fruit-bearing  tree,  bearing  a  fruit  which  is 
remarkably  nutritious — for  the  date  will  sustain  life  for  a  long  time,  without  any  other 
kind  of  food — ^is  an  admirable  picture  of  the  righteous  mam  He  bears  fruit ;  he  is 
expected  to  "  bear  much  firuit,"  and  fruit  of  many  kinds :  excellency  of  spirit, — love, 
joy,  peace,  long-suffering,  etc. ;  worthiness  of  Z^e,— -consistency,  blamelessness,  practical 
kindness,  etc. ;  earnest  effort  to  do  good, — patient,  prayerful  endeavour  to  awaken  the 
slumbering,  to  elevate  the  fallen,  to  comfort  the  sorrowful,  to  encourage  the  feeble,  etc. 
And  if  he  does  this,  it  can  only  be  by  having  much  to  do  with  Jesus  Christ  his  Lord. 
He  must  be  a  branch  abiding  in  the  vine  ;  he  must  maintain  a  very  close  spiritual 
connection  with  Christ;  and  how  shall  he  do  this  without  the  ordinances  of  hit 
house? 

m.  Itb  beatttt.  The  palm  tree  lends  a  great  charm  to  the  landscape  when  seen 
standing  in  clusters  upon  the  heights  against  the  sky ;  and  its  evergreen  foliage  makes 
each  particular  tree  an  object  of  beauty.  The  righteous  man  is  he  whose  character  is 
fair,  excellent,  admirable.  When  he  is  what  his  Master  calls  on  him  to  be,  and  what 
he  actually  becomes  when  he  seeks  the  strength  and  refreshment  to  be  found  in  com- 
munion with  God,  then  the  more  he  is  observed  the  more  he  is  admired.  Those 
qualities  are  found  in  him  which  are  "lovely  and  of  good  report;"  hei8imBelfish,pure, 
considerate,  open-handed,  patient,  brave,  loyal,  loving.  His  goodness,  like  the  foliage 
of  the  palm,  grows  not  near  the  ground,  where  it  can  easily  be  soiled  and  lost,  but  high 
up,  where  lower  things  cannot  damage  or  destroy  it. 

IV.  Its  ELASTiom'.  The  fibre  of  the  palm  is  so  elastic  that,  even  when  loaded  with 
considerable  weights,  it  still  grows  determinately  upwards  (see  Smith's  '  Dictionary  of 
the  Bible ').  The  good  man  may  have  much  to  depress  him  and  to  hamper  his  growth, 
bat  if  he  "  dwells  in  the  house  of  the  Lord,"  he  will  rise,  notwithstanding  all  that 
would  otherwise  check  him,  to  a  noble  height  of  virtue  and  of  f  iety. 

XZEEIEL — II.  3  A. 


354 


THE   BOOK  OF  THE   PEOPHET  EZEKIBL.    [oh.  xlii.  1—20. 


Y.  Its  ultimate  TBroMPH.  It  does  not  promise  much  at  the  beginning.  "  It  is 
rough  to  the  touch  and  enveloped  in  dry  bark,  but  above  it  is  adorned  with  fruit  .  .  . 
so  is  the  life  of  the  elect,  despised  below,  beautiful  above ;  .  .  .  down  below  straitened 
by  innumerable  afflictions,  but  on  high  it  ia  expanded  into  a  foliage  ...  of  beautiful 
greenness  "  (see  2  Cor.  Iv.  17 ;  Heb.  xii.  11).— 0. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XLH. 


This  chapter  fvunishes  a  brief  account  of 
the  priests'  chambers  in  the  outer  court 
(vers.  1 — 14),  and  a  detailed  measurement 
of  the  temple  precincts  (vers.  15 — 20). 

Vers.  1 — 14. — The  priest/  ehamben. 

Ver.  1. — The  survey  of  the  house  having 
been  completed,  the  Beer  was  conducted  by 
his  gnlde  into  the  outer  court  (see  on  ch.  xl. 
17)i  by  the  way  toward  the  north,  t.e.  by  the 
inner  north  gate  (see  ch.  xl.  23),  and  from 
the  outer  court  into  the  chamber  that  was 
over  against  the  separate  place,  and  which 
was  before  the  building  toward  the  north. 
That  this  chamber,  or  these  chambers  (n^i^h 
being  a  collective  noun,  though  in  vers.  4 
and  S  it  occurs  in  the  plmal),  were  not  the 
same  cells  as  those  mentioned  in  ch.  xl.  17, 
44,  as  Havernick  supposes,  is  apparent 
from  their  situation  and  use.  Those  in  ch. 
xl.  44  were  in  the  inner,  while  these  were 
in  the  outer ;  and  if  the  cells  spoken  of  in 
ch.  xl.  17  were  in  the  outer  court,  they 
were  also  on  the  pavement  by  the  outer 
wall,  while  the  chambers  now  alluded  to 
were  "over  against,"  or  in  front  of,  the 
gizrah,  or  separute  place  (see  on  ch.  xli  12), 
and  "over  against,"  or  in  front  of,  "the 
building  toward  the  north."  This  building 
Kiel,  Hengstenberg,  Schroder,  and  Flumptre 
hold  to  have  been  the  erection  on  the  gizrah  ; 
Ewald,  Kliefoth,  Smend,  and  Currey  believe 
it  to  have  meant  the  temple.  The  question 
as  to  which  view  is  correct  is  immaterial, 
since  the  row  of  chambers  extended  in  front 
of  parts  of  both  buildings.  Ewald,  as  usual, 
follows  the  LXX.,  and  translates,  "  brought 
me  to  the  fifteen  (another  Greek  text  has 
five)  cells;"  but  of  this  the  Hebrew  con- 
tains nothing. 

Ver.  2. — With  this  verse  the  Authorized 
and  Revised  Versions  begin  a  new  sentence, 
and  are  in  this  at  one  with  Smend ;  but  the 
majority  of  expositors  place  the  second  verse 
under  the  regimen  of  the  verb,  "  he  brought 
me,"  in  ver.  1,  and  understand  the  seer  to 
state  that  he  was  planted  down  before  the 
length  (or,  long  side)  of  an  hundred  onbits, 
with  the  door  toward  the  north,  and  the 
breadth  fifty  cubits.  That  is  to  say,  the 
building  which  contained  the  sacristies,  or 
priests'  chambers,  was  a  hundred  cubits 
long  and  fifty  broad.    A*  the  building  on 


the  separate  place  was  also  a  hundred 
cubits  long  (oh.  xli.  13),  it  might  seem 
as  if  this  erection  ran  exactly  parallel  to 
that,  and  this  view  is  taken  by  Hengsten- 
berg, Schroder,  and  Plumptre;  but  Kliefoth, 
Keil,  and  Currey,  on  the  authority  of  ch. 
xlvi.  19,  locate  a  priests'  kitchen  behind 
the  priests'  chambers  towards  the  west,  and 
reserve  for  it  forty  cubits,  on  the  plausible 
ground  that  it  would  not  likely  be  smaller 
in  size  than  the  sacrificial  kitchen  for  the 
people  (see  ch.  xlvi.  22).  Hence,  if  the 
building  under  consideration  began  forty 
cubits  east  of  the  gizrah  wall,  it  would  ex- 
tend twenty  cubits  over  the  end  and  along 
the  length  of  the  temple. 

Ver.  3. — Considerable  difficulty  attaches 
to  the  words  of  this  verse.  The  twenty 
cubits  which  were  for  the  inner  court  (better, 
the  twenty  which  belonged  to  the  inner  court) 
have  been  taken  by  Kliefoth  to  signify  the 
watchers'  cells  in  the  inner  court,  west  of 
the  north  door  (ch.  xl.  40 — 46),  and  by 
Plumptre  to  indicate  an  inner  area  of 
twenty  cubits  square,  round  which  the 
galleries  in  three  stories  ran.  Both  of 
these  views,  however,  have  this  against 
them,  that  they  are  purely  conjectural, 
the  text  in  ch.  xl.  40—46  saying  nothing 
about  twenty  cubits  in  connection  with 
the  priests'  chambers,  and  the  text  under 
review  making  no  suggestion  of  an  inner 
area  of  twenty  cubits,  but  only  of  the 
already  well-known  "  inner  court."  Hence 
the  opinion  of  Ewald,  Hengstenberg,  Keil, 
SchrSder,  and  Currey  has  most  in  its 
favour,  that  the  "twenty"  alongside  of 
which  the  chamber  now  alluded  to  lay, 
meant  the  twenty  cubits  clear  space  which 
surrounded  the  temple  on  the  south,  west, 
and  north- sides  (see  ch.  xli.  12 — 14),  and 
wliich  could  properly  be  spoken  of  as  "  for 
the  inner  court,"  rather  as  "belonging  to 
the  inner  coui-y  since  it  was  practically 
a  continuation  of  the  same.  The  pavement 
which  was  for  (or,  belonged  to)  the  outer 
eonxt,  was  manifestly  that  already  described 
as  running  along  the  inside  of  the  outer 
wall  (see  ch.  xl.  17).  If,  as  is  likely,  this 
pavement  was  continued  along  the  north 
side  of  the  inner  court  wall,  then  the 
priests'  chambers  must  have  stood  upon  it, 
and  been  over  against  it  on  the  east  side,  as 
Currey  explains;  but  the  easier  and  more 
natural  supposition  is  that  adopted  by  Keil, 


oa,  XLH.  1—20.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  BZBKIEL. 


356 


that  the  second  "over  against"  points  to 
that  which  figged  the  chambers  on  the 
north,  yiz.  the  pavement,  as  the  first  marked 
their  boundary  on  the  south.  Gallery 
against  gallery  (see  on  ch.  xli.  15).  In 
t^ee  stories;  or,  in  the  third  story  (Ee- 
■vised  Version).  Whether  these  galleries 
existed  in  each  of  three  stories  of  tlie  build- 
ing, or  only  in  the  third,  cannot  be  de- 
termined. If  avhs^,  "in  the  thirds"  occurs 
elsewhere  only  in'  Gen.  vi.  16,  to  denote 
the  chambers  or  rooms  of  the  third  story 
in  the  ark,  as  Smend  observes,  "  the  ex- 
pression might  also  quite  naturally  signify 
three  stories,  one  above  another." 

Yer.  4. — Before  the  chambers  a  walk. 
Whether  this  walk  ran  along  the  longer, 
i.e.  northern,  or  in  front  of  the  eastern  side 
of  the  chambers,  and  how  it  stood  related 
to  the  way,  which  is  likewise  meutioned  in 
connection  with  the  chambers,  are  litigated 
questions.  The  LXX.  identifies  the  two,  and 
understands  a  way  in  front  of  the  chambers 
of  ten  cubits  broad  and  a  hundred  cubits 
long.  Ewald  and  Keil  so  far  agree  with 
the  LXX.  as  to  change  the  one-cubit  way 
into  a  hundred-cubit  way;  but  whereas 
Ewald  thinks  of  a  passage  ten  cubits  broad 
and  a  hundred  cubits  long,  running  from 
weat  to  east  between  two  sets  of  chambers, 
Keil  speaks  of  a  walk  of  ten  cubits  broad 
and  a  hundred  cubits  long  in  front  of  the 
cells,  extending  into  a  way  of  equal  breadth 
and  length,  leading  westward  into  the  inner 
court.  Havernick's,  Hengstenberg's,  and 
Kliefoth's  idea,  favoured  by  Schjoder, 
and  probably  the  best,  is  that  of  a  walk 
of  ten  cubits  in  front  of  the  cells,  and  a 
way  of  one  cubit  leading  into  them  from 
the  walk.  Dr.  .Currey  reverses  this,  and 
makes  a  walk  of  ten  cubits  leading  inward, 
and  a  way,  or  kerb,  of  one  cubit  in  front. 
Flumptre  agrees  that  the  passage  leading 
into  the  chambers  was  ten  cubits  broad, 
but  regards  the  one  cubit  as  denoting  the 
thickness  of  the  wall  separating  the  walk 
from  the  interior  of  the  chambers. 

Ver.  5. — The  rendering  of  the  Revised 
Version  sufficiently  explains  this  otherwise 
obscure  verse,  "Now  the  upper  chambers 
were  shorter,"  or  narrower,  "for  the  gal- 
leries took  away  from  these;"  literally, 
did  eat  of  them,  "  more  than  from  the  lower 
and  the  middlemost  in  the  building."  In 
other  words,  the  chambers  rose  in  terrace 
form,  each  of  the  upper  stories  receding 
from  that  below  it,  as  was  customary  in 
Babylonian  architecture. 

Ver.  6  supplies  the  reason  for  this  short- 
ening of  the  upper  stories.  The  chambers 
had  not  pUlars  (see  on  oh.  xl.  49)  as  the 
courts  bad.  Though  it  is  not  otherwise 
stated,  these  appear  to  have  had  colonnades 
like  those  in  the  Herodian (Josephus,  'Ant.,' 


XV.  11.  5)  and  probably  also  the  Solomonio 
temple  (Acts  iii.  11) ;  and  hence  the  second 
and  third  stories  required  to  recede  in  order 
to  find  supports  for  their  respective  galleries. 

Ver.  7. — The  wall;  .or,/e»ce— the  Hebrew 
term  being  not  nph,  as  in  ch.  xl.  5,  or  Tj3, 
as  in  ch.  xli.  5,  both  of  which  sigcify  the 
wall  of  a  city  or  a  building,  but  inj  for  X}h 
as  in  ver.  10),  which  means  a  fence  or 
hedge,  as  in  ch.  xiii.  5— without,  over 
against — or,  hy  the  aide  of  (Revised  Ver- 
sion) —  the  chambers,  toward  the  outer 
court,  cannot  have  been  a  rampart  along 
the  north  side  of  the  chambers,  since  thi« 
was  a  hundred  cubits  long,  but  must  have 
been  a  wall  upon  the  side  of  the  chambers 
(east  or  west)  fencing  off  the  outer  court 
from  tbe  passage  which  led  down  by  the 
side  of  the  oliambers.  That  this  fence  was 
on  the  east  side  is  rendered  probable  by 
the  circumstance  that  the  sacrificial  kitchen 
lay  upon  the  west  (see  ch.  xlvi.  19,  20),  and 
by  the  statements  which  follow  in  vers.  8 
and  9.  The  fence  was  doubtless  intended 
to  screen  the  side  windows  of  the  lower 
chambers  from  public  gaze,  since  these  were 
to  be  occupied  as  robing  and  disrobing 
rooms  for  the  priests  who  should  officiate 
in  the  temple  (see  ver.  14;  and  ch.  xliv. 
19). 

Ver.  8. — According  to  the  statement  con- 
tained in  this  verse,  the  chambers  that  were 
in  the  outer  court,  i.e.  the  chambers  whose 
windows  looked  into  the  outer  court,  pro- 
jected fifty  cubits  into  the  outer  court ;  i.e. 
this  was  their  breadth  or  depth  from  north 
to  south ;  whereas  those  before  the  temple 
were  an  hundred  cubits ;  i.e.  the  chambers 
whose  windows  fronted  the  temple,  were 
a  hundred  cubits  from  east  to  west. 

Ver.  9. — The  chambers  were  approached 
by  an  entry  (in  the  text  the  entry,  this 
being  a  well-known  and  recognized  part 
of  the  structure)  which  ran  along  the  east 
side  of  the  building,  and  led  from  the  outer 
to  the  temple  court.  As  this  (the  outer) 
court  was  higher  than  that  (the  temple), 
and  could  only  be  reached  by  steps,  the 
"  entry "  is  represented  as  lying  under  the 
chambers.  It  was  manifestly  this  "  entry  " 
that  was  screened  by  the  feuce  mentioned 
in  ver.  7. 

Vers.  10 — 12, — A  similar  suite  of  cham- 
bers, corresponding  in  every  detail,  is  de- 
picted as  having  stood  upon  the  south  side 
of  the  temple  and  in  front  of  the  gizrah. 
The  only  question  among  interpreters  is 
whether  ver.  10  relates  to  the  north  or 
south  suite,  or  to  an  east  suite.  Schroder 
and  Currey  see  in  ver.  10  a  repetition,  fcom 
another  point  of  view,  of  what  has  already 
been  stated  about  the  north  chambers,  viz. 
that,  viewed  from  the  outer  court,  they 
appeared  in  the  thickness  or  breadth  of  tbe 


856 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  EZBKIEL.    [oh.  xlil  1— 20. 


wall  (vei.  7)  and  (lengthwise)  over  against 
the  separate  place  and  the  buildings,  (.«. 
the  gizrah  and  the  temple.  Bwald,  Smend, 
and  Keil  decide  that  ver.  10  fonns  part  of 
the  description  of  a  softh  set  of  chambers 
only ;  but  in  order  to  make  this  good  they 
alter  the  text  by  substituting  D'njn,  "the 
south,"  for  onpn,  "the  east."     Plumptre 

agrees  with  Kliefoth  and  Hengstenberg  in 
holding  that  two  similar  sets  of  chambers  are 
described,  one  on  the  east  side,  and  one  on 
the  south  side  of  the  inner  court  wall.  The 
principal  objection  to  this  is  the  fact  that 
only  two  suites,  the  north  and  the  south, 
are  referred  to  by  the  guide  in  yers.  13  and  14. 
Vers.  13,  14. — These  state  the  uses  of  the 
chambers  just  desoribed,  and  now  named 
holy  ohambers,  to  denote  their  separation 
and  dedication  to  sacred  purposes.  Those 
purposes,  agaL.  are  defined  as  two.  The 
ohambers  were  to  serve  as  dining-halls  and 
robing  rooms  for  the  priests  when  they 
officiated  in  the  temple.  The  most  holy 
things ;  literally,  the  holy  of  the  holies 
(comp.  ch.  zli.  4 ;  zliii  12 ;  xlv.  3 ;  xlviii. 
12;  Lev.  ii.  3;  vi.  17,  25,  29;  yii.  1,  6; 
X.  12,  17;  xiv.  13;  xxiv.  9;  xxvii.  28; 
Numb.  xviiL  9),  signified  those  portions  of 
the  different  saoritioial  offerings  which  were 
to  be  eaten  by  the  priests  as  the  servants 
and  representatives  of  Jehovah  (see  Keil's 
'  Biblisohe  Archaologie,'  i.  §  46)  or  of  the 
people  (see  Kurtz's  '  Sacrificial  Worship  of 
the  Old  Testament,'  p.  240,  Eng.  transl.). 
Under  the  Law  these  were  appointed  to  be 
eaten  in  the  holy  place  beside  the  altar 
(Lev.  X.  12,  13;  Numb,  xviii.  10);  in 
Ezekiel's  temple,  a  special  quarter  in  the 
near  vicinity  of  the  house  should  be  re- 
served for  this  purpose.  There  those  por- 
tions of  the  sacrifices  that  could  be  eaten 
were  to  be  consumed ;  as  e.^.  the  flesh  of  the 
sin  and  trespass  offerings,  and  the  meal  of 
the  meat  offering;  but  as  these  could  not 
be  at  once  used,  they  were  to  be  deposited 
there  until  they  were  prepared  for  eating, 
the  flesh  by  being  boiled  and  the  meal  by 
being  mixed  with  oil.  The  obvious  inten- 
tion of  this  was  to  convey  an  idea  of  the 
special  sanctity  of  the  worship  in  which  the 
priests  were  engaged;  and  just  for  this 
reason  also  they  were  required  to  arra^ 
themselves  in  other  garments  (Lev.  xvi. 
23)  when  they  entered  on  their  priestly 
functions.  The  putting  on  and  off  of  these 
holy  clothes  took  place  in  the  chambers 
now  referred  to. 

Vers.  15—20. — The  temple  preoinett.  The 
Beer's  guide,  haying  completed  his  measure- 
ment of  the  honse  with  its  courts,  proceeds 
to  measure  its  encompassing  wall,  for  this 
purpose  conducting  the  prophet  out  by  the 


east  gate,  and  meaBUiing,  first  the  east, 
next  the  north,  thirdly  the  (oath,  and 
lastly  the  west  wall,  each  flve  hundred 
reeds  in  length,  or  three  thousand  cubits, 
so  that  the  entire  area  of  the  quadrangle 
amounted  to  3000  x  3000  =  9,000,000  square 
cubits,  equivalent  to  2,250,000  square  yards. 

Ver.  15. — ^The  inner  honse  was  not  the 
temple  as  distinguished  from  its  courts, 
but  the  temple  with  its  courts,  which  lay 
within  the  wall  about  to  be  measured. 

Ver.  16. — Five  hundred  reeds.  Ewald, 
Hitzig,  and  Smend,  with  others,  foUovring 
the  LXX.,  regard  this  wall  as  that  of  the 
outer  court,  and  change  the  "  reeds "  into 
"  cubits ;  "  but  the  majority  of  expositors 
adhere  to  the  text,  and  understand  the  wall 
to  be  that  of  a  great  quadrangle  which  en- 
compassed the  whole  structure,  or  the  outer 
court  and  all  within. 

Ver.  20. — To  make  a  separation  between 
the  sanctuary  and  the  profane.  la  these 
words  the  prophet  indicates  the  purpose 
designed  to  be  served  by  this  particular 
wall;  and  although  it  may  be  said  the 
outer  court  divided  between  the  "sanc- 
tuary," or  that  which  wai  holy,  and  the 
"  profane,"  or  that  which  was  common,  yet 
a  more  decided  separation  would  assuredly 

ThB  TeMFLB  COUBT  and  its  FsBOINOTa. 


p  e  ^ 

p 


0,  the  temple  court,  600  onblta  iqTuisi  r,  the 

temple  precincts,  3000  cnblta  square. 

be  made  by  extending  in  the  way  described 
the  precincts  of  the  house.  The  objections 
usually  offered  to  the  view  which  regard* 
the  present  measurements  as  those  of  a 
larger  quadrangle  encompassing  the  outer 
court,  are  not  sufBcient  to  make  that  view 
impossible.  (1)  It  is  said  that  the  "sano- 
tuary  "  always  refers  to  the  house  as  con- 
trasted with  its  courts,  especially  with  the 


OH.  XLii.  1— 20.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL. 


85T 


outer  court,  and  that  in  this  sense  it  should 
here  he  taken;  hut  the  rendering,  "that 
which  is  holy,"  shows  how  the  idea  of 
special  sanctity  might  easily  he  extended 
to  the  whole  structure,  including  conrta 
as  well  as  house  (see  Ps.  ciiv.  2 ;  Dan.  ix. 
20).  (2)  It  ia  urged  that  there  is  no  other 
instance  in  which  the  measurements  are 
represented  as  having  heen  taken  hy 
"reeds"  in  the  plural;  hut  a  glance  at 
ch.  xlv.  1,  etc.,  and  xlviii.  16,  will  show 
that  this  is  incorrect.  (3)  It  ia  represented 
that  in  the  centre  of  6uch  a  huge  quad- 


rangle the  house,  with  its  courts  and  g;'.te9^ 
would  wear  an  insigniiicant  appearance; 
hut,  while  this  might  have  heen  so  had  the 
area  heen  crowded  with  other  buildings, 
it  ia  rather  likely  that  in  the  midst  of  so 
large  a  vacant  apace  the  temple  and  its 
courts  stand  out  with  increased  clearness, 
if  not  with  augmented  size.  (4)  It  is  added 
that  the  summit  of  Mount  Moriah  could 
not  admit  of  the  construction  of  such  a  vast 
quadrangle;  and  it  is  answered  that  this 
shows  the  temple  was  an  ideal  house,  never 
meant  to  he  huilt  upon  the  literal  Moriah. 


Geound  Plan  op  Temflb. 

WIST 


J5L 


GCALE  or  CUBITS 


H.  o.,  eto^  gateways ;  o,  ontw  oonrt ;  p,  pavement ;  e,  cooking-chambers  for  the  priests ;  b»  bolling-hoosei 
for  the  people;  c,  chambers  on  the  pavement;  o,  the  gizrah;  o,  priests'  chambers;  f,  fences  U  inaer  coBlif 
B.  a.,  V.  Ck.  ib  a.,  gates ;  a,  altar  of  sacrifice ;  w,  watchers'  chambers ;  h  p  and  h,  the  hons*. 


»38  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xlii.  1— 2a 


HOMILETICB. 

Yer.  1, — Tha  outer  cowrt.  There  was  an  outer  conrt  In  the  temple  of  Jerusalem, 
held  to  be  less  sacred  than  the  courts  nearer  to  the  holy  place ;  to  this  court  Gentiles 
wore  admitted. 

I.  There  is  an  outeb  ooubt  nr  all  belioion.  There  are  always  people  who 
seem  to  stand  midway  between  the  Church  and  the  world.  In  some  cases  they  are 
like  Elijah's  contemporaries,  baiting  between  two  opinions  (1  Kings  zviii.  21).  They 
may  be  described  as  like  the  scribe  who  was  "  not  far  from  the  kingdom  of  God  " 
(Mark  xii.  34).  Feeling  a  certain  attraction  for  religion,  they  are  drawn  into  associa- 
tion with  public  worship.  Others,  like  the  money-changers  and  cattle-vendors  whom 
our  Lord  disturbed,  find  it  possible  to  make  worldly  profit  for  themselves  by  hanging 
on  to  the  fringe  of  religious  ordinances. 

II.  They  who  are  in  the  outer  court  ekjot  certain  privileges.  These 
people  can  see  what  is  going  on  in  the  more  sacred  interior  of  the  temple.  Though  they 
take  no  part  in  the  services,  they  are  able  to  witness  the  sacrificial  rites.  Similarly,  there 
are  regular  attendants  at  Christian  churches  who  do  not  enter  into  the  more  intimate 
life  of  the  community  nor  enjoy  its  highest  advantages.  Yet  they  have  some  privileges. 
It  is  something  to  see  the  door,  if  we  have  not  yet  knocked  at  it.  Knowing  the  way 
ought  to  be  a  preparation  for  entering  it.  In  a  professedly  Christian  country,  where 
New  Testament  facts  are  familiar  to  most  people,  and  where  few  are  quite  out  of  the 
range  of  potential  religious  influences,  privileges  are  enjoyed  which  bring  a  responsibility 
not  shared  by  the  more  ignorant  heathen. 

III.  Thet  who  are  in  the  outer  court  hibb  the  best  BLESsiNa.  At  most 
they  have  Esau's  blessing,  not  Jacob's.  Like  Balaam,  they  see  the  Christ,  but  "  not 
near ; "  therefore,  like  that  unhappy  prophet  of  Moab,  they  must  be  excluded  from  the 
covenant  of  promise.  It  is  an  aggravation  to  the  torment  of  Dives  that  he  can  see 
Lazarus  in  Abraham's  bosom.  The  knowledge  of  Christian  truth  and  the  sight  of 
Christian  grace  do  not  save  the  souls  of  men  who  will  not  yield  themselves  to  Christ 
in  heart  and  life.  We  have  to  beware  of  a  common  snare.  Many  are  tempted  to 
believe  that  they  are  safe  because  they  are  in  some  sort  of  external  association  with 
religion.  We  need  to  understand  distinctly  that  this  will  not  avail.  There  must  be 
personal  membership  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  for  all  who  will  enjoy  the  real  blessings 
©f  the  kingdom. 

IV.  It  is  now  possible  for  those  who  are  in  the  outer  court  to  enter  thb 
INNER  COURT.  This  was  even  true  of  the  old,  narrow  Jewish  religion,  on  the  con- 
dition that  the  Gentile  proselyte  was  circumcised  and  became  a  Jew.  It  is  certainly 
true  of  the  free,  world-wide  Christian  gospel.  None  need  linger  in  the  outer  court. 
There  is  room  within  the  privileged  Church  for  every  soul  on  earth,  and  a  welcome  from 
Christ  for  all  who  will  come.  But  observe,  in  conclusion,  the  distinction  between  outer 
and  inner  courts  in  the  Christian  Church  is  spiritual,  not  visible.  Professed  Church- 
members  may  be  in  the  outer  court ;  while  those  who  join  no  earthly  community,  and 
are  regarded  by  their  brethren  as  religious  Bohemians,  are  in  the  inner  court  if  their 
hearts  and  lives  are  truly  near  to  Christ, 

Yer.  13. — Holy  places.  In  a  Protestant  reaction  against  the  superstition  that  attaches 
magical  sanctity  to  certain  sites,  we  have  perhaps  lost  hold  of  the  truths  of  which  that 
iuperstition  was  a  perversion. 

I.  There  is  a  sanctity  of  association.  We  may  own  to  a  revulsion  for  a  man 
who  would  botanize  on  his  mother's  grave.  Every  Englishman  must  feel  a  thrill  of 
national  pride  when  he  visits  the  field  of  Waterloo,  as  every  Greek  must  have  done  when 
treading  the  plain  of  Marathon.  Though  a  man  may  have  travelled  far  and  have  acquired 
wealth  that  has  raised  him  above  his  humble  origin,  it  is  but  natur^  that  he  should 
look  back  to  the  cottage  home  of  his  chiklhood  with  tender  afiection  as  to  the  most  sacred 
•hrine  on  earth.  It  may  be  from  superstition,  or  it  may  be  from  sentiment;  but 
whichever  be  the  cause,  it  is  surely  no  strange  thing  to  confess  that  the  house  of  God 
in  which  a  man  has  worshipped  for  years  gathers  to  itself  a  peculiar  consecration.  There 
his  burdened  soul  has  been  cheered ;  there  the  light  has  pierced  his  darkness ;  there  h« 


en.  xLii.  1—20.]     THE    BOOK   OP   THE   PROPHET   EZEKIBL.  359 

has  sat  side  by  side  with  tlie  loved  and  lost,  and  if  the  place  that  once  knew  them  now 
knows  them  no  more,  does  not  the  very  sense  of  change  and  the  very  pain  of  the 
vacancy  add  a  new  sacredness  to  the  place,  while  dear  memories  of  a  beautiful  past  cling 
to  its  very  walls  and  drape  them  with  a  sweet,  sad  sanctity  ? 

II.  There  is  a  sanctity  of  use.  The  sacred  chambers  were  to  be  used  by  the 
priests,  and  in  them  sacrificial  meals  were  to  be  eaten.  Thus  the  sanctity  of  sacred 
usage  was  to  be  attached  to  these  rooms.  The  commonest  thing  becomes  holy  when  it 
is  consecrated  to  a  holy  purpose.  The  shop  may  be  a  temple,  the  counter  an  altar,  and 
the  wares  sacrifices,  when  the  business  is  carried  on  for  the  glory  of  God  in  quiet  obedi- 
ence to  his  will  of  righteousness.  Thus  the  very  bells  on  the  horses  may  have  "  Holiness 
to  the  Lord  "  inscribed  upon  them.  It  is  in  this  direction  that  we  sliould  move  when 
we  would  abolish  too  narrow  distinctions  between  the  secular  and  the  sacred.  We 
should  lose  the  distinction,  not  by  making  religion  earthly,  but  by  making  earth 
religious ;  not  by  desecrating  the  spiritual  functions,  but  by  consecrating  things  of  the 
outer  world. 

III.  Thebb  18  A  8AN0TITT  OF  LIFE.  This  Is  the  only  true  sanctity.  The  other 
forms  of  sanctity  are  its  reflections  and  results.  True  holiness  resides  in  the  heart, 
and  there  alone.  That  is  the  holy  place  in  which  the  holy  man  dwells.  The  pre- 
sence of  the  priest  sanctifies  the  temple-chambers.  But  it  is  not  the  "  linen  ephod  " 
or  any  badge  of  ofBce  that  makes  the  true  priest.  Every  man  who  has  habitual  access 
to  the  presence  of  God  is  a  true  priest  of  God.  He  who  walks  with  God  treads  holy 
ground,  A  halo  of  sanctity  surrounds  the  heavenly  life.  Whether  this  life  be  spent 
in  a  temple  court,  a  hermit's  cell,  a  Christian  home,  or  in  tlie  hard,  fierce  world,  it  is 
«ncircled  with  holiness,  and  it  weaves  about  it  its  own  sacred  taberuacle. 

Ver.  14. — Holy  garments.  The  priests  were  to  keep  their  holy  garments  in  their 
holy  chambers,  wearing  them  in  the  sacred  offices  of  the  temple,  and  exchanging  them 
for  their  common'olothing  before  mixing  with  the  people.  This  regulation  was  a  neces- 
sary part  of  the  Old  Testament  ceremonial,  with  its  suggestions  of  separateness  and 
external  holiness.  But  it  was  susceptible  of  abuse,  and  some  of  the  modern  reproduc- 
tions of  it  are  certainly  far  from  being  commendable. 

I.  The  ancient  siqnifigance  of  holt  garments.  1.  T%e  necessity  of  holiness 
in  all  worship.  God  must  be  worshipped  with  clean  hands  and  a  pure  heart — "  in 
the  beauty  of  holiness  "  (Ps.  xovi.  9).  The  old  heathenish  divorce  of  religion  from 
morality  could  not  be  permitted  under  the  Jewish  economy.  All  that  was  most 
formal  and  external  was  intended  to  keep  before  the  minds  of  the  worshippers  a  clear 
perception  of  God's  horror  of  sin,  and  a  vivid  presentation  of  his  supreme  love  for 
righteousness.  2.  The  experience  of  holiness  by  individml  men.  Not  only  were  the 
chambers  in  which  the  priests  ate  the  sacrificial  meals  to  be  holy,  but  even  the 
garments  worn  by  the  priests  were  also  to  be  sacred.  The  sanctity  attaches  to  the 
person.  The  very  bodies  of  Christian  people  are  temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost  (1  Cor. 
vi.  19).  3.  The  renewal  of  holiness  in  every  act  of  worship.  It  is  necessaiy  to  see 
that  we  are  in  a  fit  condition  to  approach  God.  It  is  not  sufScieut  that  we  were  once 
pardoned  and  cleansed.  Unhappily,  fresh  defilement  is  repeatedly  contracted.  It  is 
therefore  necessary  that  renewed  cleansing  should  be  received.  This  was  suggested  by 
Christ's  washing  his  disciples'  feet  (John  xiii.  4 — 10).  By  Christ  we  can  be  fitted  for 
entering  the  presence  of  God. 

II.  The  common  abuse  of  holy,  garments.  1.  In  distinction  of  persons.  The 
priest  in  his  robes  appeared  as  a  more  holy  man  than  the  common  worshipper  in  his 
«very-day  dress.  This  was  inevitable  under  the  old  Je^vish  system,  but  it  should  not  be 
permitted  in  the  present  day.  Yet  what  is  called  "  the  cloth  "  is  often  supposed  to  carry 
a  certain  sanctity,  and  clerical  attire  is  thought  by  the  superstitious  to  mark  a  spiritual 
separateness.  But  no  such  separateness  exists  in  the  Christian  Church,  all  the  members 
of  which  constitute  "  an  holy  priesthood "  (1  Pet.  ii.  6).  2.  By  observing  seasons. 
The  priests  wore  their  holy  garments  for  a  time,  and  then  laid  them  aside  and  assumed 
their  ordinary  apparel.  Some  people  put  on  their  religion  as  they  put  on  their  Sunday 
clothes.  They  are  saints  at  church,  and  sinners  in  the  world ;  holy  on  Sunday,  and 
profane  on  the  week-days.  This  is  all  delusive.  No  man  can  live  two  honest  live*. 
Beligion  claims  our  whole  being  and  time.    For  the  true  Christian  all  days  are  sacred 


860  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xlh.  1— za 

to  Christ's  service.  3.  With  mire  external  profenUm,  The  holinesi  resides  only  in 
the  garment;  the  religion  is  nothing  better  than  a  clothing — it  is  no  inspiration. 
Such  religion,  like  that  of  the  Pharisees  who  cleansed  the  outside  of  the  oup  and 
platter,  is  hypocrisy. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS 

Vers.  13,  14. — Sacerdotal  lanctity.  If  the  Jews  were  a  peculiar,  a  consecrated^ 
a  holy  people,  it  may  be  said  that  their  sanctity  was  concentrated  in  the  temple — the 
building  which  was  "  holiness  unto  the  Lord,"  and  in  the  holy  priesthood,  set  apart  for 
the  ministrations  of  the  sanctuary.  The  angel  who  showed  Ezekiel  the  temple  of  vision 
laid  great  stress  upon  this  characteristic  of  the  marvellous  and  symmetrical  building. 

I.  CebeuoniaIi  holiness.  This  is  exhibited  as  affecting :  1.  The  priests,  who  were 
set  apart  from  the  rest  of  the  people.  How  should  they  be  clean  who  bear  the  vessels 
ef  the  Lordl  2.  Their  residences.  During  the  period  of  their  officiation  in  the  temple 
services  and  sacrifices,  they  had  their  dwelling  in  certain  chambers  within  the  pre- 
cincts, and  these  chambers  were  deemed  holy  pkces.  3.  Their /ood.  They  are  said  to 
"  eat  the  most  holy  things ; "  i.e.  there  were  certain  regulations  as  to  food  which  were 

5rescribed  for  them  that  had  no  reference  to  the  people  generally.  4.  Their  garments. 
'he  priests  were  provided  with  raiment  which  they  were  required  to  wear  when  minis- 
tering before  the  Lord.  Holy  functions  necessitated  holy  vestments.  6.  Their  offer- 
ings. As  the  reader  of  this  passage  is  reminded,  it  was  the  duty  of  the  priests  to  present 
meal  offerings,  sin  offerings,  and  guilt  offerings.  As  these  were  offered  upon  the  holy 
altar  to  the  holy  God,  they  tbeniselves  were  holy.  It  thus  appears  that  everything 
connected  with  the  position,  the  life,  the  ministrations,  of  the  priests  was  marked  by 
ceremonial  sanctity. 

II.  The  BPiBiTUAi.  siONiFioANOE  OF  OEBEUONiAL  H0UNE8S.  What  was  the  purpose 
ef  all  the  arrangements  described  in  this  and  other  passages  of  Old  Testament 
Scripture?  Why  was  this  artificial  separation  Introduced  into  the  religion  and 
life  of  the  Hebrew  people?  A  complete  answer  to  these  questions  is  perhaps  not 
possible.    But  it  is  evident  that  it  was  intended  to  convey  to  Israel  and  to  mankind : 

1.  A  conception  of  the  holy  nature  of  Qod.  Very  different  was  the  character  claimed 
for  himself  by  Jehovah  from  the  character  attributed  to  the  deities  of  the  heathen 
■atioDS  around.  Whilst  these  deities  were  disfigured  by  selfishness,  cruelty,  and  lust,. 
Jehovah's  attributes  were  righteousness,  holiness,  and  benevolence.  Everything 
connected  with  the  worship  of  Ood,  as  practised,  in  the  temple  at  Jerusalem,  was 
adapted  to  convey  to  men's  minds  the  idea  of  God's  infinite  and  spotless  holiness. 

2.  A  conception  of  the  holy  character  of  acceptaile  worship.  Concerning  idolatrous 
worship,  we  know  that  it  was  distinguished  by  perfunctoriness  and  superstition,  and 
in  some  cases  by  impurity.  Religious  rites  among  the  heathen  are  usually  corrupt,  or 
else  mechanical  and  spiritually  valueless.  On  the  contrary,  the  worship  of  the  true 
Hebrew,  as  is  evident  to  the  attentive  reader  of  the  Book  of  Psalms  and  of  the 
prophets,  was  a  sincere,  holy,  and  spiritual  worship.  It  was  well  understood  that  no 
other  worship  could  be  acceptable  to  the  holy  and  heart-searching  King  of  kings.  And 
the  arrangements  described  in  this  passage  of  the  Book  of  Ezekiel  were  evidently 
adapted  to  produce  and  to  deepen  this  impression.  3.  A  conception  of  the  holy 
services  of  obedience  and  praise.  Sacrifices  were  enjoined  and  required  of -the  pious 
Hebrew ;  but  sacrifices  were  not  the  only  or  the  chief  services  to  be  presented  by  the 
devout  worshipper.  In  connection  with  these,  and  beyond  these,  were  the  offerings 
which  God  ever  delights  to  accept  from  his  own  people — spiritual  offerinp  of  devotion 
and  of  active  services.    And  if  these  are  distinguished  by  one  characteristic  ftbove 

'  another,  that  characteristic  is  true  holiness. — T. 

Vers,  16 — 19. — The  symmetry  of  the  sanctuary.  The  measurements  which  are  in 
this  part  of  Ezekiel's  prophecies  given  with  such  abundance  and  such  minuteness  are 
intended  primarily  to  convey  the  impression  that  the  temple  which  was  seen  in  vision 
was  a  building  of  perfect  beauty,  harmony,  and  completeness.  But  the  material 
kuilding  was  a  figure  of  a  spiritual  edifice,  and  the  material  qualities  ascribed  to  it 


OH.  XMi.  1— 20.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  361 

were  significant  of  moral  attributes  of  the  profoundest  interest.  And  the  stracture, 
made  without  hands,  yet  possessing  every  quality  that  can  command  admiration  ani 
reTerence,  is  none  other  than  the  Church  of  the  living  Qod. 

I.  Thx  symuetby  of  thb  Chubch  follows  fbou  its  BEma  planned  bt  God'i 
viBDOM.  The  tabernacle  was  constructed  according  to  the  pattern  shown  by  God  to 
Moses  in  the  mount.  The  plan  and  details  of  Solomon's  temple  are  attributed  to 
Divine  inspiration.  And  the  Chiirch  of  Christ  is  in  the  New  Testament  compared 
to  the  temple,  with  its  Divine  foundation,  its  ample  precincts,  its  spiritual  sacrifices, 
its  accepted  worshippers.  All  the  productions  of  the  Divine  mind  are  perfect.  When 
Qod  looks  upon  his  works  he  pronounces  them  to  be  "  very  good."  Upon  the  Church, 
as  upon  what  possesses  a  higher  interest  and  value  than  aught  material,  Divine  wisdom 
has  expended  all  its  resources.  A.ad  the  perfectly  symmetrical  product  is  just  what 
might  be  expected.  In  God's  mind  the  spiritual  temple  is  faultlessly  perfect ;  and  the 
actual  Oburch  is  destined  to  realize  the  glorious  ideal. 

U.  The  stmuetbt  of  the  Chuboh  besdlts  fbom  its  constbuotion  upon  thi 
MODEL  OF  Chbist  HIMSELF.  The  humanity  of  the  Lord  Jesus  was  the  temple  of  Qod. 
And  when  he  departed  from  earth  he  left  his  representative  in  the  Church  which  ha 
redeemed  and  sanctified,  and  which  he  appointed  to  continue  in  his  stead  unto  the 
end  of  time.  The  temple  of  his  body  was  succeeded  by  the  spiritual  temple,  built  up  of 
loyat  and  living  souls.  If  Christ  contaiaed  within  himself,  if  Christ  exhibited  in  his 
Ufe,  every  moral  perfection,  it  is  manifest  that  the  Church,  which  is  his  body,  must 
perpetuate  the  spiritual  excellences  which  existed  in  himself. 

in.  The  bymmbtbt  of  the  Church  is  wbodoht  by  the  inspibation  and 
ootebnuent  of  the  Holy  Sfibit.  There  is  a  Divine  presence  in  the  Church,  which, 
so  far  from  being  merely  passive,  is  vital,  energetic,  and  transfurmiug.  Who  has  not 
admired  the  action  of  certain,  physical  and  vital  principles  which  produce  the 
marvellous  symmetry  of  crystals,  and  the  yet  more  marvellous  symmetry  of  every 
form  of  vegetable  and  animal  life?  What  takes  place  in  the  natural  kingdom  is 
transcended  by  what  occurs  in  the  spiritual  realm,  although  these  results  are  not  in 
the  same  way  apparent  to  the  senses  of  the  observer,  and  appeal  rather  to  his  spiritual 
discernment  and  susceptibilities.  But  the  provision  for  the  growth  and  prosperity  of 
Christ's  Church,  the  provision  for  ministers  and  o£Scers,  for  co-operation  and  sympathy 
in  Church  worship  and  Church  work,  all  tell  of  a  Spirit  informing,  iospiring,  and  direct- 
ing the  whole,  and  producing  a  result  of  marvellous  and  admirable  harmony  and 
spiritual  beauty. 

IV.  The  symmetby  of  the  Chxtbch  will  beach  its  full  and  pebfkot  develop- 
ment in  the  heavenly  state.  Who  can  read  this  portion  of  Ezekiel's  prophecies,  and 
the  correspoading  chapters  from  the  Book  of  the  Revelation,  without  formmg  the  con- 
viction that,  however  this  world  may  be  the  scene  of  the  Church's  discipline,  the  scene 
of  the  Church's  maturity  is  elsewhere,  is  above  ?  The  heavenly  temple  is,  in  glory  and 
beauty,  faintly  imaged  by  the  Church  militant  on  earth.  Yonder  all  imperfections 
shall  be  removed,  all  deficiencies  shall  be  supplied,  all  holy  tendencies  shall  be  fully 
developed,  all  promise  shall  be  fulQlled.  There  the  city  and  the  temple  are  one ;  fw 
of  the  heavenly  Jerusalem  it  is  said,  "  The  Lord  Qod  Almighty  and  the  Lamb  are  the 
temple  thereof." — ^T. 

Yer.  20. — Separation  between  the  holy  and  the  common.  The  walls  described  by  the 
prophet  served  another  purpose  than  the  most  obvious  one  of  enclosing  a  space  and 
supporting  a  roof.  They  had  a  symbolical  meaning.  They  were  walls  of  separation. 
The  several  portions  of  the  temple  were  invested  with  varying  degrees  of  holiness,  and 
in  this  arrangement  there  was  no  doubt  a  Divine  significance  and  intention.  There 
were  parts  reserved  for  Israelites,  parts  reserved  for  the  priests,  and  one  part  into 
which  the  high  priest  alone  was  permitted  to  enter.  In  this  way  separation  was 
effected  between  the  more  and  the  less  holy,  and  between  the  holy  and  the  common 

I.  Such  bepabation  was  appointed  by  Divine  wisdom.  It  was  not,  as  similar 
arrangements  in  heathen  temples  may  have  been,  a  device  of  human  ingenuity  and  a 
provision  of  human  and  sacerdotal  policy.  It  was  part  of  the  Divine  intention  of  which 
the  whole  was  the  outworking  and  expression. 

II.  SuoH  SEPARATION  WAS  INTENDED  FOR  HUMAN  iNSTBUOTioN.     The  Israelites 


862         THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  [oh.  xlu.  1— 20, 

needed  to  be  taught  the  elements  of  religious  knowledge,  and  to  be  trained  in  rudi- 
mentary religious  life.  The  means  adopted  to  this  end  were  in  harmony  with  their 
condition,  and  with  the  stage  of  intellectual  and  spiritual  development  which  they  had 
reached,  A  wall  of  separation  was  certainly  something  very  visible,  tangible,  and 
unmistakable ;  they  who  looked  upon  it,  and  who  by  it  were  prevented  from  approach- 
ing some  sacred  spot,  were  thereby  taught  most  precious  truths  as  to  the  character  of 
the  God  to  whose  honour  the  temple  was  reared,  as  to  the  nature  of  his  laws  and  his 
worship,  as  to  the  conditions  of  acceptance  with  him.  Discrimination  between  the 
good  and  the  wicked,  the  exclusion  of  the  latter  and  the  admission  of  the  former  into 
Divine  favour, — such  were  moral  lessons  which  the  provisions  connected  with  the  temple 
precincts  were  admirably  fitted  to  impress  upon  the  minds  of  a  rude  and  rebellious 
people. 

III.  The  lessons  or  suoh  separation  wbbe  often  coebdptbd  bt  human  pbe- 
JUDIOB  AND  unspibitualitt.  The  tendency  of  human  nature  is  to  rest  in  the  symbol 
instead  of  passing  on  to  that  which  is  symbolized,  to  mistake  the  shadow  for  the 
substance.  The  material  was  designed  to  lead  to  the  spiritual;  but  the  importance 
which  properly  belonged  only  to  the  spiritual  was  sometimes  attributed  to  the 
material.  This  was  so  not  only  with  reference  to  the  case  before  us,  but  with  reference 
to  all  the  provisions  of  a  similar  and  symbolical  nature  which  existed  in  connection 
with  the  temple  and  its  worship.  And  Christians  must  not  imagine  themselve?'free 
from  a  similar  liability  to  error.  Even  in  our  spiritual  dispensation  the  same  mistake 
ts  committed,  and  church  buildings  and  sacraments  are  sometimes  substituted  for  the 
great  spiritual  realities  which  they  represent. 

IV.  Thebe  is  a  sense  in  which  snoH  sepabation  was  teufobaby,  and  has 
BEEN  ABOLISHED  BT  Chbistianity.  One  great  work  of  our  Divine  Saviour  was  to 
break  down  the  middle  wall  of  partition  that  fenced  off  Jews  from  Gentiles,  and  to 
make  of  two  "  one  new  humanity."  It  was  a  first  lesson  of  Christianity  that  men 
should  give  up  calling  any  man  or  any  thing  "  common  or  unclean."  The  change  was 
brought  about,  not  by  levelling  things  sacred,  but  by  raising  things  secular,  and  by 
steeping  everything  in  a  Divine  light,  pure  and  lustrous.  All  Christians  are  admitted 
into  the  true  Israel ;  all  are  enrolled  in  the  sacred  priesthood ;  all  are  welcomed  to 
fellowship  with  Heaven. 

Y.  These  is  a  sense  in  which  such  sepabation  enditbes,  inasmuch  as  God  eveb 

EKCOMPASSES   AND   EK0L0SE8  HIS     PEOPLE    WITHIN     WALLS     OP    LIYINQ    HOLINESS.      He 

delights  to  include,  but  takes  no  pleasure  in  exclusion.  Into  the  heavenly  city,  which 
is  a  (temple,  there  enters  not  anything  unclean  or  common.  Prom  such  contamination 
the  blessed  and  glorified  are  for  ever  preserved.  There  is  around  the  citizens  of  the 
heavenly  Jerusalem,  the  worshippers  of  the  heavenly  temple,  a  wall  which  preserves 
them  for  ever  from  all  molestation  and  from  every  incursion  of  evil.  But  within 
there  is  no  distinction;  there  is  one  heart,  one  service,  and  one  song. — ^T. 

Vers.  4 — 14. — Separation  and  society.  What  did  those  "  chambers  "  mean,  of  which 
we  read  so  much  in  this  vision  ?  Tiieir  immediate  use,  as  intimated  to  the  prophet,  is 
given  in  the  thirteenth  and  fourteenth  verses.  They  were  for  the  personal  acccom- 
modation  of  the  priests;  that  they  might  there,  in  a  place  which  was  nowise  pr.fane 
but  thoroughly  holy,  eat  that  part  of  the  sacrifices  which  fell  to  their  share ;  and  that 
they  might  there  robe  and  unrobe,  so  as  to  serve  in  sacred  vestments  and  mingle  with 
the  people  in  ordinary  drete.  Their  object,  therefore,  was  to  maintain  the  separateness 
or  sanctity  of  the  priests.  It  has  been  suggested  that  they  also  answered  this  general 
purpose  by  constituting  places  for  sacred  retirement  and  devotion;  possibly  for  the 
accommodation  of  those  who,  like  Anna  the  prophetess, "  departed  not  from  the  temple, 
night  or  day  "  (Luke  ii.  37).  Those  who  were  to  minister  in  the  temple  were  to  be 
provided  with  rooms  which  were  separated  from  the  commerce  and  the  strife  of  the 
outer  world,  where  there  would  be  nothing  to  contaminate  or  interrupt.  But  what 
meant  the  "  walk  of  ten  cubits  breadth "  (ver.  4)  ?  Was  not  this  for  society,  as  the 
chambers  were  for  separation  ?  Matthew  Henry  suggests  that  these  "  walks  of  five 
yards  broad  were  for  those  that  had  lodgings  in  the  chambers,  that  there  they  might 
meet  for  conversation,  might  walk  and  talk  together  for  their  mutual  edification,  might 
communicate  their  knowledge  and  eziieriences ;  fur,"  he  adds  with  characteiistio  good 


OH.  XLU.  1— 20.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  36« 

sense,  "  we  are  not  to  spend  all  our  time  between  the  church  and  the  chamber."  We 
learn — 

I.  The  duty  and  thb  fbiyileoe  of  sbpakation.  1.  That  which  is  obligatory  mA 
constant ;  viz.  to  be  separate  in  spirit  and  ia  sympathy  from  sin ;  to  stand  apart,  in 
spirit,  from  all  that  is  in  any  way  unchristian.  2.  That  which  is  obligatory  and 
frequent ;  viz.  to  separate  ourselves  much  and  generally  from  the  society  of  the  sinful.. 
Jesus  Christ  was  thus  "  separate  from  sinners  "  (Heb.  vii.  26).  It  is  the  sacred  duty 
of  most  good  men,  and  of  all  the  young,  to  keep  aloof  from  the  vicious  and  profane  { 
to  decline  the  society,  and  firmly  to  refuse  the  friendship,  of  those  who  fear  not  God  and 
whose  conduct  is  unprincipled  and  deleterious.  3.  That  which  is  wise  and  occasional; 
viz.  to  retire  into  the  seclusion  of  the  quiet  chamber,  where  there  is  no  disturbing  voioa 
to  prevent  our  close  communion  with  the  Father  and  Saviour  of  our  spirits. 

IL  The  bebvioe  of  sooiett.  There  are  truths  to  be  learned  and  there  are  influences 
to  be  gained  in  solitude  which  cannot  be  secured  in  society  j  but,  on  the  other  hand, 
there  is  a  service  which  only  society  can  render  us.  To  meet  men  and  to  know  them 
as  they  are  living  their  daily  life  of  toil  and  struggle ;  to  come  into  close  contact  with 
their  difficulties,  their  doubts,  their  joys,  and  their  sorrows ;  to  exchange  ideas  with 
them  ;  to  learn  what  their  experience  and  their  wisdom  have  to  teach  us,  and  to 
convey  to  them  what  we  ourselves  have  learned  in  the  solitary  place ;  to  be  in  the 
world,  and  still  above  it ; — ^this  is  not  only  the  true  triumph  of  Christian  principle,  It 
is  the  fair  and  open  opportunity  of  Christian  usefulness. — 0. 

Vers.  15 — 20. — I%e  size  and  strength  of  the  kingdom,  "The  particularity  witk 
which  these  measurements  are  given  .  .  .  shows  the  importance  attached  by  the  pro- 
phet to  the  external  dimensions.  .  .  .  The  compass  assigned  to  the  sacred  buildings 
exceeded  the  liihits  of  all  ancient  Jerusalem.  .  .  .  Here  is  another  of  those  traits 
intended  to  render  manifest  the  ideal  character  of  the  whole  description  "  (Fairbairn). 
The  fulfilment  is  found  in  the  glorious  magnitude  of  the  Church  of  Christ,  of  which  the 
temple  was  designed  to  be  the  type.    We  look,  then,  at — 

I.  The  size  of  the  kingdom.  The  kingdom  of  Christ  is  indeed  of  vast  dimen- 
sions ;  it  requires  a  heavenly  messenger  to  compute  it.  1.  It  is  inclusive  of  aU  classa 
and  characters.  It  is  not  confined  to  rich  or  poor,  or  to  those  who  have  "  neither 
poverty  nor  riches ; "  it  is  not  intended  for  the  learned  any  more  than  for  the  unlearned  j 
it  is  the  home  of  those  who  have  been  devout  and  upright  all  their  days,  and  it  offers  an 
asylum  to  those  who  have  wandered  away  into  the  darkness  and  fallen  into  the  depths 
of  sin.  2.  It  is  unlimited  by  race.  The  Jew  at  first  imagined  that  the  kingdom  was 
for  him  only ;  but  it  was  not  long  before  the  providence  and  the  grace  of  God  demon- 
strated that  the  kingdom  of  Christ  was  open  to  the  whole  Gentile  world;  and 
missionary  labours  have  proved  that  there  is  no  climate  beneath  the  sun  where  the 
seeds  of  Christian  truth  will  not  spring  up  and  bear  flower  and  fruit.  3.  It  is 
extended  through  all  time.  Nineteen  centuries  have  nearly  gone  since  John  declared 
that  the  kingdom  was  "  at  hand,"  and,  so  far  from  there  being  any  signs  of  completion, 
there  is  more  active  and  successful  evangelization  than  at  any  previous  period  of 
Church  history.  The  prophet  might  well  see  a  large  space  measured  when  the  area 
of  the  kingdom  was  in  question. 

II.  The  steenqth  of  the  kingdom.  This  temple  is  a  perfect  square,  five  hun- 
dred reeds  on  every  side.  "  Buildings  which  are  four-square  are  the  most  stable,  firm, 
and  lasting."  The  kingdom  of  Christ  is  immovably  strong,  and  nothing  can  with- 
stand it,  because :  1.  It  rests  on  the  basis  of  Divine  truth.  Not  "  cunningly  devised 
fables,"  but  well-established  facts,  are  the  foundation  on  which  the  fair,  spiritual 
edifice  is  resting — the  facts  of  the  Incarnation,  of  the  works  of  beneficent  power 
wrought,  of  the  words  of  truth  and  grace  spoken,  of  the  resurrection  from  the  dead 
accomplished  by  Jesus  Christ ;  the  facts  of  the  apostolic  ministry,  of  the  opposition 
off'ered  to  the  gospel  and  of  its  steady,  spiritual,  glorious  triumph  over  it.  2.  It  meets 
the  deep  and  abiding  needs  of  owr  humanity.  Beneath  all  skies,  under  all  condition^, 
through  all  changes  and  circumstances,  after  all  political  and  social  revolutions,  maa 
wants  the  same  things  to  be  truly  and  profoundly  satisfied.  He  wants  a  Divine 
Father  of  his  spirit ;  a  salvation  from  sin ;  a  refuge  in  time  of  trouble ;  a  source  of 
elevation  in  all  the  meanness  and  littleness  of  earthly  life;  hope  in  death.    This  the 


364 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIKL.    [oh.  xliii.  1—27. 


gospel  of  Christ  is  always  offering  him.  To  hungering,  toiling,  sorrowing,  burdened 
humanity  Jesus  Christ  is  ever  saying,  "  Come  unto  me,  ...  I  will  give  you  rest." 
3.  It  relies  on  the  Divine  power  and  presence.  "  All  power  is  given  to  me  in  heaven 
and  in  earth ;  go  ye,  therefore,  and  teach  all  nations  .  .  .  lo,  lam  with  you  alway," 
etc.  (Matt,  xxviii.  18 — 20).  In  the  presence,  the  sympathetic  and  active  presence,  of 
the  all-powerful  Redeemer  we  have  the  strongest  assurance  that  the  kingdom  will 
extend  and  prevail ;  it  is  strong  in  its  present  and  mighty  Lord. — C. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XLIIL 


llieconBeoration  of  the  new  temple  by  the 
•ntranoe  into  it  of  the  glory  of  the  God  of 
Israel  (vers.  1 — 12),  and  a  description  of  the 
idtar  with  its  dedication  to  the  solemn  ritual 
fbr  which  it  was  in  future  to  be  employed 
(vers.  13 — 27),  form  the  contents  of  the 
present  chapter,  and  complete  the  prophet's 
picture  of  the  future  sanctuary  of  Israel. 

Vers.  1 — 12. — ^The  consecration  of  the 
temple  by  the  entrance  into  it  of  the  glory 
•f  the  God  of  Israel. 

Ver.-  1. — Afterward,  etc.  Having  com- 
pleted the  survey  of  the  temple  precincts 
(ch.  xlii.  15 — 20),  the  prophet's  guide,  "  the 
measuring  man,"  conducted  him  back  to  the 
gate  that  looked  towards  the  east,  t.e.  to 
the  gate  leading  into  the  outer  comrt  from 
the  east  (see  on  ch.  xl.  6),  perhaps  because 
this  was  the  principal  entrance  to  the 
sanctuary,  but  chiefly  because  through  it 
the  impending  tbeophany  was  to  pass. 

Ver.  2. — Scarcely  had  the  prophet  taken 
up  his  station  at  or  near  the  gate  when  the 
glory  of  the  Ood  of  Israel  (see  on  ch.  i.  28 ; 
ill.  23)  came  from  the  way  of  the  east,  as  if 
intending  to  enter  the  temple  by  the  very 
door  tbrough  which  it  had  previously 
departed  from  the  temple  (comp.  ch.  x.  19  ; 
xi.  22,  23).  The  voice  which  proceeded 
ftom  the  theophauy  and  resembled  the  noise 
of  many  waters,  is  after  the  LXX.  (ical  <l>avii 
TTis  Trapefi0o\rjs)  by  Keil  and  Smend  under- 
stood to  have  been  the  sound  produced  by 
the  motion  of  the  wheels  and  the  rustling 
of  the  wings  of  the  cherubim  (see  on  ch.  i. 
2,  1 ;  X.  5),  but  is  better  taken,  with  Kliefoth 
and  Hengatenberg,  to  signify  the  voice  of 
the  Almighty  himself,  i.e.  of  the  personal 
Jehovah  (comp.  Rev.  i.  15).  The  statement 
that  the  earth  shined  with  his  glory  (comp. 
Rev.  xviii.  1)  has  by  Havemick,  Kliefoth, 
and  others  been  supposed  to  indicate  the 
absence  of  that  "  cloud  "  in  which  the  glory 
of  Jehovah  appeared  in  both  the  Mosaic 
tabernacle  (Exod.  xl.  84,  35)  and  the 
Solomonic  temple  (1  Kings  viii.  10,  11),  and 
tiiereby  to   point   to  the  clearer  and  more 


resplendent  manifestations  of  the  Godhead, 
which  were  to  be  given  in  connection  with 
the  new  dispensation  for  which  Ezekiel'i 
"house"  was  being  prepared.  This,  how- 
ever, as  Keil  has  shown,  cannot  be  main- 
tained in  face  of  the  facts  that  in  both 
Exodus  and  1  Kings  "the  glory  of  the 
Lord"  is  used  synonymously  with  "the 
cloud,"  and  that  in  Ezekiel's  vision  "the 
glory  "  and  "  the  cloud  "  were  alike  present 
(see  ch.  x.  3,  4).  Kliefoth  and  Schroder 
hold  "the  earth"  which  was  illumined  to 
have  been  "the  whole  globe,"  "the  entire 
region  of  humanity,"  as  in  Isa.  vi.  3 ;  Ix.  1, 
etc. ;  but  there  does  not  appear  ground  for 
departing  from  the  ordinary  sense  of  the 
words,  that  "the  path"  of  the  advancing 
God  was  irradiated  by  the  brilliance  of  his 
material  glory. 

Yer.  3. — ^The  prophet  identifies  the  vision 
on  which  he  now  looks  as  ttie  same  he  had 
foi-merly  beheld  on  the  banks  of  the  Chebar, 
when  he  came  to  destroy  the  city,  i.e.  when, 
in  obedience  to  Divine  command,  he  stood 
forth  to  announce  the  destruction  of  Jerusa- 
lem. Ewald  and  Smend  follow  the  Ynlgatst 
quando  venit  u(  disperderei,  in  substituting 
"  he,"  Jehovah,  for  "  I,"  Ezekiel ;  but  the 
change  is  unnecessary,  as  the  prophet's 
language  is  perfectly  intelligible  and  quite 
correct,  since  "the  prophet  destroyed  the 
city  ideally  by  his  prophecy  "  (Hitzig),  and 
it  is  not  unusual  for  Scriptiue  to  represent  • 
prophet  as  himself  doing  what  he  is  only 
sent  to  predict  (comp.  ch.  iv.  2;  xxxii.  18; 
Jer.  i.  10).  The  prophet's  reason  for  intro- 
ducing this  clause  was  manifestly  the  same 
he  had  tor  identifying  the  visions — to  show 
that,  while  it  was  the  same  Jehovah  who 
had  departed  from  the  old  temple  that  was 
now  returning  to  the  new,  there  was  nothing 
incongruous  in  the  idea  that  he  who  in  the 
past  had  shown  himself  a  God  of  justice  and 
judgment  by  overturning  and  destroying 
the  old,  should  in  the  future  exhibit  himseU 
as  a  God  of  grace  and  mercy  by  condescend- 
ing to  establish  his  abode  in  the  new.  The 
impression  produced  upon  the  prophet's  soul 
by  his  vision  was  the  same  that  had  been 
produced  by  the  former — he/eU  upon  hit  fad 
in  awe  and  wonder. 

Vers.  4,  6. — The  prophet  n^xt  narratea 


OH.  XLin.  1— 27.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  BZEKIBL. 


365 


that  he  saw  the  glory  of  the  Lord  entering 
into  and  taking  possession  of  the  "house,"  as 
formerly  it  had  entered  into  and  taken 
possession  of  the  tabernacle  and  the  temple 
(Exod.  xl.  84,  35;  1  Kings  viii.  10, 11),  and 
that  of  this  he  was  further  assured  by 
experiencing  immediately  thereafter — not  a 
push  from  the  wind,  as  Luther  and  Eliefoth 
translate,  but  an  impulse  from  the  Spirit 
(not  "  a  spirit,"  Bwald,  though  the  Hebrew 
word  wants  the  article),  which  raised  liim 
from  the  ground  upon  which  he  had  fallen 
(ver.  3),  took  him  up  (see  on  ch.  ii.  2 ;  iii. 
12),  and  brought  him  into  the  inner  court, 
exactly  in  front  of  the  "house,"  where, 
having  looked  into  the  interior,  be  saw  that 
the  glory  of  the  lord  filled  the  house,  the 
language  being  that  used  in  connection  with 
the  tabernacle  and  the  temple. 

Ver.  6. — And  I  heard  him  (better,  one) 
speaking  unto  me  out  of  the  house ;  and  the 
(literally,  a)  man  stood  by  me.  Two  ques- 
tions arise — Who  was  the  speaker  ?  and,  Who 
the  man  ?  As  to  the  epeaJter,  the  natural 
reply  is  that  the  One  who  addressed  Ezekiel 
from  the  interior  of  the  "  house "  was 
Jehovah  himself,  whose  "  glory  "  had  just 
entered  in  to  take  possession  of  the  house, 
and  this  view  is  adopted  by  most  interpreters, 
though  Hengstenberg  and  Schroder  regard 
the  man  who  stood  beside  the  prophet  as  the 
one  who  addressed  him.  As  to  the  man,  it 
cannot,  as  Eliefoth  maintains,  be  decided 
solely  by  the  absence  of  the  article  before 
"  man "  that  this  was  a  different  person 
from  the  guide  who  had  hitherto  conducted 
the  prophet  and  measured  the  building. 
The  article  may  have  been  omitted  because 
the  important  point  to  be  recorded  was  not 
the  circumstance  that  the  "  one  "  who  stood 
beside  him  was  his  quondam  guide,  but  the 
fact  that  this  "  one  "was  a  man.  That  he 
was  also  Ezekiel's  old  conductor  is  at  least  a 
natural  suggestion  when  one  finds  him  after- 
wards appearing  as  a  measurer  with  a  line 
in  his  hand  (ch.  xlvii.  3). 

Vers.  7 — 12. — Debate  exists  as  to  who  the 
speaker  in  the  seventh  verse  was,  whether 
Jehovah  or  the  man — some  holding  with 
Eliefoth,  Ewald,  Smend,  and  Ourrey,  that 
he  was  Jehovah ;  others,  with  Havernick, 
Eeil,  Hengstenberg,  and  Schroder,  that  he 
was  "the  man;"  and  still  others,  with 
f  lumptre,  that  it  cannot  be  decided  which 
he  was.  One  thing  is  dear,  that  if  "  the 
man "  was  the  speaker,  his  words  and 
message  were  not  his  own,  but  Jehovah's. 
Tet  unless  the  man  had  been  the  angel  of 
the  Lord — the  view  of  Hengstenberg  and 
Schroder — ^it  will  always  seem  incongruous 
that  he  should  have  addressed  Ezekiel  with- 


out a  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord."„  Hence  the 
notion  that  the  speaker  was  Jehovah  is, 
perhaps,  the  one  freest  from  difficulty.  The 
message  announced  or  communication  made 
to  the  prophet  related  first  to  Jehovah's 
purpose  in  entering  the  temple  (vers.  7 — 9), 
and  secondly  to  his  object  in  showing  the 
house  to  the  prophet,  viz.  that  he  might 
show  it  to  the  house  of  Israel  (vers.  10 — 12). 

Ver.  7.— The  LXX.  and  the  Vulgate 
divide  the  present  verse  into  two  parts,  and 
take  the  first  as  equivalent  to  a  solemn  word 
of  consecration,  the  former-supplying  edpaxas 
the  latter  vidisti,  "  thou  hast  seen."  The 
Ohaldee  Targum  inserts,  hie  est  locus,  "  this 
is  the  place,"  and  in  so  doing  is  followed  by 
Luther  and  the  Eevised  Version.  Some 
word,  it  is  obvious,  either  a  "  see  I  "  or  a  "  be- 
'hold  I "  must  be  interpolated,  in  thought  at 
least,  unless  one  adopts  the  construction  of 
the  Authorized  Version,  with  which  Smend 
agrees,  and  makes  "  the  place  of  my  throne," 
etc.,  to  be  governed  by  the  verb  "  defile,"  or, 
with  Ewald,  places  it  under  the  regimen  of 
"show"  in  ver.  10,  throwing  the  whole 
iuterve:nng  clause  into  a  long  parenthesis 
— a  device  which  does  not  contribute  to 
lucidity.  Of  the  two  expressions  here 
employed  to  designate  the  sanctuary— not 
the  temple  proper,  but  the  whole  house 
with  its  surroundings — the  former,  the  place 
of  my  throne,  though  peculiar  to  Ezekiel, 
receives  explanation  from  the  conception, 
familiar  to  earlier  writers,  of  Jehoviih  as 
dwelling  between  the  cherubim  (Exod.  xxv. 
22;  1  Sam.  iv.  4;  2  Kings  xix.  15;  Fa. 
Ixxx.  1 ;  Isa.  xxxvii.  16) ;  the  latter,  the 
place  of  the  soles  of  my  feet,  was  of  frequent 
occurrence  to  denote  the  ark  of  the  covenant 
(1  Chron.  xxviii.  2 ;  Fs.  xcix.  5 ;  cxxxii  7) 
and  the  temple  (Isa.  Ix.  13;  Lam.  ii.  1). 
The  word  of  consecration  was  expressed  in 
the  promise,  I  will  dwell  (in  the  temple)  in 
the  midst  of  the  children  of  Israel  for  ever, 
etc.,  which  went  beyond  anything  that  had 
been  spoken  concerning  either  the  tabernacle 
of  Moses  or  the  temple  of  Solomon  (comp. 
Exod.  xxv.  8;  xxix.  45;  1  Kings  vi.  13). 
The  second  part  of  the  verse  announces  what 
would  be  the  result  of  Jehovah's  perpetual 
inhabitation  of  the  temple  —  the  house  of 
Israel  would  no  more  defile  his  holy  Name 
either  by  their  whoredom  or  by  the  carcases 
of  their  kings  in  their  high  places,  or,  ac- 
cording to  another  reading,  tn  their  death. 
That  the  whoredom  signified  idolatry 
(comp.  ch.  xvi.)  commentators  are  agreed. 
What  divides  them  is  whether  this  also  is 
alluded  to  in  the  alternative  clause.  Bosen- 
miiller,  Havernick,  Keil,  Fairbairn,  and 
Flumptre  believe  it  is,  contending  that  the 
"  carcases  of  their  kings  "  (comp.  Lev.  xivi. 


S66 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xlui.  1—27. 


80 ;  and  Jer.  xvi.  18)  was  a  contemptuous 
and  satiiical  designation  of  the  idols  they 
had  formerly  served,  that  the  word  "  kings  " 
is  frequently  employed  in   this  sense   in 
Scripture  (see  Isa.  viii.  21 ;  Amos  y.  26 ; 
Zeph.  i.  5),  and  that  the  special  sin  com- 
plained of,  that  of  buildiag  altars  for  dead 
idols  in  the  very  temple  court,  had  beea 
practised  by  more  kings  than  one  in  Judah 
(oomp.  2  Kings  xvi.  11 ;  xxi.  i,  5 — 7)  ;  and 
in  support  of  this  view  may  be  urged  first 
that  it  is  favoured  by  the  use  of  the  term 
hamolh,  or  "high  places,"  in  ver.  7,  and 
secondly  by  the  exposition  offered  in  ver.  8 
of  the  nature  of  the  sin,     Ewahl,  Hitzig, 
Kliefoth,  and    Smend,  on  the  other  hand, 
regard  the  sin  spoken  of  in  the  second  clause 
as  different  from  that  indicated  in  the  first, 
maintaining  that  while  tliis  was  the  practice 
of  defiling  Jehovah's  sanctuary  by  idolatry, 
that  was  the  desecration  of  the  same  by  the 
interment  in  its  courts  of  their  dead  kings. 
Against  this,  however,  stands  the  fact  that 
no  authentic  instance  can  be  produced  of  a 
Judsean    sovereign's    corpse    having    been 
interred     in    the    temple    area.       David, 
Solomon,   Jehoshaphat,   and     otlieis   were 
buried  in  the  city  of  David  (1  Kings  ii.  10 ; 
li.  43  ;  xxii.  50),  and  a  place  of  sepulchres 
existed  on  the  south-west  corner  of  Zion  in 
the  days  of  Nehemiah  (iii.  16) ;  but  these 
prove  notliiug  unleas  the  temple  hill  be 
taken,  as  no  doubt  it  sometimes  was,  in  an 
extended  sense  as  inclusive  cf  Mount  Zion. 
Similarly,  the  statement  that  Manasseh  had 
a  burial-place  in  the  garden  of  Uzzah  (2 
Kings  xxi.    18,  26)  cannot  be  adduced  in 
support  of  this  view,  unless  it  can  be  shown 
that  the  garden  of  Uzzah  was  situated  on 
the  temple  hill.   On  the  whole,  therefore,  the 
balance  of  argument  inclines  in  favour  of  the 
first  view,  though  it  does  involve  tlie  intro- 
duction of  a  figurative  sense  into  the  words. 

Ver.  8. — In  their  setting  of  their  threshold 
by  my  thresholds,  etc.  The  first  "their" 
can  only  refer  to  "  the  house  of  Israel 
and  their  kings;"  the  second  "their"  may 
also  allude  to  these,  but  is  best  taken  as 
pointing  to  the  "  idols,"  whose  thresholds  or 
temples,  according  to  the  view  adopted  of 
the  preceding  verse,  were  set  up  in  the  court 
of  Jehovah's  temple,  and  so  close  to  the 
latter  that  nothing  stood  between  them 
except  the  temple  Wall.  Smend,  who  favours 
the  second  view  of  the  preceding  verse, 
considers  this  verse  ns  a  complaint  against 
the  kings  for  having  erected  their  royal  resi- 
dence on  Mount  Zion,  in  the  immediate 
vicinity  of  the  temple ;  but  as  David's  palace 
was  older  than  the  temple,  it  is  not  likely 
Ezekiel  was  guilty  of  perverting  history  in 
the  manner  this  hypothesis  would  imply. 

Ver.  9. — Now  let  them  put  away  their 
whoredom,  etc.  What  has  just  been  declared 


to  be  the  necessary  consequence  of  Jehovah's 
abiding  in  the  midst  of  Israel  is  now  enjoined 
upon  Israel  as  an  indispensable  prerequisite 
of  Jehovah's  taking  up  his  residence  amongst 
them.  Ezekiel's  theology  in  this  respect 
harmonizes  with  that  of  Old  and  New 
Testament  writers  generally,  who  invariably 
postulate  purity  of  heart  and  life  as  a 
necessary  condition  of  God's  abiding  in  the 
heart,  while  asserting  that  such  Divine  in- 
dwelling in  the  heart  is  the  only  certain 
creator  of  such  purity  (comp.  oh.  xviii.  31 ; 
xxxvi.  26 ;  Isa.  i.  16, 25 ;  xxvi.  12 ;  John  xiv. 
23 ;  2  Cor.  vi.  17 ;  Jas.  iv.  8). 

Ver.  10. — Show  (or,  make  known,  i.e. 
publish  the  revelation  concerning)  the  house 
to  the  house  of  Israel.  For  this  purpose  the 
vision  had  been  imparted  to  the  propliet 
That  they  may  be  ashamed  of  their  iniquities. 
This  told  the  reason  why  the  vision  of  the 
house  shoTild  be  made  known  to  Israel.  And 
let  them  measure  the  pattern ;  sum,  number,  or 
well-proportioned  building.  This  explained 
how,  by  beholding  the  house,  Israel  would  be 
led  to  repent,  and  be  asliamed  of  her  ini- 
quities. There  is  no  ground  for  thinking 
the  ultimate  object  Jehovah  bad  in  view,  in 
recommending  the  house  of  Israel  to  note 
the  proportions  of  the  visionary  edifice,  was, 
as  Wellhausen,  Smend,  and  others  allege, 
that  they  might  reproduce  these  in  the  post- 
exilic  building ;  if  they  were  to  measure,  i.e. 
scan  and  meditate  upon  the  fair  dimensions 
of  the  "house,"  it  was  that  they  might 
understand  its  religious  or  moral  and 
spiritual  significance,  both  as  a  whole  and 
in  detail. 

Ver.  11. — And  if  they  be  ashamed  of  all 
that  they  have  done.  This  cannot  signify 
that  Ezekiel  was  not  to  show  the  house 
until  they  had  evinced  a  sincere  penitence 
for  past  wickedness,  since  the  converse  has 
just  been  stated,  that  their  repentance 
should  flow  from  a  disclosure  to  them  of 
the  house ;  but  that  in  the  event  of  the  pre- 
sentation to  them  of  the  "  well-measured  " 
building  awaking  in  them  any  disposition 
of  regret  and  sorrow,  then  the  prophet 
should  proceed  to  unfold  to  them  its  details. 
He  should  show  them  first  the  form  of  the 
honse,  i.e.  the  external  shape  of  the  building, 
and  the  fashion  thereof,  or  its  well-pro- 
portioned and  harmonious  arrangements; 
the  goings  out  thereof,  and  the  comings  in 
thereof,  i.e.  its  exits  and  entrances  (oh.  xliv. 
5),  and  all  the  forms  thereof,  which  can  only 
mean.the  shapes  of  its  several  parts ;  and  aU 
the  ordinances  thereof,  or  regulations  con- 
cerning its  use  in  worship,  and  all  the  forma 
thereof— the  same  words  as  above,  and  there- 
fore omitted  by  the  LXX.  as  well  as  some 
Hebrew  manuscripts,  and,  after  their  example, 
by  Dathe,  Hitzig,  Ewald,  Smend,  and  others, 
though  Keil,  Kliefoth,  Schroder,  and  o  hers 


OH.  XLiii.  1—27.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PEOPHET  BZEKIEL. 


36T 


retain  the  clause  as  gennine,  and  legard  it 
as  an  illustration  of  Ezekiel's  habit  of 
crowding  words  together  for  the  sake  of 
emphasis — and  all  the  laws  thereof,  by  which 
were  probably  signified  "  the  instructions 
contained  in  these  statutes  for  sanctification 
of  life"  (Keil).  In  addition  to  rehearsing 
the  above  in  the  hearing  of  the  people,  the 
prophet  was  directed  to  write  them  in  theix 
sight,  if  it  be  not  open  to  understand  the 
"  writing "  as  explanatory  of  the  way  in 
which  the  "  showing  "  was  to  be  made. 

Ver.  12. — This  is  the  law  of  the  house. 
In  this  instance  "  the  house  "  must  not  be 
restricted  to  the  temple  proper,  consisting 
of  the  holy  place  and  the  holy  of  holies, 
bnt  extended  to  the  whole  free  space  en- 
compassing the  outer  court,  the  quadrangular 
area  of  three  thousand  cubits  square  (ch. 
xlii  16 — 20) ;  and  concerning  this  house 
as  so  defined,  the  fundamental  torah,  law, 
or  regulation,  is  declared  to  be  that  of  its 
•complete  sanctity.  Ewald  and  Smend,  as 
usual,  unite  witli  the  LXX.  in  connecting 
"  upon  the  top  of  the  mountain "  with 
"  house ; "  but  expositors  generally  agree 
that  the  clause  belongs  to  the  words  that 
follow,  Upon  the  top  of  the  mountain 
the  whole  limit  thereof  round  about; 
and  that  the  prophet's  thought  is  that  the 
entire  territory  upon  the  mountain  summit 
included  within  the  above  specified  border, 
and  not  merely  the  inner  sanctuary,  or  even 
that  with  Its  chambers  and  courts,  was  to 
be  regarded  as  most  holy,  or  as  a  holy  of 
holiet,  i.e.  was  to  be  consecrated  as  the 
innermost  adytum  of  the  tabernacle  and 
temple  had  been,  by  the  indwelling  of 
Jehovah.  Smend  notes  that  "  This  is  the 
law "  is  the  customary  underwriting  and 
superscription  of  the  laws  of  the  priest- 
code  (see  Lev.  vi.  9, 14 ;  vii.  1,  37 ;  xi.  46 ; 
xii.  7 ;  xiii.  59 ;  xiv.  54 ;  xv.  32) ;  but  it 
need  not  result  from  this  that  the  priest- 
code  borrowed  this  expression  from  Ezekiel, 
who  employs  it  only  in  this  verse.  The 
more  rational  hypothesis  is  that  Ezekiel, 
himself  a  priest,  made  use  of  this  formula 
because  acquainted  with  it  as  already  exist- 
ing in  the  so-called  priest-code. 

Vers.  13 — 27. — The  temple-altar  described 
(vers.  13 — 17),  and  the  ritual  for  its  conse- 
cration explained  (vers.  18 — 27). 

Ver.  13.— The  measures  of  the  altar.  The 
altar  is  naian,  that  formerly  mentioned  as 
standing  in  the  inner  court,  immediately  in 
front  of  the  "  house  "  (ch.  xl.  47),  the  altar  of 
burnt  offering,  and  not  the  altar  of  incense 
in  the  holy  place  (ch.  xli.  22).  Its  dimen- 
sions, then  omitted,  are  now  reported  in 
connection  with  its  consecration,  which  also 
is  narrated  as  a  pendant  to  that  of  the 
"  house,"  because  of  the  intimate  connection 


between  the  two— the  consecration  of  the 
altar  being  practically  equivalent  to  the 
consecration  of  the  house,  and  the  conse- 
cration of  the  house  finding  approximate 
expression  in  the  consecration  of  the  altar. 
Am  in  the  other  portions  of  the  temple,  so  in 
this,  the  measurements  are  given  after  the 
cubits,  i.e.  by  or  in  cubits,  the  length  of  each 
cubit  being  noted  at  "  a  cubit  and  an  hand- 
breadth,"  as  in  ch.  xl.  5.  They  are  likewise 
taken  first  from  the  foundation  upwards  (vers. 
13 — 15),  and  then  from  the  top  downwards 
(vers.  16,  17).  The  first  portion  measured 
is  the  bottom ;  literally,  the  bosom  (Hebrew, 
p'n,  "that  which  embraces,"  from  pin,  "to 
embrace ; "  LXX.,  K6\iraim :  Vulgate,  einui); 
bnt  what  exactly  that  signified  is  debated 
among  interpreters.  Gesenius  thinks  of 
"  the  hollowed  part  for  the  fire ; "  Hitzig,  of 
"  a  frame  running  round,  a  stand  in  which 
the  altar  stood ; "  Kliefotb,  of  "  a  deepening 

Thb  Altab. 


A,  base ;  b,  border ;  c,  lower  settle ;  d,  tipper 
settle ;  E,  "  mount  of  Cfod  "  (harel) ;  f,  "  he&rth 
of  God"  (arlel) ;  H,  H,  horDS  of  altar. 

on  the  wooden  ring  in  which  the  whole  altar 
stands ; "  Keil,  of  "  a  lower  hollow  or  base  of 
the  altar,  formed  by  a  border  of  a  definite 
height ; "  Smend,  of  "  the  channel  or  gutter 
at  the  altar  base,  which  should  receive  the 
sacrificial  blood ; "  Havemick,  Currey,  and 
Plumptre,  of  "a  base  upon  which  the  altar 
stood."  If  Smend's  feasible  notion  be  not 
adopted,  then  probably  that  of  Hitzig,  Klie- 
foth,  or  Keil  most  nearly  expresses  the  con- 
ception of  the  Hebrew  term.  The  altar  was 
surrounded  by  an  enclosure  in  which  it 
seemed  to  be  set,  or  out  of  which  to  rise ; 
the  dimensions  of  this  "stand"  or  "en- 
closure" being  a  cubit  in  height,  and  a 
cubit  in  breadth,  with  a  border  on  its  edge 
round  about  a  span  or  half  a  cubit  high. 
This,  the  stand  just  described,  should  be 
the  higher  place ;  literally,  the  bach ;  hence 
the  support,  base  (Eevised  Version),  or  ele- 
vation, v\^os  (LXX.)  of  the  altar. 


368 


THE   BOOK   OF  THE   PEOPHET  EZBKIBL.     [oh.  XLm.  1— 27- 


Ver.  14. — The  next  measurements  whicb 
are  taken  from  the  bottom  upon  the  ground, 
i.e.  from  the  p'n,  "  base,"  or  ground  frame- 
work above  described,  to  the  lower  settle, 
i.e.  to  the  top  of  the  undermost  of  the 
two  "  terraces,"  or  enclosures,"  or  "  plat- 
forms," of  which  the  altar  consisted,  are  two 
cubits  of  height  with  one  cubit  of  breadth ; 
tlie  measurements  which  follow,  from  the 
lesser  settle,  i.e.  the  undermost,  to  the 
greater  settle,  i.e.  the  uppermost,  are  four 
oubits  of  height  with  one  cubit  of  breadth. 

Ver.  15. — Noteworthy  is  the  word  altar, 
which  in  this  verse  renders  two  distinct 
Hebrew  terms,  ^STID  "-^^  ^S'?.*?!  which 
Oesenius,  Hitzig,  Ewald,  Smend,  and  others, 
after  the  LXX.  (ri  &piii\),  identify  as 
synonymous,  and  translate  by  "hearth." 
But  the  first  can  only  signify  "  the  mount  of 
God,"  while  the  latter  may  mean  either  "  lion 
of  God"  or  "hearth  of  God."  Kliefoth, 
deriving  the  latter  from  nn*!,  "  to  consOme," 

and  ^;n,  "a  ram,"  prefers  as  its  import 
"  ram-devourer ; "  Hengstenberg,  resolving 
into  b'N,  "a  ram,"  and  ns,  "a  lion,"  pro- 
poses as  its  equivalent  "  ram-lion,"  i.e.  "  the 
lion  that  consumes  the  rams  for  God" — a  ren- 
dering closely  allied  to  that  of  Kliefoth.  In 
any  case,  the  terms  allude  to  parts  of  the 
altar:  the  second,  Ariel  (equivalent  to  the 
hearth  on  which  God's  fire  bums),  according 
to  Keil,  Kliefoth,  and  the  best  expositors, 
meaning  the  flat  surface  of  the  altar;  and 
the  first,  Haiel  (conveying  the  ideas  of 
elevation  and  sanctity),  the  base  on  which 
it  rested.  The  lieight  of  this  base  was  four 
cubits,  while  from  the  hearth  projected  four 
horns,  as  in  the  altars  of  the  Mosaic  taber- 
nacle (Exod.  zxvii.  2;  xxxviii.  2;  Lev. 
iv.  7,  18;  viii.  15)  and  Solomonic  temple 
(Ps.  civiii.  27).  If  the  length  of  these  be 
set  down,  as  Kliefoth  suggests,  at  three  cubits, 
then  the  whole  height  of  the  altar  will  be 
in  cubits — one  for  the  ground  bottom,  two  for 
the  lower  settle,  four  for  the  upper,  four  for 
the  bases  of  the  hearth,  with  three  for  the 
horns,  equal  to  fourteen  in  all ;  or,  omitting 
the  horns,  of  which  the  length  is  not  given, 
and  the  altar  base,  which  is  distinguished 
from  the  altar,  ten  cubits  in  all  for  the 
altar  proper.  As  to  the  symbolic  import  of 
tiie  "horns,"  Kurtz,  after  Hofmann  and 
Kliefoth,  finds  this  in  the  idea  of  elevation, 
the  "horns,"  as  the  highest  point  in  the 
allar,  bringing  the  blood  put  upon  them 
n.  arer  to  God  than  the  sides  did  the  blood 
sprinkled  on  them  (see  '  Sacrificial  Worship 
of  the  Old  Testament,'  §  18) ;  Keil,  after  Balir, 
in  the  notions  of  strength,  beauty,  and 
blessing,  the  horns  of  an  animal  being  the 
joints  in  which  its  power,  grace,  and  fulness 
of  life  are  concentrated,  and  therefore  fitting 


emblems  of  those  points  in  the  altar  in 
which  appears  "  its  significance  as  a  place 
of  the  revelation  of  Divine  might  and 
strength,  of  Divine  salvation  and  blessing" 
('  Biblische  Arohaologie,'  §  20). 

Vers.  16,  17. — The  measurements   that 
now  begin  concern  the  breadth  of  the  altar, 
and  proceed  from  above  downwards.     First 
the  altar,  or,  hearth  of  God  (Hebrew,  arid) 
was  twelve  cubits  long  and  twelve  broad,  i.e. 
was  square  in  the  four  squares  (or,  sidei) 
thereof,  or  a  perfect  square  (comp.  Exod. 
zxvii.  1 ;  Rev,  zxi.  16).     Kext  the  settle, 
or,  enclosure  (Hebrew,  nijpjg)  of  ver.  14, 
was   fourteen   cubits    long,   and   fourteen 
broad  in  the  four  squares  (or,  tideB)  thereof; 
the  fourteen  being  made  up  of  the  twelve 
oubits  of  the  altar-hearth's  side  with  one 
cubit  of  ledge  from  the  settle  all  round. 
The  only  question  is  to  which  "  settle,"  the 
upper  or  the  under,  reference  is  made.    Some 
expositors,  identifying  the  greater  Azarah 
with  the  Harel,  i.e.  the  "  upper  settle,"  with 
"the  mount  of  God"  or  the  base  of  the 
hearth,  make  the  al  tar  height  only  seven  cubits 
from  the  ground  to  the  hearth.   The  general 
belief,  however,  is  that  they  cannot  be  so 
identified.      Among  interpreters  who  dis- 
tinguish them,  Kliefoth,  with  whom  Smend 
agrees,  holds  the  "  settle "  in  this  verse  to 
be  the  harel,  or  "mount  of  God,"  which  ex- 
tended (Smend  says  with  a  hek,  or  "  gutter  ") 
one  cubit  on  each  side  beyond  the  ariel,  or 
"hearth  of  God,"   so  that  the  "mount  of 
God,"  on  which  the  "  hearth  of  God  "  rested, 
was  fourteen  cubits  square,    Then,  assum- 
ing a  similar  extension  of  one  cubit  at  each 
stage — in   the   greater   azarah,  the    lesser 
azarah,  and  the  liek,  or  ground  bottom — he 
finds  the  surface  of  the  greater  azarah  to  be 
sixteen,  of  the  lesser  azarah  eighteen,  and 
of  the  ground  bottom  twenty  cubits  square. 
Keil,  with  whom  Schroder  and  Currey  agree, 
objects  to  this  as  involving  too  much  of 
arbitrary  assumption,  and  takes  the  "  settle  " 
of  this  verse  to  mean  the  lower  azarah ;  so 
that  no  additional    measurements  are  re- 
quired beyond  those  given  in  the  text.    If 
the  square  surface  of   the  greater  azarah 
be  considered  as  having  been  the  same  as 
that  of  the  harel,  so  that  their  sides  were 
continuous,  then,  as  the  "  ground  bottom  " 
extended  one  cubit  on  each  side  beyond  the 
lower  azarah,  the  altar  at  its  base  was  a 
square  of  sixteen  cubits.     Comparing  now 
these  measurements  with  those  of  the  altar 
of  burnt  offering  in  the  tabernacle  and  the 
temple,  one  finds  that  the  former  was  only 
five   cubits  square  and  three  cubits  high 
(Exod.  xxvii.  1),  while  the  latter  was  twenty 
oubits  broad,  but  only  ten  cubits  high  (2 
Chron.  iv.  1),  which  awakes  the  suspicion 
that  the  different  views  above  noted  have 
been  insensibly  infiuenced  by  a  desire  on 


OH.  XLiii.  1—27.]     THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PKOPHET   EZEKIEL. 


369 


the  part  of  their  anthors  to  make  them 
havmonize  wit)i  the  measurements  of  the 
temple.  But  there  does  not  appear  sufficient 
reason  why  the  mensurements  of  Ezekiel'a 
nltar  shonld  have  agreed  with  those  of 
Solomon's  rather  than  with  those  of  Moses'. 
The  border  (or,  parapet)  of  half  a  onbit  which 
ran  round  the  ledge,  or  bottom,  of  a  cubit, 
at  the  foot  of  the  lower  azarah  was  clearly 
d9si°;ned,  not  for  the  protection  of  the  priest 
officiating,  but  for  ornament.  The  stairs  (or, 
$teps),  mention  of  wliioh  closes  the  description, 
mark  a  departure,  not  from  the  pattern  of  tke 
Bolomonic  temple,  in  which  the  altar  must 
have  had  steps  (see  Eeil's  'Biblische  Archa- 
blogie,'  p.  141),  but  from  the  pattern  of  the 
tabernacle,  in  which  altar-steps  were  disal- 
lowed (Exod.  XX.  26)  and  did  not  exist  (Exod. 
xxxviii.  1 — 7).  But  if,  as  Jewish  tradition 
asserts,  the  post-exilio  altar  had  no  steps  as 
Bzekiel's  had,  having  been  reached  by  an  in- 
clined plane,  because  in  the  so-called  book  of 
the  covenant  steps  were  forbidden,  how  does 
this  harmonize  with  the  theory  that  Ezekiel'a 
vision  temple  was  designed  as  a  model  for 
the  post-exilic  temple?  And  why,  if  the 
priest-code  was  the  composition  of  a  writer 
who  worked  in  the  spirit  and  on  the  lines  of 
Ezekiel,  should  it  have  omitted  to  assign 
steps  to  the  tabernacle  altar? 

Ver.  18. — The  ordinances  of  the  altar. 
These  were  not  the  regulations  for  the 
sacrificial  worship  to  be  afterwards  per- 
formed upon  this  altar,  but  the  rites  to  be 
observed  at  its  consecration  when  the  day 
should  arrive  for  its  construction.  As  the 
altar  in  the  tabernacle  (Exod.  xxix.  1 — 46; 
Lev.  viii.  11 — 33),  and  that  in  Solomon's 
temple  (1  Kings  viii.  63—66 ;  2  Chron.  vii. 
4 — 10),  80  was  this  in  Ezekiel's  "house" 
deilicated  by  a  special  ceremonial  before 
being  brought  into  ordinary  use.  The  par- 
ticular ritual  observed  by  Solomon  is  not 
described  in  detail;  but  a  comparison  be- 
tween that  enjoined  upon  and  practised  by 
Moses  with  that  revealed  to  and  published 
by  Ezekiel  shows  that  while  in  some  respects 
they  agreed,  in  other  important  particulars 
they  differed.  In  both  the  ceremony 
largely  consisted  in  offering  sacrifice  and 
smearing  blood,  and  lasted  seven  days ;  but 
in  the  former  the  ceremony  was  performed 
exclusively  by  Moses,  consisted,  in  addition 
to  the  above,  of  an  anointing  of  the  altar, 
the  holy  utensils,  and  the  tabernacle  itself 
with  oil,  and  was  associated  with  the  oonse- 
oration  of  the  priests ;  whereas  in  the  latter, 
in  addition  to  some  variations  in  the  sacri- 
ficial victims,  which  will  be  noted  in  the 
course  of  exposition,  the  priests  should  bear 
an  active  part — there  should  be  no  anointing 
with  oil,  and  no  consecration  of  the  priests, 
the  priesthood  being  assumed  as  already  ei- 
iBting.     If  in  Ezekiel's  ritual  there  was 

XZEKUEL — II. 


no  mention  of  a  cleansing  of  the  sanctuary 
(that  of  ch,  xlv.  18  referring  to  a  special 
case),  but  "only  of  the  altar,  that  was  tuffl- 
oiently  explained  by  the  circumstance  that 
Jehovah  was  already  in  the  "  house."  The 
final  clause,  to  offer  bnmt  offerings  ther»- 
on,  and  to  sprinkle  blood  thereon,  indicates 
the  purpose  for  which  the  altar  was  to  be 
used. 

Ver.  19. — Thou  shalt  give  to  the  priests. 
This  injunction,  which  was  addressed  to 
Ezekiel,  not  as  the  representative  of  the 
people  or  of  the  priests  (Smend),  but  as  the 
prophet  of  Jehovah,  made  it  clear  that 
Ezekiel  was  not  to  act  in  the  future  conse- 
cration of  the  altar  alone  as  Moses  did  in 
the  dedication  of  the  tabernacle  altar,  but 
that  the  priests  were  to  bear  their  part  in 
the  ceremonial.  If  some  expressions,  as 
the  use  of  "thou"  in  this  and  the  follow- 
ing verses,  appear  to  suggest  that  Ezekiel 
alone  should  officiate,  the  employment  of 
"they"  in  vers'  22,  24,  25,  26  as  plainly 
indicates  that  Ezekiel's  share  in  the  cere- 
monial was  to  be  performed  through  the 
medium  of  the  priests.  And,  indeed,  if  the 
temple  was  a  pattern  designed  to  be  con- 
verted into  an  actual  building  after  the 
return  from  captivity,  as  the  newer  criticism 
contends,  it  is  apparent  that  Ezekiel  could 
not  have  been  expected  to  have  any  hand 
in  its  erection.  The  Levites  that  he  of  the 
seed  of  Zadok.  The  assistants  of  Ezekiel 
and  the  officiating  priests  at  the  new  altar 
were  not  to  be  the  whole  body  of  the  Le- 
vitical  priesthood,  but  those  only  who 
derived  their  descent  from  Zadok  (see  on 
ch,  xliv.  15).  A  young  bullock  for  a  sin 
offering.  With  the  offering  of  this  the  ritual 
commenced,  as  in  Exod.  xxix.  1,  10  and 
Lev.  viii.  14  (comp.  ch.  xlv.  18)  It  is  ob- 
servable that  in  the  Levitical  code  a  young 
bullock,  i.e.  of  a  bullock  in  the  full  vigour 
of  youth,  is  appointed  as  the  requisite  sin 
offering  for  the  priest,  »'.«.  the  high  priest, 
who  was  the  head  and  representative  of  the 
people. 

Ver.  20. — And  thou  shalt  take  of  the  blood 
thereof,  and  put  it.  The  application  of  the 
rictim's  blood  to  and  upon  the  altar  formed 
an  integral  part  of  every  expiatory  offering ; 
but  "whereas  in  all  the  other  kinds  of 
sacrifice  the  blood  was  poured  indifferently 
round  about  the  altar  of  the  fore  court,  in 
the  «in  offering  it  was  not  to  be  sprinkled, 
lest  the  intention  should  be  overlooked,  but 
smeared  with  the  finger  upon  the  horns  of 
the  altar  ('  And  the  priest  shall  put  of  the 
blood  upon  the  horns,'  Lev.  iv.  7,  18,  25, 
30,  84)"  (Kurtz,  'Sacrificial  Worship  of 
the  Old  Testament,'  §  107).  In  the  present 
instance  the  blood  was  to  be  carefully  put 
upon  the  four  horns  of  the  altar — the  only 
part  to  be  smeared  with  blood  in  the  Mosait^ 

2i> 


870 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  BZEKIBL.    [oh.  axm.  1— 27. 


consecration  (Exod.  xxiz.  12) — the  fonr 
corners  of  the  settlei  or  azarah,  bnt 
whether  the  greater  or  lesser  is  left  unde- 
cided, thongh  in  all  probability  it  was  the 
nnder,  if  not  both,  and  the  border  round 
about,  that  mentioned  in  ver.  17 ;  and  tlie 
effect  of  this  smearing  with  blood  should 
be  to  cleanse  and  purge,  or,  make  atonement 
for,  the  altar;  not  for  the  people,  as  Haver- 
nick  interprets,  saying,  "  without  an  atoned- 
for  altar,  no  atoned  -  for  people  (phne 
entsShnten  AUar,  kein  entsUhntes  Voile)"  but 
for  the  altar,  either,  as  Kliefoth  suggests, 
because,  beiug  made  out  of  a'part  of  the  sin- 
ful earth  and  world,  it  required  to  be  sancti- 
fied, or  because,  as  Plumptre  prefers,  the 
sins  of  the  people  having  been,  as  it  were, 
transferred  to  it,  it  stood  in  need  of 
cleansing. 

Ver.  21. — As  a  further  stage  in  the  cere- 
mony, the  bullock  of  the  sin  offering,  t.e.  the 
carcase  of  the  victim,  was  to  be  burned  by 
Ezekiel  or  the  priest  acting  for  him  in  the 
appointed  place  of  the  house,  without  the 
sanctuary,  as  in  the  Mosaic  code  it  was  pre- 
scribed that  the  flesh  of  the  bullock,  with 
bis  skin  and  dung,  should  be  burned  without 
the  camp  (Exod.  xxix.  14;  Lev.  iv.  12,  21 ; 
ix.  11,  15;  comp.  Heb.  xiii.  13).  Ewald 
at  first  sought  the  place  liere  referred  to 
in  the  sacrificial  kitchens  (ch.  xlvi.  19), 
which  it  could  not  be,  as  these  belonged  to 
the  "sanctuary"  in  the  strictest  sense;  he 
has,  however,  since  adopted  the  view  of 
Kliefoth,  which  is  doubtless  correct,  that 
the  "  place  of  the  house,  without  the  sanc- 
tuiiry  "  lueant  the  gizrah,  or  separate  place 
(cli.  xli.  12),  which  was  a  part  of  the 
"house"  in  the  widest  sense,  and  yet  be- 
longed not  to  the  "sanctuary"  in  the 
strictest  sense.  Smend  thinks  of  the 
migrash,  "  suburbs "  or  "  open  spaces," 
which  surrounded  the  temple  precincts 
(ch.  xlv.  2) ;  and  these  were  certainly 
without  the  sanctuary,  while  they  were  also 
appointed  for  (he  holy  place,  and  might 
have  been  designated,  as  here,  raiphkadh,  as 
being  always  under  the  inspection  of  the 
temple  watchmen.  The  fact  that  in  poat- 
exilic  times  one  of  the  city  gates  was  called 
Bammiphkadh  (Neh.  iii.  81)  lends  counte- 
nance to  this  view.  That  in  this  "appointed 
place "  the  carcase  of  the  bullock  should 
be  consumed  was  a  deviation  from  the 
Mosaic  ritual,  which  prescribed  that  the 
fat  portions  should  be  burned  upon  the 
altar,  and  the  rest  eaten  as  a  sacrificial 
meal  (Lev.  iv.  10,  26,  85 ;  vii.  15,  81 ;  Deut. 
xii.  7,  17, 18).  Keil  appears  to  think  tliat 
the  fat  portions  may  have  been  burned 
upon  the  altar,  although  it  is  not  so  men- 
tioned, and  that  only  "  those  points  "  were 
mentioned  "in  which  deviation*  &om  the 
ordinary  ritual  took  place." 


Ver.  22. — The  second  day's  ceremonial 
ihould  begin  with  the  offering  of  a  kid  of 
the  goats  (rather,  a  he-goaf)  without  blemish 
for  a  sin  offering,  the  ritual  observed  being 
probably  the  same  as  that  of  the  preceding 
day.  The  substitution  of  a  "  he-goat,"  the 
offering  for  a  ruler  who  sins  (Lev.  iv.  23, 
24),  instead  of  a  "young  bullock,"  which 
formed  the  first  day's  offering,  was  a  devia- 
tion from  the  ritual  prescribed  for  the  con- 
secration of  the  Mosaic  altar  and  priesthood 
(Exod.  xxix.  36).  The  object  of  the  offering 
of  the  "he-goat"  was  the  same  as  that  of 
the  offering  of  the  "bullock,"  viz.  to 
cleanse  the  altar;  not,  however,  as  if  the 
previous  day's  cleansing  had  been  insuffi- 
cient and  required  to  be  supplemented,  or 
had  already  become  inefQcient  so  as  to  call 
for  renewal,  but  in  the  sense  of  recalling 
the  meaning  and  impression  of  the  previous 
day's  ceremonial,  and  so  in  a  manner  link- 
ing jt  on  with  the  several  rites  of  the  suc- 
ceeding days. 

Vers.  23, 24. — The  presentation  of  a  burnt 
offering  unto  the  Lord  was  the  next  item 
in  the  ritual  that  should  be  observed. 
The  material  composing  it  should  consist  of 
a  young  bullock  without  blemish,  as  in  the 
ordinary  sacrificial  code  (Lev.  i.  3,  4,  5), 
and  a  ram  out  of  the  flock  without  blemish, 
as  in  the  consecration  of  the  priests  (Exod. 
xxix.  18)  and  of  the  altar  (Lev.  viii.  18). 
The  persons  presenting  it  should  be  the 
prophet,  thou,  and  the  priests,  they,  as 
his  representatives.  The  mode  of  offering 
should  be  by  burning,  .the  distinctive  act 
in  a  burnt  offering,  as  that  of  a  sin  offer- 
ing was  sprinkling,  and  that  of  a  peace 
offering  the  sacrificial  meal,  and  by  casting 
salt  upon  the  carcase,  a  feature  in  every 
meat  offering  (Lev.  ii.  13),  and  here  added 
probably  to  intensify  the  idea  of  purification. 
"In  the  corrosive  and  antiseptic  property 
of  salt  there  is  hidden  something  of  the 
purifying  and  consuming  nature  of  fire; 
hence  the  Eedeemer,  in  Mark  ix.  49,  com- 
bines the  salting  of  the  sacrifice  with  the 
purifying  fire  of  self-denial"  (Kurtz, 
'  Sacrificial  Worship  of  the  Old  Testament,' 
§  145).  The  significance  of  it  should  be 
an  expression  of  complete  self-surrender 
unto  Jehovah,  as  the  necessary  outcome  of 
the  antecedent  act  of  expiation.  The  time 
of  its  presentation  should  be  immediately 
after  the  cleansing  of  the  altar  on  the  second 
day^  and  presumably  also  on  the  succeeding 
days.  Whether  the  burnt  offering  was,  as 
Keil  maintains,  or  was  not,  as  Kliefoth  con- 
tends, offered  also  on  the  first  day  is  difficult 
to  decide,  though  the  former  opinion  has, 
perhaps,  most  in  its  favour.  The  Mosaic 
ritual  always  enjoined  a  burnt  offering  to 
be  offered  as  a  sequel  to  the  sin  offering 
(comp.  Exod.  xxix.  14,  18,  with  Lev.  viii. 


OH.  XLiii.  1— 27.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET   EZEKIEL. 


871 


14, 18 ;  and  see  Kurtz,  '  Saciifloial  Worship 
of  the  Old  Testament,'  §  86) ;  and,  in  accord- 
ance with  this,  vers.  23  and  24  naturally 
follow  on  vers.  19 — 21,  ver.  22  being  inter- 
posed because  of  the  variation  in  the  sin 
offering  for  the  second  day. 

Ver.  25. — Seven  days,  Hitzig  reckons 
these  as  additional  to  the  first  (ver.  19) 
and  second  (ver.  22)  days ;  Kllefoth  begins 
them  with  the  second;  Keil,  SohrSder, 
Currey,  and  the  majority  of  expositors  take 
them  as  inclusive  of  the  first  and  second. 
Hitzig's  proposal  may  be  set  aside,  since  it 
cannot  be  maintained  without  erasing  "  thou 
shalt  make  atonement  for  it "  in  ver.  20,  and 
the  first  half  of  the  present  verse.  In  favour 
of  Kliefoth's  view  may  be  urged  that  the 
first  day  appears  to  stand  out  from  the 
others,  and  to  be  distingaished  by  the 
peculiar  character  of  its  offering — a  young 
bullock  for  a  sin  offering,  without  any  ac- 
companying burnt  ofiering;  that  the  offer- 
ings on  the  second  and  subsequent  days 
are  alike,  a  he-goat  and  a  ram ;  that  on  each 
of  the  seven  days  a  goat  is  mentioned  for  a 
sin  offering,  whereas  on  the  first  day  it  was 
a  young  bullock  that  was  slain ;  and  that  in 
Zech.  iii.  9  occurs  an  allusion  to  what 
seems  a  special  day.  such  as  this  first  day  of 
Ezekiel.  In  support  of  Keil's  interpreta- 
tion it  is  contended  that  the  seven  days 
were  to  be  employed  in  purging  or  mailing 
atonement  for,  and  purifying  the  altar, 
which  was  in  part  at  least  (even  admitting 
a  distinction  in  meaning  between  K^n  and 
inD)  the  business  of  the  first  day ;  that  the 
general  statement  in  ver.  20  as  to  a  goat  for 
a  sin  offering  on  the  seven  days  admits  of 
easy  qualification  by  the  previous  statement 
in  ver.  19 ;  and  that  seven  days  was  the 
normal  duration  of  religious  solemnities 
under  the  Law  (see  Lev.  viii.  33 ;  1  Kings 
viii.  65;  2  Chron.  vii.  8,  9). 

Ver.  26.— They  shall  purge  the  altar. 
Smend  thinks  it  strange  that  only  the  puri- 
fication of  the  altar  should  be  mentioned 
here,  while  that  of  the  sanctuary  is  referred 
to  later  (oh.  xlv.  18),  and  finds  in  this  an 
explanation  (at  least,  perhaps)  of  the  fact 
that  in  Exod.  xzix.  36  only  the  consecration 
of  the  Mosaic  altar — not  of  the  Mosaic 
tabernacle — is  reported.  He  conceives  it 
likely  that  the  author  of  Exod.  xxix.  36 
copied  Ezekiel,  but  does  not  explain  why 
Ezekiel  may  not  have  copied  the  author  of 
Exod.  xxix.  36.  And  they  shall  consecrate 
themselves;   more  correctly,  thej/ — ie.  the 


priests — ihall  oonieeraie  it ;  literally,  f3l  ill 
hand.  The  phrase,  i;  k  Vp, "  to  fill  one's  hand," 
JO.  with  gifts,  occurs  with  reference  to 
Jehovah  (Exod.  xxxii.  29;  1  Chron.  xxix. 
5 ;  2  Chron.  xxix.  31).  It  is  also  employed 
in  the  sense  of  filling  the  hand  of  another, 
as  e.g.  of  a  priest,  with  sacrificial  gifts,  when 
he  is  instituted  into  bis  sacred  office  (Exod. 
xxviii.  41;  xxix.  9;  Lev.  xxi.  10;  comp. 
Lev.  viii.  27).  Here  the  hand  to  be  filled  is 
that  of  the  altar,  which  is  personified  for  the 
purpose  (compare  the  use  of  the  terms 
"  bosom  "  and  "  lip  "  in  connection  with  the 
altar).  The  meaning  is  that  the  altar,  at 
its  consecration,  should  have  a  plentiful 
supply  of  gifts,  to  symbolize  that  the  offer- 
ing of  such  gifts  was  the  work  for  which 
it  was  'set  apart,  and  that  it  should  never 
be  without  them, 

Ter.  27. — The  eighth  day,  and  so  forward. 
Omit "  so."  With  this  day  the  regular  sacri- 
ficial service  should  commence.  Thence- 
forward the  priests  should  offer  upon  the 
altar  the  burnt  offerings  and  peaoe  offer- 
ings of  the  people.  The  omission  of  sin 
offerings  is  explained  by  Keil,  on  the 
principle  that  "  burnt  offerings  "  and  "  peaoe 
offerings "  were  "  the  principal  and  most 
frequent  sacrifices,  whilst  sin  offerings  and 
meat  offerings  were  implied  therein ; " 
Kliefoth  adding  that  ch.  xliv.  27,  29; 
xlv.  17, 19,  22,  23,  25 ;  and  xlvi.  20  show  it 
cannot  be  inferred  that  sin  offerings  were 
no  more  to  be  offered  on  this  altar.  At  the 
same  time,  the  prominence  given  to  "  burnt " 
and  "peace"  as  distinguished  from  "sin 
offerings  "  may,  as  Schroder  suggests,  have 
pointed  to  the  fact  that  the  sacrificers  who 
should  use  this  altar  would  be  "a  people 
in  a  state  of  grace,"  to  whom  Jehovah  was 
prepared  to  say,  I  will  accept  you,  not  your 
offerings  alone,  but  your  persons  as  weU ; 
and  not  these  because  of  those,  but  contrari- 
wise, those  on  account  of  these.  Kliefoth's 
idea,  that  the  first  day  symbolized  the  future 
day  of  Christ's  sacrifice,  that  the  seven  in- 
termediate days  (on  his  hypothesis)  pointed 
to  the  period  of  the  Christian  Church,  and 
that  the  eighth  day  looked  forward  to  the 
time  of  the  end,  while  not  without  elements 
of  truth,  is  open  to  this  objection,  that  in 
the  period  of  the  Christian  Church  there 
should  have  been  "  no  more  eacrifice  for 
sin;"  and  yet,  as  Kliefoth  admits,  "sin 
offerings"  were  afterwards  to  be  made  upon 
this  altar. 


HOMttETIOa 

Ver.  2. — ''  The  glory  of  the  Ood  of  Israel."  The  visionary  glory  that  daziled  the  eyes 
of  the  rapt  seer  is  bat  an  earthly  suggestion  of  that  ineffable  glory  in  which  th« 


872  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [ch.  XLin.  1—27. 

unseen  God  is  ever  clothed.  We  may  take  the  manifeatation  of  glory  as  •  type  and 
suggestion  of  that  higher  wonder. 

I.  In  what  the  qloby  of  the  God  of  Ibbael  consists.  1.  The  radiance  of 
heavenly  light.  The  glory  is  like  tlie  effulgence  of  sunlight,  the  raying  forth  of  beams 
of  splendour  from  the  central  fountain  of  light.  (1)  It  is  perfect  truth.  All  error  and 
falsehood  are  excluded.  God  dwells  in  infinite  knowledge  and  wisdom  and  truthful- 
ness. (2)  It  is  absolute  holiness.  No  stain  or  fleck  of  sin  ever  touches  the  supreme 
purity  of  God.  (3)  It  is  infinite  love.  The  glory  of  God  is  most  seen  in  his  goodness. 
By  wonderful  doeds  of  grace  he  manifests  his  glory.    (4)  It  is  unutterable  joy.     The 

'  joy  of  truth,  holiness,  and  love  must  ever  dwell  in  the  heart  of  God.  God  smiles 
over  his  creatures :  that  is  his  gloiy.  2.  The  wealth  of  heavenly  voices.  " His  voice 
was  like  a  noise  of  many  waters."  God  has  broken  the  silence  of  eternity.  He  has 
called  to  his  lost  and  wayward  children.  With  variety  of  utterance  and  of  truth  God 
has  made  his  voice  heard.    His  gospel  message  is  his  glory. 

II.  How  THE  GLOBY  OF  THE  GoD  OF  IsBAEL  APPEARS.  Ezekiel  saw  the  glory 
dawn  in  the  east  like  the  pure,  bright  light  of  a  rising  sun.  1.  It  was  not  always 
mmifest.  There  had  been  a  night  previous  to  this  glad  dawn.  There  had  been 
dark  days  in  the  Captivity,  when  even  the  radiance  of  God  seemed  to  be  dimmed. 
(1)  In  the  world's  history  there  have  been  awful,  blank  ages,  out  of  which  all  Divine 
glory  seems  to  have  been  excluded.  (2)  In  individual  experience  there  are  sad  days 
when  the  soul  exclaims,  "  iVIy  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ? "  2.  It  is 
made  manifest.  (1)  To  the  world,  in  Christ,  who  manifested  forth  the  glory  of  his 
Father.  Thus  St.  John  says,  "  And  we  beheld  his  glory,  the  glory  as  of  the  Only 
Begotten  of  the  Father"  (John  i.  14).  (2)  To  the  individual,  by  faith.  When  we 
triUy  seek  for  the  biightness  of  God's  countenance  in  Christ,  and  trust  his  grace,  there 
rises  a  light  in  the  darkness,  and  God's  glory  appears. 

III.  The   EBSULT8   THAT   FOLLOW   THE   MANIFESTATION  OF  THE   OLOBT  OF   THE  GoD 

OF  IsBABL.  "  And  the  earth  shined  with  his  glory."  This  radiance  was  not  confined 
to  celestial  regions.  It  was  no  vain  pageantry  displayed  among  the  clouds.  It  came 
into  the  world  as  a  brightness  for  earthly  things.  This  is  ever  the  case  with  manifes- 
tations of  God's  glory.  It  is  especially  so  with  Christ  who  "  tabernacled  among  us,"  and 
so  brought  the  celestial  glory  to  dwell  on  earth.  The  shining  forth  of  God's  truth  and 
goodness  makes  a  new  day  for  the  world.  It  is  already  reflected  in  purified,  gladdened 
lives ;  it  will  be  fully  seen  in  a  renewal  of  the  whole  face  of  society.  That  which  seems 
to  be  most  remote  and  unpractical  is  thus  most  closely  associated  with  the  needs  and  hopes 
of  mankind.  The  world  pines  and  despairs  for  lack  of  more  visions  of  Divine  truth  and 
goodness.  The  perfect  day  will  be  when  this  light  shines  into  the  darkest  places  of 
the  earth,  i.e.  when  all  men  have  received  "the  glorious  gospel  of  the  blessed  God." 

Ver.  3. — God  the  same  in  Jitdgment  and  in  mercy.  The  remarkable  point  of  this  verse 
lies  in  the  fact  that  Ezekiel  could  detect  no  change  in  the  manifestation  of  the  Divine 
glory  when  he  compared  the  new  appearance  which  heralded  the  great  redemption  of 
Israel  with  the  earlier  appearance  which  preceded  the  denunciation  of  wrath  and  doom. 
God  is  the  same  in  both  cases. 

I.  The  FACT.  This  has  two  sides — one  relating  to  the  time  of  judgment,  and  the 
other  concerned  with  the  period  of  redemption.  1.  God's  mercy  is  not  lost  in  judg- 
ment. He  was  glorious  when  he  came  to  judgment,  and  one  essential  element  of  the 
glory  of  God  is  his  inefi'able  love.  We  may  not  see  love  in  wrath,  but  it  is  present,  for 
"  whom  the  Lord  loveth  he  chasteneth  "  (Heb.  xii.  6).  God  does  not  change  his  nature 
because  men  sin,  nor  indeed  does  he  cease  to  yearn  over  his  poor  fallen  children  with 
infinite  pity  because  it  has  become  well  that  he  should  smite  them  in  his  great  anger. 
2.  Qod's  righteousness  is  not  lost  in  redemption.  He  loses  none  of  the  glory  of  his 
holiness  by  saving  sinners.  Christ  came  to  "  magnify  the  Law  and  make  it  honourable  " 
(Isa.  xlii.  21).  Righteousness  is  honoured  (1)  in  the  Person  of  Christ,  our  great  Repre- 
sentative, who  ofi'ered  his  pure  and  spotless  soul  as  a  perfect  sacrifice  to  God ;  (2)  in 
the  deliverance  of  man  from  sin.  Righteousness  itself  desires  an  end  of  sin  more  than 
the  mere  punishment,  which  is  but  a  means  towards  that  end.  Thus  the  glory  of 
God's  holiness  is  most  manifest  when  he  redeems  man  from  sin  and  leads  him  into  • 
new,  holy  life. 


OH.  XLin.  1—27.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  378 

II.  Its  conskqubncbs,  1.  There  is  no  escape  from  the  law  of  righteousnets.  The 
subjects  of  a  changeable  autocrat  watch  his  fickle  moods,  and  endeavour  to  seize  on  lucky 
moments  when  he  appears  to  be  in  a  good  humour,  in  order  to  exti  act  some  favour  from 
him.  No  such  manoeuvres  are  needed,  or  can  be  of  any  use,  when  men  are  looking  for 
God's  grace.  On  the  one  hand,  he  is  always  desirous  to  save  and  bless ;  on  the  other 
hand,  he  is  never  weakly  negligent  in  regard  to  the  great  principles  of  justice.  We  can 
never  evade  his  laws.  2.  There  is  no  reason  to  despair  on  account  of  the  wrath  of 
God  against  sin.  That  wrath  was  always  felt  by  God,  though  it  has  not  always  been 
perceived  by  man.  "  God  is  angry  with  the  wicked  every  day  "  (Ps.  vii.  11).  Yet  God 
has  shown  continuous  love,  and  has  put  forth  repeated  efforts  of  mercy  to  save  his 
fallen  children.  He  has  not  changed  towards  us  because  he  has  veiled  his  mercy  and 
displayed  his  wrath  for  a  season.  The  same  ever-righteous  and  ever-merciful  Father 
who  at  one  time  smites  in  anger  and  at  another  saves  in  grace  will  act  to  us  just  as  we 
do  to  him.  "  With  the  froward  thou  wilt  show  thyself  froward,"  etc.  (Ps.  xviii.  26). 
Therefore  our  part  is  to  be  plain  and  straight  with  God,  simply  trusting  his  great  love, 
and  honestly  endeavouring  to  fulfil  his  holy  will. 

Ver.  5. — Filled  with  glory.  I.  The  globy  or  God  in  the  temple.  Ezekiel  saw 
the  temple  filled  with  the  glory  of  God.  This  was  only  a  vision  ;  but  it  was  predicted 
concerning  the  rebuilt  temple  that  the  glory  of  the  latter  house  should  exceed  that  of 
the  former  (Hag.  ii.  9).  Yet,  while  young  men  rejoiced  at  the  sight  of  the  new  strue- 
ture,  old  men  wept  as  they  remembered  the  greater  splendour  of  Solomon's  temple, 
which  Nebuchadnezzar  had  destroyed  (Ezra  iii.  12, 13).  Nevertheless,  it  was  promised 
that,  though  in  materials  and  architecture  Zerubbabel's  temple  might  be  inferior  to 
Solomon's,  there  was  this  unique  privilege  reserved  for  the  new  building — the  Lord 
himself  should  suddenly  appear  in  it  (Mai.  iii.  1).  This  promise  was  fulfilled  in  the 
advent  of  Christ  (Luke  ii.  27). 

II.  The  qloky  of  God  in  the  Church.  The  spiritual  brotherhood  of  Christians, 
the  Church  of  Christ,  has  taken  the  place  of  the  temple  of  the  Jewish  economy 
(1  Cor.  iii.  16 ;  Eph.  ii.  21).  Now  God  has  manifested  his  glory  in  the  Church,  for 
it  is  seen  in  the  display  of  Christian  graces,  so  that  she  is  like  a  city  set  on  a, 
hill,  that  cannot  be  hid.  But  the  brightness  or  the  dimness  of  this  glory  will  be 
just  proportionate  to  the  Christ-likeness  or  the  worldliness  of  the  Church.  The 
more  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ  there  is  in  this  great  temple,  the  more  of  the  glory 
of  God  will  there  be  there.  Her  glory  has  been  looked  for  in  size,  numbers,  wealth, 
power,  influence,  intellect ;  in  her  sons  of  genius  and  her  works  of  worldly  importance. 
But  these  things  do  not  reveal  God's  glory.  Christ  is  the  Glory  of  the  Church — "  Christ 
in  you,  the  hope  of  glory  "  (Col,  i.  27). 

III.  The  olort  of  God  in  the  world.  Ezekiel  saw  the  broad  earth  ablaze  with 
the  radiance  of  the  heavenly  glory  (ver.  2).  But  this  glory  was  concentrated  in 
the  temple.  God  has  a  brightness  for  all  men,  but  the  best  light  for  those  who 
8eek  his  near  presence.  The  world  now  reveals  the  glory  of  God  in  creation  and  in 
providence.  When  the  world  is  brought  to  the  feet  of  Jesus  Christ  it  will  enjoy  the 
richer,  fuller  glory  of  God  in  Christ.  Even  now,  in  so  far  as  a  Christ-spirit  is 
spread  through  society,  a  new  light  dawns  over  the  old  weary  world.  The  day  is 
coming  when  the  earth  shall  be  full  of  his  glory.  That  will  be  the  day  of  the  earth's 
perfect  redemption  and  man's  perfect  blessedness. 

IV.  The  olort  of  God  in  the  socl,  God's  glory  comes  into  the  Church  and 
the  world  by  first  entering  individual  souls.  To  the  darkest  and  saddest  this  joy  and 
light  will  appear,  when  the  barred  door  is  opened  to  the  Guest  who  stands  knocking 
and  graciously  waiting  for  admission.  There  is  no  glory  equal  to  that  which  his 
in-coming  will  bring.  We  may  think  much  of  riches,  popularity,  intellect,  and 
power.  But  the  greatest  glory  of  a  human  life  is  the  glory  of  goodness.  The  highest 
ambition  should  be  to  live  a  good  and  useful  life.  Christ's  aureole  surrounds  such 
a  life. 

Ver,  lO.-^The  goodness  that  leads  to  repentance.  The  people  of  Israel  are  to  see 
the  nbw  temple  in  order  that  they  may  be  ashamed  of  their  iniquities.  The  goodness 
of  God  in  restoring  tbe  temple  will  induce  them  to  look  with  new  horror  on  their  old 


374  THE   BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  EZEKIEL.     [oh.  XLin.  1—27.' 

Bins.  Thus  Clod's  goodness  in  life  generally,  and  in  the  gospel  of  Ghriat,  should  lead 
men  to  see  the  evil  of  their  ways  and  to  repent  of  it. 

I.  Qod's  goodness  pbeoedes  man's  bepbntanob.  The  full  enjoyment  of  that 
goodness  is  not  possible  for  those  who  are  still  living  in  sin.  The  prodigal  son 
cannot  enjoy  the  fatted  calf  hefore  he  comes  to  himself,  or  arises  and  returns  to  his 
father.  But  long  before  any  movement  is  made  on  the  side  of  the  sinner  to  return, 
God  is  preparing  the  way  for  him.  The  shepherd  seeks  the  wandering  sheep.  The 
woman  sweeps  for  the  lost  piece  of  silver.  Even  in  Eden,  on  the  discovery  of  the  Fall, 
God  promised  a  gospel  and  victory  (Gten.  iiL  15).  The  pity  of  God  for  Lirael  in 
Egypt  was  made  known  to  Moses  in  the  bush  before  tlie  people  made  any  effort  to 
effect  their  own  escape.  Christ  came  into  a  world  that  was  even  unmlling  to  receive 
him,  yet  he  came  for  the  world's  salvation.  The  gospel  is  now  only  too  often  offered 
to  unwilling  hearers.     God  now  waits  to  be  gracious. 

IL  The  revelation  of  God's  goodness  shows  the  neoebsitt  of  bepentanoe. 
1.  It  should  reveal  ottr  tin.  (1)  By  contrast.  God  is  good  to  us,  while  we  behave  ill 
to  him.  Surely  we  should  see  how  sad  it  is  to  live  in  rebellion  against  a  gracious  God. 
Thus  the  dreadful  guilt  of  ingratitude  is  added  to  other  sins.  (2)  By  the  manner  of 
the  revelation.  It  is  a  revelation  in  holiness.  God's  glory  was  seen  in  the  temple.  It 
is  a  revelation  in  atonement  for  sin :  the  temple  was  for  sacrifices ;  Christ  died  on  the 
cross  as  a  sacrifice  for  the  world's  sin.  Thus  the  very  proclamation  of  the  gospel 
involves  a  declaration  of  man's  sinfulness.  2.  If  shotild  incline  «s  to  return.  If  God 
had  turned  against  us  we  might  feel  no  inclination  to  go  back  to  him.  But  his 
graciousness  should  serve  as  a  great  attraction.  Surely  it  is  bad  indeed  to  hold  out 
against  such  forgiving  mercy  as  that  of  our  Father  and  of  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ. 

III.  God's  goodness  assists  us  in  bepentanoe.  1.  It  opens  the  door  for  our 
return.  There  is  no  longer  any  excuse  for  delay.  Despair  need  not  paralyze  our 
returning  footsteps.  The  preparation  is  an  invitation;  the  invitation  should  be  an 
inspiration.  2.  It  moves  owr  hearts  to  return.  We  may  only  be  hardened  by  denun- 
ciations of  wrath  and  doom.  But  love  should  melt  the  heart  of  ice.  God's  love  is  shed 
abroad  in  the  hearts  of  his  people.  It  comes  as  a  glow  of  reviving  energy  to  the  soul 
that  is  unable  to  save  itself  because  it  is  just  "  dead  in  trespasses  and  sin."  All  is 
now  ready.  The  temple  built,  the  sacrifice  offered,  the  welcome  waiting.  "  And  the 
Spirit  and  the  bride  say.  Come.  And  let  him  that  heareth  say,  Come.  And  let  him 
that  is  athirst  come.  And  whosoever  will,  let  him  take  the  water  of  life  freely  " 
(Rev.  xxu.  17). 

Vers.  18 — 22. — The  sin  offering.  When  Bzekiel,  a  prophet,  describes  the  ceremonial 
of  a  sin  offering  with  some  minuteness,  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  he  intends  the 
details  to  be  suggestive  of  spiritual  facts. 

I.  Theeb  must  be  an  opfebing  fob  bin.  "  Without  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no 
remission  of  sins."  The  practical  universality  of  sin  offerings  among  various  races  has 
made  it  appear  that  the  sacrifice  arose  from  an  instinct  of  consciene-e.  We  feel  that  we 
need  a  propitiation  for  our  sins.  Now,  Christ  has  come  to  satisfy  that  need,  and  hii 
one  death  on  the  cross  is  the  great  atonement  for  the  world's  sin.  How  the  Sacrifice  is 
efiScacious  may  be  a  matter  of  consideration,  and  may  give  rise  to  divergent  views. 
The  important  point  lies  in  the  fact  that  Christ  is  a  Sacrifice  for  sin  (Heb.  x.  12). 

n.  This  offering  must  be  unblemished.  God  cannot  take  what  is  not  pun 
and  perfect.  Even  in  our  daily  work  we  should  give  our  best  to  God.  But  in  makine 
aa  offering  for  sin,  no  man  can  come  before  OtoA  without  blemishes  being  seen  on  aU 
he  is  and  all  he  does.  Christ  is  the  one  perfect  Sacrifice  for  sin,  the  Lamb  without 
spot.    No  one  ever  convicted  him  of  evil-doing.    He  is  the  v)tll-1>doved  Son  of  Gh)d. 

III.  A  PBiEST  MUST  present  THE  OFFERING.  It  must  be  given  by  one  who  has 
a  right  of  close  access  to  God.  With  our  sin  we  shrink  back  from  God  and  dare  not 
enter  his  holy  presence.  Therefore,  though  in  rite  and  symbol  priests  may  be  found 
to  present  sacrifices,  as  a  fact,  since  all  men  are  alienated  from  God,  no  men  can  truly 
serre  as  priests.  But  Christ,  who  became  a  Man,  and  so  our  Bepresentative,  and  was 
like  us  in  all  other  points,  was  unlike  us  in  his  sinlessneas.  He  never  lost  his  near 
communion  with  God.  He  is  our  one  High  Priest,  and  he  does  not  need  to  ofiiv 
sacrifices  first  for  himself,  as  was  the  case  with  the  Aaronic  priesthood. 


OH.  xLin.  1— 27.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  EZEKIEL.  875 

IV.  The  blood  of  the  ovvebjsq  must  be  spbisklbd.  This  essential  part  of  th« 
ceremonial  was  necessary  that  the  completed  sacrifices  might  be  efficacious  by  the 
application  of  its  results  to  the  worshippers.  Christ  has  made  his  great  sacrifice  of 
himself  once  for  all.  But  now  the  benefits  of  Ms  death  have  to  be  shared  individually 
by  men.  These  benefits  do  not  accrue  spontaneously  and  without  men's  actively 
receiving  them.  The  blood  must  be  sprinkled ;  the  grace  of  Christ's  great  sacrifics 
must  be  taken  home.  1.  There  must  be  individual  faith  in  Christ.  Thus  the  sacri- 
fice is  made  efficacious  in  the  case  of  each  man  who  will  avail  himself  of  it.  2.  There 
must  he  an  application  to  the  whole  of  life.  The  blood  of  the  Passover  lamb  was 
sprinkled  on  the  lintels  and  doorposts  of  the  houses  of  the  Hebrews.  We  need  to 
have  our  homes  and  all  that  belongs  to  us  brought  into  subjection  to  Christ,  and  then 
brought  under  the  gracious  influences  that  stream  from  the  great  Sacrifice  on  Calvary. 

Ver.  27  (last  clause,  "  And  I  will  accept  you,  saith  the  Lord  God  "). — Accepted  hy 

God.      I.   (X)N8IDKR   THE  MOTIVES  THAT   MAY    INDUCE    GtOD  TO   AOOBPT   MEN.      It  might 

be  supposed  that  God  was  self-sufficient  and  would  not  look  beyond  the  range  of  nia 
own  infinite  Being ;  or  that,  if  he  took  note  of  what  was  other  than  himself,  he  would 
be  satisfied  with  the  high  intelligence  and  pure  character  of  angel-beings,  and  not  con- 
descend to  notice  such  feeble  and  sinful  creatures  as  mortal  men.  Ye't  God  has  reasons 
for  accepting  men.  1.  His  infinity.  This,  which  has  been  raised  as  an  objection,  really 
works  the  other  way,  for  an  infinite  Being  is  not  simply  vast  and  only  concerned  with 
vast  things.  To  him  the  greatest  finite  thing  is  infinitely  small.  If  he  attends  to  the 
greatest  he  may  as  easily  stoop  to  the  smallest.  But,  further,  his  very  infinity  embraces 
all  things,  the  most  minute  as  much  as  the  most  gigantic.  2.  Eis  royalty.  God  is  the 
supreme  Sovereign  of  the  universe ;  therefore  he  is  concerned  with  aU  the  subjects  of 
his  realm.  3.  nis  Justice.  Having  made  men,  he  will  not  desert  his  own  creatures. 
4.  His  love.  God  is  love,  and  love  is  full  of  sympathy.  Prom  this  supreme  motive 
God  must  be  ever  yearning  to  gather  his  children  to  himself,  ever  longing  to  give  them 
a  welcome  home. 

II.  ObSBEVB    the    GREAT    HINDBANOE    THAT    MAT    PBBVEST    GoD    FEOM    ACOBPTINa 

MEN.  If  God  is  the  infinite  Sovereign  of  the  universe,  what  is  to  hinder  his  wel- 
coming whomsoever  he  will?  The  Greeks  dreamed  of  a  fate  ruling  supreme  even 
over  the  dread  Olympian  deities ;  but  we  hold  that  there  is  no  power  above  that  of  God. 
No  potoer,  it  is  true.  Tet  there  is  the  awful  principle  of  righteousness,  and  even  God 
follows  and  does  not  bend  that  supreme  principle.  It  may  be  identified  with  his  own 
holy  nature.  ITien  we  must  say  that  Cfod  cannot  but  be  true  to  himself.  This  being 
BO,  a  great  obstruction  stands  in  the  way  of  man's  being  accepted  by  God,  viz.  man's 
sin.  The  holy  God  cannot  give  a  free  welcome  to  the  unholy  man.  It  would  be  to 
contradict  his  own  being  and  character. 

III.  Note  the  conditions  on  which  God  accepts  men.  The  Divine  act  of 
receiving  men  is  placed  by  Ezekiel  after  the  sacrificial  ritual.  God  accepts  on  condition 
of  sacrifice.  There  were  first  of  all  sin  offerings,  and  then  dedication  (burnt)  oiferings 
and  thank  (peace)  offerings.  With  us  the  first  grand  condition  is  fulfilled.  Christ  is 
the  one  Sacrifice  for  the  world's  sin.  In  Christ's  great  surrender  of  his  pure  soul  to 
God  through  death,  God  sees  the  sacrifice  of  man  by  his  Representative,  and  therefore, 
accepting  the  sacrifice,  accepts  man  on  whose  behalf  it  is  offered.  We  must  make  tha 
sacrifice  our  own  by  entering  into  the  spirit  of  it,  by  ourselves  dying  to  sin  and  yielding 
ova  hearts  and  wills  to  the  crucified  Saviour.  Then  God  accepts  his  penitent  children. 
But  for  Ml  acceptance  thank  and  dedication  offerings  were  added.  God  expects  us  to 
come  to  him  with  grateful  hearts,  and  to  yield  our  souls  to  him  in  obedient  service. 
When  we  approach  him  thus,  as  it  were  with  our  peace  and  our  burnt  offerings,  h« 
accepts  us. 

rV.  Look  at  the  bebultb  of  being  acoeptbo  by  God.  The  first  is  immediate 
and  personal — ^the  reconciliation  of  the  child  with  his  father,  and  the  glad  return  of  the 
wanderer  to  the  home  of  his  childhood.  But  from  this  follow  other  consequences. 
We  desire  that  God  will  accept  us  as  his  servants ;  when  he  does  we  have  the  privilege 
of  living  and  labouring  for  him.  We  would  have  our  work  and  gift  accepted  by  God ; 
for  him  to  receive  our  offerings  of  service  or  sacrifice  is  to  be  most  honoured  by  Qod. 
At  death  he  will  receive  his  faithful  servants  to  the  heavenly  rest. 


376  THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PROPHET  BZBKIEL.    [oh,  xLin.  1—27. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vera.  1 — 5. — ITie  glory  of  the  Lord  in  the  house.  The  glory  of  the  honse  of  God 
does  not  consist  in  its  beauty  and  grandeur,  but  in  the  indwelling  of  the  Eternal 
himself.  When  the  tabernacle  of  witness  reared  in  the  wilderness  was  completed, 
when  Moses  had  finished  the  work,  "  then  the  cloud  covered  the  tent  of  meeting,  and 
the  glory  of  the  Lord  filled  the  tabernaele."  Upon  the  occasion  of  the  dedication  of 
Solomon's  temple,  "  it  came  to  pass,  when  the  priests  were  come  out  of  the  holy  place, 
that  the  cloud  lilled  the  house  of  the  Lord,  so  ttiat  the  priests  could  not  stand  to 
minister  by  reason  of  the  cloud;  for  the  glory  of  the  Lord  filled  the  house  of  the 
Lord."  What  Ezekiel,  in  vision,  observed  upon  the  inauguration  of  the  ideal  temple 
was  therefore  in  agreement  with  what  bad  taken  place  upon  two  of  the  most  memorable 
occasions  in  the  history  of  the  Jewish  Church. 

I.  This  was  a  ebstorbd  globt.  1.  The  prophet  had  seen  the  glory  of  the  Lord 
depart  from  the  temple  by  the  way  of  the  east,  towards  the  Mount  of  Olives.  In 
consequence  of  the  sin  of  the  people  and  the  defilement  of  the  sacred  building,  the 
holy  Presence  had  been  removed.  The  idolatry  by  which  the  temple  and  the  city  had 
been  profaned  had  caused  the  withdrawal  of  the  Divine  favour.  Man  was  constituted 
to  be  the  temple  of  the  Eternal;  by  his  sin  he  alienated  and  repelled  "the  Divine 
Inhabitant."  2.  The  purification  of  the  temple  was  the  occasion  of  the  return  of  the 
lost  favour  and  glory.  The  presence  of  the  Most  High  is  represented  as  returning  by 
the  way  by  which  it  had  departed.  When  man's  nature  is  cleansed,  when  the  way  is 
made  open  for  the  restoration  of  relations  long  suspended,  then  the  glory  of  God  is  once 
again  displaj-ed,  and  his  favour  once  again  enjoyed. 

II.  This  wab  ah  imfbesbive  globt.  1.  As  described  in  itself  it  is  characterized 
by  majesty.  The  figurative  language  employed  is  drawn  from  those  sources  by  which 
the  senses  are  chiefly  impressai  Whan  we  read  that  the  voice  w«b  as  the  sound  of 
many  waters,  and  that  the  earth  shone  with  the  splendour,  we  are  assured  that  the 
spiritual  majesty  which  such  figures  are  employed  to  set  forth  was  nothing  ordinary. 
2.  And  this  assurance  is  deepened  as  we  are  led  to  recognize  the  manner  in  which  the 
manifestation  affected  the  prophet  himself:  he  "fell  upon  his  face,"  overcome  with  the 
grandeur  of  the  spectacle.  It  is  not  every  nature  that  is  so  affected  by  great  spiritual 
realities.  Yet  there  is  nothing  in  the  world  so  deserving  of  reverence,  so  truly  fitted  to 
call  out  emotions  of  awe,  as  the  spiritual  presence  of  the  Eternal  in  bis  Church.  It  is 
only  because  men  are  so  carnal,  so  insensible  to  true  grandeur,  that  they  can  know  oi 
the  Divine  nearness  and  yet  remain  unmoved. 

III.  This  was  a  diffused  oloby.  In  simple  and  sublime  language  the  prophet 
rel  ites  what  followed  the  marvellous  return  of  Deity :  "  The  glory  of  the  Lord  filled  the 
house."  How  wonderfully  does  the  statement  express  the  universal  pervasion  of  the 
Church  by  the  Divine  presence  and  splendour !  How  fitted  is  such  a  representatiori  to 
remove  our  misconceptions  and  our  prejudices!  There  is  no  member  of  Christ's  Church 
however  lowly,  there  is  no  work  in  Christ's  Church  however  unobtrusive,  there  is  no 
section  of  Christ's  Church  however  lacking  in  learning,  wealth,  refinement,  or  power, 
which  is  not  full  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord^-of  that  glory  which  is  spiritual,  which 
is  apprehended  by  human  minds  when  quickened  and  enlightened  by  the  Spirit  ol 
God. 

IV.  This  was  a  pebmanent  glory.  The  glor;  of  the  temple  at  Jerusalem  passed 
away.  In  the  appointed  time  the  building  perished,  and  not  one  stone  was  left  upon 
another.  But  the  temple  which  Ezekiel  saw  in  his  vision  was  a  spiritual,  and  therefore 
an  abiding,  temple,  whose  walls  shall  never  be  taken  down,  whose  ministrations  and 
ofierings  shall  never  cease,  and  which  shall  evor  echo  with  ten  thousand  voices  uttering 
the  high  praises  of  our  redeeming  God. — T. 

Ver.  7. — The  Divine  indwelling.  There  is  a  peculiar  solemnity  in  this  utterance. 
The  prophet  has  beheld  the  return  of  the  Lord's  glory  to  his  house,  and  has  seen  its 
courts  filled  with  the  mystic  lustre.  He  stands  in  the  inner  court,  the  attendant  angel 
being  by  his  side.  And  the  voice  of  the  Lord,  mighty  as  the  sound  of  many  waters, 
addresses  him  as  the  son  of  man,  and  assures  him  that  the  Eternal  Spirit  has  now  taken 


OH.  XLiii.  1— 27.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  377 

up  a  perpetual  abode  mthin  his  consecrated  temple,  and  that  those  courts  shall  hence- 
forth be  pure  from  every  defilement,  and  shall  be  holy  unto  the  Lord. 

I.  The  fact  of  the  Divine  indwellino.  It  appears  that  this  is  set  forth  under 
two  metaphors,  both  just  and  impressive,  yet,  even  when  taken  together,  inadequate 
to  set  forth  the  great  reality.  1.  The  Chiirch  is  God's  dwelling,  his  home,  where  he 
reveals  himself  in  his  compassion  and  kindness,  and  where  he  admits  men  to  his  sacred 
fellowship,  upon  terms  of  delightful,  though  reverent,  intercourse  and  familiarity. 
2.  The  Church  is  God's  throne,  whence  he  rules  by  the  publication  of  his  Divine  and 
righteous  laws,  and  the  exercise  of  his  just,  irresistible,  and  yet  benign  authority.  Tt 
is  as  though  he  were  at  once  the  Father  of  the  spiritual  family  and  the  King  of  the 
spiritual  dominion.  He  is,  indeed,  all  this,  and  more  than  this,  to  the  Church  he  loves 
and  has  redeemed. 

II.  The  accompaniments  of  the  Divine  indwellino.  These,  as  represented  in 
this  passage,  are :  1.  Deliverance  from  past  idolatries,  by  which  humanity  has  been 
defiled,  degraded,  and  disgraced.  2.  By  implication,  reverence  for  God's  holy  Name, 
displaying  itself  in  holiness,  in  obedience,  in  praise.  It  was  the  expulsion  of  evil 
abominations  which  made  the  return  of  the  Lord  a  possibility;  it  is  the  prevalence 
of  holy  worship  and  affectionate  service  which  secures  the  lasting  residence  and  reign 
of  the  great  and  glorious  Inhabitant. — T. 

Ver.  10. — Shame  for  sin.  Shame  is  an  emotion  which  is  often  misdirected.  Men 
are  ashamed  sometimes  of  those  things  of  which  they  ought  rather  to  boast,  whilst  they 
boast  of  those  things  of  which  they  ought  to  be  asliamed.  There  is  one  habit  of  which 
men  ought  always  to  be  ashamed — the  habit  of  sinning  against  God.  It  was  this  which 
Bzekiel  was  directed  to  bring  home  to  the  hearts  of  his  fellow-countrymen  of  the  house 
of  Israel. 

I.  The  sin  of  which  a  justly  sensitive  nature  is  ashamed.  The  iniquities 
with  which  the  prophet  was  directed  to  charge  the  people  of  Jerusulem,  and  for  which 
he  was  instructed  to  reproach  them,  were  their  idolatrous  practices,  especially  in  con- 
nection with  the  temple  precincts.  The  palaces  of  the  idolatrous  monarchs  of  Judah 
adjoined  the  consecrated  edifice,  and  in  those  palaces  heathen  rites  were  celebrated. 
Not  only  so,  some  of  the  kings  of  Judah,  as  Ahaz  and  Manasseh,  actually  introduced 
idolatry  into  the  very  courts  of  the  temple.  Of  such  infamous  conduct  both  monarchg 
and  subjects  may  well  have  been  ashamed.  All  who  put  the  creature  in  the  place  of 
the  Creator,  who  worship,  whether  with  their  lips  or  in  their  hearts,  others  than  Gh)d, 
are  virtually  guilty  of  idolatry,  and  have  need  to  humble  themselves  with  shame  and 
confusion  of  face. 

II.  The  manner  in  which  shame  fob  sin  is  awakened.  I.  The  Word  of  God 
without  propounds  the  sacredness  and  the  exacting  character  of  the  Divine  Law  which 
has  been  violated,  and  summons  the  offender  to  contrast  his  conduct  with  the  command- 
ment which  is  holy,  just,  and  good.  2.  The  voice  of  conscience  within  responds  to  the 
voice  of  the  Word,  testifies  to  its  Divinity  and  its  authority,  rebukes  the  sinner  for  his 
rebelliousness,  and  awakens  within  the  soul  fear  of  the  righteous  judgment  of  G-od. 
No  wonder  that  this  conjunction  should  cause  bitter  humiliation,  poignant  shame,  deep 
contrition. 

III.  The  pkopbb  effects  of  shame  foe  sin.  1.  The  offence  is  loathed  and  for- 
saken; the  idolater  abandons  his  idols,  the  unjust,  impure,  and  profane  relinquish  their 
sinful  practices.  2.  Reverence  ensues  for  the  Law  and  ordinances  of  God.  Corre- 
sponding to  the  aversion  and  humiliation  felt  in  the  retrospect  of  evil  courses  now 
abandoned,  is  the  aspiration  which  takes  possession  of  the  penitent,  urging  him  to 
conformity  to  the  Divine  character,  and  subjection  to  the  Divine  will.  To  be  ashamed 
of  sin  is  to  glory  in  righteousness,  to  boast  one's  self  in  God. — T. 

Ver.  12. — "  The  law  of  the  housed  The  connection  to  which  is  owing  the  introduction 
and  treatment  in  this  place  of  the  law  of  the  house,  appears,  though  it  is  not  very  plain, 
to  be  this — Lawlessness  has  been  described,  lawlessness,  taking  the  form  of  sinful 
rebellion  against  God,  and  defiance  of  just  authority,  especially  in  the  sacred  precincts 
of  the  temple,  which  have  been  diverted  f lom  spiritual  worship  to  idolatrous  rites. 
Lawlessness,  by  contrast,  suggests  law,  and  especially  law  as  applicable  to  the  house  of 


378  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  XLin.  1— 27. 

God.  And  to  the  spiritual  apprehension,  the  orderly  arrangement,  the  symtnetrical 
proportions  of  the  temple,  and  the  provision  made  for  all  proper  services,  all  speak  of 
the  Church  of  Christ,  which  is  obviously  symbolized  by  the  sanctuary  beheld  by  the 
prophet  in  his  vision. 

I.  The  tact  of  Divine  law  in  the  Church.  With  the  increase  of  habits  of 
observation  and  of  accuracy,  with  the  diminution  of  superstition,  men  have  come  to 
recognize  throughout  the  universe  the  presence  and  operation  of  law.  Many  different 
opinions  prevail  regarding  natural  law;  but  it  is  recognized  as  a  reality.  No  wonder 
that  a  settled  conviction  should  have  formed  itself  in  men's  miuds  that  "order  is 
Heaven's  first  law."  It  would  be  strange,  indeed,  were  the  Church,  God's  noblest 
revelation  of  himself  now  on  earth,  exempt  from  what  seems  a  condition  of  all  God's 
works.  As  there  was  a  law  of  the  house  in  the  Jewish  temple,  so  also  is  there  in  the 
Church  of  the  redeemed,  the  living  temple  of  the  Spirit. 

n.  The  RAJiQE  OF  Divine  law  in  the  Chubch.  Referring  to  the  cootext,  we 
observe  that  the  prophet  notes  the  application  of  law  to  the  form,  the  furniture,  the 
ordinances,  the  holiness,  of  the  temple.  When  we  come  to  consider  the  range  within 
which  law  is  observable  in  Christ's  Church,  we  find  ourselves  constrained  to  believe 
that  the  principles  are  universal  and  unmistakable,  but  that  in  the  details  there  is 
uncertainty.  Opinions  differ  as  to  the  measure  in  which  law  of  an  explicit  character 
governs  the  constitution,  the  ministry,  the  observances,  etc.,  of  the  Church  of  Christ. 
Some  students  are  disposed  to  look  to  Scripture  and  to  primitive  usage  for  more  explicit 
instructions  regarding  Church  matters  than  are  others ;  and  this  holds  good  of  those 
taking  different  views  of  what  are  known  as  ecclesiastical  principles.  But  all  are  agreed 
that  mutual  love  is  a  universal  obligation,  that  acceptable  worship  must  be  spiritual, 
that  efforts  are  to  be  made  for  the  enlightenment  and  salvation  of  mankind.  And  such 
laws  as  these  are  of  far  more  importance  than  many  customs  and  regulations  upon  which 
different  opinions  prevail. 

III.  The  authority  of  Divine  law  in  the  Chuhoh.  It  is  the  authority  of  right, 
which,  however  it  may  be  misunderstood  and  practically  repudiated  by  any,  is  not 
denied,  but  is  admitted  by  all.  It  is  also  the  authority  of  love ;  the  Divine  Lawgiver 
himself  declared,  "Te  are  my  friends,  if  ye  do  whatsoever  I  command  you." 

IV.  The  blessings  of  Divine  law  in  the  Chueoh.  These  are  apparent  to  those 
who  consider  how  wretched  would  be  the  state  of  a  Church  without  a  law,  and  how 
little  less  wretched  the  state  of  a  Church  handed  over  to  the  control  of  fallible  and 
imperfect  human  legislators.  The  past  history  of  the  Church  shows  that  it  has  truly 
prospered  just  so  far  as  the  rules  laid  down  for  it  by  Divine  authority  have  been 
obeyed,  just  so  far  as  man  has  been  kept  in  abeyance,  and  human  policy  and  human 
selfishness  have  been  repudiated.  Beside  the  direct  blessings  which  have  accrued  to  the 
Church  itself  through  subjection  to  "  the  law  of  the  house,"  it  must  be  borne  in  mind 
that  the  world  has  benefited  by  the  example  which  has  thus  been  set  to  earthly  institu- 
tions and  secular  rulers,  that  owe  more  than  they  are  forward  to  acknowledge  to  those 
principles  of  authority  and  subjection  which  by  the  Church  have  been  introduced  into 
and  impressed  upon  the  world. — T. 

Yer.  27. — Acceptcmee.  The  purpose  of  the  temple  is  the  establishment  and  main- 
tenance of  harmonious  relations  between  God  and  the  sons  of  men.  By  sin  those 
relations  have  been  interrupted ;  by  religion  they  are  restored.  What  was  symbolized 
by  the  material  temple  at  Jerusalem — its  priesthood  and  services  and  sacrifices — ^is 
realized  in  the  spiritual  temple  of  the  new  covenant,  in  which  Christ  is  the  Sacrifice  and 
the  Priest,  and  in  which  the  Holy  Spirit  sheds  the  Shechinah-glory  through  the  holiest 
of  all.    Acceptance  thus  takes  the  place  of  estrangement. 

I.  Acceptance  is  of  God's  obaoe,  and  is  undeserved. 

II.  ACOEFTANOE     IB     IN     VIRTUE    OF     THE    HIOH     FRIEST'b    MEDIATION     ADS     INTKB- 

0EB8ION. 

III.  Acceptance  is  for  the  obedient,  the  compliant,  the  submissive. 

IV.  Acceptance  is  alike  of  the  person  and  of  the  service. 

V.  Acceptance   involves   the   enjoyment  op   all  the    manifestations  axd 

OONBEQUENOES   OF   THE   DiVINB   FAVOUR. 

Application.    1.  One  aim  of  a  spiritual  ministry  to  men  is  to  convince  them  that 


OH.  xun.  1— 27.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  379 

in  their  sinful  state  they  are  without  acceptance  with  God.  2.  Another  aim  of  such 
a  ministry  is  to  exhibit  the  divinely  appointed  method  of  obtaining  and  enjoying 
acceptance  with  Grod.  3.  Yet  another  aim  is  to  expose  false  and  delusive  representations 
of  the  way  of  acceptance.  "  There  is  one  God,  and  one  Mediator  between  God  and 
man,  the  Man  Christ  Jesus ;  who  gave  himself  a  ransom  for  all,  to  be  testified  in  due 
time."— T. 

Vers.  1 — 9. — Sunshine  after  storm.  The  prophet  of  Jehovah  has  inspected  all  the 
plans  of  the  second  temple.  In  clearest  vision  he  has  seen  all  its  parts  arranged.  The 
sacred  edifice  has  grown  to  perfection  before  his  eye.  Court  within  court  has  successively 
appeared.  And  now  the  great  question  arises,  "  Will  the  God  of  heaven  ^ain  stoop  to 
dwell  there  ? "  In  vain  will  be  all  this  preparation  and  toil  unless  Jehovah  shall  fill 
the  house  again  with  his  presence.  In  vain  will  be  all  ceremony  and  all  sacrifice  unless 
the  God  of  Abraham  responds  to  human  appeals.  The. prophet's  suspense  is  only  for 
a  moment.  As  soon  as  the  separation  between  the  "  sanctuary  and  the  profane  place  " 
is  accomplished,  the  God  who  had  retired  because  of  the  desecrations  of  his  palace 
again  approaches.  He  resumes  his  wonted  place.  Again,  as  in  the  days  of  Solomon, 
his  glory  fills  the  central  shrine.  No  change  has  occurred  in  his  dispositions  and 
intentions.  He  is.ready  to  keep  to  the  full  his  part  of  the  Abrahamic  covenant.  As  he 
fulfilled  his  word  in  departing,  so  will  he  in  returning. 

I.  God's  unohanqbableness  in  his  self-manifestations.  "  The  visions  were  like 
the  vision  that  I  saw  by  the  river  Chebar."  As  the  splendour  of  light  had  been  the 
best  imagery  that  could  illustrate  his  presence  in  the  past,  so  is  it  still.  All  that 
God  had  been  to  Israel  in  the  ages  gone,  he  was  prepared  to  be  again.  The  past  con- 
descensions of  God  were  a  pattern  according  to  which  he  will  act  in  the  future.  It 
was  an  accommodation  to  human  weakness  that  the  sun  should  image  forth  the 
essential  nature  of  Jehovah,  and,  inasmuch  as  it  worthily  serves  that  purpose,  it  shall 
be  a  permanent  dress  in  which  Jehovah  shall  appear.  But  all  metaphors  are  inadequate, 
all  conceptions  of  him  are  inadequate.  The  light  of  his  presence  transcends  far  the 
brightness  of  the  material  sun.     He  is  the  Light  of  all  light. 

II.  God   18  UNCHANGEABLE   IN  THE  PRINCIPLES   OF   HIS   ROLE.      "  The    vislou   which 

I  saw  was  according  to  the  vision  that  I  saw  when  I  came  to  destroy  the  city." 
Although  God  had  withdrawn  his  favour  &om  Israel,  although  he  had  chastised  his 
people  sore,  he  had  not  altered  a  single  rule  of  action  nor  abandoned  any  principle  of 
covenant.  He  was  the  same  God  who  had  pledged  himself  to  Abraham's  seed,  the 
same  God  who  had  delivered  them  from  the  hands  of  their  foes,  the  same  God  who  had 
given  them  over  to  the  Chaldeans,  who  now  was  preparing  for  them  restoration  and 
honour.  God  had  acted  throughout, upon  a  line  of  clear  consistency.  The  conduct  and 
the  loyalty  of  the  people  had  changed ;  therefore  they  had  felt  the  rod  of  his  anger.  The 
isame  fatherly  heart  which  had  rewarded  obedience  also  punished  rebellion.  The  man 
who  turns  his  back  upon  the  sun  makes  a  shadow  for  himself,  yet  the  sun  has  in  no 
wise  changed.  The  warm  beams  that  penetrate  and  bless  the  ploughed  furrows  of  the 
field  only  harden  and  injure  the  trodden  surface  of  the  soil.  God  remains,  in  the 
essential  principles  of  his  government,  the  same,  although  sometimes  men  bask  in  his 
friendship,  and  sometimes  writhe  beneath  his  rod. 

IIL  God  is  onchanoeable  m  his  choice  of  abode.  "  I  wiU  dwell  in  the  midst 
of  the  children  of  Israel  for  ever."  So  long  as  they  are  children  of  Israel — ^men  of  faith 
and  prayer — so  long  will  God  dwell  among  them.  It  is  a  permanent  and  unchangeable 
law  that  God  finds  delight  among  the  sons  of  men,  and  wherever  his  presence  is  desired 
his  presenee  will  be  found.  If  provision  is  made  tor  him  in  the  heart,  iu  the  home,  oi 
in  social  gatherings,  he  will  speedily  descend.  If  separation  from  sin  has  been  made ; 
if  altars  are  reared  and  sacrifices  are  brought;  if,  in  humility  and  reverence,  he  is 
sought,  certainly  he  will  come  and  dwell  in  their  midst.  In  such  circumstances,  God 
may  always  be  expected  to  come. 

IV.  God  is  unohanobable  in  his  mode  of  ooMMUNioATiNa  with  men.  "  I  heard 
him  speaking  unto  me."  It  has  ever  been  God's  wont  to  communicate  to  the  race  by 
the  agency  of  a  man.  He  speaks  to  one,  that  the  one  may  convey  the  message  to  the 
many.  He  enlightens  one,  that  the  one  may  enlighten  others.  God  honours  the  human 
family  by  making  one  a  mediator  between  himself  and  the  rest.     The  man  selected  t 


880  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PKOPHET  EZEKIBL.    [ch.  xini.  1— 27. 

be  a  prophet  i8  blessed  thereby,  and  he  learns  the  lesson  of  responsibility.  To  have  at 
our  disposal  the  well-being  of  many  (if  a  man  have  the  true  prophet's  spirit)  elevates 
a  man,  and  brings  into  activity  all  the  best  qualities  of  his  nature.  In  every  age  God 
has  thus  dealt  with  men. 

V.  God  is  unchangeable  in  his  mobal  LKmas  and  DiSLiEiNas.  "They  have 
even  defiled  my  holy  Name,  .  .  .  wherefore  I  have  consumed  them  in  my  anger."  Thit 
which  was  offensive  to  God  in  Eden  was  offensive  to  him  in  Jerusalem ;  and  that  self- 
same thing  is  equally  offensive  to  him  to-day.  Eebellion  against  his  high  authority, 
springing  as  it  does  from  a  lack  of  love,  is  to  him  an  abomination.  All  sin  is  pollution, 
a  stench  in  Jehovah's  nostrils.  To  a  refined  mind,  some  forms  of  sin  are  offensive 
enough.  Drunkenness  is  a  sore  offence  to  many.  Murder  is  an  abomination  to  a  larger 
number  yet.  But  in  the  esteem  of  God  all  forms  of  disobedience  are  as  ghastly  as 
murder,  and  to  him  murder  is  tenfold  more  vile  than  it  is  to  us.  Oar  spiritual 
sensibility  is  weakened  by  long  indulgence  in  evil  practice.  By-and-by  the  redeemed 
will  regard  sin  as  God  regards  it ;  they  will  loathe  it  as  God  loathes  it ;  they  will 
esteem  it  as  of  all  things  the  most  abominable. 

VI.  God  is  unchangeable  in  his  conditions  of  blessino.  "Let  them  put  away 
their  whoredom  ...  far  from  me,  and  I  will  dwell  in  the  midst  of  them."  In  the 
eye  of  God  all  idulatry  is  whoredom.  The  heart  had  gone  after  a  foul  and  unholy  rival. 
And  the  abandonment  of  all  idolatry  is  God's  immovable  condition  for  blessing  men. 
If  every  idol  is  cast  out  of  the  human  heart,  God  will  dwell  there.  The  greatest  promise 
he  has  ever  made  to  men  is  based  on  this  condition,  either  expressed  or  implied.  His 
inmost  nature  is  the  quintessence  of  purity,  and  if  the  taint  of  active  sin  is  in  the 
atmosphere,  he  speedily  departs.  God's  gifts  in  nature  always  depend  on  fixed  conditions. 
Light  will  come  to  us  only  through  a  proper  condition  of  atmosphere.  The  electric 
message  will  travel  to  its  destination  only  along  conducting  media.  Health  visits  men 
only  through  fixed  channels.  And  life  itself  is  conveyed  only  through  conditions  that 
never  change.  To  obtain  the  abiding  presence  of  God  we  must  concede  to  him  his  own 
terms.— D. 

Vers.  10 — 12. — "  2%e  law  of  the  house."  Through  all  the  ceremonies  and  observances 
of  the  ancient  temple  one  conspicuous  lesson  ran,  viz.  a  lesson  of  purity.  Every  rite 
and  sacrifice  were  vocal  with  this  lesson.  It  was  written  on  every  altar.  It  was  visible 
in  ihe  priestly  dress.  It  was  engraven  on  the  high  priest's  mitre.  On  every  side  men 
saw  and  heard  the  cardinal  truth  that  God  is  holy,  and  that  on  earth  he  has  a  residence 
in  order  to  make  men  holy. 

I.  God's  abode  among  men  is  the  highest  peoof  of  his  favoub.  This  is  the 
climax  of  bis  condescension.  Material  gifts  he  imparts  to  all  his  creatures :  "  He 
makes  his  sun  to  shine  on  the  evil  and  on  the  good."  It  is  an  act  of  kindness  for  God 
to  speak  to  men  through  a  messenger ;  an  act  of  kindness  to  provide  |  ardon  for  the 
penitent ;  an  act  of  kindness  to  open  the  way  to  spiritual  eminence  and  joy.  But  to 
dwell  among  inferior,  wayward,  rebellious  creatures  is  the  highest  piece  of  condescension 
we  can  conceive.  Such  an  idea  overwhelmed  Solomon's  mimi  with  surprise;  "Will 
God  in  very  deed  dwell  with  men  on  the  earth  ?  "  And  the  incarnation  of  God  in  the 
Man  Christ  Jesus  will  ever  remain  the  mystery  of  mysteries.  If  God  be  with  us  wc 
can  have  no  need.  If  God  be  with  us  we  are  sure  to  conquer,  sure  to  rise  in  excellence, 
sure  to  reach  perfection. 

II.  God's  amazing  kindness  is  the  source  op  penitbnoe.  The  end  of  this 
gracious  revelation  by  Ezekiel  is  "  that  they  may  be  ashamed  of  their  iniquities." 
"  What  the  Law  could  not  do  "  love  has  accomplished.  So  constructed  is  the  human 
heart  that  love  (if  mighty  enough)  shall  move  and  conquer  it.  The  exile  in  Babylon 
had  ploughed  deep  furrows  in  the  hearts  of  the  Hebrews,  and  now  the  dew  and  sunshine 
from  heaven  had  fallen  on  them  to  make  the  soil  fruitful.  The  purity  of  the  human 
soul  is  an  end  so  transcendently  great  that  no  measures  are  too  costly  by  which  such 
an  end  can  be  gained.  The  magnificent  provision  which  God  was  making,  in  Ezekiel's 
day,  for  dwelling  again  in  the  midst  of  Israel  was  well  calculated  to  awaken  remorse 
and  shame  in  every  breast.  Jehovah's  good  will,  in  spite  of  provocation,  was  enough 
to  melt  the  stoutest  heart. 

III.  Man's  penitence  ib  the  obound  or  fubthbb  revelation  fbom  God.     "  If 


OH.  xLin.  1— 27.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  BZEKIEL.  881 

ihey  be  ashamed  .  .  .  show  them  the  form  of  the  house,'' etc.  Bight  moral  dispositions 
Are  essential  to  an  understanding  of  God.  "  To  the  froward  God  will  appear  as  froward." 
To  the  Jews  of  his  day  Jesus  said,  "  How  can  ye  believe,  who  receive  honour  one  of 
another,  and  seek  not  the  lionour  that  cometh  from  God  only  ?  "  As  natural  light  cannot 
find  its  way  into  our  dwelling  if  the  window  be  barred  with  shutters,  so  cannot  GK>d'8 
truth  enter  the  mind  if  the  mind  be  choked  with  worldly  things.  "  The  secret  of  the 
Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  him ; "  "  To  the  upright  there  ariseth  light  in  the  darkness." 
For  God  to  reveal  his  will  to  sin-loving  men  would  be  "to  cast  pearls  before  swine." 
That  heart  must  be  right  towards  God  that  desires  to  know  the  truth ;  and  whensoever 
a  man  eagerly  desires  the  truth,  God  will  reveal  it  unto  him.  The  man  who  has  a 
docile  mind  shall  see  a  light  that  others  do  not  see,  shall  hear  a  voice  that  others  do 
not  hear. 

IV.  God's  revelations  to  men  have  a  pbaotioal  aspect.  "Write  it  in  their 
sight,  that  they  may  keep  the  whole  form  thereof."  God  has  seen  fit  never  to  indulge 
human  curiosity.  Questions  that  have  no  practical  bearing  on  conduct  God  will  not 
answer.  To  indulge  the  curiosity  of  men  would  divert  them  from  the  great  practical 
tasks  required  of  them — tasks  which  are  the  largest  channel  of  blessing.  Further, 
God  has  condescended  to  put  his  will  in  a  written  form,  that  it  may  be  more  clearly 
known,  and  may  have  permanence  amid  the  dissolutions  of  mankind.  These  chapters 
in  the  prophet's  book  which  seem  to  us  void  of  interest,  were  written  by  special 
command  of  God.  They  have  served  a  useful  purpose  in  the  past ;  they  may  fulfil 
a  beneficent  mission  in  time  to  come.  "  All  Scripture,  written  by  inspiration  of  God, 
is  profitable  " — it  promotes  some  noble  end.  The  fashion  of  the  temple,  its  court  within 
•court,  its  many  gates  and  porches,  all  conveyed  important  lessons  to  the  Jews,  they 
convey  momentous  lessons  still. 

y.  God's  temple  is  a  visible  and  imfbesbive  revelation  of  his  holiness. 
-"  The  law  of  the  house "  is  this,  viz.  holiness.  The  sanctuary  of  God  iucorporateg 
men's  idea  of  God.  Unless  men  adopt  God's  thoughts  and  cherish  God's  feelings,  they 
will  not  build  God's  temple  after  God's  plan.  This  is  the  visible  and  eloquent  witness 
for  God,  age  after  age.  If  it  be  truly  a  temple  of  God,  and  God  reside  in  it,  it  will  be 
a  centre  of  light  and  purity  and  blessing  to  the  neighbourhood.  The  purifying  power 
will  touch  every  worshipper.  The  gracious  influence  will  be  felt  in  the  home,  in  the 
city,  in  every  commercial  circle;  it  will  spread  through  the  nation ;  it  will  bless  the 
world.  "  The  whole  limit  thereof  round  about  shall  be  holy."  What  the  sanctuary 
is,  the  town  or  city  will  be.  What  the  combined  sanctuaries  of  the  land  are,  the 
nation  will  be.  This  law  of  God's  house  is  influential  holiness — holiness  that  uplifts 
and  ennobles  and  beautifies  humanity ;  the  holiness  that  springs  from  love. — D. 

Ver.  27. — Foimdation  of  acceptance  with  Qod.  It  is  a  question  vital  to  the  interests 
of  men,  "  How  to  find  reconciliation  with  God."  If  the  Bible  contains  no  authentic 
information  on  this  head,  it  contains  no  real  gospel.  Martin  Luther  tersely  described 
this  doctrine  of  justification  as  the  hinge  of  a  standing  or  a  falling  Church.  It  is  the 
pivot  of  salvation  or  perdition  for  every  man.  What  the  sun  is  in  the  midst  of  the 
solar  system,  what  the  heart  is  to  the  human  body,  what  the  mainspring  is  to  a 
watch,  the  doctrine  of  man's  justification  before  God  is  to  all  the  other  doctrines  of 
religion.  On  this  momentous  matter  God  has  clearly  revealed  to  us  his  will.  It  is  so 
plainly  unfolded  that  he  "  may  run  who  reads."  The  Old  Testament  is  in  complete 
accord  with  the  New.  Acceptance  is  based  on  vicarious  sacrifice.  On  the  part  of  man 
active  and  implicit  faith  is  required. 

I.  Acceptance  with  God  is  man's  PBEssiNa  want.  All  other  needs  are  subordinate 
to  this.  God's  favour  con  verts  man's  hell  into  heaven.  To  bring  men  into  reconciliation 
with  God,  all  these  visions  were  vouchsafed  to  Ezekiel.  For  this,  all  the  sacrifice  of 
animal  life  had  been  made.  For  this,  the  temple  had  been  erected,  and  was  now  to  be 
reconstructed.  For  this,  the  office  of  priesthood  had  been  instituted.  For  this,  every 
written  revelation  has  been  given.     For  this,  God's  mind  has  been  deeply  concerned. 

II.  Foe  man's  acceptance  with  God  a  hediatiko  pbiest  is  bbquired.  The 
work  of  bringing  men  back  to  God  is  so  full  of  difficulty  that  it  must  b« 
accomplished  by  distinct  stages.  A  priest  serves  many  useful  purposes.  He  is  an 
instructor,  by  deed,  if  not  by  utterance.    He  is  a  sympathizing  helper.     He  has  near 


382  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  BZEKIEL.    [oh.  xliii.  1—27. 

access  to  God,  and  interest  with  him.  The  priest  must  be,  of  all  men,  the  least  erring. 
His  mission  must  be  marked  as  specially  sacred.  Every  circumstance  which  can  lend 
sanctity  to  his  ofSce  must  be  provided.  He  must  be  mature  in  years,  experienced  in 
human  needs.  His  person  must  be  free  from  blemish.  Frequent  ablutions  must  be 
practised.  Exact  obedience  to  the  commands  of  God  must  be  observed.  He  must  be 
a  pattern  man.  God  has  been  pleased  to  do  for  us  through  a  Priest  what  he  will  not 
do  without  a  Priest.  And  all  the  complicated  arrangements  of  the  priesthood  were 
designed  to  impress  men's  minds  with  the  gigantic  evil  of  rebellion,  and  with  the 
difficulty  of  regaining  the  lost  place  in  God's  regard. 

HI.  Fob  man's  aooeftanoe  vicarious  death  is  needed.  The  necessity  for 
substitution  for  the  endurance  of  penalty  prior  to  reconciliation  with  God  may  be  » 
necessity  on  God's  side  as  well  as  a  necessity  on  man's  side.  The  maintenance  of  the 
Divine  government  throughout  the  universe  is  an  object  of  supreme  moment.  To 
make  pardon  cheap  and  easy  would  loosen  the  bonds  of  loyalty,  and  depreciate  the 
value  of  righteousness,  in  men's  esteem.  As  law  had  expressed  the  moral  relations 
between  God  and  men,  law  must  be  maintained.  The  penalty  of  sin  must  be  met. 
Innocent  lambs  and  heifers  must  die  that  sentiments  of  penitence  may  be  deepened  in 
the  human  soul.  So  valuable  is  reconciliation  between  man  and  God  that  it  is  worth 
while  to  sacrifice  hecatombs  of  inferior  animals  in  order  to  gain  the  end.  This  was 
an  educational  process,  that  men  might  perceive  how  devoid  of  e£Scacy  any  sacrifice 
n^ust  be,  short  of  the  perfect  sacrifice  of  God's  Son.  Whether  our  mindis  can  compre- 
hend the  reason  of  the  atonement  or  not,  it  is  clearly  the  will  of  Gt>d  that  restoration 
of  man  can  come  only  by  the  channel  of  vicarious  sacrifice. 

IV.  Fob  man's  acobptanob  a  complete  otclb  of  time  fob  prepabation  must 
ELAPSE.  "  When  these  days  are  expired,  it  shall  be."  Day  after  day,  for  seven  days, 
a  victim  slain  was  demanded  in  order  to  purify  the  altar.  The  Jewish  altar  had  been 
grievously  desecrated  and  polluted;  hence  a  complete  purgation  was  required.  Not 
until  the  completion  of  the  week  could  the  priests  proceed  to  present  any  offerings  for 
guilty  men.  A  cycle  of  time  was  to  be  spent  in  the  work  of  preparation.  In  like 
manner,  the  patriarchal  and  Levitical  periods  were  a  time  of  preparation  for  Messiah's 
work.  Until  men  have  learnt  the  tremendous  evil  there  is  in  sin,  until  they  have 
learnt  that  without  Divine  interposition  moral  renovation  is  impossible,  they  will  not 
value  a  Saviour  from  sin ;  they  will  not  listen  to  him.  Therefore  "  in  the  fulness 
time  " — then,  and  not  till  then — "  the  Son  of  God  came  forth." 

v.  Fob  man's  acobptance  complete  consecration  of  self  is  demanded.  The 
offerings  appointed  to  be  laid  upon  the  altar  were  "  burnt  offerings."  The  burnt  offer- 
ings must  precede  the  peace  offerings.  By  a  burnt  offering  is  meant  that  which  must 
be  wholly  consumed.  The  sacrifice  must  be  complete.  A  profound  moral  lesson  is 
here  inculcated;  it  should  be  written  in  capitals.  Salvation  means  complete 
surrender  to  God,  complete  devotion  to  his  service.  If  we  keep  back  anything  from 
God,  we  still  grieve  his  heart,  we  mar  ovu-  characters,  we  imperil  our  salvation.  If 
one  foe  remains  in  the  citadel,  the  city  is  not  safe.  One  weed  left  in  the  garden  may 
spread  and  spoil  the  whole.  One  germ  of  disease  in  the  system  may  issue  in  deaths 
Loyalty,  to  be  worth  anything,  must  be  complete.  In  order  to  be  saved,  the  Son  of 
God  must  reign  supremely  in  us.  King  over  every  thought. — D. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — The  return  of  Ood's  glory.  The  prophet  had  witnessed  in  sadness  the 
departure  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord  (see  ch.  x.  18,  19 ;  xi.  23).  He  has  now  a  happy 
vision  of  its  return ;  and  of  that  return  he  gives  a  very  graphic  description.  It  affected 
him  with  solemn  awe  (ver.  3)  as  well  as  with  sacred  joy.  He  found  himself  trans- 
ported to  the  place  where,  as  a  priest,  he  had  an  official  right  to  stand  (ver.  6),  and 
there  he  saw  the  brightness  of  Jehovah's  presence  filling  the  sanctuary,  while  he  heard 
the  voice  of  the  Lord  communicating  his  holy  will.  The  departure  and  the  return  of 
the  Divine  glory  have  various  illustrations  beside  those  which  were  witnessed  in 
connection  with  the  temple  at  Jerusalem.    We  may  find  this  in  relation  to — 

I.  The  human  world.  When  man  was  sinless  he  enjoyed  the  very  near  presence 
and  the  very  close  fellowship  of  his  Divine  Maker;  and  even  after  he  sinned,  before  the 
world  was  utterly  corrupted  by  its  iniquity,  men  possessed  not  a  little  of  the  near 
presence  and  of  the  communications  of  God.    But  as  sin  advanced  God  retired,  and 


OH.  xun.  1— 27.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  BZBKIEL.  888 

there  came  to  be  do  coDveise  betvreea  earth  and  heaven.  Then  the  glory  of  the  Lord 
had  departed.  But  "in  the  fulness  of  time"  God  manifested  himself  to  the  world — be 
came  in  redeeming  grace  to  raise  and  restore  our  fallen  race.  "  The  Word  was  made 
flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us,  and  we  beheld  his  glory  "  (John  i.  14) ;  we  had  "  the  light 
of  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ "  (2  Cor.  iv.  6).  Am 
men  looked  upon  him,  as  they  heard  bis  words,  as  they  witnessed  bis  life,  as  they 
beheld  the  glories  of  his  goodness  and  hia  power,  they  had  a  nobler  vision  of  the  glory 
of  the  Lord  than  that  of  Ezekiel,  as  here  described. 

IL  The  Ghdbch  of  Chbibt.  The  glory  of  the  Church  is  the  presence  of  its  Divine 
Lord — that  presence  as  manifested  by  the  indwelling  and  the  action  of  his  Holy  Spirit. 
Great  was  its  glory  when  that  Divine  presence  was  manifested  on  the  day  of  Pentecost, 
not  only  (ifor  indeed  chiefly)  by  the  tongues  of  flame  or  the  rushing  mighty  wind,  but 
by  the  conversion  of  "  three  thousand  souls."  But  there  may  come,  as  there  often  has 
coma,  a  time  when  the  glory  of  Christ  has  departed.  When  a  Church  sinks  down  into 
a  condition  of  unbelief,  or  of  spiritual  pride  and  fancied  independence,  or  of  indulgence 
and  (it  may  be)  immorality,  or  of  worldliiiess  and  prayerlessness,  then  might  the 
prophet  of  the  Lord,  with  inward  eye,  see  tlje  glory  of  the  Lord  "  on  the  threshold  " 
or  on  the  summit  of  the  mouatain,  no  longer  "  filling  the  house."  But  when  the 
sacred  and  the  blessed  hour  of  penitence  and  of  prayer,  of  humility  and  of  faith, 
arrives,  then  may  be  had  another  and  happier  vision — that  of  the  Lord's  return.  Christ 
wiU  come  again,  and  he  will  reveal  the  glory  of  his  goodness  and  his  grace,  imparting 
the  blessings  which  once  were  lost,  which  had  taken  flight,  aad  are  now  renewed ; 
bringing  with  him  power,  beauty,  joy,  life,  victory. 

lU.  The  individual  boul.  All  outward  pomps  and  all  human  distinctions  are 
as  nothing  to  the  himian  soul  compared  with  the  glorious  presence  of  the  Divine 
Bpirit  in  the  heart  of  man.  But  though  God  comes  to  us  thus  and  dwells  with  us,  he 
will  not  abide  with  us  if  we  do  not  retain  our  purity,  our  moral  and  spiritual  integrity 
(see  1  Cor.  iii.  16  ;  2  Cor.  vi.  16).  Yet  may  there  be,  in  individual  experience,  a 
blessed  return  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord.  If  there  be  a  sincere  and  deep  humility ;  if 
there  be  an  earnest  seeking  after  God  in  prayer ;  if  there  be  a  cordial  reconsecration 
of  the  heart  and  life  to  the  Divine  Redeemer ; — then  will  there  be  a  gracious  and  a 
glorious  return  of  his  presence  and  of  his  blessing  to  the  soul. — C. 

Vers.  7 — 9.—GocPs  vnapproaduMe  sovereignty.  God  now  appears  among  his 
people  as  their  Divine  Sovereign ;  the  house  to  which  he  comes  in  glorious  manifesta- 
tion is  "  the  place  of  his  throne  "  (ver.  7).  There  he  is  resolved  to  rule.  Other  kings, 
human  potentates,  had  been  reigning  there,  but  their  rule  shonld  now  be  over.  They 
had  been  usurpers  in  that  they  bad  set  up  their  will  against  his,  "  their  threshold  by  his 
thresholds,  their  post  by  his  posts  "  (ver,  8) ;  but  all  such  pretensions  would  be  hence- 
forth peremptorily  disallowed ;  they  would  be  unsparingly  swept  away :  "  I  consumed 
them  in  mine  anger."  The  Lord  alone  was  to  reign,  without  any  rival,  the 
unchallenged,  unapproachable  Authority.  The  sanctuary  of  the  Lord  was  the  throne 
of  the  great  King. 

L  The  Chuboh  of  Chbist  the  bphebe  of  Divms  sotebxigntt.  Ai  God  declared, 
through  his  prophet,  that  he  would  reign  in  the  temple,  sp  Jesiu  Chri^  claims  to  be 
the  one  and  only  Head  and  Euler  of  his  Church.  "  One  is  your  Master,  even  Christ." 
We  must  not  invade  his  "crown  rights"  in  any  way  or  under  any  consideration 
whatever.  1.  To  him  we  must  pay  our  worship,  not  placing  any  created  being  by  his 
side  upon  his  throne.  2.  By  his  revealed  wiU  we  must  determine  the  constitution  of 
his  Church.  Whether  we  gather  that  from  his  own  words,  or  from  the  spirit  of  his 
Ufe,  or  from  the  words  and  action  of  his  apostles,  we  must  make  the  will  of  Christ 
absolutely  supreme  in  all  our  collective  action.  And  his  will  not  only  affects  us  in 
deciding  on  the  forms  and  the  rules  of  our  ecclesiastical  association,  but  also  as  to  the 
spirit  in  which  we  hold  our  post  and  do  our  work  in  his  kingdom ;  we  are  essentially 
disloyal  to  him  when  our  attitude  or  bearing  toward  any  of  our  brethren  is  other  than 
that  which  illustrates  the  spirit  of  Christ. 

II.  The  Chuboh  of  Chbist  the  bouboe  of  Divine  sovEBEiaNTT.  The  source  in 
the  sense  of  being  instrumental  in  its  promotion.  For  it  is  to  the  Church  that  God 
has  committed  that  truth  which  alone  wiU  establish  it ;  and  it  is  of  the  Church  h« 


384  THE  BOOK   OF  THE   PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xliii.  1— 27. 

oxpuutB  that  life  which  will  contribute  so  largely  to  its  extension.  The  Church — every 
Christian  Church — baa  :  1.  To  proclaim  the  sovereign  rights  of  him  who  is  the  God  of 
our  life ;  to  present  God  to  men  as  the  Divine  Author  of  their  being,  Fountain  of  their 
ji  ly,  Source  of  all  their  comforts  and  their  blessings,  Father  of  their  spirit,  Preserver  "nd 
Guardian  of  their  life;  as  that  Divine  One  in  whom  they  "live  anil  move  and  have 
their  being,"  "  with  wliom  they  have  to  do  "  in  a  deeper  sense  and  to  a  far  higher  degree 
than  they  have  with  any  human  being.  2.  To  present  the  regal  claims  of  the  Lord  of 
our  salvation ;  to  hold  up  before  the  eyes  of  men  that  Son  of  man  who  came  down  from 
faeaveu  to  be  our  Teacher,  Leader,  Friend,  and  Saviour;  who  lived,  taught,  wrought, 
sorrowed,  and  died  for  our  redemption ;  that  Son  of  God  who  rose  in  triumph  from  the 
grave  and  ascended  to  the  right  hand  of  God ;  who  has  a  supreme  right  to  the  trust, 
the  love,  the  obedience,  the  full  and  entire  devotion  of  all  who  have  received  the  story 
of  his  dying  love  and  Uving  power.  3.  To  show  the  way  of  a  true,  thorough,  happy 
subjection  to  the  Divine  rule.  Thus  will  the  Church  of  Christ  become  "  the  place  of 
his  throne." — C. 

Ver.  12. — "  T^e  law  of  the  house  " — universal  holiness.  "  The  law  of  the  house,  what 
was  pre-eminently  entitled  to  be  called  the  law,  consisted  in  the  whole  region  of  the  temple 
mount  being  most  holy.  Not,  as  hitherto,  was  this  characteristic  to  be  confined  to  a 
single  apartment  of  the  temple ;  it  was  to  embrace  the  entire  circumference  occupied  by 
the  symbolical  institutions  of  the  kingdom — the  chambers  allotted  to  the  priests,  and 
even  the  courts  trodden  by  the  people,  as  well  as  the  immediate  dwelling-place  of 
Jehovah.  AU  were  to  have  one  character  of  sacredness,  because  all  connected  with 
them  were  to  occupy  a  like  position  of  felt  nearness  to  God  and  equally  to  enjoy  the 
privilege  of  access  to  him."  For  the  glory  of  the  Lord — his  manifested  presence — 
filled  the  house ;  every  one,  therefore,  in  every  part  of  the  sacred  precincts,  stood  in 
very  close  and  hallowed  relation  to  the  liviog  God,  and  character  must  correspond  with 
privilege.  The  Church  of  Christ  is  now  the  "house"  of  the  Lord,  and  respecting  its 
holiness  we  have — 

1.  Its  two  spimtual  coNSTmjBHTS.  These  are :  1.  Felt  nearness  to  Qod.  He  only 
can  be  truly  said  to  be  holy  who  realizes  continually  how  near  he  is  to  the  living  God, 
how  intimate  is  the  relationship  in  which  he  stands  to  him,  how  free  is  his  access  to 
him  ;  and  who,  realizing  this,  does  in  truth  "  walk  with  God  "  and  "  have  fellowship 
with  the  Father."  2.  Beparateness  from  sin.  The  holy  man  is  he  who,  like  the 
righteous  and  holy  Father  himself,  "  hates  all  manner  of  iniquity,"  puts  far  from  him, 
far  from  his  sight  and  from  his  sympathy  as  well  as  from  his  conversation  and  hii 
conduct,  everything  that  defiles  and  dishonours ;  he  is  the  man  who  repels  from  his 
«oul,  and  therefore  banishes  from  his  life,  all  falsehood  and  falsity,  all  impurity, 
all  covetousness,  all  forms  of  dishonesty  and  intemperance,  all  irreverence  and 
profanity. 

IL  Its  universal  pbbvalencb.  "  The  whole  limit  thereof  round  about  shall  be 
most  holy."  Not  one  particular  compartment,  but  the  whole  "  mountain  of  the  Lord." 
Tlius  with  the  Church  of  Christ,  holiness  is  to  characterize :  1.  All  its  members,  what- 
ever their  position  or  function  maybe,  whether  they  be  ministers  or  whether  they  hold 
no  ofiBcial  position  at  all.  There  is,  indeed,  a  peculiar  and  emphatic  demand  made  upon 
those  who  speak  for  Christ,  that  they  should  be  holy;  but  any  one  member  of  the 
C'hristiau  household  who  does  not  realize  his  nearness  to  God  and  does  not  separate 
himself  from  sin,  is  not  qualified  to  take  his  place  there,  he  is  not  obeying  "the  law  oi 
the  house,"  he  is  a  disloyal  subject,  an  unworthy  inmate.  2.  Its  members  in  aU 
their  relntionships.  Not  only,  though  markedly  and  unmistakably  there,  in  all  their 
distinctively  religious  engagements,  but  in  every  sphere  in  which  they  move — domestic, 
social,  literary,  artistic,  municipal,  political.  At  all  times  and  in  every  place  the 
people  of  God  are  to  have  respect  to  "  the  law  of  the  house,"  for  wherever  they  tre 
they  are  members  of  the  hous-ehold  of  God. 

in.  The  beobet  of  its  haiktenancg.  How  are  we  to  be  holy,  and  to  maintain  our 
sanctity  in  all  the  rush  and  strife,  under  all  the  burdens  and  provocations,  in  all  the 
unwholesome  atmosphere,  of  daily  life  ?  1.  By  being  much,  in  thought  and  prayer, 
with  Jesus  Christ,  the  holy  Saviour.  Much  of  his  friendship  will  mean  much  of  hta 
spirit,  for  we  constantly  grow  into  the  likeness  of  him  we  love.    2.  By  receiving  into 


OH.  XLIV.  1— 31.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIBL.  385 

our  minds  all  we  can  welcome  of  Divine  truth  (see  John  xv.  3 ;  xvii.  17).     3.  By 
seeking  and  obtaining  the  cleansing  and  renewing  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit. — 0. 

Vers.  13 — 27. — Purification  and  preparation.  Almost  all  the  regulations  pertaining 
to  the  sacrifices  under  the  old  economy  bore  upon  the  supreme  question  of  sanctity. 
God  would  impress  upon  his  people,  by  every  means  and  in  every  way,  that  the  Holy 
One  of  Israel  must  be  approached  by  those  only  who  were  pure  and  holy ;  that  if 
they  would  "  ascend  unto  the  hill  of  the  Lord  "  they  must  come  "  with  clean  hands 
and  a  pure  heart."  Hence  everything  and  every  one  had  to  be  carefully  purified  or 
consecrated  in  preparation  for  the  solemn  service.  In  these  verses  we  have  the  same 
idea  once  more  affirmed  in  the  prophet's  vision.  The  priests  who  officiated  were  to 
be  duly  consecrated  (ver.  26) ;  the  animals  slain  were  to  be  very  carefully  seleote<l, 
only  those  without  blemish  being  allowed  (vers.  22,  23,  25).  And  even  the  altar 
itself,  wliich  might  have  been  thought  to  be  incapable  of  any  impurity,  had  to  be 
formally  purged  and  cleansed  (ver.  20).  Sin  offerings  and  burnt  offerings  were  to  be 
presented,  not  forgetting  the  salt  (ver.  25),  that  the  altar  might  be  perfectly  prepared 
for  use,  and  that  the  worshippers  who  approached  it  might  find  acceptance  with  the 
Lord  (ver.  27).  Such  preparation  by  sacrifice  is  unknown  to  the  Church  of  Christ,  the 
old  ritual  having  happily  become  obsolete.  But  the  essential  idea  of  it  remains  and 
will  never  disappear.  Before  we  draw  near  to  God  in  public  worship  it  becomes  us  to 
make  preparation  answering  to  the  purification  of  the  older  time.    There  is — 

I.  The  pbepabation  of  the  bodt.  Our  Lord  said  there  was  a  certain  "  kind  "  of 
evil  which  could  only  be  expelled  after  prayer  and  fasting  (Matt.  xvii.  21).  We  must 
recognize  the  fact  that  one  bodily  condition  is  much  more  favourable  to  pure  and 
sustained  devotion  than  another ;  e.g.  a  wakeful  I'ather  than  a  somnolent  one ;  a  wisely 
and  moderately  nourished  state  in  preference  to  one  incapacitated  by  jiidulgenoe  on  the 
one  hand  or  by  prolonged  abstinence  on  the  other.  Not  in  weariness  and  exhaustion, 
nor  yet  in  a  disabling  and  unfitting  fulness,  should  we  bring  our  oflFering  of  prayer  or 
praise,  of  exhortation  or  docility,  unto  the  house  of  the  Lord. 

II.  The  pbefabatiom  of  the  mind.  They  who  have  undertaken  the  sacred  task 
of  speaking  for  God  should  surely  prepare  for  this  high  and  exalted  work.  If  we 
carefully  prepare  to  speak  in  our  own  name,  how  much  more  should  we  do  so  when  we 
Bpeak  in  his !  Should  we  not  gather  all  the  knowledge  we  can  anywise  obtain,  think 
our  subject  through  to  the  best  of  our  ability,  search  the  Scriptures  to  sustain  the 
truth  we  are  to  utter  by  the  Word  of  God,  lay  all  our  mental  acquisitions  and  informa- 
tion under  contribution  to  give  clearness  and  cogency  to  our  argument  or  appeal,  order 
and  arrange  our  thoughts  that  we  may  present  them  as  freely  and  as  forcibly  as  we 
can? 

III.  The  pbepabation  of  the  heabt.  This  preparation,  more  than  that  of  the 
body  or  the  mind,  answers  to  the  purification  described  in  the  text.  Our  hearts  need 
to  be  "  cleansed  and  purged"  (ver.  20).  It  has  to  be  cleansed  from  :  1.  All  self-seeking ; 
so  that  we  aim,  not  at  our  own  honour  or  advancement,  but  at  the  glory  of  Christ  and 
the  good  of  men.  2.  All  worldliness  and  vanity  ;  so  that  when  we  bow  in  prayer  or 
assume  the  attitude  of  attentiveness  we  are  not  lost  in  the  remembrance  or  the 
anticipation  of  bargains  in  the  market  or  of  pleasures  in  society.  3.  The  search  for 
enjoyment  rather  than  the  seeking  after  God ;  the  temptation  to  come  to  the  house  of 
the  Lord  to  partake  of  that  which  is  sweet  unto  ovir  taste  rather  than  that  which  is 
strengthening  to  our  character  and  nourishing  to  our  soul.  Such  preparation  or 
purification  as  this  must  be  wrought  in  the  secret  chamber  of  devotion,  when  we  are 
alone  with  God,  in  solemn  contemplation  and  in  earnest  and  believing  prayer.  — C. 


EXPOSITION. 
CHAPTER  XLIV. 


The  prophet,  having  finished  his  ao- 
connt  of  the  temple,  or  place  of  worship, 
fiooeeds,  in  the  second  section  of  his  vision 


(oh.  iliv. — xlvi),  to  let  forth  the  coltui, 
or  ritual,  to  be  performed  in  the  temple; 
treating  first  of  the  several  classes  in  the 
new  community,  and  of  their  relation  to 
the  sanctuary  (ch.  xliv.) ;  next  of  the  regu- 


bzekiel — II.  2  o 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROI'HET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xliv.  1—31. 


lations  to  be  observed  in  the  maintenance 
of  worship  (ch.  xlv.);  and,  thirdly,  of  certain 
Bupplementary  orders  for  the  prince,  the 
people,  and  the  priests,  when  engaged  in 
the  eolemnitiee  of  their  religion  (oh.  xlyi.). 
In  particular,  the  present  chapter  deals  (1) 
with  the  relation  of  the  prince  to  the  sano- 
tnary  (vers.  1—3);  (2)  with  that  of  the 
people,  Levites,  and  priests  (vers.  4 — 16); 
and  (3)  with  the  duties  and  emoluments  of 
the  priests  (vers.  17 — 31). 

VeiB.  1 — 3. — The  relation  of  the  prince  to 
the  sanctuary. 

Yer.  1. — The  gate  of  the  ontward  sano- 
tnary — or,  the  outer  gate  of  the  lanctuary 
(Kevised  Version) — ^whioh  looketh  toward 
the  east.  To  this  door  the  prophet  was 
conducted  back,  by  way  of  the  inner  .north 
or  south  gate,  from  the  inner  court,  in 
which  he  had  received  the  measurements 
of  the  altar  and  the  instructions  for  its 
consecration  (ch.  xliii.  5).  Whether  Ezekiel 
stood  upon  the  outside  of  this  door,  as  in 
ch.  sliii.  1,  or  upon  its  inside,  cannot  as  yet 
be  determined;  but  in  either  case  he  ob- 
served that  it  was  shut — again,  whether  on 
the  east  side  towards  the  temple  precincts, 
or  on  the  west  towards  the  outer  court,  is 
not  mentioned,  and  cannot  at  this  stage  be 
decided.  Wliat  led  the  seer  to  notice  that 
the  gate  was  closed  was  probably  the  cir- 
cumstance that  the  last  time  he  stood  beside 
it  it  was  open  (ch.  xliii.  1),  though  proof 
cannot  be  given  that  he  passed  through  it 
(ch.  xliii.  5),  conjoined  with  the  fact  that 
it  formed  the  principal  entrance  to  the 
temple,  and  as  such  liad  been  described  to 
him  and  measured  (ch.  xl.  6). 

Yer.  2. — This  gate  shall  be  shnt.  The 
prophet  must  have  noted  this  as  an  im- 
portant difference  between  the  new  sanc- 
tuary and  the  old  (whether  temple  or 
tabernacle),  in  which  the  east  gate  stood 
always  open.  That  the  gate  of  the  new 
temple  was  to  be  closed  only  on  the  six 
working  days  Ewald  mistakenly  infers 
from  ch.  xlvi.  1,  where  he  reads,  after  the 
LXX.,  the  outer  instead  of  the  inner  court. 
But  oil,  xlvi.  1  refers  to  the  east  gate  of  the 
inner  court.  Of  the  east  gate  of  the  outer 
court  it  is  declared  emphatically  that  it 
(hall  not  be  opened,  neither  shall  any  man 
enter  in  by  it,  meaning  that  it  should  be 
closed  in  perpetuity ;  and  that  not,  as  Abar- 
banel  and  Lightfoot  have  supposed,  to  ex- 
press the  idea  that  the  glory  of  Jehovah 
should  no  more  depart  from  the  temple,  but 
abide  in  it  for  ever,  but  to  inspire  an  exalted 
conception  of  the  sanctity  of  the  "  house  " 
and  all  its  belongings,  as  Jehovah  explained, 
Because  the  Lord,  the  Ood  of  Israel,  hath 


entered   in  by  it,  therefore  it   shall   b« 
shnt. 

Yer.  3.— It  is  for  the  prince  conveys  an 
erroneous  impression,  as  if  the  edict,  ex- 
cluding all  from  passing  through  the  east 
outer  gate,  did  not  apply  to  the  prince ;  but 
even  for  him  the  gate  was  not  to  serve  as  a 
mode  of  entrance  into  the  temple,  or,  if  so, 
only  on  exceptional  occasions  (see  on  ch.  xlvi. 
2),  but  merely  as  a  place  to  sit  in.  The  Re- 
vised Yersion  accurately  renders  the  words. 
As  for  the  prince,  he  shaU  tit  therein  at 
prince,  etc.  That  the  "  prince  "  here  alluded 
to  (K'fe'in)  could  not  have  been  the  Prince 
David,  t.e.  the  Messiah  already  spoken  of 
(oh.  xxxiv.  23,  24;  xxivii.  24),  but  must 
have  denoted  the  civic  authorities  of  the 
new  community  of  Israel,  "  the  civil  head 
of  the  theocracy,"  Havernick  infers  from 
ch.  xlv.  8,  9,  where  the  coming  "prince" 
is  contrasted  with  Israel's  previous  rulers 
who  oppressed  their  subjects,  from  the 
absence  of  some  such  characteristic  predi- 
cate as  "  shepherd "  or  "  king,"  which 
would,  he  thinks,  have  been  attached  to 
the  word  "  prince "  had  it  been  intended  to 
designate  Messiah,  from  the  prince's  offering 
for  himself  a  sin  offering  (ch.  xlv.  22),  from 
the  allusion  to  his  sons  (ch.  xlvi.  16),  and 
from  what  is  recorded  about  his  behaviour 
in  worship  (ch.  xlvi.  2) ;  but  none  of  these 
statements  concerning  the  "  prince  "  forbids 
his  identification  with  Messiah,  unless  on 
the  supposition  that  it  was  already  under- 
stood Messiah  should  be  a  Divine-human 
Personage.  This,  however,  had  not  then 
been  so  distinctly  revealed  as  to  be  widely 
and  accurately  known.  Hence  it  seems 
enough  to  say  that  while  the  "prince" 
would  have  his  highest  antitype  in  the 
Messiah,  he  would  also  have,  though  in  a 
lower  and  lesser  degree,  an  antitype  in  every 
righteous  ruler  (if  ever  there  should  be  such) 
who  might  subsequently  preside  over  Israel 
(see  on  cli.  xxxvii.  25).  The  phrase,  to  eat 
bread  before  the  Lord,  while  referring  in 
the  first  instance  to  those  sacrificial  meals 
which,  under  the  Law,  commonly  accom- 
panied unbloody  offerings,  as  the  meat 
offerings  (Lev.  ii.  3),  the  shewbread  (Lev. 
xxiv.  9),  and  the  unleavened  loaves  of  the 
Passover  (Exod.  xii.  18;  Lev.  xxiii.  6; 
Numb,  xxviii.  17 ;  Dent.  xvi.  3),  and  could 
only  be  partaken  of  by  the  priests,  in  the 
second  instance  signified  to  partake  of 
sacrificial  meals  in  general,  even  of  such 
as  consisted  of  the  portions  of  flesh  which 
were  eaten  in  connection  with  ordinary 
bloody  offerings  (Qea.  xxxi.  54;  Exod, 
xviii.  12).  If,  after  Eliefoth,  the  former 
be  adopted  as  the  import  of  the  phrase 
here,  then  the  thought  will  be  that  in  the 
new  oultus  the  prince  should  enjoy  a  privi- 
lege which  under  the  old  was  not  possessed 


CH.  XLiv.  1— 31.J    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZBKIEL. 


387 


eren  hy  the  king ;  if,  after  Eeil,  the  seoond 
Tiew  be  preferred,  the  sense  will  amount  to 
this,  that  under  the  regulations  of  the  future 
the  prince  should  have  the  favour  accorded 
him  "  of  holding  his  sacrificial  meals  in  the 
gate,"  whereas  the  people  should  only  be 
permitted  to  hold  theirs  "  in  the  court,"  or 
"  in  the  vicinity  of  the  sacrificial  kitchens." 
The  way  of  the  porch  is  mentioned  as  the 
ingress  and  egress  for  the  prince;  which 
implies  that  he  should  obtain  access  to  the 
outer  court  by  either  the  north  or  the  south 
gate,  since  the  outer  door  of  the  east  gate 
was  shut.  This  renders  it  probable  that 
Ezekiel  was  himself  standing  on  the  outside 
of  the  east  gate  (see  on  ver.  1). 

Vers.  4 — 16. — The  reUttiom  of  the  people, 
Levitet,  and  priesti  to  the  sanctuary. 

Yer.  4. — From  the  outside  of  the  east 
gate  of  the  outer  court  the  prophet  was 
brought  the  way  of  the  north  gate,  but 
whether  of  the  outer  or  of  the  inner  is  un- 
certain, and  set  down  before  the  honse.  On 
the  ground  that  the  prophet  at  his  new 
station  was  in  front  of  the  temple,  Hitzig, 
Keil,  and  others  decide  for  the  north  gate 
of  the  inner  court ;  whereas  Eliefoth,  look- 
ing to  the  circumstance  that  the  first  com- 
muaicatiuns  made  to  the  prophet  at  his 
new  post  concerned  "  the  entering  in  of  the 
house,"  and  "  the  going  forth  of  the  sanc- 
tuary," prefers  the  north  gate  of  the  outer 
court.  But  at  whichever  of  the  gates  the 
prophet  was  set  down  he  perceived  a  second 
time  (comp.  ch.  xliii.  S)  that  the  glory  of  the 
Lord  filled  the  honse  of  the  Lord,  and  this, 
perhaps,  should  cast  the  balance  in  favour 
of  the  inner  court  entrance,  from  which  the 
interior  of  the  "  house  "  could  be  more  easily 
■een. 

Ver.  5. — Having  fallen  on  his  face  before 
the  renewed  theophany,  the  prophet  was 
summoned  as  once  before  (ch.  xl.  4),  but 
with  greater  emphasis  thau  before,  to  mark 
well,  or  let  his  heart  to  observe,  the  commu- 
nications about  to  be  made  to  him  ooucem- 
Ing  all  the  ordinances  of  the  house  of  the 
Lord,  and  all  the  laws  thereof  (see  on  ch. 
xliii.  11),  more  especially  with  regard  to  the 
persons  who  should  have  a  right  to  partici- 
pate in  its  services. 

Ver.  6. — Let  it  snfSce  yon  of  all  your 
abominations.  It  was  not  without  signifi- 
cance that  at  the  north  gate,  which  had 
formerly  been  represented  as  the  scene  of 
Israel's  idolatries  (oh.  viii.  5),  the  prophet 
should  be  reminded  of  those  past  iniquities 
of  his  nation,  and  receive  instructions  as  to 
how  the  new  community  should  be  pre- 
served from  lapsing  into  similar  transgres- 
■ions. 

Ver.  7. — The  special  sin  chargeable 
•gainst  Israel  in  the  past  had  been  the 


introduction  into  the  sanctuary,  while  the 
priests  were  engaged  in  sacrifice,  of  strangers 
— aliens  (Revised  Version);  literally,  sons 
of  a  stranger — ^nnoiroumcised  in  heart  and 
nnoironmcised  in  flesh,  in  express  contra- 
vention of  Jehovah's  covenant.  Ewald, 
Havernick,  Hengstenberg,  Schroder,  and 
Carrey  restrict  the  designation  "  strangers  " 
to  unfaithful  and  unauthorized  priests,  who, 
as  in  the  days  of  Israel's  apostasy,  noto- 
riously under  Jeroboam  (1  Kings  xii.  31 ;  2 
Chron.  xi.  15),  may,  in  the  confluence  of 
idolatries  that  took  place  in  Jerusalem 
during  the  reigns  of  Ahaz  (2  Kings  xvi.  3, 
4,  10—15;  2  Ohron.  xxviii.  2—4,  23—25) 
and  Manasseh  (2  Kings  xxi.  2 — 7, 11, 15 ; 
2  Chron.  xxxiii.  2 — ^7),  have  been  admitted 
to  participate  in  the  temple  services;  but 
Kliefoth,  Delitzsch,  Keil,  Smend,  and 
Plumptre,  with  better  judgment,  recognize 
in  the  "  strangers  "  foreigners  who  had  not 
incorporated  themselves  with  Israel  by 
submitting  to  circumcision,  but,  though 
dwelling  in  the  midtit  of  Israel,  were  still 
uncircumcised  heathen  in  both  heart  and 
flesh.  With  regard  to  these  foreigners,  the 
Law  of  Moses  (Lev.  xvii.  8, 10)  enacted  that, 
by  accepting  circumcision,  they  might  be- 
come members  of  the  Israelitish  common- 
wealth, but  that  without  this  they  could 
not  be  permitted  to  partake  of  the  Passover, 
the  highest  symbol  of  national  and  religious 
unity  (Exod.  xii.  48,  49).  Nevertlieless,  it 
was  open  to  them,  on  giving  a  certain 
measure  of  obedience  to  the  Law  (Exod.  xii. 
19;  XX.  10;  Lev.  xvii.  10,  12;  xviii.  26; 
XX.  2 ;  xxiv.  16,  22),  to  enter  the  sanctuary 
and  present  all  sorts  of  offerings  to  Jehovah 
(Lev.  xvii.  8;  Numb.  xv.  14,  29).  Hence 
Israel's  ofience  had  not  been  the  admission 
of  such  "sons  of  the  stranger"  into  the 
sanctuary,  but  the  admission  of  them  with- 
out insisting  on  the  above  specified  con- 
ditions, in  other  words,  the  admission  of 
such  as  not  only  lacked  the  bodily  mark 
of  circumcision — which  would  not  have  ex- 
cluded them — but  were  destitute  as  well  of 
the  first  elements  of  Hebrew  piety,  i.e.  were 
as  uncircumcised  in  heart  as  they  were  in 
the  flesh.  The  sanctioning  of  such  within 
the  temple  courts,  while  Jehovah's  bread, 
the  fat  and  the  blood,  was  being  offered, 
i.e.  while  sacrificial  worship  was  being  per- 
formed, was  not  simply  a  desecration  of  the 
"house,"  but  was  an  express  violation  of 
the  covenant  Jehovah  had  made  vrith  Israel 
with  reference  to  these  very  "sons  of  the 
stranger." 

Ver.  8. — Instead  of  having  exercised  a 
holy  solicitude  for  the  purity  of  the  temple 
and  the  regularity  of  its  rites,  by  keeping 
strict  watch  over  the  holy  things  of  Jeliovuh, 
the  house  of  Israel  had  set  keepers;  lite- 
rally, had  set  them,  i.e.  the  uncircumcised 


888 


THE  BOOK  OF   THE  PEOPHET  BZBKIEL.    [ch.  xli>.  1—31. 


'stiangers"  above  referred  to,  ai  keeperi 
of  Jehovah's  charge  in  his  Banctnary  for 
themselTes,  i.e.  to  please  themselves,  irre- 
spective altogether  of  Jehovah's  enactments. 
From  this  it  has  been  argued,  by  Well- 
hausen,  Smend,  Driver,  and  others,  tliat  the 
"  strangers  "  above  mentioned  had  been  not 
only  allowed  access  to  the  outer  court  as 
spectators  or  as  worshippers  while  the 
priests  were  offering  sacrifice,  but  admitted 
to  the  inner  court  as  assistants  to  the  priests 
in  their  altar  duties,  that  this,  the  employ- 
ment of  thene  lieathen  hierodules,  had  been 
the  special  wickedness  of  which  Israel  had 
been  guilty,  and  tliat  henceforward  these 
"foreign  ministers"  were  to  be  thrust  out 
from  their  offices,  and  their  places  supfilied 
by  the  about-to-be-degraded  Levites.  It  is, 
however,  doubtful  if  the  phrase,  Iceepera  of 
my  charge  in  the  sanctuary,  can  be  made  to 
signify  more  than  ijas  already  been  ex- 
pressed by  the  clause,  "  to  be  in  my  sanc- 
tuary .  .  .  when  ye  offer  my  bread"  (ver. 
7),  by  which,  as  Kliefotli  and  Keil  ex- 
plain, Israel  had  practically  made  these 
strangers  "keepers  of  Jehovah's  charge," 
i.e.  observers  of  the  rites  of  worship  pre- 
scribed by  him,  though  observers  in  their 
way,  not  in  his ;  if  more  can  be  extracted 
from  the  words,  then  the  most  they  can  be 
legitimately  made  to  afSrm  (as  there  is  no 
mention  of  the  inner  court)  is  that  these 
"strangers,"  in  addition  to  obtaining 
access  to  the  outer  court  to  witness  the 
sacrifices,  or  perhaps  offer  such  for  them- 
selves, had  been  more  or  less  frequently 
employed  in  performing  subordinate  offices 
towards  the  Levites,  who  were  the  proper 
priests'  assistants,  like  the  Gibeonites, 
whom  Joshua  (ix.  27)  made  "  hewers  of  wood 
and  drawers  of  water  for  the  congregation 
and  for  the  altar  of  the  Lord  unto  this  day," 
and  like  the  Nethinim,  whom,  according  to 
Ezra  (viii  20),  David  and  the  princes  had 
given  for  the  service  of  the  Levites  (see 
Delitzsch,  Luthardt's  'Zeitsohrift  fiir  kirch- 
liohe  Wissenschaft,'  1880,  p.  283).  (On 
the  phrase,  "to  keep  the  charge  of  Je- 
hovah," as  signifying  to  follow  bis  direc- 
tions or  comply  with  his  prescriptions,  see 
Numb.  ix.  23.)  "In  the  sanctuary"  ex- 
plains that  the  prescriptions  alluded  to 
were  those  pertaining  to  the  sanctuary  or 
to  the  worship  of  Jehovah. 

Vers.  9 — 16. — Accordingly,  that  no  suoh 
abuses  might  creep  in  to  desecrate  the 
temple  of  the  future,  a  new  Torah  was 
promulgated  concerning  the  persons  who 
should  have  a  right  to  participate  in  its 
services.  If  the  "prince"  is  omitted,  the 
reason  probably  was  that  a  special  section  is 
subsequently  devoted  to  him  (ch.  zlvi.  1 — 8). 


Ver.  9. — The  ordinance  for  the  people.  Ko 
stranger  (or,  alien),  nucircnmcised  in  heart, 
nor  unoiicumcised  in  flesh,  shall  enter  into 
my  sanctuary.  The  publication  of  this 
edict  marked  a  clear  advance  upon  preced- 
ing legislation.  The  old  Torah  conceded 
right  of  access  to  a  foreigner,  though  un- 
circumoised,  on  certain  conditions  (ver.  7); 
this  new  Torah  would  accord  such  right  of 
access  to  a  foreigner  on  no  conditions. 
Even  should  he  be  circumcised  in  the  flesh, 
unless  he  possessed  also  that  which  the 
bodily  mark  symbolized,  viz.  circumcision 
of  heart,  he  must  remain  without.  Does 
not  this  look  as  if  Ezekiel  were  posterior  to 
the  priest-code,  rather  than  viae  vena,  as 
Wellhausen  contends  ? 

Vers.  10— U.— The  ordinance  for  the 
Levites.  According  to  the  so-called  priest- 
code,  the  Levites  were  Levi's  descendants, 
who  were  chosen  by  Jehovah  for  service  in 
the  tabernacle  (Numb.  iii.  6 — 13;  xvi.  9), 
to  minister  to  the  priests  when  these  sacri- 
ficed in  the  tabernacle  (Numb.  viii.  19; 
xviii.  6),  and  in  particular  to  keep  the 
charge  of  the  tabernacle,  i.e.  of  the  house 
and  all  its  vessels  (Numb.  i.  53),  as  dis- 
tinguished from  the  charge  of  the  sanc- 
tuary and  of  the  altar,  which  pertained  to 
Aaron  and  his  sons  alone  as  priests  (N'umb. 
xviii.  2—6,  23).  The  Deuteronomic  code, 
says  Wellhausen  ('  Gesohichte  Israels,'  pp. 
121,  etc.),  was  unacquainted  with  any  such 
distinction  between  Levites  and  priests, 
who,  it  is  alleged,  composed  one  homogt^ne- 
ous  body,  the  tribe  of  Levi,  whose  members 
were  equally  empowered  to  officiate  at  the 
altar  (Deut.  x.  8),  the  lower  duties  of  the 
tabernacle  having  been  performed  by  the 
aforesaid  "^  strangers,"  and  the  subordination 
of  Levites  to  priests  having  first  been  sug. 
gested  by  Ezekiel  (comp.  Smend,  'Der 
Prophet  Ezekiel,'  p.  361,  "Der  unterscMed 
zmschen  Priestern  und  Leviten  ist  Her  im 
Enetehn  begriffen "),  and  first  formally 
carried  out  alter  the  exile.  Tliis  theory, 
however,  cannot  be  admitted  as  made  out 
in  face  of  (1)  Deut.  xviii.,  which  (ver  1) 
recognizes  "  the  priests  "  and  "  the  Levites  " 
as  constituting  "  the  whole  tribe  of  Li  vi," 
and  (vers.  3,  6)  distingnislies  between  "  the 
priest"  and  "the  Levite;"  (2)  2  Sam. 
XV.  24,  whioh  associates  with  Zadok  the 
priest,  the  Levites  as  carriers  of  the  ark; 
(3)  1  Kings  viii.  4,  in  which  the  same 
distinction  between  the  two  bodies  is  recog- 
nized ;  (4)  1  and  2  Chron.,  passim,  which 
attest  the  existence  of  priests  and  Levites 
as  separate  temple  officials  in  pre-exilio 
times ;  and  (5)  Ezra  i.  5,  62 ;  iii.  8,  10 ; 
vi.  20,  which  show  that  the  distinction, 
alleged  to  have  been  first  made  by 
Eiekiel,  was  well  known  to  the  first  com- 
pany  of  exiles  who  returned  under  Zerub- 


OH.  xuv.  1— 31.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPHET  EZBKIBL. 


889 


babel  to  Jerusalom,  and  was  by  them  traced 
back  to  pie-exilio  times  (see  Eeil,  on  Dent, 
xviii.  1 ;  Curties's  '  Levitioal  Priests,'  pp. 
22,  etc. ;  Delitzsoh,  in  LuthardtV  '  Zeit- 
■chrift  fur  kiichliche  Wissensohaft,'  pp.  286, 
etc.,  and  in  Biehm's  '  Handwoiterbuoh  des 
Biblischen  Alterthums,'  art.  "  Leviten ; " 
Oehler,  in  Herzog's '  Beal-Enoyolopadle,'  art. 
"  Levi  ")•  The  question,  therefore,  of  which 
Levites  Ezekiel  speaks  in  this  verse,  whether 
of  those  whose  duties  were  of  a  menial  order 
or  of  those  whose  functions  partook  of  a 
priestly  character,  is  not  difficult  to  resolve. 
It  could  hardly  have  been  the  former,  since 
in  vers.  11 — 14  Ezekiel's  Levites  are  repre- 
sented as  about  to  be  degraded  by  being 
relegated  to  Inferior  tasks  than  those  they 
had  formerly  performed  ;  it  must  have  been 
tbe  latter,  because  in  the  present  verse  they 
are  designated  the  Levites  that  are  gone 
•way  (or,  went)  far  from  me,  when  Israel 
went  astray.  Now,  Israel's  apostasy  from 
Jeliovah  and  declension  towards  idolatry 
began  with  Solomon's  unfaithfulness  (1 
Kings  xi.  4 — 8),  ami  continued  with  greater 
or  less  intensity  in  every  subsequent  reign 
till  the  exile;  it  certainly  cannot  be  re- 
stricted, as  Eeil  and  Gurrey  propose,  to 
Jeroboam's  conduct  in  setting  up  rival 
sanctuaries  in  Dan  and  Bethel,  with  altars 
and  priests,  for  the  accommodation  of  the 
northern  kingdom  (1  Kings  xii.  26—33). 
Nor  is  there  room  for  doubting,  although 
historical  notices  of  the  fact  are  not  abun- 
dant, that  in  this  apostasy  the  priesthoOLl 
largely  led  the  way  (Jer.  xxvi.  7,  11;  2 
Kings  xvi  11 — 16;  Zeph.  i.  4),  becoming 
priests  of  the  high  places,  ministering  for 
the  people  at  heatheu  altars,  and  so  causing 
them  to  fall  into  iniquity  (ver.  12).  Heng- 
Btenberg  and  Plumptre  suggest  that  tlie 
reason  why  these  apostate  priests  are  now 
called  Levites  was  to  intimate  that  they 
were  no  more  worthy  of  the  priesthood,  and 
were  about  to  be  reduced  to  tlie  lower 
ministry  of  the  Levites  so  called.  Conse- 
quently, under  the  new  Torah,  those  among 
the  priests  (who  were  also  Levites)  who  had 
been  guilty  of  this  flagrant  wickedness 
(t.e.,  says  Delitzsch,  all  the  Aaronides  who 
were  not  Zadokites)  would  no  more,  either 
in  themselves  or  their  descendants,  be 
suffered  to  retain  the  priestly  office,  but 
would  be  degraded  to  the  stntus  of  ordin- 
ary Levites,  and,  like  them,  should  be 
ministers  in  Jehovah's  sanctuary,  having 
charge— or,  oversight  (Revised  Version) — at 
the  gates  of  the  house,  and  ministering  to 
(or,  t'n)  the  honse,  i.e.  in  its  courts,  serving 
SB  keepers  of  the  charge  of  the  house  (ver. 
14),  as  watchers  at  the  gates  of  the  house 
(ver.  11),  as  slaughterers  of  the  sacrificial 
Tictims  (ver.  11),  but  should  not,  like  their 
biethren   who  had    remained    faithful,   be 


allowed  to  do  the  office  of  a  priest,  i.6. 
approach  the  altar  to  offer  saorifice,  or  to 
enter  into  the  holy  place  (ver.  18).  In  this 
way  they  should  bear  their  iniquity  (vers, 
10, 12) — a  favourite  expression  in  the  middle 
books  of  the  Pentateuch  (Exod.  xxviii.  38, 
43;  Lev.  v.  1;  x.  17;  xx.  19;  Numb.  v.  31; 
xviii.  1),  but  never  occurring  in  Deutero- 
nomy, and  meaning  "to  be  requited"  on 
account  of,  and  make  expiation  for,  sin  and 
theii  shame  and  their  abominations,  i.e.  the 
sliame  due  to  tliem  for  their  abominations — 
a  specially  Ezekelian  phrase  (comp.  ch.  xvi. 
52,  54 ;  xxxii.  30 ;  xxxvi.  7). 

Vers.  15,  16. — The  ordinance  for  tlie  prieiU. 
That  Ezekiel  derived  the  phrase,  the  priests 
the  Levites,  from  Deuteronomy  (xvii.  9; 
xviii.  1 ;  xxiv.  8 ;  xxvii.  9)  may  be  granted 
without  admitting  that  the  Levites  were  all 
priests,  or  that  the  phrase  had  other  import 
than  that  the  priests  were,  as  the  Deutero- 
nomist  says,  "  sons  of  Levi "  (xxi.  5 ;  xxxL 
9).  The  priesthood,  at  its  institution, 
having  been  entrusted  to  Aaron  and  his 
sous  (Exod.  xxvii.  20,  21;  xxviii.  1—4; 
xxix.  9,  44;  Numb.  iii.  10;  xvi.  40 ;  xviii. 
7;  XXV.  13),  on  Aaron's  death  tlje  high 
priesthood  passed  into  the  hands  of  Eleazar, 
his  eldest  (living)  son  (Numb.  xx.  26 — ^28), 
and  after  Eleazar's  death  into  those  of 
Fhinehas,  his  eldest  son  (Numb.  xxv.  11 — 
13).  In  the  last  days  of  the  judges,  when 
the  ark  and  tabernacle  stood  at  Sbiloli,  the 
high  priesthood  belonged  to  Eli,  of  the  line 
of  Ithamar(comp.  1  Sam.  xiv.  3  and  xxii.  20 
with  1  Chron.  xxiv.  3;,  in  which  line  it 
continued  till  tlie  reign  of  David,  when  it 
was  held  conjointly  by  Abiatliar  (called  also 
Ahimelech)  of  the  line  of  Ithamar,  and 
Zadok  of  the  line  of  Eleazar  (2  Sam.  viii. 
17 ;  XX.  25 ;  1  Kings  iv.  4).  This  arrange- 
ment, however,  Solomon  eventually  over- 
turned, by  deposing  the  former  for  espousing 
Adouijah's  pretensions  to  the  throne  (1 
Kings  i.  7;  ii.  26),  and  from  that  time 
forward  till  the  exile  the  high  priesthood 
remained  with  Zadok  and  his  sons  (1  King* 
ii.  35 ;  1  Chron.  xxix.  22).  When,  therefore, 
it  is  announced  to  Ezekiel  that  his  vision- 
sanctuary  should  have  as  priests  the  sons  of 
Zadok,  that  kept  the  charge  of  Jehovah's 
sanctuary,  when  the  children  of  Israel  went 
astray  &om  him,  the  first  question  that 
arises  is— To  what  doet  this  alludel  Kliefoth 
holds  it  cannot  mean  that,  while  Israel  as  a 
whole  declined  into  idolatry,  the  Zadokite 
priests  remained  faithful  to  the  worship  of 
Jehovah,  because  the  vision  of  Judah's 
idolatries  granted  to  the  prophet,  in  oh. 
viii.  16,  revealed  quite  clearly  that  the 
priesthood  was  as  much  caught  in  the 
national  apostasy  as  were  the  princes  or 
the  people.  Nor  is  the  language  of  the 
text  perfectly  satisfied  by  the  view  of  Haver 


390 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xliv.  1— 31. 


sick,  Keil,  Delitzsoh,  and  others,  that  it 
goes  baok  to  Zadok's  fidelity  to  the  throne 
of  David  at  the  time  of  Absalom's  rebellion 
(2  Bam.  xv.  24—29),  a  fidelity  exhibited 
also  by  Abiathar,  or  to  his  adherence  to 
Bolomon  in  preference  to  Adonijah  (1  Kings 
i.  8,  39),  this  time  without  Abiathar's  con- 
currence, rather  in  the  face  of  his  oppositiim. 
In  neither  of  these  instances  was  Zadok's 
fidelity  specially  directed  towards  Jehovah's 
sanctuary,  but  concerned  expressly  and 
exclusively  David's  throne.  Hence  the 
commendation  of  the  Zadokites'  fidelity  can 
only  signify  that,  while  the  priesthood  as  a 
body  were  corrupt  like  the  people,  there 
were  among  them,  as  among  the  people, 
some  who,  like  Ezekiel,  continued  steadfast 
to  Jehovah's  sanctuary ;  that  tliese  faithful 
few  were  Zadokites  (see  ch.  xlviii.  11),  and 
that  to  these  should  be  entrusted  the  priest- 
hood in  the  new  sanctuary.  But,  at  this 
point,  a  second  question  starts —  Was  it  in- 
tended to  declare  that  tlw  new  priesthood 
should  he  Zadokites  in  body,  i.e.  in  respect  of 
lineal  descent,  or  only  in  soul,  i.e.  in  respect 
of  moral  and  religious  excellence?  The 
former  is  contended  by  Kuenen,  Wellhau- 
sen,  Smend,  and  others,  who  see  in  the 
vision-sanctuary  a  plan  of  the  second,  or 
post-exilio,  temple,  and  in  its  ordinances  a 
programme  for  the  establishment  of  the 
Levitical  hierarchy;  but  this  contention 
shatters  itself  on  the  fact  that  no  proof 
exists  either  that  the  second  temple  was 
constructed  after  Ezekiel's  as  a  model,  or 
that  those  who  served  in  it  were  exclusively 
flesh  and  blood  Zadokites.  The  latter 
opinion,  favoured  by  Kliefoth,  appears  the 
more  correct,  tliat  moial  and  spiritual  re- 
semblance to  the  sons  of  Zadok  should  form 
the  first  qualification  for  the  priesthood  in 
this  ideal  sanctuary  of  the  future  (see  note 
«t  the  end  of  ch.  xlviii.). 

Vers.  17 — 31. — The  duties  and  etnolumentt 
tf  the  priests. 

Ver.  17.  —  Beginning  with  their  attire 
when  engaged  in  temple  service,  this  verse 
states,  in  a  general  way,  that  the  priests 
should  be  clothed  with  linen  garments,  as 
the  priests  were  under  the  Law  (Exod. 
xxviii.  40—43 :  xxxix.  27—29;  Lev.  vi.  10), 
with  this  difference,  that  whereas  under  the 
Law  the  terms  enjployed  were  cp',  the  white 
byssus  of  Egypt,  and  na,  "  fine  white  linen," 
here  the  word  is  nnts'B.or  "  flax  " — a  difference 
which  assists  newer  critics  to  perceive  in 
the  so-called  priest-code  a  refinement  on 
Ezekiel,  and  therefore  an  evidence  that 
the  priest-oode  arose  later  than  Ezekiel. 
But  if  the  so-calk  d  priest-code  had  already 
indicated  that  the  linen  for  priests'  gar- 
ments  should    be    of   the    finest    quality. 


Ezekiel  may  have  felt  there  wm  no  occa- 
sion for  him  to  use  other  than  the  generis 
term  for  "  linen,"  which  rwB'a  (jpishteh)  seems 
to  have  been  (comp.  Lev.  xiii.  47,  48,  52, 
59;  Dent.  xxii.  11;  Jer.  xiii.  1).  That 
this  was  so  is  suggested  by  the  statement 
that  no  wool,  ~ipv,  "  perhaps  so  called  from 
its  being  shorn  off"  (Gesenius),  should  oome 
upon  them  whiles  they  ministered  in  the 
gates  of  the  inner  court,  or  within  the 
court  itself,  or  the  house — the  contrast 
being;  between  what  was  of  vegetable  and 
what  w:is  of  animal  production.  The  reason 
for  the  prohibition  of  wool  is  hinted  at  in 
ver.  18 — it  was  apt  to  cause  sweat,  and  thus 
entail  impurity ;  the  clean  white  linen,  on 
the  other  hand,  was  designed  both  for 
hygienic  reasons  and  as  an  emblem  of 
purity  (comp.  Rev.  xix.  8, 14). 

Ver.  18. — In  particular  the  priests  should 
have  linen  bonnets  upon  their  heads — ^lite- 
rally, linen  tires  shall  be  upon  their  heads — 
and  linen  breeches  upon  their  loins.  To 
infer  from  the  use  of  nysia  in  Lev.  viii.  13 
and  of  IKS  here  for  the  head-dress  of  the 
priests,  that  Ezekiel  was  composed  before 
Leviticus,  is  not  convincing.  Bmend  ex- 
plains the  latter  term  as  the  customary 
head-dress  of  common  people,  and  the  former 
as  a  specially  ornamental  tiara  or  turban. 
Gesenius  reverses  this  meaning,  making 
the  former  the  ordinary  round  cap,  and  the 
latter  a  tiara  (see  for  the  former,  Exod. 
xxviii.  40 ;  xxix.  9 ;  xxxix.  28 ;  and  for  the 
latter,  Exod.  xxxix.  28;  Isa.  Ixi.  10;  ch. 
xxiv.  17, 23).  In  addition,  the  priests  should 
not  gird  themselves  with  any  thing  that 
canseth  sweat ;  literally,  should  not  gird 
themselves  in,  or  with  sweat,  which  was 
another  way  of  forbidding  them  to  wear 
woollen  clothing,  which  might  cause  them 
to  sweat  and  so  lead  to  uncleanness. 

Ver.  19. — When  the  priests  retired  firom 
the  inner  court,  and  before  they  passed  into 
the  outer  court  to  mingle  with  the  people, 
they  were  enjoined  to  lay  aside  their 
ofScial  robes,  depositing  them  in  the  holy 
chambers  already  described  (ch.  xiii.  1  — 
14),  and  to  put  on  other,  i.e.  their  ordinary, 
clothes  (comp.  Lev.  vi.  11).  The  reason 
for  this  injunction  was  that  thoy  might 
not  sanctify  the  people  (comp.  oh  xlvi.  20) 
through  the  people's  coming  in  contact  with 
their  garments.  These,  being  in  a  manner, 
i.e.  ceremonially,  holy,  would  impart  to  the 
people  a  levitical  or  ritualistic  sanctity  which 
would  disqualify  them,  for  a  time,  at  least, 
from  attending  to  the  common  duties  of  life, 
as  under  the  Law  those  were  who  touched 
the  sacrificial  flesh  (Lev.  vi.  18,  27),  the 
altar  (Exod.  xxix.  37),  and  the  vessels  of 
the  sanctuary  (Exod.  xxx.  29). 

Ver.  20.— The  next  rubric  concerned  the 


OH.  XLiv.  1— 31.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL. 


39] 


mode  in  which  the  priests  should  wear  their 
hail.  It  should  neither  he  shaved  nor 
worn  long,  thus  avoiding  excess  on  either 
side  (compare  for  the  first,  Lev.  xxi.  5;  and 
for  the  second,  Lev.  x.  6;  xxi.  10,  Revised 
Version),  but  should  merely  be  polled.  The 
obUgation  to  let  the  hair  grow  freely  was 
imposed  upon  the  Nazarite  only  during  the 
period  of  his  vow  (Numb.  vi.  5).  The  verb 
"to  poll,"  or  "cut"  (ddj),  occurs  nowhere 
else. .  Smend  thinks  what  is  here  denied  to 
the  priests  collectively  is  in  the  priest-code 
denied  solely  to  the  high  priest  (Lev.  xxi. 
10,  Bevised  Version ;  compare,  however, 
Lev.  X.  6,  Revised  Version),  and  discovers 
in  this  a  sign  of  the  later  origin  of  Leviticus. 
Ezekiel's  raising  the  priesthood  as  a  body  to 
the  rank  of  the  high  priest,  of  whom  in  con- 
nection with  this  temple  is  no  trace,  rather 
proves  Ezekiel  to  have  been  later  than 
Leviticus. 

Ver.  21. — The  prohibition  of  wine  to  the 
priests  when  engaged  in  temple  service 
aocorded  with  Mosaic  legislation  (Lev.  x. 
9).  Total  abstinence  at  other  times  was  not 
enjoined. 

ver.  22. — As  to  marriage  (since  the  priests 
in  Ezekiel's  "  house  "  were  no  more  expected 
to  be  celibates  than  were  those  employed 
about  Moses'  tabernacle  or  Solomon's 
temple),  they  were  forbidden  to  marry 
widows  (which  the  Levitical  priests  were  not, 
though  the  high  priest  was)  or  divorced 
women,  and  allowed  to  wed  only  virgins  of 
the  house  of  Israel,  or  (the  sole  exception) 
widows  of  such  as  had  been  priests  (com- 
pare with  the  priest-code,  Lev.  xxi.  7,  13, 
14).  Ezekiel's  enactment  discovers  two  variei- 
tions — ^first,  that  it  does  not  formally  forbid 
to  the  priests  marriage  with  a  harlot ;  and, 
second,  that  it  sanctions  marriage  with  a 
priest's  widow.  But  the  first  was  implied 
in  the  prohibition  of  marriage  with  an 
adulteress,  and  the  second  was  a  sign  of  the 
higher  sanctity  of  the  priesthood  belonging 
to  Ezekiel's  temple.  Hence,  so  far  from 
indicating  the  priority  of  Ezekiel,  it  rather 
points  to  the  priority  of  Leviticus. 

Vers.  23,  24. — Among  the  priests'  official 
dnties  four  things  are  prescribed.  (1)  The 
education  of  the  people  in  the  fundamental 
principles  of  their  religion,  viz.  that  a  dis- 
tinction existed  between  the  "holy"  and 
••  profane,"  or  "  common,"  and  in  the  prac- 
tical application  of  that  principle,  the 
art  of  discerning  between  the  "unclean" 
and  the  "clean."  Tiiis  duty  had  been  laid 
upon  the  priests  of  Mosaism  (Lev.  x.  10; 
Dent.  xxiv.  8 ;  xxxiii.  10),  but  in  the  last 
years  of  the  monarchy  had  been  neglected 
(oh.  xxvi.  26;  comp.  Mai.  ii.  7—9).  (2) 
The  administration  of  justice  in  all  disputes 
arising  out  of  and  connected  with  the  prac- 
tice of  their  religion.    Thi»  office  had  per- 


tained to  the  priests  under  the  Law  (Numb. 
V.  14—31;  Deut.  xvii.  8—13;  six.  17;  xxi 
5),  and  was  exercised  in  pre-exilio  times 
(Hos.  iv.  6 ;  Micah  iii.  11 ;  Isa.  xxviii.  7 : 
Jer.  xviii.  18),  though  not  always  in  accord- 
ance with  Jehovah's  judgments.  That  the 
juridical  authority  of  the  priests  was  purely 
of  a  moral  kind  (Wellhausen,  Smend),  can 
be  maintained  only  by  rejecting  2  Chrou. 
xvii.  7 — 9  and  xix.  5—11  as  unhistoricaL 
(3)  The  regulation  of  all  festal  assemblies  in 
accordance  with  the  Divine  statutes.  For 
errors  in  the  celebration  of  these  festivals, 
the  priests  should  be  answerable,  as  they 
had  always  been;  only  under  the  new 
rfgime  there  should  be  no  errors.  4.  Th« 
hallowing  of  Jehovah's  sabbaths.  This  they 
should  do  both  by  resting  on  the  seventh 
day  and  by  offering  the  sabbath  sacrifices, 
the  shewbread,  and  the  burnt  offering ; 
both  of  which  things  the  priests  under  the 
Law  had  been  commanded  to  do  (see  Exod. 
XX.  8 — 11 ;  xxxi.  13—17 ;  Lev,  xxiii.  3 ; 
xxiv.  8 ;  Numb,  xxviii.  9),  but  had  not 
done  (ch.  xx.  1 2, 13, 20, 21 ;  xxii.  8 ;  xxiii.  28). 

Vers.  25 — 27.  -Regulations  are  next  given 
for  preserving  the  priesthood  from  defilement 
through  coming  in  contact  with  the  dead, 
and  for  removing  such  defilement  in  case  of 
its  having  been  contracted.  As  under  the 
Law,  so  in  the  ideal  constitntion  of  Ezekiel, 
the  priests  should  not  be  at  liberty  to  con- 
tract ceremonial  impurity  through  touching 
a  corpse  except  in  the  case  of  near  relations 
(comp.  Lev.  xxi.  1 — 4).  That  neither  in 
Leviticus  nor  in  Ezekiel  is  the  priest's  wife 
among  the  excepted  is  surprising,  and 
hardly  to  be  explained,  with  Knobel,  on  the 
ground  that  a  wife  is  not  a  blood-relation, 
since  according  to  the  Divine  conception  of 
marriage  husband  and  wife  are  one  (Gen. 
ii.  24),  but  either  by  holding,  with  Keil,  that 
the  wife,  who  stands  nearer  her  husband 
than  any  of  the  relatives  named,  was  viewed 
as  included  under  the  phrase,  "  and  for  his 
kin  that  is  near  unto  him  "  (Lev.  xxi.  2),  or 
by  supposing  it  self-evident  that  such  defile- 
ment  could  not  be  avoidedin  the  caseof  a  wife 
and  was  therefore  tacitly  allowed.  Smend, 
as  usual,  finds  signs  of  Ezekiel's  priority  to 
the  priest-code,  first  in  the  circumstance 
that  Ezekiel  regarded  it  as  perfectly  natural 
that  a  priest  should  sorrow  for  his  wife  (cb, 
xxiv.  15 — 18),  whicti  showed  he  had  no 
acquaintance  with  Lev.  xxi. ;  and  secondly, 
in  the  fact  that  Lev.  xxi.  11  prohibits  abso- 
lutely to  the  high  priest  all  contact  with  • 
corpse,  which,  it  is  argued,  betrays  a  greater 
strictness  than  existed  in  the  days  of 
Ezekiel.  But  as  the  prohibition  in  Lev. 
xxi.  11  applies  only  to  the  high  priest,  who 
in  Ezekiel's  temple  has  no  place,  an  argu- 
ment as  to  which  of  the  books  had  priority 
of  origin  cannct  properly  be  founded  on  ao 


892 


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PBOPHBT  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xliv.  1—31, 


insecure  a  basis.  Knobel  remarks  on  Lev. 
xxi.  1—4  that  "among  the  Greeks,  priests 
and  priestesses  remained  at  a  distance  from 
funerals  (Plato,  'De  Legg.,'  xii.  p.  947); 
while  among  the  Romans  ought  the  Flamen 
dialis  to  touch  no  corpse  (Oell..  x.  15),  the 
augur  perform  no  funeral  rites  (Tacit., 
'  Ann.,'  i.  31),  and  tbe  pontlfex  accompany 
no  funeral  prooession  (Dio  Oass.,  Ivi.  31) ; 
not  at  all  should  he  behold  a  dead  body 
(Serv.,'Ad  .21n.,'vi.  176),and  incase  he  had 
OMjasion  to  pronounce  a  funeral  oration,  a 
curtain  should  hang  betvreen  him  and  the 
corpse."  As  to  the  cleansing  of  a  defiled 
priest,  that  should  be  conducted  in  accord- 
ance with  the  customary  regulations  (comp. 
Numb,  xix.),  with  thisdifference — that  on  tlie 
termination  of  the  ordinary  rites,  which  ex- 
tended over  seven  days,  an  additional  seven 
days,  according  to  Haverniok  and  Keil 
(though  Heiigstenberg  and  Plumptre  de- 
cide for  only  one  heptade),  should  elapse, 
at  the  end  of  which,  on  the  presentation  of 
a  sin  offering,  he  should  be  restored  to 
service  in  the  inner  sanctuary. 

Vers.  28 — 31  state  the  emoluments  which 
■hould  be  enjoyed  by  the  priests. 

Ver.  28. — The  Authorized  Version  con- 
veys the  impression  that  the  first  portion  of 
the  priests'  sustenance  should  be  derived 
from  the  sin  offering,  which  is  not  mentioned 
till  the  following  verse.  And  it  shall  be 
unto  them  for  an  inheritance  ought  rather 
to  be  rendered,  and  there  shall  be  to  them 
(what  shall  be) /or  an  inheritance;  or  more 
simply,  and  they  shall  have  an  inheritance 
(Be vised  Version),  which,  it  is  next  declared, 
•s  in  the  Law  (Numb,  xviii.  20 ;  Deut.  x.  9  ; 
xviii.  1,  2),  should  be  Jehovah,  and  not  any 
territorial  possession  or  tribal  tract  such  as 
eliould  be  assigned  to  the  other  tribes  (see 
oh.  xlviii.).  Smend  thinks  Ezekiel  was 
scarcely  accurate  in  describing  the  priests 
as  landless  in  tbe  sense  intended  by  the 
Deuteronomist  and  the  priest-code,  since  in 
eh.  xIt.  4  they  are,  after  all,  furnished  witb 
a  plot  of  ground  on  which  to  build  their 
bouses  and  erect  their  sanctuary ;  whilst 
Wellbausen  ('  Geschiclite  Israels,'  p.  165) 
holds  the  priest-code  to  have  somewhat 
romanced  in  adopting  the  same  language 
about  the  Aaronides  and  Levites,  since,  if 
tliey  really  did  obtain  forty-eight  cities, 
"  what  were  these  if  not  a  lot  and  a  land 
tract,  and  that  too  a  comparatively  great 
and  important  one  ?  "  Neither  view  stands 
in  need  of  refutation. 

Ver.  29. — To  the  priests  should  be  allo- 
coied,  in  addition,  what  already  had  been 
B^^igned  them  by  the  Law  for  their  support, 
tho  meat  (or,  meal)  offering,  consisting  of 
flonr,  corn,  or  bread  (comp.  Lev.  ii.  1 — 16  ; 
vi.  IG;  Numb,  xxviii.  12,  13),  and  the  sin 


offering  (see  Lev.  vi.  25—29 ;  vii.  6 ;  Nnmb. 
xviii.  9,  10),  and  the  trespass  (or,  guiU) 
offering  (comp.  Lev.  vii.  28—38),  and  every 
dedicated  (or,  devoted)  thing  in  Israel  (see 
Lev.  xxvii.  21 ;  Numb,  xviii.  14).  The  burnt 
offering  is  omitted,  because  it  was  entirely 
consumed  upon  the  altar,  with  the  exception 
of  the  hide  or  skin,  which  under  the  Law  be- 
came a  perquisite  of  the  officiating  priest 
(Lev.  vii.  8).  That  Ezekiel  is  silent  about 
this,  while  the  requirement  of  Lev.  vii.  30, 
that  the  priest  should  obtain  the  breast 
with  the  right  shoulder  of  every  fire  offering, 
goes  beyond  the  prescription  of  Deut.  xviii. 
3,  that  the  shoulder,  two  cheeks,  and  the 
maw  should  be  the  priest's  portion,  is 
regarded  by  Wellbausen  and  Smend  as  a 
proof  that  Ezekiel  stands  between  Deutero- 
nomy and  the  priest-code.  But  as  Ezekiel 
does  not  condescend  upon  the  particular 
parts  which  should  be  reserved  from  the  fire 
offerings,  it  is  impossible  to  say  whether  he 
held  with  the  Deuteronomist  or  the  writer  of 
the  priest-code,  supposing  them  to  be  dif- 
ferent ;  and,  inasmuch  us  Lev.  vii  30  speaks 
of  an  offering  by  fire  that  was  first  paid 
to  Jehovah  and  by  him  afterwards  handed 
over  to  Aaron  and  his  sons,  while  Deut. 
xviii.  3  treats  of  the  dues  which  should  be 
paid  by  the  people  directly  to  tbe  priests, 
it  is  clear  that  both  practices  may  have 
existed  together  instead  of  the  one  (the 
former)  coming  in  as  an  advance  upon  the 
other  (the  latter) ;  see  Keil  on  Dent,  xviii.  3. 

Ver.  30. — A  furtber  portion  of  the  priests' 
emoluments  is  stated  as  the  first  of  all  the 
flrstfrnits  of  all  things — or,  of  everything 
(Bevised  Version),  as  e.g.  of  corn,  oil,  mus^ 
and  wool— and  every  oblation  (npiin)— or, 
heave  offering — of  all — or,  of  everything — 
with  the  first  of  the  people's  dough;  or, 
coarse  meal;  which  again  re-echoes  the  pro- 
visions of  the  Law,  the  first  of  the  firstfruita 
being  specified  in  Kxod.  xxiii.  19;  xxxiv, 
26;  Numb,  xviii.  13;  Deut.  xviii.  4;  the 
oblation,  or  terumah  (Hebrew),  in  Numb. 
XV.  19;  xviii.  19;  and  the  dough,  or  coarse 
meal,  or  groats,  in  Numb.  xv.  20,  21.  Eze- 
kiel's  supposed  (Wellbausen, Smend)  silence 
as  regards  the  firstlings  of  cattle,  which  in 
the  biiok  of  the  covenant  (Exod.  xxii.  29) 
and  in  the  Deuteronomist  (Deut.xv.  19)  are 
to  be  eaten  by  the  offerer,  but  iu  the  priest- 
code  (Numb,  xviii.  21)  belong  to  the  priests, 
is  imaginary.  The  first  of  all  tbe  firstfruits 
of  everything  cannot  surely  mean  of  every, 
thing  except  cattle.  If  Ezekiel  does  not 
give  the  tenths  of  the  tithes  to  the  priests, 
be  still  assigns  tbem  to  the  sanctuary  (see 
ch,  xlv.  14). 

Ver.  31. — The  commandment  of  the  Mo- 
saic Law  is  here  renewed  against  eating  the 
flesh  of  any  fovyl  or  beast  that  had  either 
died  a  natural  death  or  been  mangled  in 


0H.XLIT.1— 31.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  BZBKIBL.  893 

the  killing  (comp.  Lev.  xvii.  15 ;  zxli.  8) —   i   equally  binding  upon  all  (Exod.  xx.  81 ; 

a  oommandmeat  which,  while  enjoined  speci-       Dent.  xir.  21). 
ally  upon  the  priests  (Lev.  xxii.  8),  was   | 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  2,  3. — 77ie  shut  gate.  The  "  Golden  Gate  "  at  Jerusalem,  on  the  eastern  side  of 
the  temple  area,  looking  towards  the  Mount  of  Olives,  is  now  built  up,  so  that  it  can 
only  be  traced  by  means  of  the  form  of  the  arches  and  carved  work  embedded  in  a  line 
of  wall.  Tradition  associates  this  now  inaccessible  archway  with  the  gate  which 
Ezekiel  said  should  be  shut  till  the  Prince  passed  through  it.  There  is  a  striking 
symbolism  in  Ezekiel's  description  of  the  shut  gate. 

I.  Thg  aATE  WAS  SHUT.  1.  The  way  to  Ood  was  closed.  Man  once  had  free  access 
to  his  Father.  Sin  barred  the  door  and  shut  him  out  in  the  waste.  2.  The  way  to  lift 
was  dosed.  Cherubim  with  flaming  swords,  stood  between  Adam  and  the  tree  of  life 
(Gen.  iii.  24).  Fallen  man  cannot  recover  his  spiritual  life ;  he  has  forfeited  eternal 
life,  and  it  is  beyond  his  power  to  regain  it.  3.  The  way  to  happiness  was  closed.  The 
tree  of  life  stood  in  Eden,  and  Eden  was  shut  against  fallen  man.  4.  2%e  way  t» 
heaven  was  closed.  The  door  was  shut  against  the  foolish  virgins.  The  bliss  of 
futurity  is  denied  to  man  in  his  sin. 

II.  The  holiness  of  God  bars  the  qatb.  God  had  passed  through  the  gat«; 
therefore  it  was  to  be  closed  against  man.  This  suggests  a  painful  thought ;  where 
God  is  man  may  not  be.  The  same  idea  was  prominent  at  Horeb,  when  no  man  or 
beast  was  to  come  near  the  mount  while  God  descended  upon  it  (Heb.  zii.  20).  There 
is  a  natural  feeling  of  the  supreme  majesty  of  God  that  leads  to  a  thought  of  utter 
sepaiateness.  No  being  approaches  him  in  greatness  or  rank.  The  Sovereign  of  all  is 
alone  in  his  awful  majesty.  Yet  we  must  not  associate  vulgar  ideas  of  pomp  and 
ceremony  with  God.  He  does  not  need  the  artificial  dignity  of  separateness.  He  is 
necessarily  apart  from  us  in  sheer  greatness.  But  he  desires  to  be  near  to  his  children. 
The  real  secret  of  the  separateness  is  sin.  Man  cannot  come  where  God  is  because  man 
is  sinful  and  God  is  holy. 

III.  The  oate  is  opened  fob  the  Fbince.  Christ,  and  Christ  alone,  realizes  the 
Messianic  vision  of  Hebrew  prophecy.  He  is  the  Prince  par  excellence.  Christ  has  a 
right  of  access  to  God  by  reason  of  his  sinlessness,  and  by  reason  of  his  nature  as  "  the 
Only  Begotten  of  the  Father."  He  has  made  a  way  to  God  by  his  intercession  and  his 
sacrifice.  Th»  door,  long  barred  by  sin,  is  now  opened  by  grace.  First  our  Prince  goes 
through  it,  and  himself  realizes  communion  with  God.  But  he  does  not  keep  this  as  a 
rare  privilege  for  himself  alone.  He  is  the  "  Firstborn  among  many  brethren,"  and  he 
opens  the  door  of  access  to  God  for  all  men.  He  leads  all  his  people  to  the  tree  of  life, 
for  "  he  that  hath  the  Son  hatli  life  "  (1  John  v.  12).  He  gives  true  blessedness  to 
his  people.  He  unbars  the  golden  gate  of  heaven.  All  who  sleep  in  Jesus  will  awake 
in  the  glorious  resurrection-life  of  which  he  is  the  Source  and  Centre  who  could  say, 
"  I  am  the  Resurrection  and  the  Life  "  (John  xi.  25). 

Ver.  5. — The  attentive  consideration  of  religious  truth.  Ezekiel  was  to  mark  well 
the  [iiinute  directions  which  were  given  to  him  concerning  the  temple.  He  was  not  a 
builder,  and  there  is  no  reason  to  think  that  he  was  expected  to  consider  these  matters 
with  a  view  to  carrying  out  the  work  of  constructing  the  new  temple.  But  it  wag 
important  that  he  should  attend  to  the  suggestiveness  of  every  detail,  because  all  that 
was  here  set  forth  was  symbolical  of.  spiritual  truth.  The  smallest  points  of  this  truth 
should  be  considered  with  exactness,  while  every  efi'ort  is  made  to  grasp  and  comprehend 
it  in  its  vast  length  and  breadth. 

I.  Relioioub  truth  is  worthy  of  attentive  consideration.  Great  attention  is 
required  for  a  man's  business  if  that  is  to  be  made  successful.  Politics  absorb  the 
thoughts  of  those  who  are  much  engaged  in  them.  Pleasure,  and  what  is  called 
"  sport,"  command  earnest  attention.  Is  it  right  that  these  things  should  occupy  all  a 
man's  faculties,  and  that  religion  should  be  treated  in  an  off-hand  style  as  not  worth 
much  thought?     Yet  the  conduct  of  multitudes  would  suggest  that  this  supreme 


394  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  BZBKIEL.    [oh.  xliv.  1—31. 

Interest  could  be  suQiciently  considered  by  occasional  and  listless  attendance  at  publio 
worship.  But  note  how  important  it  is.  1.  It  concerns  Ood.  Surely  he — ^Maker  of 
all  things,  Ruler  of  the  universe,  "  in  whom  we  live  and  move  and  have  our  being,"  our 
Father  and  our  God — ^is  worthy  of  some  thoughtful  attention.  2.  It  concerns  our  duty. 
The  chief  thing  to  be  thought  of  is  what  we  ought  to  do.  To  give  much  attention  to 
our  worldly  interests  and  pleasures,  and  to  treat  our  duty  with  thoughtless  indifference, 
is  to  show  shameful  negligence  of  what  is  supremely  important  to  us.  3.  It  concerns 
our  eternal  welfare.  Religion  is  a  matter  of  life  and  death.  Its  truth  embraces 
eternity.  When  the  petty  affairs  of  this  brief  life  are  forgotten,  its  mighty  issues  will 
sttU  proceed  to  work  our  highest  blessedness  or  our  utter  destruction. 

II.  RBLiaions  tbuth  needs  attentive  considebatiok.  It  is  not  to  be  taken  in 
with  indolent  ease.  A  man  cannot  comprehend  bis  Bible  at  a  glance,  as  he  would  his 
newspaper.  Religious  truth  requires  thought  for  several  reasons.  1.  /(  is  remote  from 
our  common  experience.  It  should  not  be  so;  but  sin  has  introduced  aa  entirely 
different  train  of  ideas.  We  require  an  effort  to  bring  thoughts  of  religion  vividly  to 
mind.  2.  It  is  concerned  with  great  mysteries.  We  can  never  understand  it  perfectly ; 
but  there  is  room  in  it  for  the  explorations  of  the  greatest  minds.  We  must  never 
forget,  indeed,  that  its  most  precious  pearls  are  for  simple,  childlike  minds ;  that  God 
has  revealed  to  babes  what  he  has  hidden  from  the  wise  (Matt.  zi.  25).  But  who  give 
such  absorbing  attention  to  what  interests  them  as  children  i>  We  just  need  the  child's 
whole-hearted  listening,  as  when  he  drinks  in  a  tale,  every  detail  of  which  he  pictures 
to  himself  in  his  fresh  imagination. 

III.  Religious  teuth  should  beoeive  attentive  consideration.  We  now  come 
to  the  practical  point — How  are  we  to  give  full  attention  to  this  great  subject  ? 
Bzekiel  suggests  three  ways.  1.  We  must  fix  attention.  "  Mark  well."  The  mind 
tends  to  float  away  from  difficult  subjects.  The  anchor  to  hold  it  is  some  keen 
interest.  The  love  of  truth,  or,  better,  the  love  of  Christ,  should  serve  as  such  an 
anchor.  2.  We.  must  look  into  truth.  "  And  behold  with  thine  eyes,  and  hear  with 
thine  ears."  We  must,  so  to  speak,  visualize  truth.  To  make  it  real  we  must  see  it 
before  us.  But  first  we  must  look  for  it.  There  is  a  seeing  and  hearing  by  experience 
that  is  better  than  all  indirect  testimony.  As  soon  as  we  thus  come  into  personal 
contact  with  truth  it  is  likely  to  be  interesting  to  us.  Then  it  is  a  real  thing.  Above 
all,  it  is  well  to  follow  the  Greeks,  who  "  would  see  Jesus,"  and  by  living  experience  to 
know  him  for  ourselves. 

Ver.  6. — A  sufficiency  of  sin.  I.  Observe  in  what  the  scffioiknoy  op  sm  oon- 
BIBTB.  All  sin  is  in  excess  of  what  it  should  be,  for  no  sin  is  permissible.  How,  then,  can 
there  be  such  a  thing  as  a  sufBciency  of  it  ?  We  may  regard  this  as  an  ironical  idea,  or 
as  a  thought  that  is  useful  in  the  argv/mentum  ad  hominem.  It  is  as  though  a  man 
had  said  he  must  have  some  sin,  and  now  the  question  is  raised — Has  he  not  had 
enough?  Those  who  sin  greatly  may  be  said  to  have  had  more  than  enough — to  have 
attained  what  St.  James  calls  "a  superfluity  of  naughtiness"  (Jas.  i.  21).  The 
sufficiency  of  sin  may  be  tested  in  three  ways.  1.  By  its  magnitude.  What  more  can 
the  sinner  desire?  Would  he  still  add  to  his  enormous  pile  of  guilt?  Surely  no 
mortal  man  could  crave  a  heavier  account.  2.  By  its  fruits.  The  pleasures  of  sin 
soon  cloy,  and  the  foolish  slave  of  vice  has  to  turn  from  one  to  another  form  of  evil  to 
whet  his  jaded  appetite.  One  would  have  thought  that  he  had  got  his  surfeit.  Is  there 
yet  more  pleasure  to  be  extracted  from  the  rotten  root  of  sin  ?  Certainly  the  more  it 
is  drawn  upon  the  less  really  enjoyable  are  its  products.  3.  By  its  penalties.  All  this 
sin  must  Be  paid  for,  and  the  time  of  reckoning  is  at  hand.  Is  not  the  sin  already 
committed  enough  to  have  to  answer  for  ?  It  will  be  a  heavy  account  as  it  is,  if  no 
more  be  added. 

II.  Consider  how  tbb  suffioignot  of  sin  is  to  be  treated.  1.  It  should  not 
ie  increased.  It  is  great  enough  ;  let  us  add  no  more  to  it.  This  awful  tale  of  guilt 
can  never  be  met ;  it  would  be  madness  to  proceed  still  further  in  piling  up  accusations 
against  one's  self.  2.  /(  should  be  regarded  with  profound  penitence.  There  are  not 
many  things  of  which  the  sinner  is  full.  In  regard  to  his  better  nature  he  seems  to  be 
a  helpless  bankrupt.  Indeed,  he  has  but  one  perfect  thing — his  sin.  He  is  rich  only 
in  one  commodity — wickedness.     Surely  the  consciousness  of  such  a  state  of  affairs 


OH.  XLiv.  1— 31.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  EZEKIEL.  393 

should  oTerwhelm  him  with  grief  and  shame.  3.  It  should  he  hroughi  to  Ood  for 
pardon.  Man  cannot  undo  the  past,  nor  can  he  compensate  for  the  many  misdeeds  ha 
has  committed.  Were  his  sin  but  small,  it  would  still  be  impossible  for  him  to  atons 
for  it.  With  a  fulness  of  sin  to  account  for,  there  can  be  no  possibility  for  hope  in  man 
alone.  But  great  as  man's  sin  is,  the  love  of  God  is  even  greater.  Heavy  as  is  his 
guilt,  the  merits  of  Christ  outweigh  it  all.  Thanks  be  to  God,  the  sufficiency  of  man's 
sin  is  met  by  the  sufficiency  of  Christ's  atonement.  The  sin  was  great  to  require  the 
death  of  the  Son  of  God;  but  since  Christ  bas  died  for  it,  the  supreme  work  of 
redemption  has  been  accomplished.  Even  a  surfeit  of  past  sin  is  now  no  barrier  to 
God's  full  pardon  of  his  penitent  children. 

Ver.  8. — Region  by  proxy.  The  people  had  neglected  their  own  duty  in  regard  to 
the  worihip  of  God,  and  had  appointed  hirelings  to  discharge  the  sacred  offices  in  their 
stead.  This  was  a  case  of  trying  to  practise  religion  by  proxy.  We  often  see  the 
attempt  made  in  various  ways  now,  but  it  is  doomed  to  failure. 

I.  The  attempt  to  satisfy  the  claims  or  bbligion  by  pboxt.  There  are 
now  many  Jews  in  Jerusalem  kept  in  idleness  by  their  more  wealthy  brethren  in 
Europe,  who  hope  by  this  expedient  to  secure  for  themselves  the  merit  of  living 
and  dying  in  the  Holy  City,  without  undergoing  the  irksome  experience  of  actusu 
residence.  In  Roman  Catholic  countries  it  is  common  to  devote  a  sum  of  money 
to  the  payment  of  the  priest  who  is  to  say  so  many  Masses  on  behalf  of  a  person.^ 
Among  ourselves  there  is  an  unconfessed  but  common  notion  that  the  minister  in 
gome  way  performs  the  offices  of  religion  on  behalf  of  the  people,  who  stand  by  as 
idle  spectators,  and  yet  enjoy  the  fruits  of  his  vicarious  service.  The  development 
of  elaborate  ritual  and  the  cultivation  of  highly  ornate  choral  services  tend  in  this 
direction,  by  taking  the  acts  of  worship  out  of  the  grasp  of  the  people,  and  consigning 
them  to  the  clergy  and  choir.  Where  this  is  not  the  case,  there  is  a  common  feeling 
that  the  mere  attendance  at  church  when  a  service  is. being  conducted  is  of  soma 
religious  efficacy,  the  officiating  minister  carrying  on  the  real  worship  on  behalf  of 
the  congregation,  which  may  be  listless  and  indifferent,  so  long  as  he  discharges  his 
duty  faithfully.  Or  perhaps  the  religion  by  proxy  is  attempted  in  the  way  of  money 
payments.  The  rich  man  who  will  make  no  moral  sacrifice,  and  who  is  unwillmg  to 
worship  God  or  serve  him,  subscribes  to  charities  and  Missionary  Societies,  and  consoles 
himself  by  the  thought  that  he  is  supporting  religion  and  other  good  works.  He  i» 
not  a  pillar  of  the  church  within  the  sacred  building,  but  he  is  a  sort  of  buttress  out- 
side it.  By  this  indirect  service  of  a  money  payment  he  thinks  to  compound  for  his 
irreligion.  Lastly,  living  in  a  Christian  land,  belonging  to  a  Christian  home,  and 
having  Christian  associates  are  regarded  as  matters  of  some  religious  value  by  people 
who  possess  no  real  religion  of  their  own.  Thus  they  too  would  be  religious  by 
proxy. 

II.  The  utteb  futility  of  this  attempt.  Every  man  must  have  his  own 
personal  dealings  with  God.  There  are  such  things  as  mediation,  intercession,  and 
vicarious  sacrifices.  The  good  mother  is  spiritually  helpful  to  her  children.  Christ's 
righteousness,  his  obedience,  and  his  sacrifice  are  for  the  good  of  the  world.  But  none 
of  these  things  will  compensate  for  irreligion  in  those  who  would  avail  themselves  of 
their  advantages.  Moreover,  God  looks  to  the  heart.  Money  gifts  not  offered  by  a 
grateful,  devout  heart,  but  only  paid  in  tines  to  exonerate  a  man  from  the  consequences 
of  his  misdeeds  and  negligences,  are  of  no  value  whatever  in  the  sight  of  God.  There 
is  no  merit  in  helping  the  religion  of  other  people  if  no  right  motive  inspires  the  action. 
The  very  desire  to  be  religious  by  proxy  reveals  a  wrong  state  of  the  heart,  for  it  sliows 
that  those  people  who  experience  it  have  no  love  for  God  and  no  real  inclination  for 
religion.  The  man  whose  heart  is  right  with  God  will  not  wish  to  be  religious  by 
proxy.  The  son  who  has  true  affections  will  have  no  inclination  to  pay  a  substitute 
to  take  his  place  in  the  family  circle.  When  his  heart  is  renewed  the  Christian  is 
most  eager  to  be  near  to  God,  for  then  worship  is  glad  and  spontaneous. 

Ver.  9. — The  exclusion  of  the  stranger.  There  was  a  strict  exclusiveness  about  the 
Hebrew  religion.  Only  the  circumcised  were  to  share  in  its  privileges.  In  regard  to 
outward  ordinances  and  national  distinctions,  this  exclusiveness  is  destroyed  by  Christ, 


896  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PKOPHET  EZEKIBL.    [oh.  xliv.  1— 31. 

aod  his  gospel  is  free  to  Gentile  as  well  as  Jew,  to  the  uncircumcised  as  well  as  the 
circumcised  (Gal.  v.  6).  Nevertheless,  in  spite  of  the  new  breadth  of  Christianity,  th* 
ideas  suggested  by  the  old,  narrow  exclusiveness  still  obtain,  though  now  only  in 
spiritual  relations. 

I.  The  strangbb  to  God  is  excluded  fbom  the  PBiviLEaES  of  religion.  It 
matters  not  what  nation  he  belongs  to ;  now  we  have  to  do  with  spiritual,  not 
national  distinctions.  Thus  it  is  possible  that  the  Jew  or  the  Christian  may  be  a 
stranger  to  God,  while  the  Gentile  and  one  of  a  heathen  nation  may  really  know  and 
love  God.  But  where  the  distinction  is  it  does  involve  serious  consequences.  It  is 
a  mistake  to  treat  a  Christian  nation  as  though  all  its  citizens  enjoyed  the  favour  of 
Heaven  ;  and  it  is  a  mistake  to  address  a  Christian  congregation  as  though  all  its 
members  were  devout  men  and  women.  Now,  so  long  as  a  man  is  alienated  from  God, 
he  is  excluded  from  all  the  highest  blessings  of  the  gospel.  The  door  of  heaven  is  shut 
against  the  bard,  the  worldly,  the  impeniteut.  Surely  some  Church  discipline  should 
be  exercised  in  regard  to  those  whose  alienation  from  God  is  undisguised.  To  keep  up 
the  name  of  Church-fellowship  with  people  in  this  unhappy  condition  is  to  delude 
them  with  false  hopes. 

II.  The  unoiboumcibed  in  heaet  are  steangbbs  to  God.  Even  in  the  direc- 
tions that  concern  the  old  Jewish  ritual  this  class  is  named  as  well  as  that  of  the 
uncircumcised  in  flesh.  The  one  great  question  is  as  to  the  state  of  a  man's  heart. 
The  uncircumcised  heart  is  given  up  to  sinful  naturalism.  Pure  human  nature  should 
be  fit  Tor  the  presence  of  God,  but  sinful  human  nature  is  not.  Unclean  and  degraded, 
it  needs  a  spiritual  circumcision  before  it  can  be  accepted  by  God.  In  the  state  of  sin 
man  is  thus  far  from  God,  and  so  excluded  from  the  privileges  of  enjoying  heavenly 
blessings.  But  the  estrangement  that  results  from  this  sinful  condition  involves  a 
state  of  ignorance.  Alienated  from  God,  sinful  man  does  not  know  his  loss.  He  is 
out  in  the  darkness,  a  heathen,  though  bearing  the  Christian  name. 

III.  The  stbangers  who  abb  as  yet  unoiecumoisbd  in  heabt  mat  beoous 
TEUE  PEOPLE  OF  GoD  AND  ENJOY  THE  PEiviLBOB  OF  ACCESS  TO  GoD.  The  hindrance 
must  first  be  removed.  1.  There  must  le  a  change  of  heart.  The  mischief  is  in  the 
heart ;  thither  the  cure  must  be  brought.  Thus  the  first  thing  is  for  a  man  to  pray 
that  God  would  create  in  him  a  clean  heart  (Ps.  li.  10).  2.  This  can  only  he  brought 
ohout  by  a  Divine  renewal,  which  may  be  called  the  circumcision  of  the  heart.  Grod, 
and  he  only,  can  create,  and  we  need  to  be  new  creatures  in  Christ  Jesus.  3.  Thit 
may  be  realized  through  the  gospel  of  Christ.  He  has  come  to  call  in  the  strangers. 
By  his  great  all-embraoing  love  he  reconciles  "  them  that  are  alar  off"  as  well  as 
"  them  that  are  near."  There  are  now  no  barriers  which  the  grace  of  Christ  cannot 
break  through.  It  only  remaiift  for  the  strangers  and  uncircumcised  in  heart  to 
avail  themselves  of  that  grace  by  penitent  confession  of  sin  and  active  trust  in 
Christ. 

Vers.  10 — 16. — The  degradation  of  the  Levitet.  Prom  this  interesting  passage  it 
would  appear  that  there  was  a  time  when  the  Levites  enjoyed  free  access  to  the  altar, 
and  were  allowed  to  serve  as  priests  before  the  Lord.  But  they  had  abused  their  privi- 
leges in  admitting  heathen  people  to  the  sacred  enclosure,  in  doing  their  work  by  proxy, 
in  even  going  aside  to  idolatry.  Therefore  they  were  degraded  from  their  high  functions 
. — all  of  them  except  one  family,  that  of  Zadok.  As  the  members  of  this  family  had 
remained  true,  the  priesthood  was  now  settled  exclusively  on  them,  while  the  rest  of 
the  Levites  were  put  down  to  serve  in  secondary  offices  in  connection  with  the  temple 
ritual. 

I.  Disloyal  sebviob  is  punished  by  loss  of  office.  The  unfaithful  priest  is 
deprived  of  his  rank  and  ministry.  Of  Judas  it  was  said,  "  His  bishopric  let  another 
take"  (Acts  i.  20).  The  hireling  may  direct  the  flock  for  a  season  to  his  own  advan- 
tage. Even  the  thief  and  the  wolf  may  be  in  office.  We  cannot  judge  of  a  man's 
character  by  bis  rank,  nor  can  we  tell  what  is  his  position  in  the  eyes  of  God  by 
observing  his  ecclesiastical  status.  Much  is  expected  of  those  to  whom  much  has 
been  given.  Therefore  the  disloyal  servant  who  stands  in  a  high  position  will  be  most 
sternly  judged.  His  first  penalty  will  he  loss  of  olfice.  The  man  who  had  buried 
his  talent  is  deprived  of  it  (Matt.  xxv.  28). 


OH.  xuv.  1— 31.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  397 

II.  DEaRABED     SEBTANTS     MAT    BE     PERMITTED     TO     DISCHABQE     HUMBLES    DUTIES. 

The  Levites  are  not  discharged;  they  are  only  put  to  lowei'  offices.  God  inflict* 
no  heavier  penalties  than  are  absolutely  necessary.  He  bears  no  grudge  against  aay 
of  his  servants.  If  we  have  failed  in  a  more  honourable  position,  we  need  not  despair ; 
there  may  be  a  lowly  work  which  we  can  still  perform.  It  must  have  been  most 
painful  fur  the  Levites  to  be  thw>  forced  to  take  a  lower  place.  Possibly  at  first  they 
would  rather  have  given  up  the  "vhole  temple  service,  and  have  devoted  themselves  to 
secular  pursuits.  It  speak«  weil  for  them  that  they  silently  confessed  the  justice  of 
what  was  done,  and  quietly  took  the  lower  place.  It  is  hard,  like  John  the  Baptist, 
to  step  back  and  give  way  for  a  new  man ;  hard  to  say,  "  He  must  increase,  but  I  must 
decrease"  (John  iii.  30).  But  he  who  has  the  cause  of  Christ  at  heart  will  be  willing 
to  do  anything  for  the  service  of  his  Master.  Many  would  be  willing  to  take  the  rank 
of  priests.  The  test  is  whether  we  will  obey  when  we  are  called  to  the  more  humble 
work  uf  the  Levites. 

III.  The  DEGRADATION   OF   THE   DNFAITHFUL  IS   ACCOMPANIED   BT  THE   EXALTATION 

OF  THE  FAITHFUL.  The  luss  of  the  Levites  is  the  gain  of  the  family  of  Zadok. 
The  talent  that  is  taken  from  the  idle  servant  is  given  to  the  servant  with  ten  talents. 
We  may  here  see  a  hierarchy  in  the  making.  Merit  and  practical  utility  lie  at  the 
foundation  of  institutions  that  have  subsec[uently  become  more  formal.  But  merit 
vod  utility  should  always  govern  the  appointment  to  office.  There  is  no  higher  honour 
vban  to  have  been  true  in  a  time  of  general  unfaithfulness. 

Ver.  23. — "  The  difference  between  the  holy  and  profane."  I.  Thebb  is  a  real 
DIFFERENCE.  Men  have  been  much  concerned  with  wholly  fictitious  distinctions,  and 
a  most  artificial  line  has  been  drawn  between  what  has  been  accuunted  sacred  and 
what  has  been  regarded  as  profane.  But  this  is  only  the  abuse  and  the  degeneracy  of 
what  should  be  discovered  in  its  high  and  true  condition  as  a  genuine  difference.  The 
formal  distinctions  of  the  Jewish  Law  were  all  intended  to  symbolize  moral  and 
spiritual  differences.  Some  of  them  were  obviously  concerned  with  matters  of  common 
cleanliness  and  decency;  some  had  a  more  immediate  bearing  on  sanitary  laws; 
others,  perhaps,  were  too  suggestive  of  Jewish  exolusiveness  or  conventional  propriety ; 
but  even  these  latter  regulations  could  not  but  impress  upon  the  minds  of  thoughtful 
men  the  separateness  of  true  holiness.  The  one  real  distinction  is  moral.  It  is  the 
line  of  demarcation  that  separates  sin  from  righteousness.  This,  and  not  the  supposed 
distinction  between  the  secular  and  the  sacred,  is  the  real  difference  between  clean  and 
unclean.  St.  Peter  was  taught  to  call  none  of  the  creatures  of  God  common  or 
unclean  (Acts  x.  15).  It  is  not  they  that  are  lo,  but  the  uncleanness  is  in  us,  in  our 
use  of  them.  "  Unto  the  pure  all  things  are  pure :  but  unto  them  that  are  defiled  and 
unbelieving  is  nothing  pure ;  but  even  their  mind  and  conscience  is  defiled  "  (Titus  i. 
15).  Similarly,  men  make  an  artificial  distinction  between  sacred  and  profane  history. 
Coming  from  the  pen  of  a  Josephus,  the  history  of  Israel  is  profane ;  written  by  an 
Arnold,  the  history  of  Bome  is  sacred.  He  who  sees  God  in  history  beholds  a  sacred- 
ness  in  it.     To  him  who  is  worldly  and  untrue  in  heart  all  that  he  touches  is  profane. 

II.  This  dipfebence  is  to  be  leabnt  by  spiritual  education.  The  priests 
were  to  teach  the  people  the  difference  between  the  clean  and  the  unclean.  No 
doubt  .the  elaborate  external  regulations  of  the  Jewish  Law  required  careful  study, 
and  men  needed  to  be  thoroughly  instructed  in  regard  to  them,  in  order  that  they 
might  avoid  even  unconscious  offences.  This  was  a  necessary  adjunct  of  a  ceremonial 
religion.  A  religion  of  law  needed  lawyers  for  its  priests.  Now  that  system  is  wholly 
■wept  away.  We  live  in  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  sons  of  God,  and  there  is  no  need 
for  us  to  be  instructed  in  elaborate  rules  of  ceremonial  purification.  Still,  moral  educa- 
tion is  now  needed,  though  in  another  direction.  Conscience  must  be  educated,  so  that 
it  may  be  sensitive  and  keen,  to  discern  what  is  right,  and  separate  this  from  what  is 
evil.  This  education  is  not  to  be  a  drilling  in  casuistry,  which  would  be  a  return  to 
the  old  bondage  of  the  Law ;  but  it  is  to  be  an  enlightening  in  regard  to  the  great 
principles  of  Christian  righteousness,  and  still  more  a  quickening  of  the  soul  to  feel 
the  force  of  those  principles,  and  to  apply  them  without  delay  to  every  case  as  it 
arises.  It  is  important  that  the  religious  teaching  of  children  should  be  directed  more 
to  this  end.     One  great  function  of  the  pulpit  is  to  awaken  men's  sense  of  the  great 


898  THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET   EZEKIEL.    [on.  xliv.  1—31. 

distinction  between  sin  and  purity.     We  live  too  much  by  compromise.     We  need  to 
learn  more  of  tlie  absolute  claims  of  righteousness. 

Ver.  28. — -Taking  Ood  as  an  Inheritance.  The  priests  were  to  have  no  share  in  the 
partition  of  the  land.  They  were  to  be  supported  by  means  of  the  sacrificial  offerings 
of  the  people ;  and  in  so  living  they  were  said  to  take  God  for  their  Inheritance. 
Viewing  their  position  from  the  lowest  point  of  view,  we  have  the  thought  that  they- 
were  dependent  on  what  was  dedicated  to  God,  as  their  livelihood  was  derived  from 
God's  share  of  the  produce  of  the  land ;  a  higher  consideration  would  lead  them  to 
see  that  it  was  through  God's  relation  to  his  people  that  they  received  their  main- 
tenance ;  and  the  highest  view  to  which  they  could  attain  would  be  to  regard  God 
himself  as  their  real  Inheritance,  and  the  sacrificial  offerings  merely  as  necessary 
means  of  living.  Let  us  see  how  God  may  be  regarded  as  an  Inheritance  and  a 
Possession. 

I.  God  mat  bs  beoeived.  An  inheritance  is  not  some  distant  territory  that  one 
(imply  knows  of  or  beholds  at  a  distance.  We  may  believe  in  God,  and  even  look 
towards  him  from  afar,  and  yet  not  think  of  having  any  inheritance  in  him.  But  it  is 
possible  to  have  more  close  relations  with  him.  1.  The  inheritance  is  received  as  a 
oirthrighi.  The  priests  had  a  hereditary  claim  on  their  portion.  All  men  are  by  nature 
children  of  God.  By  new  birth  we  recover  our  original  birthright.  The  Christian  is 
an  heir  of  God.  2.  The  inheritance  is  received  through  death.  One  dies,  and  another 
receives  his  inheritance.  That  was  seen  in  Old  Testament  times  in  the  succession 
of  the  priests.  To  us  it  is  remarkable,  as  witnessed  in  the  great  fact  that  Christ  died 
to  give  us  our  heavenly  inheritance. 

II.  God  mat  be  owned.  When  we  receive  God  as  an  Inheritance,  we  take  him 
as  our  Possession.  There  is  thus  a  certain  ownership  in  God  established.  But  in  the 
most  complete  way  he  owns  us.  How,  then,  can  we  also  own  God?  There  is  a 
spiritual  appropriation  by  which  we  personally  accept  God  as  our  God,  and  hold  to  him 
in  faith.  It  is  much  to  be  able  to  say  from  the  heart,  "  0  God,  thou  art  my  God  1 " 
All  religion  centres  in  that  experience.  The  priests  were  to  enjoy  special  Divine 
privileges  in  the  Jewish  system ;  all  Christians  are  now  to  own  Gkid  as  their  peculiar 
Possession. 

III.  GoD  MAT  BE  ENJOTED.  The  inheritance  is  made  use  of  and  valued  for  what 
it  gives,  and  on  its  own  account.  1.  When  God  is  our  Inheritance,  Divine  nestings 
are  our  portion.  A  rich  inheritance  contains  many  treasures — acres  of  fertile  soil, 
well-timbered  land,  farms  and  orchards,  perhaps  mines  and  houses.  He  who  takes 
God  for  his  Portion  has  all  the  wealth  of  God  to  supply  his  need.  It  is  true  he  may 
■till  receive  but  little  of  this  world's  goods ;  that  is  because  God  sees  that  it  is  beat  for 
him  to  be  tried  with  poverty.  But  he  will  have  a  true  sufficiency.  If  he  trusts  in 
God,  and  does  what  is  right,  he  has  the  promise  that  he  shall  be  fed  (Ps.  xxxvii.  3). 
Ultimately  he  will  have  great  possessions.  "  All  things  are  yours  "  (1  Cor.  iii.  22). 
2.  Ood  is  himself  the  greatest  Blessing  for  his  people.  The  inheritance  itself  is  more' 
valuable  than  all  that  it  is  the  means  of  procuring  for  us.  To  own  God  is  to  be  rich 
indeed.  When  the  Lord  is  our  Portion  we  have  a  wealth  of  treasures  for  our  souls. 
His  presence,  his  love,  his  truth,  his  life,  be  himself  dwelling  within,  make  those  who 
own  him  rich  in  the  highest  good. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOBa 

Vers.  1 — 3. — The  prerogative  of  the  prince.  The  regulation  prescribed  in  these  verses 
is  very  remarkable,  and  is  not  free  from  difficulties.  It  appears  that  a  peculiar  sanctity 
attached  to  the  eastern  gate  of  the  temple,  owing  to  the  fact  that  it  was  by  this  gate 
that  the  glory  of  the  Lord  entered,  and  by  this  same  gate  that  the  glory  of  the  Lord 
had  previously  forsaken,  the  sacred  precincts.  To  mark  this  sacredness,  the  gate  was 
kept  shut,  and  no  one  was  permitted  to  pass  through  it,  except  the  prince.  He,  as  the 
head,  the  representative,  the  ruler,  of  Israel,  was  permitted  to  enter  and  to  depart  by  this 
gate.  And  further,  it  was  appointed  that  he  should  in  this  gateway  eat  bread — whether 
by  this  be  meant  the  meat  offering  or  the  shewbread.     This  was  a  priestly  privilege. 


CH.  XLiv.  1— 31.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZBKIEL.  899 

but  it  seems  to  have  been  shared  by  the  prince,  who,  after  the  return  from  the  Captivity, 
was  not  only  the  representative  of  the  consecrated  people,  but  also  the  representative 
of  the  promised  Messiah.  This  siagular  prerogative  suggests  to  our  minds  certain 
pnDciples  which  have  a  special  application  to  a  religious  community  and  state. 

I.  The  unitt  of  a  religious  and  oonseorated  nation  is  pbesonified  in  a 
BELloious  BOVEBEIQN.  Davld  was  not  only  the  greatest  of  the  Hebrew  monarchs ;  ha 
was  the  representative  of  the  Hebrew  monarchy  and  theocracy.  In  the  prophets  and 
in  the  later  national  religious  literature,  David  appears  as  the  ideal  king,  personifying 
the  people  of  the  oovenant  and  foreshadowing  the  promised  Messiah,  ^d  the  "  prince  " 
of  the  people  is,  in  this  and  other  passages,  regarded  as  the  successor  of  the  cherished 
son  of  Jesse.  The  prince  is  looked  upon  as  worthy  uf  his  station,  worthy  of  his 
illustrious  and  beloved  predecessor.  The  true  head  of  a  great  and  religious  people  is 
that  people's  representative,  not  only  before  man,  but  before  God. 

II.  ThEBE   IS  IMPLIED   IN   THIS   PROVISION   THE    DiVINE   OBIQIN   AND   CHABACTEB   OF 

POLITICAL  AUTHOBiTT.  There  are  some  students  of  Scripture  who  find  in  the  Word  of 
God  much  relating  to  the  authority  of  the  Church,  but  who  fail  to  remark  the  many 
assertions  of  the  Divine  authority  of  the  state  and  of  its  officials  and  rulers.  But  it  is 
very  instructive  for  those  in  such  a  position  to  remark  how,  in  this  and  similar  passages, 
stress  is  laid  upon  the  position  and  power  of  the  prince.  "  The  powers  that  be  are 
ordained  of  God ; "  the  state  is  as  much  Divine  in  its  origin  and  sanction  as  is  the 
Church.  In  the  theocracy  the  monarch  no  doubt  occupied  a  very  special  position. 
But  religion  certainly  has  for  one  of  its  fimctions  the  upholding  of  government  as 
a  Divine  institution  and  of  authority  as  a  Divine  principle.  Independently  of  the  form 
of  government,  and  of  the  designation  of  the  chief  ruler  of  the  state,  it  is  for  teachers  of 
religion  to  follow  the  example  of  the  scriptural  writers  in  requiring  justice  from  the 
governor  and  loyalty  from  the  governed. 

HI.  The  osLiaATioN  is  apparent  that  those  in  authobity  should  cultivate 
AND  fbactibe  tbue  beligion.  It  is  taken  for  granted  by  the  prophet  that  the  prince 
will  appreciate  and  will  use  the  prerogative  here  described.  Nevertheless,  it  is  probable 
that  some  who  occupied  the  highest  position  in  the  nation  were  far  from  being  truly 
devout  and  pious  meu.  In  every  age  and  country  men  are  found  who  come  short  of  the 
ideal  of  their  station.  This,  however,  does  not  affect  the  fact  that  the  occupation  of 
a  high  position,  the  primacy  of  a  great  people,  imposes  upon  a  man  a  peculiar  obligation 
to  honour  God,  the  Fountain  of  all  authority  and  the  Judge  of  every  earthly  sovereign. 
He  who  leads  a  people  should  lead  them  in  the  ways  of  righteousness  and  of  piety. — T. 

Ver.  i. — Beverence.  The  prophet  was  brought  "  the  way  of  the  north  gate  before 
the  house,"  because  it  was  thence  that,  on  a  previous  occasion,  he  had  been  directed  to 
gaze  upon  the  provision  for  idolatrous  worship  which  aroused  the  indignation  of 
■  Jehovah.  Instructions  were  about  to  be  given  which  would  be  the  means  of  preventing 
a  repetition  of  the  infamous  defilement  of  God's  holy  place  which  in  times  past  had 
taken  place  within  the  temple  precincts.  And  that  a  suitable  impression  might  be 
made,  "  the  glory  of  the  Lord  filled  the  house  of  the  Lord."  It  was  upon  this  occasion 
that  the  prophet,  filled  with  reverence  and  awe,  fell  upon  his  face. 

I.  There  is  misplaced  beverence.  1.  When  men  revere  worldly  greatness  and 
splendour.  2.  When  meu  revere  idols  and  deities,  which  are  nothing  but  the  work  of 
their  own  hands  and  the  invention  of  their  own  minds. 

II.  There  is  justifiable  and  becoming  reverence.  Such  was  that  felt  and 
manifested  by  Ezekiel  in  the  presence  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord.  1.  The  nature  of  man 
is  capable  of  true  and  profound  reverence.  There  is  grovelling  and  degrading  homage 
offered  to  men  or  to  supposed  supernatural  powers — homage  not  worthy  to  be  designated 
reverence.  But  man  lias  the  capacity  of  honouring  the  noblest  and  the  best ;  and  this 
is  among  the  sublimest  capacities  of  his  nature.  2.  The  attributes,  the  character,  of 
God  deserve  such  reverence.  The  more  the  Eternal  is  studied,  as  manifested  in  his 
works  and  in  his  Word,  the  more  will  it  be  felt  that  he  is  the  one  fit  Object  of 
reverential  regard  and  worship.  The  admonition  of  the  angel  addressed  to  the  seer  of 
the  Apocalypse  was  just  and  is  universally  applicable,  "  Worship  God  I " 

III.  There  is  appbopbiatb  expression  of  true  veneration  and  adobation.  A 
BStural  manifestation  of  reverence  is  that  accorded  in  the  text :  "  I  fell  upon  my  &co." 


400  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [ch.  xliv.  1— 3L 

The  attitude  of  the  body  and  the  expression  of  the  countenance  aru  the  natural  revela- 
tion of  the  deep  feelings  of  awe  and  veneration.  A  more  articulate  expression  is  the 
language  of  prayer  and  praise,  which  must  indeed  always  be  inadequate,  which  yet  may 
in  all  conceivable  circumstances  be  employed  by  the„Church  of  Christ.  All  attitudes 
and  all  language  are  vain  except  as  the  manifestation  of  the  deep  feelings  of  the  heart. 
Yet  it  is  not  possible  for  men  to  have  a  just  view  of  God,  to  feel  aright  towards  him, 
w'"4hout  presenting  some  audible  or  visible,  some  manifest  expression  of  such  thought 
and  emotion.  Man  is  both  soul  and  body,  and  the  movements,  the  attitudes,  the 
utterances,  of  the  bodily  nature  are  the  expressions  of  what  is  intellectual  and  spiritual. 
Whilst  worship,  to  be  acceptable,  must  be  in  spirit  and  in  truth,  they  who  are  in  the 
flesh  will  bow  in  reverence  or  kneel  in  supplication,  will  pour  forth  their  gratitude  in 
song,  and  their  faith  and  adoration  in  petition  and  in  praise. — T. 

Ver.  9. — The  true  circumcision  and  the  true  worshipper.  Provisions  such  as  this 
were  no  doubt  of  an  educational  character,  and  were  intended  to  teach  the  Israelites 
the  necessity  and  the  duty  of  holiness.  The  consecrated  nation  was  called  to  present 
to  Jehovah  a  pure  offering.  The  alien  was  denied  the  privileges  appointed  for  the 
Israelite;  being  uncircumcised,  and  not  a  child  of  the  covenant,  he  was  forbidden  access 
to  the  holy  place. 

I.  The  sanctuabt  was  a  btmbol  of  the  Divine  pbesekce,  fellowship,  and 
FAVOCB.  The  Lord's  holy  temple  was  the  scene  of  the  especial  manifestation  vouch- 
safed by  Jehovah  to  Israel.  The  Divine  presence,  naturally  ubiquitous,  was  for  a 
purpose  localized.  Here  was,  so  to  spenk,  the  point  of  contact  between  the  Crod  of 
Israel  and  his  chosen  people;  the  mtdia  of  communication  being  the  sacrifices  and 
services  ministered  by  the  consecrated  priesthood.  Here  the  acceptance  and  good  will 
of  Jehovah  were  sealed.  They  who  conformed  to  Divine  appointments  were  cere- 
monially justified  and  cleansed;  and  they  who  drew  near  with  hearts  prepared  to 
receive  a  spiritual  blessing  were  abundantly  rewarded. 

II.  The  selection  or  the  cikcumcised  and  consecrated,  and  the  exclusion 
OF  the  uncircumcised  and  the  alien,  were  symbolical  of  the  spiritual  con- 
ditions OF  acceptable  worship.  No  one  can  suppose  that  there  was  "  favouritism  " 
in  the  treatment  of  worshippers  by  the  just,  impartial  God ;  we  know  that  in  every 
nation  those  who  wrought  righteousness  were  accepted.  But  so  far  as  the  temple  at 
Jerusalem  was  concerned,  there  were  regulations  intended  to  draw  attention  to  the 
character  of  true  worship,  and  to  the  qualifications  of  acceptable  worshippers.  No 
doubt  impure  Israelites  were  admitted,  and  just  and  benevolent  aliens  were  excluded. 
But  all  were  taught  the  indispensable  necessity  of  compliance  with  Divine  regulations; 
and  of  the  possession  of  prescribed  qualifications.  This  provision  was  a  preparation  for 
the  introduction  amongst  men  of  a  higher  and  purer  conception  of  true  holiness,  that 
which  is  not  ceremonial,  but  real. 

III.  In  Christianity  we  have  the  fulfilment  of  the  type  and  promise  op 
this  preparatory  dispensation.  The  religion  of  Christ  lays  stress  upon  the  new 
nature,  the  new  heart,  the  new  birth,  the  new  life.  It  requires  a  cleansing,  a  putting 
off  of  the  old  nature,  the  circumcision  of  the  spirit.  It  requires  a  naturalization  in  the 
new  and  Divine  kingdom,  a  citizenship  such  as  no  physical  birlh  and  no  external 
legislation  can  impart.  A  man  must  be  burn  anew  and  from  above  in  order  to  enter 
into  the  kingdom  of  God,  of  heaven.  The  conditions  of  acceptable  worship  at  Jerusalem 
have  to  be  translated  into  the  language  of  spiritual  reality  in  order  to  be  applicable  to 
the  new  dispensation. 

IV.  The  conditions  of  entrance  into  the  Hebrew  sanotuabt  were  an  antici- 
pation OF  the  TERU3  OF  HEAVENLY  CITIZENSHIP.  In  tMs,  as  in  SO  many  passages, 
the  prophecies  of  Etiekiel  point  on  to  the  language  of  the  Apocalypse,  and  the  reader  of 
the  New  Testament  interprets  these  ancient  declarations,  prescriptions,  and  promises  in 
the  light  of  the  closing  book  of  the  canon.  The  ceremonial  preparation  required  of  the 
Hebrew  worshipper  prefigured  the  qualifications  laid  down  as  a  condition  of  admission 
into  the  celestial  temple.  Into  the  abodes  of  immortal  purity  there  enters  nothing  t^at 
worketh  abomination  or  maketh  a  lie.  The  citizens  of  the  heavenly  Jerusalem  are 
renewed  and  purified  and  thus  fitted  for  the  privileges  and  occupations  of  the  city  whoM 
Builder  and  Maker  is  God. — T. 


OH,  XLiv.  1—31.]    THE  BOOK  OF   THE   PEOPHET   EZEKIEL.  401 

Vers.  15, 16. — Appointed  ministrations.  The  priests  were  an  essential  element  in 
the  Mosaic  system,  and  their  duties  were  prescribed  with  a  precise  exactness.  After 
the  Captivity,  tliey  still  fulfilled  their  appointed  duties,  although  their  relative  importance 
was  probably  diminished,  whilst  the  scribes  became  growingly  the  religious  leaders  and 
teachers  of  the  people.  In  the  dispensation  of  the  Spirit,  the  priesthood,  so  far  as  it  is 
perpetuated,  has  been  widened  so  as  to  include  the  whole  Christian  congregation. 

I.  MiNISTBT   IN     THE   ChUBOH     18  'CHB   APPOINTMENT   OF    GOD.        As    the    priesthood 

was  instituted  by  Divine  wisdom,  so  the  will  and  pleasure  of  the  great  Htid  of  the 
Church  is  that  the  members  of  the  spiritual  society  should  regard  themselves  as  called 
by  God  to  the  fulfilment  of  varied  duties  as  his  servants. 

II.  Ministry  in  the  Chitboh  is  upon  the  pattern  of  the  ministry  of  Christ 
THE  Head.  The  Son  of  man  came,  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to  minister.  The 
Lord  was  himself  Servant  of  alt,  and  those  who  are  his  are  summoned  to  follow  the 
example  of  him  who  declared  that  he  was  among  his  people  as  One  who  served. 

III.  Ministry  in  the  Church  is  for  uutual  benefit.  It  is  sometimes  taken 
for  granted  that  there  are  certain  persons  who  minister  to  their  fellow-Christians,  whilst 
the  rest  simply  receive  and  enjoy  the  advantages  of  their  services.  But  in  reality  thero 
is  no  one  member  of  the  true  Church  who  is  not  commissioned  for  some  special  work 
which  it  is  for  him  to  do,  who  has  not  some  gifts  and  opportunities  for  serving  his 
fellow-disciples,  for  the  edification  of  the  body  of  Christ. 

IV.  Ministry  in  the  Church  is  for  the  salvation  of  the  world.  The  Jewish 
Church  was  restricted ;  the  Christian  Church  has  a  universal  mission — a  mission  lor  the 
benefit  of  mankind.  They  who  have  Christ's  Spirit  will  live  as  disciples  of  him  who 
said,  "  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up  from  the  earth,  will  draw  all  men  unto  myself." 

V.  Ministry  in  the  Church  involvbs  accountability  to  God.  With  calling 
•nd  gifts  and  influence  there  is  associated  responsibility.  And  this  responsibility  is  to 
him  who  is  the  one,  only,  all-sufScient  Judge  and  Lord.  From  this  responsibility  there 
is  no  escape ;  and  it  must  ever  be  the  aim  and  the  hope  of  every  Christian  that  he 
himself  and  his  work  may  be  acceptable  and  approved  at  last,  when  every  man  shall 
have  praise  of  God. — T. 

Ver.  23. — "  ITie  difference  between  the  holy  and  profane"  It  was  one  great  office  of 
the  Jewish  priesthood  to  instruct  the  people  to  discern  between  the  unclean  and  the 
clean.  No  doubt  this  office  was  often  discharged  in  a  perfunctory  manner ;  yet  a  valuable 
purpose  was  answered  by  the  importance  which  the  Israelites  were  thus  encouraged  to 
attach  to  obedience  to  the  behests  of  the  great  King. 

I.  There  is  an  arbitrary  and  factitious  distinction  between  the  holy  and 
the  profane.  Such  is  the  distinction  drawn  in  heathen  communities,  simply  in  the 
interests  of  the  priests  themselves,  with  no  moral  bearing  or  intention. 

II.  There  is  a  ceremonial  and  symbolical  distinction  between  the  holy 
AND  the  profane.  Such  was  the  difference  which  was  established  by  the  Law  given 
by  Moses  to  the  Israelites,  and  maintained  by  Divine  command  by  the  instnAnentality 
pf  the  priests  of  Jehovah. 

III.  There  is  a  spiritual  and  real  distinction  between  the  holy  and  the 
PROFANE.  It  cannot  be  doubted  that  the  ceremonial  differences  were  intended  to  be 
the  emblems  pf  deeper  and  more  real  distinctions  of  a  moral  nature.  In  the  Christian 
dispensation  men  were  early  taught  upon  the  highest  authority  to  call  nothing  common 
or  unclean.  But  whilst  Christ  abolished  distinctions,  which  were  a  means  to  an  end, 
which  served  a  temporary  purpose  of  preparation,  he  emphasized  those  distinctions 
which,  in  the  sight  of  a  holy  God,  are  real  and  important.  Especially  was  this  the 
case  with  the  eternal  difference  between  moral  good  and  evil,  between  what  is  in 
accordance  with,  and  what  is  repugnant  to,  the  nature,  the  character,  and  the  will  of 
God.  This  distinction  is  one  which  the  Church  of  Christ  is  bound  to  maintain,  both 
by  teaching  and  by  conduct,  before  a  sinful  and  disobedient  world. — ^T. 

Ver.  28. — The  Lord  the  Inheritance  of  his  people.  There  was  a  special  sense  in 
which  the  Lord  was  the  Inheritance  of  the  Levites  and  priests  among  the  sons  of  Israel. 
A  provision  was  made  for  them  to  compensate  them  for  the  lack  of  a  territory  such  as 
was  apportioned  to  the  other  tribes.    Jehovah  himself  undertook  the  care  of  those  who 

EZEKIEL — n.  2   D 


402  THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET   EZEKlBL.    [ch.  xliv.  1—31. 

ministered  in  his  sanctuary ;  he  was  their  Inheritance.  This  declaration  is  suggestive 
of  a  wider  truth,  viz.  that  God  is  the  Portion  and  Inheritance  of  aU  his  people. 

I.  The  Lobd  provides  fob  all  the  need,  both  teufobal  akd  SFiBiTirAii,  of 

THOSE    WUO   TBDST    IN    HIM. 

II.  The  Lobd  is  the  Jot  and  Comfort  of  the  heabts  of  all  who  love  him. 

III.  The  Lobd  is  thk  bverlastino  Pobtios  op  all  who  seek  and  bebte  him 

BKRE. 

Applioatiox.  Such  a  declaration  aa  this  should  assist  those  who  profess  themselves 
tu  be  God's  people  to  overcome  the  natural  tendency  to  be  anxious  and  careful  con- 
cerning their  temporal  state  and  prospects.  It  should  enconrage  them  to  set  their 
affection  upon  things  above — upon  the  true  riches.  "  Where  yovir  treasure  is,  there  will 
your  heart  be  also." — T. 

Ver.  29. — The  devoted  thing.  There  were  objects,  both  animate  and  inanimate,  in 
connection  with  the  worship  and  the  sacrifices  of  the  temple,  which  were  in  an 
especial  sense  dedicated  and  devoted  to  the  Lord.  By  this  provision,  spiritual  instruc- 
tion was  afforded,  and  religious  reverence  was  encouraged.  As  in  the  Christian 
dispensation  nothing  is  common  or  unclean,  we  are  taught  to  regard  everything  that 
belongs  to  and  is  associated  with  the  Christian  as  consecrated  to  the  Lord. 

I.  ALL  that  the  Christian  has  is  devoted  to  the  Lobd  in  virtue  of  what 
THE  Lord  has  done  fob  him,  1.  Everything  is  the  Lord's  gift.  What  have  we 
that  we  did  not  receive?  2.  Everything  is  redeemed  by  Christ,  who,  in  giving  himself 
a  ransom  for  us,  redeemed  our  possessions  and  our  powers  unto  himself. 

II.  All  that  the  Christian  has  is  devoted  to  the  Lord  in  virtue  of  his 
CONSCIOUS  surbendek  and  deliberate  consecration  of  himself  to  his  eedeemino 
God.  The  dedication  which  the  true  Christian  has  made  of  himself  to  his  Saviour  is 
unreserved, 

"  Yet  if  I  might  mate  some  reserve, 
And  duty  did  not  call, 
I  love  my  Lord  with  zeal  so  great 
That  I  would  give  thee  all  I " 

As  it  was  foretold  that  upon  the  bells  of  the  horses  should  be  inscribed,  "  Holiness  unto 
the  Lord,"  so,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  should  the  sincere  Christian  devote  to  his  Redeemer 
all  the  common  possessions,  all  the  daily  opportunities,  with  which  Providence  enriches 
him. 

III.  This  principle  lends  a  new  beautt  and  dignity  to  all  that  the 
Christian  owns  and  does.  Every  Christian's  life  is  dedicated,  and  all  his  property 
and  all  his  talents  and  influence  are  devoted.  He  is  not  his  own.  Thus  the  light  of 
heaven  is  shed  upon  the  darkness  of  earth,  and  common  things  are  not  without  a 
glory,  because  they  are  sanctified  and  ennobled  as  used  for  the  service  and  the  praise 
of  Gud.— T. 

Vers.  4 — 9. — Church-worship  vital  to  the  soul.  As  the  heart  is  vital  to  the  body, 
and  sends  its  tide  of  life  to  every  organ  in  the  system,  so  the  sanctuary  is  the  central 
Bource  of  spiritual  life  to  the  human  commonwealth.  What  the  Church  is,  the  home 
will  be,  the  town  will  be,  the  nation  will  bo.  The  guilt  contracted  by  Israel  in  the 
temple  was  a  fount  of  iniquity  whence  defilement  spread  to  every  part  of  the  body 
politic.  The  sin  of  the  sanctuary  was  the  sin  of  sins.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
sanctuary  may  be  a  well-spring  of  salvation.  The  loftiest  expectations  cherishe  1  here 
God  will  satisfy.  "  This  is  my  rest  for  ever :  here  will  I  dwell."  Here,  "  he  that  aska, 
receives."     "  I  looked,  and,  behold,  the  glory  of  the  Lord  filled  the  house." 

I.  CHURCH-woRhHiP  IS  BUPBBMELT  IMPORTANT.  "  Son  of  man,  mark  well,  and 
behold  with  thine  eyes,  and  hear  with  thine  ears,  all  that  I  say  unto  thee  concerning 
all  the  ordinances  of  the  house."  Of  such  moment  to  human  interests  are  these  laws 
and  ordinances,  that  the  prophet  must  give  concentrated  attention  to  the  matter. 
Every  faculty  of  soul  must  be  engaged  to  learn  the  will  of  God,  and  to  do  it.  There 
are  subtle  bonds  of  vital  connection  between  the  human  soul  and  temple-worship, 
which  easily  escape  the  notice  of  the  eye.  To  gain  the  good  which  God  intends  we 
must  prepare  the  heart  and  mind  beforehand.     "Mark  well  the  entering  iu  of  th« 


OH.  XLiv.  1— 31.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEU  408 

house."  High  expectation  of  blessing  should  be  raised.  A  state  of  mind  free  from 
•elfish  care  should  be  fostered.  As  the  photographer  carefully  prepares  hia  plate  to 
receive  a  faithful  impression,  so  equally  concerned  should  we  be  to  prepare  our  hearts 
for  high  and  intimate  converse  with  Grod.  Nor  should  we  be  unmindful  how  we 
depart  from  that  august  Presence.  What  care  is  needed  to  bury  deep  in  our  memory 
the  truths  we  have  received  I  What  care  ought  there  be  to  retain  the  anointing  of 
holy  influence  upon  the  soul  I 

II.  Chtjkoh-worship  embraces  elements  visible  and  invisible.  To  be  accept- 
able worshippers  God  required  that  they  should  be  circumcised  in  flesh  and  circumcised 
in  heart.  The  one  was  designed  to  be  the  visible  symbol  of  the  other.  To  circumcise 
the  flesh  would  be  useless  if  there  was  not  also  the  circumcision  of  the  heart.  The 
circumcision  of  the  flesh  was  instructive  and  disciplinary — was  a  test  of  obedience.  To 
neglect  this  was  a  wilful  and  open  breach  of  the  covenant  made  with  Israel.  In  our 
present  earthly  state,  outward  religious  forms  are  highly  useful ;  but  if  they  remain 
only  forms — done  without  heart  or  willinghood — they  are  barren  of  blessing  to  men. 
As  the  race  advances  in  religious  culture,  simpler  and  fewer  forms  will  su£Sce.  Men 
will  be  able  to  rise  to  communion  with  God  without  the  intervention  of  rites.  In  the 
heavenly  home  no  temple  is  found,  for  God  himself  is  the  Temple,  and  the  redeemed 
have  immediate  access  to  his  presence.  But  for  the  present,  visible  ordinances  are  the 
best  channels  by  which  we  can  gain  fellowship  with  God. 

III.  Ohdech-worship  requires  purity  of  character.  Had  the  God  of  Israel 
demanded  internal  purity  as  the  condition  of  approaching  him,  he  would  have  shut 
out  the  whole  race  of  men  from  his  house.  But  his  high  design  is  to  create  holy 
character  among  men,  and  eveiy  arrangement  of  temple-worship  has  purification  for 
its  end.  The  uncircumcised  Gentiles  were  allowed  to  enter  an  outer  court ;  the  circum- 
cised could  have  nearer  approach ;  an  inner  circle  was  reserved  for  the  children  of  Levi ; 
and  only  one  of  all  the  human  race  was  permitted  to  enter  the  holiest  sanctuary — ^the 
very  presence-chamber  of  Jehovah.  In  this  way  the  world  was  taught  the  value  of 
moral  purity.  In  proportion  to  holiness  of  character  is  the  nearness  of  access  to  God. 
The  pure  in  heart  shall  see  him.  Hence  the  cardinal  distinction  between  the  circum- 
cised and  the  uncircumcised,  which  God  so  wisely  imposed.  With  that  man  God 
dwells  who  has  a  humble  and  contrite  heart.  To  promote  moral  purity  is  the  proper 
design  of  Church-woiship, 

IV.  Church- WORSHIP  debased  is  the  foulest  oefbnob.  It  is  to  repel  Gk)d  in 
the  act  of  his  most  gracious  approach  to  men.  It  is  to  wound  God  in  the  tenderest 
part  of  his  nature.  Sacrilege  has  always  been  counted  a  most  heinous  offence.  To 
secularize  the  temple  is  to  destroy  the  only  ladder  by  which  we  can  climb  to  heaven. 
To  trifle  with  religion  is  to  commit  spiritual  suicide.  On  this  head  our  Lord  asks,  "  If 
the  light  that  is  in  thee  be  darkness,  how  great  is  that  darkness ! "  As  new-fallen  snow 
is  among  the  most  beautiful  of  natural  objects,  so  tarnished  snow  is  most  offensive  to  the 
«ye.  If  the  only  fount  of  living  water  be  poisoned,  how  can  the  life  of  men  be  sus- 
tained ?  To  abuse  the  ordinances  of  the  sanctuary  is  to  starve  one's  own  soul,  is  to 
make  religion  obnoxious  to  our  fellows,  is  to  insult  Jehovah.  This  is  man's  crowning 
sin — "  a  sin  unto  death." 

V.  Religious  service  must  be  personal  and  individual.  "Ye  have  not  kept 
the  charge  of  mine  holy  things :  but  ye  have  set  keepers  of  my  charge  in  my  sanctuary 
for  yourselves."  In  the  eyes  of  God  it  was  a  foul  oflence  that  the  priests  had  delegated 
their  work  to  others — to  persons  whom  Jehovah  had  not  appointed,  did  not  approve ! 
It  is  impossible  for  any  man  to  devolve  his  service  for  Q-od  upon  another  person. 
God's  service  cannot  be  discharged  by  proxy.  Just  as  no  man  can  transfer  to  another 
his  talents,  or  his  qualities,  or  his  position,  so  no  man  can  transfer  his  responsibilities 
or  his  work.  Already  God  has  supreme  claim  to  the  entire  service  of  that  man  to 
whom  I  may  wish  to  transfer  my  task.  Already  he  is  under  tribute  to  serve  the  same 
Master.  Moreover,  by  abandoning  my  service,  I  abandon  my  reward  and  my  joy. 
Delegation  of  service  in  God's  kingdom  is  forbidden.  "Each  one  of  us  must  give 
account  of  himself  before  God."  Rightly  understood,  service  is  privilege.  To  serve  is 
to  reign. — ^D. 

Vers,  10—16. — Reward  and  punishment  on  earth.    According  to  rank  and  position 


404  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PBOPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xliv.  1—31. 

in  the  Ohurch  is  responsibility.  Example  is  contagious.  Treachery  by  a  military 
ofBcer  is  a  graver  sin  than  treachery  by  a  soldier  in  the  ranks.  Pollution  at  the  fount 
is  a  greater  evil  than  pollution  in  a  branch-stream.  Disease  in  the  heart  is  a  more 
aerioui  matter  than  disease  in  the  skin  or  at  the  extremities.  If  the  priests  of  God 
sanction  idolatry,  the  whole  nation  will  follow  suit,  and  the  cause  of  God  is  betrayed. 
The  sin  of  Judas  lay  in  this — that  he  had  been  a  trusted  friend  and  companion  of  Jesus. 
God's  ministers  hold  responsible  posts. 

I.  Mbh  are  often  subjected  to  a  oeuoial  test.  The  present  race  is  mainly 
tempted  to  infidelity,  but  the  earlier  generations  of  men  were  tempted  to  idolatry.  As 
infidelity  is  now  the  ally  of  vice,  so  was  and  is  idolatry.  Both  chime  in  with  the 
lower  passions  of  human  nature.  la  the  period  preceding  Ezekiel's  birth  Israel  had 
gone  astray  after  idols.  On  every  side  false  deities  were  being  set  up.  Idolatry  was  in 
the  atmosphere.  A  great  opportunity  opened  to  the  Levites.  As  ministers  of  Jehovah, 
set  apart  for  the  service  of  religion,  they  should  have  stood  in  the  gap  and  raised 
barriers  against  the  inflowing  tide  of  idolatry.  The  honour  of  God  was  in  their 
keeping.  The  well-being  of  the  nation  rested  with  them.  They  were  the  trustees  of 
God's  truth  for  the  world.  It  was  a  testing-time.  Men's  favour  or  God's — which 
would  they  choose?  Popularity  for  the  moment  or  enduring  fidelity — which?  Alasl 
they  made  a  suicidal  choice  I  They  chose  the  path  of  selfish  ease.  Like  a  physician 
summoned  to  a  critical  case,  they  too  might  have  abated  the  raging  fever  and  saved 
the  patient's  life.  But  they  had  no  religious  earnestness.  They  were  mere  func- 
tionaries of  a  system ;  and  so  long  as  duty  was  light  and  a  livelihood  secure,  religion 
might  take  care  of  itself.  Honoured  with  a  tremendous  trust,  they  proved  themselves 
unworthy — faithless.  Begard  for  God  was  lacking.  Moral  prowess  was~  lacking. 
They  drifted  with  the  stream.  Their  sin  was  the  sowing  of  evil  tares,  which  develop^ 
into  a  harvest  of  misery  and  disaster. 

II.  In  such  oases  two  lines  of  coNDnoT  abe  possible.  In  the  stress  of  tempta- 
tion men  can  either  resist  or  yield.  In  no  case  is  it  a  necessity  to  succumb.  Moral 
principle  in  man  has  withstood  the  incoming  deluge  of  temptation,  and  it  always  can. 
Unseen  resources  are  on  the  side  of  him  who  steadfastly  adheres  to  right.  God  is  at 
his  side.  So  far  as  public  action  went,  Elijah  stood  alone  in  the  days  of  Jezebel's 
idolatry.  In  Babylon  Daniel  stood  erect  as  the  sole  witness  for  Jehovah,  and  notable 
triumph  was  his.  Martin  Luther  was  for  years  the  only  champion  of  Bible  truth  on 
the  continent  of  Europe — one  man  against  the  world ;  yet  he  prevailed.  So,  in  the 
instance  narrated  here,  one  family  reiuained  faithful.  The  sons  of  Zadok  were  worthy 
sons  of  a  worthy  sire.  A  good  name  is  a  good  heritage,  and  no  better  name  can  a  man 
wear  than  Zadok,  i.e.  "  Righteousness."  If  a  man  trusts  to  his  good  name,  he  is  a  fool ; 
but  if  he  lives  up  to  a  good  name — ^makes  that  his  model — ^he  is  wiser  than  Solomon. 
A  rotten  ship  will  not  stirvive  the  storm,  though  she  is  named  Impregnable.  These 
sons  of  Zadok  were  like  Abdiel,  "  faithful  among  the  faithless  found."  "  They  kept 
the  charge  of  the  sanctuary"  when  Israel  went  astray.  They  had  moral  backbone — 
some  iron  principle  in  their  blood.  It  is  the  basest  cowardice  merely  to  go  with  the 
majority.  Numbers  are  not  the  arbiter  of  truth  or  of  right.  Men  who  deserve  the 
name  inquire  for  themselves,  judge  for  themselves,  seek  guidaace  from  the  Unerring 
Source,  and  act  according  to  the  result.  There  was  no  external  necessity  to  follow  the 
crowd  of  idolaters.  The  sons  of  Zadok  resisted.  So  in  every  case  a  man's  conduct  is 
the  outcome  of  his  own  choice. 

III.  As  THERE    ARE   TWO    LINES    OF   CONDUCT,   THERE   ARE    TWO    KINDS  OF  AWARD. 

It  is  only  the  blindness  of  men  that  supposes  that  God's  justice  ever  slumbers  or 
ever  mistakes.  God  can  patiently  wait  his  time,  and  can  generously  forbear.  Yet 
with  perfect  calmness  he  metes  out  justice  to  every  man.  Touching  these  Levites  he 
declares,  "  they  shall  even  bear  their  iniquity."  If  any  sensitiveness  of  soul  was  left 
in  them,  they  must  have  been  sorely  pained,  during  the  seventy  years  of  captivity,  vrith 
the  self-conviction  that  their  unfaithfulness  had  been  a  main  cause  of  Israel's  disaster. 
Nor  was  this  all.  A  perpetual  stigma  was  upon  their  name.  An  everlasting  degradation 
was  imposed  on  them  and  on  their  posterity.  Their  children  and  their  children's  children 
through  many  generations  were  involved  in  the  disgrace  and  in  the  deprivation  of 

office.     So  far  as  it  had  been  an  honour  to  be  a  Levite,  now  it  shall  be  reversed it 

•hall  be  a  dishonour.     "  They  shall  not  come  near  unto  me,  to  do  the  office  of  a  priest 


OH.  XLiT.  1— 31.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  BZEKIEL.  405 

unto  me,  nor  to  come  near  lo  any  of  my  holy  things,  in  the  most  holy  place."  They 
had  put  God  far  away  from  them ;  it  was  simple  retribution  that  God  should  forbid 
them  to  come  near  to  him.  Sin  always  bears  its  own  natural  fruit.  Still,  judgment 
was  tempered  with  mercy.  They  shall  not  be  entirely  superseded.  They  shall  not 
be  banished  from  the  new  temple.  Inferior  office  they  may  yet  fill;  subordinate 
service  they  may  yet  perform.  And  in  their  degraded  rank  they  shall  learn  that  God's 
service  is  real  honour;  that  nearness  to  God  is  man's  heaven.  "  They  shall  be  minis- 
ters in  my  sanctuary,  having  charge  at  the  gates  of  the  house,  and  ministering  to  the 
house ;  they  shall  slay  the  burnt  offering  and  the  sacrifice  for  the  people."  But,  on  the 
other  hand,  special  honour  is  conferred  on  the  loyal  sons  of  Zadok.  "  They  shall  come 
near  to  me  to  minister  unto  me,  and  they  shall  stand  before  me  . . .  They  shall  enter 
into  my  sanctuary,  and  they  shall  come  near  to  my  table,"  etc.  Here  is  unmistakable 
promotion.  "  They  had  kept  the  charge  of  the  sanctuary ; "  now  "  they  shall  keep 
my  charge."  In  other  words,  "  They  shall  be  my  treasures :  I  will  entrust  my  honour 
and  all  my  precious  things  unto  them."  Their  fidelity  is  established ;  yea,  is 
strengthened  and  enlarged  by  this  strain  of  temptation.  Their  characters  have  come 
forth  from  the  furnace  like  burnished  gold.  They  shall  be  trusted  in  the  heavenly 
kingdom  because  they  are  trustworthy.  The  omniscient  eye  of  God  does  not  over- 
look the  least  meritorious  deed.  High  reward  is  in  course  of  preparation  for  tha 
righteous.  Men  often  deceive  themselves  ^ith  specious  hopes  of  escape.  They  often 
deceive  others  with  plausible  semblances.    They  can  never  deceive  God  I — D. 

Yers.  27 — 30. — Substantial  wealth.  In  every  part  of  the  world  there  is  hunger,  more 
or  less,  to  possess  land.  By  long  observation  men  have  discovered  that  to  possess  land 
is  to  possess  influence  and  honour  among  their  fellow-men.  Is  not  land  essential  as  the 
foundation  of  the  harvest-crops  ?  And  are  not  crops  of  com  and  fruit  essential  to  the  life 
of  men  ?  Is  not  agriculture  the  mainstay  of  a  nation's  well-being  ?  Yet  without  land 
agriculture  is  impossible ;  is  it  not  therefore  reasonable  that  men  should  eagerly  long 
to  call  the  land  their  own?  On  the  other  hand,  this  anxiety  chains  down  men's 
thoughts  to  inferior  occupations  and  to  a  provision  for  their  inferior  nature.  Such 
anxiety  tends  to  draw  away  their  attention  from  God  and  to  weaken  their  sense  of 
pious  trust.  In  order  to  counteract  this  disastrous  tendency,  God  appointed  a  class  of 
men  whose  business  it  should  be  to  keep  God  prominently  before  the  eyes  of  their 
fellow-men.  These  servants  of  God  were  precluded  from  acquiring  wealth.  They 
were  to  be  wholly  employed  in  fostering  the  religious  life  in  men.  For  their  main- 
tenance God  provided  in  a  special  manner.  These  priests  were  designed  to  be  models 
of  human  life,  patterns  of  later  Christians.  God's  method  for  teaching  the  race  is 
this — viz.  to  set  down  a  good  man  in  their  midst,  and  to  inspire  others  with  the 
desire  to  imitate  him.  If  one  man  can  live  and  prosper  by  virtue  of  implicit  and 
practical  faith  in  God,  other  men  can.  By  diligent  culture  of  the  land,  God  hai 
ordained  that  human  life  shall  be  sustained.  Yet  God  is  not  shut  up  to  this  one 
«ystem.  "  Man  does  not  live  by  bread  alone,  but  by  every  word  that  proceedeth  out 
of  the  mouth  of  God." 

I.  Eabthlt  possession  IB  ONLY  A  MEAKS  TO  AN  END.  It  is  not  a  blessing,  but 
only  a  medium  of  blessing.  It  is  part  of  God's  system  of  means.  The  land  exists 
with  a  view  to  harvest.  The  harvest  is  produced  with  a  view  to  man's  bodily  life. 
Man's  bodily  life  is  sustained  with'  a  view  to  his  spiritual  character.  On  the  whole,  it 
is  best  that  the  land  should  be  appropriated  to  personal  possession.  This  secures  that 
the  land  shall  be  cultivated  in  the  highest  degree,  and  that  the  crops  shall  be  protected 
from  premature  use.  If  all  land  should  remain  as  common  property,  there  would  be 
lack  of  inducement  to  cultivate  it ;  there  would  be  lack  of  inducement  to  personal 
exertion ;  there  would  be  no  check  to  extravagant  waste.  Personal  possession  is  best 
for  a  community;  yet  it  becomes  a  waste  and  an  injury  if  a  man  possesses  more 
than  he  can  cultivate.  God  gives  not  land  to  a  man  in  order  that  he  may  be 
tyrannical,  selfish,  puffed  up  with  overweening  conceit.  This  is  a  miserable  perversion 
of  a  Divine  gift.  Land  is  created  for  cultivation.  Cultivation  of  land  is  designed  for 
the  support  of  human  life.  And  all  the  land  in  the  world  is  worth  nothing  to  me 
except  as  it  ministers  to  the  health  and  vigour  of  my  life. 
n.  God  can  skoure  this  end  by  other  systems  op  means.    The  best  proof  that 


406  THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xlit.  1— 31. 

he  can  do  so  is  the  fact  that  he  has  done  so  on  many  occasions.  It  would  be  the 
height  of  folly  to  suppose  that  God  has  not  made  the  wisest  possible  arrangement  for 
Ae  well-being  of  men.  Yet  if  men  abuse  the  arrangement  and  push  God  away  from 
his  rightful  place,  God  can  alter  his  system,  and  bring  about  his  end  by  other  agencies. 
He  sustained  the  life  of  Abraham,  gave  him  wealth  and  influence  among  men,  while, 
at  the  same  time,  he  refused  to  give  him  a  rood  of  land.  He  was  the  Special  Protector 
of  the  Hebrew  nation ;  yet  he  led  them  about  the  desert  for  the  lifetime  of  a  whole 
generation,  where  harvests  could  not  be  gathered,  aud  where  land  was  not  desired  as  a 
possession.  Yet  they  wanied  not  for  food  or  for  clothing.  God  was  to  them  better  than 
all  harvests.  So  Jesus  Christ  called  away  the  twelve  from  their  secular  pursuits ;  yet 
he  did  not  suffer  tliem  to  want  any  good  thing.  Jesus  himself  preferred  to  have  no 
encumbrance  of  land  or  wealth.  He  freely  chose  the  state  of  poverty.  To  him,  living 
in  such  intimate  union  with  his  Father,  landed  possession  would  have  been  a  needless 
burden ;  yet,  not  only  were  his  own  wants  supplied,  but  he  royally  spread  a  table  for 
others.    What  the  Son  did  on  earth  was  the  visible  effect  of  his  Father's  working. 

III.  Unselfish  service  brings  to  a  man  the  largest  gain.  He  who  forgets 
himself  in  his  generous  kindness  is  not  forgotten  by  his  fellows— is  not  forgotten  by 
God.  The  family  of  Zadok  were  prohibited  from  being  landholders.  Nevertheless, 
they  shall  not  want.  "  Every  dedicated  thing  in  Israel  shall  be  theirs."  "  The  first 
of  all  the  firstfruits  "  shall  be  theirs.  God  out-distances  all  his  creatures  in  generously 
rewarding  faithful  service.  In  his  book  every  item  of  devoted  toil  and  sacrifice  is 
noted  ;  for  it  ample  reward  is  preparing.  Just  as  one  grain  of  corn  will  produce,  in  the 
harvest,  a  hundred  grains,  so  consecrated  service  is  living  seed — it  shall  fructify  into 
splendid  results.  Did  Abraham  ever  regret  his  unswerving  fidelity  to  God?  Does 
St.  Paul  feel  to-day  that  he  made  too  great  sacrifices  of  himself  for  others  ?  Has  any 
one  been  a  loser  for  serving  God  ?  It  almost  savours  of  profanity  to  propose  such  a 
question.  The  true  servants  of  God  shall  enjoy  the  tribute  d«e  to  God  himself. 
Statesmen,  under  a  mighty  king,  are  rewarded  with  a  goodly  share  of  the  revenue  of 
the  empire ;  so  the  tribute  paid  into  God's  temple  God  distributes  among  his  priests. 
For  them  who  serve  God  well  other  men  labour.  Other  men  till  the  ground  and  prepare 
the  produce.  They  who  do  the  highest  work  shall  have  the  best  reward.  Thus  it  was 
predicted,  "  Strangers  shall  stand  and  feed  your  flock,  and  the  sons  of  the  alien  shall  bo 
your  ploughmen  and  your  vine-dressers;  but  ye  shall  he  called  the  Priests  of  the 
Lord."  Like  many  other  good  things,  the  name  and  the  office  of  the  priest  have  been 
made  a  curse.  Yet  a  true  priest — God's  servant  to  mankind — is  a  very  fount  of 
blessing.  He  is  like  salt  in  the  earth — a  preserving  and  purifying  power.  Wherever 
he  comes  he  is  a  spring-season  of  life  and  joy.  He  is  to  be  well  cared  for,  so  "  that  he 
may  cause  the  blessing  to  rest  in  thine  house.'' 

IV.  The  devoted  sebtant  or  God  obtains  a  pbopbietobship  in  God.  "  I  am 
their  Inheritance  ...  I  am  their  Possession."  An  estate  is  not  really  ours  because 
we  call  it  ours.  We  cannot  call  anything  ours  unless  it  becomes  a  part  and  parcel 
of  ourselves.  If  it  adds  to  our  character  and  our  strength,  then,  and  only  then,  is  it 
ours.  The  land  estate  is  often  the  master  of  the  man.  He  lives  to  improve  it  rathei 
than  to  be  impioved  by  it.  We  possess  property  when  we  really  get  some  advantage 
out  of  it.  So  is  it  also  with  respect  to  God.  If  we  make  God  our  Friend,  we  extract 
advantage  from  him.  If  we  believe  his  promises  and  open  our  souls  to  his  vitalizing 
grace,  we  are  enriched  from  him.  God's  wisdom  becomes  our  wisdom.  His  righteous- 
ness Ijecomes  our  righteousness.  His  love  becomes  a  fountain  of  love  in  us.  We  are 
"  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature."  In  a  very  emphatic  sense  God  gives  himself  to  us. 
Every  capacity  in  us  may  be  filled  with  God.  If  we  are  fully  God's  property,  God  is 
our  Portion — our  Inheritance.  This  is  transcendant  condescension,  the  sublimity 
of  love. 

Y.  To  POSSESS  Gk>D  is  to  possess  all  thinos.  On  this  account  it  would  have 
been  a  superfluity  if  Jesus  had  been  a  Proprietor  of  wealth.  Of  what  advantage 
would  it  have  been  for  him  to  possess  fields,  if  he  could  create  a  sufBoient  supply  of 
bread  by  the  magic  of  command  ?  Although  the  poorest,  he  was  yet  the  richest  of 
men.  It  is  understood  that  he  who  possesses  the  key  of  the  bank  possesses  the  con- 
tents of  the  bank.  If  the  Creator  be  mine,  if  I  can  call  him  "my  Father,"  thea 
whatever  his  creation  contains  of  good  is   mine  also.     It  is  clear  that  I  must,  as 


OH.  xLiv.  1—31.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PEOPHET  EZEKIEL.  407 

a  creature,  be  dependent  Is  it  better  to  depend  on  law  or  on  the  Lawgiver?  on 
the  cistern  or  on  the  Fount?  on  blind  circumstances  or  on  Omniscient  Wisdom?  on 
natural  forces  or  on  the  all-creative  God  ?  My  faith  is  founded  in  common  sense. 
God  undertakes  to  be  my  Friend — my  Father.  Then  I  am  his  child ;  and  "  if  a  son, 
then  an  heir — heir  of  God."     "  All  things  are  yours,  for  ye  are  .  . ,  God's." — D. 

Vers.  1,  2. — TJie  shut  gate:  reverence.  What  is  the  true  significance  of  this 
idosure?  Much  has  been  made  of  it  by  fanciful  exposition  ;  but  surely  the  true  lesson 
is  that  which  lies  upon  the  surface,  viz.  that  the  closed  gate  would  be  a  continual 
reminder  that  the  people  must  reverently  abstain  from  using  the  entrance  through 
which  the  Most  High  himself  had  once  passed.  It  was  another  symbolic  utterance  of 
the  truth  that  we  must  "  put  off  our  shoes  "  when  we  stand  on  "  holy  ground."  The 
fact  that  there  was  a  closed  gate  in  this  visionary,  this  ideal  temple,  may  not  unfittingly 
tuggest  to  us  (though  it  cannot  be  said  to  teach  us) — 

I.  The  way  that  is  barbed.  If  we  try  to  enter  the  kingdom  of  God  by  the 
way  or  the  gate  of:  1.  A  false  independence ;  if  we  attempt  to  reach  the  saving  and 
redeeming  truth  of  God  by  our  unaided  intelligence,  tmwilling  to  learn  of  him  who 
came  to  teach  us,  to  be  to  us  "  the  Wisdom  of  God," — then  we  shall  find  no  entrance 
there  (see  Matt,  xviii.  3 ;  1  Cor.  iii.  18).  The  same  may  be  said  of:  2.  Unholy  indul- 
gence ;  and  of:  3.  The  favourable  opportunity  in  the  future.  Whoever  seeks  to  enter 
the  kingdom  of  Christ  by  these  doors  will  find  no  open  gate,  but  a  barred  way  j  he 
must  enter  by  the  way  of  childlike  faith,  of  purity,  of  immediate  decision.  The  closed 
gate  may  also  suggest  to  us,  by  contrast — 

II.  The  openness  of  the  kingdom.  There  is  a  very  valuable  and  most  precious 
sense  in  which  no  gate  is  shut  that  was  ever  open  into  the  kingdom  of  Goi.  No  man, 
let  him  be  who  or  what  he  may,  let  him  have  been  anything  whatever  in  the  past, 
coming  to  the  gate  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ  in  sincere  penitence  and  simple  faith, 
will  find  it  closed  against  him.  By  whatever  path  he  may  have  approached,  by  what- 
ever influences  constrained,  if  he  be  earnestly  desirous  of  seeking  God  and  serving  him, 
he  will  find  himself  before  an  open  door.  Christ  himself  is  the  Door,  and  he  is  ever 
saying,  "  Him  that  cometh  unto  me,  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out."  But  the  true  lesson 
of  the  passage  is — 

III.  The  CONSTANT  DUTY  OF  BBVERENCB  IN  THE  WORSHIP  AND  SBBVIOB  OP  QoD.      The 

shut  gate  said  (in  effect),  "  Where  God  has  come,  you  may  not  enter ; .  there  must  be 
another  way  for  the  feeble  and  sinful  creature  than  that  taken  by  the  almighty  and 
holy  Creator ;  realize  the  immeasurable  difference  between  yourself  and  him."  It  is 
well  that  there  should  be  raised,  now  and  again,  the  reminder  that  the  Lord  whom  we 
serve  is  the  Most  High  and  the  Most  Holy  One ;  that  it  becomes  us  to  worship  him  and 
to  speak  for  him  in  the  spirit  of  deepest  reverence ;  that  if  a  "  holy  boldness  "  may  be 
cultivated,  an  unholy  irreverence  is  to  be  most  sedulously  shunned ;  that  our  dearest 
Friend  is  our  Divine  Lord,  worthy  of  the  profoundest  homage  our  hearts  can  pay  him, 
claiming  the  fullest  subjection  we  can  bring  to  his  feet,  as  we  worship  in  his  house  or 
work  in  his  vineyard. — C. 

Vers.  9 — 14. — Divine  discrimination.  The  prophet  is  necessarily  expressing  himself 
in  the  terms  of  the  old  dispensation ;  and  he  declares,  in  God's  name,  that  no  man  who 
has  not  received  a  right  spirit  ("  uncircumcised  in  heart "),  and  that  no  man  who  has 
not  been  admitted  to  the  citizenship  of  the  kingdom  of  God  ("  uncircumcised  in  flesh  "), 
can  "enter  the  sanctuary" — can  come  into  closest  contact  with,  and  render  holiest 
service  unto,  the  Lord  (see  ver.  9).  And  he  further  declares  that  those  of  his  peopla 
who  had  grievously  sinned  against  him  by  their  guilty  apostasy  should  be  excluded 
from  the  more  sacred  offices  of  the  priesthood;  yet  that  they  should  be  admitted  to  the 
humbler  posts  of  guarding  the  doors,  of  slaying  the  sacrificial  animals,  and  of  minister- 
ing to  those  priests  who  were  worthier  than  themselves  (vers.  11, 14).  The  general 
lesson  we  learn  is  that  God  deals  with  us  graciously  and  generously,  biit  discriminately. 
He  gives  to  all  his  children,  but  he  does  not  give  the  same  kind,  nor  does  he  give  the 
same  measure,  to  all ;  he  is  merciful  to  the  penitent,  but  he  does  not  let  his  mercy 
obscure  or  reduce  his  righteousness.  Those  who  have  done  serious  wrong  "bear  their 
iniquity"  (ver.  10),  they  "bear  their  shame"  (ver.  13);  and  yet  they  have  their  place 


408  THE   BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET   EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xliv.  1—31. 

and  do  their  work  io  the  day  of  restoration  (see  vers.  11,  14).    In  that  kingdom  of 
God  wherein  we  now  stand  we  see  illustrations  of  this  Divine  discrimination  in — 

I.  The  dispensing  of  the  Divine  bounty.  God  gives  much  to  all  his  creatures, 
to  all  his  children ;  but  he  gives  much  more  to  some  than  he  does  to  others.  Herein 
Is  no  favouritism  or  injustice.  It  is  simply  the  presence  of  a  most  desirable  variety; 
the  conferring  upon,  every  one  more  than  he  deserves  or  can  claim,  and  upon  some  a 
very  large  inheritance  of  good.  Not  any  one  of  us  is  entitled  to  our  being,  or  our 
comforts,  or  our  powers ;  but  God,  in  the  fulness  of  his  bounty,  gives  us  these.  Shall 
we  complain  because  there  are  those  to  whom  he  has  been  even  more  bountifully  than 
be  has  to  us  ?  Shall  we  not  rather  rejoice  and  be  grateful  that  he  has  not  limited  his 
love  as  he  might  well  have  done?  In  fact,  although  very  much  inequality  here  is 
due  to  our  own  unwisdom,  much  is  due  to  the  variety  in  the  Divine  distribution.  To 
aome  he  gives  more  vigorous  health,  a  clearer  or  more  active  mind,  a  stronger  will, 
B  fuller  or  longer  life.  Surely  gratitude  and  not  complaint  is  the  note  of  the  wise  and 
the  good. 

II.  The  diveesitt  of  the  Divinb  bestowal  of  "  oifts."  While  there  is  no 
one  who  may  not  and  who  should  not  bring  his  contribution  to  the  cause  of  Christ 
and  of  man,  it  is  clear  that  some  may  do  a  much  higher  and  a  much  greater  work  than 
others  can.  To  some  it  is  given  to  guard  the  door  only;  to  others  to  present  the 
sacrifice  unte  the  Lord.  Some  with  a  feeble  intelligence  and  a  scanty  knowledge  may 
be  quite  equal  to  a  humble  post;  others  with  versatile  and  vigorous  powers  and  a 
well-stored  mind  may  render  most  impoi'tant  and  vital  service.  And  there  are  many 
degrees  between  the  humblest  and  the  highest  office  in  the  Christian  ranks.  Let 
every  man  feel  that  to  be  or  to  do  anything  for  Christ  is  a  joy  and  an  honour;  let 
those  who  are  invited  to  the  "  chief  seats  "  remind  themselves  that  they  "  have  nothing 
which  they  have  not  received,"  and  let  them  do  everything  "  as  with  the  aWlity  which 
God.giveth." 

III.  The  exercise  of  Divine  meeot.  The  "  Levites  that  went  astray  after  their 
idols  "  were  to  receive  the  Divine  mercy ;  they  were  to  be  restored  to  their  place  in 
the  commonwealth  of  Israel;  they  were  to  be  admitted  to  service  at  and  indeed  in 
the  sanctuary  (see  vers.  11,  14);  but  they  could  not  wholly  regain  what  they  had 
lost ;  some  of  their  iniquity  (or  shame,  ver.  13)  they  would  have  to  bear ;  at  a  certain 
point  their  privileges  stopped.  Now,  in  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  we  have  the  same 
kind  of  Divine  discrimination.  1.  There  is  mercy  for  those  who  have  gone  furthest 
astray.  Into  whatever  alienation  of  heart,  rejection  by  the  mind,  guiltiness  of  behaviour, 
they  have  wandered,  there  is  forgiveness  to  be  had  in  Jesus  Christ.  2.  The  mercy  of 
God  means  much.  It  means  the  absolute  pardon  of  all  past  sin ;  the  restoration  of  the 
soul  to  the  favour  and  the  friendship  of  God ;  access,  full  and  free,  to  his  praise,  his 
throne,  his  table ;  liberty  to  serve  him  in  the  broad  field  of  sacred  usefulness.  3.  But 
there  is  some  serious  and  necessary  qualification.  They  who  have  gone  very  far  into 
wrong-doing,  or  have  spent  many  years  in  sinful  estrangement,  mv^t  "bear  their 
iniquity  "  in  one  sense — they  must  suffer  the  injury  which  their  sin  has  wrought  in 
the  formation  of  evil  habits  (mental  or  physical)  which  cannot  be  immediately  cast 
forth ;  in  the  loss  of  reputation  which  cannot  be  at  once  regained ;  in  the  enfeeblement 
of  the  soul  (or,  at  any  rate,  the  loss  of  strength  and  influence  that  might  have  been 
acquired)  which  has  to  be  endured.  Sin  means  some  considerable  measure  of  abso- 
lutely irreparable  loss. — 0. 

Vers.  15,  16. — Fidelity  and  its  retoard.  We  do  not  suppose  that  the  statement 
respecting  the  sons  of  Zadok  is  to  be  pressed  to  historical  exactitude.  Their  stead- 
fastness is  assumed  for  the  purpose  of  exhortation,  to  point  out  the  reward  of  fidelity 
in  the  kingdom  of  God.    We  have — 

I.  The  fact  and  the  account  of  unfaithfulness.  There  is  no  more  patent 
fact  before  our  eyes  than  that  men  do  "  go  astray ; "  they  go  astray,  like  these  Levites, 
from  God,  from  truth,  from  wisdom,  from  purity,  from  their  earlier  convictions  and 
their  noble  life.  The  frequency  of  the  fact  cannot  dull  our  eyes  to  the  extreme 
sadness  of  it.  What  sadness  was  there  in  the  tone  of  the  Master's  question,  "  Will 
ye  also  go  away?"  With  what  profound  regret  do  we  now  witness  the  descent  of 
a  human  soul  from  the  heights  of  heavenly  wisdom  to  the  depths  of  disbelief  or 


CH.  jxiv.  1— 31,]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  409 

iniquity  I  If  we  are  asked  to  account  for  it,  we  suggest  three  powerful  temptations 
which  prove  too  strong  for  resistance.  1.  The  fascinations  of  novelty;  the  love  of 
looking  at  things  in  new  lights  or  of  treading  new  paths.  2.  The  strength  of  the 
social  current ;  the  unconscious  and  (often)  the  wholly  unreasonahle  deference  we  pay 
to  the  opinions  of  those  around  us.  It  is  ^fficult  to  row  against  the  stream  of  current 
thought  and  practice ;  it  is  pleasant  to  go  with  the  tide,  even  though  we  suspect  it 
is  bearing  us  out  to  the  open  sea  of  uncertainty  and  unbelief.  3.  Concern  for  our 
temporal  interests;  for  it  often  happens  that  a  firm  adherence  to  conviction  means 
a  painful  parting,  not  only  from  friends,  but  firom  the  source  of  "  food  and  raiment." 

II.  The  BUUU0N8  to  fidelity.  Many  things  demand  of  us  that  we  should  be 
faithful  even  to  the  end.  Fidelity  is :  1.  Obligatory,  We  cannot  leave  the  service  of 
Qod  or  of  truth  without  breaking  the  most  sacreid  bonds,  without  laying  ourselves 
open  to  self-reproach  and  doing  that  which  we  shall  look  back  upon  with  shame  and 
sorrow.  We  owe  it  to  those  who  are  coming  up  after  us — especially  to  our  own 
children — that  we  turn  not  our  back  on  our  old  principles.  2.  Excellent.  There  is 
something  honourable  and  admirable  in  a  very  high  degree  in  a  consistent  and  faithful 
life ;  not,  of  course,  the  unintelligent  repetition  of  the  old  sounds,  but  the  adherence, 
through  good  report  and  evil  report,  through  storm  and  sunshine,  to  the  vital  principles 
we  learnt  at  the  feet  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  head  that  has  grown  white  with  the  con- 
sistent advocacy  and  illustration  of  elevating  and  ennobling  truth  does  wear  a  glorious 
crown.  3.  Attended  with  a  large  and  a  true  reward.  Steadfastness,  as  compared  with 
vacillation  or  apostasy,  not  only  commands  the  esteem  of  men,  and  not  only  enables 
its  possessor  to  enjoy  his  own  self-respect,  but  it  secures  for  him  the  abiding  favow  of 
Qod,  God  calls  such  men  not  only  to  the  gate  or  door  of  the  sanctuary;  he  bids  them 
"  enter  into  it,"  and  "  come  near  to  his  table,"  to  "  minister  unto  him."  For  them  is 
reserved  the  closer  fellowship  and  the  more  honourable  and  essential  service.  In  the 
service  of  Christ  fidelity  not  only  aspires  to  the  higher  and  better  service  of  the  Master 
and  of  mankind  hdo/w,  but  it  looks  forward  to  an  admission  within  the  blessed  gates, 
and  sitting  down  to  the  "table"  of  the  Lord  in  the  heavenly  kingdom  (Luke  xziL 
30).— 0. 

Vers.  17 — 31. — "  A  good  minister  of  Jetus  Ohriet."  What  the  faithful  priest  was 
under  the  Law,  that  the  "  good  minister  "  is  under  Christ  (1  Tim.  iv.  6).  And  while 
the  form  of  service  is  altogether  different,  the  spirit  should  be  the  same.  The  ideal 
priest,  as  here  delineated,  is,  mutatis  mutandis,  the  true  bishop  or  pastor  of  the  New 
Testament.     The  latter  is — 

I.  Stumoub  of  his  Mastkr's  win,  ktkn  iif  small  pabtioitlars.  The  priest 
was  to  carry  out  very  minute  instructions  (see  vers.  17 — 20).  The  minister  of  Christ 
is  freed  from  the  observance  of  such  particulars,  but  still  he  is  to  be  regardful  of  the 
vill  of  Christ  in  everything.  He  is  to  carry  a  Christian  temper  and  bearing  every- 
where. If  in  the  view  of  the  Master  there  was  a  right  and  a  wrong  way  of  entering 
a  room  and  taking  a  seat  (see  Luke  xiv.  7 — 10),  so  may  there  be  a  right  and  a  wrong 
way  of  entering  a  pulpit,  or  reading  a  chapter,  or  visiting  a  cottage. 

II.  Cabbful  to  bb  at  his  best  in  public  ministeations.  The  priest  was  to 
avoid  the  drinking  of  wine  at  or  near  the  time  of  sacrifice  (ver.  21).  The  true  minister 
of  Christ  will  (1)  shun  everything  in  the  way  of  bodily  indulgence  which  unfita  him, 
and  (2)  study  and  practise  every  habit,  whether  physical  or  mental,  which  will  qualify 
him,  for  the  discharge  of  his  sacred  duties  with  the  utmost  efficiency. 

III.  An  exemplab  in  all  matters  of  pubitt.  (Vers.  22,  25,  26.)  In  all  domestio 
relations,  as  husband  and  father  (see  1  Tim.  iii.  1 — 6 ;  Titus  i.  6).  And  in  all  his  rela- 
tions with  either  sex  it  becomes  him  to  be  a  pattern  of  purity;  not  only  shuuning  that 
which  is  positively  wrong  and  guilty,  that  which  is  condemned  in  terms,  but  avoiding 
even  the  approaches  to  evil  in  this  direction,  knowing  the  great  importance  that  he 
should  encourage  all,  more  especially  the  young,  in  that  thorough  purity  (of  heart, 
of  word,  and  of  deed)  without  which  no  character  can  be  beautiful  in  the  sight  of 
God. 

IV.  One  that  exfoitnds  and  enforces  pbacticai.  riqhtboubnbss.  (Ver.  23.) 
What  the  people  have  a  right  to  look  for  from  their  Christian  teacher  is :  1.  A  full, 
clear,  forcible  declaration  of  those  truths  which  determine  their  relation  to  Cbd.    First 


110 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  [ch.  xlv.  1— 25. 


of  all,  men  want  to  be  brought  into  a  right  relation  with  him ;  until  that  is  done  it 
may  be  said  that  nothing  is  done;  estranged  and  separated  from  God,  there  is  no  rest 
or  rightness  for  the  human  heart.  Then  comes :  2.  A  clear  enunciation  of  Christian 
morals;  such  an  exposition  of  duty  that  men  shall  know  and  feel  the  distitiction 
between  what  is  right  and  what  is  wrong  in  all  their  dealings  with  their  fellow-men, 
in  all  their  home  relations,  in  all  the  varied  spheres  in  which  they  move.  The  minister 
of  Christ  is  to  be,  like  Noah,  a  "  preacher  of  righteousness ; "  he  is  so  to  speak  that 
those  who  hear  him  will  be  powerfully  encouraged  in  every  virtue,  strongly  dissuaded 
from  every  evil  way  and  all  unworthiness  in  temper  and  spirit. 

v.  A  MAN  OF  AN  ESSENTIALLY  DEVOUT  LIFE.  (Vers.  24,  27,  28.)  One  that  delights 
in  the  worship  of  God,  that  does  not  fail  to  use  well  the  privileges  provided  by  the  day 
and  the  house  of  the  Lord,  that  finds  his  chief  and  best  inheritance  in  Go<l  himself; 
to  whom  the  Fatherhood  of  God  and  the  friendship  and  service  of  Jesus  Christ  are  (and 
not  merely  bring)  an  "  exceeding  great  reward."  He  is  to  be  a  man  who  can  say  that 
"  to  him  to  live  is  Christ,"  and  that,  conversely,  to  know  and  love  and  serve  Christ  is 
life  indeed. — 0. 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEE  XLV. 


From  the  sustenance  of  the  priests  (ch. 
xliv.  29—31),  the  new  Torah  naturally 
passes  in  the  present  chapter  to  the  main- 
tenance of  the  temple  service  as  a  whole, 
setting  forth  in  the  first  section  of  the 
chapter  (vers.  1 — 8)  the  portions  of  land 
that  should  be  allotted  respectively  to  the 
sanctuary,  i.t.  for  the  temple  buildings,  and 
the  priests'  and  Levites'  houses  (vers.  1 — 5), 
to  the  city  and  its  inhabitants,  that  they 
might  be  able  to  discharge  their  religions 
and  civil  obligations  on  the  one  hand  to  the 
temple,  and  on  the  other  hand  to  the  state 
(ver.  6),  and  to  the  prince  to  enable  him  to 
support  himself  and  meet  the  charge  of 
those  public  offerings  which  were  required 
of  him  as  the  head  of  the  community  (vers. 
7,  8);  in  the  second  section  (vers.  9 — 17) 
dealing  with  the  oblations  tlie  people  should 
make  to  the  prince  for  this  purpose,  re- 
minding the  prince,  on  the  one  hand,  that 
these  should  not  be  levied  from  the  people 
by  extortion  (ver.  9),  and  the  people,  on  the 
other,  that  these  should  be  delivered  to  the 
prince  with  honesty  (vers.  10 — 16),  and  both 
that  !i  certain  part  of  tlie  prinoo'a  revenue 
from  the  people's  oblations  should  be  de- 
votei)  to  the  furnishing  of  offerings  for  the 
Boleninities  of  the  house  of  Israel  (ver.  17); 
and  in  the  third  section  (vers.  IS — 25) 
instituting  a  new  feast-cycle,  beginning 
with  a  Passover  in  the  first  (vers.  18 — 24) 
and  ending  with  a  Feast  of  Tabernacles  in 
the  seventh  (ver.  25)  month. 


Vers.  1 — 8. — The  portions  of  land  that 
should  be  allotted  to  the  sanctuary,  the 
city,  and  the  prince. 

Ver.  l..^ll[oreover,  when  ye  shall  divide 
by  lot  the  land  (literally,  and  in  your 
causing  the  land  to  fall)  for  inheritance. 
As  the  territory  of  Canaan  had  been  origin- 
ally divided  by  lot  among  tlie  twelve 
tribes  after  the  conquest  (conip.  Numb, 
xxvi.  55;  xxxiii.  54;  Josh.  xiii.  6,  etc.), 
this  same  method  of  allocating  tlie  soil 
amongst  tlie  new  community  sliould  be 
followed  on  a  second  time  taking  posBossinn 
of  it  after  the  exile.  Currey  believes  the 
phrase,  "divide  by  lot,"  "does  not  imply 
anytbing  like  casting  lots,  but  is  equiv.ilent 
to  our  notion  of  allotment,  the  several  por- 
tions being  assigned  by  rule."  There  is, 
however,  little  doubt "  lots  "  were  cast  to  de- 
termine, if  not  the  actual  size,  at  least  the 
precise  situation,  of  each  tribe's  territory 
(see  Keil  and  'Pulpit  Commentary'  on 
Numb.  xxvi.  54).  Tiiat  no  sucb  methodical 
distriliution  of  Canaiin  ever  took  place,  or 
for  that  mutter  could  have  taken  place 
amongst  the  returned  exiles,  should  be  proof 
sufficient  that  the  prophet  here  moves  in  the 
region  of  the  ideal  and  symbolical  rather  than 
of  the  real  and  literal.  Ye  shall  offer  an  obla- 
tion— literiiUy,  lift  up  a  heave  offering  (com p. 
ch.  xliv.  30;  Exod.  xxv.  2,  3;  xxix.  28; 
XXX.  13,  14;  Lev.  vii.  14,  32;  xxii.  12; 
Numb.  XV.  19  ;  xviii.  24)— unto  the  Lord,  an 
holy  portion  of  the  land;  literally,  a  holy 
(portion) /rom  the  land.  Very  sii^niflcantly, 
in  the  new  partition  of  Palestine  the  Lord's 
portion  should  be  the  first  to  be  marked 
off  and  solemnly  dedicated  to  Jehoviih  for 
the  purposes  to  be  forthwith  specified. 
Those  who,  like  Wellhausen  and  Smend, 
perceive  in  this  allotment  of  land  to 
Jehovah,  and  therefore  to  the  priests,  a  coo- 


OH.  XLV.  1—25.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL 


411 


tracUction  to  oh.  xliv.  28,  omit  to  notice  first 
that  Jebovah  required  some  place  on  wliicii 
his  sanctuary  might  be  erected,  and  the 
priests  some  ground  on  which  to  build 
houses  for  themselves;  and  secondly,  that, 
■o  far  aa  the  priests  were  concerned,  the  land 
was  given  by  the  people,  not  to  them,  but 
to  Jehovah,  and  by  him  to  them  (comp.  on 
ch.  xliv.  28).  Tlie  exact  site  of  this  terumah, 
or  "holy  portion,"  is  afterwards  indicated 
(oh.  xlviii.  8);  meanwhile  its  dimensions 
are  recorded.  The  length  shall  be  the 
length  of  five  and  twenty  thousand  reeds, 
»nd  the  breadth  shall  be  ten  thousand. 
Whether  "reeds"  or  "cubits"  should  be 
supplied  after  "  thousand  "  has  divided  ex- 
positors. Bottcher,  Hitzig,  Ewald,  Heng- 
stenberg,  and  Smend  decide  for  "cubits," 
principally  on  the  grounds  that  "cubits" 
•re  mentioned  in  ver.  2 ;  that "  cubits  "  have 
been  the  usual  measure  hitherto,  even  (as 
they  contend)  in  ch.  xlii.  16 ;  and  that  other- 
wise the  dimensions  of  tliis  sacred  territory 
must  have  been  colossal,  in  fact,  out  of  all 
proportion  to  the  Holy  Laud,  viz.  about 
720  square  miles  (25,000  reeds,  or  42^  miles, 
X  10,000  reeds,  or  17  miles,  =  722J  square 
miles).  Havernick,  Keil,  Kliefoth,  Ourrey, 
and  Plumptre  favour  "reeds,"  chiefly  for 
the  reasons  that  in  ver.  2  "cubits"  are 
specified,  and  are  therefore  to  be  regarded 
as  exceptional ;  that  the  customary  measur- 
ing instrument  throughout  has  been  a  reed 
(see  ch.  xl.  5 ;  xlii.  16) ;  and  that  the  dimen- 
sions, which  Ezekiel  designed  should  be 
colossal  (comp.  oh.  xl.  2),  correspond  exactly 
with  the  measurements  afterwards  given 
in  ch.  xlviii.,  if  these  be  in  reeds,  but  not  if 
they  be  in  cubits.  As  to  the  breadth  of  this 
terumah  from  east  to  west,  Hitzig,  Keil, 
Smend,  Schroder,  and  Plumptre  follow  the 
LX  X.  (eUocrt  x<A«i5as)  in  substituting  20,000 
for  10,000,  considering  that  the  space  re- 
ferred to  in  ver.  3  appears  as  if  meant  to  be 
taken  from  an  already  measured  larger  area, 
which  could  only  be  that  of  ver.  1 — the 
portion  in  ver.  1  being  the  whole  territory 
assigned  to  the  priests  and  Levites,  and  that 
in  ver.  3  the  allotment  for  the  priests. 
Kliefoth,  however,  contends  that  no  neces- 
sity exists  for  tampering  with  the  text,  and 
certainly  if  vers.  1 — 4  be  regarded  as  descrip- 
tive cf.  the  priestd'  portion  only,  and  ]D  in  the 
phrase,  "  of  this  measure  "  (nSin  n^sn-|ni), 

in  ver.  3  be  rendered  "  according  to  " — a 
sense  it  may  have  (see  Gesenius,  sub  voce), 
the  supposed  difficulty  disappears.  In  this 
case  the  demonstrative  this  in  the  last  clause 
will  refer  to  the  priests'  portiou  exclusively ; 
in  the  former  case,  to  the  whole  portion  of 
the  priests  and  Levites.  That  ch.  xlviii.  14 
declares  the  Levites'  portion  to  be  "holy 
unto  the  Lord  "  does  not  prove  it  must  have 


been  included  in  the  holy  terumah  of  vet.  1- 
Nor  does  this  concession  follow,  as  will 
appear,  from  ver.  7. 

Ver.  2.— Of  this  districf,  either  of  25,000 
X  10,000,  or  25,000  x  20,000  reeds,  accord- 
ing to  the  view  taken  of  ver.  1,  there  should 
be  measured  off  for  tlie  sanctuary  five 
hundred  in  length,  with  five  hundred  in 
breadth.  The  supplement  here  also,  Keil, 
Kliefoth,  Plumptre,  and  otiiers  consider  to 
be  "reeds,"  since  obviously  the  whole  temple 
with  its  precincts  is  intended  (ch.  xlii.  16 — 
20),  though  Hengstenberg  and  Schroder 
prefer  "cubits,"  holding  the  sanotutiry  to 
be  the  temple  buildings  enclosed  within  the 
outer  court  wall  (oh.  xl.).  The  free  space 
of  fifty  ouhits  round  about  for  the  suburbs(or, 
open  places)  thereof  seems  to  indicate  that 
the  larger  area  was  that  alluded  to  by  the 
prophet.  That  the  term  ^JfO  occurs  more 
frequently  in  the  so-called  priest-code  (Lev. 
XXV.  34 ;  Numb.  xxxv.  2,  3,  4,  5,  7 ;  Josh, 
xiv.  4 ;  xxi.  2,  3,  8,  U,  13,  etc.)  and  in  the 
Chronicles  (1  Chron.  v.  16;  vi.  35,  37; 
xiii.  2  ;  2  Chron.  xi.  14 ;  xxxi.  19)  than  in 
Ezekiel  (see  oh.  xxvii.  28 ;  xlviii.  15,  17)  is 
a  fact ;  but  on  this  fact  cannot  be  founded 
an  argument  for  the  priority  of  Ezekiel, 
since  it  rather  points  to  Kzekiel's  acquaint- 
ance with  such  "suburbs"  in  connection 
with  priestly  and  Levitioal  cities. 

Yer.  3. — And  of  this  measure  shalt  thon 
measure.    As  above  explained,  if  )D,  "of," 

be  taken  as  equivalent  to  "  from,"  i.e.  de- 
ducted from,  then  the  whole  "measure"  in 
ver.  1  must  have  been  25,000  x  20,000 
reeds ;  but  if,  as  Ewald  translates,  it  may 
signify  "after,"  "according  to,"  tlien  the 
text  in  ver.  1  will  not  require  to  be  altered 
(see  on  ver.  1),  and  the  present  verse  will 
be  merely  a  reiteration  of  the  statement  in 
ver.  1  that  the  priests'  portion  should  be 
25,000  X  10,000  reeds,  preparatory  to  the 
additional  notification  that  in  it  should  be 
the  sanctuary  and  the  most  holy  place,  or 
rather,  the  sanctuary  which  is  most  holy 
(Revised  Version).  The  exact  position  of 
the  sanctuary  in  the  priests' portion  is  after- 
wards stated  to  have  been  in  the  midst  (see 
ch.  xlviii.  8). 

Ver.  4. — The  holy  portion  of  the  land  just 
defined  (ver.  3)  should  be  reserved  for  the 
priests  the  ministers  of  the  sanctuary,  t.e. 
of  the  inner  court,  who  were  piivileged  to 
draw  near  to  Jehovah  in  altar  ministrations 
(comp.  ch.  xliv.  15;  Exod.  xxviii.  43;  xxx. 
20;  Numb.  xvi.  5,  40),  as  distinguished 
from  the  Levites,  who  were  only  "  ministers 
of  the  house"  (ver.  5),  i.e.  guardians  of  the 
temple  and  assistants  in  its  outer  court 
services.  As  such  this  holy  portion  should 
serve  the  twofold  purpose  of  providing  for 
the  priests  a  place  for  their  honsei  in  which 


412 


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [ch.  xlv.  1— 25. 


they  might  dwell,  and  an  holy  place  for  the 
eanctuary,  in  which  they  should  minister. 

Ver.  5. — A  portion  of  similar  dimpnsions 
should  likewise  be  marked  off  for  the 
Ijevites,  for  themselves,  for  a  possession  of 
twenty  ohamhers;  better,  fm  a  possession 
unto  themselves  for  twenty  chambers  (Revised 
Version).  Ewald,  Hitzig,  and  Smend,  as 
usual,  follow  the  LXX.  (ourols  cij  /toTairx"''"' 
Tr6\eis  ToS  KaroLKeTy),  and  amend  the  text 
after  Numb.  xxxv.  2 ;  Josh.  xxi.  2,  so  as  to 
read  "  cities  (on^)  to  dwell  in ; "  and  with 
them  Keil  agrees,  only  substituting  "  gates  " 
ip^yivf)  instead  of  "cities."  Kliefoth  and 
■Currey  retain  the  word  "  chambera  "  as  in 
the  text,  and  think  the  "  chambers "  and 
the  "  land  "  were  two  distinct  possessions  of 
the  Levites,  the  chambera  having  been 
-within  (see  ch.  xl.  17,  18)  as  the  land  wag 
without  the  sanctuary.  Bosenmuller,  Haver- 
nick,  Hengstenberg,  and  Schroder  decide 
for  "  chambers,"  or  "  courts,"  rows  of  dwell- 
ings standing  outside  the  sanctuary  as  the 
priests'  chambers  were  located  within. 
Havernick  supposes  that  along  with  these, 
which  were  obviously  designed  to  be  em- 
ployed when  the  Levites  were  on  duty,  there 
may  have  been  other  Levitical  towns  and 
dwellings.  Hengstenberg  conceives  them 
48  having  been  "barracks  for  the  Levites, 
the  inhabitants  of  which  used  the  twentieth 
part  of  the  land  assigned  to  them  as  pastur- 
•age."  Unfavourable  to  the  first  view  is  the 
fact  tliat  it  requires  the  text  to  be  altered. 
Against  the  second  is  its  awkward  dividing 
of  the  verse  and  unexpected  interjection  of 
M  reference  to  cells  within  the  sanctuary 
while  speaking  of  the  land  without.  The 
tliird,  while  not  free  from  difScuIty  a« 
taking  ra^  to  be  equivalent  to  "cell- 
buildings,"  is  perhaps  the  best. 

Ver.  6. — In  addition  to  the  holy  terumah 
for  the  priests  and  the  portion  for  the 
Levites,  should  be  marked  off  as  the  poBses- 
«ion  of  the  city  a  third  tract  of  territory, 
five  thonsand  (reeds)  broad,  and  five  and 
twenty  thousand  long,  over  against — ^rather, 
tide  by  side  with  (Revised  Veroion), "  parallel 
to  "  (Keil)— the  oblation  of  the  holy  portion. 
That  is  to  say,  it  should  lie  upon  the  south, 
as  the  Levites'  territory  lay  upon  the  north 
of  the  priests'  portion.  Adding  the  10,000 
reeds  of  breadth  for  the  Levites'  domain, 
the  10,000  for  the  priests'  land,  and  the 
5000  for  the  city  quarter,  makes  a  total 
breadth  of  25,000  reeds;  so  that  the  tract  in 
which  all  these  were  included  was  a  square. 
That  the  portion  for  the  city  should  be  for 
the  whole  house  of  Israel  implied  that  it 
shonld  be  communal  property,  belonging  to 
no  tribe  in  particular,  but  to  all  the  tribes 
together — ^In  modern  phrase  should  be 
■"common  good,"  tin   Volksgut  (Kliefoth), 


which  should  neither  be  confiscated  by 
kingly  rapacity  (comp.  Jer.  xxii.  13)  nor 
invaded  by  imlividual  and  private  appro- 
priation, but  retained  for  the  use  of  the 
inhabitants  generally  (see  oh,  xlviii.  18, 19). 

Ver.  7. — And  a  portion  shall  be  (or,  ye  shall 
appoint)  for  the  prince.  As  to  situation, 
this  portion  should  lie  on  both  sides  of  the 
holy  portion  (or  portions,  i.e.  of  the  priesti 
and  of  the  Levites;  see  oh.  xlviii.  20 — 22), 
and  of  the  possession,  or  portion,  of  the  city ; 
should  stretch  exactly  in  front  or  alongside 
of  these,  j.«.  from  north  to  south ;  and  should 
extend  on  the  one  side  westward  (to  the 
Mediterranean),  and  on  the  other  side  east- 
ward (to  the  Jordan).  The  concluding 
clause,  And  the  length  shall  be  over  against 
(nSa^,  a  plural  form,  occurring  only  here) 
one  of  the  portions,  from  the  west  border 
unto  the  east  border,  though  somewhat 
obscure,  obviously  imports  that  the  prince's 
portion,  on  both  sides  of  the  holy  terumah, 
should  extend  lengthwise,  j.e.  from  east  to 
west,  along  the  side  of  one  of  the  portions 
assigned  to  the  tribes;  in  other  worda, 
should  be  bounded  on  the  north  and  south 
by  the  tribal  territories  of  Judah  and  Benja- 
min (see  ch.  xlviii.  22). 

Ver.  8. — Uy  princes  shall  no  more  oppiesi 
my  people.  That  Israel  in  former  times  had 
suffered  from  the  oppressions  and  exactiona 
of  her  kings,  from  Solomon  downwards,  as 
Samuel  had  predicted  she  would  (1  Sam. 
viii.  10 — 18),  was  matter  of  history  (see 
1  Kings  xii.  4,  10, 11 ;  2  Kings  xxiii.  35), 
and  was  perhaps  partly  explained,  though 
not  justified,  by  tlie  fact  that  the  kings  had 
no  crown  Innds  assigned  them  for  their 
support.  This  excuse,  however,  for  regal 
tyranny  should  in  future  cease,  as  a  sufAoi- 
ent  portion  of  land  should  be  allocated  to 
the  prince  and  hia  successors,  who  accord- 
ingly should  give,  or  leave,  the  rest  of  the 
land  to  the  house  of  Israel  according  to  their 
tribes.  The  use  of  "princes"  does  not 
show,  as  Hengstenberg  asserts,  that  "  under 
the  ideal  unity  of  the  prince  in  Ezekiel,  a 
numerical  plurality  is  included,"  and  that 
"  those  who  understand  by  the  prince  merely 
the  Messiali  must  here  do  violence  to  the 
text ; "  but  simply,  as  Kliefoth  explains, 
that  Ezekiel  was  thinking  of  Israel's  past 
kings,  and  contrasting  with  them  the  rulers 
Israel  might  have  in  the  future,  without 
afSrming  that  these  should  be  many  or  one 
(see  on  oh.  xliv.  3). 

Vers.  9 — 17. — The  oblations  of  the  people 
to  the  prince  for  the  sanctuary. 

Ver.  9. — In  continuation  of  the  foregoing 
thought,  the  princes  of  Israel  first  are  re- 
minded that  whatever  they  should  obtain 
from  the  people  for  the  sanctuary  was  not 
to  be  extorted  from  them  by  violence  and 


OH.  XLV.  1—25.]  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPS ET  EZEKIEL. 


413 


spoil  (comp.  ch.  Tii.  11,  23 ;  viii.  17 ;  Jer. 
vi.  7";  XX.  8 ;  Hab.  i.  3)  or  by  exactions — 
literally,  expuUiont,  or  drivings  of  persons 
out  of  their  possessions,  such  as  had  been 
practised  on  Nahoth  by  Ahab  (1  Kings 
xxi.) — ^but  levied  with  judgment  and  justice, 
which,  besides,  should  regulate  their  whole 
behaviour  towards  their  subjects  (comp. 
2  Sam.  viii.  15 ;  Jer.  xxiii.  5 ;  xxxiii..  25), 

Ver.  10. — The  exhortation  addressed  to 
the  princes  to  practise  justice  and  juds;- 
nient  now  extends  itself  so  as  to  include 
their  subjects,  who  are  required,  in  all  their 
commercial  dealings,  to  have  just  balances 
and  just  measures — a  just  ephah  for  dry 
goods,  and  a  just  bath  for  liquids  (compare 
the  prescriptions  in  Lev.  xix.  35,  36  and 
Deut.  XXV.  13 — 15,  and  contrast  the  prac- 
tices in  Hos.  xii.  7 ;  Amos  viii.  5 ;  Micah  vi. . 
10,  11 ;  see  also  Prov.  xvi.  11). 

Ver.  11. — The  ephah  (a  word  of  Egyptian 
origin)  and  the  bath  shall  be  of  one  mea- 
sure. That  is,  each  was  to  be  the  tenth 
part  of  an  homer  (see  Lev.  xxvii.  16 ;  Numb. 
xi.  32),  or  cor  ("b,  Kiipos,  1  Kings  iv.  22 ; 
Luke  xvi.  7),  which  appears  to  have  con- 
tained about  seventy-five  gallons,  or  thirty- 
two  pecks.  The  homer  (or,  chomer')  is  to 
be  distinguished  from  the  'omer  of  Exod. 
xvi.  36,  which  was  the  tenth  part  of  an 
ephah. 

Ver.  12. — The  shekel  shall  be  twenty 
gerahs.  This  ordained  that  the  standard 
for  money  weights  should  remain  as  it  had 
been  fixed  by  the  Law  (Exod.  xxx.  13; 
Lev.  xxvii.  25;  Numb.  iii.  47).  The 
"shekel"  (or  "weight,"  from  bpt^,  "to 
weigh ; "  compare  the  Italian  lira,  the 
French  livre  out  of  the  Latin  libra,  and 
the  English  pound  sterling)  was  a  piece 
of  silver  whose  value,  originally  determined 
by  weight,  became  gradually  fixed  at  the 
definite  sum  of  twenty  "  gerahs,"  beans,  or 
grains  (from  nia,  "  to  roll ").  The  "  geiah," 
value  twopence,  was  the  smallest  silver 
coin;  the  "shekel,"  therefore,  was  forty 
pence,  or  Ss.  id.  Commentators  are  di- 
vided as  to  how  the  second  half  of  this 
verse  should  be  understood :  twenty  shekels, 
five  and  twenty  shekels,  fifteen  shekels 
shall  be  your  maneh.  The  "  maneh  "  (or 
"portion,"  from  njp,  "to  be  divided"), 
which  occurs  only  here  and  in  1  Kings  x. 
17;  Ezra  ii.  69;  and  Neh.  vii.  71,  72— 
"that  is  to  say,  only  in  books  written 
during  the  Captivity  or  subsequent  to  it" 
(Keil)— was  probably  the  same  coin  as  the 
Greek  mina  liiva),  though  its  weight  may 
have  somewhat  differed.  A  comparison  of 
1  Kings  X.  17  with  2  Chron.  ix.- 16  shows 
that  a  maneli  was  equal  to  a  hundred 
shekels,  which  cannot  be  made  to  har- 
monize with  the  statement  in  this  verse 


without  supposing  either  that  an  error 
has  crept  in  through  transcription,  or  that 
the  chronicler  has  employed  tlie  late  Greek 
style  of  reckoning,  in  which  one  mina  is 
equivalent  to  a  hundred  drachmas.  Again, 
the  Hebrew  and  Attic  talents,  when  ex- 
amined, fail  to  solve  the  problem  as  to  how 
the  text  should  be  rendered.  The  Hebrew 
talent,  n|3,  contained  3000  sacred  or  Mosaic 
shekels  according  to  Exod.  xxxviii.  25,  26; 
and  the  Attic  talent  60  minas,  each  <if  lOO 
diachmas,  i.e.  6000  drachmas,  or  3000  di- 
drachmas,  each  of  which  again  was  equal 
to  a  Hebrew  shekel.  Hence  the  Attic  mina 
must  have  been  one-sixtieth  part  of  3000, 
i.e.  50  shekels,  which  once  more  fails  to 
coiTespond  with  Ezikiel's  notation.  What 
this  notation  is  depends  on  how  the  clauses 
should  be  connected.  If  with  "and,"  as 
Ewald,  following  the  Targumists,  thinks, 
Ezekiel  is  supposed  to  have  ordained  that' 
in  the  future  the  maneh  should  be,  not  50, 
but  60  (20  -1-  25  -f  15;  shekels— the  weight 
of  the  Babylonian  mana  ('Kecords  of  the 
Past,'  iv.  97,  second  series);  only,  if  he  so 
intended,  one  sees  not  why  he  should  have 
adopted  this  roundabout  method  of  expres- 
sion instead  of  simply  stating  that  hence- 
forth the  maneh  should  be  sixty  shekels. 
If  with  "  or,"  as  Michaelis,  Gesenius,  Hit- 
zig,  and  Hengetenberg  prefer,  then  the 
prophet  is  regarded  as  asserting  that  in 
the  future  three  manehs  of  varying  values 
should  be  current — one  of  gold,  another  of 
silver,  and  a  third  of  copper  (HItzig),  or  all 
of  the  same  metal,  but  of  different  mag- 
nitudes (Michaelis) ;  and  this  arrangement 
might  well  have  been  appointed  for  the 
future,  although  no  historical  trace  can 
be  found  of  any  such  manehs  of  twenty, 
twenty-five,  and  fifteen  shekels  respectively 
having  been  in  circulation  either  among 
the  Hebrews  or  among  foreign  peoples. 
Kliefoth  pronounces  both  solutions  unsatis- 
factory, but  has  nothing  better  to  offer. 
Keil  supposes  a  corruption  of  the  text  of 
old  standing,  for  the  correction  of  which  we 
are  as  yet  without  materials.  Berthean 
and  Uavernick  follow  the  LXX.  (Cod. 
Alex.),  Oi  irevTC  ffiKKat  weVre,  kou  SeKa 
<riK\0L  SeKO,  fcal  veyr^KOvra  trlic\oi  i]  /iva 
eVrai  viuv,  "  The  five  tliekel  (piece)  shall  bo 
five  shekels,  and  the  ten  shekel  (piece)  shall 
be  ten  shekels,  and  fifty  ahehcU  ehall  your 
maneh  be  ;  "  but  Hitzi^'s  judgment  on  this 
proposal,  with  which  Kliefoth  and  Keil 
agree,  will  most  likely  be  deemed  correct, 
that "  it  carries  on  the  face  of  it  the  pro- 
bability of  its  resting  upon  nothing  more 
than  an  attempt  to  bring  the  text  into 
harmony  with  the  ordinary  value  of  the 
mina." 

Vers.  18 — 15. — The  offerings  the  people 
should  present  are  next  specified.    (1)  Of 


414 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [ch.  xlv.  1—26. 


-wheat,  the  sixth  part  of  an  ephah  of  (out, 
of,  01  from)  an  homer;  i.e.  the  sixtieth  part 
of  an  homer,  equal  to  about  one-tenth  of  a 
bnshel  (ver.  13).  (2)  Of  barley,  the  same 
(ver.  13).  (8)  Of  oil,  a  tenth  part  of  a 
bath  out  of  the  oor,  or  homer  of  ten  baths, 
i.e.  the  hundredth  part  of  every  homer, 
equal  to  a  little  more  than  half  a  gallon 
(ver.  14).  (4)  Of  the  flock,  one  lamb  or 
kid  (n'^,  meaning  either)  out  of  the  flock, 
out  of  two  hundred,  out  of  the  fat— or  well- 
watered  (see  Gen.  xiii.  10) — pastures  of 
Israel',  i.e.  one  of  every  two  hundred,  and 
never  the  worst,  but  always  the  best. 
These  oblations  should  be  made  for  the 
maintenance  of  the  necessary  sacrificial 
worship  in  the  new  temple,  for  the  meal, 
burnt,  and  peace  or  thank  offerings  that 
should  there  be  presented  to  make  recon- 
ciliation or  atonement  for  the  house  of 
Israel.  Compared  with  the  offerings  pre- 
scribed by  the  Law  of  Moses,  these  discover 
important  variations.  (1)  Of  flour,  the  Law 
demanded  one-tenth  of  an  ephah  of  fine 
flour  with  a  lamb  (Exod.  xxix.  40),  with 
a  ram  two-tenths  (Numb.  xv.  6),  with  a 
bullock  three-tenths  (Numt>.  xv.  9);  of 
wheat  and  of  barley  Ezekiel's  Torah  re- 
quires one-sixteenth  of  an  ephah  for  each, 
i.e.  one-tliiril  in  all.  (2)  Of  oil,  the  Mosaic 
ordinance  was,  with  a  lamb  sliould  be  pre- 
sented one-fourth  of  a  hin,  i.e.  one-twenty- 
fourth  of  a  bath ;  with  a  ram,  one-third  of 
a  hin,  i.e,  one-eigliteenth  of  a  batli  ;  with  a 
bullock  one-half  of  a  hin,  i.e.  one-twelfth  of 
a  bath.  Ezekiel's  ordinance  was  in  every 
case  one-tenth  of  a  bath.  (3)  Of  animals, 
the  Pentateuchal  legislation  left  the  neces- 
sary victims,  whether  rams,  goats,  or  bul- 
locks, to  be  provided  by  the  offerers  at 
their  own  fjee-will,  stipulating  as  com- 
pulsory only  the  firstborn  of  the  flocks  and 
herds  (Exod.  xiii.  2,  12  ;  xxii.  29,  30  ;  Lev. 
xxvii.  26;  Numb.  iii.  13;  viii.  17;  Deut. 
XV.  19),  the  first  ripe  fruits  of  the  earth 
(Exod.  xxii.  29  ;  Numb,  xviii.  12),  and  the 
tithes,  or  tenths,  of  seed,  fruit,  the  herd  and 
flock  (Lev.  xxvii.  30—33);  the  Ezekelian 
omits  the  latter,  but  ordains  in  lieu  of  tlie 
former  that  one  animal  out  of  every  two 
hundred  in  every  floek  shall  be  obligatory 
on  Jehovah's  worshippers.  Thus  the  de- 
mands of  Bzokiel'd  Torah  surpass  tliose  of 
the  earlier  or  Mosaic  Torah  in  quantity  as 
well  as  quality.  That  those  demands  are 
definitely  specified  does  not  prove  they 
should  partake  rather  of  the  nature  of  a 
tax  than  of  a  free-will  offering.  That  they 
were  not  to  be  regarded  as  taxes  is  shown 
by  the  absence  of  any  allusion  to  penalties 
for  neglect  of  payment;  that  they  wore  de- 
signed to  be  h)oked  upon  as  free-will  offer- 
ings is  plain  from  the  circumstance  that 
Jehovah  never  supposes  for  a  moment  that 


these  generous  offerings  will  be  withheld ; 
and  perhaps  all  that  is  really  signified  by 
them  is  that  the  liberality  of  Jehovah's 
people  in  the  future  age  should  greatly 
exceed  that  which  had  been  practised  at 
any  former  time. 

Ver.  16. — All  the  people  of  the  land  shalJ 
give  (literally,  ehall  be  for)  this  oblation  (at, 
terumah)  for  the  prince  in  Israel.  Assum- 
ing that  the  prince  here  refers  to  the  ordin- 
ary civil  magistrate,  Hengstenberg  founds 
on  this  an  argument  in  support  of  state 
Churches:  "This  is  also  the  general  doo- 
trine,  that  the  magistrate  shall  take  first 
of  all  from  the  taxes  levied  the  means  for 
the  proper  observance  of  Divine  worship." 
But  if  the  oblations  above  referred  to  were 
not  properly  taxes,  and  if  the  prince  was 
not  properly  an  earthly  sovereign  of  the 
ordinary  type,  this  argument  falls  to  the 
ground. 

Ver.  17. — The  prince,  as  receiver-general 
of  the  people's  offerings,  should  devote 
them  to  maintaining  (literally,  it  should  be 
upon  him,  and  so  form  part  of  his  duty  to 
maintain)  the  sacrificial  worship  of  the  new 
temple,  in  the  feasts  (D'Jn,  or  joyous  cele- 
brations), and  in  the  new  moons,  and  in  the 
sabbaths,  and  generally  in  aU  solemnities 
(nnyJiD,  or  appointed  times,  hence  festal 
seasons)  of  the  house  of  Israel  (comp.  1 
Kings  viii.  62  ;  Ezra  vii.  17),  that  thereby 
he  might  make  reconciliation  (or,  atonement) 
for  the  house  of  Israel.  This  combination 
of  the  kingly  and  priestly  oflices  in  the 
person  of  the  prince  (David)  obviously  typi- 
fied the  similar  union  of  the  same  offices  in 
David's  Son  (Christ). 

Vers.  18—25. — These  verses  allude  to  the 
institution  of  a  new  feast-cycle,  whose 
deviations  from  that  of  the  Pentateuch  will 
be  best  exhibited  in  the  course  of  exposi- 
tion. Whether  three  festivals  are  referred 
to  or  only  two  is  debated  by  expositors. 
Fairbiiirn,  Havernick,  Ewald,  Keil,  Schro- 
der, and  Plumptre  decide  for  three— the 
festival  of  the  new  year  (vers.  18 — 20),  the 
Passover  (vers.  21 — 24),  and  the  Feast  of 
Tabernacles  (ver.  25).  Kliefoth,  Smend, 
and  Currey  find  only  two  —  a  Passover 
and  a  Feast  of  Tabernacles.  Hengstenberg 
sees  in  the  solemnities  of  the  first  and 
seventh  days  of  the  now  year  a  special 
consecration  service  for  the  new  temple, 
not  to  be  repeated,  corresponding  to  the 
dedication  of  the  tabernacle  on  the  first 
day  of  the  first  mouth  (Exod.  zl.  1, 17),  or 
of  the  Solomonic  temple  in  the  seventh 
month  (1  Kings  viii.  2;  2  Chron.  vii.  S'j, 


OH.  XLv.  1—25.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL. 


415 


•nd  in  imitation  of  which  the  post-ezilio 
temple  was  dedicated,  probably  on  the  first 
day  of  the  year  (Ezra  vi.  16 — 22).  Against 
the  notion  of  a  special  dedication  service, 
however,  stand  the  facts  (1)  that  the  temple 
had  been  already  consecrated  by  the  en- 
trance into  it  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord  (ch. 
/  zliii.  4) ;  and  (2)  that  the  service  here  de- 
scribed differs  in  respect  either  of  time  or 
ritual  or  both  from  every  one  of  the  three 
cited  dedications.  Between  the  two  other 
views  the  difference  is  slight.  If  the  festival 
of  the  new  year  (vers.  18 — 20)  was  distinct 
&om  the  Passover,  it  was  still,  by  the  ritnal 
of  the  seventh  and  fourteenth  days  of  the 
first  month  (vers.  20,  22),  so  closely  con- 
nected with  the  Passover  as  practically  to 
form  a  preparation  for  and  introduction  to 
it.  Then  the  circumstance  that  the  proper 
ceremonial  for  the  new  moon  is  afterwards 
described  (ch.  xlvi.  6)  favours  the  proposal 
to  regard  the  rites  in  vers.  18 — 20  as  a  part 
of  the  Passover  festival;  while  this  view, 
if  adopted,  will  explain  the  omission  from 
ver.  25  of  all  mention  of  the  Feast  of 
Trumpets  on  the  first  day  of  the  seventli 
month  (Lev.  xxiii.  24;  Numb.  xxii.  1), 
■nd  of  tlie  great  Day  of  Atonement  on  the 
tenth  day  of  the  seventh  month  (Lev.  xxiii. 
27;  Numb.  xxix.  7),  with  which  the  autumn 
festival  was  usually  preceded,  by  showing 
that  in  lieu  of  these  a  sacrificial  observance 
had  been  prefixed  to  the  Passover  on  the 
first  and  seventh  days  of  the  first  month. 
Smend's  theory,  that  "Ezekiel's  feast- 
calendar  divides  the  ecclesiastical  year  into 
two  halves,  each  of  which  begins  with  a  re- 
conciliation ceremony  (or  expiatory  sacrifice) 
on  the  first  days  of  the  first  and  seventh 
months  respectively,"  would  lend  confir- 
mation to  the  above  view,  were  it  not  that 
the  theory  in  question  is  based  on  an 
alteration  of  the  text  in  ror.  20  (see  Ex- 
position). 

Ver.  18.— Thus  eaith  the  Lord  Ood.  The 
usual  solemn  introduction  prefixed  to  Divine 
enactments  (oomp.  ver,  9;  oh.  xliii.  19; 
iliv.  6,  9 ;  xlvi.  1, 16).  In  the  first  month, 
in  the  first  day  of  the  month  (comp.  Gen. 
viii.  13).  That  the  first  month,  Abib,  was 
intended  is  apparent  from  ver.  21,  com- 
pared with  Exod.  xii.  2;  Numb.  ix.  1. 
Under  the  Mosaic  Torah,  the  Passover 
began  on  the  tenth  day  of  the  first  month 
by  the  selection  of  a  lamb  (Exod.  xii.  3 — 6), 


corresponding  to  which  the  great  Day  of 
Atonement  in  the  seventh  month  fell  upon 
the  tenth  day  (Lev.  xxiii.  27).  In  the 
Torah  of  Ezekiel,  the  ceremonies  intro- 
ducing and  leading  up  to  the  Passover 
should  begin  with  the  first  day  of  the 
month,  as  under  the  Law  the  Feast  of 
Trumpets  on  the  first  day  of  the  seventh 
month  practically  began  the  solemnities 
which  culminated  in  the  Feast  of  Taber- 
nacles. A  young  bullock  without  blemish 
should  form  the  sacrificial  offering  on  this 
first  day  of  the  year,  according  to  the  or- 
dinance published  by  Ezekiel;  that  pro- 
mulgated by  the  Hebrew  lawgiver  ap- 
pointed for  new  moons  generally,  in  addition 
to  the  burnt  and  meat  offerings,  a  he-goat 
for  a  sin  offenng  (Numb,  xxviii.  15),  and 
particularly  for  tlie  first  day  of  the  seventh 
month,  in  addition  to  the  regular  burnt 
and  meat  offerings,  one  young  bullock,  one 
ram,  and  seven  lambs  for  a  burnt  offering, 
meat  offerings  of  fiour  and  oil  for  each  of 
these  animals,  and  a  he-goat  for  a  sin  offer- 
ing (Numb.  xxix.  2— 6>  The  object  for 
which  the  Mosaic  offerings  were  presented 
was  to  make  atonement  for  the  worshippers; 
tlie  Ezekelian  sacrifices  should  stand  in 
more  immediate  relation  to  the  place  of 
worship,  and  be  designed  to  cleanse  the 
sanctuary  from  such  defilement,  to  be  after- 
wards mentioned,  as  might  be  contracted 
from  the  presence  in  it  of  erring  men  (ver 
20). 

Ver.  19.  —The  mode  in  which  this  act  of 
purgation  should  be  performed  is  next 
describtd.  Tlie  blood  of  the  sin  offering 
should  by  the  priest  be  put  (not  sprinkled) 
upon  the  posts  of  the  house,  i.e.  upon  the 
posts  or  pillars  of  the  door  connecting  the 
holy  place  with  the  holy  of  holies  (ch.  xii. 
21),  and  upon  the  four  comers  of  the 
settle  of  the  altar  of  burnt  offering  in  the 
inner  court  (ch.  xliii.  14),  and  upon  the 
posts  of  the  gate  of  the  Inner  court,  not 
of  the  eastern  gate  only,  as  Hitzig  suggests, 
but  of  all  the  three  gates  (oh.  xl.  29,  33, 
36).  Compare  ch.  xliii.  20,  and  the  pro- 
cedure in  sin  offerings  under  the  Law,  which 
directed  that  in  certain  cases  part  of  the 
blood  should  be  put  by  the  priest's  finger 
upon  the  horns  of  the  altar,  and  the  rest 
poured  out  beside  the  bottom  of  the  altar 
(Exod.  xxix.  12;  Lev.  iv.  7),  while  in  other 
oases  it  should  be  sprinkled  before  the  veil 
of  the  sanctuary  (Lev.  iv.  6, 17),  and  on  the 
great  Day  of  Atonement  seven  times  even 
on  and  before  the  mercy-seat,  and  on  the 
altar  of  incense  (Lev.  xvi.  14,  18, 19). 

Ver.  20. — The  same  ceremony  should  be 
repeated  on  the  seventh  day  of  the  month, 
not  on  the  first  day  of  the  leventh  month,  aa 
Smend  proposes,  in  accordance  with  the 
LXX.,  'Ev  rf  /i-nvl  T^  ej35(ijuy'  ^i  j  t(,B  linvhs 


416 


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZBKIEL.    [oh.  xlv.  1—25. 


x^^,  and  on  the  ground  that "  the  seventh 
day  of  (the  Bame)  month  "  would  have  been 
in  Hebrew  ir'i'n'p  nj;3!»3,  as  in  ch.  i.  1 ;  xxx. 
20  ;  at  the  same  time  admitting  tliat 
B'lha  is  sometimes  used  (Numb.  x.  11), 
though  not  (except  in  this  verse)  by 
Btekiel.  The  sin  offerings  in  question 
should  be  made  for  (or,  on  account  of,  JD, 
"  away  from,"  expressing  the  reason  why  any- 
thing is  done)  every  one  that  erreth,  and  for 
him  that  is  simple,  i.e.  for  such  transgressors 
as  should  have  gone  aside  from  the  straight 
path  through  ignorance  or  foolishness,  the 
"  simple  "  man  being  here,  as  in  Prov.  vii. 
7;  xxii.  3;  ixvii.  12,  one  easily  enticed  or 
persuaded  to  do  evil.  For  such  offenders 
the  Law  of  Moses  provided  means  of 
expiation  (Lev.  ii.  2,  etc. ;  v.  15 ;  Kumb. 
XV.  27) ;  for  the  presumptuous  sinner,  who 
despised  the  word  of  tlie  Lord  and  violated 
his  commandment,  only  one  doom  remained, 
to  be  out  off  from  among  his  people  (Kumb. 
XV.  30 ;  Deut,  xvii.  12). 

Ver.  21. — With  the  fourteenth  day  of 
the  month,  the  day  appointed  by  the  Law 
of  Moses  for  the  killing  of  the  Paschal 
lamb  (Exod.  xii.  6),  the  Fassover  (no^n 
with  the  article,  the  well-known  festival  of 
that  name)  should  commence.  Though 
the  selection  of  the  lamb  upon  the  tenth 
day  of  the  first  month  is  not  specified,  it 
may  be  assumed  that  this  would  be  im- 
plied in  the  appointment  of  a  Passover 
which  should  begin  on  the  day  already 
legalized  by  the  Mosaic  Torah.  According 
to  Wellhausen  anil  Smend,  the  first  mention 
of  the  Passover  occurs  in  Deut.  xvi.  2,  5,  6, 
and  the  next  in  2  Kings  xxiii.  22 ;  but  this 
can  only  be  maintained  by  declaring  Exod. 
xxxiv.  25,  which  occurs  in  the  so-called 
'Book  of  the  Covenant' — a  pre-Deuteronomio 
work — "  a  gloss,"  and  by  relegating  Exod, 
xii.  to  the  "priest-code"  for  no  other 
reason  than  that  it  alludes  to  the  Passover 
(vers.  11,  21,  27,  43) — a  principle  of  easy 
application,  and  capable  of  being  used  to 
prove  anything.  Smend  likewise  regards 
it  as  strange  that  tiie  Fassover  should  be 
made  to  commence  on  the  fourteenth  of  the 
month,  and  not,  as  the  autumn  feast,  on  the 
fifteenth  (ver.  25);  and  suggests  tliat 
the  original  reading,  which  he  supposes 
was  the  fifteenth,  may  have  been  corrected 
■nbsequenily  in  accordance  with  the  priest- 
oode.  But  if  the  priecrt-code  was  posterior 
to  and  modelled  after  Ezekiel,  why  should 
it  have  ordained  the  fouiteenth  instead  of 
that  which  its  master  recommended,  viz,  the 
fifteenth  ?  A  sufficient  explanation  of  the 
differing  dates  in  Ezekiel  is  supplied  if 
Ezekiel,  in  fixing  them,  may  be  held  to  have 
followed  the  so-called  priest-code.  A  feast 
•f  leven  days ;  literally,  a  feast  of  hebdomadi 


of  day$  (Q'o;  nwa?'  jn).  By  almost  all 
interpreters  this  is  understood  to  mean  "a 
feast  of  a  full  week,"  the  exact  duration  of 
the  Feast  of  Unleavened  Bread,  which  began 
with  the  eating  of  the  Paschal  lamb  (Exod. 
xii.  8, 15—20;  Lev.  xxiii.  6 ;  Numb.  ix.  11 ; 
Deut.  xvi.  3,  4).  At  the  same  time,  it  ia 
frankly  admitted  that,  to  extract  this  sense 
from  the  words,  nip^e'  must  be  changed 
into  nj;?!?'-  As  the  words  stand,  they  can 
only  signify  a  feast  of  weeks  of  dsyi. 
rny^t^  jn,  in  Exod.  xxxiv.  22  and  Dent. 
xvi.  10,  is  applied  to  the  Feast  of  Pentecost, 
which  was  called  "a  Feast  of  Hebdomads," 
from  the  seven  weeks  which  intervened  be- 
tween the  Passover  and  it.  Hence  Kliefoth, 
adhering  to  the  legitimate  sense  of  the 
expression,  understands  the  prophet  to  say 
that  the  whole  period  of  seven  weeks  be- 
tween the  first  Passover  and  Pentecost 
should  be  celebrated  in  the  new  dispensa- 
tion as)  a  Feast  of  Unleavened  Bread.  In 
support  of  this  Eliefoth  cites  a  similar  use 
of  the  word  "  days  "  in  Gen.  xxix.  14 ;  xii. 
1;  Deut.  xxi.  13;  2  Kings  xv.  13;  Jer. 
xxviii.  3,  11 ;  Dan.  x.  2,  3;  and  certainly 
no  objection  can  be  taken  to  a  Fassover  of 
seven  weeks,  if  Ezekiel  may  be  supposed 
to  have  been  merely  expressing  analogically 
spiritual  conceptions,  and  not  furnishiug 
actual  legislation  to  be  afterwards  put  in 
operation.  Against  this  translation,  how^ 
ever,  Keil  urges  that  the  expression,  "seven 
days  of  the  feast "  (ver.  23),  appears  to  mark 
the  duration  of  the  festival ;  but  this  ia 
not  so  convincing  as  its  author  imagines, 
since  the  prophet  may  be  held  as  describing, 
in  vers.  23,  24,  the  procedure  of  each  seven 
days  without  intending  to  unsay  what  he 
had  already  stated,  that  the  feast  should 
continue  seven  weeks  of  days.  A  second 
objection  pressed  by  Keil,  that  d<q;  "is 
not  usually  connected  with  the  preceding 
noun  in  the  construct  state,  but  is  attached 
as  an  adverbial  accusative,"  as  in  the  above- 
cited  passages,  is  sufficiently  disposed  of  by 
Eliefoth's  statement  that  the  punctuation 
might  easily  be  altered  so  as  to  read  n'lpa^. 
Upon  the  whole,  while  not  free  from  difficulty, 
the  view  of  Eliefoth  seems  best  supported 
by  argument. 

Ver.  22.— The  first  day  of  the  feast 
proper,  t.«.  the  fourteenth,  should  be  dis- 
tinguished by  the  prince's  presenting,  for 
himself  and  for  all  tile  people  of  the  land,  a 
bnllook  (or  a  sin  offering.  That  this  was 
a  deviation^from  the  earlier  Mosaic  legisla- 
tion in  thiee  particulars  is  apparent.  In 
the  first  place,  the  "sin  offering"  here  pre- 
scribed was  manifestly  to  take  preoedeaoe 
of  the  Paschal  feast  proper,  whereas  in  the 
Paschal  festival  of  the  so-called  priest-code 
the  daily  sacrifices  were  appointed  to  begin 


cii,  XLV.  1— 25.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZBKIEL. 


417 


on  the  fifteenth  aftei  the  Paschal  lamb  had 
been  slain  and  eaten  (Lev.  xxiii.  8).  In 
the  second  place,  the  sin  offering  was  to 
consist  of  a  bullock  instead  of  a  he-goat  as 
formerly  (Numb,  xxviii.  22).  In  the  third 
place,  it  was  not  intended  to  be  renewed  on 
each  of  the  seven  following  days  of  the  feast, 
font  was  designed,  by  repeating  the  sacrifice 
of  the  first  and  seventh  days,  to  connect  these 
with  the  fourteenth,  on  which  the  feast 
proper  opened. 

Vers.  23,  24.— The  deviations  of  Bzekiel's 
Torah  from  that  of  Hoses  in  regard  to  the 
•fferings  to  be  made  during  the  seven  days 
of  the  feast  are  also  unmistakable  (see 
Numb,  xxviii.  19—22).  (1)  While  the 
Pentatenchal  code  demanded,  as  a  daily 
burnt  offering,  two  bullocks,  one  ram,  and 
seven  yearling  lambs,  this  of  Ezckiel  pre- 
scribes seven  bnllooks  and  seven  rams,  (d) 
While  that  enjoined,  as  a  meal  offering,  three- 
tenths  of  an  ephah  of  flour  mixed  with  oil 
for  eaoli  buUook,  two-tenths  for  a  ram,  and 
one-tenth  for  each  lamb,  this  asks  an  ephah 
of  flour  with  a  hin  of  oil  for  each  bullock 
and  each  ram.  (3)  The  sin  offering  in  the 
new  Torah  should  be  the  same  as  in  the  old, 
a  he-goat  daily. 

Ver.  2.5 — In  the  seventh  month,  i.e.  in 
month  of  Tishri  (1  Kings  viii.  2),  in  the 
fifteenth  day  of  the  month,  shall  he,  i.e. 
the  prince,  as  in  ver.  22,  do  the  like  in  the 
feast  of  the  seven  days ;  or,  in  the  feast  shall 
he  do  the  like  the  seven  days  (Revised 
Version).  That  is,  the  same  sacrifices 
should  be  offered  daily  throughout  the 
seven  days  of  this  feast  as  had  been  offered 
during  the  seven  days  of  the  former  feast. 
That  this  feast  was  designed  to  represent 
the  ancient  Feast  of  Tabemsioles  can 
scarcely  be  doubted,  though  the  practice  of 
living  in  booths  (Lev.  xxiii.  40 — 43)  is  not 
adverted  to.  Possibly  this  may  have  been 
omitted,  as  Keil  remarks,  "because  the 
practice  of  living  in  booths  would  be  dropped 
in  the  time  to  come  "  (see,  however,  Neh. 
viii.  14-^17),  or,  as  Kliefoth  observes,  "  be- 
cause, when  Ezekiel's  Torah  should  come 
into  operation,  the  people  of  God  would  be 
dwelling  in  the  eternal  tabernacles  of 
which  the  booths  of  the  Mosaic  Torah  were 
but  the  types."  Nor  are  the  deviations  of 
Bzekiel's  Torah  from  that  of  Moses,  in 
respect  of  the  daily  offerings  prescribed  for 
this  feast,  fewer  or  of  less  importance  than 
those  which  have  been  noted  in  connection 
with  the  Passover.  Ezekiel's  Torah  pre- 
•cribes  for  a  burnt  offering  seven  bullocks 
and  seven  rams  daily,  for  a  sin  offering  a  he- 
goat  daily,  for  a  meat  offering  an  ephah  of 
flour  with  a  hin  of  oil  for  each  bullock  and 
each  ram  daily ;  the  Mosaic  Torab,  while 
retaining  the  he-goat  for  a  sin  offering, 
required — for  a  burnt  offering  on  the  first 
BZEKIBL — n. 


day  thirteen  young  bullocks,  two  rams,  and 
fourteen  lambs,  and  so  on,  diminishing  by 
one  bullock  each  day,  till  the  seventh,  when 
seven  bullocks,  two  rams,  and  fnurteen 
Iambs  should  be  sacrificed ;  and  for  a  meal 
offering  three-tenths  of  an  ephah  of  flour  for 
every  bullock,  and  two-tenths  of  an  ephah 
for  every  ram,  and  one-tenth  of  an  ephah 
for  each  lamb,  according  to  the  number  of 
bullocks,  rams,  and  lambs  for  each  day.  In 
addition,  the  Mosaic  celebration  couoluded 
with  a  solemn  assembly  with  special 
sacrifices  on  the  eighth  day  (see  Lev. 
xxiii.  34— 3G;  Numb.  xxix.  12—39),  of 
which  no  mention  is  made  in  Ezekiel. 
Nor  should  it  be  overlooked  that  Bzeljiel's 
Torah  omits  all  reference  to  the  other  great 
festival  that  figures  in  the  Mosaic  Torah,  viz. 
that  of  Pentecost,  or  the  Feast  of  Weeks,  aa 
well  as  to  the  Feast  of  Trumpets  and  the  great 
Day  of  Atonement  (see  on  ver.  21),  although 
Hetigstenberg  is  of  opinion  that  Ezekiel, 
having  instanced  the  Passover  and  Taber- 
nacles, the  beginning  and  end  of  the  feast- 
cycle  already  known  to  the  Jews,  designed 
that  all  the  feasts  which  lay  between  should 
be  included.  Be  this,  however,  as  it  may, 
to  infer  from  the  deviations  in  Ezekiel's 
Torah  from  that  of  Moses,  as  George,  Vatke, 
Kuenen,  Wellhausen,  Smend,  Bobertson 
Smith,  Cornill,  and  Driver  have  done,  that 
.the  latter  had  no  existence  in  the  time  of 
Ezekiel  is,  as  H'avernick  observes,  not  only 
to  render  Ezekiel's  representations  com- 
pletely unintelligible,  but  to  beg  the  entire 
question  between  the  newer  criticism  and 
the  old  faith.  "How  will  one  generally 
explain,"  asks  Cornill  ('  Einleitung  in  dai 
Alte  Testament,'  p.  64),  "  that  a  Jerusalem 
priest  sets  up  a  Torah  for  the  future 
which  completely  ignores  the  priest-code  (?), 
in  all  points  remains  far  behind  its  require 
ments  (?),  and  in  a  groping  manner  lays 
hold  of  the  future,  instead  of  appropriating 
to  himself  the  finished  system  (i.e.  of  the 
so-called  priest-code,  supposing  it  to  h{ive 
then  existed)  ?  Why  does  Ezekiel  require 
in  the  cultus  (which  he  sets  up)  so  much 
less  than  Numb,  xxviii.  and  xxix.  ?  Where 
in  Ezekiel  is  the  high  priest,  who  for  the 
priest-code  is  the  centre  of  the  theocracy  ? 
Where  is  the  great  Day  of  Atonement  of 
Lev,  xvi.  ?  "  and  so  on.  The  answer  to  these 
interrogations  is  that  Ezekiel  did  not  intend 
to  republish  the  Mosaic  Torah,  but  to 
modify  it  so  as  to  meet  the  requirements  of 
the  new  era,  or  (perhaps  better)  to  express 
more  adequately  the  new  conceptions  ol 
religion  and  worship  he  had  been  commis- 
sioned to  set  before  his  fellow-exiles ;  and 
that  Ezekiel  had  a  perfect  right  to  deal 
in  this  way  even  with  the  Mosaic  Torah,  in- 
asmuch as  he  distinctly  claimed,  in  com- 
mitting to  writing  the  details  of  his  tempi*' 

2  ■ 


418 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIBL.    [ch.  xlv.  1— 2fiL 


rUion,  to  be  acting  nnder  epeoial  Divine 
guidance  (oh.  xliii.  10, 11 ;  zliv.  5).  Oanon 
DriTer  Q  An  Introduction  to  the  Literature 
of  the  Old  Testament,'  p.  133)  admiii  that 
the  argnment  from  Ezekiel'a  deviations  from 
the  lo-called  priest-code  in  favour  of  the 
later  origin  of  the  latter,  if  "talsen  hy  itself, 
would  not,  perhaps,  be  a  decisive  one,"  and 
eren  adds  that, "  however  doubtful  it  may 
be  whether  Ezekiel  presupposes  the 
tompUted  priests'  code,  it  is  difficult  not  to 
conclude  that  he  pres^uppoBes  parts  of  it" 
(ibid.,  p.  138).  But  if  none  of  it  existed 
before  Ezekiel,  then  a  counter-question  to 
that  of  Comill  may  be  put,  "  How  is  it  to 
be  explained  thnt  the  unknown  author  of 
the  priests'  code  should  have  allowed  him- 
self to  deviate  so  far  from  the  arrangements 
which  Ezekiel,  a  prophet  acting  under 
Jehovah's  guidance,  had  established?" 
The  natural  reply  is  that  when  the  priests' 
oode  was  composed,  Ezekiel's  Torah  did  not 
exiit.    If  the  newer  criticism  believes  that 


Ezekiel  would  not  have  deviated  so  largely 
as  he  has  done  from  the  rites  prescribed  in 
the  priests'  code  bad  these  been  in  operation 
and  invested  with  authority  (see  Driver, 
<An  Introduction,'  etc.,  p.  133),  the  newer 
oriticism  should  explain  how  the  priests' 
code  came  to  deviate  from  the  Torah  of 
Ezekiel,  which,  if  it  was  not  then  in  actual 
operation,  was  at  least  invested  with  Divine 
authority.  Is  it  not  every  way  as  logical 
to  infer,  from  the  deviations  of  the  priests' 
code  (supposing  it  to  be  post-exilio)  from 
the  Torah  of  Ezekiel,  that  the  author  of  th« 
priests'  code  could  not  have  known  of  the 
existence  of  Ezekiel's  Torah,  and  therefore 
that  it  could  not  then  have  been  In  existence, 
as  vibe  vend  that  Ezekiel  had  no  acquaint- 
ance with  the  priests'  code,  and  that  there- 
fore it  had  not  in  ids  day  been  composed  1 
The  impartial  reasoner,  with  no  theory  to 
uphold,  will  recognize  that  the  two  argument* 
mn  exactly  paH  pasiu. 


HOMILETICS. 

V«r.  7. — Z%«  Princes  portion.  In  the  division  of  the  land  and  its  produce,  while  care 
WM  taken  for  the  maintenance  of  the  priesthood  by  means  of  the  sacrifices,  arrangement! 
were  also  made  for  the  support  of  the  government  by  assigning  a  certain  portion  to  "  the 
prince."  Christ,  as  "  Prince  of  Peace,"  the  Head  of  the  spiritual  kingdom,  has  a  right 
to  claim  his  portion  in  all  that  we  possess.  - 

I.   A  FOBTIOH   BHOniiD  BE   BESEBYED   FOB   CUB   HEAVENLY  PbINCE.    All  that  WO  haVO 

should  be  devoted  to  Christ,  and  nothing  used  except  as  he  may  be  pleased  with  the 
purpose  to  which  it  is  directed.  In  all  our  daily  pursuits,  if  we  are  true  Christians,  wa 
should  not  forget  that  Christ  owns  us,  and  therefore  owns  all  our  property.  But  it  is  not 
enough  to  allow  this  truth  and  even  endeavour  to  act  upon  it.  As  the  Idea  of  the  sacred- 
ness  of  all  days  is  sometimes  pleaded  in  excuse  for  the  misuse  of  Sunday,  so  the  notion 
that  all  we  have  belongs  to  Christ  may  be  used  as  a  plea  for  escaping  from  all  direct 
acts  of  sacrifice  on  behalf  of  his  cause.  But  we  have  to  remember  that  our  Master  claims 
a  portion  for  his  immediate  use.  Some  of  our  time  should  be  devoted  to  Christ's  work, 
some  of  our  money  to  the  furtherance  of  his  kingdom  among  men.  What  we  give  to 
a  missionary  society  should  be  considered  as  especially  a  part  of  the  Prioce's  portion. 
Does  the  Prince  have  all  that  is  due  to  him  in  this  way  ? 

IL  The  Pbincb  bequibeb  and  will  use  his  pobtion.  What  we  give  wisely  to 
the  cause  of  Christ  is  not  wasted  as  a  merely  ceremonial  oblation.  It  is  not  like  a 
sacred  libation  which  is  spilt  for  no  practical  purpose.  The  money  and  labour  spent  in 
the  cause  of  Christ  should  bear  fruit  in  advancing  his  cause.  By  the  economy  of  Piovi- 
denoe  this  great  work  is  left  to  Christ's  people.  If  they  do  not  give  their  Prince  his 
portion,  the  rights  of  the  kingdom  will  be  crippled,  and  its  progress  among  men  will  be 
hindered.  Great  and  rich  as  he  is,  Christ  has  graciously  condescended  to  make  the 
spread  of  his  kingdom  on  earth  depend  on  the  gifts  and  labours  of  Christian  men  and 
women.    Thus  we  may  say  the  Prince  needs  his  portion. 

III.  The  Pbimoe  has  kabned  hib  fobtion.  Democratic  people  grow  impatient  at 
the  claims  of  princes,  whom  they  consider  to  be  idle  and  useless.  But  some  princes 
have  their  missions  in  the  world.  Christ  came  to  do  a  great  work.  He  was  no  indolent 
Prince,  only  eager  to  clutch  at  his  dues,  and  giving  his  people  nothing  in  return.  The 
account  lies  just  the  other  way.  He  who  was  rich,  for  our  sakes  became  poor,  that  wa 
through  his  poverty  might  be  rich  (2  Cor.  viii.  9).  Christ  has  given  himself  for  his 
people.  He  has  now  ascended  up  on  high,  to  give  gifts  to  men  (Eph.  iv.  8).  When 
we  give  him  anything,  we  are  only  returning  some  portion  of  what  we  first  receive 


OH.  XLT.  1— 25.]  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PBOPHET  BZBKIEL.        419 

from  bim,  only  rendering  to  him  what  is  his  own.  If  we  would  measure  Christ's  claim 
upon  us,  we  must  he  able  to  tell  how  great  was  hii  condescension  in  coming  to  this 
world,  how  tremendous  was  his  sacrifice  in  his  death  on  the  cross,  and  how  glorioos  are 
the  blessings  which  he  bestows  on  his  people. 

Ver.  10. — "  Just  balances."  The  princes  of  Israel  are  exhorted  to  govern  justly  and 
to  be  fair  in  their  exaction  of  taxes.  The  older  prophets  often  had  occasion  to  denounce 
the  oppression  and  robbery  of  the  people  by  the  princes.  After  the  chastisement  of  the 
Captiyity,  the  restored  people  should  be  well  treated  by  a  better  order  of  princes.  But 
when  the  rulers  set  an  example  of  using  just  balances,  the  people  may  be  required  to 
follow. 

I.  Commercial  honebtt  is  a  fbimabt  Ohbistian  dutt.  It  is  possible  to  represent 
the  spirituality  of  religion  as  so  extremely  ethereal  that  It  has  no  contact  with  the 
commonplace  facts  of  daily  life.  There  is  a  subtle  temptation  to  antinomiaaism  in 
the  highest  pretensions  of  holiness.  But  the  scriptural  view  of  religion  keeps  it  In 
close  relations  with  plain  every-day  morality.  The  saintliness  that  is  too  refined  to 
condescend  to  questions  of  truth  and  honesty  is  pure  hypocrisy.  The  Christian  should 
be  first  just  and  true ;  let  him  then  add  whatever  other  graces  he  may  attain  to.  But 
to  neglect  these  duties  is  to  leave  the  most  fundamental  parts  of  morality  unestablished. 
The  airy  pinnacles  of  rapturous  devotion  that  shoot  up  so  high  in  the  heavens  rest  on  an 
insecure  foundation  when  these  essential  duties  are  neglected. 

II.  This  duty  is  SHAMEruLLT  neglected  by  peofebsedly  Cebistian  people. 
In  some  quarters  there  seems  to  be  a  tacit  understanding  that  it  is  impossible  to  be 
quite  true  and  straightforward.  A  certain  amount  of  laxity  is  said  to  be  permitted  by 
"  the  custom  of  the  trade."  This  evil  is  glaringly  apparent  in  regard  to  those  goods  that 
•re  exported  to  foreign  nations.  The  worthless  shoddy  and  the  sized  calico  that  wealthy 
English  firms  send  abroad  advertise  to  the  world  the  hypocrisy  of  English  Christianity. 
It  is  hard  for  the  missionary  to  urge  the  heathen  to  embrace  the  gospel  when  the 
merchant  offers  to  them  these  things  as  specimens  of  its  products.  It  is  vain  to  urge 
that  competition  is  so  fierce  as  to  make  an  honest  course  ruinous  to  those  who  would 
pursue  it.  It  is  better  to  be  a  bankrupt  than  to  be  a  thief.  But  experience  shows  that 
dishonest  trading  does  not  pay  in  the  long  run.  Its  character  is  certain  to  be  dis- 
covered, and  then  confidence  is  destroyed  and  the  trade  checked.  On  the  other  hand, 
there  are  well-known  houses  that  have  grown  rich  and  prosperous  on  their  ascertained 
fairness  in  supplying  good  wares  by  honest  measures. 

IIL  Dishonesty  MiNaLED  with  falsehood  is  doubly  wicked.  This  is  the  case 
where  incorrect  measures  are  used.  The  measures  are  intended  to  represent  a  certain 
standard,  of  which  they  come  short.  There  is  the  pretence  of  giving  good  measure. 
This  is  worse  than  the  offering  of  a  short  quantity  without  the  show  of  testing  it. 
The  highwayman  who  meets  a  man  openly  and  demands  his  purse  is  no  hypocrite. 
But  the  business  man  who  uses  false  measures  is  passing  himself  off  as  honest  while 
he  is  acting  as  a  thief.  The  shame  of  lying  is  added  to  the  crime  of  stealing.  There  is 
an  abuse  of  confidence,  for  the  well-known  measure  is  supposed  to  represent  a  certain 
quantity.  The  deceitfulness  of  this  conduct  utterly  degrades  the  miserable  man  who 
fattens  for  a  while  on  its  ill-gotten  gains,  only  to  reap  in  the  end  certain  ruin  in  the 
next  world,  if  not  in  this. 

Vers.  13 — 16. — Systematic  giving.  Tery  elaborate  regulations  were  drawn  up  to 
determine  the  several  proportionate  gifts  of  various  kinds  which  were  to  be  made  by 
the  Israelites.  These  regtilations  were  after  the  manner  of  the  times,  and  in  accordance 
with  the  spirit  of  the  Jewish  Law.  A  larger  freedom. appertains  to  the  Christian  era, 
and  we  are  not  now  required  to  make  our  offerings  according  to  any  definite  proportion 
fixed  for  us  by  authority.  But  we  are  not  therefore  to  conclude  that  there  is  to  be  no 
system  or  method  in  our  giving  for  Christian  or  charitable  objects.  We  are  left  to  make 
our  own  system.  No  one  is  to  say  what  his  brother  should  do.  But  each  is  responsible 
to  his  Master  to  do  what  he  feels  to  be  right.  Thus  St  Paul  says,  "  Let  every  one  of 
you  lay  by  him  in  store  as  God  hath  prospered  him  "  (1  Cor.  xvL  2). 

I.  Systematic  giving  is  less  difficult  than  ibbeoulab  givino.  People  who  live 
up  to  if  not  beyond  their  incomes  find  it  impossible  to  spare  any  considerable  amount 


420         THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  [ch.  xlv.  1—25. 

for  objeota  outside  the  range  of  their  private  expenses.  But  if  the  money  to  be  con- 
tributed for  such  objects  were  set  aside  from  the  first,  it  would  be  forthcoming,  just  as 
the  rent  money  is  forthcoming.  Christ's  portion  is  his  due,  and  provision  should 
certainly  be  made  for  this,  whatever  may  remain  over  for  other  objects.  That  can  be 
done  by  a  man  setting  aside  a  portion  of  his  income  as  sacred  for  his  Master's  use. 

II.  Ststkmatio  givinq  is  genebcus  giving.  People  who  give  without  method  or 
consideration  rarely  know  how  little  they  give.  There  are  pitiable  creatures,  who  feel 
as  though  they  were  being  bled  every  time  a  coin  is  extracted  from  them  for  soine  good 
object.  They  remember  the  disagreeable  operation  long  after,  and  it  makes  so  deep  an 
impression  on  them  that,  when  it  comes  to  be  repeated,  they  imagine  that  they  are 
always  giving.  If  they  were  always  giving  this  would  be  no  hard  thing ;  for  are  they 
not  always  receiving  ?  But  if  these  people  deliberately  considered  the  claims  of  the 
best  objects,  and  then  determined  to  assign  a  portion  of  their  income  to  meet  those  claims, 
they  could  not  put  down  the  miserable  sum  their  contributions  now  amount  to,  unless 
they  were  devoid  of  all  Christian  principle. 

III.  SvsTEMATio  GIVING  SHOULD  BE  WISE  GIVING.  Spasmodic  charity  may  be  very 
generous,  but  it  is  likely  to  be  foolish  and  misdirected.  A  more  thoughtful  method 
would  lead  to  a  more  just  apportioning'  of  the  funds  that  are  contributed.  It  is  not 
right  that  the  cause  of  Christ  should  depend  on  irregular  gushes  of  liberality.  There 
may  be  less  scope  for  sentiment  in  a  methodical  manner  of  giving,  but  there  will  be 
more  practical  utility. 

IV.  Systematic  giving  will  become  HURTrrrL  if  it  is  tbeated  m  a  wbong 
R'IBIT.  One  danger  is  that  it  should  degenerate  into  a  mechanical  routine,  like  the 
payment  of  taxes.  Then  all  heart  and  soul  will  vanish  out  of  it.  Another  danger  is 
that  it  may  generate  ostentatiousness,  since  the  left  hand  may  know  too  well  what  the 
right  hand  does.  A  third  danger  is  that  this  system  of  giving  may  harden  the  heart 
in  regard  to  new  claims.  The  systematic  giver  often  fortifies  himself  against  the  most 
pathetic  appeals  by  the  reply  that  he  has  reached  the  end  of  his  charitable  fund.  Such 
an  answer  is  unworthy  of  one  who  has  a  Christian  heart  of  sympathy.  The  remedy  ia 
to  be  found  in  regarding  the  fixed  amount  to  be  given  as  a  minimum,  never  as  a 
mascimum. 


HOMILIES  BY  VAEIOUS  AUTHOBS. 

Ver.  8. — Princes  not  oppressors.  In  the  apportionment  of  the  restored  and  newly 
occupied  territory  there  was  need  for  a  display  of  a  just  and  equitable  spirit.  That 
there  was  some  danger  of  another  and  contrary  spirit  is  evident  from  the  admonition 
here  addressed  by  the  prophet  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  to  those  in  power  and  authoritgr. 

I.  The  spheeb  of  oppbession.  The  oppressor  may  exercise  his  might  in  violation 
of  the  principles  of  righteousness ;  either  (1)  against  the  personal  liberty,  or  (2)  against 
the  property  and  possessions,  of  the  oppressed. 

II.  The  motive  to  offbession.  This  is  almost  always  selfishness,  the  desire  of 
personal  enrichment,  aggrandizement,  or  power,  to  attain  which  the  rights  of  another 
are  treated  as  of  no  account. 

III.  The  oppoetunitt  of  oppbession.  It  is  no  merit  on  the  part  of  the  obscure, 
the  impoverished,  the  friendless,  that  they  abstain  from  oppression,  for  the  simple 
reason  that  it  is  not  in  their  power ;  they  may  be  oppressed,  but  they  cannot  be 
oppressors.  But  those  in  high  station,  especially  princes,  whose  power  is  arbitrary  and 
unchecked,  have  many  opportunities  of  wronging  their  subjects  and  inferiors.  In  a 
country  like  our  own,  where  public  rights  are  secured,  and  where  the  monarch  acts  of 
necessity  within  constitutional  limits,  it  is  not  easy  to  understand  how  in  other  states 
of  society  the  poor  and  uninfluential  may  be  at  the  mercy  of  the  great. 

IV.  The  bin  of  oppbession.  This  appears  from  considering  the  fact  that  the  distinc- 
tions obtaining  amongst  men  are  to  a  large  extent  accidental  and  artificial.  It  is  for  the 
welfare  of  society  that  certain  individuals  should  be  entrusted  with  power ;  when  that 
power  is  abused,  the  very  purpose  of  such  distinctions  is  violated.  The  law  of  him 
who  is  King  of  kings,  and  the  principles  of  whose  government  are  justice  and  mercy, 
is  opposed  to  the  exercise  of  political  power  in  an  unrighteous  and  inconsiderate  manner. 


OH.  XT,v.  1— 25.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZBKIEL.  421 

y.  The  remedy  for  ofpbession.  This  is  set  forth  in  a  very  striking  manner  in 
the  passage  before  us :  "  My  princes  shall  no  more  oppress  my  people."  The  fact  that 
both  superior  and  inferior,  both  governors  and  subjects,  are  the  Lord's,  is  adduced  as  the 
strongest  argument  against  oppression.  If  both  alike  are  the  Lord's,  the  unreasonable- 
ness is  apparent  of  one  class  treating  the  other  with  harshness  and  injustice.  In  fact, 
religion  is  here,  as  elsewhere,  the  true  guide  of  human  conduct,  the  true  corrective  of 
human  ills.  Let  men  first  consider  their  obligations  to  the  Giver  of  all,  their  responsi- 
bility to  the  Ruler  of  all,  and  such  considerations  will  preserve  them  from  wronging 
those  who  are,  with  them,  subjects  of  the  same  Sovereign  and  children  of  the  same 
Father.  All  alike  are  his,  and  there  is  a  community  of  interest  amongst  all  who 
acknowledge  a  common  allegiance  and  a  common  indebtedness.  In  such  a  case, 
oppression  is  not  only  unrighteous,  it  is  unreasonable  and  monstrous. — T. 

Ver.  15. — Reconciliation.  The  relations  between  Israel  and  Jehovah  were  symbolical 
of  those  existing  between  the  race  of  man  and  the  same  righteous  Ruler  and  Judge. 
The  sacrifices  and  priesthoods,  the  services  and  festivals,  of  the  Mosaic  economy  have  all  a 
spiritual  significance,  and  are  typical  of  spiritual  and  Christian  realities.  Turning  from 
the  local  and  temporary  circumstances,  and  regarding  only  the  abiding,  permanent,  and 
universal  truths  sugoiested  by  the  term  "  reconciliation,"  we  remark — 

I.  There  is  reason  and  need  fob  reoonoiliation.  This  is  to  be  found  in  the 
estrangement  of  the  human  race  from  God,  in  that  rebellion  which  is  both  aerious  in 
itself  and  universal  in  extent,  in  the  displeasure  of  hirn  who  is  justly  offended  with  the 
repudiation  of  his  claims  and  the  rejection  of  bis  authority. 

II.  Reconciliation  is  needed  fob  man  with  God.  God's  favour  is  essential  to 
man's  welfare.  God  stands  in  no  need  of  aught  upon  man's  part.  Tlie  requirements 
and  necessity  are  on  the  human  side;  but  the  advances  and  the  provision  must  be  upon 
the  Divine  side.  The  question  is — Is  God  willing  to  be  reconciled  with  sinful,  rebellious, 
guilty  man?  There  is  no  equality  between  the  parties  to  the  transaction.  It  is  God's 
part  to  bestow,  and  man's  to  receive. 

III.  Reconciliation  is  effected  by  a  divinely  appointed  Mediator.  It  is 
observable  that,  in  the  arrangement  prescribed  in  the  prophetic  book,  the  prince  and  the 
priest  both  took  part  in  the  work  of  reconciliation.  The  oblation  of  the  people  was 
handed  to  the  prince,  and  he  gave  it  to  the  priests,  who  duly  presented  it.  The  kingly 
and  sacerdotal  offices  had  accordingly  each  a  part  in  the  work  of  reconciliation.  This 
typifies  the  union  of  the  two  offices  in  the  Person  of  the  great  Reconciler,  the  Son  of 
God.  In  him  were  combined  the  functions  of  th^  high  priest  with  the  functions  of 
the  king.  The  more  the  character  and  the  offices  of  Christ  are  studied,  the  more  is  it 
apparent  that  he  combined  in  himself  all  the  qualifications  needed  for  the  fulfilment 
of  the  atoning  work,  for  making  reconciliation  for  the  sins  of  the  people. 

IV.  The  means  by  which  reconciliation  is  effected  are  sacrificial.  The 
sacrifices  required  under  the  old  covenant  were  minutely  prescribed  j  but  their  impor- 
tance lay,  not  only  in  the  moral  truths  which  they  symbolized,  but  in  the  great  Sacri- 
fice which  was  to  be  offered  up  for  all  mankiijd,  and  not  for  Israel  alone,  and  by  which 
not  a  ceremonial  but  a  true  and  spiritual  reconciliation  was  to  be  brought  about.  Christ 
offered  himself  for  us. 

V.  The  result  is  worthy  of  the  means  employed.  Whether  we  consider  the 
vast  numbers  of  those  whose  acceptance  and  well-being  is  secured,  the  completeness  of 
the  harmony  effected,  or  the  everlasting  duration  of  the  peace  secured,  we  cannot  but 
admit  that  the  sacrifice  offered  on  Calvary  and  pleaded  in  heaven  was  not  provided  in 
vain.  The  nation  of  the  saved  is  brought  into  harmonious  relations  with  the  Lord  of 
all.  Rebelliun  is  at  an  end,  and  an  affectionate  loyalty  reigns  for  ever  in  place  of  dis- 
cord and  disobedience. — T. 

Vers.  18 — ^25. — Sacred  festivalt.  The  prophet  here  refers  to  some  of  those  great 
"  feasts  of  the  Jews  "  which  formed  so  interesting  a  feature  of  the  social  and  religioui 
life  of  the  chosen  people.  These  references  are  suggestive  of  the  spiritual  privileges 
and  religious  exercises  of  the  vaster  Israel  of  God,  wLich  he  has  redeemed  to  himself 
by  the  death  of  his  Son  and  consecrated  to  himself  by  the  grace  of  his' Spirit. 
Among  the  lessons  which  these  festivals  may  thus  convey  may  be  mentioned^ 


422  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xlv.  1—26. 

L  The  uottt  or  thb  oonseobatbd  people.  Never  could  Israel  have  mora 
impresiively  realized  and  displayed  their  oneness  in  political  and  religious  life  than 
when  they  together  celebrated  such  festivals  as  those  of  the  Passover  and  of  Tabernacles, 
both  referred  to  by  the  prophet  in  this  passage.  A  grander  unity  distinguishes  the 
spiritual  Israel,  which  is  one  because  under  the  care  of  the  one  Father,  because  redeemed 
by  the  one  Mediator,  because  informed,  hallowed,  and  guided  by  the  one  Spirit,  It  wa< 
the  prayer  and  the  purpose  of  the  Divine  High  Priest  that  all  his  people  might  be  oina — 
as  one  nation,  cherishing  the  same  memories,  obeying  the  same  laws,  speaking  the  same 
language,  and  honouring  the  same  King. 

n.  The  indwellino  of  God  among  the  conbeobatbd  people.  It  was  not  to  cele- 
brate a  merely  human  community  that  the  children  of  Israel  kept  their  solemn  feasts ;  it 
was  in  order  to  realize,  in  a  striking  and  helpful  manner,  the  perpetual  interest  and  care 
of  their  glorious  Lord  and  King.  They  were  a  chosen  nation,  a  peculiar  people,  and 
this  they  both  recognized  and  testified  when  they  assembled  to  observe  their  festive 
solemnities,  instituted  by  Divine  wisdom  to  retain  among  the  nation  the  sentiment  of 
nearness  to  the  unseen  but  mighty  Head. 

in.  The  uobal  habmont  existikq  between  Gk>D  ahd  the  oonseobateo 
FBOFLE.  The  sacrifices  and  offerings  presented  were  the  symbolic  means  of  preserving 
this  harmony  between  Jehovah  and  the  seed  of  Abraham.  Offences  were  confessed 
with  penitence,  submission  was  made,  prescribed  observances  were  complied  with,  and 
the  favour  of  God  was  manifested  and  the  conscience  was  purged  from  guilt.  Such 
harmony,  only  deeper  and  more  spiritual,  obtains  between  God  and  his  Church  on 
earth.  The  estrangement  and  enmity  are  abolished;  reconciliation  is  effected;  com- 
munion is  enjoyed. 

IV.  The  pebpetual  bemeubbance  of  inbtanoeb  or  Diyinb  hebot,  fobbeab- 
anob,  asd  delivebakoe.  The  Hebrew  people  were  accustomed,  upon  occasion  of 
their  sacred  festivals,  to  remind  one  another  of  the  blessings  bestowed  upon  their  fore- 
fathers. The  Passover  reminded  them  of  their  deliverance  from  the  cruel  bondage  of 
Egypt ;  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  brought  to  their  memory  the  wanderings  in  the  wilder- 
ness. On  such  occasions  they  would  turn  their  thoughts  to  their  marvellous  national 
history,  and  especially  to  its  more  instructive  and  memorable  incidents.  Similarly  in 
the  Church  of  Christ,  the  wonderful  interpositions  effected  by  Divine  power  and  clemency 
can  never  be  forgotten ;  they  must  be  held  in  everlasting  remembrance ;  the  mighty 
works  which  God  did  in  old  time  m\i8t  never  lose  their  freshness  and  their  wonder. 
The  "  sacred  year  "  of  the  Church  is  filled  with  reminders  of  God's  mercy,  and  especially 
of  those  supremely  gloiious  and  blessed  events  in  which  the  Church  on  earth  took  its 
rise — events  connected  with  the  advent,  the  sacrifice,  and  the  glory  of  Immanuel,  and 
those  connected  with  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God. 

V.  The  pbivilegb  op  united  and  joyfdIi  pbaisb.  The  Hebrew  festivals  were 
occasions  of  social  and  sacred  joy.  With  them  were  associated  the  thanksgivings  and 
the  adorations  of  a  nation.  The  people  gave  thanks  to  the  God  of  gods,  the  Lord  of 
lords,  to  him  who  remembered  them  in  their  low  estate,  who  led  his  people  through 
the  wilderness ;  for  his  mercy  endureth  for  ever.  There  is  no  exercise  more  congenial 
or  delightful  to  the  Church  of  Christ  than  the  exercise  of  grateful  praise.  The  songs 
of  the  redeemed  and  the  righteous  ever  ascend  to  him  from  whom  all  mercies  flow,  to 
whom  all  praise  is  due.  The  moral  nation  of  the  saved  ever  lifts  to  heaven  the  tribute 
and  offering  of  filial  gratitude  and  spiritual  worship. — ^T. 

Vers.  9 — 12. — Beligum  the  parent  of  morality.  It  is  certain  that  God  feels  an  active 
Interest  in  all  the  covenants  of  man.  The  same  authority  that  requires  love  to  God 
requires  love  for  our  neighbours,  equal  in  strength  to  love  for  self.  True  religion  is 
not  sublimely  indifferent  to  the  details  of  home  and  mercantile  life.  It  designs  to 
make  every  home  a  nursery  for  the  Church,  every  shop  an  arena  for  the  victories 
of  faith.  Every  commercial  transaction  bears  a  testimony  either  for  God  or  against 
bim. 

i  I.  Belioioit  has  a  hesbaqb  fob  eveby  bank  of  hcuan  sooibtt.  Like  the  sun 
in  the  heavens,  religion  exerts  the  beuignest  influence  on  men  of  every  rank  and  station. 
It  teaches  the  monarch  humility  and  self-restraint.  It  teaches  princes  to  live  for 
others.    It  teaches  magistrates  the  value  of  equity  and  justice.    It  teaches  merchants 


■CH.  XLV.  1—25.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PKOPHBT  EZEKIEL.  423 

principles  of  honesty  and  truthfulness.  It  cares  for  the  poorest  and  the  meanest 
among  men;  inspires  them  with  the  spirit  of  industry;  casts  a  halo  of  beauty  over 
the  lowliest  lot.  Nothing  that  appertains  to  man  is  too  insignificant  for  the  nutice 
of  true  religion.  For  every  stage  in  life,  from  childhood  to  old  age,  religion  has  some 
iindly  ministration.  For  every  circumstance  it  afi'ords  some  succour.  It  superadds 
dignity  to  the  prince.  It  gives  a  kingly  bearing  to  the  peasant.  It  links  all  classes 
(when  unhindered)  in  true  and  blissful  harmony.  Tyranny  on  the  one  hand,  and 
Insubordination  on  the  other,  are  equally  obaoxious  to  religion. 

II.  BELiaiON     SEEDS   ITS     INFLUENOB     THROUGH     EVBBY     DEPABTMBNT    OF      HUMAN 

UPE.  We  cannot  go  into  any  assembly  of  men  for  whatever  purpose  they  meet,  where 
we  are  excused  from  manifesting  the  principles  and  the  spirit  of  true  religion.  Whether 
we  meet  for  gaining  knowledge,  or  for  industrial  toil,  or  for  political  action,  or  for 
commercial  pursuits,  religion  claims  to  preside  over  all  our  thoughts  and  plans  and 
deeds.  The  shop  and  the  mart  are  capacious  fields  for  the  daily  exercise  of  Christian 
virtues — fields  exquisitely  suited  for  the  growth  and  ripening  of  the  noblest  qualities. 
Courage  can  only  be  developed  in  presence  of  strife  and  peril ;  so  our  religious  virtues 
can  only  be  strengthened  in  an  atmosphere  of  temptation.  If  a  man  is  not  pious  and 
faithful  and  truthful  in  bis  commercial  transactions,  he  will  not  be  pious  and  faithful 
anywhere.    This  is  his  test ;  and  woe  be  to  the  man  who  succumbs  in  the  strife ! 

III.  Religion  bets  up  standards  fob  all  human  actions.  "  Ye  shall  have  just 
balances."  The  shekel  and  the  homer  were  to  be  fixed  standards.  If  fraud  be  allowed 
to  creep  into  our  commercial  scales  and  measures,  the  fraud  will  corrupt  every  trans- 
action. The  very  heart  of  the  mercantile  system  will  be  poisoned.  Villany  secreted 
here  would  spread  as  from  a  centre  to  the  whole  circumference  of  commerce.  It  is 
supremely  important  that  men  establish  right  standards  of  speech  and  conduct.  If 
the  exchange  is  to  prosper,  it  must  (like  the  throne)  be  established  in  righteousness. 
Over  the  portals  of  every  shop,  on  the  beam  of  every  balance,  engraved  on  every  coin, 
ought  the  maxim  to  run  in  largest  capitals,  "  Whatsoever  ye  would  that  men  should 

-do  to  you,  do  ye  even  so  to  them  1 " — D. 

Vers.  13 — 15. — Religion  a  practical  thing.  In  the  infancy  of  the  world  outward 
.symbol  was  more  needed  for  the  religious  instruction  of  men  than  it  is  to-day.  In 
the  sacred  ceremonies  of  the  temple  every  man  had  a  part  to  take.  Beligious  truth 
can  better  be  impressed  upon  the  mind  when  outward  action  accompanies  inward 
sentiment.  Religion  requires  the  loyalty  and  service  of  the  entire  man ;  and  if  con- 
victions of  religious  duty  can  be  wrought  into  the  soul,  it  is  cheaply  purchased  by  the 
jevotement  of  our  wealth  to  God.  No  cost  is  too  great  by  which  we  can  gain  adequate 
Appreciation  of  our  indebtedness  to  Qod.  God's  requirements  and  our  advantage  are 
identical ;  they  are  interwoven  like  light  and  heat  in  solar  rays. 

I.  Belioion  embbaces  many  elements.  There  were  required  "meat  offerings, 
«nd  burnt  offerings,  and  peace  offerings."  Each  of  these  had  a  distinct  meaning,  and 
represented  a  distinct  need  of  man.  In  true  religion  there  enters  the  sentiment  of 
reverential  homage,  gratitude  for  gifts  received,  acknowledgment  of  trangression, 
application  for  larger  blessing,  vows  of  fresh  service,  intercession  on  behalf  of  others. 
Offerings  for  ourselves,  for  our  household,  for  the  nation,  are  suitable ;  and  in  desiring 
the  good  of  others,  our  benevolent  nature  expands,  we  get  a  larger  good  ourselves. 
The  expansion  of  the  soul  is  real  gain. 

n.  Bkligious  wobship  is  best  expressed  by  personal  offebings.  Wheat, 
I>arley,  lambs,  heifers,  oil,  were  to  be  the  staple  of  the  people's  offerings.  It  is  of  the 
£rst  importance  that  men  should  feel  that  God  is  the  Creator  and  Giver  of  all  good. 
We  are  absolutely  dependent  on  his  bounty.  To  live  in  the  hourly  realization  of  this 
dependence  is  blessing  unspeakable.  Nor  can  any  arrangement  better  promote  this 
«nd  than  the  regular  offering  of  such  things  as  God  has  conferred.  We  owe  to  him  our 
all,  our  whole  being,  our  entire  possessions.  But  he  graciously  accepts  a  part  as 
acknowledged  tribute,  and  gives  in  return  a  substantial  blessing  upon  the  remainder. 
Best  of  all,  he  uses  our  gift  as  a  channel  through  which  to  pour  new  blessing  and  joy 
into  our  own  souls.  Our  spontaneous  offerings  foster  the  groivth  of  faith  and  love  and 
-spiritual  aspiration.     "  It  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive." 

HI.  Beligious  offerings  should  be  proportional  to  our  pbospbeity.     The 


124  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xlv.  1—25. 

man  tliat  supposes  God  to  be  an  austere  Taskmaster  is  a  precipitant  blunderer.  He 
has  grossly  missed  the  truth.  God  does  not  require  gigantic  offerings.'  He  requires 
gifts  simply  proportionate  to  our  possessions.  The  gift  of  ten  thousand  pounds  may 
be  in  the  balance  of  righteousness  only  a  paltry  and  selfish  deed.  The  giver  m«y  be 
seeking  only  self-interests  or  human  fame.  The  gift  of  a  farthing  may  win  the  smile 
of  Jehovah.  The  magnitude  of  our  offering  is  measured  by  the  motive  that  prompts 
it,  the  end  sought,  ajid  the  residue  that  remains.  According  to  this  spiritual  calculation, 
the  woman  who  gave  all  she  had  gave  transcendently  more  than  the  rich  donors  of 
golden  shekels.  The  offering  of  our  heart's  warm  love  is  the  noblest  tribute  which 
God  appreciates,  and  unless  our  gifts  are  the  outflow  and  manifestation  of  our  love,  they 
are  rejected  as  worthless,  they  are  like  smoke  in  one's  eyes.  "  That  which  is  highly 
esteemed  among  men  is  often  an  abomination  in  the  sight  of  God." 

IV.  Fidelity  to  God  BBiuas  the  laeobst  benefits  to  men.  The  end  of  such 
offerings  among  the  Jews  was  "  to  make  reconciliation  for  them,  saith  the  Lord  God." 
Yet  we  shall  grossly  err  if  we  look  upon  this  as  a  commercial  bargain.  Beconciliation 
with  God  cannot  be  purchased  with  gold,  or  tithes,  or  animal  saoiiflces.  Reconciliation 
is  the  outcome  of  God's  grace ;  but  to  bestow  it  upon  rebellious  men  indiscriminately 
would  be  a  waste  and  a  crime.     The  grace  that  has  originated  reconciliation  must;  pre- 

Eare  men's  hearts  to  possess  it.  This  omnipotent  kindness  of  God  moves  the  sinner's 
eart  to  repentance.  His  desire  for  God's  friendship  expresses  itself  in  prayer  and  in 
Bu}>stantial  offerings.  To  obtain  such  a  heavenly  boon  he  is  willing  to  make  any 
sacrifice.  Such  good  does  his  conscience  perceive  to  dwell  in  God's  favour  that  obedi- 
ence to  his  will  is  a  delight,  a  very  luxury  to  the  soul.  As  a  child  finds  a  delicious  joy 
in  pleasing  its  parent,  and  runs  cheerfully  to  do  that  parent's  will,  so  the  repentant  man 
loyally  responds  to  God's  commands,  and  at  the  altar  of  sacrifice  implores  to  be  reconciled. 
To  have  God  as  his  Friend  is  his  supreme  desire,  his  supreme  good.  "  In  his  favour  is 
life,  his  loving-kindness  is  better  than  life." — D. 

Vers.  18 — 20. — Sanctity  of  time  and  place.  Human  life  on  earth  is  conditioned  by 
time  and  place.  It  is  a  necessity  of  our  existence  here  that  we  should  occupy  gome 
definite  place.  It  is  a  necessity  that  we  should  live  during  some  duration  of  time. 
We  are  cradled  amid  outward  circumstance.  Until  the  soil  has  matured  its  powers, 
it  is  moulded  and  modified  by  external  surroundings.  What  these  are,  the  character 
of  the  man,  in  great  measure,  will  be. 

I.  The  banctuabt  is  the  FonNTAiN-HSAD  OF  PUBLIC  BELioiON.  A  man's  personal 
piety  must  be  nourished  in  secret — by  meditation,  faith,  and  prayer.  But  a  man  is  not 
an  isolated  creature.  He  is  related  on  many  sides  to  others.  He  is  part  of  a  family, 
part  of  a  community.  Therefore  his  religion  must  have  a  public  aspect,  and  must 
influence  all  his  relationships.  His  religion  is  helped  by  mutual  action  and  reaction. 
It  is  fostered  by  common  beliefs,  common  sympathies,  common  worship.  The  meeting- 
place  between  man  and  man  is  also  the  meeting-place  between  men  and  God.  Scarce 
•ny  man  will  rise  above  the  level  of  religious  life  prevailing  in  the  sanctuary.  Here 
men's  souls  are  fed  and  nourished  and  vitalized.  What  the  sanctuary  is  the  home  will 
be,  the  nation  will  be,  the  world  will  be.  If  the  fountain  be  clear  and  abundant  in  its 
flow,  the  streams  will  be  full  and  clear  also.  The  future  of  our  world  hangs  upon  our 
sanctuary-worship. 

II.  The   FOUNTAIN-HEAD  OP  PUBLIC   EELIGION   MUST   BE   KEPT  PUBE.      So  Subtle  and 

insidious  is  the  working  of  sin,  that  it  insinuates  a  way  into  the  house  of  God.  Base 
and  selfish  motives  disfigure  the  beauty  of  our  worship.  Worldliness  clogs  the  wheels 
of  the  soul,  and  prevents  it  from  running  in  the  way  of  holy  duty.  The  priests  and 
ministers  of  God  are  liable  to  temptation's  defiling  touch.  The  channel  of  communi- 
cation between  heaven  and  men  may  become  choked  with  avarice  and  earthly  ambition. 
The  face  of  God  may  be  hidden  by  the  mists  and  clouds  of  hvmian  unbelief.  The  ears 
of  men  may  become  deaf  to  the  soft  whispers  of  God's  voice.  Sin  in  the  sanctuary 
may  be  so  subtle  as  to  remain  undetected.  Our  knowledge  of  God  and  of  his  will  is 
so  partial  and  imperfect  that  even  good  men  sin  through  ignorance  and  error  and 
inadvertence.  Hence  arises  the  need  for  the  repurification  of  the  sanctuary.  No 
means  are  to  be  neglected  by  which  men's  minds  can  be  more  deeply  impressed  with 
the  need  of  purity.    No  expenditure  is  waste  by  which  the  souls  of  men  can  be  cleansed 


OH.  XLV.  1— 25.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  425 

and  ennobled.    Our  very  tears  of  repentance  must  be  washed.    The  fountain  of  truth 
and  piety  must  be  kept  sweet. 

III.  Thk  fcbifioation  of  the  sanotuabt  demands  the  fibst  uouents  of  oub 
TIME.  The  holiest  work  must  be  the  work  first  done.  The  dawn  of  the  new  year  is 
the  most  fitting  time  for  this  sacred  service.  Just  as  every  part  of  the  nation  is 
hallowed  for  God  by  the  hallowing  of  a  particular  spot,  so  the  whole  year  is  hallowed 
by  the  consecration  to  God  of  its  first  moments.  God's  claim  to  every  part  of  our 
nature  and  of  our  possessions  must  be  practically  yielded ;  and  we  admit  the  obligation 
by  bringing  the  firstfruit  of  our  fields,  the  best  of  our  flocks,  the  central  spot  of  our 
territory,  the  first  moments  of  the  year.  It  is  by  giving  that  we  gain.  None  have 
been  losers  by  giving  freely  unto  God.    That  which  we  thus  give  we  really  possess. — D. 

Vers,  1 — 5. — Devotement  and  consecration.  In  the  ideal  kingdom  there  was  to  b& 
a  certain  portion  of  the  land  devoted  to  sacred  objects — to  the  sanctuary  of  Jehovah 
and  to  the  residence  of  his  ministers.  This  was  called  "  a  holy  portion ; "  it  was  "  an 
oblation  unto^  the  Lord."  Thus  in  the  very  heart  of  the  metropolis,  in  the  most 
commanding  situation,  on  the  very  best  possible  site,  there  was  an  abiding  witness  of 
the  presence  and  the  claims  of  God,  and  a  continual  recognition  of  and  response  to  those 
claims  on  the  part  of  the  nation.  In  a  country  as  Christian  as  ours  the  towers  and 
spires  of  our  sanctuaries,  rising  heavenward  under  every  sky,  standing  strong  and  even 
thick  among  the  homes  and  the  shops  and  counting-houses  of  town  and  city,  bear  their 
testimony  that  God  is  remembered,  that  Jesus  Christ  is  honoured  and  worshipped  by 
the  people  of  the  land.  But  better  than  this  devotement  of  land  and  this  building 
of  sanctuaries,  good  as  that  is,  is  the  consecration  of  heart  and  life  to  the  Person  and 
the  service  of  the  Kedeemer.    The  first  and  essential  step  in  this  act  is — 

L  The  sueeendee  or  ourselves  to  Jesus  Chbist.  The  dear  recognition  that 
we  are  not  our  own,  but  his ;  that  he  claims  us  in  virtue  of  his  surpassing  love  and 
his  supreme  sacrifice ;  that  he  has  "  bought  us  with  the  price  "  of  his  own  blood  (1  Cor. 
vL  20).  And  the  free  and  full  surrender  of  ourselves  to  himself;  the  hearty  and 
definite  acceptance  of  him  as  our  Divine  Teacher,  Lord,  and  Friend ;  so  that  in  the 
future  it  is  the  will  of  Christ,  not  our  own  will,  that  will  be  the  determining  power 
within  us.     This  surrender  or  consecration  of  self  necessarily  includes — 

II.  The  dedication  of  oub  days  and  oub  powees  to  his  service.  Being  his, 
in  the  deepest  thought  of  our  mind  and  the  strongest  feeling  of  our  heart  and  the 
most  deliberate  choice  of  our  will,  we  can  withhold  nothing  from  him.  1.  Not  merely 
will  one  day  in  seven  be  given  to  worship  in  his  sanctuary,  but  all  the  hours  of  all  our 
days  will  be  spent  as  in  his  presence  and  to  his  praise.  2.  Not  only  shall  we  sing 
some  psalms  and  utter  some  prayers  "  unto  the  Lord,"  but  we  shall  use  every  faculty 
we  possess,  both  of  mind  and  sense,  with  the  view  of  pleasing  and  of  honouring  him> 
And  beyond  this,  or  we  might  say,  implied  and  included  in  this,  is — 

III.  The  assignment  of  our  possessions  to  him  and  to  his  sebvioe.  This 
includes  :  1.  The  holding  and  the  spending  of  all  that  we  have  in  the  spirit  of  obedi- 
ence, having  regard  to  his  will  in  all  that  we  do  with  our  substance.  2.  The  assign- 
ment of  some  serious  proportion  of  our  means  to  the  cause  of  God  and  of  man,  of 
religion  and  of  humanity.  What  that  proportion  shall  be,  and  what  form  it  shall 
take — land,  money,  time,  labour — is  left  to  the  individual  conscience.  There  is  no 
prescription  in  the  New  Testament.  We  are  called  unto  liberty ;  but  we  are  sacredly 
and  happily  bound  to  give  all  we  can  for  such  a  Saviour,  in  such  a  cause. — C. 

Ver.  8. — Human  oppression.  "  My  princes  shall  no  more  oppress  my  people."  God 
is  now  upon  the  throne  (see  ch.  xliii.  7),  and  there  is  no  room  for  an  earthly  sovereign. 
The  highest  ruler  is  the  "prince;"  but  that  word  stands  for  human  authority  and 
power,  whatever  be  the  name  by  which  it  is  indicated.  The  promise  has  a  reflex 
significance;  it  points  to  the  evils  which  had  been  in  past  times.  And  Israel  would 
have  been  fortunate  indeed  if  it  had  escaped  the  common  doom  of  oppression  at  the 
hand  of  its  kings  and  princes.  Many  and  sad  are  the  sorrows  which  this  poor  world 
of  ours  has  endured  at  the  hand  of  those  who  should  have  lived  to  bless  and  not  to 
curse  it.  The  view,  or  review,  is  melancholy  in  the  last  degree ;  surely  it  is  only  too 
true  that — 


426  THE  BOOK   OP  THE  PKOPHET  EZEKIEL.    [ch.  xlv.  1— 25. 

"Man's  inhnmanity  to  man 
Makei  countless  agei  moom." 

I.  Its  yabiottb  fobhs.  These  are :  1.  ImpresimeTU.  The  children  of  Israel  wwe 
plainly  and  powerfully  forewarned  of  this  evil  (1  Sam.  yiii.  11 — 17).  2.  Taxation. 
It  was  not  long  before  the  land  groaned  beneath  the  weight  of  the  sovereign's  levies 
(2  Sam.  X.  4).  3.  Bobbery  of  individual  right,  and  invasion  of  individual  liberty. 
It  needs  but  to  mention  the  case  of  David's  sad  defection  from  right,  and  Ahab's 
senseless  covetousness  and  weak  yielding  to  his  truculent  queen,  to  be  reminded  how 
kings,  even  of  Judah  and  Israel,  defrauded  men  of  their  dearest  rights.  And  if  we 
extend  the  meaning  of  the  word  "prince"  to  any  one  in  authority,  or  in  power,  or  in 
possession,  we  think  at  once  of  the  terrible  oppressions,  in  this  worst  form,  that  have 
dishonoured  the  lands,  darkened  the  homes,  and  blighted  the  lives  of  men  under  every 
sky  and  in  every  age  of  the  world.    4.  Violence. 

II.  Its  essential  iniqcitt  and  enobmity.  For  what  ii  it,  in  truth?  It  is  a 
shameful  abuse  of  power.  It  is  nothing  less  than  a  man  taking  from  the  hand  of  God 
the  power  or  opportunity  which  be  gave  him  in  order  that  he  might  nse  for  the  good, 
the  elevation,  the  happiness- of  his  kind,  and  turning  that  power  into  an  instrument 
of  mischief  and  of  sorrow.  It  is  a  heartless  and  shameless  exaggeration  by  a  man  of 
his  own  personal  importance,  as  if  hit  comfort  were  everything,  and  an  equally  heart- 
less and  shameless  disregard  of  the  wishes  and  the  wants,  the  joys  and  the  sorrows, 
the  hearts  and  the  homes  of  other  people.  It  is  a  guilty  perversion  of  the  purpose  and 
debasement  of  the  gift  of  God. 

III.  The  deep  Divine  disapfboval  of  it.  How  could  the  Divine  Father  of  all 
human  spirits  see  one  of  his  children  wronging,  oppressing  a  number  of  his  fellows, 
weighting  them  with  grievous  burdens  or  robbing  them  of  the  essential  rights  of  their 
manhood  or  their  womanhood,  without  deep,  Divine  indignation  and  sorrow  (see 
Exod.  iii.  7 ;  2  Kings  xiiL  4 ;  xiv.  26 ;  Isa.  i.  23,  24 ;  xlix.  25 ;  Jer.  xxiL  17 ;  Hos.  iv. 
18 ;  and  oh.  xxii.  27)? 

lY.  The  Divine  pbomisi  ttkdeb  the  EuraDOU  of  Chbist,  The  time  shall  come 
when  princes  and  powers  "  shall  no  more  oppress."  When  Jesus  Christ  shall  exercise 
his  benignant  sway  over  all  nations,  when  bis  spirit  of  righteousness  and  of  love  shall 
fill  the  hearts  and  regulate  the  lives  of  men,  then  the  hard  hand  of  oppression  will  be 
taken  off  every  shoulder ;  the  cruel  exactions  shall  cease ;  the  spirit  of  the  Christian 
poet  will  prevail,  when  he  says — 

"  I  would  rather  be  myself  the  slave 
And  wear  the  bonds  than  fasten  them  on  him ; " 

«ruelty  shall  give  place  to  kindaess,  and  selfishness  to  considerateness;  and  instead  of 
men  asking — How  much  can  I  get  out  of  the  multitude  to  fill  my  purse  and  serve 
my  purpose?  they  will  ask — What  can  I  do  to  enlighten,  to  enrich,  to  elevate,  to 
bless?— 0. 

Ver.  10. — Piety  and  equity.  "  Te  shall  have  just  balances."  Devotion,  when  divorced 
from  morality,  is  worth  nothing  in  the  sight  of  God.  Men  have  thought  and  taught 
that  tbe  one  thing  that  God  (or  the  gods)  required  was  to  be  reverently  approached 
liy  his  adherents,  and  to  receive  their  numerous  ofifeiiDgs  (see  Micah  vi.  6,  7).  But 
his  disciples  did  not  so  learn  Moses,  and  we  have  not  so  learned  Christ.  Under  him 
we  have  come  to  understand  that  every  good  tree  must  bring  forth  good  fruit,  and  that 
it  is  he  who  doeth  i  ighteousness  that  it  righteous.  In  this  great  matter  of  equity. 
betweea  man  and  man  it  is  difficult  to  over-estimate  its  religiout  importance.  By  error 
«nd  failure  therein  we  separate  ourselves  from  God ;  by  rectitude  and  fidelity  therein 
we  commend  ourselves  to  his  loving  favour.  We  take  the  injunction  as  covering  more 
ground  than  the  words  themselves  express;  and  we  look,  therefore,  at — 

I.  The  banoe  of  its  afflioation.  "  Ye  shall  have  just  balances  "  means,  of  course, 
more  especially — Be  fair  in  your  dealings  when  you  trade  one  with  another;  but  it  also 
means — Do  what  is  just  and  upright  in  all  your  relations;  do  sound  and  thorough  work 
!»t  the  carpenter's  bench,  and  at  the  forge,  when  you  build  the  house  or  dig  the  garden 
or  plant  the  field ;  be  true  and  faithful  to  your  scholars,  to  your  people,  to  your  clients, 
to  your  constituents,  in  the  schoolroom,  or  the  pulpit,  or  the  court,  or  the  House  of 


OH.  ILV.  1— 25.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZBKIEL.  427 

CommonB.  Do  what  you  undertake  to  do;  be  what  you  profess  to  be;  be  honest, 
sincere,  faithful  in  every  sphere  in  which  you  move. 

U.  The  DiviiTB  beoabd.  "  The  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  in  every  place,  beholding  the 
evil  and  the  good ; "  but  if  they  could  overlook  anything  they  would  not  fail  to  observe 
whether  men  did  or  did  not  do  justice  to  their  fellows.  If  we  suppose  that  there  are 
some  things  respecting  which  God  is  indifferent,  among  these,  assuredly,  is  not  tba 
question  whether  we  do  or  leave  undone  what  we  have  promised  to  do.  From  the 
formal  compact,  carefully  drawn  and  solemnly  ratified  between  the  sovereign  and 
the  nation,  down  to  the  word  of  promise  made  by  the  tradesman  or  the  sempstress, 
all  our  human  dealings  and  undertakings  are  the  object  of  the  Divine  regard.  "  I  have 
seen  "  is  a  sentence  we  should  do  well  to  hear  at  all  times  and  in  every  place  when  we 
covenant  with  men. 

IIL  The  DimnE  becomfsnbb.  1.  Approval  or  dispUatwe.  We  may  make  quite 
iure  that,  when  we  are  acting  unfairly  or  unfaithfully  in  any  relationship  whatever, 
however  we  may  be  gathering  money  or  reaping  honour,  we  are  laying  up  a  large 
measure  of  Divine  disapproval ;  the  "  anger  of  the  Lord  is  kindled  against  us."  But 
when  we  are  acting  conscientiously  and  equitably,  however  we  may  be  disregarded 
end  passed  by  on  the  part  of  our  fellows,  we  are  enjoying  the  favour  of  our  Lord,  2. 
Bernard  or  penalty.  Faithfulness  will  bring  (1)  our  own  self-respect;  (2)  the  esteem 
of  those  whom  we  serve ;  (3)  the  consolidation  of  our  Christian  character ;  (^  com- 
mendation and  promotion  in  the  day  of  Divine  recompense  (Luke  xiz.  17).  Unfaith- 
fulness will  have  to  bear  a  penalty  corresponding  to  this — the  loss  of  self-respect,  public 
reprobation,  degradation  of  character.  Divine  condemnation  in  the  future. — C. 

Ver.  20. — TTte  erring  and  the  simple.  The  sacrifices  imder  the  Law  of  Moses  were 
not  intended  for  presumptuous,  high-handed  sins  of  the  worst  kind  (see  Numb.  xv.  30 ; 
Deut.  xviL  12),  They  were  designed  for  the  less  grave  offences,  more  especially  for 
transgressions  of  the  ceremonial  law.  Here  we  have  an  injunction  requiring  a  general, 
and  not  individual,  offering  to  be  rendered  on  behalf  of  those  who  had  been  inad- 
vertently led  into  error,  or  who,  by  reason  of  mental  simplicity,  had  failed  to  recognize 
their  duty,  and  had  therefore  left  it  undone.  It  was  valuable  as  recognizing  the 
responsibility  of  the  nation  for  those  of  its  members  who  were  less  well  able  to  take 
care  of  themselves,  and  it  suggests  to  us  our  Christian  duty  to  seek,  for  their  sake  as 
much  as  for  our  own,  to  guide  or  to  restore  them. 

I.  The  pbesenoe  of  the  simple.  We  not  only  come  into  this  world  very  variously 
endowed,  some  having  inclinations  and  faculties  of  which  others  are  not  conscious  at  all, 
but  our  minds  are  of  very  different  gradations  in  general  capacity.  Between  that  of 
the  man  just  above  imbecility  and  that  of  the  greatest  poet,  or  statesman,  or  organizer, 
how  immeasurable  the  distance  I  There  is  iquite  a  considerable  company  of  the 
imbecile ;  these  have  been,  in  some  countries,  singularly  regarded  as  in  close  connection 
with  the  supernal  powers,  and  treated  with  peculiar  regard  on  that  account.  Otherwise 
and  elsewhere  they  are  usually  the  objects  of  a  good-natured  tolerance.  But  above 
these  and  below  the  men  and  women  of  average  intelligence  are  "  the  simple  " — those 
who  can  acquire  but  very  little  learning,  study  how  they  may ;  who  soon  lose  their 
way  in  reasoning,  and  are  easily  worsted  in  dispute ;  who  cannot  look  far  ahead,  and 
may  be  readily  taken  advantage  of  by  the  unscrupulous  j  who  cannot  discern  dangers 
ahead,  and  are  specially  open  to  the  attacks  of  the  enemy, 

II,  The  pbebenoe  of  the  ESBma.  It  is,  no  doubt,  "the  simple"  who  become 
"  the  erring,"  whose  error  is  due  to  their  simplicity.  But  it  is  not  all  the  simple  who 
err,  nor  are  all  the  erring  to  be  found  among  the  simple.  There  are  those  who  leave 
the  strait  path  without  that  excuse — men  and  women  who  are  possessed  of  the  ordi- 
nary intelligence  and  have  received  a  very  fair  measure  of  instruction  and  Christian 
Influence,  who  are  found  in  paths  of  folly.  Some  temptation  has  proved  too  strong  for 
them.  And  if  they  are  not  among  the  flagrantly  immoral,  yet  is  there,  in  their  case, 
a  deviation  from  the  straight  line  of  truthfulness,  or  of  purity,  or  of  sobriety,  or  of 
reverence,  or  of  the  becoming  and  the  consistent — a  deviation  which  detracts  seriously 
from  the  worth  and  beauty  of  their  character,  and  which  makes  their  best  frienda 
concerned  or  even  alarmed  about  them. 

in.  OUB  SAOBED   DUTT,  WHICH  IS  OUB  PBIVILEaE,  OONCEBNINO  THESE.     1.    To  guidt 


428  THE   BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [ch.  xlv.  1—25. 

and  guard.  Those  on  whom  God  has  conferred  greater  power,  and  who  can  conse- 
quently see  more  clearly  where  evil  lies  and  where  danger  begins,  should  esteem  it  their 
most  sacred  and  bounden  duty  to  befriend,  to  preserve,  to  save,  those  who  are  feebler 
and  more  exposed.  We  have  our  powers,  no  doubt,  that  we  may  take  care  of  ourselves, 
that  we  may  secure  and  enrich  ourselves.  But  this  is  only  one  part,  and  it  is  quite 
a  small  part,  of  our  duty  and  of  our  opportunity.  We  live  to  love  and  bless.  God  has 
made  us  what  we  are  and  given  us  what  we  have,  for  the  express  purpose  that  we  may 
serve  those  who  are  around  us,  and  more  particularly  those  who  are  nearly  related  to  us, 
by  defending  them  when  they  are  assailed,  by  timely  warning  against  attack,  by  arming 
them  for  the  evil  hour,  by  encouraging  them  in  the  midst  of  the  battle  when  they  are 
distressed,  by  enabling  them  to  make  the  most  of  the  resources  which  they  possess. 
By  wise  direction  and  strengthening  companionship  many  a  simple  soldier  has  been 
enabled,  on  moral  as  well  as  material  fields,  to  fight  a  brave  and  faithful  battle,  and  to 
win  the  victory  and  the  crown.  2.  To  restore.  "Ye  who  are  spiritual  restore  such  a 
one  "  (Gal.  vi.  1).  Here  is  not  only  a  sacred  duty,  but  a  very  high  privilege.  To  win 
a  fortune,  to  establish  "  a  house  "  or  a  family,  to  build  up  a  great  reputation,  to  rise  to 
conspicuous  eminence, — this  is  laudable,  honourable,  attractive  enough,  or  at  least  it 
may  be  so.  But  there  are  things  which  are  higher  and  better  than  these.  And  of  these 
nobler  things  there  are  few  that  rank  higher  in  the  estimate  of  Christ  or  will  give  our 
own  hearts  deeper  satisfaction  in  the  calmer  and  truer  moments  of  our  life  than  the 
act  of  restoration.  To  lead  our  erring  brother  or  sister  back  again  from  the  highway 
or  the  byway  of  evil  into  the  road  of  rectitude,  into  the  path  of  life, — this  is  emphatic- 
ally and  pre-eminently  the  Christian  thing  to  do ;  it  is  to  reduce  to  action  the  Divine 
instruction,  "  As  my  Father  hath  sent  me,  even  so  send  I  you." — C. 

Ver.  21. — The  moral  of  the  Passover.  This  great  feast,  which  was  so  solemnly  though 
hastily  inaugurated,  and  so  solemnly  and  joyously  renewed  after  a  discreditable  lapse 
(Exod.  xii. ;  2  Chron.  xxx.),  had  an  historical  and  also  a  religious  aspect. 

I.  Its  historical  significance.  It  recalled  one  great  event  of  surpassing  national 
interest ;  it  brought  back  to  memory  the  pitiless  cruelty,  the  blind  obduracy,  the  false 
confidence  of  Egypt,  and,  at  the  same  time,  the  sad  sufferings  and  the  trembling  hopes 
of  Israel.  "  With  what  solemn  awe  and  yet  with  what  thrilling  expectation  did  their 
forefathers  in  the  land  of  bondage  partake  of  that  strange  meal  I  With  what  eager 
carefulness  did  they  see  that  the  saving  blood-stream  marked  the  lintels  of  the  door 
which  would  shut  in  their  dear  ones !  And  what  a  morning  on  the  morrow  1  What 
joyous  congratulations  in  each  Hebrew  family  when  they  all  met,  in  life  and  health,  on 
that  memorable  march  1  And  what  terrible  consternation  in  those  Egyptian  homes 
where  the  angel  of  death  had  mo<  passed  by  but  had  struck  his  fearful  stroke  1  It  was 
the  hour  of  Jehovah's  most  signal  interposition ;  it  was  the  hour  of  national  redemption. 
They  might  well  remember  it  "  in  all  their  dwellings  through  all  their  generations." 

II.  Its  spiritual  significance.  The  keeping  of  the  Passover  was  fitted  to  etfri 
a  most  invaluable  influence  in  two  ways.  1.  It  was  calculated  to  bind  the  nation 
together  and  so  to  preserve  its  unity ;  or,  when  that  unity  was  broken,  to  induce  a 
kinder  or  more  brotherly  feeling  between  the  separated  communities,  and  to  prevent 
fiirther  dissolution.  For  nothing  is  a  stronger  tie  than  common  sacred  memories — the 
vivid  recollection  of  scenes,  of  suflferings,  of  struggles,  through  which  common  ancestors 
have  passed.  Such  memories  allay  ill  feeling  and  strengthen  existing  "  cords  of  love." 
2.  It  was  calculated  to  preserve  their  allegiance  to  their  Divine  Deliverer.  For  the 
slaying  and  eating  of  the  lamb  in  their  homes  :  (1)  Spoke  to  their  hearts  of  the  vast  and 
the  immeasurable  obligation  under  which  they  stood  to  the  Lord  their  God ;  it  presented 
him  to  their  minds  as  the  Lord  their  Eedeemer,  who  had  with  a  mighty  hand  rescued 
them  from  tyranny  and  oppression,  and  placed  them  in  the  land  of  plenty,  in  homes  of 
peace.  (2)  Summoned  them  to  the  liveliest  gratitude  for  such  signal  mercy,  for  such 
abounding  and  abiding  goodness.  (3)  Charged  them  to  live  that  life  of  purity  and 
of  separateiicss  from  heathen  iniquity  of  which  the  unleavened  bread  spoke  to  them 
while  the  feast  lasted  (see  homily  in  loc,  in  Lev.  xxiii.  4 — 8). 

1.  It  is  well  to  signalize  individual  mercies ;  it  is  well,  by  some  wise  habit  or 
institution,  to  call  to  remembrance,  for  renewed  gratitude  and  consecration,  some  special 
deliverance  granted  us  by  the  God  of  our  life  during  our  past  career.    2.  It  is  well  to 


OH,  XLVI.  1— 24.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PEOPHET   EZEKIEL. 


429 


commemorate  common,  natidnal  favours ;  to  recall,  with  thankfulness  and  devotion, 
the  goodness  of  God  shown  in  great  national  conjunctures.  3.  It  is  best  to  perpetuate 
the  one  great,  surpassing  redemption  of  our  race ;  to  join  in  the  commemoration  of  th't 
supreme  event  when  the  Lamb  of  God  was  slain  for  the  sins  of  the  world. — G. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XLVL 


This  chapter  falls  into  three  divisions. 
The  first  (vers.  1 — 15)  gives  supplementary 
directions  for  the  prince  and  the  people  of 
the  land  when  engaged  in  solemn  acts  of 
worship;  the  second  (vers.  16 — 18)  furnishes 
the  prince  with  instructions  as  to  how  he 
may  dispose  of  his  portion  or  inheritance;' 
the  third  (vers.  19 — 24)  adds  particulars 
about  the  sacrificial  kitchens  for  the  priests 
■  and  for  the  people. 

Vers.  1 — 15. — The  supplementary  direc- 
tions contained  in  these  verses  relate  to  the 
worship  of  the  prince  and  the  people  on  the 
sabbaths  and  the  new  moons  (vers.  1 — ^7) 
and  at  the  appointed  feasts  generally  (vers. 
8—15). 

Ver.  1. — ^Like  the  preceding  sections 
which  introduced  distinctly  new  enactments 
in  Ezekiel's  Torah  (see  ch.  xliv.  9 ;  xlv.  9, 
18),  this  properly  opens  with  a  Thus  saith 
the  Lord  God,  since  it  refers  to  the  worship 
that  should  be  celebrated  at  the  gate  of  the 
inner  court  which  looketh  toward  the  east. 
Ewald,  after  the  LXX.  (^  -irvKn  tj  ev  tj?  av\f 
iri  iaaiTiptf),  changes  the  text  so  as  to  read 
the  outer  court  gate,  and  understands  the 
statement  here  made  to  be  a  qualification 
of  that  contained  in  oh.  xliv.  1 — 3.  It  is, 
however,  the  inner  east  gate  to  which  the 
present  clause  alludes,  and  the  announce- 
ment made  concerning  it  is  that,  like  the 
outer  east  gate,  it  should  be  shut  on  the  siz 
working  days ;  literally,  the  six  days  of  the 
husiness  (comp.  1  Sam.  xx.  19);  but  that, 
unlike  the  outer  east  gate,  it  should  be 
opened  on  the  sabbath  (literally,  t»  the  day 
of  the  mlbath)  and  in  the  day  of  the  new 
moon,  both  of  which  days  had  been  marked 
under  the  Law,  and  should  in  future  con- 
tinue to  be  marked,  by  special  sacrificial 
celebrations. 

Ver.  2. — The  reason  for  the  opening  of 
this  inner  east  gate  should  be  that  the 
prince  might  enter  it  as  far  as  its  threshold, 
and  stand  there  worshipping  by  the  posts 
of  the  gate,  while  his  burnt  offerings  and 
his  peace  offerings  were  being  prepared  by 
the  priests,  who,  rather  than  the  prince, 
were  the  proper  ministers  for  conducting 
the  sacrificial  ceremony.   The  prince  should 


reach  bis  station  at  the  threshold  of  the 
inner  gate,  by  the  way  of  the  porch  of  that 
(or,  the)  gate  without;  but  whether  this 
signified  that  he  should  pass  through  the 
eastern  gate  of  the  outer  court,  and  so 
advance  towards  the  inner  east  gate,  as 
Ewald,  Keil,  Kliefotli,  and  Plumptre  as- 
sume, or,  as  Hengstenberg,  Scliroder,  and 
Smend  suppose,  that  he  should  enter  the 
inner  gate  by  the  way  of  the  porch  of  the 
gate,  i.e.  from  the  outside,  from  the  outer 
court  into  which  he  had  previously  entered 
through  either  the  north  or  the  south  outer 
gates,  cannot  be  decided.  In  favour  of  the 
former  may  be  urged  the  consideration  that 
it  seems  more  natural  to  apply  yno  to  the 

outer  gate  than  to  the  outer  court,  since  no 
one  could  enter  the  inner  gate  except  from 
the  outer  court,  unless  he  were  alretidy  in 
the  inner  court ;  but  in  favour  of  the  latter 
is  (1)  the  stringent  character  of  the  language 
in  ch.  xliv.  1—3,  which  expressly  declares 
that  the  outer  east  gate  Bhould  not  be 
opened,  and  that  no  man  should  enter  in  by 
it,  thus  scarcely  admitting  of  an  exception ; 
and  (2)  the  statement  in  vers.  9,  10  of  the 
present  chapter,  that  in  the  "appointed 
feasts"  the  prince  and  the  people  alike 
should  enter  the  outer  court  either  by  the 
north  or  the  south  gate,  since,  if  any  of 
these  "feasts"  fell  upon  a  sabbath,  this 
regulation  would  not  be  practicable,  if  the 
prince  and  the  people  were  required  to 
enter  by  different  doors.  The  question, 
however,  in  itself  is  immaterial.  The  points 
of  importance  are  that  the  prince  should 
worship  in  the  porch  of  the  inner  gate,  and 
that,  on  finishing  his  worship,  he  should 
retire,  and  that  the  gate  should  not  be  shut 
until  the  evening. 

Ver.  8. — likewise  (or,  and)  to  the  people 
of  the  land  should  be  accorded  permission 
to  worship  at  this  inner  gate,  only  not  like 
the  prince,  in  its  porch,  but  at  its  door,  yet 
on  the  same  occasions  as  he,  in  the  sabbaths 
and  in  the  new  moons.  Kliefoth,  who  takes 
"this  gate"  to  signify  the  outer  gate,  through 
which,  according  to  his  interpretation  of 
ver.  2  (see  above),  the  prince  should  pass 
so  as  to  reach  the  inner  east  gate,  conceives 
the  import  of  the  present  verse  to  be  that, 
while  tl^e  prince  should  be  permitted  on  the 
sabbaths  and  new  moons  to  pass  through 
the  eastern  gate,  the  people  "should  remain 
standing  in  front  of  the  outer  east  gate. 


430 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  EZEKIEL,    [oh.  xlvi.  1— 34. 


aud,  looking  throngh  it  and  the  opened 
inner  east  gate,  should  piay  before  JehoTah." 
This,  however,  ia  unnatural,  even  on  the 
hypotliesis  that  the  prince  should  pass 
through  tlie  outer  east  gate,  and  the  view 
of  Keil  is  greatly  preferable,  that  "  this 
gate  "  was  the  inner  east  gate,  and  that  the 
people  should  reach  it  (even  if  the  prince 
did  not)  by  entering  the  outer  court  through 
the  north  gate  or  the  south. 

Vers.  4,  5  describe  the  saorLfioes  the 
prince  should  offer  nnto  the  Lord  on  the 
sabbaths.  (1)  A  burnt  offering  of  six  lambs 
and  a  ram,  all  without  blemish.  The  Mosaic 
Law,  or  so-called  priests'  cods,  demanded 
two  yearling  lambs  (If  umb.  xxviii.  9).  (2) 
A  meat  offering,  consisting  of  an  ephah  of 
flne  flour  for  a  ram,  and  for  the  lambs  as  he 
shall  be  able  to  give ;  literally,  a  gift  of  his 
hand — not  a  handful,  but,  as  ver.  7  explains, 
what  his  hand  can  attain  unto  (comp. 
Lev.  xiv.  31 ;  ixv.  26),  i.e.  as  much  as  he 
can,  with  a  hin  of  oil  to  an  ephah,  for  which 
again  the  Law  required  two-tenths  of  an 
ephah  of  fine  flour  mingled  with  oil  (Numb. 
xxTui.  9). 

Vers.  6,  7  specify  the  corresponding  sacri- 
fices for  the  new  moons.  (1)  A  burnt 
offering  of  a  young  bullock  without  blesush, 
■iz  lambs,  and  a  ram,  with  which  may  be 
compared  the  two  bullocks,  one  ram,  and 
seven  lambs  of  the  Mosaic  Torah  (Numb, 
xxviii.  H — 15).  (2)  A  meat  (or,  meal) 
offering  of  an  ephah  for  the  bullock,  an 
ephah  for  the  ram,  and  for  the  lambs  ac- 
eordiug  as  his  hand  shall  attain  unto  (comp. 
ver  5 ;  and  the  similar  expressions  in  Lev. 
V.  7,  11;  xii.  8),  with  a  hin  of  oil  to  an 
ephah.  This  also  is  less  than  that  which 
had  been  demanded  by  the  Law,  viz.  three- 
tenths  of  an  ephah  of  flne  flour  mingled 
with  oil  for  each  bullock,  two-tenths  for  the 
ram  and  one-tenth  for  every  lamb  (Numb, 
ixviii.  11—15).  The  Torah  of  Ezekiel 
omits  the  sin  offering  of  a  he-goat,  which 
had  a  place  in  the  Torah  of  Moses. 

Yer.  8  begins  an  ordinance  relative  to  the 
mode  of  conducting  worship  at  the  appointed 
festivals  (ver.  9 ;  comp.  olu  xxxvl  38 ;  xlv. 
17 ;  Lev.  xxiii  2 ;  Hos.  xii.  9),  by  indicat- 
ing first  how  the  prince  shoidd  enter  and 
depart  from  the  templo.  According  to 
Kliefoth  and  Keil,  the  prince's  entrance  and 
departure  should  be  by  the  way  of  the  porch 
of  the  outer,  according  to  Hengstenberg, 
Bmend,  and  Onrrey,  of  the  inner,  east  gate 
(see  on  ver.  2). 

Yer.  9. — But  when  the  people  of  the  land 
shall  come  before  the  Lord.  As  the  pre- 
ceding verse  referred  to  the  prince's  en- 
trance into  and  departure  from  the, inner 
gate,  this  was  intended  to  rebate  the 
movements  of  the  prince's  subjects  when 
they  should  enter  the  outer  court  at  any 


of  the  festal  seasons — not  the  liigh  festivala 
alone,  such  as  the  Passover  and  the  Feast 
of  Tabernacles,  which  are  usually  denomi- 
nated D'iin,  but  the  ordinary  appointed 
feasts  (Qnp.iB),  including,  besides  the  high 
festivals,  the  sabbaths  aud  the  new  moons 
and  such  other  religious  celebrations  as 
were  or  should  be  prescribed  in  the  new 
Torah.  In  order  to  prevent  confusion,  and 
that  all  might  be  conducted  with  propriety 
(comp.  1  Oor.  xiv.  10),  no  one  should  depart 
by  the  gate  through  which  he  had  entered, 
but  by  the  opposite,  i.e.  he  who  had  entered 
by  the  north  gate  should  retire  throngh  the 
south  gate,  and  vice  versa.  Hengstenberg 
thinks  the  reason  for  this  regulation  "cannot 
be  sought  in  the  endeavour  to  avoid  • 
throng,"  since  "in  that  case  it  must  have 
been  ordained  that  all  should  go  in  by  the 
same  gate  and  go  out  by  the  opposite  one ; " 
it  must,  he  holds,  have  been  "  a  theological 
one,"  viz.  "  to  signify  that  each  should  go 
out  of  the  sanctuary  another  man  than  he 
came  in." 

Yer.  10. — ^And  the  prince  in  the  midst  of 
them,  when  they  go  in,  shall  go  in,  etq, 
Schroder,  but  without  reason,  would  restrict 
this  regulation  to  the  celebrations  of  the 
first  and  seventh  days  of  the  first  month 
(oh.  xlv.  18,  20);  Hengstenberg  would  con- 
fine it  to  the  high  festivals  (cli.  xlv.  21,  25); 
KUefoth,  KeU,  and  commentators  generally 
apply  it  to  all  the  statutory  feasts  or  ap- 
pointed seasons  and  times  for  united  sacri- 
ficial worship.  The  regulation  seems  to 
teach  that  in  such  observances  at  least 
the  prinue  should  stand  on  a  level  with  the 
people,  and  both  enter  and  retire  by  the 
same  door  as  they. 

Yer.  11  speci^es  the  meat  (or,  meal) 
offering  which  should  be  presented  in  the 
feasts  (D'iin),  or  high  festivals,  as  the  Pass- 
over and  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  and  in  the 
solemnities  (D'lytoXor  appointedfeasts  gene- 
rally, viz.  an  ephah  to  a  bullook,  and  an 
ephah  to  a  ram,  and  to  the  lambs  as  he  is 
able  to  give  (comp.  vers.  5, 7),  with  a  hin  of 
oU  to  an  ephah.  This  is  the  same  meat 
offering  as  was  appointed  for  the  new 
moons  (see  ver.  7),  but  slightly  different 
in  quantity  from,  though  the  same  in  prin- 
ciple as,  that  stipulated  for  the  seven  days 
of  the  Passover  (oh.  xlv.  24)t 

Yer.  12  determines  the  procedure  in  case 
of  the  prince  resolving  to  offer  privately,  on 
his  own  account,  a  voluntary  burnt  offering 
or  peace  offering;  heUex,  a  free-uiM  offering 
(P'?7i)>  a  sacrifice  prompted  by  the  heart  of 
the  offerer,  as  opposed  to  one  legally  enjoined 
(Exod.  XXXV.  29;  Lev.  xxii.  7S),  which  might 
be  either  a  burnt  or  a  peace  offering.  In 
this  case  the  east  inner  gate  should  be 
opened  to  him  as  on  the  sabbath  days  (see 


OH.  XLVL  1— 24.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL. 


431 


ver.  1),  but,  differently  from  what  occurred 
on  the  sabbath,  it  should  not  remain  open 
till  the  evening  (ver.  2),  but  should  be  shut 
immediately  the  prince's  offering  was  done. 

Yers.  13 — 15  supply  closing  instructiona 
for  the  daily  sacrifice.  The  daily  burnt 
offering  should  be  a  lamb  of  the  first  year ; 
literally,  a  son  of  hit  year  /'whereas  the  Law 
of  Moses  required  a  lamb  twic*  a  day 
(Exod.  xxix.  38—42 ;  Numb,  xxviii.  1—8). 
The  daily  meat  (or,  meal)  offering  to  accom- 
pany tliis  should  be  the  sixth  part  of  an 
•phah,  instead  of  a  tenth  as  under  Moses, 
and  the  third  part  of  a  hin  of  oil,  instead 
of  a  fourth  as  prescribed  by  the  earlier 
legislation,  to  temper  with — Di^  (from  doj, 
a  word  peculiar  to  Ezekiel),  to  moUten  or 
mix  with — the  fine  flour.  These  saoriflces 
should  be  offered  every  morning ;  literally, 
morning  by  morning;  but  not  every  evening 
as  in  the  Mosaic  Law.  This  difference  wag 
not  accidental,  but  intentional,  though  why 
in  the  new  order  of  things  the  evening 
aacritice  should  have  been  omitted  does  not 
fcppear.  Currey  thinks  Ezekiel  did  not 
intend  to  enumerate  all  the  sacrifices  of  the 
Law,  but  only  a  few  of  them,  and  tliat, 
though  not  mentioned,  the  evening  sacrifice 
may  have  been  designed  to  be  retained. 
The  presentation  of  these  sacrifices  was  not 
to  be  the  special  duty  of  the  prince,  but 
diould  devolve  upon  the  community  as  a 
whole,  who  are  now  addressed  as  "  tliou " 
(vera.  13, 14)  and  "  they  "  (ver.  15),  and  who 
should  act  in  its  fulfilment  through  their 
priests. 

Vers.  16 — 18. — Instructions  for  the  prince 
OS  to  how  he  shbuld  deal  with  his  property 
are  summarized  in  three  regulations,  intro- 
duced by  the  solemn  formula  of  "Thus 
saith  the  Lord  "  (oomp.  ver.  1 ;  ch.  xlv.  9), 

Ver.  16. — The  first  regulation.  The  prince 
might  dispose  of  a  portion  of  his  royal 
property  (see  oh.  xlv.  7,  8)  by  presenting 
part  of  it  as  a  gift  to  any  of  his  sous.  In 
this  case  what  was  gifted  should  belong  to 
his  son  or  sons  in  perpetuity,  should  be  his 
or  theirs  as  his  or  their  possession  by  in- 
heritance ;  it  should  never  again  revert  to 
the  prince. 

Ver.  17. — The  second  regulation.  Should 
the  prince,  however,  bestow  a  portion  of  his 
inheritance  on  one  of  his  servants,  what 
was  thus  bestowed  should  not  belong  to 
that  servant  in  perpetuity,  but  should  be 
regarded  simply  as  a  temporary  loan  which 
should  be  his  till  the  year  of  liberty,  n:^ 
TiTin,  i.e.  the  year  of  free  flowing  in 
general— comp.  Exod.  xix.  23,  im-i!j, 
pure  myrrh  (Authorized  Version)  or  flowing 
myrrh  (Kevised  Version) — hence  the  year  of 
release  ;  after  which  it  should  return  to  the 


prince.  Smend  thinks  Ilzekiel  could  hardly 
have  had  in  view  the  year  of  jubilee  (Lev. 
XXV.  10 ;  xxvii  24),  else  he  would  not  hava 
employed  the  term  "  liberty,"  which 
Jeremiah  (xxxiv.  8,  15,  17)  uses  to 
denote  the  freedom  regained  by  Hebrew 
bondmen  in  the  seventh  year  (Exod.  xxi.  2 ; 
Deut.  XV.  12).  But  (1)  the  seventh  year 
was  only  a  year  of  the  release  of  bondmen, 
not  of  the  reversion  of  property,  and  to  this 
rather  than  to  that  Ezekiel  refers.  (2)  The 
year. of  jubilee  might  properly  be  called  the 
"year  of  liberty,"  since  in  it  both  slaves 
were  emancipated  and  property  was  liberated. 
And  (3)  Bzekiel's  phraseology  is  not  framed 
(nor  is  Jeremiah's)  in  imitation  of  either 
Exodus  or  Deuteronomy,  the  latter  of  which 
in  particular  speaks  of  "  the  year  of  release  " 
(p^imn  njB'),  but  adheres  closely  to  the  style 
of  Leviticus,  which,  in  fact,  it  presupposes. 
n'mn  n:^'  can  only  signify  the  year  of 
the  release,  i.e.  the  well-known  year  of 
emancipation.  The  last  clause  should  be 
rendereid,  as  in  the  Bevised  Version,  "  As  for 
his  inheritance  (generally),  it  shall  be  for 
his  sons,"  or,  as  KeU  translates,  "  Only  his 
inheritance  it  is,"  i.e.  the  prince's;  "as  for 
his  sons,  it  shall  be  for  tliem." 

Ver.  18. — The  third  regulation.  The 
prince  in  nil  cases  should  endow  his  sons 
(or  others)  out  of  his  own,  and  not  out  of  hia 
subjects'  possessions,  of  which  they  have 
been  violently  robbed.  A  good  rule  for  other 
princes  besides  this,  and  for  owners  of 
property  in  general. 

Vers.  19 — 24. — The  sacrificial  kitchens 
for  the  priests  and  for  the  people.  This 
passage  has  been  transferred  by  Ewald  to 
oh.  xlii,  and  inserted  after  ver.  14 ;  but  the 
Exposition  will  show  it  must  have  originally 
stood  where  it  is. 

Ver.  19. — ^After  (or,  and)  he — i.e.  the 
measuring  man,  who  had  hitherto  acted  as 
the  prophet's  conductor — brought  me  through 
the  entry,  which  was  at  the  side  of  the  gate. 
This  was  the  inner  north  gate,  from  which 
the  prophet  had  been  conducted  to  the 
front  of  the  house  in  order  to  receive  the 
sacrificial  Torah  (ch.  xliv.  4),  and  to  whicli, 
when  this  was  finished,  he  had  been  seem- 
ingly led  back.  From  this  gate,  then,  he 
was  taken  by  his  guide  along  the  entry  or 
passage  (oh.  xlii.  9),  which  ran  towards  and 
extended  in  front  of  the  holy  chambers  of 
(or,  for")  the  priests,  which  looked  toward 
the  north,  and  which  have  already  been 
described  (ch.  xlii.  1 — 14).  Arrived  at  the 
western  corner  of  the  chambers,  he  per- 
ceived a  place  on  the  two  sides — or,  on  the 
hinder  ■part  (Bevised  Version) — ^westward. 
The  translation  in  the  Authorized  Version 
was  obviously  suggested  by  the  dual  form 


432 


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  iLvi.  1— 24. 


wnp"]',  which  properly  signifleg  "  on  both 
sides,"  but  when  applied  to  the  tabemaole 
<Exod.  xxvi.  23)  or  temple  (1  Kings  vi.  16)^ 
Blways  describes  the  back  part  or  rear. 
That  a  similiir  "place"  existed  on  the 
south  side  is  more  than  probable;  though 
Smind  thinks  there  was  not  a  "plflce"  on 
fr,e  suuth.  The  LXX.  omits  tlie  words  after 
"  place,"  and  supplies  Kexa'pur/i^vos,  "  sepa- 
rated." Keil  finds  in  the  description  here 
given  of  the  passage  towards  the  holy 
cliamhers  a  proof  that  this  section  could 
not  have  stood  originally  after  oh.  xlii.  14, 
as  in  that  case  no  such  desciiption  would 
have  been  needed.  Nor  would  the  language 
in  ch.  xlvii.  1,  "  and  he  brought  me  back," 
have  been  required  or  appropriate  had  the 
prophet  not  in  the  mean  while  changed  his 
place,  which  he  does  to  visit  the  holy 
chambers. 

Ver.  20. — The  "  place  "  was  designed  as 
a  kitchen  where  the  priests  should  boil  the 
trepass  and  the  sin  offerings  and  bake  the 
meat  (or,  meal)  offering,  i.e.  cook  the  portions 
of  the  sacrifices  tliey  should  eat  in  their 
ofScial  capacity  (see  oh.  xlii.  13).  The  Law 
of  Moses  (Lev.  viii.  31)  required  the  flesh  to 
be  boiled  (and  probably  also  the  flour  to  be 
baked)  at  the  tabernacle  door.  The  last 
clause,  that  they,  i.e.  the  priests,  bear  them, 
i.e.  the  offerings,  not  out  into  the  utter  (or, 
outer)  court,  to  sanctify  the  people,  is  by 
most  interpreters  understood  in  the  sense  of 
ch.  xliv.  19  (which  see).  To  this,  however, 
Kliefoth  objects  that  the  oouoeption  of 
deriving  ceremonial  sanctity  from  contact 
with  such  offerings  is  completely  strange  to 
the  Old  Testament  (see  Hag.  ii.  12),  and 
accordingly  he  connects  the  words,  "  to 
sanctify  the  people,"  with  the  "baking" 
and  "  boiling  "  of  the  preceding  clause. 

Vers.  21,  22. — The  prophet  next  observed, 
as  his  guide  led  him  round  the  outer  area, 
that  in  every  eomer  of  the  court  there  was  a 
court — literally,  a  court  in  a  corner  of  tte 
eourf,  a  court  in  a  eomer  of  the  court— and 


hat  these  were  courts  joined  of  forty  cubits 
ong  and  thirty  broad.  The  word  "joined" 
nnpp)  has  been  variously  translated :  by 

Gesenius  (see  "Heb.  Lex.,'  eub  voce),  as 
"  vaulted  "  or  "  roofed,"  with  which  Hitzig 
seems  to  agree ;  by  tl le  LXX.,  whom  Bottcher 
and  Ewald  follow,  fuicpd,  equal  to  con- 
tracta  ;  by  Kliefoth,  "  uncovered  ;  "  by 
Havemiok,  "  firm,"  "  strongly  built ;  "  by 
Smend, "  separated ;  "  by  Hengstenberg  and 
Schroder,  after  the  Talmudists  (fumum 
exhalantia),  "  smoking"  Or  "  made  with 
chimneys"  (Authorized  Version  margin); 
but  is  probably  best  rendered  by  the 
Revised  Version,  KeU,  Currey,  after 
Gesenius  (' Thesaurus,'  p.  1213),  "  enclosed," 
meaning  muris  cincta  et  januis  cHausa.  Ac- 
cording to  the  last  clause  of  ver.  22,  these 
four  comers  were  of  one  measure;  oi,  one 
measure  was  to  the  four  cut-away  places,  i.e. 
corners,  n'lyi'pnp  being  the  hoph.  parti- 
ciple of  psp^, "  to  cut  off."  This  last  word  is 
omitted  in  tlie  LXX.  and  the  Vulgate, 
Hitzig,  and  Smend,  thepuncta  extraordinaria 
showing  that  the  Massoiites  regarded  it  as 
suspicious. 

Ver.  23. — And  there  was  a  row  of  build- 
ing round  about  in  tbem ;  but  whether  lie 
meant  a  "  wall,"  "  fence,"  or  "  enclosure," 
as  Gesenius,  Havernick,  and  Bwald  trans- 
late, or  "  row,"  '■  series,"  "  a  shelf  of  brick- 
work which  had  several  separate  shelves 
under  which  the  cooking-hearths  were 
placed,"  as  Keil  explains,  the  obvious  inten- 
tion was  to  describe  the  range  of  boiling 
places  which  were  built  along  tlie  inside 
walls  of  these  corner  courts,  as  the  next 
verse  states. 

Ver.  24. — ^Ihese  are  the  places  (literally, 
houses)  of  them  that  boil — hence  kitchens — 
where  the  ministers  of  the  house  (or,  tempZe) 
— ».e.  the  Levites(Bee  ch.  xliv.  11, 12)— shall 
boil  the  sacrifioe  of  the  people;  i.e-  the 
portions  of  the  people's  offerings  which  Call 
to  be  consumed  by  the  priests. 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  3. —  The  people's  worship.  Although  there  was  an  elaborate  hierarchical  system 
in  the  Hebrew  religion,  care  was  taken  that  the  people  generally  should  take  an 
important  part  in  the  service.  They  were  not  admitted  to  the  most  sacred  parts  of  the 
temple  enclosure,  but  they  were  expected  to  come  up  to  the  temple  and  share  in  its 
worship. 

L  God  looks  fob  the  people's  worship.  If  this  was  expected  under  the  Law, 
much  more  is  it  looked  for  In  the  gospel  dispensation,  according  to  which  all  the  Lord's 
people  are  priests,  and  all  are  admitted  to  the  most  holy  place  through  the  rent  reiL 
God  has  personal  dealings  with  each  soul,  and  it  is  right  for  each  soul  to  come  up  before 
him  in  grateful  adoration.  The  service  in  which  the  people  do  not  take  part  cannot  be 
said  to  be  of  much  use  to  them.  It  is  true  that  there  is  value  in  intercession,  and  we 
should  all  plead  one  for  another.  Still,  we  cannot  grant  to  any  priest  a  power  of  attorney 
to  execute  our  religious  contracts  in  our  stead. 


OH.  XLVi.  1—24.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET   EZBKIEL.  433 

IL  Thb  people  oas  knjot  W0B8HIF.  When  the  heart  is  in  it,  no  joy  on  earth  can 
be  more  rich  and  full. 

"Lord,  how  delightful  'tis  to  see 
A  whole  assembly  worship  thee  I " 

The  dreariness  of  Sunday  just  arises  from  the  fact  that  so  many  people  who  go  to 
church  really  take  no  part  in  the  service.  It  must  be  wearisome  to  sit  as  spectator  of 
a  feast  of  which  one  does  not  partake.  But  when  once  a  living  interest  is  taken  in  the 
worship,  and  the  spectator  becomes  a  guest  at  the  table,  the  whole  character  of  the 
scene  is  changed,  and  the  joy  of  worship  is  experienced.  Then  it  is  possible  to  say, 
"  How  amiable  are  thy  tabernacles,  0  Lord  of  hosts  I  my  soul  longeth,  yea,  even  fointeth 
for  the  courts  of  the  Lord ; "  and  "  I  was  glad  when  they  said  unto  me.  Let  us  go  into 
the  house  of  the  Lord." 

IIL  WoBSHiF  saouiiD  BE  ADAPTED  TO  THE  PEOPLE.  It  may  not  be  possible  to 
make  it  all  that  we  would  desire  in  form  »nd  external  expression.  Indeed,  popular 
worship  can  never  reach  the  standard  of  fastidious  sastheticism.  In  trying  to  satisfy 
the  refined  taste  of  one  or  two  cultured  persons,  we  may  simply  destroy  the  meaas  of 
worship  for  the  majority  of  a  congregation.  In  that  case  the  service,  while  it  reaches 
the  perfection  of  art,  loses  its  spiritual  character  and  degenerates  into  a  mere  musical 
performance.  We  should  always  bear  in  mind  the  practical  end  of  worship,  always  see 
that  it  is  in  touch  with  the  people  and  expresses  and  helps  the  devotion  of  the  congre- 
gation generally.  The  church  should  be  the  people's  home  of  worship,  not  the  shrine 
of  a  privileged  aristocracy.     Christ  was  one  of  the  people. 

rV.   WOBSHIP   MUST   NOT  BE  DEaBADBD  IS   OBDEB  THAT   IT   MAT  BE  MADE   POPULAB. 

There  is  considerable  danger  of  running  into  this  opposite  extreme  in  the  effort  to 
attract  and  interest  the  indifferent.  But  then  the  whole  object  is  defeated.  We  may 
get  the  people  and  amuse  them  for  a  while,  but  what  is  the  use  of  doing  so  if  we 
sacrifice  the  great  end  of  assembling  together — the  reverent  adoration  of  the  holy  God? 
Fine  art  may  be  sacrificed,  but  spiritual  reality  must  be  retained.  Religion,  the  essence 
of  whicli  is  reverence,  cannot  be  helped  by  mere  vulgarity.  The  people's  worship  must 
be  worship. 

Ver.  10. — "  The  Prinee  in  the  midst  of  them."  The  centre  of  the  glory  of  restored 
Israel  was  to  be  found  in  her  prince.  No  prince  appeared,  however,  who  was  able  to 
accomplish  the  expectations  of  prophecy  until  the  advent  of  Jesus  Christ.  He  is  "  the 
Prince  in  the  midst  of  his  people." 

I.  Chbist  is  THE  Prince  of  his  people.  1.  He  is  one  of  them.  The  Jew's  Prince 
.was  a  Jew,  not  a  foreigner.  Christ  is  "  the  Firstborn  among  many  brethren."  He  is  » 
true  Man,  the  Son  of  man.  He  has  been  over  the  Christian  course,  and  has  himself  liveiJ 
the  pattern  Christian  life.  2.  He  is  their  Head.  Christ  stoops  to  save,  but  he  rises 
again  to  rule.  Even  during  his  earthly  humiliation  he  plainly  took  the  lead  among 
his  disciples.     Now  he  is  seated  on  his  throne  in  heaven,  reigning  over  his  Church. 

n,  Chbist  is  in  the  midst  of  his  people.  During  his  earthly  ministry  he  dwelt 
among  men.  Unlike  John  the  Baptist,  who  retired  to  the  solitude  of  the  wilderness  and 
to  whom  people  had  to  come  by  leaving  their  homes,  Jesus  went  about  through  the 
towns  and  villi^es  of  Israel,  eating  and  drinking  with  all  sorts  and  conditions  of  men. 
Although  he  is  no  longer  visible,  we  have  his  assurance  that  he  will  be  always  with  his 
true  disciples  (Matt,  xxviii.  20).  Christ  does  not  simply  visit  his  people  in  moments  of 
great  need ;  he  is  always  with  them.  He  does  not  select  some  choice  followers  for  his 
companionship,  to  the  neglect  of  the  great  body  of  his  people,  like  a  prince  who  enjoys 
himself  with  bis  courtiers  and  takes  little  or  no  notice  of  the  bulk  of  the  nation.  Jesus 
is  in  the  midst  of  bii  people,  right  in  the  centre  of  the  population  of  the  kingdom  d 
heaven. 

EEL  Chbist  xntebs  into  his  people's  worship.  When  the  people  go  in,  i.».  to  the 
temple,  the  Prince  shall  go  in.  The  Prince  must  worship  with  his  people.  Prince  and 
peasant  must  bow  together  before  their  common  Lord.  Every  purely  human  prince  needs 
to  confess  his  sins  as  a  penitent  and  to  utter  the  publican's  prayer,  "  God  be  merciful 
to  me  a  sinner  I  "  Christ  the  sinless  cannot  take  part  in  our  confession  except  by 
s.inpathy.  But  he  is  with  us  throughout  our  worship.  Christian  worship  at  its 
iBZEKiEL — n.  8  » 


434  THE   BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xlvi.  1— 24 

highest  is  communion  with  Christ.  In  that  most  sacred  act  of  worship,  the  Lord's 
Supper,  we  seelj  especially  for  the  living  presence  of  Christ.  For  surely  every  Pro- 
testant must  admit  that  there  is  a  real  Presence — not  in  the  bread  or  wine — hut  in  the 
hearts  of  Christ's  worshipping  people. 

IV.  Christ  goes  with  his  people  into  the  wobld.  When  the  people  go  forth 
their  Prince  is  to  accompany  them.  It  would  be  sad  if  Christ  only  met  his  people  i» 
their  worship.  He  is  more  needed  -in  work,  in  temptation,  in  trouble.  Christ  is  witV 
us  in  the  world  as  well  as  in  the  Church.  He  does  not  confine  his  sympathy  to  ecclesi- 
astical circles.  But  when  we  have  some  hard  task  to  accomplish  or  some  severe  trial 
to  face  his  presence  may  be  especially  looked  for.  The  good  leader  wiU  be  in  the  thick 
of  the  Rght,  cheering  his  soldiers  jost  where  the  battle  is  hottest.  Our  Captfuu  of 
salvation  accompanies  us  in  the  holy  war  against  sin.  If  courage  foils,  this  should  be 
our  cheering  thought — the  Prince  is  in  the  midst  of  usl 

Ver.  13. — The  morning  sacrifice.  I.  The  mobninq  bhould  be  dedicated  to  God. 
Then  especially  worship  is  fitting.  It  is  sad  to  begin  the  day  without  prayer.  But  the 
fresh  morning  devotion  has  a  preciousness  of  its  own.  1.  Then  we  awake  from  ileep. 
It  is  happy  indeed  to  wake  to  some  good  thought  of  God.  He  has  preserved  ub 
through  the  long  hours  of  darkness.  New  strength  has  come  by  refireshing  rest,  and 
this  is  God's  gift.  Therefore  grateful  thoughts  should  rise  with  morning  worship. 
2.  Then  we  commence  a  new  day.  Has  the  fig  tree  been  fruitless  hitherto?  Yetin  his 
long-suffering  patience  the  Master  has  not  cut  it  down.  Here  is  another  opportunity  for 
fruit-bearing.    Shall  this  new  one  be  wasted  as  were  so  many  of  bygone  diiys  ? 

"Lo  I  here  hath  been  dawning 
Another  blue  day : 
Think,  wilt  thou  let  it 
Slip  useless  away  ? 

"Out  of  eternity 

This  new  day  is  bom ; 
Into  eternity 
At  night  will  return. 

"  Behold  it  aforetime 
No  eye  ever  did; 
So  soon  it  for  ever 
Prom  all  eyes  is  hid." 

(Oarlyle.) 

IT.  EvBBT  NEW  MOBNiNG  SHOULD  BE  DEDICATED  ANEW.  We  may  tMnk  We  have 
dedicated  our  lives  to  God.  Yet  we  need  to  renew  the  dedication— to  dedicate  our  days 
as  well  as  our  years.  Every  day  brings  its  fresh  duties,  and  these  need  the  grace  of 
Christ,  that  they  may  be  rightly  discharged.  Every  day  also  brings  its  new  tempta- 
tions We  cannot  live  to-day  in  the  grace  of  yesterday.  The  manna  fell  daily  to  feed 
the  Israelites  in  the  wilderness,  and  it  would  not  bear  keeping  for  the  morrow.  Christ 
teaches  us  to  pray  for  daily  bread  :  "  Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread." 

IIL  The  best  dedication  of  the  new  day  is  by  saobifice.  The  Israelites 
dedicated  each  day  with  moining  burnt  offerings.  Although  we  have  outgrown  the 
necessity  of  using  these  symbolical  oOerings,  we  can  never  outgrow  the  requirement  of 
sacrifice.  It  is  well  to  begin  the  day  in  the  spirit  of  sacrifice.  First  there  should  be 
the  desire  to  slay  all  sin  and  renounce  all  bad  habits.  Then  comes  the  positive  solf- 
denial  and  cross-bearing  for  the  sake  of  Christ.  Is  there  any  new  sacrifice  of  love  that 
may  be  offered  on  the  new  day  ?  Throughout  the  day  this  thought  should  pervade 
the  minil  of  the  Christian  :  "  I  am  a  servant  of  Christ.  It  is  my  part  to-day  to  study 
my  Master's  will,  and  live  for  his  glory." 

IV  The  dedicated  day  will  be  a  blessed  day.  It  may  not  see  any  great 
event  But  it  will  be  a  day  spent  for  God,  in  lowly  service,  perhaps,  yet  in  holy 
living.    Such  a  day  is  one  sure  stepping-stone  towards  heaven. 

Vers.  16  17. The  eon  and  the  aervant.    The  Jewish  Law  made  careful  provision  to 


CH.  XL VI.  1—24.]    THE   BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  435 

prevent  the  alienation  of  land  from  the  families  to  which  it  orginally  belonged.  The 
Bon  might  inherit  permanently;  but  the  servant  could  only  receive  a  gift  of  land 
for  a  time,  which  would  cease  at  the  year  of  jubilee.  Here  was  a  marked  distinction 
between  the  privileges  of  sonship  and  those  of  service.  Now  St.  Paul  draws  attention  to 
this  distinction  from  another  point  of  view,  when  contrasting  the  gospel  with  the  Law. 
There  is  a  reliaion  of  worship,  and  one  of  service. 

I.  The  lite  of  worship  has  a  permanent  inheritance.  This  is  the  case  with 
the  spiritual  experience  of  Christianity.  1.  The  Christian  is  a  son.  (1)  He  is  begotten 
by  God.  (2)  He  is  adopted  by  God.  (3)  He  owns  Christ  for  his  Brother.  (4)  He  is 
admitted  into  God's  presence  as  a  child  at  home.  (5)  He  has  the  liberty  of  a  son  and 
his  privileges.  "  The  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  him."  God  makes  his 
counsels  knowit  to  true  Christians.  2.  The  son^s  inheritance  it  permanent.  (1)  For 
life.  The  grace  of  God  given  to  the  true  Christian  child  will  not  desert  him  in  after- 
years  if  he  still  looks  for  it  and  follows  its  guidance.  Goii  does  not  treat  his  people  aa 
the  favourites  of  a  day,  whom  a  prince  pampers  while  the  whim  is  on  him,  and  then 
capriciously  flings  aside ;  his  favour  is  enduring  like  his  eternal  love.  (2)  After  death. 
The  Christian  inheritance  is  but  tasted  on  earth  ;  the  better  part  of  it  awaits  us  beyond 
the  grave.  It  is  like  the  inheritance  of  Israel,  a  small  part  of  which  was  on  the  coast 
of  the  Jordan,  while  that  river  had  to  be  crossed  before  the  main  portion  could  be 
reached.  "  Godliness  is  profitable  unto  all  things,  having  promise  of  the  life  that  now 
is,  and  of  that  which  is  to  come "  (1  Tim.  iv.  8).  We  do  not  resign  our  Christian 
inheritance  when  we  lie  down  to  die ;  on  the  contrary,  then  we  prepare  to  enter  into 
the  promised  land  in  all  its  length  and  breadth. 

n.  The  life  of  servitude  has  but  tbmporaet  pbivilbgeb.  ].  The  promises  of 
the  Mosaic  religion  were  for  this  world,  as  Bishop  Warburton  proved  with  redundancy 
of  argument,  in  his  famous  book  on  the  '  Divine  Legation  of  Moses.'  Therefore  the 
Jew  stood  below  the  Christian  in  regard  to  his  prospects  of  future  good.  But  there 
are  far  lower  lives  of  servitude  than  that  of  the  pious  Jew.  2.  Christ  spoke  of  the 
slavery  of  sin  (John  viii.  3i).  Now,  this  degraded  servitude  has  its  rewards.  Sin  gives 
gifts  to  its  slaves.  But  they  are  not  enduring  possessions.  3.  The  bondage  of  worldli- 
ness  holds  many  men.  This  thraldom  promises  great  rewards.  Biches  and  pleasures 
come  in  its  train.  The  chains  are  forged  of  gold,  and  at  first  the  weight  of  them  is  not 
felt.  But  the  rewards  of  sin  and  worldliness  are  of  brief  duration.  Their  fruits  may 
be  sweet  at  first,  but  the  after-taste  of  them  is  unendurably  bitter.  Even  if  no  dis- 
appointment is  met  on  earth,  the  worldly  inheritance  must  be  resigned  at  death.  The 
slave  of  sin  and  the  world  can  carry  none  of  his  treasures  with  him  to  the  unseen 
future. 

Ver.  18. — A  warning  to  the  great.  I.  The  great  are  responsible  to  God.  The 
prince  is  the  leader  and  supreme  ruler  of  Israel.  His  rank  and  privilege  lift  him  into 
the  most  exalted  position.  Yet  he  is  responsible  to  God,  and  his  duty  is  definitely 
marked  out  for  him.  Even  the  most  "irresponsible"  rtder  of  a  despotic  state  cannot 
escape  from  responsibility  in  the  sight  of  Heaven.  Prince  as  well  as  peasant  will  have 
to  give  account  of  himself  before  the  judgment-seat  of  God.  Moreover,  God  directs  and 
controls  the  movements  of  the  most  powerful  earthly  magnates.  He  who  said  to 
the  sea,  "  Hitherto  shalt  thou  come,  but  no  further ;  and  here  shall  thy  proud  waves  be 
stayed,"  "  put  his  hooks"  in  the  proud  ruler  of  Egypt  (ch.  xxix.  4). 

II.  The  great  are  tempted  to  exceed  their  bights.  Men  who  enjoy  the 
largest  scope  and  who  own  the  widest  possessions  must  come  to  the  confines  of  their 
territory.  The  biggest  park  has  its  fence.  Now,  a  common  temptation  is  to  despise  the 
best  things  within  a  man's  right,  in  envy  for  what  lies  Vieyond  them.  Thus,  with  all  the 
wealth  of  the  royal  demesne,  Ahab  is  sick  with  covetousness  for  Naboth's  vineyard 
(1  Kings  xxi.  4).  The  possession  of  considerable  power  aggravates  the  temptation  of 
the  great  to  go  beyond  their  rights.  It  is  difficult  for  the  despot  to  avoid  degenerating 
into  a  tyrant. 

in.  The  great  abk  warned  against  oppressing  the  people.  The  danger  of 
power  passing  over  to  tyranny  is  the  besetting  temptation  of  persons  in  influential 
positions.  This  danger  alone  raises  a  question  as  to  the  wisdom  of  entrusting  over- 
much power  even  to  the  best  men.     In  the  abstract,  an  irresistible  paternal  government 


436  THE   BOOK   OF   THE   PROPHET  EZEKIEL.     [oh.  xlvi.  1—24. 

might  seem  to  be  likely  to  secure  the  greatest  good  of  a  nation.  But  for  this  to  be 
satisfactory  we  must  not  only  endue  the  ruler  with  supreme  wisdom,  we  must  also 
eliiniaate  from  his  character  every  atom  of  selfishness. 

IV.  The  oebat  are  not  moeb  favoured  by  God  than  abk  other  fboflb. 
They  have  unique  privileges,  but  these  are  btstowed  in  the  form  of  a  solemn  trust. 
God  is  no  respecter  of  persons.  He  cares  for  all  his  children.  He  is  the  people's  God, 
ami  the  Friend  of  the  poor.  They  who  can  find  no  earthly  protector  may  look  to  Heaven 
for  deliverance,  for  he  who  heard  the  cry  of  the  Hebrews  when  they  groaned  under  the 
oppression  of  the  Egyptian  bondage,  and  saved  them  from  Pharaoh  and  his  host,  is  still 
mighty  to  help  the  needy. 

V  God's  equal  qraob  fob  the  people  as  well  as  the  great  should  lead 
all  to  trust  him.  If  God  only  favoured  the  so-called  privileged  classes,  the  multi- 
tude might  well  turn  aside  from  religion  in  despair.  But  since  God  has  ever  been  on 
the  side  of  the  oppressed,  and  has  ever  cared  for  the  people,  it  is  foolish  to  distrust  him, 
and  ungrateful  to  disregard  his  goodness.  Whatever  else  the  great  may  seize  upon, 
they  cannot  take  a'way  the  poor  man's  religion.  Here  is  a  prize  of  permanent  possession. 
It  would  be  well  if  all  knew  and  loved  the  God  who  cares  for  all. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  3. — Worship.  The  prophet,  having  described  by  anticipation  the  sacred  city 
and  temple,  having  represented  the  several  duties  of  prince,  priest,  and  people,  having 
given  regulations  for  sacrifices  and  festivals,  now  proceeds  to  depict  the  sacred  services 
for  which  all  this  preparation  has  been  undertaken.  The  rulers  of  the  nation,  the 
ministers  of  religion,  and  the  people  of  the  land  are  beheld  uniting  in  the  solemn 
function  of  spiritual  worship.  This  is  the  loftiest  exercise  of  the  Church,  whether  upon 
earth  or  in  heaven.  The  worship  of  the  individual  soul  yields  in  beauty  and  in 
grandeur  to  that  sacrifice  of  worship  in  Which  multitudes,  willingly,  gratefully,  and 
joyfully  unite. 

I.  The  Object  of  wobbhip  is  God  only.  In  this  a  distinction  existed  between 
Israel  and  the  heathen  people  around;  for  whilst  these  worshipped  gods  many  and 
lords  many,  the  chosen  people  worshipped  Jehovah,  and  him  alone.  In  the  Church  of 
Christ,  whilst  many  of  the  great  and  holy  in  former  times  are  remembered  with  grati- 
tude and  veneration,  worship,  in  the  strict  and  proper  sense  of  the  term,  is  reserved 
for  the  Supreme  and  Eternal,  who  shares  his  honour  with  none  beside.  His  glorious 
perfections  demand  the  homage  and  adoration  uf  his  intelligent  creatures;  and  the 
more  his  character  is  sturiied,  the  more  will  it  appear  worthy  of  all  the  admiration  and 
reverence  which  can  be  brought  into  his  sacred  presence. 

n.  The  wobshiffebs  are  the  Church  of  the  living  God.  The  great  and  the 
small,  the  young  and  the  old,  the  learned  and  the  lay,  are  all  qualified  to  present  to 
the  Eternal  the  spiritual  tribute  which  is  his  due.  For  it  is  in  virtue  of  their  humanity, 
their  participation  in  human  nature,  experieuce,  and  powers,  and  not  in  virtue  of  any 
peculiar  possession  or  acquisition,  that  they  are  summoned  to  unite  in  the  worship 
of  their  Creator.  The  idea  of  the  prophet  was  one  in  a  high  degree  expanded  and 
comprehensive ;  yet  even  this  fell  short  of  the  great  reality  as  apprehended  by  the 
Apocalyptic  seer. 

III.  The  beat  or  aooeftable  worship  is  the  heart.  It  is  true  that  this 
spiritual  doctrine  is  especially  that  of  Christianity,  of  the  New  Testament.  But 
the  attentive  reader  of  the  Psalms  and  prophecies  of  the  old  covenant  is  aware  that 
the  'enlightened  Hebrews  were  superior  to  a  merely  formal  and  mechanical  view  of 
worship.  Sacrifices  and  offerings  were  known  and  felt  to  be  of  no  avail  unless  they 
expressed  the  deep  and  sincere  emotions  of  the  inner  nature.  Thus  it  must  ever  be| 
he  who  is  a  Spirit  must  be  worshipped  in  spirit  and  in  truth. 

IV.  The  oharaoteb  of  true  worship  cobbgsponds  with  the  nature  and  nebb 
OP  THE  WOBSHIPPBBB.  1.  There  must  he  acknowledgment  of  the  Divine  attributes, 
contemplated  with  reverence.  2.  There  must  be  humiliation  and  confession  of  sin. 
8.  There  must  be  the  presentation  of  the  due  offering  of  gratitude  to  him  from  whom 
itU  Uesdngs  proceed.     4.  There  must  be  petitions  and  intercessions  for  needed  good. 


OH.  XLVI.  1—24.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PROPHET  EZBKIEL.  437 

V.  The  bxpkesbion  and  fobm  of  worship  must  vabt  with  the  individual 
WOBSHIFPEB  AND  HIS  oiBonMSTANOEB.  It  IS  Darruw  bigotry  to  ineist  upon  one  form 
of  spiritual  service  or  of  uttered  adoration  and  prayer.  There  are  occasions  upon 
which  worship  may  be  spontaneous  and  ejaculatory ;  and  other  occasions  upon  which 
it  may  be  elaborate,  artistic,  and  protracted.  The  worship  of  the  individual  who  is 
momentarily  touched  by  what  is  beautiful  in  nature,  or  impressive  in  the  Word  of 
God,  is  as  acceptable  as  the  liturgy  of  a  cathedral  service,  or  as  the  fervent  service  of 
praise  in  which  expression  may  be  given  to  a  nation's  gratitude  for  signal  favours. 

VI.  The  seasons  fob  worship  are  both  ocoasionaIj  and  continuous.  The 
text  speaks  of  the  "  new  moons  "  and  the  "  sabbaths  "  as  opportunities  for  solemn  and 
public  services  of  devotion.  Yet  we  read  a  little  later  of  the  daily  offering.  The  truth 
is  that  there  is  no  season  when  worship  is  unsuitable  on  the  part  ot  man  or  unacceptable 
to  God.  Yet  there  is  wisdom  in  the  appointment  both  of  regular  and  of  special  seasons 
and  occasions  of  worship.  None  can  worship  God  too  much,  or  too  reverently,  or  too 
fervently. 

"  From  every  place  beneath  the  skies 
Let  the  Creator's  praise  arise  I 
Let  the  Redeemer's  Name  be  sung 
In  every  land,  by  every  tongue  I " 

T, 

Ver.  11. — Feasts  and  solemnities.  In  all  religions  there  are  instituted  festivals  and 
public  functions,  which  serve  to  manifest  and  to  sustain  the  religious  life  of  the 
community.  This  was  especially  the  case  with  Judaism,  which  prescribed  many  stated 
solemnities.  Even  the  Christian  religion  has  its  appointed  sacraments,  and,  in  addition 
to  these,  which  were  instituted  by  the  Divine  Founder,  the  Church  has  at  various 
periods  set  apart  times  and  seasons  for  certain  public  observances,  participation  in 
which  has  been  found  conducive  to  religious  earnestness  and  vitality,  as  well  as  to 
ecclesiastical  prosperity. 

I.  Kblioious  festivals  and  solemnities  abb  jostipied  as  habmonizing  with 
THE  VERY  NATURE  OP  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  It  is  not  in  human  nature  to  proceed  in 
one  undeviating  and  monotonous  course.  Life  is  best  lived  when  the  regular  and  stated 
order  of  things  is  varied  by  occasional  diversities.  As  in  ordinary  existence,  so  in  the 
religious  life,  it  is  well  that  there  should  be  variety,  and  that  men  should  be  invited  to 
special  engagements  of  a  spiritual  nature,  whether  of  humiliation  or  of  rejoicing,  whether 
commemorative  or  anticipatory.  Men  do  not  cease  to  be  men  because  they  are  Christians, 
and  Christianity  is  not  only  compatible  with,  it  is  promoted  by,  special  sacred  festivals, 
fasts,  and  other  observances. 

II.  Rblimous  festivals  and  solemnities  are  justified  by  the  natubb  of 
Divine  intebpositions  whioh  abb  occasional  and  special.  The  Jews  had,  in 
the  course  of  their  national  history,  experienced  wonderful  interventions  of  Divine 
mercy  upon  their  behalf.  And  it  is  evident  that  the  solemnities,  whioh  formed  so 
beautiful  a  feature  of  the  Jewish  religion,  were  for  the  most  part  designed  to  celebrate 
the  great  things  which  God  had  done  for  his  chosen  people.  The  treatment  of  the 
nation  by  God  had  not  been  of  a  uniform  and  regular  character;  and  it  was  natural 
that  there  should  be  a  correspondence  between  the  national  history  and  the  national 
religion,  between  what  Jehovah  had  effected  on  behalf  of  his  chosen  people,  and  what 
that  people  did  in  acknowledgment  of  the  Divine  mercy.  Similarly  with  our  Christmas, 
Easter,  and  Whitsuntide;  we  celebrate  the  special  mercy  of  God  in  the  advent,  the 
death,  and  the  resurrection  of  our  Saviour,  and  in  the  fulfilment  of  "  the  promise  of 
the  Father  "  in  the  outpouring  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 

III.  Religious  festivals  and  solemnities  abb  justified  by  the  suooebsivb 

GENERATIONS   WHO  NEED   TO   BE   IMPRESSED   BY   THE   SAME    GREAT    SPIRITUAL    TRUTHS. 

With  reference  to  the  Jewish  Passover,  we  are  expressly  assured  that  one  purpose  of  its 
observaDce  was  to  train  the  rising  generation  in  the  reverent  memory  of  the  signal 
favours  of  God.  When  the  son  of  the  household  asked,  "  What  mean  ye  by  this  ser- 
vice ?"  the  answer  was  given  that  it  commemorated  the  loving-kindness  and  faithfiilness 
of  the  God  of  the  Hebrews,  who  had  delivered  his  chosen  people  from  destruction  and 
assured  to  them  his  lasting  protection.     How  much  more  powerfully  was  such  a  lesson 


438  THE   BOOK   OP   THE   PROPHET    EZEKIEL.     [oh.  xlvi.  1—24 

taught  by.  8uch  ordinances  than  by  words  I  The  youthful  mind  is  especially  impressed 
by  sacred  solemnities,  and  by  their  observance  provision  is  made  that  the  attention 
of  successive  generations  shall  be  directed  to  the  glorious  truth  that  God  has  visited 
and  redeemed  his  people. — T. 

Ver.  12. — A  free-will  offering.  There  were  certain  sacrifices  and  offerings  which  the 
pious  Jew  was  bound  to  present.  To  omit  compliance  with  certain  regulations  upon 
these  observances  would  have  been  disloyalty.  But  there  were  other  offerings  which 
were  optional,  which  were  left  to  the  feelings  and  to  the  circumstances  of  the  wor- 
ship[.er.  They  were  only  brought  when  there  was  an  especially  lively  sense  of  the 
Lord's  goodness,  and  an  especial  desire  to  express  consecration  and  devotion.  Gifts 
prompted  by  gratitude  and  love  are  the  only  gifts  which  are  of  value  in  the  sight  of 
him  who  searcheth  and  looketh  upon  the  heart. 

I.  Pbeb-will  offebinqs  abb  becomino  on  the  pabt  op  man.  Man's  nature  is 
distinguished  by  the  glorious  prerogative  of  liberty.  There  b  for  him  no  moral 
excellence  or  beauty  in  constraint.  The  heart  is  free,  and  it  is  the  only  gift  which 
in  God's  sight  is  precious;  all  other  gifts  have  value  so  far  only  as  they  are  the 
expression  of  the  love  and  loyalty  of  the  spiritual  nature.  Whatever  is  dedicated  to 
God  of  the  worshipper's  free-will  is  a  human  and  a  worthy  offering,  such  as  a  being 
with  man's  prerogative  of  liberty  may  justly  offer. 

II.  Feeb-will  offebinqs  are  aoobptablb  to  God.  False  religions  sometimes 
extort  from  devotees,  by  the  motive  of  terror,  gifts  and  offerings,  services  and  sacrifices, 
which  would  otherwise  be  withheld.  They  must  be  fictitious  deities  that  are  repre- 
sented as  gratified  with  such  offerings  as  these.  But  the  character  of  God  is  such  as 
assures  us  of  his  willingness  to  receive  what  is  freely  and  cheerfully  presented.  Not 
that  he  can  be  enriched  by  anythiag  that  his  creatures  can  present.  "  Of  thine  own," 
they  acknowledge — "  of  thiue  own  have  we  given  thee."  But  all  is  precious  to  him  that 
reveals  a  loyal,  loving,  and  grateful  heart. — T. 

Ver.  13. — The  daily  offering.  There  is  nothing  inconsistent  in  the  combination  of 
special  solemnities  observed  upon  certain  occasions  with  the  regular  daily  worship. 
They  are  not  contradictory  of,  but  complementary  to,  each  other.  If  there  is  an  adap- 
tation between  annual  festivals  and  one  principle  of  human  nature,  there  is  an  equal 
adaptation  between  another  tendency  of  that  nature  and  the  constantly  recurring  daily 
sacrifice  of  prayer  and  praise.  Accordingly,  in  this  same  chapter  are  found  directions 
as  to  the  yearly  feasts  and  instructions  concerning  the  daily  sacrifice.  How  just  and 
reasonable  is  this  latter  provision  for  our  religious  life  is  apparent  from — 

I.  The  daily  mercies  which  have  to  be  acknowledcjed.  The  tokeas  ot  God's 
goodness  and  bounty,  forbearance  and  grace,  do  not  come  to  us  at  long  intervals. 
They  are  incessantly  bestowed.  He  daily  loadeth  us  with  benefits.  He  giveth  us  day 
by  day  our  daily  bread.  The  mind  that  is  at  once  observant  and  sensitive  is,  at  the 
contemplation  of  renewed,  unceasing  favours,  ready  to  exclaim,  "Every  day  will  I 
praise  thee,  and  I  will  bless  thy  Name  for  ever  and  ever." 

II.  ThK    daily  sins   which   have   to   be   confessed,  and   fob   which   F0BQIVBNE89 

HAS  TO  BE  ASKED.  The  o0erings  and  sacrifices  of  the  temple  included  not  only 
tliaiik  oBerings,  but  sin  and  trespass  offerings.  The  Israelitish  worshipper  appeared 
befoi'e  Jehovah  as  a  penitent  supplicating  forbearance  and  pardon.  There  is  no 
human  worshipper  who  has  not  occasion  to  come  into  the  presence  of  the  God  of  holi- 
ness with  shame  and  confusion  of  face.  Daily  transgressions  and  omissions  call  for 
daily  acts  of  humiliation  and  daily  entreaties  for  mercy.  The  self-righteous  may 
conceal  from  themselves  this  fact,  and  the  hypocritical  may  seek  to  conceal  it  from 
God.  But  those  who  kuow  themselves,  and  are  sincere  iu  their  devotions,  will  implore 
the  clemency  and  the  forgiveness  promised  by  the  righteous  Sovereign  to  those  who 
seek  reconciliation  through  the  mediation  ol  the  Divine  Bedeemer. 

III.  The  daily  oniDANOB  and  steength  which  abb  needed,  and  which  havb 
TO  BE  bought  fbom  Uod.  Devotion  is  primarily  the  offering  of  the  heart,  its  love 
and  grateful  praise,  to  God.  But  it  includes  also  the  seeking  of  blessings  which  it  it 
his  prerogative  to  bestow.  There  is  no  day  which  does  not  bring  with  it  duties  that 
can  be  properly  fulfilled  only  with  Divine  assistance,  trials  which  can  only  be  passed 


OH.  XLVL  1—24.]    THE   BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  489 

through  securely  and  beneficially  through  the  direction  which  God's  Holy  Spirit  alone 
can  vouchsafe.  If  this  is  so,  how  reaBonable  is  the  provision  for  daily  communion  with 
Godl  Thus  only  can  we  be  assured  of  that  grace  which  will  enable  us  so  to  pass 
through  the  discipline  of  earth  that  it  may  be  the  means  of  meatening  us  for  the 
service  and  the  joys  of  heaven. — T. 

Vers,  1 — 3. — The  consecration  of  time.  God  has  mercifully  imparted  to  human  life 
a  pleasant  variety.  It  might  have  been,  especially  as  the  result  of  transgression,  a  dull 
monotony.  It  might  have  been  day  without  night;  a  continuous  season,  neither 
summer  nor  winter;  working  days  in  perpetual  succession.  But  as  in  nature  he  has 
given  to  us  the  delightful  spectacle  of  mountain  and  valley,  land  and  water ;  as  in  the 
circumstance  and  experience  of  life  we  have  youth,  manhood  and  old  age ;  so  also  we 
have  secular  days  and  sacred. 

I.  Natdbal  objects  are  appointed  ab  lesson-books  Df  BBLiaioN.  Sun  and  moon 
and  stars  not  only  serve  as  luminaries  of  our  earth,  they  are  appointed  as  signs.  They 
signify  unseen  and  spiritual  realities.  The  sun  speaks  to  us  of  another  Fount  of  light 
— the  Sun  of  Eighteousuess,  who  illuminates  man's  soul.  The  moon,  with  her  many 
phases,  serves  as  an  emblem  of  the  Church,  receiving  her  light  and  heat  from  the  Sun. 
Every  mountain  appeals  to  us  to  rise  above  the  common  level  of  a  mortal's  life.  Every 
flower  points  to  spiritual  beauty  and  usefulness,  while  it  preaches  likewise  a  lesson  of 
man's  brief  opportunity.  So  when  the  gate  that  looked  towards  the  east  was  opened, 
it  was  that  the  worshippers  might  be  moved  and  lifted  heavenward  by  the  sight  of  the 
rising  sun.  This  privilege  was  repeated  on  the  day  when  the  new  moon  appeared. 
Incarnate  as  we  are  in  flesh  and  blood,  we  need  to  learn  from  every  quarter  lessons  of 
spiritual  moment.  God  deigns  to  instruct  us  by  the  service  of  a  thousand  teachers. 
If  our  eyes  are  open  wide  we  may  learn  gospel  lessons  on  every  side. 

n.  God  is  sfeoiallt  accessible  to  me^  at  special  seasons.  He  came  near  to 
Jacob  in  a  special  manner  by  the  vision  at  Bethel.  He  came  down  on  Horeb,  and 
talked  with  Moses  as  a  man  talketh  with  his  friend.  Especially  he  has  ordained  the 
sabbath  as  a  time  when  he  will  commune  with  men.  Even  ignorant  men  have  dis- 
covered that  rest  of  body  and  intellect  one  day  in  seven  is  a  benefit  to  the  man  and 
to  the  nation.  But  without  doubt  God  sees  a  deeper  reason  for  the  institution  of  the 
sabbath  than  do  we.  Certain  it  is  that  in  the  olden  time  he  regarded  the  observance 
of  the  sabbath  as  emphatically  the  maintenance  of  men's  covenant  with  him.  The 
violation  of  the  sabbath  obtained  his  withering  frown.  And  the  intrinsic  value  of  the 
day  is  as  great  now,  although  its  violation  be  not  followed  by  the  summary  punish- 
ment of  Ged.  The  sabbath  day  is  peculiarly  a  day  "in  which  he  maj'  be  found." 
Having  spread  the  banquet  for  human  souls,  the  King  comes  near  to  see  his  guests. 

III.  Fob  the  hioh  enjoyment  of  God's  pbbsbnce  the  innbb  doob  of  the  hbaet 
MUST  BE  opened.  The  hindrance  to  intimate  intercourse  with  God  is  on  our  side. 
On  God's  side  there  is  eager  willingness.  "  We  are  not  straitened  in  him."  He  is 
prepared  to  make  his  presence  a  joyous  reality  as  much  as  ever  he  did  to  saints  in  the 
olden  time.  We  may  walk  with  him  as  Enoch  did,  if  we  will.  We  may  have  com- 
munications with  him  as  Abraham  did,  if  we  will.  The  hindrance  is  in  our  own  will. 
If  only  the  door  of  the  heart  be  unbarred,  if  only  our  strongest  affections  wait  on  the 
threshold  to  give  him  welcome,  he  will  meet  with  us,  and  give  us  all  the  comforts  of 
his  friendship.  Other  guests  are  often  entertained,  such  as  vain  ambitions,  animal 
inclinations,  worldly  cares,  evil  companionships,  and  we  are  ashamed  to  bring  in  the 
heavenly  King.    Alas!  too  often  the  door  is  locked  on  the  inside. 

rV.  In  bbligion  one  can  be  helpful  to  many.  The  prince  exerts  an  influence 
either  for  evil  or  for  good  over  multitudes.  His  example  is  especially  contagions.  If 
he  is  sincerely  pious,  he  can  induce  many  to  serve  the  Lord.  But  even  the  prince  may 
not  bring  the  sacrifice  near  to  Go  1.  His  rank  anii  ofBce  are  limited  by  Divine  authority. 
In  the  service  of  the  sanctuary  he  may  not  be  supreme.  Even  the  king  must  draw 
nigh  to  God  through  the  offices  of  the  priest.  The  priest  likewise  renders  useful 
service  to  multitudes.  He  speaks  for  them  to  God.  He  conveys  substantial  good 
from  God  to  them.  So  every  man,  in  proportion  to  his  faith  and  piety  and  prayerful- 
ness,  may  win  over  others  to  the  side  of  virtue — to  the  side  of  God.  Each  of  us 
occupies  a  centre,  and  by  a  holy  character  we  can  draw,  by  the  magnetic  power  of  love 


440  THE   BOOK  OP  THE   PROPHET  EZBKIEL,    [ch.  xlvi.  1—24, 

Godward,  men  and  women  from  a  wide  circumference.  As  "one  sinner  deatroyeth 
much  good,"  so  one  saint  may  save  alive  a  myriad  of  his  fellow-men. 

V.   OUB    BOLIKBT   WOBSHIP   ON  BAETH    IS    ONLT    ON    THE    THRESHOLD  OF   THE    TBDB 

TEMPLE.  So  encompassed  are  we  with  a  material  nature,  that  we  can  get  no  further 
than  the  margin  of  the  eternal  kingdom.  We  can  see  the  great  realities  "  only  through 
•  glass  darkly."  Yet  we  make  them  more  obscure  by  our  spiritual  indolence  and  our 
undue  attachment  to  earthly  pursuits.  Above  everything,  candour  and  openness  of 
soul  are  needed  to  allow  the  light  of  truth  to  stream  in.  We  can  make  earthly  and 
carnal  all  the  sensibilities  of  our  souls  by  the  habitual  neglect  of  Uod's  presence.  But 
if  we  wish  honestly  and  earnestly  to  know  God  more,  and  to  have  friendly  intercourse 
with  him,  we  can.  The  open  door  of  the  heart  will  be  a  welcome  to  God  well  under- 
stood.—D. 

Ver,  9. — The  soul's  grototh  in  goodness.  The  wisdom  of  God  has  been  clearly  evinced 
in  the  spiritual  training  of  the  human  family.  The  forbidden  fruit  was  the  wisest  test 
that  God  could  impose  on  Adam.  The  simple  sacrifice  of  a  lamb  was  the  fittest 
training  of  men's  souls  during  the  patriarchal  age.  And  as  the  race  developed  from 
infancy  into  youth,  and  from  youth  to  manhood,  God's  methods  for  unfolding  and 
maturing  the  spiritual  nature  have  been  singularly  appropriate.  The  highest  good  man 
can  obtain  is  the  development  of  his  spirit — the  expansion  of  his  highest  powers.  To 
this  end  all  religious  worship  is  designed  to  contribute. 

L  Man's  spiritual  life  begins  at  zero.  In  all  God's  works  we  see  development 
from  a  simple  germ  to  highest  perfection.  For  high  reasons  God  does  not  produce 
perfected  natures  at  a  single  stroke.  Even  this  unconscious  earth  passed  through  long 
stages  of  preparation  before  it  was  fit  for  human  habitation.  Tlje  rose  does  not  reach 
perfection  except  by  patient  culture.  Everything  about  us  is  in  transition,  and  is 
moving  onward  in  a  course  of  development.  Art  is  not  yet  perfected.  Our  bodily 
nature  begins  with  a  microscopic  germ,  and  slowly  develops  towards  maturity.  If 
anything  is  plainly  revealed  in  Scripture,  it  is  this — that  the  life  of  the  soul  begins  at 
the  lowest  point  and  is  intended  to  reach  the  highest.  We  do  not  begin  our  earthly 
career  with  robust  faith  in  the  unseen  God,  nor  yet  with  a  sensitive  conscience,  nor 
yet  with  strong  aspirations  after  moral  excellence.  All  this  is  the  result  of  research 
and  self-discipline  and  prayer.  Clearly  there  is  an  intimate  analogy  between  all  the 
varieties  of  life  known  to  us.  With  respect  to  the  grain  there  is  first  the  seed,  then 
the  blade,  then  stalk,  then  ear,  then  full  corn  in  the  ear.  With  respect  to  the  body 
there  is  babyhood,  infancy,  youth,  manhood,  maturity.  And  the  life  of  the  soul 
begins  with  a  thought,  a  feeling,  a  wish,  a  prayer.  It  begins  in  the  understanding, 
passes  into  the  conscience,  touches  the  emotions,  moves  the  desires,  constrains  the 
will,  moulds  the  life.  It  begins  in  feebleness  and  develops  into  world-controlling 
power.  Probably  the  main  reason  for  this  is  that  the  spiritual  life,  to  have  any 
Deauty  or  excellence,  must  be  the  spontaneous  desire  and  endeavour  of  the  man  him- 
aelt.  If,  by  the  constitution  of  his  nature,  a  man  must  be  holy  and  benevolent,  there 
would  be  no  merit  in  holiness,  no  worth  in  benevolence.  Therefore  scope  is  given  to 
a  man,  greater  or  lesser,  to  foster  the  young  germ  of  spiritual  life,  and  to  develop  it 
unto  the  noblest  perfection.    This  is  our  supreme  business  during  our  mortal  career. 

IL  Man's  spiritual  life  can  be  nourished  by  acts  of  public  worship.  The 
temple  in  the  olden  time,  and  Christian  sanctuaries  now,  are  designed  by  God  for  this 
end.  1.  Itistruction  is  provided.  In  the  former  ages  this  was  furnished  in  the  form 
of  rite  and  emblem;  now,  almost  entirely,  by  oral  utterance.  There  is  conveyed 
information  respecting  God,  his  nature,  his  kingdom,  his  will,  his  doings ;  information 
r«specting  man,  his  nature,  his  fall,  his  redemption,  his  possible  elevation  to  purity, 
hii  destinies  in  a  future  state.  2.  Access  to  Qod  is  allowed.  Self-inspection  is  encour- 
aged. Interior  sin,  in  inclination  and  desire,  is  detected.  The.  eye  is  turned  inward 
upon  the  soul.  The  best  sensibilities  of  the  heart  are  strengthened  and  expanded. 
A  vision  of  holiness  is  obtained.  New  aspirations  begin  to  bud.  The  sacred  influence 
of  God  is  felt  upon  the  soul.  True  prayer  is  stimulated.  3.  Bight  habits  are  con- 
firmed. Every  man  is  more  or  less  influenced  by  his  fellow-roan,  so  contact  with  holy 
men  produces  salutary  impressions  upon  every  sensitive  mind.  The  forceful  presenta- 
tion of  truth  upon  the  moral  nature  tends  to  elevate  it.     Convictions  of  religious  duty 


OH.  XLvi.  1—24.]     THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PKOPHET  EZEKIEL.  441 

•re  inwrought.  Begard  for  G-od's  revelation  and  for  Qod's  will  is  deepened.  Besolu- 
tion  to  follow  a  right  course  is  often  formed.  The  energies  of  the  soul  are  braced  up 
for  high  endeavour.  Familiarity  with  God  and  with  eternal  things  is  increased.  As 
•  plant  grows  and  buds  under  the  influence  of  the  vernal  sun,  so  a  man's  soul  unfolds 
amid  the  surroundings  of  public  worship.     4.  A  Divine  influence  is  present. 

lit.  Man's  aFiBiTUAi.  life  is  either  helped  ob  ouEaKSD  bt  eveb;  tibit  to 
THE  SANCTUABT.  Thls  Is  the  main  truth  taught  in  this  verse.  Men  were  not  allowed, 
in  the  second  temple,  to  retrace  their  steps.  They  might  not  depart  by  the  same  path 
as  that  by  which  they  approached  the  altar.  Without  doubt  this  was  ordained  in 
order  to  leave  an  impressive  lesson  on  their  minds.  The  law  yet  remains.  It  is 
written  on  maa's  spiritual  constitution.  It  is  written  iu  the  very  structure  of  the 
temple.  No  man  leaves  God's  house  precisely  the  same  man  as  he  went  in.  He  is 
either  worse  or  better  for  his  visit.  If  he  has  yielded  in  any  measure  to  the  claims 
of  God,  he  is  the  better.  If  he  has  resisted  them  afresh,  he  is  the  worse.  1.  Let  us 
contemplate  the  foolish  man.  (1)  If  he  enter  by  the  gate  of  self-righteousness  he  will 
in  all  probability  leave  by  the  gate  of  insensibility.  His  soul  will  be.  hardened  under 
the  pr>,  cess.  The  sun  that  melts  wax  hardens  clay.  (2)  If  he  enter  by  the  gate  of 
unbelief  he  will  leave  by  the  gate  of  despair.  Foregone  conclusions  fasten  like  a 
bandage  upon  the  eyes.  The  root  of  blindness  is  a  perverse  will.  The  man  without 
God  is  without  hope.  (3)  If  he  enter  by  the  gate  of  formal  custom  he  will  leave  by 
the  gate  of  bondage.  His  carnal  fetters  will  have  been  more  firmly  riveted  by  the 
visit.  2.  Let  us  contemplate  the  wise  man — the  beneficial  visit.  (1)  He  who  enters 
by  the  gate  of  inquiry  leaves  by  the  gate  of  knowledge.  (2)  He  who  enters  by  the 
gate  of  penitence  leaves  by  the  gate  of  peace.  (3)  He  who  enters  by  the  gate  of 
prayer  leaves  by  the  gate  of  triumph.  (4)  He  who  enters  by  the  gate  of  consecration 
leaves  by  the  gate  of  immortal  hope. — D. 

Vers.  13 — 15. — The  essence  of  religion.  Inasmuch  as  true  religion  is  a  daily  help  and 
solace  to  men,  it  was  needfal  to  impress  this  upon  the  minds  of  the  Jews  by  a  daily 
sacrifice.  In  order  to  obtain  the  highest  good  from  God,  we  must  dedicate  our  whole 
self  to  God.  It  is  in  giving  that  we  receiye.  Our  interests  and  God's  interests  are  not 
distinct;  they  are  identical.  Yet  this  is  a  difficult  lesson  for  men  to  learn.  They 
persist  in  judging  that  time  taken  from  secular  pursuits  is  time  misspent ;  that  money 
removed  from  material  fructification  is  property  waste.  Surely  God  does  not  need  our 
poor  gifts.  And  if  he  accepts  them,  it  is  in  order  that  they  may  be  made  channels  of 
blessing  to  the  worshipper.     The  essence  of  religion  is  hearty  self-sacrifice. 

I.  I^ELIGION  CONSISTS  IN  COMPLETE  SBLP-coNSECRATioN.  The  bumt  offering  was 
wholly  consumed.  Outward  and  formal  acts  of  worship  do  not  constitute  acceptable 
religion.  The  ceremony  may  only  be  the  show  and  not  the  substance,  tK^  shell 
without  the  kernel,  the  body  without  the  soul,  the  channel  without  a  living  st:eam 
of  love.  If  love  be  the  central  germ  of  piety,  then  love  constrains  the  dedication  to 
God  of  all  I  am — all  I  have.  Such  dedication  is  only  reasonable.  I  cannot  lay  my 
finger  on  any  organ  of  my  body,  or  on  any  virtue  in  my  soul,  or  on  any  item  of  my 
substance,  which  does  not  belong  to  God  by  right ;  hence  in  completest  consecration 
I  only  fulfil  my  obligation ;  I  give  no  more  than  is  due.  God  has  given  to  his  children 
all  he  has — has  not  withheld  his  Son ;  therefore  the  obligation  is  intensified.  No  lesser 
repayment  of  the  debt  would  be  complete.  Self-dedication  is  God-like.  As  when  a 
man  carries  his  gold  to  the  royal  mint  that  it  may  become  current  coin  for  exchange, 
he  receives  it  back  with  the  image  and  superscription  of  the  sovereign  upon  it ;  so, 
when  we  give  ourselves  wholly  to  God,  we  get  a  nobler  self;  God's  image  is  super- 
added.    We're  most  our  own  when  most  completely  his. 

II.  Bbligion  IMPOSES  ON  MEN  A  PEEPET0AL  OBLIGATION.  The  burnt  offering  was 
to  be  repeated  "  every  morning."  The  surrender  of  self  to  God  is  not  an  isolated  act 
done  once  for  all.  It  means  the  continuous  habitude  of  the  soul.  As  we  open  our 
shutters  every  morning  or  withdraw  our  blinds  in  order  to  let  in  the  light,  so  every 
morning  we  need  to  open  all  the  doorways  of  the  soul  afresh  to  give  access  to  God. 
The  tempter  is  ever  at  hand  to  induce  us  to  foru;et  God ;  our  fleshly  nature  asserts 
itself — thrusts  itself  in  between  us  and  God ;  therefore  tliere  is  daily  need  to  renew  our 
sacred  vows.     As  the  fields  are  refreshed  every  summer  morning  by  another  baptism 


442  THE   BOOK   OF  THE   PROPHET   EZEKIEL.     [oh.  xlvi.  1—24. 

of  dew,  so  may  our  souls  be  refreshed  by  new  communion  with  God.  Bach  day  God 
wisely  requires  fresh  service ;  we  cannot  withhold  it.  Each  day  will  bring  new  cares, 
new  toils,  new  opportunities  for  making  God  known ;  therefore  we  require  new  strength. 
Each  day  God  has  some  new  blessing  to  convey :  we  should  be  ever  ready  to  receive  it. 
Self-devotement  should  be  repeated  with  the  dawn  of  every  day.  Aa  new  as  God's 
gifts  to  us  should  be  our  dedication  to  him. 

III.  Eeligion  aims  at  producing  holy  ohabaoteb.  The  lamb  was  required  to 
be  "  without  blemish."  This  was  a  daily  and  emphatic  reminder  that  God  expected, 
for  his  society  and  his  service,  a  perfect  character.  Better  still,  this  was  a  tacit 
promise  that  God  would,  by  his  gracious  expedients,  make  us  perfect.  We  aspire  after 
perfection.  We  are  ashamed  of  our  imperfections.  And  we  give  ourselves  up  to  God, 
that,  by  his  creative  Spirit,  he  may  mould  us  unto  perfection.  This  is  our  confident 
hope  that  perfect  trust  may  lead  to  perfect  holiness.  By  daily  consecration  of  every 
thought  and  feeling  and  purpose,  we  shall  step  by  step  attain  the  likeness  of  our 
Saviour.     This  is  God's  purpose,  and  it  cannot  be  frustrated. 

IV.  Kelioion  asks  the  dbvotembnt  of  ode  TotTNG  LIFE.  The  daily  offering 
consisted  of  a  "lamb."  Why  this  particular  sacrifice  was  commanded  can  have  but 
one  explanation;  viz.  that  our  earliest  years  should  be  consecrated  to  God.  While 
religion  in.  its  final  end  is  sublime,  in  its  essential  principle  it  is  simple  enough.  It 
is  love — love  to  the  worthiest  Being,  and  a  child  has  c.ipaoity  to  love.  God  takes 
especial  interest  in  children.  When  Jesus  took  into  his  arms  young  infants  and 
blessed  them,  he  said  substantially,  "  He  that  hath  seen  me  hath  seen  the  Father  1 " 
Inasmuch  as  God  regaids  things  which  are  not  as  yet  as  though  they  were,  he  smiles 
with  Fatherly  compkcenoy  on  faith  in  embrjo — on  the  tiny  buds  of  character  not  yet 
unfolded.  The  first  breath  of  prayer  ascends  to  heaven  more  fragrant  than  temple 
incense. 

V.  Beligion  requibes  fob  its  acts  DUE  PBBPABATioN.  "  Thou  shalt  prepare.*' 
As  considerable  pains  were  required  to  prepare  the  burnt  offering,  so  thought  and  self- 
inspection  are  required  for  acts  of  piety.  To  gain  advantage  and  enjoyment  from 
worship,  wo  must  bring  to  the  exercise  concentration  of  mind,  tender  feeling,  intelligent 
expectation,  steadfast  trust.  The  farmer  has  to  plough  and  pulverize  his  soil  before 
he  casts  in  bis  seed,  and,  unless  our  hearts  have  their  furrows  open,  the  seed  of  truth 
will  disappear  as  soon  as  sown.  The  eye  must  be  trained  in  order  to  gain  vision; 
the  hand  must  be  trained  in  order  to  dexterous  indtistry ;  so  too  the  soul  must  be 
trained  in  order  to  enjoy  h^h  communion  with  God.  Desultory  talk  is  not  prayer ;  for 
prayer  is  the  outgoing  of  the  whole  man  Godward. — D. 

Yers.  16 — 18. — Earthly  sovereignty  not  absolute.  Great  temptations  surround  kings, 
inducing  them  to  tyranny.  Their  own  will  is  enveloped  within  military  force. 
Obsequious  flatterers  pander  to  royal  power.  For  self-interest,  soldiers  usuaUy  take 
sides  with  the  prince.  Hence  a  first  lesson  for  princes  to  learn  is  that  right  is  superior 
to  might.     The  voice  of  justice  is  the  voice  of  God. 

I.  The  pbince  is  a  subject  of  a  higher  Monaboh.  No  earthly  king  holds 
absolute  sway  over  his  subjects.  In  truth,  the  mightiest  monarch  is  only  a  vassal- 
king.  He  rules  in  the  place  of  God.  He  has  to  listen  to  the  summons,  "  Thus  saith 
the  Lord."  He  is  appointed  to  administer  the  laws  of  God.  He  is  amenable  to  a 
superior  authority,  and  must  render  an  account  of  his  rule  at  the  judgment-bar  of 
heaven.  To  no  king  has  God  transferred  the  right  of  absolute  rule.  The  term  of  a 
tyrant's  rule  is  entirely  at  the  disposal  of  God.  At  any  moment  the  King  of  kings  can 
terminate  a  prince's  rule,  and  require  a  report  of  his  doings.  At  the  very  height  of  a 
boastful  tyranny  he  has  often  suffered  an  humiliating  fall.  A  prince  is  simply  a 
■aperior  servant. 

if.  The  i-BiNCE  IS  DNDEB  OBLIGATION  TO  HIS  SONS.  As  he  is  not  absolute  master 
of  his  subjects,  neither  is  he  absolute  master  of  his  possessions.  Even  a  king  has  no 
freehold  in  his  property.  It  is  held  under  lease.  He  has  only  a  life-enjoyment  in  it. 
Death  dissolves  all  earthly  covenants.  If  he  has  sons,  they  are  his  heirs.  By  the  indis- 
putable law  of  God  they  have  a  right  in  reversion.  As  the  prince  had  full  enjoyment 
of  his  estates  during  his  mortal  life,  so  his  sons  shall  have  undiminished  enjoyment  of 
the  estates  during  their  life.     By  no  principle  of  law  or  justice  can  a  prince  claim  to 


OH.  XLVL  1— 24]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET   EZEKIEL.  443 

extract  from  the  ancestral  estates  more  than  a  life-enjo3'ment,  nor  encumber  his  estates 
for  successors.  He  must  learn  to  identify  himself  with  his  children,  to  treat  them  »» 
part  and  parcel  of  himself  Checks  on  selfishness  God  everywhere  imposes.  In  the 
household  of  God  sonship  carries  with  it  complete  heirship. 

III.  The  fbinob  is  itndeb  obliqation  to  his  subjects.  Obligations  among  men 
are  mutual.  Kingship  has  duties  as  well  as  rights.  If  subjects  are  under  obligation 
to  serve  and  support  their  prince,  so  too  princes  are  under  obligation  to  protect  the 
lives  and  property  of  their  subjects.  Rightly  understood,  the  prosperity  of  the  people 
is  identical  with  the  prosperity  of  the  king.  The  throne  cannot  be  strong  if  the  people 
are  impoverished.  The  king  and  his  people  are  united  by  a  common  bond  of  interest. 
The  invasion  of  his  subjects'  rights  is  suicide  to  his  authority — suicide  to  kingship. 
"  No  man  liveth  unto  himself."  A  selfish  and  avaricious  policy  is  moral  madness.  No 
other  principle  is  so  favourable  to  prosperity  and  joy  as  wise  benevolence. 

lY.  The  fbinoe  is  undeb  obligation  to  his  sebvants.  No  man  is  more 
dependent  upon  the  service  of  others,  no  man  so  dependent,  as  a  prince.  His  time 
and  strength  are  as  limited  as  any  other  man's,  yet  the  demands  of  duty  are  enormous. 
For  his  personal  needs  he  requires  servants ;  for  his  family  wants  he  requires  servants ; 
and  for  every  deparment  of  public  government  he  requires  servants.  In  proportion  to 
the  value  of  the  services,  remuneration  must  be  made.  If  the  prince  be  accounted  mean 
or  parsimonious,  he  will  lose  dignity,  reputation,  and  influence.  Yet  his  generous 
impulses  must  never  be  allowed  to  violate  principles  of  justice.  He  must  never  trench 
on  others'  possessions  to  discharge  a  personal  debt.  Yet,  alas  !  this  has  often  been 
done!  Kings  stand  among  the  greatest  criminals.  Secret  service  to  the  king  has 
been  paid  in  stolen  coin.  Yet  restitution  must  some  day  be  made,  for  God  is  always 
on  the  side  of  righteousness.  And  to  every  prince  he  says,  "  Be  just  before  you  are 
generous." — D. 

Vers.  2,  3, 10. — Distinction  and  eqwdity  in  the  kingdom  of  Qod.  We  have  here 
a  distinction  drawn  between  one  citizen  and  all  the  rest.  The  prince  was  to  enter 
by  the  way  of  the  porch  of  the  east  gate  and  stand  by  the  post  of  the  gate,  "  at  the 
porch  of  the  inner  court,"  while  the  people  were  to  stand  at  a  distance,  at  the  outer 
gate  (vers.  2,  3) ;  yet  on  other  occasions  the  prince  and  the  people  together  were  to 
enter  in  and  to  go  forth  together  without  regard  to  social  distinction  (ver.  10).  We 
are  thus  invited  to  consider  that,  in  the  coming  kingdom,  of  which  this  whole 
vision  was  prophetic,  there  were  to  be  both  distinction  and  equality.  And  we 
have  both. 

I.  Distinction  within  thb  kingdom.    In  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  there  we : 

1.  Higher  posts  in  the  Ghurch  to  be  occupied  by  a  few ;  there  have  been  (or  are) 
apostles,  prophets,  evangelists,  pastors,  teachers,  deacons,  etc. ;  and  there  is  a  sense  in 
which  these  have  a  priority  of  position  over  the  ordinary  members  of  the  Ghurch. 

2.  Higher  order  of  service  to  be  rendered  by  some.  While  every  citi  zen  of  the  kingdom 
of  God  has  to  serve  by  living  the  truth,  by  illustrating  its  essential  principles  in  daily 
action  in  every  sphere,  it  is  given  to  some  to  commend  the  saving  truth  by  powerful 
and  persuasive  utterances,  or  by  unanswerable  and  imperishable  literature ;  and  yet 
again  it  is  given  to  others  to  contribute  still  nobler  service  by  suffering,  or  even  dying, 
"for  the  sake  of  the  Lord  Jesus"  and  in  confirmation  of  the  truth  (see  Acts  v.  41 ; 
Phil.  i.  29  ;  Rev.  vii.  13, 14).  3.  Longer  period  of  service  granted  to  some  than  given 
to  others.  (1)  There  are  those  who  are  called  and  blessed  from  childhood  to  old  age, 
who  serve  Christ  and  his  cause  through  all  the  stages  of  human  life, with  the  gathered 
wisdom  of  long  and  varied  experience.  (2)  There  are  those  who  have  not  heard  the 
Divine  summons  until  the  greater  part  of  life  is  over,  and  these  can  only  bring  their 
wasted  and  rapidly  declining  faculties  to  the  altar  of  holy  service.  Yet  is  there 
essential — 

II.  Equality  in  the  kinodom.  Inasmuch  as:  1.  All  must  enter  at  the  same 
gate.  To  one  and  all  alike,  however  favoured  or  however  denied,  Jesus  Christ  is  the 
one  open  Door  by  which  to  come  (John  x.  7).  2.  All  must  advance  by  the  same 
spiritual  course — ^by  means  of  watchfulness  and  prayer  and  holy  usefulness,  by  learning 
of  God,  by  gaining  from  God,  by  working  for  God.  3.  All  must  give  account  of  their 
Christian  life,  and  the  use  they  have  made  of  their  life-opportunity  (Luke  six.  12 — 26; 


444  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  BZEKIBL.    [oh.  xlvi.  1—24. 

2  Cor.  y.  10).    4.  All  will  be  judged  on  principles  of  perfect  equity  (Matt.  xzt.  20 — 
23  ;  Luke  xii.  48 ;  2  Cor.  vili.  12).— C. 

Vers.  4 — 12. — The  optional  and  the  obligatory  in  the  kingdom  of  Ood.  1.  Here  arc 
minute  and  positive  prescriptions,  requiring  exact  conformity  and  allowing  no  devi- 
ation. The  burnt  offering  was  to  be  six  lambs  and  one  ram — no  more  and  no  less 
(ver.  4).  In  the  day  of  the  new  moon — at  that  particular  time — the  offering  was  to 
include  a  young  bullock  (ver.  6).  They  who  entered  in  by  the  north  gate  were  to  go 
out  by  the  south  gate,  and  vice  versd  (ver.  9).  These  (and  other)  instructions  were  in 
full  and  oarefnl  detail,  and  there  was  to  be  no  departure  from  them.  2.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  prince  might,  at  certain  hours  and  on  occasion,  bring  an  offering  that  was 
purely  "  voluntary ;"  one  that  was  "  voluntarily"  presented  unto  the  Lord  (ver.  12). 
Room  was  left  for  spontaneity,  even  in  tbe  midst  of  these  very  specific  requirements. 
In  the  kingdom  of  Jesus  Christ  we  have  these  two  orders  of  service — the  obligatory  and 
the  optional,  the  plainly  and  positively  enjoined,  and  the  voluntary ;  and  that  Christian 
life  is  not  complete  which  is  lacking  in  either. 

I.  The  obligatobt.  Of  those  things  pertaining  to  our  Christian  life  which  are 
indispensable  there  are :  1.  At  its  entrance :  (1)  humility  (or  penitence) ;  and  (2)  faith, — 
that  living  faith  in  Jesus  Christ  which  includes  the  acceptance  of  him  as  the  Saviour 
of  the  soul  and  the  Lord  of  the  life.  2.  Throughout  its  course :  (1)  worship,  or  the 
approach  of  the  human  spirit  to  the  Divine  in  prayer,  in  thanksgiving,  in  consecration; 
(2)  obedience,  or  the  conformity  of  conduct  to  those  precepts  which  are  an  essential 
part  of  Christian  morals  ;  (3)  love,  including  not  only  the  "  love  of  the  brethren,"  or  a 
special  attachment  to  those  who  are  the  friends  and  followers  of  Jesus  Christ,  but  also 
a  genuine  pity  for  those  who  are  far  from  him  and  need  to  be  brought  nigh,  and  • 
practical  determination  to  seek  and  to  win  these  erring  souls. 

II.  The  optional.  There  is  room  for  the  voluntary  as  well  as  for  the  necessary  in 
our  Christian  life.  1.  In  the  particulars  of  our  worship.  We  have  one  main  principle 
binding,  upon  all  men  everywhere  (John  iv.  23,  24),  but  it  is  left  to  our  individual 
choice — to  our  own  judgment  and  conscience — at  what  times,  in  what  forms,  within 
what  buildings,  with  what  kind  of  human  ministry,  we  shall  draw  nigh  to  God  in  true 
and  pure  devotion.  2.  In  the  minutise  of  obedience.  What  shall  be  the  rules  and  the 
regulations  we  shall  lay  down  for  the  observance  of  the  great  principles  of  purity,  of 
temperance,  of  equity,  of  veracity,  of  reverential  speech,  of  courtesy, — these  are  not  to 
be  found  in  any  Christian  directory ;  tliey  are  to  be  decided  upon  in  the  sanctuary  of 
every  consecrated  spirit  and  of  every  cultivated  conscience.  3.  In  the  measure  and 
methods  of  loving  service.  What  proportion  of  our  income,  what  amount  of  our  time, 
what  order  of  personal  effort,  we  shall  devote  to  the  cause  of  Christ  and  in  the  interest 
of  our  fellow-men, — this  rests  with  every  individual  Christian  man  to  decide.  These 
must  be,  in  some  sense  and  degree,  "  voluntary  offerings." — C. 

Ver.  18.-  -Losing  and  keeping  the  inheritance.  The  subject  of  this  commandment  is 
"  the  inalienable  nature  of  the  prince's  possession,  and  the  sacred  regard  he  must  pay 
to  the  peoples' ;  "  its  object  was  to  legislate  so  that  "  no  temptation  might  exist  to 
spoil  the  people  of  their  proper  inheritances,  as  had  been  too  often  done  in  the  days 
that  were  past."    By  the  words  of  the  text  we  are  brought  in  contact  with — 

I.  The  Hebeew  ideal  of  tamily  inheritance.  The  Mosaic  legislation  contem- 
plated keeping  the  land  in  the  occupancy  of  the  same  tribe  and  of  the  same  family 
from  generation  to  generation.  It  was  not  in  the  power  uf  the  occupier  to  sell  it  or  to 
will  it  away  from  the  family ;  and  although  it  might  be  mortgaged,  it  reverted  to  the 
original  possessor  (or  his  family)  at  the  year  of  jubilee.  The  ideal  was  that  of  all  the 
families  of  the  nation  being  interested  and  engaged  in  the  happy,  honourable,  and 
fruitful  employment  of  agriculture.  In  this  case  there  would  be  no  superabounding 
wealth  on  the  one  hand,  and  no  degrading  poverty  on  the  other  hand ;  while  every 
Israelite  would  have  the  deepest  interest  in  preserving  the  integrity  of  his  country's 
freedom,  and  would  be  contributing  to  its  wealth.  Such  an  ideal  as  this  is  hopelessly 
impossible  in  such  a  time  as  this,  but  in  a  primitive  and  pastoral  age  it  was  one 
calculated  to  secure  the  largest  possible  measure  of  individual  happiness,  domestir 
comfort,  and  national  prosperity. 


OH.  XLTii.  1— 23.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  BZEKIEL. 


445 


IL  Its  pabtial  failube  and  ultimate  dibapfeabakoe.  Such  a  provision  must 
have  been  attended  with  great  difBculties  in  the  way  of  realization.  Dissipation  on  the 
one  hand  and  avarice  on  the  other  would  almost  inevitably  lead  to  loss  and  to  appro- 
priation. And  there  is  no  doubt  they  did.  As  time  went  by  the  land  became  lost  to 
the  families  to  whom  it  was  originally  apportioned  (Josh.  zix.  51).  And  when  the 
time  came  for  the  great  and  sad  deportation  to  other  lands,  the  entire  arrangement  was 
broken  up;  finally  the  Jews  were  " scattered,  every  man  from  his  possession ;"  and, 
dispersed  among  the  Gentiles,  they  became  the  least  pastoral  or  agricultural,  and  the 
most  trading  and  financing,  of  any  people  on  the  earth.  Where,  then,  does  this 
prediction  find — 

111.  A  PLACE  IN  THE  KXNGDOM  OF  Chbist  ?  It  Will  find  it,  in  substance,  in  : 
1.  Provision  for  the  material  well-being  of  the  people  of  the  land;  As  the  result  of 
Ohristian  principle  acting  at  both  ends  of  the  body  politic,  elevating  the  character  and 
therefore  the  condition  of  those  at  the  bottom,  and  leading  those  at  the  top  to  devote 
their  resources  and  employ  their  (legislative  and  other)  opportunities  in  the  interest  of 
the  people,  there  will  gradually  ensue  a  wide  distribution  of  comfort  and  prosperity. 
Abject  poverty  and  superfluous  possession  will  give  place  to  universal  competence, 
education,  morality,  piety — ^in  fact,  national  well-being.  Many  forces  will  have  to 
contribute  to  this  result,  and  it  may  be  a  long  time  coming,  but  it  must  be  the  issue 
of  a  true  and  practical  Christianity.  There  are  other  "  inheritances "  beside  that  of 
land  and  wealth  which  need  to  be  preserved,  and  which  a  Christian  family  or  a 
Christian  Church  should  devoutly  determine  to  maintain.  There  must  be  ;  2.  The 
perpetuation  of  the  fair  heritage  of  an  honourable  name,  a  reputation  for  family  good- 
ness or  wisdom  that  has  come  down  many  generations.  3.  The  preservation  of  the 
precious  deposit  of  sacred  truth. — C. 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEB  XLVII. 


As  the  first  part  of  Ezekiel's  vision 
(oh.  zl. — xllii.)  dealt  with  tbe  temple,  or 
"house,"  and  the  second  (ch.  zliv. — xlvii.) 
with  the  ritual,  or  "  worship,"  an  the  third, 
which  begins  with  the  present  chapter 
(oh.  zlvii.,  zlviii,),  treats  of  the  land,  or 
"inheritance,"  setting  forth  first  its  rela- 
tion to  the  temple  (vers.  1 — 12)  and  to  out- 
lying courtrieg  (vers.  IS — ^21),  and  secondly 
its  division  among  the  tribes,  inclusive  of 
the  priests,  Levites,  sanctuary,  prince,  and 
city  (oh.  zlviii.  1 — ^23),  with  a  statement  of 
the  dimensions  and  gates  of  the  last  (vera. 
24 — 85).  The  opening  seotion  of  the  pre- 
sent chapter  (vers.  1 — 12)  is  by  Eliefoth 
eHid  others  connected  with  the  second  part 
as  a  oonclnsion,  rather  than  with  the  third 
port  as  an  introduction ;  but,  taken  either 
way,  the  passage  has  the  same  significance 
or  nearly  so.  If  read  in  continuation  of  the 
foregoing,  it  depicts  the  blessed  oonse- 
qnenoes,  in  the  shape  of  life  and  healing, 
which  should  flow  to  the  land  of  Israel  and 
its  inhabitants  from  the  ereotion  in  their 
midst  of  the  sanctuary  of  Jehovah,  and  the 


observance  by  them  of  the  holy  ordinances 
of  Jeliovah's  religion.  Viewed  as  a  preface 
to  what  follows,  it  exhibits  the  transforma- 
tion which  the  institution  of  such  a  cnltui 
would  effect  upon  the  land  before  proceeding 
to  speak  of  its  partition  among  the  tribes. 
The  prophet's  imagery  in  this  paragraph 
may  have  taken  as  its  point  of  departure 
the  well-known  fact  that  the  waters  of 
Shiloah  (Isa.  viii.  6;  Ps.  zlvl.  4)  appeared 
to  flow  from  under  the  temple  hill,  the  Pool 
of  Siloam  having  been  fed  from  a  spring 
welling  up  with  intermittent  aotion  from 
beneath  Ophel  (see  Conder,  '  Handbook  to 
the  Bible,'  p.  334;  King,  'Becent  Dis- 
coveries on  Temple  Hill,'  p.  173).  To 
Isaiah  "the  waters  of  Shiloah  that  go 
softly,"  had  already  been  an  emblem  of  the 
blessings  to  be  enjoyed  under  Jehovah's 
rule  (Isa.  viii.  6) ;  to  Joel  (iii.  18)  "  a  foun- 
tain," coming  forth  from  the  honse  of  the 
Lord  and  watering  the  valley  of  Shittim, 
or  the  Acacia  valley,  on  the  borders  of 
Moab,  on  the  other  side  of  Jordan,  where 
the  Israelites  halted  and  sinned  (Numb. 
zzv.  1;  zxziii.  49),  had  symbolized  the 
benefits   that    should    be   ezperienced    by 


446 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  BZEKIEL.    [oh.  xlvii.  1—23. 


Igrael  in  the  MesBianio  era  when  Jehovsh 
■hovild  permanently  dwell  in  his  holy  meant 
of  Zion ;  to  Ezebiel,  accordingly,  the  same 
figure  naturally  occurs  as  a  means  of  ex- 
hihiting  the  life  and  healing,  peace  and 
prosperity,  that  should  result  to  Israel  from 
the  erection  upon  her  soil  of  Jehovah's 
sanctuary  and  the  institution  among  her 
people  of  Jehovah's  worship.  Zechariah 
(xiii.  1 ;  xiv.  8)  and  John  (Rev.  xxii.  1,  2) 
undoubtedly  make  use  of  the  same  image, 
which,  it  is  even  probable,  they  derived 
from  Ezekiel  (comp.  Ecclns.  zxiv.  30,  31,  in 
which  'Wisdom  is  introduced  as  saying,  "I 
also  came  out  as  a  brook  from  a  river,  and 
as  a  conduit  into  a  garden.  I  said,  I  will  water 
my  best  garden,  and  will  water  abundantly 
my  garden  bed ;  and,  lo,  my  bi  ook  became 
a  river,  and  my  river  became  a  sea  "). 

"Ver.  1. — Having  completed  his  .survey 
of  the  sacrificial  kitchens  in  the  outer 
court  (oh.  xlvi.  19 — 24),  the  prophet  was 
once  more  conducted  by  his  guide  to  the 
door  of  the  house,  or  of  the  temple  in  the 
strict  sense,  i.e.  of  the  sanctuary.  There 
he  perceived  that  waters  issuua  (literally, 
and  behold  waters  issuing)  from  under  the 
threshold  of  the  house,  i.e.  of  the  temple 
pnrch  (see  oh.  xl.  48,  49 ;  and  comp.  ch.  ix. 
3),  eastward,  the  rlirection  having  been 
determined  by  the  fact  that  the  forefront  of 
the  house  stood  or  was  toward  the  east. 
He  also  noticed  that  the  waters  came  down 
(or,  descended) — the  temple  having  been 
situated  on  higher  ground  than  the  inner 
court — ^from  under  tlie  threshold,  from  the 
right  side  of  the  house — literally,  from  the 
shoulder  (comp.  ch.  xl.  18,  40,  41, 44 ;  xU, 
2,  26;  xlvi.  29)  of  the  house,  the  right. 
The  two  clauses  are  not  to  be  oonjoined  as 
by  Hengstenherg,  Ewald,~and  Smehd,  as  if 
they  meant,  from  underneath  the  right  side 
of  the  house ;  but  kept  distinct,  to  indicate 
the  diiferent  features  which  entered  into  the 
prophet's  picture.  The  first  was  that  the 
waters  issued  forth  from  under  the  threshold 
of  tlie  house;  the  second,  that  they  pro- 
ceeded from  the  right  side  or  shoulder  of 
the  house,  i.e.  from  the  corner  where  the 
south  wall  of  the  porch  and  the  eaet  wall  of 
the  temple  joined  (see  ch.  xli.  1);  the  third, 
that  the  stream  flowed  on  the  south  side  of 
the  altar,  which  stood  exactly  in  front  of  the 
temple  porch  (see  oli.  xl.  47),  and  would 
have  obstructed  the  course  of  the  waters 
had  they  issued  forth  from  the  porch  door- 
way instead  of  from  the  comer  above 
described. 

Ver.  2. — ^As  the  prophet  could  not  follow 
the  stream's  course  by  passing  through  the 


east  inner  gate,  which  was  shut  on  the  six 
working  days  (ch.  xlvi.  1),  or  through  the 
east  outer  gate,  which  was  always  shut 
(ch.  xliv.  1),  his  oonductor  led  him  outside 
of  the  inner  and  outer  courts  by  the  north 
gates  (literally,  to  the  north  (outer)  gaie),  and 
brought  him  round  by  the  way  without  unto 
the  outer  gate  by  the  way  that  looketh 
eastward.  This  can  only  import  tliat,  on 
reaching  the  north  outer  gate,  the  prophet 
and  his  guide  turned  eastward  and  moved 
round  to  the  east  outer  gate.  The  Revised 
Version  reads,  by  the  way  of  the  gate  that 
looketh  toward  the  east;  but  as  the  east 
outer  gate  was  the  terminus  ad  quem  of 
the  prophet's  walk,  it  is  better  to  translate,. 
to  the  gate  looking  eastward.  When  the 
prophet  had  arrived  thither,  he  once  more 
beheld  that  there  ran  out — ^literally,  trickled 
forth  (D*3sp  occurring  here  only  in  Scripture, 
and  being  derived  from  nap, "  to  drop  down," 
or  '*  weep  ") — ^waters.  Obviously  these  were 
the  same  as  Ezekiel  had  already  observed 
(whence  probably  the  omission  of  the  article ; 
see  Ewald's  '  Syntax  of  the  Hebrew  Gram- 
mar,' p.  S4,  Eng.  transl.).  On  (literally, 
from)  the  right  side;  or,  shoulder.  This, 
again,  signified  the  comer  where  the  east 
wall  of  the  temple  and  the  south  wall  of  ttie 
gate  joined. 

Ver.  3. — ^Having  emerged  from  the  corner 
of  the  east  outer  gate  in  drops,  the  stream, 
which  had  not  swollen  in  its  passage  across 
the  outer  court  and  under  the  temple  wall, 
speedily  exhibited  a  miraculous  increase  in 
depth,  and  therefore  in  volume.  Having 
advanced  eastward  along  the  course  of  the 
stream  an  accurately  measured  distance  of 
a  thousand  cubits  (about  one-third  of  a 
mile),  the  prophet's  guide  brought,  or  caused, 
him  to  pass,  through  the  waters,  when  he 
found  that  they  were  to  the  ankles ;  or,  were 
waters  of  the  ankles,  as  the  Ohaldee,  Syriao, 
Vulgate,  Eeil,  Eliefoth,  Ewald,  and  Smend 
translate,  rather  than  "water  of  the  foot- 
soles,"  as  Oesenius  and  Havemiok  render,, 
meaning,  "  water  that  hitherto  had  only  been 
deep  enough  to  wet  the  soles."  The  SSa>p 
o^eVcaw,  or  "  water  of  vanishing,"  of  the 
LXX.,  is  based  on  the  idea  of  "  failing," 
"  ceasing,"  "  coming  to  an  end,"  which 
appears  to  be  the  root-conceiition  of  DS^ 
(see  Gen.  xlviL  15,  16;  Ps.  Ixxvii.  9;  Isa. 
xvi.  4). 

Ver.  4. — ^At  a  second  and  a  third  distance 
of  a  thousand  cubits  the  same  process  was  re- 
peated, when  the  waters  were  found  to  be  first 
waters  to  the  knees,  and  secondly  waters  to 
(or,  of)  the  loins.  The  unusual  expression, 
D<^^a  d;o,  instead  *q,  as  in  the  similar 
expressions  before  and  after,  may  have  been 
chosen,  Eeil  suggests,  in  order  to  avoid  re- 
semblance to   the  phrase,    oh^l  'Q'S)    ^ 


OH.  xLvn.  1— 23.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIBL. 


447 


Isa.  zxzvi.  12  (Keri) — ^not  a  likely  explana- 
tion. HaYemiok  describes  it  simply  ;is  an 
Instance  of  bold  empl.asis.  Schroder  breaks 
it  up  into  two  clauses,  thus :  "  waters,  to  the 
knees  they  reach."    Smend  cl  i  anges  va  into 

Ver.  5. — After  a  fourth  distance  of  a 
thousand  cubits,  the  waters  had  risen,  or, 
lifted  themselves  up  (comp.  Job  viii.  11,  in 
which  the  verb  is  used  of  a  plant  growing 
up),  and  become  waters  to  swim  in — ^lite- 
rally, waters  of  swimming  (in^  occurs  only 
here ;  the  noun  nj^  only  in  ch.  xxjdi.  6) — 
a  river  that  could  not  be  passed  over,  on 
account  of  its  depth.  The  word  hn^  was 
applied  either  to  a  river  that  constantly 
flowed  from  a  fountnia,  as  the  Arnon,  or  to 
a  winter  torrent  that  springs  up  from  rain 
or  snow  upon  the  mountains,  and  disappears 
in  summer  like  theKedron.wbioh  had  seldom 
any  water  in  it  (see  Robinson's  '  Bibl,  Bes.,' 
i.  402).  That  Bzekiel's  river  broadened 
and  deepened  so  smidenly,  and  apparently 
without  receiving  into  it  any  tributaries, 
clearly  pointed  to  miraculous  action. 

Ver.  6. — Then  he  .  .  .  caused  me  to  re- 
turn to  the  brink  of  the  river.  The 
difficulty  lying  in  the  word  "  return  "  has 
given  rise  to  a  variety  of  conjectures. 
Hengstenberg  supposes  the  prophet  had 
made  trial  of  the  river's  deptli  by  wading 
in  (perhaps  up  to  the  neck),  and  that  the 
angel  caused  him  to  return  from  the  stream 
to  the  bank.  According  to  Hitzig,  the  mea- 
suring had  taken  pla^  at  some  distance 
from  the  stream,  and  the  prophet,  having 
come  up  to  Ids  guide  from  the  bank  after 
making  trial  of  the  water's  depth,  was  once 
more  conducted  back  to  the  river's  brink. 
Havernick  conceives  the  sense  to  be  that 
the  prophet,  having  accompanied  the  angel 
to  the  point  where  the  stream  debouched 
into  the  Dead  Sea, was  led  back  to  the  river- 
bank.  All  difficulty,  however,  vanishes  if, 
eitlier  with  Schroder  we  refer  'Mej.'i  to  a 
mental  returning,  as  if  the  import  were 
that  the  angel,  having  ascertained  that  the 
prophet  had  "  seen  "  the  river's  course,  now 
told  him  to  direct  liis  attention  to  the  bank, 
or,  with  Keil  and  Kliefoth,  translate  hy  by 
"along"  or  "on"  rather  than  "to."  AJs 
the  prophet  had  been  led  along  or  on  the 
river's  bank  to  see  the  increasing  breadth 
and  depth  cf  the  water,  so  was  he  now 
"  caused  to  return  "  along  or  on  tlie  same 
bank  to  note  the  abundance  of  the  foliage 
with  which  it  was  adorned. 

Ver.  7. — Now  when  I  had  returned. 
'Uie'a  is  by  the  best  interpreters,  after 
Geseiiiua  ('  Hebrew  Grrammar,'  §  132.  2),  re- 
garded as  an  incorrect  form  for  ''^v^s 
(literally,  in  my  returning),  though  Schroder 


adheres  to  the  transitive  sense  of  the  verb, 
and  translates, "  when  I  had  turned  myself,'* 
and  Hitzig  takes  the  suffix  '3  as  a  genitive 
of  possession,  and  renders,  "  when  he  came 
back  witli  me."  In  any  case,  on  the  return 
journey  the  prophet  observed  that  at  (or,  on) 
the  bank  (or,  Up)  of  the  river  were  very 
many  trees  on  the  one  side  and  on  the  other. 
Hitzig  supposes  the  trees  had  not  been  there 
when  the  prophet  made  the  down  journey, 
but  sprang  up  when  he  had  turned  to  his 
guide_(ver.  6),  and  stood  with  his  back  to 
the  river.  Kliefoth's  conclusion  is  hotter, 
that  the  trees  had  been  there  all  the  while, 
but  that  the  prophet's  attention  had  not 
been  directed  to  them.  The  luxuriant 
foliage  of  this  vision  reappears  in  that  of  the 
Apocalyptic  river  (Eev.  xxii.  2). 

Ver.  8. — Toward  the  east  country  (h^'^^h-'tn 
njlDi^n) ;  literally,  the  east  eirale,  in' "this 
case  probably  "the  region  about  Jordan" 
(Josh.  xxii.  10,  11),  above  the  Dead 
Sea,  where  the  valley  or  ghdr  widens  out 
into  a  broad  basin,  equivalent  to  n.TH  T33 
(Gen.  xiii.  10).  The  LXX.  render,  tU 
rijv  ra\t\aiav,  designing  by  this,  however 
(presumably),  only  to  Grsscize  the  Hebrew 
word  n^'S|,  as  they  do  with  the  term 
njnyn,  desert,  or,  plain,  which  they 
translate  by  tV  'Apaffiav.  The  Arabah 
signified  the  low,  sterile  valley  into  which 
the  Jordan  runs  near  Jericho,  in  which 
are  the  De.id  Sea  (hence  called  "the 
sea  of  the  Arabah,"  Dent,  iii  17;  iv.  4U), 
and  the  brook  Kedron,  or  "river  of  the 
Arabah  "  (Amos  vi.  14),  and  which  extends 
as  far  south  as  the  head  of  the  Elanitio 
gulf.  The  whole  region  is  described  by 
Eobinson  ('  Bibl.  Kes.,'  ii.  596)  as  one  of  ex- 
tremedesolation — ^acharacter  which  belonged 
to  it  in  ancient  times  (Josephus, '  Wars,'  iii. 
10.  7;  iv.  8.  2).  The  part  of  this  Arabah 
into  which  the  waters  flowed  was  situated 
north  of  the  sea,  clearly  not  the  Mediter- 
ranean, but  the  Dead  Sea,  "  the  sea  of  the 
Arabah,"  as  above  stated,  and  the  "eastern 
sea  "  as  afterwards  named  (ver.  18),  into 
which  they  ultimately  flowei  The  clause, 
which  being  brought  forth  Into  the  sea, 
may  either  be  connected  witli  the  pre- 
ceding words  or  formed  into  an  independent 
sentence  Among  those  who  adopt  the 
former  construction  a  variety  of  renderings 
prevails.  The  LXX.  i  eads, "  (And  the  water) 
comes  to  the  sea  (eir!  rh  SSctp  t^i  SieK;8oX^s), 
to  the  sea  of  the  pouring  out,"  i.e.  the  Dead 
Sea,  into  wliioh  the  river  debouches.  With 
this  Havernick  agrees,  rendering, "  to  th» 
sea  of  that  outflow."  Ewald  reads, "  into  the 
sea  of  muddy  waters,"  meaning  the  Dead 
Sea.  Kimchi,  "into  the  sea  where  the 
waters  are  brought  forth,"  i.e.  the  oouan 
(the  Mediterranean),  whose  waters  go  forth 


448 


THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xlvii.  1— 23. 


to  encompass  the  world.  Hengstenberg, 
Kliefoth,  Keil,  and  Onney,  who  adopt  the 
latter  construction,  borrow  1N3  from  the 
antecedent  clause,  and  translate,  "To  the 
sea  (come  or  go)  the  waters  that  have  been 
brought  forth,"  with  which  accords  the 
Revised  Version.  The  last  words  record  the 
efi'ect  which  should  be  produced  by  their 
enlering  into  the  sea.  The  waters  shall 
be  healed,  i.e.  rendered  salubrious,  from 
being  hurtful  (comp.  Exod.  xv.  23,  25; 
2  Kings  ii.  22).  The  translation  of  the 
LXX.,  !iytii<ret  ri  SSara,  is  inaccurate.  The 
unwholesome  character  of  the  Dead  Sea  is 
described  by  Tacitus :  "  Laeus  immerao 
amJnfu,  ipecie  marie  eapore  corruptior,  gravi- 
tate odoris  accolis  peetifer,  neqtie  vento  impel- 
littir  neque  pisces  aut  luetas  aquia  volueret 
pititur  "  ('  Hist., '  V.  6).  Von  Baumer  (p.  61) 
writes,  "  The  sea  is  called  Dead,  because 
there  is  in  it  no  green  plant,  no  water-fowl 
in  it,  no  fish,  no  shell.  If  the  Jordan  carry 
fish  into  it,  they  die."  "  According  to  the 
testimony  of  all  antiquity  and  of  most, 
modern  travellers,"  says  Eobinson  ('Bibl. 
Ees.,'  ii  226),"  there  exists  within  the  waters 
of  the  Dead  Sea  no  living  thing,  no  trace, 
indeed,  of  animal  or  vegetable  life.  Our 
own  experience  goes  to  confirm  the  truth  of 
th  s  testimony.  We  perceived  no  sign  of 
life  within  the  waters." 

Ver.  9. — The  nature  of  the  healing  is 
next  described  as  an  impartation  of  such 
salubrity  to  the  waters  that  everything  that 
liveth,  which  moveth — better,  every  living 
creature  which  swarmeth  (comp.  Gen.  i.  20, 
21;  vii.  21) — ^whithersoever  the  rivers 
(literally,  the  two  rivers)  shall  come,  shall 
live.  The  meaning  cannot  be  that  every- 
thing which  liveth  and  si^armeth  in  the 
sea  whitlier  tlie  rivers  come  shall  live, 
because  the  Dead  Sea  contains  no  fish  (see 
above),  but  whithersoever  the  rivers  come, 
there  living  and  swarming  creatures  of  every 
kind  shall  spring  into  existence,  shall  come 
to  life  and  flourish.  The  dual  form,  D'^f]], 
has  been  accounted  for  by  Maurer,  as  having 
been  selected  on  account  of  its  resemblance  to 
d;o  ;  by  Haverniok  and  Ourrey,  as  pointing 
to  the  junction  of  another  river,  the  Kedron 
(H'avernick),  the  Jordan  (Currey),  with  the 
ibmple-stream  before  the  latter,  should  'all 
into  the  sea;  by  Kliefoth,  as  alluding  tea 
division  of  the  river  waters  after  entering  tlie 
sea ;  by  Neumann  and  Schroder,  as  referring 
to  tlie  waters  of  tlie  sea  and  the  waters  of  the 
river,  which  should  henceforth  be  united; 
and  by  Hengstenberg,  with  whom  Keil  and 
Plumptre  agree,  as  a  dual  of  intensification 
(as  in  Jer.  1.  21),  signifying  "double  river," 
with  allusion  to  its  greatness,  or  the  strength 
of  its  current.  None  of  thiee  interpretations 
ia  free  from  objection ;  though  probably,  in 


default  of  better,  the  last  is  best.  Ewald 
changes  the  dual  into  D^n],  a  singalar 
with  a  suffix,  while  Hitzig  makes  of  it  n 
plural ;  but  neither  of  these  devices  is  satieh 
factory.  As  a  further  evidence  that  the 
waters  of  the  sea  should  be  healed  by  the 
inflowing  into  them  of  the  waters  of  the 
river,  it  is  stated  that  the  sea  should  there* 
after  contain  a  very  great  multitude  of  fish 
(literally,  and  the  fish  will  be  very  many'),  of 
wliich  previously  it  contained  none.  Tlienezt 
clauses  supply  the  reason  of  this  abundance 
of  fish,  because  these  waters  (of  the  river) 
shall — or,  ore  (Revised  Version)  come  thither 
— (into  the  waters  of  the  pea),  for  (literally, 
and)  they,  the  latter,  shall  be  (Or,  are)  healed, 
and  everything  shall  live  (or,  connecting 
this  with  the  foregoing  clause,  and  every- 
thing fhaU  be  healed,  and  live)  whithersoever 
the  river  cometh — the  river,  namely,  that 
proceedeth  from  the  temple. 

Ver.  10. — As  another  consequence  of  the 
inflowing  of  this  river  into  the  Dead  Sea, 
it  is  stilted  that  the  fishers  (rather,  fishers, 
without  the  article)  should  stand  upon  its 
banks,  from  Enge^,  even  onto  £neglaim ; 
there  shall  be  a  place  to  spread  forth  nets. 
The  Revised  Version  mor  ■  correctly  renders, 
fishers  shall  stand  by  it ;  from  Engedi  even 
unto  Bneglaim,  shall  be  a  place  for  the 
spreading  of  nets  ;  or,  more  literally,  a  plaoe 
of  spreading  oat  for  nets  (comp.  oh.  zxvi, 
5).     Engedi,  n/;  ys,  meaning   "Fountain 

of  the  kid,"  originally  styled  Hazezon-Tamar 
(2  Chron.  xx.  2),  now  called  'Ain  Jidy 
(Robinson, 'Bibl.  Res.,'  ii.  214), was  situated 
in  the  middle  of  the  west  coast  of  the  Dead 
Sea,  and  not  at  its  southern  extremity, 
as  Jerome  supposed.  Eneglaim,  d;^JJ(.  yy, 
signifying  "  Fountain  of  two  calves,"  was 
located  by  Jerome,  who  calls  it  En  Gallim, 
at  the  northern  extremity  of  the  Dead  Sea, 
and  is  usually  identified  with  the  modern 
'Ain  Feshkhah,  or  "  Fountain  of  mist,"  at  the 
northern  end  of  the  west  coast,  where  the 
ruins  of  houses  and  a  .  mall  tower  have  been 
discovered  (Robi.ison,  'Bibl.  Res.,'  ii.  220). 
Ewald  cited  Isa.  xv.  8  to  show  that  En- 
eglaim was  on  the  eastern  shore  of  the  Dead 
Sea,  which,  Smend  notes,  was  given  up  by 
the  prophet  to  the  sous  of  the  Bast 

Ver.  11.— The  miry  plaoes  thereof  Oipttsa, 
an  incorrect  reading  for  Vrtsa,  the  plural 
with  suffix  of  njji,  "a  marsh,  or  swamp,"  aa 
in  Job  viiL  11 ;  xL  21)  and  the  marshes 
thereof,  v^jj,"  its  pools  and  sloughs  "  (oomp. 
Isa.  XIX.  14,  where  the  term  signifies  a 
reservoir  for  water,  or  cistern),  were  the  low 
tracts  of  land  upon  the  borders  of  the  Dead 
Sea,  which  in  the  rainy  season,  when  its 
waters  overflowed,  became  covered  with 
pools  (see  Eobinson,  'Bibl.  Res.,'  ii  225> 


OH.  xLTn.  1— 23.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  BZBKIBL. 


449 


These,  according  to  the  prophet,  ahnuld  not 
be  healed  (better  than,  "and  that  whioli 
shall  not  be  healed,"  as  in  the  margin  of  the 
Autlioriied  Text),  obviously  because  the 
waters  of  the  temple-river  should  not  reach 
them,  but  should  be  given  to  salt.  When 
the  waters  of  the  above-mentioDed  pools 
have  been  dried  np  or  evaporated,  they 
leave  beliind  them  a  deposit  of  salt  (see 
Eotinson,  '  Bibl.  Bes.,'  ii.  226),  and  Canon 
Driver  ('  Literature  of  the  Old  Testament,' 
p.  276),  following  Smend,  conceives  that  the 
above-named  miry  places  and  marshes  in 
the  vicinity  of  the  Dead  Sea  were  to  be 
allowed  to  remain  as  they  were  on  account 
of  the  excellent  salt  which  they  furnished. 
(On  the  supposed  (1)  excellence  of  the  salt 
derived  from  the  Dead  Sea,  Thomson's 
'  Land  and  the  Book,'  p.  616,  may  be  oou- 
Bulted.)  If  this,  however,  were  the  correct 
import  of  the  prophet's  words,  then  the 
clause  would  describe  an  additional  blessing 
to  be  enjoyed  by  the  hind,  viz.  that  the 
temple-river  would  not  be  permitted  to  spoil 
its  "salt-pans;"  but  the  manifest  intention 
of  the  prophet  was  to  indicate  a  limitation 
to  the  fife-giving  influence  of  the  river,  and 
to  signify  that  places  and  persons  unvisited 
by  its  healing  stream  would  be  abandoned 
to  incurable  destruction.  "  To  give  to  salt " 
is  in  Scripture  never  expressive  of  blessing, 
but  always  of  judgment  (see  Deut.  xxix. 
23;  Jnilg.  ix.47;  Ps.  ovii.34;  Jer.  xvii. 
6;  Zeph.  ii.  9). 

Ver.  12. — The  effect  of  the  river  upon  the 
vegetation  growing  on  its  banks  is  the  last 
feature  added  to  the  prophet's  picture. 
Already  referred  to  in  ver.  7,  it  is  here 
developed  at  greater  length.  The  "very 
many  trees"  of  that  verse  become  in 
this  all  trees,  or  every  tree  for  msat,  i.e. 
every  sort  of  tree  with  edible  fruit  (comp. 
Lev.  xix.  23),  whose  leaf  should  not  fade  or 
wither,  and  whose  fruit  should  not  be  con- 
sumed or  finished,  i.e.  should  not  fail,  but 
continue  to  bring  forth  new  fruit,  i.e.  early 
or  firstfruits  (Bevised  Version  margin), 
aeeording  to  his  (or,  itt)  months ;  or,  every 
month;  the  ^  in  D'E'nn';  being  taken  dis- 
tributively,  as  in  Isa.  xlvii  13  (compare 
d'v^,  "every  day,"  in  oh.  xlvi.  13).  This 
remarkable  productivity,  the  prophet  saw, 
was  due,  not  so  much  to  the  fact  that 
the  tree  roots  sucked  up  moistiure  from  the 
stream,  as  to  the  circumstance  that  the 
waters  which  they  drank  up  issued  out  of 
the  sanctuary.  To  the  same  circumstance 
were  owing  the  nutritive  and  medicinal 
properties  of  their  fruit  and  leaves  respec- 
tively. The  picture  in  this  verse  is  unmis- 
takaoly  based  on  Gen.  ii  9,  and  is  a« 
clearly  reproduced  by  the  Apocalyptic  seer 
In  Bev.  xxii.  2.  On  this  whole  vision  the 
KZKKIBL — n. 


remarks  of  Thomson,  in  *  The  Land  and  the 
Book '  (pp.  660—663),  are  worthy  of  being 
consulted. 

Vers.  13— 23.— The  boundaries  of  the 
land,  and  the  manner  of  its  division. 

Ver.  13.— Thus  saith  the  lord.  The  usual 
formula  introducing  a  new  Divine  enact- 
ment (comp.  eh.  xluL  18 ;  iliv.  9 ;  xlv.  9, 
18;  xlvi  1,  16).  This,  n;;  is  obviously  a 
copyist's  error  for  ni,  which  the  LXX.,  the 
Vulgate,  and  the  Targum  have  substituted 
for  it ;  the  change  seems  demanded  by  the 
complete  nntranslatability  of  m,  and  by 
the  fact  that  Sa?  nil  recurs  in  ver.  15. 
The  border,  whereby  ye  shall  inherit  the 
land;  or,  divide  (he  land  for  inheritanoe 
(Bevised  Version).  The  term  ^13|,  applied 
in  ch.  xliii  13,  17  to  the  border  of  the  altar, 
here  signifies  the  boundary  or  limit  of  the 
land.  (For  the  verb,  comp.  Numb,  xxxii 
18 ;  xxxiv.  13 ;  Isa.  xiv.  2.)  According  to 
the  twelve  tribes.  This  presupposed  that 
at  least  representatives  of  the  twelve  tribes 
would  retiuTD  from  exile ;  but  it  is  doubtful 
if  this  can  be  proved  from  Scripture  to  have 
taken  place,  which  once  more  shows  that 
a  Uteral  interpretation  of  this  temple-vision 
cannot  be  consistently  carried  through. 
Smend  observes  that  the  word  commonly  em- 
ployed in  the  priest- code  to  denote  "  tribes  " 
is  nitSD  (Numb,  xxvi  55;  xxx.  1  ;  xxxi  4; 
xxxiii  54 ;  Josh.  xiv.  1  ;<  xxi  1 ;  xxii.  14), 
which  is  never  used  by  EzeUel,  who 
habitually  selects,  as  here,  the  term  D'cna' 
(ch.  xxxvii.  19 ;  xlv.  8 ;  xlviii  1),  which 
also  was  not  unknown  to  the  priest-code 
(Exod.  xxxix.  14 ;  Numb,  xviii  2 ;  Josh, 
xiii  29 ;  xxi.  16 ;  xxu.  9, 10,  11,  18).  That 
is  to  say,  if  the  priest-code  existed  before 
Ezekiel,  he  had  the  choice  of  botli  terms, 
and  selected  thebhet ;  whereas  if  Ezekiel 
existed  before  the  priest-code,  and  prepared 
the  way  for  it,  the  author  of  the  latter 
rejected  Ezekiel's  word  ihebhet,  and  adopted 
another  perfectly  unknown  to  the  prophet 
This  fact  appears  to  point  to  a  dependence 
of  Ezekiel  on  the  priest-code  rather  than  of 
the  priest-code  on  EzekieL  Joseph  shall 
have  two  portions ;  rather,  Joseph  portionn, 
as  D<^3n  is  not  dual.  Yet  that  two  were 
intended  is  undoubted  (see  Gen.  xlviii.  22  ; 
Josh,  xvii  14, 17). 

Ver.  14. — ^Ye  shall  inherit  it,  one  as  well 
as  another;  literally,  a  man  a»  hit  brother — 
the  customary  Hebrew  phrase  for  "  equally  " 
(see,  however,  2  Sam.  xi.  25).  The  equal 
participants  were  to  be  tribes,  not  the 
familie^j,  as*  in  the  Mosaic  distribution 
(Numb,  xxxiii.  54).  Had  the  earlier  prin- 
ciple of  allotment  been  indicated  as  that  to 
be  followed  in  the  future,  it  would  Jot  have 


450 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xlvii.  1—23. 


been  possible  to  give  the  tribes  equal  por- 
tions, as  some  tribes  would  certainly  have  a 
larger  number  of  families  than  others. 
Nevertheless,  the  division  was  to  be  equal 
among  the  tribes,  which  shows  it  was 
rather  of  an  ideal  than  of  an  actual  distri- 
bution the  prophet  was  speaking.  Then 
what  they  should  divide  amongst  themselves 
was  to  be  tlie  land  concerning  which 
Jeliovah  had  lifted  aphis  hand — a  peculiarly 
Ezekelian  phrase  (see  oh.  xx.  5,  6,  15,  23, 
28,  42),  signifying  "  to  swear"  (comp.  Gen. 
riv.  22;  Deut.  zxxiii.  40) — to  give  it  unto 
their  fathers  (see  Gen.  xii.  7 ;  xviii.  8 ; 
xxvi.  3;  xxviii.  13).  Tliat  the  land  was 
uot  divided  after  this  fashion  among  the 
tribes  that  returned  from  exile  is  one  more 
attestation  that  the  prbphet'.s  directions  were 
not  intended  to  be  literally  carried  out. 

Ver.  15. — The  north  boundary.  And  thii 
shall  be  the  bordei  of  the  land  toward  the 
north  side.  The  Revised  Version  follows 
Kliefoth  and  Keil  in  detaching  the  last 
clause  from  the  preceding  words,  and  read- 
ing. Thi$  shall  be  the  border  of  the  land :  on 
the  north  tide.  From  the  great  sea,  tlie 
Mediterranean,  by  the  way  of  Eethlon,  as 
men  go  to  (or,  unto  the  entering  in  of)  Zedad. 
The  former  of  these  places  {Ohethlon\  which 
is  again  mentioned  in  ch.  xlviii.  1,  has  not 
yet  been  identified,  though  Ourrey  suggests 
for  the  "way,"  "the  defile  between  the 
ranges  of  Lehanus  and  Antilibanus,  from 
tlie  sea  to  Hamath."  Tiie  latter  (Zedad) 
Wetstein  and  Bobinson  find  in  the  city  of 
8adad  (_Sudud),  east  of  the  road  leading 
from  Damascus  to  Hums  (Emesa),  and 
therefore  west  of  Hamath ;  but  as  Hamath 
in  all  probability  lay  to  the  east  of  Zedad, 
this  opinion  must  be  rejected. 

Ver.  16. — The  four  names  here  mentioned 
belong  to  towns  or  places  lying  on  the  road 
to  Zedad,  and  stretching  from  west  to  east. 
Hamath,  called  also  Hamath  the  Great 
(Amos  vi.  2),  situated  on  the  Orontes,  north 
of  Hermon  and  Antilibanus  (Josh.  xiii.  5 ; 
Judg.  iii.  3),  was  the  capital  of  a  kingdom 
to  which  also  belonged  Biblah  (2  Kings 
xxiii.  33).  Originally  colonized  by  the 
Canaanites  (Gen.  x.  18),  it  became  in  David's 
time  a  flourishing  kingdom  under  Toi,  who 
formed  an  alliance  with  the  Hebrew  sove- 
reign against  Hadadezer  of  Zoba  (2  Sam. 
viii.  9;  1  Chron.  xviii.  9).  It  was  subse- 
quently conquered  by  the  King  of  Assyria 
(2  Kings  xviii.  34).  Winer  thinks  it  never 
belonged  to  Israel ;  but  Sohiirer  cites 
1  Kings  ix.  19  and  2  Ghron.  viii,  3,  4  to 
show  that  at  least  in  Solomon's  reign  it  was 
temporarily  annexed  to  the  empire  of 
David's  son.  In  Ezekiel's  chart  the  terri- 
tory of  united  Israel  should  extend,  not  to 
the  town  of  Hamath,  but  to  the  southern 
boundary  of  the  land  of  Hamath.    Berothah 


was  probably  the  same  as  Berothai  (2  Sam. 
viiL  8),  afterwards  called  Chun  (1  Chron. 
xviii.  8),  if  Chun  is  not  a  textual  corruption. 
The  town  in  question  cannot  be  identified 
either  with  the  modem  Beirut  on  the 
Phoenician  coast  (Conder),  since  it  must 
have  lain  west  of  Hamath,  and  therefore  at 
a  coubiderable  distance  from  the  sea;  or 
with  Birtha,  the  present  day  M-Bir,  or 
Birah,  on  the  east  bank  of  the  Euphrates, 
which  is  too  far  east ;  or  with  the  Galilssan 
Beroiha,  near  Kadesh  (Josephus),  as  this  is 
too  far  south;  but  must  be  sought  for 
between  Hamath  and  Damascus,  and  most 
likely  close  to  the  former.  Sibraim,  occur- 
ring here  only,  may,  on  the  other  hand,  be 
assumed  to  have  lain  nearer  Damascus,  and 
may,  perhaps,  be  identified  with  Ziphron 
(Numb,  xxxiv.  9),  though  the  site  of  this 
town  cannot  be  where  Wetstein  placed  it,  at 
Zifran,  north-east  of  Damascus,  and  on  the 
road  to  Palmyra.  Smend  compares  it  with 
Sepharvaim  (2  Kings  xvii.  24).  Damascus 
was  the  well-known  capital  of  Syria  (Isa. 
vil  8),  and  the  principal  emporium  of  com- 
merce between  Bast  and  West  Asia  (ch. 
xxvii.  18).  Its  high  antiquity  is  testified 
by  both  Scripture  (Gen.  xiv.  15  ;  xv.  2)  and 
the  cuneiform  inscriptions,  in  which  it 
appears  as  Dimaski  and  Dimaska  (Schrader, 
'Die  Keilinschriften  und  das  Alte  Testa- 
ment,' p.  138).  Hazar-hatticon;  or,  the 
middle  Hazar,  was  probably  so  styled  to 
distinguish  it  from  Hazar-enan  (ver.  17). 
(On  the  import  of  Hatticon,  see  Exod.  xxvi 
28  and  2  Kings  xx.  4,  in  both  of  which 
places  it  signifies  "  the  middle.")  The  word 
Hazar  (isn),  "an  enclosure,"  or  "place 
fenced  off,"  was  employed  to  denote 
villages  or  townships,  of  which  at  least  six 
are  mentioned  in  Scripture  (see  Gesenius, 
'Lexicon,'  sub  voce).  Eauran,  AupowTu 
(LXX.),  "  Cave-land,"  so  called  because  ot 
the  number  of  its  caverns,  was  most  likely 
designed  to  designate  "  the  whole  tract  ot 
land  between  Damascus  and  the  country  ot 
GUead"(Keil). 

Ver.  17. — The  northern  boundary  is 
further  defined  as  extending  from  the  sea, 
t.e.  the  Mediterranean  on  the  west,  to  Hazar- 
enan,  or  the  "  Village  of  fountains,"  in  the 
east,  which  village  again  is  declared  to  have 
been  the  border,  frontier  city  (Keil),  at  the 
border  (Revised  Version)  of  Damascus,  and 
as  having  on  the  north  northward  the  border 
or  territory  of  Hamath.  The  final  clause 
adds.  And  this  is  the  north  side,  either 
understanding  nt<%  with  Geseuins,  as  equiva- 
lent to  oi)T(fs,  ipse,  "this  same,"  or  with 
Hitzig  and  Smend,  after  tlie  Syriac,  substi- 
tuting for  it  here  and  in  vers.  18,  19  n>!i 
as  in  ver.  20;  though  IlengstenlMsrg  and 
Keil  prefer  to  regard  nx  as  the  customary 
sign  of  the  accusative,  and  to  supply  soma 


OH.  XLvn.  1— 23.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PROPHET  EZBKIEL. 


451 


enoh  thought  as  "  ye  see  "  (Hongstenberg), 
or  "  ye  shall  measure  "  (Keil),  wliich  ver. 
18  shows  was  in  the  prophet's  mind.  Com- 
pared with  the  ancient  north  boundary  of 
Canaan  (Numb,  xixiv.  7 — 9),  this  appointed 
by  Ezekiel's  Torah  for  the  new  land  shows 
a  marked  correspondence. 

Ver.  18. — The  east  boundary.  And  the 
sast  side  ye  shall  measure  from  Hanian,  eto. 
The  Bevlsed  Version,  after  EeUand  Kliefotb, 
translates,  And  the  east  side,  between  Hauran 
and  Damaicus  and  Gilead,  and  the  land  of 
Israel,  shall  he  (the)  Jordan ;  from  the  (north) 
border  unto  the  east  sea  shall  ye  measure. 
Bmend  offers  as  the  correct  rendering,  The 
eatt  side  goes  from  between  Hauran  ajtd 
Damaseus,  and  from  between  Gilead  and  the 
land  of  Israel,  along  the  Jordan,  from  the 
border  v/nto  the  east  sea.  In  any  case,  by 
this  instmotion,  first  the  land  of  Israel  was 
defined  as  the  territory  lying  west  of  the 
Jordan,  and  secondly  its  boundary  should 
extend  from  the  last-named  north  border  at 
its  easternmost  point,  Hazar-enan,  down  the 
Jordan  valley  to  the  Dead  Sea.  The 
practical  effect  of  this  would  be  to  cut  off 
the  lands  which  in  the  earlier  division 
(Numb,  xxxiv.  14,  15)  had  been  assigned  to 
Beuben,  Gad,  and  the  half-tribe  of  Manasseh. 
Otherwise  the  boundary  here  given  corre- 
Bponds  with  that  traced  in  Numbers,  though 
the  latter  is  more  minute.  Hengstenberg, 
however,  thinks  the  prophet  cannot  have 
intended  to  assert  that  the  new  Israel 
should  not  possess  the  land  of  Gilead  as  a 
frontier  in  the  future  as  formerly,  as  in  that 
case  he  would  have  been  at  variance,  not 
only  with  pre-existing  Scripture  (oomp. 
Ps.  Ix.  7;  Micahvii.  14;  Jer.  L  19;  Zech. 
X  10),  but  with  subsequent  history. 

Ver.  19. — The  south  boundary.  This  should 
begin  where  the  east  boundary  terminated, 
viz.  at  Tamar,  "Palm  tree."  Different  from 
Hazezon-Tamar,  or  Engedi  (ver.  10;  2 
Chron.  XX.  2),  which  lay  too  far  up  the 
west  side  of  the  sea,  Tamar  can  hardly  be 
identified  either  with  the  Tamar  of  1  Kings 
ix.  18  near  Tadmor  in  the  wilderness,  or 
with  the  Thamara  (@aixapi£)  of  Ensebius 
between  Hebron  and  Elath,  supposed  by 
Eobinson  ('  Bibl.  Bes.,'  ii.  616,  622)  to  be 
Kurnub,  six  hours  south  of  MUh,  towards 
the  pass  of  Es-Sufah,  since  this  was  too 
distant  from  the  Dead  Sea.  The  most 
plausible  conjecture  is  that  Tamar  was  "a 
village  near  the  southern  end  of  the  Dead 
Sea  "  (Currey).  Proceeding  westward,  the 
southern  boundaiy  should  reach  to  the 
waters  of  strife  in  Kadesh;  better,  to  the 
tDaters  of  Meriboth  Kadesh.  These  were  in 
the  'Desert  of  Sin,  near  Kadesh- Barnea 
(Numb.  XX.  1 — 13),  which,  again,  was  on  the 
road  from  Hebron  to  Egypt  (Gen.  xvi.  14). 
The  exact  site,  however,  of  Eadesli-Barnea 


is  matter  of  dispute;  Eowland  and  Keil 
find  it  in  the  spring  'Ain  Kades,  at  the 
north-west  corner  of  the  mountain-land  of 
Azazimeh,  which  stretches  on  the  south  of 
Palestine  from  the  south-south-west  to  the 
north-north  east,  and  forms  the  watershed 
between  the  Mediterranean  and  the  Arabah 
valley.  Delitzsch  and  Conder  seek  it  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  the  Wady-el-Jemen,  on  the 
south-east  side  of  the  above  watershed,  and 
on  the  road  froin  Mount  Hor.  Eobinson 
('  Bibl.  Bes.,'  ii.  582)  discovers  it  in  'Ain-el- 
Weibeh,  not  far  from  Petra.  A  writer  (Sm., 
Smend  ?)  in  Eiehm  ('  Handworterbuch  dea 
Biblischen  Alterthums,'  art.  "Kades") 
pleads  for  a  site  on  the  west  side  of  the 
Azazimeh  plateau,  and  in  the  vicinity  of 
the  road  by  Shur  to  Egypt.  Leaving 
Kadesli,  the  boundary  should  continue  to 
the  river,  or,  brook,  Le.  of  Egypt,  and  thence 
extend  to  the  great  sea,  or  Mediterranean. 
The  punctuation  of  n^nj,  which  makes  the 
word  signify  "lot,"  must  be  changed  into 
njri],  so  as  to  mean  "river,"  since  the 
reference  manifestly  is  to  the  torrent  of 
Egypt,  the  Wady-el-Arish,  on  the  borders 
of  Palestine  and  Egypt,  which  enters  the 
Mediterranean  near  Bhinocorura  ('PivoKi- 
povpa).  In  Numb,  xxxiv.  5  it  is  called  the 
river  of  Egypt.  And  this  is  the  south  side 
southward  (see  on  ver.  17).  The  corre- 
spondence between  this  line  and  that  of  the 
earlier  chart  (Numb,  xxxiv.  4,  5)  is  once 
more  apparent. 

Ver.  20. — The  western  boundary.  This,  as 
in  Numb,  xxxiv.  6,  should  be  the  great  sea 
from  the  border,  i.e.  the  southern  boundary 
last  mentioned  (ver.  19),  till  a  man  come 
over  against  Hamath;  UteraUy,  unto  (the 
place  which  is)  over  against  the  coming  to 
Hamath ;  i.e.  till  opposite  the  point  (on  the 
coast)  at  which  one  enters  the  territory  of 
Hamath  (oomp.  Judg.  xix.  10;  xx.  43). 

Vers.  21— 23.— The  geographical  boun- 
daries of  the  land  having  been  indicated, 
general  directions  are  fiirnished  as  to  the 
manner  of  its  distribution.  (1)  It  should  be 
partitioned  among  the  tribes  as  tribes  ratlier 
than  among  the  families  of  Israel  (see  on 
ver.  13).  (2)  The  division  of  the  territory 
should  be  made  by  lot.  This  is  pointed  to  by 
the  use  of  p^n  (from  pSn,  "a  smooth  stone  "), 
which  signifies  "  to  divide  by  loi"  (3)  The 
strangers  who  should  sojourn  amongst  the 
tribes  and  beget  obUdren  amongst  them 
should  inherit  equally  with  Israelites  who 
should  be  bom  in  the  country.  (4)  The 
inheritance  of  the  stranger  should  be 
assigned  him  in  tlie  tribe  where  he  sojourned. 
Of  these  regulations  the  last  two  were  an 
advance  on  the  earlier  Mosaic  legislation 
with  regard  to  "strangers,"  or  ans.,  who 
were  to  be  treated  with  affectionate  kindnesi 


462 


THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PBOPHET  EZEKIEL.     [oh.  xlto,  1— 23. 


(Exod.  xxii.  21 ;  xxiiL  9 ;  Ley.  xix.  31 ; 
Dent.  i.  16 ;  xxiv.  14),  admitted  to  offer 
Bacriflce  (Lev.  xvii.  8,  10,  13),  and  even 
allowed  to  partake  of  the  Passover  on  sub- 
mitting to  olroumoiaion  (Exod.  xii.  48),  but 
on  no  account  permitted  to  hold  property  in 
land  (Lev.  xxv.  47 — 55).  But  if  the  priest- 
code  was  later  than  Ezehiel,  why  should  it 
have  receded  from  the  freer  and  more  libernl 
spirit  of  Ezekiel?  If  progressive  tlevelop- 
ment  can  determine  the  relative  ages  of  two 
documents,  then  Ezekiel,  which  accords 
equal  rights  to  Jew  and  Gentile  in  the  new 
Israel,  and  thus  anticipates  that  breaking 
down  of  tlie  middle  wall  of  partition  which 
has  taken  place  under  the  gospel  (John  x. 
16;  Eom.  ii.  10,  11;  ix.  24;  Gal.  iii.  8—14, 
28 ;  Bph.  ii.  14—16),  should  be  posterior  to 
the  priest- code,  which  shows  itself  to  be  not 
jret  emancipated  from  the  trammels  of 
Jewish  exclusivism.  At  the  same  time, 
Eieklel's  Torah  does  not  grant  equal  rights 
with  native-born  Israelites  to  "  stranprers " 
indiscriminately,  or  only  to  those  of  them 
who  should  have  families,  as  Hitzig 
BT^fjests,  in  reward  for  their  increasing  the 
population,  but  to  such  of  them  as  should 
permanently  settle  in  the  midst  of  Israel, 
and  show  this  by  begetting  children,  and  in 
this  manner  "building  houses"  for  them- 
■elves.  Eliefoth  justly  cautions  against 
ixmolnding  from  the  prophet's  statement 
that  the  time  in  which  the  prophet's  vision 
realizes  itself  will  necessarily  be  one  in 
wWoh  marrying  and  begetting  children  will 
take  place ;  and  with  equal  justice  points 
oat  that  the  number  of  Israel,  especially 
when  swelled  up  by  an  influx  of  Gentiles, 
wiD  be  so  great  (oomp.  ver.  10)  as  to  render 
their  settlement  within  the  narrow  boun- 
daries of  the  land  an  impossibility — in  this 
eiroumstance  finding  another  indication  that 
the  prophet's  language  was  intended  to  be 
^jmbolioally,  not  literally,  interpreted. 

KoTB. — On  the  boundariei  of  the  land. 
Bmend  thinks  (1)  that  in  respect  of  the 
nbith  boundary,  Ezekiel  and  the  priest-code 
contradict  the  older  source  of  the  Pentateuch, 
which  does  not  permit  the  territory  of  Asher 
to  extend  so  far  north  as  Hamath  (see  Josh, 
xix.  24—31;  and  comp.  Judg.  1.  31);  (2) 
that  never  at  any  time  did  Israelites  dwell 
so  far  north  as  at  the  entering  in  of  Hamath ; 
(8)  that  this  extension  of  the  land  north- 


wards was  intended  as  a  compensation  for 
the  withdrawment  of  tlie  territory  east  of 
the  Jordan ;  and  (4)  that  in  dividing  among 
tribes  rather  than  among  families  Ezekiel 
deviates  from  both  the  Jehovistio  tradition 
and  the  priest-code.  But  (1)  if  the  above- 
cited  passages  do  not  extend  Aaher's 
territory  beyond  Tyre,  Gen.  XT.  18,  which 
critics  assign  to  the  Blohist,  one  of  the 
authors  of  J.E.,  the  so-called  prophetical 
narrative  of  the  Hexateuch,  and  Exod.  xxiii. 
31,  which,  according  to  the  same  autho- 
rities, formed  part  of  the  commonly  styled 
hook  of  the  covenant,  expressly  mention 
the  great  river  Euphrates  as  the  north 
boundary  of  the  land,  while  the  same  is 
recognized  by  the  Deuteronomist  (xi.  24; 
xix.  8).  (2)  1  Kings  iv.  24 ;  viii.  65 ;  and 
2  Kings  xiv.  25  (oomp.  2  Chron.  vii  8 ;  viii 
3,  4)  show  that  in  the  time  of  Solomon  the 
boundaries  of  the  land  reached  as  far  north 
as  Hamath.  (3)  As  it  was  not  originally 
contemplated  by  the  Mosaic  distribution  to 
take  immediate  possession  of  the  east  .Jordan 
land  (Numb,  xxxiv.  10 — 12),  and  this  was 
only  granted  to  Benben,  Gad,  and  half 
Manasseh  on  their  entreaty  (Numb,  xxxii. 
33 — 42),  no  ground  existed  why  its  with- 
drawal should  be  compensated  for.  (4)  If 
Ezekiel's  division  of  the  land  according  to 
tribes  rather  than  families  shows  that  it 
existed  prior  to  the  priest-code,  then  the 
same  argnment  should  demonstrate  its  prior 
existence  to  J.E.,  which  thronghout  as- 
sumes the  principle  of  division  according  to 
families.  (5)  If  Ezekiel  preceded  the 
priest-code,  it  will  require  some  explanation 
to  understand,  first,  why  the  author  of  the 
latter  sliould  have  followed  the  compara- 
tively nncertain  Jehovistio  tradition  rather 
than  the  definite  arrangements  made  by  a 
prophet  whom  he  regarded  as  practically 
the  originator  of  his  faith ;  and  secondly, 
why  he  should  have  so  materially  altered 
that  prophet's  land-bonndaries  and  tribe- 
dispositiona. 


HOMILETIOa 

Yen.  1 — 6. — The  visitm  tf  the  wattrt.  Hitherto  most  of  EzeUel'i  representations  of 
the  happy  age  of  the  restoration  have  been  given  in  somewhat  prosaic  details  which 
eeald  be  realized  in  actual  facts.     But  now  he  returns  to  his  figurative  style,  and  seti 


OH.  XLVii.  1—23.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  463 

before  \ia  an  imaginative  picture  of  the  glorious  future.  He  passes  from  the  regulation! 
of  the  priesthood  and  the  government  to  a  description  of  a  fountain  of  water  issuing 
from  the  temple  in  the  most  natural  way,  as  though  all  these  things  were  equally  sure 
to  happen  in  the  course  of  time.  But  the  prophet  can  scarcely  have  been  anticipating 
a  repetition  of  Moses'  miracle  at  the  rock  of  Horeb,  because  his  subsequent  language 
would  be  absurd  if  we  read  it  literally.  It  must  be,  therefore,  that  the  prophecy  is 
here  symbolical.  The  blessings  of  the  Messianic  era  are  like  waters  flowing  from 
under  the  threshold  of  the  temple. 

I.  Thb  BLB88INO  OP  THE  WATEEB.  In  a  dry  land  streams  of  water  are  most  highly 
valued.  Their  banks,  fringed  with  green,  tell  a  pleasing  story  of  the  life  and  fertility 
that  they  bring  wherever  they  flow.    The  blessings  of  the  gospel  are  like  living  waters. 

1.  Cleansing.  God  has  opened  a  fountain  for  all  uncleanness.  2.  Life.  Christ  gives 
the  water  of  life.  Without  his  grace  our  souls  are  parched  and  perishing.  3.  Be/reah- 
ment.  The  water  is  continually  flowing;  it  is  no  stagnant  pool.  The  life  which  it 
first  quickens  is  daily  fed  by  its  invigorating  supplies.  The  good  Shepherd  leads  his 
flock  by  the  still  waters  for  repeated  cheering  and  rel'reshing.  4.  Beauty.  Where  the 
water  flows  the  land  is  green  and  fair.  The  beauty  of  holiness  springs  up  by  the 
channel  of  Christ's  grace.  5.  Fruitfulness.  There  grow  by  the  water  fruit-bearing 
trees.     Christian  fruitfulness  springs  from  the  ever  fresh  supplies  of  Christ's  grace. 

II.  The  sourob  of  the  waters.  .1.  From  Qod.  The  stream  issues  from  th« 
temple  where  God  visits  the  earth  and.  has  his  typical  dwelling.  It  is  he  who  sends 
forth  the  life-giving  flood.  We  have  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God.  From  him,  and 
him  alone,  comes  our  salvation.  2.  By  sacrifice.  The  stream  is  to  flow  from  under 
the  altar  on  which  sacrifices  are  offered.  God's  grace  is  given  to  us  in  Christ,  and  by 
means  of  his  great  atoning  sacrifice.  Christ  especially  claimed  to  give  living  waters 
(Jolin  iv.  10).  It  is  by  his  death  that  we  live.  From  his  cross  the  stream  now  flows 
tor  the  healing  of  the  nations.  3.  Through  worship.  The  temple  had  to  be  built,  the 
altar  set  up,  and  the  services  duly  conducted.  We  receive  grace  through  faith  when 
we  yield  our  hearts  and  lives  to  Christ. 

III.  The  coubse  of  the  waters.  1.  Outflowing.  They  rise  in  the  temple ;  but 
they  are  not  shut  up  in  the  sacred  enclosure ;  they  flow  out  for  the  good  of  the  people. 
The  gospel  rose  in  Judaism,  and  passed  out  to  the  Gentile  world.  The  grace  of  Christ 
is  for  the  people  generally,  chiefly  for  those  who  thirst  and   faint  for  need  of  it. 

2.  Increasing.  The  small  stream  becomes  a  mighty  river.  "  He  giveth  more  grace." 
The  blessings  of  Christ  increase  with  time.  The  more  we  know  of  him,  and  the  longer 
we  follow  him,  the  more  of  his  grace  flows  to  us.  The  gospel  widens  its  area  as  it 
flows  down  the  ages.  The  tiny  stream,  represented  by  the  upper  room  at  Jerusalem, 
becomes  the  mighty  river  of  Christendom.  As  the  area  of  influence  widens,  the  grace 
of  Christ  comes  in  ever  more  and  more  abundant  supplies,  so  that  there  is  enough 
for  all. 

Vers.  8 — 11. — Life  and  healing.  The  stream  that  bursts  from  the  temple  rock  is 
to  flow  through  the  dry  ravines  of  the  eastern  wilderness  until  it  reaches  the  Dead  Sea, 
the  desolate  waters  of  which  are  to  be  miraculously  healed  by  the  coming  of  the  life- 
bearing  flood.  Then  fish  shall  swarm  in  the  purified  sea,  "and  everything  shall  live 
whither  the  river  cometh."    This  is  a  parable  of  the  course  of  the  gospel  of  Christ. 

I.  The  obaoe  of  Christ  flows  to  the  most  dead  and  deoraded  people.  The 
Dead  Sea  may  be  taken  to  represent  the  world  in  its  sin,  or  that  portion  of  mankind 
that  is  most  sunken  and  worthless.  The  temple  waters  were  not  confined  to  the 
bracing  heights  of  Jerusalem.  They  could  not  contain  themselves  in  those  upland 
regions.  Their  quantity  was  so  great  that  they  could  not  but  overflow  and  pour  them- 
selves down  through  the  wilderuess.  Christ  cannot  keep  his  rich  gifts  for  a  few  rare, 
saintly  souls  already  safely  gathered  into  the  Church.  They  are  for  the  world,  chiefly 
for  the  world  in  its  sin  and  desolation.  The  gathering  flood  cannot  rest  till  it  finds  the 
low  level  of  the  Dead  Sea.  Christ  can  have  no  satisfaction  till  his  gospel  has  reached 
the  most  sinful  and  fallen  creatures  in  the  world. 

II.  The  geace  of  Christ  brings  purification  and  healing.  1.  Purification. 
The  Dead  Sea  is  charged  with  salts ;  the  stream  is  represented  as  washing  these  away, 
or  in  some  manner  transforming  them.     Some  great  cleansing  is  needed  to  purge  the 


454  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [on.  XLvn.  1— 23w 

earthy  mixture  out  of  the  hearts  and  lives  of  man.  Christ  hrings  waters  in  which  the 
foulest  may  wa§h  and  he  clean.  2.  Healing.  The  strong  brine  of  the  Dead  Sea  is 
fatal  to  all  life.  If  fish  come  down  in  the  Jordan  they  must  perish  as  soon  as  they 
reach  the  fatal  lake.  To  the  bather  the  waters  are  bo  pungent  that  they  produce 
agonizing  sensations  in  the  eyes,  and  the  taste  of  them  is  unendurable.  Enclosed  by 
the  bluest  of  hills,  steaming  with  tropical  heat,  the  dull  and  heavy  waters  produce  a 
scene  of  noxious  beauty — like  the  charm  of  the  snake,  like  the  fascination  of  sin.  But 
the  gospel  brings  healing  to  the  poisoned  sea  of  human  life,  as  the  temple  flood  was 
imagined  to  bring  it  to  the  Dead  Sea. 

III.  The  pubifioation  and  healinq  of  the  obaob  of  Ohbist  bbab  fbuit  iir 
LIFE.  The  purged  sea  is  to  team  with  fish,  and  fishermen  are  to  spread  their  nets  on 
its  now  neglected  shores.  Before  Christ  comes  men  are  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins. 
He  brings  life  for  the  dead,  and  wherever  his  gospel  goes  it  introduces  this  life  to  the 
world.  Even  intellectual,  social,  and  political  life  are  energized  by  Christianity.  The 
strongest,  keenest,  freshest  life  of  the  world  is  found  in  Christendom.  Those  lands 
which  were  once  Christian,  and  have  since  lost  the  religion  of  the  Christ,  have  sunk 
back  to  semi-barbarism  ;  e.g.  North  Africa.  The  best  nourishment  for  the  highest  life 
of  man  in  all  its  branches  is  found  in  the  New  Testament.  When  Christ  is  received, 
life  is  strong,  rich,  and  fruitful. 

Ver.  12. — Trees  of  life.  I.  The  site  on  which  thbt  obow.  "  By  the  river  upon  the 
bank,  on  this  side  and  on  that  side."  All  the  blessings  of  Christianity  are  drawn  from 
its  central  stream  in  the  grace  of  Christ.  But  that  stream  fertilizes  its  banks,  like  the 
Nile,  and  many  trees  overshadow  its  waters.  As  the  dry  wady  is  pleasantly  broken  by 
a  thread  of  green  just  where  the  watercourse  winds  through  it,  so  the  dreary  and 
spiritually  fruitless  waste  of  the  sin-stricken  world  has  the  cheering  presence  in  its 
midst  of  Christianity  and  the  fruits  of  the  love  and  work  of  Christ.  We  inust  be  near 
the  stream  if  we  would  reach  the  trees,  and  we  must  be  near  Christ  if  we  would  enjoy 
his  blessing.  The  closer  the  trees  stand  to  the  refreshing  flood  the  more  freely  will 
they  grow  and  flourish,  and  the  closer  all  our  Christian  work  and  various  institutions 
are  to  Christ  the  better  will  they  thrive. 

II.  The  number  and  vabibtt  of  them.  "  All  trees  for  meat,"  etc.  1.  They  are 
numerous.  Many  Christian  agencies  cluster  about  the  gospel  of  Christ.  There  is 
abundance  of  life  and  energy  here.  However  many  may  seek  for  grace  from  Christ, 
there  is  enough  for  all.  2.  They  are  of  various  kinds.  Thus  they  are  suited  to 
different  orders  of  minds,  to  different  circumstances  and  needs,  and  to  different  good 
ends.  There  is  a  rich  variety  in  the  blussings  of  the  gospel,  like  the  variety  of  nature, 
in  which  many  kinds  and  species  contribute  to  the  general  well-being  of  the  whole. 

III.  Their  pebennial  freshness.  1.  They  are  evergreen.  Most  earthly  comforts 
fade  and  pass  away  in  course  of  time.  Human  good  things  are  subject  to  shifting 
seasons.  The  fickle,  changeful,  transient  character  of  the  comforts  of  this  world  should 
drive  us  to  the  everlasting  refuge  of  the  Eock  of  Ages  and  the  never-fading  freshness  of 
the  trees  of  life.  God's  grace  never  fails.  The  blessings  that  spring  from  Christianity 
are  independent  of  the  fluctuations  of  outward  hfe.  It  is  possible  to  enjoy  the  green 
leaf  in  the  garden  of  the  Lord  when  all  around  is  bare  and  desolate  in  wintry  death. 
2.  Their  fruit  comes  continuously.  "It  shall  bring  forth  new  fruit  every  month." 
(1)  The  fruit-season  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  all  the  year  round.  Here  we  are  often 
made  to  distinguish  between  the  time  of  seed-sowing — which  may  be  one  of  tears — 
and  that  of  the  joyous  harvest.  It  is  not  so  with  the  heavenly  trees  of  life.  They 
bear  fruit  in  "the  winter  of  our  discontent,"  There  is  never  a  time  when  we  may  not 
seek  and  find  some  comfjrt  and  satisfaction  in  Christ.  (2)  These  blessings  come  again 
and  again  as  fresh  gifts  from  God :  "  New  fruit."  We  are  not  to  be  satisfied  with  the 
grace  of  the  past ;  grace  comes  anew  to  God's  people. 

IV.  The  gbeat  service  thet  bendeb.  1.  they  supply  food.  "The  fruit  the.  eof 
shall  be  for  meat."  Thus  God  nourishes  the  interior  life  of  his  people  with  heavenly 
fruit.  Excluded  from  the  earthly  Eden,  they  can  eat  of  the  better  fruit  of  the  unseen 
and  spiritual  paradise.  Souls  live  on  Christ,  the  heavenly  Manna.  His  flesh  is  meat 
indeed.  2.  They  give  medicine.  "And  the  leaf  thereof  for  medicine."  We  need 
spiritual  healing  as  well  as  feeding — healing  from  the  bite  of  the  serpent  sin,  from  the 


OH.  TLvn.  1— 23.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  45S 


crushini^  blow  of  adversity,  from  all  that  makes  heart  and  soul  sick.  This  too  ii 
provided  in  the  grace  of  Christ  the  "  good  Physician."  Balm  of  Gilead  may  fail  ui, 
but  the  Divine  Herbalist  has  decoctions  from  the  leaves  of  the  tree  of  life  that  cum  all 
loul  ailments. 

Ver.  13. — JosepKs  double  portion.  When  the  land  was  divided  the  tribes  did  not  all 
share  alike.  Some  had  larger  territories  than  others,  and  the  descendants  of  Joseph 
had  two  tribal  portions,  being  divided  into  two  tribes — Ephraim  and  Manasseh. 

I.  The  BLBS8INQ8  or  THE  FATHBE  DESCEND  TO  THE  CHILDREN.  Joseph  had  proved 
himself  the  best  as  well  as  the  greatest  of  the  sons  of  Jacob.  He  had  returned  good 
for  evil  to  his  cruel,  murderous  brothers,  and  had  been  the  means  of  bringing  blessing 
to  all  his  father's  household.  He  was  now  blessed  in  the  blessing  of  his  children. 
There  is  no  better  way  of  rewarding  good  parents  than  by  prospering  their  children. 
We  may  see  God's  favour  descending  in  line  from  generation  to  generation  of  them  that 
fear  him. 

II.  Justice  is  not  the  same  as  equality.  It  might  seem  to  be  unjust  to  the 
rest  of  the  tribes  that  Joseph's  descendants  should  be  reckoned  as  two  tribes.  But  it  is 
not  always  right  and  fair  to  give  exactly  the  same  to  every  one.  Equal  partition  may 
mean  great  wrong.  Justice  takes  account  of  merit ;  some  deserve  more  than  others.  It 
takes  note  of  need ;  some  require  more  than  others.  It  has  reference  to  capacity ;  some 
can  use  more  than  others.  It  is  not  just  to  reward  the  faithless  as  much  as  the  faithful 
■ervant,  nor  to  give  to  the  giant  as  small  a  meal  as  to  the  dwarf,  nor  to  entrust  to  th« 
man  of  small  mind  as  much  responsibility  as  to  one  of  large  powers.  Joseph's  tribei 
may  have  deserved,  have  needed,  or  have  been  capable  of  using,  more  territory  than 
any  of  the  other  tribes.    They  were  more  numerous  in  population. 

III.  There  is  no  injustice  where  no  one  is  wronged.  Provision  was  made  for 
the  double  share  of  Joseph  by  giving  to  one  of  his  tribes  the  portion  that  would  have 
fallen  to  the  lot  of  Levi,  who  was  provided  for  out  of  the  sacrificial  offerings  and  the 
sacred  cities  whose  inheritance  was  the  Lord.  Thus  when  it  is  granted  that  sacrifices 
should  be  made  and  tithes  paid  for  religious  purposes,  we  may  conclude  that  there  was 
a  portion  to  spare.  The  ten  tribes  were  not  robbed  to  give  to  Ephraim  or  Manasseh, 
Ko  injustice  was  done  to  those  labourers  of  our  Lord's  parable  who  had  toiled  all  dar 
when  the  eleventh-hour  labourers  received  equal  wages ;  for  the  former  had  had  foil 
pay,  all  they  had  agreed  for,  and  the  heavier  rate  of  the  payment  given  to  the  latter  was 
dependent  only  on  the  generosity  of  the  master,  who,  having  satisfied  all  due  claims,  had 
a  right  to  do  as  he  woi^d  with  his  own  (Matt.  zx.  16).  Angels  have  no  right  to  envy 
God's  grace  to  men,  for  angels  have  their  due.  We  have  no  right  to  begrudge  to  any 
people  whatever  favour  God  may  show  them.     He  does  not  rob  us. 

IV.  God  provides  for  individuals,  and  not  merely  for  communities.  Ephraim 
and  Manasseh,  the  two  tribes  of  Joseph,  were  equal  in  population  to  the  other  tribes,  if 
not  more  numerous.  Therefore,  the  individual  members  of  these  two  tribes  received  no 
more  than  their  brethren  in  other  tribes.  Caring  for  man  and  not  for  communities,  God 
was  fair  in  giving  most  land  to  the  most  populous  branch  of  the  family  of  Jacob.  His 
blessings  now  are  for  separate  souls. 

Y.  Great  trusts  being  great  responsibilities.  The  man  of  five  talents  does 
his  duty  in  getting  five  more,  while  he  of  two  talents  does  his  equally  in  getting  but 
two  more.  With  double  territory  the  two  tribes  of  Joseph  were  expected  to  furnish 
a  proportionately  large  supply  of  men  for  the  national  defence.  Much  is  expected 
of  those  to  whom  much  has  been  given.  Specially  privileged  Christian  people  may  rest 
assured  that  specially  important  duties  have  been  laid  upon  them. 

Ver.  21. — The  division  of  the  land.  I.  The  division  was  into  separate  allotuemts. 
The  land  of  Israel  was  not  held  in  common  by  the  whole  people.  Certain  dues  were 
attached  to  it,  and  certain  regulations  governed  the  treatment  of  it  by  its  owners.  Thus 
it  was  forbidden  for  any  one  to  make  an  absolute  sale  of  his  estate.  On  these  conditions 
each  family  held  its  own  land,  like  the  peasant-proprietors  of  France  and  Belgium. 
God  divides  our  lives  out  severally.  Each  must  live  his  own  separate  life  and  discharge 
his  individual  duty  while  he  receives  his  personal  grace.  We  are  to  live  in  the 
community  and  for  its  benefit,  bearing  one  another's  burdens  and  so  fulfilling  the  law 


456  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  XLvn.  1— 23. 

of  Christ,  but  still  each  taking  his  own  particular  part  in  the  common  life  of  th« 
■whole. 

II.  The  divibion  was  oleab  and  definite.  There  were  exact  confines,  and  it  wm 
a  criminal  offence  for  any  one  to  remove  his  neighbour's  landmark  (Deut.  xix.  14).  We 
ought  to  have  no  doubt  as  to  our  poitiou  in  life.  Occasionally  we  may  see  a  desolatOi 
ruinous  house — part  of  an  estate  in  chancery,  the  ownership  of  which  is  disputed ;  on 
the  other  hand,  we  hear  of  claimants  to  estates  who  find  it  difiBcult  to  obtain  what  they 
urge  is  their  own  property.  But  in  the  region  of  personal  religion  each  should  see 
what  is  his  portion  and  mission  fur  the  world. 

III.  The  divibion  included  a  portion  fob  etebt  Ibbaelite.  It  was  so  carefully 
made  that  the  most  insignificant  family  should  not  be  overlooked.  There  should  be  a 
share  for  every  one  in  the  produce  of  our  great  fruitful  earth.  Centres  of  population 
may  be  overcrowded,  but  the  earth  is  not  yet  full.  Folly  and  sin,  tyranny,  injustice^ 
and  robbery,  keep  many  out  of  their  rights.  If  all  did  their  duty  and  had  their  diief 
there  would  be  enough  for  all.  This  holds  good  also  in  the  spiritual  world.  There  te 
room  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  i'or  all.  No  one  need  fear  that  others  will  go  in  first 
and  take  the  blessing,  and  so  leave  him  behind  too  late  to  get  any  benefit  from  th« 
Divine  bounty — ^like  the  impotent  man  at  the  pool  of  Betbesda  (John  v.  7).  There  is 
a  portion  in  Christ's  redemption  for  every  soul  of  man.  It  only  remains  for  all  to  receive 
their  inheritance,  accepting  it  by  faith  and  entering  it  with  obedience  to  the  Lord  who 
is  supreme  over  the  whole. 

IV.  The  division  was  by  lot.  This  expedient  prevented  all  complaints  of  sup- 
posed injustice.  The  owner  of  a  bit  of  bare  hillside  had  no  right  to  envy  the  fortunate 
possessor  of  a  rich  plot  in  the  valley.  But  there  was  more  than  this  object  in  view  in 
the  use  of  the  lot,  which  was  taken  as  part  of  the  method  of  Divine  government. 
"  The  lot  is  cast  into  the  lap;  but  the  whole  disposing  thereof  is  of  the  Lord"  (Prov. 
xvi.  33).  The  people  were  thus  to  feel  that  God  was  to  determine  where  each  should 
settle,  and  to  say,  "  He  shall  choose  our  inheritance  for  us  "  (Ps.  xlvii.  4).  We  talk  of 
the  "  lottery  of  life,"  but  we  should  remember  that  Providence  obliterates  chance. 
Gud  orders  our  circumstances,  and  whether  the  lines  have  fallen  to  us  in  pleasant 
places  and  we  have  a  goodly  heritage,  or  we  are  left  to  poverty  and  hardship,  oar 
Father's  choice  must  be  good. 

Vers.  22,  23. — The  stranger's  portion.  We  do  wrong  to  the  ancient  Jewish  Law  and 
to  the  character  of  the  Jews  themselves  when  we  regiud  a  selfish  exclusiveness  as  the 
marked  feature  of  Old  Testament  times.  A  certain  separateness  was  required  to  keep 
the  people  of  God  from  the  idolatry  and  immorality  of  their  heathen  neighbours,  and 
none  of  the  privileges  of  Israel  could  be  enj  >yed  excepting  on  condition  of  entering  into 
the  covenant  of  Israel — the  covenant  which  needed  to  be  accepted  and  kept  by  the 
chosen  people  themselves  in  order  that  they  might  enjoy  their  privileges.  But  the 
bitter  jealousy  which  was  seen  in  the  narrow  Judaism  of  New  Testament  times  is  not 
encouraged  by  the  Law,  nor  does  it  seem  to  have  been  indulged  in  by  the  Old  Testa- 
.  ment  Israelites.  It  was  the  revenge  of  a  persecuted  sect  turned  against  their  powerful 
oppressors.  A  freer,  happier,  more  generous  spirit  prevailed  in  the  earlier  Hebrew 
nation.  The  people  were  taught  to  cultivate  national  hospitality.  Care  for  the  stranger 
was  repeatedly  inculcated  in  their  Law.  Much  more  is  it  incumbent  on  Christians  to 
manifest  a  brotherly  spirit  in  welcoming  strangers. 

I.  Stbaiioebb  should  becbite  a  brotherly  welcome  from  Christian  feofle. 
Hospitality  is  an  Eastern  habit ;  it  should  be  a  Christian  grace.  1.  In  the  chv/rck. 
Care  should  be  taken  to  make  strangers  feel  at  home  in  our  midst.  The  least  aversion 
to  having  a  stranger  sitting  by  one's  side  may  check  the  beginning  of  a  new  course  of 
life  by  repelling  the  seeker  after  truth  from  the  means  of  enlightenment.  The  friend- 
less, the  poor,  the  timid,  the  penitent,  should  be  received  with  especial  kindness.  *2,  fit 
the  home.  Christian  people  have  not  sufficiently  regarded  their  Lord's  command  to 
m  ke  guests  of  the  poor  who  can  offer  no  return  (Luke  xiv.  13).  3.  In  the  wot  td, 
A  generous  Christian  spirit  should  open  the  heart  to  receive  strangers.  The  miserably 
seltish  isolation  in  which  some  people  immure  themselves  is  quite  alien  to  the  brotherly 
Bjjirit  of  Jesus  Christ. 

II.  StKANGERS    abb    welcomed    by     ChKIST    into    the     kingdom    or    HEAVEN.      1. 


OH.  XL-ra.  1— 23.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  BZEKIBL.  457 

OenUlei.  Assuredly  Christianity  is  not  narrower  than  Judaism,  under  which  even 
provision  was  made  for  a  brotherly  reception  of  proselytes.  They  who  were  strangers  to 
the  covenant  of  promise  are  now  brought  nigh  by  the  blood  of  Christ.  The  wild  olive 
branch  is  grafted  in  to  the  fruitful  stock  (Bom.  xi.  17)k  Greutiles  are  freely  admitted 
to  the  promised  blessings  of  Abraham.  2.  Heathen.  Strangers  to  Christendom  are 
invited  into  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  The  heathen  world  is  to  receive  the  gospel.  From 
China,  from  New  Gruinea,  from  Central  Africa,  the  strangers  press  into  the  privil^ed 
kingdom.  3.  Sinners.  We  have  not  to  go  to  a  distant  continent  to  discover  strangers 
to  Christ.  They  may  be  found  in  a  Christian  land — even  in  a  Christian  Church] 
Every  man  who  lives  in  sin  is  a  stranger  to  Christ.  But  all  sinners  are  invited  to  the 
Saviour. 

III.    StBANOERS   must   become   TBCE   citizens    in   order   to   enjoy  the   PBIVILEaES 

or  THE  kingdom  01'  HEAVEN.  The  stranger  needed  to  adopt  the.  Law,  to  be  circum- 
cised, and  to  become  a  Jew,  if  he  was  to  have  his  portion  in  the  land.  People  who  are 
spiritually  strangers  now  need  a  circumcision  of  heart  (Dent.  %zx.  6)  and  a  new  birth 
to  have  the  blessings  of  Christ.  All  may  have  the  Christian  blessedness,  but  all  must 
first  become  Christians.  There  is  a  portion  for  every  one  in  Christ's  kingdom ;  it  now 
only  rests  with  every  one  to  qualify  himself  for  his  inheritance  by  penitence  and  fiuth 
in  Jesus  Christ. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1—12. — lZ%e  holy  waters.  The  beauty  and  even  sublimity  of  this  portion  of 
Ezekiel's  prophecies  must  impress  every  reader  of  imagination  and  taste.  Upon  the 
suggestion  of  the  waters  of  Siloam  taking  their  rise  from  the  temple  rock,  and  the 
watercourse  of  the  Kedron  threading  its  way  among  the  rocky  deserts  until  it  reaches 
the  expanse  of  the  Dead  Sea,  the  poet-prophet  describes  a  river  which  has  its  source  in 
the  sanctuary  of  Jehovah,  and  which  broadens  and  deepens  as  it  flows,  until  it  becomes 
a  stream  of  vastest  blessing,  diffusing;  health  and  life  for  the  benefit  of  multitudes  of 
men.  Under  this  similitude  Ezekiel  pictures  the  spiritual  blessings  brought  by  Ood, 
through  the  channels  of  his  grace  and  faithfulness,  not  to  Israel  alone,  but  to  all  mankind. 

I.  The  soubce  op  the  holy  waters.  As  the  rain  comes  down  from  heaven,  filters 
in  the  soil,  and  wells  up  a  living  spring,  so  the  blessings  of  the  gospel  have  their 
fountain  in  the  very  mind  and  heart  of  God  himself.  But,  as  conveyed  to  men,  they 
have  a  well-spring  human  and  earthly.  The  student  of  human  history,  who  looks 
beneath  the  surface  of  things,  and  seeks  to  understand  the  growth  of  thought  and  of 
morals,  turns  his  attention  to  the  Hebrew  people,  wondering  that  from  them,  as  from 
a  well-head  of  ethicnl  and  religious  life,  should  flow  blessings  so  priceless  for  the  enrich- 
ment of  humanity.  Yet  so  it  is ;  the  temple  at  Jerusalem  is  the  symbol  of  a  Divine 
revelation.  The  justest  and  noblest  ideas  which  have  entered  into  the  intellectual  and 
spiritual  life  of  man  have  very  largely  issued  from  Moses  and  the  Hebrew  prophets. 
How  far  Ezekiel  entered  into  this  truth  may  not  be  certain ;  yet  since  he  was  a  cosmo- 
polite, in  relation  with  Babylon,  Egypt,  and  Tyre,  and  knew  well  the  mental  and 
moral  state  of  the  nations  of  antiquity,  it  seems  reasonable  to  believe  that  he  had 
enough  of  the  critical  spirit  to  compare  the  debt  of  the  world  to  the  Hebrews  as  com- 
pared with  the  people  that  figure  so  vastly  in  secular  history.  He  was  certainly  right 
in  tracing  to  Israelitish  sources  the  waters  of  life,  fruitfulness,  and  healing  which  were 
to  bring  blessing  to  mankind. 

II.  The  widening  and  deepening  of  the  holy  waters.  It  is  here  that  Ezekiel 
passes  from  history  to  prophecy.  Possessed  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  he  was  able  to  look 
into  the  future  and  behold  the  wonder  yet  to  be.  It  is,  indeed,  marvellous  that,  in  a 
perjod  of  national  depression,  when  national  extinction  seemed  to  human  foresight  to 
be  imminent,  the  prophet  of  the  exile  should  have  had  so  clear  a  perception  of  the 
reality  of  things,  and  so  clear  a  foresight  of  the  spiritual  future  of  the  world,  which 
must  in  his  apprehension  have  appeared  bound  up  with  the  continuity  of  the  history 
and  religious  life  of  Israel.  The  river,  like  the  temple  from  which  it  proceeded,  was 
the  emblem  of  what  was  greater  than  itself.  Christian  commentators  have  taken 
pleasure  in  tracing  correspondences  between  the  gradual  increase  of  the  stream  and  the 


468  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  XLvn,  1— 23. 

growth  of  true  and  spiritual  religion.  Beginning  with  Judaism,  the  stream  of  truth 
and  blessing  widened  and  deepened  into  Christianity;  and  Christianity  itself,  com- 
mencing its  course  in  the  bosom  of  Israel,  soon  came  to  include  in  its  ever-widening 
flood,  its  eyer-deepening  volume  of  blessing,  all  the  nations  comprehended  in  the 
dominion  of  Rome.  And  following  centuries  have  witnessed  the  constant  broadening 
of  the  life-giving  and  beneficent  stream,  so  that  none  can  place  a  limit  to  the  area  which 
shall  be  fertilized  and  refreshed  by  the  waters  that  first  flowed  from  the  courts  of  the 
temple  at  Jerusalem. 

III.  The  beneficence  or  the  holt  watees.  Among  the  results  of  the  presence 
of  the  waters  of  life  may  be  observed  the  following.  1.  Healing,  The  salt  and  bitumi- 
nous waters  of  the  Dead  Sea  are  represented  as  being  healed  and  restored  to  sweetness 
by  this  inflow  of  the  sweet  and  wholesome  waters  issuing  from  the  sanctuary.  By  this 
may  be  understood  the  power  of  pure  and  supernatural  religion  to  heal  the  corruptions 
of  sinful  society.  Certainly,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  not  a  little  has  been  done  in  this 
direction  in  the  course  of  the  centuries,  as  the  Church  has  taken  possession,  first  of  the 
Soman  empire,  and  then  of  the  nations  of  the  North,  and  as,  in  these  latter  days,  it 
has,  with  missionary  zeal,  penetrated  the  foulness  of  the  remotest  heathenism.  2.  Life. 
And  this  in  two  several  directions.  The  prophet  saw  very  many  trees  on  the  banks 
of  the  river,  and  a  very  great  multitude  of  fish  in  its  translucent  waters.  Life,  both 
vegetable  and  animal,  life  of  every  kind  and  order,  is  the  result  of  the  stream's  full 
and  beneficent  flow.  Corresponding  with  this  is  the  spiritual  life  which  results  from 
the  benign  and  wholesome  influence  of  true  Christianity.  The  Lord  Jesus  came  that 
men  might  have  life,  and  that  they  might  have  it  more  abundantly.  Life  of  the 
spirit,  the  very  life  of  God  himself — such  is  the  issue  of  the  Divine  interposition  and 
provision.  3.  Fruit/ulness  and  abundance.  The  fishers  spread  their  nets  and  draw 
up  from  the  waters  a  great  supply  of  fish ;  the  husbandmen  go  forth  into  the  gardens 
and  vineyards  by  the  river-side  and  gather  great  crops  of  fruit.  The  river  of  the  water 
of  life,  like  the  streams  of  Damascus  creating  a  green  oasis  in  the  Syrian  desert,  brings 
fertility,  a  wealth  of  blossom  and  of  fruit,  wherever  it  flows.  Righteousness  and 
holiness,  patience  and  peace,  devotion  and  hope, — such  are  the  harvest  for  which  the 
world  is  indebted  to  the  sweet  waters  of  the  Divine  sanctuary. — T. 

Ver.  12. — Uie  tree  of  life.  The  river,  which  in  his  prophetic  vision  Ezekiel  beholds, 
as  it  pursues  its  widening  course  from  the  temple  rock  eastwards  towards  the  Arabah, 
is  seen  by  him  to  be  bordered  with  trees,  clad  with  perennial  foliage,  and  laden  with 
luscious  and  nutritious  fruits.  And  as  the  waters  of  life  bring  satisfaction  and  refresh- 
ment to  the  thirsting  spirits  of  men,  so  do  the  trees  supply  them  with  leaves  to  heal 
their  wounds  and  sicknesses,  and  with  fruit  to  satisfy  the  hunger  which  the  Dead  Sea 
apples  can  only  mock  and  leave  unappeased. 

I.  The  source  of  salvation.  The  fruitfulness  of  the  trees  which  border  the  river- 
banks  is  accounted  for  by  the  fresh  and  flowing  waters  which  keep  their  roots  for  ever 
moist  &nd  nourished.  The  gospel  is  a  Divine  provision  for  human  need ;  its  suitable- 
ness and  sufiBciency  are  only  to  be  explained  by  its  heavenly  origin  in  the  infinite 
wisdom  and  the  infinite  love  of  God  himself.  Our  Saviour  Christ,  "for  us  men  and  for 
our  salvation,  came  down  from  heaven."  The  Holy  Spirit  who  enlightens,  quickens, 
and  blesses,  is  the  Gift  of  God,  "  proceeding  from  the  Father  and  the  Son." 

II.  The  charactbb  of  salvation.  As  represented  in  this  exquisitely  beautiful 
figure,  salvation  is  twofold.  1.  It  includes  healing  for  sin.  As  the  leaves  of  certain 
trees  were  and  are  applied  to  the  body  for  the  healing  of  w/ounds  and  diseases,  so  the 
gospel  brings  to  sinful  men  the  Divine  remedy  and  cure.  2.  It  includes  the  supply  of 
spiritual  wants.  It  is  an  imperfect  view  of  religion  which  confines  it  to  a  provision  for 
pardon.  Religion  takes  possession  of  the  whole  nature,  and  provides  truth  for  the 
understanding,  love  for  the  heart,  and  power  for  the  life.  It  is  to  the  spiritual  nature 
what  food  is  to  the  body — sustenance,  stimulus,  and  strength.  As  the  strong  man  eats 
in  order  that  he  may  be  in  health  and  vigorous  life,  in  order  that  he  may  do  his  daily 
work,  so  does  the  good  man  partake  of  the  fruit  of  God's  Word  in  order  that  he  may  oe 
empowered  to  render  true  and  effective  service  to  his  God. 

III.  The  abundance  of  salvation.  The  trees  which  grew  by  the  river  of  life  are 
represented  as  characterized  by  unwithering  leaf  and  by  unfailing  firuit.     1.  Salvation 


OH.  XLvn.  1— 23.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.  45» 

is  afibrded  as  God's  gift  to  inTiumerable  applicants  of  every  variety  of  character  and 
from  every  land.  2.  Salvation  is  provided  for  successive  generations.  There  was  s 
marvellous  largeness  of  view  in  the  Prophet  Bzekiel ;  he  contemplated  not  only  the 
many  nations  of  men,  but  the  successive  inhabitants  of  the  earth,  as  benefited  by  the 
provision  of  Divine  mercy.  The  perennial  and  inexhaustible  trees  of  life  afford  to  all 
mankind  in  every  age  the  healing  and  the  sustenance  which  they  reqmre.  There  is 
no  limit  to  God's  bounty,  as  there  is  no  limit  to  man's  need. — T. 

Vers.  13 — 21. — The  inheritance  of  the  children.  The  prophet  was  looking  forward 
to  the  restoration  of  his  fellow-countrymen  to  the  land  given  by  God  to  their  fathers. 
The  temple  and  all  that  concerns  its  services  and  ministrations  having  been  desciibed, 
Ezekiel  naturally  turns  in  the  next  place  to  picture  the  repossessed  and  apportioned 
inheritances.  There  are  difficulties  in  interpreting  this  passage  relating  to  the  terri- 
tories given  to  the  several  tribes ;  but  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  prophet  foretold 
the  renewed  occupation  of  the  soil  by  the  descendants  of  Abraham.  It  seems  probable 
that  all  the  while  Ezekiel  had  in  his  mind  the  spiritual  Israel  of  which  the  chosen 
people  were  the  type.     There  is  an  inheritance  for  the  whole  Israel  of  God. 

I.  A  DIVINELY  APPOINTED  IMHERITANOE.  Whatever  are  the  possessions  and  privi- 
leges of  God's  people,  this  is  certain,  that  they  are  the  gift  of  God's  goodness.  What 
have  we  that  we  did  not  receive?  All  things  are  of  God.  If  we  as  Christians  have 
entered  upon  a  heritage  of  knowledge,  of  liberty,  of  purity,  of  peace,  this  is  because  the 
Lord  has  dealt  bountifully  with  us. 

II.  An  especial  inheritance  fob  kaoh.  In  the  settlement  of  the  tribes  in  the 
Holy  Land  nothing  was  left  to  accident  or  to  ambition ;  the  lot  of  each  tribe  was  marked 
out  by  Divine  appointment.  All  Christians  may  appropriate  the  language  of  the 
psalmist,  "The  lines  have  fallen  nnto  me  in  pleasant  places;  yea,  I  have  a  goodly 
heritage."  To  one  the  great  Head  of  the  Church  assigns  an  inheritance  of  conflict ;  to 
another,  an  inheritance  of  peace.  One  section  of  the  Church  is  distinguished  for  its 
thinkers ;  another,  for  its  workers.  But  each  has  his  own  ministry  and  responsibility, 
and  it  becomes  each  to  be  content  and  to  refrain  from  envying  the  lot  of  another. 

m.  A  SUFFICIENT  INHERITANCE  FOR  ALL.  Palestine,  though  comparatively  a  small 
country,  was  large  enough  to  contain  all  the  tribes.  In  the  Church  of  Christ  there  is 
abundant  accommodation  and  provision  for  all  the  members  of  that  Church.  "All 
things  are  yours,  and  ye  are  Christ's,  and  Christ  is  God's."  There  is  no  limitation  to 
the  Divine  resources  or  to  the  Divine  liberality. 

IV.  A  PERPETUAL  INHERITANCE.  Israel  retained  possession  of  the  land  of  promise 
for  generations,  for  centuries ;  but  that  possession,  nevertheless,  came  to  an  end.  In 
this  respect,  there  is  a  contrast  betweeli  the  temporal  and  the  spiritual  inheritance. 
None  of  God's  people  can  ever  be  dispossessed  from  God's  favour,  or  deprived  of  the 
privileges  which  are  secured  to  them  by  the  faithful  promises  of  God.  Those  promises 
nave  respect,  not  to  time  only,  but  to  eternity.  Theirs  is  an  "  inheritance  incorruptible 
and  nndefiled,  and  that  fadeth  not  away." — T. 

Vers.  22,  23. — The  inheritance  of  the  strangers.  It  was  certainly  a  provision  of 
remarkable  interest  and  liberality  that  is  recorded  in  these  verses.  Considering  the 
exclusive  and  clannish  spirit  which  so  largely  distinguished  the  Hebrew  people,  we 
cannot  but  read  with  wonder  as  well  as  with  gratification  that  aliens  were  permitted 
to  partake  with  them  the  possession  and  enjoyment  of  the  land  of  promise.  Those  of 
other  blood,  but  of  the  same  religion,  who  during  the  Captivity  had  cultivated  the  soil, 
'  were  to  be  suffered  to  retain  their  inheritance  equally  with  the  returning  exiles. 
Probably  there  was  abundant  room  for  all,  for  the  numbers  of  the  Israelites  may  well 
have  been  diminished  during  their  exile.  Strangers  thus  coalesced  with  the  sons  of 
Israel  in  the  several  tribes  that  went  to  make  up  the  nation.  In  the  same  manner, 
upon  a  larger  scale,  an  amalgamation  of  Jews  and  Gentiles  took  place  in  the  constitu- 
tion of  the  Israel  of  God — the  Church  of  Christ. 

I.  The  EQUAL  INHERITANCE  OF  ALL  ChRIST'S  PEOPLE  IN  CHRISTIAN  PRIVILEGES  IS 
FOT  OWINS   TO   NATURE,   BUT   IS   THE   AKBANQBMENT   OF   THE   GRACE   OF   GOD. 

II.  The  EQUAL  INHERITANCE  INVOLVES  A  SIMILAR  SPIRITUAL  PBEPABATION  AND 
ADAPTATION. 


460  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  EZEKIEL.    [ch.  xLvn.  1— Za 

in.  The  equal  inheritance  entitles  all  the   members  of  Christ's  Chuboh 

TO   EQUAL  PRIVILEGES. 

Application.  1.  All  distinctions  of  an  hereditary,  secular,  and  educational  character 
are  of  little  importance  in  the  Cbristian  community.  Boasting  is  excluded  where  all 
is  of  grace,  and  where  none  has  any  claim  of  right.  2.  Mutual  consideration  and  for- 
bearance should  obtain  within  the  boundaries  of  the  Church.  Every  Christian  has 
some  especial  office  and  gift ;  perhaps  every  Christian  has  some  special  infirmity  and 
imperfection.  3.  It  is  profitable  and  delightful  to  look  forward  to  the  perfect  fulfil- 
ment of  the  Saviour's  purpose  and  prayer,  to  anticipate  the  time  when  all  shall  be  one — 
one  flock  under  one  Shepherd.  The  inheritance  of  all  God's  people  is  known  only  by 
the  common  designation :  "  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light." — T. 

Vers.  1 — 12. — T%e  river  of  salvation.  The  prophet  has  advanced  from  step  to  step 
in  his  outline  sketch  of  Israel's  destined  glory.  The  temple  is  now  complete.  The 
throne  is  to  be  erected  on  a  foundation  of  righteousness.  The  better  order  for  sacrificial 
worship  is  instituted.  The  climax  of  blessing  is  almost  reached.  One  great  defect  had 
been  manifest  in  Israel's  past  history.  They  lived  for  themselves.  They  were  the 
exclusive  favourites  of  Jehovah.  This  defect  shall  be  remedied.  Israel  shall  hence- 
forth be  a  blessing  to  the  world.  Prom  under  the  temple  altar  a  stream  of  life  is  seen 
to  flow,  which  deepens  as  it  flows,  and  which  shall  irrigate  and  vitalize  whatever  is 
barren  in  the  land.  Prom  Israel,  as  from  a  centre,  gracious  power  shall  go  forth  to 
penetrate  with  new  life  the  human  race.  Such  is  the  significance  of  the  vision.  Tet 
this  structure  of  future  hope  rests  upon  a  groundwork  of  fact.  Within  recent  years  it 
has  been  discovered  that  immense  reservoirs  of  water  exist  under  the  identical  spot 
where  once  the  altar  stood.  Ezekiel  borrowed  the  material  of  his  vision  from  the 
physical  features  of  the  temple  area,  aud  from  the  formation  of  the  country  lying  to 
the  east.  By  a  geographical  necessity,  this  stream  flowed  (in  Bzekiel's  day)  down  the 
valley  of  Jehoshaphat,  along  the  valley  of  the  Kedron,  through  land  blasted  with 
desolation,  and  found  its  way  into  the  Dead  Sea.  With  this  raw  material  of  fact  the 
prophet  weaves  a  gorgeous  tapestry  of  prophecy.  He  foresees-  the  glorious  reality  of 
Messiah's  day.  He  limns  in  outline  the  magnificent  results  of  Calvary.  Pentecost,  with 
its  far-reaching  consequences,  was  filling  his  heart  with  joy :  hence  he  describes  in 
glowing  colours  man's  regenerated  state  through  the  abounding  grace  of  God. 

L  Mare  the  source  of  this  LiFE-oiviNa  stream.  "Behold,  waters  issued  out 
from  under  the  threshold  of  the  house  eastward  .  .  .  the  waters  came  down  from  under 
from  the  right  side  of  the  house,  at  tlie  south  side  of  the  altar."  Here  we  have  an  eariy 
unfolding  of  God's  great  plan  of  salvation — an  anticipation  of  the  closing  vision  in 
John's  Apocalypse.  There  is  vital  instruction  in  every  line.  The  stream  had  its  rise 
under  the  altar,  which  altar  is  the  emblem  of  the  Saviour's  cross.  Hence  we  learn 
that  the  stream  of  Divine  mercy,  the  river  of  life  to  men,  has  its  source  in  suffering 
and  sacrifice  and  death.  Atoning  death,  the  outburst  of  pent-up  love,  is  the  spring 
of  life  to  the  world.  Such  was  the  spectacle  to  the  prophet's  eye;  this  was  revelation 
enough  for  the  moment ;  yet  there  was  a  gracious  fact  further  back.  The  real,  invisible 
source  of  this  salvation  is  in  the  heart  of  infinite  love ;  but  for  wisest  reasons  the 
stream  flows  through  the  channel  of  the  cross.  Therefore,  to  the  eye  of  man  the  most 
fitting  spot  whence  this  stream  should  seem  to  rise  is  the  altar  in  the  temple,  where 
for  ages  God  had  been  sought  and  his  mercy  had  been  found.  The  plural  word 
"  waters  "  signifies  "  abundance."  They  gushed  forth  in  copious  plentifulness.  The 
impression  made  upon  the  mind  was  the  very  opposite  to  stint  or  reluctance.  It  was 
a  generous  overflow,  a  glad  relief  from  previous  restraint.  Such  is  the  quality  of  Gkid'g 
mercy  to  men.  It  leaps  forth  in  generous  abundance.  There  is  no  limit  to  his  kind- 
ness. His  love  is  equal  to  men's  largest  needs — equal  to  the  salvation  of  the  race.  If 
God  is  the  purveyor,  there  can  be  no  lack.  He  gives  with  the  heart  of  a  Father  and 
with  the  freeness  of  a  King. 

II.  Mark  the  rapid  growth  or  the  stream.  At  the  distance  of  a  thousand 
cubits  from  its  source  the  waters  reached  only  to  a  man's  ankles.  Another  like  distance 
was  measured,  now  they  renched  the  knees;  and  soon  the  stream  was  a  river  to  swim 
in — a  river  that  could  not  he  forded.  Impressive  picture  this  of  the  development  of 
God's  plan  of  redemption  I     In  Eden  there  was  only  an  obscure  promise.     Down  to 


OH.  XLvn.  1— 23.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIBL.  461 

the  days  of  Abraham  the  rill  of  experienced  mercy  reached  only  to  the  ankles.  But  it 
Bteadily  grew  in  depth  and  fulness.  It  would  be  a  waste  of  blessing  if  God  should 
disclose  his  grace  faster  than  man  has  capacity  to  receive.  In  Paul's  day  the  stream 
had  sweUed  in  volume,  so  that,  having  tried  his  sounding-Une,  he  stood  confounded, 
and  cduld  only  exclaim,  "  Oh  the  depth  of  the  riches  both  of  the  wisdom  and  know- 
ledge of  God  I "  Still  the  stream  rolls  on  and  increases  in  magnitude.  At  its  banks 
every  thirsty  soul  may  drink  and  live.  For  six  thousand  years  it  has  been  flowing, 
and,  instead  of  giving  any  sign  of  diminution,  the  volume  still  increases  and  shall 
increase.  For  this  saving  knowledge  shall  cover  the  earth  as  the  natural  water  fills 
the  caverns  of  ocean.  So  important  did  God  conceive  it  to  be  that  Ezekiel  should  know 
of  this  steady  increase,  that  he  caused  him  to  test  it  by  personal  experiment.  It  did 
not  suffice  that  Ezekiel  looked  upon  this  increasing  volume  with  his  eye ;  he  must  go 
into  it,  and  have  deepest  knowledge  of  the  fact.  'I'hey  who  preach  to  others  must  have 
personal  experience  of  the  truth.  Theory  and  tradition  and  speculation  will  not  suffice 
for  the  instruction  of  men.  The  preacher  sent  from  God  must  declare  what  he  has 
"  tasted  and  handled  and  felt  of  the  good  word  of  life."  Attention  is  summoned : 
"Son  of  man,  hast  thou  seen  this?" 

III.  Mark  the  salutabt  effects  of  this  stream.  "Everything  shall  live 
whither  the  river  cometh."  The  prophet  soon  left  the  region  of  natural  fact.  There 
was  then  a  stream  flowing  out  from  under  the  temple ;  but  its  waters  were  not  sweet ; 
it  did  not  grow  in  bulk  as  it  proceeded ;  it  did  not  bring  fertility  and  life  to  the  district. 
The  country  through  which  the  Kedron  flows  is  the  most  rocky  and  desolate  to  be 
found  in  Palestine.  Although  this  little  stream  has  been  flowing  for  ages  into  the 
Dead  Sea,  it  has  not  perceptibly  alleviated  its  bitterness.  Nauseous  and  pungent  to 
the  taste  as  ever  is  that  water.  Though  beautiful  to  the  eye  as  the  Sea  of  Galilee,  no 
animated  life  is  on  its  shores ;  all  verdure  is  wanting ;  and  not  the  tiniest  animalcula 
can  live  in  its  depths.  It  is  the  scene  of  silence  and  desolation.  Pathetic  emblem  this 
of  man's  moral  barrenness !  1.  Food  is  provided.  To  this  natural  spectacle  what  a 
contrast  does  Ezekiel's  picture  present  1  This  copious  stream  brings  life  and  beauty 
to  both  its  banks.  Here  grows  every  tree  that  can  yield  fruit.  Here  no  scarcity  can 
be  found,  for  the  trees  bear  in  constant  succession.  As  soon  as  one  sort  of  fruit  is 
exhausted  another  is  purple  with  ripeness.  No  winter  is  here ;  it  is  perpetual  summer. 
Such  fruits  may  be  enumerated :  (1)  knowledge ;  (2)  repentance ;  (3)  pardon  j  (4)  peace; 
f  5)  obedience ;  (6)  adoption ;  (7)  Divine  communion ;  (8)  strength ;  (9)  purity  ; 
QlO)  patience ;  (11)  hope ;  (12)  immortality.  Already  the  deserts  of  earth  have 
blossomed ;  already  these  fruits  of  Paradise  have  been  tasted.  For  long  years  the 
prophecy  has  ripened  into  fact.  2.  Medicine.  "  The  leaf  thereof  shall  be  for  medicine." 
The  provision  which  God  makes  is  always  complete.  Man  is  not  only  the  subject  of 
hunger,  he  is  a  victim  of  disease.  He  is  racked  with  pain,  torn  with  sorrows,  tormented 
with  a  thousand  cares.  And  as  in  nature  the  leaves  and  cells  of  plants  contain  medicine 
for  every  bodily  disease ;  so  in  his  kingdom  of  grace  God  has  furnished  remedies  for 
•11  care  and  sorrow.  "  The  leaves  of  the  tree  are  for  the  healing  of  the  nations."  And 
what  else  can  these  leaves  be  except  the  truths  and  promises  of  the  gospel  of  Christ  ? 
Is  it  not  a  fact  well  attested  that  these  words  and  pledges  of  Jehovah  have  alleviated 
the  distress  of  many  an  anguished  soul  ?  acted  as  cooling  balm  to  many  a  fevered 
heart '  How  many  men,  fettered  with  chains  of  despair,  have  broken  them  by  virtue 
af  the  promise,  "  Him  that  cometh  unto  me,  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out "  !  How  many 
no  tongue  can  tell.  And  like  healing  medicine  to  a  thousand  afflicted  souls  has  been 
the  whispered  assurance,  "  I  will  never  leave  thee ;  "  and  this,  "  My  grace  is  sufficient 
for  thee."  "He  has  sent  forth  his  word  and  healed  them."  3.  There  is  perpetual 
verdure.  Of  these  trees  "  the  leaf  shall  not  fade."  As  a  willow  planted  by  the  river- 
ride  is  well-nigh  always  verdant,  so  the  trees  of  righteousness  were  beauteous  in  immortal 
verdure  because  their  roots  were  nourished  by  the  river  of  God.  Human  nature 
(unvisited  by  God's  grace)  is  a  desert  more  bald  and  sterile  than  the  hjll^sountry  of 
Judna.  But  wherever  this  crystal  stream  of  mercy  comes,  life — luxuriant,  joyous  life — 
Appears.  The  plants  of  holiness  flourish — "  trees  of  the  Lord,  full  of  sap."  A  thousand 
tach  deserts  have  already  blossomed,  and  the  prophecy  is  undergoing  fulfilment  before 
ear  eyes.  4.  Alwidant  life  ia  yd  another  effect.  "There  shall  be  a  very  great 
multitude  of  fish,  because  these  waters  shall  come  thither."    It  ia  in  keeping  with  the 


462  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  XLVn.  1— 23. 

allegory  that  the  prophet  should  speak  only  of  fish  as  the  kind  of  life  generated  hy  this 
stream.  Yet  as  the  result  of  this  human  life  was  sustained.  Population  increased,  for 
men  found  useful  occupation.  The  whole  circumference  of  the  Dead  Sea  hecame  a 
scene  cf  activity — the  home  of  industry  and  plenty.  Again  we  have  a  graphic  sketch 
of  th«  ilfe-giving  grace  of  our  God.  Wherever  it  has  penetrated  it  has  heen  life  from 
the  dead,'  Bodily  life  has  heen  valued  and  prolonged.  The  curative  art  has  developed- 
Domestic  life  has  been  enriched.  All  forms  of  intellectual  life  have  unfolded.  National 
life  has  oeen  purified  and  organized.  Population  has  grown.  Best  of  all,  the  spiritual 
life  in  man  has  heen  awakened,  and  practical  love  to  the  human  race  has  flourished.  A 
moral  revolution  among  mankind  is  in  progress.  The  regeneration  of  society  is  pro- 
ceeding. 5.  Exceptional  barrenness  is  incurable.  "  But  the  miry  places  thereof,  and 
the  marshes  thereof,  shall  not  he  healed ;  they  shall  he  given  to  salt."  There  is  a 
certain  physical  condition  of  harren  land  which  no  ahundance  of  water  will  fertilize. 
So  in  the  kingdom  of  grace  resistance  of  Divine  influence  is  possihle.  Among  the 
chosen  twelve  there  was  a  Judas.  In  the  first  Church  avarice  and  hypocrisy  wrought 
havoc  of  death.  Some  always  "  resist  the  Holy  Ghost."  Some  "  count  themselveg 
unworthy  of  everlasting  life."  To  some  in  his  day  Jesus  spake  with  pathetic  sorrow, 
"  Te  will  not  come  to  me,  that  ye  might  have  life." — ^D. 

Vers,  13, 14,  22,  23. — Oanaan  a  type  of  heaven.  To  the  Jews  exiled  in  Ghaldea 
rettoration  to  Palestine  seemed  a  lesser  heaven.  To  regain  their  land,  their  ancestral 
estates,  their  temple,  their  priesthood,  was  the  goal  of  present  ambition,  was  a  stepping- 
stone  to  yet  higher  good.  The  prophetic  pictures  of  Ezekiel  were  designed  to  tempt 
their  thoughts  to  loMer  soarings.  A  better  thing  than  Canaan  was  in  store  for  them, 
but  as  yet  they  could  not  appreciate  it,  therefore  could  not  perceive  it.  So,  by  slow 
and  patient  steps,  God  leads  us  upward.  We  know  but  little  as  yet,  realize  little  as 
yet,  of  our  great  inheritance.  The  soul  is  under  bondage  to  the  flesh.  The  eye  ia 
veiled  with  material  things. 

I.  Heaven  is  assigned  as  the  raHERiTANOB  of  the  teub  Isbabl.  It  is  an 
undoubted  fact  that  the  natural  Israel  is  the  type  of  the  faithful  in  every  land.  It  is 
a  fact  that  the  earthly  Canaan  is  described  in  the  New  Testament  as  the  type  of  the 
heavenly.  "  If  we  are  Christ's,  then  are  we  Abraham's  seed,  and  heirs  according  to  the 
promise."  "  We  are  come,"  says  St.  Paul,  "  to  the  heavenly  Jerusalem."  To  the  eye 
of  the  exiled  John  the  architecture  of  the  heavenly  city  was  formed  of  materials 
borrowed  from  the  earthly  Jerusalem.  Hence  we  still  "  seek  a  country,  that  is,  a 
heavenly,"  It  is  provided  for  us  by  God ;  it  is  in  course  of  preparation  for  our  use. 
His  house  must  be  furnished  with  guests,  and  the  guests  are  being  prepared  for  the 
place.  "  The  redeemed  shall  dwell  there."  "  The  tabernacle  of  God  is  with  men,  and 
ne  will  dwell  among  them."  "  He  is  not  ashamed  to  be  called  their  God,  for  he  has 
provided  for  them  a  city." 

II.  This  inheeitanoe  God  has  seouebd  bt  oath  unto  all  the  HBiag.  The 
title-deed  is  signed  and  sealed.     It  is  writ  in  lines  of  blood — the  blood  of  Christ. 

"  Signed  when  our  Redeemer  died, 
Sealed  when  he  was  glorified." 

To  all  other  guarantees  God  has  added  this,  viz.  his  solemn  oath.  "Concerning  the 
which  I  lifted  up  mine  hand  to  give  it."  As  men  will  accept  transference  of  property  and 
testimony  in  general,  done  under  the  sanction  of  an  oath,  when  they  would  not  accept  it 
as  final  and  unalterable  without  the  oath,  so  God  has  condescended  to  our  infirmities — 
condescends  to  act  according  to  human  customs.  A  single  promise  from  him  suffices ;  a 
single  word  is  enough.  When  he  created,  a  word  was  ample  :  "  He  spake,  and  it  was 
done."  He  said,  "  Let  light  be  I  and  light  was  I "  So,  in  securing  to  us  the  inheritance 
of  heaven,  a  word  from  him  is  full  security.  His  promise  is  as  good  as  his  perforinance. 
Yet  he  stoops  to  employ  human  methods  and  human  expedients  in  order  to  quell  our 
doubts  and  satisfy  our  faith.  Not  a  loophole  for  doubt  is  left.  As  firmly  established 
as  Jehovah's  throne  is  the  gift :  "  Ye  shall  inherit  it,  one  as  well  as  another."  'Tis  not 
ft  matter  of  purchase ;  it  is  his  spontaneous  gift.  "  I  am  Jehovah ;  therefore  I 
change  not." 

III.  This    inheeitanok  oomprisbb   distinct    bewabdb  fob  faithful  sebtiob. 


OH.  XLvn.  1— 23.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  BZEKIEL.  46S 

"Jotepli  shall  have  two  portions.''  It  would  be  a  serious  mistake  to  suppose  that 
hearen  contained  equal  measures  of  honour  and  of  joy  for  all.  In  all  likelihood  there  is 
greater  diversity  in  eminence  and  in  joy  than  on  earth.  From  the  lips  of  the  unerr- 
ing Judge  the  verdicts  fall,  "Be  thou  ruler  over  ten  cities.  ...  Be  thou  ruler  over  five 
cities."  The  place  of  honour  on  Christ's  right  hand  sliall  be  given  to  him  "  for  whom 
it  is  prepared."  In  proportion  to  fidelity  here  shall  be  reward  there.  Even  Jesua 
Christ  himself  tastes  a  richer  joy  as  the  result  of  his  suffering.  "  For  the  joy  that  waa 
set  before  him  he  endured  the  cross ;  "  "  Therefore  doth  my  Father  love  me,  because  I 
lay  down  my  life  for  the  sheep."  For  some  there  is  in  store  "  a  far  more  ezceediug 
and  eternal  weight  of  glory." 

IV.  The  heavenly  inhebttance  has  a  place  fob  smbitual  ArriNiTiBS.  The 
favoured  occupants  still  dwell  according  to  their  tribes.  In  St.  John's  enumeration  of 
the  redeemed  he  reads  the  muster-roll  of  the  tribes.  Each  tribe  had  its  tale  complete — 
it  numbered  twelve  thousand.  To  the  same  effect  Jesus  affirmed, "  In  my  Father's 
house  are  many  mansions."  The  demarcations  made  by  family  and  social  lines  on 
earth  will  be  obliterated ;  but  instead,  new  associations,  new  affinities,  will  appear. 
The  denizens  will  be  drawn  closer  together,  or  less  close,  according  to  spiritual  tastes 
and  proclivities.  "  He  that  doeth  the  will  of  my  Father  in  heaven,  the  same  is  my 
brother,  and  sister,  and  mother."  There  will  be  emulation,  and  a  measure  of  seemly 
rivalry,  while  envy  and  jealousy  will  be  unknown. 

v.  The  heavenly  inhbritanob  will  be  comprehensive  m  citizenship.  "Ye 
shall  divide  it  by  lot  for  an  inheritance  unto  you,  and  to  the  strangers  that  sojourn 
among  you  .  .  .  they  shall  be  unto  you  as  born  in  the  country."  The  old  spirit  of 
exclusiveness  shall  cease.  Earthly  nationality  is  an  accident,  which  possesses  in  itself 
no  excellence.  Concerning  Greek,  or  Barbarian,  or  Hebrew,  "  God  is  no  respecter  of 
persons."  In  Christ  Jesus  "  neither  circumcision  availeth  anything,  nor  uncircum- 
cision,  but  simply  a  new  creature."  The  distinction  in  God's  kingdom  is  character. 
Demarcation  is  between  the  excellent  and  the  vUe.  He  who  has  in  his  breast  the 
faith  of  Abraham  will  receive  a  welcome,  while  he  who  inherits  only  Abraham's  blood 
will  be  excluded.  No  matter  in  what  clime  a  man  is  born,  no  matter  what  the  colour 
of  his  skin,  if  he  chooses  God  to  be  his  God  and  Sovereign  and  Friend,  he  shall  find  a 
place  among  the  citizens ;  he  shall  obtain  a  lot  among  one  of  the  tribes.  "  Wherefore," 
saith  God,  "  separate  yourselves  from  the  evil,  and  be  ye  clean,  and  I  will  receive  you : 
I  will  be  a  Father  unto  you,  and  ye  shall  be  my  sons  and  daughters,  saith  the  Lord 
Almighty."  The  simple  term  of  citizenship  is  a  "  new  birth."  "  Except  ye  be  con- 
verted, and  become  as  a  little  child  "—such  is  the  condition  to  Jew  and  Gentile  alike — 
"  ye  cannot  enter  the  kingdom  of  God."  "  Without  holiness  no  man  shall  see  the 
Lord."  There  is  world-wide  comprehensiveness,  coupled  with  self-imposed  exclusive- 
ness.— D. 

Vers.  1 — 12. — The  river  of  life.  In  this  noble  vision  we  have  a  prophecy  of  that 
great  redeeming  power  which  Jesus  Christ  should  introduce  to  the  world,  and  we  have 
some  insight  given  us  of  its  triumphs  in  the  far  future.  Of  this  wonderful  river  we 
have  to  inquire  into  - — 

L  Its  Divine  souboe.  The  river  flowed  "  from  under  the  threshold  of  the  house  " 
— from  the  very  dwelling-place  of  Jehovah.  The  river  of  life  has  its  source  in  the 
.Divine,  in  God  himself,  in  his  fatherly  yearning,  in  his  boundless  pity,  in  his  redeem- 
ing purpose.  The  heavens  themselves  pour  down  the  rains,  which  feed  the  springs, 
which  make  the  rivers  of  earth ;  but  from  above  the  clouds,  from  one  whom  "  the 
heaven  of  heavens  cannot  contain,"  comes  that  river  of  life  which  a  wasted  and 
despoiled  world  is  waiting  to  receive.  It  is  a  Divinu  mind  alone  that  could  conceive, 
a  Divine  heart  alone  that  could  produce,  such  a  benevolent  force  as  this. 

II.  Its  bpibitual  ohabactbr.  The  river  of  the  gospel  of  Christ  is  the  river  of 
Divine  truth.  The  kingdom  of  God  is  to  be  established  by  purely  moral  and  spiritual 
agencies.  When  violence  is  used  to  promote  it,  there  is  a  miserable  departure  from  its 
essential  spirit,  and  there  is  a  serious  injury  done  to  its  final  triumph.  For  it  wins  by 
other  and  better  means.  And  as  water  is  itself  composed  of  two  elements,  so  the  truth 
of  God  in  the  gospel  of  Christ  is  twofold.  It  includes  the  truth  we  most  want  to 
know  concerning  ourselves — our  nature,  our  character,  our  position  before  God,  our 


464  THE  BOOK   OF   THE   PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  XLVn.  1— 23. 

poBBibilities  in  the  present  and  in  the  future ;  and  also  the  truth  we  most  want  to 
know  concerning  God— his  character  and  disposition,  tia  purpose  of  mercy,  his 
supreme  act  of  self-denying  lore,  his  overtures  of  grace,  his  summons  to  eternal  life. 

in.  Its  two  sovebbign  vibtubs.  1.  That  of  renewal.  All  kinds  of  fish  live  in 
%e  waters  (vers.  9, 10) ;  many  trees  grow  and  thrive  on  its  banks,  nourished  by  its 
.streams  (ver.  7)j  "everything  lives  whither  the  river  cometh"  (ver.  9).  2.  That  of 
cleansing.  Su-h  are  the  virtues  of  this  river  that,  flowing  into  the  Dead  Sea,  it 
sweetens  even  its  salt  waters  and  cleanses  thera  of  their  bitterness,  so  that  fish  once 
more  live  therein :  "  Its  waters  are  healed  "  (ver.  8).  Such  is  the  gracious  and  bene- 
ficent action  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel  of  Christ.  (1)  It  is  the  source  of  new  life ;  it 
revives  and  it  sustains.  It  finds  men  and  communities  in  spiritual  death,  and  it 
imparts  a  new  and  blessed  life;  before  it  comes  is  a  dreary  moral  waste,  after  :ta 
waters  have  begun  to  flow  there  is  beauty  and  fertility.  Peoples  that  seemed  wholly 
lost  to  -wisdom  and  to  righteousness  are  regained;  homes  that  appeared  hopelessly 
darkened  with  sin  and  shame  are  made  light  with  its  beams  of  truth  and  grace ;  hearts 
that  were  desolate  and  deathful  are  filled  with  peace  and  joy  and  immortsd  hope. 
Everything  lives  where  this  blessed  river  comes.  (2)  It  is  the  one  great  cleansing 
power.  Into  the  darkest  and  foulest  places  it  enters,  and  it  brings  with  it  sweetness 
and  purity  j  corruption  cannot  live  where  its  waters  pass,  but  disappears  before  them. 
This  is  true,  not  only  of  the  hearts  and  the  homes  of  men,  but  of  districts,  of  cities,  of 
countries. 

IV.  Its  gloeious  abdndance.  (Vers.  3 — 5.)  Once  a  small  stream,  it  is  now  a 
broad,  deep  river,  whose  course  nothing  can  check,  whose  waters  are  inexhaustibly 
full,  whose  beneficence  nothing  can  measure.  It  has  come  down  these  many  centuries, 
it  has  girdled  the  whole  earth,  it  will  flow  on  and  on  until  all  the  nations  have  been 
renewed.  1.  Have  we  partaken  of  its  life-giving  waters  ?  2.  Are  we  gaining  there- 
from the  healing  and  the  growth  they  will  yield  ? — 0. 

Ver.  12. — The  doiMe  service — meat  and  medicine.  So  nourishing  should  be  th« 
waters  of  this  (allegorical)  river  that  the  trees  which  they  fed  upon  its  banks  should 
produce  a  never-failing  fruit  and  an  unfading  leaf,  "  and  the  fruit  thereof  should  be  for 
meat,  and  the  leaf  thereof  for  medicine."  The  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  perfectly  fulfils 
the  prophecy ;  its  properties  and  provisions  are  such  that  it  supplies  ample  food  (or 
meat)  for  the  sustenance,  and  all  healing,  (or  medicine)  for  the  recovery  of  the  human 
Boul.     Taking  the  latter  first,  as  being  first  required,  we  have — 

L  The  rbstoeing  vibtue  op  the  gospbi,.  .The  leaf  of  the  tree  of  life  is  "  for 
medicine,"  or  "  for  bruises  and  sores  "  (marginal  reading).  1.  How  great  is  the  need 
for  such  medicine  as  this  in  "  a  bruised  and  sore  "  world  like  ours !  On  every  hand  are 
men  and  women  who  are  chafed  with  the  worries  of  life,  who  are  perplexed  with  its 
problems,  who  are  smitten  and  are  sore  by  reason  of  its  varied  persecutions,  who  are 
worn  and  wearied  with  its  excessive  toils,  who  are  badly  wounded  by  its  heavier 
soriows,  by  crushing  loss,  by  darkening  disappointment,  by  saddening  bereavement, 
by  iisabling  sickness,  by  cruel  disloyalty.  And  beyond  these  there  are  those  who  are 
stung  with  shams,  who  have  been  awakened  to  a  sense  of  their  guilt  before  God,  and 
are  filled  with  a  holy  shame,  a  compunction  which  is  the  first  step  to  true  blessedness, 
but  which  "  for  the  present "  is  grievous  and  distressing  to  the  soul.  2.  How  invalu- 
able is  the  remedy  which  this  tree  of  life  provides !  To  such  wounded  hearts  comes  the 
healin;;  Saviour;  he  comes  (1)  with  tender  sympathy,  ofl'ering  himself  as  the  Divine 
Friend,  who  is  "  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities ; "  (2)  with  the  comfort  of 
his  own  example,  as  our  Leader,  "  whose  way  was  much  rougher  and  darker  than 
ours,"  and  who  asks  us  whether  "  it  is  not  enough  for  the  disciple  to  be  os  his  Lord ; " 
(3)  with  his  Divine  aid,  ready,  at  our  appeal,  to  revive  us  by  his  indwelling  Spirit  and 
grant  us  such  sustaining  grace  that,  instead  of  groaning  under  the  blow,  we  can  even 
glory  in  bearing  it  for  him  (2  Cor.  xii.  9);  (4)  with  his  gracious  promises,  ofifering 
pardon,  peace,  eternal  life,  to  every  penitent  ana  believing  heart ;  thus  is  he  the  Divin* 
Healer  of  the  bruised  and  bleeding  hearts  of  men. 

II.  The  noubishing  powbb  which  it  possesses.  "The  fruit  thereof  shall  be  for 
meat  [or,  '  food '],"  When  health  has  been  restored,  when  the  medicine  of  the  leaf  h,i» 
d«De  its  work,  then  there  needs  to  be  sustenance  in  order  that  the  recovered  strength 


OH.  XLVii.  1—23.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIBL.  466 

may  be  maintained.  Shall  we  not  find  the  nourishment  where  we  found  the  healing  ? 
The  gospel  of  Christ  meets  this  our  need  by  providing :  1.  Divine  truth.  All  that 
truth  concerning  the  nature,  character,  will,  purpose,  of  God  our  Father  and  out 
Saviour  which  we  have  revealed  to  us  in  the  Word  of  God,  and  more  particularly  in 
the  teaching  of  his  Son,  who  came  forth  from  him  and  was  one  with  him.  All  that 
iruth  also  which  relates  to  our  spiritual  nature,  to  our  duty,  to  our  privilege,  to  our 
prospects.  2.  Christian  fellowship.  For  the  society  of  the  holy  is  a  sustaining  power 
that  builds  up  and  makes  strong  in  faith  and  purity.  3.  ITie  action  of  the  Spirit  of 
God.  We  are  "strengthened  with  might  by  his  Spirit  in  the  inner  man."  Such 
imple  and  such  fitting  food  as  this  makes  strong  for  testimony,  for  endurance,  for 
energetic  action,  for  growth  unto  the  full  stature  of  Christian  manhood,  for  readiness 
for  the  heavenly  kingdom. — C. 

Vers.  13, 14  (with  ch.  xliv.  28). — 2%e  three/old  inheritance.  "  Ye  Bhall  divide  the 
land  for  inheritance ; "  "  Ye  shall  inherit  it,  one  as  well  as  another ; "  "I  am  their 
Inheritance  ...  I  am  their  Possession."  These  passages  speak  of  two  kinds  of  inheri- 
tance, and  there  is  a  third  which  remained  to  be  revealed,  and  still  remains  to  be 


I.  The  matebiaIi  inhebitanoe.  According  to  the  prophetic  vision  the  land  of 
Israel  was  to  be  fairly  divided  among  the  different  tribes.  The  prospect  here  held  out 
is  the  possession  of  the  soil — that  soil  which  has  within  it  the  power  of  great  material 
enrichment.  Land  we  call  "  real  property,"  as  distinguished  from  that  about  which 
there  is  a  measure  of  insecurity  or  fluctuation.  Those  who  own  the  soil  own  that 
which  cannot  be  taken  away,  and  which,  though  its  market  value  may  rise  and  fall, 
and  though  it  may  be  greatly  enriched  by  diligence  or  impoverislied  by  recklessness, 
still  has  the  possibility  and  the  promise  of  produce  and  provision.  Land,  therefore, 
may  well  stand  as  the  representation  and  type  of  all  material  inheritance.  God  gives 
to  us  here  a  certain  heritage  of  this  order;  not,  indeed,  "one  as  another"  in  the  sense 
of  equality,  for  there  is  very  great  inequality.  The  inequality  cannot  be  said  to  be 
due  to  Divine  arrangement;  it  is  rather  the  bitter  consequence  of  all  forms  of  sin  and 
folly.  God  has  given  us  a  large,  ample,  fruitful,  beautiful  world  for  our  earthly  home. 
And  if  we  were  but  actuated  by  the  spirit  of  justice  and  of  kindness,  though  there 
might  not  be  anything  like  the  absolute  equality  of  which  some  men  dream,  yet 
would  there  be  a  goodly  heritage  for  every  child  of  man — enough  for  the  ooml'ort  of 
eveiy  home,  for  the  training  of  every  mind ;  enough  to  satisfy,  to  beautify,  to  gladden. 
But  there  is  a  better  heritage  than  this. 

IL  The  spibitual  inhebitanob.  The  Levites  were  not  to  have  any  land  for  their 
share;  God  himself  and  his  service — this  was  to  be  their  "Inheritance,"  this  their 
"  Possession"  (ch.  xliv.  28).  What  was  true  in  their  case  is  surely  far  more  true  in 
ours.  To  us  to  whom  God  has  revealed  himself  in  Jesus  Christ  a  spiritual  well-being 
is  offered  which  does  indeed  constitute  a  noble  heritage.  "  God  has  provided  some 
better  thing  for  us "  (Heb.  xi.  40).  For  us  there  is  not  the  tangible  mountain,  the 
visible  fire,  the  audible  trumpet,  but  an  inheritance  which  eye  cannot  see,  nor  ear  hear, 
nor  could  the  heart  of  man  conoeiTe  (see  Heb.  xii.  18  with  1  Cor.  ii.  9);  for  us  there  is 
a  redeeming  God,  an  Almighty  Saviour,  a  Divine  Comforter,  a  holy  and  elevating 
Mrvice,  a  heavenly  home.  In  this  last  particular  we  have  a  third  heritage,  compared 
rvith  which  any  partition  of  the  soil  was  small  indeed. 

in.  The  heavbnlt  inhebitanoe.  There  are  those  who  pass  throtigh  so  great  "  a 
fight  of  afflictions  "  that  even  with  all  the  boundless  blessings  and  invaluable  treasures 
which  are  "in  Christ  Jesus,"  life  may  seem  of  little  worth;  for  these,  as  indeed  for  us 
all,  there  is  the  fair  prospect  of  "  an  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory  " — of  such 
glories  that  the  sufferings  of  time  are  "  not  worthy  to  be  compared  "  with  them ;  the 
near  presence  of  Christ ;  a  home  of  perfect  love  and  rest ;  reunion  with  the  holy  and  the 
true;  a  sphere  of  imtiring,  elevating  service ;  a  life  of  growing  blessedness. — C. 

Vers.  22,  23. — Jew  and  Oentile.  The  introduction  of  this  passage  is  an  indication 
of  the  figurative  and  spiritual  character  of  the  whole  prophetic  utterance.  The  ideal 
community,  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  was  to  be  one  that  would  attract  those  that  were 
without  and  that  should  welcome  all  that  came ;  it  should  be  a  welcome  home  to  the 

EZEKIEL — U.  2  H 


466 


THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PROPHET  EZBKIEL.    [oh.  XLTm.  1— 35. 


"stranger;"  there  the  aucinut  "people  of  God"  should  find  their  inheritance;  and 
thither  tliose  who  had  been  his  wandering  and  distant  children  should  resort.  Thus 
we  gain  the  idea  of — 

I.  The  ATTBA0TIVENE8B  Or  TEE  KINGDOM.  Ab  the  GentUes  are  here  imagined  as 
crossing  the  Jordan  to  sojourn  within  the  borders  of  Israel,  so  we  are  to  expect  that 
men  will  come  from  beyond  the  pale  Of  the  Christian  Church  to  find  a  homo  within  its 
gates.  1.  It  ought  to  be  far  more  attractive  than  it  has  been  made.  The  discord,  the 
envy,  the  strife  among  its  members ;  the  lamentable  inconsistencies  in  the  lives  of  too 
many  of  its  professors ;  and  the  grave  unwisdom  with  which  its  teachers  have  pro- 
pounded their  theories  as  if  they  were  of  the  essence  and  substance  of  its  truth ; — 
these  have  been  repelling  enough.  2.  Tet,  on  the  other  hand,  the  gospel  of  Christ  has 
been  a  great  attractive  power.  (1)  The  repose  which  it  offers  to  the  human  mind, 
presenting  to  it  one  Divine  and  holy  Creator  and  Sustainer  of  all  things  and  beings; 
(2)  the  rest  which  it  offers  to  the  human  heart,  tendering  to  it  full  and  immediate 
restoration  to  a  Divine  Father's  love ;  (3)  the  enlargement  which  it  offers  to  htunan 
life,  making  it  a  sacred  and  noble  thing  even  in  obscurity  and  poverty ;  (4)  the  high 
and  glorious  hope  it  holds  out  to  the  human  soul,  speaking  of  a  heavenly  future; — M 
this  may  well  prove,  as  it  does  prove,  attractive  (a)  to  those  of  other  faiths  which  have 
no  such  doctrine  to  preach,  no  such  glad  tidings  to  convey ;  (b)  to  those  of  no  faith  at 
ftU,  and  to  whom  this  world  proves  to  be  insufficient  for  lasting  joy. 

II.  The  welcome  on  which  all  comebs  mat  count.  1.  Christ  welcomes  them 
to  his  kingdom.  There  is  no  doubt  at  all  as  to  the  certainty  or  the  cordiality  of  that 
welcome.  Even  tlie  sou  that  has  gone  into  the  very  far  country  and  done  sad  dis- 
honour to  the  Father's  Name  is  received  back  with  every  manifestation  of  parental  joy 
(Luke  XV.).  Jesus  Christ  is  not  only  the  Approachable  One,  from  whom  no  sincere 
seeker  need  shrink ;  he  is  the  One  that  seeks,  that  comes  to  our  own  door,  that  stands 
and  knocks  and  waits  for  entrance  there  (Bev.  iii.  20).  2.  All  his  true  disciples 
welcome  them.  There  may  be  found  communities  bearing  the  Christian  name,  whose 
gates  are  too  narrow  to  receive  many  a  true  follower  of  Christ;  but  all  those  in  whom 
the  Spirit  of  Jesus  Christ  is  dwelling,  and  who  do  not  misrepresent  their  Master,  will 
gladly  welcome  every  "  stranger  "  that  comes  to  "  sojourn  "  or  to  settle  in  the  kingdom ; 
they  will  encourage  him  to  enter ;  they  will  give  him  the  right  hand  of  fellowship,  they 
will  find  him  a  post  in  the  vineyard  of  the  Lord ;  they  will  make  him  to  know  and  feel 
that  in  entering  "  Israel "  he  has  come  to  his  true  home,  that  he  is  "  as  the  home- 
born."— 0. 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTBB  XL VIII. 


Theclosingchapterof  the  prophet's  temple- 
Tision  treats  more  particularly  of  the  distri- 
bution of  the  laud  among  the  several  tril)es 
(vers.  1 — 29),  and  concludes  with  a  statement 
Gonceming  the  gates,  dimensions,  and  name 
of  the  city  (vers.  30—35). 

Vers.  1 — 29.— TAe  distribution  of  the  la/ad 
among  the  several  tribes.  First,  the  portions 
north  of  the  temmah  (vers.  1 — 7) ;  secondly, 
the  terumah  (vers.  8 — 22),  embracing  the 
portions  of  the  priests  and  Levites  (vers.  8 — 
14),  with  the  portions  for  the  city  (vera.  15 — 
20)  and  the  prince  (vers.  21,  22);  and 
thirdly,  the  portions  south  of  the  city 
(vers.  23—30). 

Vers.  1—7.— The  portions  north  of  the 
terumah.      These  should  he  leven,  lie    in 


parallel  strips  from  the  Mediterranean  to 
the  east  border,  and  be  allocatt  d   to   the 
tribes  of  Dan,  Asher,  Naphtali,  Manasseh, 
Bphraim,  Benben,  and  Jndah.     The  diver 
genoes   between  this  and  the  earlier  divi 
sion  under  Joshua  (xiv. — ^xix.)  are  apparent. 

(1)  In  that  Beuben,  Gad,  and  the  half- 
tribe  of  Manasseh  received  portions  on  the 
east  ot  Jordan  ;  in  this  no  tribe  obtains  a  lot 
outside  of  the  boundary  of  the  Holy  Land. 

(2)  In  that  the  allocation  commenced  in  the 
south  with  Judah  ;  in  this  it  begins  in  the 
north  with  Dan  (for  the  reason,  see  Exposi- 
tion). (3)  In  that  the  most  northern  portions, 
those  of  Asher  and  Naphtab,  started  from  a 
point  a  little  above  Tyre ;  in  this  the  most 
northern  portion,  that  of  Dan,  proceeds  from 
the  entering  in  or  the  south  border  of 
Hamath,  some  fifty  or  sixty  miles  north  of 


OH.  XLViii.  1—35.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  BZBKIEL. 


467 


Damascus.  (4)  In  that  the  portions  were 
scarcely  ever  parallel ;  in  this  they  always 
are.  (5)  In  that  the  portions  of  Judah 
and  Benben  lay  south,  and  that  of  Dan 
west  of  Jerusalem  ;  in  this  all  three  are 
situated  north  of  the  city. 

Vers.  1, 2. — The  names  of  the  tribes.  The 
tribe  of  Levi  being  excepted,  the  number 
twelve  should  in  the  future  as  in  the  past 
division  of  the  holy  soil  be  preserved  by 
assigning  to  Joseph  portions  (oh.  xlvii.  13), 
one  for  Ephraim  and  one  for  Manasseh. 
From  the  north  end.  On  the  former  occa- 
sion the  allotment  had  begun  in  the  south 
of  the  laud  and  proceeded  northwards ;  on 
this  it  should  commence  in  the  north  and 
move  regularly  southward.  The  alteration 
is  sufficiently  explained  by  remembering 
that,  after  the  conquest,  the  people  were 
viewed  as  having  come  from  the  south, 
whereas  at  the  restoration  they  should 
appear  as  entering  in  trom  the  north.  To 
the  coast  of  (better,  beside)  the  way  of 
Eethlon,  as  one  goeth  to  (literally,  to  the 
entering  in  of)  Hamath,  Hazar-enau,  the 
border  of  Damascus  This  was  the  north 
boundary  of  the  land  from  west  to  east,  as 
already  defined  (oh.  xlvii.  16, 17) ;  and  with 
this  line  the  portion  of  Dan  should  begin. 
The  portion  should  then,  as  to  situation,  be 
one  lying  northwards,  to  the  coast  of  (or 
rather,  betide)  Hamath.  That  is  to  say, 
beginning  with  the  border  of  Hamath,  it 
should  extend  soutli  wards.  For  these  are 
his  sides,  east  and  west  should  be.  And 
there  ehall  be  to  him  sides  east,  west,  mean- 
ing "  the  tract  between  both  eastern  and 
western  boundaries,"  rather  than  as  Hitzig 
translates,  "  And  there  shall  be  to  him  the 
east  side  of  the  sea,"  signifying  that  his 
territory  should  embrace  the  laud  east -of 
the  Mediterranean;"  or  as  Hengstenberg 
renders,  "And  they  shall  be  to  him  the 
east  side  the  sea,"  equal  to  "  the  tract  in 
question  should  have  the  sea  for  its  east 
border."  Then,  as  this  applies  equally  to 
all  the  tribe-portions,  Hengstenberg  regards 
'  to  him  "  (Sh)  as  pointing  to  "  the  whole 
of  the  tribes  combined  into  an  ideal  unity," 
but  expositors  generally  agree  that  "to 
liim"  should  be  referred  to  Dan,  whom 
the  prophet  had  in  mind  and  was  about  to 
mention.  A  portion  for  Dan  should  be 
Dan  one  "portion,"  ban  (ch.  xlvii.  13X 
rather  than  "tribe,"  036^,  as  Smend  proposes. 
To  take  nn«  as  alluding  to  the  enumeration 
of  the  tribes  is  indeed  coimtenanced  by 
Ezekiel's  mode  of  numbering  the  gates 
(vers.  30 — 35) ;  but  Ezekiel's  style  in  vers. 
80 — ^35  will  be  preserved  here  also  if  "pan 
precede  "Judah,"  thus:  "the  portion  of  Dan 


one."  "  The  presupposition  that  one  tribe 
should  receive  exactly  as  much  as  another 
led  to  the  individual  tribe's  portion  being 
considered  as  a  monas"  (Eliefolh).  In 
the  first  division  of  the  land,  Dan's  portion 
was  small,  and  situated  west  of  the  terri- 
tories of  Ephraim  and  Benjamin. 

Vers.  3 — 7. — ^After  Dan,  Asher,  Naphtali, 
Manasseh  (the  whole  tribe),£phraim,  Beuben, 
and  Judah  should  receive  portions,  each  the 
size  of  Dan's,  and,  like  his,  stretching  from 
the  east  side  to  the  west,  each  joining  on 
to  the  border  of  its  predecessor,  and  the 
seven  portions  together  occupying  the  whole 
space  between  the  north  boundary  of  the 
land  and  the  portion  of  the  Levites.  Among 
the  differences  distinguishing  this  from  the 
division  made  by  Joshua,  these  may  be 
noticed :  (1)  Benben  and  Manasseh  are 
brought  from  the  east  of  Jordan  to  the  west, 
and  Beuben  inserted  between  Judah  and 
Ephraim.  (2)  In  order  to  make  room  for 
these,  Zebulun,  Ephraim,  and  Benjamin  are 
displaced,  and  located  south  of  the  city. 
(3)  Dan  lieads  the  list,  instead  of  fetching 
up  the  rear  as  on  the  last  occasion.  (4) 
Epliraini  loses  her  former  position  next  to 
Judah. 

Vers.  8 — 22. — ^The  terumah,  or  priests' 
portion  (vers.  8 — 12),  with  the  portions  lor 
the  Levites  (vers.  13,  14),  for  the  city  (vers. 
15—20),  and  for  the  prince  (vers.  21,  22). 

Ver.  8. — The  terumah,  already  referred 
to  (ch.  xlv.  1 — 5),  is  here  more  minutely 
described.  (1)  In  situation,  it  should  be 
by  the  border  of  Judah,  i.e.  contiguous  to 
Judah's  territory  on  the  south.  Hence  it 
should  embrace  all  the  above  specified  por- 
tions. (2)  In  breadth,  from  north  to  south, 
it  should  be  twenty-five  thousand  reeds,  this 
being  undoubtedly  the  word  to  be  supplied. 
(3)  In  length,  it  should  be  as  one  of  the 
other  parts,  extending  from  the  east  to  the 
west  side  of  the  land.  (4)  In  relation  to 
the  sanctuary,  this  should  be  in  the  midst  of 
it,  not  necessarily  in  the  exact  geographical 
centre  of  the  whole  ternmah  in  the  larger 
sense,  but  generally  in  a  central  position. 

Vers.  9 — 12  refer  to  the  priests'  portion 
proper,  setting  forth  (1)  its  dimensions, 
25,000  reeds  along  the  nortli  and  south 
boundaries  from  east  to  west,  and  10,000 
reeds  from  north  to  south  along  the  east 
and  west  sides,  so  that  it  should  form  an 
oblong  or  rectangle  of  25,000  x  10,000  reeds 
=  548  square  (geographical)  miles  ;  (2)  its 
relation  to  the  sanctuary,  which  should  stand 
in  its  midst,  in  this  case  should  occupy  the 
exact  geographical  centre;  (3)  its  destina- 
tion, viz.  for  the  priests  that  are  sanctified 
of  the  sons  of  Zadok — better  than  "that 
which  is  sanctified  is  for  the  priests,"   as 


168 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xLvm.  1—35. 


Ewald  and  Hitzig  propose ;  (4)  its  charac- 
ter, most  holy ;  and  (5)  iin  position,  by  the 
burdor  of  the  Levites,  i.e.  with  the  Levites' 
portion  adjoining  it,  but  whether  on  the 
north  or  the  south  is  not  stated,  and  cannot 
yet  be  determined  (see  on  ver.  22). 

Vers.  13,  14. — ^The  LeTites'  portion  is 
next  described  by  its  situation,  as  lying 
over  against — navS,  "at  or  near,"  answerable 
to  (Revised  Version),  parallel  with  (Keil) — 
the  border  of  the  priests ;  by  its  dimensions, 
fls  twenty-five  thousand  reeds  in  length, 
from  east  to  west,  and  ten  thousand  reeds 
in  breadth,  or  from  north  to  south,  i.e.  it 
thould  be  as  large  as  the  priests'  portion — 
ia  point  of  iaot  larger,  since  the  bpace 
necessary  for  the  sanctuary  required  to  be 
deducted  from  the  former;  by  its  tenure, 
wliich  was  such  that  the  Levites  could 
neiti.er  Bell,  ezohange,  nor  alienate  it,  any 
more  than  under  the  Law  the  Levites  oould 
sell  the  field  of  the  suburbs  or  pasture-lands 
of  their  cities  (Ley.  xxv.  34) ;  and  by  its 
character,  which,  as  consisting  of  the  flrst- 
(roits  of  the  land,  i.e.  of  the  first  portion  of 
tlie  land  heaved  up  or  presented  in  ofiuring 
(see  oh.  xIt.  1),  was  holy  unto  the  Lord  (cf 
ch.  xliv.  30).  The  changes  in  the  text 
made  by  the  LXX.  and  favoured  by  Hitzig 
and  Smend — ^"to  the  Levites"  instead  of 
"the  Leiitea"  (ver.  13),  and  "twenty" 
instead  of  "  ten  thousand "  (ver.  13)— are 
unnecessary. 

Vers.  15 — 19. — In  the  same  way  the 
portion  for  the  oity  receives  detailed  ex- 
position. 

Ver.  15  gives  four  particulars.  (1)  The 
oity  portion  should  consist  of  the  five 
thousand  reeds'  breadth  of  the  entire  teru- 
mah  remaining  after  the  deduction  of  the 
priests'  and  Levites'  portions.  (2)  It  should 
lie  over  against  Ojb~^s)  ;  tn  front  of,  and 
therefore  parallel  with,  the  five  and  twenty 
thousand  cubit-lengtha  of  which  these  were 
composed.  (3)  In  character  it  should  be 
a  profane  place,  i.e.  a  place  devoted  to 
common  use  as  opposed  to  consecrated 
ground  (comp.  Lev.  x.  10),  and  designed 
for  the  city,  i.e.  for  dwelling,  and  for 
ivburbs,  i.e.  for  the  erection  of  houses,  and 
for  an  open  space  or  precinct  (ti'^^p)  around 
the  city,  similar  to  that  around  the  sanc- 
tuary (see  ch.  xlv.  2).  Among  the  Romans 
"a  space  of  ground  was  left  free  from 
traildings,  both  within  and  without  the 
walla,  which  was  called  pomwriura,  and 
Iraa  likewise  held  sacred/'  (see  Adam's 
'  Roman  Antiquities,'  p.  62).  (4)  The  oity 
should  stand  in  the  midst  thereof,  as  the 
sanctuary  in  the  midst  of  the  priests'  por- 
tion (ver.  10). 

Ver.  16. — The  dimension*  of  the  oity 


should  be  four  thousand  five  hundred  reedt 
on  the  four  sides ;  in  other  words,  it  should 
form  a  square  (comp.  Lev.  xxi.  16).  The 
v>on,  left  unpunctuated  by  the  Massorites, 
and  marked  as  "written  but  not  to  be 
read,"  should  be  omitted  as  an  error. 

Vers.  18,  19. — The  remaining  portions  of 
the  terumah  should  be  two  strips  of  land, 
each  10,000  x  5000  reeds,  one  on  each  side 
of  the  cityrthe  increase  or  produce  of  which 
should  be  for  food  unto  them  that  serve 
the  oity.  By  "  them  that  serve  the  city  " 
Hitzig  and  Smend  understand  its  ordinary 
inhabitants,  since  a  district  may  be  said 
to  be  cultivated  through  simple  residence 
upon  it  (compare  coJere  locum).  Havernick, 
after  Gesenius,  thinks  of  the  workmen  who 
should  be  employed  in  building  the  city, 
against  which  may  be  urged  that  the  city 
is  suppose  d  to  be  already  built.  Hengsten- 
berg,  with  whom  Flumptre  seems  disposed 
to  agree,  can  only  see  in  the  city  servers 
"  a  militia  who  take  the  city  in  the  midst" 
Keil  and  Klitfuth  find  tliem  in  the  labour- 
ing classes,  who  should  not  in  this  future 
state,  as  so  often  in  ordinary  states  among 
men,  be  destitute  of  a  possession  in  laud, 
but  should  receive  an  allotment  for  their 
maintenance.  But  an  obvious  objection  to 
this  view  is  that  it  hands  over  the  oity 
land  exclusively  to  the  labouring  classes, 
forgetting  that  the  "  other  "  classes  require 
support  as  well  as  they.  Probably  the  best 
interpretation  is  to  regard  Tj;?  'H?!'.  "  them 
that  serve  the  city,"  as  standing  in  anti- 
thesis to  the  other  two  classes  already 
mentioned — the  Levites,  whose  office  should 
be  to  serve  the  tabernacle  (see  Numb.  iv. 
24,  26 ;  xviii.  6,  in  which  laj?  is  employed 
to  denote  the  service  of  the  Levites) ;  and 
the  priests,  whose  special  function  should 
be  to  serve  the  altar  (see  Numb,  xviii.  7, 
in  which,  again,  the  same  verb  is  used). 
Thus  regarded,  "  they  that  serve  the  city  " 
will  mean  all  engaged  in  secular  puisuiti 
in  the  city,  which  approximates  to  the 
view  of  Hitzig;  and  the  prophet's  language 
will  signify  tbat  all  such  should  derive 
their  sustenance  from  the  oity  lands,  t.«. 
should  either  have  direct  access  to  these 
lands  to  cultivate  them  for  themselves,  oi 
should  obtain  a  share  in  the  produce  of 
these  lands  for  other  services  rendered  to 
the  oity.  With  this  accords  the  further 
statement  that  those  who  served  the  city 
should  serve  it  out  of  all  the  tribes  of 
Israel;  t.«.  its  inhabitants  should  not,  as 
formerly,  be  drawn  chiefly  from  the  tribes 
of  JudaL  and  Benjamin,  but  contain  repre- 
sentatives from  aU  the  tribes  of  Israel 
(comp.  ch.  xlv.  6). 

Ver.  20. — All  the  oblation,  the  whole 
temmab,  must  in  this  verse  include  the 
three  portions  already  marked  out  for  th« 


OH.  XLVin.  1—35.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIBL. 


469 


priests,  the  Levites,  and  the  city.  Added 
together,  they  chould  form  a  square  of  five 
and  twenty  thousand  reeds.  Hence  it  is 
added  in  the  second  clause,  Te  shall  offer 
the  holy  oblation  fonr  square,  with  the  pos- 
session of  the  city.  Hitzig,  Kliefoth,  and 
Keil  translate,  "  To  a  fourth  part  shall  ye 
lift  off  the  holy  terumah  for  a  possession 
of  the  city,"  as  if  thu  sense  were  that  the 
nrea  of  the  city  possession  should  be  a 
fourth  part  of  the  area  of  the  whole  teru- 
mah. That  5000  of  breadth  is  a  fourth 
part  of  20,000  of  breadth  may  be  admitted ; 
but  that  the  city  portion  was  not  in  aiea 
a  fourth  of  the  other  two,  a  little  arithmetic 
will  show — the  area  of  the  whole  terumah 
being  25,000  x  25,000  reeds  =  625,000,000 
square  reeds,  and  that  uf  tbtj  city  possession 
being  5000  x  25,000  reeds  =  125,000,000 
square  reeds.  Henoe  the  Authorized  and 
Revised  Versions  are  probably  correct  in 
taking  n'jj'3^  "a  fourth  part"  (see  Exod. 
xxix.  40),  as  equivalent  to  pan  (oh.  xliii. 
16),  Terpdyawov  (LXX.). 

Vers.  21, 22. — ^The  prince's  portion  should 
take  up  the  residue  of  the  original  oblation, 
or  terumah  (see  ver.  8),  from  which  had 
been  withdrawn  the  aforesaid  square'  con- 
taining tho  portions  of  the  Lf>vites,  the 
priests,  and  the  city.  This  residue  should 
consist  of  two  strips  of  land,  situated  one 
on-  each  side  of  the  holy  oblation  (here,  of 
the  priests  and  Levites)  and  of  tlie  posses- 
sion of  the  city,  and  running  along  the 
whole  length  of  the  five  and  twenty  thou- 
sand of  the  oblation  (here  the  three  por- 
tions composing  the  square),  and  extending 
eastward  to  the  Jordan  and  westward  to 
the  Mediterranean.  The  last  two  clauses 
of  ver.  21,  which  should  read,  And  the  holy 
oblation  and  the  sanctuary  of  the  house  shall 
be  in  Ihe  midst  of  it,  implies  that  the  two 
parts  'if  the  prince's  portion,  the  eastern 
and  the  western,  shonld  be  equal.  Ver.  22 
teaches  that  the  whole  intermediate  terri- 
tory between  the  border  of  Judah  (in  the 
north  of  the  terumah)  and  the  border  of 
Benjamin  (in  the  south  of  the  terum  ih), 
from  the  possession  of  the  Levites  (the 
north  portion  of  the  temmah)  and  from 
(equivalent  to  "to")  the  possession  of  tho 
city  (the  southern  portion  of  the  terumah), 
should  lielong  to  the  prince.  The  mention 
of  the  possession  of  the  Levites  and  the 
possession  of  the  city  as  the  extreme  por- 
tions of  the  terumah,  appears  to  indicate 
that  the  priests'  portion  lay  between. 
Ewald  translates  as  if  the  prophet  meant 
to  say  the  sanctuary  should  lie  between 
the  possession  of  the  Levites  and  the  pos- 
session of  the  city  (in  the  first  place),  and 
between  the  two  parts  of  the  prince's  land 
(in  the  second  place),  and  yet  again  between 
the  border  of  Judah  and  the  border  of  Ben- 


jamin (in  the  third  place);  but  to  read 
thus  thr  text  must  be  dianged. 

Vers.  23— 29.— As  for  the  rest  of  the 
tribes,  these  should  follow  on  the  south 
of  the  city  portion,  in  purallel  tracts,  trom 
east  t'l  west — Benjamin,  Simeon,  Issaohar, 
Zebulun,  Gad — till  the  southern  boundaiy 
of  th(  land  should  be  reached,  whion 
boundary  is  again  defined  as  in  ch.  xlvii. 
19.  Each  tribe  should  reraivc,  as  tlioie 
north  of  the  terumah,  ona  portion.  The 
exact  extent  of  this  equal  portion,  though 
not  stated,  may  be  calculated — 

Latitude  of  entrance  to  Hamath    34°  20* 
Kadesh  (say)  30°  30' 

3°  50' 

60  X  S|  =  230  geographical  miles.  But 
the  whole  breadth  of  the  terumah  was 
25,000  reeds = 37  geographical  miles.  Henoe 
230  —  37  =  193  mUes,  which,  divided  by 
12,  gives  16  miles  of  breadth  (from  north 
to  south)  for  each  poition.  The  precise 
length  from  east  to  west  is  more  di£Scult 
to  estimate,  in  consequence  of  the  varying 
widths  of  the  land.  Accepting  this,  how- 
ever, as  55  miles  at  Jerusalem,  the  breadth 
of  the  prince's  portion  from  east  to  west 
would  be  only  2J  miles  on  each  side  of  the 
terumah;  which,  multiplied  by  50  miles 
from  north  to  south,  would  yield  an  area 
of  125  square  miles  on  each  side,  or  of  250 
square  miles  in  all.  The  disposition  of  the 
southern  tribes  differs  from  that  made 
under  the  earlier  division  of  the  land — 
Simeon  alone  lying  where  he  had  been 
formerly  placed,  in  the  south  quarter,  Is- 
sachav  and  Zebulun  being  fetched  from  the 
north,  Benjamin  from  the  middle,  and  Gad 
from  the  west  to  keep  him  company.  Upon 
the  whole,  the  new  arrangement  has  several 
marked  peculiarities  which  distinguish  it 
from  the  old.  While  agreeing  with  the 
old  in  this,  that  the  three  tribes,  Dan, 
Asher,  and  Naphtali  retain  their  original 
places'in  the  nortij,  and  the  temple  is  not 
deprived  of  its  central  position  between 
Judah  and  Benjamin,  it  differs  from  the 
old  in  placing  the  three  northern  tribes 
side  by  side  from  west  to  east,  but  after  one 
another  from  north  to  south,  and  exchanges 
the  positions  of  Benjamin  and  Judah,  trans- 
ferring the  former  to  the  south  and  the 
latter  to  the  north  of  the  temple  and  the 
city.  Then,  while  under  the  old  neither 
priests,  Levites,  nor  prince  had  a  portion, 
all  three  obtain  one  in  this.  And,  finally, 
while  under  the  old  no  regard  was  had  to 
the  temple,  in  the  new  this  forms  the 
central  point  of  the  whole. 

Vers.  30 — 35. — The  closing  paragraph  ii 
devoted  to  a  statement  of  the  gates,  dimen- 
sions, and  name  of  the  city. 


470 


THE   BOOK   OF   THE   PROPHET   EZEKIEL.     [oh.  xtvin.  1—35, 


Ver.  30. — The  goings  out  of  the  city. 
These  were  not,  as  Hitzig,  Gesenius,  Evtald, 
Soliroder,  and  Currey  have  snppoBed,  the 
city  exits,  or  gates,  wliich  are  afterwards 
reterrt-d  to,  but,  as  Kliefoth,  Keil,  Heng- 
stenberg,  and  Smend  suggest,  the  exten- 
sions or  boundary-lines  of  the  city,  in  other 
wards,  the  city  walls  in  which  the  gates 
should  be  placed,  and  wliich  are  measured 
before  the  gates  are  specified.  The  north 
wall,  with  which  the  rest  should  correspond, 
should  be  four  thousand  and  five  htrndred 
measures ;  literally,  floe  hundred  and  four 
thotisand  (not  cubits,  as  Ewald  states,  but 
reeds)  by  measure. 

Vers.  31— 34.— The  gates  of  the  oity. 
These  should  be  twelve  in  number,  three  on 
each  side,  and  named  after  the  twelve  tribes 
(comp.  Bev.  xxi.  12).  The  gates  leading 
northward  should  be  those  of  Beuben, 
Judah,  and  Levi,  all  children  of  Leah  (Gen. 
XXLX.  32,  35),  as  Keil  observes,  "the  first- 
bom  in  age,  tlje  firstborn  by  virtue  of  the 
patriarchal  blessing,  and  the  one  chosen  by 
Jehovah  for  his  own  service  in  the  place  of 
the  firstborn."  The  same  three  occupy  the 
first  three  places  and  in  the  same  order  in 
tlie  blessing  of  Moses  (Deut.  xxxiiL  6—8). 
Towards  the  east  sljonld  lead  tlie  gates  of 
Joseph,  Benjamin,  and  Dan,  the  first  and 
second  sons  of  Bachel,  and  the  third  a  son 
of  Bachel's  handmaid  (Gen.  xxx.  6,  24; 
XXXV.  18).  In  the  blessing  of  Moses 
Benjamin  precedes  Joseph  (Deut.  xxxiii. 
12,  13).  The  south  gates  receive  the  names 
of  Simeon,  Issachar,  and  Zebulun,  again  all 
sons  of  Leah.  The  west  gates  are  those  of 
Gad,  Asher,  and  Naphtali,  that  is,  two  sons 
of  Leah's  handmaid  and  one  of  Bachel's.  It 
is  observable  that  in  the  naming  of  the  gates 
Levi  resumes  his  place  among  the  tribes, 
which  necessitates  the  substitution  of  Joseph 
the  original  tribe-father  instead  of  Ephraim 
and  Manasseh  his  two  sons.  (On  the  phrase, 
one  gate  of  Judah,  literally,  the  gate  of 
Judah  one,  see  on  ver.  1.) 

Ver.  35. — The  entire  circuit  of  the  oity 
sliould,  according  to  the  above  measurement 
ot  the  walls,  be  eighteen  thousand  reeds,  i.e. 
18,000  X  6  (cubits)  x  li  (feet)  =  162,000 
feet  =  30  miles.  Josephus  ('  Wars,'  v.  4.  3) 
reckoned  the  circuit  of  Jerusalem  in  his  day 
to  be  thirty-three  stadia,  or  four  miles.  The 
name  of  the  oity  from  that  day  should  be, 
The  Lord  is  there.  It  is  debated  whether 
"  from  that  day  "  (dVd)  should  be  connected 
with  the  preceding  or  the  succeeding  words, 
find  likewise  whetlier  rvffff  should  be  trans- 
lated « there"  or  "thither."  The  Authorized 
and  Revised  Versions,  Ewald,  Havernick, 
Hengstenberg,  Schroder,  and  Smend  agree 
that  DVD  belongs  to  the  antecedent  clause, 
but  differ  as  to  whether  it  should  be  under- 
rtood  8S  equivalent  to  "  from  this  time  forth," 


i.e.  for  all  time  to  come  (Ewald),  or  "from 
henceforth,"  i.e.  from  that  day  on,  i.e.  from 
the  day  of  the  city's  building  (Hengsten- 
berg), which  seems  the  most  natural  inter- 
pretation. Eliefoth  and  Keil  prefer  to 
conjoin  "  from  that  day  "  with  the  clause 
following,  and  expound  the  prophet's  state- 
ment as  saying  that  the  city's  name  should 
be,  "Henceforward  Jehovah  is  there,  or 
thither."  Ewald,  Hitzig,  Keil,  and  Smend, 
with  the  two  En-disli  Versions,  decide  for 
"  there,"  Havernick,  Hengstenberg,  Kliefoth, 
and  Schroder  for  "  thither,"  as  the  sense  of 
n!;:^.  That  "  thither  "  is  the  ordinary  import 
of  TV^\»  is  undoubted ;  but  that  by  Ezekiel 
(see  ch.  xxiii  3;  xxxiiL  29,  30)  and  others 
(Jer.  xviii.  2 ;  Ps.  cxxii.  5 ;  2  Kings  xxiii  8) 
it  is  used  as  "  there  "  is  also  correct  (see  Ge- 
senius, 'Lexicon,' 8«6  voce).  HappUy,  which- 
ever rendering  be  adopted,  the  difference  in 
significance  is  not  materiaL  If  "  there,"  the 
sense  is  that  Jehovah  will  henceforth  reside 
in  the  city;  if  "thitlier,"  that  he  will 
henceforth  direct  his  regards  towards  the 
city.  To  object  against  the  former  view 
that  Jehovali  was  in  the  future  to  reside  in 
the  temple  rather  than  in  the  city  is 
hypercritical,  since,  if  Jehovuh  should  make 
the  temple  his  peculiar  habitation,  it  would 
be  for  the  sake  of  the  city;  if  the  latter 
view  be  taken,  Klicfoth's  explanation  must 
be  set  aside  that  "  from  this  day  on  Jehovah 
would  direct  himself  towards  the  city  ;  that 
the  oity  and  all  concerning  it  may  come  to 
pass."  As  Keil  observes,  the  name  Jthovnh 
Shammah  was  not  to  be  given  to  the  city 
before  but  after  it  was  built  (comp.  Isa.  Ix. 
14). 

VOTB. 

On  the  significance  of  the  temple-vition. 

The  substance  of  what  has  been  ascer- 
tained in  the  foregoing  Exposition  may  thus 
be  set  forth. 

1.  According  to  the  vision  shown  to  the 
prophet,  on  returning  to  take  possession  of 
their  own  land  in  accordance  with  promises 
previously  given  (oh,  xxxiv.  13;  xxxvi  24; 
xxxvii.  12,  21,  25),  the  tribes  of  restored  and 
reunited  Israel  should  first  separate  from 
the  soil  a  holy  heave,  or  terumah,  as  a  portion 
for  Jehovah  (oh.  xlv.  1 — 8).  This  terumah 
they  should  divide  into  three  parallel  tracts  : 
assigning  that  on  the  north,  two-fifths  of 
the  whole,  to  the  Levites  for  chambers  and 
for  lands ;  that  in  the  middle,  also  two-fifths 
of  the  whole,  to  the  priests,  for  the  sanotnary, 
wliich  should  occapy  its  centre,  and  for 
houses  in  which  they  might  reside ;  and  that 
in  the  south,  one-fifth  of  the  whole,  for  the 
city,  which  also  should  stand  in  its  middle, 
for  dwellings  and  for  suburbs  (oh.  xlviii  IS). 


OH.  xLvm.  1-55.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHKT  EZEKIBL. 


471 


Two  BtripB  of  equal  area  on  either  side  of 
the  temmah,  one  extending  westward  to 
the  Mediterranean  and  another  eastward 
to  the  Jordan,  should  be  handed  oyer  as  a 
portion  for  the  prince,  ont  of  which  he 
shonld  provide  burnt,  meat,  and  drink 
offeringB  in  the  feasts,  new  moons,  sabbaths, 
and  other  solemnities  of  the  iiouse  of  Israel 
(oh.  xlv.  17).  The  remainder  of  the  land 
they  should  partition  nmong  themselves, 
allotting  to  each  tribe  an  equal  portion, 
which  should  extend  from  east  to  west 
across  the  entire  breadth  of  the  territory 
between  the  river  an  '  the  sea,  and  be 
parallel  to  the  holy  oblation,  but  locating 
seven  tribes  north  and  five  south  of  the 
temmah. 

2.  On  returning  to  their  own  land,  they 
should  find  that  Jehovah  had  again, 
according  to  promise,  established  amongst 
them  his  sanctuary  (oh.  xxxvii  26,  27),  a 
description  of  which  the  prophet  gives.  It 
is  noticeable  that  no  indication  is  furnished 
by  tlie  prophet  that  the  people  should  erect 
an  edifice  after  the  pattern  and  according  to 
the  measurements  of  the  house  shown,  but 
simply  a  statement  made  that  euoh  should 
be  the  sanctuary  in  which  they  should 
worship. 

3.  Un  finding  themselves  once  more  in 
possession  of  the  land  which  had  been  given 
to  their  fathers,  and  of  a  sanctuary  prepared 
for  them  by  Jehovah,  the  people  of  Israel 
should  tlienoeforward  serve  him  in  accord- 
ance with  the  ordinances  prescribed  in  the 
new  Torah  (ch.  xliv. — xlvi.) ;  should  appear 
before  him  in  the  yearly  feasts  of  the  Pass- 
over and  Tabernacles,  in  the  monthly  feasts 
of  the  new  moon,  in  the  weekly  feasts  of 
the  sabbath,  and  in  the  daily  ritual  of 
saoriflce ;  should  devolve  upon  the  Zadokite 
(i.e.  upon  faithful)  priests  the  duty  of 
ministering  at  the  altar,  upon  the  Levites,  to 
which  rank  the  apostate  (or  unfaithful) 
priests  of  the  monarchy  should  be  reduced, 
that  of  attending  to  the  s  inctuary,  or  of 
serving  the  priests;  and  upon  the  prince 
that  of  providing  the  requisite  sacrificial 
victims  for  the  public  festivals;  the  people 
for  this  purpose  paying  him  the  sixtieth 
part  of  their  corn,  the  hundredth  part  of 
tlieir  oil,  and  the  two-hundredth  head  of 
their  flocks  annually  as  a  heave  offering. 

4.  When  Israel,  thus  revived  and  regene- 
rated, restored  and  reunited,  should  serve 
Jehovah  with  a  pure  cultus,  faithfully  per- 
forming his  commandments  and  walking  in 
his  ways,  there  should  flow  from  the  temple, 
as  the  habitation  of  Jehovah  and  the  central 
institution  of  the  land,  down  to  the  Jordan 
valley  and  into  the  Dead  Sea,  a  miraculously 
increasing  river,  which  should  clothe  the 
banks  along  its  course  with  never-fading 
beauty  and  never-failing  fertility,  and  on 


reaching  the  sea  should  render  its  waters 
salubrious,  so  that  living  creatures  and 
fishes  of  every  kind  should  swarm  therein. 

The  question,  therefore,  which  remains  is 
— What  significance  should  be  attached  to 
this  temple-vision?  The  answer  will  de- 
pend on  whether  the  principle  of  interpre- 
tation applied  t^  it  is  literal  or  metaphorical, 
historical  or  typical;  actual  or  symbolical 
Roun  I  these  two  methods  of  interpretation 
the  different  views  that  have  been  enter- 
tained of  this  temple- vision  may  with 
sufficient  accuracy  be  grouped. 

I.  Views  which  gbound  themselves  ok 

A  MORE  OB  LESS  LITEBAL  INTERPRETATION  OF 

THE  visiOK.  The  only  point  which  all  the 
views  in  this  class  have  in  conunon  is  that 
they  regard  Ezekielas  I  lavlng  furnished  the 
sketch  of  a  new  constitution  for  Israel,  civil 
as  well  as,  but  chiefly,  religious,  to  be 
actually  put  in  force  at  some  time  in  the 
future,  either  immediately  subsequent  to 
the  exile  or  afterwards,  by  the  erection  of  a 
temple,  the  institution  of  a  worship  and  a 
division  of  the  land  in  accord  ance  with  the 
specifications  furnished  by  Ezekiel 

1.  Tliat  the  "temple- vision"  was  designed, 
in  whole  or  in  part,  to  provide  a  new  oonsti- 
tittion  for  the  exiles  who  should  return  from 
^uhylon  when  the  seventy  years  of  captivity 
had  run  their  course,  is  a  view  wliich  has 
always  commanded  support.  -  (1)  It  was 
favoured  by  Villalpandus,  who  saw  in 
Ezekiel's  "house"  only  a  reminiscence  of 
the  Solomonic  temple  which  the  prophet, 
having  conjured  up  before  his  imagination, 
placed  on  paper  that  it  might  serve  as  a 
model  for  the  future  shrine  which  the  home- 
returning  Israelites  should  erect ;  but  inas- 
much as  Ezekiel's  "  house,"  while  exhibiting 
not  a  few  correspondences  with  Solomon's 
temple,  at  the  same  time  discovered  too  many 
differences  from  that  edifice  to  admit  of 
being  regarded  as  its  exact  transcript,  critics 
soon  perceived  that  the  explanation  of  Vil- 
lalpandus would  require  to  be  modified. 
(2)  Accordingly,  Grotius  substituted  for  the 
temple  as  first  constructed  by  Solomon,  the 
same  edifice  as  it  existed  in  Nebuchad- 
nezzar's time  immediately  before  the  de- 
struction of  Jerusalem.  Tliis,  that  scholar 
thouglit,  would  account  for  the  variations 
ftom  Solomon's  temple  which  were  per- 
ceptible in  Ezekiel's  "  house ;  "  but,  as 
EUefoth  properly  observes,  while  changes 
must  undoubtedly  have  passed  upon  the 
temple  (both  upon  the  bmlding  and  in  its 
ritual)  between  the  dates  of  its  erection 
and  of  its  demolition,  these  were  little  likely 
to  be  of  such  a  character  as  to  render  it  the 
harmonious  and  symmetrical  structure  it 
appears  in  Ezekiel's  vision.  (3)  A  third 
suggestion  was  then  advanced  by  Eichhom, 
Dathe,  and  Herder,  and  adopted  by  Hitz^^, 


472 


THE  BOOK   OF   THE   PEOPHET   EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xlviii.  1—35. 


that  Bzetiel's  temple  -was  not  so  much 
modelled  after  Solnmon's  as  freelj'  imaged 
and  presented  to  the  exiles  as  an  ideal 
sketch  of  the  new  religious  and  civil  order 
wliich  should  be  estublished  in  Palestine 
after  the  return  ii-om  captivity ;  while  to 
the  objection  that  no  such  order  nas 
establishLd  by  the  Jews  who  came  back 
from  Babylon,  it  was  replied  that  that  was 
net  the  fault  of  Ezekiel,  but  of  the  people, 
and  no  detraction  from  tlie  splendour  of  the 
ideal  which  had  been  held  up  before  them, 
but  only  an  indication  of  their  inability  to 
convert  that  ideal  into  reality.  This  view, 
however,  besides  being  open  to  the  objec- 
tions to  be  afterwards  urged  against  it  in 
common  with  others,  has  this  difficulty  of 
its  own  to  contend  with,  that  in  introducing 
the  subjective  element  of  fancy  as  Ihe 
primal  source  of  the  "  vision,"  it  directly 
conflicts  with  the  proiihet's  statement  that 
the  vision  was  expressly  shown  him  by 
supernatural  agency.  (4)  Closely  allied  to 
the  preceding  views,  and  in  fact  combining 
them,  are  those  of  Ewald,  Kuenen,  Well- 
hausen,  Smend,  Robertson  Bmith,  Canon 
Driver,  and  their  followers  in  Germany  and 
in  England.  "  Ezekiel  may  for  a  long  time," 
writes  Esvald  ('  Die  Fropheten  des  Alten 
Bundes,'  vol.  ii.  p.  531),  "have  ponder^ 
with  burning  desire  and  lively  recollection 
on  the  institutions  of  the  fallen  temple  and 
kingdom  :  what  appeared  to  him  great  and 
glorious  therein  may  have  deeply  engraven 
itself  upon  his  heart  as  the  model  of  a 
future  restoration;  with  such  historical 
memories  he  may  have  compared  the 
Messianic  expectations  and  demands  in 
detail,  and  thus  in  spirit  have  projected  for 
himself  the  most  vivid  pictures  of  the  best 
constitution  and  arrangement  of  the  details 
at  the  hoped-for  restoration  of  the  kingdom." 
Kuenen  ('The  Religion  of  Israel,'  ii.  114) 
oalls  the  passage  now  alluded  to  "  a  com- 
plete plan  for  the  organization  of  tl.e  new 
IsraeL"  Wellhausen  ('  Geschichte  Israels,' 
p.  62)  speaks  of  the  whole  "  vision  "  as  "  a 
programme  for  the  future  restoration  of  the 
theocracy."  Smend  styles  Ezekiel  "  a  law- 
giver, who  outlines  a  complete  life-ordinance 
for  the  Israel  of  the  future."  Robertson 
Smith  ('  The  Old  Testament  in  the  Jewish 
Churoh,'  p.  874)  characterizes  his  Torah  as 
"  a  sketch  of  ritual  for  the  period  of  restora- 
tion." Canon  Driver  ('  An  Introduction  to 
the  Literature  of  the  Old  Testament,'  p. 
273)  says  that  oh.  xl. — xlviii.  give  "  the 
constitution  of  the  restored  theocracy,"  but 
adds  (p.  274)  that,  "  though  the  details  are 
realistically  conceived,  it  is  evident  tliat 
there  is  an  ideal  element  in  Ezekiel's 
representations  which  in  many  respects  it 
wae  found  impossible  to  put  into  practice." 
Thus,  while  preseniing  different  sliades  of 


opinion,  the  interpreters  and  critics  just 
mentioned,  from  VillalpanduB  downwards, 
are  unanimous  in  regardingthe  "  vision  "  as 
having  been  at  once  a  temple  plan,  a  oultus 
Torali,  and  a  land  act  for  the  post-exilio 
age ;  but  against  this  understanding  of  the 
"vision,"  in  thejuilgment  of  such  scholars 
and  expositors  as  Havernick,  Eairbairn, 
Keil,  Kliefoth,  "Wright,  and  Plumptre,  the 
objections  that  may  be  urged  are  too 
numerous  to  admit  of  the  belief  that  Ezekiel 
had  any  such  intention  as  it  supposes,  vii. 
an  intention  to  prepare  beforehand  a  new 
constitution  for  the  restoration  era,  which 
he  believed  to  be  at  hand.  These  objeotiong 
are  the  following : — 

(1)  If  Ezekiel  actually  did  intend  to 
leave  behind  him  a  programme  for  the 
coming  age,  a  constitution  for  the  new 
theocracy  which  he  foresaw  should  arise, 
it  is,  to  say  the  least,  remarkable  that  no 
suspicion  of  this  appears  to  have  crossed 
the  minds  of  any  of  the  post-exilic  leaders, 
such  as  Zerubbabel,  Joshua,  Ezra,  or 
Neheminh,  all  of  whom,  besides,  lived  so 
olose  to  Ezekiel's  time  that  they  must  have 
been  aware  of  it  had  any  such  intention 
existed. 

(2)  ^Tor  is  it  simply  that  the  post-exilio 
leaders  gave  no  indication  that  they  re- 
garded it  as  binding  on  them  to  carry  oat 
the  wishes  of  Ezekiel  as  these  were  set 
forth  in  this  temple-vision ;  but  in  proceed- 
ing with  their  work  of  restoration,  in  the 
reconstruction  of  the  temple,  in  the  re- 
organization of  the  worship,  and  in  the 
redistribution  of  the  land,  tliey  went  back 
to  the  state  and  condition  of  things  which 
had  existed  in  pre-exilio  times,  building 
their  new  temple  on  the  exact  foundations 
of  the  old  (Ezra  iii.  8 — 13),  fashioning  their 
worship  in  aocordanoe  with  the  prescrip- 
tions of  the  Levitical  (or  so-called  priest-) 
code  (wiiioh,  "  in  its  main  stock,"  Driver, 
'An  Introduction,'  etc.,  p.  135,  admits 
existed,  though  in  unwritten  form,  in  pre- 
exilic  times),  and  dividing  their  territory, 
if  not  after  the  land  act  of  Moses,  still  less 
after  that  of  Ezekiel. 

(3)  Add  to  this  that,  had  the  post-exilio 
leaders  been  desirous  of  following  the 
directions  of  the  "  vision,"  they  would  have 
found  it  in  many  points  quite  impraot>oable. 
Not  to  speak,  at  least  in  this  connection 
(see  below),  about  the  "  very  high  moun- 
tain" or  the  "temple-river,"  which  one 
scarcely  sees  how  they  could  have  impro 
vised,  it  may  be  asked  how  they  could 
have  laid  out  on  the  summit  of  Moriah  the 
precincts  of  tlie  temple,  which  were  500 
reeds  (i.e.  3000  cubits,  or  4500  feet)  square, 
or  a  compass  of  over  three  miles  and  a 
hnlf ;  or  measured  off  the  terumah,  which 
enclosed  an  area  of  2SO0  square  miles,  or 


OH.  XLViii.  1— 35.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  BZEKIEL. 


473 


nearly  twice  as  large  as  the  whole  of 
Judeea  (see  Conder's  'Handbook  to  the 
Bible,'  p.  273);  or  divided  the  territory 
(whidi  they  did  not  posseBs)  from  the 
entrance  of  Hamath  to  thu  river  of  Egypt  ? 
Assuredly,  if  Ezekiel's  plan  was  thus  one 
which  could  not  have  been  carried  out,  even 
had  he  meant  it,  Ezekiel  may  be  credited 
with  having  had  sufficient  sense  not  to 
mean  it. 

(4)  Then  on  the  literal  liypothesis,  what 
ia  to  be  made  of  the  "  yery  high  mountain  " 
on  which  the  temple  was  seen  to  rest,  and 
of  the  rivei'  that  increased  without  receiving 
any  tributaries  along  its  course ;  and  of  the 
sea,  whose  waters  were  rendered  salubrious 
and  made  to  teem  with  fish  by  the  flowing 
into  them  of  the  temple-stream?  A  hill 
whose  maximum  elevation  above  the  sea 
waB  not  more  than  2528  feet  could  hardly 
have  been  repreuented  as  a  "very  higli 
mountain ;  "-  a  water-canal  or  spring  could 
Boarcely  have  been  made  to  do  duty  for  a 
freely  flowing  river;  while  a  visit  to  the 
Dead  Sea  will  convince  the  most  sceptical 
that  its  waters  are  to-day  as  unwholesome 
and  fatal  to  life,  both  vegetable  and  animal, 
as  they  ever  were.  Considerations  such  as 
these   are  sufficient  to   indicate  that  the 

Erophet  never  intended  his  language  to 
e  taken  literally,  or  his  "house"  to  be 
regarded  as  a  new  temple,  his  Torah  aa  a 
new  litual,  and  his  territorial  distribution 
scheme  as  a  new  laud  act  for  the  returned 
exiles. 

(5)  If  more  be  needed  to  demonstrate 
that  the  prophet,  in  writing  down  these 
temple  -  measurements,  sacrificial  ordin- 
ances, and  land  arrangements,  was  not 
draughting  a  new  constitution  for  post- 
exilic  Israel,  it  may  be  found  in  this, 
that  he  removed  the  temple  so  completely 
beyond  the  precincts  of  the  city.  What- 
ever significance  may  have  lain  in  that  as 
a  symbol  (to  be  considered  in  th,c  sequel), 
it  is  obvious  that  no  Jewish  patriot  could 
have  been  expected  to  acquieisce  in  such  an 
arrangement  (already  it  has  been  seen  that 
they  did  not),  on  the  supposition  that  it 
was  meant  to  be  actually  put  in  force ;  and 
hence  it  may  be  almost  pronounced  certain 
that,  whatever  notions  may  have  lurked  in 
the  prophet's  mind  regarding  it,  he  never 
seriously  proposed  it  as  a  model  to  be 
copied  by  the  builders  of  the  post-exilic 
age. 

2.  A  second  view  deserving  mention,  if 
less  extended,  is  that  of  those  who,  while 
finding  in  the  temple-vision  a  new  con- 
stitution for  restored  and  reunited  Israel, 
and  while  conceding  that  in  some  sn.all 
measure  or  degree  it  may  have  been  put 
in  force  subsequent  to  the  exile,  neverthe- 
less anticipate  the  coming  of  a  golden  age. 


when  it  wiU  receive  an  exaet  and  eompUtt 
fulfilment,  when  the  soil  of  Palestine  will 
be  divided,  the  temple  erected  at  Jerusalem, 
and  the  worship  of  Jehovah  established 
therein  precisely  as  here  outlined  by  EzekieL 
(1)  It  is  not  difficult  to  understand  how 
this  idea  should  from  the  first  have  been 
favoured  by  Jewish  interpreters,  who  still 
expected  Messiah,  and  believed  that  when 
he  came  he  would  not  only  replace  the 
Jewish  people  in  their  own  lan^  but  set 
up  the  precise  civil  and  religious  arrange- 
ments that  are  here  sketched.  (2)  But 
besides  these,  not  a  few  Christian  mille- 
narians  have  embraced  this  interpretation, 
holdiug,  as  they  do,  not  only  that  Jesus  is 
the  Messiah,  but  that  in  connection  with 
and  prior  to  his  second  coming — which 
they  consider  will  introduce  the  thousand 
years'  reign  of  the  risen  saints  upon  the 
earth — all  the  details  of  this  vision  will  be 
carried  out:  the  Jews,  who  shall  then  have 
become  converted  to  Christianity,  will  re- 
turn to  their  own  land,  which  they  wUl 
divide  amongst  themselves  as  here  repre- 
sented, erect  a  temple  after  the  specifica- 
tions here  laid  down,  and  institute  a  wor- 
ship in  accordance  with  the  Torah  here 
enjoined.  Of  this  view  a  representative 
may  be  found  in  M.  Baumgarten,  who 
thinks  that  the  points  of  contact  between 
Ezekiel's  temple  and  Solomon's  are  too 
numerous  and  close  for  one  to  resolve  the 
whole  picture  into  symbol  and  allegory, 
and  who  asks  how,  when  Israel  has  re- 
turned to  her  God,  she  ought  to  give  ex- 
pression to  her  faith  and  obedience,  if  not 
in  the  forms  and  ordinances  which  Jehovah 
has  given  to  them — tliese  forms  and  ordin- 
ances being  th0c>e  embodied  in  Ezekiel's 
temple-vision  (see  Herzog's  '  Eeal-Encyolo- 
padie,' art.  "Ezechiul").  But  against  this 
view,  whether  in  its  Jewish  or  Christian 
form,  which  expects  a  future  glorification 
of  the  land,  people,  and  religion  of  Israel, 
serious  and  insurmountable  difficulties  press. 
(1)  The  objections  alreiidy  mentioned  as 
declaring  against  the  former  view  of  a  pro- 
gramme for  the  post-exilic  age  speak  with 
equal  force  against  this,  which  simply 
transfers  the  building  of  the  temple,  the 
institution  of  the  ritual,  and  the  dividing 
of  tlie  land  to  a  future  Messianic  age,  either 
with  the  Jews,  that  of  a  first,  or  with  the 
millenarians,  tliat  of  a  second,  coming.  It 
is  true  the  ad\ocatea  of  this  theory  ex- 
perience no  difEoulty  in  dealing  with  any 
of  the  unusual  phenomena  which  ordinarily 
hamper  the  literal  interpretation,  such  ai 
the  rapidly  incrtasing  river,  the  sweeten- 
ing of  the  waters  of  the  Dead  Sea,  and  the 
exceeding  high  mountain,  because  they 
anticipate  such  a  glorification  of  Pales- 
tine in  the  Messianic,  or  millennial,  era  at 


17  I 


'ram  book  of  the  PKOPHET  BZEKIBU    [oh.  xi-vm.  1—36. 


will  mil  only  iidmll  of  all  thoge  thing* 
'ii'liiK,  I'lil  hIidw  llidin  actually  to  be,  rea- 
llw«r  'I'lm  piiKHngcB  of  Scripture,  however, 
wlilnli  i<rn  HiipponcKl  to  prdiutao  the  future 
ixtdiniil  j;l(iilllraitlon  of  Oaiionnare,  niither 
In  tliii  Old  TdBlainont  (laa,  H.  2 — i;  iv. 
a— tl;  ix.  I— U;  xi.  12;  Jer.  xxxi.  81—44  ; 
xxxiii.  16;  Amos  Ix.  8—15;  Zooh.  xiv. 
H ;  Joel  Iv.  18 ;  Mioah  vii.  9 — 13)  nor  in  the 
New  (Bom,  li.  Ift ;  Acts  iii.  19 — 21 ;  Bev. 
fii.  1 — 8;  xiv.  1—5;  xxiL  1,  2),  so  clear 
and  decisive  that  their  literal  interpretation 
cannot  be  disputed,  as  in  reality  it  is, 
to  the  extent  even  of  denial,  by  the  ma- 
jority of  Bible  students;  and  accordingly, 
to  claim  these  as  substantiating  the  pro- 
position that  Oanaan  is  ultimately  to  under- 
go such  a  transformation  as  to  render  the 
lealization  of  Ezekiel's  vision  possible,  is 
uimply  to  beg  the  question  at  issue. 

(2)  In  addition  to  this,  the  view  under- 
going examination  is  exposed  to  all  those 
difficulties  nhich  tell  against  the  mille- 
narian  doctrine  in  general,  and  this  in  par- 
ticular, that  the  Jews  will  yet  as  a  nation 
return  to  their  own  land.  Were  they  to 
do  go,  it  would  not  infallibly  follow  that 
they  would  re-erect  ii  temple,  worship  Je- 
hovah, and  divide  up  the  soil  as  here 
directed;  but  it  is  certain  they  would  do 
neither  of  these  things  if  they  never  did 
return;  and  that  they  never  will  return 
(as  a  nation)  to  occupy  Faleetine  may  at 
least  be  regarded  as  the  more  probable 
altematiye  of  the  two.  Unless  resort  is 
to  be  had '  to  miracle,  it  is  not  easy  to 
discern  how,  after  the  Jews  have  re- 
nounced their  unbelief  and  become  Chris- 
tian, they  are  to  be  prevented  from  inter- 
mingling with  Christians  and  so  losing  one 
of  their  national  characteristics,  or  how  the 
tribal  divisions  which  have  for  centuries 
been  lost  are  again  to  be  recovered,  or  how 
the  lamJ  is  to  be  rendered  capable  of  sus- 
taining them.  Kor  can  one  detect  a  suffi- 
uient  reason  for  restoring  the  national 
existence  of  Israel  in  the  closing  years  of 
tho  Christian  dispensutiou,  if  not  for  the 
purpose  nf  rcintroduoins;  the  special  wor- 
Hhlp  ol'  JudiiiHm;  and  this,  it  should  now 
bn  nmpluiBizcd,  oocasious  the  greatest  of  all 
dininiiltics  that  impinge  against  the  theory 
nndor  review.     For — 

(U)  If  Israel  as  a  nntion  Ig,  in  some  golden 
era  or  millennial  period  towards  the  close  of 
time,  to  return  to  her  old  land,  re-erect  her 
old  tcinplo,  uud  reiustituto  her  old  worship, 
whiit  shjill  Ihtin  (or  oven  now)  be  said  of  the 
trul.lil'iiliuiHb  nl' tliosu  puBsages  of  Scripture 
wliloli  touch  that  tho  Levitioal  system  of 
tiilporimcic  (or  tcmplo)  and  altar,  of  priest 
mill  Hiicrldcii,  of  typo  ami  symbol,  of  external 
miinnirinflinont  imd  visible  ceremonial,  was 
Ironi    Ilia    Uiut    proviHicinal    in    its    niiture. 


intended  to  serve  as  a  shadow  of  good 
things  to  oome,  and  designed  to  be  set  aside 
for  ever  when  the  higher  and  more  spiritual 
system  of  the  gospel  had  been  inaugurated 
by  the  incarnation,  death,  resurrection,  and 
ascension  of  the  Messiah  (see  Heb.  v. — x. ; 
and  comp.  John  iv.  21 — 24;  CoL  ii.  17; 
Gal.  iii.  23—25)?  The  simple  suggestion 
that  in  the  glorious  millennial  era,  whe» 
Christianity  as  a  system  of  religion  will  bt 
near  the  culmination  of  its  trininphiil  prv 
gress  through  the  centuries,  the  Church  of 
God,  either  in  whole  or  in  part,  should  return 
to  the  beggarly  elements  of  Judaism,  and 
set  up  the  worship  of  God  by  means  of 
bloody  offerings  and  all  the  paraphejnalia 
of  alters  and  priests,  is  too  ridiculous  to  be 
entertained  for  a  moment  by  any  one  who 
hag  attained  to  a  proper  conception  of  the 
spiritual  nature  of  that  religion  which  man- 
kind eighteen  centuries  ago  received  from 
Jesus  Christ.  "  The  whole  teaching  of  the 
Kew  Testement,"  writes  Plumptre  (unpub- 
lished manuscript  notes)," and  especially  of 
the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  is  opposed  to  the 
thought  that  the  revival  of  a  local  sancluary 
at  Jerusalem,  sacred  above  aU  other 
sanctuaries,  the  object  of  devout  pilgiimages 
from  all  quarters  of  the  world,  with  the 
perpetuation  of  annual  sacrifices  offered  by 
the  priests  of  the  house  of  Aaron,  living 
under  the  old  ceremonial  conditions,  forms 
part  and  parcel  of  what  we  are  to  expect  in 
the  future  history  of  Christendom.  We  are 
compelled,  if  we  would  be  true  to  that 
higher  teaching,  to  gay  that  the  visions  of 
Ezekiel,  like  those  of  the  Apocalypse,  which 
in  part  reproduce  them,  can  receive  only,  as 
symbols  of  the  truth,  a  spiritual  and  not  a 
literal  falfilment"  To  this  the  weighty 
utterance  of  Delitzsch  (LuthardPe  Zeits^nft 
fur  kirkliehe  Whtenugtaft,  1880-1881,  p. 
289)  may  be  added:  "The  New  Testament 
Divine  worship  knows  of  a  central  sanctuary 
neither  in  Jerusalem  nor  upon  Gerizim, 
and  the  religion  of  Jehovah,  after  it  has 
become  the  religion  of  humanity,  will  never 
again  return  back  into  its  chrysalis  con- 
dition, and  the  setting  up  again  of  animal 
gacrifloes  as  memorials  of  Christ's  death 
would  be,  in  face  of  the  offering  which  was 
made  upon  the  altar  of  the  cross  (Heb.  x. 
11^14),  a  return  out  of  the  essence  into  the 
shadow,  out  of  the  spirit  into  the  letter,  out 
of  the  law  of  freedom  into  the  law  of  the 
'elements  of  the  world,'  of  which  Christ 
was  the  end.  A  Christian  world-oathedral 
belonging  to  Israel  converted  to  Christ  and 
again  assembled  in  Jerusalem—  a  monument 
such  as  this  of  the  history  of  salvation 
having  reached  its  final  aim,  a  finger-post 
like  this  directed  heavenward  towards  God 
the  AU-meroiftil — will  necessarily  be  of 
another  sort  than  the  temple  of  Old  Testa- 


OH.  XLvm.  1— 35.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL. 


476 


ment  piopbetg  still  fast  bound  In  shadow 
work." 
II.  Views   which   gbodm)    thbmseltes 

ON     A     SYMBOLIO     nfTEBPBBTATION     OF    THB 

VISION.  A  literal  interpretation  being  im- 
posalble,  the  only  alternative  is  to  have 
recourse  to  the  method  of  symbolio  exposi- 
tion; and,  in  addition  to  what  has  been 
already  said,  some  things  suggest  themselves 
as  strongly  corroborative  of  this  conclusion. 
First,  there  is  the  circumstance  that  the 
temple-plan,  the  ritual  Torah,  and  the  laud 
act  formed  three  successive  parts  of  one 
extended  "yiuion,"  wliioh  was  shown  to  the 
prophet  while  in  a  state  of  "  trance "  or 
ecstasy,  and  were  thus,  as  to  mode  of  com- 
munication at  least,  totally  unlike  the 
tabernacle  model,  the  Levitioal  code,  aod 
the  land  arrangements  which  were  directly 
exhibited  or  imparted  to  Moses  without  the 
intervention  of  a  "vision."  Besides,  the 
obvious  correspondence  of  this  closing  vision 
to  tlie  earlier  vision  or  visions  (ch.  viii — 
xL),  in  which  were  represented  the  desecra- 
tion and  destruction  of  the  first  temple, 
lends  countenance  to  the  inference  that 
here  also,  as  there,  tlie  tableaux  presented 
to  the  prophet's  inward  eye  were  designed 
as  symbols.  Secondly,  there  is  the  absence 
of  any  Instruction  to  the  prophet,  Uke  that 
given  to  Moses,  to  see  that  all  things  were 
made,  either  by  himself  or  others,  according 
to  the  pattern  which  had  been  shown  to  him 
in  the  mount.  From  the  beginning  to  the 
end  no  hint  is  discoverable  that  the  prophet 
or  hifl  countrymen  were  expected  to  replace 
the  building  Nebuchadnezzar  had  o  verthro  wn 
by  one  fashioned  after  the  pattern  now  dis- 
closed. Thirdly,  without  emphasizing  as 
strongly  as  KUefoth  does  tlie  numbers  three, 
ie«!en,  and  twelve,  that  run  through  'the 
whole,  the  obvious  symmetry  maintained 
alike  in  the  temple-buildings,  sacrificial 
ordinances,  and  land  arrangements,  speaks 
for  a  symbolic  as  against  a  literal  interpre- 
tation ;  and  this  impression  is  confirmed 
rather  than  weakened  by  observing  that  in 
respect  both  of  the  temple  and  the  city, 
only  (or  principally)  ground-measurements 
are  recorded,  while  no  allusion  whatever  is 
made  to  either  building  materials  or 
architectural  details.  Fourthly,  tliere  are 
portions  of  this  "  vision "  to  which  a 
symboblio  interpretation  must  of  necessity 
be  assigned,  as  e.g.  the  temple-river  and 
the  healing  of  the  wuters  of  the  sea ;  and 
this  fact  alone  should  be  held  as  decisive, 
unless  it  should  emerge  that  there  are  other 
portions  to  which  a  symbolio  exposition  is 
inapplicable.  Fifthly,  antecedent  passages  in 
Ezekiel,  to  which  this  temple-vision  palpably 
looks  Imok,  declare  more  or  less  strongly 
for  a  symbolic  interpretation.  One  of  these 
has  already  been  referred  to,  oh.  viii. — xi. 


Another  is  ch.  xx.  40 — 41,  concerning  which 
it  may  suffice  to  quote  Plumptre's  words  in 
this  Commentary:  "The  fact  that  Israel 
itself  is  said  to  be  the  'sweet  savour' 
(Bevised  Version)  which  Jehovah  accepts 
(oomp.  2  Cor.  ii.  15 ;  Eph.  v.  2 ;  Phil.  iv.  18^ 
suggests  a  like  spiritual  interpretation  of  the 
other  oifei'ings,  though  the  literal  meaning 
was  probably  dominant  in  the  prophet's  own 
thoughts."  A  third  is  ch.  xxxvii.  26—28, 
in  which  a  literal  interpretation  can  be 
maintained  only  at  the  expense  of  truth. 
Sixthly,  the  analogy  of  similar  prophetic 
adumbrations  of  Israel's  future  supports  the 
idea  that  here  also  the  writer's  thought 
clothes  itself  in  a  symbolio  dress.  Let  the 
pictures  given  by  Jeremiah,  Ezekiel's  con- 
temporary (xxxi  38 — 10;  xxxiii.  17 — 22), 
by  Isaiah  (Ix.  1—22),  Joel  (iii.  18),  Haggai 
(ii  7 — 9),  and  Zeohariah  (vi.  9—15;  viii. 
1 — 8;  xiv.  8 — 21)  be  attentively  studied, 
and  the  conviction  will  be  hard  to  resist 
that  one  and  all  they  were  designed  in 
figurative  language  to  foreshadow  the 
spiritual  bli  ssings  of  a  future  time;  and 
if  such  was  the  prophetic  style  generally, 
it  seems  reasonable  to  infer  tliat  Ezekiel, 
like  his  predecessors,  contemporaries,  and 
successors,  was  accustomed  to  use  the 
same.  Seventhly,  the  symbolic  interpreta- 
tion admits  of  being  carried  out,  which  is 
more  than  can  be  afiirmed  of  the  literal ; 
and  this  consideration  should  decide  the 
question  as  to  how  the  "  vision  "  should  be 
understood  in  favour  of  the  former  rather 
than  of  the  latter  mode  of  exposition. 

But  now  assuming  the  symbolic  method 
of  interpretation  to  have  been  fully  vindi- 
cated as  the  only  one  properly  applicable  to 
the  temple-vision,  a  fresh  inquiry  rises — 
Of  what  was  the  vision  meant  to  be  symbolic? 
And  the  reply  to  this  may  be  stated  in 
terms  so  general  as  to  unite  all  who  favour 
the  ideal  or  allegorical  method  of  interpre- 
tation. It  may  be  said  that  the  vision  was 
designed  to  symbolize  the  great  and  gracious 
blessings  Jehovah  purposed  at  a  future  time, 
when  he  had  turned  again  the  captivity  of 
Israel,  to  bestow  upon  his  Church.  Bo  far 
as  the  terminus  ad  quern  of  this  period  of 
blessing  is  concerned,  it  is  agreed  by  all 
expositors  that  that  is  the  consummation  of 
all  things,  when  Israel's  last  and  mightiest 
enemies,  Gog  and  Magog,  shall  have  been 
destroyed;  only  -then  do  interpreters  fall 
out  when  the  terminus  a  quo  is  inquired 
after.  Some,  like  Diodati,  Greenhill,  and 
Hengstenberg,  find  the  point  of  departure 
in  the  return  from  Babylon ;  others,  at 
Luther,  Calvin,  Cocceius,  Pfeiffer,  Fairbairn, 
Havemick,  Kliefoth,  and  Currey,  begin 
with  the  Incarnation  ;  «  bile  a  third  group, 
of  whom  Keil  may  be  regarded  as  the  repre- 
{  sentative.  restrict  the  "  vision  "  to  the  times  of 


476 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHBT  EZEKIEL.  [oh.  xt.viit.  1— 35. 


the  onnsumraation,  i.e.  to  the  perfect  service 
of  God  in  the  heavenly  world. 

1.  It  seems  impossible  to  doubt  that  the 
"  vision "  had  a  reference  to  the  times 
iminedidtely  subsequeni  to  the  exile.  With- 
out conceding  to  Hengsteuberg  that  tiie 
wliole  propliecy,  with  tlie  exception  of  ch. 
xl\ii.  1 — 12,  was  destined  then  to  receive 
fulfilment,  or  to  Wellhausen  that  it  was 
expressly  composed  as  a  new  constitution 
for  post-exilic  Judaism,  it  may  be  granted 
that  the  exiles  in  Babylonia  were  intended 
to  derive  from  it  the  hope  and  promise  of 
a  return  to  their  own  land,  a  reereotion  of 
their  fallen  temple,  and  a  relnstitution  of 
their  ancient  worship.  Indeed,  it  is  hard.to 
see  how  they  could  have  failed  to  deduce 
such  an  inference  from  a  perusal  of  the 
prophet's  words  Forming,  as  tlie  "vision" 
did,  the  last  and  culminating  note  of  cunso- 
latiou  addressed  to  tlie  exiles,  if  the  picture 
it  held  up  before  their  minds  wa«  not  a  mere 
ignis  fatuiis  intended  to  mislead — ^if  it 
represented  (even  symbolically)  any  under- 
lying reality — then  that  reality  could  only 
have  been  that  in  the  future,  it  miglit  be 
dim  and  distnnt,  Israel  and  Judah,  once  more 
united  and  enlarged  by  accessions  from  the 
Gentiles,  or  tlie  Church  of  God  whom  they 
represented,  .-should  serve  Jehovah  with  a 
pure  cultus  in  a  land  lie  had  prepared  for 
and  given  to  them;  and  not  a  large  amount 
of  insight  would  be  required  to  conclude 
that  if  Israel  and  Judah  had  any  such 
destiny  before  them  in  the  future,  then 
assuredly  their  exile  must  terminate  and 
their  divided  tribes  be  once  more  united  in 
the  old  country.  Whatever  may  have  been 
the  true  significance  of  that  picture,  if  it 
symbolized  anything  in  which  Israel  and 
Judah  were  to  have  a  share,  it  could  not  but 
occur,  at  least  to  the  prophet  himself  and 
the  more  thoughtful  of  his  first  readers,  that 
it  prognosticated  the  dawning  of  brighter 
days,  when  Jehovah  should  turn  again  the 
captivity  of  his  people,  and  re-establish  them 
in  their  own  land. 

2.  Similarly,  the  view  of  those  who  find  in 
the  vision  a  symbol  of  the  Christian  Church 
as  a  whole,  or,  in  the  words  of  Kliefoth, 
"the  Ohristinn  Church  in  its  origin,  its 
development  and  influence  in  the  world,  and 
its  completion  in  the  herealter,"  has  much 
to  support  it.  That  Ezekiel  perfectly  under- 
stood the  significance  of  his  own  "  vision  " 
is  not  assei-ted,  and  is  not  likely  to  have 
been  the  case  (see  I  Pet.  i.  11);  all  that 
is  wished  to  be  nfflrmed  by  those  who  adopt 
this  view  is  that  Ezekiel'af  picture  of  a  new 
temple,  a  new  worship,  and  a  new  Innd 
pointed  to  a  state  and  condition  of  things 
which  first  began  to  be  realized  when  the 
Christian  dispensation  was  established  by 
the  incarnatifm,  death,  and  resurrection  of 


Jesus  Christ ;  and  certainly  there  are  few 
particulars  in  which  the  import  of  the 
symbol  (looked  at  in  this  light)  cannot  be  at 
once  and  clearly  traced.  Without  claiming 
it  as  a  point  in  favour  of  this  view  that  the 
vision  makes  no  mention  of  any  bidding 
materials,  inasmuch  us  the  Cliristian  Church 
is  composed  of  "  lively  stones,"  or  believiug 
and  gracious  souls  (1  Pet.  ii.  i),  the  entrance 
into  the  teii;ple  of  the  glory  of  God  (oh.  xliiU 
1 — 6)  found  and  still  retains  its  counter- 
part in  the  perpetual  inlialitation  of  the 
Church  by  the  Spirit  of  Christ  (Eph.  ii.  21, 
22).  The  awful  sanctity  with  which  the 
temple  was  surrounded,  increasing  as  one 
approached  it  from  the  outside,  beginning 
with  the  holy  teiumah,  and  advancing  suc- 
cessively to  the  priests'  portion  in  the  midst 
of  which  the  temple  stood,  to  the  precincts 
five  hundred  reeds  square  which  encom- 
passed the  court,  to  the  suburbs  or  "  void 
places "  which  ran  round  the  outer  wall,  to 
the  seven  steps  which  conducted  into  the 
gateway,  to  the  outer  court,  to  the  eight 
steps  leading  up  to  the  inner  court,  and 
finally  to  the  ascent  by  which  aeoess  was 
gained  to  the  "  house," — all  this  fitly  symbo- 
lized the  superior  holiness  which  should 
belong,  and  in  point  of  tact  does  belong,  to 
the  Church  of  God  under  the  gospeL  So 
the  absence  of  both  high  priest  and  great 
Day  of  Atonement  in  Ezekiel's  temple  » as 
an  adumbration  of  the  time  when  the  ever- 
living  High  Priest  of  the  house  of  God 
having  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  him- 
self, all  Jehovah's  worshippers  should  be 
priests  in  their  own  right,  whose  services 
should  be  acceptable  through  Jesus  Christ. 
The  daily  sin  offering,  and  the  similar  otter- 
ings  on  the  solemn  feast-days,  meant  that 
in  the  Church  of  the  future  there  should  be 
a  constant  remembrance  of  the  great  Propiti- 
ation that  had  bet  n  ofierid  once  for  all,  and 
an  ever-renewed  appropriation  of  the  same 
by  those  who  worshipped.  The  greater 
symmetry  and  fulness  in  the  burnt  offerings 
and  mial  offerings  served  to  typifythe  more 
tlioroiigli  self-cousef  ration  of  Jehovah'* 
worshippers,  and  their  more  intimate  fellow 
ship  with  him  in  the  new  dispensation. 
That  the  prince  should  be  charged  with  the 
responsibility  of  providing  victims  for  all 
the  public  festivals,  and  on  the  occasion  of 
their  celebration  should  enter  and  retire 
from  the  temple  courts  in  their  midst,  was 
a  foreshadowing  of  the  truth  tliat  all  the 
offerings  of  a  Christian  worshipper  must 
be  present!  d  through  Christ,  who  thus,  as  it 
were,  ideally  approaches  the  heavenly  throne 
surrounded  by  his  people.  Tlie  miraculously 
fiowing  river  rising  in  the  temple,  and  in- 
creasing in  width  and  depth  as  it  flows, 
creating  life  and  beauty  wheresoever  it 
comes,  was  an  easily  understood  picture  of 


OH.  XLViii.  1— 85.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  BZBKIBL. 


477 


tho  BpiritunUy  healthful  and  vivifying 
influences  of  the  gospel.  The  equal  division 
of  the  land  among  the  tribes,  and  the  intro- 
duction of  the  sons  of  the  stranger  to  equal 
privileges  with  the  Israelite,  may  have  been 
designed  to  intimate  that  when  the  new 
ooncUtion  of  things  arrived  to  which  the 
vision  looked  forward,  i.e.  when  the  Christian 
«ra  dawned,  the  distinction  between  Jew 
and  GrentUe  should  uo  more  e  list  (Eph.  iL 
14 — 16),  and  all  the  members  of  the  new 
Israel  should  share  alike  in  the  inheritance 
of  which  Canaan  was  the  earthly  emblem. 
The  separation  of  the  temple  from  the  city 
may  liave  pointed  to  the  fact  that  in  that 
oomiug  age  the  Church  should  be  an  insti- 
tution altogether  distinct  from  and  no 
longer  identical  with  the  state,  as  under  the 
Hebrew  dispensation  it  had  been.  These, 
witli  otlier  instances  tliat  might  be  given, 
show  how  easily  the  whole  symbol  na,y  be 
understood  of  the  Christian  Churh  on  earth, 
which  was  the  view  commonly  entertained 
by  the  Eeformed  theologians,  who  did  not, 
except  indirectly,  employ  it  as  typical  of  the 
kingdom  of  God  in  its  perfect  or  heavenly 
condition. 

3.  This,  however,  is  the  view  taken  of 
the  vision  by  both  Eliefoth  and  Keil,  the 
first  of  wliom  does  not,  while  the  second 
does,  exclude  all  allusion  to  the  present  or 
historical  condition  of  the  Christian  Church. 
In  the  vision  Kliefoth,  while  discovering 
some  things,  as  fur  instance  the  sin  offerings, 
that  can  only  be  applied  to  the  present  or 
temporal  form  of  the  Church,  finds  others,  as 
t.g.  the  temple-river,  which  he  holds  can 
only  have  its  counterpart  in  the  river  of  the 
Apocalypse  (Bev.  xxii.  1).  On  the  other 
hand,  Keil  argues  that  only  one  thing  pre- 
supposes that  Israel  has  still  to  take  posses- 
sion of  (the  heavenly)  Canaan,  viz.  "the 
directions  concerning  the  boundaries  and 
the  division  of  the  land,"  and  proceeds  to 
say,  "  It  follows  from  this  that  the  pro- 
phetic picture  does  not  furnish  a  typical 
exhibition  of  the  Church  of  Christ  in  its 
gradual  development,  but  sets  forth  the 
kingdom  of  Qod  established  by  Christ  in 
its  perfect  form."  In  short,  Keil  regards 
the  whole  "  vision  "  as  a  symbolic  representa- 
tion, in  Old  Testament  language  and  ideas 
— the  only  way  in  which  such  representation 
could  have  been  given  so  as  to  be  iutelli- 

fible  to  Ezekiel's  readers — of  the  intro- 
action  of  God's  spiritual  Israel  into  their 
heavenly  Canaan,  and  of  the  perfect  service 
they  shall  there  render  to  Jehovah.  That 
the  heavenly  condition  of  the  Church  of 
God  was  designed  to  be  depicted  it  seems 
necessary  to  hold,  both  fix>m  the  position  of 
the  vision  in  Ezekiel's  book  and  from  the 
contents  (in  part)  of  the  vision  itself.  The 
vicion  oocora,  as  the  last  note  of  consolation 


offered  to  the  exiles,  after  the  vision  of 
their  moral  and  spiritual  resuscitation  and 
establishment  in  their  own  land,  with  David, 
Jehovah's  Servant  and  King,  ruling  over 
them,  and  in  close  connection  with,  if  not 
immediately  after,  the  final  conflict  with 
Oog,  which  leads  up,  one  should  say,  quite 
naturally  to  the  complete  blessedness  of 
the  future  life.  Then  the  correspondence 
between  the  river  in  John's  description  of 
the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  and  this  temple- 
stream  in  Ezekiel's  vision,  renders  it  im- 
possible to  exclude  from  the  latter  all 
allusion  to  the  heavenly  state.  At  the  same 
time,  there  are  points,  even  on  Eeil's  showing, 
th»t  cannot  well  be  harmonized  with  the 
theory  that  only  the  heavenly  and  glorified 
form  of  the  Church  is  symbolized  by  the 
vision.  One  of  these  has  been  mentioned, 
the  perpetuation  of  the  sin  offering ;  another 
is  the  precept  concerning  the  hereditary 
property  of  the  prince  and  its  transmission 
to  his  sons ;  a  third  is  the  separation  be- 
tween the  temple  and  the  city ;  a  fourth  ia 
the  invasion  of  Gog,  which,  as  Keil  has 
observed,  is  represented  as  occurring  after 
Israel  has  taken  possession  of  the  land. 
Hence  probably  it  is  wrong  to  restrict  the 
significance  of  the  "  vision  "  so  exclusively 
as  Keil  does  to  the  heavenly  world. 

Upon  the  whole,  it  seems  best  to  find  a 
place  for  eaot  of  the  above  views  in  any 
interpretation  of  the  vision ;  and  this  may 
be  done  by  supposing  that  the  vision  was 
designed  by  its  real  Author — the  Spirit  of 
Christ  (1  Pet.  i.  11)— to  set  forth,  by  means 
of  Old  Testament  imagery,  a  picture  of  that 
perfect  service  which  ought  to  have  been 
rendered  from  the  first  by  Israel  (after  the 
flesh)  to  Jehovah,  but  was  not,  and  which  it 
was  Jehovah's  promise  to  the  exiles  would 
ultimately  be  rendered  by  that  new  Israel 
(according  to  the  Spirit)  he  was  soon  to  call 
out  of  the  ruins  of  the  old.  In  this  way,  as 
setting  forth  the  ideal  of  a  perfect  worship 
which  will  not  be  completely  realized  until 
Israel  reaches  the  heavenly  Canaan,  the 
"vision"  admits  of  Keil's  interpretation; 
but  inasmuch  as  this  ideal  worship  will  not 
be  attained  to  there  unless  the  worship 
itself  begins  on  earth  in  the  Christian  Church 
— ^to  which  not  a  few  features  in  the  symbol 
point — the  vision  is  also  susceptible  of 
Kliefoth's  exposition;  while  as  the  first 
step  towards  the  calling  out  of  the  new 
Israel  was  taken  when  God  turned  again 
the  captivity  of  the  exiles,  the  view  of 
Eengstenberg  cannot  be  excluded. 

A  few  words  may  be  added  on  the  bearing 
which  the  view  just  taken  of  the  signiflonnee 
of  the  temple-vision  has  upon  the  chief 
critical  question  of  the  day  as  to  the 
struoture  of  the  Pentateuch.    The  modern 


478 


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  BZEKIEL.    [oh.  XLvni,  1— 36. 


theory,  begun  by  Graf  and  Keuss,  but  per- 
feoteil  by  Kuenen  und  ■WcUhauBen,  it  is  well 
known,  is  tbat,  while  the  book  of  the  cove- 
nant (Exod.  xxi. — xxiii.)  originated  in  the 
early  years  of  the  monarchy,  and  Deutero- 
nomy not  later  than  the  reign  of  JoBiah,the 
prieet-code,  as  it  is  styled  (Exod.  zxIt. — ^zl. 
with  some  exceptions,  the  whole  of.  Leviticus, 
and  the  most  of  Numbers),  is  a  work  of  post- 
exilio  origin,  and  that  Ezekiel  (xL — ^ilviii.) 
constituted,  as  it  were,  the  bridge  by  which 
the  law-making  spirit  of  the  Hebrew  religion 
passed  over  from  the  popular  legislation  of 
the  Fifth  Book  of  Moses  to  the  higlily 
deyelopeil  and  minutely  articulated  system 
of  Leviticus.  Into  the  general  question  it 
would  be  out  of  plaee  in  this  work  to 
enter;  the  most  that  can  be  done  is  to 
indicate  how  far  the  theory  is  entitled  to 
claim  support  from  the  temple-visiou  which 
has  just  been  expounded  and  interpreted. 
Kor  IS  it  needful,  in  doing  so,  to  dwell  upon 
the  alleged  evidence  of  Ezekiel's  priority  to 
Leviticus,  deiived  from  Ezekiel's  language 
and  the  contents  of  his  sacrificial  Torah — 
this  has  been  more  or  less  done  in  the 
course  of  exposition— since  the  validity  or 
invalidity  of  such  (so-called)  evidence 
depends  entirely  on  the  correctness  or  incor- 
rectness of  the  presupposition  which  is  com- 
monly made,  viz.  that  Ezekiel  designed  to 
draft  a  new  constitution  for  the  post-exilic 
Church.  Gould  this  have  been  made  out, 
it  would  by  no  means  have  followed  that 
Ezekiel's  Torah,  by  its  divergences  from 
tliat  of  Leiiticus,  proved  the  later  origin  of 
the  latter,  since  Ezekiel,  having  himself  been 
a  prophet,  no  less  than  Moses,  was  at  liberty 
to  abrogate  or  modify  any  pre-existing  law 
if  impelled  lo  do   so  by  the  Spirit  that 


originally  taught  Moses;  but  inasmuch  as 
it  hag  not  been  and  cannot  be  made  oat 
beyond  reasonable  doubt — ^rather,  Inasmuch 
as  strong  grounds  exist  for  holding  that 
Ezekiel  hadno  such  intention,  but  designed 
to  provide  a  complex  symbol  of  the  perfect 
relations  which  should  subsist  between  God 
and  his  (spiritual)  Israel,  it  is  dearly  not 
permissible  to  argue  that  Ezekiel  was  sug- 
gesting for  the  first  time  the  course  which 
temple-legislation  should  pursue  in  the 
new  era  which  should  commence  when  the 
exile  was  ended  and  the  restoration  begun. 
If  all  that  Ezekiel  bad  in  contemplEftioii 
was  to  furnish  a  symbol  of  the  sort  already 
indicated,  it  is  manifestly  an  inference  not 
warranted  by  the  premisses  that  he  desired 
to  initiate  a  distinction  which  should  after- 
wards be  put  in  force  between  the  priests 
who  should  serve  the  altar  and  the  Levites 
who  should  serve  the  tabernacle,  and  to 
assign  the  former  honour  to  the  sons  of 
Zadok,  while  inflicting  the  latter  degradation 
on  the  Levites  who  had  miDisteied  at  pre- 
ezilic  high  places.  If  Ezekiel's  fetching  in 
of  the  sons  of  Zadok  was  merely  a  device 
to  obtain  a  symbol  of  faithful  and  pure 
service,  then  the  whole  theory  which  has 
been  so  ingeniously  erected  on  the  so-called 
degrndation  of  the  Levites — a  passage  which 
has  been  styled  "  the  key  to  the  Old  Testa- 
ment " — ^runs  the  risk  of  falling  to  piecus, 
and,  to  use  the  words  of  Delitzs'  h  (Luthardt't 
ZeiUchri/t  fur  hirkliche  Wissemehaft,  1880- 
1881,  p.  288),  "tlie  degradation  of  the 
Levites,  which  certainly  appears  in  Ezekiel 
as  an  innovation,"  becomes  "another  thing 
than  a  riddle  to  be  solved  by  the  new  Pen- 
tateuchal  theory." 


HOMILETICa 

Ver.  1  (first  clause,  "  Now  these  are  the  names  of  the  tribes  "). — Namei.  The  tribes 
are  here  severally  named.  Elsewhere  whole  pages  of  the  Bible  are  taken  up  with  lists 
of  names.     Let  us  consider  the  significance  of  this  method  of  assortment. 

I.  Names  indicate  individuals.  Each  tribe  has  its  name;  each  person  also  has- 
his  own  private  name.  Thus  the  community  is  broken  up  into  its  several  constituent 
elements.  God  does  not  treat  men  in  the  mass.  He  takes  "  one  of  a  city,  and  two  of 
a  family  "  (Jer.  iii.  14).  Bach  tribe  of  Israel  had  its  separate  district,  each  family  its 
own  allotted  inheritance. 

II.  Names  debcbibb  ohabaoteks.  This  was  the  case  with  names  in  Old  Testament 
times.  It  does  not  apply  among  us,  excepting  in  the  case  of  soubriquets.  But  the  old 
BuggesLiveness  contains  a  lesson  for  all  time.  Different  men  have  different  characters. 
All  these  varieties  are  known  to  God,  even  though  some  of  them  may  be  "concealed 
from  our  fellow-men.  It  might  often  have  happened  that  by  some  accident,  misunder- 
standing, or  act  of  malice,  a  false  name  would  he  given  to  a  person — a  good  name  to  a 
bad  man,  or  a  bad  name  to  a  good  man.  No  such  error  can  be  found  in  God's  books, 
the  books  in  which  he  reads  the  names  of  his  people.  There  he  notes  the  true  character 
•fall. 

IIL  Names  dibeot  apfealb.     We  call  a  person  by  name  to  arrest  his  attention 


OH.  XLvm.  1— 35.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  BZEKIBL.  479 

and  to  show  that  we  desire  to  speak  to  him  individually,  and  we  write  bis  name  on  a 
letter  in  order  that  it  may  he  sent  to  him  and  accepted  hy  him  as  intended  for  himself. 
Ohrist  calls  his  sheep  by  name  (John  x.  3).  He  knows  each  member  of  his  flock 
separately,  and  has  direct,  separate,  personal  dealings  with  every  one.  God  called 
young  Samuel  by  name.  We  do  not  expect  audible  appeals  from  heaven.  Yet  God 
is  changeless,  and  he  just  as  truly  seeks  us  out  separately  now  as  he  sought  out  Samuel 
in  the  days  of  the  judges. 

IV.  Names  pbebebve  memobieb.  History  would  be  a  hopeless  morass  but  for  the 
solid  ground  afforded  in  definite  names.  If  a  man  has  done  anything  worthy  of  fame 
he  is  said  to  have  made  a  name.  His  name  is  now  treated  with  respect  and  handed 
down  to  subsequent  generations.  There  are  names  of  honour  and  names  of  infamy. 
To  Ohrist  is  given  the  name  that  is  above  every  name  (Phil.  ii.  9).  If  one  lives  an  ill 
life  he  may  earnestly  desire  to  be  forgotten ;  but,  alas !  the  stigma  of  disgrace  is  indelibly 
stamped  on  his  name. 

Y.  Naues  jubtift  olaiub.  A  signature  gives  authority.  A  name  in  a  will  entitles 
its  owner  to  what  is  bequeathed  under  it.  There  are  names  "  written  in  the  Lamb's 
book  of  life  "  (Rev^  xxi.  27),  and  all  who  own  those  names  are  entitled  to  an  eternal 
inheritance  with  the  saints  in  light.  A  man's  name  may  not  be  down  in  the  list  of 
Israel's  heirs,  nor  recorded  in  any  Doomsday  book  on  earth ;  yet  if  it  is  written  in 
Christ's  records  it  is  secure  for  a  possession  better  and  richer  than  the  most  valuable 
estate  that  can  ever  be  enjoyed  in  this  world. 

VI.   A  CHANGE  OP   NAME  SIQNIPIE8  A  CHANGE  OP  STATUS.      JaCob,  "  the  Supplauter," 

is  named  afresli  Israel, "  God's  prince."  Christ's  people  have  a  new  name  on  their  fore- 
heads (Rev.  xxii.  4).  We  may  leave  the  evil  name  of  the  old  life  and  enjoy  the 
blessings  that  attach  themselves  to  a  true  Christian  name. 

Yer.  14. — An  inalienable  possession.  The  people  were  not  permitted  to  sell  their 
allotments,  and  especial  provision  was  made  to  prevent  the  priests  from  parting  with 
their  share  of  the  fruits  of  the  land. 

I.  The  Christian  inhebitanoe  is  an  inalienable  possession.  1.  No  enemy  can 
take  it  away.  Christ  secures  it  for  his  people,  so  that  it  is  theirs  for  ever.  We  may 
lose  all  earthly  things  in  the  shocks  and  changes  of  life,  but  the  heavenly  treaKuie 
abides.  So  long  as  we  hold  it  truly,  no  moth  nor  rust  can  corrupt  it,  no  thief  can 
then  break  through  and  steal  it.  2.  The  Christian  has  no  right  to  part  with  it.  He 
can  deny  Christ,  renounce  the  gift  of  God,  and  abdicate  his  position  as  one  of  the  kings 
and  priests  of  God.  But  he  has  no  right  to  act  in  this  way.  When  once  he  is  called 
into  the  kingdom  it  is  with  a  view  of  never  departing  from  it.  Thoi^h  left  free  from 
external  constraints,  the  bands  of  conscience  forbid  his  ever  giving  up  his  glorious 
heritage.     The  vows  of  Christian  fidelity  are  irrevocable. 

II.  It  is  a  sin  to  endanoeb  the  Chbistian  inhebitanoe.  As  Christians,  we 
have  a  charge  to  keep.  Our  estate  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  entrusted  to  us.  But 
we  may  he  false  to  our  trust  in  various  ways.  1.  By  neglecting  it.  So  lung  as  our 
heritage  is  faithfully  kept  no  enemy  can  enter  or  injure  it.  But  if  the  hedge  is  broken 
down  the  wild  boar  from  the  wood  may  come  through  and  root  up  the  tender  Vines 
(Ps.  Ixxx.  13).  We  need  to  watch  over  and  carefully  guard  the  privileges  of  the 
Christian  life.  2.  By  renouncirig  it  for  worldly  things.  'The  priest  might  grow  tired 
of  his  sacred  ofiBce,  and  might  prefer  to  have  a  farm  of  his  own  rather  than  be  dependent 
on  the  sacrificial  offerings  of  the  people,  whUe  a  lay  Israelite,  ambitious  of  the  priest- 
hood, might  be  glad  to  barter  his  estate  for  rank  and  office  in  the  temple.  This  was 
forbidden.  The  Christian  has  no  right  to  give  up  his  allegiance  to  Christ  and  his 
inheritance  in  heavenly  things'  for  any  earthly  consideration.  Having  put  his  hand  to 
the  |)lough,  he  is  never  to  look  back. 

III.  The  inalienability  of  the  Chbistian  inhebitanoe  besults  pbom  its 
BBiiATiONB  TO  GoD.  The  portiou  of  the  priests  was  holy,  not  because  they  had  it, 
but  because  it  was  primarily  God's  share  of  the  produce  of  the  land.  The  Christian 
inheritance  has  special  relations  to  God.  1.  It  is  pwchased  hy  the  death  tf  Christ,  the 
Son  of  Ood.  A  possession  so  acquired  must  have  a  profound  sanctity  attached  to  it. 
To  throw  away  lightly  a  gift  that  was  brought  to  us  by  means  of  the  incarnation  and 
crucifixion  of  our  Lord  is  to  despise  God's  most  wonderful  condescension,  to  tramplf 


480  THE   BOOK  OF   THE   PROPHET   BZBKIBL.     [oh.  XLVin.  1—35. 


on  the  love  of  Christ  in  his  most  tremendous  self-sacrifice.  If  he  has  died  to  make  the 
inheritance  ours,  the  least  we  can  do  is  to  prize  it  above  all  things.  2.  It  is  still  rightly 
owned  by  God.  The  priests  enjoyed  God's  portion  of  the  produce.  It  was  still  God's 
while  thej'  had  it.  Christ  has  called  us  into  his  kingdom  to  be  his  stewards.  All  we 
enjoy  really  lielongs  to  him,  and  we  shall  have  to  give  an  account  of  our  stewardship. 
If  we  destroy  or  alienate  the  vineyard  with  which  we  are  now  entrusted,  we  shall  have 
no  answer  to  give  in  the  great  day  of  reckoning. 

Ver.  16. — "  A  profane  place."  We  are  not  to  suppose  that  this  place  was  devoted 
to  evil  uses.  It  was  simply  distinguished  from  the  holy  place  of  the  temple.  There 
were  degrees  of  holiness — all  the  land  holy  when  compared  with  heathen  countries ; 
Jerusalem  especially  the  holy  city;  the  temple  the  holy  site  in  Jerusalem;  and  the 
holy  place  and  the  holy  of  holies  the  most  sacred  centre  of  the  whole  circle  of  sanctity. 
By  comparison  with  the  temple  area  the  rest  of  the  city  of  Jerusalem  was  called 
"  profane." 

L  God  provides  fob  the  bvertdat  life  of  his  people.  The  so-called  "  profane 
place  "  was  carefully  mapped  out,  and  ample  provision  was  made  for  the  life  of  the 
people  in  it.  The  laity  was  not  ignored  when  the  priesthood  was  provided  for.  It  was 
never  expected  that  the  people  would  spend  all  their  days  in  the  temple,  nor  that  they 
would  need  no  comfort  for  their  life  in  the  world.  God  is  not  now  only  concerned  with 
our  attending  to  religious  services  at  church.  The  greater  part  of  life  must  be  occupied 
with  secular  pursuits.  These  pursuits  can  be  followed  according  to  the  call  of  God, 
and  in  occupying  ourselves  with  them  we  may  well  expect  that  he  will  give  the  neces- 
sary supplies,  guiding  our  energies,  and  ultimately  blessing  our  toil  if  it  is  in  accordance 
with  his  mind  and  will. 

II.  It   IB   POSSIBLE   TO  LIVE   A   HOLY    LIFE   AMIDST   THINGS    CALLED    PB0PA3tB.      The 

priests  might  be  guilty  of  spiritual  iirofanity  while  busily  engaged  in  temple  service ; 
the  laity  might  be  truly  occupied  with  a  holy  ministry,  though  on  ground  that  was 
named  profane.  It  is  not  necessary  to  be  consecrated  to  the  priesthood  nor  to  enter  • 
monastery  in  order  to  live  "the  religious  life."  The  work  of  the  busy  world  must  be 
carried  on,  and  it  would  be  simply  disastrous  if  all  who  were  inspired  with  pure  and 
lofty  aims  were  to  withdraw  from  its  many  necessary  occupations.  Not  only  would 
the  service  of  life  be  neglected  for  want  of  men  and  women  to  employ  themselves  in  it, 
but  what  work  was  accomplished  by  others  would  be  degraded  in  character.  This 
would  just  amount  to  handing  the  world  and  all  its  concerns  over  to  the  powers  of 
wickedness.  Christians  are  called  upon  to  take  the  exactly  opposite  course,  and  so  to 
be  "  the  salt  of  the  earth  "  (Matt.  v.  13). 

III.  Adverse  external  circumstances  do  not  prevent  spiritualitt  of  life. 
The  seoularity  of  a  man's  occupations  does  not  prevent  him  firom  being  a  Christian  of 
the  very  highest  type.  The  supposed  profaneness  of  his  circumstances  cannot  be 
accepted  as  an  excuse  for  godless,  sinful  living.  Nothing  would  be  really  profone  if 
the  heart  were  true  ami  spiritual ;  for  "  to  the  pure  all  things  are  pure."  It  is  sometimet 
supposed  that  it  would  be  more  easy  for  a  mnn  to  live  a  religious  life  if  he  were  a 
minister  of  religion.  But  then  the  temptation  of  professionalism  would  come  in,  and 
the  business  spirit  endanger  the  sacredness  of  the  most  spiritual  things,  whereas  when 
religion  is  wholly  sought  after  for  its  spiritual  use  it  is  less  in  danger  of  sinking  into  a 
mere  form.  But  the  whole  question  turns  on  the  spirituality  of  the  character  and 
conduct — ^rather  than  on  the  form  of  the  occupations  of  daily  duty. 

Ver.  19. — Serving  the  city.  A  militia,  selected  from  all  the  tribes  of  Israel,  is  to  be 
marshalled  as  the  garrison  of  Jerusalem.  Thus  representatives  of  the  whole  nation 
are  to  have  a  share  in  the  service  of  the  city. 

I.  Men  serve  God  bt  serving  man.  They  who  serve  the  royal  city  serve  the 
king.  If  we  love  not  our  brethren  whom  we  have  seen,  we  cannot  love  Gkid  whom  we 
have  not  seen  (1  John  iv.  20).  But  a  true-hearted  love  for  God  must  inspire  practical 
love  for  man.  Obedience  to  the  two  great  commandments  is  one  common  experience 
in  the  heart  of  the  servant  of  God.  It  is  a  mistake  that  any  should  urge  "  the  service 
of  man "  as  a  new  religion  for  the  age ;  this  is  the  true  ritual  of  the  old  religion  of 
Ohrist  (Jas.  i.  27).     There  is  no  Christianity  without  it.     Christianity  is  most  vigorous 


OH,  XLvni.  1— 35.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIBL.  481 

and  fruitful  ■when  ministries  of  active  benevolence  are  most  vigorously  maintained. 
Jesus  was  the  Son  of  man,  who  "  went  about  doing  good." 

II.  All  olabbes  should  take  part  in  the  service  of  man.  The  one  tribe  of 
Levi  was  told  off  for  the  service  of  the  temple ;  but  every  tribe  was  to  be  represented 
in  the  city  guard.  The  special  work  of  the  Christian  ministry  devolves  upon  those  who 
are  specially  adapted  to  it,  and  called  by  God  to  devote  their  lives  to  it.  It  is  not  every 
Christian  who  is  required  to  occupy  the  post  of  a  minister  of  a  Church  or  to  go  out  as  a 
missionary  to  foreign  lands.  But  every  man,  woman,  and  child  should  take  part  in  the 
Christian  work  of  helping  others.  Every  class  in  society,  every  order  of  mind,  every 
gift,  faculty,  and  opportunity  can  and, should  be  used  for  this  wide  and  varied  service. 

III.  A  ciTT  HAS  PEODLIAB  CLAIMS  ON  CHRISTIAN  BBRVIOB.  Jerusalem  was  to  be 
specially  provided  for  as  the  capital  of  the  land.  The  metropolis  needs  to  be  carefully 
guarded.  But  every  city  has  its  claims.  These  depend  on  several  considerations. 
1.  Qreat  needs.  A  city  is  a  heterogeneous  collection  of  human  beings.  The  energetic 
are  attracted  and  the  helpless  are  drifted  there.  In  the  city  human  life  is  lived  at  its 
best  and  at  its  worst.  The  |ioverty,  the  vice,  the  degradation,  that  haunt  the  purlieus 
of  great  cities  call  for  especial  attention.  The  enemies  that  now  attack  our  cities  are 
not  armed  men  besieging  after  the  old  style.  But  strong  drink ;  gambling ;  profligacy ; 
cruel  oppression  of  workpeople ;  fierce  competition  among  traders ;  selfish  inconsiderate- 
ness  on  the  part  of  the  public,  making  this  competition  almost  a  necessity  of  life ;  over- 
crowding, rendering  common  decency  a  physical  impossibility,  and  infant  mortality  a 
frequent  occurrence ;  the  tremendously  rapid  growth  of  the  centres  of  population  over- 
taking the  means  of  Christian  work  ;  the  obscurity  and  loneliness  of  life  in  a  crowd 
permitting  the  unfortunate  to  perish  unheeded ; — these  and  other  characteristic  cir- 
cumstances of  modem  city  life  call  for  redoubled  energy  on  the  part  of  all  Christian 
people  in  great  fields  of  work.  Christ  concentrated  his  ministry  on  the  densely  populated 
regions  round  about  the  Sea  of  Galilee.  2.  Qreat  influence.  A  city  is  a  centre  of 
influence  to  all  the  region  round  about.  The  metropolis  is  the  heart  of  the  nation.  If 
there  is  righteousness  in  the  centre,  righteousness  may  flow  through  all  the  national 
life.  Christianity,  which  came  as  a  cosmopolitan  religion,  manifested  from  the  first 
metropolitan  affinities.  The  apostles  concentrated  their  labours  to  a  great  extent  on  the 
principal  cities  of  the  empire — Jerusalem,  Antiooh,  Bphesus,  Thessalonica,  Corinth, 
Athens,  Bome.  The  country-people  were  more  slow  to  receive  the  gospel,  and  thus 
the  names  "  pagan  "  and  "  heathen  "  came  to  stand  for  "  non-Christian."  It  will  be  a 
bad  thing  for  Christendom  if  the  cities  are  lost  to  Christ. 

Yer.  31. — The  city  gate*.  I.  The  citt  gates  are  for  egress.  The  citizens  are 
not  to  remain  always  immured  in  their  streets  and  houses.  They  are  to  go  forth  to 
the  country — till  their  vineyards,  lead  their  flocks  over  the  hills,  visit  their  neighbours. 

1.  It  is  bad  to  be  always  in  society.  Christ  called  his  disciples  away  from  the  multitude 
to  a  desert  place,  to  rest  awhile.  2.  It  is  desirable  to  cultivate  the  spirit  of  enterprise. 
We  English  have  our  island  home  guarded  by  the  friendly  sea,  but  we  take  care  to 
have  many  gates,  and  to  go  forth  over  the  wide  world.  We  travel  and  trade ;  in 
discovery  and  adventure  the  hardy  vigour  of  the  British  race  finds  scope,  and  grows  by 
exercise.  It  will  be  a  misfortune  for  England  if  this  spirit  of  enterprise  gives  place  to 
a  more  indolent,  self-indulgent  tone  of  life.  The  same  spirit  should  be  seen  in  the 
Church.  We  ought  to  have  more  energy  and  daring,  not  content  to  enjoy  our  privileges 
at  home,  but  eager  to  go  forth  and  do  some  fresh  service  for  our  Master.  3.  It  is  a 
Christian  duty  to  carry  missionary  work  out  into  the  world.  Christians  should  go 
out  of  the  gates  of  Christendom  to  bring  the  standard  of  the  gospel  into  heathen  lands. 

n.  The  citt  gates  are  fob  ingress.  1.  Strangers  should  be  welcomed.  The  gates 
of  the  city  of  God  are  open  day  and  night  (Bev.  xxL  26).  The  heavenly  Jerusalem 
is  always  ready  to  welcome  new  guests.  The  city  is  to  be  a  metropolis  of  man,  a  centre 
and  home  for  all  travellers  in  the  weary  journey  of  life.  It  is  utterly  contrary  to  the 
spirit  of  Christ  for  a  Church  to  show  any  spirit  of  exclusiveness,  any  desire  to  keep  its 
privileges  to  itself.    Christianity  is  for  the  world.    "  Whosoever  will,  let  him  come." 

2.  The  citizens  should  rettim  home.  "  Man  goeth  forth  unto  his  iirork,  and  to  his 
labour,  until  the  evening"  (Ps.  civ.  23).    Then 

«  The  ploughman  homeward  plods  his  weary  way,* 
b^eiel — IL  8  I 


482  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPHET  EZBKIEL.    [oh.  XLvm.  1— 8Bi 

After  work  in  the  fields  comes  rest  in  the  home.  We  cannot  be  always  engaged  in 
Christian  enterprises.  It  would  not  be  healthy  for  a  Church  to  be  wholly  absorbed  in 
mission  work.     It  must  also  have  its  own  loving  fellowship  and  refreshiug  worship. 

in.  The  crrr  oateb  abb  fob  pboteotion.  They  are  gates,  not  gaps.  The  well 
cared-foT  city  of  the  olden  times  had  massive  gate*  with  stout  locks  and  bars,  and 
perhaps  a  portcullis  at  each  gate  for  additional  protection.  The  city  of  God  has  ample 
means  of  warding  off  the  attack  of  the  enemy  of  souls.  God  has  not  cast  his  people 
out  in  a  waste,  howling  wilderness  to  be  a  prey  to  evil  creatures.  He  has  called  them 
into  "  a  city  which  hath  foundations  "  and  walls  and  gates.  Christ  himself  is  the  Lord 
of  this  new  Jerusalem,  and  all  are  safe  who  are  with  him.  "  There  is  now  no  condem- 
nation to  them  that  are  in  Christ  Jesus  "  (Rom.  viii.  1). 

IV.  The  crrr  oatbs  must  be  maitned  bt  the  people.  1.  Z%ey  need  guard*. 
The  garrison  of  Jerusalem  must  concentrate  its  attention  on  the  gates.  Christ  is  the 
Captun,  we  are  the  soldiers ;  under  him  it  becomes  our  duty,  to  hold  the  gates.  The 
■ick,  the  aged,  and  women  and  children,  are  kept  in  the  city  while  the  men  sally  forth  to 
attack  the  enemy.  The  gates  must  be  guarded  for  the  sake  of  the  human  trust  within. 
The  Church  should  guard  the  young,  the  feeble,  the  tempted.  2.  The  guards  an 
tevercUly  apportioned.  Each  gate  seems  to  be  named  after  the  tribe  to  whose  soldiers 
it  is  allotted.  There  are  various  branches  of  the  Christian  Church,  and  there  is  separate 
work  for  each  body  of  Christians.  If  one  gate  is  taken,  the  city  is  endangered.  Faith- 
fulness is  needed  in  all  classes  of  Christians  for  the  security  of  the  whole  Church. 

Ver.  36. — A  gloriom  name.  The  restored  city  of  Jerusalem  is  to  receive  s  new 
name,  "The  Lord  ii  there."  The  announcement  of  this  name  makes  a  splendid  con- 
clusion to  the  Book  of  Ezekiel.  The  numerous  and  varied  utterances  of  the  prophet 
have  carried  us  through  scenes  of  shame  and  sorrow,  and  even  of  blood  and  terror ;  but 
above  all  has  shone  the  vision  of.  God  and  his  grand  providence,  and  the  end  of  all  ia 
seen  in  the  new  city  and  temple  of  a  renewed  people. 

I.  The  name  desobibes  a  wondebful  fact.  Sin  drives  away  the  blessed  con- 
sciousness of  the  Divine  presence,  though  God  is  never  really  absent  from  any  part  of 
his  dominions.  But  when  God's  people  are  reconciled  to  him  he  draws  near  to  them 
in  inward  communion.  1.  A  real  presence.  This  is  not  the  name  of  a  truth  unrealized. 
God  is  now  present  with  his  people.  He  does  not  govern  his  city  by  deputy ;  he  him- 
self dwells  there.  2.  A  permanent  presence.  "The  Lord  is  there."  This  describe* 
what  is  continuous.  God  is  ever  with  his  people.  3.  A  wide  presence.  He  fills  the 
city ;  all  the  citizenn  may  enjoy  his  fellowship. 

II.  The  name  dbnotes  a  hafpt  condition.  God  is  present  for  high  and  glorious 
purposes.  1.  To  protect,  God  is  the  Commander  of  the  garrison,  and  he  has  innumer- 
able heavenly  armies  whom  he  can  summon  to  the  relief  of  his  hard-pressed  people  a» 
occasion  may  require.  If  he  is  in  our  midst,  we  shall  never  be  moved  (Fs.  xlvi.  6).  2. 
To  govern.  God  is  the  Sovereign.  If  he  comes,  it  must  be  to  rule  over  us.  The  order 
and  life  of  the  Church  depend  on  the  Divine  Spirit  that  dwells  in  the  midst  of  her. 
But  if  God  is  thus  present,  he  must  be  obeyed.  Disobedience  is  sedition.  3.  To  lieu. 
The  very  presence  of  God  is  sunshine  to  the  souL  His  communion  with  his  people 
brings  life  and  blessedness. 

ni.  The  name  commemobates  a  obbat  event.  "  From  that  day."  This  phrase 
indicates  a  definite  period.  There  were  ages  when  it  could  not  be  used ;  there  is  a 
particular  time  after  which  it  can  be  used,  viz.  the  time  of  the  restoration  of  Israel, 
and  the  rebuilding  of  the  once  ruined  and  desolate  city.  The  glorious  name  takes  its 
rise  from  this  glorious  event.  1.  After  repentance.  Sin  caused  God  to  withdraw  from 
the  city.  He  returns  to  meet  his  penitent  people,  he  dwells  in  the  contrite  spirit. 
2.  Throt/yh  redemption.  God  calls  his  people  back  to  their  land  after  he  has  redeemed 
them  from  the  power  of  their  enemies.  Christ's  redemption  opens  the  path  for  a  return 
to  God.  He — our  great  Redeemer — is  the  Way  to  God.  3.  In  restoration.  The 
people  come  back  to  their  home  and  rebuild  their  city ;  then  God  manifests  himself  In 
the  midst  of  them.  God  dwells  in  his  Church  from  the  time  of  Christ's  great  restoring 
work ;  he  dwells  in  each  soul  as  soon  as  it  is  restored  to  him.  The  thought  of  his 
presence  commemorates  our  redemption. 

IV.  The  name  pboolaims  an  impobtant  tbuth.    Not  only  is  it  stated  that  God 


OH.  XLvm.  1— 35.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PEOPHET  EZEKIEL.  483 

will  be  with  his  people,  but  this  truth  is  to  be  constantly  set  forth  by  standing  in  the 
Tery  name  of  the  city.  1.  As  a  grateful  acknowledgment.  If  God  is  with  us,  we 
ought  not  to  be  ashamed  of  so  wonderful  a  fact,  nor  should  we  ungratefully  ignore  it. 
Let  this  be  in  the  forefront  of  our  banner,  let  it  be  the  inspiration  of  our  song  1  2.  As 
a  necessary  reminder.  There  is  a  danger  lest  God's  people  should  forget  bis  presence 
(1)  in  doubt  and  distrust,  or  (2)  in  worldliness  and  self-sufficiency.  3.  As  an  inviting 
gospel.  Dwellers  in  other  parts  would  learn  the  new,  high  name  of  the  holy  city,  and 
•o  be  led  to  seek  the  privileges  of  citizenship.  A  confession  of  Christian  truth  and  a 
description  of  the  blessings  of  the  faith  help  to  draw  others  to  Christ  and  his  grace. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  ATJTHOBa, 

Ver.  11. — Fidelity.  It  was  highly  creditable  to  these  sons  of  Zadok  that,  when  tha 
children  of  Israel  generally  and  the  Levites  in  particular  went  astray,  they  resisted  tha 
influence  of  a  very  geneni  example,  and  remained  faithful  to  the  worship  and  servica 
of  Jehovah.  "  Faithful  among  the  faithless,"  they  were  recognized  and  remembered 
by  God  himself,  and  their  fidelity  was  rewarded  in  the  apportionment  of  the  territory 
among  the  people.  It  is  a  virtue  which  every  Christian  should  aim  at  possessing  and 
exercising. 

I.  Fidelity  is  in  oontbabt  to  oenebal  unfaithfulness.  Doubtless  there  waa 
a  period  in  the  history  of  Israel  when  apostasy  was  remarkably  general.  But  such  is 
the  weakness  and  vacillation,  the  inconstancy  and  mutability,  of  human  nature,  that 
fidelity  is  in  every  age  and  in  every  state  of  society  a  noticeable  virtue.  When  multi- 
tudes turn  from  Otoi  and  abandon  themselves  to  error  or  superstition,  to  infidelity  and 
irreligion,  they  are  conspicuous  and  commendable  who  cleave  unto  the  Lord  with 
purpose  of  heart. 

II.  FiOELiTT  IS  DiBPLATED  IN  THE  BESisTAKOB  OF  TEMPTATION.  Two  Considera- 
tions account  for  unfaithfulness — the  inducement  of  interest,  indolence,  worldliness,  etc } 
and  the  weakness  of  the  moral  nature,  the  frailty  of  resolution.  To  brave  unpopularity, 
to  dare  to  be  singular,  to  turn  a  deaf  ear  to  the  instigations  of  the  lower  parts  of  tha 
nature,  to  follow  the  guidance  of  deliberate  convictions, — such  is  the  way  of  honoiur 
and  of  piety.  Life  is  a  scene  of  discipline;  none  can  escape  the  probation;  the  faithful 
endure  it  and  profit  by  it. 

III.  FiDELiTT  OONSISTB  IN  KEEFINO  THE  Lobd's  ohabse.  Wa  are  all  trustees  to 
whom  the  great  Buler  and  Judge  of  all  has  conQded  a  charge.  It  may  be  a  deposit  of 
truth,  it  may  be  a  certain  service  to  be  rendered ;  but  whatever  it  be,  it  is  required  in 
us  as  stewards  that  we  be  found  faithful.  There  are  those  who  boast  of  their  fidelity 
to  their  fellow-men,  who  have,  however,  no  just  and  practical  sense  of  tha  duty  of  faith- 
fulness to  God  himself.  But  of  all  our  responsibilities  the  most  sacred  is  that  to  him 
in  whom  we  live  and  move  and  have  our  being,  who  has  assigned  to  us  our  work  and 
vocation  on  earth,  and  who  will  require  of  every  one  of  us  a  strict  account. 

ly.  FiDELITT   IB    A    VIBTUE    THE    UANIFEBT    EXHIBITION    OF    WHICH    UUBT    HEESS 

INFLUENCE  THE  OOMMUNITT  FOB  HiOHBBT  oooD.  The  faithful  are  the  salt  of  hvmian 
society ;  they  are  a  rebuke  to  the  vacillating,  and  an  encouragement  and  inspiration 
especially  to  the  younger  members  of  society  whose  aim  it  is  to  serve  their  generation 
according  to  the  will  of  God.  In  Jewish  history  are  to  be  found  not  a  few  illustrations 
of  the  beneficial  effects  of  examples  of  faithfulness  to  God  and  to  the  mission  and  the 
witness  appointed  by  God. 

Y.  Fidelity  is  afpbeoiated  and  bewabded  by  God  hiuself.  The  text  furnishes 
us  with  an  instance  of  the  Divine  satisfaction  with  those  who  do  not  shrink  from 
fulfilling  the  charge  committed  to  them.  And  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  assured  us 
that  those  who  are  faithful  in  a  few  things  shall  be  made  rulers  over  many  things. 
The  prospect  of  Divine  approval  may  well  sustain  the  servants  of  God  when  they  hava 
to  endure  tribulation,  persecution,  and  desertion  because  of  theii  steadfastness  and 
integrity  in  the  discharge  of  sacred  duty;  all  this  God  is  "not  unrighteous  to 
forget"— T. 

Yer.  19. — 3%«  service  o/the  city,    Jenisalem  was  the  metropolis  of  the  Jewish  stata 


484  THE   BOOK   OF   THE   PROPHET  EZEKIBL.     [oh.  XLVin.  1—35. 


and  of  the  Jewish  Church.  Accordingly,  it  was  regarded  as  the  charge  of  the  whole 
nation.  All  Israelites  had  an  interest  in  its  peace  and  prosperity,  and  all  recognized 
the  honourable  obligation  of  providing  for  its  welfare.  !□  his  ideal  reconstitution  of 
the  nation  Ezekiel  provided  that  the  city  lands  should  he  cultivated,  and  the  city 
service  should  be  fulfilled  by  Israelites  selected  from  aU  tribes,  who  also  should  serve 
as  a  militia  for  its  defence.  The  principle  is  a  Divine  principle  which  applies  to  the 
Ohorch  of  Christ,  the  true  and  spiritual  Jerusalem. 

L  A  UKIVERBAL  8EBVI0S.  As  all  the  tribes  of  Israel  joined  in  serving  their  country's 
metropolis,  so  in  the  Church  of  the  Divine  Bedeemer  no  one  is  exempt  from  contribu- 
tion to  the  common  good.  No  one  is  so  feeble  or  so  obscure  that  his  aid  may  be 
dispensed  with.  Every  age  and  every  land  in  which  Christianity  is  professed  furnishes 
a  contingent  to  swell  the  army  of  the  Lord. 

II.  A  voLUNTABY  BEBViOE.  No  Other  is  acceptable  to  the  Lord,  who  desires  the 
heart,  and  who  will  accept  no  mechanical,  unwilling  labour.  Cordiality  is  essential, 
even  though  power  be  slight  and  opportunity  be  limited.  The  professional  and  ofBcial 
element  must  always  be  regarded  with  auxitt  and  watchfulness,  for  the  motive  must 
be  pure  or  else  the  work  is  marred. 

UI.  A  TABIED  8EBVI0E.  Each  has  his  own  special  gift,  and  none  should  he  nnder- 
Yalued,  far  less  despised.  Young  and  old,  learned  and  lay,  those  in  public  and  those 
in  private  life,  all  have  their  work  to  do,  their  part  to  fulfil.  None  can  be  spared. 
The  Church  is  built  upon  its  Divine  Foundation  through  the  labours  of  many  mind% 
many  voices,  many  hands.    The  one  Master  iinds  work  for  all. 

"He  has  his  young  men  at  the  war, 
His  little  ones  at  home." 

rV.  A  DIGNIFIED  AND  HONOUBABLE  SEBvioB.  To  do  anything  at  the  bidding  of 
such  a  Master,  and  for  the  progress  of  such  a  cause,  may  well  be  esteemed  a  privilege. 
Our  Lord  himself,  by  his  incarnation,  ministry,  and  sacrifice,  has  done  more  than  could 
have  been  done  in  any  other  way  to  teach  ua  the  true  dignity  of  service.  If  it  be  an 
honour  to  serve  a  great  nation,  a  powerful  king,  how  much  higher  is  the  honour  of 
serving  the  Lord  Jesus  and  those  for  whom  he  died  1 

V.  A  SEBVIOE  WHICH  18  UBEBALLY  EECOMPENBED.  OuT  Lord  himself  saw  of  the 
travail  of  his  soul,  and  was  satisfied.  And  when  the  promise  is  given  to  his  faithful 
servants  and  followers,  that  they  shall  enter  into  the  joy  of  their  Lord,  this  is  equivalent 
to  an  assurance  that,  sharing  his  toil,  they  shall  also  share  his  recompense.  The  safety 
and  the  growth,  the  prosperity  and  the  glory,  of  the  city  is  an  abundant  reward  to  the 
citizen  who  works  with  diligence  and  self-denial  for  its  good.  And  the  Christian  has 
no  greater  joy  than  to  witness  the  increase  and  the  lame  of  the  heavenly  Jerusalem, 
and  no  brighter  hc^  than  to  share  his  Master's  throne. — T. 

Ver.  35. — "  The  Lord  is  there."  A  sublime  close  to  a  glorious  book  of  prophecy. 
Ezekiel  has  had  occasion  to  witness  against  Jerusalem,  to  upbraid  the  inhabitants  of 
the  city  for  their  unfaithfulness  to  their  God  and  to  their  privileges,  to  threaten 
chastisement  and  desolation,  and  to  lament  because  his  prediction  has  been  fulfilled. 
But  as  he  turns  his  vision  away  from  the  actual  to  the  ideal,  from  the  past  to  the 
future,  from  the  Jerusalem  that  now  is  to  the  Jerusalem  which  is  from  above  which  if 
the  mother  of  us  all,  from  the  Jewish  state  to  the  Church  of  God  which  that  state 
foreshadowed,  his  mind  is  elevated  with  a  sacred  rapture,  he  beholds  his  brightest  hopes 
fulfilled,  God  in  very  deed  dwells  with  man — "  the  name  of  the  city  from  that  day 
shall  be,  The  Lord  is  there." 

1.  To  DiBPiiAY  HIS  FAITHFULNESS  TO  THE  CITY,  The  purposcs  and  promises  of  God 
to  man  stand  written  indelibly  upon  the  sacred  page,  Not  one  word  that  he  has 
cpoken  shall  fail ;  all  shall  be  Mfilled.  "  I  have  luved  thee  with  an  everlasting  love." 
"  The  mountains  may  depart,  and  the  hills  be  removed,  but  my  faithfulness  shall  not 
depart  from  thee,  neither  shall  the  covenant  of  my  peace  be  removed,  saith  the  Lord 
that  hath  mercy  upon  thee." 

IL  To  BULB  AND  dovBBN  THE  CITY.  Not  wlth  the  harshness  of  a  despotic  tyrant, 
but  with  the  wisdom  and  justice  of  a  beneficent  Sovereign,  does  Jehovah  bear  sway 
over  his  redeemed  and  happy  Church.    He  represses  all  rebellion  and  disorder,  he  pro 


OH.  XLvm.  1—35.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PEOPHET  EZEKIEL.  485 

mulgates  ordinances,  he  inspires  a  cheerful  obedience,  he  maintains  that  order  which  is 
the  expression  of  loyalty  and  contentment. 

III.  To  PROTECT  THE  CITY.  The  Lord  has  taken  his  Zion  under  his  own  guardian 
care.  The  foes  of  the  city  may  be  mighty,  but  her  Friend  and  Protector  is  mightii^r 
still.  "The  Lord  of  hosts  is  with  us;  the  God  of  Jacob  is  our  Refuge."  Fear  cannot 
be,  for  danger  cannot  come  where  he  is.  He  casts  the  shield  of  his  almiohty  protection 
around  his  beloved.  The  walls  of  the  city  are  salvation.  The  citizens  may  dwell  in 
everlasting  peace.     No  weapon  that  is  formed  against  Zion  shall  prosper. 

IV.  To  DiQNiPT  AND  HONOUR  THE  CITY.  The  presence  and  the  throne  of  the 
Eternal  Majesty  shed  a  lustre  over  the  sacred  metropolis.  The  seat  of  his  government 
is  by  that  very  fact  invested  with  an  incomparable  splendour  and  renown.  The  kings 
of  the  earth  bring  their  honour  into  it.  Every  citizen  shares  in  the  dignity  conferred 
by  the  throne  of  the  great  King. 

V.  To  ABIDE  FOB  EVER  IN  THE  CITY.  "The  Lord  IS  there."  The  unfaithfulness 
and  defection  of  the  Israelites  were  such  that  the  glory  of  the  God  of  Israel  removed  by 
the  east  gate  from  the  temple  and  the  city  of  Jerusalem.  But  the  prophet  beholds 
him  returnto  his  chosen  dwelling-place.  And  as  Jehovah  takes  up  his  abode  in  his 
Church,  he  utters  the  assurance,  "I  will  never  leave  thee!" — T. 

Vers.  8 — 14. — Religion  the  nucleus  of  human  life.  The  spiritual  training  of  men 
has  been  uppermost  in  God's  mind.  As  a  wise  father  trains  his  child,  so  Gud  has  been 
training  us.  Prom  God  earthly  fathers  have  instinctively  learnt  their  methods.  With 
unparalleled  patience  God  has  been  encouraging  men  to  take  the  first  step  heaven- 
ward, then  the  next,  and  the  next.  The  progress  has  been  slow,  often  imperceptible; 
yet  it  has  been  continuous.  Earth  has  been,  and  still  will  be,  a  great  schuul-house,  • 
religious  university,  and  God's  lesson-books  are  numberless.  The  outline  of  God's 
plan  was  sketched  in  Judsea,  and  the  Hebrews  (dull  scholars  as  they  were)  have  become 
teachers  to  the  world. 

I.  Eei.igion  fills  a  CENTRAL  PLACE  IN  A  RENOVATED  WORLD.  "The  sauctuary 
of  the  Lord  shall  be  in  the  midst  thereof."  As  the  light  of  truth  permeates  men's 
minds,  they  will  discover  the  supreme  excellence  of  piety.  Whatever  will  aid  in  tha 
unfolding  of  their  spiritual  nature,  whatever  will  promote  inci  easing  likeness  to  God, 
shall  be  most  appreciated.  Temporary  good  will  sink  into  its  proper  place ;  will  be 
appraised  at  its  proper  value.  The  outlook  upon  human  destiny  will  be  taken  from  a 
loftier  elevation.  Present  possessions  and  enjoyments  will  be  deemed,  not  final,  but 
stepping-stones  to  higher  things.  And,  from  her  central  throne.  Religion  will  radiate 
a  benign  influence  over  every  interest  men  have  in  life.  What  the  sun  is  to  the  solar 
system,  or  what  the  axle  is  to  the  wheel,  or  what  the  heart  is  to  the  "human  body, 
true  religion  will  be  among  the  concernments  of  our  race. 

II.  Religion  provides  a  graduated  scale  op  excellence.  It  produces  states 
of  purity,  circle  within  circle.  Central  amongst  the  civilized  nations  lay  the  Hebrew 
people — a  "  holy  nation — a  peculiar  people."  Among  the  Hebrew  tribes  was  one  triba 
set  apart  and  hallowed  for  God.  Within  this  tribe  was  selected  a  consecrated  family, 
and  within  this  family  a  consecrated  man.  So  also  within  Jerusalem,  the  holy  city, 
there  was  a  central  portion  holier  still ;  within  this  enclosure  a  court  sacred  to  the 
priests,  and  within  this  holy  place  the  holy  of  holies.  Thus  God  leads  us  step  by  step 
from  a  lower  to  a  loftier  life,  from  one  stage  of  holiness  unto  another.  We  aspire  and 
make  endeavour  after  a  nobler  style  of  life,  and  lol  when  we  have  attained  it  (as  in 
ascending  the  Alpine  mountains)  we  discover  heights  of  excellence  still  above  us,  mora 
attractive  yet.  Kindlier  methods  than  those  God  uses  on  our  behalf  it  is  impossiblo 
to  employ,  and  his  benevolent  ambition  is  to  raise  us  to  his  own  level  of  life  and  joy. 

m.  Religion  promotes  unity  amid  diversity.  "  The  sanctuary  shall  be  in  tha 
midst  of  it."  In  other  words,  the  several  tribes  of  Israel  were  allotted  their  territory 
(in  Ezekiel's  ideal  sketch)  in  relation  to  the  holy  place.  Their  vital  connection  with 
the  sanctuary  determined  their  connection  with  each  other.  The  distinction  between 
the  tribes  was  not  obliterated ;  it  served  some  useful  purpose ;  but  this  common  relation 
to  the  sanctuary  bound  them  each  to  each.  If  they  had  any  separate  interests  as 
tribes,  they  had  larger  aud  more  precious  interests  as  a  nation.  The  more  they  valued 
the  sanctuary  the  stronger  was  the  attachn;ent  to  each  other.     The  nearer  they  got  to 


486  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  EZEKIEL.    [oh.  xltoi.  1—35 

Chid  the  less  distance  there  was  between  each  other.  Among  the  citizens  in  Christ's 
kingdom  diyersities  in  minor  things  will  continue.  Diversity  adds  to  beauty  and  to 
iisefulness.  Diversity  of  fiinction  and  o£Sce,  diversity  in  opinion  and  in  taste,  is 
lawful ;  yet  amid  all  lawful  diversity  there  nms  a  bond — a  vital  tie — of  true  unity. 
The  members  of  the  body  are  various,  yet  the  body  is  one.  In  all  God's  works  the 
same  principle  prevails. 

IT.  Bbligion  BBIN08  GtoD  EQXTALLT  NKAB  TO  ALL.  As  a  fact  in  Jewlsh  history, 
the  tribe  of  Dan,  being  furthest  removed  from  God's  sanctuary,  became  more  worldly, 
idolatrous,  and  godless  than  the  other  tribes.  In  the  new  settlement  of  things,  in 
Eiekiel's  vision,  Dan  shall  have  equal  privilege  with  the  rest.  Type  and  parable  will 
always  lack  some  elements,  which  inhere  in  the  substance.  In  the  new  kingdom  God 
shall  be  within  easy  reach  of  all.  Spiritual  monopolies  shall  cease.  Exclusive  privilege 
has  vanished.  The  devout  heart  in  every  tribe  of  men,  or  in  any  class  of  society,  may 
find  God  always  near.  Distance  from  God  is  no  longer  geographical ;  it  is  moraL  The 
slave  and  the  pauper  may  have  access  to  the  great  presence-chamber;  the  monarch, 
Jew  or  Gentile,  may  be  barred  out  by  their  own  unbelief.  "  With  that  man  will  I 
dwell,  who  is  of  an  humble  and  a  contrite  heart." 

y.  Religion  has  auplb  bewabd  fob  FAiTHFin.  bebvioe.  The  sons  of  Zadok  had 
remained  faithful  in  a  time  of  general  apostasy.  Divine  approval  may  not  have  been 
openly  or  profusely  expressed  at  the  time.  Yet  generous  reward  was  in  store.  Perma- 
nent honovir  and  permanent  advantage  appear  as  the  prolific  fruit.  They  shall  dwell 
nearer  to  God  than  others  do.  The  entire  nation  shall  serve  them.  Their  deed  shall 
reflect  honour  upon  their  father's  name.  The  glory  of  their  deed  shall  be  perpetual, 
■hall  be  world-wide.  Their  noble  deed  shall  be  the  seed-corn  for  other  deeds,  and  these 
again  shall  bear  fruit  in  other  lands.     "  The  memory  of  the  righteous  is  blessed." 

YL  Beliqioh  is  surBEHSLT  VALUABLE.  Concerning  this  consecrated  land  it  was 
decreed,  "  They  shall  not  sell  of  it,  neither  exchange,  nor  alienate  the  firstfruits  of  the 
laDd."  Nothing  can  compensate  for  the  loss  of  religion.  It  is  solid  consolation  that 
true  piety  is  inalienable.  No  power  on  earth  or  in  hell  can  rob  us  of  our  faith,  or  of 
our  purity,  or  of  our  hope.  It  bas  the  guarantee  of  almighty  protection.  You  can  no 
more  aUenate  religion  frc»n  a  saint  than  you  can  alienate  warmth  from  a  sunbeam  or 
saltness  from  the  sea.  "  All  that  a  man  hath  will  he  give  for  his  life ; "  but  the  life  ot 
his  spirit  he  accounts  a  thousandfold  more  precious  yet.  God's  friendship  is  treasure 
which  no  arithmetic  can  express.    All  comparisons  faiL — ^D. 

V^r.  35. — The  apex  (/glory.  "  The  name  of  the  city  from  that  day  shall  be,  Tte 
Lord  is  there."  The  final  words  of  the  prophet  are  golden,  and  deserve  to  be  written 
in  largest  capitals.  The  architecture  of  the  holy  city  is  ideally  complete ;  its  finial 
shines  out  wilh  immortal  lustre.  The  city  is  baptized  with  a  new  name.  Instead  <tf 
"  Jerusalem,"  it  shall  be  "  Jehovah-Shammah."  Names  are  often  labels  which  falsify 
the  reality.  A  worthless  mine  may  be  named  "  El  Dorado."  A  rotten  ship  may  still 
bear  the  name  ImpregncMe.  But  this  name  shall  express  the  distinctive  feature  of 
the  renovated  city.  Its  glory  shall  not  appear  in  chiselled  marble  and  in  burnished 
gold.  In  the  new  kingdom  Oirist  shall  set  up,  all  the  materials  shall  be  spiritual, 
therefore  impervious  to  decay.  The  charm  and  enchantment  of  the  place  will  be  this — 
"The  Lord  is  there."  It  shall  be  nothing  less  than  heaven  in  miniature.  This 
illustrious  name  betokens — 

I.  Seoitritt.  Real  security  is  never  a  visible  quantity.  It  does  not  consist  of 
granite  walls  and  bastions,  nor  yet  of  approved  artillery.  The  walls  of  Jericho  were  a 
poor  defence.  Jerusalem  was  better  shielded  by  an  unseen  angel  against  the  legions 
of  Sennacherib,  than  by  all  its  towers  and  citadels  and  gates.  The  host  of  Israel,  when 
invading  Canaan,  was  invincible  because  the  Lord  was  among  them.  The  presence  of 
God  is  no  mere  fancy ;  'tis  a  substantial  reality.  And  if  he  be  among  us  he  brings  with 
him  all  the  qualities  of  Omnipotence.  He  who  reared  the  Alps  by  a  word,  cannot  he 
dafend  us?  He  who  created  with  a  breath  this  solid  globe,  cannot  he  protect  ?  He  is 
to  US  better  than  all  "  munitions  of  rocks."  If  he  dwell  in  our  midst,  well  may  we 
triumphantly  shout,  "  The  Lord  of  hosts  is  with  us ;  the  God  of  Jacob  is  our 
Scfuge." 

XL  EimnMT  benowh.    A  city  is  deemed  garnished  with  honour  if  it  be  the  residenea 


i)H.  xLviii.  1—35.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZBKIEL.  487 

of  a  king.  To  have  the  presence  of  a  monarch  in  their  midst,  to  enjoy  ever  and  anou 
his  smile,  is  a  privilege  which  all  citizens  prize.  But  how  superior  the  renown  of  a  city 
in  which  the  King  of  heaven  specially  dwells  1  That  he  should  stoop  to  sojourn  among 
feeble  mortals  is  an  act  of  condescension  peculiarly  God-like,  Compassion  to  the  fallen 
is  his  delight,  and  he  is  satisfied  if  he  can  bestir  in  us  holy  ambitions.  But  what  an 
honour!  It  is  a  difficult  task  to  make  it  real  to  ourselves.  His  presence  is  the 
essential  charm  of  heaven.  He  is  its  Light  and  its  Life.  Yet  he  deigns  to  dwell  in  an 
earthly  empire !  "Will  he  not  be  equally  the  Life  and  Glory  of  the  place  ?  Will  not 
this  city  acquire  an  eminence  that  shall  cast  into  the  shade  all  other  renown  ?  What 
other  honour  can  we  desire  than  this  ?  Can  ambition  any  higher  climb  ?  Is  not  this  a 
«limax  of  honour — "  God  with  us  "  ?    Such  a  city  becomes  the  metropolis  of  the  world, 

III.  Intebnal  osdeb.  If  our  King  dwell  in  our  midst,  and  if  he  be  endowed  with 
qualities  of  supreme  wisdom  and  supreme  righteousness,  then  the  order  of  the  city  will 
be  complete.  Oppression  of  every  sort  and  kind  will  be  unknown.  Upon  every  act  of 
violence  he  will  frown,  and  his  frown  will  sufBce.  The  inhabitants  will  instinctively 
study  his  comfort.  The  least  danger  of  losing  his  presence  will  make  them  loyal. 
They  will  feel  intolerable  shame  at  any  act  that  would  distress  his  mind.  His  laws 
and  regulations  they  know  to  be  righteous  through  and  through.  His  administration 
of  rule  is  kindly  and  gentle.  It  is  a  joy  to  please  him.  Resistance  can  fiud  no  corner 
wherein  to  lurk,  for  "  his  eyes  are  in  every  place."  To  meet  his  gracious  commands  is 
not  enough ;  they  anticipate  his  every  wish.  For  such  a  one  service  is  a  very  banquet. 
At  Ms  feet  they  place  heart  and  will. 

IV.  Pbospemtt.  The  presence  of  God  among  us  brings  real  prosperity.  From  him, 
the  eternal  Fount  of  good,  all  substantial  blessing  flows.  A  hollow,  transient  pros- 
perity may-  now  and  again  be  possessed  without  him ;  but  it  soon  collapses, — ^it  is  only 
penalty  disguised.  The  foes  of  God  have  at  times  had  a  flash  of  apparent  success.  But 
ugain  men  looked;  it  had  vanished;  the  possessors  were  hurled  into  destruction;  into 
fimoke  had  they  faded  away.  As  the  rising  of  the  sun  brings  to  us  radiant  day,  so  the 
timile  of  God  alone  gives  success  to  agriculture,  to  commerce,  to  art,  to  legislation,  and 
to  literature.  If  God  dwell  among  us,  every  interest  in  human  life  prospers.  Industry 
reaps  a  full  reward.  Contentment  reigns  in  every  home.  The  very  deserts  bud  and 
blossom  like  the  rose. 

V.  HiQE  coMMtTNioN  ALSO  IS  ENJOYED.  Our  King  does  not  clothe  himself  in 
silent,  proud  reserve.  The  very  opposite ;  he  is  free  of  speech,  affable,  familiar.  All 
the  stores  of  knowledge  he  has  he  is  ready  to  communicate.  It  is  his  purpose  to  make 
us  wise,  righteous,  beneficent,  pure.  He  dwells  among  us  that  we  may  commune  with 
bim  and  learn  of  him.  We  have  known  and  felt  the  rich  gains  to  character  and  to 
spiritual  progress  we  have  made  by  an  hour  or  two  of  converse  with  the  great  and  good 
among  men.  We  were  lifted  up  to  a  higher  plane  of  life.  But  what  language  can 
express  the  gain  of  purity  and  spiritual  excellence  we  obtain  from  converse  with  God? 
It  is  at  times  a  glad  experience ;  but  earth  is  too  poor  in  speech  to  tabulate  the  gain. 
And  it  is  a  gain  that  abides.  A  stupendous  change  passed  over  the  eleven  apostles 
through  their  familiar  intercourse  with  Jesus,  and  we  have  often  envied  them  the  high 
advantage.  Yet  we  are  not  excluded.  We  are  invited  to  closer  friendship,  to  more 
intimate  converse  with  God.  Fools  we  are  that  we  do  not  use  the  privilege.  By  com- 
munion with  God  we  become  like  God. 

VI.  Exquisite  jot.  As  superior  joy  pervades  like  a  sunny  atmosphere  the  scenes 
of  heaven,  so  an  instalment  of  the  same  joy  fills  the  city  on  earth  where  God  dwells, 
Joy  springs  out  of  the  harmony  between  our  souls  and  our  surroundings.  The  highest 
joy  is  reached  when  our  souls  have  perfect  fiiendship  with  our  Maker,  Out  of  this 
intimate  relationship  with  God  comes  friendly  relationship  with  all  holy  beings.  Now 
"  all  things  work  together  for  our  good,"  Sorrow  is  but  a  preparative  for  a  higher  joy. 
The  darkest  cloud  breaks  into  showers  of  blessing.  Sorrow  is  ephemeral ;  joy  is  perma- 
nent. There  are  qualities  in  joy  as  well  as  varying  measures.  This  joy  is  superlative 
—the  cream  of  all  joy.  'Tis  the  selfsame  joy  that  dwells  in  Jehovah's  heart,  "My 
peace,"  said  Jesus,  "  I  give  unto  you."  All  other  forms  of  gladness  fade  into  nothing- 
ness in  the  presence  of  such  joy  as  this.  It  is  a  well-spring  of  bliss  which  can  never 
be  exhausted,  because  God  can  never  be  exhausted.  "  In  thy  presence  is  fulness  of 
loT."    "  Then  shall  I  be  satisfied  when  I  awake  in  thy  likeness." 


488  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  BZEKIEL.    [oh.  xlviii.  1— 3!x 

"O  blest  the  city,  blest  the  land. 
That  yield  them  to  this  King's  command  I 
O  blest  the  heart  set  free  from  sin. 
To  which  he  deigns  to  enter  in  I " 

Sl 

Vers.  1 — 20. — OharaeteHtUcs  of  the  Mngdom.  The  kingdom  of  God,  here  symbo- 
liMd  "  with  such  imperfect  materials  of  thought  and  utterance  as  then  lay  within  the 
prophet's  reach,"  was  to  be  one  that  has  not  yet  been  realized ;  but  with  the  overthrow 
of  many  superstitions,  the  breaking  down  of  much  corruption,  and  the  birth  and  growth 
(or  the  revival)  of  much  Christian  zeal,  it  may  be  said  that  this  fair  vision  is  being 
fulfilled — that  the  kingdom  of  Christ  is  coming,  though  it  is  far  from  having  come. 
Among  its  characteristics,  as  it  shall  one  day  be,  are — 

I.  Globiodb  maonitude  or  dimension.    (Ver.  10.    See  homily  on  oh.  xliL  16—20.) 

II.  Its  admixture  of  qbaoe  and  of  bbwabd.  The  distribution  of  the  land  seems 
to  have  been  without  much  (if  any)  regard  to  the  meritoriousness  of  the  tribes,  Dan^ 
which  for  its  admission  of  idolatrous  elements  might  have  been  last  placed,  comes  first 
of  all  (ver.  1) ;  on  the  other  hand,  marked  preference  is  shown  to  "  the  priests  ...  of 
the  sons  of  Zadok,  which  have  kept  my  charge,  which  went  not  astray,"  etc.  (ver.  H). 
In  the  kingdom  of  Christ  there  is  this  same  righteous  and  beneficent  admixture.  1.  It 
is  of  God's  grace  that  all  sinful  souls  are  taken  back  into  his  favour,  and  are  partaken 
of  eternal  life  (Eph.  ii.  6 ;  Bom.  vi.  23).  2.  A  large  reward  is  offered  to  steadfastness 
and  fidelity  (Luke  xxii.  28 ;  Matt.  xxv.  21 ;  Bom.  ii.  7 ;  Eev.  ii.  10). 

III.  Communion  and  co-opebation.  1.  The  several  tribes  were  so  placed  that  they 
wera  as  near  to  one  another  as  could  be ;  they  were  to  be  located  side  by  side.  And 
there  was  to  be  no  barrier  of  sea  or  mountain  wall,  or  even  deep  river  between  them; 
there  was  to  be  no  hindrance  to  full  communion  («ee  vers.  1 — 8).  2.  They  were  to 
unite  in  a  common  service.  All  the  tribes  were  to  take  part  in  the  service  required  for 
the  city  (ver.  19).  When  in  the  future  the  kingdom  of  Ghxi  shall  be  what  its  Lord 
would  have  it,  there  shall  be  no  separating  walls  keeping  Churches  and  communities 
apart;  there  will  be  nothing  standing  in  the  way  of  fullest  and  happiest  communion ; 
differences  of  opinion  or  of  organization  will  not  be  sources  of  division  and  separation ; 
and  while  fellowship  will  be  uninterrupted,  co-operation  for  common  ends  will  b« 
common  and  complete, — all  will  serve  together. 

IV.  Beautt.  The  aspect  presented  by  this  vision  is  one  of  symmetry ;  the  sanctnarjr 
of  the  Lord  in  the  midst  of  it  (ver.  10) ;  the  sacred  city  around  the  sanctuary;  and  tM 
twelve  tribes  around  the  city.  Here  is  the  beauty  of  a  symmetrical  arrangement.  The 
beauty  of  the  Church  will  not,  indeed,  be  of  this  visible,  material  order.  That  is  quite 
out  of  the  question.  It  must  necessarily  be  moral,  spiritual,  if  at  all.  And  that  it 
will  be.  1.  It  will  be  fair  with  devotion — constant,  systematic,  and  (withal)  spon- 
taneous devotion  (see  next  homily).  2.  It  will  be  adorned  with  an  admirable  cormstency 
of  behaviour,  shunning  the  evil  and  pursuing  the  good  which  its  Divine  Master  has 
either  condemned  or  commended.  3.  It  will  be  beautiful  with  the  spirit  of  a  true 
catholicity,  its  members  having  a  cordial  regard  and  affection  for  one  another,  however 
they  may  differ  in  views  and  tastes.  4.  It  will  be  arrayed  in  the  "  beautiful  garments  " 
of  sympathy  a/nd  helpfulness. — 0. 

Vers.  31 — 34. — Ood  the  Accessible  One.  Admitting  to  the  sacred  city,  in  the  midst 
of  which  was  "  the  sanctuary  of  the  Lord  "  (ver.  10),  were  twelve  gates,  three  on  each 
side  of  it,  and  bearing  the  names  of  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel.  Surely  the  significance 
of  this  arrangement  was  that  the  Divine  Sovereign  was  always  accessible  to  all  his 
people ;  that  he  desired  to  be  approached  by  them  all  in  order  that  they  might  have 
fdlowship  with  him,  and  that  he  might  confer  blessing  upon  them.  In  that  kingdom, 
of  which  the  vision  is  prophetic,  the  Divine  Lord  is  accessible  to  all ;  and  it  is  not  only 
tnie  that  he  may  be  approached  by  all  who  will  seek  him,  but  that  it  is  his  express, 
Us  strong  desire  that  all  his  children  should  freely  draw  near  to  him  and  hold  converee 
with  him.     God,  as  revealed  and  related  to  us  in  Jesus  Christ,  is  accessible — 

L  At  all  Times.  The  gates  into  the  kingdom,  or  into  the  near  presence  of  God, 
sh^  "  in  no  wise  be  shut,"  either  day  or  night.    There  may  be  days  and  hours  when 


OH.  XLViii.  1— 35.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIBL.  489 

we  ma,j  he  offered  unusual  facilities  for  coming  before  God,  but  there  i»  no  day  and 
there  ii  no  hour  when  we  may  not  draw  nigh  unto  him,  when  he  is  not  willing  «nd 
•Ten  dedrous  that  we  should  pour  our  prayers  or  our  praises  into  his  ear. 

n.  From  all  dibections.  These  gates  looked  in  all  directions — ^nortfa,  Kmth,  east, 
and  west.  From  all  the  four  quarter.i  of  the  land  the  children  of  Israel  were  to  draw 
near  to  the  sacred  city  and  to  the  more  sacred  sanctuary  of  the  Lord.  From  all 
possible  directions  are  we  now  to  approach  Qod.  1.  All  geographical  directions.  There 
If  no  sort  of  favouritism  anywhere.  As  well  be  bom  in  any  one  place  under  heaven  as 
in  any  other.  There  is  no  Jerusalem,  no  Gerizim,  no  Mecca,  no  Benares,  no  Rome,  in 
the  langdom  of  Christ. 

"Where'er  we  seek  thee,  thou  art  foond. 
And  every  plaoe  is  hallowed  ground." 

3.  All  moral  directions.  We  may  approach  God  from  a  great  variety  of  spiritual 
•tan^wints.  (1)  From  that  of  the  burdened  sinner  seeking  forgiveness  and  release. 
(2)  From  that  of  the  son  who  has  been  painfully  conscious  of  a  long  estrangement  or 
a  growing  coldness,  and  who  is  anxious  for  full  reconciliation  and  for  close  and  happy, 
psrhaps  renewed,  intercourse  with  his  Father.  (3)  From  that  of  a  rejoicing  spirit 
longing  to  bring  bis  gladness  in  holy  and  happy  gratitude  to  the  altar  of  the  Lbid. 
(4)  From  that  of  the  troubled  and  sorrowful  soul  seeking  comfort  of  him  who  "  raiseth 
up  them  that  are  bowed  down."  (5)  From  that  of  the  seeker  after  righteousness,  who 
ia  longing  for  more  complete  deliverance  from  evil  and  greater  likeness  to  his  Divine 
Leader,  asking  for  the  cleansing  and  renewing  influences  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  (6)  From 
that  of  the  earnest  worker  in  the  vineyard,  pleading  for  the  effectuating  power  which 
alone  will  make  his  efforts  to  be  crowned  with  a  true  success.  But  from  whatsoever 
direction  a  man  draws  near  to  God  he  will  find  an  open  gate,  a  welcome,  a  response. 
But  there  is  now  one  Name  only  that  is  inscribed.    All  entrance  is — 

in.  Thbouoh  Jesus  Christ.  He  is  "  the  Door,"  and  "  no  man  cometh  unto  the 
Father  but  by  him."    By  him  both  Jew  and  Gentile  "have  access  unto  the  Father" 

gohn  X.  7 ;  xiv.  6 ;  Eph.  ii.  18).  Jesus  Christ  is  our  Mediator  (1  Tim.  ii.  6) ;  he  is 
e  one  Propitiation  for  our  sins,  having  offered  the  one  sacrifice  for  sins  for  ever 
(1  John  ii.  2 ;  Heb.  iz.  26 ;  z.  12).  It  is  through  him  we  come,  and  it  is  his  Name  we 
plead  (John  xvi.  23).  He  is  the  open  Door,  and  whether  we  approach  as  sinners  seeking 
reconciliation,  or  as  children  or  friends  seeking  communion  and  blessing,  we  have  con- 
stant admission  to  the  ever-accessible  Father  of  our  spirits. — 0. 

Ver.  35. — The  presence  of  Christ  in  his  Church.  Far  more  valuable  to  the  Church 
of  Jesus  Christ  is  that  Divine  presence  here  promised  than  was  the  sacred  Shechinah  to 
the  ancient  people.  The  latter  was  only  a  mere  symbol,  once  a  year  beheld  by  one  man; 
but  the  former  is  a  gracious  power,  to  be  appreciated  and  felt  by  every  true  Christian ' 
heart.  "God  is  in  the  midst  of  her; "  "The  Lord  is  there,"  or  (as  Fairbairn  would 
translate  it)  "  The  Lord  is  thither  or  thereupon ; "  the  Lord  from  his  temple  looks 
towards  (or  upon)  the  city,  and  through  the  city  to  the  whole  land.  It  is  the  presence 
(rf  its  Divine  Lord  in  the  midst  of  the  Church  that  is  here  indicated,  and  it  may  well 
be  the  concluding,  as  it  is  the  crowning,  thought  which  gives  completeness  to  the 
prophet's  vision. 

L  His  obsbbvant  pbesknok.  Jesus  Christ  is  "with  us  always"  (Matt,  xxviii. 
20);  not  in  the  body,  but  in  the  spirit;  and  his  spiritual  presence  means  his  observation 
of  us,  his  perfect  knowledge  of  us  all,  his  observation  of  our  inner  life  and  of  our 
outward  conduct,  in  the  homes  in  which  we  live  and  in  the  different  spheres  in  which 
we  move  as  well  as  when  we  are  gathered  together  in  his  house  or  around  his  table. 
The  near  presence  of  our  Lord  is  a  thought  which  should  preserve  us  from  folly  and 
fiom  sin  which  should  urge  us  to  duty  and  to  kindness,  which  should  sustain  us  in 
trouble  and  in  loss.  .... 

IL  His  sympathetic  pebsknck.  We  have  need  of  his  presence  at  all  times,  but 
we  realize  our  need  more  especially  and  more  profoundly  in  the  time  of  our  affliction. 
It  is  then  we  want  a  Divine  Friend  and  an  all-powerful  Deliverer.  Man  fails  us  then ; 
he  may  be  something  or  even  much  to  us,  but  he  leaves  much  to  be  desired.  And  to 
feel  that  "  the  Lord  is  there,"  in  the  trials  of  the  household,  in  the  anxieties  of  daily 


490  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIE-L.    [oh.  xLvm.  1— 86. 

duty,  in  the  pregsing  problems  and  sacred  struggles  of  the  Church,  is  much  to  the  mmd 
of  the  devout.  In  Jesus  Christ  we  have  a  present,  sympathizing  Friend,  who  enteia 
into  our  sorrows,  who  goes  down  with  us  into  the  deepest  waters  through  which  we 
have  to  paRS. 

IIL  His  aotivk  pbebenoe.  Our  Lord  is  with  us,  not  only  observing  us  and  feeling 
for  us,  but  also  acting  graciously  upon  us  and  through  us.  1.  Hluminating  our  minds 
by  the  inspiration  of  his  Holy  Spirit.  2.  Sustaining  our  spiritual  life  by  Divine  com- 
munications of  power  (see  Eph.  i.  19).  8.  Besponding  ito  our  devotion,  accepting  our 
praise  and  our  adoration,  bearing  and  answering  our  prayers.  4.  Energizing  and 
effectuating  our  work,  enabling  us  to  speak  for  bim,  and  making  our  words  to  be 
"  mighty  to  pull  down  "  and  to  build  up.  The  near  presence  of  Christ  should  be  the 
most  power^  incentive  to  the  pursuit  of  spiritual  worth  and  to  the  execution  of 
Oiristian  enterprise. 

Pbaotioaii  ooNOLUSiOMB.  1.  J)o  not  indulge  in  a  vain  regret.  It  would  have  been 
very  pleasant  to  "  see  the  Lord  "  as  his  apostles  saw  him,  to  look  into  his  face,  to  hear 
his  voice ;  and  very  honourable  it  would  have  been  to  minister  to  his  necessities  as 
they  were  permitted  to  do ;  but  we  can  be,  in  fact  and  in  truth,  a$  near  to  him  now  aa 
they  were  then ;  and  still  we  listen  to  bis  word,  and  still  we  serve  him  most  acceptably 
ft)r  inasmuch  as  we  show  kindness  or  render  help  to  "  one  of  these  little  ones  of  his,"  we 
do  the  same  thing  "  unto  him."  2.  Do  not  cherish  an  unfounded  hope.  Many  are  the 
souls  that  lived  long  and  died  disappointed,  expecting  to  have  a  present  visible  Saviour 
amongst  them.  We  need  not  add  to  their  number;  the  words  of  promise  find  another 
fulfilment  than  this.  3.  Bealize  the  valuable  truth,  the  invaluable  truth,  that  our  Lord 
is  with  us  now,  loving  us,  caring  for  us,  strengthening  and  comforting  us,  governing 
and  using  us,  blessing  us  with  all  priceless  blessings.  4.  Make  the  present  heritage  a 
foretaste  of  the  future.  Live  in  such  happy  and  holy  consciousness  of  the  presence  of 
the  Lord  that  it  will  only  be  a  change  of  scene  and  sphere,  not  of  spiritual  condition, 
when  we  are  citizens  of  that  country  where  "  God  himself  shall  be  with  them,"  where 
"  he  who  sits  on  the  throne  iball  dwell  among  them,"  of  that  oit^  which  may  well  ba 
called  "  Jehovah-ShamnuUi,''  for  "the  Lord  i«  there."— 0. 


HOMILETIOAL  INDEX 


TO 


THE  BOOK  OE  TIE  PEOPIET  EZEHEL. 


VOLUME  n. 

nmn 

-.-, 

GHAPTEB  ZXn. 

Sinnen  left  to  themaelTM  and  to  their 

taawm 

fAsa 

U 

BooidBliia          ^          . 

iM 

A  SeireM  Judgment  and  iti  Satiih 

Diflhoneit  Gain    m           «. 

•M 

fketory  Oonseqnenoea      ...           ... 

n 

A  Total  OollapM  ...           m. 

»•• 

The  ExelnsiTeneM  if  the  Wfltah^  ft 

Onus      ...           —           .M 

••• 

til*  Laid  Ood m 

n 

Boly  ud  Ptofime...           «« 

••• 

AUantostandinihaCkp 

■M 

OHAPTSB  XXTT. 

Vie  Bepioaoh  of  Jenualea 

•■• 

y 

ihe  Droa8  in  the  Fnrtiaaa  ... 

•M 

TheBeething-pot...           m.           m. 

M 

Oominan  Oorroption  of  all  OlaiiM 

•M 

Hanorable  Daya  .^           — 

84 

The  Fraphet  on  the  Jndgmen^Mat  ... 

A  Weary  Task     ...           ...           «. 

85 

The  Smelting  Fomaoe       ... 

•  •• 

God  Tme  to  his  Word        .m           m. 

8« 

Highest  Bank  among  Man  not  longht 

"The  Desire  of  thine  Eyea"            ^ 

87 

An  Appalling  Indiotmont  and  a 

Jn*t 

The  Domb  Month  opened  .m           — 

87 

Judgment 

••• 

11 

The  Oonanming  Oanldron  »«           m» 

88 

Daploiable    Deterioratloa    and 

De- 

Ineffeotnal  Disoipllne         ...           m. 

89 

■erred  Destniotion 

... 

U 

Speechless  and  Tearless  Sonww       m. 

40 

Ibe  Unlrenal  FreTalenoe  of  Wieked- 

EieldelaSign     ^ 

41 

aeos,  and  the  Oonoeqnent  Cartalnij 

The  Interior  Meohaniam  of  War      ». 

41 

of  Judgment     

M« 

U 

Gradnated  Lessons             ...           »• 
The  Parable  of  the  Cauldron ;  or,  the 

42 

GHAPTEB  XXm. 

Judgment  upon  Jerusalem 
A  Sudden  and  Sorrowful  Berearement 

48 

MiMiandAhoUbah         ^ 

•m 

21 

An  Awful  Catastrophe  and  a   Pro- 

Doting on  the  AMyriani    ... 

M. 

21 

hibition  of  Mourning      m.           tm 

47 

A  Bad  Example  ...           ^ 

M. 

22 

Forgetting  God    ...           ... 

... 

28 

GHAPTEB  XXY. 

AbominatiiHis  declared       ... 

M. 

24 

The  Foreign  and  the  Oonunon 

... 

24 

The  Judgment  of  the  Nations          m« 

n 

Inezonsable  Infidelity 

... 

25 

The  ScofBng  Nation           .„           «• 

62 

The  Sceptical  Nation         m.           m. 

St 

Sin 


26 


A  Forgotten  People  n>  Ma      68 


INDEX. 


THEUE  FAOB 

The  BeTengefnl  Nation     ,„           .^  54 

The  Hating  Nation            ...           ...  55 

Malignity             ...           ...           ...  56 

The  Blaephemy  and  the  Panishment 

ofMoab             ...            ...           ...  57 

The  Hostility  and  the  Curse  of  Edom  57 

The  Old  Hatred 58 

The  Tribunal  of  Nation*    ...           ...  59 

The  Sin  and  Judgment  of  the  Am- 
monites            ...            ...           ...  60 

The    Sin   and   Panishment    of    the 

Moabites           ...           ...           ...  62 

The  Judgment  of  Edom ;  oi,  the  Sin 

and  Punishment  of  Bevenge         ...  63 
The  Heinous  Sin  and  Severe  Punish- 
ment, of  the  Pliilistines  ...           ...  65 


CHAPTER  XXVl 


OHAPTEB  XXVIL 


68 


Tyre,  the  England  of  Antiquity       , 

An  Unworthy  Anticipation              m>  69 

Divine  Antagonism            ...           m«  70 

The  Mission  of  Nebnohadnezzar      ...  70 

Songs  silenced      ...           ...           m«  71 

"  The  Princes  of  the  Sea " ...           ...  72 

The  Jealousy  of  Tyre        .^           ...  72 

The  Pate  of  Tyre...           ...           ...  78 

The  Besieging  of  Tyre       ...           m.  74 

Glory  departed     ...            ...            ...  75 

Collision  between  Man's  Plani   and 

God's  Plans      ...           ...           ...  76 

A  Miracle  of  Foreknowledge            ...  77 
National  Disaster  becomes  a  Pnblio 

Lesson              ...           ...           ...  78 

The  Sin  and  Doom  of  Tyre              ...  78 
The  Exultation  of  the  World  over  the 

Church             ...           ...           ...  81 

A  Lamentation  over  Fallen  Greatness  82 
An    Encouraging   Assurance   for    • 

Depressed  People            ...           ...  84 


A  Lamentation  for  Tyre     ...  » 

iEistheticism  as  a  Beligion ...  » 

The  Slave-trade  ...  ...  ,. 

Great  Waters  of  Affliction  ...  .. 

An  Incomparable  Doom     ...  „. 

A  Great  Surprise...  ...  .. 

The  Beauty,  Glory,  and  Beplenlsh- 

ment  of  the  City  of  Tyro  ...      94 

National  Shipwreok  ...  ...      95 


The  Bewailing  of  the  City ...  „.  99 

Wreck  of  a  Stately  Ship     ...  ...  96 

A  Celebration  of  Bemarkable  Proa- 

perity...  ...  ...  ...  97 

A  Piotnre  of  Extensive  Commereial 

Belationa  ...  ...  ...  99 


OHAPTEB  XXVnL 

A  Prinee's  Sin      ...           ...           m.  104 

"  Wiser  than  Daniel "        ...           ^  105 

The  Innocence  of  Early  Days          m.  106 

The  Judgment  of  Zidon      ...           m.  106 

The  Home-gathering         ,m           m.  107 

Confidence            ...           .m           m.  108 

The  Height  of  Arroganoe  .»           m.  109 

The  Folly  of  Worldly  Wisdom         m.  110 

Sin  and  Destruction           ...           m.  Ill 

The  Favour  shown  to  Israel              ...  Ill 

Pride's  Terrible  Fall           ...            ...  Ha 

The  Glory   and  Shame  of  Eden  re- 

prodnoed            ...            ...            ...  Hg 

The  Curse  and  Doom  of  Arroganoe  ...  114 

The  Insufficiency  of  Circnmstanoe^  eta  115 

The  End  of  Divine  Judgment  ...  116 
The  Prince  of  Tyre ;  or,  the  Expression 

and  Punishment  of  Pride              ...  117 

Man  in  Impressive  Aspects  ...  X19 
God  glorified   in  the   Exeontion   of 

Judgment         ...            ...            ...  Ul 

God  glorified  in  his  Dealings  with  bis 

People  under  Chastisement           m.  12S 


CHAPTEB  y^TT, 

The  Doom  of  Egypt  -.  ...  127 

"  A  Staff  of  Beed  "  ...  127, 183 

The  Pride  of  Creation         ...  ...  128 

The  Metigre  Bestoration  of  Egypt  „,  129 

Nebuchadnezzar's  Wages  ...  ...  ISO 

The  Budding  Horn  ...  ...  ISO 

Boastful  Self-confidence     ...  m.  131 

Mightier  than  the  Mighty  ...  w.  182 

The  Humiliation  of  Egypt's  Flido  „.  184 

Light  out  of  Darkness        ...  m.  184 

The  King  of  Kings  .m  „.  185 

The  World-power  doomed  ...  m.  135 

God's  Frown,  a  Chill  of  Death  ».  186 

A  New  Tear's  Gift  to  a  King  „.  187 

Egypt :  A  Guilty  "Vaunt    ...  ...  188 

The  Confidence  whioh  is  eondemned  188 

Speech,  Silenoe,  and  Propheey  ...  139 


INDEX. 


iU 


OHAPTEB  XXX. 

AOlondyDay      ...            ...           ...  142 

Aesociated  OtdamitiM         .m           ...  143 

Desolation            ...           ...           „.  144 

"The  Careless  Bthioplaiw"             ...  145 

Destroying  Idols  ...           m           ...  145 
Broken  Aims        ...           ...           146, 151 

"The  Day  of  the  Lord"     ...           ...  147 

The  Fate  of  the  Alliei       148 

Idols  destroyed     ...           ...           ...  148 

One  strengthened  and  Another  weak- 
ened   ...            ...           ...           ...  149 

The  Lord's  Day  in  Egypt  ...           ...  150 

The  Day  of  Desolation       ...           ...  152 

Broken  Yokes       ...           ...           ...  158 

The  Broken  and   the   Strengthened 

Arm    ...           ...           M.           ...  154 


OHAPTEB  TTYTT. 


The  Great  Oedar  ...           •«• 

•M 

156 

The  Root  and  the  Waten  »^ 

—M 

157 

Pride  humiliated ...            ••• 

M* 

158 

The  Bifiappearanoe  of  Bden 

•*• 

158 

The  Greatness  of  AsByria  ..« 

Ma 

159 

The  Penalty  of  Pride 

•»• 

160 

The  Lesson  for  aU  Nationa 

«•• 

160 

Mourning  and  Lamentation 

••• 

161 

Greatness  no  Exemption  bom  Betribn- 

tion     ...  ...  ...  ...  162 

A  Terrible  Perdition  ...  ...  162 

The  Sooroe  of  Strength  and  Beauty  164 

"The  Garden  of  God"       ...  ...  165 

The  Spectacle  of  Fallen  Greatness  ...  165 

OHAPTEB  XXXIL 


The  Lion  in  a  Xet 

••• 

••• 

169 

Lights  darkened  •«. 

•M 

•M 

169 

Vexation  of  Heart 

•M 

••« 

170 

StiU  Waters  of  Death 

*•« 

••a 

171 

Sympathetic  Sorrow 

••• 

••• 

172 

The  World  of  the  Dead 

M* 

••« 

172 

Indelible  Sin 

■•• 

•«• 

173 

Pharaoh  comfbrted 

••• 

a.. 

174 

The  Noxiousness  of  a  Si&M  Nation  174 
The  Sympathy  of  Nature  and  of  Man 

with  a  Fallen  People      ...  ...    175 

The  Sword  the  Imploneat  of  DiTine 

Judgment         ...  ...  ...    175 

The  Gathering  of  the  Gnilty  Nations 

In  Hades  ...  ...  ...    176 


Judgment  on  a  Prond  King  ...  177 

The  Downfall  of  One  inTolres  the 

Downfall  of  Many  ...  ...  178 

Oompanionship  in  Woe       ...  ...  179 

God's  Teaching  in  History  ...  180 

The  UuTisited  Biver;  or.  Life  at  a 

Low  Level        ...  ...  ...  181 

A  Vision  of  the  Unseen  World         ...  181 

OHAPTEB  XXXm. 

The  Watchman    ...  ...  ...  186 

A  Question  of  Despair       ...  ...  187 

God's  Desire  for  the  World's  SalTation  187 

Past  and  Present  ...  ...  ...  183 

Charging  God  with  Injustioa  ...  189 

The  Bight  of  the  Many      189 

Popular  Preaching  ...  ...  190 

The  Becognition  of  a  Prophet  ...  191 

The  Commission  of  the  Watchman  ...  192 

The  Besponaibility  of  the  Watchman  193 

The  Vanity  of  Transitory  Goodness  ...  193 

The  Efficacy  of  Bepentanoe  ...  194 

Diyine  Equity       ...  ...  ...  194 

Evil  Tidings         194 

The  Powerlessness  of  Privilege  to  save  195 

The  Prophet's  Beception    ...  ...  196 

The  Watchman's  Office       ...  ...  196 

Men's  Misconception  of  Ged's  Govern- 
ment ...  ...  ...  ...  198 

Bight,  not  Might,  the  Foundation  of 

Stable  Empire  ...  ...  ...  199 

Superficial  Beligiousness    ...  ...  200 

Ministerial  and  Individual  Besponsi- 

bility  ...  ...  ...  ...  201 

The  Hope  and  the  Way  of  Life       ...  202 

God's  Equal  Way...  ...  „.  203 

ni-grounded  Hope  „,  ».  204 

The  Test  of  Piety...  m,  m.  SOB 

OHAPTEB  XXXIV. 

Shepherds  denounced         ...  ...  208 

Seeking  Lost  Sheep  ...  ...  208 

The  Flock  divided  m  ...  209 

The  One  Shepherd  m  m.  210 

"A  Covenant  of  Peace"     «»  ...  211 

"Showers  of  Blessing"      ^  ...  211 

"  A  Plantation  of  Benown"  ...  212 

The  Presence  of  God  ...  m«  213 

God's  Flock  214 

The  Human  Shepherds  of  the  Flook...  214 


IT 


INDEX. 


VHHJfM 

rAOB 

THun 

>Aaa 

The  DiTine  Shepherd  of  the  Hook 

... 

215 

God's  Name  and  onn         .„ 

,^ 

260 

A  Pastor  and  a  Prince 

... 

216 

The  Three  Elements  of  Piety 

#•• 

861 

The  Promise  of  Blessing    ... 

.« 

216 

The  Period  of  Spiritnal  Prosperity 

... 

208 

The  Peace  and  Welfare  of  the  Ohnroh 

217 

God's  Verdict  npon  Self-serving  Bnlers 

217 

OHAPTEB  XXXYIL 

Social  Oppressions 

... 

218 

The  Golden  Age  of  Peace  ... 

••• 

219 

The  Valley  of  Dry  Bones  ... 

... 

869 

The  Use  and  the  Abnse  of  Offloe 

... 

221 

Prophesying  to  the  Dry  Bones  and  to 

God's  Interest  in  Men 

•M 

221 

the  Wind 

••• 

269 

The    Monntain-height   of   Israel 

— . 

The  Two  Sticks   ... 

—* 

870 

Moral  and  Spiritnal  Eleration 

... 

222 

The  Fascination  of  Idolatry 

M. 

871 

The  SinfolnesB  of  Selflshneai 

••« 

223 

Chitst  the  King    ...           m. 

M. 

872 

One  Greater  than  David    ... 

•M 

224 

God's  Tabemade  ...           m. 

.^ 

873 

The  Sanctifloation  of  the  Ohiiroli  • 

Gospel  for  the  World      m. 

•M 

873 

CHAPTBB  XXXV. 

The  Valley  of  Death          m 

874 

The  Desolation  of  Monnt  Beir 

227 

The  CaU  to  Life  ...           m. 

.•« 

875 

The  End  of  Iniquity           .m 

••« 

228 

The  Divine  Bestorer          ^ 
Unity 

Ma 

276 

A  Misoalcnlation  ...            m« 

229 

••m 

Hi 

Boasting  against  God         ... 
Desolate  in  the  Midst  of  Oenend  Joy 
fulness              ...            •••            --' 

230 
230 

The  Tabernacle  of  God  with  Hen    ^. 

The  Vision  of  Dry  Bones    ... 

Union  Essential  to  Highert  Prosperity 

878 
878 
279 

Bejoicing  over  the  Bnin  of  Othem 
"Lex  Talionis"    ...           m. 

... 

231 

From  Death  to  Life            _ 

... 

881 

232 

The  Cry  of  the  Hopeless    ^ 

•«• 

288 

The  Lord's  Identiflcation  <^  himself 

The  Blessed  Kingdom       m. 

— 

282 

with  Israel 

... 

232 

Special  Punishment  of  Special  Sis 

... 

233 

OHAPTEB  XXXVm. 

Features  to  be  found  in  Penalty 
The  Supreme  Mistake 

... 
••• 

231 
285 

Gog  and  Magog    ...           ^ 
"After  Many  Days"          « 

•M 

888 

889 

"An  Evil  Thought"          ^ 

•m% 

290 

CHAPTBB  XXXYL 

The  Day  of  Security           ^ 

•a. 

290 

An  Earthquake    ...           „, 

—t 

291 

Premature  Triumph           ,», 

••• 

842 

Mutual  Antagonism           m. 

292 

Betuming  Prosperity         m« 

••« 

243 

God  sanctifying  himself     «m 

... 

293 

Multiplying  Men  ...           m< 

•  •• 

244 

The   Invasion  of  those  vhe   dwell 

The  Better  Future 

M. 

244 

Secure                ...            ^ 

293 

Ck>d  saving  for  his  own  Name^i  Sak* 

245 

Divine  Control     „.           ^ 

••a 

294 

"Clean  Water"    ...           «. 

••a 

246 

An  Evil  Device    ...           •„ 

.•a 

295 

"  A  New  Heart "...            m. 

•M 

247 

The  Invader  discomfited    ... 

... 

296 

The  Indwelling  Spirit 

•*. 

248 

The  Stability  of  God's  Kingdom 

a*. 

29S 

Bad  Memories       ...            m— 

••• 

248 

Human  Malice  a  Contribution  to  God's 

A  New  Eden         ...            m 

—M 

249 

Glory ...            ...           ,„ 

aa. 

297 

Promise  of  Bevival             m. 

••* 

850 

The  Supreme  Contest         m 

»•« 

299 

Profanation  and  Pity 

~ 

851 

Sent  back  by  God... 

••• 

299 

Benewal...            ...            ... 

•  •■ 

251 

Spiritnal  Security..            _ 

M« 

800 

Self-knowledge  and  Self-loatUag 

»•• 

253 

Making  God  Great  ahd  Holy 

••« 

801 

Inquiry  of  God     ... 

•  •• 

253 

The  Material  Creation  sh«ring  in 

the 

OHAPTEB  XXXIZ. 

Fortune*  of  Men 

... 

264 

A  Yislen  of  the  Tme  Golden  Age 

•  M 

255 

God's  Purpose  accomplished 

... 

807 

Prosperity  snspendedon  Human  Prayer 

258 

God's  Glory  among  the  Heathen 

a.. 

307 

Gnoonragement  in  Exile    ... 

... 

259 

Sin  and  its  Consequences   ... 

... 

308 

INDEX. 


THBU  rAOI 

The  Glorious  Bestontion  ...           ».  809 

The  Beatored  Virion  of  God             ...  809 

The  Lord's  Oaro  for  hii  omi  Nuns  ...  810 

The  Spotter  spoiled             ...           ...  811 

The  Divine  Beason  for  Xuael'i  Oap- 

tivity 8ia 

Israel's  Bestoration  a  Proof  of  DiTine 

Meroy...            ...            ...           ...  818 

The  Terrible  Doom  of  Bebels  .„  818 
God's  Bevelation  of  himself  »  Voimt 

of  Blessing        ...            m.           ...  815 

Divine  Interposition           »<           m*  816 

FaUing  on  the  Field          _            ...  817 

Degradation  and  Beversal  m*            ...  818 

God  hia  own  Interpreter     „,           mt  818 

OHAPTEB  XL. 

The  Exalted  Oity...            ...            ^  828 

The  Man  with  the  Meaaniing-reed  ...  829 
"  The  Gate  which  looketh  toward  the 

East" 829 

Sacrifices  in  the  New  Temple           ...  330 
Measurement        ...            ...           881, 837 

The  Office  of  the  Prophet  .^           ...  832 

Singers  ...           ...           m           m.  833 

Priests    ...            ...            ...            ...  831 

Vision  of  the  New  Temple ...           ...  834 

God's  Kingdom  divinely  organized  ...  835 

Sacrifice  Essential  to  Human  WoTBhlp  837 

Entrance  to  the  Kingdom  ...           ...  838 

Palms  upon  the  Posts:  Ornamental 

Strength            ...            ...            ...  339 

The  Windows  of  the  Ohnroh            „.  839 

Spiritual  Ascent  ...           ...           m.  840 

Sacred  Song         ...           „           m.  841 

OHAPTEB  XLL 

The  New  Temple ...           ...           ^  847 

Solidity  ...            ...            ...           m.  848 

"  Chembims  and  Palm  Trees*         m.  848 

"The  Most  Holy  Place" 849 

»  The  Table  that  is  before  the  Loid  "  850 

Sacred  Places        ...            ...            ...  351 

The  Significance  of  the  Ohemblm    ...  852 

The  Significance  of  the  Palm  Trees ...  858 


CHAPTKB  TfT-TT 


The  Onter  Court 
Holy  Placea 


...    858 
...    858 


THBHI  rAOI 

Holy  Garments     ...  «.  m.  859 

Sacerdotal  Sanctity  .^  —  360 

The  Symmetry  of  the  Sanotnary      ...  860 
Separation  between  the  Holy  and  the 

Common  ...  ...  ...  861 

Separation  and  Society       ...  ...  862 

The  Size  and  Strength  of  the  Kingdom  863 

OHAPTEB  XLm. 

"The  Glory  of  the  God  of  Israel"  ...  Wl 
God  the  Same  in  Judgment  and  in 

Meroy...           ...           ...           ...  372 

FUled  with  Glory ...           ...           ...  878 

The  Goodness  that  leads  to  Bepent- 

anoe    ...            ...            ...            ...  373 

The  Sin  Offering 374 

Accepted  by  God  ...           ...           ...  875 

The  Glory  of  the  Lord  In  the  House ...  376 

The  Divine  Indwelling       ...           ...  376 

Shame  for  Sin       ...            ...            ...  377 

"The  Law  of  the  House"  ...   877,880,384 

Acceptance            ...            „.            ...  378 

Sunshine  after  Storm          ...           ...  379 

Foundation  of  Acceptance  with  God ...  881 

The  Beturn  of  God's  Glory...           ...  882 

Gh>d'B  Unapproachable  Sovereignty  ...  383 

Universal  Holiness             ...           ...  884 

Purification  and  PreparstioB            m.  885 

CHAPTEB  XlilT. 

The  Shut  Gate     ...  ...  893, 407 

The  Attentive  Consideration  of  Be- 

ligions  Truth    ...  ...  ...  393 

A  Sufficiency  of  Sin  ...  ...  894 

Beligion  by  Proxy  ...  ...  895 

The  Exclusion  of  the  Stranger         ...  395 

The  Degradation  of  the  Levitea  ...  896 
"The  Difference  between  the  Holy 

and  Profane"    ...  ...  897,401 

Taking  God  as  an  Inheritance         ...  898 

The  Prerogative  of  the  Prinoe         ...  898 
Beverence            ...           ...           899, 407 

The  True  Cironmcirion  and  the  Tme 

Worshipper       ...  ...  ...  400 

Appointed  Ministrations    ...  ...  401 

The   Lord   the   Inheritance   of    Us 

People...  ...  ...  ...  401 

The  Devoted  Thing  ...  ...  402 

Church-worship  Vital  to  the  SonI     ...  402 

Beward  and  Punishment  on  Earth  ...  403 


▼1 


INDEX 


FAOI 

Babcrtantial  Wealth  m  .^  405 

Divine  Disorimiiiatioii        m<  •••  407 

Fidelity  and  its  Beward     ...  ...  408 

« A  Oood  Minister  of  JenuOhrlat*...  409 


OHAPTBB  XLV. 

The  Frinoe's  Portion  ,„  „,  418 

"Jnst  Balanoea"  ...  ...  ...  419 

Systematic  Giving  ...  m.  419 

Princes  not  Oppressor!       m«  •..  420 

Beoonciliation       ...  ...  w.  421 

Sacred  Festivals   ...  ...  m.  421 

Beligion  the  Parent  of  Morality  ...  422 

Beligion  a  Practical  Thing...  ...  423 

Sanctity  of  Time  and  Place  ...  424 

Devotement  and  Conseoration  m.  425 

Human  Oppression  ...  .^  425 

Piety  and  Equity  ...  .m  m.  426 

The  Erring  and  the  Simple  m.  427 

The  Moral  of  the  Passover  .m  •..  428 


OHAPTEB  XLVL 

The  People's  Worship        ...  ...  432 

"  The  Prince  in  the  Midst  of  tiwm  "  433 

The  Morning  Sacrifice        ...  m.  434 

The  Son  and  the  Servant   ,„  .m  434 

A  Warning  to  the  Oreat     .m  m.  435 

Worship...            ...            ^  M  136 

Feasts  and  Solemnitiei       m«  •..  437 

A  Free-will  Offering          ,„  ^,  438 

The  Daily  Offering             ...  ^  438 

The  Oonsecration  of  Time  ...  m.  439 

The  Soul's  Orowth  in  Goodnew  ...  440 

The  Essence  of  Beligion    ...  ...  441 

Earthly  Sovereignty  not  Absolute    ...  442 

Distinction    and     Eqoalify    ia  the 

Kingdom  of  Ood             m  m.  448 


The  Optional  and  the  OUigatsiy  In 

the  Kingdom  of  God        ...  m. 
Losing  and  keeping  the  Inheritanoe 

OHAPTEB   XLVn. 

The  Vision  of  the  Waten  ^  „. 

Life  and  Healing  ...           m«  m. 

Trees  of  Life         ...           ».  m. 

Joseph's  Donble  Portion     m«  m. 

The  Division  of  the  Land  »•  „. 

The  Stranger's  Portion       m«  •» 

The  Holy  Waters  ...           ...  m« 

The  Tree  of  Life  ...           ...  m. 

The  Inheritance  of  the  Children 
The  Inheritance  of  the  Strangers 
The  Biver  of  Salvation       ... 
Canaan  a  Type  of  Heaven  ... 
The  Biver  of  Life ... 

The     Donble     Service  —  Meat  and 

Medicine           ...           ...  ... 

The  Tlireefold  Inheritanoe.M  ••• 

Jew  and  Gentile  ...           m*  m» 


444 
444 


CHAPTEB  ZliVIIL 

Names    ...  ...  „,  m« 

An  Inalienable  Possession  «•  n< 

f  A  Profane  Place"  j,  ^ 

Serving  the  City  ...  m«  m. 

The  City  Gates     .m  Ma  n. 

A  Glorious  Name ...  »•     .  m. 

Fidelity  ...  ...  „,  ^ 

The  Service  of  the  City      m.  ... 

"  The  Lord  is  there  "  „ 

Beligion  the  Nuolens  of  Hmnan  life 
The  Apex  of  Glory 

Characteristics  of  the  Kingdom  ... 

God  the  Accessible  One      ...  ... 

The  Presence  of  Christ  la  Us  Qhoreli 


452 

453 
454 

455 
455 
456 
457 
458 
459 
459 
460 
462 
463 

464 
465 
465 


478 
479 
480 
480 
481 
482 
483 
483 
484 
485 
486 
488 
488 
489 


